LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101231978
33173
Alzheimers Dement
Alzheimers Dement
Alzheimer's &amp; dementia : the journal of the Alzheimer's Association
1552-5260
1552-5279

37270665
10693651
10.1002/alz.13129
NIHMS1897419
Article
Gaps in clinical research in frontotemporal dementia: A call for diversity and disparities focused research
Franzen Sanne 1*
Nuytemans Karen 2*
Bourdage Renelle 13
Caramelli Paulo 4
Ellajosyula Ratnavalli 56
Finger Elizabeth 789
Illán-Gala Ignacio 1011
Loi Samantha M. 1213
Morhardt Darby 14
Pijnenburg Yolande 1516
Rascovsky Katya 17
Williams Monique M. 18
Yokoyama Jennifer 1920
Alladi Suvarna 21
Broce Iris 2223
Castro-Suarez Sheila 2425
Coleman Kristy 7
de Souza Leonardo Cruz 26
Dacks Penny A. 27
de Boer Sterre C. M. 1516
de Leon Jessica 28
Dodge Shana 27
Grasso Stephanie 29
Gupta Veer 30
Gupta Vivek 31
Ghoshal Nupur 32
Kamath Vidyulata 33
Kumfor Fiona 34
Matias-Guiu Jordi A. 35
Narme Pauline 3
Nielsen T. Rune 36
Okhuevbie Daniel 3738
Piña-Escudero Stefanie D. 39
Garcia Ramiro Ruiz 40
Scarioni Marta 1541
Slachevsky Andrea 42434445
Suarez-Gonzalez Aida 46
Tee Boon Lead 474849
Tsoy Elena 2950
Ulugut Hülya 151628
Babulal Ganesh M. 51525354¥
Onyike Chiadi U. 33¥
ISTAART FTD PIA and ISTAART Diversity and Disparities PIA
1 Department of Neurology and Alzheimer Center, Erasmus MC University Medical Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands
2 John P. Hussman Institute for Human Genomics and Dr. John T. Macdonald Department of Human Genetics, University of Miami, Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL
3 Laboratoire Mémoire Cerveau et Cognition (UR 7536), Institut de Psychologie, Université Paris Cité, Boulogne-Billancourt, France
4 Behavioral and Cognitive Neurology Research Group, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte (MG), Brazil
5 Manipal Hospitals, Bangalore and Annasawmy Mudaliar Hospital, Bangalore, India
6 Manipal Academy of Higher Education (MAHE), India
7 Parkwood Institute Research, London, Ontario, Canada
8 Robarts Research Institute, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada
9 Department of Clinical Neurological Sciences, Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada
10 Sant Pau Memory Unit, Department of Neurology, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Biomedical Research Institute Sant Pau, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
11 Centro de Investigación en Red-Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), Barcelona, Spain
12 Neuropsychiatry, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville VIC Australia 3050
13 Department of Psychiatry, University of Melbourne, Parkville VIC Australia 3052
14 Mesulam Center for Cognitive Neurology and Alzheimer’s Disease and Department of Preventive Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine
15 Alzheimer Center Amsterdam, Neurology, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam UMC location VUmc, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
16 Amsterdam Neuroscience, Neurodegeneration, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
17 Department of Neurology and Penn Frontotemporal Degeneration Center, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine
18 St. Louis Oak Street Health, St. Louis, MO, USA
19 Memory and Aging Center, Department of Neurology, Weill Institute for Neurosciences, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA
20 Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA
21 National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences, Bangalore, India
22 Department of Neurosciences, UC San Diego
23 Department of Neurology, UC San Francisco
24 CBI en Demencias y Enfermedades Desmielinizantes del Sistema Nervioso, Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Neurológicas, Lima, Peru
25 Atlantic Senior Fellow for Equity in Brain Health at the University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, 94115, USA
26 Department of Internal Medicine, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil
27 The Association for Frontotemporal Degeneration
28 Department of Neurology, Memory and Aging Center, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA
29 Speech, Language and Hearing Sciences, The University of Texas at Austin
30 IMPACT—The Institute for Mental and Physical Health and Clinical Translation, School of Medicine, Deakin University, Geelong, VIC 3216, Australia
31 Macquarie Medical school, Faculty of Medicine, Health and Human Sciences, Macquarie University, NSW, Australia
32 Depts. of Neurology and Psychiatry, Knight Alzheimer Disease Research Center, Washington University School of Medicine
33 Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA
34 The University of Sydney, Brain &amp; Mind Centre and the School of Psychology, Sydney, Australia
35 Department of Neurology, Hospital Clinico San Carlos, San Carlos Institute for Health Research (IdiSSC), Universidad Complutense, Madrid, Spain
36 Danish Dementia Research Center, Department of Neurology, The Neuroscience Center, Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark
37 Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, University of Lagos, Nigeria
38 Department of Comparative Biosciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison, USA
39 Global Brain Health Institute at the Memory and Aging Center. University of California, San Francisco, USA
40 Instituto Nacional de Neurología y Neurocirurgía Manuel Velasco Suárez, Mexico DF, Mexico
41 Department of Neurology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium
42 Geroscience Center for Brain Health and Metabolism (GERO), Santiago, Chile
43 Neuropsychology and Clinical Neuroscience Laboratory (LANNEC), Physiopathology Department - Intitute of Biomedical Sciences (ICBM), Neurocience and East Neuroscience Departments, Faculty of Medicine, University of Chile, Santiago, Chile
44 Memory and Neuropsychiatric Center (CMYN), Memory Unit, Neurology Department, Hospital del Salvador and Faculty of Medicine, University of Chile, Santiago, Chile
45 Servicio de Neurología, Departamento de Medicina, Clínica Alemana-Universidad del Desarrollo, Santiago, Chile
46 Dementia Research Centre, UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology, University College London, London WC1N 3BG, UK
47 Memory and Aging Center, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States
48 Department of Neurology, Dyslexia Center, University of California, San Francisco, CA, United States
49 Global Brain Health Institute, University of California, San Francisco, United States
50 Global Brain Health Institute, University of California San Francisco and Trinity College Dublin
51 Department of Neurology, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, USA
52 Institute of Public Health, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, USA
53 Department of Psychology, Faculty of Humanities, University of Johannesburg, South Africa
54 Department of Clinical Research and Leadership, The George Washington University School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Washington, DC, USA
*/¥; equal contribution

Corresponding author: Sanne Franzen, PhD, Neuropsychologist and postdoctoral researcher, Erasmus MC University Medical Center, Department of Neurology and Alzheimer Center, Nf-331, Dr. Molewaterplein 40; 3015 GD Rotterdam, The Netherlands, Tel: +31650032313 / Fax: +3110-7044721 / s.franzen@erasmusmc.nl
11 5 2023
12 2023
03 6 2023
01 12 2024
19 12 58175836
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) is one of the leading causes of dementia before age 65 and often manifests as abnormal behavior—in behavioral variant FTD—or language impairment—in primary progressive aphasia. FTD’s exact clinical presentation varies by culture, language, education, social norms, and other socioeconomic factors; current research and clinical practice, however, is mainly based on studies conducted in North America and Western Europe. Changes in diagnostic criteria and procedures as well as new or adapted cognitive tests are likely needed to take into consideration global diversity. This perspective paper by two professional interest areas of the Alzheimer’s Association International Society to Advance Alzheimer’s Research and Treatment examines how increasing global diversity impacts the clinical presentation, screening, assessment, and diagnosis of FTD and its treatment and care. It subsequently provides recommendations to address immediate needs to advance global FTD research and clinical practice.

frontotemporal dementia
primary progressive aphasia
cultural diversity
ethnicity
language
literacy
neuropsychological tests
diagnosis

pmc1. Introduction

Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) comprises neurodegenerative disorders usually characterized by onset in middle age or earlier and heterogeneity in the clinical presentations, neuropathological features, and genetic linkages. The canonical syndromes are defined by abnormal behaviors or defective language and communication, which have been codified in formal diagnostic criteria1,2. The behavioral variant FTD (bvFTD) is defined by aberrant temperament, judgment, self-control and conduct. Two language variants have been defined: non-fluent variant primary progressive aphasia (nfvPPA), which is characterized by labored, dysfluent and agrammatical speech, and difficulty understanding sentences; and semantic variant primary progressive aphasia (svPPA), in which speech is fluent but empty on account of anomia and of agnosia for words and objects. Other phenotypes have been described, featuring cognitive deficits (especially executive, attention, and language dysfunctions) alongside motor symptoms (apraxia and parkinsonism)3. FTD, defined in terms of the behavioral and language phenotypes in epidemiological studies, is a leading cause of young-onset dementia.

FTD appears to affect individuals of all races, ethnicities, and cultures, with incidence reports in over 30 population-based studies from many research and clinical centers in different world regions4. However, the impact of ethnic and cultural diversity in FTD care and research is often overlooked. Given that FTD mainly manifests as deficits in social behavior and communication it is reasonable to surmise that the wide global ethnocultural diversity—with over 3800 cultures and over 6000 different languages5— results in disparities in FTD clinical practice and research across the world.

This paper focuses on the intersection between ethnocultural diversity and clinical research and practice. It is now widely acknowledged that aspects of diversity, which encompasses differences in language, social norms, socioeconomic status (SES), and education, influence the performance and outcomes of cognitive and behavioral assessments. As such, ethnocultural diversity can be expected to influence all aspects of the FTD clinical process, including help-seeking, access to healthcare, diagnostic practice and treatment4. It is also to be noted that the FTD clinical research literature has relied heavily on data from individuals of European descent living in North America, Western Europe, and Australia—owing to advantages in social and medical capital, expertise, expendable resources, and public health priorities6. Furthermore, in most low- and middle-income countries (LMICs), poverty, low literacy, cultural norms and local practices are barriers to neurodegenerative disease research7–9.

Today, diagnostic and monitoring tools, standard-of-care practices, and preferred treatments mainly reflect what has been learned from research and published, without systematic adaptations that take into account the worldwide disparities in local context, knowledge, expertise and resources. There is, for example, a need for clinical assessment instruments adapted or adaptable to differing social and linguistic contexts, to facilitate case detection, diagnosis, clinical care and research.

Two Professional Interest Area (PIA) groups supported by the Alzheimer’s Association International Society to Advance Alzheimer’s Research and Treatment (ISTAART), i.e., the Frontotemporal Dementia (FTD) and Diversity and Disparities PIAs, convened a workgroup to bring together international expertise for the purpose of examining and addressing questions about diversity and equity in current FTD research and care. Here, we examine what is known of how diversity in culture, language, education, SES, and other factors impact the clinical presentation and diagnosis of FTD and its subsequent treatment and care. We conclude by describing next steps and recommendations for future research.

2. Clinical features

2.1 Clinical presentation and diagnostic challenges in diverse populations

Ascertaining a clinical diagnosis of FTD is challenging. First, the wide familiarity with Alzheimer’s disease dementia (AD) may cause patients, caregivers, and even clinicians to implicitly associate dementia with memory deficits—which are not considered among the core features of FTD syndromes. Most formal cognitive assessments focus heavily on detecting memory impairment; assessment of social cognition and behavior, which are often impaired in FTD, is rarely included in routine cognitive assessments10,11. Moreover, bvFTD is frequently confounded with primary psychiatric disorders due to overlap in initial symptoms and its young age of onset—about 50% of bvFTD patients receive a psychiatric diagnosis prior to the bvFTD diagnosis12. Furthermore, dementia is generally underrecognized and undertreated in LMICs and in underrepresented populations in high-income countries13,14. This lack of recognition, diagnosis, and related treatment is likely due to the small number of medical specialists, particularly psychiatrists and neurologists, as well as due to the limited training these specialists have received in identifying bvFTD specifically.

Depending on the ethnocultural context, FTD may be associated with longer illness duration, or a more advanced clinical state (more severe brain atrophy, lower cognitive test scores, and more florid symptomatology) at presentation15–18. In other words, later diagnosis of FTD is common in many underrepresented populations15,17,19,20. These delays are due to factors at the level of the individual/family, and those at the level of the medical/health system (summarized in Table 1). In preparation for a 2021 Externally Led Patient-Focused Drug Development meeting on FTD, The Association for Frontotemporal Degeneration and the FTD Disorders Registry collaborated on the FTD Insights Survey, a community based online survey of nearly 1,800 diagnosed patients, care partners, and family members designed to better understand the lived experience of FTD in the United States, Canada, and United Kingdom. This survey revealed that, among patients who received a diagnosis of FTD, the subset of Black/African American and Latino/Latina respondents took longer and consulted with more doctors to obtain their diagnosis21,22. It has also been shown that neighborhood-level disadvantage (i.e., low access to care) occurs in association with a lower likelihood of receiving standard diagnostic tests (for example, structural neuroimaging, laboratory studies23).

The cultural contexts also influences the expression and interpretation of cognitive and behavioral symptoms24,25. For example, studies from India and Japan have shown their bvFTD patients to have a higher frequency of utilization and imitation behaviors compared to studies from North America or Europe16,26. It has been observed that alterations in eating behaviors occur at similar frequencies in bvFTD patients in Japan and the UK, but, in contrast to the UK, are not associated with severe weight gain in Japan due to culture-related differences in diet27. Comparisons of attitudes regarding bvFTD in Turkey, Greece, and the US suggest that, at first, behavioral symptoms are often accepted as normal behavior in Greece and Turkey, and therefore overlooked17. These examples illustrate the challenges in framing awareness, public health messages and diagnostic practices in ways that maximize case identification and access to care in different ethnocultural contexts.

Interest in the potential impact of biological sex in the clinical presentation of FTD is increasingly being studied. The existence of both patient- and study partner-related biases associated with sex and gender may influence the diagnosis of the behavioral variant and language variants of FTD, possibly withholding an accurate representation of both sexes. But other biological factors like those noted in AD or ALS may also play a role28,29. The clinical presentation, longitudinal decline, and cortical thickness in bvFTD has recently been characterized by Illán-Gala et al.30, showing that at diagnosis, women with bvFTD showed a more severe frontotemporal atrophy burden in comparison to men despite showing similar clinical characteristics. Altogether, these studies warrant clinicians and researchers to be aware of the existence of sex-linked differences in the clinical presentation of FTD and its possible impact on diagnostics and prognostics.

2.2 Language Diversity in Primary Progressive Aphasia

The global diversity in languages presents us with challenges in the recognition and diagnosis of language impairment across the FTD spectrum, but particularly in the primary progressive aphasias (PPA). Many studies have demonstrated that language typology influences PPA symptomatology. The most frequently reported feature is the over-regularization phenomenon, one of the core linguistic features in the formal diagnostic criteria for svPPA2. In English language speakers, this phenomenon manifests as surface dyslexia or surface dysgraphia, where there is a failure to read and spell irregular words (i.e., words with discordant grapheme-phoneme correspondence). In other words, irregular words are incorrectly read or spelled phonetically. This phenomenon appears to be absent in languages such as Spanish and Portuguese31,32. In languages such as German and Spanish, words are almost always pronounced in the same way as they are spelled, and irregular words are uncommon. In these contexts, regularization manifests as inaccurate usage of articles with atypical gender nouns or difficulties with past tense verb inflectional morphology33,34. In French and Hebrew, the over-regularization phenomenon presents as errors in derivational morphology35–37. Japanese language speakers with svPPA have contrasting performances in reading the syllable-based script kana (a script that lacks irregular words) versus the ideogram script kanji (a script that is rich with irregular words)38,39. In terms of motor speech and morphosyntactic functions, monolingual English speakers have been shown to produce more distortions in connected speech compared to monolingual Italian speakers, but they performed better on syntactic comprehension and complexity tasks, reflecting distinct linguistic features of these languages40. Similarly, Chinese-speaking patients with nfvPPA have tone production and tone perception deficits in lexical selection processing, which are linguistic features probably more significant in tonal languages41. Chinese language users with PPA have also been shown to have various linguistic dysgraphia errors unique to logographic script, such as homophone or compound word errors41. Without adequate linguistic diversity in the PPA research field, we lack understanding regarding the generalizability of the current PPA diagnostic criteria and treatment guidelines, which potentially contributes to underdiagnosis or misdiagnosis of PPA in non-English language speakers.

There is still much to learn about how bilingualism or multilingualism affects the progression of symptoms in PPA. Bilingual speakers with neurodegenerative disease experience either a parallel decline in the first (L1, usually the mother tongue) and second (L2) acquired languages, or a differential decline42,43. To date, most studies have shown either disproportionately severe loss of L2 or parallel decline of both languages44–56. However, in the largest series of bilingual patients with svPPA to date, the less proficient language prior to disease onset was lost, regardless of whether the language was L1 or L257. Beyond the need to understand the patterns of language decline in bilingual speakers, there is also a gap in investigating their unique symptoms, such as inappropriate mixing or code-switching42,58–61. Future prospective studies should include for all of a subject’s languages, information on age and manner of acquisition, patterns of use, objective measures of proficiency, measures of education and literacy, and culturally and linguistically appropriate testing.

3. Diagnostic and monitoring tools

Neuropsychological assessment is challenging in many ethnocultural contexts, due to the substantial influence of culture, language, education, institutional, and economic factors on neuropsychological testing, as illustrated in the ECLECTIC framework62. These influences are particularly evident in the cognitive domains most relevant to bvFTD and PPA: social cognition, executive functioning, and language. Unfortunately, most assessment tools have been designed in Western Europe and North America and cannot be applied directly in other regions and countries, such as in Latin America63. This section will focus on screening tools, behavioral scales, functional impairment scales, and these three cognitive domains. Although FTD manifests with decline of multiple cognitive domains, including memory64, we focus on social cognition, executive functions and language, particularly as tests of memory have been widely studied in diverse populations (for example, in AD, see Franzen et al.65).

3.1 Cognitive screening tests

Some widely used cognitive screening tests like the Mini-Mental State Examination66 have low sensitivity in the early symptoms of bvFTD and PPA, as they fail to detect impairment in executive dysfunction, social cognition and language. Several exceptions should be noted, however. The Addenbrookse’s Cognitive Examination (ACE) was developed to assess and differentiate cognitive impairment in AD from that in the different FTD syndromes. The ACE-Revised (ACE-R) and ACE-III have been translated and culturally adapted into many languages and are used in research and clinical settings worldwide67–69. Most studies report fair sensitivity and specificity of all ACE versions for FTD70,71 and these tests may also be useful in PPA72 because of the inclusion of items to screen for language deficits.

The Frontal Assessment Battery (FAB) is another example of a test that has been examined in different populations and translated/adapted to several languages73. Although most items of the FAB can be translated with relative ease, the letter fluency subtest poses more challenges, particularly as languages that adopt a logographic script (e.g. Chinese languages, Japanese-Kanji) do not possess sublexical form graphemes with phonemic information, leading to adaption and interpretation challenges for phonographic dependent tests such as letter fluency74. For example, two different versions of the FAB are available for different Chinese populations: a Traditional Chinese FAB in which letter fluency has been substituted with orthographic fluency75 where patients are asked to name words that begin with a given Chinese orthographical structure (e.g. a word with left-right orthographical pattern) and the FAB-phonemic76 which requires patients to generate words starting with a specific phoneme (fā, 发). In other languages, the letter used in letter fluency may have to be changed to ensure equivalent difficulty, such as in the Chilean version of the FAB77. An instrument that captures several elements of the abovementioned tests (verbal fluency, ACE-III and other tests) is the INECO Frontal Screening, originally developed in Argentina78, now also used in several other Latin American countries. This instrument was found to be more useful for discriminating AD from FTD than the FAB in Peru79.

The Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) is a screening tool designed to evaluate individuals with mild cognitive impairment80. While the test has been translated widely into more than 60 languages, many are merely direct translations; there is then a need to adapt the instrument for cross-cultural use to ensure validity81. The test has also been used as a global cognitive measure in FTD, including a few case-control studies conducted in diverse populations82,83. In these studies, the MoCA was essentially used to characterize the overall cognitive profile of the participants, without specific analysis of its diagnostic purposes. The Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR)84 has been extensively used for almost three decades to stage cognitive and functional impairment in AD. However, the CDR does not contemplate clinical domains that are impaired in FTD, such as behavior and language. These domains have been incorporated in a modified version of the instrument, the CDR® plus NACC FTLD rating scale, which has proven to be an effective staging tool in FTD85. These scales have been used in two Latin American studies assessing bvFTD and PPA patients86,87. While the CDR did not display good sensitivity in severe disease stages in one study87, the CDR® plus NACC FTLD rating scale proved to be a valuable staging measure.

Although these instruments may be promising screening tools for FTD, more research is needed. It is also important to emphasize that FTD diagnosis cannot be made on the basis of scores on any bedside or field screening tests. Accurate diagnosis requires a comprehensive clinical assessment. Screening tests are more valuable for facilitating case detection in population studies and monitoring illness severity.

3.2 Behavioral rating scales

The Frontal Behavioral Inventory (FBI) was designed to operationalize and quantify personality and behavior changes in FTD88. The FBI is a study partner-based questionnaire which assesses the severity and frequency of negative and positive behaviors. Blair et al.89 demonstrated that the original English version of FBI was better than the Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI) for discriminating FTD from AD patients. Kertesz et al.90 administered the FBI in patients with FTD, nfvPPA, AD, vascular dementia and depressive disorder and demonstrated that the scale correctly classified 92.7% of the patients with FTD with a high internal consistency and inter-rater reliability90. The FBI has been validated for the diagnosis of bvFTD or FTD with ALS in several languages in Europe and Asia91–99 and the different versions have generally shown good interrater and test-retest reliability, internal consistency, convergent validity, and diagnostic accuracy (when reported).

Portuguese and Spanish language adaptations of the Frontotemporal Dementia Rating Scale (FTD-FRS)100 have been shown to have good utility for assessing and monitoring illness severity101,102. The Frontal Systems Behavior Scale (FrSBE), developed for measuring behavioral disturbances related to frontal lobe functions, with subscales for apathy, executive dysfunction, and disinhibition103 has been shown useful for discriminating AD from FTD. A translated version has been created and used in the linguistically diverse FTD patient population in India104.

3.3 Functional impairment scales

Functional impairment is a key dimension in neurodegenerative disease, as it determines the threshold between the early stages of cognitive impairment and dementia105. Assessment of functional impairment is generally accomplished with self-report, informant-report, and performance-based measures. In bvFTD, self-report measures tend to have little use due to loss of insight early in the disease. Performance-based measures of functional impairment are time consuming and administered under artificial conditions, potentially leading to results that differ significantly from the individual’s performance in real environments106. Informant-rated questionnaires have proven to be a practical and valid measure of everyday functioning in dementia. Current evidence suggests that patients with FTD show a differential pattern of functional impairment compared to patients with Alzheimer’s disease dementia; patients with FTD show greater functional impairment than patients with Alzheimer’s disease dementia and tend to experience both impairment in instrumental and basic activities of daily living at an early stage107. Cultural factors are critical to take into considerations in the assessment of functional impairment. For example, in certain cultures, it may be customary for younger members of the family to manage the household and take care of financial matters, while elders play a more social role within the community as they are aging108. Similarly, older individuals who are illiterate or low educated may always have been dependent on others to support them in administrative and financial matters. Studies are now increasingly conducted on this topic in non-European and non-North American countries (for example see Musa Salech et al.109). Emerging evidence shows that gender, age, education, and culture influence scores on commonly used instruments of functional impairment in many parts of the world110.

3.4 Social cognition

Social cognition refers to the ability to attend to, interpret and respond to social cues, and normal performance is essential for successful interactions with others111,112. While definitions vary, the term encompasses three domains: 1) emotion reactivity and recognition, 2) mentalizing (empathy and theory of mind), and 3) regulation, including moral reasoning and knowledge of social norms113. Impaired social cognition is increasingly recognized as a core clinical feature of FTD and has been shown to be associated with abnormal social behaviors1,2,11,104,114. Culture can impact all aspects of social cognition, such as 1) how emotions are perceived and categorized, e.g., the perception of emotion intensity115; 2) how social cues are responded to and how empathy is demonstrated116,117; and 3) which behaviors are considered appropriate according to local social rules and norms118. Multiple studies have shown different neuroanatomical activation patterns between participants of East Asian and ‘Western’ cultures when engaged in similar social tasks, suggesting that the neural networks underlying social cognition and affective processes may vary across cultures119–123.

Relatively few tests of social cognition have been validated in FTD in general124. Unsurprisingly, even less research is available in underrepresented populations with FTD125. The adaptation or development of novel tests of social cognition has been identified as a research priority by European experts on cross-cultural neuropsychological assessment126. The Global Social Cognition Study in cognitively healthy adults demonstrated that cultural background, education, gender, and age impact performance on tests of emotion recognition and theory of mind127. Cultural differences explained almost 21% of the variance on an emotion recognition task and 25% of the variance on a faux pas test127. Similar cross-cultural differences were found in theory of mind using the Reading the Mind in the Eyes test128. Such differences do not necessarily limit the tests’ utility for discriminating patients with FTD from other patients or control subjects (e.g.129), provided normative data are available for the target population. Cultural differences can, however, impact the construct validity of these tests across cultural contexts; that is, instead of measuring a specific aspect of the construct social cognition, the test may actually measure general FTD severity or aspects of language related to the format of the test. Newly designed or adapted tests may be needed for a more valid assessment of specific cognitive domains.

Not all studies of emotion recognition report differences across different cultural groups130. However, tests of emotion recognition and theory of mind using faces as stimuli, such as the Ekman 60 Faces Test or Reading the Mind in the Eyes test, may need to include photographs of individuals sharing physical features with the target population (e.g. Chinese faces in the assessment of Chinese participants), given the differences in performance depending on whether the individuals portrayed have similar or different physical features128,131–133. Tests of mentalizing such as theory of mind and tests of social reasoning, such as faux pas detection and humor interpretation, are likely to be particularly influenced by culture127,134,135. Such tasks therefore need to be adapted to suit local contexts. Furthermore, the use of more objective measures (e.g., physiological responses) is also receiving increasing attention136–138, as it may be less susceptible to sociocultural bias.

3.5 Executive functioning

Executive functioning encompasses the capacity to form a goal, plan, and carry out goal-directed actions effectively, making use of abilities such as cognitive flexibility, concept formation, inhibition, and reasoning139. A twofold challenge exists in the assessment of this complex set of functions. First, large cross-cultural differences in executive test performance (e.g., Trail Making Test) have been reported even across ‘Western’ countries140. While causes of these differences are varied, linguistic diversity plays an important role in test performance on certain executive measures. A recent study has examined alternating category verbal fluency as an alternative to letter fluency tests in multicultural settings (e.g.141); researchers found that alternating fluency is a suitable measure of cognitive flexibility in diverse populations, but may not be able to discriminate patients with AD from patients with ‘frontal’ neurodegenerative disease. Second, adequate assessment of low educated or illiterate individuals may be particularly challenging due to a lack of suitable tests65. Common tests of executive functioning, such as the Trail Making Test, Stroop test, and phonemic fluency, are generally not appropriate in these populations; such tests often require a certain level of literacy and abstract reasoning skills acquired through formal education. Alternative tests of executive functioning have therefore been developed, such as the Color Trails Test142, Five Digit Test143 and Sun-Moon test144. However, the majority of these novel or adapted tests have not yet been studied in bvFTD and PPA.

3.6 Language

Changes in language are the hallmark of PPA and frequently occur in bvFTD145. The Boston Naming Test (BNT) is the most widely used test to assess naming impairment in North America and Europe146,147. However, its items – such as a pretzel, beaver, and asparagus – are culture-specific and not suitable for use in many parts of the world. Additionally, items such as the noose (BNT) are explicitly criticized for their offensive nature due to associations with traumatic historical and political events148–152. In addition, several studies suggest that the two-dimensional black-and-white line drawings included in most confrontation naming tasks may not be appropriate for evaluation of individuals with low educational attainment or illiterate populations153,154. The Multilingual Naming Test155 was developed to assess bilingual individuals in several languages; while the test is useful in some contexts, the stimuli (presented as black-and-white line drawings) may not be recognized equally across cultures156. Several initiatives have therefore focused on the development of widely applicable naming tests using colored photographs, such as the Cross-Linguistic Naming Test157 and the Naming Assessment in Multicultural Europe (NAME158). However, these tests have not yet been studied in patients with FTD or PPA specifically.

In addition to naming tests, category fluency tests are relatively widely used and studied in diverse populations, although not specifically in diverse individuals with FTD65. It is known that category fluency can be substantially influenced by education159 – animal fluency tests more so than foods and supermarket fluency160,161. Linguistic effects can also occur; for example, Spanish speakers produce relatively few words in animal fluency due to animal names being relatively long in comparison to other languages, such as Vietnamese162.

To differentiate between different types of PPA, neuropsychological tests are needed that take into account other aspects of language, such as syntax and phonology. Given the unique characteristics of languages across the globe, mere translation of existing tests will not be sufficient. For example, to address deficits relating to tone in individuals with PPA speaking tonal languages, researchers have used a ‘one-syllable tongue twister’ test to measure tonal errors in the Chinese Language Assessment for PPA (CLAP)41. In Spanish-speakers, surface dyslexia may be hard to study because of the transparent spelling to sound matching163; a reading test using words in which stress marks have been left out has been proposed as a valid alternative164. These examples highlight the challenges in this area and the need for language-specific test development. To this end, the Mini-Linguistic State Examination has been proposed as a brief assessment tool for the diagnosis and classification of PPA, with several language versions available, such as Spanish, Farsi, and Japanese165,166. In addition, language specific tests of semantic memory, which is culture and context dependent, have been developed to aid in the assessment of bvFTD and svPPA (e.g., in China167 and India168).

Additional challenges may arise in cross-linguistic assessments of bilingual and multilingual patients. Before such an assessment can begin, it is important to examine the level of proficiency in each language to determine which language the assessment should be conducted in and how to subsequently interpret the findings. As stated by Mendis et al.169, however, bilingualism is dynamic, meaning proficiency can vary based on exposure to other language users, as well as opportunity and frequency of use. In addition, appropriate, short screening tests to determine language proficiency across languages are lacking. The assessment becomes even more complex when patients are assessed in their second or even third language (as is often the case for immigrant and/or refugee patients), when patients switch between languages during the assessment, or when they use different languages in speaking versus writing170. Even with the use of an interpreter, the validity and reliability of such assessments can quickly become compromised (for a more in-depth illustration, see Plejert et al.171).

4. Treatment

4.1 Clinical trials

Clinical trials of pharmacologic and non-pharmacologic interventions for patients with FTD have largely been conducted in North America, Western Europe, and Australia. Ethnoracial, sex, gender, and socioeconomic data for participants enrolled in FTD clinical trials are limited but are likely similar to trends observed in AD research studies, particularly clinical trials. Participants in AD studies are consistently predominantly non-Hispanic white, with &lt;5% of participants being ethnoracially diverse, as noted in the ISTAART perspective paper for Diversity in AD research172. Diversity of participants with FTD enrolled in clinical trials is limited by numerous factors that have the potential to reduce the generalizability and applicability of the study findings.

Restricted geographic accessibility is a common limitation as most interventional trials are conducted in academic centers, usually in urban settings, that have small catchment areas and require long travel times of rural participants. Strict inclusion and exclusion criteria typically prohibit participation of patients with medical comorbidities and patients who are not proficient in the dominant language in a country. In a recent randomized controlled trial investigating a monoclonal antibody infusion for AD, screen failure rates were higher for traditionally underrepresented groups than for non-Hispanic white participants173. Frequent in-person visits and limited flexible scheduling present high opportunity costs which limit access for those whose caregiver or study partner is lacking adequate transportation, are working or need childcare. In our experience, enrollment of symptomatic women with FTD is more challenging than enrolling men, which delays trial completion and increases costs for studies targeting balanced enrollment.

Additional barriers need to be overcome to conduct clinical trials in LMICs. Funding (private and public) for research development has been limited in many countries outside North America, Western Europe, Australia and Japan. For example, in Latin America less than 2% of national public health budgets (the minimal percentage recommended by the Council on Health Research for Development) has been invested in research174. Difficulties with regulatory processes and SES represent additional barriers. Approximately 10% of the Latin American population is indigenous and the vast majority of this population lives in poverty, and sometimes in isolation, complicating their access to education and health programs175. Similar circumstances exist in parts of Asia and Africa.

4.2 Speech and language interventions.

Most of the extant literature has focused on linguistic diversity (i.e., speakers of the nonmainstream language or bilingual speakers), specifically in those presenting with PPA. Although a systematic review is beyond the scope of the current paper (see instead176,177), an assessment of the literature shows bias in PPA treatment research wherein English and Western European contexts and languages are over-represented compared to other language families (as has been well documented in post-stroke aphasia178). A notable exception is a recent study from Brazil examining a case-based intervention to promote different aspects of language functioning in 18 Brazilian Portuguese speaking patients with PPA that found significant improvement in 13 of the subjects179.

There is a very limited body of research investigating bilingual effects in the context of PPA treatment. A study in the United States180 investigated the effects of a lexical retrieval intervention in a group of bilingual speakers with logopenic variant PPA and svPPA. All participants were bilingual and were treated in both English and a second language (i.e., Spanish, Portuguese, Farsi or French). The intervention was designed to engage residual orthographic, phonological and semantic knowledge and to encourage self-cueing. After treatment, participants showed improved performance in both dominant and nondominant languages. In addition, cross-linguistic transfer for words that share meaning and form across languages, e.g., telephone and téléfono, was observed for most participants. In sum, there is promising evidence that dual-language speech and language intervention results in immediate and long-term naming improvements in bilingual individuals with PPA. Further research is needed to investigate additional language families, and to optimize approaches such that the unique linguistic characteristics of each language are incorporated into the treatment designs. Furthermore, future studies might indicate whether such approaches can be applied in unbalanced bilinguals, i.e., individuals more proficient in one language than the other, such as immigrant populations who learned a second language later in life. Importantly, cultural factors must be considered in the future development of novel interventions in diverse populations. In the current era of globalization, it will be incumbent upon researchers and clinical training programs181 to advance knowledge regarding assessment and treatment in bilingual FTD, as these individuals are often underserved due to low referral rates182,183.

5. Care needs

5.1 Caregivers – cultural differences

Caregiver burden is a complex and multifaceted construct mediated by several variables and their interactions184. Examining variables that contribute to caregiver burden in FTD is important given the particularly high level of caregiver burden in FTD compared to AD185–188. Mioshi et al. showed in 2009 that caregiver variables such as depression were relevant and, in 2013, that FTD disease severity was the main factor contributing to high levels of caregiver burden189,190. However, most studies of caregiver burden in FTD have been conducted in North America, Europe, and Australia and primarily in non-Hispanic white populations. A 2013 study by Mekala et al.20, was the first to compare caregiver burden in FTD in two countries with different cultures, India and Australia. They found that both groups experienced similar levels of stress and depression, despite the Indian caregivers caring for a more impaired group of patients and delivering a greater number of hours of care; however, the Indian caregivers did report higher levels of anxiety. The authors suggest that perhaps some Indian caregivers perceived their loved one’s symptoms as part of ‘normal’ aging, making it difficult to address their worries and to obtain the right coping skills. Differences in reporting of anxiety and depression may also originate from cultural variations, such as differences in the willingness and comfort discussing such topics as part of research. The authors concluded that addressing FTD caregiver coping skills with Indian caregivers may have a greater impact than those targeting dementia specific symptoms.

5.2 Shame and stigma affecting diagnosis and care in FTD

Shame and stigma are important cultural factors that can impact caregiver burden and quality of life (QoL), and also affect the recognition of symptoms and whether patients obtain a diagnosis. In the following paragraphs, several illustrative examples are provided of shame and stigma affecting diagnosis and care in FTD in different global contexts. Furthermore, an example from one of the author’s clinical practice is described in Box 1.

In Colombia, caregivers felt stigmatized by their role, in that they thought they were less worthy, which predicted increased caregiver burden, greater depression and reduced QoL191. In China, Chao et al.15 reported that there was often confusion and disagreement about various symptoms, e.g., motor or cognitive symptoms being attributed to “normal aging”, thereby delaying the seeking of medical attention. Given the stigma surrounding mental illness in China, psychiatric or behavioral symptoms are generally not openly discussed and may not be disclosed on direct questioning. Disclosure is even less likely if the specialist is of a different race or culture. “Dementia” has the meaning of “crazy and catatonic disorder”, and stigma may thus be amplified for FTD given the concurrence of cognitive dysfunctions and behavioral changes. Delayed diagnosis is very common, and the disease is often advanced before being brought to the attention of a medical professional15. Both in China and in Latin America, there is a culture of looking after the person at home which also relates to difficulties in finding appropriate aged care facilities when the decision is made to eventually transition the person into a formal care facility. There are also feelings of guilt that influence the willingness to pursue placement in care facilities.

In Latin America, care is predominantly provided by women with low education living in multigenerational households9. As unconditional respect for the patriarch is considered very important in some Latin American cultures, women and younger family members who are caregivers for an older male are uncomfortable and have difficulty managing dysfunctional behaviors. Secondly, there is shame in seeking help for these behaviors, such as sexualized behavior, disinhibition and excessive alcohol drinking. Furthermore, caregivers may perceive these behaviors as deliberate, not recognizing them as symptoms of FTD, which delays evaluation, diagnosis and treatment—with adverse impacts on the levels of caregiver burden. For PPA specifically, the loss of communications pertaining to traditions and heritage can contribute to frustration and guilt9.

Emerging evidence from Sub-Saharan Africa pertaining to all-cause dementia has shown that people may simultaneously hold a number of different beliefs about dementia and its causes192. For example, a study in South Africa found that participants, on the one hand, often believed that dementia was related to witchcraft or punishments from ancestors or God, while on the other they also believed dementia to be a medical condition193. Help was therefore often sought from multiple different sources simultaneously, typically faith healers and traditional medicine practitioners, and to a lesser degree allopathic medicine providers194. It is also to be noted that access to psychiatrists and neurologists is very low in much of Africa. In cases of suspected witchcraft, caregivers may be shunned by community, and even family, due to fear192. It is not hard to imagine that the ‘strange’ behavior displayed by individuals with bvFTD may be misconstrued as caused by such forces in environments where religio-magical explanatory models are commonly used. In much of Africa, there is a culturally entrenched reliance on informal care from younger relatives—and residential programs are uncommon4.

5.3 Caregiver support and interventions

There is very little information on caring and how to care for people with FTD in an international context. In Peru, the majority (76%) of 145 medical professionals (neurologists, psychiatrists, residents in neurology or psychiatry) who completed a survey about knowledge and attitudes for the management of bvFTD indicated that they do not provide education, information, and support to the caregiver of the bvFTD patient. The survey respondents reported that 88% of patients with advanced bvFTD were not followed by a palliative care team195.

An appraisal of the current literature indicates large gaps with respect to intervention studies aimed at caregivers of individuals with FTD from ethnoculturally diverse populations. Nevertheless, a body of research has examined the effects of interventions administered to caregivers with AD and related disorders, some of which included those presenting with FTD. A subset of these studies purposefully included individuals from diverse backgrounds. Outcomes demonstrate that tailored caregiver interventions result in improved caregiver quality of life and increased strategy and skill usage196–199. Future interventions specifically tailored to the different variants of FTD will need to be developed specially for diverse populations. In addition, it is vital that such interventions take into consideration the ethnocultural differences in clinical presentations and the related differences in caregiver perceptions of FTD. In many contexts, raising dementia awareness will be a crucial first step200.

6. Gaps and next steps.

As the preceding sections emphasize, a substantial amount of research is needed to cover the gaps in FTD research and clinical practice. In the following paragraphs, we outline the workgroup’s recommendations for next steps.

6.1 Recognition of bvFTD and PPA in diverse populations

Awareness of bvFTD and PPA is often limited and requires targeted efforts and awareness campaigns. For example, in a study of 14 countries, the level of public awareness of the general concept of aphasia varied from 1% in Argentina to 66% in Sweden201. Given the influence of cultural diversity in clinical presentations, and of dementia literacy, explanatory models, and modes of help-seeking, public awareness campaigns need to be tailored to the specific ethnocultural contexts, and target audiences must be mindfully defined. In addition to awareness campaigns in the general population, investments should be made to disseminate expert knowledge on FTD and PPA to clinicians working in the field. For example, a study in New Zealand found that only 21% of healthcare professionals surveyed had basic knowledge about the general concept of aphasia202. This knowledge dissemination can take different forms. One option is through remote or in-person clinician training for general practitioners, neurologists, and psychiatrists, to improve recognition of early and later presentations and to differentiate different subtypes. Another possibility is the development of a best practice manual for the diagnosis of FTD—as was recently done for dementia in Latin America203. Additionally, this topic should be included in the curriculum of undergraduate studies from health sciences.

From a systems perspective, the development of formal partnerships and exchange programs between established centers in North America, Western Europe, Australia and Japan, and clinical programs in LMICs will foster knowledge transfer and the development of local expertise. A global effort to map the definitions and delineations of normal and abnormal behavior in FTD and language symptoms (via table or concept map) may be helpful to gain a better understanding of the variation in presentation across cultures. To this end, researchers in LMICs may contribute valuable knowledge about the influence of culture on behavioral symptoms of FTD, as well as the role of language typology and the different linguistic features characteristic of PPA in different languages. Consensus criteria could then be developed to diagnose PPA in diverse populations, moving away from the current over-reliance on aspects such as surface dyslexia. Such advances are hindered, however, by a lack of funding for FTD-research in LMICs. For example, of the 613 FTD-related grants ($432,167,275) awarded between 1998–2008, the majority (89%) was from the United States and the remainder largely from Europe204. In addition to more funding, open access publication should be the standard requirement to improve access to scientific knowledge for researchers working in low-resource settings. Open access publications will facilitate access to scientific knowledge.

6.2 Cognitive assessment and diagnosis of FTD in diverse populations

Researchers should be aware that mere translation of existing cognitive tests developed in North America and Europe is insufficient to make such tests appropriate for other populations. Test development should follow international guidelines for cross-cultural translation and adaptation procedures, such as those currently being formulated in a neuropsychological addendum to the existing International Test Commission Guidelines by the Cultural Special Interest Group of the International Neuropsychological Society205. They should also take into consideration the cultural and linguistic appropriateness of the stimuli and test procedures. Ideally, individuals possessing relevant cultural expertise are involved early on in the development and/or adaptation of the target measure and during pilot-testing. Regrettably, few researchers use these guidelines for test development in FTD research.

To enhance the diagnosis of PPA, language-specific tests are likely needed; however, as there are over 6000 living languages worldwide, it may not be feasible to develop unique sets of speech and language batteries for all these languages. Instead, the demands for linguistically tailored tests in each language should be evaluated by comparing the linguistic differences of each PPA relevant language features with that of the English language that are relatively well studied in the PPA research field. For instance, the reading and writing presentations between languages with different writing systems would be expected to vary more than between languages using the same writing system. Since most research has been dedicated to the reading and writing symptomatologies of alphabetic language users with PPA, the demands for studying dyslexia and dysgraphia in non-alphabetical languages may be more clinically imperative. Culture is to be taken into account as well; studies relying on the Boston Naming test have demonstrated that speakers of the same language may have regional differences in their item responses206,207. This is likely related to the local variations in a language and differences in cultural background. Thus, it is also important to consider validating the speech and language tools of the same language in a population specific manner.

Researchers in the domain of social cognition face similar questions about whether to develop culture-specific tests or try to design tests applicable to individuals with a wider variety of backgrounds. One interesting example from schizophrenia research is the development of the SOCRATIS battery208, in which researchers tailored a commonly used false belief task to reflect the local context in India by changing stories, characters, and images to reflect culture-specific settings (e.g. temple instead of a church).

Using novel digital technologies such as virtual reality and automatic speech processing may provide promising ways of obtaining neuropsychological data that closely resembles everyday life, which may be particularly important for individuals who are not familiar with being formally tested due to a lack of formal education or relevant exposure, and who may not understand the need to complete more abstract tests170,209.

6.3 Addressing diversity in FTD treatment and care

Much work remains to be done to improve FTD treatment and care across the globe. A crucial first step is to improve equity in access to a timely and accurate diagnosis of FTD. In addition to this being a priority on ethical grounds, a delayed or incorrect diagnosis will also impede access to care and participation in research. It is also to be noted that lower levels of case recognition also impede FTD treatment development, by reducing the pool of potential participants in the relevant research. In the context of clinical trials, in 2020, the US Food and Drug Administration issued non-binding guidance recommendations for industry for enhancing the diversity of clinical trial populations. The guidance highlights two key steps—broadening eligibility while limiting exclusion criteria and improving recruitment so that participants involved in the trial reflect those most likely to use the drug210. For clinical trials in FTD, purposeful study design and support for participants will be needed to ensure sufficient enrollment of women, residents from rural settings, and participants from underrepresented ethnic and racial groups. Potential strategies to accomplish broader participation and more diverse enrollment and retention in FTD clinical trials and other studies include: Limiting in-person study visits and using remote data collection to reduce participant burden and opportunity costs, with increased reliance on remote data collection either directly from the patient’s home or from digital assessment tools or standardized sample collection deployed with local clinical sites. Such decentralized trial design would also enable broader catchment areas for established sites within countries and expansion to a larger set of international sites.

Active collaboration with physicians and health providers serving rural and underrepresented racial and ethnic communities, alongside international collaborations, in long term relationships that foster education and clinical support and extend research opportunities. Partnerships between leading clinical trials centers and those in developing countries has been implemented successfully for decades in infectious disease clinical trials211.

Adaptation, translation, and validation of study materials to a broader range of languages and cultures to facilitate inclusion of countries outside of North America, Western Europe and Australia in FTD clinical trials, leveraging existing local expertise and growing international FTD consortia. This would also include the development of measures less reliant on reports from a single caregiver, for patients in alternate living and care situations. Language and cultural similarities have motivated the organization of research networks that will facilitate clinical research and trials across international networks, such as the ReDLat group, an FTD consortium spanning Latin American and Caribbean countries212. Similar consortia have been developed in Japan and South Korea, and are developing in China and South East Asia.

Providing under-resourced centers with technical assistance for navigating regulatory processes, study start-up, and other infrastructure necessary for the implementation of clinical trials (e.g., modern brain imaging methods, sophisticated genetic and biochemical assays). The use of direct-to-patient registries like the FTD Disorders Registry may also help identify which under-resourced clinical sites are likely to have a substantial cohort of potential participants for FTD clinical trials.

Assurance of adequate enrollment of men and women, and consideration of sex/gender effects on behavioral and other psychometric measures, and caregiver and quality of life outcomes.

Application of the social marketing model of recruitment to maximize the diversity of participant enrollment. The social marketing model is an effective means to increase research participation of underrepresented populations213. The recruitment method involves six principles: product, price, place, promotion, participants and partners.

Involvement of people with FTD and caregivers from diverse backgrounds in the design of interventions to maximize fit with needs and expectations. Similar input should be incorporated on clinical trial design and outcome measures, to maximize participation, minimize attrition, and ensure that the trial tools accurately capture what matters.

Involvement of researchers from diverse backgrounds in the design and implementation of interventions.

It is fundamental that caregivers of patients with FTD are provided with a tailored, interdisciplinary approach to care, including training on complex medical symptoms, psychosocial issues, spiritual well-being, and planning for the future. However, improvement in health literacy, such as what is considered “normal aging” is required to increase the profile of dementia, including FTD. This should not be targeted just to caregivers, but also needs to be recognized as a social issue by government and health bodies. Using social media might be one method to provide relevant information to large populations214. This might improve help-seeking, access to care and decrease stigma. Furthermore, high quality online resources and remote caregiver programs may improve access to people living in remote areas by reducing financial and logistical barriers. For PPA, multidisciplinary teams with speech pathologists and other language experts need to collaborate to design language-specific interventions that can be delivered by non-specialists available in community settings.

7. Conclusions

This work has focused on priorities pertaining to a multicultural and international perspective of FTD care and research, highlighting gaps in our understanding of the ethnocultural factors that shape how illness is manifested, experienced and articulated, as well as what happens for diagnosis, treatment and research, and for the psychosocial adaptation of patients and families. Questions regarding FTD epidemiology, genetics, biofluid and neuroimaging biomarkers, are also crucial—they are tackled in a subsequent paper215. From the foregoing, it will be clear to the reader that examination of these cross-cultural aspects of FTD is in its infancy—and disparities exist worldwide with respect to the expertise, knowledge and resources required to provide the care and to bridge gaps in our knowledge.

Recognition of the need for global and ethnocultural perspectives for FTD research is timely and growing. The multicentric research collaborations developed in North America (ARTFL-LEFFTDS Longitudinal Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration216) and Europe (Genetic FTD Initiative217) have yielded invaluable insights regarding the natural history of FTD, with respect to symptom progression, brain atrophy and physicochemical change. However, it is recognized that these findings, valuable as they are, derive from a study population that lacks diversity. As such, it would be premature to take the findings as representative of all FTD cases in the various ethnocultural contexts around the world. This limitation, and its recognition, is one of the motivations for the formation of the Frontotemporal Prevention Initiative (FPI218). The FPI is working actively to coalesce the regional international consortia (currently those from North America, Europe, Latin America and the Caribbean, Australian and New Zealand, South East Asia, Japan, South Korea, and China) into a global initiative to foster harmonization of methods and sharing of resources, and bring a timely diversity in the populations and contexts in which FTD is investigated. This is a work in progress, with recognized gaps that include incomplete worldwide reach (e.g., no presence in Africa and Eurasia), need for knowledge transfer and capacity building programs, and the necessity of adaptations of research methods for the cross-cultural work that is to be done.

Alongside this international development within the field, there is recognition at the policy level, embodied in the 2022 United States National Institutes of Health draft recommendations for FTD research, of the urgency for major investments in research to advance our understanding how ethnocultural and socioeconomic factors correlate with risk factors and pathophysiology, and influence FTD clinical expression, illness progression, treatment response, psychosocial adaptation, and research participation, advocacy and other sociocultural aspects.

Ultimately, we hope that the increasing recognition of the importance of diversity in FTD, together with the recommendations presented in this perspective paper, will encourage global discussion of diversity in FTD research and practice, and result in the formation of one or more workgroups or multi-stakeholder expert panels that can determine which goals to prioritize, formulate action plans, and generate the road map and activities to these challenges.

Funding

S.F. is supported by ZonMW (#73305095007) and Health Holland, Topsector Life Sciences &amp; Health (PPP-allowance; #LSHM20106). R.B. is supported by the IDEX Fellowship. I.I.-G. is supported with funding from GBHI, Alzheimer’s Association, and Alzheimer’s Society (GBHI ALZ UK-21-720973 and AACSF-21-850193), as well as by the Instituto de Salud Carlos III (JR20/0018 and PI21/00791). D.M. receives funding from NIH/NIA, HRSA and a private foundation. J.S.Y. is supported by NIH-NIA R01 AG062588, R01 AG057234, P30 AG062422; NIH-NINDS U54 NS123985; the Rainwater Charitable Foundation; the Alzheimer’s Association; the Global Brain Health Institute; and the Mary Oakley Foundation. J.L. is supported by NIDCD K23 DC018021. F.K is supported by the National Health and Medical Research Council Career Development Fellowship GNT1158762. A.S. is supported by ANID / FONDAP /ID15150012; ANID/FONDEF/ID22I10251; ANID/ Fondecyt Regular/ 1210195 &amp;1191726, ; ANID/PIA/Anillos ACT210096; Multi-Partner-Consortium to expand dementia research in Latin-America [ReDLat, supported by National Institutes of Health, National Institutes of Aging (R01 AG057234), Alzheimer’s Association (SG-20-725707), Tau Consortium, and Global Brain Health Institute] and Alzheimer’s Association GBHI ALZ UK-20-639295. A.S.-G. is funded by a UKRI Healthy Ageing Challenge Catalyst Award (ES/W006405/1), the National Institute for Health Research (COV-LT2-0014) and a grant jointly funded by the Economic and Social Research Council (UK) and the National Institute for Health Research (UK) (ES/S010467/1). E.T. is supported by the Alzheimer’s Association. H.U. has received the Alzheimer’s Association Clinician Scientist Fellowship (AACSF) grant (Re: AACSF-22-849085). G.B. is supported by NIH/NIA: R01AG068183 (GMB), R01AG056466 (GMB), R01AG067428 (GMB) R01AG074302 (GMB) and BrightFocus Foundation A2021142S (GMB).

Author disclosure/conflicts of interest

S.F. has received consulting fees from Biogen (paid to her organization) unrelated to this manuscript. All other authors report no conflicts of interest.

Table 1. Individual and clinical barriers to FTD diagnosis in diverse populations

Individual and Family Barriers to Diagnosis	Medical and Health System Barriers to Diagnosis	
Lack of awareness in the populationa 15,17,20,219,220	Lack of awareness in cliniciansa 7,195,220–222	
Poor educationa,b 223,224	Disregard for expressed concernsa 219	
Attributing dementia to normal aginga,b 20,219	Misinterpretation of behavioral symptoms by clinicians17	
Associating dementia with amnesia15,219	Lack of social cognition assessment tools based on local cultural norms24	
Stigma against mental illnessa15,225–227	MMSE limited cognitive assessment and lack of validation of detailed cognitive testsa 228	
Tendency to talk to religious leaders instead of doctorsa219	Limited time for patient assessment and lack of trained neuropsychologistsa 221,228	
Considering symptoms not important enough to address in clinical settingsa 15,17,219	Difficulties in accessing high-cost diagnostic tools such as biomarkers, genetic screening, or PET scansa 13,228	
Focusing on cognitive/motor symptoms or considering behavioral changes less important or secondary features15,17	Barriers in research; poor support from the governments, fewer funding opportunities for research, and negative beliefs/attitudes towards brain (organ) donationa 229	
Lack of medical insurance or knowledge for the utilization of servicesa 15,219,230	Diagnostic criteria that do not reflect global diversity40,231	
a This barrier also applies to dementia in general

b This barrier can also be present in medical and health systems

Box 1: Amir’s story

Amir had always been a generous, compassionate, and devoted Muslim. He and his family were respected and valued members of the Muslim community and particularly well-regarded at their local mosque.

In his late 50’s, Amir’s behavior began to change; he would breach etiquette when visiting the mosque (e.g., speaking loudly and wearing shoes) and he would flirt with other women. He also stopped observing Ramadan and showed indifference to other people’s feelings and beliefs. This behavior is different to common societal perceptions of dementia (e.g., forgetfulness and disorientation) which led others to perceive Amir as a bad Muslim, someone who had “turned away the Prophet and the Qur’an”. Amir’s behavior created embarrassment and high levels of concern and distress to Amir’s wife and daughters, who also had to deal with great social rejection and stigma. To avoid conflicts in the mosque, Amir’s family drastically reduced their activities outside their home. As a result, Amir’s family became more isolated, Amir’s behaviors became more agitated and the whole family’s mental health suffered.

When Amir received a diagnosis of bvFTD, his wife was able to explain his symptoms to their religious community leaders. Amir’s dementia was acknowledged and consequently, he was exempted from performing religious duties. Moreover, the understanding of Amir’s symptoms also served to repair the bonds between his family and their religious community and partially restored their social and spiritual activities.

Research in context

Systematic review:

The authors reviewed the literature on diversity and disparities in behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD) and primary progressive aphasia (PPA) research using traditional sources (e.g., PubMed).

Interpretation:

Experts from the Diversity and Disparities and the Frontotemporal Dementia Professional Interest Areas of the International Society to Advance Alzheimer’s Disease and Treatment (ISTAART) outline critical gaps in knowledge how diversity in culture, language, education, and socioeconomic factors among others, impacts clinical presentation, recognition, and diagnosis of bvFTD and PPA, as well as subsequent treatment and care.

Future directions:

Future research should be aimed at 1) increasing global awareness and recognition of bvFTD and PPA; 2) modifying current diagnostic criteria and diagnostic procedures; 3) developing more/sensitive cognitive tests to diagnose bvFTD and PPA in diverse populations; 4) increasing enrollment of patients from underrepresented groups in FTD clinical trials; 5) conducting more research into inclusive caregiver interventions.


References

1. Rascovsky K , Hodges JR , Knopman D , Sensitivity of revised diagnostic criteria for the behavioural variant of frontotemporal dementia. Brain. 2011;134 (9 ):2456–2477. doi:10.1093/brain/awr179.21810890
2. Gorno-Tempini ML , Hillis AE , Weintraub S , Classification of primary progressive aphasia and its variants. Neurology. 2011;76 (11 ):1006–1014. doi:10.1212/WNL.0b013e31821103e6.21325651
3. Poole ML , Brodtmann A , Darby D , Vogel AP . Motor Speech Phenotypes of Frontotemporal Dementia, Primary Progressive Aphasia, and Progressive Apraxia of Speech. J Speech Lang Hear Res. 2017;60 (4 ):897–911. doi:10.1044/2016_jslhr-s-16-0140.28289749
4. Onyike CU , Shinagawa S , Ellajosyula R . Frontotemporal Dementia: A cross-cultural perspective. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2021;1281 :141–150. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-51140-1_10.33433874
5. UNESCO. Investing in Cultural Diversity and Intercultural Dialogue. UNESCO Publishing. unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000185202/PDF/185202eng.pdf.multi. Published 2009. Updated 2009. Accessed May 24, 2022.
6. Onyike CU , Diehl-Schmid J . The epidemiology of frontotemporal dementia. Int Rev Psychiatry. 2013;25 (2 ):130–137. doi:10.3109/09540261.2013.776523.23611343
7. Lekoubou A , Echouffo-Tcheugui JB , Kengne AP . Epidemiology of neurodegenerative diseases in sub-Saharan Africa: a systematic review. BMC Public Health. 2014;14 (653 ):1–32. doi:10.1186/1471-2458-14-653.24383435
8. Mattap SM , Mohan D , McGrattan AM , The economic burden of dementia in low-and middle-income countries (LMICs): a systematic review. BMJ Global Health. 2022;7 (4 ):e007409. doi:10.1136/bmjgh-2021-007409.
9. Piña-Escudero SD , Aguirre GA , Javandel S , Longoria-Ibarrola EM . Caregiving for Patients With Frontotemporal Dementia in Latin America. Front Neurol. 2021;12 :665694. doi:10.3389/fneur.2021.665694.34305781
10. Bertoux M , Volle E , De Souza L , Funkiewiez A , Dubois B , Habert M . Neural correlates of the mini-SEA (Social cognition and Emotional Assessment) in behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia. Brain Imaging Behav. 2014;8 (1 ):1–6. doi:10.1007/s11682-013-9261-0.24078043
11. Narme P , Mouras H , Roussel M , Devendeville A , Godefroy O . Assessment of socioemotional processes facilitates the distinction between frontotemporal lobar degeneration and Alzheimer’s disease. J Clin Exp Neuropsychol. 2013;35 (7 ):728–744. doi:10.1080/13803395.2013.823911.23930667
12. Woolley JD , Khan BK , Murthy NK , Miller BL , Rankin KP . The diagnostic challenge of psychiatric symptoms in neurodegenerative disease: rates of and risk factors for prior psychiatric diagnosis in patients with early neurodegenerative disease. J Clin Psychiatry. 2011;72 (2 ):126–133. doi:10.4088/JCP.10m06382oli.21382304
13. Ferri CP , Jacob K . Dementia in low-income and middle-income countries: different realities mandate tailored solutions. PLoS medicine. 2017;14 (3 ):e1002271. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1002271.28350797
14. Prince M , Comas-Herrera A , Knapp M , Guerchet M , and Karagiannidou M Improving healthcare for people living with dementia: Coverage, quality and costs now and in the future. World Alzheimer Report. 2016:1–131. doi:10.13140/RG.2.2.22580.04483.
15. Chao SZ , Rosen HJ , Azor V , Frontotemporal dementia in eight Chinese individuals. Neurocase. 2013;19 (1 ):76–84. doi:10.1080/13554794.2011.654218.23311888
16. Ghosh A , Dutt A , Ghosh M , Bhargava P , Rao S . Using the revised diagnostic criteria for frontotemporal dementia in India: evidence of an advanced and florid disease. PloS One. 2013;8 (4 ):e60999. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0060999.23596513
17. Papatriantafyllou JD , Viskontas IV , Papageorgiou SG , Difficulties in detecting behavioral symptoms of frontotemporal lobar degeneration across cultures. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 2009;23 (1 ):77–81. doi:10.1097/WAD.0b013e318182d874.18695586
18. Sheng B , Law CB , Yeung KM . Characteristics and diagnostic profile of patients seeking dementia care in a memory clinic in Hong Kong. Int Psychogeriatr. 2009;21 (2 ):392–400. doi:10.1017/S104161020800817X.19102800
19. Guimarães HC , Vale TC , Pimentel V , de Sá NC , Beato RG , Caramelli P . Analysis of a case series of behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia: emphasis on diagnostic delay. Dement Neuropsychol. 2013;7 (1 ):55–59. doi:10.1590/S1980-57642013DN70100009.29213820
20. Mekala S , Alladi S , Chandrasekar K , Cultural differences are reflected in variables associated with carer burden in FTD: A comparison study between India and Australia. Dement Neuropsychol. 2013;7 (1 ):104–109. doi:10.1590/S1980-57642013DN70100016.29213826
21. Dodge SG , Vincent L , Dacks P , &amp; Wheaton DKH African American experiences of Frontotemporal Degeneration (FTD): A sub-cohort assessment of the FTD Insights Survey. Alzheimer’s Association International Conference, San Diego, CA. July 2022.
22. Vincent L , Dodge SG , Dacks P , &amp; Wheaton DKH Perceptions of Frontotemporal Degeneration (FTD) Experiences among Latino Americans: A sub-cohort assessment of the FTD Insights Survey. Latinos and Alzheimer’s Symposium, Bonita Springs, FL. April 25 2022.
23. Tsoy E , Kiekhofer RE , Guterman EL , Assessment of racial/ethnic disparities in timeliness and comprehensiveness of dementia diagnosis in California. JAMA Neurol. 2021;78 (6 ):657–665. doi:10.1001/jamaneurol.2021.0399.33779684
24. Koelkebeck K , Uwatoko T , Tanaka J , Kret ME . How culture shapes social cognition deficits in mental disorders: A review. Soc Neurosci. 2017;12 (2 ):102–112. doi:10.1080/17470919.2016.1155482.26899265
25. McLean D , Thara R , John S , DSM-IV “criterion A” schizophrenia symptoms across ethnically different populations: evidence for differing psychotic symptom content or structural organization? Cult Med Psychiatry. 2014;38 (3 ):408–426. doi:10.1007/s11013-014-9385-8.24981830
26. Shimomura T , Mori E . Obstinate imitation behaviour in differentiation of frontotemporal dementia from Alzheimer’s disease. Lancet. 1998;352 (9128 ):623–624. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(05)79578-7.
27. Shinagawa S , Ikeda M , Nestor P , Characteristics of abnormal eating behaviours in frontotemporal lobar degeneration: a cross-cultural survey. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2009;80 (12 ):1413–1414. doi:10.1136/jnnp.2008.165332.19917828
28. Davis EJ , Solsberg CW , White CC , Sex-specific association of the X chromosome with cognitive change and tau pathology in aging and Alzheimer disease. JAMA Neurol. 2021;78 (10 ):1249–1254. doi:10.1001/jamaneurol.2021.2806.34424272
29. Flaherty C , Kraft J , Brothers A , The relationship between oestrogen and executive functioning in ALS females with emerging Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration (FTLD) supports a neuroendocrine model of FTLD attenuation. Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener. 2017;18 (1–2 ):74–85. doi:10.1080/21678421.2016.1249487.27892698
30. Illán-Gala I , Lleo A , Karydas A , Plasma tau and neurofilament light in frontotemporal lobar degeneration and Alzheimer disease. Neurology. 2021;96 (5 ):e671–e683. doi:10.1212/WNL.0000000000011226.33199433
31. Senaha MLH , Caramelli P , Nitrini R , Charchat-Fichman H , Weekes BS . Semantic dementia without surface dyslexia in Portuguese. Brain Lang. 2006;99 (1–2 ):33–34. doi:10.1016/j.bandl.2006.06.031.
32. Wilson MA , Martínez-Cuitiño M . Semantic dementia without surface dyslexia in Spanish: unimpaired reading with impaired semantics. Behav Neurol. 2012;25 (3 ):273–284. doi:10.3233/BEN-2012-119009.22713391
33. Billette OV , Preiß D , Nestor PJ . The concept of regularization: Resolving the problem of surface dyslexia in semantic variant primary progressive aphasia across different languages. Neuropsychology. 2020;34 (3 ):298. doi:10.1037/neu0000611.31868373
34. Ralph MAL , Sage K , Heredia CG , El-La: The impact of degraded semantic representations on knowledge of grammatical gender in semantic dementia. Acta Neuropsychol. 2011;9 (2 ):115–131.
35. Auclair-Ouellet N , Fossard M , Houde M , Laforce R , Macoir J . Production of morphologically derived words in the semantic variant of primary progressive aphasia: Preserved decomposition and composition but impaired validation. Neurocase. 2016;22 (2 ):170–178. doi:10.1080/13554794.2015.1081391.26304677
36. Auclair-Ouellet N , Fossard M , Laforce R Jr , Bier N , Macoir J . Conception or *conceivation? The processing of derivational morphology in semantic dementia. Aphasiology. 2017;31 (2 ):166–188. doi:10.1080/02687038.2016.1168918.
37. Kavé G , Heinik J , Biran I . Preserved morphological processing in semantic dementia. Cogn Neuropsychol. 2012;29 (7–8 ):550–568. doi:10.1080/02643294.2012.759097.23521053
38. Sasanuma S , Monoi H . The syndrome of Gogi (word‐meaning) aphasia: Selective impairment of kanji processing. Neurology. 1975;25 (7 ):627–627. doi:10.1212/wnl.25.7.627.1171393
39. Yamadori A Gogi (word meaning) aphasia and its relation with semantic dementia. Front Neurol Neurosci. 2019;44 :30–38. doi:10.1159/000494950.31220829
40. Canu E , Agosta F , Battistella G , Speech production differences in English and Italian speakers with nonfluent variant PPA. Neurology. 2020;94 (10 ):e1062–e1072. doi:10.1212/WNL.0000000000008879.31924679
41. Tee BL , Deleon J , Chen Li Ying LK , Tonal and orthographic analysis in a Cantonese-speaking individual with nonfluent/agrammatic variant primary progressive aphasia. Neurocase. 2022;28 (1 ):1–10. doi:10.1080/13554794.2021.1925302.34404317
42. Paradis M Bilingualism and aphasia. In: Whitaker HA , Whitaker H , editors. New York: Academic Press; 1977:65–121.
43. Albert ML , Obler LK . The Bilingual Brain: Neuropsychological and Neurolinguistic Aspects of Bilingualism. Perspectives in Neurolinguistics and Psycholinguistics. New York: Academic Press; 1978.
44. Costa AS , Jokel R , Villarejo A , Bilingualism in primary progressive aphasia: a retrospective study on clinical and language characteristics. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 2019;33 (1 ):47. doi:10.1097/WAD.0000000000000288.30640254
45. Devaughn S , Chen W , Burciaga J , Peery S . A Case of Semantic Variant of Primary Progressive Aphasia (svPPA) in a Balanced Bilingual. Arch Clin Neuropsychol. 2016;31 (6 ):588–588. doi:10.1093/arclin/acw043.14.
46. Druks J , Weekes BS . Parallel deterioration to language processing in a bilingual speaker. Cogn Neuropsychol. 2013;30 (7–8 ):578–596. doi:10.1080/02643294.2014.882814.24527801
47. Filley CM , Ramsberger G , Menn L , Wu J , Reid BY , Reid AL . Primary progressive aphasia in a bilingual woman. Neurocase. 2006;12 (5 ):296–299. doi:10.1080/13554790601126047.17190751
48. Hernández M , Caño A , Costa A , Sebastián-Gallés N , Juncadella M , Gascón-Bayarri J . Grammatical category-specific deficits in bilingual aphasia. Brain Lang. 2008;107 (1 ):68–80. doi:10.1016/j.bandl.2008.01.006.18294684
49. Kambanaros M , Grohmann KK . BATting multilingual primary progressive aphasia for Greek, English, and Czech. J Neurolinguistics. 2012;25 (6 ):520–537. doi:10.1016/j.jneuroling.2011.01.006.
50. Larner AJ . Progressive non-fluent aphasia in a bilingual subject: Relative preservation of “Mother Tongue”. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2012;24 (1 ):E9–E10. doi:10.1176/appi.neuropsych.11010019.
51. Lind M , Simonsen HG , Ribu ISB , Svendsen BA , Svennevig J , de Bot K . Lexical access in a bilingual speaker with dementia: Changes over time. Clin Linguist Phon. 2018;32 (4 ):353–377. doi:10.1080/02699206.2017.1381168.29043848
52. Machado Á , Rodrigues M , Simões S , Santana I , Soares-Fernandes J . The Portuguese who could no longer speak French: Primary progressive aphasia in a bilingual man. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2010;22 (1 ):123. e131-123. e132. doi:10.1176/jnp.2010.22.1.123.e31.
53. Malcolm T , Lerman A , Korytkowska M , Vonk JM , Obler LK . Primary progressive aphasia in bilinguals and multilinguals. John Wiley &amp; Sons Ltd.; 2019.
54. Mendez MF , Saghafi S , Clark DG . Semantic dementia in multilingual patients. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2004;16 (3 ):381–381. doi:10.1176/jnp.16.3.381.
55. Meyer AM , Snider SF , Eckmann CB , Friedman RB . Prophylactic treatments for anomia in the logopenic variant of primary progressive aphasia: Cross-language transfer. Aphasiology. 2015;29 (9 ):1062–1081. doi:10.1080/02687038.2015.1028327.26257456
56. Zanini S , Angeli V , Tavano A . Primary progressive aphasia in a bilingual speaker: a single-case study. Clin Linguist Phon. 2011;25 (6–7 ):553–564. doi:10.3109/02699206.2011.566464.21631307
57. Ellajosyula R , Narayanan J , Patterson K . Striking loss of second language in bilingual patients with semantic dementia. J Neurol. 2020;267 (2 ):551–560. doi:10.1007/s00415-019-09616-2.31705289
58. Adrover-Roig D , Galparsoro-Izagirre N , Marcotte K , Ferré P , Wilson MA , Inés Ansaldo A . Impaired L1 and executive control after left basal ganglia damage in a bilingual Basque–Spanish person with aphasia. Clin Linguist Phon. 2011;25 (6–7 ):480–498. doi:10.3109/02699206.2011.563338.21453016
59. Bhat S , Chengappa S . Code Switching in Normal and Aphasic Kannada-English Bilinguals. Proceedings of the 4th International Symposium on Bilingualism; 2005; Somerville, Massachusetts.
60. Chengappa S , Daniel KE , Bhat S . Language mixing and switching in Malayalam-English bilingual aphasics. Asia Pac Disabil Rehabil J. 2004;15 (2 ):68–76.
61. Paradis M , Goldblum M-C , Abidi R . Alternate antagonism with paradoxical translation behavior in two bilingual aphasic patients. Brain Lang. 1982;15 (1 ):55–69. doi:10.1016/0093-934x(82)90046-3.7059791
62. Fujii DE . Developing a cultural context for conducting a neuropsychological evaluation with a culturally diverse client: The ECLECTIC framework. Clin Neuropsychol. 2018;32 (8 ):1356–1392. doi:10.1080/13854046.2018.1435826.29463175
63. Henríquez F , Cabello V , Baez S , Multidimensional Clinical Assessment in Frontotemporal Dementia and Its Spectrum in Latin America and the Caribbean: A Narrative Review and a Glance at Future Challenges. Front Neurol. 2021;12 :768591–768591. doi:10.3389/fneur.2021.768591.35250791
64. Poos JM , Russell LL , Peakman G , Impairment of episodic memory in genetic frontotemporal dementia: A GENFI study. Alzheimers Dement (Amst). 2021;13 (1 ):e12185. doi:10.1002/dad2.12185.34027016
65. Franzen S , van den Berg E , Goudsmit M , A systematic review of neuropsychological tests for the assessment of dementia in non-western, low-educated or illiterate populations. J Int Neuropsychol Soc. 2020;26 (3 ):331–351. doi:10.1017/S1355617719000894.31511111
66. Hutchinson A , Mathias J . Neuropsychological deficits in frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer’s disease: a meta-analytic review. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2007;78 (9 ):917–928. doi:10.1136/jnnp.2006.100669.17371908
67. Bruno D , Slachevsky A , Fiorentino N , Argentinian/Chilean validation of the Spanish-language version of Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination III for diagnosing dementia. Neurologia (Engl Ed). 2020;35 (2 ):82–88. doi:10.1016/j.nrl.2017.06.004.28865943
68. Bruno D , Vignaga SS . Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination III in the diagnosis of dementia: a critical review. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2019;15 :441. doi:10.2147/NDT.S151253.30858702
69. Mekala S , Paplikar A , Mioshi E , Dementia diagnosis in seven languages: the Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination-III in India. Arch Clin Neuropsychol. 2020;35 (5 ):528–538. doi:10.1093/arclin/acaa013.32188967
70. Mathuranath PS , Nestor PJ , Berrios GE , Rakowicz W , Hodges JR . A brief cognitive test battery to differentiate Alzheimer’s disease and frontotemporal dementia. Neurology. 2000;55 (11 ):1613–1620. doi:10.1212/01.wnl.0000434309.85312.19.11113213
71. Amaral-Carvalho V , Lima-Silva TB , Mariano LI , Brazilian Version of Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination—Revised in the Differential Diagnosis of Alzheimer’s Disease and Behavioral Variant Frontotemporal Dementia. Arch Clin Neuropsychol. 2022;37 (2 ):437–448. doi:10.1093/arclin/acab071.34530438
72. Leyton CE , Hornberger M , Mioshi E , Hodges JR . Application of Addenbrooke’s Cognitive examination to diagnosis and monitoring of progressive primary aphasia. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2010;29 (6 ):504–509. doi:10.1159/000313980.20523049
73. Custodio N , Alva-Diaz C , Becerra-Becerra Y , Performance of cognitive brief test in elderly patients with dementia in advanced stage living in an urban community of Lima, Peru. Rev Peru Med Exp Salud Publica. 2016;33 (4 ):662–669. doi:10.17843/rpmesp.2016.334.2549.28327834
74. Eng N , Vonk JM , Salzberger M , Yoo N . A cross-linguistic comparison of category and letter fluency: Mandarin and English. Q J Exp Psychol (Hove). 2019;72 (3 ):651–660. doi:10.1177/1747021818765997.29512423
75. Wang T-L , Hung Y-H , Yang C-C . Psychometric properties of the Taiwanese (traditional Chinese) version of the Frontal Assessment Battery: A preliminary study. Appl Neuropsychol Adult. 2016;23 (1 ):11–20. doi:10.1080/23279095.2014.995792.25997071
76. Li X , Shen M , Jin Y , Validity and Reliability of the New Chinese Version of the Frontal Assessment Battery-Phonemic. J Alzheimers Dis. 2021;80 (1 ):371–381. doi:10.3233/JAD-201028.33554904
77. Grandi F , Martínez-Pernía D , Parra M , Standardization and diagnostic utility of the Frontal Assessment Battery for healthy people and patients with dementia in the Chilean population. Dement Neuropsychol. 2022;16 :69–78. doi:10.1590/1980-5764-DN-2021-0059.35719260
78. Torralva T , Roca M , Gleichgerrcht E , Lopez P , Manes F . INECO Frontal Screening (IFS): a brief, sensitive, and specific tool to assess executive functions in dementia. J Int Neuropsychol Soc. 2009;15 (5 ):777–786. doi:10.1017/S1355617709990415.19635178
79. Custodio N , Herrera-Perez E , Lira D , Evaluation of the INECO Frontal Screening and the Frontal Assessment Battery in Peruvian patients with Alzheimer’s disease and behavioral variant Frontotemporal dementia. eNeurologicalSci. 2016;5 :25–29. doi:10.1016/j.ensci.2016.11.001.29430554
80. Nasreddine ZS , Phillips NA , Bédirian V , The Montreal Cognitive Assessment, MoCA: a brief screening tool for mild cognitive impairment. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2005;53 (4 ):695–699. doi:10.1111/j.1532-5415.2005.53221.x.15817019
81. Kaul S , Paplikar A , Varghese F , MoCA in five Indian languages: A brief screening tool to diagnose dementia and MCI in a linguistically diverse setting. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2022;37 (10 ). doi:10.1002/gps.5808.
82. Tan YL , Ng A , Kandiah N . Frontotemporal dementia in southeast Asia: a comparative study. Dement Geriatr Cogn Dis Extra. 2013;3 (1 ):1–9. doi:10.1159/000345780.23569453
83. Reyes P , Ortega-Merchan MP , Rueda A , Functional Connectivity Changes in Behavioral, Semantic, and Nonfluent Variants of Frontotemporal Dementia. Behav Neurol. 2018;2018 :9684129. doi:10.1155/2018/9684129.29808100
84. Morris JC . The Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR): current version and scoring rules. Neurology. 1993;43 (11 ):2412–2414. doi:10.1212/wnl.43.11.2412-a.
85. Knopman DS , Kramer JH , Boeve BF , Development of methodology for conducting clinical trials in frontotemporal lobar degeneration. Brain. 2008;131 (Pt 11 ):2957–2968. doi:10.1093/brain/awn234.18829698
86. Russo G , Russo MJ , Buyatti D , Utility of the Spanish version of the FTLD-modified CDR in the diagnosis and staging in frontotemporal lobar degeneration. J Neurol Sci. 2014;344 (1–2 ):63–68. doi:10.1016/j.jns.2014.06.024.25015844
87. Lima-Silva TB , Mioshi E , Bahia VS , Disease Progression in Frontotemporal Dementia and Alzheimer Disease: The Contribution of Staging Scales. J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol. 2021;34 (5 ):397–404. doi:10.1177/0891988720944239.32762416
88. Kertesz A , Davidson W , Fox H . Frontal behavioral inventory: diagnostic criteria for frontal lobe dementi. Can J Neurol Sci. 1997;24 (1 ):29–36. doi:10.1017/s0317167100021053.9043744
89. Blair M , Kertesz A , Davis-Faroque N , Behavioural measures in frontotemporal lobar dementia and other dementias: the utility of the frontal behavioural inventory and the neuropsychiatric inventory in a national cohort study. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2007;23 (6 ):406–415. doi:10.1159/000101908.17446701
90. Kertesz A NN , Davidson W , Thomas AW . The Frontal Behavioral Inventory in the differential diagnosis of frontotemporal dementia. J Int Neuropsychol Soc. 2000;6 (4 ):460–468. doi:10.1017/s1355617700644041.10902415
91. Alberici A , Geroldi C , Cotelli M , The Frontal Behavioural Inventory (Italian version) differentiates frontotemporal lobar degeneration variants from Alzheimer’s disease. Neurol Sci. 2007;28 (2 ):80–86. doi:10.1007/s10072-007-0791-3.17464470
92. Bahia VS , Silva M-NMd , Viana R , Behavioral and activities of daily living inventories in the diagnosis of frontotemporal lobar degeneration and Alzheimer’s disease. Dement Neuropsychol. 2008;2 :108–113. doi:10.1590/S1980-57642009DN20200006.29213552
93. Boutoleau-Bretonnière C , Lebouvier T , Volteau C , Prospective evaluation of behavioral scales in the behavioral variant of frontotemporal dementia. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2012;34 (2 ):75–82. doi:10.1159/000341784.22922703
94. Chin J , Seo SW , Kim SH , Neurobehavioral dysfunction in patients with subcortical vascular mild cognitive impairment and subcortical vascular dementia. Clin Neuropsychol. 2012;26 (2 ):224–238. doi:10.1080/13854046.2012.658865.22348292
95. Diehl‐Schmid J , Schūlte‐Overberg J , Hartmann J , Förstl H , Kurz A , Häussermann P . Extrapyramidal signs, primitive reflexes and incontinence in fronto‐temporal dementia. Eur J Neurol. 2007;14 (8 ):860–864. doi:10.1111/j.1468-1331.2007.01773.x.17662005
96. Gündüz T , Emir Ö , Kürtüncü M , Cognitive impairment in neuro-Behcet’s disease and multiple sclerosis: a comparative study. Int J Neurosci. 2012;122 (11 ):650–656. doi:10.3109/00207454.2012.704454.22720779
97. Li S , Ou R , Yuan X , Executive dysfunctions and behavioral changes in early drug-naïve patients with Parkinson’s disease. J Affect Disord. 2019;243 :525–530. doi:10.1016/j.jad.2018.09.052.30292146
98. Pachalska M , Talar J , Kurzbauer H , Frańczuk B , Grochmal-Bach B , Macqueen BD . Differential diagnosis of frontal syndrome in patients with closed-head injuries. Ortop Traumatol Rehabil. 2002;4 (1 ):81–87.17679907
99. Watanabe Y , Beeldman E , Raaphorst J , Japanese version of the ALS-FTD-Questionnaire (ALS-FTD-QJ). J Neurol Sci. 2016;367 :51–55. doi:10.1016/j.jns.2016.05.036.27423564
100. Mioshi E , Hsieh S , Savage S , Hornberger M , Hodges JR . Clinical staging and disease progression in frontotemporal dementia. Neurology. 2010;74 (20 ):1591–1597. doi:10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181e04070.20479357
101. Lima-Silva TB , Bahia VS , Carvalho VA , Translation, cross-cultural adaptation and applicability of the Brazilian version of the Frontotemporal Dementia Rating Scale (FTD-FRS). Dement Neuropsychol. 2013;7 :387–396. doi:10.1590/S1980-57642013DN74000006.29213863
102. Turró-Garriga O , Hermoso Contreras C , Olives Cladera J , Adaptation and validation of a Spanish-language version of the Frontotemporal Dementia Rating Scale (FTD-FRS). Neurologia. 2017;32 (5 ):290–299. doi:10.1016/j.nrl.2015.12.004.26877196
103. Malloy P , Tremont G , Grace J , Frakey L . The Frontal Systems Behavior Scale discriminates frontotemporal dementia from Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement. 2007;3 (3 ):200–203. doi:10.1016/j.jalz.2007.04.374.19595938
104. Arshad F , Paplikar A , Mekala S , Social cognition deficits are pervasive across both classical and overlap frontotemporal dementia syndromes. Dement Geriatr Cogn Dis Extra. 2020;10 (3 ):115–126. doi:10.1159/000511329.33442389
105. Sachdev PS , Lipnicki DM , Kochan NA , The Prevalence of Mild Cognitive Impairment in Diverse Geographical and Ethnocultural Regions: The COSMIC Collaboration. PLoS One. 2015;10 (11 ):e0142388. 2015;10(11):e0142388. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0142388 26539987
106. Schmitter-Edgecombe MG T Measures of activities of daily living. United Kingdom: Sage Publications: The SAGE handbook of clinical neuropsychology (Vol 2 ); forthcoming.
107. Giebel CM , Knopman D , Mioshi E , Khondoker M . Distinguishing Frontotemporal Dementia From Alzheimer Disease Through Everyday Function Profiles: Trajectories of Change. J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol. 2021;34 (1 ):66–75. doi:10.1177/0891988720901791.32054376
108. Yemm H , Robinson DL , Paddick SM , Instrumental Activities of Daily Living Scales to Detect Cognitive Impairment and Dementia in Low- and Middle-Income Countries: A Systematic Review. J Alzheimers Dis. 2021;83 (1 ):451–474. doi:10.3233/jad-210532.34334407
109. Musa Salech G , Lillo P , van der Hiele K , Méndez-Orellana C , Ibáñez A , Slachevsky A . Apathy, Executive Function, and Emotion Recognition Are the Main Drivers of Functional Impairment in Behavioral Variant of Frontotemporal Dementia. Front Neurol. 2021;12 :734251. doi:10.3389/fneur.2021.734251.35095710
110. Ayhan Y , Karahan S , Akbulut BB , Topçuoğlu ES , Bilir N , Karadag O Culture Matters in Assessment of Daily Activities: An example from Turkey in a large community sample. The Alzheimer’s Association International Conference, Hacettepe University; 2022.
111. Fiske ST , Taylor SE . Social cognition: From brains to culture. Thousand Oaks, California: Sage Publications, Ltd; 2013.
112. Frith CD , Frith U . Social cognition in humans. Curr Biol. 2007;17 (16 ):R724–R732. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2007.05.068.17714666
113. Dickerson BC . Dysfunction of social cognition and behavior. Continuum (Minneap Minn). 2015;21 :660. doi:10.1212/01.CON.0000466659.05156.1d.26039847
114. Seeley WW , Carlin DA , Allman JM , Early frontotemporal dementia targets neurons unique to apes and humans. Ann Neurol. 2006;60 (6 ):660–667. doi:10.1002/ana.21055.17187353
115. Engelmann JB , Pogosyan M . Emotion perception across cultures: the role of cognitive mechanisms. Front Psychol. 2013;4 :118. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00118.23486743
116. Atkins D , Uskul AK , Cooper NR . Culture shapes empathic responses to physical and social pain. Emotion. 2016;16 (5 ):587. doi:10.1037/emo0000162.26950365
117. Cassels TG , Chan S , Chung W , Birch SAJ . The role of culture in affective empathy: Cultural and bicultural differences. J Cogn Cult. 2010;10 (3–4 ):309–326. doi:10.1163/156853710X531203.
118. Eriksson K , Strimling P , Gelfand M , Perceptions of the appropriate response to norm violation in 57 societies. Nat Commun. 2021;12 (1 ):1–11. doi:10.1038/s41467-021-21602-9.33397941
119. Cheon BK , Im D-m , Harada T , Cultural influences on neural basis of intergroup empathy. NeuroImage. 2011;57 (2 ):642–650. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.04.031.21549201
120. Derntl B , Habel U , Robinson S , Amygdala activation during recognition of emotions in a foreign ethnic group is associated with duration of stay. Soc Neurosci. 2009;4 (4 ):294–307. doi:10.1080/17470910802571633.19479638
121. Han S , Ma Y . Cultural differences in human brain activity: a quantitative meta-analysis. NeuroImage. 2014;99 :293–300. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.05.062.24882220
122. Ma Y , Bang D , Wang C , Sociocultural patterning of neural activity during self-reflection. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci. 2014;9 (1 ):73–80. doi:10.1093/scan/nss103.22956678
123. Moriguchi Y , Ohnishi T , Kawachi T , Specific brain activation in Japanese and Caucasian people to fearful faces. Neuroreport. 2005;16 (2 ):133–136. doi:10.1097/00001756-200502080-00012.15671862
124. Dodich A , Crespi C , Santi GC , Cappa SF , Cerami C . Evaluation of discriminative detection abilities of social cognition measures for the diagnosis of the behavioral variant of frontotemporal dementia: a systematic review. Neuropsychol Rev. 2021;31 (2 ):251–266. doi:10.1007/s11065-020-09457-1.33040199
125. Kumfor F , McDonald S . Research methodologies, brain correlates, cross-cultural perspectives. In: McDonald S , editor. Clinical Disorders of Social Cognition; London: Routledge;2021:52–80.
126. Franzen S , Papma JM , van den Berg E , Nielsen TR . Cross-cultural neuropsychological assessment in the European Union: a Delphi expert study. Arch Clin Neuropsychol. 2021;36 (5 ):815–830. doi:10.1093/arclin/acaa083.33043958
127. Quesque F , Coutrot A , de Souza LC , Does culture shape our understanding of others’ thoughts and emotions? An investigation across 12 countries. Neuropsychology. 2022;36 (7 ):664–682. doi:10.1037/neu0000817.35834208
128. Vellante M , Baron-Cohen S , Melis M , The “Reading the Mind in the Eyes” test: Systematic review of psychometric properties and a validation study in Italy. Cogn Neuropsychiatry. 2013;18 (4 ):326–354. doi:10.1080/13546805.2012.721728.23106125
129. Custodio N , Montesinos R , Cruzado L , Social Cognition and Behavioral Assessments Improve the Diagnosis of Behavioral Variant of Frontotemporal Dementia in Older Peruvians With Low Educational Levels. Front Neurol. 2021:1315 . doi:10.3389/fneur.2021.704109.
130. de Souza LC , Bertoux M , de Faria ÂRV , The effects of gender, age, schooling, and cultural background on the identification of facial emotions: a transcultural study. Int Psychogeriatr. 2018;30 (12 ):1861–1870. doi:10.1017/S1041610218000443.29798733
131. Elfenbein HA , Ambady N . When familiarity breeds accuracy: cultural exposure and facial emotion recognition. J Pers Soc Psychol. 2003;85 (2 ):276–90. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.85.2.276.12916570
132. Elfenbein HA , Ambady N . On the universality and cultural specificity of emotion recognition: a meta-analysis. Psychol Bull. 2002;128 (2 ):203–35. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.128.2.203.11931516
133. Perez-Zapata D , Slaughter V , Henry JD . Cultural effects on mindreading. Cognition. 2016;146 :410–414. doi:10.1016/j.cognition.2015.10.018.26529195
134. Adams RB Jr , Rule NO , Franklin RG Jr , Cross-cultural reading the mind in the eyes: an fMRI investigation. J Cogn Neurosci. 2010;22 (1 ):97–108. doi:10.1162/jocn.2009.21187.19199419
135. Vu T-V , Finkenauer C , Huizinga M , Novin S , Krabbendam L . Do individualism and collectivism on three levels (country, individual, and situation) influence theory-of-mind efficiency? A cross-country study. PLoS One. 2017;12 (8 ):e0183011. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0183011.28832602
136. Christopoulos GI , Uy MA , Yap WJ . The body and the brain: Measuring skin conductance responses to understand the emotional experience. Organ Res Methods. 2019;22 (1 ):394–420. doi:10.1177/1094428116681073.
137. Kumfor F , Hazelton JL , Rushby JA , Hodges JR , Piguet O . Facial expressiveness and physiological arousal in frontotemporal dementia: phenotypic clinical profiles and neural correlates. Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci. 2019;19 (1 ):197–210. doi:10.3758/s13415-018-00658-z.30488224
138. Rahal R-M , Fiedler S Understanding cognitive and affective mechanisms in social psychology through eye-tracking. J Exp Soc Psychol. 2019;85 :103842. doi:10.1016/j.jesp.2019.103842.
139. Lezak MD . The problem of assessing executive functions. Int J Psychol. 1982;17 (1–4 ):281–297. doi:10.1080/00207598208247445.
140. Fernandez AL , Marcopulos BA . A comparison of normative data for the Trail Making Test from several countries: Equivalence of norms and considerations for interpretation. Scand J Psychol. 2008;49 (3 ):239–246. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9450.2008.00637.x.18419589
141. Narme P , Maillet D , Palisson J , Le Clésiau H , Moroni C , Belin C . How to assess executive functions in a low-educated and multicultural population using a switching verbal fluency test (the TFA-93) in neurodegenerative diseases? Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen. 2019;34 (7–8 ):469–477. doi:10.1177/1533317519833844.30827122
142. Maj M , D’Elia L , Satz P , Evaluation of two new neuropsychological tests designed to minimize cultural bias in the assessment of HIV-1 seropositive persons: a WHO study. Arch Clin Neuropsychol. 1993;8 (2 ):123–135. doi:10.1016/0887-6177(93)90030-5.14589670
143. Sedó M ‘5 digit test’: a multilinguistic non-reading alternative to the Stroop test. Rev Neurol. 2004;38 (9 ):824–828.15152349
144. Goudsmit M , Uysal-Bozkir Ö , Parlevliet JL , van Campen JP , de Rooij SE , Schmand B . The Cross-Cultural Dementia Screening (CCD): A new neuropsychological screening instrument for dementia in elderly immigrants. J Clin Exp Neuropsychol. 2017;39 (2 ):163–172. doi:10.1080/13803395.2016.1209464.27501011
145. Suárez‐González A , Cassani A , Gopalan R , Stott J , Savage S . When it is not primary progressive aphasia: A scoping review of spoken language impairment in other neurodegenerative dementias. Alzheimers Dement (N Y). 2021;7 (1 ):e12205. doi:10.1002/trc2.12205.34485677
146. Maruta C , Guerreiro M , De Mendonça A , Hort J , Scheltens P . The use of neuropsychological tests across Europe: the need for a consensus in the use of assessment tools for dementia. Eur J Neurol. 2011;18 (2 ):279–285. doi:10.1111/j.1468-1331.2010.03134.x.20597968
147. Rabin LA , Paolillo E , Barr WB . Stability in test-usage practices of clinical neuropsychologists in the United States and Canada over a 10-year period: A follow-up survey of INS and NAN members. Arch Clin Neuropsychol. 2016;31 (3 ):206–230. doi:10.1093/arclin/acw007.26984127
148. Baird AD , Ford M , Podell K . Ethnic differences in functional and neuropsychological test performance in older adults. Arch Clin Neuropsychol. 2007;22 (3 ):309–318. doi:10.1016/j.acn.2007.01.005.17317093
149. Barker‐Collo S Boston naming test performance of older New Zealand adults. Aphasiology. 2007;21 (12 ):1171–1180. doi:10.1080/02687030600821600.
150. Boone KB , Victor TL , Wen J , Razani J , Pontón M . The association between neuropsychological scores and ethnicity, language, and acculturation variables in a large patient population. Arch Clin Neuropsychol. 2007;22 (3 ):355–365. doi:10.1016/j.acn.2007.01.010.17320344
151. Byrd DA , Rivera Mindt MM , Clark US , Creating an antiracist psychology by addressing professional complicity in psychological assessment. Psychol Assess. 2021;33 (3 ):279. doi:10.1037/pas0000993.33779204
152. Salo SK , Marceaux JC , McCoy KJ , Hilsabeck RC . Removing the noose item from the Boston naming test: A step toward antiracist neuropsychological assessment. Clin Neuropsychol. 2022;36 (2 ):311–326. doi:10.1080/13854046.2021.1933187.34148526
153. Reis A , Faísca L , Ingvar M , Petersson KM . Color makes a difference: Two-dimensional object naming in literate and illiterate subjects. Brain Cogn. 2006;60 (1 ):49–54. doi:10.1016/j.bandc.2005.09.012.16271820
154. Reis A , Petersson KM , Castro-Caldas A , Ingvar M . Formal schooling influences two-but not three-dimensional naming skills. Brain Cogn. 2001;47 (3 ):397–411. doi:10.1006/brcg.2001.1316.11748896
155. Gollan TH , Weissberger GH , Runnqvist E , Montoya RI , Cera CM . Self-ratings of spoken language dominance: A Multilingual Naming Test (MINT) and preliminary norms for young and aging Spanish–English bilinguals. Biling (Camb Engl). 2012;15 (3 ):594–615. doi:10.1017/S1366728911000332.25364296
156. Li C , Zeng X , Neugroschl J , The 32-Item Multilingual Naming Test: Cultural and Linguistic Biases in Monolingual Chinese-Speaking Older Adults. J Int Neuropsychol Soc. 2022;28 (5 ):511–519. doi:10.1017/S1355617721000746.34140060
157. Ardila A Toward the development of a cross-linguistic naming test. Arch Clin Neuropsychol. 2007;22 (3 ):297–307. doi:10.1016/j.acn.2007.01.016.17303376
158. Franzen S , van den Berg E , Ayhan Y , The Naming Assessment in Multicultural Europe (NAME): Development and Validation in a Multicultural Memory Clinic. J Int Neuropsychol Soc. 2022:1–13. doi:10.1017/S135561772100148X.33658102
159. Fichman HC , Fernandes CS , Nitrini R , Age and educational level effects on the performance of normal elderly on category verbal fluency tasks. Dement Neuropsychol. 2009;3 :49–54. doi:10.1590/S1980-57642009DN30100010.29213610
160. Da Silva CG , Petersson KM , Faísca L , Ingvar M , Reis A . The effects of literacy and education on the quantitative and qualitative aspects of semantic verbal fluency. J Clin Exp Neuropsychol. 2004;26 (2 ):266–277. doi:10.1076/jcen.26.2.266.28089.15202546
161. Nielsen TR , Waldemar G . Effects of literacy on semantic verbal fluency in an immigrant population. Neuropsychol Dev Cogn B Aging Neuropsychol Cogn. 2016;23 (5 ):578–590. doi:10.1080/13825585.2015.1132668.26786839
162. Kempler D , Teng EL , Dick M , Taussig IM , Davis DS . The effects of age, education, and ethnicity on verbal fluency. J Int Neuropsychol Soc. 1998;4 (6 ):531–538. doi:10.1017/s1355617798466013.10050357
163. Rascovsky K , Matallana DL . Frontotemporal dementia. International Neurology. 2016:153–156.27561331
164. Matías-Guiu JA , Cuetos F , Cabrera-Martín MN , Reading difficulties in primary progressive aphasia in a regular language-speaking cohort of patients. Neuropsychologia. 2017;101 :132–140. doi:10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2017.05.018.28532703
165. Matias-Guiu JA , Pytel V , Hernández-Lorenzo L , Spanish Version of the Mini-Linguistic State Examination for the Diagnosis of Primary Progressive Aphasia. J Alzheimers Dis. 2021;83 (2 ):771–778. doi:10.3233/jad-210668.34366355
166. Patel N , Peterson KA , Ingram R , The Mini Linguistic State Examination (MLSE): a brief but accurate assessment tool for classifying Primary Progressive Aphasias. medRxiv. 2020:1–35. doi:10.1101/2020.06.02.20119974.
167. Guo Q , He C , Wen X , Song L , Han Z , Bi Y . Adapting the Pyramids and Palm Trees Test and the Kissing and Dancing Test and developing other semantic tests for the Chinese population. Applied Psycholinguistics. 2014;35 (6 ):1001–1019. doi:10.1017/S0142716412000677.
168. Paplikar A , Vandana VP , Mekala S , Semantic memory impairment in dementia: A cross-cultural adaptation study. Neurol Sci. 2022;43 (1 ):265–273. doi:10.1007/s10072-021-05272-5.33966130
169. Mendis SB , Raymont V , Tabet N . Bilingualism: A Global Public Health Strategy for Healthy Cognitive Aging. Front Neurol. 2021;12 :628368. doi:10.3389/fneur.2021.628368.33935937
170. Nielsen TR . Effects of Illiteracy on the European Cross-Cultural Neuropsychological Test Battery (CNTB). Arch Clin Neuropsychol. 2019;34 (5 ):713–720. doi:10.1093/arclin/acy076.30272111
171. Plejert C , Antelius E , Yazdanpanah M , Nielsen TR . ‘There’s a letter called ef’ on Challenges and Repair in Interpreter-Mediated Tests of Cognitive Functioning in Dementia Evaluations: A Case Study. J Cross Cult Gerontol. 2015;30 (2 ):163–187. doi:10.1007/s10823-015-9262-0.25982531
172. Babulal GM , Quiroz YT , Albensi BC , Perspectives on ethnic and racial disparities in Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias: Update and areas of immediate need. Alzheimers Dement. 2019;15 (2 ):292–312. doi:10.1016/j.jalz.2018.09.009.30555031
173. Raman R , Quiroz YT , Langford O , Disparities by race and ethnicity among adults recruited for a preclinical Alzheimer disease trial. JAMA Netw Open. 2021;4 (7 ):e2114364–e2114364. doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2021.14364.34228129
174. Coronel E , Halstead D , Fregni F . Clinical research in Latin America: obstacles and opportunities. Clin Investig. 2011;1 (7 ):911–913. doi:10.4155/CLI.11.83.
175. Gómez HL , Pinto JA , Castañeda C , Vallejos CS . Current barriers for developing clinical research in Latin America: A cross-sectional survey of medical oncologists. Clin Res Trials. 2015;1 (2 ):22–28. doi:10.15761/CRT.1000108.
176. Cotelli M , Manenti R , Ferrari C , Gobbi E , Macis A , Cappa SF . Effectiveness of language training and non-invasive brain stimulation on oral and written naming performance in Primary Progressive Aphasia: A meta-analysis and systematic review. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2020;108 :498–525. doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2019.12.003.31811834
177. Pagnoni I , Gobbi E , Premi E , Language training for oral and written naming impairment in primary progressive aphasia: A review. Transl Neurodegener. 2021;10 (1 ):1–34. doi:10.1186/s40035-021-00248-z.33390174
178. Beveridge ME , Bak TH . The languages of aphasia research: Bias and diversity. Aphasiology. 2011;25 (12 ):1451–1468. doi:10.1080/02687038.2011.624165.
179. Machado TH , Carthery-Goulart MT , Campanha AC , Caramelli P . Cognitive intervention strategies directed to speech and language deficits in primary progressive aphasia: Practice-based evidence from 18 cases. Brain Sci. 2021;11 (10 ):1268. doi:10.3390/brainsci11101268.34679333
180. Grasso SM , Peña ED , Kazemi N , Treatment for anomia in bilingual speakers with progressive aphasia. Brain Sci. 2021;11 (11 ):1371. doi:10.3390/brainsci11111371.34827370
181. Santhanam SP , Parveen S , Santhanam SP , Parveen S . Serving culturally and linguistically diverse clients: A review of changing trends in speech-language pathologists’ self-efficacy and implications for stakeholders. Clin Arch Commun Disord. 2018;3 (3 ):165–177. doi:10.21849/cacd.2018.00395.
182. Riedl L , Last D , Danek A , Diehl-Schmid J . Long-term follow-up in primary progressive aphasia: clinical course and health care utilisation. Aphasiology. 2014;28 (8–9 ):981–992. doi:10.1080/02687038.2014.904497.
183. Taylor C , Kingma RM , Croot K , Nickels L . Speech pathology services for primary progressive aphasia: Exploring an emerging area of practice. Aphasiology. 2009;23 (2 ):161–174. doi:10.1080/02687030801943039.
184. Brodaty H , Donkin M . Family caregivers of people with dementia. Dialogues in Clinical Neurosciences. Dialogues Clin Neurosci. 2009;11 (2 ):217–228. doi:10.31887/DCNS.2009.11.2/hbrodaty.19585957
185. Boutoleau-Bretonnière C , Vercelletto M , Volteau C , Renou P , Lamy E . Zarit burden inventory and activities of daily living in the behavioral variant of frontotemporal dementia. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2008;25 (3 ):272–277. doi:10.1159/000117394.18285675
186. de Vugt ME , Riedijk SR , Aalten P , Tibben A , van Swieten JC , Verhey FR . Impact of behavioural problems on spousal caregivers: a comparison between Alzheimer’s disease and frontotemporal dementia. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2006;22 (1 ):35–41. doi:10.1159/000093102.16679763
187. Mourik JC , Rosso SM , Niermeijer MF , Duivenvoorden HJ , Van Swieten JC , Tibben A . Frontotemporal dementia: behavioral symptoms and caregiver distress. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2004;18 (3–4 ):299–306. doi:10.1159/000080123.15305107
188. Riedijk SR , De Vugt ME , Duivenvoorden HJ , Caregiver burden, health-related quality of life and coping in dementia caregivers: a comparison of frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer’s disease. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2006;22 (5–6 ):405–412. doi:10.1159/000095750.16966830
189. Mioshi E , Bristow M , Cook R , Hodges JR . Factors underlying caregiver stress in frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer’s disease. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2009;27 (1 ):76–81. doi:10.1159/000193626.19155621
190. Mioshi E , Foxe D , Leslie F , The impact of dementia severity on caregiver burden in frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer disease. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 2013;27 (1 ):68–73. doi:10.1097/WAD.0b013e318247a0bc.22314247
191. Velilla L , Hernández J , Giraldo-Chica M , Guzmán-Vélez E , Quiroz Y , Lopera F . A Spanish Neuropsychological Battery Discriminates Between the Behavioral Variant of Frontotemporal Dementia and Primary Progressive Aphasia in a Colombian Sample. Front Neurol. 2021;12 :656478. doi:10.3389/fneur.2021.656478.34290661
192. Brooke J , Ojo O . Contemporary views on dementia as witchcraft in sub-Saharan Africa: A systematic literature review. J Clin Nurs. 2020;29 (1–2 ):20–30. doi:10.1111/jocn.15066.31531993
193. Khonje V , Milligan C , Yako Y , Mabelane M , Borochowitz KE , de Jager CA . Knowledge, Attitudes and Beliefs about Dementia in an Urban Xhosa-Speaking Community in South Africa. Adv Alzheimer Dis. 2015;04 (02 ):21–36. doi:10.4236/aad.2015.42004.
194. Mushi D , Rongai A , Paddick SM , Dotchin C , Mtuya C , Walker R . Social representation and practices related to dementia in Hai District of Tanzania. BMC Public Health. 2014;14 :260. doi:10.1186/1471-2458-14-260.24642112
195. Castro-Suarez S , Guevara-Silva E , Caparó-Zamalloa C , Knowledge and Attitudes for the Management of Behavioral Variant of Frontotemporal Dementia. Front Neurol. 2021;12 :786448. doi:10.3389/fneur.2021.786448.35087469
196. Belle SH , Burgio L , Burns R , Enhancing the quality of life of dementia caregivers from different ethnic or racial groups: a randomized, controlled trial. Ann Intern Med Clin Cases. 2006;145 (10 ):727–738. doi:10.7326/0003-4819-145-10-200611210-00005.
197. Gallagher-Thompson D , Gray HL , Dupart T , Jimenez D , Thompson LW . Effectiveness of Cognitive/Behavioral Small Group Intervention for Reduction of Depression and Stress in Non-Hispanic White and Hispanic/Latino Women Dementia Family Caregivers: Outcomes and Mediators of Change. J Ration Emot Cogn Behav Ther. 2008;26 (4 ):286–303. doi:10.1007/s10942-008-0087-4.25067886
198. Hu M , Ma C , Sadarangani T , Wu B . Social-behavioral interventions for Asian and Hispanic American dementia caregivers: An integrative review. Aging Health Res. 2021;1 (3 ):100027. doi:10.1016/j.ahr.2021.100027.
199. Nielsen TR , Nielsen DS , Waldemar G . A personalized dementia care intervention for family carers from minority ethnic groups in Denmark: A pilot study. Dementia. 2022;21 (2 ):477–488. doi:10.1177/14713012211046597.34605285
200. Askari N , Bilbrey AC , Garcia Ruiz I , Humber MB , Gallagher-Thompson D . Dementia Awareness Campaign in the Latino Community: A Novel Community Engagement Pilot Training Program with Promotoras. Clin Gerontol. 2018;41 (3 ):200–208. doi:10.1080/07317115.2017.1398799.29240536
201. Code C The implications of public awareness and knowledge of aphasia around the world. Ann Indian Acad Neurol. 2020;23 (Suppl 2 ):S95. doi:10.4103/aian.AIAN_460_20.33343132
202. McCann C , Tunnicliffe K , Anderson R . Public awareness of aphasia in New Zealand. Aphasiology. 2013;27 (5 ):568–580. doi:10.1080/02687038.2012.740553.
203. Ibanez A , Slachevsky A , &amp; Serrano C Manual de Buenas Practicas para el Diagnostica de Demencia. Fundacion INECO. 2020.
204. Walentas CD , Shineman DW , Horton AR , Boeve BF , Fillit HM . An analysis of global research funding for the frontotemporal dementias: 1998–2008. Alzheimers Dement. 2011;7 (2 ):142–150. doi:10.1016/j.jalz.2010.11.010.21276758
205. International Test Commission. The International Test Commission guidelines for translating and adapting tests. 2017 (Second Edition).
206. Chen TB , Lin CY , Lin KN , Culture qualitatively but not quantitatively influences performance in the Boston naming test in a chinese-speaking population. Dement Geriatr Cogn Dis Extra. 2014;4 (1 ):86–94. doi:10.1159/000360695.24847347
207. Li Y , Qiao Y , Wang F , Culture Effects on the Chinese Version Boston Naming Test Performance and the Normative Data in the Native Chinese-Speaking Elders in Mainland China. Front Neurol. 2022;13 :866261. doi:10.3389/fneur.2022.866261.35645954
208. Mehta UM , Thirthalli J , Naveen Kumar C , Validation of Social Cognition Rating Tools in Indian Setting (SOCRATIS): A new test-battery to assess social cognition. Asian J Psychiatr. 2011;4 (3 ):203–209. doi:10.1016/j.ajp.2011.05.014.23051118
209. Kosmidis MH . Challenges in the neuropsychological assessment of illiterate older adults. Lang Cogn Neurosci. 2018;33 (3 ):373–386. doi:10.1080/23273798.2017.1379605.
210. United States Food and Drug Administration. Enhancing the Diversity of Clinical Trial Populations - Eligibility Criteria, Enrollment Practices, and Trial Designs Guidance for Industry. 2020.
211. Matee MI , Manyando C , Ndumbe PM , European and Developing Countries Clinical Trials Partnership (EDCTP): the path towards a true partnership. BMC Public Health. 2009;9 :249. doi:10.1186/1471-2458-9-249.19619283
212. Ibanez A , Yokoyama JS , Possin KL , The Multi-Partner Consortium to Expand Dementia Research in Latin America (ReDLat): Driving Multicentric Research and Implementation Science. Front Neurol. 2021;12 :631722. doi:10.3389/fneur.2021.631722.33776890
213. Williams MM , Meisel MM , Williams J , Morris JC . An interdisciplinary outreach model of African American recruitment for Alzheimer’s disease research. Gerontologist. 2011;51 (Suppl 1 ):S134–141. doi:10.1093/geront/gnq098.21173436
214. Leung AYM , Molassiotis A , Zhang J , Dementia Literacy in the Greater Bay Area, China: Identifying the At-Risk Population and the Preferred Types of Mass Media for Receiving Dementia Information. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020;17 (7 ):2511. doi:10.3390/ijerph17072511.32272551
215. Nuytemans K , Franzen S , Caramelli P , Gaps in basic science research in frontotemporal dementia: A call for diversity and disparities focused research. Manuscript in preparation. 2022.
216. ALLFTD. ARTFL-LEFFTDS Longitudinal Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration: a multisite research consortium. www.allftd.org. Published 2012. Accessed2022.
217. Genetic FTD Initiative. GENFI. www.genfi.org. Published 2012. Updated 2022. Accessed2022.
218. The FTD Prevention Initiative. The FPI. www.thefpi.org. Published 2015. Updated 2022. Accessed2022.
219. Mahoney DF , Cloutterbuck J , Neary S , Zhan L . African American, Chinese, and Latino family caregivers’ impressions of the onset and diagnosis of dementia: cross-cultural similarities and differences. Gerontologist. 2005;45 (6 ):783–792. doi:10.1093/geront/45.6.783.16326660
220. Nakamura AE , Opaleye D , Tani G , Ferri CP . Dementia underdiagnosis in Brazil. Lancet. 2015;385 (9966 ):418–419. doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(15)60153-2.25706975
221. Prince M , Livingston G , Katona C . Mental health care for the elderly in low-income countries: a health systems approach. World Psychiatry. 2007;6 (1 ):5–13. Published 2007/03/08. 17342213
222. Gleichgerrcht E , Flichtentrei D , Manes F . How much do physicians in Latin America know about behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia? J Mol Neurosci. 2011;45 (3 ):609–617. doi:10.1007/s12031-011-9556-9.21611804
223. Hahn RA , Truman BI . Education Improves Public Health and Promotes Health Equity. Int J Health Serv. 2015;45 (4 ):657–678. doi:10.1177/0020731415585986.25995305
224. Raghupathi V , Raghupathi W . The influence of education on health: an empirical assessment of OECD countries for the period 1995–2015. Arch Public Health. 2020;78 :20. doi:10.1186/s13690-020-00402-5.32280462
225. Corrigan PW , Watson AC . Understanding the impact of stigma on people with mental illness. World Psychiatry. 2002;1 (1 ):16–20. Published 2006/09/02. 16946807
226. Kim S , Werner P , Richardson A , Anstey KJ . Dementia Stigma Reduction (DESeRvE): Study protocol for a randomized controlled trial of an online intervention program to reduce dementia-related public stigma. Contemp Clin Trials Commun. 2019;14 :100351. doi:10.1016/j.conctc.2019.100351.30997434
227. Rewerska-Juśko M , Rejdak K . Social Stigma of People with Dementia. J Alzheimers Dis. 2020;78 (4 ):1339–1343. doi:10.3233/jad-201004.33185610
228. Prince MJ , Acosta D , Castro-Costa E , Jackson J , Shaji KS . Packages of care for dementia in low- and middle-income countries. PLoS Med. 2009;6 (11 ):e1000176. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1000176.19888456
229. Stoner CR , Lakshminarayanan M , Durgante H , Spector A . Psychosocial interventions for dementia in low-and middle-income countries (LMICs): a systematic review of effectiveness and implementation readiness. Aging &amp; Mental Health. 2021;25 (3 ):408–419. doi:10.1080/13607863.2019.1695742 31814427
230. Janevic MR , Connell CM . Racial, ethnic, and cultural differences in the dementia caregiving experience: recent findings. Gerontologist. 2001;41 (3 ):334–347. doi:10.1093/geront/41.3.334.11405431
231. Tee BL , Kwan-Chen LYL , Chen T-F , Dysgraphia phenotypes in native Chinese speakers with primary progressive aphasia. Neurology. 2022;98 (22 ):e2245–e2257. doi:10.1212/WNL.0000000000200350.35410909
