LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101731723
47936
Biochim Biophys Acta Gene Regul Mech
Biochim Biophys Acta Gene Regul Mech
Biochimica et biophysica acta. Gene regulatory mechanisms
1874-9399
1876-4320

36682583
10037092
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2023.194909
NIHMS1877272
Article
DNA methylation of the promoter region at the CREB1 binding site is a mechanism for the epigenetic regulation of brain specific PKMζ
Pramio Dimitrius Tansini 1
Vieceli Felipe Monteleone 1
Varella-Branco Elisa 2
Goes Carolina Purcell 13
Kobayashi Gerson Shigeru 2
da Silva Pelegrina Diogo Vieira 1
de Moraes Beatriz Caroline 1
Allam Aicha El 4
De Kumar Bony 5
Jara Gabriel 6
Farfel José Marcelo 789
Bennett David Alan 8
Kundu Somanath 10
Viapiano Mariano S. 10
Rego Reis Eduardo Moraes 1
de Oliveira Paulo Sergio Lopes 6
Passos-Bueno Maria Rita dos Santos e 2
Rothlin Carla V. 1112
Ghosh Sourav 412*
Schechtman Deborah 1*
1. Department of Biochemistry, Instituto de Química, Universidade de São Paulo, SP, Brazil
2. Instituto de Biociências, Universidade de São Paulo, SP, Brazil
3. Laboratory of Neuromodulation of Experimental Pain, Department of Anatomy, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil
4. Department of Neurology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA
5. Yale Center for Genome Analysis, New Haven, CT, USA
6. Brazilian Center for Research in Energy and Materials (CNPEM), Brazilian National Biosciences Laboratory (LNBio) Campinas, SP, Brazil
7. Traumatology and Orthopedy Department, Faculdade de Medicina Universidade de São Paulo, SP, Brazil
8. Rush Alzheimer’s Disease Center, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA
9. Health Sciences Program, Instituto de Assistência Medica ao Servidor Público do Estado (IAMSPE), SP, Brazil
10. Department of Neuroscience and Physiology, SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse NY, USA
11. Department of Immunobiology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA
12. Department of Pharmacology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA
Author contributions DTP Performed the experiments, wrote, and revised the manuscript; FMV, CPG, EVB, GK, DVSP, GJ, BCM performed the experiments and revised the manuscript; JMF, DAB, EMR, PSLO and MRSPB contributed to the scientific design of the paper and revised the manuscript; CR, SG and DS contributed to the scientific design of the manuscript, wrote and revised the manuscript.

* Corresponding authors deborah@iq.usp.br, sourav.ghosh@yale.edu
17 3 2023
3 2023
20 1 2023
01 3 2024
1866 1 194909194909
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Protein kinase M zeta, PKMζ, is a brain enriched kinase with a well characterized role in Long-Term Potentiation (LTP), the activity-dependent strengthening of synapsis, a mechanism involved in long-term memory formation. However, little is known about the molecular mechanisms that maintain the tissue specificity of this kinase. Here, we characterized the epigenetic factors, mainly DNA methylation, regulating PKMζ expression. The PRKCZ gene has an upstream promoter regulating Protein kinase C ζ (PKCζ), and an internal promoter driving PKMζ expression. A demethylated region, including a canonical CREB binding site, situated at the internal promoter was only observed in human CNS tissues. The induction of site-specific hypermethylation of this region resulted in decreased CREB1 binding and downregulation of PKMζ expression. Noteworthy, CREB binding sites were absent in the upstream promoter of PRKCZ locus, suggesting a specific mechanism for regulating PKMζ expression. These observations were validated using a system of human neuronal differentiation from induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). CREB1 binding at the internal promoter was detected only in differentiated neurons, where PKMζ is expressed. The same epigenetic mechanism in the context of CREB binding site was identified in other genes involved in neuronal differentiation and LTP. Additionally, aberrant DNA hypermethylation at the internal promoter was observed in cases of Alzheimer’s disease, correlating with decreased expression of PKMζ in patient brains. Altogether, we present a conserved epigenetic mechanism regulating PKMζ expression and other genes enhanced in the CNS with possible implications in neuronal differentiation and Alzheimer’s disease.

Graphical abstract

PKMζ
CREB1
DNA methylation
Alzheimer’s disease
Epigenetics

pmc1. Introduction

The PRKCZ locus encodes both PKCζ and PKMζ proteins, whose transcription start from two distinct promoters separated by approximately 15 kb. The upstream promoter drives expression of the full-length PKCζ, which contains both the regulatory and catalytic domains, whereas an intronic promoter initiates the transcription of two predicted PKMζ isoforms: one containing only the kinase domain (variant 2), and another one retaining the protein kinase C conserved region 1 (C1 domain) of the regulatory domain (variant 4). Only expression of variant 2 (without the C1 domain), however, has been observed so far (1). The seminal work of Hernandez and colleagues identified the PKMζ promoter and characterized its mRNA in rats, distinguishing this isoform from a possible proteolytic cleavage product of PKCζ (1). Little attention was given to the PRKCZ locus since then, and the identity of its transcriptional regulators and mechanisms of spatial and temporal control of expression have remained elusive. Nevertheless, characterization of PKMζ regulatory elements is fundamental to understanding the aberrant expression levels observed in models of depression (2), alcohol consumption (3), and Alzheimer’s disease (AD) (4), instances in which PKMζ has been shown to be involved.

PKMζ is the major mRNA transcript and protein expressed from the PRKCZ gene in brain and has been described to have a pivotal role in the establishment of neuronal cell polarity by negatively regulating axon development through the interaction with the conserved polarity protein Par3 on the non-axon forming neurites. Knocking down PKMζ leads to the loss of an inhibitory axis of axon formation, resulting in neurons with multiple axons (5). PKMζ has been directly related to memory formation processes and is involved in the maintenance of long-term potentiation (LTP) by recruiting glutamatergic receptors to the synaptic cleft, and by participating in the formation of postsynaptic spines (6).

Given the tissue specificity of PKMζ expression and its plastic expression behavior in animal models of learning and memory (7), we wondered if these transcriptional patterns could be modulated by epigenetic factors. Epigenetic mechanisms are classically defined as those capable of affecting gene expression without relying on nucleotide sequence alterations, albeit being mitotically and/or meiotically heritable (8). Among these, DNA methylation is the most stable epigenetic mark (9). The covalent ligation of the methyl radical on the cytosine ring, in the context of CpG dinucleotides, is catalyzed by DNA methyltransferase enzymes (DNMTs). DNA methylation at promoter regions with high CpG content can result in gene silencing by directly preventing the docking of transcription activators to their binding motifs, or by recruiting repressor protein complexes that recognize methylated DNA motifs and promote chromatin compaction, making the region inaccessible to the transcriptional machinery (10,11).

cAMP Response Element-Binding Proteins (CREB) are transcription factors whose docking has been shown to be inhibited by DNA methylation. The cAMP Response Element (CRE) is a highly conserved binding site for CREB. CRE methylation at the central CpG dinucleotide (5’ TGACGTCA 3’) abrogates transcription factor binding, leading to silencing of target genes (12,13). CREB proteins belong to the basic leucine zipper (bZIP) superfamily of transcription factors and are important positive regulators of genes associated with long-term memory consolidation (14,15). Specifically, when phosphorylated at key residues such as serine 133 by protein kinase A (PKA), CREB1 acts as a relay of multiple signaling pathways, facilitating binding of the histone acetyltransferases CREB-binding protein (CBP) and p300, resulting in the transcription of target genes (16,17).

Within the PKMζ promoter of amniotes we observed a single conserved CRE, which we demonstrate to bind CREB1 and to be important for driving PKMζ expression both in mouse and human cell lines, including a model of neuronal differentiation from human pluripotent stem cells (iPSC). By using the dCas9-DNMT3a targeted DNA methylation system (18), we show that methylation of CRE CpG dinucleotide decreases CREB binding and subsequent PKMζ expression. Besides regulating PKMζ expression through CpG methylation, CREs were also observed in promoters of a subset of genes that are preferentially expressed in the brain and involved in neuronal differentiation and LTP, supporting the idea that other CREB-regulated genes are involved in the same biological processes and may have similar epigenetic mechanisms for fine tuning their expression. Further, we find that brain biospecimens from Alzheimer’s patients have increased methylation at regions surrounding the PKMζ promoter and decreased PKMζ expression, further supporting a role for CpG methylation in the regulation of PKMζ expression and in implicating this epigenetic modification in Alzheimer’s pathogenesis.

2. Material and methods

2.1 Human and Macaca mulatta brain samples

Specimens from human brain tissue without pathology, (from either forebrain or cerebellum)(Male 76 years old, Male 66 years old, Female 71 years old, Female 63 years old and unknown), were obtained as discard surgical samples from the Department of Neurosurgery at SUNY Upstate Medical University and flash-frozen until use. Institutional Review Board approval and patient consent were obtained for tissue procurement for research (SUNY Upstate Medical University IRB 305315-22).

Macaca mulatta brain samples were obtained from Prof. Katalin Gothard. All procedures comply with the NIH guidelines for the use of non-human primates in research and have been approved by The University of Arizona’s Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. qPCR to verify the mRNA expression of full length PKCζ and PKMζ was performed using specific primers for human and macaque (supplementary table 1).

2.1 Methyl-Seq Target Enrichment Quality Control of human DNA brain specimens

Genomic DNA quality was determined by estimating the A260/A280 and A260/A230 ratios by nanodrop and concentration by Qubit dsDNA BR Assay. DNA integrity and size was confirmed by running an Agilent Bioanalyzer gel. Genomic DNA (1 µg) was sheared to a fragment length of 150–200 bp using a focused acoustic energy Covaris E220 system (Covaris, part#500003). Fragmented sample size distribution was determined by the Caliper LabChip GX system (PerkinElmer, Part#122000). Unmethylated C residues of enriched DNA were modified by bisulfite conversion using EZ DNA Methylation-Gold Kit (Zymo Research, part#D5005). Indexed paired-end whole genome sequencing libraries are prepared using SureSelect XT Methyl-Seq kit (Agilent, part#G9651B).

2.2 Flow Cell Preparation and Sequencing

Sample concentrations were normalized to 10 nM and loaded onto an Illumina NovaSeq flow cell at a concentration that yielded 130 million passing filter clusters per sample. Samples were sequenced using 150bp paired-end sequencing on an Illumina HiSeq or NovaSeq according to Illumina protocols. The 10bp dual index was read during additional sequencing reads that automatically follow the completion of read 1.

Data generated during sequencing runs were simultaneously transferred to the YCGA high-performance computing cluster. In addition, a positive control (prepared bacteriophage Phi X library) provided by Illumina was spiked into every lane at a concentration of 0.3% to monitor sequencing quality in real time.

2.4 Methyl-Seq data analysis

Signal intensities were converted to individual base calls during a run using the system’s Real Time Analysis (RTA) software. Base calls were transferred from the machine’s dedicated personal computer to the Yale High-Performance Computing cluster via a 1 Gigabit network mount for downstream analysis. Primary analysis - sample de-multiplexing and alignment to the human genome - was performed using Illumina’s CASAVA 1.8.2 software suite. The data returned to the user if the sample error rate was less than 1% and the distribution of reads per sample in a lane within a reasonable tolerance. Fastq files were aligned to the Human reference genome Hg38 using BWA-Meth (19). Analysis for methylation status was done using methylKit, and data visualization and downstream analysis were performed using custom R Script.

2.5 Cell culture

Mouse neuroblastoma (Neuro 2A), HEK-293 and HL-60 cell lines were obtained from American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA, USA) and maintained in DMEM high Glucose (Neuro 2A and HEK-293 cells) or RPMI 1640 (HL-60 cells) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), penicillin/streptomycin [50 U/mLand 50 μg/mL respectively (Gibco-BRL)], at 37 °C under 5% CO2. E14TG2A mouse ES was obtained from ATCC and maintained in DMEM high glucose supplemented with 1mM Sodium pyruvate, 1% of non-essential amino acids, 0,1mM beta mercaptoethanol, 10% ES fetal bovine serum and 103 U/mL of Leukemia Inhibitory Factor. 5-Azacytidine (5-Aza: Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) and Trichostatin A (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) treatments were done in various concentrations during 72h, with the compound being added every 24h. Importantly, for TSA and 5-Aza treatments, cells were seeded at low confluency (&lt;50%). iPSCs were obtained from peripheral blood cells (PBMCs) of healthy individuals who did not present neurological disorders. The sample collection was performed only when it was approved by the Research Ethics Committee for Human Beings of the Biosciences Institute of the University of Sao Paulo (protocol 067/2007). PBMCs were reprogrammed using episomal vectors as described by (20). Next, derived iPSCs were used to obtain neural stem cells and neurons using an adapted protocol based on double inhibition of SMAD pathway, as described in (21). Briefly, iPSCs were maintained in Matrigel coated with Essential 8 Medium (Thermo Fisher Scientific) until 80–100% of confluence, when the medium was changed to induced neural medium containing SMAD inhibition factors (1 µM dorsomorphin and 10 µM SB4315420). Between 8–12 days, a uniform neuroepithelial layer emerged, and cells were collected and plated on polyornithine and laminin coated plates containing neural induction medium supplemented with SMAD inhibition factors. After the emergence of rosettes, the neuronal cells were maintained for 4 days in neurobasal medium supplemented with N2, B-27, and 20 ng/ml FGF2 (basic fibroblast growth factor) to promote the expansion of neural stem cells (NSCs). Finally, the cells were maintained in neurobasal medium with N-2 and B-27 and no growth factor supplementation. Once substantial neurogenesis had occurred (around day 28), cells were re-plated with Accutase in polyornithine and laminin coated plates and maintained around 50 days until pellets were collected. All NSC and neurons were verified by detection of neural differentiation markers.

2.6 Site-specific editing of DNA methylation

We utilized the targeted DNA methylation system of Vojta et.al (18). For sgRNA design we utilized the GPP web portal (https://portals.broadinstitute.org/gpp/public/analysis-tools/sgrna-design) and selected 6 sgRNAs that specifically targeted the PKMζ promoter region, in addition to a scramble control: (sgRNA#1: 5’ CTGAGGCACGCGCTAAAACA; sgRNA#2: 5’ CTCCCCTGGGAAGCTACGGC; sgRNA#3: 5’ GGGTGGTACCCGGCTCCCCT; sgRNA#4:5’ CACCCTGCCCATTGTCGATC; sgRNA#5:5’ CAGCCCTCATCCTGTCCGGC; sgRNA#6:5’ CCTCCTCATGTCTCCAGGCC). Oligos were annealed and inserted into BpiL/BbsI-digested pdCas9-DNMT3A-PuroR. Oligos used for this step are present in supplementary table 1.

Neuro-2a cells were then transfected with lipofectamine 3000 (ThermoFisher Scientific), and after 24 h they were treated with 1µg/mL puromycin for 48 h before recovering for 4 additional days in complete media, prior to chromatin, DNA and RNA extraction.

2.7 Knock-down of target genes

We utilized the ON-target plus siRNA Smart pool designs (Horizon Discovey, Water-beach, UK) for CREBBP and CREB1, and transfected Neuro-2a cells in low confluency (&lt; 50%) with 50 nM of each Smart pool, utilizing the lipofectamine 3000 protocol. Cells were kept in culture for 48h in presence of siRNAs and were subsequently lysed in TRizol for total RNA isolation. (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA USA). 1 µg of total RNA was used for cDNA synthesis using the iScript cDNA Synthesis Kit (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA).

2.8 Next generation sequencing of sodium bisulfite-converted DNA amplicons

Genomic DNA from 106 cells or 30mg of tissues was extracted with DNeasy Blood &amp; Tissue Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). 1 µg of total DNA was used to perform bisulfite conversion, using the EZ DNA Methylation Kit (Zymo Research, California, USA). Human and mouse amplicons were amplified with primers containing the IIlumina adaptor overhangs, listed in supplementary table 1, using Platinum Taq DNA Polymerase High Fidelity (ThermoFisher Scientific, Massachusetts, USA). Amplicons were purified with 20 µl of the AMPure XP beads (Beckman Coulter, California, USA), followed by two 80% ethanol washes and elution in 10 mM Tris pH 8.5. Purified amplicons were used as templates in the Index PCR, with Nextera DNA UD indexes, set A. (IDT technologies, Iowa, USA) and Platinum Taq DNA Polymerase High Fidelity. The cycling conditions were as follows: 95°C for 30 seconds, followed by 8 cycles of 95°C for 30 seconds, 55°C for 30 seconds and 72°C for 30 seconds. A second cleanup was performed with AMPure XP beads, and the library was quantified using the Bioanalyzer High Sensitivity DNA Analysis (Agilent technologies, California, USA). The library was pooled, denaturated and diluted to a final concentration of 8 pM. Paired end sequencing was perfomed in a MySeq sequencer (Illumina, California, USA) using the MiSeq Reagent Kit v2 (300-cycles) (Illumina). The reads were mapped with using bwameth (19) and variants were called with iVar 1.3 (22). Frequency of C&gt;T substitutions were used to infer the levels of CpG methylation in the original template molecules.

2.9 Quantitative PCR

Total RNA from 30 mg of fresh tissue was extracted using the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Venlo, Netherlands). Total RNA from 106 cells was extracted with the TRIzol reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA USA). 1 µg of total RNA was used for cDNA synthesis using the iScript™ cDNA Synthesis Kit (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA). Real time PCR reactions were performed with the PowerUp SYBR Green Master Mix (ThermoFisher Scientific) on a 7500 Real Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, California), using the reaction default parameters. The primers used on this study are listed on (Supplementary Table 1). Relative abundance of transcripts was calculated according to Pfafl method (23).

2.10 Chromatin Immunoprecipitation

Chromatin isolation from fixed animal tissues was performed according to Cotney and Noonan (24). Briefly, we used 30 mg of pancreas and kidney, or 70 mg of forebrain and cerebellum of adult C57BL6 mice for manual disruption and formaldehyde crosslinking. Animals were handled, euthanized and tissue extraction was performed in accordance to protocols approved by the Animal Ethics Committee (CEUA# 2105050521).

Nuclei were isolated and the chromatin sonicated in a Branson SFX250 Sonifier (Branson Ultrasonics – Danbury, CT, USA), using 10% of amplitude, 5s pulse and 5s rest, for a total of 7.5 minutes. 5 µg of histone variants antibodies were incubated overnight with 25 µg of chromatin. Alternatively, 10 µg of transcription factor antibodies were incubated with 50 µg of chromatin. 5% of total chromatin without the antibodies was saved as input. Purified chromatin and input were quantified using the Qubit dsDNA HS (High Sensitivity) Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific), to add equal amounts of DNA in each qPCR reaction. Chromatin isolation from fixed cell lines was performed according to Carey (25). We started with approximately 107 cells in each experiment, and nuclei were isolated and sonicated in a Branson SFX250 Sonifier, using the same conditions described above. 10 µg of transcription factor antibodies was incubated overnight with 50 µg of chromatin. 5% of total chromatin was saved as input. Primers used in these experiments are listed on Supplementary table 1. The following antibodies were used: NeuroD (D35G2) Rabbit mAb #4373 and Normal Rabbit IgG #2729 from Cell signaling technology (Danvers, MA, USA). Anti-CREB antibody (ab31387), Anti-Histone H3 (acetyl K9) antibody (ab4441), Anti-Histone H3 (tri methyl K4) antibody (ab8580), Anti-Histone H3 (tri methyl K9) antibody (ab8898) and Anti-Histone H3 (tri methyl K27) antibody (ab6002) from Abcam (Cambridge, UK).

2.11 Immunofluorescence

Differentiated neurons (more than 60 days under differentiation protocol) were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde solution diluted in PBS for 10 minutes, and subsequently permeabilized in a solution containing 0.2% Triton X-100 for 30 minutes at room temperature. Cells were then incubated on a 5% BSA solution for 1 hour, and primary antibodies (anti-Tuj1, ab7751, Abcam) were added for an overnight incubation at 4°C. After PBS washes, cells were incubated with a conjugated secondary antibody (AlexaFluor 488 – 1:400 dilution – Thermo Fisher Scientific) for one hour at room temperature. Nuclei were stained with DAPI (VECTASHIELD -Vector Laboratories), and images were processed on a confocal Zeiss LSM 710 microscope.

2.12 Dynamic simulations of CREB1 and DNA sequences

2.12.1 Preparation of the system

Three systems were constructed: 1) CREB-1 bound to 5’-AGGAGCTGACGTCACACGGA-3’ dsDNA sequence (CREB-1/DNA), 2) CREB-1 bound to the sequence methylated in the cytosines at positions 10 and 17 (CREB-1/CpG-DNA) and 3) dsDNA without CREB-1 (free state). These models were built using the crystallographic structure of CREB-1 in complex with dsDNA (PDB ID: 5ZKO). The CREB-1/DNA was built by mutating the dsDNA sequence of crystal structure, using YASARA program (26) . The CREB-1/CpG-DNA was constructed by replacing the cytosines with methylated cytosines. Amino acid protonation states were determined by using the H++ program (27). Free DNA was created as type B-DNA using the nab program from the AMBER18 package (28). Then, each of the three systems was prepared for the simulation following the same protocol: the system was immersed into an octahedral box of ~17,000 TIP3P waters for free state and ~25.000 for CREB-1/DNA and CREB-1/CpG-DNA. All the systems were neutralized by adding Na+ and Clions until reaching a concentration of 150 mM. The ff14sb (29) and parmbc1 (30) force fields were used for describing protein and DNA, respectively. The methylated cytosine was described by the parameters used by Lankaš et al. (31), and some atom names were adapted to be compatible with parmbsc1 force field.

After solvation and neutralization the systems were equilibrated using the following protocol: 1) the energy of the system was minimized by 2500 steepest descent steps followed by 5000 conjugate gradient steps; 2) the solvent was equilibrated by two steps, restraining protein and DNA positions with a force constant of 10 kcal mol−1 Å−2: 200 ps under NVT conditions followed by 500 ps under NPT conditions; 3) MD simulation without any restrictions on the system was run under NPT conditions for 500 ps. The production step was obtained through 200 ns simulation under NPT conditions. All simulations were performed at 298.15 K using a Langevin thermostat with a collision frequency of 5 ps−1(32). In the case of the NPT simulations, the pressure was maintained at 1.01325 bar using the Berendsen barostat with a relaxation time of 1 ps (33). Electrostatic interactions were calculated using the Particle Mesh Ewald (PME) method with a 9 Å cut-off radius (34). Bonds involving hydrogen atoms were constrained using the SHAKE algorithm (35), allowing the integration step of 2 fs. All simulations were performed using the pmemd.cuda program from the AMBER18 package (28).

2.12.2 Thermodynamics integration

The thermodynamic integration (TI) calculations were run using 21 windows (each 0.05 of the coupling parameter, λ), simultaneously changing the two cytosines by the 5’-methyl-cytosines. Each window involved 2000 steepest descent steps followed by 200 ps of thermalization at NVT condition. Then the TI productions were run for 9 ns divided into 9 simulations de 1 ns under NTP conditions, reaching convergence. The TI region was the cytosines and the 5’-methyl-cytosines. Softcore potentials were applied for the description of the coulombic and Lennard-Jones interactions (parameters β = 12 Å2 and α = 0.5, respectively). The conversion from one state (wild type) to another was performed in one step, using dual-topology (36). The free energy estimation was done using alchemical analysis program with a cubic spline for interpolating between the data point for integration (37).

2.12.3 MM-PBSA calculations

The frames were selected every 40 ps of the last 40 ns of the 200 ns MDs of the CREB-1/DNA and CREB-1/CpG-DNA complexes. In the implementation of the calculation focused on saline 0.15 M, the atomic radios suitable by Tan et al. (38) and an internal dielectric constant of 4. Entropy calculations were not considered, and it is expected to be similar for the complexes. The MMPBSA method was used using the python script MMPBSA.py (39).

2.13 Analysis of published datasets

Clinical and pathological data from participants in one of two ongoing clinical-pathologic cohort studies were used, the Religious Orders Study and the Rush Memory and Aging Project (ROSMAP, (https://www.radc.rush.edu/home.htm), as well as RNA-seq data from 638 participants plus DNA methylation data and H3K9Ac ChIP-seq data(Illumina 450k) from 740 participants (40). Participants enroll without known dementia and agree to annual clinical evaluation and organ donation. At the time of death, a neurologist reviewed select clinical data, without access to the pathologic data, and made a summary diagnosis proximate to death. Persons died with a range of cognition from no cognitive impairment to mild cognitive impairment to dementia. Here, we limited analyses to “NIA-Reagan pathologic diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease” (41), which categorizes persons into four groups: 1-High-likelihood of AD, 2-Moderate likelihood, 3-Low likelihood of AD and 4-No AD pathology. We then analyzed the datasets based on the dichotomized version of the modified NIA-Reagan diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease, which considers either patients with AD (composed of participants with high or intermediate likelihood of AD) or without AD (low likelihood or no AD). Both ROS MAP were approved by an Institutional Review Board of Rush University Medical Center. ROSMAP participants signed an Anatomic Gift Act and Informed Consent agreeing to brain donation at the time of death. They also signed a repository consent allowing their data to be shared.

For the 450K DNA methylation dataset, we extracted the normalized beta value for 6 different probes mapping the PRKCZ locus, ‘cg03959306’, ‘cg13591369’, ‘cg14418633’, ‘cg04520340’, ‘cg13387826’, and ‘cg16653138’, and stratified them according to the variables mentioned above. For the RNA-seq analysis, we selected the normalized counts for PKMζ transcripts ENST00000400921.6 and ENST00000461106.6 and stratified them according to the variables mentioned above. To test the correlations between clinical and molecular data, we used the spearman correlation test. The highest module of correlation between a clinical feature and NIA-Reagan score was age of death at −0.22. We therefore tried correcting the methylation and expression values to age, and to age and sex, but as these had very low correlation with the expression and methylation values of our selected probes the adjustment procedure had an unnoticeable effect and was removed to reduce data interference. We also performed descriptive statistics on the age of death and gender status of participants, and we did not detect major discrepancies between the groups (supplementary table 2).

Finally, we used an ATAC-seq dataset as an estimate of the cellular composition of the ROSMAP samples, by averaging the intensity of accessibility of the most representative genes of each cell type; Astrocyte markers: CPE, CLU, ALDOC, SLC1A3, and SLC1A2, microglia markers: CCL4, CCL3, CTSS, TYROBP, and CD83, neurons: NPY, SST, SNAP25, VIP, and SCG2, oligodendrocytes: PLP1, CNP, MAL, MOG, and CRYAB.

For the epigenomic analyzes of the PRKCZ locus, we utilized WGBS and RNA-seq data from ENCODE (https://www.encodeproject.org/), visualizing all datasets on the IVG genome viewer (https://igv.org/app/), and using the mouse (GRCm38/mm10) and human (GRCh38/hg38) genomes as reference.

3. Results

3.1 PKMζ expression is restricted to human nervous system and correlates with demethylation of a promoter CRE

In humans, PKMζ expression is prevalent in the central nervous system (CNS) and driven by the PRKCZ internal promoter (1). A transcription factor (TF) motif search using JASPAR (42) revealed a putative CREB1 binding site that contained a canonical CRE at the proximal promoter region of PKMζ that is conserved among amniotes (Figure 1, supplementary figure 1.A). Interestingly, an adenine to guanine substitution seems to have occurred in the ancestors of placental mammals (Figure 1.A, B), potentially creating a new epigenetic layer of DNA methylation-based gene expression regulation in this lineage. In agreement with this hypothesis, accessible DNA methylation and expression data from human tissues indicates a negative correlation between PKMζ promoter methylation and gene expression (Figure 1.A). We validated these findings by sequencing bisulfite-treated DNA from human tissue and measured PKMζ expression levels by RT-qPCR for both PKCζ and PKMζ transcripts (Figure 1.C, D and E). The human PRKCZ locus, including the CpG island at the PRKCZ internal promoter, was mostly demethylated, except for a few CpGs within a CpG island at the gene body (Figure 1.D). The demethylation of PKMζ promoter was associated with the transcript expression. In contrast, the upstream promoter of PRKCZ, which drives expression of PKCζ, has a CpG island that is demethylated in the human and mouse brain, even though PKCζ mRNA is detected only at residual levels in the brain, suggesting that DNA demethylation is not sufficient to allow PKCζ expression. The preference for the shorter transcript of the PRKCZ locus was also observed in different areas of the macaque brain (supplementary figure 1.B).

3.2 DNA methylation is associated with regulation of PKMζ expression

The differential methylation of the PKMζ promoter in neural versus nonneural tissues prompted us to test if this mechanism is responsible for regulating PKMζ expression. To test this hypothesis, we demethylated the genomes of mouse embryonic stem cells and human adult cell lines that do not express PKMζ with 5-Azacytidine (5-Aza), a nucleoside analog that inhibits DNA methyltransferase activity. Treatment with 5-Aza for 72h caused loss of methylation at the promoter, verified by bisulfite sequencing, and promoted up-regulation of PKMζ expression (Figure 2.A, B). To simulate an opposite situation, we used a CRISPR-based DNA methylation system (18) to specifically target the PKMζ promoter in Neuro-2a neuroblastoma cells, which express PKMζ at high levels. Bisulfite sequencing confirmed specific methylation by the dCas9-DNMT3a system at target sites. Again, this treatment acted as expected and caused downregulation of PKMζ expression (Figure 2.C).

3.3 DNA methylation controls PKMζ expression by blocking CREB1 binding

A CRE at the PKMζ promoter is conserved in amniotes and could likely regulate PKMζ expression. Further, a canonical CRE containing a central CpG emerged in placental mammals (Figure 1) and binding of CREB factors are sensitive to DNA methylation at this site (13). Therefore, we set up to verify the role of CREB1 in PKMζ expression.

First, we confirmed CREB1 binding to PKMζ promoter using ChIP-qPCR. Binding was detected in both Neuro-2A cells and mouse brain samples, but not in the pancreas, which expresses CREB1 but not PKMζ (Figure 3.A). siRNA-mediated knockdown of CREB1 and CREB binding protein (CREBBP) alone or combined decreased PKMζ expression in a similar manner in Neuro-2A cells (Figure 3.B). Next, we used the dCas9-DNMT3a with single guide RNAs (sgRNAs) #1 and #5 to specifically hypermethylate the proximal region of the PKMζ promoter where the CRE is located. CREB1 binding to this region was significantly reduced upon methylation, providing evidence that PKMζ downregulation was caused by disruption of CREB1-mediated activation (Figures 2.C and 3.C). To further support this model, we analyzed the interaction of CREB1 with the promoter region that contains this CRE element, either hypermethylated (5’-AGGAGCTGA(`5mC)GTCACA(5mC)GGA-3’) or demethylated (5’-AGGAGCTGACGTCACACGGA-3’), using molecular dynamics simulations. The free energy calculations, using both the MM-PBSA (43) and thermodynamic integration methods (44), indicated that the hypermethylated form has a greater free energy of binding (ΔΔG = +3.1 ± 0.4 kcal mol-1 and ΔΔG = +9.9 ± 0.5 kcal mol−1 for TI and MM-PBSA, respectively), indicating that the CpG methylation significantly disfavors the complex formation. Altogether, these results strongly support the idea that methylation of the proximal promoter region negatively regulates PKMζ expression by preventing CREB1 binding.

3.4 The CREB/CBP complex has H3K9Ac activity on the PKMζ proximal promoter

Encoded by the CREBBP gene, CBP is the histone acetyltransferase responsible for the deposition of the H3K27Ac mark, which is associated with active enhancers, but can also acetylate the lysine 9 of histone H3 (H3K9Ac) in vitro (45). Promoter H3K9 acetylation (H3K9Ac) is an epigenetic activation marker and has been shown to be important for memory consolidation (46). Therefore, we evaluated H3K9Ac enrichment relative to PKMζ expression. Treatment of Neuro-2A cells with the histone deacetylase inhibitor Trichostatin A (TSA) upregulated expression of PKMζ, followed by a marginal increase in the H3K9Ac signal on the promoter region (Figure 3.D). Conversely, siRNA-mediated knockdown of CREBBP seemed to decrease the levels of H3K9Ac at the PKMζ promoter (p=0.06) (Figure 3.E). Taken together, our data support a model in which the CREB/CBP complex promotes H3K9 acetylation to regulate PKMζ expression.

3.5 CREB binding to PKMζ promoter correlates with changes in mRNA levels in a model of neuronal differentiation from human induced pluripotent cells

Given that PKMζ is a brain-specific kinase, we asked if neuronal differentiation of human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) would recapitulate the PKMζ expression pattern observed in tissues (Figure 4.A and B). PKMζ variant 2 was indeed upregulated following neuronal differentiation, whereas variant 4 was not detected (Figure 4.C). Interestingly, CREB1 expression levels also increased throughout neuronal differentiation, whereas CREBBP levels remained constant (Figure 4.D). Further, CREB1 binding was only detected at the PKMζ promoter in differentiated neurons, as seen by ChIP-qPCR (Figure 4.E).

Taken together, these data suggest that CREB binding at the PKMζ promoter is important for activating expression and that DNA methylation fine tunes this activity. Given the importance of CREB in memory related processes (15), of which PKMζ is of central importance, we wondered whether this epigenetic mechanism of regulation is specific for PKMζ. To answer this question, we searched for canonical CREs at the promoters (−2000 bp to +200 bp relative to transcription start sites) of all 88,076 human transcripts (representing 19,574 genes) whose annotation includes a 5’ untranslated region, to ensure that actual promoters were being screened. We found 1,040 genes for which at least 1 transcript contains a canonical CRE, to which binding to CREB is amenable to regulation by DNA methylation. Of these, 37 (7,8%) are preferentially expressed in the human brain, defined here as having a normalized expression four times higher than in any other tissue in the Human Protein Atlas database (47) (Figure 5.A). Enrichment of putative CREB1 target genes expression seems to be specific to the brain, as the other analyzed gene sets with tissue-specific expression displayed a smaller percentage of components with a canonical CRE at their promoter regions (Figure 5.A). To test whether the 38 genes (including PRKCZ) preferentially expressed in the brain are related to each other functionally, we performed a Gene Ontology analysis to detect terms that are overrepresented among them (http://bioinformatics.sdstate.edu/go/). PRKCZ, representing PKMζ in this gene-based list, and four other genes (NR2E1, LRRTM2, SLC8A2 and SNAP25) were found to be involved in LTP (Enrichment FDR: 3.7E-05) of a total of 97 known genes involved in this process. Other top hits of the gene ontology analysis were related to Neurogenesis (18 genes from the list of 37 genes, Enrichment FDR: 2.5E-08) and Regulation of synaptic plasticity (8 genes from the list of 37 genes, Enrichment FDR: 4.1E-07). To verify if those 37 genes have similar DNA methylation patterns to PKMζ at their promoters, we utilized WGBS data from ENCODE and compared the DNA methylation levels of iPSCs, neural stem cells (NSCs) and the neuroblastoma cell line SK-N-SH, simulating a trajectory of neuronal differentiation from iPSCs. Pancreas was used as a non-neuronal control (Figure 5.B). A neuronal specific DNA demethylation pattern during differentiation of iPSCs into neurons with some resemblance to PKMζ was observed for the promoters of the LTP-related genes LRRTM2 and SLC8A2 (SLC8A2 CRE site was demethylated even though other CpGs close to CRE were methylated in SK-N-SH), whilst CREs at the SNAP25, NR2E1 and KIF5C promoters were already demethylated in iPSCs. Furthermore, other putative CREB-regulated genes not involved in LTP (NEUROD6, FAM163B) displayed a similar DNA demethylation pattern emergence during differentiation of iPSCs into neurons, while others (CRTAM, BSN, TMEM144, MTCL1) became hypermethylated in the SK-N-SH neuroblastoma cell line, used here as representative of differentiated neurons. These genes, however, were only hypermethylated in this cell line and not in iPSCs nor in NSCs, and could thus be potential tumor-suppressor genes that were epigenetically downregulated, a common feature of cancer cells (48). In agreement with this hypothesis, the comparison of the expression levels between normal neurons and SK-N-SH showed that all genes that became hypermethylated during differentiation of iPSC into neurons were downregulated in SK-N-SH cells when compared to normal neurons (supplementary figure 2). We quantified the expression levels of some of the putative CREB regulated genes that displayed DNA methylation changes from iPSCs to the SK-N-SH neuroblastoma cell line, by using our model of neuronal differentiation from iPSCs. Indeed, the expression levels of the genes LRRTM2 and NEUROD6 were negatively correlated with their promoter DNA methylation levels (figure 5.C and 5.B). To further corroborate the epigenetic regulation of the putative CREB target genes, we treated HEK-293 and HL-60 cells with 5-azacitidine for 72 h and measured their expression by RT-qPCR (Figure 5.D). We first looked at two genes that are not expressed in HEK-293 cells (Figure 5.D, top): CRTAM, which encodes an activation molecule expressed in activated Natural Killer cells (NKT) and CD8+ T cells, and is highly expressed in neurons and glial cells (49), was not expressed in untreated HEK-293 cells and became up-regulated upon treatment with 5µM and 7µM of 5-Aza. MTCL1, which encodes for a factor involved in microtubule dynamics regulation, and was described as essential in maintaining neuronal polarity of Purkinje cells (50), was upregulated in HEK cells upon treatment with 7 µM of 5-Aza. The treatment with 5-Aza in HL-60 (Figure 5D, bottom) cells resulted in the upregulation of the expression of CREB1 target genes LRRTM2, CRTAM, NEUROD6 and PKMζ.

3.6 PKMζ is epigenetically downregulated In Alzheimer’s disease

Given that PKMζ has an important role in long-term memory consolidation, and that patients with neurodegenerative diseases have memory impairment (51), we wondered if an aberrant hypermethylation of PKMζ promoter could be observed in association with pathologic Alzheimer’s disease (AD). We analyzed data from participants in either the Religious Orders Study or Rush Memory and Aging Project (ROSMAP; https://www.radc.rush.edu/), and observed a weak negative correlation between PKMζ promoter DNA methylation levels and RNA expression: probe cg04520340 versus PKMζ FPKM correlation = −0.158, p-value = 0.00019; probe cg14418633 versus PKMζ FPKM correlation = −0.058, p-value = −0.17 (Figure 6.A). When we stratified patients according to the dichotomized version of the modified NIA-Reagan diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease (presence or absence of AD), we observed that participants with AD had PKMζ promoter hypermethylated, when compared to participants without AD (Figure 6.B). Accordingly, PKMζ variant 2 was downregulated in the brain of pathologic AD participants (Figure 6.C), suggesting a role for aberrant DNA methylation in downregulating the expression of a central gene in memory formation in AD participants. CREB1 and CREBBP expression levels were not different between patient groups. We also analyzed H3K9Ac levels at PKMζ promoter using the H3K9Ac ChIP-seq dataset from the Religious Orders Study or Rush Memory and Aging Project and found no difference on the levels of H3K9Ac between participants with or without AD (Supplementary figure 3). Importantly, there was no over-representation of non-neuronal cell types in samples from AD participants, which could introduce bias to the DNA methylation data (figure 6.D). Of note, no difference in expression or methylation was observed for the other genes involved in LTP (LRRTM2, data not shown), highlighting a possible specificity for PKMζ deregulation in AD.

4. Discussion

Prevalent in the brain, the atypical PKC M zeta, PKMζ, was described almost two decades ago, and since then a considerable body of evidence has documented its key role in the processes of long-term memory storage (7,52,53). Therefore, it is not surprising that a decrease in PKMζ expression has been documented in models of depression (2), aging, cognitive impairment (54) and Alzheimer’s disease (4). By examining the proximal promoter region of PKMζ, we characterized DNA methylation at this region as a mechanism of controlling gene expression and identified CREB1 as an epigenetically regulated transcription factor that drives PKMζ expression.

Supporting our results, Chen and colleagues observed that aged rats with cognitive impairment had downregulation of PKMζ specifically in the prelimbic cortex, when compared to young and adult rats (54). This downregulation correlated with DNA hypermethylation, assessed by methylation-specific quantitative PCR (MS-qPCR). Interestingly, aged rats submitted to a protocol of environmental enrichment, which improves memory retention, presented a gain of PKMζ expression that was correlated with PKMζ promoter demethylation. Even though the study of Chen and colleagues only shows a correlation between PKMζ expression and DNA methylation by using a semi-quantitative technique (MS-qPCR), they suggested that DNA methylation could be involved in the regulation of PKMζ expression. In the present study we address the negative correlation between PKMζ expression and DNA hypermethylation in mouse and human tissues and show that the pharmacological demethylation of PKMζ promoter leads to its up regulation in mouse and human cells, demonstrating that this epigenetic mechanism of regulation of expression is evolutionarily conserved in placental mammals. Further, we show that the targeted DNA hypermethylation of PKMζ proximal promoter is sufficient to downregulate its expression in the neuroblastoma mouse cell line Neuro-2a, pointing to a causal role of DNA methylation in regulating the expression of PKMζ. We also identify and characterize CREB1 as an important transcription factor driving PKMζ expression in mouse and human neurons, with its activity modulated by CpG methylation at its consensus binding motif. While the analysis of sequence conservation of the PKMζ promoter region and the brain-specific expression of the transcript suggests that CREB regulation is a feature shared among all amniotes, the presence of a CpG dinucleotide at the canonical CRE motif is a more recent phenomena (restricted to placental mammals), increasing the complexity of regulation of PKMζ expression in these mammals. This finding, together with simulations of methylated DNA and CRE binding agrees with the work of Zhang and colleagues, that showed the methylated CRE consensus inhibiting CREB1 binding to the promoter region of the corresponding genes (13). We searched for canonical CREs at the promoters of chicken orthologues of the analyzed genes and found hits for both LRRTM2 and NEUROD6, but not PKMζ, indicating that the acquisition of a canonical CRE being capable of methylation was a recent event specific for PKMζ.

We identified 1040 putative CREB1 regulated genes, 38 (including PRKCZ) containing a canonical CRE and being enriched in the brain. Of the 37 genes found, excluding PRKCZ, 31 are methylated in at least one site in pancreas (83% of total genes) and 19 in all sites analyzed (51% of total genes), supporting the idea that methylation at the CREB binding site or surrounding this site is an important regulatory mechanism of inhibiting these genes from being expressed in other tissues other than brain. Of note, most of these genes (n=27) were already demethylated at the CRE site and surrounding CGs, in iPSC, NSC and both in pancreas and spinal cord, indicating that other genomic (e.g, enhancer activity) and epigenetic mechanisms are responsible for its enhanced expression in brain. Four of the genes (PRKCZ, LRRTM2, NEUROD6, and FAM163B) follow the same pattern of gene expression and promoter DNA demethylation upon neuronal differentiation from stem cells. Interestingly, NEUROD6 is involved in neuronal differentiation and, as the PRKCZ locus, is also under the control of two distinct promoters, one with a CRE and one with a conserved C/EBP binding site (55), in fact, C/EBP has been shown to be involved in long-term facilitation in Aplysia (56).

This could be a case of alternative promoter usage being requested in different developmental stages or situations, and methylation of the CRE could help regulate promoter usage.CREB1 has been implicated in memory formation processes, being required for both short and long-term memory formation, as well as adult neurogenesis (15,57–59). The most plausible explanation is that CREB1 drives the expression of a set of genes related to the same biological functions (e.g, long-term memory formation

In agreement with this hypothesis, we observed that from the 37 genes that are enhanced in the brain and contain a canonical CREB site, five (NR2E1, PRKCZ, LRRTM2, SLC8A2 and SNAP25) are involved in long-term potentiation of a total of 97 known genes involved in LTP (according to a gene ontology analysis, a total of 5%).

Not only PKMζ and LRRTM2 expression are regulated in a similar way, they also might work synergistically in the maintenance of LTP. LRRTM2 codes for a transmembrane neuronal protein involved in the development and maintenance of excitatory synapses, being required for the stabilization of AMPA receptors at synapses in hippocampal neurons, after LTP induction (60). Knocking out both LRRTM1 and LRRTM2 in adult mice causes impairment in LTP, as well as a decrease in the AMPA-receptor mediated synaptic transmission (61). Likewise, PKMζ increases the density of AMPA receptors in the postsynaptic neurons by regulating the trafficking of GluR2-containing AMPA receptors (62). Future studies should address if there is any direct association between PKMζ and LRRTM2 in the context of long-term memory formation, and if the epigenetic silencing of both PKMζ and LRRTM2 is sufficient to promote changes in LTP.

Given that the patients with Alzheimer’s disease usually have memory impairment, we also analyzed the epigenetic patterns of the LTP genes identified in our study in a cohort of AD patients. De Jager et al. had previously observed a set of differentially methylated regions associated with an AD susceptibility gene network in presymptomatic AD patients, suggesting that DNA methylation might be associated with the onset of AD (63). In agreement with this hypothesis, PKMζ was shown to be downregulated in a mouse model of AD (4). However, the differences in PKMζ expression were investigated only at the protein level, so we cannot rule out the hypothesis that the downregulation of PKMζ expression in this mouse model of AD could occur by posttranslational mechanisms. Wu and colleagues analyzed expression datasets of AD patients and found that LRRTM2 was also downregulated in patients with AD, compared to healthy individuals (64). In our analysis of LTP genes in association with Alzheimer’s disease we only observed an increase in methylation correlating with a decrease in expression of PKMζ. Genes like SNAP25, also involved in LTP, have been in fact shown to be downregulated by other mechanisms (65). Further studies should address if the silencing of these genes have functional impact on AD models, and if the pharmacological targeting of CREB (66) could be beneficial for AD patients.

One limitation of the analysis of the AD brain biospecimens with the Ilumina 450K platform is that for some candidate genes we can only see methylation of regions adjacent to CRE, instead of the actual CpG dinucleotide within the CRE. However, we see that in normal non pathological brain tissue the CRE at PKMζ promoter and its surroundings have low DNA methylation levels. Another limitation is the fact that the Rush Alzheimer’s disease center cohort is predominantly older, including the group of non-Alzheimer’s patients, and the DNA methylation of genes related to memory and LTP, such as PKMζ, may also be increased because of aging (67), thus initial events of hypermethylation that occur with aging could mask methylation events specific of Alzheimer. Furthermore, differential DNA methylation has been observed in distinct areas of the brain (68), and aberrant DNA methylation in AD could be restricted to specific anatomical locations. Therefore, future studies should address those regional epigenetic differences in the brain of AD subjects.

Borodinova and colleagues used primary cultures of rat cortical neurons to evaluate the role of histone acetylation in the control of the expression of aPKCs (69). Prkcι gene expression was directly controlled by an increase in the histone acetylation marks H3K9Ac and H3K18Ac, and treatment with HDAC inhibitors preferentially up-regulated the expression of PKCζ, while downregulating the expression of PKMζ. In the present study an increase in both the expression of PKMζ and H3K9Ac levels was observed upon treatment with TSA. Levels of H3K9Ac also decreased upon CREBBP knock-down. Our results go in different directions than the study by Borodinova and colleagues. The differences observed in both studies could be related due to differences in the basal expression levels of PKMζ, which is a consequence of distinct basal epigenetic states. Borodinova et al. used adult rat cortical neurons which already expresses PKMζ and do not express PRCζ, whereas we used murine embryonic stem cells, which do not express PKMζ. Both studies suggest that the PRKCZ locus is epigenetically regulated in a dual manner: the upstream promoter of PKCζ isoform is upregulated by histone acetylation and does not seem to be regulated by DNA methylation, whereas the downstream promoter of PKMζ is regulated by DNA methylation. Tissue specific-regulation of expression of genes with dual promoters has been shown to be achieved via DNA methylation and alternative methylation of distinct promoters (70–72).

Methylation of the PKMζ promoter could be a means of segregating the regulation of expression of these two kinases. Interestingly the only region in the brain that expresses the brain-specific PKMζ and the ubiquitous PKCζ is the cerebellum, but whether the same cells express these two isoforms remains to be confirmed. Subsequent studies should address the molecular basis that maintains both regions epigenetically insulated from each other and whether expression of one isoform influences the expression of the other.

Taken together we demonstrate that DNA methylation of the promoter recently evolved as a mechanism of restricting and fine tuning PKMζ expression. This mechanism is used by the nervous system during cell differentiation. Altered DNA methylation of PKMζ promoter and consequently a reduction in mRNA expression may contribute to the development of Alzheimer’s disease.

Supplementary Material

1

2

3

Acknowledgements

We would like to acknowledge Layla Farage Martins, Edward K Mandell and Irina Maskaykina for technical support, Prof. Katalin Gothard for providing Macaca samples. FAPESP Grant #2019/06982-6 to DS and FAPESP fellowships 2015/17812-3 to DP, 2020/13929-1 to FMV and 2020/16204-8 to CPG. Fellowships from Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior (CAPES) to DVSP and BCM. FAPESP Fellowship # 2015/24046-5 to DS and CNPQ PQ-2 fellowship # 305729/2021-7to D.S. ROSMAP is supported by NIA grants P30AG10161, P30AG72975, R01AG15819, R01AG17917, R01AG36042, U01AG46152, and U01AG61356.

Figure 1. PKMζ transcription in the PRKCZ locus in human brain is enhanced and contains a conserved CRE.

(A) Expression (RNA-seq), CpG methylation status (whole genome bisulfite sequencing – WGBS) and epigenetic features from human ENCODE data is shown for the human PRKCZ locus. The sequence conservation track among vertebrates is shown below the epigenetic tracks, evidencing the evolutionary conservation of the PKMζ 5’UTR (blue peak). (B) Inset of the PKMζ proximal promoter, showing conservation across species of a CRE sequence. (C) and (D) DNA methylation levels quantification at sets of CpGs across the PRKCZ locus of human brain specimens (n=5). In (C) the CpG island at PRKCZ internal promoter is represented (CREB1 CpG is marked in red). In (D) a partially methylated CpG island at the PRKCZ gene body is represented (inset). A hypermethylated CpG island immediately downstream of the PRKCZ locus (not visible on the genome viewer window) is also shown. Individual colors indicate individual nucleotides or bases within the same CpG island. (E) Quantification of mRNA expression levels of PRKCζ and PKMζ transcripts from human brain specimens, detected by RT-qPCR (n=5).

Figure 2. Pharmacological and targeted manipulation of PKMζ promoter DNA methylation induces local transcriptional alterations.

(A) 5-Azacytidine treatment was performed for 72h. DNA and RNA were extracted for bisulfite sequencing and RT-qPCR, respectively. The expression in HEK-293 cell line was evaluated for PKMζ variant 2 (variant 4 was not expressed) (n= 3). (B) The same experiments were performed in the mouse embryonic stem cell lineage e14TG2a (n=3). (C) The dCas9-DNMT3a system was used to specifically hypermethylate the PKMζ promoter region in Neuro-2a cells, using distinct combinations of sgRNAs. PKMζ expression was measured by RT-qPCR (left, n=3), and DNA methylation levels were confirmed by bisulfite NGS (right, n=4). Methylation increased in different promoter segments according to the specific guide RNAs used. Unpaired t test was used to calculate the difference between groups (* p-value &lt; 0.05, ** p-value &lt; 0.01).

Figure 3. CREB1 drives PKMζ expression, and binding to the promoter region is hindered by DNA methylation.

(A) CREB1 binding at PKMζ promoter was measured by ChIP-qPCR in Neuro2a and mouse brain, (both models express PKMζ). CREB1 binding was also measured in pancreas, a tissue that does not express PKMζ, but has similar expression levels of CREB1 (n=3). (B) Neuro-2a cells were treated with siRNA against CREB1 (n=6) and CREBBP (n=3), and their expression, as well as of PKMζ, were measured by RT-qPCR. (C) The dCas9-DNTM3a system was utilized with two sgRNAs that target CREB1 binding site at PKMζ promoter region, and CREB1 binding was measured by ChIP-qPCR (n=3). (D) E14Tg2a cells were treated with TSA 50nM or 100nM for 72h, and PKMζ expression was measured by RT-qPCR (left, n=4), while H3K9Ac enrichment was assessed by ChIP-qPCR (right, n=3). (E) siRNA against CREBBP, was performed in Neuro-2a cell lines, and H3K9Ac enrichment was measured by ChIP-qPCR (n=4). Unpaired t test was used to calculate the difference between groups (* p-value &lt; 0.05, ** p-value &lt; 0.01).

Figure 4. PKMζ expression is upregulated during neuronal differentiation from iPSCs.

(A) Expression of a panel of markers of different developmental stages of neuronal differentiation from human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), measured by RT-qPCR (n=3). (B) Immunofluorescence of Neuron-specific class III β-tubulin (Tuj1) and DAPI staining in IPSCs from three different patients differentiated to neurons. (C) Expression of human PRKCZ locus during neuronal differentiation, measured by RT-qPCR (n=3). (D) Expression of CREB1 and CREBBP during neuronal differentiation (n=3). (E) CREB1 binding to PKMζ promoter region during neuronal differentiation, measured by ChIP-qPCR (n=3). Unpaired t test was used to calculate the difference between the groups (* p-value &lt; 0.05).

Figure 5. PKMζ and other CREB responsive genes display a similar DNA methylation pattern during neuronal differentiation.

(A) The percentage of genes with tissue-specific expression (i.e. four times more than other tissues) that possesses a canonical CREB binding motif on their promoter region is higher in brain tissues. (B) WGBS data from the promoter region of 38 genes that have a CREB binding motif, in human iPSCs, Neural stem cells, the neuroblastoma cell line SK-N-SH and pancreas. For a given sample, each column represents a single CpG dinucleotide, in a total of 5 CpGs per gene. The “c” in the heatmap represents the CREB binding sites. (C) RT-qPCR data from putative CREB target genes differentially methylated, as seen in panel B, in IPSCs neural stem cells and differentiated neurons, confirming that expression correlates with methylation of putative CREB binding site (n=3). (D) RT-qPCR data from putative CREB target genes after 72h of 5-Aza treatment in HEK-293 cells (top n=4) and HL-60 cells (bottom, n=5). Unpaired t test was used to calculate the difference between groups (* p-value &lt; 0.05, ** p-value &lt; 0.01).

Figure 6. PKMζ is aberrantly methylated and downregulated in Alzheimer’s disease patients.

(A) Scatter plot demonstrating the negative correlation between PKMζ promoter DNA methylation and RNA expression. A linear regression was calculated to predict PKMζ expression based on DNA methylation levels. A significant regression equation was found [F(1,549) = 14.1, p-value = 0.0001], with an adjusted R2 of 0.023 for the probe cg04520340. The linear regression for the probe cg14418633 was not significant [F(1,549) = 13.36, p-value =0.1712], with an adjusted R2 of 0.0015. Trend lines are shown based on the calculated linear model. (B) Quantification of DNA methylation signals from two illumina 450 probes mapped at PKMζ promoter region, distributed according to the Reagan pathologic diagnosis of AD. (C) Expression levels of PKMζ variants 2 and 4, CREB and CREBBP measured by RNA-seq. (D) Expression levels of a panel of genes that are specific for each cell type of the brain, serving as an estimate of cellular composition across the different groups of patients. To test the correlations between clinical and molecular data, the spearman correlation test was used (** p-value &lt; 0.0005).

Highlights

DNA methylation, of a CRE regulates the specific expression of PKMζ in human brain.

CRE site methylation regulates brain-specific expression of Long-term potentiation genes.

PKMζ expression decreases and promoter methylation increases in Alzheimer’s disease.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Conflict of Interest

The authors no conflict of interest.


References

1. Hernandez AI , Blace N , Crary JF , Serrano PA , Leitges M , Libien JM , Protein kinase Mζ synthesis from a brain mRNA encoding an independent protein kinase Cζ catalytic domain. Implications for the molecular mechanism of memory. J Biol Chem 2003;278 (41 ):40305–16.12857744
2. Yan W , Liu J-F , Han Y , Zhang W , Luo Y-X , Xue Y-X , Protein kinase Mζ in medial prefrontal cortex mediates depressive-like behavior and antidepressant response. Mol Psychiatry 2018 Sep 28;23 (9 ):1878–91.29180675
3. Lee AM , Zou ME , Lim JP , Stecher J , McMahon T , Messing RO . Deletion of Prkcz Increases Intermittent Ethanol Consumption in Mice. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 2014 Jan;38 (1 ):170–8.23905844
4. Li Q , Navakkode S , Rothkegel M , Soong TW , Sajikumar S , Korte M . Metaplasticity mechanisms restore plasticity and associativity in an animal model of Alzheimer’s disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci 2017 May 23;114 (21 ):5527–32.28484012
5. Parker SS , Mandell EK , Hapak SM , Maskaykina IY , Kusne Y , Kim J-Y , Competing molecular interactions of aPKC isoforms regulate neuronal polarity. Proc Natl Acad Sci 2013;110 (35 ):14450–5.23940317
6. Glanzman DL . PKM and the maintenance of memory. F1000 Biol Rep 2013 Feb 1;5 (February ):1–9.23361308
7. Wang S , Sheng T , Ren S , Tian T , Lu W . Distinct Roles of PKCι/λ and PKMζ in the Initiation and Maintenance of Hippocampal Long-Term Potentiation and Memory. Cell Rep 2016;16 (7 ):1954–61.27498875
8. Wu CT , Morris JR . Genes, genetics, and epigenetics: A correspondence Vol. 293 , Science. American Association for the Advancement of Science; 2001. p. 1103–5.
9. Blomen V a , Boonstra J . Stable transmission of reversible modifications: maintenance of epigenetic information through the cell cycle. Cell Mol Life Sci 2011;68 (1 ):27–44.20799050
10. Bird A DNA methylation patterns and epigenetic memory. Genes Dev 2002;16 (1 ):6–21.11782440
11. Jones PA . Functions of DNA methylation: islands, start sites, gene bodies and beyond. Nat Rev Genet 2012;13 (7 ):484–92.22641018
12. Mancini DN , Singh SM , Archer TK , Rodenhiser DI . Site-specific DNA methylation in the neurofibromatosis (NF1) promoter interferes with binding of CREB and SP1 transcription factors. Oncogene 1999 Jul 30;18 (28 ):4108–19.10435592
13. Zhang X , Odom DT , Koo SH , Conkright MD , Canettieri G , Best J , Genome-wide analysis of cAMP-response element binding protein occupancy, phosphorylation, and target gene activation in human tissues. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2005 Mar 22;102 (12 ):4459–64.15753290
14. Kandel ER . The molecular biology of memory: CAMP, PKA, CRE, CREB-1, CREB-2, and CPEB. Vol. 5 , Molecular Brain BioMed Central; 2012. p. 1–12.22217152
15. Silva AJ , Kogan JH , Frankland PW , Kida S . CREB AND MEMORY. Annu Rev Neurosci. 1998 Mar;21 (1 ):127–48.9530494
16. Altarejos JY , Montminy M . CREB and the CRTC co-activators: sensors for hormonal and metabolic signals. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2011;12 (3 ):141–51.21346730
17. Shaywitz AJ , Greenberg ME . CREB: A Stimulus-Induced Transcription Factor Activated by A Diverse Array of Extracellular Signals. Annu Rev Biochem 1999;68 (1 ):821–61.10872467
18. Vojta A , Dobrinic P , Tadic V , Bockor L , Korac P , Julg B , Repurposing the CRISPR-Cas9 system for targeted DNA methylation. Nucleic Acids Res 2016;44 (12 ):5615–28.26969735
19. Pedersen BS , Eyring K , De S , Yang IV ., Schwartz DA . Fast and accurate alignment of long bisulfite-seq reads 2014 Jan 6;
20. Okita K , Yamakawa T , Matsumura Y , Sato Y , Amano N , Watanabe A , An Efficient Nonviral Method to Generate Integration-Free Human-Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells from Cord Blood and Peripheral Blood Cells. Stem Cells 2013 Mar 1;31 (3 ):458–66.23193063
21. Shi Y , Kirwan P , Smith J , Robinson HPC , Livesey FJ . Human cerebral cortex development from pluripotent stem cells to functional excitatory synapses. Nat Neurosci 2012;15 (3 ):477–86.22306606
22. Grubaugh ND , Gangavarapu K , Quick J , Matteson NL , De Jesus JG , Main BJ , An amplicon-based sequencing framework for accurately measuring intrahost virus diversity using PrimalSeq and iVar. Genome Biol 2019 Jan 8;20 (1 ):1–19.30606230
23. Pfaffl MW . A new mathematical model for relative quantification in real-time RT-PCR. Nucleic Acids Res 2001 May 1;29 (9 ):45e–45.
24. Cotney JL , Noonan JP . Chromatin Immunoprecipitation with Fixed Animal Tissues and Preparation for High-Throughput Sequencing. Cold Spring Harb Protoc 2015 Feb;2015 (2 ):pdb.prot084848.
25. Carey MF , Peterson CL , Smale ST . Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP). Cold Spring Harb Protoc 2009 Sep;2009 (9 ):pdb.prot5279.
26. Krieger E , Vriend G . YASARA View - molecular graphics for all devices - from smartphones to workstations. Bioinformatics 2014 Oct 15;30 (20 ):2981–2.24996895
27. Anandakrishnan R , Aguilar B , Onufriev AV . H++ 3.0: automating pK prediction and the preparation of biomolecular structures for atomistic molecular modeling and simulations. Nucleic Acids Res 2012 Jul 1;40 (W1 ):W537–41.22570416
28. Salomon-Ferrer R , Case DA , Walker RC . An overview of the Amber biomolecular simulation package. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Comput Mol Sci 2013 Mar 1;3 (2 ):198–210.
29. Maier JA , Martinez C , Kasavajhala K , Wickstrom L , Hauser KE , Simmerling C . ff14SB: Improving the Accuracy of Protein Side Chain and Backbone Parameters from ff99SB. J Chem Theory Comput 2015 Jul 7;11 (8 ):3696–713.26574453
30. Ivani I , Dans PD , Noy A , Pérez A , Faustino I , Hospital A , Parmbsc1: a refined force field for DNA simulations. Nat Methods 2016 Dec 30;13 (1 ):55–8.26569599
31. Lankaš F , Šponer J , Langowski J , Cheatham TE . DNA Basepair Step Deformability Inferred from Molecular Dynamics Simulations. Biophys J 2003;85 (5 ):2872.14581192
32. Zwanzig R Nonlinear generalized Langevin equations. J Stat Phys 1973;9 (3 ):215–20.
33. Berendsen HJC , Postma JPM , Van Gunsteren WF , Dinola A , Haak JR . Molecular dynamics with coupling to an external bath. J Chem Phys 1998 Aug 31;81 (8 ):3684.
34. Darden T , York D , Pedersen L . Particle mesh Ewald: An N⋅log(N) method for Ewald sums in large systems. J Chem Phys 1998 Aug 31;98 (12 ):10089.
35. Ryckaert J-P , Ciccotti+ G , Berendsen HJC . Numerical integration of the Cartesian Equations of Motion of a System with Constraints: Molecular Dynamics of n-Alkanes. J Comput Phys 1977;23 :321–41.
36. Gapsys V , Khabiri M , De Groot BL , Freddolino PL . Comment on “Deficiencies in Molecular Dynamics Simulation-Based Prediction of Protein-DNA Binding Free Energy Landscapes.” J Phys Chem B 2018;2017 (20 ):5151–61.
37. Klimovich PV , Shirts MR, Mobley DL. Guidelines for the analysis of free energy calculations. J Comput Aided Mol Des 2015 May 1;29 (5 ):397–411.25808134
38. Sun YP , Zhou B , Lin Y , Wang W , Fernando KAS , Pathak P , Quantum-sized carbon dots for bright and colorful photoluminescence. J Am Chem Soc 2006 Jun 21;128 (24 ):7756–7.16771487
39. Miller BR , McGee TD , Swails JM , Homeyer N , Gohlke H , Roitberg AE . MMPBSA.py: An Efficient Program for End-State Free Energy Calculations. J Chem Theory Comput 2012 Sep 11;8 (9 ):3314–21.26605738
40. Bennett DA , Buchman AS , Boyle PA , Barnes LL , Wilson RS , Schneider JA . Religious Orders Study and Rush Memory and Aging Project. J Alzheimer’s Dis [Internet] 2018 Jan 1 [cited 2022 Feb 17];64 (s1 ):S161–89. Available from: http://www.radc.rush.edu 29865057
41. Ball M , Braak H , Coleman P , Dickson D , Duyckaerts C , Gambetti P , Consensus recommendations for the postmortem diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol Aging 1997 Jul 1;18 (4 SUPPL. ):S1–2.9330978
42. Fornes O , Castro-Mondragon JA , Khan A , Van Der Lee R , Zhang X , Richmond PA , JASPAR 2020: update of the open-access database of transcription factor binding profiles. Nucleic Acids Res 2020 Jan 1;48 (D1 ):D87–92.31701148
43. Kollman PA , Massova I , Reyes C , Kuhn B , Huo S , Chong L , Calculating structures and free energies of complex molecules: Combining molecular mechanics and continuum models. Acc Chem Res 2000;33 (12 ):889–97.11123888
44. Kirkwood JG . Statistical mechanics of fluid mixtures. J Chem Phys 1935 Nov 3;3 (5 ):300–13.
45. Henry RA , Kuo YM , Andrews AJ . Differences in specificity and selectivity between CBP and p300 acetylation of histone H3 and H3/H4. Biochemistry 2013 Aug 27;52 (34 ):5746–59.23862699
46. Korzus E , Rosenfeld MG , Mayford M . CBP Histone Acetyltransferase Activity Is a Critical Component of Memory Consolidation. Neuron 2004;42 (6 ):961–72.15207240
47. Uhlén M , Fagerberg L , Hallström BM , Lindskog C , Oksvold P , Mardinoglu A , Tissue-based map of the human proteome. Science (80− ) 2015 Jan 23;347 (6220 ).
48. Kazanets A , Shorstova T , Hilmi K , Marques M , Witcher M . Epigenetic silencing of tumor suppressor genes: Paradigms, puzzles, and potential. Vol. 1865 , Biochimica et Biophysica Acta - Reviews on Cancer Elsevier B.V.; 2016. p. 275–88.
49. López-Bayghen E , Pérez-Toledo K , Ramírez-Martínez L , Robledo J , Ortiz V , Ortega A . Class-I MHC-Restricted T-Cell Associated Molecule (CRTAM) Expression in Cerebellum. Acta Sci Neurol 2020;3 :2582–1121.
50. Satake T , Yamashita K , Hayashi K , Miyatake S , Tamura-Nakano M , Doi H , MTCL1 plays an essential role in maintaining Purkinje neuron axon initial segment. EMBO J 2017 May 2;36 (9 ):1227–42.28283581
51. Bäckman L , Small BJ , Fratiglioni L . Stability of the preclinical episodic memory deficit in Alzheimer’s disease. Brain 2001;124 (1 ):96–102.11133790
52. Pastalkova E , Serrano P , Pinkhasova D , Wallace E , Fenton AA , Sacktor TC . Storage of spatial information by the maintenance mechanism of LTP. Science (80− ) 2006;313 (5790 ):1141–444.
53. Sacktor TC , Hell JW . The genetics of PKMζ and memory maintenance. Vol. 10 , Science Signaling American Association for the Advancement of Science; 2017.
54. Chen C , Meng S-QQ , Xue Y-XX , Han Y , Sun C-YY , Deng J-HH , Epigenetic modification of PKMζ rescues aging-related cognitive impairment. Sci Rep 2016 Apr 1;6 (October 2015):1–17.28442746
55. Uittenbogaard M , Martinka DL , Johnson PF , Vinson C , Chiaramello A . 5′UTR of the neurogenic bHLH Nex1/MATH-2/NeuroD6 gene is regulated by two distinct promoters through CRE and C/EBP binding sites. J Neurosci Res 2007 Jan 1;85 (1 ):1–18.17075921
56. Alberini CM , Ghirardl M , Metz R , Kandel ER . C/EBP is an immediate-early gene required for the consolidation of long-term facilitation in Aplysia. Cell 1994 Mar 25;76 (6 ):1099–114.8137425
57. Chen G , Zou X , Watanabe H , Van Deursen JM , Shen J . CREB binding protein is required for both short-term and long-term memory formation. J Neurosci 2010 Sep 29;30 (39 ):13066–77.20881124
58. Ortega-Martínez S A new perspective on the role of the CREB family of transcription factors in memory consolidation via adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Front Mol Neurosci 2015 Aug 26;8 (AUGUST):46.26379491
59. Yu XW , Curlik DM , Oh MM , Yin JCP , Disterhoft JF . CREB overexpression in dorsal CA1 ameliorates long-term memory deficits in aged rats. Elife 2017 Jan 4;6.
60. Soler-Llavina GJ , Arstikaitis P , Morishita W , Ahmad M , Südhof TC , Malenka RC . Leucine-rich repeat transmembrane proteins are essential for maintenance of long-term potentiation. Neuron 2013 Aug 7;79 (3 ):439–46.23931994
61. Bhouri M , Morishita W , Temkin P , Goswami D , Kawabe H , Brose N , Deletion of LRRTM1 and LRRTM2 in adult mice impairs basal AMPA receptor transmission and LTP in hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2018 Jun 5;115 (23 ):E5382–9.29784826
62. Migues PV , Hardt O , Wu DC , Gamache K , Sacktor TC , Wang YT , PKM maintains memories by regulating GluR2-dependent AMPA receptor trafficking. Nat Neurosci 2010 May;13 (5 ):630–4.20383136
63. De Jager PL , Srivastava G , Lunnon K , Burgess J , Schalkwyk LC , Yu L , Alzheimer’s disease: Early alterations in brain DNA methylation at ANK1, BIN1, RHBDF2 and other loci. Nat Neurosci 2014 Sep 1;17 (9 ):1156–63.25129075
64. Wu M , Fang K , Wang W , Lin W , Guo L , Wang J . Identification of key genes and pathways for Alzheimer’s disease via combined analysis of genome-wide expression profiling in the hippocampus. Biophys Reports 2019 Apr 20;5 (2 ):98–109.
65. Furuya TK , Silva PNO , Payão SLM , Bertolucci PHF , Rasmussen LT , De Labio RW , Analysis of SNAP25 mRNA expression and promoter DNA methylation in brain areas of Alzheimer’s Disease patients. Neuroscience 2012 Sep 18;220 :41–6.22732502
66. Xia M , Huang R , Guo V , Southall N , Cho MH , Inglese J , Identification of compounds that potentiate CREB signaling as possible enhancers of long-term memory. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2009 Feb 17;106 (7 ):2412–7.19196967
67. Harris CJ , Davis BA , Zweig JA , Nevonen KA , Quinn JF , Carbone L , Age-Associated DNA Methylation Patterns Are Shared Between the Hippocampus and Peripheral Blood Cells. Front Genet 2020 Mar 6;11 :111.32211019
68. Rizzardi LF , Hickey PF , Rodriguez DiBlasi V , Tryggvadóttir R , Callahan CM , Idrizi A , Neuronal brain-region-specific DNA methylation and chromatin accessibility are associated with neuropsychiatric trait heritability. Nat Neurosci 2019 222 2019 Jan 14;22 (2 ):307–16.
69. Borodinova AA , Kuznetsova MA , Alekseeva VS , Balaban PM . Histone acetylation determines transcription of atypical protein kinases in rat neurons. Sci Rep 2019 Dec 1;9 (1 ):1–12.30626917
70. Haupt S , Söntgerath VSA , Leipe J , Schulze-Koops H , Skapenko A . Methylation of an intragenic alternative promoter regulates transcription of GARP. Biochim Biophys Acta - Gene Regul Mech 2016 Feb 1;1859 (2 ):223–34.
71. Hoivik EA , Witsoe SL , Bergheim IR , Xu Y , Jakobsson I , Tengholm A , DNA Methylation of Alternative Promoters Directs Tissue Specific Expression of Epac2 Isoforms. PLoS One 2013 Jul 4;8 (7 ):e67925.23861833
72. Bujko M , Kober P , Rusetska N , Wakuła M , Goryca K , Grecka E , Aberrant DNA methylation of alternative promoter of DLC1 isoform 1 in meningiomas. J Neurooncol 2016 Dec 1;130 (3 ):473.27614886
