LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101626387
42287
Curr Treat Options Psychiatry
Curr Treat Options Psychiatry
Current treatment options in psychiatry
2196-3061

37465053
10353767
10.1007/s40501-017-0105-1
NIHMS1862644
Article
Psychosocial and Environmental Treatment Approaches for Behavioral and Psychological Symptoms in Neurocognitive Disorders: an Update and Future Directions
Regier Natalie G. PhD 12*
Gitlin Laura N. PhD 123
1 Center for Innovative Care in Aging, Johns Hopkins School of Nursing, 525 North Wolfe Street, SON House Room 301, Baltimore, MD, 21205, USA
2 Department of Community and Public Health, Johns Hopkins School of Nursing, 525 N. Wolfe Street, Suite 316, Baltimore, MD, 21205, USA
3 Department of Psychiatry, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, 525 N. Wolfe Street, Suite 316, Baltimore, MD, 21205, USA
* Nregier1@jhu.edu
6 1 2023
3 2017
06 2 2017
18 7 2023
4 1 80101
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Opinion Statement

Nearly all persons with dementia will exhibit behavioral and psychological symptoms (BPSD) at some point during the course of the disease. These symptoms often pose significant challenges for formal and informal caregivers, and their treatment is unclear. Current guidelines recommend implementing nonpharmacological interventions as the first-line approach to managing BPSD. Given the recent proliferation of research evaluating the use of nonpharmacological interventions for BPSD, there is a continuing need to reevaluate and synthesize the findings in this area. The current review examines the evidence for using psychosocial and environmental strategies, focusing on the past 3 years of research efforts and assessing how this research augments what is known from prior reviews. We conclude that the results in the recent literature concerning the efficacy of psychosocial and environmental treatment approaches to behavioral symptoms in dementia continue to be promising, yet results are also mixed. We recommend the consideration of music therapy and tailored activities when utilizing a nonpharmacological approach, as these appear particularly promising throughout the literature. We also find that multisensory stimulation and animal-assisted therapy warrant further evaluation. In contrast, in this and previous reviews, approaches such as bright light therapy and aromatherapy have consistently been shown to be ineffective and, thus, cannot be recommended with confidence based on the evidence. We discuss limitations of current research studies and make recommendations for future research in the area of psychosocial and environmental interventions for BPSD.

Behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia
Nonpharmacological
Intervention
Psychosocial
Environmental

pmcIntroduction

Behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia (BPSD) are a hallmark feature of dementia—also known as neurocognitive disorders—for the nearly 47 million people worldwide who have this disorder [1]. Also referred to as neuropsychiatric symptoms (NPS), behavioral symptoms, neurobehavioral symptoms, or behavioral disturbances, this term encompasses a wide range of behavioral and psychiatric symptoms with multifactorial etiologies. These complex etiologies may include biological changes in the brain, biological stressors (e.g., medical illness), changes in executive functioning and information processing, increased vulnerability to an individual’s relationships and interactions with their physical and social environment, unmet needs, deterioration of effective coping mechanisms, or a combination of factors [2–6].

An increase in the frequency and severity and incidence and prevalence of BPSD tends to parallel dementia progression for most behaviors, although behavioral occurrences are episodic and occur across disease progression [7]. When combined with the concurrent need for more comprehensive and complex levels of care as dementia progresses, BPSD commonly lead to more expensive care measures including hospitalizations, increased time in caregiving, and long-term care placement [8–10]. Not surprisingly, prevention and management of BPSD are among the most challenging, burdensome, and costly aspects of dementia care. Behavioral symptoms often signal the need for more intense caregiving ([11, 12], Jutkowitz et al., under review) and are a significant source of stress for family members, formal caregivers [2, 12], residential staff [13, 14], and hospital staff [15, 16].

The ascertainment of BPSD is sorely neglected in all care settings, although published quality indicators such as those from the American Association of Neurology [17] and the International Consortium for Health Outcomes dementia measurement sets for clinicians include indicators for assessing BPSD, educating family caregivers, and using nonpharmacological treatment approaches.

Moreover, the treatment of BPSD remains unclear and inconsistent. As to pharmacological treatments, guidelines advise that antipsychotics should only be used in patients with severe distress and after a risk-benefit analysis, with limited dose and treatment duration and attempts at discontinuation [4, 18]. In 2012, the American Geriatrics Society recommended avoiding initiating antipsychotic use or limiting its use with older adults due to increased mortality from cerebrovascular events. Additional side effects of antipsychotic therapy can include falls, extrapyramidal symptoms, metabolic effects, infections, decreased quality of life, and further cognitive decline [19, 20], all of which tend to be most pronounced in persons with severe dementia.

Thus, most medical associations have endorsed the use of nonpharmacological approaches as first-line treatment for dementia-related behavioral symptoms [21–23, 24•]. These interventions are commonly classified as psychosocial, which addresses aspects of psychological and social behaviors and symptoms of dementia [25], and environmental, which denotes environmental modifications or interventions affecting specific environmental attributes [26] and has recently been referred to as ecopsychosocial interventions [27].

Over the past 30 years, there has been an increased emphasis on the use of psychosocial and environmental approaches and a proliferation of studies to evaluate their effectiveness on BPSD in different contexts. Among other positive outcomes, these interventions have been shown to decrease the frequency and severity of behaviors, increase engagement, and improve quality of life [28, 29•, 30]. Furthermore, studies show that teaching caregivers to use specific nonpharmacological approaches (e.g., effective communication techniques, environmental simplification) can significantly decrease caregiver burden and occurrences of behavioral symptoms and enable persons with dementia to remain in the community longer [25, 31, 32]. Nevertheless, these approaches have not been integrated into routine clinical care for a variety of reasons, as the assessment for BPSD and introduction of strategies requires time on the part of practitioners and because limited time and reimbursement structures typically prohibit their use. Furthermore, practitioners may not be aware of the level of evidence for strategies or trained in their use.

In this article, we examine the evidence for using psychosocial and environmental strategies, focusing on the most recent (i.e., past 3 years) research efforts from which to draw conclusions and recommendations. While there have previously been numerous systematic reviews of nonpharmacological approaches [25, 33–38], findings have been inconsistent although suggestive of potential benefit. For example, a meta-analysis of interventions providing caregiver education, support, and skills showed overall improvements in behavioral symptoms in persons with dementia [25]. Other reviews of intervention studies of a wide range of home-based interventions such as exercise, activity, and environmental supports show improvements in various outcomes including quality of life, behavioral symptoms, and overall well-being [2] as well as slowed rate of physical functional decline [39].

As research in this area grows, so does the need to evaluate evidence for use of recent advances. Given the strong associations of BPSD with caregiver burden and long-term care placement, as well as the substantial risks of using pharmacotherapies in older adults with dementia, it is critical to develop, evaluate, and disseminate effective interventions to prevent and/or manage and reduce behavioral symptoms. We begin by examining the theoretical basis for nonpharmacological strategies and then proceed with a systematic review of only the most recent evidence (past 3 years), followed by a discussion of the implications of this growing robust body of research for knowledge transfer to the clinical setting.

Why should nonpharmacological approaches be effective?

Four theoretical frameworks in particular have been applied to conceptualizing dementia-related behaviors and provide a rationale for using nonpharmacological approaches. These are (1) the neurobiological/genetic framework [40–42], (2) the behavioral model [43], (3) the reduced stress threshold model [44, 45], and (4) the unmet needs model [46].

In brief, the neurobiological/genetic model proposes that behavioral symptoms are the result of dementia-related changes in the brain [40–42]. This in turn heightens the individuals’ vulnerabilities to their environment such that they may not be able to process cues or new information, resulting in frustration, agitation, and other behavioral manifestations. According to the behavioral model, also known as the “ABC model,” the consequences of behaviors positively or negatively reinforce the relationships between the antecedents (or triggers for a particular behavior) and the behavioral occur-rence. This model suggests that removing antecedents or modifiable triggers may prevent the behaviors or facilitate better management when they occur [43].

The reduced stress threshold model, also known as the progressively lowered stress threshold (PLST) or environmental vulnerability model, postulates that individuals become increasingly vulnerable to the environment and experience the environment as more stressful as dementia progresses [44, 45]. The stress threshold becomes lower as day progresses (and also with disease progression), such that stimuli result in heightened anxiety and behavioral symptoms. The PLST model suggests that a stimulus that may be acceptable or manageable for a cognitively intact person may elicit an overreaction from or be perceived as stressful by a person with dementia [40, 45]. Finally, the unmet needs model, also referred to as the needs-driven dementia-compromised behavior model, posits that behavioral symptoms are the result of attempts to communicate physical or psychic distress related to unmet needs [46], as well as from the reduced capacity to effectively engage or use the environment to accommodate needs [40].

These theoretical models are not mutually exclusive and may be complementary [33]. Of importance is that each suggests that BPSD may be due to one or more factors that are modifiable (e.g., a trigger in the environment or unmet need) and hence would be responsive to a nondrug intervention. These models may also help to account for different behaviors in different persons with dementia or for different catalysts of the same behavior. Each of these models and/or their combination can be used to guide a nonpharmacological intervention for behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia.

Methods

To examine the most recent state-of-the-science in this area, we conducted a rapid review of studies using the following criteria: (a) use of a randomized, controlled trial design and/or reviews or meta-analyses of randomized controlled trials (RCTs); (b) published in the past 3 years; (c) in English; (d) evaluation of a nonpharmacological intervention; and (e) inclusion of a measure of BPSD as an outcome. We excluded interventions that only reported caregiver outcomes although they may have included instruction in behavioral management. A comprehensive computerized search of peer-reviewed published studies (January 1, 2013–October 10, 2016) was conducted in Cochrane, PubMed, CINAHL, CINAHL Plus, PsycINFO, Medline, Google Scholar, Ovid, and EBSCO using the following search terms: dementia, neurocognitive disorders, psychosocial, environmental, environment, nonpharmacological, treatment, intervention, behaviors, behavioral disturbances, behavioral symptoms, neuropsychiatric symptoms, behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia, aromatherapy, cognitive, music, bright light, massage, multi-sensory stimulation, Snoezelen, exercise, animal-assisted therapy, burden, and stress.

Additionally, a search of meta-analyses, review papers, and book chapters was conducted and the reference sections were cross-checked with the original search. Papers identified through this secondary process were further examined for additional references related to relevant studies.

All studies meeting inclusion criteria were appraised for design strength and quality of evidence using the National Health and Medical Research Council [47, 48] criteria for rating studies to assess the effectiveness of interventions. Level I evidence, the highest level, is produced by a systematic review of level II studies, which are RCTs. Level III-1 is a pseudorandomized controlled trial, level III-2 is a comparative study with concurrent controls, and level III-3 is a comparative study without concurrent controls. Level IV, the lowest level, is a case series with either posttest or pretest-posttest outcomes. As our analysis included meta-analyses and reviews as well as articles with original data, the highest level of evidence for an intervention in this review was level I. Only high-quality meta-analyses (level I) and randomized (level II) or pseudorandomized (level III-1) studies were included.

Results

The initial search based on key words yielded 362 papers (Fig. 1). Through manual searches of these papers, an additional 16 were identified. Among these 378 papers, 14 met all of our inclusion criteria and were included in this review (see Fig. 1). Of these 14 publications, two were reviews/meta-analyses and 12 were individual RCTs. Of the meta-analyses, 16 studies in total were represented. The details of the 14 publications are summarized in Table 1.

Overview of findings

Overall, we find that ten different nonpharmacological interventions were systematically evaluated in the past 3 years. Although there is no consensus as to their classification [63], we grouped the interventions tested in these studies into six categories (sensory stimulation, cognitive, exercise, multicomponent, tailored activity, and animal-assisted therapy). Table 2 lists each intervention type, a description of what each entails, and a summary of effectiveness by intervention type.

Sensory stimulation

A focus on sensory stimulation is primarily based on the premise that dementia appears to alter the way individuals see, hear, taste, feel, and smell as the disease progresses over and above changes due to the normal aging process [64, 65]. As cognitive function deteriorates [66], the context in which people live tends to be experienced at a sensory level. As such, the environment needs to be managed carefully to make it understandable and comfortable. In order to achieve this, persons with dementia, particularly in later stages, may require the simplification of environmental structures and stimulation [67]. This approach is supported by the Guideline on Supporting People with Dementia and Their Carers in Health and Social Care, developed by the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence and the Social Care Institute for Excellence (NICE-SCIE) [68] which highlighted that sensory stimulation may be the primary form of psychological intervention to reduce or prevent BPSD in persons with advanced dementia.

Sensory stimulation refers to any technique used to stimulate the senses with the goals of increasing alertness and reducing BPSD, and enhancing quality of life [69]. Interventions may be single sensory, which requires stimulation to only one sensory modality (e.g., touch), or multisensory, which requires stimulation of two or more senses [70].

In the past 3 years, seven studies have tested a sensory stimulation approach for persons with dementia with the goal of reducing and preventing BPSD. Sensory-oriented approaches that were tested included music (n = 1 meta-analysis of 10 studies), multisensory stimulation (MSS; n = 1), aromatherapy (n = 3), bright light therapy (n = 1), and touch therapies (n = 1).

Music therapy

In our review, one meta-analysis of ten RCTs [51] evaluated the effects of music interventions on the frequency of BPSD. Interventions were presented in both group [71–75] and individual [76–79] formats. Sample size ranged from 20 [73] to 100 participants [72]. Level of dementia spanned various stages including mild-moderate [71–75], moderate [72], moderate-severe [74, 77], and severe [73, 79]. The studies were primarily conducted within skilled nursing facilities [71–75, 78], while one study took place in assisted living [77]. No community-dwelling participants were included in any of the studies reviewed. Average length of time of the music therapy interventions was 30 min [72–75, 78, 79], with a maximum of 65 min [77]. The total time period of the study ranged from 4 weeks [74] to 16 weeks [78].Agitation was the BPSD most commonly targeted [71–75, 77, 78], followed by anxiety [71, 75, 76]. Other behaviors affected included delusions, apathy, irritability, aberrant motor activity, and nighttime disturbances [73, 78]. Overall, this meta-analysis found a significant reduction in the frequency of occurrences of dementia behaviors overall and that group music therapy exhibited a larger and more significant effect on BPSD than individual music therapy [51]. It is unclear whether it was the music itself, the opportunity for socialization, or both factors that are responsible for these treatment effects.

Multisensory stimulation

The MSS environment is typically a pleasant and relaxing room known as a Snoezelen room, which includes features that stimulate the primary senses except taste (e.g., fiber-optic cables, water columns, aromatherapy, different music/sounds, tactile objects, and screen projectors) [80]. Snoezelen is intended to stimulate the five senses without requiring the person with dementia to exert intellectual effort [81]. Stimuli used do not follow a specific sequence or pattern but rather are experienced moment by moment without relying on short-term memory to link them to previous events [81].Only one pilot RCT was identified and this study involved 32 persons with severe dementia residing in a skilled nursing facility [60]. Participants were randomly assigned to one of three groups: MSS, one-to-one activity, and a usual care control group. The MSS entailed twice-weekly 30-min sessions in a Snoezelen room for a period of 16 weeks (32 sessions total). The activity group participated in a series of intellectually or physically demanding one-to-one activity sessions (e.g., playing a game) for the same duration as the MSS group. Control group members continued with their usual daily routine.

Findings indicate that MSS may be more effective than one-to-one activity sessions in reducing BPSD in patients with severe dementia, though the improvement with regard to agitation was comparable between the groups [60]. There were no significant differences between MSS and the control condition with regard to agitation or other BPSD.

Aromatherapy

Aromatherapy interventions were those that involved the absorption of essential oil via transdermal administration or inhalation in order to activate the autonomic nervous system and induce a reaction of the limbic system and hypothalamus [82]. The most frequently used oils in the treatment of BPSD such as agitation are lavender and Melissa oil (lemon balm). Though the majority of studies were published outside of our search parameters, we identified three studies: two RCTs [54, 62] tested a combined aromatherapy intervention compared to aromatherapy alone and a control group, and one randomized control crossover trial (RCCT) [58•] tested the effectiveness of lavender oil alone compared to an inactive oil. The combined intervention in Fu et al. [54] involved lavender oil and hand massage applied in tandem, while the combined intervention utilized by Yang and colleagues [62] paired aromatherapy with acupressure. Sample sizes across these three studies ranged from 64 [58•] to 186 [62]. Two of the studies primarily included persons with severe dementia [54, 58•], while the level of dementia was not specified in the third study [62]. All three studies were conducted within skilled nursing facilities. Duration of intervention varied considerably, from 1 min three times in 1 week with a 30-min observation period [58•], to 5 min twice per day for 10 days [54] to 15 min once per day, 5 days per week, for 4 weeks total [62].Neither Fu et al. [54] nor O’Connor et al. [58•] found significant improvements in BPSD for persons who received aromatherapy as compared to those who did not. In contrast, Yang et al. [62] found that both aromatherapy combined with acupressure and aromatherapy alone significantly decreased agitation as compared to a control group that did not receive any intervention, with the combination intervention (aromatherapy and acupressure) having the most robust effect.

Bright light therapy

Bright light therapy (BLT) has primarily been tested as an intervention for circadian rhythm disorders or to reduce the incidence and duration of delirium in postoperative patients [83, 84]. The science behind this type of therapy is that dementia, particularly due to Alzheimer’s disease (AD) pathology, exacerbates the physiological changes to circadian rhythms that occur with normal aging [85]. In persons with dementia, these changes may also be associated with such disturbances as rest-activity cycle disruptions and sundowning [86]. The neurobiological basis of these behavioral disorders is related to degeneration of the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) of the hypothalamus that results in reduced expression of the vasopressin gene [86].As with our search for aromatherapy, the majority of studies assessing bright light therapy as a behavioral intervention in dementia were published outside our 3-year window for inclusion. However, Forbes et al. [53•] conducted a systematic review examining the effectiveness of light therapy in improving cognition, activities of daily living (ADLs), sleep, challenging behaviors, and psychiatric symptoms in persons with dementia. Among the five included studies with BPSD as an outcome variable, sample size ranged from 13 [87] to 189 [88]. Median level of dementia was severe across studies, and all took place in skilled nursing facilities. Exposure protocol was variable and ranged from 10 days [89] to 3.5 years [88]. No two studies had the same method of bright light exposure. Agitation was the primary target for all studies, although aberrant motor behavior was also affected in one study [90].

Touch

Touch therapies can include craniosacral therapies, therapeutic touch, and massage. Only one trial met the search criteria of this review. Moyle et al. [57] compared the effect of foot massage (intervention) and quiet presence (control) on agitation and mood in 55 long-term care residents with moderate to severe dementia. Sessions lasted approximately 10 min, 5 days per week, for 3 weeks. In both groups, participants’ level of agitation increased, with a greater increase for the control group.

Cognitive interventions

Cognitive interventions involve three types: cognitive stimulation, cognitive training, and cognitive rehabilitation. There is also a significant overlap with what has been referred to as reality orientation, which emphasizes relearning orientation information, whereas cognitive interventions focus more on implicit information processing [52, 91]. Traditionally, cognition-focused interventions have been those that directly or indirectly target cognitive functioning as opposed to interventions that primarily address BPSD, emotions, or physical function [92].

Cognitive rehabilitation

In a crossover RCT, Brunelle-Hamann et al. [50] evaluated the impact of a cognitive rehabilitation program on 12 behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia in 15 persons with mild to moderate Alzheimer’s disease. A wait-list control group received the intervention following the study period. Results showed both negative and positive effects: there was a significant increase in aberrant motor behavior and a decrease in delusional symptoms for the cognitive rehabilitation group as compared to the control group.

Cognitive stimulation

In a pilot single-blind randomized controlled clinical trial, D’Onofrio et al. [52] investigated the efficacy of an integrated treatment of rivastigmine transdermal patch (RTP) and cognitive stimulation (CS) as compared to RTP alone in 90 community-dwelling persons with Alzheimer’s disease. Overall, the authors concluded that the integrated treatment of RTP + CS in AD patients for 6 months significantly improved cognition, depressive and neuropsychiatric symptoms, functional status, and mortality risk in comparison with RTP treatment alone [52].

Physical exercise

As part of the Well-Being and Health for People with Dementia (WHELD) program, Ballard et al. [49] conducted a cluster-randomized factorial controlled trial with two replications for 195 persons with dementia residing in 16 UK nursing homes. Results showed that a personalized exercise plan significantly improved neuropsychiatric symptoms as compared to a social interaction intervention and antipsychotic review. In contrast, Lowery et al. [55] conducted a pragmatic, randomized, controlled, single-blind, parallel-group trial of a dyadic exercise regimen (i.e., tailored walking) versus treatment as usual for 116 community-dwelling individuals with dementia and their caregivers. These authors found no significant difference between the groups regarding mean NPI score at week 12 [55].

Tailored activities

Existing research finds that engagement in meaningful activity can increase positive emotions, improve performance in activities of daily living, improve quality of life and well-being, foster positive attitudes toward caregivers, and decrease behavioral symptoms [93, 94]. Furthermore, tailoring activities to the interests and abilities of persons with dementia may be particularly beneficial [29•, 95, 96].

The trial included in our review [61•] evaluated the utility of a preference-based activity intervention on improving affect and behavioral engagement in 188 nursing home residents with dementia. Residents were randomly assigned either to usual care or to one of two experimental conditions in which certified nursing assistants (CNAs) led one-on-one activities. In the first experimental group, the CNA led a standard activity, which involved looking through a magazine with the participant and discussing the content. In the second group, the CNA led an activity tailored to the individual’s current preferences and abilities. Results showed similar outcomes among the standard activity and tailored activity groups in terms of increased pleasure, alertness, engagement, positive touch, and less general restlessness as compared to persons receiving usual care, with no significant differences found between the experimental groups. However, the standard activity group exhibited more uncooperativeness and more negative verbal behaviors as compared to the tailored activity or usual care groups [61•].

Multicomponent psychosocial interventions

Multicomponent interventions were those that utilized at least two interventions in combination, with at least one of them being nonpharmacological. Pieper et al. [59] conducted a single-blind, cluster, RCT of a stepwise multicomponent intervention (STA OP!) to assess its effectiveness in reducing challenging behaviors and depression in nursing home residents with advanced dementia. The intervention was delivered in a stepwise fashion and entailed the following: a physical needs assessment, an affective needs assessment, a trial of nonpharmacological comfort interventions, a trial of analgesics if nonpharmacological approaches were ineffective, and consultation with other health-care professionals or practitioners or a trial of psychotropic drugs. Staff in the control group received training on pain, dementia management, and general nursing skills, without the stepwise component. Results showed a significant effect of the intervention on agitation and neuropsychiatric symptoms overall [59].

Animal-assisted therapy

Animal-assisted therapy (AAT) is traditionally used to promote social interactions for persons with dementia through interaction with a trained animal facilitated by a human handler. In one study, Majić et al. [56•] investigated the efficacy of AAT compared to treatment as usual using a matched case-control design with within-participant repeated measures. In the control group, symptoms of agitation/aggression and depression significantly increased over 10 weeks, whereas the frequency and severity of symptoms of agitation/aggression and depression were unchanged for persons receiving AAT [56•].

Discussion

BPSD are universal and occur across disease trajectory regardless of etiology [97, 98]. They can be disturbing to persons with dementia as well as caregivers. A growing body of evidence suggests that psychosocial and environmental approaches may be efficacious and safe. While there have been several systematic reviews of nonpharmacological interventions for dementia behaviors previously, given the importance of deriving treatment options and the continued growth of research in this area, our review presents the research published within the past 3 years.

The studies discussed in this review show considerable heterogeneity with regard to intervention protocols, assessment tools, and evaluation of outcome(s). We identified six categories or types of interventions evaluated over the past 3 years. With regard to sensory-oriented interventions, numerous approaches have been tested, including music, multisensory stimulation, aromatherapy, bright light therapy, movement, and touch therapies. As to music therapy, previous systematic reviews reported inconsistent outcomes, with some showing reductions in BPSD [33–35], and others not [37, 99]. The meta-analysis in our review [51], however, found a significant reduction in dementia behaviors with music therapy. The authors recommended that individual music therapy be provided once per week to persons with cognitive impairment, and group music therapy be provided several times a week to individuals with disruptive behaviors to reduce anxiety. The results indicated that when residents in nursing homes attended music therapy less than once a week, the therapy provided was less effective at managing behaviors [51].

Previous reviews and studies reported inconsistent findings but some positive effects of MSS on BPSD. However, there has been no consistent evidence to demonstrate significant or long-term reductions in symptoms [33, 34, 37, 100]. Our review similarly did not find compelling evidence to support this intervention, as MSS appears preferable to one-on-one activity sessions but not a control condition [60].

The bulk of the literature detailing the clinical benefits of aromatherapy in dementia was published outside of the search parameters of this review, and the evidence for this intervention has thus far proven inconclusive [34, 35, 37, 38, 101]. Our review findings regarding this intervention are inconclusive as well; one study suggests it may be beneficial but only in combination with other strategies.

Findings from previous reviews indicate that bright light therapy appears to be ineffective at best [33, 37, 102] and, at worst, may actually increase or exacerbate dementia behaviors [38, 103]. Our review similarly suggests that bright light therapy appears to be ineffective in managing BPSD.

There is still much to learn regarding the impact of cognitive interventions on BPSD of dementia, as most studies have focused on improving global or specific cognitive functions versus BPSD [92]. Previous reviews including a Cochrane report [104] indicated that these types of interventions do not appear to have an impact on BPSD. In our review, two studies met the search criteria and examined the relationship between a cognitive intervention and behavioral symptoms. Cognitive rehabilitation appeared to have discrepant effects on various types of behavioral symptoms, as it increased aberrant motor behavior, a negative effect, yet decreased delusions, a positive effect [50]. Cognitive stimulation appears promising only when combined with rivastigmine [52].

At present, there are few robust clinical trials examining the effects of physical exercise on BPSD and conflicting results from meta-analyses [102, 105]. Previous research yielded insufficient support for physical exercise specific to its effects on BPSD [30, 37, 102]. Similarly, our review includes two RCTs [49, 55], one with positive and one with negative outcomes; thus, support for physical exercise as an intervention for BPSD remains inconclusive.

The literature contains many anecdotal reports of positive results from AAT in persons with dementia as well as some published findings from controlled studies [106]. A prior systematic review found AAT to have beneficial effects on BPSD [33]. In contrast, the study included in our review [106] found that BPSD did not improve as a result of AAT, but remained constant in frequency and severity while BPSD exhibited by the control group worsened. As behaviors did not worsen, this could be interpreted as a positive outcome. Consequently, AAT continues to show some promise but more high level rigorous studies need to be conducted with positive results in order for this type of intervention to be recommended as a nonpharmacological strategy to decrease dementia behaviors.

Increasing evidence suggests that activities tailored to an individual’s preferences and abilities are beneficial and result in reduced behavioral symptoms [29•, 95, 96]. The recent study included in our review [61•] found similar outcomes with regard to the positive effects on affect and behavior of standard activities and tailored activities. However, the tailored activities did not result in any negative outcomes whereas the standard activity was also associated with anger, negative verbal behaviors, and uncooperative behaviors. Overall, this study was consistent with the findings in the literature that tailoring activities has positive benefits. Similarly, positive findings have been reported for a single arm study that introduced the use of tailored activities as a therapeutic modality in the hospital setting [107]. Although this study was not reviewed here as it did not fit our review criteria (e.g., not a RCT), it does add incrementally to a growing and strong body of evidence showing the benefits of activity that enhances engagement in persons with dementia [108]. This is an area that should be prioritized for research investments.

One study employed a stepwise, multicomponent approach including a trial of nonpharmacological interventions [59]. Results showed significant effects on BPSD as compared to the control group, though it is unclear whether it was the bundled intervention as a whole that resulted in a decrease of BPSD or if one of the discrete components was the key ingredient.

Given the recent proliferation of research on nonpharmacological interventions for dementia behaviors, it is imperative that the systematic synthesis of the evidence be ongoing, particularly as high-quality research studies are published. For example, the studies included in our review all used a randomized controlled design, the lack of which has been a critique of previous research in this area. With adequate control groups, we now find differential effects still due to lack of power, small sample sizes, lack of diversity in samples (most samples were Caucasian), and lack of attention to fidelity. Maintaining up-to-date syntheses that integrate high-quality studies into our evidence base will ensure optimum approaches to treatment and provide guidance as to which nonpharmacological approaches and for which behaviors should be integrated into clinical practice.

Of note, we find that the research rigor in this area is advancing but only partially. One concern is that nonpharmacological approaches previously shown to be effective do not appear to have undergone further replication, testing, and implementation, at least over the past 3 years that we examined in our review. For example, prior research showed that the physical and social environment can be impacted and in turn can improve behavioral outcomes [33, 96, 109]. Nevertheless, no studies in the last 3 years have been published to further this line of important work. Research is still needed to more fully understand these approaches and specifically to determine their effectiveness with diverse populations, and to systematically link participant characteristics, specific behavioral symptoms with particular intervention strategies. Similarly, implementation studies of previously proven interventions to identify strategies for their integration in practice settings are critically needed [110].

Another concern is that methodological limitations continue to persist even in these most recent studies. For example, most studies were conducted in nursing homes versus the home, whereas the latter is where most persons with dementia live and thus where many behavioral symptoms are experienced. In addition, numerous studies that were not included in our review because they did not employ a randomized controlled design have reported positive outcomes for BPSD from nonpharmacological approaches, supporting a signal and that more research needs to be pursued [111, 112]. However, the lack of diversity among study samples continues to be alarming; as the use of nonpharmacological strategies must be tailored to particular contexts including the cultural values and beliefs of families, involving more diverse samples in this field of research is an imperative.

Conclusion

We conclude that the results in the recent literature concerning the efficacy of psychosocial and environmental treatment approaches to behavioral symptoms in dementia continue to be promising yet the results are also mixed. Despite their outcomes, these studies as a whole illustrate that it is possible to design randomized controlled trials to evaluate nonpharmacological interventions. From our review and in keeping with previous reviews, several nonpharmacological approaches emerge as important for continued research and possibly use in clinical settings. Music therapy and tailored activities appear particularly promising, and there is some evidence to suggest that MSS and AAT are worthy of further careful evaluation. In contrast, approaches such as bright light therapy and aromatherapy have consistently been shown to be ineffective. Given the limited research funding allocated to the study of BPSD and their treatment, we recommend that studies of interventions with clear or somewhat clear indications of efficacy be pursued.

In summary, the studies we reviewed do not report adverse or negative side effects. Furthermore, some although not all nonpharmacological strategies appear to positively affect behaviors. As such, we suggest that some strategies can be used now in the clinical context while more evaluation is underway in different contexts. For example, multicomponent interventions that involve providing caregivers education and support, instruction in effective communication strategies and ways to simplify the environment, along with the purposeful tailoring and use of meaningful activities, are all examples of approaches that can be used now and provided to families to help them prevent and/or manage behavioral symptoms at home [113].

Fig. 1. Search flowchart.

Table 1. Characteristics of studies included in this review

Reference	Study design/location	LOE	Sample size	Age range	Intervention	
Ballard et al. [49]	RFCT/SNF	II	195	Mean = 85.26	Exercise ≥1 h/week of exercise or increase in exercise by 20% after 9 months (Antipsychotic review versus an intervention to increase social interaction versus a personalized exercise intervention)	
Brunelle-Hamann et al. [50]	RCT/US	II	15	Mean = 80.47	Cognitive rehabilitation 45–60 min session, twice a week for 4 weeks (Randomly assigned to cognitive rehabilitation program to learn/relearn an instrumental activity of daily living or wait-list control)	
Chang et al. [51]	Meta-analysis of 10 RCTs/SNF, ALF	I	465	65–87	Music therapy 30–65 min for 4–16 weeks	
D’Onofrio et al. [52]	RCT/CD	II	90	69–87	Cognitive stimulation 90 min once/week for two 2-month cycles (Rivastigmine transdermal patch versus rivastigmine transdermal patch combined with cognitive stimulation)	
Forbes et al. [53•]	Meta-analysis of 11 RCTs (5 with behavioral outcomes)	I	154	61–99	Bright light therapy 10 days-3.5 years	
Fu et al. [54]	RCT/SNF	II	67	61–93	Aromatherapy All treatments were given twice a day at two time periods, 7 days a week for 6 weeks (Randomly assigned to combination aromatherapy and hand massage, aromatherapy, or water spray placebo control)	
Lowery et al. [55]	RCT/CD	II	131	58–99	Exercise 20–30 min at least 5 times per week for 12 weeks (Personalized exercise versus treatment as usual)	
Majić et al. [56•]	RCT/SNF	II	54	Mean = 81.7	Animal-assisted therapy Once a week for up to 45 min for 10 weeks (Interaction with border collie and dog therapy guide versus usual care)	
Moyle et al. [57]	RCT/ALF, SNF, RH	II	55	74–103	Massage 5 min once per day, 5 days per week for 6 weeks (foot massage versus quiet presence of staff member)	
O’Connor et al. [58•]	RCCT/SNF	III-1	64	Mean = 77.6	Aromatherapy Three applications with a 30-min observation over a 1-week period (Randomly assigned to receive dermally applied, neurophysiologically active, high purity 30% lavender oil or an inactive control oil)	
Pieper et al. [59]	CRCT/SNF	II	288	Unknown	Multicomponent intervention Unspecified dose and intensity (Stepwise application of a physical needs assessment, an affective needs assessment, a trial of nonpharmacological comfort interventions, a trial of analgesics if needed, and consultation with other health-care professionals or practitioners or a trial of psychotropic drugs)	
Sánchez et al. [60]	RCT/SNF	II	32	68–102	Multisensory stimulation (MSS) 30 min, twice per week for 16 weeks (Randomly assigned to 1 of 3 groups: MSS in a Snoezelen room, one-to-one activity, and a usual care control group)	
Van Haitsma et al. [61•]	RCT/SNF	II	188	64–105	Individualized activities 10 min, 3 days per week for 3 weeks (Tailored activity versus standard activity of looking through a magazine and conversing versus usual care)	
Yang et al. [62]	RCT/SNF	II	186	Unknown	Aromatherapy ≤15 min, once per day, 5 days per week for 4 weeks (Randomly assigned to aroma-acupressure group, aromatherapy group, and usual care group)	
Reference	Behavioral outcomes	Measures used	Outcomes	Effect size	
Ballard et al. [49]	Neuropsychiatric symptoms Agitation	NPI
CMAI	Significant decrease in neuropsychiatric symptoms. No effect on agitation	Not reported	
Brunelle-Hamann et al. [50]	Neuropsychiatric symptoms	NPI	Significant increase in aberrant motor behavior. Significant reduction in delusions for both groups	For aberrant motor behavior, Cohen’s d = 1.38
For delusions, Cohen’s d = 0.96	
Chang et al. [51]	Overall BPSD, neuropsychiatric symptoms, agitation, anxiety	BEHAVE-AD
CMAI
C-CMAI
NPI
RAID
Hamilton
CMAI-SF	Five studies reduced overall BPSD. All studies reduced agitation; 2 reduced delusions, apathy, and anxiety; 1 reduced irritability, aberrant motor activity, and nighttime disturbances	The overall Hedges’ g was −0.66 (R = −1.18 to −0.18)	
D’Onofrio et al. [52]	Neuropsychiatric symptoms	NPI	Significant decrease in neuropsychiatric symptoms	Not reported	
Forbes et al. [53•]	Agitation
Neuropsychiatric symptoms
Agitation
Agitation
Neuropsychiatric symptoms	ABRS
NPI
CMAI
CMAI
ABRS	One study showed decrease in aberrant motor behavior and an increase in agitation/aggression. No studies found significant decreases in agitation.	Cohen’s d ranged from −0.01 to 2.22	
Fu et al. [54]	Agitation	CMAI-SF	No significant effects on agitation.	Not reported	
Lowery et al. [55]	Neuropsychiatric symptoms	NPI	No significant effect on neuropsychiatric symptoms	Not reported	
Majić et al. [56•]	Agitation	CMAI	Levels of agitation and aggression remained constant.	Not reported	
Moyle et al. [57]	Agitation	CMAI	Significant increase in agitation	2 ranged from 0.01 to 0.10	
O’Connor et al. [58•]	Agitation	CMAI	No significant effects on agitation	Not reported	
Pieper et al. [59]	Agitation Neuropsychiatric symptoms	CMAI
NPI-NH	Significant decrease in agitation and neuropsychiatric symptoms	Not reported	
Sánchez et al. [60]	Agitation
Neuropsychiatric symptoms	CMAI
NPI	Nonsignificant improvement in agitation Significant improvement in neuropsychiatric symptoms as compared to the activity group but not the control	For MSS and activity groups, significant improvement in aggressive behavior (2 = 0.300) and total CMAI (2 = 0.277)	
Van Haitsma et al. [61•]	Verbal and nonverbal behaviors; affect	MOSES	Both activity groups showed greater pleasure, alertness, engagement, positive touch, and positive verbal behavior versus usual care	Cohen’s d ranged from 0.00 to 2.24.	
Yang et al. [62]	Agitation	CMAI	Significant reduction in agitation, particularly when combined with acupressure	Not reported	
Level I = evidence obtained from a systematic review or meta-analysis of all relevant RCTs; level II = RCT; level III-1: well-designed pseudo-RCT

SNF skilled nursing facility, ALF assisted living facility, RH respite home, CD community-dwelling, LOE level of evidence, BEHAVE-AD Behavioral Pathology in Alzheimer’s Disease Rating Scale, CMAI Cohen-Mansfield Agitation Inventory, NPI Neuropsychiatric Inventory, RAID Rating Anxiety in Dementia Scale, ABRS Agitated Behavior Rating Scale, MOSES Multidimensional Observation Scale for Elderly Subjects, RCT randomized controlled trial, RCCT randomized controlled crossover trial, RFCT randomized factorial controlled trial, CRCT cluster-randomized controlled trial

Table 2. Summary of intervention effectiveness

Intervention type	Description of intervention	Number of studies (n)	Percent of studies showing improvement, n (%)	
Sensory				
 Music therapy	Various group and individual music interventions	10	6 (60)	
 Multisensory stimulation	Snoezelen room	1	0 (0)a	
 Aromatherapy	Aromatic oil transdermally applied or diffused into the environment to cause a calming psychological and physiological response	3	1 (33)	
 Bright light therapy	Exposure to ambient light of various intensities and duration	5	1 (20)	
 Touch	May include massage, therapeutic touch, and craniosacral therapies	1	0 (0)	
Cognitive				
Cognitive rehabilitation	Focuses on relearning or strengthening various skills or cognitive abilities	1	0 (0)	
 Cognitive stimulation	Cognitively stimulating or challenging activities	1	1 (100)	
Exercise				
 Physical exercise	Aimed at increasing physical activity	2	1 (50)	
Multicomponent psychosocial				
 Stepwise multidisciplinary intervention	Stepwise administration of intervention protocol	1	1 (100)	
Tailored activities				
 Individualized activity	Tailoring activity to preferences and physical/cognitive capabilities	1	1 (100)	
Animal-assisted therapy				
 Interaction with dog	Interaction with a trained animal facilitated by a human handler	1	0 (0)	
a The MSS intervention was not significant compared to the control group but was significant compared to a one-to-one activity intervention

Conflict of Interest

Dr. Natalie G. Regier declares that she has no conflict of interest. Dr. Laura N. Gitlin declares that she has no conflict of interest.

Human and Animal Rights and Informed Consent

There are no sources of funding to report. This article does not contain any studies with human or animal subjects performed by any of the authors.


References and Recommended Reading

Recently published papers of particular interest have been highlighted as:

• Of importance

1. Alzheimer’s Disease International. 2015. World Alzheimer Report 2015. Retrieved August 10, 2016, from https://www.alz.co.uk/sites/default/files/pdfs/world-alzheimer-report-2015-executive-summary-english.pdf.
2. Gitlin LN , Piersol CV , Hodgson N , Marx K , Roth DL , Johnston D , Reducing neuropsychiatric symptoms in persons with dementia and associated burden in family caregivers using tailored activities: design and methods of a randomized clinical trial. Contemp Clin Trials. 2016;49 :92–102. doi:10.1016/j.cct.2016.06.006.27339865
3. Hyman BT . Anatomical changes underlying dementia in Alzheimer’s disease. Research and perspectives in Alzheimer’s disease. In: Alzheimer and beyond, 2006.
4. Kales HC , Gitlin LN , Lyketsos CG . Management of neuropsychiatric symptoms of dementia in clinical settings: recommendations from a multidisciplinary expert panel. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2014;62 (4 ):762–9. doi:10.1111/jgs.12730.24635665
5. Mitty E , Flores S . Assisted living nursing practices: the language of dementia: theories and interventions. Geriatr Nurs. 2007;28 (5 ):283–8. doi:10.1016/j.gerinurse.2007.08.009.17923285
6. Tampi RR , Williamson D , Muralee S , Mittal V , McEnerney N , Thomas JT , Behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia: part I—epidemiology, neurobiology, heritability, and evaluation. Clin Geriatr. 2011;19 :41–6.
7. van der Linde RM , Dening T , Stephan BCM , Prina AM , Evans E , Brayne C . Longitudinal course of behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia: systematic review. Br J Psychiatry. 2016;209 (5 ):366–77. doi:10.1192/bjp.bp.114.148403.27491532
8. de Vugt ME , Stevens F , Aalten P , Lousberg R , Jaspers N , Verhey FR . A prospective study of the effects of behavioral symptoms on the institutionalization of patients with dementia. Int Psychogeriatr. 2005;17 (4 ):577.16185379
9. Gaugler JE , Yu F , Krichbaum K , Wyman JF . Predictors of nursing home admission for persons with dementia. Med Care. 2009;47 (2 ):191–8.19169120
10. Schoenmakers B , Buntinx F , Devroey D , Van Casteren V , DeLepeleire J . The process of definitive institutionalization of community dwelling demented vs non demented elderly: data obtained from a network of sentinel general practitioners. Int J GeriatrPsychiatry. 2009;24 (5 ):523–31.
11. Allegri RF , Sarasola D , Serrano CM , Taragano FE , Arizaga RL , Butman J , Neuropsychiatric symptoms as a predictor of caregiver burden in Alzheimer’s disease. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2006;2 (1 ):105–10.19412452
12. Lima-Silva TB , Bahia VS , Carvalho VA , Guimarães HC , Caramelli P , Yassuda MS . Neuropsychiatric symptoms as a predictor of caregiver burden in Alzheimer’s disease. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2015;40 (5–6 ):268–75.26302667
13. Norton MJ , Allen RS , Snow AL , Hardin JM , Burgio LD . Predictors of need-driven behaviors in nursing home residents with dementia and associated certified nursing assistant burden. Aging Ment Health. 2010;14 (3 ):303–9. doi:10.1080/13607860903167879.20425649
14. Zwijsen SA , Kabboord A , Eefsting JA , Hertogh CMPM , Pot AM , Gerritsen DL , Nurses in distress? An explorative study into the relation between distress and individual neuropsychiatric symptoms of people with dementia in nursing homes. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2014;29 :384–91.23963653
15. Sourial R , McCusker J , Cole M , Abrahamowicz M . Agitation in demented patients in an acute care hospital: prevalence, disruptiveness, and staff burden. Int Psychogeriatr. 2001;13 (02 ):183–97.
16. Marx KA , Stanley IH , van Haitsma K , Moody J , Alonzi D , Hansen BR , &amp; Gitlin LN . Knowing versus doing: education and training needs of staff in a chronic care hospital unit for individuals with dementia. J Gerontol Nurs 2014;1–9 .
17. Odenheimer G , Borson S , Sander AE , Swain-Eng RJ , Kyomen HH , Tierney S , Quality improvement in neurology: dementia management quality measures. Neurology. 2013;81 (17 ):1545–9.24068786
18. Azermai M , Petrovic M , Elseviers MM , Bourgeois J , Van Bortel LM , Vander Stichele RH . Systematic appraisal of dementia guidelines on the management of behavioural and psychological symptoms. Ageing Res Rev. 2012;11 :78–86.21856452
19. Ballard CG , O’Brien J , James I , Mynt P , Lana M , Potkins D . Quality of life for people with dementia living in nursing home and residential care. Int Psychogeriatr. 2001;13 :93–106.11352339
20. Steinberg M , Lyketsos CG . Atypical antipsychotic use in patients with dementia: managing safety concerns. Am J Psychiatry. 2012;169 (9 ):900–6. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.2012.12030342.22952071
21. American Geriatrics Society &amp; American Association for Geriatric Psychiatry. The American Geriatrics Society and American Association for Geriatric Psychiatry recommendations for policies in support of quality mental health care in U.S. nursing homes. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2003;51 :1299–304.12919244
22. Benoit M , Arbus C , Blanchard F , Camus V , Cerase V , Clement JP , Professional consensus on the treatment of agitation, aggressive behaviour, oppositional behaviour, and psychotic disturbance in dementia. J Nutr Health Aging. 2006;10 (5 ):410–5.17066213
23. Kolanowski AM , Hill NL . Community-based nonpharmacological interventions delivered by family caregivers to reduce behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia. Evid-Based Nurs. 2013;16 :67–8.23204295
24.• Lyketsos CG , Colenda CC , Beck C , Blank K , Doraiswamy MP , Kalunian DA , Position statement of the American Association for Geriatric Psychiatry regarding principles of care for patients with dementia resulting from Alzheimer disease. Am J Geriatr Psychiatr. 2006;14 (7 ):561–72.
Once BPSD have been identified, differentiated, and contributing causes sorted out, specific tailor-made treatments are often needed. The principles of care require that nonpharmacologic interventions be tried first. Medication is recommended only when these approaches have failed.

25. Brodaty H , Arasaratnam C . Meta-analysis of nonpharmacological interventions for neuropsychiatric symptoms of dementia. Am J Psychiatr. 2012;169 :946–53.22952073
26. Cohen-Mansfield J Neuropsychiatry of dementia: nonpharmacologic interventions for inappropriate behaviors. In: McNamara P , editor. Dementia, volume 3: treatments and developments. Denver: Praeger; 2011. p. 1–22.
27. Zeisel J , Reisberg B , Whitehouse P , Woods R , Verheul A . Ecopsychosocial interventions in cognitive decline and dementia: a new terminology and a new paradigm. Am J Alzheimer Dis Dement. 2014;31 (6 ):502–7. doi:10.1177/1533317516650806.
28. Cohen-Mansfield J , Marx MS , Dakheel-Ali M , Regier NG , Thein K , Freedman L . Can agitated behavior of nursing home residents with dementia be prevented with the use of standardized stimuli? J Am Geriatr Soc. 2010;58 (8 ):1459–64. doi:10.1111/j.1532-5415.2010.02951.x.20579167
29.• Gitlin LN , Winter L , Burke J , Chernett N , Dennis MP , Hauck WW . Tailored activities to manage neuropsychiatric behaviors in persons with dementia and reduce caregiver burden: a randomized pilot study. Am J Geriatr Psychiatr. 2008;16 (3 ):229–39. doi:10.1097/JGP.0b013e318160da72.
Engagement in meaningful activity has beneficial effects on mood, well-being, relationships, and behavioral symptoms for persons with dementia. The New Ways for Better Days: Tailoring Activities for Persons with Dementia and Caregivers (TAP) significantly reduced the number of behaviors and frequency of occurrences and objective burden or hours spent in care.

30. Livingston G , Kelly L , Lewis-Holmes E , Baio G , Morris S , Patel N , A systematic review of the clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of sensory, psychological and behavioural interventions for managing agitation in older adults with dementia. Health Technol Assess. 2014;18 (39 ):1–226. doi:10.3310/hta18390 . v–vi.
31. McLaren AN , LaMantia MA , Callahan CM . Systematic review of non-pharmacologic interventions to delay functional decline in community-dwelling patients with dementia. Aging Ment Health. 2013;17 (6 ):655–66.23611141
32. Gitlin LN , Winter L , Dennis MP , Hodgson N , Hauck WW . Targeting and managing behavioral symptoms in individuals with dementia: a randomized trial of a nonpharmacological intervention. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2010;58 (8 ):1465–74.20662955
33. Cohen-Mansfield J Nonpharmacologic interventions for inappropriate behaviors in dementia: a review, summary, and critique. Am J Geriatr Psychiatr. 2001;9 (4 ):361–81.
34. Douglas S , James I , Ballard C . Non-pharmacological interventions in dementia. Adv Psychiatr Treat. 2004;10 :171–9.
35. Kverno KS , Black BS , Nolan MT , Rabins PV . Research on treating neuropsychiatric symptoms of advanced dementia with non-pharmacological strategies, 1998–2008: a systematic literature review. Int Psychogeriatr. 2009;21 (5 ):825–43.19586562
36. McClam TD , Marano CM , Rosenberg PB , Lyketsos CG . Interventions for neuropsychiatric symptoms in neurocognitive impairment due to Alzheimer’s disease: a review of the literature. Harv Rev Psychiatry. 2015;23 (5 ):377–93.26332220
37. O’Neil M , Freeman M , Christensen V , Telerant A , Addleman A , &amp; Kansagara D . Non-pharmacological interventions for behavioral symptoms of dementia: a systematic review of the evidence. VA-ESP Project #05–225, 2011
38. Turner S Behavioural symptoms of dementia in residential settings: a selective review of nonpharmacological interventions. Aging Ment Health. 2005;9 (2 ):93–104.15804626
39. Gitlin LN , Hodgson N , Choi S , Marx K . Interventions to address functional decline in persons with dementia: closing the gap between what a person “does do” and what they “can do”. In: Park R , editors. Neuro-psychology of Alzheimer’s disease and other dementia. 2nd ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2016.
40. Cohen-Mansfield J Theoretical frameworks for behavioral problems in dementia. Alzheim Care Q. 2000;1 (4 ):8–21.
41. Garand L , Hall GR . The biological basis of behavioral symptoms in dementia. Issues Ment Health Nurs. 2000;21 (1 ):91–107.10839054
42. Raskind MA , Peskind ER . Neurobiologic bases of noncognitive behavioral problems in Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 1994;8 suppl 3 :54–60.7999346
43. Teri L Assessment and treatment of neuropsychiatric signs and symptoms in cognitively impaired older adults: guidelines for practitioners. Semin Clin Neuropsychiatry. 1997;2 :152–8.10320455
44. Hall GR , Buckwalter KC . Progressively lowered stress threshold: a conceptual model for care of adults with Alzheimer’s disease. Arch Psychiatr Nurs. 1987;1 :399–406.3426250
45. Smith M , Gerdner LA , Hall GR , Buckwalter KC . History, development, and future of the progressively lowered stress threshold: a conceptual model for dementia care. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2004;52 :1755–60.15450057
46. Algase DL , Beck C , Kolanowski A , Whall A , Berent S , Richards K , Need-driven dementia-compromised behavior: an alternative view of disruptive behavior. Am J Alzheimer Dis Dement. 1996;11 (6 ):10–9.
47. National Health Medical Research Council. How to use the evidence: assessment and application of scientific evidence. Canberra: National Health and Medical Research Council; 2000.
48. National Health Medical Research Council. Additional levels of evidence and grades for recommendations for developers of guidelines: stage 2 consultation. Canberra: National Health and Medical Research Council; 2009.
49. Ballard CG , Orrell M , YongZhong S , Moniz-Cook E , Stafford J , Whittaker R , Impact of antipsychotic review and nonpharmacological intervention on antipsychotic use, neuropsychiatric symptoms, and mortality in people with dementia living in nursing homes: a factorial cluster-randomized controlled trial by the Well-Being and Health for People with Dementia (WHELD) program. Am J Psychiatry. 2016;173 (3 ):252–62.26585409
50. Brunelle-Hamann L , Thivierge S , Simard M . Impact of a cognitive rehabilitation intervention on neuropsychiatric symptoms in mild to moderate Alzheimer’s disease. Neuropsychol Rehabil. 2015;25 (5 ):677–707. doi:10.1080/09602011.2014.964731.25312605
51. Chang Y , Chu H , Yang C , Tsai J , Chung M , Liao Y , The efficacy of music therapy for people with dementia: a meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. J Clin Nurs. 2015;24 :3425–40.26299594
52. D’Onofrio G , Sancarlo D , Addante F , Ciccone F , Cascavilla L , Paris F , A pilot randomized controlled trial evaluating an integrated treatment of rivastigmine transdermal patch and cognitive stimulation in patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Int J Geriatr Psychiatr. 2015;30 (9 ):965–75.
53.• Forbes D , Blake CM , Thiessen EJ , Peacock S , Hawranik P . Light therapy for improving cognition, activities of daily living, sleep, challenging behaviour, and psychiatric disturbances in dementia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014;26 (2 ):CD003946. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD003946.pub4.
Consistent with the literature, which finds light therapy to be ineffective and even damaging, this intervention does not appear to be helpful in managing BPSD.

54. Fu C , Moyle W , Cooke M . A randomised controlled trial of the use of aromatherapy and hand massage to reduce disruptive behaviour in people with dementia. BMC Complement Altern Med. 2013;13 :165. doi:10.1186/1472-6882-13-165.23837414
55. Lowery D , Cerga-Pashoja A , Iliffe S , Thuné-Boyle I , Griffin M , Lee J , The effect of exercise on behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia: the EVIDEM-E randomised controlled clinical trial. Int J Geriatr Psychiatr. 2013;29 :819–27.
56.• Majić T , Gutzmann H , Heinz A , Lang UE , Rapp MA . Animal-assisted therapy and agitation and depression in nursing home residents with dementia: a matched case–control trial. Am J Geriatr Psychiatr. 2013;21 (11 ):1052–9.
Nursing home residents with dementia received animal-assisted therapy once a week for up to 45 minutes for 10 weeks. Behaviors remained constant in frequency and severity while BPSD exhibited by the control group worsened. As behaviors did not worsen, this could be interpreted as a positive outcome and warrants further study.

57. Moyle W , Cooke ML , Beattie E , Shum DHK , O’Dwyer ST , Barrett S . Foot massage versus quiet presence on agitation and mood in people with dementia: a randomised controlled trial. Int J Nurs Stud. 2014;51 (6 ):856–64. doi:10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2013.10.019.24216598
58.• O’Connor DW , Eppingstall B , Taffe J , van der Ploeg ES . A randomized, controlled cross-over trial of dermally-applied lavender (Lavandula angustifolia) oil as a treatment of agitated behaviour in dementia. BMC Complement Altern Med. 2013;13 :315. doi:10.1186/1472-6882-13-315.24219098
The authors explored the effectiveness of lavender oil alone on agitation as compared to an inactive oil. There were no significant differences between groups, and findings in the literature continue to be inconclusive regarding lavender oil as a behavioral intervention.

59. Pieper MJC , Francke AL , van der Steen JT , Scherder EJA , Twisk JWR , Kovach CR , Effects of a stepwise multidisciplinary intervention for challenging behavior in advanced dementia: a cluster randomized controlled trial. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2016;64 (2 ):261–9.26804064
60. Sánchez A , Mirante-Moar P , Sarabia C , de Labra C , Lorenzo T , Maseda A , Multisensory stimulation as an intervention strategy for elderly patients with severe dementia: a pilot randomized controlled trial. Curr Top Res. 2016;31 (4 ):341–50. doi:10.1177/1533317515618801.
61.• Van Haitsma KS , Curyto K , Abbott KM , Towsley GL , Spector A , Kleban M . A randomized controlled trial for an individualized positive psychosocial intervention for the affective and behavioral symptoms of dementia in nursing home residents. J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci. 2015;70 (1 ):35–45. doi:10.1093/geronb/gbt102.24304555
Engagement in individualized activities resulted in only positive outcomes for persons with dementia, whereas a standard activity was significantly associated with both positive and negative outcomes such as anger, uncooperative behaviors, and very negative verbal behaviors. Findings support the use of tailored activities in the management of BPSD.

62. Yang MH , Lin LC , Wu SC , Chiu JH , Wang PN , Lin JG . Comparison of the efficacy of aroma-acupressure and aromatherapy for the treatment of dementia-associated agitation. BMC Complement Altern Med. 2015;15 :93. doi:10.1186/s12906-015-0612-9.25880034
63. Gaugler JE , Jutkowitz E , Shippee TP , Brasure M . Consistency of dementia caregiver intervention classification: an evidence-based synthesis. Int Psychogeriatr. 2016. doi:10.1017/S1041610216001514.
64. Alves J , Petrosyan A , Magalhaes R . Olfactory dysfunction in dementia. World J Clin Cases. 2014;2 :661–7.25405189
65. National Institutes of Health. Home safety for people with Alzheimer’s disease. National Institute on Aging Alzheimer’s Disease Education and Referral (ADEAR) Center. NIH Publication No. 02–5179, US, 2002.
66. Behrman S , Chouliaras L , Ebmeier KP . Considering the senses in the diagnosis and management of dementia. Maturitas. 2014;77 (4 ):305–10.24495787
67. Tariot PN . Medical management of advanced dementia. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2003;51 (5 Suppl ):S305–13.12801387
68. National Collaborating Centre for Mental Health (UK). Dementia: a NICE–SCIE guideline on supporting people with dementia and their carers in health and social care—national clinical guidelines N. 42. Leicester, England: British Psychological Society; 2007.
69. Lykkeslet E , Gjengedal E , Skrondal T , Storjord MB . Sensory stimulation—a way of creating mutual relations in dementia care. Int J Qual Stud Health Well-being. 2014;9 :23888. doi:10.3402/qhw.v9.23888.25008197
70. Wilson SL , Powell GE , Brock D , Thwaites H . Vegetative state and responses to sensory stimulation: an analysis of 24 cases. Brain Inj. 1996;10 (11 ):807–18.8905159
71. Cooke ML , Moyle W , Shum DH , Harrison SD , Murfield JE . A randomized controlled trial exploring the effect of music on agitated behaviours and anxiety in older people with dementia. Aging Ment Health. 2010;14 (8 ):905–16. doi:10.1080/13607861003713190.20635236
72. Lin Y , Chu H , Yang CY , Chen CH , Chen SG , Chang HJ , Effectiveness of group music intervention against agitated behavior in elderly persons with dementia. Int J Geriatr Psychiatr. 2011;26 (7 ):670–8. doi:10.1002/gps.2580.
73. Raglio A , Bellelli G , Traficante D , Gianotti M , Ubezio MC , Gentile S , Efficacy of music therapy treatment based on cycles of sessions: a randomised controlled trial. Aging Ment Health. 2010;14 (8 ):900–4. doi:10.1080/13607861003713158.21069596
74. Sung HC , Chang SM , Lee WL , Lee MS . The effects of group music with movement intervention on agitated behaviours of institutionalized elders with dementia in Taiwan. Complement Ther Med. 2006;14 :113–9.16765849
75. Sung HC , Lee WL , Li TL , Watson R . A group music intervention using percussion instruments with familiar music to reduce anxiety and agitation of institutionalized older adults with dementia. Int J Geriatr Psychiatr. 2012;27 :621–7.
76. Guétin S , Soua B , Voiriot G , Picot MC , Hérisson C . The effect of music therapy on mood and anxiety-depression: an observational study in institutionalised patients with traumatic brain injury. Ann Phys Rehabil Med. 2009;52 (1 ):30–40. doi:10.1016/j.annrmp.2008.08.009.19027186
77. Janata P Effects of widespread and frequent personalized music programming on agitation and depression in assisted living facility residents with Alzheimer-type dementia. Music Med. 2012;4 (1 ):8–15.
78. Raglio A , Bellelli G , Traficante D , Gianotti M , Ubezio MC , Trabucchi M . Efficacy of music therapy in the treatment of behavioral and psychiatric symptoms of dementia. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 2008;22 (2 ):158–62.18525288
79. Sakamoto M , Ando H , Tsutou A . Comparing the effects of different individualized music interventions for elderly individuals with severe dementia. Int Psychogeriatr. 2013;25 (5 ):775–84. doi:10.1017/S1041610212002256.23298693
80. Milev RV , Kellar T , McLean M , Mileva V , Luthra V , Thompson S , Multisensory stimulation for elderly with dementia: a 24-weeks single-blind randomized controlled pilot study. Am J Alzheimers Dis Dement. 2008;23 (4 ):372–6.
81. Baker R , Bell S , Baker E , Gibson S , Holloway J , Pearce R , A randomized controlled trial of the effects of multi-sensory stimulation (MSS) for people with dementia. Br J Clin Psychol. 2001;40 (pt 1 ):81–96.11317951
82. Cook N , Lynch J . Aromatherapy: reviewing evidence for its mechanisms of action and CNS effects. Br J Neurosci Nurs. 2008;4 :595–601.
83. Chong MS , Tan KT , Tay L , Wong YM , Ancoli-Israel S . Bright light therapy as part of a multicomponent management program improves sleep and functional outcomes in delirious older hospitalized adults. Clin Interv Aging. 2013;8 :565–72. doi:10.2147/CIA.S44926.23723696
84. Taguchi T , Yano M , Kido Y . Influence of bright light therapy on postoperative patients: a pilot study. Intensiv Crit Nurs. 2007;23 (5 ):289–97. doi:10.1016/j.iccn.2007.04.004.
85. McCurry SM , Pike KC , Vitiello MV , Logsdon RG , Larson EB , Teri L . Increasing walking and bright light exposure to improve sleep in community-dwelling persons with Alzheimer’s disease: results of a randomized, controlled trial. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2011;59 (8 ):1393–402.21797835
86. Liu RY , Zhou JN , Hoogendijk WJG , van Heerikhuize J , Kamphorst W , Unmehopa UA , Decreased vasopressin gene expression in the biological clock of Alzheimer disease patients with and without depression. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2000;59 (4 ):314–22.10759187
87. Gasio PF , Krauchi K , Cajochen C , van Someren E , Amrhein I , Pache M , Dawn-dusk simulation light therapy of disturbed circadian rest-activity cycles in demented elderly. Exp Gerontol. 2003;38 (1–2 ):207–16.12543279
88. Riemersma-van der Lek RF , Swaab DF , Twisk J , Hol EM , Hoogendijk WJG , Van Someren EJW . Effect of bright light and melatonin on cognitive and noncognitive function in elderly residents of group care facilities: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2008;299 (22 ):2642–55.18544724
89. Ancoli-Israel S , Martin J , Gehrman P , Shochat T , Corey-Bloom J , Marler M , Effect of light on agitation in institutionalized patients with severe Alzheimer disease. Am J Geriatr Psychiatr. 2003;11 (2 ):194–203.
90. Dowling GA , Graf CL , Hubbard EM , Luxenberg JS . Light treatment for neuropsychiatric behaviors in Alzheimer’s disease. West J Nurs Res. 2007;29 (8 ):961–75.17596638
91. Spector A , Davies S , Woods B , Orrell M . Reality orientation for dementia: a systematic review of the evidence of effectiveness from randomized controlled trials. The Gerontologist. 2000;40 (2 ):206–12.10820923
92. Bahar-Fuchs A , Clare L , Woods B . Cognitive training and cognitive rehabilitation for persons with mild to moderate dementia of the Alzheimer’s or vascular type: a review. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2013;5 (4 ):35. doi:10.1186/alzrt189.23924584
93. Vikström S , Josephsson S , Stigsdotter-Neely A , Nygård L . Engagement in activities: experiences of persons with dementia and their caregiving spouses. Dementia. 2008;7 (2 ):251–70.
94. Barton C , Ketelle R , Merrilees J , Miller B . Nonpharmacological management of behavioral symptoms in frontotemporal and other dementias. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. 2016;16 (2 ):14. doi:10.1007/s11910-015-0618-1.26750129
95. Cohen-Mansfield J , Marx MS , Regier NG , Dakheel-Ali M . The impact of personal characteristics on engagement in nursing home residents with dementia. Int J Geriatr Psychiatr. 2009;24 (7 ):755–63. doi:10.1002/gps.2192.
96. Gitlin LN , Winter L , Dennis MP , Hodgson N , Hauck WW . A biobehavioral home-based intervention and the well-being of patients with dementia and their caregivers: the COPE randomized trial. JAMA. 2010;304 (9 ):983–91. doi:10.1001/jama.2010.1253.20810376
97. Ballard C , Corbett A , Chitramohan R , Aarsland D . Management of agitation and aggression associated with Alzheimer’s disease: controversies and possible solutions. Curr Opin Psychiatr. 2009;22 :532–40.
98. Lyketsos CG , Lopez O , Jones B , Fitzpatrick AL , Breitner J , DeKosky S . Prevalence of neuropsychiatric symptoms in dementia and mild cognitive impairment: results from the cardiovascular health study. JAMA. 2002;288 (12 ):1475–83.12243634
99. Vink AC , Birks J , Bruinsma MS , Scholten RJPM . Music therapy for people with dementia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009;2004 (3 ):CD003477.
100. Burns I , Cox H , Plant H . Leisure or therapeutics? Snoezelen and the care of older persons with dementia. Int J Nurs Pract. 2000;6 :118–26.11249409
101. Ballard CG , O’Brien J , Reichelt K , Perry EK . Aromatherapy as a safe and effective treatment for the management of agitation in severe dementia: the results of a double blind, placebo controlled trial. J Clin Psychiatry. 2002;63 :553–8.12143909
102. Forbes D , Forbes S , Morgan DG , Markle-Reid M , Wood J , Culum J . Physical activity programs for persons with dementia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008;16 (3 ):CD006489. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD006489.pub2.
103. Barrick AL , Sloane PD , Williams CS , Mitchell CM , Connell BR , Wood W , Impact of ambient bright light on agitation in dementia. Int J Geriatr Psychiatr. 2010;25 (10 ):1013–21.
104. Woods B , Aguirre E , Spector AE , Orrell M . Cognitive stimulation to improve cognitive functioning in people with dementia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD005562.pub2.
105. Heyn P , Abreu BC , Ottenbacher KJ . The effects of exercise training on elderly persons with cognitive impairment and dementia: a meta-analysis. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2004;85 (10 ):1694–704.15468033
106. Marx MS , Cohen-Mansfield J , Regier NG , Dakheel-Ali M , Srihari A , Thein K . The impact of different dog-related stimuli on engagement of persons with dementia. Am J Alzheimers Dis Dement. 2008;25 (1 ):37–45. doi:10.1177/1533317508326976.
107. Gitlin LN , Marx KA , Alonzi D , Kvedar T , Moody J , Trahan M , Feasibility of the Tailored Activity Program for Hospitals (TAP-H). Gerontologist Pract Concepts. 2016. doi:10.1093/geront/gnw052.
108. Regier N , Hodgson N , Gitlin LN . Characteristics of activities for persons with dementia at the mild, moderate and severe stages. Gerontologist. 2017. doi:10.1093/geront/gnw133.
109. Kiser L , Zasler N . Residential design for real life rehabilitation. NeuroRehabilitation. 2009;25 (3 ):219–27. doi:10.3233/NRE-2009-0518.19893190
110. Gitlin LN , Czaja SJ . Behavioral intervention research: designing, evaluating and implementing. New York: Springer; 2016.
111. Chen R , Chien-Liang L , Lin M , Peng L , Chen L , Liu L , Chen L . Non-pharmacological treatment reducing not only behavioral symptoms, but also psychotic symptoms of older adults with dementia: a prospective cohort study in Taiwan. Geriatr Gerontol Int. 2014;14 :440–6. doi:10.1111/ggi.12126.23910097
112. Karlin BE , Visnic S , McGee JS , Teri L . Results from the multisite implementation of STAR-VA: a multicomponent psychosocial intervention for managing challenging dementia-related behaviors of Veterans. Psychol Serv. 2014;11 (2 ):200–8. doi:10.1037/a0033683.23937081
113. Gitlin LN , Kales HC , Lyketsos CG . Nonpharmacologic management of behavioral symptoms in dementia. JAMA. 2012;308 (19 ):2020–9.23168825
