LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9814863
21942
J Alzheimers Dis
J Alzheimers Dis
Journal of Alzheimer's disease : JAD
1387-2877
1875-8908

36710681
10023438
10.3233/JAD-221042
NIHMS1861772
Article
A function of amyloid β in mediating activity-dependent axon/synapse competition may unify its roles in brain physiology and pathology
Huang Zhen
Departments of Neuroscience and Neurology, University of Wisconsin-Madison
zhuang3@wisc.edu, Telephone: (608)263-2469
1 1 2023
2023
18 3 2023
92 1 2957
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Amyloid-β precursor protein (AβPP) gives rise to Aβ, a peptide at the center of Alzheimer’s disease (AD). AβPP, however, is also an ancient molecule dating back in evolution to some of the earliest forms of metazoans. This suggests a possible ancestral function that may have been obscured by those that evolve later. Based on literature from the functions of Aβ/AβPP in nervous system development, plasticity, and disease, to those of anti-microbial peptides (AMPs) in bacterial competition as well as mechanisms of cell competition uncovered first by Drosophila genetics, I propose that Aβ/AβPP may be part of an ancient mechanism employed in cell competition, which is subsequently co-opted during evolution for the regulation of activity-dependent neural circuit development and plasticity. This hypothesis is supported by foremost the high similarities of Aβ to AMPs, both of which possess unique, opposite (i.e., trophic vs. toxic) activities as monomers and oligomers. A large body of data further suggests that the different Aβ oligomeric isoforms may serve as the protective and punishment signals long predicted to mediate activity-dependent axonal/synaptic competition in the developing nervous system and that the imbalance in their opposite regulation of innate immune and glial cells in the brain may ultimately underpin AD pathogenesis. This hypothesis can not only explain the diverse roles observed of Aβ and AβPP family molecules, but also provide a conceptual framework that can unify current hypotheses on AD. Furthermore, it may explain major clinical observations not accounted for and identify approaches for overcoming shortfalls in AD animal modeling.

Alzheimer’s disease
amyloid beta
anti-microbial peptide
axon competition
homeostatic plasticity
microglia
inflammatory cytokine
innate immunity
neuroinflammation
tau phosphorylation

pmcIntroduction

AβPP gives rise to Aβ, which accumulates in large quantities in the AD brain. Aβ production, however, also takes place in the healthy brain and is regulated by neural activity. This suggests that Aβ may have a physiological role in the normal brain and that this may be related to its pathological role. Large numbers of studies have shown that while Aβ oligomers at high concentrations are toxic, Aβ oligomers at low concentrations or Aβ monomers have in contrary protective effects on neurons. Similar contrasting activities have also been observed on microglia, resident immune cells of the brain. The concentration/oligomeric isoform-dependent effects of Aβ are reminiscent of AMPs, anti-microbial peptides employed by some bacterial species that perform trophic signaling at low concentrations in monomeric conformations but mediate competitive killing as oligomers. In this essay, I propose that a normal function of Aβ in the nervous system may be to act as an agent of circuit-level neural activity and mediate circuit-level activity-dependent axon/synapse competition and that the imbalance in Aβ monomeric/oligomeric isoform activity that normally regulates this process may ultimately underlie AD development. I will first summarize principles of AMP deployment in bacterial competition and the concentration/oligomeric isoform-specific effects of Aβ that have been observed. I will then go through the major lines of experimental evidence that support a role of Aβ as mediators in activity-dependent axon/synapse competition. Lastly, I will discuss how this proposal may unify leading hypotheses of AD, explain clinical observations not accounted for previously, and identify new approaches for AD modeling.

AMPs and bacterial competition

When resources are scarce, some bacterial species deploy AMPs in both inter-species and intra-species competition to kill competitors and enhance their own survival. The intra-species competition is the most informative for our purpose since the competing cells are identical, which helps understand how a cell can deploy AMPs to kill other identical cells while protecting itself. There are many types of AMPs in bacterial competition, and they act in different ways, but all share common properties [1, 2]. Below I will use nisin, a 3.4 kD peptide bacteriocin secreted by Lactococcus lactis, as an example to illustrate the regulation of AMPs in this process [3] (Fig. 1).

At the genomic level, the nisin gene is organized together with several other related genes in a cluster [4, 5]. This includes genes responsible for the post-translational modification and secretion of nisin as well as genes encoding immunity proteins. The cluster also contains other genes encoding a so-called two-component system that includes a sensor histidine kinase receptor and a response regulator that controls the transcription of the gene cluster. The ligand for the histidine kinase receptor is nisin itself, which regulates the receptor in a mechanism known as quorum sensing, i.e., it activates the gene cluster expression and cell competition in a cell density-dependent manner [6]. In short, under a sparsely populated condition, nisin is produced at minimal levels and does not activate the receptor. However, upon crowding, nisin, in the common extracellular pool plenished and shared by all cells, reaches a threshold concentration and activates the receptor. This leads to two processes common to all cell competition, one of which induces the production of large amounts of nisin that form oligomers and inhibit/kill competitor cells, and the other induces immunity proteins for self-protection. Both depend on the unique property of nisin as an AMP, i.e., it can have opposite activities in different oligomeric conformations. At low concentrations, nisin exists mainly as monomers and binds to its receptor to activate expression of the immunity protein NisI (as well as more nisin). NisI prevents the suicidal effects of nisin through several mechanisms [7, 8]. 1) As a cell surface protein, NisI sequesters and prevents local nisin from aggregating into toxic oligomers near the cell surface. Some NisI is also secreted, which may further neutralize nisin locally. 2) Nisin binding to NisI can also induce cell clustering, which inhibits oligomer access to the clustered cells. Nisin signaling, however, also induces mass production of the AMP itself [9, 10], which, once reaching a high concentration, forms oligomers that inhibit or kill competitor cells [11–13]. For example, they can induce the aggregation of the cell wall precursor lipid II and as a result inhibit peptidoglycan biosynthesis and cell growth. Aggregation of the nisin-lipid II complex can also cause membrane instability and pore formation, leading to cell death. Furthermore, nisin oligomers can decrease lipid packing density and increase membrane permeability independent of lipid II binding. Thus, the unique properties of nisin as an AMP play a key role in cell competition, enabling cells to self-protect at low concentrations through protective signaling while killing competitors at high concentrations through oligomer formation.

Concentration/oligomeric isoform-specific effects of Aβ

The properties of nisin and other AMPs are reminiscent of Aβ, which has indeed been found to possess potent anti-microbial activity against several microbes [14]. Recent studies have further uncovered unique concentration/oligomeric isoform-specific effects of Aβ on neuronal physiology that parallel those of AMPs (Table 1). In short, studies by several labs have found that at low concentrations and likely as monomers and/or low-molecular-weight oligomers, Aβ increases presynaptic vesicle pool, vesicle release probability, and as a result miniature EPSC frequency [15–17]. It also enhances long-term potentiation (LTP) in brain slices and several forms of learning and memory in vivo [17–22]. Indeed, recent studies show Aβ monomers may in fact be synaptogenic [23]. In contrary, at high concentrations and likely as high-molecular-weight oligomers, Aβ inhibits neurotransmitter exocytosis and decreases presynaptic vesicle pool [16, 24–27]. It also impairs LTP and learning and memory [18, 22, 28–31]. At the cellular level, studies also find Aβ monomers protect neurons [32–34], while Aβ oligomers are well known to be neurotoxic. Importantly, at the molecular structural level, Aβ similarly shows opposite, concentration-specific effects [35]. At low concentrations, Aβ induces a desensitized conformation of the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor a7nACh that still responds to its cognate ligand, but at high concentrations, it induces a resting-state-like conformation that no longer responds to the ligand. These results indicate that Aβ does have AMP-like concentration/oligomeric isoform-specific properties that would be required for mediating cell/axon competition.

The concentration/oligomeric isoform-specific effects of Aβ are also not restricted to neurons. Using fibrils of Aβ42 or occasionally those of Aβ40, many studies have reported pro-inflammatory effects of Aβ on macrophages/microglia [36–51]. In contrary, non-fibrillar Aβ by itself lacks pro-inflammatory effects [49–51]. In conference presentations, monomeric Aβ has further been reported to suppress macrophage/microglial pro-inflammatory activation. In the periphery, Aβ40 and Aβ42 also both inhibit T cell activation when employed under conditions that favor the monomer conformation [52]. This is consistent with findings that Aβ monomers activate PI3K/Akt [32], major mediators of anti-inflammatory signaling [53, 54]. Thus, these results indicate that Aβ also possesses concentration/oligomeric isoform-specific activity on innate immune cells, a cell type with key regulatory roles in axon/synapse pruning.

Aβ is also not the only mammalian peptide with such unique activities. The mammalian AMP LL-37 also activates trophic signaling in protected cells and inhibits pro-inflammatory activity of immune cells at low concentrations as monomers [55–57], while acting in opposite manners at high concentrations as oligomers [58–60]. Besides Aβ, there are also many other AMP-like peptides with critical functions in both the vertebrate and invertebrate nervous system [61, 62]. These peptides not only show sequence and structural similarities to AMPs but also possess functional anti-microbial activity. For example, substance P, a widely distributed 11 amino acid neurotransmitter and neuromodulator, has potent antimicrobial activity against S. aureus, E. coli, and other microbes [63]. Neuropeptide Y, a 36 amino acid peptide that regulates diverse processes such as feeding, behavior and metabolism, also has potent antifungal activity [64]. α-Melanocyte stimulating hormone (αMSH), a 13 amino acid peptide that regulates appetite, metabolism, and sexual behavior, is effective against S. aureus and C. albicans at concentrations (1fM to 1pM) far below those of most AMPs [65]. In Drosophila, diptericin B , a 9 kDa AMP active against Gram-negative bacteria, regulates long-term memory [62]. Nemuri, another Drosophila AMP, increases arousability when deleted and drives prolonged sleep when overexpressed [66]. Thus, AMPs appear to have been widely co-opted during evolution and play important roles in the nervous system.

Hypothesis on Aβ/AβPP physiological function in the nervous system

Based on the unique properties of Aβ, their similarities to AMPs, and other lines of evidence (see below), I hypothesize that the ancient function of Aβ/AβPP in unicellular precursors of metazoans may be to mediate cell competition. During evolution of multi-cellular metazoans and the nervous system, this function may have been co-opted for regulating one unique aspect of nervous system function, the sensing of circuit-level neural activity and the mediating of circuit-level activity-dependent axon/synapse competition and plasticity (Fig. 2). Since the discovery of ocular dominance columns by Hubel and Wiesel, the mechanisms of activity-dependent axon/synapse competition have been intensively studied [67–69]. These studies have also led to a prediction of the existence of protective and punishment signals in this process that emanate from a stronger synapse and act locally to protect itself while eliminating a weaker synapse at a distance [70–72]. The identity of these signals, however, has remained elusive. While many activity-regulated signals have been discovered, few appear to fit the bill. For example, since these signals can apparently mediate synapse elimination at a distance, they presumably must not only be produced in an activity-dependent manner, but also be protective at the stronger synapse yet able to diffuse across a significant distance and induce elimination of the weaker synapse. Of the few secreted molecules regulated by circuit-level activity, adenosine is indeed produced in such an activity-dependent manner, but studies have found it primarily regulate neural activity and sleep at the circuit level [73–75]. Mature and pro-BDNF have also been proposed as the reward and punishment signal respectively [76]. However, while there is significant evidence implicating their pivotal roles in this process [76–78], there is also difficulty regarding, for example, the relative large size of the pro-BDNF molecule (32kDa) that presumably has to diffuse at least a distance of 50μm [70, 71] to fulfill its potential role as a punishment signal. In contrast, Aβ appears to fulfill these requirements well. As discussed in the two earlier sections, Aβ is not only structurally similar to the AMP molecules that have been directly implicated in mediating cell competition but can also exist in different oligomeric conformations as these AMPs and function protectively as monomers and in a toxic manner as oligomers. In addition, Aβ also appears to operate in the same concentration range as AMPs in bacterial competition. Nisin activates trophic signaling as monomers at the concentration of 30pM [3], while inhibiting bacterial growth at a minimum concentration of 3μM [12]. Similarly, Aβ monomers enhance mammalian synaptic function at a concentration of 100pM [15, 16], while the affinity of Aβ oligomers for PirB, one of the receptors that mediate their inhibitory effects is ~180nM [30]. This concentration range is also in agreement with the dose-effect relationship observed of Aβ in several other studies (see Table 1). Below I will go through other major lines of evidence that support the hypothesis.

1) Aβ/AβPP possesses AMP-like concentration/oligomeric isoform-dependent activity

This has been discussed above. There are also other observations along this line that support the proposed hypothesis. For example, full-length AβPP has been found to possess iron export activity [79], an activity employed in nutritional immunity [80], one of the oldest forms of cellular self-protection mechanism. This finding aligns well with a potential role of AβPP/Aβ in cell competition. The kinetics of Aβ oligomerization, a likely key factor in axon/synapse competition, has also been found regulated by Aβ42/40 ratio [81], which is in turn regulated by neural activity [82]. Aβ42 oligomerization is faster than Aβ40 and is inhibited by Aβ40 [83], while only Aβ42 but not Aβ40 oligomers form toxic membrane channels [84, 85]. These findings suggest evolution of intricate mechanisms that fine-tune Aβ oligomer species and activity in axon/synapse competition. Besides, AβPP family members APLP1/2 are also processed by similar steps of proteolytic cleavage and may potentially play complementary roles [86]. (To clarify, throughout the review, I refer to Aβ monomers as being protective and Aβ oligomers as toxic. This is a simplification for easier presentation. The protective effects of Aβ likely include both Aβ monomers and low-concentration and thus likely low-molecular-weight oligomers, while the toxic effects likely come mostly from high-concentration and high-molecular-weight oligomers).

2) Flower, a calcium channel essential for cell competition, regulates synaptic vesicle endocytosis, a process independently found to regulate neural activity-dependent Aβ production

A second line of evidence is that Aβ production/secretion is not only coupled to neural activity but also regulated by the same molecules that regulate cell competition. Cell competition in metazoans is best studied in Drosophila and one of the most interesting genes identified is flower, a calcium channel that regulates endocytosis [87, 88]. In non-neural tissues such as the Drosophila imaginal epithelia, Flower is uniformly expressed in all cells. Genetic removal of Flower results in apoptosis of mutant cells. But this only happens when Flower is removed from a subset of cells. When it is removed from all cells, mutant cells survive and grow normally. There is also a Flower isoform that, when overexpressed in a subset of cells, results in their apoptosis. However, when it is uniformly overexpressed, again all cells grow normally. Thus, Flower specifically regulates cell competition-related cell survival or death. In the nervous system, Flower localizes to synaptic vesicles at the Drosophila neuromuscular junction (NMJ) [88]. Upon vesicle fusion, it re-localizes to the presynaptic zone and regulates both clathrin-mediated endocytosis and activity-dependent bulk endocytosis [89]. These functions are conserved at mammalian synapses [89]. These findings thus indicate that endocytosis likely plays a key role in cell competition. Indeed, in the immune system, Flower regulates cytotoxic granule endocytosis and is essential for target cell killing by T lymphocytes [90]. In the nervous system, I propose Aβ may be an activity-regulated agent that mediates axon/synapse competition. As such, Aβ must, first of all, be coupled to neural activity and also share mechanisms known to regulate cell competition. In support, Aβ production in the brain is well known to be regulated by neural activity [91]. Aβ levels in the brain are directly influenced by neuronal endocytosis and inhibition of clathrin-mediated endocytosis, the same process regulated by Flower, leads to decreases in interstitial Aβ [92]. Furthermore, endosomes are a well-established subcellular site of β-secretase activity that produces Aβ [93–96]. Interestingly, besides Flower, recent studies have found NMDA receptors, another key regulator of neuronal activity in the nervous system, also regulate cell competition between non-neuronal epithelial cells in Drosophila [97]. Thus, these findings support a role of Aβ in mediating activity-dependent axon competition.

3) Elimination of loser cells or axons requires similar interactions between immune cells, cytokines, and AMPs in cell and axon competition

Another line of evidence is that cell competition in Drosophila and axonal competition in the nervous system both require the same set of players, innate immune cells, cytokines, and AMP-like peptides, and similar interactions between them. In Drosophila, the elimination of losing tumor cells during cell competition requires participation of innate immune cells, the hemocytes, as well as coordinated activity of TNFα and AMPs [98–100]. Hemocytes in the vicinity of a loser cell secrete TNFα, which induces phosphatidylserine exposure by the losing cell. Phosphatidylserine exposure renders losing cells sensitive to AMPs such as Defensin, which bind to the exposed phosphatidylserine and, together with other TNFα effectors, provoke cell death. The apoptotic cell is then removed by hemocyte-mediated phagocytosis. Similar interactions have been observed between TNFα and Defensin during mammal cell death [101]. The close coordination between local cytokines, AMPs, and innate immune cells likely ensures the specificity of target elimination.

Activity-dependent axonal competition and pruning in the vertebrate nervous system similarly involve innate immune cells (microglia) and cytokines such as TNFα. In the retinogeniculate system, microglia play an essential role in at least two activity-dependent processes, the segregation of eye-specific axonal terminals and the refinement (pruning) of axonal inputs per thalamic target neuron. Disrupting the complement cascade, which targets presynaptic elements with exposed phosphatidylserine for microglial engulfment [102], results in defective eye-specific segregation as well as multiply innervated neurons [72, 103]. In the visual cortex, disrupting the microglial P2Y12 receptor similarly alters microglial response to monocular deprivation and abrogates ocular dominance plasticity [104]. Similarly, activation of β2-adrenergic receptors, which inhibits microglia surveillance function, also disrupts experience-dependent ocular dominance plasticity [105]. Furthermore, microglia mediate activity-dependent axon terminal/synapse remodeling through fractalkine-CX3CR1 signaling in the somatosensory cortex [106]. Thus, like in Drosophila cell competition, innate immune cells also play an essential role in activity-dependent axonal/synapse competition.

Cytokines have similarly been implicated in activity-dependent axonal competition. In the retino-geniculate system, a TNFα receptor superfamily member (TNFRSF12a or Fn14) is required for both sensory experience-dependent reduction in the number of retinal inputs per target neuron and the strengthening of surviving connections [107]. The cytokine IL-33 is similarly involved in activity-dependent excess synapse elimination in this brain region [108]. Another TNFα receptor superfamily member (TNFRSF21 or DR6) is required for activity-dependent axonal competition in the retino-collicular system as well as in the somatosensory cortex [109, 110]. JAK/Stat, downstream mediators of cytokine signaling have been implicated in similar processes [111]. Furthermore, at the vertebrate NMJ, a classic model for the study of axonal competition, TNFα is essential for the elimination of supernumerary terminals in an activity-dependent manner [112]. Exogenous TNFα promotes terminal elimination while TNFα mutation delays this process. Thus, the role of cytokines in metazoan cell competition also appears to be conserved in activity-dependent competition in the nervous system.

Furthermore, while the direct role of Aβ in axon competition remains to be tested, acute overproduction of either axonal or dendritic Aβ has been found to reduce spine density and plasticity at nearby dendrites [113]. Oligomeric Aβ directly injected into the brain also induces significantly higher volumes of microglial engulfment of synaptic elements than monomeric Aβ [114]. Several findings are also consistent with the interpretation that, like AMPs in loser cell killing, Aβ may tag axonal terminals and recruit innate immune cells for their elimination. For example, Aβ has been found to bind to and activate several components of the complement cascade [115, 116], which in turn participate in several processes of competitive axonal pruning [72, 103]. The complement cascade appears not involved in the visual and somatosensory cortex [106, 117]. However, oligomeric Aβ can also activate other microglial receptors such as TREM2 [118], which may alternately mediate these effects. Indeed, studies found TREM2 can sense fibrillar Aβ-associated anionic and zwitterionic lipids typically exposed on damaged neurons [119]. TREM2 loss of function also results in impaired synapse elimination in vivo [120]. Besides, several other high affinity oligomeric Aβ receptors such as PirB, cellular prion protein, and NgR are also expressed in microglial lineages and regulate their activity [121–124] and may play additional roles (see further discussion below). Thus, these results further support a role of Aβ in activity-dependent axon/synapse competition.

4) Loss of function in AβPP, a mediator of oligomeric Aβ (oAβ) toxic effects, results in expansion of would-be losing axons during activity-dependent competition

I propose that Aβ oligomers may serve as a punishment signal in activity-dependent axon competition. If so, removing Aβ oligomers should result in not only survival and growth of would-be losing axons but also potential enhanced growth of normally winning axons since competition is a two-way process. Because of the complexity of Aβ regulation and the different effects of different isoforms, specifically determining the role of Aβ oligomers is challenging. However, several studies have shown that the neurotoxic effects of Aβ oligomers are mediated by AβPP. For example, in AβPP knockout animals, the deleterious effects of Aβ oligomers on synaptic plasticity, learning and memory, and other processes are all prevented [125, 126]. This provides a way to test the role of Aβ oligomers. Indeed, results compatible with a role of Aβ oligomers in mediating competitor elimination have been obtained in the retinocollicular system as well as in the somatosensory cortex. AβPP loss of function results in unpruned retinal axons persisting beyond their normal target zone in the superior colliculus [127]. In vivo two-photon imaging also shows cell autonomous loss of function in AβPP suppress mutant axon pruning during cortical rewiring induced by whisker plucking in the somatosensory cortex [128] (Fig. 3). Furthermore, at the NMJ, double mutations in AβPP and its homolog APLP2 result in exuberant axonal terminal sprouting, a phenotype consistent with potential defects in activity-dependent pruning [129]. Together, these results support the interpretation of Aβ oligomers as a punishment signal in activity-dependent competition.

5) Loss of function in PirB, a high affinity receptor for oligomeric Aβ, also results in cortical expansion of normally losing axons that relay weaker input from the ipsilateral eye

Oligomeric Aβ has also been found to bind with high affinity to PirB, a receptor for major histocompatibility complex I (MHCI) [30]. This suggests that PirB may also mediate the punishment effects of oAβ. Indeed, results compatible with this interpretation have also been obtained in several studies. In the mouse visual cortex, monocular deprivation of input from the contralateral eye during the critical period results in expansion of the binocular zone. This in large part results from disinhibited growth of the normally weaker input from the ipsilateral (open) eye [130]. In PirB mutants, these effects of bilateral zone expansion are even more pronounced than in wildtype animals [131]. Thus, like AβPP, PirB also appears to mediate the toxic effects of oAβ, which, when removed, results in the growth of would-be losing axons. This suggests that AβPP and PirB may act in the same pathway that mediate oAβ effects. Consistent with this interpretation, AβPP family members have been found to associate with and regulate the stability of MHCI molecules [132, 133], which in turn can bind PirB both in cis and in trans [134]. Mutations in MCHI genes, like PirB, also result in exaggerated expansion of the binocular zone in the visual cortex following monocular deprivation [135]. Furthermore, in mouse AD models where oAβ is produced at elevated levels, a manipulation predicted to result in excessive pruning of both the would-be winning and losing axons, studies have indeed found a shrunken binocular zone following monocular deprivation. In addition, this shrinkage is prevented by the removal of PirB [30] (Fig. 4). Thus, these results further support a role of Aβ in axonal competition.

Mutations in MHCI also result in defective eye-specific retinal axon segregation in the thalamus (retino-geniculate projection) during normal development [136]. While PirB mutants do not show such defects, mutations in CD3ζ, a more widely expressed MHCI receptor (than PirB), similarly result in defective eye-specific terminal segregation [136]. In addition, MCHI promotes motor neuron terminal pruning at the NMJ [137]. At the molecular level, oAβ activates Syk family kinases [48, 138, 139], mediators of CD3ζ signaling [140] known to negatively regulate axonal growth [141]. Thus, oAβ appears to mediate activity-dependent axonal competition throughout the developing nervous system. Besides axons, oAβ has also been found to inhibit dendritic spine synapse development through Nogo receptors (NgR) [142–144]. NgR mutation increases while oAβ decreases spine synapse density. Cell autonomous mutations in PirB and MHCI similarly increase spine synapse density [145, 146]. Of note, many of these molecules are also involved in the suppression of axonal regeneration as well as the termination of critical periods of cortical plasticity. For example, chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan, which activates NgRs [147], controls the closure of the critical window of ocular dominance plasticity [148]. Myelin associated factors, which inhibit axon regeneration through both PirB and NgR [149], also inhibit ocular dominance plasticity through NgR [150]. These findings suggest that plasticity-limiting mechanisms may potentially act through modulating the same process of axon/synapse competition. (A third oAβ high affinity receptor, the cellular prion protein, has also been identified that directly binds oAβ [29, 144]. It is still unclear whether cellular prion proteins participate in axon/synapse competition. However, studies have shown, for example, that it regulates AβPP cleavage as well as TNFα signaling [121, 122, 151], raising possibilities of its involvement).

In non-neural cell competition, AMP activity on target cells is coordinated with that of cytokines [98–100]. Since microglia are the primary producer of cytokines in the brain, this suggests that besides directly engaging axons, Aβ may also concomitantly modulate microglial activity. This appears to be the case. As mentioned, in line with the protective effects of monomeric Aβ on neurons [32–34], it has been reported that monomeric Aβ suppresses microglial expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines, while oligomeric Aβ provokes secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines [36–51]. Furthermore, macrophages mutant for oAβ receptors PirB and cellular prion protein both show altered cytokine secretion [122, 152]. Thus, Aβ may regulate axon competition by both directly acting on axonal targets and indirectly through regulating microglial activity.

6) The neuron-Aβ/glia-cytokine module regulates homeostatic synaptic plasticity in the adult brain

Axonal/synaptic competition is most prominent during development. In the adult brain, a large body of works suggests that the neuron-Aβ/glia-cytokine module proposed to regulate axon/synapse competition may be conserved for the regulation of synaptic plasticity. Astrocytes play a big role in this process. Since astrocytes tightly coordinate with microglia in cytokine regulation [153], these glial cell types likely regulate plasticity in concert. The proposed Aβ/cytokine function in the adult brain is supported by studies of a unique form of plasticity, homeostatic synaptic plasticity, a mechanism by which central synapses maintain overall balance of activity by up-scaling synaptic efficiency when activity is low and down-scaling efficiency when activity is high. Glial secretion of TNFα plays a key role in this process. Glial secretion of TNFα is on one hand negatively regulated by neural activity, but it on the other hand promotes postsynaptic AMPA receptor insertion and synaptic transmission enhancement [154, 155]. The effects of neural activity on TNFα in this circuit are consistent with mediation by Aβ (Fig. 5), since, as discussed above, neuronal Aβ production is positively regulated by activity while Aβ monomers negatively regulate glial TNFα secretion. Besides, Arc, an activity-induced cytoskeletal protein that mediates AMPAR endocytosis in homeostatic plasticity has also been found to in parallel promote neuronal Aβ production [156, 157]. This further supports a role of Aβ in homeostatic plasticity. Moreover, Aβ has been independently shown to depress synaptic transmission and act as an endogenous negative feedback that keeps hyperactivity in check [158, 159], by mechanisms that may include induction of p35 cleavage and cdk5 and plk2 activation [160, 161] . It has also been directly implicated in homeostatic plasticity in a recent study [162]. The roles of glial TNFα in homeostatic plasticity are also not restricted to the hippocampus. In the visual cortex, TNFα is required for the enhanced response to the open eye induced by monocular deprivation [163]. In the spinal cord, glial secretion of TNFα and other messengers also results in a unique form of LTP that travels long distances via the cerebrospinal fluid [164]. Besides homeostatic plasticity, other forms of plasticity are also regulated by cytokines such as IL-1β and IL-6 [165–168]. In addition, antibody blocking studies have implicated a role of endogenous Aβ in hippocampal LTP as well as learning and memory [20, 21, 169]. Thus, these results strongly suggest that the Aβ/cytokine signaling module that regulates axonal competition during development may be conserved and regulate homeostatic synaptic plasticity in the adult brain.

In sum, a significant body of data on AMPs, Aβ, and activity-dependent plasticity are coming into alignment supporting the hypothesis that Aβ may act as protective and punishment signals that mediate activity-dependent axonal competition in the nervous system (Fig. 2). Its dual role as both protective and punishment signals is potentially made possible by, above all, the unique concentration/oligomeric isoform-specific activity of Aβ against both neurons and glia. This hypothesis may not only provide a cohesive explanation for the array of biological functions observed of AβPP/Aβ, but may also unify understanding of AD pathogenesis.

A conceptual framework that may unify current hypotheses on AD

Homeostatic synaptic plasticity protects synapses from destabilizing forces and is essential for maintaining lifelong normal brain function [170]. If it is regulated by Aβ and cytokines as proposed, this would necessitate safety mechanisms that keep toxic effects of both Aβ and cytokines in check. Long periods of neuronal inactivity, for example, could severely reduce Aβ, resulting in accumulation of dangerously high levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines, and vice versa. Studies have found that cytokines increase AβPP cleavage and Aβ production by neurons and astrocytes [171–177]. Cytokines also induce expression of Arc, a plasticity protein that promotes Aβ production [157, 178, 179]. Both suggest evolution of negative feedbacks that take advantage of the neuron-Aβ/glia-cytokine module for maintaining brain cytokine homeostasis. Conversely, Aβ is cleared from the brain during sleep [180, 181], a process reciprocally regulated by cytokines [182, 183]. All of these suggest the evolution of multipronged safety mechanisms that maintain brain cytokine and Aβ homeostasis. Indeed, during microglia and astrocyte cytokine secretion, for example, it has been found that ATP is also secreted, which not only acutely amplifies pro-inflammatory glial activity [184, 185], but also triggers a temporally delayed program in which ATP is metabolized into adenosine, which may then induce sleep [73–75]. Thus, robust safety mechanisms appear to have evolved to regulate Aβ and cytokines in the brain and provide a potential framework for a unified explanation of AD pathogenesis.

AD hallmarks include accumulation of amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles, microglial activation, and cytokine elevation [186, 187]. Several major hypotheses have been proposed over its pathogenic mechanism, including the amyloid cascade, the tau, the neuroinflammation, and the antimicrobial protection hypothesis. While strong evidence supports each of these hypotheses, there are also major missing links or conflicting evidence. The concept that Aβ and cytokines mediate axon competition during development and continue to regulate plasticity in the adult brain provides a framework that may unify these hypotheses. As mentioned, because of the toxicity of high-concentration Aβ and cytokines, robust mechanisms such as Aβ-mediated negative feedback are in place to keep toxicity in check. I propose that defects in this feedback pathway, arising from different primary perturbations in different forms of AD, may ultimately result in the same outcome of chronic microglial activation and chronic brain cytokine elevation and that this lies at the core of AD (Fig. 6). Briefly, in familial AD, genetic mutations may lead to Aβ overproduction and/or increased Aβ42/40 ratio and as a result Aβ aggregation into oligomers/fibrils/plaques. This may deplete the effective pool of Aβ monomers in the brain parenchyma (since aggregation not only reduces the physical concentration of Aβ monomers, but because the aggregates act as de facto decoy receptors, it also reduces their effective concentration), and as a result impair Aβ-mediated anti-inflammatory feedback signaling and lead to chronic microglial hyperactivity. Chronic microglial hyperactivity will in turn lead to cytokine elevation, which increasing evidence indicates leads to tauopathy (see further discussion below in section on tau hypothesis). Aβ oligomers can also directly activate a number of tau kinases [160, 188–196] and may interact with cytokines to further promote tauopathy. Cytokine elevation may also activate compensatory increases in Aβ production (through, for example, increasing synaptic strength and neural activity [154, 155]), exacerbating Aβ aggregation and setting off a vicious cycle. In support of this interpretation, studies have found that in AD brains, soluble Aβ40 is severely reduced, dropping from 50% of total Aβ in normal control and 8% in pathological aging to 2.7% in AD [197]. In mouse models of cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA), plaque formation is also found to divert Aβ away from blood vessels [198], indicating a depleting effect. On the other hand, in sporadic AD, while Aβ over-production and/or defective clearance may play a primary role in subsets of cases, defective negative regulation of microglial inflammatory activation and/or defective pro-resolving microglial phagocytic activity may play a primary role in the majority (see also sections below on the neuroinflammation hypothesis and AD risk factors). These defects may render microglia hyperactive when exposed to immune stimulants such as associated with infection, sleep-disordered breathing, traumatic brain injury, and other factors during aging and lead to chronic microglial activity and chronic cytokine elevation. This may in turn lead to increases in Aβ production and consequent amyloidosis that further exacerbates neuroinflammation, and result in tauopathy (as similarly described above for familial AD). Thus, the Aβ/cytokine module that normally regulates homeostatic plasticity in the brain provides a potential unified explanation for familial and sporadic AD.

This explanation is not only compatible with leading AD hypotheses [199], but also fills in missing links and provides potential answers for several key clinical observations not accounted for previously. For example, the amyloid cascade hypothesis posits that Aβ deposition is the initiating step of AD pathogenesis, which then leads to tau deposition, followed by neuronal and synaptic loss and cognitive decline. This hypothesis is strongly supported by genetic data from familial AD, in which Aβ aggregation is almost certain the primary triggering factor [199, 200]. The model I propose in this review is compatible with this hypothesis since, as mentioned, Aβ aggregation, besides forming toxic oligomers, is predicted to also deplete the effective pool of Aβ monomers and lead to microglial hyperactivity. One difference in my model is that Aβ aggregation need not always be the primary initiating factor. In sporadic AD, Aβ aggregation, due to increased production and/or defective clearance, may play a primary role. However, defective microglial anti-inflammatory and/or pro-resolving signaling by monomeric Aβ and/or other pathways, caused by genetic, epigenetic, or other factors, may also serve as primary factors triggering the vicious cycle of escalating cytokines and escalating Aβ. Indeed, studies have found functional perturbation of a large number of sporadic AD risk genes all (&gt; 25) result in increased microglial lineage pro-inflammatory activity and/or impaired pro-resolving phago/endocytic pathway activity [201–228]. As such, the model I propose in this review can potentially explain the dominance of microglia-related risk genes in sporadic AD [229]. More importantly, the model also provides plausible explanations for several clinical observations not accounted for by the amyloid cascade hypothesis. For example, against that hypothesis, minimal correlation has been observed between the severity of amyloid deposit and cognitive decline or between the severity of amyloid deposit and regional brain hypometabolism in AD patients [230, 231]. This may potentially be explained by a sufficient level of monomeric Aβ anti-inflammatory signaling despite Aβ aggregation in subpopulations of patients or subregions of the brain. It may also explain rare cases of familial AD that show only minimal cognitive impairment or neurodegeneration despite unusually high amyloid load [232]. Indeed, recent studies show, in both familial and sporadic AD patients, high soluble brain Aβ42, which by chemical law also means likely high brain Aβ monomers [233, 234], in fact preserves normal cognition in AD patients despite increasing amyloidosis being detected in their brains [235–237]. Furthermore, the model in this review provides a potential reason for the failure of most anti-amyloid clinical trials so far since almost all target both Aβ monomers and oligomers [238], which may not only fail to restore anti-inflammatory signaling, but may unwittingly compromise it further.

The tau hypothesis proposes that tau pathology is the primary driver of cognitive decline and neurodegeneration in AD. This is also compatible with the model underlying this review since chronic microglial hyperactivity lies at the core of my model while numerous recent studies have elucidated an increasingly clear causative role of abnormal microglial activity in tau pathology. For example, increased IL-1β signaling has been found to result in tau hyperphosphorylation and aggregation via p38 MAPK in the mouse brain [239]. IL-1β has also been found to increase neuronal calcium influx [168], leading to prolonged activation of cdk5, a neuronal kinase with critical roles in both amyloid and tau pathology [160, 240]. Conversely, ablation of microglia has been found to ameliorate ApoE4-driven tau pathology and neurodegeneration [241]. Clearance of senescent microglia and astrocytes similarly prevents tau-dependent pathology and cognitive decline [242]. Furthermore, blockade of inflammasome activation, which regulates IL-1β secretion, reduces tau hyperphosphorylation and aggregation, by altering the activity of tau kinases and phosphatases such as GSK3β [243]. One issue of the tau hypothesis is that it offers no specific explanation for the universal presence of amyloidosis in sporadic AD. The model underlying this review fills in this missing link. As discussed, I propose Aβ-mediated negative feedback is a key mechanism in brain cytokine homeostasis. If elevated cytokines cause tauopathy, brain cytokine levels should be rising well before the development of tauopathy. These rising cytokines would certainly have also activated this negative feedback and increased Aβ production. Increased Aβ production, meanwhile, has been causatively linked to amyloidosis in familial AD. Thus, the Aβ anti-inflammatory pathway provides a potential explanation for why tau pathology spreading is always accompanied by amyloid pathology in sporadic AD.

The neuroinflammation hypothesis proposes that inflammation is a central mechanism that may play a causative role in AD [244, 245]. This is the same overall conceptual framework as my model, in which I further propose how different primary factors that affect Aβ production, clearance, monomeric Aβ and/or other anti-inflammatory signaling may all eventually lead to the same outcome of chronic microglial hyperactivity and vicious cycles of escalating cytokines and Aβ. The neuroinflammation hypothesis is strongly supported by genetic studies that implicate a large number of microglial function-related risk genes in sporadic AD [229]. An integrated systems approach employing post-mortem human brain tissues also identifies an immune- and microglia-specific gene regulatory-network as the dominant module linked to late-onset AD [246]. Extensive studies have further shown many of these genes normally suppress microglial proinflammatory activity [201–203]. Moreover, human imaging shows that inflammation can be observed in the brain of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) subjects before amyloid deposition [245]. One issue for the neuroinflammation hypothesis is the well-accepted primary role of amyloidosis in familial AD. While Aβ aggregates may play a direct role in aggravating neuroinflammation in AD especially in late stages, the model I propose in this review provides a reason why it may trigger chronic neuroinflammation early on in familial AD, since, as discussed, Aβ aggregation will deplete the brain of effective monomers and may compromise anti-inflammatory signaling that would normally revolve neuroinflammation and prevent it from getting out of control in a timely manner at an early stage. Moreover, my proposal that microglial hyperactivity lies at the core of AD is also supported by recent studies that uncover profound effects of aging that lead to microglial hyperactivity, and may potentially explain why age is the biggest risk factor for AD. For example, studies have associated aging with systematic changes including mitochondrial dysfunction that are linked to chronic inflammation [247, 248]. Inflammasome, a major sensor of these changes, has been further found responsible for the chronic elevation of pro-inflammatory cytokines in the brain during aging [249]. Aging has also been found to result in the buildup of lipid-droplet-accumulating microglia, which are not only defective in phagocytosis but also produce high levels of reactive oxygen species as well as proinflammatory cytokines [250], all key contributors to AD pathology. Besides changes within the brain, age-related peripheral factors can also impact microglia. Studies show that, for example, β2-microglobulin, a systemic pro-aging factor elevated in the bloodstream during aging, can not only induce pro-inflammatory phenotypes in peripheral macrophages but also enter the brain and impact microglia in a similar fashion [251–253]. Aged blood has also been found to activate microglia via brain endothelial cells [254]. Furthermore, at the genomics level, brain transcriptome analysis reveals aging has the most profound impact on the microglial Trem2 pathway [255]. Thus, the model underlying this review also provides a plausible explanation for why age is the biggest risk factor for AD.

Lastly, the antimicrobial protection hypothesis proposes that Aβ deposition is an early innate immune response to genuine, or mistakenly perceived, immune challenge in the brain and plays a primary role in AD pathology [256]. The model underlying this review is also compatible with this hypothesis. The function of Aβ in cell competition I propose is in essence an immune mechanism for unicellular organisms. Aβ, with its oligomeric isoform-specific activity, and full-length AβPP, with its iron export activity, may both be part of an ancient program of cell competition and immunity [14, 79]. In this process, Aβ monomers may serve in self-protection, while Aβ oligomers inhibit or kill competitors or pathogens. Full-length AβPP may, on the other hand, participate in this process by exporting iron and activating a nutritional immunity program against intracellular pathogens.

How genetic and non-genetic risk factors may affect microglial activity

One of the potential issues for the hypothesis underlying this review is how to explain the link between different functional groups of AD risk genes and microglial activity. Several functional groups of genes have been linked to AD risks, including genes in endosomal trafficking, immune response, and cholesterol metabolism [257]. Perturbed function in many endosomal trafficking genes has been found to result in increased Aβ production [258–261], suggesting they may potentially increase AD risks through mechanisms similar to familial AD. Immune response genes such as Trem2 normally directly or indirectly regulate microglial inflammatory and/or phagocytic activity and perturbation of their function may clearly impact microglial activity and brain immune homeostasis [201–228]. Cholesterol metabolism genes include, among others, ApoE, the E4 allele of which is the highest genetic risk factor for sporadic AD. ApoE is unique in that it is a pleiotropic gene that regulates multiple AD-related processes. For example, ApoE is a ligand for Trem2 and may thus impact microglial activity through Trem2 [262–264]. ApoE4 also competes with Aβ for LRP1 binding and may impede Aβ clearance [265, 266]. It also appears to increase neuronal Aβ production [267, 268]. Furthermore, ApoE4 may contribute to microglial hyperactivity through affecting blood brain barrier [269, 270]. Lastly, ApoE is a key carrier for cholesterol trafficking from astrocytes to other cell types in the brain [271] and plays a fundamental role in brain cholesterol metabolism [267, 272, 273]

Importantly, recent studies show that perturbed brain cholesterol metabolism alone may by itself impact microglial activity through a multitude of mechanisms. This is in large part due to that cholesterol synthesis appears to be a major part of the microglial pro-inflammatory program and there exist a large number of feedforward mechanisms through which cholesterol synthesis enhances microglial activity. Microglial cholesterol synthesis is normally activated during inflammation to facilitate immune receptor signaling as well as fine-tune plasma membrane composition for self-protection against AMPs being released [274–276]. In all cells, the level of cholesterol synthesis is regulated by the transcription factors SREBPs [277], the activity of which is in turn determined by resting cellular cholesterol level. When the level is low, SREBP is released from sequestration and enters the nucleus, where it activates cholesterol synthesis-promoting genes. A key factor affecting resting cholesterol level is extracellular availability. In the brain, astrocytes synthesize the bulk of cholesterol and since cholesterol does not normally cross the blood brain barrier, low astrocytic cholesterol synthesis and trafficking will result in increased microglial cholesterol synthesis during microglial activation [278]. Increased SREBP activity and cholesterol synthesis can in turn enhance microglial pro-inflammatory activity through a number of feedforward mechanisms.

Activated SREBP2 has been found to promote the translocation of NLRP3 inflammasome to sites near mitochondria [279]. Since mitochondria play a critical role in inflammasome activation and release of cytokines such as IL-1β, this enhances microglial pro-inflammatory activity [280].

Activated SREBP2 also binds to the promoters of inflammatory genes in macrophages and directly stimulate immune response independent of its function in sterol metabolism [281].

Active SREBP2 further primes the trafficking and activation of STING, an endoplasmic reticulum sensor that positively promotes cellular interferon response [282].

Increased cholesterol synthesis produces a large number of metabolites including mevalonate, which induces enhanced innate immune activity (trained immunity) through mTOR activation and histone modification of inflammatory pathway genes [283, 284].

Increased cholesterol synthesis is also linked to glutaminolysis and glutamine replenishment of the TCA cycle, which result in accumulation of fumarate, a metabolite that facilitates enhanced immune activity (trained immunity) through inhibiting the KDM5 histone demethylase [285].

Glutaminolysis in addition leads to the accumulation of a third metabolite, succinate, which stabilizes and enhances the activity of hypoxic factor HIF-1α and induces inflammatory cytokines including IL-1β [286]. Oxidation of succinate, together with elevation of mitochondrial membrane potential, also induces pro-inflammatory gene expression [287].

Thus, low resting cholesterol in microglia may promote cholesterol synthesis and microglial hyperactivity through a multitude of epigenetic and non-epigenetic mechanisms. This may explain the prominence of cholesterol metabolic genes as AD risk factors.

The epigenetic regulation of microglial activity also provides a potential mechanism linking non-genetic risk factors to microglial hyperactivity and as such a coherent explanation for all AD risk factors. As alluded to above, cholesterol metabolism is intimately linked to innate immune memory in microglial lineage cells. Like adaptive immune cells, innate immune cells also possess lasting memory. Depending on the conditions of initial exposure, macrophages may increase or decrease response upon subsequent exposure to stimulants (trained immunity or tolerance). Studies have found that metabolites in both the cholesterol synthesis pathway and the TCA cycle play key roles in this process. For example, β-glucan induced trained immunity has been found to increase pro-inflammatory cytokine response thorough epigenetic mechanisms mediated by mevalonate and succinate [283]. β-glucan can also enhance trained immunity through inhibition of genes responsible for the synthesis of the tolerance-inducing metabolite itaconate [288]. Importantly, recent studies show that innate immune memory may indeed play a role in AD. For example, endogenous immune stimulants such as age-associated oxidized lipids common in AD have been found to induce innate immune memory [289]. Among the gene loci epigenetically modified during macrophage immune memory are also a large number of AD risk genes [290–295], including EphA4, CTB-104H12.6, TREML2, PSen2, SLC2A5, SORL1, NME8, SLC24A4, HLA-DRA/DRB5/DQA1, GAL3ST4, CLU, MS4A6E, TREM1, ABCA1, SAMSN1, BCL3, and RELB [296], of which Psen2 is most notable for its role in familial AD. Furthermore, strong evidence indicates that non-genetic AD risk factors such as viral activity, sleep apnea/hypoxia, and traumatic brain injury [297–299] may all contribute to AD by epigenetically altering microglia, which, due to their longevity, exert lasting impact on the brain. For example, microglial depletion followed by repopulation, which erases their acute-phase memory, has been found to reduce chronic neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration in animal models of traumatic brain injury [300, 301]. Peripherally applied inflammatory stimuli have also been found to induce innate immune memory in microglia and alter disease pathology in AD models [302]. Aging, the biggest risk factor for AD, also prominently affects microglial activity (see previous section). Thus, these findings provide further support for a central role of microglial hyperactivity in AD pathogenesis.

Why AβPP overexpression mouse AD models do not produce tangles

A well-known issue in current AD research is that none of the mouse models overexpressing familial AD genes show robust neurofibrillary tangles. There are a number of potential explanations, including the much shorter lifespan of mice. However, based on the hypothesis underlying this review, a potential factor may be that overexpression of AβPP, even of mutant forms, may increase basal levels of monomeric Aβ. Increased monomeric Aβ is predicted to inhibit microglial pro-inflammatory activity and as a result inhibit tau pathology development. Indeed, studies have found that the level of soluble Aβ40 in 5xFAD mice is five time as high as that in the control [303]. If so, a follow-up prediction will be enhancing microglial inflammatory activity in these animals should promote tau pathology. This has indeed been observed in many studies.

The 5xFAD mouse, which carries five familial AD mutations in AβPP and Presenilin 1 (PS1), is one of the most widely used AD models that show minimal tau pathology. Deletion of ATG5 and Rubicon, which increases microglial pro-inflammatory response, has been found to result in tau hyperphosphorylation and accelerated neuronal death in these animals [304]. Similarly, introduction of ApoE4 homozygosity, which increases microglial pro-inflammatory activation in comparison to ApoE3, also results in increased cdk5 activity and site-specific tau phosphorylation in 5xFAD mice [305]. The AβPPS1 model, which overexpresses two mutations in AβPP and Presenilin 1, also does not normally show significant tau pathology. However, knockout of Trem2, a gene that normally suppress microglial pro-inflammatory activity, or replacement with Trem2R47H, a variant associated with AD risk, both facilitate the seeding and spreading of tau aggregates in APPPS1 animals [306]. Similarly, deficiency in membrane anchored Cx3cl1, a ligand that normally suppresses microglial activation through CX3CR1, also results in increased expression of inflammatory cytokines and enhanced neuronal tau phosphorylation in these animals [307]. Moreover, deletion of CX3CR1 from the hAPP-J20 mouse, which overexpresses two mutations in AβPP, also exacerbates microglial activation and increases tau phosphorylation [308]. In addition, blocking the function of transthyretin, a protein that normally inhibits myeloid cell pro-inflammatory cytokine production, results in tau phosphorylation and neuronal loss in the Tg2576 mouse, a model that overexpresses a single AβPP mutant allele [309]. Lastly, a spontaneously hypertensive stroke-prone (SHRSP) genetic background that increases neuroinflammation has been also found to exacerbate tau pathology in a rat model of AD [310]. Thus, these results strongly indicate that muted microglial activity and suppressed cytokine levels may be responsible for the lack of robust tau pathology in AβPP-overexpressing animal models.

This conclusion is further supported by studies in additional AD and related disease models. Because of the lack of robust tau pathology in animals overexpressing AβPP/PS1, studies have further introduced tau mutations. The 3xTgAD mouse, which harbors human mutant AβPP, PS1, as well as tau, is widely employed. Results from these animals also support a causative role of pro-inflammatory cytokines in tau pathology development. For example, lipopolysaccharide (LPS) injection has been found to stimulate brain inflammation, induce cdk5 activation, and increase tau hyperphosphorylation in these animals [311]. Similarly, inducible IL-1β overexpression also results in robust increases in tau phosphorylation despite reductions in amyloid load [312]. Conversely, chronic dosing with an IL-1R blocking antibody suppresses inflammatory activity and markedly attenuates tau pathology in these animals [313]. Blocking Aβ42 accumulation, which likely increases monomeric Aβ, also delays the progression of tau pathology [314].

Several in vitro models of AD similarly reveal a key role of microglia and inflammatory cytokines in tau pathology. For example, in a 3D human triculture system using neurons, astrocytes and microglia that overexpresses mutant AβPP, the addition of microglia increases the secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines and induces neuronal loss in an interferon γ and Toll like receptor 4-dependent manner [315]. The severity of tau pathology in this model is positively linked to Aβ42/40 ratio but not to total Aβ level [316]. This is consistent with the model in this review since Aβ42 is known to be more prone to aggregation than Aβ40. Aβ42/40 ratio will thus determine the severity of Aβ aggregation, effective-pool monomer depletion, and defective anti-inflammatory signaling. iPSC-derived neurons have also been generated from AD patients that show increased tau phosphorylation in culture [317]. This is in apparent contradiction to the proposed role of microglia in tau pathology. However, these cultures, even though purified by cell sorting, still contain up to 10% non-neuronal cells including potentially microglia and astrocytes. In support, studies have found that iPSCs spontaneously differentiate into microglia in brain organoids [318]. Moreover, in support of a role played by cytokines, a drug screening has identified a large number of anti-inflammatory small molecules that suppress tau phosphorylation in this model [319]. Thus, many lines of evidence indicate that conventional AD modeling may have inadvertently elevated anti-inflammatory signaling, resulting in a distinct microglial phenotype. Indeed, several recent genomics studies show that the disease associated microglia (DAM) in mouse AD models are remarkably different from microglia isolated from AD patient brains, with the latter displaying a more reactive/aging-related (i.e., inflammatory) phenotype [320–322]. On the other hand, it has been reported that disrupting the monomeric Aβ signaling pathway appears to result in AD-like tau pathology in mice. Thus, the hypothesis underlying this review may also help find new approaches for better modeling AD.

Concluding remarks

In this review, I present a large body of converging evidence that supports the interpretation that Aβ monomers and oligomers may be the protective and punishment signals long predicted to mediate activity-dependent axon/synapse competition in neural development. The outcome of this competition appears to be determined by the balance between trophic Aβ monomers and toxic Aβ oligomers near the competing axons and nearby glia. In the adult brain, this regulatory circuit, especially the cytokine-inhibiting anti-inflammatory feedback mediated by Aβ monomers, appears to play a critical role in the regulation of homeostatic synaptic plasticity and brain cytokine homeostasis. Disruption of this feedback during aging due to perturbation of Aβ monomer/oligomer ratio/balance, either directly by genetic mutations that favor oligomer formation or indirectly by defective microglial anti-inflammatory signaling or pro-resolving phagocytic activity that secondarily leads to increases in Aβ production and oligomer formation, may be responsible for the same ultimate outcome of vicious cycles of escalating cytokines and escalating Aβ, and resultant tauopathy in different forms of AD. This hypothesis has the potential of providing a unified explanation for the physiological and pathological roles of Aβ in the brain.

Acknowledgements

The author thanks late Dr. D. Oertel (UW-Madison) for critical reading of an earlier version of the hypothesis underlying this review.

Funding

Funding for this project was provided in part by NIH/NCATS through CTSA award UL1TR002373 to the UW Institute for Clinical and Translational Research.

Figure 1. Roles of antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) in bacterial competition and self-protection.

(A) Genomic organization of the nisin gene cluster. Function of each gene group is listed below gene name(s). (B) Hypothetical concentration of free nisin (monomer equivalent) from the surface of a secreting cell. The low concentration near cell surface is proposed to result from fast binding and sequestration of nisin by surface receptors. (C) Hypothetical two-dimensional view of monomeric and oligomeric nisin distribution surrounding a secreting cell.

Figure 2. Proposed roles of Aβ in axonal competition.

Like bacterial cells secreting nisin, axons may produce a two-layered cloud of oligomeric and monomeric Aβ. Unlike bacterial competition, however, Aβ-mediated activity-dependent competition involves not only the competing axons/synapses themselves but also microglia. Studies have shown the pruning of an axon terminal likely require coincident cytokine pathway activation in that axon and the presence of Aβ oligomers in the immediate vicinity of that axon. Cytokine signaling plays a key role in this process by inducing plasma membrane scrambling of targeted axon, to which the Aβ oligomers in the vicinity, besides exerting direct toxic effects, would then bind and potentially tag for elimination. In such ways, the monomeric Aβ secreted by the stronger axon (axon 1) may protect itself not only by directly activating trophic signaling in itself (green + symbol) but also by suppressing inflammatory activity of nearby microglia, thus preventing the triggering of either signal. In contrast, the oligomeric Aβ cloud axon 1 produces (at a distance from itself) may inhibit the competing weaker axon (axon 2) by provoking microglial activity near that axon, which would then facilitate the binding of Aβ oligomers near that axon (red - symbol). This two-signal system may conceivably narrow the spatial-temporal window of pruning activation, increase the precision of axon/synapse targeting during activity-dependent competition, and minimize potential problems that may be caused by the diffusible nature of molecules involved. (Note: astrocytes and other glial cell types intimately interact with microglia in the brain and likely also participate in this process but for simplicity reasons are not depicted in the model).

Figure 3. APP cell-autonomously mediates axonal pruning in sensory deprivation-induced plasticity of the somatosensory cortex.

(A) Whole-body APP mutation results in severely reduced axonal terminal retraction (in red) in comparison to wildtype (WT) during barrel cortex plasticity, consistent with a role of APP in mediating proposed pruning effects of oligomeric Aβ. (B) Sparse deletion of APP from would-be retracting axons confirms a cell-autonomous requirement for APP in mediating the pruning effects of oligomeric Aβ. (Schematized based on data in Marik et al. 2016)

Figure 4. PirB mediates axonal pruning in sensory deprivation-induced ocular dominance plasticity of the mouse visual cortex.

(A) Schematic diagram of the normal distribution pattern in the visual cortex of axon terminals relaying ipsi- and contralateral eye input as well as the site of ocular deprivation during experiment. (B) PirB mutation results in expanded binocular zone (BZ), consistent with a role of oAβ-binding PirB in mediating proposed pruning effects of oligomeric Aβ. Increased oligomeric Aβ level (in APP/PS1 AD models) shrinks the BZ, also consistent with a role of oAβ in mediating pruning in this process. Furthermore, this effect is blocked by PirB mutation. (Adapted from Kim et al 2013)

Figure 5. Role of Aβ and TNFα in mediating homeostatic synaptic plasticity.

Glial secretion of TNFα, which is inhibited by neuronal activity, has been found to promote AMPA receptor (AMPAR) insertion and increase postsynaptic strength at excitatory synapses. Aβ secretion instead is promoted by neuronal activity and Aβ monomers suppress glial inflammatory cytokine secretion. This supports a potential role of Aβ in mediating the regulation of homeostatic plasticity by neural activity. The fact that Arc, an activity-induced cytoskeletal protein that promotes AMPAR removal in homeostatic plasticity, also regulates Aβ production in parallel further supports this interpretation.

Figure 6. A unifying model for AD pathogenesis.

I hypothesize Aβ monomers normally act a negative feedback signal to prevent uncontrolled neuroinflammation (and maintain homeostatic plasticity) in the healthy brain. This loop may be perturbed, directly by Aβ aggregation-induced monomer depletion in familial AD (as well as potentially subsets of sporadic AD), or indirectly by defective microglial anti-inflammatory signaling in potentially most sporadic AD that results in increased cytokine and then increased Aβ (feedback signal) production and aggregate formation. Both may ultimately lead to the same outcome of effective-pool Aβ monomer depletion, chronic neuroinflammation, cytokine elevation, and tau pathology on one hand, and toxic oligomer accumulation and synaptic dysfunction on the other hand. The direct neurotoxic effects of Aβ oligomers may also further interact with effects of inflammatory cytokines and promote tauopathy development. This model has potential of reconciling leading hypotheses on AD as well as explaining clinical observations previously unaccounted for. (Note: astrocytes communicate intimately with microglia in regulating brain immune signaling, but for simplicity reasons are not depicted in this model). NFT, neurofibrillary tangle; TLRs, Toll-like receptors.

Table 1. Summary of concentration/oligomeric isoform-dependent Aβ effects

Effects of low-concentration Aβ			
Presynaptic			
100 pM mAβ40 &amp; 100 pM covalent Aβ40 dimer	Increases releasable vesicles (assayed using FM1-43)	[15]	
100 pM Aβ40/42	Increases the recycling pool of synaptic vesicles	[16]	
200 pm oAβ42	Increases frequency of miniature EPSCs	[17]	
	Decreases paired pulse facilitation (PPF)		
	Increases docked vesicle number		
	PPF effects blocked by α7nAChR knockout and acute inhibition		
Postsynaptic			
200 pm oAβ42	Increases length of postsynaptic density	[17]	
	Increases expression of plasticity-related proteins		
Plasticity			
200 pM oAβ42	Enhances LTP	[22]	
~2 nM oAβ42	Facilitates LTP induction and maintenance	[21]	
200 pM oAβ42	Restores L-LTP induction in APP-KO slices	[19]	
200 pM oAβ42	Enhances LTP	[18]	
200 pM oAβ42	Converts E-LTP into L-LTP	[17]	
	Effects blocked by α7nAChR knockout and acute inhibition		
	Effects blocked by inhibition of NO/cGMP production and PKG activation		
Learning/memory			
100 pM oAβ42	Enhances fear-conditioning memory consolidation	[20]	
200 pM oAβ42	Enhances water maze performance	[18]	
200 pM oAβ42	Converts short-term memory into long-term memory	[17]	
	Effects blocked by α7nAChR knockout		
Effects on α7nAChR			
100 pM oAβ40/oAβ42	Induces desensitized conformation responsive to Carb	[35]	
Effects of high-concentration Aβ			
Presynaptic			
50-500 nM Aβ40	Reduces frequency of miniature currents	[24]	
5-20 nM oAβ42	Inhibits calcium-triggered exocytosis (in vitro single-vesicle content-mixing assay)	[25]	
1 μM Aβ	Decreases the recycling pool of synaptic vesicles	[16]	
400 nM oAβ42	Suppresses frequency of miniature EPSP	[26]	
	Effects blocked by preventing presynaptic PIP2 drop		
500 nM covalent Aβ40 dimer	Blocks glutamate reuptake promoting hyperactivity	[27]	
Postsynaptic	No reports		
Plasticity			
Conditioned medium ~1 nM oAβ (1.5ul injected)	Inhibits LTP in vivo	[31]	
100 nM covalent Aβ40 dimer	Inhibits LTP	[28]	
200 nM oAβ42	Impairs LTP	[22]	
500 nM oAβ42	Impairs LTP	[29]	
200 nM oAβ42	Impairs LTP	[30]	
200 nM oAβ42, oAβ40 and mAβ42	20-min pretreatment impairs LTP	[18]	
Learning/memory			
200 nM oAβ42	20-min pretreatment impairs water maze performance	[18]	
Effects on α7nAChR			
100 nM oAβ40/oAβ42	Induces resting-state-like conformation unresponsive to Carb	[35]	

Conflict of Interest

The author has no conflict of interest to report.


References

[1] Li Y , Rebuffat S (2020) The manifold roles of microbial ribosomal peptide-based natural products in physiology and ecology. J Biol Chem 295 , 34–54.31784450
[2] Dal Peraro M , van der Goot FG (2016) Pore-forming toxins: ancient, but never really out of fashion. Nat Rev Microbiol 14 , 77–92.26639780
[3] Kuipers OP , Beerthuyzen MM , de Ruyter PG , Luesink EJ , de Vos WM (1995) Autoregulation of nisin biosynthesis in Lactococcus lactis by signal transduction. J Biol Chem 270 , 27299–27304.7592991
[4] Li H , O’Sullivan DJ (2006) Identification of a nisi promoter within the nisABCTIP operon that may enable establishment of nisin immunity prior to induction of the operon via signal transduction. J Bacteriol 188 , 8496–8503.17012392
[5] Ra SR , Qiao M , Immonen T , Pujana I , Saris EJ (1996) Genes responsible for nisin synthesis, regulation and immunity form a regulon of two operons and are induced by nisin in Lactoccocus lactis N8. Microbiology 142 ( Pt 5 ), 1281–1288.8704967
[6] Kleerebezem M (2004) Quorum sensing control of lantibiotic production; nisin and subtilin autoregulate their own biosynthesis. Peptides 25 , 1405–1414.15374644
[7] Khosa S , Lagedroste M , Smits SH (2016) Protein Defense Systems against the Lantibiotic Nisin: Function of the Immunity Protein Nisi and the Resistance Protein NSR. Front Microbiol 7 , 504.27148193
[8] AlKhatib Z , Lagedroste M , Fey I , Kleinschrodt D , Abts A , Smits SH (2014) Lantibiotic immunity: inhibition of nisin mediated pore formation by NisI. PLoS One 9 , e102246.25014359
[9] Dodd HM , Horn N , Chan WC , Giffard CJ , Bycroft BW , Roberts GC , Gasson MJ (1996) Molecular analysis of the regulation of nisin immunity. Microbiology 142 ( Pt 9 ), 2385–2392.8828206
[10] Ra R , Beerthuyzen MM , de Vos WM , Saris PEJ , Kuipers OP (1999) Effects of gene disruptions in the nisin gene cluster of Lactococcus lactis on nisin production and producer immunity. Microbiology 145 ( Pt 5 ), 1227–1233.10376839
[11] Scherer KM , Spille JH , Sahl HG , Grein F , Kubitscheck U (2015) The lantibiotic nisin induces lipid II aggregation, causing membrane instability and vesicle budding. Biophys J 108 , 1114–1124.25762323
[12] Prince A , Sandhu P , Ror P , Dash E , Sharma S , Arakha M , Jha S , Akhter Y , Saleem M (2016) Lipid-II Independent Antimicrobial Mechanism of Nisin Depends On Its Crowding And Degree Of Oligomerization. Sci Rep 6 , 37908.27897200
[13] Wiedemann I , Benz R , Sahl HG (2004) Lipid II-mediated pore formation by the peptide antibiotic nisin: a black lipid membrane study. J Bacteriol 186 , 3259–3261.15126490
[14] Kumar DK , Choi SH , Washicosky KJ , Eimer WA , Tucker S , Ghofrani J , Lefkowitz A , McColl G , Goldstein LE , Tanzi RE , Moir RD (2016) Amyloid-beta peptide protects against microbial infection in mouse and worm models of Alzheimer’s disease. Sci Transl Med 8 , 340ra372.
[15] Fogel H , Frere S , Segev O , Bharill S , Shapira I , Gazit N , O’Malley T , Slomowitz E , Berdichevsky Y , Walsh DM , Isacoff EY , Hirsch JA , Slutsky I (2014) APP homodimers transduce an amyloid-beta-mediated increase in release probability at excitatory synapses. Cell Rep 7 , 1560–1576.24835997
[16] Lazarevic V , Fienko S , Andres-Alonso M , Anni D , Ivanova D , Montenegro-Venegas C , Gundelfinger ED , Cousin MA , Fejtova A (2017) Physiological Concentrations of Amyloid Beta Regulate Recycling of Synaptic Vesicles via Alpha7 Acetylcholine Receptor and CDK5/Calcineurin Signaling. Front Mol Neurosci 10 , 221.28785201
[17] Gulisano W , Melone M , Ripoli C , Tropea MR , Li Puma DD , Giunta S , Cocco S , Marcotulli D , Origlia N , Palmeri A , Arancio O , Conti F , Grassi C , Puzzo D (2019) Neuromodulatory Action of Picomolar Extracellular Abeta42 Oligomers on Presynaptic and Postsynaptic Mechanisms Underlying Synaptic Function and Memory. J Neurosci 39 , 5986–6000.31127002
[18] Gulisano W , Melone M , Li Puma DD , Tropea MR , Palmeri A , Arancio O , Grassi C , Conti F , Puzzo D (2018) The effect of amyloid-beta peptide on synaptic plasticity and memory is influenced by different isoforms, concentrations, and aggregation status. Neurobiol Aging 71 , 51–60.30092511
[19] Palmeri A , Ricciarelli R , Gulisano W , Rivera D , Rebosio C , Calcagno E , Tropea MR , Conti S , Das U , Roy S , Pronzato MA , Arancio O , Fedele E , Puzzo D (2017) Amyloid-beta Peptide Is Needed for cGMP-Induced Long-Term Potentiation and Memory. J Neurosci 37 , 6926–6937.28626017
[20] Garcia-Osta A , Alberini CM (2009) Amyloid beta mediates memory formation. Learn Mem 16 , 267–272.19318468
[21] Morley JE , Farr SA , Banks WA , Johnson SN , Yamada KA , Xu L (2010) A physiological role for amyloid-beta protein:enhancement of learning and memory. J Alzheimers Dis 19 , 441–449.19749407
[22] Puzzo D , Privitera L , Leznik E , Fa M , Staniszewski A , Palmeri A , Arancio O (2008) Picomolar amyloid-beta positively modulates synaptic plasticity and memory in hippocampus. J Neurosci 28 , 14537–14545.19118188
[23] Zhou B , Lu JG , Siddu A , Wernig M , Sudhof TC (2022) Synaptogenic effect of APP-Swedish mutation in familial Alzheimer’s disease. Sci Transl Med 14 , eabn9380.36260691
[24] Parodi J , Sepulveda FJ , Roa J , Opazo C , Inestrosa NC , Aguayo LG (2010) Beta-amyloid causes depletion of synaptic vesicles leading to neurotransmission failure. J Biol Chem 285 , 2506–2514.19915004
[25] Yang Y , Kim J , Kim HY , Ryoo N , Lee S , Kim Y , Rhim H , Shin YK (2015) Amyloid-beta Oligomers May Impair SNARE-Mediated Exocytosis by Direct Binding to Syntaxin 1a. Cell Rep 12 , 1244–1251.26279571
[26] He Y , Wei M , Wu Y , Qin H , Li W , Ma X , Cheng J , Ren J , Shen Y , Chen Z , Sun B , Huang FD , Shen Y , Zhou YD (2019) Amyloid beta oligomers suppress excitatory transmitter release via presynaptic depletion of phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate. Nat Commun 10 , 1193.30867420
[27] Zott B , Simon MM , Hong W , Unger F , Chen-Engerer HJ , Frosch MP , Sakmann B , Walsh DM , Konnerth A (2019) A vicious cycle of beta amyloid-dependent neuronal hyperactivation. Science 365 , 559–565.31395777
[28] Shankar GM , Li S , Mehta TH , Garcia-Munoz A , Shepardson NE , Smith I , Brett FM , Farrell MA , Rowan MJ , Lemere CA , Regan CM , Walsh DM , Sabatini BL , Selkoe DJ (2008) Amyloid-beta protein dimers isolated directly from Alzheimer’s brains impair synaptic plasticity and memory. Nat Med 14 , 837–842.18568035
[29] Lauren J , Gimbel DA , Nygaard HB , Gilbert JW , Strittmatter SM (2009) Cellular prion protein mediates impairment of synaptic plasticity by amyloid-beta oligomers. Nature 457 , 1128–1132.19242475
[30] Kim T , Vidal GS , Djurisic M , William CM , Birnbaum ME , Garcia KC , Hyman BT , Shatz CJ (2013) Human LilrB2 is a beta-amyloid receptor and its murine homolog PirB regulates synaptic plasticity in an Alzheimer’s model. Science 341 , 1399–1404.24052308
[31] Walsh DM , Klyubin I , Fadeeva JV , Cullen WK , Anwyl R , Wolfe MS , Rowan MJ , Selkoe DJ (2002) Naturally secreted oligomers of amyloid beta protein potently inhibit hippocampal long-term potentiation in vivo. Nature 416 , 535–539.11932745
[32] Giuffrida ML , Caraci F , Pignataro B , Cataldo S , De Bona P , Bruno V , Molinaro G , Pappalardo G , Messina A , Palmigiano A , Garozzo D , Nicoletti F , Rizzarelli E , Copani A (2009) Beta-amyloid monomers are neuroprotective. J Neurosci 29 , 10582–10587.19710311
[33] Plant LD , Boyle JP , Smith IF , Peers C , Pearson HA (2003) The production of amyloid beta peptide is a critical requirement for the viability of central neurons. J Neurosci 23 , 5531–5535.12843253
[34] Ramsden M , Henderson Z , Pearson HA (2002) Modulation of Ca2+ channel currents in primary cultures of rat cortical neurones by amyloid beta protein (1-40) is dependent on solubility status. Brain Res 956 , 254–261.12445693
[35] Lasala M , Fabiani C , Corradi J , Antollini S , Bouzat C (2019) Molecular Modulation of Human alpha7 Nicotinic Receptor by Amyloid-beta Peptides. Front Cell Neurosci 13 , 37.30800059
[36] Bamberger ME , Landreth GE (2001) Microglial interaction with beta-amyloid: implications for the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease. Microsc Res Tech 54 , 59–70.11455613
[37] Glass CK , Saijo K , Winner B , Marchetto MC , Gage FH (2010) Mechanisms underlying inflammation in neurodegeneration. Cell 140 , 918–934.20303880
[38] Reed-Geaghan EG , Savage JC , Hise AG , Landreth GE (2009) CD14 and toll-like receptors 2 and 4 are required for fibrillar A{beta}-stimulated microglial activation. J Neurosci 29 , 11982–11992.19776284
[39] Richard KL , Filali M , Prefontaine P , Rivest S (2008) Toll-like receptor 2 acts as a natural innate immune receptor to clear amyloid beta 1-42 and delay the cognitive decline in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurosci 28 , 5784–5793.18509040
[40] Lee SC , Liu W , Dickson DW , Brosnan CF , Berman JW (1993) Cytokine production by human fetal microglia and astrocytes. Differential induction by lipopolysaccharide and IL-1 beta. J Immunol 150 , 2659–2667.8454848
[41] Combs CK , Karlo JC , Kao SC , Landreth GE (2001) beta-Amyloid stimulation of microglia and monocytes results in TNFalpha-dependent expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase and neuronal apoptosis. J Neurosci 21 , 1179–1188.11160388
[42] Weldon DT , Rogers SD , Ghilardi JR , Finke MP , Cleary JP , O’Hare E , Esler WP , Maggio JE , Mantyh PW (1998) Fibrillar beta-amyloid induces microglial phagocytosis, expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase, and loss of a select population of neurons in the rat CNS in vivo. J Neurosci 18 , 2161–2173.9482801
[43] Bianca VD , Dusi S , Bianchini E , Dal Pra I , Rossi F (1999) beta-amyloid activates the O-2 forming NADPH oxidase in microglia, monocytes, and neutrophils. A possible inflammatory mechanism of neuronal damage in Alzheimer’s disease. J Biol Chem 274 , 15493–15499.10336441
[44] Casal C , Serratosa J , Tusell JM (2004) Effects of beta-AP peptides on activation of the transcription factor NF-kappaB and in cell proliferation in glial cell cultures. Neurosci Res 48 , 315–323.15154677
[45] Ishii K , Muelhauser F , Liebl U , Picard M , Kuhl S , Penke B , Bayer T , Wiessler M , Hennerici M , Beyreuther K , Hartmann T , Fassbender K (2000) Subacute NO generation induced by Alzheimer’s beta-amyloid in the living brain: reversal by inhibition of the inducible No synthase. FASEB J 14 , 1485–1489.10928982
[46] Tan J , Town T , Paris D , Mori T , Suo Z , Crawford F , Mattson MP , Flavell RA , Mullan M (1999) Microglial activation resulting from CD40-CD40L interaction after beta-amyloid stimulation. Science 286 , 2352–2355.10600748
[47] Van Muiswinkel FL , Raupp SF , de Vos NM , Smits HA , Verhoef J , Eikelenboom P , Nottet HS (1999) The amino-terminus of the amyloid-beta protein is critical for the cellular binding and consequent activation of the respiratory burst of human macrophages. J Neuroimmunol 96 , 121–130.10227431
[48] McDonald DR , Brunden KR , Landreth GE (1997) Amyloid fibrils activate tyrosine kinase-dependent signaling and superoxide production in microglia. J Neurosci 17 , 2284–2294.9065490
[49] Lorton D , Kocsis JM , King L , Madden K , Brunden KR (1996) beta-Amyloid induces increased release of interleukin-1 beta from lipopolysaccharide-activated human monocytes. J Neuroimmunol 67 , 21–29.8707927
[50] Halle A , Hornung V , Petzold GC , Stewart CR , Monks BG , Reinheckel T , Fitzgerald KA , Latz E , Moore KJ , Golenbock DT (2008) The NALP3 inflammasome is involved in the innate immune response to amyloid-beta. Nat Immunol 9 , 857–865.18604209
[51] Muehlhauser F , Liebl U , Kuehl S , Walter S , Bertsch T , Fassbender K (2001) Aggregation-Dependent interaction of the Alzheimer’s beta-amyloid and microglia. Clin Chem Lab Med 39 , 313–316.11388654
[52] Grant JL , Ghosn EE , Axtell RC , Herges K , Kuipers HF , Woodling NS , Andreasson K , Herzenberg LA , Herzenberg LA , Steinman L (2012) Reversal of paralysis and reduced inflammation from peripheral administration of beta-amyloid in TH1 and TH17 versions of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Sci Transl Med 4 , 145ra105.
[53] Androulidaki A , Iliopoulos D , Arranz A , Doxaki C , Schworer S , Zacharioudaki V , Margioris AN , Tsichlis PN , Tsatsanis C (2009) The kinase Akt1 controls macrophage response to lipopolysaccharide by regulating microRNAs. Immunity 31 , 220–231.19699171
[54] Covarrubias AJ , Aksoylar HI , Yu J , Snyder NW , Worth AJ , Iyer SS , Wang J , Ben-Sahra I , Byles V , Polynne-Stapornkul T , Espinosa EC , Lamming D , Manning BD , Zhang Y , Blair IA , Horng T (2016) Akt-mTORC1 signaling regulates Acly to integrate metabolic input to control of macrophage activation. Elife 5 .
[55] Brown KL , Poon GF , Birkenhead D , Pena OM , Falsafi R , Dahlgren C , Karlsson A , Bylund J , Hancock RE , Johnson P (2011) Host defense peptide LL-37 selectively reduces proinflammatory macrophage responses. J Immunol 186 , 5497–5505.21441450
[56] von Haussen J , Koczulla R , Shaykhiev R , Herr C , Pinkenburg O , Reimer D , Wiewrodt R , Biesterfeld S , Aigner A , Czubayko F , Bals R (2008) The host defence peptide LL-37/hCAP-18 is a growth factor for lung cancer cells. Lung Cancer 59 , 12–23.17764778
[57] Gambade A , Zreika S , Gueguinou M , Chourpa I , Fromont G , Bouchet AM , Burlaud-Gaillard J , Potier-Cartereau M , Roger S , Aucagne V , Chevalier S , Vandier C , Goupille C , Weber G (2016) Activation of TRPV2 and BKCa channels by the LL-37 enantiomers stimulates calcium entry and migration of cancer cells. Oncotarget 7 , 23785–23800.26993604
[58] Yu J , Mookherjee N , Wee K , Bowdish DM , Pistolic J , Li Y , Rehaume L , Hancock RE (2007) Host defense peptide LL-37, in synergy with inflammatory mediator IL-1beta, augments immune responses by multiple pathways. J Immunol 179 , 7684–7691.18025214
[59] Bjorstad A , Askarieh G , Brown KL , Christenson K , Forsman H , Onnheim K , Li HN , Teneberg S , Maier O , Hoekstra D , Dahlgren C , Davidson DJ , Bylund J (2009) The host defense peptide LL-37 selectively permeabilizes apoptotic leukocytes. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 53 , 1027–1038.19075071
[60] Johansson J , Gudmundsson GH , Rottenberg ME , Berndt KD , Agerberth B (1998) Conformation-dependent antibacterial activity of the naturally occurring human peptide LL-37. J Biol Chem 273 , 3718–3724.9452503
[61] Brogden KA , Guthmiller JM , Salzet M , Zasloff M (2005) The nervous system and innate immunity: the neuropeptide connection. Nat Immunol 6 , 558–564.15908937
[62] Barajas-Azpeleta R , Wu J , Gill J , Welte R , Seidel C , McKinney S , Dissel S , Si K (2018) Antimicrobial peptides modulate long-term memory. PLoS Genet 14 , e1007440.30312294
[63] Kowalska K , Carr DB , Lipkowski AW (2002) Direct antimicrobial properties of substance P. Life Sci 71 , 747–750.12074933
[64] Vouldoukis I , Shai Y , Nicolas P , Mor A (1996) Broad spectrum antibiotic activity of the skin-PYY. FEBS Lett 380 , 237–240.8601432
[65] Cutuli M , Cristiani S , Lipton JM , Catania A (2000) Antimicrobial effects of alpha-MSH peptides. J Leukoc Biol 67 , 233–239.10670585
[66] Toda H , Williams JA , Gulledge M , Sehgal A (2019) A sleep-inducing gene, nemuri, links sleep and immune function in Drosophila. Science 363 , 509–515.30705188
[67] Shatz CJ , Stryker MP (1988) Prenatal tetrodotoxin infusion blocks segregation of retinogeniculate afferents. Science 242 , 87–89.3175636
[68] Katz LC , Shatz CJ (1996) Synaptic activity and the construction of cortical circuits. Science 274 , 1133–1138.8895456
[69] Seabrook TA , Burbridge TJ , Crair MC , Huberman AD (2017) Architecture, Function, and Assembly of the Mouse Visual System. Annu Rev Neurosci 40 , 499–538.28772103
[70] Jennings C (1994) Developmental neurobiology. Death of a synapse. Nature 372 , 498–499.7990917
[71] Balice-Gordon RJ , Lichtman JW (1994) Long-term synapse loss induced by focal blockade of postsynaptic receptors. Nature 372 , 519–524.7990923
[72] Stevens B , Allen NJ , Vazquez LE , Howell GR , Christopherson KS , Nouri N , Micheva KD , Mehalow AK , Huberman AD , Stafford B , Sher A , Litke AM , Lambris JD , Smith SJ , John SW , Barres BA (2007) The classical complement cascade mediates CNS synapse elimination. Cell 131 , 1164–1178.18083105
[73] Halassa MM , Florian C , Fellin T , Munoz JR , Lee SY , Abel T , Haydon PG , Frank MG (2009) Astrocytic modulation of sleep homeostasis and cognitive consequences of sleep loss. Neuron 61 , 213–219.19186164
[74] Huang ZL , Qu WM , Eguchi N , Chen JF , Schwarzschild MA , Fredholm BB , Urade Y , Hayaishi O (2005) Adenosine A2A, but not A1, receptors mediate the arousal effect of caffeine. Nat Neurosci 8 , 858–859.15965471
[75] Badimon A , Strasburger HJ , Ayata P , Chen X , Nair A , Ikegami A , Hwang P , Chan AT , Graves SM , Uweru JO , Ledderose C , Kutlu MG , Wheeler MA , Kahan A , Ishikawa M , Wang YC , Loh YE , Jiang JX , Surmeier DJ , Robson SC , Junger WG , Sebra R , Calipari ES , Kenny PJ , Eyo UB , Colonna M , Quintana FJ , Wake H , Gradinaru V , Schaefer A (2020) Negative feedback control of neuronal activity by microglia. Nature 586 , 417–423.32999463
[76] Je HS , Yang F , Ji Y , Potluri S , Fu XQ , Luo ZG , Nagappan G , Chan JP , Hempstead B , Son YJ , Lu B (2013) ProBDNF and mature BDNF as punishment and reward signals for synapse elimination at mouse neuromuscular junctions. J Neurosci 33 , 9957–9962.23761891
[77] Je HS , Yang F , Ji Y , Nagappan G , Hempstead BL , Lu B (2012) Role of pro-brain-derived neurotrophic factor (proBDNF) to mature BDNF conversion in activity-dependent competition at developing neuromuscular synapses. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109 , 15924–15929.23019376
[78] Lu B , Pang PT , Woo NH (2005) The yin and yang of neurotrophin action. Nat Rev Neurosci 6 , 603–614.16062169
[79] Duce JA , Tsatsanis A , Cater MA , James SA , Robb E , Wikhe K , Leong SL , Perez K , Johanssen T , Greenough MA , Cho HH , Galatis D , Moir RD , Masters CL , McLean C , Tanzi RE , Cappai R , Barnham KJ , Ciccotosto GD , Rogers JT , Bush AI (2010) Iron-export ferroxidase activity of beta-amyloid precursor protein is inhibited by zinc in Alzheimer’s disease. Cell 142 , 857–867.20817278
[80] Soares MP , Weiss G (2015) The Iron age of host-microbe interactions. EMBO Rep 16 , 1482–1500.26474900
[81] Pauwels K , Williams TL , Morris KL , Jonckheere W , Vandersteen A , Kelly G , Schymkowitz J , Rousseau F , Pastore A , Serpell LC , Broersen K (2012) Structural basis for increased toxicity of pathological abeta42:abeta40 ratios in Alzheimer disease. J Biol Chem 287 , 5650–5660.22157754
[82] Zoltowska KM , Maesako M , Berezovska O (2016) Interrelationship between Changes in the Amyloid beta 42/40 Ratio and Presenilin 1 Conformation. Mol Med 22 , 329–337.27391800
[83] Murray MM , Bernstein SL , Nyugen V , Condron MM , Teplow DB , Bowers MT (2009) Amyloid beta protein: Abeta40 inhibits Abeta42 oligomerization. J Am Chem Soc 131 , 6316–6317.19385598
[84] Serra-Batiste M , Ninot-Pedrosa M , Bayoumi M , Gairi M , Maglia G , Carulla N (2016) Abeta42 assembles into specific beta-barrel pore-forming oligomers in membrane-mimicking environments. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 113 , 10866–10871.27621459
[85] Bode DC , Baker MD , Viles JH (2017) Ion Channel Formation by Amyloid-beta42 Oligomers but Not Amyloid-beta40 in Cellular Membranes. J Biol Chem 292 , 1404–1413.27927987
[86] Eggert S , Paliga K , Soba P , Evin G , Masters CL , Weidemann A , Beyreuther K (2004) The proteolytic processing of the amyloid precursor protein gene family members APLP-1 and APLP-2 involves alpha-, beta-, gamma-, and epsilon-like cleavages: modulation of APLP-1 processing by n-glycosylation. J Biol Chem 279 , 18146–18156.14970212
[87] Rhiner C , Lopez-Gay JM , Soldini D , Casas-Tinto S , Martin FA , Lombardia L , Moreno E (2010) Flower forms an extracellular code that reveals the fitness of a cell to its neighbors in Drosophila. Dev Cell 18 , 985–998.20627080
[88] Yao CK , Lin YQ , Ly CV , Ohyama T , Haueter CM , Moiseenkova-Bell VY , Wensel TG , Bellen HJ (2009) A synaptic vesicle-associated Ca2+ channel promotes endocytosis and couples exocytosis to endocytosis. Cell 138 , 947–960.19737521
[89] Yao CK , Liu YT , Lee IC , Wang YT , Wu PY (2017) A Ca2+ channel differentially regulates Clathrin-mediated and activity-dependent bulk endocytosis. PLoS Biol 15 , e2000931.28414717
[90] Chang HF , Mannebach S , Beck A , Ravichandran K , Krause E , Frohnweiler K , Fecher-Trost C , Schirra C , Pattu V , Flockerzi V , Rettig J (2018) Cytotoxic granule endocytosis depends on the Flower protein. J Cell Biol 217 , 667–683.29288152
[91] Cirrito JR , Yamada KA , Finn MB , Sloviter RS , Bales KR , May PC , Schoepp DD , Paul SM , Mennerick S , Holtzman DM (2005) Synaptic activity regulates interstitial fluid amyloid-beta levels in vivo. Neuron 48 , 913–922.16364896
[92] Cirrito JR , Kang JE , Lee J , Stewart FR , Verges DK , Silverio LM , Bu G , Mennerick S , Holtzman DM (2008) Endocytosis is required for synaptic activity-dependent release of amyloid-beta in vivo. Neuron 58 , 42–51.18400162
[93] Rajendran L , Schneider A , Schlechtingen G , Weidlich S , Ries J , Braxmeier T , Schwille P , Schulz JB , Schroeder C , Simons M , Jennings G , Knolker HJ , Simons K (2008) Efficient inhibition of the Alzheimer’s disease beta-secretase by membrane targeting. Science 320 , 520–523.18436784
[94] Koo EH , Squazzo SL (1994) Evidence that production and release of amyloid beta-protein involves the endocytic pathway. J Biol Chem 269 , 17386–17389.8021238
[95] Haass C , Kaether C , Thinakaran G , Sisodia S (2012) Trafficking and proteolytic processing of APP. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2 , a006270.22553493
[96] Das U , Scott DA , Ganguly A , Koo EH , Tang Y , Roy S (2013) Activity-induced convergence of APP and BACE-1 in acidic microdomains via an endocytosis-dependent pathway. Neuron 79 , 447–460.23931995
[97] Banreti AR , Meier P (2020) The NMDA receptor regulates competition of epithelial cells in the Drosophila wing. Nat Commun 11 , 2228.32376880
[98] Parvy JP , Yu Y , Dostalova A , Kondo S , Kurjan A , Bulet P , Lemaitre B , Vidal M , Cordero JB (2019) The antimicrobial peptide defensin cooperates with tumour necrosis factor to drive tumour cell death in Drosophila. Elife 8 .
[99] Araki M , Kurihara M , Kinoshita S , Awane R , Sato T , Ohkawa Y , Inoue YH (2019) Anti-tumour effects of antimicrobial peptides, components of the innate immune system, against haematopoietic tumours in Drosophila mxc mutants. Dis Model Mech 12 .
[100] Poon I , Baxter AA , Lay FT , Mills GD , Adda CG , Payne JA , Phan TK , Ryan GF , White JA , Veneer PK , van der Weerden NL , Anderson mA , Kvansakul M , Hulett MD (2014) Phosphoinositide-mediated oligomerization of a defensin induces cell lysis. Elife 3 , e01808.24692446
[101] Lu W , de Leeuw E (2014) Functional intersection of Human Defensin 5 with the TNF receptor pathway. FEBS Lett 588 , 1906–1912.24681099
[102] Scott-Hewitt N , Perrucci F , Morini R , Erreni M , Mahoney M , Witkowska A , Carey A , Faggiani E , Schuetz LT , Mason S , Tamborini M , Bizzotto M , Passoni L , Filipello F , Jahn R , Stevens B , Matteoli M (2020) Local externalization of phosphatidylserine mediates developmental synaptic pruning by microglia. EMBO J 39 , e105380.32657463
[103] Schafer DP , Lehrman EK , Kautzman AG , Koyama R , Mardinly AR , Yamasaki R , Ransohoff RM , Greenberg ME , Barres BA , Stevens B (2012) Microglia sculpt postnatal neural circuits in an activity and complement-dependent manner. Neuron 74 , 691–705.22632727
[104] Sipe GO , Lowery RL , Tremblay ME , Kelly EA , Lamantia CE , Majewska AK (2016) Microglial P2Y12 is necessary for synaptic plasticity in mouse visual cortex. Nat Commun 7 , 10905.26948129
[105] Stowell RD , Sipe GO , Dawes RP , Batchelor HN , Lordy KA , Whitelaw BS , Stoessel MB , Bidlack JM , Brown E , Sur M , Majewska AK (2019) Noradrenergic signaling in the wakeful state inhibits microglial surveillance and synaptic plasticity in the mouse visual cortex. Nat Neurosci 22 , 1782–1792.31636451
[106] Gunner G , Cheadle L , Johnson KM , Ayata P , Badimon A , Mondo E , Nagy MA , Liu L , Bemiller SM , Kim KW , Lira SA , Lamb Bt , Tapper AR , Ransohoff RM , Greenberg ME , Schaefer A , Schafer DP (2019) Sensory lesioning induces microglial synapse elimination via ADAM10 and fractalkine signaling. Nat Neurosci 22 , 1075–1088.31209379
[107] Cheadle L , Tzeng CP , Kalish BT , Harmin DA , Rivera S , Ling E , Nagy MA , Hrvatin S , Hu L , Stroud H , Burkly LC , Chen C , Greenberg ME (2018) Visual Experience-Dependent Expression of Fn14 Is Required for Retinogeniculate Refinement. Neuron 99 , 525–539 e510.30033152
[108] Vainchtein ID , Chin G , Cho FS , Kelley KW , Miller JG , Chien EC , Liddelow SA , Nguyen PT , Nakao-Inoue H , Dorman LC , Akil O , Joshita S , Barres BA , Paz JT , Molofsky AB , Molofsky AV (2018) Astrocyte-derived interleukin-33 promotes microglial synapse engulfment and neural circuit development. Science 359 , 1269–1273.29420261
[109] Marik SA , Olsen O , Tessier-Lavigne M , Gilbert CD (2013) Death receptor 6 regulates adult experience-dependent cortical plasticity. J Neurosci 33 , 14998–15003.24048829
[110] Nikolaev A , McLaughlin T , O’Leary DD , Tessier-Lavigne M (2009) APP binds DR6 to trigger axon pruning and neuron death via distinct caspases. Nature 457 , 981–989.19225519
[111] Yasuda M , Nagappan-Chettiar S , Johnson-Venkatesh EM , Umemori H (2021) An activity-dependent determinant of synapse elimination in the mammalian brain. Neuron 109 , 1333–1349 e1336.33770504
[112] Fu XQ , Peng J , Wang AH , Luo ZG (2020) Tumor necrosis factor alpha mediates neuromuscular synapse elimination. Cell Discov 6 , 9.32140252
[113] Wei W , Nguyen LN , Kessels HW , Hagiwara H , Sisodia S , Malinow R (2010) Amyloid beta from axons and dendrites reduces local spine number and plasticity. Nat Neurosci 13 , 190–196.20037574
[114] Hong S , Beja-Glasser VF , Nfonoyim BM , Frouin A , Li S , Ramakrishnan S , Merry KM , Shi Q , Rosenthal A , Barres BA , Lemere CA , Selkoe DJ , Stevens B (2016) Complement and microglia mediate early synapse loss in Alzheimer mouse models. Science 352 , 712–716.27033548
[115] Daly Jt , Kotwal GJ (1998) Pro-inflammatory complement activation by the A beta peptide of Alzheimer’s disease is biologically significant and can be blocked by vaccinia virus complement control protein. Neurobiol Aging 19 , 619–627.10192224
[116] Bradt BM , Kolb WP , Cooper NR (1998) Complement-dependent proinflammatory properties of the Alzheimer’s disease beta-peptide. J Exp Med 188 , 431–438.9687521
[117] Welsh CA , Stephany CE , Sapp RW , Stevens B (2020) Ocular Dominance Plasticity in Binocular Primary Visual Cortex Does Not Require C1q. J Neurosci 40 , 769–783.31801811
[118] Zhao Y , Wu X , Li X , Jiang LL , Gui X , Liu Y , Sun Y , Zhu B , Pina-Crespo JC , Zhang M , Zhang N , Chen X , Bu G , An Z , Huang TY , Xu H (2018) TREM2 Is a Receptor for beta-Amyloid that Mediates Microglial Function. Neuron 97 , 1023–1031 e1027.29518356
[119] Wang Y , Cella M , Mallinson K , Ulrich JD , Young KL , Robinette ML , Gilfillan S , Krishnan GM , Sudhakar S , Zinselmeyer BH , Holtzman DM , Cirrito JR , Colonna M (2015) TREM2 lipid sensing sustains the microglial response in an Alzheimer’s disease model. Cell 160 , 1061–1071.25728668
[120] Filipello F , Morini R , Corradini I , Zerbi V , Canzi A , Michalski B , Erreni M , Markicevic M , Starvaggi-Cucuzza C , Otero K , Piccio L , Cignarella F , Perrucci F , Tamborini M , Genua M , Rajendran L , Menna E , Vetrano S , Fahnestock M , Paolicelli RC , Matteoli M (2018) The Microglial Innate Immune Receptor TREM2 Is Required for Synapse Elimination and Normal Brain Connectivity. Immunity 48 , 979–991 e978.29752066
[121] Wu GR , Mu TC , Gao ZX , Wang J , Sy MS , Li CY (2017) Prion protein is required for tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha)-triggered nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB) signaling and cytokine production. J Biol Chem 292 , 18747–18759.28900035
[122] Wang M , Zhao D , Yang Y , Liu J , Wang J , Yin X , Yang L , Zhou X (2014) The cellular prion protein negatively regulates phagocytosis and cytokine expression in murine bone marrow-derived macrophages. PLoS One 9 , e102785.25058617
[123] Barkal AA , Weiskopf K , Kao KS , Gordon SR , Rosental B , Yiu YY , George BM , Markovic M , Ring NG , Tsai JM , McKenna KM , Ho PY , Cheng RZ , Chen JY , Barkal LJ , Ring AM , Weissman IL , Maute RL (2018) Engagement of MHC class I by the inhibitory receptor LILRB1 suppresses macrophages and is a target of cancer immunotherapy. Nat Immunol 19 , 76–84.29180808
[124] Fang Y , Yan J , Li C , Zhou X , Yao L , Pang T , Yan M , Zhang L , Mao L , Liao H (2015) The Nogo/Nogo Receptor (NgR) Signal Is Involved in Neuroinflammation through the Regulation of Microglial Inflammatory Activation. J Biol Chem 290 , 28901–28914.26472924
[125] Puzzo D , Piacentini R , Fa M , Gulisano W , Li Puma DD , Staniszewski A , Zhang H , Tropea MR , Cocco S , Palmeri A , Fraser P , D’Adamio L , Grassi C , Arancio O (2017) LTP and memory impairment caused by extracellular Abeta and Tau oligomers is APP-dependent. Elife 6 .
[126] Wang Z , Jackson RJ , Hong W , Taylor WM , Corbett GT , Moreno A , Liu W , Li S , Frosch MP , Slutsky I , Young-Pearse TL , Spires-Jones TL , Walsh DM (2017) Human Brain-Derived Abeta Oligomers Bind to Synapses and Disrupt Synaptic Activity in a Manner That Requires APP. J Neurosci 37 , 11947–11966.29101243
[127] Olsen O , Kallop DY , McLaughlin T , Huntwork-Rodriguez S , Wu Z , Duggan CD , Simon DJ , Lu Y , Easley-Neal C , Takeda K , Hass PE , Jaworski A , O’Leary DD , Weimer RM , Tessier-Lavigne M (2014) Genetic analysis reveals that amyloid precursor protein and death receptor 6 function in the same pathway to control axonal pruning independent of beta-secretase. J Neurosci 34 , 6438–6447.24806670
[128] Marik SA , Olsen O , Tessier-Lavigne M , Gilbert CD (2016) Physiological role for amyloid precursor protein in adult experience-dependent plasticity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 113 , 7912–7917.27354516
[129] Wang P , Yang G , Mosier DR , Chang P , Zaidi T , Gong YD , Zhao NM , Dominguez B , Lee KF , Gan WB , Zheng H (2005) Defective neuromuscular synapses in mice lacking amyloid precursor protein (APP) and APP-Like protein 2. J Neurosci 25 , 1219–1225.15689559
[130] Antonini A , Fagiolini M , Stryker MP (1999) Anatomical correlates of functional plasticity in mouse visual cortex. J Neurosci 19 , 4388–4406.10341241
[131] Syken J , Grandpre T , Kanold PO , Shatz CJ (2006) PirB restricts ocular-dominance plasticity in visual cortex. Science 313 , 1795–1800.16917027
[132] Tuli A , Sharma M , Capek HL , Naslavsky N , Caplan S , Solheim JC (2009) Mechanism for amyloid precursor-like protein 2 enhancement of major histocompatibility complex class I molecule degradation. J Biol Chem 284 , 34296–34307.19808674
[133] Tuli A , Sharma M , McIlhaney MM , Talmadge JE , Naslavsky N , Caplan S , Solheim JC (2008) Amyloid precursor-like protein 2 increases the endocytosis, instability, and turnover of the H2-K(d) MHC class I molecule. J Immunol 181 , 1978–1987.18641335
[134] Masuda A , Nakamura A , Maeda T , Sakamoto Y , Takai T (2007) Cis binding between inhibitory receptors and MHC class I can regulate mast cell activation. J Exp Med 204 , 907–920.17420263
[135] Datwani A , McConnell MJ , Kanold PO , Micheva KD , Busse B , Shamloo M , Smith SJ , Shatz CJ (2009) Classical MHCI molecules regulate retinogeniculate refinement and limit ocular dominance plasticity. Neuron 64 , 463–470.19945389
[136] Huh GS , Boulanger LM , Du H , Riquelme PA , Brotz TM , Shatz CJ (2000) Functional requirement for class I MHC in CNS development and plasticity. Science 290 , 2155–2159.11118151
[137] Tetruashvily MM , McDonald MA , Frietze KK , Boulanger LM (2016) MHCI promotes developmental synapse elimination and aging-related synapse loss at the vertebrate neuromuscular junction. Brain Behav Immun 56 , 197–208.26802986
[138] Lacor PN , Buniel MC , Furlow PW , Clemente AS , Velasco PT , Wood M , Viola KL , Klein WL (2007) Abeta oligomer-induced aberrations in synapse composition, shape, and density provide a molecular basis for loss of connectivity in Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurosci 27 , 796–807.17251419
[139] Fu AK , Hung KW , Huang H , Gu S , Shen Y , Cheng EY , Ip FC , Huang X , Fu WY , Ip NY (2014) Blockade of EphA4 signaling ameliorates hippocampal synaptic dysfunctions in mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111 , 9959–9964.24958880
[140] Angibaud J , Louveau A , Baudouin SJ , Nerriere-Daguin V , Evain S , Bonnamain V , Hulin P , Csaba Z , Dournaud P , Thinard R , Naveilhan P , Noraz N , Pellier-Monnin V , Boudin H (2011) The immune molecule CD3zeta and its downstream effectors ZAP-70/Syk mediate ephrin signaling in neurons to regulate early neuritogenesis. J Neurochem 119 , 708–722.21895656
[141] Noraz N , Jaaoini I , Charoy C , Watrin C , Chounlamountri N , Benon A , Malleval C , Boudin H , Honnorat J , Castellani V , Pellier-Monnin V (2016) Syk kinases are required for spinal commissural axon repulsion at the midline via the ephrin/Eph pathway. Development 143 , 2183–2193.27122172
[142] Wills ZP , Mandel-Brehm C , Mardinly AR , McCord AE , Giger RJ , Greenberg ME (2012) The nogo receptor family restricts synapse number in the developing hippocampus. Neuron 73 , 466–481.22325200
[143] Zhao Y , Sivaji S , Chiang MC , Ali H , Zukowski M , Ali S , Kennedy B , Sklyar A , Cheng A , Guo Z , Reed AK , Kodali R , Borowski J , Frost G , Beukema P , Wills ZP (2017) Amyloid Beta Peptides Block New Synapse Assembly by Nogo Receptor-Mediated Inhibition of T-Type Calcium Channels. Neuron 96 , 355–372 e356.29024660
[144] Smith LM , Kostylev MA , Lee S , Strittmatter SM (2019) Systematic and standardized comparison of reported amyloid-beta receptors for sufficiency, affinity, and Alzheimer’s disease relevance. J Biol Chem 294 , 6042–6053.30787106
[145] Vidal GS , Djurisic M , Brown K , Sapp RW , Shatz CJ (2016) Cell-Autonomous Regulation of Dendritic Spine Density by PirB. eNeuro 3 .
[146] Glynn MW , Elmer BM , Garay PA , Liu XB , Needleman LA , El-Sabeawy F , McAllister AK (2011) MHCI negatively regulates synapse density during the establishment of cortical connections. Nat Neurosci 14 , 442–451.21358642
[147] Dickendesher TL , Baldwin KT , Mironova YA , Koriyama Y , Raiker SJ , Askew KL , Wood A , Geoffroy CG , Zheng B , Liepmann CD , Katagiri Y , Benowitz LI , Geller HM , Giger RJ (2012) NgR1 and NgR3 are receptors for chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans. Nat Neurosci 15 , 703–712.22406547
[148] Pizzorusso T , Medini P , Berardi N , Chierzi S , Fawcett JW , Maffei L (2002) Reactivation of ocular dominance plasticity in the adult visual cortex. Science 298 , 1248–1251.12424383
[149] Atwal JK , Pinkston-Gosse J , Syken J , Stawicki S , Wu Y , Shatz C , Tessier-Lavigne M (2008) PirB is a functional receptor for myelin inhibitors of axonal regeneration. Science 322 , 967–970.18988857
[150] McGee AW , Yang Y , Fischer QS , Daw NW , Strittmatter SM (2005) Experience-driven plasticity of visual cortex limited by myelin and Nogo receptor. Science 309 , 2222–2226.16195464
[151] Parkin ET , Watt NT , Hussain I , Eckman EA , Eckman CB , Manson JC , Baybutt HN , Turner AJ , Hooper NM (2007) Cellular prion protein regulates beta-secretase cleavage of the Alzheimer’s amyloid precursor protein. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104 , 11062–11067.17573534
[152] Munitz A , Cole ET , Beichler A , Groschwitz K , Ahrens R , Steinbrecher K , Willson T , Han X , Denson L , Rothenberg ME , Hogan SP (2010) Paired immunoglobulin-like receptor B (PIR-B) negatively regulates macrophage activation in experimental colitis. Gastroenterology 139 , 530–541.20398663
[153] Vainchtein ID , Molofsky AV (2020) Astrocytes and Microglia: In Sickness and in Health. Trends Neurosci 43 , 144–154.32044129
[154] Beattie EC , Stellwagen D , Morishita W , Bresnahan JC , Ha BK , Von Zastrow M , Beattie MS , Malenka RC (2002) Control of synaptic strength by glial TNFalpha. Science 295 , 2282–2285.11910117
[155] Stellwagen D , Malenka RC (2006) Synaptic scaling mediated by glial TNF-alpha. Nature 440 , 1054–1059.16547515
[156] Shepherd JD , Rumbaugh G , Wu J , Chowdhury S , Plath N , Kuhl D , Huganir RL , Worley PF (2006) Arc/Arg3.1 mediates homeostatic synaptic scaling of AMPA receptors. Neuron 52 , 475–484.17088213
[157] Wu J , Petralia RS , Kurushima H , Patel H , Jung MY , Volk L , Chowdhury S , Shepherd JD , Dehoff M , Li Y , Kuhl D , Huganir RL , Price DL , Scannevin R , Troncoso JC , Wong PC , Worley PF (2011) Arc/Arg3.1 regulates an endosomal pathway essential for activity-dependent beta-amyloid generation. Cell 147 , 615–628.22036569
[158] Kamenetz F , Tomita T , Hsieh H , Seabrook G , Borchelt D , Iwatsubo T , Sisodia S , Malinow R (2003) APP processing and synaptic function. Neuron 37 , 925–937.12670422
[159] Hsieh H , Boehm J , Sato C , Iwatsubo T , Tomita T , Sisodia S , Malinow R (2006) AMPAR removal underlies Abeta-induced synaptic depression and dendritic spine loss. Neuron 52 , 831–843.17145504
[160] Seo J , Giusti-Rodriguez P , Zhou Y , Rudenko A , Cho S , Ota KT , Park C , Patzke H , Madabhushi R , Pan L , Mungenast AE , Guan JS , Delalle I , Tsai LH (2014) Activity-dependent p25 generation regulates synaptic plasticity and Abeta-induced cognitive impairment. Cell 157 , 486–498.24725413
[161] Seeburg DP , Feliu-Mojer M , Gaiottino J , Pak DT , Sheng M (2008) Critical role of CDK5 and Polo-like kinase 2 in homeostatic synaptic plasticity during elevated activity. Neuron 58 , 571–583.18498738
[162] Galanis C , Fellenz M , Becker D , Bold C , Lichtenthaler SF , Muller UC , Deller T , Vlachos A (2021) Amyloid-Beta Mediates Homeostatic Synaptic Plasticity. J Neurosci 41 , 5157–5172.33926999
[163] Kaneko M , Stellwagen D , Malenka RC , Stryker MP (2008) Tumor necrosis factor-alpha mediates one component of competitive, experience-dependent plasticity in developing visual cortex. Neuron 58 , 673–680.18549780
[164] Kronschlager MT , Drdla-Schutting R , Gassner M , Honsek SD , Teuchmann HL , Sandkuhler J (2016) Gliogenic LTP spreads widely in nociceptive pathways. Science 354 , 1144–1148.27934764
[165] Balschun D , Wetzel W , Del Rey A , Pitossi F , Schneider H , Zuschratter W , Besedovsky HO (2004) Interleukin-6: a cytokine to forget. FASEB J 18 , 1788–1790.15345694
[166] Tomasoni R , Morini R , Lopez-Atalaya JP , Corradini I , Canzi A , Rasile M , Mantovani C , Pozzi D , Garlanda C , Mantovani A , Menna E , Barco A , Matteoli M (2017) Lack of IL-1R8 in neurons causes hyperactivation of IL-1 receptor pathway and induces MECP2-dependent synaptic defects. Elife 6 .
[167] Hoshino K , Hasegawa K , Kamiya H , Morimoto Y (2017) Synapse-specific effects of IL-1beta on long-term potentiation in the mouse hippocampus. Biomed Res 38 , 183–188.28637953
[168] Viviani B , Bartesaghi S , Gardoni F , Vezzani A , Behrens MM , Bartfai T , Binaglia M , Corsini E , Di Luca M , Galli CL , Marinovich M (2003) Interleukin-1beta enhances NMDA receptor-mediated intracellular calcium increase through activation of the Src family of kinases. J Neurosci 23 , 8692–8700.14507968
[169] Puzzo D , Privitera L , Fa M , Staniszewski A , Hashimoto G , Aziz F , Sakurai M , Ribe EM , Troy CM , Mercken M , Jung SS , Palmeri A , Arancio O (2011) Endogenous amyloid-beta is necessary for hippocampal synaptic plasticity and memory. Ann Neurol 69 , 819–830.21472769
[170] Turrigiano G (2012) Homeostatic synaptic plasticity: local and global mechanisms for stabilizing neuronal function. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 4 , a005736.22086977
[171] Buxbaum JD , Oishi M , Chen HI , Pinkas-Kramarski R , Jaffe EA , Gandy SE , Greengard P (1992) Cholinergic agonists and interleukin 1 regulate processing and secretion of the Alzheimer beta/A4 amyloid protein precursor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 89 , 10075–10078.1359534
[172] Ohyagi Y , Tabira T (1993) Effect of growth factors and cytokines on expression of amyloid beta protein precursor mRNAs in cultured neural cells. Brain Res Mol Brain Res 18 , 127–132.8479281
[173] Del Bo R , Angeretti N , Lucca E , De Simoni MG , Forloni G (1995) Reciprocal control of inflammatory cytokines, IL-1 and IL-6, and beta-amyloid production in cultures. Neurosci Lett 188 , 70–74.7783982
[174] Rogers JT , Leiter LM , McPhee J , Cahill CM , Zhan SS , Potter H , Nilsson LN (1999) Translation of the alzheimer amyloid precursor protein mRNA is up-regulated by interleukin-1 through 5’-untranslated region sequences. J Biol Chem 274 , 6421–6431.10037734
[175] Liao YF , Wang BJ , Cheng HT , Kuo LH , Wolfe MS (2004) Tumor necrosis factor-alpha, interleukin-1beta, and interferon-gamma stimulate gamma-secretase-mediated cleavage of amyloid precursor protein through a JNK-dependent MAPK pathway. J Biol Chem 279 , 49523–49532.15347683
[176] He P , Zhong Z , Lindholm K , Berning L , Lee W , Lemere C , Staufenbiel M , Li R , Shen Y (2007) Deletion of tumor necrosis factor death receptor inhibits amyloid beta generation and prevents learning and memory deficits in Alzheimer’s mice. J Cell Biol 178 , 829–841.17724122
[177] Blasko I , Marx F , Steiner E , Hartmann T , Grubeck-Loebenstein B (1999) TNFalpha plus IFNgamma induce the production of Alzheimer beta-amyloid peptides and decrease the secretion of APPs. FASEB J 13 , 63–68.9872930
[178] Rosi S , Ramirez-Amaya V , Vazdarjanova A , Worley PF , Barnes CA , Wenk GL (2005) Neuroinflammation alters the hippocampal pattern of behaviorally induced Arc expression. J Neurosci 25 , 723–731.15659610
[179] Belarbi K , Jopson T , Tweedie D , Arellano C , Luo W , Greig NH , Rosi S (2012) TNF-alpha protein synthesis inhibitor restores neuronal function and reverses cognitive deficits induced by chronic neuroinflammation. J Neuroinflammation 9 , 23.22277195
[180] Xie L , Kang H , Xu Q , Chen MJ , Liao Y , Thiyagarajan M , O’Donnell J , Christensen DJ , Nicholson C , Iliff JJ , Takano T , Deane R , Nedergaard M (2013) Sleep drives metabolite clearance from the adult brain. Science 342 , 373–377.24136970
[181] Iliff JJ , Wang M , Liao Y , Plogg BA , Peng W , Gundersen GA , Benveniste H , Vates GE , Deane R , Goldman SA , Nagelhus EA , Nedergaard M (2012) A paravascular pathway facilitates CSF flow through the brain parenchyma and the clearance of interstitial solutes, including amyloid beta. Sci Transl Med 4 , 147ra111.
[182] Shoham S , Davenne D , Cady AB , Dinarello CA , Krueger JM (1987) Recombinant tumor necrosis factor and interleukin 1 enhance slow-wave sleep. Am J Physiol 253 , R142–149.3496800
[183] Rockstrom MD , Chen L , Taishi P , Nguyen JT , Gibbons CM , Veasey SC , Krueger JM (2018) Tumor necrosis factor alpha in sleep regulation. Sleep Med Rev 40 , 69–78.29153862
[184] Bianco F , Pravettoni E , Colombo A , Schenk U , Moller T , Matteoli M , Verderio C (2005) Astrocyte-derived ATP induces vesicle shedding and IL-1 beta release from microglia. J Immunol 174 , 7268–7277.15905573
[185] Suzuki T , Hide I , Ido K , Kohsaka S , Inoue K , Nakata Y (2004) Production and release of neuroprotective tumor necrosis factor by P2X7 receptor-activated microglia. J Neurosci 24 , 1–7.14715932
[186] Shi Y , Holtzman DM (2018) Interplay between innate immunity and Alzheimer disease: APOE and TREM2 in the spotlight. Nat Rev Immunol 18 , 759–772.30140051
[187] Yeh FL , Hansen DV , Sheng M (2017) TREM2, Microglia, and Neurodegenerative Diseases. Trends Mol Med 23 , 512–533.28442216
[188] Takashima A , Honda T , Yasutake K , Michel G , Murayama O , Murayama M , Ishiguro K , Yamaguchi H (1998) Activation of tau protein kinase I/glycogen synthase kinase-3beta by amyloid beta peptide (25-35) enhances phosphorylation of tau in hippocampal neurons. Neurosci Res 31 , 317–323.9809590
[189] Ma QL , Lim GP , Harris-White ME , Yang F , Ambegaokar SS , Ubeda OJ , Glabe CG , Teter B , Frautschy SA , Cole GM (2006) Antibodies against beta-amyloid reduce Abeta oligomers, glycogen synthase kinase-3beta activation and tau phosphorylation in vivo and in vitro. J Neurosci Res 83 , 374–384.16385556
[190] Ma QL , Yang F , Rosario ER , Ubeda OJ , Beech W , Gant DJ , Chen PP , Hudspeth B , Chen C , Zhao Y , Vinters HV , Frautschy SA , Cole GM (2009) Beta-amyloid oligomers induce phosphorylation of tau and inactivation of insulin receptor substrate via c-Jun N-terminal kinase signaling: suppression by omega-3 fatty acids and curcumin. J Neurosci 29 , 9078–9089.19605645
[191] Zempel H , Thies E , Mandelkow E , Mandelkow EM (2010) Abeta oligomers cause localized Ca(2+) elevation, missorting of endogenous Tau into dendrites, Tau phosphorylation, and destruction of microtubules and spines. J Neurosci 30 , 11938–11950.20826658
[192] Yu W , Polepalli J , Wagh D , Rajadas J , Malenka R , Lu B (2012) A critical role for the PAR-1/MARK-tau axis in mediating the toxic effects of Abeta on synapses and dendritic spines. Hum Mol Genet 21 , 1384–1390.22156579
[193] Mairet-Coello G , Courchet J , Pieraut S , Courchet V , Maximov A , Polleux F (2013) The CAMKK2-AMPK kinase pathway mediates the synaptotoxic effects of Abeta oligomers through Tau phosphorylation. Neuron 78 , 94–108.23583109
[194] Kirouac L , Rajic AJ , Cribbs DH , Padmanabhan J (2017) Activation of Ras-ERK Signaling and GSK-3 by Amyloid Precursor Protein and Amyloid Beta Facilitates Neurodegeneration in Alzheimer’s Disease. eNeuro 4 .
[195] Amar F , Sherman MA , Rush T , Larson M , Boyle G , Chang L , Gotz J , Buisson A , Lesne SE (2017) The amyloid-beta oligomer Abeta*56 induces specific alterations in neuronal signaling that lead to tau phosphorylation and aggregation. Sci Signal 10 .
[196] Taylor HBC , Emptage NJ , Jeans AF (2021) Long-term depression links amyloid-beta to the pathological hyperphosphorylation of tau. Cell Rep 36 , 109638.34469725
[197] Wang J , Dickson DW , Trojanowski JQ , Lee VM (1999) The levels of soluble versus insoluble brain Abeta distinguish Alzheimer’s disease from normal and pathologic aging. Exp Neurol 158 , 328–337.10415140
[198] Xu F , Kotarba AE , Ou-Yang MH , Fu Z , Davis J , Smith SO , Van Nostrand WE (2014) Early-onset formation of parenchymal plaque amyloid abrogates cerebral microvascular amyloid accumulation in transgenic mice. J Biol Chem 289 , 17895–17908.24828504
[199] Long JM , Holtzman DM (2019) Alzheimer Disease: An Update on Pathobiology and Treatment Strategies. Cell 179 , 312–339.31564456
[200] Selkoe DJ , Hardy J (2016) The amyloid hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease at 25 years. EMBO Mol Med 8 , 595–608.27025652
[201] Turnbull IR , Gilfillan S , Cella M , Aoshi T , Miller M , Piccio L , Hernandez M , Colonna M (2006) Cutting edge: TREM-2 attenuates macrophage activation. J Immunol 177 , 3520–3524.16951310
[202] Vitek MP , Brown CM , Colton CA (2009) APOE genotype-specific differences in the innate immune response. Neurobiol Aging 30 , 1350–1360.18155324
[203] Sayed FA , Telpoukhovskaia M , Kodama L , Li Y , Zhou Y , Le D , Hauduc A , Ludwig C , Gao F , Clelland C , Zhan L , Cooper YA , Davalos D , Akassoglou K , Coppola G , Gan L (2018) Differential effects of partial and complete loss of TREM2 on microglial injury response and tauopathy. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 115 , 10172–10177.30232263
[204] Cunin P , Beauvillain C , Miot C , Augusto JF , Preisser L , Blanchard S , Pignon P , Scotet M , Garo E , Fremaux I , Chevailler A , Subra JF , Blanco P , Wilson MR , Jeannin P , Delneste Y (2016) Clusterin facilitates apoptotic cell clearance and prevents apoptotic cell-induced autoimmune responses. Cell Death Dis 7 , e2215.27148688
[205] Sudwarts A , Ramesha S , Gao T , Ponnusamy M , Wang S , Hansen M , Kozlova A , Bitarafan S , Kumar P , Beaulieu-Abdelahad D , Zhang X , Collier L , Szekeres C , Wood LB , Duan J , Thinakaran G , Rangaraju S (2022) BIN1 is a key regulator of proinflammatory and neurodegeneration-related activation in microglia. Mol Neurodegener 17 , 33.35526014
[206] Griciuc A , Patel S , Federico AN , Choi SH , Innes BJ , Oram MK , Cereghetti G , McGinty D , Anselmo A , Sadreyev RI , Hickman SE , El Khoury J , Colonna M , Tanzi RE (2019) TREM2 Acts Downstream of CD33 in Modulating Microglial Pathology in Alzheimer’s Disease. Neuron 103 , 820–835 e827.31301936
[207] Deming Y , Filipello F , Cignarella F , Cantoni C , Hsu S , Mikesell R , Li Z , Del-Aguila JL , Dube U , Farias FG , Bradley J , Budde J , Ibanez L , Fernandez MV , Blennow K , Zetterberg H , Heslegrave A , Johansson PM , Svensson J , Nellgard B , Lleo A , Alcolea D , Clarimon J , Rami L , Molinuevo JL , Suarez-Calvet M , Morenas-Rodriguez E , Kleinberger G , Ewers M , Harari O , Haass C , Brett TJ , Benitez BA , Karch CM , Piccio L , Cruchaga C (2019) The MS4A gene cluster is a key modulator of soluble TREM2 and Alzheimer’s disease risk. Sci Transl Med 11 .
[208] Andreone BJ , Przybyla L , Llapashtica C , Rana A , Davis SS , van Lengerich B , Lin K , Shi J , Mei Y , Astarita G , Di Paolo G , Sandmann T , Monroe KM , Lewcock JW (2020) Alzheimer’s-associated PLCgamma2 is a signaling node required for both TREM2 function and the inflammatory response in human microglia. Nat Neurosci 23 , 927–938.32514138
[209] Aikawa T , Ren Y , Yamazaki Y , Tachibana M , Johnson MR , Anderson CT , Martens YA , Holm ML , Asmann YW , Saito T , Saido TC , Fitzgerald ML , Bu G , Kanekiyo T (2019) ABCA7 haplodeficiency disturbs microglial immune responses in the mouse brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 116 , 23790–23796.31690660
[210] Karasinska JM , de Haan W , Franciosi S , Ruddle P , Fan J , Kruit JK , Stukas S , Lutjohann D , Gutmann DH , Wellington CL , Hayden MR (2013) ABCA1 influences neuroinflammation and neuronal death. Neurobiol Dis 54 , 445–455.23376685
[211] Peng Q , Malhotra S , Torchia JA , Kerr WG , Coggeshall KM , Humphrey MB (2010) TREM2- and DAP12-dependent activation of PI3K requires DAP10 and is inhibited by SHIP1. Sci Signal 3 , ra38.20484116
[212] Weisman HF , Bartow T , Leppo MK , Marsh HC Jr. , Carson GR , Concino MF , Boyle MP , Roux KH , Weisfeldt ML , Fearon DT (1990) Soluble human complement receptor type 1: in vivo inhibitor of complement suppressing post-ischemic myocardial inflammation and necrosis. Science 249 , 146–151.2371562
[213] Martens LH , Zhang J , Barmada SJ , Zhou P , Kamiya S , Sun B , Min SW , Gan L , Finkbeiner S , Huang EJ , Farese RV Jr. , (2012) Progranulin deficiency promotes neuroinflammation and neuron loss following toxin-induced injury. J Clin Invest 122 , 3955–3959.23041626
[214] Cermak S , Kosicek M , Mladenovic-Djordjevic A , Smiljanic K , Kanazir S , Hecimovic S (2016) Loss of Cathepsin B and L Leads to Lysosomal Dysfunction, NPC-Like Cholesterol Sequestration and Accumulation of the Key Alzheimer’s Proteins. PLoS One 11 , e0167428.27902765
[215] Gavin AL , Huang D , Huber C , Martensson A , Tardif V , Skog PD , Blane TR , Thinnes TC , Osborn K , Chong HS , Kargaran F , Kimm P , Zeitjian A , Sielski RL , Briggs M , Schulz SR , Zarpellon A , Cravatt B , Pang ES , Teijaro J , de la Torre JC , O’Keeffe M , Hochrein H , Damme M , Teyton L , Lawson BR , Nemazee D (2018) PLD3 and PLD4 are single-stranded acid exonucleases that regulate endosomal nucleic-acid sensing. Nat Immunol 19 , 942–953.30111894
[216] Bonilla FA , Fujita RM , Pivniouk VI , Chan AC , Geha RS (2000) Adapter proteins SLP-76 and BLNK both are expressed by murine macrophages and are linked to signaling via Fcgamma receptors I and II/III. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 97 , 1725–1730.10677525
[217] Okigaki M , Davis C , Falasca M , Harroch S , Felsenfeld DP , Sheetz MP , Schlessinger J (2003) Pyk2 regulates multiple signaling events crucial for macrophage morphology and migration. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 100 , 10740–10745.12960403
[218] Sossey-Alaoui K , Pluskota E , Bialkowska K , Szpak D , Parker Y , Morrison CD , Lindner DJ , Schiemann WP , Plow EF (2017) Kindlin-2 Regulates the Growth of Breast Cancer Tumors by Activating CSF-1-Mediated Macrophage Infiltration. Cancer Res 77 , 5129–5141.28687620
[219] Karahan H , Smith DC , Kim B , Dabin LC , Al-Amin MM , Wijeratne HRS , Pennington T , Viana di Prisco G , McCord B , Lin PB , Li Y , Peng J , Oblak AL , Chu S , Atwood BK , Kim J (2021) Deletion of Abi3 gene locus exacerbates neuropathological features of Alzheimer’s disease in a mouse model of Abeta amyloidosis. Sci Adv 7 , eabe3954.34731000
[220] Bai H , Yang B , Yu W , Xiao Y , Yu D , Zhang Q (2018) Cathepsin B links oxidative stress to the activation of NLRP3 inflammasome. Exp Cell Res 362 , 180–187.29196167
[221] Torika N , Asraf K , Roasso E , Danon A , Fleisher-Berkovich S (2016) Angiotensin Converting Enzyme Inhibitors Ameliorate Brain Inflammation Associated with Microglial Activation: Possible Implications for Alzheimer’s Disease. J Neuroimmune Pharmacol 11 , 774–785.27562846
[222] Wang Y , Colonna M (2014) Interkeukin-34, a cytokine crucial for the differentiation and maintenance of tissue resident macrophages and Langerhans cells. Eur J Immunol 44 , 1575–1581.24737461
[223] Xu P , Zhang X , Liu Q , Xie Y , Shi X , Chen J , Li Y , Guo H , Sun R , Hong Y , Liu X , Xu G (2019) Microglial TREM-1 receptor mediates neuroinflammatory injury via interaction with SYK in experimental ischemic stroke. Cell Death Dis 10 , 555.31324751
[224] Zheng H , Liu CC , Atagi Y , Chen XF , Jia L , Yang L , He W , Zhang X , Kang SS , Rosenberry TL , Fryer JD , Zhang YW , Xu H , Bu G (2016) Opposing roles of the triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2 and triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells-like transcript 2 in microglia activation. Neurobiol Aging 42 , 132–141.27143430
[225] Wei HX , Yao PS , Chen PP , Guan JH , Zhuang JH , Zhu JB , Wu G , Yang JS (2019) Neuronal EphA4 Regulates OGD/R-Induced Apoptosis by Promoting Alternative Activation of Microglia. Inflammation 42 , 572–585.30361852
[226] Jiang W , Ma C , Bai J , Du X (2022) Macrophage SAMSN1 protects against sepsis-induced acute lung injury in mice. Redox Biol 56 , 102432.35981417
[227] Collins PE , Somma D , Kerrigan D , Herrington F , Keeshan K , Nibbs RJB , Carmody RJ (2019) The IkappaB-protein BCL-3 controls Toll-like receptor-induced MAPK activity by promoting TPL-2 degradation in the nucleus. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 116 , 25828–25838.31772019
[228] Schaafsma W , Zhang X , van Zomeren KC , Jacobs S , Georgieva PB , Wolf SA , Kettenmann H , Janova H , Saiepour N , Hanisch UK , Meerlo P , van den Elsen PJ , Brouwer N , Boddeke HW , Eggen BJ (2015) Long-lasting pro-inflammatory suppression of microglia by LPS-preconditioning is mediated by RelB-dependent epigenetic silencing. Brain Behav Immun 48 , 205–221.25843371
[229] Efthymiou AG , Goate AM (2017) Late onset Alzheimer’s disease genetics implicates microglial pathways in disease risk. Mol Neurodegener 12 , 43.28549481
[230] Nelson PT , Alafuzoff I , Bigio EH , Bouras C , Braak H , Cairns NJ , Castellani RJ , Crain BJ , Davies P , Del Tredici K , Duyckaerts C , Frosch MP , Haroutunian V , Hof PR , Hulette CM , Hyman BT , Iwatsubo T , Jellinger KA , Jicha GA , Kovari E , Kukull WA , Leverenz JB , Love S , Mackenzie IR , Mann DM , Masliah E , McKee AC , Montine TJ , Morris JC , Schneider JA , Sonnen JA , Thal DR , Trojanowski JQ , Troncoso JC , Wisniewski T , Woltjer RL , Beach TG (2012) Correlation of Alzheimer disease neuropathologic changes with cognitive status: a review of the literature. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 71 , 362–381.22487856
[231] Altmann A , Ng B , Landau SM , Jagust WJ , Greicius MD , Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging I (2015) Regional brain hypometabolism is unrelated to regional amyloid plaque burden. Brain 138 , 3734–3746.26419799
[232] Arboleda-Velasquez JF , Lopera F , O’Hare M , Delgado-Tirado S , Marino C , Chmielewska N , Saez-Torres KL , Amarnani D , Schultz AP , Sperling RA , Leyton-Cifuentes D , Chen K , Baena A , Aguillon D , Rios-Romenets S , Giraldo M , Guzman-Velez E , Norton DJ , Pardilla-Delgado E , Artola A , Sanchez JS , Acosta-Uribe J , Lalli M , Kosik KS , Huentelman MJ , Zetterberg H , Blennow K , Reiman RA , Luo J , Chen Y , Thiyyagura P , Su Y , Jun GR , Naymik M , Gai X , Bootwalla M , Ji J , Shen L , Miller JB , Kim LA , Tariot PN , Johnson KA , Reiman EM , Quiroz YT (2019) Resistance to autosomal dominant Alzheimer’s disease in an APOE3 Christchurch homozygote: a case report. Nat Med 25 , 1680–1683.31686034
[233] Dear AJ , Michaels TCT , Meisl G , Klenerman D , Wu S , Perrett S , Linse S , Dobson CM , Knowles TPJ (2020) Kinetic diversity of amyloid oligomers. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 117 , 12087–12094.32414930
[234] Michaels TCT , Saric A , Curk S , Bernfur K , Arosio P , Meisl G , Dear AJ , Cohen SIA , Dobson CM , Vendruscolo M , Linse S , Knowles TPJ (2020) Dynamics of oligomer populations formed during the aggregation of Alzheimer’s Abeta42 peptide. Nat Chem 12 , 445–451.32284577
[235] Sturchio A , Dwivedi AK , Malm T , Wood MJA , Cilia R , Sharma JS , Hill EJ , Schneider LS , Graff-Radford NR , Mori H , Nubling G , El Andaloussi S , Svenningsson P , Ezzat K , Espay AJ , Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer C (2022) High Soluble Amyloid-beta42 Predicts Normal Cognition in Amyloid-Positive Individuals with Alzheimer’s Disease-Causing Mutations. J Alzheimers Dis.
[236] Sturchio A , Dwivedi AK , Young CB , Malm T , Marsili L , Sharma JS , Mahajan A , Hill EJ , Andaloussi SE , Poston KL , Manfredsson FP , Schneider LS , Ezzat K , Espay AJ (2021) High cerebrospinal amyloid-beta 42 is associated with normal cognition in individuals with brain amyloidosis. EClinicalMedicine 38 , 100988.34505023
[237] Espay AJ , Sturchio A , Schneider LS , Ezzat K (2021) Soluble Amyloid-beta Consumption in Alzheimer’s Disease. J Alzheimers Dis 82 , 1403–1415.34151810
[238] Arndt JW , Qian F , Smith BA , Quan C , Kilambi KP , Bush MW , Walz T , Pepinsky RB , Bussiere T , Hamann S , Cameron TO , Weinreb PH (2018) Structural and kinetic basis for the selectivity of aducanumab for aggregated forms of amyloid-beta. Sci Rep 8 , 6412.29686315
[239] Bhaskar K , Konerth M , Kokiko-Cochran ON , Cardona A , Ransohoff RM , Lamb BT (2010) Regulation of tau pathology by the microglial fractalkine receptor. Neuron 68 , 19–31.20920788
[240] Seo J , Kritskiy O , Watson LA , Barker SJ , Dey D , Raja WK , Lin YT , Ko T , Cho S , Penney J , Silva MC , Sheridan SD , Lucente D , Gusella JF , Dickerson BC , Haggarty SJ , Tsai LH (2017) Inhibition of p25/Cdk5 Attenuates Tauopathy in Mouse and iPSC Models of Frontotemporal Dementia. J Neurosci 37 , 9917–9924.28912154
[241] Shi Y , Manis M , Long J , Wang K , Sullivan PM , Remolina Serrano J , Hoyle R , Holtzman DM (2019) Microglia drive APOE-dependent neurodegeneration in a tauopathy mouse model. J Exp Med 216 , 2546–2561.31601677
[242] Bussian TJ , Aziz A , Meyer CF , Swenson BL , van Deursen JM , Baker DJ (2018) Clearance of senescent glial cells prevents tau-dependent pathology and cognitive decline. Nature 562 , 578–582.30232451
[243] Ising C , Venegas C , Zhang S , Scheiblich H , Schmidt SV , Vieira-Saecker A , Schwartz S , Albasset S , McManus RM , Tejera D , Griep A , Santarelli F , Brosseron F , Opitz S , Stunden J , Merten M , Kayed R , Golenbock DT , Blum D , Latz E , Buee L , Heneka MT (2019) NLRP3 inflammasome activation drives tau pathology. Nature 575 , 669–673.31748742
[244] Kinney JW , Bemiller SM , Murtishaw AS , Leisgang AM , Salazar AM , Lamb BT (2018) Inflammation as a central mechanism in Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement (N Y) 4 , 575–590.30406177
[245] Calsolaro V , Edison P (2016) Neuroinflammation in Alzheimer’s disease: Current evidence and future directions. Alzheimers Dement 12 , 719–732.27179961
[246] Zhang B , Gaiteri C , Bodea LG , Wang Z , McElwee J , Podtelezhnikov AA , Zhang C , Xie T , Tran L , Dobrin R , Fluder E , Clurman B , Melquist S , Narayanan M , Suver C , Shah H , Mahajan M , Gillis T , Mysore J , MacDonald ME , Lamb JR , Bennett DA , Molony C , Stone DJ , Gudnason V , Myers AJ , Schadt EE , Neumann H , Zhu J , Emilsson V (2013) Integrated systems approach identifies genetic nodes and networks in late-onset Alzheimer’s disease. Cell 153 , 707–720.23622250
[247] Sun N , Youle RJ , Finkel T (2016) The Mitochondrial Basis of Aging. Mol Cell 61 , 654–666.26942670
[248] Kennedy BK , Berger SL , Brunet A , Campisi J , Cuervo AM , Epel ES , Franceschi C , Lithgow GJ , Morimoto RI , Pessin JE , Rando TA , Richardson A , Schadt EE , Wyss-Coray T , Sierra F (2014) Geroscience: linking aging to chronic disease. Cell 159 , 709–713.25417146
[249] Youm YH , Grant RW , McCabe LR , Albarado DC , Nguyen KY , Ravussin A , Pistell P , Newman S , Carter R , Laque A , Munzberg H , Rosen CJ , Ingram DK , Salbaum JM , Dixit VD (2013) Canonical Nlrp3 inflammasome links systemic low-grade inflammation to functional decline in aging. Cell Metab 18 , 519–532.24093676
[250] Marschallinger J , Iram T , Zardeneta M , Lee SE , Lehallier B , Haney MS , Pluvinage JV , Mathur V , Hahn O , Morgens DW , Kim J , Tevini J , Felder TK , Wolinski H , Bertozzi CR , Bassik MC , Aigner L , Wyss-Coray T (2020) Lipid-droplet-accumulating microglia represent a dysfunctional and proinflammatory state in the aging brain. Nat Neurosci 23 , 194–208.31959936
[251] Smith LK , He Y , Park JS , Bieri G , Snethlage CE , Lin K , Gontier G , Wabl R , Plambeck KE , Udeochu J , Wheatley EG , Bouchard J , Eggel A , Narasimha R , Grant JL , Luo J , Wyss-Coray T , Villeda SA (2015) beta2-microglobulin is a systemic pro-aging factor that impairs cognitive function and neurogenesis. Nat Med 21 , 932–937.26147761
[252] Hilt ZT , Pariser DN , Ture SK , Mohan A , Quijada P , Asante AA , Cameron SJ , Sterling JA , Merkel AR , Johanson AL , Jenkins JL , Small EM , McGrath KE , Palis J , Elliott MR , Morrell CN (2019) Platelet-derived beta2M regulates monocyte inflammatory responses. JCI Insight 4 .
[253] Hilt ZT , Ture SK , Mohan A , Arne A , Morrell CN (2019) Platelet-derived beta2m regulates age related monocyte/macrophage functions. Aging (Albany NY) 11 , 11955–11974.31852838
[254] Yousef H , Czupalla CJ , Lee D , Chen MB , Burke AN , Zera KA , Zandstra J , Berber E , Lehallier B , Mathur V , Nair RV , Bonanno LN , Yang AC , Peterson T , Hadeiba H , Merkel T , Korbelin J , Schwaninger M , Buckwalter MS , Quake SR , Butcher EC , Wyss-Coray T (2019) Aged blood impairs hippocampal neural precursor activity and activates microglia via brain endothelial cell VCAM1. Nat Med 25 , 988–1000.31086348
[255] Zhao N , Ren Y , Yamazaki Y , Qiao W , Li F , Felton LM , Mahmoudiandehkordi S , Kueider-Paisley A , Sonoustoun B , Arnold M , Shue F , Zheng J , Attrebi ON , Martens YA , Li Z , Bastea L , Meneses AD , Chen K , Thompson JW , St John-Williams L , Tachibana M , Aikawa T , Oue H , Job L , Yamazaki A , Liu CC , Storz P , Asmann YW , Ertekin-Taner N , Kanekiyo T , Kaddurah-Daouk R , Bu G (2020) Alzheimer’s Risk Factors Age, APOE Genotype, and Sex Drive Distinct Molecular Pathways. Neuron.
[256] Moir RD , Lathe R , Tanzi RE (2018) The antimicrobial protection hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement 14 , 1602–1614.30314800
[257] Small SA , Simoes-Spassov S , Mayeux R , Petsko GA (2017) Endosomal Traffic Jams Represent a Pathogenic Hub and Therapeutic Target in Alzheimer’s Disease. Trends Neurosci 40 , 592–602.28962801
[258] Ubelmann F , Burrinha T , Salavessa L , Gomes R , Ferreira C , Moreno N , Guimas Almeida C (2017) Bin1 and CD2AP polarise the endocytic generation of beta-amyloid. EMBO Rep 18 , 102–122.27895104
[259] Caglayan S , Takagi-Niidome S , Liao F , Carlo AS , Schmidt V , Burgert T , Kitago Y , Fuchtbauer EM , Fuchtbauer A , Holtzman DM , Takagi J , Willnow TE (2014) Lysosomal sorting of amyloid-beta by the SORLA receptor is impaired by a familial Alzheimer’s disease mutation. Sci Transl Med 6 , 223ra220.
[260] Xiao Q , Gil SC , Yan P , Wang Y , Han S , Gonzales E , Perez R , Cirrito JR , Lee JM (2012) Role of phosphatidylinositol clathrin assembly lymphoid-myeloid leukemia (PICALM) in intracellular amyloid precursor protein (APP) processing and amyloid plaque pathogenesis. J Biol Chem 287 , 21279–21289.22539346
[261] Gustafsen C , Glerup S , Pallesen LT , Olsen D , Andersen OM , Nykjaer A , Madsen P , Petersen CM (2013) Sortilin and SorLA display distinct roles in processing and trafficking of amyloid precursor protein. J Neurosci 33 , 64–71.23283322
[262] Yeh FL , Wang Y , Tom I , Gonzalez LC , Sheng M (2016) TREM2 Binds to Apolipoproteins, Including APOE and CLU/APOJ, and Thereby Facilitates Uptake of Amyloid-Beta by Microglia. Neuron 91 , 328–340.27477018
[263] Bailey CC , DeVaux LB , Farzan M (2015) The Triggering Receptor Expressed on Myeloid Cells 2 Binds Apolipoprotein E. J Biol Chem 290 , 26033–26042.26374897
[264] Atagi Y , Liu CC , Painter MM , Chen XF , Verbeeck C , Zheng H , Li X , Rademakers R , Kang SS , Xu H , Younkin S , Das P , Fryer JD , Bu G (2015) Apolipoprotein E Is a Ligand for Triggering Receptor Expressed on Myeloid Cells 2 (TREM2). J Biol Chem 290 , 26043–26050.26374899
[265] Verghese PB , Castellano JM , Garai K , Wang Y , Jiang H , Shah A , Bu G , Frieden C , Holtzman DM (2013) ApoE influences amyloid-beta (Abeta) clearance despite minimal apoE/Abeta association in physiological conditions. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110 , E1807–1816.23620513
[266] Castellano JM , Kim J , Stewart FR , Jiang H , DeMattos RB , Patterson BW , Fagan AM , Morris JC , Mawuenyega KG , Cruchaga C , Goate AM , Bales KR , Paul SM , Bateman RJ , Holtzman DM (2011) Human apoE isoforms differentially regulate brain amyloid-beta peptide clearance. Sci Transl Med 3 , 89ra57.
[267] Lin YT , Seo J , Gao F , Feldman HM , Wen HL , Penney J , Cam HP , Gjoneska E , Raja WK , Cheng J , Rueda R , Kritskiy O , Abdurrob F , Peng Z , Milo B , Yu CJ , Elmsaouri S , Dey D , Ko T , Yankner BA , Tsai LH (2018) APOE4 Causes Widespread Molecular and Cellular Alterations Associated with Alzheimer’s Disease Phenotypes in Human iPSC-Derived Brain Cell Types. Neuron 98 , 1141–1154 e1147.29861287
[268] Wang C , Najm R , Xu Q , Jeong DE , Walker D , Balestra ME , Yoon SY , Yuan H , Li G , Miller ZA , Miller BL , Malloy MJ , Huang Y (2018) Gain of toxic apolipoprotein E4 effects in human iPSC-derived neurons is ameliorated by a small-molecule structure corrector. Nat Med 24 , 647–657.29632371
[269] Montagne A , Nation DA , Sagare AP , Barisano G , Sweeney MD , Chakhoyan A , Pachicano M , Joe E , Nelson AR , D’Orazio LM , Buennagel DP , Harrington MG , Benzinger TLS , Fagan AM , Ringman JM , Schneider LS , Morris JC , Reiman EM , Caselli RJ , Chui HC , Tcw J , Chen Y , Pa J , Conti PS , Law M , Toga AW , Zlokovic BV (2020) APOE4 leads to blood-brain barrier dysfunction predicting cognitive decline. Nature 581 , 71–76.32376954
[270] Bell RD , Winkler EA , Singh I , Sagare AP , Deane R , Wu Z , Holtzman DM , Betsholtz C , Armulik A , Sallstrom J , Berk BC , Zlokovic BV (2012) Apolipoprotein E controls cerebrovascular integrity via cyclophilin A. Nature 485 , 512–516.22622580
[271] Wahrle SE , Jiang H , Parsadanian M , Legleiter J , Han X , Fryer JD , Kowalewski T , Holtzman DM (2004) ABCA1 is required for normal central nervous system ApoE levels and for lipidation of astrocyte-secreted apoE. J Biol Chem 279 , 40987–40993.15269217
[272] TCW JaL , Shuang A and Qian Lu and Pipalia Nina H. and Chao Michael J. and Bertelsen Sarah E. and Kapoor Manav and Marcora Edoardo and Sikora Elizabeth and Holtzman David and Maxfield Frederick R. and Zhang Bin and Wang Minghui and Poon Wayne W. and Goate Alison M (2019) Cholesterol and Matrisome Pathways Dysregulated in Human APOE ∈4 Glia CELL-D-19-02156. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3435267 or 10.2139/ssrn.3435267.
[273] Gong JS , Kobayashi M , Hayashi H , Zou K , Sawamura N , Fujita SC , Yanagisawa K , Michikawa M (2002) Apolipoprotein E (ApoE) isoform-dependent lipid release from astrocytes prepared from human ApoE3 and ApoE4 knock-in mice. J Biol Chem 277 , 29919–29926.12042316
[274] Hasan M , Moghal MMR , Saha SK , Yamazaki M (2019) The role of membrane tension in the action of antimicrobial peptides and cell-penetrating peptides in biomembranes. Biophys Rev 11 , 431–448.31093936
[275] Carroll RG , Zaslona Z , Galvan-Pena S , Koppe EL , Sevin DC , Angiari S , Triantafilou M , Triantafilou K , Modis LK , O’Neill LA (2018) An unexpected link between fatty acid synthase and cholesterol synthesis in proinflammatory macrophage activation. J Biol Chem 293 , 5509–5521.29463677
[276] Posokhova EN , Khoshchenko OM , Chasovskikh MI , Pivovarova EN , Dushkin MI (2008) Lipid synthesis in macrophages during inflammation in vivo: effect of agonists of peroxisome proliferator activated receptors alpha and gamma and of retinoid X receptors. Biochemistry (Mosc) 73 , 296–304.18393765
[277] Goldstein JL , DeBose-Boyd RA , Brown MS (2006) Protein sensors for membrane sterols. Cell 124 , 35–46.16413480
[278] Ferris HA , Perry RJ , Moreira GV , Shulman GI , Horton JD , Kahn CR (2017) Loss of astrocyte cholesterol synthesis disrupts neuronal function and alters whole-body metabolism. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 114 , 1189–1194.28096339
[279] Guo C , Chi Z , Jiang D , Xu T , Yu W , Wang Z , Chen S , Zhang L , Liu Q , Guo X , Zhang X , Li W , Lu L , Wu Y , Song BL , Wang D (2018) Cholesterol Homeostatic Regulator SCAP-SREBP2 Integrates NLRP3 Inflammasome Activation and Cholesterol Biosynthetic Signaling in Macrophages. Immunity 49 , 842–856 e847.30366764
[280] Zhong Z , Liang S , Sanchez-Lopez E , He F , Shalapour S , Lin XJ , Wong J , Ding S , Seki E , Schnabl B , Hevener AL , Greenberg HB , Kisseleva T , Karin M (2018) New mitochondrial DNA synthesis enables NLRP3 inflammasome activation. Nature 560 , 198–203.30046112
[281] Kusnadi A , Park SH , Yuan R , Pannellini T , Giannopoulou E , Oliver D , Lu T , Park-Min KH , Ivashkiv LB (2019) The Cytokine TNF Promotes Transcription Factor SREBP Activity and Binding to Inflammatory Genes to Activate Macrophages and Limit Tissue Repair. Immunity 51 , 241–257 e249.31303399
[282] Chu TT , Tu X , Yang K , Wu J , Repa JJ , Yan N (2021) Tonic prime-boost of STING signalling mediates Niemann-Pick disease type C. Nature 596 , 570–575.34290407
[283] Bekkering S , Arts RJW , Novakovic B , Kourtzelis I , van der Heijden C , Li Y , Popa CD , Ter Horst R , van Tuijl J , Netea-Maier RT , van de Veerdonk FL , Chavakis T , Joosten LAB , van der Meer JWM , Stunnenberg H , Riksen NP , Netea MG (2018) Metabolic Induction of Trained Immunity through the Mevalonate Pathway. Cell 172 , 135–146 e139.29328908
[284] Cheng SC , Quintin J , Cramer RA , Shepardson KM , Saeed S , Kumar V , Giamarellos-Bourboulis EJ , Martens JH , Rao NA , Aghajanirefah A , Manjeri GR , Li Y , Ifrim DC , Arts RJ , van der Veer BM , Deen PM , Logie C , O’Neill LA , Willems P , van de Veerdonk FL , van der Meer JW , Ng A , Joosten LA , Wijmenga C , Stunnenberg HG , Xavier RJ , Netea MG (2014) mTOR- and HIF-1alpha-mediated aerobic glycolysis as metabolic basis for trained immunity. Science 345 , 1250684.25258083
[285] Arts RJ , Novakovic B , Ter Horst R , Carvalho A , Bekkering S , Lachmandas E , Rodrigues F , Silvestre R , Cheng SC , Wang SY , Habibi E , Goncalves LG , Mesquita I , Cunha C , van Laarhoven A , van de Veerdonk FL , Williams DL , van der Meer JW , Logie C , O’Neill LA , Dinarello CA , Riksen NP , van Crevel R , Clish C , Notebaart RA , Joosten LA , Stunnenberg HG , Xavier RJ , Netea MG (2016) Glutaminolysis and Fumarate Accumulation Integrate Immunometabolic and Epigenetic Programs in Trained Immunity. Cell Metab 24 , 807–819.27866838
[286] Tannahill GM , Curtis AM , Adamik J , Palsson-McDermott EM , McGettrick AF , Goel G , Frezza C , Bernard NJ , Kelly B , Foley NH , Zheng L , Gardet A , Tong Z , Jany SS , Corr SC , Haneklaus M , Caffrey BE , Pierce K , Walmsley S , Beasley FC , Cummins E , Nizet V , Whyte M , Taylor CT , Lin H , Masters SL , Gottlieb E , Kelly VP , Clish C , Auron PE , Xavier RJ , O’Neill LA (2013) Succinate is an inflammatory signal that induces IL-1beta through HIF-1alpha. Nature 496 , 238–242.23535595
[287] Mills EL , Kelly B , Logan A , Costa ASH , Varma M , Bryant CE , Tourlomousis P , Dabritz JHM , Gottlieb E , Latorre I , Corr SC , McManus G , Ryan D , Jacobs HT , Szibor M , Xavier RJ , Braun T , Frezza C , Murphy MP , O’Neill LA (2016) Succinate Dehydrogenase Supports Metabolic Repurposing of Mitochondria to Drive Inflammatory Macrophages. Cell 167 , 457–470 e413.27667687
[288] Dominguez-Andres J , Novakovic B , Li Y , Scicluna BP , Gresnigt MS , Arts RJW , Oosting M , Moorlag S , Groh LA , Zwaag J , Koch RM , Ter Horst R , Joosten LAB , Wijmenga C , Michelucci A , van der Poll T , Kox M , Pickkers P , Kumar V , Stunnenberg H , Netea MG (2019) The Itaconate Pathway Is a Central Regulatory Node Linking Innate Immune Tolerance and Trained Immunity. Cell Metab 29 , 211–220 e215.30293776
[289] Di Gioia M , Spreafico R , Springstead JR , Mendelson MM , Joehanes R , Levy D , Zanoni I (2020) Endogenous oxidized phospholipids reprogram cellular metabolism and boost hyperinflammation. Nat Immunol 21 , 42–53.31768073
[290] Lambert JC , Ibrahim-Verbaas CA , Harold D , Naj AC , Sims R , Bellenguez C , DeStafano AL , Bis JC , Beecham GW , Grenier-Boley B , Russo G , Thorton-Wells TA , Jones N , Smith AV , Chouraki V , Thomas C , Ikram MA , Zelenika D , Vardarajan BN , Kamatani Y , Lin CF , Gerrish A , Schmidt H , Kunkle B , Dunstan ML , Ruiz A , Bihoreau MT , Choi SH , Reitz C , Pasquier F , Cruchaga C , Craig D , Amin N , Berr C , Lopez OL , De Jager PL , Deramecourt V , Johnston JA , Evans D , Lovestone S , Letenneur L , Moron FJ , Rubinsztein DC , Eiriksdottir G , Sleegers K , Goate AM , Fievet N , Huentelman MW , Gill M , Brown K , Kamboh MI , Keller L , Barberger-Gateau P , McGuiness B , Larson EB , Green R , Myers AJ , Dufouil C , Todd S , Wallon D , Love S , Rogaeva E , Gallacher J , St George-Hyslop P , Clarimon J , Lleo A , Bayer A , Tsuang DW , Yu L , Tsolaki M , Bossu P , Spalletta G , Proitsi P , Collinge J , Sorbi S , Sanchez-Garcia F , Fox NC , Hardy J , Deniz Naranjo MC , Bosco P , Clarke R , Brayne C , Galimberti D , Mancuso M , Matthews F , European Alzheimer’s Disease I, Genetic, Environmental Risk in Alzheimer’s D, Alzheimer’s Disease Genetic C, Cohorts for H, Aging Research in Genomic E, Moebus S , Mecocci P , Del Zompo M , Maier W , Hampel H , Pilotto A , Bullido M , Panza F , Caffarra P , Nacmias B , Gilbert JR , Mayhaus M , Lannefelt L , Hakonarson H , Pichler S , Carrasquillo MM , Ingelsson M , Beekly D , Alvarez V , Zou F , Valladares O , Younkin SG , Coto E , Hamilton-Nelson KL , Gu W , Razquin C , Pastor P , Mateo I , Owen MJ , Faber KM , Jonsson PV , Combarros O , O’Donovan MC , Cantwell LB , Soininen H , Blacker D , Mead S , Mosley TH Jr. , Bennett DA , Harris TB , Fratiglioni L , Holmes C , de Bruijn RF , Passmore P , Montine TJ , Bettens K , Rotter JI , Brice A , Morgan K , Foroud TM , Kukull WA , Hannequin D , Powell JF , Nalls MA , Ritchie K , Lunetta KL , Kauwe JS , Boerwinkle E , Riemenschneider M , Boada M , Hiltuenen M , Martin ER , Schmidt R , Rujescu D , Wang LS , Dartigues JF , Mayeux R , Tzourio C , Hofman A , Nothen MM , Graff C , Psaty BM , Jones L , Haines JL , Holmans PA , Lathrop M , Pericak-Vance MA , Launer LJ , Farrer LA , van Duijn CM , Van Broeckhoven C , Moskvina V , Seshadri S , Williams J , Schellenberg GD , Amouyel P (2013) Meta-analysis of 74,046 individuals identifies 11 new susceptibility loci for Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Genet 45 , 1452–1458.24162737
[291] Replogle JM , Chan G , White CC , Raj T , Winn PA , Evans DA , Sperling RA , Chibnik LB , Bradshaw EM , Schneider JA , Bennett DA , De Jager PL (2015) A TREM1 variant alters the accumulation of Alzheimer-related amyloid pathology. Ann Neurol 77 , 469–477.25545807
[292] Shen L , Kim S , Risacher SL , Nho K , Swaminathan S , West JD , Foroud T , Pankratz N , Moore JH , Sloan CD , Huentelman MJ , Craig DW , Dechairo BM , Potkin SG , Jack CR Jr. , Weiner MW , Saykin AJ , Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging I (2010) Whole genome association study of brain-wide imaging phenotypes for identifying quantitative trait loci in MCI and AD: A study of the ADNI cohort. Neuroimage 53 , 1051–1063.20100581
[293] Lupton MK , Proitsi P , Lin K , Hamilton G , Daniilidou M , Tsolaki M , Powell JF (2014) The role of ABCA1 gene sequence variants on risk of Alzheimer’s disease. J Alzheimers Dis 38 , 897–906.24081377
[294] Naj AC , Jun G , Beecham GW , Wang LS , Vardarajan BN , Buros J , Gallins PJ , Buxbaum JD , Jarvik GP , Crane PK , Larson EB , Bird TD , Boeve BF , Graff-Radford NR , De Jager PL , Evans D , Schneider JA , Carrasquillo MM , Ertekin-Taner N , Younkin SG , Cruchaga C , Kauwe JS , Nowotny P , Kramer P , Hardy J , Huentelman MJ , Myers AJ , Barmada MM , Demirci FY , Baldwin CT , Green RC , Rogaeva E , St George-Hyslop P , Arnold SE , Barber R , Beach T , Bigio EH , Bowen JD , Boxer A , Burke JR , Cairns NJ , Carlson CS , Carney RM , Carroll SL , Chui HC , Clark DG , Corneveaux J , Cotman CW , Cummings JL , DeCarli C , DeKosky ST , Diaz-Arrastia R , Dick M , Dickson DW , Ellis WG , Faber KM , Fallon KB , Farlow MR , Ferris S , Frosch MP , Galasko DR , Ganguli M , Gearing M , Geschwind DH , Ghetti B , Gilbert JR , Gilman S , Giordani B , Glass JD , Growdon JH , Hamilton RL , Harrell LE , Head E , Honig LS , Hulette CM , Hyman BT , Jicha GA , Jin LW , Johnson N , Karlawish J , Karydas A , Kaye JA , Kim R , Koo EH , Kowall NW , Lah JJ , Levey AI , Lieberman AP , Lopez OL , Mack WJ , Marson DC , Martiniuk F , Mash DC , Masliah E , McCormick WC , McCurry SM , McDavid AN , McKee AC , Mesulam M , Miller BL , Miller CA , Miller JW , Parisi JE , Perl DP , Peskind E , Petersen RC , Poon WW , Quinn JF , Rajbhandary RA , Raskind M , Reisberg B , Ringman JM , Roberson ED , Rosenberg RN , Sano M , Schneider LS , Seeley W , Shelanski ML , Slifer MA , Smith CD , Sonnen JA , Spina S , Stern RA , Tanzi RE , Trojanowski JQ , Troncoso JC , Van Deerlin VM , Vinters HV , Vonsattel JP , Weintraub S , Welsh-Bohmer KA , Williamson J , Woltjer RL , Cantwell LB , Dombroski BA , Beekly D , Lunetta KL , Martin ER , Kamboh MI , Saykin AJ , Reiman EM , Bennett DA , Morris JC , Montine TJ , Goate AM , Blacker D , Tsuang DW , Hakonarson H , Kukull WA , Foroud TM , Haines JL , Mayeux R , Pericak-Vance MA , Farrer LA , Schellenberg GD (2011) Common variants at MS4A4/MS4A6E, CD2AP, CD33 and EPHA1 are associated with late-onset Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Genet 43 , 436–441.21460841
[295] Sierksma A , Lu A , Mancuso R , Fattorelli N , Thrupp N , Salta E , Zoco J , Blum D , Buee L , De Strooper B , Fiers M (2020) Novel Alzheimer risk genes determine the microglia response to amyloid-beta but not to TAU pathology. EMBO Mol Med 12 , e10606.31951107
[296] Saeed S , Quintin J , Kerstens HH , Rao NA , Aghajanirefah A , Matarese F , Cheng SC , Ratter J , Berentsen K , van der Ent MA , Sharifi N , Janssen-Megens EM , Ter Huurne M , Mandoli A , van Schaik T , Ng A , Burden F , Downes K , Frontini M , Kumar V , Giamarellos-Bourboulis EJ , Ouwehand WH , van der Meer JW , Joosten LA , Wijmenga C , Martens JH , Xavier RJ , Logie C , Netea MG , Stunnenberg HG (2014) Epigenetic programming of monocyte-to-macrophage differentiation and trained innate immunity. Science 345 , 1251086.25258085
[297] Readhead B , Haure-Mirande JV , Funk CC , Richards MA , Shannon P , Haroutunian V , Sano M , Liang WS , Beckmann ND , Price ND , Reiman EM , Schadt EE , Ehrlich ME , Gandy S , Dudley JT (2018) Multiscale Analysis of Independent Alzheimer’s Cohorts Finds Disruption of Molecular, Genetic, and Clinical Networks by Human Herpesvirus. Neuron 99 , 64–82 e67.29937276
[298] Andrade AG , Bubu OM , Varga AW , Osorio RS (2018) The Relationship between Obstructive Sleep Apnea and Alzheimer’s Disease. J Alzheimers Dis 64 , S255–S270.29782319
[299] Djordjevic J , Sabbir MG , Albensi BC (2016) Traumatic Brain Injury as a Risk Factor for Alzheimer’s Disease: Is Inflammatory Signaling a Key Player? Curr Alzheimer Res 13 , 730–738.26899581
[300] Henry RJ , Ritzel RM , Barrett JP , Doran SJ , Jiao Y , Leach JB , Szeto GL , Wu J , Stoica BA , Faden AI , Loane DJ (2020) Microglial Depletion with CSF1R Inhibitor During Chronic Phase of Experimental Traumatic Brain Injury Reduces Neurodegeneration and Neurological Deficits. J Neurosci 40 , 2960–2974.32094203
[301] Willis EF , MacDonald KPA , Nguyen QH , Garrido AL , Gillespie ER , Harley SBR , Bartlett PF , Schroder WA , Yates AG , Anthony DC , Rose-John S , Ruitenberg MJ , Vukovic J (2020) Repopulating Microglia Promote Brain Repair in an IL-6-Dependent Manner. Cell 180 , 833–846 e816.32142677
[302] Wendeln AC , Degenhardt K , Kaurani L , Gertig M , Ulas T , Jain G , Wagner J , Hasler LM , Wild K , Skodras A , Blank T , Staszewski O , Datta M , Centeno TP , Capece V , Islam MR , Kerimoglu C , Staufenbiel M , Schultze JL , Beyer M , Prinz M , Jucker M , Fischer A , Neher JJ (2018) Innate immune memory in the brain shapes neurological disease hallmarks. Nature 556 , 332–338.29643512
[303] Illouz T , Madar R , Griffioen K , Okun E (2017) A protocol for quantitative analysis of murine and human amyloid-beta1-40 and 1-42. J Neurosci Methods 291 , 28–35.28768163
[304] Heckmann BL , Teubner BJW , Tummers B , Boada-Romero E , Harris L , Yang M , Guy CS , Zakharenko SS , Green DR (2019) LC3-Associated Endocytosis Facilitates beta-Amyloid Clearance and Mitigates Neurodegeneration in Murine Alzheimer’s Disease. Cell 178 , 536–551 e514.31257024
[305] Zhou M , Huang T , Collins N , Zhang J , Shen H , Dai X , Xiao N , Wu X , Wei Z , York J , Lin L , Zhu Y , LaDu MJ , Chen X (2016) APOE4 Induces Site-Specific Tau Phosphorylation Through Calpain-CDK5 Signaling Pathway in EFAD-Tg Mice. Curr Alzheimer Res 13 , 1048–1055.27087442
[306] Leyns CEG , Gratuze M , Narasimhan S , Jain N , Koscal LJ , Jiang H , Manis M , Colonna M , Lee VMY , Ulrich JD , Holtzman DM (2019) TREM2 function impedes tau seeding in neuritic plaques. Nat Neurosci 22 , 1217–1222.31235932
[307] Lee S , Xu G , Jay TR , Bhatta S , Kim KW , Jung S , Landreth GE , Ransohoff RM , Lamb BT (2014) Opposing effects of membrane-anchored CX3CL1 on amyloid and tau pathologies via the p38 MAPK pathway. J Neurosci 34 , 12538–12546.25209291
[308] Cho SH , Sun B , Zhou Y , Kauppinen TM , Halabisky B , Wes P , Ransohoff RM , Gan L (2011) CX3CR1 protein signaling modulates microglial activation and protects against plaque-independent cognitive deficits in a mouse model of Alzheimer disease. J Biol Chem 286 , 32713–32722.21771791
[309] Stein TD , Anders NJ , DeCarli C , Chan SL , Mattson MP , Johnson JA (2004) Neutralization of transthyretin reverses the neuroprotective effects of secreted amyloid precursor protein (APP) in APPSW mice resulting in tau phosphorylation and loss of hippocampal neurons: support for the amyloid hypothesis. J Neurosci 24 , 7707–7717.15342738
[310] Denver P , D’Adamo H , Hu S , Zuo X , Zhu C , Okuma C , Kim P , Castro D , Jones MR , Leal C , Mekkittikul M , Ghadishah E , Teter B , Vinters HV , Cole GM , Frautschy SA (2019) A Novel Model of Mixed Vascular Dementia Incorporating Hypertension in a Rat Model of Alzheimer’s Disease. Front Physiol 10 , 1269.31708792
[311] Kitazawa M , Oddo S , Yamasaki TR , Green KN , LaFerla FM (2005) Lipopolysaccharide-induced inflammation exacerbates tau pathology by a cyclin-dependent kinase 5-mediated pathway in a transgenic model of Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurosci 25 , 8843–8853.16192374
[312] Ghosh S , Wu MD , Shaftel SS , Kyrkanides S , LaFerla FM , Olschowka JA , O’Banion MK (2013) Sustained interleukin-1beta overexpression exacerbates tau pathology despite reduced amyloid burden in an Alzheimer’s mouse model. J Neurosci 33 , 5053–5064.23486975
[313] Kitazawa M , Cheng D , Tsukamoto MR , Koike MA , Wes PD , Vasilevko V , Cribbs DH , LaFerla FM (2011) Blocking IL-1 signaling rescues cognition, attenuates tau pathology, and restores neuronal beta-catenin pathway function in an Alzheimer’s disease model. J Immunol 187 , 6539–6549.22095718
[314] Oddo S , Caccamo A , Tseng B , Cheng D , Vasilevko V , Cribbs DH , LaFerla FM (2008) Blocking Abeta42 accumulation delays the onset and progression of tau pathology via the C terminus of heat shock protein70-interacting protein: a mechanistic link between Abeta and tau pathology. J Neurosci 28 , 12163–12175.19020010
[315] Park J , Wetzel I , Marriott I , Dreau D , D’Avanzo C , Kim DY , Tanzi RE , Cho H (2018) A 3D human triculture system modeling neurodegeneration and neuroinflammation in Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Neurosci 21 , 941–951.29950669
[316] Kwak SS , Washicosky KJ , Brand E , von Maydell D , Aronson J , Kim S , Capen DE , Cetinbas M , Sadreyev R , Ning S , Bylykbashi E , Xia W , Wagner SL , Choi SH , Tanzi RE , Kim DY (2020) Amyloid-beta42/40 ratio drives tau pathology in 3D human neural cell culture models of Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Commun 11 , 1377.32170138
[317] Israel MA , Yuan SH , Bardy C , Reyna SM , Mu Y , Herrera C , Hefferan MP , Van Gorp S , Nazor KL , Boscolo FS , Carson CT , Laurent LC , Marsala M , Gage FH , Remes AM , Koo EH , Goldstein LS (2012) Probing sporadic and familial Alzheimer’s disease using induced pluripotent stem cells. Nature 482 , 216–220.22278060
[318] Ormel PR , Vieira de Sa R , van Bodegraven EJ , Karst H , Harschnitz O , Sneeboer MAM , Johansen LE , van Dijk RE , Scheefhals N , Berdenis van Berlekom A , Ribes Martinez E , Kling S , MacGillavry HD , van den Berg LH , Kahn RS , Hol EM , de Witte LD , Pasterkamp RJ (2018) Microglia innately develop within cerebral organoids. Nat Commun 9 , 4167.30301888
[319] van der Kant R , Langness VF , Herrera CM , Williams DA , Fong LK , Leestemaker Y , Steenvoorden E , Rynearson KD , Brouwers JF , Helms JB , Ovaa H , Giera M , Wagner SL , Bang AG , Goldstein LSB (2019) Cholesterol Metabolism Is a Druggable Axis that Independently Regulates Tau and Amyloid-beta in iPSC-Derived Alzheimer’s Disease Neurons. Cell Stem Cell 24 , 363–375 e369.30686764
[320] Zhou Y , Song WM , Andhey PS , Swain A , Levy T , Miller KR , Poliani PL , Cominelli M , Grover S , Gilfillan S , Cella M , Ulland TK , Zaitsev K , Miyashita A , Ikeuchi T , Sainouchi M , Kakita A , Bennett DA , Schneider JA , Nichols MR , Beausoleil SA , Ulrich JD , Holtzman DM , Artyomov MN , Colonna M (2020) Human and mouse single-nucleus transcriptomics reveal TREM2-dependent and TREM2-independent cellular responses in Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Med 26 , 131–142.31932797
[321] Srinivasan K , Friedman BA , Etxeberria A , Huntley MA , van der Brug MP , Foreman O , Paw JS , Modrusan Z , Beach TG , Serrano GE , Hansen DV (2020) Alzheimer’s Patient Microglia Exhibit Enhanced Aging and Unique Transcriptional Activation. Cell Rep 31 , 107843.32610143
[322] Keren-Shaul H , Spinrad A , Weiner A , Matcovitch-Natan O , Dvir-Szternfeld R , Ulland TK , David E , Baruch K , Lara-Astaiso D , Toth B , Itzkovitz S , Colonna M , Schwartz M , Amit I (2017) A Unique Microglia Type Associated with Restricting Development of Alzheimer’s Disease. Cell 169 , 1276–1290 e1217.28602351
