LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101773306
50167
Nat Aging
Nat Aging
Nature aging
2662-8465

36993868
10046492
10.1038/s43587-023-00378-1
NIHMS1880710
Article
Shared and disease-specific glial gene expression changes in neurodegenerative diseases
Zhao Guoyan
Department of Neuroscience, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO, USA.
7 3 2023
3 2023
13 2 2023
28 3 2023
3 3 246247
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
We found evolutionarily conserved astrocyte and microglia subpopulations shared across multiple brain regions. We reveal similarities and differences between Alzheimer’s disease glia and Parkinson’s disease glia, as well as regional variance linked to disease pathology and neurodegeneration.


pmcThe question

Neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease (AD), Parkinson’s disease (PD), Huntington’s disease and others display notable phenotypic heterogeneity, both clinically and pathologically. Clinical manifestations include loss of specific neurons and synapses in distinct brain regions. Pathologically, abnormal protein aggregates with distinct compositions accumulate in particular neurons and brain regions specific to each disorder — for example, extracellular amyloid plaques and intracellular neurofibrillary tangles of tau protein in AD and Lewy bodies of α-synuclein protein in PD. These phenotypic differences in neurons and brain regions are referred to as selective neuronal and regional vulnerability. The molecular mechanisms underpinning selective neuronal and regional vulnerability remain unclear, although many hypotheses have been proposed, such as differences in energy demand, protein concentration, calcium homeostasis and aging-related changes1,2.

Despite their diverse clinical and pathological manifestations, neurodegenerative diseases share common features3, such as the regional aggregation of misfolded proteins, suggesting common mechanisms of neurodegenerative pathogenesis. Yet the molecular bases of common and specific characteristics of different diseases remain elusive. Mounting evidence demonstrates how glial cells like astrocytes and microglia play a key part in neurodegenerative disease4,5. However, most current knowledge is derived from in vitro systems or animal models, whose relevance to human disease remains under debate.

The discovery

We used single-nucleus RNA sequencing (snRNA-seq) to compare transcriptomes from postmortem striata of cognitively normal individuals and individuals with AD or PD with previously published transcriptomes from postmortem entorhinal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex and prefrontal cortex of control individuals and individuals with AD, PD, Parkinson’s disease dementia, or dementia with Lewy bodies. snRNA-seq has emerged as a better method than single-cell RNA sequencing for archived frozen specimens and difficult-to-dissociate tissues such as the brain, and it enabled the unbiased identification of cell types and states, as well as of cell-type-specific transcriptomic differences between diseased brains and brains of cognitively normal individuals.

We identified three astrocyte and two microglia subpopulations shared across different brain regions in all disease conditions (Fig. 1) and evolutionarily conserved between humans and mice. The transcriptomes of AD and PD astrocytes differed from that of their healthy counterparts, but they shared common features. We also revealed regional differences within the transcriptomes of AD and PD astrocytes that contribute to amyloid pathology and neurodegeneration. We describe a population of activated microglia in all brains that shared molecular signatures with murine disease-associated microglia; in addition, disease-associated and regional differences in microglia transcriptomic changes link microglia to amyloid pathology, tauopathy and neuronal death. Our study also revealed common microglia activation-associated genes and pathways (such as regulation of cell killing and antigen processing and presentation pathways) shared by brains of cognitively normal individuals and brains of individuals with diverse disease conditions such as AD, PD and glioblastoma multi-forme, irrespective of the brain region being studied. This finding supports the idea that reactive microglia share a common response to central nervous system challenges. We also discovered that microglia in various disease conditions elicit a disease-specific response relevant to disease pathology.

Future directions

Our study discovered regional differences in pathology-associated transcriptomic changes in human astrocytes and microglia that may contribute to the spatial variations in disease pathology and vulnerability between the cortex and striatum. The set of microglia activation-associated genes shared in different diseases that we determined in our study will help to define disease-specific roles of microglia in various central nervous system diseases.

As in all postmortem human tissue studies, validation of the potentially causal relationships between transcriptomic changes and disease pathology is limited. However, our study provides testable hypotheses to guide future investigations.

How human astrocyte and microglia heterogeneity and reactivity are regulated remains unclear. Identification of transcriptional regulators and their cell-type-specific modulation, to test whether alteration of glial cell identity and reactivity could change disorder outcomes, may provide candidate target genes for the development of general or disease-specific treatments.

EXPERT OPINION

“It is well established that neurodegenerative diseases are not brain-centric and involve non-neuronal cells within and outside the brain that affect neuron fate. In this study, the authors used single-nucleus RNA-seq and identified regional differences in glia–neuron communication within the brain, as well as common and disease-specific pathways. Further understanding of the common pathway may lead to development of new therapeutic targets that are potentially applicable to a broad range of neurodegenerative conditions.” Michal Schwartz, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel.

Fig. 1 | Three astrocyte and two microglia subpopulations shared across different brain regions.

a–f, Unsupervised clustering of single-nucleus RNA-seq data and uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) visualization of astrocyte (a,c,e) and microglia (b,d,f) subpopulations, colored by cluster identity, for putamen, entorhinal cortex6 and prefrontal cortex7. Microglia subpopulations are also colored by inferred pseudotime values (black–blue scale, starting from 0 representing the earliest pseudotime). Black lines represent inferred pseudotime trajectories. © 2023, Xu, J. et al.


REFERENCES

1. Fu H , Hardy J &amp; Duff KE Selective vulnerability in neurodegenerative diseases. Nat. Neurosci 21 , 1350–1358 (2018).30250262
A review article that describes the biology underlying selective neuronal vulnerability.

2. Pandya VA &amp; Patani R Region-specific vulnerability in neurodegeneration: lessons from normal ageing. Ageing Res. Rev 67 , 101311 (2021).33639280
A review article that describes normal aging in relation to regional vulnerability.

3. Gan L , Cookson MR , Petrucelli L &amp; La Spada AR Converging pathways in neurodegeneration, from genetics to mechanisms. Nat. Neurosci 21 , 1300–1309 (2018).30258237
A review article on the common pathways shared by neurodegenerative diseases.

4. Hickman S , Izzy S , Sen P , Morsett L &amp; El Khoury J Microglia in neurodegeneration. Nat. Neurosci 21 , 1359–1369 (2018).30258234
A review article that summarizes the roles of microglia in neurodegeneration.

5. Brandebura AN , Paumier A , Onur TS &amp; Allen NJ Astrocyte contribution to dysfunction, risk and progression in neurodegenerative disorders. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 24 , 23–39 (2023).36316501
A review article that summarizes the roles of astrocytes in neurodegeneration.

6. Grubman A A single-cell atlas of entorhinal cortex from individuals with Alzheimer’s disease reveals cell-type-specific gene expression regulation. Nat. Neurosci 22 , 2087–2097 (2019).31768052
The source of the entorhinal cortex data.

7. Lau SF , Cao H , Fu AKY &amp; Ip NY Single-nucleus transcriptome analysis reveals dysregulation of angiogenic endothelial cells and neuroprotective glia in Alzheimer’s disease. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 117 , 25800–25809 (2020).32989152
The source of the prefrontal cortex data.

