LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


8603766
2765
Clin Geriatr Med
Clin Geriatr Med
Clinics in geriatric medicine
0749-0690
1879-8853

36404035
10013181
10.1016/j.cger.2022.07.005
NIHMS1875737
Article
Neuropathology of the Common Forms of Dementia
Mehta Rupal I. M.D. 12*
Schneider Julie A. M.D., M.S. 123
1 Rush Alzheimer’s Disease Center, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL 60612, USA
2 Department of Pathology, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL 60612, USA
3 Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL 60612, USA
* Corresponding Author: Rupal I. Mehta, MD, Rush University, Alzheimer’s Disease Center and Department of Pathology, 1750 W. Harrison Street, Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA, rupal_mehta@rush.edu, Tel: (312) 942-2354
18 2 2023
2 2023
18 10 2022
01 2 2024
39 1 91107
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
cardiovascular disease
cerebrovascular disease
dementia
mixed dementia
neurodegenerative disease
proteinopathy

pmcI. Introduction

Dementia is an umbrella clinical term that refers to a range of debilitating neurological conditions, and its incidence is increasing. Alzheimer’s disease (AD) dementia is the most common form of dementia1. However, a variety of neuropathological lesions are found in persons who succumb with dementia, including AD dementia2. Due to the chronic nature of dementing diseases and the range of potential etiologies and brain lesions, accurate diagnosis of dementia subtypes requires targeted postmortem brain dissection with comprehensive histologic evaluation and incorporation of ancillary testing. But knowledge on complex etiologies for dementias also remains incomplete and, over the years, neurobiological and epidemiological evidence have revised criteria used for neuropathologic diagnosis, scoring, and staging schemes. Likewise, neuropathological studies continue to inform on the significance of epidemiological data and new forms of disease. Therefore, classification of this group of diseases is evolving.

A century of research has shown that various misfolded protein species accumulate in different brain regions and account for distinct proteinopathies that involve different susceptible cell types1 Here, we explore the range of lesions that are documented within brains of persons who have died with a clinical diagnosis of dementia and summarize the etiologies, classification, topographies, and staging of these lesions. While AD pathology is the most common pathology encountered overall, persons with AD type dementia (e.g., amnestic dementia) may harbor multiple brain changes including various vascular pathologies and other non-AD neuropathologies, in addition to typical AD lesions. Other common forms of neurodegenerative diseases, such as those characterized by Lewy bodies and transactive response DNA-binding protein 43 kD (TDP-43) pathology, as well as less common processes such as Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease and chronic traumatic encephalopathy are described briefly. We also summarize non-proteinopathic diseases and mixed lesions that are linked to dementia syndromes. These other brain ‘hits’ are recognized to lower the threshold for dementia in proteinopathic diseases3. While summarizing current knowledge on dementia pathologies, this review also highlights knowledge gaps and emerging concepts pertaining to cognitive reserve.

II. Proteinopathic Diseases

Proteinopathic diseases, also known as proteopathies or proteinopathies, are a heterogeneous group of protein misfolding disorders that manifest grossly as brain atrophy, and histologically as accumulation of aberrant deposits within cortical or subcortical brain regions. These deposits selectively damage vulnerable neurons and/or glial cell populations in distinct brain regions, disturbing neural pathways and thereby altering brain structure and functions. Multiple mechanisms are involved, including neuronal and glial cell death pathways, organelle damage, and secondary physiological disturbances including reactive astro- and micro-gliosis4. Neuropathologic lesions accumulate chronically over time, thereby precipitating dementia syndromes. Primary diseases are listed in the Table 1 (upper panel) and are summarized below and in Fig 1A, B, and D.

Alzheimer’s Disease.

Microscopically, AD neuropathologic change (AD-NC) is defined by the intraparenchymal accrual of two abnormal proteins, amyloid-beta (βA) in the form of extracellular plaques and irregularly phosphorylated forms of the microtubule-associated protein tau, in the form of intraneuronal neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs)5,6. On routine stains, these protein aggregates may appear as atypical eosinophilic inclusions within brain gray matter (for βA), or as irregular or flame-shaped intraneuronal inclusions (for NFTs) (Fig 1A). These neuropathologic markers may be imperceptible on routine brain examination but are easily visualized on silver stains (e.g. Bielschowsky, Gallyas, and Bodian) and/or via immunohistochemistry panels that incorporate primary antibodies targeted toward the aberrant βA or tau protein (e.g. thioflavin S, AT8, Tau), (Fig. 1A). The abundance of these aggregates (especially tau protein) generally corresponds with the severity of cognitive impairment, as they are related to variable degree of cortical brain atrophy, particularly in vulnerable medial-temporal lobe structures. Cerebral cortical and subcortical tissue loss leads to variable degree of symmetrical sulcal widening, hippocampal atrophy, and lateral ventriculomegaly. AD-NC may also be characterized by loss of neuromelanin-containing neurons in the locus ceruleus.

Extracellular plaques are formed by the accumulation and aggregation of βA with 40 (1–40βA) or 42 (1–42βA) amino acids. Aβ is a normal peptide product derived from cellular metabolism of the amyloid precursor protein (APP), which may be a neuroprotective molecule though its functions are yet unknown. APP undergoes sequential β- and γ-secretase mediated enzymatic cleavage to produce amyloidogenic isoforms. Based on its accumulation pattern, βA-containing plaques are classified into either diffuse plaques (DPs) or neuritic plaque (NP) varieties. NPs are composed of aggregated βA protein that may accumulate as dense cores and/or dystrophic neurites, which correspond to degenerated neuronal cell processes. 1–40βA is enriched in NPs whereas 1–42βA is enriched in DPs. In addition to 1–40βA, NPs also harbor variable numbers of astrocytic and microglial processes. βA NPs usually deposit in layer II-V of the neocortex, but in advanced cases can also be noted in neocortical layers I and VI and in subcortical white matter7.

Tau protein, which is produced from microtubule associated protein tau gene (MAPT), supports neuronal microtubule stability and is the primary constituent of NFTs. Alternate splicing of exon 10 generates tau species with either three or four conserved ~32 amino acid repeats (R), leading to either 3R or 4R tau on biochemical and immunohistochemical characterization. In AD, tau undergoes abnormal phosphorylation that promotes its aggregation into paired helical filaments8. These tau inclusions accumulate within neuronal cell soma as large rounded bodies and in neuronal dendrites and axons as neuropil threads (NTs)8. The morphology of NFTs is variable as they acquire the shape of involved neurons. In cortical neurons, NFTs may be flame or triangular shaped (Fig. 1A) but in subcortical or brainstem neurons they are generally rounded and/or globose. Pre-NFTs exhibit diffuse, low level tau label within the cytoplasm of intact neurons, while mature NFTs exhibit cytoplasmic filamentous tau aggregates that displace neuronal nuclei and extend into dendrites. Late stage “ghost” NFTs appear entombed within nonviable, nucleus-devoid neurons8.

The successive accumulation of NFTs within the aging brain follows a stereotyped pattern that has been depicted in six stages7. Initially, NFTs are found only in the trans-entorhinal cortex (stage I and II). With disease progression, they gradually involve the entorhinal cortex and hippocampus (stage III and IV) and neocortical brain regions (stage V and VI) (Fig. 2A). Similar to NFTs, βA accumulation also follows a stereotyped pattern of brain accumulation that is distinct from tau accumulation and has been described along five stages9. Initially, βA deposits within neocortex (stage I). With disease progression, they spread into allocortical brain regions such as entorhinal cortex, CA1, and subiculum region of hippocampus (stage II); subcortical nuclei including basal ganglia, thalamus, and hypothalamus (stage III); and, eventually into the medulla oblongata and midbrain colliculi (stage IV); and, finally, into pontine neurons and the cerebellar molecular layer (stage V) (Fig. 2A)9. While earlier staging schema required AD dementia for pathological diagnosis of disease, revised guidelines for a diagnosis of AD-NC no longer require the presence of clinical symptoms. Current criteria for AD-NC requires presence of brain βA deposits. A diagnosis of AD is confirmed when there is at least intermediate or high AD-NC which requires a Braak stage of 3 or more, and a Thal stage of 3. At this stage, most cases will have at least moderate NPs in the neocortex.

Lewy body Diseases: Lewy Body Demenita and Parkinson’s Disease Dementia.

Lewy body (LB) diseases are characterized by abnormal intracytoplasmic accumulation of alpha-synuclein protein positive LBs10. On routine stains, LBs appear as round, eosinophilic neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions that may be associated with peripheral halos and are highlighted by immunohistochemistry using antibodies directed to phosphorylated alpha-synuclein (Fig. 1B)10. When present in substantia nigra and accompanied by evidence of significant neuronal loss, these inclusions confirm a pathologic diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease (PD). With involvement of cortical neurons, LBs may cause cognitive impairment and account for two recognized dementia syndromes, i.e., Parkinson’s disease dementia (PDD) or Lewy Body Dementia (LBD). Although these disorders are similar, PDD is associated with motor changes typically occurring years after motor onset of PD whereas LBD exhibits cognitive and motor (parkinsonism) impairment within a year of each other. Neuropathological data have demonstrated that accrual of LBs may progress along different anatomical pathways. Most frequently, LBs appear to ascend initially in pigmented brainstem nuclei (e.g., vagus dorsomedial nucleus, locus ceruleus and/or substantia nigra), and then along limbic areas (entorhinal cortex and anterior cingulate) and, finally progress along neocortical brain tissue (Fig. 2B). Though presently unclear whether PD, PDD, and LBD are truly distinct disorders or representative of a disease continuum11, pathology is currently subclassified based on the regional LB distribution as brainstem, limbic or neocortical-predominant12. Postmortem evaluation shows that some brains feature LBs within the amygdala or olfactory bulb, but not brainstem, and these have been described as amygdala-predominant or olfactory types12. Spongiform change in entorhinal and other temporal cortical regions, and presence of alpha-synuclein neurites within hippocampus CA2 sector and areas exhibiting LBs are supporting features of LBD. PDD and LBD may be associated with mild atrophy in affected brain regions. The observation of alpha-synuclein inclusions within glial cells characterizes multiple system atrophy (MSA).

Limbic-predominant Age-related TDP-43 Encephalopathy (LATE).

LATE is a recently characterized proteinopathy that afflicts older persons. LATE-neuropathological change (LATE-NC) is characterized by neuronal and glial TDP-43 inclusions in adults over age 80 years (Fig. 1D)13. LATE-NC includes neuronal loss and astrocytosis in the hippocampus with hallmark features of TDP-43 inclusions involving the limbic structures, olfactory bulb, basal ganglia, neocortex, and occasionally the brainstem. The TDP-43 inclusions initially present only in the amygdala (stage 1), but over time spread gradually to involve the hippocampus (stage 1 and 2) and midfrontal cortex (stage 3) (Fig. 2C)13. This neuropathology typically manifests with atrophy in mesial temporal lobe structures, including the hippocampus, and may occur concomitantly with hippocampal sclerosis (described below). Indeed, most cases of hippocampal sclerosis in aging are associated with TDP-43 proteinopathy. The inferior frontal, and insular cortices, and other cortical regions may be less frequently involved13.

Hippocampal Sclerosis (HS).

HS is currently broadly defined as severe neuronal loss and gliosis of the hippocampus. In aging, it is most frequently neurodegenerative in origin. The vast majority of HS in aging is characterized by TDP-43 proteinopathy, hippocampal neuronal loss and/or gliosis14 and thus is often part of LATE. HS is not specific to any other neurodegenerative disease pathology, but may be associated with several other classified disease processes, including various age-related neurodegenerative diseases (listed above), hypoxic/ischemic brain injury, and temporal lobe epilepsy15. In epilepsy, HS is often referred to as mesial temporal sclerosis. In neurodegenerative and hypoxic/ischemic diseases, HS is frequently characterized by severe neuronal loss and gliosis involving the hippocampus CA1 sector and the subiculum16.

Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration (FTLD).

FTLD is characterized by cerebral cortical degeneration and is classified into three subtypes according to neuronal and glial protein aggregates17. FTLD-Tau exhibits hyperphosphorylated tau protein inclusions, whereas FTLD-TDP manifests TDP-43-positive protein inclusions, and FTLD-FUS exhibits fused in sarcoma protein inclusions17. FTLD-FUS includes atypical FTLD with only ubiquitin inclusions (aFTLD-U), neuronal intermediate filament inclusion disease (NIFID), and basophilic inclusion body disease (BIBD), which are all characterized by FUS inclusions in addition to caudate nuclei atrophy15,18. Microscopic examination of brains exhibiting FTLD inclusions often show ballooned neurons, laminar spongiosis involving superficial cerebral cortical layers (i.e., I-III), and prominent myelin loss in association with the above neuronal and/or glial cell inclusions17. FTLD also includes Pick’s Disease, which is characterized by ‘Pick bodies’ that appear as rounded, basophilic intraneuronal cytoplasmic bodies on routine stain and are composed of abnormally phosphorylated tau17. Unlike tau of AD-NC, the aberrant tau protein in Pick’s Disease has been shown to form straight helical filaments and aggregates in frontal and temporal cerebral cortical neurons17. In addition to Pick bodies, cortical neurons in these regions also display ballooned neurons termed Pick cells17. As implied by its name, FTLD causes frontal and temporal lobe atrophy, which when severe is often described at knife-edge atrophy.

Progressive Supranuclear Palsy (PSP) and Corticobasal Degeneration (CBD).

PSP and CBD typically present as atypical parkinsonian disorders but may also present with a dementia syndrome. PSP and CBD are characterized by NFTs involving the substantia nigra, but unlike AD-NC these diseases are characterized by 4R immunoreactive NFTs19. In PSP, 4R tau-positive tangles may additionally be found in subcortical regions such as the subthalamic and red nuclei, basal ganglia, and basis pontis19. In PSP, the 4R tau inclusions are also present in astrocytes and oligodendrocytes where they characterize so-called tufted astrocytes and coiled bodies, respectively. Tufted astrocytes display fine branching processes and may also be distributed within motor cortex. 4R tau-positive coiled bodies are also seen in subcortical white matter. In CBD, there is also 4R tau-positive tangles involving the substantia nigra, but cortical pathology is also prominent, especially in the peri-rolandic regions of the neocortex. In addition to neuronal tangles, CBD manifests with 4R tau-positive astrocytic plaques and neuritic threads in the cerebral cortex and subcortical basal ganglia, thalamus and brainstem. Scattered achromatic or ballooned cerebral cortical neurons are typically present in the peri-rolandic cortices19.

Chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE).

CTE describes the neuropathology associated with repetitive concussive and/or subconcussive head injuries, such as that which occurs in professional athletes including football and hockey players. This disease is characterized by neuronal NFTs present diffusely throughout the brain, including the hippocampus and brainstem, with accentuated perivascular distribution20. Perivascular and subpial glial tau accumulation may also be present. Grossly, CTE brains feature cerebral cortical and subcortical nuclear atrophy with enlargement of the lateral and third ventricles. CTE neuropathology has been shown to progress in 4 stages20. Initially, phosphorylated-tau NFTs deposits in perivascular NFT clusters, usually at neocortical sulcal depths (stage 1). Next, they accumulate in discrete clusters in perivascular and superficial cortical layers (stage 2). With subsequent progression, they aggregate multifocally in the medial temporal lobe, hypothalamus, thalamus, nucleus basalis, mammillary bodies, substantia nigra, raphe nuclei, and locus coeruleus (stage 3). Finally, with continued progression, NFTs distribute more widely throughout the brain and are associated with progressive myelin and myelinated axon loss (stage 4).

Huntington’s Disease (HD).

HD is a rare neurodegenerative disease that is caused by CAG (polyglutamine) expansion repeats in the huntingtin gene (i.e., HTT) on chromosome 421. Huntingtin protein misfolding causes intraneuronal aggregation of mHTT, primarily in striatal regions. Thus, this disease is characterized by striatal degeneration that is associated with secondary ventricular enlargement. HD is a familial dominantly inherited disease21. Neuropathological grading criteria used for this disorder is based on ventricle size and degree of striatal pathology and atrophy22. Initially, only microscopic evidence of gliosis and neuronal loss is observed without gross evidence of striatal atrophy (grade 1). Disease progression features striatal atrophy with minimal changes observed early on in lateral ventricle size (grade 2), but there is increased striatal atrophy and ventriculomegaly with disease progression (grades 3 and 4)22. Mild cerebral cortical neuronal loss may also be present and involve the frontal cerebral cortices.

Creutzfeldt Jakob Disease (CJD).

CJD is a rare disease that is associated with various etiologies. The disease may be infectious, heritable, sporadic or iatrogenic in nature23. CJD is characterized by intraneuronal prion protein (PrP) inclusions that induce severe and rapidly progressing neuronal loss and gliosis in various brain regions23. End-stage disease is usually characterized by severe cerebral cortical spongiform change and corresponding atrophy23.

Other Proteinopathies and Unclassified Tissue Changes.

Other age-related neuropathologies feature neuronal and/or glial inclusions24. Argyrophilic Grain Disease25, Aging-Related Tau Astrogliopathy (ARTAG)26, globular glial tauopathy27, and Primary Age-Related Tauopathy (PART)28 are also currently classified as separate neuropathologies. However, their epidemiological significance and link to clinical dementia syndrome(s) is presently unclear. Moreover, the significance of other nonclassified (Fig. 1H), but well-recognized lesions such as granulovacuolar degeneration (Fig. 1I), which manifest in hippocampal pyramidal neurons of aged persons and commonly co-exist with AD-NC, remains undefined.

III. Age-Related Vessel Changes and Vascular Diseases

Cerebrovascular pathologies are common with aging and induce vascular and/or brain damage, both of which may contribute to structural brain pathology29,30. Cardiac, extracranial and/or intracranial large vessel, and intracerebral small vessel diseases may all contribute to dementia syndromes by compromising blood flow, causing subtle multifocal or diffuse neuronal dropout or more discrete, localized brain parenchymal injuries31,32. Thereby, these processes indirectly or directly lead to impairment of function in cognitive domains, though they may not directly induce deposition of intracerebral protein aggregates33. While an array of disorders is recognized in this category, some older literature used nonspecific terminology to describe these lesions and no formal criteria exist for their grading or staging. Moreover, many cerebral small vessel diseases are only superficially classified and their true incidences are unknown. A partial list of contributing disorders is summarized in the Table (lower panel), and described further below and in Fig 1C and E–H.

Cardiac and Extracranial Cardiovascular Diseases.

Cardiac diseases and extracranial CVD (e.g., structural or functional heart diseases such arrhythmic disorders, coronary artery, valvular, and/or hypertensive diseases, and extracranial carotid artery narrowing, occlusion, and/or emboli) are linked to ischemic phenomena with or without brain hemorrhage32. These diseases may lead to vascular brain injuries (VBI) including multifocal or diffuse ischemia with neuronal dropout and/or macroscopic or cystic infarcts (Fig 1C)3. Mechanisms of cell depletion may include apoptosis and oncotic necrosis, among other mixed cell death pathways33. While primary or secondary pulmonary or respiratory diseases such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, chronic obstructive sleep apnea, chronic bronchitis, and/or pneumonia, asthma, and/or pulmonary edema also compromise lung function and may contribute to hypoxia, their overall contribution to dementia syndromes remains controversial in the literature.

Intracranial Cerebral Large Vessel Diseases.

Diseases involving the circle of Willis may also lead to vascular brain injuries. Atherosclerosis (Fig 1E) and much less commonly large vessel vasculitis and other vasculopathies may cause hemispheric or focal ischemic stroke that leads to macroscopic cerebral infarcts, other macroscopic cystic infarcts, “strategic” infarcts, or contribute to microbleeds32. These diseases may also cause acute, subacute, or chronic neuronal dropout from hypoxic-ischemic damage. As with cardiac diseases and extracranial CVD, the mechanisms of cell depletion may include apoptotic, oncotic, and mixed cell death pathways37.

Intracerebral Small Vessel Diseases.

Diseases involving cerebral small vessels also have potential to cause vascular brain injuries, and recent studies emphasize the significance of cerebral small vessel diseases (SVD) as an etiology for neuronal loss, oligodendrocyte and myelinated fiber depletion, white matter rarefaction, microbleeds, small and microinfarcts, inflammation and gliosis34,35. Arteriolosclerosis is the most common etiology of cerebral SVD and causes partial or total fibrous replacement of intracerebral arteriolar smooth muscle cell layers (Fig 1F), with microbleeds and/or small and microscopic infarcts3,36. When widespread, this may lead to subcortical ischemic vascular disease, also known as multi-infarct dementia, Binswanger’s disease, or vascular dementia of Binswanger type (Fig. 2D)36.

Cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA) is also common in older decedents and is characterized by βA deposition within basement membranes and/or smooth muscle cell layer of cerebral arteries and arterioles (Fig 1G)37,38. This disease manifests with preferential deposition of 1–40βA species and often leads to petechial microhemorrhages and less commonly lobar hemorrhage36. Severe forms of SVD results in vessel wall damage with vessel dilation, blood element extravasation, and occasionally vessel occlusion. Several community-based studies demonstrate an association of CAA with cognitive impairment39. Clinicopathological evaluations suggest significant associations between moderate and severe, multifocal CAA with ischemic pathologies40, while a strong correlation is also noted between CAA and age. CAA commonly but not always accompanies AD pathology and may also occur in the absence of significant AD.

Other Intracerebral Vessel Abnormalities.

The prevalence of other uncharacterized and subtle vascular changes such as enlarged perivascular spaces (ePVS)41,42 and blood brain barrier disruption43 in persons with dementia is increasingly recognized, although the significance of these changes is presently unclear (Fig 1H).

IV. Metabolic, Toxic, and Other Diseases

Brain injury is also induced by a host of other diseases. Acute, subacute and chronic metabolic disturbances are liable to contribute to dementia through various mechanisms. Additionally, metals and other environmental toxins may damage neurons through additional pathways.

Wernicke encephalopathy (WE) and Wernicke Korsakoff syndrome (WKS).

Wernicke diseases are precipitated by vitamin B1 (thiamine) deficiency44. Although recognized most commonly in association with chronic alcoholism, WKS is also observed in systemic diseases that result in nutrient deficiencies. In the acute phase, WE is characterized by ophthalmoplegia, mental status changes, and ataxia, whereas the chronic phase of WKS includes confabulation and a dementia syndrome44. In WKS, bilateral mammillary body degeneration is observed on gross brain examination and is associated with hemorrhage and neuropil loss. With more extensive disease, WKS may be characterized by progressive involvement, including bilateral diencephalic degeneration44.

Carbon Monoxide Poisoning.

Carbon monoxide poisoning is caused by inhalation of combustion fumes and binds to blood hemoglobin to form carboxyhemoglobin, which decreases blood oxygen carrying capacity and causes brain tissue hypoxia with preferential necrosis of the globus pallidus and subcortical white matter demyelination45,46.

Heavy Metals.

Some evidence also suggests that dysregulation of metals such as aluminum, arsenic and lead may precipitate dementia by causing oxidative stress with axonal and synaptic damage45.

V. Age Considerations and Mixed Pathologies

Among multiple potential etiologies described above, the most common causes of dementia are AD, CVD, and LB diseases (Fig. 1A–C; 2A,B,D), but proteinopathies may coexist with each other and with non-proteinopathic CVD/VBI lesions47,48. In fact, longitudinal cohort studies demonstrate that mixed pathologies represent the most common form of pathology underlying age-related dementia including AD type dementia47,48. LB disease is reported to occur commonly with AD-NC, especially in persons younger than 60 years at death49,50, but is also seen commonly in aging and with AD-NC51. As noted above, TDP-43 pathology (Fig. 2C) often coincides with HS, and may also co-occur with LB disease52. Cohort studies have also shown that, in the oldest old, the incidence of AD-NC plateaus51,53 while other age-related pathologies, specifically, LATE-NC becomes more common although the reasons for this are unclear. Despite the detailed diagnostic criteria summarized above for distinct neurodegenerative disease forms of dementia in aging, pure neurodegenerative diseases are relatively rare. Overlapping processes are thought to potentiate the common final pathway of neuronal loss and complex brain inflammation with gliosis that precipitate clinical dementia that is increasingly accepted as a multifactorial and pathologically heterogeneous disorder that occurs along a continuum with a range of phenotypes (Fig. 2E)54. Overall, the location(s) and total burden of various neuropathological substrates determine the clinical dementia syndrome. Thus, the validity and utility of some classification and staging schemes for discrete neuropathologic forms of dementia in aging is presently unclear, as mixed pathologies are also recognized as a common cause for atypical clinical presentations. Interestingly, risk factors for dementia are also found to differ by age, with some CVD risk factors appearing to become protective in the oldest-old55.

VI. Limitations of Current Nomenclatures, Classifications, and Staging Schemes

Importantly, the above neuropathologies may also be present in persons who are cognitively intact56,57. In fact, in persons aged 90 years or older, 40% of individuals without dementia exhibit AD-NC or other neurodegenerative disease lesions55. In addition to recognition of mixed pathologies and age-related differences in epidemiology, it is increasingly accepted that co-existing proteinopathies and CVD/VBI potentiate dementia severity3,55,58. For example, LB, CAA, SVD, and VBI (Fig. 2A–D) in many persons mitigate the burden of AD-NC required for the development of clinical AD-type dementia (Fig. 2F,G). Likewise, clinicopathological studies demonstrate that persons with overlapping AD-NC and LATE-NC tend to show more rapid cognitive decline compared to persons with pure disease17,59 (Fig 2G). So, while data on the range of potential neurodegenerative disease substrates is advancing, epidemiological data have also made clear that the presence of neurodegenerative pathologies do not directly equate to dementia syndromes55.

Over recent years, newer concepts have been introduced in attempt to explain the disconnects that are frequently observed between AD-NC score and degree of cognitive impairment, which presumably represent uncharacterized neuroprotective mechanisms. The term resistant is a heuristic that refers to persons whose brains remain “lesion-proof”, or free of structural brain pathologies throughout aging (Fig 2E and F)61. In contrast, resilient is a term that refers to cognitive preservation, or the paradoxical ability to sustain cognitive function in the face of existing structural brain pathologies55 (Fig 2E–G). So-called non-demented individuals with AD neuropathology (NDAN), a.k.a. SuperAgers or asymptomatic AD (ASYMAD)62 emphasize the significance of this group of elderly persons who are not prone to develop dementia and remain cognitively intact despite the presence of structural brain pathologies (Fig 2E–G). While both resistant and resilient persons have been said to exhibit cognitive reserve, evidence suggests that these are distinct phenomena that refer to unique scenarios, i.e., resisting disease development versus compensating for existing disease(s)61. The causes for these phenomena may include brain maintenance and neurorestorative factors that are presently unknown62. Emerging evidence indicates that lifestyle and behavioral factors, along with other metabolic, genetic, environmental, and/or physiological variables may influence AD-NC onset and progression, highlighting the importance of advising on nutrition, exercise, social and cognitive activities, and control of vascular risk factors that may enhance cognitive functioning but are not accounted for in current classification and staging schemes55 21,55.

VII. Summary and Future Directions

Dementia is very common in aging and while Alzheimer’s disease pathology (i.e., AD-NC) is arguably the most common underlying pathology, other pathologic causes of dementia in aging include Lewy bodies, TDP-43, vascular neuropathologies, and mixed pathologies. Less common pathologic causes should also be recognized. It is important to note that each person has a different threshold for dementia onset. This threshold may be determined by various measures (e.g., the number of existing brain axons and synapses, neuroimmune state, stress level, and genetic and biological factors), and also often changes with age. New concepts and emerging data regarding cognitive reserve support the value of exploring nontraditional and/or nonstructural targets and risk factors for the purpose of preventing or delaying onset and progression of neurocognitive diseases in aging persons. Regarding current classification and nomenclatures, protein aggregates appear to be a final common denominator of many, but not all age-related dementia syndromes. Moreover, vascular mechanisms also play a fundamental role in many dementia syndromes. Indeed, it is notable that dementia syndromes also occur in the absence of protein aggregates, and what causes protein aggregates in the first place is incompletely known. With recognition of resistance and resilient factors and mixed pathologies, the boundaries of distinct neuropathological diseases have become more uncertain. For these reasons, some experts have proposed a general neuropathological category of “brain dementia” in aging with specific lesions enumerated secondarily, whereas others suggest revision of current schema though evidence regarding precise revisions is lacking and current schema continue to evolve.

What is currently known about dementia in aging is that: (1) Dementia represents a looming public health crisis1. (2) The brain undergoes various complex age-related structural, physiological, and biochemical changes and is exposed to heterogeneous environmental stress conditions over the lifespan that may foster the development and progression, or resistance and resilience toward disease susceptibilities55. (3) In patients with dementia, a spectrum of neuropathologies contribute to neurodegeneration and may overlap. (4) Isolated and mixed pathologies result in pruning and loss of neurons and glia and are associated with inflammation in various brain regions that collectively result in synapse and brain volume loss. (5) In persons symptomatic for dementia, the location(s) of neurodegenerative brain changes determine clinical symptomatologies. (6) Heterogeneity among clinical disease phenotypes indicates among other things, the existence of other nonclassified and or nonstructural determinants of disease55. Therefore, identification and investigation of potential nonclassified brain pathologies, interactions of different brain pathologies, and currently unrecognized resistant and resilient factors are required as they may not only elucidate hidden contributors to disease, but may also uncover potential novel targets for disease prevention.

Funding:

This work is supported by P30AG072975 and R21AG079221.

Figure 1. Histologic features of common neurodegenerative disease lesions.

(A) AD-NC is classically associated with frontoparietal atrophy (left). Etiological lesions, shown at right (clockwise from upper left), include diffuse and neuritic plaques with neurofibrillary tangles (Bielschowsky’s silver stain), neurofibrillary tangles (H&amp;E stain), neurofibrillary tangle (phospho-Tau AT8 stain), and diffuse and neuritic plaques (4G8 amyloid stain). (B) Lewy body (LB) disease is characterized by mild cortical atrophy with evidence of α-synuclein-positive LBs. (C) Macroscopic cerebral infarcts are characterized by cerebral edema with reperfusion-related petechial microhemorrhage (left) and acute neuronal necrosis (right). (D) LATE-NC is characterized by cortical atrophy with TDP-43-positive neuronal inclusions. Vascular changes and/or vascular brain injuries may also result from: (E) large vessel atherosclerosis, as depicted in the basilar artery; (F) small vessel diseases (SVD), such as arteriolosclerosis; and/or (G) cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA). Other neuropathological lesions of unknown significance include enlarged perivascular spaces (ePVS) and granulovacuolar degeneration (GVD), shown in (H) and (I), respectively. A-I: Boxed/marked area shown in enlarged and/or labeled section. Scale bars: A-D,F-I, 10 μm; E, 1 mm.

Figure 2: Topographies and overlap of common proteinopathic and age-related disease substrates, and effects on brain function.

Schematic figures illustrate topographical distribution of AD-NC (A), LB disease (B), LATE-NC (C), and arteriolosclerosis (D), which exhibit different susceptibilities. Mixed pathologies (e.g., βA plaques, Tau neurofibrillary tangles, Lewy bodies, TDP-43 inclusions, and/or cerebrovascular lesions) also occur (E). Persons who do not develop pathology or do not progress to severe stage of pathology are referred to as “resistant”, while afflicted persons who do not exhibit dementia are referred to as “resilient”. Various effects of AD-NC (F) and mixed pathologies (G) are shown. Disease resistance refers to the absence of, or lower-than-expected disease burden, whereas resilience refers to the absence of, or delayed onset of cognitive impairment in the face of existing neuropathologies.

Table 1. Summary of common diseases that lead to neurodegenerative lesions in persons with dementia.

Proteinopathic and vascular diseases cause age-related and neurodegenerative tissue substrates, as listed with involved brain region(s). Common neurodegenerative pathologies accumulate over time, but some metabolic and ischemic etiologies may develop over an acute or subacute interval.

Disease	“Etiological” Inclusion(s)	Primary Brain Region(s) Involved	
Proteinopathic Diseases Associated with Chronic Cell Loss	
AD-NC	β-Amyloid	Cerebral cortex	
Tau (3R and 4R)	Cerebral cortex	
LB Disease	α-Synuclein	Brainstem and limbic region, including substantia nigra	
LATE-NC	TDP-43	Hippocampus and temporal lobe	
FTLD-Tau	Tau	Frontal and temporal lobes	
FTLD-TDP	TDP-43	Frontal and temporal lobes	
FTLD-Atypical	Ubiquitin, FUSᶲ	Frontal and temporal lobes	
PSP	Tau (4R)	Subcortical nuclei and brainstem, including substantia nigra	
CBD	Tau (4R)	Cerebral cortex and subcortical nuclei, including substantia nigra	
CJD	PrP	Hemispheric gray matter	
HD	mHTT	Basal ganglia	
PART	Tau	Hippocampus	
CTE	Tau	Cerebral cortex	
ARTAG	Tau	Cerebral cortex	
CAA‡	β-Amyloid	Cerebral cortex	
Hippocampal Sclerosis	TDP-43*	Hippocampus	
Other Diseases Associated with Acute/Subacute or Chronic Cell Loss	
Cardiac and Extracranial Cardiovascular Disease (CVD)	N/A	Global/multilobar/lobar, variable	
Intracranial CVD (Large Vessel)	N/A	Global/multilobar/lobar, variable	
Intracerebral CVD (Small Vessel)	N/A	Subcortical gray or white matter, variable	
Hippocampal Sclerosis	N/A*	Hippocampus and white matter	
Wernicke Korsakoff Syndrome	N/A**	Mammilary body and white matter	
Carbon Monoxide Poisoning	N/A***	Globus pallidus and white matter	
‡ CAA may occur with or without AD-NC;

ᶲ FTLD-Atypical is characterized by FUS, ubiquitin, and neuronal intermediate filament inclusions, or basophilic inclusions;

* hippocampal sclerosis may or may not be associated with TDP-43 and LATE-NC;

** the etiology of Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome is vitamin B1 (thiamine) deficiency;

*** the etiology of carbon monoxide poisoning is oxygen deficiency.

Synopsis:

Dementias encompass a range of debilitating neurological conditions. Here, we summarize the neuropathology of common forms of dementia, focusing on Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and related dementias. AD is part of a spectrum of neurodegenerative diseases that consists of various protein inclusions (i.e., proteinopathies), but other brain abnormalities are also related to dementia. Beta-amyloid and tau aggregates are hallmarks of AD. Other tissue substrates include Lewy bodies, TDP-43 inclusions, vascular brain lesions, and mixed pathologies. This review highlights the complexity of neurodegenerative and other disease substrates and summarizes topography of these lesions and concepts of mixed brain pathologies, resistance and resilience.

Key Points:

Dementia is a nonspecific term that corresponds to a group of heterogeneous, mostly age-related neurological disorders that cause impaired cognition and deterioration of brain functions.

This neurological condition is a manifestation of various processes that primarily or secondarily affect the brain organ.

Underlying neuropathologic substrates encompass various protein inclusions, vascular brain injuries, and cerebrovascular, traumatic, and metabolic brain changes.

Protein inclusions and metabolic abnormalities accumulate in distinct stereotyped brain regions, while trauma and vascular-associated substrates may occur in patchy and/or irregular distribution(s).

The burden and location(s) of brain lesions influence the type and degree of clinical symptoms, which establish the dementia syndrome.

CLINICS CARE POINTS

AD-NC is the most common dementia pathology, and manifests with diagnostic lesions of βA plaques and NFTs.

Other common neuropathological forms of dementia include LB disease, LATE NC, and vascular dementia.

Additional pathologies related to dementia include FTLD, PSP, CBD, CTE, and CJD, among others.

Mixed and asymptomatic pathologies are also commonly found in older persons.

As modifiable risks, vascular diseases and lifestyle factors are important to address in the geriatric population, but also show important age-related differences.

Evidence suggests that traditional brain markers are not fully predictive of clinical disease, as other physiological factors impact on manifestation of dementia syndromes.

Resistance factors prevent the appearance of neurodegenerative and other brain disease lesions, while resilience factors are hypothesized to mask cognitive dysfunction that would otherwise be predicted by the presence of a significant burden of neuropathologic lesions.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Disclosure/Conflict of Interest:

The authors declare no financial or nonfinancial conflicts of interest


References

1. Alzheimer’s Association. 2022 Alzheimer’s disease facts and figures. Alzheimers Dement 2022;18 .
2. Brunnstrom H , Gustafson L , Passant U , Englund E . Prevalence of dementia subtypes: A 30-year retrospective survey of neuropathological reports. Archives of Gerontology and Geriatrics. 2008;49 :146–9.18692255
3. Kapasi A , DeCarli C , Schneider JA . Impact of multiple pathologies on the threshold for clinically overt dementia. Acta Neuropathol. 2017;134 :171–86.28488154
4. Fiala JC , Feinberg M , Peters A , Barbas H . Mitochondrial degeneration in dystrophic neurites of senile plaques may lead to extracellular deposition of fine filaments. Brain Struct Funct. 2007;212 :195–207.17717688
5. Montine TJ , Phelps CH , Beach TG , Alzheimer’s Association. National institute on aging-alzheimer’s association guidelines for the neuropathologic assessment of alzheimer’s disease: A practical approach. Acta Neuropathol. 2012;123 :1–11.22101365
6. Schneider JA , Arvanitakis Z , Leurgans SE , Bennett DA . The neuropathology of probable alzheimer disease and mild cognitive impairment. Ann Neurol. 2009;66 :200–8.19743450
7. Braak H and Braak E . Neuropathological stageing of alzheimer-related changes. Acta Neuropathol. 1991;82 :239–59.1759558
8. Moloney CM , Lowe VJ , Murray ME . Visualization of neurofibrillary tangle maturity in Alzheimer’s disease: A clinicopathologic perspective for biomarker research. Alzheimers Dement. 2021;17 :1554–74.33797838
9. Thal DR , Capetillo-Zarate E , Del Tredici K , Braak H . The development of amyloid beta protein deposits in the aged brain. Sci Aging Knowledge Environ. 2006;2006 :re1.16525193
10. McKeith IG , Dickson DW , Lowe J , Consortium on DLB. Diagnosis and management of dementia with lewy bodies: Third report of the DLB consortium. Neurology. 2005;65 :1863–72.16237129
11. Jellinger KA , Korczyn AD . Are dementia with lewy bodies and parkinson’s disease dementia the same disease? BMC Med. 2018;16 :34.29510692
12. Attems J , Toledo JB , Walker , Neuropathological consensus criteria for the evaluation of Lewy pathology in post-mortem brains: a multi-centre study. Acta Neuropathol. 2021;141 :159–172.33399945
13. Nelson PT , Dickson DW , Trojanowski JQ , Limbic-predominant age-related TDP-43 encephalopathy (LATE): consensus working group report. Brain. 2019;142 :1503–27.31039256
14. Amador-Ortiz C , Lin WL , Ahmed Z , , D. W. TDP-43 immunoreactivity in hippocampal sclerosis and alzheimer’s disease. Ann Neurol. 2007;61 :435–45.17469117
15. Josephs KA , Whitwell JL , Weigand SD , TDP-43 is a key player in the clinical features associated with alzheimer’s disease. Acta Neuropathol. 2014;127 :811–24.24659241
16. Ala TA , Beh GO , and Frey WH 2nd . Pure hippocampal sclerosis: A rare cause of dementia mimicking alzheimer’s disease. Neurology. 2000;54 :843–8.10690974
17. Hernandez I , Fernandez MV , Tarraga L , Boada M , Ruiz A . Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration (FTLD): Review and Update for Clinical Neurologists. Curr Alzheimer Res. 2018;15 :511–30.28745227
18. Josephs KA , Dickson DW . Hippocampal sclerosis in tau-negative frontotemporal lobar degeneration. Neurobiol Aging. 2007;28 :1718–22.16930776
19. Mimuro M , Yoshida M . Chameleons and mimics: Progressive supranuclear palsy and corticobasal degeneration. Neuropathology. 2020;40 :57–67.31515852
20. McKee AC , Cairns NJ , Dickson DW , The first NINDS/NIBIB consensus meeting to define neuropathological criteria for the diagnosis of chronic traumatic encephalopathy. Acta Neuropathol. 2016;131 :75–86.26667418
21. Hong EP , MacDonald ME , Wheeler VC , Huntington’s Disease Pathogenesis: Two Sequential Components. J Huntingtons Dis. 2021;10 :35–51.33579862
22. Vonsattel JP , Myers RH , Stevens TJ , Neuropathological classification of huntington’s disease. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 1985;44 :559–77.2932539
23. Watson N , Brandel JP , Green A , The importance of ongoing international surveillance for Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. Nat Rev Neurol. 2021;17 :362–79.33972773
24. Brettschneider J , Libon DJ , Toledo JB , Microglial activation and TDP-43 pathology correlate with executive dysfunction in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Acta Neuropathologica. 2012;123 :395–407.22210083
25. Braak H and Braak E . Argyrophilic grain disease: Frequency of occurrence in different age categories and neuropathological diagnostic criteria. Journal of Neural Transmission. 1998;105 :801–19.9869320
26. Kovacs GG , Ferrer I , Grinberg LT , Aging-related tau astrogliopathy (ARTAG): Harmonized evaluation strategy. Acta Neuropathol. 2016;131 :87–102.26659578
27. Chung DC , Carlomagno Y , Cook CN , Tau exhibits unique seeding properties in globular glial tauopathy. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2019;7 :36.30845985
28. Crary JF , Trojanowski JQ , Schneider JA , Primary age-related tauopathy (PART): A common pathology associated with human aging. Acta Neuropathol. 2014;128 :755–66.25348064
29. Arvanitakis Z , Capuano AW , Leurgans SE , Bennett DA , Schneider JA . Relation of cerebral vessel disease to alzheimer’s disease dementia and cognitive function in elderly people: A cross-sectional study. The Lancet Neurology. 2016;15 :934–943.27312738
30. Thal DR , Grinberg LT , Attems, J. Vascular dementia: Different forms of vessel disorders contribute to the development of dementia in the elderly brain. Exp Gerontol. 2012;47 :816–24.22705146
31. Corrada MM , Sonnen JA , Kim RC , Kawas CH . Microinfarcts are common and strongly related to dementia in the oldest-old: The 90+ study. Alzheimers Dement. 2016;12 :900–8.27243907
32. Dolan H , Crain B , Troncoso J , Atherosclerosis, dementia, and alzheimer disease in the baltimore longitudinal study of aging cohort. Ann Neurol. 2010;68 :231–40.20695015
33. Kahle KT , Simard JM , Staley KJ , Nahed B , Jones P , Sun D . Molecular mechanisms of ischemic cerebral edema: role of electroneutral ion transport. Physiology. 2009;24 :257–65.19675357
34. Poels MM , Ikram MA , van der Lugt A , Cerebral microbleeds are associated with worse cognitive function: The rotterdam scan study. Neurology. 2012;78 :326–33.22262748
35. Hommet C , Mondon K , Constans T , Review of cerebral microangiopathy and alzheimer’s disease: Relation between white matter hyperintensities and microbleeds. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2011;32 :367–78.22301385
36. Smith EE , Schneider JA , Wardlaw JM , Greenberg SM . Cerebral microinfarcts: The invisible lesions. Lancet Neurol. 2012;11 :272–82.22341035
37. Auriel E and Greenberg SM . The pathophysiology and clinical presentation of cerebral amyloid angiopathy. Curr Atheroscler Rep. 2012;14 :343–50.22565298
38. Grinberg LT , Thal DR . Vascular pathology in the aged human brain. Acta Neuropathol. 2010;119 :277–90.20155424
39. Boyle PA , Yu L , Nag S , Cerebral amyloid angiopathy and cognitive outcomes in community-based older persons. Neurology. 2015;85 :1930–6.26537052
40. Akoudad S , Wolters FJ , Viswanathan A Association of cerebral microbleeds with cognitive decline and dementia. JAMA Neurology. 2016;73 :934–43.27271785
41. Javierre-Petit C , Schneider JA , Kapasi A , Neuropathologic and Cognitive Correlates of Enlarged Perivascular Spaces in a Community-Based Cohort of Older Adults. Stroke. 2020;51 :2825–33.32757750
42. Mestre H , Kostrikov S , Mehta RI , Nedergaard M . Perivascular Spaces, Glymphatic Dysfunction, and Small Vessel Disease. Clin Sci (Lond). 2017;131 : 2257–74.28798076
43. Giwa MO , Williams J , Elderfield K , Neuropathologic evidence of endothelial changes in cerebral small vessel disease. Neurology. 2012;78 :167–74.22170884
44. Chandrakumar A , Bhardwaj A , ‘t Jong GW . Review of thiamine deficiency disorders: Wernicke encephalopathy and Korsakoff psychosis. J Basic Clin Physiol Pharmacol. 2018;30 :153–162.30281514
45. Killin LOJ , Starr JM , Shiue IJ , Russ TC . Environmental risk factors for dementia: a systematic review. BMC Geriatr. 2016;16 :175.27729011
46. Schofield P . Dementia associated with toxic causes and autoimmune disease. Int Psychogeriatr. 2005;17 :S129–47.16240488
47. Boyle PA , Yang J , Yu L , Varied effects of age-related neuropathologies on the trajectory of late life cognitive decline. Brain. 2017;140 :804–12.28082297
48. Schneider JA , Arvanitakis Z , Bang W , Bennett DA . Mixed brain pathologies account for most dementia cases in community-dwelling older persons. Neurology. 2007;69 :2197–204.17568013
49. Beach TG , Malek-Ahmadi M . Alzheimer’s Disease Neuropathological Comorbidities are Common in the Younger-Old. J Alzheimers Dis. 2021;79 :389–400.33285640
50. Beach TG , Adler CH , Lue L , Unified staging system for lewy body disorders: Correlation with nigrostriatal degeneration, cognitive impairment and motor dysfunction. Acta Neuropathol. 2009;117 :613–34.19399512
51. James BD , Bennett DA , Boyle PA , Leurgans S , Schneider JA . Dementia from alzheimer disease and mixed pathologies in the oldest old. JAMA. 2012;307 :1798–800.22550192
52. Nag S , Yu L , Capuano AW , Hippocampal sclerosis and TDP-43 pathology in aging and alzheimer disease. Ann Neurol. 2015;77 :942–52.25707479
53. Robinson JL , Corrada MM , Kovacs GG , Non-alzheimer’s contributions to dementia and cognitive resilience in the 90+ study. Acta Neuropathol. 2018;136 :377–88.29916037
54. Jack CR , Therneau TM , Weigand SD , Prevalence of Biologically vs Clinically Defined Alzheimer Spectrum Entities Using the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association Research Framework. JAMA Neurol. 2019;76 :1174–83.31305929
55. Kawas CH , Legdeur N , Corrada MM . What have we learned from cognition in the oldest-old. Curr Opin Neurol. 2021;34 :258–65.33560671
56. Hyman BT , Phelps CH , Beach TG , National institute on aging-alzheimer’s association guidelines for the neuropathologic assessment of alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement. 2012;8 :1–13.22265587
57. Serrano-Pozo A , Qian J , Muzikansky A , Thal amyloid stages do not significantly impact the correlation between neuropathological change and cognition in the alzheimer disease continuum. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2016;75 :516–26.27105663
58. Korczyn AD . Mixed dementia--the most common cause of dementia. Annals of the New York Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2002;977 :129–34.
59. Nag S , Yu L , Wilson RS , Chen EY , Bennett DA , Schneider JA . TDP-43 pathology and memory impairment in elders without pathologic diagnoses of AD or FTLD. Neurology. 2017;88 :653–60.28087828
60. Bauckneht M , Chincarini A , Piva R , Metabolic correlates of reserve and resilience in MCI due to Alzheimer’s Disease (AD). Alzheimers Res Ther. 2018;10 :35.29615111
61. Bocancea D , van Loenhoud AC , Groot C , Barkhof F , van der Flier WM , Ossenkoppele R . Measuring Resilience and Resistance in Aging and Alzheimer Disease Using Residual Methods: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. Neurology. 2021;97 :474–488.34266918
62. Kok FK , van Leerdam SL , de Lange ECM . Potential Mechanisms Underlying Resistance to Dementia in Non-Demented Individuals with Alzheimer’s Disease Neuropathology. J Alzheimers Dis. 2022;87 :51–81.35275527
