LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101573691
39703
Cell Rep
Cell Rep
Cell reports
2211-1247

37339050
10592530
10.1016/j.celrep.2023.112669
NIHMS1911162
Article
Reelin Through the Years: From Brain Development to Inflammation
Alexander Anna 12
Herz Joachim M.D. 1234
Calvier Laurent Ph.D. 12
1 Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas (UT) Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, USA.
2 Center for Translational Neurodegeneration Research, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, USA.
3 Department of Neuroscience, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, USA.
4 Department of Neurology and Neurotherapeutics, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, USA.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

A.A. wrote the manuscript, J.H and L.C. have revised it for interpretation and content.

* Corresponding author: Laurent Calvier, Ph.D. Molecular Genetics, UT Southwestern Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd. Dallas, TX 75390-9046, calvier.laurent@gmail.com
21 7 2023
27 6 2023
19 6 2023
23 10 2023
42 6 112669112669
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Reelin was originally identified as a regulator of neuronal migration and synaptic function, but its non-neuronal functions have received far less attention. Reelin participates in organ development and physiological functions in various tissues, but it is also dysregulated in some diseases.

In the cardiovascular system, Reelin is abundant in the blood where it contributes to platelet adhesion, coagulation, as well as vascular adhesion and permeability to leukocytes. It is a pro-inflammatory and pro-thrombotic factor with important implications for auto-inflammatory and auto-immune diseases such as multiple sclerosis, Alzheimer’s disease, arthritis, atherosclerosis, or cancer.

Mechanistically, Reelin is a large secreted glycoprotein that binds to several membrane receptors including ApoER2, VLDLR, integrins, and ephrins. Reelin signaling depends on the cell type but mostly involves phosphorylation of NF-κB, PI3K, AKT, or JAK/STAT.

This review focuses on non-neuronal functions and the therapeutic potential of Reelin while highlighting secretion, signaling, and functional similarities between cell types.

Reelin
ApoER2
VLDR
NF-κB
PI3K
AKT
JAK
STAT
liver
vascular system
coagulation
lymphatic circulation
immune system
intestine
kidney
cancer
fibrosis
inflammation
leukocyte
multiple sclerosis
Alzheimer’s disease
atherosclerosis
arthritis

pmc1) INTRODUCTION

Reelin is a large extracellular glycoprotein initially known as a regulator of neuronal migration whose secretion is critical for development and migration, especially in the cortex and hippocampus1–3. During embryonic development, Reelin is mainly secreted by Cajal-Retzius cells and promotes neuroblast migration and development of layer-specific connections in the hippocampus and entorhinal cortex1,4–7. In the adult brain, Reelin is mainly secreted by a subset of cortical GABA-ergic interneurons5,8,9, cerebellar granule cells and hippocampal interneurons10–12 and modulates synaptic plasticity6,13, migration of neuroblasts14, as well as dendrite15 and dendritic spine16 formation. Reelin has been implicated in a wide range of neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer’s disease (AD), cognitive disorders, such as autism spectrum disorder, and neuropsychiatric disorders, such as schizophrenia and bipolar disorder12,17–22.

In 1951, a mutant mouse model showing a characteristic “reeling” gait was documented for the first time and named reeler mice23. This behavior was later attributed to a disruption in the layered structure of the brain24,25 due to the absence of Reelin expression2. This model has been largely used to study various aspects of brain development, including neuronal migration, synapse formation, and neurodevelopmental disorders such as autism and schizophrenia. Interestingly, the neurons retain their morphology with intact cellular connectivity despite their disorganized positioning, and comprehensive studies suggest that a layer loss only leads to defects in sensory processing by reeler mice while cortical layers are not an essential for basic perception and cognition26. In 1995, the RELN gene was identified on chromosome 7q222 and the anti-Reelin mouse monoclonal antibody CR-50 was engineered with the remarkable ability to block Reelin’s function7,27. CR-50’s mechanism is through binding to the N-terminal (N-t) region which in turn blocks multimerization of Reelin, a prerequisite to Reelin’s biological activity27. In 1999, the two main receptors of Reelin, Apolipoprotein E receptor 2 (ApoER2, also known as LRP8) and very low density lipoprotein receptor (VLDLR), were discovered through the presence of the Dab1-binding NPxY motif in their cytoplasmic domains and the finding that Apoer2/Vldr double KO mice phenocopy the reeler (and scrambler) mice28,29.

Reelin’s structure (Figure 1) is comprised of a signal peptide followed by an F-spondin-like domain, eight Reelin repeats that have an epidermal growth factor (EGF)-like cysteine pattern dividing each repeat into two subdomains (A and B), and a positively charged C-terminus30. Originally, two cleavage points were identified: one located between Reelin repeats 2 and 3 and one between repeats 6 and 731,32. Recently, the N-terminal cleavage site was more precisely identified at the beginning of repeat 3 between Pro-1244 and Ala-1245, which is supported in both in vivo and in vitro studies33–35. Three fragments are produced: The N-terminal, central, and C-terminal fragments; however, these two cleavage events occur independently, meaning the central fragment can be attached to either terminus upon proteolytic cleavage. Of the three fragments produced, the central fragment containing repeats 3 through 6 is the active one as the receptor binding domain for canonical Reelin receptors is located on Reelin repeats 5 and 632,36.

Since its initial discovery, Reelin’s main studies have been focused on its beneficial function in nervous system, but over the past two decades, Reelin has been related to various non-neuronal functions, suggesting that Reelin may have implications in cancer propagation, coagulation deficits, and endothelial dysfunction in chronic inflammatory diseases37–40 (Figure 2). Thus, Reelin has proven to have a pleiotropic nature, with beneficial effects in the brain and diverse effects in the periphery. The goal of this review is to encompass the wide versatility of responses to Reelin in the peripheral systems. The reader should grasp the benefits as well as detriments of abnormal Reelin expression in mouse models, human patients, and various cell lines.

2) REELIN REGULATION AND PATHWAYS

Reelin pathways have been primarily studied in neurons, as outlined below, and confirmed in different cell types. Reelin has two major membrane receptors, ApoER2 and VLDLR, both of which belong to the low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) family28–30,41–43. These receptors have an Asn-Pro-X-Tyr (NPxY) motif on their cytoplasmic tails, a common feature of the LDLR family29,44. Upon Reelin binding the extracellular surface of these receptors, the NPxY domain causes the recruitment of Disabled-1 (Dab1), the intracellular adaptor protein that facilitates Reelin signaling29,44,45. This induces tyrosine phosphorylation of Dab1 by Src-family tyrosine kinases (SFKs), specifically Fyn and Src, which are activated by the clustering of receptors upon Reelin signaling46–48. Interestingly, the reeler phenotype can also be replicated via double knock-out of ApoER2 and VLDLR, as well as through loss of Dab1, known as the scrambler mouse model, demonstrating the importance of these receptors on Reelin processing29,45,49,50. Reelin not only cues the phosphorylation of Dab1, but it also signals for its degradation through polyubiquitination51. After the initial Reelin-induced Dab1 phosphorylation event, various pathways may become active underlying Reelin’s diverse effects at the molecular level.

One major Reelin-inducible effect is activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) by its regulatory subunit p85α, which activates the serine/threonine kinase Akt and inhibits glycogen synthase kinase 3β (GSK-3β), an enzyme responsible for tau phosphorylation52,53. p85α forms a complex with the tyrosine-phosphorylated Dab1 in order to activate PI3K, stimulating downstream effectors Akt and GSK-3β via phosphorylation of specific serine residues52,53. PI3K and Akt are crucial components in cortical development, and Akt stimulates the canonical mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway which controls dendritic growth and branching54. This involves the protein complexes mTORC1 and mTORC2, as well as S6 kinase 1 (S6K1), which modulates protein synthesis and polarizes actin organization within the cytoskeleton54,55. Akt also influences cancer through induction of nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells (NF-κB) through extensive crosstalk with mTOR56.

Others transmembrane proteins and potential receptors studied in reference to Reelin include integrins and the amyloid precursor protein (APP). Integrins are transmembrane receptors that participate in neuronal migration and outgrowth by influencing neuronal adhesion to the extracellular matrix57–61. Reelin has been shown to directly bind the α3β1 integrin and activate α5β1, suggesting alternate pathways for neuronal migration and positioning59,60. APP is a type I transmembrane protein that activates the central Reelin fragment and interacts with the integrin α3β1 in order to promote neurite outgrowth62,63. However, APP is processed to form biologically-active amyloid-beta peptides that can accumulate when unregulated and result in amyloid plaques as characterized in Alzheimer’s disease63–66. Aberrant APP processing also coincides with Reelin depletion in AD brains21. Furthermore, APP overexpression in mammalian cortical neurons results in reduction of Dab1 tyrosine phosphorylation, suggesting that APP may quench Reelin signaling by interfering with the canonical Reelin pathway potentially by altering stoichiometry of Reelin coreceptors, but direct evidence of this potential competition is missing 67.

Other Reelin pathways that have been noted in neurons include Crk-family proteins, LIM kinase 1 (LIMK1), and ephrins. After initial Dab1 phosphorylation, Crk-family proteins induce tyrosine phosphorylation of C3G in order to activate Rap1, part of the Ras subfamily of GTPases, to regulate neuronal polarization during radial migration of neurons in the developing cortical plate68,69. Reelin not only directs migrating neurons but also stabilizes their cytoskeleton in the marginal zone through LIM kinase 1 and cofilin intracellular signaling70–73. Although the mechanism is unknown, Reelin also reportedly binds both ephrin B ligands and Eph B receptors74–77. One suggested mechanism is that ligands ephrin B2 and ephrin B3 influence cortical layering by recruiting and activating SFKs within ApoER2 and VLDLR receptor clusters during canonical Reelin signaling76. This finding is arguably dependent on mouse background, as the reeler-like phenotype was not seen in similar models by Pohlkamp et. al. in 2016. However, Reelin and ephrins have some interaction as seen by the lack of surviving ephrin B3 and Reelin double knockout mice77.

Research in adult mouse brains connects Reelin, through activated SFKs, to proteins that regulate long term potentiation, N-methyl-D-aspartic acid receptor (NMDAR) and α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid receptor (AMPAR)6,13. Acute Reelin exposure allows for NMDAR activation via phosphorylation of NR2 subunits by Src, whereas longer Reelin exposure increases AMPAR at synaptic sites through PI3K13,78,79.

Some of these canonical (ApoER2-dependent) pathways have been validated in non-neuronal cells as detailed in each section of this review, but most of the non-canonical ones remain yet to be confirmed.

3) REELIN AND THE LIVER

The liver, specifically hepatic stellate cells, are believed to be the main source of Reelin outside of the brain, and Reelin secretion in these cells has been documented after liver injury80–84. Hepatic stellate cells have the ability to transdifferentiate into collagen-producing myofibroblasts upon activation during liver fibrosis85–87. Stellate cells amplify liver inflammation88 by releasing various inflammatory molecules and promoting leukocyte chemotaxis and adherence89. Additionally, these cells respond to many inflammatory signals. They express different receptors such as toll-like receptors, IL-receptors, Fc receptors, TNFR, CXCR3, intracellular adhesion molecule (ICAM)-1, the C5a receptor (CD88)85,88,89 and directly respond to diverse immunological triggers such as cytokines including TNFα, IFNγ, and IL-685,89. While stellate cell response to these various cytokines is well understood, it is unknown if these cytokine responses also lead to increased Reelin secretion.

Activation of hepatic stellate cells in liver disease results in Reelin production.

In patients with liver diseases such as fibrosis or cirrhosis, activated hepatic stellate cells increase Reelin expression80,81, although secretion into the circulation has not yet been established. Immunohistochemistry of liver samples from patients with Hepatitis C Virus (HCV)-related chronic liver disease showed that Reelin was coexpressed with CRBP-1, a marker used to detect activated stellate cells in liver disease81. Both Reelin and CRBP-1 positive stellate cells showed direct correlation to liver fibrosis progression, increasing with worsening disease state81. However, Reelin was not correlated with alpha-SMA, another marker for hepatic stellate cells, and the authors suggest that Reelin should not be regarded as a marker of hepatic stellate cells/myofibroblasts differentiation but rather as a functional protein expressed during some phases of liver fibrosis. Hepatic Reelin appears to be a product of the disease and not an inducer, yet the potential of plasma Reelin as a biomarker remains to be evaluated. Beyond liver fibrosis or cirrhosis, studying if plasma Reelin is also secreted by the liver may be relevant for atherosclerosis to evaluate the disease activity.

4) REELIN AND THE VASCULAR SYSTEM

Outside of the central nervous system (CNS), the source for circulating Reelin is unclear, but it is suspected that it is mainly produced by hepatic stellate cells and released into the bloodstream82. Other peripheral sources where Reelin expression has been detected include the kidney, adrenal medulla, lymphatic vessels, small intestine, submandibular gland, cartilage, and bone83,90–96. Nevertheless, Reelin is abundant in blood as seen from the analysis of plasma and serum in both mice and humans, therefore a role for this circulating protein on the vasculature has been hypothesized. Since Reelin is beneficial in the brain, a similar protective function was envisaged for the vascular system. However, ultimately the role of Reelin in the vasculature appears to be more complex.

In 2016, Ding et al. demonstrated both whole body or circulation-specific depletion of Reelin greatly reduced disease pathology in the low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) deficiency mouse model of atherosclerosis38. Lesion area size of the aorta was markedly reduced in both whole body and circulation-specific mouse models and the reduction of monocyte infiltration into these lesions correlated with a reduction of vascular adhesion marker protein expression on the endothelium, such as vascular cell adhesin molecule-1 (VCAM-1) and intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1)38. To determine the role of Reelin for leukocyte recruitment, intravital microscopy was performed on WT and Reelin conditional knockout (cKO) healthy mice to follow leukocyte rolling on the vessel wall38. When compared to controls, leukocyte velocity was increased while the number of rolling leukocytes decreased in Reelin cKO mice, indicating less adhesion to the endothelium. This suggests that Reelin promotes inflammatory cell recruitment and inflammation by increasing the expression of leukocyte-endothelial adhesion proteins on the endothelial surface38.

Further in vitro experiments on human aortic endothelial cells have demonstrated that Reelin binds to its receptor ApoER2 to activate a phosphorylation cascade through Dab-2, PI3K, Akt and importantly NF-κB38,97. Activation of NF-κB directly promotes the expression of adhesion molecules, such as VCAM-1, ICAM-1 and E-selectin. In addition, Reelin also reduces endothelial NOS (eNOS), a naturally occurring anti-adhesion molecule with potent vasodilation properties that manages systemic blood pressure38,98, and promotes vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation via STAT3 phosphorylation97. It appears that Reelin is implicated as a ligand for multiple pathways regarding atherosclerosis. Double knockouts for ApoE and either Stabilin-1 or Stabilin-2 showed reduced aortic plaque development when compared to lone ApoE knockout (KO) mice99. Upon proteomic analysis of these mice, Reelin was found to be a novel ligand for the Stabilins99. This is the first instance reporting Stabilins with a role in atherosclerosis and Reelin as a ligand of Stabilins.

Based on these previous observations, anti-Reelin strategies have been devised to dampen leukocyte extravasation. In the atherosclerosis-prone LDLR KO model fed with a high cholesterol diet, prophylactic Reelin depletion by anti-Reelin antibody (CR-50) or antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) decreases plaque formation in the aorta97. These findings suggest that Reelin inhibition may provide a novel therapeutic approach to counteract leukocyte or monocyte adhesion as well as extravasation and inhibit the progression of atherosclerosis.

5) REELIN AND NEUROINFLAMMATION

The results on atherosclerosis have raised the intriguing question of how the organism “reuses” a neuron guidance molecule (Reelin), that is crucial for brain development to pave the way for leukocyte extravasation and guide them to the perivascular space during inflammation. This new paradigm on the role of guidance molecules across different functions and cell types has been further investigated in the neurovascular breakdown that occurs during neuroinflammation. In multiple sclerosis (MS), chronic inflammation allows monocytes to infiltrate the nervous system resulting in demyelination and eventual paralysis100,101. Unfortunately, medications that mitigate leukocyte infiltration can leave the patient vulnerable to opportunistic infections102–104. Thus, other therapeutic options must be explored105.

As highlighted previously, expression of inflammatory mediators (E-selectin, ICAM-1, and VCAM-1) in human endothelial cells is increased by Reelin through its receptor ApoER2 and NF-κB signaling, both known to regulate endothelial homeostasis38,106. Accordingly, Reelin serum concentrations from MS patients were raised during relapse phases and decreased to control levels during remission phases37. This suggested that the amount of circulating Reelin could directly correlate to disease phase and severity in MS. Thus, the prophylactic and therapeutic potential of circulating Reelin depletion via CR-50 antibody treatment was tested in the mouse model of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) and the results were further validated in Reelin cKO mice37. Removal of plasma Reelin by either approach protected against neuroinflammation and largely abolished the neurological consequences by reducing endothelial expression of adhesion proteins (E-selectin and ICAM-1) and consequently reducing immune cell (monocytes, B cells, T helper cells and T cells) accumulation in the CNS37. Depletion of Reelin also protected mice from paralysis by inhibiting disease progression, as seen with decreased EAE clinical scores and lower weight loss when compared to controls37. Importantly, peripheral treatment with CR-50 did not deplete or alter Reelin function in the CNS37.

These results were further confirmed in a second study focused on the Reelin receptor ApoER2. After induction of EAE in mice with either Apoer2 KO or loss-of-function mutation (Apoer2 EIG), neuroinflammation and paralysis were largely abolished107. There was also downregulation of the vascular adhesion proteins E-selectin and ICAM-1 in the spinal cord, thus ApoER2 deficiency causes dampening of neuroinflammatory signals107. This was further supported using intravital microscopy on both Apoer2 models, demonstrating leukocyte adhesion to the endothelium was reduced in the Apoer2 mutants.

All these models are recapitulated in Figure 3, illustrating that Reelin or ApoER2 disruption reduces the expression of adhesion molecules, infiltration of leukocytes, and paralysis. This suggests a role for circulating Reelin in neuroinflammatory diseases where the blood-brain barrier is compromised, like multiple sclerosis (MS) and Alzheimer’s disease (AD).

Genome-wide association studies of APOE-ε4 homozygous individuals, a known genetic risk factor for AD108,109, led to the finding that DAB1-RELN single nucleotide polymorphisms were also associated with AD110. Indeed, the RELN locus is genetically associated with not only AD but various neuropsychiatric disorders including schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and autism spectrum disorder111–113. Although this data shows the pathway as a whole influencing AD incidence, it does not on its own provide mechanistic insight into proper therapeutic intervention. The main features of AD are β-amyloid (Aβ) plaque deposition114–118, neurofibrillary tau tangles114,115, and infiltration of inflammatory cells, a more recent hallmark gaining increasing attention119–121. Although initial monocyte infiltration bolsters Aβ clearance, a sustained inflammatory environment is detrimental and hastens AD progression122,123. Since circulating Reelin promotes neuroinflammation, it poses as a new therapeutic target for AD. Although this has not been tested directly in the AD context as of yet, Reelin depletion decreases blood-brain barrier permeability to leukocytes, thus dampening neuroinflammation37,107. Future studies are required and should include testing plasma Reelin levels in AD patients to determine the translational relevance for human neuroinflammation.

6) REELIN AND ARTHRITIS

Arthritis is a leading cause of pain and disability globally, affecting people of all ages. This term regroups different diseases and conditions all causing degradation in the joints and surrounding tissues. There are several types of arthritis that can be differentiated between inflammatory forms featuring warm or swollen joints, such as rheumatoid arthritis or ankylosis spondylitis, and non-inflammatory forms such as osteoarthritis, the most common type of arthritis. Due to the important burden of arthritis on the society and patients, many studies have been conducted to identified genetic causes and biomarkers, among some of which Reelin has been identified124–128.

First in a very small arthritis cohort, patients with rheumatoid arthritis presented increased Reelin expression in serum and synovial fluid compared to patients with osteoarthritis125. In the same study Reelin mRNA expression was detected in fibroblast-like synoviocytes. In a second larger study, Reelin protein expression was found also differentially expressed in the serum of rheumatoid patients124. In a different form of inflammatory arthritis, Reelin variant p.(Ser2486Gly) was identified in a family with ankylosis spondylitis, associating for the first time a Reelin SNP mutation in the ApoER2 binding region to a form of arthritis126.

Although osteoarthritis has traditionally been classified as a noninflammatory arthritis, it also relies on inflammation of the synovial membrane and recruitment of immune processes, attesting an ongoing low grade chronic inflammation129–131. In a rat model for osteoarthritis, Reelin mRNA expression was elevated in ipsilateral cartilage compared to sham-operated cartilage127. In addition, Reelin mRNA expression was also increased in differentiating chondrocyte culture.

Taken together, these results suggest that Reelin is associated with several forms of arthritis, but the underlying mechanism remains unknown. Given the role described for this protein in endothelial dysfunction and infiltration of leukocytes37,38,97,102,107 and the importance of leukocyte infiltration in arthritis, future studies should be designed to test this mechanism in inflammatory arthritis models.

7) REELIN AND COAGULATION

Platelets are also suspected to be a source of production and storage of Reelin132. Therefore, its role in coagulation has been recently investigated. Platelets are normally dormant in the vasculature unless there is vessel wall injury. This damage triggers accumulation of platelets that adhere to one another in order to seal the vessel via hemostasis133. Increased adhesion of leukocytes is a result of Reelin stimulation37,97,107. Therefore, Reelin stimulation could bolster repair of injured vessels by increasing platelet adhesion. However, this can be problematic for patients with hypercoagulable disorders in which there is excessive clot formation, thus Reelin ablation could be beneficial for thrombosis therapies.

Reelin ablation reduces thrombus formation.

Reeler mice are noted as coagulation deficient and thus have inhibited thrombosis and hemostasis. In vivo, reeler mice had no incidence of arterial thrombosis 40 minutes after FeCl3 injury to mesenteric arterioles, whereas 100% of wild type mice had complete vessel occlusion by thrombus formation at this point134. Furthermore, this coagulation deficit was recapitulated in WT mice treated with the anti-Reelin antibody CR-50134. Further, in a tail bleeding assay, reeler mice bled for significantly longer periods of time and were more prone to rebleeding than heterozygotes or wild-type controls39. This blunted hemostasis is a result of abnormal fibrin clot formation indicative of deficient thrombin generation and altered prothrombin cleavage during blood coagulation efforts39. Thus, Reelin has a role in thrombus formation further extending its role in adhesion in peripheral systems. The evidence from these studies points to selective ablation of Reelin in the circulatory system as a therapeutic target for diseases such as prothrombin gene mutations or dysfibrinogenemia, as well as acquired hypercoagulable disorders, such as heart attacks or strokes.

Reelin’s receptors, APP and ApoER2, influence fibrinogen adhesion.

Multiple pathways have been studied referencing Reelin’s influence on coagulation. Thrombus formation occurs when platelets activate adhesion-signaling receptors, like the glycoprotein (GP) receptors GPVI and GPIb-IX-V, that interact with various extracellular matrix proteins, such as collagen, fibrinogen, laminin and von Willebrand factor133,135. When investigating canonical Reelin receptors, a link between Amyloid precursor protein (APP) and ApoER2 was found. Extracellular Reelin treatment on wild-type platelets increased platelet adhesion to fibrinogen134,136, but not in APP deficient (App−/−) and ApoER2 deficient (Lrp8−/−) platelets134. To explore thrombus formation in the circulation, whole blood was used ex vivo from APP and ApoER2 deficient mice. Without Reelin treatment, less thrombi formation and surface coverage was seen at high shear conditions for blood from App−/− mice, similar to that of reeler blood, yet surprisingly blood from Lrp8−/− mice formed thrombi similar to that of WT blood134. However, in the same experiment, extracellular Reelin treatment rescued App−/− phenotype suggesting that APP alone is not sufficient for Reelin signaling in platelets. The authors suggest that APP is a receptor influencing Reelin’s role in platelet adhesion, although APP and ApoER2 appear to share some functions within this phenomenon134. Of note, VLDLR, another Reelin receptor, showed to have no effect on platelet adhesion134.

Glycoprotein VI is a platelet receptor for Reelin influencing collagen adhesion.

Other coagulation mechanisms for Reelin have also been proposed to explain its influence on platelet adhesion. As stated previously, exogenous Reelin treatment increases platelet adhesion to fibrinogen, but the effect of Reelin on collagen adhesion remained unknown. Recent work demonstrated WT-platelet adhesion to collagen was unaltered by Reelin treatment; however, reeler platelet adhesion to collagen was lower than WT-platelet adhesion136. This decreased adhesion was rescued by recombinant Reelin treatment, promoting high levels of collagen adhesion indistinguishable from controls136. This study further suggested that Reelin may stimulate Glycoprotein VI (GPVI), a major collagen receptor found on the platelet surface135,137. GPVI induces tyrosine phosphorylation on target proteins, including PLC-γ2 and Syk, which stimulates platelet adhesion, cytoskeletal reorganization and clot retraction133,136. Reelin’s role in this pathway was further supported in vivo. Antibody-induced inhibition of GPVI in WT mice increased the FeCl3-induced occlusion time compared to IgG-treated controls, and GPVI inhibition alone had an even more severe effect on coagulation than Reelin absence in reeler mice136. Together along with positive coimmunoprecipitation data between GPVI and Reelin136, this suggests Reelin as a new ligand for GPVI and shows that arterial thrombosis could be prevented with inhibition of Reelin production by platelets. These findings could be applied to a range of cardiovascular diseases including stroke, myocardial infarction, or aortic aneurysm formation.

Reelin increases platelet adhesion directly influencing coagulation.

Reelin promotes adhesion both in endothelial cells and platelets, hinting at a common mechanism between cell types. Overall, these coagulation studies demonstrate that Reelin increases platelet adhesion, and thus coagulation, but that there are multiple possible mechanisms involved. It appears that increased platelet adhesion via Reelin is guided by various receptors, with APP and ApoER2 influencing fibrinogen adhesion and GPVI influencing collagen adhesion. More studies need to be performed to determine Reelin’s specific effect on these mechanisms.

8) REELIN AND LYMPHATIC CIRCULATION

Reelin is produced by lymphatic endothelial cells and appears pertinent for lymphatic system development82,138. This is similar to how Reelin guides neuronal migration in brain development. However, unlike in the brain, studies have found that canonical Reelin signaling through Dab1 does not influence lymphatic development or circulation, promoting investigation of brand-new mechanisms. Interestingly, Reelin influences multiple cell-to-cell communications between lymphatic endothelial cells and varying muscle cells.

Reelin guides lymphatic vessel formation through communication between lymphatic endothelial cells and smooth muscle cells.

The lymphatic vasculature is composed of lymphatic capillaries, responsible for the intake of lymph, and collecting lymphatic vessels, responsible for lymph propulsion to lymph nodes and where Reelin is secreted by lymphatic endothelial cells91,139. Interestingly, not only do reeler mice show deficits in neuronal formation, but they have defective dermal lymphatic vessel formation and function, specifically related to collecting vessels, and a reduced amount of smooth muscle cell contractions91. Upon secretion by endothelial cells, Reelin’s proteolytic processing is controlled by adjacent smooth muscle cells resulting in the proteolytic cleavage of the N terminus to form a 180 kDa fragment as well as the central Reelin fragment responsible for canonical Reelin signaling91. However, canonical Reelin signaling does not influence lymphatic development, proven by studying Apoer2/Vldlr and Dab1 mutant mice, which showed normal lymphatic vessel formation91. Thus, either the central Reelin fragment acts through an unknown pathway or the 180 kDa fragment is the active form of Reelin in the lymphatic system. One possibility involves monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) which is associated with the recruitment of mural cells (smooth muscle cells and pericytes) to endothelial cells91,140–142. Increased MCP-1 mRNA expression upon treatment with the central Reelin fragment and fulllength Reelin implicate its possible participation in Reelin signaling91. These novel findings are some of the first data to implicate smooth muscle cells in formation and regulation of the lymphatic system.

Reelin influences lymphatic endothelial cell and cardiomyocyte communication in cardiac lymphangiogenesis

Formation of new lymphatics, known as lymphangiogenesis, may prove beneficial to the injured heart by influencing immune cell clearance and cardiac repair as seen in multiple animal models143,144. Upon conditional deletion of the Prox1 gene, an essential regulator of cardiac lymphangiogenesis145, from murine lymphatic endothelial cells, mutant embryos had significantly smaller hearts with edema and lacked nearly all cardiac lymphatics when compared to controls at E17.5146. At a cellular level, cardiomyocyte production, proliferation, and apoptosis were significantly altered146. The authors observed that Reelin mRNA expression in lymphatic endothelial cells was greatly reduced by 80% in Prox1 mutant hearts. Similarly, conditional deletion of Reelin from lymphatic endothelial cells in mice caused mutants to develop smaller hearts and altered cardiomyocyte production and apoptosis146. Thus, Reelin has some importance in cardiac development; however, no cardiac alterations have been reported in reeler mice to date. Reelin increased phosphorylation of FAK, Dab1, AKT, and ERK via integrin-β1 in cultured primary cardiomyocytes treated with WT lymphatic endothelial cell-conditioned medium, but this did not occur when treating the cardiomyocytes with conditioned medium from RELN-deficient lymphatic endothelial cells146. This data insinuates that lymphatic endothelial cell and cardiomyocyte communication is needed but not critical for effective cardiac lymphatic development. Reelin influences this communication during embryonic development, yet the pathway signaling between Prox1 and Reelin remains to be explored.

Reelin promotes early postnatal cardiac repair.

Normal postnatal cardiac Reelin expression is reduced at P2 and steadily declines until it is barely detectable at P14146. After neonatal myocardial infarction of wild-type mice at P2, analysis at P7 showed that Reelin expression was re-activated in the infarcted hearts with higher expression in infarcted tissue146. When inducing myocardial infarction to both wild-type mice and reelers, the reeler mice had increased cardiac fibrosis and depressed cardiac function at P21146. Delivery of Reelin directly to the heart via patches surgically sutured to myocardial infarcted hearts in two-month old mice significantly improved cardiac function 21–42 days after myocardial infarction, reduced fibrotic scarring of the myocardium, and reduced cardiomyocyte apoptosis when compared to controls146. These results indicate that Reelin mediates and bolsters cardiac repair beyond embryonic stages and warrants additional studies in adult mice.

9) REELIN AND IMMUNE SYSTEM

It has been demonstrated that Reelin depletion decreases the recruitment of circulating leukocytes into different tissues due to decreased adhesion properties of the vascular endothelium. This result raises another question regarding Reelin’s influence on immune cells. To date, no direct effect of Reelin has been reported on leukocytes37,38,107; however, a 30 years old study by Green-Johnson et al. suggested that lack of Reelin, during development only, may have a secondary effect on leukocytes. On one hand, they observed that reeler mice have a notable change in their cytokine profiles compared to homozygous WT or heterozygous littermates, with reduced expression of IL-1, IL-2, IL-4, and IFN-γ147. On the other hand, reelers have a higher concentration of norepinephrine due to altered brain development147,148. This abnormally high concentration of norepinephrine is caused by a reduction in cerebellar size without a compensating reduction of norepinephrine148. Knowing that increased norepinephrine levels directly altered cytokine production and macrophage count, it has been suspected by the authors that increased norepinephrine level in reeler mice have a secondary effect on leukocytes. Importantly for anti-Reelin therapies, this same effect would not be recapitulated in conditional or pharmacological knockouts of Reelin as these experiments would deplete Reelin after normal embryonic brain development has concluded. Indeed, white blood cell subpopulation counts are similar in WT and Reelin cKO mice38.

10) REELIN AND THE INTESTINE

Due to the constant self-renewal process of intestinal cells, equilibrium between cell proliferation, differentiation into subclasses (colonocytes, goblet cells, enteroendocrine cells, and Paneth cells), and apoptosis is of key importance149. Reeler mice have more severe consequences after colonic injury indicating Reelin’s protective involvement in the intestine.

Reelin expression is restricted to myofibroblasts and the muscle layer in mouse small intestine and colon149. Reelin receptors (ApoER2 and VLDLR) and Dab1 are expressed in both myofibroblasts and epithelial cells, namely colonocytes149. Myofibroblasts are characterized by their expression of α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) and are important to the intestine when regarding activation of immune response, inflammation (i.e. inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)), and epithelial regulation150,151. Dextran sulphate sodium (DSS)-induced colitis in mice produced various detrimental symptoms and vastly upregulated ApoER2, Reelin, and Dab1 with no change in VLDLR expression and minimal change in α-SMA, indicating that Reelin itself is upregulated and not myofibroblast cell production149. Reelin protein expression increased in the mucosa directly with duration of DSS treatment, further providing evidence that DSS-induced colitis activates Reelin gene expression149. When comparing DSS treatment of wild-type and reeler mice, more severe colitis progression was seen in the reeler phenotype characterized by higher disease activity index, higher mortality (40% vs. 10% in controls) and higher pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-1β expression149. Thus, the authors suggested that Reelin has a protective effect against DSS-induced colitis; however, this effect could be secondary to altered immune cell function as observed in reeler mice (see Reelin and Immune System). Further investigations using Reelin cKO or depletion in this model would be required to conclusively address this question.

Nevertheless, it appears that canonical Reelin signaling is active in the intestine and colon. Further study of the Reelin receptor ApoER2 and its intracellular adaptor protein Dab1 could provide valuable information on Reelin’s influence in this organ’s pathophysiology with important application for chronic inflammation in human bowel diseases such as Crohn’s Disease.

11) REELIN AND THE KIDNEY

Although not essential, Reelin is expressed in the kidney during fetal and postnatal stages in lymphatic vessels82 but also shows variable expression in specific kidney cells as detailed in this section. Reelin’s expression is heightened during early fetal stages in humans and gradually decreases in late fetal stages, similar to human neuronal expression92. This trend is consistent with the conclusion of nephrogenesis at 38 weeks development, indicating Reelin’s importance in early kidney formation92. In adults, increased Reelin expression has been observed in response to angiotensin II during kidney disease 152.

Reelin and Dab1 have differential protein expression in the kidney.

During fetal development, Reelin is detected in the cytoplasm of distal convoluted tubules (DCT), glomeruli, and is strongly expressed in proximal convoluted tubules (PCT)92. This expression is nearly completely ablated in the postnatal kidney. At this time point, Reelin was only detected in PCT structures and glomeruli, albeit at much lower levels than during all embryonic time points. Dab1, a Reelin cytoplasmic adaptor protein, is expressed across all prenatal and postnatal stages in the DCT and glomeruli, with variable expression in the PCT92. Unlike Reelin, the highest expression of Dab1 is seen in the DCT throughout embryonic development92. During human postnatal periods at 1.5 years and 7 years of age, when nephrogenesis is fully complete and differentiation of nephrons occurs, overall Dab1 expression is much higher than Reelin expression, especially in the PCT92. The hypothesis for consistently high Dab1 expression is that this protein may trigger downstream pathways of ion exchange protein channels, helping the development and differentiation of nephrons in the kidney tissue. Dab1 and Reelin only have coexpression in the healthy human kidney during the early fetal stages, essentially disappearing upon birth92. Thus, another pathway (such as those involving Src family kinases) may be sufficient to trigger Dab1 in the absence of Reelin during kidney maturation and maintenance. These results need to be corroborated with other experimental methods, such as western blotting and RT-PCR, owing to the heightened autofluorescence of the kidney153.

Reelin production is upregulated by Angiotensin II in kidney disease.

It has been suggested that podocytes play an important function in glomerular basement membrane morphogenesis during embryonic development of the kidney, as well as throughout the life of the organism in glomerular filtration154,155. Angiotensin II has been shown to increase podocyte apoptosis in both in vivo and in vitro models152,156,157. Podocyte apoptosis and excessive angiotensin II activation, through the renin-angiotensin system, lead to increased oxidative stress, activation of proinflammatory cytokines, and increased glomerular pressure ultimately resulting in kidney failure158–160. Angiotensin II increased pDab1 and Reelin levels as seen in Ang II-treated rats and cultured podocytes152. Further investigation of cellular proliferation and apoptosis via MAP kinase pathways showed that Dab1 siRNA diminished the response of the p38 pathway but not the ERK pathway following angiotensin II infusion152. This indicates that angiotensin II-induced podocyte apoptosis acts through phosphorylation of p38152. Thus, this hormone promotes Reelin expression and Dab1 phosphorylation in podocytes, suggesting Reelin’s involvement in the progression of kidney disease.

Reelin is important for embryonic organ development in various tissues.

Reelin appears to have a ubiquitously important role in the development of the intestine, immune system, and kidney. However, Reelin also has a negative role as it bolsters the progression of postnatal disease. This is the case regardless of signaling pathway, either canonical or non-canonical. With the study of genetic or pharmacological depletion of Reelin, we can begin to uncover the importance, or lack thereof, of postnatal Reelin in the pathophysiology of various diseases such as kidney failure, IBD, or myocardial ischemia.

12) REELIN AND CANCER

Literature on Reelin and cancer is abundant and exposes a complex role for this extracellular protein in cancer development. Due to Reelin’s roles in cell migration and proliferation161,162, conflicting data is seen on whether it is helpful or hindering to tumorigenesis (Table 1). One example is in neuroblastoma, a pediatric cancer of the nervous system, Reelin expression and cancer cell migration varied across different neuroblastoma cell lines163. Further, Reelin’s involvement in individual cancers may make Reelin levels a helpful marker for cancer progression or initiation.

Cases where increased Reelin expression is associated with cancer progression.

In some cancers, Reelin upregulation directly relates to cancer prognosis and severity of disease. Multiple myeloma patients with low Reelin expression had better overall and event-free survival than those with high expression162. Reelin specifically was found to exacerbate symptoms in multiple myeloma patients due to enhanced aerobic glycolysis, increased cell adhesion, and overall enhanced survival of multiple myeloma cells162,164. Mechanistically, Reelin activates integrin β1 through the phosphorylation cascade FAK/Syk, PI3K/Akt/mTor, and STAT3. This cascade promotes transcription of cell-cycle genes, thus producing multiple signals towards cellular proliferation162,164. In this context, Reelin ablation has a protective effect against multiple myeloma by preventing cellular adhesion and decreasing proliferation of multiple myeloma cells.

Reelin expression was also found specifically in cancerous tissue in 39% of samples when looking at 66 cases of prostate cancers165. Within this sample set, no Reelin expression was found for prostate intraepithelial neoplasia lesions, a precursor to prostate cancer. Thus, Reelin levels could be a useful identifier of prostate cancer progression as Gleason score (a sum of primary and secondary patterns of cancerous cells) does not fully grasp the severity of disease166.

Reelin was also found to induce cisplatin resistance in non-small cell lung cancer which accounts for ~84% of all lung cancer167. Cisplatin is a chemotherapeutic drug that halts DNA replication, causing eventual cell death, via the formation of DNA lesions168. Unfortunately, cancer patients can form cisplatin resistance causing limitations in treatment168,169. When looking at specialized cisplatin-resistant A549 lung cancer cells transfected with Reelin or control siRNA, Reelin suppression resulted in reduced cell viability and increased apoptosis when compared to controls170. Conversely, Reelin upregulation directly enhanced cisplatin resistance across various lung cancer cell lines, including two non-small cell lung cancer cell lines H1299 and H460, significantly improving cancer cell viability170. Reelin also promotes epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and thus cell migration of non-small cell lung cancer cells through activation of p38/GSK3β signaling170. Further, Reelin knockdown resulted in reduction of p38 and GSK3β phosphorylation in non-small cell lung cancer cells170. Thus, Reelin ablation could assist in chemotherapeutic treatment by reducing cisplatin resistance in lung cancer patients. Another cancer where Reelin is associated with chemoresistance is noted in acute myeloid leukemia, where mutations in the RELN gene are seen in pediatric and adult patients171.

Cases where decreased Reelin expression is associated with cancer migration and proliferation.

While some cancers show increased Reelin expression in malignant cells as presented in the previous section, others present an extinction of Reelin expression and hypermethylation of the RELN gene. For example in breast cancer, Reelin expression is lost or strongly reduced in cancerous lesions compared to healthy tissue, with majority of lesions showing some degree of promoter methylation172. Upon transfection of a triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) cell line (MDA-MB 231) with a Reelin vector restoring expression, cell migration and invasion were mitigated172. In accordance with this, suppression of endogenous Reelin in another TNBC cell line, SUM159, increased the cell line’s invasive potential173. Interestingly, when ablating integrin α3β1 in MDA-MB 231 cells through RNAi-mediated knockdown, Reelin mRNA significantly increased173. This gives insight into Reelin’s role in tumor cell migration inhibition with integrin α3β1 as the responsible receptor for the spread of breast cancer cells via the downregulation of Reelin.

The epigenetic suppression of Reelin expression is reported in multiple types of cancers. When looking at normal colon and colorectal adenocarcinoma samples from the same patient, Reelin mRNA expression is downregulated due to an upregulation of DNMT1 and thus hypermethylation of the RELN promoter174. A lack of Reelin in the small intestine alters cell proliferation, migration and apoptosis, impairing the intestinal barrier and increasing the occurrence of colitis-associated tumorigenesis as seen in reeler mice175,176. Further, ApoER2 mRNA expression was upregulated, and the tumor suppressor gene HIC1, hypermethylated in cancer 1, had reduced mRNA expression in colonic adenocarcinoma samples174.

Regarding pancreatic cancer, absent expression of Reelin protein and mRNA is seen across multiple types of pancreatic cancer tissues, and the majority of pancreatic cancer cell lines showed hypermethylation of both the RELN and DAB1 genes, indicating a deficiency in Reelin signaling in this type of cancer177. In this pathology as well the loss of Reelin results in greatly enhanced cell motility, invasiveness, and colony-forming ability177.

Lastly, hepatocellular carcinoma, a common form of liver cancer, demonstrates silencing of the RELN gene allowing for cellular migration and increasing the probability of metastasis178. A key factor in hepatocellular carcinoma severity is initiation of metastasis through EMT, granting epithelial cells the ability to invade other tissues due to lessened adherence179. Transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β), a major metabolic regulator of the TGF-β superfamily180–184 known to activate EMT markers such as N-cadherin and vimentin178,185,186, also inhibits Reelin expression. Furthermore, Reelin overexpression impairs TGF-β1-induced EMT enhancement supporting Reelin’s importance in liver cancer prevention178.

Whether protective or adverse, Reelin affects adhesion, migration, and proliferation of cancer cells.

These studies highlight the complexity of Reelin’s role in cancer and suggest ambiguous functions either promoting or inhibiting malignant cell adhesion, migration and proliferation depending on the cell type and organ affected. In this context, Reelin may appear as a specific biomarker for some types of tumors, such as multiple myeloma or prostate cancer. Reelin supplementation could also be a possible therapy for cancers exhibiting Reelin downregulation. Similarly, Reelin inhibition could be envisaged for some well-defined cancers, but would require a refined benefit / risk evaluation as systemic Reelin depletion may also affect the recruitment of leukocytes potentially fighting malignant cells. The heterogeneity of Reelin function in cancer types makes it difficult to conclude on a general mechanism. For example, while decreased Reelin expression is associated with increased cancer migration and proliferation in several cases, for the glioblastoma cell lines U251 and U87 the opposite association was observed187,188.

Finally, a switch in Reelin source may explain different and conflicting functions as it has been suggested that Reelin has a dual role in neuroblastoma formation. Autocrine expression marks low-grade differentiating tumor cells, whereas paracrine Reelin presented by lymphatic and blood vessel endothelium may act as a chemoattractant and promote hematogenic and lymphogenic dissemination in progressed stages163.

13) FUTURE PERSPECTIVES AND CONCLUSION

As presented in this review, studies are emerging on Reelin’s importance in various systems and diseases outside of the central nervous system. Our understanding of this extracellular protein’s biology is still growing and mostly leans on knowledge gained through neuronal research in addition to the extended use of reeler mice. However, this model has major disadvantages for scientific investigations, being limited by brain malformation and immune system aberrations. Specifically, altered brain development in these animals lead to increased norepinephrine expression that affects cytokine production, as well as macrophage and lymphocyte composition147. Instead, the use of Reelin cKO mice is more appropriate, with an induction of the KO phenotype in adult mice after proper brain development. In addition to this genetic mouse model, different tools have been developed to pharmacologically deplete Reelin, such as the commercially available monoclonal anti-Reelin antibody CR-50 created by Dr. Mikoshiba in 1995, or antisense oligonucleotides (ASO) against Reelin7,27,37,97. CR-50 works by binding the N-terminal part of Reelin thus preventing its multimerization27. In addition, intraperitoneal injections of CR-50 in mice lead to an immune complex formation with which rapidly clears this protein from the circulation38. Importantly, peripheral anti-Reelin treatment has not shown a depletion of Reelin in the brain, thus preserving its function in neuronal activity while abrogating its possibly deleterious effect outside of the CNS.

Most of the studies so far have focused on Reelin’s separate effect in each system. However, different Reelin functions may have cumulative effects. For example, in the circulation, depletion of Reelin decreases coagulation, yet in the endothelium, Reelin reduction leads to decreased leukocyte adhesion and increased eNOS activity. Altogether, these three functions of Reelin could participate synergistically, yielding superior organ perfusion and reduction of inflammation.

Some important questions remain unclear, probably due to the multitude and complex Reelin functions in different organs. For one, Reelin is abundant in the plasma; however, its major cellular source and its regulation within an organism remains unknown. Outside of the CNS, Reelin expression has been detected in the liver, kidney, adrenal medulla, lymphatic vessels, small intestine, submandibular gland, cartilage, and bone83,90–96. Intriguingly, circulating Reelin increases in different inflammatory conditions such as MS and atherosclerosis. Reelin has also been observed in lymphatic endothelial cells, human umbilical vein endothelial cells, and human microvascular endothelial cells. Beside its source, how Reelin is induced, regulated, and how its structure or cleavage affect its functions still remains elusive. Answering these questions would fill a gap in our current knowledge of Reelin biology with profound implication for different pathologies involving this protein.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We thank Catherine Wasser, Chandler Werthmann, Murat Durakoglugil and Brian Emerson for their precious help in revising and editing this manuscript.

FUNDING

J.H. was supported by grants from the NHLBI (R37 HL063762), NIA (RF AG053391), the NINDS and NIA (R01 NS093382), BrightFocus A2016396S, the Bluefield Project to Cure FTD and a Harrington Scholar Innovator Award (2019).

Figure 1. Reelin structure, cleavage products, interaction with proteases and antibody binding sites.

Reelin is a large extracellular protein with many glycosylation sites affecting its molecular weight and two major cleavage site generating multiple cleavage products.

Figure 2. Overview of Reelin expression and function among organs and cell types.

Besides neurological function, Reelin is secreted by different cells and is present in many organs mainly linked to the cardiovascular system, where it regulates organ development, vascular permeability, inflammation, fibrosis and thrombosis among others.

Figure 3. Inhibition of Reelin pathway protects from neuroinflammation.

(A) Meta-analysis on all the literature available 37,107 on Reelin or Apoer2 inhibition in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) mouse models. Expression of adhesion markers were evaluated by Western blotting and the presence of inflammatory cells by immunohistochemistry or FACS, all normalized to corresponding controls. EAE severity was evaluated daily from day 10 by EAE clinical score (from 0 = unaffected to 10 = dead) and hanging test (for a maximum time of 180 s). EAE severity and hanging time indexes were calculated for each animal by integrating daily scores over the course of the experiment and represent the area under the curve (AUC). The graph represents the fold change (compared to controls set as 1, dotted line) on a logarithmic scale. *p&lt;0.05 and **p&lt;0.01 (t-test). (B) This mechanistic model incorporates the findings described in this article and the literature to date, as discussed. Reelin promotes the expression of vascular adhesion proteins, thereby increasing monocyte adhesion/extravasation, inflammation and consequently demyelination. Both genetic or therapeutic Reelin depletion prevents this inflammatory cascade and thus paralysis in a murine EAE model. We surmise that the same mechanism is conserved in humans where Reelin also promotes monocyte adhesion to vascular endothelial cells in vitro. Adapted from 37,107 with permission from the authors.

Table 1. Reelin’s Protective and Adverse Effects on Various Cancer Types

Type of Cancer	Reelin Upregulated or Downregulated?	Protective or Adverse Effect?	Summary of Findings	Associated proteins/pathways	Reference	
Multiple Myeloma	Upregulated	Adverse	Patients showed a significant negative correlation between RELN expression and patient outcome.	Integrin β1, HIF1α	162	
Multiple Myeloma	Upregulated	Adverse	H929 and U266, human myeloma cell lines, showed increased adhesion of MM cells to BMSCs with increased Reelin concentration.	Integrin β1	189	
Prostate	Upregulated	Adverse	Reelin immunohistochemistry staining of 66 cases of prostate cancer showed a direct association between cancer progression and reelin expression.		165	
Lung	Upregulated	Adverse	Reelin upregulation increased cisplatin resistance in multiple lung cancer cell lines. Silencing Reelin production increased apoptosis among cisplatin-resistant A549 lung cancer cells.	p38, GSK3β	170	
TNBC	Upregulated	Protective	MDA-MB 231 cells transfected to produce Reelin had less migratory and invasive cellular behavior. Reelin siRNA treatment of SUM159 cells causes increased invasive potential.	Integrin α3β1	173	
Colorectal	Downregulated	Adverse	There is an increasing occurrence of colitis-associated tumorigenesis when comparing reeler mice to controls.	Sox9, Cdx2, Smad5, Cyclin D1	175	
Colorectal	Downregulated	Adverse	Reelin depletion is a result of upregulated ApoER2 mRNA expression and HIC1 mRNA downregulation as seen in adenocarcinoma samples.	ApoER2, HIC1	174	
Hepatocellular Carcinoma	Downregulated	Adverse	As a result of RELN inhibition by siRNAs or RELN depletion with TGF-β treatment, EMT increased, allowing for higher initiation of metastasis.	TGF-β1, N-cadherin, Vimentin, Fibronectin	178	
Hepatocellular Carcinoma	Downregulated	Adverse	Hepatocellular carcinoma tumor tissue had reduced RNA Reelin expression in 70.8% of samples. 37.5% of these tissues had some degree of hypermethylation at the RELN promoter.		190	
Pancreatic	Downregulated	Adverse	Su8686 pancreatic cancer cell line had increased cell motility upon Reelin silencing. Absence of RELN mRNA expression seen in 18 different pancreatic cell lines.		177	
Breast Cancer	Downregulated	Adverse	Reduced expression of Reelin is a result of promoter methylation.		172	
MM: multiple myeloma, BMSC: bone marrow stromal cells

DECLARATION OF INTERESTS

L.C., and J.H. are co-shareholders of Reelin Therapeutics, Inc. and co-inventors of a patent related to anti-Reelin strategies (application Number: 15/763,047 and Publication Number: 20180273637)


REFERENCES

1. D’Arcangelo G . (2014). Reelin in the Years: Controlling Neuronal Migration and Maturation in the Mammalian Brain. Advances in Neuroscience 2014 , 1–19. 10.1155/2014/597395.
2. D’Arcangelo G , Miao GG , Chen SC , Soares HD , Morgan JI , and Curran T . (1995). A protein related to extracellular matrix proteins deleted in the mouse mutant reeler. Nature 374 , 719–723. 10.1038/374719a0.7715726
3. D’Arcangelo G , Nakajima K , Miyata T , Ogawa M , Mikoshiba K , and Curran T . (1997). Reelin is a secreted glycoprotein recognized by the CR-50 monoclonal antibody. J Neurosci 17 , 23–31.8987733
4. Frotscher M . (1997). Dual role of Cajal-Retzius cells and reelin in cortical development. Cell Tissue Res. 290 , 315–322. 10.1007/s004410050936.9321693
5. Pesold C , Impagnatiello F , Pisu MG , Uzunov DP , Costa E , Guidotti A , and Caruncho HJ (1998). Reelin is preferentially expressed in neurons synthesizing gamma-aminobutyric acid in cortex and hippocampus of adult rats. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A 95 , 3221–3226. 10.1073/pnas.95.6.3221.9501244
6. Weeber EJ , Beffert U , Jones C , Christian JM , Forster E , Sweatt JD , and Herz J . (2002). Reelin and ApoE receptors cooperate to enhance hippocampal synaptic plasticity and learning. J Biol Chem 277 , 39944–39952. 10.1074/jbc.M205147200.12167620
7. Ogawa M , Miyata T , Nakajima K , Yagyu K , Seike M , Ikenaka K , Yamamoto H , and Mikoshiba K . (1995). The reeler gene-associated antigen on Cajal-Retzius neurons is a crucial molecule for laminar organization of cortical neurons. Neuron 14 , 899–912. 10.1016/08966273(95)90329-1.7748558
8. Kelsom C , and Lu W . (2013). Development and specification of GABAergic cortical interneurons. Cell Biosci 3 , 19. 10.1186/2045-3701-3-19.23618463
9. Hamad MIK , Jbara A , Rabaya O , Petrova P , Daoud S , Melliti N , Meseke M , Lutz D , Petrasch-Parwez E , Schwitalla JC , (2021). Reelin signaling modulates GABAB receptor function in the neocortex. J Neurochem 156 , 589–603. 10.1111/jnc.14990.32083308
10. Fatemi SH (2005). Reelin glycoprotein: structure, biology and roles in health and disease. Mol Psychiatry 10 , 251–257. 10.1038/sj.mp.4001613.15583703
11. Lacor PN , Grayson DR , Auta J , Sugaya I , Costa E , and Guidotti A . (2000). Reelin secretion from glutamatergic neurons in culture is independent from neurotransmitter regulation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 97 , 3556–3561. 10.1073/pnas.97.7.3556.10725375
12. Fatemi SH , Earle JA , and McMenomy T . (2000). Reduction in Reelin immunoreactivity in hippocampus of subjects with schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and major depression. Mol Psychiatry 5 , 654–663, 571. 10.1038/sj.mp.4000783.11126396
13. Beffert U , Weeber EJ , Durudas A , Qiu S , Masiulis I , Sweatt JD , Li W-P , Adelmann G , Frotscher M , Hammer RE , (2005). Modulation of synaptic plasticity and memory by Reelin involves differential splicing of the lipoprotein receptor Apoer2. Neuron 47 , 567–579. 10.1016/j.neuron.2005.07.007.16102539
14. Gong C , Wang T-W , Huang HS , and Parent JM (2007). Reelin regulates neuronal progenitor migration in intact and epileptic hippocampus. J. Neurosci 27 , 1803–1811. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3111-06.2007.17314278
15. Niu S , Renfro A , Quattrocchi CC , Sheldon M , and D’Arcangelo G . (2004). Reelin promotes hippocampal dendrite development through the VLDLR/ApoER2-Dab1 pathway. Neuron 41 , 71–84.14715136
16. Niu S , Yabut O , and D’Arcangelo G . (2008). The Reelin signaling pathway promotes dendritic spine development in hippocampal neurons. J. Neurosci 28 , 10339–10348. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1917-08.2008.18842893
17. Fatemi SH , Stary JM , and Egan EA (2002). Reduced blood levels of reelin as a vulnerability factor in pathophysiology of autistic disorder. Cell Mol Neurobiol 22 , 139–152. 10.1023/a:1019857620251.12363196
18. Grayson DR , and Guidotti A . (2013). The dynamics of DNA methylation in schizophrenia and related psychiatric disorders. Neuropsychopharmacology 38 , 138–166. 10.1038/npp.2012.125.22948975
19. Impagnatiello F , Guidotti AR , Pesold C , Dwivedi Y , Caruncho H , Pisu MG , Uzunov DP , Smalheiser NR , Davis JM , Pandey GN , (1998). A decrease of reelin expression as a putative vulnerability factor in schizophrenia. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A 95 , 15718–15723. 10.1073/pnas.95.26.15718.9861036
20. Marckx AT , Fritschle KE , Calvier L , and Herz J . (2021). Reelin changes hippocampal learning in aging and Alzheimer’s disease. Behav Brain Res 414 , 113482. 10.1016/j.bbr.2021.113482.
21. Yu N-N , Tan M-S , Yu J-T , Xie A-M , and Tan L . (2016). The Role of Reelin Signaling in Alzheimer’s Disease. Mol. Neurobiol 53 , 5692–5700. 10.1007/s12035-015-9459-9.26491027
22. Knuesel I . (2010). Reelin-mediated signaling in neuropsychiatric and neurodegenerative diseases. Prog Neurobiol 91 , 257–274. 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2010.04.002.20417248
23. Falconer DS (1951). Two new mutants, “trembler” and “reeler”, with neurological actions in the house mouse (Mus musculus L.). J Genet 50 , 192–201. 10.1007/BF02996215.24539699
24. Goffinet AM (1984). Events governing organization of postmigratory neurons: studies on brain development in normal and reeler mice. Brain Res 319 , 261–296. 10.1016/0165-0173(84)90013-4.6383524
25. Goffinet AM (1979). An early development defect in the cerebral cortex of the reeler mouse. A morphological study leading to a hypothesis concerning the action of the mutant gene. Anat Embryol (Berl) 157 , 205–216. 10.1007/BF00305160.517767
26. Guy J , and Staiger JF (2017). The Functioning of a Cortex without Layers. Front Neuroanat 11 , 54. 10.3389/fnana.2017.00054.28747874
27. Utsunomiya-Tate N , Kubo K , Tate S , Kainosho M , Katayama E , Nakajima K , and Mikoshiba K . (2000). Reelin molecules assemble together to form a large protein complex, which is inhibited by the function-blocking CR-50 antibody. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 97 , 9729–9734. 10.1073/pnas.160272497.10920200
28. Hiesberger T , Trommsdorff M , Howell BW , Goffinet A , Mumby MC , Cooper JA , and Herz J . (1999). Direct binding of Reelin to VLDL receptor and ApoE receptor 2 induces tyrosine phosphorylation of disabled-1 and modulates tau phosphorylation. Neuron 24 , 481–489. 10.1016/s0896-6273(00)80861-2.10571241
29. Trommsdorff M , Gotthardt M , Hiesberger T , Shelton J , Stockinger W , Nimpf J , Hammer RE , Richardson JA , and Herz J . (1999). Reeler/Disabled-like disruption of neuronal migration in knockout mice lacking the VLDL receptor and ApoE receptor 2. Cell 97 , 689–701. 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)80782-5.10380922
30. Lee GH , and D’Arcangelo G . (2016). New Insights into Reelin-Mediated Signaling Pathways. Front. Cell. Neurosci 10 . 10.3389/fncel.2016.00122.
31. Okoro EU , Zhang H , Guo Z , Yang F , Smith C , and Yang H . (2015). A Subregion of Reelin Suppresses Lipoprotein-Induced Cholesterol Accumulation in Macrophages. PLoS ONE 10 , e0136895. 10.1371/journal.pone.0136895.
32. Jossin Y , Ignatova N , Hiesberger T , Herz J , Lambert de Rouvroit C , and Goffinet AM (2004). The central fragment of Reelin, generated by proteolytic processing in vivo, is critical to its function during cortical plate development. J Neurosci 24 , 514–521. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3408-03.2004.14724251
33. Koie M , Okumura K , Hisanaga A , Kamei T , Sasaki K , Deng M , Baba A , Kohno T , and Hattori M . (2014). Cleavage within Reelin repeat 3 regulates the duration and range of the signaling activity of Reelin protein. J Biol Chem 289 , 12922–12930. 10.1074/jbc.M113.536326.24644294
34. Ogino H , Hisanaga A , Kohno T , Kondo Y , Okumura K , Kamei T , Sato T , Asahara H , Tsuiji H , Fukata M , (2017). Secreted Metalloproteinase ADAMTS-3 Inactivates Reelin. J Neurosci 37 , 3181–3191. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3632-16.2017.28213441
35. Okugawa E , Ogino H , Shigenobu T , Yamakage Y , Tsuiji H , Oishi H , Kohno T , and Hattori M . (2020). Physiological significance of proteolytic processing of Reelin revealed by cleavage-resistant Reelin knock-in mice. Sci Rep 10 , 4471. 10.1038/s41598-020-61380-w.32161359
36. Yasui N , Nogi T , Kitao T , Nakano Y , Hattori M , and Takagi J . (2007). Structure of a receptor-binding fragment of reelin and mutational analysis reveal a recognition mechanism similar to endocytic receptors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104 , 9988–9993. 10.1073/pnas.0700438104.17548821
37. Calvier L , Demuth G , Manouchehri N , Wong C , Sacharidou A , Mineo C , Shaul PW , Monson NL , Kounnas MZ , Stüve O , (2020). Reelin depletion protects against autoimmune encephalomyelitis by decreasing vascular adhesion of leukocytes. Sci. Transl. Med 12 , eaay7675. 10.1126/scitranslmed.aay7675.
38. Ding Y , Huang L , Xian X , Yuhanna IS , Wasser CR , Frotscher M , Mineo C , Shaul PW , and Herz J . (2016). Loss of Reelin protects against atherosclerosis by reducing leukocyte-endothelial cell adhesion and lesion macrophage accumulation. Science Signaling 9 , ra29–ra29. 10.1126/scisignal.aad5578.26980442
39. Tseng W-L , Chen T-H , Huang C-C , Huang Y-H , Yeh C-F , Tsai H-J , Lee H-Y , Kao C-Y , Lin S-W , Liao H-R , (2014). Impaired thrombin generation in Reelin-deficient mice: a potential role of plasma Reelin in hemostasis. J. Thromb. Haemost 12 , 2054–2064. 10.1111/jth.12736.25255925
40. Wang Q , Lu J , Yang C , Wang X , Cheng L , Hu G , Sun Y , Zhang X , Wu M , and Liu Z . (2002). CASK and its target gene Reelin were co-upregulated in human esophageal carcinoma. Cancer Lett 179 , 71–77. 10.1016/s0304-3835(01)00846-1.11880184
41. D’Arcangelo G , Homayouni R , Keshvara L , Rice DS , Sheldon M , and Curran T . (1999). Reelin is a ligand for lipoprotein receptors. Neuron 24 , 471–479.10571240
42. Reddy SS , Connor TE , Weeber EJ , and Rebeck W . (2011). Similarities and differences in structure, expression, and functions of VLDLR and ApoER2. Mol Neurodegener 6 , 30. 10.1186/1750-1326-6-30.21554715
43. Duit S , Mayer H , Blake SM , Schneider WJ , and Nimpf J . (2010). Differential functions of ApoER2 and very low density lipoprotein receptor in Reelin signaling depend on differential sorting of the receptors. J Biol Chem 285 , 4896–4908. 10.1074/jbc.M109.025973.19948739
44. Herz J , and Bock HH (2002). Lipoprotein receptors in the nervous system. Annu. Rev. Biochem 71 , 405–434. 10.1146/annurev.biochem.71.110601.135342.12045102
45. Rice DS , Sheldon M , D’Arcangelo G , Nakajima K , Goldowitz D , and Curran T . (1998). Disabled-1 acts downstream of Reelin in a signaling pathway that controls laminar organization in the mammalian brain. Development 125 , 3719–3729. 10.1242/dev.125.18.3719.9716537
46. Arnaud L , Ballif BA , Förster E , and Cooper JA (2003). Fyn tyrosine kinase is a critical regulator of disabled-1 during brain development. Curr. Biol 13 , 9–17. 10.1016/s0960-9822(02)01397-0.12526739
47. Bock HH , and Herz J . (2003). Reelin activates SRC family tyrosine kinases in neurons. Curr. Biol 13 , 18–26. 10.1016/s0960-9822(02)01403-3.12526740
48. Strasser V , Fasching D , Hauser C , Mayer H , Bock HH , Hiesberger T , Herz J , Weeber EJ , Sweatt JD , Pramatarova A , (2004). Receptor clustering is involved in Reelin signaling. Mol. Cell. Biol 24 , 1378–1386. 10.1128/mcb.24.3.1378-1386.2004.14729980
49. Ware ML , Fox JW , González JL , Davis NM , Lambert de Rouvroit C , Russo CJ , Chua SC , Goffinet AM , and Walsh CA (1997). Aberrant splicing of a mouse disabled homolog, mdab1, in the scrambler mouse. Neuron 19 , 239–249. 10.1016/s0896-6273(00)80936-8.9292716
50. Goldowitz D , Cushing RC , Laywell E , D’Arcangelo G , Sheldon M , Sweet HO , Davisson M , Steindler D , and Curran T . (1997). Cerebellar disorganization characteristic of reeler in scrambler mutant mice despite presence of reelin. J Neurosci 17 , 8767–8777. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.17-22-08767.1997.9348346
51. Bock HH , Jossin Y , May P , Bergner O , and Herz J . (2004). Apolipoprotein E receptors are required for reelin-induced proteasomal degradation of the neuronal adaptor protein Disabled-1. J. Biol. Chem 279 , 33471–33479. 10.1074/jbc.M401770200.15175346
52. Beffert U , Morfini G , Bock HH , Reyna H , Brady ST , and Herz J . (2002). Reelin-mediated signaling locally regulates protein kinase B/Akt and glycogen synthase kinase 3beta. J. Biol. Chem 277 , 49958–49964. 10.1074/jbc.M209205200.12376533
53. Bock HH , Jossin Y , Liu P , Förster E , May P , Goffinet AM , and Herz J . (2003). Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase interacts with the adaptor protein Dab1 in response to Reelin signaling and is required for normal cortical lamination. J. Biol. Chem 278 , 38772–38779. 10.1074/jbc.M306416200.12882964
54. Jossin Y , and Goffinet AM (2007). Reelin signals through phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and Akt to control cortical development and through mTor to regulate dendritic growth. Mol. Cell. Biol 27 , 7113–7124. 10.1128/MCB.00928-07.17698586
55. Jacinto E , Loewith R , Schmidt A , Lin S , Rüegg MA , Hall A , and Hall MN (2004). Mammalian TOR complex 2 controls the actin cytoskeleton and is rapamycin insensitive. Nat Cell Biol 6 , 1122–1128. 10.1038/ncb1183.15467718
56. Dan HC , Cooper MJ , Cogswell PC , Duncan JA , Ting JP-Y , and Baldwin AS (2008). Akt-dependent regulation of NF-{kappa}B is controlled by mTOR and Raptor in association with IKK. Genes Dev 22 , 1490–1500. 10.1101/gad.1662308.18519641
57. Andressen C , Arnhold S , Puschmann M , Bloch W , Hescheler J , Fässler R , and Addicks K . (1998). Beta1 integrin deficiency impairs migration and differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cell derived neurons. Neurosci Lett 251 , 165–168. 10.1016/s0304-3940(98)00535-7.9726369
58. DeFreitas MF , Yoshida CK , Frazier WA , Mendrick DL , Kypta RM , and Reichardt LF (1995). Identification of integrin alpha 3 beta 1 as a neuronal thrombospondin receptor mediating neurite outgrowth. Neuron 15 , 333–343. 10.1016/0896-6273(95)90038-1.7544141
59. Dulabon L , Olson EC , Taglienti MG , Eisenhuth S , McGrath B , Walsh CA , Kreidberg JA , and Anton ES (2000). Reelin binds alpha3beta1 integrin and inhibits neuronal migration. Neuron 27 , 33–44. 10.1016/s0896-6273(00)00007-6.10939329
60. Sekine K , Kawauchi T , Kubo K-I , Honda T , Herz J , Hattori M , Kinashi T , and Nakajima K . (2012). Reelin controls neuronal positioning by promoting cell-matrix adhesion via inside-out activation of integrin α5β1. Neuron 76 , 353–369. 10.1016/j.neuron.2012.07.020.23083738
61. Fishman RB , and Hatten ME (1993). Multiple receptor systems promote CNS neural migration. J Neurosci 13 , 3485–3495. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.13-08-03485.1993.8393483
62. Hoe H-S , Lee KJ , Carney RSE , Lee J , Markova A , Lee J-Y , Howell BW , Hyman BT , Pak DTS , Bu G , (2009). Interaction of reelin with amyloid precursor protein promotes neurite outgrowth. J Neurosci 29 , 7459–7473. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4872-08.2009.19515914
63. O’Brien RJ , and Wong PC (2011). Amyloid precursor protein processing and Alzheimer’s disease. Annu Rev Neurosci 34 , 185–204. 10.1146/annurev-neuro-061010-113613.21456963
64. Bock HH , and May P . (2016). Canonical and Non-canonical Reelin Signaling. Front Cell Neurosci 10 , 166. 10.3389/fncel.2016.00166.27445693
65. Haass C , Kaether C , Thinakaran G , and Sisodia S . (2012). Trafficking and proteolytic processing of APP. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2 , a006270. 10.1101/cshperspect.a006270.
66. Selkoe DJ (2000). Toward a comprehensive theory for Alzheimer’s disease. Hypothesis: Alzheimer’s disease is caused by the cerebral accumulation and cytotoxicity of amyloid beta-protein. Ann N Y Acad Sci 924 , 17–25. 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2000.tb05554.x.11193794
67. Pramatarova A , Ochalski PG , Lee C-H , and Howell BW (2006). Mouse disabled 1 regulates the nuclear position of neurons in a Drosophila eye model. Mol Cell Biol 26 , 1510–1517. 10.1128/MCB.26.4.1510-1517.2006.16449660
68. Ballif BA , Arnaud L , Arthur WT , Guris D , Imamoto A , and Cooper JA (2004). Activation of a Dab1/CrkL/C3G/Rap1 Pathway in Reelin-Stimulated Neurons. Current Biology 14 , 606–610. 10.1016/j.cub.2004.03.038.15062102
69. Jossin Y , and Cooper JA (2011). Reelin, Rap1 and N-cadherin orient the migration of multipolar neurons in the developing neocortex. Nat Neurosci 14 , 697–703. 10.1038/nn.2816.21516100
70. Chai X , Förster E , Zhao S , Bock HH , and Frotscher M . (2009). Reelin stabilizes the actin cytoskeleton of neuronal processes by inducing n-cofilin phosphorylation at serine3. J Neurosci 29 , 288–299. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2934-08.2009.19129405
71. Yang N , Higuchi O , Ohashi K , Nagata K , Wada A , Kangawa K , Nishida E , and Mizuno K . (1998). Cofilin phosphorylation by LIM-kinase 1 and its role in Rac-mediated actin reorganization. Nature 393 , 809–812. 10.1038/31735.9655398
72. Chai X , Förster E , Zhao S , Bock HH , and Frotscher M . (2009). Reelin acts as a stop signal for radially migrating neurons by inducing phosphorylation of n-cofilin at the leading edge. Commun Integr Biol 2 , 375–377. 10.4161/cib.2.4.8614.19721896
73. Frotscher M , Zhao S , Wang S , and Chai X . (2017). Reelin Signaling Inactivates Cofilin to Stabilize the Cytoskeleton of Migrating Cortical Neurons. Front Cell Neurosci 11 , 148. 10.3389/fncel.2017.00148.28588454
74. Bouché E , Romero-Ortega MI , Henkemeyer M , Catchpole T , Leemhuis J , Frotscher M , May P , Herz J , and Bock HH (2013). Reelin induces EphB activation. Cell Res 23 , 473–490. 10.1038/cr.2013.7.23318582
75. Klein R . (2004). Eph/ephrin signaling in morphogenesis, neural development and plasticity. Curr Opin Cell Biol 16 , 580–589. 10.1016/j.ceb.2004.07.002.15363810
76. Sentürk A , Pfennig S , Weiss A , Burk K , and Acker-Palmer A . (2011). Ephrin Bs are essential components of the Reelin pathway to regulate neuronal migration. Nature 472 , 356–360. 10.1038/nature09874.21460838
77. Pohlkamp T , Xiao L , Sultana R , Bepari A , Bock HH , Henkemeyer M , and Herz J . (2016). Ephrin Bs and canonical Reelin signalling. Nature 539 , E4–E6. 10.1038/nature20129.27882975
78. Levenson JM , Qiu S , and Weeber EJ (2008). The role of reelin in adult synaptic function and the genetic and epigenetic regulation of the reelin gene. Biochim Biophys Acta 1779 , 422–431. 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2008.01.001.18237558
79. Qiu S , Zhao LF , Korwek KM , and Weeber EJ (2006). Differential reelin-induced enhancement of NMDA and AMPA receptor activity in the adult hippocampus. J Neurosci 26 , 12943–12955. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2561-06.2006.17167084
80. Botella-Lopez A , de Madaria E , Jover R , Bataller R , Sancho-Bru P , Candela A , Compañ A , Pérez-Mateo M , Martinez S , and Sáez-Valero J . (2008). Reelin is overexpressed in the liver and plasma of bile duct ligated rats and its levels and glycosylation are altered in plasma of humans with cirrhosis. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 40 , 766–775.18449964
81. Carotti S , Perrone G , Amato M , Vespasiani Gentilucci U , Righi D , Francesconi M , Pellegrini C , Zalfa F , Zingariello M , Picardi A , (2017). Reelin expression in human liver of patients with chronic hepatitis C infection. Eur J Histochem 61 , 2745. 10.4081/ejh.2017.2745.28348420
82. Samama B , and Boehm N . (2005). Reelin immunoreactivity in lymphatics and liver during development and adult life. Anat Rec A Discov Mol Cell Evol Biol 285 , 595–599. 10.1002/ar.a.20202.15912522
83. Smalheiser NR , Costa E , Guidotti A , Impagnatiello F , Auta J , Lacor P , Kriho V , and Pappas GD (2000). Expression of reelin in adult mammalian blood, liver, pituitary pars intermedia, and adrenal chromaffin cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 97 , 1281–1286.10655522
84. Kobold D , Grundmann A , Piscaglia F , Eisenbach C , Neubauer K , Steffgen J , Ramadori G , and Knittel T . (2002). Expression of reelin in hepatic stellate cells and during hepatic tissue repair: a novel marker for the differentiation of HSC from other liver myofibroblasts. J Hepatol 36 , 607–613. 10.1016/s0168-8278(02)00050-8.11983443
85. Weiskirchen R , and Tacke F . (2014). Cellular and molecular functions of hepatic stellate cells in inflammatory responses and liver immunology. Hepatobiliary Surg Nutr 3 , 344–363. 10.3978/j.issn.2304-3881.2014.11.03.25568859
86. Meng F , Wang K , Aoyama T , Grivennikov SI , Paik Y , Scholten D , Cong M , Iwaisako K , Liu X , Zhang M , (2012). Interleukin-17 signaling in inflammatory, Kupffer cells, and hepatic stellate cells exacerbates liver fibrosis in mice. Gastroenterology 143 , 765–776.e3. 10.1053/j.gastro.2012.05.049.22687286
87. Kisseleva T , Cong M , Paik Y , Scholten D , Jiang C , Benner C , Iwaisako K , Moore-Morris T , Scott B , Tsukamoto H , (2012). Myofibroblasts revert to an inactive phenotype during regression of liver fibrosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109 , 9448–9453. 10.1073/pnas.1201840109.22566629
88. Fujita T , and Narumiya S . (2016). Roles of hepatic stellate cells in liver inflammation: a new perspective. Inflamm Regen 36 , 1. 10.1186/s41232-016-0005-6.29259674
89. Maher JJ (2001). Interactions between hepatic stellate cells and the immune system. Semin. Liver Dis. 21 , 417–426. 10.1055/s-2001-17555.11586469
90. Khialeeva E , and Carpenter EM (2017). Nonneuronal roles for the reelin signaling pathway. Dev. Dyn 246 , 217–226. 10.1002/dvdy.24462.27739126
91. Lutter S , Xie S , Tatin F , and Makinen T . (2012). Smooth muscle-endothelial cell communication activates Reelin signaling and regulates lymphatic vessel formation. J. Cell Biol. 197 , 837–849. 10.1083/jcb.201110132.22665518
92. Racetin A , Jurić M , Filipović N , Šolić I , Kosović I , Glavina Durdov M , Kunac N , Zekić Tomaš S , Saraga M , Šoljić V , (2019). Expression and localization of DAB1 and Reelin during normal human kidney development. Croat. Med. J 60 , 521–531.31894918
93. Rawlinson SCF , McKay IJ , Ghuman M , Wellmann C , Ryan P , Prajaneh S , Zaman G , Hughes FJ , and Kingsmill VJ (2009). Adult rat bones maintain distinct regionalized expression of markers associated with their development. PLoS One 4 , e8358. 10.1371/journal.pone.0008358.20027296
94. García-Miranda P , Peral MJ , and Ilundain AA (2010). Rat small intestine expresses the reelin-Disabled-1 signalling pathway. Exp Physiol 95 , 498–507. 10.1113/expphysiol.2009.050682.19946030
95. Rebustini IT , Hayashi T , Reynolds AD , Dillard ML , Carpenter EM , and Hoffman MP (2012). miR-200c regulates FGFR-dependent epithelial proliferation via Vldlr during submandibular gland branching morphogenesis. Development 139 , 191–202. 10.1242/dev.070151.22115756
96. Diaz-Mendoza MJ , Lorda-Diez CI , Montero JA , Garcia-Porrero JA , and Hurle JM (2014). Reelin/DAB-1 signaling in the embryonic limb regulates the chondrogenic differentiation of digit mesodermal progenitors. J Cell Physiol 229 , 1397–1404. 10.1002/jcp.24576.24519818
97. Calvier L , Xian X , Lee RG , Sacharidou A , Mineo C , Shaul PW , Kounnas MZ , Tsai S , and Herz J . (2021). Reelin Depletion Protects Against Atherosclerosis by Decreasing Vascular Adhesion of Leukocytes. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 41 , 1309–1318. 10.1161/ATVBAHA.121.316000.33626909
98. Garcia V , and Sessa WC (2019). Endothelial NOS: perspective and recent developments. Br J Pharmacol 176 , 189–196. 10.1111/bph.14522.30341769
99. Manta C-P , Leibing T , Friedrich M , Nolte H , Adrian M , Schledzewski K , Krzistetzko J , Kirkamm C , David Schmid C , Xi Y , (2022). Targeting of Scavenger Receptors Stabilin-1 and Stabilin-2 Ameliorates Atherosclerosis by a Plasma Proteome Switch Mediating Monocyte/Macrophage Suppression. Circulation. 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.121.058615.
100. Epelman S , Lavine KJ , and Randolph GJ (2014). Origin and functions of tissue macrophages. Immunity 41 , 21–35. 10.1016/j.immuni.2014.06.013.25035951
101. Carstensen M , Christensen T , Stilund M , Møller HJ , Petersen EL , and Petersen T . (2020). Activated monocytes and markers of inflammation in newly diagnosed multiple sclerosis. Immunol Cell Biol 98 , 549–562. 10.1111/imcb.12337.32253768
102. Calvier L , Alexander AE , and Herz J . (2022). The “6B” Strategy: Build Back a Better Blood-Brain Barrier. Immuno 2 , 506–511. 10.3390/immuno2030032.
103. Cutter GR , and Stüve O . (2014). Does risk stratification decrease the risk of natalizumabassociated PML? Where is the evidence? Mult Scler 20 , 1304–1305. 10.1177/1352458514531843.24812045
104. Stüve O , Marra CM , Jerome KR , Cook L , Cravens PD , Cepok S , Frohman EM , Phillips JT , Arendt G , Hemmer B , (2006). Immune surveillance in multiple sclerosis patients treated with natalizumab. Ann Neurol 59 , 743–747. 10.1002/ana.20858.16634029
105. Thompson AJ (2015). A much-needed focus on progression in multiple sclerosis. Lancet Neurol 14 , 133–135. 10.1016/S1474-4422(14)70330-8.25772885
106. Ramesh S , Morrell CN , Tarango C , Thomas GD , Yuhanna IS , Girardi G , Herz J , Urbanus RT , de Groot PG , Thorpe PE , (2011). Antiphospholipid antibodies promote leukocyte-endothelial cell adhesion and thrombosis in mice by antagonizing eNOS via β2GPI and apoER2. J. Clin. Invest 121 , 120–131. 10.1172/JCI39828.21123944
107. Calvier L , Manouchehri N , Sacharidou A , Mineo C , Shaul PW , Hui DY , Kounnas MZ , Stüve O , and Herz J . (2021). Apolipoprotein E receptor 2 deficiency decreases endothelial adhesion of monocytes and protects against autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Sci Immunol 6 , eabd0931. 10.1126/sciimmunol.abd0931.
108. Saunders AM , Strittmatter WJ , Schmechel D , George-Hyslop PH , Pericak-Vance MA , Joo SH , Rosi BL , Gusella JF , Crapper-MacLachlan DR , and Alberts MJ (1993). Association of apolipoprotein E allele epsilon 4 with late-onset familial and sporadic Alzheimer’s disease. Neurology 43 , 1467–1472. 10.1212/wnl.43.8.1467.8350998
109. Strittmatter WJ , Saunders AM , Schmechel D , Pericak-Vance M , Enghild J , Salvesen GS , and Roses AD (1993). Apolipoprotein E: high-avidity binding to beta-amyloid and increased frequency of type 4 allele in late-onset familial Alzheimer disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 90 , 1977–1981. 10.1073/pnas.90.5.1977.8446617
110. Bracher-Smith M , Leonenko G , Baker E , Crawford K , Graham AC , Salih DA , Howell BW , Hardy J , and Escott-Price V . (2022). Whole genome analysis in APOE4 homozygotes identifies the DAB1-RELN pathway in Alzheimer’s disease pathogenesis. Neurobiol Aging 119 , 67–76. 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2022.07.009.35977442
111. Bufill E , Roura-Poch P , Sala-Matavera I , Antón S , Lleó A , Sánchez-Saudinós B , Tomàs-Abadal L , Puig T , Abós J , Bernades S , (2015). Reelin signaling pathway genotypes and Alzheimer disease in a Spanish population. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 29 , 169–172. 10.1097/WAD.0000000000000002.24384746
112. Ovadia G , and Shifman S . (2011). The genetic variation of RELN expression in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. PLoS One 6 , e19955. 10.1371/journal.pone.0019955.
113. Wang Z , Hong Y , Zou L , Zhong R , Zhu B , Shen N , Chen W , Lou J , Ke J , Zhang T , (2014). Reelin gene variants and risk of autism spectrum disorders: an integrated meta-analysis. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet 165B , 192–200. 10.1002/ajmg.b.32222.24453138
114. Alzheimer A . (1907). Über Eine Eigenartige Erkankung Der Hirnrinde. Allgemeine Zeitschrift fur Psychiatrie und Psychisch-gerichtliche Medizin 64 , 146–148.
115. Alzheimer A , Stelzmann RA , Schnitzlein HN , and Murtagh FR (1995). An English translation of Alzheimer’s 1907 paper, “Uber eine eigenartige Erkankung der Hirnrinde.” Clin Anat 8 , 429–431. 10.1002/ca.980080612.8713166
116. Hardy JA , and Higgins GA (1992). Alzheimer’s disease: the amyloid cascade hypothesis. Science 256 , 184–185. 10.1126/science.1566067.1566067
117. Hardy J , and Selkoe DJ (2002). The amyloid hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease: progress and problems on the road to therapeutics. Science 297 , 353–356. 10.1126/science.1072994.12130773
118. Selkoe DJ (1991). The molecular pathology of Alzheimer’s disease. Neuron 6 , 487–498. 10.1016/0896-6273(91)90052-2.1673054
119. Czirr E , and Wyss-Coray T . (2012). The immunology of neurodegeneration. J Clin Invest 122 , 1156–1163. 10.1172/JCI58656.22466657
120. Kitazawa M , Oddo S , Yamasaki TR , Green KN , and LaFerla FM (2005). Lipopolysaccharide-induced inflammation exacerbates tau pathology by a cyclin-dependent kinase 5-mediated pathway in a transgenic model of Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurosci 25 , 8843–8853. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2868-05.2005.16192374
121. Schwartz M , Kipnis J , Rivest S , and Prat A . (2013). How do immune cells support and shape the brain in health, disease, and aging? J Neurosci 33 , 17587–17596. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3241-13.2013.24198349
122. Holmes C , Cunningham C , Zotova E , Woolford J , Dean C , Kerr S , Culliford D , and Perry VH (2009). Systemic inflammation and disease progression in Alzheimer disease. Neurology 73 , 768–774. 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181b6bb95.19738171
123. Varatharaj A , and Galea I . (2017). The blood-brain barrier in systemic inflammation. Brain Behav Immun 60 , 1–12. 10.1016/j.bbi.2016.03.010.26995317
124. Zhang T , Shu Q , Zhu H , Wang M , Yang N , Zhang H , and Ge W . (2022). Serum proteomics analysis of biomarkers for evaluating clinical response to MTX/IGU therapy in early rheumatoid arthritis. Mol Immunol 153 , 119–125. 10.1016/j.molimm.2022.11.016.36462402
125. Magnani A , Pattacini L , Boiardi L , Casali B , and Salvarani C . (2010). Reelin levels are increased in synovial fluid of patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Clin. Exp. Rheumatol 28 , 546–548.20659411
126. Garshasbi M , Mahmoudi M , Razmara E , Vojdanian M , Aslani S , Farhadi E , Jensen LR , Arzaghi SM , Poursani S , Bitaraf A , (2020). Identification of RELN variant p.(Ser2486Gly) in an Iranian family with ankylosing spondylitis; the first association of RELN and AS. Eur J Hum Genet 28 , 754–762. 10.1038/s41431-020-0573-4.32001840
127. Appleton CTG , Pitelka V , Henry J , and Beier F . (2007). Global analyses of gene expression in early experimental osteoarthritis. Arthritis Rheum 56 , 1854–1868. 10.1002/art.22711.17530714
128. Esmaeilzadeh-Gharehdaghi E , Razmara E , Bitaraf A , Jamshidi A , Mahmoudi M , and Garshasbi M . (2020). Functional Analysis of RELN S2486G Mutation and its Contribution to Pathogenesis of Ankylosing Spondylitis. Arch Iran Med 23 , 688–696. 10.34172/aim.2020.87.33107310
129. Scanzello CR (2017). Role of low-grade inflammation in osteoarthritis. Current Opinion in Rheumatology 29 , 79–85. 10.1097/BOR.0000000000000353.27755180
130. Sokolove J , and Lepus CM (2013). Role of inflammation in the pathogenesis of osteoarthritis: latest findings and interpretations. Therapeutic Advances in Musculoskeletal 5 , 77–94. 10.1177/1759720X12467868.
131. Goldring MB , and Otero M . (2011). Inflammation in osteoarthritis. Current Opinion in Rheumatology 23 , 471–478. 10.1097/BOR.0b013e328349c2b1.21788902
132. Tseng W-L , Huang C-L , Chong K-Y , Liao C-H , Stern A , Cheng J-C , and Tseng C-P (2010). Reelin is a platelet protein and functions as a positive regulator of platelet spreading on fibrinogen. Cell Mol Life Sci 67 , 641–653. 10.1007/s00018-009-0201-5.19936619
133. Hicks SM , and Gardiner EE (2020). Free Reelin’ Along the Platelet Surface. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 40 , 2341–2343. 10.1161/ATVBAHA.120.314980.32966130
134. Gowert NS , Krüger I , Klier M , Donner L , Kipkeew F , Gliem M , Bradshaw NJ , Lutz D , Köber S , Langer H , (2017). Loss of Reelin protects mice against arterial thrombosis by impairing integrin activation and thrombus formation under high shear conditions. Cell. Signal 40 , 210–221. 10.1016/j.cellsig.2017.09.016.28943410
135. Gardiner EE , and Andrews RK (2014). Structure and function of platelet receptors initiating blood clotting. Adv Exp Med Biol 844 , 263–275. 10.1007/978-1-4939-2095-2_13.25480646
136. Krueger I , Gremer L , Mangels L , Klier M , Jurk K , Willbold D , Bock HH , and Elvers M . (2020). Reelin Amplifies Glycoprotein VI Activation and AlphaIIb Beta3 Integrin Outside-In Signaling via PLC Gamma 2 and Rho GTPases. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 40 , 2391–2403. 10.1161/ATVBAHA.120.314902.32787521
137. Rayes J , Watson SP , and Nieswandt B . (2019). Functional significance of the platelet immune receptors GPVI and CLEC-2. J Clin Invest 129 , 12–23. 10.1172/JCI122955.30601137
138. Podgrabinska S , Braun P , Velasco P , Kloos B , Pepper MS , and Skobe M . (2002). Molecular characterization of lymphatic endothelial cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99 , 16069–16074. 10.1073/pnas.242401399.12446836
139. Tammela T , and Alitalo K . (2010). Lymphangiogenesis: Molecular mechanisms and future promise. Cell 140 , 460–476. 10.1016/j.cell.2010.01.045.20178740
140. Owsiany KM , Deaton RA , Soohoo KG , Tram Nguyen A , and Owens GK (2022). Dichotomous Roles of Smooth Muscle Cell-Derived MCP1 (Monocyte Chemoattractant Protein 1) in Development of Atherosclerosis. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 42 , 942–956. 10.1161/ATVBAHA.122.317882.35735018
141. Ma J , Wang Q , Fei T , Han J-DJ , and Chen Y-G (2007). MCP-1 mediates TGF-beta-induced angiogenesis by stimulating vascular smooth muscle cell migration. Blood 109 , 987–994. 10.1182/blood-2006-07-036400.17032917
142. Aplin AC , Fogel E , and Nicosia RF (2010). MCP-1 promotes mural cell recruitment during angiogenesis in the aortic ring model. Angiogenesis 13 , 219–226. 10.1007/s10456-010-9179-8.20571857
143. Harrison MR , Feng X , Mo G , Aguayo A , Villafuerte J , Yoshida T , Pearson CA , Schulte-Merker S , and Lien C-L (2019). Late developing cardiac lymphatic vasculature supports adult zebrafish heart function and regeneration. Elife 8 . 10.7554/eLife.42762.
144. Vieira JM , Norman S , Villa Del Campo C , Cahill TJ , Barnette DN , Gunadasa-Rohling M , Johnson LA , Greaves DR , Carr CA , Jackson DG , (2018). The cardiac lymphatic system stimulates resolution of inflammation following myocardial infarction. J Clin Invest 128 , 3402–3412. 10.1172/JCI97192.29985167
145. Wigle JT , and Oliver G . (1999). Prox1 function is required for the development of the murine lymphatic system. Cell 98 , 769–778. 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81511-1.10499794
146. Liu X , De la Cruz E , Gu X , Balint L , Oxendine-Burns M , Terrones T , Ma W , Kuo H-H , Lantz C , Bansal T , (2020). Lymphoangiocrine signals promote cardiac growth and repair. Nature 588 , 705–711. 10.1038/s41586-020-2998-x.33299187
147. Green-Johnson JM , Zalcman S , Vriend CY , Nance DM , and Greenberg AH (1995). Suppressed T cell and macrophage function in the “reeler” (rl/rl) mutant, a murine strain with elevated cerebellar norepinephrine concentration. Brain Behav. Immun 9 , 47–60. 10.1006/brbi.1995.1005.7620210
148. Landis SC , Shoemaker WJ , Schlumpf M , and Bloom FE (1975). Catecholamines in mutant mouse cerebellum: Fluorescence microscopic and chemical studies. Brain Research 93 , 253–266. 10.1016/0006-8993(75)90349-2.1174970
149. Carvajal AE , Vázquez-Carretero MD , García-Miranda P , Peral MJ , Calonge ML , and Ilundain AA (2017). Reelin expression is up-regulated in mice colon in response to acute colitis and provides resistance against colitis. Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Basis Dis 1863 , 462–473. 10.1016/j.bbadis.2016.11.028.27915032
150. Andoh A , Bamba S , Brittan M , Fujiyama Y , and Wright NA (2007). Role of intestinal subepithelial myofibroblasts in inflammation and regenerative response in the gut. Pharmacol Ther 114 , 94–106. 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2006.12.004.17328956
151. Powell DW , Pinchuk IV , Saada JI , Chen X , and Mifflin RC (2011). Mesenchymal cells of the intestinal lamina propria. Annu Rev Physiol 73 , 213–237. 10.1146/annurev.physiol.70.113006.100646.21054163
152. Gao Z , Chen X , Zhu K , Zeng P , and Ding G . (2017). Dab1 Contributes to Angiotensin II-Induced Apoptosis via p38 Signaling Pathway in Podocytes. Biomed Res Int 2017 , 2484303. 10.1155/2017/2484303.
153. Zhang Y , Wang Y , Cao W-W , Ma K-T , Ji W , Han Z-W , Si J-Q , and Li L . (2018). Spectral Characteristics of Autofluorescence in Renal Tissue and Methods for Reducing Fluorescence Background in Confocal Laser Scanning Microscopy. J Fluoresc 28 , 561–572. 10.1007/s108-95-018-2217-4.29560601
154. Cellesi F , Li M , and Rastaldi MP (2015). Podocyte injury and repair mechanisms. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens 24 , 239–244. 10.1097/MNH.0000000000000124.26066473
155. Abrahamson DR (2012). Role of the podocyte (and glomerular endothelium) in building the GBM. Semin Nephrol 32 , 342–349. 10.1016/j.semnephrol.2012.06.005.22958488
156. Ding G , Reddy K , Kapasi AA , Franki N , Gibbons N , Kasinath BS , and Singhal PC (2002). Angiotensin II induces apoptosis in rat glomerular epithelial cells. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 283 , F173–180. 10.1152/ajprenal.00240.2001.12060599
157. Jia J , Ding G , Zhu J , Chen C , Liang W , Franki N , and Singhal PC (2008). Angiotensin II infusion induces nephrin expression changes and podocyte apoptosis. Am J Nephrol 28 , 500–507. 10.1159/000113538.18204248
158. Toto R . (2001). Angiotensin II subtype 1 receptor blockers and renal function. Arch Intern Med 161 , 1492–1499. 10.1001/archinte.161.12.1492.11427096
159. Xu Z , Li W , Han J , Zou C , Huang W , Yu W , Shan X , Lum H , Li X , and Liang G . (2017). Angiotensin II induces kidney inflammatory injury and fibrosis through binding to myeloid differentiation protein-2 (MD2). Sci Rep 7 , 44911. 10.1038/srep44911.28322341
160. Ravarotto V , Bertoldi G , Innico G , Gobbi L , and Calò LA (2021). The Pivotal Role of Oxidative Stress in the Pathophysiology of Cardiovascular-Renal Remodeling in Kidney Disease. Antioxidants (Basel) 10 , 1041. 10.3390/antiox10071041.34209494
161. Castellano E , Molina-Arcas M , Krygowska AA , East P , Warne P , Nicol A , and Downward J . (2016). RAS signalling through PI3-Kinase controls cell migration via modulation of Reelin expression. Nat Commun 7 , 11245. 10.1038/ncomms11245.27071537
162. Qin X , Lin L , Cao L , Zhang X , Song X , Hao J , Zhang Y , Wei R , Huang X , Lu J , (2017). Extracellular matrix protein Reelin promotes myeloma progression by facilitating tumor cell proliferation and glycolysis. Sci Rep 7 , 45305. 10.1038/srep45305.28345605
163. Becker J , Fröhlich J , Perske C , Pavlakovic H , and Wilting J . (2012). Reelin signalling in neuroblastoma: migratory switch in metastatic stages. Int J Oncol 41 , 681–689. 10.3892/ijo.2012.1488.22614235
164. Lin L , Yan F , Zhao D , Lv M , Liang X , Dai H , Qin X , Zhang Y , Hao J , Sun X , (2016). Reelin promotes the adhesion and drug resistance of multiple myeloma cells via integrin β1 signaling and STAT3. Oncotarget 7 , 9844–9858. 10.18632/oncotarget.7151.26848618
165. Perrone G , Vincenzi B , Zagami M , Santini D , Panteri R , Flammia G , Verzì A , Lepanto D , Morini S , Russo A , (2007). Reelin expression in human prostate cancer: a marker of tumor aggressiveness based on correlation with grade. Mod. Pathol 20 , 344–351. 10.1038/modpathol.3800743.17277764
166. Gleason DF (1992). Histologic grading of prostate cancer: a perspective. Hum Pathol 23 , 273–279. 10.1016/0046-8177(92)90108-f.1555838
167. Ganti AK , Klein AB , Cotarla I , Seal B , and Chou E . (2021). Update of Incidence, Prevalence, Survival, and Initial Treatment in Patients With Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer in the US. JAMA Oncol 7 , 1824–1832. 10.1001/jamaoncol.2021.4932.34673888
168. Galluzzi L , Vitale I , Michels J , Brenner C , Szabadkai G , Harel-Bellan A , Castedo M , and Kroemer G . (2014). Systems biology of cisplatin resistance: past, present and future. Cell Death Dis 5 , e1257. 10.1038/cddis.2013.428.24874729
169. Kim ES (2016). Chemotherapy Resistance in Lung Cancer. Adv Exp Med Biol 893 , 189–209. 10.1007/978-3-319-24223-1_10.26667345
170. Li J-M , Yang F , Li J , Yuan W-Q , Wang H , and Luo Y-Q (2020). Reelin Promotes Cisplatin Resistance by Induction of Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition via p38/GSK3β/Snail Signaling in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer. Med Sci Monit 26 , e925298. 10.12659/MSM.925298.
171. Brown FC , Cifani P , Drill E , He J , Still E , Zhong S , Balasubramanian S , Pavlick D , Yilmazel B , Knapp KM , (2017). Genomics of primary chemoresistance and remission induction failure in paediatric and adult acute myeloid leukaemia. Br J Haematol 176 , 86–91. 10.1111/bjh.14413.27766616
172. Stein T , Cosimo E , Yu X , Smith PR , Simon R , Cottrell L , Pringle M-A , Bell AK , Lattanzio L , Sauter G , (2010). Loss of reelin expression in breast cancer is epigenetically controlled and associated with poor prognosis. Am. J. Pathol 177 , 2323–2333. 10.2353/ajpath.2010.100209.20847288
173. Ndoye A , Miskin RP , and DiPersio CM (2021). Integrin α3β1 Represses Reelin Expression in Breast Cancer Cells to Promote Invasion. Cancers (Basel) 13 . 10.3390/cancers13020344.
174. Serrano-Morales JM , Vázquez-Carretero MD , Peral MJ , Ilundáin AA , and García-Miranda P . (2017). Reelin-Dab1 signaling system in human colorectal cancer. Mol Carcinog 56 , 712–721. 10.1002/mc.22527.27434856
175. Carvajal AE , Serrano-Morales JM , Vázquez-Carretero MD , García-Miranda P , Calonge ML , Peral MJ , and Ilundain AA (2017). Reelin protects from colon pathology by maintaining the intestinal barrier integrity and repressing tumorigenic genes. Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Basis Dis 1863 , 2126–2134. 10.1016/j.bbadis.2017.05.026.28572005
176. García-Miranda P , Vázquez-Carretero MD , Sesma P , Peral MJ , and Ilundain AA (2013). Reelin is involved in the crypt-villus unit homeostasis. Tissue Eng Part A 19 , 188–198. 10.1089/ten.TEA.2012.0050.22897172
177. Sato N , Fukushima N , Chang R , Matsubayashi H , and Goggins M . (2006). Differential and epigenetic gene expression profiling identifies frequent disruption of the RELN pathway in pancreatic cancers. Gastroenterology 130 , 548–565. 10.1053/j.gastro.2005.11.008.16472607
178. Luo Y , Huang K , Zheng J , Zhang J , and Zhang L . (2019). TGF-β1 promotes cell migration in hepatocellular carcinoma by suppressing reelin expression. Gene 688 , 19–25. 10.1016/j.gene.2018.11.033.30447345
179. Hanahan D , and Weinberg RA (2011). Hallmarks of cancer: the next generation. Cell 144 , 646–674. 10.1016/j.cell.2011.02.013.21376230
180. Calvier L , Boucher P , Herz J , and Hansmann G . (2019). LRP1 Deficiency in Vascular SMC Leads to Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension That Is Reversed by PPARγ Activation. Circ Res 124 , 1778–1785. 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.119.315088.31023188
181. Calvier L , Chouvarine P , Legchenko E , Kokeny G , Mozes MM , and Hansmann G . (2019). Chronic TGF-β1 Signaling in Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension Induces Sustained Canonical Smad3 Pathways in Vascular Smooth Muscle Cells. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 61 , 121–123. 10.1165/rcmb.2018-0275LE.31259625
182. Calvier L , Chouvarine P , Legchenko E , and Hansmann G . (2017). Transforming Growth Factor β1- and Bone Morphogenetic Protein 2/PPARγ-regulated MicroRNAs in Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 196 , 1227–1228. 10.1164/rccm.201705-0923LE.28653861
183. Kökény G , Calvier L , and Hansmann G . (2021). PPARγ and TGFβ-Major Regulators of Metabolism, Inflammation, and Fibrosis in the Lungs and Kidneys. Int J Mol Sci 22 , 10431. 10.3390/ijms221910431.34638771
184. Calvier L , Chouvarine P , Legchenko E , Hoffmann N , Geldner J , Borchert P , Jonigk D , Mozes MM , and Hansmann G . (2017). PPARγ Links BMP2 and TGFβ1 Pathways in Vascular Smooth Muscle Cells, Regulating Cell Proliferation and Glucose Metabolism. Cell Metab 25 , 1118–1134.e7. 10.1016/j.cmet.2017.03.011.28467929
185. Kasai H , Allen JT , Mason RM , Kamimura T , and Zhang Z . (2005). TGF-beta1 induces human alveolar epithelial to mesenchymal cell transition (EMT). Respir. Res 6 , 56. 10.1186/1465-9921-656.15946381
186. Vincent T , Neve EPA , Johnson JR , Kukalev A , Rojo F , Albanell J , Pietras K , Virtanen I , Philipson L , Leopold PL , (2009). A SNAIL1-SMAD3/4 transcriptional repressor complex promotes TGF-beta mediated epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Nat. Cell Biol. 11 , 943–950. 10.1038/ncb1905.19597490
187. Schulze M , Violonchi C , Swoboda S , Welz T , Kerkhoff E , Hoja S , Brüggemann S , Simbürger J , Reinders J , and Riemenschneider MJ (2018). RELN signaling modulates glioblastoma growth and substrate-dependent migration. Brain Pathol 28 , 695–709. 10.1111/bpa.12584.29222813
188. Biamonte F , Sica G , Filippini A , and D’Alessio A . (2021). Evidence of Reelin Signaling in GBM and Its Derived Cancer Stem Cells. Brain Sci 11 , 745. 10.3390/brainsci11060745.34205192
189. Lin L , Zhang X , Cao L , An Q , Hao J , Zhang Y , Jin R , Chang Y , Huang X , Lu J , (2017). Reelin promotes adhesion of multiple myeloma cells to bone marrow stromal cells via integrin β1 signaling. J Cancer 8 , 2212–2222. 10.7150/jca.18808.28819423
190. Okamura Y , Nomoto S , Kanda M , Hayashi M , Nishikawa Y , Fujii T , Sugimoto H , Takeda S , and Nakao A . (2011). Reduced expression of reelin (RELN) gene is associated with high recurrence rate of hepatocellular carcinoma. Ann. Surg. Oncol 18 , 572–579. 10.1245/s10434-010-1273-z.20734148
