LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9212404
21262
Pharmacoeconomics
Pharmacoeconomics
PharmacoEconomics
1170-7690
1179-2027

35553029
10372750
10.1007/s40273-022-01150-w
NIHMS1915691
Article
Addressing Challenges to Alternative Payment Models for New Alzheimer’s Disease Therapies for US Commercial Payers
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-2766-390X
Hlávka Jakub P. 1
Lavelle Tara A. 2
Neumann Peter J. 2
Lin Pei-Jung 2
1 Price School of Public Policy, Schaeffer Center for Health Policy &amp; Economics, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA
2 Center for the Evaluation of Value and Risk in Health, Institute for Clinical Research and Health Policy Studies, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA
Author contributions JPH, TAL, PJN, and PJL participated equally in the drafting and revisions of the manuscript.

✉ Jakub P. Hlávka, jakub.hlavka@usc.edu
21 7 2023
7 2022
13 5 2022
27 7 2023
40 7 647652
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Commercial payers that ultimately decide to cover aducanumab or other Alzheimer’s disease therapies may require innovative payment tools to minimize their financial risk given the uncertain benefits and high cost of such treatments. Drawing on the published evidence, we propose two different types of payment models applicable to disease-modifying therapies in Alzheimer’s disease, and suggest four strategies to overcome challenges in their implementation. Such strategies range from developing best practices for outcome measurement in Alzheimer’s disease, investing in infrastructure to collect real-world data, increasing representativeness of registry data in Alzheimer’s disease, and integrating the diagnostic, treatment, and payment landscape. These important steps could make access to emerging therapies in Alzheimer’s disease more sustainable in the long term, and could serve as a blueprint for better access to novel therapies in other indications in the future.


pmc1 Background

The Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services April 2022 National Coverage Determination limits Medicare’s coverage of Aduhelm™ (aducanumab, Biogen) and other monoclonal antibodies for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) only to patients enrolled in randomized controlled trials and Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services-approved prospective comparative studies [1]. Outside of Medicare, commercial plans also struggle to determine coverage for patients with AD who satisfy label requirements [1]. A number of US commercial health insurers have deemed the drug “investigational” or “experimental” and decided against coverage since Aduhelm’s US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval in June 2021 [2]. For commercial payers that ultimately decide to cover Aduhelm, they will likely require innovative payment tools to minimize financial risk given the product’s high costs and uncertain benefits. The timing of treatment further increases risks for commercial payers in that even if Aduhelm confirmatory studies demonstrate clinically meaningful improvements in cognition and function, patients may not experience such benefits before they transition to Medicare. Commercial payers may superficially deal with this risk by restricting coverage to patient subgroups, such as those with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) who are more likely to stay covered longer. These constraints are not unique to Aduhelm; similar challenges will likely emerge for future FDA-approved disease-modifying treatments for AD, and could result in delayed or denied patient access.

Previous work has discussed how some of these constraints could be addressed by alternative (e.g., risk-sharing) payment models (APMs) [3]. However, APMs have proven to be hard to implement in the USA and other countries because of high transaction costs, outcome measurement issues, and gaps in the data infrastructure needed to support these models [4, 5]. In this commentary, we describe two types of APMs that commercial payers may consider for new AD disease-modifying therapies. We focus on the constraints that limit their practical use and propose strategies that may facilitate their implementation.

2 A lternative Payment Model Options in AD

2.1 Outcome-Based Payment Arrangements

An outcome-based payment model may be of interest to commercial payers given uncertainty about a treatment’s real-world clinical effectiveness because of a short trial duration or the use of surrogate endpoints. Such a model can be structured so that improvements in patient clinical outcomes are rewarded with additional payments, creating a possible upside for the manufacturer (or alternatively, not achieving pre-specified benefits could result in partial or full refund of the treatment cost). Risk-sharing agreements between the payers and the drug manufacturers on performance-based installment payments may have the dual benefits of responding to outcomes as real-world data (RWD) are generated and better aligning payments with the accrual of benefits over time (in a simpler model, installments may be fixed, without an explicit link to clinical outcomes).

However, several challenges must be overcome for AD outcome-based payment models to succeed. First, payers and the manufacturer would need to agree on validated cognitive and functional measures, and provide oversight and quality assurance to avoid over-reporting or under-reporting clinical gains. Pre-specified outcome measures may come with possible biases and measurement challenges, from selection and attrition bias to measurement errors [6]. Second, payments should also be linked to treatment-related adverse events. For Aduhelm, this would likely mean that coverage would be tied to the results of FDA-mandated magnetic resonance imaging scans for amyloid-related imaging abnormalities. Amyloid-related imaging abnormalities resulted in the discontinuation of therapy in close to 10% of patients in Aduhelm phase III trials [7]. Providers would need to report adverse events to payers and manufacturers, which, along with the reporting of clinical outcomes, would increase the time and administrative costs associated with the therapy. This may require large-scale investment in RWD collection and sharing, as discussed below. Third, identifying matched controls (where randomized assignment is not possible) may be necessary to estimate the magnitude of benefit in treated patients. Finally, coordination among payers may be required if payments for patients were continued when they switch their primary insurance (including to, possibly, Medicare).

2.2 Disease State-Specific Arrangements (Indication-Based Pricing)

Commercial payers may also opt to negotiate payment that differs by patient or disease characteristics. Indication-based pricing, as this payment model is usually termed, is motivated by the expected differences in clinical benefit accrued to different patients. For instance, Aduhelm is indicated for the treatment of MCI or mild AD. Patients in these two disease states may have different health and economic outcomes at baseline, different disease trajectories, and the economic value of treatment may differ by group.

While indication-based pricing can be less difficult to implement, payers often require that patients meet pre-specified outcomes after a certain time period to qualify for continued coverage. Indication-based pricing may further require the comparison of outcomes in treated patients to the average decline in non-treated patients (to estimate the disease state-specific value of treatment), such as by drawing on controls from AD registries and other datasets. In these non-randomized comparisons, analysts will need to estimate treatment effectiveness using quasi-experimental research methods that control for differences in patient groups. We summarize key features of both alternative payment models in Table 1.

3 Overcoming Challenges to Innovation in Payment in AD

Either of the two APMs will require substantial coordination and investment by manufacturers and payers. We identify four principal strategies that may address APM implementation constraints in AD, and improve patient access to disease-modifying treatments among the commercially insured.

3.1 Strategy 1: Establish Consensus on Best Practices in Outcome Measurement

Clinical trials in AD use a wide range of outcome measures. For example, one review of 805 MCI/dementia interventional studies identified 321 unique cognitive assessments, 40 unique functional assessments, and 119 other unique assessments [8]. Further, regulatory policy in AD disease-modifying trials has changed over time, with different FDA guidance documents published in 2013 and 2018 (in both cases, these were non-binding recommendations for drug developers in draft form only) [9]. As a result, different AD drug candidates have relied on different endpoints; Aduhelm received approval through the accelerated approval pathway based on surrogate (biomarker) endpoints.

When implementing APMs, the lack of consensus in AD outcome measures could mean that different payers could require clinicians to report different outcome measures at different timepoints, making such arrangements impractical. Key clinical domains in AD typically include cognitive, behavioral, functional, and global assessments, but may also draw on patient-reported or caregiver-reported outcomes such as quality of life [10]. Payers, manufacturers, clinicians, and patient advocates should work to achieve consensus and provide recommendations on a core outcome set that should be used in both clinical trials and APMs (some such work was recently started using National Institutes of Health funding [11]). Previous work provided recommendations for cognitive, functional, and global assessment endpoints to be used in AD clinical trials, but significant heterogeneity prevails in ongoing clinical trials [12, 13]. As more evidence from clinical trials is collected, science on the most suitable endpoints in AD may evolve further. Additional research should develop crosswalks to allow for comparisons among different AD trial populations where outcomes were measured using different instruments [14].

3.2 Strategy 2: Develop Human and Technical Infrastructure to Collect RWD

There are millions of individuals with cognitive impairment in the USA who may seek out specialists to assess their eligibility for new AD disease-modifying drugs, and the capacity of specialists could be dwarfed by the demand [15]. Follow-up care provided by specialists may further strain the system. In clinical practice today, cognitive, functional, and behavioral measures are rarely required for reimbursement purposes—even if they are used for clinical assessment. Adding standardized assessments to follow-up care to facilitate the use of APMs will create significant time and administrative barriers both for clinicians who need to collect and report data to payers, and payers who need to analyze these data. Additional payer review may be required to assess data quality (e.g., incorrectly entered values), control for the risk of bias (this was a concern when analyzing clinical trial data, where some patients were unblinded because of adverse events, and will likely pose an even greater challenge in the real world [16]), and to reduce the risk of under-reporting or over-reporting of outcomes.

To address existing infrastructure constraints, payers and manufacturers need to agree on provisions that allow for additional reimbursement to physicians for time spent on clinical assessments, reporting, and safety follow-up. Staff training will improve accurate recording of adverse events, and additional oversight (such as by independent clinical panels or technical tools) should be considered to ensure data quality and validity. Additional considerations for broader elements of value of therapy, such as productivity and caregiver time costs, may be made in RWD collection to inform comprehensive value-based payment approaches [17].

3.3 Strategy 3: Increase Trial and Registry Representativeness in AD

Clinical trials in AD, including the Aduhelm trials, are notoriously unrepresentative of the USA population with AD [18]. In one review of 101 AD trials between 2001 and 2019, 95% of participants were white [19], and some widely used registries in AD have faced similar challenges, although there are increasing efforts to recruit participants from non-white backgrounds [20, 21].

Inclusion of non-white participants in AD trials and registries is vital for multiple reasons. Specific to payment and reimbursement, diverse data are required to help conduct risk adjustment and benchmark treated patients to non-treated patients. Without longitudinal data on patients with AD from different backgrounds and disease states, APMs may further exacerbate inequalities in access to healthcare in the USA by making relatively limited treatment effects more detectable in larger populations of patients where more precise estimates can be measured. Such investments need to be made by both public and private stakeholders, and should be coordinated at the national level to achieve their greatest return on investment (e.g., by agreeing on primary endpoints that will be collected for all participants, and regular and standardized reporting that can be easily accessed for research and payment design purposes).

Possible solutions may involve: more inclusive trial and registry design (e.g., by reducing the number of exclusion criteria); investment in trial centers that serve underrepresented populations; timely diagnosis of cognitive decline in underrepresented populations; greater support to trial participants’ caregivers; increasing awareness of clinical trials in underrepresented populations; and making clinical trial participation less burdensome for underrepresented patients [18, 22].

3.4 Strategy 4: Integrate the Diagnostic, Treatment, and Payment Landscape

The US healthcare system is highly fragmented. Commercial and public payers face different incentives (e.g., commercial payers may have less incentive to provide access to high-cost therapies in patients who are likely to transition to Medicare). Such fragmentation may challenge the implementation of APMs and patient access to AD-modifying therapies. Furthermore, commercial payers may not have strong incentives to share patients’ clinical or other data when they switch insurance plans—this may be especially difficult if the patient with AD switches while receiving a disease-modifying therapy and data sharing between plans is required for reimbursement reasons. As a result, longer term payment arrangements, which in AD may be particularly salient given the life expectancy following initial diagnosis of MCI or early AD, may not be feasible to implement.

These challenges could be addressed by regulatory requirements for payers to share clinical and claims data (with specific provisions to ensure privacy of data sharing) to a unified repository. Certain reporting requirements for payers already exist because of legislative mandates at the state level. Existing all-payer claims databases, developed in partnership with the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, currently exist within 18 US states, aggregating data from patient medical, pharmacy, and dental claims, but they do not include lab work or imaging, nor do they include any clinical measures [23, 24]. Data sharing at the national level, however, may be required for APMs to achieve economies of scale and to allow for tracking long-term clinical outcomes. In addition, the scope of data collection in existing all-payer claims databases would need to expand if they were to be used for APMs (to include both claims and electronic health records).

Additionally, significant coordination between payers is needed to create mechanisms for the ‘clearing’ of any longer term transactions (such as the provision of discounts or payment of premiums based on long-term clinical outcomes, or installment-based payment solutions). This level of coordination will likely require regulatory action. Despite these challenges, RWD sharing in AD could set an impactful precedent for broader improvements to data sharing in other disease areas, further contributing to better care.

4 What Will it Take?

Commercial payers will face unique challenges in providing cost-effective and sustainable access to AD therapies. Alternative payment models may help avoid suboptimal outcomes, but overcoming the constraints outlined above will require large investments by both public and private stakeholders. Regulation to encourage the use of innovative contracts has already been implemented [25] (allowing for greater flexibility when designing APMs in Medicaid) but data collection is still siloed, hindering the comparison of natural disease progression between and within patient populations. Regulatory and payment incentives need to be strengthened before payers and manufacturers can ask clinicians to regularly assess and report clinical outcomes in AD. This will require collaboration by major providers as well as public and commercial payers, ideally across states. In addition, an agreement on a ‘gold standard’ for outcomes (e.g., a core outcome set) in AD could help increase the comparability of clinical outcomes across providers and geographies.

More systematic collection of real-world evidence in patients with AD will likely require legislative action and federal funding. Many stakeholders already contribute claims data to different privately and publicly funded databases, but these data are not sufficient to track and compare clinical outcomes over time, or to be used as clinical benchmarks for reimbursement purposes. Even if full integration of electronic health records is not feasible, patients with AD eligible for emerging treatments could join a registry that allows for the integration and analysis of RWD and evidence. Countries such as Germany and Australia give patients the option to share clinical data digitally with different physicians [26]; an opt-in system may be a way forward in the USA as well. If implemented in AD, it could become a blueprint for improving the interoperability of electronic health records in other indications, and help position the USA to become a global leader in integrated care.

Should APMs involve more than one payer, a mechanism to clear payments would require the coordination among payers themselves, with legislative action likely required if Medicare eventually becomes involved in such agreements. Upfront investments in the data infrastructure will be substantive (likely exceeding $1 billion dollars) but the return on investment could, too, be significant given the enormous burden of AD [27], and the expected benefits of providing cost-effective and timely access to novel therapies. Additional efforts to increase trial diversity, some of which are already underway [28], would be beneficial to overcome some of the challenges affecting minority populations in AD.

5 Conclusions

Alternative payment models have the potential to facilitate timely access to novel AD therapies in patients with commercial insurance by addressing some of the market failures such as the misalignment of incentives faced by commercial payers. In practice, many challenges remain in their implementation. Resolving some of the barriers—with investments in measurement science and consensus on outcome measurement, investments in RWD and evidence collection, advances in greater diversity of participation in trials and registries, and better coordination of data and information exchange related to innovative payment agreements—may help patients in both AD and other disease areas, and help modernize healthcare delivery in the USA for years and decades to come. This will require a joint effort of all key stakeholders—drug manufacturers, payers, providers, as well as government agencies. Yet, to realize the potential of APMs to increase access to novel therapeutics in AD, commercial payers will need to play a decisive role.

Funding

Funding for the article was provided by the National Institutes of Health (R01AG060165 and R01AG062277).

Availability of data and material

Not applicable.

Table 1 Key features of outcome-based and indication-based payment models

	Outcome-based payment	Indication-based pricing	
	
Summary	Payment is tied to specific process or outcome-based endpoints, and may result in partial or full refunds if pre-specified endpoints are not met	Payment amount differs by patient and disease characteristics (typically clinical or disease characteristics, but may include demographic factors such as age)	
Key challenges	Payers and manufacturers need to agree on: endpoints, refunds and/ or bonuses based on meeting specific endpoints, terms for treatment and/or coverage discontinuation	Payers and manufacturers need to agree on: value-based payment rates by disease stage or other patient characteristics, terms for treatment and/or coverage discontinuation	
	Selecting the appropriate controls and quasi-experimental methods when estimating the benefit of treatment	Selecting the appropriate controls and quasi-experimental methods when estimating the benefit of treatment	
	Increased demands because of collection and administrative processing of outcomes data		
Real-world data collection	Need to systematically collect endpoints (e.g., every 1–3 months) Need quality assurance processes	Real-world data collection may be required	
	Real-world data collection may be used for post-marketing clinical trials and evidence generation		

Key points

Alternative payment models have the potential to facilitate timely access to novel Alzheimer’s disease therapies in patients with commercial insurance.

Two payment model types and four strategies to ensure the success of innovation in payment are discussed along with implementation challenges.

Resolving key barriers may help patients in both Alzheimer’s disease and other disease areas and help modernize healthcare delivery in the USA.

Conflicts of interest/competing interests The authors have no conflict of interests to declare.

Ethics approval Ethical approval was not required for this work as it is based only on published data.

Consent to participate Not applicable.

Consent for publication Not applicable.

Code availability Not applicable.


References

1. Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services. Monoclonal antibodies directed against amyloid for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease. Decision Memo 2022 April 7 , 2022. https://www.cms.gov/medicare-coverage-database/view/ncacal-decision-memo.aspx?proposed=Y&amp;NCAId=305. Accessed 28 Apr 2022.
2. Terry M Biogen’s Aduhelm faces more obstacles as some insurers balking at paying for drug. 2021. https://www.biospace.com/article/biogen-s-aduhelm-faces-more-obstacles-as-some-insurers-balking-at-paying-for-drug/. Accessed 5 Mar 2022.
3. Hlavka JP , Yu JC , Goldman DP , Lakdawalla DN . The economics of alternative payment models for pharmaceuticals. Eur J Health Econ. 2021;22 (4 ):559–69.33725260
4. Bohm N , Bermingham S , Grimsey Jones F , Goncalves-Bradley DC , The challenges of outcomes-based contract implementation for medicines in Europe. Pharmacoeconomics. 2022;40 (1 ):13–29.34480324
5. Neumann PJ , Chambers JD , Simon F , Meckley LM . Risk-sharing arrangements that link payment for drugs to health outcomes are proving hard to implement. Health Aff (Millwood). 2011;30 (12 ):2329–37.22147861
6. Jicha GA , Abner EL , Arnold SE , Committee on High-quality Alzheimer’s Disease Studies (CHADS) consensus report. Alzheimers Dement. 2021. 10.1002/alz.12461.
7. Buracchio T , Yasuda SJ , Bastings E , Dunn B . Summary memorandum. Silver Spring, MD: U.S. Food and Drug Administration; 2021.
8. Harrison JK , Noel-Storr AH , Demeyere N , Reynish EL , Outcomes measures in a decade of dementia and mild cognitive impairment trials. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2016;8 (1 ):48.27866472
9. US Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring MD. Early Alzheimer’s disease: developing drugs for treatment guidance for industry. 2018.
10. DiBenedetti DB , Slota C , Wronski SL , Vradenburg G , Assessing what matters most to patients with or at risk for Alzheimer’s and care partners: a qualitative study evaluating symptoms, impacts, and outcomes. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2020;12 (1 ):90.32731886
11. Govern P VUMC awarded $31.7 million to harmonize Alzheimer’s research data. VUMC Reporter 2021. https://news.vumc.org/2021/10/01/vumc-awarded-31-7-million-to-harmonize-alzheimers-researchdata/. Accessed 15 Jan 2022.
12. Webster L , Groskreutz D , Grinbergs-Saull A , Howard R , Development of a core outcome set for disease modification trials in mild to moderate dementia: a systematic review, patient and public consultation and consensus recommendations. Health Technol Assess. 2017;21 (26 ):1–192.
13. Vellas B , Andrieu S , Sampaio C , Coley N , Endpoints for trials in Alzheimer’s disease: a European task force consensus. Lancet Neurol. 2008;7 (5 ):436–50.18420157
14. Hlavka JP , Kinoshita AT , Fang S , Hunt A . Clinical outcome measure crosswalks in Alzheimer’s disease: a systematic review. J Alzheimers Dis. 2021;83 (2 ):591–608.34334392
15. Liu JL , Hlavka JP , Hillestad R , Mattke S . Assessing the preparedness of the U.S. health care system infrastructure for an Alzheimer’s treatment. Santa Monica (CA): RAND Corporation; 2017.
16. Lin GA , Whittington MD , Synnott PG , Aducanumab for Alzheimer’s disease: effectiveness and value. Boston, MA: Institute for Clinical and Economic Review; 2021.
17. Mattingly TJ 2nd , McQueen RB , Lin PJ . Contextual considerations and recommendations for estimating the value of Alzheimer’s disease therapies. Pharmacoeconomics. 2021;39 (10 ):1101–7.34554383
18. Anderson TS , Ayanian JZ , Souza J , Landon BE . Representativeness of participants eligible to be enrolled in clinical trials of aducanumab for Alzheimer disease compared with Medicare beneficiaries with Alzheimer disease and mild cognitive impairment. JAMA. 2021;326 (16 ):1627–9.34499725
19. Franzen S , Smith JE , van den Berg E , Rivera Mindt M , Diversity in Alzheimer’s disease drug trials: the importance of eligibility criteria. Alzheimers Dement. 2022;18 (4 ):810–23.34590409
20. National Institutes of Health. NIH unveils new online tool to improve Alzheimer’s clinical trials recruitment. 2021. https://www.nih.gov/news-events/news-releases/nih-unveils-new-online-tool-improve-alzheimers-clinical-trials-recruitment. Accessed 15 Jan 2022.
21. National Institute on Aging. Registries. Alzheimer’s &amp; dementia outreach, recruitment &amp; engagement resources. 2021. https://www.nia.nih.gov/research/alzheimers-dementia-outreach-recruitment-engagement-resources/term/registries. Accessed 15 Jan 2022.
22. Grill JD , Karlawish J . Addressing the challenges to successful recruitment and retention in Alzheimer’s disease clinical trials. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2010;2 (6 ):34.21172069
23. Porter J , Peters A , Sachs J , Costello A , editors. The basics of all-payer claims databases: a primer for states. Princeton, NJ: Robert Wood Johnson Foundation; 2014.
24. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ). All-payer claims databases. 2018. https://www.ahrq.gov/data/apcd/index.html. Accessed 15 Jan 2022.
25. U.S. Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services. CMS issues final rule to empower states, manufacturers, and private payers to create new payment methods for innovative new therapies based on patient outcomes. 2020. https://www.cms.gov/newsroom/press-releases/cms-issues-final-rule-empower-states-manufacturers-and-private-payers-create-new-payment-methods. Accessed 15 Jan 2022.
26. The Commonwealth Fund. What is the status of electronic health records? Health system features. 2020. https://www.commonwealthfund.org/international-health-policy-center/system-features/what-status-electronic-health-records. Accessed 15 Jan 2022.
27. Hurd MD , Martorell P , Delavande A , Mullen KJ , Monetary costs of dementia in the United States. N Engl J Med. 2013;368 (14 ):1326–34.23550670
28. National Institute on Aging. The urgent need for increased and diverse participation in studies: report of 2019–2020 scientific advances for the prevention, treatment, and care of dementia 2020. https://www.nia.nih.gov/report-2019-2020-scientific-advances-prevention-treatment-and-care-dementia/urgent-need-increased. Accessed 15 Jan 2022.
