LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9111633
32751
J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis
J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis
Journal of stroke and cerebrovascular diseases : the official journal of National Stroke Association
1052-3057
1532-8511

37004301
10499500
10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2023.107068
NIHMS1929601
Article
Influence of mild cognitive impairment on patient and care partner decision-making for acute ischemic stroke
Blair Emilie M. BA *1
Reale Bailey K. MPH *12
Zahuranec Darin B. MD, MS 3
Forman Jane ScD 156
Langa Kenneth M. PhD 1456
Giordani Bruno J. PhD 7
Plassman Brenda L. PhD 8
Welsh-Bohmer Kathleen A. PhD 8
Wang Jing PhD 8
Kollman Colleen D. 9
Levine Deborah A. MD, MPH 135
1 Department of Internal Medicine and Cognitive Health Services Research Program, U-M Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI
2 Lake Erie College of Osteopathic Medicine at Seton Hill, LECOM, Greensburg, PA
3 Department of Neurology and Stroke Program, U-M, Ann Arbor, MI
4 Institute for Healthcare Policy and Innovation, U-M, Ann Arbor, MI
5 VA Ann Arbor Healthcare System, Ann Arbor, MI
6 Institute for Social Research, U-M, Ann Arbor, MI
7 Department of Psychiatry and Michigan Alzheimer’s Disease Center, U-M, Ann Arbor, MI
8 Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Science, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC
9 Kollman Research Services, Ann Arbor, MI
* Shared co-first authors. Emilie M. Blair, BA, and Bailey K. Reale, MPH, worked together on the publication and contributed equally.

Address for Correspondence: Deborah A. Levine, MD, MPH, University of Michigan Division of General Medicine, North Campus Research Complex, 2800 Plymouth Road, 16-430W, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2800, Telephone: 734-936-5216, deblevin@umich.edu
8 9 2023
6 2023
31 3 2023
13 9 2023
32 6 107068107068
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Goals:

Evidence suggests that patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) receive fewer treatments for acute ischemic stroke and other cardiovascular diseases than patients with normal cognition. Little is known about how patient and care partner preferences for ischemic stroke treatment differ between the patient population with MCI and the population with normal cognition. This study aimed to understand how patient MCI diagnosis influences patient and care partner decision-making for acute ischemic stroke treatments.

Methods:

Multi-center qualitative study using in-person semi-structured interviews with 20 MCI and normal cognition patient-care partner dyads using a standard guide. The present study reports results on patient and care partner preferences for a clinical vignette patient to receive three non-invasive treatments (intravenous tissue plasminogen activator, inpatient rehabilitation, and secondary preventive medications) and two invasive treatments (feeding tube and carotid endarterectomy) after acute ischemic stroke. We used qualitative content analysis to identify themes.

Findings:

We identified three major themes: 1) Patients with MCI desired non-invasive treatments after stroke, similar to patients with normal cognition and for similar reasons; 2) Patients with MCI expressed different preferences than patients with normal cognition for two invasive treatments after stroke: carotid endarterectomy and feeding tube placement; and 3) Patients with MCI expressed more skepticism of the stroke treatment options and less decisiveness in decision-making than patients with normal cognition.

Conclusions:

These results suggest that patient MCI diagnosis may contribute to differences in patient and care partner preferences for invasive treatments after stroke, but not for non-invasive treatments.

mild cognitive impairment
decision-making
treatment
aging

pmcIntroduction

More than 5.4 million older adults (65+) have mild cognitive impairment (MCI) in the United States (US).(1) MCI is objective cognitive impairment that does not significantly impair daily functioning, whereas dementia does.(2) Although older adults with MCI have increased dementia risk (3–15% per year), many patients with MCI live an average of 10 years with good quality of life and do not progress to dementia, and some even revert to normal cognition (14–55%).(2–6) The leading cause of death in older adults with MCI and normal cognition (NC) is cardiovascular disease (CVD), including acute ischemic stroke (AIS).(5, 7)

AIS is the leading cause of disability in older adults in the US,(7) making effective treatment following AIS critical. Experts recommend that all vulnerable older adults -except for those with end-stage dementia or limited life expectancy - receive guideline-concordant, effective treatments for AIS.(8–10) However, patients with pre-existing MCI receive fewer guideline-concordant treatments for AIS, other CVD events, and other conditions than patients with NC.(10–14)

The driving factors behind the disparity in receiving effective treatments for AIS events between older adults with MCI and those with NC are unclear. One potential explanation is that patients with MCI and their care partners prefer less intensive treatment than patients with NC and their care partners. Patients with MCI and their care partners might prefer less intensive treatment for AIS because they have concerns about developing dementia and underestimate AIS risks.(15) An alternative explanation is that patients with MCI and their care partners want the same AIS treatments as those with NC, but physicians recommend fewer treatments to patients with MCI and dementia due to discrimination.(16) Yet, we know little about how patient MCI diagnosis influences patient and care partner preferences for AIS treatment and treatment in general.

We conducted a descriptive qualitative study using in-person semi-structured interviews to understand the influence of patient MCI diagnosis on patient and care partner treatment preferences and decision-making for five common treatments after AIS.(17) We hypothesized that patients with MCI and their care partners would prefer less intensive treatment after AIS than patients with NC and their care partners.

Methods

Requests for de-identified data should be sent to the corresponding author and are subject to institutional review board and data use agreements. The University of Michigan and Duke University Institutional Review Boards approved this study. Methods details are reported adhering to consolidated criteria for reporting qualitative research.(18)

Study Design

This descriptive qualitative study used in-person semi-structured interviews of patient and care partner dyads.(19) In order to distinguish between participants in the dyads, we will refer to participants as either patients or care partners. These interviews were part of a mixed-methods study that looked at the influence of MCI on physician recommendations and patient and surrogate preferences for CVD treatments.(12, 13, 19–22) The study population consisted of patients with MCI, patients with NC, and their associated care partners. We recruited patients with MCI and NC at two large academic medical centers. MCI patients were recruited in collaboration with the Michigan Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center (MADRC) at the University of Michigan and the Joseph and Kathleen Bryan Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center at Duke University Medical Center (Duke Bryan ADRC).

Recruitment at the MADRC was from the University of Michigan Memory and Aging Project (UM-MAP) longitudinal cohort, which enrolls adults 55 and older with and without cognitive impairment. The UM-MAP recruits patients and care partners from the U-M Cognitive Disorders Clinic in the Department of Neurology, the Neuropsychology Section, or from the community via newspaper advertisements, community outreach programs, the MADRC website, or word of mouth. Enrollment in UM-MAP also includes the designation of a study partner. Patients and care partners were evaluated by a neurologist and underwent neuropsychological testing with a trained technician. Caregivers completed measures of functional ability and neurobehavioral symptoms with a trained staff member, and they completed a packet of questionnaires on their own that contained other measures. Patient and caregiver data were collected during the same research visit. The University of Michigan Health System Institutional Review Board approved UM-MAP.(23) Our study recruited patients and care partners from the UM-MAP cohort who had received a consensus diagnosis of MCI or NC within 12 months. The Consensus Committee consists of at least two MADRC neurologists, at least two MADRC neuropsychologists, and other clinical research staff. For each patient and care partner, research diagnostic classifications are assigned consistent with the national Alzheimer’s Disease Core Center and Unified Data Set guidelines.(24)

At the Duke study site, patients with MCI were recruited from the Duke Memory Disorders Clinic and the Geriatric Evaluation and Treatment Clinic using chart review. These patients received a diagnosis of MCI based on clinician expert diagnosis. To limit probability of conversion to dementia, we only recruited individuals seen in the Memory Disorders Clinic within 12 months. Patients with NC were recruited from the established Duke University Alzheimer’s Disease Prevention Registry, Duke Bryan ARDC outreach and educational events, and other ARDC studies that allow for re-contacting patients and care partners for future studies.

All patients in this study were required to be 65 or older, read and speak English, self-identify as having Black or White race, and have a diagnosis of MCI or NC within the last 12 months. At both sites, the diagnosis of MCI was based on cognitive testing, clinical examinations, and expert clinician diagnosis following the 2011 National Institute on Aging–Alzheimer’s Association (NIA-AA) diagnostic guidelines for MCI.(25) Care partners were required to be 18 or older and were defined as a friend or family member involved in the patient’s medical care. Study staff contacted eligible patients and care partners consecutively via telephone until we reached or exceeded our target numbers (target=5 MCI-care partner dyads and 5 NC-care partner dyads at each site). All patients and care partners received an incentive of $50 upon completion of the interview. No patients or care partners dropped out during or after interviews.

Data Collection

Trained qualitative interviewers (co-authors CDK or JW) conducted in-person interviews with patients and care partners separately. The interviewer conducted interviews in a private workspace at one of the Alzheimer’s Disease Centers through which recruitment occurred. The interviewer identified herself as a qualitative research consultant or qualitative interviewer and non-medical professional. The patients’ and care partners’ knowledge of the interviewer was limited to knowing her occupation and reasons for doing the research. Non-participants were not present during interviews. The interviewers had training in interviewing and moderating techniques. Before the interview, patients and care partners provided written consent and completed questionnaires to collect age, gender, race, ethnicity, marital status, education level, and history of acute myocardial infarction (AMI) and stroke. Care partners’ questionnaires also included relationship to the patient, duration of the relationship, frequency of contact with the patient, and the patient’s functional abilities using the Dementia Severity Rating Scale (DSRS).(26)

The interviewer used a standard interview guide and asked the same questions in the same way to all participants. Interviewers were provided with a standard list of question probes that could be used at interviewer discretion to help clarify questions or their purpose. The interviewer used a standard guide comprised of questions regarding patient preferences for AMI and AIS treatment and perceived risk of dementia and CVD in the next two years.(15, 27) The interview guide was pilot tested with separate groups of patients and care partners in both locations prior to the study and refined based on interviewee feedback. The interviewer started the interview by stating the purpose of the study and the definition of MCI.

The interview used a clinical vignette that depicted a fictional patient, David, who had a pre-existing diagnosis of MCI before AIS (Figure 1). This paper focuses on the interview questions asking patients and care partners about their treatment preferences for five different guideline-concordant treatments after AIS (Figure 2). The interviewer read the definition of stroke to patients and care partners before asking questions regarding the five specific stroke treatments. The interviewer also described each treatment and its purpose. Then patients were asked, “If you were David, would you want to have [specific treatment/test]?” The five treatments and tests in the interview were: a) medication to treat the current stroke (intravenous tissue plasminogen activator, or IV t-PA); b) minor surgery to insert a tube into the stomach if stroke makes David unable to swallow (feeding tube); c) intensive rehabilitation in a hospital to reduce disability from stroke (inpatient rehabilitation); d) medication to prevent future stroke (secondary preventive medications); and e) surgery to open the blocked carotid artery (carotid endarterectomy). Care partners were asked, “If you were helping David make medical decisions, would you want him to have [specific treatment/test]?” Patients and care partners were then asked to discuss the reasons behind each treatment decision.

Patients and care partners were interviewed separately. Participant responses were not disclosed to respective study partner. The interviewer used audio recording and field notes to collect the data. The interview duration was approximately 60 minutes. The interviews were recorded and transcribed by a professional transcription service. Study staff listened to all recordings and double-verified the accuracy of the interview transcripts. De-identified transcripts were uploaded to the Dedoose web application, a qualitative and mixed methods coding and analysis software.(28) We discontinued data collection after interviewing 23 dyads because thematic saturation was achieved based on the inductive approach. In particular, interviews did not identify new codes for patient preferences for treatment, perceived risks, or reactions to pilot study data.(29) Repeat interviews were not conducted. Interview transcripts were not provided to participants.

Analysis

We compared interview participant characteristics using Mood’s median test for continuous variables and Fisher’s exact test for categorical variables. Patients and care partners of patients with MCI were compared to those with NC.

We used a descriptive qualitative methodology grounded in a naturalist philosophy, wherein the goal is to be “data-near,” reporting findings in their standard terms, rather than more highly theorized terms.(30) The underlying epistemology is subjectivism.(31) In using inductive qualitative content analysis as our approach to coding, we accepted data as representing our patients’ and care partners’ subjective perceptions, and our role as researchers as using our skills to describe our interpretations of the perceptions as stated by the participants.(31) This approach supports our goal of producing findings that apply to real-world practice.

We performed qualitative content analysis to identify unifying and recurrent themes from the interview data using the Dedoose web application.(28, 32, 33) The coding team consisted of a vascular neurologist (DBZ), an internal medicine physician (DAL), qualitative researchers (JF, CDK), and study staff (BKR, EMB). The coding team initially read through the first several transcripts and developed a codebook consisting of codes specific to each interview question. To produce the final codebook, the team then independently coded additional transcripts and held regular meetings to discuss and resolve discrepancies and refine code definition. The remaining transcripts were coded by one of four coders (EMB, BKR, and two research associates). To ensure coding reliability, each coder achieved a kappa score of &gt;=0.08 compared to a “gold standard” sample of interview excerpts that had been coded by the senior project manager (BKR) and senior author (DAL) using a consensus process. To maintain coding reliability, two coders coded one-third of transcripts and the entire coding team discussed discrepancies in bi-weekly meetings. After coding was complete, the team reviewed the data organized under each code and discussed themes that emerged. Patients and care partners did not provide feedback on the findings. The University of Michigan and Duke University Institutional Review Boards approved this study. All co-authors reviewed and approved the themes presented in this manuscript.

Results

Figure 3 shows the derivation of the cohort. Thirteen participants refused to participate. We interviewed 23 patient-care partner dyads (MCI patient and care partner, n=11; NC patient and care partner, n=12). Of the 23 interviewed dyads, two dyads were deemed ineligible because they did not meet inclusion criteria for minimum age of patient. We also excluded one dyad that had missing eligibility information, resulting in 20 dyads in the study sample. Table 1 shows interview participant characteristics. No significant differences were observed between patients with MCI and NC. Care partners of MCI patients had greater education than those of NC patients (P=0.04).

We identified 3 major themes: 1) Patients with MCI desired non-invasive treatments after AIS similarly as patients with NC and for generally similar reasons; 2) Patients with MCI differed from patients with NC in their preferences for two invasive treatments after AIS, namely patients with MCI desired carotid endarterectomy more frequently and the feeding tube less frequently than patients with NC; however, each group expressed their preferences for similar reasons; and 3) Patients with MCI expressed more skepticism of the stroke treatment options than patients with NC. Representative quotes are presented in text and in Table 2.

Theme 1: Patients with MCI want the same non-invasive stroke treatments as patients with NC.

Overall, patients with MCI, compared with patients with NC, wanted the same non-invasive treatments after AIS, including thrombolysis (IV t-PA), inpatient rehabilitation, and secondary preventive medications, with only minor differences between cognitive status groups. Patients with MCI and NC wanted these treatments for largely the same reasons.

Most patients with MCI and with NC wanted IV t-PA after AIS. Among patients with MCI and patients with NC, most common reasons for wanting IV t-PA were to avoid more brain damage and reduce complications. One patient with MCI said, “Because if it was not dissolved, he could become much worse…so in order to minimize the overall effect – I mean, it sounds like he’s minimally involved with the memory, so the quality of life could still be very good if they could stop it.” All participants noted that they would want to consider alternatives to, necessity of, and risks of IV t-PA.

The majority of patients with MCI and patients with NC wanted inpatient rehabilitation after AIS, with the main reason being to get better and have a faster functional recovery. One patient with MCI said, “Because if it’s daily, maybe you would make faster improvement and strides toward, you know, your ADLs [activities of daily living] and everything.” Most patients with MCI and NC wanted preventive medications to prevent another stroke. One patient with MCI said, “Because if it’s going to prevent me from having a stroke, you better believe I would. I don’t walk two miles a day for nothing.” A patient with NC remarked, “Because I don’t want another stroke! I don’t want to go through this again!”

There were only minor differences in reasons behind preferences for IV t-PA and inpatient rehabilitation between patients with MCI and patients with NC. Fewer patients with MCI than patients with NC would want IV t-PA to have a faster recovery from the stroke. Some patients with MCI cited wanting IV t-PA to prevent future strokes. Regarding inpatient rehabilitation, patients with MCI considered their prior familiarity with treatment, family or partner preferences, alternative treatments, and guidance from their doctor. More patients with NC than MCI considered treatment burden and benefits of inpatient rehabilitation and the patient’s level of physical functioning.

Theme 2: Patients with MCI expressed different preferences than patients with NC for two invasive treatments.

Patients with MCI desired feeding tube placement less frequently and carotid endarterectomy more frequently than patients with NC. Representative quotes are shown in the text and in Table 3.

Sub-theme 2a:

Fewer patients with MCI than patients with NC expressed that they would want the feeding tube if they were the clinical vignette patient. Some patients with MCI said they would not want the feeding tube because they had lived a long life, or their quality of life was poor. Among patients with MCI and NC who wanted the feeding tube if they were the vignette patient, the reasons were similar, with the most common reason being that nutrition is essential to survive. Some patients with MCI and NC also wanted a feeding tube to avoid more damage or reduce stroke complications. A similar number of patients with MCI and NC refused a feeding tube. Some patients in both groups were unsure if they wanted a feeding tube and said that they would consider a feeding tube (said maybe), but the decision would depend upon other factors. Other factors considered similarly by both patients with MCI and NC included the risks of the procedure, a desire to discuss the procedure with close family, prior experiences with feeding tube, and stroke severity. Some patients with NC did not want the feeding tube because they believed it to be permanent. More patients with MCI considered necessity of the feeding tube, while more patients with NC considered treatment burden.

Sub-theme 2b:

More patients with MCI than patients with NC expressed that they definitely wanted carotid endarterectomy if they were the vignette patient. No patients with NC declined carotid endarterectomy; however, many patients with NC said that they would maybe want or were unsure if they would want the carotid endarterectomy instead of explicitly wanting the treatment. Among all who wanted carotid endarterectomy, the reasoning was similar: to prevent another stroke and reduce complications from the current stroke. Half of the patients with NC and one patient with MCI said maybe to carotid endarterectomy but noted that their decision would depend on guidance from their doctor, risks of surgery, and how physically healthy they were before surgery. Two patients with MCI stated that they would not want to have carotid endarterectomy, noting that they had lived a long life.

Theme 3: Patients with MCI expressed more skepticism about stroke treatment options than patients with NC.

Patients with MCI frequently expressed skepticism of the treatments than patients with NC. This skepticism appeared to be connected to a lack of confidence or trust in the treatment. Although all patients commonly considered treatment risks, prior familiarity with treatment, physician recommendations, and alternative treatments, patients with MCI more frequently considered alternative treatments and guidance from their doctor than those with NC.

Multiple patients with MCI said they would want a second opinion to determine if treatment was necessary before agreeing to that treatment. This was particularly true regarding feeding tube insertion and carotid endarterectomy. Many patients with MCI provided reasoning contingent on receiving more information from physicians. For example, when considering insertion of a feeding tube, a patient said they would need to ask their doctor many questions to determine if the treatment was necessary before deciding whether they would want it.

Patients with MCI also expressed the desire not to make quick decisions about treatments, stating that they wanted to explore alternative treatments and treatment necessity before deciding their preferences on treatment. For example, multiple patients with MCI said that they do not make treatment decisions quickly. One patient said, “you never rush into surgery unless you are bleeding…and you want to get a second opinion.” Patients with NC did not express the same reluctance in their reasoning.

Care Partner Results

Care partner responses were similar to patient responses for IV-tPA, inpatient rehabilitation, preventive medications, feeding tube, and carotid endarterectomy. It was reported that care partners of both patients with MCI and NC would want their loved ones to receive IV-tPA, inpatient rehabilitation, and preventive medications for similar reasons given by patients. Additionally, care partners of patients with MCI had similar preferences for feeding tubes as care partners of patients with NC, with half desiring the treatment and half being unsure. Care partners of patients with both cognitive statuses also differed from patients in their preferences for carotid endarterectomy, with half of care partners desiring the treatment and half unsure. We found that patients and care partners considered nearly identical factors in their treatment decisions.

Discussion

In this qualitative study, we identified how patient MCI diagnosis influences patient and care partner preferences for non-invasive and invasive guideline-concordant treatments after stroke. We identified three themes: 1) Patients with MCI desired the non-invasive treatments after AIS similarly to patients with NC; 2) Patients with MCI differed from patients with NC in their preferences for two invasive treatments after AIS; and 3) Patients with MCI had greater difficulty in understanding the stroke treatments and required more time and explanation to understand the stroke treatments than patients with NC.

Few studies have examined the influence of patient MCI diagnosis on patient and care partner treatment preferences. Conversely, studies have shown that presence and severity of cognitive impairment influences physician decision-making for CVD in older adults.(34, 35) Studies suggest that some physicians assume that patients with MCI, compared to patients with NC, prefer less treatment.(20, 36) However, we found no evidence that patient MCI influenced patient preferences for non-invasive treatments, namely IV t-PA, inpatient rehabilitation, and preventive medications, after stroke. Our study suggests that patients with MCI and NC similarly desire non-invasive treatments for stroke because they want to optimize their functional recovery, reduce complications from the AIS, and prevent future strokes. This may be because many older adults with MCI, like those with NC, often have several years of good quality of life without substantially impaired functioning.(2) Conversely, we found evidence that patient MCI influenced patient preferences for invasive treatments after stroke. Patients with MCI desired carotid endarterectomy more frequently and more definitively than patients with NC because they wanted to prevent future strokes. Potential explanations for this finding are uncertain, but interview data suggests that the patients with MCI did not understand and consider the procedure’s risks as much as patients with NC did. Conversely, patients with MCI wanted the feeding tube less frequently than patients with NC because they had lived a long life, or their quality of life was poor. Patients with MCI may have had different preferences because they understood the feeding tube’s necessity, duration, and burden less than patients with NC.

We found that patients with MCI, compared to those with NC, often had less understanding of the treatment, took longer to understand the treatment, and were more skeptical of the treatment. Incomplete understanding about the risks, benefits, and potential burdens of invasive treatments could lead to an asymmetry of information between patients with MCI and providers, which could reduce patients’ ability to make an informed decision.

Research suggests that patients with MCI want to participate in their health care decisions, including for stroke and CVD treatments,(21) and can participate in treatment decision-making.(37) Many patients, both those with MCI and NC, reported that they would consult their care partner while making decisions for stroke treatments. These results are consistent with studies showing that surrogates completely or jointly make decisions with the patient for CVD treatments for nearly half of hospitalized older adults and that surrogate involvement can help improve communication and understanding.(38, 39) Physicians also involve surrogates in treatment decisions more frequently in patients with MCI compared to those with NC.(36) More research is needed to understand better how patients with MCI and AIS react in real-life situations.

Our study has limitations. We only interviewed 20 patient-care partner dyads, 9 of which included a patient with MCI. This small sample size might have missed some dyad perspectives. Although the sample size was small, we used purposeful sampling to select information-rich patients and care partners and we achieved thematic saturation. Patients and care partners were recruited from two academic medical centers, so our findings may not be generalizable to other settings. Even so, patients in community medical settings might share similar beliefs to those in academic settings. The sample size limited power to examine differences by patient characteristics. We did not assess differences by type of MCI (e.g., amnestic vs non-amnestic). We did not measure participant fatigue or its association with interview duration. We intentionally asked patients to respond from the perspective of the clinical vignette patient (and care partners from the perspective of a family member) to minimize confounding factors from participants’ own lives that may impact decision-making. This framing may have limited our ability to assess what participants would want for themselves, though most responded providing their own perspectives despite these instructions.

This study has implications for clinical practice and policy. Our results suggest that patients with MCI might lack explicit knowledge and understanding of AIS events and treatments, contributing to uninformed treatment decisions, and ultimately leading to treatment disparities. Additionally, interviewer notes and recordings suggest that it took more time and explanation for patients with MCI to understand information about the treatments and answer questions about their treatment preferences. Patients with MCI asked more clarifying questions about treatments or the stroke itself than patients with NC. After considering all this information, patients with MCI sometimes found it challenging to make a concrete decision about their preferences. For example, one patient with MCI changed their inpatient rehabilitation decision multiple times during the interview. These observations suggest that patients with MCI might require more in-depth conversations, care partner involvement, and assessments of accurate understanding about treatments to ensure that treatment decisions reflect true preferences and an informed decision. While there have been initiatives to recommend shared decision-making between patients, care partners, and providers,(40, 41) the differences in reasoning for treatment decisions, understanding of treatments, and skepticism of treatments between patients with MCI and patients with NC suggest that the two groups may warrant different approaches to shared decision-making, particularly for more invasive procedures, where lack of knowledge about the treatment may be inappropriately driving patient preferences.(37) In-depth discussions with providers regarding treatment purposes, risks, and benefits may increase treatment understanding among patients with MCI and provide more symmetry of information in the shared decision-making process. It may also allow providers to better understand treatment preferences of their patients with MCI, influencing their recommendations. Our results suggest a scientific need to identify effective strategies for patient-centered communication between patients with MCI, their care partners, and providers.

Conclusion

Overall, patients with MCI and their care partners expressed similar preferences as patients with NC and their care partners for non-invasive treatments. However, patients with MCI expressed different treatment preferences for invasive treatments than patients with NC. Patients with MCI might want most of the same treatments as patients with NC, but the population with MCI might require more time, assistance, and reassurance when making AIS treatment decisions.

Sources of Funding

This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health (NIH)/NIA grant R01 AG051827 (Dr Levine, PI). Dr. Levine was also supported by NIH/NINDS R01 NS102715 (PI) and NIH/NIA R01 AG068410. Dr. Langa received funding support from NIH/NIA grants P30 AG053760 and P30 AG024824.

Non-standard Abbreviations and Acronyms

US United States

MCI Mild cognitive impairment

NC Normal cognition

CVD Cardiovascular disease

AIS Acute ischemic stroke

AMI Acute myocardial infarction

MADRC Michigan Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center

UM-MAP University of Michigan Memory and Aging Project

NIA-AA National Institute on Aging – Alzheimer’s Association

DSRS Dementia Severity Rating Scale

Figure 1: Clinical Vignette

Figure 2: Relevant Interview Questions and Content

Figure 3: Recruitment STROBE Diagram

Table 1: Interview Participant Characteristics

	Patients	Care partners	
	MCI
(n=11)	NC
(n=9)	P *	MCI
(n=11)	NC
(n=9)	P *	
Age, years: median (Q1, Q3)	72 (69, 76)	75 (68, 79)	0.99	70 (69, 75)	71 (70, 77)	0.99	
Recruitment Site: n (%)			0.67			-	
 Duke	5 (45.4)	3 (33.3)		-	-		
 UM	6 (54.6)	6 (66.7)		-	-		
Female: n (%)	4 (36.4)	7 (77.8)	0.09	8 (72.3)	3 (33.3)	0.18	
Race: n (%)			0.99			0.99	
 Black	2 (18.2)	1 (11.1)		1 (9.1)	1 (11.1)		
 White	9 (81.8)	8 (88.9)		9 (81.8)	8 (88.9)		
 Bi-racial	0 (0.0)	0 (0.0)		1 (9.1)	0 (0.0)		
Education: n (%)			0.38			0.04	
 Some college or less	3 (27.2)	2 (22.2)		3 (27.3)	6 (66.7)		
 4-Year college degree	4 (36.4)	1 (11.1)		7 (63.6)	1 (11.1)		
 More than 4-year college degree	4 (36.4)	6 (66.7)		1 (9.1)	2 (22.2)		
Married: n (%)	10 (90.9)	5 (55.6)	0.13	10 (90.9)	6 (66.7)	0.29	
Relationship to care partner: n (%)			0.19			-	
 Spouse	10 (90.9)	5 (55.6)		-	-		
 Family	0 (0.0)	2 (22.2)		-	-		
 Friend	1 (9.1)	1 (11.1)		-	-		
 Other	0 (0.0)	1 (11.1)		-	-		
Abbreviations: MCI, mild cognitive impairment; NC, normal cognition; Q, quartile; UM, University of Michigan

* p-values for age obtained using Mood’s median. All other p-values obtained using Fischer’s exact.

Table 2: Representative Quotes for Participant Preferences for Non-Invasive Stroke Treatments

	Patient with MCI	Patient with NC	
Intravenous tPA	“Yes, because if it was not dissolved, he could become much worse…so in order to minimize the overall effect - I mean it sounds like he’s minimally involved with the memory, so the quality of life could still be very good if they could stop it.”	“Yes, definitely as soon as possible. The thought process is with stroke if the blockage has created problems and can cause more problems, then get rid of the blockage. And if that medication does that, I mean, my understanding is the sooner you can get the treatment for stroke the better.”	
Inpatient Rehabilitation	“Yes, because if [inpatient rehab] is daily, maybe you would make faster improvement and strides toward, you know, your ADLs and everything.”	“I would choose the rehab unit I guess because - I would be away from my family long enough to do that with the hope that I would have better recovery of my function over the long term…”	
Post-Stroke Medications (like statins)	Again, life is good, so if it’s going to prevent the stroke, again, I would say yes. But, again, I would question the side effects and what I would have to do to keep this medication on focus.	“Well, obviously I wouldn’t want another stroke, so based on, you know, the confidence that I have in my doctors, if they recommend that I take this medication, naturally I would want to if there’s any harm or anything that might come from the medications. But I would have no problem taking the medication because, naturally, I would like to prevent another stroke.”	

Table 3: Representative Quotes for Participant Preferences for Invasive Stroke Treatments

	Patients with MCI	Patients with NC	
Feeding Tube Placement			
Yes	“I’m pretty sure I’d say “yes” because I’m not sure what the alternative would be. The alternative would be you don’t get food…which means you’re not going to live that long.”	“Well, I would think he would need nourishment. He would need to receive food in some manner. I’m not familiar with how a feeding tube is inserted, but I definitely would want an answer to how it’s inserted, how long would it have to remain there, what other complications, or you know, the usual complications from something like that. But the idea of getting nourishment to your body, I would think that, you know, you would definitely need that. I wouldn’t be averse to doing that.”	
No	“I don’t think I would want to be fed. In other words, I wouldn’t want to be kept alive. If I didn’t know my family, I think I’d be ready to go, I mean take away everything…Well if he’s had a stroke, I don’t think he’d be in his right mind all a whole lot of time. Then just continue to feed him and not being able to talk or carry on a conversation with family, I wouldn’t want to live.”	“No, and the reason because is my daughter had a head injury, she was able to relearn to swallow. With someone with a stroke, I don’t know that people can relearn to swallow, and once you insert a feeding tube, you’re – I just know I don’t want to live like that.”	
Carotid Endarterectomy			
Yes	“I’d have the surgery. Because I’d want to prevent [another stroke] from happening. Well, if they can prevent it, even though it may cause me to have another one, I think prevention is good. Now that’s my time, that’s what I think. Well, if the prevention would make me live longer, that would be, you know, given more life. You know if they could do something about it.”	“Yes, I would. The chances of him having another stroke is decreased, so you always want to prevent things from happening instead of treating them afterwards, so the treatment will help him not to have one is a better treatment than waiting until he does have one and then treating it.”	
No	“Well, certainly not yes. So now between maybe and a no. But if had to choose right now it would be no.
I mean, nobody lives forever anyhow so what’s all this trouble for? You know, kiss me goodbye, hold me, tell me a story, touch me in some kind of an affectionate way, sit around and hold my hand while I’m dying. All that, that’s good. But I don’t want keeping me alive to become their life.”	N/A	

Disclosures: The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.


References

1. Plassman BL , Langa KM , Fisher GG , Prevalence of cognitive impairment without dementia in the united states. Ann Intern Med. 2008;148 :427–34.18347351
2. Petersen RC , Lopez O , Armstrong MJ , Practice guideline update summary: Mild cognitive impairment: Report of the guideline development, dissemination, and implementation subcommittee of the american academy of neurology. Neurology. 2018;90 :126–135.29282327
3. Farias ST , Mungas D , Reed BR , Progression of mild cognitive impairment to dementia in clinic- vs community-based cohorts. Arch Neurol. 2009;66 :1151–7.19752306
4. Mitchell AJ , Shiri-Feshki M . Rate of progression of mild cognitive impairment to dementia--meta-analysis of 41 robust inception cohort studies. Acta Psychiatr Scand. 2009;119 :252–65.19236314
5. Sachs GA , Carter R , Holtz LR , Cognitive impairment: An independent predictor of excess mortality: A cohort study. Ann Intern Med. 2011;155 :300–8.21893623
6. Bárrios H , Narciso S , Guerreiro M , Quality of life in patients with mild cognitive impairment. Aging Ment Health. 2013;17 :287–92.23215827
7. Virani SS , Alonso A , Benjamin EJ , Heart disease and stroke statistics-2020 update: A report from the american heart association. Circulation. 2020;141 :e139–e596.31992061
8. Cheng EM , Fung CH . Quality indicators for the care of stroke and atrial fibrillation in vulnerable elders. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2007;55 Suppl 2 :S431–7.17910567
9. Wenger NS , Solomon DH , Amin A , Application of assessing care of vulnerable elders-3 quality indicators to patients with advanced dementia and poor prognosis. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2007;55 Suppl 2 :S457–63.17910571
10. Murao K , Bombois S , Cordonnier C , Influence of cognitive impairment on the management of ischaemic stroke. Rev Neurol (Paris). 2014;170 :177–86.24613474
11. Gharacholou SM , Reid KJ , Arnold SV , Cognitive impairment and outcomes in older adult survivors of acute myocardial infarction: Findings from the translational research investigating underlying disparities in acute myocardial infarction patients’ health status registry. Am Heart J. 2011;162 :860–869.e1.22093202
12. Levine DA , Langa KM , Galecki A , Mild cognitive impairment and receipt of treatments for acute myocardial infarction in older adults. J Gen Intern Med. 2020;35 :28–35.31410812
13. Levine DA , Galecki AT , Morgenstern LB , Preexisting mild cognitive impairment, dementia, and receipt of treatments for acute ischemic stroke. Stroke. 2021;52 :2134–2142.33902296
14. Stagg BC , Ehrlich JR , Choi H , Association of cognitive impairment and dementia with receipt of cataract surgery among community-dwelling medicare beneficiaries. JAMA Opthamol. 2019;137 :114–117.
15. Ostergren JE , Heeringa SG , Leon CFM , The influence of psychosocial and cognitive factors on perceived threat of alzheimer’s disease. Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen. 2017;32 :289–299.28605999
16. Longley V , Peters S , Swarbrick C , What factors affect clinical decision-making about access to stroke rehabilitation? A systematic review. Clinical Rehabilitation. 2019;33 :304–316.30370792
17. Sandelowski M Whatever happened to qualitative description? Res Nurs Health. 2000;23 :334–40.10940958
18. Tong A , Sainsbury P , Craig J . Consolidated criteria for reporting qualitative research (coreq): A 32-item checklist for interviews and focus groups. Int J Qual Health Care. 2007;19 :349–57.17872937
19. Kimmel HJ , Levine DA , Whitney RT , A mixed-methods study of the impact of mild cognitive impairment diagnosis on patient and care partner perception of health risks. J Alzheimers Dis. 2022;85 :1175–1187.34924384
20. Levine DA , Langa KM , Fagerlin A , Physician decision-making and recommendations for stroke and myocardial infarction treatments in older adults with mild cognitive impairment. PLoS One. 2020;15 :e0230446.32182264
21. Levine DA , Galecki AT , Plassman BL , The association between mild cognitive impairment diagnosis and patient treatment preferences: A survey of older adults. J Gen Intern Med. 2021;Online ahead of print.
22. Blair EM , Zahuranec DB , Forman J , Physician diagnosis and knowledge of mild cognitive impairment. J Alzheimers Dis. 2022;85 :273–282.34806602
23. Ryan KA , Weldon A , Huby NM , Caregiver support service needs for patients with mild cognitive impairment and alzheimer disease. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 2010;24 :171–6.19571729
24. Besser L , Kukull W , Knopman DS , Version 3 of the national alzheimer’s coordinating center’s uniform data set. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 2018;32 :351–358.30376508
25. Albert MS , DeKosky ST , Dickson D , The diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment due to alzheimer’s disease: Recommendations from the national institute on aging-alzheimer’s association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement. 2011;7 :270–9.21514249
26. Clark CM , Ewbank DC . Performance of the dementia severity rating scale: A caregiver questionnaire for rating severity in alzheimer disease. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 1996;10 :31–9.
27. Kahneman D , Egan P . Thinking, fast and slow. United States: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, 2011.
28. Dedoose Version 8.0.35. Web application for managing, analyzing, and presenting qualitative and mixed method research data. Los Angeles, CA: SocioCultural Resarch Consultants LLC, 2018.
29. Saunders B , Sim J , Kingstone T , Saturation in qualitative research: Exploring its conceptualization and operationalization. Qual Quant. 2018;52 :1893–1907.29937585
30. Sandelowski M What’s in a name? Qualitative description revisited. Res Nurs Health. 2010;33 :77–84.20014004
31. Bradshaw C , Atkinson S , Doody O . Employing a qualitative description approach in health care research. Glob Qual Nurs Res. 2017;4 :2333393617742282.
32. Forman J , Damschroder L . Qualitative content analysis. Empirical methods for bioethics: A primer. Elsevier, 2008;1 :39–62.
33. Elo S , Kyngäs H . The qualitative content analysis process. J Adv Nurs. 2008;62 :107–115.18352969
34. Brauner DJ , Muir JC , Sachs GA . Treating nondementia illnesses in patients with dementia. JAMA. 2000;283 :3230–5.10866871
35. Fitzpatrick AL , Kuller LH . Quantity versus quality of life: How do we decide? J Am Geriatr Soc. 2004;52 :314–5.14728647
36. Blair EM , Zahuranec DB , Langa KM , Impact of patient mild cognitive impairment on physician decision-making for treatment. J Alzheimers Dis. 2020;78 :1409–1417.33164931
37. Daly RL , Bunn F , Goodman C . Shared decision-making for people living with dementia in extended care settings: A systematic review. BMJ Open. 2018;8 :e018977.
38. Torke AM , Sachs GA , Helft PR , Scope and outcomes of surrogate decision making among hospitalized older adults. JAMA Intern Med. 2014;174 :370–7.24445375
39. Vick JB , Amjad H , Smith KC , “Let him speak:” A descriptive qualitative study of the roles and behaviors of family companions in primary care visits among older adults with cognitive impairment. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2018;33 :e103–e112.28585721
40. Sepucha KR , Scholl I . Measuring shared decision making: A review of constructs, measures, and opportunities for cardiovascular care. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2014;7 :620–6.24867916
41. Institute of Medicine Committee on Quality of Health Care in America. Crossing the quality chasm: a new health system for the 21st century. United States: National Academies Press, 2001.
