LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101311472
34100
Cell Stem Cell
Cell Stem Cell
Cell stem cell
1934-5909
1875-9777

37028406
10150940
10.1016/j.stem.2023.02.006
NIHMS1877987
Article
Activation of hypothalamic-enhanced adult-born neurons restores cognitive and affective function in Alzheimer's disease
Li Ya-Dong 12#
Luo Yan-Jia 12#
Xie Ling 3
Tart Dalton S 1+
Sheehy Ryan N 14+
Zhang Libo 1
Coleman Leon G Jr 15
Chen Xian 3
Song Juan 126*
1 Department of Pharmacology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA
2 Neuroscience Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA
3 Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA
4 Pharmacology Curriculum, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA
5 Bowles Center for Alcohol Studies, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA
6 Lead Contact
* Correspondence: Juan Song, PhD, juansong@email.unc.edu
# These authors contributed equally to this study

+ These authors contributed equally to this study

Author contributions

J.S. conceived and supervised the project, designed the experiments, and wrote the paper. Y-D.L. designed the experiments, wrote the paper, and carried out experiments and data analysis. Y-J.L. carried out all aspects of electrophysiology experiments and data analysis, and assisted in preparing the manuscript. L.X. and X.C. performed phosphoproteomics analyses and helped manuscript preparation. S.T. and R.S. performed microglia phagocytosis analysis. L.Z. provided technical supports for the project. L.C. provided aged 3×Tg-AD mice.

10 3 2023
06 4 2023
06 4 2024
30 4 415432.e6
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Summary

Patients with Alzheimer’s disease (AD) exhibit progressive memory loss, depression, and anxiety, accompanied by impaired adult hippocampal neurogenesis (AHN). Whether AHN can be enhanced in impaired AD brain to restore cognitive and affective function remains elusive. Here we report that patterned optogenetic stimulation of hypothalamic supramammillary nucleus (SuM) enhances AHN in two distinct AD mouse models, 5×FAD and 3×Tg-AD. Strikingly, chemogenetic activation of SuM-enhanced adult-born neurons (ABNs) rescues memory and emotion deficits in these AD mice. By contrast, SuM stimulation alone or activation of ABNs without SuM modification fails to restore behavioral deficits. Furthermore, quantitative phosphoproteomics analyses reveals activation of the canonical pathways related to synaptic plasticity and microglia phagocytosis of plaques following acute chemogenetic activation of SuM-enhanced (versus control) ABNs. Our study establishes activity-dependent contribution of SuM-enhanced ABNs in modulating AD-related deficits and informs signaling mechanisms mediated by activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs.

Graphical Abstract

eTOC Blurb

The process of generating adult-born new neurons (ABNs) in the hippocampus is impaired in AD. Song and colleagues report a circuit-based strategy by stimulating SuM to enhance hippocampal neurogenesis in AD mice. Activation of SuM-modified ABNs restores cognitive and affective function along with improved hippocampal plasticity and microglia dynamics.


pmcIntroduction

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is characterized by formation of β-amyloid (Aβ) plaques and neurofibrillary tangles, neuroinflammation, and neurodegeneration 1,2. Spatial memory decline along with depression and anxiety has been known to be early clinical signs of AD 3,4, for which the hippocampus has a crucial role 2,5. Within the hippocampus, dentate gyrus (DG) contains neural stem cells that continue to generate adult-born new neurons (ABNs) throughout life, a process known as adult hippocampal neurogenesis (AHN). Substantial evidence has supported the existence of AHN in human brains and the level of AHN is significantly declined during AD progression 6-12. Ample studies using rodent models have established the causal role of ABNs in regulating memory performance 13-17 and emotional states 18,19, two key functions of adult hippocampus that are impaired in AD patients. However, the function and therapeutic potential of ABNs in AD brains remains largely unknown. A long-standing question has been centering on whether AHN can be effectively enhanced in otherwise impaired AD brains and exploited for therapeutic purpose in AD to restore hippocampal function.

It has been well-established that environmental stimuli, such as enriched/novel environment and voluntary exercise, can enhance AHN and improve hippocampal function in both healthy and AD mice, potentially through mechanisms involved in neurotrophic factors (i.e. BDNF) or microRNAs 20-25. However, environmental stimuli exert broad effects on various brain regions and cell types, so the key circuit and signaling mechanisms that mediate enhanced AHN and improved hippocampal function in these contexts remain largely undefined. Given that dysregulated circuits and networks are the hallmarks of AD, lacking circuit-based knowledge represents one of the major roadblocks for clinical transformation of the beneficial effects associated with environmental stimulations to improve AHN and brain functions. A series of our studies have established that AHN is dynamically regulated by activity mediated by diverse neural circuits 21,26-30. Importantly, neural circuits are capable of relaying external stimuli to the neurogenic niche to regulate AHN 26. Recently, we identified a key subcortical region in the hypothalamus, supramammillary nucleus (SuM), which sends abundant projections to DG and is highly responsive to pro-neurogenic stimuli 21. Specifically, SuM neurons exhibit increased firing frequency, calcium dynamics, and c-Fos expression when animals are exposed to a novel environment. Importantly, SuM neurons are required for environmental novelty (EN)-induced enhancement of AHN, as ablation of SuM neurons abolishes these effects. These findings raise an exciting possibility that stimulating SuM may mimic EN-induced enhancement of AHN.

Supporting this view, we found that patterned optogenetic stimulation of SuM neurons at the frequency mimicking their firing rate in the novel environment increases the number of ABNs with enhanced developmental properties 21. Strikingly, acute chemogenetic activation of a small population of time-stamped SuM-enhanced ABNs improves memory performance and reduces anxiety-like behavior. These results suggest that increasing activity of SuM-enhanced ABNs, even just a small number, can recapitulate the behavioral benefits mediated by environmental stimulation.

In this study, we set out to test this novel AHN-enhancing strategy in degenerated AD brains and address whether it can restore AHN and achieve functional recovery using two distinct AD mouse models, 5×FAD 31 and 3×Tg-AD 32. We found that patterned optogenetic stimulation of SuM in AD mice at various disease stages (ranging from early to late) restores the number and developmental properties of ABNs. Importantly, acute chemogenetic activation of a small population of SuM-enhanced ABNs in AD mice can restore memory and reduce anxiety/depression-like behaviors. By contrast, SuM stimulation alone or acute activation of ABNs without SuM modification fails to restore behavioral deficits. To probe ABN-activity-dependent mechanisms, we performed quantitative phosphoproteomics of the hippocampus following acute chemogenetic activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs. Our analyses reveal activation of the canonical pathways related to synaptic plasticity and microglia phagocytosis of plaques in response to acute activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs.

Results

Impaired hippocampal neurogenesis occurs prior to behavioral deficits in 5×FAD mice

We first examined hippocampal neurogenesis and behavioral states in relation to plaque deposition at various ages of 5×FAD mice and their littermate wild-type (WT) controls. First, we examined plaque deposition in the DG where AHN occurs and found no Aβ plaque deposition in 2.5-month 5×FAD mice. Mild plaque deposition was found in 3.5-month AD mice, which became progressively severe at 4.5 and 6.5 months. By contrast, no plaques were found in littermate WT controls at these stages (Figure S1A).

We then examined when AHN impairment in 5×FAD mice started. Interestingly, the density of Ki67+ cells was significantly reduced in 3.5-month (but not 2.5-month) 5×FAD mice without altering the density of DCX+ immature neurons (Figure S1B-E, Figure S2A-D). These results suggested that AHN impairment started in 3.5-month 5×FAD mice, and at this time only proliferation of neural precursor cells was affected. To address whether reduced proliferation leads to reduced production of ABNs, we performed lineage-tracing of neural stem/progenitor cells (NSPCs) in 3.5- and 5.5-month 5×FAD and WT mice to evaluate the production of behaviorally relevant ABNs during the critical window of 4-6 weeks 33,34 (Figure S1F, K). To label NSPCs in AD mice, we generated triple transgenic mice harboring Ascl1-CreERT2 (a Cre-inducible recombinase under the control of the endogenous Achaete-scute homolog 1 promoter 35), Ai9 (a floxed reporter line expressing tdTomato 36), and 5×FAD, referred as Ascl1-Ai9-AD mice. The double transgenic littermates Ascl1-CreER::Ai9 were used as controls, referred as Ascl1-Ai9 mice. With 3-day tamoxifen (TMX) induction, a significant reduction in the densities of Ki67+ tdTomato+ and total tdTomato+ cells was observed in both 3.5- and 5.5-month (but not 2.5-month) Ascl1-Ai9-AD mice (Figure S1G-J, S1Q-S, Figure S2E-H). 32 days after the first TMX induction when tdTomato+ cells reached the critical window for behavioral contribution, a significant reduction of total tdTomato+, DCX+ tdTomato+, NeuN+ tdTomato+ and DCX+ cells was observed in 4.5- and 6.5-month Ascl1-Ai9-AD mice as compared to their age-matched controls (Figure S1L-P, S1T-W, Figure S2I) without altering the DG volume (Figure S2J-M).

We further examined hippocampus-dependent memory performance and emotional states of 3.5- and 4.5-month 5×FAD mice to determine when these behaviors become impaired. Novel place recognition (NPR) and contextual fear condition (CFC) were performed to assess memory performance, open field and elevated zero maze were performed to assess anxiety-like behavior, and forced swimming was performed to assess depression-like behavior. These behaviors were selected, as we recently showed that they respond to acute chemogenetic manipulation of ABNs during the critical window in WT mice 21, thus are ABN activity dependent. As a result, 4.5-month 5×FAD mice exhibited decreased discrimination ratio in the NPR test (Figure 1A), decreased freezing time in context A (24 hours and 7 days after foot shocks) in the CFC test (Figure 1B, D) without altering the freezing time in context B (Figure 1C). In addition, the time spent in central area of the open field was not altered (Figure 1E), but the total locomotion was decreased (Figure 1F). Furthermore, the time spent in open arms of the elevated zero maze was decreased (Figure 1G), and the time of immobility in the forced swimming test was increased (Figure 1H). By contrast, 3.5-month 5×FAD mice showed no significant changes in all the behaviors tested above (Figure S3A-H). These results revealed impaired memory and elevated anxiety- and depression-like behavior in 4.5-month (but not 3.5-month) 5×FAD mice. Therefore, AHN deficits occurred (3.5-month) before behavioral deficits (4.5-month) in 5×FAD mice.

Activation of ABNs fails to rescue behavioral deficits in 5×FAD mice

Our recent study showed that acute chemogenetic activation of ABNs during the critical window of 4-6 weeks improves memory performance and emotional sates in WT mice 21. Therefore, we asked whether activation of ABNs in 4.5-month 5×FAD mice could restore cognitive and affective function. To activate ABNs, we generated triple transgenic mice harboring Ascl1CreER, floxed hM3Dq 37, and 5×FAD, referred as AM3-AD mice. The double transgenic hM3Dq::5×FAD mice were used as controls, referred as M3-AD mice. These mice were induced with TMX for 3 consecutive days, and 32 days after the first TMX injection, cognitive and affective behaviors mentioned above in Figure 1A-H were performed upon acute chemogenetic activation of ABNs by intraperitoneal injection of CNO (Figure 1I-J). By note, HA+ hM3Dq+ ABNs were found in AM3-AD (but not M3-AD control) mice (Figure 1K), thus validating the reliability of Cre-induced expression of hM3Dq. As a result, chemogenetic activation of ABNs in 4.5-month AM3-AD mice had no effects on all the behaviors tested, including NPR (Figure 1L), CFC (Figure 1M-N), open field (Figure 1O-P), elevated zero maze (Figure 1Q), and forced swimming (Figure 1R). These results suggested that activation of impaired ABNs in the diseased AD brain does not convey behavioral benefits.

Patterned optogenetic stimulation of SuM enhances hippocampal neurogenesis in 5×FAD mice

Our recent study identified a key subcortical region in the hypothalamus, the SuM, which upon patterned optogenetic stimulation can effectively enhance AHN by acting on multiple neurogenesis stages, leading to increased number of behaviorally relevant ABNs with enhanced developmental properties including accelerated maturation, longer/more elaborate dendrites, and increased dendritic spines in WT mice 21. Importantly, acute chemogenetic activation of these SuM-enhanced ABNs functionally improves memory performance and reduces anxiety-like behaviors in WT mice (Figure 5 and Figure 6 in 21). Based on these findings, we asked whether chronic patterned optogenetic stimulation of SuM neurons can similarly enhance ABNs in AD mice; and if so, whether activation of these SuM-enhanced ABNs can restore behavioral deficits in AD mice.

To address this question, we first examined the activity of DG-projecting SuM neurons in 5×FAD mice measured by c-Fos expression and Ca2+ dynamics (fiber photometry) of DG-projecting SuM neurons in 5×FAD and WT mice at 3.5- and 4.5-months of age. To label DG-projecting SuM neurons, retroAAV-Cre was injected into the DG, and AAV-DIO-eGFP (for c-Fos) or AAV-DIO-GCaMP7f (for fiber photometry) was injected into the SuM (Figure 2A, 2D). A significant reduction of c-Fos expression and Ca2+ activity in DG-projecting SuM neurons was found in 4.5-month (but not 3.5-month) 5×FAD mice (Figure 2B-C, 2E-G). These results suggested that DG-projecting SuM neurons exhibit reduced activity in 4.5-month (but not 3.5-month) 5×FAD mice.

We then applied 32-d patterned optogenetic stimulation of SuM neurons in 3.5-month triple transgenic Ascl1-Ai9-AD mice injected with AAV-CaMKII-ChR2-YFP or AAV-CaMKII-YFP in SuM, referred as ChR2-AD (experimental) or YFP-AD (control) mice (Figure 2H-I), followed by the quantification of the number and developmental properties of SuM-modified and control ABNs in 4.5-month ChR2- and YFP-AD mice (Figure 2H-I). The SuM stimulation paradigm has been used and validated in WT mice from our recent study 21. By combining SuM stimulation and Cre-inducible triple transgenic AD mice, we can study a cohort of time-stamped ABNs that have been modified by SuM stimulation. Our results showed that chronic patterned opto-stimulation of SuM led to a significant increase in the densities of tdTomato+ and DCX+ tdTomato+ cells along with an increased trend of NeuN+ tdTomato+ cells (p = 0.095) (Figure 2J-M) and a significant increase in the dendritic spine density of tdTomato+ ABNs (Figure 2N-O) in 4.5-month ChR2-AD mice as compared to sham control YFP-AD mice. The density of total DCX+ cells (independent of tdTomato fluorescence) in SuM-stimulated ChR2-AD mice was also significantly increased as compared to sham control YFP-AD mice (Figure 2P-Q), thus confirming the neurogenic effects mediated by SuM stimulation were not an artifact of transgene expression in ABNs. Interestingly, the mossy fiber axons of tdTomato+ ABNs in the CA3 subfield of ChR2-AD mice was significantly increased (Figure 2R-S), indicating increased connectivity between SuM-enhanced ABNs and CA3 neurons. Notably, chronic SuM stimulation did not alter Aβ plaque pathology and GFAP expression (proxy for neuroinflammation) in DG of ChR2-AD mice (Figure S4A-C). Moreover, c-Fos expression in DG, CA3, and CA1 was not altered (Figure S4D-E). These results suggested that chronic SuM stimulation leads to increased number of ABNs with improved developmental properties without significantly altering AD pathology in the neurogenic niche.

Activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs rescues behavioral deficits in 5×FAD mice

Given that pattered SuM stimulation enhanced AHN in AD mice, we wondered whether SuM-stimulated 5×FAD mice exhibit improved behaviors. Behavioral tests were performed one day after chronic SuM stimulation to avoid acute circuit effects (Figure 2H). As a result, no behavioral improvements were observed following chronic SuM stimulation, though these animals have SuM-enhanced ABNs (Figure S5), suggesting that SuM stimulation alone is not sufficient for behavioral improvement in 5×FAD mice. These results are consistent with recent findings that increasing AHN alone failed to ameliorate cognitive deficits in the same 5×FAD mouse model 23.

We next examined whether activation of these SuM-enhanced ABNs can restore behavioral deficits in 5×FAD mice. AAV-CaMKII-ChR2-mCherry or AAV-CaMKII-mCherry were injected to the triple transgenic AM3-AD mice, referred as ChR2-AM3-AD and mCherry-AM3-AD mice. Similar TMX induction and SuM stimulation paradigms were applied in 3.5-month 5×FAD mice, followed by behavioral tests (Figure 3A-B). Chronic SuM stimulation significantly increased the density of HA+ hM3Dq+ cells in ChR2-AM3-AD mice as compared to mCherry-AM3-AD mice (Figure 3C-D). To avoid acute circuit effects from chronic opto-stimulation of SuM, we tested behaviors upon acute chemogenetic activation of SuM-enhanced or control ABNs one day after SuM stimulation. Strikingly, acute chemogenetic activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs in ChR2-AM3-AD mice significantly increased the discrimination ratio in the NPR test (Figure 3R) and the freezing time in context A (24 hours and 7 days after foot shocks) in the CFC test (Figure 3F, 3H) without altering the freezing time in the neutral context B (Figure 3G). In addition, the time spent in open arms of the zero maze was significantly increased and the time of immobility in the forced swimming test was significantly decreased (Figure 3K-L). By contrast, the time spent in central area of the open field and locomotion was not significantly altered (Figure 3I-J). Notably, animal performance in AD mice reached similar level as AM3-WT mice (Figure 3E-L), indicative of a full restoration. These results suggested that activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs rescues both memory and emotion deficits in 5×FAD mice, thus highlighting activity-dependent contribution of SuM-enhanced ABNs in AD brains.

By note, in contrast to most studies trying to label as many ABNs as possible to maximize the chance for behavioral changes, we tuned the TMX dose in our Cre-inducible mice to manipulate a small population of time-stamped ABNs (~300 ABNs/DG, &lt;0.05% of the total DG granule neuron population) at a comparable level of AHN in humans, as the level of AHN in humans is lower than that in mice and it is even lower in AD patients. Therefore, these findings suggest that modulating the activity of SuM-enhanced ABNs, even just a small population, can exert profound effects on behaviors in AD brains.

Activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs rescues behavioral deficits in aged 3×Tg-AD mice

The 5×FAD mice exhibit severe plaque deposition at a relatively young age, therefore, a concern was raised for lacking the aging factor critical for AD in this mouse model. To address this issue, we incorporated an additional AD mouse model, 3×Tg-AD, which exhibits much slower AD pathology than 5xFAD mice. We examined neurogenic and behavioral effects mediated by SuM stimulation in 3×Tg-AD mice at 9 and 15 months of age. Specifically, AAV-CaMKII-ChR2-YFP or AAV-CaMKII-YFP was injected to SuM for optogenetic stimulation of SuM neurons, followed by injection of the mixture of retrovirus expressing Cre (RV-CAG-Cre-HA) and AAV-DIO-hM3Dq-mCherry to the DG for chemogenetic stimulation of ABNs during behavioral tests. Similar 32-day SuM stimulation paradigm was applied in 9- and 15-month 3×Tg-AD mice to enhance ABNs (Figure 4A). Consistent with the findings in 4.5-month 5×FAD mice, we found that chronic patterned stimulation of SuM increased the density of HA+ ABNs in both 9- and 15-month 3×Tg-AD mice (Figure 4B-C) without altering the percentage of HA+DCX+/HA+ ABNs (Figure 4D). Moreover, the density of total DCX+ ABNs (independent of fluorescence) in both 9- and 15-month 3×Tg-AD mice was also increased following SuM stimulation (Figure 4E), thus confirming that neurogenic effects mediated by SuM stimulation were not an artefact of viral-mediated expression in ABNs. Furthermore, acute chemogenetic activation of SuM-enhanced (but not control) ABNs rescued spatial memory performance in the NPR test and anxiety/depression-like behaviors in the elevated zero maze, open filed, and forced swimming tests in both 9- and 15-month 3×Tg-AD mice (Figure 4F, 4H-J) without affecting locomotion (Figure 4G). These results not only validated the neurogenic and behavioral effects mediated by SuM stimulation in another distinct AD mouse model, but also suggested that SuM-mediated AHN-enhancing strategy is effective in aged AD mice.

Phosphoproteomics analyses reveals signaling mechanisms mediated by activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs in 5×FAD mice

These behavioral findings promoted us to address the signaling mechanisms mediated by activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs in 5×FAD mice. To probe activity-dependent signaling mechanisms mediated by SuM-enhanced ABNs, we performed phosphoproteomics of the whole hippocampus from 4.5-month ChR2-AM3-AD and mCherry-AM3-AD mice following acute chemogenetic activation of SuM-enhanced and control ABNs using label-free quantitative (LFQ) method coupled with liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) 38. Brain tissues were collected 30-60 minutes after intraperitoneal injection of CNO to match the behavioral readouts (Figure 3A). Phosphoproteomics analyses identified 21,894 phosphorylation sites from 4,121 phosphoproteins, and the changes of 13,643 phosphorylation sites were quantified (Excel Table S1). Among them, 717 sites from 540 proteins showed altered levels of phosphorylation with P-value ≤ 0.05 and log2 ratios ≤ −0.50 or ⩾ 0.50 when comparing SuM-stimulated ChR2-AM3-AD to sham control mCherry-AM3-AD mice following CNO administration (Figure 5A) without altering the global protein level (Figure S6A-B). Interestingly, gene ontology analyses of pathways showed that the majority of canonical signaling pathways (64 out of 72) exhibited activation upon acute stimulation of SuM-enhanced ABNs (Figure S6C, Excel Table S2). Among these pathways, we found significant activation in pathways related to synaptic plasticity, such as long-term potentiation (LTP), CREB signaling, and synaptogenesis (Figure 5B, 5E, Figure S6C). Some phosphoproteins within these pathways have been widely implicated in learning and memory, including CaMKII (CaMKIIA and CaMKIIB) and PLCg1 39-41. Interestingly, we also found significant activation in pathways related to microglia phagocytosis of plaques, such as FCγ receptor-mediated phagocytosis in microglia 42 (Figure 5A-B). Some phosphorylated proteins in this pathway have been implicated in plaque clearance, such as PAK1 43 (Figure 5A-B).

As a negative control, we performed similar phosphoproteomics analyses of the hippocampus from AM3-AD and M3-AD mice following acute chemogenetic activation of control ABNs (without SuM modification), as ABN activation in AM3-AD mice did not improve behaviors. Brain tissues were collected 30-60 minutes after intraperitoneal injection of CNO to match the behavioral readouts (Figure 3A). As a result, 830 differentially phosphorylated sites from 633 phosphoproteins were identified following acute ABN activation (Figure 5C, Excel Table S1). Interestingly, in contrast to predominantly activated canonical pathways in ChR2-AM3-AD/mCherry-AM3-AD mice (Figure S7), most canonical pathways (39 out of 50) were suppressed when comparing AM3-AD to M3-AD mice (Figure 5D-E, Figure S6D, Excel Table S3), including the ones related to synaptic plasticity and microglia phagocytosis of plaques (Figure 5D, 5E, Figure S6D). Together, these results revealed activity dependent signaling mechanisms that may underlie distinct behavioral readouts mediated by activation of SuM-enhanced versus control ABNs in AD brains.

Activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs induces hippocampal subregion specific alteration of phosphoproteins related to synaptic plasticity in 5×FAD mice

Converging evidence suggests that ABNs can modulate DG and CA3 dynamics through direct synaptic contacts with DG/hilar and CA3 interneurons and principle cells 15,44-47. Furthermore, ABNs can indirectly modulate CA1 through ABN-CA3-CA1 connections. Therefore, activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs may exert distinct effects on the activity dynamics and synaptic plasticity of different hippocampal subfields. Given that our phosphoproteomics was performed using the tissues from the whole hippocampus, we intended to validate some of the key differentially regulated phosphoproteins (DRPs) using immunohistochemistry following acute chemogenetic activation of SuM-enhanced or control ABNs in SuM or sham stimulated ChR2/mCherry-AM3-AD mice to obtain hippocampal subregion specific information on their expression. We also included hippocampal tissues from the 5×FAD mice with SuM-stimulation only (mCherry-AD vs ChR2-AD) and acute chemogenetic activation of ABNs without SuM modification (M3-AD vs AM3-AD) as additional controls. Several key DRPs involved in synaptic plasticity, including pPLCg1, pCaMKII, and pCREB, were selected for validation (Figure 5F). Interestingly, these DRPs exhibit distinct expression patterns in different hippocampal subfields (DG, CA3, and CA1) following acute activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs. Specifically, acute chemogenetic activation of SuM-enhanced (vs control) ABNs induced significantly increased expression of pPLCg1, pCaMKII, and pCREB in CA1 (Figure 5G-I), pPLCg1 and pCREB in CA3 (Figure 5J-L), and only pPLCg1 in DG (Figure 5M-O), as compared to various controls. These results provided region-specific signaling mechanisms underlying activity-dependent modulation of hippocampal circuit dynamics mediated by activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs.

Activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs increases CA1 LTP in 5×FAD mice

Given that CA1 among all hippocampal subfields exhibited the broad alteration of selected DRPs, we decided to perform functional validation of synaptic plasticity in CA1 by recording LTP upon acute chemogenetic activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs in acute brain slices prepared from SuM or sham stimulated ChR2/mCherry-AM3-AD mice (Figure 6A). Additional controls from the 5×FAD mice with SuM-stimulation only (mCherry-AD vs ChR2-AD) and acute chemogenetic activation of ABNs without SuM modification (M3-AD vs AM3-AD) were also included for cross comparison. Interestingly, acute chemogenetic activation of ABNs in ChR2-AM3-AD mice through bath application of CNO led to a significant increase in CA1 LTP, as compared to various controls (Figure 6B-C). Together with phosphoprotein data (Figure 5A-E), these results demonstrated that activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs increases hippocampal CA1 LTP along with increased expression of phosphoproteins involved in synaptic plasticity including pPLCg1, pCaMKII, and pCREB.

Activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs increases CA3 and CA1 activity in 5×FAD mice

CREB signaling is highly implicated in neuronal activity and learning/memory 48,49. Therefore, activation of CREB signaling in neurons promoted us to ask whether activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs alters local hippocampal circuit activity. We first examined c-Fos expression in DG, CA3, and CA1 following acute chemogenetic activation of SuM-enhanced vs control ABNs in 4.5-month ChR2-AM3-AD or mCherry-AM3-AD mice, respectively (Figure 6D). Interestingly, activation of SuM-enhanced (vs control) ABNs increased c-Fos expression in CA3 and CA1, but not DG (Figure 6E-F). To confirm the c-Fos results, we performed fiber photometry to record calcium activity of CA3 and CA1 pyramidal neurons labeled with GCaMP6f upon chemogenetic activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs by intraperitoneal CNO injection (Figure 6G-H). Compared to mCherry-AM3-AD control mice, activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs in ChR2-AM3-AD mice increased the frequency of calcium events in both CA1 and CA3 without altering the amplitude of these events (Figure 6I-O). By contrast, activation of control ABNs without SuM modification in AM3-AD mice failed to alter c-Fos expression and calcium activity in CA3 and CA1 (Figure 6F, 6P-X). These results suggested that activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs increased hippocampal CA3 and CA1 (but not DG) activity, which aligns with the phosphoproteomics data showing increased expression of pCREB only in CA3 and CA1 (but not DG).

Activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs increases microglial phagocytosis of plaques in 5×FAD mice

Our quantitative phosphoproteomics of hippocampus in 5×FAD mice showed that acute chemogenetic activation of SuM-enhanced (vs control) ABNs activates the pathways for Fcγ receptor-mediated microglia phagocytosis; while chemogenetic activation of ABNs without SuM modification in 5xFAD mice suppressed this pathway (Figure 5E). These data support the interaction between activity of SuM-enhanced ABNs and microglia dynamics. Supporting this view, we found that tdToamto+ ABN mossy fibers are closely associated with Iba+ microglia in the DG/hilus where the most severe plaque deposition was observed among all hippocampal subfields in Ascl1-Ai9-AD mice (Figure 7A-B). We then examined microglia phagocytosis of plaques following acute chemogenetic activation of SuM-enhanced or control ABNs in ChR2/mCherry AM3-AD mice by Imaris analysis. Interestingly, acute activation of SuM-enhanced (vs control) ABNs increased microglial engulfment of Thio-S+ plaques (Figure 7C-D) without altering the volumes of Iba1+ fluorescence and Thio-S (Figure 7E-F). By contrast, acute activation of ABNs without SuM modification in AD mice failed to alter microglial engulfment of Thio-S+ plaques (Figure 7G-I).

Furthermore, we analyzed microglia morphology after acute chemogenetic activation of SuM-enhanced or control ABNs in ChR2-AM3-AD or mCherry-AM3-AD mice, respectively. Additional controls were included for cross comparison, including the 5×FAD mice with SuM-stimulation only (mCherry-AD vs ChR2-AD) and acute chemogenetic activation of ABNs without SuM modification (M3-AD vs AM3-AD), as well as WT mice. The density of the microglia was not altered across multiple experimental and control groups (Figure 7J-K). It has been reported that microglia in AD mice exhibit enlarged soma and retracted processes, which represent a pathological state 50,51. Consistent with these findings, we found similar morphological features of microglia in the DG of 5×FAD mice characterized by increased soma area (Figure 7L), reduced arborization of processes (Figure 7M), and increased morphological index (Figure 7N), as compared to WT mice. Strikingly, acute activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs significantly decreased soma area, increased arborization of processes, and decreased morphological index of microglia (Figure 7L-N), as compared to various control groups mentioned above. These results suggested that activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs promotes microglial phagocytosis of plaques and improves microglial morphology in AD mice.

Discussion

Substantial studies by immunohistology and single-nucleus RNA-Sequencing using human postmortem tissues have revealed impaired AHN in various neurological and psychiatric disorders, including AD 6-9, Lewy body dementia 52, and major depressive disorders 53. Therefore, targeting AHN may represent a new avenue to restore cognitive and affective function in diseased brains. Since AHN is impaired in AD patients, a long-standing question has been centering on whether modulating AHN alone is sufficient to rescue cognitive and affective deficits in AD. Our study showed that acute chemogenetic activation of ABNs without SuM modulation fails to rescue hippocampal deficits in 5×FAD mice (Figure S8A), suggesting stimulating the activity of impaired ABNs in AD brains is not beneficial for hippocampal function. In addition, although chronic patterned opto-stimulation of SuM restored AHN in AD mice, it failed to restore hippocampal function or alter major AD pathology (Figure S8B). By contrast, the combination of opto-stimulation of SuM with subsequent chemogenetic activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs can reverse hippocampal deficits in AD mice (Figure S8C). Therefore, our study highlights activity-dependent contribution of SuM-enhanced ABNs to hippocampal function in AD brains.

Besides the effects on hippocampal activity and plasticity, acute activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs also increased microglia phagocytosis of plaques and improves microglial morphology in 5×FAD mice. Due to the acute nature of activity manipulation of these ABNs, we do not expect acute modulation of microglial properties contributes to improved hippocampal function observed in 5×FAD mice. However, it is possible that chronic stimulation of SuM-enhanced ABNs may benefit hippocampal function in AD through improved microglial function to reduce plaques and correct aberrant synaptic pruning. Future studies that test various aspects of hippocampal function following chronic activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs during the critical window will be able to address this question.

ABNs can modulate DG and CA3 activity dynamics and synaptic plasticity by forming direct synaptic connections with DG/hilar and CA3 interneurons (INs), DG granule cells (GCs), and CA3 pyramidal cells (PCs). Therefore, ABNs can form disynaptic inhibitory inputs and monosynaptic excitatory inputs onto DG GCs and CA3 PCs 15,44-47. These concurrent excitatory and inhibitory inputs collectively contribute to feedback/feedforward inhibition along with feedback/feedforward excitation onto DG GCs and CA3 PCs. Furthermore, ABNs can also modulate CA1 activity dynamics and synaptic plasticity indirectly through ABN-CA3-CA1 connections. How activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs modulates hippocampal circuit dynamics of AD mice remains unknown. Our phosphoproteomics analyses along with functional assays provide hippocampal subregion-specific signaling mechanisms underlying ABN activity-dependent modulation of hippocampal circuit dynamics (Figure S8D). Specifically, acute chemogenetic activation of SuM-enhanced (vs control) ABNs increased activity in CA3 and CA1 (but not DG) of AD mice. These results support the view that activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs exerts a net excitation on CA3 potentially through dominant feedforward excitation from ABNs to CA3 PCs over feedforward inhibition from ABNs-CA3 INs-CA3 PCs, which in turns activate CA1 PCs. Interestingly, acute activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs did not impact activity of DG GCs, potentially due to concurrent feedback inhibition and excitation onto GCs thus leading to unaltered overall activity. These region-specific activity changes perfectly match the expression pattern of pCREB in these distinct hippocampal subfields, thus revealing pCREB as a neuronal signaling molecule highly responsive to activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs. In contrast to pCREB showing hippocampal subregion-specific expression, pPLCg1 exhibited increased expression in all hippocampal subfields, including DG, CA3 and CA1. pPLCg1 is highly implicated in LTP, so these results suggest that activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs may enhance LTP in all hippocampal subregions (note: only CA1 LTP is validated in the current study).

Our study showed that activation of ABNs without SuM modulation in AD mice fails to improve hippocampal function. These results highlight the critical role of SuM modulation of ABNs in mediating activity-dependent benefits in hippocampal function. SuM is a small brain structure located within the hypothalamus, and recent studies have shown that SuM is critical for hippocampal theta rhythm 54-56, sleep-wake cycles 57, behavioral responses to novelty signals 58,59, and locomotion 60. Importantly, this brain structure is largely spared of plaque deposition during disease progression 61, thus avoiding the potential release of toxic chemicals upon stimulation. In addition, SuM forms direct inputs to NSCs and ABNs 21, thus ensuring its beneficial effects on AHN despite in a neurogenic niche with AD pathology. These features make it an ideal candidate for therapeutic intervention, potentially through deep brain stimulation.

In summary, our findings present the evidence that boosting the activity of a small population of ABNs with enhanced properties is sufficient to restore cognitive and affective deficits associated with AD. Importantly, our studies provide novel ABN-activity dependent signaling mechanisms underlying the functional improvement in AD brains mediated by activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs. Recently, the existence of adult human hippocampal neurogenesis has gained increasing support 6-12. It is generally agreed that low-level neurogenesis exists in adult humans across aging potentially via low-frequency de novo generation of ABNs from adult neural stem/progenitor cells and protracted maturation of ABNs 9. In AD brains, this level is even lower 6-9. By manipulating a small population of ABNs, our findings provide timely answers to the long-standing question on how to effectively enhance ABNs to restore hippocampal function in degenerated AD brains.

Limitations of the study

There are some limitations in this study. First, we used two AD mouse models, 5×FAD and 3×Tg-AD, which carry different transgenes and exhibit different disease progression patterns. However, they both overexpress the disease genes. Therefore, they do not fully recapitulate human AD pathologies. In future, we will consider knock-in mouse models of AD to extend our findings to a more physiological context for AD pathologies. Second, we focused on validation of the phosphoproteins related to synaptic plasticity, because neuronal populations are enriched in bulk hippocampal tissues used for our phosphoproteomics analyses. The phosphoproteins related to microglial phagocytosis remain to be validated. Third, the behavioral data presented in Figure 4 were only collected from AD animals (3×Tg-AD) as a validation for the data from 5×FAD mice. Therefore, direct cross comparison of AD and WT data was not immediately available.

STAR★Methods

RESOURCE AVAILABILITY

Lead Contact

Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Juan Song (juansong@email.unc.edu).

Materials Availability

This study did not generate new unique reagents.

Data and Code Availability

Proteomics data have been deposited at ProteomeXchange and are publicly available as of the date of publication. Accession numbers are listed in the key resources table. This paper does not report the original codes. Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request.

EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS

Experimental animals

Single, double, or triple transgenic mice (6-14 weeks, males and females) were used for all experiments from the following genetically modified mouse lines: Ascl1CreERT2 35,62 (B6), and Ai9 (B6) mice and 5×FAD (B6) mice were obtained from the Jackson laboratory; hM3Dq-flox 37 (R26-LSL-Gq-DREADD, B6) mice were obtained from Bryan Roth’s lab at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. Ascl1CreERT2 mice were mated to Ai9 or hM3Dq mice to get Ascl1-CreER::Ai9 or Ascl1CreER::hM3Dq mice. Then, Ascl1-CreER::Ai9 or Ascl1-CreER::hM3Dq mice were mated with 5×FAD mice to get Ascl1CreER::Ai9::5×FAD mice or Ascl1CreER::hM3Dq::5×FAD mice. The Ascl1CreER+/−::Ai9+/− littermates or hM3Dq::5×FAD littermates were used as control, based on the design of different experiments. Only Ascl1CreER heterozygous mice were used in the experiments. The aged triple-transgenic mice 3×Tg-AD 32 were the gifts from Dr. Leon Coleman at UNC. Both male and female AD mice were used in this study and gender was matched in different groups. No immune deficiencies or other health problems were observed in these lines, and all animals were experimentally and drug-naive before use. Animals were group-housed and bred in a dedicated husbandry facility with 12/12 hour light-dark cycles with food and water ad libitum and under veterinary supervision. Behavior tests were performed in the light phase. Animals subjected to surgical procedures were moved to a satellite housing facility for recovery with the same light-dark cycle. All procedures were conducted in accordance with the NIH Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and with the approval of the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill (UNC).

Choice of the mouse model

In our study, we used a well-established AD mouse line, 5×FAD mice (C57BL6 background), which expresses human APP and PSEN1 transgenes with a total of five AD-linked mutations: the Swedish (K670N/M671L), Florida (I716V), and London (V717I) mutations in APP, and the M146L and L286V mutations in PSEN1 31. Most of the current AD transgenic mouse models are generated by the overexpression of mutation(s) related to familial AD (FAD). While the 5×FAD mouse model expresses rare early-onset FAD mutations, the pathological features found in the brains of 5×FAD mice are common to all forms of AD. Therefore, we believe that the results of our studies are also relevant for generalized AD pathology (beyond that of early-onset FAD). We chose 5×FAD mice, which show faster AD progression than other AD mouse models, based on our goal of investigating whether chronic stimulation of SuM neurons during early-stage AD when AHN is mildly impaired is beneficial for AHN and memory performance at later AD stages. Specifically, our chronic SuM stimulation paradigm lasts 32 days, and we intend to address whether 32-d SuM stimulation is sufficient to improve hippocampal neurogenesis. 5×FAD mice are ideal for this purpose, as within this time frame (from 3.5 to 4.5 months of age), 5×FAD mice exhibit progressive impairment of hippocampal neurogenesis, ranging from mild impairment at early AD stages to more severe impairment at later AD stages.

To avoid the bias of the fast 5×FAD mouse model, we also used the triple-transgenic mice 3×Tg-AD to validate the key neurogenesis and behavioral results under the same SuM stimulation paradigm. 3×Tg-AD mice harbor expression of human transgenes with familial mutations associated with AD, including PSEN1 M146V, APP Swedish, and MAPT P301L. Importantly, 3×Tg-AD mice have slower AD pathology, compared to 5xFAD mice.

METHOD DETAILS

Stereotaxic surgery

Mice were anesthetized under 1.5–2 % isoflurane in oxygen at 0.8 LPM flow rate. The virus was injected by microsyringe (Hamilton, 33GA) and microinjection pump (Harvard Apparatus), at a rate of 30–50 nl/min with the following coordinates: AAVs were injected unilaterally into the lateral SuM (anteroposterior (AP): −2.4 mm, mediolateral (ML): ±0.6 mm, dorsoventral (DV): −4.85 mm) or the DG (AP: −2.0 mm, ML: ±1.4 mm, DV: −2.0 mm). A total of 150–250 nl of the virus was delivered to each site, and the needle was left in the site for at least 10 min to permit diffusion. All coordinates were based on values from 'The Mouse Brain Stereotaxic Coordinates'.

For in vivo fiber photometry recording, retroAAV2-Cre (Addgene) was injected into DG, and AAV5-DIO-GCaMP7 was injected into SuM, respectively. Unilateral optic fibers (Newdoon Inc, O.D.: 1.25 mm, core: 200 μm, NA: 0.37) were implanted in the SuM at AP: −2.4 mm, ML: + 0.6 mm, DV: −4.85 mm.

For in vivo optogenetics, unilateral optic fibers (Newdoon Inc, O.D.: 1.25 mm, core: 200 μm, NA: 0.37) above the SuM at AP: −2.4 mm, ML: + 0.6 mm, DV: −4.5 mm. We only unilaterally stimulated SuM neurons because SuM neurons send almost equal projections to the bilateral DG. After 3 weeks of recovery, mice were used for in vivo optogenetic stimulation.

To activate SuM enhanced ABNs in 3×Tg-AD mice, AAV-CaMKII-ChR2-YFP or control virus AAV-CaMKII-YFP was injected into SuM. After 2 weeks, Retrovirus (RV)-HA-Cre (1 μl) mixed with AAV-DIO-hM3Dq-mCherry (200 nl) was injected into both dorsal (AP: −2.0 mm, ML: ± 1.45 mm, DV: −2.0 mm) and ventral (AP: −3.65 mm, ML: ± 2.60 mm, DV: −3.25 mm)DGs, with fiber implantation above SuM. One day after optogenetic stimulation, behaviors were tested with CNO injection to activated ABNs.

In terms of the quality control for our data, mice with off-target viral injection/expression in SuM were excluded from analysis after post hoc examination of fluorescence expression. The coverage of the injection site in lateral SuM was examined to control inter-animal variability.

Fiber photometry recording and analysis

After 3 weeks of surgery, fiber photometry recording was carried out by using a commercial device (RWD life science, Shenzhen, China) as previously described 59,63,64. In brief, 470 nm and 410 laser beams first launched into the fluorescence cube, then launched into the optical fibers. 410 laser was used for motion control. The GCaMP and control emission fluorescence was collected by the camera at 20 Hz. The in vivo recordings were carried out in an open-top home cage (21.6 × 17.8 × 12.7 cm) for 10 minutes. We derived the value of the photometry signal F as F470/F410, calculating ΔF/F= (F–F0)/F0, where F0 is the median of the photometry signal. Only calcium signal over 3 SD was treated as events. The average of 10 peak ΔF/F and the number of events per minute for each mouse were analyzed.

Chemical administration and optogenetic/chemogenetic stimulation protocol

For lineage-tracing experiments, 473 nm blue light stimulation at 10 Hz, 5 ms, 30 s/5 minutes was given as below: For 3-day post tamoxifen injection (dpi), blue light stimulations were given 8 hours/day for 3 days with tamoxifen at 80 mg/kg i.p. injections (3 shots in total). Mice were perfused on day 3 after the last tamoxifen injection. For 32 dpi experiments, blue light was given for 8 hours for the first 3 days with 80 mg/kg tamoxifen i.p. injection. From day 4 to 32, blue light stimulations were given for 2 hours/day, and mice were perfused on day 32 immediately after light stimulation. For behavior tests after chronic SuM stimulation, mice were tested from day 33 (1 day after the last optogenetic stimulation) to avoid acute effects from SuM activation.

For chemogenetic activation of DG newborn neurons, CNO 0.5 mg/kg was administered to AM3-AD and M3-AD mice via i.p. injection, 30–60 min before memory retrieval or emotional behavior tests, respectively. For chronic SuM-stimulated mice, behavior tests were performed from day 33 (1 day after the last optogenetic stimulation) to avoid acute effects from SuM activation.

Immunohistochemistry (IHC)

Mice were perfused and then brain samples were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) for 24 hours, followed by 30% sucrose for 2–3 days until they were fully submerged. Brains slices from frozen section at a thickness of 40 μm and stored in an anti-freeze solution at −20°C for further usage. For all staining, sections were pretreated as following; 5-minute incubations in PBS, 3 x 5-minute incubations in 1 mg/ml Sodium borohydride in PBS, then 2-hour incubations in 0.3% Triton-X in PBS (PBST), then 2-hour incubations in 0.1% PBST containing 5% donkey serum. Sections were incubated in primary antibody solution in 0.1% PBST and kept at 4 degrees for 48 hours with shaking. After primary incubation, the sections went through 3 x 20-minute wash steps in 0.1% PBST. Sections were then transferred to a secondary antibody solution in 0.1% PBST for 2 hours at 24 degrees with shaking. Sections were washed 3 x 30-minute in 0.1% PBST with 1 μM DAPI solution included on the third wash step. Finally, sections were mounted onto charged glass slides using Diamond prolong gold mounting media (Thermo Fisher Scientific, P36961) and a no.1.5 glass coverslips (Electron Microscopy Sciences, cat#72204-02).

For c-Fos labeling, mice were perfused 90 minutes after CNO injection. A rabbit c-Fos antibody (Synaptic System, # 226003) was used at 1:1000. For Aβ and GFAP staining, a rabbit Aβ antibody (Cell Signaling Technology, #9888) was used at 1:1000; for GFAP staining, a goat GFAP antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, #sc33673) was used at 1:1000. For HA-tag staining, a rabbit HA-tag antibody (Cell Signaling Technology, #3724) was used at 1:500 to label the Ascl1-hM3Dq cells. For NeuN and DCX staining, a mouse NeuN antibody (Millipore, #MAB377) and a rabbit DCX antibody (Cell Signaling Technology, #4604) were used at 1:500. For Iba1 staining, a rabbit Iba1 antibody (Wako, #019-19741) was used at 1:1000 after antigen retrieval. For spine counting, the fluorescence of tdTomato was raised by anti-RFP staining. For LTP pathway validation, anti-rabbit pPLCg1 (Thermo Fisher, BS-3343R), anti-rabbit pIP3R (Boster, A01465S1598), anti-rabbit pCaMKII (Abcam, ab5683), anti-rabbit pCREB (Cell Singling, #9198) antibody was used at 1:500, respectively.

Image analysis

All image analyses were performed blind to the experimental group. Confocal images were taken by confocal microscopy (Olympus FLUOVIEW3000), and then loaded into ImageJ (FIJI). Cell counting in DG was performed following stereological methods adopted in our previous publications 21,26-30. Specifically, we quantified 5 sections/per mouse spanning from anterior to posterior. The cell number of each DG was divided by the DG volume (area of the GCL (by DAPI) /slice × thickness of the sections) to get the cell density counts. Cells were counted using the Cell Counter plugin in ImageJ. Then the average density of 5 sections was calculated for each animal. For lineage analysis, cells were counted as below: (1) For 3 dpi experiments: the total number of tdTomato+ and Ki67+/tdTomato+ cells were counted per section. (2) For 32 dpi experiments, the total number of tdTomato+, tdTomato+NeuN+, and tdTomato+DCX+ neurons were counted per section. For Ascl1-hM3Dq mice, HA-tag labeled cells were counted.

For microglial-amyloid beta colocalization analysis, Aβ and Iba1 staining images were taken by confocal microscopy (Olympus FLUOVIEW3000) under a × 60 objective, 1 × zoom in, XY-resolution 0.4975 mm/pixel, Z-resolution 0.8 μm/slice and then loaded into Imaris (version 9.9.1). A region of interest (ROI) surface was drawn around the DG, and their volumes were recorded. Channel fluorescence was masked to the region (setting outside voxel to 0). ROI Aβ and Iba1 volume were measured after thresholding to exclude the background noise. Next, using the ‘colocalization’ function, ROI Aβ and Iba1 interaction was determined using the same intensity thresholds for the Aβ channel and Iba1 channel that was used to create their volumetric surfaces. The volume of colocalization was normalized to total ROI Iba1 volume, which is the maximum volume that could be considered colocalized 65.

For Spine density analysis, dendritic spine was analyzed for newborn neurons (32 dpi) labeled by tdTomato fluorescence. DG sections were obtained from ChR2-YPF and YFP control Ascl1CreER-Ai9 mice 32 days post tamoxifen injection. The tdTomato signal was taken by confocal microscopy (Olympus FLUOVIEW3000) under a × 60 objective, 3 × zoom in, XY-resolution 0.4975 mm/pixel, Z-resolution 0.5 μm/slice. Four mice per experimental group were analyzed for dendritic spines. For each mouse, 20 dendritic fragments of 10-μm length were quantified (n = 80 fragments per group). Distal dendritic fragments in the middle-to-outer molecular layer (ML) were selected. To compute spine density, the number of spines counted on each fragment was normalized by the cylindrical approximation of the surface of the specific fragment 66,67. Experiments were conducted blind to the experimental group. Researcher 1 imaged dendritic fragments and randomized images, while researcher 2 performed manual spine counting.

Microglia morphology analysis was performed based on previous studies 68,69. Microglia was immunofluorescence labeled by antibody (anti-Iba-1, 1:1,000, Wako #019-19741). Images were taken by confocal microscopy (Olympus FLUOVIEW3000) under a × 60 objective, 1 × zoom in, XY-resolution 0.4975 mm/pixel, Z-resolution 0.5 μm/slice, and then loaded into Image to count microglia number. Microglia density was normalized by DG hilus volume. Microglial somas and branches were outlined manually in ImageJ and the morphological index was calculated as soma area/arborization area. In total, 20 microglia from 4 slices were counted for each mouse and the average value of each mouse for a total of 5 mice/each group were compared.

Behavioral tests

Contextual fear conditioning (CFC).

Contextual fear conditioning experiments were carried out in a commercial fear conditioning system (Med Associate) as previously described 21. On Day 1, mice were habituated in the behavioral context for 3 min, followed by two foot shocks (0.65 mA, 2 s) delivered at 180 s and 240 s. Mice remained in the behavior chamber for 80 s after the second foot shock and then returned to their home cages. Memory retrieval was performed at 2 hours, 24 hours, and 1 week after encoding in the conditioned context (A, grid floors, opaque ceilings, white lighting) or a different context (B, white plastic floors, curved wall with visual cues, white lightning, B) for 5 min to recall memory. To minimize the animal number, the same cohort of mice was used for CFC tests at different retrievals. Each mouse was injected with CNO 2 times for the CFC test at 24h, and 7 days after training. Behavior videos were recorded with VideoFreeze software and the freezing level was automatically analyzed by the software.

Novel position recognition (NPR).

NPR tests were performed as previously described 59. In brief, the encoding phases were identical for the NPR task and comprised a 10-minute interval during which the mice were allowed to explore two identical objects in the open field. After 24 hours, memory retrieval was tested. One of the two objects from the encoding phase was moved to a different location. At each test, mice had 5 minutes to explore the arena. Only the mice that showed no preference for objects in the encoding phase were included in the behavior analysis. Object exploration was considered whenever the mouse sniffed the object or touched the object while looking at it (when the distance between the nose and the object was less than 1 cm). Times were converted into a discrimination ratio according to the general formula: (time at novel − time at old)/(time at old + time at novel), where ‘novel’ refers to the novel position object.

Open field (OF) test.

The OF test apparatus was a Plexiglas-squared arena (45 × 45 cm) with gray walls (40-cm high) and an open roof. Mice were gently placed in the center of the field, and movement was recorded for 5 min with a video-tracking system. The time spent in the center of the arena (defined as a 25 × 25 cm zone in the center of the apparatus) was measured 63,70. Locomotion and time spent in the central area were analyzed by EthoVision XT (Noldus, Netherlands).

Forced swimming (FS).

The FS test apparatus consisted of an acrylic cylinder (with a diameter of 20 cm and height of 30 cm) filled with water to a depth of 20 cm and maintained at 23 ± 1 °C. Each mouse was subjected to a 5 min videotaped swimming trial and subsequently analyzed by two independent observers who were blinded to the treatment. Time of immobility was reported as the mouse remained immobile during the test session. After each trial, the apparatus was filled with fresh water.

Zero-maze (ZM).

The ZM test apparatus was comprised of a 6 cm wide white ring, 45 cm outer diameter, containing four equal quadrants of alternating walled (closed) or unwalled (open) sections, and the entire ring was elevated to a height of 40 cm. Animal were placed in the closed section at the start of the 5-min session. The following parameters were recorded and the time spent in the open sections was counted. After each trial, the maze was cleaned with a damp tissue containing 75% ethanol.

Sample preparation for global expression analysis and mass spectrometry analysis.

Peptides, generated from M3AD (3x), AM3AD (2x), ChR2-AM3AD (3x) and mch-AM3AD (3x) were labeled with isobaric stable tandem mass tags (TMT) following manufacture instruction. The mixture of labeled peptides was fractionated into 15 fractions on C18 stage tip with buffer 10 mM Trimethylammonium bicarbonate (TMAB), pH 8.5 containing 5 to 50% acetonitrile. Dried peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile. 0.5 μg of peptides of each fraction was analyzed. Analytical separation of all peptides was achieved with 140-min gradient. A linear gradient of 5 to 10% buffer B over 5 min, 10% to 31% buffer B over 100 min, 31% to 75% buffer B over 15 min was executed at a 250 nl/min flow rate followed a ramp to 100%B in 1 min and 19-min wash with 100%B, where buffer A was aqueous 0.1% formic acid, and buffer B was 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. MS experiments were also carried out in a data-dependent mode with full MS with a resolution of 120,000 followed by high energy collision-activated dissociation-MS/MS of the top 15 most intense ions with a resolution of 45,000 at m/z 200. High energy collision-activated dissociation-MS/MS was used to dissociate peptides at a normalized collision energy of 32 eV in the presence of nitrogen bath gas atoms. Dynamic exclusion was 45 seconds. Every fraction was subject to three technical LC-MS replicates.

Phosphorylated peptide enrichment.

Proteins of mouse hippocampus (3 mice each group) tissue was extracted with a buffer of 8 M Urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0. Proteins in the lysate were reduced with dithiothreitol (5 mM final) for 30 min at room temperature and alkylated with iodoacetamide (15 mM final) for 45 min in the dark at room temperature. Samples were diluted 4-fold with 25 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 1 mM CaCl2, and digested with trypsin at 1:100 (w/w, trypsin : protein) ratio overnight at room temperature. Peptides were desalted on C18 cartridge (Waters). Peptide concentration was measured with Pierce™ Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Thermofisher). 1 mg of each peptide sample was used for phosphor-enrichment with High-Select™ Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo Fisher) following the manufacture instruction. There were three biological samples for each condition.

Mass spectrometry analysis.

Dried phosphorylated peptides were dissolved in 0.1 % formic acid, 0.3% TFA, and 2% acetonitrile. 0.5 μg of phosphor-peptides was analyzed on a Q-Exactive HFX coupled with an Easy nanoLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto a nanoEase MZ HSS T3 Column (100Å, 1.8 μm, 75 μm x 250 mm, Waters). Analytical separation of all peptides was achieved with a 100-min gradient. A linear gradient of 5 to 30% buffer B over 75 min, 30% to 45% buffer B over 15 min was executed at a 300 nl/min flow rate followed by a ramp to 100%B in 1 min and 9-min wash with 100%B, where buffer A was aqueous 0.1% formic acid, and buffer B was 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. LC-MS experiments were also carried out in a data-dependent mode with full MS (externally calibrated to a mass accuracy of &lt;5 ppm and a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200) followed by high energy collision-activated dissociation-MS/MS of the top 15 most intense ions with a resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200. High energy collision-activated dissociation-MS/MS was used to dissociate peptides at a normalized collision energy of 27 eV in the presence of nitrogen bath gas atoms. Dynamic exclusion was 30 seconds. Each sample was subjected to two replicate technical LC-MS analyses.

Raw proteomics data processing and analysis.

Mass spectra were processed, and peptide identification was performed using the MaxQuant software version 1.6.10.43 (Max Planck Institute, Germany). Protein database searches were performed against the UniProt human protein sequence database (UP000005640). A false discovery rate (FDR) for both peptide-spectrum match (PSM) and protein assignment was set at 1%. Search parameters included up to two missed cleavages at Lys/Arg on the sequence, phosphorylation of tyrosine, serine, and threonine, oxidation of methionine, and protein N-terminal acetylation as dynamic modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was considered as a static modification. Peptide identifications are reported by filtering of reverse and contaminant entries and assigning to their leading razor protein. Data processing and statistical analysis were performed on Perseus (Version 1.6.0.7). The missing values of intensity were replaced with a constant that is the lowest non-zero value of all data. Two-sample tests were performed for comparing two groups. A p-value of 5% was used to report statistically significant abundance fold-changes. The canonical pathways were analyzed by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) (http:www.ingenuity.com).

Slice preparation.

4.5- to 5-month-old 5×FAD mice, AM3-AD mice, and M3-AD mice were used for LTP recordings. Mice were anesthetized and perfused transcardially with ice-cold modified artificial cerebral spinal fluid (ACSF) saturated with 95% O2 and 5% CO2 and containing (in mM):225 sucrose, 2.5 KCl, 7 glucose, 1.25 NaH2PO4, 24 NaHCO3, 2 Na-pyruvate, 0.4 ascorbic acid, 7 MgSO4, and 0.5 CaCl2 (pH 7.35, osmolarity 300-310 mOsM). Brains were then rapidly removed, and acute transverse hippocampal slices (350 μm thick) were cut using a vibratome (VT1200, Leica) in ice-cold modified ACSF. Next, slices were transferred to a holding chamber containing standard recording ACSF (in mM): 125 NaCl, 2.5 KCl, 11 glucose, 1 NaH2PO4, 26 NaHCO3, 2 Na-pyruvate, 1.3 MgSO4, and 2.5 CaCl2 (pH 7.35, osmolarity 300-310 mOsM), and allowed to recover for 30 min at 34 °C. Then, slices were maintained at room temperature for at least 60 min before recording.

Long-term potentiation (LTP) recording

Slices were withdrawn from the holding chamber as needed and placed in a recording chamber, where they were continuously perfused at a rate of 2 ml/min with standard ACSF. The recording chamber was kept at a temperature of 30 ± 1 °C by an automatic temperature controller (Warner TC-324B). Field excitatory postsynaptic potentials (fEPSPs) were evoked in the CA1 stratum radiatum by stimulation of Schaffer collaterals with a concentric bipolar stimulating electrode (30200, FHC) and recorded with ACSF-filled glass pipettes (2-4 MΩ) using Axoclamp-700B amplifiers and a Digidata 1440A analogue-to-digital converter (Molecular Devices, CA). Basal fEPSPs were evoked by a brief pulse (100-μs) of constant current delivered by stimulus isolation unit (ISO-Flex, AMPI, Israel) every 30 s. fEPSPs were filtered at 1 kHz and digitized at sampling rates of 10 kHz with a DigiData 1440A (Axon Instruments). Data were acquired and analyzed with pClamp10.7 software (Molecular Devices, CA). The pulse intensity was adjusted to elicit approximately 40% of the maximum response (fEPSP slope). The strength of synaptic transmission was determined by measuring the initial (20%–70% of rising phase) slope of the fEPSP.

CNO 10 μM (dissolved in ACSF, containing 0.1% DMSO) was bath applied during the recording. A 20-min stable baseline was recorded prior to LTP induction. LTP was induced with three theta-burst stimulation, which is four pulses at 100 Hz, repeated three times with a 200-ms interval. Responses were recorded for an hour following the last stimulation. The average of fEPSP slopes during the last 10 min prior to the induction of LTP was taken as the baseline, and the values of fEPSP slope measured during 50-60 min after LTP induction was used for analysis. All values were normalized to the averaged baseline value.

QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS

Data are reported and presented as the mean ± SEM. No statistical methods were used to pre-determine sample sizes but our sample sizes are similar to those reported in previous publications 21,59,63,64. Animals or data points were not excluded and each experiment was repeated 2 times. Both behavioral analysis and cell counting were performed blinded to the conditions of the experiments. To compare the cell density, spine density, discrimination ratios, freezing percent, and other behavioral tests in different groups, we used unpaired t-tests or paired t-tests. In multi-group comparison, a one-way or two-way ANOVA was used, followed by Tukey’s post-hoc test. Testing was always performed two-tailed with α = 0.05. ‘n.s’ indicates no significant difference (P&gt;0.05). Statistical analyses were performed in GraphPad Prism8.

Supplementary Material

Supplemental Information

Table S1 Excel Tables S1, Related to Figure 5. Changed phosphorylation sites upon chemogenetic activation of ABNs. Quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis comparing SuM-stimulated ChR2-AM3AD and mCherry-AM3AD control mice and non-SuM-stimulated AM3AD and M3AD mice following CNO administration.

Table S2 Excel Tables S2, Related to Figure 5. Canonical signaling pathways upon chemogenetic activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs. Z-scored canonical signaling pathways comparing ChR2-AM3AD and mCherry-AM3AD mice.

Table S3 Excel Tables S3, Related to Figure 5. Canonical signaling pathways upon chemogenetic activation of ABNs with SuM stimulation. Z-scored Canonical signaling pathways comparing AM3AD and M3AD mice.

Acknowledgments

We thank all the members of the Song lab for comments and discussions. We also thank Dr. Bryan Roth for proving floxed hM3Dq mice. This work was supported by grants awarded to J. Song from NIH (R01MH111773-01, R01MH122692-01, RF1AG058160, R01NS104530) and Alzheimer’s Association, and to X. Chen from NIH (R21AG071229, R01GM133107). Y-D. Li was partially supported by a NARSAD Young Investigator Grant from the Brain &amp; Behavior Research Foundation (29600). R. Sheehy is supported by UNC Pharmacology Curriculum predoctoral T32 training grant. Confocal microscopy was performed at the UNC Neuroscience Microscopy Core Facility (RRID: SCR_019060) with technical assistance from Dr. Michelle S Itano. The Neuroscience Microscopy Core was supported in part by funding from the NIH-NINDS Neuroscience Center Support Grant P30 NS045892 and the NIH-NICHD Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities Research Center Support Grant U54 HD079124.

Figure 1. Chemogenetic activation of ABNs fails to rescue cognitive and emotional deficits in 5×FAD mice.

(A) Discrimination ratio in the NPR test in 4.5-month WT/AD mice. n = 12 mice for WT group, and n = 16 mice for AD group.

(B–D) Freezing time in context-A at 24 h (B), in context-B at 24 h (C), and in context-A at 7 days (D) in the CFC test. n = 9 mice for WT group, n = 11 mice for AD group.

(E–H) Affective behavior tests in 4.5-month WT/AD mice. Time spent in center area (E) and total locomotion (F) in the open field test. Time spent in open arms in the zero maze test (G). Time of immobility in the forced swimming test (H). n = 8 mice for each group.

(I) Experimental scheme. Tamoxifen was injected to 3.5-month Ascl1CreER:hM3Dq:5xFAD (AM3-AD) or hM3Dq:5xFAD (M3-AD) mice. Behavioral tests were performed 32-d later with i.p. injection of CNO to activate ABNs in 4.5-month AD mice.

(J) Experimental scheme for chemogenetic activation of ABNs at 32 dpi in 4.5-month AM3-AD mice.

(K) Sample images showing expression of HA+ hM3Dq cells in the DG of AM3-AD mice, but not M3-AD mice. Scale bar = 100 μm.

(L) Discrimination ratio in the NPR test following chemogenetic activation of ABNs. n = 11 mice for M3-AD group, and n = 6 mice for AM3-AD group.

(M–N) Freezing time in context-A at 24 h (L) and 7 days (M) in CFC test. n = 11 mice for M3-AD group, and n = 6 mice for AM3-AD group.

(O–R) Affective behavior tests following chemogenetic activation of ABNs. Time spent in center area (O) and total locomotion (P) in the open field test. Time spent in open arms in the zero maze test (Q). Time of immobility in the forced swimming test (R). n = 11 mice for M3-AD group, and n = 6 mice for AM3-AD group.

Data are represented as mean ± SEM. *p &lt; 0.05, **p &lt; 0.01 by unpaired t-test.

See also Figure S1, Figure S2 and Figure S3.

Figure 2. Chronic patterned optogenetic activation of SuM leads to increased ABNs with improved developmental properties in 5×FAD mice.

(A) Experimental scheme for c-Fos quantification in DG-projecting SuM neurons.

(B) Representative images of c-Fos expression in DG-projecting SuM neurons. Arrowheads indicate c-Fos+GFP+ cells. Scale bar = 20 μm.

(C) Percent of c-Fos expression in DG-projecting SuM neurons. n = 3-4 mice in each group.

(D) Experimental scheme for calcium recording of DG-projecting SuM neurons.

(E) Sample image showing GCaMP expression in DG-projecting SuM neurons and fiber implantation. Scale bar = 100 μm.

(F) Representative traces of population calcium activity of DG-projecting SuM neurons.

(G) Events of population calcium activity of DG-projecting SuM neurons. n = 5-7 mice in each group.

(H) Experimental scheme. Optogenetic activation of SuM to enhance ABNs. Following viral injection to label SuM with ChR2/mCherry, optogenetic stimulation of SuM was given to 3.5-month AD mice for 32 days to restore impaired ABNs. Behavioral tests were performed 1 day later to avoid acute effect from chronic SuM stimulation.

(I) Lineage tracing in Ascl1-Ai9-AD mice with optogenetic stimulation of SuM for 32 days.

(J) Representative confocal images of tdTomato+ cells in Ascl1-Ai9-AD mice after 32-d SuM stimulation paradigm. Scale bar = 100 μm.

(K–M) Density of tdTomato+ (K), tdTomato+/DCX+ (L) and tdTomato+/NeuN+ (M) cells. n = 4 mice for mCherry group, n = 6 mice for ChR2 group.

(N–O) Sample images of dendritic spines (N) and quantification of dendritic spine density (O). Scale bar = 1 μm. 80 dendritic segments from 4 mice for each group.

(P) Representative confocal images of DCX+ cells in the DG . Scale bar = 100 μm.

(Q) Density of DCX+ cells in the DG. n = 4 mice for mCherry group, and n = 6 mice for ChR2 group.

(R) Representative images of tdTomato+ terminals of ABNs in the CA3. Scale bar = 100 μm.

(S) Quantification of the area of tdTomato (percent of area) in the CA3. n = 4 mice for mCherry group, and n = 6 mice for ChR2 group.

Data are represented as mean ± SEM. *p &lt; 0.05, **p &lt; 0.01 by unpaired t-test or two-way ANOVA, followed by Tukey’s post-hoc test.

See also Figure S4 and Figure S5.

Figure 3. Acute chemogenetic activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs restores cognitive and affective deficits in 5×FAD mice.

(A) Experimental scheme. Chemogenetic activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs. Following viral injection to label SuM, tamoxifen was injected and optogenetic stimulation of SuM was given to 3.5-month AM3-AD mice for 32 days to restore impaired ABNs. Behavioral tests were carried 1 day later to avoid acute effect from SuM stimulation. Then, CNO i.p. injection was given to 4.5-month AM3-AD mice for chemogenetic activation of SuM-modified or control ABNs during behavioral tests.

(B) Experimental scheme for behavioral tests following acute chemogenetic activation of SuM-modified ABNs.

(C–D) Representative images showing expression (C) and density (D) of HA-tag+ hM3Dq cells in the DG. Scale bar = 100 μm. n = 5-7 mice for each group.

(E) Discrimination ratio in the NPR test after chemogenetic activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs. For WT mice, n = 9 mice for each group; for AD mice, n = 6 mice for mCherry group, and n = 8 mice for ChR2 group.

(F–G) Freezing time in context-A at 24 h (F), in context-B at 24 h (G), and in context-A at 7 days

(H) in CFC test after chemogenetic activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs. For WT mice, n = 10 mice for each group; for AD mice, n = 6 mice for mCherry group, and n = 8 mice for ChR2 group.

(I–L) Affective behavior tests following chemogenetic activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs. For WT mice, n = 10 mice for each group; for AD mice, n = 6 mice for mCherry group, and n = 8 mice for ChR2 group.

Data are represented as mean ± SEM. *p &lt; 0.05, **p &lt; 0.01 by two-way ANOVA, followed by Tukey’s post-hoc test.

Figure 4. Acute chemogenetic activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs rescues cognitive and affective deficits in aged 3×Tg-AD mice.

(A) Experimental scheme. AAV-CaMKII-ChR2-YFP or AAV-CaMKII-YFP was injected into SuM. After 2 weeks, retrovirus (RV)-Cre-HA and AAV-DIO-hM3Dq-mCherry was co-injected into both dorsal and ventral DGs, with fiber implantation above SuM. One day after optogenetic stimulation of SuM, behaviors were tested with CNO injection to activated ABNs.

(B) Images of HA staining indicated ABNs with hM3Dq expression in dorsal and ventral DG. Scale bar = 100 μm.

(C) Chronic stimulation of SuM increased HA+ ABNs in both 9-month and 15-month 3×Tg-AD mice. n = 4 mice.

(D) Expression of DCX in HA+ cells. Scale bar = 20 μm. n = 4 mice.

(E) Chronic stimulation of SuM increased total DCX+ cells. n = 4 mice. Scale bar = 100 μm.

(F) Chemogenetic activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs promoted spatial memory retrieval in the NPR test.

(G–H) Chemogenetic activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs did not alter locomotion (G), but increased time spent in the center area (H) in the open field test.

(I) Chemogenetic activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs increased time spent in the open arms in the zero maze test in the 15-month 3×Tg-AD mice.

(J) Chemogenetic activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs decreased time of immobility in the forced swimming test. n = 6-7 mice.

Data are represented as mean ± SEM. *p &lt; 0.05, **p &lt; 0.01 by unpaired t-test or two-way ANOVA, followed by Tukey’s post-hoc test.

Figure 5. Acute chemogenetic activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs induces hippocampal subregion specific alteration of phosphoproteins in 5×FAD mice.

(A) Quantitative phosphoproteomic analyses (whole hippocampal tissues) comparing SuM-stimulated ChR2-AM3AD and sham control mCherry-AM3AD mice following CNO administration. Label-free quantitation was performed with a P-value of 0.05 and log2 ratios of ±0.50 to report statistically significant up- or down-regulated phosphorylated sites. Three mice for each group and 2 LC-MS/MS technical replicates of enriched phosphorylated peptides were generated from each mouse.

(B) Selected activated canonical signaling pathways comparing ChR2-AM3AD to mCherry- AM3AD mice. cut-off: Z-score ±1.0, P-value 0.05, same in (D).

(C) Quantitative phosphoproteomic analyses comparing AM3AD and M3AD mice following CNO administration.

(D) Selected canonical signaling pathways comparing AM3AD to M3AD mice.

(E) A heatmap of the Z-scored canonical signaling pathways, ChR2-AM3AD vs mCherry-AM3AD and AM3AD vs M3AD mice.

(G) Representative images of pPLCg1, pCaMKII, and pCREB immunofluorescence staining in CA1, CA3 and DG from mCherry-AM3AD and ChR2-AM3AD mice. Scale bar = 20 μm.

(G–O) Quantification of fluorescence density of pPLCg1, pCaMKII, and density of pCREB in CA1 (G-I), CA3 (J-L), and DG (M-O) from 4.5-month M3AD, AM3AD, mCherry-AD, ChR2-AD, mCherry-AM3AD−, and ChR2-AM3AD mice, respectively. n = 4 mice for each group.

Data are represented as mean ± SEM. Comparisons were using one-way ANOVA, followed by Tukey’s post-hoc test.

See also Figure S6, Figure S7, Excel table 1, Excel table 2 and Excel table 3.

Figure 6. Acute chemogenetic activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs modulates hippocampal circuit activity dynamics and synaptic plasticity in 5×FAD mice.

(A) Diagram of slice LTP recording in CA1. Schematic diagram described the location of the stimulus electrode and recording electrode in the dorsal hippocampal slices. CNO 10 μM was bath applied constantly throughout the entire recording.

(B) Traces of fEPSPs before (1) and after (2) induction of LTP from an M3AD, AM3AD, mCherry-AD, ChR2-AD, mCherry-AM3AD, and ChR2-AM3AD mouse, respectively.

(C) Bar graphs show mean values of fEPSP slope changes (%) measured during 50–60 min after TBS from 4.5-month M3AD, AM3AD, mCherry-AD, ChR2-AD, mCherry-AM3AD, and ChR2-AM3AD mice, respectively. n = 4-6 slices, from 4-5 mice for each group.

(D) Experimental scheme for c-Fos quantification.

(E) Representative image of c-Fos expression in the hippocampus. Scale bar = 200 μm.

(F) Density of c-Fos in the DG, CA3, and CA1. n = 4 mice for each group.

(G) Fiber photometry recording of CA1 and CA3 pyramidal neurons following activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs.

(H) Representative confocal images of GCaMP expression in CA3 and CA1 pyramidal neurons. Scale bar = 100 μm.

(I) Representative traces of population calcium activity from in CA1 and CA3 pyramidal neurons 30 mins after CNO 0.5 mg/kg i.p. injection.

(J–L) Events (J), average peak (K), and percent above thresholds (L) of population calcium activity from CA3 pyramidal neurons. n = 6 mice in each group.

(M–O) Events (M), average peak (N), and percent above thresholds (O) of population calcium activity from CA1 pyramidal neurons. n = 5 mice in each group.

(P) Experimental scheme for fiber photometry recording of CA1 and CA3 pyramidal neurons.

(Q) Representative images of GCaMP expression in CA1 and CA3 pyramidal neurons. Scale bar = 100 μm.

(R) Representative traces of population calcium activity from in CA1 and CA3 pyramidal neurons 30 mins after vehicle or CNO 0.5 mg/kg i.p. injection.

(S–U) Events (S), average peak (T), and percent above thresholds (U) of population calcium activity from CA3 pyramidal neurons in AM3AD mice after vehicle or CNO injection. n = 6 mice in each group.

(V–X) Events (V), average peak (W), and percent above thresholds (X) of population calcium activity from CA1 pyramidal neurons in AM3AD mice after vehicle or CNO injection. n = 5 mice in each group.

Data are represented as mean ± SEM. *p &lt; 0.05 by unpaired or paired t-test, or one-way ANOVA, followed by Tukey’s post-hoc test.

Figure 7. Acute chemogenetic activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs improves microglial properties in 5×FAD mice.

(A) Representative image and 3D reconstruction of Ascl1+ ABN mossy fibers and microglia in the hilus. A1-A2: 3D reconstruction of tdTomato and IBA1 staining fluorescence. Scale bar = 5 μm.

(B) Representative confocal images of Aβ and Iba1 staining in the DG, CA3, and CA1 in 4.5-month AD mice. Scale bar = 100 μm.

(C) Sample images showing Aβ plaque (Thio-S+) and microglia (Iba1+) for co-localization analysis. Top: confocal images. Bottom: 3D reconstruction by Imaris. Scale bar = 5 μm.

(D) Normalized engulfed of Iba1 and Thio-S in the DG of 4.5-month mCherry-AM3AD and ChR2-AM3AD mice. n = 3 mice in each group.

(E–F) Normalized volume of Iba1 and Thio-S in the DG of 4.5-month mCherry-AM3AD and ChR2-AM3AD mice. n = 3 mice in each group.

(G) Normalized engulfed of Iba1 and Thio-S in the DG of 4.5-month M3AD and AM3AD mice. n = 3 mice in each group.

(H–I) Normalized volume of Iba1 and Thio-S in the DG in 4.5-month M3AD and AM3AD mice. n = 3 mice in each group.

(J) Representative images of Iba1 staining in the DG in 4.5-month AD mice following activation of control ABNs (M3AD/AM3AD), chronic SuM stimulation (mCherry-AD/ChR2-AD), and chemogenetic activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs (mCherry-AM3AD/ChR2-AM3AD). Scale bar = 100 μm.

(K) Quantification of the density of Iba1+ cells in the DG.

(L–N) Quantification of microglia cell body area (L), arborization area (M), and morphological index (N). n = 5 mice in each group.

Data are represented as mean ± SEM. *p &lt; 0.05, **p &lt; 0.01 by unpaired t-test or one-way ANOVA, followed by Tukey’s post-hoc test.

KEY RESOURCES TABLE

REAGENT or RESOURCE	SOURCE	IDENTIFIER	
Antibodies	
Anti-Rabbit c-Fos	Synaptic Systems	Cat# 7-80; RRID: 226003	
Anti-Rabbit HA-tag	Cell Signaling Technology	Cat# 3724	
Anti-Rabbit Ki67	Thermo Fisher Scientific	Cat# PA5-19462	
Anti-Goat GFAP	Santa Cruz Biotechnology	Cat# sc-6170	
Anti-Goat Sox2	Santa Cruz Biotechnology	Cat# sc-17320	
Anti-Mouse NeuN	Millipore	MAB377	
Anti-Goat DCX	Santa Cruz Biotechnology	Cat# sc-8066	
Anti-Rabbit Aβ	Cell Signaling Technology	Cat#9888	
Anti-rabbit Iba1	Wako	Cat#019-19741	
Anti-rabbit pPLCg1	Thermo Fisher	Cat#BS-3343R	
Anti-rabbit pCaMKII	Abcam	Cat#ab5683	
Anti-rabbit pCREB	Cell Singling	Cat#9198	
Anti-Rabbit RFP	Rockland	Cat# 600-401-379	
Alexa Fluor 647 Donkey anti-Rabbit	Invitrogen	Cat # A32795	
Alexa Fluor 647 Donkey anti-Goat	Invitrogen	Cat # A32849	
Alexa Fluor 488 Donkey anti-Goat	Invitrogen	Cat # A32814	
Alexa Fluor 488 Donkey anti-Rabbit	Invitrogen	Cat # A32790	
Alexa Fluor 568 Donkey anti-Rabbit	Invitrogen	Cat # A10042	
Bacterial and virus strains	
AAV5- CaMKII-eYFP	UNC Vector Core	N/A	
AAV5- CaMKII-mCherry	UNC Vector Core	N/A	
AAV5-CaMKII-ChR2-mCherry	UNC Vector Core	N/A	
AAV5-CaMKII-ChR2-eYFP	UNC Vector Core	N/A	
AAV9- hsyn-DIO-GCaMP7	UNC Vector Core	Cat #104492	
AAV2-retro-Cre	Addgene	Cat #55636	
AAV5-DIO-hM3Dq-mCherry	Addgene	Cat344361	
Retrovirus (RV)-CAG-HA-Cre	University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill	Dr. Kimberly D Ritola	
Chemicals, peptides, and recombinant proteins	
Bicuculline	Tocris	Cat #0131	
TTX	Tocris	Cat #1078	
Thio-S	Sigma	Cat #MKCH408	
Pierce™ Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay	Thermofisher	23275	
High-Select™ Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit	Thermofisher	A32992	
CNO	NIH	Cat #C-929	
Critical commercial assays	
N/A			
Deposited data	
PXD034176	ProteomeXchange	User name: reviewer_pxd034176@ebi.ac.uk
Password: TzTighQA	
Experimental models: Cell lines	
N/A			
Experimental models: Organisms/strains	
Mouse: Ascl1CreER (B6, Ascl1tm1.1(cre/ERT2)Jejo) mice	Jackson laboratory	Stock No: 012882	
Mouse: Ai9 (B6, Gt(ROSA)26Sortm9(CAG-tdTomato)Hze) mice	Jackson laboratory	Stock No: 007909	
Mouse: hM3Dq-flox (B6, Tg(CAG-CHRM3*,-mCitrine)1Ute) mice	Jackson laboratory	Stock No: 026220	
Mouse: 5xFAD	Jackson laboratory	Stock No. 008730	
Mouse:3xTg-AD	Jackson laboratory	Stock No: 004807	
Oligonucleotides	
N/A			
Recombinant DNA	
N/A			
Software and algorithms	
MATLAB R2014b	Mathworks	RRID:SCR_001622	
Imaris	Bitplane	RRID: SCR_007370	
FIJI	ImageJ	RRID: SCR_002285	
pClamp	Molecular Devices	RRID: SCR_011323	
Olympus FluoView	Olympus	RRID: SCR_014215	
MaxQuant software version 1.6.10.43	Max Planck Institute	https://maxquant.net/perseus/	
UniProt human protein sequence database	UniProt	UP000005640	
Prism	Graphpad	RRID:SCR_002798	
Adobe Illustrator	Adobe	www.adobe.com	
Other	

Highlights

Patterned optogenetic stimulation of SuM enhances hippocampal neurogenesis in AD

Activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs rescues memory and emotion deficits in AD

Activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs promotes hippocampal plasticity and activity in AD

Activation of SuM-enhanced ABNs increases microglia phagocytosis of plaques in AD

Declaration of Interests

The authors declare no competing interests.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


Reference

1. Selkoe DJ (2001). Alzheimer's disease: genes, proteins, and therapy. Physiological reviews 81 , 741–766. 10.1152/physrev.2001.81.2.741.11274343
2. Selkoe DJ (2002). Alzheimer's disease is a synaptic failure. Science 298 , 789–791. 10.1126/science.1074069.12399581
3. Palmer K , Berger AK , Monastero R , Winblad B , Backman L , and Fratiglioni L (2007). Predictors of progression from mild cognitive impairment to Alzheimer disease. Neurology 68 , 1596–1602. 10.1212/01.wnl.0000260968.92345.3f.17485646
4. Ehrenberg AJ , Suemoto CK , Franca Resende EP , Petersen C , Leite REP , Rodriguez RD , Ferretti-Rebustini REL , You M , Oh J , Nitrini R , (2018). Neuropathologic Correlates of Psychiatric Symptoms in Alzheimer's Disease. Journal of Alzheimer's disease : JAD 66 , 115–126. 10.3233/JAD-180688.30223398
5. Phelps EA (2004). Human emotion and memory: interactions of the amygdala and hippocampal complex. Current opinion in neurobiology 14 , 198–202. 10.1016/j.conb.2004.03.015.15082325
6. Moreno-Jimenez EP , Flor-Garcia M , Terreros-Roncal J , Rabano A , Cafini F , Pallas-Bazarra N , Avila J , and Llorens-Martin M (2019). Adult hippocampal neurogenesis is abundant in neurologically healthy subjects and drops sharply in patients with Alzheimer's disease. Nat Med 25 , 554-+. 10.1038/s41591-019-0375-9.30911133
7. Tobin MK , Musaraca K , Disouky A , Shetti A , Bheri A , Honer WG , Kim N , Dawe RJ , Bennett DA , Arfanakis K , and Lazarov O (2019). Human Hippocampal Neurogenesis Persists in Aged Adults and Alzheimer's Disease Patients. Cell Stem Cell 24 , 974–982 e973. 10.1016/j.stem.2019.05.003.31130513
8. Terreros-Roncal J , Moreno-Jimenez EP , Flor-Garcia M , Rodriguez-Moreno CB , Trinchero MF , Cafini F , Rabano A , and Llorens-Martin M (2021). Impact of neurodegenerative diseases on human adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Science 374 , 1106–1113. 10.1126/science.abl5163.34672693
9. Zhou Y , Su Y , Li S , Kennedy BC , Zhang DY , Bond AM , Sun Y , Jacob F , Lu L , Hu P , (2022). Molecular landscapes of human hippocampal immature neurons across lifespan. Nature 607 , 527–533. 10.1038/s41586-022-04912-w.35794479
10. Ammothumkandy A , Ravina K , Wolseley V , Tartt AN , Yu PN , Corona L , Zhang N , Nune G , Kalayjian L , Mann JJ , (2022). Altered adult neurogenesis and gliogenesis in patients with mesial temporal lobe epilepsy. Nature neuroscience 25 , 493–503. 10.1038/s41593-022-01044-2.35383330
11. Spalding KL , Bergmann O , Alkass K , Bernard S , Salehpour M , Huttner HB , Bostrom E , Westerlund I , Vial C , Buchholz BA , (2013). Dynamics of hippocampal neurogenesis in adult humans. Cell 153 , 1219–1227. 10.1016/j.cell.2013.05.002.23746839
12. Wang W , Wang M , Yang M , Zeng B , Qiu W , Ma Q , Jing X , Zhang Q , Wang B , Yin C , (2022). Transcriptome dynamics of hippocampal neurogenesis in macaques across the lifespan and aged humans. Cell research 32 , 729–743. 10.1038/s41422-022-00678-y.35750757
13. Clelland CD , Choi M , Romberg C , Clemenson GD Jr. , Fragniere A , Tyers P , Jessberger S , Saksida LM , Barker RA , Gage FH , and Bussey TJ (2009). A functional role for adult hippocampal neurogenesis in spatial pattern separation. Science 325 , 210–213. 10.1126/science.1173215.19590004
14. Sahay A , Scobie KN , Hill AS , O'Carroll CM , Kheirbek MA , Burghardt NS , Fenton AA , Dranovsky A , and Hen R (2011). Increasing adult hippocampal neurogenesis is sufficient to improve pattern separation. Nature 472 , 466–470. 10.1038/nature09817.21460835
15. Gu Y , Arruda-Carvalho M , Wang J , Janoschka SR , Josselyn SA , Frankland PW , and Ge S (2012). Optical controlling reveals time-dependent roles for adult-born dentate granule cells. Nature neuroscience 15 , 1700–1706. 10.1038/nn.3260.23143513
16. Danielson NB , Kaifosh P , Zaremba JD , Lovett-Barron M , Tsai J , Denny CA , Balough EM , Goldberg AR , Drew LJ , Hen R , (2016). Distinct Contribution of Adult-Born Hippocampal Granule Cells to Context Encoding. Neuron 90 , 101–112. 10.1016/j.neuron.2016.02.019.26971949
17. McHugh SB , Lopes-Dos-Santos V , Gava GP , Hartwich K , Tam SKE , Bannerman DM , and Dupret D (2022). Adult-born dentate granule cells promote hippocampal population sparsity. Nature neuroscience. 10.1038/s41593-022-01176-5.
18. Snyder JS , Soumier A , Brewer M , Pickel J , and Cameron HA (2011). Adult hippocampal neurogenesis buffers stress responses and depressive behaviour. Nature 476 , 458–461. 10.1038/nature10287.21814201
19. Anacker C , Luna VM , Stevens GS , Millette A , Shores R , Jimenez JC , Chen B , and Hen R (2018). Hippocampal neurogenesis confers stress resilience by inhibiting the ventral dentate gyrus. Nature 559 , 98–102. 10.1038/s41586-018-0262-4.29950730
20. Kempermann G , Kuhn HG , and Gage FH (1997). More hippocampal neurons in adult mice living in an enriched environment. Nature 386 , 493–495. 10.1038/386493a0.9087407
21. Li YD , Luo YJ , Chen ZK , Quintanilla L , Cherasse Y , Zhang L , Lazarus M , Huang ZL , and Song J (2022). Hypothalamic modulation of adult hippocampal neurogenesis in mice confers activity-dependent regulation of memory and anxiety-like behavior. Nature neuroscience 25 , 630–645. 10.1038/s41593-022-01065-x.35524139
22. van Praag H , Kempermann G , and Gage FH (1999). Running increases cell proliferation and neurogenesis in the adult mouse dentate gyrus. Nature neuroscience 2 , 266–270. 10.1038/6368.10195220
23. Choi SH , Bylykbashi E , Chatila ZK , Lee SW , Pulli B , Clemenson GD , Kim E , Rompala A , Oram MK , Asselin C , (2018). Combined adult neurogenesis and BDNF mimic exercise effects on cognition in an Alzheimer's mouse model. Science 361 . 10.1126/science.aan8821.
24. Walgrave H , Balusu S , Snoeck S , Vanden Eynden E , Craessaerts K , Thrupp N , Wolfs L , Horre K , Fourne Y , Ronisz A , (2021). Restoring miR-132 expression rescues adult hippocampal neurogenesis and memory deficits in Alzheimer's disease. Cell Stem Cell 28 , 1805–1821 e1808. 10.1016/j.stem.2021.05.001.34033742
25. Zhang X , Wei X , Mei Y , Wang D , Wang J , Zhang Y , Li X , Gu Y , Peng G , and Sun B (2021). Modulating adult neurogenesis affects synaptic plasticity and cognitive functions in mouse models of Alzheimer's disease. Stem cell reports 16 , 3005–3019. 10.1016/j.stemcr.2021.11.003.34861165
26. Song J , Zhong C , Bonaguidi MA , Sun GJ , Hsu D , Gu Y , Meletis K , Huang ZJ , Ge S , Enikolopov G , (2012). Neuronal circuitry mechanism regulating adult quiescent neural stem-cell fate decision. Nature 489 , 150–154. 10.1038/nature11306.22842902
27. Song J , Sun J , Moss J , Wen Z , Sun GJ , Hsu D , Zhong C , Davoudi H , Christian KM , Toni N , (2013). Parvalbumin interneurons mediate neuronal circuitry-neurogenesis coupling in the adult hippocampus. Nature neuroscience 16 , 1728–1730. 10.1038/nn.3572.24212671
28. Bao H , Asrican B , Li W , Gu B , Wen Z , Lim SA , Haniff I , Ramakrishnan C , Deisseroth K , Philpot B , and Song J (2017). Long-Range GABAergic Inputs Regulate Neural Stem Cell Quiescence and Control Adult Hippocampal Neurogenesis. Cell stem cell 21 , 604–617 e605. 10.1016/j.stem.2017.10.003.29100013
29. Asrican B , Wooten J , Li YD , Quintanilla L , Zhang F , Wander C , Bao H , Yeh CY , Luo YJ , Olsen R , (2020). Neuropeptides Modulate Local Astrocytes to Regulate Adult Hippocampal Neural Stem Cells. Neuron. 10.1016/j.neuron.2020.07.039.
30. Yeh CY , Asrican B , Moss J , Quintanilla LJ , He T , Mao X , Casse F , Gebara E , Bao H , Lu W , (2018). Mossy Cells Control Adult Neural Stem Cell Quiescence and Maintenance through a Dynamic Balance between Direct and Indirect Pathways. Neuron. 10.1016/j.neuron.2018.07.010.
31. Oakley H , Cole SL , Logan S , Maus E , Shao P , Craft J , Guillozet-Bongaarts A , Ohno M , Disterhoft J , Van Eldik L , (2006). Intraneuronal beta-amyloid aggregates, neurodegeneration, and neuron loss in transgenic mice with five familial Alzheimer's disease mutations: potential factors in amyloid plaque formation. The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 26 , 10129–10140. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1202-06.2006.17021169
32. Oddo S , Caccamo A , Shepherd JD , Murphy MP , Golde TE , Kayed R , Metherate R , Mattson MP , Akbari Y , and LaFerla FM (2003). Triple-transgenic model of Alzheimer's disease with plaques and tangles: intracellular Abeta and synaptic dysfunction. Neuron 39 , 409–421. 10.1016/s0896-6273(03)00434-3.12895417
33. Ge S , Yang CH , Hsu KS , Ming GL , and Song H (2007). A critical period for enhanced synaptic plasticity in newly generated neurons of the adult brain. Neuron 54 , 559–566. 10.1016/j.neuron.2007.05.002.17521569
34. Schmidt-Hieber C , Jonas P , and Bischofberger J (2004). Enhanced synaptic plasticity in newly generated granule cells of the adult hippocampus. Nature 429 , 184–187. 10.1038/nature02553.15107864
35. Kim EJ , Leung CT , Reed RR , and Johnson JE (2007). In vivo analysis of Ascl1 defined progenitors reveals distinct developmental dynamics during adult neurogenesis and gliogenesis. The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 27 , 12764–12774. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3178-07.2007.18032648
36. Madisen L , Zwingman TA , Sunkin SM , Oh SW , Zariwala HA , Gu H , Ng LL , Palmiter RD , Hawrylycz MJ , Jones AR , (2010). A robust and high-throughput Cre reporting and characterization system for the whole mouse brain. Nature neuroscience 13 , 133–140. 10.1038/nn.2467.20023653
37. Zhu H , Aryal DK , Olsen RH , Urban DJ , Swearingen A , Forbes S , Roth BL , and Hochgeschwender U (2016). Cre-dependent DREADD (Designer Receptors Exclusively Activated by Designer Drugs) mice. Genesis 54 , 439–446. 10.1002/dvg.22949.27194399
38. Ankney JA , Muneer A , and Chen X (2018). Relative and Absolute Quantitation in Mass Spectrometry-Based Proteomics. Annual review of analytical chemistry 11 , 49–77. 10.1146/annurev-anchem-061516-045357.
39. Park J , Chavez AE , Mineur YS , Morimoto-Tomita M , Lutzu S , Kim KS , Picciotto MR , Castillo PE , and Tomita S (2016). CaMKII Phosphorylation of TARPgamma-8 Is a Mediator of LTP and Learning and Memory. Neuron 92 , 75–83. 10.1016/j.neuron.2016.09.002.27667007
40. Alkon DL , Sun MK , and Nelson TJ (2007). PKC signaling deficits: a mechanistic hypothesis for the origins of Alzheimer's disease. Trends in pharmacological sciences 28 , 51–60. 10.1016/j.tips.2006.12.002.17218018
41. Yang YR , Jung JH , Kim SJ , Hamada K , Suzuki A , Kim HJ , Lee JH , Kwon OB , Lee YK , Kim J , (2017). Forebrain-specific ablation of phospholipase Cgamma1 causes manic-like behavior. Molecular psychiatry 22 , 1473–1482. 10.1038/mp.2016.261.28138157
42. Fuller JP , Stavenhagen JB , and Teeling JL (2014). New roles for Fc receptors in neurodegeneration-the impact on Immunotherapy for Alzheimer's Disease. Frontiers in neuroscience 8 , 235. 10.3389/fnins.2014.00235.25191216
43. Qi LF , Liu S , Liu YC , Li P , and Xu X (2021). Ganoderic Acid A Promotes Amyloid-beta Clearance (In Vitro) and Ameliorates Cognitive Deficiency in Alzheimer's Disease (Mouse Model) through Autophagy Induced by Activating Axl. International journal of molecular sciences 22 . 10.3390/ijms22115559.
44. Toni N , Laplagne DA , Zhao C , Lombardi G , Ribak CE , Gage FH , and Schinder AF (2008). Neurons born in the adult dentate gyrus form functional synapses with target cells. Nature neuroscience 11 , 901–907. 10.1038/nn.2156.18622400
45. Faulkner RL , Jang MH , Liu XB , Duan X , Sailor KA , Kim JY , Ge S , Jones EG , Ming GL , Song H , and Cheng HJ (2008). Development of hippocampal mossy fiber synaptic outputs by new neurons in the adult brain. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 105 , 14157–14162. 10.1073/pnas.0806658105.18780780
46. Drew LJ , Kheirbek MA , Luna VM , Denny CA , Cloidt MA , Wu MV , Jain S , Scharfman HE , and Hen R (2016). Activation of local inhibitory circuits in the dentate gyrus by adult-born neurons. Hippocampus 26 , 763–778. 10.1002/hipo.22557.26662922
47. Luna VM , Anacker C , Burghardt NS , Khandaker H , Andreu V , Millette A , Leary P , Ravenelle R , Jimenez JC , Mastrodonato A , (2019). Adult-born hippocampal neurons bidirectionally modulate entorhinal inputs into the dentate gyrus. Science 364 , 578-+. 10.1126/science.aat8789.31073064
48. Moore AN , Waxham MN , and Dash PK (1996). Neuronal activity increases the phosphorylation of the transcription factor cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) in rat hippocampus and cortex. The Journal of biological chemistry 271 , 14214–14220. 10.1074/jbc.271.24.14214.8662977
49. Silva AJ , Kogan JH , Frankland PW , and Kida S (1998). CREB and memory. Annual review of neuroscience 21 , 127–148. 10.1146/annurev.neuro.21.1.127.
50. Sarlus H , and Heneka MT (2017). Microglia in Alzheimer's disease. J Clin Invest 127 , 3240–3249. 10.1172/JCI90606.28862638
51. Franco-Bocanegra DK , McAuley C , Nicoll JAR , and Boche D (2019). Molecular Mechanisms of Microglial Motility: Changes in Ageing and Alzheimer's Disease. Cells 8 . 10.3390/cells8060639.
52. Gatt A , Ekonomou A , Somani A , Thuret S , Howlett D , Corbett A , Johnson M , Perry E , Attems J , Francis P , (2017). Importance of Proactive Treatment of Depression in Lewy Body Dementias: The Impact on Hippocampal Neurogenesis and Cognition in a Post-Mortem Study. Dementia and geriatric cognitive disorders 44 , 283–293. 10.1159/000484437.29393203
53. Boldrini M , Hen R , Underwood MD , Rosoklija GB , Dwork AJ , Mann JJ , and Arango V (2012). Hippocampal angiogenesis and progenitor cell proliferation are increased with antidepressant use in major depression. Biological psychiatry 72 , 562–571. 10.1016/j.biopsych.2012.04.024.22652019
54. Root DH , Zhang S , Barker DJ , Miranda-Barrientos J , Liu B , Wang HL , and Morales M (2018). Selective Brain Distribution and Distinctive Synaptic Architecture of Dual Glutamatergic-GABAergic Neurons. Cell reports 23 , 3465–3479. 10.1016/j.celrep.2018.05.063.29924991
55. Ito HT , Moser EI , and Moser MB (2018). Supramammillary Nucleus Modulates Spike-Time Coordination in the Prefrontal-Thalamo-Hippocampal Circuit during Navigation. Neuron 99 , 576–587 e575. 10.1016/j.neuron.2018.07.021.30092214
56. Hashimotodani Y , Karube F , Yanagawa Y , Fujiyama F , and Kano M (2018). Supramammillary Nucleus Afferents to the Dentate Gyrus Co-release Glutamate and GABA and Potentiate Granule Cell Output. Cell reports 25 , 2704–2715 e2704. 10.1016/j.celrep.2018.11.016.30517859
57. Pedersen NP , Ferrari L , Venner A , Wang JL , Abbott SBG , Vujovic N , Arrigoni E , Saper CB , and Fuller PM (2017). Supramammillary glutamate neurons are a key node of the arousal system. Nature communications 8 , 1405. 10.1038/s41467-017-01004-6.
58. Chen S , He L , Huang AJY , Boehringer R , Robert V , Wintzer ME , Polygalov D , Weitemier AZ , Tao Y , Gu M , (2020). A hypothalamic novelty signal modulates hippocampal memory. Nature 586 , 270–274. 10.1038/s41586-020-2771-1.32999460
59. Li Y , Bao H , Luo Y , Yoan C , Sullivan HA , Quintanilla L , Wickersham I , Lazarus M , Shin YI , and Song J (2020). Supramammillary nucleus synchronizes with dentate gyrus to regulate spatial memory retrieval through glutamate release. Elife 9 . 10.7554/eLife.53129.
60. Farrell JS , Lovett-Barron M , Klein PM , Sparks FT , Gschwind T , Ortiz AL , Ahanonu B , Bradbury S , Terada S , Oijala M , (2021). Supramammillary regulation of locomotion and hippocampal activity. Science 374 , 1492–1496. 10.1126/science.abh4272.34914519
61. Gail Canter R , Huang WC , Choi H , Wang J , Ashley Watson L , Yao CG , Abdurrob F , Bousleiman SM , Young JZ , Bennett DA , (2019). 3D mapping reveals network-specific amyloid progression and subcortical susceptibility in mice. Communications biology 2 , 360. 10.1038/s42003-019-0599-8.31602409
62. Kim EJ , Ables JL , Dickel LK , Eisch AJ , and Johnson JE (2011). Ascl1 (Mash1) defines cells with long-term neurogenic potential in subgranular and subventricular zones in adult mouse brain. PloS one 6 , e18472. 10.1371/journal.pone.0018472.21483754
63. Li YD , Luo YJ , Xu W , Ge J , Cherasse Y , Wang YQ , Lazarus M , Qu WM , and Huang ZL (2020). Ventral pallidal GABAergic neurons control wakefulness associated with motivation through the ventral tegmental pathway. Molecular psychiatry. 10.1038/s41380-020-00906-0.
64. Luo YJ , Li YD , Wang L , Yang SR , Yuan XS , Wang J , Cherasse Y , Lazarus M , Chen JF , Qu WM , and Huang ZL (2018). Nucleus accumbens controls wakefulness by a subpopulation of neurons expressing dopamine D1 receptors. Nature communications 9 , 1576. 10.1038/s41467-018-03889-3.
65. Huang Y , Happonen KE , Burrola PG , O'Connor C , Hah N , Huang L , Nimmerjahn A , and Lemke G (2021). Microglia use TAM receptors to detect and engulf amyloid beta plaques. Nature immunology 22 , 586–594. 10.1038/s41590-021-00913-5.33859405
66. Roy DS , Arons A , Mitchell TI , Pignatelli M , Ryan TJ , and Tonegawa S (2016). Memory retrieval by activating engram cells in mouse models of early Alzheimer's disease. Nature 531 , 508–512. 10.1038/nature17172.26982728
67. Ryan TJ , Roy DS , Pignatelli M , Arons A , and Tonegawa S (2015). Memory. Engram cells retain memory under retrograde amnesia. Science 348 , 1007–1013. 10.1126/science.aaa5542.26023136
68. Gonzalez Ibanez F , Picard K , Bordeleau M , Sharma K , Bisht K , and Tremblay ME (2019). Immunofluorescence Staining Using IBA1 and TMEM119 for Microglial Density, Morphology and Peripheral Myeloid Cell Infiltration Analysis in Mouse Brain. Journal of visualized experiments : JoVE. 10.3791/60510.
69. Tremblay ME , Zettel ML , Ison JR , Allen PD , and Majewska AK (2012). Effects of aging and sensory loss on glial cells in mouse visual and auditory cortices. Glia 60 , 541–558. 10.1002/glia.22287.22223464
70. Li YD , Ge J , Luo YJ , Xu W , Wang J , Lazarus M , Hong ZY , Qu WM , and Huang ZL (2020). High cortical delta power correlates with aggravated allodynia by activating anterior cingulate cortex GABAergic neurons in neuropathic pain mice. Pain 161 , 288–299. 10.1097/j.pain.0000000000001725.31651580
