LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101603421
42576
Int Rev Res Dev Disabil
Int Rev Res Dev Disabil
International review of research in developmental disabilities
2211-6095
2211-6109

37396708
10312212
10.1016/bs.irrdd.2022.05.006
NIHMS1910069
Article
Cognitive outcome measures for tracking Alzheimer’s disease in Down syndrome
Fleming Victoria ab
Hom Christy L. c
Clare Isabel C.H. d
Hurd-Thomas Shemaya L. d
Krinsky-McHale Sharon e
Handen Benjamin f
Hartley Sigan L. ab
a Waisman Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, United States
b School of Human Ecology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, United States
c Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, University of California, Irvine School of Medicine, Orange, CA, United States
d Department of Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom
e New York State Institute for Basic Research in Developmental Disabilities, Staten Island, NY, United States
f Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States
24 6 2023
2022
21 7 2022
30 6 2023
62 227263
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Down syndrome (DS) is now viewed as a genetic type of Alzheimer’s disease (AD), given the near-universal presence of AD pathology in middle adulthood and the elevated risk for developing clinical AD in DS. As the field of DS prepares for AD clinical intervention trials, there is a strong need to identify cognitive measures that are specific and sensitive to the transition from being cognitively stable to the prodromal (e.g., Mild Cognitive Impairment—Down syndrome) and clinical AD (e.g., Dementia) stages of the disease in DS. It is also important to determine cognitive measures that map onto biomarkers of early AD pathology during the transition from the preclinical to the prodromal stage of the disease, as this transition period is likely to be targeted and tracked in AD clinical trials. The present chapter discusses the current state of research on cognitive measures that could be used to screen/select study participants and as potential outcome measures in future AD clinical trials with adults with DS. In this chapter, we also identify key challenges that need to be overcome and questions that need to be addressed by the DS field as it prepares for AD clinical trials in the coming years.


pmc1. Introduction

Down syndrome (DS) is a developmental disability caused by a full or partial extra copy of chromosome 21 (Korenberg et al., 1994). Complete triplication of chromosome 21 occurs in approximately 95% of DS cases. Other less common forms of DS include translocation (4% of DS cases), in which the extra copy of chromosome 21 attaches to another chromosome, and mosaicism (1% of DS cases), which involves only some cells containing three copies of chromosome 21 and other cells being euploid (Irum et al., 2021). DS is the most common known genetic cause of intellectual disability and has an estimated incidence of 1 in 691 live births in the US (Mai et al., 2019) and 1 in 1000 to 1100 worldwide (World Health Organization, 2018). Individuals with DS have a physical phenotype consisting of shortened extremities, poor muscle tone, flat nasal bridge, and a large tongue (Bhattacharyya, Sanyal, &amp; Bhattacharyya, 2018). Individuals with DS also share a behavioral phenotype consisting of intellectual disability, language impairments especially in expressive language (Abbeduto, Warren, &amp; Conners, 2007), and mental health problems and maladaptive behaviors including restlessness, inattention, and anxiety (Hodapp &amp; Fidler, 2021).

Adults with DS are also at increased risk for Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and experience an earlier age of AD onset than adults without DS (e.g., Zigman &amp; Lott, 2007). The early hallmark features of AD brain pathology, including the accumulation of amyloid-beta (Aβ), are near-universally present in DS by age 40 years (Fortea et al., 2021; Head, Powell, Gold, &amp; Schmitt, 2012; Lao et al., 2017). It is estimated that over half of adults with DS exhibit AD dementia by 55 years of age (Rubenstein, Hartley, &amp; Bishop, 2020) and this rises to 88–100% after age 65 years (Mann &amp; Esiri, 1989). AD has been identified as the proximate cause of death in 70% of cases of adults with DS (Hithersay et al., 2019; McCarron et al., 2017). These findings have led researchers to view DS as a genetically-determined form of AD, similar to the autosomal dominant form of AD (Fortea et al., 2020).

The high risk of AD in DS is posited to be due to the triplication of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) gene located on chromosome 21 (e.g., Prasher et al., 1998; Wiseman et al., 2015). There is excess production of Aβ due to increased APP expression and proteolytic processing. With age, Aβ accumulates into intracellular plaques, which is an early event in the cascade of AD pathology ( Jack et al., 2013). Thus, the triplication of the APP gene is considered to be sufficient to cause the elevated rate of AD in DS. Indeed, in a recent case report, an adult with DS who had partial trisomy of chromosome 21 that did not involve the triplication of the APP gene, did not exhibit elevated AD pathology (Doran et al., 2017). Other genes located on chromosome 21 are posited to modify and/or contribute to the effects of increased APP expression through mechanisms such as oxidative stress and inflammation (Fortea et al., 2021). Genes on chromosomes other than 21, including those shown to alter the risk of AD in non-DS populations (e.g., Giri, Zhang, &amp; Lü, 2016; Rossini et al., 2020), may also alter the timing of AD in DS. Although findings are mixed (Kim, Basak, &amp; Holtzman, 2009; Yamazaki, Zhao, Caulfield, Liu, &amp; Bu, 2019), the apoliprotein E (APOE) gene has been associated with an earlier age of AD-related cognitive decline and increased Aβ deposition in DS (e.g., Prasher et al., 2008; Vilaplana et al., 2020).

2. Unfolding of AD pathology and symptomology in DS

The unfolding of AD pathology in DS occurs over many decades (Fig. 1). Aβ and synaptojanin 1 begin accumulating within enlarged endosomes and lysosomes as early as the embryonic stage (e.g., Flores-Aguilar et al., 2020; Martini et al., 2020). Intracellular Aβ, within endosomes, can lead to mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative damage throughout the developmental period (Benejam et al., 2020). By early adulthood, individuals with DS evidence decreased cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) Aβ concentrations (Dekker, Fortea, Blesa, &amp; De Deyn, 2017; Fortea et al., 2020), that correspond to fibrilized Aβ plaques in the brain ( Jennings et al., 2015; Montoliu-Gaya, Strydom, Blennow, Zetterberg, &amp; Ashton, 2021). Elevated levels of tau protein are evident as individual with DS age into their mid-30s (Fortea et al., 2020). By the mid-40s, tau is hyperphosphorylated, leading to neurofibrillary tangles (Schöll et al., 2019; Startin et al., 2019), increased plasma neurofilament light protein (NfL), an indication of neuroinflammation (Fortea et al., 2018), and decreased brain glucose metabolism and hippocampal volume (e.g., Teipel &amp; Hampel, 2006; Wisniewski, Wisniewski, &amp; Wen, 1985). White matter degeneration has been linked to other AD pathology and observed in individuals with DS in their 40s and 50s (e.g., Bazydlo et al., 2021; Lin et al., 2016). Overall, the pattern of unfolding AD pathology observed in DS has overlap with what has been theorized using the Aβ cascade hypothesis (e.g., Karran, Mercken, &amp; De Strooper, 2011) and modeled using the amyloid, tau, neurodegeneration (AT[N])biomarker framework ( Jack et al., 2016) with the autosomal dominant AD population (e.g., Fortea et al., 2021; Lott &amp; Head, 2019; Rafii, 2020).

Similar to autosomal dominant and late onset AD, there is a long preclinical phase in DS, where AD-related pathological changes have occurred but clinical AD symptomology is not present (e.g., Fortea et al., 2020; Head &amp; Ances, 2020; Lott &amp; Head, 2019). During this preclinical stage, adults with DS continue to be “cognitively stable,” meaning that their cognitive functioning remains intact with no more than normative aging-related changes. The cognitively stable stage is then followed by the transition into a “prodromal” stage, where initially mild and subtle declines in cognition and functioning occur at a level beyond normative aging. The term mild cognitive impairment (MCI) has been used to describe this intermediate stage between being cognitively stable and clinically-significant AD dementia in the DS population and in other AD populations. Finally, the ‘AD dementia’ stage involves marked impairments in cognitive and functional ability.

Studies indicate a median age of clinical status of AD dementia ranging from approximately 50 to 58 years in adults with DS (e.g. Knox et al., 2021; Rubenstein et al., 2020; Sinai et al., 2018) with transition to the prodromal stage reported to occur around age 50 to 53 years (Fortea et al., 2020). However, there is considerable variability in the age of onset of the prodromal stage and clinical AD dementia in DS. Some studies report that up to 55% of adults with DS exhibit clinical AD dementia by age 49 years, while other studies indicate that 15% to 77% may not exhibit clinical AD dementia until their 60s (Holland, Hon, Huppert, &amp; Stevens, 2000; Lai &amp; Williams, 1989; Tyrrell et al., 2001). A variety of factors are thought to drive this variability including genes such as APOE (Fortea et al., 2020), co-occurring physical health conditions (Lao et al., 2020), and lifestyle (e.g., Mihaila et al., 2019). As for survival, the median survival time from clinical AD dementia to death in adults with DS has been reported to be 3.8 years, which is half as long as what has been reported for late onset and autosomal dominant forms of AD (Sinai et al., 2018). However, there is a need for more longitudinal studies to fully understand the course of prodromal AD in DS.

Given the high risk for AD in DS, developing interventions that can delay or prevent the onset of AD-related pathology and cognitive decline is of high importance to the field of DS. Due to this critical need, the National Institutes of Health have funded several studies aimed at establishing biomarkers of AD pathology in DS and understanding their association with AD-related cognitive decline and dementia. Funded studies include the Alzheimer’s Biomarkers Consortium of Down syndrome (ABC-DS), which involves a collaboration between eight primary research sites located across the United States and one in the United Kingdom. Inherent in this effort is the aim of establishing feasible, reliable, and valid measures that can track AD-related cognitive declines in adults with DS. Similar large-scale efforts aimed at identifying valid measures of cognitive declines occurring in the progression of AD in DS are underway both in the United States and other countries, including, the LuMIND-International Down Syndrome Community (LuMIND-IDSC)led Longitudinal Investigation for Enhancing Down Syndrome Research (LIFE-DSR) Study and Down Syndrome—Clinical Trial Network (DS-CTN), London Down Syndrome Consortium (LonDownS) and the Down Alzheimer Barcelona Neuroimaging Initiative. Recent efforts to launch large data management and portals (e.g., NIH-funded Data Coordinating Center for INCLUDE projects) are also underway and will allow DS researchers to combine and analyze data on common cognitive measures across studies.

With the identification of feasible, valid, and sensitive measures for tracking AD-related cognitive decline in adults with DS, the field will be primed to support clinical AD trials, such as the efforts that are underway in the Trial-Ready-Down Syndrome (TRC-DS; https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04165109) study. These future AD clinical trials in DS are likely to be aimed at early AD pathology, including Aβ or tau accumulation, and are likely to focus on individuals in the “cognitively stable” and/or “preclinical” stage. Thus, having established measures of early cognitive decline that align with biomarkers of AD during the preclinical stage may be especially important for screening and identifying participants for these clinical trials and for monitoring intervention effectiveness across time.

3. Challenges in assessing cognition and dementia in DS

Direct assessments of cognitive decline and dementia symptoms, however, can be challenging with adults with DS. Otherwise healthy adults with DS (i.e., prior to the onset of AD-related cognitive decline) generally score on standardized measures of IQ in the mild (IQ: 50–69) to moderate (IQ: 35–49) intellectual range and evidence adaptive functioning impairments in-line with this severity level (Hamburg et al., 2019). This means that measures developed to assess AD-related cognitive decline in neurotypical populations (i.e., adults from the general population of similar age) are typically too difficult for adults with DS. As a result, the DS field often uses cognitive measures designed for younger populations (e.g., children), who are of matched mental age to adults with DS, and/or modified versions of measures originally created for the neurotypical adult population.

While the majority of adults with DS score in the mild to moderate range of intellectual functioning (based on cognitive measures and adaptive skill measures) prior to AD-related decline, a subset of adults with DS have cognitive and functional ability levels that are more severely affected and require extensive to pervasive support in everyday life (Karmiloff-Smith et al., 2016). The large heterogeneity in intellectual functioning across the DS population, creates further challenges for cognitive assessment. Among research samples of adults with DS, IQ scores have been reported to range from 8 to 67, with mental age equivalents ranging from ≤2 years to 12 years across IQ tests and samples (e.g., Carr, 1988; Dykens, Hodapp, &amp; Evans, 2006; Godfrey &amp; Lee, 2018). Expressive vocabulary on standardized tests has also ranged from ≤2 years to 12 years in adults with DS (e.g., Finestack &amp; Abbeduto, 2010; Kristensen et al., 2022; Pennington, Moon, Edgin, Stedron, &amp; Nadel, 2003). Most traditionally used cognitive measures are not designed for such a wide range of functioning.

Many of the existing cognitive measures relevant to the early progression of AD in DS have poor sensitivity and specificity in adults with DS with a mental age equivalent of ≤4 years or IQ &lt;30 to 40 (Pezzuti et al., 2018). Heterogeneity in intellectual functioning level and expressive language ability across the DS population also means that single indicators (i.e., cutoff score) on measures of cognition are not relevant for tracking AD. Focusing on within-person change in scores on a measure overtime can help address this problem. However, to date, little is known about how much decline on a specific test is clinically relevant and indicative of AD-related change. This issue is complicated by the possibility that the amount of change on a specific test that signals clinically meaningful decline could vary as a function of premorbid level of intellectual disability.

3.1 Floor effects

One frequently encountered problem with cognitive measures for the DS population is floor effects (i.e., scores clustered at or near the lowest possible score). Floor effects occur when tests or parts of tests are too difficult for all or for a marked portion of the individuals assessed. Floor effects lead to skewing in the mean and in the distribution of scores, making it impossible to detect a reduction in the score over time. In order to minimize floor effects, many studies examining AD in DS have study inclusion criteria that involve an IQ cut off score that excludes adults with DS who have more severe intellectual impairments (e.g., IQ &lt;50 and requiring extensive to pervasive support in everyday life) (e.g., Breia et al., 2014; Hamburg et al., 2019).

In recent years, z-scores, or approaches that derive true deviations from population norms, have been used in populations with intellectual disability including DS. These alternative approaches attempt to capture performance near the floor of the test by increasing the range of scores (e.g., Hessl et al., 2009; Pezzuti et al., 2018). Other researchers have recommended the use of raw scores, rather than standard scores (Hamburg et al., 2019). Creating measurement standards and understanding which scoring methods are most sensitive to AD-related changes for adults with DS, given their widely varying premorbid level of intellectual disability, is an important step for the field in the coming years. Indeed, these efforts are particularly important for establishing tests that have few floor effects in lower functioning adults with DS (i.e., those with severe/profound premorbid levels of intellectual disability based on cognitive and adaptive living skill support needs). Until the field has identified cognitive measures that are reliable and valid for capturing AD-related decline in adults with DS with severe or profound premorbid levels of intellectual disability, this subgroup will not be able to be included in clinical AD trials.

3.2 Co-occurring conditions

Another challenge to capturing AD-related cognitive decline in adults with DS is the high rate of co-occurring mental and physical health conditions. Many of these conditions can impair cognitive performance in ways that mirror what is seen early on in the progression to AD in adults with DS, leading to over- or under-diagnosis of clinical AD. In terms of physical health, adults with DS are at a higher risk for hypothyroidism than the general population (e.g., Guaraldi et al., 2017), which has been shown to impact learning and memory (Lai et al., 2021). Adults with DS are also at risk for vision (e.g., cataracts, strabismus, and keratoconus) (Hashemi, Mehravaran, Asgari, &amp; Dehghanian Nasrabadi, 2021; Krinsky-McHale et al., 2014) and hearing problems (Bent, McShea, &amp; Brennan, 2015) that may affect visual processing, comprehension of instructions, and performance on visual or verbal memory tests in ways that mimic AD-related cognitive decline. Adults with DS are also at risk for disrupted sleep (Giménez et al., 2018) and sleep disordered breathing problems (e.g., Trois et al., 2009), which are linked to memory and executive functioning difficulties in DS (Cody et al., 2020; Gandy et al., 2020) which can also mimic AD-related cognitive declines. Vitamin B2 and folate deficiency are also elevated in the DS populations and their effects on cognition can overlap with those seen in AD dementia (Prasher, 2005). Finally, adults with DS are at risk for late-onset epilepsy (De Simone, Puig, Gélisse, Crespel, &amp; Genton, 2010; Sharma et al., 2018), and this condition can cause diagnostic uncertainty, as it also contributes to cognitive decline and disrupts the performance of activities of daily living (Lott et al., 2012). More recently, late-onset epilepsy has been seen as an indicator of AD dementia (Altuna, Giménez, &amp; Fortea, 2021).

Mental health problems also complicate the assessment of AD-related cognitive declines in DS, particularly if information about prior cognitive functioning is not available. Relative to their neurotypical peers, individuals with DS have a heightened prevalence of autism spectrum disorder (Moss, Richards, Nelson, &amp; Oliver, 2013) and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (Del Hoyo Soriano et al., 2020), which are both associated with their own profiles of cognitive strengths and weaknesses and variability in testing performance. As a result, these conditions can make it difficult to determine if AD-related cognitive declines are occurring. In a study by Tassé et al. (2016), depression and anxiety were found to be common mental health problems in adults with DS, and the rate of these problems increased across adulthood. Obsessive compulsive disorder, and ordering and tidiness in particular, also have an elevated prevalence in adults with DS relative to the neurotypical population (Prasher &amp; Day, 1995; Vicari, Pontillo, &amp; Armando, 2013). These mental health conditions can affect attention, motivation, working memory, processing speed, perseveration, and task completion and performance of everyday living skills (e.g., Culpepper, Lam, &amp; McIntyre, 2017)—all of which may result in declines in testing performance that mirror what would be seen in the early stages of AD-dementia in DS.

3.3 Regression

The phenomenon of behavioral regression can also complicate the assessment of AD-related cognitive decline in DS. Regression involves the sudden onset or progressive “regression” (known by other names, including “DS disintegrative disorder” or “idiopathic regression in DS”) that occurs in a subset of individuals with DS in late adolescence to early adulthood. Regression has been reported to involve a wide range of symptoms including the loss of daily living skills, language skills, and motor functions, changes in personality such as disinterest/withdrawal, and sleep disorders (see Rosso et al., 2020; Walpert, Zaman, &amp; Holland, 2021).

It is now widely agreed that regression is not part of the early unfolding of AD pathology in DS. Indeed, treatment of regression, which most often involves anti-depressants or anti-psychotics, normally leads to at least partial recovery of cognitive and functional abilities with time. However, only a minority of adults with DS (about one-third; Walpert et al., 2021) who experience regression return to their baseline level of cognitive and functional abilities. Regression can thus complicate efforts to capture baseline levels of cognitive functioning prior to AD pathology. It can also be mistaken for early AD-related symptomology. While regression is not considered to be part of AD pathology, it remains unclear if it shares etiological mechanisms with AD and/or if regression at earlier life stages accelerates AD pathology or cognitive decline. In a recent small study (Handen et al., 2021), there was evidence that there may be subtle differences in AD-related proteomic biomarkers (i.e., tau and NfL) between adults with DS in their 20s through 40s that were reported to have experienced regression compared those who did not.

4. Cognitive measures and AT(N) biomarkers

Despite the challenges to assessing cognitive decline and in differentiating AD dementia from other co-occurring conditions in DS, a body of research has emerged on cognitive measures that appear to be promising for tracking AD-related progression in DS. A subset of this research has been aimed at identifying cognitive measures that are sensitive to early AD biomarkers of pathology, as has been done in the autosominal dominant AD population. In particular, a growing body of research has identified cognitive measures that are sensitive to AD biomarkers, drawing on the AT(N) framework. The AT(N) framework is an AD biomarker descriptive classification scheme used in non-DS populations to map the progression of AD pathology ( Jack et al., 2016). The ‘A’ refers to biomarkers of Aβ (e.g., PET Aβ or CSF Aβ42). The ‘T’ refers to biomarkers of tau (e.g., tau PET or CSF phospho tau). The ‘(N)’ refers to biomarkers of neurodegeneration or neuronal injury (e.g., [18F] fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography [FDG–PET], structural MRI, or CSF total tau).

Table 1 identifies some of the cognitive measures that have been associated with AT(N) biomarkers in the DS population. Much of the research around cognitive measures and the AT(N) model has been cross-sectional and focused on PET Aβ (i.e., ‘A’ in the AT(N) model (e.g., Annus et al., 2016; Hartley et al., 2014; Nelson et al., 2011). Among the handful of longitudinal studies (e.g., Hartley et al., 2017, 2020), there is evidence of an association between PET Aβ and early AD cognitive decline (e.g., transition to the prodromal stage). Using the PET imaging agent [11C]PiB, Hartley et al. (2020) reported that non-demented adults with DS with marked Aβ accumulation (Aβ+group) performed worse on measures of memory, visual attention, executive function, and visuospatial ability than those without marked accumulation (Aβ−group). These cognitive domains were assessed using the Cued Recall Test (Zimmerli &amp; Devenny, 1995), cancelation subtest of the Developmental Neuropsychological Assessment (NEPSY; Korkman, Kirk, &amp; Kemp, 2007), Stroop Cats and Dogs Task (Ball, Holland, Treppner, Watson, &amp; Huppert, 2008), and Block Design items from the Weschler Intelligence Scales for Children (WISC-IV; Wechsler, 2004) and Haxby extension (Haxby, 1989). Moreover, across time, the Aβ+ group had greater decline in memory, visual attention, and visuospatial ability than the Aβ− group. However, only the Cued Recall Test differentiated the Aβ+ group from the subset of adults with DS who converted from Aβ− to Aβ+ during the study (spanning 2–8 years). Thus, episodic memory was the cognitive domain affected earliest in the transition from preclinical to prodromal AD in DS (i.e., it was the only measure to differentiate those who recently converted from Aβ− to Aβ+ from those who were Aβ−). These early episodic memory declines appeared to be followed by declines in visual attention, executive functioning, and visuospatial abilities, with these non-memory domains differentiating the Aβ− group from the Aβ+ group. Episodic memory is similarly the earliest cognitive domain impacted by AD pathology (e.g., PET Aβ and PET tau) in the autosomal dominant and late-onset AD populations (Gagliardi et al., 2019; Tromp, Dufour, Lithfous, Pebayle, &amp; Després, 2015). Recent DS research (Hom, Taylor, et al., 2021; Hom, Walsh, et al., 2021) suggests that PET Aβ accumulation in the frontal lobe specifically, may lead to early impairments in memory and other cognitive domains as assessed by the Rapid Assessment of Developmental Disabilities (RADD; Walsh et al., 2007), WISC-IV Digit Span Forward, and Stroop Cats and Dogs Task.

There is also evidence of an association between CSF biomarkers of the “A” in AT(N) and clinical ratings of AD based on a battery of cognitive measures (e.g., Fortea et al., 2018), including the Cambridge Examination for Mental Disorders of Older People with Down Syndrome and others with Intellectual Disabilities (CAMDEX-DS; Ball et al., 2004) and the Cambridge Cognition Examination (CAMCOG; Roth et al., 1986). Mixed evidence has been reported for an association between biomarkers of plasma Aβ (e.g., Aβ 1–40 and Aβ 1–42 and their ratio) and AD-related cognitive decline (Fortea et al., 2018; Iulita et al., 2016) and AD clinical status (Petersen et al., 2021).

Cognitive measures have also been found to correlate with biomarkers of PET tau (i.e., ‘T’ in the AT(N) model) prior to AD dementia in DS. In a small sample (n = 12), Rafii et al. (2017) found that PET tau measured via 18F-AV-1451 was negatively associated with performance on the Observer Memory Questionnaire (OMQ; O’Shea, 1996), Vineland-II (Sparrow &amp; Cicchetti, 1989), recent memory items of the CAMCOG, and the Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status Total score (RBANS; Randolph, Tierney, Mohr, &amp; Chase, 1998). In a sample of 92 non-demented adults with DS, Tudorascu et al. (2021) found that higher tau PET 18F-AV-1451 was associated with lower episodic memory scores (on the Cued Recall Test), motor control and planning (on the Purdue Pegboard (Vega, 1969), and dementia symptoms on the Down Syndrome Mental Status Examination (DSMSE; Haxby, 1989).

In a follow-up study on the same sample of non-demented adults with DS analyzed by Tudorascu et al. (2021), elevated PET tau predicted lower episodic memory performance in models that controlled for Aβ. Thus, early declines in episodic memory on the Cued Recall Test were most closely associated with the presence of PET tau than Aβ accumulation alone (Hartley et al., 2022). Research by Fortea et al. (2018) also found that biomarkers of CSF (e.g., 181-phosphorylated tau and total tau) differentiated adults with DS deemed to be symptomatic for AD dementia (i.e., in prodromal stage) versus those deemed to be asymptomatic based on the CAMOG and CAMDEX-DS. Plasma biomarkers of total tau have also been found to be sensitive to AD-related cognitive decline in DS, both in terms of differentiating those in the cognitively stable stage from the prodromal stage of AD and from AD dementia (e.g., Fortea et al., 2018; Petersen et al., 2021).

Less has been published on cognitive measures sensitive to biomarkers of (N) in the AT(N) model in the DS population, and there appears to be little consensus on what the optimal biomarkers of (N) are for DS within or across various domains of biomarkers (e.g., imaging, plasma, and CSF). PET FDG studies of adults with DS have shown an association with AD dementia status (Haier, Head, Head, &amp; Lott, 2008; Neale, Padilla, Fonseca, Holland, &amp; Zaman, 2017; Rafii et al., 2015), as well as cognitive impairments on the DSMSE (Dani et al., 1996) and Dementia Questionnaire for Mentally Retarded Persons (Evenhuis, 1992, 1996; Haier et al., 2008). Structural MRI changes (e.g., T1-weighted indices) have been associated with a status of AD dementia in DS (Matthews et al., 2016; Rafii et al., 2015). Diffusion tensor imaging biomarkers of white matter degeneration have also been associated with cognitive declines (including specifically in memory) prior to AD dementia in DS (Bazydlo et al., 2021; Rosas et al., 2020), and have been associated with AD dementia status (Lin et al., 2016; Powell et al., 2014). Finally, plasma and CSF biomarkers of neuroinflammation, and specifically NfL, have been reported to be an indicator of both prodromal and AD dementia status in DS (Fortea et al., 2018; Petersen et al., 2021) and associated with scores on the CAMOG, Cambridge Neuropsychological Test Automated Battery (CANTAB®, 2016) Paired Associates Learning subtest, and OMQ (Rafii et al., 2019).

In summary, a growing body of research has identified cognitive correlates of biomarkers (imaging, CSF, and plasma) of AD pathology in DS drawing on the AT(N) framework. These studies have found associations between biomarkers of Aβ and tau and early and subtle memory declines, with the presence of elevated Aβ and tau being most sensitive to memory impairments in PET imaging studies. These early cognitive declines were closely followed by associations between biomarkers and declines in attention and executive functioning and then declines in other cognitive domains, as show in Fig. 2. Biomarkers of (N) have also been linked to AD-related cognitive decline. Going forward, it will be important for the field to examine profiles (A+/T+/(N)− vs A+/T+/(N)+) of biomarkers of A, T, and (N) in adults with DS in order to better understand the time-ordered sequence of AD pathology in relation to changes in cognition.

5. Measures sensitive to AD-related decline and dementia symptoms

5.1 Prodromal stage

Another line of DS research has been aimed at identifying measures sensitive to cognitive decline indicative of the prodromal stage, which is often when an MCI clinical status is given. Much of this research has focused on identifying cognitive measures that can capture subtle cognitive declines that occur prior to the onset of AD dementia and understanding which cognitive domains decline first (i.e., their sequence of decline). This work has lever-aged data-driven methods and pooled data across studies to estimate long-term trends from cross-sectional and short-term longitudinal studies of adults with DS (e.g., Aschenbrenner et al., 2021; Firth et al., 2018; Silverman et al., 2021). In general, research studies on cognitive measures of the prodromal stage of AD in DS have found that directly-administered measures of cognition are more sensitive to early decline than informant-based measures (Firth et al., 2018; Prasher, 2018).

Findings from two large-scale efforts have largely converged in terms of the cognitive domains affected in the transition to prodromal AD (Aschenbrenner et al., 2021; Firth et al., 2018; Krinsky-McHale, Zigman, Lee, et al., 2020). Firth et al. (2018) explored the sequence of cognitive decline prior to clinical dementia, drawing on a cross-sectional sample of 283 young (16–35 years) and middle-aged (36+ years) adults with DS. Using an event-based model, the earliest decline occurred in memory, attention, visuomotor ability, and verbal fluency; this decline was assessed based on the first trial memory score from the CANTAB paired associates learning task, NEPSY-II car and motorbike score (Hatton et al., 2001) and a semantic verbal fluency task.

Aschenbrenner et al. (2021) compiled data from five large longitudinal studies to identify measures sensitive to the early indicators of transition to the prodromal stage of AD in DS. A machine-learning approach was used to examine the items and measures, which differed across the five studies. Their sample included 312 adults with DS, all without a diagnosis of clinical AD dementia, with at least two cycles of data. After adjusting for age and baseline level of intellectual functioning, their models showed that declines in memory and attention occurred early on, and that these declines were followed by declines in measures of executive function. The authors concluded that that the Cued Recall Test and CANTAB paired associate learning test were promising directly-administered measures of memory for consideration in AD clinical trials in DS (see Aschenbrenner et al., 2021 for full list of recommended measures).

A third large-scale recent study has also focused on cognitive measures of the prodromal stage in adults with DS. In this study, researchers examined cognitive measures that could differentiate adults with DS with a clinical status of MCI from those deemed to be cognitively stable (Silverman et al., 2021). It is important to note that the MCI stage continues to be debated within other AD populations (Dubois &amp; Albert, 2004; Petersen, 2009), and is difficult to diagnose within the DS population. In the Silverman et al. (2021) study, a clinical status of MCI was based on within-person change (to the extent possible) and the individual’s overall profile of performance on directly-administered cognitive measures as well as informant-report measures. Drawing on a large (n ¼ 269) longitudinal study, Silverman et al. (2021) examined cognitive measures that differentiated the 67 adults with DS who developed MCI from those who remained cognitively stable. They found that adults with DS who developed MCI had greater declines in memory, mental status, visuospatial ability, and adaptive behavior relative to those who remained cognitively stable. These cognitive domains were measured using the Selective Reminding Test (Buschke, 1973), Modified Mini Mental Status Evaluation–Down syndrome (Wisniewski &amp; Hill, 1985), DSMSE; Test for Severe Impairment (Albert &amp; Cohen, 1992), Block Design subtests of WISC-Revised (Wechsler, 1974), and adaptive behavior on the American Association on Mental Deficient Adaptive Behavior Scale, Part I (ABSI; Nihira, 1976). In this study, performances on a measure of verbal fluency (McCarthy Category Fluency Test: McCarthy, 1972) and on the Beery-Buktenica Test of Visuomotor Integration (Beery, Buktenica, &amp; Beery, 2004) did not differentiate those who developed MCI-DS from those who remained cognitively stable, but these measures were associated with transition to AD dementia.

Overall, recent data-driven and large sample efforts are remarkably consistent in identifying memory and attention as the domains impacted early on in the transition to prodromal AD in DS, with subsequent changes in visuospatial ability, executive functioning, verbal fluency, motor control and planning, and mental status, all prior to AD dementia (Fig. 2). This sequence is well-aligned with studies examining the cognitive correlates of AD biomarkers of Aβ and tau reviewed earlier (e.g., Hartley et al., 2017; Tudorascu et al., 2020) which also suggest that declines in memory, followed by declines in attention and executive functioning, are associated with biomarkers of early AD pathology in DS. These findings also align with other recent studies that have reported that measures that assess a range of cognitive domains, including memory, attention, and executive functioning, differentiate adults with DS clinically deemed to be in the prodromal stage (or have MCI) from those who were cognitively stable (e.g., Benejam et al., 2020; Fortea et al., 2018; Hom, Taylor, et al., 2021; Hom, Walsh, et al., 2021; Krinsky-McHale et al., 2020). Table 1 displays cognitive measures that have been found to be associated with cognitive changes associated with the prodromal stage of AD, including a clinical status of MCI, in DS.

5.2 AD dementia

Identifying feasible, valid, and sensitive cognitive measures of the AD dementia stage is also critical for the longitudinal evaluation of the effectiveness of AD clinical trials in DS. Insight into how to track change during the dementia stage can also yield information to help caregivers and health providers anticipate care needs and the course of progression following clinical dementia diagnosis ( Jozsvai, Hewitt, &amp; Gedye, 2018). Direct measures of cognition can become increasingly difficult for individuals with AD dementia, due to their reduced level of cognitive functioning (which exacerbates floor effects), and because lengthy testing batteries can be taxing. The late onset of seizures, which is linked to AD dementia in DS (e.g., De Simone et al., 2010; Möller, Hamer, Oertel, &amp; Rosenow, 2001), can also make direct testing difficult (Lott et al., 2012).

In DS, AD dementia is characterized by cognitive, physical, and behavioral deterioration, including memory loss, communication problems, loss of mobility, change in eating, weight loss, and problems with continence (McCarron et al., 2018). It has also been associated with night-time confusion, agitation, wandering, and visual hallucinations (Urv, Zigman, &amp; Silverman, 2010). There is also evidence that the rate of cognitive decline in adults with DS accelerates after the transition to AD dementia (Keator et al., 2020) and that men and women with DS may decline at different rates; specifically, women decline faster than men following AD dementia (e.g., Keator et al., 2020), which is also true in non-DS populations (see Ferreira, Ferreira Santos-Galduróz, Ferri, &amp; Fernandes Galduróz, 2014).

5.3 Direct measures

Table 1 highlights some of the direct measures that have shown promise for detecting AD dementia in DS. The RADD measures overall cognition using selected items from tests that were designed for neurotypical populations. On the RADD, a total score of &lt;20 had a sensitivity of 0.89 and a specificity of 0.75 for detecting AD dementia in adults with DS with severe ID, and a total score of &lt;60 had a sensitivity of 0.95 and specificity of 0.79 for classifying AD dementia in those with mild ID (Hom, Walsh, Doran, &amp; Lott, 2018). The CAMCOG-DS has also been shown to differentiate individuals with DS who are cognitively stable from those with AD dementia (Fonseca, Ball, &amp; Holland, 2018), with a sensitivity of 0.75 and specificity of 0.88 for people with mild ID and a sensitivity of 0.84 and specificity of 0.84 for people with moderate ID (Benejam et al., 2020). The CAMCOG-DS also has limited floor effects in adults with DS with mild and moderate premorbid ID levels (Hon, Huppert, Holland, &amp; Watson, 1998). The Severe Impairment Battery (SIB; Saxton et al., 2005), which measures nine domains of cognitive functioning has also been shown to be effective in differentiating between early-stage and late-stage AD dementia in adults with DS (Koehl, Harp, Van Pelt, Head, &amp; Schmitt, 2020), with a sensitivity of 0.63 and specificity of 0.59 (Wallace et al., 2021). The Test for Severe Impairment (TSI) covers a range of cognitive functions and was found to have few floor effects in adults with DS with premorbid ID in the moderate to severe range (Tyrrell et al., 2001). The TSI has been found to differentiate adults with DS with versus without AD dementia (Tyrrell et al., 2001), but there are no published rates of sensitivity or specificity for the DS population. The DSMSE has also been found to differentiate adults with DS with versus without AD dementia, although some researchers have noted that this measure was better suited for adults with DS with mild to moderate premorbid ID (McCarron, McCallion, Reilly, &amp; Mulryan, 2014). Using a Total score (Free + Cued), the Cued Recall Test was recently found to have a sensitivity of 0.84 and specificity of 0.81 for distinguishing cognitively stable adults with DS from those with AD dementia (Krinsky-McHale, Silverman, Lee, et al., 2022, and a sensitivity of 0.91 and specificity of 0.75 in a previous study (Devenny, Krinsky-McHale, &amp; Kittler, 2006).

5.4 Informant measures

Informant reports aimed at capturing cognitive and functional decline have also been found to be sensitive to clinical AD in DS. The Dementia Questionnaire for People with Learning Disabilities (DLD; Evenhuis, 2018) is an informant-report of cognitive and behavioral changes. The criterion for clinical AD is an increase in the Sum of Cognitive Scores of ≥7 points and/or an increase of the Sum of Social Scores of ≥5 points in comparison to baseline (premorbid) functioning. The standardization study using these criteria found the DLD to have a sensitivity of 1.00 and a specificity of 0.75 for classifying AD dementia in DS (Deb &amp; Braganza, 1999; Evenhuis, 2018), whereas Shultz et al. (2004) found the DLD to have a sensitivity of 0.65 and specificity of 0.93 among their sample of DS participants with and without AD dementia. Additionally, McCarron et al. (2014) found the DLD to be sensitive to change across time and Harp et al. (2021) demonstrated that the DLD Sum of Cognitive Scores combined with the Vineland-II Community subdomain score had a sensitivity of 1.00 and a specificity of 0.81 for detecting clinical AD in a sample of adults with DS, in which 31% had profound ID. In other studies, however, the DLD was reported to be plagued by floor effects in adults with profound ID (McKenzie, Metcalfe, &amp; Murray, 2018). Regardless of premorbid ID level, a single assessment cut-off score was found to be less sensitive and specific to AD dementia compared to longitudinal changes in scores (Evenhuis, 1996, 2018).

The Dementia Scale for Down Syndrome scale (DSDS; Gedye, 1995) was designed to measure cognitive decline in adults with DS, especially those with severe or profound ID. In the standardization study 76% had severe or profound ID, and the DSDS had a sensitivity of 0.85 and specificity of 0.89 for AD dementia. By comparison, the DLD had a sensitivity and specificity of 0.92 for the same sample. In a subsequent study by Shultz et al. (2004), the DSDS had a sensitivity of 0.65 and specificity of 1.00, whereas the DLD’s corresponding values were 0.65 and 0.93, respectively. For adults with DS with mild to moderate ID, the DSDS was found to be better at detecting individuals with middle or late stages of dementia relative to those in the early stage of dementia (Prasher, 2018).

The CAMDEX-DS includes an informant interview and is available in English, Portuguese, Spanish, and German. Using cohorts from the United Kingdom, the CAMDEX-DS had a sensitivity of 0.88 to1.00 and specificity of 0.94 for classifying the clinical AD in DS samples (Ball et al., 2004; Beresford-Webb et al., 2021). The CAMDEX-DS also successfully differentiated between adults with AD dementia from those with co-occurring mental conditions and without dementia (Beresford-Webb et al., 2021). In Brazil, the Portuguese version was reported to have a sensitivity of 1.00 and specificity of 0.98 (Fonseca et al., 2019). The CAMDEX-DS has recently been updated and is now the CAMDEX-II (Beresford-Webb et al., 2021). The Dementia Screening Questionnaire for Individuals with Intellectual Disabilities (DSQIID; Deb, Hare, Prior, &amp; Bhaumik, 2007) is also effective for classifying AD dementia in DS, with a published sensitivity of 0.92 and specificity of 0.97. However, it has been noted that the DSQIID may not be as useful for adults with severe or premorbid ID or advanced dementia if using the fixed cut-off score of 20 (O’Caoimh, Clune, &amp; Molloy, 2013).

The National Task Group-Early Detection Screen for Dementia (NTG-EDSD) is a freely available measure (Esralew, Janicki, DiSipio, Jokinen, &amp; Keller, 2013; Esralew, Janicki, &amp; Keller, 2018) that has been translated into at least 18 languages and was designed for use in adults with DS with varying premorbid ID levels. A recent study by Silverman and colleges (2021), however, highlighted limitations of the measure in terms of screening for MCI-DS. Using a criterion of one or more total concerns on the NTG-EDSD, in a sample of 185 adults with DS, sensitivity was 0.89 and specificity was 0.52. When using a more severely affected criterion of two or more total concerns, sensitivity dropped to 0.83 but specificity increased to 0.64. Among the domains, sensitivity was highest within the Memory and Language domain and specificity was highest in the Language and Communication domain.

In terms of informant-report of adaptive behavior, the Adaptive Behavior Assessment System (ABAS; Harrison &amp; Oakland, 2000) has been used in AD research in DS (e.g., Strydom, Dickinson, Shende, Pratico, &amp; Walker, 2009), but little has been published about its ability to detect AD dementia. The Adaptive Behavior Scale (ABS; Nihira, Foster, Shellhaas, &amp; Leland, 1975) and its abbreviated version (short ABS; Hatton et al., 2001) has been found to be a valid and reliable measure with few ceiling or floor effects in the DS population (Kay et al., 2003; Startin et al., 2016). Margallo-Lana et al. (2007) followed a cohort of 92 institutionalized adults with DS over a period of 15 years and &lt;10% of their participants had ABS total scores that deteriorated by more than one standard deviation. However, a limitation of that study was that none of the participants resided in a home, where there would likely be more opportunities and variability in daily responsibilities and community experiences. In contrast, Zigman, Krinsky-McHale, Schupf, Urv, and Silverman (2018) followed 133 adults with DS at 18-month intervals for at least five cycles. The ABS Part I scores changed more for those converting to AD dementia compared to those who were cognitively stable at each time point, both before and after the onset of AD dementia.

The Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales is the most commonly used adaptive living skills instrument in AD research in DS (e.g., Hamburg et al., 2019; Keeling et al., 2017). When considered in combination with other measures, the Vineland shows promise in detecting AD dementia in DS. In a study of 141 adults with DS (51% with AD dementia and 38% had severe to profound ID), the Vineland-II Community subdomain score was particularly effective at classifying those with versus without AD dementia (Harp et al., 2021). Meanwhile, in a study of 168 adults with DS (20% with AD dementia, all with mild or moderate ID), the Vineland-III Communication domain score was the only composite score that differentiated those with and without AD dementia (Pulsifer et al., 2020). Hence, the Vineland Communication score appears to be the best indicator of clinical AD in higher functioning individuals with DS, whereas the Vineland Community score may be the best indicator for lower functioning individuals at baseline.

6. Conclusions and next steps

DS is now recognized as a genetic type of AD, given the near universal presence of AD pathology by age 40 years (Lott &amp; Head, 2019) and 90% lifetime risk of clinical AD dementia in DS (McCarron et al., 2014). Over the past decade, a growing body of DS research has been aimed at identifying measures of cognition that correspond to AD biomarkers and are sensitive to early declines and progressive stages of AD. The driving goal of this research is to prepare the field for AD-DS clinical trials. The research that explores the progression of AD is complicated by the challenges of assessing cognition in the DS population. Research in DS has begun to identify associations between AD biomarkers and transition to the prodromal stage and the AD clinical status including a variety of PET imaging, CSF, and plasma biomarkers that map onto the AT(N) model. Overall, research to-date has generally been consistent in revealing a pattern of AD-related cognitive decline in DS that is similar to that of autosomal dominant and late-onset AD. Specifically, research suggests a sequence of decline that starts with changes in memory and attention, and has found that measures of these domains correlate with PET biomarkers of A and T in the AT(N) model. These early cognitive changes are then followed by changes in executive functioning, visuospatial and visuomotor ability, and verbal fluency.

In this chapter, we highlighted several direct and caregiver-reported measures (Table 1) that have shown promise for detecting adults with DS in the prodromal stage (including a clinical rating of MCI-DS) and/or who have AD dementia. Many are also good candidates for inclusion in AD intervention trials that are focused on the transition from the preclinical to prodromal stage of AD in DS. Some of these measures, however, work better for those with mild to moderate premorbid intellectual disability and when used longitudinally to track change in performance over time. It should be noted that in some studies, there was circularity in that the measure evaluated for sensitivity or specificity in detecting MCI or AD dementia was also used in making the clinical rating of MCI or AD dementia. Thus, there remains a strong need for more work aimed at understanding the reliability and validity of these cognitive measures in isolation and when used across samples and clinicians.

Looking forward, there are several important next steps for DS research on cognitive measures in order to prepare for clinical AD intervention trials. While varying levels of premorbid intellectual disability may preclude reliance on a single cut-point on many cognitive measures, guidelines should be developed that are focused on within-person change when possible and that reference premorbid level of functioning. It is also important for the field to establish best practices on specific measures in terms of using raw (vs standard scores) and true deviation approaches to maximize variability in measures at both the between-person and within-person across time level. It is possible that the amount of decline on specific measures that are clinically relevant will differ as a function of premorbid intellectual and functional ability level. Guidelines for differentiating AD-related decline from the effect of co-occurring physical and mental health would also be valuable in clinical and research settings. Finally, there is a critical need for more research to identify more reliable and valid measures for individuals with DS with severe and profound levels of premorbid intellectual disability, as many of the promising cognitive measures are prone to floor effects.

To-date, research on cognitive measures of AD-related decline in DS have predominantly involved individuals who identify as white, non-Hispanic. Moreover, most studies have limited participation to adults with DS who are fluent in the dominant language of that country (e.g., English for studies in the U.S.). There is a critical need for DS researchers to focus on recruiting more racially/ethnically diverse samples and to work to ensure that research opportunities are available for individuals who speak multiple languages, as important subgroups of adults with DS are being left out of science.

Finally, in the coming years there is also a need to understand how genetic factors such as mosaicism, translocation, and APOE status impact the trajectory of AD-related cognitive decline in DS. For example, it is possible that the cognitive domains and/or timeline for cognitive decline differs as a function of these genetic factors. If so, screening recommendations and clinical trial planning may need to differ based on these genetic considerations. Indeed, there is evidence that cognitive declines may occur 2 years earlier in adults with DS who have the APOE e4 gene (Fortea et al., 2020). Genetic factors may have an important role in the progression of AD within the DS population. Similarly, it is possible that lifestyle factors such as physical activity and leisure activities (Fleming et al., 2021; Mihaila et al., 2019) and co-occurring conditions such as sleep disruptions and sleep disordered breathing (Chen, Spanò, &amp; Edgin, 2013; Cody et al., 2020) also alter the rate of cognitive decline associated with AD in DS; the potential role of these environmental and health factors on profiles of cognitive decline need to be explored in the coming years.

As the DS field nears its first large-scale AD prevention trials, there is critical need for research that continues to focus on identifying feasible, reliable, valid, and sensitive measures of cognitive decline and dementia symptoms in full array of adults with DS. It is important that this research consider measures that are suitable for the wide array of premorbid intellectual levels and support needs. It is also critical that this research focus on identifying cognitive measures that are sensitive to the transition from preclinical to prodromal AD in DS, including measures that correlate with AD biomarkers during these stages. These measures will play a key role in participant screening/recruitment for selection into AD clinical trials, tracking intervention efficacy, and characterizing the progression of AD in DS.

Funding

NIH funding: U19 AG070043; R01 AG070028, U01 AG15001, U01 AG051412, and P50HD105353.

Abbreviations

DS Down syndrome

AD Alzheimer’s disease

Aβ amyloid beta

APP amyloid precursor protein

AT[N] amyloid, tau, neurodegeneration

Fig. 1 Hypothetical model of Alzheimer’s disease from birth to 70 years in Down syndrome from Lott and Head (2019).

Fig. 2 Mapping of Alzheimer’s biomarkers (blue), clinical Alzheimer’s disease status (green), cognitive and functional declines (orange) and chronological age in the progression of Alzheimer’s disease in Down syndrome.

Table 1 Summary of cognitive measures highlighted in the current chapter and the Alzheimer’s disease (AD) stage or variable domain that they have been associated with in Down syndrome.

Domain	Measure	Measure citation	Type of
measure	AD stage/variable domain	
AT(N)
biomarkers	Prodromal	AD
dementia	
Adaptive behavior	American association for mental deficiency, adaptive behavior scale (AAMD-ABS)/Part I	Nihira et al. (1975), Nihira, Leland, and Lambert (1993); Hatton et al. (2001)	Informant		X	X	
Vineland adaptive behavior scale	Sparrow and Cicchetti (1989); Sparrow, Cicchetti, and Balla (2005); Sparrow, Cicchetti, and Saulnier (2016)	Informant	X	X	X	
Cambridge neuropsychological test automated battery (CANTAB)	CANTAB® (2016)	Direct		X	X	
Overall cognitive functioning	Cambridge examination for mental disorders of older people with Down syndrome and others with disabilities (CAMDEX)	Ball et al. (2004) Beresford-Webb et al. (2021)	Informant		X	X	
Rapid assessment of developmental disabilities (RADD)	Walsh et al. (2007)	Direct			X	
Repeatable battery for the assessment of neuropsychological status total score (RBANS)	Randolph et al. (1998)	Direct	X			
Down syndrome mental status examination (DSMSE)	Haxby (1989)	Direct	X	X	X	
Dementia symptoms	Dementia questionnaire for mentally retarded persons	Evenhuis (1992, 1996)	Informant	X			
Dementia questionnaire for people with learning disabilities (DLD)	Evenhuis, Kengen, and Eurlings (1998, 2006)	Informant			X	
Dementia scale for Down syndrome (DSDS)	Gedye (1995)	Informant			X	
Dementia screening questionnaire for individuals with intellectual disabilities (DSQIDD)	Deb et al. (2007)	Informant			X	
National task group-early detection screen for dementia (NTG-EDSD)	Esralew et al. (2013)	Informant		X	X	
McCarthy category fluency test	McCarthy (1972)	Direct			X	
Executive Functioning	Neuropsychological (NEPSY) word generation	Korkman et al. (2007)	Direct	X			
NEPSY cancelation	Korkman et al. (2007)	Direct	X	X	X	
Stroop cats and dogs task	Ball et al. (2008)	Direct	X			
Cued recall test	Zimmerli and Devenny (1995)	Direct	X	X	X	
Memory	Observer memory questionnaire (OMQ)	O’Shea (1996)	Informant	X			
Cambridge cognition examination (CAMCOG)	Roth et al. (1986)	Direct	X	X	X	
Selective reminding test	Buschke (1973)	Direct		X		
WISC-IV digit span forward	Wechsler (2004)	Direct	X			
Mental Status	Modified Mini Mental Status Evaluation - DS	Wisniewski and Hill (1985)	Direct		X		
Severe Impairment Battery (SIB)	Saxton et al. (2005)	Direct	X	X	X	
Test for Severe Impairment (TSI)	Albert and Cohen (1992)	Direct		X	X	
Visuomotor Control and Planning	Developmental Test of Visuomotor Integration (VMI)	Beery et al. (2004)	Direct	X	X	X	
Purdue pegboard	Vega (1969)	Direct	X	X	X	
NEPSY-II car and motorbike score	Hatton et al. (2001)	Direct		X		
Visuospatial ability	Weschler intelligence scale for children-IV (WISC-IV) block design and haxby extension	Wechsler (2004); Haxby (1989)	Direct	X	X	X	


References

Abbeduto L , Warren SF , &amp; Conners FA (2007). Language development in down syndrome: From the prelinguistic period to the acquisition of literacy. Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabilities Research Reviews, 13 (3 ), 247–261. 10.1002/MRDD.20158.17910087
Albert M , &amp; Cohen C (1992). The test for severe impairment: An instrument for the assessment of patients with severe cognitive dysfunction. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 40 (5 ), 449–453. 10.1111/j.1532-5415.1992.tb02009.x.1634695
Altuna M , Giménez S , &amp; Fortea J (2021). Epilepsy in down syndrome: A highly prevalent comorbidity. Journal of Clinical Medicine, 10 (13 ), 2776. 10.3390/jcm10132776.34202784
Annus T , Wilson LR , Hong YT , Acosta-Cabronero J , Fryer TD , Cardenas-Blanco A , (2016). The pattern of amyloid accumulation in the brains of adults with Down syndrome. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia, 12 (5 ), 538–545. 10.1016/J.JALZ.2015.07.490.
Aschenbrenner AJ , Baksh RA , Benejam B , Beresford-Webb JA , Coppus A , Fortea J , (2021). Markers of early changes in cognition across cohorts of adults with down syndrome at risk of Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia: Diagnosis, Assessment &amp; Disease Monitoring, 13 (1 ), e12184. 10.1002/dad2.12184.
Ball SL , Holland AJ , Huppert FA , Treppner P , Watson P , &amp; Hon J (2004). The modified CAMDEX informant interview is a valid and reliable tool for use in the diagnosis of dementia in adults with Down’s syndrome. Journal of Intellectual Disability Research, 48 (Pt 6 ), 611–620. 10.1111/j.1365-2788.2004.00630.x.15312062
Ball SL , Holland AJ , Treppner P , Watson PC , &amp; Huppert FA (2008). Executive dysfunction and its association with personality and behaviour changes in the development of Alzheimer’s disease in adults with down syndrome and mild to moderate learning disabilities. The British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 47 (Pt. 1 ), 1–29. 10.1348/014466507X230967.17681112
Bazydlo A , Zammit M , Wu M , Dean D , Johnson S , Tudorascu D , (2021). White matter microstructure associations with episodic memory in adults with down syndrome: A tract-based spatial statistics study. Journal of Neurodevelopmental Disorders, 13 (1 ), 17. 10.1186/s11689-021-09366-1.33879062
Beery KE , Buktenica NA , &amp; Beery NA (2004). The Beery-Buktencia developmental test of visual motor integration (5th ed.). Bloomington, MN: Pearson.
Benejam B , Videla L , Vilaplana E , Barroeta I , Carmona-Iragui M , Altuna M , (2020). Diagnosis of prodromal and Alzheimer’s disease dementia in adults with Down syndrome using neuropsychological tests. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia (Amsterdam), 12 (1 ), e12047. 10.1002/dad2.12047.
Bent S , McShea L , &amp; Brennan S (2015). The importance of hearing: A review of the literature on hearing loss for older people with learning disabilities. British Journal of Learning Disability, 43 , 277–284. 10.1111/bld.12148.
Beresford-Webb JA , Mak E , Grigorova M , Daffern SJ , Holland AJ , &amp; Zaman SH (2021). Establishing diagnostic thresholds for Alzheimer’s disease in adults with Down syndrome: The Cambridge Examination for mental disorders of older people with Down’s syndrome and others with intellectual disabilities (CAMDEX-DS). British Journal of Psychology, 7 (3 ), e79. 10.1192/bjo.2021.36.
Bhattacharyya R , Sanyal D , &amp; Bhattacharyya S (2018). Diagnostic algorithm of Down syndrome by minor physical anomaly. Indian Journal of Psychiatry, 60 (4 ), 398–403. 10.4103/psychiatry.IndianJPsychiatry_401_17.30581204
Breia P , Mendes R , Silvestre A , Gonçalves MJ , Figueira MJ , &amp; Bispo R (2014). Adults with Down syndrome: Characterization of a Portuguese Sample. Acta Médica Portuguesa, 27 (3 ), 357–363. 10.20344/AMP.4898.25017348
Buschke H . (1973). Selective reminding for analysis of memory and learning. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 12 (5 ), 543–550.
CANTAB®. (2016). Cambridge neuropsychological test automated battery (CANTAB®). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Cognition Ltd.
Carr J . (1988). Six weeks to twenty-one years old: A longitudinal study of children wit Down’s syndrome and their families. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 29 (4 ), 407–431. 10.1111/J.1469-7610.1988.TB00734.X.2975288
Chen CC , Spanò G , &amp; Edgin JO (2013). The impact of sleep disruption on executive function in Down syndrome. Research in Developmental Disabilities, 34 (6 ), 2033–2039. 10.1016/j.ridd.2013.03.009.23584183
Cody KA , Piro-Gambetti B , Zammit MD , Christian BT , Handen BL , Klunk WE , (2020). Association of sleep with cognition and beta amyloid accumulation in adults with Down syndrome. Neurobiology of Aging, 93 , 44–51. 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2020.04.018.32447011
Culpepper L , Lam RW , &amp; McIntyre RS (2017). Cognitive impairment in patients with depression: Awareness, assessment, and management. The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 78 (9 ), 1383–1394. 10.4088/JCP.tk16043ah5c.29345866
Dani A , Pietrini P , Furey ML , McIntosh AR , Grady CL , Horwitz B , (1996). Brain cognition and metabolism in Down syndrome adults in association with development of dementia. Neuroreport, 7 (18 ), 2933–2936. 10.1097/00001756-199611250-00026.9116213
De Simone R , Puig XS , Gélisse P , Crespel A , &amp; Genton P (2010). Senile myoclonic epilepsy: Delineation of a common condition associated with Alzheimer’s disease in Down syndrome. Seizure, 19 (7 ), 383–389. 10.1016/j.seizure.2010.04.008.20598585
Deb S , &amp; Braganza J (1999). Comparison of rating scales for the diagnosis of dementia in adults with Down’s syndrome. Journal of Intellectual Disability Research, 43 (Pt 5 ), 400–407. 10.1046/j.1365-2788.1999.043005400.x.10546964
Deb S , Hare M , Prior L , &amp; Bhaumik S (2007). Dementia screening questionnaire for individuals with intellectual disabilities. British Journal of Psychiatry, 190 , 440–444. 10.1192/bjp.bp.106.024984.
Dekker AD , Fortea J , Blesa R , &amp; De Deyn PP (2017). Cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers for Alzheimer’s disease in Down syndrome. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia: Diagnosis, Assessment &amp; Disease Monitoring, 8 , 1–10. 10.1016/J.DADM.2017.02.006.
Del Hoyo Soriano L , Rosser T , Hamilton D , Wood T , Abbeduto L , &amp; Sherman S (2020). Gestational age is related to symptoms of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in late-preterm to full-term children and adolescents with down syndrome. Scientific Reports, 10 (1 ), 20,345. 10.1038/s41598-020-77392-5.31941944
Devenny D , Krinsky-McHale S , &amp; Kittler P (2006). Cognitive processes in early-stage dementia in adults with Down syndrome; [Paper presentation]. (9th World Down Syndrome Congress).
Doran E , Keator D , Head E , Phelan MJ , Kim R , Totoiu M , (2017). Down syndrome, partial trisomy 21, and absence of Alzheimer’s disease: The role of APP. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 56 (2 ), 459–470. 10.3233/JAD-160836.
Dubois B , &amp; Albert ML (2004). Amnestic MCI or prodromal Alzheimer’s disease? The Lancet. Neurology, 3 (4 ), 246–248. 10.1016/S1474-4422(04)00710-0.15039037
Dykens E , Hodapp R , &amp; Evans D (2006). Profiles and development of adaptive behavior in children with Down syndrome. Down Syndrome Research and Practice, 9 (3 ), 45–50. 10.3104/reprints.293.
Esralew L , Janicki MP , DiSipio M , Jokinen J , &amp; Keller SM (2013). Members of the National Task Group Section on Early Detection and Screening. National Task Group Early Detection Screen for Dementia (NTGEDSD) manual, 16 , 47–54.
Esralew L , Janicki MP , &amp; Keller SM (2018). National task group early detection screen for dementia (NTG-EDSD). Neuropsychological assessments of dementia in down syndrome and intellectual disabilities (pp. 197–213). Cham: Springer.
Evenhuis HM (1992). Evaluation of a screening instrument for dementia in aging mentally retarded persons. Journal of Intellectual Disability Research, 36 (Pt. 4 ), 337–347. 10.1111/j.1365-2788.1992.tb00532.x.1525439
Evenhuis HM (1996). Further evaluation of the Dementia Questionnaire for persons with mental retardation (DMR). Journal of Intellectual Disability Research, 40 (Pt. 4 ), 369–373. 10.1046/j.1365-2788.1996.786786.x.8884592
Evenhuis HM (2018). The dementia questionnaire for people with learning disabilities. In Prasher VP (Ed.), Neuropsychological assessments of dementia in Down syndrome and intellectual disabilities (pp. 43–56). UK: Springer.
Evenhuis HM , Kengen MMF , &amp; Eurlings HA (1998). Dementie Vragenlijst voor Verstandelijk Gehandicapten (DVZ) (2nd). Amsterdam: Harcourt Test Publishers.
Evenhuis HM , Kengen MMF , &amp; Eurlings HA (2006). Dementia Questionaire for Persons with Intellectual Disabilities (DMR). Amsterdam: Harcourt Test Publishers.
Ferreira L , Ferreira Santos-Galduróz R , Ferri CP , &amp; Fernandes Galduróz JC (2014). Rate of cognitive decline in relation to sex after 60 years-of-age: A systematic review. Geriatrics &amp; Gerontology International, 14 (1 ), 23–31. 10.1111/ggi.12093.
Finestack LH , &amp; Abbeduto L (2010). Expressive language profiles of verbally expressive adolescents and young adults with Down syndrome or fragile X syndrome. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 53 (5 ), 1334–1348. 10.1044/1092-4388(2010/09-0125).
Firth NC , Startin CM , Hithersay R , Hamburg S , Wijeratne PA , Mok KY , (2018). Aging related cognitive changes associated with Alzheimer’s disease in Down syndrome. Annals of Clinical and Translational Neurology, 5 (6 ), 741–751. 10.1002/acn3.571.29928657
Fleming V , Piro-Gambetti B , Patrick A , Zammit M , Alexander A , Christian BT , (2021). Physical activity and cognitive and imaging biomarkers of Alzheimer’s disease in down syndrome. Neurobiology of Aging, 107 , 118–127. 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2021.07.016.34428720
Flores-Aguilar L , Iulita MF , Kovecses O , Torres MD , Levi SM , Zhang Y , (2020). Evolution of neuroinflammation across the lifespan of individuals with Down syndrome. Brain, 143 (12 ), 3653–3671. 10.1093/brain/awaa326.33206953
Fonseca LM , Ball SL , &amp; Holland AJ (2018). The Cambridge examination for mental disorders of older people with Down’s syndrome and others with intellectual disabilities (CAMDEX-DS). In Prasher VP (Ed.), Neuropsychological assessments of dementia in Down syndrome and intellectual disabilities (pp. 123–144). UK: Springer International.
Fonseca LM , Haddad GG , Mattar GP , Oliveira MC , Simon SS , Guilhoto LM , (2019). The validity and reliability of the CAMDEX-DS for assessing dementia in adults with Down syndrome in Brazil. Brazil Journal of Psychiatry, 41 (3 ), 225–233. 10.1590/1516-4446-2018-0033.
Fortea J , Carmona-Iragui M , Benejam B , Fernández S , Videla L , Barroeta I , (2018). Plasma and CSF biomarkers for the diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease in adults with Down syndrome: A cross-sectional study. The Lancet Neurology, 17 (10 ), 860–869. 10.1016/S1474-4422(18)30285-0.30172624
Fortea J , Vilaplana E , Carmona-Iragui M , Benejam B , Videla L , Barroeta I , (2020). Clinical and biomarker changes of Alzheimer’s disease in adults with Down syndrome: A cross-sectional study. The Lancet, 395 (10242 ), 1988–1997. 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30689-9.
Fortea J , Zaman SH , Hartley S , Rafii MS , Head E , &amp; Carmona-Iragui M (2021). Alzheimer’s disease associated with Down syndrome: A genetic form of dementia. The Lancet. Neurology, 20 (11 ), 930–942. 10.1016/S1474-4422(21)00245-3.34687637
Gagliardi G , Epelbaum S , Houot M , Bakardjian H , Boukadida L , Revillon M , (2019). Which episodic memory performance is associated with Alzheimer’s disease biomarkers in elderly cognitive complainers? evidence from a longitudinal observational study with four episodic memory tests (insight-PreAD). Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 70 (3 ), 811–824. 10.3233/JAD-180966.
Gandy KC , Castillo HA , Ouellette L , Castillo J , Lupo PJ , Jacola LM , (2020). The relationship between chronic health conditions and cognitive deficits in children, adolescents, and young adults with down syndrome: A systematic review. PLoS One, 15 (9 ), e0239040. 10.1371/journal.pone.0239040.32915911
Gedye A . (1995). Manual for the dementia scale for Down syndrome. Vancouver: Gedye Research and Consulting.
Giménez S , Videla L , Romero S , Benejam B , Clos S , Fernández S , (2018). Prevalence of sleep disorders in adults with down syndrome: A comparative study of self-reported, actigraphic, and polysomnographic findings. Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, 14 (10 ), 1725–1733. 10.5664/jcsm.7382.30353801
Giri M , Zhang M , &amp; Lü Y (2016). Genes associated with Alzheimer’s disease: An overview and current status. Clinical Interventions in Aging, 11 , 665–681. 10.2147/CIA.S105769.27274215
Godfrey M , &amp; Lee NR (2018). Memory profiles in Down syndrome across development: A review of memory abilities through the lifespan. Journal of Neurodevelopmental Disorders, 10 (1 ), 5. 10.1186/s11689-017-9220-y.29378508
Guaraldi F , Rossetto Giaccherino R , Lanfranco F , Motta G , Gori D , Arvat E , (2017). Endocrine autoimmunity in Down’s syndrome. Frontiers of Hormone Research, 48 , 133–146. 10.1159/000452912.28245458
Haier RJ , Head K , Head E , &amp; Lott IT (2008). Neuroimaging of individuals with Down’s syndrome at-risk for dementia: Evidence for possible compensatory events. NeuroImage, 39 (3 ), 1324–1332. 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2007.09.064.18006337
Hamburg S , Lowe B , Startin CM , Padilla C , Coppus A , Silverman W , (2019). Assessing general cognitive and adaptive abilities in adults with Down syndrome: A systematic review. Journal of Neurodevelopmental Disorders, 11 , 16. 10.1186/s11689-019-9279-8.31370779
Handen B , Clare I , Laymon C , Petersen M , Zaman S , O’Bryant S , (2021). Acute regression in Down syndrome. Brain Sciences, 11 (8 ), 1109. 10.3390/brainsci11081109.34439728
Harp JP , Koehl LM , Pelt K , Hom CL , Doran E , Head E , (2021). Cognitive and behavioral domains that reliably differentiate normal aging and dementia in Down syndrome. Brain Sciences, 11 (9 ), 1128. 10.3390/brainsci11091128.34573150
Harrison PL , &amp; Oakland T (2000). Adaptive behavior assessment system. San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.
Hartley SL , Handen BL , Devenny DA , Hardison R , Mihaila I , Price JC , (2014). Cognitive functioning in relation to brain amyloid-β in healthy adults with Down syndrome. Brain, 137 (9 ), 2556–2563. 10.1093/brain/awu173.24993958
Hartley SL , Handen BL , Devenny D , Mihaila I , Hardison R , Lao PJ , (2017). Cognitive decline and brain amyloid-β accumulation across 3 years in adults with Down syndrome. Neurobiology of Aging, 58 , 68–76. 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2017.05.019.28715661
Hartley SL , Handen BL , Devenny D , Tudorascu D , Piro-Gambetti B , Zammit MD , (2020). Cognitive indicators of transition to preclinical and prodromal stages of Alzheimer’s disease in Down syndrome. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia: Diagnosis, Assessment &amp; Disease Monitoring, 12 (1 ), e12096. 10.1002/dad2.12096.
Hartley SL , Handen BL , Tudorascu D , Lee L , Cohen A , Piro-Gambetti B , (2022). Role of tau deposition in early cognitive decline in Down syndrome. Alzheimer’s and Dementia: Diagnosis, Assessment and Disease Monitoring, 14 (1 ), e12256. Epub ahead of print 10.1002/dad2.12256.
Hashemi H , Mehravaran S , Asgari S , &amp; Dehghanian Nasrabadi F (2021). Refractive and vision status in Down syndrome: A comparative study. Turkish Journal of Ophthalmology, 51 (4 ), 199–205. 10.4274/tjo.galenos.2020.52959.34461695
Hatton C , Emerson E , Robertson J , Gregory N , Kessissoglou S , Perry J , (2001). The adaptive behavior scale-residential and community (part I): Towards the development of a short form. Research in Developmental Disabilities, 22 (4 ), 273–288. 10.1016/s0891-4222(01)00072-5.11523952
Haxby JV (1989). Neuropsychological evaluation of adults with Down’s syndrome: Patterns of selective impairment in non-demented old adults. Journal of Mental Deficiency Research, 33 (Pt. 3 ), 193–210. 10.1111/j.1365-2788.1989.tb01467.x.2526879
Head E , &amp; Ances B (2020). Biomarkers in Down syndrome can help us understand Alzheimer’s disease. The Lancet, 395 (10242 ), 1951–1953. 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30916-8.
Head E , Powell D , Gold BT , &amp; Schmitt FA (2012). Alzheimer’s disease in Down syndrome. European Journal of Neurodegenerative Disease, 1 (3 ), 353–364.25285303
Hessl D , Nguyen DV , Green C , Chavez A , Tassone F , Hagerman RJ , (2009). A solution to limitations of cognitive testing in children with intellectual disabilities: The case of fragile X syndrome. Journal of Neurodevelopmental Disorders, 1 (1 ), 33–45. 10.1007/s11689-008-9001-8.19865612
Hithersay R , Startin CM , Hamburg S , Mok KY , Hardy J , Fisher E , (2019). Association of dementia with mortality among adults with Down syndrome older than 35 years. JAMA Neurology, 76 (2 ), 152–160. 10.1001/jamaneurol.2018.3616.30452522
Hodapp RM , &amp; Fidler DJ (2021). Down syndrome. In Glidden LM , Abbeduto L , McIntyre L , &amp; Tassé MJ (Eds.), APA handbook of intellectual and developmental disabilities: Foundations American Psychological Association. 10.1037/0000194-006. pp. 123–150.
Holland AJ , Hon J , Huppert FA , &amp; Stevens F (2000). Incidence and course of dementia in people with Down’s syndrome: Findings from a population-based study. Journal of Intellectual Disability Research, 44 (Pt. 2 ), 138–146. 10.1046/j.1365-2788.2000.00263.x.10898377
Hom C , Taylor L , Mapstone M , Rosas HD , Silverman W , Krinsky-McHale SJ , (2021). The relationship between regional amyloid deposition and executive function decline in adults with Down syndrome. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia, 17 , e053302. 10.1002/alz.053302.
Hom CL , Walsh DM , Doran E , &amp; Lott IT (2018). The rapid assessment for developmental disabilities. In Neuropsychological assessments of dementia in Down Syndrome and intellectual disabilities (pp. 215–233). Cham: Springer.
Hom CL , Walsh D , Fernandez G , Tournay A , Touchette P , &amp; Lott IT (2021). Cognitive assessment using the rapid assessment for developmental disabilities, second edition (RADD-2). Journal of Intellectual Disability Research, 65 (9 ), 831–848. 10.1111/jir.12863.34196436
Hon J , Huppert FA , Holland AJ , &amp; Watson P (1998). The value of the Rivermead Behavioral Memory Test (Children’s Version) in an epidemiological study of older adults with Down syndrome. The British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 37 (1 ), 15–29. 10.1111/j.2044-8260.1998.tb01276.x.9547957
Irum S , Robert HM , Mahmood A , Mahmood R , Khurshid A , &amp; Khan SA (2021). Frequency of clinical features and cytogenetic defects in down syndrome diagnosed at afip. PAFMJ, 71 (Suppl. 1 ), S28–S31. 10.51253/pafmj.V71isuppl-1.6196.
Iulita MF , Ower A , Barone C , Pentz R , Gubert P , Romano C , (2016). An inflammatory and trophic disconnect biomarker profile revealed in Down syndrome plasma: Relation to cognitive decline and longitudinal evaluation. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia, 12 (11 ), 1132–1148. 10.1016/j.jalz.2016.05.001.
Jack CR Jr. , Bennett DA , Blennow K , Carrillo MC , Feldman HH , Frisoni GB , (2016). A/T/N: An unbiased descriptive classification scheme for Alzheimer’s disease biomarkers. Neurology, 87 (5 ), 539. 10.1212/WNL.0000000000002923.27371494
Jack CR , Knopman DS , Jagust WJ , Petersen RC , Weiner MW , Aisen PS , (2013). Update on hypothetical model of Alzheimer’s disease biomarkers. The Lancet Neurology, 12 (2 ). 10.1016/S1474-4422(12)70291-0.
Jennings D , Seibyl J , Sabbagh M , Lai F , Hopkins W , Bullich S , (2015). Age dependence of brain β-amyloid deposition in Down syndrome: An [18F]florbetaben PET study. Neurology, 84 (5 ), 500–507. 10.1212/WNL.0000000000001212.25568295
Jozsvai E , Hewitt S , &amp; Gedye A (2018). Gedye dementia scale for Down syndrome. In Prasher VP (Ed.), Neuropsychological assessments of dementia in Down syndrome and intellectual disabilities (2nd ed., pp. 57–71). London: Springer International Publishing.
Karmiloff-Smith A , Al-Janabi T , D’Souza H , Groet J , Massand E , Mok K , (2016). The importance of understanding individual differences in Down syndrome. F1000Research, 5 . F1000 Faculty Rev–389 10.12688/f1000research.7506.1.
Karran E , Mercken M , &amp; De Strooper B (2011). The amyloid cascade hypothesis for Alzheimer’s disease: An appraisal for the development of therapeutics. Nature Reviews. Drug Discovery, 10 (9 ), 698–712. 10.1038/nrd3505.21852788
Kay DW , Tyrer SP , Margallo-Lana ML , Moore PB , Fletcher R , Berney TP , (2003). Preliminary evaluation of a scale to assess cognitive function in adults with Down’s syndrome: The Prudhoe cognitive function test. Journal of Intellectual Disability Research, 47 (Pt. 3 ), 155–168. 10.1046/j.1365-2788.2003.00451.x.12603513
Keator DB , Doran E , Taylor L , Phelan MJ , Hom C , Tseung K , (2020). Brain amyloid and the transition to dementia in Down syndrome. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia, 12 (1 ), e12126. 10.1002/dad2.12126.
Keeling LA , Spiridigliozzi GA , Hart SJ , Baker JA , Jones HN , &amp; Kishnani PS (2017). Challenges in measuring the effects of pharmacological interventions on cognitive and adaptive functioning in individuals with Down syndrome: A systematic review. American Journal of Medical Genetics Part A, 173 (11 ), 3058–3066. 10.1002/ajmg.a.38416.28857390
Kim J , Basak JM , &amp; Holtzman DM (2009). The role of apolipoprotein E in Alzheimer’s disease. Neuron, 63 (3 ), 287–303. 10.1016/j.neuron.2009.06.026.19679070
Knox K , Stanley J , Hendrix JA , Hillerstrom H , Dunn T , Achenbach J , (2021). Development of a symptom menu to facilitate goal attainment scaling in adults with Down syndrome-associated Alzheimer’s disease: A qualitative study to identify meaningful symptoms. Journal of Patient-Reported Outcomes, 5 (1 ), 1–10. 10.1186/S41687-020-00278-7/FIGURES/1.33403643
Koehl L , Harp J , Van Pelt KL , Head E , &amp; Schmitt FA (2020). Longitudinal assessment of dementia measures in Down syndrome. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia (Amsterdam), 12 (1 ), e12075. 10.1002/dad2.12075.
Korenberg JR , Chen XN , Schipper R , Sun Z , Gonsky R , Gerwehr S , (1994). Down syndrome phenotypes: The consequences of chromosomal imbalance. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 91 (11 ), 4997–5001. 10.1073/PNAS.91.11.4997.8197171
Korkman M , Kirk U , &amp; Kemp S (2007). NEPSY-II (2nd ed.). San Antonio: Harcourt Assessment.
Krinsky-McHale SJ , Silverman W , Gordon J , Devenny DA , Oley N , &amp; Abramov I (2014). Vision deficits in adults with Down syndrome. Journal of Applied Research in Intellectual Disabilities, 27 (3 ), 247–263.23784802
Krinsky-McHale SJ , Silverman W , Lee JH , (2022). Sensitivity and specificity of the modified cued recall test for Alzheimer’s disease in Down syndrome. [Meeting Presentation]. Alzheimer’s Biomarker Consortium – Down Syndrome Annual Meeting, Long Beach, CA.
Krinsky-McHale SJ , Zigman WB , Lee JH , (2020). Promising outcome measures of early Alzheimer’s dementia in adults with Down syndrome. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia, 2020 (12 ), e12044. 10.1002/dad2.
Kristensen K , Lorenz KM , Zhou X , Piro-Gambetti B , Hartley SL , Godar SP , (2022). Language and executive functioning in young adults with Down syndrome. Journal of Intellectual Disability Research, 66 (1–2 ), 151–161. 10.1111/jir.12868.34288180
Lai F , Mercaldo ND , Wang CM , Hersch MS , Hersch GG , &amp; Rosas HD (2021). Association between hypothyroidism onset and Alzheimer’s disease onset in adults with Down syndrome. Brain Sciences, 11 (9 ), 1223. 10.3390/brainsci11091223.34573243
Lai F , &amp; Williams RS (1989). A prospective study of Alzheimer’s disease in Down syndrome. Archives of Neurology, 46 (8 ), 849–853. 10.1001/archneur.1989.00520440031017.2527024
Lao PJ , Gutierrez J , Keator D , Rizvi B , Banerjee A , Igwe KC , (2020). Alzheimer-related cerebrovascular disease in Down syndrome. Annals of Neurology, 88 (6 ), 1165–1177. 10.1002/ana.25905.32944999
Lao PJ , Handen BL , Betthauser TJ , Mihaila I , Hartley SL , Cohen AD , (2017). Longitudinal changes in amyloid positron emission tomography and volumetric magnetic resonance imaging in the nondemented Down syndrome population. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia (Amsterdam), 9 , 1–9. 10.1016/j.dadm.2017.05.001.
Lin AL , Powell D , Caban-Holt A , Jicha G , Robertson W , Gold BT , (2016). (1)H-MRS metabolites in adults with Down syndrome: Effects of dementia. Neuroimage: Clinical, 11 , 728–735. 10.1016/j.nicl.2016.06.001.27330972
Lott IT , Doran E , Nguyen VQ , Tournay A , Movsesyan N , &amp; Gillen DL (2012). Down syndrome and dementia: Seizures and cognitive decline. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 29 (1 ), 177–185. 10.3233/JAD-2012-111,613.
Lott IT , &amp; Head E (2019). Dementia in Down syndrome: Unique insights for Alzheimer’s disease research. Nature Reviews. Neurology, 15 (3 ), 135. 10.1038/S41582-018-0132-6.30733618
Mai CT , Isenburg JL , Canfield MA , Meyer RE , Correa A , Alverson CJ , (2019). National population-based estimates for major birth defects, 2010–2014. Birth Defects Research, 111 (18 ), 1420–1435. 10.1002/bdr2.1589.31580536
Mann DMA , &amp; Esiri MM (1989). The pattern of acquisition of plaques and tangles in the brains of patients under 50 years of age with Down’s syndrome. Journal of the Neurological Sciences, 89 (2–3 ). 10.1016/0022-510X(89)90019-1.
Margallo-Lana ML , Moore PB , Kay DW , Perry RH , Reid BE , Berney TP , (2007). Fifteen-year follow-up of 92 hospitalized adults with Down’s syndrome: Incidence of cognitive decline, its relationship to age and neuropathology. Journal of Intellectual Disability Research, 51 (Pt. 6 ), 463–477. 10.1111/j.1365-2788.2006.00902.x.17493029
Martini AC , Helman AM , McCarty KL , Lott IT , Doran E , Schmitt FA , (2020). Distribution of microglial phenotypes as a function of age and Alzheimer’s disease neuropathology in the brains of people with Down syndrome. Alzheimer’s &amp; dementia (Amsterdam, Netherlands), 12 (1 ), e12113. 10.1002/dad2.12113.
Matthews DC , Lukic AS , Andrews RD , Marendic B , Brewer J , Rissman RA , (2016). Dissociation of Down syndrome and Alzheimer’s disease effects with imaging. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia, 2 (2 ), 69–81. 10.1016/j.trci.2016.02.004.
McCarron M , McCallion P , Coppus A , Fortea J , Stemp S , Janicki M , (2018). Supporting advanced dementia in people with Down syndrome and other intellectual disability: Consensus statement of the International Summit on Intellectual Disability and Dementia. Journal of Intellectual Disability Research, 62 (7 ), 617–624. 10.1111/jir.12500.29781149
McCarron M , McCallion P , Reilly E , Dunne P , Carroll R , &amp; Mulryan N (2017). A prospective 20-year longitudinal follow-up of dementia in persons with Down syndrome. Journal of Intellectual Disability Research, 61 (9 ), 843–852. 10.1111/jir.12390.28664561
McCarron M , McCallion P , Reilly E , &amp; Mulryan N (2014). A prospective 14-year longitudinal follow-up of dementia in persons with Down syndrome. Journal of Intellectual Disability Research, 58 (1 ), 61–70. 10.1111/jir.12074.23902161
McCarthy D . (1972). McCarthy scales of children’s abilities (MSCA). Psychological Corporation.
McKenzie K , Metcalfe D , &amp; Murray G (2018). A review of measures used in the screening, assessment and diagnosis of dementia in people with an intellectual disability. Journal of Applied Research in Intellectual Disabilities, 31 (5 ), 725–742. 10.1111/jar.12441.29424088
Mihaila I , Handen BL , Christian BT , Lao PJ , Cody KA , Klunk WE , (2019). Leisure activity, brain β-amyloid, and episodic memory in adults with Down syndrome. Developmental Neurobiology, 79 (7 ), 738–749. 10.1002/dneu.22677.30912871
Möller JC , Hamer HM , Oertel WH , &amp; Rosenow F (2001). Late-onset myoclonic epilepsy in Down’s syndrome (LOMEDS). Seizure, 10 (4 ), 303–306. 10.1053/seiz.2000.0500.11466028
Montoliu-Gaya L , Strydom A , Blennow K , Zetterberg H , &amp; Ashton NJ (2021). Blood biomarkers for Alzheimer’s disease in Down syndrome. Journal of Clinical Medicine, 10 (16 ), 3639. 10.3390/JCM10163639.34441934
Moss J , Richards C , Nelson L , &amp; Oliver C (2013). Prevalence of autism spectrum disorder symptomatology and related behavioral characteristics in individuals with Down syndrome. Autism, 17 (4 ), 390–404. 10.1177/1362361312442790.22589453
Neale N , Padilla C , Fonseca LM , Holland T , &amp; Zaman S (2017). Neuroimaging and other modalities to assess Alzheimer’s disease in Down syndrome. NeuroImage: Clinical, 17 , 263–271. 10.1016/j.nicl.2017.10.022.29159043
Nelson DLD , Siddarth DP , Kepe DV , Scheibel MKE , Huang DSC , Barrio DJR , (2011). Positron emission tomography of brain β-amyloid and tau levels in adults with Down syndrome. Archives of Neurology, 68 (6 ), 768. 10.1001/ARCHNEUROL.2011.104.21670401
Nihira K . (1976). Dimensions of adaptive behavior in institutionalized mentally retarded children and adults: Developmental perspective. American Journal of Mental Deficiency, 81 (3 ), 215–226.998656
Nihira K , Foster R , Shellhaas M , &amp; Leland H (1975). AAMD adaptive behavior scale (Rev). Washington, DC: American Association on Mental Deficiency.
Nihira K , Leland H , &amp; Lambert N (1993). Adaptive Behaviour Scale-Residential and community: Examination booklet. Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
O’Caoimh R , Clune Y , &amp; Molloy DW (2013). Screening for Alzheimer’s disease in Down’s syndrome. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease and Parkinsonism, S7 (001 ). 10.4172/2161-0460.S7-001.
O’Shea MF (1996). The cognitive and affective correlates of the memory complaint in temporal lobe epilepsy (Doctoral dissertation). University of Melbourne.
Pennington BF , Moon J , Edgin J , Stedron J , &amp; Nadel L (2003). The neuropsychology of Down syndrome: Evidence for hippocampal dysfunction. Child Development, 74 (1 ), 75–93. 10.1111/1467-8624.00522.12625437
Petersen RC (2009). Early diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease: Is MCI too late? Current Alzheimer Research, 6 (4 ), 324–330. 10.2174/156720509788929237.19689230
Petersen ME , Rafii MS , Zhang F , Hall J , Julovich D , Ances BM , (2021). Plasma total-tau and neurofilament light chain as diagnostic biomarkers of Alzheimer’s disease dementia and mild cognitive impairment in adults with Down syndrome. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease: JAD, 79 (2 ), 671–681. 10.3233/JAD-201167.33337378
Pezzuti L , Nacinovich R , Oggiano S , Bomba M , Ferri R , La Stella A , (2018). Beyond the floor effect on the WISC-IV in individuals with Down syndrome: Are there cognitive strengths and weaknesses? Journal of Intellectual Disability Research, 62 (7 ), 593–603. 10.1111/jir.12499.29682828
Powell D , Caban-Holt A , Jicha G , Robertson W , Davis R , Gold BT , (2014). Frontal white matter integrity in adults with Down syndrome with and without dementia. Neurobiology of Aging, 35 (7 ), 1562–1569. 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.01.137.24582640
Prasher VP (2005). Alzheimer’s disease and dementia in Down syndrome and intellectual disabilities. Oxford: Milton Keynes: Radcliffe Publishing.
Prasher VP (2018). Neuropsychological assessments of dementia in Down syndrome and intellectual disabilities (2nd ed.). UK: Springer.
Prasher VP , &amp; Day S (1995). Brief report: Obsessive-compulsive disorder in adults with Down’s syndrome. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 25 (4 ), 453–458. 10.1007/BF02179379.7592255
Prasher VP , Farrer MJ , Kessling AM , Fisher EM , West RJ , Barber PC , (1998). Molecular mapping of Alzheimer-type dementia in Down’s syndrome. Annals of Neurology, 43 (3 ), 380–383. 10.1002/ana.410430316.9506555
Prasher VP , Sajith SG , Rees SD , Patel A , Tewari S , Schupf N , (2008). Significant effect of APOE epsilon 4 genotype on the risk of dementia in Alzheimer’s disease and mortality in persons with Down Syndrome. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 23 (11 ), 1134–1140. 10.1002/GPS.2039.18464295
Pulsifer MB , Evans CL , Hom C , Krinsky-McHale SJ , Silverman W , Lai F , (2020). Language skills as a predictor of cognitive decline in adults with Down syndrome. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia (Amsterdam), 12 (1 ), e12080. 10.1002/dad2.12080.
Rafii MS (2020). Alzheimer’s disease in Down syndrome: Progress in the design and conduct of drug prevention trials. CNS Drugs, 34 (8 ), 785–794. 10.1007/s40263-020-00740-6.32506291
Rafii MS , Donohue MC , Matthews DC , Muranevici G , Ness S , O’Bryant SE , (2019). Plasma neurofilament light and Alzheimer’s disease biomarkers in Down syndrome: Results from the Down syndrome biomarker initiative (DSBI). Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 70 (1 ), 131–138. 10.3233/JAD-190322.
Rafii MS , Lukic AS , Andrews RD , Brewer J , Rissman RA , Strother SC , (2017). PET imaging of tau pathology and relationship to amyloid, longitudinal MRI, and cognitive change in Down syndrome: Results from the Down syndrome biomarker initiative (DSBI). Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 60 (2 ), 439–450. 10.3233/JAD-170390.
Rafii MS , Wishnek H , Brewer JB , Donohue MC , Ness S , Mobley WC , (2015). The down syndrome biomarker initiative (DSBI) pilot: Proof of concept for deep phenotyping of Alzheimer’s disease biomarkers in down syndrome. Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience, 9 , 239. 10.3389/fnbeh.2015.00239.26441570
Randolph C , Tierney MC , Mohr E , &amp; Chase TN (1998). The repeatable battery for the assessment of neuropsychological status (RBANS): Preliminary clinical validity. Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology, 20 (3 ), 310–319. 10.1076/jcen.20.3.310.823.9845158
Rosas HD , Hsu E , Mercaldo ND , Lai F , Pulsifer M , Keator D , (2020). Alzheimer-related altered white matter microstructural integrity in Down syndrome: A model for sporadic AD? Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia (Amsterdam), 12 (1 ), e12040. 10.1002/dad2.12040.
Rossini PM , Di Iorio R , Vecchio F , Anfossi M , Babiloni C , Bozzali M , (2020). Early diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease: The role of biomarkers including advanced EEG signal analysis. Report from the IFCN-sponsored panel of experts. Clinical Neurophysiology, 131 (6 ), 1287–1310. 10.1016/j.clinph.2020.03.003.32302946
Rosso M , Fremion E , Santoro SL , Santoro SL , Oreskovic NM , Chitnis T , (2020). Down syndrome disintegrative disorder: A clinical regression syndrome of increasing importance. Pediatrics, 145 (6 ). 10.1542/PEDS.2019-2939/76920.
Roth M , Tym E , Mountjoy CQ , Huppert FA , Hendrie H , Verma S , (1986). CAMDEX. A standardized instrument for the diagnosis of mental disorder in the elderly with special reference to the early detection of dementia. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 149 , 698–709. 10.1192/bjp.149.6.698.3790869
Rubenstein E , Hartley S , &amp; Bishop L (2020). Epidemiology of dementia and Alzheimer’s disease in individuals With Down syndrome. JAMA Neurology, 77 (2 ), 262–264. 10.1001/jamaneurol.2019.3666.31657825
Saxton J , Kastango KB , Hugonot-Diener L , Boller F , Verny M , Sarles CE , (2005). Development of a short form of the severe impairment battery. The American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 13 (11 ), 999–1005. 10.1176/appi.ajgp.13.11.999.16286444
Schöll M , Maass A , Mattsson N , Ashton NJ , Blennow K , Zetterberg H , (2019). Biomarkers for tau pathology. Molecular and Cellular Neurosciences, 97 , 18. 10.1016/J.MCN.2018.12.001.30529601
Sharma RA , Varga AW , Bubu OM , Pirraglia E , Kam K , Parekh A , (2018). Obstructive sleep apnea severity affects amyloid burden in cognitively normal elderly. A longitudinal study. American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, 197 (7 ). 10.1164/rccm.201704-0704OC.
Shultz J , Aman M , Kelbley T , LeClear Wallace C , Burt DB , Primeaux-Hart S , (2004). Evaluation of screening tools for dementia in older adults with mental retardation. American Journal of Mental Retardation, 109 (2 ), 98–110. 10.1352/0895-8017(2004)109&lt;98:eostfd&gt;2.0.co;2.15000667
Silverman W , Krinsky-McHale SJ , Lai F , Diana Rosas H , Hom C , Doran E , (2021). Evaluation of the National Task Group-Early Detection Screen for Dementia: Sensitivity to ‘mild cognitive impairment’ in adults with Down syndrome. Journal of Applied Research in Intellectual Disabilities, 34 (3 ), 905–915. 10.1111/jar.12849.33314467
Sinai A , Mokrysz C , Bernal J , Bohnen I , Bonell S , Courtenay K , (2018). Predictors of age of diagnosis and survival of Alzheimer’s disease in Down syndrome. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 61 (2 ). 10.3233/JAD-170624.
Sparrow S , Cicchetti D , &amp; Saulnier C (2016). Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales—Third edition (Vineland-3). Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance Service.
Sparrow SS , &amp; Cicchetti DV (1989). The Vineland adaptive behavior scales. Allyn &amp; Bacon.
Sparrow SS , Cicchetti DV , &amp; Balla DA (2005). Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales—Second edition (Vineland–II). Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance Service.
Startin CM , Hamburg S , Hithersay R , Al-Janabi T , Mok KY , Hardy J , (2019). Cognitive markers of preclinical and prodromal Alzheimer’s disease in Down syndrome. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia, 15 (2 ), 245–257. 10.1016/j.jalz.2018.08.009.
Startin CM , Hamburg S , Hithersay R , Davies A , Rodger E , Aggarwal N , (2016). The LonDownS adult cognitive assessment to study cognitive abilities and decline in Down syndrome. Wellcome Open Research, 1 , 11. 10.12688/wellcomeopenres.9961.1.28018980
Strydom A , Dickinson MJ , Shende S , Pratico D , &amp; Walker Z (2009). Oxidative stress and cognitive ability in adults with Down syndrome. Progress in Neuro-psychopharmacology &amp; Biological Psychiatry, 33 (1 ), 76–80. 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2008.10.006.18983885
Tassé MJ , Navas Macho P , Havercamp SM , Benson BA , Allain DC , Manickam K , (2016). Psychiatric conditions prevalent among adults with Down syndrome. Journal of Policy and Practice in Intellectual Disabilities, 13 , 173–180. 10.1111/jppi.12156.
Teipel SJ , &amp; Hampel H (2006). Neuroanatomy of Down syndrome in vivo: A model of preclinical Alzheimer’s disease. Behavior Genetics, 36 (3 ), 405–415. 10.1007/s10519-006-9047-x.16485178
Trois MS , Capone GT , Lutz JA , Melendres MC , Schwartz AR , Collop NA , (2009). Obstructive sleep apnea in adults with Down syndrome. Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, 5 (4 ), 317–323. 10.5664/jcsm.27541.19968008
Tromp D , Dufour A , Lithfous S , Pebayle T , &amp; Després O (2015). Episodic memory in normal aging and Alzheimer’s disease: Insights from imaging and behavioral studies. Aging Research Reviews, 24 , 232–262. 10.1016/J.ARR.2015.08.006.26318058
Tudorascu DL , Hartley SL , Zammit MD , Cody KA , Laymon CM , Minhas DS , (2021). Associations between cognition, Aβ, and tau in adults with Down syndrome. ALZ. https://alz.confex.com/alz/2021/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/52887.
Tudorascu DL , Laymon CM , Zammit M , Minhas DS , Anderson SJ , Ellison PA , (2020). Relationship of amyloid beta and neurofibrillary tau deposition in neurodegeneration in aging Down syndrome (NiAD) study at baseline. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia (New York), 6 (1 ), e12096. 10.1002/trc2.12096.
Tyrrell J , Cosgrave M , McCarron M , McPherson J , Calvert J , Kelly A , (2001). Dementia in people with Down’s syndrome. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 16 (12 ), 1168–1174. 10.1002/gps.502.11748777
Urv TK , Zigman WB , &amp; Silverman W (2010). Psychiatric symptoms in adults with Down syndrome and Alzheimer’s disease. American Journal of Intellectual &amp; Developmental Disabilities, 115 (4 ), 265–276. 10.1352/1944-7558-115.4.265.
Vega A . (1969). Use of purdue pegboard and finger tapping performance as a rapid screening test for brain damage. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 25 (3 ), 255–258. 10.1002/1097-4679(196907)25:3&lt;255::aid-jclp2270250306&gt;3.0.co;2-v.5803245
Vicari S , Pontillo M , &amp; Armando M (2013). Neurodevelopmental and psychiatric issues in Down’s syndrome: Assessment and intervention. Psychiatric Genetics, 23 (3 ), 95–107. 10.1097/YPG.0b013e32835fe426.23492931
Vilaplana E , Videla L , Carmona-Iragui M , Benejam B , Barroeta I , Fernandez S , (2020). The effect of APOE ε4 in Alzheimer’s disease biomarkers in Down syndrome. ALZ. https://alz.confex.com/alz/20amsterdam/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/48122.
Wallace ER , Harp JP , Van Pelt KL , Koehl LM , Caban-Holt AM , Anderson-Mooney AJ , (2021). Identifying dementia in Down syndrome with the severe impairment battery, brief praxis test and Dementia scale for people with learning disabilities. Journal of Intellectual Disability Research, 65 , 1085–1096. 10.1111/jir.12901.34786786
Walpert M , Zaman S , &amp; Holland A (2021). A systematic review of unexplained early regression in adolescents and adults with Down syndrome. Brain Sciences, 11 (9 ), 1197. 10.3390/BRAINSCI11091197.34573218
Walsh DM , Finwall J , Touchette PE , McGregor MR , Fernandez GE , Lott IT , (2007). Rapid assessment of severe cognitive impairment in individuals with developmental disabilities. Journal of Intellectual Disability Research, 51 (2 ), 91–100. 10.1111/j.1365-2788.2006.00853.x.17217473
Wechsler D . (1974). Wechsler intelligence scale for children—Revised edition. San Antonio, TX: The Psychological Corporation.
Wechsler D . (2004). Wechsler memory scale-fourth edition: Administration and scoring manual. San Antonio: The Psychological Corporation.
WHO ∣ Life expectancy. (2018). World Health Organization. http://www.who.int/gho/mortality_burden_disease/life_tables/situation_trends_text/en/.
Wiseman FK , Al-Janabi T , Hardy J , Karmiloff-Smith A , Nizetic D , Tybulewicz VLJJ , (2015). A genetic cause of Alzheimer’s disease: Mechanistic insights from Down syndrome. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 16 (9 ), 564–574. 10.1038/nrn3983.26243569
Wisniewski K , &amp; Hill AL (1985). Clinical aspects of dementia in mental retardation and developmental disabilities. Aging and Developmental Disabilities, 195–207.
Wisniewski K , Wisniewski H , &amp; Wen G (1985). Occurrence of neuropathological changes and dementia of Alzheimer’s disease in Down’s syndrome. Annals of Neurology, 17 (3 ), 278–282. 10.1002/ANA.410170310.3158266
Yamazaki Y , Zhao N , Caulfield TR , Liu CC , &amp; Bu G (2019). Apolipoprotein E and Alzheimer’s disease: Pathobiology and targeting strategies. Nature Reviews. Neurology, 15 (9 ), 501–518. 10.1038/s41582-019-0228-7.31367008
Zigman WB , Krinsky-McHale SJ , Schupf N , Urv TK , &amp; Silverman W (2018). Adaptive behavior change, mild cognitive impairment and dementia in Down Syndrome: Case classification using the adaptive behavior scale. In Prasher VP (Ed.), Neuropsychological assessments of dementia in Down syndrome and intellectual disabilities (pp. 99–122). London: Springer International Publishing.
Zigman WB , &amp; Lott IT (2007). Alzheimer’s disease in Down syndrome: Neurobiology and risk. Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabilities Research Reviews, 13 (3 ), 237–246. 10.1002/mrdd.20163.17910085
Zimmerli E , &amp; Devenny D (1995). Cued recall as a screen for dementia in the MR population, Gatlinburg Conference for Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities, Gatlinburg, TN.
