LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


2985134R
2913
Chem Rev
Chem Rev
Chemical reviews
0009-2665
1520-6890

37115110
10524010
10.1021/acs.chemrev.2c00851
NIHMS1897751
Article
Regulation of Biomolecular Condensates by Poly(ADP-ribose)
Rhine Kevin Program in Cell, Molecular, Developmental Biology, and Biophysics, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21218, United States; Department of Biology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21218, United States; Present Address: K.R.: Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California San Diego School of Medicine, La Jolla, California 92093, United States

Odeh Hana M. Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, United States

http://orcid.org/0000-0001-5269-8533
Shorter James Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, United States

http://orcid.org/0000-0001-9098-3423
Myong Sua Program in Cell, Molecular, Developmental Biology, and Biophysics, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21218, United States; Department of Biophysics, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21218, United States; Physics Frontier Center (Center for the Physics of Living Cells), University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801, United States

Author Contributions

CRediT: Kevin Rhine writing-original draft, writing-review &amp; editing; Hana Odeh writing-review &amp; editing; James Shorter writing-review &amp; editing; Sua Myong writing-review &amp; editing.

Corresponding Author smyong@jhu.edu
16 5 2023
26 7 2023
28 4 2023
26 1 2024
123 14 90659093
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Biomolecular condensates are reversible compartments that form through a process called phase separation. Post-translational modifications like ADP-ribosylation can nucleate the formation of these condensates by accelerating the self-association of proteins. Poly(ADP-ribose) (PAR) chains are remarkably transient modifications with turnover rates on the order of minutes, yet they can be required for the formation of granules in response to oxidative stress, DNA damage, and other stimuli. Moreover, accumulation of PAR is linked with adverse phase transitions in neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. In this review, we provide a primer on how PAR is synthesized and regulated, the diverse structures and chemistries of ADP-ribosylation modifications, and protein–PAR interactions. We review substantial progress in recent efforts to determine the molecular mechanism of PAR-mediated phase separation, and we further delineate how inhibitors of PAR polymerases may be effective treatments for neurodegenerative pathologies. Finally, we highlight the need for rigorous biochemical interrogation of ADP-ribosylation in vivo and in vitro to clarify the exact pathway from PARylation to condensate formation.

Graphical Abstract


pmc1. INTRODUCTION

The cellular response to various stresses relies upon the rapid and reversible recruitment of proteins, RNA, and other molecules into functional ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complexes.1 Unlike membrane-bound organelles, the responding biomolecules are not compartmentalized by lipid bilayers, exposing the RNP complex to the surrounding cellular milieu. Instead, it is thought that RNP complexes undergo a phase transition into liquid-like granules, which are also called biomolecular condensates.2 Proteins with intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) and multivalent RNA molecules together promote this transition through a process called phase separation (PS), in which the dense RNP complex is a discrete phase with unique viscoelastic properties from the dilute phase.3 Multivalent interactions allow RNP complexes to quickly form in response to cellular stimuli. PS may contribute to diverse biological processes such as the stress response, transcription, the DNA damage response, mRNA splicing, RNA degradation, and others.4

Two major challenges for the cell when assembling phase-separated compartments are (1) rapidly triggering PS in response to the external stimulus and (2) recruiting the correct biomolecules to the granule. Biomolecular condensates do not have a membrane that is selectively permeable to specific proteins. Moreover, certain granules, like stress granules (SGs), must only assemble in response to acute stimuli, or cells cannot survive.5,6 Therefore, the cell needs mechanisms to direct the formation of biomolecular condensates on demand. One emerging hypothesis is that a molecule called PAR enables such rapid organization of certain cellular condensates in species that express PARPs.7–18

Poly(ADP-ribose) (PAR) is a nucleic-acid-like polymer that is synthesized by poly(ADP-ribose) polymerases (PARPs).19 PAR is added as a posttranslational modification to target proteins, where it can act as a signal for various biological processes. Unlike many other posttranslational modifications that deposit small chemical groups to certain amino acids,20,21 PAR is a multivalent polymer that is synthesized directly on the protein. Therefore, PAR confers a unique biochemical property on the poly(ADP-ribosylated) (PARylated) protein: multivalency. In other words, a newly synthesized PAR chain can serve as a scaffold on which other proteins may assemble. Importantly, multivalency is a well-established universal mechanism to promote PS.22

PARP-dependent PARylation is best characterized in the DNA damage response.17,18,23 Like other stress-related processes that we will describe in this review, PARPs rapidly synthesize PAR chains in response to DNA breaks (the stress), helping direct the recruitment of DNA repair proteins within minutes (the response). An emerging theme is that PAR can serve as a molecular trigger for DNA repair or potentially other stress responses, and as such, PAR can promote the formation of phase-separated granules at specific foci, like a DNA damage site.17,18,24 Therefore, we propose that PAR-mediated interaction can serve as a unifying mechanism for initiating stimulus- or stress-induced granule formation. Such a mechanism has also been suggested by others.7,9,11–14

Here, we review recent advances in PS and PAR biology, focusing on how PAR drives the PS of diverse proteins in response to biological stress. First, we provide background information on PAR structure and synthesis. Next, we cover the covalent (i.e., posttranslational) and noncovalent binding of PAR to proteins, including the various protein domains that recognize PAR chains. With this primer, we then provide a detailed overview of the literature covering PAR’s role in PS, including the DNA-damage response, stress granule formation and dissolution, viral infections, osmotic pressure sensing, and other roles. Finally, we link PAR PS to clinical studies showing increased PARylation and PARP activity in neurodegenerative diseases like Parkinson’s disease, Alzheimer’s disease, frontotemporal dementia, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Further mechanistic studies with recent technical advances in PAR biology are needed to provide a more detailed understanding of PAR-mediated PS, but we hope that this review will provide the scientific foundation and impetus for these studies to occur.

2. POLY(ADP-RIBOSE) STRUCTURE AND SYNTHESIS

PAR is covalently attached to proteins by PARPs19,25 (Table 1), and many PARPs are implicated in PS. PARPs use nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) as a substrate for each ADP-ribose unit added to a target protein (Figure 1). Therefore, the structure of an ADP-ribose unit resembles NAD+ without the nicotinamide group.26,27 Target proteins can be mono- or poly(ADP-ribosylated), and PAR chains can be up to ~200 units long.28,29 Because PAR chains are covalently attached to proteins, long PAR modifications significantly impact the structure and biochemical properties of the target protein. PAR chains are also stiffer than RNA or DNA chains.30 This section is a primer on the enzymatic cycle underlying PAR synthesis and catabolism, and the catalytic activity of PARPs.

2.1. The PARylation Cycle

Unlike many other posttranslational modifications, ADP-ribosylation marks are polymerized and depolymerized on proteins, allowing dynamic control of PAR chain length and structure. The canonical PARylation cycle starts with the deposition of mono-ADP-ribose units on proteins through a covalent linkage to the target protein.40 Many PARPs can catalyze this initial mono-ADP-ribosylation (MARylation), and we discuss the covalent linkage of ADP-ribose to proteins in more detail below (see section ADP-Ribosylation of Proteins). The MARylation reaction uses a single NAD+ molecule: the covalent linkage between the ribose sugar and the nicotinamide molecule is cleaved in a rate-limiting step, which allows the ribose sugar to be attached to the acceptor amino acid of the target protein. Many target proteins are MARylated under basal conditions;41 stress events or other stimuli usually direct the PARylation reaction.16

Once a mono(ADP-ribose) (MAR) unit is added to the target protein, certain PARPs may further modify the protein to synthesize a polymerized ADP-ribose chain.42 It is unclear whether MARylation added by one PARP may act as a substrate for PARylation by other PARPs. The formation of a 2′–1′′ ribose–ribose glycosidic bond underlies the PARylation reaction, which can be sequentially catalyzed on each terminal ADP-ribose unit.43 Every ADP-ribose unit requires a new NAD+ molecule.42 PAR chains range in length from ~2–200 units,28,29 meaning that PAR chains act as an NAD+ sink during extensive PARylation events.44 Moreover, branching of the PAR chain may be initiated by PARP1/2; here, the PARP catalyzes the formation of a 2″–1′′ ribose–ribose bond in addition to the usual 2′–1′′ linkage.27,45 PAR branching is spaced every ~20–50 units,26,28 allowing further PARylation at new terminal ADP-ribose units. Branching allows highly PARylated targets to adopt a “starfish” morphology with huge PAR chains emanating from a single initiating chain.46 For more on the structural heterogeneity of PAR chains, we refer the reader to a recent review in ref 47.

Depolymerization of PAR is mediated by PAR glycohydrolases (PARGs), which act through endo- or exoglycosidic cleavage of PAR chains (Table 2).48 Exoglycosidic cleavage is generally more common, meaning that individual ADP-ribose units are typically released as the PAR chain is depolymerized from the end of the modification.49 Certain PARGs may release intact PAR chains via endoglycosidic cleavage,50 but free PAR is readily catabolized by basal expression of PARGs in cells. Release of the initial ADP-ribose unit (i.e., MARylation) is mediated by specific PARGs that recognize the unique protein-ADP-ribose linkage.51 Thus, dePARylation and deMARylation are functionally decoupled and usually occur independently.

Therefore, a dynamic cycle of MARylation, PARylation, dePARylation, and deMARylation defines the PAR cycle. Each of these steps regulates the recruitment of proteins to PAR foci and the formation of phase-separated condensates.

2.2. Mechanism of PAR Chain Synthesis

The canonical PARP active site consists of a histidine–tyrosine–glutamate (H–Y–E) triad, which is essential for polymerization (Figure 2). All PARylating PARP enzymes contain the H–Y–E triad.52 However, the H–Y–E-containing PARP3 and PARP4 are unable to synthesize PAR chains, indicating that the triad is not sufficient on its own for PARylation.52 Natural variations of the H–Y–E triad in other PARPs (e.g., H–Y–I, H–Y–L, etc.) can still engage in MARylating activity.52 Many structural studies use PARP1, the main nuclear PARP enzyme, and the founding member of the PARP family, as their model, but homology between PARP1 and other PARylating PARPs implies that many of the catalytic activities are similar.53,54 For a more complete review on PARP1 synthesis of PAR chains, we refer the reader to ref 55.

In PARP1, triad amino acids His-862 and Tyr-896 are required for NAD+ binding.56 His-862 contacts the 2′-OH of the adenosine–ribose of NAD+, and Tyr-896 stacks with the nicotinamide ring.56 These two residues are essential for proper catalysis: the PARPs without His-862 and Tyr-896 equiv, PARP9 (Q-Y-T) and PARP13 (Y–Y–V), are either weakly active or completely inactive, respectively.52,57 By contrast, the last triad residue Glu-988 is required for destabilizing NAD+ and covalently attaching the remaining ADP-ribose molecule to the target protein or ADP-ribose.43 Glu-988 performs this activity by hydrogen bonding with the 2′-OH of the nicotinamide ribose, which allows the target protein side chain to perform a nucleophilic attack on the ribose–nicotinamide bond.43 Glu-988 primarily serves to position NAD+ and the acceptor site in the correct orientation.43,58 Other structural elements, such as the donor and acceptor loops, further modulate the catalytic activity of PARP enzymes.52,59 Mutations at nearby residues impact PAR branching efficiency of PARP1.45,60 Finally, accessory factors may help terminate PARylation reactions, shifting the PAR cycle toward dePARylation.61 Before dePARylation occurs, many proteins may noncovalently bind to the covalently bound PARylated protein, as we discuss in the next section.

3. PROTEIN-POLY(ADP-RIBOSE) BINDING

Poly(ADP-ribose) chains are added as a posttranslational modifications to proteins. Therefore, there are two main modes of protein–PAR binding: (1) covalent attachment of the ADP-ribosylation modification to the target protein and (2) noncovalent binding of the PAR chain to a PAR-binding protein (Figure 3). Together, these two interactions provide exquisite specificity; PAR chains can be synthesized on certain proteins in response to stimuli, which then recruit binding partners to the new PAR chains. PARG and PARG-like enzymes disrupt both interactions by degrading the PAR chain from the target protein. Given the remarkably transient nature of ADP-ribosylation, the covalent and noncovalent PAR interactions can be brief, only occurring when the correct biological stimulus promotes PAR synthesis.

In the context of PS, the synthesis of the PAR chain provides a multivalent scaffold for the assembly of PAR-binding proteins on the target protein. A naked, newly synthesized PAR chain can be recognized by proteins with PAR-binding domains, also known as PAR readers. If the PAR chain is of a sufficient length, multiple PAR readers can assemble on a single target protein, which then promotes a phase transition. In this model, the PARylated protein is recruited into the phase-separated condensate, even if it cannot undergo PS on its own. An alternative mechanism is that PAR can induce conformational changes in proteins by freeing IDRs, which then promote PS, perhaps independently of PAR.

This section will review the biochemistry underlying the ADP-ribosylation modification and recognition of the PAR modification by other proteins. In particular, we will focus on how PARPs target certain proteins for ADP-ribosylation, which amino acids accept ADP-ribosylation modifications, and cofactors that may alter ADP-ribosylation activity of PARP enzymes. Then, we will discuss various domains that interact with PAR chains, the enrichment of PAR-binding domains in disordered regions of proteins, and how PAR binding aligns with other binding interactions.

3.1. ADP-Ribosylation of Proteins

ADP-ribosylation modifications are added by PARPs, as discussed in section Poly(ADP-ribose) Structure and Synthesis above. There are 17 PARP enzymes in humans, of which 16 are catalytically active52 (Table 1). Only 4 of the 16 PARP enzymes can synthesize PAR chains: PARP1, PARP2, PARP5a, and PARP5b.52 The first two enzymes, PARP1 and PARP2, are predominantly nuclear, though PARP2 has been identified in puncta in the cytoplasm.62 PARP2 mediates branching of PARP1-synthesized PAR chains.33 PARP5a and PARP5b have high sequence similarity,63 and they are localized to the cytoplasm.16,62 PARP5a and PARP5b cannot synthesize branched PAR chains,64 so it is thought that most cytoplasmic PAR modifications are linear chains.

The remaining 12 PARPs only add mono(ADP-ribosylation) modifications. The exact interplay between MARylating PARP enzymes and the PARylating PARP enzymes is unknown; MARylating PARPs may target unique proteins for ADP-ribosylation, which could then be targeted for PARylation by other PARPs, although the evidence for this theory is lacking.65,66 Certain MARylating PARPs may also modulate the PARylation activity of other PARPs. For example, PARP3 can stimulate PARP1 activity in the absence of DNA.67 Because ADP-ribosylation-mediated PS appears to rely on the multivalency of PAR chains (see section Molecular Interactions Underlying PAR-Mediated Phase Separation below), we will focus our discussion on PARylating PARPs.

PARP1 and PARP2 synthesize the vast majority of PAR in cells,68 and they predominantly initiate ADP-ribosylation at serine residues.69–74 Serine targeting is mediated by the cofactor histone PARylation factor 1 (HPF1). Structural studies of PARP1-HPF1 binding demonstrate that HPF1 completes the active site of PARP1, biasing PARP1 toward serine ADP-ribosylation.61 HPF1 also sterically hinders automodification of PARP1, and HPF1 binding blunts the length of PAR chains synthesized by PARP1.61,72,75 The exact motif targeted by the PARP1/2-HPF1 complex is unknown, although likely involves nearby basic residues.70,76 The ADPriboDB tool maintains a list of ADP-ribosylated targets.77 Notably, PARPs are themselves major targets of ADP-ribosylation through automodification reactions.78

ADP-ribosylation may also occur at other residues, including arginine,40,74,79–95 aspartate,52,96 cysteine,52,82,97–99 glutamate,52,96 histidine,74 lysine,52,100 and tyrosine.74,101 PARPs appear to have different preferred targets; for example, PARP8 may prefer modifying cysteine residues.52 Therefore, MARylating PARPs may target proteins or sites that are otherwise not recognized or efficiently modified by the PARylating PARP enzymes.

PARP activity is promoted by environmental stimuli such as oxidative stress and DNA-damaging agents.16,34,102 These perturbations activate biological responses that require the activity of PARP1, PARP5a, or both, but the exact mechanism of how ADP-ribosylation activity increases in response to this stimulus is unclear. PARP1/2 activity is directly stimulated by DNA damage, which is recognized by DNA-binding domains of PARP1/2.103 Notably, the surge in ADP-ribosylation mediated by environmental stress is fast, increases in PAR levels can be detected within minutes.60 Recent studies have indicated that PARP activation is upstream of stress-mediated PS,17,18,34 so the exact molecular mechanism of how ADP-ribosylation is stimulated by stress should be of intense interest to the field.

3.2. Free PAR Chains

PARPs require a protein target for their ADP-ribosylation activity, so free PAR is not directly synthesized by PARPs. However, dePARylating enzymes like PARG can release free PAR chains via endoglycosidic cleavage of the PAR chain on an ADP-ribosylated protein (Figure 4).48–50,104–106 The preferred enzymatic activity of PARG is exoglycosidic cleavage, but endoglycosidic cleavage occurs in ~20% of cleavage events.49 TARG1 can also release free PAR by cleaving the ADP-ribosylation linkage.51

The basal expression of PARG and ARH3, which also has robust exoglycosidic activity, suggests that free PAR is rapidly degraded.107–111 Indeed, H2O2-stimulated PAR chains were observed to rapidly degrade within 20 min of oxidative stress.60 Branched PAR chains may be more resistant to PARG/ARH3 activity.60 Despite the widespread use of purified PAR chains in many biochemical studies, direct evidence of appreciable free PAR in cells is limited.

Evidence for free PAR chains primarily comes from nuclear PARP1 exerting influence over cytoplasmic biological processes; some studies have suggested that PARP1 activity may regulate localization of cytoplasmic PAR-binding proteins. For instance, PARP1 activity mediates the translocation of apoptosis inducing factor 1 (AIF1) from the mitochondria to the nucleus.112,113 PARP1 regulates the localization of predominantly nuclear proteins like TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) and hnRNPA1 to cytoplasmic stress granules.31,114 Indeed, PARP1 inhibitors promote nuclear retention of TDP-43 and prevents formation of cytoplasmic TDP-43 aggregates.114 It is possible that TDP-43 and hnRNPA1 are ADP-ribosylated in the nucleus and exported to the cytoplasm. Other studies have suggested that PARP1 has little role regulating G3BP1 or FUS localization to cytoplasmic stress granules.34 Given that PARP1 is a predominantly nuclear protein, its PARylation activity should be limited to the nucleus; data suggesting that it exerts an effect on cytoplasmic PAR-binding proteins may imply the release of free PAR that is exported to the cytoplasm. Further studies are needed to clarify whether free PAR can be stably maintained in cells without inhibiting PARG activity.

3.3. PAR Readers

Noncovalent interactions with PAR chains are mediated by a variety of protein domains, including monofunctional domains that only bind PAR and multifunctional domains that engage with other binding partners (for a more comprehensive review of the subject, please see ref 10). PAR readers recognize PAR chains through the diverse functional groups on the ADP-ribose polymer, including the adenosine base (PAR binding zinc fingers), the iso-ADP-ribose linkage (WWE domains), and the entire ADP-ribose unit (Macro domains). Other domains like RGG repeats engage in more nonspecific interactions with the highly negatively charged backbone. Therefore, even proteins without defined PAR-binding domains may interact with PAR chains. This section will give an overview of identified PAR-reader domains (Figure 5).

The most common PAR-reader domain is the PAR-binding motif (PBM), which was identified in a proteomics study of PAR-binding proteins.115 Recognition of PAR is mediated by a mixture of basic and hydrophobic residues stretching ~20 amino acids: [HKR]1-X2-X3-[AIQVY]4-[KR]5-[KR]6-[AILV]7-[FILPV]8. The trio of KR motifs are the most important constituents of the PBM because they likely recognize the negatively charged PAR backbone.116 The strong electrostatic attraction allows some PBMs to achieve affinities in the nanomolar range.117 Multiple PBM regions can contribute to a multivalent protein–PAR interaction; for instance, the ALS-associated TDP-43 has two distinct PBMs embedded in its nuclear-localization sequence (NLS), which together promote strong association with PAR chains in vitro and in vivo.118,119 Notably, many hnRNP proteins, which undergo PS, contain PBMs, but these do not always appear in the NLS.120

WWE domains, consisting of a pair of conserved tryptophan residues and glutamate, are found in PARPs and ubiquitin ligases.121 The WWE pocket binds to the iso-ADP-ribose linkage (i.e., the ribose–ribose sugar linkage in a PAR chain) with micromolar affinity,122–126 but it has much weaker binding to the monomeric ADP-ribose unit. Therefore, WWE proteins mostly recognize poly(ADP-ribosylation), not mono-(ADP-ribosylation). WWE domains enable certain MARylating PARPs (e.g., PARP11, PARP12, and PARP14) to bind PAR chains, recruiting them to PAR foci. As discussed below, PARP12 translocation from the Golgi to the stress granule relies upon its WWE domain interacting with PAR chains synthesized upon oxidative stress.37 WWE domains are also found in several E3 ubiquitin ligases, suggesting a functional connection between PARylation and ubiquitination, perhaps to target PAR-binding proteins for degradation.122,127–130 Indeed, PARP1, which itself is one of the main targets of PARylation in cells, is targeted for degradation when it is autoPARylated, and the WWE-containing E3 ubiquitin ligases Iduna and TRIP12 mediate this action.131,132

Macro domains are also present in PAR metabolic enzymes, including PARP9, PARP14, PARP15, PARG, TARG1, MacroD1, and MacroD2.51,104,133–135 The Macro domain is a conserved ~100–200 amino acid domain with nanomolar affinity for PAR chains.134,136 Unlike other PAR readers, Macro domains only recognize the terminal ADP-ribose unit. Macro domains are found in many viral proteins, including the nsP3 protein of SARS-CoV-2, and are often paired with glycohydrolase activity.133,137–140 As discussed below, viral Macro domain-linked glycohydrolase activity is linked with turnover of stress granules.133 Interestingly, some histone variants also contain Macro domains, and these Macro domains can help localize histone variants and chromatin remodelers to regions with PARP1 activity, i.e., double-stranded DNA breaks (DSBs).141–143

Some DNA damage response proteins contain a modified zinc finger that binds PAR molecules: PAR binding zinc fingers (PBZ).144–151 The PBZ domain consists of a conserved amino acid motif that resembles canonical zinc fingers:145 [K/R]xxCx[F/Y]GxxCxbbxxxxHxxx[F/Y]xH. Recognition of PAR chains by the PBZ domain hinges on adenine bases.145 The specificity of PBZ for PAR chains allows efficient recruitment of diverse DNA damage response proteins like Ku, Chk2, RAD17, APLF, CHFR, and others. As with other zinc fingers, PBZ requires zinc for nanomolar affinity to its binding partner.

RNA-recognition motifs and other nucleic acid binding domains may also recognize PAR, albeit with lower affinity than for their preferred substrate.117,152–155 This bifurcated binding ability leads to a competitive interaction between the protein, PAR, and DNA/RNA, which can tune the biophysical properties of condensates or regulate the biological function of the protein–PAR interaction.24,34

Finally, some of the most highly enriched PAR readers do not contain a canonical PAR-binding domain per se; instead, they have repeats of positively charged residues, such as RGG repeats, KR-rich motifs, or SR repeats.102,156,157 Like the PAR-binding motif, the positively charged arginine residues contribute to a strong electrostatic interaction with negatively charged PAR chains. For example, the arginine residues of FUS, which are clustered in three RGG repeats, are required for localization of FUS to DNA damage foci and to stress granules.17,24,34

Importantly, RGG domains can independently promote PS, and the toxic dipeptide repeat protein, poly(GR), is linked with neurodegeneration in c9ALS/FTD.158–161 Because both PAR binding and PS propensity are encoded within RGG repeats, the two biochemical interactions may regulate each other. PAR binding may prevent or promote individual RGG domains from interacting with other disordered regions, inhibiting or promoting PS, respectively. For example, PAR associates with poly(GR) in vitro and in post-mortem brain tissue, and appears to promote poly(GR) condensation, suggesting a role of PAR in promoting dipeptide repeat toxicity in c9ALS/FTD.162 Furthermore, tandem RGG domains, such as those observed in FET family proteins, can coordinate PS by binding PAR with some RGG repeats and other proteins with other RGG repeats. Indeed, proteins with tri-RGG domains are particularly enriched among PAR readers.156

More broadly, the other types of proteins that contain PAR-binding domains also skew toward phase-separation-related processes. Several recent studies using proteomics-based approaches identified and quantified the relative binding of PAR readers to ADP-ribosylated proteins.102,115,156,163 RNA-binding proteins, RNA helicases, and RGG-containing proteins were among the most enriched PAR readers.156 Many of these proteins undergo, regulate, or are implicated in PS events.3,164–173 PAR readers also tend to be enriched in biological processes that are thought to involve PS, including DNA repair, RNA splicing, glycolysis, and translation.17,168,174–176 Therefore, there is a strong link between noncovalent protein–PAR interactions and PS.

4. POLY(ADP-RIBOSE)-MEDIATED PHASE SEPARATION (PS)

Membrane-bound organelles are surrounded by lipid bilayers that confer several advantages: first, they allow cells to compartmentalize various reactions; second, they protect or sequester certain proteins and nucleic acids through their semipermeable membranes; third, organelles have carefully controlled internal environments. However, canonical organelles are inefficient at responding to external stimuli, and the cell expends a lot of energy to maintain their specialized environments. For instance, the cell must establish and sustain a Ran-GTP/-GDP gradient to direct nucleocytoplasmic transport.177

Membraneless granules circumvent these shortcomings by using the physical properties of PS to reversibly generate dynamic compartments. Granules are not protected by a membrane, so constituent biomolecules can readily diffuse in and out. They are also more easily dissolved by enzymes or changes in cellular salt concentrations. However, the dynamism of membraneless granules allows the cell to respond to stress or damage by quickly compartmentalizing proteins, RNAs, and other molecules.178

PAR is uniquely positioned to support PS in PARP-expressing cells. Because PAR chains are readily synthesized and then rapidly degraded, they can direct the formation of phase-separated granules and assist with the dissolution of granules, too. The chemical nature of the PAR chain also potently promotes PS: it is a negatively charged multivalent polymer able to bind many PAR readers at once. As previous reviews have noted,7,9–14 PAR is involved in several biological processes that are associated with PS (Figure 6). In this section, we will discuss the biophysics of PS, the mechanisms of protein–PAR PS and review the literature that describes the role of PAR in biomolecular condensates.

4.1. The Biophysical Principles of Phase Separation

Phase separation (PS) occurs when it is more energetically favorable for multivalent polymers to coalesce into a dense condensate within a dilute liquid phase. The coexistence of two phases is the hallmark of a phase-separated system. When the condensate is a liquid phase, it is formally referred to as a coacervate, and a coacervate usually consists of biological polymers like polypeptides and nucleic acids.179 Coacervation occurs when the dense liquid phase exists in thermodynamic equilibrium with the surrounding dilute phase, and the coacervation thermodynamics can be described by the Flory–Huggins model180 (see ref 181 for a review on the subject). Biological coacervates often form via associative interactions between biopolymers, which is a type of coacervation called complex coacervation.182 Importantly, the dilute phase retains some of the molecules that are concentrated within the complex coacervate; in a biological context, this means that a significant fraction of proteins or RNAs that are concentrated within a granule also exists in the cytoplasm or nucleoplasm.183

A key element of complex coacervation is the associative interactions between biopolymers. In practical terms, one molecule may act as a scaffold, which recruits clients into the coacervate.22 The valency of the scaffold is a critical part of the associative polymer model: if a scaffold can accommodate many clients, it can increase the local concentration of the of the biopolymers into the dense phase.3,184 The network that arises from these interactions drives the formation of the coacervate, thereby causing PS. The conditions that support PS can be clearly delineated in a phase diagram, in which the concentration of the dense biopolymer is usually plotted versus changes in another environmental factor.185 The coexistence line on the phase diagram denotes the transition from the one-phase system to the two-phase system. Crossing the coexistence line begins the nucleation process, allowing the formation of new condensates. Recent reports have indicated that nucleation may also initiate in the one-phase system.186,187

Importantly, biological PS is often triggered by changes in the concentration of biopolymers like the release of mRNA during stress or the translocation of proteins from one region of the cell to another. Environmental changes can also mediate PS, including shifts in pH, salt concentration, temperature, or pressure. Such changes may lead to reentrant phase transitions, in which the two-phase system devolves back into a single-phase, well-mixed system. This may occur if the valency of the scaffold is too high, which will disperse the client to such an extent that it cannot form a dense coacervate.173

4.2. Phase Separation in Biology

In biology, one of the first descriptions of PS was the P granule in Caenorhabditis elegans.169 Many groups have since reported biological PS for a variety of cellular granules, including stress granules,188,189 P bodies,190,191 TIS granules,192,193 G bodies,174,194 the nucleolus,195,196 paraspeckles,197,198 histone locus bodies,199 DNA repair granules,17,18 and others.4 In cells, phase-separated condensates are generally called granules; in vitro condensates are usually referred to as droplets. Condensate is a generic term to refer to biomolecular structures that does not presuppose the material state of the structure. Other terms, such as aggregate or amyloid, describe solid-like condensates that adopt distinct structural patterns. By contrast, liquid-like condensates (i.e., coacervates) demonstrate wetting, fusion, and other characteristics reflective of true liquids, and these parameters can be quantified by physical characteristics like viscosity and elasticity (for a review of the liquid properties of condensates, please see ref 200 and in addition, ref 201 discusses the differences between liquid–liquid PS and PS in more detail). Liquid-like granules can mature into gel-like or solid-like condensates through a process termed percolation,202,203 which may contribute to disease pathology (see section Accumulation of Poly(ADP-ribose) in Neurodegenerative Pathologies below). In this review, we generally refer to any phase-separated body as a condensate or granule so that we do not presume the material properties of the condensate. Granules have been proposed to accelerate enzymatic reactions, concentrate biomolecules, buffer the internal environment, sense environmental changes, among other roles.185 Given the ubiquitous presence of phase-separated granules in the cytoplasm and nucleus, there is intense interest in understanding the regulation, function, and dissolution of condensates.

Multivalent interactions between biopolymers drive the formation of the dense condensate phase (for a thorough review of the physical processes underlying PS, please see ref 181). The associative polymer model posits that proteins and other biomolecules are composed of so-called “sticker” and “spacer” regions,166,204 which together determine the relevant parameters of PS, including the protein concentration at which PS occurs (Csat). Stickers are regions of the polymer that can associate with other polymers; examples include residues that form cation–π and π–π interactions, like arginine or tyrosine, and domains that promote multivalent binding interactions like RNA-binding domains or PAR readers.22,205 Meanwhile, spacers are the residues or domains that do not participate in PS although they may control percolation.206,207 By definition, all regions that are not stickers are spacers and vice versa. Not all stickers are equally strong at promoting PS, though; for instance, lysine is a weaker sticker than arginine.166

What determines whether a protein may undergo PS? In general, the presence of enough sticker regions to promote multivalent assembly of a dense phase is required. Proteins with certain amino acids tend to self-associate and multimerize into condensates. For example, arginine and tyrosine can promote PS,166,204 and other charged residues also support PS by electrostatic interactions.208 IDRs may also engage in multivalent interactions that drive PS (for a review on IDRs, see ref 209). Prediction software like IUPred help determine whether a protein is disordered or not.210,211 As mentioned above, binding domains can also function as stickers by promoting multivalent interactions.

4.3. Molecular Interactions Underlying PAR-Mediated Phase Separation

The associative polymer model helps explain why biomolecules like PAR can promote PS. If we consider PAR readers to be sticker domains, then PS propensity is directly correlated to the number of PAR readers and PAR chains present in the system. PAR chains may also act as stickers, in which a minimal PAR length (n) is sufficient for protein binding and each multiple of this minimal requirement (2n, 3n, etc.) increases the multivalency of the protein–PAR interaction. Therefore, PAR chains will directly increase the PS propensity and decrease the observed Csat, a phenomenon that has been observed in vitro.31,34,118 Consistent with this observation, mono(ADP-ribose) is usually insufficient to promote PS.31,34,118

The minimal PAR chain length required for protein binding depends on the PAR reader. The tumor suppressor protein p53 can form monomers with 16-mer PAR but requires longer PARs of &gt;40 units for stronger, multimeric binding.212 A similar dependence of 40+-unit PAR was observed for the oncoprotein DEK.213 Biological processes mediated by PAR chains such as the parthanatos cell death pathway and inhibition of cell cycle progression via activation of Chk1 are also promoted by longer PAR chains of &gt;40 units.112,113,146 Likewise, PARP1 binding increases with longer PAR chains,156 which may provide a positive feedback loop to promote robust and rapid formation of PAR chains. Some proteins, such as NONO, XRCC1, and PARG, appear to bind shorter PAR chains with higher affinity.156

A recent study examining FUS condensation with PAR more directly linked PAR length with PS.34 FUS multimerization increased as a function of PAR length, and PAR chains of 16 units or longer enabled the formation of FUS multimers.34 The apparent binding affinity of FUS for PAR also increased by ~20-fold for 32-mer PAR compared to 8-mer PAR.34 Increased PAR binding directly correlated with increased PS in vitro,34 indicating that longer PARs more strongly promote condensation of PAR readers. Other studies have likewise shown FUS PS in response to DNA damage-mediated PARP1 activity, which forms long PAR chains of &gt;30-mer.17,18,24 Therefore, the multivalent scaffolding afforded by a long PAR chain supports PS, a similar phenomenon to what has been observed with RNA.214–217 PARylation of multiple sites on the same protein may also achieve multivalency.

Less is known about the effect of PAR branching on PS. The branching of PAR chains may be considered analogous to secondary structures like hairpins and stem loops in RNA molecules, which affect the affinity of proteins for RNA.218–220 Indeed, a few studies have shown that certain PAR readers may prefer branched PAR chains.123,221,222 Branched PAR modifications may increase PS through a few distinct mechanisms: (1) incorporation of new proteins that otherwise would not easily interact with linear PAR, (2) added multivalency by increasing the local concentration of minimal PAR chains (n), or (3) increasing the stability of condensates through a more complex binding network. In line with the last hypothetical, branched PAR chains likely impact the material properties of PAR-mediated condensates by forcing PAR readers into unique conformations or more highly concentrated oligomers. It is important to note that branched PAR chains are only formed by nuclear PARPs,64 indicating that branched PARylation likely is not a major factor in cytoplasmic PS. However, there are some instances in which PARP1 is mislocalized to the cytoplasm,223 and it is also possible that branched PAR on target proteins may be exported.224

Other posttranslational modifications also regulate PS.20,21,225,226 For instance, arginine methylation can reduce PS by dampening sticker contacts of arginine residues or binding to RNA.227–233 However, arginine methylation of TDP-43 allows PS but disfavors pathological aggregation.233 Phosphorylation of serine and threonine residues can either inhibit or promote phase transitions.232–238 By contrast, PARylation of proteins usually promotes PS, likely because PARylation introduces a new scaffold for PAR-reader binding and multimerization. Instead of modifying the biochemical properties of existing stickers like arginines, PARylation provides creates a multivalent sticker, enabling quick and reversible formation of condensates. We do note that very high concentrations of PAR chains may buffer PS by diluting the multivalency of protein–PAR binding networks.34,173

Therefore, given the transient nature of PARylation and its inclination to promote PS, several biological processes appear to rely on PAR chains for efficient condensation. The following sections will discuss biological examples of PAR-mediated PS in more detail.

4.4. The DNA Damage Response Requires Phase Separation of PAR Readers

The role of poly(ADP-ribose) and PARP1 in the DNA damage response is well established. PARP1 activity is essential for the identification of single- and double-stranded breaks, recruitment of DNA damage repair proteins, and resolution of the DNA lesion (for a comprehensive review of PARP1 in the DNA damage response, we refer the reader to ref 239). Poly(ADP-ribosylation) modifications are rapidly added to histones, DNA, and PARP1 itself.73,240–242 Single- or double-stranded breaks are required for PARP1-mediated synthesis of PAR chains.23,103,243–246 In fact, increased PARP1 activity is often observed in cancer;223,247–249 enhanced PARP1 expression is needed so that the higher rate of DNA damage can be addressed, but PARP1 activation also upregulates other inflammation-related and oncogenic factors and can initiate error-prone DNA damage repair pathways.250–252 Small-molecule inhibitors of PARP1 activity are approved for clinical use with certain cancers.253–255 PARP1 acts upstream of both nonhomologous end-joining (NHEJ) and homologous recombination (HR),239 highlighting its essentiality in resolving DSBs.

An important finding in the field was the formation of PARP1-dependent phase-separated compartments in the DNA damage response (Figure 7).17 PAR synthesis by PARP1 is rapid (occurring on the order of seconds), and turnover of PAR chains is equally quick (within minutes).256 The PS-prone FET family proteins are recruited shortly after PAR synthesis (within seconds to minutes), strongly interacting with PAR.17,18,24,257,258 The FET family consists of three related tri-RGG proteins: FUS, EWSR1, and TAF15.259 Each of these proteins can form droplets in vitro,18,166,260 and PS characteristics were observed at the DNA damage foci to which FET family proteins are adsorbed.17,24 The RGG domains of FET proteins are critically important for this association with the DNA damage site.17,24 Moreover, the prion-like domain of FUS is also required for DNA repair initiation.261 The individual FET family proteins appear to direct the formation of the phase-separated DNA damage compartment.

PAR-mediated FUS recruitment is required for proper resolution of the DNA damage site.261 PAR chains robustly promote the formation of FUS condensates,17,18,34 and FUS recruitment to the DNA damage site is PARP1-activity dependent.24 Loss of FUS significantly delays recruitment of proteins required for the DNA damage response, including 53BP1, NBS1, Ku80, and SFPQ.261 Importantly, disruption of these FUS interactions leads to cytoplasmic mislocalization of FUS and subsequent neurodegenerative phenotypes.262,263 The formation of the γH2AX histone variant is also dependent on FUS.261 Transcriptional-associated DNA damage resolution may also require FUS.264 Therefore, it is reasonable to hypothesize that PAR-mediated FUS PS is essential for proper progression of the DNA damage response.

Although several models have been proposed for PARP1 ejection from DNA damage sites following repair,265 recent evidence suggests that EWSR1 binding is required for efficient PARP1 displacement.266 Depletion of EWSR1 leads to hyperaccumulation of PARP1 at DNA damage foci,266 indicating that the DNA damage response is stalled. It is also possible that EWSR1 is essential for the recruitment of other proteins that eventually eject PARP1. The role of the final FET protein family member, TAF15, in the DNA damage response is not known. Following ejection from the DNA damage site, PARylated PARP1 is targeted for proteasomal degradation by the WWE domains of the E3 ubiquitin ligases Iduna and TRIP12.131,132

Other RG- and IDR-containing proteins likely contribute to PAR-mediated PS. A recent study identified that the splicing factor USP39 directs NHEJ in response to PARP1 activity.267 Like FET proteins, USP39 PS is RG-motif dependent.267 Recruitment of XRCC4, LIG4, APTX, and PAXX, all of which are required for NHEJ, follows USP39-PAR PS.267 Excessive recruitment of USP39 may eventually downregulate HR by depleting BRCA mRNA through its role in the spliceosome.267,268

Moreover, PAR binding and PS have been observed in a decoupled manner for other proteins. For example, p53 is known to oligomerize on PAR chains,212 p53 can be PARylated,269 and PS of p53 was recently described in vitro and in vivo.270,271 Thus, PAR may mediate condensation of additional proteins, perhaps working in tandem with the highly PS-prone FET family proteins. PARP1 activity is also enriched in the phase-separated nucleolus,272 where it regulates ribosome biogenesis and DDX21 activity.152,273 PARylation-independent PS also contributes to the DNA damage response through the protein 53BP1, which is recruited to damage foci independently of PARP1 activity.274,275

A recent report suggests that PARylation plays a role in antagonizing transcription, especially in response to DNA damage at the transcriptional locus (Figure 8).32 If PARP1 senses DNA damage at a transcriptional locus, it PARylates the elongation factor P-TEFb.32 Importantly, PARylation of P-TEFb inhibits its PS.32 Although PAR chains usually promote PS, PARylation of P-TEFb neutralizes the self-association of nearby positively charged P-TEFb residues, indicating that the effect of PAR on PS is context-dependent.32 This disruption prevents P-TEFb from hyperphosphorylating RNAP II, which is required for elongation of mRNA.276 Other reports indicate that PARylation regulates transcription,277–282 and it is hypothesized that PS augments transcriptional activity.283–287 Therefore, an interplay between transcriptional PS and the DNA damage response PS may exist in which the factors involved in each process are mutually exclusive.

The exact spatiotemporal relationship between the various proteins contributing to PAR-dependent PS at DNA damage foci is unclear. It is likely that the synergistic effect of many PAR readers with PS-prone domains (e.g., prion-like domains of FET proteins) contributes to the formation of a dynamic,288 reversible DNA damage compartment that is a bona fide phase-separated granule. In addition, the phase-separated DNA damage foci may also direct exactly which type of DNA repair occurs at double-stranded breaks: NHEJ or HR. It is possible that PAR chain structural heterogeneity (i.e., branched versus linear, short versus long chains) encodes regulatory input for the DNA damage response. Nevertheless, an abundance of evidence supports the notion that the phase-separated DNA damage response is seeded by PAR chains in a PARP1 activity-dependent manner.

4.5. Stress Granules Are Nucleated by PAR Readers and PAR Chains

Stress granules are cytoplasmic phase-separated condensates that form in response to environmental stressors, such as temperature changes or the presence of oxidative agents.289 RNAs and IDR-containing proteins contribute to the rapid formation of stress granules,215,290 and it is thought that stress granules protect certain mRNAs from degradation until the stress event recedes. A pair of related IDR-containing proteins are required for stress granule formation: G3BP1 and G3BP2.167,234,291 In addition, multiple PARPs localize to stress granules in PARP-expressing cells, including PARP5a, PARP12, PARP13, PARP14, and PARP15.16 PAR is also enriched within stress granules,34 although stress granule PARG enzymes may counteract some PARP activity.16 PAR chains readily interact with many stress granule components, including G3BP1, hnRNPA1, TDP-43, and FUS (for a more extensive review on PAR in stress granules, we refer the reader to ref 292). Moreover, PAR production is stimulated by some of the same stresses that promote stress granule formation.34

Recent studies have suggested that PAR synthesis is required for the localization of IDR-containing proteins to stress granules (Figure 9a). G3BP binding to PAR is necessary for stress granule formation under most conditions.102 The PBMs of the stress granule protein TDP-43 lie within its NLS.118 This finding indicates that TDP-43 localization may be differentially regulated by competition in binding to the NLS between PAR and nuclear-import receptors.118,293–296 In fact, interactions between PAR and TDP-43 are required to solubilize and effectively localize TDP-43 into stress granules;118,297 moreover, PAR binding to TDP-43 through its PBM antagonizes neurodegeneration-linked TDP-43 aggregation.114,119,298 Likewise, hnRNPA1 localization to stress granules is promoted by PARylation and PAR binding of hnRNPA1, which also promote co-condensation with TDP-43.31 TIA-1 and other stress granule proteins are likely PARylation targets.16 FUS recruitment to stress granules is dependent on PARP5a-mediated PAR synthesis, and PAR likely interacts with the arginines in the RGG domains of FUS.24,34

However, one major question is the source of PAR that is localized in the stress granule. An obvious choice would be the stress granule-associated PARPs, especially the PARylating enzymes PARP5a and PARP5b, which also interact with TDP-43 via its tankyrase-binding motif in RRM1.297 Indeed, some recent evidence suggests that PARP5a/b inhibition destabilizes stress granules, as mentioned above,34,102,118,297 and PARP5a activity is sufficient for homotypic and heterotypic droplet formation in vitro.34 Yet other studies indicate that PARP1/2 inhibition prevents localization of IDR-containing proteins to stress granules,31,114 which is paradoxical given that PARP1/2 are nuclear in nearly all cases. It is also unclear what would activate PARP1, although certain stresses may trigger both DNA damage and one of the four eIF2α kinases, likely HRI.299

One hypothesis to explain this observation is that free PAR is produced by PARP1, which translocates to the cytoplasm through an unknown mechanism (we discuss this possibility in the section Free PAR Chains, above). Although there is some evidence to support the notion of free PAR chains, endogenous PARG activity likely degrades any exposed PAR chains nearly immediately. The basal degradation of PAR chains is supported by biochemical experiments often requiring PARG inhibition to isolate and detect PAR by Western blot.34 Another hypothesis is that nuclear stress granule proteins are PARylated by PARP1/2, exported to the cytoplasm, and incorporated into stress granules. Again, a major problem with this hypothesis is that PAR chains attached to proteins will also be targeted for degradation by PARG, which is observed in real-time dispersal of proteins to the DNA damage response machinery within minutes in cells.17,18

One possible explanation is that a PAR reader may shield another PARylated protein from PARG through oligomerization. For instance, a protein could be PARylated by PARP1 in the nucleus, and another protein could then bind to the attached PAR chain, preventing PARG from degrading the chain. Furthermore, if a protein is a PAR reader and a substrate for PARylation, one could imagine that dimerization of the protein could lead to safe shuttling of the protein–PAR complex from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. However, evidence for such a mechanism is currently lacking.

Given the rapid nature of PAR synthesis and the transient nature of PAR chains in vivo, it is also plausible that poly(ADP-ribosylation) of proteins acts as a molecular trigger for stress granule formation in species that express PARPs and utilize PAR.8 PAR readers can rapidly assemble on newly synthesized PAR chains. The incorporation of RNA could be a downstream event in PAR-mediated stress granule assembly; recent evidence suggests that RNA can supplant PAR from preformed protein–PAR droplets.34 However, further studies are needed to determine exactly how PAR contributes to stress granule assembly.

4.6. Viral nSP3 Proteins Dissolve Stress Granules via Glycohydrolase Digestion of PAR

Stress granule dissolution is a hallmark of viral infection.300 The initial stages of viral infection promote stress granule assembly through a viral RNA-mediated signaling cascade: protein kinase R phosphorylates eIF2α,301–304 which stalls translation and releases mRNA from polysomes for stress granule formation (Figure 9b).305 Cessation of translation is a survival strategy initiated by the infected cell to inhibit the production of viral proteins. Later stages of infection cause the disassembly of stress granules, presumably bypassing the translational arrest imparted by stress granule formation.306–308 Importantly, recent studies demonstrate that stress granule dissolution is at least partially driven by PAR recognition and glycohydrolase activity embedded in viral nsP3 proteins.36,133,137–139,309–313

nsP3 genes are conserved, encoding multifunctional proteins that are essential for viral replication.314 Macro domains are a shared component among nsP3 proteins, enabling robust PAR reader activity.134 Weak PARG activity is also present within the Macro domain of some viral proteins.137,312,315 Indeed, a recent report demonstrated that this PARG activity serves a vital role in viral infection: the PAR glycohydrolase domain of nsP3 proteins targets G3BP1 PARylation,309 and loss of G3BP1 ADP-ribosylation leads to stress granule disassembly (Figure 9c).102 Other studies have suggested that PARG activity within the SARS-CoV2 nsP3 protein reverses PARP9 activity,36 indicating a potential therapeutic avenue. PARP9 has also been shown to oligomerize the E3 ubiquitin ligase DTX3L.316 The regulation of stress granules via the catalysis of poly(ADP-ribosylation) on G3BP1 highlights the relevance of PAR in maintaining the structure of phase-separated stress granules.

4.7. PAR Chains Arrest Golgi Processing of Proteins by Sequestering PARP12 in Stress Granules

In a concomitant pathway with nsP3-mediated dissolution of stress granules, infected cells are attempting to shut down translation.300 A recent study highlighted a separate PAR-dependent mechanism that affects PARP12,37 a Golgi-associated MARylating PARP.52,62 The WWE domain of PARP12 recognizes PAR produced during the viral infection;37 this PAR reader activity drives the localization of PARP12 from the Golgi to the stress granule (Figure 9b).37,317,318 The Golgi complex simultaneously loses its canonical ribbon morphology, and posttranslational processing of proteins is halted.37 It is possible that PARG activity by nsP3 proteins during viral infection reverses incorporation of PARP12 into stress granules, countermanding the cell’s attempt to arrest translation. However, this hypothesis has not been tested.

4.8. Osmotic Pressure Sensing Requires Basal PAR to Maintain Liquid-Like Condensates

Yet another stress response appears to depend on PAR: osmotic pressure sensing.319 The apoptosis-related protein ASK3 is reversibly phosphorylated when cells are exposed to osmotic stress.320 At the same time, ASK3 condenses into liquid-like droplets.319 Unlike other biological processes discussed, PAR is not required to form the condensates; instead, basal PAR levels appear to be required to maintain the liquid-like properties of the ASK3 condensates in vitro and in vivo.319 Mutations of ASK3′s PBM or degradation of PAR by PARG leads to the formation of solid-like condensates that cannot be resolved through ASK3 phosphorylation,319 indicating that the presence of PAR may help facilitate the enzymatic phosphorylation of ASK3 in condensates.

4.9. PARP5a Phase Separation May Impact Cytoskeletal Polymerization

The PARP enzymes may also undergo PS, especially PARP5a/b and their ankyrin repeats.62 Indeed, recent evidence suggests that PARP5a undergoes PAR-independent condensation,34 although PAR may enhance the degree of PS. In cells, PS of PARP5a/b may enable actin cytoskeletal branching by competing with Arp2/3 for binding to Arpin,321 which antagonizes Arp2/3-mediated branching.322,323 Indeed, PARP5a localizes to the mitotic spindle and is required for proper cytoskeletal polymerization during mitosis.62,324–326 PARP5a is also required for the separation of telomeres during mitosis.326,327 Given recent reports that PS occurs at telomeres, PARP5a activity may regulate the condensation at telomeres through PARylation.328,329 A direct link between PARP5a-dependent PARylation, PS of PARP5a, and regulation of cytoskeletal activity has not yet been made.

5. ACCUMULATION OF POLY(ADP-RIBOSE) IN NEURODEGENERATIVE PATHOLOGIES

Dysregulation of PARPs or accumulation of PAR chains can have profoundly negative consequences for neurons. Hyperactive PARP1 may help cells overcome copious DNA damage sites, but this increased activity can drive error-prone repair, trigger cell death pathways, or possibly contribute to deleterious phase transitions of IDR-containing proteins. The role of PAR in cancer is well documented, and we refer the reader to recent reviews for more on this subject (refs 330, 331). Here, we will focus on how PARylation may lead to neurodegeneration by coarsening phase-separated condensates or mislocalizing IDR-containing proteins (we also refer the reader to a recent review on this subject, ref 332).

Abnormal expression of PAR metabolic enzymes is linked with a variety of rare neurological disorders. Recessive Mendelian mutations in the glycohydrolases ARH3 and TARG1 are associated with early onset neurodegeneration.51,333 Single nucleotide polymorphisms at the MacroD2 glycohydrolase locus have also been identified in epilepsy, autism, multiple sclerosis, and schizophrenia.334–338 Given that these mutations target PAR-degrading enzymes, it is likely that the accumulation of PAR chains is inherently neurotoxic. This notion is further supported by a recent report linking hyperactivation of PARP1/2 to aggregation of thousands of proteins, causing the neurodegenerative disorder ataxia-telangiectasia.339 PARylation is of course not entirely deleterious. PAR is required for proper development: PARP1/2−/− mice embryos die during gastrulation, and PARP5a/b−/− mice embryos die prior to formation of the blastocyst.63,340 Therefore, the moderate expression level maintained by careful regulation of PARP and PARG activity is essential for healthy development and cellular homeostasis.

In neurodegeneration, the accumulation of PAR has been linked with Parkinson’s disease, Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis/frontotemporal dementia (ALS/FTD), and Alzheimer’s disease. Importantly, aberrant phase transitions are detected in each of these diseases: α-synuclein in Parkinson’s disease,341 RNA-binding proteins with PrLDs, including TDP-43, FUS, hnRNPA1, hnRNPA2, TAF15, EWSR1, and TIA1 in ALS/FTD,18,120,342–346 and tau in FTD and Alzheimer’s disease.347 Dysregulation of the DNA damage response and apoptosis are also associated with neurodegeneration, and PAR is essential for these biological processes. In this section, we will review the clinical and primary research concerning the role of PAR in each of these diseases, especially in the context of the condensation of proteins.

5.1. Premature Cell Death Is Driven by PAR Accumulation in Parkinson’s Disease

Parkinson’s disease is driven by the pathological accumulation of misfolded α-synuclein.348,349 The exact mechanism of Parkinson’s disease progression is debated, but it is likely a confluence of α-synuclein aggregation, prion-like transmission of α-synuclein aggregates, and activation of cell death pathways.350 Recent studies have indicated that PS of α-synuclein can seed Parkinson’s-associated aggregates,341 and it is certainly plausible that PAR chains contribute to this PS event. However, the strongest evidence for a role of PARylation in Parkinson’s disease involves its contribution to the cell death pathway parthanatos.

Parthanatos is triggered by high concentrations of free PAR, which is highly cytotoxic.112 Higher concentrations of longer PAR chains are especially damaging.112 PAR initiates cell death through a caspase-independent mechanism.112 Instead, free PAR induces the translocation of apoptosis inducing factor (AIF) from the mitochondria to the nucleus, where it shears DNA and triggers cell death.113,351 Depletion of NAD+ levels by hyperactive PARP1 also likely drive AIF recruitment to the nucleus.

In Parkinson’s disease, α-synuclein aggregation and PARP1 activity promote each other, eventually driving parthanatos activation. It is thought that overactivation of PARP1 through DNA damage may initiate extensive PARylation.352 PAR chains can then induce aggregation of α-synuclein.352 Importantly, α-synuclein fibrils drive PARP1 activity in a devastating feedback loop, which triggers parthanatos and causes cell death of dopaminergic neurons in mice.352,353 Moreover, transfection of human neuronal cells in culture with purified PAR chains elicits formation of toxic, cytoplasmic α-synuclein inclusions.354 Therefore, deleterious phase transitions of α-synuclein, possibly through aberrant PAR-mediated PS, increases PARP1 activity, which eventually induces cell death through the parthanatos pathway, leading to a Parkinson’s-like pathological phenotype.

Elevated PAR levels were found in the cerebrospinal fluid of Parkinson’s patients,352 indicating that this PAR-mediated mechanism is a plausible course of the disease in humans. Small-molecule inhibitors of PARP1 activity have shown promising results in cell models.354 It may also be plausible to supplement cells with NAD+, which appears to inhibit translocation of AIF and activation of the parthanatos cell death pathway.355,356 Other approaches may limit PAR-mediated PS of α-synuclein, which is one of the most upstream components of the pathway.

5.2. Elevated PAR Levels Are Linked with Alzheimer’s Disease

The exact cause of Alzheimer’s disease is still unclear, but it is thought that amyloid-β peptides elicit tau tangles, which lead to the aggressive form of dementia observed in patients.357 Amyloid-β fibers are required to transform tau protein into a neurotoxic state.358,359 Tau is required for Alzheimer’s pathology because amyloid-β toxicity alone is not sufficient for the dementia-like outcomes in mouse models.360 Moreover, the toxicity of tau protein may arise from PS-mediated phase transitions.361

A clear mechanism between increased PAR activity and Alzheimer’s disease is lacking, but evidence suggests that PAR may promote amyloid-β toxicity in a similar manner as it does with α-synuclein in Parkinson’s disease. Increased PAR levels and PARP1 activity were observed in Alzheimer’s patients.362–364 Moreover, loss of PARP1 appears to ameliorate some of the canonical Alzheimer’s phenotypes in mice.365 Treatment with PARP1 inhibitors has a similarly protective effect on amyloid-β toxicity.366–368 The inflammatory response or mitochondrial defects may be associated with PARP1 activity.369,370 However, the exact link between how PAR chains may directly interact with tau and amyloid-β during aggregation or if the parthanatos pathway is directly involved in Alzheimer’s disease remains to be tested.

5.3. PAR-Mediated Phase Separation of ALS/FTLD-Linked Proteins May Drive Disease Progression

Perhaps the clearest link between PAR-mediated PS and neurodegeneration is in ALS/FTD. Mutations in several RNA-binding proteins with PrLDs and expansions of repetitive RNA are linked with the formation of neurotoxic aggregates in patients.371 ALS and FTD exist on a pathological spectrum; some patients display symptoms of both diseases, whereas other cases more closely align with only one of the diseases. The proteins that are linked with ALS/FTD, TDP43, FUS, hnRNPA1, and others, participate in biological processes that rely on PAR-mediated PS, especially the DNA damage response and stress granule formation.332 Poly(ADP-ribose) chains promote in vitro PS of FUS, TDP-43, and hnRNPA1.17,18,31,34,118,119

PARylation may play both neuroprotective and neurotoxic roles in ALS/FTLD. For TDP-43, PAR-driven PS is initially protective, as it helps TDP-43 retain a liquid-like status in stress granules.118 PARP5a activity is also required for FUS localization to stress granules.34 Importantly, stress granules are distinct from the disease-associated aggregates formed by TDP-43 and FUS in ALS/FTD disease models.118,346,372,373 Therefore, initial association with PAR may help solubilize ALS/FTD-linked proteins.

However, sustained incubation with PAR has a negative effect on ALS/FTD-linked proteins. Previous studies have noted that liquid-like granules may transition to solid- or gel-like material states through aging or percolation.172,189,374,375 EWSR1, FUS, and TAF15 all transition to solid-like aggregates after prolonged interactions with PAR chains.17 High concentrations of long PAR chains promote aggregation of FUS, and PAR can help disease-associated FUS mutations mature into gel-like condensates.34 In the context of C9ORF72-related ALS/FTLD, PAR directly binds to arginine-rich dipeptide repeats (R-DPRs), which in turn increases their deleterious interactions with other RNA-binding proteins, including TDP-43. In fact, PAR increases poly(GR)-induced TDP-43 aggregation, contributing to the overall toxicity.162,376 Consistent with the notion of PAR’s neurotoxic effect, inhibitors of PARP1 or PARP5a activity appear to not only prevent TDP-43 aggregation and toxicity but also suppress R-DPR toxicity.114,119,162,297,377

As discussed above in section Stress Granules Are Nucleated by PAR Readers and PAR Chains, the source of neurotoxic PAR in ALS/FTLD is unclear. It is possible that, like in Parkinson’s disease, PARP1 activity initiates the parthanatos pathway, driving cell death. Indeed, FUS and other ALS/FTLD-linked proteins are required for prompt resolution of DNA damage and cessation of PAR synthesis by PARP1.17,266 In ALS/FTD, the parthanatos response may be driven by the sustained activity of PARP1, consuming NAD+ and activating AIF.263 PARP5a/b may simultaneously supply cytoplasmic PAR for oligomerization of ALS/FTD-linked proteins, suggesting that both PARP1 and PARP5a/b inhibition will be effective in ALS/FTD.332

It is important to note that FDA-approved PARP1 inhibitors are not ideal as therapeutics for ALS/FTD or other neurodegenerative disorders. First, FDA-approved PARP1 inhibitors are not brain-penetrant, which may limit their efficacy in ALS/FTD; and second, they are designed to kill cancer cells by trapping PARPs on DNA, which leads to cytotoxicity.378 For applications to ALS/FTD, these properties are undesirable, and instead we seek brain-penetrant PARP1 inhibitors with minimal cytotoxicity. There is also concern that inhibiting DNA repair pathways via PARP1 inhibition in ALS/FTD patients may also be detrimental. Thus, it may be beneficial to focus on brain-penetrant PARP5a/b inhibitors for ALS/FTD, which can effectively mitigate TDP-43 neurotoxicity297 and would not impair DNA repair pathways.

6. NEW METHODS TO STUDY THE ROLE OF PAR IN PHASE SEPARATION

An emerging theme from the literature explored in this review is that PARylation is a unique promoter and regulator of PS, especially in the context of the stress response and at DNA damage foci. In vitro experiments demonstrate that purified PAR chains directly promote PS through protein–PAR interactions,18,34,118 and biochemical studies further show that many PS-prone proteins accept PARylation modifications.31 In cells, PARylation activity of PARP1/2 and PARP5a/b, which synthesize the nuclear and cytoplasmic PAR chains in the cell, are required for PS at DNA damage foci and at stress granules, respectively.17,297 The assembly of these granules appears to be temporally coordinated with PARP activation, indicating that PAR may act as a seed for PS.18

However, the exact role of PARylation in many of these processes is unclear. There are several major questions that the field needs to address: (1) What is the molecular mechanism of how PAR promotes PS in cells, especially which proteins are accepting PARylation modifications and which proteins are recruited by these PAR chains? (2) What exactly is the role of PARP1 in regulating cytoplasmic PAR PS processes, and is PAR a messenger to direct cytoplasmic PS in response to DNA damage stress? (3) What is the functional relevance of PAR-mediated PS, and does this PS serve a protective role in stressed conditions for the cell? (4) Are PARPs or PAR chains a therapeutic target for neurodegenerative diseases caused by pathological aggregation of PS-prone proteins?

One major challenge to study the role of PARylation in PS and neurodegeneration is the lack of commercially available tools to monitor, synthesize, and manipulate PAR chains. Unlike DNA and RNA, PAR chains of discrete lengths or with specific chemical modifications are not available for purchase from commercial sources. It is also difficult to track or target PAR in cells. These technical challenges preclude efficient and rigorous studies on PAR-mediated PS. Fortunately, recent advances in PAR technology are poised to help researchers overcome many of the obstacles that have impeded PAR-mediated PS research to date. In this section, we review exciting new PAR tools, which are summarized in Table 3.

For in vitro studies, commercially available PAR products currently consist of a mix of “long” (80–200-mer), unmodified PAR chains. However, several recent studies demonstrate that PAR chains of discrete lengths can be purified and then modified for biochemical and biophysical studies. To isolate PAR chains, the catalytic domain of PARP5a is purified and combined with NAD+ to generate large amounts of PAR chains. After dissociating PAR from the catalytic domain with 1 M KOH, PAR chains of distinct lengths are isolated via high-performance liquid chromatography.379 PAR chains can be further modified using copper-catalyzed alkyne–azide cycloaddition to azide-modified polymers or enzymatic labeling of the terminal ADP-ribose (ELTA) with the protein OAS1.34,380 Because PARP5a generates linear PAR chains, these methods enable more detailed studies of cytoplasmic PAR.

One major challenge is to generate discrete versions of branched PAR, which is synthesized by PARP1.26 A recent study demonstrated that point mutations in PARP1 alter the extent of PAR branching,60 but this finding has not yet been leveraged to create branched PAR chains with the desired branching in a reproducible manner. Such a technology would enable biophysical and mechanistic interrogation of PARP1-mediated PS at the DNA damage site.

In PAR-mediated PS, there are proteins that accept PAR chains as modifications (hubs) and proteins that recognize PAR chains (readers) (Figure 3). Recent advances have furthered our understanding of which proteins inhabit each group. To identify PAR readers, a recent report created PAR photoaffinity probes called PARprolink by using the ELTA technology.156 The PARprolink system enabled the robust pulldown and identification of PAR binding proteins in cells. PARprolink was added to HeLa nuclear extract in this study, but it would be more physiologically relevant to introduce the PARprolink probe into living cells. Combined with mass spectrometer studies that identify PARylated amino acids on proteins,74,93,97,101,115,136,382,388 these two techniques can identify the PAR hubs and readers. The main experimental challenge will be matching and mapping the hubs and readers in a robust and reproducible way, especially because there is still uncertainty about which amino acids truly accept PARylation modifications.

The difficulties in studying PAR also extend to visualization of PAR in cells. Although there are several commercially available antibodies for detection of PAR, there is wide variability in the efficacy and reproducibility of the antibodies, and they tend to recognize PAR much more efficiently than MAR. A recent report created an antibody-like protein fusion that identifies PAR chains for a variety of biochemical applications.383 Moreover, several groups are advancing technologies to track PAR in live cells.384–390 The recently reported PAR Tracker uses an oligomerization-dependent split nano luciferase with PAR-reading WWE domains to allow live tracking of PAR chains, which can also detect changes in PARylation levels in response to DNA damage and other stimuli.384 Other versions of PAR-Ts can also be used to recognize certain types of PAR chains. Importantly, PAR Tracker could be used to identify whether PARylation is accumulated at cellular granules like stress granules and DNA damage foci. Clickable PAR probes have also been used to visualize PAR chains in cells.385–387

One important strength of the technologies to study PAR is the many enzymatic inhibitors available for PARP1, PARP5a/b, and PARG. A variety of potent small molecules have been developed that reliably inhibit these proteins, and the PARG inhibitor in particular is quite important for halting PAR degradation in cellular lysates while performing biochemical assays.34,156 This is a unique asset in studying PAR-mediated PS, as it is difficult to inhibit other PS implicated posttranslational modifications in a similar manner.

7. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS

PARylation is emerging as a mechanism through which the cell can organize the response to various cellular stimuli, including DNA damage, oxidative stress, viral infection, osmotic pressure changes, and others. Synthesis of PAR chains allows the rapid assembly of IDR-containing PAR readers into phase-separated granules. By targeting certain proteins for PARylation, including PARPs and the stress granule protein G3BP1, the cell can nucleate a new granule within minutes. Importantly, the control of PAR concentration in cells through basal PARG expression allows the equally quick dissolution of granules once the stimulus has passed or resolved. Dysregulation of PAR levels is linked with a variety of neurodegenerative disorders that are thought to be caused by aberrant protein oligomerization, indicating that clinical intervention that corrects PAR levels may be effective.

Moving forward, the field should make use of new advances in PAR biology and biochemistry to further interrogate the mechanisms underlying PAR-mediated PS. Once the PAR biology toolkit is more widely available to the research community, more in-depth experiments of PAR in PS will be possible. In the context of ALS/FTD, it would be of interest to explore the effects of PAR length and PAR branching on TDP-43 PS and aggregation. While PARP inhibitors are promising potential therapeutics, there is a plethora of essential roles for PAR in cellular physiology. A better understanding of PAR-mediated TDP-43 condensation will therefore allow us to design more specific targeted therapies to combat neuro-degeneration.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank members of the Myong and T.J. Ha laboratories for helpful advice and discussions. K.R. was funded by an NIH NRSA fellowship (F31-NS113439) and is currently supported as a Milton Safenowitz Postdoctoral Fellow via the ALS Association (ALSA). H.M.O. was supported by an AstraZeneca Post-Doctoral Fellowship and an Alzheimer’s Association Research Fellowship. J.S. is supported by funding from NIH (R01-GM099836, R01-GM138690, R21-AG079609, and R21-AG065854), Target ALS, AFTD, ALSA, the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs through the Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Research Program (W81XWH-20–1-0242), Sanofi, and the G. Harold and Leila Y. Mathers Foundation. S.M. is funded by the NIH (RF1-AG071326 and RF1-NS113636), the National Science Foundation grant PHY-1430124 via the Center for Physics of Living Cells, and the Johns Hopkins Discovery Award.

Kevin Rhine earned his B.A. in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and M.A. in Biotechnology from Boston University in 2017, where he worked on aldolase’s interaction with the cytoskeleton. He then earned his Ph.D. in Biology with Dr. Sua Myong at Johns Hopkins University in 2022. His Ph.D. research focused on heterotypic interactions regulating the phase separation of the protein FUS. He is currently a postdoctoral scholar with Dr. Gene Yeo at the University of California San Diego, where he is interested in RNA and protein changes in ALS and aging models.

Hana M. Odeh is a Postdoctoral Fellow at the University of Pennsylvania. She received her Bachelor’s degree in Biological Sciences from Jordan University. She then received her Master’s and Ph.D. degrees in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology from Johns Hopkins School of Public Health. Her postdoctoral work focuses on antagonizing neurotoxic phase transitions of TDP-43.

James Shorter is a Professor of Biochemistry and Biophysics at the University of Pennsylvania. He received his B.A. and M.A. in Biology from the University of Oxford and a Ph.D. in Cell Biology from University College London. His postdoctoral training was at Yale University and the Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research at MIT. His lab focuses on mechanisms to counter deleterious phase transitions in neurodegenerative disease.

Sua Myong is a Professor of Biophysics at Johns Hopkins University. She obtained her B.S in Molecular Cellular Biology and her Ph.D in Nutrition/Biochemistry from the University of California Berkeley. Her postdoctoral training was with Dr. Taekjip Ha at the University of Illinois Urbana–Champaign, focusing on the single-molecule biophysics of processive helicases. Her lab’s research focus is the structural dynamics of telomeres, G-quadruplexes, and ribonucleoprotein condensates. In particular, her lab uses single-molecule biophysics to interrogate the interactions of proteins with nucleic acids.

ABBREVIATIONS

ALS amyotrophic lateral sclerosis

DSB double-stranded break

FET FUS/EWSR1/TAF15

FTLD frontotemporal lobar dementia

HR homologous recombination

IDR intrinsically disordered region

MAR mono(ADP-ribose)

NAD+ nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide

NHEJ nonhomologous end joining

PAR poly(ADP-ribose)

PARG poly(ADP-ribose) glycohydrolase

PARP poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase

PBM poly(ADP-ribose) binding motif

PBZ poly(ADP-ribose) binding zinc finger

PS phase separation

RGG arginine–glycine–glycine

RNP ribonucleoprotein

SG stress granule

Figure 1. The PAR cycle. Target proteins are mono- and poly-(ADP-ribosylated) (MARylated and PARylated, respectively) with nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+). All PARPs except PARP13 can MARylate targets, but only PARP 1/2/5a/5b can PARylate proteins. PARP1/2 are the only PARPs with reported branching activity. Proteins are dePARylated and deMARylated by PAR glycohydrolase (PARG) and PARG-like enzymes, releasing free ADP-ribose. The protein ribbon structure in this figure is the catalytic domain of PARP1 (PDB 7KK2).39

Figure 2. H–Y–E triad of PARP1. The PARP1 ribbon structure is in light blue, H–Y–E residues are red line structures, and the NAD+ analogue is a yellow line structure. The PDB structure is 6BHV.245

Figure 3. Covalent and noncovalent PAR interactions. Proteins can accept PAR modifications (covalent binding, i.e., PARylation) or interact with PAR chains (noncovalent binding of PAR readers). The dashed line denotes a noncovalent PAR reader interaction.

Figure 4. A model for the production of PAR chains. In theory, PARG or TARG1 endoglycosidic cleavage of a covalently attached PAR chain may release free PAR with which other proteins may interact.

Figure 5. PAR-reader recognition sites. The WWE domain recognizes the iso-ADP-ribose linkage, the PBZ domains recognizes a pair of ADP-riboses, and the Macro domain recognizes the terminal ADP-ribose. Other domains (e.g., PBM and RGG repeats) may recognize the negatively charged phosphate backbone.

Figure 6. The role of PAR in biological PS. (a) PARylation mediates the assembly of stress granule proteins FUS, TDP-43, G3BP1, and hnRNPA1. (b) Free PAR signals the release of AIF, which causes cell death in Parkinson’s disease and other neurodegenerative pathologies. (c) PAR binding directs the translocation of Golgi-associated PARP12 to the stress granule, inhibiting Golgi function. (d) PAR chains synthesized by PARP1 initiate PS of DNA damage response proteins, including FUS, TAF15, NONO, EWSR1, and USP39. (e) PARG activity encoded in viral nsP3 proteins causes dissolution of stress granules in response to viral infection. (f) ASK3-PAR condensates respond to osmotic stress, and PAR is required for the liquid-like properties of ASK3 granules. PAR chains are pink linear or branched rods.

Figure 7. The PAR-driven PS model of the DNA damage response. Recognition of double-stranded breaks by PARP1 stimulates PAR synthesis. FET family proteins (FUS, TAF15, EWSR1) and possibly USP39 are simultaneously recruited to the DNA damage site by new PAR chains, driving PS at the DNA damage site. After resolution of the DNA damage, EWSR1 and possibly FUS help eject PARP1 from the repaired DNA and dissolve the phase-separated granule. Branched pink rods are PAR chains.

Figure 8. Control of PS by PARylation at transcriptional DNA damage sites. If a double-stranded break is recognized near a transcriptional focus, PARP1 recruitment will antagonize transcription by PARylating P-TEFb. This action dissolves P-TEFb condensates, which stops phosphorylation of RNAP II and thus transcription. Meanwhile, a DNA damage condensate likely forms until the break is repaired. Pink rods are PAR chains.

Figure 9. PAR drives stress granule (SG) assembly. (a) PARylation of PARPs and other proteins (G3BP1 and hnRNPA1) promotes SG assembly with other proteins like FUS and TDP-43. Free PAR released from PARP1 may also contribute to SG formation. (b) Viral infection leads to simultaneous PAR production and eIF2α phosphorylation by protein kinase R, leading to Golgi arrest and SG assembly, respectively. (c) Production of viral nsP3 proteins with PARG domains degrades SGs through loss of PAR. Pink rods are PAR chains.

Table 1. PARP Family in Humans

PARP	other
names	catalytic activity	implicated in PS?a	
PARP1	PARP,
ARTD1	PARylation (+ branching)	DNA damage foci,17 stress granules,31 transcriptional
loci32	
PARP2	ARTD2	PARylation (+ branching)	DNA damage foci?33	
PARP3	ARTD3	MARylation		
PARP4	vPARP,
ARTD4	MARylation		
PARP5a	TNKS1,
ARTD5	PARylation	stress granules16,34	
PARP5b	TNKS2,
ARTD6	PARylation	stress granules?34	
PARP6	ARTD17	MARylation		
PARP7	tiPARP,
ARTD14	MARylation	unidentified nuclear granule35	
PARP8	ARTD16	MARylation		
PARP9	BAL1,
ARTD9	MARylation	stress granules (viral response)36	
PARP10	ARTD10	MARylation		
PARP11	ARTD11	MARylation		
PARP12	ARTD12	MARylation	stress granules16,37	
PARP13	ZAP,
ARTD13		stress granules16,38	
PARP14	BAL2,
ARTD8	MARylation	stress granules?16	
PARP15	BAL3,
ARTD7	MARylation	stress granules?16	
PARP16	ARTD15	MARylation		
a PARP2 has not been directly implicated in the DNA damage foci PS, but it is required for proper PARP1 activity. PARP14 and PARP15 are both stress granule proteins, but it is unclear what, if any, function they might have in forming, regulating, or disassembling stress granules.

Table 2. PARG Family in Humans

PARG	substrate	catalytic activity	amino acid selectivity	
PARCa	PAR	partial		
TARG1	MAR/PAR	complete	D/E	
MacroDl	MAR	complete	D/E	
MacroD2	MAR	complete	D/E	
ARH1	MAR	complete	R	
ARH3	MAR/PAR	complete	S	
ENPP1	MAR/PAR	partial		
NUDT9	PAR	partial		
NUDT16	MAR/PAR	partial		
a PARG has an alternatively spliced isoform that is primarily cytoplasmic.

Table 3. New PAR Technologies to Study Phase Separation

method	description	ref	
HPLC fractionation of synthesized PAR	PAR is synthesized in vitro by the catalytic domain of PARP5a, released with a strong base, and fractionated into discrete lengths by high-performance liquid chromatography	379	
enzymatic labeling of the terminal ADP-ribose (ELTA)	The protein OAS1 and dATP analogues (e.g., fused to a fluorophore or affinity tag) are used to label the terminal end of the synthetic PAR chain	380	
PARprolink	photoaffinity probe is attached to a synthetic PAR chain using ELTA to enable cross-linking and pulldown of PAR binding proteins in cell lysate	156	
controlling PARP1 branching with active site mutations	site-directed mutagenesis of PARP1 to bias PAR chain synthesis toward short/hypobranched PAR (G972R), short/hyperbranched (Y986S), and long/hyperbranched (Y986H)	60	
Click-ChIP-Seq	clickable NAD+ analogue is used with an analogue-sensitive PARP to synthesize PAR chains that can be cross-linked, immunoprecipitated, and sequenced	279,381	
mass spectrometry of PARylated peptides	there are several approaches to isolate and fragment PARylated peptides, which can lead to biases toward which residues appear to be PARylated	74,76,101,115,136,382	
chimeric PAR antibodies	PAR recognizing domains are fused to the Fc domain of rabbit antibodies to better recognize PAR chains	383	
PAR tracker	PAR-binding WWE domain is fused to each half of a split nano luciferase to enable live cell tracking of PAR chains	384	
AO-alkyne probes	PAR-binding probe recognizes cellular PAR and contains an alkyne handle for click chemistry with a reporter	385–387	

The authors declare the following competing financial interest(s): K.R., H.M.O., and S.M. declare no competing interests. J.S. is a consultant for Dewpoint Therapeutics, ADRx, and Neumora, and an advisor and shareholder in Confluence Therapeutics.


REFERENCES

(1) Riback JA ; Katanski CD ; Kear-Scott JL ; Pilipenko EV ; Rojek AE ; Sosnick TR ; Drummond DA Stress-Triggered Phase Separation Is an Adaptive, Evolutionarily Tuned Response. Cell 2017, 168 , 1028–1040 e1019.28283059
(2) Roden C ; Gladfelter AS RNA Contributions to the Form and Function of Biomolecular Condensates. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell. Biol. 2021, 22 , 183.32632317
(3) Rhine K ; Vidaurre V ; Myong S RNA Droplets. Annu. Rev. Biophys. 2020, 49 , 247–265.32040349
(4) Banani SF ; Lee HO ; Hyman AA ; Rosen MK Biomolecular Condensates: Organizers of Cellular Biochemistry. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell. Biol. 2017, 18 , 285–298.28225081
(5) Shelkovnikova TA ; Dimasi P ; Kukharsky MS ; An H ; Quintiero A ; Schirmer C ; Buée L ; Galas M-C ; Buchman VL Chronically Stressed or Stress-Preconditioned Neurons Fail to Maintain Stress Granule Assembly. Cell Death Dis. 2017, 8 , No. e2788 .
(6) Ratti A ; Gumina V ; Lenzi P ; Bossolasco P ; Fulceri F ; Volpe C ; Bardelli D ; Pregnolato F ; Maraschi A ; Fornai F ; Silani V ; Colombrita C Chronic Stress Induces Formation of Stress Granules and Pathological TDP-43 Aggregates in Human ALS Fibroblasts and iPSC-Motoneurons. Neurobiol. Dis. 2020, 145 , 105051.32827688
(7) Leung AK Poly(ADP-Ribose): An Organizer of Cellular Architecture. J. Cell. Biol. 2014, 205 , 613–619.24914234
(8) Citarelli M ; Teotia S ; Lamb RS Evolutionary History of the Poly(ADP-Ribose) Polymerase Gene Family in Eukaryotes. BMC Evol. Biol. 2010, 10 , 308.20942953
(9) Leung AKL Poly(ADP-Ribose): A Dynamic Trigger for Biomolecular Condensate Formation. Trends Cell Biol. 2020, 30 , 370–383.32302549
(10) Teloni F ; Altmeyer M Readers of Poly(ADP-Ribose): Designed to Be Fit for Purpose. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016, 44 , 993–1006.26673700
(11) Aguzzi A ; Altmeyer M Phase Separation: Linking Cellular Compartmentalization to Disease. Trends Cell Biol. 2016, 26 , 547–558.27051975
(12) Spegg V ; Altmeyer M Biomolecular Condensates at Sites of DNA Damage: More Than Just a Phase. DNA Repair (Amst.) 2021, 106 , 103179.34311273
(13) Alemasova EE ; Lavrik OI Poly(ADP-Ribose) in Condensates: The PARtnership of Phase Separation and Site-Specific Interactions. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23 , 14075.36430551
(14) Alemasova EE ; Lavrik OI A Separate Phase? Poly(ADP-Ribose) Versus RNA in the Organization of Biomolecular Condensates. Nucleic Acids Res. 2022, 50 , 10817–10838.36243979
(15) Huang D ; Kraus WL The Expanding Universe of PARP1-Mediated Molecular and Therapeutic Mechanisms. Mol. Cell 2022, 82 , 2315–2334.35271815
(16) Leung AK ; Vyas S ; Rood JE ; Bhutkar A ; Sharp PA ; Chang P Poly(ADP-Ribose) Regulates Stress Responses and MicroRNA Activity in the Cytoplasm. Mol. Cell 2011, 42 , 489–499.21596313
(17) Altmeyer M ; Neelsen KJ ; Teloni F ; Pozdnyakova I ; Pellegrino S ; Grofte M ; Rask MD ; Streicher W ; Jungmichel S ; Nielsen ML ; Lukas J Liquid Demixing of Intrinsically Disordered Proteins Is Seeded by Poly(ADP-Ribose). Nat. Commun. 2015, 6 , 8088.26286827
(18) Patel A ; Lee HO ; Jawerth L ; Maharana S ; Jahnel M ; Hein MY ; Stoynov S ; Mahamid J ; Saha S ; Franzmann TM ; Pozniakovski A ; Poser I ; Maghelli N ; Royer LA ; Weigert M ; Myers EW ; Grill S ; Drechsel D ; Hyman AA ; Alberti S A Liquid-to-Solid Phase Transition of the ALS Protein FUS Accelerated by Disease Mutation. Cell 2015, 162 , 1066–1077.26317470
(19) Chambon P ; Weill JD ; Mandel P Nicotinamide Mononucleotide Activation of New DNA-Dependent Polyadenylic Acid Synthesizing Nuclear Enzyme. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 1963, 11 , 39–43.14019961
(20) Owen I ; Shewmaker F The Role of Post-Translational Modifications in the Phase Transitions of Intrinsically Disordered Proteins. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20 , 5501.31694155
(21) Luo YY ; Wu JJ ; Li YM Regulation of Liquid-Liquid Phase Separation with Focus on Post-Translational Modifications. Chem. Commun. (Camb) 2021, 57 , 13275–13287.34816836
(22) Li P ; Banjade S ; Cheng HC ; Kim S ; Chen B ; Guo L ; Llaguno M ; Hollingsworth JV ; King DS ; Banani SF ; Russo PS ; Jiang QX ; Nixon BT ; Rosen MK Phase Transitions in the Assembly of Multivalent Signalling Proteins. Nature 2012, 483 , 336–340.22398450
(23) Satoh MS ; Lindahl T Role of Poly(ADP-Ribose) Formation in DNA Repair. Nature 1992, 356 , 356–358.1549180
(24) Singatulina AS ; Hamon L ; Sukhanova MV ; Desforges B ; Joshi V ; Bouhss A ; Lavrik OI ; Pastre D PARP-1 Activation Directs FUS to DNA Damage Sites to Form PARG-Reversible Compartments Enriched in Damaged DNA. Cell Rep. 2019, 27 , 1809–1821 e1805.31067465
(25) Luscher B ; Ahel I ; Altmeyer M ; Ashworth A ; Bai P ; Chang P ; Cohen M ; Corda D ; Dantzer F ; Daugherty MD ; Dawson TM ; Dawson VL ; Deindl S ; Fehr AR ; Feijs KLH ; Filippov DV ; Gagne JP ; Grimaldi G ; Guettler S ; Hoch NC ; Hottiger MO ; Korn P ; Kraus WL ; Ladurner A ; Lehtio L ; Leung AKL ; Lord CJ ; Mangerich A ; Matic I ; Matthews J ; Moldovan GL ; Moss J ; Natoli G ; Nielsen ML ; Niepel M ; Nolte F ; Pascal J ; Paschal BM ; Pawlowski K ; Poirier GG ; Smith S ; Timinszky G ; Wang ZQ ; Yelamos J ; Yu X ; Zaja R ; Ziegler M ADP-Ribosyltransferases, an Update on Function and Nomenclature. FEBS J. 2022, 289 , 7399–7410.34323016
(26) Miwa M ; Saikawa N ; Yamaizumi Z ; Nishimura S ; Sugimura T Structure of Poly(Adenosine Diphosphate Ribose): Identification of 2’-[1”-Ribosyl-2”-(or 3′’-)(1”’-Ribosyl)]Adenosine-5′,5′’,5′”-Tris(Phosphate) as a Branch Linkage. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 1979, 76 , 595–599.218210
(27) Miwa M ; Ishihara M ; Takishima S ; Takasuka N ; Maeda M ; Yamaizumi Z ; Sugimura T ; Yokoyama S ; Miyazawa T The Branching and Linear Portions of Poly(Adenosine Diphosphate Ribose) Have the Same Alpha(1 Leads to 2) Ribose-Ribose Linkage. J. Biol. Chem. 1981, 256 , 2916–2921.6782097
(28) Alvarez-Gonzalez R ; Jacobson MK Characterization of Polymers of Adenosine Diphosphate Ribose Generated in Vitro and in Vivo. Biochemistry 1987, 26 , 3218–3224.3038179
(29) Hayashi K ; Tanaka M ; Shimada T ; Miwa M ; Sugimura T Size and Shape of Poly(ADP-Ribose): Examination by Gel Filtration, Gel Electrophoresis and Electron Microscopy. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 1983, 112 , 102–107.6838598
(30) Badiee M ; Kenet AL ; Ganser LR ; Paul T ; Myong S ; Leung AKL Switch-Like Compaction of Poly(ADP-Ribose) Upon Cation Binding. bioRxiv 2023, 2023.2003.2011.531013
(31) Duan Y ; Du A ; Gu J ; Duan G ; Wang C ; Gui X ; Ma Z ; Qian B ; Deng X ; Zhang K ; Sun L ; Tian K ; Zhang Y ; Jiang H ; Liu C ; Fang Y Parylation Regulates Stress Granule Dynamics, Phase Separation, and Neurotoxicity of Disease-Related RNA-Binding Proteins. Cell Res. 2019, 29 , 233–247.30728452
(32) Fu H ; Liu R ; Jia Z ; Li R ; Zhu F ; Zhu W ; Shao Y ; Jin Y ; Xue Y ; Huang J ; Luo K ; Gao X ; Lu H ; Zhou Q Poly(ADP-Ribosylation) of P-TEFb by PARP1 Disrupts Phase Separation to Inhibit Global Transcription after DNA Damage. Nat. Cell Biol. 2022, 24 , 513.35393539
(33) Chen Q ; Kassab MA ; Dantzer F ; Yu X PARP2Mediates Branched Poly ADP-Ribosylation in Response to DNA Damage. Nat. Commun. 2018, 9 , 3233.30104678
(34) Rhine K ; Dasovich M ; Yoniles J ; Badiee M ; Skanchy S ; Ganser LR ; Ge Y ; Fare CM ; Shorter J ; Leung AKL ; Myong S Poly(ADP-Ribose) Drives Condensation of FUS Via a Transient Interaction. Mol. Cell 2022, 82 , 969–985 e911.35182479
(35) Zhang L ; Cao J ; Dong L ; Lin H Tiparp Forms Nuclear Condensates to Degrade Hif-1alpha and Suppress Tumorigenesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 2020, 117 , 13447–13456.32482854
(36) Russo LC ; Tomasin R ; Matos IA ; Manucci AC ; Sowa ST ; Dale K ; Caldecott KW ; Lehtio L ; Schechtman D ; Meotti FC ; Bruni-Cardoso A ; Hoch NC The SARS-CoV-2 Nsp3Macrodomain Reverses PARP9/DTX3L-Dependent ADP-Ribosylation Induced by Interferon Signaling. J. Biol. Chem. 2021, 297 , 101041.34358560
(37) Catara G ; Grimaldi G ; Schembri L ; Spano D ; Turacchio G ; Lo Monte M ; Beccari AR ; Valente C ; Corda D PARP1-Produced Poly-ADP-Ribose Causes the PARP12 Translocation to Stress Granules and Impairment of Golgi Complex Functions. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7 , 14035.29070863
(38) Todorova T ; Bock FJ ; Chang P PARP13 Regulates Cellular Mrna Post-Transcriptionally and Functions as a Pro-Apoptotic Factor by Destabilizing TRAILR4 Transcript. Nat. Commun. 2014, 5 , 5362.25382312
(39) Ryan K ; Bolanos B ; Smith M ; Palde PB ; Cuenca PD ; VanArsdale TL ; Niessen S ; Zhang L ; Behenna D ; Ornelas MA ; Tran KT ; Kaiser S ; Lum L ; Stewart A ; Gajiwala KS Dissecting the Molecular Determinants of Clinical PARP1 Inhibitor Selectivity for Tankyrase1. J. Biol. Chem. 2021, 296 , 100251.33361107
(40) Obara S ; Mishima K ; Yamada K ; Taniguchi M ; Shimoyama M DNA-Regulated Arginine-Specific Mono(ADP-Ribosyl)Ation and De-ADP-Ribosylation of Endogenous Acceptor Proteins in Human Neutrophils. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 1989, 163 , 452–457.2505768
(41) Challa S ; Stokes MS ; Kraus WL MARTs and MARylation in the Cytosol: Biological Functions, Mechanisms of Action, and Therapeutic Potential. Cells 2021, 10 , 313.33546365
(42) Alvarez-Gonzalez R 3′-Deoxy-NAD+ as a Substrate for Poly(ADP-Ribose)Polymerase and the Reaction Mechanism of Poly(ADP-Ribose) Elongation. J. Biol. Chem. 1988, 263 , 17690–17696.3141424
(43) Ruf A ; Rolli V ; de Murcia G ; Schulz GE The Mechanism of the Elongation and Branching Reaction of Poly(ADP-Ribose) Polymerase as Derived from Crystal Structures and Mutagenesis. J. Mol. Biol. 1998, 278 , 57–65.9571033
(44) Hurtado-Bages S ; Knobloch G ; Ladurner AG ; Buschbeck M The Taming of PARP1 and Its Impact on NAD(+) Metabolism. Mol. Metab. 2020, 38 , 100950.32199820
(45) Rolli V ; O’Farrell M ; Menissier-de Murcia J ; de Murcia G Random Mutagenesis of the Poly(ADP-Ribose) Polymerase Catalytic Domain Reveals Amino Acids Involved in Polymer Branching. Biochemistry 1997, 36 , 12147–12154.9315851
(46) de Murcia G ; Jongstra-Bilen J ; Ittel ME ; Mandel P ; Delain E Poly(ADP-Ribose) Polymerase Auto-Modification and Interaction with DNA: Electron Microscopic Visualization. EMBO J. 1983, 2 , 543–548.6313345
(47) Reber JM ; Mangerich A Why Structure and Chain Length Matter: On the Biological Significance Underlying the Structural Heterogeneity of Poly(ADP-Ribose). Nucleic Acids Res. 2021, 49 , 8432–8448.34302489
(48) Hatakeyama K ; Nemoto Y ; Ueda K ; Hayaishi O Purification and Characterization of Poly(ADP-Ribose) Glycohydrolase. Different Modes of Action on Large and Small Poly(ADP-Ribose). J. Biol. Chem. 1986, 261 , 14902–14911.3771556
(49) Braun SA ; Panzeter PL ; Collinge MA ; Althaus FR Endoglycosidic Cleavage of Branched Polymers by Poly(ADP-Ribose) Glycohydrolase. Eur. J. Biochem. 1994, 220 , 369–375.8125093
(50) O’Sullivan J ; Tedim Ferreira M ; Gagne JP ; Sharma AK ; Hendzel MJ ; Masson JY ; Poirier GG Emerging Roles of Eraser Enzymes in the Dynamic Control of Protein ADP-Ribosylation. Nat. Commun. 2019, 10 , 1182.30862789
(51) Sharifi R ; Morra R ; Appel CD ; Tallis M ; Chioza B ; Jankevicius G ; Simpson MA ; Matic I ; Ozkan E ; Golia B ; Schellenberg MJ ; Weston R ; Williams JG ; Rossi MN ; Galehdari H ; Krahn J ; Wan A ; Trembath RC ; Crosby AH ; Ahel D ; Hay R ; Ladurner AG ; Timinszky G ; Williams RS ; Ahel I Deficiency of Terminal ADP-Ribose Protein Glycohydrolase TARG1/C6orf130 in Neurodegenerative Disease. EMBO J. 2013, 32 , 1225.23481255
(52) Vyas S ; Matic I ; Uchima L ; Rood J ; Zaja R ; Hay RT ; Ahel I ; Chang P Family-Wide Analysis of Poly(ADP-Ribose) Polymerase Activity. Nat. Commun. 2014, 5 , 4426.25043379
(53) Domenighini M ; Montecucco C ; Ripka WC ; Rappuoli R Computer Modelling of the NAD Binding Site of ADP-Ribosylating Toxins: Active-Site Structure and Mechanism of NAD Binding. Mol. Microbiol. 1991, 5 , 23–31.1901617
(54) Marsischky GT ; Wilson BA ; Collier RJ Role of Glutamic Acid 988 of Human Poly-ADP-Ribose Polymerase in Polymer Formation. Evidence for Active Site Similarities to the ADP-Ribosylating Toxins. J. Biol. Chem. 1995, 270 , 3247–3254.7852410
(55) Alemasova EE ; Lavrik OI Poly(ADP-Ribosyl)Ation by PARP1: Reaction Mechanism and Regulatory Proteins. Nucleic Acids Res. 2019, 47 , 3811–3827.30799503
(56) Barkauskaite E ; Jankevicius G ; Ahel I Structures and Mechanisms of Enzymes Employed in the Synthesis and Degradation of PARP-Dependent Protein ADP-Ribosylation. Mol. Cell 2015, 58 , 935–946.26091342
(57) Yang CS ; Jividen K ; Spencer A ; Dworak N ; Ni L ; Oostdyk LT ; Chatterjee M ; Kusmider B ; Reon B ; Parlak M ; Gorbunova V ; Abbas T ; Jeffery E ; Sherman NE ; Paschal BM Ubiquitin Modification by the E3 Ligase/ADP-Ribosyltransferase Dtx3l/PARP9. Mol. Cell 2017, 66 , 503–516 e505.28525742
(58) Ikejima M ; Marsischky G ; Gill DM Direction of Elongation of Poly(ADP-Ribose) Chains. Addition of Residues at the Polymerase-Proximal Terminus. J. Biol. Chem. 1987, 262 , 17641–17650.2961740
(59) Wahlberg E ; Karlberg T ; Kouznetsova E ; Markova N ; Macchiarulo A ; Thorsell A-G ; Pol E ; Frostell A-G ; Ekblad T ; Öncü D ; Kull B ; Robertson GM ; Pellicciari R ; Schüler H ; Weigelt J Family-Wide Chemical Profiling and Structural Analysis of PARP and Tankyrase Inhibitors. Nat. Biotechnol. 2012, 30 , 283–288.22343925
(60) Aberle L ; Kruger A ; Reber JM ; Lippmann M ; Hufnagel M ; Schmalz M ; Trussina I ; Schlesiger S ; Zubel T ; Schutz K ; Marx A ; Hartwig A ; Ferrando-May E ; Burkle A ; Mangerich A PARP1 Catalytic Variants Reveal Branching and Chain Length-Specific Functions of Poly(ADP-Ribose) in Cellular Physiology and Stress Response. Nucleic Acids Res. 2020, 48 , 10015–10033.32667640
(61) Rudolph J ; Roberts G ; Muthurajan UM ; Luger K Hpf1 and Nucleosomes Mediate a Dramatic Switch in Activity of PARP1 from Polymerase to Hydrolase. Elife 2021, 10 , e65773.33683197
(62) Vyas S ; Chesarone-Cataldo M ; Todorova T ; Huang YH ; Chang P A Systematic Analysis of the PARP Protein Family Identifies New Functions Critical for Cell Physiology. Nat. Commun. 2013, 4 , 2240.23917125
(63) Chiang YJ ; Hsiao SJ ; Yver D ; Cushman SW ; Tessarollo L ; Smith S ; Hodes RJ Tankyrase 1 and Tankyrase 2 Are Essential but Redundant for Mouse Embryonic Development. PLoS One 2008, 3 , No. e2639 .
(64) Rippmann JF ; Damm K ; Schnapp A Functional Characterization of the Poly(ADP-Ribose) Polymerase Activity of Tankyrase 1, a Potential Regulator of Telomere Length. J. Mol. Biol. 2002, 323 , 217–224.12381316
(65) Prokhorova E ; Agnew T ; Wondisford AR ; Tellier M ; Kaminski N ; Beijer D ; Holder J ; Groslambert J ; Suskiewicz MJ ; Zhu K ; Reber JM ; Krassnig SC ; Palazzo L ; Murphy S ; Nielsen ML ; Mangerich A ; Ahel D ; Baets J ; O’Sullivan RJ ; Ahel I Unrestrained Poly-ADP-Ribosylation Provides Insights into Chromatin Regulation and Human Disease. Mol. Cell 2021, 81 , 2640–2655 e2648.34019811
(66) Mao Z ; Hine C ; Tian X ; Van Meter M ; Au M ; Vaidya A ; Seluanov A ; Gorbunova V SIRT6 Promotes DNA Repair under Stress by Activating PARP1. Science 2011, 332 , 1443–1446.21680843
(67) Loseva O ; Jemth AS ; Bryant HE ; Schuler H ; Lehtio L ; Karlberg T ; Helleday T PARP-3 Is a Mono-ADP-Ribosylase That Activates PARP-1 in the Absence of DNA. J. Biol. Chem. 2010, 285 , 8054–8060.20064938
(68) Beck C ; Robert I ; Reina-San-Martin B ; Schreiber V ; Dantzer F Poly(ADP-Ribose) Polymerases in Double-Strand Break Repair: Focus on PARP1, PARP2 and PARP3. Exp. Cell Res. 2014, 329 , 18–25.25017100
(69) Leidecker O ; Bonfiglio JJ ; Colby T ; Zhang Q ; Atanassov I ; Zaja R ; Palazzo L ; Stockum A ; Ahel I ; Matic I Serine Is a New Target Residue for Endogenous ADP-Ribosylation on Histones. Nat. Chem. Biol. 2016, 12 , 998–1000.27723750
(70) Bonfiglio JJ ; Fontana P ; Zhang Q ; Colby T ; Gibbs-Seymour I ; Atanassov I ; Bartlett E ; Zaja R ; Ahel I ; Matic I Serine ADP-Ribosylation Depends on HPF1. Mol. Cell 2017, 65 , 932–940 e936.28190768
(71) Palazzo L ; Leidecker O ; Prokhorova E ; Dauben H ; Matic I ; Ahel I Serine Is the Major Residue for ADP-Ribosylation Upon DNA Damage. Elife 2018, 7 , e34334.29480802
(72) Suskiewicz MJ ; Zobel F ; Ogden TEH ; Fontana P ; Ariza A ; Yang JC ; Zhu K ; Bracken L ; Hawthorne WJ ; Ahel D ; Neuhaus D ; Ahel I HPF1 Completes the PARP Active Site for DNA Damage-Induced ADP-Ribosylation. Nature 2020, 579 , 598–602.32028527
(73) Gibbs-Seymour I ; Fontana P ; Rack JGM ; Ahel I HPF1/C4orf27 Is a PARP-1-Interacting Protein That Regulates PARP-1 ADP-Ribosylation Activity. Mol. Cell 2016, 62 , 432–442.27067600
(74) Hendriks IA ; Larsen SC ; Nielsen ML An Advanced Strategy for Comprehensive Profiling of ADP-Ribosylation Sites Using Mass Spectrometry-Based Proteomics. Mol. Cell Proteomics 2019, 18 , 1010–1026.30798302
(75) Sun FH ; Zhao P ; Zhang N ; Kong LL ; Wong CCL ; Yun CH Hpf1 Remodels the Active Site of PARP1 to Enable the Serine ADP-Ribosylation of Histones. Nat. Commun. 2021, 12 , 1028.33589610
(76) Bilan V ; Leutert M ; Nanni P ; Panse C ; Hottiger MO Combining Higher-Energy Collision Dissociation and Electron-Transfer/Higher-Energy Collision Dissociation Fragmentation in a Product-Dependent Manner Confidently Assigns Proteomewide ADP-Ribose Acceptor Sites. Anal. Chem. 2017, 89 , 1523–1530.28035797
(77) Ayyappan V ; Wat R ; Barber C ; Vivelo CA ; Gauch K ; Visanpattanasin P ; Cook G ; Sazeides C ; Leung AKL ADPriboDB 2.0: An Updated Database of ADP-Ribosylated Proteins. Nucleic Acids Res. 2021, 49 , D261–D265.33137182
(78) Desmarais Y ; Menard L ; Lagueux J ; Poirier GG Enzymological Properties of Poly(ADP-Ribose)Polymerase: Characterization of Automodification Sites and NADase Activity. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1991, 1078 , 179–186.1648406
(79) Moss J ; Garrison S ; Oppenheimer NJ ; Richardson SH NAD-Dependent ADP-Ribosylation of Arginine and Proteins by Escherichia Coli Heat-Labile Enterotoxin. J. Biol. Chem. 1979, 254 , 6270–6272.221495
(80) Moss J ; Stanley SJ Amino Acid-Specific ADP-Ribosylation. Identification of an Arginine-Dependent ADP-Ribosyltransferase in Rat Liver. J. Biol. Chem. 1981, 256 , 7830–7833.6267027
(81) Yost DA ; Moss J Amino Acid-Specific ADP-Ribosylation. Evidence for Two Distinct NAD:Arginine ADP-Ribosyltransferases in Turkey Erythrocytes. J. Biol. Chem. 1983, 258 , 4926–4929.6403540
(82) Hsia JA ; Tsai SC ; Adamik R ; Yost DA ; Hewlett EL ; Moss J Amino Acid-Specific ADP-Ribosylation. Sensitivity to Hydroxylamine of [Cysteine(ADP-Ribose)]Protein and [Arginine-(ADP-Ribose)]Protein Linkages. J. Biol. Chem. 1985, 260 , 16187–16191.3934172
(83) West RE Jr ; Moss J Amino Acid Specific ADP-Ribosylation: Specific NAD: Arginine Mono-ADP-Ribosyltransferases Associated with Turkey Erythrocyte Nuclei and Plasma Membranes. Biochemistry 1986, 25 , 8057–8062.3099839
(84) Matsuura R ; Tanigawa Y ; Tsuchiya M ; Mishima K ; Yoshimura Y ; Shimoyama M Preferential ADP-Ribosylation of Arginine-3 in Synthetic Heptapeptide Leu-Arg-Arg-Ala-Ser-Leu-Gly. Biochem. J. 1988, 253 , 923–926.3140792
(85) Inageda K ; Nishina H ; Tanuma S Mono-ADP-Ribosylation of Gs by an Eukaryotic Arginine-Specific ADP-Ribosyltransferase Stimulates the Adenylate Cyclase System. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 1991, 176 , 1014–1019.1903936
(86) Terashima M ; Mishima K ; Yamada K ; Tsuchiya M ; Wakutani T ; Shimoyama M ADP-Ribosylation of Actins by Arginine-Specific ADP-Ribosyltransferase Purified from Chicken Heterophils. Eur. J. Biochem. 1992, 204 , 305–311.1740142
(87) Milligan G ; Mitchell FM An Arginine Residue Is the Site of Receptor-Stimulated, Cholera Toxin-Catalysed ADP-Ribosylation of Pertussis Toxin-Sensitive G-Proteins. Cell Signal 1993, 5 , 485–493.8396964
(88) Pierrard J ; Willison JC ; Vignais PM ; Gaspar JL ; Ludden PW ; Roberts GP Site-Directed Mutagenesis of the Target Arginine for ADP-Ribosylation of Nitrogenase Component Ii in Rhodobacter Capsulatus. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 1993, 192 , 1223–1229.8507194
(89) Terashima M ; Yamamori C ; Shimoyama M ADP-Ribosylation of Arg28 and Arg206 on the Actin Molecule by Chicken Arginine-Specific ADP-Ribosyltransferase. Eur. J. Biochem. 1995, 231 , 242–249.7628477
(90) Rigby MR ; Bortell R ; Stevens LA ; Moss J ; Kanaitsuka T ; Shigeta H ; Mordes JP ; Greiner DL ; Rossini AA Rat Rt6.2 and Mouse Rt6 Locus 1 Are NAD+: Arginine ADP Ribosyltransferases with Auto-ADP Ribosylation Activity. J. Immunol. 1996, 156 , 4259–4265.8666796
(91) Bortell R ; Rigby M ; Stevens L ; Moss J ; Kanaitsuka T ; Mordes J ; Greiner D ; Rossini A Mouse Rt6 Locus 1 and Rat Rt6.2 Are NAD+. Arginine ADP-Ribosyltransferases with Auto-ADP-Ribosylation Activity. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 1997, 419 , 169–173.9193650
(92) Laing S ; Unger M ; Koch-Nolte F ; Haag F ADP-Ribosylation of Arginine. Amino Acids 2011, 41 , 257–269.20652610
(93) Laing S ; Koch-Nolte F ; Haag F ; Buck F Strategies for the Identification of Arginine ADP-Ribosylation Sites. J. Proteomics 2011, 75 , 169–176.21784185
(94) Tsurumura T ; Tsumori Y ; Qiu H ; Oda M ; Sakurai J ; Nagahama M ; Tsuge H Arginine ADP-Ribosylation Mechanism Based on Structural Snapshots of Iota-Toxin and Actin Complex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 2013, 110 , 4267–4272.23382240
(95) Stevens LA ; Moss J Mono-ADP-Ribosylation Catalyzed by Arginine-Specific ADP-Ribosyltransferases. Methods Mol. Biol. 2018, 1813 , 149–165.30097866
(96) Zhang Y ; Wang J ; Ding M ; Yu Y Site-Specific Characterization of the Asp- and Glu-ADP-Ribosylated Proteome. Nat. Methods 2013, 10 , 981–984.23955771
(97) McDonald LJ ; Wainschel LA ; Oppenheimer NJ ; Moss J Amino Acid-Specific ADP-Ribosylation: Structural Characterization and Chemical Differentiation of ADP-Ribose-Cysteine Adducts Formed Nonenzymatically and in a Pertussis Toxin-Catalyzed Reaction. Biochemistry 1992, 31 , 11881–11887.1445918
(98) McDonald LJ ; Moss J Enzymatic and Nonenzymatic ADP-Ribosylation of Cysteine. Mol. Cell. Biochem. 1994, 138 , 221–226.7898467
(99) Rodriguez KM ; Buch-Larsen SC ; Kirby IT ; Siordia IR ; Hutin D ; Rasmussen M ; Grant DM ; David LL ; Matthews J ; Nielsen ML ; Cohen MS Chemical Genetics and Proteome-Wide Site Mapping Reveal Cysteine MARylation by PARP-7 on Immune-Relevant Protein Targets. Elife 2021, 10 , e60480.33475084
(100) Altmeyer M ; Messner S ; Hassa PO ; Fey M ; Hottiger MO Molecular Mechanism of Poly(ADP-Ribosyl)Ation by PARP1 and Identification of Lysine Residues as ADP-Ribose Acceptor Sites. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009, 37 , 3723–3738.19372272
(101) Leslie Pedrioli DM ; Leutert M ; Bilan V ; Nowak K ; Gunasekera K ; Ferrari E ; Imhof R ; Malmstrom L ; Hottiger MO Comprehensive ADP-Ribosylome Analysis Identifies Tyrosine as an ADP-Ribose Acceptor Site. EMBO Rep. 2018, 19 , e45310.29954836
(102) Isabelle M ; Gagne JP ; Gallouzi IE ; Poirier GG Quantitative Proteomics and Dynamic Imaging Reveal That G3BP-Mediated Stress Granule Assembly Is Poly(ADP-Ribose)-Dependent Following Exposure to MNNG-Induced DNA Alkylation. J. Cell Sci. 2012, 125 , 4555–4566.22767504
(103) Sukhanova MV ; Abrakhi S ; Joshi V ; Pastre D ; Kutuzov MM ; Anarbaev RO ; Curmi PA ; Hamon L ; Lavrik OI Single Molecule Detection of PARP1 and PARP2 Interaction with DNA Strand Breaks and Their Poly(ADP-Ribosyl)Ation Using High-Resolution AFM Imaging. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016, 44 , No. e60 .
(104) Brochu G ; Duchaine C ; Thibeault L ; Lagueux J ; Shah GM ; Poirier GG Mode of Action of Poly(ADP-Ribose) Glycohydrolase. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1994, 1219 , 342–350.7918631
(105) Pourfarjam Y ; Kasson S ; Tran L ; Ho C ; Lim S ; Kim IK PARG Has a Robust Endo-Glycohydrolase Activity That Releases Protein-Free Poly(ADP-Ribose) Chains. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2020, 527 , 818–823.32439163
(106) Slade D ; Dunstan MS ; Barkauskaite E ; Weston R ; Lafite P ; Dixon N ; Ahel M ; Leys D ; Ahel I The Structure and Catalytic Mechanism of a Poly(ADP-Ribose) Glycohydrolase. Nature 2011, 477 , 616–620.21892188
(107) Mashimo M ; Kato J ; Moss J ADP-Ribosyl-Acceptor Hydrolase 3 Regulates Poly (ADP-Ribose) Degradation and Cell Death During Oxidative Stress. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 2013, 110 , 18964–18969.24191052
(108) Mashimo M ; Bu X ; Aoyama K ; Kato J ; Ishiwata-Endo H ; Stevens LA ; Kasamatsu A ; Wolfe LA ; Toro C ; Adams D ; Markello T ; Gahl WA ; Moss J PARP1 Inhibition Alleviates Injury in ARH3-Deficient Mice and Human Cells. JCI Insight 2019, 4 , e124519.30830864
(109) Winstall E ; Affar EB ; Shah R ; Bourassa S ; Scovassi IA ; Poirier GG Preferential Perinuclear Localization of Poly(ADP-Ribose) Glycohydrolase. Exp. Cell Res. 1999, 251 , 372–378.10471322
(110) Bonicalzi ME ; Vodenicharov M ; Coulombe M ; Gagne JP ; Poirier GG Alteration of Poly(ADP-Ribose) Glycohydrolase Nucleocytoplasmic Shuttling Characteristics Upon Cleavage by Apoptotic Proteases. Biol. Cell 2003, 95 , 635–644.14720466
(111) Meyer-Ficca ML ; Meyer RG ; Coyle DL ; Jacobson EL ; Jacobson MK Human Poly(ADP-Ribose) Glycohydrolase Is Expressed in Alternative Splice Variants Yielding Isoforms That Localize to Different Cell Compartments. Exp. Cell Res. 2004, 297 , 521–532.15212953
(112) Andrabi SA ; Kim NS ; Yu SW ; Wang H ; Koh DW ; Sasaki M ; Klaus JA ; Otsuka T ; Zhang Z ; Koehler RC ; Hurn PD ; Poirier GG ; Dawson VL ; Dawson TM Poly(ADP-Ribose) (PAR) Polymer Is a Death Signal. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 2006, 103 , 18308–18313.17116882
(113) Yu SW ; Andrabi SA ; Wang H ; Kim NS ; Poirier GG ; Dawson TM ; Dawson VL Apoptosis-Inducing Factor Mediates Poly(ADP-Ribose) (PAR) Polymer-Induced Cell Death. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 2006, 103 , 18314–18319.17116881
(114) McGurk L ; Mojsilovic-Petrovic J ; Van Deerlin VM ; Shorter J ; Kalb RG ; Lee VM ; Trojanowski JQ ; Lee EB ; Bonini NM Nuclear Poly(ADP-Ribose) Activity Is a Therapeutic Target in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis. Acta Neuropathol. Commun. 2018, 6 , 84.30157956
(115) Gagne JP ; Isabelle M ; Lo KS ; Bourassa S ; Hendzel MJ ; Dawson VL ; Dawson TM ; Poirier GG Proteome-Wide Identification of Poly(ADP-Ribose) Binding Proteins and Poly(ADP-Ribose)-Associated Protein Complexes. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008, 36 , 6959–6976.18981049
(116) Pleschke JM ; Kleczkowska HE ; Strohm M ; Althaus FR Poly(ADP-Ribose) Binds to Specific Domains in DNA Damage Checkpoint Proteins. J. Biol. Chem. 2000, 275 , 40974–40980.11016934
(117) Krietsch J ; Rouleau M ; Pic E ; Ethier C ; Dawson TM ; Dawson VL ; Masson JY ; Poirier GG ; Gagne JP Reprogramming Cellular Events by Poly(ADP-Ribose)-Binding Proteins. Mol. Aspects Med. 2013, 34 , 1066–1087.23268355
(118) McGurk L ; Gomes E ; Guo L ; Mojsilovic-Petrovic J ; Tran V ; Kalb RG ; Shorter J ; Bonini NM Poly(ADP-Ribose) Prevents Pathological Phase Separation of TDP-43 by Promoting Liquid Demixing and Stress Granule Localization. Mol. Cell 2018, 71 , 703–717 e709.30100264
(119) McGurk L ; Gomes E ; Guo L ; Shorter J ; Bonini NM Poly(ADP-Ribose) Engages the TDP-43 Nuclear-Localization Sequence to Regulate Granulo-Filamentous Aggregation. Biochemistry 2018, 57 , 6923–6926.30540446
(120) Kim HJ ; Kim NC ; Wang YD ; Scarborough EA ; Moore J ; Diaz Z ; MacLea KS ; Freibaum B ; Li S ; Molliex A ; Kanagaraj AP ; Carter R ; Boylan KB ; Wojtas AM ; Rademakers R ; Pinkus JL ; Greenberg SA ; Trojanowski JQ ; Traynor BJ ; Smith BN ; Topp S ; Gkazi AS ; Miller J ; Shaw CE ; Kottlors M ; Kirschner J ; Pestronk A ; Li YR ; Ford AF ; Gitler AD ; Benatar M ; King OD ; Kimonis VE ; Ross ED ; Weihl CC ; Shorter J ; Taylor JP Mutations in Prion-Like Domains in hnRNPA2B1 and Hnrnpa1 Cause Multisystem Proteinopathy and ALS. Nature 2013, 495 , 467–473.23455423
(121) Aravind L The Wwe Domain: A Common Interaction Module in Protein Ubiquitination and ADP Ribosylation. Trends Biochem. Sci. 2001, 26 , 273–275.11343911
(122) Wang Z ; Michaud GA ; Cheng Z ; Zhang Y ; Hinds TR ; Fan E ; Cong F ; Xu W Recognition of the Iso-ADP-Ribose Moiety in Poly(ADP-Ribose) by WWE Domains Suggests a General Mechanism for Poly(ADP-Ribosyl)Ation-Dependent Ubiquitination. Genes Dev. 2012, 26 , 235–240.22267412
(123) Andrabi SA ; Kang HC ; Haince JF ; Lee YI ; Zhang J ; Chi Z ; West AB ; Koehler RC ; Poirier GG ; Dawson TM ; Dawson VL Iduna Protects the Brain from Glutamate Excitotoxicity and Stroke by Interfering with Poly(ADP-Ribose) Polymer-Induced Cell Death. Nat. Med. 2011, 17 , 692–699.21602803
(124) He F ; Tsuda K ; Takahashi M ; Kuwasako K ; Terada T ; Shirouzu M ; Watanabe S ; Kigawa T ; Kobayashi N ; Guntert P ; Yokoyama S ; Muto Y Structural Insight into the Interaction of ADP-Ribose with the PARP WWE Domains. FEBS Lett. 2012, 586 , 3858–3864.23010590
(125) Siddiqua B ; Qamarunnisa S ; Azhar A RCD1 Homologues and Their Constituent Wwe Domain in Plants: Analysis of Conservation through Phylogeny Methods. Biologia 2016, 71 , 642–650.
(126) Jaspers P ; Brosché M ; Overmyer K ; Kangasjär J The Transcription Factor Interacting Protein RCD1 Contains a Novel Conserved Domain. Plant Signaling &amp; Behavior 2010, 5 , 78–80.20592818
(127) DaRosa PA ; Wang Z ; Jiang X ; Pruneda JN ; Cong F ; Klevit RE ; Xu W Allosteric Activation of the RNF146 Ubiquitin Ligase by a Poly(ADP-Ribosyl)Ation Signal. Nature 2015, 517 , 223–226.25327252
(128) Ahmed SF ; Buetow L ; Gabrielsen M ; Lilla S ; Chatrin C ; Sibbet GJ ; Zanivan S ; Huang DT DELTEX2 C-Terminal Domain Recognizes and Recruits ADP-Ribosylated Proteins for Ubiquitination. Sci. Adv. 2020, 6 , eabc0629 .
(129) Vivelo CA ; Ayyappan V ; Leung AKL Poly(ADP-Ribose)-Dependent Ubiquitination and Its Clinical Implications. Biochem. Pharmacol. 2019, 167 , 3–12.31077644
(130) Zhang Y ; Liu S ; Mickanin C ; Feng Y ; Charlat O ; Michaud GA ; Schirle M ; Shi X ; Hild M ; Bauer A ; Myer VE ; Finan PM ; Porter JA ; Huang S-MA ; Cong F Rnf146 Is a Poly(ADP-Ribose)-Directed E3 Ligase That Regulates Axin Degradation and Wnt Signalling. Nat. Cell Biol. 2011, 13 , 623–629.21478859
(131) Kang HC ; Lee YI ; Shin JH ; Andrabi SA ; Chi Z ; Gagne JP ; Lee Y ; Ko HS ; Lee BD ; Poirier GG ; Dawson VL ; Dawson TM Iduna Is a Poly(ADP-Ribose) (PAR)-Dependent E3 Ubiquitin Ligase That Regulates DNA Damage. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 2011, 108 , 14103–14108.21825151
(132) Gatti M ; Imhof R ; Huang Q ; Baudis M ; Altmeyer M The Ubiquitin Ligase Trip12 Limits PARP1 Trapping and Constrains PARP Inhibitor Efficiency. Cell Rep. 2020, 32 , 107985.32755579
(133) Abraham R ; McPherson RL ; Dasovich M ; Badiee M ; Leung AKL ; Griffin DE Both ADP-Ribosyl-Binding and Hydrolase Activities of the Alphavirus Nsp3Macrodomain Affect Neurovirulence in Mice. mBio 2020, 11 , e03253–19.32047134
(134) Karras GI ; Kustatscher G ; Buhecha HR ; Allen MD ; Pugieux C ; Sait F ; Bycroft M ; Ladurner AG The Macro Domain Is an ADP-Ribose Binding Module. EMBO J. 2005, 24 , 1911–1920.15902274
(135) Agnew T ; Munnur D ; Crawford K ; Palazzo L ; Mikoč A ; Ahel I Macrod1 Is a Promiscuous ADP-Ribosyl Hydrolase Localized to Mitochondria. Front. Microbiol. 2018, 9 , 20.29410655
(136) Dani N ; Stilla A ; Marchegiani A ; Tamburro A ; Till S ; Ladurner AG ; Corda D ; Di Girolamo M Combining Affinity Purification by ADP-Ribose-Binding Macro Domains with Mass Spectrometry to Define the Mammalian ADP-Ribosyl Proteome. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 2009, 106 , 4243–4248.19246377
(137) Egloff MP ; Malet H ; Putics A ; Heinonen M ; Dutartre H ; Frangeul A ; Gruez A ; Campanacci V ; Cambillau C ; Ziebuhr J ; Ahola T ; Canard B Structural and Functional Basis for ADP-Ribose and Poly(ADP-Ribose) Binding by Viral Macro Domains. J. Virol. 2006, 80 , 8493–8502.16912299
(138) Brosey CA ; Houl JH ; Katsonis P ; Balapiti-Modarage LPF ; Bommagani S ; Arvai A ; Moiani D ; Bacolla A ; Link T ; Warden LS ; Lichtarge O ; Jones DE ; Ahmed Z ; Tainer JA Targeting SARS-CoV-2 Nsp3Macrodomain Structure with Insights from Human Poly(ADP-Ribose) Glycohydrolase (PARG) Structures with Inhibitors. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 2021, 163 , 171–186.33636189
(139) Frick DN ; Virdi RS ; Vuksanovic N ; Dahal N ; Silvaggi NR Molecular Basis for ADP-Ribose Binding to the Mac1 Domain of SARS-CoV-2 Nsp3. Biochemistry 2020, 59 , 2608–2615.32578982
(140) Cho CC ; Lin MH ; Chuang CY ; Hsu CH Macro Domain from Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (Mers-Cov) Is an Efficient ADP-Ribose Binding Module: Crystal Structure and Biochemical Studies. J. Biol. Chem. 2016, 291 , 4894–4902.26740631
(141) Timinszky G ; Till S ; Hassa PO ; Hothorn M ; Kustatscher G ; Nijmeijer B ; Colombelli J ; Altmeyer M ; Stelzer EH ; Scheffzek K ; A Macrodomain-Containing Histone Rearranges Chromatin Upon Sensing PARP1 Activation. Nat. Struct. Mol. 2009, 16 , 923–929.
(142) Ahel D ; Horejsi Z ; Wiechens N ; Polo SE ; Garcia-Wilson E ; Ahel I ; Flynn H ; Skehel M ; West SC ; Jackson SP ; Owen-Hughes T ; Boulton SJ Poly(ADP-Ribose)-Dependent Regulation of DNA Repair by the Chromatin Remodeling Enzyme Alc1. Science 2009, 325 , 1240–1243.19661379
(143) Gottschalk AJ ; Timinszky G ; Kong SE ; Jin J ; Cai Y ; Swanson SK ; Washburn MP ; Florens L ; Ladurner AG ; Conaway JW ; Conaway RC Poly(ADP-Ribosyl)Ation Directs Recruitment and Activation of an ATP-Dependent Chromatin Remodeler. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 2009, 106 , 13770–13774.19666485
(144) Eustermann S ; Brockmann C ; Mehrotra PV ; Yang JC ; Loakes D ; West SC ; Ahel I ; Neuhaus D Solution Structures of the Two Pbz Domains from Human Aplf and Their Interaction with Poly(ADP-Ribose). Nat. Struct. Biol. 2010, 17 , 241–243.
(145) Ahel I ; Ahel D ; Matsusaka T ; Clark AJ ; Pines J ; Boulton SJ ; West SC Poly(ADP-Ribose)-Binding Zinc Finger Motifs in DNA Repair/Checkpoint Proteins. Nature 2008, 451 , 81–85.18172500
(146) Min W ; Bruhn C ; Grigaravicius P ; Zhou ZW ; Li F ; Kruger A ; Siddeek B ; Greulich KO ; Popp O ; Meisezahl C ; Calkhoven CF ; Burkle A ; Xu X ; Wang ZQ Poly(ADP-Ribose) Binding to Chk1 at Stalled Replication Forks Is Required for S-Phase Checkpoint Activation. Nat. Commun. 2013, 4 , 2993.24356582
(147) Isogai S ; Kanno SI ; Ariyoshi M ; Tochio H ; Ito Y ; Yasui A ; Shirakawa M Solution Structure of a Zinc-Finger Domain That Binds to Poly-ADP-Ribose. Genes to Cells 2010, 15 , 101–110.20088964
(148) Oberoi J ; Richards MW ; Crumpler S ; Brown N ; Blagg J ; Bayliss R Structural Basis of Poly (ADP-Ribose) Recognition by the Multizinc Binding Domain of Checkpoint with Forkhead-Associated and RING Domains (CHFR). J. Biol. Chem. 2010, 285 , 39348–39358.20880844
(149) Li GY ; McCulloch RD ; Fenton AL ; Cheung M ; Meng L ; Ikura M ; Koch CA Structure and Identification of ADP-Ribose Recognition Motifs of APLF and Role in the DNA Damage Response. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 2010, 107 , 9129–9134.20439749
(150) Rulten SL ; Rotheray A ; Green RL ; Grundy GJ ; Moore DA ; Gomez-Herreros F ; Hafezparast M ; Caldecott KW PARP-1 Dependent Recruitment of the Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis-Associated Protein FUS/TLS to Sites of Oxidative DNA Damage. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014, 42 , 307–314.24049082
(151) Rulten SL ; Cortes-Ledesma F ; Guo L ; Iles NJ ; Caldecott KW Aplf (C2orf13) Is a Novel Component of Poly(ADP-Ribose) Signaling in Mammalian Cells. Mol. Cell. Biol. 2008, 28 , 4620–4628.18474613
(152) Kim DS ; Camacho CV ; Nagari A ; Malladi VS ; Challa S ; Kraus WL Activation of PARP-1 by SnoRNAs Controls Ribosome Biogenesis and Cell Growth Via the RNA Helicase DDX21. Mol. Cell 2019, 75 , 1270–1285 e1214.31351877
(153) Malanga M ; Czubaty A ; Girstun A ; Staron K ; Althaus FR Poly(ADP-Ribose) Binds to the Splicing Factor ASF/SF2 and Regulates Its Phosphorylation by DNA Topoisomerase I. J. Biol. Chem. 2008, 283 , 19991–19998.18495665
(154) Adamson B ; Smogorzewska A ; Sigoillot FD ; King RW ; Elledge SJ A Genome-Wide Homologous Recombination Screen Identifies the RNA-Binding Protein RBMX as a Component of the DNA-Damage Response. Nat. Cell Biol. 2012, 14 , 318–328.22344029
(155) Izhar L ; Adamson B ; Ciccia A ; Lewis J ; Pontano-Vaites L ; Leng Y ; Liang AC ; Westbrook TF ; Harper JW ; Elledge SJ A Systematic Analysis of Factors Localized to Damaged Chromatin Reveals PARP-Dependent Recruitment of Transcription Factors. Cell Rep. 2015, 11 , 1486–1500.26004182
(156) Dasovich M ; Beckett MQ ; Bailey S ; Ong SE ; Greenberg MM ; Leung AKL Identifying Poly(ADP-Ribose)-Binding Proteins with Photoaffinity-Based Proteomics. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2021, 143 , 3037–3042.33596067
(157) Haince JF ; McDonald D ; Rodrigue A ; Dery U ; Masson JY ; Hendzel MJ ; Poirier GG PARP1-Dependent Kinetics of Recruitment of MRE11 and NBS1 Proteins to Multiple DNA Damage Sites. J. Biol. Chem. 2008, 283 , 1197–1208.18025084
(158) Boeynaems S ; Holehouse AS ; Weinhardt V ; Kovacs D ; Van Lindt J ; Larabell C ; Van Den Bosch L ; Das R ; Tompa PS ; Pappu RV ; Gitler AD Spontaneous Driving Forces Give Rise to Protein-RNA Condensates with Coexisting Phases and Complex Material Properties. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 2019, 116 , 7889–7898.30926670
(159) Kramer NJ ; Haney MS ; Morgens DW ; Jovicic A ; Couthouis J ; Li A ; Ousey J ; Ma R ; Bieri G ; Tsui CK ; Shi Y ; Hertz NT ; Tessier-Lavigne M ; Ichida JK ; Bassik MC ; Gitler AD CRISPR-Cas9 Screens in Human Cells and Primary Neurons Identify Modifiers of C9orf72 Dipeptide-Repeat-Protein Toxicity. Nat. Genet. 2018, 50 , 603–612.29507424
(160) DeJesus-Hernandez M ; Mackenzie IR ; Boeve BF ; Boxer AL ; Baker M ; Rutherford NJ ; Nicholson AM ; Finch NA ; Flynn H ; Adamson J ; Kouri N ; Wojtas A ; Sengdy P ; Hsiung GY ; Karydas A ; Seeley WW ; Josephs KA ; Coppola G ; Geschwind DH ; Wszolek ZK ; Feldman H ; Knopman DS ; Petersen RC ; Miller BL ; Dickson DW ; Boylan KB ; Graff-Radford NR ; Rademakers R Expanded GGGGCC Hexanucleotide Repeat in Noncoding Region of C9orf72 Causes Chromosome 9p-Linked FTD and ALS. Neuron 2011, 72 , 245–256.21944778
(161) Fratta P ; Mizielinska S ; Nicoll AJ ; Zloh M ; Fisher EM ; Parkinson G ; Isaacs AM C9orf72 Hexanucleotide Repeat Associated with Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and Frontotemporal Dementia Forms RNA G-Quadruplexes. Sci. Rep. 2012, 2 , 1016.23264878
(162) Gao J ; Mewborne QT ; Girdhar A ; Sheth U ; Coyne AN ; Punathil R ; Kang BG ; Dasovich M ; Veire A ; DeJesus Hernandez M ; Liu S ; Shi Z ; Dafinca R ; Fouquerel E ; Talbot K ; Kam TI ; Zhang YJ ; Dickson D ; Petrucelli L ; van Blitterswijk M ; Guo L ; Dawson TM ; Dawson VL ; Leung AKL ; Lloyd TE ; Gendron TF ; Rothstein JD ; Zhang K Poly(ADP-Ribose) Promotes Toxicity of C9orf72 Arginine-Rich Dipeptide Repeat Proteins. Sci. Transl. Med. 2022, 14 , No. eabq3215 .
(163) Wright RHG ; Lioutas A ; Le Dily F ; Soronellas D ; Pohl A ; Bonet J ; Nacht AS ; Samino S ; Font-Mateu J ; Vicent GP ; Wierer M ; Trabado MA ; Schelhorn C ; Carolis C ; Macias MJ ; Yanes O ; Oliva B ; Beato M ADP-Ribose-Derived Nuclear ATP Synthesis by NUDIX5 Is Required for Chromatin Remodeling. Science 2016, 352 , 1221–1225.27257257
(164) Weis K ; Hondele M The Role of Dead-Box ATPases in Gene Expression and the Regulation of RNA-Protein Condensates. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 2022, 91 , 197–219.35303788
(165) Hondele M ; Sachdev R ; Heinrich S ; Wang J ; Vallotton P ; Fontoura BMA ; Weis K Dead-Box ATPases Are Global Regulators of Phase-Separated Organelles. Nature 2019, 573 , 144–148.31435012
(166) Wang J ; Choi JM ; Holehouse AS ; Lee HO ; Zhang X ; Jahnel M ; Maharana S ; Lemaitre R ; Pozniakovsky A ; Drechsel D ; Poser I ; Pappu RV ; Alberti S ; Hyman AA A Molecular Grammar Governing the Driving Forces for Phase Separation of Prion-Like RNA Binding Proteins. Cell 2018, 174 , 688–699 e616.29961577
(167) Guillen-Boixet J ; Kopach A ; Holehouse AS ; Wittmann S ; Jahnel M ; Schlussler R ; Kim K ; Trussina I ; Wang J ; Mateju D ; Poser I ; Maharana S ; Ruer-Gruss M ; Richter D ; Zhang X ; Chang YT ; Guck J ; Honigmann A ; Mahamid J ; Hyman AA ; Pappu RV ; Alberti S ; Franzmann TM RNA-Induced Conformational Switching and Clustering of G3BP Drive Stress Granule Assembly by Condensation. Cell 2020, 181 , 346–361 e317.32302572
(168) Iserman C ; Desroches Altamirano C ; Jegers C ; Friedrich U ; Zarin T ; Fritsch AW ; Mittasch M ; Domingues A ; Hersemann L ; Jahnel M ; Richter D ; Guenther UP ; Hentze MW ; Moses AM ; Hyman AA ; Kramer G ; Kreysing M ; Franzmann TM ; Alberti S Condensation of Ded1p Promotes a Translational Switch from Housekeeping to Stress Protein Production. Cell 2020, 181 , 818–831 e819.32359423
(169) Brangwynne CP ; Eckmann CR ; Courson DS ; Rybarska A ; Hoege C ; Gharakhani J ; Julicher F ; Hyman AA Germline P Granules Are Liquid Droplets That Localize by Controlled Dissolution/Condensation. Science 2009, 324 , 1729–1732.19460965
(170) Zhang H ; Elbaum-Garfinkle S ; Langdon EM ; Taylor N ; Occhipinti P ; Bridges AA ; Brangwynne CP ; Gladfelter AS RNA Controls PolyQ Protein Phase Transitions. Mol. Cell 2015, 60 , 220–230.26474065
(171) Elbaum-Garfinkle S ; Kim Y ; Szczepaniak K ; Chen CC ; Eckmann CR ; Myong S ; Brangwynne CP The Disordered P Granule Protein Laf-1 Drives Phase Separation into Droplets with Tunable Viscosity and Dynamics. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 2015, 112 , 7189–7194.26015579
(172) Lin Y ; Protter DS ; Rosen MK ; Parker R Formation and Maturation of Phase-Separated Liquid Droplets by RNA-Binding Proteins. Mol. Cell 2015, 60 , 208–219.26412307
(173) Maharana S ; Wang J ; Papadopoulos DK ; Richter D ; Pozniakovsky A ; Poser I ; Bickle M ; Rizk S ; Guillen-Boixet J ; Franzmann TM ; Jahnel M ; Marrone L ; Chang YT ; Sterneckert J ; Tomancak P ; Hyman AA ; Alberti S RNA Buffers the Phase Separation Behavior of Prion-Like RNA Binding Proteins. Science 2018, 360 , 918–921.29650702
(174) Fuller GG ; Han T ; Freeberg MA ; Moresco JJ ; Ghanbari Niaki A ; Roach NP ; Yates JR ; Myong S ; Kim JK RNA Promotes Phase Separation of Glycolysis Enzymes into Yeast G Bodies in Hypoxia. Elife 2020, 9 , e48480.32298230
(175) Sun S ; Ling SC ; Qiu J ; Albuquerque CP ; Zhou Y ; Tokunaga S ; Li H ; Qiu H ; Bui A ; Yeo GW ; Huang EJ ; Eggan K ; Zhou H ; Fu XD ; Lagier-Tourenne C ; Cleveland DW ALS-Causative Mutations in FUS/TLS Confer Gain and Loss of Function by Altered Association with Smn and U1-snRNP. Nat. Commun. 2015, 6 , 6171.25625564
(176) Wang A ; Conicella AE ; Schmidt HB ; Martin EW ; Rhoads SN ; Reeb AN ; Nourse A ; Ramirez Montero D ; Ryan VH ; Rohatgi R ; Shewmaker F ; Naik MT ; Mittag T ; Ayala YM ; Fawzi NL A Single N-Terminal Phosphomimic Disrupts TDP-43 Polymerization, Phase Separation, and RNA Splicing. EMBO J. 2018, 37 , e97452.29438978
(177) Soniat M ; Chook YM Nuclear Localization Signals for Four Distinct Karyopherin-Beta Nuclear Import Systems. Biochem. J. 2015, 468 , 353–362.26173234
(178) Weber SC ; Brangwynne CP Getting RNA and Protein in Phase. Cell 2012, 149 , 1188–1191.22682242
(179) Bungenberg de Jong HGKHR Coacervation (Partial Miscibility in Colloid Systems). Proceedings Royal Acad. Amsterdam 1929, 33 , 849–856.
(180) Flory PJ Thermodynamics of High Polymer Solutions. J. Chem. Phys. 1942, 10 , 51–61.
(181) Choi JM ; Holehouse AS ; Pappu RV Physical Principles Underlying the Complex Biology of Intracellular Phase Transitions. Annu. Rev. Biophys. 2020, 49 , 107–133.32004090
(182) Overbeek JT ; Voorn MJ Phase Separation in Polyelectrolyte Solutions; Theory of Complex Coacervation. J. Cell Physiol. Suppl 1957, 49 , 7–22 discussion, 22–26. 13449108
(183) Seim I ; Posey AE ; Snead WT ; Stormo BM ; Klotsa D ; Pappu RV ; Gladfelter AS Dilute Phase Oligomerization Can Oppose Phase Separation and Modulate Material Properties of a Ribonucleoprotein Condensate. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 2022, 119 , No. e2120799119 .
(184) Chujo T ; Hirose T Nuclear Bodies Built on Architectural Long Noncoding RNAs: Unifying Principles of Their Construction and Function. Mol. Cells 2017, 40 , 889–896.29276943
(185) Alberti S ; Gladfelter A ; Mittag T Considerations and Challenges in Studying Liquid-Liquid Phase Separation and Biomolecular Condensates. Cell 2019, 176 , 419–434.30682370
(186) Martin EW ; Harmon TS ; Hopkins JB ; Chakravarthy S ; Incicco JJ ; Schuck P ; Soranno A ; Mittag T A Multi-Step Nucleation Process Determines the Kinetics of Prion-Like Domain Phase Separation. Nat. Commun. 2021, 12 , 4513.34301955
(187) Kar M ; Dar F ; Welsh TJ ; Vogel L ; Kühnemuth R ; Majumdar A ; Krainer G ; Franzmann TM ; Alberti S ; Seidel CAM ; Knowles TPJ ; Hyman AA ; Pappu RV Phase Separating RNA Binding Proteins Form Heterogeneous Distributions of Clusters in Subsaturated Solutions. bioRxiv 2022, 2022.02.03.478969.
(188) Protter DSW ; Parker R Principles and Properties of Stress Granules. Trends Cell Biol. 2016, 26 , 668–679.27289443
(189) Molliex A ; Temirov J ; Lee J ; Coughlin M ; Kanagaraj AP ; Kim HJ ; Mittag T ; Taylor JP Phase Separation by Low Complexity Domains Promotes Stress Granule Assembly and Drives Pathological Fibrillization. Cell 2015, 163 , 123–133.26406374
(190) Rao BS ; Parker R Numerous Interactions Act Redundantly to Assemble a Tunable Size of P Bodies in Saccharomyces Cerevisiae. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 2017, 114 , E9569–E9578.29078371
(191) Luo Y ; Na Z ; Slavoff SA P-Bodies: Composition, Properties, and Functions. Biochemistry 2018, 57 , 2424–2431.29381060
(192) Ma W ; Mayr C A Membraneless Organelle Associated with the Endoplasmic Reticulum Enables 3′UTR-Mediated Protein-Protein Interactions. Cell 2018, 175 , 1492–1506 e1419.30449617
(193) Ma W ; Zhen G ; Xie W ; Mayr C In Vivo Reconstitution Finds Multivalent RNA-RNA Interactions as Drivers of Mesh-Like Condensates. Elife 2021, 10 , e64252.33650968
(194) Jin M ; Fuller GG ; Han T ; Yao Y ; Alessi AF ; Freeberg MA ; Roach NP ; Moresco JJ ; Karnovsky A ; Baba M ; Yates JR 3rd ; Gitler AD ; Inoki K ; Klionsky DJ ; Kim JK Glycolytic Enzymes Coalesce in G Bodies under Hypoxic Stress. Cell Rep. 2017, 20 , 895–908.28746874
(195) Brangwynne CP ; Mitchison TJ ; Hyman AA Active Liquid-Like Behavior of Nucleoli Determines Their Size and Shape in Xenopus Laevis Oocytes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 2011, 108 , 4334–4339.21368180
(196) Feric M ; Vaidya N ; Harmon TS ; Mitrea DM ; Zhu L ; Richardson TM ; Kriwacki RW ; Pappu RV ; Brangwynne CP Coexisting Liquid Phases Underlie Nucleolar Subcompartments. Cell 2016, 165 , 1686–1697.27212236
(197) Lin Y ; Schmidt BF ; Bruchez MP ; McManus CJ Structural Analyses of Neat1 Lncrnas Suggest Long-Range RNA Interactions That May Contribute to Paraspeckle Architecture. Nucleic Acids Res. 2018, 46 , 3742–3752.29394378
(198) Hennig S ; Kong G ; Mannen T ; Sadowska A ; Kobelke S ; Blythe A ; Knott GJ ; Iyer KS ; Ho D ; Newcombe EA ; Hosoki K ; Goshima N ; Kawaguchi T ; Hatters D ; Trinkle-Mulcahy L ; Hirose T ; Bond CS ; Fox AH Prion-Like Domains in RNA Binding Proteins Are Essential for Building Subnuclear Paraspeckles. J. Cell. Biol. 2015, 210 , 529–539.26283796
(199) Duronio RJ ; Marzluff WF Coordinating Cell Cycle-Regulated Histone Gene Expression through Assembly and Function of the Histone Locus Body. RNA Biol. 2017, 14 , 726–738.28059623
(200) Hyman AA ; Weber CA ; Julicher F Liquid-Liquid Phase Separation in Biology. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2014, 30 , 39–58.25288112
(201) Mittag T ; Pappu RV A Conceptual Framework for Understanding Phase Separation and Addressing Open Questions and Challenges. Mol. Cell 2022, 82 , 2201–2214.35675815
(202) Choi JM ; Hyman AA ; Pappu RV Generalized Models for Bond Percolation Transitions of Associative Polymers. Phys. Rev. E 2020, 102 , 042403.33212590
(203) Zeng X ; Holehouse AS ; Chilkoti A ; Mittag T ; Pappu RV Connecting Coil-to-Globule Transitions to Full Phase Diagrams for Intrinsically Disordered Proteins. Biophys. J. 2020, 119 , 402–418.32619404
(204) Martin EW ; Holehouse AS ; Peran I ; Farag M ; Incicco JJ ; Bremer A ; Grace CR ; Soranno A ; Pappu RV ; Mittag T Valence and Patterning of Aromatic Residues Determine the Phase Behavior of Prion-Like Domains. Science 2020, 367 , 694–699.32029630
(205) Mitrea DM ; Cika JA ; Guy CS ; Ban D ; Banerjee PR ; Stanley CB ; Nourse A ; Deniz AA ; Kriwacki RW Nucleophosmin Integrates within the Nucleolus Via Multi-Modal Interactions with Proteins Displaying R-Rich Linear Motifs and rRNA. Elife 2016, 5 , e1e571.
(206) Harmon TS ; Holehouse AS ; Rosen MK ; Pappu RV Intrinsically Disordered Linkers Determine the Interplay between Phase Separation and Gelation in Multivalent Proteins. Elife 2017, 6 , e30294.29091028
(207) Ginell GM ; Holehouse AS An Introduction to the Stickers-and-Spacers Framework as Applied to Biomolecular Condensates. Methods Mol. Biol. 2023, 2563 , 95–116.36227469
(208) Greig JA ; Nguyen TA ; Lee M ; Holehouse AS ; Posey AE ; Pappu RV ; Jedd G Arginine-Enriched Mixed-Charge Domains Provide Cohesion for Nuclear Speckle Condensation. Mol. Cell 2020, 77 , 1237–1250 e1234.32048997
(209) Oldfield CJ ; Dunker AK Intrinsically Disordered Proteins and Intrinsically Disordered Protein Regions. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 2014, 83 , 553–584.24606139
(210) Meszaros B ; Erdos G ; Dosztanyi Z IUPred2A: Context-Dependent Prediction of Protein Disorder as a Function of Redox State and Protein Binding. Nucleic Acids Res. 2018, 46 , W329–W337.29860432
(211) Choi JM ; Dar F ; Pappu RV LASSI: A Lattice Model for Simulating Phase Transitions of Multivalent Proteins. PLoS Comput. Biol. 2019, 15 , No. e1007028 .
(212) Fahrer J ; Kranaster R ; Altmeyer M ; Marx A ; Burkle A Quantitative Analysis of the Binding Affinity of Poly(ADP-Ribose) to Specific Binding Proteins as a Function of Chain Length. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007, 35 , No. e143 .
(213) Fahrer J ; Popp O ; Malanga M ; Beneke S ; Markovitz DM ; Ferrando-May E ; Burkle A ; Kappes F High-Affinity Interaction of Poly(ADP-Ribose) and the Human DEK Oncoprotein Depends Upon Chain Length. Biochemistry 2010, 49 , 7119–7130.20669926
(214) Schwartz JC ; Wang X ; Podell ER ; Cech TR RNA Seeds Higher-Order Assembly of FUS Protein. Cell Rep. 2013, 5 , 918–925.24268778
(215) Khong A ; Matheny T ; Jain S ; Mitchell SF ; Wheeler JR ; Parker R The Stress Granule Transcriptome Reveals Principles of mRNA Accumulation in Stress Granules. Mol. Cell 2017, 68 , 808–820 e805.29129640
(216) Niaki AG ; Sarkar J ; Cai X ; Rhine K ; Vidaurre V ; Guy B ; Hurst M ; Lee JC ; Koh HR ; Guo L ; Fare CM ; Shorter J ; Myong S Loss of Dynamic RNA Interaction and Aberrant Phase Separation Induced by Two Distinct Types of ALS/FTD-Linked FUS Mutations. Mol. Cell 2020, 77 , 82.31630970
(217) Hamad N ; Mashima T ; Yamaoki Y ; Kondo K ; Yoneda R ; Oyoshi T ; Kurokawa R ; Nagata T ; Katahira M RNA Sequence and Length Contribute to RNA-Induced Conformational Change of TLS/FUS. Sci. Rep. 2020, 10 , 2629.32060318
(218) Colombrita C ; Onesto E ; Megiorni F ; Pizzuti A ; Baralle FE ; Buratti E ; Silani V ; Ratti A TDP-43 and FUS RNA-Binding Proteins Bind Distinct Sets of Cytoplasmic Messenger RNAs and Differently Regulate Their Post-Transcriptional Fate in Motoneuron-Like Cells. J. Biol. Chem. 2012, 287 , 15635–15647.22427648
(219) French RL ; Grese ZR ; Aligireddy H ; Dhavale DD ; Reeb AN ; Kedia N ; Kotzbauer PT ; Bieschke J ; Ayala YM Detection of TAR DNA-Binding Protein 43 (TDP-43) Oligomers as Initial Intermediate Species During Aggregate Formation. J. Biol. Chem. 2019, 294 , 6696–6709.30824544
(220) Mann JR ; Gleixner AM ; Mauna JC ; Gomes E ; DeChellis-Marks MR ; Needham PG ; Copley KE ; Hurtle B ; Portz B ; Pyles NJ ; Guo L ; Calder CB ; Wills ZP ; Pandey UB ; Kofler JK ; Brodsky JL ; Thathiah A ; Shorter J ; Donnelly CJ RNA Binding Antagonizes Neurotoxic Phase Transitions of TDP-43. Neuron 2019, 102 , 321–338 e328.30826182
(221) Panzeter PL ; Realini CA ; Althaus FR Noncovalent Interactions of Poly(Adenosine Diphosphate Ribose) with Histones. Biochemistry 1992, 31 , 1379–1385.1736995
(222) Moor NA ; Vasil’eva IA ; Kuznetsov NA ; Lavrik OI Human Apurinic/Apyrimidinic Endonuclease 1 Is Modified in Vitro by Poly(ADP-Ribose) Polymerase 1 under Control of the Structure of Damaged DNA. Biochimie 2020, 168 , 144–155.31668992
(223) Xu F ; Sun Y ; Yang SZ ; Zhou T ; Jhala N ; McDonald J ; Chen Y Cytoplasmic PARP-1 Promotes Pancreatic Cancer Tumorigenesis and Resistance. Int. J. Cancer 2019, 145 , 474–483.30614530
(224) Mashimo M ; Onishi M ; Uno A ; Tanimichi A ; Nobeyama A ; Mori M ; Yamada S ; Negi S ; Bu X ; Kato J ; Moss J ; Sanada N ; Kizu R ; Fujii T The 89-Kda PARP1 Cleavage Fragment Serves as a Cytoplasmic PAR Carrier to Induce AIF-Mediated Apoptosis. J. Biol. Chem. 2021, 296 , 100046.33168626
(225) Hofweber M ; Dormann D Friend or Foe-Post-Translational Modifications as Regulators of Phase Separation and Rnp Granule Dynamics. J. Biol. Chem. 2019, 294 , 7137–7150.30587571
(226) Nosella ML ; Tereshchenko M ; Pritisanac I ; Chong PA ; Toretsky JA ; Lee HO ; Forman-Kay JD O-Linked-N-Acetylglucosaminylation of the RNA-Binding Protein Ews N-Terminal Low Complexity Region Reduces Phase Separation and Enhances Condensate Dynamics. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2021, 143 , 11520–11534.34304571
(227) Qamar S ; Wang G ; Randle SJ ; Ruggeri FS ; Varela JA ; Lin JQ ; Phillips EC ; Miyashita A ; Williams D ; Strohl F ; Meadows W ; Ferry R ; Dardov VJ ; Tartaglia GG ; Farrer LA ; Kaminski Schierle GS ; Kaminski CF ; Holt CE ; Fraser PE ; Schmitt-Ulms G ; Klenerman D ; Knowles T ; Vendruscolo M ; St George-Hyslop P FUS Phase Separation Is Modulated by a Molecular Chaperone and Methylation of Arginine Cation-Pi Interactions. Cell 2018, 173 , 720–734 e715.29677515
(228) Hofweber M ; Hutten S ; Bourgeois B ; Spreitzer E ; Niedner-Boblenz A ; Schifferer M ; Ruepp MD ; Simons M ; Niessing D ; Madl T ; Dormann D Phase Separation of FUS Is Suppressed by Its Nuclear Import Receptor and Arginine Methylation. Cell 2018, 173 , 706–719 e713.29677514
(229) Gittings LM ; Boeynaems S ; Lightwood D ; Clargo A ; Topia S ; Nakayama L ; Troakes C ; Mann DMA ; Gitler AD ; Lashley T ; Isaacs AM Symmetric Dimethylation of Poly-GR Correlates with Disease Duration in C9orf72 Ftld and ALS and Reduces Poly-GR Phase Separation and Toxicity. Acta Neuropathologica 2020, 139 , 407–410.31832771
(230) Cai T ; Yu Z ; Wang Z ; Liang C ; Richard S Arginine Methylation of SARS-CoV-2 Nucleocapsid Protein Regulates RNA Binding, Its Ability to Suppress Stress Granule Formation, and Viral Replication. J. Biol. Chem. 2021, 297 , 100821.34029587
(231) Huang C ; Chen Y ; Dai H ; Zhang H ; Xie M ; Zhang H ; Chen F ; Kang X ; Bai X ; Chen Z UBAP2L Arginine Methylation by PRMT1Modulates Stress Granule Assembly. Cell Death &amp; Differentiation 2020, 27 , 227–241.31114027
(232) Tsang B ; Arsenault J ; Vernon RM ; Lin H ; Sonenberg N ; Wang LY ; Bah A ; Forman-Kay JD Phosphoregulated FMRP Phase Separation Models Activity-Dependent Translation through Bidirectional Control of mRNA Granule Formation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 2019, 116 , 4218–4227.30765518
(233) Aikio M ; Wobst HJ ; Odeh HM ; Lee BL ; Class B ; Ollerhead TA ; Mack KL ; Ford AF ; Barbieri EM ; Cupo RR ; Drake LE ; Castello N ; Baral A ; Dunlop J ; Gitler AD ; Javaherian A ; Finkbeiner S ; Brown DG ; Moss SJ ; Brandon NJ ; Shorter J Opposing Roles of P38α-Mediated Phosphorylation and Arginine Methylation in Driving TDP-43 Proteinopathy. bioRxiv 2021, 2021.08.04.455154.
(234) Yang P ; Mathieu C ; Kolaitis RM ; Zhang P ; Messing J ; Yurtsever U ; Yang Z ; Wu J ; Li Y ; Pan Q ; Yu J ; Martin EW ; Mittag T ; Kim HJ ; Taylor JP G3BP1 Is a Tunable Switch That Triggers Phase Separation to Assemble Stress Granules. Cell 2020, 181 , 325–345 e328.32302571
(235) Carlson CR ; Asfaha JB ; Ghent CM ; Howard CJ ; Hartooni N ; Safari M ; Frankel AD ; Morgan DO Phosphoregulation of Phase Separation by the Sars-Cov-2 N Protein Suggests a Biophysical Basis for Its Dual Functions. Mol. Cell 2020, 80 , 1092–1103 e1094.33248025
(236) Liu Z ; Zhang S ; Gu J ; Tong Y ; Li Y ; Gui X ; Long H ; Wang C ; Zhao C ; Lu J ; He L ; Li Y ; Liu Z ; Li D ; Liu C Hsp27 Chaperones FUS Phase Separation under the Modulation of Stress-Induced Phosphorylation. Nat. Struct. Mol 2020, 27 , 363–372.
(237) Boehning M ; Dugast-Darzacq C ; Rankovic M ; Hansen AS ; Yu T ; Marie-Nelly H ; McSwiggen DT ; Kokic G ; Dailey GM ; Cramer P ; Darzacq X ; Zweckstetter M RNA Polymerase Ii Clustering through Carboxy-Terminal Domain Phase Separation. Nat. Struct. Mol. 2018, 25 , 833–840.
(238) Kim S ; Kalappurakkal JM ; Mayor S ; Rosen MK Phosphorylation of Nephrin Induces Phase Separated Domains That Move through Actomyosin Contraction. Mol. Biol. Cell 2019, 30 , 2996–3012.31599693
(239) Pandey N ; Black BE Rapid Detection and Signaling of DNA Damage by PARP-1. Trends Biochem. Sci. 2021, 46 , 744–757.33674152
(240) Talhaoui I ; Lebedeva NA ; Zarkovic G ; Saint-Pierre C ; Kutuzov MM ; Sukhanova MV ; Matkarimov BT ; Gasparutto D ; Saparbaev MK ; Lavrik OI ; Ishchenko AA Poly(ADP-Ribose) Polymerases Covalently Modify Strand Break Termini in DNA Fragments in Vitro. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016, 44 , 9279–9295.27471034
(241) Zarkovic G ; Belousova EA ; Talhaoui I ; Saint-Pierre C ; Kutuzov MM ; Matkarimov BT ; Biard D ; Gasparutto D ; Lavrik OI ; Ishchenko AA Characterization of DNA ADP-Ribosyltransferase Activities of PARP2 and PARP3: New Insights into DNA ADP-Ribosylation. Nucleic Acids Res. 2018, 46 , 2417–2431.29361132
(242) Ogata N ; Ueda K ; Kawaichi M ; Hayaishi O Poly(ADP-Ribose) Synthetase, a Main Acceptor of Poly(ADP-Ribose) in Isolated Nuclei. J. Biol. Chem. 1981, 256 , 4135–4137.6260786
(243) Eustermann S ; Videler H ; Yang JC ; Cole PT ; Gruszka D ; Veprintsev D ; Neuhaus D The DNA-Binding Domain of Human PARP-1 Interacts with DNA Single-Strand Breaks as a Monomer through Its Second Zinc Finger. J. Mol. Biol. 2011, 407 , 149–170.21262234
(244) Dawicki-McKenna JM ; Langelier MF ; DeNizio JE ; Riccio AA ; Cao CD ; Karch KR ; McCauley M ; Steffen JD ; Black BE ; Pascal JM PARP-1 Activation Requires Local Unfolding of an Autoinhibitory Domain. Mol. Cell 2015, 60 , 755–768.26626480
(245) Langelier M-F ; Zandarashvili L ; Aguiar PM ; Black BE ; Pascal JM NAD+ Analog Reveals PARP-1 Substrate-Blocking Mechanism and Allosteric Communication from Catalytic Center to DNA-Binding Domains. Nat. Commun. 2018, 9 , 844.29487285
(246) Langelier MF ; Planck JL ; Roy S ; Pascal JM Crystal Structures of Poly(ADP-Ribose) Polymerase-1 (PARP-1) Zinc Fingers Bound to DNA: Structural and Functional Insights into DNA-Dependent PARP-1 Activity. J. Biol. Chem. 2011, 286 , 10690–10701.21233213
(247) Ossovskaya V ; Koo IC ; Kaldjian EP ; Alvares C ; Sherman BM Upregulation of Poly (ADP-Ribose) Polymerase-1 (PARP1) in Triple-Negative Breast Cancer and Other Primary Human Tumor Types. Genes Cancer 2010, 1 , 812–821.21779467
(248) Rojo F ; Garcia-Parra J ; Zazo S ; Tusquets I ; Ferrer-Lozano J ; Menendez S ; Eroles P ; Chamizo C ; Servitja S ; Ramirez-Merino N ; Lobo F ; Bellosillo B ; Corominas JM ; Yelamos J ; Serrano S ; Lluch A ; Rovira A ; Albanell J Nuclear PARP-1 Protein Overexpression Is Associated with Poor Overall Survival in Early Breast Cancer. Ann. Oncol. 2012, 23 , 1156–1164.21908496
(249) Liu Y ; Zhang Y ; Zhao Y ; Gao D ; Xing J ; Liu H High PARP-1 Expression Is Associated with Tumor Invasion and Poor Prognosis in Gastric Cancer. Oncol. Lett. 2016, 12 , 3825–3835.27895737
(250) Swindall AF ; Stanley JA ; Yang ES PARP-1: Friend or Foe of DNA Damage and Repair in Tumorigenesis? Cancers (Basel) 2013, 5 , 943–958.24202328
(251) Sharma S ; Javadekar SM ; Pandey M ; Srivastava M ; Kumari R ; Raghavan SC Homology and Enzymatic Requirements of Microhomology-Dependent Alternative End Joining. Cell Death Dis. 2015, 6 , No. e1697 .
(252) Golan T ; Kanji ZS ; Epelbaum R ; Devaud N ; Dagan E ; Holter S ; Aderka D ; Paluch-Shimon S ; Kaufman B ; Gershoni-Baruch R ; Hedley D ; Moore MJ ; Friedman E ; Gallinger S Overall Survival and Clinical Characteristics of Pancreatic Cancer in Brca Mutation Carriers. Br. J. Cancer 2014, 111 , 1132–1138.25072261
(253) Rouleau M ; Patel A ; Hendzel MJ ; Kaufmann SH ; Poirier GG PARP Inhibition: PARP1 and Beyond. Nat. Rev. Cancer 2010, 10 , 293–301.20200537
(254) Menear KA ; Adcock C ; Boulter R ; Cockcroft XL ; Copsey L ; Cranston A ; Dillon KJ ; Drzewiecki J ; Garman S ; Gomez S ; Javaid H ; Kerrigan F ; Knights C ; Lau A ; Loh VM Jr ; Matthews IT ; Moore S ; O’Connor MJ ; Smith GC ; Martin NM 4-[3-(4-Cyclopropanecarbonylpiperazine-1-Carbonyl)-4-Fluorobenzyl]-2h-Phthalazin- 1-One: A Novel Bioavailable Inhibitor of Poly(ADP-Ribose) Polymerase-1. J. Med. Chem. 2008, 51 , 6581–6591.18800822
(255) Robson M ; Im SA ; Senkus E ; Xu B ; Domchek SM ; Masuda N ; Delaloge S ; Li W ; Tung N ; Armstrong A ; Wu W ; Goessl C ; Runswick S ; Conte P Olaparib for Metastatic Breast Cancer in Patients with a Germline BRCA Mutation. N. Engl. J. Med. 2017, 377 , 523–533.28578601
(256) Alvarez-Gonzalez R ; Althaus FR Poly(ADP-Ribose) Catabolism in Mammalian Cells Exposed to DNA-Damaging Agents. Mutat. Res. 1989, 218 , 67–74.2770765
(257) Mastrocola AS ; Kim SH ; Trinh AT ; Rodenkirch LA ; Tibbetts RS The RNA-Binding Protein FUSed in Sarcoma (FUS) Functions Downstream of Poly(ADP-Ribose) Polymerase (PARP) in Response to DNA Damage. J. Biol. Chem. 2013, 288 , 24731–24741.23833192
(258) Wang W-Y ; Pan L ; Su SC ; Quinn EJ ; Sasaki M ; Jimenez JC ; Mackenzie IRA ; Huang EJ ; Tsai L-H Interaction of FUS and HDAC1 Regulates DNA Damage Response and Repair in Neurons. Nat. Neurosci. 2013, 16 , 1383–1391.24036913
(259) Schwartz JC ; Cech TR ; Parker RR Biochemical Properties and Biological Functions of FET Proteins. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 2015, 84 , 355–379.25494299
(260) Boulay G ; Sandoval GJ ; Riggi N ; Iyer S ; Buisson R ; Naigles B ; Awad ME ; Rengarajan S ; Volorio A ; McBride MJ ; Broye LC ; Zou L ; Stamenkovic I ; Kadoch C ; Rivera MN Cancer-Specific Retargeting of BAF Complexes by a Prion-Like Domain. Cell 2017, 171 , 163–178 e119.28844694
(261) Levone BR ; Lenzken SC ; Antonaci M ; Maiser A ; Rapp A ; Conte F ; Reber S ; Mechtersheimer J ; Ronchi AE ; Muhlemann O ; Leonhardt H ; Cardoso MC ; Ruepp MD ; Barabino SML FUS-Dependent Liquid-Liquid Phase Separation Is Important for DNA Repair Initiation. J. Cell. Biol. 2021, 220 , e202008030.33704371
(262) Ishigaki S ; Riku Y ; Fujioka Y ; Endo K ; Iwade N ; Kawai K ; Ishibashi M ; Yokoi S ; Katsuno M ; Watanabe H ; Mori K ; Akagi A ; Yokota O ; Terada S ; Kawakami I ; Suzuki N ; Warita H ; Aoki M ; Yoshida M ; Sobue G Aberrant Interaction between FUS and SFPQ in Neurons in a Wide Range of FTLD Spectrum Diseases. Brain 2020, 143 , 2398–2405.32770214
(263) Naumann M ; Pal A ; Goswami A ; Lojewski X ; Japtok J ; Vehlow A ; Naujock M ; Günther R ; Jin M ; Stanslowsky N ; Reinhardt P ; Sterneckert J ; Frickenhaus M ; Pan-Montojo F ; Storkebaum E ; Poser I ; Freischmidt A ; Weishaupt JH ; Holzmann K ; Troost D ; Ludolph AC ; Boeckers TM ; Liebau S ; Petri S ; Cordes N ; Hyman AA ; Wegner F ; Grill SW ; Weis J ; Storch A ; Hermann A Impaired DNA Damage Response Signaling by FUS-NLS Mutations Leads to Neurodegeneration and FUS Aggregate Formation. Nat. Commun. 2018, 9 , 335.29362359
(264) Hill SJ ; Mordes DA ; Cameron LA ; Neuberg DS ; Landini S ; Eggan K ; Livingston DM Two Familial ALS Proteins Function in Prevention/Repair of Transcription-Associated DNA Damage. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 2016, 113 , E7701–E7709.27849576
(265) Ferro AM ; Olivera BM Poly(ADP-Ribosylation) in Vitro. Reaction Parameters and Enzyme Mechanism. J. Biol. Chem. 1982, 257 , 7808–7813.6282854
(266) Lee SG ; Kim N ; Kim SM ; Park IB ; Kim H ; Kim S ; Kim BG ; Hwang JM ; Baek IJ ; Gartner A ; Park JH ; Myung K Ewing Sarcoma Protein Promotes Dissociation of Poly(ADP-Ribose) Polymerase 1 from Chromatin. EMBO Rep. 2020, 21 , No. e48676 .
(267) Kim JJ ; Lee SY ; Hwang Y ; Kim S ; Chung JM ; Park S ; Yoon J ; Yun H ; Ji JH ; Chae S ; Cho H ; Kim CG ; Dawson TM ; Kim H ; Dawson VL ; Kang HC Usp39 Promotes Non-Homologous End-Joining Repair by Poly(ADP-Ribose)-Induced Liquid Demixing. Nucleic Acids Res. 2021, 49 , 11083–11102.34614178
(268) Wang S ; Wang Z ; Li J ; Qin J ; Song J ; Li Y ; Zhao L ; Zhang X ; Guo H ; Shao C ; Kong B ; Liu Z Splicing Factor USP39 Promotes Ovarian Cancer Malignancy through Maintaining Efficient Splicing of Oncogenic Hmga2. Cell Death Dis. 2021, 12 , 294.33731694
(269) Kanai M ; Hanashiro K ; Kim SH ; Hanai S ; Boulares AH ; Miwa M ; Fukasawa K Inhibition of Crm1-P53 Interaction and Nuclear Export of P53 by Poly(ADP-Ribosyl)Ation. Nat. Cell Biol. 2007, 9 , 1175–1183.17891139
(270) Petronilho EC ; Pedrote MM ; Marques MA ; Passos YM ; Mota MF ; Jakobus B ; dos Santos de Sousa G ; Pereira da Costa F ; Felix AL ; Ferretti GDS ; Almeida FP ; Cordeiro Y ; Vieira T ; de Oliveira GAP ; Silva JL Phase Separation of P53 Precedes Aggregation and Is Affected by Oncogenic Mutations and Ligands. Chem. Sci. 2021, 12 , 7334–7349.34163823
(271) Kamagata K ; Kanbayashi S ; Honda M ; Itoh Y ; Takahashi H ; Kameda T ; Nagatsugi F ; Takahashi S Liquid-Like Droplet Formation by Tumor Suppressor P53 Induced by Multivalent Electrostatic Interactions between Two Disordered Domains. Sci. Rep. 2020, 10 , 580.31953488
(272) Veith S ; Schink A ; Engbrecht M ; Mack M ; Rank L ; Rossatti P ; Hakobyan M ; Goly D ; Hefele T ; Frensch M ; Fischbach A ; Bürkle A ; Mangerich A PARP1 Regulates DNA Damage-Induced Nucleolar-Nucleoplasmic Shuttling of WRN and XRCC in a Toxicant and Protein-Specific Manner. Sci. Rep. 2019, 9 , 10075.31296950
(273) Boamah EK ; Kotova E ; Garabedian M ; Jarnik M ; Tulin AV Poly(ADP-Ribose) Polymerase 1 (PARP-1) Regulates Ribosomal Biogenesis in Drosophila Nucleoli. PLoS Genet 2012, 8 , No. e1002442 .
(274) Kilic S ; Lezaja A ; Gatti M ; Bianco E ; Michelena J ; Imhof R ; Altmeyer M Phase Separation of 53BP1 Determines Liquid-Like Behavior of DNA Repair Compartments. EMBO J. 2019, 38 , No. e101379 .
(275) Zhang L ; Geng X ; Wang F ; Tang J ; Ichida Y ; Sharma A ; Jin S ; Chen M ; Tang M ; Pozo FM ; Wang W ; Wang J ; Wozniak M ; Guo X ; Miyagi M ; Jin F ; Xu Y ; Yao X ; Zhang Y 53BP1 Regulates Heterochromatin through Liquid Phase Separation. Nat. Commun. 2022, 13 , 360.35042897
(276) Price DH P-TEFb, a Cyclin-Dependent Kinase Controlling Elongation by RNA Polymerase Ii. Mol. Cell. Biol. 2000, 20 , 2629–2634.10733565
(277) Krishnakumar R ; Gamble MJ ; Frizzell KM ; Berrocal JG ; Kininis M ; Kraus WL Reciprocal Binding of PARP-1 and Histone H1 at Promoters Specifies Transcriptional Outcomes. Science 2008, 319 , 819–821.18258916
(278) Krishnakumar R ; Kraus WL PARP-1 Regulates Chromatin Structure and Transcription through a Kdm5b-Dependent Pathway. Mol. Cell 2010, 39 , 736–749.20832725
(279) Gibson BA ; Zhang Y ; Jiang H ; Hussey KM ; Shrimp JH ; Lin H ; Schwede F ; Yu Y ; Kraus WL Chemical Genetic Discovery of PARP Targets Reveals a Role for PARP-1 in Transcription Elongation. Science 2016, 353 , 45–50.27256882
(280) Liu Z ; Kraus WL Catalytic-Independent Functions of PARP-1 Determine Sox2 Pioneer Activity at Intractable Genomic Loci. Mol. Cell 2017, 65 , 589–603 e589.28212747
(281) Luo X ; Ryu KW ; Kim DS ; Nandu T ; Medina CJ ; Gupte R ; Gibson BA ; Soccio RE ; Yu Y ; Gupta RK ; Kraus WL PARP-1 Controls the Adipogenic Transcriptional Program by Parylating C/EBPbeta and Modulating Its Transcriptional Activity. Mol. Cell 2017, 65 , 260–271.28107648
(282) Ryu KW ; Nandu T ; Kim J ; Challa S ; DeBerardinis RJ ; Kraus WL Metabolic Regulation of Transcription through Compartmentalized NAD(+) Biosynthesis. Science 2018, 360 , eaan5780.29748257
(283) Hnisz D ; Shrinivas K ; Young RA ; Chakraborty AK ; Sharp PA A Phase Separation Model for Transcriptional Control. Cell 2017, 169 , 13–23.28340338
(284) Sabari BR ; Dall’Agnese A ; Boija A ; Klein IA ; Coffey EL ; Shrinivas K ; Abraham BJ ; Hannett NM ; Zamudio AV ; Manteiga JC ; Li CH ; Guo YE ; Day DS ; Schuijers J ; Vasile E ; Malik S ; Hnisz D ; Lee TI ; Cisse II ; Roeder RG ; Sharp PA ; Chakraborty AK ; Young RA Coactivator Condensation at Super-Enhancers Links Phase Separation and Gene Control. Science 2018, 361 , eaar3958.29930091
(285) Boija A ; Klein IA ; Sabari BR ; Dall’Agnese A ; Coffey EL ; Zamudio AV ; Li CH ; Shrinivas K ; Manteiga JC ; Hannett NM ; Abraham BJ ; Afeyan LK ; Guo YE ; Rimel JK ; Fant CB ; Schuijers J ; Lee TI ; Taatjes DJ ; Young RA Transcription Factors Activate Genes through the Phase-Separation Capacity of Their Activation Domains. Cell 2018, 175 , 1842–1855 e1816.30449618
(286) Guo YE ; Manteiga JC ; Henninger JE ; Sabari BR ; Dall’Agnese A ; Hannett NM ; Spille JH ; Afeyan LK ; Zamudio AV ; Shrinivas K ; Abraham BJ ; Boija A ; Decker TM ; Rimel JK ; Fant CB ; Lee TI ; Cisse II ; Sharp PA ; Taatjes DJ ; Young RA Pol Ii Phosphorylation Regulates a Switch between Transcriptional and Splicing Condensates. Nature 2019, 572 , 543–548.31391587
(287) Henninger JE ; Oksuz O ; Shrinivas K ; Sagi I ; LeRoy G ; Zheng MM ; Andrews JO ; Zamudio AV ; Lazaris C ; Hannett NM ; Lee TI ; Sharp PA ; Cisse II ; Chakraborty AK ; Young RA RNA-Mediated Feedback Control of Transcriptional Condensates. Cell 2021, 184 , 207–225 e224.33333019
(288) March ZM ; King OD ; Shorter J Prion-Like Domains as Epigenetic Regulators, Scaffolds for Subcellular Organization, and Drivers of Neurodegenerative Disease. Brain Res. 2016, 1647 , 9–18.26996412
(289) Maxwell BA ; Gwon Y ; Mishra A ; Peng J ; Nakamura H ; Zhang K ; Kim HJ ; Taylor JP Ubiquitination Is Essential for Recovery of Cellular Activities after Heat Shock. Science 2021, 372 , No. eabc3593 .
(290) Van Treeck B ; Protter DSW ; Matheny T ; Khong A ; Link CD ; Parker R RNA Self-Assembly Contributes to Stress Granule Formation and Defining the Stress Granule Transcriptome. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 2018, 115 , 2734–2739.29483269
(291) Sanders DW ; Kedersha N ; Lee DSW ; Strom AR ; Drake V ; Riback JA ; Bracha D ; Eeftens JM ; Iwanicki A ; Wang A ; Wei MT ; Whitney G ; Lyons SM ; Anderson P ; Jacobs WM ; Ivanov P ; Brangwynne CP Competing Protein-RNA Interaction Networks Control Multiphase Intracellular Organization. Cell 2020, 181 , 306–324 e328.32302570
(292) Jin X ; Cao X ; Liu S ; Liu B Functional Roles of Poly(ADP-Ribose) in Stress Granule Formation and Dynamics. Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 2021, 9 , 671780.33981709
(293) Boeynaems S ; Gitler AD Pour Some Sugar on TDP(−43). Mol. Cell 2018, 71 , 649–651.30193092
(294) Guo L ; Kim HJ ; Wang H ; Monaghan J ; Freyermuth F ; Sung JC ; O’Donovan K ; Fare CM ; Diaz Z ; Singh N ; Zhang ZC ; Coughlin M ; Sweeny EA ; DeSantis ME ; Jackrel ME ; Rodell CB ; Burdick JA ; King OD ; Gitler AD ; Lagier-Tourenne C ; Pandey UB ; Chook YM ; Taylor JP ; Shorter J Nuclear-Import Receptors Reverse Aberrant Phase Transitions of RNA-Binding Proteins with Prion-Like Domains. Cell 2018, 173 , 677–692 e620.29677512
(295) Doll SG ; Meshkin H ; Bryer AJ ; Li F ; Ko YH ; Lokareddy RK ; Gillilan RE ; Gupta K ; Perilla JR ; Cingolani G Recognition of the TDP-43 Nuclear Localization Signal by Importin Alpha1/Beta. Cell Rep. 2022, 39 , 111007.35767952
(296) Odeh HM ; Fare CM ; Shorter J Nuclear-Import Receptors Counter Deleterious Phase Transitions in Neurodegenerative Disease. J. Mol. Biol. 2022, 434 , 167220.34464655
(297) McGurk L ; Rifai OM ; Bonini NM TDP-43, a Protein Central to Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis, Is Destabilized by Tankyrase-1 and -2. J. Cell Sci. 2020, 133 , 133.
(298) Portz B ; Lee BL ; Shorter J FUS and TDP-43 Phases in Health and Disease. Trends Biochem. Sci. 2021, 46 , 550–563.33446423
(299) Donnelly N ; Gorman AM ; Gupta S ; Samali A The EIF2α Kinases: Their Structures and Functions. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 2013, 70 , 3493–3511.23354059
(300) McCormick C ; Khaperskyy DA Translation Inhibition and Stress Granules in the Antiviral Immune Response. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2017, 17 , 647–660.28669985
(301) Willis KL ; Langland JO ; Shisler JL Viral Double-Stranded RNAs from Vaccinia Virus Early or Intermediate Gene Transcripts Possess Pkr Activating Function, Resulting in NF-Kappab Activation, When the K1 Protein Is Absent or Mutated. J. Biol. Chem. 2011, 286 , 7765–7778.21183678
(302) Rojas M ; Arias CF ; Lopez S Protein Kinase R Is Responsible for the Phosphorylation of EIF2alpha in Rotavirus Infection. J. Virol. 2010, 84 , 10457–10466.20631127
(303) Nallagatla SR ; Hwang J ; Toroney R ; Zheng X ; Cameron CE ; Bevilacqua PC 5′-Triphosphate-Dependent Activation of PKR by RNAs with Short Stem-Loops. Science 2007, 318 , 1455–1458.18048689
(304) Heinicke LA ; Wong CJ ; Lary J ; Nallagatla SR ; Diegelman-Parente A ; Zheng X ; Cole JL ; Bevilacqua PC RNA Dimerization Promotes PKR Dimerization and Activation. J. Mol. Biol. 2009, 390 , 319–338.19445956
(305) McInerney GM ; Kedersha NL ; Kaufman RJ ; Anderson P ; Liljestrom P Importance of EIF2alpha Phosphorylation and Stress Granule Assembly in Alphavirus Translation Regulation. Mol. Biol. Cell 2005, 16 , 3753–3763.15930128
(306) Borghese F ; Michiels T The Leader Protein of Cardioviruses Inhibits Stress Granule Assembly. J. Virol. 2011, 85 , 9614–9622.21752908
(307) Khaperskyy DA ; Emara MM ; Johnston BP ; Anderson P ; Hatchette TF ; McCormick C Influenza a Virus Host Shutoff Disables Antiviral Stress-Induced Translation Arrest. PLoS Pathog. 2014, 10 , No. e1004217 .
(308) Finnen RL ; Zhu M ; Li J ; Romo D ; Banfield BW Herpes Simplex Virus 2 Virion Host Shutoff Endoribonuclease Activity Is Required to Disrupt Stress Granule Formation. J. Virol. 2016, 90 , 7943–7955.27334584
(309) Jayabalan AK ; Adivarahan S ; Koppula A ; Abraham R ; Batish M ; Zenklusen D ; Griffin DE ; Leung AKL Stress Granule Formation, Disassembly, and Composition Are Regulated by Alphavirus ADP-Ribosylhydrolase Activity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 2021, 118 , e2021719118.33547245
(310) Abraham R ; Hauer D ; McPherson RL ; Utt A ; Kirby IT ; Cohen MS ; Merits A ; Leung AKL ; Griffin DE ADP-Ribosyl-Binding and Hydrolase Activities of the Alphavirus Nsp3Macrodomain Are Critical for Initiation of Virus Replication. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 2018, 115 , E10457.30322911
(311) Ferreira-Ramos AS ; Sulzenbacher G ; Canard B ; Coutard B Snapshots of ADP-Ribose Bound to Getah Virus Macro Domain Reveal an Intriguing Choreography. Sci. Rep. 2020, 10 , 14422.32879358
(312) Saikatendu KS ; Joseph JS ; Subramanian V ; Clayton T ; Griffith M ; Moy K ; Velasquez J ; Neuman BW ; Buchmeier MJ ; Stevens RC ; Kuhn P Structural Basis of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus ADP-Ribose-1”-Phosphate Dephosphorylation by a Conserved Domain of Nsp3. Structure 2005, 13 , 1665–1675.16271890
(313) Malet H ; Coutard B ; Jamal S ; Dutartre H ; Papageorgiou N ; Neuvonen M ; Ahola T ; Forrester N ; Gould EA ; Lafitte D ; Ferron F ; Lescar J ; Gorbalenya AE ; de Lamballerie X ; Canard B The Crystal Structures of Chikungunya and Venezuelan Equine Encephalitis Virus Nsp3Macro Domains Define a Conserved Adenosine Binding Pocket. J. Virol. 2009, 83 , 6534–6545.19386706
(314) Lei J ; Kusov Y ; Hilgenfeld R Nsp3 of Coronaviruses: Structures and Functions of a Large Multi-Domain Protein. Antiviral Res. 2018, 149 , 58–74.29128390
(315) Putics A ; Gorbalenya AE ; Ziebuhr J Identification of Protease and ADP-Ribose 1”-Monophosphatase Activities Associated with Transmissible Gastroenteritis Virus Non-Structural Protein 3. J. Gen. Virol. 2006, 87 , 651–656.16476987
(316) Ashok Y ; Vela-Rodriguez C ; Yang C ; Alanen HI ; Liu F ; Paschal BM ; Lehtio L Reconstitution of the DTX3L-PARP9 Complex Reveals Determinants for High-Affinity Heterodimerization and Multimeric Assembly. Biochem. J. 2022, 479 , 289–304.35037691
(317) Todorova T ; Bock FJ ; Chang P PARP13 Regulates Cellular Mrna Post-Transcriptionally and Functions as a Pro-Apoptotic Factor by Destabilizing TRAILR4 Transcript. Nat. Commun. 2014, 5 , 5362.25382312
(318) Xue G ; Braczyk K ; Goncalves-Carneiro D ; Dawidziak DM ; Sanchez K ; Ong H ; Wan Y ; Zadrozny KK ; Ganser-Pornillos BK ; Bieniasz PD ; Pornillos O Poly(ADP-Ribose) Potentiates ZAP Antiviral Activity. PLoS Pathog. 2022, 18 , No. e1009202 .
(319) Watanabe K ; Morishita K ; Zhou X ; Shiizaki S ; Uchiyama Y ; Koike M ; Naguro I ; Ichijo H Cells Recognize Osmotic Stress through Liquid-Liquid Phase Separation Lubricated with Poly(ADP-Ribose). Nat. Commun. 2021, 12 , 1353.33649309
(320) Naguro I ; Umeda T ; Kobayashi Y ; Maruyama J ; Hattori K ; Shimizu Y ; Kataoka K ; Kim-Mitsuyama S ; Uchida S ; Vandewalle A ; Noguchi T ; Nishitoh H ; Matsuzawa A ; Takeda K ; Ichijo H ASK3 Responds to Osmotic Stress and Regulates Blood Pressure by Suppressing WNK1-SPAK/OSR1 Signaling in the Kidney. Nat. Commun. 2012, 3 , 1285.23250415
(321) Simanov G ; Dang I ; Fokin AI ; Oguievetskaia K ; Campanacci V ; Cherfils J ; Gautreau AM Arpin Regulates Migration Persistence by Interacting with Both Tankyrases and the Arp2/3 Complex. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22 , 4115.33923443
(322) Dang I ; Gorelik R ; Sousa-Blin C ; Derivery E ; Guérin C ; Linkner J ; Nemethova M ; Dumortier JG ; Giger FA ; Chipysheva TA ; Ermilova VD ; Vacher S ; Campanacci V ; Herrada I ; Planson A-G ; Fetics S ; Henriot V ; David V ; Oguievetskaia K ; Lakisic G ; Pierre F ; Steffen A ; Boyreau A ; Peyriéras N ; Rottner K ; Zinn-Justin S ; Cherfils J ; Biéche I ; Alexandrova AY ; David NB ; Small JV ; Faix J ; Blanchoin L ; Gautreau A Inhibitory Signalling to the Arp2/3 Complex Steers Cell Migration. Nature 2013, 503 , 281–284.24132237
(323) Gorelik R ; Gautreau A The Arp2/3 Inhibitory Protein Arpin Induces Cell Turning by Pausing Cell Migration. Cytoskeleton (Hoboken) 2015, 72 , 362–371.26235381
(324) Chang P ; Coughlin M ; Mitchison TJ Tankyrase-1 Polymerization of Poly(ADP-Ribose) Is Required for Spindle Structure and Function. Nat. Cell Biol. 2005, 7 , 1133–1139.16244666
(325) Chang W ; Dynek JN ; Smith S Numa Is a Major Acceptor of Poly(ADP-Ribosyl)Ation by Tankyrase 1 in Mitosis. Biochem. J. 2005, 391 , 177–184.16076287
(326) Dynek JN ; Smith S Resolution of Sister Telomere Association Is Required for Progression through Mitosis. Science 2004, 304 , 97–100.15064417
(327) Smith S ; Giriat I ; Schmitt A ; de Lange T Tankyrase, a Poly(ADP-Ribose) Polymerase at Human Telomeres. Science 1998, 282 , 1484–1487.9822378
(328) Jack A ; Kim Y ; Strom AR ; Lee DSW ; Williams B ; Schaub JM ; Kellogg EH ; Finkelstein IJ ; Ferro LS ; Yildiz A ; Brangwynne CP Compartmentalization of Telomeres through DNA-Scaffolded Phase Separation. Dev. Cell 2022, 57 , 277–290 e279.35077681
(329) Okamoto K ; Bartocci C ; Ouzounov I ; Diedrich JK ; Yates JR III ; Denchi EL A Two-Step Mechanism for TRF2-Mediated Chromosome-End Protection. Nature 2013, 494 , 502–505.23389450
(330) Cortesi L ; Rugo HS ; Jackisch C An Overview of PARP Inhibitors for the Treatment of Breast Cancer. Targeted Oncology 2021, 16 , 255–282.33710534
(331) Dias MP ; Moser SC ; Ganesan S ; Jonkers J Understanding and Overcoming Resistance to PARP Inhibitors in Cancer Therapy. Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol. 2021, 18 , 773–791.34285417
(332) McGurk L ; Rifai OM ; Bonini NM Poly(ADP-Ribosylation) in Age-Related Neurological Disease. Trends Genet. 2019, 35 , 601–613.31182245
(333) Ghosh SG ; Becker K ; Huang H ; Dixon-Salazar T ; Chai G ; Salpietro V ; Al-Gazali L ; Waisfisz Q ; Wang H ; Vaux KK ; Biallelic Mutations in ADPrhl2, Encoding ADP-Ribosylhydrolase 3, Lead to a Degenerative Pediatric Stress-Induced Epileptic Ataxia Syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 2018, 103 , P431–P439.
(334) Xu B ; Woodroffe A ; Rodriguez-Murillo L ; Roos JL ; van Rensburg EJ ; Abecasis GR ; Gogos JA ; Karayiorgou M Elucidating the Genetic Architecture of Familial Schizophrenia Using Rare Copy Number Variant and Linkage Scans. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 2009, 106 , 16746–16751.19805367
(335) Baranzini SE ; Wang J ; Gibson RA ; Galwey N ; Naegelin Y ; Barkhof F ; Radue EW ; Lindberg RL ; Uitdehaag BM ; Johnson MR ; Angelakopoulou A ; Hall L ; Richardson JC ; Prinjha RK ; Gass A ; Geurts JJ ; Kragt J ; Sombekke M ; Vrenken H ; Qualley P ; Lincoln RR ; Gomez R ; Caillier SJ ; George MF ; Mousavi H ; Guerrero R ; Okuda DT ; Cree BA ; Green AJ ; Waubant E ; Goodin DS ; Pelletier D ; Matthews PM ; Hauser SL ; Kappos L ; Polman CH ; Oksenberg JR Genome-Wide Association Analysis of Susceptibility and Clinical Phenotype in Multiple Sclerosis. Hum. Mol. Genet. 2009, 18 , 767–778.19010793
(336) Jones RM ; Cadby G ; Blangero J ; Abraham LJ ; Whitehouse AJO ; Moses EK Macrod2 Gene Associated with Autistic-Like Traits in a General Population Sample. Psychiatr. Genet. 2014, 24 , 241–248.25360606
(337) Autism Spectrum Disorders Working Group of The Psychiatric Genomics Consortium. Meta-Analysis of Gwas of over 16,000 Individuals with Autism Spectrum Disorder Highlights a Novel Locus at 10q24.32 and a Significant Overlap with Schizophrenia. Mol. Autism 2017, 8 , 21.28540026
(338) Lesca G ; Rudolf G ; Labalme A ; Hirsch E ; Arzimanoglou A ; Genton P ; Motte J ; de Saint Martin A ; Valenti MP ; Boulay C ; De Bellescize J ; Keo-Kosal P ; Boutry-Kryza N ; Edery P ; Sanlaville D ; Szepetowski P Epileptic Encephalopathies of the Landau-Kleffner and Continuous Spike and Waves During Slow-Wave Sleep Types: Genomic Dissection Makes the Link with Autism. Epilepsia 2012, 53 , 1526–1538.22738016
(339) Lee JH ; Ryu SW ; Ender NA ; Paull TT Poly-ADP-Ribosylation Drives Loss of Protein Homeostasis in Atm and Mre11 Deficiency. Mol. Cell 2021, 81 , 1515–1533 e1515.33571423
(340) Boehler C ; Gauthier L ; Yelamos J ; Noll A ; Schreiber V ; Dantzer F Phenotypic Characterization of PARP-1 and PARP-2 Deficient Mice and Cells. Methods Mol. Biol. 2011, 780 , 313–336.21870269
(341) Ray S ; Singh N ; Kumar R ; Patel K ; Pandey S ; Datta D ; Mahato J ; Panigrahi R ; Navalkar A ; Mehra S ; Gadhe L ; Chatterjee D ; Sawner AS ; Maiti S ; Bhatia S ; Gerez JA ; Chowdhury A ; Kumar A ; Padinhateeri R ; Riek R ; Krishnamoorthy G ; Maji SK Alpha-Synuclein Aggregation Nucleates through Liquid-Liquid Phase Separation. Nat. Chem 2020, 12 , 705–716.32514159
(342) Kwiatkowski TJ Jr ; Bosco DA ; Leclerc AL ; Tamrazian E ; Vanderburg CR ; Russ C ; Davis A ; Gilchrist J ; Kasarskis EJ ; Munsat T ; Valdmanis P ; Rouleau GA ; Hosler BA ; Cortelli P ; de Jong PJ ; Yoshinaga Y ; Haines JL ; Pericak-Vance MA ; Yan J ; Ticozzi N ; Siddique T ; McKenna-Yasek D ; Sapp PC ; Horvitz HR ; Landers JE ; Brown RH Jr Mutations in the FUS/TLS Gene on Chromosome 16 Cause Familial Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis. Science 2009, 323 , 1205–1208.19251627
(343) Vance C ; Rogelj B ; Hortobagyi T ; De Vos KJ ; Nishimura AL ; Sreedharan J ; Hu X ; Smith B ; Ruddy D ; Wright P ; Ganesalingam J ; Williams KL ; Tripathi V ; Al-Saraj S ; Al-Chalabi A ; Leigh PN ; Blair IP ; Nicholson G ; de Belleroche J ; Gallo JM ; Miller CC ; Shaw CE Mutations in FUS, an RNA Processing Protein, Cause Familial Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Type 6. Science 2009, 323 , 1208–1211.19251628
(344) Sreedharan J ; Blair IP ; Tripathi VB ; Hu X ; Vance C ; Rogelj B ; Ackerley S ; Durnall JC ; Williams KL ; Buratti E ; Baralle F ; de Belleroche J ; Mitchell JD ; Leigh PN ; Al-Chalabi A ; Miller CC ; Nicholson G ; Shaw CE TDP-43 Mutations in Familial and Sporadic Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis. Science 2008, 319 , 1668–1672.18309045
(345) Johnson BS ; Snead D ; Lee JJ ; McCaffery JM ; Shorter J ; Gitler AD TDP-43 Is Intrinsically Aggregation-Prone, and Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis-Linked Mutations Accelerate Aggregation and Increase Toxicity. J. Biol. Chem. 2009, 284 , 20329–20339.19465477
(346) Bentmann E ; Neumann M ; Tahirovic S ; Rodde R ; Dormann D ; Haass C Requirements for Stress Granule Recruitment of FUSed in Sarcoma (FUS) and TAR DNA-Binding Protein of 43 Kda (TDP-43). J. Biol. Chem. 2012, 287 , 23079–23094.22563080
(347) Lippens G ; Sillen A ; Landrieu I ; Amniai L ; Sibille N ; Barbier P ; Leroy A ; Hanoulle X ; Wieruszeski JM Tau Aggregation in Alzheimer’s Disease: What Role for Phosphorylation? Prion 2007, 1 , 21–25.19164903
(348) Polymeropoulos MH ; Lavedan C ; Leroy E ; Ide SE ; Dehejia A ; Dutra A ; Pike B ; Root H ; Rubenstein J ; Boyer R ; Stenroos ES ; Chandrasekharappa S ; Athanassiadou A ; Papapetropoulos T ; Johnson WG ; Lazzarini AM ; Duvoisin RC ; Di Iorio G ; Golbe LI ; Nussbaum RL Mutation in the Alpha-Synuclein Gene Identified in Families with Parkinson’s Disease. Science 1997, 276 , 2045–2047.9197268
(349) Conway KA ; Lee SJ ; Rochet JC ; Ding TT ; Williamson RE ; Lansbury PT Jr Acceleration of Oligomerization, Not Fibrillization, Is a Shared Property of Both Alpha-Synuclein Mutations Linked to Early-Onset Parkinson’s Disease: Implications for Pathogenesis and Therapy. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 2000, 97 , 571–576.10639120
(350) Olsen AL ; Feany MB PARP Inhibitors and Parkinson’s Disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 2019, 380 , 492–494.30699325
(351) Artus C ; Boujrad H ; Bouharrour A ; Brunelle MN ; Hoos S ; Yuste VJ ; Lenormand P ; Rousselle JC ; Namane A ; England P ; Lorenzo HK ; Susin SA AIF Promotes Chromatinolysis and Caspase-Independent Programmed Necrosis by Interacting with Histone H2AX. EMBO J. 2010, 29 , 1585–1599.20360685
(352) Kam TI ; Mao X ; Park H ; Chou SC ; Karuppagounder SS ; Umanah GE ; Yun SP ; Brahmachari S ; Panicker N ; Chen R ; Andrabi SA ; Qi C ; Poirier GG ; Pletnikova O ; Troncoso JC ; Bekris LM ; Leverenz JB ; Pantelyat A ; Ko HS ; Rosenthal LS ; Dawson TM ; Dawson VL Poly(ADP-Ribose) Drives Pathologic Alpha-Synuclein Neurodegeneration in Parkinson’s Disease. Science 2018, 362 , eaat8407.30385548
(353) Pan B ; Petersson EJ A PARP-1 Feed-Forward Mechanism to Accelerate Alpha-Synuclein Toxicity in Parkinson’s Disease. Biochemistry 2019, 58 , 859–860.30776897
(354) Puentes LN ; Lengyel-Zhand Z ; Reilly SW ; Mach RH Evaluation of a Low-Toxicity PARP Inhibitor as a Neuroprotective Agent for Parkinson’s Disease. Molecular Neurobiology 2021, 58 , 3641–3652.33788167
(355) Lehmann S ; Costa AC ; Celardo I ; Loh SHY ; Martins LM PARP Mutations Protect against Mitochondrial Dysfunction and Neurodegeneration in a PARKIN Model of Parkinson’s Disease. Cell Death Dis. 2016, 7 , No. e2166 .
(356) Chung I ; Park H-A ; Kang J ; Kim H ; Hah SM ; Lee J ; Kim HS ; Choi W-S ; Chung JH ; Shin M-J Neuroprotective Effects of ATPase Inhibitory Factor 1 Preventing Mitochondrial Dysfunction in Parkinson’s Disease. Sci. Rep. 2022, 12 , 3874.35264673
(357) Bloom GS Amyloid-Beta and Tau: The Trigger and Bullet in Alzheimer Disease Pathogenesis. JAMA Neurol 2014, 71 , 505–508.24493463
(358) Gotz J ; Chen F ; van Dorpe J ; Nitsch RM Formation of Neurofibrillary Tangles in P301l Tau Transgenic Mice Induced by Abeta 42 Fibrils. Science 2001, 293 , 1491–1495.11520988
(359) Lewis J ; Dickson DW ; Lin WL ; Chisholm L ; Corral A ; Jones G ; Yen SH ; Sahara N ; Skipper L ; Yager D ; Eckman C ; Hardy J ; Hutton M ; McGowan E Enhanced Neurofibrillary Degeneration in Transgenic Mice Expressing Mutant Tau and App. Science 2001, 293 , 1487–1491.11520987
(360) Roberson ED ; Scearce-Levie K ; Palop JJ ; Yan F ; Cheng IH ; Wu T ; Gerstein H ; Yu GQ ; Mucke L Reducing Endogenous Tau Ameliorates Amyloid Beta-Induced Deficits in an Alzheimer’s Disease Mouse Model. Science 2007, 316 , 750–754.17478722
(361) Kanaan NM ; Hamel C ; Grabinski T ; Combs B Liquid-Liquid Phase Separation Induces Pathogenic Tau Conformations in Vitro. Nat. Commun. 2020, 11 , 2809.32499559
(362) Love S ; Barber R ; Wilcock GK Increased Poly(ADP-Ribosyl)Ation of Nuclear Proteins in Alzheimer’s Disease. Brain 1999, 122 , 247–253.10071053
(363) Zeng J ; Libien J ; Shaik F ; Wolk J ; Hernandez AI Nucleolar PARP-1 Expression Is Decreased in Alzheimer’s Disease: Consequences for Epigenetic Regulation of Rdna and Cognition. Neural. Plast. 2016, 2016 , 8987928.27034851
(364) Abeti R ; Duchen MR Activation of PARP by Oxidative Stress Induced by Β-Amyloid: Implications for Alzheimer’s Disease. Neurochem. Res. 2012, 37 , 2589–2596.23076628
(365) Kauppinen TM ; Suh SW ; Higashi Y ; Berman AE ; Escartin C ; Won SJ ; Wang C ; Cho SH ; Gan L ; Swanson RA Poly(ADP-Ribose)Polymerase-1 Modulates Microglial Responses to Amyloid Beta. J. Neuroinflammation 2011, 8 , 152.22051244
(366) Martire S ; Fuso A ; Rotili D ; Tempera I ; Giordano C ; De Zottis I ; Muzi A ; Vernole P ; Graziani G ; Lococo E ; Faraldi M ; Maras B ; Scarpa S ; Mosca L ; d’Erme M PARP-1 Modulates Amyloid Beta Peptide-Induced Neuronal Damage. PLoS One 2013, 8 , No. e72169 .
(367) Salech F ; Ponce DP ; SanMartin CD ; Rogers NK ; Chacon C ; Henriquez M ; Behrens MI PARP-1 and P53 Regulate the Increased Susceptibility to Oxidative Death of Lymphocytes from Mci and Ad Patients. Front. Aging Neurosci. 2017, 9 , 310.29051731
(368) Salech F ; Ponce DP ; Paula-Lima AC ; SanMartin CD ; Behrens MI Nicotinamide, a Poly [ADP-Ribose] Polymerase 1 (PARP-1) Inhibitor, as an Adjunctive Therapy for the Treatment of Alzheimer’s Disease. Front. Aging Neurosci. 2020, 12 , 255.32903806
(369) Raghunatha P ; Vosoughi A ; Kauppinen TM ; Jackson MF Microglial Nmda Receptors Drive Pro-Inflammatory Responses Via PARP-1/TRMP2 Signaling. Glia 2020, 68 , 1421–1434.32036619
(370) Yu Y ; Fedele G ; Celardo I ; Loh SHY ; Martins LM PARP Mutations Protect from Mitochondrial Toxicity in Alzheimer’s Disease. Cell Death Dis. 2021, 12 , 651.34172715
(371) Elbaum-Garfinkle S Matter over Mind: Liquid Phase Separation and Neurodegeneration. J. Biol. Chem. 2019, 294 , 7160–7168.30914480
(372) Shelkovnikova TA ; Robinson HK ; Connor-Robson N ; Buchman VL Recruitment into Stress Granules Prevents Irreversible Aggregation of FUS Protein Mislocalized to the Cytoplasm. Cell Cycle 2013, 12 , 3383.
(373) An H ; Litscher G ; Watanabe N ; Wei W ; Hashimoto T ; Iwatsubo T ; Buchman VL ; Shelkovnikova TA ALS-Linked Cytoplasmic FUS Assemblies Are Compositionally Different from Physiological Stress Granules and Sequester hnRNPA3, a Novel Modifier of FUS Toxicity. Neurobiol. Dis. 2022, 162 , 105585.34915152
(374) Xiang S ; Kato M ; Wu LC ; Lin Y ; Ding M ; Zhang Y ; Yu Y ; McKnight SL The Lc Domain of hnRNPA2 Adopts Similar Conformations in Hydrogel Polymers, Liquid-Like Droplets, and Nuclei. Cell 2015, 163 , 829–839.26544936
(375) Jawerth L ; Fischer-Friedrich E ; Saha S ; Wang J ; Franzmann T ; Zhang X ; Sachweh J ; Ruer M ; Ijavi M ; Saha S ; Mahamid J ; Hyman AA ; Julicher F Protein Condensates as Aging Maxwell Fluids. Science 2020, 370 , 1317–1323.33303613
(376) Cook CN ; Wu Y ; Odeh HM ; Gendron TF ; Jansen-West K ; Del Rosso G ; Yue M ; Jiang P ; Gomes E ; Tong J ; Daughrity LM ; Avendano NM ; Castanedes-Casey M ; Shao W ; Oskarsson B ; Tomassy GS ; McCampbell A ; Rigo F ; Dickson DW ; Shorter J ; Zhang YJ ; Petrucelli L C9orf72 Poly(Gr) Aggregation Induces TDP-43 Proteinopathy. Sci. Transl. Med. 2020, 12 , eabb3774.32878979
(377) Marcus JM ; Hossain MI ; Gagne JP ; Poirier GG ; McMahon LL ; Cowell RM ; Andrabi SA PARP-1 Activation Leads to Cytosolic Accumulation of TDP-43 in Neurons. Neurochem. Int. 2021, 148 , 105077.34082062
(378) Pommier Y ; O’Connor MJ ; de Bono J Laying a Trap to Kill Cancer Cells: PARP Inhibitors and Their Mechanisms of Action. Sci. Transl. Med. 2016, 8 , 362ps317.
(379) Tan ES ; Krukenberg KA ; Mitchison TJ Large-Scale Preparation and Characterization of Poly(ADP-Ribose) and Defined Length Polymers. Anal. Biochem. 2012, 428 , 126–136.22743307
(380) Ando Y ; Elkayam E ; McPherson RL ; Dasovich M ; Cheng SJ ; Voorneveld J ; Filippov DV ; Ong SE ; Joshua-Tor L ; Leung AKL Elta: Enzymatic Labeling of Terminal ADP-Ribose. Mol. Cell 2019, 73 , 845–856 e845.30712989
(381) Rogge RA ; Gibson BA ; Kraus WL Identifying Genomic Sites of ADP-Ribosylation Mediated by Specific Nuclear PARP Enzymes Using Click-ChIP. Methods Mol. Biol. 2018, 1813 , 371–387.30097881
(382) Martello R ; Mangerich A ; Sass S ; Dedon PC ; Burkle A Quantification of Cellular Poly(ADP-Ribosyl)Ation by Stable Isotope Dilution Mass Spectrometry Reveals Tissue- and Drug-Dependent Stress Response Dynamics. ACS Chem. Biol. 2013, 8 , 1567–1575.23631432
(383) Gibson BA ; Conrad LB ; Huang D ; Kraus WL Generation and Characterization of Recombinant Antibody-Like ADP-Ribose Binding Proteins. Biochemistry 2017, 56 , 6305–6316.29053245
(384) Challa S ; Ryu KW ; Whitaker AL ; Abshier JC ; Camacho CV ; Kraus WL Development and Characterization of New Tools for Detecting Poly(ADP-Ribose) in Vitro and in Vivo. Elife 2022, 11 , e72464.35476036
(385) Morgan RK ; Cohen MS A Clickable Aminooxy Probe for Monitoring Cellular ADP-Ribosylation. ACS Chem. Biol. 2015, 10 , 1778–1784.25978521
(386) Morgan RK ; Cohen MS Detecting Protein ADP-Ribosylation Using a Clickable Aminooxy Probe. Methods Mol. Biol. 2017, 1608 , 71–77.28695504
(387) Wallrodt S ; Buntz A ; Wang Y ; Zumbusch A ; Marx A Bioorthogonally Functionalized NAD(+) Analogues for in-Cell Visualization of Poly(ADP-Ribose) Formation. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl. 2016, 55 , 7660–7664.27080423
(388) Gibson BA ; Kraus WL Identification of Protein Substrates of Specific PARP Enzymes Using Analog-Sensitive PARP Mutants and a ″Clickable″ NAD(+) Analog. Methods Mol. Biol. 2017, 1608 , 111–135.28695507
(389) Lehner M ; Rieth S ; Hollmuller E ; Spliesgar D ; Mertes B ; Stengel F ; Marx A Profiling of the ADP-Ribosylome in Living Cells. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl. 2022, 25 , No. e202200977 .
(390) Aguilera-Gomez A ; van Oorschot MM ; Veenendaal T ; Rabouille C In Vivo Visualization of Mono-ADP-Ribosylation by Dparp16 Upon Amino-Acid Starvation. Elife 2016, 5 , e21475.27874829
