LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101231978
33173
Alzheimers Dement
Alzheimers Dement
Alzheimer's &amp; dementia : the journal of the Alzheimer's Association
1552-5260
1552-5279

36811307
10440222
10.1002/alz.12969
NIHMS1869417
Article
Genome-wide Methylomic Regulation of Multiscale Gene Networks in Alzheimer’s Disease
Wang Erming 12#
Wang Minghui 12#
Guo Lei 12
Fullard John F 13611
Micallef Courtney 136
Bendl Jaroslav 134611
Song Won-min 12
Ming Chen 12
Huang Yong 12
Li Yuxin 5
Yu Kaiwen 5
Peng Junmin 5
Bennett David A. 7
De Jager Philip L. 8
Roussos Panos 134691011
Haroutunian Vahram 391213
Zhang Bin 1245*
1 Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA.
2 Mount Sinai Center for Transformative Disease Modeling, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA.
3 Department of Psychiatry, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA.
4 Icahn Institute of Genomics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA.
5 Departments of Structural Biology and Developmental Neurobiology, Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, 38105, USA.
6 Friedman Brain Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA.
7 Rush Alzheimer’s Disease Center, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois, USA
8 Center for Translational &amp; Computational Neuroimmunology, Department of Neurology and the Taub Institute, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New York, USA.
9 Mental Illness Research Education and Clinical Center (MIRECC), James J. Peters VA Medical Center, 130 West Kingsbridge Road, Bronx, NY 10468, USA.
10 Center for Dementia Research, Nathan Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research, Orangeburg, NY 10962, USA
11 Center for Disease Neurogenomics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA
12 The Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, One Gustave L Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA.
13 Nash Family Department of Neuroscience, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 1425 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10029, USA
# These authors contributed equally to the work.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

Conceptualization, B.Z.; Investigation, E.W., M.W., L.G., J.F., C.M., J.B., S.W., C.M., Y.H., Y.L., J.P., J.K., D.B., P.J. P.R., V.H. and B.Z.; Resources, B.Z.; Writing – Original Draft, E.W., M.W., and B.Z. ; Writing – Review &amp; Editing, All Authors; Supervision, B.Z.; Funding Acquisition, B.Z..

* Corresponding author: Bin Zhang, PhD, Willard T.C. Johnson Research Professor of Neurogenetics, Professor, Department of Genetics &amp; Genomic Sciences, Professor, Department of Pharmacological Sciences, Director, Mount Sinai Center for Transformative Disease Modeling, Icahn Genomics Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 1425 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10029, (O) 212-659-1726 (F) 212-659-5507, bin.zhang@mssm.edu
1 4 2023
8 2023
22 2 2023
01 8 2024
19 8 34723495
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
INTRODUCTION:

Recent studies revealed the association of abnormal methylomic changes with Alzheimer’s disease (AD) but there lacks a systematic study of the impact of methylomic alterations over the molecular networks underlying AD.

METHODS:

We profiled genome-wide methylomic variations in the parahippocampal gyrus from 201 postmortem control, mild cognitive impaired and AD brains.

RESULTS:

We identified 270 distinct differentially methylated regions (DMRs) associated with AD. We quantified the impact of these DMRs on each gene and each protein as well as gene and protein co-expression networks. DNA methylation had profound impact on both AD-associated gene/protein modules and their key regulators. We further integrated the matched multi-Omics data to show the impact of DNA methylation on chromatin accessibility which further modulate gene and protein expression.

DISCUSSION:

The quantified impact of DNA methylation on gene and protein networks underlying AD identified potential upstream epigenetic regulators of AD.

Alzheimer’s disease
Epigenetics
DNA methylation
Epigenome-wide association study
the parahippocampal gyrus
transcriptomics
proteomics
epigenomics
coexpression network

pmc1 BACKGROUND

Alzheimer’s disease (AD), a chronic progressive neurodegenerative disease1–6, is the most common form of dementia7. Its pathogenesis may start decades earlier before its clinic diagnosis8. Currently, there is no cure for this devastating disease. Pathologically, AD is characterized by the accumulation of intracellular neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs), and extracellular fibrils of the amyloid-β peptide (Aβ)1–3, along with the presence of inflammation9,10, the sustained immune response in the diseased brain10. Despite tremendous progress in studying molecular mechanisms underlying AD neuropathology, and developing and testing various approaches to prevent Aβ plaques and NFTs, the etiology of typical AD, particularly late-onset AD (LOAD), is still elusive11.

Epigenetic changes such as DNA methylation, histone modification12, and non-coding RNA-mediated gene silencing 4,13,14 play critical roles in establishing and maintaining cellular phenotype and function. Abnormalities in epigenetic codes and features have been implicated in various human diseases, including AD. In recent years, various methods have been utilized in AD methylomic research, which included immuno-histochemical techniques, polymerase chain reaction, pyrosequencing4,15, and in particular, epigenome-wide association studies (EWAS)4,15–19,6,20. These investigations have revealed the association of not only global methylation level with AD progression in postmortem brains21 but also the presence of differentially (hydroxyl-) methylated sites near or inside the coding regions of many genes. Several studies even unraveled methylation-associated alterations in transcriptomic expression of specific candidate genes22–26 in bulk brain tissue or blood17,27,28 or sorted populations of certain cell types in AD brains29. However, how the methylomic variations interact with and affects the transcriptome and proteome remains unclear. Understanding the profound effects of DNA methylation on gene/protein expression would lead to the discovery of novel neuropathological processes and molecular mechanisms for developing novel therapeutics for AD.

Brain regional vulnerability is a prominent feature in the development of AD neuropathology4,30. Differential methylation was detected across brain cortical regions affected by AD 6,17,18. The entorhinal cortex (ER) is one of the earliest brain regions31–33 affected by AD, where aberrant methylation sites were observed in a recent EWAS analysis17. Our recent results showed that the parahippocampal gyrus (PHG) encompassing ER was the most impacted region in terms of epigenomic34 and transcriptomic35 changes in AD and thus studying multi-Omics of PHG has the potential to uncover the critical molecular mechanism of AD.

In the present study, we performed Illumina Infinium methylation EPIC beadChip array36 profiling of the DNAs from the tissues in the PHG region from 201 human postmortem control, mild cognitive impaired (MCI) and AD brains in the MSBB cohort37,38. We identified 270 distinct differentially methylated regions (DMRs) associated with AD clinical and pathological traits as well as genome-wide gene expression changes. We further defined a gene-level overall methylation score (OMS) to quantify the effect of both hyper- and hypo-methylation through these DMRs. In the top-ranked AD associated gene and protein modules, gene and protein OMS, are consistent with differential expression at mRNA and protein levels, respectively. Integration of the matched methylomic, epigenomic (ATAC-seq), transcriptomic and proteomic data reveals for the first time a detailed signaling map of regulatory relationships among DNA methylation, chromatin accessibility, transcription and translation. Key findings were validated in an independent ROSMAP cohort.

2 RESULTS

We utilized the Illumina 850K methylation array platform to investigate genome-wide methylomic alteration relevant to AD neuropathology. We systematically interrogated &gt; 850,000 CpG sites for differences in methylation level in the parahippocampal gyrus (PHG) region, one of the earliest impacted and the most vulnerable brain regions35 for AD, across the 201 human postmortem samples in the MSBB cohort. We streamlined a workflow to process the raw IDAT data derived from the Illumina 850K methylation array assays (Fig. 1a, and Methods). After a rigorous QC, 776,508 CpG sites in 196 PHG samples were retained for downstream analysis (Supplementary Fig. 1, and Supplementary Data 1a).

According to the CERAD neuropathological classification, the 196 QCed subjects (122 females and 74 males) consisted of 61 healthy normal control (NL) subjects, 85 definite AD cases, 24 probable AD cases, and 26 possible AD cases (Supplementary Data 1a). The average age at death ranges from 61.0 to 108.0 years, with a mean of 85.2 years (Supplementary Data 1b).

2.1 Methylomic alterations on CpG sites in AD

We first investigated the association of the methylomic differences with the plaque mean density (PLQ_Mn), one of the key criteria in quantifying the neuropathology of AD35,39(Supplementary Discussion)40. Previous research discovered the methylomic alteration associated with the burden of neuritic amyloid plaques (plaq_n)16. Thus, unless otherwise indicated, we focused on this criterion to study methylomic changes associated with AD (Methods).

We identified 13,755 differentially methylated positions (DMPs) in AD vs. NL (FDR &lt; 0.05) (Supplementary Data 2a). Among these DMPs, 5,896 and 7,859 were hypo- and hyper-methylated in AD vs. NL, respectively (Supplementary Fig. 2a). Furthermore, ~70% of these DMPs were located nearby distinct genomic features such as 3’ UTR, 5’ UTR, and TSS and ~75% of them were close to transcriptional start sites (Supplementary Fig. 2b), suggesting their potential regulatory roles in transcription. Genes nearby the DMPs were involved in diverse functions including neuronal and synaptic pathways relevant to AD neuropathology (Supplementary Data 2c). Strikingly, genes nearby the hyper-methylated DMPs were enriched for neuronal and synaptic functions (Supplementary Fig. 2c), which were often down-regulated in AD41. Whereas genes nearby hypo-methylated DMPs displayed enrichment for pathways such as immune systems process that are usually activated in AD 39,42 (Supplementary Fig. 2c). These results suggested functional relevance of the alterations at the methylomic level in AD.

2.2 Differentially methylated regions (DMRs) in AD

To understand the spatial organization of the previously identified methylated CpG sites in AD, we applied a sliding window-based algorithm (comb-p) to identify regions of highly correlated neighboring CpG sitess43. We defined a DMR as a genomic region which included &gt; 3 CpG sites within a 500 bp window size and had a Šidák-corrected p &lt; 0.055,17. As a result, we discovered 270 distinct DMRs (Supplementary Data 2c) on autosomal chromosomes. Chromosomes 1 and 11 contain most (27) DMRs and Chromosomes 9 and 21 have the least (2) DMRs (Supplementary Fig. 3a). About 40% of the DMRs possessed 4 CpG sites while DMR204 had most (16) CpG sites (Supplementary Fig. 3b and Supplementary Data 2c). Among the 270 DMRs, 137 and 131 included unanimously only under- or over-methylated CpG sites, respectively (Supplementary Data 2d). Two DMRs (DMR225 and DMR71) contained both under- and over-methylated CpG sites (Supplementary Data 2d).

We next evaluated DMRs for their relevance in AD neuropathology. We used the mean expression across the CpG sites within a DMR to represent the methylation level of that DMR. We then performed correlation analysis of DMR methylation level with the clinical trait PLQ-Mn. We found that all the DMR had a significant correlation with PLQ_Mn (FDR &lt; 0.05) (Fig. 1b, Supplementary Data 2e). Similar results were obtained with the differential expression analysis stratified on PLQ_Mn (Supplementary Data 2f). Supplementary Fig. 1d–e show two representative DMRs: DMR182, which is hypo-methylated (Supplementary Fig. 1d), and DMR1, which is hyper-methylated (Supplementary Fig. 1e). Thus, the methylomic differences in DMR are associated with AD neuropathology. Unless otherwise indicated, we used the DMR mean expression for downstream integration of methylation profiling with other omics. We further termed a DMR as hyper-methylated if it is positively associated with PLQ-Mn or hypo-methylated if the association is negative (Fig. 1b and Supplementary Data 2d–e).

2.3 Differential methylation analysis is minimally impacted by the difference in brain cell-type proportions

Since AD presents significant neuronal cell loss as its pathogenesis progresses 17,14,44,45,39,46, we assessed whether the observed differential methylomic expression was due to the variation of cell-type composition. We first estimated the neuronal proportion within each subject by the CETS package47, and then performed DMP analysis on the M values after regressing out the neuronal proportion estimates. Despite the overall decrease in statistical significance, we observed a high concordance in the fold changes of the M values in AD vs. NL before and after correcting for neuronal proportion (Supplementary Fig. 4a). With respect to the two representative DMRs shown in Fig. 1e–f, they remained the same as hypo- or hyper-methylation status after correction for neuronal proportion (Supplementary Figs. 4b–c). Similar results were observed for the transcriptomic and proteomics profiling concerning the cofounding effects caused by the neuronal proportion change (Supplementary Figs. 5a–b). We speculated a limited impact of the neuronal confounding on differential expression analysis46.

2.4 DMRs were functionally relevant to gene expression

DNA methylation is one of the key integral components in post-transcriptional regulation over gene expression. We generated both transcriptomic41 and proteomics data (Methods) from the same brain cortex region with matched subjects in the same subjects, thus providing an unprecedented opportunity to investigate the regulatory consequence of DNA methylation on gene expression.

We first interrogated the extent to which the DMRs as a whole contributed to the variance of the mRNA or protein expressions of each gene. By using the variance partitioning approach48, we quantified the total contribution of all DMRs to each gene. As shown in Fig. 2a, in average 34% (with a range of 13% to 61%) of the variations in the expression level of the 23,201 mRNAs can be explained by the DMRs. Interestingly, the DMRs contributed even more to the variance in protein expression by explaining an average of 39% (with a range of 13 to 77%) of the variance of protein expression (Fig. 2b). Fig. 2c–g illustrated two examples, in which gene expression was concordant to the alteration in the DMR’s methylation status. DMR236 was hypo-methylated in AD (Fig. 2c). Consistently, TRIM56, a gene nearby DMR236, was upregulated in AD at both the mRNA (Fig. 2d) and protein levels (Fig. 2g). TRIM56 is involved in innate immune system and ubiquitin-protein transferase activity49. Our previous data revealed that TRIM56 was a high-ranked network key driver gene (KDG) relevant to AD neuropathology41. In contrast, HTR2A, another high-ranked network KDG, was downregulated in AD (Fig. 2f–g), which was consistent with a nearby hyper-methylated DMR88 (Fig. 2e). HTR2A functions in biological pathways such as signaling by GPCR, a potential therapeutic target for intervention in neurodegenerative disorders50.

To summarize the genes subject to the impact of methylation, we ranked the genes by the methylomic contribution derived from the variance partition analysis. We defined a gene to have a significant methylomic contribution if methylation explained &gt; 45% of its expression variance. This cut-off value was based on our variance partition analysis on simulated dataset, in which we observed a maximum of 45% contribution to gene expression variance by randomly generated data. Hence, we identified 3,449 potential methylation-regulated genes (MRGs) and 2,632 potential methylation-regulated proteins (MRPs). We observed an overlap between the MRGs and MRPs (1,345 entries in common, fold enrichment (FE) = 1.26, hypergeometric test p = 9.59e-40). Strikingly, among the 1,345 common genes, 601 were significantly altered in AD vs. NL, the majority of which (589) were in the same direction in expression change in AD comparing to NL, and participated in functional pathways and biological processes such as neuronal and synaptic functions and immune response, critical to AD neuropathology (Fig. 2h).

2.5 DMR-associated genes and AD risk genes

After determining the methylomic contributions to gene and protein expression, we investigated correlations between individual DMRs and gene or protein expression. A gene was correlated with a DMR if it was significantly correlated the DMR at a BH-adjusted p-value &lt; 0.05. We observed that a gene was either positively or negatively correlated with a DMR but not both. Thus, we took the union of all the genes with significant positive correlations with a given DMR as the DMR-positively associated signature (PAS) for that DMR. The DMR-negatively associated signature (NAS) was determined similarly. As shown in Supplementary Fig. S6a, the DMRs had a medium number of 463 and 424 NAS and PAS of mRNAs, respectively (Supplementary Data 3a–b). We noted that ~10% (33) of the DMRs had no significantly correlated genes.

We next investigated the relevance of the DMRs to AD by examining their associated gene signatures. We reasoned that an AD-relevant DMR would impact genes critical to AD, such as AD genome-wide association studies (ADGWAS) genes39 or genes differentially expressed in AD brain46. Therefore, we intersected each DMR-associated signature with the differentially expressed gene signatures (DEGs) we previously characterized46, along with the ADGWAS genes and aβ gene signatures39. We then ranked the DMRs via an ensemble ranking approach51 that combines the adjusted enrichment p values of intersecting individual DMR-associated signatures with the DEGs, ADGWAS genes, and aβ gene signatures (Supplementary Data 3c). For the top-ranked DMR137, its associated gene signature was significantly enriched in the AD-related DEGs, ADGWAS genes, and aβ pathway gene signature (Supplementary Data 3c). Whereas the bottom-ranked six DMRs did not show significant association with any AD-related genes (Supplementary Data 3c).

Moreover, we showed in Supplementary Fig. 7a that the PASs of the hypo-methylated DMRs predominantly overlapped with the down-regulated DEG signatures, while the NASs of the hypo-methylated DMRs primarily overlapped with the up-regulated DEG signatures. By contrast, the PASs of the hyper-methylated DMRs predominantly overlapped with the up-regulated DEG signatures, while the NASs of the hyper-methylated DMRs mainly overlapped with the down-regulated DEG signatures (Supplementary Fig. 7a).

We also observed enrichment of the DMR-associated genes in the ADGWAS and Aβ pathway genes (Supplementary Fig. 7b) and brain cell-type signatures (Supplementary Fig. 7c). Of note, the brain neuronal marker gene signatures were the most enriched in the DMR-associated signatures (Supplementary Fig. 7c), followed by the microglia and astrocytes marker signatures (Supplementary Fig. 7c). Furthermore, the DMR-associated gene signatures were enriched for a range of GO processes and functions such as synapse, neuron part, myelin sheath, immune response, and extracellular matrix (Supplementary Fig. 7d).

Similarly, we investigated the impact of methylation on the protein expression and obtained similar results (Supplementary Figs. 8–9, and Supplementary Data 4a–c). Taken together, these findings indicated that the DMRs affected the expression of an array of critical genes and proteins in AD.

2.6 OMS summarized the net effect of methylation over gene expression

Because of the complicated interactions between the DMRs and the gene signatures (Supplementary Fig. 7a and Supplementary Fig. 9a) and possibly interactions among the DMRs as well, we proposed a new statistic termed overall methylation score (OMS) to quantify the net methylomic effect over gene and protein expression (Methods). A negative OMS (OMS(−)) suggests a net effect leading to a decrease in the gene expression caused by methylation, while a positive OMS (OMS(+)) denotes a net effect of increased gene expression caused by methylation. OMS(0) indicates no methylation impact. A module’s OMS was calculated as the sum of mRNA-OMS for all the genes in a module.

We calculated both the gene- and gene module-level OMS (Supplementary Data 5a–c and Supplementary Data 6a–c), and then studied the relevance of OMS to the metrics of the gene co-expression modules as well as AD neuropathology. We used the mRNA- and protein-OMS to represent the overall methylation effect on gene expression at the mRNA and protein levels, respectively. We then evaluated the correlation between the gene modules’ OMS and the modules’ relevance scores (RS) with AD35. Fig. 3a–b show the significant correlations between the module RS and the module mRNA-OMS (−) (rho = −0.77, p &lt; 2.0E-16) and between the module RS and the module mRNA-OMS (+) (rho = 0.77, p &lt; 2.2E-16), indicating a crucial role of methylation on regulating the gene co-expression modules underlying AD neuropathology. For example, in the top-ranked neuron enriched module M62 with the highest module RS (Supplementary Data 5b), the direction of gene-level mRNA-OMS and that of mRNA differential expression between AD and control are consistent: down-regulated genes usually had negative mRNA-OMS while up-regulated genes had positive mRNA-OMS (Fig. 3c). The mRNA-OMS for the genes showing no difference between AD and control is close to 0 (Fig. 3c). Note that all key driver genes (KDG) in M62 were down-regulated in AD and had negative mRNA-OMS except three genes AKT3, PTPN4, and RAPGEF2 (Fig. 3c). Similar relationship between differential expression and mRNA OMS was found in another top-ranked microglia enriched module M153 (Supplementary Fig. 10a).

We performed similar analyses for the protein co-expression network (Fig. 3d–f, Supplementary Fig. 10b, and Supplementary Data 6a–c). For instance, in the top-ranked neuronal module M5 (Supplementary Data 6b), an overall protein-OMS(−) or protein-OMS(0) were observed, consistent with the down-regulation in most of the proteins within the module (Fig. 3f). For example, the KDPs with OMS(−) often had a down-regulation of their protein or mRNA expression (Fig. 3f). Strikingly, about half of the KDPs were also the KDGs in the transcriptomic network of the PHG region (Fig. 3f). Similarly, in the top-ranked up-regulated microglia module M245 (Supplementary Data 6b), an overall protein-OMS(+) or protein-OMS(0) were observed, consistent with the up-regulation in most of the proteins in the module (Supplementary Fig. 10b). For example, most of the nodes, in particular, the KDPs, had an OMS(+), which were also up-regulated in their protein expression (Supplementary Fig. 10b). Together, these results from the association analysis of OMS and the protein and gene networks revealed that methylation plays an important role in regulating not only individual gene and protein expression but also higher-level gene/protein interactions (i.e., network modules).

2.7 Epigenetic regulation of gene networks

We further investigated the epigenetic regulation of the key drivers (KD) of the gene networks. KDs are key regulatory components in the gene networks. More substantial effects would be observed when perturbing KDs than non-key driver genes in the network52.

We previously predicted KD genes (KDGs) from the Bayesian causal gene network of the PHG region46. We ranked the KDGs using the same strategy as for ranking the modules46 (Supplementary Data 5c). Out of 1,454 KDGs, 774 were associated with DMR: 517 had a negative mRNA-OMS while 257 had positive mRNA-OMS (Supplementary Data 5c). We found that the KDG ranking score was significantly correlated with its mRNA-OMS when separated into positive and negative groups (Fig. 4a–b). We further examined the methylation levels for the genes as the downstream of the KDGs (up to 3 steps away from a key driver). We showed the KDG ranking scores were correlated with the number of the nodes in the downstream neighborhood (Fig. 4c), and more importantly correlated with the mRNA-OMS of the downstream genes (Fig. 4d–e). As an example, genes in the downstream neighborhood of GABRB2, a top-ranked KDG that had a negative mRNA-OMS (Supplementary Data 5c), exhibited mainly mRNA-OMS(−) (Supplementary Fig. 11a). By contrast, the downstream genes of TNPO1, a lowly ranked KDG (Supplementary Data 5c), exhibited mainly mRNA-OMS(0) (Supplementary Fig. 11b).

Similar results were found for the key drivers in the protein Bayesian network (Fig. 4f–j, Supplementary Figs. 11c–d and Supplementary Data 6c). These findings suggested the profound role of methylation in regulating primary network KDs and their downstream genes.

2.8 Relation of OMS to gene expression is conserved in different cohorts/brain regions

To verify our OMS metric in an independent dataset, we leveraged the processed methylation array data16 from the ROSMAP cohort, along with its transcriptomic and proteomics expression data of matched subjects (Methods). The ROSMAP methylation arrays were performed on the Illumina 450K platform16 using the DNAs extracted from the postmortem PFC tissue.

To be consistent with the MSBB PHG cohort analysis, we focused on the neuritic plaque burden (plaq_n, that is, np16) as the neuropathology-based disease classification to study the association of the methylomic changes with AD. As a note, we obtained similar results with respect to the other clinical traits (Supplementary Figs. 12a–b, and Supplementary Data 7a). We identified 392 DMRs in the ROSMAP cohort using the same calling method as in the MSBB cohort (Supplementary Data 7b). We then investigated the genes that were associated with the DMRs. We then calculated both gene- and gene module-level OMS to capture the overall net impact of methylation on individual genes and gene modules (Supplementary Data 7c–d), respectively. Strikingly, we observed a significant correlation between the module-level OMS and the module relevance to AD (rho = −0.36 and p = 1.8E-9, Supplementary Fig. S13a; rho = 0.42 and p = 8.2E-15, Supplementary Fig. S13b). Similar results were observed at the protein level (Supplementary Figs. 13c–d and Supplementary Data 8a–b). Furthermore, the metrics for determining KDGs and KDPs was also significantly correlated with gene-level OMS (Supplementary Figs. 14a–f and Supplementary Data 7e and 8c). Together, these results from the ROSMAP cohort validated our findings from the MSBB cohort.

2.9 Consistent findings were obtained from integrative insights into the methylomic consequences on gene expression

We utilized two approaches (variance partition and direct correlation) to access the methylomic impact on the gene expression. We observed significant overlap among the gene signatures derived by the two methods (Fig. 5a–b and Supplementary Figs. 15a–b). For example, in the MSBB cohort, ~50% of the mRNA signatures and more than 60% of the protein signatures derived from the variance partition analysis were present in the gene lists obtained by the direct correlation analysis (mRNA: FE = 2.7, p &lt; 2.2e-16; protein: FE = 1.7, p &lt; 2.2e-16), respectively (Fig. 5a). Similar results were observed in the ROSMAP cohort (Supplementary Figs. 15a–b). Thus, these methods collaboratively corroborate each other, demonstrating that DNA methylation exerts regulatory effects over the expression of a substantial number of genes in the human brain.

We further used the partial correlation analysis (Methods) to examine whether the network structures (e.g., the links among genes) were altered upon removing the methylomic regulation from the data. We reasoned that a methylation-regulated correlated gene pair would become uncorrelated upon the removal of the methylomic effects. Indeed, after regressing out the methylomic effects from the gene expression, we observed less than 30% fewer correlations from all the gene pairs in the MSBB transcriptome were disrupted and became insignificant. We thus termed these gene pairs as the methylation-associated links. We projected the list of the methylation-associated links onto the expanded co-expression network for enrichment analysis (Methods). Interestingly, 136 of the 441 network modules were found to be enriched for the methylation-associated links (Fig. 5c). Strikingly, many of the enriched modules were top-ranked AD modules (Fig. 5c). For instance, the enriched modules M62 and M6 were neuronal modules, ranking no.1 and no.5, respectively as we previously reported41.

We also assessed the impact of methylation on the protein co-expression network structure. We found about 25% of the 386 modules were enriched for the methylation-associated links, and again, many of the enriched modules were top-ranked AD modules (Fig. 5e). Similar trends were acquired for the mRNA (Fig. 5d) and protein (Fig. 5f) co-expression networks in the ROSMAP cohort. These results were consistent with our observation made from the OMS analysis (Fig. 3, Fig. S13), that is, top-ranked AD modules tended to be impacted by methylation.

2.10 Genetic variation was not a major source of DMR function

We evaluated if the differential effects of our DMRs were also a consequence of genetic variants. We undertook a comprehensive survey of the genetic variation on DNA methylation. At the stringent cutoff of the Bonferroni’s adjusted p &lt; 0.05, we detected 3,413,227 significant mQTL associations occurring between 2,218,270 genetic variants and 59,960 eCpG sites. However, we observed no significant enrichment of eCpG sites within the DMR regions (Supplementary Fig. 15a, and Supplementary Data 9) or DMR regions including their ±1Mb flanking regions (Supplementary Fig. 15b) comparing to that across the CpG sites we investigated on the arrays. Similarly, we observed that only a limited number of our DMRs’ signatures showed significant enrichment for AD risk gene signatures (Supplementary Figs. 7b and 9b ). These results suggested that AD risk factors and genetics variants might not be the main sources driving DMRs’ association with AD and their regulation over gene expression16.

ATAC activity was altered in AD

To tackle the mechanism underpinning the DMR-association with AD and its effects on gene networks, we performed ATAC-seq assays on neuronal nuclei that were purified by fluorescence activated nuclear sorting (FANS) from the postmortem PHG tissue of the subjects in the MSBB cohort (Methods). The subjects were classified into definite (AD, 14 cases) and possible AD (7 cases) cases, and normal healthy control (NL, 20 subjects) according to the CERAD criteria (Supplementary Data 1b). The subjects had a ratio of male vs. female of 17 to 24, and an average of age at death of 83.7 ranging from 61 to 103 years. Note that all of the ATAC-seq assays had their corresponding counterparts in the RNA-seq and proteomics profiling analyzed above.

As a QC step, genotypes were determined using the ATAC-seq data following the GATK best practice pipeline (Supplementary information). Sex determination inference53 and kinship analysis54 revealed that all the subjects had a sex status consistent to that recorded in the sample demographic data, and no duplication and/or contamination occurred among the samples.

We determined the ATAC peaks for open transcription active domains genome-wide over each of the ATAC-seq profiles. We excluded peaks on sex chromosomes since we focused on methylation changes on autosomal chromosomes. We also excluded peaks on the peak black list, and peaks with no definitive chromosomal assignment. After these refinements, we discovered 59,938 ATAC domains that had a distinct ATAC peak across at least half of the samples (Supplementary Data 10a). We searched for the genomic features nearest to our ATAC peaks (Supplementary Data 10b). As expected, more than 95% of the nearest genomic features were either intergenic or within introns or promoter regions (Supplementary Fig. 17a), and ~ 70% belonged to protein-coding genes (Supplementary Fig. 17b), highlighting their potential roles in transcriptional regulation.

As an independent validation, we overlapped our ATAC peaks with the ATAC list discovered in the iPSC neurons44. We observed 20,492 overlapping peaks between the ATAC peaks and our ATAC list, covering ~ 34% of the unique ATAC peaks in the present study and ~ 50% of the unique ATAC peaks in their iPSC neurons. We also compared our ATAC peaks with the H3K9ac domain atlas derived from the PFC region in the large ROSMAP human cohort44. The acetylation of H3K9ac marks transcriptionally active open chromatin, and thus, we should expect a significant overlap of the H3K9ac domains with the ATAC peaks. Indeed, we detected 20,200 partially overlapping peaks between their H3K9ac domains and our ATAC peaks, representing ~ 33% of the unique ATAC in the present study and ~ 65% of the unique H3K9ac domains in the ROSMAP PFC cohort. These comparisons, therefore, validated the consistency of our ATAC results over the published atlas of ATAC and H3K9ac in human44.

We further investigated the relevance of our ATAC peaks to AD neuropathophysiology. We performed differential accessibility of ATAC peaks over stratified groups of AD clinical traits (Methods) to find out AD-associated ATAC peaks. We detected ~ 5% (3,119) of the ATAC peaks that were significantly associated with the AD clinical trait CERAD (p.adj &lt; 0.05, Supplementary Fig. 18a, and Supplementary Data 10c). Similarly, a substantial number of the ATAC peaks were shown to be associated with the CDR score (p.adj &lt; 0.05, Supplementary Fig. 18b, and Supplementary Data 10d). Thus, the alteration in chromatin accessibility we observed is likely relevant to AD.

2.11 Methylation linked mainly in trans to ATAC activities

To explore for the potential interaction between methylation in the DMRs and the active transcription in the ATAC peaks, we analyzed the correlation between the methylation level of each of the DMRs and the activity of each ATAC peak. At the FDR &lt; 5% level, we detected 77,910 DMR-ATAC pairs that were significantly correlated, covering ~ 36% (21,722) unique ATAC peaks and ~ 30% (80) unique DMRs. Only ~4.5% (3,505) of the significantly associated DMR-ATAC pairs were located on the same chromosomes. The remaining vast majority of the significantly associated DMR-ATAC peak pairs were associated in trans on different chromosomes.

2.12 DMRs and ATAC peaks showed concordance in regulating gene expression

We assessed the concordance of the gene signatures associated with the DMR and ATAC peak in each DMR-ATAC pair. We performed Fisher exact tests to check whether the number of the overlapping entries of the DMR- and ATAC-associated signatures in a DMR-ATAC pair is significantly above the background noise. In about 40% (1,298,436) out of the DMR-ATAC pairs, a significant intersection between their associated mRNA signatures was detected. Fig. 6a showed the DMR-ATAC pairs that possessed a significant concordance in their correlated mRNA signatures. Similarly, ~27% (717,928) of the DMR-ATAC pairs also displayed a significant concordance in their associated protein signatures (Fig. 6b). For example, the down-regulated ATAC peak (chr8:53326398–53326598) (Fig. 6c) is 324bp upstream of the hyper-methylated DMR264 (Fig. 6d), and as expected this DMR-ATAC pair showed a reverse trend in their expression (Fig. 6e). Strikingly, this DMR-ATAC pair possessed a significant concordance in their associated protein signatures (FE = 1.8, FDR = 6.7E-49). These results suggested that the DMRs might regulate the gene expression by effecting the open chromatic transcriptional activities.

2.13 DMRs are causal to gene expression via ATAC peaks

We investigated the causal relationship between DMRs and ATAC peaks on gene expression using the cit algorithm for causality test55,56. We reasoned that DMRs could affect the gene expression via ATAC peaks (Scenario I: DMR → ATAC → gene expression, Fig. 7a, left panel) or alternatively ATAC peaks might influence gene expression via DMRs (Scenario II: ATAC → DMR → gene expression, Fig.7a, right panel). We first performed the cit tests at the mRNA level. We constructed 2,004,818 triplets in each of which the mRNA had a significant correlation to its DMR and ATAC peak. In Scenario I, we identified 92,630 (4.6%) out of all the tests that possessed a q value &lt; 0.05, which involved in 1,899 unique genes, unique 191 DMRs and 2,858 unique ATAC peaks. By contrast, in Scenario II, none of the tests had a q value &lt; 0.05. Similar trends were observed at the protein level: out of the 1,513,092 tests, we detected 54,326 (3.6%) had a q value &lt; 0.05 in Scenario I, which involved in 911 unique proteins, unique 255 DMRs and 1,939 unique ATAC peaks. Again, none of the triplets possessed a q value &lt; 0.05 in Scenario II. These results suggested that DMRs likely influence gene expression via ATAC peaks.

We next investigated the biological consequence of the triplets by looking into their involved genes and GO pathways. We collapsed the genes derived from all the triplets (q&lt;0.05) that had the same DMR and ATAC peak, and termed them the DMR causal gene signatures (DCSs). We found that the DCSs were enriched for many GO pathways that are critical in AD neuro-pathology such as synapse signaling, neuron and mitochondrion functions (Fig. 7b). We then took the union of all the DCSs, and projected it onto the mRNA MEGENA network. As shown in Fig. 7c, a number of the modules in the network were found to be enriched for DCSs. Notably, top-ranked AD modules tended to be enriched for DCSs (Fig. 7c). Similar results were observed in the MEGENA network of the proteins (Fig.7d). Figs. 7e–f illustrated the complex causal network of top-ranked DMRs. Together, the results highlighted the mechanical relevance of DMRs in regulating gene expression in relation to AD.

3 DISCUSSION

In the present study, we first demonstrated the existence of AD-associated variation in methylation level genome-wide, out of which DMRs were further identified to highlight the methylomic changes in relation to AD neuropathology. Focused on the DMRs, we next revealed and disentangled the complex and intertwining gene networks underpinning the methylomic cascading. We then proposed a novel statistic, i.e., OMS, to capture and quantify the overall net effect of methylation that occurred on individual genes in the genetic networks, and related OMS with co-expression network metrics. In the top-ranked modules, we found that genes generally possessed a net change in OMS, consistent with their differences in expression at both mRNA and protein levels, and genes/proteins downstream the top-ranked KDs tended to be influenced by methylation. It is worth noting that the results regarding OMS were observed in both the discovery set and the validation set for two different brain regions, i.e. PHG and PFC. Our study, to our knowledge, was the most extensive array-based profiling on methylomic variation in AD and the first integrative analysis of omics on DNA methylation and transcription and protein expression of co-expression networks.

DNA methylation is one of the well-established epigenetic molecular marks in the human genome14,36 and was demonstrated to be linked to abnormal neuropathology in AD16–18,22,24,25,27,29,57. Several recent EWAS using the 450K platform were conducted on DNAs extracted from bulk postmortem tissue of various brain regions including PFC, entorhinal cortex, hippocampus, superior temporal gyrus (STG) and cerebellum15–17,45 or purified brain cell populations29. DMP and/or DMR signatures were subsequently identified concerning AD neuropathological phenotypes16–18,57 such as the Braak score5,17, neuritic amyloid plaque16, and AD case vs. control16,57. In the present study, we used the newly developed 850K platform, which contained &gt; 90% of the 450K CpG sites36 (Methods), thus providing a common base to compare our findings with the other published work. About 4.5% (611) out of the 13,755 DMPs identified from our discovery set (850K array) were also found differentially expressed in the validation set (the ROSMAP 450K array). The low rate of concordance in the DMP signatures between the discovery set and the validation set may be partly because &gt; 40% of the probes in the discovery array are specific to the 850K array, not examined in the previous version of 450K platform (see Methods). To walk around this complication, we scanned through the genes nearby the DMP sites, which were annotated by Illumina58. We found 5,441 unique genes that were nearby our DMPs and were enriched for AD-related neurophysiological pathways and functional processes such as neuronal and synaptic function, and immune process (Fig. 1c). Importantly, 2,608 (about 50%) of our DMP-nearby genes were replicated in the validation set (the ROSMAP cohort) (FDR &lt; 2.2e-16). Similar results were obtained on the DMR analysis. We found that 36 (~14%) of our DMRs can be located on an overlapping counterpart over the DMRs in the validation set. We also compared our DMR list with that characterized by Smith et al (2018)5 in the PFC region using the samples from the MSBB cohort. Seven (18.9%) out of the 37 DMRs their study identified were also among our DMR list. Importantly, as shown in Fig. S19, we replicated the finding of the hyper-methylated super DMR of a 48-kb spanning the HOXA gene cluster discovered in a recent EWAS study5. In addition, we also overlapped our DMR list with the DMR list characterized by Watson using the STG brain region6. Unfortunately, only 9 (~3.3%) of our DMRs were found in their list. Similarly, a low overlapping percentage of ~12% was observed for the validation array when compared with the DMR list from Watson6. The low replication rate of the DMRs in the present study and that by Watson6 is possibly due to the different algorithms used to scan for DMRs in the two investigations. Nevertheless, together, our findings on AD-associated differential methylation replicated to some extent that of earlier EWAS studies. However, many of the DMPs and DMRs reported in the present study were novel, not yet reported in the EWAS using 450K platform6,18,57.

It would be reasonable to assume an inverse relationship between a gene’s differential expression and the methylomic alteration in its promoter region. However, the impact of DNA methylation on gene expression is complex59. Gene expression can be regulated by methylation directly in cis or indirectly in trans via its genetic network that is regulated by methylation60. It was found that genes are frequently influenced by methylation in genomic regions as much as 10 Mb or more away from their promoter regions61–63. The methylomic effect could be negative or positive, resulting in a decrease or increase in the gene expression. Furthermore, hyper- or hypo-methylation could cause an opposite effect on the gene expression. In addition, there possibly exist interactions among DNA methylation of different genomic regions (for example, DMRs) as well. Therefore, the ultimate outcome of a gene’s expression that is regulated by methylation would be the summation of methylomic effects of all sources, both in cis and in trans. To our knowledge, there is no report regarding statistically modeling on such net effect from methylation over gene expression. Summarized statistic(s) on net methylomic effects over individual genes, and thus their clusters (modules) would make it more feasible to investigate the association of methylation with other measures of gene expression at both transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels, and the metrics of gene networks. This would facilitate the integration of methylomic profiling with other omics as in the present study we conducted on transcriptomic and proteomic data.

Thus, in the present study, we used correlation-weighted AD-associated variation in methylation level to model the net methylomic effects (Methods). We put forward and defined the OMS to catch and delineate the net outcome on the gene expression that come from all sources of methylomic regulation. We then associated OMS with the metrics of genetic networks. We found that AD-module ranking was significantly correlated with the sum of their members’ OMS in both the transcriptomic and proteomic co-expression networks, thus, revealing that top-ranked co-expression modules tended to be impacted by methylation (Fig. 3a–f). We further screened for methylation-impacted gene-gene links, and projected the methylation-associated gene-gene links to co-expression networks. Again, we found that top-ranked modules often were enriched for methylation-associated gene-gene links (Fig.5 c–f), therefore corroborating the finding obtained using OMS.

Another metric of the networks we evaluated for its relation to OMS is key driver (KD) in the Bayesian causal networks. Naturally, more substantial effects would be expected when perturbing the function of a KDG than non-key driver genes in the network52. As their relation to OMS, we observed that the downstream neighborhood of top-ranked KDs were often regulated by methylation. It is possible that top-ranked KDs were key regulator genes60 whose expression levels were altered by methylation, which in turn regulated the expression levels of many genes downstream64. It is also possible that both the KD and its downstream genes are independently regulated by shared unkown factor(s), for example, transcription factors65,66. Clearly, more research is needed to unravel the mechanism by which KDs influence their downstream neighborhood in methylation.

AD is a neurodegenerative disease, which is implicated as progressive loss of certain structures, functions, and neurons across diverse brain cortex regions2,3,57, complicating the interpretation of the involvement of DNA methylation in AD neuropathology. Furthermore, cell-type-specific methylation signatures were identified in the methylomic profiling of purified human brain cell populations29,47. Various bioinformatics deconvolution algorithms47,67,68 were developed to estimate and correct brain cell-type composition to circumvent the cofounding effects caused by tissue heterogeneity in bulk epigenetics analysis17,18,57. However, disparate evidence existed for variation in the estimated proportions of neurons in the AD brain when applying cell-type-specific signatures of DNA methylation to evaluate and adjust for variation in brain cell-type proportions6,16–18,57,47,67. In the present study, we used the CETS package43 to assess the neuronal cell-type proportions across individual samples. Although the statistical significance was decreased upon the adjustment of neuronal proportions, we found a significant correlation of the fold changes in methylation level of DMPs before and after correcting for the neuronal cell proportions (Supplementary Fig. 4a). Furthermore, overall, the methylation status (hyper vs. hypo) of DMRs after correcting for the neuronal cell proportions remained the same as the original one (Supplementary Fig. 4b). Thus, these results along with our previous findings41, suggested that the brain cell-type composition might impose a minimal impact on the differential expression and network analyses. However, we cannot untwine the effects caused by the brain cell-type composition from the actual signals governing differential expression and network structures. Perhaps, future work using a purified cell-type population would be more feasible to disentangle the real methylomic effects from the background noises such as those arose from cell-type population composition.

In summary, the present study is the most extensive genome-wide array-based interrogation on the effect of methylation on AD neuropathology and the first integrative view on the complex interactions between methylation, and multiscale transcriptomic and proteomics networks in AD.

4 METHODS

4.1 Multi-omics Cohorts in AD

In this study, we analyzed multi-Omics data from subjects in the Mount Sinai Brain Bank 41 and two ongoing cohort studies, the Religious Orders Study and the Rush Memory and Aging Project 69,70. The MSBB cohort includes matched epigenomic (ATAC-seq), methylomic, transcriptomic (RNA-seq) and proteomic data in the parahippocampal gyrus (PHG) of 201 postmortem control, mild cognitive impaired (MCI) and AD brains while the ROSMAP cohort includes methylomic, transcriptomic (RNA-seq) and proteomic data in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) of 713 postmortem AD dementia, mild cognitive impaired (MCI) and no cognitive impairment (NCI) brains as previously described71–73. The MSBB cohort was taken as a discovery dataset and the ROSMAP cohort was used as an independent validation dataset. The methylomic data in the MSBB cohort were generated through the Infinium MethylEPIC BeadChips36 (referred to as ‘850K’ hereafter) and the methylomic data in the ROSMAP cohort were based on the Illumina HumanMethylation450 BeadChip16 (referred to as ‘450K’ hereafter). The 850K platform contains &gt; 90% of the CpG sites on the 450K one and has additional 330,000 CpG sites. ROS and MAP were each approved by an Institutional Review Board of Rush University Medical Center. All participants signed an informed consent, an Anatomic Gift Act, and a repository consent.

4.2 Genomic DNA extraction

Total genomic DNA was purified from ten mg of postmortem brain tissue dissected from the PHG region using the Qiagen All Prep DNA/RNA Mini Kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Qiagen, catalog# 80204). Tissues were homogenized using Qiagen’s TissueLyzer LT (Qiagen, catalog# 69980) combined with 5mm stainless steel beads (Qiagen, catalog# 69989). Next, the homogenized tissues were lysed and loaded onto QIAmp spin columns and then washed to remove any impurities. Finally, purified DNA was eluted off from the columns using a low salt buffer.

4.3 Methylation array assays

Array assays were carried out on 200–500ng extracted DNA per sample. Bisulfite conversion was conducted using the EZ-96 DNA Methylation-Lightning Kit from Zymo Research following the manufacturer’s instructions (Zymo, catalog# D5033). DNA samples were fragmented and hybridized to Infinium MethylEPIC BeadChips36 (referred to as ‘850K’ hereafter)(Illumina, catalog# WG-317–1001). BeadChips were loaded onto the Illumina iScan microarray scanner (Illumina, catalog# SY-202–1001) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The raw data were deposited in the Synapse (https://www.synapse.org) with accession number syn22025006.

The methylation array dataset of the ROSMAP was downloaded from Synapse (accession number syn3157275).

4.4 Methylation data preprocessing

We developed a pipeline to preprocess, normalize, and quality check (QC) the data generated from the Illumina 850K methylation array. Briefly, we used the R package “minfi” to preprocess and normalize the raw array data in the IDAT files and output the β and M values of 866,029 probes on the platform. We then inferred genotypes on 59 probes querying high-frequency SNPs by training a mixed model as previously described74 and compared them with whole-genome sequencing (WGS) based genotypes generated from the same set of subjects. Five methylation samples were removed due to showing either low genotype concordance with their corresponding WGS samples or high genotype concordance with WGS samples of different brains. Next, we removed 89,521 probes which were either internal control, showing low quality (detection p-value &lt; 0.05)75, or known to have common SNPs at the CpG sites75. The β and M values of the remaining probes (776,508 CpG sites) were adjusted for covariables including the age of death, batch (plates for sample assays), PMI, race, and sex (Supplementary Fig. 1). The genic annotation of the CpG sites was acquired from the annotation package for Illumina’s EPIC methylation arrays (IlluminaHumanMethylationEPICanno.ilm10b2.hg19), which was termed in the present study as the nearby gene(s).

The ROSMAP methylation data (syn3157275) was processed as described in the previous study16. In the present study, we used the imputed format of this methylation data, where missing values were imputed using a k-nearest neighbor algorithm (https://www.synapse.org/#!Synapse:syn3157275).

4.5 Identification of differentially methylated position (DMP)

We performed DMP analysis on individual CpG sites over the neurotic plaque burden. For the discovery cohort MSBB, we first classified subjects into AD or normal control (NL) or cases with intermediate AD based on the plaque mean density (PLQ-Mn). Specifically, a subject was classified as an AD case if he/she had a score greater than 9 while a subject was classified as a normal control (NL) case if he/she had no plaque (PLQ-Mn =0). A subject was classified as intermediate AD if he/she had a PLQ-Mn score greater than 0 but less than or equal to 9 (Supplementary Data 1b)35,39. To identify DMPs, we performed a pair-wise comparison to detect significant changes in methylation level between any two previously defined groups by the moderated t-test implemented in the limma package76. DMPs were determined to have a Benjamini-Hochberg (BH) adjusted p &lt; 0.05. A DMP was termed as hypo-methylated in a group if it had a significant decrease in methylation in comparison with a contrast group under testing. A DMP was termed as hyper-methylated in a group if it had a significant increase in methylation in comparison with a contrast group under testing.

For the validation cohort ROSMAP, we conducted the DMP analysis over the neuritic plaque burden (plaq_n, that is, np). We downloaded the Qced β values that were adjusted for age at death, sex, and experimental batch (https://www.synapse.org/#!Synapse:syn3157275)16. A linear model was used to detect DMPs associated with neuritic plaque pathology16, controlled for the testing of multiple hypotheses (Benjamini-Hochberg).

4.6 Identification of differential methylation region (DMR)

The python module comb-p was utilized to combine p values of adjacent probes to further identify DMRs. A DMR contained more than 3 spatially correlated CpGs in a 500-bp sliding window and had a Šidák-corrected comb-p &lt; 0.0543.

4.7 Correlation analysis

The mean of the methylation across CpG sites within a DMR was termed as the mean expression of the DMR. Pearson’s correlation was subsequently calculated between the mean expression of a DMR and the expression of individual mRNAs/proteins. A gene or protein was termed DMR-associated gene or protein if it was significantly correlated with a DMR (BH-adjusted p-value &lt; 0.05). For a given DMR, we defined the DMR-associated gene (or protein) signature as the union of all the genes or proteins significantly correlated with the DMR. The union of the genes (or proteins) associated with any DMR was the methylation-associated gene or protein signatures.

4.8 Overall methylation score (OMS)

The impact of DNA methylation on gene expression is complex. Gene expression can be influenced by methylation directly in cis or indirectly in trans via its genetic network that is regulated by methylation. The methylation effect could be negative (hypermethylation) or positive (hypomethylation), leading to decreased or increased gene expression. Therefore, we defined the overall methylation score (OMS) to quantify the overall impact on gene expression from all the DMRs. OMS can be computed for a gene or a co-expression network module.

To calculate the OMS for a gene, we considered four possible scenarios: net up-regulation from hyper-methylated DMRs, termed OMS.1; net down-regulation from hyper-methylated DMRs, termed OMS.2; net up-regulation from hypo-methylated DMRs, termed OMS.3; net down-regulation from hypo-methylated DMRs termed OMS.4. The OMS.1 and OMS.2 are the sum of the methylomic effects derived from its positive and negative association with hyper-DMRs, respectively. In contrast, the OMS.3 and OMS.4 are the summation of the methylomic effects derived from its negative and positive associations with hypo-DMRs, respectively. Therefore, the OMS from each possible source was calculated as: OMS(k,Ni)=(−1)k+1∑j|Mj|∗|Cj|

where k=1,2,3,4 for OMS.1, OMS.2, OMS.3, and OMS.4, respectively; Ni for i=1,2 are the total number of DMRs in the hyper- and hypo-methylation groups, respectively. Mj for j=1,2,...,Ni are the log2-transformed AD-associated fold changes of the methylomic level of each DMR. Cj for j=1,2,...,Ni are the Pearson’s correlation coefficients between the gene expression and the methylation level of each DMR. Note that we constrained Cj to have a BH-adjusted p value &lt; 0.05. We used the mean methylation level across CpG sites within a DMR as its methylation level.

The final OMS of the gene was defined as the sum of OMS.1, OMS.2, OMS.3, and OMS.4. Thus, a negative and positive OMS confers a net decrease and increase to the gene expression, respectively. OMS of zero would denote that methylation has no impact on the gene expression.A module-specific OMS was calculated as the sum of the OMS of all the genes/proteins within a module.

4.9 Methylation level adjustment by cell-type proportion

We used the R package CETS to estimate the neuronal proportions in the postmortem PHG tissue. We first intersected the probes on the 850K platform with the reference set of probes from the CETS package47, resulting in 9,039 common probes. The 9,039 common probes were then overlapped with the top-200 cell-type-specific probe set29 to get a further refined reference set of 102 probes. The neuronal proportion was estimated for all the MSBB samples examined according to the CETS package method. Next, the methylation level (M value) was corrected by the estimated neuronal proportions using a linear model. The neuronal proportion-adjusted M value was only used in the evaluation of the interference of the neuronal proportion on characterizing differential methylation in AD.

4.10 RNA-seq data processing

Here we used the normalized and covariate-adjusted RNA-seq data from the PHG region of postmortem brain tissues in the MSBB cohort as we had previously described41,77,78,48. For the RNA-seq data of the ROSMAP cohort79, we downloaded the raw fastq files from the AMP-AD Knowledge Portal with accession number syn3219045 and then applied the same RNA-seq data processing pipeline to perform read alignment, gene quantification, normalization, and covariate adjustment as for the MSBB cohort41,37.

4.11 Proteomic profiling

Tandem Mass Tag (TMT)-based proteomics analysis was utilized to profile the protein expression in the PHG region of 185 human postmortem brains in the MSBB cohort. We identified 12,147 distinct protein isoforms following a previously described method80. We then corrected the protein expression over the covariables postmortem interval, race, gender, batch, and age at death via a linear model. We used the regression residuals for downstream analysis.

We downloaded TMT-assayed proteomics data in the prefrontal cortex region of the ROSMAP cohort from the AMP-AD Knowledge Portal (accession number syn21261728 81–84). Missing values were imputed by the function in the R package ‘impute’ with the default parameters. Protein entries with missing value in more than 50% of the samples were discarded. The remaining proteins’ expression data was further corrected for sex and age at death via a linear model. The regression residuals were used for downstream analysis.

4.12 Cell-type deconvolution in the bulk RNA-seq and proteomics assays

We performed cell-type deconvolution for the bulk RNA-seq and proteomics profiling via the DSA68 algorithm. We estimated the proportions of major brain cell-types by utilizing the set of five marker genes44 that was derived for each major human brain cell-types as described44.

4.13 Co-expression network analysis

Gene co-expression networks were identified by using Multiscale Embedded GEne co-expression Network Analysis (MEGENA)85–87. Briefly, MEGENA first selects gene pairs with significant correlations (FDR &lt; 0.05) and then embeds them onto a 3-dimensional topological sphere 88. The resulting co-expression network belongs to a class of geometrical networks called “planar filtered networks (PFNs)” that can be drawn on the surface of the sphere without any link intersections 89. PFNs then go through unsupervised clustering to identify network clusters (i.e., gene modules) at various resolutions.85–87 The resulting gene modules are organized in a hierarchy. The hierarchy represents the multiscale organization of gene modules with different degrees of compactness. It captures a series of higher-order relationships (i.e., parent) modules possessing children modules residing within these parent modules. MEGENA recognizes more compact children modules within the parent modules 87.

Gene modules are then annotated by the enriched MSigDB signatures and associated with outcomes through the previously identified gene signatures’ enrichment test. Furthermore, candidate key hubs of gene modules are identified, employing statistically significant hubs with hub p-value &lt; 0.0587. Detection of hub genes of modules was achieved via the internal function in the MEGENA package87. Essentially, hubs are those nodes with top connections with other nodes in the same individual modules90,91. Key driver analysis (KDA) on MEGENA modules was performed by the R package KDA (version 0.02) following the method described in 52,92.

4.14 Bayesian causal inference network analysis

Bayesian causal network was constructed as described 41,93, 94,11. Briefly, we first used causal inference test (CIT)55 to infer the probability of causal regulatory relationships among genes associated with the same expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL). The CIT-based causal relationships were combined with TF-target relationships derived from ENCODE as structure priors for building Bayesian network from all genome-wide expressed genes through a Monte Carlo Markov Chain (MCMC) simulation based procedure implemented in software RIMBANet92,95.

4.15 ATAC assays and data processing

We utilized the PHG tissue dissected from postmortem brains in the MSBB cohort to perform the neuronal ATAC assays. The subjects were classified into definite (AD, 14 cases) and possible AD (7 cases) cases, and normal healthy control (NL, 20 subjects) according to the CERAD criteria. The subjects had a ratio of male vs. female of 17 to 24, and an average of age at death of 83.7 ranging from 61 to 103 years. Note that all of the ATAC-seq assays had their corresponding counterparts in the RNA-seq and proteomics profiling mentioned above. FANS sorting of neuronal nuclei and subsequent preparation of ATAC-seq libraries were carried out according to the methodology as described by Bendl34 (2021). ATAC-seq libraries were sequenced on Novaseq (Illumina) machines yielding 100 bp paired-end reads.

We processed the ATAC sequencing data starting with the fastq data. Since the ATAC library size is small, ~100bp in length, the raw paired-end fastq data first went through the Trimmomatic (v0.39)96 method to remove any adapter sequences, which were followed by fastqc97 (v0.11.8) to control for general sequencing metrics such as sequence depth, quality score, GC content, sequence length distribution, adapter content. The QCed trimmed reads were next mapped back onto the human reference hg19 genome by the bowtie2 aligner (v2.4.1)98, and the aligning quality was monitored and evaluated by the qualimap99 (v2.2.1) method. Summarized QC results were combined by using the MultiQC tool100. The ATAC peaks were called by following the MACS2 (v2.1.0) python package101, and the peak calling quality was assessed by the software ataqv102 for visualization and validation of the ATAC-seq assay data. All 41 samples passed the fastqc and qualimap QC, and the ATAC peak calling QC.

We used the total counts of reads that were mapped to an ATAC peak to denote the activity of transcription occurring in the peak. The processing of peak sets, merging of overlapping peaks, counting of reads to individual peaks, and removing of peak regions in the hg19 blacklist were achieved by using the R package DiffBind103. Read count transformation and normalization was conducted via the functions of normTransform and vst in the Deseq2 R package104, which was further adjusted for the covariates of PMI, sex and AOD via the linear model. The residual was used for downstream analysis such as differential peak detection, correlation analysis and cit tests.

4.16 Causal Inference Test (cit) analysis

The cit tests were performed essentially following the algorithm and R package as described55,56. We tested the causal relationship between DMRs and ATAC peaks on gene expression at the mRNA and protein level, respectively. We considered two scenarios, that is, Scenario I: DMR → ATAC → gene expression (Fig. 7A, left panel), and Scenario II: ATAC → DMR → gene expression (Fig.7A, right panel). We constructed the test triplets on those where the mRNA or protein has a significant correlation with both the DMR and the ATAC peak (Bonferroni-adjusted p &lt; 0.05). We first screened out the triplets that had a q value &gt; 0.05 by permutation-based cit approach to control for multiple tests56. We checked the effects of permutation number by using 1,000 and 10,000 rounds of permutation, which resulted in a similar total number of significant triplets detected and &gt; 95% overlap of the triplets between different numbers of permutation. Thus, in the present study, we reported the cit results using the approach with 1,000 rounds of permutation.

4.17 Gene-gene partial correlation analysis conditioned on DNA methylation

Gene-gene (or protein-protein) partial correlations conditioned on DMRs were computed for every gene pair based on the residual mRNA or protein expression level after iteratively regressing out methylation levels of one DMR at a time. Here, the DMR methylation levels were represented by the mean methylation M value from multiple CpGs in each DMRs. Correlation p values were adjusted for multiple tests by Bonferroni correction. To assess the maximum potential impact on the gene co-expression by a single DMR, the final partial correlation for a given gene pair was chosen as the one with the lowest absolute correlation coefficient value out of all the DMR conditioned models tested. We considered the correlation between a pair of genes was modulated by DNA methylation (DMRs) if the gene pairs showed significant correlation in the ordinary correlation analysis but became insignificant in the partial correlation analysis.

We then set out to test whether the gene-gene (or protein-protein) correlations modulated by DNA methylation (e.g., DMRs) are overrepresented in the respective gene (or protein) networks as well as their underlying gene (protein) modules. Let R be the significant gene-gene correlations based on cutoffs for correlation coefficients and p-values, RY be the subset of R that are regulated by DMRs, RN-L be the L-layer links in the MEGENA network (L=1,2,3; links from a given node to all the nodes within L layers away from the node), which have significant correlations, i.e., subset of R, RY,N-L be the intersection of RY and RN-L, i.e. the L-layer network links that are regulated by DMRs, RN-Lm be the L-layer links in a module (m) in the MEGENA network (RN-Lm is a subset of RN-L), RY,N-Lm be the intersection of RY,N-L and RN-Lm, i.e. the L-layer network links that are regulated by DMRs. Via the hypergeometric test51, we evaluated whether RY,N-Lm is overrepresented in RN-Lm given that there are RY,N-L in RN-L.

Supplementary Material

sD1

sD2

sD3

sD5

dD6

sD4

sD8

sD9

dD7

supinfo

sD10

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Gregory Klein for curating the clinical data in the ROSMAP cohort.

FUNDING

This work was supported in parts by grants from the National Institutes of Health (NIH)/National Institute on Aging (U01AG046170, RF1AG054014, RF1AG057440, R01AG057907, U01AG052411, R01AG068030, RF1AG074010, R01DA051191, R01AG063819, R01DE029322, R01AG062355, R21AI149013 and R01AG062661). ROSMAP is supported by P30AG10161, P30AG72975, R01AG15819, R01AG17917. U01AG46152, U01AG61356. ROSMAP resources can be requested at https://www.radc.rush.edu.

Fig. 1. The Overview of the study design and identification of AD-associated DMRs.

a Overview of the study design. DNA methylation and cell type-specific ATAC-seq were performed from postmortem brain tissues in the MSBB cohort. Existing multi-omics (WGS, RNA-seq, and proteomics) profiling in the MSBB cohort, as well as the DNA methylation and other -omics data from an independent ROSMAP cohort, were also collected. After data quality controlled and normalization, differentially methylated CpG sites in AD were identified, and clustered into differentially methylated regions (DMRs). Genes and proteins correlated with DMRs were identified and then used to characterize gene coexpression network modules impacted by DMRs. Combined with the ATAC-seq data, potential causal regulatory relationships between epigenetic modifications and gene expression traits were inferred.. b Summary of EWAS (epi-genome-wide association study) over PLQ_Mn for human brain PLQ_Mn burden and its association with AD and transcriptomic and proteomics data. The perimeter of this circular figure presents each chromosome, and the cytogenetic bands of each chromosome are represented in the first circle, with the centromere highlighted in red. The next track reports the density of all the Qced CpG probes across individual chromosomes, ranging 1–664 probes per 100 kb. Next comes the track that reports the density of all the DMP sites across individual chromosomes, ranging 0–124 probes per 10kb, which followed by the track that shows the DMR-association with AD using the –log10(p.adj) between a DMR mean expression and the PLQ_Mn burden, ranging 1.7–6.5 with 1.3 revealing a significant correlation (p.adj &lt; 0.05). Red and blue bars indicate hyper- and hypo-methylated DMRs, respectively. In the last four tracks, we illustrated the potential relevance of DMRs to AD via gene expression. The gene symbol track shows the AD risk target genes that are nearest to a DMR and also a DEG (the track next to the most inner one) or DEP genes (The most inner track). We used the AD GWAS risk gene targets reported in Johnson et al 105. The legend bar in the circle center denotes the fold change in AD vs. health control in DEG and DEP analysis.

Fig. 2. The methylomic contribution to gene expression.

a) Variance partition of gene expression across the transcriptome concerning methylation contribution. Genes were ranked-ordered according to the portion of their expression variance explained by methylation. b) Variance partition of protein expression across the proteome concerning methylation contribution. Proteins were ranked-ordered according to the portion of their expression variance explained by methylation. c) An example of a hypo-methylated DMR. d) The mRNA expression of an up-regulated gene nearby the DMR shown in (c). y-axis, mRNA expression level. e) An example of a hyper-methylated DMR. f) The mRNA expression of a down-regulated gene nearby the DMR shown in (e). y-axis, mRNA expression level. g) The corresponding protein expression of the genes TRIM56 in (d) and HRT2A in (f). h) Top-ranked GO terms that were enriched for the gene list common to the DMR-regulated mRNA- and protein-signatures.

Fig. 3. Overall methylation effects on the gene modules of the MEGENA co-expression network of the MSBB PHG cohort.

a-b) Scatter plots of the mRNA-OMS over the module ranking score. (a), negative mRNA-OMS; (b), positive mRNA-OMS. Highlighted are top-ranked modules (in red). c) The relation of mRNA-OMS to the change in expression of individual genes’ mRNA in the neuronal module M62. Filling color in red represents positive mRNA-OMS(+), green for negative mRNA-OMS(−), and gray for neutral no effect mRNA-OMS(0). Border colors denoted the directionality in differential expression of the genes’ mRNA in AD vs. NL. Turquoise, orange, and blue stand for increased (DE(+)), decreased (DE(−)), and no change (DE(0)), respectively. Enlarged nodes, KDGs. d-e) Scatter plots of the protein-OMS over the module ranking score. d, negative protein-OMS; e, positive protein-OMS. Highlighted are top-ranked modules (in red). f) The relation of protein-OMS to the change in expression of individual genes at both protein and mRNA levels in the neuronal module M5. Each node was split into four parts to depict the change in expression for protein (left) and mRNA (right) stratified by CDR (top) or CERAD (bottom). Filling colors in nodes: red, increased; blue, decreased; black, unchanged; turquoise, no matched in mRNA expression in AD vs. NL. Border colors denoted the magnitude in overall methylation: red, protein-OMS(+); gray, neutral no effect protein-OMS(0); turquoise, protein-OMS(−).

Fig. 4. The relation of the OMS to the KDs in the Bayesian inference networks of the MSBB PHG region.

a-b) Scatter plots of the mRNA-OMS over the KDG ranking score. a, mRNA-OMS(+); b, mRNA-OMS(−). c-e) Scatter plots of the KDG ranking score over the numbers of the nodes (link degree) (c), mRNA-OMS(+) (d), and mRNA-OMS(−) (e) in the downstream neighborhood (3 layers) of the KDG over its ranking score, respectively. f-g) Scatter plots of protein-OMS over the KDP ranking score. (f), protein-OMS(−); (g), protein-OMS(+). h-j) Scatter plots of the KDP ranking score over the numbers of the nodes (link degree) (h), protein-OMS(+) (i), and protein-OMS(−) (j) in the downstream neighborhood (3 layers) of the KDP over its ranking score, respectively. Highlighted are top-ranked KDG/KDPs.

Fig. 5. Integration of the methylomic consequences on gene expression.

a-b) The Venn diagram showing the overlapping among the methylation-regulated (PCR, principal component regression) and the methylation-associated (Cor) gene signatures. (a), mRNAs of the MSBB cohort. (b), proteins of the MSBB cohort. c-f) The sunburst plots of the enrichment for the methylation-associated gene-gene links in the expanded MEGENA network space. (c), the MSBB transcriptome; (d), the ROSMAP transcriptome; (e), the MSBB proteome; (f), the ROSMAP proteome. Labelled are the top-ranked AD modules.

Fig. 6. The methylomic association with the ATAC activities.

a) Concordance of DMR- and ATAC-associated mRNA signatures. Point size was proportional to the –log10(FDR) between the DMR- and ATAC-associated mRNA signatures in a DMR-ATAC pair. Note, showed were only the DMR-peak pairs with an overlap –log10(FDR) &gt; 50. b) Concordance of DMR- and ATAC-associated proteins signatures. Point size was proportional to the –log10(FDR) between the DMR- and ATAC-associated protein signatures in a DMR-ATAC pair. Note, showed were only the DMR-peak pairs with an overlap –log10(FDR) &gt; 10. c) The violin plot of the ATAC peak chr8:53326398–53326598 activity in AD vs. NL. d) The violin plot of the DMR264 expression in AD vs. NL. e) The scatter plot of the expression of DMR264 and the activity of the ATAC peak chr8:53326398–53326598.

Fig. 7. DMR are causal to gene expression via the ATAC peaks.

a) Schematic representation of the possible causal relationship between DMRs and ATAC peaks on gene expression. b) GO enrichment analysis for DMR causal gene signatures. The gene signatures were collapsed from the triplets per DMR-ATAC pair. c-d) the enrichment analysis of the DMR causal gene signatures in the mRNA- (c) and protein-MEGENA network space (d). The gene signatures from all the DMR-ATAC pairs were collapsed and projected onto the modules of the MEGENA networks for overlapping and enrichment analysis. e-f) Representative DMR-centered causal gene network for top-ranked DMR1 (e) and DMR149 (f). Enlarged circles are key driver genes. DEG(−) and DEG(+) are down- and up-regulated genes in AD vs. healthy control, respectively.

Highlights

A cohort of DNA methylation data in the parahippocampal gyrus (PHG) was developed from 201 postmortem control, mild cognitive impaired (MCI) and AD brains.

Two hundred seventy distinct differentially methylated regions (DMRs) were found to be associated with AD in comparison with normal control.

A metric was developed to quantify methylation impact on each gene and each protein.

DNA methylation was found to have profound impact on not only the AD-associated gene modules but also key regulators of the gene and protein networks.

Key findings were validated in an independent multi-Omics cohort in AD.

The impact of DNA methylation on chromatin accessibility was also investigated by integrating the matched methylomic, epigenomic (ATAC-seq), transcriptomic and proteomic data.

Research In Context

Systematic review:

Recent studies revealed the association of abnormal methylomic changes with AD but there lacks a systematic study of the impact of methylomic alterations over the molecular networks underlying AD.

Interpretation:

We profiled genome-wide methylomic variations in the parahippocampal gyrus (PHG) from 201 postmortem control, mild cognitive impaired (MCI) and AD brains. We identified 270 distinct differentially methylated regions (DMRs) in AD in comparison with normal control. The impact of DMRs on individual genes and proteins as well as gene and protein networks was quantified. The impact of DMRs on chromatin accessibility was also investigated. Key findings were validated in an independent multi-Omics cohort in AD.

Future directions:

Experimental validation of some key DMRs is needed to confirmed the predicted impact of DNA methylation on gene and protein expression. Single cell multi-Omics is necessary for disentangling the real methylomic effects from the background noises.

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

The human postmortem sequencing data are available via the AD Knowledge Portal (https://adknowledgeportal.synapse.org). The AD Knowledge Portal is a platform for accessing data, analyses, and tools generated by the Accelerating Medicines Partnership Alzheimer’s Disease (AMP-AD) Target Discovery Program and other NIA-supported programs to enable open-science practices and accelerate translational learning. The data, analyses, and tools are shared early in the research cycle without a publication embargo on secondary use. Data are available for general research use according to the following requirements for data access and data attribution (https://adknowledgeportal.synapse.org/DataAccess/Instructions). The data used in this study can be found at https://adknowledgeportal.synapse.org/Explore/Studies/DetailsPage?Study=syn3159438, and https://adknowledgeportal.synapse.org/Explore/Studies/DetailsPage?Study=syn3219045. The software tools are available upon request.

DECLARATIONS OF INTEREST

Erming Wang, Minghui Wang, Lei Guo, John F Fullard, Courtney Micallef, Jaroslav Bendl, Chen Ming, Yong Huang, Yuxin Li, and Kaiwen Yu have nothing to disclose.

Junmin Peng, David A. Bennett, Philip L. De Jager, Panos Roussos, Vahram Haroutunian, Bin Zhang received support for the present manuscript from NIH (U01AG046170, RF1AG054014, RF1AG057440, R01AG057907, U01AG052411, R01AG068030, RF1AG074010, R01DA051191, R01AG063819, R01DE029322, R01AG062355, R21AI149013 and R01AG062661, P30AG10161, P30AG72975, R01AG15819, R01AG17917. U01AG46152, U01AG61356).

In the past 36 months, Won-min Song, Minghui Wang, Junmin Peng, David A. Bennett, Philip L. De Jager, Panos Roussos, Vahram Haroutunian, Bin Zhang received grants from NIH or foundations.

In the past 36 months, Junmin Peng received patent royalties from Harvard Medical School.

In the past 36 months, Philip L. De Jager received consultant fee from Partech, Roche and Biogen; David A. Bennett received consultant fee from AbbVie, DSMB, Takeda, Origent and SBIR; and Vahram Haroutunian received consultant fee from Synaptec.

In the past 36 months, Bin Zhang received an honorarium for presentation from Lehigh University; Philip L. De Jager received payments from Novartis, Astra Zeneca and Biogen for lectures/presentations; David A. Bennett received payments or honoraria from academia in US and government (NGO) for lectures/presentations.

In the past 36 months, the following authors have pending patents: Bin Zhang (US2020/056080 titled “STATHMIN 2 (STMN2) as a therapeutic target for Parkinson’s disease”, MS-0029–01-US-P titled “A Novel therapeutic strategy for targeting the molecular subtypes of Alzheimer’s disease”, and MS-00–30-01-US-P titled “Novel Compounds for Treating Alzheimer’s Disease”), Minghui Wang (US2020/056080 titled “STATHMIN 2 (STMN2) as a therapeutic target for Parkinson’s disease”).

In the past 36 months, David A. Bennett was on the external advisory board of AbbVie.

David A. Bennett received equipment, materials, drugs, medical writing, gifts, or other services from Rush philanthropy in the past 36 months.

CONFLICT OF INTERESTS

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.


References

1 Hardy J The amyloid hypothesis for Alzheimer’s disease: a critical reappraisal. J Neurochem 110 , 1129–1134, doi:10.1111/j.1471-4159.2009.06181.x (2009).19457065
2 Hardy J &amp; Selkoe DJ The amyloid hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease: progress and problems on the road to therapeutics. Science 297 , 353–356, doi:10.1126/science.1072994 (2002).12130773
3 Huang Y &amp; Mucke L Alzheimer mechanisms and therapeutic strategies. Cell 148 , 1204–1222, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2012.02.040 (2012).22424230
4 Iatrou A , Kenis G , Rutten BP , Lunnon K &amp; van den Hove DL Epigenetic dysregulation of brainstem nuclei in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease: looking in the correct place at the right time? Cell Mol Life Sci 74 , 509–523, doi:10.1007/s00018-016-2361-4 (2017).27628303
5 Smith RG Elevated DNA methylation across a 48-kb region spanning the HOXA gene cluster is associated with Alzheimer’s disease neuropathology. Alzheimers Dement 14 , 1580–1588, doi:10.1016/j.jalz.2018.01.017 (2018).29550519
6 Watson CT Genome-wide DNA methylation profiling in the superior temporal gyrus reveals epigenetic signatures associated with Alzheimer’s disease. Genome Med 8 , 5, doi:10.1186/s13073-015-0258-8 (2016).26803900
7 Revett TJ , Baker GB , Jhamandas J &amp; Kar S Glutamate system, amyloid ss peptides and tau protein: functional interrelationships and relevance to Alzheimer disease pathology. J Psychiatry Neurosci 38 , 6–23, doi:10.1503/jpn.110190 (2013).22894822
8 Shaw LM , Korecka M , Clark CM , Lee VM &amp; Trojanowski JQ Biomarkers of neurodegeneration for diagnosis and monitoring therapeutics. Nat Rev Drug Discov 6 , 295–303, doi:10.1038/nrd2176 (2007).17347655
9 Zotova E , Nicoll JA , Kalaria R , Holmes C &amp; Boche D Inflammation in Alzheimer’s disease: relevance to pathogenesis and therapy. Alzheimers Res Ther 2 , 1, doi:10.1186/alzrt24 (2010).20122289
10 Kinney JW Inflammation as a central mechanism in Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement (N Y) 4 , 575–590, doi:10.1016/j.trci.2018.06.014 (2018).30406177
11 Zhang B Integrated systems approach identifies genetic nodes and networks in late-onset Alzheimer’s disease. Cell 153 , 707–720, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2013.03.030 (2013).23622250
12 Marzi SJ A histone acetylome-wide association study of Alzheimer’s disease identifies disease-associated H3K27ac differences in the entorhinal cortex. Nat Neurosci 21 , 1618–1627, doi:10.1038/s41593-018-0253-7 (2018).30349106
13 Zusso M , Barbierato M , Facci L , Skaper SD &amp; Giusti P Neuroepigenetics and Alzheimer’s Disease: An Update. J Alzheimers Dis 64 , 671–688, doi:10.3233/JAD-180259 (2018).29991138
14 Feinberg A The Key Role of Epigenetics in Human Disease. N Engl J Med 379 , 400–401, doi:10.1056/NEJMc1805989 (2018).
15 Roubroeks JAY , Smith RG , van den Hove DLA &amp; Lunnon K Epigenetics and DNA methylomic profiling in Alzheimer’s disease and other neurodegenerative diseases. J Neurochem 143 , 158–170, doi:10.1111/jnc.14148 (2017).28805248
16 De Jager PL Alzheimer’s disease: early alterations in brain DNA methylation at ANK1, BIN1, RHBDF2 and other loci. Nat Neurosci 17 , 1156–1163, doi:10.1038/nn.3786 (2014).25129075
17 Lunnon K Methylomic profiling implicates cortical deregulation of ANK1 in Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Neurosci 17 , 1164–1170, doi:10.1038/nn.3782 (2014).25129077
18 Smith RG Elevated DNA methylation across a 48-kb region spanning the HOXA gene cluster is associated with Alzheimer’s disease neuropathology. Alzheimers Dement, doi:10.1016/j.jalz.2018.01.017 (2018).
19 Lunnon K Variation in 5-hydroxymethylcytosine across human cortex and cerebellum. Genome Biol 17 , 27, doi:10.1186/s13059-016-0871-x (2016).26883014
20 Liu Y , Wang M , Marcora EM , Zhang B &amp; Goate AM Promoter DNA hypermethylation - Implications for Alzheimer’s disease. Neurosci Lett 711 , 134403, doi:10.1016/j.neulet.2019.134403 (2019).
21 Ellison EM , Abner EL &amp; Lovell MA Multiregional analysis of global 5-methylcytosine and 5-hydroxymethylcytosine throughout the progression of Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurochem 140 , 383–394, doi:10.1111/jnc.13912 (2017).27889911
22 Shao Y DNA methylation of TOMM40-APOE-APOC2 in Alzheimer’s disease. J Hum Genet 63 , 459–471, doi:10.1038/s10038-017-0393-8 (2018).29371683
23 Tulloch J APOE DNA methylation is altered in Lewy body dementia. Alzheimers Dement 14 , 889–894, doi:10.1016/j.jalz.2018.02.005 (2018).29544979
24 Smith AR Increased DNA methylation near TREM2 is consistently seen in the superior temporal gyrus in Alzheimer’s disease brain. Neurobiol Aging 47 , 35–40, doi:10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2016.07.008 (2016).27522519
25 Liu J DNA methylation in the APOE genomic region is associated with cognitive function in African Americans. BMC Med Genomics 11 , 43, doi:10.1186/s12920-018-0363-9 (2018).29739406
26 Foraker J The APOE Gene is Differentially Methylated in Alzheimer’s Disease. J Alzheimers Dis 48 , 745–755, doi:10.3233/JAD-143060 (2015).26402071
27 Boden Kirsty A. , I. S. B , Clement Naomi , Patel Tulsi , Guetta-Baranes Tamar , Brookes Keeley J. , Chappell Sally , Craigon Jim , Chapman Natalie H. , ARUK Consortium, &amp; Kevin Morgan GBSAB Methylation Profiling RIN3 and MEF2C Identifies Epigenetic Marks Associated with Sporadic Early Onset Alzheimer’s Disease. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease Reports 1 , 97–108 (2017).
28 Tannorella P Methylation analysis of multiple genes in blood DNA of Alzheimer’s disease and healthy individuals. Neurosci Lett 600 , 143–147, doi:10.1016/j.neulet.2015.06.009 (2015).26079324
29 Gasparoni G DNA methylation analysis on purified neurons and glia dissects age and Alzheimer’s disease-specific changes in the human cortex. Epigenetics Chromatin 11 , 41, doi:10.1186/s13072-018-0211-3 (2018).30045751
30 Grothe MJ Molecular properties underlying regional vulnerability to Alzheimer’s disease pathology. Brain 141 , 2755–2771, doi:10.1093/brain/awy189 (2018).30016411
31 Thaker AA Entorhinal Cortex: Antemortem Cortical Thickness and Postmortem Neurofibrillary Tangles and Amyloid Pathology. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 38 , 961–965, doi:10.3174/ajnr.A5133 (2017).28279988
32 Gomez-Isla T Profound loss of layer II entorhinal cortex neurons occurs in very mild Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurosci 16 , 4491–4500 (1996).8699259
33 Maass A Entorhinal Tau Pathology, Episodic Memory Decline, and Neurodegeneration in Aging. J Neurosci 38 , 530–543, doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2028-17.2017 (2018).29192126
34 Jaroslav Bendl MEH , Kiran Girdhar. The three-dimensional landscape of chromatin accessibility in Alzheimer’s disease. bioRxiv, doi:10.1101/2021.01.11.426303 (2021).
35 Wang M Integrative network analysis of nineteen brain regions identifies molecular signatures and networks underlying selective regional vulnerability to Alzheimer’s disease. Genome Med 8 , 104, doi:10.1186/s13073-016-0355-3 (2016).27799057
36 Moran S , Arribas C &amp; Esteller M Validation of a DNA methylation microarray for 850,000 CpG sites of the human genome enriched in enhancer sequences. Epigenomics 8 , 389–399, doi:10.2217/epi.15.114 (2016).26673039
37 Wang M The Mount Sinai cohort of large-scale genomic, transcriptomic and proteomic data in Alzheimer’s disease. Sci Data 5 , 180185, doi:10.1038/sdata.2018.185 (2018).
38 Wang M Transformative Network Modeling of Multi-Omics Data Reveals Detailed Circuits, Key Regulators, and Potential Therapeutics for Alzheimer’s Disease. Neuron S0896–6273 , 8, doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2020.11.002 (2020).
39 Kajiwara Y GJA1 (connexin43) is a key regulator of Alzheimer’s disease pathogenesis. Acta Neuropathol Commun 6 , 144, doi:10.1186/s40478-018-0642-x (2018).30577786
40 Bendl J The three-dimensional landscape of cortical chromatin accessibility in Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Neurosci 25 , 1366–1378, doi:10.1038/s41593-022-01166-7 (2022).36171428
41 Wang M Transformative Network Modeling of Multi-omics Data Reveals Detailed Circuits, Key Regulators, and Potential Therapeutics for Alzheimer’s Disease. Neuron 109 , 257–272 e214, doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2020.11.002 (2021).33238137
42 Johnson ECB Large-scale proteomic analysis of Alzheimer’s disease brain and cerebrospinal fluid reveals early changes in energy metabolism associated with microglia and astrocyte activation. Nat Med 26 , 769–780, doi:10.1038/s41591-020-0815-6 (2020).32284590
43 Pedersen BS , Schwartz DA , Yang IV &amp; Kechris KJ Comb-p: software for combining, analyzing, grouping and correcting spatially correlated P-values. Bioinformatics 28 , 2986–2988, doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bts545 (2012).22954632
44 Klein HU Epigenome-wide study uncovers large-scale changes in histone acetylation driven by tau pathology in aging and Alzheimer’s human brains. Nat Neurosci 22 , 37–46, doi:10.1038/s41593-018-0291-1 (2019).30559478
45 Nativio R Author Correction: An integrated multi-omics approach identifies epigenetic alterations associated with Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Genet 52 , 1266, doi:10.1038/s41588-020-00733-7 (2020).
46 Wang M , Aiqun Li A , Michiko Sekiya M Molecular Networks and Key Regulators of the Dysregulated Neuronal System in Alzheimer’s Disease. bioRxiv, doi:10.1101/788323 (2019).
47 Guintivano J , Aryee MJ &amp; Kaminsky ZA A cell epigenotype specific model for the correction of brain cellular heterogeneity bias and its application to age, brain region and major depression. Epigenetics 8 , 290–302, doi:10.4161/epi.23924 (2013).23426267
48 Hoffman GE &amp; Schadt EE variancePartition: interpreting drivers of variation in complex gene expression studies. BMC Bioinformatics 17 , 483, doi:10.1186/s12859-016-1323-z (2016).27884101
49 Tsuchida T The ubiquitin ligase TRIM56 regulates innate immune responses to intracellular double-stranded DNA. Immunity 33 , 765–776, doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2010.10.013 (2010).21074459
50 Azam S G-Protein-Coupled Receptors in CNS: A Potential Therapeutic Target for Intervention in Neurodegenerative Disorders and Associated Cognitive Deficits. Cells 9 , doi:10.3390/cells9020506 (2020).
51 Wang Q The landscape of multiscale transcriptomic networks and key regulators in Parkinson’s disease. Nat Commun 10 , 5234, doi:10.1038/s41467-019-13144-y (2019).31748532
52 ZHang B , Zhu J Identification of key causal regulators in gene networks. Proceedings of the World Congress on Engineering &amp; Computer Science II , 1309–1312 (2013).
53 Marees AT A tutorial on conducting genome-wide association studies: Quality control and statistical analysis. Int J Methods Psychiatr Res 27 , e1608, doi:10.1002/mpr.1608 (2018).29484742
54 Manichaikul A Robust relationship inference in genome-wide association studies. Bioinformatics 26 , 2867–2873, doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btq559 (2010).20926424
55 Millstein J , Zhang B , Zhu J &amp; Schadt EE Disentangling molecular relationships with a causal inference test. BMC Genet 10 , 23, doi:1471–2156-10–23 [pii] 10.1186/1471-2156-10-23 (2009).19473544
56 Millstein J , Chen GK &amp; Breton CV cit: hypothesis testing software for mediation analysis in genomic applications. Bioinformatics 32 , 2364–2365, doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btw135 (2016).27153715
57 Semick SA Integrated DNA methylation and gene expression profiling across multiple brain regions implicate novel genes in Alzheimer’s disease. Acta Neuropathol 137 , 557–569, doi:10.1007/s00401-019-01966-5 (2019).30712078
58 Maunakea AK , Chepelev I , Cui K &amp; Zhao K Intragenic DNA methylation modulates alternative splicing by recruiting MeCP2 to promote exon recognition. Cell Res 23 , 1256–1269, doi:10.1038/cr.2013.110 (2013).23938295
59 Li C , Lee J , Ding J &amp; Sun S Integrative analysis of gene expression and methylation data for breast cancer cell lines. BioData Min 11 , 13, doi:10.1186/s13040-018-0174-8 (2018).29983747
60 Yoo S Integrative analysis of DNA methylation and gene expression data identifies EPAS1 as a key regulator of COPD. PLoS Genet 11 , e1004898, doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1004898 (2015).
61 Kim S , Park HJ , Cui X &amp; Zhi D Collective effects of long-range DNA methylations predict gene expressions and estimate phenotypes in cancer. Sci Rep 10 , 3920, doi:10.1038/s41598-020-60845-2 (2020).32127627
62 Kennedy EM An integrated -omics analysis of the epigenetic landscape of gene expression in human blood cells. BMC Genomics 19 , 476, doi:10.1186/s12864-018-4842-3 (2018).29914364
63 Yang IV Relationship of DNA methylation and gene expression in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 190 , 1263–1272, doi:10.1164/rccm.201408-1452OC (2014).25333685
64 Vallender TW &amp; Lahn BT Localized methylation in the key regulator gene endothelin-1 is associated with cell type-specific transcriptional silencing. FEBS Lett 580 , 4560–4566, doi:10.1016/j.febslet.2006.07.017 (2006).16870175
65 Hop PJ Genome-wide identification of genes regulating DNA methylation using genetic anchors for causal inference. Genome Biol 21 , 220, doi:10.1186/s13059-020-02114-z (2020).32859263
66 Marchal C &amp; Miotto B Emerging concept in DNA methylation: role of transcription factors in shaping DNA methylation patterns. J Cell Physiol 230 , 743–751, doi:10.1002/jcp.24836 (2015).25283539
67 Houseman EA DNA methylation arrays as surrogate measures of cell mixture distribution. BMC Bioinformatics 13 , 86, doi:10.1186/1471-2105-13-86 (2012).22568884
68 Zhong Y , Wan YW , Pang K , Chow LM &amp; Liu Z Digital sorting of complex tissues for cell type-specific gene expression profiles. BMC Bioinformatics 14 , 89, doi:10.1186/1471-2105-14-89 (2013).23497278
69 Bennett DA Religious Orders Study and Rush Memory and Aging Project. J Alzheimers Dis 64 , S161–S189, doi:10.3233/JAD-179939 (2018).29865057
70 Bennett DA &amp; Launer LJ Longitudinal epidemiologic clinical-pathologic studies of aging and Alzheimer’s disease. Curr Alzheimer Res 9 , 617–620, doi:10.2174/156720512801322645 (2012).22715984
71 Bennett DA Decision rules guiding the clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease in two community-based cohort studies compared to standard practice in a clinic-based cohort study. Neuroepidemiology 27 , 169–176, doi:10.1159/000096129 (2006).17035694
72 Bennett DA Natural history of mild cognitive impairment in older persons. Neurology 59 , 198–205, doi:10.1212/wnl.59.2.198 (2002).12136057
73 Bennett DA Neuropathology of older persons without cognitive impairment from two community-based studies. Neurology 66 , 1837–1844, doi:10.1212/01.wnl.0000219668.47116.e6 (2006).16801647
74 Heiss JA &amp; Just AC Identifying mislabeled and contaminated DNA methylation microarray data: an extended quality control toolset with examples from GEO. Clin Epigenetics 10 , 73, doi:10.1186/s13148-018-0504-1 (2018).29881472
75 Maksimovic J , Phipson B &amp; Oshlack A A cross-package Bioconductor workflow for analysing methylation array data. F1000Res 5 , 1281, doi:10.12688/f1000research.8839.3 (2016).27347385
76 Ritchie ME limma powers differential expression analyses for RNA-sequencing and microarray studies. Nucleic Acids Res 43 , e47, doi:10.1093/nar/gkv007 (2015).25605792
77 Liao Y , Smyth GK &amp; Shi W featureCounts: an efficient general purpose program for assigning sequence reads to genomic features. Bioinformatics 30 , 923–930, doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btt656 (2014).24227677
78 Robinson MD , McCarthy DJ &amp; Smyth GK edgeR: a Bioconductor package for differential expression analysis of digital gene expression data. Bioinformatics 26 , 139–140, doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btp616 (2010).19910308
79 Consens ME , Y. C , Menon V , Wang Y , Schneider JA , De Jager PL , Bennett DA , Tripathy SJ , Felsky D . Bulk and single-nucleus transcriptomics highlight intra-telencephalic and somatostatin neurons in Alzheimer’s disease. Front Molec Neurosci. (2022).
80 Bai B Deep Multilayer Brain Proteomics Identifies Molecular Networks in Alzheimer’s Disease Progression. Neuron 105 , 975–991 e977, doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2019.12.015 (2020).31926610
81 Johnson ECB Deep proteomic network analysis of Alzheimer’s disease brain reveals alterations in RNA binding proteins and RNA splicing associated with disease. Mol Neurodegener 13 , 52, doi:10.1186/s13024-018-0282-4 (2018).30286791
82 Ping L Global quantitative analysis of the human brain proteome in Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s Disease. Sci Data 5 , 180036, doi:10.1038/sdata.2018.36 (2018).
83 Mertins P Reproducible workflow for multiplexed deep-scale proteome and phosphoproteome analysis of tumor tissues by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. Nat Protoc 13 , 1632–1661, doi:10.1038/s41596-018-0006-9 (2018).29988108
84 Wingo TS Integrating Next-Generation Genomic Sequencing and Mass Spectrometry To Estimate Allele-Specific Protein Abundance in Human Brain. J Proteome Res 16 , 3336–3347, doi:10.1021/acs.jproteome.7b00324 (2017).28691493
85 Song W-M , Di Matteo T &amp; Aste T Building complex networks with Platonic solids. Physical Review E 85 , 046115 (2012).
86 Song W-M , Di Matteo T &amp; Aste T Nested hierarchies in planar graphs. Discrete Appl Math 159 , 2135–2146 (2011).
87 Song WM &amp; Zhang B Multiscale Embedded Gene Co-expression Network Analysis. PLoS Comput Biol 11 , e1004574, doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004574 (2015).
88 Tumminello M , Aste T , Di Matteo T &amp; Mantegna RN A tool for filtering information in complex systems. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102 , 10421–10426, doi:10.1073/pnas.0500298102 (2005).16027373
89 Tumminello M , Aste T , Di Matteo T &amp; Mantegna RN A tool for filtering information in complex systems. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 102 , 10421–10426 (2005).16027373
90 Langfelder P &amp; Horvath S WGCNA: an R package for weighted correlation network analysis. BMC Bioinformatics 9 , 559, doi:10.1186/1471-2105-9-559 (2008).19114008
91 Wang E Amylin Treatment Reduces Neuroinflammation and Ameliorates Abnormal Patterns of Gene Expression in the Cerebral Cortex of an Alzheimer’s Disease Mouse Model. J Alzheimers Dis 56 , 47–61, doi:10.3233/JAD-160677 (2017).27911303
92 Zhu J Integrating large-scale functional genomic data to dissect the complexity of yeast regulatory networks. Nat Genet 40 , 854–861 (2008).18552845
93 Millstein J , Zhang B , Zhu J &amp; Schadt EE Disentangling molecular relationships with a causal inference test. BMC Genetics 10 , 23, doi:10.1186/1471-2156-10-23 (2009).19473544
94 Zhu J Increasing the Power to Detect Causal Associations by Combining Genotypic and Expression Data in Segregating Populations. PLoS computational biology 3 , e69, doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.0030069 (2007).17432931
95 Zhu J Increasing the Power to Detect Causal Associations by Combining Genotypic and Expression Data in Segregating Populations. PLoS Comput Biol 3 , e69 (2007).17432931
96 Bolger AM , Lohse M &amp; Usadel B Trimmomatic: a flexible trimmer for Illumina sequence data. Bioinformatics 30 , 2114–2120, doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btu170 (2014).24695404
97 S. A . FastQC: a quality control tool for high throughput sequence data. . (2010).
98 Langmead B &amp; Salzberg SL Fast gapped-read alignment with Bowtie 2. Nat Methods 9 , 357–359, doi:10.1038/nmeth.1923 (2012).22388286
99 Okonechnikov K , Conesa A &amp; Garcia-Alcalde F Qualimap 2: advanced multi-sample quality control for high-throughput sequencing data. Bioinformatics 32 , 292–294, doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btv566 (2016).26428292
100 Ewels P , Magnusson M , Lundin S &amp; Kaller M MultiQC: summarize analysis results for multiple tools and samples in a single report. Bioinformatics 32 , 3047–3048, doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btw354 (2016).27312411
101 Zhang Y Model-based analysis of ChIP-Seq (MACS). Genome Biol 9 , R137, doi:10.1186/gb-2008-9-9-r137 (2008).18798982
102 Orchard P , Kyono Y , Hensley J , Kitzman JO &amp; Parker SCJ Quantification, Dynamic Visualization, and Validation of Bias in ATAC-Seq Data with ataqv. Cell Syst 10 , 298–306 e294, doi:10.1016/j.cels.2020.02.009 (2020).32213349
103 Stark R Normalizing ChIP and ATAC sequencing data for differential analysis. F1000Res, doi:10.7490/f1000research.1118449.1 (2020).
104 Love MI , Huber W &amp; Anders S Moderated estimation of fold change and dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biol 15 , 550, doi:10.1186/s13059-014-0550-8 (2014).25516281
105 Johnson ECB Large-scale deep multi-layer analysis of Alzheimer’s disease brain reveals strong proteomic disease-related changes not observed at the RNA level. Nat Neurosci 25 , 213–225, doi:10.1038/s41593-021-00999-y (2022).35115731
