LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


8812164
1373
J Autoimmun
J Autoimmun
Journal of autoimmunity
0896-8411
1095-9157

36435700
10203067
10.1016/j.jaut.2022.102957
NIHMS1852587
Article
The immunomodulatory roles of the gut microbiome in autoimmune diseases of the central nervous system: multiple sclerosis as a model
Hoffman Kristina 1
Brownell Zackariah 2
Doyle William J. 1
Ochoa-Repáraz Javier 1*
1 Department of Biological Sciences, Boise State University, Boise, ID 83725, USA
2 Department of Biological Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85281, USA
* Corresponding author: Javier Ochoa-Repáraz, Ph.D., Assistant Professor, Department of Biological Sciences, SN-228, Boise State University, Mail Stop: 1515, 1910 University Dr, Boise, ID 83725-1515, Office: 208-426-4620, jochoareparaz@boisestate.edu
29 11 2022
5 2023
23 11 2022
01 5 2024
137 102957102957
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
The gut-associated lymphoid tissue is a primary activation site for immune responses to infection and immunomodulation. Experimental evidence using animal disease models suggests that specific gut microbes significantly regulate inflammation and immunoregulatory pathways. Furthermore, recent clinical findings indicate that gut microbes’ composition, collectively named gut microbiota, is altered under disease state. This review focuses on the functional mechanisms by which gut microbes promote immunomodulatory responses that could be relevant in balancing inflammation associated with autoimmunity in the central nervous system. We also propose therapeutic interventions that target the composition of the gut microbiota as immunomodulatory mechanisms to control neuroinflammation.

Gut microbiota
Microbiome
CNS inflammatory demyelination
Microbiota interventions
Neuroinflammation
Immunomodulation

pmc1. Introduction

Over the last decade, an increasing number of studies have highlighted the importance of gut microbiota in regulating the function of the immune system. In the gut, the heterogeneous and intra- and inter-individually variable sum of microorganisms, including bacteria, archaea, fungi, and viruses, form a complex population that directly impacts the host’s immune homeostasis and ability to respond to infections. While clinical findings associate human diseases with an altered composition of the microbiome, experimental models of disease, primarily murine models, provide mechanistic insights into the potential of gut microbes to regulate the susceptibility, onset, progression, and severity of diseases. In this review article, we focus on the role of gut microbes in inducing immunomodulatory responses that could impact disease stages in autoimmune conditions that affect the central nervous system (CNS). We will review the literature on immunoregulatory cell populations and products induced or expanded by gut microbes, mostly bacteria, that promote protective responses in experimental models of CNS autoimmunity. We will also revise previous findings for and against ideas postulated to determine the mechanisms by which gut microbes promote immunomodulation. Although multiple sclerosis (MS) and its experimental models are the primary disease paradigm covered in this review, we also treat other CNS autoimmune diseases.

A debate exists on whether MS, neuromyelitis optica, and other CNS diseases are considered autoimmune or autoinflammatory. While autoimmune diseases have been considered those based on deficiencies in the adaptive immune responses and autoinflammatory diseases in those with impacted innate reactions, for many conditions of the CNS, the distinction is not sufficiently clear [1]. The CNS conditions covered in this review are complex and characterized by organ-specific responses against self-components mediated by T – and B-lymphocyte responses. However, the innate branch of the immune system appears to be impacted in at least some of these conditions. In addition, the debate about whether some of these conditions are considered neurological or immune-mediated is still active [2].

In CNS autoimmune diseases, the immune-mediated reaction targets the myelin sheath in neuronal axons. In the CNS, myelin is produced by oligodendrocytes. Myelin is a glycoprotein-based complex biopolymer with a 40 % water content. The dry weight of myelin is composed mainly of lipids (approximately 75 %). Cholesterol, glycolipids (such as galactosyl ceramide), and phospholipids are the three primary lipid forms in myelin. The remaining dry weight is made mostly of three proteins: proteolipid protein (PLP), myelin basic protein (MBP), and myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG). Our review considers autoimmunity based on the traditional definition of conditions with T- and B-lymphocyte-mediated responses to an autoantigen. We will explore the concept of immunomodulation as T and B cell immunoregulatory responses triggered in response to gut microbes and products.

2. MS and immunomodulation

MS is a chronic disease that affects the brain and spinal cord. MS is considered one of the most common neurodegenerative diseases; It affects approximately 900,000 individuals in the US and 2.8 million worldwide. Although the prevalence is higher in developed or developing countries, diagnosis rates vary between regions and demographics [3]. Women are 2-3 times more likely than men to develop disease [4]. The condition is often diagnosed at ages 20 to 40, and the affected group's life expectancy is five to ten years lower than the general population.

A varied list of symptoms of MS includes blurry or double vision, one-eye transient blindness, muscle weakness, and mental and debilitating behavioral effects are first observed. As the disease progresses, the severity and duration of the symptoms increase. These prolonged symptoms include visual difficulties, motor and sensory impairment associated with paralysis, muscle spasms, coordination, balance difficulties, speech problems, fatigue, pain, or bowel and bladder dysfunction [3]. Clinically, MS can be diagnosed based on the stage of the disease progression. Relapsing-remitting MS (RRMS) is the most diagnosed form of the disease and is characterized by periods of remission that follow relapses in symptomatology. Approximately half of RRMS patients develop secondary progressive MS (SPMS) within 10 to 15 years. During SPMS, no remissions are observed. Nearly 15 % of MS patients are initially diagnosed with primary progressive MS, with no remissions documented and continuous progression of the disease and worsening of symptoms [5]. Although the exact mechanisms remain to be discerned, it has been proposed that autoreactive T lymphocytes and secreted inflammatory mediators attack the axonal myelin sheath products as a process of immunological tolerance breakdown. Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), one of the most widely used models of the disease, is induced by active immunization with specific epitopes of myelin proteins PLP, MOG, or MBP. The attack triggers an inflammatory milieu that results in demyelination, the formation of sclerosing plaques, and the infiltration of myelin-specific lymphocytes into the CNS parenchyma by crossing the blood-brain barrier. Demyelination is followed by axonal damage and, eventually, axonal and neuronal death [5].

Both genetic and environmental factors have been proposed to contribute to the etiology of MS [6]. Several polymorphisms in the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) gene loci have been identified. Most HLA genes encode proteins that form the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules class I and II, required for the antigenic presentation of peptides to CD8 T lymphocytes and CD4 T lymphocytes, respectively. Specific HLA alleles appear to be the most vital genetic determinant for MS patients for predisposition and resistance [7]. For example, individuals who carry an HLA-DRB1*15:01 allele are at a ~ three times higher risk of developing MS than people who don’t [8]; This is reflected in studies that have shown different ethnic groups have a variety of alleles that are associated with MS or protection of MS [7,8]. The exact mechanism by which these different HLA alleles contribute to MS is still unknown, although the parameters of autoantigen binding to HLA proteins may be the critical component in determining the predisposition or protection of the HLA. Polymorphisms in other genes outside the HLA loci, including the interleukin (IL) 7 receptor (IL7R) gene [9] and others, have been shown to play roles in increased disease risk. IL7R gene plays a crucial role in lymphocyte development and homeostasis, specifically in T cells. Various studies have found a single nucleotide polymorphism in IL7R, rs6897932, as a risk biomarker for MS in many diverse ethnic populations [10]. Cytokine genes are highly susceptible to SNP, especially in regulatory and promoter regions [11]. Interleukin 2 (IL-2) cytokine regulates immune functions and is produced mainly by activated CD4+ and CD8+ T cells and is necessary for proliferation and differentiation in T cells. Some IL-2 gene promoter region polymorphisms may contribute to MS [12]. Interleukin 21 (IL-21) is another class I cytokine. IL-21 is considered pro-inflammatory in MS, and IL-2/IL-21 has been associated with other autoimmune diseases [13]. Abdulla et al. investigated polymorphisms of IL-21 and found rs2055979 may be an indicator for MS. IL-23 and IL-27 regulate the function of T helper 17 (Th17) cells, which produce proinflammatory IL-17, IL-6, IL-21, IL-22, IL-23, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha [11]. Barac et al. showed a significant association of MS risk with IL-27 SNP A964G and T4730C and protection with IL-23 SNP R381Q. IL-6 SNP rs100795 has been associated with MS risk in previous studies, although most IL-6 SNP roles are unknown [14]. IL-6 SNP rs1818879 was linked to central inflammation with a possible regulating activity in MS [14]. IL-10 is a cytokine with anti-inflammatory functions. IL-10 SNP was found to affect the progression of the disease rather than the onset [15]. While genetics may contribute significantly to the etiology of MS, the involvement of an unknown environmental factor cannot be ruled out. MS concordance rates in dizygotic twins are approximately 30 % and 5 % for monozygotic twins [16]. Among possible environmental factors, a recent study has resurfaced the hypothesis that a previous viral infection, particularly infection by Epstein Barr Virus (EBV), determines subsequent disease [17]. Other viruses were previously associated with increased risk for MS[18]. Vitamin D deficiency, smoking, contaminants, and other factors were linked to MS [18]. We will discuss later the potential role of the gut microbiome, harnessing the effects of environmental and genetic factors that could promote immune dysfunction contributing to the immunopathophysiology of MS [19].

The failure of immune cells to preserve tolerance in MS results in increased inflammatory pathways. CD4 T lymphocytes (T cells) are fully functional after egressing the thymus. In MS and EAE, a pathogenic role of T cells differentiated into T helper 1 (Th1) and Th17 subsets upon antigen stimulation has been described. Th1 cells are characterized by the secretion of interferon-gamma (IFN-γ), IL-2, IL-15, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, among other cytokines. Th17 cells produce IL-17A, IL-17F, and IL-22. Th1 lymphocytes were first identified as pathogenic cells in the EAE model, but later Th17 cells were also recognized as critical in promoting neuroinflammation in EAE and MS [20]. The cerebrospinal fluid and demyelinated plaques of the CNS parenchyma of MS patients contain an accumulation of Th17 cells [21]. The presence of Th17 cells and Th1 lymphocytes in the CNS parenchyma results from the cells crossing the BBB. Interestingly, the absence of gut microbes in germ-free (GF) mice, born and raised sterile, impacts the integrity of the BBB, promoting cellular CNS entry [22].

Dysfunctional self/non-self-discrimination is a proposed mechanism triggering autoimmunity. Central and peripheral tolerance play a critical role in avoiding self-reaction against our tissues and organs. Gut microbes emerged as significant players in peripheral tolerance responses, developing and educating our immune system by triggering processes of lineage differentiation that result in immunomodulation. For example, the monocolonization of GF mice with Bacteroides fragilis producing the capsular polysaccharide A (PSA) restores the ability of the GF mice to form appropriate secondary lymphoid tissues and the unbiased T helper cell balances [23]. CD4+ T cells expressing the transcription factor forkhead box 3 (Foxp3), known as regulatory T cells or Tregs, are the most studied immunomodulatory cell populations, not only in the context of CNS autoimmune diseases. Tregs differentiate in the thymus and the periphery. In MS, both reduced frequencies in Tregs and diminished function have been described [24]. More recently, a differentiation between resting and active Tregs was made, suggesting that the reduction in Tregs in MS patients is restricted to resting Tregs while active Tregs are, by contrast, increased [25]. As further discussed, the gut microbiome is perhaps the best-characterized mediator of Treg induction. In recent years, the epithelial group or type 3 innate lymphocyte cells (ILC3) emerged as a critical link between the gut microbiome and Treg induction [26-28].

B lymphocyte maturation is completed in the periphery. B cells’ MS involvement gained significant attention [29]. The CSF of MS patients contains oligoclonal bands that may be specific to myelin antigens [30]. Studies have previously focused on the expression of the B cell receptor (BCR) genes in MS and the reduction of B cells as a therapeutic [31]. B cells may be driven to pathogenicity by activated nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kB) and cholesterol pathways along with specific signal receptor up-regulation in MS [31]. These specific pathogenic B cell phenotypes have been found paired with polyclonal antibodies such as IgM+ and IgG1+, promoting inflammation, memory, and plasmablast (PB) and plasma cell (PC) differentiation [31]. Another phenotype, intestinal IgA+ B cell, has been found to be a source of IL-10 for regulating and suppressing EAE independent of their specific BCR [32,33]. During active MS, gut bacteria were found to have varying IgA coating, which may be a promising indicator for pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory taxa, and to determine specific regulatory IgA responses [33]. Natural killer (NK) cells have opposing roles in regulating but also inducing autoimmune disease [34]. The NKs mediate inflammatory response by secreting various cytokines that help determine the immune response [34,35]. There is evidence that the NK and NKT cell function can be augmented, allowing the restoration of their regulator role and leading to a reduction of inflammatory activity [35]. This regulation may treat MS and other autoimmune disorders by improving regulatory cell function while reducing reactive T-cell interactions [34,35].

Proinflammation could be linked to a deficiency in immunoregulatory responses, reduced numbers of tolerogenic cells, diminished function, or both. Both a reduced number of regulatory T cells (Tregs) and reduced Treg function have been described in MS patients. Central (in the thymus and bone marrow) and peripheral tolerance mechanisms are essential in reducing the number of circulating autoreactive cells. The gut-associated lymphoid tissue plays a critical role as an inducer of peripheral Tregs. As covered in the next section, several bacterial taxa of the microbiome promote these tolerogenic responses.

3. Gut dysbiosis in MS

While the microbiota contains all microbes, the sum of genes defines the microbiome. In the gut, bacteria, archaea, and eukaryotic microbes coexist with acellular microbes, mostly bacteriophages. Environmental factors that regulate microbial growth, such as oxygen levels, pH, nutrient availability, water content, and others, regulate the microbiome’s composition, creating a longitudinal and transversal composition and microbial load gradient [36]. Furthermore, the host’s genetics [37], sex [38], age [39], health, and disease [40], impact the microbiome’s composition and generates significant inter and intra-individual variability. Although the most recent advanced molecular and genetic technological advances promoted fast progress in research, significant challenges remain. Variability in the findings based on methodology differences and confounding factors are still relevant considerations [41]. Nevertheless, it is now understood that the gut microbiome plays a significant role in regulating multiple organs and systems, including the nervous system, endocrine system, cardiovascular system, metabolic system, and immune system.

A Pubmed search of the term dysbiosis brings more than 5,200 results, most of them from works published in the last 15 years. However, dysbiosis is not new and was first utilized in 1920 in a study focused on gut microbes in unhealthy horses [42]. Dysbiosis is an altered microbial system characterized by an unbalanced composition that can lead to inflammation and disease. In the context of neuroinflammation, dysbiosis is associated with an increasing number of conditions, including CNS autoimmune diseases such as MS and NMO. In this section, we summarize the evidence suggesting the presence of an altered microbiome in the gut of patients and animal models suffering from CNS autoimmune diseases, starting with initial works done in the EAE model and other experimental models (Table 1). A summary of the impact of microbiome interventions on EAE and other models of CNS demyelination on susceptibility or progression is provided in table 2. We also discuss the possible reciprocal interactions between the disease and the gut microbiome.

3.1. Early studies in EAE and other experimental models of CNS autoimmunity.

The first studies that suggested the importance of gut microbes regulating the progression of CNS inflammatory demyelination were performed, provoking significant microbiome alterations with broad-spectrum antibiotics administered orally mixed in drinking water (Table 2). Yokote et al. showed in the MOG35-55 EAE model in C57BL/6 mice that the oral administration with kanamycin, colistin, and vancomycin resulted in an increased frequency of invariant natural killer T cells (iNKT) protective against the disease. As expected, antibiotic treatment promoted significant alterations in the gut microbiome’s composition [43]. We next demonstrated that ampicillin, neomycin sulfate, metronidazole, and vancomycin administered orally in drinking water or by oral gavages resulted in protection against EAE in MOG35-55 - C57BL/6 and in the PLP131-155 - SJL EAE models by the induction of Tregs. The intraperitoneal administration of the same antibiotics did not provide protection, suggesting that the effects on CNS inflammatory demyelination were microbiome dependent. The protective effects of Tregs induced by the treatment with antibiotics were confirmed by the lack of effects when antibiotics were administered in EAE treated with anti-CD25 neutralizing antibodies. Furthermore, the adoptive transfer of Tregs isolated from antibiotics-treated mice into recipient EAE mice resulted in protection against the disease [44]. Tregs were also hypothesized to be responsible for the protection conferred by the treatment with antibiotics in a mouse model of autoimmune uveitis [45]. When the antibiotics were administered separately, ampicillin was found to be responsible for the protection in the EAE model [46]. Seifert et al. later confirmed the protective effects of antibiotics by the induction of anti-inflammatory cells [47]. In the later study, the protective mechanism of the gut microbiome’s alterations with antibiotics was attributed to the generation of anti-inflammatory macrophages and resident microglia [47]. In Theiler’s murine encephalomyelitis virus (TMEV) model of demyelination, the treatment with antibiotics reduced the infiltration of CD4 and CD8 T cells to the CNS during the acute phase of the disease, and when the treatment was stopped, TMEV mortality increased. Alternatively, antibiotic treatment had no noticeable effects on chronic disease [48]. Interestingly, we observed that the treatment with antibiotics of non-obese diabetic (NOD) EAE mice protected against the disease when the antibiotics were administered during the first two weeks of the disease. No protection was observed when antibiotics were administered during the chronic phase of the disease [49]. The prophylactic administration of antibiotics reduced susceptibility to disease in a spontaneous model of EAE induced in SJL/J mice with MOG-reactive CD4+ T cells [50]. No protective effects were observed in animals when antibiotic treatment was initiated after the onset of the disease [50]. Collectively, the data suggest that early interventions of the gut microbiome could impact the progression of the disease but that the administration of antibiotics cannot regulate advanced disease (Table 2).

The inflammatory pathways induced in a demyelinating mouse model triggered with an injection of lysolecithin were also reduced by the treatment with broad-spectrum antibiotics (ampicillin/sulbactam, ciprofloxacin, vancomycin, metronidazole, and imipenem). Increased CD68hi cells and reduced macrophages/microglia expressing MHC class II and Arg1 were observed in animals treated with antibiotics compared to untreated controls. However, antibiotic treatment did not positively impact oligodendrocyte differentiation and myelin debris clearance [51]. Furthermore, the antibiotic treatment enhanced demyelination in mice subjected to a cuprizone (CPZ) diet, a model to study demyelination and remyelination [52]. These findings suggest that although antibiotic alterations modulate the balance between inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cell populations, the treatment cannot promote remyelination.

The effects of the gut microbiota in regulating EAE were later confirmed using GF mice (Table 2); The active induction of GF C57BL/6 mice resulted in mild disease compared to conventionally housed mice [53]. The absence of microbes also reduced disease susceptibility in spontaneous EAE [54]. The severity and susceptibility to EAE were restored when animals were either monocolonized with Segmented filamentous bacteria (SFB) [53] or colonized with gut content isolated from conventionally-housed mice [54]. The effects were in both papers associated with increased Th17 cell function. In both studies, the proportion of IL-17-producing CD4+ T cells in GALT of GF mice was reduced compared to specific-pathogen-free mice [53,54]. SFB was identified as a mouse-specific gut microbe [55,56]. IL-17A and IL-17F are required for CNS autoimmunity susceptibility, which correlates with changes in the microbiota composition. However, deficiency in IL17A/F did not impact the encephalitogenic role of differentiated Th cells [57]. In the spontaneous EAE SJL/J model, the adoptive transfer of MOG-reactive CD4+ T cells resulted in increased proliferation, reduced when the animals were treated with antibiotics. In addition, gut microbes promoted B cells capable of differentiating into autoantibody-producing cells [54].

GF mice were also successfully used in mechanistic immunomodulation studies by gut microbes. Two papers published in the same issue explored the impact of the transplantation of fecal content from patients with MS to EAE mice in GF conditions [58,59]. MS fecal content isolated from three individuals enhanced the severity of EAE in GF C57BL/6 mice induced with MOG35-55 compared to GF mice receiving fecal content from healthy donors. The effects were attributed to a reduced function of IL-10-producing Tregs when GF mice received MS fecal content [58]. The study also identified Parabacteroides distasonis as a bacterium-inducing anti-inflammatory response mediated by IL-10-producing Tregs and IL-10-producing CD4+ T cells with reduced relative abundance in MS fecal contents versus fecal contents of healthy donors [58]. The second study compared the effects of the transplantation of fecal contents from dizygotic twins (one of them with MS and the other twin healthy). The study used the spontaneous EAE model described above in GF settings. The transfer of fecal content from MS individuals increased the susceptibility of GF to the disease when compared to healthy counterparts. As in the previous work discussed, the immunomodulatory responses reduced when GF mice received MS fecal content were also attributed to IL-10-producing T cells [59]. These studies highlight the critical role of IL-10 in regulating experimental CNS inflammatory demyelination promoted by the gut microbiota (Table 2). The relevance of IL-10 induced by gut microbes is discussed in further detail in the following sections.

3.2. Clinical evidence suggesting gut dysbiosis in patients with MS.

Gut microbiome dysbiosis has been shown in many previous studies to play a role in MS (Table 3). However, dysbiosis’s mechanisms in MS pathogenesis remain largely undefined [60]. Confounding factors such as genetics and environmental conditions uniquely impact gut microbiomes, making it more challenging to determine roles and mechanisms [61]. The gut microbiome of RRMS patients has been the focus of most studies, with very few on progressive MS (PMS) [60]. The gut microbiome population diversity and composition are compared between MS and healthy patients to determine dysbiosis. Alpha diversity measures the diversity of richness and evenness within the sample utilizing Shannon Index, Chao1, or Simpson. Richness and evenness are the number and distribution of taxa expected within a single sample. Beta diversity then measures the similarity, or difference, in gut microbiome composition between samples. Finally, relative abundance is another component of species’ diversity that refers to the evenness of distribution of individuals among species in the sample. Relative abundance can provide insight into how a microbe community functions, such as through competition. A meta-analysis was recently performed on five original published clinical studies of MS versus healthy patients [62]. Richness, evenness, and Shannon Index were not significantly different between MS and healthy patients, suggesting alpha diversity alone may not be a suitable biomarker for MS [62]. The beta diversity was significantly different in PMS patients compared to the healthy gut microbiome, but with RRMS compared to PMS, it was not significantly different [60]. Although this review focuses on the bacterial component of the gut ecosystem, it is relevant to note that recent studies show that dysbiosis in MS patients also affects the fungal communities of the gut (the mycobiome) [63].

Disease form impacts gut microbiome beta diversity the most versus other identifiers such as BMI, race, or sex [60,61,64]. RRMS and PMS had increased Clostridium bolteae, Ruthenibacterium lactatiformans, and Akkermansia muciniphila [60]. Blautia wexlerae, Dorea formicigenerans, and Erysipelotrichaceae CCM were decreased. Blautia participates in carbohydrate fermentation, crosstalk between other microbes, and potential probiotic characteristics [60]. PMS had specific differences of increased Enterobacteriaceae and Clostridium g24 FCEY and decreased Agathobaculum spp. Disease severity was associated with many Clostridium species [60,65]. Pediatric MS cases showed increased relative abundances of Desulfovibrionaceae and reductions in Lachnospiraceae and Ruminococcaceae [66]. The relative abundance of Bacteroidetes was negatively associated with CD4+ T cells and Tregs while Actinobacteria was positively associated with CD4+ T cells and Tr1 [66]. In EAE mice, Akkermansia isolated from MS patients reduced RORyt+ and IL-17-producing T cells, resulting in lower disease severity [60]; these findings suggest Akkermansia may be regulatory or beneficial in MS. Consistent with previous views, they found butyrate producers to play a beneficial role [60,64]. In Chinese patients, overall gut microbiome composition did not vary significantly between MS and healthy, but the bacterial richness significantly decreased [67]. Cytokine levels changed associated with the richness of specific taxa, such as butyrate producers. The abundance of Fecalibacterium, a bacterium associated with anti-inflammatory effects, was dramatically reduced in MS patients [67,68]. They found no significant difference between MS and healthy patients’ alpha diversity, richness, and overall beta diversity [67]. Although gut microbiota appeared to remain similar, the abundance of several MS-associated phyla changed [67]. For example, Faecalibacterium, Roseburia, Dorea, Butyricicoccus, and Clostridium XIVb, producers of short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), discussed later in more detail, were all reduced in abundance. Studies summarized later highlight the importance of SCFAs’ anti-inflammatory role in immune cell regulation and autoimmune processes, specifically on the balance of Th17/Treg cells and cytokines. A study of Japanese MS versus healthy patients found significant differences in Clostridium and Bacteroidetes [69]. Analysis revealed that a reduced Clostridium species in Japanese MS patients were not associated with anti-inflammatory Clostridium species connected to other autoimmune diseases, suggesting they are unique to MS [69]. As with other studies, Takewaki et al. found that each MS form had similar alpha diversity but significantly differed in the abundance of numerous species compared to healthy controls. Reduction in SCFA-producing bacteria is the top alteration [70]. Beta-diversity significantly differed between RRMS and healthy and SPMS and healthy individuals. Many of the abundance changes were associated with disease severity. RRMS had reduced butyrate and propionate, including eight Clostridium species [70]. An increase of A. muciniphila was also shown in RRMS, which supports other findings of a potential pathogenic role [58,59,70-73]. SPMS and RRMS were similar in gut microbiome composition, but metagenomic functional data showed increased DNA mismatch repair in SPMS, resulting in increased oxidative levels over RRMS [70]. With a lower abundance of SCFA-producing bacteria, SPMS pathogenesis could also increase by deleting antioxidant gut-derived hydrogen, which increases oxidative stress [70]. High oxidative stress is associated with increased inflammation and disease [70].

The impact of genetic and environmental factors could be a determinant in microbiome studies. For example, a recent study show that the gut dysbiosis observed in obese EAE mice results in exacerbated disease [74]. The gut microbiota found in MS patients of three major ethnic groups and matched healthy patients were investigated at the onset of the disease for potential differences that could lead to changes in disease severity [75]. Clostridium was found to have an increased relative abundance in all three ethnic groups. There were no significant differences in alpha diversity across groups. However, there were significant differences in beta diversity between MS and healthy Hispanic-American patients [75]. Exploring the nature of dysbiosis observed in MS can be inconsistent with identified taxa varying between studies [76]. Studies may not account for confounding factors and may not be a large enough sample size. The microbial composition can be affected by over 60 covariates, with stool consistency having the most significant effect [76]. The gut microbiome of MS patients and their healthy household members were compared to elucidate differences while sharing the same environment. MS patients had similar overall microbiomes to their healthy household members; however, an increase in Ruminococcaceae, Christensenellaceae, Desulfovibrionaceae, and Clostridiales was found as well as lower diversity [61]. Clostridiales can be toxin-producing, which may cross the BBB and induce inflammation and autoreactivity. Bacteroidaceae, Tannerellaceae, Veillonellaceae, and Burkholderiaceae were increased in healthy household members. In the other hand, Prevotella, among other bacteria, were observed reduced in the gut of MS patients versus healthy controls [77]. As discussed later, Prevotella histicola has been shown to promote protection against EAE [78-80].

3.3. Does disease promote alterations in the gut microbiome?

Whether the dysbiotic gut precedes neuroinflammation, neuroinflammation triggers or exacerbates intestinal dysbiosis is a question that remains to be answered. Experimental models have shown that the induction of disease affects both composition of the gut microbiome and the integrity of the intestinal epithelial barrier. The specific factors that promote increased intestinal barrier permeability are mainly unknown. However, in the EAE model, active and passive induction of the disease results in significant changes in expression levels of tight junction protein genes and products within the first two weeks of the disease [81]. The intestinal barrier disruption is associated with an influx of proinflammatory T cell subsets to the GALT [81], possibly in response to bacterial translocation and increased antigen presentation, dendritic cell IL-23 production, and T cell differentiation into Th17 cells [82]. Members of the family Erysipelotrichaceae and Lactobacillus reuteri also promote Th17-driven enhancement of EAE severity, through MOG-specific responses [46]. Contrary to the effects of early treatment with ampicillin alone, if the treatment starts at the peak of the disease, the severity of EAE is exacerbated and L reuteri relative abundances reduced [83]. Increased antigen exposure in the GALT could be subsequently followed by systemic inflammation in response to endotoxin and other inflammatory mediators, exacerbating neuroinflammation. One of those mediators could be fragylysin, a zinc metalloproteinase produced by enteropathogenic strains of Bacteroides fragilis that, acting as an endotoxin, impacts the integrity of the intestinal barrier by cleaving E-cadherin and causes murine sepsis [84]. The treatment with probiotics and microbial metabolites have been identified as mechanisms that downplay experimental barrier disruption [85,86]. In MS, the disruption of the intestinal barrier, also known as the “leaky gut,” was first described after analysis of intestinal biopsies from patients [87,88]. Years later, disrupted lactulose/mannitol permeability tests in MS patients suggested increased intestinal barrier permeability [89]. The associations between the gut microbiome and the intestinal barrier were reviewed by Camara-Lemarroy et al. [90]. How could neuroinflammation favor a leaky gut? One possible mechanism is based on inflammatory mediators released during neuroinflammation. TNF-α levels are increased in EAE mice and MS patients [91]. In vitro, the exposure of a monolayer of caco-2 cells to TNF-α promotes barrier disruption [92,93]. In vivo, TNF-α activated the ERK1/2 pathway and the ETS domain-containing transcription factor Elk-1 [93].

Gastrointestinal dysfunction, including constipation, is observed in numerous neurological disorders [94]. Constipation induced chemically in EAE mice with loperamide resulted in increased disease severity, and changes observed in the composition of the gut microbiota, intestinal barrier permeability, the BBB and resulted in reduced peripheral Tregs and increased Th17 cell frequencies. The transplantation of fecal content from constipated mice resulted in similar negative effects in recipient EAE mice [95]. The results observed in the context of constipation suggest that the interaction between disease and the gut microbiome is reciprocal. Disease induction also promoted significant changes in different models of neuroinflammation. Our lab hypothesized that disease and gut microbiome interactions are bidirectional [96]. Our results indicate that disease induction in two different mouse models of EAE in C57BL/6 mice and NOD mice promotes significant modifications in the gut microbiome’s composition [49,97,98]. The NOD EAE model is induced as the C57BL/6 model (with MOG35-55 emulsified in complete Freund’s adjuvant and two doses of pertussis toxin). NOD EAE mice suffer from a first inflammatory mild phase followed by a short period of remission and a long-lasting progressive phase. Others showed that the NOD model’s progressive form is associated with increased BBB permeability, increased immune cell infiltration into the parenchyma of the CNS, microgliosis, and astrogliosis [5,99]. In NOD mice, EAE promoted significant microbiome changes 14 days post-induction (dpi) that remained at 30 dpi. The differences in the microbiome’s composition depended on the severity of the disease (approximately 70% of mice developed a severe form of the disease; the remaining suffered only mild disease, with clinical scores that did not go over 1.5 on a scale of 0 to 5). Surprisingly, the composition of the microbiome of untreated and EAE mice was not significantly different at the end of the experiment, when the disease was most severe. Furthermore, antibiotics reduced the severity of EAE only when animals were treated before the initial phase of the disease and were ineffective when administered at later stages [49]. We observed a significant reduction in the relative abundances of the Operational Taxonomic Units (OTUs) associated with the induction of IL-10-producing Tregs [49]. Among the relative bacterial abundances impacted by EAE induction and progression, Akkermansia muciniphila has been previously found altered in dysbiotic stool samples from MS patients and EAE mice [58,59,66,73]. We initially described in the biphasic model of EAE induced in NOD mice that the relative abundances of A. muciniphila increased during the early stages of the disease while decreasing significantly at the progressive stages [49]. Others made similar observations, and the protective effects of A. muciniphila against EAE were described [100]. Remarkably, the microRNA 30d (miR-30), with elevated expression in the intestine of MS patients and EAE mice, was taken up by A. muciniphila, resulting in its proliferation. The increase in relative abundances of A. muciniphila resulted in regulatory T cell responses and protection against EAE [100]. In the C57BL/6 EAE model, disease induction modified the microbiome’s composition by 14 dpi [97]. Others have also reported significant modifications in the microbiome’s composition after EAE induction [101,102] and the CPZ model of demyelination [102]. While early alterations of microbiota impact the severity of EAE induced in mice, the nature of the gut microbiota established early in life also affects the severity of EAE, as we recently reported for C57BL/6 mice obtained from two different commercial vendors and harboring distinct among the relative bacterial abundances that are significantly impacted by EAE induction, progression [97].

4. Gut microbiome-triggered immunomodulation in experimental MS

In the previous sections, we outlined the impact that the gut microbiome, and microbiome alterations, have on the susceptibility, severity, or progression of MS. The effects can be attributed to modifications in the gut's balance between pro- and anti-inflammatory responses that can transform neuroinflammatory pathways. However, the specific mechanisms by which immunomodulation occurs were not discussed. Whether the regulatory responses are antigen-specific or not is still uncertain. In this section, we cover the specific effects of some microbial antigens in the induction of immunomodulation and the impact of microbial metabolites secreted in the gut on immunomodulation. Some microbes and microbial products proposed to promote immunomodulation is graphically shown in figure 1. We also discuss whether the immunomodulatory pathways are antigen-specific and activated by bystander activation, molecular mimicry, or other mechanisms.

4.1. Immunomodulation triggered by gut microbes’ antigens

Although the immunomodulatory effects of some microbes of the gut microbiome are now well established, less is known about the specific microbial structures that trigger such responses. Bacterial structures such as lipopolysaccharides (LPS), peptidoglycan, outer membrane proteins, flagella, fimbriae, and others serve as ligands for pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) expressed in antigen-presenting cells (APCs). These microbial structures, collectively named pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) or microbe-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs), trigger the activation of gene expression pattern pathways in APCs that result in increases in cell surface expression of costimulatory molecules, MHC molecules, chemokine receptors, and secretion of cytokines. Depending on the nature of the antigen, the antigen-PRR interaction, and the location of the interactions, the immune responses elicited vary based on lymphocyte differentiation and could be categorized as pro- or anti-inflammatory. LPS, flagella, and other PAMPs promote inflammatory pathways [103]. Although these responses could be seen as unidirectional, experimental shreds of evidence suggest that the host’s genetics of the PRR can impact the way our immune responses are triggered, as well as the microbiome composition and the host’s physiology. For example, deficiency in the expression of Toll-like receptor 5 (TLR5), a major PRR associated with the recognition of bacterial flagella, leads to significant modifications of the gut microbiome, obesity, and hyperglycemia [104]. Microbial interactions under a dysbiotic state with PRRs of the nod-like receptor (NLR) family, specifically those capable of forming the inflammasome, have been linked to gut and CNS inflammation in Alzheimer’s disease [105,106]. Parkinson’s disease [107,108], depression in a model of neuropathic pain [109], and major depressive disorders [110]. Other NLRs, such as NLR1 and NLR2, serve as intracellular receptors for bacterial peptidoglycan (PGN) [111]. PGN can be detected in the serum and brains of healthy individuals, while brain concentrations increase with age [112]. PGN has been proposed to exacerbate neuroinflammation in MS patients [113,114]. Mice deficient in the expression of Nod1 and Nod2 suffer from mood disorders and leaky gut [115]. The importance of TLRs modulating immune responses has been widely studied (for a review: [103]). LPS, a TLR4 ligand, was described as an axonal damaging factor by the activation of inflammation through inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) in microglia and macrophages in the Lewis rat model of EAE [116]. LPS concentrations increased in brains with Alzheimer’s disease [117]. LPS’ TLR4 signaling was associated with increased IL-17 and IL-22 in experimental models of Alzheimer’s disease [118]. TLR4 was also linked to Parkinson’s disease [119]. Experimental models of neuroinflammation have also revealed an important role for TLR2, including in MS [120]. We will next discuss that TLR2 was implicated in immunomodulatory responses in EAE and other immune-mediated disease models.

Other microbial antigens promote immunomodulatory responses. Colonization factor antigen/1 (CFA/1) is fimbriae expressed by enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (ETEC). CFA/1 is a major virulence factor of the bacterium to attach to the gut’s epithelium. Pathogenesis depends on CFA/1 attachment, and protection against the disease depends on the generation of neutralizing antibodies against the fimbriae. In searching for a novel oral vaccine against traveler’s diarrhea, early studies by the laboratory of David W Pascual showed that a strain of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium genetically engineered to express CFA/1 induced macrophages in vitro to secrete anti-inflammatory cytokines. While the exposure of macrophages (intraperitoneal macrophages and RAW264.7) to Salmonella Typhimurium used as a vector for the construction of the strain (strain H647) induced the production of TNF-α, IL-6, IL-1α, and IL-1β, all proinflammatory, the exposure to CFA/I-expressing S. Typhimurium (H697) completely abrogated their production [121]. Treatment with H697 resulted in EAE protection when administered prophylactically to SJL/J mice by reducing CNS and peripheral inflammation and induction of Th2-mediated immune responses characterized by increased IL-4, IL-10, and IL-13 [122]. The protective effects of H697 against EAE were also after therapeutic administration of a single dose of the bacterium seven dpi. A significant accumulation of Foxp3+Tregs was observed in the cervical lymph nodes of SJL/J mice treated with H697 versus H647-treated and sham-treated mice. The protection observed was CD25-dependent. Furthermore, the adoptive transfer of CD25+CD4+ T cells (90% expressing Foxp3) induced almost complete protection against the disease, while H697-induced CD25−CD4+ T cells with a Th2 phenotype promoted partial protection [123]. TGF-β was responsible for the EAE protection by H697, as demonstrated later by in vivo neutralization studies [124]. Subsequent studies by Pascual's lab demonstrated the antiinflammatory and immunoregulatory effects of oral administration of genetically engineered bacteria expressing CFA/1 in different models of autoimmune inflammatory diseases [125-129].

Gut microbes provide the appropriate signals for the generation of Treg-based peripheral tolerance. Although the phenotype of the regulatory cells could differ depending on the microbial component eliciting the response and the cell population responsible for their recognition and amplification signals, their role as immunomodulatory agents is now evident. The regulatory cell types induced by gut microbes appear to be not restricted to Foxp3-expressing T cells, and Foxp3-negative CD4+ T cells that produce IL-10 (Tr1) [130]. Foxp3+ Tregs, and RORγt+Tregs [131], and regulatory B cell [132] and plasma cells [32], and NKT cell populations (for a review, see [133]). ILC3s are an important source of the immunomodulatory signals required to induce peripheral tolerance and regulate the gut-microbiota-brain axis [134]. One of the most studied symbiont microbial products that promote immunomodulation is PSA, produced by Bacteroides fragilis [135]. B. fragilis is an obligate anaerobic Gram-negative bacterium present in the gut of most individuals. In the gut, B. fragilis promotes symbiotic responses [136]; however, when displaced, the bacterium triggers strong inflammatory reactions that lead to abscess formation [137]. PSA is one of the eight capsular polysaccharides produced by B. fragilis, required for the colonization and survival of the microorganism. PSA is a zwitterionic macromolecule made of tetrasaccharide unit repeats [138]. PSA presentation by dendritic cells activates T cells on MHC class II molecules [139]. Dendritic cells, plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs), and conventional DCs are essential for the tolerogenic responses triggered by PSA in mice [140,141]. Dendritic cells isolated from human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) are also responsible for the immunomodulatory effects of PSA [142,143]. At least Dectin-1 and TLR1/TLR2 heterodimers have been identified in recognizing PSA by APCs (for a recent review, see: [135]). The recognition of PSA might determine the fate of the responses triggered by the polysaccharide. The first studies identified TLR2 as a key PRR responsible for APC recognition [144], processing, and immunomodulatory effects [145]. Furthermore, TLR2 signaling was found required for the protection that PSA confers in EAE [146,147], experimental colitis [140,145,148], mouse colorectal cancer [149]. The importance of TLR2/TLR1 heterodimers and Dectin-1 recognition to activate the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway leading to the production of IL-10 and EAE protection, was demonstrated in subsequent studies [150]. By contrast, the presence of an oligosaccharide bound covalently to PSA to anchor it to the outer membrane activates the TLR4-TRIF pathway, resulting in the activation of interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) associated with the production of IFN-β by conventional DCs and protection against murine vesicular stomatitis virus infection [151]. PSA presentation in MHC class II is dependent on the presence of a lipid moiety. The lipidic component is required for the protective effects of PSA against EAE [150].

Although the phenotype of immunomodulatory cells triggered in response to PSA might vary depending on the experimental disease model, it appears that IL-10 plays a key role [23]. In the EAE model, IL-10 produced by Tregs was necessary for the protection conferred by administering a purified form of the polysaccharide [152]. CD103+DCs isolated from PSA-treated mice converted naive T cells into Treg in vitro [152]. The colonization of antibiotics-treated EAE mice rendered sustained protection against the disease, while colonization with a B. fragilis strain deficient in the production of PSA (ΔPSA B. fragilis) restored the severity after antibiotics treatment [153]. The protection by PSA-producing B. fragilis was associated with IL-10-producing Tregs [153]. IL-10 is also the critical immunomodulatory effector molecule for the protection induced by PSA in a murine model of viral encephalitis, mediated by B lymphocytes and ICOS+CD39+CD37+CD4+ T cells and CD37+CD8+ T cells [154]. IL-10-producing CD39+T cell subpopulations were also found accumulating in the CNS of EAE mice treated with PSA [146]. TLR2 was required for the protection conferred by PSA-induced CD39+T cells, both Foxp3+ and Foxp3− [147]. CD39, an ectoenzyme that catalyzes ATP into adenosine monophosphate, is expressed in subsets of Tregs. Interestingly, CD39+Tregs isolated from RRMS patients had reduced suppressive function in vitro compared to those isolated from healthy donors [155]. Using PBMCs isolated from healthy human donors, PSA stimulated DCs to overexpress MHC class II (HLA-DR) costimulatory CD86 and PD-L1, inducing CD39+Tregs and IL-10 production and enhancing their immunosuppressive effects against TNF-α-producing monocytes in vitro [142]. In PBMCs from MS patients, PSA increased Foxp3 expression in Tregs [143].

There is limited evidence regarding other microbial antigens promoting immunomodulation in CNS autoimmune diseases. However, an outer membrane of Akkermansia muciniphila was identified as an inducer of HT-5, resulting in improved gastrointestinal tract motility in dysbiotic mice [156]. Specific clusters of Clostridia (IV and XIVa) are strong colonic Treg inducers [157]. Whether specific antigens trigger Treg induction by clostridia is unknown; by contrast, their production of SCFAs appears critical for Clostridia's immunomodulatory effects [158]. SCFAs and other secreted microbial products are discussed in the next section. The activation of the TLR2/MyD88 pathway in intestinal IL-10-producing macrophages was also described for Clostridium butyricum in a model of experimental colitis [159]. Heat-killed Clostridium butyricum was able to induce IL-10-producing macrophages. However, culture supernatants did not; these results suggested that an unknown microbial PAMP was responsible for the tolerogenic responses [159].

4.2. Possible mechanisms of gut microbiome antigen-induced immunomodulation

Although it is understood that the recognition of PAMP/MAMPs by specific receptors determines antigen presentation and lymphocyte differentiation through cytokine signaling, it is less clear whether specific molecular mechanisms, such as molecular mimicry, bystander activation, or epitope spreading, promote immunoregulatory mechanisms that could lead to protection against autoimmunity. Molecular mimicry’s theory defends that ortholog antigens and autoantigens cross-react. In the context of the gut microbiota and immunomodulation, cross-reactivity would promote lymphocytes with immunomodulatory reactions against CNS autoantigens. Molecular mimicry has been postulated as the mechanism of immunomodulation triggered by Endogenous retrovirus-1 in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) [160]. More than 20 bacterial species in the gut microbiome have protein expression homologous to myelin proteins which may trigger autoimmunity through biomimicry [161]. For example, Fusobacterium nucleatum has four proteins, and Clostridium has three identified as homologous to myelin proteins [161]. MS IgG targets these bacteria more than IgA, and RRMS patients have been observed with higher serum anti-Akkermansia muciniphila IgG activities than healthy patients [161]. Gut-derived IgA+ cells can enter the CNS in MS relapses and increase IgA [33]. Immune responses to commensal biomimicry should be further studied on a larger scale as a possible mechanism in MS pathogenesis [161]. As it was described earlier in this review, Erysipelotrichaceae and Lactobacillus reuteri promote Th17 cells responses that favor increased EAE severity [46]. The study identified UvrABC system protein A (UvrA) produced by L. reuteri that cross-reacted with MOG [46].

An alternative mechanism would be bystander activation, where the costimulatory molecules' overexpression cloud drives antigen-independent lymphocyte activation, driving immunomodulatory responses [162,163]. Bystander activation is the mechanism proposed for the immunomodulatory responses induced by CFA/I-expressing bacterial vectors protective against EAE and other experimental autoimmune diseases. In this context, disease-irrelevant antigen, the fimbriae CFA/1, with no similar molecular structure to myelin antigens, would facilitate increases in TGF-β-producing Tregs capable of protecting against EAE [124]. A third possible mechanism is epitope spreading, which results in an increased diversity of responses to epitopes different from the original that triggered the initial response [164]. Although it has been proposed to enhance the protective effects of immunotherapeutics against cancer models [165], the epitope-spreading, molecular mimicry, and bystander activation in the immunomodulation of CNS autoimmunity need to be explored in further detail.

4.3. Immunomodulation triggered by gut microbes secreted products

An alternative to the interaction between PAMPs and PRRs that trigger immunomodulation is the secretion of metabolites and larger products recognized by specific receptors expressed in immune cells. The most studied microbial metabolites with immunomodulatory effects are the SCFAs, introduced above. SCFAs are bacterial products of anaerobic fermentation of complex dietary carbohydrates. SCFA are made up of a maximum of six carbons. The most abundant SCFA are acetate (2 carbons), propionate (3 carbons), and butyrate (4 carbons). Monocarboxylate transporters expressed by colonocytes uptake SCFAs and are used for ATP biosynthesis. A proportion of SCFAs travels to the liver for further ATP production by hepatocytes. In addition to their importance as energy sources and other metabolic effects [166], SCFAs play a significant role in regulating immune function. The effects of SCFAs in immune cells have been associated with interactions with G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) and other receptors. SCFAs have histone-deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitory functions regulating cell gene transcription [167]. Reduced inflammatory pathways triggered by the inhibition of NFkB signaling are triggered by SCFA interaction with GPR41; these anti-inflammatory effects reduced severity in a murine model of Alzheimer’s disease [168]. SCFAs induce colonic Treg induction [158,169,170]. The cytokine microenvironment could determine whether SCFAs promote Tregs or IL-17-producing T-cell induction [171]. SCFAs impact the CNS’s lipid content, attenuate spinal cord demyelination in EAE [172], and promote remyelination [52]. Fettig and Osborne recently reviewed the cellular effects of SCFAs in the context of neuroinflammation [173]. Reduced SCFAs circulatory concentrations have been described in MS patients [70,174-176]. In mice, the treatment with SCFAs and SCFA-producing bacteria restored the disrupted BBB observed in GF mice compared to conventional mice [22]. Furthermore, experimental studies have shown that the treatment with SCFAs reduces EAE severity [52,174,175,177,178]. Additional microbial metabolites, such as indole-3-aldehyde, indole-3 acetic acid, tryptamine, and others, could also promote immunomodulation by serving as aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) ligands (for a review: [179]). The importance of AHR ligands in neuroinflammation has also been proposed [180]. AHR ligands have been shown to promote anti-inflammatory responses that lead to EAE protection [83,181].

Some intestinal microbes are known producers of neurotransmitters. In addition to the direct impact of neurotransmitters in neurobehavioral conditions, immune cells express and respond to some of them. We recently reviewed the potential therapeutic benefit of using the gut microbiome to regulate neuroinflammation by activating GABAergic responses [182]. Ionotropic GABA A receptors (GABAAR) are expressed in immune cells, including CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocytes and myeloid cells [183-187]. T-cell stimulation with GABA results in reduced cellular proliferation [186]. In the EAE model, GABAergic compounds reduce the severity of the disease [187,188]. Treatment with vigabatrin and topiramate reduced EAE clinical scores and proinflammatory cytokine production; moreover, adoptive transfer of T cells isolated from splenocytes of mice treated with either vigabatrin or topiramate resulted in protection against EAE [187]. The treatment with homotaurine protected against established EAE by reducing Th17 and Th1-mediated responses [188]. Although the mechanisms by which GABA promotes immunomodulatory responses need further study, it has been shown that GABA exposure promotes TGF-β-producing Treg induction in experimental autoimmune Type 1 Diabetes (T1D) [189,190] and high fat diet-induced hyperglycemia and metabolic disease [191]. A possible explanation for the Treg induction by GABA treatment could be the exposure of antigen-presenting cells to the neurotransmitter resulting in tolerogenic phenotypes [187]. In MS patients, GABA levels in the brain and circulation are reduced compared to healthy individuals [192-194]. Reduced concentrations in patients with neuromyelitis optica were also recently described [195]. Our studies in the EAE model show that the microbiome modifications promoted by the disease induction include significant reductions in the relative abundance of lactic acid bacteria GABA producers [49,98]. Serotonin (5-HT), also produced partly in the gut, has been shown to impact T cell function [196]. As discussed in the previous subsection, an outer membrane protein of A. muciniphila, a gut modulator of EAE, triggers 5-HT production [156]. Immune cells express 5-HT receptors [197], and 5-HT levels in EAE mice are reduced compared to naive animals [198]. Several publications postulate that serotonin is critical in regulating the gut-microbiota-brain axis and a key modulator of neurological and neurobehavioral disorders, such as autism spectrum disorders [199-201]. The bacterial metabolite 4-ethyl phenyl sulfate (4EPS) produced by gut microbes has been recently associated with increased severity of anxiety-like disorders in mice and reduced myelination [200].

5. Non-MS autoimmune diseases of the CNS.

While MS is the most prominent autoimmune disease of the CNS, reactivity against myelin antigens also characterizes other conditions. While MS lesions are disseminated in white matter, neuromyelitis optica (NMO) is an autoimmune disease characterized by an immune-mediated attack to the myelin sheath of the spinal cord, brainstem, and optic nerve resulting in paralysis and loss of vision. In NMO lesions, neutrophils and other granulocytes are prevalent [202]. Aquaporin 4 (AQP)-specific IgG autoantibodies and components of the complement system have been associated with the autoreactivity against astrocytes in NMO [203]. A small cohort microbiome analysis of NMO and MS patients treated with rituximab showed significant differences in gut microbiota composition. NMO patients’ microbiomes had increased relative abundances of Clostridium perfringens compared to MS patients and healthy donors [203]. Cross-reactivity of AQP4 antibodies with an adenosine triphosphate-binding cassette transporter permease (ABC-TP) of the bacterium infers AQP4 may be an autoantigen in NMO. The investigators’ initial findings showed that AQP4-specific proliferation of T cells from NMO patients was significantly higher than in MS T cells and that AQP4 exposure facilitated Th17 differentiation in NMO [204]. Taking these findings together, although the immune-related pathogenic pathways of NMO and MS appear to differ, the gut microbiome’s role in the tolerance breakdown can be proposed.

Myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibody-associated disease (MOGAD) is a neurological, immune-mediated disorder of the CNS characterized by the inflammation and demyelination of the optic nerves, brain, and spinal cord. A newly isolated member of Erysipelotrichaceae has been found to cause a Th17 inflammatory response based on gut microbiota composition and increased severity [205]. Another study showed that two distinct signals in the microbiota activate T cell response in the small intestine, one of those being MOG-specific CD4+ T cells [46]. The disorder has a higher prevalence in children. It was initially considered an antibody response associated with MS, but recent studies suggest it is a separate demyelinating disease [206]. It is hypothesized that due to the location of MOG that it would be an ideal target for antibody and cell-mediated response treatments [206]. The presence of the MOG antibodies is a major diagnostic characteristic of MOGAD, but also the presence of infiltrated CD4+ T cells, but not CD8+ T cells; This differs from MS, where CD8+ T cells are found in lesions [206].

Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM) is an inflammatory demyelinating disease. Since it presents with encephalopathy and brain lesions, care must be taken to rule out similar diseases such as autoimmune encephalitis and MS [207]. Another name for ADEM is post-infectious encephalomyelitis because it is thought that biomimicry of myelin by pathogens may activate the autoimmune response [207]. Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 infection and many other pathogens have been associated with ADEM, including influenza, measles, and Epstein-Barr virus [207]. ADEM rarely occurs with 0.2-0.4 out of 100,000 children aged between 3 and 7 years annually. Initial therapeutics are steroids in the absence of ever; for severe symptoms, immunotherapies are utilized, and long-term care follows neurocognitive results [207].

6. Gut immunomodulation as a therapeutic approach against CNS autoimmune diseases

Despite the different cellular and molecular mechanisms involved, recent evidence suggests that the gut microbiome and microbial products could be the source of novel and safe therapeutics against CNS autoimmune diseases. We described individual microbes, antigens, and products showing protective effects in animal models of CNS diseases. This last section will summarize probiotic mixtures tested preclinically and in clinical studies.

Prebiotic treatment through a modified diet promoted protection in the non-human primate EAE model using marmoset twins by reducing proinflammatory T cell-mediated responses and CNS cellular apoptosis and demyelination [208]. The diet, based on increased concentrations of fruit juices, carrot juice, yogurt, yeast flakes, vitamin D, among other components, and reduced ground powder, selected a Bifidobacteria-enriched microbiome [208]. In the mouse EAE models, the treatment with pomegranate peel extract resulted in significant modifications in the gut microbiome and protection against the disease [209]. Numerous other studies have shown the potential benefits of dietary interventions in EAE (for a review: [210]).

In addition to dietary interventions based on microbiota-modifying prebiotics, single- and multi-species probiotics have been tested in experimental autoimmunity, and some have been used in clinical studies. In mice, treatment with Lactobacilli (L. paracasei DSM 13434, L. plantarum DSM15312, and DSM 15313) triggers IL-10-producing Treg-dependent EAE protection [211]. Pediococcus acidilactici promotes EAE protection through IL-10-producing Tregs and reduced Th1/Th17 responses [212]. The impact of PSA-producing B. fragilis on EAE was already discussed [146,147,150,152,153]. The combination of Bifidobacterium bifidum, Streptococcus thermophilus, and three Lactobacillus strains also promoted EAE protection through the same proposed mechanism (increased Treg function and reduced Th1/Th17 responses) [213]. Bifidobacterium animalis, and Lactobacillus plantarum, are also protective against EAE by Th2 and Treg-mediated responses [214]. Clostridium butyricum treatment also reduced EAE severity [215]. Treatment with HSP65-producing Lactococcus lactis reduced Th17 responses and increased IL-10-producing Tregs in EAE mice [216]. Treatment with Prevotella histicola ameliorated EAE through reductions in proinflammatory Th17 responses and increased IL-10-producing Tregs [78-80]. In the rat EAE model, the treatment with Bifidobacterium animalis ameliorates EAE severity [217], and the treatment with Lactobacillus casei [218].

Probiotic mixes have shown promising results in EAE. The probiotic mixtures VSL3 and Lactibioane iki protect EAE mice, impacting APC function and rendering them tolerogenic [219]. A probiotic mixture containing Lactobacillus acidophilus, Lactobacillus casei, Bifidobacterium bifidum, and Lactobacillus fermentum was also used in a clinical study with 30 RRMS subjects and compared with a placebo (30 individuals) [220]. The treatment with the probiotic improved the expanded disability status scale (EDSS) and reduced inflammatory markers in RRMS patients [220]. VSL3 was used in nine RRMS patients in combination with glatiramer acetate. The effects were compared in 13 healthy controls. Despite the small size of the groups utilized, the results suggest anti-inflammatory effects in the periphery triggered by the combination of glatiramer acetate with the probiotic mixture [221].

6. Conclusions

Although the cellular mechanisms remain to be elucidated, experimental evidence suggests that gut microbes significantly promote immunomodulation in CNS neuroinflammation. Studies in EAE and other models of neuroinflammation highlight the impact of gut microbiota alterations on the susceptibility or progression of CNS disease. In addition, clinical data suggest the presence of a dysbiotic gut microbiome in individuals suffering from CNS autoimmune diseases. However, whether the changes are the cause, or the consequence of the disease remains to be addressed. Moreover, although EAE studies suggest that using the gut microbiome as a therapeutic intervention could be a novel alternative to currently approved disease-modifying therapies, more studies with larger sample sizes are needed. Other alternatives to prebiotics and probiotics exist, such as fecal transplantation approaches or phage therapy targeting specific taxa.

Acknowledgments

This work was partly supported by a grant from the National Institutes of Health (R15NS107743). We acknowledge support from the Institutional Development Awards (IDeA) from the National Institute of General Medical Sciences of the National Institutes of Health under Grants #P20GM103408, P20GM109095, and the BSU-Biomolecular Research Center, RRID: SCR_019174.

Figure 1. CNS inflammatory demyelinating diseases and gut dysbiosis could reciprocally exacerbate. EAE studies show that the induction of disease modifies the gut microbiome’s composition and increases intestinal barrier disruption. MicroRNA’s associated with MS can also facilitate growth of specific taxa. Disease and disease-mediated dysbiosis could promote the disruption of the intestinal barrier permeability through TNF-α, IL-1β, or other inflammatory mediators. Dysbiosis induced by environmental factors can also favor the abundances of inflammation-triggering microbes. By contrast, immunomodulatory responses mediated by anti-inflammatory macrophages, Bregs, Tregs, Tr1 cells, or invariant NKT cells regulate inflammation. Metabolites product of microbial physiology such as SCFA or neurotransmitters could facilitate immunomodulatory responses and the integrity of the gut epithelium and the BBB, disrupted in EAE and MS. BBB: blood-brain barrier; GABA: γ-aminobutyric acid; HT-5: 5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin); LPS: lipopolysaccharide; OMP: outer membrane protein; PGN: peptidoglycan; SCFA: short-chain fatty acid.

Table 1. Impact of CNS inflammatory demyelination on gut microbiome’s composition.

Animal
model	Changes observed in gut microbiome	Ref.*	
NOD EAE model	• Significant changes in beta diversity 14, and 30 days post-EAE induction (dpi) in mild and severe EAE vs. controls. No significance at 58 dpi (chronic)
• Severe EAE vs controls: ↓ Lactobacillus spp., ↓ Christensenellaceae (14 and 30 dpi), ↓ Lachnospiraceae (30 and 58 dpi), ↑ Ruminococcaceae, ↑ Turicibacter (also increased at 0 dpi), ↑ Bacilli (class) ↑ Akkermansia (↓ Akkermansia at 58 dpi).
• Mild EAE vs controls: ↓ Lactobacillus spp (14 dpi), ↓ Christensenellaceae (14 and 30 dpi.)	[49]	
TMEV model in SJL mice	• Early: ↑ Firmicutes 14 days post disease induction (infection), and back to control levels at 28 dpi. ↓ Alloprevotela, Akkermansia, Anaerotruncus
• Chronic: ↑ Alistipes and Eubacterium; ↓ Streptococcus;	[48]	
C57BL/6 EAE model	• Reduced alpha diversity in EAE mice over time vs. naïve and CFA controls
• Significant changes in beta diversity in EAE vs controls
• ↓ Lactobacillaceae
• ↑ Clostridiaceae: (Ruminiclostridium, Ruminococcus, Romboutsia, and Corpococcus), Rumincoccaceae, Peptostreptococcaceae
• ↑ Erysipelotrichia at peak and chronic EAE	[101]	
C57BL/6 EAE model	• EAE vs control: reduced alpha diversity in Jackson labs EAE 14 and 21 dpi (no differences in Envigo EAE mice)
• EAE vs controls: different beta diversity at 14 and 21 dpi.	[97]	
Cuprizone in C57BL/6	• ↑ alpha diversity (Shannon index) and richness at beginning at cuprizone (CPZ) diet administration; ↓ from weeks 2 to 9
• Changes in overall composition in CPZ vs controls visualized by principal component analysis
• CPZ vs controls: ↑ Lactobacillus, Akkermansia, Sphingobacteria, Faecalibacterium, Flavonifractor, Senegalimassilia, Defluvitaleaceae, Tyzzerella, Blautia, Marinifilaceae, Oscillibacter, Roseburia
• CPZ vs. controls: ↓ Bacteroidales, Deltaproteobacteria, Lactobacillaceae, Thermoanaerobacteraceae, Streptococcaceae, Veillonellaceae, Haloplasmataceae, Flavobacteria, Ruminococcus, Robinsoniella, Oscillospira, Eubacterium, Pseudoflavonifractor, Lachnoclostridium, Herbaspirillum	[102]	
C57BL/6 EAE model	• Changes in overall composition in EAE vs controls visualized by principal component analysis
• When considering no EAE vs scores 0-3 vs scores &gt;3: Tendency to increase: Phyla Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes; Tendency to decrease: Phyla Actinobacteria, Proteobacteria
• No EAE scores: ↑ Prevotelladaceae, Erysipelotrichaceae, genus Prevotella
• EAE scores 0-3 ↑ Parabacteroides; ↓ Bacteroidaceae
• EAE scores &gt;3: ↑ Coriobacteriaceae, Verrucomicrobiaceae (Akkermansia)	[102]	
* Ref.: The references are organized chronologically.

Table 2. Experimental evidence that links the gut microbiome with CNS inflammatory demyelination in EAE and other demyelination models.

Animal
model	Condition or
intervention*	Impact on disease and proposed mechanism of
action	Ref.**	
C57BL/6 EAE model	• Antibiotics vs. untreated	• Early treatment with antibiotics protects against EAE. No protective effects after onset of disease
• Protection mediated by NKT cells
• Antibiotics vs. untreated: ↓ Lactobacillus murinus, Bacteroides fragilis, ↑ B. thetaiotaomicron	[43]	
C57BL/6 and SJL EAE model	• Antibiotics vs. untreated	• Antibiotics treatment prior immunization protect against EAE
• Protection against EAE with adoptive transfer Tregs from antibiotic-treated to recipient EAE	[44]	
C57BL/6 EAE model	• Antibiotics and reconstitution with PSA-producing- or PSA-deficient B. fragilis	• Reconstitution of antibiotics-treated mice with PSA-producing B. fragilis protective against EAE
• Protection against EAE with adoptive transfer Tregs from PSA-producing B. fragilis reconstituted EAE mice to recipient EAE
• Reconstitution with ΔPSA B. fragilis restores EAE severity. Increased proinflammatory responses observed	[153]	
C57BL/6 EAE model	• Antibiotic (ampicillin) vs untreated	• Ampicillin alone treatment starting at day 22 worsens EAE scores.
• Treatment reduced abundance of Lactobacillus reuteri.
• Proposed reduction of aryl hydrocarbon receptor agonist production by L. reuteri from tryptophan	[83]	
NOD EAE model	• Antibiotics vs. untreated	• Antibiotics treatment confers protection against EAE
• Increased Treg frequencies observed in antibiotics-treated mice
• No protective effects after the onset of disease
• Severe EAE: ↓ Lactobacillus spp., ↑ Ruminococcaceae; ↑ Akkermansia, initial stages, then ↓ Akkermansia at late stages.
• Severe and mild EAE: ↓ Lactobacillus spp., Christensenellaceae, ↑ Turicibacter	[49]	
C57BL/6 EAE model	• Antibiotics (separate) vs. untreated, and germ-free vs conventional, &amp; colonization	• Antibiotics used individually. Ampicillin confers protection against EAE
• Depletion of Erysipelotrichacecie family and Allobaculum genus
• OTU002 (Fam. Erysipelotrichacecie) and L. reuteri induce Th17 cells
• Molecular mimicry model proposed, based on UvrABC system protein A (UvrA) produced by L. reuteri.	[46]	
TMEV model	• Antibiotics vs. untreated	• ↓ CNS T-cell infiltration during acute phase
• ↑ TMEV mortality when treatment finished
• No effects of antibiotics on chronic disease
• TMEV at 14 dpi: ↓ Alloprevotela, Akkermansia, Anaerotruncus, ↑ Firmicutes, Alistipes
• Antibiotics + TMEV at 28 dpi: ↓ Bacteroidetes, ↑ Verrucomicrobia	[48]	
C57BL/6 EAE model	• Antibiotics vs. untreated	• Antibiotics confer protection against EAE
• Treatment promotes anti-inflammatory macrophages and resident microglia	[47]	
Spontaneous SJL/J model	• Antibiotics vs. untreated	• Antibiotics reduce susceptibility to EAE
• No protective effects after onset of disease
• Antibiotics vs. untreated: ↓ alpha and beta diversity, ↑ Enterococcus durans, Akkermansia, Bacteroides, Blautia	[50]	
Toxin-induced demyelination	• Antibiotics vs. untreated	• Reduced inflammation during remyelination with antibiotic treatment
• High doses of antibiotics negatively impact oligodendrocyte differentiation and remyelination	[51]	
C57BL/6 EAE model	• Germ free (GF) vs specific pathogen free (SPF) conditions
• Colonization with Segmented filamentous bacterium (SFB)	• Reduced EAE severity in GF mice vs. SPF
• Severity restored in GF monocolonized with SFB
• Reduced IFN-γ and IL-17+ CD4+ T cells in GF vs SPF mice
• Increased splenic and mesenteric lymph node Tregs in GF vs SPF EAE mice when cultured with MOG	[53]	
Spontaneous C57BL/6 EAE model	• Germ free (GF) vs specific pathogen free (SPF) conditions
• Colonization with fecal contents	• Reduced spontaneous EAE susceptibility in GF mice vs. SPF
• Susceptibility restored in GF colonized with fecal content from conventionally housed mice.
• GF mice have impaired ability for Th17 differentiation.
• GF mice show reduced MOG-specific IgG2a antibodies and reduced germinal center B cells in cervical lymph nodes.	[54]	
C57BL/6 EAE model	• Germ-free (GF) and reconstitution with fecal content from MS patients (MS) or healthy controls (HC)	• EAE severity increased in GF mice after transplantation of fecal content from patients with MS vs HC
• ↓ IL-10-producing Tregs in MS vs. HC
• MS sample: ↓ in Parabacteroides distasonis, ↑ Acinetobacter, Akkermansia	[58]	
Spontaneous C57BL/6 EAE model	• Germ-free (GF) and reconstitution with fecal content from MS patients (MS) or healthy controls (HC)	• Promotes EAE in GF mice with transplantation of fecal content from the dizygotic twin with MS vs fecal content from the healthy dizygotic twin
• ↓ IL-10-producing Tregs and IL-10-producing CD4+ T cells in MS vs. HC
• MS sample: ↑ Akkermansia muciniphila	[59]	
* The treatment with single, multi-species probiotics, or microbial products are not included.

** Ref.: The references are organized based on the condition or interventions used (second column), and then chronologically.

Table 3. Clinical evidence for dysbiosis in CNS inflammatory demyelination in MS.

MS form and sample size	Major findings	Ref.*	
HC (n = 31) vs. MS (n = 30)	• Type A Clostridium perfringens reduced in MS vs HC
• Type B C. perfringens found in one MS patient	[65]	
HC (n = 8) vs. MS (n =7 MS; 4 MS and vitamin D supplementation).	• Prior vitamin D supplementation, ↓ Bacteroidaceae and Faecalibacterium, and ↑ Ruminococcus in MS vs HC
• Vit. D supplementation: ↑ Faecalibacterium, Enterobacteriaceae; ↓ Ruminococcus
• Untreated MS ↑ Akkermansia, Faecalibacterium, and Coprococcus	[72]	
HC (n = 50) vs. MS (n = 20)	• MS vs. HC: ↓ specific clusters of Clostridium, and Bacterioides spp.	[69]	
HC (n= 17) vs. RRMS (n = 18).	• No differences in beta diversity
• Alterations in pediatric MS
• ↑ Bilophila, Desulfovibrio and Christensenellaceae
• ↓ Lachnospiraceae and Ruminococcaceae	[66]	
HC (n = 9) vs. MS (n = 15)	• Uneven microbiota (species overgrowth) associated with ↑ markers of Th17 and Th2 populations.
• Bacteroidetes was negatively associated with CD4+ T cells and Tregs, Actinobacteria was positively associated with CD4+ T cells and Tr1	[68]	
HC (n = 43) vs. MS (n = 60)	• No differences in overall structural diversity
• MS vs. HC: ↑ Metanobrevibacter, Akkermansia and ↓ Butyricimonas
• Positive association between ↑ frequencies of Metanobrevibacter, Akkermansia and proinflammatory immune pathways	[73]	
HC (n = 36) vs. MS (n = 38)	• Differences in overall structure of microbiota
• MS vs. HC: ↓ Parabacteroides, Prevotella, Adlercreutzia and Collinsella, Erysipelotrichaceae	[77]	
HC (n = 71) vs. MS (n = 71)	• No differences in overall structural diversity
• MS vs. HC: ↑ Acinetobacter and Akkermansia muciniphila; ↓ Parabacteroides	[58]	
34 MZ twin pairs for MS	• No differences in overall structural diversity
• MS vs. HC: ↑ A. muciniphila	[59]	
• Caucasian HC (n = 15) vs. MS (n = 15)
• Hispanic HC (n = 15) vs. MS (n = 15)
• African American HC (n = 14) vs. MS (n = 14)	• MS vs. HC (all ethnic groups): ↑ Clostridium species with no significant difference in alpha diversity
• Beta diversity significantly different between Hispanic HC and MS	[75]	
HC (n = 33) vs. MS (n = 22)	• No differences in overall structural diversity
• Reduced richness in MS samples
• MS vs. HC: ↓ Faecalibacterium, Roseburia, Dorea, Butyricicoccus, and Clostridium XIVb	[67]	
HC (n = 55) vs. SPMS (n = 15) vs. RRMS (n = 62)	• No difference in alpha diversity
• Reduced diversity in SPMS and RRMS samples
• RRMS vs. HC: ↓ eight different Clostridium spp.; ↑ A. muciniphila	[70]	
HC (n = 41) vs. RRMS (n = 62)	• RRMS vs. HC: ↑ A. muciniphila, Fusobacterium, and Acinetobacter; ↓ Prevotella	[71]	
HC (n = 29) vs. RRMS (n = 95) vs. PMS (n = 27)	RRMS and PMS vs. HC: ↑ Clostridium bolteae, Ruthenibacterium lactatiformans, and A. muciniphila; ↓ in RRMS and PMS samples: Blautia wexlerae, Dorea formicigenerans, and Erysipelotrichaceae CCM
• PMS: ↑ Enterobacteriaceae and Clostridium g24 FCEY and ↓ Agathobaculum spp.	[60]	
** Ref.: The references are organized chronologically.

HC: Healthy controls; MZ: monozygotic; PMS: progressive MS; PPMS: primary progressive MS; RRMS: relapsing remitting MS; SPMS: secondary progressive MS

HIGHLIGHTS

Mechanistic studies in murine models indicate an important role of the gut microbiome regulating autoimmune CNS diseases.

Metagenomics analysis of the gut microbiome of MS patients indicate significant alterations the relative abundances of specific microbial taxa.

Immunomodulatory responses triggered by gut microbes could contribute to the microbiome's regulatory effects on multiple sclerosis.

The cellular mechanisms of immunomodulation triggered by the gut microbiome remain to be elucidated.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


References

[1] El-Shebiny EM , Zahran ES , Shoeib SA , Habib ES , Bridging autoinflammatory and autoimmune diseases, Egypt. J. Intern. Med 33 (2021) 11. 10.1186/s43162-021-00040-5.
[2] Sen MK , Almuslehi MSM , Shortland PJ , Coorssen JR , Mahns DA , Revisiting the Pathoetiology of Multiple Sclerosis: Has the Tail Been Wagging the Mouse?, Front. Immunol 11 (2020) 572186. 10.3389/fimmu.2020.572186.33117365
[3] Dobson R , Giovannoni G , Multiple sclerosis – a review, Eur. J. Neurol 26 (2019) 27–40. 10.1111/ene.13819.30300457
[4] Orton S-M , Herrera BM , Yee IM , Valdar W , Ramagopalan SV , Sadovnick AD , Ebers GC , Sex ratio of multiple sclerosis in Canada: a longitudinal study, Lancet Neurol. 5 (2006) 932–936. 10.1016/S1474-4422(06)70581-6.17052660
[5] Basso AS , Frenkel D , Quintana FJ , Costa-Pinto FA , Petrovic-Stojkovic S , Puckett L , Monsonego A , Bar-Shir A , Engel Y , Gozin M , Weiner HL , Reversal of axonal loss and disability in a mouse model of progressive multiple sclerosis, J. Clin. Invest 118 (2008) 1532–1543. 10.1172/JCI33464.18340379
[6] Milo R , Kahana E , Multiple sclerosis: Geoepidemiology, genetics and the environment, Autoimmun. Rev 9 (2010) A387–A394.19932200
[7] Mamedov A , Vorobyeva N , Filimonova I , Zakharova M , Kiselev I , Bashinskaya V , Baulina N , Boyko A , Favorov A , Kulakova O , Ziganshin R , Smirnov I , Poroshina A , Shilovskiy I , Khaitov M , Sykulev Y , Favorova O , Vlassov V , Gabibov A , Belogurov A , Protective Allele for Multiple Sclerosis HLA-DRB1*01:01 Provides Kinetic Discrimination of Myelin and Exogenous Antigenic Peptides, Front. Immunol 10 (2020) 3088. 10.3389/fimmu.2019.03088.32010139
[8] Rizvi SA , Cahill JF , Coyle PK , eds., Clinical Neuroimmunology: Multiple Sclerosis and Related Disorders, Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2020. 10.1007/978-3-030-24436-1.
[9] Galarza-Muñoz G , Briggs FBS , Evsyukova I , Schott-Lerner G , Kennedy EM , Nyanhete T , Wang L , Bergamaschi L , Widen SG , Tomaras GD , Ko DC , Bradrick SS , Barcellos LF , Gregory SG , Garcia-Blanco MA , Human Epistatic Interaction Controls IL7R Splicing and Increases Multiple Sclerosis Risk, Cell. 169 (2017) 72–84.e13. 10.1016/j.cell.2017.03.007.28340352
[10] AL-Eitan L , Al Qudah M , Al Qawasmeh M , Association of Multiple Sclerosis Phenotypes with Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms of IL7R, LAG3, and CD40 Genes in a Jordanian Population: A Genotype-Phenotype Study, Biomolecules. 10 (2020) 356. 10.3390/biom10030356.32111053
[11] Barac IS , Iancu M , Văcăraş V , Cozma A , Negrean V , Sâmpelean D , Mureşanu DF , Procopciuc LM , Potential Contribution of IL-27 and IL-23 Gene Polymorphisms to Multiple Sclerosis Susceptibility: An Association Analysis at Genotype and Haplotype Level, J. Clin. Med 11 (2021) 37. 10.3390/jcm11010037.35011777
[12] Abdulaali Abed T , Department of Biology, College of Sciences, University of Babylon, Iraq., A.A. Abdulla, Department of Biology, College of Sciences, University of Babylon, Iraq., Correlation of - 475 IL-2 Promoter Gene Polymorphisms and the Levels of Serum IL-2 on the Risk of Multiple Sclerosis, Rep. Biochem. Mol. Biol 11 (2022) 83–88. 10.52547/rbmb.11.1.83.35765522
[13] Ali. Abdulla A , Abdulaali Abed T , Razzaq Abdul-Ameer W , Impact of IL-21 gene polymorphisms (Rs2055979) and the levels of serum IL-21 on the risk of multiple sclerosis, Arch. Razi Inst (2021). 10.22092/ari.2021.356470.1848.
[14] Bruno A , Dolcetti E , Azzolini F , Moscatelli A , Gambardella S , Ferese R , Rizzo FR , Gilio L , Iezzi E , Galifi G , Borrelli A , Buttari F , Furlan R , Finardi A , De Vito F , Musella A , Guadalupi L , Mandolesi G , Centonze D , Stampanoni Bassi M , Interleukin 6 SNP rs1818879 Regulates Radiological and Inflammatory Activity in Multiple Sclerosis, Genes. 13 (2022) 897. 10.3390/genes13050897.35627281
[15] Masilionyte U , Gedvilaite G , Kaikaryte K , Vilkeviciute A , Kriauciuniene L , Glebauskiene B , Balnyte R , Liutkeviciene R , IL-10 Gene Polymorphisms and IL-10 Serum Levels in Patients with Multiple Sclerosis in Lithuania, Brain Sci. 12 (2022) 800. 10.3390/brainsci12060800.35741685
[16] Compston A , Coles A , Multiple sclerosis, The Lancet. 372 (2008) 1502–1517.
[17] Bjornevik K , Cortese M , Healy BC , Kuhle J , Mina MJ , Leng Y , Elledge SJ , Niebuhr DW , Scher AI , Munger KL , Ascherio A , Longitudinal analysis reveals high prevalence of Epstein-Barr virus associated with multiple sclerosis, Science. 375 (2022) 296–301. 10.1126/science.abj8222.35025605
[18] Ward M , Goldman MD , Epidemiology and Pathophysiology of Multiple Sclerosis, Contin. Lifelong Learn. Neurol 28 (2022) 988–1005. 10.1212/CON.0000000000001136.
[19] Ochoa-Reparaz J , Kirby TO , Kasper LH , The Gut Microbiome and Multiple Sclerosis., Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med (2018) a029017.29311123
[20] Moser T , Akgün K , Proschmann U , Sellner J , Ziemssen T , The role of TH17 cells in multiple sclerosis: Therapeutic implications, Autoimmun. Rev 19 (2020) 102647. 10.1016/j.autrev.2020.102647.32801039
[21] Kebir H , Kreymborg K , Ifergan I , Dodelet-Devillers A , Cayrol R , Bernard M , Giuliani F , Arbour N , Becher B , Prat A , Human TH17 lymphocytes promote blood-brain barrier disruption and central nervous system inflammation., Nat. Med 13 (2007) 1173–1175.17828272
[22] Braniste V , Al-Asmakh M , Kowal C , Anuar F , Abbaspour A , Tóth M , Korecka A , Bakocevic N , Ng LG , Guan NL , Kundu P , Gulyás B , Halldin C , Hultenby K , Nilsson H , Hebert H , Volpe BT , Diamond B , Pettersson S , The gut microbiota influences blood-brain barrier permeability in mice., Sci. Transl. Med 6 (2014) 263ra158–263ra158.
[23] Surana NK , Kasper DL , The yin yang of bacterial polysaccharides: lessons learned from B. fragilis PSA., Immunol. Rev 245 (2012) 13–26.22168411
[24] Sambucci M , Gargano F , Guerrera G , Battistini L , Borsellino G , One, No One, and One Hundred Thousand: T Regulatory Cells’ Multiple Identities in Neuroimmunity, Front. Immunol 10 (2019) 2947. 10.3389/fimmu.2019.02947.31956323
[25] Verma ND , Lam AD , Chiu C , Tran GT , Hall BM , Hodgkinson SJ , Multiple sclerosis patients have reduced resting and increased activated CD4+CD25+FOXP3+T regulatory cells, Sci. Rep 11 (2021) 10476. 10.1038/s41598-021-88448-5.34006899
[26] Hepworth MR , Fung TC , Masur SH , Kelsen JR , McConnell FM , Dubrot J , Withers DR , Hugues S , Farrar MA , Reith W , Eberl G , Baldassano RN , Laufer TM , Elson CO , Sonnenberg GF , Group 3 innate lymphoid cells mediate intestinal selection of commensal bacteria–specific CD4 + T cells, Science. 348 (2015) 1031–1035. 10.1126/science.aaa4812.25908663
[27] Deng T , Suo C , Chang J , Yang R , Li J , Cai T , Qiu J , ILC3-derived OX40L is essential for homeostasis of intestinal Tregs in immunodeficient mice, Cell. Mol. Immunol 17 (2020) 163–177. 10.1038/s41423-019-0200-x.30760919
[28] Ravindran R , Thornton E , ILC3-induced regulatory T cells are directed by gut microorganisms, Nat. Rev. Immunol 22 (2022) 207–207. 10.1038/s41577-022-00697-1.35236920
[29] Hauser SL , The Charcot Lecture ∣ beating MS: a story of B cells, with twists and turns., Mult. Scler. Houndmills Basingstoke Engl 21 (2015) 8–21.
[30] Link H , Huang Y-M , Oligoclonal bands in multiple sclerosis cerebrospinal fluid: An update on methodology and clinical usefulness, J. Neuroimmunol 180 (2006) 17–28. 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2006.07.006.16945427
[31] Ramesh A , Schubert RD , Greenfield AL , Dandekar R , Loudermilk R , Sabatino JJ , Koelzer MT , Tran EB , Koshal K , Kim K , Pröbstel A-K , Banerji D , University of California, San Francisco MS-EPIC Team, Guo C-Y , Green AJ , Bove RM , DeRisi JL , Gelfand JM , Cree BAC , Zamvil SS , Baranzini SE , Hauser SL , Wilson MR , A pathogenic and clonally expanded B cell transcriptome in active multiple sclerosis, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci 117 (2020) 22932–22943. 10.1073/pnas.2008523117.32859762
[32] Rojas OL , Pröbstel A-K , Porfilio EA , Wang AA , Charabati M , Sun T , Lee DSW , Galicia G , Ramaglia V , Ward LA , Leung LYT , Najafi G , Khaleghi K , Garcillán B , Li A , Besla R , Naouar I , Cao EY , Chiaranunt P , Burrows K , Robinson HG , Allanach JR , Yam J , Luck H , Campbell DJ , Allman D , Brooks DG , Tomura M , Baumann R , Zamvil SS , Bar-Or A , Horwitz MS , Winer DA , Mortha A , Mackay F , Prat A , Osborne LC , Robbins C , Baranzini SE , Gommerman JL , Recirculating Intestinal IgA-Producing Cells Regulate Neuroinflammation via IL-10, Cell. 176 (2019) 610–624.e18. 10.1016/j.cell.2018.11.035.30612739
[33] Pröbstel A-K , Zhou X , Baumann R , Wischnewski S , Kutza M , Rojas OL , Sellrie K , Bischof A , Kim K , Ramesh A , Dandekar R , Greenfield AL , Schubert RD , Bisanz JE , Vistnes S , Khaleghi K , Landefeld J , Kirkish G , Liesche-Starnecker F , Ramaglia V , Singh S , Tran EB , Barba P , Zorn K , Oechtering J , Forsberg K , Shiow LR , Henry RG , Graves J , Cree BAC , Hauser SL , Kuhle J , Gelfand JM , Andersen PM , Schlegel J , Turnbaugh PJ , Seeberger PH , Gommerman JL , Wilson MR , Schirmer L , Baranzini SE , Gut microbiota–specific IgA + B cells traffic to the CNS in active multiple sclerosis, Sci. Immunol 5 (2020) eabc7191. 10.1126/sciimmunol.abc7191.33219152
[34] Trachtenberg EA , Understanding the role of natural killer cell receptors and their human leukocyte antigen ligands in multiple sclerosis, Ann. Neurol 65 (2009) 626–628. 10.1002/ana.21747.19557875
[35] Calahorra L , Camacho-Toledano C , Serrano-Regal MP , Ortega MC , Clemente D , Regulatory Cells in Multiple Sclerosis: From Blood to Brain, Biomedicines. 10 (2022) 335. 10.3390/biomedicines10020335.35203544
[36] Donaldson GP , Lee SM , Mazmanian SK , Gut biogeography of the bacterial microbiota, Nat. Rev. Microbiol 14 (2015) 20–32.26499895
[37] Lopera-Maya EA , Kurilshikov A , van der Graaf A , Hu S , Andreu-Sánchez S , Chen L , Vila AV , Gacesa R , Sinha T , Collij V , Klaassen MAY , Bolte LA , Gois MFB , Neerincx PBT , Swertz MA , LifeLines Cohort Study, Aguirre-Gamboa R , Deelen P , Franke L , Kuivenhoven JA , Lopera-Maya EA , Nolte IM , Sanna S , Snieder H , Swertz MA , Vonk JM , Wijmenga C , Harmsen HJM , Wijmenga C , Fu J , Weersma RK , Zhernakova A , Sanna S , Effect of host genetics on the gut microbiome in 7,738 participants of the Dutch Microbiome Project, Nat. Genet 54 (2022) 143–151. 10.1038/s41588-021-00992-y.35115690
[38] Markle JGM , Frank DN , Mortin-Toth S , Robertson CE , Feazel LM , Rolle-Kampczyk U , von Bergen M , McCoy KD , Macpherson AJ , Danska JS , Sex differences in the gut microbiome drive hormone-dependent regulation of autoimmunity., Science. 339 (2013) 1084–1088.23328391
[39] Bosco N , Noti M , The aging gut microbiome and its impact on host immunity, Genes Immun. 22 (2021) 289–303. 10.1038/s41435-021-00126-8.33875817
[40] Durack J , Lynch SV , The gut microbiome: Relationships with disease and opportunities for therapy, J. Exp. Med 216 (2019) 20–40. 10.1084/jem.20180448.30322864
[41] Vujkovic-Cvijin I , Sklar J , Jiang L , Natarajan L , Knight R , Belkaid Y , Host variables confound gut microbiota studies of human disease, Nature. 587 (2020) 448–454. 10.1038/s41586-020-2881-9.33149306
[42] Scheunert CA , Über Knochenweiche bei Pferden und ‘Dysbiose der Darmflora, Z Infekt. 21 (1920) 105–121.
[43] Yokote H , Miyake S , Croxford JL , Oki S , Mizusawa H , Yamamura T , NKT cell-dependent amelioration of a mouse model of multiple sclerosis by altering gut flora., Am. J. Pathol 173 (2008) 1714–1723.18974295
[44] Ochoa-Reparaz J , Mielcarz DW , Ditrio LE , Burroughs AR , Foureau DM , Haque-Begum S , Kasper LH , Role of gut commensal microflora in the development of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis., J. Immunol. Baltim. Md 1950 183 (2009) 6041–6050.
[45] Nakamura YK , Metea C , Karstens L , Asquith M , Gruner H , Moscibrocki C , Lee I , Brislawn CJ , Jansson JK , Rosenbaum JT , Lin P , Gut Microbial Alterations Associated With Protection From Autoimmune Uveitis, Investig. Opthalmology Vis. Sci 57 (2016) 3747–12.
[46] Miyauchi E , Kim S-W , Suda W , Kawasumi M , Onawa S , Taguchi-Atarashi N , Morita H , Taylor TD , Hattori M , Ohno H , Gut microorganisms act together to exacerbate inflammation in spinal cords, Nature. 585 (2020) 102–106. 10.1038/s41586-020-2634-9.32848245
[47] Seifert HA , Benedek G , Nguyen H , Gerstner G , Zhang Y , Kent G , Vandenbark AA , Bernhagen J , Offner H , Antibiotics protect against EAE by increasing regulatory and anti-inflammatory cells, Metab. Brain Dis 33 (2018) 1599–1607. 10.1007/s11011-018-0266-7.29916184
[48] Carrillo-Salinas FJ , Mestre L , Mecha M , Feliú A , del Campo R , Villarrubia N , Espejo C , Montalbán X , Álvarez-Cermeño JC , Villar LM , Guaza C , Gut dysbiosis and neuroimmune responses to brain infection with Theiler’s murine encephalomyelitis virus, Sci. Rep 7 (2017) 44377. 10.1038/srep44377.28290524
[49] Colpitts SL , Kasper EJ , Keever A , Liljenberg C , Kirby T , Magori K , Kasper LH , Ochoa-Reparaz J , A bidirectional association between the gut microbiota and CNS disease in a biphasic murine model of multiple sclerosis., Gut Microbes. 8 (2017) 561–573.28708466
[50] Gödel C , Kunkel B , Kashani A , Lassmann H , Arumugam M , Krishnamoorthy G , Perturbation of gut microbiota decreases susceptibility but does not modulate ongoing autoimmune neurological disease, J. Neuroinflammation 17 (2020) 79. 10.1186/s12974-020-01766-9.32143718
[51] McMurran CE , Guzman de la Fuente A , Penalva R , Ben Menachem-Zidon O , Dombrowski Y , Falconer J , Gonzalez GA , Zhao C , Krause FN , Young AMH , Griffin JL , Jones CA , Hollins C , Heimesaat MM , Fitzgerald DC , Franklin RJM , The microbiota regulates murine inflammatory responses to toxin-induced CNS demyelination but has minimal impact on remyelination, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci 116 (2019) 25311–25321. 10.1073/pnas.1905787116.31740610
[52] Chen T , Noto D , Hoshino Y , Mizuno M , Miyake S , Butyrate suppresses demyelination and enhances remyelination, J. Neuroinflammation. 16 (2019) 165. 10.1186/s12974-019-1552-y.31399117
[53] Lee YK , Menezes JS , Umesaki Y , Mazmanian SK , Proinflammatory T-cell responses to gut microbiota promote experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci 108 Suppl 1 (2011) 4615–4622.20660719
[54] Berer K , Mues M , Koutrolos M , Rasbi ZA , Boziki M , Johner C , Wekerle H , Krishnamoorthy G , Commensal microbiota and myelin autoantigen cooperate to trigger autoimmune demyelination., Nature. 479 (2011) 538–541.22031325
[55] Ivanov II , de L.Frutos R , Manel N , Yoshinaga K , Rifkin DB , Sartor RB , Finlay BB , Littman DR , Specific Microbiota Direct the Differentiation of IL-17-Producing T-Helper Cells in the Mucosa of the Small Intestine, Cell Host Microbe. 4 (2008) 337–349.18854238
[56] Ivanov II , Atarashi K , Manel N , Brodie EL , Shima T , Karaoz U , Wei D , Goldfarb KC , Santee CA , Lynch SV , Tanoue T , Imaoka A , Itoh K , Takeda K , Umesaki Y , Honda K , Littman DR , Induction of Intestinal Th17 Cells by Segmented Filamentous Bacteria, Cell. 139 (2009) 485–498.19836068
[57] Regen T , Isaac S , Amorim A , Núñez NG , Hauptmann J , Shanmugavadivu A , Klein M , Sankowski R , Mufazalov IA , Yogev N , Huppert J , Wanke F , Witting M , Grill A , Gálvez EJC , Nikolaev A , Blanfeld M , Prinz I , Schmitt-Kopplin P , Strowig T , Reinhardt C , Prinz M , Bopp T , Becher B , Ubeda C , Waisman A , IL-17 controls central nervous system autoimmunity through the intestinal microbiome, Sci. Immunol 6 (2021) eaaz6563. 10.1126/sciimmunol.aaz6563.33547052
[58] Cekanaviciute E , Yoo BB , Runia TF , Debelius JW , Singh S , Nelson CA , Kanner R , Bencosme Y , Lee YK , Hauser SL , Crabtree-Hartman E , Katz Sand I , Gacias M , Zhu Y , Casaccia P , Cree BAC , Knight R , Mazmanian SK , Baranzini SE , Gut bacteria from multiple sclerosis patients modulate human T cells and exacerbate symptoms in mouse models., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 363 (2017) 201711235–6.
[59] Berer K , Gerdes LA , Cekanaviciute E , Jia X , Xiao L , Xia Z , Liu C , Klotz L , Stauffer U , Baranzini SE , Kümpfel T , Hohlfeld R , Krishnamoorthy G , Wekerle H , Gut microbiota from multiple sclerosis patients enables spontaneous autoimmune encephalomyelitis in mice., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 145 (2017) 201711233–6.
[60] Cox LM , Maghzi AH , Liu S , Tankou SK , Dhang FH , Willocq V , Song A , Wasén C , Tauhid S , Chu R , Anderson MC , De Jager PL , Polgar-Turcsanyi M , Healy BC , Glanz BI , Bakshi R , Chitnis T , Weiner HL , Gut Microbiome in Progressive Multiple Sclerosis, Ann. Neurol 89 (2021) 1195–1211. 10.1002/ana.26084.33876477
[61] Galluzzo P , Capri FC , Vecchioni L , Realmuto S , Scalisi L , Cottone S , Nuzzo D , Alduina R , Comparison of the Intestinal Microbiome of Italian Patients with Multiple Sclerosis and Their Household Relatives, Life. 11 (2021) 620. 10.3390/life11070620.34206853
[62] Plassais J , Gbikpi-Benissan G , Figarol M , Scheperjans F , Gorochov G , Derkinderen P , Cervino ACL , Gut microbiome alpha-diversity is not a marker of Parkinson’s disease and multiple sclerosis, Brain Commun. 3 (2021) fcab113. 10.1093/braincomms/fcab113.34704023
[63] Yadav M , Ali S , Shrode RL , Shahi SK , Jensen SN , Hoang J , Cassidy S , Olalde H , Guseva N , Paullus M , Cherwin C , Wang K , Cho T , Kamholz J , Mangalam AK , Multiple sclerosis patients have an altered gut mycobiome and increased fungal to bacterial richness, PLOS ONE. 17 (2022) e0264556. 10.1371/journal.pone.0264556.35472144
[64] Levi I , Gurevich M , Perlman G , Magalashvili D , Menascu S , Bar N , Godneva A , Zahavi L , Chermon D , Kosower N , Wolf BC , Malka G , Lotan-Pompan M , Weinberger A , Yirmiya E , Rothschild D , Leviatan S , Tsur A , Didkin M , Dreyer S , Eizikovitz H , Titngi Y , Mayost S , Sonis P , Dolev M , Stern Y , Achiron A , Segal E , Potential role of indolelactate and butyrate in multiple sclerosis revealed by integrated microbiome-metabolome analysis, Cell Rep. Med 2 (2021) 100246. 10.1016/j.xcrm.2021.100246.33948576
[65] Rumah KR , Linden J , Fischetti VA , Vartanian T , Isolation of Clostridium perfringens type B in an individual at first clinical presentation of multiple sclerosis provides clues for environmental triggers of the disease., PLoS ONE. 8 (2013) e76359.24146858
[66] Tremlett H , Fadrosh DW , Faruqi AA , Zhu F , Hart J , Roalstad S , Graves J , Lynch S , Waubant E , the US Network of Pediatric MS Centers, Gut microbiota in early pediatric multiple sclerosis: a case–control study, Eur. J. Neurol 23 (2016) 1308–1321. 10.1111/ene.13026.27176462
[67] Ling Z , Cheng Y , Yan X , Shao L , Liu X , Zhou D , Zhang L , Yu K , Zhao L , Alterations of the Fecal Microbiota in Chinese Patients With Multiple Sclerosis, Front. Immunol 11 (2020) 590783. 10.3389/fimmu.2020.590783.33391265
[68] Tremlett H , Fadrosh DW , Faruqi AA , Hart J , Roalstad S , Graves J , Spencer CM , Lynch SV , Zamvil SS , Waubant E , Associations between the gut microbiota and host immune markers in pediatric multiple sclerosis and controls, BMC Neurol. 16 (2016) 1–9.26727957
[69] Miyake S , Kim S , Suda W , Oshima K , Nakamura M , Matsuoka T , Chihara N , Tomita A , Sato W , Kim S-W , Morita H , Hattori M , Yamamura T , Dysbiosis in the Gut Microbiota of Patients with Multiple Sclerosis, with a Striking Depletion of Species Belonging to Clostridia XIVa and IV Clusters, PLOS ONE. 10 (2015) e0137429. 10.1371/journal.pone.0137429.26367776
[70] Takewaki D , Suda W , Sato W , Takayasu L , Kumar N , Kimura K , Kaga N , Mizuno T , Miyake S , Hattori M , Yamamura T , Alterations of the gut ecological and functional microenvironment in different stages of multiple sclerosis, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci 117 (2020) 22402–22412. 10.1073/pnas.2011703117.32839304
[71] Vallino A , Dos Santos A , Mathé CV , Garcia A , Morille J , Dugast E , Shah SP , Héry-Arnaud G , Guilloux C-A , Gleeson PJ , Monteiro RC , Soulillou J-P , Harb J , Bigot-Corbel E , Michel L , Wiertlewski S , Nicot AB , Laplaud D-A , Berthelot L , Gut bacteria Akkermansia elicit a specific IgG response in CSF of patients with MS, Neurol. - Neuroimmunol. Neuroinflammation. 7 (2020) e688. 10.1212/NXI.0000000000000688.
[72] Cantarel BL , Waubant E , Chehoud C , Kuczynski J , DeSantis TZ , Warrington J , Venkatesan A , Fraser CM , Mowry EM , Gut microbiota in multiple sclerosis: possible influence of immunomodulators., J. Investig. Med. Off. Publ. Am. Fed. Clin. Res 63 (2015) 729–734.
[73] Jangi S , Gandhi R , Cox LM , Li N , von Glehn F , Yan R , Patel B , Mazzola MA , Liu S , Glanz BL , Cook S , Tankou S , Stuart F , Melo K , Nejad P , Smith K , Topçuolu BD . Holden J , Kivisäkk P , Chitnis T , De Jager PL , Quintana FJ , Gerber GK , Bry L , Weiner HL , Alterations of the human gut microbiome in multiple sclerosis., Nat. Commun 7 (2016) 12015.27352007
[74] Shahi SK , Ghimire S , Lehman P , Mangalam AK , Obesity induced gut dysbiosis contributes to disease severity in an animal model of multiple sclerosis, Front. Immunol 13 (2022) 966417. 10.3389/fimmu.2022.966417.36164343
[75] Ventura RE , Iizumi T , Battaglia T , Liu M , Perez-Perez GI , Herbert J , Blaser MJ , Gut microbiome of treatment-naïve MS patients of different ethnicities early in disease course, Sci. Rep 9 (2019) 16396. 10.1038/s41598-019-52894-z.31705027
[76] Reynders T , Devolder L , Valles-Colomer M , Van Remoortel A , Joossens M , De Keyser J , Nagels G , D’hooghe M , Raes J , Gut microbiome variation is associated to Multiple Sclerosis phenotypic subtypes, Ann. Clin. Transl. Neurol 7 (2020) 406–419. 10.1002/acn3.51004.32162850
[77] Chen J , Chia N , Kalari KR , Yao JZ , Novotna M , Soldan MMP , Luckey DH , Marietta EV , Jeraldo PR , Chen X , Weinshenker BG , Rodriguez M , Kantarci OH , Nelson H , Murray JA , Mangalam AK , Multiple sclerosis patients have a distinct gut microbiota compared to healthy controls., Sci. Rep 6 (2016) 28484.27346372
[78] Mangalam A , Shahi SK , Luckey D , Karau M , Marietta E , Luo N , Choung RS , Ju J , Sompallae R , Gibson-Corley K , Patel R , Rodriguez M , David C , Taneja V , Murray J , Human Gut-Derived Commensal Bacteria Suppress CNS Inflammatory and Demyelinating Disease., CellReports. 20 (2017) 1269–1277.
[79] Shahi SK , Freedman SN , Murra AC , Zarei K , Sompallae R , Gibson-Corley KN , Karandikar NJ , Murray JA , Mangalam AK , Prevotella histicola, A Human Gut Commensal, Is as Potent as COPAXONE® in an Animal Model of Multiple Sclerosis., Front. Immunol 10 (2019) 462.30984162
[80] Shahi SK , Jensen SN , Murra AC , Tang N , Guo H , Gibson-Corley KN , Zhang J , Karandikar NJ , Murray JA , Mangalam AK , Human Commensal Prevotella histicola Ameliorates Disease as Effectively as Interferon-Beta in the Experimental Autoimmune Encephalomyelitis, Front. Immunol 11 (2020) 578648. 10.3389/fimmu.2020.578648.33362764
[81] Nouri M , Bredberg A , Weström B , Lavasani S , Intestinal barrier dysfunction develops at the onset of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, and can be induced by adoptive transfer of autoreactive T cells., PLoS ONE. 9 (2014) e106335.25184418
[82] Shih VF-S , Cox J , Kljavin NM , Dengler HS , Reichelt M , Kumar P , Rangell L , Kolls JK , Diehl L , Ouyang W , Ghilardi N , Homeostatic IL-23 receptor signaling limits Th17 response through IL-22-mediated containment of commensal microbiota, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci 111 (2014) 13942–13947. 10.1073/pnas.1323852111.25201978
[83] Rothhammer V , Mascanfroni ID , Bunse L , Takenaka MC , Kenison JE , Mayo L , Chao C-C , Patel B , Yan R , Blain M , Alvarez JI , Kébir H , Anandasabapathy N , Izquierdo G , Jung S , Obholzer N , Pochet N , Clish CB , Prinz M , Prat A , Antel J , Quintana FJ , Type I interferons and microbial metabolites of tryptophan modulate astrocyte activity and central nervous system inflammation via the aryl hydrocarbon receptor, Nat. Med 22 (2016) 586–597. 10.1038/nm.4106.27158906
[84] Choi VM , Herrou J , Hecht AL , Teoh WP , Turner JR , Crosson S , Wardenburg JB , Activation of Bacteroides fragilis toxin by a novel bacterial protease contributes to anaerobic sepsis in mice, Nat. Med 22 (2016) 563–567. 10.1038/nm.4077.27089515
[85] Troll JV , Hamilton MK , Abel ML , Ganz J , Bates JM , Stephens WZ , Melancon E , van der Vaart M , Meijer AH , Distel M , Eisen JS , Guillemin K , Microbiota promote secretory cell determination in the intestinal epithelium by modulating host Notch signaling, Development. 145 (2018) dev155317. 10.1242/dev.155317.29475973
[86] Paone P , Cani PD , Mucus barrier, mucins and gut microbiota: the expected slimy partners?, Gut. 69 (2020) 2232–2243. 10.1136/gutjnl-2020-322260.32917747
[87] Lange LS , Shiner M , SMALL-BOWEL ABNORMALITIES IN MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS, The Lancet. 308 (1976) 1319–1322. 10.1016/S0140-6736(76)91972-3.
[88] Gupta JK , Ingegno AP , Cook AW , Pertschuk LP , Multiple Sclerosis and Malabsorption, Am. J. Gastroenterol 68 (1977) 560–565.612212
[89] Yacyshyn B , Meddings J , Sadowski D , Bowen-Yacyshyn MB , Multiple sclerosis patients have peripheral blood CD45RO+ B cells and increased intestinal permeability, Dig. Dis. Sci 41 (1996) 2493–2498. 10.1007/BF02100148.9011463
[90] Camara-Lemarroy CR , Metz L , Meddings JB , Sharkey KA , Wee Yong V , The intestinal barrier in multiple sclerosis: implications for pathophysiology and therapeutics, Brain. 141 (2018) 1900–1916. 10.1093/brain/awy131.29860380
[91] Kemanetzoglou E , Andreadou E , CNS Demyelination with TNF-α Blockers., Curr. Neurol. Neurosci. Rep 17 (2017) 36.28337644
[92] Watari A , Sakamoto Y , Hisaie K , Iwamoto K , Fueta M , Yagi K , Kondoh M , Rebeccamycin Attenuates TNF-α-Induced Intestinal Epithelial Barrier Dysfunction by Inhibiting Myosin Light Chain Kinase Production, Cell. Physiol. Biochem 41 (2017) 1924–1934. 10.1159/000472367.28391269
[93] Al-Sadi R , Guo S , Ye D , Ma TY , TNF-α Modulation of Intestinal Epithelial Tight Junction Barrier Is Regulated by ERK1/2 Activation of Elk-1, Am. J. Pathol 183 (2013) 1871–1884. 10.1016/j.ajpath.2013.09.001.24121020
[94] Emmanuel A , Neurogenic bowel dysfunction, F1000Research. 8 (2019) 1800. 10.12688/f1000research.20529.1.
[95] Lin X , Liu Y , Ma L , Ma X , Shen L , Ma X , Chen Z , Chen H , Li D , Su Z , Chen X , Constipation induced gut microbiota dysbiosis exacerbates experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis in C57BL/6 mice, J. Transl. Med 19 (2021) 317. 10.1186/s12967-021-02995-z.34301274
[96] Ochoa-Reparaz J , Magori K , Kasper LH , The chicken or the egg dilemma: intestinal dysbiosis in multiple sclerosis., Ann. Transl. Med 5 (2017) 145–145.28462225
[97] Daberkow DP , Hoffman K , Kohl HM , Long T , Kirby TO , Ochoa-Repáraz J , Microbiome Methods in Experimental Autoimmune Encephalomyelitis, Curr. Protoc 1 (2021). 10.1002/cpz1.314.
[98] Sell LB , Ramelow CC , Kohl HM , Hoffman K , Bains JK , Doyle WJ , Strawn KD , Hevrin T , Kirby TO , Gibson KM , Roullet J-B , Ochoa-Repáraz J , Farnesol induces protection against murine CNS inflammatory demyelination and modifies gut microbiome, Clin. Immunol (2021) 108766. 10.1016/j.clim.2021.108766.34091018
[99] Levy H , Assaf Y , Frenkel D , Characterization of brain lesions in a mouse model of progressive multiple sclerosis, Exp. Neurol 226 (2010) 148–158.20736006
[100] Liu S , da Cunha AP , Rezende RM , Cialic R , Wei Z , Bry L , Comstock LE , Gandhi R , Weiner HL , The Host Shapes the Gut Microbiota via Fecal MicroRNA, Cell Host Microbe. 19 (2016) 32–43. 10.1016/j.chom.2015.12.005.26764595
[101] Johanson DM , Goertz JE , Marin IA , Costello J , Overall CC , Gaultier A , Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis is associated with changes of the microbiota composition in the gastrointestinal tract, Sci. Rep 10 (2020) 15183. 10.1038/s41598-020-72197-y.32938979
[102] Moles L , Egimendia A , Osorio-Querejeta I , Iparraguirre L , Alberro A , Suárez J , Sepúlveda L . Castillo-Triviño T , Muñoz-Culla M , Ramos-Cabrer P , Otaegui D , Gut Microbiota Changes in Experimental Autoimmune Encephalomyelitis and Cuprizone Mice Models, ACS Chem. Neurosci 12 (2021) 893–905. 10.1021/acschemneuro.0c00695.33566588
[103] Keogh CE , Rude KM , Gareau MG , Role of pattern recognition receptors and the microbiota in neurological disorders, J. Physiol 599 (2021) 1379–1389. 10.1113/JP279771.33404072
[104] Vijay-Kumar M , Aitken JD , Carvalho FA , Cullender TC , Mwangi S , Srinivasan S , Sitaraman SV , Knight R , Ley RE , Gewirtz AT , Metabolic Syndrome and Altered Gut Microbiota in Mice Lacking Toll-Like Receptor 5, Science. 328 (2010) 228–231.20203013
[105] Pontillo A , Catamo E , Arosio B , Mari D , Crovella S , NALP1/NLRP1 Genetic Variants are Associated With Alzheimer Disease, Alzheimer Dis. Assoc. Disord 26 (2012) 277–281. 10.1097/WAD.0b013e318231a8ac.21946017
[106] Tan M-S , Tan L , Jiang T , Zhu X-C , Wang H-F , Jia C-D , Yu J-T , Amyloid-β induces NLRP1-dependent neuronal pyroptosis in models of Alzheimer’s disease, Cell Death Dis. 5 (2014) e1382–e1382. 10.1038/cddis.2014.348.25144717
[107] Zhou Y , Lu M , Du R-H , Qiao C , Jiang C-Y , Zhang K-Z , Ding J-H , Hu G , MicroRNA-7 targets Nod-like receptor protein 3 inflammasome to modulate neuroinflammation in the pathogenesis of Parkinson’s disease, Mol. Neurodegener 11 (2016) 28. 10.1186/s13024-016-0094-3.27084336
[108] Gordon R , Albornoz EA , Christie DC , Langley MR , Kumar V , Mantovani S , Robertson AAB , Butler MS , Rowe DB , O’Neill LA , Kanthasamy AG , Schroder K , Cooper MA , Woodruff TM , Inflammasome inhibition prevents α-synuclein pathology and dopaminergic neurodegeneration in mice, Sci. Transl. Med 10 (2018) eaah4066. 10.1126/scitranslmed.aah4066.30381407
[109] Li Q , Liu S , Zhu X , Mi W , Maoying Q , Wang J , Yu J , Wang Y , Hippocampal PKR/NLRP1 Inflammasome Pathway Is Required for the Depression-Like Behaviors in Rats with Neuropathic Pain, Neuroscience. 412 (2019) 16–28. 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2019.05.025.31125603
[110] Inserra A , Rogers GB , Licinio J , Wong M-L , The Microbiota-Inflammasome Hypothesis of Major Depression, BioEssays. 40 (2018) 1800027. 10.1002/bies.201800027.
[111] Clarke TB , Davis KM , Lysenko ES , Zhou AY , Yu Y , Weiser JN , Recognition of peptidoglycan from the microbiota by Nod1 enhances systemic innate immunity, Nat. Med 16 (2010) 228–231. 10.1038/nm.2087.20081863
[112] Arentsen T , Qian Y , Gkotzis S , Femenia T , Wang T , Udekwu K , Forssberg H , Diaz Heijtz R , The bacterial peptidoglycan-sensing molecule Pglyrp2 modulates brain development and behavior, Mol. Psychiatry 22 (2017) 257–266. 10.1038/mp.2016.182.27843150
[113] Schrijver IA , Bacterial peptidoglycan and immune reactivity in the central nervous system in multiple sclerosis, Brain. 124 (2001) 1544–1554. 10.1093/brain/124.8.1544.11459746
[114] Laman JD , ’t Hart BA , Power C , Dziarski R , Bacterial Peptidoglycan as a Driver of Chronic Brain Inflammation, Trends Mol. Med 26 (2020) 670–682. 10.1016/j.molmed.2019.11.006.32589935
[115] Pusceddu MM , Barboza M , Keogh CE , Schneider M , Stokes P , Sladek JA , Kim HJD , Torres-Fuentes C , Goldfild LR , Gillis SE , Brust-Mascher I , Rabasa G , Wong KA , Lebrilla C , Byndloss MX , Maisonneuve C , Bäumler AJ , Philpott DJ , Ferrero RL , Barrett KE , Reardon C , Gareau MG , Nod-like receptors are critical for gut–brain axis signalling in mice, J. Physiol 597 (2019) 5777–5797. 10.1113/JP278640.31652348
[116] Moreno B , Jukes J-P , Vergara-Irigaray N , Errea O , Villoslada P , Perry VH , Newman TA , Systemic inflammation induces axon injury during brain inflammation, Ann. Neurol 70 (2011) 932–942.22190366
[117] Zhan X , Stamova B , Jin L-W , DeCarli C , Phinney B , Sharp FR , Gram-negative bacterial molecules associate with Alzheimer disease pathology, Neurology. 87 (2016) 2324–2332. 10.1212/WNL.0000000000003391.27784770
[118] Nishimori JH , Newman TN , Oppong GO , Rapsinski GJ , Yen J-H , Biesecker SG , Wilson RP , Butler BP , Winter MG , Tsolis RM , Ganea D , Tükel Ç , Microbial Amyloids Induce Interleukin 17A (IL-17A) and IL-22 Responses via Toll-Like Receptor 2 Activation in the Intestinal Mucosa, Infect. Immun 80 (2012) 4398–4408. 10.1128/IAI.00911-12.23027540
[119] Stefanova N , Fellner L , Reindl M , Masliah E , Poewe W , Wenning GK , Toll-Like Receptor 4 Promotes α-Synuclein Clearance and Survival of Nigral Dopaminergic Neurons, Am. J. Pathol 179 (2011) 954–963. 10.1016/j.ajpath.2011.04.013.21801874
[120] Fujiwara M , Anstadt EJ , Flynn B , Morse K , Ng C , Paczkowski P , Zhou J , Mackay S , Wasko N , Nichols F , Clark RB , Enhanced TLR2 responses in multiple sclerosis, Clin. Exp. Immunol 193 (2018) 313–326. 10.1111/cei.13150.30043528
[121] Pascual DW , Trunkle T , Sura J , Fimbriated Salmonella enterica Serovar Typhimurium Abates Initial Inflammatory Responses by Macrophages, Infect. Immun 70 (2002) 4273–4281.12117936
[122] Jun S , Gilmore W , Callis G , Rynda A , Haddad A , Pascual DW , A live diarrheal vaccine imprints a Th2 cell bias and acts as an anti-inflammatory vaccine., J. Immunol 175 (2005) 6733–6740.16272329
[123] Ochoa-Reparaz J , Riccardi C , Rynda A , Jun S , Callis G , Pascual DW , Regulatory T cell vaccination without autoantigen protects against experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis., J. Immunol 178 (2007) 1791–1799.17237429
[124] Jun S , Ochoa-Reparaz J , Zlotkowska D , Hoyt T , Pascual DW , Bystander-mediated stimulation of proteolipid protein-specific regulatory T (Treg) cells confers protection against experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) via TGF-β, J. Neuroimmunol 245 (2012) 39–47.22418032
[125] Nelson AS , Akgul A , Maddaloni M , Bhagyaraj E , Hoffman C , Pascual DW , Oral probiotic promotes indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase- and TGF-β–Producing plasmacytoid dendritic cells to initiate protection against type 1 diabetes, Immunol. Lett 239 (2021) 12–19. 10.1016/j.imlet.2021.07.009.34333043
[126] Nelson AS , Maddaloni M , Abbott JR , Hoffman C , Akgul A , Ohland C , Gharaibeh RZ , Jobin C , Brusko TM , Pascual DW , Oral therapy with colonization factor antigen I prevents development of type 1 diabetes in Non-obese Diabetic mice, Sci. Rep 10 (2020) 6156. 10.1038/s41598-020-62881-4.32273533
[127] Maddaloni M , Kochetkova I , Jun S , Callis G , Thornburg T , Pascual DW , Milk-Based Nutraceutical for Treating Autoimmune Arthritis via the Stimulation of IL-10- and TGF-β-producing CD39 + Regulatory T Cells, PLoS ONE. 10 (2015) e0117825–6.25629976
[128] Kochetkova I , Trunkle T , Callis G , Pascual DW , Vaccination without autoantigen protects against collagen II-induced arthritis via immune deviation and regulatory T cells., J. Immunol. Baltim. Md 1950 181 (2008) 2741–2752.
[129] Ochoa-Reparaz J , Rynda A , Ascón MA , Yang X , Kochetkova I , Riccardi C , Callis G , Trunkle T , Pascual DW , IL-13 production by regulatory T cells protects against experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis independently of autoantigen., J. Immunol. Baltim. Md 1950. 181 (2008) 954–968.
[130] Maynard CL , Harrington LE , Janowski KM , Oliver JR , Zindl CL , Rudensky AY , Weaver CT , Regulatory T cells expressing interleukin 10 develop from Foxp3+ and Foxp3− precursor cells in the absence of interleukin 10, Nat. Immunol 8 (2007) 931–941. 10.1038/ni1504.17694059
[131] Sefik E , Geva-Zatorsky N , Oh S , Konnikova L , Zemmour D , McGuire AM , Burzyn D , Ortiz-Lopez A , Lobera M , Yang J , Ghosh S , Earl A , Snapper SB , Jupp R , Kasper D , Mathis D , Benoist C , Individual intestinal symbionts induce a distinct population of RORγ + regulatory T cells, Science. 349 (2015) 993–997. 10.1126/science.aaa9420.26272906
[132] Mizoguchi A , Mizoguchi E , Takedatsu H , Blumberg RS , Bhan AK , Chronic Intestinal Inflammatory Condition Generates IL-10-Producing Regulatory B Cell Subset Characterized by CD1d Upregulation, Immunity. 16 (2002) 219–230. 10.1016/S1074-7613(02)00274-1.11869683
[133] Kamada N , Núñez G . Role of the Gut Microbiota in the Development and Function of Lymphoid Cells, J. Immunol 190 (2013) 1389–1395. 10.4049/jimmunol.1203100.23378581
[134] Miljković Ð , Jevtić B , Stojanović I , Dimitrijević M , ILC3, a Central Innate Immune Component of the Gut-Brain Axis in Multiple Sclerosis, Front. Immunol 12 (2021) 657622. 10.3389/fimmu.2021.657622.33912185
[135] Erturk-Hasdemir D , Ochoa-Repáraz J , Kasper DL , Kasper LH , Exploring the Gut-Brain Axis for the Control of CNS Inflammatory Demyelination: Immunomodulation by Bacteroides fragilis’ Polysaccharide A, Front. Immunol 12 (2021) 662807. 10.3389/fimmu.2021.662807.34025663
[136] Erturk-Hasdemir D , Kasper DL , Finding a needle in a haystack: Bacteroides fragilis polysaccharide A as the archetypical symbiosis factor: PSA as the archetypical microbial symbiosis factor, Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci 1417 (2018) 116–129. 10.1111/nyas.13660.29528123
[137] Polk BF , Bacteroides fragilis Subspecies in Clinical Isolates, Ann. Intern. Med 86 (1977) 569. 10.7326/0003-4819-86-5-569.322563
[138] Tzianabos AO , Pantosti A , Baumann H , Brisson JR , Jennings HJ , Kasper DL , The capsular polysaccharide of Bacteroides fragilis comprises two ionically linked polysaccharides, J. Biol. Chem 267 (1992) 18230–18235.1517250
[139] Cobb BA , Wang Q , Tzianabos AO , Kasper DL , Polysaccharide Processing and Presentation by the MHCII Pathway, Cell. 117 (2004) 677–687. 10.1016/j.cell.2004.05.001.15163414
[140] Dasgupta S , Erturk-Hasdemir D , Ochoa-Reparaz J , Reinecker H-C , Kasper DL , Plasmacytoid dendritic cells mediate anti-inflammatory responses to a gut commensal molecule via both innate and adaptive mechanisms., Cell Host Microbe. 15 (2014) 413–423.24721570
[141] Round JL , Mazmanian SK , Inducible Foxp3+ regulatory T-cell development by a commensal bacterium of the intestinal microbiota., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 107 (2009) 12204–12209.
[142] Telesford KM , Yan W , Ochoa-Reparaz J , Pant A , Kircher C , Christy MA , Begum-Haque S , Kasper DL , Kasper LH , A commensal symbiotic factor derived from Bacteroides fragilis promotes human CD39(+)Foxp3(+) T cells and Treg function., Gut Microbes. 6 (2015) 234–242.26230152
[143] Burgess JN , Pant AB , Kasper LH , Colpitts Brass S , CD4+ T cells from multiple sclerosis patients respond to a commensal-derived antigen., Ann. Clin. Transl. Neurol 4 (2017) 825–829.29159195
[144] Wang Q , McLoughlin RM , Cobb BA , Charrel-Dennis M , Zaleski KJ , Golenbock D , Tzianabos AO , Kasper DL , A bacterial carbohydrate links innate and adaptive responses through Toll-like receptor 2, J. Exp. Med 203 (2006) 2853–2863. 10.1084/jem.20062008.17178920
[145] Round JL , Lee SM , Li J , Tran G , Jabri B , Chatila TA , Mazmanian SK , The Toll-Like Receptor 2 Pathway Establishes Colonization by a Commensal of the Human Microbiota, Science. 332 (2011) 974–977. 10.1126/science.1206095.21512004
[146] Wang Y , Begum-Haque S , Telesford KM , Ochoa-Reparaz J , Christy M , Kasper EJ , Kasper DL , Robson SC , Kasper LH , A commensal bacterial product elicits and modulates migratory capacity of CD39(+) CD4 T regulatory subsets in the suppression of neuroinflammation., Gut Microbes. 5 (2014) 552–561.25006655
[147] Wang Y , Telesford KM , Ochoa-Reparaz J , Haque-Begum S , Christy M , Kasper EJ , Wang L , Wu Y , Robson SC , Kasper DL , Kasper LH , An intestinal commensal symbiosis factor controls neuroinflammation via TLR2-mediated CD39 signalling., Nat. Commun 5 (2014) 4432.25043484
[148] Shen Y , Torchia MLG , Lawson GW , Karp CL , Ashwell JD , Mazmanian SK , Outer Membrane Vesicles of a Human Commensal Mediate Immune Regulation and Disease Protection, Cell Host Microbe. 12 (2012) 509–520. 10.1016/j.chom.2012.08.004.22999859
[149] Lee YK , Mehrabian P , Boyajian S , Wu W-L , Selicha J , Vonderfecht S , Mazmanian SK , The Protective Role of Bacteroides fragilis in a Murine Model of Colitis-Associated Colorectal Cancer, MSphere. 3 (2018) e00587–18. 10.1128/mSphere.00587-18.30429227
[150] Erturk-Hasdemir D , Oh SF , Okan NA , Stefanetti G , Gazzaniga FS , Seeberger PH , Plevy SE , Kasper DL , Symbionts exploit complex signaling to educate the immune system, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A (2019) 201915978. 10.1073/pnas.1915978116.
[151] Stefan KL , Kim MV , Iwasaki A , Kasper DL , Commensal Microbiota Modulation of Natural Resistance to Virus Infection, Cell. 183 (2020) 1312–1324.e10. 10.1016/j.cell.2020.10.047.33212011
[152] Ochoa-Repáraz J , Mielcarz DW , Wang Y , Begum-Haque S , Dasgupta S , Kasper DL , Kasper LH , A polysaccharide from the human commensal Bacteroides fragilis protects against CNS demyelinating disease, Mucosal Immunol. 3 (2010) 487–495. 10.1038/mi.2010.29.20531465
[153] Ochoa-Reparaz J , Mielcarz DW , Ditrio LE , Burroughs AR , Begum-Haque S , Dasgupta S , Kasper DL , Kasper LH , Central nervous system demyelinating disease protection by the human commensal Bacteroides fragilis depends on polysaccharide A expression., J. Immunol. Baltim. Md 1950. 185 (2010) 4101–4108.
[154] Ramakrishna C , Kujawski M , Chu H , Li L , Mazmanian SK , Cantin EM , Bacteroides fragilis polysaccharide A induces IL-10 secreting B and T cells that prevent viral encephalitis, Nat. Commun 10 (2019) 2153. 10.1038/s41467-019-09884-6.31089128
[155] Fletcher JM , Lonergan R , Costelloe L , Kinsella K , Moran B , O’Farrelly C , Tubridy N , Mills KHG , CD39+Foxp3+ Regulatory T Cells Suppress Pathogenic Th17 Cells and Are Impaired in Multiple Sclerosis, J. Immunol 183 (2009) 7602–7610.19917691
[156] Wang J , Xu W , Wang R , Cheng R , Tang Z , Zhang M , The outer membrane protein Amuc_1100 of Akkermansia muciniphila promotes intestinal 5-HT biosynthesis and extracellular availability through TLR2 signalling, Food Funct. 12 (2021) 3597–3610. 10.1039/D1FO00115A.33900345
[157] Atarashi K , Tanoue T , Shima T , Imaoka A , Kuwahara T , Momose Y , Cheng G , Yamasaki S , Saito T , Ohba Y , Taniguchi T , Takeda K , Hori S , Ivanov II , Umesaki Y , Itoh K , Honda K , Induction of Colonic Regulatory T Cells by Indigenous Clostridium Species, Science. 331 (2011) 337–341.21205640
[158] Furusawa Y , Obata Y , Fukuda S , Endo TA , Nakato G , Takahashi D , Nakanishi Y , Uetake C , Kato K , Kato T , Takahashi M , Fukuda NN , Murakami S , Miyauchi E , Hino S , Atarashi K , Onawa S , Fujimura Y , Lockett T , Clarke JM , Topping DL , Tomita M , Hori S , Ohara O , Morita T , Koseki H , Kikuchi J , Honda K , Hase K , Ohno H , Commensal microbe-derived butyrate induces the differentiation of colonic regulatory T cells, Nature. 504 (2013) 1–8.
[159] Hayashi A , Sato T , Kamada N , Mikami Y , Matsuoka K , Hisamatsu T , Hibi T , Roers A , Yagita H , Ohteki T , Yoshimura A , Kanai T , A Single Strain of Clostridium butyricum Induces Intestinal IL-10-Producing Macrophages to Suppress Acute Experimental Colitis in Mice, Cell Host Microbe. 13 (2013) 711–722. 10.1016/j.chom.2013.05.013.23768495
[160] Perl A , Nagy G , Koncz A , Gergely P , Fernandez D , Doherty E , Telarico T , Bonilla E , Phillips PE , Molecular mimicry and immunomodulation by the HRES-1 endogenous retrovirus in SLE, Autoimmunity. 41 (2008) 287–297. 10.1080/08916930802024764.18432409
[161] Sterlin D , Larsen M , Fadlallah J , Parizot C , Vignes M , Autaa G , Dorgham K , Juste C , Lepage P , Aboab J , Vicart S , Maillart E , Gout O , Lubetzki C , Deschamps R , Papeix C , Gorochov G , Perturbed Microbiota/Immune Homeostasis in Multiple Sclerosis, Neurol. - Neuroimmunol. Neuroinflammation. 8 (2021) e997. 10.1212/NXI.0000000000000997.
[162] Pascual DW , Yang X , Holderness K , Jun S , Maddaloni M , Kochetkova I , Regulatory T-cell vaccination independent of auto-antigen, Exp. Mol. Med 46 (2014) e82–10.24626168
[163] Pascual DW , Ochoa-Repáraz J , Rynda A , Yang X , Tolerance in the absence of autoantigen., Endocr. Metab. Immune Disord. Drug Targets 7 (2007) 203–210.17897047
[164] Vanderlugt CL , Miller SD , Epitope spreading in immune-mediated diseases: implications for immunotherapy, Nat. Rev. Immunol 2 (2002) 85–95. 10.1038/nri724.11910899
[165] Brossart P , The Role of Antigen Spreading in the Efficacy of Immunotherapies, Clin. Cancer Res 26 (2020) 4442–4447. 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-20-0305.32357962
[166] Lu Y , Zhang Y , Zhao X , Shang C , Xiang M , Li L , Cui X , Microbiota-derived short-chain fatty acids: Implications for cardiovascular and metabolic disease, Front. Cardiovasc. Med 9 (2022) 900381. 10.3389/fcvm.2022.900381.36035928
[167] Vinolo MAR , Rodrigues HG , Nachbar RT , Curi R , Regulation of Inflammation by Short Chain Fatty Acids, Nutrients. 3 (2011) 858–876. 10.3390/nu3100858.22254083
[168] Liu J , Li H , Gong T , Chen W , Mao S , Kong Y , Yu J , Sun J , Anti-neuroinflammatory Effect of Short-Chain Fatty Acid Acetate against Alzheimer’s Disease via Upregulating GPR41 and Inhibiting ERK/JNK/NF-κB, J. Agric. Food Chem 68 (2020) 7152–7161. 10.1021/acs.jafc.0c02807.32583667
[169] Arpaia N , Campbell C , Fan X , Dikiy S , van der Veeken J , deRoos P , Liu H , Cross JR , Pfeffer K , Coffer PJ , Rudensky AY , Metabolites produced by commensal bacteria promote peripheral regulatory T-cell generation, Nature. 504 (2013) 451–455. 10.1038/nature12726.24226773
[170] Smith PM , Howitt MR , Panikov N , Michaud M , Gallini CA , Bohlooly-Y M , Glickman JN , Garrett WS , The Microbial Metabolites, Short-Chain Fatty Acids, Regulate Colonic T reg Cell Homeostasis, Science. 341 (2013) 569–573. 10.1126/science.1241165.23828891
[171] Bhaskaran N , Quigley C , Paw C , Butala S , Schneider E , Pandiyan P , Role of Short Chain Fatty Acids in Controlling Tregs and Immunopathology During Mucosal Infection, Front. Microbiol 9 (2018) 1995. 10.3389/fmicb.2018.01995.30197637
[172] Chevalier AC , Rosenberger TA , Increasing acetyl-CoA metabolism attenuates injury and alters spinal cord lipid content in mice subjected to experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, J. Neurochem 141 (2017) 721–737. 10.1111/jnc.14032.28369944
[173] Fettig NM , Osborne LC , Direct and indirect effects of microbiota-derived metabolites on neuroinflammation in multiple sclerosis, Microbes Infect. 23 (2021) 104814. 10.1016/j.micinf.2021.104814.33775860
[174] Park J , Wang Q , Wu Q , Mao-Draayer Y , Kim CH , Bidirectional regulatory potentials of short-chain fatty acids and their G-protein-coupled receptors in autoimmune neuroinflammation, Sci. Rep 9 (2019) 8837. 10.1038/s41598-019-45311-y.31222050
[175] Duscha A , Gisevius B , Hirschberg S , Yissachar N , Stangl GI , Eilers E , Bader V , Haase S , Kaisler J , David C , Schneider R , Troisi R , Zent D , Hegelmaier T , Dokalis N , Gerstein S , Del Mare-Roumani S , Amidror S , Staszewski O , Poschmann G , Stühler K , Hirche F , Balogh A , Kempa S , Träger P , Zaiss MM , Holm JB , Massa MG , Nielsen HB , Faissner A , Lukas C , Gatermann SG , Scholz M , Przuntek H , Prinz M , Forslund SK , Winklhofer KF , Müller DN , Linker RA , Gold R , Haghikia A , Propionic Acid Shapes the Multiple Sclerosis Disease Course by an Immunomodulatory Mechanism, Cell. 180 (2020) 1067–1080.e16. 10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.035.32160527
[176] Saresella M , Marventano I , Barone M , La Rosa F , Piancone F , Mendozzi L , d’Arma A , Rossi V , Pugnetti L , Roda G , Casagni E , Cas MD , Paroni R , Brigidi P , Turroni S , Clerici M , Alterations in Circulating Fatty Acid Are Associated With Gut Microbiota Dysbiosis and Inflammation in Multiple Sclerosis, Front. Immunol 11 (2020) 1390. 10.3389/fimmu.2020.01390.32733460
[177] Luu M , Pautz S , Kohl V , Singh R , Romero R , Lucas S , Hofmann J , Raifer H , Vachharajani N , Carrascosa LC , Lamp B , Nist A , Stiewe T , Shaul Y , Adhikary T , Zaiss MM , Lauth M , Steinhoff U , Visekruna A , The short-chain fatty acid pentanoate suppresses autoimmunity by modulating the metabolic-epigenetic crosstalk in lymphocytes, Nat. Commun 10 (2019) 760. 10.1038/s41467-019-08711-2.30770822
[178] Mizuno M , Noto D , Kaga N , Chiba A , Miyake S , The dual role of short fatty acid chains in the pathogenesis of autoimmune disease models, PLOS ONE. 12 (2017) e0173032. 10.1371/journal.pone.0173032.28235016
[179] Rothhammer V , Quintana FJ , The aryl hydrocarbon receptor: an environmental sensor integrating immune responses in health and disease, Nat. Rev. Immunol 19 (2019) 184–197. 10.1038/s41577-019-0125-8.30718831
[180] Barroso A , Mahler JV , Fonseca-Castro PH , Quintana FJ , The aryl hydrocarbon receptor and the gut–brain axis, Cell. Mol. Immunol 18 (2021) 259–268. 10.1038/s41423-020-00585-5.33408340
[181] Quintana FJ , Murugaiyan G , Farez MF , Mitsdoerffer M , Tukpah A-M , Burns EJ , Weiner HL , An endogenous aryl hydrocarbon receptor ligand acts on dendritic cells and T cells to suppress experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci 107 (2010) 20768–20773. 10.1073/pnas.1009201107.21068375
[182] Kohl HM , Castillo AR , Ochoa-Repáraz J , The Microbiome as a Therapeutic Target for Multiple Sclerosis: Can Genetically Engineered Probiotics Treat the Disease?, Diseases. 8 (2020) 33. 10.3390/diseases8030033.32872621
[183] Mendu SK , Bhandage A , Jin Z , Birnir B , Different subtypes of GABA-A receptors are expressed in human, mouse and rat T lymphocytes., PLoS ONE. 7 (2012) e42959.22927941
[184] Dionisio L , De Rosa MJ , Bouzat C , Esandi M. del C. , An intrinsic GABAergic system in human lymphocytes, Neuropharmacology. 60 (2011) 513–519. 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2010.11.007.21093461
[185] Alam S , Laughton DL , Walding A , Wolstenholme AJ , Human peripheral blood mononuclear cells express GABAA receptor subunits., Mol. Immunol 43 (2006) 1432–1442.16213022
[186] Tian J , Chau C , Hales TG , Kaufman DL , GABA(A) receptors mediate inhibition of T cell responses., J. Neuroimmunol 96 (1999) 21–28.10227421
[187] Bhat R , Axtell R , Mitra A , Miranda M , Lock C , Tsien RW , Steinman L , Inhibitory role for GABA in autoimmune inflammation., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 107 (2010) 2580–2585.20133656
[188] Tian J , Song M , Kaufman DL , Homotaurine limits the spreading of T cell autoreactivity within the CNS and ameliorates disease in a model of multiple sclerosis, Sci. Rep 11 (2021) 5402. 10.1038/s41598-021-84751-3.33686135
[189] Soltani N , Qiu H , Aleksic M , Glinka Y , Zhao F , Liu R , Li Y , Zhang N , Chakrabarti R , Ng T , Jin T , Zhang H , Lu W-Y , Feng Z-P , Prud’homme GJ , Wang Q , GABA exerts protective and regenerative effects on islet beta cells and reverses diabetes, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci 108 (2011) 11692–11697. 10.1073/pnas.1102715108.21709230
[190] Tian J , Dang H , Nguyen AV , Chen Z , Kaufman DL , Combined Therapy With GABA and Proinsulin/Alum Acts Synergistically to Restore Long-term Normoglycemia by Modulating T-Cell Autoimmunity and Promoting β-Cell Replication in Newly Diabetic NOD Mice, Diabetes. 63 (2014) 3128–3134. 10.2337/db13-1385.25146474
[191] Tian J , Dang HN , Yong J , Chui W-S , Dizon MPG , Yaw CKY , Kaufman DL , Oral Treatment with γ-Aminobutyric Acid Improves Glucose Tolerance and Insulin Sensitivity by Inhibiting Inflammation in High Fat Diet-Fed Mice, PLoS ONE. 6 (2011) e25338. 10.1371/journal.pone.0025338.21966503
[192] Cao G , Edden RAE , Gao F , Li H , Gong T , Chen W , Liu X , Wang G , Zhao B , Reduced GABA levels correlate with cognitive impairment in patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis., Eur. Radiol 28 (2018) 1140–1148.28986640
[193] Cawley N , Solanky BS , Muhlert N , Tur C , Edden RAE , Wheeler-Kingshott CAM , Miller DH , Thompson AJ , Ciccarelli O , Reduced gamma-aminobutyric acid concentration is associated with physical disability in progressive multiple sclerosis., Brain. 138 (2015) 2584–2595.26304151
[194] Arm J , Oeltzschner G , Al-iedani O , Lea R , Lechner-Scott J , Ramadan S , Altered in vivo brain GABA and glutamate levels are associated with multiple sclerosis central fatigue, Eur. J. Radiol 137 (2021) 109610. 10.1016/j.ejrad.2021.109610.33657474
[195] Yang Y , Rui Q , Han S , Wu X , Wang X , Wu P , Shen Y , Dai H , Xue Q , Li Y , Reduced GABA levels in the medial prefrontal cortex are associated with cognitive impairment in patients with NMOSD, Mult. Scler. Relat. Disord 58 (2022) 103496. 10.1016/j.msard.2022.103496.35032882
[196] Yang G , Wu G , Yao W , Guan L , Geng X , Liu J , Liu Z , Yang L , Huang Q , Zeng X , Yang P , 5-HT is associated with the dysfunction of regulating T cells in patients with allergic rhinitis, Clin. Immunol (2022) 109101. 10.1016/j.clim.2022.109101.36029976
[197] Wan M , Ding L , Wang D , Han J , Gao P , Serotonin: A Potent Immune Cell Modulator in Autoimmune Diseases, Front. Immunol 11 (2020) 186. 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00186.32117308
[198] Benson CA , Wong G , Tenorio G , Baker GB , Kerr BJ , The MAO inhibitor phenelzine can improve functional outcomes in mice with established clinical signs in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), Behav. Brain Res 252 (2013) 302–311. 10.1016/j.bbr.2013.06.019.23777648
[199] Yano JM , Yu K , Donaldson GP , Shastri GG , Ann P , Ma L , Nagler CR , Ismagilov RL , Mazmanian SK , Hsiao EY , Indigenous Bacteria from the Gut Microbiota Regulate Host Serotonin Biosynthesis, Cell. 161 (2015) 264–276. 10.1016/j.cell.2015.02.047.25860609
[200] Needham BD , Funabashi M , Adame MD , Wang Z , Boktor JC , Haney J , Wu W-L , Rabut C , Ladinsky MS , Hwang S-J , Guo Y , Zhu Q , Griffiths JA , Knight R , Bjorkman PJ , Shapiro MG , Geschwind DH , Holschneider DP , Lischbach MA , Mazmanian SK , A gut-derived metabolite alters brain activity and anxiety behaviour in mice, Nature. 602 (2022) 647–653. 10.1038/s41586-022-04396-8.35165440
[201] Hertli S , Zimmermann P , Molecular interactions between the intestinal microbiota and the host, Mol. Microbiol 117 (2022) 1297–1307. 10.1111/mmi.14905.35403275
[202] Lucchinetti CF , A role for humoral mechanisms in the pathogenesis of Devic’s neuromyelitis optica, Brain. 125 (2002) 1450–1461. 10.1093/brain/awf151.12076996
[203] Zamvil SS , Spencer CM , Baranzini SE , Cree BAC , The Gut Microbiome in Neuromyelitis Optica., Neurother. J. Am. Soc. Exp. Neurother 15 (2018) 92–101.
[204] Varrin-Doyer M , Spencer CM , Schulze-Topphoff U , Nelson PA , Stroud RM , Cree BAC , Zamvil SS , Aquaporin 4-specific T cells in neuromyelitis optica exhibit a Th17 bias and recognize Clostridium ABC transporter, Ann. Neurol 72 (2012) 53–64. 10.1002/ana.23651.22807325
[205] Lopez JA , Denkova M , Ramanathan S , Dale RC , Brilot F , Pathogenesis of autoimmune demyelination: from multiple sclerosis to neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders and myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibody-associated disease, Clin. Transl. Immunol 10 (2021). 10.1002/cti2.1316.
[206] Ambrosius W , Michalak S , Kozubski W , Kalinowska A , Myelin Oligodendrocyte Glycoprotein Antibody-Associated Disease: Current Insights into the Disease Pathophysiology, Diagnosis and Management, Int. J. Mol. Sci 22 (2020) 100. 10.3390/ijms22010100.33374173
[207] Wang CX , Assessment and Management of Acute Disseminated Encephalomyelitis (ADEM) in the Pediatric Patient, Pediatr. Drugs 23 (2021) 213–221. 10.1007/s40272-021-00441-7.
[208] Kap YS , Bus-Spoor C , van Driel N , Dubbelaar ML , Grit C , Kooistra SM , Fagrouch ZC , Verschoor EJ , Bauer J , Eggen BJL , Harmsen HJM , Laman JD , ’t Hart BA , Targeted Diet Modification Reduces Multiple Sclerosis-like Disease in Adult Marmoset Monkeys from an Outbred Colony., J. Immunol. Baltim. Md 1950 (2018) ji1800822.
[209] Lu X-Y , Han B , Deng X , Deng S-Y , Zhang Y-Y , Shen P-X , Hui T , Chen R-H , Li X , Zhang Y , Pomegranate peel extract ameliorates the severity of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis via modulation of gut microbiota, Gut Microbes. 12 (2020) 1857515. 10.1080/19490976.2020.1857515.33382357
[210] van den Hoogen WJ , Laman JD , ’t Hart BA , Modulation of Multiple Sclerosis and Its Animal Model Experimental Autoimmune Encephalomyelitis by Food and Gut Microbiota, Front. Immunol 8 (2017) 1081. 10.3389/fimmu.2017.01081.28928747
[211] Lavasani S , Dzhambazov B , Nouri M , F\aak F , Buske S , Molin G , Thorlacius H , Alenfall J , Jeppsson B , Weström B , A novel probiotic mixture exerts a therapeutic effect on experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis mediated by IL-10 producing regulatory T cells., PLoS ONE. 5 (2010) e9009–11.20126401
[212] Takata K , Kinoshita M , Okuno T , Moriya M , Kohda T , Honorat JA , Sugimoto T , Kumanogoh A , Kayama H , Takeda K , Sakoda S , Nakatsuji Y , The lactic acid bacterium Pediococcus acidilactici suppresses autoimmune encephalomyelitis by inducing IL-10-producing regulatory T cells., PLoS ONE. 6 (2011) e27644.22110705
[213] Kwon H-K , Kim G-C , Kim Y , Hwang W , Jash A , Sahoo A , Kim J-E , Nam JH , Im S-H , Amelioration of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis by probiotic mixture is mediated by a shift in T helper cell immune response, Clin. Immunol 146 (2013) 217–227. 10.1016/j.clim.2013.01.001.23416238
[214] Salehipour Z , Haghmorad D , Sankian M , Rastin M , Nosratabadi R , Soltan Dallal MM , Tabasi N , Khazaee M , Nasiraii LR , Mahmoudi M , Bifidobacterium animalis in combination with human origin of Lactobacillus plantarum ameliorate neuroinflammation in experimental model of multiple sclerosis by altering CD4+ T cell subset balance, Biomed. Pharmacother 95 (2017) 1535–1548. 10.1016/j.biopha.2017.08.117.28946394
[215] Chen H , Ma X , Liu Y , Ma L , Chen Z , Lin X , Si L , Ma X , Chen X , Gut Microbiota Interventions With Clostridium butyricum and Norfloxacin Modulate Immune Response in Experimental Autoimmune Encephalomyelitis Mice, Front. Immunol 10 (2019) 1662. 10.3389/fimmu.2019.01662.31428083
[216] Rezende RM , Oliveira RP , Medeiros SR , Gomes-Santos AC , Alves AC , Loli FG , Guimarães MAF , Amaral SS , da Cunha AP , Weiner HF , Azevedo V , Miyoshi A , Faria AMC , Hsp65-producing Lactococcus lactis prevents experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis in mice by inducing CD4+LAP+ regulatory T cells., J. Autoimmun 40 (2013) 45–57.22939403
[217] Ezendam J , de Klerk A , Gremmer ER , van Loveren H , Effects of Bifidobacterium animalis administered during lactation on allergic and autoimmune responses in rodents., Clin. Exp. Immunol 154 (2008) 424–431.19037925
[218] Maassen CBM , Claassen E , Strain-dependent effects of probiotic lactobacilli on EAE autoimmunity, Vaccine. 26 (2008) 2056–2057. 10.1016/j.vaccine.2008.02.035.18378048
[219] Calvo-Barreiro L , Eixarch H , Ponce-Alonso M , Castillo M , Lebrón-Galán R , Mestre L , Guaza C , Clemente D , del Campo R , Montalban X , Espejo C , A Commercial Probiotic Induces Tolerogenic and Reduces Pathogenic Responses in Experimental Autoimmune Encephalomyelitis, Cells. 9 (2020) 906. 10.3390/cells9040906.32272791
[220] Kouchaki E , Tamtaji OR , Salami M , Bahmani F , Daneshvar Kakhaki R , Akbari E , Tajabadi-Ebrahimi M , Jafari P , Asemi Z , Clinical and metabolic response to probiotic supplementation in patients with multiple sclerosis: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, Clin. Nutr 36 (2017) 1245–1249. 10.1016/j.clnu.2016.08.015.27669638
[221] Tankou SK , Regev K , Healy BC , Tjon E , Laghi L , Cox LM , Kivisäkk P , Pierre IV , Hrishikesh L , Gandhi R , Cook S , Glanz B , Stankiewicz J , Weiner HL , A probiotic modulates the microbiome and immunity in multiple sclerosis, Ann. Neurol 83 (2018) 1147–1161. 10.1002/ana.25244.29679417
