LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9814863
21942
J Alzheimers Dis
J Alzheimers Dis
Journal of Alzheimer's disease : JAD
1387-2877
1875-8908

37980674
10739926
10.3233/JAD-230906
NIHMS1952264
Article
Neuropsychological assessment of older adults in Nepal for population-based dementia ascertainment: Needs, challenges, and opportunities
Briceño Emily M. PhD a
Dhakal Usha PhD b
Sharma Uttam PhD c
Adhikari Nabin MPH c
Pradhan Meeta S. PhD c
Shrestha Lochana MD d
Jalan Pankaj MD e
Rai Janak PhD f
Langa Kenneth M. MD, PhD ghi
Lee Jinkook PhD j
Ghimire Dirgha PhD ck
Mendes de Leon Carlos F. PhD l
a Departments of Physical Medicine &amp; Rehabilitation and Neurology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
b Department of Sociology &amp; Gerontology, Miami University, Oxford, Ohio, USA
c Institute for Social and Environmental Research-Nepal (ISER-N), Bharatpur-15, Chitwan, Nepal
d Nepalese Army Institute of Health Sciences, Kathmandu, Nepal
e Norvic International Hospital, Kathmandu, Nepal
f Central Department of Anthropology, Tribhuvan University, Nepal
g Survey Research Center, University of Michigan Institute for Social Research, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
h Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
i Veterans Affairs Center for Clinical Management Research, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
j Department of Economics, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA
k Institute for Social Research, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
l Department of Oncology, Georgetown University, Washington DC, USA
Corresponding author: Emily M. Briceño, PhD, University of Michigan Medical School, Department of Physical Medicine &amp; Rehabilitation, 325 E. Eisenhower Blvd, 3rd Floor, Ann Arbor, MI 48108, 734-763-6496 (telephone), 734-936-7048 (fax), emily.briceno@umich.edu
17 12 2023
2023
22 12 2023
96 4 13391352
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
The population of Nepal is rapidly aging, as in other low and middle-income countries, and the number of individuals living with Alzheimer’s Disease and related dementias (ADRD) is expected to increase. However, information about the neuropsychological assessment of ADRD in Nepal is lacking. We first aimed to examine the needs, challenges, and opportunities associated with the neuropsychological assessment of older adults in Nepal for population-based ADRD ascertainment. Second, we introduce the Chitwan Valley Family Study- Study of Cognition and Aging in Nepal (CVFS-SCAN), which is poised to address these needs, and its collaboration with the Harmonized Cognitive Assessment Protocol (HCAP) international network. We reviewed the existing literature on the prevalence, risk factors, available neuropsychological assessment instruments, and sociocultural factors that may influence the neuropsychological assessment of older adults for ADRD ascertainment in Nepal. Our review revealed no existing population-based data on the prevalence of ADRD in Nepal. Very few studies have utilized formal cognitive assessment instruments for ADRD assessment, and there have been no comprehensive neuropsychological assessment instruments that have been validated for the assessment of ADRD in Nepal. We describe how the CVFS-SCAN study will address this need through careful adaptation of the HCAP instrument. We conclude that the development of culturally appropriate neuropsychological assessment instruments is urgently needed for the population-based assessment of ADRD in Nepal. The CVFS-SCAN is designed to address this need and will contribute to the growth of global and equitable neuropsychology and to the science of ADRD in low- and middle-income countries.

Alzheimer’s Disease and related dementias
mild cognitive impairment
global health
cognitive aging
cultural neuropsychology

pmcIntroduction

The global impact of dementia is tremendous and is rapidly growing, projected to increase from approximately 57 million cases in 2019 to approximately 153 million cases in 2050 [1]. This is due in part to the growth and aging of the population, the fastest of which is occurring in low and middle-income countries (LMIC). Expected percentage change in dementia cases from 2019– 2050 is more than double for the lowest-income countries (330%) compared to the highest-income countries (140%; [1]. Despite this tremendous expected growth of dementia burden in LMIC, there is relatively little knowledge regarding dementia determinants, diagnosis, treatment, and impact in these countries.

Nepal is a mountainous, landlocked South Asian country located between India and China. Nepal ranks among the poorest countries in the world. Its per capita gross national income (GNI) is $1,220 [2], which moved it from low-income to low middle-income country in 2020, barely above the lower threshold of this category ($1,036). Similar to many low and middle-income countries, Nepal is undergoing a demographic transition, with the number of older adults rapidly increasing compared to the total population growth rate. Based on 2021 census data, the total population in Nepal is 29,192,480, with women comprising approximately 51% [3]. Life expectancy at birth has increased from 54 years in 1991 to 71 years in 2021 [4]. Adult emigration has become more common, rising from 2.6% in 1981 to 7.4% in 2021 [3]. Together, these changes have resulted in slowed population growth (from 2.2% in 2001 to 0.93% in 2021) and an aging population. The percentage of the population aged 60 years and above has increased steadily, from 6.5% in 2001 to 10.2% in 2021 [3] and is projected to increase to 17.9% in 2050 [5].

Despite the aging of the population in Nepal, there is currently no research capacity to investigate the prevalence and primary determinants of ADRD in the Nepali older adult population. There is also little to no infrastructure or evidence base for clinical neuropsychological assessment in Nepal. These capacities are urgently needed to guide the development of ADRD diagnosis and prevention strategies, assess resource and intervention needs, and to reduce the burden of ADRD in Nepal. The goals of the present paper are to 1) describe the current needs, considerations, and challenges in the neuropsychological assessment of ADRD in the older adult population in Nepal; 2) introduce the Chitwan Valley Family Study-Study of Aging and Cognition in Nepal (CVFS-SCAN), which aims to address these needs; and 3) discuss the potential for the CVFS-SCAN study to contribute to cross-national harmonization of cognitive aging data within an international cognitive aging network.

Prevalence of dementia and its risk factors in Nepal

There are no existing population-based data on the cognitive health of older adults, the prevalence and determinants of dementia, or the needs of individuals with dementia and their support system in Nepal [6]. Existing, limited data suggest dramatically different prevalence rates of cognitive impairment in older adults, likely driven by differences in sampling and assessment methods. For example, one study of 260 Nepali adults aged 60 and older who sought care in a psychiatry outpatient department in a tertiary-level hospital reported a dementia diagnosis among 11.4% of the sample over a 1-year period [6]. For this study, clinical diagnoses of dementia were made using ICD-10 criteria and included assessment with the Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE). In contrast, the Ministry of Health and Population of Nepal reported only 117 diagnosed cases of AD in the country [7], which almost certainly reflects substantial underdiagnosis of dementia. A study of 115 community-dwelling older Nepali reported a mild cognitive impairment (MCI) prevalence of 93% [8]. This study utilized the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) for MCI assessment. The authors did not describe an approach to MoCA translation and adaptation and reported that 81.7% of their sample had no formal education. They used the original publisher’s cut-offs for classification of impairment (MoCA &lt; 26) and did not differentiate between the classification of MCI and dementia. These limitations likely contribute to a substantial overestimate of MCI in this sample. These findings also underscore current challenges in implementing existing cognitive screening tools in Nepal, given the absence of tools that have been adapted for the Nepalese cultural and linguistic context, the lack of tools that have been validated for individuals with no formal education in Nepal, and the lack of existing population-specific normative data from which to interpret test scores. Taken together, the prevalence of mild cognitive impairment and dementia in community-dwelling older adults in Nepal remains unknown.

There are limited data on the physical and mental health characteristics of older Nepalis, some of which may be important risk factors for dementia. Studies that exist are limited by small or non-representative samples and inconsistent use of measurement tools [9]. These previous studies suggest that diabetes, hypertension, gastritis, and musculoskeletal health conditions are the most common physical health conditions in older adults and often coexist [10,11]. Diabetes and hypertension, in particular, represent important modifiable risk factors for dementia [12]. Similarly, depression (49.2%) and loneliness (55.6%) appear to affect a sizeable percentage of Nepali older adults [13] and each have been shown to be associated with risk for cognitive decline and dementia ([12,14]). There have been several significant stressors impacting the Nepali older adult population, including a decade-long armed conflict (1996–2006), a devastating earthquake (2015), and the COVID-19 pandemic. Exposure to these chronic stressors may increase dementia risk through their impact on mental health (e.g., post-traumatic stress disorder; depression) and physical health (e.g., allostatic load; [15]). While studies have reported a higher risk of mental health diagnoses among those exposed to the decade-long armed conflict in Nepal[16], earthquake[17], and COVID-19[18], no existing studies have linked these stressors to the cognitive health of older adults in Nepal. Nepal thus provides a unique context to understand the association between these shared, multiple environmental exposures and cognitive aging in LMICs.

Existing neuropsychological assessment tools in Nepal

A reliable and valid method of dementia assessment is a critical foundation to accurately determine the prevalence of dementia in Nepal. Currently, there are no comprehensive dementia assessment instruments that have been developed and validated for use in Nepal. Table 1 provides a summary of the methodology used in existing studies of dementia and/or MCI in Nepal. As seen in Table 1, most studies have used screening instruments such as the MMSE, although there is not yet an evidence base for the translation, adaptation, and validation of this instrument for the Nepali older adult population. One group has undertaken the translation and adaptation of the Rowland Universal Dementia Assessment Scale [19] in Nepal. This work is a significant step forward in the development of culturally appropriate cognitive assessment tools in Nepal, although validation of this instrument in older adults with ADRD is currently lacking.

There have been very few cognitive assessment instruments that have been utilized in other adult populations (e.g., other neurologically impaired populations) in Nepal, leaving no substantial evidence base to draw from in developing cognitive assessment instruments for ADRD assessment. This represents a challenge for the adaptation of ADRD neuropsychological assessment instruments in Nepal. As such, a very careful translation, adaptation, and validation approach is urgently needed to ensure that new cognitive assessment instruments are appropriate for the Nepali population.

Sociocultural features of the aging population in Nepal that are relevant for neuropsychological assessment

When considering the need to appropriately develop, translate, and/or adapt neuropsychological assessment tools for a population that does not yet have an evidence base in neuropsychology, it is critical to consider the population’s cultural, linguistic, educational, and social context. Nepal is an ethnically and linguistically diverse country. There are a total of 142 caste/ethnic groups, the largest of which is Chettri (16.45%) followed by Brahmin (11.29%) [20]. Although Nepali is the official and most commonly spoken language in Nepal (by 44.6% of the population as the primary language and by 46% of the population as the second language [20]), 123 local dialects are spoken nationwide [21]. The lifestyle of the majority of the Nepali population is embedded in the Hindu religion. According to the Census data from Nepal of 2011, more than 80% of people aged 60+ are Hindus, and 10% are Buddhist. Although Nepal has made significant strides in increasing literacy rates in recent years, many older adults in Nepal have no to limited formal education and are not able to read or write. In 2001, only 14.1% of adults aged 60+ were literate, which increased to 22.9% in 2011 [22]. The vast majority of older adults reside in rural areas: only 14.3% of older adults resided in urban areas in 2011 [22].

In terms of socioeconomic status, about half of the older adult population is economically active and the vast majority work in the agriculture sector. In 2001, 50.7% of older adults participated in the labor force, while this decreased to 46.1% in 2011. According to the 2011 Census, 6.4% of older adults (60+) reported disability, an increase from 1% in 2001 [22]. Since the vast majority of older adults do not receive pensions from retirement, the allowance received from the government is an important source of income for these age groups, although age eligibility varies by geographic location, ethnicity, and marital status. In the absence of retirement pensions, this allowance is often not adequate for older adults who are not supported by their relatives[23].

Family relationships are highly valued in Nepali culture. Older adults often have strong relationships with their children and extended family members [10]. A small fraction of older adults live alone (4% in 2011). The average family size in households with older adults was 5.7 in 2011 [22]. However, there is a trend for increasing widowhood in Nepal. Whereas in 2001, 81.3% of 60+ were married or in union and 16.2% were widowed, the 2011 numbers were 77.0% and 21.4%, respectively[22]. In addition, older adults are increasingly likely to live alone and manage their own health due to emigration of younger men and due to younger women and children moving out of villages to access better access to education and health opportunities[24]. Until recently, older adults would be cared for by family members, and only those without family members or those neglected by them would be sent to Old Age Homes (Briddhashrams). Since establishing an Old Age Home is a cumbersome process requiring multiple layers of approval from municipalities, the District Administrative Office and at times from the Social Welfare Council, there are very few (141) Old Age Homes in Nepal, of which 75 are in Kathmandu and the rest elsewhere in the country [25]. Many of these Old Age Homes also lack adequate amenities for proper care, support and basic needs[25].

Taken together, the unique social, cultural, linguistic, and educational characteristics of Nepal have a number of implications and challenges for neuropsychological assessment. Given the high prevalence older Nepali adults with no formal education, neuropsychological assessment tools need to be accessible for individuals with little to no literacy and numeracy. This reflects a critical and urgently needed challenge for the field of neuropsychology, as most neuropsychological assessment instruments have been developed and validated within North American populations with high levels of education. In addition, formal education systems provide exposure to the experience of testing; as such, a systematic approach to orientation to the neuropsychological testing experience is also needed. It is critically important to consider linguistic diversity when developing neuropsychological assessment tools for this population. Receiving a cognitive assessment in one’s non-dominant language may interfere with assessment validity and sensitivity of measurement. In addition, all test stimuli need to be scrutinized to evaluate their familiarity and cultural appropriateness in the Nepali population.

There are several cultural factors that may affect the assessment of functional impairment due to dementia in this population. Family members are likely to attribute milder memory loss as a part of the normal aging process and more severe memory loss as mental illness or psychiatric disorders [26]. Additionally, there is not a specific Nepali term for dementia [26,27]. The manifestation of dementia symptoms is typically described as pagalpan (people are referred as “pagal”), which closely translates to madness in the English language [27]. Relating dementia to pagalpan may demotivate both older Nepali and their family members to acknowledge and disclose ADRD symptoms [28] due to the country’s deeply-rooted stigma associated with pagalpan and other mental illnesses. This likely results in the failure to recognize symptoms of dementia as a condition that requires medical assessment and intervention. Due to cultural values and stigma, close family members may also be hesitant to disclose concerns regarding changes in an older adult’s cognition and functional independence, which may interfere with attempts to identify cognitive disorders such as dementia in the general population.

CVFS-SCAN

The CVFS-SCAN is a Fogarty-NIA-funded project that aims to address the tremendous need for ADRD research in Nepal. The project aims to lay the foundation for a sustainable program of population-based research in ADRD in Nepal. It will initiate a series of research capacity-building activities and develop a population-based, longitudinal cohort study of ADRD and related age-associated chronic health conditions in this population. The capacity-building activities will consist of workshops with hands-on experience in the design and administration of cognitive assessments to identify ADRD in the general population, and in statistical analysis methods for longitudinal data from complex surveys. The project will also begin a longitudinal cohort study of ADRD designed to fill the critical gaps in information on ADRD and its primary risk factors in Nepal.

The study will leverage the data collection infrastructure that has been developed for the Chitwan Valley Family Study (CVFS). The CVFS is a 26-year panel study of social, demographic, and ecological change in Chitwan Valley [29,30]. Launched in 1995, it used a stratified cluster sample design and enrolled a representative probability sample of 151 communities,1580 households and 4646 participants aged 15–59 years. Over time, any household that moved into the sample community and individuals that move or are born into those households were added to the sample. Once enrolled in the sample, all original households and individuals are followed irrespective of their residence, raising the current household sample size to 4,000 and individuals aged 15–59 to over 10,714. The sampling clusters vary by location and access to key variations in social resources and context (roads, schools, health services, employers, etc.) within a single setting of economic, environmental and policy conditions. By focusing on the population of one large valley, the CVFS design controls for higher-level macro-variations and uniform shocks to focus on community, household, and individual variations within the population.

Chitwan Valley is a diverse area with a larger city (Narayanghat) and otherwise mostly rural areas that are similar to many other parts of Nepal. It is situated in the lowlands of south-central Nepal, bordering India and 100 miles south-west from Kathmandu (capital city of Nepal). Although the population closely resembles the entire population of Nepal in most characteristics, the Chitwan population has slightly higher levels on socioeconomic indicators, such as income, education, and the Human Development Index. In terms of language use, Nepali is the mother tongue for 73% of the population and is the second language for 26% of the population [20]. This study has produced knowledge about many economic and social conditions in Chitwan Valley and their association with behavioral and health outcomes such as schooling, employment, migration, marriage, childbearing, mental health, and functional health activities [31–35].

The CVFS cohort is now aging, providing a unique opportunity to begin a new population study of ADRD and other chronic health conditions. The study will include the estimated 4,000 surviving participants who have now become age-eligible (≥ 50) for this study. This sample will be invited for a baseline interview, including a detailed neuropsychological assessment which includes a separate interview with a key informant for each participant. Participants will also be invited to donate a blood sample if they consent to it. CVFS-SCAN is designed to conduct a follow-up interview with all surviving participants two years after the baseline interview. Outcomes from the capacity building and research activities will be shared with relevant stakeholders and organizations in Nepal to inform local solutions and policies for the prevention and treatment of ADRD in this population. We anticipate that much of this work will have relevance for other low-resource, low-income countries that face similar circumstances and challenges as Nepal.

CVFS-SCAN and the HCAP International Network

CVFS-SCAN will join the growing collaboration of the Harmonized Cognitive Assessment Protocol (HCAP) International Partner Studies. The HCAP International Network represents a collaborative effort to develop a cross-nationally comparable cognitive assessment instrument, informant report, and dementia ascertainment approach across several countries across the world. The HCAP was developed within the framework of the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) in the United States and its international network of partner studies. The HCAP has been implemented in 18 countries, with new data collection planned for several additional countries[36]. The cognitive assessment and informant interview are comprised of several neuropsychological instruments that are commonly used for the assessment of ADRD and were selected to optimize cross-national comparability [37]. The items in the battery are adapted by each study to optimize the balance between within-study appropriateness (cultural, linguistic, educational) and cross-study comparability. For the HCAP informant interview, an informant is recruited to provide collateral information with a structured interview. The informant is typically a close family member or friend that knows the respondent well. The informant interview is composed of several sections that are designed to capture the informant’s observations of the respondent’s cognition and functioning.

The HCAP international network offers an optimal foundation from which to develop a population-based cognitive assessment and dementia ascertainment protocol for older adults in Nepal. Each study within the HCAP network has collected cognitive data with adaptation to each study population’s context and includes studies with populations with educational (e.g., India, Mexico) and linguistic (e.g., India) diversity. Harmonized HCAP data across several studies have been made publicly available (www.g2aging.org). Initial work with the HCAP across national contexts has shown a similar factor structure across several countries [38–41] and evidence of comparable measurement [38,40,42] across national contexts after cultural neuropsychology-informed harmonization procedures [43].

CVFS-SCAN will develop an HCAP assessment aimed at arriving at the appropriate classification of MCI and dementia among older Nepali adults. It will build on the HCAP assessment that is used in the context of the Longitudinal Aging Study in India (LASI) study, a nationally representative study of more than 73,000 adults in India aged 45 and older across all 29 states in India. Of all the international network of HCAP partner studies, LASI takes place in a population that is geographically closest, and most socially, educationally, and culturally similar to the Nepali older adult population. LASI implemented the HCAP assessment with its Diagnostic Assessment of Dementia sub-study (LASI-DAD). The LASI-DAD study administered the HCAP to a subsample of 4,096 LASI participants aged 60 and older across 18 states in India, with oversampling of participants with low cognitive test scores in the core LASI survey. This sample is linguistically diverse (12 assessment languages, with the highest proportion (31.6%) tested in Hindi) and 56% of the sample has no formal education [39,44]. The LASI-DAD study team rigorously translated, adapted, and piloted the HCAP instrument in India to ensure its appropriateness for their study population and performed a feasibility study in a small sample of older adults with dementia [44,45]. They have published the factor structure of the HCAP instrument in India, which showed adequate model fit, with a general cognitive performance (GCP) factor and five broad cognitive domains [39]. The study has excellent documentation of their instrument’s administration, scoring, and data (www.lasi-dad.org) and has demonstrated comparable measurement with the HRS-HCAP instrument [42].

Adaptation of the HCAP for the Nepal context

Given the relative sociocultural, educational, and linguistic similarities of the study populations and the strong methodological and empirical foundation of the LASI-DAD study, CVFS-SCAN will use the LASI-DAD HCAP (Table 2) as the base for translation and adaptation in Nepal. Despite LASI-DAD HCAP assessment’s strong foundation, comprehensive methods are necessary to ensure that the HCAP instrument is appropriate to measure cognitive health and dementia in the Nepal context. The Chitwan Valley Family Study research team has extensive experience in the translation and culturally appropriate validation of several health instruments for the Nepal context [46] using established methodology from cross-cultural survey guidelines.

To develop a translation and adaptation of the HCAP, our team is drawing upon guidance on best practices recommended through the International Test Commission Guidelines for Translating and Adapting Tests [47] and the Cross-Cultural Survey Guidelines [48]. Our work has been approved by the University of Michigan institutional review board (IRB-MED) and the Nepal Health Research Council and is completed in accordance with Helsinki Declaration. These methods (Figure 1) include an iterative process. We have assembled a local multidisciplinary expert team to conduct an initial translation of the HCAP instrument. Next, a multidisciplinary local Nepali expert panel including a practicing neurologist, geriatrician, psychiatrist, sociologist, and anthropologist reviewed the initial translation and provided input regarding the appropriateness of the translations and the items in the local context. A focus group was then conducted with this expert panel for group discussion. The study neuropsychologist collaborated with other study team members to review this feedback and consider items in need of further refinement. Next steps will be to conduct cognitive interviewing with cognitively healthy older adults residing in the Chitwan Valley community, with representation of the full spectrum of education, language, ethnicity, and sex/gender that exists in the larger Chitwan Valley community. Cognitive interviewing [49] is a qualitative methodology that aims to interrogate how understandable and familiar test instructions and stimuli are and to confirm that the intended construct is being measured by a given test item. We will integrate this feedback with focus group feedback to further refine the HCAP instrument. After additional expert review, we will then perform pre-testing of the instrument with a diverse and representative group of older adult community members and further identify any items in need of refinement. We will then perform preliminary clinical validation to ensure that clear performance differences are observed between healthy older adults and patients with a local clinical diagnosis of dementia. We will then further refine the instrument and repeat pre-testing and validation as needed until the team is in consensus that it is ready for the full baseline data collection.

We anticipate the need to address a number of challenges in the adaptation and validation of the HCAP in the CVFS context. Given the very limited evidence base on cognitive assessment in Nepal, our multidisciplinary translation and adaptation team will need to make decisions about cognitive test adaptation without a robust evidence base and will thus need to anticipate possible threats to cognitive test validity across our diverse study population. In addition, although we anticipate that Nepali will be an accessible cognitive assessment language for our study population, we need to scrutinize this assumption through our preliminary adaptation work. We may need to translate the HCAP into other local languages, which would then require additional preliminary validation work. We may also need to develop procedures for determining the most appropriate assessment language for multilingual individuals [50]. We may encounter challenges in creating appropriate informant ratings of cognitive decline, given concerns about stigma and the limited use of the concept of dementia in the local community. We will address each of these concerns with careful attention and community-engaged strategies.

Use of the HCAP instrument for dementia ascertainment in Nepal

The HCAP assessment in HRS and several of its international network of partner studies use an algorithmic approach to the classification of MCI and dementia [51,52]. The critical components of this dementia classification algorithm include the classification of HCAP cognitive domain impairment using a local robust normative sample and the identification of informant-rated cognitive and functional decline. Efforts are currently underway in the HCAP international network to develop and optimize harmonized approaches to the classification of dementia with these algorithm components. For the Nepal context, the identification of a local robust normative sample will require careful consideration and collection of the specific factors in Nepal that may influence cognitive test performance. This work will require collaboration with local Nepali experts and with other HCAP network colleagues.

CVFS-SCAN aims to administer the HCAP to a sample of 4,000 community-dwelling older adults who have previously enrolled in the Chitwan Valley Family Study and have become age-eligible (≥50 years) during the study period. We selected the lower age limit of 50 years old for eligibility to account for the extended prodromal period that has been observed before clinical diagnosis of ADRD [53,54]. This will allow us to link disease incidence in future waves with risk factor data from before disease onset with greater certainty. We will repeat HCAP assessments for all enrolled participants at 2-year follow-up. We will collaborate with our HCAP international network colleagues and our local clinical experts to determine the most appropriate identification of our robust normative sample, including brain health-relevant medical conditions in need of exclusion and sociocultural and demographic factors in need of adjustment. Longitudinal HCAP data will also be used when available for the identification of the robust normative sample.

Cross-national harmonization with other studies in the HCAP network

Our prospective collaboration with other studies within the HCAP network to optimize the comparability of our assessment and other survey data collection procedures will facilitate future cross-cultural cognitive data harmonization efforts. Data from CVFS-SCAN will be added to the growing list of the international network of HCAP studies. We will have the opportunity to co-calibrate our cognitive assessment with the other studies in the HCAP network. The statistical harmonization approach used for the HCAP allows for co-calibration of cognitive domains using both common and unique cognitive test data. This approach is optimal for cross-cultural cognitive aging studies as it allows each study to adapt the instrument according to its own needs and to balance the goals of within-study validity with cross-study harmonization. This will allow for powerful investigation of measurement equivalence and validity across national contexts, and critically, across diverse educational contexts, which offers the opportunity for tremendous advancement in cross-cultural neuropsychological assessment and in neuropsychological measurement more broadly. This work will also allow for substantive investigation of the complex determinants and impacts of cognitive impairment in older adults across national contexts. This work will also inform national policies needed to support the aging population for the early detection and treatment of ADRD. For example, systematic data on the prevalence of dementia in Nepal may reveal informative demographic patterns in dementia risk and highlight critical gaps in the clinical resources available for the identification and treatment of ADRD in older Nepali adults. In addition, we anticipate our data also to provide evidence for policymakers to develop comprehensive dementia care policies, which may focus on strategies to prevent cognitive impairment and ADRD in the general population, on increased clinical resources including more specialized training for health care providers and greater availability of clinical care of patients with ADRD, and programs to assist families who provide care for older Nepali adults with ADRD.

Conclusions

Nepal is a low-middle income country with robust ethnic, linguistic, educational, and cultural diversity. The burden of dementia in Nepal and its most important risk factors is currently unknown, in part due to the lack of an existing neuropsychological assessment and ADRD research infrastructure. Its population is rapidly aging and there is an urgent need for objective, culturally appropriate and validated cognitive assessment instruments for the diagnosis of cognitive impairment and dementia in older adults. CVFS-SCAN is poised to address this critical need and to contribute to addressing significant knowledge gaps and needs in global neuropsychology. It will leverage and build upon the powerful foundation of our international network of partner studies (e.g., LASI-DAD, HRS-HCAP) to adapt a neuropsychological assessment instrument that is appropriate for the unique characteristics of the Nepali older adult population. We will perform rigorous multidisciplinary translation, adaptation, and validation work to optimize its measurement of cognitive health in a valid manner. This work will address an immense need for cognitive assessment tools in Nepal, with implications for the growth of global and equitable neuropsychology.

Funding sources:

This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health (grant number R01AG074079 (CMdL/DG); K23AG080035 (EB); P30P30AG024824 (EB), and pilot funding from the Center for Global Health Equity at the University of Michigan.

Figure 1. Summary of CVFS-SCAN approach to HCAP translation and adaptation

Figure 1 displays a summary of the procedures to be used for the translation and adaptation of the Harmonized Cognitive Assessment Protocol (HCAP) in the Chitwan Valley Family Study-Study of Aging and Cognition in Nepal (CVFS-SCAN). Note: LASI-DAD is Longitudinal Aging Study in India - Diagnostic Assessment of Dementia. *Indicates informal back-translation at the time of HCAP revision.

Table 1. Summary of studies that have investigated dementia in Nepal

Study	Publication Year	Participants	Location	Dementia/MCI assessment method	Cognitive assessment method	Cognitive assessment interpretation	Cognitive instrument translation/validation	Cognitive instrument normative data	
[6]	2017	All patients (n = 210) 60 and older presenting to an outpatient psychiatry clinic	B.P. Koirala Institute of Health Sciences	Clinical diagnosis according to ICD-10 criteria (additional details not provided).
Dementia severity assessed with Blessed Dementia Rating Scale	MMSE	N/A. All patients diagnosed with dementia had MMSE scores &lt;25.	Not reported	Not reported	
[55]	2021	Patients (n = 1332) seeking inpatient or outpatient psychiatry care	Nepalgunj Medical College, Kohalpur	ICD-10 classification; “MMSC check list (Nepali version)” (additional details not provided)	MMSE	Not reported	Not reported	Not reported	
[56]	2018	Patients (n = 95) with dementia in an outpatient clinic	Nepal Medical College and Teaching Hospital, Kathmandu	Clinical diagnosis based on DSM-IV criteria, informed by collection of medical history, examination, and cognitive assessment. Also reported functional assessment (ADL/IADL scales) and lab work.	MMSE, immediate recall of 10-word list, Wechsler Logical Memory immediate recall (additional details not provided)	N/A	Not reported	N/A	
[57]	2021	Older adults (n = 304) living in public and private old age homes.	Kathmandu valley	Not reported	6-item Cognitive Impairment Test	0–7 cognitively healthy; 8–9: mild cognitive impairment; 10–28 significant cognitive impairment.	Instrument was translated into Nepali and pre-tested in a sample of 30 older adults living in a similar setting.	Not reported	
[58]	2022	Older adults (n = 90) aged older than 60 seeking care in an outpatient psychiatry department	Kathmandu	MMSE	MMSE	Not reported	Not reported	Not reported	
[59]	2012	Psychiatric inpatients (n = 138) aged 60 and older	Bhairahawa	Clinical diagnosis according to ICD-10 criteria (additional details not provided).	Not reported	N/A	N/A	N/A	
[60]	2019	Outpatient psychiatry patients aged 60 or older (n = 178)	Nepalgunj Medical College Teaching Hospital (NGMCTH), Kohalpur	Clinical diagnosis according to ICD-10 criteria	Not reported	N/A	N/A	N/A	
[8]	2020	Clients aged 60 and older (n = 115; additional details not reported)	ward No. 3 and 4 of Baraha municipality	MoCA	MoCA	25 or below interpreted as impaired	Not reported	Not reported	
Note: MMSE is Mini Mental State Examination. MoCA is Montreal Cognitive Assessment.

Table 2. Summary of tests included in LASI-DAD HCAP-Respondent and HRS-HCAP-Respondent interviews

Domain	HRS-HCAP	LASI-DAD HCAP	LASI-DAD adaptation notes (Banerjee et al. 2020)	
Orientation/Various	MMSE	HMSE	HMSE included due to its adaptations for language, literacy/numeracy	
CSI-D	CSI-D		
Learning/Memory	CERAD Word List Learning, Delayed Recall, and Recognition	CERAD Word List Learning, Delayed Recall, Recognition	Adapted for literacy/sensory impairment	
East Boston Memory Test, Immediate and Delayed Recall	East Boston Memory Test, Immediate and Delayed Recall		
WMS-IV Logical Memory, Story B, Immediate, Delayed Recall, Recognition	WMS-IV Logical Memory, Story B Immediate, Delayed Recall, Recognition	Adapted for culture/language	
CERAD Constructional Praxis Recall	CERAD Constructional Praxis Recall		
Language	Animal naming	Animal naming		
HRS TICS items	HRS TICS items	Adapted culture/language	
	Tokens test		
Attention/Executive Functioning	Letter cancellation	Symbol cancellation	Adapted for literacy	
Raven’s standard progressive matrices (abbreviated)	Raven’s standard progressive matrices (abbreviated)		
Trail Making Test		Not included due to literacy/numeracy demands	
HRS Number Series		Not included due to numeracy demands	
	Digit repetition forward/backward		
	Hindi hand movement sequencing		
	Go/No-Go test		
	Judgment and problem-solving		
	Clock drawing		
Visuospatial	CERAD Constructional Praxis copy	CERAD Constructional Praxis copy		
Figure copy (from MMSE)	Figure copy (from HMSE)		
Note: CERAD is Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer’s Disease. CSI-D is the Community Screening Interview for Dementia. HMSE is Hindi Mental State Examination. HRS is Health and Retirement Study. MMSE is Mini Mental State Examination. WMS-IV Wechsler Memory Scale-Fourth Edition (WMS-IV).

Conflict of interests:

Dr. Ghimire is research professor at the University of Michigan and also the Director of the Institute for Social and Environmental Research – Nepal (ISER-N), which conducted pilot study reported here. Ghimire’s conflict of interest management plan is approved and monitored by the Regents of the University of Michigan.


References

[1] Nichols E , Steinmetz JD , Vollset SE , Fukutaki K , Chalek J , Abd-Allah F , Abdoli A , Abualhasan A , Abu-Gharbieh E , Akram TT , Al Hamad H , Alahdab F , Alanezi FM , Alipour V , Almustanyir S , Amu H , Ansari I , Arabloo J , Ashraf T , Astell-Burt T , Ayano G , Ayuso-Mateos JL , Baig AA , Barnett A , Barrow A , Baune BT , Béjot Y , Bezabhe WMM , Bezabih YM , Bhagavathula AS , Bhaskar S , Bhattacharyya K , Bijani A , Biswas A , Bolla SR , Boloor A , Brayne C , Brenner H , Burkart K , Burns RA , Cámera LA , Cao C , Carvalho F , Castro-de-Araujo LFS , Catalá-López F , Cerin E , Chavan PP , Cherbuin N , Chu D-T , Costa VM , Couto RAS , Dadras O , Dai X , Dandona L , Dandona R , De La Cruz-Góngora V , Dhamnetiya D , Dias Da Silva D , Diaz D , Douiri A , Edvardsson D , Ekholuenetale M , El Sayed I , El-Jaafary SI , Eskandari K , Eskandarieh S , Esmaeilnejad S , Fares J , Faro A , Farooque U , Feigin VL , Feng X , Fereshtehnejad S-M , Fernandes E , Ferrara P , Filip I , Fillit H , Fischer F , Gaidhane S , Galluzzo L , Ghashghaee A , Ghith N , Gialluisi A , Gilani SA , Glavan I-R , Gnedovskaya EV , Golechha M , Gupta R , Gupta VB , Gupta VK , Haider MR , Hall BJ , Hamidi S , Hanif A , Hankey GJ , Haque S , Hartono RK , Hasaballah AI , Hasan MT , Hassan A , Hay SI , Hayat K , Hegazy MI , Heidari G , Heidari-Soureshjani R , Herteliu C , Househ M , Hussain R , Hwang B-F , Iacoviello L , Iavicoli I , Ilesanmi OS , Ilic IM , Ilic MD , Irvani SSN , Iso H , Iwagami M , Jabbarinejad R , Jacob L , Jain V , Jayapal SK , Jayawardena R , Jha RP , Jonas JB , Joseph N , Kalani R , Kandel A , Kandel H , Karch A , Kasa AS , Kassie GM , Keshavarz P , Khan MA , Khatib MN , Khoja TAM , Khubchandani J , Kim MS , Kim YJ , Kisa A , Kisa S , Kivimäki M , Koroshetz WJ , Koyanagi A , Kumar GA , Kumar M , Lak HM , Leonardi M , Li B , Lim SS , Liu X , Liu Y , Logroscino G , Lorkowski S , Lucchetti G , Lutzky Saute R , Magnani FG , Malik AA , Massano J , Mehndiratta MM , Menezes RG , Meretoja A , Mohajer B , Mohamed Ibrahim N , Mohammad Y , Mohammed A , Mokdad AH , Mondello S , Moni MAA , Moniruzzaman M , Mossie TB , Nagel G , Naveed M , Nayak VC , Neupane Kandel S , Nguyen TH , Oancea B , Otstavnov N , Otstavnov SS , Owolabi MO , Panda-Jonas S , Pashazadeh Kan F , Pasovic M , Patel UK , Pathak M , Peres MFP , Perianayagam A , Peterson CB , Phillips MR , Pinheiro M , Piradov MA , Pond CD , Potashman MH , Pottoo FH , Prada SI , Radfar A , Raggi A , Rahim F , Rahman M , Ram P , Ranasinghe P , Rawaf DL , Rawaf S , Rezaei N , Rezapour A , Robinson SR , Romoli M , Roshandel G , Sahathevan R , Sahebkar A , Sahraian MA , Sathian B , Sattin D , Sawhney M , Saylan M , Schiavolin S , Seylani A , Sha F , Shaikh MA , Shaji K , Shannawaz M , Shetty JK , Shigematsu M , Shin JI , Shiri R , Silva DAS , Silva JP , Silva R , Singh JA , Skryabin VY , Skryabina AA , Smith AE , Soshnikov S , Spurlock EE , Stein DJ , Sun J , Tabarés-Seisdedos R , Thakur B , Timalsina B , Tovani-Palone MR , Tran BX , Tsegaye GW , Valadan Tahbaz S , Valdez PR , Venketasubramanian N , Vlassov V , Vu GT , Vu LG , Wang Y-P , Wimo A , Winkler AS , Yadav L , Yahyazadeh Jabbari SH , Yamagishi K , Yang L , Yano Y , Yonemoto N , Yu C , Yunusa I , Zadey S , Zastrozhin MS , Zastrozhina A , Zhang Z-J , Murray CJL , Vos T (2022) Estimation of the global prevalence of dementia in 2019 and forecasted prevalence in 2050: an analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019. Lancet Public Health 7 , e105–e125.34998485
[2] World Bank Open Data, World Bank Open Data, https://data.worldbank.org. Last updated 2023, Accessed on 6/12/2023.
[3] National Statistics Office (2023) National Population and Housing Census 2021, National Report. https://censusnepal.cbs.gov.np/results/files/result-folder/National%20Report_English.pdf. Last updated May 2023, Accessed 6/12/2023.
[4] The World Bank (2023) Life Expectancy at Birth- Nepal. https://data.worldbank.org/country/nepal?view=chart. Last updated 2023, Accessed 6/12/2023.
[5] United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division (2015) World Population Prospects: The 2015 Revision, Key Findings and Advance Tables. Working paper No. ESA/P/WP.241.
[6] Nepal S , Sapkota N (2018) Prevalence of Dementia among Elderly Patients attending Psychiatry OPD of Tertiary Care Hospital and its Association with Socio Demographic Variables. J Psychiatr Assoc Nepal 6 , 12–17.
[7] Government of Nepal Ministry of Health and Population, Department of Health Services. (2021) Annual Report Department of Health Services 2076/2077 (2019/2020). http://dohs.gov.np/wp-content/uploads/2021/07/DoHS-Annual-Report-FY-2076-77-for-website.pdf. Accessed 6/12/2023.
[8] Pradhan N , Adhikari BR , Lama S , Shrestha S , Sigdel R (2020) Prevalence of Mild-Cognitive-Impairment and Depression among Elderly Clients in Selected Wards of Baraha Municipality: A Cross-Sectional Study. J BP Koirala Inst Health Sci 3 , 57–65.
[9] Tausig M , Subedi J (2022) Aging in Nepal. The Gerontologist 62 , 803–808.35385876
[10] Chalise HN , Rosenberg E (2019) Social and Health Status of Community-Dwelling Older Adults in Nepal. Adv Aging Res 8 , 63–74.
[11] Shakya Y , Shrestha B , Aacharya R , Gupta S (2017) Disease pattern among the elderly people coming in Tribhuvan University Teaching Hospital Kathmandu Nepal. J Inst Med 39 , 76–79.
[12] Livingston G , Huntley J , Sommerlad A , Ames D , Ballard C , Banerjee S , Brayne C , Burns A , Cohen-Mansfield J , Cooper C , Costafreda SG , Dias A , Fox N , Gitlin LN , Howard R , Kales HC , Kivimäki M , Larson EB , Ogunniyi A , Orgeta V , Ritchie K , Rockwood K , Sampson EL , Samus Q , Schneider LS , Selbæk G , Teri L , Mukadam N (2020) Dementia prevention, intervention, and care: 2020 report of the Lancet Commission. The Lancet 396 , 413–446.
[13] Devkota R , Mishra K , Shrestha S (2019) Loneliness and Depression among Older People Living in a Community of Nepal. J Nepal Health Res Counc 17 , 185–192.31455932
[14] Sutin AR , Stephan Y , Luchetti M , Terracciano A (2020) Loneliness and Risk of Dementia. J Gerontol Ser B 75 , 1414–1422.
[15] Juster R-P , McEwen BS , Lupien SJ (2010) Allostatic load biomarkers of chronic stress and impact on health and cognition. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 35 , 2–16.19822172
[16] Axinn WG , Ghimire DJ , Williams NE , Scott KM (2013) Gender, Traumatic Events, and Mental Health Disorders in a Rural Asian Setting. J Health Soc Behav 54 , 444–461.24311755
[17] Acharya Pandey R , Chalise P , Khadka S , Chaulagain B , Maharjan B , Pandey J , Nepal J , Pandey C (2023) Post-traumatic stress disorder and its associated factors among survivors of 2015 earthquake in Nepal. BMC Psychiatry 23 , 340.37189110
[18] Devkota HR , Sijali TR , Bogati R , Ahmad M , Shakya KL , Adhikary P (2021) The impact of COVID-19 on mental health outcomes among hospital fever clinic attendants across Nepal: A cross-sectional study. PLOS ONE 16 , e0248684.33750955
[19] Nepal GM , Shrestha A , Acharya R (2019) Translation and cross-cultural adaptation of the Nepali version of the Rowland universal dementia assessment scale (RUDAS). J Patient-Rep Outcomes 3 , 38.31321572
[20] Caste/ Ethnicity Report | National Population and Housing Census 2021 Results. https://censusnepal.cbs.gov.np/results/downloads/caste-ethnicity. Updated 2023, Accessed 6/12/2023.
[21] Central Bureau of Statistics (2012) National Population and Housing Census 2011 (Vol. 1). https://censusnepal.cbs.gov.np/results/downloads/national. Updated November, 2012, Accessed 6/12/2023.
[22] Minnesota Population Center (2020) Integrated Public Use Microdata Series, International: Version 7.3 [dataset]. 10.18128/D020.V7.3. Accessed 6/12/2023.
[23] Chalise H , Bohora P , Khanal T (2022) Older people and social security system in Nepal. Gerontol Geriatr Res 8 , 1075.
[24] Ghimire D , Bhandari P (2020) Study of migration and later life health in Nepal. J Migr Health 1–2 , 100018.
[25] National Human Rights Commission, Nepal (2019) Monitoring Synopsis of the Senior Citizens Care Centers 2019. https://www.nhrcnepal.org/uploads/publication/Monitoring_Synopsis_of_the_Senior_Citizens_Care_Centers_2019-min.pdf. Updated April, 2019. Accessed 6/12/2023.
[26] Shrestha S , Tranvåg O (2022) Dementia care in Nepalese old age homes: Critical challenges as perceived by healthcare professionals. Int J Older People Nurs 17 , e12449.35139253
[27] Jha B , Seavy J , Young D , Bonner A (2015) Positive Mental Health Outcomes in Individuals with Dementia: The Essential Role of Cultural Competence. Online J Issues Nurs 20 , 69–80.
[28] Pathak KP , Montgomery A (2015) General practitioners’ knowledge, practices, and obstacles in the diagnosis and management of dementia. Aging Ment Health 19 , 912–920.25393131
[29] Axinn WG , Yabiku ST (2001) Social Change, the Social Organization of Families, and Fertility Limitation. Am J Sociol 106 , 1219–1261.
[30] Barber J , Shivakoti G , Axinn WG , Gajurel K (1997) Sampling strategies for rural settings: A detailed example from Chitwan Valley Family Study, Nepal. Nepal Popul J 6 , 193–203.
[31] Allendorf K , Ghimire DJ (2013) Determinants of marital quality in an arranged marriage society. Soc Sci Res 42 , 59–70.23146598
[32] Axinn WG , Choi KW , Ghimire DJ , Cole F , Hermosilla S , Benjet C , Morgenstern MC , Lee YH , Smoller JW (2022) Community-Level Social Support Infrastructure and Adult Onset of Major Depressive Disorder in a South Asian Postconflict Setting. JAMA Psychiatry 79 , 243.35080609
[33] Brauner-Otto SR (2009) Schools, schooling and children’s support of their ageing parents in rural Nepal. Ageing Soc 29 , 1015–1039.20161526
[34] Compernolle EL (2021) Temporary Labor Migration and Spouses’ Marital Quality: Evidence from Nepal. J Marriage Fam 83 , 1058–1075.34456366
[35] Musse I , Thornton R , Ghimire D (2022) How Do Women Learn They Are Pregnant? The Introduction of Clinics and Pregnancy Awareness in Nepal. Stud Fam Plann 53 , 43–59.34878176
[36] HCAP Network | Harmonized Cognitive Assessment Protocol. https://hcap.isr.umich.edu/. Updated 2023, Last accessed 9/11/2023.
[37] Langa KM , Ryan LH , McCammon RJ , Jones RN , Manly JJ , Levine DA , Sonnega A , Farron M , Weir DR (2019) The Health and Retirement Study Harmonized Cognitive Assessment Protocol Project: Study Design and Methods. Neuroepidemiology 54 , 64–74.31563909
[38] Arce Rentería M , Briceño EM , Chen D , Saenz J , Kobayashi LC , Gonzalez C , Vonk JMJ , Jones RN , Manly JJ , Wong R , Weir DR , Langa KM , Gross AL (2023) Memory and language cognitive data harmonization across the United States and Mexico. Alzheimers Dement Diagn Assess Dis Monit 15 , e12478.
[39] Gross AL , Khobragade PY , Meijer E , Saxton JA (2020) Measurement and Structure of Cognition in the Longitudinal Aging Study in India–Diagnostic Assessment of Dementia. J Am Geriatr Soc 68 , S11–S19.32815599
[40] Gross AL , Li C , Briceño EM , Arce Rentería M , Jones RN , Langa KM , Manly JJ , Nichols E , Weir D , Wong R , Berkman LF , Lee J , Kobayashi LC (2023) Harmonization of Later-Life Cognitive Function Across National Contexts: Results from the Harmonized Cognitive Assessment Protocols (HCAPs). Lancet Healthy Longev In Press..
[41] Jones R , Manly J , Langa K , Ryan L , Levine D , McCammon R , Weir D (2020) Factor structure of the Harmonized Cognitive Assessment Protocol neuropsychological battery in the Health and Retirement Study, PsyArXiv. https://psyarxiv.com/rvmhj/. Updated 2/22/2021, Accessed 6/12/2023.
[42] Vonk JMJ , Gross AL , Zammit AR , Bertola L , Avila JF , Jutten RJ , Gaynor LS , Suemoto CK , Kobayashi LC , O’Connell ME , Elugbadebo O , Amofa PA , Staffaroni AM , Arce Rentería M , Turney IC , Jones RN , Manly JJ , Lee J , Zahodne LB (2022) Cross-national harmonization of cognitive measures across HRS HCAP (USA) and LASI-DAD (India). PLOS ONE 17 , e0264166.35213581
[43] Briceño EM , Arce Rentería M , Gross AL , Jones RN , Gonzalez C , Wong R , Weir DR , Langa KM , Manly JJ (2023) A cultural neuropsychological approach to harmonization of cognitive data across culturally and linguistically diverse older adult populations. Neuropsychology 37 , 247–257.35482625
[44] Lee J , Petrosyan S , Khobragade P , Banerjee J , Chien S , Weerman B , Gross A , Hu P , Smith JA , Zhao W , Aksman L , Jain U , Shanthi GS , Kurup R , Raman A , Chakrabarti SS , Gambhir IS , Varghese M , John JP , Joshi H , Koul PA , Goswami D , Talukdar A , Mohanty RR , Yadati YSR , Padmaja M , Sankhe L , Rajguru C , Gupta M , Kumar G , Dhar M , Jovicich J , Ganna A , Ganguli M , Chatterjee P , Singhal S , Bansal R , Bajpai S , Desai G , Bhatankar S , Rao AR , Sivakumar PT , Muliyala KP , Sinha P , Loganathan S , Meijer E , Angrisani M , Kim JK , Dey S , Arokiasamy P , Bloom DE , Toga AW , Kardia SLR , Langa K , Crimmins EM , Dey AB (2023) Deep phenotyping and genomic data from a nationally representative study on dementia in India. Sci Data 10 , 45.36670106
[45] Banerjee J , Jain U , Khobragade P , Weerman B , Hu P , Chien S , Dey S , Chatterjee P , Saxton J , Keller B , Crimmins E , Toga A , Jain A , Shanthi GS , Kurup R , Raman A , Chakrabarti SS , Varghese M , John JP , Joshi H , Koul P , Goswami D , Talukdar A , Mohanty RR , Yadati YSR , Padmaja M , Sankhe L , Pedgaonkar S , Arokiasamy P , Bloom DE , Langa K , Jovicich J , Dey AB , Lee J , Gambhir IS , Rajguru C (2020) Methodological considerations in designing and implementing the harmonized diagnostic assessment of dementia for longitudinal aging study in India (LASI–DAD). Biodemography Soc Biol 65 , 189–213.32727279
[46] Ghimire DJ , Chardoul S , Kessler RC , Axinn WG , Adhikari BP (2013) Modifying and validating the Composite International Diagnostic Interview (CIDI) for use in Nepal: Modifying and validating the CIDI for use in Nepal. Int J Methods Psychiatr Res 22 , 71–81.23494758
[47] International Test Commission (2017) The ITC Guidelines for Translating and Adapting Tests (Second edition). www.InTestCom.org. Updated 2017, Accessed 6/12/2023.
[48] Survey Research Center (2016) Guidelines for Best Practice in Cross-Cultural Surveys. ccsg.isr.umich.edu. Updated 2016. Accessed 6/12/2023.
[49] Willis GB (2005) Cognitive interviewing: a tool for improving questionnaire design, Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, Calif.
[50] Briceño EM , Mehdipanah R , Gonzales XF , Heeringa SG , Levine DA , Langa KM , Zahs D , Garcia N , Longoria R , Morgenstern LB (2021) Bilingualism, assessment language, and the Montreal Cognitive Assessment in Mexican Americans. J Am Geriatr Soc 69 , 1971–1981.33963535
[51] Manly JJ , Jones RN , Langa KM , Ryan LH , Levine DA , McCammon R , Heeringa SG , Weir D (2022) Estimating the Prevalence of Dementia and Mild Cognitive Impairment in the US: The 2016 Health and Retirement Study Harmonized Cognitive Assessment Protocol Project. JAMA Neurol 79 , 1242.36279130
[52] Rentería MA , Manly JJ , Vonk JMJ , Arango SM , Obregon AM , Samper-Ternent R , Wong R , Barral S , Tosto G (2022) Midlife Vascular Factors and Prevalence of Mild Cognitive Impairment in Late-Life in Mexico. J Int Neuropsychol Soc 28 , 351–361.34376262
[53] Caselli RJ , Langlais BT , Dueck AC , Chen Y , Su Y , Locke DEC , Woodruff BK , Reiman EM (2020) Neuropsychological decline up to 20 years before incident mild cognitive impairment. Alzheimers Dement 16 , 512–523.31787561
[54] Rajan KB , Wilson RS , Weuve J , Barnes LL , Evans DA (2015) Cognitive impairment 18 years before clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer disease dementia. Neurology 85 , 898–904.26109713
[55] Belbase M , Adhikari J (2021) Dementia in 50 Years and Older Patients from the Psychiatry Out Patient Department of a Tertiary Care Center: A Descriptive Cross-sectional Study. J Nepal Med Assoc 59 , 843–846.
[56] Gautam S , Singh PM (2018) A Study of Dementia in the Geriatric Patients Attending the Out Patient Department of Nepal Medical College Teaching Hospital. Ann Int Med Dent Res 4 , 1–4.
[57] Singh DR , Parajuli P , Hug J , Nath D , Koirala R , Mandal R (2021) Dementia Symptoms among Senior Citizens Living in Geriatric Homes of Kathmandu Valley. Kathmandu Univ Med J 19 , 195–199.
[58] Shrestha L , Shrestha B , Gautam K , Khadka S , Mahara Rawal N (2022) Plasma Vitamin B-12 Levels and Risk of Alzheimer’s Disease: A Case-Control Study. Gerontol Geriatr Med 8 , 233372142110577.
[59] Aich T , Dhungana M , Muthuswamy R (2012) Pattern of neuropsychiatric illnesses in older age group population: An inpatient study report from Nepal. Indian J Psychiatry 54 , 23.22556433
[60] Poudel R , Belbase M (2019) Prevalence and nature of psychiatric disorders in geriatric people attending psychiatry outpatient department. J Psychiatr Assoc Nepal 8 , 33–38.
