LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101504991
36564
ACS Appl Mater Interfaces
ACS Appl Mater Interfaces
ACS applied materials &amp; interfaces
1944-8244
1944-8252

36724494
10037301
10.1021/acsami.2c20334
NIHMS1876949
Article
Zinc-Epigallocatechin-3-gallate Network-Coated Nanocomposites against the Pathogenesis of Amyloid-Beta
Andrikopoulos Nicholas 1
Li Yuhuan 12
Nandakumar Aparna 1
Quinn John F. 13
Davis Thomas P. 14
Ding Feng 5
Saikia Nabanita 5
Ke Pu Chun 16
1 Drug Delivery, Disposition and Dynamics, Monash Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Monash University, 381 Royal Parade, Parkville, VIC 3052, Australia
2 Liver Cancer Institute, Zhongshan Hospital, Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Cancer Invasion, Ministry of Education, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200032, China
3 Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, Monash University, Clayton, VIC 3800, Australia
4 Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology, The University of Queensland, Brisbane Qld 4072, Australia
5 Department of Physics and Astronomy, Clemson University, Clemson, SC 29634, United States
6 Nanomedicine Center, The Great Bay Area National Institute for Nanotechnology Innovation, 136 Kaiyuan Avenue, Guangzhou, 510700, China
Author contributions

PCK, NA and FD conceived the project. NA, NS and PCK wrote the manuscript. NA performed nanomaterials syntheses and characterizations, TEM, ThT and FTIR. NA, YL and AN performed cell viability, ROS, ICP-MS and NanoEL assays. NS and FD performed DFT and DMD computer simulations and analyses. JFQ and TPD provided their inputs and all authors agreed on the presentation of the manuscript.

Corresponding Authors: Feng Ding, fding@clemson.edu; Nabanita Saikia, nsaikia@g.clemson.edu; Pu Chun Ke, pu-chun.ke@monash.edu.
17 3 2023
15 2 2023
01 2 2023
15 2 2024
15 6 77777792
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
The aggregation of amyloid beta (Aβ) is a hallmark of Alzheimer’s disease (AD), a major cause of dementia and an unmet challenge in modern medicine. In this study, we constructed a biocompatible metal-phenolic network (MPN) comprised of a polyphenol epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG) scaffold coordinated by physiological Zn(II). Upon adsorption onto gold nanoparticles, the MPN@AuNP nanoconstruct elicited a remarkable potency against the amyloid aggregation and toxicity of Aβ in vitro. The superior performance of MPN@AuNP over EGCG@AuNP was attributed to the porosity and hence larger surface area of the MPN in comparison with that of EGCG alone. The atomic detail of Zn(II)-EGCG coordination was unravelled by density functional theory calculations and the structure and dynamics of Aβ aggregation modulated by the MPN were further examined by discrete molecular dynamics simulations. As MPN@AuNP also displayed a robust capacity to cross a blood-brain barrier model through the paracellular pathway, and given the EGCG’s function as an anti-amyloidosis and antioxidation agent, this MPN-based strategy may find application in regulating the broad AD pathology beyond protein aggregation inhibition.

Graphical Abstract

A metal-phenolic network of Zn(II) coordinated by EGCG enabled the aggregation inhibition of Alzheimer’s Aβ as well as their paracellular translocation across a blood-brain barrier model.

Aβ
metal-phenolic network
amyloid aggregation
gold nanoparticle
density functional theory
molecular dynamics simulation

pmc1. INTRODUCTION

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a primary form of neurological disorder characterized by a severe loss in memory and cognitive function through ageing.1 A hallmark of the AD brain is the presence of amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles resulting from the kinetic processes of protein self-assembly: extracellularly by amyloid beta (Aβ) and intracellularly by hyperphosphorylated tau.2 Structurally, such amyloid fibrils and tangles possess a ubiquitous cross-beta backbone and a polymorphic morphology, while their intermediates of oligomers and protofibrils have been implicated as the most toxic species.3 Mechanistically, amyloidosis can induce membrane poration, lipid extraction, production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), as well as damage to mitochondria and other cellular organelles, which in turn can elicit a cascade of inflammatory and regulatory responses such as cytokine secretion and autophagy, leading to neurodegeneration and the eventual onset of AD.4–5 Accordingly, strategies aimed at preventing Aβ from their self-assembly and downstream events have been developed over the past three decades, albeit with little clinical success owing to a lack of comprehensive understanding of the broad AD pathophysiology beyond protein aggregation.6

Nanomaterials possess diverse physicochemical properties such as their small size, large surface area and hydrophobicity, which enable them to be utilized, through surface modification or protein adsorption, as inhibitors against the amyloidogeneses of Aβ (associated with AD), alpha synuclein (αS; Parkinson’s disease), and human islet amyloid polypeptide (IAPP; type 2 diabetes), to name a few.7–10 Their small size and amphiphilicity also endow nanoparticle inhibitors with the capacity of crossing the blood-brain barrier (BBB) via transcellular or paracellular routes. Together, functionalized nanomaterials and nanocomposites represent an emerging class of nanomedicines for targeting a range of neurodegenerative, metabolic, and systemic disorders.11–12

Metal-phenolic network (MPN) is a concept first established by Caruso et al.13 for the deposition of thin films on various engineered substrates including nanoparticles. Naturally occurring in plant species and known for their antioxidative property, phenolic tannic acid can readily adsorb onto surfaces and subsequently assemble into dendritic MPN structures through their coordination with divalent or multivalent metal ions. Collectively, MPNs feature stimuli responsiveness, combined characteristics of both their metal and phenolic constituents, and controllable architecture and function, and have since found a range of new applications in catalysis, drug delivery and targeting.14–16 In addition, a cobalt (II)-tannic acid network coated on gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) effectively inhibited the amyloid formation of Aβ40 via the interaction between exposed cobalt and the histidine and methionine residues of the peptide.17 Given the promise, the inhibitory potential and mechanisms entailed by novel MPN nanocomposites against amyloidogenesis warrant further investigation.

In the current study, we devised gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) coated with a MPN comprised of Zn(II)-epigallocatechin gallate (MPN@AuNP) and demonstrated their inhibitory potential against the aggregation and toxicity of Aβ1–42, the most amyloidogenic isoform of Aβ. EGCG is a known inhibitor and a remodelling agent against the fibrillization of pathogenic peptides such as Aβ, αS and IAPP.18–21 In addition, EGCG has shown a potency fending off viral/bacterial infection and inflammation,22–24 aspects linked with the broad pathology of AD beyond amyloid aggregation.25 The effects of metal ions (CuII, ZnII, FeIII, AlIII, etc.) on Aβ aggregation have been studied extensively, showing that the types of the metal ions and their stoichiometries to Aβ significantly influenced the peptide aggregation.26 Concerning the role of Zn (II) on Aβ aggregation, it has been known that increased concentration of Zn (II) at 100 μM can lead to the formation of amorphous aggregates of Aβ42.27 A recent report has shown that Zn (II)-Aβ42 complex exhibited a greater cytotoxicity than Aβ-derived diffusible ligands at equimolar concentrations of Aβ42 and Zn (II) in neuroblastoma cells.28 On the other hand, Zn (II) at low concentrations displayed a neuroprotective effect against Aβ derived toxicity.29 Up to date, however, the role of zinc and its concentration variability in AD brains remain unclear, with several studies presenting either elevated or decreased Zn (II) levels in the biological tissues.30–31 In this study, specifically, we determined the aggregation kinetics, secondary structure, and toxicity of Aβ1–42 in the presence of the MPN@AuNP, using a thioflavin T (ThT) fluorescence assay, Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), and a cell viability assay. The atomic coordination of the Zn(II)-EGCG network was revealed by density functional theory (DFT) calculations, and the inhibition mechanism of Aβ aggregation by MPN was illustrated by modelling the self-assembly of six Aβ amyloidogenic fragments of residues 15–25 (Aβ15–25) in the presence and absence of MPN using discrete molecular dynamics (DMD) simulations, a predictive and efficient molecular dynamics algorithm with enhanced sampling efficiency.32 Our DMD simulations revealed that Aβ15–25 initiated strong binding with EGCGs in the MPN, and that the large surface area of the mesoporous MPN allowed an efficient sequestration of the monomeric peptides, thereby inhibiting the peptide self-association and subsequent fibrillization. As MPN@AuNP translocated across a hCMEC/D3 BBB model, they appeared to be a promising multi-purpose inhibitor against the pathology of AD.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Materials

All reagents used for the synthesis and characterization of citrate-coated AuNPs (cit-AuNPs), EGCG@AuNP and Zn-EGCG@AuNP (or MPN@AuNP hereafter) were purchased from Merck. Aβ1–42 (MW: 4514 Da; purity: &gt;95%) was purchased from AnaSpec in the lyophilized form and was further treated with hexafluoro-2-propanol (HFIP) for 4 h at room temperature to obtain a homogenous monomeric solution. The Aβ1–42 solution was further aliquoted and dried in vacuum for 2 h. Aβ1–42 powder aliquots were readily dissolved in 4 μL 0.1% NH4OH and were further diluted in Milli-Q (MQ) H2O before each experiment. Aβ oligomers (Aβo) used in the study were prepared upon incubation of a readily dissolved Aβ1–42 solution (150 μM) for 10 h. Additionally, 48 h incubation of Aβ1–42 solution (150 μM) led to the formation of Aβ fibrils (Aβf) that were used in the study. Synthesized EGCG@AuNP and MPN@AuNP were mixed with glutathione (L-GSH) at a 2:1 EGCG/L-GSH ratio to prevent EGCG from auto-oxidation. EGCG stock solutions contained L-GSH at the same ratios as for the synthesized nanoconstructs.

Synthesis of gold nanoparticles

Spherical citrate-capped gold nanoparticles (cit-AuNPs, 30 nm) were prepared following a seeded-growth synthetic formulation using spherical cit-AuNPs (13 nm) as seeds. The cit-AuNPs (13 nm) were initially synthesized following the Turkevich method. Specifically, 50 mL of aqueous chloroauric acid solution (HAuCl4, 0.25 mM) were brought into boiling condition at 100 °C for 15 min under continuous stirring. A reducing agent, 0.97 mL of sodium citrate solution (Na3C6H5O7, 38.75 mM), was subsequently added in a dropwise manner. The solution was kept stirring vigorously in boiling condition till a wine-reddish color appeared indicating the presence of 13 nm AuNPs. Thereafter, the solution was slowly cooled down at room temperature and was purified using centrifugal filter tubes (MWCO-30 kDa), and was further diluted into 50 mL of MQ H2O. The controlled size growth into cit-AuNPs (30 nm) was achieved by adding 3.5 mL of aqueous HAuCl4 solution (1 mM) into a mixture of 1.6 mL cit-AuNPs (13 nm) and 0.3 mL hydroxylamine hydrochloride (NH2OH.HCl, 40 mM) dropwise. The reaction was kept stirring for 2 h at room temperature. Cit-AuNPs (30 nm) were purified using centrifugal filter tubes (MWCO-30 kDa) and kept at 4 °C as a stock solution (Au0- 1 mM) for experimental use.

Synthesis of EGCG-capped AuNPs (EGCG@AuNP)

4.8 mL (−)-Epigallocatechin gallate solution (EGCG, 0.1 mg/mL) was initially prepared and stirred at 300 rpm for 15 min at 40 °C. Upon continuous stirring, 200 μL of HAuCl4 aqueous solution (0.9 mL, 4 mM) was added dropwise. A reddish solution was observed within 30 s of adding HAuCl4 indicating the formation of functionalized AuNPs. The resulting suspension was stirred for an additional 15 min at 40 °C. The suspension was transferred to centrifugal filter tubes (MWCO-30 kDa) and was centrifuged at 4,000 rpm for 10 min. The resulting EGCG@AuNP was washed thrice with MQ H2O, purified, and redispersed in H2O to obtain a solution with optical density (OD525) of approximately 1.0. To avoid EGCG oxidation, L-GSH was added into the post-characterized and concentration-determined EGCG@AuNP, at a 2:1 final concentration ratio (EGCG:L-GSH).

Synthesis of Zn(II)-EGCG AuNPs (MPN@AuNP)

A MPN layer was achieved through a one-pot assembly process. Saturated EGCG solution (20 μL, 10 mg/mL) was added to the EGCG@AuNP dispersion (2.4 mL, OD525~ 1.0) and vortexed for 20 s. Subsequently, 18 μL of Zn(II) ion solution (24 mM) was added and further vortexed for 30 s. Metal-catechol complex formation occurred upon adjustment of the solution’s pH with 0.6 mL Tris-HCl buffer (100 mM, pH=8.0), after which the dispersion was subsequently vortexed for 120 s. The suspension was transferred into centrifuge tubes and spun at 4,000 rpm for 10 min. Three washes with MQ H2O, purification and redispersion in MQ H2O and addition of L-GSH then followed, similarly as for the preparation of EGCG@AuNP. Between each wash, the suspensions were sonicated using an ultrasonic probe sonicator for 30 s (20 kHz, Ampl:20%, pulse 1 sec. “on’’, 1 sec. “off’’). After purification and redispersion, the resulting MPN@AuNP were filtered using a Whatman syringe filter (1 μm).

Au0, EGCG, Zn component characterizations

The Au0 (mM) component was determined using Lambert-Beer law and the extinction coefficient for AuNPs of 30–35 nm was derived from literature.33 EGCG concentration was quantified based on the absorption peak of catechols at the wavelength of 270 nm using a calibration standard for EGCG (5–75 μg/mL) (Supporting Information, Fig. S3). Zinc component (μg/L) was determined using a colorimetric (560 nm) zinc assay kit (Sigma Aldrich). Prior to Zn quantification, a MPN@AuNP aliquot (200 μL) was digested by adding a few drops of hydrochloric acid and subsequent overnight heating (190 °C) till evaporation. Nanoparticle digestion for the catechol determination (μg/mL) was performed with the addition of a few drops of aqua regia and subsequent overnight heating (190 °C).

Dynamic light scattering (DLS) measurement

Hydrodynamic size and zeta-potential values were obtained for the nanoparticles using a Zetasizer Nano-ZS (Malvern) equipped with a solid-state He-Ne laser (λ= 632.8 nm) and were analyzed with Zetasizer Software 7.02. The nanoparticle solutions used for the DLS measurements were further diluted in MQ H2O. The DLS measurements were performed at room temperature.

Transmission electron microscopy (TEM)

TEM imaging was performed with a FEI Tecnai F20 operating at 200 kV voltage. Grid sample preparation included addition of 10 μL sample volume at the top of a glow-discharged formvar/carbon-coated copper grid (400 mesh, ProSciTech) for 60 s. Negative staining on the sample-coated grids was performed with 5 μL of uranyl acetate (UA, 1%) for 30 s for samples that contained amyloid proteins. Intermediate and final grid drying was performed with Whatman filter paper.

Attenuated total reflection-Fourier transform infrared (ATR-FTIR) spectroscopy

ATR-FTIR spectra were acquired from an IRTracer-100 (Shimadzu) equipped with a He-Ne laser and an MCT detector (Hg-Cd-Te) under liquid nitrogen cooling. After placing 5 μL sample volume on the reservoir, all samples were air-dried at room temperature. Data acquisition included a %Transmittance measurement mode of 512 scans accompanied with a Happ-Genzel apodization function. Samples used for Aβ secondary structure analysis were lyophilized upon 42 h incubation at 37 °C and redispersed in MQ H2O. The Aβ concentration in all relevant samples was 25 µM and the respective catechol concentration (EGCG) was 100 µM. Dehydration stress induced by lyophilization caused physical instability and aggregation of the nanoparticles as well as their separation from Aβ using centrifugal filter tubes. Aβ was purified and separated from EGCG using centrifugal filter tubes (MWCO-3 kDa). An additional lyophilization step of the amyloid-purified samples followed. Aβ lyophilized samples were dissolved in 5 µL of MQ H2O and each respective spectrum was acquired following the method mentioned above. Quantitative secondary structure analysis was derived from peak deconvolution of each amide I band spectrum into Gaussian band profiles using built-in PeakDeconvolution application through Origin Software (Origin Lab). Second-derivative order data points were calculated and plotted through OriginSoftware, while Savitzky-Golay smoothing filters with polynomial order (n=5) and points of window (n=6–10) were applied.

Thioflavin T (ThT) kinetic assay

ThT fluorescence (Ex/Em: 440/484 nm) was collected every 60 min from a clear bottom, black 96-well plate (Costar) with an EnSpire 2300 microplate reader (PerkinElmer) at 37 °C. The fluorescence intensity values were obtained using a bottom reading detection mode. All samples contained freshly prepared ThT dye at a 2:1 molar ratio (ThT:Aβ1–42) and were prepared in pre-mixed form and subsequently assayed in triplicate wells. The kinetic parameter values (lag time, t1/2 and k) were extracted from the obtained ThT assays following the literature.34

Immunohistochemistry (IHC)

A volume of 150 μL of either monomeric (Aβm) or oligomeric Aβ (Aβo) at 25 μM (see Materials) was added to 8-well chamber slides (μ-slide, Ibidi) (n=3 per condition) and allowed to dry using an air-dryer gun operated at room temperature. The well samples were afterwards fixed with 5% paraformaldehyde (PFA) and washed once with Dulbecco's phosphate-buffered saline (DPBS) and then with ultrapure water for 5 min. Once the samples were dried, 50 μL of primary antibody (Rabbit anti-oligomer-A11, Thermofisher Scientific) at 2 μg mL−1 was added to each well and the samples were incubated overnight at 4 °C. Upon incubation, removal of the unbound antibodies took place followed by a wash with 1× DPBS. Secondary antibody (Donkey Anti-Rabbit IgG H&amp;L, Alexa Fluor® 488, Abcam) staining then followed by adding 50 μL of antibody solution (2 μg mL−1). Once the well samples were incubated for 2 h at room temperature, unbound secondary antibodies were removed by washing with 1× DPBS. Well chamber slides were then air-dried, followed by image acquisition using a confocal scanning fluorescence microscope (Leica SP8 Confocal/Multiphoton) (λex/λem: 488 nm/500–600 nm). Image analysis was performed with ImageJ/Fiji software. Fluorescence intensity values were measured by integrating maximum intensity Z-projected images (n = 4). Background subtractions were performed via threshold adjustment.

Cellular viability and reactive oxygen species (ROS) assays

SH-SY5Y human neuroblastoma cells (ATCC® CRL-2266™) were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium: Nutrient Mixture F-12 (DMEM/F12, ATCC) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and passaged every 5–6 days (passage number &lt; 14). hCMEC/D3 human brain endothelial cells (Merck Millipore-SCC066) were cultured in complete EBM™ endothelial cell growth medium (Lonza) mixed with endothelial cell growth medium SingleQuots™ supplements (Lonza) and passaged every 5–6 days (passage number &lt; 14). Cell viability assays were performed in an attachment factor (37 °C, 30 min incubation) bottom covered and cells seeded (~30 000 cells for SH-SY5Y and ~15 000 cells for hCMEC/D3) in black 96-well plates (Costar). Regarding hCMEC/D3 cells, 10× collagen (Sigma) Type I solution in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) was used as an attachment factor. Cells were further cultured overnight until ~80% confluency. Thereafter, cells were treated with optimized sample concentrations for each respective assay in the presence of propidium iodide (PI, 1 μM, containing the corresponding medium solution), incubated at 37 °C for 30 min. PI-positive cell quantification and mapping were acquired every hour using nine reads per well by an Operetta CLS High-Content Analyzer (PerkinElmer) at 37 °C (5% CO2). ROS assays were performed similarly to the cell viability assays. Either neuroblastoma or endothelial cells were pre-stained with 10 μM 2',7'-dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate (H2DCFDA, Cell Biolabs) solution in DMEM/F12 medium upon 30 min incubation at 37 °C. Cells were then washed twice with Dulbecco's phosphate-buffered saline (DPBS) and incubated with the adjusted concentrations of nanomaterials in DMEM/F12 in the presence and absence of pre-incubated Aβ1–42 oligomeric species. DCF fluorescence intensity values (EGFP channel) were acquired (Ex/Em: 480/530 nm) with an EnSpire 2300 microplate reader (PerkinElmer). Cell quantification and mapping were performed after 1 h by an Operetta CLS High-Content Analyzer (PerkinElmer) at 37 °C (5% CO2), using nine reads per well.

Immunofluorescence staining-gap area analysis

hCMEC/D3 cells were seeded (~40 000 cells) on 8-well chamber slides (μ-slide, Ibidi) and grown until a confluent monolayer was reached (~5 days). Prior to the seeding process, transwell inserts were coated with 300 μL of 10× collagen (Sigma) Type I solution in PBS for 30 min (37 oC). Thereafter, the endothelial monolayer was treated with the nanomaterials (cit-AuNPs, EGCG@AuNP, MPN@AuNP) and small molecule compounds (EDTA, Thrombin, EGCG) dispersed in the supplemented EBM™ endothelial cell growth medium at the aforementioned concentrations for 1 h incubation at 37 °C (5% CO2). Cells were afterwards washed twice with DPBS and fixed with 250 μL 4% paraformaldehyde for 15 min. Upon two additional washing steps with DPBS/azide (0.1 %), the cell monolayer was permeabilized and blocked with 250 μL of PBS/azide buffer solution containing 0.1% saponin and 5% horse serum for 1 h at room temperature. Overnight incubation at 4 °C with 100 μL primary antibody solution (Rabbit anti-VE-cadherin, 1:200 in DPBS/azide buffer containing 5% horse serum) then followed. The antibody solution was washed off twice with DPBS/azide and the cell monolayer was then incubated with a secondary antibody solution (goat anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor 647, ab150083, Abcam) at a 1:200 volume ratio in DPBS/azide for 2 h at room temperature. Thereafter, two additional staining steps with phalloidin-iFluor 488 (Abcam) (1:1000 in DPBS/azide, 2 h -RT) and Hoechst 33342 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) (1:2000 in DPBS/azide, 15 min-RT) were conducted, each followed with the inclusion of intermediate washing steps. Cell imaging was performed with confocal fluorescence microscopy (Leica SP8 Lightning). The acquired images were semi-quantitatively analyzed using Trainable Weka Segmentation plugin through ImageJ following a previously reported protocol.35

Transwell insert assay

hCMEC/D3 cells were cultured and seeded (~25 000 cells) on collagen-coated transwell polycarbonate membrane inserts (0.4 μm pore diameter, Corning Costar) in a 24-well plate. After the formation of a confluent monolayer (3 days), hCMEC/D3 cells were treated for 1 h (37 oC) with 250 μL of different types of nanomaterials or small molecules dispersed in the supplemented EBM™ endothelial cell growth medium at aforementioned concentrations. Cell growth medium solution in the presence of FITC–dextran (0.1 mg/mL, 40 kDa, Sigma-Aldrich) was afterwards added to the treated groups, followed by 40 min of incubation. Depending on the permeability rate of the endothelial monolayer, FITC–dextran could translocate to the lower compartments of the well plates. 100 μL from each bottom well compartment (600 μL in total) was collected and transferred into a 96-well plate. Fluorescence readings (λEx/λEm: 480/530 nm) were collected with an EnSpire 2300 microplate reader (PerkinElmer).

Inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (ICP-MS)

Sample digestion and instrumentation were similar to those in our previous report.55 The instrument (PerkinElmer NexION 5000) was initially calibrated with freshly prepared series (n=4, including blank) of standards from stock standard solution of our element of interest. Batch samples (n=3 per condition) (300 μL) were initially placed in 10 mL polypropylene tubes for weight/volume recording. The digestion process was initiated with the addition of 150 µL of concentrated HNO3 (sub boiled ultra-pure, 70%) to the sample tubes, which were moderately heated up to clearing for 5 h. Once samples were cooled down to room temperature, they were treated with 100 µL of H2O2 (analytical reagent grade, 30%) and were moderately heated again for 2 h. The last step of the digestion process included the addition of 200 µL of HCl (sub boiled ultra-pure, 36%) and a 2 h heating. Sample volumes were then made up to 10 mL with MQ H2O and analyzed with ICP-MS (PerkinElmer NexION 5000) for the quantification of Zn. The instrument was equipped with a discrete dynode detector and operated under the following specific conditions: ICP RF power (1200–1500 Watt), vacuum pressure (&lt; 8 × 10 -6 Torr), pulse stage voltage (800–1500 V), plasma gas flow (15–17 L/min), auxiliary gas flow (1–2 L/min), and nebulizer gas flow (0.85–12. L/min). All the acquired elemental quantification measurements were above the MDL-detection limit (=10). Analysis was performed at the Mark Wainwright Analytical Centre, ICP Laboratory, UNSW.

Density functional theory calculations

First principles density functional theory (DFT) calculations on Zn(II)-EGCG complexation in bis- and tris-coordination in the gas phase were performed using Gaussian 09 program. Compared to optimizations with a computationally-intensive polarizable continuum model in DFT considering the solvent effect, the gas-phase calculation has been shown to be a fast and reasonable alternative for obtaining a good description of bond lengths and angles for typical biological molecules. The hybrid GGA (generalized gradient approximation) exchange-correlation functional, B3LYP (Becke’s three parameter Lee−Yang−Parr) was employed, along with the LANL2DZ (Los Alamos effective-core potential)36 basis set for the Zn(II) metal and the 6–31G(d,p) basis set for the hydrogen, carbon, and oxygen atoms of the complex.37–38 The B3LYP functional has been shown to provide a reliable description of the electronic structures of biomolecules interacting with transition metals.39 To reduce the computational cost associated with geometry optimization of Zn(II)-EGCG complexes, we replaced the bulky catechin group with -CH3 group as shown in Fig. 6a, b. We considered three spin states, singlet (S = 1/2), triplet (3/2), and quintet (5/2) to determine the ground state of Zn(II) in the complexes. To confirm that the gas phase-optimized geometries of bis- and tris-coordinated Zn(II)-EGCG complexes corresponded to the ground state configurations, geometry optimization without symmetry constraint was followed by vibrational frequency calculations at the same level of theory. GaussView 6.0 was used to analyze the minimum energy structures and relevant geometric parameters (bond length and bond angle) of the complexes, and the values are listed in Fig. 6a and Table S4.

Discrete molecular dynamics simulations

DMD, a molecular dynamics algorithm with significantly enhanced sampling efficiency, was employed in the present study.32 Applications of DMD simulations in studying protein folding and aggregation, interactions between small molecule/nanoparticle-protein, and the supertertiary structure of multi-domain proteins have been extensively reported by us 40 and by other groups.41–42 Both bonded (i.e., covalent bonds, bond angles, and dihedrals) and non-bonded (i.e., van der Waals, solvation, hydrogen bond, and electrostatic potentials) interactions were included in the DMD simulations. Interatomic interactions were modeled by stepwise functions mimicking the continuous potential functions in conventional molecular dynamics simulations. Solvent effect was implicitly modeled by the Lazaridis-Karplus EEF1 model.43 Distance and angular-dependent hydrogen bond interactions were depicted by a reaction-like algorithm.44 Screened electrostatic interactions were modeled by the Debye–Hückel approximation with the Debye length of 10 Å, corresponding to 100 mM of NaCl under physiological conditions. The units of mass, time, length, and energy were 1 Dalton, ~50 femto-second, 1 Å, and 1 kcal/mole, respectively. Simulation temperature was maintained by the Anderson’s thermostat.

DMD modelling of Zn(II)-MPN

As in our previous simulation studies of small-molecular amyloid inhibitors,45 EGCG molecules and their interactions with proteins in DMD simulations were modelled with MedusaScore, an extension of the Medusa force field. Combined with DMD, the MedusaScore force field has been shown to accurately describe the interactions between proteins and a wide variety of small molecules, including curcumin, resveratrol, EGCG, naringin, polyamidoamine dendrimers, and so forth. To model the coordination interaction of Zn with EGCG in DMD simulations, we adopted a similar approach used in our prior study of endogenous inhibition of IAPP aggregation via the formation of aggregation-incompetent molecular complexes mediated by zinc-coordination.46 Briefly, the distance and orientation-dependent coordination bond – e.g., the coplanar configuration between zinc and the coordinated aromatic ring – were modelled by assigning auxiliary interactions of associated atoms in corresponding aromatic ring with zinc in addition to the directly coordinated oxygen atoms (Fig. S2). Instead of using statistically derived interaction parameters from protein databank, we used the distances derived from DFT calculations (geometric parameters in Fig. 6a). In terms of the binding energy ɛ, we followed a similar approach as in a previous study46 and the value of 22 kcal/mol corresponded to the minimalized value for which the zinc ion could fully stay in contact with EGCG.

Simulation setup

The initial structure of Aβ1–42 peptide was taken from protein data bank (PDB ID: 1z0q). For the DMD simulations, we considered the central amyloidogenic fragment of Aβ1–42, residues 15–25 with the sequence of 15QKLVFFAEDVG25. Six Aβ15–25 peptides were included in the DMD simulations, both in the presence and absence of a Zn(II)-EGCG network, starting with different initial configurations (i.e., coordinates, orientations, and velocities). In both molecular systems, a peptide concentration of ~26 mM was adopted.

The Zn(II)-EGCG MPN having a stoichiometry of 3:2 was modeled with 69 EGCGs and 46 Zn (II) metal ions. This stoichiometric ratio facilitated the formation of both bis- and tris- coordination complexes of Zn(II) with EGCGs. To simulate the formation of the MPN, 69 EGCGs and 46 Zn(II) ions were randomly positioned in a periodic box of dimensions 70×70×90 Å3. A higher dimension of 90 Å along the z-axis allowed formation and expansion of the network without any constraints from the periodic box. After energy minimization, the production DMD run lasted ~150 ns. The temperature of the system was maintained around 300 K using the Anderson’s thermostat.

For the simulations of Aβ peptides in the presence of a Zn(II)-EGCG network, we started with a pre-formed MPN and added six Aβ15–25 peptides that were randomly positioned in the simulation box of dimensions of 70×70×200 Å3 with the minimum intermolecular distance between any two peptides of 1.5 nm. Ten independent DMD simulations were performed, each lasting 400 ns. To avoid potential biases of initial states, the last 300 ns of simulation data was used for the analysis.

Simulation analysis

Secondary structure analysis was performed using the dictionary secondary structure of protein (DSSP) method.47 A hydrogen bond was considered formed if the distance between the backbone N and O atoms was ≤ 3.5 Å and the angle of N–H⋯O ≥120°. The hierarchical clustering program (www.compbio.dundee.ac.uk/downloads/oc) was utilized to group similar conformations. Depending on the pairwise root-mean-square distance matrix, the clustering algorithm iteratively combines two closest clusters into one. The “cluster distance” was determined based on all pairwise distances between elements of two corresponding clusters. We used the mean of all values to compute the distance between two clusters, and we chose the centroid structure of each cluster with the smallest average distance to other elements in the cluster.

2. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

2.1. Synthesis and characterization of EGCG@AuNP and MPN@AuNP

Growing evidence has implicated polyphenols, especially EGCG, as effective modulators of human calcitonin (hCT), IAPP, Aβ and αS amyloid aggregation.19, 48–51 The ability of EGCG to redirect Aβ peptide aggregation into non-toxic off-pathway oligomers with decreased β-sheets conformation prompted us to examine EGCG-Aβ1–42 interaction, in the presence of an AuNP substrate; the latter was for elevating the poor bioavailability and delivery of the polyphenol. Accompanied by their anti-amyloidogenic and anti-cancer applications, polyphenols can be utilized as reducing agents and effective metal ion chelators based on the properties of their catechol moieties. Such supramolecular assembly has led to the engineering of metal-phenolic layer platforms (core or hollow) with applications in drug delivery, anti-fouling, catalysis and MRI imaging.16, 52–53 In this context, EGCG was used in the present study as a reducing and stabilizing capping agent for an Au precursor (HAuCl4) to produce EGCG-capped AuNPs (EGCG@AuNP). The nanosized template was further exposed to the polyphenol and a Zn(II) solution to slightly increase the thickness of the coating and assemble the mesoporous MPN network at pH~8. As shown in Fig. 1a, basic conditions were applied to yield bis/tris- metal-catecholate complexes with a Td/Oh geometry. Both EGCG@AuNP and MPN@AuNP were characterized with TEM, DLS, UV-Vis and FTIR. In particular, TEM revealed the formation of a thin sub-5 nm MPN layer (Fig. 1b right), which was absent for spherical cit-AuNPs (30 nm) (Fig. 1b left). TEM also indicated the overall size of the formed core-shell nanoconstruct to be ~30 nm (Fig. 1b), while DLS measurements showed an average hydrodynamic size of 45.4 ± 13.4 nm (Supporting Information, Table S1) with a polydispersity index (PDI) of 0.243 for MPN@AuNP one-month post synthesis, consistent with the particle size distribution determined by TEM (35.0 ± 6.5 nm) shown in Fig. S1. Regarding EGCG@AuNP, DLS exhibited a hydrodynamic size of 39.5 ± 12.2 nm (Table S1) with a PDI of 0.261 (Fig. 1c) confirming the colloidal stability of the nanoparticles over time. Furthermore, zeta-potential measurements revealed a negative surface charge of -26.7 ± 3.3 mV for EGCG@AuNP and -27.4 ± 5.1 mV for MPN@AuNP, respectively (Fig. 1c). Moreover, the surface plasmon resonance (SPR) peak of AuNPs upon polyphenol capping did not significantly differ from cit-AuNPs of similar sizes, while the SPR peak was not shifted upon MPN coating formation (Fig. 1d), consistent with a previous report for another type of metal MPN-coated AuNPs.17 Successful polyphenol capping on the nanoparticle surface and the metal-catecholate complex formation were further verified with ATR-FTIR by comparing the infrared spectra of free EGCG, EGCG@AuNP and MPN@AuNP (Fig. 1e). More specifically, EGCG exhibited a major peak at ~3300 cm−1 (which can be mainly attributed to the stretching vibration of the hydroxyl (–OH) groups), and other peaks at 1685 cm-1 (ester C=O), 1650–1630, 1530–1520, 1450–1420 cm-1 (aromatic C=O stretching), 1420–1335 cm-1 (O-H plane bending), 1230 cm-1 (aromatic O-H), 1135 cm-1 (antisymmetric stretching C-OH), and 1030 cm-1 (antisymmetric stretching C-O). Air-dried EGCG@AuNP sample exhibited the above-mentioned vibration bands, confirming the presence of EGCG on the AuNP surface (Fig. 1e). Upon complexation with zinc ions, the antisymmetric stretching C-O band of EGCG was significantly more intense than the C-OH vibration peak, while the presence of an additional peak at 415 cm-1 (Zn-O stretching vibration) confirmed the complexation reaction (Fig. 1e). Moreover, the stretching vibration of the hydroxyl (–OH) groups at 3300 cm-1 for MPN@AuNP showed the presence of available hydroxyl (–OH) groups for further metal chelation. To quantify the EGCG components, both nanoconstructs were digested and the EGCG concentration was quantified based on the absorption peak of catechols at 270 nm wavelength and a calibration standard (5–75 μg/mL-EGCG) (Fig. S3). Zn(II) for digested MPN@AuNP was determined by a ligand based colorimetric assay, which developed an absorbance peak at 560 nm upon zinc chelation (Fig. 1f) similarly to other transition-metal ion fluorescent probes.54 The presence of Zn (II) on the nanoparticle substrate was further characterized and determined with ICP-MS upon open lid acid digestion (Fig. S4), indicating an accordance between the two methods on measuring the Zn (II) concentration in aqueous MPN@AuNP solutions.

2.2. Elevated inhibition of Aβ fibrillization by MPN@AuNP over EGCG@AuNP

To assess the effects of EGCG and their equivalent nanoconstructs (MPN@AuNP and EGCG@AuNP) on Aβ aggregation, we monitored Aβ self-assembly at 25 μM in the presence of the catechols at 50 μM and 100 μM using a ThT fluorescence kinetic assay (Fig. 2a–c). EGCG, EGCG@AuNP or MPN@AuNP at 100 µM were initially incubated with ThT (50 µM) to test whether they could quench the dye fluorescence (Fig. S5). The extracted kinetic parameters (lag time, t1/2 and k) for each assayed sample were analyzed to provide insights on the sigmoidal kinetic growth of peptides during aggregation. Specifically, EGCG reduced the ThT intensity in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. 2a), while extending the lag phase of Aβ from 21.5 h to 28.5 h and increasing t1/2 by 5 h at lower doses (Fig. 2d). Higher EGCG concentration led to a prolonged nucleation phase of Aβ until end of the assay (44 h) indicating the absence of fibrillization. TEM further confirmed fibrillar aggregates characterized by a significantly reduced contour length (Fig. 2g) compared to the mature fibrils formed after 44 h of Aβ incubation (Fig. 2f). Additional ThT assays performed for Aβ in the presence of MPN@AuNP at lower doses indicated a partial aggregation inhibition resulting in sigmoidal curves with a reduced apparent first-order aggregation constant k (0.25 ± 0.08 h-1), compared to Aβ control (0.39 ± 0.05 h-1). Lag time and t1/2 values did not differ significantly from Aβ control (Table S2). MPN@AuNP at high catechol concentrations extended the lag phase until the endpoint of the assay, similarly as for Aβ in the presence of EGCG. However, the unstructured morphology of aggregates captured on the MPN@AuNP surface was distinct from fibrillar as shown by TEM (Fig. 2h). Similar off-pathway aggregates have been previously reported for metal-associated Aβ in the presence of EGCG or for IAPP in the presence of metal-associated EGCG, enhancing EGCG’s inhibitory efficiency against amyloid aggregation.48–49 In order to distinguish whether the nanoparticle substrate or the pre-formed metal-phenolic complex influenced the formation of such amorphous amyloid aggregates, Aβ (25 µM) was incubated with EGCG@AuNP at catechol concentrations of 50 μM and 100 μM. The ThT assay indicated a partial Aβ aggregation inhibition at both concentrations and a lack of Aβ elongation mitigation by EGCG@AuNP at high concentrations. Lag time and t1/2 values did not significantly differ from those obtained for Aβ control (Table S2, Fig. 2e), while the k constant for a high dose of EGCG@AuNP (0.45 ± 0.21 h-1) was greater than for a lower dose (0.33 ± 0.11 h-1) and comparable to that for Aβ control (0.43 ± 0.05 h-1) (Table S2, Fig. 2e). An additional ThT assay was performed to investigate whether cit-AuNPs at 0.125 and 0.25 mM (Au0) (as additional controls for MPN@AuNP) could induce a similar inhibitory effect against Aβ fibrillization as MPN@AuNP (Fig. S6a, b). At the lower concentration of 0.125 mM, cit-AuNPs did not prevent the aggregation of Aβ nor affected its lag phase (0–18.5 h), but did slightly prolong the value of t1/2. On the other hand, cit-AuNPs at 0.25 mM led to an accelerated Aβ fibrillization coupled with an ~25% decrease in ThT signal at saturation. TEM imaging further revealed formation of fibrils for incubated Aβ (25 µM) in the presence of EGCG@AuNP (100 µM) or cit-AuNPs (0.312 mM) at the end of the saturated phase for each assay (Fig. 2i, j, Fig. S6c), indicating weakened interactions between Aβ monomers and EGCG@AuNP/cit-AuNPs. Such results further supported the hypothesis of a distinct inhibition effect on Aβ amyloidosis by MPN@AuNP, compared to EGCG@AuNP or cit-AuNPs. On the other hand, the reduced capacity of EGCG@AuNP than free EGCG in inhibiting Aβ amyloidosis may be attributed to the steric hindrance of AuNPs, which prevented their surface-adsorbed EGCG from extensively binding with the peptide. To investigate whether EGCG, EGCG@AuNP or MPN@AuNP could disaggregate/remodel pre-formed mature Aβf, a catechol: Aβ ratio of 4:1 were applied. EGCG as known from literature is able to cross-link amyloid fibrils and form Schiff bases through its quinone derivatives upon auto-oxidation.21 Indeed, upon 42 h of Aβf incubation with EGCG, amyloid cross-linking led to significant shortened fibrils and formation of amyloid seeds as characterized by TEM (Fig. S7). Interestingly, several amyloid seeds were also found in our Aβf samples in the presence of MPN@AuNP showing their potency in disaggregating Aβf fibrils, likely through H-bonding (Fig. S7). On the other hand, EGCG@AuNP were ineffective in fibril shortening and seed formation, possibly due to the significantly fewer EGCG layers that were sterically unavailable for cutting down Aβf compared to MPN@AuNP (Fig. S7).

2.3. Aβ secondary structure upon incubation with EGCG, MPN@AuNP and EGCG@AuNP

ATR-FTIR spectroscopy was implemented to investigate conformational changes to Aβ (25 µM) secondary structure induced by EGCG and its associated nanoconstructs. More specifically, we obtained mid-IR region spectra (1725–1200 cm-1) (Fig. S8a–e) consisting of the amide I region (1600–1695 cm-1), which is mainly governed by the C=O stretching vibrations, the amide II region (1480–1600 cm−1), which is mainly derived from the in-plane bend vibrations of NH and CN stretching vibration, and the amide III region that is less sensitive for protein structural analysis. The amide I band was solely used for the analysis here as it mainly reflected the secondary structure of the backbone and was less affected by the nature of the side chains. Quantitative secondary structure analysis was derived from peak deconvolution of each amide I band spectrum into Gaussian band profiles by approximating the positions based on the maxima of the second derivative spectra presented in Fig. 3a–e. To avoid interference of the C=O stretching vibrations by EGCG and to remove saturated catechol, all EGCG-containing samples (bare or NP coated) were extensively dialyzed upon incubation with Aβ. As shown in Fig. S8f, EGCG control exhibited several individual bands in the region of 1725–1200 cm-1, which can be attributed to C=O stretching vibrations, while the spectra for catechol dialyzed Aβ samples (Fig. S8c–e) exhibited mainly the amide I, II, III bands originating from the bond vibrations across the peptide’s backbone and side chains. Monomeric non-incubated Aβ exhibited a broad amide I band with a maximum at 1635 cm-1 indicating its unstructured conformation (37.6%) in aqueous conditions (Fig. S8a, Fig. 3a). Upon 42 h incubation, Aβ exhibited a sharp band with a maximum at 1627 cm-1, while adopting a predominantly (58.0%) β-sheet conformation (Table S3, Fig. 3b). After 42 h incubation of Aβ with EGCG, we found that the amide-I frequency maximum at 1629 cm-1 was not distinct from the fibrillar Aβ spectrum. However, the amide-I band became broader between 1640 and 1660 cm−1 after incubation with EGCG, while exhibiting a smaller peak at 1651 cm-1 similarly as for monomeric Aβ (Fig. S8c, Fig. 3c). These observations pointed to increased helical and random-unstructured conformations (40.9%) of Aβ in the presence of EGCG (Table S3, Fig. 3f), consistent with the literature.55 Interestingly, the amide I band spectrum of Aβ incubated for 42 h with MPN@AuNP exhibited a maximum at 1651 cm-1 and some less intense peaks at 1670 and 1682 cm-1 indicating their distinct characters from both monomeric and fibrillar Aβ. Interpretation of the specific result showed the dominance (39.3%) of helical and random coil conformations (Table S3, Fig. 3f). Moreover, the weaker amide I band at lower frequencies (1620–1635 cm−1) as well as in the presence of a more intense amide I band at higher frequencies (1678–1695 cm−1) suggested a proportion of antiparallel β-sheet conformation (38.6%) for the resulting amorphous “off-pathway” aggregates. On the other hand, incubation with EGCG@AuNP did not seem to significantly alter the conformation of Aβ, compared to its fibrillar spectrum after 42 h incubation (Fig. 3b, e). The amide I band spectrum consisted of a sharp maximum at 1628 cm-1 indicating a high proportion of β-sheets (60.9%) mainly originating from the cross-β Aβ fibrils (Table S3, Fig. 3f). Overall, the specific results indicated differing mechanisms for Aβ aggregation inhibition between the MPN and EGCG, thereby rendering distinct conformation states of the peptide.

2.4. Protecting neuroblastoma cells from Aβ toxicity with EGCG@AuNP and MPN@AuNP

Despite the broad spectrum of biomedical applications that EGCG can offer (antioxidation, anti-inflammatory, anti-amyloidogenic, anti-tumor), its clinical applications are hampered by its poor bioavailability. The rapid auto-oxidation and polymerization of EGCG into quinone derivatives constitute the main factors of ROS generation, including hydroxyl radicals, while increasing hepatic lipid peroxidation, DNA damage and cell apoptosis.57 In this context, we exposed neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells to a wide range of concentrations of freshly dissolved EGCG (5–100 µM). In particular, 12 h of SH-SY5Y exposure to EGCG at 5, 12.5, 25 µM did not significantly affect (p &gt; 0.12) cell mortality by more than 5% from control (Fig. 4a, Fig. S9a). Dose-dependent cell death appeared upon an EGCG exposure of 50 µM, initiated from 4 h (~9%) and reached ~25 % within 12 h. Higher EGCG concentrations (i.e., at 75 µM and 100 µM) led to significantly (p &lt; 0.0001) reduced cell viability at 12 h (~40% for 75 µM and ~25% for 100 µM), compared to 50 µM (Fig. 4a, Fig. S9a). Addition of L-GSH into a readily dissolved EGCG stock solution at a 1:2 molar ratio (L-GSH: EGCG) to prevent EGCG’s auto-oxidation led to an ~15% reduction of cell mortality (%) especially for the highest tested EGCG concentration (100 µM) (Fig. S9b), while the presence of L-GSH did not significantly affect the cytotoxic profile of EGCG at lower concentrations (&lt; 100 µM) (Fig. S9b). SH-SY5Y cellular exposure to MPN@AuNP (Fig. 4b, Fig. S9d) even at high EGCG concentrations (75 µM and 100 µM) did not induce any marked neuroblastoma cell death (≤ 10%, p &gt; 0.12) within 12 h exposure, compared with control groups. Similarly, EGCG@AuNP (Fig. 4c, Fig. S9c) did not induce cytotoxicity at 12.5–100 µM of catechol concentration within 12 h exposure (&gt;95% cell viability). This result indicated how the stability and bioavailability of EGCG could be enhanced by the substrates of certain nanomaterials (e.g., AuNPs, lipid-based nanocapsules, etc.). The characteristic biocompatibility of the MPN@AuNP nanoconstruct was further assessed by exposing SH-SY5Y cells to a variety of Zn (II) concentrations that could be released from the MPN. In particular, 1 h of SH-SY5Y exposure to Zn (II) at concentrations corresponding to 25–100% coordinated at MPN did not significantly trigger ROS formation (Fig. S10). Moreover, SH-SY5Y cells were exposed to Aβ oligomeric species (Aβo) in the presence of EGCG, EGCG@AuNP or MPN@AuNP to investigate whether they could sequester the toxic Aβo and thus prevent its induction of membrane poration and subsequent cell death.58 Aβo were obtained upon 10 h incubation of Aβm (150 µM) at 37 °C. ThT assay in Fig. S11a indicated the aggregation rate of Aβ at 150 µM and showed that the peptide was in the elongation phase between 6–14 h. In addition to the ThT assay, the presence of Aβo at our timepoint of interest (10 h) was supplemented with immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis using an oligomeric specific polyclonal antibody (A11) (Fig. S11b–d). Regarding SH-SY5Y cell viability, 25 µM of Aβo exerted a significant (p &lt; 0.001) cytotoxicity, reducing SH-SY5Y cell viability down to ~66% within 12 h of exposure (Fig. 4d, Fig. S12). EGCG at 50 µM led to a slightly less neuroprotective efficacy (~79% cell viability) against Aβo, compared to MPN@AuNP treatment (~84% cell viability) within 12 h (Fig. 4d, Fig. S12). EGCG@AuNP was largely ineffective at mitigating Aβo-induced cytotoxicity, indicating its limited ability to sequester Aβo and Aβm, compared to either EGCG or MPN@AuNP. The specific results did not notably differ upon alteration of the experimental conditions by the inclusion of L-GSH at a 1:2 molar ratio (L-GSH: EGCG) (Fig. S13).

In addition to the cell viability assay, SH-SY5Y cells were further stained with H2DCFDA to investigate the production of ROS by the oligomeric peptide (Fig. S14). SH-SY5Y cells treated with Aβo (25 µM) for 1.5 h exhibited strong fluorescence due to the DCF rendered, confirming the ability of Aβo to initiate lipid peroxidation and ROS elevation.58 On the other hand, MPN@AuNP (100 µM) notably suppressed the Aβo-induced DCF fluorescence down to levels similar to control, indicating the antioxidant potency of the nanoconstruct as a free radical scavenger. Moreover, EGCG at the lower concentration of 50 µM could significantly decrease the ROS induced by Aβo (p &lt; 0.0001). However, the resulting DCF fluorescence intensities were higher (p &lt; 0.0001) than those with both Aβo and MPN@AuNP (Fig. S14). The specific increase of DCF fluorescence was mainly derived from EGCG, as fluorescence was not notably distinct from EGCG control (50 µM). The fact that ROS levels were not totally suppressed to control levels, despite the presence of L-GSH (Fig. S15), indicated the dual function of EGCG’s as both an antioxidant and a prooxidant.57

2.5. Paracellular transport of EGCG@AuNP and MPN@AuNP with a BBB model

Drug delivery across the BBB remains a major challenge in medicine, even though the BBB is partially disrupted under certain pathological conditions.59 Microvascular endothelial cells provide the BBB with significant morphological characteristics through the presence of tight junction proteins (e.g., claudin, occludin family proteins) and adherent junctions such cadherin proteins, assisting in the restriction of compound transportation.Apart from intracellular trafficking of nanoparticles via the transcytosis pathway, inorganic nanoparticles of certain charge (anionic) and size (&lt;100 nm) may harness the paracellular space of the vasculature (including the BBB) via nanomaterials-induced endothelial leakiness (NanoEL),60 a phenomenon characterized by the physical disruption of vascular endothelial-cadherins (VE-cadherins) into microscopic gaps.61 Indeed, our synthesized polyphenolic nanoconstructs (MPN@AuNP, EGCG@AuNP) induced endothelial leakiness without evoking cytotoxicity in a brain microvascular endothelial cell line hCMEC/D3 (Fig. 5a).

To observe VE-cadherin junction disruption in the endothelial barriers, immunofluorescence staining was employed (Fig. 5b). For quantification of intercellular micron-sized gaps upon nanoparticle exposure, a machine learning trainable plugin from Fiji (Weka Segmentation-ImageJ) was employed to process every acquired image individually. More specifically, upon image loading, contrast and threshold adjustment, the background area was manually identified (n&gt; 50) using a cursor and loaded as Class 1. Areas solely including the gaps were also manually identified (n&gt; 200) in a similar manner and loaded as Class 2. Once the automated algorithm classifier was accurately trained, images were converted into binary and particle/gap area analysis was processed upon binary image adjustment (Convert to Mask, Fill Holes, Watershed). Interestingly, upon exposure for 1 h, apart from 30 nm citrate-capped AuNPs, both MPN@AuNP and EGCG@AuNP induced NanoEL in hCMEC/D3 monolayers at 0.1 mM Au0 concentration (Fig. 5b, c). The positive controls of thrombin and EDTA exhibited a significant EL competence (Fig. 5b) due to thrombin’s catalytic activity to fibrinolysis or EDTA’s ability to sequester Ca+2 ions between repeated extracellular cadherin-like (EC) domains.62–63 The abundance of gap areas was mapped and quantified (Fig. 5c) following a protocol developed in our earlier work.35 Specifically, MPN@AuNP induced slightly less endothelial leakiness than EGCG@AuNP, likely due to the less availability of catechol groups in the former to sequester calcium ions due to their bis-coordination with zinc. On the other hand, EGCG at 34 μM, the highest polyphenol loading within EGCG@AuNP and MPN@AuNP per 0.1 mM Au0, led to a statistically insignificant increase of permeability. This was possibly due to the hydrophilicity of EGCG, which would have a less energetic incentive to engage with the paracellular space than to remain in the aqueous extracellular space. In comparison, the hydrophilicity of EGCG was reduced for EGCG@AuNP and MPN@AuNP, thus promoting their paracellular association and hence the occurrence of NanoEL. Gap size analysis through calculation of the feret diameter frequency distribution showed the formation of 7–9 μm gaps for endothelial leakiness induced by all sample conditions, compared to the mean gap size (2.75 μm) for the negative control (Fig. S16). Stretched gaps related to morphological changes and reorganization of actin filaments were also evident in accordance with the disrupted VE-cadherin gaps in hCMEC/D3 monolayers (Fig. S17). However, the specific cytoskeletal reorganization and endothelial leakiness were not correlated with ROS production or cell death for the corresponding incubation time (Fig. S18). To further quantify the NanoEL, we measured the permeability of the hCMEC/D3 endothelial monolayer through a transwell assay, using fluorescein isothiocyanate conjugated dextran (FITC–dextran) as a fluorescent probe (Fig. 5d), and the results were qualitatively consistent with our immunofluorescence observations with confocal fluorescence microscopy (Fig. 5b, c).

2.6. Probing the interaction between Zn and EGCG using DFT and DMD simulations

The aim of our DFT study of Zn(II)-EGCG complexation was to obtain proper geometrical structures for the complexes and the corresponding interaction parameters of MPN for subsequent DMD simulations. Gas-phase DFT calculations of Zn(II)–EGCG complexes in tetrahedral (Td) and octahedral (Oh) coordination suggested that Zn(II) could form stable bis-and tris-coordination with the phenolic O atoms of the EGCG molecule. The optimized geometries of the two complexes and relevant geometrical parameters (bond length and bond angle) are presented in Fig. 6a, b and Table S4. The calculated Zn–O bond lengths were between 1.99 – 2.02 Å for the bis-coordinated complex. The O–Zn–O bond angle varied from 84.26° to 125.90°, which were all of reasonable range and in agreement with previously reported values.64 For the bis-complex, low-energy ground state geometry had a triplet spin state and favored a distorted tetrahedral geometry while for the tris- complex, a singlet spin state was favored. The triplet spin state of tris-coordinated Zn(II)-EGCG complex had an imaginary frequency and therefore was not considered in our calculations. For the tris-coordinated octahedral (Oh) complex, calculated Zn–O bond lengths were between 2.10 – 2.18 Å. This increase in the bond length can be credited to the spin-state, number of coordinated ligands to the central metal ion, and molecular geometry. We believe that variations in Zn–O bond length of up to 0.16 Å should not affect modelling of the coordination interaction of Zn(II) with EGCG in DMD simulations. The free energy of binding for the Td and Oh complexes were -70.24 and -62.69 kcal/mol, respectively, which confirmed the possibility of bis- along with tris-coordination to be observed in modelling MPN for our DMD simulations. The DFT-derived binding free energy difference was also consistent with the survey of solved zinc-coordinated structures,65 where both coordination numbers of four (tetrahedral complex) and six (octahedral complex) were observed, but the tetrahedral complex was more populated than the octahedral complex.

A previous study by Mucha et al.66 reported a six coordinated Zn(II) complex with flavonoid molecules with a distorted octahedral geometry and mainly six- and five-coordinated complexes with coumarin. Zn(II) can form six coordinated complexes with water molecules, while in zinc-finger proteins and enzymes, tetrahedral coordination is typically favored. Theoretical studies on assessing the role of nonaqua ligands on the geometry of Zn complexes are rather limited.67 In a protein, zinc prefers to be tetrahedrally coordinated to imidazole if the metal-binding site is buried, but octahedrally coordinated if the metal-binding site is accessible to solvent.67 In an aqueous solution or a protein environment, zinc can adopt either an octahedral or tetrahedral geometry, depending on the type of protein ligand and solvent accessibility of the metal-binding site. Based on this rationale and our DFT calculated data (geometrical parameters shown in Fig. 6a and Table S4), a stoichiometric ratio of 2:3 for Zn(II):EGCG in MD simulations was considered as this would enable the formation of both bis- and tris- coordination complexes in the MPN and allow us to study the effect of coordination on the inhibition of Aβ1–42 aggregation.

DMD simulations of Zn(II) with EGCG molecules of stoichiometry 2:3 spontaneously formed a mesoporous network with the mesochannels being highly dynamic in nature (Fig. 7a, simulation snapshots). To confirm the overall stability of the MPN and that the coordination was retained within the mesoporous network, simulations of pre-formed MPN without Aβ15–25 peptides were performed using a periodic box of dimension 70×70×200 Å3. Time evolution of the potential energy showed the MPN to be dynamic with varying mesochannel pore sizes within the network (Fig. 7b).

2.7 Efficient inhibition of Aβ aggregation by the mesoporous MPN

We first performed the aggregation simulations of six Aβ15–25 in the absence of MPN. As in our prior simulations 68 of Aβ fragments containing the same central amyloidogenic core, all six peptides formed β-sheet-rich aggregates from isolated monomers and reached steady states after 100 ns in all ten independent simulations. Using the last 300 ns of simulation trajectories after reaching equilibrium, we examined secondary structure content of the hexamers. Aβ15–25 hexamers mainly adopted β-sheets and random coils with a low propensity for helix and turn regions (Fig. 7c). Representative conformations of Aβ15–25 hexamers demonstrated that peptides mainly formed antiparallel β-sheets. Hence, our control simulations confirmed that Aβ15–25 formed β-sheet rich aggregates during the course of the simulations.

In the presence of preformed MPN, Aβ15–25 showed a significantly impaired propensity to form β-sheet-rich structures (Fig. 7d). Aβ15–25 preferred to interact with the Zn(II)-EGCG network instead of self-association, and they entered the porous mesochannels of the MPN (Fig. 7e). Polar contacts between Aβ and EGCG molecules as well as aromatic stacking stabilized their intermolecular interactions and enabled strong binding (Fig. 7e). As a result of their strong binding with the MPN, most Aβ15–25 stayed as monomers and only transient Aβ dimers were observed (Fig. 7e). Together, our DMD simulation showed the Zn(II)-EGCG MPN effectively halted Aβ fibrillization by sequestering the peptides inside the mesoporous network, supporting a novel anti-amyloidosis mechanism by the MPN. This anti-amyloidosis property of Zn(II)-EGCG MPN arose from the unique mesoporous structure (Fig. 7) as well as strong peptide binding by EGCG in forming ample hydrogen bonds and aromatic stacking interactions.

3. Conclusion

Nanomaterials have recently shown promise as inhibitors against amyloidosis associated with a range of debilitating neurodegenerative and metabolic diseases. While the exact mechanisms involved in nanoparticle-amyloid protein association remain to be fully elucidated, owing to the complexity of protein self-assembly and the vast library of nanomaterials design and surface functionalization,69 it is generally understood that elevated nanoparticle-protein interactions could effectively disrupt protein-protein association from accumulating toxic oligomers and other tertiary structures. Indeed, the combined use of MPN and AuNPs in the current study largely preserved the potency of the polyphenol in Aβ amyloidosis inhibition (Figs. 2, 3) while exploiting the capacity of AuNPs in AD-compromised BBB translocation via the paracellular space (Fig. 5).70 This afforded a biocompatible nanocomposite (Fig. 4) for enhancing the poor bioavailability of EGCG and enabling their downstream anti-amyloidosis applications. On the atomic scale, our DFT calculation showed that Zn(II) could be coordinated by EGCG in both bis- and tris- configurations. Our DMD simulations further revealed that Aβ interacted with the Zn(II)-EGCG network by entering the porous mesochannels of the MPN (Fig. 7e), thereby suppressing on-pathway self-assembly of the amyloidogenic peptides. The Aβ-EGCG interactions were mediated by their ample polar contacts and aromatic stacking, enabled by the “sponge-like” porous architecture of the MPN anchored on the AuNP substrate. Owing to the general nature of MPN in initiating H-bonding and aromatic interactions with proteins and peptides, combined with the delivery competence of AuNPs as well as the known anti-viral and anti-inflammatory signatures of EGCG, our facile nanocomposite system may find more usage against the broad pathogeneses6 of amyloid diseases beyond protein aggregation.

Supplementary Material

supplementary information

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by National Key R&amp;D Program of China (2021YFA1200900, 2022YFC2409700), National Natural Science Foundation of China (T2250710182), National Science Foundation (CAREER CBET-1553945) and National Institutes of Health (MIRA R35GM119691).

Figure 1. Synthesis and nanomaterials characterization.

a) Schematic representations of EGCG@AuNP and MPN@AuNP. b) TEM images of spherical 30 nm cit-AuNPs and Zn-EGCG AuNPs (MPN@AuNP) revealing the size and successful EGCG coating of AuNPs. Scale bars: 20 nm. c) Size distribution by volume (n=1) and zeta-potential distribution (n=3) of EGCG@AuNP (green) and MPN@AuNP (purple). d) Visible spectra (400–650 nm) indicating nearly overlapping maximum absorption peaks (~530 nm) for AuNPs (orange), EGCG@AuNP and MPN@AuNP. e) FTIR spectra of EGCG, EGCG@AuNP and MPN@AuNP confirming the presence of EGCG on the AuNP substrate through the vibration bands (stretching and plane bending) between the functional groups of EGCG. f) Colorimetric zinc detection of MPN@AuNP at 560 nm upon MPN digestion. Blank (dye), Zn(II) (0.04 mM), Zn(II) (0.08 mM) and non-digested MPN@AuNP (pH 7) were used as negative and positive controls.

Figure 2. In vitro inhibition of Aβ fibrillization by EGCG, MPN@AuNP and EGCG@AuNP.

a-c) ThT assays of Aβ (25 µM) in the presence and absence of (a) EGCG (50 µM/100 µM), (b) MPN@AuNP (50 µM/100 µM-EGCG) and (c) EGCG@AuNP (50 µM/100 µM-EGCG). ThT (50 μM) was used as control and data points were depicted as mean values of repeated measurements (n=3) ± standard errors of the mean (SEM). d, e) Bar graphs of t1/2, lag time, and apparent aggregation constant k values over time (h) for Aβ in the presence and absence of (d) EGCG, MPN@AuNP and (e) EGCG@AuNP. Data points were obtained from panels a-c. f-j) TEM images of Aβ in the presence (g) and absence (f) of EGCG (100 µM), and the presence of (h) MPN@AuNP (100 µM-EGCG) and (i, j) EGCG@AuNP (100 µM-EGCG). Panels i and j were acquired at two different magnifications and for different regions to illustrate the more global and regional effects of EGCG@AuNP on Aβ fibrillization inhibition. Amyloid protein samples for TEM were obtained after completion of the ThT assays (presented in panels a-c) and were instantly stained on formvar/carbon-coated copper grids.

Figure 3. Structural analysis for Aβ exposed to the nanoconstructs.

a-e) ATR-FTIR amide I region spectra (1600–1700 cm-1) of Aβ (0 h) (a), Aβ (42 h) (b), Aβ + EGCG (42 h) (c), Aβ + MPN@AuNP (42 h) (d) and Aβ + EGCG@AuNP (42 h) (e). f) Secondary structure profiles (β-sheets, α-helices/disordered, β-turns) derived from peak deconvolution of spectra presented in panels a-e. Each type of the secondary structure is highlighted (β-sheets: green, α-helices/disordered: purple, β-turns: red) corresponding to their specific wavenumber (cm-1) regions.56

Figure 4. Cell viability with EGCG and their associated nanoconstructs.

a-c) Effects of (a) EGCG, (b) MPN@AuNP and (c) EGCG@AuNP on SH-SY5Y cellular viability in a wide range of catechol concentrations (5–100 μM) at 12 h. d) Cell viability assay for Aβo (25 μM) in the presence and absence of EGCG@AuNP (100 μM), MPN@AuNP (100 μM) and EGCG (50 μM) at 12 h. EGCG or EGCG@AuNP or MPN@AuNP 500 µM (catechol) stocks were used for each assay. DMEM/F-12 medium solutions with MQ H2O (20% v/v) were used as controls. Data points are depicted as mean values of repeated measurements (n=3) ± standard errors of the mean (SEM). Statistical analysis was performed through one-way ANOVA: *p &lt; 0.05, **p &lt; 0.001, ***p &lt; 0.0005 and ****p &lt; 0.0001.

Figure 5. Paracellular transport of cit-AuNPs, EGCG@AuNP and MPN@AuNP through the induction of endothelial leakiness in a BBB endothelial cell line model (hCMEC/D3).

a) Schematic representation of the interaction between a specific cell-cell adhesion protein (VE-cadherin) of the adherens junction complex (VE-cadherin, p120, α-catenin, β-catenin, actin filament) and functionalized polyphenolic (EGCG@AuNP, MPN@AuNP) or cit- AuNPs. b) Integrity of the hCMEC/D3 monolayer was visualized with confocal fluorescence microscopy after 1 h treatment with citrate or EGCG functionalized AuNPs at 0.1 mM Au0 contained concentration. EGCG was used as control at 34 μM, which corresponded to the highest equivalent EGCG concentration in EGCG@AuNP (26 μM) and MPN@AuNP (34 μM) per 0.1 mM Au0. Positive and negative controls included treatments with cell medium (negative), thrombin (10 U/mL) or EDTA (0.1 mM) (positive). Channels: VE-cadherin (red), actin (green), nuclei (blue). Scale bars: 28 μm. c) Gap area (%) analysis of the gap area images depicted in panel b, which were semi-quantitatively analyzed using the Trainable Weka Segmentation plugin through ImageJ. Number of images analyzed (n=8) from treatments (n=2). d) Transwell assay (n=4) revealed qualitative permeability of the endothelial monolayer after 1 h incubation with all the sample conditions included in panel b. Data points are depicted as mean values of repeated measurements ± standard errors of the mean (SEM). Statistical analysis was performed through one-way ANOVA: *p &lt; 0.05, **p &lt; 0.001, ***p &lt; 0.0005 and ****p &lt; 0.0001.

Figure 6. Optimized geometries of EGCG–Zn(II) complex in (a) Tetrahedral (Td) and (b) Octahedral (Oh) coordination. The table shows some relevant geometrical parameters (bond length and bond angle) for selected atoms of EGCG–Zn(II) complex in Td (bis) coordination. The calculated geometrical parameters of EGCG–Zn(II) complex in Oh (tris) coordination is provided in Table S4. The free energy of binding for the bis- complex is calculated as -70.24 kcal/mol and -62.69 kcal/mol for the tris- complex, respectively, which suggests that Zn(II) can form both bis- and tris-coordination with EGCGs, though the bis-coordination is thermodynamically favored.

Figure 7. Time evolution of the potential energy of the Zn(II)-EGCG MPN. (a) Simulation using a 70×70×90 Å3 box, and (b) simulation of the pre-formed MPN within a 70×70×200 Å3 box. Periodic boundary conditions were used and the neighboring cells are shown in gray to illustrate the network structures. The simulated system is highlighted inside the box with solid lines. A 70×70×200 Å3 box with the z-dimension expanded for a pre-formed MPN ensured that the coordination within the Zn(II)-EGCG complex was retained and the MPN was stable yet dynamic. Per-residue secondary structure content of Aβ15–25 peptide hexamers, in the absence (c) and presence (d) of Zn(II)-EGCG MPN. Compared to the control simulations without MPN, Aβ15–25 peptides showed a significant decrease in the β-sheet content, especially in the amyloidogenic core region of 16–22, in the presence of the MPN. Representative structures of Aβ15–22 peptides in control simulations illustrated the formation of β-sheet rich hexamers. (e) Representative structure of Aβ15–25 hexamers interacting with the Zn(II)-EGCG MPN. The periodic boundary condition is illustrated by showing neighboring cells in gray, highlighting the mesoporous network of the MPN. The simulated system is highlighted inside the simulation box with black lines. The dimension of periodic box has been truncated along z-axis for visualization purpose. Zn(II) ions are shown as grey spheres, EGCG molecules in cyan, and six Aβ15–25 peptides colored in orange, violet, pink, green, yellow, and blue.

ASSOCIATED CONTENT

Supporting Information

The Supporting Information is available free of charge. Additional details include TEM imaging, DFT configurations, UV-vis absorbance, ThT kinetics assay, ATR-FTIR spectroscopy, SH-SY5Y cell mortality and ROS assay, Feret diameter frequency distributions, VE-cadherin confocal microscopy, a hCMEC/D3 ROS assay (Figs. S1–18), and Tables S1–S4 (PDF).

Conflict of Interest

The authors declare no conflict of interest.


References

(1) Long JM ; Holtzman DM Alzheimer Disease: An Update on Pathobiology and Treatment Strategies. Cell 2019, 179 , 312–339.31564456
(2) Hardy JA ; Higgins GA Alzheimer's Disease: The Amyloid Cascade Hypothesis. Science 1992, 256 , 184–185.1566067
(3) Ke PC ; Zhou R ; Serpell LC ; Riek R ; Knowles TPJ ; Lashuel HA ; Gazit E ; Hamley IW ; Davis TP ; Fandrich M ; Otzen DE ; Chapman MR ; Dobson CM ; Eisenberg DS ; Mezzenga R Half a Century of Amyloids: Past, Present and Future. Chem Soc Rev 2020, 49 , 5473–5509.32632432
(4) Serra-Batiste M ; Ninot-Pedrosa M ; Bayoumi M ; Gairi M ; Maglia G ; Carulla N Abeta42 Assembles into Specific Beta-Barrel Pore-Forming Oligomers in Membrane-Mimicking Environments. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2016, 113 , 10866–10871.27621459
(5) Ciudad S ; Puig E ; Botzanowski T ; Meigooni M ; Arango AS ; Do J ; Mayzel M ; Bayoumi M ; Chaignepain S ; Maglia G ; Cianferani S ; Orekhov V ; Tajkhorshid E ; Bardiaux B ; Carulla N Abeta(1–42) Tetramer and Octamer Structures Reveal Edge Conductivity Pores as a Mechanism for Membrane Damage. Nat Commun 2020, 11 , 3014.32541820
(6) Ke PC ; Sani MA ; Ding F ; Kakinen A ; Javed I ; Separovic F ; Davis TP ; Mezzenga R Implications of Peptide Assemblies in Amyloid Diseases. Chem Soc Rev 2017, 46 , 6492–6531.28702523
(7) Mahmoudi M ; Akhavan O ; Ghavami M ; Rezaee F ; Ghiasi SM Graphene Oxide Strongly Inhibits Amyloid Beta Fibrillation. Nanoscale 2012, 4 , 7322–7325.23079862
(8) Gao N ; Sun H ; Dong K ; Ren J ; Duan T ; Xu C ; Qu X Transition-Metal-Substituted Polyoxometalate Derivatives as Functional Anti-Amyloid Agents for Alzheimer's Disease. Nat Commun 2014, 5 , 3422.24595206
(9) Luo Q ; Lin YX ; Yang PP ; Wang Y ; Qi GB ; Qiao ZY ; Li BN ; Zhang K ; Zhang JP ; Wang L ; Wang H A Self-Destructive Nanosweeper That Captures and Clears Amyloid Beta-Peptides. Nat Commun 2018, 9 , 1802.29728565
(10) Zhao Y ; Cai J ; Liu Z ; Li Y ; Zheng C ; Zheng Y ; Chen Q ; Chen H ; Ma F ; An Y ; Xiao L ; Jiang C ; Shi L ; Kang C ; Liu Y Nanocomposites Inhibit the Formation, Mitigate the Neurotoxicity, and Facilitate the Removal of Beta-Amyloid Aggregates in Alzheimer's Disease Mice. Nano Lett 2019, 19 , 674–683.30444372
(11) Andrikopoulos N ; Li Y ; Cecchetto L ; Nandakumar A ; Da Ros T ; Davis TP ; Velonia K ; Ke PC Nanomaterial Synthesis, an Enabler of Amyloidosis Inhibition against Human Diseases. Nanoscale 2020, 12 , 14422–14440.32638780
(12) Hu X-L ; Kwon N ; Yan K-C ; Sedgwick AC ; Chen G-R ; He X-P ; James TD ; Yoon J Bio-Conjugated Advanced Materials for Targeted Disease Theranostics. Advanced Functional Materials 2020, 30 , 1907906.
(13) Ejima H ; Richardson JJ ; Liang K ; Best JP ; van Koeverden MP ; Such GK ; Cui J ; Caruso F One-Step Assembly of Coordination Complexes for Versatile Film and Particle Engineering. Science 2013, 341 , 154–157.23846899
(14) Zhang W ; Besford QA ; Christofferson AJ ; Charchar P ; Richardson JJ ; Elbourne A ; Kempe K ; Hagemeyer CE ; Field MR ; McConville CF ; Yarovsky I ; Caruso F Cobalt-Directed Assembly of Antibodies onto Metal-Phenolic Networks for Enhanced Particle Targeting. Nano Lett 2020, 20 , 2660–2666.32155075
(15) Meng X ; Chen L ; Lv R ; Liu M ; He N ; Wang Z A Metal–Phenolic Network-Based Multifunctional Nanocomposite with Ph-Responsive Ros Generation and Drug Release for Synergistic Chemodynamic/Photothermal/Chemo-Therapy. Journal of Materials Chemistry B 2020, 8 , 2177–2188.32096524
(16) Ejima H ; Richardson JJ ; Caruso F Metal-Phenolic Networks as a Versatile Platform to Engineer Nanomaterials and Biointerfaces. Nano Today 2017, 12 , 136–148.
(17) Zhang W ; Christofferson AJ ; Besford QA ; Richardson JJ ; Guo J ; Ju Y ; Kempe K ; Yarovsky I ; Caruso F Metal-Dependent Inhibition of Amyloid Fibril Formation: Synergistic Effects of Cobalt-Tannic Acid Networks. Nanoscale 2019, 11 , 1921–1928.30644497
(18) Bieschke J ; Russ J ; Friedrich RP ; Ehrnhoefer DE ; Wobst H ; Neugebauer K ; Wanker EE Egcg Remodels Mature Alpha-Synuclein and Amyloid-Beta Fibrils and Reduces Cellular Toxicity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010, 107 , 7710–7715.20385841
(19) Ehrnhoefer DE ; Bieschke J ; Boeddrich A ; Herbst M ; Masino L ; Lurz R ; Engemann S ; Pastore A ; Wanker EE Egcg Redirects Amyloidogenic Polypeptides into Unstructured, Off-Pathway Oligomers. Nat Struct Mol Biol 2008, 15 , 558–566.18511942
(20) Meng F ; Abedini A ; Plesner A ; Verchere CB ; Raleigh DP The Flavanol (-)- Epigallocatechin 3-Gallate Inhibits Amyloid Formation by Islet Amyloid Polypeptide, Disaggregates Amyloid Fibrils, and Protects Cultured Cells against Iapp-Induced Toxicity. Biochemistry 2010, 49 , 8127–8133.20707388
(21) Palhano FL ; Lee J ; Grimster NP ; Kelly JW Toward the Molecular Mechanism(S) by Which Egcg Treatment Remodels Mature Amyloid Fibrils. J Am Chem Soc 2013, 135 , 7503–7510.23611538
(22) Kaihatsu K ; Yamabe M ; Ebara Y Antiviral Mechanism of Action of Epigallocatechin-3-O-Gallate and Its Fatty Acid Esters. Molecules 2018, 23.30577607
(23) Singh NA ; Mandal AK ; Khan ZA Potential Neuroprotective Properties of Epigallocatechin-3-Gallate (Egcg). Nutr J 2016, 15 , 60.27268025
(24) Jeon J ; Kim JH ; Lee CK ; Oh CH ; Song HJ The Antimicrobial Activity of (-)- Epigallocatehin-3-Gallate and Green Tea Extracts against Pseudomonas Aeruginosa and Escherichia Coli Isolated from Skin Wounds. Ann Dermatol 2014, 26 , 564–569.25324647
(25) Sait A ; Angeli C ; Doig AJ ; Day PJR Viral Involvement in Alzheimer's Disease. ACS Chem Neurosci 2021, 12 , 1049–1060.33687205
(26) Kim AC ; Lim S ; Kim YK Metal Ion Effects on Abeta and Tau Aggregation. Int J Mol Sci 2018, 19.30577572
(27) Ha C ; Ryu J ; Park CB Metal Ions Differentially Influence the Aggregation and Deposition of Alzheimer's Beta-Amyloid on a Solid Template. Biochemistry 2007, 46 , 6118–6125.17455909
(28) Lee MC ; Yu WC ; Shih YH ; Chen CY ; Guo ZH ; Huang SJ ; Chan JCC ; Chen YR Zinc Ion Rapidly Induces Toxic, Off-Pathway Amyloid-Beta Oligomers Distinct from Amyloid-Beta Derived Diffusible Ligands in Alzheimer's Disease. Sci Rep 2018, 8 , 4772.29555950
(29) Cardoso SM ; Rego AC ; Pereira C ; Oliveira CR Protective Effect of Zinc on Amyloid-Beta 25–35 and 1–40 Mediated Toxicity. Neurotox Res 2005, 7 , 273–281.16179264
(30) Wang L ; Yin YL ; Liu XZ ; Shen P ; Zheng YG ; Lan XR ; Lu CB ; Wang JZ Current Understanding of Metal Ions in the Pathogenesis of Alzheimer's Disease. Transl Neurodegener 2020, 9 , 10.32266063
(31) Ayton S ; Lei P ; Bush AI Metallostasis in Alzheimer's Disease. Free Radic Biol Med 2013, 62 , 76–89.23142767
(32) Ding F ; Tsao D ; Nie H ; Dokholyan NV Ab Initio Folding of Proteins with All-Atom Discrete Molecular Dynamics. Structure 2008, 16 , 1010–1018.18611374
(33) Liu X ; Atwater M ; Wang J ; Huo Q Extinction Coefficient of Gold Nanoparticles with Different Sizes and Different Capping Ligands. Colloids Surf B Biointerfaces 2007, 58 , 3–7.16997536
(34) Andrikopoulos N ; Song Z ; Wan X ; Douek AM ; Javed I ; Fu C ; Xing Y ; Xin F ; Li Y ; Kakinen A ; Koppel K ; Qiao R ; Whittaker AK ; Kaslin J ; Davis TP ; Song Y ; Ding F ; Ke PC Inhibition of Amyloid Aggregation and Toxicity with Janus Iron Oxide Nanoparticles. Chemistry of Materials 2021, 33 , 6484–6500.34887621
(35) Lee M ; Ni N ; Tang H ; Li Y ; Wei W ; Kakinen A ; Wan X ; Davis TP ; Song Y ; Leong DT ; Ding F ; Ke PC A Framework of Paracellular Transport Via Nanoparticles-Induced Endothelial Leakiness. Adv Sci (Weinh) 2021, 8 , e2102519.34495564
(36) Jean Nono H ; Bikele Mama D ; Ghogomu JN ; Younang E A Dft Study of Structural and Bonding Properties of Complexes Obtained from First-Row Transition Metal Chelation by 3-Alkyl-4-Phenylacetylamino-4,5-Dihydro-1h-1,2,4-Triazol-5-One and Its Derivatives. Bioinorg Chem Appl 2017, 2017 , 5237865.28757814
(37) Hay PJ ; Wadt WR Ab Initio Effective Core Potentials for Molecular Calculations. Potentials for K to Au Including the Outermost Core Orbitals. The Journal of Chemical Physics 1985, 82 , 299–310.
(38) Ditchfield R ; Hehre WJ ; Pople JA Self‐Consistent Molecular‐Orbital Methods. Ix. An Extended Gaussian‐Type Basis for Molecular‐Orbital Studies of Organic Molecules. The Journal of Chemical Physics 1971, 54 , 724–728.
(39) Francl MM ; Pietro WJ ; Hehre WJ ; Binkley JS ; Gordon MS ; DeFrees DJ ; Pople JA Self‐Consistent Molecular Orbital Methods. Xxiii. A Polarization‐Type Basis Set for Second‐Row Elements. The Journal of Chemical Physics 1982, 77 , 3654–3665.
(40) Saikia N ; Yanez-Orozco IS ; Qiu R ; Hao P ; Milikisiyants S ; Ou E ; Hamilton GL ; Weninger KR ; Smirnova TI ; Sanabria H ; Ding F Integrative Structural Dynamics Probing of the Conformational Heterogeneity in Synaptosomal-Associated Protein 25. Cell Reports Physical Science 2021, 2 , 100616.34888535
(41) Emperador A ; Orozco M Discrete Molecular Dynamics Approach to the Study of Disordered and Aggregating Proteins. J Chem Theory Comput 2017, 13 , 1454–1461.28157327
(42) Brodie NI ; Popov KI ; Petrotchenko EV ; Dokholyan NV ; Borchers CH Solving Protein Structures Using Short-Distance Cross-Linking Constraints as a Guide for Discrete Molecular Dynamics Simulations. Sci Adv 2017, 3 , e1700479.28695211
(43) Lazaridis T ; Karplus M Effective Energy Function for Proteins in Solution. Proteins: Structure, Function, and Bioinformatics 1999, 35 , 133–152.
(44) Ding F ; Borreguero JM ; Buldyrey SV ; Stanley HE ; Dokholyan NV Mechanism for the Alpha-Helix to Beta-Hairpin Transition. Proteins 2003, 53 , 220–228.14517973
(45) Nedumpully-Govindan P ; Kakinen A ; Pilkington EH ; Davis TP ; Chun Ke P ; Ding F Stabilizing Off-Pathway Oligomers by Polyphenol Nanoassemblies for Iapp Aggregation Inhibition. Sci Rep 2016, 6 , 19463.26763863
(46) Ge X ; Kakinen A ; Gurzov EN ; Yang W ; Pang L ; Pilkington EH ; Govindan-Nedumpully P ; Chen P ; Separovic F ; Davis TP ; Ke PC ; Ding F Zinc-Coordination and C-Peptide Complexation: A Potential Mechanism for the Endogenous Inhibition of Iapp Aggregation. Chem Commun (Camb) 2017, 53 , 9394–9397.28745731
(47) Kabsch W ; Sander C Dictionary of Protein Secondary Structure: Pattern Recognition of Hydrogen-Bonded and Geometrical Features. Biopolymers 1983, 22 , 2577–2637.6667333
(48) Hyung SJ ; DeToma AS ; Brender JR ; Lee S ; Vivekanandan S ; Kochi A ; Choi JS ; Ramamoorthy A ; Ruotolo BT ; Lim MH Insights into Antiamyloidogenic Properties of the Green Tea Extract (-)-Epigallocatechin-3-Gallate toward Metal-Associated Amyloid-Beta Species. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2013, 110 , 3743–3748.23426629
(49) Lee YH ; Lin Y ; Cox SJ ; Kinoshita M ; Sahoo BR ; Ivanova M ; Ramamoorthy A Zinc Boosts Egcg's Hiapp Amyloid Inhibition Both in Solution and Membrane. Biochim Biophys Acta Proteins Proteom 2019, 1867 , 529–536.30468883
(50) Huang R ; Vivekanandan S ; Brender JR ; Abe Y ; Naito A ; Ramamoorthy A Nmr Characterization of Monomeric and Oligomeric Conformations of Human Calcitonin and Its Interaction with Egcg. J Mol Biol 2012, 416 , 108–120.22200484
(51) Pithadia A ; Brender JR ; Fierke CA ; Ramamoorthy A Inhibition of Iapp Aggregation and Toxicity by Natural Products and Derivatives. J Diabetes Res 2016, 2016 , 2046327.26649317
(52) Besford QA ; Ju Y ; Wang T-Y ; Yun G ; Cherepanov P ; Hagemeyer CE ; Cavalieri F ; Caruso F Self-Assembled Metal–Phenolic Networks on Emulsions as Low-Fouling and Ph-Responsive Particles. Small 2018, 14 , 1802342.
(53) Xie W ; Guo Z ; Zhao L ; Wei Y Metal-Phenolic Networks: Facile Assembled Complexes for Cancer Theranostics. Theranostics 2021, 11 , 6407–6426.33995665
(54) Dou W-T ; Han H-H ; Sedgwick AC ; Zhu G-B ; Zang Y ; Yang X-R ; Yoon J ; James TD ; Li J ; He X-P Fluorescent Probes for the Detection of Disease-Associated Biomarkers. Science Bulletin 2022, 67 , 853–878.36546238
(55) Acharya A ; Stockmann J ; Beyer L ; Rudack T ; Nabers A ; Gumbart JC ; Gerwert K ; Batista VS The Effect of (-)-Epigallocatechin-3-Gallate on the Amyloid-Beta Secondary Structure. Biophys J 2020, 119 , 349–359.32579965
(56) Li H ; Lantz R ; Du D Vibrational Approach to the Dynamics and Structure of Protein Amyloids. Molecules 2019, 24.31861689
(57) Ouyang J ; Zhu K ; Liu Z ; Huang J Prooxidant Effects of Epigallocatechin-3-Gallate in Health Benefits and Potential Adverse Effect. Oxid Med Cell Longev 2020, 2020 , 9723686.32850004
(58) Li Y ; Tang H ; Andrikopoulos N ; Javed I ; Cecchetto L ; Nandakumar A ; Kakinen A ; Davis TP ; Ding F ; Ke PC The Membrane Axis of Alzheimer's Nanomedicine. Adv Nanobiomed Res 2021, 1 .
(59) Garcia-Garcia E ; Andrieux K ; Gil S ; Couvreur P Colloidal Carriers and Blood-Brain Barrier (Bbb) Translocation: A Way to Deliver Drugs to the Brain? Int J Pharm 2005, 298 , 274–292.15896933
(60) Setyawati MI ; Tay CY ; Chia SL ; Goh SL ; Fang W ; Neo MJ ; Chong HC ; Tan SM ; Loo SC ; Ng KW ; Xie JP ; Ong CN ; Tan NS ; Leong DT Titanium Dioxide Nanomaterials Cause Endothelial Cell Leakiness by Disrupting the Homophilic Interaction of Ve-Cadherin. Nat Commun 2013, 4 , 1673.23575677
(61) Peng F ; Setyawati MI ; Tee JK ; Ding X ; Wang J ; Nga ME ; Ho HK ; Leong DT Nanoparticles Promote in Vivo Breast Cancer Cell Intravasation and Extravasation by Inducing Endothelial Leakiness. Nat Nanotechnol 2019, 14 , 279–286.30692675
(62) Xie L ; Chiang ET ; Wu X ; Kelly GT ; Kanteti P ; Singleton PA ; Camp SM ; Zhou T ; Dudek SM ; Natarajan V ; Wang T ; Black SM ; Garcia JG ; Jacobson JR Regulation of Thrombin-Induced Lung Endothelial Cell Barrier Disruption by Protein Kinase C Delta. PLoS One 2016, 11 , e0158865.27442243
(63) Dejana E Endothelial Cell-Cell Junctions: Happy Together. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2004, 5 , 261–270.15071551
(64) Huang J-H ; Hou G-F ; Ma D-S ; Yu Y-H ; Jiang W-H ; Huang Q ; Gao J-S Two Pairs of Zn(Ii) Coordination Polymer Enantiomers Based on Chiral Aromatic Polycarboxylate Ligands: Synthesis, Crystal Structures and Properties. RSC Advances 2017, 7 , 18650–18657.
(65) Dudev M ; Wang J ; Dudev T ; Lim C Factors Governing the Metal Coordination Number in Metal Complexes from Cambridge Structural Database Analyses. J Phys Chem B 2006, 110 , 1889–1895.16471760
(66) Mucha P ; Skoczynska A ; Malecka M ; Hikisz P ; Budzisz E Overview of the Antioxidant and Anti-Inflammatory Activities of Selected Plant Compounds and Their Metal Ions Complexes. Molecules 2021, 26.35011258
(67) Dudev T ; Lim C Tetrahedral Vs Octahedral Zinc Complexes with Ligands of Biological Interest:  A Dft/Cdm Study. Journal of the American Chemical Society 2000, 122 , 11146–11153.
(68) Sun Y ; Wang B ; Ge X ; Ding F Distinct Oligomerization and Fibrillization Dynamics of Amyloid Core Sequences of Amyloid-Beta and Islet Amyloid Polypeptide. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2017, 19 , 28414–28423.29038815
(69) Ke PC ; Pilkington EH ; Sun Y ; Javed I ; Kakinen A ; Peng G ; Ding F ; Davis TP Mitigation of Amyloidosis with Nanomaterials. Adv Mater 2020, 32 , e1901690.31183916
(70) Kurz C ; Walker L ; Rauchmann BS ; Perneczky R Dysfunction of the Blood-Brain Barrier in Alzheimer's Disease: Evidence from Human Studies. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 2022, 48 , e12782.34823269
