LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9309609
20556
Am J Geriatr Psychiatry
Am J Geriatr Psychiatry
The American journal of geriatric psychiatry : official journal of the American Association for Geriatric Psychiatry
1064-7481
1545-7214

37798224
10655836
10.1016/j.jagp.2023.09.013
NIHMS1941727
Article
Life-Course Brain Health as a Determinant of Late-Life Mental Health: American Association for Geriatric Psychiatry Expert Panel Recommendations
Eyre Harris A. M.B.B.S., Ph.D. Brain Capital Alliance, San Francisco, CA
Neuroscience-inspired Policy Initiative (NIPI), New Approaches to Economic Challenges, Office of the Chief Economist, Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development, Paris, France
Center for Health and Biosciences, The Baker Institute for Public Policy, Rice University, Houston, TX
Meadows Mental Health Policy Institute, Dallas, TX
Euro-Mediterranean Economists Association, Barcelona, Spain
Institute for Mental and Physical Health and Clinical Translation (IMPACT), Deakin University and Barwon Health, Geelong, Victoria, Australia
Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX
Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Texas Health Sciences Center, Houston, TX
Global Brain Health Institute, University of California, San Francisco (UCSF) San Francisco, CA
Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland
FondaMental Fondation, Paris, France
Latin American Brain Health Institute (BrainLat), Universidad Adolfo Ibáñez, Santiago de Chile, Chile
Houston Methodist Behavioral Health, Houston Methodist Academic Institute, Houston, TX

Stirland Lucy E. M.B.Ch.B., Ph.D. Global Brain Health Institute, University of California, San Francisco (UCSF), San Francisco, CA
Division of Psychiatry, Centre for Clinical Brain Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK

Jeste Dilip V. M.D. Global Research Network on Social Determinants of Mental Health and Exposomics, La Jolla, CA

Reynolds Charles F. III M.D. Department of Psychiatry, The University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA

Berk Michael M.D., Ph.D. Institute for Mental and Physical Health and Clinical Translation (IMPACT), Deakin University and Barwon Health, Geelong, Victoria, Australia
Department of Psychiatry, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia
The Florey Institute for Neuroscience and Mental Health, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia
ORYGEN Youth Health, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia

Ibanez Agustin Ph.D. Brain Capital Alliance, San Francisco, CA
Neuroscience-inspired Policy Initiative (NIPI), New Approaches to Economic Challenges, Office of the Chief Economist, Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development, Paris, France
Global Brain Health Institute, University of California, San Francisco (UCSF), San Francisco, CA
Latin American Brain Health Institute (BrainLat), Universidad Adolfo Ibáñez, Santiago de Chile, Chile
Cognitive Neuroscience Center (CNC), Universidad de San Andrés, and National Scientific and Technical Research Council (CONICET), Buenos Aires, Argentina

Dawson Walter D. D.Phil. Brain Capital Alliance, San Francisco, CA
Neuroscience-inspired Policy Initiative (NIPI), New Approaches to Economic Challenges, Office of the Chief Economist, Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development, Paris, France
Global Brain Health Institute, University of California, San Francisco (UCSF) San Francisco, CA
Oregon Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center, School of Medicine, Oregon Health &amp; Science University, Portland, OR
Institute on Aging, College of Urban &amp; Public Affairs, Portland State University, Portland, OR

Lawlor Brian M.D. Global Brain Health Institute, University of California, San Francisco (UCSF) San Francisco, CA

Leroi Iracema M.D. Global Brain Health Institute, University of California, San Francisco (UCSF) San Francisco, CA

Yaffe Kristine M.D., Ph.D. Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA
Department of Psychiatry and Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA

Gatchel Jennifer R. M.D., Ph.D. Division of Geriatric Psychiatry, McLean Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Belmont, MA
Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA

Karp Jordan F. M.D. Department of Psychiatry, College of Medicine, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ

Newhouse Paul M.D. Center for Cognitive Medicine, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN
Geriatric Research, Education, and Clinical Center (GRECC), Veterans Affairs-Tennessee Valley Health Care System, Nashville, TN

Rosand Jonathan M.D., M.Sc. McCance Center for Brain Health, Department of Neurology, Mass General Brigham, Boston, MA
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA

Letourneau Nicole Ph.D., R.N., F.R.S.C. Alberta Children’s Hospital Research Institute, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada

Bayen Eleonore M.D., Ph.D. Global Brain Health Institute, University of California, San Francisco (UCSF) San Francisco, CA
Department of Physical and Rehabilitation Medicine, Sorbonne Université – Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, France

Farina Francesca Ph.D. Global Brain Health Institute, University of California, San Francisco (UCSF) San Francisco, CA
Feinberg School of Medicine, Department of Medical Social Sciences, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL

Booi Laura Ph.D. Global Brain Health Institute, University of California, San Francisco (UCSF) San Francisco, CA
Centre for Dementia Research, School of Health, Leeds Beckett University, Leeds, UK

Devanand Devangere P. M.D. Division of Geriatric Psychiatry, New York State Psychiatric Institute and College of Physicians and Surgeons of Columbia University, New York, NY

Mintzer Jacobo M.D., M.B.A. Ralph. H. Johnson VA Medical Center, Charleston, SC and Professor, College of Health Professions, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC

Madigan Sheri Ph.D. University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada
Alberta Children’s Hospital Research Institute, Calgary, Alberta, Canada

Jayapurwala Inez M.B.A. Brain Health Nexus, New York, NY

Wong Stephen T.C. Ph.D. T.T. and W.F. Chao Center for BRAIN Houston Methodist Hospital, Houston, TX
Houston Methodist Cancer Center, Houston Methodist Hospital, Houston, TX
Department of Radiology, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY
Department of Neurosciences, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY

Falcoa Veronica Podence M.D. Institute for Mental and Physical Health and Clinical Translation (IMPACT), Deakin University and Barwon Health, Geelong, Victoria, Australia
Hospital Beatriz Angelo, Lisbon, Portugal

Cummings Jeffrey L. M.D., Sc.D. Chambers-Grundy Center for Transformative Neuroscience, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, NV

Reichman William M.D. Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada

Lock Sarah Lenz J.D. Global Council on Brain Health, Policy and Brain Health, AARP, Washington, DC

Bennett Marc Ph.D. School of Psychology, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin, Ireland
MRC-Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, University of Cambridge, England, UK

Ahuja Rajiv J.D. Center for the Future of Aging, The Milken Institute, Washington, DC

Steffens David C. M.D., M.H.S. Department of Psychiatry, University of Connecticut School of Medicine, Farmington, CT

Elkind Mitchell S.V. M.D. Department of Neurology, Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, and Department of Epidemiology, Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia University, New York City, NY
American Heart Association/American Stroke Association, Dallas, TX

Lavretsky Helen M.D., M”.S. David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), Los Angeles, CA
Semel Institute for Neuroscience and Human Behavior, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

HAE and HL wrote initial draft. All coauthors edited final publication. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.

correspondence and reprint requests to Harris A. Eyre, M.D., Ph.D., The Baker Institute for Public Policy, Rice University, Houston, TX harris.eyre@rice.edu
9 11 2023
12 2023
26 9 2023
01 12 2024
31 12 10171031
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
This position statement of the Expert Panel on Brain Health of the American Association for Geriatric Psychiatry (AAGP) emphasizes the critical role of life course brain health in shaping mental well-being during the later stages of life. Evidence posits that maintaining optimal brain health earlier in life is crucial for preventing and managing brain aging-related disorders such as dementia/cognitive decline, depression, stroke, and anxiety. We advocate for a holistic approach that integrates medical, psychological, and social frameworks with culturally tailored interventions across the lifespan to promote brain health and overall mental well-being in aging adults across all communities. Furthermore, our statement underscores the significance of prevention, early detection, and intervention in identifying cognitive decline, mood changes, and related mental illness. Action should also be taken to understand and address the needs of communities that traditionally have unequal access to preventive health information and services. By implementing culturally relevant and tailored evidence-based practices and advancing research in geriatric psychiatry, behavioral neurology, and geroscience, we can enhance the quality of life for older adults facing the unique challenges of aging. This position statement emphasizes the intrinsic link between brain health and mental health in aging, urging healthcare professionals, policymakers, and a broader society to prioritize comprehensive strategies that safeguard and promote brain health from birth through later years across all communities. The AAGP Expert Panel has the goal of launching further activities in the coming months and years.

Brain health
late-life
neurology
psychiatry
life-course
well-being
prevention

pmcINTRODUCTION

Life-long brain health is essential to preventing late-life mental disorders and promoting mental well-being.1–3 The World Health Organization (WHO) recently released a position paper on brain health, defining it as “the state of brain functioning across cognitive, sensory, social-emotional, behavioral, and motor domains, allowing a person to realize their full potential over their life course, irrespective of the presence or absence of disorders.”4 Importantly, this paper highlights the central role that the brain plays in mental health, physical health, and key societal goals. It further points out the need to develop metrics to be able to measure and monitor the state of brain functioning and to implement these metrics cost-effectively into practice.

With the population aged 65 years and likely to reach two billion people by 2050, global aging is driving the already high and rising prevalence of late-life mental, substance, and neurological disorders. We therefore require novel solutions to boost the capacity for resilience and preserve the independence of older adults for as long as possible.1,5–7 A foundational approach involves re-framing efforts toward primary prevention. Efforts at curbing neuropsychiatric diseases of aging will need to start decades earlier, ideally in childhood and adolescence, to reduce the cumulative effects of trauma, lifestyle, and environmental toxicities that can drive neurodegenerative and vascular changes later in life.8–11 In regions with larger inequalities, mental health is one of the foremost challenges to healthy aging.12

Geriatric psychiatrists and mental health providers are uniquely positioned to advocate for the societal shifts required to improve brain health at the population level and therefore reduce the impact of dementia. In addition, through secondary and tertiary prevention efforts, we can optimize the brain health and function of older adults with mental illnesses before they develop dementia, and try to limit the progression of, or harm from, dementia in people who are already symptomatic. The linked concepts of brain health and brain capital, an emerging construct integrating cognitive, emotional and social brain resources, provide a new opportunity to bridge the lifespan-focused fields of brain and mental health by working with stakeholders across public and private enterprises to harness collective resources and cultivate transdisciplinary scientific, public health, and economic innovations.13–16 The adoption of brain health initiatives by professionals working in mental health will allow a positive approach to risk reduction and promote unity with allied clinical neuroscience practitioners across the lifespan.

BRAIN CAPITAL AS THE WORLD’S MOST IMPORTANT RESOURCE

With a confluence of major megatrends—climate change, generative AI, quantum computing, political and economic instability, we believe brain capital is the world’s most important resource14 and the global economy increasingly relies on brain capital.17 The WHO noted that investing in building brain capital is fundamental to meet modern societal challenges and to drive innovation.4 Indeed, policies and investments to boost brain power can increase productivity, stimulate greater creativity and economic dynamism, afford social cohesion, and create a more resilient, adaptable, and sustainability-engaged populace.18,19

CONTEMPORARY DEFINITIONS OF BRAIN HEALTH

A recent concept analysis synthesized the definition of brain health as “a life-long, multidimensional, dynamic state consisting of cognitive, emotional, and motor domains underpinned by physiological processes and can be objectively measured and subjectively experienced.”20 As such, measures of brain health must be developed through a process of co-design with researchers and those with lived experience.21 The coauthors of this paper noted brain health is influenced by eco-biopsychosocial determinants. A full inventory of brain health definitions was completed by the WHO and can be found via their report.4

A Presidential Advisory from the American Heart Association (AHA)/American Stroke Association (ASA) defined optimal brain health for adults in a 2017 paper.22 They identified seven metrics that originated from AHA’s Life’s Simple 7, including four ideal health behaviors (nonsmoking, physical activity at goal levels, healthy diet consistent with current guidelines, and body mass index &lt;25 kg/m2) and three ideal health factors (untreated blood pressure &lt;120/&lt;80 mm Hg, untreated total cholesterol &lt;200 mg/dL, and fasting blood glucose &lt;100 mg/dL). In 2022, an updated version “Life’s Essential 8, included an additional recommendation of sleep duration between 7 and 9 hours, and proposed additional studies on stress management and the role of positive and negative psychological factors and the Social Determinants of Health.23 In addition, in relation to the maintenance of cognitive health, the AHA/ASA recommend following previously published guidance from the AHA/ASA, National Academy of Medicine, and Alzheimer’s Association that incorporates control of cardiovascular risks and suggest social engagement and other allied relationship strategies. This definition opens the opportunity to improve brain health through primordial prevention. The AHA/ASA further recommends the important role of primary care physicians in addressing optimal brain health, as the burden of cognitive aging will likely not be satisfactorily addressed by mental and neurological health professionals alone.24

To date, several initiatives have been launched to promote brain health including Brain Awareness Week and World Brain Day. However, the majority of which have roots in the neurology community (Box 1). This is an opportune time for geriatric psychiatry to embrace the concept of brain health as a determinant of late-life mental and cognitive health. It implies further increasing the engagement of many practitioners, scientists, patients, advocates, and society as a whole. Adopting brain health perspectives for health maintenance and illness prevention can provide a critical linkage to help educate, align, and mobilize stakeholders involved in healthy and positive aging.

BRAIN HEALTH SCIENCE

Brain health begins very early in development, with overwhelming evidence pointing to adverse impacts of stressful environmental exposures and concomitant excessive glucocorticoids during fetal, infancy and early childhood development on behavioral disorder (e.g. attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder, anxiety).26 When children experience behavioral disorders, it can place them on a trajectory of greater risk for persistent mental health disorders (e.g., depression, anxiety) as youth. In turn, mental health disorders in youth predict mental health disorders in adults,8 and given that globally, one in seven youth experiences a mental disorder,27 the scale of this problem and need for greater prevention efforts is clear.

There is growing evidence that interventions at the earliest stages of life may improve developmental mental and brain health. Early childhood poverty correlates with differences in brain structure and function. In the Baby’s First Years trial; however, 1,000 low-income mothers were randomly assigned to receive either large or nominal monthly cash gifts shortly after delivery of their infants.28 Those infants whose mothers received larger gifts showed more power in high-frequency bands on electroencephalography at 1 year, a pattern associated with development of subsequent cognitive skills. These changes, which likely reflect neuroplasticity and environmental adaptation, provide experimental evidence that increasing resources for poor mothers improves their children’s brain health.

There are several recent examples of emerging brain science that exemplify the critical link between brain health and late-life mental and cognitive health. Studies of sleep and circadian rhythms, for example, demonstrate a bidirectional link. They are both transdiagnostic and relevant to the entire life course, and sleep disturbance is increasingly recognized as a risk factor for incident dementia.29 Brain disorders are often associated with sleep disturbances and changes in rest-activity rhythms. Conversely, impairments in sleep health (e.g., loss of slow-wave or deep sleep) impair key sleep-related functions. These include the efficient functioning of the immune system and lymphatic function, thereby compromising the body’s defense systems and the removal of metabolic waste.30 Treatment of sleep disturbances, such as insomnia, decreases the risk of clinical depression in older adults.31 This becomes important when considering depression as a modifiable risk factor for neurodegenerative disorders like Alzheimer’s and vascular dementia.

Evidence indicates vascular disease is a pre-eminent component of pathology brain aging.32,33 Advances in neurovascular biology have revealed an intricate relationship among brain cells, meninges, and the hematic and lymphatic vasculature (the neurovasculome) that is highly relevant to the maintenance of cognitive function.34 The American Heart Association recently published a scientific statement from a multidisciplinary team of experts examining neurovasculome advances in late-life brain health, assessing relevance to disease, identifying knowledge gaps, and providing future directions.34 They noted “The neurovasculome, composed of extracranial, intracranial, and meningeal vessels, as well as lymphatics and associated cells, subserves critical homeostatic functions vital for brain health. These include delivering O2 and nutrients through blood flow and regulating immune trafficking, as well as clearing pathogenic proteins through perivascular spaces and dural lymphatics. Single-cell omics technologies have unveiled an unprecedented molecular heterogeneity in the cellular components of the neurovasculome and have identified novel reciprocal interactions with brain cells. The evidence suggests a previously unappreciated diversity of the pathogenic mechanisms by which disruption of the neurovasculome contributes to cognitive dysfunction in neurovascular and neurodegenerative diseases, providing new opportunities for the prevention, recognition, and treatment of these conditions.” These findings and updates provide new approach to prevention, diagnosis and treatment.

Advances in the neuroscience of neurodegenerative disorders are identifying potential targets for prevention in late life. For example, it is increasingly clear that Alzheimer’s disease pathology does not represent the entire spectrum of proteinopathies associated with cognitive impairment.35 Abnormal deposition of a series of proteins (e.g., TDP-43, tau, alpha synuclein) in the aging brain appears to be associated with late life cognitive impairment and dementia beyond Alzheimer’s disease pathology and may represent targets for early preventative intervention. Genetic research is identifying not only genes associated with increased risk for dementia but also genes associated with resilience to cognitive impairment. Understanding both protein expression differences and genetic influences bidirectionally will be helpful in developing prevention strategies. The development and refinement of highly sensitive fluid and imaging biomarkers for neurodegenerative disorders like Alzheimer’s disease offers the opportunity for the development and implementation of secondary prevention strategies aimed at identifying high-risk individuals and intervening with either lifestyle and/or medical treatment to prevent the development of symptomatic disease.

World Wide Fingers (WW-FINGERS) is an interdisciplinary network that aims to share experiences, harmonize data, and plan joint international initiatives to reduce the risk of cognitive impairment or dementia.36 The network was established to support and convene global multidomain dementia prevention trials. The Finnish Geriatric Intervention Study to Prevent Cognitive Impairment and Disability (FINGER) trial is the first randomized controlled trial (RCT) showing that it is possible to reduce cognitive decline using a multidomain lifestyle intervention among older at-risk individuals.37 The results from this trial highlighted the value of addressing multiple dementia risk factors simultaneously as a strategy to protect brain health, promote overall health and functioning, and reduce the risk of developing new chronic diseases. In collaboration with the FINGERS Brain Health Institute (FBHI), WW-FINGERS is in the process of creating a federated database system as part of the data pooling and joint analysis.36 This would allow multiple, decentralized databases to be connected and enable joint analysis without the transfer of underlying data.

Researchers also suggests that mid-life is not too late to improve brain health by engaging in healthy behaviors that will pay dividends later.38,39 Some studies show that the incidence of brain diseases like Alzheimer’s disease among older adults may have fallen in recent decades, which may be due, in part, to healthier lifestyles that improve our cardiovascular health and reduce our risk for chronic diseases like diabetes and hypertension. However, increasing mid-life rates of obesity and associated health conditions threaten to reverse these improvements and are projected to lead to a 9 percent increase in dementia in the United States.38

A recent commentary by Ibanez and Zimmer further highlights the intertwined nature of mental and brain health and disease.40 Common genetic, environmental, and lifestyle factors contribute to disorders that manifest in symptoms considered psychiatric or neurological, and partially share neurocognitive and pathophysiological mechanisms. The common mental health disorders also share several operative pathophysiological pathways including allostatic load (the wear and tear on the body which accumulates as an individual is exposed to repeated or chronic stress), inflammation, oxidative stress, and mitochondrial dysfunction. These drive the interactions between disorders and the progression of both mental disorders (i.e., neuroprogression) and physical disorders (i.e., somatoprogression).41,42 Ibanez and Zimmer concluded with a call to work together across disciplines, to achieve a more comprehensive and holistic understanding of mental and brain health and disease and the application were possible of emerging neurotechnologies. Similarly, by developing interventions that target shared neurocognitive mechanisms and reduce allostatic load, individuals may be able to reduce their risk of developing multiple disorders. More interdisciplinary, integrative, and multisectoral initiatives are essential to combine dimensional and transnosological approaches in research, prevention, clinical assessments, interventions, actionable policies, and strategies for improving brain and mental health, reducing stigma, and increasing awareness.

By embracing a shared understanding of mental and brain health and disease, we can better understand, prevent, and treat these multifaceted disorders, ultimately improving individual and societal outcomes. It is also necessary to consider an integrated lifestyle approach to prevention and promotion of brain and physical health that would incorporate diet, physical activity, stress reduction, circadian rhythm normalization, and substance abuse minimization strategies. Indeed, because of the commonality of risk factors across the mental and non-communicable disorder spectrum, a shared promotion and prevention strategy for the non-communicable mental and physical disorders at a public health level is urgently needed.43

The Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME) recently released the Brain Health Initiative5 (see https://brainhealthinitiative.org/). Using a science-based approach to quantify the present burden, future trends, and economic impact of brain health conditions, the Brain Health Initiative aims to leverage data to guide policy change. Using IHME’s global database of scientific evidence and its network of health and policy experts, the initiative is working to create urgency by disseminating compelling evidence on the prevalence of brain disorders and measuring the true health and economic impact of brain disorders over time. Groups that share the goal of prioritizing brain conditions and reducing the burden of death and disability are encouraged to participate in this initiative. Brain Health expertise is vital to increasing awareness and demonstrating the urgency of new research and thoughtful policy. We applaud this work; however, we note it is not currently exploring clinical service innovations.

BRAIN HEALTH AS A PREVENTION FRAMEWORK: UNDERSTANDING OF BRAIN HEALTH AS A CENTRAL PART OF PUBLIC HEALTH PRACTICE

The initiative creates and supports partnerships, collects and reports data, increases awareness of brain health, supports populations with a high burden of Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias, and promotes the use of its Road Map series: State and Local Public Health Partnerships to Address Dementia: The 2018–2023 Road Map, and the Healthy Brain Initiative Road Map for Indian Country. The Road Map series provides actionable steps to promote brain health, reduce cognitive impairment, and address the needs of caregivers. In addition, the Healthy Brain Initiative supports the development of future Road Maps. CDC is working with partners to accomplish the Road Map’s recommended actions. For example, the Alzheimer’s Association helps develop and track Road Map action items and helps state public health agencies to use them. Given that one out of every three American Indian and Alaskan Native elders develops dementia, the Association for State Territorial Health Officials (ASTHO) developed a series of health communication materials to improve quality, availability, and accessibility of public health resources to address the connection between brain health and heart health, Healthy Heart, Healthy Brain.

The connection between heart health and brain health is well established. The American Heart Association thus has a major interest in brain health.24,34 They draw parallels between “what is good for the heart is good for the brain.” They have published a range of papers on this topic to explore research, and clinical and public health innovations for heart-brain health dynamics. Cerebrovascular diseases, such as ischemic strokes, transient ischemic attacks (TIAs), and aneurysms, can significantly impact brain health. Elderly individuals are more susceptible to these cerebrovascular diseases, and brain health becomes particularly crucial as people age. These conditions can cause cognitive, emotional, and psychological effects, and survivors of strokes often experience a range of mental health challenges, including depression, cognitive impairments, and other mental health disorders. By promoting heart health through factors like maintaining a balanced diet, engaging regular exercise, managing blood pressure, controlling cholesterol levels, and avoiding smoking, individuals can reduce their risk of these cerebrovascular diseases and maintain better brain health.

The Lancet-World Psychiatric Association Commission report titled “Time for United Action on Depression” calls for collective action on depression.44 This is an important report for the benefits of managing depression and, hence preventing dementias. It synthesizes evidence from diverse contexts, including people with lived experience, to generate recommendations for stakeholders such as communities affected by depression, clinicians and public health practitioners, researchers, policy makers, and financiers. The report includes six major sections: what is depression; the epidemiology and burden of depression worldwide; the roots of depression; the public understanding of depression; interventions to reduce the burden of depression; and recommendations, which includes a discussion on the relationship between depression and the Sustainable Development Goals. The Commission highlights the need for a staged approach to care, collaborative, cost-effective strategies to scale up interventions, and an increased investment with whole-of-society engagement to translate knowledge into practice. The report is accompanied by an editorial with emphasis on ensuring care for people living with depression.

Brain health provides a constructive framework for prevention and promotion efforts, another area where mental health has lagged physical health. It is established that many of the primary drivers of non-communicable physical illnesses overlap substantially with those for neurological and mental health disorders.45 Inadequate nutrition, physical inactivity, smoking, substance abuse, poor sleep, social disconnection and socio-economic disadvantage are particularly common risk factors.46 Targeting these primary drivers has been shown to positively influence mental health across the lifespan. What is less well appreciated is that mental health is likely to be a far more catalytic driver of behavior change because effective interventions will need to take place amongst youth. The distal benefits of cancer, diabetes prevention, and dementia in older age are very weak behavior change motivators in young people. In contrast, the wave of mental health problems affecting young people27 may be a powerful motivator for some to change lifestyle. As such, mental health can lead the charge of behavior change across non-communicable disorders and throughout the lifespan. This will yield benefits to dementia prevention.

Individual-level strategies for dementia prevention have been noted as having limited potential, particularly for resource-constrained populations in which exposure to risk factors is greatest, and exposure to protective factors is lowest. Walsh et al propose that a population-level approach to dementia risk reduction is therefore essential to meet the scale of the challenge and to address global inequalities in risk and incidence of disease.47 They propose 10 strategic goals to achieve population-level dementia risk reduction and protection enhancement, targeted at researchers, professionals, funders, science communicators, governments, businesses, and policy makers. The Global Council on Brain Health also recently set forth the societal, political and environmental factors that influence people’s opportunities to maintain brain health through the course of their lives and set forth recommendations for policymakers and thought leaders, community groups, healthcare providers, advocates as well as individuals to take to build better brain health for all.48

Meaningful analysis of factors important for brain health should also consider the social determinants known to contribute to increased risk for late life brain disorders including socioeconomic status, income inequalities, racial, ethnic, and gender discrimination or disadvantage, and environmental factors.12,49 Brain disorders—like cardiovascular diseases—disproportionately affect certain racial and ethnic groups. For instance, a systematic review of racial disparities in dementia in the United States provided evidence that annual dementia incidence for individuals greater than or equal to 65 years old who self-identify as black or Caribbean Hispanic is significantly higher compared with Mexican American, Japanese American, and non-Hispanic white individuals.50 Blood pressure differences between black and non-Hispanic white individuals may explain these differences: in an individual patient meta-analysis of almost 20,000 participants from 5 cohort studies, for example, differences between black participants and white participants in global cognitive decline were no longer statistically significant after adjusting for cumulative systolic blood pressure.51

Targeting life course factors through intervention could dramatically improve mental health and reduce dementia prevalence. While there is growing consensus for the importance of early intervention, significant evidence gaps remain regarding the life stages at which risk factors have been investigated.52,53 Critically, almost no Alzheimer’s disease and related disorders prevention research focuses on individuals younger than 40 years. Of the highly influential modifiable risk factors identified in the 2020 Lancet Commission for Dementia Prevention, only one focuses on early life (i.e., childhood education) and none focus on young adulthood (i.e., 18–39 years).39 Without accurate evidence about dementia risk influences in younger age groups, it is impossible to take the life course approach needed for prevention.

The course of lifelong health and well-being is set during early years. Half of mental disorders related to behavior, mood and emotion, and substance-use begin by the age of 14 years.54 Exposure to multiple adverse experiences during childhood is also understood to increase the risk of mental and physical health difficulties during adulthood as well as negatively impact critical stages of neurological development. This means that childhood and adolescences is a critical period for interventions that prevent symptom onset. One approach may be Brain Health Awareness—a unique educational opportunity to provide innovative and impactful primary prevention in childhood and adolescence. While international awareness campaigns about brain health and its association with mental wellbeing have been developed for the geriatric and adult populations, youth education has been left behind. Primary prevention about modifiable neuroprotective and risk factors for brain health supports society paradigm shift from cure- and-care to prevention (i.e., better to prevent smoking than working on tobacco stop), and therefore applies beneficially to the youth target.

Young adulthood is particularly pertinent to long-term dementia prevention efforts given that exposure to many lifestyle-related risk factors begins in this life stage. Roughly 75% of mental health disorders begin by age 25, with age of onset for depression peaking at 20.5 years.55 Heavy alcohol consumption peaks between the ages of 20–24 years and most individuals who smoke daily first tried smoking between the ages of 18–26 years.56 Young adults are among the most at-risk groups for traumatic head injury due to motor car accidents and domestic violence.57 The risk for obesity is increasing in young adulthood at incidence rates never before seen in history.58 With cannabis use becoming recently legal in several countries, the link between development and young adult brain health requires investigation and inclusion in brain health cohort studies.59 Despite clear evidence linking young adults to dementia risk factors, the impact of these exposures on late-life dementia risk is not well understood. Without this knowledge, the timing and duration of interventions cannot be optimized. Furthermore, public health messages cannot be tailored or may even be based on incorrect information (i.e., more suited to older populations).

Bridging knowledge gaps around brain health in young adulthood is a massive opportunity not only for the promotion of brain health, but also for that of brain capital, as young adults currently account for over 30% of the world’s population.60 Young adulthood is an important transitional life stage marked by increasing independence. Habits and behaviors formed during this time carry long-term implications for health and well-being. Therefore, young adulthood can be considered a pivotal window during which to intervene to promote healthy behaviors and reduce future disease burden. Connecting brain health with issues that young adults already value may help to amplify its importance. For example, the effects of air pollution on late-life dementia risk could be linked to ongoing youth activism on climate change.61

BRAIN HEALTH INNOVATION

Brain health interventions targeting children and adolescents aim at empowering them toward adopting healthy lifestyles early on, and throughout life. Children already know a lot about brain science through movies, television, science days and brain awareness weeks, etc. They are passionate about the brain and eager to understand its mechanisms making emerging brain health initiatives successful.62–64 In turn, the engagement of these younger “game changer” generations ricochets rapidly on their peers and also on upper generations, and it has the capacity to connect challenges (i.e., shared interests of changing daily life behaviors—eating less red meat for instance—has mutual benefits in terms of better health and positive climate impact because of less beef exploitation). From an outreach perspective, brain health has the advantage to be a wide umbrella concept that covers a set of healthy lifestyles and challenges that are already partially addressed in educational settings (take for instance healthy diet, the role of physical activity, etc.).

Adolescence specifically is an important period in the context of successfully promoting lifelong healthy behavior. Developmentally, it is a time of social and inter-personal change that have marked effects on their psychology and decision-making.65 A young person’s reasoning and behavior are often shaped by their social and peer context, and this susceptibility to social influence peaks during the adolescent years. This naturally means a heightened sensitivity to negative influence on health behavior (such as substance use and antisocial behavior) but there is promising evidence for a sensitivity to positive influence during adolescents as well.66,67 Brain Health Campaigns may in fact be most impactful and influential in affecting positive change when tailored for these sensitive years. Moreover, adolescences and early adulthood are key stages for identify formation as fuelled by more complex processes of self-reflection and self-evaluation.68 The emergence of one’s sense of “purpose” begins during these years with the formation of (inter)-personal and vocational goals and values that then evolve across the lifespan.69 This means adolescence may also be the ideal time to effect sustained improvements health and well-being by boost one’s awareness and appreciation of Brain Health.

To further move the agenda for brain health empowerment in youth, we need advocacy and strategies aiming at: speaking about the brain, about brain and mental health in a gentle and adapted narrative which means to add an “implementation science” component to the global brain health strategy;70 introducing brain health class in educational curricular activities of elementary, middle and secondary school settings; strengthening connections between brain health and mental health as post-COVID area unveiled high suffering and uncovered needs which can be addressed with complementary tools and approaches; fostering intergenerational dialogues between youth and their parents and grandparents as brain health spans the whole demographic pyramid stretching from fetal to end-of-life stages; involving youth in the brain and mental health conversation so that they can contribute actively to the design of study and awareness initiatives.

Advancing brain health via evidence-based technologies is a key strategy to achieve scale. To this end, we previously proposed a brain health living lab model. According to the European Network of Living Labs (https://enoll.org/), Living Labs are “a user-centered, open innovation ecosystem based on a systematic user co-creation approach, integrating research and innovation processes in real life communities and settings.” Living Labs are both clinical practice-based and real-life environments (such as the home) where new solutions are developed via human-centered innovations.71 Through this unique design, Living Labs facilitate and foster open innovation and provide a vehicle for design thinking and deep collaboration. These living labs create templates for expansion and dissemination. This enables joint value co-creation, rapid prototyping, and validation for scale innovation and businesses by bringing together patients, families, research organizations, cities, and regions as a user-centered, iterative ecosystem, integrating concurrent clinical care, research and innovation processes.3

A real-world example of a brain health living lab comes from Baycrest, Toronto, Canada. Baycrest is an academic health sciences center providing a continuum of care for older adults, including independent living, assisted living, long-term care, and a post-acute hospital, all on one campus. It is closely linked to the Rotman Institute (focused on research in aging and brain health and affiliated with The University of Toronto) and powers the Centre for Aging ± Brain Health Innovation (CABHI). CABHI is an example of such a platform which is aligned to a major academic health service and helps innovators develop, disseminate, scale, and promote adoption of promising innovations in the aging and brain health sector.

We believe a brain health industrial policy strategy requires further exploration to further scale and reinforce existing activities. A recent paper by Bonvillian72 from the Information Technology and Innovation Foundation noted modern industrial policies emphasize: a team of change agents, connections to strong research entities, testing and demonstrating technologies, integration between agencies, industries and universities, technological certification and validation, financing, procurement, and flexible contracting mechanisms. We must keep these elements in mind as we seek to advance brain health innovation.

BRAIN HEALTH CLINICAL SERVICE INNOVATIONS

Recently, a prototype Brain Care Score was outlined as a motivational, multidimensional tool for use in primary care.73 The Brain Care Score is a comprehensive tool designed to answer the commonly asked question, “what can I do to take good care of my brain, so I don’t develop the dementia or stroke that my loved one suffered?” and provide a simple motivating frame for claiming agency for one’s healthcare. It includes 12 components, each a modifiable risk factor for at least one of the three most common non-communicable diseases: dementia, stroke, and depression. Four are physical components (blood pressure, hemoglobin A1c, cholesterol, and body mass index), five are lifestyle elements (nutrition, alcohol intake, smoking, physical activity, and sleep), and three are social factors (stress, relationships, and meaning in life). Patients are encouraged to increase their score, focusing sequentially on the components for which they are most motivated. Applicability of the Brain Care Score further extends to cardiovascular health, as it incorporates all the Life’s Essential Eight, the American Heart Association’s key measures for improving and maintaining cardiovascular health. In addition, many of the components of the Brain Care Score are linked to reductions in risk for certain cancers, making it an appealing choice to serve as the cornerstone of an approach to preserving health and wellbeing over a lifetime.

The European Task Force for Brain Health Services is focused on dementia prevention and recently established a series of guidelines for innovative services with the aim of preventing Alzheimer’s disease. The proposal is detailed in an article published in The Lancet Regional Health—Europe, and includes the creation of second-generation memory clinics, called “Brain Health Services.”74 This new care network would include services for a segment of the population without cognitive impairment who wish to preserve or improve their memory, and for which there is a lack of specific programs in current clinics. We wish to consider these approaches across the lifespan, not just in later life.

KEY AREA FOR LATE-LIFE MENTAL HEALTH LEADERSHIP IN BRAIN HEALTH

Advocate for Early Childhood Innovations

Prevention efforts in primary care can support childbearing families with interventions designed to ensure adequate maternal-fetal and child nutrition, address mental health risks (e.g., depression) in parents, and support the development of healthy connected relationships in families (e.g., parent-child attachment interventions) to buffer trauma exposures. Prevention can also focus on promoting social support (e.g., peer support) and reduce family-level traumas such as domestic violence. Along with income and housing support for families that reduce stress and allostatic load, these targets are systems-level interventions that can reduce the developing child’s exposure to Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACEs) and thus protect mental health over the lifespan.28,75 Pediatric care can attend to ACEs assessment and potential biomarkers of risk for later disorders linked to mental health, and recommend appropriate and timely intervention, across infancy, early childhood, and adolescence.76

Combat Social Isolation

Social isolation and loneliness (SIL) are also major contributors to impaired well-being and mental health.77 The US Surgeon General has emphasized in a recent report the importance of societal approaches to enhancing social connection, with far-ranging consequences for the well-being of the country.78 Resilience may also benefit from reduced SIL. The report calls out social media among youth as a particular problem and emphasizes six pillars to enhance social connectedness: 1) Strengthen Social Infrastructure in Local Communities, 2) Enact Pro-Connection Public Policies, 3) Mobilize the Health Sector, 4) Reform Digital Environments, 5) Deepen our knowledge, and 6) Cultivate a Culture of Connection. Others have emphasized the importance of participation in the arts to combat the effects of SIL.

Infuse Late-Life Mental Health Factors in New Brain Health Clinical Service Design

Examples of important considerations for late-life mental health approaches to new, aforementioned Brain Health Clinical Services include: Stress reduction

Positive emotion therapies

Psychological, physical, and cognitive resilience building

Reduction in loneliness and increase in social connectedness

Engagement in meaningful activities that promote a sense of purpose

Encourage Brain Health Via Primary Care

Dedicated emphasis on upskilling and educating primary care physicians and health practitioners is key. Given shortages in physicians trained to provide geriatric care, expanding the workforce to include social workers, care navigators and other allied health professionals could increase access to necessary brain healthcare. This could focus on risk factors and early symptoms, whereas in secondary care it would cover the effective use of biomarkers.79

Support Brain Health Metric Research

To monitor brain health across the lifespan, we first need to arrive at a consensus definition of brain health, and a composite of measures that can be used as a basis to establish normative brain function (at an individual and population level) and determine points when brain health may be declining to suboptimal levels. This approach is focused on prevention rather than intervention at crisis points and would provide data to potentially reverse engineer diseases and disorders—to better understand their origin and progression. The emergence of generative AI is a powerful tool for data analysis and disease modeling to be employed in the service of these initiatives.

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS

To optimize global brain health, we need transdisciplinary science to deepen our understanding of the dissoluble links between neurology, brain function, and mental health.40,80 We need diplomatic linkages between the fields of neurology and psychiatry. We need the prevention start early due to the deciding impact of perinatal and early trauma on future disorders of aging with evidence pointing to the importance of addressing the social determinants of health early in life, aging starts at conception.

Figure 1 schematizes these interrelationships. There are opportunities to engage economic think tanks in the brain health field given they are “green fields” for fresh, collaborative economic and policy activities. We hope these approaches will harness the global brain capital of specialized neurology and mental health practitioners, scientists, policymakers, and advocates.

We hereby propose the formalization of an AAGP Brain Health Task Force to develop recommendations for brain health science, clinical service innovation, technology innovation, public health, patient voice, and policy in close collaboration with all stakeholders in the United States and around the world.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

JC is supported by NIGMS grant P20GM109025; NINDS grant U01NS093334; NIA grant R01AG053798; NIA grant P30AG072959; NIA grant R35AG71476; NIA R25 AG083721–01; Alzheimer’s Disease Drug Discovery Foundation (ADDF); Ted and Maria Quirk Endowment; Joy Chambers-Grundy Endowment. We thank Isabel Cerda Marcos, Mikele Epplerly and Luis R. Solis Tarazona for their helpful review of this manuscript.

DATA STATEMENT

The data has not been previously presented orally or by poster at scientific meetings.

FIGURE 1. Inter-relationships between neurology, mental health, and brain health.

BOX 1. Major Brain Health Activities

From the Dementia Research Network Ireland (2019) “Time matters - a call to prioritize brain health.” A position paper for policy recommendations focused on prioritizing individuals’ brain health, mainly on neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease. It seeks strategies to limit the impact of neurodegenerative diseases and encourages research to identify practical diagnostic tools and disease-modifying treatments.

From the European Academy of Neurology (2022) “The European Academy of Neurology Brain Health Strategy: One brain, one life, one approach.”25 A non-disease, non-age-centered holistic and positive approach to prevent neurological disorders, preserve brain health, and promote recovery after brain damage. It supports the 47 European national neurological societies, healthcare, and policymakers in implementing integrated and people-centered campaigns to foster research, promote education and raise public awareness of neurological disorders and brain health.25

The work was recently formalized into a Brain Health Mission to encourage wider stakeholder engagement and more action. From the European Brain Council (2023) “Brain Innovation Days.”

The Brain Innovation Days bring the brain ecosystem together to foster dialogue, exchange knowledge, accelerate investment in research &amp; innovation and facilitate business development.

From the European Federation of Neurological Associations (EFNA) and the European Academy of Neurology (EAN) (2022). OneNeurology. It aims to unite and strengthen neurology-related groups to stimulate action for the worldwide prevention, treatment, and management of neurological disorders. It includes a series of podcasts exploring the urge to make neurology a global health priority, targeting policy and decision-makers to prioritize neurology and drive change at the governance, healthcare, and public research levels.

From the University of California San Francisco and Trinity College Dublin (2022) Global Brain Health Institute (GBHI). GBHI works to improve brain health and reduce the scale and impact of dementia. An equity-based approach to promote education, effect policy change, and develop evidence-based interventions on brain health, with a clear focus on dementia care.

Brain Health Scotland (2021). Brain Health and Dementia Research Strategy. A health strategy supported by a broad range of Scottish organizations, defining key areas in brain health and dementia research, looking to collaborate with the population as co-designers, co-producers and co-beneficiaries of research work.

Latin American Brain Health Institute (BrainLat), Chile (2020) BrainLat aims to empower innovative brain health research leaders across Latin America, one of the regions with the largest inequalities and with multimodal genetic and environmental risks for brain and mental health. BrainLat seeks to transcend disciplinary boundaries, forge groundbreaking investigations, improve brain health, and reduce the regional impact of brain diseases.

From the AARP (formerly known as the American Association of Retired Persons) Global Council on Brain Health (GCBH). An independent collaboration of scientists, health professionals, scholars, and policy experts, working in areas of brain health related to human cognition. It focuses on peoples’ ability to think and reason as they age, and lifestyle interventions to maintain and improve brain health.

AARP created an online program for consumers offering personalized content on brain health, with challenges, recipes, articles, and activities designed to support healthy behaviors consistent with the evidence set forth by the GCBH. See: https://stayingsharp.aarp.org/

From the World Federation of Neurology. The Brain Health Initiative. A series of comprehensive articles on Brain health and the intrinsic and altruistic action of the neurologists committed to both preventing brain disease and improving the outcomes of those living with brain diseases, creating awareness and advocacy worldwide.

The American Academy of Neurologists recently published their Brain Health across a Lifetime Action Plan. The AAN’s action plan to achieve the future of optimal brain health spans across a lifetime. The action is focused on individual life epochs, including fetal and childhood development, adolescence, youth, adulthood, and maturity/senescence. Each one is centered around a key overarching goal toward achieving lifelong optimal brain health. Each individual life epoch reflects broadly on the various types of potential brain insults, recurrent exposures, and gene-environment interactions, as well as personalized prevention and intervention strategies necessary and possible to ensure optimal brain health. We applaud this work but note that the plan may not adequately address innovative clinical services that could enhance brain health and well-being across the entire lifespan.

Cohen Veteran’s Bioscience has established the Brain Health Nexus The mission of the Brain Health Nexus (BHN) is to build a new paradigm of global collaboration and unleash science and technology to optimize brain health and prevent brain disease. BHN will achieve its mission by developing, deploying, and promoting an index to measure and monitor brain health across the lifespan. This will be a community-driven effort and will begin with a consensus definition of brain health and a composite of measures that can serve as the basis of a first-generation index.

The Milken Institute Alliance to Improve Dementia Care published a series of consensus-drive recommendations to address long-standing barriers to achieving brain health: Better Brain Health through Equity focuses on opportunities to remediate brain health disparities and inequities through a series of recommendations to strengthen the infrastructure among health-care, long-term care, and community based organizations, and expand dementia-friendly communities and workplaces for racially and ethnically diverse communities

Building Workforce Capacity to Improve Detection and Diagnosis of Dementia focuses on strategies to build a dementia-capable workforce across the care continuum to increase system capacity and close gaps in care through the coordination of individualized and integrated medical and social care.

The Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME) recently released the Brain Health Atlas project. Using a science-based approach to quantify the present burden, future trends, and economic impact of brain health conditions, the Brain Health Initiative aims to leverage data to guide policy change. As the world’s largest independent health data resource, the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME) at the University of Washington is leading this initiative with the help of like-minded organizations.

Highlights

• What is the critical role of life course brain health in shaping mental well-being during the later stages of life?

This position statement of the Expert Panel on Brain Health of the American Association for Geriatric Psychiatry (AAGP) emphasizes the critical role of life course brain health in shaping mental well-being during the later stages of life.

• What is the main finding of this study?

We advocate for a holistic approach that integrates medical, psychological, and social frameworks with culturally tailored interventions across the lifespan to promote brain health and overall mental well-being in old age across all communities.

• What is the meaning of the finding?

This position statement emphasizes the intrinsic link between brain health and late-life mental health, urging healthcare professionals, policymakers, and a broader society to prioritize comprehensive strategies that safeguard and promote brain health from birth through old age across all communities.

DISCLOSURES

JC has provided consultation to Acadia, Actinogen, Acumen, AlphaCognition, ALZpath, Aprinoia, AriBio, Artery, Biogen, Biohaven, BioVie, BioXcel, Bristol-Myers Squib, Cassava, Cerecin, Diadem, Eisai, GAP Foundation, GemVax, Janssen, Jocasta, Karuna, Lighthouse, Lilly, Lundbeck, LSP/eqt, Merck, NervGen, New Amsterdam, Novo Nordisk, Oligomerix, Optoceutics, Ono, Otsuka, Oxford Brain Diagnostics, Prothena, ReMYND, Roche, Sage Therapeutics, Signant Health, Simcere, sinaptica, Suven, True-Binding, Vaxxinity, and Wren pharmaceutical, assessment, and investment companies. WR is an employee of Baycrest. SLL is an employee of AARP. JR is an employee of the Harvard McCance Brain Health Center. MSVE is an employee of AHA/ASA. IJ is an employee of Brain Health Nexus. No other authors report relevant conflicts of interest.


References

1. Eyre HA , Lundin R , Falcao VP , : Brain health is a determinant of mental health. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 2023; 31 :379–381 36914554
2. Ternes K , Iyengar V , Lavretsky H , : Brain health INnovation diplomacy: a model binding diverse disciplines to manage the promise and perils of technological innovation. Int Psychogeriatr 2020; 32 :955–979 32019621
3. Richardson S , Sinha A , Vahia I , : Brain health living labs. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 2021; 29 :698–703 33342676
4. WHO: Optimizing Brain Health Across the Life Course. Geneva, Switzerland: WHO Position Paper, 2022
5. IHME: Global Health Data Exchange Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation. Seattle, WA: The University of Washington, 2023
6. Dawson WD , Smith E , Booi L , : Investing in late-life brain capital. Innov Aging 2022; 6 :igac016 35602311
7. Reynolds CF 3rd , Jeste DV , Sachdev PS , : Mental health care for older adults: recent advances and new directions in clinical practice and research. World Psychiatry 2022; 21 :336–363 36073714
8. Mulraney M , Coghill D , Bishop C , : A systematic review of the persistence of childhood mental health problems into adulthood. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2021; 129 :182–205 34363845
9. Su S , Jimenez MP , Roberts CT , : The role of adverse childhood experiences in cardiovascular disease risk: a review with emphasis on plausible mechanisms. Curr Cardiol Rep 2015; 17 :88 26289252
10. Gold AL , Meza E , Ackley SF , : Are adverse childhood experiences associated with late-life cognitive performance across racial/ethnic groups: results from the Kaiser Healthy Aging and Diverse Life Experiences study baseline. BMJ Open 2021; 11 :e042125
11. Farina FR , Booi L , Occhipinti JA , : Young adult brain capital: a new opportunity for dementia prevention. J Alzheimers Dis 2023; 94 :415–423 37302036
12. SantamarSantamaria-Garcia H , Sainz-Ballesteros A , Hernandez H , : Factors associated with healthy aging in Latin American populations. Nat Med 2023; 29 :2248–2258 37563242
13. Owolabi MO , Leonardi M , Bassetti C , : Global synergistic actions to improve brain health for human development. Nat Rev Neurol 2023; 19 :371–383 37208496
14. Smith E , Ali D , Wilkerson B , : A brain capital grand strategy: toward economic reimagination. Mol Psychiatry 2021; 26 :3–22 33100330
15. Eyre HA , Ayadi R , Ellsworth W , : Building brain capital. Neuron 2021; 109 :1430–1432 33957073
16. Lock SL : The benefits of brain health to our economies. Nature Aging 2023; 3 :1–2 37118523
17. Lundbeck: Our Position on Brain Health: Brain Health as a Global Priority. Copenhagen, Denmark: Lundbeck, 2022
18. Winter SF , Angeler DG , Dawsom WD , : Brain Health-Directed Policymaking a New Concept to Strengthen Democracy. The Brookings Institution Policy Paper Series, 2022 Working Paper #178
19. Eyre HA , Ibanez A , Falcoa VP , : Brain Capital Is Key to a Sustainable Future. Rice University’s Baker Institute for Public Policy, 2023 Research Paper no. 07.10.23
20. Chen Y , Demnitz N , Yamamoto S , : Defining brain health: a concept analysis. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 2021; 37 ;doi:10.1002/gps.5564
21. Slattery P , Saeri AK , Bragge P : Research co-design in health: a rapid overview of reviews. Health Res Policy Syst 2020; 18 :17 32046728
22. Gorelick PB , Furie KL , Iadecola C , : Defining optimal brain health in adults: a presidential advisory from the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke 2017; 48 :e284–e303 28883125
23. Lloyd-Jones DM , Allen NB , Anderson CAM , : Life’s essential 8: updating and enhancing the American Heart Association’s Construct of Cardiovascular Health: a presidential advisory from the American Heart Association. Circulation 2022; 146 :e18–e43 35766027
24. Lazar RM , Howard VJ , Kernan WN , : A primary care agenda for brain health: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Stroke 2021; 52 :e295–e308 33719523
25. Bassetti CLA , Endres M , Sander A , : The European Academy of Neurology Brain Health Strategy: one brain, one life, one approach. Eur J Neurol 2022; 29 :2559–2566 35538709
26. Lupien SJ , McEwen BS , Gunnar MR , : Effects of stress throughout the lifespan on the brain, behaviour and cognition. Nat Rev Neurosci 2009; 10 :434–445 19401723
27. WHO: Mental health of adolescents, WHO, 2021. Available at: https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/adolescent-mental-health. Accessed August 21, 2023
28. Troller-Renfree SV , Costanzo MA , Duncan GJ , : The impact of a poverty reduction intervention on infant brain activity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2022; 119 :e2115649119 35074878
29. Golombek DA , Booi L , Campbell D , : Sleep diplomacy: an approach to boosting global brain health. Lancet Healthy Longev 2023; 4 :e368–e370 37419135
30. Logan RW , McClung CA : Rhythms of life: circadian disruption and brain disorders across the lifespan. Nat Rev Neurosci 2019; 20 :49–65 30459365
31. Irwin MR , Carrillo C , Sadeghi N , : Prevention of incident and recurrent major depression in older adults with insomnia: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Psychiatry 2022; 79 :33–41 34817561
32. Steffens DC : Vascular depression: is an old research construct finally ready for clinical prime time? Biol Psychiatry 2019; 85 :441–442 30777170
33. Taylor WD , Aizenstein HJ , Alexopoulos GS : The vascular depression hypothesis: mechanisms linking vascular disease with depression. Mol Psychiatry 2013; 18 :963–974 23439482
34. Iadecola C , Smith EE , Anrather J , : The neurovasculome: key roles in brain health and cognitive impairment: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke 2023; 54 :e251–e271 37009740
35. Knopman DS , Amieva H , Petersen RC , : Alzheimer disease. Nat Rev Dis Primers 2021; 7 :33 33986301
36. WWFingers: A Global Collaboration for Future Generations. Washington, DC, USA: Alzheimer’s Association, 2023
37. Lehtisalo J , Levalahti E , Lindstrom J , : Dietary changes and cognition over 2 years within a multidomain intervention trial: the Finnish Geriatric Intervention Study to Prevent Cognitive Impairment and Disability (FINGER). Alzheimers Dement 2019; 15 :410–417 30527596
38. Loef M , Walach H : Midlife obesity and dementia: meta-analysis and adjusted forecast of dementia prevalence in the United States and China. Obesity (Silver Spring) 2013; 21 :E51–E55 23401370
39. Livingston G , Huntley J , Sommerlad A , : Dementia prevention, intervention, and care: 2020 report of the Lancet Commission. Lancet 2020; 396 :413–446 32738937
40. Ibanez A , Zimmer ER : Time to synergize mental health with brain health. Nat Mental Health 2023; 1 :441–443
41. Morris G , Puri BK , Walker AJ , : Shared pathways for neuroprogression and somatoprogression in neuropsychiatric disorders. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2019; 107 :862–882 31545987
42. McEwen BS , Stellar E : Stress and the individual. Mechanisms leading to disease. Arch Intern Med 1993; 153 :2093–2101 8379800
43. O’Neil A , Jacka FN , Quirk SE , : A shared framework for the common mental disorders and non-communicable disease: key considerations for disease prevention and control. BMC Psychiatry 2015; 15 :15 25652365
44. Herrman H , Patel V , Kieling C , : Time for united action on depression: a Lancet-World Psychiatric Association Commission. Lancet 2022; 399 :957–1022 35180424
45. Fusar-Poli P , Correll CU , Arango C , : Preventive psychiatry: a blueprint for improving the mental health of young people. World Psychiatry 2021; 20 :200–221 34002494
46. Ibanez A , Legaz A , Ruiz-Adame M : Addressing the gaps between socioeconomic disparities and biological models of dementia Brain 2023, Available at: https://academic.oup.com/brain/article/146/9/3561/7223123?login=false Accessed August 21, 2023
47. Walsh S , Govia I , Peters R , : What would a population-level approach to dementia risk reduction look like, and how would it work? Alzheimers Dement 2023; 19 :3203–3209 36791256
48. GCBH: Building Better Brain Health for All People: GCBH Recommendations on Removing Barriers and Improving Opportunities Around the World, 2023, Available at: https://www.aarp.org/health/brain-health/global-council-on-brain-health/equity/ Accessed August 21, 2023
49. Elkind MSV , Albert MA , Lloyd-Jones DM : Road to equity in brain health. Circulation 2022; 145 :e869–e871 35500047
50. Mehta KM , Yeo GW : Systematic review of dementia prevalence and incidence in United States race/ethnic populations. Alzheimers Dement 2017; 13 :72–83 27599209
51. Levine DA , Gross AL , Briceno EM , : Association between blood pressure and later-life cognition among black and white individuals. JAMA Neurol 2020; 77 :810–819 32282019
52. Anstey KJ , Peters R , Zheng L , : Future directions for dementia risk reduction and prevention research: an international research network on dementia prevention consensus. J Alzheimers Dis 2020; 78 :3–12 32925063
53. Farina FR , Gregory S , Lawlor B , : Brain health in young adults. BMJ 2022; 378 :o2311 36170998
54. McGrath JJ , Al-Hamzawi A , Alonso J , : Age of onset and cumulative risk of mental disorders: a cross-national analysis of population surveys from 29 countries. Lancet Psychiatry 2023; 10 :668–681 37531964
55. Uhlhaas PJ , Davey CG , Mehta UM , : Towards a youth mental health paradigm: a perspective and roadmap. Mol Psychiatry 2023;doi:10.1038/s41380-023-02202-z
56. WHO: Global Status Report on Alcohol and Health 2018. Geneva, Switzerland: WHO, 2019
57. Lefevre-Dognin C , Cogne M , Perdrieau V , : Definition and epidemiology of mild traumatic brain injury. Neurochirurgie 2021; 67 :218–221 32387427
58. Sharkey T , Whatnall MC , Hutchesson MJ , : Effectiveness of gender-targeted versus gender-neutral interventions aimed at improving dietary intake, physical activity and/or overweight/obesity in young adults (aged 17–35 years): a systematic review and meta-analysis. Nutr J 2020; 19 :78 32731865
59. Conrod PJ : Cannabis and brain health: what is next for developmental cohort studies? Am J Psychiatry 2022; 179 :317–318 35491566
60. UNDESA: 2022 Revision of World Population Prospects. 2023
61. Cloughton I : Global Youth Activism on Climate Change. Soc Work Policy Stud Soc Justice Pract Theory 2021; 4
62. BHS: My Amazing Brain. 1–12 https://www.brainhealth.scot/amazingbrain
63. CDC: Report to Congress on the Management of TBI in Children; Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/traumaticbraininjury/pubs/congress-childrentbi.html Accessed August 21, 2023
64. MBR: My Brain Robbie. Available at: https://mybrainrobbie.org/ Accessed August 21, 2023
65. Blakemore S-J : Avoiding social risk in adolescence. Curr Dir Psychol Sci 2018; 27 :116–122
66. Ahmed S , Foulkes L , Leung JT , : Susceptibility to prosocial and antisocial influence in adolescence. J Adolesc 2020; 84 :56–68 32858504
67. Chierchia G , Piera Pi-Sunyer B , Blakemore SJ : Prosocial influence and opportunistic conformity in adolescents and young adults. Psychol Sci 2020; 31 :1585–1601 33226891
68. Pfeifer JH , Berkman ET : The development of self and identity in adolescence: neural evidence and implications for a value-based choice perspective on motivated behavior. Child Dev Perspect 2018; 12 :158–164 31363361
69. Damon W , Malin H : The development of purpose: an international perspective. In: Jensen LA , ed. The Oxford Handbook of Moral Development: An Interdisciplinary Perspective, New York City, USA: Oxford University Press, 2020
70. Kools FRW , Mirali S , Holst-Bernal S , : Publications are not the finish line: focusing on societal rather than publication impact. Front Med (Lausanne) 2018; 5 :314 30483507
71. Eyre HA , Smith E , Ibanez A , : Toward a brain capital living lab model: multi-scale opportunities. Braz J Psychiatry 2023; 45 :1–2 35998332
72. Bonvillian WB : Emerging Industrial Policy Approaches in the United States. Washington DC, USA: Information Technology and Innovation Foundation, 2021
73. Singh SD , Gutierrez-Martinez L , Newhouse A , : Brain health begins with brain care. Lancet Neurol 2022; 21 :961–962 36270304
74. Frisoni GB , Altomare D , Ribaldi F , : Dementia prevention in memory clinics: recommendations from the European Task Force for brain health services. Lancet Reg Health Eur 2023; 26 :100576 36895446
75. Gebhard B : Early Experiences Matter: A Guide to Improved Policies for Infants and Toddlers. Washington DC: Zero to Three, 2009
76. Shonkoff JP , Boyce WT , Bush NR , : Translating the biology of adversity and resilience into new measures for pediatric practice. Pediatrics 2022; 149 :e2021054493 35535547
77. Donovan NJ , Blazer D : Social isolation and loneliness in older adults: review and commentary of a national academies report. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 2020; 28 :1233–1244 32919873
78. US Surgeon General, 2023, Our Epidemic of Loneliness and Isolation: The U.S. Surgeon General’s Advisory on the Healing Effects of Social Connection and Community. Available at: www.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/surgeon-general-social-connection-advisory.pdf Accessed August 21, 2023
79. Ritchie CW , Russ TC , Banerjee S , : The Edinburgh Consensus: preparing for the advent of disease-modifying therapies for Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Res Ther 2017; 9 :85 29070066
80. Dawson WD , Bobrow K , Ibanez A , : The necessity of diplomacy in brain health. Lancet Neurol 2020; 19 :972–974
