LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9814863
21942
J Alzheimers Dis
J Alzheimers Dis
Journal of Alzheimer's disease : JAD
1387-2877
1875-8908

35253745
10084495
10.3233/JAD-215108
NIHMS1876446
Article
Mitochondrial targeting of amyloid-beta precursor protein intracellular domain induces hippocampal cell death via a mechanism distinct from amyloid beta
Sandberg Alexandra A. a
Manning Evan a
Wilkins Heather M. ab
Mazzarino Randall a
Minckley Taylor a
Swerdlow Russell H. b
Patterson David c
Qin Yan a
Linseman Daniel A. ac*
a Department of Biological Sciences, University of Denver, 2199 S. University Blvd., Denver, CO, USA
b Department of Neurology, University of Kansas Alzheimer’s Disease Center, University of Kansas Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow Blvd, Kansas City, KS, USA
c Knoebel Institute for Healthy Aging and Eleanor Roosevelt Institute, University of Denver, 2155 E. Wesley Ave., Denver, CO, USA
* Corresponding author: daniel.linseman@du.edu; 1.303.871.4663
9 3 2023
2022
10 4 2023
86 4 17271744
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Background:

Amyloid beta (Aβ) is a principal cleavage product of amyloid-β precursor protein (AβPP) and is widely recognized as a key pathogenic player in Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Yet, there is increasing evidence of a neurotoxic role for the AβPP intracellular domain (AICD) which has been proposed to occur through its nuclear function. Intriguingly, there is a γ-secretase resident at the mitochondria which could produce AICD locally.

Objective:

We examined the potential of AICD to induce neuronal apoptosis when targeted specifically to the mitochondria and compared its mechanism of neurotoxicity to that of Aβ.

Methods:

We utilized transient transfection of HT22 neuronal cells with bicistronic plasmids coding for DsRed and either empty vector (Ires), Aβ, AICD59, or mitochondrial-targeted AICD (mitoAICD) in combination with various inhibitors of pathways involved in apoptosis.

Results:

AICD induced significant neuronal apoptosis only when targeted to the mitochondria. Apoptosis required functional mitochondria as neither Aβ nor mitoAICD induced significant toxicity in cells devoid of mitochondrial DNA. Both glutathione and a Bax inhibitor protected HT22 cells from either peptide. However, inhibition of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore only protected from Aβ, while pan-caspase inhibitors uniquely rescued cells from mitoAICD.

Conclusion:

Our results show that AICD displays a novel neurotoxic function when targeted to mitochondria. Moreover, mitoAICD induces apoptosis via a mechanism that is distinct from that of Aβ. These findings suggest that AICD produced locally at mitochondria via organelle-specific γ-secretase could act in a synergistic manner with Aβ to cause mitochondrial dysfunction and neuronal death in AD.

Alzheimer’s disease (AD)
Amyloid-beta precursor protein intracellular domain (AICD)
amyloid beta (Aβ)
Mitochondria
Caspase

pmcIntroduction

Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) is a progressive and irreversible form of dementia. There are currently over 6.2 million cases of AD in the United States and this number is projected to reach 12.7 million by 2050 [1]. AD is characterized pathologically by the presence of amyloid plaques consisting principally of Aβ peptide aggregates and neurofibrillary tangles made up of hyper-phosphorylated Tau protein. These plaques and tangles are believed to contribute to synaptic dysfunction and the progressive death of pyramidal neurons in the hippocampus and cerebral cortex [2, 3]. Two major factors, the ongoing demographic shift of the U.S. population towards more elderly adults and the lack of effective drugs to treat AD, both contribute to a critical need to discover novel therapeutics that target the complex mechanisms of disease progression.

Later stages of AD are marked by the formation of extracellular senile plaques comprised of Aβ. Multiple forms of Aβ and in particular, soluble oligomers of this peptide, have been shown to induce mitochondrial dysfunction partly through an increase in reactive oxygen species (ROS) [2, 4, 5]. The mitochondrial dysfunction in turn causes further generation of ROS creating a vicious feed forward cycle of organelle damage. Amyloid beta is generated by sequential β-secretase (BACE) and γ-secretase-mediated cleavage of AβPP and has been shown to induce apoptosis when overexpressed in various neuronal systems [6, 7]. However, due to the recent failure of multiple clinical trials using therapeutics targeting the amyloid cascade (e.g., BACE inhibitors, γ-secretase inhibitors, antibodies against beta-amyloid), specifically in sporadic AD [8, 9], other mechanisms besides that of amyloid deposition have been hypothesized to play a role in disease progression. Indeed, additional cleavage products of AβPP besides Aβ are increasingly being examined as possible pathogenic molecules in AD. AβPP is processed to yield a number of protein fragments including the AICD which is produced in both the amyloidogenic and non-amyloidogenic pathways via γ-secretase activity. Increasing evidence has emerged supporting the role of AICD as a neurotoxic molecule in AD using various models including transgenic mice, cell culture systems, and human brain tissue, yielding the consensus that AICD is a transcriptional regulator of pro-apoptotic genes [10–15].

In AD, free radical-induced oxidative damage plays a significant role in initiation of the complex pathogenic mechanisms leading to neuronal cell death [16]. Specifically, mitochondrial dysfunction and mitochondrial oxidative stress (MOS) are thought to be key and potentially initiating sources of ROS in AD pathology [17, 18]. To induce apoptosis in vitro, full-length AβPP targets the mitochondria [19]. Additionally, studies have found that AβPP can translocate to the mitochondria and may become stuck in translocase of the outer mitochondrial membrane (TOM)/translocase of the inner mitochondrial membrane (TIM) channels leading to a disruption of mitochondrial transport [20]. This mitochondrially-localized AβPP may then be targeted for cleavage by the resident γ-secretase present in the outer mitochondrial membrane, yielding AICD locally at the mitochondria [21]. The possibility of endogenous production of AICD at the mitochondria raises the question of whether this protein might contribute to the mitochondrial dysfunction and neurotoxicity seen in AD.

Here, we demonstrate that although AICD overexpression is not toxic in itself to hippocampal neurons, when forced to localize to mitochondria through the addition of a mitochondrial targeting sequence, mitoAICD induces significant apoptosis. In addition, we find that the neurotoxic mechanism of mitoAICD is distinct from that of Aβ, suggesting the possibility that these two peptides might act synergistically at the mitochondria to amplify organelle dysfunction and hippocampal cell death in AD. These findings begin to elucidate the distinct apoptotic mechanisms of unique AβPP cleavage products and may contribute to the development of novel therapeutics to combat the pathogenesis of AD beyond strictly targeting the amyloidogenic pathway.

Materials and Methods

Reagents

Lipofectamine 2000, Lipofectamine 3000, Opti-MEM, Neurobasal Medium, Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM), GlutaMAX, B-27, primary antibody to COXIV, and Mitochondrial Transitional Pore Assay were purchased from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA). Bax Inhibitor and Glutathione Monoethyl Ester were purchased from Calbiochem (San Diego, CA). Hank’s Balanced Salt Solution, Staurosporine, 2’,7’-Dichlorofluorescin diacetate (DCF), Cyclosporin A, Q-VD-OPh-non-methylated (QVD), Hoechst stain, and primary antibody to C-terminal of AβPP were purchased from Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). CAS-BIND Pro Pan Caspase (Pro-VAD-FMK; Casp) was purchased from Vergent Bioscience (Minneapolis, MN). DsRed-Express2 plasmids were purchased from Clontech (Mountain View, CA). Primary antibody to Bax (6A7) was purchased from Novus Biologicals (Centennial, CO). Primary antibody to active caspase-3 was purchased from Promega (Madison, WI). Primary antibody to lamin-B1 was purchased from Abcam (Waltham, MA). Primary antibody to p53 (D2H9O) was purchased from Cell Signaling Technologies (Danvers, MA). HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies were purchased from BioRad (Hercules, CA). Cy3-conjugated secondary antibodies were purchased from Jackson Immunoresearch (Westgrove, PA).

HT22 Cell Culture

Immortalized mouse hippocampal cells (HT22) were plated in 35mm diameter 6-well culture plates in DMEM containing 1g/mL glucose and 2mM L-glutamine supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), and 2mM penicillin/streptomycin (100 Units/mL/100μg/mL). Cells were incubated overnight at 37°C in 10% CO2. The next day the HT22 cells were transfected and treated appropriately at 80-90% confluence.

SH-SY5Y Cell Culture

SH-SY5Y ρ0 cells and SH-SY5Y ρ+ cells were plated in 35mm diameter 6 well culture plates in 1mL DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, 100 ug pyruvate, and 50 ug uridine. Cells were incubated overnight at 37°C in 5% CO2. After 48-72 hours the ρ0 and ρ+ cells were transfected and treated appropriately at 80 90% confluence.

Primary Hippocampal Neuron Preparation

Primary hippocampal neurons were isolated from rat embryos at day 18 (E18) in dissection medium consisting of 10X Hanks’ Balanced Salt Solution (HBSS), 1 M HEPES buffer (pH 7.3) and 50 μg/mL gentamycin. Hippocampus were cut up then treated with 1000 U/mL papain added to the dissection medium and dissociated by trituration in 1 mg/mL DNase. Cells were plated in plating medium consisting of MEM supplemented with glucose and 5% FBS on 1 mg/mL poly-L-lysine-coated 14 mm round glass coverslips at a density of 40,000 cells/coverslip per dish. After checking that cells were adhered, neuron plating medium was replaced with Neurobasal Medium supplemented with 0.3X GlutaMAX and 1X B-27. Neurons were then incubated at 37 °C in 5% CO2. All animal work was performed in accordance with the protocol approved by the University of Denver Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (Protocol approval #1363214-1).

Plasmid Preparation

Empty pIRES2 DsRed-Express2 (DsRed2) bicistronic vectors or vectors containing Aβ42, AICD59, or mitoAICD sequences were originally transformed using 50ng of plasmid in JM109 Escherichia coli and grown on LB agar plates containing 35μg/mL kanamycin sulfate at 37°C overnight. Primers were engineered with BamHI and SacI restriction sites with the following primers:

Aβ42 Sac I Forward-GCG GAG CTC GTC ATG GAT GCA GAA TTC CGA C

Aβ42 BamHI Reverse-CGC GGA TCC TAC GCT ATG ACA ACA CC

AICD59 SacI Forward-GCG GAG CTC GTC ATG ATA GCG ACA GTG ATC

AICD59 BamHI Reverse-CGC GGA TCC TAG TTC TGC ATC TGC TC

mAICD SacI Forward-GCG GAG CTC ATG TTG AGC CGG GCA GTG TGC GGC ACC AGC AGG CAG CTG GCT CCG GCT TTG GGG TAT CTG GGC TCC AGG CAG ATG ATA GCG ACA GTG ATC

mAICD BamHI Reverse-CGC GGA TCC TAG TTC TGC ATC TGC TCA AAG AAC

TTG TAG GTT GGA TTT TCG TAG CCG TTC TGC TGC

The mitochondrial targeting sequence used was as follows: ATG TTG AGC CGG GCA GTG TGC GGC ACC AGC AGG CAG CTG GCT CCG GCT TTG GGG TAT CTG GGC TCC AGG CAG [22].

PCR products were purified from agarose gel (0.8%) and digested with restriction enzymes one at a time, gel purified between each. The vector was linearized with restriction enzymes separately one at a time, then gel purified, then dephosphorylated using calf intestinal alkaline phosphatase and a phenol cholorform reaction was completed. Ligations were set up and starter cultures were created using a colony containing transformed cells and grown in LB broth with 35μg/mL kanamycin sulfate for 6 to 8h at 37°C and diluted to 1:250 into overnight cultures. Plasmids were isolated and purified using a Maxi prep Kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Clontech, Mountain View, CA). Plasmid concentrations were quantified using three averaged recordings by a Thermo Scientific NanoDrop 2000. Bicistronic vectors that allow for co-expression of DsRed separate from the protein of interest are used in this experiment in place of protein fusion construction to prevent interference with the normal functioning and localization of the small proteins being examined. Because DsRed is expressed in the cell separately from the AβPP cleavage products, there is no interference with normal functioning of the cleavage products or formation of unnatural AβPP cleavage product aggregates following overexpression.

For mitochondrial oxidative stress evaluation, Matrix-roGFP was a gift from Paul Schumacker (Addgene plasmid # 49437; http://n2t.net/addgene:49437; RRID: Addgene_49437). Plasmid was propagated and purified using ampicillin resistance and Maxi prep Kit according to manufacturer’s instructions (Clontech, Mountain View, CA).

Transfection

Transfection efficiency was assessed to be approximately 20-30% for each experiment. 5μg/mL DsRed2 plasmids containing Aβ42, AICD59, mitoAICD, or empty IRES vector sequences were used to transfect either HT22 or SY5Y ρ0 and SY5Y ρ+ cells using a standard Lipofectamine 2000 protocol as outlined by Bartley et al [19]. In experiments to assess MOS, 5μg/mL DsRed2 plasmids containing Aβ42, AICD59, mitoAICD, or empty IRES vector sequences were co-transfected with 5μg/mL Matrix-roGFP plasmids in HT22 cells using the same protocol. Both cell types were incubated in Opti-MEM with the DsRed2 bicistronic plasmid/Lipofectamine 2000 mixture for 4-6h at 37°C in 10% CO2 for HT22 and 5% CO2 for SY5Y ρ0 and ρ+. Transfection was terminated in both cell cultures after 4-6h through replacement of the Opti-MEM with 1mL culture media with or without appropriate treatments. Cells were incubated overnight at 37°C in 10% CO2 for HT22 and 5% CO2 for SY5Y ρ0 and ρ+.

1.25μg/mL DsRed2 plasmids containing Aβ42, AICD59, mitoAICD, or empty IRES vector sequences were used to transfect primary hippocampal neurons between 5-15 days in vitro, using the manufacturer’s protocol for Lipofectamine 3000 (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) in 500 μL Opti-MEM. The reagent-DNA mixture was incubated for a minimum of 25 min at 25°C. Before adding reagent-DNA, 1 mL media was removed from each imaging dish and syringe filtered with an equal volume of fresh neuron culture media (50:50 media), which was then added to the neuron imaging dishes and incubated at 37 °C for 4 hours. Neurons were then washed three times with 1 mL prewarmed neuron culture media. Then, 2 mL of the 50:50 media was added to the neurons and they were incubated at 37 °C in 5 CO2 for 48h until imaging.

Cell Treatments

Cell culture treatments were performed at the following concentrations in 1mL of culture medium for both HT22 and SY5Y ρ0 and ρ+ cells immediately after the removal of the transfectionmedium: Glutathione Monoethyl Ester (GSH-MEE) was administered at a 1mM concentration, Bax Inhibitor (BaxI) was administered at a 150μM concentration, the pan-caspase inhibitor, QvD, was administered at a 20μM concentration, the pan-caspase inhibitor Pro-VAD-FMK (Casp), was administered at 10μM, Staurosporine (staur) was administered at 250 or 500nM and Cyclosporin A (CyA) was administered at a 10μM concentration. All cells were left in treatment media overnight.

Reactive Oxygen Species Detection

Reactive oxygen species (ROS) detection was performed on live HT22 cells using DCF fluorescence 24h post transfection. Anhydrous DCF was reconstituted in DMSO to yield 2mM stocks that were used for up to 2mo. Positive control groups were treated with hydrogen peroxide (H2O2; 125μM) for 45-60 min at 37°C protected from light prior to loading with DCF. Then, all groups were loaded with 1mL of 10μM DCF dye in warmed phosphate buffered saline solution (PBS, pH 7.4) for 30min at 37°C protected from light. Labeling solution was then aspirated and cells were stained with Hoechst stain (1μM) in warmed PBS for 15min at 37°C protected from light. The cells were then mounted in anti-quench solution consisting of PBS with 5-10mg p-phenylenediamine for imaging.

Cell Lysis and Nuclear/Cytosol Fractionation for Western Blotting

HT22 cells were lysed 24 h post transfection termination. First, 500 μL of fractionation buffer (20 mM HEPES (pH 7.4), 10 mM KCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM DTT, supplemented with leupeptin and aprotinin) was added to each sample and incubated on ice for 15 minutes. Cells were then harvested by scraping the plates and passed through a 25 gauge needle 10 times, then incubated on ice for 20 minutes. The suspension was then centrifuged at 3,000 rpm for 5 minutes. The supernatant fraction containing the mitochondria and cytoplasmic fractions was collected and kept on ice, while the pellet was washed with 500 μL fractionation buffer, then passed through a 25 gauge needle 10 times. This suspension was then centrifuged at 3,000 rpm for 10 minutes and the subsequent supernatant was discarded. The pellet, containing the nuclei, was then resuspended in TBS with 0.1% SDS and sonicated briefly to yield the nuclear fraction. The mitochondrial and cytosolic fraction was centrifuged for 8,000 rpm for 5 minutes. The supernatant contained the cytoplasmic, while the pellet contained the mitochondrial fractions. Protein concentrations of fractions were determined using a Pierce BCA protein assay.

Western Blotting

Western blots were utilized to analyze HT22 cell fractions. Protein samples (10-15 μg/lane) were resolved by 8-16% gradient Novex Tris-glycine gels (Thermo Fisher, Carlsbad, CA) and proteins were then transferred to PVDF membranes. Non-specific binding sites were blocked using 1% BSA in PBS (pH 7.4) containing 0.1% Tween-20 (PBS-T) for 1 h at 25°C. The blocking buffer was drained, and the membrane was allowed to incubate in primary antibody diluted in blocking buffer according to manufacturer’s recommendations overnight at 4 °C. The membrane was washed three times for 15 minutes in PBS-T and was then incubated with the secondary antibody for 1.5 h at 25 °C. The secondary was then removed, and the membrane was washed again in PBS-T, three times for 15 minutes. Immunoreactive proteins were detected using enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) reagents (GE Healthcare; Pittsburgh, PA) and films were imaged using a ChemiDoc (BioRad, Hercules, CA). Re-probing of blots was performed by stripping in 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 2% SDS, and 100 mM β-mercaptoethanol for 30 minutes at 52 °C. The blots were rinsed twice in PBS-T and processed as above with a different primary antibody.

Mitochondrial Permeability Transitional Pore Assay

Mitochondrial transitional pore assays were performed on live HT22 cells using the Image-IT LIVE Mitochondrial Transitional Pore Assay Kit for microscopy (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). 24h post transfection, cells were loaded using 1 mL of warmed calcein labeling solution consisting of 1μM calcein, 1μM Hoechst dye, 1mM CoCl2 in modified HBSS (with HEPES; 10mM, L-glutamine; 2mM, succinate; 100μM) for 15min at 37°C protected from light. Positive control groups were then loaded with 1mL of 1μM ionomycin in modified HBSS for 15min. Labeling solution was then aspirated, cells were washed with warmed modified HBSS, then mounted in anti-quench solution consisting of warmed HBSS with 5-10mg p-phenylenediamine for imaging.

Fluorescence Staining and Imaging

Transfected and treated HT22 and ρ 0 and ρ + cells were washed once with PBS (pH 7.4) and fixed for 45 minutes in 4% paraformaldehyde at 25°C. Cells were then washed twice with PBS then incubated in a 1:1000 dilution of Hoechst nuclear stain in PBS at 4°C overnight. The following day, cells were washed twice with PBS and placed in an anti-quench solution comprised of PBS with 5-10mg p-phenylenediamine for imaging. Transfected primary hippocampal neurons were washed once with prewarmed PBS then plated in a 1:1000 dilution of nuclear Hoechst stain in PBS for 15min at 37°C. Neurons were then mounted in anti-quench solution for imaging.

For immunohistochemistry experiments, following paraformaldehyde fixation, HT22 cells were washed twice with PBS then non-specific sites were blocked with 5% BSA in PBS containing 0.2% TritonX-100 for 1h at 25°C. Blocking solution was then aspirated and cells were incubated overnight at 4°C in a primary antibody solution consisting of 2% BSA in PBS containing 0.2% TritonX-100 and primary antibody diluted according to manufacturer’s recommendations. Cells were then washed five times with PBS over the course of 1h and then incubated in 1:1000 dilution of Hoechst nuclear stain and 1:250 dilution of secondary antibody in PBS at 25°C, protected from light for 1h. Cells were then washed five times with PBS over the course of 1h before plating in an anti-quench solution for imaging.

Cells were imaged using a Zeiss Axiovert-200M epi-fluorescence microscope with five representative images taken of each well for assessment of apoptosis. All experimental conditions were performed in duplicate or triplicate wells in each experiment for HT22 and ρ 0 and ρ + experiments and in singular or duplicate dishes for primary neuron experiments. Only cells fluorescing red through the expression of the DsRed-Express2 vector were counted and assessed for apoptosis through the visual evaluation of condensed or fragmented nuclei as indicated by Hoechst nuclear stain. Roughly 75-125 transfected cells were quantified for each experimental condition in each HT22 and ρ 0 and ρ + experiment and roughly 10-15 transfected cells were quantified for each primary neuron experiment.

Data Analysis

All experimental conditions were performed in duplicate and statistical analysis was only performed on experiments quantified a minimum of three times. Data represents the means +/− SEM for the total number (n) of independent experiments carried out. Data were analyzed using either an unpaired student’s T test or a one-way ANOVA with a post hoc Tukey’s test. A p-value of &lt;0.05 was considered statistically significant.

Results

Expression of Aβ42 or mitoAICD induces apoptosis in HT22 cells

Amyloid precursor protein (AβPP) can be processed via amyloidogenic or non-amyloidogenic pathways to produce Aβ42 (amyloidogenic) and AICD59 (both pathways) [23]. In order to study the effects of AβPP cleavage products on cellular functioning, each peptide was assessed for apoptotic effects in HT22 immortalized mouse hippocampal cells by transient transfection using pIRES2 DsRed-Express 2 bicistronic expression vectors. Because of the presence of a mitochondrial γ-secretase and the known localization of AβPP to the mitochondria, a mitochondrial-targeted AβPP intracellular domain (mitoAICD) construct was also assessed for apoptotic effects to mimic AICD59 fragments which could be generated locally at the mitochondria [20, 21].

At 24 hours post-transfection, HT22 cells were stained with Hoechst dye and DsRed-positive cells were examined for fragmented and/or condensed nuclei, which are morphological hallmarks of apoptotic cell death. HT22 cells transfected with either the Ires control vector or AICD59 displayed large, intact, and healthy nuclei (Figure 1A). In contrast, many cells transfected with either Aβ42 or mitoAICD had nuclei that were condensed and/or significantly fragmented, indicative of apoptotic cell death (Figure 1A). Quantitative analysis of HT22 cell apoptosis, based on the percentage of cells with fragmented and/or condensed nuclei as compared to the total number of transfected cells, was performed. Transient expression of Aβ42 significantly increased apoptosis as compared to the Ires control and mitoAICD significantly increased apoptosis as compared to AICD59, while AICD59 did not significantly increase apoptosis as compared to Ires (Figure 1B). These data show that, as expected, expression of Aβ42 induces significant apoptosis of HT22 cells. However, expression of AICD59 only causes significant apoptosis of HT22 cells when this peptide is targeted to mitochondria.

Functional mitochondria are required for Aβ42 or mitoAICD to induce apoptosis in SH-SY5Y cytoplasmic hybrid cells

We have previously shown that apoptosis induced by the overexpression of wild-type AβPP requires functional mitochondria in SH-SY5Y cytoplasmic hybrid cells [19]. As a means of further investigating the relationship between the AβPP cleavage products and the mitochondria, Aβ42, AICD59, mitoAICD, and empty Ires vectors were transfected into SH-SY5Y ρ0 and ρ+ cells. ρ0 cells are devoid of mitochondrial DNA, resulting in a nonfunctional electron transport chain and sole dependence on glycolysis for energy production. Imaging of nuclear morphology in ρ+ and ρ0 cells transfected with either the Ires control or AICD59 expression plasmids showed relatively large, healthy, and intact nuclei (Figure 2A). In contrast, a significant fraction of ρ+ cells transfected with either Aβ42 or mitoAICD displayed very condensed nuclei characteristic of apoptosis (Figure 2A). However, neither Aβ42 nor mitoAICD caused significant nuclear condensation in ρ0 cells, which are devoid of functional mitochondria (Figure 2A). Quantification of apoptosis in transfected (DsRed-positive) SH-SY5Y cells, as indicated by fragmented or condensed nuclei, demonstrated that Aβ42 and mitoAICD significantly increased apoptosis as compared to the empty Ires control vector and AICD59, respectively, in the ρ+ cells; whereas AICD59 did not significantly increase apoptosis as compared to Ires (Figure 2B). However, expression of Aβ42 or mitoAICD failed to significantly increase apoptosis in the ρ0 cells (Figure 2B). These data indicate that functional mitochondria are required for either Aβ42 or mitoAICD to induce neuronal apoptosis.

Glutathione protects HT22 cells from apoptosis induced by Aβ42 and mitoAICD

Next, we evaluated the role of oxidative stress in HT22 cell apoptosis induced by the AβPP-derived peptides. First, we stained cells with the peroxide-sensitive dye 2’,7’-Dichlorofluorescin diacetate (DCF) to detect hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). As expected, HT22 cells transfected with either the Ires control vector or AICD59 did not display any significant DCF fluorescence; however, addition of H2O2 to these cultures produced a marked increase in DCF fluorescence (Figure 3A). HT22 cells transfected with either Aβ42 or mitoAICD showed marked increases in DCF fluorescence, comparable to that observed in cells overexpressing Ires or AICD59 and treated with H2O2, indicating significant oxidative stress in these cells (Figure 3A). In order to investigate the potential role of MOS in neuronal apoptosis induced by Aβ42 and mitoAICD, HT22 cells expressing these peptides were treated with 1mM glutathione-monoethyl-ester (GSH-MEE) as a free radical scavenger. GSH-MEE is actively transported into many different cell types and preferentially increases the mitochondrial GSH pool after it is converted intracellularly into free GSH [24, 25]. HT22 cells treated with GSH-MEE and transfected with the Aβ42 and mitoAICD vectors showed essentially no increase in apoptosis in comparison to the Ires and AICD59 control vectors, respectively (Figure 3B). Additionally, we co-transfected with our plasmids of interest and with a plasmid specific for detecting MOS (Matrix-roGFP; [26]). We found that there was a marked increase in GFP signal in the cells overexpressing Aβ42 and mitoAICD in comparison to their controls, Ires and AICD. Interestingly, when these cells were treated with GSH, there was a drastic decrease in Matrix-roGFP fluorescence, indicating a decrease in MOS in Aβ42 and mitoAICD with GSH (Figure 3C). These results indicate that GSH protects HT22 cells from these AβPP-derived peptides and furthermore, oxidative stress, and more specifically ROS generated at the level of the mitochondria, plays a significant role in the neuronal apoptosis induced by either Aβ42 or mitoAICD.

Bax Inhibitor protects HT22 cells from apoptosis induced by Aβ42 and mitoAICD

Mitochondrial oxidative stress is closely linked to Bax activation and subsequent mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization during neuronal apoptosis [27]. In order to investigate a potential role for Bax activation in HT22 cell apoptosis induced by Aβ42 and mitoAICD, we first stained cells with an antibody to the active conformation of Bax (6A7). As anticipated, HT22 cells transfected with either the Ires control vector or AICD59 did not show any detectable active Bax staining; however, addition of the apoptosis inducer, staurosporine, to these cultures caused a striking increase in active Bax (Figure 4A). HT22 cells transfected with either Aβ42 or mitoAICD displayed high levels of active Bax, similar to those observed in cells overexpressing Ires or AICD59 and treated with staurosporine (Figure 4A). To explore whether or not apoptosis induced by Aβ42 or mitoAICD could be prevented by inhibition of Bax, transfected HT22 cells were treated with 150μM Bax inhibitor (BaxI). The Bax inhibitor prevents the conformational change and activation of Bax at the mitochondria. Incubation with the BaxI significantly decreased HT22 cell apoptosis in cells transfected with either Aβ42 or mitoAICD (Figure 4B). Additionally, given the subcellular redistribution of pro-apoptotic p53 often observed in concert with Bax activation, we investigated the location of p53 in nuclear and cytosolic fractions of HT22 lysates following transfection with our proteins of interest. Using Western blotting, we found p53 expression in cytosolic fractions in all groups. However, in response to Aβ42 overexpression, p53 was also present in the nuclear fraction which was verified by positive lamin-B1 expression. This indicates p53 activation following Aβ42 overexpression, as has previously been reported [28], but no nuclear localization of p53 in response to mitoAICD expression (Figure 4C). These data suggest that conformational activation of Bax is required for either Aβ42 or mitoAICD to trigger neuronal apoptosis. In contrast, p53 nuclear translocation is uniquely associated with Aβ42 expression.

Mitochondrial permeability transition pore opening plays a role in Aβ42 toxicity, but not toxicity induced by mitoAICD

Opening of the mPTP can be triggered by MOS and components of the mPTP (e.g., the adenine nucleotide translocase) have been shown to physically interact with active Bax at the mitochondria [27]. A calcein-cobalt assay was used to determine whether the mPTP was opened following transfection of HT22 cells with Aβ42 or mitoAICD. In this assay, opening of the mPTP allows cobalt to permeate the inner mitochondrial membrane and quench the fluorescence of the calcein dye within the mitochondrial matrix [29]. HT22 cells transfected with either the Ires control vector or AICD59 displayed robust calcein staining of the mitochondrial matrix; however, incubation with the Ca2+ ionophore, ionomycin, caused a rapid opening of the mPTP and nearly complete quenching of the calcein fluorescence (Figure 5A). HT22 cells transfected with Aβ42 showed a similar quenching of the calcein fluorescence to that observed in cells overexpressing Ires and treated with ionomycin, demonstrating opening of the mPTP (Figure 5A). In contrast, significant calcein staining of the mitochondrial matrix was maintained in cells transfected with mitoAICD, indicating that the mPTP remained closed (Figure 5A). In agreement with these imaging data, incubation of transfected HT22 cells with 10μM cyclosporin A, an inhibitor of cyclophilin D and a blocker of the mPTP, significantly decreased apoptosis induced by Aβ42, but not mitoAICD (Figure 5B). Thus, opening of the mPTP appears to play a significant role in neuronal apoptosis induced by Aβ42, but not that caused by mitoAICD.

Pan-caspase inhibitors protect HT22 cells from apoptosis induced by mitoAICD, but they do not block Aβ42 toxicity

Next, we examined whether caspase activity was necessary for HT22 cell apoptosis induced by either Aβ42 or mitoAICD. We first stained cells with an antibody to the active, cleaved fragment of the executioner caspase-3. HT22 cells transfected with either the Ires control vector or AICD59 showed little-to-no detectable active caspase-3 staining; however, addition of the apoptosis inducer, staurosporine, to these cultures caused a dramatic increase in active caspase-3 (Figure 6A). HT22 cells transfected with either Aβ42 or mitoAICD displayed significant immunoreactivity for active caspase-3, similar to that observed in cells overexpressing Ires or AICD59 and treated with staurosporine (Figure 6A). To determine if apoptosis induced by either Aβ42 or mitoAICD is caspase-dependent, we used two pan-caspase inhibitors, Q-VD-OPh-non-methylated (QVD) and CAS-BIND Pro Pan Caspase (Pro-VAD-FMK; Casp). In HT22 cells transfected with either Aβ42 or mitoAICD in the absence of caspase inhibitors, we observed the expected significant increase in apoptosis (Figures 6B, C). Incubation with either 20μM QVD or 10μM Casp had no significant effect on HT22 cell apoptosis induced by expression of Aβ42, but both pan-caspase inhibitors significantly protected cells from the toxic effects of mitoAICD (Figures 6B, C). Collectively, the above findings suggest that expression of either Aβ42 or mitoAICD triggers activation of caspase-3 in HT22 cells. However, caspase activity appears to be dispensable for cell death induced by Aβ42, whereas it is required for apoptosis caused by mitoAICD.

Aβ42 and mitoAICD each induce cell death in primary hippocampal neurons

Finally, we examined whether our initial finding that mitochondrial targeting is required for AICD59 to induce apoptosis in the HT22 hippocampal cell line, could be replicated in primary hippocampal neuron cultures. Primary hippocampal neurons harvested from embryonic rats were transfected with empty Ires vector, Aβ42, AICD59, or mitoAICD to examine the effects of these AβPP-derived peptides in a primary hippocampal cell culture system. As shown in Figure 7A, hippocampal neurons transfected with either the empty Ires control vector or AICD59 displayed large intact nuclei and a highly complex arrangement of neuronal processes, indicative of healthy neurons. In marked contrast, hippocampal neurons transfected with either Aβ42 or mitoAICD exhibited drastic changes in the appearance of their neuronal processes, showing substantial reductions in both size and complexity. Additionally, these cells often had fragmented and/or condensed nuclei (Figure 7A). Upon quantification, we found a significant increase in cell death in hippocampal neurons expressing Aβ42 and mitoAICD in comparison to the Ires control and AICD59, respectively (Figure 7B). Thus, as we observed in the HT22 cell line, expression of Aβ42 induces significant apoptosis of primary hippocampal neurons; however, expression of AICD59 only causes significant apoptosis of these cells when this peptide is targeted to mitochondria.

Discussion

Our data suggest that individual overexpression of two major cleavage products of AβPP, Aβ42 and mitochondrial-targeted AICD59 (mitoAICD), each induce apoptosis via two distinct mechanisms in HT22 immortalized hippocampal cells. We found that both fragments require functional mitochondria through the investigation of apoptosis in cells lacking mtDNA and further, that the proteins induce different apoptotic cascades at the mitochondria. Apoptosis induced by either peptide could be reduced by blocking oxidative stress and subsequent Bax activation at the mitochondria; however, following these events, Aβ42 appears to be caspase-independent but requires opening of the mPTP, while mitoAICD requires caspase activation. Finally, we investigated the ability of these fragments to induce apoptosis in primary hippocampal cell cultures and found similar results to HT22 cells in that AICD only elicits significant apoptosis if it is targeted to the mitochondria. Collectively, these data not only indicate a novel neurotoxic role of AICD at the mitochondria, but also suggest a potentially synergistic role of these proteins at the mitochondria in inducing cell death during AD progression.

AβPP is processed by a series of cleavage events which can produce Aβ42 when cleavage occurs via β- and γ-secretase. AICD59 is produced by the γ-secretase cleavage event during both the amyloidogenic and non-amyloidogenic processing of AβPP [23]. Studies have suggested that AβPP associates with TOM40 and TIM23 and in this manner, may block mitochondrial protein import [20]. Coupled with the presence of a mitochondrial γ-secretase, we hypothesized that the localization of AβPP to mitochondria may be the basis for the production of AICD within the mitochondria, which could lead to subsequent mitochondrial dysfunction and apoptosis in cells [21, 30]. In the current study, overexpression of either Aβ42 or mitoAICD was found to induce apoptosis in HT22 cells, while AICD59 elicited no significant neurotoxic effect. When considered with previous studies which suggest that Aβ42 localization to the mitochondria via binding to amyloid beta peptide-binding alcohol dehydrogenase (ABAD) is necessary for Aβ42 to induce apoptosis, these data suggest that mitochondrial localization is also sufficient for AICD to cause apoptotic cell death [31].

Further, evaluation of the toxicity induced by Aβ42 and mitoAICD in SH-SY5Y cytoplasmic hybrid cells further supports the necessity of mitochondrial interaction in the apoptotic mechanisms of both peptides since both Aβ42 and mitoAICD were found to be toxic in SH-SY5Y ρ+ cells which harbor functional mitochondria, but not in SH-SY5Y ρ0 cells, which are devoid of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and in turn lack functional mitochondria. These data suggest that specific mtDNA products (e.g., mitochondrially-encoded respiratory chain complexes) and a functional electron transport chain (ETC) are necessary for Aβ42 and mitoAICD to induce apoptosis.

Previous studies have indicated that oxidative damage is one of the first events in the pathology of AD [16]. Additionally, Aβ42 has been shown to induce mitochondrial dysfunction partly through an increase in ROS [4, 32, 33]. In the mitochondria, ROS are mainly produced through the functioning of complexes I and III of the ETC at the inner membrane and these free radicals participate in redox signaling between the mitochondria and the rest of the cell [34, 35]. Mutations of mtDNA or nuclear-encoded respiratory chain complexes, impairment of oxidative phosphorylation, and errant expression of antioxidant enzymes all lead to an increase in ROS and eventually cell death through the intrinsic apoptotic pathway following oxidative damage [36]. MOS, which results from an increase in ROS at the mitochondria, can cause oxidation of cardiolipin and increase the amount of soluble cytochrome c in the intermembrane space. This solubilized cytochrome c can then be released through pro-apoptotic Bax/Bak-dependent pore formation of the outer mitochondrial membrane or the opening of the mPTP, triggering formation of the apoptosome, activation of effector caspases, and apoptosis [37]. Both Aβ42 and mitoAICD resulted in an increase in ROS as indicated by DCF staining, which suggests that an increase in mitochondrial ROS may play a role in both Aβ42 and mitoAICD induction of HT22 cell apoptosis.

One potential cause of cellular oxidative damage are ROS that are not scavenged by intracellular antioxidants [38]. The reducing agent GSH is an essential intracellular antioxidant that forms a discrete pool in the mitochondria, in addition to a larger cytosolic pool, which are critical for maintaining cell survival in the presence of increased levels of ROS [39, 40]. We found that treatment with GSH-MEE was sufficient to significantly reduce apoptosis in HT22 cells transfected with either Aβ42 or mitoAICD to levels not significantly different from their respective controls. Further, we found that GSH treatment decreased MOS specifically using the MOS-specific sensor, Matrix-roGFP. Based on these results, we next sought to determine if inhibiting the cascade of apoptosis induced by MOS could distinguish different mechanisms by which the overexpression of Aβ42 and mitoAICD each induce neuronal cell death.

We hypothesized that the pro-apoptotic member of the Bcl-2 family of proteins, Bax, may be involved in the apoptotic mechanisms induced by both Aβ42 and mitoAICD. Bax is activated in the intrinsic apoptotic pathway associated with MOS and previous studies have shown that an increase in ROS can cause Bax to translocate to the mitochondria and induce apoptosis through the formation of a pore in the outer mitochondrial membrane. Immunohistochemistry revealed active Bax staining in HT22 cells overexpressing Aβ42 and mitoAICD like that of the controls treated with the Bax activator, staurosporine. Further, apoptosis was significantly decreased upon inhibition of Bax in cells transfected with either Aβ42 or mitoAICD, suggesting that Bax is involved in the apoptotic cascades induced by both of these peptides. An additional mechanism to consider in regards to the downstream activation of Bax is that of p53. Previous research has found that AICD can transcriptionally regulate p53 [41, 42], which can in turn regulate Bcl-2 family proteins, including Bax [43]. We investigated the subcellular location of p53 in response to overexpression of our proteins of interest and found that p53 was exclusively cytosolic in cells exposed to Ires, AICD or mitoAICD, but showed some nuclear translocation in cells exposed to Aβ42. Thus, p53 is likely involved in Aβ42-induced neurotoxicity, as has been previously documented [28]. However, p53 does not appear to undergo nuclear translocation in response to mitochondrial targeting of AICD.

Next, we investigated the role of the mPTP in HT22 cell apoptosis induced by Aβ42 and mitoAICD. Similar to Bax, activation of the mPTP has been shown to induce apoptosis through the release of apoptotic factors from the mitochondria [44]. It has also been proposed that mPTP activation may play a role in the Aβ-mediated mitochondrial dysfunction in AD through the dysregulation of cytosolic calcium concentrations [45]. We found that only overexpression of Aβ42 resulted in opening of the mPTP, while it remained closed following incubation with mitoAICD. Next, we utilized CyA which has been shown to inhibit opening of the mPTP through its binding to cyclophilin D on the matrix side of the inner mitochondrial membrane [46]. Expectedly, inhibition of the mPTP using CyA protected against Aβ42 induced toxicity; however, it had no effect on apoptosis induced by mitoAICD. These data suggest that mPTP opening is necessary for Aβ42 overexpression to induce HT22 cell apoptosis but it is not required for mitoAICD neurotoxicity.

Both translocation of Bax to the mitochondria and opening of the mPTP can induce apoptosis through the release of cytochrome c from the intermembrane space following MOS [37, 47, 48]. Because cytochrome c is known to initiate an apoptotic caspase cascade through the activation of caspase-9 and its subsequent activation of executioner caspases [37], we evaluated activation of caspase-3 in HT22 cells following transfection with Aβ42 and mitoAICD. This revealed active caspase-3 staining in cells transfected with either peptide, like that of controls treated with staurosporine. However, when cells were treated with pan-caspase inhibitors, QvD or Casp [49], there was only a significant reduction in apoptosis in cells overexpressing mitoAICD, but not Aβ42. These data suggest that mitoAICD elicits cell death in a caspase-dependent manner when it is targeted to the mitochondria. In contrast, although Aβ42 overexpression clearly induces caspase-3 activation, this action appears to be dispensable for neurotoxicity induced by this peptide.

We hypothesize that cell death induced by Aβ42 instead utilizes caspase-independent apoptotic factors located within the mitochondria (e.g., apoptosis-inducing factor or EndoG). MOS and mitochondrial damage that leads to mitochondrial membrane permeation through either the recruitment of Bax or opening of the mPTP can cause the release of AIF or EndoG, as well as calcium, into the cytosol. An increase in cytosolic calcium concentration due to its release from intracellular stores, such as the mitochondria, can initiate neurotoxic cascades involving calpains, nitric oxide synthase, and calcineurin [50]. Additionally, Bax activation is necessary for the release of AIF from the mitochondria and its subsequent translocation to the nucleus where it induces apoptosis through chromatin condensation and DNA fragmentation [51]. Additional studies will need to be performed to determine which specific caspase-independent apoptotic cascades are initiated by Aβ42.

Finally, using hippocampal neurons isolated from embryonic rats, we examined the reproducibility of results we observed in HT22 cells in primary neurons. When transfected with the Ires and AICD59 controls, the neurons displayed highly complex processes and round intact nuclei, indicative of healthy cells. However, neurons transfected with either Aβ42 or mitoAICD displayed fragmented, shortened and simpler processes, in addition to fragmented and condensed nuclei, characteristic of cell death. Upon quantification, there was a significant increase in cell death in these cells as compared to the Ires and AICD59 controls, similar to the results obtained in the HT22 cell line.

Taken together, our data suggest that two major cleavage products of AβPP, Aβ42 and mitochondrial-targeted AICD59, exhibit distinct apoptotic mechanisms through their interaction with the mitochondria. While both peptides increase ROS and induce activation of the pro-apoptotic protein Bax, it appears that Aβ42 proceeds primarily through a caspase-independent mechanism of cell death that involves opening of the mPTP, whereas mitoAICD stimulates a caspase-dependent mode of cell death. These data are novel in that they elucidate a previously unrecognized neurotoxic role of AICD59 at the mitochondria, where it can be formed endogenously through a resident γ-secretase. In addition, our findings suggest a potentially synergistic role of Aβ42 and AICD59 acting at the mitochondria, leading to the induction of neuronal apoptosis through distinct mechanisms.

Given these novel findings regarding a potential neurotoxic role of AICD at the mitochondria, it is also important to consider other protein fragments beyond that of Aβ42 that might be influencing the disease state. Beyond its putative generation at the mitochondria through the resident γ-secretase, AICD is still notably derived through the β-secretase pathway [52–54]. As mentioned previously, other fragments of AβPP are being actively studied for their potential neurotoxic roles in AD, including the β-secretase derived fragment C99. C99 is the precursor of AICD in amyloidogenic processing and has been shown to induce mitochondrial deficiencies leading to reduced neuronal survival [55, 56]. Interestingly, some studies have found that preventing C99 production via inhibition of γ-secretase leads to harmful effects. This may be due to the fact that γ-secretase has many substrates other than AβPP, suggesting that γ-secretase activity may in fact be important for mitigating C99-mediated toxicity [57]. Thus, the importance of mitigating the production of AICD specifically at the mitochondria via use of a selective inhibitor of the resident mitochondrial γ-secretase, rather than an indiscriminant inhibitor of cellular γ-secretase activity, may be a promising strategy to address the downstream neurotoxic effects we have reported here.

In conclusion, this study serves as foundational support for future inquiries into the molecular mechanism(s) of AICD-induced neurotoxicity at the mitochondria. Given the limitations of our current transient expression system, in the future we plan to utilize either inducible stable cell lines or lentiviral expression systems to uncover changes in mitochondrial function such as respiration, mtDNA expression, MOS production, and bioenergetics occurring downstream of mitoAICD and Aβ42 expression. Together, the identification of distinct apoptotic mechanisms exhibited by these two cleavage products of AβPP may provide valuable insight towards the discovery of new AD therapeutics which could target both mechanisms of action as a means of mitigating disease pathogenesis.

Acknowledgments:

This work was funded by an internal grant from the Knoebel Institute for Healthy Aging at the University of Denver to DAL.

Data Availability:

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author (DAL) upon reasonable request.

Figure 1. Aβ42 and mitoAICD each induce apoptosis in HT22 hippocampal cells.

A) Representative images of HT22 cells imaged 24 hours after transfection with empty pIRES Ds-Red-Express2 (Ires) bicistronic vector or vector co-expressing either Aβ42 (Aβ), AICD59, or mitoAICD (mAICD) as indicated. Nuclei are stained with Hoechst dye (blue). Arrows indicate successfully transfected cells as indicated by DsRed2 protein expression (red). Bottom panels are shown in black and white to emphasize nuclear morphology. Scale bar = 10 μm. B) Quantitative apoptotic assessment of HT22 cells 24 hours after transfection with Ires vector or vector co-expressing Aβ42, AICD59, or mitoAICD. Only DsRed2-positive cells were counted and were scored as apoptotic based on the appearance of condensed or fragmented nuclei, as demonstrated by Hoechst nuclear stain. Data are expressed as the mean +/− SEM, n=12 independent experiments, performed in triplicate. *** indicates p&lt;0.001 for Aβ42 compared to Ires control; ### indicates p&lt;0.001 for mitoAICD compared to AICD59 control, as determined using one-way ANOVA with a post hoc Tukey’s test.

Figure 2. Aβ42 and mitoAICD each induce apoptosis in ρ+ cells, but not ρ0 cells.

A) Representative images of cytoplasmic hybrid SY-SY5Y ρ0 and ρ+ cells imaged 24 hours after transfection with empty pIRES Ds-Red-Express2 (Ires) bicistronic vector or vector co-expressing either Aβ42, AICD59, or mitoAICD (mAICD) as indicated. Arrows indicate successfully transfected cells as indicated by DsRed2 protein expression. Only nuclei are shown. Scale bar = 10 μm. B) Quantitative apoptotic assessment of SH-SY5Y ρ+ and ρ0 cytoplasmic hybrid cells 24 hours after transfection with Ires vector or vector co-expressing Aβ42, AICD59, or mitoAICD. Only DsRed2-positive cells were counted and scored as apoptotic based on the appearance of condensed or fragmented nuclei, as demonstrated by Hoechst nuclear stain. Data are expressed as the mean +/− SEM, n=3 independent experiments, performed in duplicate. ** indicates p&lt;0.01 compared to Ires control and ## indicates p&lt;0.01 compared to AICD59 control (AICD59), as determined using one-way ANOVA with a post hoc Tukey’s test. NS = no significant difference.

Figure 3. Glutathione decreases HT22 cell apoptosis induced by either Aβ42 or mitoAICD.

A) Representative images of DCF assay to detect oxidative species in HT22 cells imaged 24 hours after transfection with empty pIRES Ds-Red-Express2 (Ires) bicistronic vector or vector co-expressing either Aβ42, AICD59, or mitoAICD (mAICD) in the presence or absence of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2; 125 μM). Top images display Hoechst stained nuclei (blue) with successfully transfected cells indicated by DsRed2-fluorescence (red). Below oxidative species are indicated by DCF staining (green) in the transfected cells from top images. Scale bar = 10 μm. B) Quantitative assessment of HT22 cell apoptosis 24 hours after transfection with Ires vector or vector co-expressing Aβ42, AICD59, or mitoAICD in absence or presence of Glutathione monoethyl ester (GSH; 1 mM). Only DsRed2-positive cells were counted and scored as apoptotic based on the appearance of condensed or fragmented nuclei, as demonstrated by Hoechst nuclear stain. Data are expressed as the mean +/− SEM performed in duplicate, n=4 independent experiments for Aβ42 and mitoAICD, n=5 independent experiments for Ires, Aβ42 + GSH, AICD59, and mitoAICD + GSH. *** indicates p&lt;0.001 for Aβ42 compared to Ires control, ### indicates p&lt;0.001 for Aβ42 with GSH treatment compared to Aβ42 alone, *** indicates p&lt;0.001 for mitoAICD compared to AICD59 control, # indicates p&lt;0.05 for mitoACID with GSH treatment compared to mitoAICD alone, as determined using one-way ANOVA with a post hoc Tukey’s test. C. Representative images of HT22 cells imaged 24 hours after co-transfection with Matrix-roGFP and either Ires or vector co-expressing either Aβ42, AICD59, or mitoAICD (mAICD) in the presence or absence of GSH-MEE (1mM). Left panels display cells successfully transfected with plasmids of interest indicated by DsRed staining (red) and MOS indicated by Matrix-roGFP signal (green). Right panels display MOS alone. Scale bar = 10 μm.

Figure 4. Bax inhibitor decreases HT22 cell apoptosis induced by either Aβ42 or mitoAICD.

A) Representative images of active Bax staining in HT22 cells imaged 24 hours after transfection with empty pIRES DsRed-Express2 (Ires) bicistronic vector or vector co-expressing Aβ42, AICD59, or mitoAICD (mAICD) in the presence or absence of staurosporine (str; 500 nM) to activate Bax. Left images display Hoechst stained nuclei (blue) with successfully transfected cells marked by DsRed2-fluorescence (red). Right images display 6A7 staining cells for active Bax (green) of the cells from the images on the left. Arrows indicate transfected cells. Scale bar = 10 μm. B) Quantitative assessment of HT22 cells apoptosis 24 hours after transfection with Ires vector or vector co-expressing Aβ42, AICD59, or mitoAICD in the absence or presence of Bax inhibitor (BaxI; 150 μM). Only DsRed2-positive cells were counted and scored as apoptotic based on the appearance of condensed or fragmented nuclei, as demonstrated by Hoechst nuclear stain. Data are expressed as the mean +/− SEM performed in duplicate, n=3 independent experiments for Aβ42 + BaxI and mitoAICD + BaxI, n=12 independent experiments for Ires, Aβ42, AICD59, and mitoAICD. *** indicates p&lt;0.001 for Aβ42 compared to Ires control, ## indicates p&lt;0.01 for Aβ42 with BaxI treatment compared to Aβ42 alone, *** indicates p&lt;0.001 for mitoAICD compared to AICD59 control, # indicates p&lt;0.05 for mitoACID with BaxI treatment compared to mitoAICD alone, as determined using one-way ANOVA with a post hoc Tukey’s test. C. Western blot analysis of cytosolic (cyto) and nuclear (nucl) fractions of HT22 cells 24 hours after transfection with Ires vector or vector co-expressing Aβ42, AICD59, or mitoAICD using antibodies specific for p53 (top panel) and nuclear marker lamin-B1 (bottom panel).

Figure 5. Cyclophilin D inhibitor, cyclosporin A decreases HT22 cell apoptosis induced by Aβ42, but not mitoAICD.

A) Representative images of mitochondrial permeability transitional pore (mPTP) assay of HT22 cells imaged 24 hours after transfection with empty pIRES DsRed-Express2 (Ires) bicistronic vector or vector co-expressing Aβ42, AICD59, or mitoAICD (mAICD) in the presence or absence of ionomycin (ion; 0.5 μM) to open the mPTP. Successfully transfected cells are indicated by DsRed2-fluorescence (red), closed mPTP indicated by calcein fluorescence (green) in mitochondria (punctate staining), nuclei are stained with Hoechst dye (blue). Scale bar = 10 μm. B) Quantitative assessment of HT22 cells apoptosis 24 hours after transfection with Ires vector or vector co-expressing Aβ42, AICD59, or mitoAICD in the absence or presence of cyclosporine A (CyA; 10 μM). Only DsRed2-positive cells were counted and scored as apoptotic based on the appearance of condensed or fragmented nuclei, as demonstrated by Hoechst nuclear stain. Data are expressed as the mean +/− SEM, n=7 independent experiments, each performed in triplicate. *** indicates p&lt;0.001 for Aβ42 compared to Ires control, ### indicates p&lt;0.001 for Aβ42 with CyA treatment compared to Aβ42 alone, *** indicates p&lt;0.001 for mitoAICD compared to AICD59 control, as determined using one-way ANOVA with a post hoc Tukey’s test. NS = no significant difference.

Figure 6. Pan-caspase inhibitors decrease HT22 cell apoptosis induced by mitoAICD, but not Aβ42.

A) Representative images of HT22 cells imaged 24 hours after transfection with empty pIRES DsRed-Express2 (Ires) bicistronic vector or vector co-expressing Aβ42, AICD59, or mitoAICD (mAICD) in the presence or absence of staurosporine (str; 500 nM). Left images display Hoechst stained nuclei (blue) with successfully transfected cells marked by DsRed2-fluorescence (red). Right images display active caspase-3 staining (green) of the cells from the images on the left. Arrows indicate transfected cells. Scale bar = 10 μm. B) Quantification of the effects of the pan-caspase inhibitor, Q-VD-Oph (QvD; 20 μM) on apoptosis induced 24 hours post-transfection with Aβ42 or mitoAICD. Only DsRed2-positive cells were counted and marked as apoptotic based on the appearance of condensed or fragmented nuclei, as demonstrated by Hoechst nuclear stain. Data are expressed as the mean +/− SEM, n=8 independent experiments, each performed in triplicate. *** indicates p&lt;0.001 for Aβ42 compared to Ires control, *** indicates p&lt;0.001 for mitoAICD compared to AICD59 control, ## indicates p&lt;0.01 for mitoAICD with QvD treatment compared to mitoAICD alone, as determined using one-way ANOVA with a post hoc Tukey’s test. NS = no significant difference. C) Quantification of the effects of the pan-caspase inhibitor Pro-VAD-FMK (Casp; 10 μM) on apoptosis induced 24 hours post-transfection with Aβ42 or mitoAICD. Data are expressed as the mean +/− SEM performed in triplicate, n=5 independent experiments for Ires, Aβ42, Aβ42 with Casp, n=4 independent experiments for AICD59, mitoAICD, and mitoAICD with Casp. *** indicates p&lt;0.001 for Aβ42 compared to Ires control, *** indicates p&lt;0.001 for mitoAICD compared AICD59 control, # indicates p&lt;0.05 for mitoAICD with Casp treatment compared to mitoAICD alone, as determined using one-way ANOVA with a post hoc Tukey’s test. NS = no significant difference.

Figure 7. Aβ42 and mitoAICD induce cell death in primary hippocampal neurons.

A) Representative images of rat embryonic primary hippocampal neurons imaged live 48 hours after transfection with empty pIRES DsRed-Express2 (Ires) bicistronic vector or vector co-expressing Aβ42, AICD59, or mitoAICD (mAICD) as indicated. Left images display decolorized DsRed2-fluorescence, right panels display Hoechst nuclear staining. Panels are shown in black and white to emphasize morphologies. Arrows indicate successfully transfected cells fluorescing red through DsRed2-expression. Scale bar = 10 μm. B) Quantitative assessment of primary hippocampal neuron cell death 48 hours after transfection with Ires vector or vector co-expressing Aβ42, AICD59, or mitoAICD. Only DsRed2-positive cells were counted and assessed for cell death based on the appearance of condensed or fragmented nuclei as demonstrated by Hoechst nuclear stain as well as overall morphology and processes fragmentation. Data are expressed as the mean +/− SEM, n=4 independent experiments, each performed in triplicate.*** indicates p&lt;0.001 for Aβ42 compared to Ires control, ### indicates p&lt;0.001 for mitoAICD compared to AICD59 control, as determined using one-way ANOVA with a post hoc Tukey’s test.

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial interests.


References

[1] Alzheimer’s Association (2021) 2021 Alzheimer’s disease facts and figures. https://www.alz.org/media/documents/alzheimers-facts-and-figures.pdf
[2] Mancuso M , Orsucci D , LoGerfo A , Calsolaro V , Siciliano G (2010) Clinical features and pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease: involvement of mitochondria and mitochondrial DNA. Adv Exp Med Biol 685 , 34–44.20687493
[3] Scheltens P , Blennow K , Breteler MM , de Strooper B , Frisoni GB , Salloway S , Van der Flier WM (2016) Alzheimer’s disease. Lancet 388 , 505–517.26921134
[4] Chen JX , Yan SD (2007) Amyloid-beta-induced mitochondrial dysfunction. J Alzheimers Dis 12 , 177–184.17917162
[5] Wang X , Su B , Perry G , Smith MA , Zhu X (2007) Insights into amyloid-beta-induced mitochondrial dysfunction in Alzheimer disease. Free Radic Biol Med 43 , 1569–1573.18037122
[6] Mark RJ , Hensley K , Butterfield DA , Mattson MP (1995) Amyloid beta-peptide impairs ion-motive ATPase activities: evidence for a role in loss of neuronal Ca2+ homeostasis and cell death. J Neurosci 15 , 6239–6249.7666206
[7] Morishima-Kawashima M (2014) Molecular mechanism of the intramembrane cleavage of the beta-carboxyl terminal fragment of amyloid precursor protein by gamma-secretase. Front Physiol 5 , 463.25505888
[8] Mullard A (2018) BACE failures lower AD expectations, again. Nat Rev Drug Discov 17 , 385.
[9] Oxford AE , Stewart ES , Rohn TT (2020) Clinical Trials in Alzheimer’s Disease: A Hurdle in the Path of Remedy. Int J Alzheimers Dis 2020 , 5380346.32308993
[10] Bukhari H , Glotzbach A , Kolbe K , Leonhardt G , Loosse C , Muller T (2017) Small things matter: Implications of APP intracellular domain AICD nuclear signaling in the progression and pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease. Prog Neurobiol 156 , 189–213.28587768
[11] Ghosal K , Vogt DL , Liang M , Shen Y , Lamb BT , Pimplikar SW (2009) Alzheimer’s disease-like pathological features in transgenic mice expressing the APP intracellular domain. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106 , 18367–18372.19837693
[12] Passer B , Pellegrini L , Russo C , Siegel RM , Lenardo MJ , Schettini G , Bachmann M , Tabaton M , D’Adamio L (2000) Generation of an apoptotic intracellular peptide by gamma-secretase cleavage of Alzheimer’s amyloid beta protein precursor. J Alzheimers Dis 2 , 289–301.12214090
[13] Simon AM , Schiapparelli L , Salazar-Colocho P , Cuadrado-Tejedor M , Escribano L , Lopez de Maturana R , Del Rio J , Perez-Mediavilla A , Frechilla D (2009) Overexpression of wild-type human APP in mice causes cognitive deficits and pathological features unrelated to Abeta levels. Neurobiol Dis 33 , 369–378.19101630
[14] Giliberto L , Zhou D , Weldon R , Tamagno E , De Luca P , Tabaton M , D’Adamio L (2008) Evidence that the Amyloid beta Precursor Protein-intracellular domain lowers the stress threshold of neurons and has a “regulated” transcriptional role. Mol Neurodegener 3 , 12.18764939
[15] Nakayama K , Ohkawara T , Hiratochi M , Koh CS , Nagase H (2008) The intracellular domain of amyloid precursor protein induces neuron-specific apoptosis. Neurosci Lett 444 , 127–131.18722509
[16] Nunomura A , Perry G , Aliev G , Hirai K , Takeda A , Balraj EK , Jones PK , Ghanbari H , Wataya T , Shimohama S , Chiba S , Atwood CS , Petersen RB , Smith MA (2001) Oxidative damage is the earliest event in Alzheimer disease. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 60 , 759–767.11487050
[17] Smith MA , Nunomura A , Zhu X , Takeda A , Perry G (2000) Metabolic, metallic, and mitotic sources of oxidative stress in Alzheimer disease. Antioxid Redox Signal 2 , 413–420.11229355
[18] Cardoso S , Seica RM , Moreira PI (2017) Mitochondria as a target for neuroprotection: implications for Alzheimer s disease. Expert Rev Neurother 17 , 77–91.27366815
[19] Bartley MG , Marquardt K , Kirchhof D , Wilkins HM , Patterson D , Linseman DA (2012) Overexpression of amyloid-beta protein precursor induces mitochondrial oxidative stress and activates the intrinsic apoptotic cascade. J Alzheimers Dis 28 , 855–868.22133762
[20] Anandatheerthavarada HK , Biswas G , Robin MA , Avadhani NG (2003) Mitochondrial targeting and a novel transmembrane arrest of Alzheimer’s amyloid precursor protein impairs mitochondrial function in neuronal cells. J Cell Biol 161 , 41–54.12695498
[21] Pavlov PF , Wiehager B , Sakai J , Frykman S , Behbahani H , Winblad B , Ankarcrona M (2011) Mitochondrial gamma-secretase participates in the metabolism of mitochondria-associated amyloid precursor protein. FASEB J 25 , 78–88.20833873
[22] Fishel ML , Seo YR , Smith ML , Kelley MR (2003) Imbalancing the DNA base excision repair pathway in the mitochondria; targeting and overexpressing N-methylpurine DNA glycosylase in mitochondria leads to enhanced cell killing. Cancer Res 63 , 608–615.12566303
[23] Muller T , Meyer HE , Egensperger R , Marcus K (2008) The amyloid precursor protein intracellular domain (AICD) as modulator of gene expression, apoptosis, and cytoskeletal dynamics-relevance for Alzheimer’s disease. Prog Neurobiol 85 , 393–406.18603345
[24] Anderson MF , Nilsson M , Eriksson PS , Sims NR (2004) Glutathione monoethyl ester provides neuroprotection in a rat model of stroke. Neurosci Lett 354 , 163–165.14698463
[25] Anderson ME , Powrie F , Puri RN , Meister A (1985) Glutathione monoethyl ester: preparation, uptake by tissues, and conversion to glutathione. Arch Biochem Biophys 239 , 538–548.4004275
[26] Waypa GB , Marks JD , Guzy R , Mungai PT , Schriewer J , Dokic D , Schumacker PT (2010) Hypoxia triggers subcellular compartmental redox signaling in vascular smooth muscle cells. Circ Res 106 , 526–535.20019331
[27] Polster BM , Fiskum G (2004) Mitochondrial mechanisms of neural cell apoptosis. J Neurochem 90 , 1281–1289.15341512
[28] Akhter R , Sanphui P , Biswas SC (2014) The essential role of p53-up-regulated modulator of apoptosis (Puma) and its regulation by FoxO3a transcription factor in beta-amyloid-induced neuron death. J Biol Chem 289 , 10812–10822.24567336
[29] Petronilli V , Miotto G , Canton M , Brini M , Colonna R , Bernardi P , Di Lisa F (1999) Transient and long-lasting openings of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore can be monitored directly in intact cells by changes in mitochondrial calcein fluorescence. Biophys J 76 , 725–734.9929477
[30] Devi L , Prabhu BM , Galati DF , Avadhani NG , Anandatheerthavarada HK (2006) Accumulation of amyloid precursor protein in the mitochondrial import channels of human Alzheimer’s disease brain is associated with mitochondrial dysfunction. J Neurosci 26 , 9057–9068.16943564
[31] Lustbader JW , Cirilli M , Lin C , Xu HW , Takuma K , Wang N , Caspersen C , Chen X , Pollak S , Chaney M , Trinchese F , Liu S , Gunn-Moore F , Lue LF , Walker DG , Kuppusamy P , Zewier ZL , Arancio O , Stern D , Yan SS , Wu H (2004) ABAD directly links Abeta to mitochondrial toxicity in Alzheimer’s disease. Science 304 , 448–452.15087549
[32] Nunomura A , Tamaoki T , Tanaka K , Motohashi N , Nakamura M , Hayashi T , Yamaguchi H , Shimohama S , Lee HG , Zhu X , Smith MA , Perry G (2010) Intraneuronal amyloid beta accumulation and oxidative damage to nucleic acids in Alzheimer disease. Neurobiol Dis 37 , 731–737.20034567
[33] Casley CS , Canevari L , Land JM , Clark JB , Sharpe MA (2002) Beta-amyloid inhibits integrated mitochondrial respiration and key enzyme activities. J Neurochem 80 , 91–100.11796747
[34] Droge W (2002) Free radicals in the physiological control of cell function. Physiol Rev 82 , 47–95.11773609
[35] Murphy MP (2009) How mitochondria produce reactive oxygen species. Biochem J 417 , 1–13.19061483
[36] Wang CH , Wu SB , Wu YT , Wei YH (2013) Oxidative stress response elicited by mitochondrial dysfunction: implication in the pathophysiology of aging. Exp Biol Med (Maywood) 238 , 450–460.23856898
[37] Orrenius S , Gogvadze V , Zhivotovsky B (2007) Mitochondrial oxidative stress: implications for cell death. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 47 , 143–183.17029566
[38] Halliwell B (1992) Reactive oxygen species and the central nervous system. J Neurochem 59 , 1609–1623.1402908
[39] Franco R , Cidlowski JA (2009) Apoptosis and glutathione: beyond an antioxidant. Cell Death Differ 16 , 1303–1314.19662025
[40] Wilkins HM , Kirchhof D , Manning E , Joseph JW , Linseman DA (2013) Mitochondrial glutathione transport is a key determinant of neuronal susceptibility to oxidative and nitrosative stress. J Biol Chem 288 , 5091–5101.23283974
[41] Ozaki T , Li Y , Kikuchi H , Tomita T , Iwatsubo T , Nakagawara A (2006) The intracellular domain of the amyloid precursor protein (AICD) enhances the p53-mediated apoptosis. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 351 , 57–63.17054906
[42] Alves da Costa C , Sunyach C , Pardossi-Piquard R , Sevalle J , Vincent B , Boyer N , Kawarai T , Girardot N , St George-Hyslop P , Checler F (2006) Presenilin-dependent gamma-secretase-mediated control of p53-associated cell death in Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurosci 26 , 6377–6385.16763046
[43] Miyashita T , Krajewski S , Krajewska M , Wang HG , Lin HK , Liebermann DA , Hoffman B , Reed JC (1994) Tumor suppressor p53 is a regulator of bcl-2 and bax gene expression in vitro and in vivo. Oncogene 9 , 1799–1805.8183579
[44] Crompton M (1999) The mitochondrial permeability transition pore and its role in cell death. Biochem J 341 (Pt 2 ), 233–249.10393078
[45] Du H , Yan SS (2010) Mitochondrial permeability transition pore in Alzheimer’s disease: cyclophilin D and amyloid beta. Biochim Biophys Acta 1802 , 198–204.19616093
[46] Halestrap AP , Connern CP , Griffiths EJ , Kerr PM (1997) Cyclosporin A binding to mitochondrial cyclophilin inhibits the permeability transition pore and protects hearts from ischaemia/reperfusion injury. Mol Cell Biochem 174 , 167–172.9309682
[47] Gomez-Lazaro M , Galindo MF , Melero-Fernandez de Mera RM , Fernandez-Gomez FJ , Concannon CG , Segura MF , Comella JX , Prehn JH , Jordan J (2007) Reactive oxygen species and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase activate Bax to induce mitochondrial cytochrome c release and apoptosis in response to malonate. Mol Pharmacol 71 , 736–743.17172466
[48] Weng C , Li Y , Xu D , Shi Y , Tang H (2005) Specific cleavage of Mcl-1 by caspase-3 in tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL)-induced apoptosis in Jurkat leukemia T cells. J Biol Chem 280 , 10491–10500.15637055
[49] Slee EA , Harte MT , Kluck RM , Wolf BB , Casiano CA , Newmeyer DD , Wang HG , Reed JC , Nicholson DW , Alnemri ES , Green DR , Martin SJ (1999) Ordering the cytochrome c-initiated caspase cascade: hierarchical activation of caspases-2, -3, -6, -7, -8, and -10 in a caspase-9-dependent manner. J Cell Biol 144 , 281–292.9922454
[50] Szydlowska K , Tymianski M (2010) Calcium, ischemia and excitotoxicity. Cell Calcium 47 , 122–129.20167368
[51] Moubarak RS , Yuste VJ , Artus C , Bouharrour A , Greer PA , Menissier-de Murcia J , Susin SA (2007) Sequential activation of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1, calpains, and Bax is essential in apoptosis-inducing factor-mediated programmed necrosis. Mol Cell Biol 27 , 4844–4862.17470554
[52] Goodger ZV , Rajendran L , Trutzel A , Kohli BM , Nitsch RM , Konietzko U (2009) Nuclear signaling by the APP intracellular domain occurs predominantly through the amyloidogenic processing pathway. J Cell Sci 122 , 3703–3714.19773363
[53] Belyaev ND , Kellett KA , Beckett C , Makova NZ , Revett TJ , Nalivaeva NN , Hooper NM , Turner AJ (2010) The transcriptionally active amyloid precursor protein (APP) intracellular domain is preferentially produced from the 695 isoform of APP in a {beta}-secretase-dependent pathway. J Biol Chem 285 , 41443–41454.20961856
[54] Flammang B , Pardossi-Piquard R , Sevalle J , Debayle D , Dabert-Gay AS , Thevenet A , Lauritzen I , Checler F (2012) Evidence that the amyloid-beta protein precursor intracellular domain, AICD, derives from beta-secretase-generated C-terminal fragment. J Alzheimers Dis 30 , 145–153.22406447
[55] Vaillant-Beuchot L , Mary A , Pardossi-Piquard R , Bourgeois A , Lauritzen I , Eysert F , Kinoshita PF , Cazareth J , Badot C , Fragaki K , Bussiere R , Martin C , Mary R , Bauer C , Pagnotta S , Paquis-Flucklinger V , Buee-Scherrer V , Buee L , Lacas-Gervais S , Checler F , Chami M (2021) Accumulation of amyloid precursor protein C-terminal fragments triggers mitochondrial structure, function, and mitophagy defects in Alzheimer’s disease models and human brains. Acta Neuropathol 141 , 39–65.33079262
[56] Lauritzen I , Becot A , Bourgeois A , Pardossi-Piquard R , Biferi MG , Barkats M , Checler F (2019) Targeting gamma-secretase triggers the selective enrichment of oligomeric APP-CTFs in brain extracellular vesicles from Alzheimer cell and mouse models. Transl Neurodegener 8 , 35.31827783
[57] Checler F , Afram E , Pardossi-Piquard R , Lauritzen I (2021) Is gamma-secretase a beneficial inactivating enzyme of the toxic APP C-terminal fragment C99? J Biol Chem 296 , 100489.33662398
