LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


7808616
7840
Trends Neurosci
Trends Neurosci
Trends in neurosciences
0166-2236
1878-108X

37591720
10528597
10.1016/j.tins.2023.07.006
NIHMS1925304
Article
Alzheimer’s disease and related tauopathies – Disorders of disrupted neuronal identity
Frost Bess PhD 123*
1 Barshop Institute for Longevity and Aging Studies, University of Texas Health San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas
2 Glenn Biggs Institute for Alzheimer’s and Neurodegenerative Diseases, University of Texas Health San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas
3 Department of Cell Systems and Anatomy, University of Texas Health San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas
* Corresponding Author: Bess Frost, Ph.D., Associate Professor, 4939 Charles Katz Dr., Barshop Institute, Rm 1041, University of Texas Health San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 78229, Phone: 210-562-5037, bfrost@uthscsa.edu
17 8 2023
10 2023
15 8 2023
01 10 2024
46 10 797813
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Post-mitotic neurons require persistently active controls to maintain terminal differentiation. Unlike dividing cells, aberrant cell cycle activation in mature neurons causes apoptosis rather than transformation. In Alzheimer’s disease and related tauopathies, evidence suggests that pathogenic forms of tau drive neurodegeneration via neuronal cell cycle reentry. Multiple interconnected mechanisms linking tau to cell cycle activation have been identified, including but not limited to tau-induced over-stabilization of the actin cytoskeleton, consequent changes to nuclear architecture, and disruption of heterochromatin-mediated gene silencing. Cancer- and development-associated pathways are upregulated in human and cellular models of tauopathy, and many tau-induced cellular phenotypes are also present in various cancers and progenitor/stem cells. In this review, I delve into mechanistic parallels between tauopathies, cancer and development, and highlight the role of tau in cancer and in the developing brain. Based on these studies, I put forth a model by which pathogenic forms of tau disrupt the program that maintains terminal neuronal differentiation, driving cell cycle reentry and consequent neuronal death. This framework presents tauopathies as conditions involving the profound, toxic disruption of neuronal identity.

Neurodegeneration
tau
cell nucleus
epigenetics
development
cancer
cell cycle

pmcALZHEIMER’S DISEASE AND RELATED TAUOPATHIES

Alzheimer’s disease (Box 1), the most common cause of dementia globally, presents a pressing public health challenge with approximately 50 million individuals affected and a projected rise in cases due to aging populations. This progressive neurodegenerative disorder is neuropathologically defined by the presence of amyloid beta (Aβ) plaques and neurofibrillary tau tangles in patient brains. While tau is most well-known for its role alongside Aβ in Alzheimer’s disease, tau deposits are the defining neuropathological feature of many neurodegenerative disorders that are collectively classified as “tauopathies.” Among these disorders, “primary” tauopathies are characterized by the abnormal aggregation of tau protein as the primary pathological feature, whereas “secondary” tauopathies feature tau pathology alongside other protein accumulations such as Aβ plaques [1].

In this review, I first briefly outline the evidence indicating that pathogenic forms of tau drive neurodegeneration. I then provide an overview of the cellular mechanisms underlying tau-induced cell cycle reentry, emphasizing the effects of tau on nuclear architecture and function, and drawing parallels between tauopathy, cancer, and cellular development. I will also discuss various studies suggesting that tau is involved in human cancers and in the developing brain, further supporting a link between tau and immature cellular identity. The toxic cellular cascade induced by pathogenic forms of tau lays the foundation for the perspective proposed here, arguing that these mechanisms reflect a tau-induced cellular dedifferentiation, akin to processes involved in cancer and maintained in less developed cell types.

PATHOGENIC FORMS OF TAU DRIVE NEUROTOXICITY

While the debate surrounding the “toxic agent” in Alzheimer’s disease has been a decades-long controversy, some of the earliest neuropathological analyses of human brain affected by Alzheimer’s disease suggest that the progressive accumulation of neurofibrillary tangles better correlates with dementia than do amyloid plaques [2]. More modern in vivo imaging of human brains affected by Alzheimer’s disease has further revealed that the location of pathogenic forms of tau, but not Aβ, predict areas of the brain that will degenerate in the following two years [3]. Human APP transgenic mice do not exhibit neurotoxicity when endogenous levels of tau are reduced [4], demonstrating that tau pathogenicity is required for the shortened lifespan and behavioral deficits of the APP-based model. Dysfunction of the tau protein is clearly sufficient to drive neurodegeneration in non-Alzheimer’s tauopathies, as autosomal dominant mutations in the MAPT gene are sufficient to cause frontotemporal dementia [5–7]. The sporadic primary human tauopathies are phenotypically distinct, vary in the types of cells and brain regions affected, and can involve the deposition of differing tau isoforms (Box 2).

A currently prevalent notion in the Alzheimer’s disease field is that Aβ deposition initiates Alzheimer’s disease but requires formation of pathogenic tau to exert toxicity (Fig. 1). While Aβ is clearly the initiating factor in the context of APP- and, likely, presenilin 1 and presenilin 2 mutation [8–10], I propose that accumulation of pathogenic forms of tau is not a consequence of Aβ in all sporadic Alzheimer’s disease cases. My reasoning is threefold. First, pathogenic forms of tau are present in human brain affected by Alzheimer’s disease in regions that appear to lack Aβ [2]. Second, pathogenic forms of tau can clearly accumulate independently of Aβ, as is seen among the primary tauopathies [11,12]. Third, pathological forms of tau begin to form in humans very early in life - decades prior to Aβ detection [13].

In vitro and in vivo studies across human brain and model organisms demonstrate that tau phosphorylation and acetylation drive multimerization and neurodegeneration [14], and that tau seeds spread pathology between cells in a prion-like manner [15,16]. Current tau-based therapeutic efforts are primarily focused on reducing overall tau levels [17,18], preventing tau phosphorylation, or blocking tau spread [19,20]. While pharmacologically preventing the formation of pathogenic tau species (Box 3) has the potential to limit the toxic effects of tau in humans, we now know that pathogenic forms of tau deposit in the brain decades prior to symptom onset [13,21], and that tau seeds are present in the brain prior to neurofibrillary detection [22–24]. It is possible that therapeutic strategies targeting the tau protein itself will be ineffective in symptomatic individuals who already have a significant tau burden in their brain, as tau has already initiated a series of toxic cellular events that ultimately culminate in neuronal death. Traditional therapeutic strategies to limit phosphorylation or acetylation, such as small molecules developed to inhibit kinase/acetyltransferase activity, affect many cellular proteins besides tau and are thus less optimal for specific targeting. Therapeutically targeting the downstream cellular pathways that connect pathogenic forms of tau to neurotoxicity may be more relevant to symptomatic patients and could be combined with strategies to reduce pathogenic tau levels. In the subsequent section, I review the tau-induced toxic cascade driving abortive neuronal cell cycle reentry. Each of the nodes in the pathway connecting tau to induced cell cycle reentry are established casual drivers of neuronal death and represent opportunities for therapeutic targeting.

MECHANISMS OF TAU-INDUCED CELL CYCLE ACTIVATION AND PARALLELS TO CANCER AND DEVELOPMENT

Since the initial discovery that the cell cycle-related protein p16 is upregulated in brains of patients with Alzheimer’s disease [25], a large body of work has implicated pathogenic forms of tau as a driver of cell cycle reentry in neurons. While studies in mice indicate that neuronal cell cycle reentry can cause the formation of pathogenic tau species [26], studies in mouse, Drosophila, and neuronal cell cultures indicate that presence of pathogenic forms of tau are sufficient to drive cell cycle reentry, and that such tau-induced neuronal cell cycle activation is neurotoxic [27–29]. Studies in primary mouse cortical neurons indicate that tau is required for Aβ-induced cell cycle reentry [30]. Abnormal DNA replication and aneuploidy have been reported in neurons of postmortem brain tissue from patients with Alzheimer’s disease [31]. To my knowledge, the occurrence of cell division in post-mitotic neurons has not been observed in human brain or Alzheimer’s disease/tauopathy models, indicating that cellular mechanisms are in place to halt the full dedifferentiation and bona fide replication of mature neurons. Multiple lines of evidence suggest that tau does not need to be in aggregate form to induce cell cycle reentry and consequent neuronal death [30,32–34].

In Drosophila models of tauopathy, genetic blockage of cell cycle activation significantly reduces tau-induced neurodegeneration, indicating that tau-induced aberrant cell cycle activation causally mediates neurotoxicity [27]. Mechanistically, a model has emerged in which abortive cell cycle activation results from tau-induced activation of moesin, a protein that is well-known for its role in cancer, which drives over-stabilization of the actin cytoskeleton, leading to architectural changes in the nucleus and genome, activating retrotransposons and driving neuronal cell cycle reentry [19,35–39] (Fig. 2). While activation of the cell cycle in post-mitotic neurons causes cell death rather than cellular transformation [27,31,40,41], the nucleocentric pathway connecting tau to cell cycle activation has close parallels to cellular mechanisms that drive cancer and metastasis, many of which are also involved in development.

Pathogenic tau-induced moesin activation drives actin overstabilization.

The Accelerating Medicines Partnership® Program for Alzheimer’s Disease, a partnership between the USA National Institute of Aging and other stakeholders, has nominated moesin as a drug target for Alzheimer’s diseasei based on genomic and proteomic data from human Alzheimer’s disease samples. Mechanistically, moesin works with the proteins ezrin and radixin to link filamentous actin to the plasma membrane [42], and is well-known for its role as a driver of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) [43,44]. As a cytoskeletal linker protein, moesin occupies a central position within a complex regulatory network that encompasses cellular processes such as cellular migration, growth and adhesion, as well as cancer cell invasion and metastasis. In developing neurons, moesin localizes to neurites and growth cones, and is thought to regulate the development of neuronal polarity [31].

In recent work [45], we analyzed transcriptional networks in human Alzheimer’s disease and mouse tauopathy to gain insights into the relationships between co-expressed genes and their association with biological determinants of cellular identity. These analyses identified moesin as a highly connected “hub” gene in a co-expression module that is related to EMT and cancer in human Alzheimer’s disease cases and across disease stages in brains of tau transgenic mice. Subsequent analysis of human brain tissue indicated that moesin protein levels are elevated in neurons of Alzheimer’s disease patients. Based on studies in a well-described Drosophila model of tauopathy, we found that expression of transgenic human tau is sufficient to elevate moesin levels, suggesting that the Alzheimer’s disease-associated moesin activation is a consequence of pathogenic forms of tau.

Moesin is a known activator of the EMT, a process that involves the transdifferentiation of epithelial cells into mesenchymal cells. EMT is critical for organ development [46] and wound healing [47,48] and involves a significant remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton to break down cell-to-cell connections and deplete proteins that maintain a terminally differentiated epithelial identity. In EMT, moesin drives the formation of stable actin bundles that promote transdifferentiation and cellular migration [44]. Moesin is elevated in many types of human cancers, where it also drives the over-stabilization of filamentous actin [43,44], disrupts terminally differentiated phenotypes, and induces cell cycle activation and tumor metastasis [44,49–53]. Consistent with the role of moesin in the EMT and elevation of moesin in neurons of tau transgenic Drosophila, we find that brains of tau transgenic Drosophila exhibit a reduction in cellular adhesion proteins that are also depleted during EMT (Drosophila homologs of human cadherin 1 and catenin alpha 1) as well as reduction of neuroglian, a cellular adhesion protein homologous to the vertebrate neural adhesion protein L1 [45].

Presence of Hirano bodies, eosinophilic inclusions composed of bundles of filamentous actin, in post-mortem human Alzheimer’s disease brains provided one of the first hints of an association between Alzheimer’s disease and actin dysfunction [54–56]. Bundles of actin filaments are resistant to actin-depolymerizing drugs, unlike solo actin filaments, indicating that actin bundles are more stable than filaments [37]. An increase in over-stabilized filamentous actin also occurs in mouse and Drosophila models of tauopathy [37], and Hirano bodies are known to contain tau protein [57,58]. Like other microtubule-associated proteins, tau can bind to both microtubules [59] and to actin [60,61], can bundle actin filaments [37,62], and can crosslink actin filaments to microtubules [63]. In Drosophila models of tauopathy, aberrant tau phosphorylation drives filamentous actin stabilization, neuronal cell cycle reentry and consequent neurodegeneration in the adult brain. Genetically reducing over-stabilized forms of actin in tau transgenic Drosophila suppresses tau-induced cell cycle activation and neurotoxicity, clearly demonstrating that actin over-stabilization is a cause, rather than a consequence or epiphenomenon, of cell cycle reentry and neuronal death [37].

Based on the established role of moesin as a regulator of actin dynamics and cellular fate, alongside the presence of over-stabilized actin and cell cycle reentry in human tauopathy brain and various laboratory models of tauopathy, we investigated a potential role for moesin as a mediator of tau-induced actin overstabilization and cell cycle reentry. We discovered that activation of moesin specifically in neurons is sufficient to elevate overall levels of filamentous actin and drive neurodegeneration, and that neuronal knockdown of moesin suppresses tau-induced actin overstabilization, cell cycle reentry, and neuronal death in the adult Drosophila brain [45]. Taken together, these studies place moesin and consequent actin over-stabilization as a potentially shared mechanism between EMT/cancer-related changes in cellular identity and tau-induced neuronal cell cycle reentry.

Effects of tau on nuclear architecture.

As the encapsulator of the genome and the producer of RNA, the nucleus stands at the helm of cellular control. The typical artistic rendering of the nucleus as a perfect sphere afloat within the cytoplasm is scientifically inaccurate. The nuclear envelope-spanning linker of nucleoskeleton and cytoskeleton (LINC) serves as a bridge between the cytoskeleton and the lamin nucleoskeleton, thus anchoring the nucleus into a central location within the cellular soma [64]. In early developmental stages and in some pathological conditions, cells harbor tubular invaginations of the nuclear envelope deep into the nucleoplasm. Due to ultrastructural similarity to the endoplasmic reticulum, these nuclear envelope invaginations are also known as a “nucleoplasmic reticulum” [65].

Neuronal nuclei from patients with Alzheimer’s disease and familial tauopathy feature a significant increase in nuclear envelope invagination compared to unaffected individuals [36,66,67]. Nucleoplasmic reticulum expansion has also been reported in Drosophila models of tauopathy [36], mouse models of tauopathy [68], iPSC-derived neurons from patients harboring mutations in the MAPT gene [67], upon induced tau expression in HEK293 cells [69], and as a consequence of induced tau multimerization in primary neurons [70], demonstrating that the phenomenology of nuclear envelope invagination is robustly conserved across model organisms and model systems of tauopathy. In line with the increased frequency of nuclear pleomorphism across tau models, new studies in cultured neuroblastoma cells suggest that pathogenic forms of tau decrease overall nuclear tension and that pharmacological manipulation of filamentous actin stability is sufficient to induce nuclear invaginations/blebs and alter nuclear tension [71].

Studies utilizing post-mortem human brain tissue from patients with Alzheimer’s disease reveal that nuclear envelope invaginations contain pathogenic forms of tau, a core of filamentous actin, and are lined with nuclear pores. In Drosophila, genetic over-stabilization of actin is sufficient to induce nuclear envelope invagination in neurons of the adult brain [36]. Reducing the interaction between the actin cytoskeleton and the lamin nucleoskeleton via genetic manipulation of the LINC complex increases lamin levels and reduces the extent of nuclear envelope invagination, neuronal cell cycle activation and neurodegeneration in tau transgenic Drosophila, indicating that tau-induced nuclear envelope invagination is a causal factor driving cell cycle reentry and neurotoxicity [36]. While it is currently unknown how an overly rigid cytoskeleton causes the nuclear envelope to invaginate, I speculate that filamentous actin exerts a physical force on the nuclear envelope, which causes membrane involution.

The LINC complex also tethers microtubules to the lamin nucleoskeleton [64]. Consistent with a role for tau as a crosslinker of tau and microtubules, evidence suggests that microtubules are present within the core of nuclear envelope invaginations in iPSC-derived neurons harboring MAPT mutations [67]. The authors speculate that the effects of tau on microtubules cause “increased pushing forces on the nucleus”, which aligns with my thoughts on filamentous actin and nuclear envelope invaginations outlined earlier. Taken together, these studies demonstrate that tau, filamentous actin, and microtubules are present within invaginations, that tau-induced nuclear envelope invaginations are present in Drosophila, iPSC-derived neurons harboring MAPT mutations, human Alzheimer’s disease, and human frontotemporal dementia with MAPT mutation, and that nuclear envelope invaginations are causally associated with cell cycle activation and neuronal death.

Historically, nuclear pleomorphisms were among the earliest changes identified in pathological analyses of tumor tissue [72]. Nuclear envelope invaginations are present in many types of cancers, including but certainly not limited to thyroid, ovarian, breast, bladder and renal cancer. Oncogene activation is sufficient to induce changes in nuclear shape, and presence of invaginations and grooves in nuclei from biopsies are used to predict the potential for malignancy [73,74]. Similar to tauopathy, cancer-associated nuclear envelope invaginations contain filamentous actin and microtubules [75], and cancer cells exhibit less nuclear tension [76]. In breast epithelial cells, microtubule-mediated nuclear envelope invagination induces epithelial mesenchymal plasticity, and decreasing the interaction between the cytoskeleton and the nucleoskeleton by reducing LINC complex components drives the mesenchymal phenotype back toward an epithelial phenotype [77]. Similarly, cells with a lesser degree of differentiation have a higher frequency of nuclear envelope invagination [78], further supporting a link between nuclear invaginations, reduced nuclear tension, and immature cellular identity.

Tau-induced heterochromatin decondensation.

DNA is packaged into gene-rich, transcriptionally-permissive euchromatin and transcriptionally-restrictive heterochromatin. Cells contain two types of heterochromatin: facultative heterochromatin can transition into and out of a condensed state to accommodate gene expression, while constitutive heterochromatin is rather static and gene-sparse. Specific proteins and histone modifications maintain constitutive heterochromatin. For example, dimethylated lysine 9 of histone 3 (H3K9me2), and the heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1) are enriched in constitutive telomeric and pericentromeric heterochromatin [79].

The lamin nucleoskeleton is a critical determinant of the three-dimensional packaging of the genome, as it serves as a tethering site for highly condensed constitutive heterochromatin [80–82]. Improper interactions between the cytoskeleton, the LINC complex, the nucleoskeleton, and heterochromatin will thus disrupt genomic architecture, which has major consequences on gene expression. Depletion of B-type lamin protein levels in animal models of Alzheimer’s disease and related tauopathies [36], perhaps as a consequence of a “stretched” nucleoskeleton that results from nuclear envelope invagination, cause constitutive heterochromatin to decondense, which allows genes that are normally transcriptionally silenced by heterochromatin to become aberrantly expressed [35]. Decondensation of constitutive heterochromatin in patients with Alzheimer’s disease, large-scale changes within the epigenome, and alterations of chromatin architecture are more closely associated with tau pathology than with Aβ pathology [83], as are differences in DNA methylation [84,85]. Based on analysis of publicly available datasets of human Alzheimer’s disease, we have reported that loss of heterochromatin markers corresponds to higher transcript levels of genes normally silenced by constitutive heterochromatin, particularly those with roles in neurodevelopment, suggesting that tau-induced heterochromatin decondensation has a major impact on gene expression, and, potentially, cellular identity [35]. These studies are consistent with those of another publication, where pathogenic tau-associated changes in DNA methylation were reported to preferentially affect genes involved in neurodevelopment and neurogenesis [84]. Studies in iPSC-derived neurons from patients with early-onset Alzheimer’s disease (PS1 mutations) feature an altered chromatin landscape that correlates with the entry of these cells into a precursor-like state with gene expression profiles more closely related to ectoderm and non-ectoderm lineages than neurons. While the cellular phenotypes of these cells were not specifically attributed to tau in this study [86], PS1 mutations are clearly associated with tau accumulation in human cases of early onset Alzheimer’s disease, and phosphorylated tau accumulates within various PS1 mutant iPSC lines [87,88]. Induced neurons from sporadic Alzheimer’s disease cases also feature a higher degree of open chromatin and an immature and “transformation-like” transcriptional program [89].

While we have discovered that the effects of cytoplasmic tau on the actin cytoskeleton regulate nuclear architecture via the LINC complex [36], our studies do not exclude potential effects of nuclear tau on genomic packaging. Physiological forms of tau are clearly present in the nucleus, where they interact directly with DNA by binding the minor groove of the double helix [90,91]. Tau binds to AT-rich satellite DNA, colocalizes with pericentromeric heterochromatin [92], and protects DNA from peroxidation-induced DNA damage [91]. Reduction of tau in mice and in cultured SHS75Y neuroblastoma cells causes loss of heterochromatin [93,94], suggesting that loss of physiological tau function also contributes to heterochromatin decondensation in tauopathy.

Studies in Drosophila suggest that pathogenic tau-induced heterochromatin decondensation causally drives cell cycle reentry and consequent neuronal death. Genetically depleting HP1 and H3K9me2 in tau transgenic Drosophila significantly enhance tau-induced neurodegeneration, while genetically increasing heterochromatin levels significantly suppress tau-induced cell cycle reentry and neurodegeneration in the adult Drosophila brain [35]. Collectively, studies to date on the tau-affected epigenome suggest that decondensation of constitutive heterochromatin in human tauopathy is a consequence of pathogenic tau, allows transcription of genes that are normally silenced, causally mediates cell cycle reentry and neurodegeneration in tauopathy, and may result from both a toxic gain of tau function in the cytoplasm as well as a loss of normal tau function in the nucleus.

The overall reduction of constitutive heterochromatin in Drosophila and loss of heterochromatin markers in tau transgenic mice and in post-mortem brain of patients with Alzheimer’s disease demonstrate that the effects of tau on the epigenome are robust and are conserved across model systems. Loss of heterochromatin-mediated transcriptional silencing in various cancers is also well-documented and drives transformation [95]. Heterochromatin-mediated gene silencing plays an important role in differentiation and maintaining cellular identity. In pluripotent stem cells, boundaries between chromocenters are poorly defined and chromatin is rather decondensed. As cells differentiate, they increase overall levels of heterochromatin that localize to distinct nuclear compartments. In fully differentiated cells, decondensation of heterochromatin is required for effective reprogramming to an iPSC [96,97]. The overall genetic architecture of the nucleus is thus tightly linked to differentiation state and cellular identity.

Tau-induced activation of transposable elements.

Constitutive heterochromatin is a major mechanism by which cells silence transposable elements, or “jumping genes” [98]. Transposable elements comprise an astonishing 45% of the human genome [99]. Long and Short Interspersed Nuclear Elements (LINEs, and SINEs, respectively), and Long-Terminal Repeat (LTR)-containing elements compose the major retrotransposon classes [100]. In the human genome, approximately 7,000 of the half million LINE elements are intact, harboring two open reading frames that encode proteins with RNA binding, nucleic acid chaperone, endonuclease and reverse transcriptase activities. LINE-encoded proteins reverse transcribe LINE and SINE RNA and insert the de novo LINE or SINE DNA copy into the genome [101]. Endogenous retroviruses (ERVs) compose 8% of the human genome. These elements are structurally similar to exogenous retroviruses [102]. Intact ERVs encode matrix and capsid proteins, as well as a protease, reverse transcriptase, integrase, and envelope proteins. While retrotransposon activation can drive genome expansion, evolutionary diversity, and somatic diversification, unchecked transposition generates DNA breaks and genomic instability, genetic polymorphisms, and insertional mutations that can negatively affect organismal function [103]. Fortunately, most human transposable elements are transpositionally inert, with the exception of ~35–40 subfamilies of LINE1, Alu, and SVA [104].

Based on the effects of tau on constitutive heterochromatin and the essential function of constitutive heterochromatin in transcriptionally silencing retrotransposons, we previously hypothesized that retrotransposons may be dysregulated in tauopathy. Consistent with this hypothesis, we found that transcript levels of LINE1, human endogenous retrovirus (HERV), and SVA transposable element family members are elevated in postmortem brain from patients with Alzheimer’s disease and progressive supranuclear palsy [39]. Along a similar line, elevation of specific HERV subfamily members in the brain are reported to correlate with neurofibrillary tau burden, but not Aβ burden, and reduced cognitive performance in the year prior to death [105]. The authors also reported increased transposable element DNA copy number in brains of tau transgenic Drosophila. Relatedly, the forementioned study from our group provides evidence that transposable elements actively mobilize in the brain of tau transgenic Drosophila, and that tau-induced heterochromatin decondensation drives retrotransposon activation, which induces cell cycle reentry [39]. Consistent with the high degree of conservation among model systems mentioned for other aspects of tau’s effects on nuclear function, we subsequently determined that transposable element activation is conserved among three different mouse models of tauopathy [106].

In line with the progressive increase in heterochromatin-mediated gene silencing as cells commit to a mature identity, transposable elements are expressed at high levels in embryonic stem cells but become silenced with terminal differentiation. Pluripotency factors OCT4 and NANOG regulate the transcription of retrotransposons in stem cells [107], suggesting that retrotransposons may be involved in self-renewal and maintenance of a pluripotent state. In line with this hypothesis, suppression of the human endogenous retrovirus HERVH induces differentiation of pluripotent stem cells [108]. Interestingly, LINE-1 reactivation has been proposed to mark cellular dedifferentiation in the early stages of salamander limb regeneration [109]. Retrotransposons are also robustly activated in various cancers (reviewed in [110]), consistent with disruption of a terminally differentiated state.

In addition to mutations induced by transposition, retrotransposon-derived products such as double stranded RNAs (dsRNAs), proteins, and episomal DNA can drive inflammation due to the high degree of similarity between retrotransposons and exogenous retroviruses [111]. In cancer, for example, the reactivation of protein-coding retrotransposons leads to the production of tumor-specific antigens that may contribute to the infiltration of immune cells into the tumor and trigger cytolytic T-cell responses [110]. In addition, studies in various cancers reveal that desilencing of endogenous retrotransposons generates transposable element-derived dsRNAs, which, like retrovirus-derived dsRNAs, induce an interferon response through the dsRNA-sensing innate immune system [112].

In a recent study, we reported that panneuronal transgenic expression of human tau drives neuroinflammation through the production of retrotransposon-derived dsRNAs in astrocyte-like cells in the Drosophila brain [113]. We also found that astrocytic dsRNA deposition is conserved in brains of tau transgenic mice and in patients with Alzheimer’s disease or progressive supranuclear palsy [113], thus drawing yet another parallel between tau-induced neurodegeneration and mechanisms involved in cancer. Of note, antiretroviral therapies are currently in clinical trials for Alzheimer’s diseaseii, iii and PSPiv.

Tau-induced neuronal dedifferentiation – a conceptual framework.

I speculate that the cellular phenotypes that are shared between cancer and tauopathy (including moesin activation, actin over-stabilization, nucleoskeletal destabilization, heterochromatin decondensation, transposable element activation, and loss of cell cycle control) (Table 1) are a consequence of disrupted neuronal identity and transition back toward a more plastic cellular phenotype. The observation that Alzheimer’s disease involves the reinduction of genes involved in the early stages of development was introduced as early as the 1990’s [114]. In 2000, it was proposed that the re-expression of developmentally-regulated genes and attempts at neuronal cell cycle reentry are “due to a loss of differentiation control that normally regulates neuronal plasticity,” and that this reflects a process of dedifferentiation [115]. While the concept that neurons undergo dedifferentiation in Alzheimer’s disease is thus not new, the studies reviewed in previous sections point toward the negative effects of tau on nuclear function as a mechanism driving loss of mature neuronal identity.

More recent evidence that neurons in Alzheimer’s disease undergo cellular dedifferentiation come from studies in iPSC-derived neurons and induced neurons from patients with familial [116] and sporadic Alzheimer’s disease [89], respectively. iPSC-derived neurons carrying early-onset Alzheimer’s disease mutations were found to assume a state resembling precursor cells, displaying characteristics associated with both ectoderm and non-ectoderm lineages. Through various omics analyses, these transcriptional changes were reported to correlate with dysregulated chromatin structure [116]. Similarly, induced neurons from sporadic Alzheimer’s disease cases feature upregulation of immature and progenitor-like signaling pathways, cell cycle reentry, and an epigenetic landscape akin to malignant transformation [89]. While the mechanisms driving such epigenetic and neuronal state markers were not investigated in these studies, the studies reviewed above suggest that such changes are likely a consequence of pathogenic forms of tau. These findings are in line with our previous analyses of human Alzheimer’s disease brain that revealed transcriptional activation of genes that were silenced by heterochromatin in controls, with an over-representation of genes involved in developmental processes and a transcriptional profile that more closely resembles fetal brain than age-matched healthy brain [35].

Taken together, a significant body of work across model systems and human brain suggests that pathogenic forms of tau disrupt the cellular program that maintains terminal differentiation in neurons. For the most part, these studies are focused on the effects of tau specifically in neurons and in neurodegenerative conditions. Interestingly, various species of tau that are considered “pathogenic” in human tauopathies are also present in various cancers and in the developing mammalian brain, as highlighted in the following sections, further supporting the idea that tau may be involved in inducing or sustaining an immature cellular state.

INVOLVEMENT OF “PATHOGENIC” TAU SPECIES IN CANCER AND DEVELOPMENT

The presence of tau deposits in human neurodegenerative disorders and the association of MAPT mutations with autosomal dominant human frontotemporal dementias has led to extensive investigations focused on tau biology within the adult central nervous system. While tau species that are considered “pathogenic” in adult human neurodegenerative disorders also accumulate in various non-neuronal cancers and in the developing rodent and human brain, the role of tau in cancer and brain development are less well studied. A deeper understanding of the role tau plays in these noncanonical contexts may provide clues into tau biology and mechanistic links between tau and cellular identity.

Tau in human cancers.

A study examining 110 human brain tumors found that tau is elevated in glial neoplastic cells and reactive astrocytes within tumor tissues, including astrocytic tumors, oligodendroglial tumors, glioblastoma, neuronal tumors, and poorly differentiated tumors, suggesting that astrocytes express tau over the course of neoplastic transformation [119]. A similar large-scale analysis of human prostate cancers indicated that tau is elevated in 8.2% of cases, and that tau elevation is associated with advanced tumor stage and early biochemical recurrence [150]. Tau was reported to be elevated and aberrantly phosphorylated in DU145, ALVA-31 and PC-3 prostate cancer cell lines compared to 267B1 non-cancerous prostate epithelial cells, but tau levels are unchanged in LNCaP prostate cancer cells [118,120]. Similarly, HCT 116 and SW480 colorectal cancer cell lines have higher levels of phosphorylated tau protein compared to noncancerous CCD18Co control, as do SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells, but Caco-2, HT29 and DLD-1 colorectal cell lines do not feature tau upregulation/phosphorylation [117]. Tau elevation is also heterogenous among breast cancer cell lines but is reported to increase along with metastatic potential [151]. In breast cancer cells, tau is necessary and sufficient for the formation of tubulin microtentacles, structures that aid in the re-attachment of detached cancerous cells to the extracellular matrix and thus promote metastasis. A comparison of matched primary to metastatic patient breast cancer samples revealed an increase in tau transcript levels in 26% of metastatic tumors compared to their matched primary tumor, further suggesting a link between tau upregulation and cancer cell invasion [151].

Elevated tau levels are strongly linked to drug resistance in non-neuronal cancers. Microarray data from breast cancer tissue samples identified tau as the gene whose upregulation most closely correlates with resistance to the microtubule stabilizing drug paclitaxel [123]. Subsequent analyses of breast cancer cell lines [122] and gastric cancer tissue [121] support a correlation between high tau expression and resistance to paclitaxel. Prostate cancer cells with resistance to the microtubule destabilizing drug estramustine have elevated levels of tau compared to their drug-sensitive control [120]. Work in pancreatic cancer further demonstrates a correlation between tau levels and resistance to different benzoylphenylurea-derived anti-mitotic compounds [124]. High levels of tau may out-compete microtubule-targeting drugs for microtubule binding, thus rendering these therapies less effective.

While tau elevation has been implicated in multiple types of human cancer time and time again, studies of tau in cancer are clearly a mixed bag. With a few exceptions, the majority of studies implicating tau in cancer focus on tau transcript or protein levels rather than tau phosphoepitopes that are implicated in human neurodegenerative tauopathies. Elevation of tau in various cancers exhibits a high degree of patient-to-patient heterogeneity, making it difficult to draw general conclusions aside from a clear link between high tau levels and chemotherapy resistance. While tau dysfunction is clearly not sufficient to cause cancer, as human neurodegenerative tauopathies are not associated with increased cancer risk and patients with Alzheimer’s disease have reduced risk for cancer [152], increased cancer incidence has been reported in carriers of the P301L MAPT mutation [153]. Other studies cast doubt on this finding, and report decreased incidence of cancer in individuals harboring the MAPT N279K mutation [154], suggesting that the relationship between MAPT mutation and cancer is complicated and cannot be generalized to all tau mutants.

Tau in human brain development.

The smallest tau isoform (0N3R) is exclusively expressed in the fetal human brain and is phosphorylated at epitopes associated with human neurodegenerative tauopathies [125,155–157]. Studies in the mouse brain reveal a transition from 3R to 4R tau between postnatal day 9 and 18 that coincides with a shift from high to low tau phosphorylation [158]. Analyses of the developing rat brain suggest that elevated levels of phosphotau correlate with the period of intense neurite. While tau is not thought to form bona fide fibrillar aggregates in the developing brain, high molecular weight tau species are present in human fetal brain, consistent with multimerization [125]. Fetal human tau is thioflavin S negative, indicating that tau multimers do not possess the beta sheet structure characteristic of fibrillar aggregates [125]. These data suggest that tau species commonly associated with human disease may play a physiological role in human brain development, and that distinct phosphorylation patterns within the tau protein may dictate whether tau is physiologically active or neurotoxic.

CONCLUDING REMARKS

There is a critical need for therapies that slow or prevent disease progression in Alzheimer’s disease and related tauopathies. The argument that I have put forth, that pathogenic forms of tau kill neurons by disrupting neuronal identity and thus initiating an abortive activation of the cell cycle, remain to be further tested, and if substantiated, could provide multiple avenues for therapeutic intervention (see Outstanding Questions). In preclinical studies, pharmacological and/or genetic intervention at each node in the pathway that I outline have been shown to effectively suppress tau-induced neurodegeneration in vivo [27,35,36,38,39,159,160].

Studies since the 1990’s have provided evidence supporting the idea that neurons affected by Alzheimer’s disease undergo dedifferentiation marked by the re-expression of development-associated genes and neuronal cell cycle reentry. Ever more sophisticated experimental approaches have further substantiated this hypothesis and suggest that loss of neuronal identity is a mechanistic consequence of pathogenic forms of tau. Paradoxically, the concept of neuronal dedifferentiation has somewhat diminished in prominence despite decades of supportive research. Considering tauopathies as disorders of cellular identity and neuronal dedifferentiation provides untapped entry points for therapeutic development. Drawing from the wealth of knowledge in cancer-related drug development, insights into tau-mediated cellular identity maintenance mechanisms may uncover novel targets for therapeutic development in the many human neurodegenerative disorders induced by pathogenic forms of tau.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the National Institute of Health (R01 AG057896, B.F.)

Figure 1 | Drivers of toxic forms of tau in Alzheimer’s disease and related tauopathies.

Aberrantly modified monomeric forms of tau, soluble multimeric forms of tau, and insoluble fibrillar tau species are present in brains affected by Alzheimer’s disease and primary tauopathies. While amyloid plaque formation can drive the production of toxic tau species, other contributing factors may exist. Multiple drivers of tau multimerization are thought to be involved in primary tauopathies. Soluble multimeric form of tau, and, perhaps, aberrantly modified monomeric forms of tau, may be more neurotoxic than insoluble fibrillar tau species.

Figure 2 | A nucleocentric model of tau-induced cell cycle activation and neurotoxicity.

Neurons harboring pathogenic forms of tau have an overly stabilized actin cytoskeleton, tau- and F-actin-containing nuclear envelope invaginations, and decondensation of constitutive heterochromatin. The cellular pathway connecting pathogenic forms of tau to cell cycle activation and consequent neuronal death may reflect disrupted control over the cellular program that maintains terminal neuronal differentiation.

Table 1 | Phenotypic parallels between tauopathy, cancer, and development.

	Tauopathy	Cancer	Development	
Tau accumulation	Defining neuropathological feature of primary and secondary human tauopathies	Tau/pTau levels are elevated in various human cancers, but patient-to-patient variability is high [117–119]. Elevated tau levels decrease response to chemotherapy [120–124].	pTau and multimeric tau species present in fetal human brain [125]	
Moesin	Activated in human Alzheimer’s disease, elevated in tau transgenic Drosophila [45]	Activation indicates poor prognosis in glioma [126] as well as in breast [43,127] oral [128] and lung cancer [51]	Activated in growth cones of developing neurons [53,129], essential for neuroblast proliferation and mitotic progression in developing Drosophila brain [130]	
Actin bundles	Present in Alzheimer’s disease, frontotemporal dementia, tau transgenic mice [37]	Used to form protrusions that facilitate metastatic spread of cancer cells [131]	Formation of neuronal processes/growth cones [129]	
Nuclear invaginations/blebs	Observed in Alzheimer’s disease [36], frontotemporal dementia due to MAPT mutation [67], Drosophila models of tauopathy [36], MAPT mutant iPSC-derived neurons [67], HEK293 [132] and neuroblastoma [71] cells with induced tau expression, primary neurons with induced tau aggregation [70]	Diagnostic/prognostic in cancer [133]	Marker of less differentiated cell types [78], quiescent neural stem cells [134], hematopoietic stem cells [135]	
Lamins	Reduced in Alzheimer’s disease, Drosophila models of tauopathy [36], induced expression of tau in HEK293 cells [132], depleted from nuclear envelope upon induced tau multimerization in primary neurons [136]	Reduced in lung [137], gastric [138], and breast [139], and in large B cell lymphoma [140]	Control neuron-specific cell fate [141]	
Heterochromatin	Decondensed in Alzheimer’s disease, tau transgenic mice and Drosophila [35], tau binds to pericentromeric DNA [142]	Decondensation drives transformation [143]	Controls cell fate, decondensation is required for reprogramming [144]	
Nuclear mechanics	Reduced nuclear tension upon induced tau expression in neuroblastoma cells [71]	Reduced nuclear stiffness associated with metastasis [145]	Mesenchymal stem cells have low levels of nuclear tension, tension increases upon differentiation[146]	
Retrotransposon activation	Observed in Alzheimer’s disease, progressive supranuclear palsy [39], mouse models of tauopathy [106], Drosophila models of tauopathy [39]	Widely activated [147]	Activated in neural precursor cells, proposed to control neuronal somatic diversification [148]	
Cell cycle activation	Aberrantly reactivated Alzheimer’s disease, primary tauopathies [31,40], mouse and Drosophila models of tauopathy [27]	Fundamental aspect of cancer [149]	Neural progenitor cells are proliferative, whereas mature adult neurons are post-mitotic.	

BOX 1 A brief history of Alzheimer’s disease

In the early 1900’s, physicians at leading neuropathological schools were applying the latest techniques in histochemistry to brains of patients with neurological disorders. Dr. Oskar Fischer, of the Prague pathology school, and Dr. Alois Alzheimer, of the Munich pathology school, were among the leaders in the field. In 1907, Dr. Fischer [161] reported presence of neuritic plaques in post-mortem brains of 16 patients with senile dementia, and Dr. Alzheimer [162] reported presence of plaques and tangles within the brain of a single patient. Fischer then reported the presence of plaques and tangles in brains of a larger cohort of patients in 1910 [163]. Plaques and tangles remain the defining pathological features of what was termed “Alzheimer’s disease” by the director of the Prague pathology school, Dr. Emil Kraepelin [164]. Eight decades later, the major components of plaques and tangles were identified. Plaques were found to be composed of aggregates of a small polypeptide [165,166], later termed “Aβ,” while tangles were found to be composed of a hyperphosphorylated, filamentous form of tau [167,168]. Dominant mutations in genes encoding amyloid precursor protein (APP), from which Aβ is produced [169,170], and MAPT, which encodes tau, were discovered to be genetically linked to Alzheimer’s disease [171] and familial cases of frontotemporal lobar degeneration with tau-immunoreactive inclusions [5–7], respectively, establishing that dysfunction of these proteins can initiate neurodegeneration.

Subsequent decades of Alzheimer’s disease research saw a division between those favoring Aβ versus those favoring tau as a driver of neurodegeneration. In cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), Aβ was found to decrease prior to the onset of Alzheimer’s disease symptoms [172], whereas early studies indicated that changes in total tau were not detected in CSF until patients were symptomatic [173] and that CSF tau did not predict severity or rate of progression in Alzheimer’s disease once patients were symptomatic [174]. While these findings suggested that Aβ dysfunction precedes tau dysfunction, the brain told a different story. In the brain, tau neurofibrillary tangles and neuropil threads were detected decades before the appearance of Aβ plaques [13]. In 1991, Drs. John Hardy and Gerald Higgins proposed that Aβ is the “causative agent of Alzheimer’s pathology and that the neurofibrillary tangles, cell loss, vascular damage, and dementia follow as a direct result of this deposition” [175]. In a publication from the same year, Drs. Eva Braak and Heiko Braak claimed that the presence, density, and distribution of Aβ is inconsistent and is thus not well-suited for establishing stages of disease progression, while neurofibrillary tangles “exhibit a well-defined pattern, permitting differentiation of stages” [2].

BOX 2 Alternative splicing of the tau transcript

The tau transcript is alternatively spliced into six isoforms that result from the presence or absence of exons 2, 3 and 10. Inclusion or exclusion of exon 10 generates tau species with either three microtubule binding repeats or four microtubule binding repeats, denoted as 3R and 4R. Collectively, the six tau isoforms are classified as 0N3R, 0N4R, 1N3R, 1N4R, 2N3R, and 2N4R [14].

While 3R tau is predominantly expressed in the developing human brain, the adult human brain produces an equal ratio of 3R to 4R tau. Neurofibrillary tangles present in human Alzheimer’s disease are composed of an equal ratio of 3R to 4R tau [176], whereas various other tauopathies feature an imbalance between 3R and 4R isoforms. Corticobasal degeneration (CBD) and progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), for example, are predominantly 4R tauopathies, while Pick’s disease is a 3R tauopathy [177,178]. Many of the mutations in the MAPT gene that are associated with frontotemporal dementia drive the preferential production of 4R tau. Tau isoforms differ in their propensity to aggregate, with 4R isoforms assembling significantly more rapidly than 3R isoforms [179]. Of relevance to the current review, studies in Drosophila indicate that transgenic expression of human 4R tau or 3R tau induce cell cycle activation at the Drosophila embryonic ventral midline [180]. In human brain, cell cycle reentry has been reported in primary and secondary tauopathies regardless of their 3R:4R classification [181,182]. The aberrant cell cycle activation present in human brains affected by pathogenic forms of tau is thus not restricted to specific tau isoforms.

BOX 3 Tau - what are the toxic species?

While there is evidence that loss of normal tau function can affect cellular physiology [183–188], the deposition of misfolded, aberrantly phosphorylated and acetylated tau protein in Alzheimer’s disease and related tauopathies and the lack of neurodegeneration in mice with tau knockout [186] suggest that pathogenic forms of tau predominantly exert toxicity via a dominant gain-of-function mechanism. Toxic tau species are highly phosphorylated at specific, disease-associated residues [189,190]. Tau phosphorylation at these residues causes it to detach from microtubules [191] and form small oligomeric species that eventually accumulate into large fibrillar structures [192]. Over time, the neurodegeneration field has grown to appreciate that the smaller, soluble, high molecular weight oligomeric forms of tau are likely more toxic than the large neurofibrillary tangles that are easily detected by histological staining of human brains affected by Alzheimer’s disease [193–195]. Based on the lack of tau fibrils in many of the commonly used Drosophila models of tauopathy [196], as well as preliminary evidence on the lack of tau oligomers in these models (unpublished observations, Frost lab), the presence of neurodegeneration in these models, and the high degree of conservation between these models and human brain in terms of mechanisms of tau-induced neurodegeneration [27,35–37,39,197,198], I speculate that misfolded, aberrantly modified tau monomer also drives neurodegeneration.

Outstanding Questions

Pathogenic forms of tau have been long-recognized as a driver of abortive cell cycle activation in neurons, and accumulating evidence suggests that such tau species may disrupt maintenance of a terminally differentiated neuronal state. What is the biological mechanism whereby tau initiates this process?

In fetal brain tissue, tau is posttranslationally modified at epitopes that are associated with disease in adults. Might modification at these epitopes regulate a physiological function of tau that is important for establishing an immature neuronal identity?

Reduced nuclear stiffness is associated with less developed cell types, metastasis, and tauopathy. Is there a relationship between nuclear mechanotransduction and maintenance of a mature neuronal phenotype in tauopathy?

Is tau-induced disruption of a mature neuronal phenotype druggable? If so, which nodes in the cascade of tau neurotoxicity represent the best targets for therapeutic development?

HIGHLIGHTS

Alzheimer’s disease and related “tauopathies” feature tau protein deposits in brains of affected individuals. Pathogenic forms of tau activate the cell cycle in post-mitotic neurons, driving neuronal death.

Accumulating evidence delineates a mechanistic pathway connecting tau to cell cycle reentry that involves tau-induced over-stabilization of filamentous actin, leading to nuclear architecture changes, decondensation of heterochromatin, and activation of retrotransposons.

The effects of tau on nuclear form and function exhibit notable parallels to cancers and developmental states. Indeed, new studies support the hypothesis that tau disrupts the cellular program that maintains a terminally differentiated neuronal identity. Consideration of tauopathies as disorders of neuronal dedifferentiation opens new therapeutic opportunities, including the potential repurposing of cancer drugs.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Declaration of Interests

The author serves as a consultant for the MD Anderson Neurodegeneration Consortium and Transposon Therapeutics


References

1. Sexton C (2022) Current directions in tau research: Highlights from Tau 2020. Alzheimers Dement 18 , 988–1007 34581500
2. Braak H and Braak E (1991) Neuropathological stageing of Alzheimer-related changes. Acta Neuropathol 82 , 239–259 1759558
3. La Joie R (2020) Prospective longitudinal atrophy in Alzheimer’s disease correlates with the intensity and topography of baseline tau-PET. Sci Transl Med 12 , eaau5732 31894103
4. Roberson ED (2007) Reducing endogenous tau ameliorates amyloid beta-induced deficits in an Alzheimer’s disease mouse model. Science 316 , 750–4 17478722
5. Hutton M (1998) Association of missense and 5′-splice-site mutations in tau with the inherited dementia FTDP-17. Nature 393 , 702–705 9641683
6. Spillantini MG (1998) Tau Pathology in Two Dutch Families with Mutations in the Microtubule-Binding Region of Tau. Am J Pathol 153 , 1359–1363 9811325
7. Poorkaj P (1998) Tau is a candidate gene for chromosome 17 frontotemporal dementia. Ann Neurol 43 , 815–825 9629852
8. Clark RF (1995) The structure of the presenilin 1 (S182) gene and identification of six novel mutations in early onset AD families. Nat Genet 11 , 219–222 7550356
9. Lemere CA (1996) The E280A presenilin 1 Alzheimer mutation produces increased Aβ42 deposition and severe cerebellar pathology. Nat Med 2 , 1146–1150 8837617
10. Lopera F (1997) Clinical features of early-onset Alzheimer disease in a large kindred with an E280A presenilin-1 mutation. JAMA 277 , 793–9 9052708
11. Arendt T (2016) Tau and tauopathies. Brain Res Bull 126 , 238–292 27615390
12. Cairns NJ (2007) Neuropathologic diagnostic and nosologic criteria for frontotemporal lobar degeneration: consensus of the Consortium for Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration. Acta Neuropathol 114 , 5–22 17579875
13. Braak H and Braak E (1997) Frequency of Stages of Alzheimer-Related Lesions in Different Age Categories. Neurobiol Aging 18 , 351–357 9330961
14. Alquezar C (2021) Tau Post-translational Modifications: Dynamic Transformers of Tau Function, Degradation, and Aggregation. Frontiers in Neurology, 11 , 595532 33488497
15. Frost B (2009) Propagation of Tau Misfolding from the Outside to the Inside of a Cell. Journal of Biological Chemistry 284 , 12845–12852 19282288
16. Vaquer-Alicea J and Diamond MI (2019) Propagation of Protein Aggregation in Neurodegenerative Diseases. Annu Rev Biochem 88 , 785–810 30917002
17. Mignon L (2018) Design of the First-in-Human Study of IONIS-MAPTRx, a Tau-lowering Antisense Oligonucleotide, in Patients with Alzheimer Disease (S2.006). Neurology
18. DeVos SL (2017) Tau reduction prevents neuronal loss and reverses pathological tau deposition and seeding in mice with tauopathy. Sci Transl Med 9 , eaag0481 28123067
19. Orr ME (2017) A Brief Overview of Tauopathy: Causes, Consequences, and Therapeutic Strategies. Trends Pharmacol Sci 38 , 637–648 28455089
20. Congdon EE and Sigurdsson EM (2018) Tau-targeting therapies for Alzheimer disease. Nat Rev Neurol 14 , 399–415 29895964
21. Furman JL (2017) Widespread tau seeding activity at early Braak stages. Acta Neuropathol 133 , 91–100 27878366
22. Kaufman SK (2017) Characterization of tau prion seeding activity and strains from formaldehyde-fixed tissue. Acta Neuropathol Commun 5 , 41 28587664
23. Kaufman SK (2018) Tau seeding activity begins in the transentorhinal/entorhinal regions and anticipates phospho-tau pathology in Alzheimer’s disease and PART. Acta Neuropathol 136 , 57–67 29752551
24. DeVos SL (2018) Synaptic Tau Seeding Precedes Tau Pathology in Human Alzheimer’s Disease Brain. Front Neurosci 12 , 267 29740275
25. Arendt T (1996) Expression of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p16 in Alzheimer’s disease. Neuroreport 7 , 3047–3049 9116237
26. Park KHJ (2007) Conditional neuronal simian virus 40 T antigen expression induces Alzheimer-like tau and amyloid pathology in mice. J Neurosci 27 , 2969–2978 17360920
27. Khurana V (2006) TOR-Mediated Cell-Cycle Activation Causes Neurodegeneration in a Drosophila Tauopathy Model. Current Biology 16 , 230–241 16461276
28. Delobel P (2006) Cell-cycle markers in a transgenic mouse model of human tauopathy: increased levels of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors p21Cip1 and p27Kip1. Am J Pathol 168 , 878–887 16507903
29. Hradek AC (2015) Distinct chronology of neuronal cell cycle re-entry and tau pathology in the 3xTg-AD mouse model and Alzheimer’s disease patients. J Alzheimers Dis 43 , 57–65 25061053
30. Seward ME (2013) Amyloid-β signals through tau to drive ectopic neuronal cell cycle re-entry in Alzheimer’s disease. J Cell Sci 126 , 1278–1286 23345405
31. Arendt T (2012) Cell Cycle Activation and Aneuploid Neurons in Alzheimer’s Disease. Mol Neurobiol 46 , 125–135 22528601
32. Andorfer C (2005) Cell-Cycle Reentry and Cell Death in Transgenic Mice Expressing Nonmutant Human Tau Isoforms. J Neurosci 25 , 5446–5454 15930395
33. Jaworski T (2009) AAV-Tau Mediates Pyramidal Neurodegeneration by Cell-Cycle Re-Entry without Neurofibrillary Tangle Formation in Wild-Type Mice. PLoS One 4 , e7280 19794916
34. Khurana V (2006) TOR-Mediated Cell-Cycle Activation Causes Neurodegeneration in a Drosophila Tauopathy Model. Current Biology 16 , 230–241 16461276
35. Frost B (2014) Tau promotes neurodegeneration through global chromatin relaxation. Nat Neurosci 17 , 357–366 24464041
36. Frost B (2016) Lamin Dysfunction Mediates Neurodegeneration in Tauopathies. Current Biology 26 , 129–136 26725200
37. Fulga TA (2007) Abnormal bundling and accumulation of F-actin mediates tau-induced neuronal degeneration in vivo. Nat Cell Biol 9 , 139–148 17187063
38. Frost B (2015) Connecting the dots between tau dysfunction and neurodegeneration. Trends Cell Biol 25 , 46–53 25172552
39. Sun W (2018) Pathogenic tau-induced piRNA depletion promotes neuronal death through transposable element dysregulation in neurodegenerative tauopathies. Nat Neurosci 21 , 1038–1048 30038280
40. Yang Y (2003) Neuronal Cell Death Is Preceded by Cell Cycle Events at All Stages of Alzheimer’s Disease. J Neurosci 23 , 2557–2563 12684440
41. Liu DX and Greene LA (2001) Neuronal apoptosis at the G1/S cell cycle checkpoint. Cell Tissue Res 305 , 217–228 11545259
42. Fehon RG (2010) Organizing the cell cortex: the role of ERM proteins. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 11 , 276–287 20308985
43. Clucas J and Valderrama F (2015) ERM proteins in cancer progression. J Cell Sci 128 , 1253–1253 25774052
44. Haynes J (2011) Dynamic actin remodeling during epithelial–mesenchymal transition depends on increased moesin expression. Mol Biol Cell 22 , 4750–4764 22031288
45. Beckmann A (2023) Moesin is an effector of tau-induced actin overstabilization, cell cycle activation, and neurotoxicity in Alzheimer’s disease. iScience 26 , 106152 36879821
46. Hardy KM (2010) ErbB/EGF Signaling and EMT in Mammary Development and Breast Cancer. J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia 15 , 191–199 20369376
47. Weber CE (2012) Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition, TGF-β, and Osteopontin in Wound Healing and Tissue Remodeling After Injury. Journal of Burn Care &amp; Research 33 , 311–318 22561306
48. Yan C (2010) Epithelial to Mesenchymal Transition in Human Skin Wound Healing Is Induced by Tumor Necrosis Factor-α through Bone Morphogenic Protein-2. Am J Pathol 176 , 2247–2258 20304956
49. Shankar J (2010) Pseudopodial Actin Dynamics Control Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition in Metastatic Cancer Cells. Cancer Res 70 , 3780–3790 20388789
50. Shankar J and Nabi IR (2015) Actin cytoskeleton regulation of epithelial mesenchymal transition in metastatic cancer cells. PLoS One 10 , e0119954 25756282
51. Li YQ (2021) Moesin as a prognostic indicator of lung adenocarcinoma improves prognosis by enhancing immune lymphocyte infiltration. World J Surg Oncol 19 , 1–11 33388059
52. Moussalli MJ (2011) Mechanistic contribution of ubiquitous 15-lipoxygenase-1 expression loss in cancer cells to terminal cell differentiation evasion. Cancer Prevention Research 4 , 1961–1972 21881028
53. Paglini G (1998) Suppression of radixin and moesin alters growth cone morphology, motility, and process formation in primary cultured neurons. J Cell Biol 143 , 443–455 9786954
54. Hirano A (1994) Hirano bodies and related neuronal inclusions. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 20 , 3–11 8208338
55. Gibson PH and Tomlinson BE (1977) Numbers of Hirano bodies in the hippocampus of normal and demented people with Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurol Sci 33 , 199–206 903782
56. Schmidt ML (1989) Analysis of epitopes shared by Hirano bodies and neurofilament proteins in normal and Alzheimer’s disease hippocampus. Lab Invest 60 , 513–22 2468822
57. Peterson C (1988) High molecular weight microtubule-associated proteins bind to actin lattices (Hirano bodies). Acta Neuropathol 77 , 168–174 3227813
58. Galloway PG (1987) Hirano bodies contain tau protein. Brain Res 403 , 337–340 3103867
59. Weingarten MD (1975) A protein factor essential for microtubule assembly. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 72 , 1858–1862
60. Henríquez JP (1995) Subpopulations of tau interact with microtubules and actin filaments in various cell types. Cell Biochem Funct 13 , 239–250 10232926
61. He HJ (2009) The proline-rich domain of tau plays a role in interactions with actin. BMC Cell Biol 10 , 81 19895707
62. Moraga DM (1993) A tau fragment containing a repetitive sequence induces bundling of actin filaments. J Neurochem 61 , 979–86 8360695
63. Cabrales Fontela Y (2017) Multivalent cross-linking of actin filaments and microtubules through the microtubule-associated protein Tau. Nat Commun 8 , 1–12 28232747
64. Crisp M (2006) Coupling of the nucleus and cytoplasm: role of the LINC complex. J Cell Biol 172 , 41–53 16380439
65. Malhas A (2011) The nucleoplasmic reticulum: form and function. Trends Cell Biol 21 , 362–73 21514163
66. Eftekharzadeh B (2018) Tau protein disrupts nucleocytoplasmic transport in Alzheimer’s disease. Neuron 99 , 925–940.e7 30189209
67. Paonessa F (2019) Microtubules Deform the Nuclear Membrane and Disrupt Nucleocytoplasmic Transport in Tau-Mediated Frontotemporal Dementia. Cell Rep 26 , 582–593.e5 30650353
68. Fernández-Nogales M (2017) Tau-positive nuclear indentations in P301S tauopathy mice. Brain Pathology 27 , 314–322 27338164
69. Montalbano M (2020) RNA-binding proteins Musashi and tau soluble aggregates initiate nuclear dysfunction. Nat Commun 11 , 4305 32855391
70. Jiang L and Wolozin B (2021) Oligomeric tau disrupts nuclear envelope via binding to lamin proteins and lamin B receptor. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 17 , e054521
71. Sohn C (2023) Pathogenic tau decreases nuclear tension in cultured neurons. Frontiers in Aging 4 , 1058968 36756194
72. Underwood JCE and Crocker J (1990) Pathology of the Nucleus, Springer-Verlag
73. Bussolati G (2008) Pleomorphism of the nuclear envelope in breast cancer: a new approach to an old problem. J Cell Mol Med 12 , 209–18 18053086
74. Zink D (2004) Nuclear structure in cancer cells. Nat Rev Cancer 4 , 677–687 15343274
75. Jorgens DM (2017) Deep nuclear invaginations are linked to cytoskeletal filaments – integrated bioimaging of epithelial cells in 3D culture. J Cell Sci 130 , 177–189 27505896
76. Denais C and Lammerding J (2014) Nuclear mechanics in cancer. Adv Exp Med Biol 773 , 435–470 24563360
77. Garcia MA (2022) Epithelial-Mesenchymal Plasticity is regulated by inflammatory signalling networks coupled to cell morphology. bioRxiv DOI: 10.1101/689737
78. Johnson N (2003) Actin-filled nuclear invaginations indicate degree of cell de-differentiation. Differentiation 71 , 414–24 12969334
79. Dillon N (2004) Heterochromatin structure and function. Biol Cell 96 , 631–637 15519697
80. Ye Q and Worman HJ (1996) Interaction between an integral protein of the nuclear envelope inner membrane and human chromodomain proteins homologous to Drosophila HP1. J Biol Chem 271 , 14653–6 8663349
81. Camps J (2014) Loss of lamin B1 results in prolongation of S phase and decondensation of chromosome territories. FASEB J 28 , 3423–34 24732130
82. Belmont AS (1993) Lamin B distribution and association with peripheral chromatin revealed by optical sectioning and electron microscopy tomography. J Cell Biol 123 , 1671–85 8276889
83. Klein HU (2019) Epigenome-wide study uncovers large-scale changes in histone acetylation driven by tau pathology in aging and Alzheimer’s human brains. Nat Neurosci 22 , 37–46 30559478
84. Altuna M (2019) DNA methylation signature of human hippocampus in Alzheimer’s disease is linked to neurogenesis. Clin Epigenetics 11 , 91 31217032
85. Mastroeni D (2010) Epigenetic changes in Alzheimer’s disease: decrements in DNA methylation. Neurobiol Aging 31 , 2025–37 19117641
86. Caldwell AB (2020) Dedifferentiation and neuronal repression define familial Alzheimer’s disease. Sci Adv 6 , eaba5933 33188013
87. Li L (2018) iPSC Modeling of Presenilin1 Mutation in Alzheimer’s Disease with Cerebellar Ataxia. Exp Neurobiol 27 , 350–364 30429645
88. Shimada H (2022) A next-generation iPSC-derived forebrain organoid model of tauopathy with tau fibrils by AAV-mediated gene transfer. Cell Reports Methods 2 , 100289 36160042
89. Mertens J (2021) Age-dependent instability of mature neuronal fate in induced neurons from Alzheimer’s patients. Cell Stem Cell 28 , 1533–1548.e6 33910058
90. Hua Q (2003) Microtubule associated protein tau binds to double-stranded but not single-stranded DNA. Cell Mol Life Sci 60 , 413–421 12678504
91. Wei Y (2008) Binding to the minor groove of the double-strand, tau protein prevents DNA from damage by peroxidation. PLoS One 3 , e2600 18596978
92. Sjöberg MK (2006) Tau protein binds to pericentromeric DNA: a putative role for nuclear tau in nucleolar organization. J Cell Sci 119 , 2025–34 16638814
93. Mansuroglu Z (2016) Loss of Tau protein affects the structure, transcription and repair of neuronal pericentromeric heterochromatin. Sci Rep 6 , 33047 27605042
94. Maina MB (2018) The involvement of tau in nucleolar transcription and the stress response. Acta Neuropathol Commun 6 , 70 30064522
95. Carone DM and Lawrence JB (2013) Heterochromatin instability in cancer: from the Barr body to satellites and the nuclear periphery. Semin Cancer Biol 23 , 99–108 22722067
96. Gaspar-Maia A (2011) Open chromatin in pluripotency and reprogramming. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 12 , 36–47 21179060
97. Fussner E (2011) Constitutive heterochromatin reorganization during somatic cell reprogramming. EMBO J 30 , 1778–1789 21468033
98. Wood JG and Helfand SL (2013) Chromatin structure and transposable elements in organismal aging. Front Genet 4 , 274 24363663
99. Lander ES (2001) Initial sequencing and analysis of the human genome. Nature 409 , 860–921 11237011
100. Platt RN (2018) Mammalian transposable elements and their impacts on genome evolution. Chromosome Res 26 , 25–43 29392473
101. Ochoa Thomas E (2020) Awakening the dark side: retrotransposon activation in neurodegenerative disorders. Current Opinion in Neurobiology 67 , 65–72
102. Hughes JF and Coffin JM (2002) A novel endogenous retrovirus-related element in the human genome resembles a DNA transposon: evidence for an evolutionary link? Genomics 80 , 453–5 12408960
103. Hancks DC and Kazazian HH (2016) Roles for retrotransposon insertions in human disease. Mob DNA 7 , 9 27158268
104. Mills RE (2007) Which transposable elements are active in the human genome? Trends Genet 23 , 183–91 17331616
105. Guo C (2018) Tau Activates Transposable Elements in Alzheimer’s Disease. Cell Rep 5 , 2874–2880
106. Ramirez P (2022) Pathogenic tau accelerates aging-associated activation of transposable elements in the mouse central nervous system. Prog Neurobiol 208 , 102181 34670118
107. Kunarso G (2010) Transposable elements have rewired the core regulatory network of human embryonic stem cells. Nat Genet 42 , 631–634 20526341
108. Lu X (2014) The retrovirus HERVH is a long noncoding RNA required for human embryonic stem cell identity. Nat Struct Mol Biol 21 , 423–425 24681886
109. Zhu W (2012) Retrotransposon long interspersed nucleotide element-1 (LINE-1) is activated during salamander limb regeneration. Dev Growth Differ 54 , 673–685 22913491
110. Grundy EE (2022) Transposable element regulation and expression in cancer. FEBS J 289 , 1160–1179 33471418
111. Liddicoat BJ (2015) RNA editing by ADAR1 prevents MDA5 sensing of endogenous dsRNA as nonself. Science 349 , 1115–1120 26275108
112. Cuellar TL (2017) Silencing of retrotransposons by SETDB1 inhibits the interferon response in acute myeloid leukemia. J Cell Biol 11 , 3535–3549
113. Ochoa E (2023) Pathogenic tau-induced transposable element-derived dsRNA drives neuroinflammation. Sci Adv 9 , eabq5423 36608133
114. Geddes JW (1990) Increased expression of the embryonic form of a developmentally regulated mRNA in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurosci Lett 109 , 54–61 2314641
115. Arendt T (2000) Alzheimer’s disease as a loss of differentiation control in a subset of neurons that retain immature features in the adult brain. Neurobiol Aging 21 , 783–796 11124422
116. Caldwell AB (2020) Dedifferentiation and neuronal repression define familial Alzheimer’s disease. Sci Adv 6 , eaba5933 33188013
117. Huda MN (2016) Expression, phosphorylation, localization, and microtubule binding of tau in colorectal cell lines. Appl Biol Chem 59 , 807–812
118. Souter S and Lee G (2009) Microtubule-associated protein tau in human prostate cancer cells: isoforms, phosphorylation, and interactions. J Cell Biochem 108 , 555–564 19681044
119. Miyazono M (1993) Widespread distribution of tau in the astrocytic elements of glial tumors. Acta Neuropathol 86 , 236–241 8213081
120. Sangrajrang S (1998) Estramustine resistance correlates with tau over-expression in human prostatic carcinoma cells. Int J Cancer 77 , 626–631 9679768
121. Mimori K (2006) Reduced tau expression in gastric cancer can identify candidates for successful Paclitaxel treatment. Br J Cancer 94 , 1894–1897 16721363
122. Wagner P (2005) Microtubule Associated Protein (MAP)-Tau: a novel mediator of paclitaxel sensitivity in vitro and in vivo. Cell Cycle 4 , 1149–1152 16103753
123. Rouzier R (2005) Microtubule-associated protein tau: a marker of paclitaxel sensitivity in breast cancer. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102 , 8315–8320 15914550
124. Jimeno A (2007) Development of two novel benzoylphenylurea sulfur analogues and evidence that the microtubule-associated protein tau is predictive of their activity in pancreatic cancer. Mol Cancer Ther 6 , 1509–1516 17483439
125. Hefti MM (2019) Tau Phosphorylation and Aggregation in the Developing Human Brain. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 78 , 930–938 31504677
126. Zhu X (2013) Moesin is a glioma progression marker that induces proliferation and Wnt/β-Catenin pathway activation via interaction with CD44. Cancer Res 73 , 1142–1155 23221384
127. Wang CC (2012) Differential expression of moesin in breast cancers and its implication in epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Histopathology 61 , 78–87 22439598
128. Barros FBA (2018) Moesin expression by tumor cells is an unfavorable prognostic biomarker for oral cancer. BMC Cancer 18 , 1–8 29291726
129. Marsick BM (2012) Activation of ezrin/radixin/moesin mediates attractive growth cone guidance through regulation of growth cone actin and adhesion receptors. J Neurosci 32 , 282–296 22219290
130. Abeysundara N (2018) Moesin is involved in polarity maintenance and cortical remodeling during asymmetric cell division. Mol Biol Cell 29 , 419–434 29282284
131. Stevenson RP (2012) Actin-bundling proteins in cancer progression at a glance. J Cell Sci 125 , 1073–1079 22492983
132. Montalbano M (2019) Tau oligomers mediate aggregation of RNA-binding proteins Musashi1 and Musashi2 inducing Lamin alteration. Aging Cell 18 , e13035 31532069
133. Alvarado-Kristensson M and Rosselló CA (2019) The Biology of the Nuclear Envelope and Its Implications in Cancer Biology. Int J Mol Sci 20
134. Cebrián-Silla A (2017) Unique Organization of the Nuclear Envelope in the Post-natal Quiescent Neural Stem Cells. Stem Cell Reports 9 , 203–216 28648897
135. Biedzinski S (2020) Microtubules control nuclear shape and gene expression during early stages of hematopoietic differentiation. EMBO J 39 , e103957 33089509
136. Jiang L (2021) Interaction of tau with HNRNPA2B1 and N(6)-methyladenosine RNA mediates the progression of tauopathy. Mol Cell 81 , 4209–4227.e12 34453888
137. Jia Y (2019) Lamin B1 loss promotes lung cancer development and metastasis by epigenetic derepression of RET. Journal of Experimental Medicine 216 , 1377–1395 31015297
138. Wu Z (2009) Reduced expression of lamin A/C correlates with poor histological differentiation and prognosis in primary gastric carcinoma. J Exp Clin Cancer Res 28 , 8 19144202
139. Capo-chichi CD (2011) Loss of A-type lamin expression compromises nuclear envelope integrity in breast cancer. Chin J Cancer 30 , 415–425 21627864
140. Agrelo R (2005) Inactivation of the lamin A/C gene by CpG island promoter hypermethylation in hematologic malignancies, and its association with poor survival in nodal diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 23 , 3940–3947 15867203
141. Gigante CM (2017) Lamin B1 is required for mature neuron-specific gene expression during olfactory sensory neuron differentiation. Nat Commun 8 , 15098 28425486
142. Sjöberg MK (2006) Tau protein binds to pericentromeric DNA: A putative role for nuclear tau in nucleolar organization. J Cell Sci DOI: 10.1242/jcs.02907
143. Janssen A (2018) Heterochromatin: Guardian of the Genome. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 34 , 265–288 30044650
144. Nicetto D and Zaret KS (2019) Role of H3K9me3 heterochromatin in cell identity establishment and maintenance. Curr Opin Genet Dev 55 , 1–10 31103921
145. Deville SS and Cordes N (2019) The Extracellular, Cellular, and Nuclear Stiffness, a Trinity in the Cancer Resistome-A Review. Front Oncol 9 , 1376 31867279
146. Heo S-J (2016) Differentiation alters stem cell nuclear architecture, mechanics, and mechano-sensitivity. Elife 5 , e18207 27901466
147. Ishak CA and De Carvalho DD (2020) Reactivation of Endogenous Retroelements in Cancer Development and Therapy. Annu Rev Cancer Biol 4 , 159–176
148. Muotri AR (2005) Somatic mosaicism in neuronal precursor cells mediated by L1 retrotransposition. Nature 435 , 903–910 15959507
149. Matthews HK (2022) Cell cycle control in cancer. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 23 , 74–88 34508254
150. Schroeder C (2019) Aberrant expression of the microtubule-associated protein tau is an independent prognostic feature in prostate cancer. BMC Cancer 19 , 193 30823906
151. Matrone MA (2010) Metastatic breast tumors express increased tau, which promotes microtentacle formation and the reattachment of detached breast tumor cells. Oncogene 29 , 3217–27 20228842
152. Musicco M (2013) Inverse occurrence of cancer and Alzheimer disease: a population-based incidence study. Neurology 81 , 322–328 23843468
153. Rossi G (2018) Tau Mutations Serve as a Novel Risk Factor for Cancer. Cancer Res 78 , 3731–3739 29794074
154. Deutschländer AB (2018) Tau Mutations as a Novel Risk Factor for Cancer-Letter. Cancer Res 78 , 6523–6524 30373809
155. Takahashi H (1991) Immunohistological study on brains of Alzheimer’s disease using antibodies to fetal antigens, C-series gangliosides and microtubule-associated protein 5. Acta Neuropathol 81 , 626–631 1909079
156. Kenessey A and Yen SH (1993) The extent of phosphorylation of fetal tau is comparable to that of PHF-tau from Alzheimer paired helical filaments. Brain Res 629 , 40–46 8287279
157. Goedert M (1993) The abnormal phosphorylation of tau protein at Ser-202 in Alzheimer disease recapitulates phosphorylation during development. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 90 , 5066–5070 8506352
158. Yu Y (2009) Developmental regulation of tau phosphorylation, tau kinases, and tau phosphatases. J Neurochem 108 , 1480–1494 19183272
159. Cornelison GL (2019) Tau-induced nuclear envelope invagination causes a toxic accumulation of mRNA in Drosophila. Aging Cell 18 , e12847 30411463
160. DuBoff B (2012) Tau promotes neurodegeneration via DRP1 mislocalization in vivo. Neuron 75 , 618–32 22920254
161. Fischer O Priv.-Doz. Dr. , (1907) Miliare Nekrosen mit drusigen Wucherungen der Neurofibrillen, eine regelmässige Veränderung der Hirnrinde bei seniler Demenz. Eur Neurol 22 , 361–372
162. Alzheimer A (1995) An English translation of Alzheimer’s 1907 paper, “Uber eine eigenartige Erkankung der Hirnrinde”. Clin Anat 8 , 429–31 8713166
163. Fischer O (1910) Die presbyophrene demenz, deren anatomische grundlage und klinische Abgrenzung. Zeitschrift für die gesamte Neurologie und Psychiatrie 3 , 371–471
164. Kraepelin E (1910) Psychiatrie: ein Lehrbuch für Studierende und Ärzte
165. Glenner GG and Wong CW (1984) Alzheimer’s disease: initial report of the purification and characterization of a novel cerebrovascular amyloid protein. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 120 , 885–90 6375662
166. Masters CL (1985) Amyloid plaque core protein in Alzheimer disease and Down syndrome. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 82 , 4245–9 3159021
167. Brion JP (1985) Mise en évidence immunologique de la protéine tau au niveau des lésions de dégénérescence neurofibrillaire de la maladie d’Alzheimer. Arch Biol (Liege) 96 , 229–235
168. Grundke-Iqbal I (1986) Microtubule-associated protein tau. A component of Alzheimer paired helical filaments. J Biol Chem 261 , 6084–9 3084478
169. Kang J (1987) The precursor of Alzheimer’s disease amyloid A4 protein resembles a cell-surface receptor. Nature 325 , 733–6 2881207
170. Tanzi RE (1987) Amyloid beta protein gene: cDNA, mRNA distribution, and genetic linkage near the Alzheimer locus. Science 235 , 880–4 2949367
171. Goate A (1991) Segregation of a missense mutation in the amyloid precursor protein gene with familial Alzheimer’s disease. Nature 349 , 704–6 1671712
172. Andreasen N (1999) Cerebrospinal fluid beta-amyloid(1–42) in Alzheimer disease: differences between early- and late-onset Alzheimer disease and stability during the course of disease. Arch Neurol 56 , 673–80 10369305
173. Kanai M (1998) Longitudinal study of cerebrospinal fluid levels of tau, A beta1–40, and A beta1–42(43) in Alzheimer’s disease: a study in Japan. Ann Neurol 44 , 17–26 9667589
174. Sunderland T (1999) Longitudinal stability of CSF tau levels in Alzheimer patients. Biol Psychiatry 46 , 750–5 10494442
175. Hardy John A. and Higgins Gerald A. (1992) Alzheimer’s Disease: The Amyloid Cascade Hypothesis. Science 256 , 184–185 1566067
176. Goedert M (1989) Multiple isoforms of human microtubule-associated protein tau: sequences and localization in neurofibrillary tangles of Alzheimer’s disease. Neuron 3 , 519–526 2484340
177. Sergeant N (1999) Neurofibrillary degeneration in progressive supranuclear palsy and corticobasal degeneration: tau pathologies with exclusively “exon 10” isoforms. J Neurochem 72 , 1243–1249 10037497
178. Goedert M (2018) Distinct Conformers of Assembled Tau in Alzheimer’s and Pick’s Diseases. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol 83 , 163–171 30886056
179. Zhong Q (2012) Tau isoform composition influences rate and extent of filament formation. J Biol Chem 287 , 20711–20719 22539343
180. Barros CS and Bossing T (2021) Microtubule disruption upon CNS damage triggers mitotic entry via TNF signaling activation. Cell Rep 36 , 109325 34233183
181. Nagy Z (1997) Cell cycle markers in the hippocampus in Alzheimer’s disease. Acta Neuropathol 94 , 6–15 9224524
182. Stone JG (2011) The Cell Cycle Regulator Phosphorylated Retinoblastoma Protein is Associated with Tau Pathology in Several Tauopathies. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 70 , 578–587 21666500
183. Caceres A and Kosik KS (1990) Inhibition of neurite polarity by tau antisense oligonucleotides in primary cerebellar neurons. Nature 343 , 461–3 2105469
184. Lei P (2012) Tau deficiency induces parkinsonism with dementia by impairing APP-mediated iron export. Nat Med 18 , 291–5 22286308
185. Ikegami S (2000) Muscle weakness, hyperactivity, and impairment in fear conditioning in tau-deficient mice. Neurosci Lett 279 , 129–32 10688046
186. Harada A (1994) Altered microtubule organization in small-calibre axons of mice lacking tau protein. Nature 369 , 488–91 8202139
187. Dawson HN (2001) Inhibition of neuronal maturation in primary hippocampal neurons from tau deficient mice. J Cell Sci 114 , 1179–87 11228161
188. Ke YD (2012) Lessons from tau-deficient mice. Int J Alzheimers Dis 2012 , 873270 22720190
189. Grundke-Iqbal I (1986) Abnormal phosphorylation of the microtubule-associated protein tau (tau) in Alzheimer cytoskeletal pathology. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 83 , 4913–7 3088567
190. Biernat J (1992) The switch of tau protein to an Alzheimer-like state includes the phosphorylation of two serine-proline motifs upstream of the microtubule binding region. EMBO J 11 , 1593–1597 1563356
191. Schneider A (1999) Phosphorylation that detaches tau protein from microtubules (Ser262, Ser214) also protects it against aggregation into Alzheimer paired helical filaments. Biochemistry 38 , 3549–58 10090741
192. Alonso A (2001) Hyperphosphorylation induces self-assembly of tau into tangles of paired helical filaments/straight filaments. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 98 , 6923–8 11381127
193. Ward SM (2012) Tau oligomers and tau toxicity in neurodegenerative disease. Biochem Soc Trans 40 , 667–71 22817713
194. Berger Z (2007) Accumulation of pathological tau species and memory loss in a conditional model of tauopathy. J Neurosci 27 , 3650–62 17409229
195. Usenovic M (2015) Internalized Tau Oligomers Cause Neurodegeneration by Inducing Accumulation of Pathogenic Tau in Human Neurons Derived from Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells. J Neurosci 35 , 14234–50 26490863
196. Wittmann CW (2001) Tauopathy in Drosophila: Neurodegeneration Without Neurofibrillary Tangles. Science 293 , 711–714 11408621
197. Khurana V (2010) Lysosomal Dysfunction Promotes Cleavage and Neurotoxicity of Tau In Vivo. PLoS Genet 6 , e1001026 20664788
198. Dias-Santagata D (2007) Oxidative stress mediates tau-induced neurodegeneration in Drosophila. J Clin Invest 117 , 236–45 17173140
Resources

i https://agora.ampadportal.org/genes/(genes-router:gene-details/ENSG00000147065
ii https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04552795
iii https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04500847
iv https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04993768
