LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


8710523
21484
Adv Drug Deliv Rev
Adv Drug Deliv Rev
Advanced drug delivery reviews
0169-409X
1872-8294

36115494
10125004
10.1016/j.addr.2022.114537
NIHMS1889546
Article
Targeting the liver in dementia and cognitive impairment: Dietary macronutrients and diabetic therapeutics
Hunt Nicholas J. abcd
Wahl Devin e
Westwood Lara J. ad
Lockwood Glen P. ad
Le Couteur David G. abd
Cogger Victoria C. ad*
a Faculty of Medicine and Health, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2008, Australia
b Charles Perkins Centre, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2008, Australia
c Sydney Nano Institute, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2008, Australia
d ANZAC Research Institute &amp; Centre for Education and Research on Ageing, Concord Repatriation General Hospital, Concord, NSW 2139, Australia
e Department of Health and Exercise Science &amp; Centre for Healthy Aging, Colorado State University, CO 80523, United States
* Corresponding author at: Faculty of Medicine and Health, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2008, Australia. victoria.cogger@sydney.edu.au (V.C. Cogger).
18 4 2023
11 2022
14 9 2022
24 4 2023
190 114537114537
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Many people living with dementia and cognitive impairment have dysfunctional mitochondrial and insulin-glucose metabolism resembling type 2 diabetes mellitus and old age. Evidence from human trials shows that nutritional interventions and anti-diabetic medicines that target nutrient-sensing pathways overcome these deficits in glucose and energy metabolism and can improve cognition and/or reduce symptoms of dementia. The liver is the main organ that mediates the systemic effects of diets and many diabetic medicines; therefore, it is an intermediate target for such dementia interventions. A challenge is the efficacy of these treatments in older age. Solutions include the targeted hepatic delivery of diabetic medicines using nanotechnologies and titration of macronutrients to optimize hepatic energy metabolism.

Alzheimer’s disease
Mitochondrial dysfunction
Neuroinflammation
Oxidative stress
Diet
Prevention
Precision medicine

pmc1. Introduction

There are 55 million people living with dementia worldwide, leading to a total global economic cost of 1.3 trillion USD per year [1,2]. As the population ages and the number of people living with dementia increases there is an accelerated need for effective disease-modifying therapies. Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most prominent neurocognitive disorder and the most common cause of dementia in older populations (60–80% of dementia cases) [3]. While the primary causes of late onset AD (LOAD) are unknown, it has been proposed to be due to accumulation of misfolded beta amyloid peptides (Aβ) into plaques or toxic soluble oligomers, leading to hyperphosphorylation of tau and neurofibrillary tangles deposition in the brain [4]. These processes promote cellular damage and oxidative stress which can lead to mitochondrial dysfunction, inflammation and cellular senescence within neurons [5–8]. This amyloid cascade theory is the major traditional theory for the pathogenesis of AD [4].

However, there is increasing evidence that these toxic plaques and tangles, particularly in LOAD, may not be the initiators of the disease pathology and may be the consequence, rather than cause, of a multi-factorial disorder of genetic and environmental triggers that promote inefficient cellular energy metabolism [9]. The failure of drug discovery pipelines predicated on traditional Aβ mechanisms for AD to deliver clinically relevant treatments for the prevention, attenuation or cure of dementia supports the reasoning that alternative hypotheses require thorough investigation. This has led to interest in alternative therapeutic approaches based on non-traditional mechanisms and biological processes such as neuroinflammation and metabolic impairment [10,11].

Amongst these alternative proposed mechanisms are impaired energy metabolism related to mitochondrial dysfunction, and impaired insulin and glucose metabolism. There is a growing body of mechanistic and epidemiological studies linking dementia to mitochondrial impairment [12] (section 4), and insulin resistance [13] (section 5). Additionally, there is evidence to support the possibility that therapies acting on these pathways influence cognition and dementia. Such interventions include various healthy or experimental diets (section 7), macronutrients (section 8) and diabetic medications (section 9).

This review outlines the role of impaired mitochondrial energy metabolism and insulin-glucose metabolism in dementia and AD and compares these with the changes seen in aging and type 2 diabetes (T2D). Interventions are described that target energy metabolism and insulin-glucose metabolism, where the effects on cognition in humans and mice have been reported. We show that the liver is important for mediating the systemic and cognitive outcomes of such interventions. Further, it is proposed that targeting the liver via the use of precision medicine-based strategies, such as nanotechnologies, may improve bioavailability and increase efficacy in multimorbid and aging populations, ultimately providing greater systemic and cerebral effects.

2. Dementia and mild cognitive impairment

The incidence of dementia increases in older age, and the rate of increase is greater than for any other age-related disease [14,15]. There is a continuum in the severity of cognitive impairment from normal aging through to dementia. The symptoms range from very minor changes in short term memory and executive function, sometimes called age-related cognitive decline that are considered part of normal aging through to total loss of independence. Between 2 and 5% of people under 60 years of age have Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI), increasing to 15% at 75 and 38% at 85 years old [16,17]. MCI can be detected through cognitive testing, but by definition, doesn’t impact on function or independence. MCI is proposed to be a prodromal state or ‘predementia’ that could be targeted by preventative drug therapies, however only a portion of people with MCI progress to dementia diagnoses [18,19]. MCI has recently been re-categorized as a Minor Neurocognitive Disorder under DSM 5 [20].

Dementia is diagnosed once cognitive impairment is sufficiently severe to impair the day-to-day function and independence of a person. At this stage, memory loss is often associated with problems with language, perception, and behavior. Dementia occurs in 2% of people aged in their 60’s and increases to 36% in people aged in their 90’s [21]. Dementia has now been termed a Major Neurocognitive Disorder in the DSM 5 [20].

The main neurodegenerative disorders that underlie most cases of MCI and dementia are AD, Vascular dementia (VD), dementia with Lewy bodies and frontotemporal dementia. The most commonly reported cause of dementia is AD [3] followed by VD [22]. VD is secondary to both large and small vessel dysfunction leading to altered cerebral perfusion, cerebrovascular reactivity, and blood brain barrier (BBB) integrity [23,24]. VD is associated with cerebrovascular disease and vascular risk factors including blood pressure variability, cardiac arrhythmia, overactivity of the renin angiotensin system, endothelial dysfunction, vascular growth dysfunction and T2D [25]. Disruption of insulin signaling and glucose metabolism are a key factors driving cerebrovascular disease pathways and VD [13,26].

3. The liver, cognitive function, and dementia

There is accruing evidence that the liver may have a role in the etiology of dementia and cognitive impairment given its role in glucose, insulin and mitochondrial metabolism [27–29]. In addition to facilitating clearance of Aβ and inflammatory cytokines, the liver is the metabolic hub of the body and is critical for the regulation of glucose/insulin metabolism and the metabolism of macronutrients (glucose, lipids and protein) (Fig. 1). The liver converts dietary macronutrients (inputs) to utilizable or storable formulations (outputs) and maintains the balance of circulating concentrations of nutrients, glucose and insulin for energy metabolism. These complex pathways are shown in Fig. 1. Regulation of energy metabolism performed by the liver is also based on input from the pancreas and adipose tissue [30]. For example, hyperglycemia promotes pancreatic insulin release to regulate hepatic glucose production and release from the liver (Fig. 2). The liver, pancreas, muscle and fat tissue also remove excess glucose from the blood supply and these processes are also critical to prevent the short and long-term effects of systemic hyperglycemia (Fig. 2). Optimal glucose concentration is critical for the brain as glucose and ketone bodies (the main fuel for the brain during glucose scarcity) are required for optimal neuronal, microglial and astrocyte functions [31,32].

3.1. Liver-brain axis

Previous studies have shown that autonomic denervation of the liver following liver transplantation does not lead to life threatening metabolic derangement. However, it does lead to increased circulating levels of insulin and glucagon [33]. Insulin stimulation within the brain has been shown to promote vagal nerve activity to the liver, accelerating glycogen synthesis [34]. This controls liver glucose production and removes glucose from the circulation [35]. Afferent innervation from the liver to the brain is critical for epinephrine and cortisol release in response to insulin-induced hypoglycemia [33,36]. Strikingly, liver transplantation alters triggering for food intake but not changes in feeding behavior [37]. Decreased portal glucose gradients increase afferent vagal activity with loss of innervation inhibiting food intake triggers [38].

The presence of a liver-brain axis raises the possibility of a role for the liver in dementia. This can be partly addressed through evidence from studies of liver disease and cognitive function. One epidemiological study (n = 8,456 participants) found that cirrhosis was a greater risk factor than other comorbidities, such as diabetes and cerebrovascular disease, for dementia [39]. In mice, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is associated with key features of AD [40]. In humans, NAFLD doubled the risk of developing dementia in one cohort (n = 1,542 participants) [41]; however, contrasting results were observed in a larger study (n = 22,598 participants) [42]. Nho, et al. [43] published a key study linking liver function and AD from the AD Neuroimaging Study (n = 1,581 participants). This study showed that low levels of the liver enzyme alanine transaminase and an increased ratio of aspartate aminotransferase to alanine transaminase (markers of liver health) were associated with increased risk of AD and memory impairment. These association studies in humans are consistent with the possibility that liver disease is associated with risk of dementia.

3.2. Hepatic clearance of Aβ

The liver has a role in clearing Aβ, the protein associated with AD [28,44,45]. Peripherally administrated Aβ is distributed into the brain [46,47] while peripheral administration of tyrosine kinase inhibitors, which do not cross the BBB, leads to a reduction in brain levels of Aβ in mice [48]. These studies show that about 50% of Aβ produced in the brain is cleared peripherally, with some studies concluding that the liver is the main site for Aβ clearance [49].

It has been shown that the first step in the systemic clearance of Aβ is its uptake into hepatocytes by the low-density lipoprotein receptor-related peptide 1 [50]. It has been proposed that targeting the liver with pharmacotherapies that increase hepatic clearance of Aβ might treat or prevent AD [27]. Lam, et al. [29] recently published an important study implicating the liver in AD pathogenesis in which they generated a mouse model where the human Aβ peptide was produced only in the liver. These mice developed cognitive changes consistent with dementia, including a breakdown of the BBB and neuroinflammation [29]. Such studies provide potential mechanisms for the association between liver function (e.g., the production and clearance of Aβ) and dementia seen in epidemiological studies.

4. Mitochondria and energy metabolism

A key role of the liver is to convert dietary macronutrients into circulating glucose and ketone bodies that are substrates for mitochondrial ATP production and establish whole body (including brain) energy production. Within the brain, the number and quality of mitochondria are also influenced by mitophagy, mitochondrial fission and fusion, oxidative stress, NAD+ levels, and proteins within nutrient-sensing pathways [51], such as peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1α and nuclear respiratory factors 1 and 2 [52]. There is a close relationship between mitochondrial function and insulin signaling. Furthermore, it is known that insulin resistance contributes to mitochondrial dysfunction [51] and the loss of systemic insulin sensitivity promotes neuronal mitochondria dysfunction [53].

AD is associated with impaired mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation in the brain and many other tissues [54]. In isolated neurons from patients with LOAD, there is a decline in mitochondrial respiration, reduced NAD+/NADH ratios, diminished glucose uptake, and reduced response to insulin signaling and insulin receptor expression [9,55]. This may be related to Aβ or tau deposition. Regardless, mitochondrial dysfunction is involved with a cascade of processes related to neurotransmitter release, oxidative stress, and dysregulated calcium homeostasis, which are all key hallmarks seen in AD [56]. In addition, oxidative stress promotes lipid peroxidation of plasma and mitochondrial membranes, oxidation of structural and enzymatic proteins, irreversible modifications to proteins and nucleic acids, and impaired mitochondria bioenergetics [57]. However, while these findings suggest that peripheral mitochondrial dysfunction contributes to AD-like pathologies in pre-clinical models, a recent meta-analysis of human samples from the brains of patients with diagnosed AD did not reveal a consistent pattern of pro-oxidative changes and an accumulation of oxidative damage in tissue, thus challenging the perception that mitochondrial dysfunction drives AD in humans [58].

5. Insulin and glucose metabolism

Dysregulated insulin and glucose metabolism and T2D are associated with changes seen in all cause dementia (Fig. 3). Peripheral inflammation, insulin resistance, and glucose intolerance contribute to accelerated brain aging and dementia [59] and peripheral cardiometabolic fitness is tightly linked to brain health and cognitive function [59]. A key function of the liver is to promote insulin clearance and regulate glucose concentrations [60–62], which are potential mechanisms for its role in brain health and dementia.

Insulin is important for synaptic, neuronal/glial metabolism, trophism, neuroinflammation and nutrient homeostasis [63,64]. Insulin modulates vascular functions including vasoreactivity, lipid metabolism and inflammation [65], and regulates memory, cognitive and emotional functions [66]. Hyperinsulinemia and elevated homeostatic model assessment for insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) scores correlate with cognitive decline in middle aged (45–64) and old (&gt;70 years) AD-free and T2D-free patients [67,68].

Hyperinsulinemia reduces Aβ clearance and degradation. This is due to reduced availability of insulin degrading enzyme (IDE) that facilitates the breakdown of Aβ [69]. Interestingly, IDE has a higher selectivity for insulin than Aβ and therefore increased concentrations of circulating or central insulin contributes to reduced breakdown of Aβ because of the high affinity between IDE and insulin [70]. In addition, elevated insulin also contributes to tau hyperphosphorylation and cleavage [71] and liver mediated clearance of insulin declines with age and is exacerbated when paired with T2D [60,72].

Increased insulin receptor signaling via MAPK and AKT are also implicated in AD pathogenesis [73]. MAPK is associated with neuroinflammation, tau phosphorylation and synaptic plasticity while AKT is associated with growth, proliferation, protein synthesis [73]. Physiological insulin receptor signaling decreases glycogen synthase kinase 3β, while high signaling increases this kinase leading to increased Aβ and neurofibrillary tangle formation [74].

Decreased rates of glucose metabolism occur in parietotemporal, frontal and posterior cingulate cortices in dementia [75]. Glucose metabolism correlates with disease progression from normal aging to LOAD. These findings support that glucose metabolism may serve as a biomarker of AD progression and impaired glucose metabolism may have a role in dementia [75]. Importantly, impaired glucose metabolism is typically observed before clinical manifestations of cognitive decline (e.g., memory loss) [76,77].

Chronic hyperglycemia promotes cerebral oxidative stress [78], mediated by advanced glycation end products (AGE) [79], reactive oxygen species (ROS), nitrogen species and lipid peroxidation of oxidized proteins [80]. AGE glycolates Aβ and facilitates formation of tau tangles [81].

6. Peripheral and neuroinflammation

Low grade inflammation in older age and dementia is characterized by increased circulating cytokines IL-6, IL-1β IL-18, TNF-α, α−1 antichymotrypsin and C-reactive protein [82]. A direct correlation between peripheral inflammation and cognitive defects, particularly MCI and AD, was confirmed by a meta-analysis of 44 studies showing elevated peripheral cytokines (TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6 and TGF-β) in AD [83]. Inflammation also leads to sustained activation of the brain’s resident macrophages (microglia) and other immune cells, exacerbating Aβ and tau pathologies [84].

The liver has three potential roles within this process. First, it contributes to the initiation of low-grade inflammation via release of cytokines and the inflammatory secretions with normal aging [72], with this cascade exacerbated in T2D [85] (Fig. 4). Lipid accumulation in hepatocytes leads to ROS production, ER stress and secretion of damage associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) [72,86]. This activates hepatic stellate cells with TNF-α and TNF-β release [87]. Second, the liver facilitates the release of cytokines from adipose tissue following the development of insulin resistance [88] (Fig. 3). Finally, the liver has a key role in clearing these cytokines (TNF-α, IL-1β and IL-6), hormones and toxins from the circulation [89] (Fig. 4). While the role of individual liver cell types has not been examined in dementia, animal models of acute liver failure lead to develop neuroinflammation via microglia activation, cytokine release and recruitment of monocytes to the brain [90,91]. Finally, in a previous review, liver X receptors were proposed to have a role in AD via lipid metabolism and neuroinflammation [92].

In summary, key hallmarks of AD and T2D include impaired insulin signaling/glucose metabolism and utilization, oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction and neuroinflammation [13]. Brain insulin resistance and impaired glucose metabolism are features of AD that correlate with the severity of cognitive impairment [93,94]. Insulin resistance increases Aβ deposits, providing evidence that energy metabolism dysfunction may precede amyloid plaque-mediated cellular damage and oxidative stress [95]. This cascade of mitochondrial dysfunction and loss of homeostatic glucose and insulin metabolism has provided opportunities to examine the effects of liver acting diets, macronutrients and diabetic medications on cognitive function and AD.

7. Diet interventions for dementia and brain aging

Nutrition has profound impacts on aging and age-related diseases such as dementia [59,96]. It has been well established on the basis of animal experiments that caloric restriction delays the onset of aging and age-related diseases. On the other hand, obesity and high fat diets accelerate aging and are associated with dementia and neuroinflammation [96,97]. Overconsumption of foods rich in AGEs and saturated fats have a pro-inflammatory influence on the brain and contribute to AD [96]. At the level of macronutrients, low protein diets are associated with delayed aging and improved glucose metabolism, which might be related specifically to intake of branched chain amino acids [98,99].

The dietary intake of energy and macronutrients has dramatic effects on the abundance of hepatic proteins involved with the metabolism of protein, fat and carbohydrates and also the nutrient sensing pathways that regulate them [100]. The canonical nutrient-sensing pathways include the mTOR, AMPK, sirtuin and insulin pathways, which converge in the liver and influence autophagy, oxidative stress, inflammation, mitochondrial function and glucose/insulin metabolism [72,101,102].

7.1. Caloric restriction

Caloric restriction (CR; 20–40% daily reduction in caloric intake) and intermittent fasting (periods of time with no caloric intake) act on the liver to promote regulation of ketone bodies for energy metabolism. Ketones are the major substrate used by neurons when they cannot metabolize glucose for energy [103]. CR has been shown to shift the energy metabolism balance in the brain from glucose to ketone derived sources and is associated with white matter integrity and long-term memory in aging animals [104]. The primary action of the liver in CR is via the regulation of nutrient balance and utilization, similarly to the beneficial effects of the ketogenic diet on brain metabolism and dementia that was recently reviewed by Jensen, et al. [105]. Ketones are also neuroprotective through mechanisms which reduce oxidative stress, maintain energy supply, and attenuate neuroinflammation [106].

There are several studies exploring the influence of CR on brain health and cognition in humans. Long-term 25% CR is associated with reduced circulating IL-6, and this reduction is correlated with increased performance on spatial memory tests [107]. Shorter-term fasting (or CR) for 4-weeks similarly improves pattern separation (a key marker of cognition) in obese humans [108], and 30% CR for three months improves verbal memory scores and is associated with reduced circulating fasting insulin and c-reactive protein (a marker of systemic/brain inflammation) in older humans [109].

7.2. Mediterranean diet

The Mediterranean diet is characterized by consumption of fruits, legumes, vegetables, berries, olive oil, moderate amounts of red wine, and limited red meat consumption. Monounsaturated fatty acids (e.g., olive oil) are a key component of this diet and are associated with a reduced risk of cognitive decline [110]. In healthy animals monounsaturated fatty acids alone are not associated with diet induced changes in the hepatic proteome in mice [111]. However, in fatty liver disease, monounsaturated fatty acids are associated with improved hepatic lipid metabolism [112]. These studies highlight the fact that healthy dietary interventions act on the liver to improve lipid metabolism and reduce hepatic fat content, which may contribute to improved brain health [113].

There have been several studies investigating the links between The Mediterranean diet and brain health/cognition in humans. Adherence to a Mediterranean diet is related to decreased cortical thinning in AD patients [114] and also associated with improved memory and cognitive performance in a population with MCI and dementia [115]. It has also been shown that adherence to this diet is associated with improved cognition in older adults with vascular dysfunction [116], and that this diet slows age-related cognitive decline in older humans [117]. Given these positive results, the Mediterranean-DASH Intervention for Neurodegenerative Delay (MIND) study is currently underway as a multicenter, 3-year randomized control trial to test the influence of the Mediterranean diet on brain structure and cognitive function in populations at risk for AD [118].

7.3. The FINGER diet

The Finnish Geriatric Intervention Study to Prevent Cognitive Impairment and Disability (FINGER) study is a two-year multimodal domain intervention to examine the influence of diet, exercise, vascular management, and cognitive training on cognitive functioning in at-risk older adults [119]. The dietary component of the FINGER intervention was highly similar to the Mediterranean diet with the FINGER diet characterized by high fruit and vegetable intake, whole-grain cereals, low sucrose intake, low red meat consumption, and consumption of fish at least two times a week [120].

The FINGER intervention has shown increased white-matter integrity and is associated with improved cognition in older adults at risk for dementia [121], plus improved executive function in older adults [122]. The FINGER intervention is also associated with improved processing speed in older adults with dementia risk [123]. The specific influence of the dietary component of the FINGER intervention on cognition was also investigated and was associated with global increases in executive function in adults at risk for dementia [120].

7.4. Low-protein diets

Ad-libitum low-protein, high carbohydrate diets improve cardiometabolic health and cognitive function in mice [124,125], however, whether similar results hold true for humans remains to be determined. In mice, dietary protein below 8% promotes liver synthesis and secretion of fibroblast growth factor 21 (FGF21) that induces metabolic adaptation [126]. The same study identified that neurological responses to protein deficiency occurred when dietary protein decreases below 5% [126]. FGF21 is a liver secreted protein that is also increased by fasting, overfeeding, ketogenic diets, and high-carbohydrate diets [127]. Mice studies have shown that FGF21 reduces liver glycogen and lipogenesis, increases uptake of fatty acids and lipoproteins, and promotes clearance of triglycerides [128]. Furthermore, FGF21 downregulate inflammation and oxidative stress pathways in the liver [128]. FGF21 also has a role in neuroprotection and metabolic regulating with a recent review highlighting its potential as a therapeutic candidate for combating metabolic stress induced neurodegeneration [129].

In humans, some dietary patterns, like the Okinawan diet (which is associated with improved healthspan and lifespan), are lower in healthy protein sources (e.g., fish) and higher in carbohydrate (e.g., sweet potato and whole grains) and improve overall health and longevity, and there is modest evidence that similar diets may also improve cognitive health in humans [130,131].

8. Pharmacological therapies for brain aging

MCI, dementia, and AD are without a cure and current drugs appear to only ameliorate symptoms with modest effects on slowing cognitive and functional decline [132]. Presently, there are no prescribed medications for MCI. Treatments available for AD are limited to cholinesterase inhibitors (galantamine, rivastigmine, and donepezil) and a monoclonal antibody (aducanumab) in mild to moderate AD, and an N-methyl D-aspartate antagonist (memantine) in moderate to severe AD [11,132]. Cholinesterase inhibitors act by increasing the availability of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine, aducanumab promotes removal of Aβ and memantine blocks excess glutamate and regulates its activation. These treatments may inhibit dementia symptoms for a limited time but do not stop or reverse progression of the disease [11,132].

Drug discovery targeting the amyloid cascade has thus far resulted in multiple failure to launch therapeutics [11], with the number of anti-Aβ clinical trials declining between 2016 and 2019 [133]. A broader range of clinical approaches have been investigated including anti-tau, neurotransmitter modifications, anti-neuroinflammation, neuroprotective and cognitive enhancer agents [133]. Several of these agents (e.g., metformin, pioglitazone, and nicotinamide ribosome) exhibit effects on oxidative stress, mitochondria impairment, systemic inflammatory and metabolic dysfunction pathways and primarily act within the liver to regulate insulin and glucose homeostasis [102,134,135]. These medications have shown improvement in cognitive function by reducing insulin resistance and improving glucose utilization within the brain [13,74,136].

There have been several preclinical and clinical studies on the effects on cognition associated with a range of drugs that are postulated to delay aging or used to treat T2D. These drugs have predominant effects on insulin and glucose metabolism and cellular energetics, particularly the nutrient sensing pathways related to AMPK, mTOR, NAD+ and SIRT1 (Fig. 5).

8.1. Resveratrol

Resveratrol (a component of the Mediterranean diet) is an anti-inflammatory polyphenol found in red wine, nuts, berries, and chocolate and improves cognition in non-human primates [137]. Ingested resveratrol demonstrates primary biodistribution to the liver and kidneys with minimal distribution to other organs [138]. In humans, one study showed that 200 mg/day resveratrol supplementation improves functional connectivity of the hippocampus (an area of the brain associated with memory) and cognitive function in healthy, overweight older adults [139]. Another study showed that resveratrol supplementation improves cerebral blood flow, but this was not associated with improved cognition in healthy adults [140].

8.2. Nicotinamide riboside

Nicotinamide riboside (NR) is a hepatic NAD+ precursor [141], similarly to nicotinamide mononucleotide (NMN) [142]. For the formation of NAD+, NR is converted to NMN by nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase. NMN is then converted to NAD+ by nicotinamide mononucleotide adenylyl transferase. NR is a critical candidate for drug development as NMN can only be transported into cells by Slc12a8, while the dephosphorylated form of NR can be readily transported [143]. NAD+ is utilised for hydrogen transfer in mitochondria and is a co-enzyme for the catalysation of cellular redox reactions in glycolysis, free fatty acid β oxidation, or the tricarboxylic acid cycle [144].

In a recent phase 2 randomised control trial, MCI patients over the age of 65 years old were treated for 10-weeks with 1 g/day NR and demonstrated improved hippocampal blood flow, but did not show changes in cognitive measures [145]. Currently, a longer treatment period (12-week 1 g/day) phase 1 study is being performed (NCT04430517).

8.3. Rapamycin

Rapamycin is an inhibitor of mTOR with a broad range of targets in the body. Heightened mTOR activity is associated with cerebrovascular dysfunction in mice models of AD and vascular cognitive impairment [146] in normal aging [147]. In humans, rapamycin stimulates insulin-mediated glucose uptake via the mTOR/S6K pathway in the liver, muscle and fat [148]. Previous studies have shown mTOR decreases eNOS activity and that treatment with rapamycin (2.24 mg/kg/day) for 16 weeks promoted an eNOS dependent improvement in cerebral blood flow in AD mice [149]. Currently, a phase 2 clinical trial (Effects on Alzheimer’s and Cognitive Health REACH NCT04629495) is investigating the effects of 12-months of 1 mg/day rapamycin treatment in MCI and early-stage AD patients.

8.4. Azeliragon

Azeliragon (TTP488) is an orally bioavailable small molecule inhibitor of the receptor of AGE (RAGE). RAGE upregulation in the liver strongly correlates with the incidence of hepatic insulin resistance [150]. RAGE promotes cellular dysfunction and activation of inflammatory marker genes in immune and endothelial cells [151]. Animal models of AD treated with Azeliragon showed reduced Aβ plaque deposition and increased plasma levels of Ab. These mice demonstrated decreased inflammatory cytokines, reduced cognitive decline, and improve cerebral blood flow [151].

In the previous phase 2a and 2b RCTs in mild-to-moderate AD patients, Azeliragon demonstrated safety and tolerability [152] and an improved ADAS-cog score after 18 months of treatment [153]. A recent phase 3 clinical trial was terminated for business reasons with available data suggesting it failed to demonstrated significant benefit [154].

9. Diabetic therapeutics for brain aging

Anti-diabetic drugs reduce hyperglycemia, insulin resistance, and promote reversal of tissue inflammation and cellular oxidative stress through hepatic mechanisms. Anti-diabetic drugs are divided into 2 groups: hypoglycemic agents (e.g., insulin) and anti-hyperglycemic agents (insulin sensitizers e.g., metformin). Antioxidants and anti-AGE medications may also be effective approaches to normalize blood glucose levels, thus positively influencing the brain.

9.1. Insulin

Insulin acts on skeletal muscle, liver and adipose tissue and within the liver affects the hepatic insulin signaling cascade [155]. Within the liver, insulin promotes the synthesis of all major macromolecules: glycogen, lipids and proteins via the breakdown of dietary nutrients [155]. Insulin acts via its receptors to also rapidly reduce hepatic glucose production via activation of AKT and the transcription factor FOXO [155].

Preclinical investigations on genetically induced AD-like neuropathology (3xTg-AD) mice on a high fat diet (60 % kcal fat) have shown reduced glucose tolerance, increased levels of brain soluble Aβ, and memory impairment compared to AD-like mice on a regular diet [156]. A single insulin tail injection (4 IU/kg) reversed the effects of high fat diet on memory and soluble brain Aβ by increasing plasma Aβ [156]. In db/db mice with hyperinsulinemia increased AGE receptor expression and Aβ40 transport across the BBB is observed [157]. Treatment with the long-acting insulin glargine, but not metformin or glibenclamide (pancreatic insulin release stimulant), reduced hippocampal Aβ and neuronal apoptosis and correlated with decreased RAGE expression and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ (PPARγ) activity at the BBB [157]. Insulin signaling within the hippocampus appears to be critical for cognitive function, with experiments in streptozotocin ICV injected rats, a follow up ICV injection of insulin (moderate-acting, detemir) was able to restore cognitive function [158]. A previous study by this group identified that insulin signaling in the hippocampal dentate gyrus was critical for cognitive recovery [159], similarly, regular intrahippocampal insulin administration reversed Aβ induced memory impairment in rats [160]. These studies highlight the importance of insulin’s actions both directly in the brain and systemically to promote cognitive improvement.

In clinical studies it was first highlighted that peripheral insulin infusions may be beneficial in AD patients. In AD patients without hyperglycemia, insulin infusions (1 mIU/kg/min) promoted enhanced memory compared to their untreated states [161]. A crucial issue identified was the risk of hypoglycemia in mentally impaired patients. To address this risk, insulin was given intranasally to reduce the circulation of insulin. In a small RCT, 20 IU was given twice daily for 3 weeks to early AD patients, resulting in higher verbal information retention and improved attention [162]. In patients with early-stage AD/MCI (APOE ε4 neg) intranasal insulin improves cognitive function with dose dependent effects observed [163,164]. In a larger cohort RCT regular insulin therapy (20 IU/day) in mild to moderate AD and MCI without diabetes improved verbal memory and general cognition [165]. Reductions in Aβ42 and tau to Aβ42 ratios in the cerebral spinal fluid were observed to correlate with improved cognition in treated patients [165]. However, a recent phase 2/3 Study of Nasal Insulin to Fight Forgetfulness (SNIFF) performed to examine the feasibility, safety, and efficacy of intranasal insulin for the treatment MCI and AD dementia, observed that intranasal insulin did not improve cognitive functions or memory in either MCI or early-stage AD patients [166]. In a secondary analysis it was observed that there was a reduction in white matter hyperintensity volume progression [167].

9.2. Pioglitazone

Pioglitazone is a PPARγ agonist currently used in T2D patients as a 3rd line treatment for glycemic control usually when 1st line drugs, such as metformin, are ineffective in managing hyperglycemia. Pioglitazone promotes insulin sensitivity in the liver, muscle, and adipose tissue via increased insulin receptor signaling, pAMPK and GLUT4 expression and can increase glucose uptake by 30–50% within these organs [168–170]. In addition, it reduces circulating systemic inflammatory markers including C-reactive protein, IL-6, MMP-9 and white blood cell count [171].

In a small non-blinded RCT of AD patients with T2D given Pioglitazone for 6 months, it was demonstrated that treatment improved both cognition and cerebral blood flow [172]. No change in plasma Aβ40/Aβ42 ratio were observed (increased expression were observed in the control group), no dose dependent effect was observed between 15 and 30 mg treatment groups. In a recent review it was highlighted that insufficient concentration of the drug reached the target site of action with higher dosages were associated with toxicity and could not be used [173].

9.3. Metformin

Metformin is a widely used 1st line medication for T2D and similarly to Pioglitazone it is an insulin sensitizer promoting pAMPK expression and decreasing hepatic glucose output (gluconeogenesis) [174]. Metformin acts directly and indirectly on the liver to lower glucose production [175]. In mouse models of accelerated aging/AD (APP/PSI or SAMP8), intraperitoneal injections of metformin (200 mg/kg/day) for 2 or 8 weeks resulted in the rescue of spatial memory, prevention of neuronal cell death, reduced Aβ deposition, and limited microglia activation via inhibition of mTOR and activation of AMPK in hippocampal tissue [176,177].

In an RCT of non-diabetics with MCI given metformin for 8 weeks or 12 months, slight improvements in AD Assessment Scale-Cognitive Subscale test scores, cerebral spinal fluid Aβ42 and cerebral glucose metabolism were observed [178,179]. Currently, the metformin in Alzheimer’s dementia prevention (MAP) study, an RCT of 370 men and women over 55 with early and late MCI, without diabetes, using prolonged release and high dosage (2000 mg/day) metformin, is underway (NCT04098666).

9.4. Liraglutide

GLP-1 receptor agonists (exenatide and liraglutide) promote insulin secretion and suppression of glucagon secretion in the pancreas [180]. Liraglutide is a non-hepatic acting drug but demonstrates the effect of targeting glucose metabolism via the pancreas [180]. These injectable medications have been observed to reduce Aβ plaque formation and prevent memory impairment in mice models of AD [181]. Transgenic AD mice models following intraperitoneal injection of GLP-1R agonists (exendin-4 or liraglutide) have improved special memory and object recognition [182,183], which was associated with decreased Aβ and neuroinflammation.

In a RCT of AD patients, liraglutide treatment (1.8 mg) improved glucose metabolism and reduced cognitive decline [184]. On the other hand, in another RCT of patients with subjective cognitive complaints, with/without diabetes, no effect on cognition was reported [185]. Of note, both of these RCTs were underpowered for assessment of cognitive outcomes and additional studies are underway [136]. A 12-month phase 2 clinical trial in 204 participants evaluating the effects of liraglutide in AD (ELAD) is currently being performed [186].

10. Diabetic therapeutic efficacy and acceptability in clinical trials

A recent systematic review investigated the influence of antidiabetic drugs in patients with probable AD, MCI or subjective cognitive complaints. Muñoz-Jiménez, et al. [136] evaluated the efficacy of these compounds relative to the primary outcome of cognitive improvement. This review investigated 23 studies and found intranasal insulin, pioglitazone, metformin and liraglutide were promising to improve cognitive outcomes, yet efficacy and acceptability continued to be critical issues that were not overcome by previous studies.

A previous Cochrane review by Cao, et al. [187] which included a systematic review and meta-analysis examined the efficacy and acceptability of anti-diabetic medications for AD and MCI. This review concluded that Pioglitazone promoted the highest effect size; nevertheless, no drug was acceptable compared to placebo. Following the completion of this review, the extended TOMORROW trial using low dosage Pioglitazone was terminated due to lack of efficacy [136]. Intranasal insulin also showed promise according to the Cochrane review [187], however, this was prior to the conclusion of the SNIFF trial with recent results demonstrating it was an ineffective treatment for the primary outcomes [166]. From these phase 3 trials, the efficacy and acceptability of antidiabetic medications are key issues to overcome. In particular, the critical issue of acceptability was due to the risk of hypoglycemia with the dosages of intranasal insulin required to produce acceptable efficacy [188].

Insulin has also been shown to contribute to increased risk of cognitive decline due to the negative effects of hypoglycemic risk and incidence with continuous treatment [188]. Repeat hypoglycemia (i.e. from insulin injections or dosing) promotes subclinical cerebral injuries and permanent cognitive impairment [77]. These factors are critical to addressing the acceptability of treatment and continual long-term use in MCI patients. Other limitations in insulin uptake are due to the use of needles for administration, the cost of the medication and dependence on refrigeration and regimented administration times [189]. This is further complicated in patients with cognitive dysfunction [190]. These factors critically demonstrate that safer (reduced hypoglycemic risk) and oral formulations of insulin will be required for acceptability in MCI and AD patients for insulin to become a viable treatment.

11. Novel strategies to enhance ADME/efficacy include nanotechnology

Improvement of ADME (absorbance, distribution, metabolism and excretion) is a critical issue for the design of AD therapeutics [191] and for drug discovery in aging populations [192]. Older populations are the recipients of the majority of drug prescriptions with aging being the primary risk factor for cancer, cardiovascular disease and neurodegeneration [193]. Medications within advanced age cohorts also demonstrated impaired efficacy and increased toxicity [194]. This is due to reduced absorbance and 1st pass metabolism, changes in plasma proteins, body compartment water/fat composition, low grade systemic inflammation, impaired renal filtration, and dysregulated soluble transporters for bile mediated clearance (as reviewed in Hunt, et al. [195]). Aging promotes changes in pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics in a drug dependent manner with strategies to address this being a critical barrier to improving drug efficacy [196].

Nanotherapeutics is a novel area of development for improved efficacy of metabolic acting drugs in aging animal models [197]. Nano formulations of NMN (a precursor to NAD+ similar to NR) demonstrate improved drug efficacy, reduced drug dosage and improved glucose metabolism and insulin sensitivity [197]. Critically, treatment with the NMN drug alone in aging animals was ineffective even at dosages 100-fold higher than the nano formulation [197], thus highlighting the need to investigate whether novel nano formulations that target the liver might also be beneficial to reduce dementia.

In both young and old mice nanotherapeutics promote greater efficacy by altering the ADME of the transported drug agents [195]. This benefit is most dramatic in hepatic acting medications. Nanoformulations of metformin, for example, have increased bioavailability compared to metformin alone [192] due to broader absorbance via multiple soluble transported, macropinocytosis and clathrin mediated endocytosis pathways in both the gut and the liver [192]. Nanoformulations of drug candidates that were previously deemed non-efficacious (metformin, insulin and liraglutide) and other potential candidates (NMN, NR, Rapamycin and Azeliragon) may be able to address the efficacy issues associated with these treatments in previous clinical trials.

Nanotechnology also presents an opportunity to address the acceptability and usability of insulin. Insulin is currently given via injection and has a risk of hypoglycemia, and this risk is increased in MCI patients due to cognitive impairment. Nanotechnology platforms for oral delivery of insulin may reduce the risk of hypoglycemia incidence by targeted controlled release. Acceptability of injectable meditation in MCI patients is a critical barrier to the use of these medications in the clinic and providing patient care.

12. Summary

Many patients with AD and MCI have similar dysfunctional energy metabolism to T2D and nutritional deficiency. Animal studies demonstrate that nutritional and diabetic interventions improve cognition, insulin signaling, glucose metabolism and utilization, oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction clearance of Aβ and reduce neuroinflammation. Clinical trials have demonstrated some of the benefits of nutritional interventions and limited efficacy and acceptability of diabetic medications for use in AD and MCI. The use of nanotechnology may overcome this poor efficacy due to improvements in pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, acceptability, precision targeting and controlled drug release at target tissues.

Acknowledgements

The research has been funded by the National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia (1141234) and the McKnight Bequest to the Medical Foundation of the University of Sydney. N.H. is supported by the Australian Diabetes Society Skip Martin ECR Fellowship and The University of Sydney SOAR Prize. D.W. is supported by The National Institutes of Health, National Institute on Aging (F32AG069361). L.W is supported by the ANZAC Research Institute Nano DeLiver Postgraduate Scholarship.

Abbreviations:

Aβ beta amyloid

AD Alzheimer’s disease

AGE advanced glycation end products

AMPK AMP-activated protein kinase

BBB blood brain barrier

CR caloric restriction

DAMP damage associated molecular pattern

ER endoplasmic reticulum

FGF21 fibroblast growth factor 21

HOMA-IR homeostatic model assessment for insulin resistance

ICV intracerebral vascular injection

IDE insulin degrading enzyme

MCI mild cognitive impairment

mTOR mechanistic target of rapamycin

NAD+ nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide

NAFLD non-alcoholic fatty liver disease

NMN nicotinamide mononucleotide

NR Nicotinamide riboside

PPARγ peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma

RAGE receptor of advanced glycation end products

RCT randomized controlled trial

ROS reactive oxygen species

TCA tricarboxylic acid cycle

T2D type 2 diabetes mellitus

VD vascular dementia

Fig. 1. Nutrient utilization for energy production pathways within the liver.

The liver converts dietary macronutrients (inputs) to utilizable or storable formulations (outputs) and maintains the balance of circulating concentrations of nutrients, glucose and insulin for energy metabolism. Glucose is converted to glycogen for storage during hyperglycemia and following insulin signalling, in an ATP dependent reaction glucose is phosphorated, bound to uracil and enzymatically attached to glycogen chains. Glucose utilization is performed by conversion to pyruvate through glycolysis. This is an oxidative reaction requiring NAD+ and produces ATP. Pyruvate conversion to Acetyl CoA is another oxidative reaction requiring NAD+ without ATP production. Specific amino acids from digested protein may also be used to produce pyruvate via transamination. This oxidative process produces the byproduct urea. Similarly, to glucose, fatty acids are either stored or utilized for ATP production, in hyperglycemia fatty acids are storied as triglycerides in the liver with insulin resistance leading to higher circulating efflux of fatty acids from adipose tissue. Short and middle chain fatty acids and glycerol are absorbed from the gut and may be stored as triglycerides in the liver or adipose tissue via esterification. Fatty acid utilization to produce Acetyl CoA is an enzymatic and NAD+ dependent catabolic process called β oxidation. Excess fatty acid, similarly, to excess glucose, facilitate oxidative imbalance via overactivation of oxidative pathways. Acetyl CoA is utilized for cellular respiration via the tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA), also called citric acid cycle or Krebs cycle. This series of chemical reactions release stored energy via oxidation of Acetyl CoA derived from glucose, lipids or amino acids. Hyperglycemia results in excessive Acetyl CoA production resulting in overproduction of NADH and placing the mitochondrial electron transport chain under heavy electron pressure. Oxidation of excess NADH drives reactive oxygen species (ROS) production in diabetes.

Fig. 2. Systemic response to hyperglycemia to maintain blood glucose.

Excess blood glucose promotes insulin release via increased ATP/ADP ratios from the TCA cycle, this blocks ATP sensitive potassium channels, increases calcium influx and facilitates insulin vesicle exocytosis in pancreatic β cells. Insulin signaling via its receptor on adipose and muscle tissue promotes the translocation of GLUT4 receptor to the cell surface to promote glucose uptake into adipocytes and skeletal muscle. In the liver, insulin signaling facilitates GLUT2/4 translocation, promotes glycogenesis, and inhibits gluconeogenesis. These processes remove glucose from the circulation and maintain homeostatic control of glucose concentrations. Systemic hyperglycemia promotes short- and long-term effects within the circulatory and immune systems. Prolonged hyperglycemia promotes mitochondrial and endothelial damage within multiple tissues and organs leading to multiorgan failure [198–200].

Fig. 3. Impaired blood glucose metabolism within insulin resistance in type 2 diabetics and overlap with all cause dementia.

T2D and all cause dementia patients demonstrate systemic hyperglycemia, hyperlipidemia and hyperinsulinemia (may progress to hypoinsulinemia in insulin dependent diabetics) [28,92,105,201–220]. T2D is characterized by the development of insulin resistance, a reduction in the sensitivity to insulin, promoted by overactivation of the insulin signaling cascade by chronically elevated insulin. Loss of insulin sensitivity inhibits the uptake and utilization of glucose from the blood by the liver, muscle and adipose tissue. Impaired glucose uptake promotes the liver to facilitate gluconeogenesis, increasing circulating glucose. Impaired uptake of glucose also shifts the primary source of energy production to a dependance onto fatty acid metabolism. Increased fat mass within adipocytes and in circulation promotes scavenging of fatty acid by macrophages, leading to excess cytokine production in adipose tissue. Fatty acids within the liver also promotes triglyceride and ketone body formation. This excessive mitochondrial oxidative production of glucose, triglycerides and ketone bodies leads to oxidative imbalance and reactive oxygen species. Oxidative stress promotes inflammation and capillarization that inhibits the passive clearance of materials from the blood prolonging their circulation. The brain also demonstrates insulin resistance with excess glucose promoting neuronal toxicity and activation of microglia.

Fig. 4. Hepatic cellular changes in type 2 diabetes contribute to poor blood clearance and inflammation.

T2D leads to reactivity oxygen species (ROS) production and endothelial reticulum (ER) stress in hepatocytes. These stress pathways facilitate the release of damage associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) that activate hepatic stellate cells to facilitate cytokine production. Hepatic stellate cells produce collagen that forms a fibrotic basement membrane underneath the sinusoidal endothelium. These endothelial cells also respond to DAMPs and cytokines to become capillarised and lose their unique fenestrated surface. This inhibits the passive diffusion of materials from the blood into the liver, further reducing the liver’s capacity to sense nutrients. The capillarised endothelium upregulates adhesion molecules to aid cytokine mediated recruitment of monocytes and Kupffer cells to the cite of the DAMPs secretome. The chronic inflammatory signaling cascade creates a low-grade inflammatory environment within the liver that is positively regulated by all liver cell types.

Fig. 5. Therapeutic drug actions on mitochondrial nutrient sensing pathways.

Mitochondrial biosynthesis pathways are the targets of several calorie restrictive (CR) mimicking medications that also improve cognitive function. Mitochondrial dysfunction leads to excess NADH and ROS production and promotes excessive activation of oxidative ATP production pathways. Within T2D or AD patients there is extensive upregulation of glucose, lipid and fatty acid production pathways contributing to impaired insulin-glucose metabolism. CR mimetic medications such as metformin and resveratrol promote the upregulation of AMPK and inhibition of mTOR pathways to reduce production of glucose, fatty acids and ketone bodies and increase NAD+/NADH levels. The development of more efficacious promoters of the NAD+ scavengering pathway such as NR also facilitate these CR mimicking pathways.

Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.


References

[1] Gauthier S , Rosa-Neto P , Morais JA , W. C. , World Alzheimer Report 2021: Journey through the diagnosis of dementia, Alzheimer’s Disease International, London, England, 2021.
[2] W.H. Organization, Global Status Report on the Public Health Response to Dementia 2017–2025, World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland, 2021.
[3] de Matos AM , de Macedo MP , Rauter AP , Bridging type 2 diabetes and Alzheimer’s disease: assembling the puzzle pieces in the quest for the molecules with therapeutic and preventive potential, Med. Res. Rev 38 (2018) 261–324.28422298
[4] Hardy JA , Higgins GA , Alzheimer’s disease: the amyloid cascade hypothesis, Science 256 (1992) 184–186.1566067
[5] Walton CC , Begelman D , Nguyen W , Andersen JK , Senescence as an amyloid cascade: the amyloid senescence hypothesis, Front. Cell Neurosci 14 (2020).
[6] Cai Z , Hussain MD , Yan L-J , Microglia, neuroinflammation, and beta-amyloid protein in Alzheimer’s disease, Int. J. Neurosci. 124 (2014) 307–321.23930978
[7] Reddy PH , Beal MF , Amyloid beta, mitochondrial dysfunction and synaptic damage: implications for cognitive decline in aging and Alzheimer’s disease, Trends Mol. Med. 14 (2008) 45–53.18218341
[8] Cheignon C , Tomas M , Bonnefont-Rousselot D , Faller P , Hureau C , Collin F , Oxidative stress and the amyloid beta peptide in Alzheimer’s disease, Redox. Biol 14 (2018) 450–464.29080524
[9] Ryu W-I , Bormann MK , Shen M , Kim D , Forester B , Park Y , Cohen BM , Brain cells derived from Alzheimer’s disease patients have multiple specific innate abnormalities in energy metabolism, Mol. Psychiatry (2021) 1–13.33972691
[10] Graham WV , Bonito-Oliva A , Sakmar TP , Update on Alzheimer’s disease therapy and prevention strategies, Annu. Rev. Med 68 (2017) 413–430.28099083
[11] Kametani F , Hasegawa M , Reconsideration of amyloid hypothesis and tau hypothesis in Alzheimer’s disease, Front. Neurosci. 12 (2018) 25.29440986
[12] Perez Ortiz JM , Swerdlow RH , Mitochondrial dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease: role in pathogenesis and novel therapeutic opportunities, Br. J. Pharmacol. 176 (2019) 3489–3507.30675901
[13] Kellar D , Craft S , Brain insulin resistance in Alzheimer’s disease and related disorders: mechanisms and therapeutic approaches, Lancet Neurol. 19 (2020) 758–766.32730766
[14] Le Couteur DG , Thillainadesan J , What is an aging-related disease? An epidemiological perspective, Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. (2022).
[15] Vos T , Lim SS , Abbafati C , Abbas KM , Abbasi M , Abbasifard M , Murray CJL , Global burden of 369 diseases and injuries in 204 countries and territories, 1990–2019: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019, Lancet 396 (2020) 1204–1222.33069326
[16] Gillis C , Mirzaei F , Potashman M , Ikram MA , Maserejian N , The incidence of mild cognitive impairment: a systematic review and data synthesis, Alzheimers Dement 11 (2019) 248–256.
[17] Tangalos EG , Petersen RC , Mild cognitive impairment in geriatrics, Clin. Geriatr. Med. 34 (2018) 563–589.30336988
[18] Mitchell AJ , Shiri-Feshki M , Rate of progression of mild cognitive impairment to dementia – meta-analysis of 41 robust inception cohort studies, Acta Psychiatr. Scand. 119 (2009) 252–265.19236314
[19] Palmer K , Berger AK , Monastero R , Winblad B , Bäckman L , Fratiglioni L , Predictors of progression from mild cognitive impairment to Alzheimer disease, Neurology 68 (2007) 1596–1602.17485646
[20] D. American Psychiatric Association, A.P. Association, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders: DSM-5, American Psychiatric Association Washington DC, United States, 2013.
[21] Cao Q , Tan C-C , Xu W , Hu H , Cao X-P , Dong Q , Yu J-T , The prevalence of dementia: a systematic review and meta-analysis, J. Alzheimers Dis. 73 (2020) 1157–1166.31884487
[22] Dichgans M , Leys D , Vascular cognitive impairment, Circ. Res. 120 (2017) 573–591.28154105
[23] Smith E , Vascular cognitive impairment, Continuum 22 (2016) 490–509.27042905
[24] Frantellizzi V , Pani A , Ricci M , Locuratolo N , Fattapposta F , De Vincentis G , Neuroimaging in vascular cognitive impairment and dementia: a systematic review, J. Alzheimers Dis. 73 (2020) 1279–1294.31929166
[25] Parfenov VA , Ostroumova OD , Ostroumova TM , Kochetkov AI , Fateeva VV , Khacheva KK , Epstein OI , Vascular cognitive impairment: pathophysiological mechanisms, insights into structural basis, and perspectives in specific treatments, Neuropsychiatr. Dis. Treat. 15 (2019) 1381–1402.31190841
[26] Chornenkyy Y , Wang W-X , Wei A , Nelson PT , Alzheimer’s disease and type 2 diabetes mellitus are distinct diseases with potential overlapping metabolic dysfunction upstream of observed cognitive decline, Brain Pathol. 29 (2019) 3–17.
[27] Bassendine MF , Taylor-Robinson SD , Fertleman M , Khan M , Neely D , Is Alzheimer’s disease a liver disease of the brain?, J Alzheimers Dis. 75 (2020) 1–14.32250293
[28] Estrada LD , Ahumada P , Cabrera D , Arab JP , Liver dysfunction as a novel player in Alzheimer’s progression: looking outside the brain, Front. Aging Neurosci 11 (2019) 174.31379558
[29] Lam V , Takechi R , Hackett MJ , Francis R , Bynevelt M , Celliers LM , Mamo JCL , Synthesis of human amyloid restricted to liver results in an Alzheimer disease–like neurodegenerative phenotype, PLoS Biol. 19 (2021) e3001358.34520451
[30] Petersen MC , Vatner DF , Shulman GI , Regulation of hepatic glucose metabolism in health and disease, Nat. Rev. Endocrinol 13 (2017) 572–587.28731034
[31] Benton D , Parker PY , Donohoe RT , The supply of glucose to the brain and cognitive functioning, J. Biosoc. Sci 28 (1996) 463–479.8973004
[32] Aldana BI , Microglia-specific metabolic changes in neurodegeneration, J. Mol. Biol. 431 (2019) 1830–1842.30878483
[33] Perseghin G , Regalia E , Battezzati A , Vergani S , Pulvirenti A , Terruzzi I , Luzi L , Regulation of glucose homeostasis in humans with denervated livers, J. Clin. Invest. 100 (1997) 931–941.9259593
[34] Shima K , Kuroda K , Tarui S , Nishikawa M , Augmented serum insulin response to glucose infusion after the ingestion of konnyaku, Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 137 (1971) 872–876.5560675
[35] Szabo O , Szabo AJ , Studies on the nature and mode of action of the insulin-sensitive glucoregulator receptor in the central nervous system, Diabetes 24 (1975) 328–336.1132600
[36] Yi C-X , La Fleur SE , Fliers E , Kalsbeek A , The role of the autonomic nervous liver innervation in the control of energy metabolism, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Mol. Cell. Biol. Lipids 2010 (1802 ) 416–431.
[37] Louis-Sylvestre J , Servant J-M , Molimard R , Le Magnen J , Effect of liver denervation on the feeding pattern of rats, Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 239 (1980) R66–R70.
[38] Friedman MI , Control of energy intake by energy metabolism, Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 62 (1995) 1096S–1100S.7484927
[39] Chen TB , Yiao SY , Sun Y , Lee HJ , Yang SC , Chiu MJ , Wang PN , Comorbidity and dementia: a nationwide survey in Taiwan, PLoS ONE 12 (2017) e0175475.28403222
[40] Kim DG , Krenz A , Toussaint LE , Maurer KJ , Robinson SA , Yan A , Bynoe MS , Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease induces signs of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) in wild-type mice and accelerates pathological signs of AD in an AD model, J. Neuroinflamm 13 (2016) 1.
[41] Lampignano L , Donghia R , Griseta C , Lagravinese G , Sciarra S , Zupo R , Tirelli S , Liver health and dementia in an italian older population: findings from the salus in apulia study, Front. Aging Neurosci 13 (2021) 748888.34955810
[42] Labenz C , Kostev K , Kaps L , Galle PR , Schattenberg JM , Incident dementia in elderly patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in Germany, Dig. Dis. Sci. 66 (2021) 3179–3185.33037968
[43] Nho K , Kueider-Paisley A , Ahmad S , MahmoudianDehkordi S , Arnold M , Risacher SL , Han X , Association of altered liver enzymes with Alzheimer disease diagnosis, cognition, neuroimaging measures, and cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers, JAMA 2 (2019) e197978.
[44] Wang Y-R , Wang Q-H , Zhang T , Liu Y-H , Yao X-Q , Zeng F , Yan J-C , Associations between hepatic functions and plasma amyloid-beta levels—implications for the capacity of liver in peripheral amyloid-beta clearance, Mol. Neurobiol. 54 (2017) 2338–2344.26957302
[45] Sutcliffe JG , Hedlund PB , Thomas EA , Bloom FE , Hilbush BS , Peripheral reduction of β-amyloid is sufficient to reduce brain β-amyloid: Implications for Alzheimer’s disease, J. Neurosci. Res. 89 (2011) 808–814.21374699
[46] Eisele YS , Obermüller U , Heilbronner G , Baumann F , Kaeser SA , Wolburg H , Jucker M , Peripherally applied Abeta-containing inoculates induce cerebral beta-amyloidosis, Science 330 (2010) 980–982.20966215
[47] Morales R , Bravo-Alegria J , Moreno-Gonzalez I , Duran-Aniotz C , Gamez N , Edwards Iii G , Soto C , Transmission of cerebral amyloid pathology by peripheral administration of misfolded Aβ aggregates, Mol. Psychiatry 26 (2021) 5690–5701.34002023
[48] Netzer WJ , Dou F , Cai D , Veach D , Jean S , Li Y , Greengard P , Gleevec inhibits β-amyloid production but not Notch cleavage, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 100 (2003) 12444–12449.14523244
[49] Roberts KF , Elbert DL , Kasten TP , Patterson BW , Sigurdson WC , Connors RE , Bateman RJ , Amyloid-β efflux from the central nervous system into the plasma, Annu. Neurol. 76 (2014) 837–844.
[50] Shibata M , Yamada S , Kumar SR , Calero M , Bading J , Frangione B , Zlokovic BV , Clearance of Alzheimer’s amyloid-ss(1–40) peptide from brain by LDL receptor-related protein-1 at the blood-brain barrier, J. Clin. Invest. 106 (2000) 1489–1499.11120756
[51] Spinelli JB , Haigis MC , The multifaceted contributions of mitochondria to cellular metabolism, Nat. Cell Biol. 20 (2018) 745–754.29950572
[52] Pickles S , Vigié P , Youle RJ , Mitophagy and quality control mechanisms in mitochondrial maintenance, Curr. Biol. 28 (2018) R170–R185.29462587
[53] Schell M , Wardelmann K , Kleinridders A , Untangling the effect of insulin action on brain mitochondria and metabolism, J. Neuroendocrinol. 33 (2021) e12932.33506556
[54] Mecocci P , Boccardi V , Cecchetti R , Bastiani P , Scamosci M , Ruggiero C , Baroni M , A long journey into aging, brain aging, and Alzheimer’s disease following the oxidative stress tracks, J. Alzheimers Dis. 62 (2018) 1319–1335.29562533
[55] Swerdlow RH , Mitochondria and mitochondrial cascades in Alzheimer’s disease, J. Alzheimers Dis. 62 (2018) 1403–1416.29036828
[56] Quntanilla RA , Tapia-Monsalves C , The role of mitochondrial impairment in Alzheimer’s disease neurodegeneration: the tau connection, Curr. Neuropharmacol 18 (2020) 1076–1091.32448104
[57] Abyadeh M , Gupta V , Chitranshi N , Gupta V , Wu Y , Saks D , Mirzaei M , Mitochondrial dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease - a proteomics perspective, Expert Rev Proteomics 18 (2021) 295–304.33874826
[58] Zabel M , Nackenoff A , Kirsch WM , Harrison FE , Perry G , Schrag M , Markers of oxidative damage to lipids, nucleic acids and proteins and antioxidant enzymes activities in Alzheimer’s disease brain: a meta-analysis in human pathological specimens, Free Radic. Biol. Med. 115 (2018) 351–360.29253591
[59] Wahl D , Cavalier AN , LaRocca TJ , Novel strategies for healthy brain aging, Exerc. Sport Sci. Rev 49 (2021) 115–125.33739944
[60] Najjar SM , Perdomo G , Hepatic insulin clearance: mechanism and physiology, Physiology 34 (2019) 198–215.30968756
[61] Han HS , Kang G , Kim JS , Choi BH , Koo SH , Regulation of glucose metabolism from a liver-centric perspective, Exp. Mol. Med. 48 (2016).
[62] Mohamad M , Mitchell SJ , Wu LE , White MY , Cordwell SJ , Mach J , Das A , Ultrastructure of the liver microcirculation influences hepatic and systemic insulin activity and provides a mechanism for age-related insulin resistance, Aging Cell 15 (2016) 706–715.27095270
[63] Blázquez E , Velázquez E , Hurtado-Carneiro V , Ruiz-Albusac JM , Insulin in the brain: its pathophysiological implications for States related with central insulin resistance, type 2 diabetes and Alzheimer’s disease, Front. Endocrinol 5 (2014) 161.
[64] Kleinridders A , Ferris HA , Cai W , Kahn CR , Insulin action in brain regulates systemic metabolism and brain function, Diabetes 63 (2014) 2232–2243.24931034
[65] Hughes TM , Craft S , The role of insulin in the vascular contributions to age-related dementia, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Mol. Cell. Biol. Lipids 2016 (1862 ) 983–991.
[66] Kern W , Peters A , Fruehwald-Schultes B , Deininger E , Born J , Fehm HL , Improving influence of insulin on cognitive functions in humans, Neuroendocrinology 74 (2001) 270–280.11598383
[67] Zhong Y , Miao Y , Jia WP , Yan H , Wang BY , Jin J , Hyperinsulinemia, insulin resistance and cognitive decline in older cohort, Biomed. Environ. Sci. 25 (2012) 8–14.22424621
[68] Young SE , Mainous III AG , Carnemolla M , Hyperinsulinemia and cognitive decline in a middle-aged cohort, Diabetes Care 29 (2006) 2688–2693.17130206
[69] Roriz-Filho JS , Sá-Roriz TM , Rosset I , Camozzato AL , Santos AC , Chaves ML , Roriz-Cruz M , (Pre) diabetes, brain aging, and cognition, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Mol. Cell. Biol. Lipids 1792 (2009) 432–443.
[70] Qiu WQ , Folstein MF , Insulin, insulin-degrading enzyme and amyloid-β peptide in Alzheimer’s disease: review and hypothesis, Neurobiol. Aging 27 (2006) 190–198.16399206
[71] Planel E , Tatebayashi Y , Miyasaka T , Liu L , Wang L , Herman M , Duff KE , Insulin dysfunction induces in vivo tau hyperphosphorylation through distinct mechanisms, J. Neurosci. 27 (2007) 13635–13648.18077675
[72] Hunt NJ , Kang SWS , Lockwood GP , Le Couteur DG , Cogger VC , Hallmarks of aging in the liver, Comput. Struct. Biotechnol. J 17 (2019) 1151–1161.31462971
[73] Luchsinger JA , Type 2 diabetes, related conditions, in relation and dementia: an opportunity for prevention?, J Alzheimers Dis. 20 (2010) 723–736.20413862
[74] Boccardi V , Murasecco I , Mecocci P , Diabetes drugs in the fight against Alzheimer’s disease, Ageing Res. Rev 54 (2019) 100936.31330313
[75] Mosconi L , Brain glucose metabolism in the early and specific diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease, Eur. J. Nucl. Med. Mol. Imaging 32 (2005) 486–510.15747152
[76] Chen K , Langbaum JB , Fleisher AS , Ayutyanont N , Reschke C , Lee W , Thompson PM , Twelve-month metabolic declines in probable Alzheimer’s disease and amnestic mild cognitive impairment assessed using an empirically pre-defined statistical region-of-interest: findings from the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative, Neuroimage 51 (2010) 654–664.20202480
[77] Languren G , Montiel T , Julio-Amilpas A , Massieu L , Neuronal damage and cognitive impairment associated with hypoglycemia: an integrated view, Neurochem. Int. 63 (2013) 331–343.23876631
[78] Kodl CT , Seaquist ER , Cognitive dysfunction and diabetes mellitus, Endocr. Rev. 29 (2008) 494–511.18436709
[79] Vlassara H , Uribarri J , Advanced glycation end products (AGE) and diabetes: cause, effect, or both?, Curr Diab. Rep 14 (2014) 1–10.
[80] Fakhruddin S , Alanazi W , Jackson KE , Diabetes-induced reactive oxygen species: mechanism of their generation and role in renal injury, J. Diabetes Res. 2017 (2017) 8379327.28164134
[81] Iannuzzi C , Irace G , Sirangelo I , Differential effects of glycation on protein aggregation and amyloid formation, Front. Mol. Neurosci 1 (2014) 9.
[82] Kandimalla R , Thirumala V , Reddy PH , Is Alzheimer’s disease a type 3 diabetes? A critical appraisal, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 2017 (1863) 1078–1089.
[83] Anita NZ , Zebarth J , Chan B , Wu C-Y , Syed T , Shahrul D , Swardfager W , Inflammatory markers in type 2 diabetes with vs. without cognitive impairment; a systematic review and meta-analysis, Brain Behav. Immun 100 (2022) 55–69.34808290
[84] Kinney JW , Bemiller SM , Murtishaw AS , Leisgang AM , Salazar AM , Lamb BT , Inflammation as a central mechanism in Alzheimer’s disease, Alzheimers Dement 4 (2018) 575–590.
[85] Tsalamandris S , Antonopoulos AS , Oikonomou E , Papamikroulis G-A , Vogiatzi G , Papaioannou S , Tousoulis D , The role of inflammation in diabetes: current concepts and future perspectives, Eur. Cardiol. Rev 14 (2019) 50.
[86] Crispe IN , Hepatocytes as immunological agents, J. Immunol. 196 (2016) 17–21.26685314
[87] Bourebaba N , Marycz K , Hepatic stellate cells role in the course of metabolic disorders development–a molecular overview, Pharmacol. Res. 170 (2021) 105739.34171492
[88] Mu W , Cheng X-F , Liu Y , Lv Q-Z , Liu G-L , Zhang J-G , Li X-Y , Potential nexus of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease and type 2 diabetes mellitus: insulin resistance between hepatic and peripheral tissues, Front. Pharmacol. 9 (2019) 1566.30692925
[89] Iwai H , Nagaki M , Naito T , Ishiki Y , Murakami N , Sugihara J.i. , Moriwaki H , Removal of endotoxin and cytokines by plasma exchange in patients with acute hepatic failure, Crit. Care Med. 26 (1998) 873–876.9590317
[90] Jiang W , Desjardins P , Butterworth RF , Direct evidence for central proinflammatory mechanisms in rats with experimental acute liver failure: protective effect of hypothermia, J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 29 (2009) 944–952.19259110
[91] D’Mello C , Le T , Swain MG , Cerebral microglia recruit monocytes into the brain in response to tumor necrosis factorα signaling during peripheral organ inflammation, J. Neurosci. 29 (2009) 2089–2102.19228962
[92] Kang J , Rivest S , Lipid metabolism and neuroinflammation in Alzheimer’s disease: a role for liver X receptors, Endocr. Rev. 33 (2012) 715–746.22766509
[93] Butterfield DA , Halliwell B , Oxidative stress, dysfunctional glucose metabolism and Alzheimer disease, Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 20 (2019) 148–160.30737462
[94] Gejl M , Brock B , Egefjord L , Vang K , Rungby J , Gjedde A , Blood-brain glucose transfer in Alzheimer’s disease: effect of GLP-1 analog treatment, Sci. Rep. 7 (2017) 1–10.28127051
[95] Willette AA , Johnson SC , Birdsill AC , Sager MA , Christian B , Baker LD , Bendlin BB , Insulin resistance predicts brain amyloid deposition in late middle-aged adults, Alzheimers Dement 11 (2015) 504–510.e501.25043908
[96] Szczechowiak K , Diniz BS , Leszek J , Diet and Alzheimer’s dementia – nutritional approach to modulate inflammation, Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. 184 (2019) 172743.31356838
[97] Le Couteur DG , Raubenheimer D , Solon-Biet S , de Cabo R , Simpson SJ , Does diet influence aging? Evidence from animal studies, J Intern Med, n/a (2022).
[98] Solon-Biet SM , Cogger VC , Pulpitel T , Wahl D , Clark X , Bagley E , Simpson SJ , Branched chain amino acids impact health and lifespan indirectly via amino acid balance and appetite control, Nat. Metab 1 (2019) 532–545.31656947
[99] Le Couteur DG , Solon-Biet SM , Cogger VC , Ribeiro R , de Cabo R , Raubenheimer D , Simpson SJ , Branched chain amino acids, aging and age-related health, Ageing Res. Rev 64 (2020) 101198.33132154
[100] Le Couteur DG , Solon-Biet SM , Parker BL , Pulpitel T , Brandon AE , Hunt NJ , Simpson SJ , Nutritional reprogramming of mouse liver proteome is dampened by metformin, resveratrol, and rapamycin, Cell Metab. 33 (2021) 2367–2379.e2364.34767745
[101] Efeyan A , Comb WC , Sabatini DM , Nutrient-sensing mechanisms and pathways, Nature 517 (2015) 302–310.25592535
[102] Hunt NJ , McCourt PAG , Le Couteur DG , Cogger VC , Novel targets for delaying aging: the importance of the liver and advances in drug delivery, Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 135 (2018) 39–49.30248361
[103] Mattson MP , Moehl K , Ghena N , Schmaedick M , Cheng A , Intermittent metabolic switching, neuroplasticity and brain health, Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 19 (2018) 63–80.
[104] Guo J , Bakshi V , Lin A-L , Early shifts of brain metabolism by caloric restriction preserve white matter integrity and long-term memory in aging mice, Front. Aging Neurosci 7 (2015) 213.26617514
[105] Jensen NJ , Wodschow HZ , Nilsson M , Rungby J , Effects of ketone bodies on brain metabolism and function in neurodegenerative diseases, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21 (2020) 8767.33233502
[106] Yang H , Shan W , Zhu F , Wu J , Wang Q , Ketone bodies in neurological diseases: focus on neuroprotection and underlying mechanisms, Front. Neurol 10 (2019).
[107] Trevizol AP , Brietzke E , Grigolon RB , Subramaniapillai M , McIntyre RS , Mansur RB , Peripheral interleukin-6 levels and working memory in non-obese adults: a post-hoc analysis from the CALERIE study, Nutrition 58 (2019) 18–22.30273821
[108] Kim C , Pinto AM , Bordoli C , Buckner LP , Kaplan PC , Del Arenal IM , Thuret S , Energy restriction enhances adult hippocampal neurogenesis-associated memory after four weeks in an adult human population with central obesity; a randomized controlled trial, Nutrients 12 (2020) 638.32121111
[109] Witte AV , Fobker M , Gellner R , Knecht S , Flöel A , Caloric restriction improves memory in elderly humans, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 106 (2009) 1255–1260.19171901
[110] Solfrizzi V , Panza F , Torres F , Mastroianni F , Del Parigi A , Venezia A , Capurso A , High monounsaturated fatty acids intake protects against age-related cognitive decline, Neurology 52 (1999) 1563–1569.10331679
[111] de Sousa IF , Pedroso AP , de Andrade IS , Boldarine VT , Tashima AK , Oyama LM , Ribeiro EB , High-fat but not normal-fat intake of extra virgin olive oil modulates the liver proteome of mice, Eur. J. Nutr. 60 (2021) 1375–1388.32712699
[112] Godos J , Federico A , Dallio M , Scazzina F , Mediterranean diet and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: molecular mechanisms of protection, Int. J. Food Sci. Nutr 68 (2017) 18–27.27484357
[113] Gepner Y , Shelef I , Komy O , Cohen N , Schwarzfuchs D , Bril N , Shai I , The beneficial effects of Mediterranean diet over low-fat diet may be mediated by decreasing hepatic fat content, J. Hepatol. 71 (2019) 379–388.31075323
[114] Mosconi L , Murray J , Tsui WH , Li Y , Davies M , Williams S , de Leon MJ , Mediterranean diet and magnetic resonance imaging-assessed brain atrophy in cognitively normal individuals at risk for Alzheimer’s disease, J. Prev. Alzheimers Dis 1 (2014) 23–32.25237654
[115] Anastasiou CA , Yannakoulia M , Kosmidis MH , Dardiotis E , Hadjigeorgiou GM , Sakka P , Scarmeas N , Mediterranean diet and cognitive health: initial results from the hellenic longitudinal investigation of ageing and diet, PLoS ONE 12 (2017) e0182048.28763509
[116] Martínez-Lapiscina EH , Clavero P , Toledo E , Estruch R , Salas-Salvadó J , San Julián B , Martinez-Gonzalez M , Mediterranean diet improves cognition: the PREDIMED-NAVARRA randomised trial, J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 84 (2013) 1318–1325.23670794
[117] Morris MC , Tangney CC , Wang Y , Sacks FM , Barnes LL , Bennett DA , Aggarwal NT , MIND diet slows cognitive decline with aging, Alzheimers Dement 11 (2015) 1015–1022.26086182
[118] Liu X , Morris MC , Dhana K , Ventrelle J , Johnson K , Bishop L , Barnes LL , Mediterranean-DASH Intervention for Neurodegenerative Delay (MIND) study: rationale, design and baseline characteristics of a randomized control trial of the MIND diet on cognitive decline, Contemp. Clin. Trials 102 (2021) 106270.33434704
[119] Ngandu T , Lehtisalo J , Solomon A , Levälahti E , Ahtiluoto S , Antikainen R , Kivipelto M , A 2 year multidomain intervention of diet, exercise, cognitive training, and vascular risk monitoring versus control to prevent cognitive decline in at-risk elderly people (FINGER): a randomised controlled trial, Lancet 385 (2015) 2255–2263.25771249
[120] Lehtisalo J , Levälahti E , Lindström J , Hänninen T , Paajanen T , Peltonen M , Ngandu T , Dietary changes and cognition over 2 years within a multidomain intervention trial—the finnish geriatric intervention study to prevent cognitive impairment and disability (FINGER), Alzheimers Dement 15 (2019) 410–417.30527596
[121] Stephen R , Solomon A , Ngandu T , Levälahti E , Rinne JO , Kemppainen N , Liu Y , White matter changes on diffusion tensor imaging in the FINGER randomized controlled trial, J. Alzheimers Dis. 78 (2020) 75–86.32925045
[122] Ngandu T , Lehtisalo J , Korkki S , Solomon A , Coley N , Antikainen R , Kivipelto M , The effect of adherence on cognition in a multidomain lifestyle intervention (FINGER), Alzheimers Dement (2021).
[123] Stephen R , Liu Y , Ngandu T , Antikainen R , Hulkkonen J , Koikkalainen J , Solomon A , Brain volumes and cortical thickness on MRI in the Finnish Geriatric Intervention Study to Prevent Cognitive Impairment and Disability (FINGER), Alzheimers Res. Ther 11 (2019) 53.31164160
[124] Wahl D , Solon-Biet SM , Wang QP , Wali JA , Pulpitel T , Clark X , Le Couteur DG , Comparing the effects of low-protein and high-carbohydrate diets and caloric restriction on brain aging in mice, Cell Rep 25 (2018) 2234–2243. e2236.30463018
[125] Le Couteur DG , Solon-Biet S , Cogger VC , Mitchell SJ , Senior A , de Cabo R , Simpson SJ , The impact of low-protein high-carbohydrate diets on aging and lifespan, Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 73 (2016) 1237–1252.26718486
[126] Moro J , Chaumontet C , Even PC , Blais A , Piedcoq J , Gaudichon C , Azzout-Marniche D , Severe protein deficiency induces hepatic expression and systemic level of FGF21 but inhibits its hypothalamic expression in growing rats, Sci. Rep. 11 (2021) 12436.34127689
[127] Solon-Biet SM , Cogger VC , Pulpitel T , Heblinski M , Wahl D , McMahon AC , Simpson SJ , Defining the nutritional and metabolic context of FGF21 using the geometric framework, Cell Metab. 24 (2016) 555–565.27693377
[128] Keinicke H , Sun G , Mentzel CMJ , Fredholm M , John LM , Andersen B , Kjaergaard M , FGF21 regulates hepatic metabolic pathways to improve steatosis and inflammation, Endocr Connect 9 (2020) 755–768.32688339
[129] Taliyan R , Chandran KS , Kakoty V , Therapeutic approaches to alzheimer’s type of dementia: a focus on FGF21 mediated neuroprotection, Curr. Pharm. Des. 25 (2019) 2555–2568.31333086
[130] Capurso C , Whole-grain intake in the mediterranean diet and a low protein to carbohydrates ratio can help to reduce mortality from cardiovascular disease, slow down the progression of aging, and to improve lifespan: a review, Nutrients 13 (2021) 2540.34444699
[131] Le Couteur DG , Solon-Biet S , Wahl D , Cogger VC , Willcox BJ , Willcox DC , Simpson SJ , New horizons: dietary protein, ageing and the Okinawan ratio, Age Ageing 45 (2016) 443–447.27130207
[132] Knight R , Khondoker M , Magill N , Stewart R , Landau S , A systematic review and meta-analysis of the effectiveness of acetylcholinesterase inhibitors and memantine in treating the cognitive symptoms of dementia, Dement. Geriatr. Cogn. Disord. 45 (2018) 131–151.29734182
[133] Huang L-K , Chao S-P , Hu C-J , Clinical trials of new drugs for Alzheimer disease, J. Biomed. Sci. 27 (2020) 1–13.31894001
[134] Gastaldelli A , Miyazaki Y , Mahankali A , Berria R , Pettiti M , Buzzigoli E , DeFronzo RA , The effect of pioglitazone on the liver: role of adiponectin, Diabetes Care 29 (2006) 2275–2281.17003306
[135] Miyazaki Y , Mahankali A , Matsuda M , Mahankali S , Hardies J , Cusi K , DeFronzo RA , Effect of pioglitazone on abdominal fat distribution and insulin sensitivity in type 2 diabetic patients, J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 87 (2002) 2784–2791.12050251
[136] Muñoz-Jiménez M , Zaarkti A , García-Arnés JA , García-Casares N , Antidiabetic drugs in Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment: a systematic review, Dement. Geriatr. Cogn. Disord (2020) 1–12.32784302
[137] Wahl D , Bernier M , Simpson SJ , de Cabo R , Le Couteur DG , Future directions of resveratrol research, Nutr Healthy, Aging 4 (2018) 287–290.29951589
[138] Gester S , Wuest F , Pawelke B , Bergmann R , Pietzsch J , Synthesis and biodistribution of an 18F-labelled resveratrol derivative for small animal positron emission tomography, Amino Acids 29 (2005) 415–428.15997411
[139] Witte AV , Kerti L , Margulies DS , Flöel A , Effects of resveratrol on memory performance, hippocampal functional connectivity, and glucose metabolism in healthy older adults, J. Neurosci. 34 (2014) 7862–7870.24899709
[140] Kennedy DO , Wightman EL , Reay JL , Lietz G , Okello EJ , Wilde A , Haskell CF , Effects of resveratrol on cerebral blood flow variables and cognitive performance in humans: a double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover investigation, Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 91 (2010) 1590–1597.20357044
[141] Trammell SAJ , Schmidt MS , Weidemann BJ , Redpath P , Jaksch F , Dellinger RW , Brenner C , Nicotinamide riboside is uniquely and orally bioavailable in mice and humans, Nat. Commun. 7 (2016) 12948.27721479
[142] Bonkowski MS , Sinclair DA , Slowing ageing by design: the rise of NAD+ and sirtuin-activating compounds, Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 17 (2016) 679–690.27552971
[143] Grozio A , Mills KF , Yoshino J , Bruzzone S , Sociali G , Tokizane K , Imai S-I , Slc12a8 is a nicotinamide mononucleotide transporter, Nat. Metabol 1 (2019) 47–57.
[144] Imai S-I , Guarente L , NAD+ and sirtuins in aging and disease, Trends Cell Biol. 24 (2014) 464–471.24786309
[145] Orr ME , Kotkowski E , Bair-Kelps D , Romo T , Espinoza S , Musi N , Center SACDP , Results from a pilot study: the effects of nicotinamide riboside on mild cognitive impairment: Human/Human trials: Nutraceuticals and nonpharmacological interventions, Alzheimers Dement 16 (2020) e044746.
[146] Van Skike CE , Jahrling JB , Olson AB , Sayre NL , Hussong SA , Ungvari Z , Galvan V , Inhibition of mTOR protects the blood-brain barrier in models of Alzheimer’s disease and vascular cognitive impairment, Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 314 (2018) H693–h703.29351469
[147] Van Skike CE , Lin A-L , Roberts Burbank R , Halloran JJ , Hernandez SF , Cuvillier J , Galvan V , mTOR drives cerebrovascular, synaptic, and cognitive dysfunction in normative aging, Aging Cell 19 (2020) e13057.31693798
[148] Krebs M , Brunmair B , Brehm A , Artwohl M , Szendroedi J , Nowotny P , Roden M , The Mammalian target of rapamycin pathway regulates nutrient-sensitive glucose uptake in man, Diabetes 56 (2007) 1600–1607.17329620
[149] Lin A-L , Zheng W , Halloran JJ , Burbank RR , Hussong SA , Hart MJ , Fonseca RS , Chronic rapamycin restores brain vascular integrity and function through NO synthase activation and improves memory in symptomatic mice modeling Alzheimer’s disease, J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 33 (2013) 1412–1421.23801246
[150] Yamagishi S-I , Matsui T , Role of receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE) in liver disease, Eur. J. Med. Res. 20 (2015) 15.25888859
[151] Burstein AH , Sabbagh M , Andrews R , Valcarce C , Dunn I , Altstiel L , Development of azeliragon, an oral small molecule antagonist of the receptor for advanced glycation endproducts, for the potential slowing of loss of cognition in mild Alzheimer’s disease, J. Prev. Alzheimers Dis 5 (2018) 149–154.29616709
[152] Sabbagh MN , Agro A , Bell J , Aisen PS , Schweizer E , Galasko D , PF-04494700, an oral inhibitor of receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE), in Alzheimer’s disease, Alzheimer Dis. Assoc. Disord 25 (2011) 206.21192237
[153] Burstein AH , Grimes I , Galasko DR , Aisen PS , Sabbagh M , Mjalli AMM , Effect of TTP488 in patients with mild to moderate Alzheimer’s disease, BMC Neurol. 14 (2014) 12.24423155
[154] Valcarce C , Dunn I , Burstein AH , Linking Diabetes and Alzheimer’s Disease through Rage: A Retrospective Analysis of Azeliragon Phase 2 and Phase 3 studies, Alzheimer’s Association International Conference 2019, 2019, pp. P1263.
[155] Petersen MC , Shulman GI , Mechanisms of insulin action and insulin resistance, Physiol. Rev. 98 (2018) 2133–2223.30067154
[156] Vandal M , White PJ , Tremblay C , St-Amour I , Chevrier G , Emond V , Giguere Y , Insulin reverses the high-fat diet–induced increase in brain Aβ and improves memory in an animal model of Alzheimer disease, Diabetes 63 (2014) 4291–4301.25008180
[157] Chen F , Dong RR , Zhong KL , Ghosh A , Tang SS , Long Y , Hong H , Antidiabetic drugs restore abnormal transport of amyloid-β across the blood–brain barrier and memory impairment in db/db mice, Neuropharmacology 101 (2016) 123–136.26211973
[158] Shingo AS , Kanabayashi T , Kito S , Murase T , Intracerebroventricular administration of an insulin analogue recovers STZ-induced cognitive decline in rats, Behav. Brain Res. 241 (2013) 105–111.23238038
[159] Shingo AS , Kanabayashi T , Murase T , Kito S , Cognitive decline in STZ-3V rats is largely due to dysfunctional insulin signalling through the dentate gyrus, Behav. Brain Res. 229 (2012) 378–383.22289199
[160] Ghasemi R , Zarifkar A , Rastegar K , maghsoudi N , Moosavi M , Insulin protects against Aβ-induced spatial memory impairment, hippocampal apoptosis and MAPKs signaling disruption, Neuropharmacology 85 (2014) 113–120.24881967
[161] Craft S , Asthana S , Newcomer JW , Wilkinson CW , Matos IT , Baker LD , Petrova A , Enhancement of memory in Alzheimer disease with insulin and somatostatin, but not glucose, Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 56 (1999) 1135–1140.10591291
[162] Reger MA , Watson GS , Green PS , Wilkinson CW , Baker LD , Cholerton B , Craft S , Intranasal insulin improves cognition and modulates β-amyloid in early AD, Neurology 70 (2008) 440–448.17942819
[163] Reger MA , Watson GS , Frey WH , Baker LD , Cholerton B , Keeling ML , Craft S , Effects of intranasal insulin on cognition in memory-impaired older adults: modulation by APOE genotype, Neurobiol. Aging 27 (2006) 451–458.15964100
[164] Reger MA , Watson GS , Green PS , Baker LD , Cholerton B , Fishel MA , Craft S , Intranasal insulin administration dose-dependently modulates verbal memory and plasma amyloid-β in memory-impaired older adults, J. Alzheimers Dis. 13 (2008) 323–331.18430999
[165] Craft S , Baker LD , Montine TJ , Minoshima S , Watson GS , Claxton A , Plymate SR , Intranasal insulin therapy for Alzheimer disease and amnestic mild cognitive impairment: a pilot clinical trial, Arch. Neurol. 69 (2012) 29–38.21911655
[166] Craft S , Raman R , Chow TW , Rafii MS , Sun CK , Rissman RA , Aisen PS , Safety, efficacy, and feasibility of intranasal insulin for the treatment of mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer disease dementia: a randomized clinical trial, JAMA 77 (2020) 1099–1109.
[167] Kellar D , Lockhart SN , Aisen P , Raman R , Rissman RA , Brewer J , Craft S , Intranasal insulin reduces white matter hyperintensity progression in association with improvements in cognition and CSF biomarker profiles in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease, J. Prev. Alzheimers Dis. 8 (2021) 240–248.34101779
[168] Saha AK , Avilucea PR , Ye J-M , Assifi MM , Kraegen EW , Ruderman NB , Pioglitazone treatment activates AMP-activated protein kinase in rat liver and adipose tissue in vivo, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 314 (2004) 580–585.14733947
[169] Kobayashi M , Iwanishi M , Egawa K , Shigeta Y , Pioglitazone increases insulin sensitivity by activating insulin receptor kinase, Diabetes 41 (1992) 476–483.1318856
[170] Bajaj M , Suraamornkul S , Pratipanawatr T , Hardies LJ , Pratipanawatr W , Glass L , DeFronzo RA , Pioglitazone reduces hepatic fat content and augments splanchnic glucose uptake in patients with type 2 diabetes, Diabetes 52 (2003) 1364–1370.12765945
[171] Agarwal R , Anti-inflammatory effects of short-term pioglitazone therapy in men with advanced diabetic nephropathy, Am. J. Physiol. Renal Physiol 290 (2006) F600–F605.16159895
[172] Sato T , Hanyu H , Hirao K , Kanetaka H , Sakurai H , Iwamoto T , Efficacy of PPAR-γ agonist pioglitazone in mild Alzheimer disease, Neurobiol. Aging 32 (2011) 1626–1633.19923038
[173] Jojo GM , Kuppusamy G , Scope of new formulation approaches in the repurposing of pioglitazone for the management of Alzheimer’s disease, J. Clin. Pharm. Ther. 44 (2019) 337–348.30738020
[174] Hunt NJ , Lockwood GP , Kang SW , Pulpitel T , Clark X , Mao H , Le Couteur FH , The effects of metformin on age-related changes in the liver sinusoidal endothelial cell, Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci 75 (2020) 278–285.
[175] Rena G , Hardie DG , Pearson ER , The mechanisms of action of metformin, Diabetologia 60 (2017) 1577–1585.28776086
[176] Farr SA , Roesler E , Niehoff ML , Roby DA , McKee A , Morley JE , Metformin improves learning and memory in the SAMP8 mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease, J. Alzheimers Dis. 68 (2019) 1699–1710.30958364
[177] Ou Z , Kong X , Sun X , He X , Zhang L , Gong Z , Xuan A , Metformin treatment prevents amyloid plaque deposition and memory impairment in APP/PS1 mice, Brain Behav. Immun 69 (2018) 351–363.29253574
[178] Koenig AM , Mechanic-Hamilton D , Xie SX , Combs MF , Cappola AR , Xie L , Arnold SE , Effects of the insulin sensitizer metformin in Alzheimer disease: pilot data from a randomized placebo-controlled crossover study, Alzheimer Dis. Assoc. Disord. 31 (2017) 107–113.28538088
[179] Luchsinger JA , Perez T , Chang H , Mehta P , Steffener J , Pradabhan G , Bagiella E , Metformin in amnestic mild cognitive impairment: results of a pilot randomized placebo controlled clinical trial, J. Alzheimers Dis. 51 (2016) 501–514.26890736
[180] Madsbad S , Exenatide and liraglutide: different approaches to develop GLP-1 receptor agonists (incretin mimetics)–preclinical and clinical results, Best Pract. Res. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 23 (2009) 463–477.19748064
[181] McClean PL , Hölscher C , Liraglutide can reverse memory impairment, synaptic loss and reduce plaque load in aged APP/PS1 mice, a model of Alzheimer’s disease, Neuropharmacology 76 (2014) 57–67.23973293
[182] Bomfim TR , Forny-Germano L , Sathler LB , Brito-Moreira J , Houzel J-C , Decker H , McClean PL , An anti-diabetes agent protects the mouse brain from defective insulin signaling caused by Alzheimer’s disease–associated Aβ oligomers, J. Clin. Invest. 122 (2012) 1339–1353.22476196
[183] McClean PL , Parthsarathy V , Faivre E , Hölscher C , The diabetes drug liraglutide prevents degenerative processes in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease, J. Neurosci. 31 (2011) 6587–6594.21525299
[184] Gejl M , Gjedde A , Egefjord L , Møller A , Hansen SB , Vang K , Schacht A , In Alzheimer’s disease, 6-month treatment with GLP-1 analog prevents decline of brain glucose metabolism: randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind clinical trial, Front. Aging Neurosci 8 (2016) 108.27252647
[185] Watson KT , Wroolie TE , Tong G , Foland-Ross LC , Frangou S , Singh M , Reiss AL , Neural correlates of liraglutide effects in persons at risk for Alzheimer’s disease, Behav. Brain Res. 356 (2019) 271–278.30099030
[186] Femminella GD , Frangou E , Love SB , Busza G , Holmes C , Ritchie C , Edison P , Evaluating the effects of the novel GLP-1 analogue liraglutide in Alzheimer’s disease: study protocol for a randomised controlled trial (ELAD study), Trials 20 (2019) 191.30944040
[187] Cao B , Rosenblat JD , Brietzke E , Park C , Lee Y , Musial N , McIntyre RS , Comparative efficacy and acceptability of antidiabetic agents for Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment: a systematic review and network meta-analysis, Diabetes Obes. Metab. 20 (2018) 2467–2471.29790638
[188] Weinstein G , Davis-Plourde KL , Conner S , Himali JJ , Beiser AS , Lee A , Moshier E , Association of metformin, sulfonylurea and insulin use with brain structure and function and risk of dementia and Alzheimer’s disease: Pooled analysis from 5 cohorts, PLoS ONE 14 (2019) e0212293.30768625
[189] Russell-Jones D , Pouwer F , Khunti K , Identification of barriers to insulin therapy and approaches to overcoming them, Diabetes Obes. Metab. 20 (2018) 488–496.29053215
[190] Schmid V , Kullmann S , Gfrörer W , Hund V , Hallschmid M , Lipp HP , Heni M , Safety of intranasal human insulin: a review, Diabetes Obes. Metab. 20 (2018) 1563–1577.29508509
[191] Avram S , Mernea M , Limban C , Borcan F , Chifiriuc C , Potential therapeutic approaches to Alzheimer’s disease by bioinformatics, cheminformatics and predicted Adme-Tox tools, Curr. Neuropharmacol 18 (2020) 696–719.31885353
[192] Hunt NJ , Lockwood GP , Le Couteur FH , McCourt PAG , Singla N , Kang SWS , Cogger VC , Rapid intestinal uptake and targeted delivery to the liver endothelium using orally administered silver sulfide quantum dots, ACS Nano 14 (2020) 1492–1507.31976646
[193] Niccoli T , Partridge L , Ageing as a risk factor for disease, Curr. Biol. 22 (2012) R741–752.22975005
[194] Fialová D , Laffon B , Marinković V , Tasić L , Doro P , Sόos G , Teixeira JP , Medication use in older patients and age-blind approach: narrative literature review (insufficient evidence on the efficacy and safety of drugs in older age, frequent use of PIMs and polypharmacy, and underuse of highly beneficial nonpharmacological strategies), Eur. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 75 (2019) 451–466.30610276
[195] Hunt NJ , McCourt PAG , Kuncic Z , Le Couteur DG , Cogger VC , Opportunities and challenges for nanotherapeutics for the aging population, Front. Nanotechnol 4 (2022).
[196] Khan MS , Roberts MS , Challenges and innovations of drug delivery in older age, Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 135 (2018) 3–38.30217519
[197] Hunt NJ , Lockwood GP , Kang SWS , Westwood LJ , Limantoro C , Chrzanowski W , Cogger VC , Quantum dot nanomedicine formulations dramatically improve pharmacological properties and alter uptake pathways of metformin and nicotinamide mononucleotide in aging mice, ACS Nano 15 (2021) 4710–4727.33626869
[198] Kaur R , Kaur M , Singh J , Endothelial dysfunction and platelet hyperactivity in type 2 diabetes mellitus: molecular insights and therapeutic strategies, Cardiovasc. Diabetol 17 (2018) 121.30170601
[199] Umpierrez GE , Pasquel FJ , Management of inpatient hyperglycemia and diabetes in older adults, Diabetes Care 40 (2017) 509–517.28325798
[200] Corsino L , Dhatariya K , Umpierrez G , Management of diabetes and hyperglycemia in hospitalized patients, 2015.
[201] Moloney AM , Griffin RJ , Timmons S , O’Connor R , Ravid R , O’Neill C , Defects in IGF-1 receptor, insulin receptor and IRS-1/2 in Alzheimer’s disease indicate possible resistance to IGF-1 and insulin signalling, Neurobiol. Aging 31 (2010) 224–243.18479783
[202] Frölich L , Blum-Degen D , Bernstein H-G , Engelsberger S , Humrich J , Laufer S , Hoyer S , Brain insulin and insulin receptors in aging and sporadic Alzheimer’s disease, J. Neural Transm 105 (1998) 423–438.9720972
[203] Steen E , Terry BM , Rivera EJ , Cannon JL , Neely TR , Tavares R , de la Monte SM , Impaired insulin and insulin-like growth factor expression and signaling mechanisms in Alzheimer’s disease–is this type 3 diabetes?, J Alzheimers Dis. 7 (2005) 63–80.15750215
[204] Craft S , Peskind E , Schwartz MW , Schellenberg GD , Raskind M , Porte D , Cerebrospinal fluid and plasma insulin levels in Alzheimer’s disease: relationship to severity of dementia and apolipoprotein E genotype, Neurology 50 (1998) 164–168.9443474
[205] Manolopoulos K , Klotz L , Korsten P , Bornstein S , Barthel A , Linking Alzheimer’s disease to insulin resistance: the FoxO response to oxidative stress, Mol. Psychiatry 15 (2010) 1046–1052.20966918
[206] Terzo S , Amato A , Mulè F , From obesity to Alzheimer’s disease through insulin resistance, J. Diabetes Complications 35 (2021) 108026.34454830
[207] Craft S , Zallen G , Baker LD , Glucose and memory in mild senile dementia of the Alzheimer type, J. Clin. Exp. Neuropsychol 14 (1992) 253–267.1572948
[208] Kao Y-C , Ho P-C , Tu Y-K , Jou I-M , Tsai K-J , Lipids and Alzheimer’s disease, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21 (2020) 1505.32098382
[209] Raffaitin C , Gin H , Empana J-P , Helmer C , Berr C , Tzourio C , Barberger-Gateau P , Metabolic syndrome and risk for incident Alzheimer’s disease or vascular dementia: the Three-City Study, Diabetes Care 32 (2009) 169–174.18945929
[210] Dimache AM , Șalaru DL , Sascău R , Stătescu C , The role of high triglycerides level in predicting cognitive impairment: a review of current evidence, Nutrients 13 (2021) 2118.34203094
[211] Bernath MM , Bhattacharyya S , Nho K , Barupal DK , Fiehn O , Baillie R , Trojanowski JQ , Serum triglycerides in Alzheimer disease: relation to neuroimaging and CSF biomarkers, Neurology 94 (2020) e2088–e2098.32358220
[212] Walker KA , Ficek BN , Westbrook R , Understanding the role of systemic inflammation in Alzheimer’s disease, ACS Chem. Neurosci 10 (2019) 3340–3342.31241312
[213] Reeve E , Trenaman SC , Rockwood K , Hilmer SN , Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic alterations in older people with dementia, Expert Opin. Drug Metab. Toxicol. 13 (2017) 651–668.28460576
[214] Byman E , Schultz N , Blom AM , Wennström M , A potential role for α-amylase in amyloid-β-induced astrocytic glycogenolysis and activation, J. Alzheimers Dis. 68 (2019) 205–217.30775997
[215] Bass B , Upson S , Roy K , Montgomery EL , Jalonen TO , Murray IV , Glycogen and amyloid-beta: key players in the shift from neuronal hyperactivity to hypoactivity observed in Alzheimer’s disease?, Neural Regen Res. 10 (2015) 1023.26330810
[216] Stephan B , Wells J , Brayne C , Albanese E , Siervo M , Increased fructose intake as a risk factor for dementia, Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. 65 (2010) 809–814.
[217] Zhen J , Lin T , Huang X , Zhang H , Dong S , Wu Y , Yuan L , Association of ApoE genetic polymorphism and type 2 diabetes with cognition in non-demented aging Chinese adults: a community based cross-sectional study, Aging Dis. 9 (2018) 346.29896424
[218] Dahlman I , Nilsson M , Gu HF , Lecoeur C , Efendic S , Östenson CG , Vaxillaire M , Functional and genetic analysis in type 2 diabetes of liver X receptor alleles–a cohort study, BMC Med. Genet. 10 (2009) 1–13.19133158
[219] Lai KSP , Liu CS , Rau A , Lanctôt KL , Köhler CA , Pakosh M , Herrmann N , Peripheral inflammatory markers in Alzheimer’s disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis of 175 studies, J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 88 (2017) 876–882.28794151
[220] Munawara U , Catanzaro M , Xu W , Tan C , Hirokawa K , Bosco N , Fulop T , Hyperactivation of monocytes and macrophages in MCI patients contributes to the progression of Alzheimer’s disease, Immun Ageing 18 (2021) 29.34154615
