LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


7808616
7840
Trends Neurosci
Trends Neurosci
Trends in neurosciences
0166-2236
1878-108X

37633753
10530301
10.1016/j.tins.2023.07.009
NIHMS1922690
Article
Inflammasome assembly in neurodegenerative diseases
Singh Jagjit 1#
Habean Maria L. 12#
Panicker Nikhil Ph.D. 1345*
1 Department of Neurosciences, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA
2 Biomedical Scientist Training Program, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH
3 Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine of Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio 44106, USA
4 Kent State University, Neurosciences, School of Biomedical Sciences, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
5 Lead Contact
# These authors contributed equally.

* Correspondence: Nikhil Panicker, Ph.D. (PANICKN@ccf.org)
5 8 2023
10 2023
24 8 2023
01 10 2024
46 10 814831
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Neurodegenerative disorders are characterized by the progressive dysfunction and death of selectively vulnerable neuronal populations, often associated with the accumulation of aggregated host proteins. Sustained brain inflammation and hyperactivation of inflammasome complexes have been increasingly demonstrated to contribute to neurodegenerative disease progression. Here, we review molecular mechanisms leading to inflammasome assembly in neurodegeneration. We focus primarily on four degenerative brain disorders in which inflammasome hyperactivation has been relatively well documented: Alzheimer’s disease (AD), Parkinson’s disease (PD), multiple sclerosis (MS), and the spectrum of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal dementia (FTD). We discuss shared and divergent principles of inflammasome assembly across these disorders, and underscore the differences between neurodegeneration-associated inflammasome activation pathways and their peripheral-immune counterparts. We examine how aberrant assembly of inflammasome complexes may amplify pathology in neurodegeneration, including misfolded protein aggregation, and highlight prospects for neurotherapeutic interventions based on targeting inflammasome pathways.

Alzheimer’s disease
Parkinson’s disease
Frontotemporal dementia
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
Multiple Sclerosis
NLRP3
NLRP1
AIM2
NLRC4

pmcINFLAMMASOME ASSEMBLY AND DYSFUNCTION

The innate immune system has evolved to recognize and eliminate prospective foreign infectious agents, as well as host-derived inflammogens (such as dead cells or debris). This is accomplished by identifying conserved Pathogen- or Damage-Associated Molecular Patterns (PAMPs or DAMPs respectively). Innate immune pattern-recognition receptors (PRRs) can be membrane bound, allowing cells to surveil the extracellular space for prospective PAMPs/DAMPs. Alternatively, these receptors can reside intracellularly. These include the Nucleotide binding domain and Leucine-rich repeat containing proteins (NLRs) and Absent In Melanoma-2 (AIM2), which serve as receptors for inflammasome complexes. Inflammasomes are multimeric, PAMP/DAMP sensing, intracellular signaling platforms that constitute an arm of the innate immune system.

PAMP/DAMP-triggered innate immune activation is associated with both advantageous effects (clearing of infectious agents/debris) and detrimental (immunopathological) ones. Many of the initial studies that identified inflammasome genes/proteins underscored their propensity to mediate adverse effects in human disease. NLRP3/NALP3 gene mutations, for instance, were discovered in patients with the familial autoimmune disorder Muckle-Wells syndrome [1,2]. Subsequent reports discovered that NLRP3 protein expression was inflammogen-inducible, and that the protein (as well as NLRP1) could form a complex with the protein ASC (Apoptosis-associated Speck-like protein containing a Caspase recruitment domain) and the zymogen Caspase-1 (Casp1) to mediate the secretion of the cytokine Interleukin-1 beta [3–5]. This Interleukin-1 beta (IL-1β) processing complex of proteins (comprising of NLRP3/NLRP1, ASC and Casp1) was coined an inflammasome complex [3,6]. Ensuing studies identified alternate signaling/sensing mechanisms that lead to Casp1 activation (and consequently, to Casp1mediated IL-1β and IL-18 processing)- NLRC4 was found to marshal responses to microbial infection [7,8]. AIM2 was identified as a sensor of cytosolic DNA species [9–11]. Thus, canonical inflammasomes can be defined as cytosolic signaling platforms comprising a receptor/sensor (NLRP3, AIM2, NLRC4, or NLRP1, the adaptor protein ASC (which is dispensable for NLRP1 and NLRC4 inflammasome assembly), and the effector protease Casp1. Caspase-11 (Casp11) serves as the effector protease in non-canonical inflammasomes. Currently, limited evidence implicates the activation of non-canonical inflammasomes in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disorders, and accordingly, we will limit the current article and exclude discussions of Casp11-initiated signaling. The major inflammasome components and assembled inflammasomes are depicted in Figure-1.

Despite the diverse means and disparate stimuli that lead to inflammasome activation, the assembly of each inflammasome complex results in autoproteolytic Casp1 activation/cleavage and consequent IL-1β and IL-18 secretion. Caspase-1 also cleaves gasdermin D, releasing its N-terminal domain, which leads to the formation of pores in the plasma membrane and induces a form of inflammatory cell death termed pyroptosis [12–15].

Unlike the other inflammasome receptors, NLRP3 is not constitutively expressed, requiring nuclear factor kappa-B (NF-κB)-mediated transcriptional induction to attain functional expression [4]. Since NLRP3 is required for ASC (and subsequent Casp1) recruitment to the inflammasome complex, NLRP3 inflammasome assembly has a built-in ‘failsafe’ mechanism, requiring two independent steps; priming (NLRP3 induction) and activation (which entails the assembly of a functional inflammasome complex following a second hit or signal). This two-step activation mechanism is hypothesized to have evolved as a means to avoid unintended NLRP3 complex assembly.

Inflammasomes have classically been described as IL-1β converting/processing complexes that mediate acute responses to pathogenic infection or local tissue damage. Inflammasome activation, however, has been increasingly implicated in the context of neurodegeneration as well. This article aims to highlight recent advances demonstrating inflammasome activation pathways in diverse neurodegenerative disorders, and the contribution of inflammasomes to chronic progression of pathology in these conditions. Inflammasome activation mechanisms in the central nervous system (CNS) are distinct from those characterized in peripheral immune cells. Since the inflammasome-associated cytokine IL-1β acts as a master regulator of distinct physiological functions [16], inflammasome activation has been inextricably linked to IL-1β-initiated signaling. One of the objectives of this review article is to underscore how inflammasomes effectuate diverse, IL-1β-dependent and independent responses that shape pathology in degenerative brain disorders. We will limit our discussion to a number of major neurodegenerative disorders where inflammasome hyperactivation has been relatively well documented, specifically Alzheimer’s disease (AD), Parkinson’s disease (PD), multiple sclerosis (MS), and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) / frontotemporal dementia (FTD).

LINKING INFLAMMASOMES AND NEURODEGENERATION:

Neurodegenerative diseases such as AD, PD, ALS and FTD are devastating, as-yet incurable disorders typified by the disruption of neuronal function, synaptic/circuit impairment, and/or progressive loss of selectively vulnerable neuronal populations. Neuron dysfunction/death is often associated with the accumulation of misfolded proteins within affected brain regions [17]. Mounting evidence indicates that neuroimmune dysfunction contributes to the progression of pathologies in neurodegenerative disorders [18,19]. Evidence for this notion stems from multiple venues including post-mortem analyses of patient brain tissue [20,21], elevated brain cytokine and chemokine levels [22,23], mouse models of disease [24–27], and genome-wide association and whole-genome sequencing studies [28,29].

In early post-mortem studies of brains from PD and AD patients, elevated IL-1β levels and Casp1 activity were reported well before their putative association with inflammasome complexes [30–32]. Most major brain cell types express cognate IL-1β- and IL-18- receptors, rendering them responsive to IL-1β- and IL-18- initiated signal transduction. IL-1β in particular exerts context-dependent pleiotropic effects in the CNS, contributing to diverse processes such as neuronal differentiation, synapse strengthening and long-term potentiation [33,34]. In excessive amounts, IL-1β can mediate adverse effects, including deleterious effects on long-term potentiation [35]. A major advance was reported in 2008, when fibrillar Amyloid-beta (Aβ) was shown to act as an AD-specific DAMP, eliciting microglial NLRP3 inflammasome assembly [36]. From a wider perspective, these findings illustrated how a misfolded protein that could moonlight as a sterile inflammasome-activating agent, setting the stage for investigating the broader roles inflammasomes play in neurodegenerative diseases. Since inflammasomes were initially discovered in peripheral immune cells, their assembly in the context of the CNS was hypothesized to be restricted to the myeloid compartment (microglia and infiltrating monocytes/macrophages). Recent literature however suggests otherwise, and has demonstrated that neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes are capable of mounting inflammasome responses, as discussed in more detail in later sections (see also Figure 2).

INFLAMMASOME ACTIVATION PATHWAYS IN NEURODEGENERATIVE DISEASES

Inflammasome activation pathways in Alzheimer’s disease:

AD is a neurodegenerative disease characterized behaviorally by progressive memory decline and cognitive dysfunction. AD constitutes the most common cause of dementia, and is a leading cause of death, as ascertained by cohort aging studies [37]. The major neuropathological hallmarks of AD include extracellular senile plaques, predominantly comprising of Aβ, and intracellular neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) rich in hyperphosphorylated tau . Plaques and NFTs are predominantly localized to the entorhinal cortex, hippocampus, and neocortex brain regions. Early studies on postmortem brain tissue provided considerable immunohistochemical evidence for microglial presence around senile plaques in AD (e.g. [21,38]). Later on, genome-wide association studies (GWAS) and whole-genome sequencing studies identified genetic loci that confer increased AD risk, and many of these were linked to microglial and/or neuroinflammatory mechanisms [28,29,39], further implicating neuroinflammation as a central player in AD pathogenesis.

Building upon the discovery that misfolded/fibrillar Aβ could serve as an NLRP3-activating DAMP in cultured microglia [36], hyperactivation of the NLRP3 complex was demonstrated in postmortem AD hippocampus and cortical tissues, as well as in cortex/hippocampus tissues from APP1/PS1 mice, which express chimeric mouse/human amyloid precursor protein (APP) and a mutant human presenilin (PS) 1, leading to cortical and hippocampal Aβ deposition [40]. NLRP3 and Casp1-deficient mice were significantly neuroprotected under APP/PS1 settings, exhibiting attenuated plaque volume/size, as well as largely preserved spatial memory [40]. Studies using the NLRP3 inflammasome specific inhibitor MCC-950 or the Casp1 inhibitor VX-765 provided further support to the notion of a protective role for NLRP3 and Casp1 inhibition in the context of AD-related pathology [41,42]. Subsequently, soluble Aβ oligomers and protofibrils were demonstrated to mediate concomitant NLRP3 inflammasome priming and activation in microglia [43]. Apart from implicating inflammasome assembly in AD pathogenesis, these results suggest that misfolded/oligomerized proteins can circumvent the classical two-step activation requirement that characterizes NLRP3 inflammasome assembly, facilitating unencumbered inflammasome activation in neurodegenerative diseases. The ability of neurodegeneration-associated misfolded proteins to serve as concomitant NLRP3 priming as well as activating agents is perhaps what emplaces the degenerating brain as an ideal site for inflammasome assembly.

The molecular signaling pathways that facilitate NLRP3 inflammasome assembly in microglia during AD progression remain relatively undercharacterized. Recent studies, however, indicate that in the 5X Familial Alzheimer’s Disease (5XFAD) mouse model, Casp8 can serve as an unconventional contributor to Aβ-mediated microglial NF-κB responses and to NLRP3 inflammasome priming [44].

Autophagy entails the lysosome-mediated elimination of subcellular elements, including proteins and organelles [45]. Disruption of microglial autophagic pathways were found to potentiate NLRP3 complex assembly via Aβ accumulation [46]. Compromised autophagic flux can result in increased inflammasome sensor accumulation [47]. It was demonstrated that Beclin-mediated autophagy in microglia can target NLRP3 oligomers for autophagic clearance [48]. Autophagy proteins are also required for recycling of Aβ receptors [49], and disrupting this process in mice can lead to inflammasome-dependent accrual of Aβ and tau pathology [50]. Hence, autophagy proteins can disrupt inflammasome activation in the CNS via canonical and non-canonical mechanisms. More recently, engagement of the microglial Programmed Cell Death-1 (PD-1) receptor with its ligand PD-L1 on astrocytes was shown to inhibit NLRP3 responses in microglia [51], suggesting that PD-1-initiated astrocyte-microglia cross-talk might regulate inflammasome responses in AD.

Phosphorylation of NLRP3 within its pyrin domain has previously been demonstrated to inhibit NLRP3 function via facilitating electrostatic repulsion between NLRP3 molecules [52]. Although several serine kinases have been identified in peripheral cells that phosphorylate and inactivate NLRP3, their roles in the context of neurodegenerative disease remains to be studied. Among the GWAS-identified AD risk loci/genes, triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2 (TREM2) was identified as a microglial receptor for Aβ [53]. Human-induced pluripotent stem cell-derived microglia generated from carriers of AD-associated TREM2 variants exhibited diminished NLRP3 complex activation and IL-1β secretion [54]. The role of TREM2 in amplifying or ameliorating AD neuropathology remains contentious [55–58]. It remains to be investigated whether AD-associated TREM2 can modulate pathology via NLRP3 complex-dependent mechanisms.

Oligodendrocytes are broadly recognized as the myelinating cells in the CNS. White matter loss, resulting from oligodendrocyte dysfunction or cell-death, is known to be an early pathological feature of AD [59]. In mice, overactivation of the mitochondrial fission guanosine triphosphatase dynamin-related protein 1 (Drp1) induces glycolytic defects in oligodendrocytes, triggering NLRP3 inflammasome assembly and consequent pyroptotic oligodendrocyte death [60]. These results suggest that NLRP3 inflammasome assembly across CNS cell types during the neurodegenerative process in AD may effectuate distinct, cell-type specific fates, which in turn contribute to pathology through diverse mechanisms.

It has been hypothesized that increased systemic inflammation in AD may correlate with, or even participate in the disease process. Congruent with this notion, studies utilizing AD patient- (and age-matched control)-derived monocytes revealed heightened inflammasome activation profiles [61]. A pertaining question is whether changes in inflammasome activation can be leveraged to design AD biomarkers that may foretell disease onset in a non-invasive manner. Idenfying and characterizing such potential biomarkers is at the center of major current research efforts.

Increased systemic inflammation was found to impair microglial Aβ clearance via NLRP3dependent mechanisms in mice [62]. These findings raise the question of whether modulating inflammasome assembly at the systemic level could influence Aβ pathology within the CNS.

Tau aggregates were found to activate the microglial NLRP3 inflammasome, resulting in an NLRP3dependent amplification of tau pathology in mice [63,64]. Deletion of the NF-κB pathway adaptor protein MYD88 within myeloid cells attenuated both NLRP3 inflammasome assembly, as well as tau pathology in human tau-expressing mice [64]. The signaling mechanisms that govern aggregated tau-mediated inflammasome activation pathways are still relatively under-characterized. To summarize, there is considerable evidence of canonical NLRP3 inflammasome assembly downstream of AD-associated protein aggregates within myeloid cells in the CNS. Emerging evidence has established inflammasome activation pathways in other glial cells of the CNS such as oligodendrocytes that may also partake in the accrual of AD pathobiology.

Cell-autonomous inflammasome assembly pathways in AD:

Most of the studies discussed thus far have explored inflammasome assembly within the myeloid compartment of the CNS. However, emerging evidence indicates that cell-autonomous inflammasome can contribute to AD progression as well. In the APP/PS1 mouse model, Aβ elicited NLRP1-dependent neuronal pyroptosis, and knockdown of NLRP1 rescued neuron death [65].

In another study, primary human cortical neurons were shown to be capable of mounting NLRP1 responses, leading to Casp1- and Casp6-mediated neuronal dysfunction [66]. These results indicate that evolutionarily conserved/remnant, cell-autonomous inflammasome complexes within neurons could serve unexpected roles in AD-associated neuron dysfunction and death. Many of the associated possibilies remain to be tested. For instance, while it is conceivable that tau aggregates could effectuate neuronal NLRP1 assembly similar to Aβ, this has not yet been demonstrated, to our knowledge. Cell-autonomous AIM2 inflammasome assembly was found to orchestrate neuron dieback, resulting in the purging of genetically compromised neurons during neurodevelopment in mice [67]. In the context of neurodegeneration, genetic ablation of AIM2 blunted Aβ pathology in 5X FAD mice [68]. It is conceivable that AIM2-mediated signaling, required for proper ablation of neurons destined for removal during development, may go awry and partake in the neurodegenerative process in AD. Additionally, these findings lead us to ponder whether multiple inflammasome activation pathways cooperate in the progression of AD pathobiology, and whether, alternatively or complementarily, DNA damage could facilitate neuronal as well as glial AIM2 inflammasome assembly in AD.

Inflammasome activation pathways in Parkinson’s Disease

PD is among the fastest-growing major neurodegenerative diseases [69,70] and is characterized by selective degeneration and death of dopaminergic midbrain neurons, particularly in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc). Progressive loss of SNpc dopaminergic neurons results in the depletion of dopamine in the striatum (where the SNpc neurons project to). Intraneuronal inclusions called Lewy bodies, comprising primarily of aggregated alpha-synuclein (αSyn) constitute the major histopathological hallmark of PD. PD-associated neurodegeneration is intimately associated with αSyn; disease severity correlates with the extent of αSyn pathology [71,72]. Mounting evidence from PD-associated genes and risk factors, analyses of post-mortem PD brains as well as biomarker studies from PD-patient blood and/or cerebrospinal fluid suggest that excessive brain inflammation and immune dysfunction can participate in disease progression [73]. αSyn aggregates can mediate pro-inflammatory signaling in cultured microglia as well as in in-vivo models [74].

Analogous to the actions of fibrillar Aβ on microglia in AD, aggregated αSyn was shown to elicit NLRP3 activation in cultured microglia, leading to inflammasome-initiated neurodegenerative responses in sporadic and transgenic αSyn animal models. Aggregated αSyn was the first protein within the CNS shown to effectuate simultaneous NLRP3 inflammasome priming and activation [75,76]. This was supported with in vivo evidence of NLRP3 inflammasome hyperactivation within the nigrostriatal tract in mice [75,76]. As aforementioned, PD is characterized by reduction of dopamine within the nigrostriatal tract. Endogenous dopamine has been demonstrated to inhibit NLRP3 complex assembly via signaling through dopamine receptors D1 and D2 (DRD1 and DRD2) [77,78].

Another potential link between PD and inflammasome activation relates to mitochondrial function. PD pathology has long been associated with attenuated mitochondrial function [79]. Defective electron transport chain function in dysfunctional mitochondria results in the production of mitochondria-derived reactive oxygen species (mitoROS), which play a central role in eliciting NLRP3 inflammasome assembly [80]. Impairment of mitochondrial function licenses microglial NLRP3 inflammasome assembly, resulting in subsequent neurotoxic responses [81]. Thus, the triad of NLRP3-activating αSyn aggregates, dysfunctional mitochondria, and local loss of dopamine in the striatum could provide the ideal microenvironment to facilitate NLRP3 inflammasome assembly.

As with AD, little is known about the signaling mechanisms that lead to NLRP3 complex activation in PD. αSyn oligomers and aggregates can act on several receptors, such as Toll-like receptor (TLR)1/2, CD36, CD11b and receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE) to mediate pro-inflammatory responses [82–85]. Several of these receptors, including TLR2 and CD36, have been shown to participate in αSyn uptake into microglia [76,82,83]. More recent evidence suggests that alternate conformational αSyn assemblies can serve as ligands for distinct PRRs, potentially diversifying inflammasome response pathways in PD [86]. Activation of the non-receptor Src family kinase Fyn downstream of CD36 leads to NLRP3 inflammasome priming and activation [76]. More recent work suggests that activation of the stimulator of interferon genes (STING) pathway facilitates NLRP3 inflammasome assembly, and NLRP3-dependent neurotoxic responses leading to αSyn aggregation [87]. Since the STING pathway was demonstrated to be hyperactivated in the αSyn pre-formed fibril (PFF) model that entails the prionic propagation of αSyn pathology [88], it is conceivable that STING/NLRP3 crosstalk facilitates αSyn aggregation in PD. Recent work has linked Serum and Glucocorticoid-regulated-Kinase 1 (SGK1) signaling in mediating STING/NLRP3 activation pathways in PD models [89]. Following the identification of NLRP3 as a polyubiquitination substrate of the E-3 ligase parkin [90], it was demonstrated that microglial parkin could ubiquitinate NLRP3, targeting it for proteasomal clearance and abrogating neuroinflammatory responses [91]. Much of the work done exploring inflammasome biology in synucleinopathies explores the mechanisms and ramifications of NLRP3 complex assembly within microglia/myeloid cells. However, as discussed in the following section, a more recent body of literature implicates unconventional inflammasome activation pathways, as well as cell-autonomous (neuronspecific) inflammasome assembly in PD pathogenesis.

Cell-autonomous and non-canonical inflammasome activation pathways in PD

Canonical inflammasome assembly pathways were mapped out in peripheral immune cells in response to pathogenic infection or chemical-induced acute stress. These responses necessitate expeditiousness to mitigate the spread of infection or to remove stressed cells. It is therefore conceivable that the cellular mechanisms that lead to inflammasome activation or inhibition in degenerative brain disorders (which entail the gradual accumulation and spread of pathogenic aggregates of proteins over decades) may bear little resemblance to their peripheral immune counterparts. For instance, unlike inflammasome assembly in peripheral immune cells, microglial NLRP3 complex assembly in PD animal models does not seem to lead to detectable pyroptotic cell death, despite Casp1 activation [75]. Additionally, AIM2 was found to exacerbate PD neuroinflammation beyond its canonical inflammasome function by amplifying the STING pathway [92]. These data indicate that CNS-specific inflammasome activation pathways differ from the canonical/conventional inflammasome activation mechanisms.

Inflammasomes have been implicated in cell-autonomous neuropathological pathways in PD. Human αSyn was revealed to be a Casp1 cleavage substrate in neurons: Casp1-cleaved, C-terminal truncated αSyn was more prone to aggregation [93]. Cultured neurons were capable of mounting NLRP3 responses to classical NLRP3 activating agents in vitro and in PD models [94]. Subsequent histologic studies revealed elevated NLRP3 in SNpc neurons of PD patients as compared to control subjects [95]. It was demonstrated that loss of the E3 ligase parkin within dopaminergic neurons could result in spontaneous, cell-autonomous NLRP3 inflammasome assembly [90]. NLRP3 was also demonstrated in this study to be a parkin polyubiquitination substrate that accumulated in the absence of parkin, leading to NLRP3 complex priming. The accumulation of ZNF746 (PARIS), a second parkin substrate within dopaminergic neurons led to compromised mitochondrial biogenesis and mitoROS release, resulting in spontaneous NLRP3 inflammasome assembly in parkin-deficient neurons [90]. Thus, although myeloid-cell associated inflammasome assembly is well-characterized in PD, unconventional and/or cell-autonomous inflammasome activation can potentiate neuropathology and neurodegeneration in PD. It remains to be seen whether and how cell-autonomous and non-cell autonomous inflammasome activation pathways cooperate in this process.

Inflammasome activation in MS

MS is a neuroimmune disease characterized by autoreactive immune cell responses that instigate progressive demyelination and axon degeneration, leading to sustained motor dysfunction and consequent neurologic disability [96–98]. MS can be modeled in mice by inducing Experimental Autoimmune Encephalomyelitis (EAE), accomplished by immunization with myelin peptides (resulting in T-cell mediated autoimmune responses), or by using the cuprizone model, which directly mediates demyelination [99,100].

Well before the discovery of inflammasome complexes, Casp1 was found to be transcriptionally induced during the EAE course, and Casp1-deficient mice were shown to be protected from EAE-associated demyelination [101]. These results were recapitulated using NLRP3-deficient mice, suggesting that NLRP3-inflammasome responses could contribute to EAE pathology [102]. Studies utilizing the cuprizone model demonstrated that NLRP3- and IL-18-deficient, but not IL-1β-deficient mice displayed attenuated demyelination and oligodendrocyte loss, suggesting that non-canonical NLRP3 complex-instigated pathways may contribute to neurodegeneration in MS models [103]. As with AD and PD, the molecular mechanisms that lead to MS-specific inflammasome assembly are still in the process of being characterized. The NF-κB regulatory protein A20 was demonstrated to serve immunoregulatory roles in NLRP3 complex assembly and consequent deficits in EAE [104]. Elevated phospholipase A2 activity under MS conditions generate the DAMP lysolecithin from low-density lipoprotein [105]. Lysolecithin induction was demonstrated to mediate dual NLRP3/NLRC4 complex assembly, leading to neuroinflammatory responses in the cuprizone model [106]. Further studies will be needed to ascertain whether lysolecithin is the major inflammasome-activating DAMP in MS, or whether immune cell infiltration downstream of demyelination or T-cell cytokine/chemokine secretion also partakes in this process.

Non-canonical inflammasome activation pathways in MS

MS is characterized by increased myeloid cell infiltration into the brain during disease progression. Increased TLR engagement by unknown MS-associated inflammogens were shown to elicit NLRP3 responses in microglia via formation of an IRAKM-Casp8-ASC complex, driving IL-1β release, and consequent T-cell expansion in the EAE MS model [107]. Post-mortem MS brains exhibited increased Casp8 activation within microglia, suggesting that this non-canonical NLRP3 complex activating pathway could drive pathology in MS [107]. These results are reminiscent of recent work that implicates Casp8 as a non-canonical contributor to AD-associated NLRP3 inflammasome priming [44], underscoring conserved CNS-specific inflammasome activation mechanisms in diverse neurodegenerative disorders.

Inflammasome activation in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and Frontotemporal Dementia

ALS is a neurodegenerative disease characterized by progressive degeneration of motor neurons in the spinal cord, brain stem and the motor cortex [108]. Mutations in the Superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) gene are common in familial ALS cases [109]. Early studies pre-dating the discovery of inflammasome complexes showed that in Casp1 deficient mice, ALS-like progression is mitigated [110]. As with other degenerative brain disorders that entail progressive protein misfolding, mutant SOD1 was shown to form aggregates [111] that can act as an NLRP3-independent inflammogen-activating DAMP [112]. However, contradictory findings indicated that mutant SOD1 results in canonical NLRP3 inflammasome activation in cultured microglia [113]. These findings raise the intriguing possibility that varying conformations of aggregation-prone, neurodegenerative disease-associated proteins could be sensed by alternate inflammasome receptors, diversifying inflammasome pathway responses over disease course. Progressive aggregation of the protein Transactive response DNA-binding protein-43 (TDP43) is also implicated in ALS pathogenesis [114]. TDP43 aggregates were found to elicit NLRP3 complex assembly in cultured microglia, and in co-cultures of microglia with motoneurons, microglial responses to TDP43, rather than TDP43 action on neurons mediated motor neuron death [115].

FTD encompasses a group of disorders that result in degeneration and neuronal death in the frontal lobes, anterior temporal lobes, anterior cingulate cortex, and insular cortex [116]. Clinical observations of ALS and FTD, neuropathological evidence, as well as genetic and cell biological analyses indicate that ALS and FTD lie within a neurodegenerative continuum [117]. Expanded hexanucleotide repeats within the C9ORF72 gene, resulting in the generation of dipeptide repeat protein (DRPs) were found to underlie ALS/FTD-associated neuropathology [118,119]. ALS/FTD-associated DRPs could mediate NLRP3 inflammasome assembly in microglia [120,121]. To summarize, much of the work demonstrating inflammasome activation in ALS/FTD explores neuron-released protein aggregates, that act as NLRP3-activating DAMPs upon microglial uptake.

The major signaling mechanisms that function to activate or inhibit inflammasome assembly in neurodegenerative diseases are detailed in Figure 3. Although each neurodegenerative disease has distinctive features that lead to selective neuronal vulnerability, a few molecular signaling motifs have emerged that appear to be conserved across diverse neurologic diseases. In particular, misfolded proteins such as αSyn, Aβ and tau serve as sterile DAMPs, eliciting mitochondrial dysfunction and subsequent inflammasome assembly. Though these responses result in robust IL-1β secretion, microglial cell death/pyroptosis seems to be minimally induced [64,75,76].

Crosstalk of inflammasome activation and other cell death pathways

A growing body of literature suggests that inflammasome activation pathways may have overlapping molecular signaling modalities with alternate cell death pathways. It was demonstrated that the apoptotic effectors BAX and BAK could activate Casp3 and Casp7-mediated NLRP3 responses in macrophages [122]. Necroptosis is a regulated necrotic cell death mechanism that can be activated under conditions where apoptosis does not occur [123]. It ensues following formation of a signaling complex comprising of the receptor interacting protein kinase-1 (RIPK1), receptor interacting protein kinase-3 (RIPK3), and mixed lineage kinase domain-like protein (MLKL) [124]. Necroptosis and inflammasome activation pathways bear signaling commonalities; RIPK1, RIPK3, and MLKL could contribute to NLRP3 inflammasome activation in a wide variety of immune cell types [125–127]. Since necroptosis has been demonstrated to contribute to neurodegeneration in AD, ALS and other degenerative brain disorders [128–131], it is conceivable that neurodegeneration associated DAMPs could elicit signaling mechanisms that entail molecular cross-talk between inflammasome/necroptosis/apoptosis pathways.

CONSEQUENCES OF INFLAMMASOME ACTIVATION IN NEURODEGENERATIVE DISEASES

Inflammasome-associated cytokines in AD, PD, MS, ALS, and FTD.

There is conflicting evidence regarding IL-1β- and IL-18-initiated signaling in AD pathogenesis. In rats, in-vivo administration of IL-1β into the cerebral hemispheres elicited increased APP expression which could potentiate misfolded Aβ accumulation [132]. IL-1 receptor antagonist deficient mice displayed amplified pathology in an acute model of AD involving intracerebroventricular infusion of human oligomeric Aβ1–42 [133]. While these studies indicate IL-1β participation in AD pathogenesis, studies utilizing transgenic AD models have revealed inconclusive and/or neuroprotective roles of IL-1β and IL-18. IL-1 receptor deletion had no effect on Aβ plaque load in Tg2567 mice, which express an AD APP variant and exhibit age-dependent memory impairment and plaque load [134]. Sustained IL-1β expression in the hippocampus blunted Aβ pathology, but increased tau phosphorylation in the APP/PS1 model [135,136]. IL-18 deficient mice developed spontaneous lethal seizures when crossed with the APP/PS1 mouse model, suggesting that IL-18 signaling could be protective in preventing seizures in AD [137]. Taken together, these data suggest that the inflammasome-associated cytokines IL-1β and IL-18 exhibit context-dependent roles that could dampen or amplify AD pathology.

There is a significant body of work suggesting that IL-1β signaling can partake in PD neurodegeneration. AAV-delivered IL-1β amplified neuroinflammation and SNpc dopamine neuron death in an acute PD rat model [138]. IL-1 Receptor (IL-1R1) antagonist knockout mice (that exhibit hyperactivated IL-1 signaling) spontaneously develop nigrostriatal neurodegeneration and impaired motor function [139]. Studies utilizing microglia-neuron co-culture systems suggest that (microglia-derived) IL-1β directly facilitates αSyn induction and tau phosphorylation levels, although this remains to be recapitulated in mouse AD/PD models [140]. Though neurons express IL-1R1, rendering them responsive to IL-1 signaling, it is currently unclear whether IL-1β directly or indirectly facilitates progressive protein aggregation, the best characterized hallmarks of AD/PD/ALS/FTD.

Many of the aforementioned studies describe innate-immune consequences of inflammasome hyperactivation in neurodegenerative diseases. MS, by contrast, is primarily driven by adaptive-autoimmune responses. As described earlier, NLRP3, Casp1, and ASC deficient mice display attenuated neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration in EAE/Cuprizone models. NLRP3-inflammasome driven IL-1β and IL-18 were shown to regulate T-cell chemotaxis and contribute to T-helper cell infiltration into the CNS in the EAE mouse model [141]. Gasdermin-D-driven cytokine secretion was shown to contribute to T-cell differentiation and infiltration in the EAE MS model [142], although it is unclear whether gasdermin-D activity actually mediates microglial pyroptotic cell death and consequent cytokine secretion, or whether gasdermin-D partakes in pyroptosis-independent cytokine secretion, which seems to be a conserved hallmark of neurodegenerative disease-associated inflammasome assembly. Casp1 deficiency, as well as IL–1 receptor antagonist Anakinra ameliorated pathology in SOD1 transgenic mice [110]. Anakinra did not mediate a significant reduction in disease progression in ALS patients [112,143], which might reflect differences in drug dosage used in the studies, or that ALS neuropathology can accrue via IL-1β independent mechanisms. More recent results suggest that inflammasome-released IL-1β promotes ADAM10-mediated cleavage of the uptake receptor TREM2, preventing FTD/ALS-associated DRP clearance [121]. To conclude, while inflammasome-released IL-1β exerts pleitropic effects on CNS function, minimal evidence currently links IL-1β to progressive protein aggregation, the major characterized pathological hallmarks of degenerative brain disorders. However, as mentioned earlier, neurons express IL-1R1, and pathological IL-1β levels can impair long-term potentiation, memory consolidation and alter synaptic structure, as well as directly mediate neuronal cell death [144]. Taken together, these results suggest that IL-1β-mediated neuron death or dysfunction could be uncoupled from progressive protein aggregation.

Inflammasome responses facilitate Aβ, αSyn, and tau aggregation, leading to selective vulnerability of neuronal populations in neurodegenerative disease.

Though IL-1β processing and secretion was thought to be the major ostensible consequence of inflammasome assembly, it was discovered that multiple components of the inflammasome complex, particularly the adaptor protein ASC, could be released by inflammasome-activated cells. In peripheral immune cells, secreted ASC can be endocytosed/uptaken and seed inflammasome assembly in efferent cells, prionically propagating inflammasome activation [145,146]. Since the spatiotemporal profile of inflammasome activation bears correlation with Aβ aggregation within the cortex and hippocampus in the APP/PS1 AD mouse model [40], it was investigated whether ASC secretion from inflammasome-activated microglia could contribute to progressive Aβ aggregation. Microglia-released ASC specks were demonstrated to cross-seed and hasten extracellular Aβ aggregation [147]. ASC-deficient mice exhibited blunted hippocampal and cortical Aβ pathology as well as memory deficits when crossed with the APP/PS1 mouse line [147]. Cell-autonomous inflammasome assembly can also contribute to the progression of neuropathology by facilitating intraneuronal protein aggregation. Human αSyn was shown to be a Casp1 cleavage substrate [93].The resultant C-terminal truncated αSyn displayed significantly hastened aggregation kinetics, thereby directly linking inflammasome responses to progressive αSyn aggregation [93]. The Casp1 inhibitor VX-765 rescued motor deficits and dopamine neuronal neurodegeneration in a mouse model of αSyn aggregation via abrogation of Casp1-mediated C-terminal αSyn truncation, suggesting that inhibiting Casp1 activity could protect from PD-associated preferential dopamine neuron death [[148]. Global as well as microglia-specific ASC depleted mice exhibited attenuated tau aggregation [64,149]. Inflammasome activation also contributes to intraneuronal tau aggregation. Increased tau phosphorylation precedes its aggregation, and inflammasome assembly was demonstrated to contribute to tau hyperphosphorylation within the hippocampus and dentate gyrus by modulating tau kinase and phosphatase activity, albeit the mechanism through which this is accomplished is as yet unclear [149]. It is interesting to speculate that the propensity of inflammasome complexes to amplify progressive protein aggregation, leading to selective neuronal vulnerability across diverse neurodegenerative disorders may be leveraged as a pan-disease specific intervention strategy.

Inflammasome-mediated neurotoxic astrocyte induction in AD and ALS

Given the ability of microglial inflammasome responses to directly amplify neuronal pathology, it is envisagable that inflammasome mediated microglia-astrocyte cross talk could also partake in neurodegeneration. Microglial NLRP3 inflammasome responses were demonstrated to contribute to the induction of neurotoxic astrocyte-subtypes in murine models of AD and ALS, via the microglia-to-astrocyte transfer of fragmented mitochondria [150]. A recent study, on mice exposed to chronic mild stress (serving as a model of depression-like behaviors), indicates that the induction of a neurotoxic astrocyte phenotype may occur by the direct Casp1-mediated secretion of neurotoxic astrocyte inducing cytokines [151]. Further investigation into inflammasome-initiated microglial-astrocyte crosstalk is required before definitive conclusions can be drawn on how this axis contributes to disease progression.

Pyroptotic cell death as a consequence of inflammasome assembly in neurodegeneration

Cell-autonomous inflammasome assembly (covered in earlier sections) within neurons can effectuate direct pyroptotic neurodegeneration. In PD animal models, compromise or loss of activity of the E-3 ligase parkin within dopamine neurons can spontaneously lead to concurrent NLRP3 inflammasome priming and activation, resulting in gasdermin-D cleavage and neuron death [90]. Adult-onset, dopamine neuron-specific NLRP3 inflammasome assembly was sufficient to drive neurodegeneration, as well as motor/behavioral deficits in mice [90,152]. It was also demonstrated that degenerating mouse and iPSC-derived human motor neurons in ALS exhibit gasdermin-E-dependent mitochondrial dysfunction and cell death [153]. Glycolytic dysfunction in oligodendrocytes can facilitate Drp-1 dependent NLRP3 complex assembly and consequent pyroptotic death, contributing to demyelination in the 5X FAD mouse model [60].

Inflammasome-independent and dependent roles of AIM2 in MS

Inflammasome-independent, autoimmune/innate immune restraining roles of ASC were documented in T-cells and microglia respectively, demonstrating neuroprotective roles of ASC in EAE [154], [155]. AIM2 inflammasome assembly, resulting in the formation of ASC oligomers, was demonstrated within astrocytes upon EAE induction, which led to increased levels of cleaved Casp3 in astrocytes [156]. It is currently unclear how astrocyte-specific AIM2 inflammasome assembly might contribute to EAE progression, since these effects may be superceded by AIM2’s inflammasome-independent, protective roles in T-cells/microglia.

CONCLUDING REMARKS

Inflammasomes were discovered and initially characterized as innate immune host defense platforms. Mounting evidence indicates that the hyperactivation of these complexes can mediate adverse effects in disease conditions by amplifying immunopathology. In neurodegenerative diseases, excessive brain inflammation has been shown to be a major pathophysiological contributor to the neurodegenerative process. Surprising insights have emerged from investigations on inflammasome-assembly in degenerative brain disorders: misfolded neurodegenerative-disease associated proteins, for instance, were shown to instigate sterile inflammasome hyperactivation; and inflammasome assembly, which was previously thought to be restricted to cells of myeloid origin, has now been documented in all major resident CNS cell types. Clarifying the specific roles of inflammasome assembly in non-myeloid cell types is among the major goals for future research. Another fundamental question that requires further clarification relates to the mechanisms whereby inflammasome signaling exacerbate neurodegenerative disease-associated pathology and misfolded protein aggregation. In many cases, neurodegeneration is associated with heterogenous pathology of various aggregation-prone proteins [17], and it remains to be assessed whether inflammasome assembly contributes to mixed proteinopathy neurodegeneration (see Outstanding Questions). Although inflammasomes represent an attractive target for developing neurotherapeutic intervention strategies, many questions remain. These include defining proximal signaling mechanisms that lead to inflammasome assembly and interrogating the mechanisms through which inflammasome-signaling can amplify adaptive immune system responses and/or protein aggregation across neurodegenerative disorders.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We are grateful to Amanda Mendelsohn, Senior Medical Illustrator at the Cleveland Clinic, for illustrations for the Figures in this manuscript. We would like to acknowledge funding from the NIH/NIA (R00AG066862) and the Department of Defense (PD220039).

Figure 1: Major inflammasome subunits and complexes.

Inflammasomes are innate-immune assemblies, comprising of a cytosolic pattern-recognition receptor, the adaptor protein ASC (which is dispensable for NLRP1 and NLRC4 inflammasomes), and the effector proteases Casp1 or Casp11. Inflammasome receptor proteins NLRP3, NLRC4 and NLRP1 have nucleotide binding NACHT domains, that are required for oligomerization and subsequent activation of inflammasome complexes as well as Leucine-rich repeat (LRR) domains that stabilize protein-protein interactions. NLRP3 and AIM2 have pyrin (PYD) domains, which is required for homotypic interaction with the PYD containing inflammasome adaptor protein ASC. The bipartitite ASC protein also contains a Caspase-recruitment (CARD) domain, facilitating recruitment of Casp1 to the inflammasome complex. Although NLRP1 and NLRC4 have CARD domains and can conscript Casp1 without the overt requirement for an adaptor protein, ASC may stabilize these interactions, facilitating increased Casp1 recruitment to the inflammasome complexes. AIM2 possesses two DNA binding HIN200 domains, allowing it to sense pathogenic or local DNA in the cytosol. Casp1 is the major characterized inflammasome effector protease. Although Casp11 has been characterized as a bacterial LPS-sensing non-canonical inflammasome protein, the relevance of Casp11 in neurodegenerative disease has not yet been firmly established.

Figure 2: Inflammasome assembly in CNS cell types.

All major CNS cell types have been demonstrated to be capable of mounting inflammasome responses in neurodegenerative disease models. Neurons: AD-associated Aβ aggregates can mediate cortical neuron-specific NLRP1 inflammasome responses, resulting in pyroptotic neuron death. Mitochondrial dysfunction (resulting in mitoROS release) is a commononality of many degenerating neurons across diverse neurodegenerative disorders. MitoROS can mediate the activation of NLRP3 and AIM2 inflammasomes, while also facilitating the cleavage of the protease Gasdermin-E, resulting in feedback amplification of mitochondrial damage, as observed in ALS motor neurons. NLRP3 inflammasome assembly requires an additional priming step in order to license activation of the NLRP3 complex. In dopamine neurons in PD, this can occur following the deletion or inhibition of the E-3 ligase parkin, which polyubiquitinates NLRP3, targeting it for proteasomal degradation. The inflammasome effector protease Casp1 can cleave human αSyn, resulting in the generation of a C-terminus truncated αSyn product that is more prone to aggregation. Microglia: Aggregates/oligomers of αSyn/tau/Aβ can serve as PRR-ligands, facilitating sterile inflammasome priming and activation in microglia, resulting in NLRP3-dependent IL-1β responses, as well as the secretion of oligomerized ASC (the inflammasome adaptor protein). Oligodendrocytes: Glycolytic inhibition can facilitate Drp1 mediated mitochondrial dysfunction and subsequent NLRP3 responses in oligodendrocytes in AD models, facilitating their pyroptotic death. Astrocytes: In MS, increased phospholipase A2 activity can result in the generation of lysolecithin from low-density lipoprotein, which can facilitate NLRP3 as well as NLRC4 responses and astrocytes, as well as in microglia, leading to MS-associated neuroinflammatory responses. Astrocyte-specific AIM2 inflammasome responses can also be activated by unknown mechanisms towards the late phase of the EAE, and may contribute to astrogliosis via Casp3 cleavage.

Figure 3: Molecular mechanisms and consequences of inflammasome assembly in neurodegenerative disease.

Upper section, left column: Canonical NLRP3 inflammasome priming follows the engagement of neuron-released misfolded proteins (which serve as PRR ligands) with receptors such as TLR2 and CD36 in myeloid cells (top). This results in NF-κB mediated induction of pro-IL-1β, and NLRP3 inflammasome activation occurs following the release of mitoROS from dysfunctional mitochondria, licensing the assembly of a functional NLRP3 complex. Inflammasome assembly can be regulated by parkin-mediated ubiquitination and consequent proteasomal clearance, or by Beclin-mediated autophagic clearance. Recent evidence suggests that the induction of nuclear DNA damage in myeloid cells can activate the cGAS-STING pathway, which cross-talks with and feeds into NLRP3 inflammasome responses via unknown mechanisms. Serine-phosphorylation of NLRP3 within its PYD domain was shown to inhibit its assembly in peripheral immune cells, but the kinase that mediates parallel processes in the CNS has not been identified. Apoptosis and/or necroptosis pathways may cross-talk with NLRP3 inflammasome assembly. Upper section, right column: NLRP3 responses can amplify neurodegenerative disease-associated pathology by diverse mechanisms: IL-1β can result in T-cell recruitment and chemotaxis, as well as an amplification of immune responses; Casp1-mediated cleavage of gasdermin-D and αSyn can facilitate pyroptotic neuron death and increased αSyn aggregation, respectively; and ASC specks released from inflammasome-activated microglia can cross-seed extracellular Aβ aggregation. Microglial inflammasome responses can also regulate neuronal tau-kinase activity, resulting in increased tau aggregation and propagation. Second row, left column: Limited evidence currently connects AIM2 inflammasome-amplified pathology in AD models, and it is as-yet unclear whether DNA damage from the nucleus, or mitochondria can facilitate the assembly of this complex in AD or other neurodegenerative conditions. Second row, right column: In MS, activation of the AIM2 inflammasome can result in cleaved Casp3 levels and astrocytosis over the course of the disease (right column) AIM2 inflammasome activation may also facilitate AD-associated Aβ aggregation via unknown mechanisms. Third row: In MS animal models, the generation of lysolecithin can facilitate NLRC4 responses in astrocytes (left column), as well as NLRP3 responses in these cells, resulting in IL-1β-mediated recruitment of T-cells and subsequent T-cell autoimmune responses (third row, right column) that may lead to demyelination. Fourth row: AD-associated fibrillar Aβ can mediate cell-autonomous NLRP1 responses in AD, which lead to pyroptotic neuron death.

OUTSTANDING QUESTIONS

The molecular pathways governing inflammasome activation in the central nervous system (CNS) are relatively undercharacterized. Additionally, they differ markedly from conventional inflammasome assembly mechanisms, which were elucidated in macrophages and other peripheral immune cell-types. What are the CNS-specific signaling mechanisms that lead to inflammasome assembly in neurodegenerative diseases?

Microglial NLRP3-responses do not seem to entail overt inflammatory cell death (pyroptosis), instead assuming a delayed-kinetics response profile. How can microglia mount inflammasome responses without appreciable induction of pyroptosis?

Inflammasome activation was previously thought to be relegated to myeloid-origin cells within the CNS. More recent literature indicates that most if not all cell-types in the brain, including neurons, astrocytes and oligodendrocytes are capable of mounting inflammasome responses. Why are inflammasome-components expressed by cell-types ostensibly devoid of classical innate-immune functions? Does inflammasome activation in diverse CNS cell-types contribute to the progression of neuropathology?

Inflammasome inhibition seems to attenuate neuronal αSyn and tau protein aggregation in mouse disease models. Aggregates/oligomers of αSyn/tau can serve as pattern-recognition receptor ligands, facilitating sterile inflammasome activation in microglia. How do myeloid cell-inflammasome responses reciprocally contribute to neuronal αSyn/tau aggregation?

Most neurodegenerative disease pathology is not exclusively represented by a single protein, and instead entails mixed pathology of aggregation-prone proteins. Can Inflammasome components such as ASC lie at the nexus of mixed-protein neuropathology?

Recent studies implicate an autoimmune component in AD and PD progression. Can Inflammasomesignaling cross-talk with the adaptive immune system to mount AD- and PD-associated autoimmune responses?

HIGHLIGHTS

Neurodegenerative diseases are characterized by selective neuroanatomic vulnerability and the accumulation of aberrantly conformed proteins.

Inflammasomes are innate-immune signaling platforms that have classically been shown to mediate acute responses to pathogenic infection or local tissue damage. Neurodegenerative diseaseassociated misfolded proteins can elicit dysregulated inflammasome assembly.

In various neurodegenerative disorders, inflammasome responses are associated with the progression of the disease, and can amplify neuropathology via diverse mechanisms.

Although microglia represent the primary cell type that mounts inflammasome responses within the CNS, a growing body of literature indicates inflammasome assembly in non-myeloid cell types in neurodegenerative diseases.

The molecular mechanisms and consequences of inflammasome activation in CNS cell types often differ substantially from those in their peripheral-immune counterparts, and could be leveraged to develop neurotherapeutic strategies.

DECLARATION OF INTERESTS

The authors declare no competing interests.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


REFERENCES

1. Hoffman HM (2001) Mutation of a new gene encoding a putative pyrin-like protein causes familial cold autoinflammatory syndrome and Muckle-Wells syndrome. Nat Genet 29 , 301–305. 10.1038/ng756 11687797
2. Aganna E (2002) Association of mutations in the NALP3/CIAS1/PYPAF1 gene with a broad phenotype including recurrent fever, cold sensitivity, sensorineural deafness, and AA amyloidosis. Arthritis Rheum 46 , 2445–2452. 10.1002/art.10509 12355493
3. Srinivasula SM (2002) The PYRIN-CARD protein ASC is an activating adaptor for caspase-1. J Biol Chem 277 , 21119–21122. 10.1074/jbc.C200179200 11967258
4. O’Connor W Jr. (2003) Cutting edge: CIAS1/cryopyrin/PYPAF1/NALP3/CATERPILLER 1.1 is an inducible inflammatory mediator with NF-kappa B suppressive properties. J Immunol 171 , 6329–6333. 10.4049/jimmunol.171.12.6329 14662828
5. Stehlik C (2003) Apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing a caspase recruitment domain is a regulator of procaspase-1 activation. J Immunol 171 , 6154–6163. 10.4049/jimmunol.171.11.6154 14634131
6. Martinon F (2002) The inflammasome: a molecular platform triggering activation of inflammatory caspases and processing of proIL-beta. Mol Cell 10 , 417–426. 10.1016/s1097-2765(02)00599-3 12191486
7. Mariathasan S (2004) Differential activation of the inflammasome by caspase-1 adaptors ASC and Ipaf. Nature 430 , 213–218. 10.1038/nature02664 15190255
8. Sutterwala FS (2007) Immune recognition of Pseudomonas aeruginosa mediated by the IPAF/NLRC4 inflammasome. J Exp Med 204 , 3235–3245. 10.1084/jem.20071239 18070936
9. Hornung V (2009) AIM2 recognizes cytosolic dsDNA and forms a caspase-1-activating inflammasome with ASC. Nature 458 , 514–518. 10.1038/nature07725 19158675
10. Fernandes-Alnemri T (2009) AIM2 activates the inflammasome and cell death in response to cytoplasmic DNA. Nature 458 , 509–513. 10.1038/nature07710 19158676
11. Burckstummer T (2009) An orthogonal proteomic-genomic screen identifies AIM2 as a cytoplasmic DNA sensor for the inflammasome. Nat Immunol 10 , 266–272. 10.1038/ni.1702 19158679
12. Miura M (1993) Induction of apoptosis in fibroblasts by IL-1 beta-converting enzyme, a mammalian homolog of the C. elegans cell death gene ced-3. Cell 75 , 653–660. 10.1016/0092-8674(93)90486-a 8242741
13. Fink SL and Cookson BT (2006) Caspase-1-dependent pore formation during pyroptosis leads to osmotic lysis of infected host macrophages. Cell Microbiol 8 , 1812–1825. 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2006.00751.x 16824040
14. Shi J (2015) Cleavage of GSDMD by inflammatory caspases determines pyroptotic cell death. Nature 526 , 660–665. 10.1038/nature15514 26375003
15. Ding J (2016) Pore-forming activity and structural autoinhibition of the gasdermin family. Nature 535 , 111–116. 10.1038/nature18590 27281216
16. Kaneko N (2019) The role of interleukin-1 in general pathology. Inflamm Regen 39 , 12. 10.1186/s41232-019-0101-5 31182982
17. Dugger BN and Dickson DW (2017) Pathology of Neurodegenerative Diseases. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 9 . 10.1101/cshperspect.a028035
18. Glass CK (2010) Mechanisms underlying inflammation in neurodegeneration. Cell 140 , 918–934. 10.1016/j.cell.2010.02.016 20303880
19. Kwon HS and Koh SH (2020) Neuroinflammation in neurodegenerative disorders: the roles of microglia and astrocytes. Transl Neurodegener 9 , 42. 10.1186/s40035-020-00221-2 33239064
20. Akiyama H (1994) Inflammatory response in Alzheimer’s disease. Tohoku J Exp Med 174 , 295–303. 10.1620/tjem.174.295 7539162
21. McGeer PL (1988) Reactive microglia are positive for HLA-DR in the substantia nigra of Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s disease brains. Neurology 38 , 1285–1291. 10.1212/wnl.38.8.1285 3399080
22. Griffin WS (1989) Brain interleukin 1 and S-100 immunoreactivity are elevated in Down syndrome and Alzheimer disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 86 , 7611–7615. 10.1073/pnas.86.19.7611 2529544
23. Nagatsu T (2000) Cytokines in Parkinson’s disease. J Neural Transm Suppl, 143–151 11128604
24. Bornemann KD (2001) Abeta-induced inflammatory processes in microglia cells of APP23 transgenic mice. Am J Pathol 158 , 63–73. 10.1016/s0002-9440(10)63945-4 11141480
25. Yoshiyama Y (2007) Synapse loss and microglial activation precede tangles in a P301S tauopathy mouse model. Neuron 53 , 337–351. 10.1016/j.neuron.2007.01.010 17270732
26. Cicchetti F (2002) Neuroinflammation of the nigrostriatal pathway during progressive 6-OHDA dopamine degeneration in rats monitored by immunohistochemistry and PET imaging. Eur J Neurosci 15 , 991–998. 10.1046/j.1460-9568.2002.01938.x 11918659
27. Ghosh A (2007) Selective inhibition of NF-kappaB activation prevents dopaminergic neuronal loss in a mouse model of Parkinson’s disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104 , 18754–18759. 10.1073/pnas.0704908104 18000063
28. Lambert JC (2013) Meta-analysis of 74,046 individuals identifies 11 new susceptibility loci for Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Genet 45 , 1452–1458. 10.1038/ng.2802 24162737
29. Efthymiou AG and Goate AM (2017) Late onset Alzheimer’s disease genetics implicates microglial pathways in disease risk. Mol Neurodegener 12 , 43. 10.1186/s13024-017-0184-x 28549481
30. Mogi M (1996) Interleukin (IL)-1 beta, IL-2, IL-4, IL-6 and transforming growth factor-alpha levels are elevated in ventricular cerebrospinal fluid in juvenile parkinsonism and Parkinson’s disease. Neurosci Lett 211 , 13–16. 10.1016/0304-3940(96)12706-3 8809836
31. Mogi M (2000) Caspase activities and tumor necrosis factor receptor R1 (p55) level are elevated in the substantia nigra from parkinsonian brain. J Neural Transm (Vienna) 107 , 335–341. 10.1007/s007020050028 10821442
32. Cacabelos R (1994) Brain interleukin-1 beta in Alzheimer’s disease and vascular dementia. Methods Find Exp Clin Pharmacol 16 , 141–151 8007743
33. Schneider H (1998) A neuromodulatory role of interleukin-1beta in the hippocampus. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 95 , 7778–7783. 10.1073/pnas.95.13.7778 9636227
34. Yirmiya R (2002) Brain interleukin-1 is involved in spatial memory and passive avoidance conditioning. Neurobiol Learn Mem 78 , 379–389. 10.1006/nlme.2002.4072 12431424
35. Tsai SJ (2017) Effects of interleukin-1beta polymorphisms on brain function and behavior in healthy and psychiatric disease conditions. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev 37 , 89–97. 10.1016/j.cytogfr.2017.06.001 28599834
36. Halle A (2008) The NALP3 inflammasome is involved in the innate immune response to amyloid-beta. Nat Immunol 9 , 857–865. 10.1038/ni.1636 18604209
37. James BD (2014) Contribution of Alzheimer disease to mortality in the United States. Neurology 82 , 1045–1050. 10.1212/WNL.0000000000000240 24598707
38. Eikelenboom P and Veerhuis R (1996) The role of complement and activated microglia in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol Aging 17 , 673–680. 10.1016/0197-4580(96)00108-x 8892339
39. Gjoneska E (2015) Conserved epigenomic signals in mice and humans reveal immune basis of Alzheimer’s disease. Nature 518 , 365–369. 10.1038/nature14252 25693568
40. Heneka MT (2013) NLRP3 is activated in Alzheimer’s disease and contributes to pathology in APP/PS1 mice. Nature 493 , 674–678. 10.1038/nature11729 23254930
41. Dempsey C (2017) Inhibiting the NLRP3 inflammasome with MCC950 promotes non-phlogistic clearance of amyloid-beta and cognitive function in APP/PS1 mice. Brain Behav Immun 61 , 306–316. 10.1016/j.bbi.2016.12.014 28003153
42. Flores J (2018) Caspase-1 inhibition alleviates cognitive impairment and neuropathology in an Alzheimer’s disease mouse model. Nat Commun 9 , 3916. 10.1038/s41467-018-06449-x 30254377
43. Luciunaite A (2020) Soluble Abeta oligomers and protofibrils induce NLRP3 inflammasome activation in microglia. J Neurochem 155 , 650–661. 10.1111/jnc.14945 31872431
44. Kumar S (2023) Role of the caspase-8/RIPK3 axis in Alzheimer’s disease pathogenesis and Abeta-induced NLRP3 inflammasome activation. JCI Insight 8 . 10.1172/jci.insight.157433
45. Aman Y (2021) Autophagy in healthy aging and disease. Nat Aging 1 , 634–650. 10.1038/s43587-021-00098-4 34901876
46. Cho MH (2014) Autophagy in microglia degrades extracellular beta-amyloid fibrils and regulates the NLRP3 inflammasome. Autophagy 10 , 1761–1775. 10.4161/auto.29647 25126727
47. Shi CS (2012) Activation of autophagy by inflammatory signals limits IL-1beta production by targeting ubiquitinated inflammasomes for destruction. Nat Immunol 13 , 255–263. 10.1038/ni.2215 22286270
48. Houtman J (2019) Beclin1-driven autophagy modulates the inflammatory response of microglia via NLRP3. EMBO J 38 . 10.15252/embj.201899430
49. Heckmann BL (2019) LC3-Associated Endocytosis Facilitates beta-Amyloid Clearance and Mitigates Neurodegeneration in Murine Alzheimer’s Disease. Cell 178 , 536–551 e514. 10.1016/j.cell.2019.05.056 31257024
50. Heckmann BL (2020) Noncanonical function of an autophagy protein prevents spontaneous Alzheimer’s disease. Sci Adv 6 , eabb9036. 10.1126/sciadv.abb9036 32851186
51. Kummer MP (2021) Microglial PD-1 stimulation by astrocytic PD-L1 suppresses neuroinflammation and Alzheimer’s disease pathology. EMBO J 40 , e108662. 10.15252/embj.2021108662 34825707
52. Stutz A (2017) NLRP3 inflammasome assembly is regulated by phosphorylation of the pyrin domain. J Exp Med 214 , 1725–1736. 10.1084/jem.20160933 28465465
53. Zhao Y (2018) TREM2 Is a Receptor for beta-Amyloid that Mediates Microglial Function. Neuron 97 , 1023–1031 e1027. 10.1016/j.neuron.2018.01.031 29518356
54. Cosker K (2021) Microglial signalling pathway deficits associated with the patient derived R47H TREM2 variants linked to AD indicate inability to activate inflammasome. Sci Rep 11 , 13316. 10.1038/s41598-021-91207-1 34172778
55. Krasemann S (2017) The TREM2-APOE Pathway Drives the Transcriptional Phenotype of Dysfunctional Microglia in Neurodegenerative Diseases. Immunity 47 , 566–581 e569. 10.1016/j.immuni.2017.08.008 28930663
56. Zhao N (2022) Elevating microglia TREM2 reduces amyloid seeding and suppresses disease-associated microglia. J Exp Med 219 . 10.1084/jem.20212479
57. Schoch KM (2021) Acute Trem2 reduction triggers increased microglial phagocytosis, slowing amyloid deposition in mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 118 . 10.1073/pnas.2100356118
58. Meilandt WJ (2020) Trem2 Deletion Reduces Late-Stage Amyloid Plaque Accumulation, Elevates the Abeta42:Abeta40 Ratio, and Exacerbates Axonal Dystrophy and Dendritic Spine Loss in the PS2APP Alzheimer’s Mouse Model. J Neurosci 40 , 1956–1974. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1871-19.2019 31980586
59. Nasrabady SE (2018) White matter changes in Alzheimer’s disease: a focus on myelin and oligodendrocytes. Acta Neuropathol Commun 6 , 22. 10.1186/s40478-018-0515-3 29499767
60. Zhang X (2020) Oligodendroglial glycolytic stress triggers inflammasome activation and neuropathology in Alzheimer’s disease. Sci Adv 6 . 10.1126/sciadv.abb8680
61. Saresella M (2016) The NLRP3 and NLRP1 inflammasomes are activated in Alzheimer’s disease. Mol Neurodegener 11 , 23. 10.1186/s13024-016-0088-1 26939933
62. Tejera D (2019) Systemic inflammation impairs microglial Abeta clearance through NLRP3 inflammasome. EMBO J 38 , e101064. 10.15252/embj.2018101064 31359456
63. Stancu IC (2019) Aggregated Tau activates NLRP3-ASC inflammasome exacerbating exogenously seeded and non-exogenously seeded Tau pathology in vivo. Acta Neuropathol 137 , 599–617. 10.1007/s00401-018-01957-y 30721409
64. Jiang S (2021) Proteopathic tau primes and activates interleukin-1beta via myeloid-cell-specific MyD88- and NLRP3-ASC-inflammasome pathway. Cell Rep 36 , 109720. 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109720 34551296
65. Tan MS (2014) Amyloid-beta induces NLRP1-dependent neuronal pyroptosis in models of Alzheimer’s disease. Cell Death Dis 5 , e1382. 10.1038/cddis.2014.348 25144717
66. Kaushal V (2015) Neuronal NLRP1 inflammasome activation of Caspase-1 coordinately regulates inflammatory interleukin-1-beta production and axonal degeneration-associated Caspase-6 activation. Cell Death Differ 22 , 1676–1686. 10.1038/cdd.2015.16 25744023
67. Lammert CR (2020) AIM2 inflammasome surveillance of DNA damage shapes neurodevelopment. Nature 580 , 647–652. 10.1038/s41586-020-2174-3 32350463
68. Wu PJ (2017) Deletion of the Inflammasome Sensor Aim2 Mitigates Abeta Deposition and Microglial Activation but Increases Inflammatory Cytokine Expression in an Alzheimer Disease Mouse Model. Neuroimmunomodulation 24 , 29–39. 10.1159/000477092 28618410
69. Collaborators GBDN (2019) Global, regional, and national burden of neurological disorders, 1990–2016: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2016. Lancet Neurol 18 , 459–480. 10.1016/S1474-4422(18)30499-X 30879893
70. Dorsey ER (2018) The Emerging Evidence of the Parkinson Pandemic. J Parkinsons Dis 8 , S3–S8. 10.3233/JPD-181474 30584159
71. Braak H (2003) Staging of brain pathology related to sporadic Parkinson’s disease. Neurobiol Aging 24 , 197–211. 10.1016/s0197-4580(02)00065-9 12498954
72. Braak H (2002) Staging of the intracerebral inclusion body pathology associated with idiopathic Parkinson’s disease (preclinical and clinical stages). J Neurol 249 Suppl 3 , III/1–5. 10.1007/s00415-002-1301-4 11954855
73. Tansey MG (2022) Inflammation and immune dysfunction in Parkinson disease. Nat Rev Immunol 22 , 657–673. 10.1038/s41577-022-00684-6 35246670
74. Allen Reish HE and Standaert DG (2015) Role of alpha-synuclein in inducing innate and adaptive immunity in Parkinson disease. J Parkinsons Dis 5 , 1–19. 10.3233/JPD-140491 25588354
75. Gordon R (2018) Inflammasome inhibition prevents alpha-synuclein pathology and dopaminergic neurodegeneration in mice. Sci Transl Med 10 . 10.1126/scitranslmed.aah4066
76. Panicker N (2019) Fyn kinase regulates misfolded alpha-synuclein uptake and NLRP3 inflammasome activation in microglia. J Exp Med 216 , 1411–1430. 10.1084/jem.20182191 31036561
77. Yan Y (2015) Dopamine controls systemic inflammation through inhibition of NLRP3 inflammasome. Cell 160 , 62–73. 10.1016/j.cell.2014.11.047 25594175
78. Pike AF (2022) Dopamine signaling modulates microglial NLRP3 inflammasome activation: implications for Parkinson’s disease. J Neuroinflammation 19 , 50. 10.1186/s12974022-02410-4 35172843
79. Moon HE and Paek SH (2015) Mitochondrial Dysfunction in Parkinson’s Disease. Exp Neurobiol 24 , 103–116. 10.5607/en.2015.24.2.103 26113789
80. Zhou R (2011) A role for mitochondria in NLRP3 inflammasome activation. Nature 469 , 221–225. 10.1038/nature09663 21124315
81. Sarkar S (2017) Mitochondrial impairment in microglia amplifies NLRP3 inflammasome proinflammatory signaling in cell culture and animal models of Parkinson’s disease. NPJ Parkinsons Dis 3 , 30. 10.1038/s41531-017-0032-2 29057315
82. Kim C (2013) Neuron-released oligomeric alpha-synuclein is an endogenous agonist of TLR2 for paracrine activation of microglia. Nat Commun 4 , 1562. 10.1038/ncomms2534 23463005
83. Daniele SG (2015) Activation of MyD88-dependent TLR1/2 signaling by misfolded alpha-synuclein, a protein linked to neurodegenerative disorders. Sci Signal 8 , ra45. 10.1126/scisignal.2005965 25969543
84. Wang S (2015) alpha-Synuclein, a chemoattractant, directs microglial migration via H2O2-dependent Lyn phosphorylation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 112 , E1926–1935. 10.1073/pnas.1417883112 25825709
85. Long H (2022) Interaction of RAGE with alpha-synuclein fibrils mediates inflammatory response of microglia. Cell Rep 40 , 111401. 10.1016/j.celrep.2022.111401 36130498
86. Scheiblich H (2021) Microglial NLRP3 Inflammasome Activation upon TLR2 and TLR5 Ligation by Distinct alpha-Synuclein Assemblies. J Immunol 207 , 2143–2154. 10.4049/jimmunol.2100035 34507948
87. Szego EM (2022) Constitutively active STING causes neuroinflammation and degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in mice. Elife 11 . 10.7554/eLife.81943
88. Hinkle JT (2022) STING mediates neurodegeneration and neuroinflammation in nigrostriatal alpha-synucleinopathy. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 119 , e2118819119. 10.1073/pnas.2118819119
89. Kwon OC (2021) SGK1 inhibition in glia ameliorates pathologies and symptoms in Parkinson disease animal models. EMBO Mol Med 13 , e13076. 10.15252/emmm.202013076 33646633
90. Panicker N (2022) Neuronal NLRP3 is a parkin substrate that drives neurodegeneration in Parkinson’s disease. Neuron 110 , 2422–2437 e2429. 10.1016/j.neuron.2022.05.009 35654037
91. Yan YQ (2023) Parkin regulates microglial NLRP3 and represses neurodegeneration in Parkinson’s disease. Aging Cell, e13834. 10.1111/acel.13834 37029500
92. Rui WJ (2022) Microglial AIM2 alleviates antiviral-related neuro-inflammation in mouse models of Parkinson’s disease. Glia 70 , 2409–2425. 10.1002/glia.24260 35959803
93. Wang W (2016) Caspase-1 causes truncation and aggregation of the Parkinson’s disease-associated protein alpha-synuclein. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 113 , 9587–9592. 10.1073/pnas.1610099113 27482083
94. Zhang P (2016) Cdk5-Dependent Activation of Neuronal Inflammasomes in Parkinson’s Disease. Mov Disord 31 , 366–376. 10.1002/mds.26488 26853432
95. von Herrmann KM (2018) NLRP3 expression in mesencephalic neurons and characterization of a rare NLRP3 polymorphism associated with decreased risk of Parkinson’s disease. NPJ Parkinsons Dis 4 , 24. 10.1038/s41531-018-0061-5 30131971
96. Noseworthy JH (2000) Multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med 343 , 938–952. 10.1056/NEJM200009283431307 11006371
97. Trapp BD (1998) Axonal transection in the lesions of multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med 338 , 278–285. 10.1056/NEJM199801293380502 9445407
98. McGinley MP (2021) Diagnosis and Treatment of Multiple Sclerosis: A Review. JAMA 325 , 765–779. 10.1001/jama.2020.26858 33620411
99. Constantinescu CS (2011) Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) as a model for multiple sclerosis (MS). Br J Pharmacol 164 , 1079–1106. 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2011.01302.x 21371012
100. Torkildsen O (2008) The cuprizone model for demyelination. Acta Neurol Scand Suppl 188 , 72–76. 10.1111/j.1600-0404.2008.01036.x 18439226
101. Furlan R (1999) Caspase-1 regulates the inflammatory process leading to autoimmune demyelination. J Immunol 163 , 2403–2409 10452974
102. Gris D (2010) NLRP3 plays a critical role in the development of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis by mediating Th1 and Th17 responses. J Immunol 185 , 974–981. 10.4049/jimmunol.0904145 20574004
103. Jha S (2010) The inflammasome sensor, NLRP3, regulates CNS inflammation and demyelination via caspase-1 and interleukin-18. J Neurosci 30 , 15811–15820. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4088-10.2010 21106820
104. Voet S (2018) A20 critically controls microglia activation and inhibits inflammasome-dependent neuroinflammation. Nat Commun 9 , 2036. 10.1038/s41467-018-04376-5 29789522
105. Farooqui AA (2006) Inhibitors of brain phospholipase A2 activity: their neuropharmacological effects and therapeutic importance for the treatment of neurologic disorders. Pharmacol Rev 58 , 591–620. 10.1124/pr.58.3.7 16968951
106. Freeman L (2017) NLR members NLRC4 and NLRP3 mediate sterile inflammasome activation in microglia and astrocytes. J Exp Med 214 , 1351–1370. 10.1084/jem.20150237 28404595
107. Zhang CJ (2018) TLR-stimulated IRAKM activates caspase-8 inflammasome in microglia and promotes neuroinflammation. J Clin Invest 128 , 5399–5412. 10.1172/JCI121901 30372424
108. Cleveland DW and Rothstein JD (2001) From Charcot to Lou Gehrig: deciphering selective motor neuron death in ALS. Nat Rev Neurosci 2 , 806–819. 10.1038/35097565 11715057
109. Andersen PM (2006) Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis associated with mutations in the CuZn superoxide dismutase gene. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep 6 , 37–46. 10.1007/s11910-996-0008-9 16469270
110. Friedlander RM (1997) Inhibition of ICE slows ALS in mice. Nature 388 , 31. 10.1038/40299 9214497
111. Prudencio M (2009) Variation in aggregation propensities among ALS-associated variants of SOD1: correlation to human disease. Hum Mol Genet 18 , 3217–3226. 10.1093/hmg/ddp260 19483195
112. Meissner F (2010) Mutant superoxide dismutase 1-induced IL-1beta accelerates ALS pathogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107 , 13046–13050. 10.1073/pnas.1002396107 20616033
113. Deora V (2020) The microglial NLRP3 inflammasome is activated by amyotrophic lateral sclerosis proteins. Glia 68 , 407–421. 10.1002/glia.23728 31596526
114. Johnson BS (2009) TDP-43 is intrinsically aggregation-prone, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-linked mutations accelerate aggregation and increase toxicity. J Biol Chem 284 , 20329–20339. 10.1074/jbc.M109.010264 19465477
115. Zhao W (2015) TDP-43 activates microglia through NF-kappaB and NLRP3 inflammasome. Exp Neurol 273 , 24–35. 10.1016/j.expneurol.2015.07.019 26222336
116. Bang J (2015) Frontotemporal dementia. Lancet 386 , 1672–1682. 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)00461-4 26595641
117. Abramzon YA (2020) The Overlapping Genetics of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and Frontotemporal Dementia. Front Neurosci 14 , 42. 10.3389/fnins.2020.00042 32116499
118. DeJesus-Hernandez M (2011) Expanded GGGGCC hexanucleotide repeat in noncoding region of C9ORF72 causes chromosome 9p-linked FTD and ALS. Neuron 72 , 245–256. 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.09.011 21944778
119. Wen X (2014) Antisense proline-arginine RAN dipeptides linked to C9ORF72-ALS/FTD form toxic nuclear aggregates that initiate in vitro and in vivo neuronal death. Neuron 84 , 1213–1225. 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.12.010 25521377
120. Fu RH (2022) C9-ALS-Associated Proline-Arginine Dipeptide Repeat Protein Induces Activation of NLRP3 Inflammasome of HMC3 Microglia Cells by Binding of Complement Component 1 Q Subcomponent-Binding Protein (C1QBP), and Syringin Prevents This Effect. Cells 11 . 10.3390/cells11193128
121. Shu X (2023) Negative regulation of TREM2-mediated C9orf72 poly-GA clearance by the NLRP3 inflammasome. Cell Rep 42 , 112133. 10.1016/j.celrep.2023.112133 36800288
122. Vince JE (2018) The Mitochondrial Apoptotic Effectors BAX/BAK Activate Caspase-3 and −7 to Trigger NLRP3 Inflammasome and Caspase-8 Driven IL-1beta Activation. Cell Rep 25 , 2339–2353 e2334. 10.1016/j.celrep.2018.10.103 30485804
123. Degterev A (2005) Chemical inhibitor of nonapoptotic cell death with therapeutic potential for ischemic brain injury. Nat Chem Biol 1 , 112–119. 10.1038/nchembio711 16408008
124. Yuan J (2019) Necroptosis and RIPK1-mediated neuroinflammation in CNS diseases. Nat Rev Neurosci 20 , 19–33. 10.1038/s41583-018-0093-1 30467385
125. Kang TB (2013) Caspase-8 blocks kinase RIPK3-mediated activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome. Immunity 38 , 27–40. 10.1016/j.immuni.2012.09.015 23260196
126. Lawlor KE (2015) RIPK3 promotes cell death and NLRP3 inflammasome activation in the absence of MLKL. Nat Commun 6 , 6282. 10.1038/ncomms7282 25693118
127. Gutierrez KD (2017) MLKL Activation Triggers NLRP3-Mediated Processing and Release of IL-1beta Independently of Gasdermin-D. J Immunol 198 , 2156–2164. 10.4049/jimmunol.1601757 28130493
128. Ito Y (2016) RIPK1 mediates axonal degeneration by promoting inflammation and necroptosis in ALS. Science 353 , 603–608. 10.1126/science.aaf6803 27493188
129. Yang SH (2017) Nec-1 alleviates cognitive impairment with reduction of Abeta and tau abnormalities in APP/PS1 mice. EMBO Mol Med 9 , 61–77. 10.15252/emmm.201606566 27861127
130. Re DB (2014) Necroptosis drives motor neuron death in models of both sporadic and familial ALS. Neuron 81 , 1001–1008. 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.01.011 24508385
131. Ofengeim D (2017) RIPK1 mediates a disease-associated microglial response in Alzheimer’s disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 114 , E8788–E8797. 10.1073/pnas.1714175114 28904096
132. Sheng JG (1996) In vivo and in vitro evidence supporting a role for the inflammatory cytokine interleukin-1 as a driving force in Alzheimer pathogenesis. Neurobiol Aging 17 , 761–766. 10.1016/0197-4580(96)00104-2 8892349
133. Craft JM (2005) Interleukin 1 receptor antagonist knockout mice show enhanced microglial activation and neuronal damage induced by intracerebroventricular infusion of human beta-amyloid. J Neuroinflammation 2 , 15. 10.1186/1742-2094-2-15 15967035
134. Das P (2006) Interleukin-1 receptor 1 knockout has no effect on amyloid deposition in Tg2576 mice and does not alter efficacy following Abeta immunotherapy. J Neuroinflammation 3 , 17. 10.1186/1742-2094-3-17 16872492
135. Shaftel SS (2007) Sustained hippocampal IL-1 beta overexpression mediates chronic neuroinflammation and ameliorates Alzheimer plaque pathology. J Clin Invest 117 , 1595–1604. 10.1172/JCI31450 17549256
136. Ghosh S (2013) Sustained interleukin-1beta overexpression exacerbates tau pathology despite reduced amyloid burden in an Alzheimer’s mouse model. J Neurosci 33 , 5053–5064. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4361-12.2013 23486975
137. Tzeng TC (2018) Inflammasome-derived cytokine IL18 suppresses amyloid-induced seizures in Alzheimer-prone mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 115 , 9002–9007. 10.1073/pnas.1801802115 30127003
138. Pott Godoy MC (2008) Central and systemic IL-1 exacerbates neurodegeneration and motor symptoms in a model of Parkinson’s disease. Brain 131 , 1880–1894. 10.1093/brain/awn101 18504291
139. Stojakovic A (2017) Role of the IL-1 Pathway in Dopaminergic Neurodegeneration and Decreased Voluntary Movement. Mol Neurobiol 54 , 4486–4495. 10.1007/s12035-016-9988-x 27356916
140. Griffin WS (2006) Interleukin-1 mediates Alzheimer and Lewy body pathologies. J Neuroinflammation 3 , 5. 10.1186/1742-2094-3-5 16542445
141. Inoue M (2012) NLRP3 inflammasome induces chemotactic immune cell migration to the CNS in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109 , 10480–10485. 10.1073/pnas.1201836109 22699511
142. Li S (2019) Gasdermin D in peripheral myeloid cells drives neuroinflammation in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. J Exp Med 216 , 2562–2581. 10.1084/jem.20190377 31467036
143. Maier A (2015) Interleukin-1 Antagonist Anakinra in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis--A Pilot Study. PLoS One 10 , e0139684. 10.1371/journal.pone.0139684 26444282
144. Nemeth DP and Quan N (2021) Modulation of Neural Networks by Interleukin-1. Brain Plast 7 , 17–32. 10.3233/BPL-200109 34631418
145. Franklin BS (2014) The adaptor ASC has extracellular and ‘prionoid’ activities that propagate inflammation. Nat Immunol 15 , 727–737. 10.1038/ni.2913 24952505
146. Baroja-Mazo A (2014) The NLRP3 inflammasome is released as a particulate danger signal that amplifies the inflammatory response. Nat Immunol 15 , 738–748. 10.1038/ni.2919 24952504
147. Venegas C (2017) Microglia-derived ASC specks cross-seed amyloid-beta in Alzheimer’s disease. Nature 552 , 355–361. 10.1038/nature25158 29293211
148. Bassil F (2016) Reducing C-terminal truncation mitigates synucleinopathy and neurodegeneration in a transgenic model of multiple system atrophy. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 113 , 9593–9598. 10.1073/pnas.1609291113 27482103
149. Ising C (2019) NLRP3 inflammasome activation drives tau pathology. Nature 575 , 669673. 10.1038/s41586-019-1769-z
150. Joshi AU (2019) Fragmented mitochondria released from microglia trigger A1 astrocytic response and propagate inflammatory neurodegeneration. Nat Neurosci 22 , 1635–1648. 10.1038/s41593-019-0486-0 31551592
151. Li S (2022) Microglial NLRP3 inflammasome activates neurotoxic astrocytes in depression-like mice. Cell Rep 41 , 111532. 10.1016/j.celrep.2022.111532 36288697
152. von Herrmann KM (2020) Slc6a3-dependent expression of a CAPS-associated Nlrp3 allele results in progressive behavioral abnormalities and neuroinflammation in aging mice. J Neuroinflammation 17 , 213. 10.1186/s12974-020-01866-6 32680528
153. Neel DV (2023) Gasdermin-E mediates mitochondrial damage in axons and neurodegeneration. Neuron. 10.1016/j.neuron.2023.02.019
154. Chou WC (2021) AIM2 in regulatory T cells restrains autoimmune diseases. Nature 591 , 300–305. 10.1038/s41586-021-03231-w 33505023
155. Ma C (2021) AIM2 controls microglial inflammation to prevent experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. J Exp Med 218 . 10.1084/jem.20201796
156. Barclay WE (2022) The AIM2 inflammasome is activated in astrocytes during the late phase of EAE. JCI Insight 7 . 10.1172/jci.insight.155563
