LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


8807448
1179
Chem Res Toxicol
Chem Res Toxicol
Chemical research in toxicology
0893-228X
1520-5010

34990108
10443083
10.1021/acs.chemrestox.1c00274
NIHMS1923191
Article
Potential Role of Heterocyclic Aromatic Amines in Neurodegeneration
Syeda Tauqeerunnisa Ph.D. School of Health Sciences and Purdue Institute for Integrative Neurosciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, United States

http://orcid.org/0000-0003-1907-4555
Cannon Jason R. Ph.D. School of Health Sciences and Purdue Institute for Integrative Neurosciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, United States

Corresponding Author: Jason R. Cannon – School of Health Sciences and Purdue Institute for Integratisve Neurosciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, United States; Phone: (765) 494-0794; cannonjr@purdue.edu; Fax: (765) 496-1377
17 8 2023
17 1 2022
06 1 2022
22 8 2023
35 1 5972
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Heterocyclic aromatic amines (HAAs) are mainly formed in the pyrolysis process during high-temperature cooking of meat. Meat consumption is very typical of the western diet, and the amount of meat consumption in the eastern countries is growing rapidly; HAAs represents widespread exposure. HAAs are classified as possible human carcinogens; numerous epidemiological studies have demonstrated regular consumption of meat with HAAs as risk factor for cancers. Specific HAAs have received major attention. For example, 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b] pyridine has been extensively studied as a genotoxicant and mutagen, with emergent literature on neurotoxicity. Harmane has been extensively studied for a role in essential tremors and potentially Parkinson’s disease (PD). Harmane levels have been demonstrated to be elevated in blood and brain in essential tremor patients. Meat consumption has been implicated in the etiology of neurodegenerative diseases; however, the role of toxicants formed during meat preparation has not been studied. Epidemiological studies are currently examining the association between HAAs and risk of neurodegenerative diseases such as essential tremors and PD. Studies from our laboratory and others have provided strong evidence that HAA exposure produces PD and Alzheimer’s disease-relevant neurotoxicity in cellular and animal models. In this review, we summarize and critically evaluate previous studies on HAA-induced neurotoxicity and the molecular basis of potential neurotoxic effects of HAAs. The available studies provide strong support for the premise that HAAs may impact neurological function and that addressing gaps in understanding of adverse neurological outcomes is critical to determine whether these compounds are modifiable risk factors.

Graphical Abstract


pmc1. INTRODUCTION

Heterocyclic aromatic amines (HAAs) are produced primarily during high-temperature meat cooking. HAAs are created in a heat-dependent reaction between amino acids and sugars, producing pyridine, pyrimidine, or pyrazine, which reacts with creatine1–3 (Figure 1). More than 25 HAAs are formed in well-cooked red meats.4–8 There are multiple chemical subclasses of dietary HAAs, notably aminoimidazoaazarenes (AIA), α-carbolines, and β-carbolines (Table 1). AIAs are formed through the heat-catalyzed reaction between amino acids and sugars, producing pyridine or pyrazine, which reacts with creatine. α/β-Carbolines are formed in proteins or produced directly from pyrolysis of glutamic acid and tryptophan exposed to high temperatures over a period of time. β-Carbolines are also produced endogenously.3,9

2-Amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b] pyridine (PhIP) is an extensively studied AIA and the most abundant HAA isolated from the well-done cooked meat, and its levels may reach ~15 μg/kg in uncooked meat (~75% of the genotoxic material).10,11 PhIP exposure comprises about two-thirds of the total HAA consumption.12 HAAs are possible human carcinogens (International Agency for Research on Cancer Group 2A or 2B).13 Numerous studies have suggested that eating well-done grilled meat containing elevated levels of HAAs is a risk factor for colorectal cancer.14,15 Harmane (2-methyl-β-carboline, 1-methyl-9H-pyrido[3,4-b]indole, aribine) is the most extensively studied β-carboline, notably as a neurotoxicant.

Most HAAs are metabolized in the liver;16 metabolism also occurs in some extrahepatic tissues, but the extent of extrahepatic metabolism is not well-known.17–19 Cytochrome P450 (CYP) 1A2-mediated ring oxidation is the major pathway for the metabolism of 2-amino-3,8-dimethylmidazo-[4,5-f]quinoxaline (MeIQx), 2-amino-3-methylimidazo[4,5-f] quinoline (IQ), and PhIP.20,21 Cytochrome P450 1A2 catalyzes the N-oxidation of PhIP to form the 2-hydroxyamino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4, 5-b]pyridine (HONH-PhIP) and other HONH-HAAs. These reactions may also be catalyzed by CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 in extrahepatic tissues. N-acetyltransferases or sulfotransferases catalyze the HONH-HAA metabolite to form highly reactive and unstable esters that bind covalently to DNA.20,22 Human and rodent CYPs differentially metabolize HAAs. Human CYP1A2 has far greater catalytic efficiency than rat CYP1A2 in the N-oxidation of MeIQx and PhIP. This difference is important because the N-hydroxylated metabolites are thought to be critical in both genotoxicity and neurotoxicity.23,24 Recombinant human CYP1A2 shows lower Km (Michaelis constant) values for N-oxidation relative to rat CYP1A2.25,26 CYP1A2 and 1A1 also metabolize β-carbolines; CYP2D6, 2C19, and 2E1 metabolize β-carbolines to a lesser extent.27 The amount of HAAs formed depends on the type of meat, the temperature, and the duration of cooking; therefore, the concentrations of HAAs can vary by more than 100-fold.4,8,28–30 HAAs represent widespread exposure; time-weighted average of total HAAs consumed in the United States population was estimated to be ~9 ng/kg/day.12 Due to differences between the eastern and western diets, especially the amount of meat consumption, mean exposure to HAAs varied across the countries. Mean daily exposure to HAAs (PhIP and MeIQx) was 565.3 ng/d in American people,31 and mean exposure to total HAAs in meat was 69.4 ng/d in European people,32 160 ng/d in elderly population in Stockholm, 4.43 ng·kg−1 bw per day in adult women from eastern Croatia,33 49.95 ng/day (P10 14.0 ng/ day, P90 95.8 ng/day) in the Chinese population,34 1.06 ng/kg and 1.10 ng/kg per day in Japanese men and women, repectively,35 and 553.7 ng per capita day(−1) in the Malyasian population.36 This exposures can be correlated with the differences in prevalence of dementia and Parkinson’s disease (PD) in western and eastern populations.37,38

Diet has been investigated as an etiological factor in major neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and PD. Importantly, exposure to dietary factors is likely to be significantly more for most lifespans compared to other environmental contaminants.39–43 There are no effective therapies for most major neurodegenerative diseases. Therefore, identifying and preventing modifiable risk factors contributing to the etiology is a critical approach to minimize the public health burden of neurodegenerative diseases. Importantly, epidemiological studies have identified meat consumption as a potential risk factor for AD and PD.44–46 Toxicants formed during the preparation of meat have thus far received limited attention as human risk factors for neurological disease. However, mounting laboratory data addressed in this review suggest that these toxicants, especially HAAs, are putative neurotoxicants. Numerous studies reported that HAAs produce toxicity relevant to PD.23,47–50 Thus, this class of compounds deserves attention for its potential role in neurotoxicity.

HAA neurotoxicity research has primarily focused on the β-carboline subclass (harmane and its derivatives). Blood levels of harmane and its derivatives are reported to be significantly higher in tremors and PD cases.51–53 With respect to AIAs, our group showed that PhIP, its metabolites, and other HAAs are also neurotoxic.23,48,49 Lawana et al. demonstrated that these HAAs bind to neuromelanin and exert neurotoxicity relevant to PD.47 Recently, our group showed that PhIP exposure also produces neurotoxicity relevant to AD,54 suggesting that there is significant neurotoxic overlap in etiology and resultant neuropathologies of AD and PD. Indeed, there are many etiological and neuropathological overlaps known between these diseases.55–59

The role of HAAs as a carcinogen has been reviewed numerous times. In this brief and focused review, we critically discuss the potential role of HAAs in neurodegeneration and the mechanism associated with neurodegeneration.

2. HAA BRAIN ENTRY

HAAs, such as harmane have been detected in human brain. CYP enzymes that metabolize HAAs have also been reported in the brain. Harmane has been reported to accumulate in the brain in essential tremor (ET) patients, showing that it crosses the blood–brain barrier (BBB). Here, the brain concentration is roughly 2.5 times that in blood in ET cases.61 Harmane and norharmane levels in the cerebrospinal fluid were significantly higher in patients with PD.51 The mean log blood harmane levels in PD cases is 0.59 g–10/mL.52 Internal brain levels are extremely helpful in linking internal dose from animal studies to human relevance. In the future, it will be critical to obtain brain levels from both control and diagnosed (AD, PD, other neurological diseases).

In rodents, β-carboline administration induces Parkinson’s-like symptoms. A single intracerebral injection of norharmane in rats induces moderate Parkinsonism-like behavioral symptoms.62 Systematically administered norharmane, 2-mono-N-methylated norharmanium cation (2-MeNH+), and 9-mono-N′-methylnorharman (9-MeNH)-induced bradykinesia in mice.63 Harmane and harmaline exposure impaired memory formation and caused amnesia in rodents.64–67 With respect to AIAs, IQ exposure affected the exploratory behavior and locomotor activity of zebrafish. IQ exposure in zebrafish upregulated expression of proinflammatory cytokine-related genes and PD-associated genes (synuclein alpha interacting protein (sncaip), leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (lrrk2), parkin rBR e3 ubiquitin protein ligase (prkn), PTEN-induced kinase 1 (pink1), and parkinsonism associated deglycase/PARK7), suggesting that IQ enters the brain and exposure may be associated with PD.68 Moreover, harmane, norharmane, harmane derivatives (2-N-and 2,9-N-methylated harmane) and norharmane metabolites accumulated at significant levels in the human substantia nigra (SN) than in the cortex.69 Studies from our lab and others have analyzed if the preferential accumulation of HAAs in SN could be due to uptake by the dopamine transporter (DAT). Here, PhIP was not found to compete with 3H-dopamine uptake in SH-SY5Y cells, suggesting PhIP does not enter dopamine neurons through DAT.23 Moreover, blocking DAT was not neuro-protective in harmane-induced neurodegeneration in Caenorhabditis elegans.50 Thus, HAA transport into cells is not likely mediated through DAT uptake.

Following intravenous administration in rats, 3H-harmane preferentially accumulates in the brain, where levels are higher than in blood. There is uniform distribution throughout the brain with no evidence of regional differences in uptake of the radiolabeled harmane.70 Norharmane also crosses the BBB after intraperitoneal injections in mice.63 With respect to AIAs, PhIP and its primary metabolite (N-OH-PhIP) have been detected in the mouse brain after intravenous injection. The concentration of PhIP in the brain was relatively low compared to tissues such as the intestines, kidneys, liver, and spleen. However, N-OH-PhIP levels in brain were higher than in the kidneys, liver, spleen, colon, and small intestine.71 These data suggest that after metabolism, the neurotoxic metabolite may preferentially accumulate in brain.

The brain is protected from xenobiotic compounds by the BBB; it expresses multiple transporters with broad substrate specificities. The breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP; also known as ATP-binding cassette subfamily G member 2) is expressed on the luminal side of the microvessel endothelium; it limits the tissue penetration of xenobiotic compounds through export function.72–74

HAAs such as PhIP, N-OH-PhIP, 2-amino-3-methylimidazo[4,5-f]quinoline, and 3-amino-1,4-dimethyl-5H-pyrido[4,3-b]indole, and MeIQx have been identified as BCRP substrates.73 Murine BCRP efficiently transports PhIP in polarized cell lines.73 BCRP limits HAAs uptake into the brain.74 Pharmacokinetic studies showed that at a dose of 1 mg/kg 14C-PhIP, the area under the curve for oral administration was 2.9-fold higher and for intravenous administration 2.2-fold higher in BCRP−/− mice. There are also differences in clearance of PhIP in BCRP −/− mice. 14C-PhIP is cleared primarily by urinary excretion, whereas in wild-type mice, 14C-PhIP is cleared mainly by fecal excretion.73 Plasma concentrations of PhIP and two of its metabolites, 4-OH-PhIP and N-OH-PhIP, were significantly lower in BCRP−/− mice at several time points during continuous infusion. Here, the brain/plasma ratio was increased considerably in BCRP−/− mice than wild-type mice for PhIP, N-OH-PhIP, and MeIQx (brain levels of both PhIP and the neurotoxic metabolite (N-OH-PhIP) were far higher in BCRP knockouts).74 These studies provide evidence that the BCRP limits the distribution of MeIQx, PhIP, and N-OH-PhIP into the mammalian brain, and functional impairment of BCRP increases the concentration of HAAs in the brain.74 van Herwaarden et al. also found increased PhIP in the brains of BCRP −/− mice (knockout/wild-type brain PhIP = 2.8).73 Pharmacokinetic studies showed that 14C-IQ levels in the plasma/brain were substantially lower in wild-type than BCRP−/− mice after oral and intravenous administration.75 Importantly, up to 10% of individuals have polymorphisms in BCRP that significantly reduce function (in some populations, a far greater percentage of individuals are affected).76 Based on animal data, such individuals would be expected to accumulate higher brain HAA levels and potentially be at greater risk for neurotoxicity.

The cytochrome enzyme (CYP) family catalyzes the oxidative metabolism of HAAs. While the central nervous system also contains a P450-dependent metabolism system, it is unclear how important it is to HAA metabolism. CYP P450 1A2, 2A1, 2C7, and 2E1 genes were identified by RT-PCR in rat glioma C6 cell line; activity in normal brain tissue may be quite low.77 CYP P4501A1 mRNA has been found in the human brain.78 CYP1A1 mRNA and protein are localized in neurons of the cerebral cortex, cerebellum, and hippocampus. The expression of CYP P450 in the brain is very responsive to environmental factors. CYP P450 of the 1A family is inducible in the brain, suggesting that HAAs could possibly be activated in the brain.79 CYP1A1 expression was found to be significantly high in brain tumors compared to the normal tissues.80 β-Carbolines are metabolized to a minor extent by CYP2D. CYP2D is expressed and enzymatically active in the brain and is readily induced on exposure to xenobiotics.81 Humanized CYP2D6 expressing transgenic mice (TG) metabolize harmine (and related compounds) more rapidly than wild-type mice and also exhibit less severe tremor responses. Intracerebroventricular pretreatment with the CYP2D inhibitor propranolol increases harmine-induced tremor in TG. These findings suggest that human CYP2D6 metabolizes β-carbolines in the brain.82 At present, there are no data to support that significant AIA metabolism occurs in the brain.

3. MECHANISMS OF HAA NEUROTOXICITY

Numerous studies have reported the potential role of HAAs in neurodegeneration (Table 2). Exposure to HAAs has been found to reproduce major pathogenic pathways important in neurodegenerative diseases, such as dysfunction of specific populations of neurons, formation of reactive oxygen species, oxidative stress, impaired mitochondrial bioenergetics, mitochondrial dysfunctions, and DNA damage.23,47,49,50,54,83 These studies provide strong evidence that the neurotoxicity induced by HAAs could be relevant to neurodegenerative diseases, especially PD and AD. In this section, both the literature and key gaps in knowledge relative to the primary mechanisms of neurotoxic action are depicted in Figures 1 and 2.

3.1. HAAs Alter Neurotransmitters.

HAA exposure has been found to alter neurotransmitters, particularly dopamine and serotonin in the brain. Such alterations following HAAs exposure may be relevant in the etiology of neurological diseases. Specific biochemical pathways may be targeted by HAAs that disrupt neurotransmission.

3.1.1. HAAs Bind to Monoamine Oxidase A.

Monoamine oxidase-A (MAO-A) is a mitochondrial enzyme with high expression levels in the brain. MAO-A catalyzes the oxidative deamination of monoamines and has significant roles in metabolizing adrenaline, dopamine, histamine, noradrenaline, and serotonin.84

Harmane has been shown to bind to MAO-A. Studies with 3H-harmane confirmed that the harmane binds to MAO-A with high affinity via an interaction with the catalytic site in mitochondrial brain membrane homogenates. Further, studies have shown that harmane and norharmane interact with an unknown site in the brain and adrenal glands with high affinity in addition to MAO-A.70 Moreover, binding experiments have revealed a reversible, high-affinity binding site for 3H-harmane on MAO-A in the brain of rats and the primate species marmoset.85–87 3H-harmane labels binding sites that reflect the distribution of MAO-A.70

MAO-A inhibitors increase dopamine levels.88 Inhibition of MAO-A by HAAs could potentially increase dopamine levels. Dopamine is reactive (likely dopamine catabolites) and neurotoxic at high concentrations; very high dopamine content could cause cell loss and eventual dopamine depletion.89 HAAs such as 3-amino-1,4-dimethyl-5H-pyrido[4,3-b]indole (Trp-P-1) and 3-amino-1-methyl-5H-pyrido[4,3-b]indole (Trp-P-2) are potent inhibitors of MAO-A, and they alter dopamine metabolism in the brain.90,91 Trp-P-1 and Trp-P-2 decrease 3,4-dihydroxy-phenylalanine (DOPA) formation in striatal tissue slice system.92 Infusion of Trp-P-1 or Trp-P-2 in the rat striatum produces a transient increase in dopamine and continuous decreases in the metabolites of dopamine (homovanillic acid (HVA) and 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic DOPAC) in the perfusate. Systemic administration of Trp-P-1 in mice also decreases DOPAC content and increases striatal dopamine content.92

3.1.2. HAAs Alter Dopamine Metabolism.

Stereotaxic injections of harmane derivatives (2,9-Me2-harmane, 2-Me-harmol, 2-Me-harmaline, 6-MeO-2-Me-harmane, and 2-Me-harmine 2,9-Me2-norharmane) produced lesions in SN of rats. 2,9-Me2-harmane, 2,9-Me2-norharmane, 2-Me-harmane, 2-Me-harmaline, and 2-Me-norharmane, and norharmane reduced striatal dopamine levels. DOPAC levels were decreased by 2-methyl-harmaline, 2,9-Me2-harmane, and 2,9-M2-norhar-mane.93 Administration of acute harmine injection elicited a dose-dependent increase in dopamine and reduction in DOPAC, HVA, and 5-HIAA concentrations in the striatum of rats.94 In zebrafish, exposure to IQ downregulated the genes related to dopamine synthesis, transport, metabolism, and storage (tyrosine hydroxylase, DAT, MAO, and vesicular monoamine transporter 2 (VMAT2)) and the dopamine receptor-related genes (drd1, drd2b, drd3, drd4a, drd4b), again suggesting effects on dopaminergic neurotransmission.68

Studies from our lab showed that exposure to acute high doses of PhIP alters dopamine metabolism. Striatal dopamine metabolites DOPAC and HVA levels and dopamine turnover were decreased; however, no significant changes were observed in dopamine levels, suggesting possible effects on dopamine release. No significant difference was found in striatal VMAT2 that stores the majority of dopamine in dopaminergic neurons, suggesting dopamine release is not affected on PhIP exposure.49 Other neurotransmitter systems (serotoninergic, GABAergic, and glutamatergic) were found to be unaffected in this study. In a follow-up study, no significant changes were found in acetylcholine and acetylcholine esterase activity in mice on PhIP exposure, further supporting specificity to dopaminergic neurotransmission.54

Decreases in DOPAC and HVA observed following exposure to HAAs might also be due to the disruption of dopamine metabolism. Dopamine undergoes oxidative deamination by MAO.95 The product is a potentially toxic intermediate 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetaldehyde (DOPAL), which is oxidized to DOPAC by aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH).96 HAAs such as Trp-P-1 and Trp-P-2 have been shown to inhibit MAO, resulting in substantial decreases in DOPAC and HVA.90–92 Trp-P-2 was found to reversibly inhibit aromatic l-amino acid decarboxylase isolated from the human brainstem. Trp-P-2 was the most potent inhibitor of l-DOPA activity, followed by 2-amino-l-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine, and Trp-P-1.97 Additionally, acute injections of harmane and norharmane elicited dopamine efflux in the nucleus accumbens, whereas administration of an intermediate dose of norharmane and harmane caused a significant decrease in efflux.98,99 MAO and ALDH activity in response to PhIP or other abundant HAAs has not yet been evaluated.

While it is clear that HAAs may impact dopamine metabolite levels, it is unclear whether this is through impaired release, which could increase the unpackaged, reactive intracellular pool, or if there are direct effects on metabolic enzymes. Here, dopamine release and enzyme activity studies are needed.

3.1.3. HAAs Alter Serotonergic Neurotransmission.

Localized administration of harmane in the dorsal hippo-campus of rats increased serotonin levels (5-HT) with no change in 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) levels. Systemic administration of harmane enhanced 5-HT and reduced the levels of 5-HIAA.100 High doses harmane in the nucleus accumbens enhanced extracellular 5-hydroxytryptamine during the first 2 h.99

Harmane overtly elevated potassium (K)-evoked 3H-5-HT release.101 In the absence of high extracellular K, harmane, harmalan, nor harmane evoked release of 5-HT from rat cortical neurons. Harmine exposure increased dopamine efflux in the accumbens shell, with no change in accumbens core in rat brain slices. 5-HT(2A/2C) antagonist ketanserin attenuated the effect of harmine, suggesting that harmine augments dopamine efflux via a presynaptic 5-HT(2A) receptor-dependent mechanism.102

Overall, these studies suggest some HAAs affect serotonergic neurotransmission. Whether serotonergic-dependent function is altered after HAA exposure has yet to be assessed. Here, it will be critical to conduct behavioral batteries that include tests responsive to serotonergic alterations.

3.1.4. HAAs Alter GABAergic Neurotransmission.

Harmane (100–500 μM) exposure in C. elegans induced neurodegeneration in GABAergic neurons. Higher doses were required for serotonergic neurons and GABAergic neurodegeneration.50 Harmane also modulates the exocytotic release of GABA in the rat brain. Harmane and other β-carbolines are proposed to be potential endogenous ligands of the benzodiazepine receptor.103 Diazepam inhibits harmane-induced convulsions.103

3.2. HAAs Bind to Neuromelanin.

Many dopaminergic neurotoxicants have been shown to bind to neuromelanin.47,104–107 Neuromelanin is a dark polymeric pigment of 5, 6-dihydroxyindole monomers, produced in catecholaminergic neurons; dopamine oxidization products are the key precursors in neuromelanin generation. SN and locus coeruleus in the human brain are the predominant regions containing neuromelanin; these regions are darker in color due to high neuromelanin content.108,109 Aging is associated with intracellular neuromelanin accumulation, as neurons lack the mechanisms for degrading or removing neuromelanin.110 Studies show that neuromelanin-forming dopamine neurons are more susceptible to degeneration than non-neuromelanin-forming dopamine neurons in PD patients, suggesting that neuromelanin is, at least in-part, responsible for selective susceptibility of dopaminergic neurons in PD.111–113 While rats are virtually devoid of neuromelanin, recently, ectopic expression of human tyrosinase in rats SN was found to result in the formation of neuromelanin with biophysical properties similar to human neuromelanin. In these animals, intracellular neuromelanin accumulation was associated with PD-relevant neuropathology.114

PhIP is reported to bind to melanin and other pigments in the human hair follicle.115 Harmane and norharmane bind to analogs of melanin used as laboratory models of neuromelanin, Sepia melanin (melanin from Sepia officinalis), and synthetic dopamine-melanin (DAM) with high affinity, possibly indicating that harmane may accumulate in dopamine neurons.116 Data from our lab also showed that harmane, PhIP, and metabolites of PhIP bind to laboratory neuromelanin models with strong affinity; however, the amounts of analyte bound to Sepia melanin and DAM differ due properties of Sepia melanin and DAM. HAAs bind to DAM 3-fold more compared to Sepia melanin. Approximately 217 and 622 μg of harmane can bind to 1 mg of Sepia melanin and DAM, respectively, and 65 and 189 μg of PhIP can bind to 1 mg of Sepia melanin and DAM, respectively.47

Radiolabeled harmane and norharmane selectively bind to pigmented tissues such as the eye, inner ear, skin, and leptomeninges of mice. In contrast, the mouse brain has no preferential uptake or binding in specific regions due to lack of neuromelanin. Whereas in specific frog species (known to produce neuromelanin), selective uptake and retention of 3H-harmane and 3H-norharmane in pigmented brain regions was observed up to 30 days after a single intraperitoneal injection. In amelanotic neurons, there is no specific uptake or retention of 3H-harmane and 3H-norharmane.116 In SH-SY5Y cells, ectopic tyrosinase expression leads to formation of neuromelanin; these neuromelanin-forming cells exhibited significantly greater HAA uptake. SH-SY5Y cells lacking neuromelanin contained 30%–35% of total 14C-PhIP, whereas SH-SY5Y cells forming neuromelanin had levels up to 74%–82% of total exposed 14C-PhIP. Ratiometric analyses showed that the ratio of cellular PhIP to media PhIP increased by approximately 9-fold in neuromelanin-forming cells; increased internal dose was associated with heightened neurotoxicity.47 This selective uptake of HAAs in dopaminergic neurons and progressive release of accumulated HAAs may lead to sustained exposure of neurons to these toxicants and potentially impact PD-relevant neurotoxicity.

With respect to neuromelanin data, it is clear that HAA neurotoxicity studies in the future should be conducted in neuromelanin-forming animals. In models that do not form neuromelanin, a lower internal dose and lack of replication of key brain biochemistry and physiology are likely major translational weaknesses. Thus, transgenic approaches, such as published viral vector delivery models or new, stable transgenic models should be utilized to study HAA neurotoxicity in vivo.

3.3. HAAs Exposure Induces Oxidative Damage.

Oxidative stress is a common feature in the progression of AD, PD, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.117 These diseases are characterized by extensive oxidative damage to lipids, proteins, and DNA, leading to neuronal dysfunction and cell death.118 Numerous studies from our lab provide evidence for oxidative damage induced by HAAs, highlighting that HAAs exposure might be a risk factor for AD and PD.

SH-SY5Y cells exposed to a low dose of harmane (1 μM) produced a 1.6-fold increase in reactive oxygen species (ROS) and up to 3.5-fold increase with higher dose (300 μM); further increasing to 4.2-fold with a high dose (300 μM) in neuromelanin-forming SH-SY5Y cells. A similar dose-dependent increase in ROS in SH-SY5Y cells and heightened toxicity in neuromelanin-forming SH-SY5Y cells were observed on treatments with PhIP and its metabolites. The PhIP metabolite N-OH-PhIP was found to increase ROS at significantly lower doses, indicating higher toxicity than the parent compound. Glutathione levels decreased on exposure to HAAs in SH-SY5Y cells. Nitrotyrosine (NT) levels also increased in SH-SY5Y and neuromelanin-forming SH-SY5Y cells treated with 10 μM PhIP. Pretreatment with N-acetyl cysteine was protective against HAA-induced ROS generation.47 Exposure to harmane leads to increased ROS generation in C. elegans.49 Harmane and MeIQ treatment increased NT in a primary midbrain culture.48 PhIP treatment increased markers of oxidative damage 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal (HNE) and NT in dopaminergic neurons in primary midbrain culture. N-Acetyl cysteine pretreatment ameliorated PhIP-induced HNE and NT formation.23 Exposure to 8 and 80 ng/mL IQ in zebrafish upregulated expression of antioxidant enzymes genes, Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase, manganese superoxide dismutase, and catalase, whereas exposure to higher doses at 800 ng/mL downregulated these genes. Glutathione peroxidase 1α levels were downregulated at 80 and 800 ng/mL exposure levels.68 The neurotoxic metabolite of PhIP, N-OH-PhIP, can undergo conjugation reactions to form highly reactive metabolites that covalently bind to the DNA,119 and accumulation of oxidized metabolites of dopamine on HAAs exposure could be the potential source of the oxidative stress. Oxidative stress induced by HAAs affects all of the neuronal population; however, there are differences in the magnitude of damage among the subpopulation of neurons. Section 3.3.1 describes selective sensitivity to dopaminergic neurons, where there is a heightened response to systemic PhIP.

Overall, the finding of oxidative stress is supported across many model systems; this is important given ubiquitous implications in neurodegenerative diseases. However, oxidative stress data are rather general at this point, consisting primarily of oxidized biomolecules. The primary source of oxidative stress needs to be identified to discover unique, primary mechanisms of neurotoxic action (i.e., the molecular initiating event and earliest key events in an adverse outcome pathway).

3.3.1. Dopaminergic Neurons.

Dopaminergic neurons exhibit a higher baseline of oxidative stress versus other neuronal cell types, likely due to dopamine catabolism.120,121 Indeed, dopamine neurons are also more vulnerable to the oxidative damage induced by HAAs. Selective dopaminergic neurotoxicity was observed in C. elegans exposed to 100 μM harmane.50 NH-and 9-MeNH exposure in mice degenerated tyrosine hydroxylase (TH)-positive cells in the SN to 76 and 66% of values in control mice, respectively. In primary cultured mesencephalic cells, TH-positive neurons were killed at a lower dose of 2,9-Me2NH+, whereas higher doses were required to kill other neurons.63

In animal model experiments, rats exposed to high doses of PhIP had oxidative damage (as evidenced by increased NT levels) in dopaminergic neurons of the SN.49 HAAs (IQ, MeIQ, MeIQx, 4,8-DiMeIQx, and PhIP) were toxic to dopaminergic neurons in rat primary midbrain cultures, evident by a decrease in the percentage of dopaminergic neurons. Doses as low as 5 μM IQ, 100 nM 4,8-DiMeIQx, 200 nM MeIQ, and 1 μM PhIP were sufficient to elicit dopaminergic toxicity. Selective dopaminergic neurons toxicity was also observed following α/β-carboline treatment at a dose of 200 nM harmane, 100 nM norharmane and 1 μM AαC. Nondopaminergic cell numbers were intact on exposure to AIA and α/β-carboline HAA. MeIQ and harmane exposure produced oxidative damage in dopaminergic neurons in rat primary midbrain culture. Oxidative damage was also observed in nondopaminergic neurons on HAAs treatment; however, the magnitude of NT level was far less than in dopaminergic neurons.48

While yet unclear, there appears to no identified relationship between mutagenicity and neurotoxicity potencies of HAAs; the neurotoxic potency of HAAs is different from mutagenicity potency rankings. Findings from our lab suggest the following ranking in terms of neurotoxicity for all tested HAAs (lowest threshold dose for dopaminergic cell loss to highest), 4,8-DiMeIQx = norharmane &gt; MeIQ = harmane &gt; MeIQx = PhIP = AαC &gt; IQ.48

In primary midbrain cultures, PhIP and N-OH-PhIP induced a decrease in neurite length and percentage of TH+ neurons (expressed as percent of total neurons), indicating selective toxicity to dopaminergic neurons. 4-OH-PhIP did not produce neurotoxicity to dopaminergic neurons.23

Current evidence is highly suggestive of selective dopaminergic neurotoxicity. A critical next step is an unbiased stereology in chronically exposed animal models to quantitatively assess whether selective dopaminergic cell loss occurs.

3.3.2. Cholinergic Neurons.

Harmane (100–500 μM) exposure in C. elegans induced neurodegeneration in cholinergic neurons at higher doses. Cholinergic neurons were least susceptible to harmane-induced neurodegeneration compared to dopaminergic, serotonergic, and GABAergic neurons.50 In animal models, cholinergic neurons in the dorsal striatal region revealed oxidative damage in mice following acute systemic exposure to PhIP. Noncholinergic cells in this region were susceptible to PhIP-induced oxidative damage only on subacute and subchronic systemic PhIP exposure.54 At this point, the potency of HAA-induced effects on cholinergic neurotransmission is unknown and needs to be further evaluated (AD relevant neuropathology described in detail in Section 4).

3.4. HAAs Exposure Induces Mitochondrial Toxicity.

Mitochondria have been repeatedly implicated as primary targets in environmentally-induced neurodegeneration.122,123 Mitochondria are susceptible to HAAs toxicity and critical in HAAs induced toxicity. Mitochondrial toxicity induced by HAAs could lead to mitochondrial dysfunction and contribute to the initiation of neurodegenerative diseases. PhIP and harmane exposure both affect mitochondrial bioenergetics in SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells, where decreases in basal respiration, ATP synthesis, and maximal capacity were observed. PhIP and harmane elevated the cellular mitochondrial superoxide levels, reduced mitochondrial membrane potential, increased lysosomal membrane permeabilization, and reduced lysosomal acidity.124 Harmane may possibly be more potent than PhIP in inducing such mitochondrial pathologies. Harmane treatment reduced healthy mitochondria, increased mitochondrial fission, autophagy vacuole accumulation, and mitophagy, suggesting mitochondrial dysfunction leading to mitophagy and potential impairments of autophagic flux on harmane exposure.124

A dose-dependent loss of mitochondria with intact proton gradients was observed in C. elegans treated with 100–750 μM harmane. HAAs decrease functional mitochondria, potentially through inhibition of specific mitochondrial complexes of the electron transport chain, as treatment with mitochondrial complex I activator partially rescued harmane-induced neurodegeneration.50 Mitochondrial complex I activator d,l −3-hydroxybutyric acid (HBA) increased mitochondria with intact proton gradients in C. elegans treated with 500 μM harmane. No significant amelioration was observed in the high-dose group. Harmane derivatives (2-methylharmine, 2-methylharmol, 2-methylharmaline, 2-methylharmalol, 2-methylnorharman, 6-OH-2-methylharmalan, and 2-methylharman) were found to inhibit nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD)-(+)-linked O2 consumption in rat liver mitochondria.125 These studies suggest a critical role for mitochondria complex I in harmane-induced toxicity. Further studies are needed to directly evaluate if harmane and its derivatives are mitochondria complex I inhibitors.

Neuromelanin-forming SH-SY5Y cells had an exaggerated neurotoxic response on PhIP and harmane exposure with markedly increased mitochondrial superoxide generation and mitochondrial membrane potential depolarization. Neuromelanin formation ameliorated the impact of HAAs on mitochondrial function and mitochondrial morphology and increased harmane-mediated autophagic flux impairment, providing evidence that the presence of neuromelanin exacerbated the effects of HAAs.124

Overall, current data strongly suggest that HAAs target mitochondria. Given selective sensitivity of dopaminergic neurons to mitochondrial neurotoxicants, such data further support the notion that HAAs could be putative risk factors for PD.

3.5. HAAs Exposure Increases Markers of AD Pathology in the Hippocampus.

Harmane and harmaline exposure produce impaired memory formation and induced amnesia in rodents.64–67 PhIP exposure produced neurotoxicity relevant to AD. A significant increase in beta-secretase 1 (BACE1) was found in the hippocampal mossy fiber terminals upon PhIP exposure. BACE1 activity and levels are both significantly elevated in presynaptic terminals in the brain of aged rodents, nonhuman primates, and AD patients. In mice treated with PhIP for the subchronic duration, an increase in BACE1 was accompanied by a significant increase amyloid precursor protein, amyloid beta 1–42, and phosphorylation of tau in the hippocampus.54 These initial data suggest that HAAs should also be evaluated with respect to AD risk.

4. NEURONS AND REGIONS OF THE BRAIN THAT EXHIBIT HEIGHTENED SENSITIVITY TO HAAS

HAAs exposure causes neurotoxicity in heightened levels in certain regions of the brain (SN, striatum, and hippocampus) and subpopulation of neurons (dopaminergic and cholinergic) relevant to AD and PD pathology described below. Such a widespread effect could explain the presence of overlapping AD and PD neurotoxicity and neuropathology.

As discussed above, harmane and its derivatives levels are reported to be significantly higher in ET and PD cases.51–53 Louis et al. found elevated harmane levels in ET cases in the cerebellum, a region that degenerates in ET.61 Clinical studies have found pathological abnormalities in the cerebellum, brainstem, and white matter in individuals with ETs; these abnormalities primarily affected Purkinje cells, basket cells, and climbing fibers in these regions.126–128

Dopaminergic neurons in C. elegans were most vulnerable to harmane-induced neurodegeneration. Of the dopaminergic neurons, posterior deirid neurons in the tail region were most susceptible to harmane, followed by anterior deirid and cephalic sensilla neurons in the head region. Higher doses were required to produce neurodegeneration in serotonergic, GABAergic, and cholinergic neurons.50 Dopaminergic neurons in rat primary midbrain and mesencephalic culture and in SN in rats were selectively vulnerable to HAAs.48,49,63 Here it is known that dopaminergic neurons are more vulnerable to HAAs neurotoxicity due to the constant generation of ROS during dopamine metabolism. Long and unmyelinated processes of dopaminergic neurons that form multiple synapses increase their dependability on energy production mechanisms.120,129

In rodents, dopaminergic neurons in the SN were affected at a greater magnitude than the one in ventral tegmental area (VTA) on treatment with PhIP. Higher levels of neuromelanin in SN indicate that dopaminergic neurons of the SN could have a greater retention of HAAs and increased susceptibility to HAA toxicity due to the presence of neuromelanin, whereas increased VMAT2 expression in dopaminergic neurons of VTA decreased accumulation of neuromelanin, contributing to lower sensitivity to neurotoxic insults in the VTA. Differential expressions of the dopamine transporter, neurotrophic factors, calcium and potassium channels in these regions contribute to the differences in the sensitivity.49 PD is also characterized by a preferential loss of dopaminergic neurons in the SN, whereas neurons of the VTA are spared.89

Cholinergic neurons in the dorsal striatal region were more vulnerable to PhIP exposure. Noncholinergic neurons in this region were susceptible to PhIP-induced oxidative damage only on prolonged exposure. Striatal cholinergic neuron dysfunction has been reported in AD, PD, Huntington’s disease, and dystonia.130–135 Nicotine reversed harmane-induced impairment of memory in mice, suggesting involvement of the cholinergic system in the harmane-induced memory formation impairment.65 With respect to AD pathology, targets appear to be both cholinergic and noncholinergic.136,137 Thus, noncholinergic aspects of environmentally-induced AD will also be critical to study in AD. Pyramidal neurons of the hippocampus and their synapses and neurotransmitter glutamate are affected in AD.137 Hippocampal neurons of the CA3 region that contain pyramidal neurons were affected on PhIP exposure in mice. Cruz-Sánchez et al. have shown that the oxidative stress pathway starts in the CA3 and progresses to other hippocampal areas in AD progression.83 These data provide evidence that neurons and regions relevant to AD are vulnerable to HAAs toxicity, suggesting that HAAs exposure could be a risk factor for AD.

Taken together, neuropathology findings to date support a possible role for HAAs in multiple neurological diseases. While post-mortem analyses to date have been primarily limited to linking brain β-carbolines to ET, the totality of HAA neurotoxicity data suggest similar analyses should be conducted for PhIP and other HAAs in AD and PD brains as well.

5. LIMITATIONS OF CURRENT DATA SETS AND OPPORTUNITIES TO ADDRESS MAJOR GAPS

In the sections above, specific experiments are suggested as critical next-step experiments. Here, major gaps in the literature are addressed where new research foci are needed.

The concentrations of HAAs used in the reported studies are far higher than the average human consumption. Humans consume numerous HAAs, considering the dietary intake of a single HAA underestimates total HAAs consumption.138,139 PhIP content in the food can vary by &gt;500-fold due to differences in meat types, cooking times, and temperatures.138,140–144 Far higher doses of single representative HAAs are required to elicit neurotoxicity in experimental studies. Higher doses used in these studies are justified by key differences between rodents, C. elegans, and humans.

C. elegans typically require far higher doses of neurotoxicants than other in vivo models due to an impervious cuticle.145 Harmane accumulates in the brain with concentrations approximately 6.5 times greater than peripheral tissue in mammalian systems.52 Harmane concentration in the brain is elevated in ET cases and is roughly 2.5 times that in blood.61 Selective accumulation across the BBB into the parenchyma is not possible in C. elegans. The dose of harmane required in the C. elegans to elicit neurotoxic effects is far higher than a human is likely to be exposed.50

Doses of PhIP used in acute studies in rodents are 2000–40,000 times higher than the average human consumption (5–50 ng/kg daily).49,54 Studies from our lab found that the N-hydroxylation metabolic product (N-OH-PhIP) is more neurotoxic than ring-hydroxylation product (4-OH-PhIP).23 Rodent CYP1A2 converts more PhIP to 4-OH-PhIP than to N-OH-PhIP. N-hydroxylation is 13-fold less efficient in rodents than in humans.25 Rodents may require higher doses to produce neurotoxic N-OH-PhIP metabolites to elicit neurotoxicity. Toxicology studies in animals are indeed often conducted at far higher doses to account for both interspecies and intraspecies differences. However, the magnitude of difference between doses in laboratory studies and actual human exposures can become so large that it calls into question relevance. Here, the quantification of internal (brain) dose in laboratory studies may be particularly useful, especially for HAAs where there are at least some reports of human brain levels, such as for harmane.

A large amount of neuromelanin is found in neurons in the SN of humans,110,146,147 making them more susceptible to the neurotoxic effects of HAAs. Experimental models such as mice, rats, guinea pigs, and rabbits have very small amounts or a lack of neuromelanin, making these models translationally weak. Ectopic tyrosinase expression is a strategy to produce neuromelanin.47,114 In the absence of animal models, a neuronal cell line with ectopic tyrosinase expression has been utilized as a model for neuromelanin formation. However, these transformed cells are less sensitive and require higher doses of HAAs.48 Traditional model systems lacking neuromelanin, such as rats and mice, could be downplaying the neurotoxicity induced by HAAs. Therefore, there is a critical need to utilize models forming neuromelanin that may have more excellent translational value in PD studies due to their increased relevance to human neurobiology. As indicated in the sections above, it is critical to use neuromelanin-forming species or newly created models (conversion of existing models from nonforming to forming) to adequately study HAA neurotoxicity.

There are also significant weaknesses in the literature with respect to neuropathology studies. Many studies have been conducted using intraparenchymal infusion, which is not a relevant route, likely damages the BBB, and produces high, irrelevant local concentrations. Moreover, while these models have produced dopaminergic neurotoxicity, nondopaminergic neurotoxicity is not often assessed. Thus, conclusions on cell-type specificity cannot be drawn. Finally, analyses to date are largely in acute or subacute models. Thus, a major next step with respect to in vivo studies is chronic exposures in animal models with high translational value (i.e., neuromelanin forming).

There are also specific mechanistic gaps. HAAs have not yet been evaluated for effects on the aggregation of protein relevant to AD and PD. Effects of HAAs on AD-and PD-like pathology and behavior should also be evaluated. Future studies should focus on assessing the impact of HAAs on serotonergic, GABAergic, and cholinergic neurotransmission and the relevance of HAAs exposure to other neurological diseases.

Several in vitro studies demonstrated PhIP-DNA adducts formation in human prostate cells. N-OH-PhIP has been reported to directly react with DNA, or it undergoes conjugation reactions to form highly reactive metabolites that covalently bind to DNA; DNA adduct formation should also be evaluated in the brain.20

PhIP has been shown to induce the expression of antioxidant nuclear factor-erythroid factor 2-related factor 2 (NRF2) and FOXO pathways in breast epithelial cells. Given the oxidative damage induced by HAAs in neuronal cells, antioxidant NRF2 and FOXO pathways should be evaluated in neurons exposed to HAAs.

β-Carbolines have been reported to potentiate the rate of insulin secretion,148 and PhIP has been reported to alter leptin signaling via the janus kinase-signal transducer and activator of transcription and mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway cascade.149 Given the importance of these pathways in the brain, the effect of HAAs on these hormones and their influence on the brain should be evaluated.

6. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS BEYOND TOXICOLOGY

Experimental studies have provided substantial data indicating the potential role of HAAs in neurodegeneration. Given the neurotoxicity elicited on exposure to HAAs, HAAs should possibly be considered as risk factors for AD and PD. Future studies pointed out in the sections above are needed to clearly understand the mechanisms associated with HAA-induced neurotoxicity. In addition to these toxicology studies, contributions from epidemiology will be critical. The current literature provides strong support to conduct epidemiological studies on whether those who consume more charred meat or other foods high in HAAs are at greater risk for neurodegenerative diseases. Moreover, targeted studies linking plasma levels as well as post-mortem brain levels to diagnosis and progression will be critical to link with mechanistic toxicology studies. Such linkages will provide a strong basis for determining whether HAAs are a modifiable risk factor for major public health concerns such as AD and PD.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

J.R.C. was supported by ES025750 from the National Institutes of Health. We would like to thank Josephine Brown for critical reading of this manuscript. All images created by the authors using BioRender.com.

Tauqeerunnisa Syeda, Ph.D. Dr. Syeda is a Postdoctoral Fellow in the School of Health Sciences, Purdue University. She received a Ph.D. in pharmacology in 2018 from Centro de Investigación y de estudios Avanzados, Mexico. Her research focuses on the mechanisms of dietary toxicant-induced Alzheimer’s disease-relevant pathology and overlap in etiology and resultant neuropathologies of Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease.

Jason Cannon, Ph.D. Dr. Cannon is an Associate Professor of Toxicology in the School of Health Sciences, Purdue University. Dr. Cannon received a B.S. in physiology from Michigan State University, a Ph.D. in toxicology from the University of Michigan, and postdoctoral training at the Pittsburgh Institute for Neurodegenerative Diseases, University of Pittsburgh. Dr. Cannon studies mechanisms of environmentally-induced neurodegeneration. He recently gave a keynote speech at EUROTOX on this topic.

ABBREVIATIONS

PhIP 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b] pyridine

HONH-PhIP 2-hydroxyamino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo-[4,5-b]pyridine

2-MeNH+ 2-mono-N-methylated norharmanium cation

9-MeNH 9-mono-N′-methylnorharman

Trp-P-1 3-amino-1,4-dimethyl-5H-pyrido[4,3-b]indole

Trp-P-2 3-amino-1-methyl-5H-pyrido[4,3-b]indole

DOPA 4-dihydroxy-phenylalanine

DOPAL 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetaldehyde

5-HT 5-hydroxytryptamine

HNE 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal

AD Alzheimer’s disease

ALDH aldehyde dehydrogenase

AIA aminoimidazoaazarenes

APP amyloid precursor protein

BACE1 beta-secretase 1

BBB blood–brain barrier

BCRP breast cancer resistance protein

CYP cytochrome

DAM dopamine-melanin

DAT dopamine transporter

HBA D,l-3-hydroxybutyric acid

HAAs heterocyclic aromatic amines

HVA homovanillic acid

5-HIAA hydroxyindoleacetic acid

PD Parkinson’s disease

MAO-A monoamine oxidase-A

NAD nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide

NT nitrotyrosine

ROS reactive oxygen species

SN substantia nigra

TG transgenic mice

TH tyrosine hydroxylase

VTA ventral tegmental area

Figure 1. Formation, metabolism, and mechanism of neurotoxicity of HAAs. HAAs are produced in a heat-dependent reaction between amino acids and sugars, producing pyridine, pyrimidine, or pyrazine, which reacts with creatine. HAAs are primarily metabolized in the liver by cytochrome P450 (CYP1A2 is shown as a major metabolic pathway). Methylation, N-acetyltransferases, and sulfotransferases further metabolize HAAs to form acetoxy ester//sulfonyloxy ester/hydroxylated products. HAAs and their metabolite have been detected in the human brain; harmane and its derivatives levels are significantly higher in blood and cerebrospinal fluid of ET and PD patients. Laboratory studies suggest HAAs induces neurotoxicity through binding to neuromelanin, neurotransmitter alterations, mitochondrial toxicity and oxidative damage. Created with BioRender.com.

Figure 2. Proposed mechanisms of HAA neurotoxicity. Mechanisms of neurotoxicity remain poorly understood. However, laboratory and human studies suggest key pathways that should be further explored. Such pathways that target alterations in neurotransmitters, dysfunction of specific populations of neurons, formation of free reactive oxygen species, oxidative stress, impaired mitochondrial dysfunction for AD, ET, and PD relevant pathogenesis are depicted. Note: These pathways are not yet fully supported by the literature, yet there is sufficient support for the premise that proposed pathways should be further investigated in translational models and in human studies. Arrows indicate possibly mechanistic progression, though direct and indirect HAA effects on pathways are possible.

Table 1. List of HAAs Occurring Most Often in Meat

HAAs	abbreviation	refs	
2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b] pyridine	PhIP	5, 7, 8, 60	
2-amino-3-methylimidazo[4,5-f ]quinoline	IQ		
2-amino-3,4-dimethylimidazo[4,5-f ]quinoline	MeIQ		
2-amino-3,8-dimethylmidazo[4,5-f ]quinoxaline	MeIQx		
2-amino-3,4,8-trimethylimidazo[4,5-f ] quinoxaline	4,8-DiMeIQx		
1-methyl-9H-pyrido[3,4-b]indole	harmane		
9H-pyrido[3,4-b]indole	norharmane		
2-amino-9H-pyrido[2,3-b]indole	AαC		

Table 2. Summary of In Vivo and In Vitro HAAs Studies

HAAs	summary of in vivo and in vitro studies	refs	
harmane and its derivatives	harmane and its derivatives levels were significantly higher in blood and cerebrospinal fluid of ET and PD patients	51, 52, 61	
harmane, norharmane, harmane derivatives and norharmane metabolites accumulated at significant levels in the human SN	69	
3H-harmane preferentially accumulated in the rodent brain	70	
selective uptake and retention of 3H-harmane and 3H-norharmane were observed in pigmented brain regions of frog species known to produce neuromelanin	116	
harmane and norharmane bind to analogs of melanin used as laboratory models of neuromelanin	47	
norharmane, 2-MeNH+, and 9-MeNH induced bradykinesia and moderate Parkinsonism-like behavioral symptoms in rodents	62, 63	
harmane and harmaline exposure impaired memory formation and caused amnesia in rodents	64–67	
high and intermediate doses of harmane, norharmane, and harmine elicited and decreased dopamine efflux, respectively, in the nucleus accumbens; harmine elicited a dose-dependent increase in dopamine in the striatum of rats	94, 98, 99	
2,9-Me2-harmane, 2,9-Me2-norharmane, 2-Me-harmane, 2-Me-harmaline, 2-Me-norharmane, and norharmane reduced striatal dopamine levels	93	
harmane binds to MAO-A with high affinity	70, 86–88	
localized and systemic administration of harmane in the dorsal hippocampus of rats increased 5-HT	100–102	
harmane exposure in C. elegans induced neurodegeneration in dopimergic, seretonergic, GABAergic neurons, and cholinergic neurons	50	
harmane is proposed to be potential endogenous ligands of the benzodiazepine receptor	103	
selective primary dopaminergic neurons toxicity was observed following harmane and norharmane treatment	48	
2,9-Me2NH+ induced selective dopaminergic toxicity in primary mesencephalic cells	63	
harmane treatment increased nitrotyrosine in primary midbrain culture	48	
exposure to harmane increased ROS and loss of mitochondria in C. elegans and altered mitochondrial bioenergetics, autophagy vacuole accumulation, and mitophagy in SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells	47, 124	
2,9-Me2-harmane, 2-Me-harmol, 2-Me-harmaline, 6-MeO-2-Meharmane, and 2-Me-harmine 2,9-Me2-norharmane were found to inhibit NAD(+)-linked O2 consumption in rat liver mitochondria	125	
Trp-P-1 and Trp-P-2	Trp-P-1 and Trp-P-2 are potent inhibitors of MAO-A and altered dopamine metabolism in the rodent brain; Trp-P-2 was found to reversibly inhibit aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase	90–92, 97	
MeIQ, MeIQx, 4,8-DiMeIQx	MeIQ, MeIQx, and 4,8-DiMeIQx were toxic to dopaminergic neurons in primary midbrain cultures; MeIQ treatment increased nitotyrosine in primary midbrain culture	48	
IQ	14C-IQ levels in the plasma/brain were substantially higher in BCRP−/− mice than wild-type	75	
IQ was toxic to dopaminergic neurons in rat primary midbrain cultures	48	
IQ exposure downregulated the genes related to dopamine synthesis, transport, metabolism, and storage and upregulated expression of antioxidant enzymes and proinflammatory cytokine-related genes and PD-associated genes	68	
PhIP and N-OH-PhIP	PhIP is reported to bind to melanin and other pigments in the human hair follicle	115	
PhIP and N-OH-PhIP binds to analog of melanin with strong affinity; greater 14C-PhIP uptake was observed in neuromelanin-forming SH-SY5Y cells	47	
PhIP and N-OH-PhIP were detected in the mouse brain after intravenous injection	71	
brain concentration and brain/plasma ratio of PhIP were increased considerably in BCRP−/− mice than wild-type mice	73, 74	
rats exposed to high doses of PhIP had altered dopamine metabolism and oxidative damage in dopaminergic neurons of the SN	49	
PhIP and N-OH-PhIP treatment increased ROS in SH-SY5Y cells. PhIP treatment increased markers of oxidative damage in dopaminergic neurons in primary culture	23, 47	
PhIP exposure increased BACE1, amyloid precursor protein, amyloid beta 1–42, and phosphorylation of tau in hippocampus and oxidative damage in cholinergic neurons	54	
PhIP exposure altered mitochondrial bioenergetics in SH-SY5Y cells	124	

Complete contact information is available at: https://pubs.acs.org/10.1021/acs.chemrestox.1c00274

The authors declare no competing financial interest.


REFERENCES

(1) Skog KI ; Johansson MA ; Jagerstad MI Carcinogenic heterocyclic amines in model systems and cooked foods: a review on formation, occurrence and intake. Food Chem. Toxicol 1998, 36 , 879–896.9737435
(2) Matsumoto T ; Yoshida D ; Tomita H Determination of mutagens, amino-alpha-carbolines in grilled foods and cigarette smoke condensate. Cancer Lett. 1981, 12 , 105–110.7272995
(3) Zamora R ; Hidalgo FJ Formation of heterocyclic aromatic amines with the structure of aminoimidazoazarenes in food products. Food Chem. 2020, 313 , 126128.31951882
(4) Alaejos MS ; Afonso AM Factors That Affect the Content of Heterocyclic Aromatic Amines in Foods. Compr Rev. Food Sci. F 2011, 10 , 52–108.
(5) Gibis M Heterocyclic Aromatic Amines in Cooked Meat Products: Causes, Formation, Occurrence, and Risk Assessment. Compr Rev. Food Sci. F 2016, 15 , 269–302.
(6) Yan Y ; Zhang S ; Tao GJ ; You FH ; Chen J ; Zeng MM Acetonitrile extraction coupled with UHPLC-MS/MS for the accurate quantification of 17 heterocyclic aromatic amines in meat products. J. Chromatogr B Analyt Technol. Biomed Life Sci 2017, 1068-1069, 173–179.
(7) Zhang Y ; Wu WJ ; Zhou WE ; Ren ZQ ; Feng XS ; Zhang F Determination of 14 heterocyclic aromatic amines in meat products using solid-phase extraction and supercritical fluid chromatography coupled to triple quadrupole mass spectrometry. J. Sep Sci 2020, 43 , 1372–1381.31944578
(8) Ozsarac N ; Kolsarici N ; Demirok Soncu E ; Haskaraca G Formation of heterocyclic aromatic amines in doner kebab cooked with different methods at varying degrees of doneness. Food Addit Contam Part A Chem. Anal Control Expo Risk Assess 2019, 36 , 225– 235.30650036
(9) Dong H ; Xian Y ; Li H ; Bai W ; Zeng X Potential carcinogenic heterocyclic aromatic amines (HAAs) in foodstuffs: Formation, extraction, analytical methods, and mitigation strategies. Compr Rev. Food Sci. Food Saf 2020, 19 , 365–404.33325180
(10) Felton JS ; Knize MG ; Shen NH ; Andresen BD ; Bjeldanes LF ; Hatch FT Identification of the mutagens in cooked beef. Environ. Health Perspect 1986, 67 , 17–24.3757953
(11) Felton JS ; Knize MG ; Shen NH ; Lewis PR ; Andresen BD ; Happe J ; Hatch FT The isolation and identification of a new mutagen from fried ground beef: 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo-[4,5-b]pyridine (PhIP). Carcinogenesis 1986, 7 , 1081–1086.3719903
(12) Bogen KT ; Keating GAUS dietary exposures to heterocyclic amines. J. Expo Anal Environ. Epidemiol 2001, 11 , 155–168.11477514
(13) In Red Meat and Processed Meat: IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans; World Health Organization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2018.
(14) Cross AJ ; Sinha R Meat-related mutagens/carcinogens in the etiology of colorectal cancer. Environ. Mol. Mutagen 2004, 44 , 44–55.15199546
(15) Janoszka B ; Nowak A ; Szumska M ; Sniezek E ; Tyrpien-Golder K Human exposure to biologically active heterocyclic aromatic amines arising from thermal processing of protein rich food. Wiad Lek 2019, 72 , 1542–1550.32012506
(16) Turesky RJ ; Lang NP ; Butler MA ; Teitel CH ; Kadlubar FF Metabolic activation of carcinogenic heterocyclic aromatic amines by human liver and colon. Carcinogenesis 1991, 12 , 1839–1845.1934265
(17) Ma X ; Idle JR ; Malfatti MA ; Krausz KW ; Nebert DW ; Chen CS ; Felton JS ; Waxman DJ ; Gonzalez FJ Mouse lung CYP1A1 catalyzes the metabolic activation of 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine (PhIP). Carcinogenesis 2006, 28 , 732–737.17052995
(18) Vanhaecke L ; Knize MG ; Noppe H ; De Brabander H ; Verstraete W ; Van de Wiele T Intestinal bacteria metabolize the dietary carcinogen 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine following consumption of a single cooked chicken meal in humans. Food Chem. Toxicol 2008, 46 , 140–148.17766021
(19) Vanhaecke L ; Van Hoof N ; Van Brabandt W ; Soenen B ; Heyerick A ; De Kimpe N ; De Keukeleire D ; Verstraete W ; Van de Wiele T Metabolism of the food-associated carcinogen 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine by human intestinal micro-biota. J. Agric. Food Chem 2006, 54 , 3454–3461.16637707
(20) Turesky RJ ; Le Marchand L Metabolism and biomarkers of heterocyclic aromatic amines in molecular epidemiology studies: lessons learned from aromatic amines. Chem. Res. Toxicol 2011, 24 , 1169–1214.21688801
(21) Bellamri M ; Walmsley SJ ; Turesky RJ Metabolism and biomarkers of heterocyclic aromatic amines in humans. Genes Environ 2021, 43 , 29.34271992
(22) Guengerich FP ; Shimada T Oxidation of toxic and carcinogenic chemicals by human cytochrome P-450 enzymes. Chem. Res. Toxicol 1991, 4 , 391–407.1912325
(23) Griggs AM ; Agim ZS ; Mishra VR ; Tambe MA ; Director-Myska AE ; Turteltaub KW ; McCabe GP ; Rochet JC ; Cannon JR 2-Amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine (PhIP) is selectively toxic to primary dopaminergic neurons in vitro. Toxicol. Sci 2014, 140 , 179–189.24718704
(24) Fretland AJ ; Devanaboyina US ; Doll MA ; Zhao S ; Xiao GH ; Hein DW Metabolic activation of 2-hydroxyamino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine in Syrian hamsters congenic at the N-acetyltransferase 2 (NAT2) locus. Toxicol. Sci 2003, 74 , 253–259.12773763
(25) Cheung C ; Ma X ; Krausz KW ; Kimura S ; Feigenbaum L ; Dalton TP ; Nebert DW ; Idle JR ; Gonzalez FJ Differential metabolism of 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine (PhIP) in mice humanized for CYP1A1 and CYP1A2. Chemical research in toxicology 2005, 18 , 1471–1478.16167840
(26) Turesky RJ Formation and biochemistry of carcinogenic heterocyclic aromatic amines in cooked meats. Toxicol. Lett 2007, 168 , 219–227.17174486
(27) Herraiz T ; Guillen H ; Aran VJ Oxidative metabolism of the bioactive and naturally occurring beta-carboline alkaloids, norharman and harman, by human cytochrome P450 enzymes. Chem. Res. Toxicol 2008, 21 , 2172–2180.19238614
(28) Chen X ; Jia W ; Zhu L ; Mao L ; Zhang Y Recent advances in heterocyclic aromatic amines: An update on food safety and hazardous control from food processing to dietary intake. Compr Rev. Food Sci. Food Saf 2020, 19 , 124–148.33319523
(29) Puangsombat K ; Gadgil P ; Houser TA ; Hunt MC ; Smith JS Occurrence of heterocyclic amines in cooked meat products. Meat Sci. 2012, 90 , 739–746.22129588
(30) Bula M ; Przybylski W ; Jaworska D ; Kajak-Siemaszko K Formation of heterocyclic aromatic amines in relation to pork quality and heat treatment parameters. Food Chem. 2019, 276 , 511–519.30409627
(31) Pouzou JG ; Costard S ; Zagmutt FJ Probabilistic assessment of dietary exposure to heterocyclic amines and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons from consumption of meats and breads in the United States. Food Chem. Toxicol 2018, 114 , 361–374.29448093
(32) Rohrmann S ; Zoller D ; Hermann S ; Linseisen J Intake of heterocyclic aromatic amines from meat in the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC)-Heidelberg cohort. Br. J. Nutr 2007, 98 , 1112–1115.18309547
(33) Klapec T ; Peria D Quick estimation of dietary exposure to heterocyclic aromatic amines and acrylamide in a Croatian female population. J. Food Nutr. Res 2014, 53 , 251–259.
(34) Wong KY ; Su J ; Knize MG ; Koh WP ; Seow A Dietary exposure to heterocyclic amines in a Chinese population. Nutr Cancer 2005, 52 , 147–155.16201846
(35) Iwasaki M ; Tsugane S Dietary heterocyclic aromatic amine intake and cancer risk: epidemiological evidence from Japanese studies. Genes Environ 2021, 43 , 33.34315542
(36) Jahurul MH ; Jinap S ; Ang SJ ; Abdul-Hamid A ; Hajeb P ; Lioe HN ; Zaidul IS Dietary exposure to heterocyclic amines in high-temperature cooked meat and fish in Malaysia. Food Addit Contam Part A Chem. Anal Control Expo Risk Assess 2010, 27 , 1060–1071.20589547
(37) Abbas MM ; Xu Z ; Tan LCS Epidemiology of Parkinson’s Disease-East Versus West. Mov Disord Clin Pract 2018, 5 , 14–28.30363342
(38) Rizzi L ; Rosset I ; Roriz-Cruz M Global epidemiology of dementia: Alzheimer’s and vascular types. Biomed Res. Int 2014, 2014 , 908915.25089278
(39) Agim ZS ; Cannon JR Dietary factors in the etiology of Parkinson’s disease. Biomed Res. Int 2015, 2015 , 672838.25688361
(40) Chen H ; Zhang SM ; Hernan MA ; Willett WC ; Ascherio A Diet and Parkinson’s disease: a potential role of dairy products in men. Ann. Neurol 2002, 52 , 793–801.12447934
(41) Francis H ; Stevenson R The longer-term impacts of Western diet on human cognition and the brain. Appetite 2013, 63 , 119–128.23291218
(42) Grant WB Using Multicountry Ecological and Observational Studies to Determine Dietary Risk Factors for Alzheimer’s Disease. J. Am. Coll Nutr 2016, 35 , 476–489.27454859
(43) Perrone L ; Grant WB Observational and ecological studies of dietary advanced glycation end products in national diets and Alzheimer’s disease incidence and prevalence. J. Alzheimers Dis 2015, 45 , 965–979.25633677
(44) Anderson C ; Checkoway H ; Franklin GM ; Beresford S ; Smith-Weller T ; Swanson PD Dietary factors in Parkinson’s disease: the role of food groups and specific foods. Mov Disord 1999, 14 , 21–27.9918340
(45) Hu N ; Yu JT ; Tan L ; Wang YL ; Sun L ; Tan L Nutrition and the risk of Alzheimer’s disease. Biomed Res. Int 2013, 2013 , 524820.23865055
(46) Johnson CC ; Gorell JM ; Rybicki BA ; Sanders K ; Peterson EL Adult nutrient intake as a risk factor for Parkinson’s disease. Int. J. Epidemiol 1999, 28 , 1102–1109.10661654
(47) Lawana V ; Um SY ; Rochet JC ; Turesky RJ ; Shannahan JH ; Cannon JR Neuromelanin Modulates Heterocyclic Aromatic Amine-Induced Dopaminergic Neurotoxicity. Toxicol. Sci 2020, 173 , 171–188.31562763
(48) Cruz-Hernandez A ; Agim ZS ; Montenegro PC ; McCabe GP ; Rochet JC ; Cannon JR Selective dopaminergic neurotoxicity of three heterocyclic amine subclasses in primary rat midbrain neurons. Neurotoxicology 2018, 65 , 68–84.29408373
(49) Agim ZS ; Cannon JR Alterations in the nigrostriatal dopamine system after acute systemic PhIP exposure. Toxicology letters 2018, 287 , 31–41.29378243
(50) Sammi SR ; Agim ZS ; Cannon JR From the Cover: Harmane-Induced Selective Dopaminergic Neurotoxicity in Caenorhabditis elegans. Toxicol. Sci 2018, 161 , 335–348.29069497
(51) Kuhn W ; Muller T ; Grosse H ; Rommelspacher H Elevated levels of harman and norharman in cerebrospinal fluid of parkinsonian patients. J. Neural Transm (Vienna) 1996, 103 , 1435–1440.9029410
(52) Louis ED ; Michalec M ; Jiang W ; Factor-Litvak P ; Zheng W Elevated blood harmane (1-methyl-9H-pyrido[3,4-b]indole) concentrations in Parkinson’s disease. Neurotoxicology 2014, 40 , 52–56.24300779
(53) Louis ED ; Zheng W ; Jurewicz EC ; Watner D ; Chen J ; Factor-Litvak P ; Parides M Elevation of blood beta-carboline alkaloids in essential tremor. Neurology 2002, 59 , 1940–1944.12499487
(54) Syeda T ; Foguth RM ; Llewellyn E ; Cannon JR PhIP exposure in rodents produces neuropathology potentially relevant to Alzheimer’s disease. Toxicology 2020, 437 , 152436.32169473
(55) Compta Y ; Parkkinen L ; O’Sullivan SS ; Vandrovcova J ; Holton JL ; Collins C ; Lashley T ; Kallis C ; Williams DR ; de Silva R ; Lees AJ ; Revesz T Lewy-and Alzheimer-type pathologies in Parkinson’s disease dementia: which is more important? Brain 2011, 134 , 1493–1505.21596773
(56) Perl DP ; Warren CO ; Calne D Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease: distinct entities or extremes of a spectrum of neurodegeneration? Ann. Neurol 1998, 44 , S19–31.9749570
(57) Xie A ; Gao J ; Xu L ; Meng D Shared mechanisms of neurodegeneration in Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease. Biomed Res. Int 2014, 2014 , 648740.24900975
(58) Campdelacreu J Parkinson disease and Alzheimer disease: environmental risk factors. Neurologia 2014, 29 , 541–549.22703631
(59) Rosen AR ; Steenland NK ; Hanfelt J ; Factor SA ; Lah JJ ; Levey AI Evidence of shared risk for Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease using family history. Neurogenetics 2007, 8 , 263–270.17805588
(60) Louis ED ; Zheng W ; Jiang W ; Bogen KT ; Keating GA Quantification of the neurotoxic beta-carboline harmane in barbecued/grilled meat samples and correlation with level of doneness. J. Toxicol Environ. Health A 2007, 70 , 1014–1019.17497412
(61) Louis ED ; Factor-Litvak P ; Liu X ; Vonsattel JP ; Galecki M ; Jiang W ; Zheng W Elevated brain harmane (1-methyl-9H-pyrido[3,4-b]indole) in essential tremor cases vs. controls. Neurotoxicology 2013, 38 , 131–135.23911942
(62) Esmaeili MH ; Movahedi M ; Faraji A ; Haghdoost-Yazdi H Intracerebral injection of low amounts of norharman induces moderate Parkinsonism-like behavioral symptoms in rat. Neurotoxicol Teratol 2012, 34 , 489–494.22789434
(63) Matsubara K ; Gonda T ; Sawada H ; Uezono T ; Kobayashi Y ; Kawamura T ; Ohtaki K ; Kimura K ; Akaike A Endogenously occurring beta-carboline induces parkinsonism in nonprimate animals: a possible causative protoxin in idiopathic Parkinson’s disease. J. Neurochem 1998, 70 , 727–735.9453568
(64) Nasehi M ; Piri M ; Nouri M ; Farzin D ; Nayer-Nouri T ; Zarrindast MR Involvement of dopamine D1/D2 receptors on harmane-induced amnesia in the step-down passive avoidance test. Eur. J. Pharmacol 2010, 634 , 77–83.20188725
(65) Nasehi M ; Sharifi S ; Zarrindast MR Involvement of the cholinergic system of CA1 on harmane-induced amnesia in the step-down passive avoidance test. J. Psychopharmacol 2012, 26 , 1151–1161.21965190
(66) Nasehi M ; Ketabchi M ; Khakpai F ; Zarrindast MR The effect of CA1 dopaminergic system in harmaline-induced amnesia. Neuroscience 2015, 285 , 47–59.25446354
(67) Nasehi M ; Hasanvand S ; Khakpai F ; Zarrindast MR The effect of CA1 dopaminergic system on amnesia induced by harmane in mice. Acta Neurol Belg 2019, 119 , 369–377.29767374
(68) Li Z ; Cao P ; Meng H ; Li D ; Zhang Y ; Li Y ; Wang S Long-term exposure to 2-amino-3-methylimidazo[4,5-f]quinoline can trigger a potential risk of Parkinson’s disease. J. Hazard Mater 2021, 412 , 125230.33548786
(69) Matsubara K ; Collins MA ; Akane A ; Ikebuchi J ; Neafsey EJ ; Kagawa M ; Shiono H Potential bioactivated neurotoxicants, N-methylated beta-carbolinium ions, are present in human brain. Brain Res. 1993, 610 , 90–96.8518935
(70) Anderson NJ ; Tyacke RJ ; Husbands SM ; Nutt DJ ; Hudson AL ; Robinson ES In vitro and ex vivo distribution of [3H]harmane, an endogenous beta-carboline, in rat brain. Neuropharmacology 2006, 50 , 269–276.16242163
(71) Teunissen SF ; Vlaming ML ; Rosing H ; Schellens JH ; Schinkel AH ; Beijnen JH Development and validation of a liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry assay for the analysis of 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine (PhIP) and its metabolite 2-hydroxyamino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine (N-OH-PhIP) in plasma, urine, bile, intestinal contents, faeces and eight selected tissues from mice. J. Chromatogr B Analyt Technol. Biomed Life Sci 2010, 878 , 2353–2362.
(72) Cooray HC ; Blackmore CG ; Maskell L ; Barrand MA Localisation of breast cancer resistance protein in microvessel endothelium of human brain. Neuroreport 2002, 13 , 2059–2063.12438926
(73) van Herwaarden AE ; Jonker JW ; Wagenaar E ; Brinkhuis RF ; Schellens JH ; Beijnen JH ; Schinkel AH The breast cancer resistance protein (Bcrp1/Abcg2) restricts exposure to the dietary carcinogen 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine. Cancer Res. 2003, 63 , 6447–6452.14559835
(74) Enokizono J ; Kusuhara H ; Ose A ; Schinkel AH ; Sugiyama Y Quantitative investigation of the role of breast cancer resistance protein (Bcrp/Abcg2) in limiting brain and testis penetration of xenobiotic compounds. Drug Metab. Dispos 2008, 36 , 995–1002.18322075
(75) van Herwaarden AE ; Wagenaar E ; Karnekamp B ; Merino G ; Jonker JW ; Schinkel AH Breast cancer resistance protein (Bcrp1/Abcg2) reduces systemic exposure of the dietary carcinogens aflatoxin B1, IQ and Trp-P-1 but also mediates their secretion into breast milk. Carcinogenesis 2005, 27 , 123–130.16000399
(76) Meyer MR ; Maurer HH Metabolism of designer drugs of abuse: an updated review. Curr. Drug Metab 2010, 11 , 468–482.20540700
(77) Geng J ; Strobel HW Identification of cytochromes P450 1A2, 2A1, 2C7, 2E1 in rat glioma C6 cell line by RT-PCR and specific restriction enzyme digestion. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun 1993, 197 , 1179–1184.7506539
(78) Yun CH ; Park HJ ; Kim SJ ; Kim HK Identification of cytochrome P450 1A1 in human brain. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun 1998, 243 , 808–810.9500998
(79) Warner M ; Hellmold H ; Yoshida S ; Liao D ; Hedlund E ; Gustafsson JA Cytochrome P450 in the breast and brain: role in tissue-specific activation of xenobiotics. Mutat. Res 1997, 376 , 79–85.9202741
(80) Wahid M ; Mahjabeen I ; Baig RM ; Kayani MA Expression of CYP1A1 and GSTP1 in human brain tumor tissues in Pakistan. Asian Pac J. Cancer Prev 2013, 14 , 7187–7191.24460273
(81) Tolledo C ; Stocco MR ; Miksys S ; Gonzalez FJ ; Tyndale RF Human CYP2D6 Is Functional in Brain In Vivo: Evidence from Humanized CYP2D6 Transgenic Mice. Mol. Neurobiol 2020, 57 , 2509–2520.32189192
(82) Stocco MR ; Tolledo C ; Wadji FB ; Gonzalez FJ ; Miksys S ; Tyndale RF Human CYP2D6 in the Brain Is Protective Against Harmine-Induced Neurotoxicity: Evidence from Humanized CYP2D6 Transgenic Mice. Mol. Neurobiol 2020, 57 , 4608–4621.32761352
(83) Cruz-Sanchez FF ; Girones X ; Ortega A ; Alameda F ; Lafuente JV Oxidative stress in Alzheimer’s disease hippocampus: a topographical study. J. Neurol Sci 2010, 299 , 163–167.20863531
(84) Shih JC ; Chen K ; Ridd MJ Monoamine oxidase: from genes to behavior. Annu. Rev. Neurosci 1999, 22 , 197–217.10202537
(85) May T ; Pawlik M ; Rommelspacher H [3H]harman binding experiments. II: Regional and subcellular distribution of specific [3H]harman binding and monoamine oxidase subtypes A and B activity in marmoset and rat. J. Neurochem 1991, 56 , 500–508.1988553
(86) May T ; Strauss S ; Rommelspacher H [3H]Harman labels selectively and with high affinity the active site of monoamine oxidase (EC 1.4.3.4) subtype A (MAO-A) in rat, marmoset, and pig. J. Neural Transm Suppl 1990, 32 , 93–102.2128516
(87) Rommelspacher H ; May T ; Salewski B Harman (1-methyl-beta-carboline) is a natural inhibitor of monoamine oxidase type A in rats. Eur. J. Pharmacol 1994, 252 , 51–59.8149995
(88) Goldstein DS ; Jinsmaa Y ; Sullivan P ; Holmes C ; Kopin IJ ; Sharabi Y Comparison of Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors in Decreasing Production of the Autotoxic Dopamine Metabolite 3,4-Dihydroxyphenylacetaldehyde in PC12 Cells. J. Pharmacol Exp Ther 2016, 356 , 483–492.26574516
(89) Mosharov EV ; Larsen KE ; Kanter E ; Phillips KA ; Wilson K ; Schmitz Y ; Krantz DE ; Kobayashi K ; Edwards RH ; Sulzer D Interplay between cytosolic dopamine, calcium, and alpha-synuclein causes selective death of substantia nigra neurons. Neuron 2009, 62 , 218–229.19409267
(90) Kojima T ; Naoi M ; Wakabayashi K ; Sugimura T ; Nagatsu T 3-amino-1-methyl-5H-pyrido[4,3-b]indole (Trp-P-2) and other heterocyclic amines as inhibitors of mitochondrial monoamine oxidases separated from human brain synaptosomes. Neurochem. Int 1990, 16 , 51–57.20504539
(91) Maruyama W ; Ota A ; Takahashi A ; Nagatsu T ; Naoi M Food-derived heterocyclic amines, 3-amino-1,4-dimethyl-5H-pyrido-[4,3-b]indole and related amines, as inhibitors of monoamine metabolism. J. Neural Transm Suppl 1994, 41 , 327–333.7931246
(92) Ichinose H ; Ozaki N ; Nakahara D ; Naoi M ; Wakabayashi K ; Sugimura T ; Nagatsu T Effects of heterocyclic amines in food on dopamine metabolism in nigro-striatal dopaminergic neurons. Biochem. Pharmacol 1988, 37 , 3289–3295.2900009
(93) Neafsey EJ ; Albores R ; Gearhart D ; Kindel G ; Raikoff K ; Tamayo F ; Collins MA Methyl-beta-carbolinium analogs of MPP+ cause nigrostriatal toxicity after substantia nigra injections in rats. Brain Res. 1995, 675 , 279–288.7796140
(94) Iurlo M ; Leone G ; Schilstrom B ; Linner L ; Nomikos G ; Hertel P ; Silvestrini B ; Svensson H Effects of harmine on dopamine output and metabolism in rat striatum: role of monoamine oxidase-A inhibition. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2001, 159 , 98–104.11797076
(95) Cai Z Monoamine oxidase inhibitors: promising therapeutic agents for Alzheimer’s disease (Review). Mol. Med. Rep 2014, 9 , 1533–1541.24626484
(96) Elsworth JD ; Roth RH Dopamine synthesis, uptake, metabolism, and receptors: relevance to gene therapy of Parkinson’s disease. Exp. Neurol 1997, 144 , 4–9.9126143
(97) Ota M ; Naoi M ; Hamanaka T ; Nagatsu T Inhibition of human brain aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase by cooked food-derived 3-amino-1-methyl-5H-pyrido[4,3-b]indole (Trp-P-2) and other heterocyclic amines. Neurosci. Lett 1990, 116 , 372–378.2243617
(98) Baum SS ; Hill R ; Rommelspacher H Norharman-induced changes of extracellular concentrations of dopamine in the nucleus accumbens of rats. Life Sci. 1995, 56 , 1715–1720.7723600
(99) Baum SS ; Hill R ; Rommelspacher H Harman-induced changes of extracellular concentrations of neurotransmitters in the nucleus accumbens of rats. Eur. J. Pharmacol 1996, 314 , 75–82.8957221
(100) Adell A ; Biggs TA ; Myers RD Action of harman (1-methyl-beta-carboline) on the brain: body temperature and in vivo efflux of 5-HT from hippocampus of the rat. Neuropharmacology 1996, 35 , 1101–1107.9121613
(101) Abu Ghazaleh H ; Lalies MD ; Nutt DJ ; Hudson AL The modulatory action of harmane on serotonergic neurotransmission in rat brain. Brain Res. 2015, 1597 , 57–64.25498864
(102) Brierley DI ; Davidson C Harmine augments electrically evoked dopamine efflux in the nucleus accumbens shell. J. Psychopharmacol 2013, 27 , 98–108.23076833
(103) Rommelspacher H ; Nanz C ; Borbe HO ; Fehske KJ ; Muller WE ; Wollert U 1-Methyl-beta-carboline (harmane), a potent endogenous inhibitor of benzodiazepine receptor binding. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol 1980, 314 , 97–100.6255348
(104) D’Amato RJ ; Lipman ZP ; Snyder SH Selectivity of the parkinsonian neurotoxin MPTP: toxic metabolite MPP+ binds to neuromelanin. Science 1986, 231 , 987–989.3080808
(105) Karlsson O ; Berg C ; Brittebo EB ; Lindquist NG Retention of the cyanobacterial neurotoxin beta-N-methylamino-l-alanine in melanin and neuromelanin-containing cells–a possible link between Parkinson-dementia complex and pigmentary retinopathy. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2009, 22 , 120–130.19154235
(106) Langston JW ; Forno LS ; Tetrud J ; Reeves AG ; Kaplan JA ; Karluk D Evidence of active nerve cell degeneration in the substantia nigra of humans years after 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine exposure. Ann. Neurol 1999, 46 , 598–605.10514096
(107) Lindquist NG ; Larsson BS ; Lyden-Sokolowski A Autoradiography of [14C]paraquat or [14C]diquat in frogs and mice: accumulation in neuromelanin. Neurosci. Lett 1988, 93 , 1–6.3264893
(108) Fedorow H ; Tribl F ; Halliday G ; Gerlach M ; Riederer P ; Double KL Neuromelanin in human dopamine neurons: comparison with peripheral melanins and relevance to Parkinson’s disease. Prog. Neurobiol 2005, 75 , 109–124.15784302
(109) Marsden CD Pigmentation in the nucleus substantiae nigrae of mammals. J. Anat 1961, 95 , 256–261.13767161
(110) Vila M Neuromelanin, aging, and neuronal vulnerability in Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord 2019, 34 , 1440–1451.31251435
(111) Hirsch E ; Graybiel AM ; Agid YA Melanized dopaminergic neurons are differentially susceptible to degeneration in Parkinson’s disease. Nature 1988, 334 , 345–348.2899295
(112) Hirsch EC ; Graybiel AM ; Agid Y Selective vulnerability of pigmented dopaminergic neurons in Parkinson’s disease. Acta Neurol Scand Suppl 1989, 80 , 19–22.
(113) Kastner A ; Hirsch EC ; Lejeune O ; Javoy-Agid F ; Rascol O ; Agid Y Is the vulnerability of neurons in the substantia nigra of patients with Parkinson’s disease related to their neuromelanin content? J. Neurochem 1992, 59 , 1080–1089.1494900
(114) Carballo-Carbajal I ; Laguna A ; Romero-Gimenez J ; Cuadros T ; Bove J ; Martinez-Vicente M ; Parent A ; Gonzalez-Sepulveda M ; Penuelas N ; Torra A ; Rodriguez-Galvan B ; Ballabio A ; Hasegawa T ; Bortolozzi A ; Gelpi E ; Vila M Brain tyrosinase overexpression implicates age-dependent neuromelanin production in Parkinson’s disease pathogenesis. Nat. Commun 2019, 10 , 973.30846695
(115) Turesky RJ ; Liu L ; Gu D ; Yonemori KM ; White KK ; Wilkens LR ; Le Marchand L Biomonitoring the cooked meat carcinogen 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine in hair: impact of exposure, hair pigmentation, and cytochrome P450 1A2 phenotype. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2013, 22 , 356–364.23329727
(116) Ostergren A ; Annas A ; Skog K ; Lindquist NG ; Brittebo EB Long-term retention of neurotoxic beta-carbolines in brain neuromelanin. J. Neural Transm (Vienna) 2004, 111 , 141–157.14767717
(117) Kim GH ; Kim JE ; Rhie SJ ; Yoon S The Role of Oxidative Stress in Neurodegenerative Diseases. Exp Neurobiol 2015, 24 , 325–340.26713080
(118) Barnham KJ ; Masters CL ; Bush AI Neurodegenerative diseases and oxidative stress. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov 2004, 3 , 205–214.15031734
(119) Wang Y ; Peng L ; Bellamri M ; Langouet S ; Turesky RJ Mass Spectrometric Characterization of Human Serum Albumin Adducts Formed with N-Oxidized Metabolites of 2-Amino-1-methylphenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine in Human Plasma and Hepatocytes. Chem. Res. Toxicol 2015, 28 , 1045–1059.25815793
(120) Hastings TG ; Zigmond MJ Identification of catechol-protein conjugates in neostriatal slices incubated with [3H]dopamine: impact of ascorbic acid and glutathione. Journal of neurochemistry 1994, 63 , 1126–1132.8051554
(121) Horowitz MP ; Milanese C ; Di Maio R ; Hu X ; Montero LM ; Sanders LH ; Tapias V ; Sepe S ; van Cappellen WA ; Burton EA ; Greenamyre JT ; Mastroberardino PG Single-cell redox imaging demonstrates a distinctive response of dopaminergic neurons to oxidative insults. Antioxid Redox Signal 2011, 15 , 855–871.21395478
(122) Cannon JR ; Greenamyre JT Neurotoxic in vivo models of Parkinson’s disease recent advances. Progress in brain research 2010, 184 , 17–33.20887868
(123) Cannon JR ; Greenamyre JT The role of environmental exposures in neurodegeneration and neurodegenerative diseases. Toxicol. Sci 2011, 124 , 225–250.21914720
(124) Lawana V ; Um SY ; Foguth RM ; Cannon JR Neuromelanin formation exacerbates HAA-induced mitochondrial toxicity and mitophagy impairments. Neurotoxicology 2020, 81 , 147–160.33058929
(125) Albores R ; Neafsey EJ ; Drucker G ; Fields JZ ; Collins MA Mitochondrial respiratory inhibition by N-methylated beta-carboline derivatives structurally resembling N-methyl-4-phenylpyridine. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 1990, 87 , 9368–9372.2251279
(126) Bares M ; Husarova I ; Lungu OV Essential tremor, the cerebellum, and motor timing: towards integrating them into one complex entity. Tremor Other Hyperkinet. Mov 2020, 2 , 121.
(127) Louis ED ; Faust PL Essential tremor pathology: neurodegeneration and reorganization of neuronal connections. Nat. Rev. Neurol 2020, 16 , 69–83.31959938
(128) Yu M ; Ma K ; Faust PL ; Honig LS ; Cortes E ; Vonsattel JP ; Louis ED Increased number of Purkinje cell dendritic swellings in essential tremor. Eur. J. Neurol 2012, 19 , 625–630.22136494
(129) Matsuda W ; Furuta T ; Nakamura KC ; Hioki H ; Fujiyama F ; Arai R ; Kaneko T Single nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurons form widely spread and highly dense axonal arborizations in the neostriatum. J. Neurosci 2009, 29 , 444–453.19144844
(130) Aubert I ; Araujo DM ; Cecyre D ; Robitaille Y ; Gauthier S ; Quirion R Comparative alterations of nicotinic and muscarinic binding sites in Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases. J. Neurochem 1992, 58 , 529–541.1729398
(131) Calabresi P ; Centonze D ; Gubellini P ; Pisani A ; Bernardi G Acetylcholine-mediated modulation of striatal function. Trends Neurosci 2000, 23 , 120–126.10675916
(132) Court JA ; Piggott MA ; Lloyd S ; Cookson N ; Ballard CG ; McKeith IG ; Perry RH ; Perry EK Nicotine binding in human striatum: elevation in schizophrenia and reductions in dementia with Lewy bodies, Parkinson’s disease and Alzheimer’s disease and in relation to neuroleptic medication. Neuroscience 2000, 98 , 79–87.10858614
(133) Eskow Jaunarajs KL ; Bonsi P ; Chesselet MF ; Standaert DG ; Pisani A Striatal cholinergic dysfunction as a unifying theme in the pathophysiology of dystonia. Prog. Neurobiol 2015, 127–128, 91–107.
(134) Gilman S ; Koeppe RA ; Nan B ; Wang CN ; Wang X ; Junck L ; Chervin RD ; Consens F ; Bhaumik A Cerebral cortical and subcortical cholinergic deficits in parkinsonian syndromes. Neurology 2010, 74 , 1416–1423.20439843
(135) Gotti C ; Moretti M ; Bohr I ; Ziabreva I ; Vailati S ; Longhi R ; Riganti L ; Gaimarri A ; McKeith IG ; Perry RH ; Aarsland D ; Larsen JP ; Sher E ; Beattie R ; Clementi F ; Court JA Selective nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subunit deficits identified in Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease and dementia with Lewy bodies by immunoprecipitation. Neurobiol Dis 2006, 23 , 481–489.16759874
(136) Rasool CG ; Svendsen CN ; Selkoe DJ Neurofibrillary degeneration of cholinergic and noncholinergic neurons of the basal forebrain in Alzheimer’s disease. Ann. Neurol 1986, 20 , 482–488.3539000
(137) Francis PT ; Palmer AM ; Snape M ; Wilcock GK The cholinergic hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease: a review of progress. J. Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1999, 66 , 137–147.10071091
(138) Augustsson K ; Skog K ; Jagerstad M ; Steineck G Assessment of the human exposure to heterocyclic amines. Carcino-genesis 1997, 18 , 1931–1935.
(139) Roemer E ; Meisgen T ; Diekmann J ; Conroy L ; Stabbert R Heterocyclic aromatic amines and their contribution to the bacterial mutagenicity of the particulate phase of cigarette smoke. Toxicology letters 2016, 243 , 40–47.26724587
(140) Byrne C ; Sinha R ; Platz EA ; Giovannucci E ; Colditz GA ; Hunter DJ ; Speizer FE ; Willett WC Predictors of dietary heterocyclic amine intake in three prospective cohorts. Cancer Epidemiol. Biomarkers Prev 1998, 7 , 523–529.9641497
(141) Keating GA ; Bogen KT Estimates of heterocyclic amine intake in the US population. J. Chromatogr B Analyt Technol. Biomed Life Sci 2004, 802 , 127–133.
(142) Knize MG ; Dolbeare FA ; Carroll KL ; Moore DH 2nd ; Felton JS , Effect of cooking time and temperature on the heterocyclic amine content of fried beef patties. Food Chem. Toxicol 1994, 32 , 595–603.8045472
(143) Layton DW ; Bogen KT ; Knize MG ; Hatch FT ; Johnson VM ; Felton JS Cancer risk of heterocyclic amines in cooked foods: an analysis and implications for research. Carcinogenesis 1995, 16 , 39–52.7834804
(144) Zimmerli B ; Rhyn P ; Zoller O ; Schlatter J Occurrence of heterocyclic aromatic amines in the Swiss diet: analytical method, exposure estimation and risk assessment. Food Addit Contam 2001, 18 , 533–551.11407752
(145) Page AP ; Johnstone IL The cuticle. WormBook 2007, 1–15.
(146) Zecca L ; Tampellini D ; Gerlach M ; Riederer P ; Fariello RG ; Sulzer D Substantia nigra neuromelanin: structure, synthesis, and molecular behaviour. Mol. Pathol 2001, 54 , 414–418.11724917
(147) Zucca FA ; Segura-Aguilar J ; Ferrari E ; Munoz P ; Paris I ; Sulzer D ; Sarna T ; Casella L ; Zecca L Interactions of iron, dopamine and neuromelanin pathways in brain aging and Parkinson’s disease. Prog. Neurobiol 2017, 155 , 96–119.26455458
(148) Cooper EJ ; Hudson AL ; Parker CA ; Morgan NG Effects of the beta-carbolines, harmane and pinoline, on insulin secretion from isolated human islets of Langerhans. Eur. J. Pharmacol 2003, 482 , 189–196.14660022
(149) Rogers LJ ; Basnakian AG ; Orloff MS ; Ning B ; Yao-Borengasser A ; Raj V ; Kadlubar S 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo(4,5-b) pyridine (PhIP) induces gene expression changes in JAK/STAT and MAPK pathways related to inflammation, diabetes and cancer. Nutr Metab (Lond) 2016, 13 , 54.27547236
