LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101573691
39703
Cell Rep
Cell Rep
Cell reports
2211-1247

37450368
10449584
10.1016/j.celrep.2023.112774
NIHMS1920506
Article
Evidence for a clathrin-independent endocytic pathway for APP internalization in the neuronal somatodendritic compartment
Aow Jonathan 128*
Huang Tzu-Rung 3
Goh Yeek Teck 1
Sun Alfred Xuyang 4
Thinakaran Gopal 5
Koo Edward H. 267*
1 Genome Institute of Singapore, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), 60 Biopolis Street, Genome, Singapore 138672, Singapore
2 Department of Medicine, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore
3 Graduate School for Integrative Sciences and Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore
4 Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, Signature Research Program in Neuroscience and Behavioural Disorders, Singapore, Singapore
5 USF Health Byrd Alzheimer’s Center and Research Institute and Department of Molecular Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA
6 Department of Neurosciences, University of California San Diego, San Diego, CA, USA
7 Department of Physiology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore
8 Lead contact
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

J.A., T.-R.H., and E.H.K. devised the project and planned experiments. J.A., T.-R.H., and Y.T.G. carried out experiments and analyzed data. A.X.S. provided H9 stem cells and experimental expertise. J.A. wrote and revised the manuscript. E.K. supervised the project and edited the manuscript with input from G.T. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

* Correspondence: aowsj@gis.a-star.edu.sg (J.A.), edkoo@health.ucsd.edu (E.H.K.)
11 8 2023
25 7 2023
12 7 2023
24 8 2023
42 7 112774112774
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
SUMMARY

Amyloid precursor protein (APP) internalization via clathrin-/dynamin-mediated endocytosis (CME) mediated by its YENPTY motif into endosomes containing β-secretase is proposed to be critical for amyloid-beta (Aβ) production. Here, we show that somatodendritic APP internalization in primary rodent neurons is not blocked by inhibiting dynamin or mutating the YENPTY motif, in contrast to non-neuronal cell lines. These phenomena, confirmed in induced human neurons under dynamin inhibition, occur during basal conditions and chemical long-term-depression stimulus, pointing to a clathrin-independent internalization pathway for somatodendritic APP. Mutating the YENPTY motif does not alter APP recycling, degradation, or endolysosomal colocalization. However, both dynamin inhibition and the YENPTY mutant significantly decrease secreted Aβ in neurons, suggesting that internalized somatodendritic APP may not constitute a major source of Aβ. Interestingly, like APP, somatodendritic low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) internalization does not require its CME motif. These results highlight intriguing differences in neuronal internalization pathways and refine our understanding of Aβ production and secretion.

In brief

Aow et al. show that APP internalization in the neuronal somatodendritic compartment is clathrin/dynamin independent, suggesting the presence of specialized endocytic pathways in different neuronal compartments. Internalized somatodendritic APP does not appear to represent a major source of Aβ, indicating that neurons compartmentalize surface APP pools toward downstream processing pathways.

Graphical Abstract


pmcINTRODUCTION

The amyloid-beta (Aβ) peptide is hypothesized to play a seminal role in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) pathogenesis, the most prevalent age-associated dementia.1,2 Aβ is produced via sequential cleavage of the amyloid precursor protein (APP). In the first step, β-secretase (Bace1) cleaves APP, resulting in the soluble APP-β fragment (sAPPβ) and β-C-terminal fragment (β-CTF, or C99). In the second step, C99 is cleaved by γ-secretase to yield Aβ and an intracellular domain peptide3,4 (AICD). APP is cleaved by several other proteases,5,6 some of which, like α-secretase, cleave at sites that preclude the formation of an intact Aβ peptide.7

Neurons are the primary site for Aβ production in the brain. However, where and how Aβ is produced within and secreted from the neuron remains unresolved. Complex neurobiology and experimental difficulties confound efforts to definitively answer this question; many prior studies were performed in non-neuronal cells and may not be applicable in the neuronal context. For example, APP and its enzymes are distributed across multiple organelles and are known to be trafficked extensively within the polarized neuronal environment.8–12 Experimentally, APP cleavage products are hard to identify with specificity given the plethora of cleavage products and because antibodies often recognize multiple APP fragments.13 Similarly, fluorescent-protein-tagged APP constructs are still subject to cleavage14,15 and would encounter the same problems when assayed morphologically by immunolocalization. An additional intriguing phenomenon to account for is neuronal-activity-dependent Aβ production and secretion: Aβ production increases during elevated neuronal activity and decreases when activity is depressed.16–21 This behavior has also been demonstrated in vivo in humans across several paradigms, including wakefulness and sleep,22 and has been linked to the default mode network, a set of brain regions whose pattern of Aβ deposition strongly correlates with activity.23 Thus, models that explain Aβ generation in neurons need to account for the activity-dependent component of Aβ production.

APP/Bace1 interaction and cleavage is the rate-limiting step in the Aβ production pathway24 and thus a major focus of many investigations into Aβ biology. Currently, the hypothesis with arguably the most experimental evidence suggests that APP and Bace1 are separately processed within the secretory pathway, whereby APP is trafficked to the plasma membrane and Bace1 to endosomes.24 Internalization of APP from the plasma membrane is believed to be mediated by its C-terminal –YENPTY– motif, a variant of the canonical –NPXY– motif first identified in the low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR), whose internalization requires clathrin-/dynamin-mediated endocytosis25 (CME). Internalized APP then encounters Bace1 in endosomes,15,26,27 where the acidic environment is thought to permit optimal Bace1 activity.8 Evidence for this model comes from multiple sources. In Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells, APP-YENPTY mutants significantly decreased APP internalization and Aβ production.28 In APP transgenic mice, which carry human APP with the Swedish mutation that enhances Aβ production, infusion of a dynamin inhibitory peptide decreased Aβ levels in the interstitial fluid and blocked activity-dependent increases in Aβ induced by picrotoxin.29 These findings have led to a neuron-specific model positing that Aβ production occurs at axonal boutons, as APP is internalized in a CME-dependent manner during synaptic vesicle recycling.29 However, other models suggest that the APP/Bace1 interaction occurs at the trans-Golgi network30,31 (TGN), somatodendritic endosomes,15 or lysosomes.10 Thus, where and how β- and γ-secretases cleave APP to generate Aβ during periods of basal or heightened neuronal activity remain largely unresolved.

Our intent in this study was to examine changes in APP trafficking in neurons during periods of altered neuronal activity. We began by examining somatodendritic APP internalization in a decreased neuronal activity paradigm using NMDA-induced chemical long-term depression32–34 (cLTD). Surprisingly, somatodendritic APP internalization in this paradigm was neither blocked by the dynamin inhibitor dynasore nor by mutating the APP-YENPTY motif. Using an established APP-bungarotoxin internalization protocol, we showed that, in contrast to all the non-neuronal cell lines we examined, somatodendritic APP internalization appeared not to be clathrin mediated, as neither inhibiting dynamin activity nor mutating the YENPTY motif impaired endocytosis. These findings were consistent across biochemical and morphological assays and a range of APP expression levels. Further, LDLR internalization is also independent of its NPVY motif. However, levels of secreted Aβ were markedly reduced upon dynamin inhibition or in the YENPTY mutant, suggesting that internalized somatodendritic APP is likely not a major source of Aβ production. Together, our results describe somatodendritic APP internalization pathways that may be unique to neurons and refine existing models of Aβ production in neurons.

RESULTS

APP internalization during cLTD does not require dynamin activity or the YENPTY motif

To investigate APP internalization during changes in synaptic activity, we used a brief application of NMDA, which induces cLTD. This protocol triggers robust AMPA receptor internalization that can be detected as a decrease in the fluorescence of AMPA receptors tagged with the pH-sensitive GFP variant super-ecliptic pHluorin35,36 (Sep). To determine if somatodendritic APP is likewise internalized during NMDA application, we coexpressed a Sep-APP construct together with cytoplasmic mCherry (mCh) as an internal control in primary hippocampal neurons (Figure 1). Sep fluorescence is a reliable indicator for endocytosis given the quenching of the signal upon internalization into acidic endosomal organelles.14 Neurons were live imaged before and 5–10 min after drug application, and the somatodendritic Sep/mCh fluorescence ratio after drug application was normalized to the initial value (see STAR Methods). Under control conditions (without NMDA), non-specific, mild Sep photobleaching relative to mCh was observed (~6% decrease; Figures 1Ai and 1B). Relative to control, however, NMDA application induced a significant (~25%) decrease in the Sep/mCh fluorescence ratio, indicating that APP was internalized during NMDA application (Figures 1Aii and 1B). This decrease was NMDA receptor (NMDAR) dependent, as it could be blocked by pre-incubation with the NMDAR inhibitor AP-5 (Figures 1Aiii and 1B). Pre-treatment with the α-secretase inhibitor Tapi-2 did not block the effects of NMDA, indicating that the observed decrease in the Sep/mCh fluorescence ratio was not due to NMDA-enhanced α-secretase-mediated cleavage of APP (Figures 1Aiv and 1B).

We next examined if NMDA-induced APP internalization required dynamin activity and the APP C-terminal YENPTY motif, as has been reported in other studies.28,29 Surprisingly, pre-incubation with the dynamin inhibitor dynasore did not block the decrease in the Sep/mCh ratio (Figures 1Av and 1B). Dynasore incubation alone had no effect on the Sep/mCh ratio (Figures 1Avii and 1B). Likewise, NMDA induced a similar decrease in the Sep/mCh ratio when we transfected a Sep-APP-YENPTY mutant28 (AENATY) to block clathrin-mediated internalization (Figures 1Avi and 1B). These unexpected observations suggested that somatodendritic APP internalization might not require the YENPTY motif or dynamin activity, a surprising finding that requires rigorous confirmation as conducted in the following experiments.

Basal APP internalization in primary neurons does not require the YENPTY motif or dynamin

To track internalized APP more precisely, we employed a previously developed APP internalization assay14 that uses the bungarotoxin (BTX)-ligand system.37 In the construct designed for this assay, the BTX-binding site (BBS) lies between the Sep and APP sequences (Figure S1A). We have shown that application of fluorescently labeled BTX (Alexa 647-BTX, A647-BTX) to Sep-BBS-APP-transfected cells produces punctate fluorescence that reflects the presence of internalized APP molecules.14 To quantify the amount of APP internalization, we immunolabeled the surface Sep-BBS-APP pool post-fixation. We then calculated the ratio of intracellular A647-BTX fluorescence to surface-labeled Sep fluorescence in the somatodendritic compartment (Figures S1B and S1C).

Using this APP reporter construct, we examined if APP internalization was dynamin dependent by treating cells with Dyngo-4a, a potent dynasore analog.38 In Sep-BBS-APP-transfected HeLa or N2a cells, APP internalization in the presence of Dyngo-4a decreased dramatically compared with DMSO (~85% decrease; Figures 2A, 2B, and 2D), indicating that APP internalization in both cell lines is dynamin dependent, consistent with previous reports. Strikingly, somatodendritic APP internalization in the presence of Dyngo-4a increased, rather than decreased, compared with DMSO (&gt;50% increase in both soma and dendrites; Figures 2C and 2D), suggesting that somatodendritic APP internalization is dynamin independent. To confirm that these findings were specific to primary neurons, we tested three additional non-neuronal cell lines: CHO, HEK293, and B103 (Figures S2A–S2D). Similar to our results with HeLa and N2a cells, Dyngo-4a application strongly decreased APP internalization (by ~70%–90%) in these three cell lines.

We then compared APP internalization between wild-type APP (APP-WT) and a YENPTY mutant with four residues mutated to alanine (YENPTY to AEAATA, henceforth APP-4A). In CHO cells, each of these amino acid substitutions significantly impaired APP internalization.28 As expected and consistent with the Dyngo-4a findings, internalization of the APP-4A mutant was significantly lower than APP-WT in both HeLa (~85% decrease; Figures 2E and 2H) and N2a cells (~30% decrease; Figures 2F and 2H). In contrast, but in line with the Dyngo-4a results, we observed no difference in somatodendritic APP internalization between APP-4A and APP-WT in primary neurons (Figures 2G and 2H), suggesting that somatodendritic APP internalization does not require the YENPTY motif. These findings were again specific to primary neurons because internalization of the APP mutant was similarly impaired in CHO, HEK293, and B103 cell lines (~75%–90% decrease; Figures S2E–S2H). Together, these results suggest that the dependence of APP internalization on dynamin and the YENPTY motif is not obligatory across different cell types and that somatodendritic APP internalization exhibits unique behavior.

LDLR internalization in neurons does not require the NPXY motif

We examined whether neurons similarly internalize other NPXY-motif-containing proteins in the somatodendritic compartment or if the above results were unique to APP. The same BTX internalization assay was used to probe LDLR internalization in HeLa cells and primary neurons (Figure 3). Mutation of the NPVY motif in LDLR to AAAA (LDLR-4A) strongly decreased LDLR internalization in HeLa cells (~70%; Figures 3A and 3B). In contrast, there was no change in somatodendritic LDLR internalization in LDLR-4A-transfected primary neurons (Figures 3C and 3D), consistent with what we observed in the APP-4A construct (Figures 2G and 2H). These results suggest that YENPTY-independent somatodendritic APP internalization is not unique to APP per se but is possibly a general feature of NPXY-internalization motifs in the neuronal somatodendritic compartment.

Dyngo-4a blocks transferrin receptor internalization but does not block internalization of other APP chimeric constructs or C99

Given our unexpected initial observations with Dyngo-4a, we performed several additional experiments to bolster our findings. To confirm that Dyngo-4a inhibition of CME was active in primary neurons, we examined if Dyngo-4a blocked transferrin receptor internalization, which is known to be dynamin dependent.29,39 In DMSO-treated control cells, internalized fluorescently labeled transferrin colocalized with immunolabeled transferrin receptors in both HeLa cells and primary neurons (Figure S3). In contrast to APP, Dyngo-4a robustly prevented intracellular accumulation of fluorescently labeled transferrin in both cell types (~80% decrease; Figures S3B and S3D), indicating that Dyngo-4a was active and inhibitory on transferrin receptor endocytosis in both HeLa cells and primary neurons.

To test if the Sep tag in the APP construct affected the findings of Dyngo-4a treatment in primary neurons, we removed the Sep tag from APP and inserted a GFP expression cassette downstream under the control of an internal ribosomal entry site (IRES; BBS-APP-IRES-GFP). As with Sep-BBS-APP, we observed a significant increase in somatodendritic BBS-APP internalization in the presence of Dyngo-4a compared with DMSO, indicating that the presence of Sep did not alter our results and that APP is still resistant to Dyngo-4a treatment (Figure S4).

We examined if trafficking signals underlying the dynamin-independent endocytic behavior of APP resided within the C-terminal end of the APP molecule. We engineered and transfected a BBS-C99-IRES-GFP construct into primary neurons and compared the effects of Dyngo-4a versus DMSO. This chimeric C99 molecule could be detected at the cell surface (using the 6E10 APP antibody or BTX), allowing us to monitor its internalization properties without being confounded by endogenous APP C99 molecules. We observed similar non-inhibitory effects of Dyngo-4a on BBS-C99-IRES-GFP as we did with full-length BBS-APP-IRES-GFP (Figures S5A and S5B). To confirm that the internalized BTX was bound to intact C99, we pre-incubated neurons with the γ-secretase inhibitor L685,458 to block C99 cleavage by γ-secretase. Again, we saw an increase in C99 internalization in the presence of Dyngo-4a compared with DMSO (Figures S5C and S5D). These results suggest that the APP C-terminal domain contains the necessary trafficking signals for dynamin-independent somatodendritic APP endocytosis.

Cell surface antibody binding indicates potential alternate APP internalization pathways

As mentioned, there is a paucity of studies on APP internalization in primary neurons. Two reports utilized the same antibody to the extracellular domain of APP, 22C11, and both demonstrated that APP internalization was dynamin-dependent,40,41 which contrasts with our results described above. To investigate this discrepancy, we measured APP internalization in the presence of Dyngo-4a or DMSO using the same 22C11 antibody utilized previously,40,41 as well as a polyclonal GFP antibody against Sep. To our surprise, somatodendritic APP internalization significantly decreased in neurons treated with Dyngo-4a when using either the 22C11 antibody (by ~70%), as reported previously in primary neurons40,41 (Figures S6A and S6D), or the polyclonal GFP antibody (by ~90%; Figures S6B and S6D). To examine the reason for the dramatic difference between the BTX and antibody assays, we asked if APP internalization might become dynamin dependent as a possible result of antibody-induced clustering of APP at the cell surface, given the bivalent nature of these antibodies. Indeed, the 22C11 antibody was previously used to cross-link APP at the neuronal plasma membrane.42 To test this hypothesis, we examined somatodendritic APP internalization using a camelid-based nanobody against GFP (GFP-Booster-Atto647 [GBA647]; Figures S6C and S6D). Unlike traditional antibodies, GBA647 is monovalent, binds GFP in a monomeric fashion, and is closer in molecular weight to both BTX and an Fc fragment (~15 kDa, as opposed to ~150 kDa for an intact divalent antibody). Consistent with data from our BTX experiments, somatodendritic APP internalization once again increased in the presence of Dyngo-4a when we used GBA647 (Figures S6C and S6D). Together, these results suggest that antibody-feeding approaches in neurons may induce APP dimerization or complex formation that, in turn, leads to an alter nate APP internalization pathway that is dynamin dependent.

Dynamin-independent APP internalization in primary neurons under endogenous/lower APP expression levels

The APP/BTX internalization assay requires transfecting primary neurons, introducing the possibility that our results arise from an overexpression artifact. To examine somatodendritic APP internalization without the confounds of high APP levels or exogenous reporter tags, we used surface biotinylation43 to measure APP internalization in multiple cell types. In HeLa cells, we observed a significant decrease in biotinylated APP internalization (~75%) in the presence of Dyngo-4a compared with DMSO (Figure 4A). We then tested the effects of Dyngo-4a on the internalization of endogenous murine APP in primary cortical neurons. Dyngo-4a did not block the internalization of endogenous murine APP, with a trend toward increased internalization (~50%) consistent with our imaging results (Figure 4B). To examine whether the YENPTY motif was required, we transduced cortical neurons with lentiviruses containing either APP-WT or APP-4A (see STAR Methods). Similar to our imaging results with transfected neurons, the internalization of APP-4A was not significantly different from that of APP-WT (Figure 4C). Finally, Dyngo-4a did not block the internalization of endogenous human APP in neurons differentiated from human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) (Figure 4D), suggesting that dynamin-independent APP endocytosis is a general property of neurons across species.

Together, the results from imaging and biochemical assays performed under endogenous and overexpression conditions reinforced the concept that somatodendritic APP internalization does not require dynamin activity or the YENPTY motif. Our results with Dyngo-4a suggested that APP could be internalized via a dynamin-independent endocytic pathway whose activity increased following Dyngo-4a treatment, thereby accounting for increases in APP internalization with Dyngo-4a across multi ple paradigms.

Endolysosomal trafficking, recycling, and degradation of internalized somatodendritic APP are not affected by the YENPTY motif

Evidence from the literature suggests that internalized APP mol ecules are trafficked through the endolysosomal system.11 APP internalized into early endosomes may be transported to recycling endosomes for reinsertion into the neuronal plasma membrane or for Bace1-mediated cleavage.15,26,27 Alternatively, APP may be routed to late endosomes and lysosomes for degradation. We sought to identify the organelles within the endolysosomal system that internalized somatodendritic APP/BTX puncta are trafficked to. Neurons with APP/BTX puncta were colabeled with one of the following markers: Rab5 (early endosome), Rab7 (late endosome), Rab11 (recycling endosome), or Lamp1 (lysosome). We then calculated the colocalization score between the organelle marker and APP/BTX puncta (see STAR Methods). In neurons transfected with APP-WT, colocalization scores in the soma were similar across all four organelle markers (Figures 5A and 5B). Colocalization was generally lower in dendrites compared with the soma (Figures 5C and 5D), which may reflect a decreased ability to detect smaller dendritic organelles. Nonetheless, these results suggest that, within the parameters of our internalization assay, APP/BTX puncta are subsequently trafficked and distributed among endolysosomal organelles. Importantly, there were no differences between APP-WT and APP-4A in the colocalization scores for the four organelle markers in both the soma (Figures 5A and 5B) and dendrites (Figures 5C and 5D). These results suggest that the YENPTY motif does not affect the trafficking of internalized somatodendritic APP across the endolysosomal system.

Next, we examined if APP recycling was affected by dynamin activity or the YENPTY motif. Following surface biotinylation and internalization, we tracked the reinsertion of biotinylated APP molecules back into the neuronal surface using a previously established protocol.44 Under conditions where lysosomal degradation was inhibited (see STAR Methods), a majority of APP molecules were reinserted within 30 min (Figures S7A and S7B), but the time course of APP-WT recycling was not significantly different in the presence of Dyngo-4a or NMDA compared with DMSO or from the time course of APP-4A recycling (Figures S7A and S7B). Over 2 h, ~40% of biotinylated APP was leupeptin sensitive (see STAR Methods), indicating its degradation in lysosomes (Figures S7C and S7D). Similar to our results with the recycling assay, Dyngo-4a or the YENPTY motif did not affect the extent of lysosomal APP degradation (Figures S7C and S7D). Together, our results suggest that the fate of internalized APP in the somatodendritic compartment is not affected by dynamin activity or the YENPTY motif.

Proximity-ligation assay labeling of APP and Bace1 reveals poor overlap between internalized APP puncta and PLA puncta

Previously described models of Aβ production maintain that internalized APP is trafficked to Bace1-containing endosomes for cleavage.15,24 To examine if internalized somatodendritic APP interacts with Bace1, we turned to the proximity ligation assay (PLA; Figure S8A) to label the APP/Bace1 interaction in primary neurons. We hypothesized that endocytosed APP in the somatodendritic compartment might remain spatially isolated from Bace1. In previous reports,15,45 the APP/Bace1 interaction was measured using overlap between fluorescently tagged APP and Bace1 constructs, an approach we showed is likely to generate artifactual results or at least does not reflect the behavior of full-length APP because Bace1 overexpression induces perturbed Bace1-mediated APP cleavage.14 Here, we conjugated PLA probes to Y188 (Y188-probemaker; APP-Ab-PM), which recognizes the APP C terminus, and PA1–757 (PA1–757-probemaker; Bace1-Ab-PM), which recognizes the Bace1 C terminus. Our aim was to perform the PLA experiment in Sep-BBS-APP-transfected neurons labeled with internalized APP/BTX puncta without Bace1 overexpression. If internalized APP subsequently encountered Bace1, we would observe colocalization of BTX and PLA puncta. Keeping the transfected APP molecules intact was critical because BTX labeling occurred at the N-terminal ectodomain of APP, while the PLA labeling occurred at the C-terminal cytoplasmic domain. Therefore, the Bace1 inhibitor LY2811376 was added during the BTX internalization assay to prevent full-length APP from being cleaved (Figure S8B).

To demonstrate that the PLA assay could detect APP/Bace1 interactions, we transduced cortical neurons with separate APP and Bace1 lentiviruses together with LY2811376 treatment to prevent APP cleavage prior to fixation (4 h; see Cell surface antibody bind) and performed the PLA. We observed numerous PLA puncta only when both APP-Ab-PM and Bace1-Ab-PM were present, confirming the specificity of the assay (Figure S9). We then examined the overlap between internalized BTX and PLA puncta in Sep-BBS-APP-transfected neurons (without Bace1 overexpression or lentiviral transduction). Colocalization between internalized APP/BTX and PLA puncta in neurons was consistently poor: ~70% of PLA puncta in each neuron showed no overlap (&lt;10% overlapping voxels) with any neighboring BTX puncta, and only ~12% of PLA puncta exhibited suggestive signs of overlap (&gt;50% overlapping voxels) (Figure 6). Our observation that only a small fraction of PLA puncta—which represents our best effort at identifying APP and Bace1 molecules putatively interacting—overlap with internalized APP/BTX puncta suggests that internalized somatodendritic APP may not be a significant source for Bace1 cleavage in the somatodendritic compartment.

Mutating the YENPTY motif or inhibiting dynamin decreases Aβ levels in primary neurons

Given that somatodendritic APP internalization does not require dynamin activity or the YENPTY motif and that we find little evi dence for internalized somatodendritic APP interacting with Bace1, a natural question is whether Dyngo-4a or the APP-4A mutant has an effect on Aβ levels. In CHO cells, mutating this motif leads to significant decreases in secreted Aβ levels.28 We began by measuring C99 levels from cortical neurons transduced with APP-WT or APP-4A lentiviruses. C99 levels in APP-4A-expressing cortical neurons were ~75% lower than in APP-WT-expressing cortical neurons (Figure 7A), suggesting that, despite the lack of difference in somatodendritic APP internaliza tion between APP-WT and APP-4A, Bace1-mediated cleavage was significantly impaired, a result predicted from the literature given the presumption that Bace1 cleavage takes place following APP endocytosis. Consistent with the drop in C99 levels, secreted Aβ40 and Aβ42 levels decreased by similar margins (Figure 7B), suggesting that γ-secretase processing remained unchanged.

Previous studies have also demonstrated that inhibiting dynamin activity significantly diminished Aβ levels. For example, in the Tg2576 line of APP transgenic mice, inhibition of dynamin via a dynamin inhibitory peptide significantly decreased interstitial fluid (ISF) Aβ levels in the brain.29 Accordingly, we quantified the levels of Aβ secreted from primary neurons expressing APP-WT following a 4 h incubation with Dyngo-4a or control DMSO. Under these conditions, we observed a robust and significant decrease in Aβ40 and Aβ42 levels in the media (~60% decrease) from neurons incubated with Dyngo-4a compared with DMSO (Figure 7C), a level of reduction comparable to that reported in vivo.29

Taken together, these results point to an unexpected disconnect between somatodendritic APP internalization and downstream Aβ production and secretion. In previous reports,28 APP internalization directly influences C99 generation and subsequent Aβ secretion. However, the morphological complexity and polarity of neurons compared with these cell lines raise the possibility that there could be regional specialization in neuronal protein trafficking such that different pools of surface APP, i.e., from the soma and dendrites in our results, do not serve as a significant source of Aβ production and secretion.

DISCUSSION

Despite the importance of APP internalization in many models of Aβ production, direct measurements of APP internalization in primary neurons are surprisingly uncommon in the literature, contributing to a relative paucity of insights into pathways of Aβ generation in neurons. Here, we set out to assess somatodendritic APP internalization under basal culture conditions and when neuronal activity was chemically modulated. Surprisingly, NMDA application led to somatodendritic APP internalization in a manner that could not be reversed by the dynamin inhibitor dynasore or by mutating the –YENPTY– endocytic signal motif, observations seemingly at odds with scores of previous reports.28,29,40,41 These unexpected results prompted a deeper investigation. Our results from multiple morphological and biochemical approaches across a range of APP expression levels and cell types indicate that under basal activity levels, neither dynamin activity nor the –YENPTY– motif characteristic of clathrin-mediated endocytosis appears necessary for somatodendritic APP internalization. Mutating the –YENPTY– motif did not impair the trafficking of internalized APP into endolysosomal organelles, nor did it affect APP recycling or degradation.

Our results also suggest that internalized somatodendritic APP is not a major source of Aβ. Firstly, somatodendritic APP/BTX puncta rarely overlapped with APP/Bace1 PLA puncta. Secondly, levels of both C99 and secreted Aβ from neuronal cultures transduced with APP-4A were markedly lower than those transduced with APP-WT. Finally, we observed a significant reduction in the amount of new Aβ produced and secreted in the presence of Dyngo-4a compared with DMSO. Thus, both APP-4A and Dyngo-4a did not impair the internalization of APP in the somatodendritic compartment, yet total secreted Aβ levels decreased significantly. Together, these results describe remarkable somatodendritic APP internalization behaviors that are independent of dynamin and the YENPTY motif and bypass the major Aβ-production pathways.

Which pathway(s) might neurons use to internalize somatodendritic APP? Clathrin- and dynamin-independent internalization pathways have previously been described in both astrocytes and neurons46–48 as well as in multiple cell types outside the brain.49,50 Many dynamin-independent pathways were proposed within the context of rapid synaptic vesicle recycling at the axonal bouton. Our results suggest that dynamin-independent internalization occurs in the somatodendritic compartment as well. Whether this pathway requires Cdc42,51 flotillin,26 Arf6,27 bulk endocytosis,52 the CLIC/GEEC pathway,49,50 or other novel pathways was not addressed in this study and remains to be elucidated.

The internalization of cell-surface APP bound to bivalent antibodies and its sensitivity to Dyngo-4a treatment compared with the opposite outcome when bound to monovalent nanobodies was entirely unexpected, the latter condition being consistent with morphological and biochemical assays presented throughout this study. Incubation with a bivalent antibody could induce clustering of cell-surface APP,42 leading to alternate sorting pathways from the plasma membrane both dynamin dependent and independent. Dimeric and multimeric forms of APP have been reported,53 raising the possibility that the multimeric state of APP could determine the resultant endocytic pathway. APP dimerization has been proposed to enhance Aβ production,54–56 suggesting that cellular conditions that increase surface APP dimerization could favor trafficking through alternate pathways such as CME, perhaps increasing the probability of encountering Bace1 and enhancing Aβ production.

In previous studies, internalized Bace1 visualized by BTX labeling was observed to move retrogradely from dendrites to soma and undergo dynamic transport along dendrites and axons in Rab11-positive recycling endosomes.57,58 While our results strongly suggest that internalized somatodendritic APP is not a major source of Aβ, they do not rule out the possibility that Aβ could still be generated within the somatodendritic compartment, as has been suggested in studies where APP was expressed at high levels.27,59–61 For example, APP could encounter Bace1 via direct trafficking of APP from the TGN to somatodendritic endosomes or lysosomes.10,12 Several studies have proposed that APP could be cleaved by Bace1 within the TGN,30 though this has been debated by others.62 Alternatively, the APP/Bace1 interaction and downstream Aβ production may occur mainly in axons, as proposed by multiple studies.29,63–66 Accordingly, future studies could apply the APP/BTX assay toward a rigorous dissection of axonal APP internalization using microfluidics-based techniques to isolate axons for imaging, as has been done to measure Aβ secreted from axons.67 A potential pitfall is that axons isolated from microfluidic chambers likely yield too little material for quantitative analysis, which may hamper efforts to validate the imaging results with biochemical assays.

Our findings hint at the complexity of a “Holy Grail” model that describes the steps from APP synthesis to cleavage and Aβ secretion in molecular detail. In particular, our results point to a somatodendritic APP internalization pathway that, in tandem with data presented here and by others, surprisingly suggests that this pool of APP may not serve as a major source of Aβ. Further, other molecules such as the LDLR, which similarly utilize the –NPXY– clathrin motif, may share this as yet undefined pathway that represents a unique feature of neuronal protein trafficking, one that segregates the axonal and somatodendritic compartments spatially and functionally. Whether spatial segregation of other protein-sorting pathways occurs in polarized cells such as neurons and epithelial cells is an open question that deserves further investigation. Adapting the tools used here to other APP pools in neurons should help in the characterization of APP trafficking and in identifying the major source of APP in Aβ production in neurons. Utilizing them in the study of other proteins could also broaden our understanding of the biology of endocytosis in neurons.

Limitations of the study

APP trafficking and processing is a highly complex process. In this study, we exploited the cell-impermeable nature of BTX labeling to specifically mark internalized APP. Unfortunately, APP molecules that are not trafficked to the cell surface—for example, those that are newly synthesized—cannot be labeled by the BTX system; their intracellular trafficking routes therefore remain opaque to us. In addition, while we observed that internalized APP molecules are well distributed throughout the endolysosomal system, limitations in fluorescent microscopy prevent us from observing single APP-BTX molecule movements that could explain their distribution. Of note, we also did not examine APP internalization into other potential organelles of interest, such as the TGN and multivesicular bodies.

STAR★METHODS

RESOURCE AVAILABILITY

Lead contact

Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Jonathan Aow (aowsj@gis.a-star.edu.sg).

Materials availability

Plasmids generated in this study are available from the lead contact upon request.

Data and code availability

All data reported in this paper will be shared by the lead contact upon request.

This paper does not report original code.

Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request.

EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND STUDY PARTICIPANT DETAILS

Murine primary neuronal and astrocytic cultures

All animal experiments were performed with National University of Singapore Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) approval. Primary neurons were grown according to previously established protocols.14 Primary neurons and astrocytes were made from both male and female pups.

Primary hippocampal cultures

Hippocampi from P0 or P1 mouse pups (CD1 strain) were dissected in ice-cold Hibernate-A (Hb-A) (Gibco) supplemented with 5mM MgCl2, and then dissociated using papain (Sigma-Aldrich) pre-activated with L-cysteine (Sigma-Aldrich) in Hb-A/MgCl2. Tissue was further triturated, and the neuronal suspension was filtered through a 70μm cell strainer and centrifuged. Neurons were plated at a density of ~1.0–1.3×105 neurons per 12mm PDL-coated coverslip (Neuvitro) in Neurobasal-A (Nb-A) or Neurobasal-plus (Nb+) media (Gibco) supplemented with 2% B27+ (Gibco), 0.16% Glutamax (Gibco) and ~0.5–1% FBS (Hyclone). Approximately half the media was replaced every 3 days with Nb-A media, 2% B27+, and 0.16% Glutamax. Neurons were maintained for 12–18 days in vitro (DIV) before experiments.

Primary cortical cultures

Cortices from P0 or P1 mouse pups (CD1 strain) were dissected and dissociated similarly to hippocampi. Neurons were plated at a density of ~1.2–1.5×106 neurons per well in a 6-well plate, or a density of ~8×106 neurons per 10cm plate, that was pre-coated with PDL (Sigma-Aldrich, 100μg/ml dissolved in H2O, overnight at 37C). Neurons were maintained in Nb-A media (Gibco) supplemented with 2% B27+, 0.5% Glutamax, 0.5% Sodium Pyruvate, 0.16% Pen/Strep for the first 6 days (half the media was changed every 3 days), and thereafter with Nb-A media supplemented with 2% B27+, 0.25% Glutamax, 0.25% Sodium Pyruvate, 0.16% Pen/Strep. Neurons were maintained for 12–18 DIV before experiments.

We occasionally changed the media more frequently if variations that resulted in increased density and growth of the culture resulted in quicker acidification of the media. We added 50μM AP-5 (Tocris) and 1mM MgCl2 to each media change from ~10DIV to reduce the excitotoxicity of the culture.

Primary murine astrocytes

To perform surface biotinylation experiments on H9ESC-differentiated neurons (H9Ns), we plated H9Ns on a murine astrocyte feeder layer. To grow primary astrocytes, cortices from P0 or P1 mouse pups (CD1 strain) were dissected and dissociated similarly to hippocampi. Astrocytes were plated onto 6-well plates and maintained in NB+/10% FBS for 1 week.68 Astrocytes were then purified by shaking at 110rpm for 6 hrs in the cell culture incubator to remove loosely-adherent cells such as microglia. Following shaking, the resultant astrocytic layer was washed in PBS to remove floating cells and then trypsinized and centrifuged. Astrocytes were replated onto fresh 6-well plates at a density of ~4×105 astrocytes per well.

Cell culture

B103 cells, CHO cells, HEK293FT cells, HeLa cells, and N2a cells were grown and maintained in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM) (Gibco) supplemented with 10% FBS (Hyclone) and 1% Pen/Strep. Cells were passaged using Trypsin (Gibco). For imaging experiments, cells were seeded onto glass coverslips and then placed in 24-well plates. For surface biotinylation experiments in HeLa cells, cells were seeded on 6-well plates.

For lentiviral preparation, HEK293FT cells were grown and maintained according to the manufacturer’s instructions (DMEM, 10% FBS, 0.1mM MEM NEAA, 1mM Sodium Pyruvate, supplemented with 2mM L-glutamine) and similarly passaged using trypsin prior to use for lentiviral preparation.

Stem cell culture

H9 embryonic stem cells (H9ESCs) were grown on Vitronectin-coated (StemCell Technologies) 6-well plates. Cells were passaged and maintained using mTeSR (StemCell Technologies) under the manufacturer’s recommendations. This modified stem cell line contains doxycycline-inducible NeuroD1 that allows for differentiation into neurons (H9Ns) following doxycycline addition. To differentiate H9ESCs into H9Ns, doxycycline (1μg/ml) was added daily for 6 days: on days 1–2, doxycycline was added to mTeSR media during the daily media change; on days 3–6, doxycycline was added to neuronal media (NB+, B27+, glutamax) during the daily media change. On day 6, differentiated H9Ns were trypsinized using TrypLE (Gibco), followed by centrifugation and counting. H9Ns were then replated onto the astrocyte feeder layer at a density of ~1×106 neurons per well. The H9N+astrocyte co-culture was maintained for ~2 weeks before surface biotinylation experiments.

METHOD DETAILS

Plasmid construction

The Sep-APP construct was generated by removing the GFP sequence from APP-GFP cDNA and inserting the Sep sequence after the APP signal peptide using standard PCR methods.14 In neurons transfected with cytoplasmic mCherry, we replaced the EGFP sequence from the pEGFP-N1 vector (Clontech) with mCherry. Sep-BBS-APP was generated as previously described.14 The Sep-APP-YENPTY mutant had two residues mutated to alanine: YENPTY to AENATY, which we made by standard PCR mutagenesis methods. The Sep-BBS-APP-4A mutant was made by changing the YENPTY motif to AEAATA using standard PCR mutagenesis methods. BBS-APP-IRES-GFP was made by excising the Sep tag and ligating a PCR product containing the IRES and GFP sequences. BBS-C99-IRES-GFP was made by removing the APP sequence (after the signal peptide) and inserting the C99 sequence. GFP-BBS-LDLR was made by sequential replacement of 1) the APP sequence with the LDLR sequence, and 2) the replacement of Sep with GFP. All constructs were sequenced prior to transfection to ensure that there were no undesired mutations present.

Transfection

Neurons were transfected with Lipofectamine 3000 (Gibco) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and reproduced without change from our previous study.14 Per well of a 24-well plate, we separately prepared 500ng of DNA+1ul P3000 in 25μl of fresh Nb-A (or Nb+, here and elsewhere) and 1ul Lipofectamine 3000 (L3000) in 25μl of fresh Nb-A. After 5 minutes, the DNA/P3000 was mixed with the L3000 and incubated for a further 8–12 minutes. In the meantime, coverslips were moved to wells containing fresh pre-warmed Nb-A (500ul). The DNA/P3000/L3000 mix was then added to the coverslips, and neurons were transfected for ~1–3 hrs. Neurons were then transferred to fresh NB-A media containing 2% B27+ and 0.16% Glutamax or to media containing 50% fresh NB-A/B27+/Glutamax media. Neurons were typically maintained for ~16–24 hrs before experiments.

For non-neuronal cell lines, transfection was performed in Optimem-I (Gibco) instead of Nb-A. Transfection conditions for cell lines per well of a 24-well plate were identical to that used for primary neurons. For transfection of wells in a 6-well plate, we used 1.5 μg of DNA, 3μl of P3000, and 3μl of L3000 per well. The transfection mix was added directly to the cells. Typically, replacement of transfection media was performed for B103, CHO, HEK293FT, and N2a cells.

Neuronal live imaging

For live-imaging studies, coverslips containing successfully transfected primary neurons were transferred to a Zeiss LSM710 confocal microscope with a live imaging chamber. Neurons were imaged in Hb-A media at 37°C without CO2 (Hb-A is a CO2-independent media). For each coverslip, 2–3 neurons with good Sep and mCherry fluorescence were identified. Before imaging, we identified the neuronal soma, the dendritic arbor, and the axon by morphology and then maximized the somatodendritic imaging area for quantification. We then captured z-stack images of each neuron. For experiments with NMDA incubation, Hb-A media was gently replaced with media containing 25μM NMDA. Following a 2-minute interval, the original neurons were quickly re-imaged. Each z-stack took ~4–5 minutes; thus, all images were captured within ~15min of the NMDA application. For experiments involving NMDA+AP-5, 100μM AP-5 was added for at least 30mins to cultures prior to baseline imaging. For experiments involving NMDA+ Tapi-2, 20μM Tapi-2 was added for at least 30mins to cultures prior to baseline imaging. For experiments involving NMDA+dynasore, 80μM dynasore was added for at least 30mins to cultures prior to baseline imaging. Baseline and post-baseline images were analyzed using MATLAB (see Image analysis).

Internalization experiments and immunolabeling

Bungarotoxin ligand binding

For bungarotoxin internalization experiments in primary neurons, we transferred coverslips to Hb-A media and pre-incubated cells in 150–250μM tubocurarine chloride at 37°C for ~20–30 minutes to block any endogenous nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. This step was usually not necessary in cell lines. Where required by the experiment, DMSO or 30μM Dyngo-4a was added along with the tubocurarine chloride. A647-BTX was then added at 10μg/ml for 30 minutes at 37°C. Cells were then cooled on ice, and bungarotoxin was removed using two washes in ice-cold Hb-A. Cells were then further incubated at 37°C for ~20–30 minutes to allow internalization to complete. Cells were then cooled again on ice, and any A647-BTX remaining on the surface was removed via acid wash (2–3 times at 4°C, 2 minutes each, 0.1M glycine, 0.15M NaCl, pH 2.4–2.5). To neutralize the acid solution following the acid wash, cells were then washed in cold Hb-A 3–4 times before being fixed. Cells were fixed in a Hb-A/formaldehyde mixture (50% of a 4% sucrose / 4% formaldehyde in PBS solution mixed with 50% Hb-A at room temperature for ~5–7 minutes), followed by a ~5–7 minute fixation in formaldehyde (4% sucrose / 4% formaldehyde in PBS) at room temperature.

Surface antibody binding

For APP internalization experiments using antibodies or nanobodies, primary neurons were treated similarly to bungarotoxin incubation experiments, except that no tubocurarine chloride was added. We added 22C11 (monoclonal APP antibody), #50430–2 or ab13970 (both polyclonal GFP antibodies), or GFP-Booster Alexa-Fluor-647 (GFP nanobody) at 1μg/ml (for 22C11) or 0.5μg/ml (for #50430–2, ab13970 and GFP-Booster) for 30 minutes at 37°C. Following this initial incubation, subsequent steps were similar to bungarotoxin incubation experiments.

Transferrin incubation

For transferrin (Tfn) internalization experiments, cells were washed once in Hb-A, then incubated in transferrin-depleted Hb-A for ~60 minutes at 37C. Where necessary, the last ~20–30 minutes of this step involved the addition of DMSO or 30μM Dyngo-4a. Cells were then incubated with 25μg/ml A647-Transferrin at 37°C for 30 minutes. Cells were cooled to 4°C, and labeled Tfn was removed by washing twice using ice-cold Hb-A. Coverslips were then acid-washed and fixed, similar to that for bungarotoxin experiments.

Immunolabeling

Following fixation, coverslips were rinsed three times in PBS to remove formaldehyde. For experiments involving surface labeling only, coverslips were rinsed three times in PBS and then blocked using 5% donkey serum in PBS for 30mins at room temperature, followed by incubation with an anti-GFP primary antibody (#50430–2 or ab13970) to recognize Sep, followed by the appropriate Alexa-Fluor-568 secondary antibody (donkey-anti-rabbit-Alexa-568 (A10042, Invitrogen) for #50430–2, or goat-anti-chicken-Alexa-568 (A11041, Invitrogen) for ab13970). Coverslips were then mounted using ProLong Gold or ProLong Diamond Antifade Mountant (ThermoFisher Scientific) and imaged.

For experiments involving permeabilization, coverslips were rinsed three times in PBS, followed by permeabilization using 0.3% Triton X-100 in PBS for 5mins. Coverslips were then blocked using 5% donkey serum in PBS for 30mins at room temperature, followed by incubation with the appropriate primary and secondary antibodies, as required by the experiment.

For experiments with co-labeling against Rab5 or Rab11, after the initial PFA fixation and washout, cells were additionally fixed in 100% methanol at −20°C for 5 minutes, as this improved detection of both proteins by their respective antibodies. Cells co-labeled against Rab7 or Lamp1 did not require this procedure. Cells were then permeabilized using 0.3% Triton X-100 in PBS for 5 mins, as above, followed by incubation with primary and secondary antibodies. We used organelle marker antibodies at 1:100–1:200 concentrations for the primary antibodies and 1:250–1:500 for the secondary antibodies.

Coverslips were then mounted using ProLong Gold or ProLong Diamond Antifade Mountant (ThermoFisher Scientific) and imaged.

Microscopy

Slides were imaged using a Zeiss LSM 700 microscope. Cells were imaged typically at 20x for non-neuronal cells or 63x for neurons. We used laser lines at 405nm (for DAPI), 488nm (for Sep/GFP/Alexa488), 555nm (for Alexa568), and 639nm (for Alexa647). Power settings differed slightly across experiments according to sample brightness but were kept constant within each imaging setting and experiment. Images were typically captured at 1024×1024 pixels (~100nm per pixel). We captured z-stacks at 1.8μm intervals for 20x imaging and 0.5μm intervals for 63x imaging. Images were median filtered (in pixels, x=3, y=3, z=1) to remove background speckle noise. The filtered z-stacks were then used for image analysis.

For neuronal imaging, after immunofluorescent staining but prior to confocal microscopy, the axonal and dendritic regions were identified by morphological features. Axonal features include thinness (in contrast, the primary dendritic trunk that comes out of the soma in hippocampal neurons is thick and readily identifiable), non-tapering neurites, as well as the lack of dendritic spines. To maximize the quantification of somatodendritic APP internalization, we selected a field of view that maximized the area of the somatodendritic region and minimized the axons. This could be accomplished in most cases because the axon was projecting away from the dendrite. Where imaging the axon could not be avoided, we excluded the axon from downstream analysis (see Image analysis below). After excluding the axonal region, the entire FOV (which corresponds to ~100×100μm using a 63x objective) was analyzed. We drew separate ROIs for the soma and the dendritic arbor.

Image analysis

Images were analyzed using ImageJ or MATLAB using a custom script. For MATLAB analysis, we drew ROIs that encompassed the dendrites and soma within the image (we excluded the axon, which was much thinner and mainly projected away from the dendrites and outside of the field of the image). We also drew a background ROI to calculate the standard deviation of the background noise and then set the threshold for a pixel to be counted as signal if its intensity was greater than (4 standard deviations of the background noise + the average background noise itself). For each ROI, we quantified the amount of signal within each channel using the full-width half-max (FWHM) algorithm. We then calculated the fraction of internalization as the amount of bungarotoxin signal (in the 647 channel) divided by the amount of surface GFP labeling (in the 568 channel).

For internalization experiments (Tfn labeling, APP and GFP antibody internalization) where significantly less intracellular staining was observed and any staining appeared extracellular as a result of incomplete removal via acid wash, we used ImageJ to draw ROIs around the cell soma for the 2–3 maximally-in-focus central planes and employed the enlarge function (with negative values to shrink the ROI) to obtain the actual intracellular signal. We then calculated the internalization fraction as before.

Overlap between BTX and organelle co-labeling

Analysis was done blind to the organelle markers used. In ImageJ, we first used the Sep fluorescence to trace the neuronal soma and dendrites. This step removed the fluorescence in all channels due to nearby neurons that did not have BTX labeling, including from the organelle fluorescence channel. The traced-out soma and dendrites were then processed using Imaris (v. 9.5 or v. 10, Bitplane). We created different surfaces for the BTX and organelle channels (using two separate thresholds to capture punctate BTX and organellar fluorescence). Objects in both channels were retained if they had at least 10 voxels. We then created BTX and organelle masks from these surfaces and calculated the overlap, defined as the percentage of the total number of voxels in the organelle mask that overlapped with the BTX mask. The data were then exported and processed in R for statistical analysis.

Lentivirus preparation and transduction

Lentiviral particles were prepared according to a previously described protocol.14 In brief, HEK293FT cells were transfected with plasmids containing APP-WT or APP-4A for 6 hours (along with helper plasmids) before replacing the media with lentiviral collection media (Optimem-I, 5% FBS, 0.2% Sodium Pyruvate). The APP was expressed under the control of a human SynapsinI promoter and contained an N-terminus bungarotoxin binding site inserted immediately downstream of the APP signal peptide. Lentiviral media was collected after 48 hrs, spun down at 2000rpm to remove cellular debris, and filtered through a 0.33μm filter unit (Millipore). Lentiviral media was then aliquoted. For transduction, we added lentiviral media at a 1:30 – 1:40 dilution (the same dilution was used within each experiment).

Surface biotinylation

Surface biotinylation was performed according to established protocols.43 We added 100μg/ml leupeptin to cell media 1 hr before the experiment to begin blocking lysosomal proteolysis. Where necessary, Dyngo-4a or DMSO was added at least 20 minutes prior to surface biotinylation. Cells were then cooled to 4°C and washed twice in ice-cold PBS (with 1mM Ca2+ and 0.5mM Mg2+, used throughout the experiment). Cells were then surface-biotinylated using Sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin at a concentration of ~1mg/ml for 10–12 minutes at 4°C. Biotinylation was quenched using PBS containing 50mM lysine and 0.5%BSA, 3 times for 3–5 minutes each at 4°C. Cells were then washed twice in PBS, 3 minutes each time. Cells were then re-incubated with Hb-A media (supplemented with 100μg/ml leupeptin to continue to block lysosomal proteolysis, as well as Dyngo-4a or DMSO as appropriate) and warmed back up to 37°C to allow biotinylated surface APP to internalize for 15 minutes. Following re-internalization, cells were cooled back down to 4°C and washed once with ice-cold PBS. For wells in which we stripped the remaining surface biotinylated APP, cells were treated with glutathione (75mM, with 75mM NaCl, 10mM EDTA, pH 8) twice for 10–15 minutes each at 4°C. Cells were washed 3x in PBS to remove glutathione and then lysed in ice-cold RIPA buffer. Cell lysates were spun down at 2000× g for 10 minutes and the supernatants were saved (the pellet was discarded). Protein concentration was determined using the BCA assay (Pierce). 100–150μg of lysate was then incubated with 30ul of NeutrAvidin Beads 4°C overnight to pull down the biotinylated proteins (the lysate amount was kept constant within each experiment). The pulldown was washed 3x in RIPA buffer (with 5 minutes shaking between washes) and boiled with 30μl of loading dye before loading onto polyacrylamide gels.

For experiments to measure APP recycling, we added leupeptin and Dyngo-4a as appropriate (see above). NMDA was added after the surface biotinylation and quenching steps were complete and was present during the internalization and recycling periods. For recycling experiments, we followed an established protocol.44 In brief, after the first glutathione stripping step, cells were washed 2x in PBS, and then returned to cell media (NB+ with 0.2% B27+) at 37°C supplemented with 75mM glutathione, pH 7.5 (to strip off any recycling APP that was reinserted into the cell surface). Recycling was performed at 4 time intervals – 0 mins, 5 mins, 15 mins, and 30 mins. To keep the total time spent in cell media constant, cells that completed the 37°C incubation period were kept on ice until the last timepoint (30 mins) was completed (i.e., the 0 mins condition spent 30 mins on ice). Following completion, cells were treated with glutathione solution twice for 10 minutes each at 4°C, followed by a 3x PBS wash and lysis in RIPA buffer.

For experiments to measure APP degradation, following surface biotinylation and quenching, cells were returned to cell media (NB+ with 0.2% B27+) at 37°C for 2 hrs in the presence or absence of leupeptin (leupeptin had also been added 30 mins before surface biotinylation in the ‘leupeptin present’ condition). B27+ concentration was reduced to compensate for the presence of bovine serum albumin, which is known to inhibit the action of Dyngo-4a.38 Cells were then washed in PBS, and any remaining biotinylated surface APP was stripped using glutathione treatment. Cells were then washed in PBS as above and lysed in RIPA buffer.

For recycling and degradation experiments, 50–75ug of lysate was incubated with Pierce Streptavidin Beads 4°C overnight to pull down the biotinylated proteins (the lysate amount was kept constant within each experiment). The pulldown was washed 3x in TBS-T or RIPA buffer and boiled with loading dye before being loaded onto polyacrylamide gels.

Western blotting

For lysates, 5–10μg of sample lysate was loaded per well (the amount was kept constant within each experiment). For the pulldown of biotinylated samples, 5–7μl of pulldown was loaded per well – the amount loaded was kept constant within each experiment. We used both 12% (self-cast) and 4–20% (Bio-rad) Tris-acrylamide gels. Following transfer onto PVDF membranes, membranes were blocked using 5% milk / TBS-T and incubated in primary antibodies overnight at 4°C. Secondary antibodies were incubated at room temperature for 1 hour. We used a mixture of 10% Super Signal West Femto / 90% Super Signal West Pico chemiluminescent substrates. Chemiluminescence was captured using film, and protein bands were quantified using ImageJ software.

For APP recycling and degradation experiments, we used 12.5% Femto / 87.5% Pico substrates for blots incubated with Y188 and 10% Atto / 90% Pico substrates for blots incubated with 6E10. Chemiluminescence was acquired using a BioRad ChemiDoc imaging system, and protein bands were quantified using ImageJ.

PROXIMITY LIGATION ASSAY (PLA)

PLA experiments were performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions with slight modifications. We directly conjugated the DNA probes to the primary antibodies using the Probemaker kit (Merck), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Probemaker-conjugated antibodies (designated by the -PM in their names henceforth in this section) were then tested in both HeLa cells and neurons to determine if they retained their binding affinities. Unfortunately, 6E10-PM did not display a good affinity for APP post-conjugation and was therefore discarded. Likewise, the N-terminal Bace1 antibody 3C1C3 did not display a good affinity for Bace1 post-conjugation and was discarded. The pair of Y188-PM (targeting the APP C-terminus) and PA1–757-PM (targeting the Bace1 C-terminus) showed adequate signal and affinity (data not shown), and PLA puncta were only observed when both -PM antibodies were used in neurons co-transduced with APP and Bace1 lentiviruses. As a technical note, both antibodies showed higher nuclear background fluorescence, which likely results from non-specific binding between DNA and the DNA probe conjugated to the antibody.

To perform the PLA assay with Probemaker-conjugated antibodies, we permeabilized Sep-BBS-APP transfected neurons that had undergone the BTX internalization assay with 0.3% Triton X-100 in PBS for 5mins, followed by a 1X PBS wash. Neurons were then blocked using the PLA blocking reagent for 1 hr at 37°C. Cells were incubated with Y188-PM, PA1-757-PM, or both (both at 1:40 final concentration) overnight at 4°C. Cells were then washed 3 times, 5min each, in wash buffer A, followed by ligation of DNA probes at 37°C for 30mins. Following another 3 times, 5min each wash in buffer A, rolling circle amplification (RCA) was done at 37°C for 90mins (the manufacturer’s recommended amplification time of 100mins tended to produce puncta that were very large). Cells were then washed in buffer B 3 times, 10min each, followed by a wash in 0.01X buffer B. We mounted coverslips in Prolong Diamond. After drying, coverslips were stored at −20°C unless they were to be imaged immediately after drying.

To calculate the overlap between BTX and PLA puncta, we used Imaris (v. 9.7.2, Bitplane). We first created an Imaris surface in the Sep channel (filtering by pixels above a pre-defined threshold that was kept constant across all neurons in an experiment) and used that surface to mask the three fluorescent channels (BTX, PLA, and Sep fluorescence channels). We then created separate BTX and PLA surfaces, filtering each surface by pixels above pre-defined thresholds (kept constant across all neurons in an experiment). We kept objects defined by each surface with at least 10 voxels. We then created a new BTX mask based on the BTX surface and a new PLA mask based on the PLA surface. We then calculated the ‘overlapping volume ratio’ for the PLA mask against the BTX mask (i.e., for each PLA object, how much of its volume overlaps with any other BTX object). The data were exported and processed in R to generate histograms and for statistical analysis.

MEDIA COLLECTION AND Aβ ELISA

For experiments involving media collection for subsequent quantification of Aβ concentration, neurons were first cooled to room temperature for 5 minutes and then on ice for 10 minutes. The neuronal media was then collected and spun down at 200× g for 5 minutes to remove cellular debris, and the resulting supernatants were stored at −20°C until use.

To determine the effect of Dyngo-4a on Aβ production over the course of 4 hours, neurons were first cooled to room temperature for 5 minutes and then on ice for 10 minutes. Neuronal media was then removed, and neurons were washed twice in ice-cold PBS (supplemented with 1mM CaCl2 and 0.5mM MgCl2). Neurons were then incubated in NB-A supplemented with 0.2% B27+ and either DMSO or 30μM Dyngo-4a and returned to the cell culture incubator for 2 hours at 37°C (with 5% CO2). We chose a reduced B27+ concentration as the bovine serum albumin present is known to inhibit the action of Dyngo-4a.38 After 2 hours, we added another 30μM Dyngo-4a (or the equivalent volume of DMSO) to the neurons (the IC50 of Dyngo-4a also increases with time38). After 4 hours, neurons were cooled once again, and the neuronal media was collected. Media was spun down at 200× g for 5 minutes to remove cellular debris, followed by concentration in a 3kDa-cutoff Amicon centrifugal filter unit (Merck, #UFC900324) for 1 hour at 4°C, 2800× g. The concentrated media was then stored at −20°C until ELISA measurements. We noted variations in the volume of concentrated media across the filter units. To quantify the relative amount of Aβ production, we first calculated the total Aβ produced as the concentration of Aβ (from the ELISA) multiplied by the media volume. We then divided this value by the ratio of the amount of full-length APP divided by the amount of GAPDH as obtained from western blotting. This procedure normalizes the amount of APP production by the number of neurons and accounts for variations in viral transduction efficiency. Finally, we normalized the amount of Aβ produced in Dyngo-4a to that of DMSO.

ELISAs for Aβ-40 (IBL, #27718) and Aβ-42 (IBL, #27719) were run according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Where necessary, media was first diluted into EIA buffer (buffer #4) at an appropriate dilution before use. All samples, including the standards, were run in duplicates.

QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS

Statistical tests were performed, and graphs were produced using GraphPad Prism 8 (GraphPad Holdings, San Diego, CA). Figure legends detail the number of independent experiments (n) and the total number of cells (N) analyzed; for Figure 6, the number of neurons (n) and the total number of PLA puncta (N). Figure legends also detail the statistical tests used: for comparisons between two variables (control and test), we used a t test with Welch’s correction, which was paired as appropriate. For comparisons between three or more variables, we used one-way ANOVAs as appropriate, followed by post-hoc multiple comparisons testing. Significance asterisks are denoted by: *p &lt; 0.05; ** p &lt; 0.01; *** p &lt; 0.001; exact p-values less than four significant figures are listed in the figure legends. Results are presented as mean ± SEM.

Supplementary Material

1

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We gratefully acknowledge members of the Koo lab for technical and administrative assistance, as well as for many helpful discussions and advice. We gratefully acknowledge Dr. Ling Shuo-Chien, Ho Wan Yun, and members of the Ling laboratory for experimental support and infrastructural assistance. We especially thank Yeong Fu Chui for her initial efforts with the GFP-BBS-LDLR construct. We would like to acknowledge the NUS Medicine Confocal Microscopy Unit and Ms. Lee Shu Ying for the use of their Zeiss LSM710 for live-cell imaging. We would also like to acknowledge the Advanced Microscopy Unit of the Life Science Institute and Dr. Esther Koh for the use of their IMARIS software and technical discussions. This work was funded in part by grants to E.H.K. from the Singapore National Medical Research Council (NMRC, NMRC/StaR/009/2012) and the National Institutes of Health (NIH, NS84324). J.A. is funded by an Open-Fund Young Investigator’s Research Grant from NMRC (OF-YIRG, MOH-000237-00) and the Genome Institute of Singapore. T.-R.H. was supported by an Integrated Science and Engineering Program scholarship from the National University of Singapore. The graphical abstract was created using www.biorender.com.

INCLUSION AND DIVERSITY

We support inclusive, diverse, and equitable conduct of research.

Figure 1. NMDA application induces Sep-APP internalization in a dynamin-independent and YENPTY-motif-independent manner

(A) Representative maximal z-projections of primary hippocampal neurons transfected with Sep-APP and cytoplasmic mCherry (rows i–v and vii) or Sep-APP-YENPTY mutant and cytoplasmic mCherry (row vi), and imaged live before (left three panels) and after (right three panels) application of various drugs (i: control; ii: NMDA; iii: NMDA+AP-5; iv: NMDA+Tapi-2; v: NMDA+dynasore; vi: NMDA+APP-YENPTY mutant; vii: dynasore alone). Sep (green) and mCherry (red) fluorescence are shown separately for clarity; merge indicates merged images. Scale bar, 10 μm.

(B) Quantification of Sep/mCherry ratios (normalized to the 1st image) across the experimental conditions shown in (A). Values from individual neurons are shown as open circles (i: N = 15; ii: N = 16; iii: N = 10; iv: N = 9; v: N = 11; vi: N = 9; vii: N = 11). Error bars denote SEM. Exact p values are shown comparing the control condition and each of the other five conditions following post hoc multiple comparisons (one-way Brown-Forsythe ANOVA F(6.00, 20.74) = 5.108, p = 0.0023).

Figure 2. Inhibiting dynamin or mutating the YENPTY motif significantly decreases APP internalization in cell lines but not in the somatodendritic compartment of primary neurons

(A–C) Representative images of APP/BTX internalization in HeLa cells (A), N2a cells (B), and primary neurons (C) in the presence of DMSO (top panels in A–C) or Dyngo-4a (bottom panels in A–C). Internalized APP is bound to fluorescent BTX (internalized BTX, red); surface APP levels detected by immunostaining against Sep are shown in green (as in E–G). The ratio of internalized BTX to surface APP levels is quantified as the amount of APP internalization (as in E–G). Virtually no BTX is present upon Dyngo-4a application in HeLa cells and N2a cells (A and B); in contrast, more BTX is observed in the somatodendritic compartment of primary neurons (C). Arrows in (C) indicate analyzed dendrites, and the arrowheads indicate excluded axons. Scale bar, 10 μm.

(D) Quantification of results in (A)–(C). Individual values are shown as open circles. For (A), N &gt; 70 cells for both conditions, n = 4 experiments; p &lt; 0.0001, t test with Welch’s correction (as in B, C, and E–G). For (B), N &gt; 100 cells for both conditions, n = 5 experiments; p &lt; 0.0001. For (C), N &gt; 50 neurons for both conditions, n = 9 experiments; for soma, p &lt; 0.0001; for dendrites, p = 0.0012. Error bars denote SEM (as in H).

(E–G) Representative images of APP/BTX internalization in HeLa cells (E), N2a cells (F), and primary neurons (G) in the APP-WT (top panels, “-WT”) or APP-4A mutant (bottom panels, “−4A”). Arrows in (G) indicate analyzed dendrites, and arrowheads indicate excluded axons. Scale bar, 10 μm.

(H) Quantification of results in (E)–(G). Individual values are shown as open circles. For (E), N &gt; 150 cells for both conditions, n = 4 experiments; p &lt; 0.0001. For (F), N &gt; 150 cells for both conditions, n = 5 experiments; p &lt; 0.0001. For (G), N &gt; 50 neurons for both conditions, n = 10 experiments; for soma, p &gt; 0.05; for dendrites, p &gt; 0.05.

Figure 3. Mutating the YENPTY motif decreases LDLR internalization in HeLa cells but not in the somatodendritic compartment of primary neurons

(A) Representative images of LDLR/BTX internalization in HeLa cells in the LDLR-WT (top panels, “-WT”) or LDLR-NPVY mutant (bottom panels, “-AAAA”). Internalized LDLR is bound to fluorescent BTX (internalized BTX, red); surface LDLR levels detected by immunostaining against GFP are shown in green (as in D). The ratio of internalized BTX to surface LDLR levels is quantified as the amount of LDLR internalization (as in D). Scale bar, 10 μm.

(B) Quantification of results in (A). Individual values are shown as open circles. N &gt; 100 cells for both conditions, n = 4 experiments; p &lt; 0.0001, t test with Welch’s correction (as in D). Error bars denote SEM (as in D).

(C) As in (A), representative images of LDLR/BTX internalization in primary neurons in the LDLR-WT (top panels, “-WT”) or LDLR-NPVY mutant (bottom panels, “-AAAA”). Scale bar, 10 μm.

(D) Quantification of results in (C). Individual values are shown as open circles. N &gt; 20 neurons for both conditions, n = 3 experiments; for soma, p &gt; 0.05; for dendrites, p &gt; 0.05.

Figure 4. APP internalization in HeLa cells, murine primary neurons, and human differentiated neurons assessed by surface biotinylation is consistent with imaging results

(A) Left: representative western blot of internalized APP (detected by Y188 antibody) in HeLa cells in the presence of DMSO (left two lanes) or Dyngo-4a (right two lanes). Internalized APP is calculated by taking the intensity of the lane after glutathione treatment (“glutathione strip: +”) divided by the lane without glutathione treatment (“glutathione strip: –”). Right panel: quantification of internalized/surface APP ratios in Dyngo-4a normalized to DMSO. Individual values are shown as open circles. n = 3 experiments; p = 0.033, paired t test with Welch’s correction (as in B–D). Error bars denote SEM (as in B–D).

(B) As in (A) but with murine primary neurons and endogenous murine APP. Right panel; quantification of internalized/surface APP ratios in Dyngo-4a normalized to DMSO. Individual values are shown as open circles. n = 9 experiments; p &gt; 0.05.

(C) As in (B) but with murine primary neurons transduced with APP-WT lentivirus (“APP-WT,” left two lanes) or APP-4A mutant lentivirus (“APP-AEAATA,” right two lanes). Right panel; quantification of internalized/surface APP ratios in APP-4A normalized to APP-WT. Individual values are shown as open circles. n = 8 experiments; p &gt; 0.05.

(D) As in (B) but with hESC-differentiated neurons and endogenous human APP. Right panel: quantification of internalized/surface APP ratios in Dyngo-4a normalized to DMSO. Individual values are shown as open circles. n = 3 experiments; p &gt; 0.05.

Figure 5. The YENPTY motif does not affect the colocalization of internalized APP/BTX puncta with endolysosomal markers in the soma and dendrites

(A) Representative images of internalized APP/BTX puncta (red) and the colabeled organelle marker (top row: Rab5, second row: Rab7, third row: Rab11, bottom row: Lamp1; all shown in green) in somas from neurons transfected with Sep-BBS-APP-WT or Sep-BBS-APP-4A. The somatic outline is shown in white; open regions indicate the beginning of dendritic branches. Colocalization examples between BTX puncta and the organelle marker are indicated by white arrows. Scale bar, 5 μm.

(B) As in (A) but from the dendrites of neurons transfected with Sep-BBS-APP-WT or Sep-BBS-APP-4A. The dendritic outline is shown in white. Colocalization examples between BTX puncta and the organelle marker are indicated by white arrows. Scale bar, 5 μm.

(C) Quantification of results in (A), showing the percentage of thresholded voxel overlap between APP/BTX and the respective organelle markers in the neuronal soma. Number of neurons for each condition (n = 3–4 experiments): Rab5: N = 15 (APP-WT), N = 12 (APP-4A); Rab7: N = 17 (APP-WT), N = 14 (APP-4A); Rab11: N = 12 (APP-WT), N = 14 (APP-4A); Lamp1: N = 14 (APP-WT), N = 14 (APP-4A). NS, not significant (p &gt; 0.05); t test with Welch’s correction (as in D). Error bars denote SEM (as in D).

(D) Quantification of results in (B). The number of neurons analyzed is the same as in (A).

Figure 6. PLA puncta do not overlap significantly with internalized APP/BTX puncta

(A) Representative images showing the overlap between somatodendritic internalized APP/BTX puncta (red), PLA puncta (green), and merged. The neuronal outline is shown in white. Inset (blue box) shows a magnified area from the soma in which the majority of APP/BTX puncta and PLA puncta do not overlap. Arrows denote rare instances of overlap between APP/BTX puncta and PLA puncta. Scale bar, 10 μm.

(B) Histogram plot of results in (A). Within a single neuron, the percentage voxel overlap for each PLA puncta with any neighboring BTX signal is measured, with values ranging from 0% (no overlap) to 100% (complete overlap). The x axis displays the percentage overlap bins in 10% increments; overlaps &gt;50% are binned together. Histogram columns indicate the proportion of PLA puncta in each neuron that have a BTX overlap percentage in that column; N = 918 PLA puncta from n = 19 neurons, individual values for each neuron shown as open circles. As an example, averaging across the 19 neurons, ~70% of PLA puncta have 0%–9% overlap with the BTX signal, ~5% of PLA puncta have a 20%–29% overlap with the BTX signal, and ~12.5% of PLA puncta have a &gt;50% overlap with the BTX signal.

Figure 7. Reduced Aβ secretion in the APP-YENPTY mutant and in the presence of Dyngo-4a

(A) Left: representative western blot of full-length APP (fl-APP; top bands) and β-CTF/C99 (bottom bands) immunoblotted from lysates of neuronal cultures transduced with lentiviruses expressing APP-WT or the APP-YENPTY mutant (APP-4A). Right panel: quantification of the β-CTF/fl-APP ratio for both APP-WT and APP-4A. Individual values are shown as open circles. n = 4 experiments; p = 0.0048, paired t test with Welch’s correction (as in B and C). Error bars denote SEM (as in B and C).

(B) Levels of Aβ40 (left panel) and Aβ42 (right panel) present in media from neuronal cultures transduced with lentiviruses expressing APP-WT or the APP-4A mutant. Individual values are shown as open circles. n = 4 experiments; Aβ40: p &lt; 0.0001; Aβ42: p &lt; 0.0001.

(C) As in (B) but measuring the levels of Aβ40 (left panel) and Aβ42 (right panel) produced and secreted from primary neurons lentivirally transduced with APP-WT in the presence of DMSO or Dyngo-4a over a 4 h period. Individual values are shown as open circles. n = 6 experiments; Aβ40: p = 0.0003; Aβ42: p = 0.0009.

KEY RESOURCES TABLE REAGENT or RESOURCE	SOURCE	IDENTIFIER	
	
Antibodies			
	
Mouse monoclonal Anti-APP, clone 22C11	Merck Millipore	Cat#MAB348; RRID: AB_94882	
Rabbit polyclonal Anti-GFP	ProteinTech	Cat#50430–2-AP; RRID:AB_11042881	
Chicken polyclonal Anti-GFP	Abcam	Cat#ab13970; RRID:AB_300798	
GFP-Booster Alexa Fluor 647	ProteinTech	Cat#gb2AF647; RRID:AB_2827575	
Mouse monoclonal Anti-Transferrin Receptor, clone H68.4	ThermoFisher	Cat#13–6800; RRID:AB_2533029	
Mouse monoclonal Anti-β-Amyloid, clone 6E10	BioLegend	Cat#803001; RRID:AB_2564653	
Rabbit monoclonal Anti-APP, clone Y188	Abcam	Cat#ab32136; RRID:AB_2289606	
Rabbit polyclonal Anti-Bace1	ThermoFisher	Cat#PA1–757; RRID:AB_325863	
Rabbit polyclonal Anti-Rab-5A (clone S-19)	Santa Cruz	Cat#sc-309; RRID:AB_632295	
Mouse monoclonal Anti-Rab-7 (clone B-3)	Santa Cruz	Cat#sc-376362; RRID:AB_10987863	
Mouse monoclonal Anti-Rab-11A (clone A-6)	Santa Cruz	Cat#sc-166912; RRID:AB_10611645	
Mouse monoclonal Anti-Lamp1 (clone H4A3)	Santa Cruz	Cat#sc-20011; RRID:AB_626853	
Donkey anti-Rabbit IgG (H+L), Alexa Fluor 568	ThermoFisher	Cat#A10042: RRID:AB_2534017	
Donkey anti-Mouse IgG (H+L), Alexa Fluor 568	ThermoFisher	Cat#A10037; RRID:AB_2534013	
Goat anti-Chicken IgY (H+L), Alexa Fluor 568	ThermoFisher	Cat#A11041; RRID:AB_2534098	
	
Bacterial and virus strains			
	
E. coli DH5α competent cells	ThermoFisher	Cat#18265017	
E. coli Stbl3 competent cells	ThermoFisher	Cat#C737303	
pLenti-hSyn1-BBS-APP-wildtype	Aow et al14	N/A	
pLenti-hSyn1-BBS-APP-AEAATA	This study	N/A	
	
Chemicals, peptides, and recombinant proteins			
	
Neurobasal A	Gibco	Cat#10888022	
B27	Gibco	Cat#17504044	
Neurobasal Plus	Gibco	Cat#A3582901	
B27 Plus	Gibco	Cat#A3582801	
Glutamax	Gibco	Cat#35050061	
Sodium Pyruvate	Gibco	Cat#11360070	
Hibernate-A	Gibco	Cat#A1247501	
L-Glutamine (200mM)	Gibco	Cat#25030081	
DMEM	Gibco	Cat#11965092	
Pen/Strep	Gibco	Cat#15070063	
MEM non-essential amino acids solution	Gibco	Cat#11140050	
Trypsin-EDTA (0.25%)	Gibco	Cat#25200056	
TrypLE	Gibco	Cat#12563011	
Optimem-I	Gibco	Cat#31985070	
Lipofectamine 3000	Invitrogen	Cat#L3000001	
Bungarotoxin, Alexa Fluor 647 conjugated	Thermo Scientific	Cat#B35450	
Transferrin from Human Serum, Alexa Fluor 647 conjugate	Thermo Scientific	Cat#T23366	
Leupeptin	Thermo Scientific	Cat#78435	
EZ-Link Sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin	Thermo Scientific	Cat#21331	
ProLong Gold	Thermo Scientific	Cat#P36930	
ProLong Diamond	Thermo Scientific	Cat#P36970	
Pierce NeutrAvidin Agarose	Thermo Scientific	Cat#29200	
Pierce Streptavidin Agarose	Thermo Scientific	Cat#20347	
Super Signal West Pico PLUS	Thermo Scientific	Cat#34579	
Super Signal West Femto	Thermo Scientific	Cat#34094	
Super Signal West Atto	Thermo Scientific	Cat#A38554	
Vitronectin XF	StemCell Technologies	Cat#07180	
CellAdhere Dilution Buffer	StemCell Technologies	Cat#07183	
mTeSR1	StemCell Technologies	Cat#85850	
ReLeSR	StemCell Technologies	Cat#05872	
mFreSR	StemCell Technologies	Cat#05854	
NMDA	Tocris	Cat#0114, CAS 6384-92-5	
D-AP5 (also known as APV)	Tocris	Cat#0106, CAS 79055-68-8	
TAPI 2	Tocris	Cat#0613, CAS 689284-12-6	
Dynasore	Tocris	Cat#2897, CAS 304448-55-3	
(+)-Tubocurarine chloride	Tocris	Cat#2820, CAS 57-94-3	
Dyngo-4a	Selleck Chemicals	Cat#S7163, CAS 1256493-34-1	
Doxycycline	Sigma Aldrich	Cat#D5207, CAS 24390-14-5	
DMSO	Sigma Aldrich	Cat#34869, CAS 67-68-5	
Poly-D-Lysine hydrobromide, mol wt 70,000-150,000	Sigma Aldrich	Cat#P0899, CAS 27964-99-4	
L-Cysteine	Sigma Aldrich	Cat#C1276, CAS 52-89-1	
Papain, from Papaya Latex	Sigma Aldrich	Cat#P4762, CAS 9001-73-4	
Triton X-100	Sigma Aldrich	Cat#X100, CAS 9036-19-5	
Donkey Serum	Sigma Aldrich	Cat#D9663	
Lysine	Sigma Aldrich	Cat#L5501, CAS 56-87-1	
L-glutathione, reduced	Sigma Aldrich	Cat#G4251, CAS 70-18-8	
Tween 20	Sigma Aldrich	Cat#P1379, CAS 9005-64-5	
Formaldehyde	VWR Chemicals	Cat#20909.290, CAS 50-00-0	
Glycine	VWR Life Science	Cat#97063–738, CAS 56-40-6	
Bovine Serum Albumin (BSA) Lyophilized pH~7	Biowest	Cat#P6154	
4–20% Mini-PROTEAN TGX Precast Protein Gels	Bio-rad	Cat#4561096	
	
Critical commercial assays			
	
Duolink In Situ Probemaker Plus	Merck	Cat#DUO92009	
Duolink In Situ Probemaker Minus	Merck	Cat#DUO92010	
Duolink In Situ Detection Reagents Orange	Merck	Cat#DUO92007	
Amyloid Beta (1–40) High Sensitive ELISA	IBL	Cat#JP27718	
Amyloid Beta (1–42) (FL) ELISA	IBL	Cat#JP27719	
Pierce BCA assay	Thermo Scientific	Cat#23225	
	
Experimental models: Cell lines			
	
HEK293FT	ThermoFisher	Cat#R70007	
HeLa	ATCC	Cat#CCL-2	
N2a	ATCC	Cat#CCL-131	
B103	Laboratory of Edward Koo	N/A	
CHO	Laboratory of Edward Koo	N/A	
H9-embryonic stem cells	Laboratory of Alfred Sun	N/A	
	
Experimental models: Organisms/strains			
	
Mouse: Crl:CD1(ICR)	Charles-River	Cat#CD-1 IGS	
	
Recombinant DNA			
	
pEGFP-N1	Clontech	Cat#6085–1 (Discontinued)	
Plasmid: SEP-APP in pEGFP-N1 backbone	This study	N/A	
Plasmid: SEP-BBS-APP in pEGFP-N1 backbone	This study	N/A	
Plasmid: SEP-BBS-APP-AEANTY in pEGFP-N1 backbone	This study	N/A	
Plasmid: SEP-BBS-APP-AEAATA in pEGFP-N1 backbone	This study	N/A	
Plasmid: BBS-APP-IRES-GFP in pEGFP-N1 backbone	This study	N/A	
Plasmid: BBS-C99-IRES-GFP in pEGFP-N1 backbone	This study	N/A	
Plasmid: GFP-BBS-LDLR in pEGFP-N1 backbone	This study	N/A	
Plasmid: GFP-BBS-LDLR-AAAA in pEGFP-N1 backbone	This study	N/A	
	
Software and algorithms			
	
ImageJ	NIH	https://imagej.net/ij/index.html	
Prism 8	GraphPad	https://www.graphpad.com/	
Imaris (v. 9.5.0, 9.7.2, 10)	Bitplane	https://imaris.oxinst.com/	
MATLAB_R2014a	MATLAB	https://www.mathworks.com/products/matlab.html	
	
Other			
	
12mm dia.#1 thick Poly-D-lysine coated coverslips	Neuvitro	Cat#GG-12-PDL	
Amicon Centrifugal filter units, 3kDa cutoff	Merck	Cat#UFC900324	

Highlights

Somatodendritic APP endocytosis does not require dynamin activity or the YENPTY motif

LDLR endocytosis also does not require its NPVY motif, suggesting APP is not unique

Both dynamin inhibition and the YENPTY mutant reduce Aβ production and secretion

Somatodendritic APP endocytosis can be decoupled from pathways that generate Aβ

DECLARATION OF INTERESTS

The authors declare no competing interests.

SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION

Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2023.112774.


REFERENCES

1. Alzheimer’s Association (2016). 2016 Alzheimer’s disease facts and figures. Alzheimers Dement. 12 , 459–509. 10.1016/j.jalz.2016.03.001.27570871
2. Prince M , Comas-Herrera A , Knapp M , Guerchet M , and Karagiannidou M (2016). World Alzheimer Report 2016: Improving Healthcare for People Living with Dementia: Coverage, Quality and Costs Now and in the Future.
3. Haass C , Kaether C , Thinakaran G , and Sisodia S (2012). Trafficking and proteolytic processing of APP. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med. 2 , a006270. 10.1101/cshperspect.a006270.22553493
4. Nhan HS , Chiang K , and Koo EH (2015). The multifaceted nature of amyloid precursor protein and its proteolytic fragments: friends and foes. Acta Neuropathol. 129 , 1–19. 10.1007/s00401-014-1347-2.25287911
5. Andrew RJ , Kellett KAB , Thinakaran G , and Hooper NM (2016). A Greek Tragedy: The Growing Complexity of Alzheimer Amyloid Precursor Protein Proteolysis. J. Biol. Chem. 291 , 19235–19244. 10.1074/jbc.R116.746032.27474742
6. Willem M , Tahirovic S , Busche MA , Ovsepian SV , Chafai M , Kootar S , Hornburg D , Evans LDB , Moore S , Daria A , (2015). η-Secretase processing of APP inhibits neuronal activity in the hippocam pus. Nature 526 , 443–447. 10.1038/nature14864.26322584
7. Kuhn PH , Wang H , Dislich B , Colombo A , Zeitschel U , Ellwart JW , Kremmer E , Rossner S , and Lichtenthaler SF (2010). ADAM10 is the physiologically relevant, constitutive alpha-secretase of the amyloid precursor protein in primary neurons. EMBO J. 29 , 3020–3032. 10.1038/emboj.2010.167.20676056
8. Cole SL , and Vassar R (2007). The Basic Biology of BACE1: A Key Therapeutic Target for Alzheimer’s Disease. Curr. Genomics 8 , 509–530. 10.2174/138920207783769512.19415126
9. De Strooper B , and Annaert W (2010). Novel research horizons for pre-senilins and γ-secretases in cell biology and disease. Annu. Rev. CellDev. Biol. 26 , 235–260. 10.1146/annurev-cellbio-100109-104117.
10. Tam JHK , Seah C , and Pasternak SH (2014). The Amyloid Precursor Protein is rapidly transported from the Golgi apparatus to the lysosome and where it is processed into beta-amyloid. Mol. Brain 7 , 54. 10.1186/s13041-014-0054-1.25085554
11. Toh WH , and Gleeson PA (2016). Dysregulation of intracellular trafficking and endosomal sorting in Alzheimer’s disease: controversies and unanswered questions. Biochem. J. 473 , 1977–1993. 10.1042/BCJ20160147.27407168
12. Toh WH , Tan JZA , Zulkefli KL , Houghton FJ , and Gleeson PA (2017). Amyloid precursor protein traffics from the Golgi directly to early endosomes in an Arl5b-and AP4-dependent pathway. Traffic 18 , 159–175. 10.1111/tra.12465.28000370
13. Muresan V , Varvel NH , Lamb BT , and Muresan Z (2009). The cleavage products of amyloid-β precursor protein are sorted to distinct carrier vesicles that are independently transported within neurites. J. Neurosci. 29 , 3565–3578. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2558-08.2009.19295161
14. Aow J , Huang TR , Thinakaran G , and Koo EH (2022). Enhanced cleavage of APP by co-expressed Bace1 alters the distribution of APP and its fragments in neuronal and non-neuronal cells. Mol. Neurobiol. 59 , 3073–3090. 10.1007/s12035-022-02733-6.35266114
15. Das U , Scott DA , Ganguly A , Koo EH , Tang Y , and Roy S (2013). Activity-induced convergence of APP and BACE-1 in acidic microdomains via an endocytosis-dependent pathway. Neuron 79 , 447–460. 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.05.035.23931995
16. Kamenetz F , Tomita T , Hsieh H , Seabrook G , Borchelt D , Iwatsubo T , Sisodia S , and Malinow R (2003). APP processing and synaptic function. Neuron 37 , 925–937. 10.1016/s0896-6273(03)00124-7.12670422
17. Cirrito JR , Yamada KA , Finn MB , Sloviter RS , Bales KR , May PC , Schoepp DD , Paul SM , Mennerick S , and Holtzman DM (2005). Synaptic activity regulates interstitial fluid amyloid-β levels in vivo. Neuron 48 , 913–922. 10.1016/j.neuron.2005.10.028.16364896
18. Tampellini D , Rahman N , Gallo EF , Huang Z , Dumont M , Capetillo-Zarate E , Ma T , Zheng R , Lu B , Nanus DM , (2009). Synaptic activity reduces intraneuronal Aβ, promotes APP transport to synapses, and protects against Aβ-related synaptic alterations. J. Neurosci. 29 , 9704–9713. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2292.19657023
19. Bero AW , Yan P , Roh JH , Cirrito JR , Stewart FR , Raichle ME , Lee JM , and Holtzman DM (2011). Neuronal activity regulates the regional vulnerability to amyloid-β deposition. Nat. Neurosci. 14 , 750–756. 10.1038/nn.2801.21532579
20. Kastanenka KV , Hou SS , Shakerdge N , Logan R , Feng D , Wegmann S , Chopra V , Hawkes JM , Chen X , and Bacskai BJ (2017). Optogenetic Restoration of Disrupted Slow Oscillations Halts Amyloid Deposition and Restores Calcium Homeostasis in an Animal Model of Alzheimer’s Disease. PLoS One 12 , e0170275. 10.1371/journal.pone.0170275.28114405
21. Lee Y , Lee JS , Lee KJ , Turner RS , Hoe HS , and Pak DTS (2017). Polo-like kinase 2 phosphorylation of amyloid precursor protein regulates activity-dependent amyloidogenic processing. Neuropharmacology 117 , 387–400. 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2017.02.027.28257888
22. Kang JE , Lim MM , Bateman RJ , Lee JJ , Smyth LP , Cirrito JR , Fujiki N , Nishino S , and Holtzman DM (2009). Amyloid-β dynamics are regulated by orexin and the sleep-wake cycle. Science 326 , 1005–1007. 10.1126/science.1180962.19779148
23. Greicius MD , Srivastava G , Reiss AL , and Menon V (2004). Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer’s disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101 , 4637–4642. 10.1073/pnas.0308627101.15070770
24. Rajendran L , and Annaert W (2012). Membrane trafficking pathways in Alzheimer’s disease. Traffic 13 , 759–770. 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2012.01332.x.22269004
25. Hussain MM (2001). Structural, biochemical and signaling properties of the low-density lipoprotein receptor gene family. Front. Biosci. 6 , D417–D428. 10.2741/hussain1.11229872
26. Schneider A , Rajendran L , Honsho M , Gralle M , Donnert G , Wouters F , Hell SW , and Simons M (2008). Flotillin-dependent clustering of the amyloid precursor protein regulates its endocytosis and amyloidogenic processing in neurons. J. Neurosci. 28 , 2874–2882. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5345-07.2008.18337418
27. Sannerud R , Declerck I , Peric A , Raemaekers T , Menendez G , Zhou L , Veerle B , Coen K , Munck S , De Strooper B , (2011). ADP ribosylation factor 6 (ARF6) controls amyloid precursor protein (APP) processing by mediating the endosomal sorting of BACE1. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108 , E559–E568. 10.1073/pnas.1100745108..21825135
28. Perez RG , Soriano S , Hayes JD , Ostaszewski B , Xia W , Selkoe DJ , Chen X , Stokin GB , and Koo EH (1999). Mutagenesis identifies new signals for β-amyloid precursor protein endocytosis, turnover, and the generation of secreted fragments, including Abeta42. J. Biol. Chem. 274 , 18851–18856. 10.1074/jbc.274.27.18851.10383380
29. Cirrito JR , Kang JE , Lee J , Stewart FR , Verges DK , Silverio LM , Bu G , Mennerick S , and Holtzman DM (2008). Endocytosis is required for synaptic activity-dependent release of amyloid-beta in vivo. Neuron 58 , 42–51. 10.1016/j.neuron.2008.02.003.18400162
30. Burgos PV , Mardones GA , Rojas AL , daSilva LLP , Prabhu Y , Hurley JH , and Bonifacino JS (2010). Sorting of the Alzheimer’s disease amyloid precursor protein mediated by the AP-4 complex. Dev. Cell 18 , 425–436. 10.1016/j.devcel.2010.01.015.20230749
31. Tan JZA , Fourriere L , Wang J , Perez F , Boncompain G , and Gleeson PA (2020). Distinct anterograde trafficking pathways of BACE1 and amyloid precursor protein from the TGN and the regulation of amyloid-β production. Mol. Biol. Cell 31 , 27–44. 10.1091/mbc.E19-09-0487.31746668
32. Lee HK , Kameyama K , Huganir RL , and Bear MF (1998). NMDA induces long-term synaptic depression and dephosphorylation of the GluR1 subunit of AMPA receptors in hippocampus. Neuron 21 , 1151–1162. 10.1016/s0896-6273(00)80632-7.9856470
33. Aow J , Dore K , and Malinow R (2015). Conformational signaling required for synaptic plasticity by the NMDA receptor complex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 112 , 14711–14716. 10.1073/pnas.1520029112.26553983
34. Dore K , Aow J , and Malinow R (2015). Agonist binding to the NMDA receptor drives movement of its cytoplasmic domain without ion flow. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 112 , 14705–14710. 10.1073/pnas.1520023112.26553997
35. Lin DT , and Huganir RL (2007). PICK1 and phosphorylation of the glutamate receptor 2 (GluR2) AMPA receptor subunit regulates GluR2 recycling after NMDA receptor-induced internalization. J. Neurosci. 27 , 13903–13908. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1750-07.2007.18077702
36. Matsuda S , Kakegawa W , Budisantoso T , Nomura T , Kohda K , and Yuzaki M (2013). Stargazin regulates AMPA receptor trafficking through adaptor protein complexes during long-term depression. Nat. Commun. 4 , 2759. 10.1038/ncomms3759.24217640
37. Sekine-Aizawa Y , and Huganir RL (2004). Imaging of receptor trafficking by using α-bungarotoxin-binding-site-tagged receptors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101 , 17114–17119. 10.1073/pnas.0407563101.15563595
38. McCluskey A , Daniel JA , Hadzic G , Chau N , Clayton EL , Mariana A , Whiting A , Gorgani NN , Lloyd J , Quan A , (2013). Building a better dynasore: the dyngo compounds potently inhibit dynamin and endocytosis. Traffic 14 , 1272–1289. 10.1111/tra.12119.24025110
39. Ji C , and Kosman DJ (2015). Molecular mechanisms of non-transfer-rin-bound and transferring-bound iron uptake in primary hippocampal neurons. J. Neurochem. 133 , 668–683. 10.1111/jnc.13040.25649872
40. Burrinha T , Martinsson I , Gomes R , Terrasso AP , Gouras GK , and Almeida CG (2021). Upregulation of APP endocytosis by neuronal aging drives amyloid-dependent synapse loss. J. Cell Sci. 134 , jcs255752. 10.1242/jcs.255752.33910234
41. Sullivan SE , Dillon GM , Sullivan JM , and Ho A (2014). Mint proteins are required for synaptic activity-dependent amyloid precursor protein (APP) trafficking and amyloid β generation. J. Biol. Chem. 289 , 15374–15383. 10.1074/jbc.M113.541003.24742670
42. Lefort R , Pozueta J , and Shelanski M (2012). Cross-linking of cell surface amyloid precursor protein leads to increased β-amyloid peptide production in hippocampal neurons: implications for Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neurosci. 32 , 10674–10685. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.6473-11.2012.22855816
43. Mammen AL , Huganir RL , and O’Brien RJ (1997). Redistribution and stabilization of cell surface glutamate receptors during synapse formation. J. Neurosci. 17 , 7351–7358. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.17-19-07351.1997.9295381
44. Ehlers MD (2000). Reinsertion or degradation of AMPA receptors determined by activity-dependent endocytic sorting. Neuron 28 , 511–525. 10.1016/s0896-6273(00)00129-x.11144360
45. Das U , Wang L , Ganguly A , Saikia JM , Wagner SL , Koo EH , and Roy S (2016). Visualizing APP and BACE-1 approximation in neurons yields insight into the amyloidogenic pathway. Nat. Neurosci. 19 , 55–64. 10.1038/nn.4188.26642089
46. Zhang C , Xiong W , Zheng H , Wang L , Lu B , and Zhou Z (2004). Calcium-and dynamin-independent endocytosis in dorsal root ganglion neurons. Neuron 42 , 225–236. 10.1016/s0896-6273(04)00189-8.15091339
47. Jiang M , and Chen G (2009). Ca2+ regulation of dynamin-independent endocytosis in cortical astrocytes. J. Neurosci. 29 , 8063–8074. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.6139-08.2009.19553446
48. Wu Y , O’Toole ET , Girard M , Ritter B , Messa M , Liu X , McPherson PS , Ferguson SM , and De Camilli P (2014). A dynamin 1-dynamin 3-and clathrin-independent pathway of synaptic vesicle recycling mediated by bulk endocytosis. Elife 3 , e01621. 10.7554/eLife.01621.24963135
49. Mayor S , Parton RG , and Donaldson JG (2014). Clathrin-independent pathways of endocytosis. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 6 , a016758. 10.1101/cshperspect.a016758.24890511
50. Rennick JJ , Johnston APR , and Parton RG (2021). Key principles and methods for studying the endocytosis of biological and nanoparticle therapeutics. Nat. Nanotechnol. 16 , 266–276. 10.1038/s41565-021-00858-8.33712737
51. Xie C , Li N , Chen ZJ , Li BL , and Song BL (2011). The small GTPase Cdc42 interacts with Niemann-Pick C1-like 1 (NPC1L1) and controls its movement from endocytic recycling compartment to plasma membrane in a cholesterol-dependent manner. J. Biol. Chem. 286 , 35933–35942. 10.1074/jbc.M111.270199.21844200
52. Soriano-Castell D , Chavero A , Rentero C , Bosch M , Vidal-Quadras M , Pol A , Enrich C , and Tebar F (2017). ROCK1 is a novel Rac1 effector to regulate tubular endocytic membrane formation during clathrin-independent endocytosis. Sci. Rep. 7 , 6866. 10.1038/s41598-017-07130-x.28761175
53. Eggert S , Midthune B , Cottrell B , and Koo EH (2009). Induced dimerization of the amyloid precursor protein leads to decreased amyloid-β protein production. J. Biol. Chem. 284 , 28943–28952. 10.1074/jbc.M109.038646.19596858
54. Munter LM , Voigt P , Harmeier A , Kaden D , Gottschalk KE , Weise C , Pipkorn R , Schaefer M , Langosch D , and Multhaup G (2007). GxxxG motifs within the amyloid precursor protein transmembrane sequence are critical for the etiology of Abeta42. EMBO J. 26 , 1702–1712. 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601616.17332749
55. Munter LM , Botev A , Richter L , Hildebrand PW , Althoff V , Weise C , Kaden D , and Multhaup G (2010). Aberrant amyloid precursor protein (APP) processing in hereditary forms of Alzheimer disease caused by APP familial Alzheimer disease mutations can be rescued by mutations in the APP GxxxG motif. J. Biol. Chem. 285 , 21636–21643. 10.1074/jbc.M109.088005.20452985
56. Richter L , Munter LM , Ness J , Hildebrand PW , Dasari M , Unterreitmeier S , Bulic B , Beyermann M , Gust R , Reif B , (2010). Amyloid beta 42 peptide (Abeta42)-lowering compounds directly bind to Abeta and interfere with amyloid precursor protein (APP) transmembrane dimerization. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107 , 14597–14602. 10.1073/pnas.1003026107.20679249
57. Buggia-Prévot V , Fernandez CG , Riordan S , Vetrivel KS , Roseman J , Waters J , Bindokas VP , Vassar R , and Thinakaran G (2014). Axonal BACE1 dynamics and targeting in hippocampal neurons: a role for Rab11 GTPase. Mol. Neurodegener. 9 , 1. 10.1186/1750-1326-9-1.24386896
58. Buggia-Prévot V , Fernandez CG , Udayar V , Vetrivel KS , Elie A , Roseman J , Sasse VA , Lefkow M , Meckler X , Bhattacharyya S , (2013). A function for EHD family proteins in unidirectional retrograde dendritic transport of BACE1 and Alzheimer’s disease Aβ production. Cell Rep. 5 , 1552–1563. 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.12.006.24373286
59. Annaert WG , Levesque L , Craessaerts K , Dierinck I , Snellings G , Westaway D , George-Hyslop PS , Cordell B , Fraser P , and De Strooper B (1999). Presenilin 1 controls gamma-secretase processing of amyloid precursor protein in pre-golgi compartments of hippocampal neurons. J. Cell Biol. 147 , 277–294. 10.1083/jcb.147.2.277.10525535
60. Hsieh H , Boehm J , Sato C , Iwatsubo T , Tomita T , Sisodia S , and Malinow R (2006). AMPAR removal underlies Aβ-induced synaptic depression and dendritic spine loss. Neuron 52 , 831–843. 10.1016/j.neuron.2006.10.035.17145504
61. Wei W , Nguyen LN , Kessels HW , Hagiwara H , Sisodia S , and Malinow R (2010). Amyloid beta from axons and dendrites reduces local spine number and plasticity. Nat. Neurosci. 13 , 190–196. 10.1038/nn.2476.20037574
62. Ben Halima S , Mishra S , Raja KMP , Willem M , Baici A , Simons K , Brüstle O , Koch P , Haass C , Caflisch A , and Rajendran L (2016). Specific inhibition of β-secretase processing of the Alzheimer disease amyloid precursor protein. Cell Rep. 14 , 2127–2141. 10.1016/j.celrep.2016.01.076.26923602
63. Frykman S , Hur JY , Frånberg J , Aoki M , Winblad B , Nahalkova J , Behbahani H , and Tjernberg LO (2010). Synaptic and endosomal localization of active gamma-secretase in rat brain. PLoS One 5 , e8948. 10.1371/journal.pone.0008948.20126630
64. Harris JA , Devidze N , Verret L , Ho K , Halabisky B , Thwin MT , Kim D , Hamto P , Lo I , Yu GQ , (2010). Transsynaptic progression of amyloid-β-induced neuronal dysfunction within the entorhinal-hippocam-pal network. Neuron 68 , 428–441. 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.10.020.21040845
65. Vicario-Orri E , Kasuga K , Tyan SH , Chiang K , da Silva SV , Bushong EA , DeLoach K , Ling IF , Luo L , Ellisman MH , (2020). Aβ-induced synaptic injury is mediated by presynaptic expression of amyloid precursor protein (APP) in hippocampal neurons. Preprint at bioRxiv. 10.1101/2020.07.18.210344.
66. Yamamoto K , Tanei ZI , Hashimoto T , Wakabayashi T , Okuno H , Naka Y , Yizhar O , Fenno LE , Fukayama M , Bito H , (2015). Chronic optogenetic activation augments aβ pathology in a mouse model of Alzheimer disease. Cell Rep. 11 , 859–865. 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.04.017.25937280
67. Niederst ED , Reyna SM , and Goldstein LSB (2015). Axonal amyloid precursor protein and its fragments undergo somatodendritic endocytosis and processing. Mol. Biol. Cell. 26 , 205–217. 10.1091/mbc.E14-06-1049.25392299
68. Wolfes AC , and Dean C (2018). Culturing In Vivo-like Murine Astrocytes Using the Fast, Simple, and Inexpensive AWESAM Protocol. J. Vis. Exp. 131 , 56092. 10.3791/56092.
