LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


0406041
4668
J Comp Neurol
J Comp Neurol
The Journal of comparative neurology
0021-9967
1096-9861

37098996
10247506
10.1002/cne.25490
NIHMS1888976
Article
Expression of tau and phosphorylated tau in the brain of normal and hemiparkinsonian rhesus macaques
Gambardella Julia C. 12
Schoephoerster Wyatt 1
Bondarenko Viktoriya 1
Yandell Brian S. 3
Emborg Marina E. 124*
1 Preclinical Parkinson’s Research Program, Wisconsin National Primate Research Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison
2 Cellular and Molecular Pathology Graduate Program, University of Wisconsin-Madison
3 Department of Statistics, University of Wisconsin-Madison
4 Department of Medical Physics, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Corresponding Author: Marina E. Emborg, M.D., Ph.D., Preclinical Parkinson’s Research Program, Wisconsin National Primate Research Center, University of Wisconsin, Madison, 1220 Capitol Court, Madison, WI 53715, emborg@primate.wisc.edu
8 4 2023
8 2023
26 4 2023
01 8 2024
531 11 11981216
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Tau is a neuronal protein involved in microtubule stabilization and intracellular vesicle transport in axons. In neurodegenerative disorders termed ‘tauopathies’, like Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease, tau becomes hyperphosphorylated and forms intracellular inclusions. Rhesus macaques are widely used for studying ageing processes and modeling neurodegenerative disorders, yet little is known about endogenous tau expression in their brains. In this study, immunohistochemical methods were used to map and characterize total tau, 3R- and 4R-tau isoforms, and phosphorylated tau (pThr231-tau and pSer202/Thr205-tau/AT8) expression bilaterally in 16 brain regions of normal and MPTP-induced hemiparkinsonian adult rhesus macaques. Tau-immunoreactivity (-ir), including both 3R and 4R isoforms, was observed throughout the brain, with varying regional intensities. The anterior cingulate cortex, entorhinal cortex, and hippocampus displayed the most robust tau-ir, while the subthalamic nucleus and white matter regions had minimal expression. Tau was present in neurons of grey matter regions; it was preferentially observed in fibers of the globus pallidus and substantia nigra and in cell bodies of the thalamus and subthalamic nucleus. In white matter regions, tau was abundantly present in oligodendrocytes. Additionally, neuronal pThr231-tau-ir was abundant in all brain regions, but not AT8-ir. Differences in regional and intracellular protein expression were not detected between control subjects and both brain hemispheres of MPTP-treated animals. Specifically, tau-ir in the substantia nigra of all subjects colocalized with GABAergic neurons. Overall, this report provides an in-depth characterization of tau expression in the rhesus macaque brain to facilitate future investigations for understanding and modeling tau pathology in this species.

Graphical Abstract

Accumulation of the neuronal protein tau had been linked to neurodegenerative disorders. Rhesus macaques are widely used for studying aging and neurodegenerative disorders, yet little is known about the natural expression of tau in their brains. Here, we demonstrate that tau is present across brain regions in normal and hemiparkinsonian rhesus macaques detected by immunohistochemical methods. Tau is found in neuronal soma and fibers of grey matter brain regions and oligodendrocytes in white matter brain regions. Both 3R and 4R tau isoforms are detected. Tau phosphorylated at Thr231, but not Ser202/Thr205 (AT8), is also present. Nigral dopaminergic (TH+) cell loss associated to neurotoxin-induced hemiparkinsonism did not affect tau expression as the protein is mainly expressed in nigral GABAergic (GAD67+) cells.

Tau
phosphorylated tau
macaque
MPTP
substantia nigra
hippocampus
white matter

pmc1 INTRODUCTION

Tau is a member of the microtubule-associated protein (MAP) family and is predominantly expressed in neurons (Dehmelt &amp; Halpain, 2005). In physiological conditions, tau plays a critical role in microtubule stabilization and axonal transport of intracellular vesicles (Barbier et al., 2019). Six different isoforms of tau are expressed in the human brain, all of which are identified by the primary antibody HT7. Tau isoforms either contain three (3R) or four (4R) microtubule repeat regions, differentiated by alternative splicing of exon 10 (Mandelkow, von Bergen, Biernat, &amp; Mandelkow, 2007). In normal conditions, 3R- and 4R-tau isoforms are equally expressed in the adult human brain (Andreadis, 2012).

The tau protein is widely known for its role in neurodegenerative disorders termed ‘tauopathies’, which include Alzheimer’s disease (AD), frontotemporal dementia (FTD), Pick’s disease (PiD), and progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), among others. In such diseases, the ratio of 3R- to 4R-tau isoforms in the brain may become skewed (Andreadis, 2012). For example, PiD is known as a 3R-tauopathy, whereas PSP is known as a 4R-tauopathy (Liu &amp; Gong, 2008). In AD, both 3R and 4R tauopathies are present, but with altered mRNA and protein ratios in affected neurons (Ginsberg, Che, Counts, &amp; Mufson, 2006; Niblock &amp; Gallo, 2012; Sealey et al., 2017). Certain disorders, such as FTD, may have 3R-tauopathy, 4R-tauopathy, or both (de Silva et al., 2006). In addition to unbalanced tau isoform expression in disease states, the tau protein also becomes hyperphosphorylated and forms intracellular aggregates in the form of neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) and neuropil threads (NTs) (Arendt, Stieler, &amp; Holzer, 2016). Tau phosphorylation can occur at different sites on the protein and varies with disease progression. In AD, tau phosphorylation at Thr231 (pT231-tau) occurs early in the disease, while phosphorylation at Ser202 and Thr205, recognized by the monoclonal antibody AT8, often appears after pT231-tau accumulation (Augustinack, Schneider, Mandelkow, &amp; Hyman, 2002; Neddens et al., 2018).

The pattern of brain regions vulnerable to accumulation of phosphorylated tau (p-tau) depends on the neurodegenerative disorder. In AD, p-tau lesions begin in the transentorhinal region, extend to the entorhinal cortex and hippocampus, and progress outward to the neocortical association areas (Braak, Alafuzoff, Arzberger, Kretzschmar, &amp; Del Tredici, 2006). In FTD, the frontal and temporal neocortices are preferentially affected by p-tau pathology, with only mild changes in the hippocampus and subcortical nuclei (van Swieten et al., 1999). Conversely, PSP shows heavy involvement of brainstem and subcortical nuclei, including neuronal and oligodendroglial p-tau accumulation in the thalamus, subthalamic nucleus, globus pallidus, substantia nigra (SN), and striatum (Kovacs et al., 2020). In PiD, p-tau accumulates in both cortical and subcortical structures, with the frontotemporal limbic and neocortical regions affected early in the disease, followed later by the basal ganglia and then the primary motor cortex (Irwin et al., 2016).

Parkinson’s disease (PD) has been recently recognized as a tauopathy (X. Zhang et al., 2018). PD is a neurodegenerative disorder that is clinically defined by progressive motor and executive dysfunction (Jankovic, 2008). The pathological hallmarks of PD are the loss of dopaminergic neurons in the SN pars compacta (SNpc) and the presence of Lewy bodies (LBs) and Lewy neurites (LNs) (Wakabayashi, Moria, &amp; Takahashi, 2006). Misfolded alpha-synuclein (α-syn) protein is the main component of LBs, though tau and p-tau epitopes can also be present in LBs (Arima et al., 1999; Ishizawa, Mattila, Davies, Wang, &amp; Dickson, 2003; Sengupta et al., 2015). Moreover, NFTs have been reported in the temporal cortex of PD patients with dementia (Coughlin et al., 2019), in the amygdala, hippocampus, and entorhinal cortex of carriers of the PD LRRK2 mutation (Henderson, Sengupta, Trojanowski, &amp; Lee, 2019), and in the SN of aged individuals with PD-like gait impairments (Schneider et al., 2006). With respect to tau isoforms, a lower 3R- to 4R-tau ratio has been described in the SN of PD patients (Lei et al., 2012). Although differences in neuroanatomical and molecular tau-related neurodegeneration across diseases have been identified, the underlying mechanisms driving them remain unclear.

Macaque monkeys present several advantages for translational studies of tau and tau pathology compared to other species commonly used for research. In addition to their complex brain neuroanatomy (Capitanio &amp; Emborg, 2008), humans and rhesus macaques share &gt;98% sequence homology for the longest tau isoform (Nelson, Stefansson, Gulcher, &amp; Saper, 1996). In contrast, the longest tau isoform shares only ~94% homology between humans and common marmosets, and ~88% homology between humans and mice (Sharma et al., 2019). Like humans, rhesus express 3R- and 4R- isoforms in the brain (Lee &amp; Leugers, 2012; Nelson et al., 1996) while rodents only express 4R-tau (Takuma, Arawaka, &amp; Mori, 2003). P-tau inclusions have been found in the brain of aged cynomolgus macaques suggesting vulnerability to age-related tau pathology (Härtig et al., 2000; Paspalas et al., 2018). Moreover, humans and macaques exposed to 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) develop a similar PD-like syndrome associated to nigral dopaminergic neuronal loss (Emborg, 2007). Despite rhesus macaques’ advantages for the analysis of tauopathies, the expression of endogenous tau in their brains has not been characterized. To fulfill this gap in knowledge, here we report the neuroanatomical distribution of total tau, 3R- and 4R-tau isoforms, pT231-tau, and pS202/T205-tau in normal and MPTP-induced hemiparkinsonian rhesus brains.

2 MATERIAL AND METHODS

2.1 Ethics Statement

This study was performed in strict accordance with the recommendations in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the NIH (8th edition, 2011) in an AALAC-accredited facility (WNPRC, UW-Madison). The experimental protocols were approved by the Institutional Animal Use and Care Committee at UW-Madison (permit #G00492). All efforts were made to minimize the number of animals used and to ameliorate any distress.

Rhesus macaque brain tissue was obtained from the tissue bank at the Wisconsin National Primate Research Center and a previously published study (Swanson et al., 2011). Brain tissue from a human AD patient (72 y.o. female) used as a positive control for p-tau immunohistochemistry was obtained from the tissue bank at the Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center at the University of Wisconsin-Madison following documented review and approval from the Institutional Review Board.

2.2 Subjects

The tissue sections used in this study for bilateral brain evaluations were obtained from control (n=2, 4 brain hemispheres; 1 female, 1 male; age: 5.2-6yrs; 6.7-7.45 kg) and MPTP-treated (n=3, 3 intact and 3 MPTP-treated brain hemispheres; 3 males; age: 3.5-4.2 years; 4.98-6.66 kg) rhesus monkeys. Animals were housed individually (cage floor area 0.4m2 or 0.6m2 per animal, height 76 or 81 cm) on a 12-hour light/dark cycle with room temperature of 21°C. The animals were monitored twice daily by trained veterinary technicians for evidence of disease or injury, and body weight was monitored to ensure animals remained in properly sized cages. Animals were fed commercial nonhuman primate chow (2050 Teklad Global 20% Protein Primate Diet, Harlan Laboratories, Madison, WI) twice daily supplemented with fruits, vegetables, and foraging items and received water ad libitum. If necessary, nonhuman primate chow was soaked in a protein-enriched drink (Ensure©, Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, IL) to stimulate appetite. Environmental enrichment was provided on a rotational schedule to ensure novel stimulation and species-appropriate behaviors.

Hemiparkinsonism in macaques was induced by administration of a single, unilateral, intracarotid artery infusion of MPTP-HCl (2-4 mg total dose; Sigma, St. Louis, MO) in sterile surgical conditions under isoflurane anesthesia as previously described (Swanson et al., 2011). The animals’ neurological signs were evaluated using a validated clinical rating scale that ranges from 0 (normal behavior) to 32 (severe bilateral parkinsonian symptoms). As previously reported (Swanson et al., 2011), the MPTP-treated animals scored 9-13 points indicating a stable hemiparkinsonian syndrome. The postmortem brain evaluation (Supp. Figure 1) 3-months following neurotoxin dosing confirmed a significant unilateral loss of dopaminergic tyrosine hydroxylase (TH)-positive neurons in the MPTP-treated SN by unbiased stereological cell counts (84.08 ± 1.11%; two-tailed paired t-test, p &lt; 0.0001) compared to the contralateral, untreated side. A significant decrease in TH expression was also found in the ipsilateral caudate (82.32 ± 0.75%; p = 0.0033) and putamen (82.37 ± 0.95%; p = 0.0036) measured by optical density (OD). Data for specific subjects was obtained from (Swanson et al., 2011), and normalized between studies by expressing the quantification in the MPTP-treated side as percentage of loss in relationship to the contralateral side.

For necropsy, all animals were anesthetized with sodium pentobarbital (25 mg/kg IV) and transcardially perfused with heparinized saline, followed by 4% paraformaldehyde. Brains were extracted and post-fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 72 hours and cryoprotected by immersion in graded (10-30%) sucrose/0.1M phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) solutions. Coronal brain sections were cut frozen (40-μm thickness) on a sliding knife microtome. All sections were stored in a cryoprotectant solution of 1X PBS, sucrose, and ethylene glycol until processing.

2.3 Immunohistochemistry

Coronal brain sections from control and MPTP-treated animals were immunostained in parallel with primary antibodies HT7, pT231-tau, or AT8 (see Table 1 for information on primary and secondary antibodies). All antibodies used in this study were commercially available and have been previously published in humans and/or rhesus macaques (Supp. Table 1).

For pT231-tau, antigen retrieval was performed by incubating the tissue at 80°C in 1X sodium citrate buffer for 20 minutes. All immunohistochemical stains were subsequently performed according to previously published protocols (Swanson &amp; Emborg, 2014; Vermilyea, Guthrie, Hernandez, Bondarenko, &amp; Emborg, 2019). Briefly, endogenous peroxidase activity was removed by a 20-minute incubation in 0.1M sodium periodate. Non-specific staining was blocked using 5% normal serum in a Tris-buffered saline solution containing 2% bovine serum albumin and 0.05% Triton X-100. The sections were incubated overnight in primary antibodies, washed in dilution media containing diH2O, NaCl, Tris-HCl, and Triton X-100 and incubated in secondary antibodies (1:200) for one hour (Table 1). Following a series of washes in dilution media, sections were incubated in the avidin biotin substrate (1:1000; ABC; Vector Laboratories) for 75 minutes. The sections were subsequently washed in 0.1M imidazole/1.0M acetate buffer (pH 7.4). Stains were visualized using 0.05% 3,3’-diaminobenzidine (DAB) and 0.05% H2O2. Negative and positive controls were processed in parallel for all immunostainings. Negative controls consisted of omitting the primary antibodies during the immunostaining. Brain tissue from an AD patient was used as a positive control for pT231-tau and AT8 immunohistochemistry. Additional coronal brain sections were stained with Nissl to assess neuroanatomy (Swanson et al., 2011).

2.4 Immunofluorescence

Matching coronal brain sections from control and MPTP-treated animals were immunostained in parallel against (1) HT7, TH, and GAD67 to assess tau expression in dopaminergic and GABAergic cells of the SN, respectively, (2) HT7 and β-III tubulin to characterize the intraneuronal distribution of tau, (3) HT7 and Olig2 to evaluate tau expression in oligodendrocytes in white matter brain regions, and (4) 3R- and 4R-tau to characterize tau isoform expression (Table 2). Antigen retrieval was performed for all immunofluorescence stains by incubating tissues at 80°C in 1X sodium citrate buffer for 10 minutes. Tissues were washed in dilution media, then pretreated in 1X TrueBlack Lipofuscin Autofluorescence Quencher diluted in 70% ethanol for 10 minutes (Biotium). Non-specific staining was blocked using a 2-hour incubation in dilution media containing 5% normal serum and 2% bovine serum albumin. Tissues were incubated overnight in primary antibodies (Table 2), then washed and incubated for 2 hours with secondary antibodies. All tissue sections were counterstained with 4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) as a nuclear marker. Negative controls were processed in parallel by omitting the primary antibodies during the procedures.

2.5 Image Acquisition and Processing.

Brightfield images were captured using a Zeiss Axioplan 2 imaging photomicroscope equipped with a Qimaging camera (Germany). Background correction was applied using Stereoinvestigator software version 2021 (MBF Bioscience, Williston, VT, USA). Camera settings were kept consistent between images captured at the same magnification. Image brightness was adjusted using Adobe Photoshop version 22.1.0 for MacOS (Adobe Inc., San Jose, CA, USA). The same adjustments were used for images captured at the same magnification.

Immunofluorescence images were obtained using a Nikon A1 confocal microscope (Tokyo, Japan). Laser settings were kept consistent between images captured at the same magnification. Images for each brain region were captured at the 20x objective. Additionally, stitched x/y images of the SN and hippocampus were collected with 35% overlap using the 4x objective. All images in the same x/y field were captured at three z-coordinates by focusing the top, middle, and bottom of the tissue. NIS Elements software version 5.20.02 (Nikon, Tokyo, Japan) was used to combine z-stacks to create a maximum intensity projection image. LUTs (look up tables) were adjusted to eliminate background and enhance signal.

2.6 Semiquantitative rating of total tau expression

A semiquantitative rating scale was used to evaluate HT7-immunoreactivity (-ir) bilaterally in matching coronal brain sections from all animals. The following 16 regions of interest (ROIs) were identified bilaterally (Figure 1a) using a rhesus monkey stereotaxic atlas (Paxinos, Huang, &amp; Toga, 2000): prefrontal cortex, primary motor cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, entorhinal cortex, hippocampus, amygdala, caudate nucleus, putamen, external globus pallidus, internal globus pallidus, thalamus, subthalamic nucleus, SN, corpus callosum, internal capsule, and anterior commissure.

Two raters, trained to reliability and blind to the animals’ condition, rated the HT7-ir (Pearson correlation, r = 0.9; p &lt; 0.0001). The score considered the area of expression of HT7 in cell bodies (neurons and glia), fibers, and neuropil across the entire ROI. To assign scores, ROIs were observed under a Zeiss Axioplan 2 microscope (Germany) at the 4x and 40x objectives. ROIs from each brain hemisphere were scored separately. Evaluation of the whole ROI minimized the effect of uneven immunostaining due to the free-floating technique. The HT7-ir semiquantitative rating scale ranged from 0 to 5, with 0 = no HT7-ir in the entire ROI, 1 = 1-25% of the ROI exhibited HT7-ir, 2 = 26-50% of the ROI exhibited HT7-ir, 3 = 51-99% of the ROI exhibited HT7-ir, 4 = 100% of the ROI exhibited light to moderate HT7-ir, 5 = 100 % of the ROI exhibited dark HT7-ir (Supp. Figure 2). Scores from each blinded rater were subsequently averaged for analysis.

2.7 Optical density of total tau expression

Optical density (OD) of HT7-ir was obtained for the previously listed ROIs using Fiji software version 1.53c (NIH ImageJ, Bethesda, MD, USA) by a single, blinded investigator. Images of matching coronal brain sections from each animal were captured simultaneously using an Epson 1640XL-GA high-resolution digital scanner for same light exposure conditions. Each image was converted to an 8-bit grayscale image. Fiji was calibrated using a step tablet and gray scale values were converted to OD units using the Rodbard function. To minimize the effect of possible uneven staining, ROIs were outlined to encapsulate entire brain regions for analysis. OD was measured using a predetermined threshold value of 0.07 OD units. The threshold was defined as the value at which pixels within the white matter tracts remained unlabeled; it was calculated by averaging the maximal threshold value obtained for each coronal brain section. The white matter tracts (corpus callosum, internal capsule, and anterior commissure) were used as reference regions and, therefore, were excluded from OD analysis.

To further investigate tau expression on MPTP-induced hemiparkinsonism, OD of HT7-ir was evaluated in additional matching coronal brain sections containing basal ganglia ROIs, separated by approximately 960μm. (Supp. Figure 3a). The caudate and putamen were evaluated in 3 sections at the level of the anterior commissure, the external and internal globus pallida were evaluated in 3 sections at the level of the optic tract, and the SN was evaluated in 2 sections at the emergence of the 3rd cranial nerve. The OD values of HT7-ir were then averaged per ROI and hemisphere for statistical analyses.

2.8 Data Analysis

Data were collected and analyzed by investigators blind to the animals’ conditions. Three groups were considered for analysis: control animals with values from each brain hemisphere (n=4), the left (intact) hemisphere of MPTP-treated animals (n=3) and the right (lesioned) hemisphere of MPTP-treated animals, (n=3). Statistical significance was defined as p&lt;0.05. Statistics were performed using Prism version 9.0.0 for macOS (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA).

Semiquantitative ratings of HT7-ir were compared between treatment groups and brain regions using a mixed-effects model of repeated measures two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with a Bonferroni correction for pairwise comparisons. For overall regional analysis, OD measures of HT7-ir collected in 16 brain ROIs were compared between treatment groups and brain regions using a mixed-effects model of repeated measures two-way ANOVA with a Bonferroni correction for pairwise comparisons. For each statistical test, brain region scores and OD values were nested within individual subjects, with the key comparison concerning the difference between control and MPTP-treated groups across brain regions.

For the further analyses of the basal ganglia in additional brain sections, the OD values of HT7-ir in the caudate, putamen, globus pallidus internal and external, and SN were averaged per ROI and hemisphere and compared between treatment groups using a mixed-effects model of repeated measures two-way ANOVA with a Bonferroni correction for pairwise comparisons.

The statistical power was set at 80% with size of test at 10%. For the semiquantitative rating scores, the SD by region was 0.32-0.95, thus a conservative SD=1 was chosen. In these conditions, a sample size of 2 (per group) would be able to detect a measured score effect of 4 (3.98), while a sample size of 3 would detect an effect of 2.5 (2.48). For the OD, the SD by region was 0.008-067, thus a conservative SD=0.05 was chosen. A sample size of 2 (per group) would be able to detect a measured score effect of 0.2 (0.199), while a sample size of 3 would detect an effect of 0.124.

3 RESULTS

In section 3.1, we provide an overall description of tau immunoreactivities among the 16 brain ROIs. Section 3.2 delves deeper into tau expression in each brain region with corresponding figures.

3.1 Overall distribution of total tau, 3R- and 4R-tau isoforms, and p-tau in the brain of intact and hemiparkinsonian rhesus macaques

Total tau, identified by the HT7 antibody, was ubiquitously expressed throughout the rhesus brain, with regional variations in expression patterns. The prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, primary motor cortex, entorhinal cortex, caudate, putamen, amygdala, and hippocampus exhibited moderate to intense HT7-ir across the ROI. The thalamus and subthalamic nucleus displayed robust HT7 labeling of neuronal cell bodies, while in the globus pallidus and SN, HT7-ir was present in fibers. In the white matter tracts, HT7-ir was sparse. HT7-ir between the 16 brain ROIs was significantly different on both semiquantitative rating (RM Two-way ANOVA, p= 0.0053, Figure 1b; Supp. Table 2) and OD measures (RM Two-way ANOVA, p &lt;0.0001, Figure 1c; Supp. Table 3).

Like control animals, HT7-ir was ubiquitously and bilaterally expressed in all 16 brain ROIs in MPTP-treated animals. In the MPTP-treated brain hemisphere, regional variations in HT7-ir mirrored that of control brains and the hemisphere contralateral to MPTP administration. There were no significant differences in HT7-ir between treatment groups measured by semiquantitative rating (RM Two-way ANOVA, p = 0.5815, Figure 1b) and OD (RM Two-way ANOVA, p = 0.5923, Figure 1c). To further assess the effect of MPTP-induced dopaminergic neuronal loss, additional brain sections containing the caudate nucleus, putamen, external globus pallidus, internal globus pallidus, and SN were evaluated (Supp. Figure 3a). This analysis confirmed the lack of MPTP effect on HT7-ir (Two-way ANOVA, p = 0.472; Supp. Figure 3b). Triple-label immunofluorescence against HT7, TH, and GAD67 in the SN confirmed the MPTP-induced unilateral loss of TH-positive dopaminergic neurons and identified HT7-ir mainly in GAD67-positive cells (Figure 2).

The intraneuronal distribution of tau was analyzed using double-label immunofluorescence against HT7 and β-III tubulin. In all grey matter brain regions, HT7-ir colocalized with β-III tubulin-ir in neuronal cell bodies and axons with varying intensities. In the cortical regions, amygdala, and hippocampus, HT7-ir was predominantly observed in the neuropil, with weaker expression in neuronal soma and fibers. Similar to immunohistochemical findings, HT7-ir was preferentially expressed in neuronal soma of the thalamus and subthalamic nucleus, and in fibers of the globus pallidi and SN. In the striatum, HT7-ir colocalized with β-III tubulin-positive soma and axons, with slightly greater intensity in soma. In the white matter tracts, β-III tubulin-ir was absent.

Double-label immunofluorescence against HT7 and Olig2 identified tau-positive oligodendrocytes in the corpus callosum, internal capsule, and anterior commissure. These white matter tracts contained numerous oligodendrocytes with robust cytoplasmic HT7-ir.

3R- and 4R-tau isoforms were expressed in all 16 brain ROIs with varying intensities. Overall, in the grey matter brain ROIs, 3R-tau-ir was most intense in neuronal soma, and weaker in fibers and the surrounding neuropil. 4R-tau-ir was intense in the neuropil and weaker in neurons. In the white matter brain ROIs, both 3R- and 4R-tau isoforms were expressed with similar frequency and intensity in oligodendroglia-like cells.

pT231-tau was observed in soma and fibers of healthy neurons in the grey matter brain ROIs. It was also observed in glia-like cells of the white matter tracts. In contrast, AT8-ir was not identified in any of the brain ROIs, although it was detected in the positive control AD brain tissue forming NFTs, NTs, and neuritic plaques (Supp. Figure 4). Negative controls for all other stains did not show immunoreactivity (Supp. Figure 5).

3.2 Detailed description of findings in each of the 16 brain ROIs

3.2.1 Prefrontal Cortex (Brodmann Area 46) and Primary Motor Cortex (Brodmann Area 4)

HT7 was expressed across the neuropil in all cortical layers of the prefrontal and primary motor cortices (Figure 3a,b). In the prefrontal cortex, HT7-ir was evident in β-III tubulin-positive neuronal soma, but not readily distinguishable in axons due to the abundant neuropil immunoreactivity (Figure 3e; Supp. Figure 6a–c). The primary motor cortex had weak HT7-ir in the soma and fibers (Figure 3f; Supp. Figure 6d–f). Immunofluorescence labeling of 3R- and 4R-tau isoforms revealed tau expression in both neuronal soma and axons of both cortical regions. Both tau isoforms were expressed with 3R-tau-ir more intense in neuronal soma than 4R-tau-ir. In the neuropil, 4R-tau expression was present and 3R-tau expression was minimal (Figure 3i,j). pT231-tau-ir was found in all layers of the prefrontal cortex with greater intensity in layers II, III, and V (Figure 3m). The primary motor cortex also had pT231-tau-ir in all cortical layers, but with greater intensity in pyramidal neurons of layers III, V, and VI (Figure 3n). pT231-tau-ir was observed in neuronal soma and fibers, as well as the neuropil. Cortical layers were identified using matching Nissl-stained brain sections (Figure 3q,r).

3.2.2 Anterior Cingulate Cortex (Brodmann Area 24) and Entorhinal Cortex (Brodmann Area 28)

In the anterior cingulate cortex, HT7-ir was found across the neuropil in all cortical layers, but with layers III and V exhibiting slightly more intense expression (Figure 3c). Double-labeling with β-III tubulin showed weak HT7-ir in neuronal soma and axons (Figure 3g; Supp. Figure 6g–i). 3R- and 4R-tau isoforms were present throughout all cortical layers, with intense expression in the soma of pyramidal neurons. 3R- and 4R-tau expression was also present in neuronal axons, but 3R-tau-ir was slightly more robust. 4R-tau was intensely labeled in the neuropil (Figure 3k). pT231-tau-ir was present in healthy neurons of all layers of the anterior cingulate cortex, especially in layer V. pT231-tau was greatest in neuronal soma and axons, and moderate in the neuropil (Figure 3o).

In the entorhinal cortex, HT7-ir was observed uniformly across the neuropil in all cortical layers (Figure 3d). HT7 and β-III tubulin double-labeling revealed weak HT7-ir in neuronal soma and fibers (Figure 3h; Supp. Figure 6j–l). 3R and 4R-tau-ir were both present in neuronal soma. Both tau isoforms showed weak expression in neuronal fibers. 4R-tau was intense in the neuropil (Figure 3l). pT231-tau-ir was observed across the neuropil and in pyramidal neuronal soma and fibers of the entorhinal cortex, with greater intensity in layers II, V, and VI (Figure 3p). Cortical layers were identified using matching Nissl-stained brain sections (Figure 3s,t)

3.2.3 Hippocampus

HT7-ir was present across the neuropil in all hippocampal subregions (Figure 4a). HT7-ir colocalized with β-III tubulin-positive soma and axons of neurons throughout the hippocampus (Figure 4b; Supp. Figure 7a–f). Similarly, 3R- and 4R-tau-ir isoforms were identified in neuronal soma and axons in all hippocampal subregions. 3R-tau-ir was more intense in neurons and 4R-tau-ir was more intense in the neuropil (Figure 4c). All hippocampal subregions expressed pT231-tau with the greatest immunoreactivity in CA3 mossy fiber cells (Figure 4d). In the CA3, pT231-tau-ir localized preferentially in neuronal soma and fibers Figure 4d1). In the DG, it was mostly found in cell soma and the surrounding neuropil (Figure 4d2).

3.2.4 Amygdala

The neuropil was the main source of HT7-ir in the amygdala. HT7-ir was uniform throughout this region (Figure 5a). HT7 and β-III tubulin double-labeling revealed HT7-ir in neuronal soma and axons (Figure 5d; Supp. Figure 8a–c). 3R-tau-ir was robust in neurons and was primarily expressed in the soma. 4R-tau-ir intensely labeled the neuropil of the amygdala. Like 3R-tau, 4R-tau was also localized to the neuronal soma, although with weaker intensity (Figure 5g). pT231-tau-ir was robust in neuronal soma and the surrounding neuropil, and moderate in neuronal fibers (Figure 5j).

3.2.5 Thalamus and Subthalamic Nucleus

HT7-ir was intense in neuronal cell bodies of the thalamus and subthalamic nucleus (Figure 5b,c) which was confirmed by double-labeling with β-III tubulin. HT7-ir also weakly colocalized with β-III tubulin-positive fibers (Figure 5e,f; Supp. Figure 8d–i). Throughout both regions, 3R- and 4R-tau-ir was robust in neuronal soma, moderate in the neuropil, and weak in neuronal fibers (Figure 5h,i). In both regions, pT231-tau was robust in neuronal soma and axon hillocks, and moderate in the neuropil (Figure 5k,l).

3.2.6 Globus Pallidus Internal and External

In the globus pallidus internal and external HT7 extensively labeled neuronal fibers (Figure 6a,b). Double-labeling of HT7 and β-III tubulin confirmed robust HT7 expression in neuronal fibers and weak expression in the soma (Figure 6e,f; Supp. Figure 9a–f). 3R- and 4R-tau had slightly different intraneuronal expression patterns. Both isoforms were preferentially expressed in neuronal fibers. In addition, 3R-tau-ir was robust in neuronal soma, while 4R-tau-ir intensely labeled the neuropil. (Figure 6i,j). pT231-tau-ir was present in neuronal soma, fibers, and the neuropil (Figure 6m,n).

3.2.7 Caudate Nucleus and Putamen

HT7-ir was intense in the striatal neuropil. It also weakly labeled a few neurons and oligodendrocyte-like cells (Figure 6c,d). HT7 and β-III tubulin double-labeling confirmed weak HT7 expression in neuronal soma and axons (Figure 6g,h; Supp. Figure 9g–l). In the caudate, 3R- and 4R-tau-ir was present in neuronal soma and fibers, with more intense 3R-tau-ir in soma and 4R-tau-ir neuropil (Figure 6k). In the putamen, both tau isoforms were intensely expressed in neuronal soma and weakly expressed in fibers (Figure 6l). In both the caudate and putamen, pT231-tau labeled the neuropil, neuronal soma, and associated axons (Figure 6o,p).

3.2.8 Substantia Nigra

HT7-ir was robust in neuronal fibers of the SN pars compacta and reticulata (Figure 7a,b). At higher magnification, the SNpc displayed intense HT7-ir in the neuropil (Figure 7c, d). Double-labeling with β-III tubulin identified HT7 expression in neuronal fibers and soma (Figure 7e,f). Both 3R- and 4R-tau isoforms were expressed in neuronal soma, with 3R-tau-ir slightly more intense. 4R-tau-ir was more robust in the neuropil. Both isoforms exhibited similar intensity in axons (Figure 7g,h). pT231-tau was robustly labeled in both neuronal soma and fibers of the SN pars compacta (Figure 7i,j).

3.2.9 Corpus Callosum, Internal Capsule, and Anterior Commissure

HT7-ir was weakly present in the white matter tracts (Figure 8a-c). β-III tubulin-ir was not evident in the white matter tracts and, thus, HT7-ir was presumed to be of glial origin (Figure 8d-f). 3R-tau-ir and 4R-tau-ir were both present in the white matter with similar morphologies and intensity to HT7-ir (Figure 8g-i). HT7 and Olig2 double labeling confirmed frequent cytoplasmic tau expression in oligodendrocytes of the white matter regions (Figure 8j-l). pT231-tau-ir was occasionally present in glia-like cells of the white matter tracts (Figure 8m-o).

4 DISCUSSION

The present study demonstrates that tau is ubiquitously expressed throughout the rhesus macaque brain, with regional variations in quantity and intracellular location. It also provides insight on the distribution of 3R- and 4R-tau isoforms, as well as phosphorylated tau, in normal and MPTP-induced hemiparkinsonian conditions. As such, this report in rhesus macaques represents the first in-depth characterization of tau expression in the NHP brain and will facilitate future studies of tau and tau pathology in this species.

The anterior cingulate cortex, entorhinal cortex, and hippocampus were among the regions displaying the most intense HT7-ir in the rhesus brain, while the white matter regions had the weakest expression. In mice, tau-ir has not been quantified, but the protein was abundantly observed in superficial layers as well as layers IV/V of the cerebral cortex, mossy fibers axons of the hippocampus, and the inner molecular layer of the dentate gyrus (Kubo et al., 2019). Tau expression was also seldomly observed in white matter tracts of the mouse brain, suggesting that tau epitopes may be less readily available in myelinated axons (Kubo et al., 2019). In humans, immunohistochemical data on normal tau expression in the brain is sparse. In one of the first studies on tau, Trojanowski et al. reported tau-ir in axons and neuropil that was more intense in the neocortex, hippocampus, and cerebellum than in the spinal cord and peripheral nervous system (Trojanowski, Schuck, Schmidt, &amp; Lee, 1989). Interestingly, the cortex and hippocampus, which are identified in these reports as presenting abundant tau-ir, are most susceptible to p-tau pathology in AD and related disorders (Braak et al., 2006; Braak &amp; Braak, 1990; Lewis &amp; Dickson, 2016). This notion warrants further research on the relationship between tau distribution in the brain and susceptibility to tauopathy.

Immunohistochemical evaluation of HT7-ir revealed differential intraneuronal localization depending on the brain region analyzed. HT7-ir was present in the neuropil of all ROIs, but preferentially expressed in neuronal fibers of the SN and globus pallidus and in the neuronal soma of the thalamus and subthalamic nucleus. As HT7 immunostaining alone was not sufficient to characterize intraneuronal tau throughout the brain, further analysis with immunofluorescence double-labeling of HT7 and β-III tubulin was performed. Immunofluorescence confirmed HT7-ir in β-III tubulin neuronal fibers in all gray matter brain regions, an expected finding considering that tau is traditionally described as axon-specific (Binder, Frankfurter, &amp; Rebhun, 1985; Brion, Guilleminot, Couchie, Flament-Durand, &amp; Nunez, 1988; Trojanowski et al., 1989). Additionally, immunofluorescence confirmed robust somatic HT7-ir in the thalamus and subthalamic nucleus. Other regions, such as the cerebral cortex, presented somatic HT7-ir that was visible slightly above the background level. It should be noted that for the immunofluorescence staining, our rhesus brain tissue underwent heat antigen retrieval to expose intracytoplasmic tau epitopes. Publications that describe somatic tau-ir in normal brains are limited. Migheli et al used avidin-biotin peroxidase immunostaining methods and observed somatic Tau1-ir in the brainstem, cerebellum, and basal ganglia of rats (Migheli, Butler, Brown, &amp; Shelanski, 1988). The primary antibody Tau-1, like HT7, labels all six tau isoforms of human tau. The authors noted that prolonged tissue fixation diminished tau-ir (Migheli et al., 1988). Remarkably, Binder et al, which had initially reported an axon-specific localization for Tau-1 in bovine and rat brains (Binder et al., 1985), re-evaluated the protein’s distribution in rats using a phosphatase pretreatment, and was then able to observe tau in the somatic compartment (Papasozomenos &amp; Binder, 1987). More recently, Kanaan &amp; Grabinski identified in rhesus macaques somatic tau-ir in hippocampal neurons using a number of antibodies targeting all tau isoforms (Kanaan &amp; Grabinski, 2021). Tau-1-ir was only observed in hippocampal neuronal soma after dephosphorylating tissue sections overnight. In humans, somatic tau-ir is usually described as part of a pathological translocation of the protein to the somatodendritic compartment (Kowall &amp; Kosik, 1987; Zempel, Thies, Mandelkow, &amp; Mandelkow, 2010). Shin et al, challenged this hypothesis, describing somatic tau-ir in normal human hippocampus (Shin, Iwaki, Kitamoto, &amp; Tateishi, 1991). The authors used a hydrated autoclave pretreatment on paraffin-embedded tissue to obtain these findings. Taken together, these data suggest that differences in antibody choice and/or tissue processing methods may account for discordant findings as tissue treatment before immunostaining may improve epitope accessibility. Further unbiased research is needed to shed light on somatic tau expression in normal and pathological states.

Analysis of 3R-ir and 4R-tau-ir showed that the rhesus macaque brain, like the human brain, expresses both tau isoforms. It also confirmed a previous report sequencing 3R- and 4R-tau isoforms in the rhesus brain (Nelson et al., 1996). Wild-type adult mice and rats only express 4R-tau in the CNS (Takuma et al., 2003). This difference in tau isoform expression underscores the importance of species selection for neurodegeneration research and strongly support the use of macaques as model organisms for studying tau and tauopathies.

Compared to HT7, antibodies against 3R- and 4R-tau isoforms allowed much clearer observation of intraneuronal immunoreactivity. Both isoforms were expressed in neuronal soma and axons in all gray matter brain regions, but it appeared that the 3R isoform was more robust in neuronal soma, and the 4R isoform was more robust in the neuropil. In neuronal fibers, the intensity of tau isoform expression was comparable. Studies of natural tau isoform expression in neurons has mainly relied on human cell culture models and transgenic animals. In human adult primary neuron cultures with surgically derived cells from the temporal cortex, both 3R- and 4R-tau isoforms were found in β-III tubulin-positive neuronal cell bodies and axons (Iovino, Patani, Watts, Chandran, &amp; Spillantini, 2010). In transgenic mice (postnatal day 24) expressing all six isoforms of human tau, 3R-tau was found to be highly expressed in neuronal synapses throughout the cortex and hippocampus, while 4R-tau expression was limited to CA3 mossy fiber projections and the hilus (McMillan et al., 2008). In rhesus macaques, there are no reports that fully describe the regional and intracellular expression of 3R- and 4R-tau isoforms. Beckman et al injected adeno-associated viral vectors encoding for double-mutant 4R-tau P301L/S320F into the entorhinal cortex of rhesus to create a novel model of tauopathy (Beckman et al., 2021). In these animals, the investigators identified 3R- and 4R-tau expression in neuronal cell bodies and fibers of the hippocampus ipsilateral to viral delivery. As control images were not available for comparison, it is difficult to determine if the localization is naturally occurring or a consequence of the treatment. To our knowledge, the regional and intracellular distribution of tau isoforms has not yet been characterized in normal human brain tissue. Such research will provide insight on the differential expression of tau isoforms in health and disease.

Olig2+ oligodendrocytes expressing HT7-ir were clearly detected in white matter ROIs of the rhesus brain, but were difficult to discern in the grey matter ROIs (data not shown). The abundance of HT7-ir in the neuropil may have impeded visualization. Tau has been previously detected in oligodendrocytes in the hippocampus of healthy rhesus macaque brains (Kanaan &amp; Grabinski, 2021), suggesting that tau-positive oligodendrocytes could be present throughout the brain. Abundant tau-ir has also been reported in oligodendrocytes throughout the brain of mice (Kubo et al., 2019) and rats (LoPresti, Szuchet, Papasozomenos, Zinkowski, &amp; Binder, 1995; Migheli et al., 1988). Tau has been shown to support myelination in cultured oligodendrocytes derived from rodents, and its knockdown results in impaired myelin basic protein mRNA transport and neuron-glia contact formation (Klein et al., 2002; Seiberlich et al., 2015). In tauopathies, tau has been shown to form structures referred to as “coiled bodies” in oligodendroglia, further supporting its initial presence in healthy cells (Arai et al., 2001; Dickson, Kouri, Murray, &amp; Josephs, 2011; Yoshida, 2006). Coiled body-like structures have been reported in aged cynomolgus macaques (Uchihara et al., 2016). Our finding of oligodendroglial tau in the white matter is unsurprising, and again stresses the relevance of rhesus macaques for studies of endogenous tau function.

Tau phosphorylated at pT231, but not at pSer202/Thr205 labeled by AT8, was detected throughout the rhesus brain. Reports on pT231-tau and AT8 in healthy brains across species are few and present mixed results. Most studies describe the absence of AT8-ir in control brains (Strang et al., 2017), while analysis of pT231-tau-ir is seldomly reported. Upon identifying p-tau epitopes in biopsy-derived human brain tissues, Matsuo et al proposed that p-tau-ir can escape detection in autopsy-derived normal tissues due to dephosphorylation occurring during the postmortem interval, a common occurrence in human autopsies (Matsuo et al., 1994; Wang et al., 2015). In that regard, Gärtner et al. found that AT8-ir was present in the rat brain when the tissue was quickly fixed post mortem by transcardiac perfusion with 4% PFA, but the expression was limited or absent if the tissue was post-fixed or post-fixation was delayed 30 minutes, respectively; pT231-tau was not detected in any condition (Gärtner, Janke, Holzer, Vanmechelen, &amp; Arendt, 1998). Interestingly, antemortem anesthesia in animals has been reported to induce tau hyperphosphorylation (Planel et al., 2007; Whittington, Bretteville, Dickler, &amp; Planel, 2013). A few reports have detected AT8 and pT231-tau expression using autopsy-derived brain tissues. Duka et al detected both AT8-ir and pT231-ir in healthy human frontal cortex, as well as increased AT8-ir in frontal cortex of AD brains and the striatum of PD brains, but no differences in pT231-tau-ir between control and PD brains (V. Duka et al., 2013). Aragão Gomes et al. noted diffuse pT231-tau-ir in neuronal cytoplasm in entorhinal cortex and hippocampus, suggesting there is a basal level of expression in normal human brains (Aragão Gomes et al., 2021). Interestingly, the authors used antigen retrieval and an antibody concentration of 1:200 to obtain their results, like the methods in our study. In African green monkeys, Latimer et al. reported granular cytoplasmic AT8-ir in normal brains, but rare neurofibrillary changes and no tangles (Latimer et al., 2019). The authors acknowledged that their use of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue may have resulted in nonspecific binding. Yet, Wakeman et al. identified granular cytoplasmic AT8-ir in limbic structures of control African green monkeys using free-floating tissue sections that had been immersion fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (Wakeman et al., 2022). In rhesus macaques, J. Zhang et al reported the absence of pT231-tau and AT8 expression on Western blot, although in the provided image, a band was detected at 46kDa, which matches the manufacturer’s description of positive pT231-tau expression (J. Zhang et al., 2019). Taken together, these reports suggest that differences in antemortem condition, tissue processing, and species may explain the varied results of pT231-tau-ir and AT8-ir in healthy brains. The presence of pT231-tau and AT8 in healthy brains does not diminish p-tau role in tauopathy. It rather indicates that increases in p-tau and conformational changes to the protein are steps towards its abnormal aggregation in disease. Our observation of similar neuroanatomical expression of pT231-tau between control and MPTP-treated animals suggests that this p-tau species is naturally occurring in rhesus macaques. Further, the absence of AT8-ir in our animals could be explained by either the lack of pathology or by the processing methods.

In humans, pT231-tau is described as an early ‘driver’ of tau pathology in AD, as it appears in neuronal pretangles of cognitively impaired individuals (Augustinack et al., 2002; Luna-Muñoz, Chávez-Macías, García-Sierra, &amp; Mena, 2007). Conversely, AT8 is linked to more advanced AD, as it is part of insoluble paired helical filament tau (Augustinack et al., 2002; Goedert, 1995). Although neurodegenerative diseases have not been documented in rhesus to date (Walker &amp; Jucker, 2017), aged macaques seem to be susceptible to p-tau inclusions (Arnsten et al., 2019). Macaques over 25 years old are considered aged, based on the onset of menopause (Gilardi, Shideler, Valverde, Roberts, &amp; Lasley, 1997). Oikawa and colleagues identified AT8-ir inclusions in glial cells of the temporal cortex in cynomolgus macaques over 26 years of age (Oikawa, Kimura, &amp; Yanagisawa, 2010). Uchihara et al. found AT8-ir deposits, described as intraneuronal pretangles, primarily in the basal ganglia, neocortex, and hippocampus of cynomolgus macaques ≥30 years of age (Uchihara et al., 2016). As the rhesus macaques in this study were young adults between 3 and 6 years of age (Schmidt, Jones, Van Vleck, &amp; Emborg, 2022), AT8-ir aggregates were not expected.

Nigral tau expression was mainly present in GABAergic fibers and was not affected by MPTP 3 months post-administration. Moreover, pT231-tau-ir in the neurotoxin- treated SN was found mainly in fibers, without evidence of pathological accumulation or aggregation and AT8-ir was absent, similar to normal controls. A small but significant difference in age was detected between treatment groups (controls, 5.6±0.57 years; MPTP, 3.8±0.36 years; unpaired t test, p=0.0207; t=4.484; df=3). As a similar expression of HT7-ir was found between the brain hemispheres of control animals and MPTP-intact left hemispheres, the age difference between groups should not have affected the results. It could be argued that the small number of subjects per treatment group limited the detection of significant differences in HT7-ir between MPTP-treated and intact brain hemispheres. Yet, the statistical power was sufficient to detect meaningful differences in HT7-ir across brain ROIs.

A previous report by our group (Vermilyea et al., 2019) identified the presence of α-synuclein expression in nigral GABAergic fibers, also at 3 months post MPTP dosing. If tau (or α-synuclein) phosphorylation and accumulation predated nigral dopaminergic neuronal loss, it is possible that after 3 months, there were no surviving neurons to harbor pathology. Studies of α-synuclein expression following neurotoxin challenge have suggested two approaches to facilitate detection of protein changes: a chronic, low dose paradigm of MPTP administration, or euthanasia within the days or weeks following MPTP dosing (see review: (Vermilyea &amp; Emborg, 2015)). Interestingly, Duka et al found an increase in insoluble PHF-tau in the striatum of wild type mice treated with subchronic MPTP dosing (20 mg/kg, once daily for 5 consecutive days) and necropsied 3 days after the last dose (T. Duka et al., 2006). In rhesus macaques that received MPTP (0.2-0.3 mg/kg IM) for 13 weeks and were necropsied 6 months later, Hadi et al measured increases in pT231-tau and AT8 in the SN compared to vehicle-treated animals (Hadi et al., 2021). Thus, dosing paradigm and/or time elapsed between MPTP treatment and euthanasia, combined with the use of aged primates who are more vulnerable to develop tau pathology (Oikawa et al., 2010; Schultz et al., 2000; Uchihara et al., 2016), may lead to MPTP-induced changes in tau expression.

5 CONCLUSIONS

In summary, the present study demonstrates that tau is ubiquitously expressed throughout the rhesus macaque brain, with regional variations in intensity and intracellular location. Immunostaining against 3R- and 4R-tau-ir isoforms confirmed the intraneuronal distribution of the protein in all brain regions. Additionally, tau was expressed in oligodendrocytes in the white matter brain regions. pT231-tau-ir was observed in healthy neurons, but AT8-ir was not present. No differences in tau expression were detected between control subjects and both brain hemispheres of MPTP-treated hemiparkinsonian animals. We hope that our thorough characterization of tau and p-tau expression in the rhesus macaque brain will facilitate future studies on ageing and neurodegenerative processes using this species as a model organism.

Supplementary Material

1

Acknowledgements:

This study was supported by awards R61NS115102, P51OD011106, the Cellular &amp; Molecular Pathology Graduate Program T32 GM081061, the Institute for Clinical Translational Research TL1 TR002375 and the Rainwater Foundation. This research was conducted at a facility constructed with support from Research Facilities Improvement Program grant numbers RR15459-01 and RR020141-01. The authors would like to thank. Dr. S. Salamat for his advice on identifying tau pathology and the Wisconsin Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center (P30-AG062715) for providing human brain tissue for this study.

Funding Statement:

Funding agencies did not have a role in experimental design, data collection, analysis, and interpretation of results.

Data Availability Statement:

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

Figure 1. Overall distribution of endogenous tau expression in the rhesus brain.

(a) Schematics of rhesus macaque coronal brain sections showing the 16 ROIs analyzed in this study. The schematics were generated by applying an image trace function in Adobe Illustrator Version 26.2.1 on atlas images of a rhesus monkey brain (Paxinos et al., 2000). Abbreviations: amg = amygdala; cg = anterior cingulate cortex; AC = anterior commissure; cd = caudate nucleus; cc = corpus callosum; ec = entorhinal cortex; GPe = globus pallidus external; GPi = globus pallidus internal; hpc = hippocampus; ic = internal capsule; pfc = prefrontal cortex; M1 = primary motor cortex; pu = putamen; SN = substantia nigra; STN = subthalamic nucleus; Th1 = thalamus. Semiquantitative rating scores (b) and optical density (c) of HT7-ir were measured bilaterally across brain ROIs (white matter tracts were excluded for OD) of control subjects (n=4 brain hemispheres), MPTP-intact left (n=3) and MPTP-treated right (n=3) brain hemispheres. Bars correspond to the mean ± SD; data for individual brain hemispheres are depicted as circles (controls), squares (MPTP-intact left), and triangles (MPTP-treated right). Data are organized by the brain region with the greatest to least HT7-ir, calculated as the average of the three treatment groups.

Figure 2. Tau, TH, and GAD67 immunofluorescence in control and MPTP-treated substantia nigra.

Low magnification images of (a) control and (b) MPTP-treated SN immunostained against HT7 (green), TH (dopaminergic marker; red), and GAD67 (GABAergic marker; far red), with DAPI (blue) as a nuclear marker. Images were captured from one representative control animal and one representative MPTP-treated animal in the SN at the level of the third cranial nerve (3N). Higher magnification images from the (c, e, g, i) control and (d, f, h, j) MPTP-treated animal showing the substantia nigra pars compacta (boxed areas in a, b). Merged images from (c) control and (d) MPTP-treated animals showing TH, HT7, and GAD67 immunofluorescence with DAPI counterstain. In a control animal, (g) HT7-ir is observed in (e) TH-positive neuronal soma (unfilled white arrow) and fibers (unfilled white arrowheads) as well as (i) GAD67-positive neuronal soma (filled white arrows) and fibers (filled white arrowheads). In an MPTP-treated animal, (h) HT7-ir is present in (j) GAD67-positive neuronal soma and fibers despite the loss of (f) TH-ir. Scale bars: a, b, 1000 μm; c-j, 25 μm.

Figure 3. Tau expression in the prefrontal (pfc), primary motor (M1), cingulate (cg), and entorhinal (EC) cortices.

All images of immunohistochemical stains were taken from the same representative control animal. (a-d) HT7-ir was present in the cortical layers I-VI of the pfc and M1 and in the layers I-III, V, and VI of the cg and EC. Faint tau-ir was present in the white matter (wm). Insets, higher magnification images captured in cortical areas correspond to the black boxes. Faint HT7-ir was present in neuronal soma (black arrows) and axons (black arrowheads). (e-h) Double-label immunofluorescence identified HT7-ir (green) in β-III tubulin-ir (red) neuronal soma (white arrows) and axons (white arrowheads). Separate channels are shown in Supp. Fig.6. (i-l) 3R-tau-ir (green) and 4R-tau-ir (red) were observed colocalizing in axons (white arrowhead) and soma (white arrows). (m-p) pT231-tau-ir was detected in the cortical layers I-VI of the pfc and M1 and in the layers I-III, V, and VI of the cg and EC. Insets, higher magnification images captured in cortical areas correspond to the black boxes. Faint pT231-tau-ir was present in neuronal soma (black arrows) and axons (black arrowheads). (q-t) Nissl-stained sections depicting cortical layers I-VI of the pfc and M1 and layers I-III, V, and VI of the cg and EC. Scale bars: a, m, q, 500 μm; e, i, 25 μm; insets, 25 μm.

Figure 4. Tau expression in the rhesus hippocampus.

All images were taken from the same representative control animal. (a) HT7-ir was observed across hippocampal regions. Boxes in (a) correspond to higher magnification images for the CA3 (a1) and DG (a2). (b) HT7-ir (green) and β-III tubulin-ir (red) showed tau presence in neuronal soma (white arrows) and axons (white arrowheads) of the CA3 (b1) and DG (b2). Separate channels are shown in Supp. Fig.7a–f. (c) 3R-tau-ir (green) and 4R-tau-ir (red) isoforms colocalized in neuronal soma (white arrows) and axons (white arrowheads) of the CA3 (c1) and DG (c2). (d) pT231-tau-ir was present in the hippocampus. Boxes in (d) correspond to higher magnification images of the CA3 (d1) and DG (d2). In hippocampal subregions, pT231-tau-ir was observed in neuronal soma (black arrows) and fibers (black arrowheads). Scale bars: a, b, c, d, 1000 μm; a1, a2, b1, b2, c1, c2, d1, d2, 25 μm.

Figure 5. Tau expression in the amygdala, thalamus, and subthalamic nucleus (STN).

All images were taken from the same representative control animal, (a-c) HT7-ir was present throughout the amygdala, while it was mainly localized to neuronal cell bodies of the thalamus (ventral lateral nucleus) and STN. (d-f) Double-label immunofluorescence identified HT7-ir (green) in β-III tubulin-ir (red) neuronal soma (white arrows) and axons (white arrowheads). Separate channels are shown in Supp. Fig.8. (g-i) It also identified 3R-tau (green) and 4R-tau (red) isoforms colocalizing in neuronal soma (white arrows) and axons (white arrowheads). (j-l) pT231-tau-ir was found in neuronal soma (black arrows) and axons (black arrowheads). All scale bars: 25 μm.

Figure 6. Tau expression in the globus pallidus external (GPe), globus pallidus internal (GPi), caudate, and putamen.

All images were taken from the same representative control animal. (a-d) HT7-ir was found mainly in neuronal fibers of the GPe/GPi, and in the neuropil in the striatum. (e-h) Double-label immunofluorescence of HT7 (green) and β-III tubulin (red) revealed tau expression in both neuronal soma (white arrows) and axons (white arrowheads). Separate channels are shown in Supp. Fig.9. (i-l) 3R-tau-ir (green) and 4R-tau-ir (red) were found in neuronal soma (white arrows) and axons (white arrowheads). (m-p) pT231-tau-ir was observed in neuronal soma (black arrows) and axons (black arrowheads). All scale bars: 25 μm.

Figure 7. Tau expression in the rhesus substantia nigra (SN).

All images were taken from the same representative control and MPTP-treated animal, respectively. (a,b) HT7-ir was predominantly observed in neuronal fibers; (c,d) higher magnification image of HT7-ir in the SN pars compacta (SNpc). Boxes in lower magnification images indicate where higher magnification images were captured. (e,f) Double-label immunofluorescence of HT7 (green) and β-III tubulin-ir (red) reveals HT7-ir in neuronal soma (white arrows) and axons (white arrowheads) of the SNpc. Separate channels are shown in Supp. Fig.7g–l. (g,h) 3R-tau-ir (green) and 4R-tau-ir (red) isoforms were present and colocalized in neuronal soma (white arrows) and axons (arrowheads) of the SNpc. (i,j) pT231-tau-ir is present in neuronal soma (black arrows) and fibers (black arrowheads) of the SNpc. Scale bars: a, 1000 μm; c, e, g, i, 25 μm.

Figure 8. Tau expression in the corpus callosum (CC), internal capsule (IC), and anterior commissure (AC).

All images were taken from the same representative control animal. (a-c) HT7-ir is present in oligodendrocyte-like cells of the white matter tracts (black unfilled arrows). (d-f) Double-label immunofluorescence of HT7 (green) and β-III tubulin (red) showed the absence of β-III tubulin-positive neurons in the white matter. HT7-ir was present in oligodendrocyte-like cells (white unfilled arrows). (g-i) 3R-tau-ir (green) and 4R-tau-ir (red) colocalized in oligodendrocyte-like cells (white unfilled arrows). (j-l) Double-label immunofluorescence of HT7 (green) and Olig2 (red) confirmed tau expression in oligodendrocytes (white unfilled arrows). Olig2 is a nuclear marker and HT7-ir is cytoplasmic, thus HT7-ir is observed surrounding Olig2-positive nuclei. (m-o) pT231-tau-ir was faintly observed in oligodendrocyte-like cells (black unfilled arrows). Scale bars: a, d, g, m, 25 μm; j, 10 μm.

Table 1: Primary antibodies used for immunohistochemistry. All antibodies used in this study were commercially available and had been previously validated.

Antigen	Marker	Company; Catalogue Number	Clonality	Species	Dilution	Secondary Antibody	Company; Catalogue Number	
HT7	Total tau; amino acid sequence PPGQK in the C-terminus	ThermoFisher Scientific; MN1000	Monoclonal	Mouse	1:2000	Horse Anti-Mouse IgG	Vector Laboratories: BA2000	
TH	Tyrosine hydroxylase	Millipore; ab152	Polyclonal	Rabbit	1:2000	Horse Anti-Rabbit IgG	Vector Laboratories: BA1100	
AT8 *	Tau phosphorylated at Ser202/Thr205	ThermoFisher Scientific; MN1020	Monoclonal	Mouse	1:500	Horse Anti-Mouse IgG	Vector Laboratories: BA2000	
pT231- tau	Tau phosphorylated at Thr231	Abcam; ab151559	Monoclonal	Rabbit	1:200	Horse Anti-Rabbit IgG	Vector Laboratories: BA1100	
* Tissue sections immunostained against AT8 were counterstained with Nissl.

Table 2: Primary antibodies used for immunofluorescence. All antibodies used in this study were commercially available and had been previously validated.

Antigens	Marker	Company; Catalogue Number	Clonality	Species	Dilution	Secondary Antibody	Company; Catalogue Number	
HT7	Total tau; amino acid sequence PPGQK in the C-terminus	ThermoFisher Scientific; MN1000	Monoclonal	Mouse	1:500	Alexa Fluor Donkey Anti-Mouse-488	ThermoFisher Scientific; #A21202	
Beta-III Tubulin	Panneuronal, soma and processes	ThermoFisher Scientific; PA5-86069	Polyclonal	Rabbit	1:500	Alexa Fluor Donkey Anti-Rabbit-594	ThermoFisher Scientific; #A21207	
HT7	Total tau; amino acid sequence PPGQK in the C-terminus	ThermoFisher Scientific; MN1000	Monoclonal	Mouse	1:500	Alexa Fluor Donkey Anti-Mouse-488	ThermoFisher Scientific; #A21202	
Olig2	Oligodendrocytes, nuclear and/or cytoplasmic	Abcam; ab109186	Monoclonal	Rabbit	1:50	Alexa Fluor Donkey Anti-Rabbit-594	ThermoFisher Scientific; #A21207	
HT7	Total tau; amino acid sequence PPGQK in the C-terminus	ThermoFisher Scientific; MN1000	Monoclonal	Mouse	1:500	Alexa Fluor Donkey Anti-Mouse-488	ThermoFisher Scientific; #A21202	
TH	Tyrosine hydroxylase	Millipore; ab152	Polyclonal	Rabbit	1:1000	Alexa Fluor Donkey Anti-Rabbit-594	ThermoFisher Scientific; #A21207	
GAD67	Glutamate decarboxylase 1	ThermoFisher Scientific; PA5-19065	Monoclonal	Goat	1:100	Alexa Fluor Donkey Anti-Goat-647	Abcam; #ab150135	
3R-tau	3-microtubule association domain tau	Fujifilm Wako; 2A1-1F4	Monoclonal	Rat	1:50	Alexa Fluor Donkey Anti-Rat-488	ThermoFisher Scientific; #A21208	
4R-tau	4-microtubule association domain tau	Abcam; ab218314	Monoclonal	Rabbit	1:100	Alexa Fluor Donkey Anti-Rabbit-594	ThermoFisher Scientific; #A21207	

Key Points

In the rhesus macaque brain, the protein tau and its 3R and 4R isoforms were expressed in neurons and oligodendrocytes, with regional variations.

Neurons expressing tau phosphorylated at Thr231, but not tau phosphorylated at Ser202/Thr205 (AT8), were present in all brain regions.

No differences in regional and intracellular tau expression were observed between control and MPTP-induced hemiparkinsonian rhesus macaque brains.

Conflict of Interest Disclosure: All authors declare no conflict of interest.

Ethics Approval Statement: This study was performed in strict accordance with the recommendations in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the NIH (8th edition, 2011) in an AALAC-accredited facility (WNPRC, UW-Madison). The experimental protocols were approved by the Institutional Animal Use and Care Committee at UW-Madison (permit #G00492). All efforts were made to minimize the number of animals used and to ameliorate any distress.

Patient Consent Statement: Brain tissue from a human Alzheimer’s disease patient was obtained from tissue bank at the Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center at the University of Wisconsin-Madison following documented review and approval from the Institutional Review Board.

Permission to Reproduce Material from Other Sources: N/A

Clinical Trial Registration: N/A


REFERENCES

Andreadis A . (2012). Tau splicing and the intricacies of dementia. J Cell Physiol, 227 (3 ), 1220–1225. doi:10.1002/jcp.22842 21604267
Aragão Gomes L , Uytterhoeven V , Lopez-Sanmartin D , Tomé SO , Tousseyn T , Vandenberghe R , … Thal DR (2021). Maturation of neuronal AD-tau pathology involves site-specific phosphorylation of cytoplasmic and synaptic tau preceding conformational change and fibril formation. Acta Neuropathol, 141 (2 ), 173–192. doi:10.1007/s00401-020-02251-6 33427938
Arai T , Ikeda K , Akiyama H , Shikamoto Y , Tsuchiya K , Yagishita S , … McGeer PL (2001). Distinct isoforms of tau aggregated in neurons and glial cells in brains of patients with Pick’s disease, corticobasal degeneration and progressive supranuclear palsy. Acta Neuropathol, 101 (2 ), 167–173. doi:10.1007/s004010000283 11271372
Arendt T , Stieler JT , &amp; Holzer M (2016). Tau and tauopathies. Brain Res Bull, 126 (Pt 3 ), 238–292. doi:10.1016/j.brainresbull.2016.08.018 27615390
Arima K , Hirai S , Sunohara N , Aoto K , Izumiyama Y , Uéda K , … Kawai M (1999). Cellular colocalization of phosphorylated tau-and NACP/alpha-synuclein-epitopes in lewy bodies in sporadic Parkinson’s disease and in dementia with Lewy bodies. Brain Res, 843 (1-2 ), 53–61. doi:10.1016/s0006-8993(99)01848-x 10528110
Arnsten AFT , Datta D , Leslie S , Yang ST , Wang M , &amp; Nairn AC (2019). Alzheimer’s-like pathology in aging rhesus macaques: Unique opportunity to study the etiology and treatment of Alzheimer’s disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 116 (52 ), 26230–26238. doi:10.1073/pnas.1903671116 31871209
Augustinack JC , Schneider A , Mandelkow EM , &amp; Hyman BT (2002). Specific tau phosphorylation sites correlate with severity of neuronal cytopathology in Alzheimer’s disease. Acta Neuropathol, 103 (1 ), 26–35. doi:10.1007/s004010100423 11837744
Barbier P , Zejneli O , Martinho M , Lasorsa A , Belle V , Smet-Nocca C , … Landrieu I (2019). Role of Tau as a Microtubule-Associated Protein: Structural and Functional Aspects. Front Aging Neurosci, 11 , 204. doi:10.3389/fnagi.2019.00204 31447664
Beckman D , Chakrabarty P , Ott S , Dao A , Zhou E , Janssen WG , … Morrison JH (2021). A novel tau-based rhesus monkey model of Alzheimer’s pathogenesis. Alzheimers Dement, 17 (6 ), 933–945. doi:10.1002/alz.12318 33734581
Binder LI , Frankfurter A , &amp; Rebhun LI (1985). The distribution of tau in the mammalian central nervous system. J Cell Biol, 101 (4 ), 1371–1378. doi:10.1083/jcb.101.4.1371 3930508
Braak H , Alafuzoff I , Arzberger T , Kretzschmar H , &amp; Del Tredici K (2006). Staging of Alzheimer disease-associated neurofibrillary pathology using paraffin sections and immunocytochemistry. Acta Neuropathol, 112 (4 ), 389–404. doi:10.1007/s00401-006-0127-z 16906426
Braak H , &amp; Braak E (1990). Cognitive impairment in Parkinson’s disease: amyloid plaques, neurofibrillary tangles, and neuropil threads in the cerebral cortex. J Neural Transm Park Dis Dement Sect, 2 (1 ), 45–57. doi:10.1007/BF02251245 2357270
Brion JP , Guilleminot J , Couchie D , Flament-Durand J , &amp; Nunez J (1988). Both adult and juvenile tau microtubule-associated proteins are axon specific in the developing and adult rat cerebellum. Neuroscience, 25 (1 ), 139–146. doi:10.1016/0306-4522(88)90013-9 3134623
Capitanio JP , &amp; Emborg ME (2008). Contributions of non-human primates to neuroscience research. Lancet, 371 (9618 ), 1126–1135. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(08)60489-4 18374844
Coughlin D , Xie SX , Liang M , Williams A , Peterson C , Weintraub D , … Irwin DJ (2019). Cognitive and Pathological Influences of Tau Pathology in Lewy Body Disorders. Ann Neurol, 85 (2 ), 259–271. doi:10.1002/ana.25392 30549331
de Silva R , Lashley T , Strand C , Shiarli AM , Shi J , Tian J , … Mann DM (2006). An immunohistochemical study of cases of sporadic and inherited frontotemporal lobar degeneration using 3R- and 4R-specific tau monoclonal antibodies. Acta Neuropathol, 111 (4 ), 329–340. doi:10.1007/s00401-006-0048-x 16552612
Dehmelt L , &amp; Halpain S (2005). The MAP2/Tau family of microtubule-associated proteins. Genome Biol, 6 (1 ), 204. doi:10.1186/gb-2004-6-l-204 15642108
Dickson DW , Kouri N , Murray ME , &amp; Josephs KA (2011). Neuropathology of frontotemporal lobar degeneration-tau (FTLD-tau). J Mol Neurosci, 45 (3 ), 384–389. doi:10.1007/s12031-011-9589-0 21720721
Duka T , Rusnak M , Drolet RE , Duka V , Wersinger C , Goudreau JL , &amp; Sidhu A (2006). Alpha-synuclein induces hyperphosphorylation of Tau in the MPTP model of parkinsonism. FASEB J, 20 (13 ), 2302–2312. doi:10.1096/g.06-6092com 17077307
Duka V , Lee JEL , Credle J , Wills J , Oaks A , Smolinsky C , … Sidhu A (2013). Identification of the sites of tau hyperphosphorylation and activation of tau kinases in synucleinopathies and Alzheimer’s diseases. PLoS One, 8 (9 ), e75025. doi:10.1371/joumal.pone.0075025 24073234
Emborg ME (2007). Nonhuman primate models of Parkinson’s disease. ILAR J, 48 (4 ), 339–355. doi:10.1093/ilar.48.4.339 17712221
Gilardi KVK , Shideler SE , Valverde CR , Roberts JA , &amp; Lasley BL (1997). Characterization of the onset of menopause in the rhesus macaque. In (Vol. 57 , pp. 335–340). Biology of Reproduction.9241047
Ginsberg SD , Che S , Counts SE , &amp; Mufson EJ (2006). Shift in the ratio of three-repeat tau and four-repeat tau mRNAs in individual cholinergic basal forebrain neurons in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurochem, 96 (5 ), 1401–1408. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2005.03641.x 16478530
Goedert M . (1995). Molecular dissection of the neurofibrillary lesions of Alzheimer’s disease. Arzneimittelforschung, 45 (3A ), 403–409.7763334
Gärtner U , Janke C , Holzer M , Vanmechelen E , &amp; Arendt T (1998). Postmortem changes in the phosphorylation state of tau-protein in the rat brain. Neurobiol Aging, 19 (6 ), 535–543. doi:10.1016/s0197-4580(98)00094-3 10192212
Hadi F , Akrami H , Totonchi M , Barzegar A , Nabavi SM , &amp; Shahpasand K (2021). α-synuclein abnormalities trigger focal tau pathology, spreading to various brain areas in Parkinson disease. J Neurochem, 157 (3 ), 727–751. doi:10.1111/jnc.15257 33264426
Henderson M , Sengupta M , Trojanowski J , &amp; Lee V (2019). Alzheimer’s disease tau is a prominent pathology in LRRK2 Parkinson’s disease. In (Vol. 7 ). Acta Neuropathologica Communications.
Härtig W , Klein C , Brauer K , Schüppel KF , Arendt T , Brückner G , &amp; Bigl V (2000). Abnormally phosphorylated protein tau in the cortex of aged individuals of various mammalian orders. Acta Neuropathol, 100 (3 ), 305–312. doi: 10.1007/s004010000183 10965801
Iovino M , Patani R , Watts C , Chandran S , &amp; Spillantini MG (2010). Human stem cell-derived neurons: a system to study human tau function and dysfunction. PLoS One, 5 (11 ), e13947. doi:10.1371/joumal.pone.0013947 21085657
Irwin DJ , Brettschneider J , McMillan CT , Cooper F , Olm C , Arnold SE , … Trojanowski JQ (2016). Deep clinical and neuropathological phenotyping of Pick disease. Ann Neurol, 79 (2 ), 272–287. doi: 10.1002/ana.24559 26583316
Ishizawa T , Mattila P , Davies P , Wang D , &amp; Dickson DW (2003). Colocalization of tau and alpha-synuclein epitopes in Lewy bodies. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol, 62 (4 ), 389–397. doi:10.1093/jnen/62.4.389 12722831
Jankovic J . (2008). Parkinson’s disease: clinical features and diagnosis. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry, 79 (4 ), 368–376. doi:10.1136/jnnp.2007.131045 18344392
Kanaan NM , &amp; Grabinski T (2021). Neuronal and Glial Distribution of Tau Protein in the Adult Rat and Monkey. Front Mol Neurosci, 14 , 607303. doi:10.3389/fnmol.2021.607303 33986642
Klein C , Kramer EM , Cardine AM , Schraven B , Brandt R , &amp; Trotter J (2002). Process outgrowth of oligodendrocytes is promoted by interaction of fyn kinase with the cytoskeletal protein tau. J Neurosci, 22 (3 ), 698–707.11826099
Kovacs GG , Lukic MJ , Irwin DJ , Arzberger T , Respondek G , Lee EB , … Höglinger GU (2020). Distribution patterns of tau pathology in progressive supranuclear palsy. Acta Neuropathol, 140 (2 ), 99–119. doi:10.1007/s00401-020-02158-2 32383020
Kowall NW , &amp; Kosik KS (1987). Axonal disruption and aberrant localization of tau protein characterize the neuropil pathology of Alzheimer’s disease. Ann Neurol, 22 (5 ), 639–643. doi:10.1002/ana.410220514 3122646
Kubo A , Misonou H , Matsuyama M , Nomori A , Wada-Kakuda S , Takashima A , … Miyasaka T (2019). Distribution of endogenous normal tau in the mouse brain. J Comp Neurol, 527 (5 ), 985–998. doi:10.1002/cne.24577 30408165
Latimer CS , Shively CA , Keene CD , Jorgensen MJ , Andrews RN , Register TC , … Craft S (2019). A nonhuman primate model of early Alzheimer’s disease pathologic change: Implications for disease pathogenesis. Alzheimers Dement, 15 (1 ), 93–105. doi:10.1016/j.jalz.2018.06.3057 30467082
Lee G , &amp; Leugers CJ (2012). Tau and tauopathies. Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci, 107 , 263–293. doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-385883-2.00004-7 22482453
Lei P , Ayton S , Finkelstein DI , Spoerri L , Ciccotosto GD , Wright DK , … Bush AI (2012). Tau deficiency induces parkinsonism with dementia by impairing APP-mediated iron export. Nat Med, 18 (2 ), 291–295. doi:10.1038/nm.2613 22286308
Lewis J , &amp; Dickson DW (2016). Propagation of tau pathology: hypotheses, discoveries, and yet unresolved questions from experimental and human brain studies. Acta Neuropathol, 131 (1 ), 27–48. doi:10.1007/s00401-015-1507-z 26576562
Liu F , &amp; Gong CX (2008). Tau exon 10 alternative splicing and tauopathies. Mol Neurodegener, 3 , 8. doi:10.1186/1750-1326-3-8 18616804
LoPresti P , Szuchet S , Papasozomenos SC , Zinkowski RP , &amp; Binder LI (1995). Functional implications for the microtubule-associated protein tau: localization in oligodendrocytes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 92 (22 ), 10369–10373. doi:10.1073/pnas.92.22.10369 7479786
Luna-Muñoz J , Chávez-Macías L , García-Sierra F , &amp; Mena R (2007). Earliest stages of tau conformational changes are related to the appearance of a sequence of specific phospho-dependent tau epitopes in Alzheimer’s disease. J Alzheimers Dis, 12 (4 ), 365–375. doi:10.3233/jad-2007-12410 18198423
Mandelkow E , von Bergen M , Biernat J , &amp; Mandelkow EM (2007). Structural principles of tau and the paired helical filaments of Alzheimer’s disease. Brain Pathol, 17 (1 ), 83–90. doi:10.1111/j.1750-3639.2007.00053.x 17493042
Matsuo ES , Shin RW , Billingsley ML , Van deVoorde A , O’Connor M , Trojanowski JQ , &amp; Lee VM (1994). Biopsy-derived adult human brain tau is phosphorylated at many of the same sites as Alzheimer’s disease paired helical filament tau. Neuron, 13 (4 ), 989–1002. doi:10.1016/0896-6273(94)90264-x 7946342
McMillan P , Korvatska E , Poorkaj P , Evstafjeva Z , Robinson L , Greenup L , … D’Souza I (2008). Tau isoform regulation is region- and cell-specific in mouse brain. J Comp Neurol, 511 (6 ), 788–803. doi:10.1002/cne.21867 18925637
Migheli A , Butler M , Brown K , &amp; Shelanski ML (1988). Light and electron microscope localization of the microtubule-associated tau protein in rat brain. J Neurosci, 8 (6 ), 1846–1851.3133453
Neddens J , Temmel M , Flunkert S , Kerschbaumer B , Hoeller C , Loeffler T , … Hutter-Paier B (2018). Phosphorylation of different tau sites during progression of Alzheimer’s disease. Acta Neuropathol Commun, 6 (1 ), 52. doi:10.1186/s40478-018-0557-6 29958544
Nelson PT , Stefansson K , Gulcher J , &amp; Saper CB (1996). Molecular evolution of tau protein: implications for Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurochem, 67 (4 ), 1622–1632. doi:10.1046/j.1471-4159.1996.67041622.x 8858947
Niblock M , &amp; Gallo JM (2012). Tau alternative splicing in familial and sporadic tauopathies. Biochem Soc Trans, 40 (4 ), 677–680. doi:10.1042/BST20120091 22817715
Oikawa N , Kimura N , &amp; Yanagisawa K (2010). Alzheimer-type tau pathology in advanced aged nonhuman primate brains harboring substantial amyloid deposition. Brain Res, 1315 , 137–149. doi:10.1016/j.brainres.2009.12.005 20004650
Papasozomenos SC , &amp; Binder LI (1987). Phosphorylation determines two distinct species of Tau in the central nervous system. Cell Motil Cytoskeleton, 8 (3 ), 210–226. doi:10.1002/cm.970080303 2446784
Paspalas CD , Carlyle BC , Leslie S , Preuss TM , Crimins JL , Huttner AJ , … Arnsten AFT (2018). The aged rhesus macaque manifests Braak stage III/IV Alzheimer’s-like pathology. Alzheimers Dement, 14 (5 ), 680–691. doi:10.1016/j.jalz.2017.11.005 29241829
Paxinos G , Huang XF , &amp; Toga AW (2000). The rhesus monkey brain in stereotaxic coordinates. In. Academic Press.
Planel E , Richter KE , Nolan CE , Finley JE , Liu L , Wen Y , … Duff KE (2007). Anesthesia leads to tau hyperphosphorylation through inhibition of phosphatase activity by hypothermia. J Neurosci, 27 (12 ), 3090–3097. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4854-06.2007 17376970
Schmidt JK , Jones KM , Van Vleck T , &amp; Emborg ME (2022). Modeling genetic diseases in nonhuman primates through embryonic and germline modification: Considerations and challenges. Sci Transl Med, 14 (634 ), eabf4879. doi:10.1126/scitranslmed.abf4879 35235338
Schneider JA , Li JL , Li Y , Wilson RS , Kordower JH , &amp; Bennett DA (2006). Substantia nigra tangles are related to gait impairment in older persons. Ann Neurol, 59 (1 ), 166–173. doi:10.1002/ana.20723 16374822
Schultz C , Dehghani F , Hubbard GB , Thal DR , Struckhoff G , Braak E , &amp; Braak H (2000). Filamentous tau pathology in nerve cells, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes of aged baboons. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol, 59 (1 ), 39–52. doi:10.1093/jnen/59.1.39 10744034
Sealey MA , Vourkou E , Cowan CM , Bossing T , Quraishe S , Grammenoudi S , … Mudher A (2017). Distinct phenotypes of three-repeat and four-repeat human tau in a transgenic model of tauopathy. Neurobiol Dis, 105 , 74–83. doi:10.1016/j.nbd.2017.05.003 28502805
Seiberlich V , Bauer NG , Schwarz L , Ffrench-Constant C , Goldbaum O , &amp; Richter-Landsberg C (2015). Downregulation of the microtubule associated protein tau impairs process outgrowth and myelin basic protein mRNA transport in oligodendrocytes. Glia, 63 (9 ), 1621–1635. doi: 10.1002/glia.22832 25847153
Sengupta U , Guerrero-Muñoz MJ , Castillo-Carranza DL , Lasagna-Reeves CA , Gerson JE , Paulucci-Holthauzen AA , … Kayed R (2015). Pathological interface between oligomeric alpha-synuclein and tau in synucleinopathies. Biol Psychiatry, 78 (10 ), 672–683. doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2014.12.019 25676491
Sharma G , Huo A , Kimura T , Shiozawa S , Kobayashi R , Sahara N , … Hisanaga SI (2019). Tau isoform expression and phosphorylation in marmoset brains. J Biol Chem, 294 (30 ), 11433–11444. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.008415 31171723
Shin RW , Iwaki T , Kitamoto T , &amp; Tateishi J (1991). Hydrated autoclave pretreatment enhances tau immunoreactivity in formalin-fixed normal and Alzheimer’s disease brain tissues. Lab Invest, 64 (5 ), 693–702.1903170
Strang KH , Goodwin MS , Riffe C , Moore BD , Chakrabarty P , Levites Y , … Giasson BI (2017). Generation and characterization of new monoclonal antibodies targeting the PHF1 and AT8 epitopes on human tau. Acta Neuropathol Commun, 5 (1 ), 58. doi:10.1186/s40478-017-0458-0 28760159
Swanson C , &amp; Emborg M (2014). Expression of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma in the substantia nigra of hemiparkinsonian nonhuman primates. Neurol Res, 36 (7 ). 634–646. doi:10.1179/1743132813Y.0000000305 24620964
Swanson CR , Joers V , Bondarenko V , Brunner K , Simmons HA , Ziegler TE , … Emborg ME (2011). The PPAR-γ agonist pioglitazone modulates inflammation and induces neuroprotection in parkinsonian monkeys. J Neuroinflammation, 8 , 91. doi:10.1186/1742-2094-8-91 21819568
Takuma H , Arawaka S , &amp; Mori H (2003). Isoforms changes of tau protein during development in various species. Brain Res Dev Brain Res, 142 (2 ), 121–127. doi:10.1016/s0165-3806(03)00056-7 12711363
Trojanowski JQ , Schuck T , Schmidt ML , &amp; Lee VM (1989). Distribution of tau proteins in the normal human central and peripheral nervous system. J Histochem Cytochem, 37 (2 ), 209–215. doi:10.1177/37.2.2492045 2492045
Uchihara T , Endo K , Kondo EL , Okabayashi S , Shimozawa N , Yasutomi Y , … Kimura N (2016). Tau pathology in aged cynomolgus monkeys is progressive supranuclear palsy/corticobasal degeneration- but not Alzheimer disease-like -Ultrastructural mapping of tau by EDX. Acta Neuropathol Commun, 4 (1 ), 118. doi:10.1186/s40478-016-0385-5 27842611
van Swieten JC , Stevens M , Rosso SM , Rizzu P , Joosse M , de Koning I , … Heutink P (1999). Phenotypic variation in hereditary frontotemporal dementia with tau mutations. Ann Neurol, 46 (4 ), 617–626. doi:10.1002/1531-8249(199910)46:4&lt;617::aid-anal0&gt;3.0.co;2-i 10514099
Vermilyea SC , &amp; Emborg ME (2015). α-Synuclein and nonhuman primate models of Parkinson’s disease. J Neurosci Methods, 255 , 38–51. doi:10.1016/j.jneumeth.2015.07.025 26247888
Vermilyea SC , Guthrie S , Hernandez I , Bondarenko V , &amp; Emborg ME (2019). α-Synuclein Expression Is Preserved in Substantia Nigra GABAergic Fibers of Young and Aged Neurotoxin-Treated Rhesus Monkeys. Cell Transplant, 28 (4 ), 379–387. doi: 10.1177/0963689719835794 30857404
Wakabayashi K , Moria F , &amp; Takahashi H (2006). Progression patterns of neuronal loss and Lewy body pathology in the substantia nigra in Parkinson’s disease. In (Vol. 12 , pp. S92–S98). Parkinsonism and Related Disorders.
Wakeman DR , Weed MR , Perez SE , Cline EN , Viola KL , Wilcox KC , … Elsworth JD (2022). Intrathecal amyloid-beta oligomer administration increases tau phosphorylation in the medial temporal lobe in the African green monkey: A nonhuman primate model of Alzheimer’s disease. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol, 48 (4 ), e12800. doi:10.1111/nan.12800 35156715
Walker LC , &amp; Jucker M (2017). The Exceptional Vulnerability of Humans to Alzheimer’s Disease. Trends Mol Med, 23 (6 ), 534–545. doi:10.1016/j.molmed.2017.04.001 28483344
Wang Y , Zhang Y , Hu W , Xie S , Gong CX , Iqbal K , &amp; Liu F (2015). Rapid alteration of protein phosphorylation during postmortem: implication in the study of protein phosphorylation. Sci Rep, 5 , 15709. doi:10.1038/srepl5709 26511732
Whittington RA , Bretteville A , Dickler MF , &amp; Planel E (2013). Anesthesia and tau pathology. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry, 47 , 147–155. doi:10.1016/j.pnpbp.2013.03.004 23535147
Yoshida M . (2006). Cellular tau pathology and immunohistochemical study of tau isoforms in sporadic tauopathies. Neuropathology, 26 (5 ), 457–470. doi:10.1111/j.1440-1789.2006.00743.x 17080726
Zempel H , Thies E , Mandelkow E , &amp; Mandelkow EM (2010). Abeta oligomers cause localized Ca(2+) elevation, missorting of endogenous Tau into dendrites, Tau phosphorylation, and destruction of microtubules and spines. J Neurosci, 30 (36 ), 11938–11950. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2357-10.2010 20826658
Zhang J , Chen B , Lu J , Wu Y , Wang S , Yao Z , … Wei C (2019). Brains of rhesus monkeys display Aβ deposits and glial pathology while lacking Aβ dimers and other Alzheimer’s pathologies. In. Aging Cell.
Zhang X , Gao F , Wang D , Li C , Fu Y , He W , &amp; Zhang J (2018). Tau Pathology in Parkinson’s Disease. Front Neurol, 9 , 809. doi:10.3389/fneur.2018.00809 30333786
