LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101128963
29630
Ageing Res Rev
Ageing Res Rev
Ageing research reviews
1568-1637
1872-9649

37156399
10261850
10.1016/j.arr.2023.101950
NIHMS1900948
Article
Comprehensive Review of Task-Based Neuroimaging Studies of Cognitive Deficits in Alzheimer’s Disease using Electrophysiological Methods
Casagrandc Chloe C. *a
Rempe Maggie P. *ab
Springer Seth D. ab
Wilson Tony W. acCA
a Institute for Human Neuroscience, Boys Town National Research Hospital, Boys Town, NE, USA 68010
b College of Medicine, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA 68198
c Department of Pharmacology &amp; Neuroscience, Creighton University, Omaha, NE, USA 68178
CA Corresponding Author: Tony W. Wilson, PhD, Patrick E. Brookhouser Endowed Chair in Cognitive Neuroscience, Director, Institute for Human Neuroscience, Boys Town National Research Hospital, 14090 Mother Teresa Lane, Boys Town, NE, USA, tony.wilson@boystown.org
* Authors contributed equally to this work

Author Contributions

C.C.C., M.P.R., and S.D.S. performed literature search and drafted the article. C.C.C., M.P.R., S.D.S., and T.W.W. contributed to article revisions. C.C.C. and M.P.R contributed equally to the work. T.W.W. provided funding.

25 5 2023
7 2023
06 5 2023
01 7 2024
88 101950101950
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
With an aging population, cognitive decline and neurodegenerative disorders are emerging public health crises with enormous yet still under-recognized burdens. Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common type of dementia, and the number of cases is expected to dramatically rise in the upcoming decades. Substantial efforts have been placed into understanding the disease. One of the primary avenues of research is neuroimaging, and while positron emission tomography (PET) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) are most common, crucial recent advancements in electrophysiological methods such as magnetoencephalography (MEG) and electroencephalography (EEG) have provided novel insight into the aberrant neural dynamics at play in AD pathology. In this review, we outline task-based M/EEG studies published since 2010 using paradigms probing the cognitive domains most affected by AD, including memory, attention, and executive functioning. Furthermore, we provide important recommendations for adapting cognitive tasks for optimal use in this population and adjusting recruitment efforts to improve and expand future neuroimaging work.

magnetoencephalography
electroencephalography
oscillations
spectral power
amyloid

pmc1. Introduction

With more than 1 in 9 adults aged 65 years or older in the United States living with an Alzheimer’s disease (AD) diagnosis, we are currently at the forefront of a public health crisis (Alzheimer’s Association, 2021). AD accounts for an estimated 60-80% of dementia cases, and as our population continues to age, the number of people living with AD is projected to double within forty years, increasing from 6.2 million in 2021 to a staggering 13.8 million by 2060 (Alzheimer’s Association, 2021). Alzheimer’s disease is characterized by worsening cognition as evidenced by an impaired ability to acquire or retain new information, impaired reasoning and judgement, diminished visuospatial abilities, and changes in personality or behavior in ways that interfere with daily functioning (McKhann et al., 2011). Notably, the earliest diagnostic signs generally appear late in the fifth or sixth decade of life and are first diagnosed as mild cognitive impairment (MCI), which is characterized by having cognitive decline that is more severe than would be expected given the person’s age, but not severe enough to meet criteria for dementia and also not severe enough to interfere with activities of daily living (Petersen et al., 1999). Further, several studies have shown that patients with MCI, particularly the amnestic variant, will eventually convert to AD (Amieva et al., 2004a; Grundman, 2004; Morris et al., 2001). Underlying these cognitive and behavioral declines are the hallmark pathologies of AD, including beta-amyloid plaques, tau neurofibrillary tangles, and progressive atrophy of the brain (Jack et al., 2018). As research continues to be conducted on the markers of this disease, the scientific community is gaining perspective into the disparate onsets, types, and symptomology associated with what is termed the AD spectrum.

People along the AD spectrum typically present with a complex cognitive profile. The underlying neuropathology first affects the hippocampus and surrounding medial temporal structures, resulting in memory loss as one of the earliest neuropsychological deficits observed in AD spectrum progression (Di Paola et al., 2007; Fox et al., 1998). Memory can be further subdivided into a myriad of subtypes (i.e., working, episodic, short-term, long-term) which are differentially affected by both AD pathology and disease progression, with episodic memory degradations often among the first cognitive deficits noted (Dubois et al., 2007; Gainotti et al., 1998; Grober et al., 2008; Perry et al., 2000). As the disease progresses, frontal-subcortical networks begin to degrade, and other cognitive domains are affected, especially attention and executive functioning (Baddeley et al., 2001; Belleville et al., 2008; Perry and Hodges, 1999; Stopford et al., 2012). Recent work focusing on spatial navigation has also reported deficits in both young (Kunz et al., 2015) and older (Bierbrauer et al., 2020) individuals with the apolipoprotein E (APOE) ε4 allele, and this work was recently reviewed (Coughlan et al., 2018). For decades it has been assumed that the primary sensory and motor cortices are spared until late in the disease process, but task-based neurophysiological studies have suggested functional degradations may begin sooner and recent work has further supported this (Casagrande et al., 2022; Di et al., 2004; Ferreri et al., 2003; Springer et al., 2022; Wiesman et al., 2021a).

One of the most common paradigms in the AD spectrum literature is resting state. Resting state studies have been particularly attractive in this population because their administration is less affected by declines in cognitive status, and they are associated with far less frustration and burden of the patients. M/EEG resting state studies have generally revealed that people on the AD spectrum have impaired functional connectivity and disturbances in canonical frequency bands, particularly theta and alpha (Ikeda et al., 2020; Mandal et al., 2018; Nakamura et al., 2018; Osipova et al., 2005), and these disruptions in resting state rhythms have been related to impaired cognition in people with AD (Wiesman et al., 2021b).

Although theta and alpha frequency bands have been most implicated in AD, other canonical frequency bands have also been shown to be aberrant in AD, including stronger oscillatory activity in the low-frequency delta band (Fernandez et al., 2002; Huang et al., 2000) and weaker activity and connectivity in higher frequency beta and gamma bands (de Haan et al., 2008; Huang et al., 2000; Stam et al., 2006, 2002), suggesting widespread functional irregularities. In addition, literature focusing on EEG signatures of sleep architecture have shown marked differences in AD patients relative to controls (for reviews see (Horvath, 2018; Pace-Schott and Spencer, 2014)). Briefly, disruption of the circadian rhythm, reduced slow wave sleep time and activity, shorter and less frequent sleep spindle and K-complexes, increased fragmentation, and an overall slowing of REM EEG (i.e., increased delta and theta power with concurrent decrease in alpha and beta) are all observed in the setting of AD (Horvath, 2018; Pace-Schott and Spencer, 2014). Finally, electrophysiologic studies have proven instrumental in investigating the association between AD and increased epilepsy incidence (Born, 2015; Maestú et al., 2021; Vossel et al., 2017). Such studies have also demonstrated the risk of epilepsy in AD spectrum patients also extends to subclinical epileptic activity (Horvath et al., 2021; Vossel et al., 2016). This increased risk of epilepsy is clinically relevant because AD spectrum patients with clinical and subclinical epilepsy have been shown to present with cognitive decline several years earlier than those without epilepsy (Horvath et al., 2021; Vossel et al., 2013).

Beyond resting state work, a growing body of task-based studies of people along the AD spectrum have been performed using fMRI, PET, and SPECT. Interestingly, the consensus in the fMRI literature is that there is decreased task-related activity in fronto-temporo-parietal regions serving cognitive processing in patients with AD, while those with MCI more frequently show increased activation, possibly as a compensatory mechanism (Bokde et al., 2010, 2008; Golby et al., 2005; Hao et al., 2005; Jacobs et al., 2015; Peters et al., 2009; Prvulovic et al., 2002; Sperling et al., 2003; Vannini et al., 2008, 2007), although this cannot be directly tested, and therefore, other plausible theories should also be considered. Importantly, fMRI studies of working memory tasks have shown decreased activation in AD and MCI patients in hippocampal and parahippocampal regions (Golby et al., 2005; Machulda et al., 2003; Sperling et al., 2003; Yetkin et al., 2006). Conversely, PET and SPECT studies tend to show decreased metabolic activity in these same brain regions in both MCI and AD (Arnáiz et al., 2001; Buchhave et al., 2008; Collette et al., 1997; Furst et al., 2012; Huang et al., 2007, 2003; Nestor et al., 2003; Pietrini et al., 1996; Tippett and Black, 2008; Vasquez et al., 2011). While fMRI, PET, and SPECT have been critically important techniques that have furthered our understanding of the neural basis of cognitive impairments, they unfortunately lack the temporal precision necessary to investigate the neural population-level dynamics underlying cognitive processing. Focusing on these population-level dynamics may provide markers with sensitivity and specificity above that achieved to date with other neuroimaging techniques, as has been demonstrated in other conditions such as HIV-related cognitive impairment (Lew et al., 2018; Wiesman et al., 2018).

Relative to non-electrophysiologic methods (e.g., fMRI, PET, SPECT), M/EEG technologies provide a unique perspective on brain function in AD spectrum conditions, as the temporal precision enables the moment-to-moment dynamics to be directly examined. This review focuses on recent (2010 to present) task-based work in M/EEG neuroimaging modalities to identify AD spectrum related aberrations, particularly those supporting the most-affected cognitive domains of memory, attention, and executive functioning. All studies included had 10 or more participants in each participant group (including at least one group of people with MCI or people with AD) to ensure at least a moderate level of experimental rigor and reported full statistical analyses including test statistics and p-values. The experimental paradigm testing cognitive function must have been completed by participants during the M/EEG recording. In total, we included 34 studies in the review (see Table 1). We consider the conventional methods of these fields (i.e., event-related potentials (ERP) and neural oscillatory activity) and provide recommendations for future task-based studies using paradigms tailored to the AD spectrum population. See Table 2 for relevant definitions of concepts throughout.

2. Memory

2.1 Working Memory

Working memory is the ability to maintain and manipulate information for immediate cognitive processing. Working memory is generally thought to be made up of three phases: encoding, maintenance, and retrieval. Encoding refers to the loading of stimulus information into working memory, while maintenance is the short-term retention and manipulation of the temporary representations. Finally, retrieval is the recall and utilization of the representations to achieve task-related goals. Working memory deficits are well-established in normative aging (Ferguson et al., 2021; Park et al., 2002; Proskovec et al., 2016). Generally, there is a decline across adulthood in working memory performance, and older adults may also be more sensitive to increasing loads. Working memory is one of the key constructs known to be affected early in AD progression (Jahn, 2013), though importantly, these deficits need to be beyond those seen in normal aging. and has been extensively studied using fMRI, which has shown differential activation in frontal and parietal regions (Golby et al., 2005; Peters et al., 2009; Sperling et al., 2003). Given the rapid temporal progression of neural activity during working memory tasks, the use of more temporally precise imaging methods (i.e., M/EEG) is key to further understanding these deficits commonly seen in people with AD and MCI. Further, by using MEG, the spatial origins of these neural dynamics can be mapped with exceptional spatial precision (Wilson et al., 2016), which enable the key networks to be readily identified.

2.1.1 Working Memory: N-back

One of the most common tasks used to test working memory performance is the N-back task in which participants are presented with a series of stimuli and are asked to respond whether the present stimulus matches that which was presented in the preceding trial (i.e., 1-back) or two trials previously (i.e., 2-back) and so on. In other variations, the participant is asked to remember a stimulus throughout the task and respond in each trial whether the current stimulus matches the one they were asked to remember (i.e., 0-back). Event-related and oscillatory findings of N-back tasks using M/EEG are described herein.

Using the temporal resolution provided by electrophysiologic imaging methods, many studies have focused on event-related potentials (ERP) related to the N-back task. A prominent finding in this area is that the P300/P450 component has a reduced amplitude in AD or MCI groups, often in parietal regions; though these two components are separable, they have both been related to automatic attention processing and are relevant to working memory tasks (Deiber et al., 2015; Fraga et al., 2018; Gu et al., 2018). In one such study, cognitive reserve was negatively correlated with P300 amplitude change (i.e., amplitude in the 1-back minus the 0-back) in cognitively normal older adults but not in people with amnestic MCI (Gu et al., 2018). Deiber et al. (2015) assessed an attention/detection task and 2-back task in stable and deteriorating controls (i.e., those whose performance on 2+ neuropsychological tests decreased by 0.5 standard deviations at an 18-month follow-up) versus participants with MCI. This study analyzed the so-called positive-negative waveform (PNwm) component, which is calculated by subtracting the ERP response of an attention/detection task from that of a 2-back task and is thought to be able to predict cognitive decline in the setting of MCI (Deiber et al., 2015; Missonnier et al., 2007, 2005). They identified a decreased PNwm amplitude in MCI compared to stable controls, though there was no difference between the stable and deteriorating controls (Deiber et al., 2015). The PNwm has previously been shown to predict cognitive decline in MCI, however since the PNwm reduction in this study was specific to the MCI group, the authors suggested this was representative of the maintained working memory abilities in early disease stages (i.e., subtle cognitive decline of the deteriorating control group) (Deiber et al., 2015). In addition to their ERP analysis, Deiber and colleagues identified a theta event-related synchronization (ERS) in all groups and all tasks, however this theta ERS was found to be weaker in MCI relative to stable controls in posterior sensors, regardless of task (Deiber et al., 2015). MCI and deteriorating controls also exhibited stronger alpha decreases than stable controls in posterior regions. When examining the intertrial coherence, patients with MCI were found to have decreased theta and alpha intertrial coherence compared to controls over lateral parietal and occipital regions and right and mesial posterior regions, respectively, whereas deteriorating controls had decreased beta intertrial coherence compared to stable controls over right parietal regions (Deiber et al., 2015). Overall, these studies show reduced amplitude of well-established ERPs and oscillatory responses related to working memory in MCI and AD participants, while also showing key differences in responses of participants with subtle cognitive deterioration.

In an extensive EEG analysis of event-related desynchronization/synchronization (ERD/S) responses, Fraga and colleagues identified spectrally specific group differences in both match and non-match trials of each 0-back, 1-back, and 2-back conditions. In match trials of the low-level memory task (i.e., 0-back), there was a significant decrease in the high-frequency gamma synchronization over the right temporal lobe in MCI patients relative to controls (Fraga et al., 2018). However, in the match trials of the more demanding working memory tasks (i.e., 1- and 2-back), there were significantly weaker desynchronizations found in AD compared to cognitively normal participants in the slower theta and delta responses primarily in temporoparietal and temporal electrodes, respectively (Fraga et al., 2018). Similarly, in the 1-back match trials, there were weaker alpha desynchronizations in MCI compared to controls in frontal and central electrodes (Fraga et al., 2018). Additionally, in non-match trials, the MCI group showed significant decreases compared to cognitively normal controls in the beta ERS, delta ERD, and alpha ERS in 0-back, 1-back, and 2-back conditions, respectively, while AD only showed significant decreases in theta ERD in the 0-back condition in frontotemporal electrodes (Fraga et al., 2018). Taken together, Fraga et al. (2018) showed weaker oscillatory responses in MCI and AD participants compared to cognitively normal controls in the N-back task, in accordance with the previous oscillatory analysis discussed above.

One recent study analyzed cross-frequency theta-gamma coupling ( i.e., theta phase coupling with gamma amplitude; (Goodman et al., 2018)) in patients with AD. Theta-gamma coupling has previously been proposed to support coding for the ordering and manipulation of items during working memory, such that gamma oscillations code for individual items while theta oscillations are responsible for coding the time interval during which the items are held (Lisman and Jensen, 2013; Rajji et al., 2016). This study showed a stair-step effect in theta-gamma coupling by disease status such that AD had the least coupling, while cognitively normal controls had the strongest coupling (Goodman et al., 2018). Further, theta-gamma coupling during the 2-back task was positively correlated with accuracy across all participants, as well as in controls and those with MCI alone (Goodman et al., 2018). Interestingly, theta-gamma coupling was the strongest predictor of working memory accuracy in the 2-back condition when controlling for theta and gamma power (Goodman et al., 2018). In a follow-up study, the same group showed increased change in theta and alpha from pre- to post-stimulus in correct trials relative to incorrect trials across both cognitively normal controls and those with AD, and the pre- to post-stimulus theta change predicted 2-back accuracy, across all groups (Goodman et al., 2019). Finally, two additional studies assessed working memory in an AD population using an N-back task, though these results are difficult to integrate here due to use of peripheral and central stimulation paradigms (Kumar et al., 2020, 2017).

2.1.2 Working Memory: Sternberg

Another common task used to investigate working memory function is the Sternberg letter probe task (Sternberg, 1966). The Sternberg letter probe task involves the visual presentation of a list of items, either sequentially or simultaneously, which the participant is tasked with remembering for a specific amount of time (i.e., maintenance period). Following the maintenance period, the participant is required to retrieve the item(s) from working memory to correctly perform the trial.

Working memory performance in participants on the AD spectrum has been commonly investigated using M/EEG methods that probe functional connectivity. One such measure is synchronization likelihood (SL), which is a normalized estimate of dynamic interdependencies between two or more time series (Stam and van Dijk, 2002). Using MEG, Bajo and colleagues compared the SL of patients with MCI and cognitively normal older adults. Interestingly, in all frequency bands examined, participants with MCI exhibited increased interhemispheric synchronization during the encoding period between left and right anterior temporo-frontal sensors, despite there being no behavioral differences between groups (Bajo et al., 2010). In the gamma band, subjects with MCI also showed higher interhemispheric synchronization during the encoding period between posterior regions while cognitively normal older adults exhibited greater synchronization between central-posterior and frontal-posterior sensors. The authors suggest that the increased broadband interhemispheric synchronization observed in participants with MCI likely reflects a compensatory mechanism early in the progression along the AD spectrum, compared to the later stages which are dominated by synchronization disconnection (Bajo et al., 2010). In a follow-up study, Bajo and colleagues added a group with subjective memory complaints (SMC) and showed connectivity profiles like the control group with overall decreased synchronization values during the encoding period. These results suggested that SMC may represent an initial stage of the AD spectrum with hypo-synchronization, relative to the hyper-synchronization observed in MCI, indicating that subjects with SMC have memory networks that are starting to fail without the need yet for compensation (Bajo et al., 2012).

Similarly, Buldú and colleagues (2011) used the Sternberg letter probe task while participants underwent MEG and subsequently performed graph theory synchronization analyses. They found an increase in global synchronization in MCI, as well as a trend towards randomization of functional networks, relative to controls, indicating a potential breakdown of functional networks serving working memory in subjects with MCI (Buldú et al., 2011). Finally, also using MEG, Ahmadlou and colleagues compared network complexity measures in patients with MCI and controls using both graph index complexity and efficiency complexity indices. During the encoding period, both measures showed reduced alpha and theta band complexity in MCI patients relative to controls, with the theta band complexity reduction being most pronounced in left intra-hemispheric networks (Ahmadlou et al., 2014). Taken together, functional connectivity measures of participants with MCI indicate broadband increases in interhemispheric and global synchronization with a loss of network complexity during performance of a Sternberg working memory task. These results indicate functional connectivity aberrations early along the AD spectrum, with increasing overall long-range connectivity at the expense of network complexity.

Another facet of electrophysiologic analysis commonly used to evaluate changes in participants along the AD spectrum is the analysis of event-related MEG amplitude changes. Maestú and colleagues, using a modified version of the Sternberg task compared such responses (i.e., &lt; 30 Hz) of participants with AD, MCI, and cognitively normal older adults using sensor-level MEG, with the MCI group separated into those who progressed to AD in the following 2.5 years (progressive MCI) and those that did not (stable MCI). Interestingly, the progressive MCI group was found to have the greatest overall MEG responses near both the dorsal and ventral visual pathways during the encoding period, while the stable MCI participants were found to have greater MEG activity compared to cognitively normal controls only in the ventral pathway, and those with AD had the weakest overall MEG responses (Maestú et al., 2011). These results suggest that the increased activity in the ventral and dorsal pathways of those with MCI may serve a compensatory role and offset the loss of efficiency in memory networks, which degrade by the time the participant progresses to AD, eventually resulting is decreased network activity (Maestú et al., 2011). These conclusions are in line with another study by Maestú and colleagues in which participants with subjective memory complaints (SMC) were included in the same analysis (Maestu et al., 2011). Though subjects with SMC and MCI had stronger MEG responses near the ventral and dorsal pathways relative to controls during the encoding period, there were no behavioral differences between groups (Maestu et al., 2011). The authors suggested that these results support that SMCs may represent a pre-clinical stage of the AD spectrum that is not detectable by neuropsychological assessment. Further, these works demonstrate that broadband (&lt;30 Hz) MEG responses along the AD spectrum may prove useful in the discrimination of patients with stable versus progressive MCI.

In another MEG analysis using a modified Sternberg task, Kurimoto and colleagues compared participants with AD, MCI, and controls and found that, during the maintenance period, those with AD had weaker beta band ERD (15-30 Hz) relative to controls in the right central area and weaker gamma band ERD (&gt; 30 Hz) relative to participants with MCI in the left prefrontal and medial parietal cortex (Kurimoto et al., 2012). These findings indicate electrophysiological changes underlying visual working memory in participants along the AD spectrum, which the authors suggested may reflect specific aberrations in memory storage (i.e., beta band deficits) and stimulus processing (i.e., gamma band deficits). In contrast to the numerous studies showing compensatory neural increases in those with MCI, Fodor and colleagues investigated alpha (7-14 Hz) and beta (14-25 Hz) band activity during the maintenance period in MCI using EEG and found decreased alpha/beta band ERS in MCI patients relative to controls (Fodor et al., 2018). Source localization revealed that the decreased beta ERS was in the inferior and middle temporal gyri, fusiform gyrus, and cuneus and that these responses correlated positively with the size of hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, and parahippocampal gyrus.

2.2 Short-Term Memory

In the progression of AD, short-term memory loss is one of the first observed declines in function, whereas long-term memory loss typically occurs in more advanced disease states (Alescio-Lautier et al., 2007; Parra et al., 2008). Understanding what is occurring neurally during these mild stages may be crucial to earlier detection. A well-established paradigm for the examination of short-term memory is the delayed match-to-sample (DMTS) task involving encoding, maintenance, and retrieval phases. The temporal precision of M/EEG uniquely allows researchers to separately analyze these three phases to determine if poorer performance is being dictated by discrete stages of short-term memory use. Generally, reduced amplitudes of responses have been observed in people with MCI predominantly over frontocentral regions during retrieval and encoding phases (Deiber et al., 2011; Park et al., 2012). Specific to the gamma band (30+ Hz), controls exhibited a stronger gamma ERD relative to MCI, which correlated with better neurocognitive performance and accuracy on the DMTS task (Park et al., 2012). One recent study focused on the maintenance phase and found weaker activity in people with MCI over several frequency bands (i.e., theta, alpha, and beta) spanning early and late components of maintenance relative to controls, though it is unclear whether these responses were baseline normalized (i.e., ERD or ERS) and thus the group effects may have reflected stimulus response or baseline differences (Serrano et al., 2020). Thus, in performing short-term memory, people with MCI have been shown to have decreased theta, alpha, beta, and gamma activity during all phases of task execution (i.e., encoding, maintenance, and retrieval).

Several neuroimaging studies have employed so-called binding tasks to inspect short-term memory in pathologically aging populations. These tasks are based on the binding principle of cognitive neuropsychology, whereby the integration of diverse neural information (e.g., color and form) is required to have a cohesive experience. Pietto et al. utilized a shape-color binding task and EEG to examine short-term memory in familial and non-familial-MCI. Their ERP analyses revealed reduced early activity (100-250 ms) in both MCI groups in fronto-central and parieto-occipital electrodes relative to cognitively normal older adults (Pietto et al., 2016) indicating a potential aberrancy in widespread early short-term memory processes. Correspondingly, Josefsson et al. applied a joint-distribution entropy connectivity approach to the beta-band of EEG data collected during a memory binding task and found greater eccentricity (i.e., maximum shortest length between any two nodes within the network) in MCI relative to controls (Josefsson et al., 2019). They further found lower small-world characteristic values. The small world phenomenon is characterized as a network with a high clustering coefficient and reduced path length when compared to random networks. Although limited in scope, this study gave preliminary insight into aberrant functional traits of short-term memory networks in people with MCI. Tangentially, Timothy and colleagues directly examined whether EEG data from a short-term memory task or resting state was better at classifying group membership (control vs. MCI). To do so, they applied EEG sensor-level recurrence-quantification analysis which revealed hypersynchronous signal complexity over the temporoparietal in MCI and subsequently found that the task data was better at predicting group membership than resting state data, which importantly points to the crucialness of task-based studies in the MCI and AD patient populations (Timothy et al., 2017).

2.3 Declarative Memory

Like short-term memory, declarative memory is one of the first cognitive domains to deteriorate in AD. Declarative memory can be partitioned into semantic (context-independent) and episodic (context-dependent) memories. Over a series of studies, Prieto del Val et al. explored declarative memory through EEG source-localized oscillatory activity during the encoding and retrieval periods of the face-location association task, including semantically congruent and incongruent cues in people with amnestic MCI (aMCI). Their main findings were weaker alpha and beta ERDs in people with MCI relative to healthy older adults (Prieto del Val et al., 2016, 2015). In their 2015 study, the weakened alpha ERD response in the MCI group was found to be largely right lateralized and was temporally prolonged. Interestingly, a comparison among participants with MCI who had different APOE ε4 genetic status (ε4+ or ε4−) revealed weaker alpha ERD across a diffuse area of the right hemisphere in aMCI ε4+, along with more focal responses in the right frontal lobe in aMCI ε4− (Prieto del Val et al., 2015). In addition, their 2016 study found that alpha ERD in the left posterior cingulate cortex, together with the right amygdala volume, were predictive of the conversion to MCI (sensitivity = 0.78, specificity = 0.82) (Prieto del Val et al., 2016). These data suggest functional aberrancies in AD may differ based on APOE ε4 genetic status. In another study probing declarative memory, Aine and colleagues utilized MEG and an auditory word recognition paradigm adapted from the Warrington Recognition Memory Test in people with AD and controls. Within this paradigm, people with AD exhibited decreased responses in the superior temporal gyri during early auditory stimulus processing and lateral prefrontal cortex during later in auditory processing relative to controls. They also found a disparate pattern of activity whereby fewer people with AD exhibited prefrontal responses than controls and this corresponded with lower IQ and worse performances on neuropsychological testing (Aine et al., 2010).

3. Attention

Attention is the allocation of mental resources to specific properties or features of stimuli, often while ignoring other stimuli or aspects of stimuli. Attentional abilities tend to decline with advancing age in healthy older adults (Groth, 2000). Interestingly, most domains of attention show consistent decrements, but the data on selective attention deficits in older adults are mixed in the literature, with some suggesting that selective attention abilities are maintained throughout adulthood (Groth, 2000). Attention deficits are widely described in the setting of MCI and AD and are among the earliest and most affected cognitive functions in these diseases (Perry et al., 2000). Though behavioral deficits in attention are well described in the literature, task-based neuroimaging studies examining the rapid temporal evolution of neural activity involved in attention in those with AD are largely lacking. The few recent studies investigating these temporal neural dynamics of various attentional domains, including selective attention, sustained attention, and multi-object processing, will be reviewed next.

3.1 Selective Attention

Selective attention deficits are frequently described in the setting of AD and MCI. (Levinoff et al., 2005) Selective attention can be studied using a Simon task, where the participant is asked to attend to one feature of the presented stimuli (e.g., color) while ignoring other features of the stimuli (e.g., position or direction). This type of task allows the study of one’s ability to appropriately attend to task-relevant information while actively inhibiting irrelevant information. One study utilized the Simon task and EEG to examine selective attention and showed that N2pc amplitude, a posterior contralateral negativity traditionally linked to visuospatial processing, was decreased in patients with multidomain amnestic MCI compared to controls (Cespón et al., 2013). In addition, the lateralized readiness potential (LRP) amplitude (i.e., the difference in the contralateral-ipsilateral activation in each hemisphere and subsequently averaged together) was significantly smaller in both the single domain amnestic MCI group and the multidomain amnestic MCI group compared to the controls (Cespón et al., 2013). In a receiver operating characteristics (ROC) analysis, N2pc was found to be a good biomarker for multidomain MCI (sensitivity = 0.77, specificity = 0.76), while LRP was a good biomarker for both amnestic MCI subtypes (sensitivity = 0.80, specificity = 0.92), though no form of validation was used on these models (Cespón et al., 2013). In a subsequent study, they replicated their finding showing decreased N2pc amplitude in multidomain MCI compared to controls, however, they also showed that compared to controls and single domain MCI, patients with multidomain MCI had longer N2cc latency, a negative central contralateral ERP associated with cognitive control, though N2cc amplitude showed no differences (Cespón et al., 2014). N2cc also proved to be a good marker of multidomain MCI in a ROC analysis (sensitivity = 0.92, specificity = 0.84), though again unvalidated.(Cespón et al., 2014) Taken together, the authors proposed that these findings indicate that patients with amnestic MCI have reduced allocation of attentional resources to target stimuli (Cespón et al., 2014, 2013). These studies have shown important changes in event-related neural activity, which can be attributed to attention, however, to date they are lacking analyses of the neural oscillations that have repeatedly been linked to attention function and dysfunction in human and nonhuman primates.

Wei and colleagues utilized EEG and a color-match selective attention task to analyze local interconnectedness, overall connectedness, and small-world characteristics (for description of small-world characteristics, see Short-Term memory section above) of brain networks using a phase synchronization index to measure the cortical neural synchronization in alpha and beta frequency bands during active and resting states (Wei et al., 2015). This study showed that patients with MCI had a loss of small-world attributes during both active and resting states, and further, the cortical networks in patients with MCI were shifted toward randomization. The authors suggest these findings provide evidence for the functional disconnection of whole-brain networks in the setting of MCI.

Another common paradigm used to study selective attention is the Eriksen Flanker task (Eriksen and Eriksen, 1974). In a recent study, Chen et al. (2020) examined Flanker task-related oscillatory activity, measured by EEG, to determine group differences in attentional neural activity between cognitively normal older adults and patients with MCI. This study primarily focused on group differences in the relationship between pre-stimulus alpha power and reaction time to show deficits in preparatory attention in patients with MCI (Chen et al., 2020). The results were such that in controls, pre-stimulus alpha power on fast trials was significantly lower than that on slow trials, regardless of task condition, whereas there was no significant difference in the MCI group. Similarly, there was a stronger positive correlation between pre-stimulus alpha and RT in the control group compared to the MCI group. In addition to studying group differences, Chen et al. (2020) used support vector machine analysis to classify participants based on task related oscillatory activity. Here, they were able to differentiate older adults with MCI from controls with 80.4% accuracy using inputs that included task-related alpha activity based on task condition (i.e., congruent or incongruent) and reaction time (i.e., slow or fast trials), correlations between alpha activity and reaction time, and the flanker effect (i.e., difference between congruent and incongruent trials) on the error rate (Chen et al., 2020). Altogether, the authors suggest that these findings indicate a deficit in preparatory attention in older adults with MCI, and that these deficits can further be measured and used to distinguish older adults with MCI from controls. Another recent study also used the Flanker task, although this work utilized MEG and mainly focused neural differences among patients on the Alzheimer’s disease spectrum (i.e., MCI and AD in same group) and those with HIV-related cognitive impairment (Meehan et al., 2023). This investigation transformed all data into the time-frequency domain and imaged the most robust oscillatory responses using a beamformer in each condition (i.e., congruent vs. incongruent), and then subtracted the two conditions to compute flanker interference maps. The key findings were that both patient groups (i.e., AD spectrum + HIV-related cognitive impairment) performed worse than controls on the Flanker task and exhibited weaker theta interference effects in the left inferior frontal cortices and the left superior parietal. Interestingly, patients on the AD spectrum also exhibited stronger theta interference responses than the patients with HV-related impairments in the right superior parietal cortices, left middle temporal, right lingual gyrus, left middle occipital cortices, and right dorsolateral prefrontal cortices (Meehan et al., 2023). The authors concluded that the two disorders had both overlapping and distinct patterns of neurophysiological alterations, which suggests both common and unique underlying mechanism (Meehan et al., 2023).

3.2 Sustained Attention

Another type of attention that is known to be affected in dementia is sustained attention. Sustained attention can be studied using vigilance task paradigms. Waninger et al. (2018) utilized EEG and a three-choice vigilance task during which participants were asked to discriminate between a primary target and two secondary targets. In this study, patients with MCI were found to have significant suppression of the late positive potential in occipital and right temporoparietal electrodes when compared to controls. The late positive potential is thought to represent successful memory encoding and retrieval and thus the authors suggested this difference may indicate abnormal visual integration during memory processes in those with MCI (Waninger et al., 2018).

3.3 Multi-Object Processing

Multi-object processing involves attentional and visual short-term memory components, both of which are key constructs known to be affected in MCI and AD. One recent study used a multi-object processing task where participants were asked to count a variable number of targets presented among distractors. In this study, there was a stairstep effect in behavior such that patients with AD performed worse than those with MCI who performed worse than controls, however, those with MCI showed worse performance mainly for trials with larger numericities of targets (Bagattini et al., 2017). In ERP analysis, patients with AD had a decrease in N2pc amplitude, which, as mentioned earlier, is traditionally linked to visuospatial processing, and contralateral delay activity (CDA), which is a signature of active maintenance of a limited set of items, compared to controls while those with MCI showed an increase in both amplitudes compared to controls (Bagattini et al., 2017). In a ROC analysis, CDA amplitude was moderately predictive in discriminating controls and patients with MCI while showing good performance in discriminating MCI and AD (Bagattini et al., 2017). The authors propose these data indicate a pattern of hyperactivity during early stages of disease progression (i.e., MCI) and eventual hypoactivity seen in later stages (i.e., AD).

4. Executive Function

4.1 Response inhibition

Response inhibition is the selective suppression of specific actions that interfere with an ongoing goal or that are inappropriate in the current context. Domain-wide decrements in executive function are common in healthy aging populations, including inhibitory control mechanisms (Ferguson et al., 2021). Deficits in response inhibition are widely recognized in the earliest stages of AD (Amieva et al., 2004b). One paradigm that is commonly used to assess response inhibition is the Go/No-Go task. A conventional Go/No-Go paradigm requires participants to respond to a specific stimulus set (“Go” trials) while refraining from responding to another stimulus set (“No-Go” trials). Generally, a Go/No-Go paradigm will result in two ERP components: an early negative deflection in fronto-central regions (N2) and a later positive deflection (P3) whose location depends on the trial type (i.e., Go or No-Go). While the specific description of the functions for each of these components differs from study to study, the N2 component is thought to index stimulus detection/evaluation and motor response inhibition, while the P3 component marks context-updating of mental representations of the stimulus and higher-order control of response inhibition. Cid-Fernandez et al. (2014) performed an EEG study utilizing a Go/No-Go task to evaluate electrode-level ERP changes in participants with amnesic MCI and cognitively normal older adults. This study found that participants with MCI had longer reaction times, fewer correct responses, and decreased N2 component amplitudes in both Go and No-Go trials, with no changes in the P3 component (Cid-Fernández et al., 2013). Using a similar EEG electrode-level approach, Mudar et al. found participants with amnesic MCI, relative to cognitively normal older adults, had more false positive responses on No-Go trials and prolonged latency of the N2 response in both Go and No-Go trials (Mudar et al., 2016). These behavioral and electrophysiologic changes in participants with MCI demonstrate that delays in Go-N2 latency appear to precede behavioral changes in response execution, while delays in No-Go-N2 latency may underlay the decrement in response inhibition capabilities in the MCI group (Mudar et al., 2016). Taken together, the ERP studies investigating changes along the AD spectrum have demonstrated significant negative changes in behavioral performance and robust changes to ERP component characteristics (i.e., decreased amplitude and longer latency), most significantly, the N2 component.

While the study of participants along the AD spectrum has historically been dominated by resting-state and ERP analyses, recently there has been a push to perform frequency-resolved analysis of AD-specific oscillatory changes. The first such oscillatory analysis of participants with MCI was performed by Nguyen et al., in which participants with MCI were found to have more false positive responses during No-Go trials relative to controls, along with several oscillatory aberrations (Nguyen et al., 2017). Specifically, participants with MCI were found to have weaker theta ERS (4-7 Hz) in frontal and parietal electrodes during No-Go trials in addition to weaker alpha (8-10 Hz) desynchronizations in parietal electrodes during Go trials. The authors suggested that the observed decrease in theta activity during No-Go trials is likely related to worse false positive rate in participants with MCI, whereas the weaker alpha activity seems to precede any behavioral changes during Go trials. Finally, Mudar et al. investigated if cognitive training targeting higher-order reasoning would improve cognitive performance and positively alter oscillatory activity in individuals with MCI (Mudar et al., 2019). Following cognitive training, participants with MCI were found to have significantly increased theta synchronization and enhanced alpha desynchronizations during both Go and No-Go trials. These findings suggest that cognitive training regiments could prove useful in leveraging unused neurological resources in patients along the AD spectrum.

5. Considerations

In this review, we have reported on the last decade of electrophysiological studies (M/EEG) employing paradigms probing memory, attention, and executive functioning in MCI and AD patient groups. All studies included had 10 or more participants in each participant group to ensure at least a moderate level of experimental rigor. When taken together, this work has three primary conclusions as outlined herein. ERP analyses have been widely applied to task-based paradigms, especially robust, well-established paradigms such as N-back, Simon, and Go/No-Go. Most groups report decreased amplitude of ERP components (e.g., N2 component in Go/No-Go; P300/P450 in N-back) in MCI and AD groups relative to cognitively normal aging controls. Functional connectivity analyses provide us with a more complete picture of the degradation of functional networks serving higher order cognitive processes such as randomization of the cortical networks. Finally, oscillatory analyses have revealed band-specific aberrations in responses of people with MCI or AD, particularly in the theta, alpha, and beta bands, and tasks have been able to correlate alterations in oscillatory power to behavioral outcomes. It is critical to point out that the results from the electrophysiological studies in this review are unique to M/EEG, with the exception of the functional connectivity findings. While the M/EEG literature described herein largely corroborates findings in other neuroimaging modalities (e.g., fMRI, PET, SPECT), non-electrophysiological modalities are unable to directly investigate electrical and magnetic activity. Further, only electrophysiological methods have the temporal precision to take a multispectral approach and identify the specific oscillatory frequency where deficits reside. Such a capacity opens major new windows of investigation and helps improve the specificity of findings, which is critical for the development of new medications as the field approaches the future of precision medicine.

Neuroimaging studies of AD have largely focused on resting-state activity and functional connectivity. These paradigms can capture brain activity in the absence of demanding or fatiguing tasks, which have proven to be a highly feasible approach in terms of characterizing changes in resting-state activity and connectivity based on disease status (Engels et al., 2017; Wiesman et al., 2021b, 2022). These methods, however, are limited in their ability to make inferences regarding direct relationships between observed differences in brain activity and the cognitive deficits common to AD and MCI. As reviewed here, task-based studies are a feasible and highly valuable method of examining disease related neural changes and coordinated cognitive deficits in these conditions. When performing these task-based studies, key aspects of study and task design are important to keep in mind (see Table 3). Firstly, the current literature is severely lacking in studies of biomarker-confirmed diagnostic groups (i.e., Aβ-positive or negative) using amyloid or tau positron emission tomography (PET) data. Specifically in the case of MCI, this is critical to confirm the proper diagnostic status for these patients. Although it is true that persons with MCI are more likely to go on to develop AD, many will not convert to AD and remain stable, or even revert to cognitively normal. In fact, only 3-10% of people convert from MCI to AD each year in community samples and 10-13% in specialty clinic samples (Farias et al., 2009; Michaud et al., 2017; Mitchell and Shiri-Feshki, 2009). Importantly, many studies have shown Aβ pathology to be a potent predictor of conversion from MCI to AD (Schreiber et al., 2015; Sörensen et al., 2020; Trzepacz et al., 2014), highlighting the necessity of using biomarker-confirmed diagnostic groups to ensure analyses are appropriately capturing the AD spectrum. It is also important to note another subset of participants, those with subjective memory complaints, who do not meet the criteria for MCI or AD. These patients may be in the very early stages of dementia and may go on to develop MCI or AD. Considering these rates of progression, future studies should consider longitudinal designs to be able to fully capture the spectrum of cognitive deficits and how they progress from subjective memory complaints, to MCI and eventually AD. Additionally, APOE genotype is important to consider in study design. In fact, presence of the ε4 allele is the strongest genetic risk factor for late-onset AD (&gt;65 years; Bu, 2009). While 9 - 20% of the general population are thought to be carriers of this allele, this frequency increases to nearly 40% in patients with AD (Farrer, 1997). These ε4 carrier patients have also been shown to have more dramatic decrements in cognitive function and associated neuropathology, including Aβ deposition (Liu et al., 2013; Vemuri et al., 2009). While APOE genotype is not confirmatory for or necessary for the development of AD, this subset of patients is important to consider in study design. For a review of APOE genotype and its relationship to AD risk factors, see Liu et al, 2013.

Secondly, special consideration should be paid to task design in these studies. Though resting-state is valuable for measuring altered spontaneous activity, task-based studies are imperative to understanding the complex neural dynamics underlying the cognitive functions most affected in these populations. Therefore, it is important to design tasks which are adequately challenging to properly analyze target cognitive processes, however, these tasks must be calibrated appropriately to the population to achieve sufficient accuracy across all participants. Specifically, this may include using fewer distractors in tasks such as attention and Sternberg working memory paradigms or using fewer challenging conditions in tasks such as N-back (e.g., 0- and 1-back rather than 2- or 3-back conditions). Additionally, when designing tasks for any population, one must consider the balance of trial length, total number of trials, and overall task time. These aspects of task design are particularly important to consider in participants with cognitive impairments because these individuals may require extended trial lengths to account for delayed response times. However, they are also more prone to task-related fatigue and restlessness, necessitating shorter overall task lengths. Further, if a task is too long, cognitively impaired participants may forget task instructions, though this can be avoided by including regular prompts throughout the task to remind participants of the task instructions. Additionally, decreasing the number of total trials to keep the overall task time at an appropriate length can result in a decreased signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) for the underlying electrophysiological response. Taken together, researchers must carefully weigh each of these task parameters to ensure that cognitively impaired participants are able to complete the task, while also obtaining enough data to ensure an adequate SNR. One recent example of such a task was provided by Wiesman and colleagues, who implemented a novel visuospatial processing task that was easiest enough for all participants to complete, while still eliciting robust neural responses in in visual, spatial, and attention processing regions (Wiesman et al., 2021c).

Third, study design and analysis methods should attempt to use spatially, spectrally, and temporally precise techniques. Historically, the analysis of electrophysiologic dysfunction in subjects along the AD spectrum has been done using EEG ERP analyses. While these ERP analyses have proven quite useful, they are usually performed on time-domain averaged, bandpass-filtered data thus resulting in a loss of spectrally specific information and non-phase locked oscillatory activity. Recently, there has been a greater interest in analyzing M/EEG data using spectrally resolved approaches, thus respecting the differential frequency band specific changes throughout the AD spectrum. Spectrally resolved analyses of subjects along the AD spectrum are critical, considering that the pathophysiology features of AD would be expected to affect some oscillatory frequencies more than others. For example, gamma band oscillations (&gt; 30 Hz) are known to be critical for a variety of cognitive functions, including sensory processing, working memory, and attention (Başar et al., 2016; Jensen et al., 2007; Palop and Mucke, 2016), and gamma oscillations are generally produced through the coordinated action of GABAergic interneurons (Başar et al., 2016; Palop and Mucke, 2016). Interestingly, AD-related amyloid β (Aβ) and hyperphosphorylated tau (h-tau) have been linked to interneuron dysfunction, leading to inhibitory/excitatory imbalances and abnormal gamma band oscillatory activity (Garcia-Marin, 2009; Kocagoncu et al., 2020; Kurudenkandy et al., 2014; Rochart et al., 2020). As such, it would be expected that subjects along the AD spectrum would exhibit gamma-specific aberrations. Critically, most ERP analyses are insensitive to gamma band activity due to low pass filtering the raw signal to frequencies less than 30 Hz and/or the nature of time domain averaging (i.e., gamma activity is rarely phase-locked to the stimulus and thus can be eliminated via time-domain averaging). Additionally, AD is associated with loss of cholinergic pathways. It has been demonstrated that these cholinergic dysregulations lead to frequency-specific aberrations in theta (4-7 Hz) activity, with Yener and colleagues showing that untreated patients with AD, relative to controls and patients treated with cholinesterase inhibitors, exhibit increased theta oscillatory responses in parietal and occipital regions with weaker theta band phase-locking (Yener et al., 2009, 2007).

Finally, despite several advancements made in the field of AD research over the last decade, AD health disparities are still rampant with the disease disproportionately affecting women (Nichols et al., 2022; Rajan et al., 2021) and minority communities (Black and Hispanic Americans relative to their White American counterparts; (Demirovic et al., 2003; Dilworth-Anderson et al., 2008; Harwood and Ownby, 2000; Mayeda et al., 2016; Perkins et al., 1997; Power et al., 2021; Rajan et al., 2021; Steenland et al., 2015)), both in disease incidence and caretaking burden globally (i.e., US &amp; Canada; (Olson and Albensi, 2020); Europe; (Nielsen et al., 2011); China &amp; Taiwan; (Wu et al., 2018); Sub-Saharan Africa; (Alzheimer’s Disease International, 2017)). Higher dementia risks are associated with several health (i.e., cardiovascular health, diabetes; (Glymour and Manly, 2008; RTI International and Lines, 2014)) and socioeconomic factors (i.e., education levels, poverty rates, exposure to discrimination, environmental pollutants, job security; (Alzheimer’s Disease International, 2017; Glymour and Manly, 2008; RTI International and Lines, 2014; Weuve et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2016)) known to disproportionately affect minority communities. Specific to the United States, recent estimates suggest that up to 18.6% of older Black Americans and 14% of older Hispanic Americans live with AD relative to the 10% of older White Americans (Rajan et al., 2021). Regarding sex disparities, 3.8 million women over the age of 65 in the US live with AD relative to 2.4 million men of the same age (Rajan et al., 2021). A compounding issue predominately facing minority communities, namely the Black and Hispanic American populations, is the number of missed AD diagnoses, which can considerably increase the burden of the disease (Clark et al., 2005; Fitten et al., 2001; Gianattasio et al., 2019).

Important work has been conducted to identify weak points in the current research and clinical infrastructures of the United States, and guidelines have been put forth to address such structural issues and health disparities. Recruitment into clinical trials needs to be diversified to be representative of the population demographics suffering from AD. Historically, clinical trials have enrolled primarily older non-Hispanic Whites (Denny et al., 2020; Ejiogu et al., 2011; National Institute on Aging, 2018). For the scientific community to reach diverse communities, the National Institute of Aging has suggested partnering with trusted community-based organizations to build trust and relationships between the scientific/medical community and minority communities (National Institute on Aging, 2018; U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 2020). For example, of the studies included in this review, only two had mention of the race and ethnic makeup of their participant sample and these two studies reported predominately Caucasian participants. This exemplifies the glaring need to not only recruit diverse populations for inclusion in these studies, but also to report the ethnoracial makeup of study participants and consider these factors in analyses. Lastly, by addressing structural inequities in the educational system, a more diverse group of physicians can be trained, which is crucial for primary care and the identification and treatment of AD. Black and Native Americans are more likely than White Americans to serve in medically underserved areas (Association of American Medical Colleges, 2019); therefore, addressing educational disparities could increase culturally appropriate communication and mutually beneficial relationships between minority and the scientific/medical communities (Association of American Medical Colleges, 2019; U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 2020).

6. Conclusions

To conclude, this review has examined task-based M/EEG studies spanning the last decade with a focus on attention, memory, and executive functioning paradigms. Widespread alterations in cortical activity have been reported in people with MCI and AD, and we have attempted to coalesce these data and outline important next steps for the advancement of task-based studies of these populations, including but not limited to considerations of task design, recruitment practices, and the benefits of oscillatory analyses. Future work should also aim to replicate prior work using larger samples and more rigorous methodological approaches when and where possible. As the population ages, the importance of broadening our understanding of the AD spectrum will continue to climb, and electrophysiological neuroimaging methods will be at the forefront of biomarker development and giving the scientific community an important tool for examining the cortical processes underlying this disease’s progression.

Supplementary Material

1

Funding Acknowledgement

This research was supported by the National Institutes of Health (R01-MH103220, R01-MH116782-S1, R01- MH116782-S2, R01-MH118013-S1, RF1-MH117032, and P20-GM144641).

Abbreviations:

MEG magnetoencephalography

EEG electroencephalography

AD Alzheimer’s disease

MCI mild cognitive impairment

aMCI amnestic mild cognitive impairment

Table 1: Characteristics of included studies.

Reference	Modality	Diagnostic
Groups	Sample
Size	Task (Domain
of Stimuli)	Analysis
Method
(Sensor-vs.
Source-
level)	Analysis
Domain
(Time vs.
Spectral)	
Memory – Working Memory	
Deiber et al., 2015	EEG	HC vs. MCI	97 HC
45 MCI	N-back (Verbal)	Sensor	Time; Spectral	
Fraga et al., 2018	EEG	HC vs. MCI vs. AD	27 HC
21 MCI
15 AD	N-back (Numeric)	Sensor	Time; Spectral	
Goodman et al., 2019	EEG	HC vs. MCI vs. AD	31 HC
34 MCI
33 AD	N-back (Verbal)	Sensor	Spectral	
Gu et al., 2018	EEG	HC vs. MCI vs. AD	40 HC
100 MCI
29 AD	N-back (Verbal)	Sensor	Spectral	
Gu et al., 2018	EEG	HC vs. aMCI	46 HC
39 aMCI	N-back (Spatial)	Sensor	Time	
* Kumar et al., 2017	EEG	HC vs. AD	16 HC
32 AD	N-back (Verbal)	Sensor	-	
* Kumar et al., 2020	EEG	AD	16 AD w/PAS
16 AD no PAS	N-back (Verbal)	Sensor	-	
Ahmadlou et al., 2014	MEG	HC vs. MCI	19 HC
18 MCI	Modified Sternberg (Verbal)	Sensor	Spectral	
Bajo et al., 2010	MEG	HC vs. MCI	19 HC
22 MCI	Modified Sternberg (Verbal)	Sensor	Spectral	
Bajo et al., 2012	MEG	HC vs. MCI vs. SMC	25 HC
19 MCI
12 SMC	Modified Sternberg (Verbal)	Sensor	Spectral	
Buldú et al., 2011	MEG	HC vs. MCI	19 HC
19 MCI	Modified Sternberg (Verbal)	Sensor	Spectral	
Fodor et al., 2018	EEG	HC vs. MCI	21 HC
17 MCI	Sternberg (Numeric)	Source	Spectral	
Kurimoto et al., 2012	MEG	HC vs. MCI vs. early AD	14 HC
13 aMCI
13 early AD	Modified Sternberg (Numeric)	Source	Spectral	
Maestú et al., 2011a	MEG	HC vs. MCI vs. AD	17 HC
10 MCI
10 AD	Modified Sternberg (Verbal)	Source	Time	
Maestú et al., 2011b	MEG	HC vs. MCI vs. SMC	18 HC
21 MCI
12 SMC	Modified Sternberg (Verbal)	Source	Time	
Memory – Short-term Memory	
Deiber et al., 2011	EEG	HC vs aMCI (sd and md)	36 HC
43 aMCI (16 sdaMCI; 27 mdaMCI)	Delayed-Match-to-Sample Task (Face/Letter)	Sensor	Time	
Josefsson et al., 2019	EEG	HC vs. MCI	19 HC
13 MCI	Visual Short Term Memory (Shapes)	Sensor	Spectral	
Park et al., 2012	EEG	HC vs. MCI	19 HC
16 MCI	Delayed-Match-to-Sample (Spatial)	Sensor	Spectral	
Pietto et al., 2016	EEG	HC vs. MCI vs. MCI-FAD	28 HC
13 MCI
10 MCI-FAD	Visual Short Term Memory (Shapes)	Sensor	Time	
Serrano et al., 2020	MEG	HC vs. SCD vs. MCI	49 HC
49 SCD
45 MCI	Delayed-Match-to-Sample (Faces)	Source	Spectral	
Timothy et al., 2017	EEG	HC vs. MCI	18 HC
18 MCI	Auditory Story Narration	Sensor	Time	
Memory – Declarative Memory	
Aine et al., 2010 ‡	MEG	HC vs. aMCI or probable AD	18 HC
12 aMCI	Adapted Warrington Recognition Memory Test (Auditory-Verbal)	Source	Time	
Prieto del Val et al., 2015	EEG	HC vs. aMCI (APOE e4 carriers vs. non-carriers)	26 HC
34 aMCI (16 e4 carriers, 18 non-carriers)	Biographical Matching Task (Semantic/Face)	Sensor; Source	Time; Spectral	
Prieto del Val et al., 2016	EEG	HC vs. stable aMCI vs. converted MCI	26 HC
18 stable aMCI
16 MCI converters	Biographical Matching Task (Semantic/Face)	Sensor; Source	Spectral	
Attention – Selective Attention	
Cespón et al., 2013	EEG	HC vs. sdaMCI vs. mdaMCI	25 HC
17 sdaMCI
13 mdaMCI	Simon Task (Arrow-based)	Sensor	Time	
Cespón et al., 2015	EEG	HC vs. sdaMCI vs. mdaMCI	18 HC
13 sdaMCI
12 mdaMCI	Simon Task (Arrow-based)	Sensor	Time	
Chen et al., 2020	EEG	HC vs. aMCI	28 HC
28 aMCI	Erikson Flanker Task (Arrow-based)	Sensor	Spectral	
Meehan et al., 2023	MEG	HC vs. aMCI and AD	30 HC
22 aMCI and AD	Erikson Flanker Task (Arrow-based)	Source	Spectral	
Wei et al., 2015	EEG	HC vs. MCI	17 HC
10 MCI	Selective Attention (Shapes)	Sensor	Spectral	
Attention – Sustained Attention	
Waninger et al., 2018	EEG	HC vs. MCI	17 HC
18 MCI	3-Choice Vigilance Task (Shapes)	Sensor	Time	
Attention – Multi-Object Processing	
Bagattini et al., 2017	EEG	HC vs. MCI vs. AD	20 HC
16 MCI
20 AD	Enumeration paradigm (Shapes)	Sensor	Time	
Executive Function – Response Inhibition	
Cid-Fernandez et al., 2014	EEG	HC vs. aMCI	63 HC
30 aMCI	Go/NoGo (Numeric, Verbal, Shapes) w/ Auditory component	Sensor	Time	
Mudar et al., 2016	EEG	HC vs. MCI	25 HC
25 MCI	Go/NoGo (Single Car and Object Animal)	Sensor	Time	
Mudar et al., 2019	EEG	MCI	32 MCI	Go/NoGo (Single Car and Object Animal)	Sensor	Spectral	
Nguyen et al., 2017	EEG	HC vs. MCI	22 HC
22 MCI	Go/NoGo (Single Car and Object Animal)	Sensor	Spectral	
Abbreviations: EEG: electroencephalography; MEG: Magnetoencephalography; HC: Healthy controls; MCI: Mild Cognitive Impairment; aMCI: amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment; sd: single domain; md: multiple domain; AD: Alzheimer’s disease; SMC: subjective memory complaints; SCD: subjective cognitive decline; FAD: familial AD carrying the mutation E280A of the presenilin-1 gene; PAS: Paired association stimulation.

Articles had to meet the following criteria to be included in this review: (1) The study analyzed task-based imaging of a memory, attention, or executive function paradigms; (2) Statistical analyses were conducted; (3) The article was published in 2010 or later; (4) The diagnostic groups had at least 10 participants each; (5) The participant groups included at least one MCI or AD group; (6) The article was accessible to our team of researchers.

* These two articles were not discussed fully due to the use of peripheral and central stimulation paradigms making interpretation and integration here difficult.

‡ Aine et al., 2010 is the only study to utilize purely auditory stimuli. All other studies used visual stimuli.

Table 2: Relevant Definitions.

Relevant Definitions:	
Event-related Potentials (ERP)	A measured neural response to a specific stimulus (i.e., visual, motor, auditory) or other event of interest (i.e., cognitive task). These time domain averaged signals represent time-locked changes in electrical potential, as measured by EEG. These are homologous to the event-related fields (ERF) measured by MEG.	
Neural Oscillations	Rhythmic patterns of neural activity which represents fluctuations in the band-limited power of electrical activity across a neuronal population. This activity can generally be grouped into five canonical frequency bands: delta (2-4 Hz), theta (4-7 Hz), alpha (8-12 Hz), beta (15-30 Hz), gamma (&gt;30 Hz).	
Event-related Desynchronization (ERD)	A measure of neural oscillatory activity representing a decrease in power or a desynchronization of ongoing neural oscillations in a frequency band of interest in response to a stimulus. This decrease in power, or desynchronization, does not indicate a decrease in neural activity and is often considered to be an activation of a given neural population, especially in the context of occipital alpha (vision) and motor beta (movement).	
Event-related Synchronization (ERS)	A measure of neural oscillatory activity representing an increase in power or a synchronization of ongoing neural oscillations in a frequency band of interest in response to a stimulus.	
Functional Connectivity (FC)	The extent to which activity in two brain regions correlates or covaries over time. Many different measures of functional connectivity can be used and are described in detail in the text, where applicable.	
Intertrial Coherence	A measure of how consistent the phase of a given oscillatory response is across trials. Note that the trial-to-trial comparisons are performed using the same time bin (i.e., time since stimulus onset).	

Table 3: Current limitations in the field and specific recommendations.

Current Limitation:	Recommendation:	
-Limited use of cognitive tasks and reliance on resting-state paradigms	-Utilize appropriately designed tasks as these studies are feasible and highly valuable	
-Poor task design (i.e., tasks are too difficult for target population, stimulus timing does not allow for accurate capture of neural responses, tasks are too long)	-Design tasks which are adequately challenging, though calibrated properly to the population to achieve sufficient accuracy	
-Biomarker-confirmation of patients not performed	-Use amyloid positron emission tomography (PET) or examine CSF to quantify biomarkers, especially to confirm proper diagnostic status for MCI patients.	
-Dependence on EEG/ERP analyses	-Increase the use of spatially, spectrally, and temporally precise techniques (e.g., MEG using source-level and spectral domain analyses)	
-Discrepancies between study sample demographics and true population affected by AD	-Diversify recruitment into research studies and clinical trials to be representative of the population demographics suffering from AD.
-Targeting structural inequities in the educational system to promote a more diverse population of physicians.	

Highlights

Alzheimer’s spectrum disorders are severely debilitating and highly prevalent

Past neuroimaging reviews have focused on fMRI/PET data, typically resting state

We focus on task-based work using the millisecond precision of electrophysiology

Extensive recent work has focused on memory, attention, and executive function

We integrate these works and provide guidance for optimal task design in the future

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Declarations of interest: none

Conflicts of Interest

The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.

Declaration of Competing Interest

None


References

Ahmadlou M , Adeli A , Bajo R , Adeli H , 2014. Complexity of functional connectivity networks in mild cognitive impairment subjects during a working memory task. Clin. Neurophysiol 125 , 694–702. 10.1016/j.clinph.2013.08.033 24405905
Aine CJ , Bryant JE , Knoefel JE , Adair JC , Hart B , Donahue CH , Montaño R , Hayek R , Qualls C , Ranken D , Stephen JM , 2010. Different strategies for auditory word recognition in healthy versus normal aging. Neuroimage 49 , 3319–3330. 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.11.068 19962439
Alescio-Lautier B , Michel BF , Herrera C , Elahmadi A , Chambon C , Touzet C , Paban V , 2007. Visual and visuospatial short-term memory in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer disease: Role of attention. Neuropsychologia 45 , 1948–1960. 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2006.04.033 17275041
Alzheimer’s Association, 2021. 2021 Alzheimer’s Disease Facts and Figures (Special Report No. 17 (3 )).
Alzheimer’s Disease International, 2017. Dementia in sub-Saharan Africa: Challenges and opportunities 69 .
Amieva H , Letenneur L , Dartigues J-F , Rouch-Leroyer I , Sourgen C , D’Alchée-Birée F , Dib M , Barberger-Gateau P , Orgogozo J-M , Fabrigoule C , 2004a. Annual Rate and Predictors of Conversion to Dementia in Subjects Presenting Mild Cognitive Impairment Criteria Defined according to a Population-Based Study. Dement. Geriatr. Cogn. Disord 18 , 87–93. 10.1159/000077815 15087583
Amieva H , Letenneur L , Dartigues J-F , Rouch-Leroyer I , Sourgen C , D’Alchée-Birée F , Dib M , Barberger-Gateau P , Orgogozo J-M , Fabrigoule C , 2004b. Annual Rate and Predictors of Conversion to Dementia in Subjects Presenting Mild Cognitive Impairment Criteria Defined according to a Population-Based Study. Dement. Geriatr. Cogn. Disord 18 , 87–93. 10.1159/000077815 15087583
Arnáiz E , Jelic V , Almkvist O , Wahlund L-O , Winblad B , Valind S , Nordberg A , 2001. Impaired cerebral glucose metabolism and cognitive functioning predict deterioration in mild cognitive impairment: Neuroreport 12 , 851–855. 10.1097/00001756-200103260-00045 11277595
Association of American Medical Colleges, 2019. Diversity in Medicine: Facts and Figures 2019. Association of American Medical Colleges.
Baddeley AD , Baddeley HA , Bucks RS , Wilcock GK , 2001. Attentional control in Alzheimer’s disease. Brain 124 , 1492–1508. 10.1093/brain/124.8.1492 11459742
Bagattini C , Mazza V , Panizza L , Ferrari C , Bonomini C , Brignani D , 2017. Neural Dynamics of Multiple Object Processing in Mild Cognitive Impairment and Alzheimer’s Disease: Future Early Diagnostic Biomarkers? J. Alzheimers Dis 59 , 643–654. 10.3233/JAD-161274 28671112
Bajo R , Castellanos NP , López ME , Ruiz JM , Montejo P , Montenegro M , Llanero M , Gil P , Yubero R , Baykova E , Paul N , Aurtenetxe S , Del Pozo F , Maestu F , 2012. Early dysfunction of functional connectivity in healthy elderly with subjective memory complaints. AGE 34 , 497–506. 10.1007/s11357-011-9241-5 21468670
Bajo R , Maestú F , Nevado A , Sancho M , Gutiérrez R , Campo P , Castellanos NP , Gil P , Moratti S , Pereda E , del-Pozo F , 2010. Functional Connectivity in Mild Cognitive Impairment During a Memory Task: Implications for the Disconnection Hypothesis. J. Alzheimers Dis 22 , 183–193. 10.3233/JAD-2010-100177 20847450
Başar E , Emek-Savaş DD , Güntekin B , Yener GG , 2016. Delay of cognitive gamma responses in Alzheimer’s disease. Neuroimage Clin. 11 , 106–115. 10.1016/j.nicl.2016.01.015 26937378
Belleville S , Bherer L , Lepage É , Chertkow H , Gauthier S , 2008. Task switching capacities in persons with Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment. Neuropsychologia 46 , 2225–2233. 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2008.02.012 18374374
Bierbrauer A , Kunz L , Gomes CA , Luhmann M , Deuker L , Getzmann S , Wascher E , Gajewski PD , Hengstler JG , Fernandez-Alvarez M , Atienza M , Cammisuli DM , Bonatti F , Pruneti C , Percesepe A , Bellaali Y , Hanseeuw B , Strange BA , Cantero JL , Axmacher N , 2020. Unmasking selective path integration deficits in Alzheimer’s disease risk carriers. Sci. Adv 6 , eaba1394. 10.1126/sciadv.aba1394 32923622
Bokde A , Karmann M , Born C , Teipel S , Omerovic M , Ewers M , Frodl T , Meisenzahl E , Reiser M , Moller H , Hampel H , 2010. Altered Brain Activation during a Verbal Working Memory Task in Subjects with Amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 21 , 103–118. 10.3233/JAD-2010-091054
Bokde ALW , Lopez-Bayo P , Born C , Dong W , Meindl T , Leinsinger G , Teipel SJ , Faltraco F , Reiser M , Möller H-J , Hampel H , 2008. Functional abnormalities of the visual processing system in subjects with mild cognitive impairment: an fMRI study. Psychiatry Res. 163 , 248–259. 10.1016/j.pscychresns.2007.08.013 18672352
Born HA , 2015. Seizures in Alzheimer’s disease. Neuroscience 286 , 251–263. 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.11.051 25484360
Bu G , 2009. Apolipoprotein E and its receptors in Alzheimer’s disease: pathways, pathogenesis and therapy. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 10 , 333–344. 10.1038/nrn2620 19339974
Buchhave P , Stomrud E , Warkentin S , Blennow K , Minthon L , Hansson O , 2008. Cube Copying Test in Combination with rCBF or CSF Aβ42Predicts Development of Alzheimer’s Disease. Dement. Geriatr. Cogn. Disord 25 , 544–552. 10.1159/000137379 18535375
Buldú JM , Bajo R , Maestú F , Castellanos N , Leyva I , Gil P , Sendiña-Nadal I , Almendral JA , Nevado A , del-Pozo F , Boccaletti S , 2011. Reorganization of Functional Networks in Mild Cognitive Impairment. PLoS ONE 6 , e19584. 10.1371/journal.pone.0019584 21625430
Casagrande C , Wiesman A , Schantell M , Johnson H , Wolfson S , Johnson C , May P , Swindells S , Murman D , Wilson T , 2022. Signatures of Somatosensory Cortical Dysfunction in Alzheimer’s Disease and HIV-Associated Neurocognitive Disorder. Brain Communications In Press.
Cespón J , Galdo-Álvarez S , Díaz F , 2013. Electrophysiological Correlates of Amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment in a Simon Task. PLoS ONE 8 , e81506. 10.1371/journal.pone.0081506 24339941
Cespón J , Galdo-Álvarez S , Pereiro AX , Díaz F , 2014. Differences between Mild Cognitive Impairment Subtypes as Indicated by Event-Related Potential Correlates of Cognitive and Motor Processes in a Simon Task. J. Alzheimers Dis 43 , 631–647. 10.3233/JAD-132774
Chen Y , He H , Xu P , Wang J , Qiu Y , Feng W , Luo Y , Hu L , Guan Q , 2020. The Weakened Relationship Between Prestimulus Alpha Oscillations and Response Time in Older Adults with Mild Cognitive Impairment. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 14 . 10.3389/fnhum.2020.00048
Cid-Fernández S , Lindin M , Díaz F , 2013. Effects of Amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment on N2 and P3 Go/NoGo ERP Components. J. Alzheimers Dis 38 , 295–306. 10.3233/JAD-130677
Clark PC , Kutner NG , Goldstein FC , Peterson-Hazen S , Garner V , Zhang R , Bowles T , 2005. Impediments to Timely Diagnosis of Alzheimer’s Disease in African Americans: AD DIAGNOSIS IN AFRICAN AMERICANS. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc 53 , 2012–2017. 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2005.53569.x 16274388
Collette F , Salmon E , Van der Linden M , Degueldre C , Franck G , 1997. Functional anatomy of verbal and visuospatial span tasks in Alzheimer’s disease. Hum. Brain Mapp 5 , 110–118. 10.1002/(SICI)1097-0193(1997)5:2&lt;110::AID-HBM4&gt;3.0.CO;2-6 10096415
Coughlan G , Laczó J , Hort J , Minihane A-M , Hornberger M , 2018. Spatial navigation deficits — overlooked cognitive marker for preclinical Alzheimer disease? Nat. Rev. Neurol. 14 , 496–506. 10.1038/s41582-018-0031-x 29980763
de Haan W , Stam C , Jones B , Zuiderwijk I , van Dijk B , Scheltens P , 2008. Resting-State Oscillatory Brain Dynamics in Alzheimer Disease. Journal of Clinical Neurophysiology 25 , 187–193. 10.1097/WNP.0b013e31817da184 18677182
Deiber M , Ibanez V , Herrmann F , Rodriquez C , Emch J , Missonnier P , Millet P , Gold G , Giannakopoulos P , 2011. Face Short-Term Memory-Related Electroencephalographic Patterns can Differentiate Multi-versus Single-Domain Amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 26 , 157–169. 10.3233/JAD-2011-110170
Deiber M , Meziane H , Hasler R , Rodriquez C , Toma S , Ackermann M , Herrmann F , Giannakopoulos P , 2015. Attention and Working Memory-Related EEG Markers of Subtle Cognitive Deterioration in Healthy Elderly Individuals. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 47 , 335–349. 10.3233/JAD-150111
Demirovic J , Prineas R , Loewenstein D , Bean J , Duara R , Sevush S , Szapocznik J , 2003. Prevalence of Dementia in Three Ethnic Groups. Ann. Epidemiol 13 , 472–478. 10.1016/S1047-2797(02)00437-4 12875807
Denny A , Streitz M , Stock K , Balls-Berry JE , Barnes LL , Byrd GS , Croff R , Gao S , Glover CM , Hendrie HC , Hu WT , Manly JJ , Moulder KL , Stark S , Thomas SB , Whitmer R , Wong R , Morris JC , Lingler JH , 2020. Perspective on the “African American participation in Alzheimer disease research: Effective strategies” workshop, 2018. Alzheimers Dement. 16 , 1734–1744. 10.1002/alz.12160 33034414
Di L , Oliviero A , Pilato F , Saturno E , Dileone M , Marra C , Daniele A , Ghirlanda S , Gainotti G , Tonali P , 2004. Motor cortex hyperexcitability to transcranial magnetic stimulation in Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 75 , 555–559. 10.1136/jnnp.2003.018127 15026495
Di Paola M , Macaluso E , Carlesimo GA , Tomaiuolo F , Worsley KJ , Fadda L , Caltagirone C , 2007. Episodic memory impairment in patients with Alzheimer’s disease is correlated with entorhinal cortex atrophy. J. Neurol 254 , 774–781. 10.1007/s00415-006-0435-1 17404777
Dilworth-Anderson P , Hendrie HC , Manly JJ , Khachaturian AS , Fazio S , 2008. Diagnosis and assessment of Alzheimer’s disease in diverse populations. Alzheimers Dement. 4 , 305–309. 10.1016/j.jalz.2008.03.001 18631983
Dubois B , Feldman HH , Jacova C , DeKosky ST , Barberger-Gateau P , Cummings J , Delacourte A , Galasko D , Gauthier S , Jicha G , Meguro K , O’Brien J , Pasquier F , Robert P , Rossor M , Salloway S , Stern Y , Visser PJ , Scheltens P , 2007. Research criteria for the diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease: revising the NINCDS–ADRDA criteria. Lancet Neurol. 6 , 734–746. 10.1016/S1474-4422(07)70178-3 17616482
Ejiogu N , Norbeck JH , Mason MA , Cromwell BC , Zonderman AB , Evans MK , 2011. Recruitment and Retention Strategies for Minority or Poor Clinical Research Participants: Lessons From the Healthy Aging in Neighborhoods of Diversity Across the Life Span Study. The Gerontologist 51 , S33–S45. 10.1093/geront/gnr027 21565817
Engels MMA , van der Flier WM , Stam CJ , Hillebrand A , Scheltens Ph. , van Straaten ECW , 2017. Alzheimer’s disease: The state of the art in resting-state magnetoencephalography. Clin. Neurophysiol 128 , 1426–1437. 10.1016/j.clinph.2017.05.012 28622527
Eriksen BA , Eriksen CW , 1974. Effects of noise letters upon the identification of a target letter in a nonsearch task. Percept. Psychophys 16 , 143–149. 10.3758/BF03203267
Farias ST , Mungas D , Reed BR , Harvey D , DeCarli C , 2009. Progression of Mild Cognitive Impairment to Dementia in Clinic- vs Community-Based Cohorts. Arch. Neurol 66 . 10.1001/archneurol.2009.106
Farrer LA , 1997. Effects of Age, Sex, and Ethnicity on the Association Between Apolipoprotein E Genotype and Alzheimer Disease: A Meta-analysis. JAMA 278 , 1349. 10.1001/jama.1997.03550160069041 9343467
Ferguson HJ , Brunsdon VEA , Bradford EEF , 2021. The developmental trajectories of executive function from adolescence to old age. Sci. Rep 11 , 1382. 10.1038/s41598-020-80866-1 33446798
Fernandez A , Maestu F , Amo C , Gil P , Fehr T , Wienbruch C , Rockstroh B , Elbert T , Ortiz T , 2002. Focal Temporoparietal Slow Activity in Alzheimer’s Disease Revealed by Magnetoencephalography. Biological Psychiatry 52 , 764–770. 10.1016/S0006-3223(02)01366-5 12372668
Ferreri F , Pauri F , Pasqualetti P , Fini R , Dal Forno G , Rossini PM , 2003. Motor cortex excitability in Alzheimer’s disease: A transcranial magnetic stimulation study. Ann. Neurol 53 , 102–108. 10.1002/ana.10416 12509853
Fitten LJ , Ortiz F , Ponton M , 2001. Frequency of Alzheimer’s Disease and Other Dementias in a Community Outreach Sample of Hispanics. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc 49 , 1301–1308. 10.1046/j.1532-5415.2001.49257.x 11890488
Fodor Z , Sirály E , Horváth A , Salacz P , Hidasi Z , Csibri É , Szabó Á , Csukly G , 2018. Decreased Event-Related Beta Synchronization During Memory Maintenance Marks Early Cognitive Decline in Mild Cognitive Impairment. J. Alzheimers Dis 63 , 489–502. 10.3233/JAD-171079 29630552
Fox N , Warrington E , Seiffer A , Agnew S , Rossor M , 1998. Presymptomatic cognitive deficits in individuals at risk of familial Alzheimer’s disease. A longitudinal prospective study. Brain 121 , 1631–1639. 10.1093/brain/121.9.1631 9762953
Fraga F , Mamani G , Johns E , Tavares G , Falk T , Phillips N , 2018. Early Diagnosis of Mild Cognitive Impairment and Alzheimer’s with Event-Related Potentials and Event-Related Desynchronization in N-back Working Memory Tasks. Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 164 , 1–13. 10.1016/j.cmpb.2018.06.011 30195417
Furst AJ , Rabinovici GD , Rostomian AH , Steed T , Alkalay A , Racine C , Miller BL , Jagust WJ , 2012. Cognition, glucose metabolism and amyloid burden in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Aging 33 , 215–225. 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2010.03.011 20417582
Gainotti G , Marra C , Villa G , Parlato V , Chiarotti F , 1998. Sensitivity and specificity of some neuropsychological markers of Alzheimer dementia. Alzheimer Dis. Assoc. Disord 12 , 152–162. 10.1097/00002093-199809000-00006 9772017
Garcia-Marin V , 2009. Diminished perisomatic GABAergic terminals on cortical neurons adjacent to amyloid plaques. Front. Neuroanat 3 . 10.3389/neuro.05.028.2009
Gianattasio KZ , Prather C , Glymour MM , Ciarleglio A , Power MC , 2019. Racial disparities and temporal trends in dementia misdiagnosis risk in the United States. Alzheimers Dement. Transl. Res. Clin. Interv 5 , 891–898. 10.1016/j.trci.2019.11.008
Glymour MM , Manly JJ , 2008. Lifecourse Social Conditions and Racial and Ethnic Patterns of Cognitive Aging. Neuropsychol. Rev 18 , 223–254. 10.1007/s11065-008-9064-z 18815889
Golby A , Silverberg G , Race E , Gabrieli S , O’Shea J , Knierim K , Stebbins G , Gabrieli J , 2005. Memory Encoding in Alzheimer’s Disease: an fMRI Study of Explicit and Implicit Memory. Brain 128 , 773–787. 10.1093/brain/awh400 15705615
Goodman M , Kumar S , Zomorrodi R , Ghazala Z , Cheam A , Barr M , Daskalakis Z , Blumberger D , Fischer C , Flint A , Mah L , Herrmann N , Bowie C , Mulsant B , Rajji T , PACt-MD Study Group, 2018. Theta-Gamma Coupling and Working Memory in Alzheimer’s Dementia and Mild Cognitive Impairment. Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience 10 , 101. 10.3389/fnagi.2018.00101 29713274
Goodman M , Zomorrodi R , Kumar S , Barr M , Daskalakis Z , Blumberger D , Fischer C , Flint A , Mah L , Herrmann N , Pollock B , Bowie C , Mulsant B , Rajji T , PACt-MD Study Group, 2019. Changes in Theta but not Alpha Modulation Are Associated with Impairment in Working Memory in Alzheimer’s Disease and Mild Cognitive Impairment. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 68 . 10.3233/JAD-181195
Grober E , Hall CB , Lipton RB , Zonderman AB , Resnick SM , Kawas C , 2008. Memory impairment, executive dysfunction, and intellectual decline in preclinical Alzheimer’s disease. J. Int. Neuropsychol. Soc. JINS 14 , 266–278. 10.1017/S1355617708080302 18282324
Groth K , E. , 2000. Visual attention and aging. Front. Biosci 5 , d284. 10.2741/Groth 10704152
Grundman M , 2004. Mild Cognitive Impairment Can Be Distinguished From Alzheimer Disease and Normal Aging for Clinical Trials. Arch. Neurol 61 , 59. 10.1001/archneur.61.1.59 14732621
Gu L , Gao L , Shu H , Wang Z , Liu D , Yan Y , Li S , Zhang Z , 2018. Cognitive Reserve Modulates Attention Processes in Healthy Elderly and Amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment: An Event-Related Potential Study. Clinical Neurophysiology 129 , 198–207. 10.1016/j.clinph.2017.10.030 29190525
Hao J , Li Kuncheng , Li Ke , Zhang D , Wang W , Yang Y , Yan B , Shan B , Zhou X , 2005. Visual attention deficits in Alzheimer’s disease: an fMRI study. Neurosci. Lett 385 , 18–23. 10.1016/j.neulet.2005.05.028 15970381
Harwood DG , Ownby RL , 2000. Ethnicity and dementia. Curr. Psychiatry Rep 2 , 40–45. 10.1007/s11920-000-0040-4 11122930
Horvath A , 2018. EEG and ERP biomarkers of Alzheimer’s disease a critical review. Front. Biosci 23 , 183–220. 10.2741/4587
Horvath AA , Papp A , Zsuffa J , Szucs A , Luckl J , Radai F , Nagy F , Hidasi Z , Csukly G , Bares G , Kamondi A , 2021. Subclinical epileptiform activity accelerates the progression of Alzheimer’s disease: A long-term EEG study. Clin. Neurophysiol 132 , 1982–1989. 10.1016/j.clinph.2021.03.050 34034963
Huang C , Eidelberg D , Habeck C , Moeller J , Svensson L , Tarabula T , Julin P , 2007. Imaging markers of mild cognitive impairment: Multivariate analysis of CBF SPECT. Neurobiol. Aging 28 , 1062–1069. 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2006.05.017 16824650
Huang C , Wahlund L , Dierks T , Julin P , Winblad B , Jelic V , 2000. Discrimination of Alzheimer’s Disease and Mild Cognitive Impairment by Equivalent EEG Sources: a Cross-Sectional and Longitudinal Study. Clinical Neurophysiology 111 , 1961–1967. 10.1016/s1388-2457(00)00454-5 11068230
Huang C , Wahlund L-O , Almkvist O , Elehu D , Svensson L , Jonsson T , Winblad B , Julin P , 2003. Voxel- and VOI-based analysis of SPECT CBF in relation to clinical and psychological heterogeneity of mild cognitive impairment. Neuroimage 19 , 1137–1144. 10.1016/S1053-8119(03)00168-X 12880839
Ikeda Y , Kikuchi M , Noguchi-Shinohara M , Iwasa K , Kameya M , Hirosawa T , Yoshita M , Ono K , Samuraki-Yokohama M , Yamada M , 2020. Spontaneous MEG activity of the cerebral cortex during eyes closed and open discriminates Alzheimer’s disease from cognitively normal older adults. Sci. Rep 10 , 9132. 10.1038/s41598-020-66034-5 32499487
Jack CR , Bennett DA , Blennow K , Carrillo MC , Dunn B , Haeberlein SB , Holtzman DM , Jagust W , Jessen F , Karlawish J , Liu E , Molinuevo JL , Montine T , Phelps C , Rankin KP , Rowe CC , Scheltens P , Siemers E , Snyder HM , Sperling R , 2018. NIA-AA Research Framework: Toward a biological definition of Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement. J. Alzheimers Assoc 14 , 535–562. 10.1016/j.jalz.2018.02.018
Jacobs H , Gronenschild E , Evers E , Ramakers I , Hofman P , Backes W , Jolles J , Verhey F , Van Boxtel M , 2015. Visuospatial Processing in Early Alzheimer’s Disease: a Multimodal Neuroimaging Study. Cortex 64 , 394–406. 10.1016/j.cortex.2012.01.005 22342463
Jahn H , 2013. Memory Loss in Alzheimer’s Disease. Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience 15 , 445–454. 10.31887/DCNS.2013.15.4/hjahn 24459411
Jensen O , Kaiser J , Lachaux J-P , 2007. Human gamma-frequency oscillations associated with attention and memory. Trends Neurosci. 30 , 317–324. 10.1016/j.tins.2007.05.001 17499860
Josefsson A , Ibáñez A , Parra M , Escudero J , 2019. Network analysis through the use of joint-distribution entropy on EEG recordings of MCI patients during a visual short-term memory binding task. Healthc. Technol. Lett 6 , 27–31. 10.1049/htl.2018.5060 31119035
Kocagoncu E , Quinn A , Firouzian A , Cooper E , Greve A , Gunn R , Green G , Woolrich MW , Henson RN , Lovestone S , Rowe JB , 2020. Tau pathology in early Alzheimer’s disease is linked to selective disruptions in neurophysiological network dynamics. Neurobiol. Aging 92 , 141–152. 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2020.03.009 32280029
Kumar S , Zomorrodi R , Ghazala Z , Goodman M , Blumberger D , Cheam A , Fischer C , Daskalakis Z , Mulsant B , Pollock B , Rajji T , 2017. Extent of Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex Plasticity and Its Association with Working Memory in Patients with Alzheimer Disease. JAMA Psychiatry 74 , 1266–1274. 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2017.3292 29071355
Kumar S , Zomorrodi R , Ghazala Z , Goodman M , Blumberger D , Daskalakis Z , Fischer C , Mulsant B , Pollock B , Rajji T , 2020. Effects of Repetitive Paired Associative Stimulation on Brain Plasticity and Working Memory in Alzheimer’s Disease: a Pilot Randomized Double-Blind-Controlled Trial. Psychogeriatrics 1–13. 10.1017/S104161022003518
Kunz L , Schröder TN , Lee H , Montag C , Lachmann B , Sariyska R , Reuter M , Stirnberg R , Stöcker T , Messing-Floeter PC , Fell J , Doeller CF , Axmacher N , 2015. Reduced grid-cell–like representations in adults at genetic risk for Alzheimer’s disease. Science 350 , 430–433. 10.1126/science.aac8128 26494756
Kurimoto R , Ishii R , Canuet L , Ikezawa K , Iwase M , Azechi M , Aoki Y , Ikeda S , Yoshida T , Takahashi H , Nakahachi T , Kazui H , Takeda M , 2012. Induced oscillatory responses during the Sternberg’s visual memory task in patients with Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment. Neuroimage 59 , 4132–4140. 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.10.061 22047628
Kurudenkandy FR , Zilberter M , Biverstal H , Presto J , Honcharenko D , Stromberg R , Johansson J , Winblad B , Fisahn A , 2014. Amyloid- -Induced Action Potential Desynchronization and Degradation of Hippocampal Gamma Oscillations Is Prevented by Interference with Peptide Conformation Change and Aggregation. J. Neurosci 34 , 11416–11425. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1195-14.2014 25143621
Levinoff EJ , Saumier D , Chertkow H , 2005. Focused attention deficits in patients with Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment. Brain Cogn. 57 , 127–130. 10.1016/j.bandc.2004.08.058 15708202
Lew B , McDermott T , Wiesman A , O’Neill J , Mills M , Robertson K , Fox H , Swindells S , Wilson T , 2018. Neural Dynamics of Selective Attention Deficits in HIV-Associated Neurocognitive Disorder. Neurology 91 , e1860–e1869. 10.1212/wnl.0000000000006504 30333162
Lisman JE , Jensen O , 2013. The Theta-Gamma Neural Code. Neuron 77 , 1002–1016. 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.03.007 23522038
Liu C-C , Kanekiyo T , Xu H , Bu G , 2013. Apolipoprotein E and Alzheimer disease: risk, mechanisms and therapy. Nat. Rev. Neurol 9 , 106–118. 10.1038/nrneurol.2012.263 23296339
Machulda M , Ward H , Borowski B , Gunter J , Cha R , O’Brien P , Petersen R , Boeve B , Knopman D , Tang-Wai D , Ivnik R , Smith G , Tangalos E , Jack C Jr. , 2003. Comparison of Memory fMRI Response Among Normal, MCI, and Alzheimer’s Patients. Neurology 61 , 500–506. 10.1212/01.wnl.0000079052.01016.78 12939424
Maestu F , Baykova E , Ruiz JM , Montejo P , Montenegro M , Llanero M , Solesio E , Gil P , Yubero R , Paul N , Pozo F , Nevado A , 2011. Increased biomagnetic activity in healthy elderly with subjective memory complaints. Clin. Neurophysiol 122 , 499–505. 10.1016/j.clinph.2010.08.004 20826109
Maestú F , de Haan W , Busche MA , DeFelipe J , 2021. Neuronal excitation/inhibition imbalance: core element of a translational perspective on Alzheimer pathophysiology. Ageing Res. Rev 69 , 101372. 10.1016/j.arr.2021.101372 34029743
Maestú F , Yubero R , Moratti S , Campo P , Gil-Gregorio P , Paul N , Solesio E , del Pozo F , Nevado A , 2011. Brain Activity Patterns in Stable and Progressive Mild Cognitive Impairment During Working Memory as Evidenced by Magnetoencephalography. J. Clin. Neurophysiol 28 , 202–209. 10.1097/WNP.0b013e3182121743 21399524
Mandal PK , Banerjee A , Tripathi M , Sharma A , 2018. A Comprehensive Review of Magnetoencephalography (MEG) Studies for Brain Functionality in Healthy Aging and Alzheimer’s Disease (AD). Front. Comput. Neurosci 12 .
Mayeda ER , Glymour MM , Quesenberry CP , Whitmer RA , 2016. Inequalities in dementia incidence between six racial and ethnic groups over 14 years. Alzheimers Dement. 12 , 216–224. 10.1016/j.jalz.2015.12.007 26874595
McKhann GM , Knopman DS , Chertkow H , Hyman BT , Jack CR , Kawas CH , Klunk WE , Koroshetz WJ , Manly JJ , Mayeux R , Mohs RC , Morris JC , Rossor MN , Scheltens P , Carrillo MC , Thies B , Weintraub S , Phelps CH , 2011. The diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer’s disease: Recommendations from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement. J. Alzheimers Assoc 7 , 263–269. 10.1016/j.jalz.2011.03.005
Meehan CE , Schantell M , Wiesman AI , Wolfson SL , O’Neill J , Bares SH , Johnson CM , May PE , Murman DL , Wilson TW , 2023. Oscillatory markers of neuroHIV-related cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease during attentional interference processing. Aging 15 , 524–541. 10.18632/aging.204496 36656738
Michaud TL , Su D , Siahpush M , Murman DL , 2017. The Risk of Incident Mild Cognitive Impairment and Progression to Dementia Considering Mild Cognitive Impairment Subtypes. Dement. Geriatr. Cogn. Disord. Extra 7 , 15–29. 10.1159/000452486
Missonnier P , Deiber M-P , Gold G , Herrmann FR , Millet P , Michon A , Fazio-Costa L , Ibañez V , Giannakopoulos P , 2007. Working memory load–related electroencephalographic parameters can differentiate progressive from stable mild cognitive impairment. Neuroscience 150 , 346–356. 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2007.09.009 17996378
Missonnier P , Gold G , Fazio-Costa L , Michel J-P , Mulligan R , Michon A , Ibanez V , Giannakopoulos P , 2005. Early Event-Related Potential Changes During Working Memory Activation Predict Rapid Decline in Mild Cognitive Impairment. J. Gerontol. A. Biol. Sci. Med. Sci 60 , 660–666. 10.1093/gerona/60.5.660 15972621
Mitchell AJ , Shiri-Feshki M , 2009. Rate of progression of mild cognitive impairment to dementia - meta-analysis of 41 robust inception cohort studies. Acta Psychiatr. Scand 119 , 252–265. 10.1111/j.1600-0447.2008.01326.x 19236314
Morris JC , Storandt M , Miller JP , McKeel DW , Price JL , Rubin EH , Berg L , 2001. Mild Cognitive Impairment Represents Early-Stage Alzheimer Disease. Arch. Neurol 58 . 10.1001/archneur.58.3.397
Mudar RA , Chiang H-S , Eroh J , Nguyen LT , Maguire MJ , Spence JS , Kung F , Kraut MA , Hart J , 2016. The Effects of Amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment on Go/NoGo Semantic Categorization Task Performance and Event-Related Potentials. J. Alzheimers Dis 50 , 577–590. 10.3233/JAD-150586 26836634
Mudar RA , Nguyen LT , Eroh J , Chiang H-S , Rackley A , Chapman SB , 2019. Event-related neural oscillation changes following reasoning training in individuals with Mild Cognitive Impairment. Brain Res. 1704 , 229–240. 10.1016/j.brainres.2018.10.017 30342001
Nakamura A , Cuesta P , Fernández A , Arahata Y , Iwata K , Kuratsubo I , Bundo M , Hattori H , Sakurai T , Fukuda K , Washimi Y , Endo H , Takeda A , Diers K , Bajo R , Maestú F , Ito K , Kato T , 2018. Electromagnetic signatures of the preclinical and prodromal stages of Alzheimer’s disease. Brain 141 , 1470–1485. 10.1093/brain/awy044 29522156
National Institute on Aging, 2018. Together We Make the Difference: National Strategy for Recruitment and Participation in Alzheimer’s and Related Dementias Clinical Research. National Institute on Aging.
Nestor P , Caine D , Fryer T , Clarke J , Hodges J , 2003. The topography of metabolic deficits in posterior cortical atrophy (the visual variant of Alzheimer’s disease) with FDG-PET. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 74 , 1521–1529. 10.1136/jnnp.74.ll.1521 14617709
Nguyen LT , Mudar RA , Chiang H-S , Schneider JM , Maguire MJ , Kraut MA , Hart J , 2017. Theta and Alpha Alterations in Amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment in Semantic Go/NoGo Tasks. Front. Aging Neurosci 9 , 160. 10.3389/fnagi.2017.00160 28588479
Nichols E , Steinmetz JD , Vollset SE , Fukutaki K , Chalek J , Abd-Allah F , Abdoli A , Abualhasan A , Abu-Gharbieh E , Akram TT , Al Hamad H , Alahdab F , Alanezi FM , Alipour V , Almustanyir S , Amu H , Ansari I , Arabloo J , Ashraf T , Astell-Burt T , Ayano G , Ayuso-Mateos JL , Baig AA , Barnett A , Barrow A , Baune BT , Béjot Y , Bezabhe WMM , Bezabih YM , Bhagavathula AS , Bhaskar S , Bhattacharyya K , Bijani A , Biswas A , Bolla SR , Boloor A , Brayne C , Brenner H , Burkart K , Burns RA , Cámera LA , Cao C , Carvalho F , Castro-de-Araujo LFS , Catalá-López F , Cerin E , Chavan PP , Cherbuin N , Chu D-T , Costa VM , Couto RAS , Dadras O , Dai X , Dandona L , Dandona R , De la Cruz-Góngora V , Dhamnetiya D , Dias da Silva D , Diaz D , Douiri A , Edvardsson D , Ekholuenetale M , El Sayed I , El-Jaafary SI , Eskandari K , Eskandarieh S , Esmaeilnejad S , Fares J , Faro A , Farooque U , Feigin VL , Feng X , Fereshtehnejad S-M , Fernandes E , Ferrara P , Filip I , Fillit H , Fischer F , Gaidhane S , Galluzzo L , Ghashghaee A , Ghith N , Gialluisi A , Gilani SA , Glavan I-R , Gnedovskaya EV , Golechha M , Gupta R , Gupta VB , Gupta VK , Haider MR , Hall BJ , Hamidi S , Hanif A , Hankey GJ , Haque S , Hartono RK , Hasaballah AI , Hasan MT , Hassan A , Hay SI , Hayat K , Hegazy MI , Heidari G , Heidari-Soureshjani R , Herteliu C , Househ M , Hussain R , Hwang BF , Iacoviello L , Iavicoli I , Ilesanmi OS , Ilic IM , Ilic MD , Irvani SSN , Iso H , Iwagami M , Jabbarinejad R , Jacob L , Jain V , Jayapal SK , Jayawardena R , Jha RP , Jonas JB , Joseph N , Kalani R , Kandel A , Kandel H , Karch A , Kasa AS , Kassie GM , Keshavarz P , Khan MA , Khatib MN , Khoja TAM , Khubchandani J , Kim MS , Kim YJ , Kisa A , Kisa S , Kivimaäi M , Koroshetz WJ , Koyanagi A , Kumar GA , Kumar M , Lak HM , Leonardi M , Li B , Lim SS , Liu X , Liu Y , Logroscino G , Lorkowski S , Lucchetti G , Lutzky Saute R , Magnani FG , Malik AA , Massano J , Mehndiratta MM , Menezes RG , Meretoja A , Mohajer B , Mohamed Ibrahim N , Mohammad Y , Mohammed A , Mokdad AH , Mondello S , Moni MAA , Moniruzzaman M , Mossie TB , Nagel G , Naveed M , Nayak VC , Neupane Kandel S , Nguyen TH , Oancea B , Otstavnov N , Otstavnov SS , Owolabi MO , Panda-Jonas S , Pashazadeh Kan F , Pasovic M , Patel UK , Pathak M , Peres MFP , Perianayagam A , Peterson CB , Phillips MR , Pinheiro M , Piradov MA , Pond CD , Potashman MH , Pottoo FH , Prada SI , Radfar A , Raggi A , Rahim F , Rahman M , Ram P , Ranasinghe P , Rawaf DL , Rawaf S , Rezaei N , Rezapour A , Robinson SR , Romoli M , Roshandel G , Sahathevan R , Sahebkar A , Sahraian MA , Sathian B , Sattin D , Sawhney M , Saylan M , Schiavolin S , Seylani A , Sha F , Shaikh MA , Shaji K , Shannawaz M , Shetty JK , Shigematsu M , Shin JI , Shiri R , Silva DAS , Silva JP , Silva R , Singh JA , Skryabin VY , Skryabina AA , Smith AE , Soshnikov S , Spurlock EE , Stein DJ , Sun J , Tabarés-Seisdedos R , Thakur B , Timalsina B , Tovani-Palone MR , Tran BX , Tsegaye GW , Valadan Tahbaz S , Valdez PR , Venketasubramanian N , Vlassov V , Vu GT , Vu LG , Wang Y-P , Wimo A , Winkler AS , Yadav L , Yahyazadeh Jabbari SH , Yamagishi K , Yang L , Yano Y , Yonemoto N , Yu C , Yunusa L , Zadey S , Zastrozhin MS , Zastrozhina A , Zhang ZJ , Murray CJL , Vos T , 2022. Estimation of the global prevalence of dementia in 2019 and forecasted prevalence in 2050: an analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019. Lancet Public Health 7 , e105–e125. 10.1016/S2468-2667(21)00249-8 34998485
Nielsen TR , Vogel A , Riepe MW , de Mendonça A , Rodriguez G , Nobili F , Gade A , Waldemar G , 2011. Assessment of dementia in ethnic minority patients in Europe: a European Alzheimer’s Disease Consortium survey. Int. Psychogeriatr 23 , 86–95. 10.1017/S1041610210000955 20602861
Olson NL , Albensi BC , 2020. Race- and Sex-Based Disparities in Alzheimer’s Disease Clinical Trial Enrollment in the United States and Canada: An Indigenous Perspective. J. Alzheimers Dis. Rep 4 , 325–344. 10.3233/ADR-200214 33024940
Osipova D , Ahveninen J , Jensen O , Ylikoski A , Pekkonen E , 2005. Altered Generation of Spontaneous Oscillations in Alzheimer’s Disease. Neuroimage 27 , 835–841. 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.05.011 15961323
Pace-Schott EF , Spencer RMC , 2014. Sleep-Dependent Memory Consolidation in Healthy Aging and Mild Cognitive Impairment, in: Meerlo P , Benca RM , Abel T (Eds.), Sleep, Neuronal Plasticity and Brain Function, Current Topics in Behavioral Neurosciences. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 307–330. 10.1007/7854_2014_300
Palop JJ , Mucke L , 2016. Network abnormalities and interneuron dysfunction in Alzheimer disease. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 17 , 777–792. 10.1038/nrn.2016.141 27829687
Park DC , Lautenschlager G , Hedden T , Davidson NS , Smith AD , Smith PK , 2002. Models of visuospatial and verbal memory across the adult life span. Psychol. Aging 17 , 299–320. 10.1037/0882-7974.17.2.299 12061414
Park JY , Lee KS , An SK , Lee J , Kim J-J , Kim KH , Namkoong K , 2012. Gamma oscillatory activity in relation to memory ability in older adults. Int. J. Psychophysiol 86 , 58–65. 10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2012.08.002 22906816
Parra MA , Abrahams S , Fabi K , Logie R , Luzzi S , Sala SD , 2008. Short-term memory binding deficits in Alzheimer’s disease. Brain 132 , 1057–1066. 10.1093/brain/awp036
Perkins P , Annegers JF , Doody RS , Cooke N , Aday L , Vernon SW , 1997. Incidence and prevalence of dementia in a multiethnic cohort of municipal retirees. Neurology 49 , 44–50. 10.1212/WNL.49.1.44 9222168
Perry RJ , Hodges JR , 1999. Attention and executive deficits in Alzheimer’s disease: A critical review. Brain 122 , 383–404. 10.1093/brain/122.3.383 10094249
Perry RJ , Watson P , Hodges JR , 2000. The nature and staging of attention dysfunction in early (minimal and mild) Alzheimer’s disease: relationship to episodic and semantic memory impairment. Neuropsychologia 38 , 252–271. 10.1016/S0028-3932(99)00079-2 10678692
Peters F , Collete F , Degueldre C , Sterpenich V , Majerus S , Salmon E , 2009. The Neural Correlates of Verbal Short-Term Memory in Alzheimer’s Disease: an fMRI Study. Brain 132 , 1833–1846. 10.1093/brain/awp075 19433442
Petersen RC , Smith GE , Waring SC , Ivnik RJ , Tangalos EG , Kokmen E , 1999. Mild Cognitive Impairment: Clinical Characterization and Outcome. Arch. Neurol 56 , 303. 10.1001/archneur.56.3.303 10190820
Pietrini P , Furey M , Graff-Radford N , Freo U , Alexander G , Grady C , Dani A , Mentis M , Schapiro M , 1996. Preferential metabolic involvement of visual cortical areas in a subtype of Alzheimer’s disease: clinical implications. Am. J. Psychiatry 153 , 1261–1268. 10.1176/ajp.153.10.1261 8831432
Pietto M , Parra MA , Trujillo N , Flores F , García AM , Bustin J , Richly P , Manes F , Lopera F , Ibáñez A , Baez S , 2016. Behavioral and Electrophysiological Correlates of Memory Binding Deficits in Patients at Different Risk Levels for Alzheimer’s Disease. J. Alzheimers Dis 53 , 1325–1340. 10.3233/JAD-160056 27372640
Power MC , Bennett EE , Turner RW , Dowling NM , Ciarleglio A , Glymour MM , Gianattasio KZ , 2021. Trends in Relative Incidence and Prevalence of Dementia Across Non-Hispanic Black and White Individuals in the United States, 2000-2016. JAMA Neurol. 78 , 275. 10.1001/jamaneurol.2020.4471 33252617
Prieto del Val L , Cantero JL , Atienza M , 2016. Atrophy of amygdala and abnormal memory-related alpha oscillations over posterior cingulate predict conversion to Alzheimer’s disease. Sci. Rep 6 , 31859. 10.1038/srep31859 27546195
Prieto del Val L , Cantero JL , Atienza M , 2015. APOE ε4 constrains engagement of encoding-related compensatory networks in amnestic mild cognitive impairment: APOE s4-Related Oscillations During Successful Encoding. Hippocampus 25 , 993–1007. 10.1002/hipo.22422 25616215
Proskovec AL , Heinrichs-Graham E , Wilson TW , 2016. Aging modulates the oscillatory dynamics underlying successful working memory encoding and maintenance. Hum. Brain Mapp 37 , 2348–2361. 10.1002/hbm.23178 26991358
Prvulovic D , Hubl D , Sack A , Melillo L , Maurer K , Frolich L , Lanfermann H , Zanella F , Goebel R , Linden D , Dierks T , 2002. Functional Imaging of Visuospatial Processing in Alzheimer’s Disease. Neuroimage 17 , 1403–1414. 10.1006/nimg.2002.1271 12414280
Rajan KB , Weuve J , Barnes LL , McAninch EA , Wilson RS , Evans DA , 2021. Population estimate of people with clinical Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment in the United States (2020-2060). Alzheimers Dement. J. Alzheimers Assoc 17 , 1966–1975. 10.1002/alz.12362
Rajji TK , Zomorrodi R , Barr MS , Blumberger DM , Mulsant BH , Daskalakis ZJ , 2016. Ordering Information in Working Memory and Modulation of Gamma by Theta Oscillations in Humans. Cereb. Cortex bhv326 . 10.1093/cercor/bhv326
Rochart R , Liu Q , Fonteh AN , Harrington MG , Arakaki X , 2020. Compromised Behavior and Gamma Power During Working Memory in Cognitively Healthy Individuals With Abnormal CSF Amyloid/Tau. Front. Aging Neurosci 12 , 574214. 10.3389/fnagi.2020.574214 33192465
RTI International, Lines L , 2014. Racial and Ethnic Disparities Among Individuals with Alzheimer’s Disease in the United States: A Literature Review. RTI Press. 10.3768/rtipress.2014.RR.0024.1412
Schreiber S , Landau SM , Fero A , Schreiber F , Jagust WJ , 2015. Comparison of Visual and Quantitative Florbetapir F 18 Positron Emission Tomography Analysis in Predicting Mild Cognitive Impairment Outcomes. JAMA Neurol. 72 , 1183. 10.1001/jamaneurol.2015.1633 26280102
Serrano N , López-Sanz D , Bruña R , Garcés P , Rodríguez-Rojo IC , Marcos A , Crespo DP , Maestú F , 2020. Spatiotemporal Oscillatory Patterns During Working Memory Maintenance in Mild Cognitive Impairment and Subjective Cognitive Decline. Int. J. Neural Syst 30 , 1950019. 10.1142/S0129065719500199 31522594
Sörensen A , Blazhenets G , Schiller F , Meyer PT , Frings L , Alzheimer Disease Neuroimaging Initiative, 2020. Amyloid biomarkers as predictors of conversion from mild cognitive impairment to Alzheimer’s dementia: a comparison of methods. Alzheimers Res. Ther 12 , 155. 10.1186/s13195-020-00721-3 33213489
Sperling R , Bates J , Chua E , Cocchiarella A , Rentz D , Rosen B , Schacter D , Albert M , 2003. fMRI Studies of Associative Encoding in Young and Elderly Controls and Mild Alzheimer’s Disease. 74 44–50. 10.1136/jnnp.74.1.44
Springer SD , Wiesman AI , May PE , Schantell M , Johnson HJ , Willett MP , Castelblanco CA , Eastman JA , Christopher-Hayes NJ , Wolfson SL , Johnson CM , Murman DL , Wilson TW , 2022. Altered visual entrainment in patients with Alzheimer’s disease: magnetoencephalography evidence. Brain Commun. 4 , fcac198. 10.1093/braincomms/fcac198 35974799
Stam C , Jones B , Manshanden I , van Cappellen van Walsum A , Montez T , Verbunt J , de Munck J , van Dijk B , Berendse H , Scheltens P , 2006. Magnetoencephalographic Evaluation of Resting-State Functional Connectivity in Alzheimer’s Disease. Neuroimage 32 , 1335–1344. 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2006.05.033 16815039
Stam C , van Cappellen van Walsum A , Pijnenburg Y , Berendse H , de Munck J , Scheltens P , van Dijk B , 2002. Generalized Synchornization of MEG Recordings in Alzheimer’s Disease: Evidence for Involvement of the Gamma Band. Journal of Clinical Neurophysiology 19 , 562–574. 10.1097/00004691-200212000-00010 12488788
Stam CJ , van Dijk BW , 2002. Synchronization likelihood: an unbiased measure of generalized synchronization in multivariate data sets. Phys. Nonlinear Phenom 163 , 236–251. 10.1016/S0167-2789(01)00386-4
Steenland K , Goldstein FC , Levey A , Wharton W , 2015. A Meta-Analysis of Alzheimer’s Disease Incidence and Prevalence Comparing African-Americans and Caucasians. J. Alzheimers Dis 50 , 71–76. 10.3233/JAD-150778
Sternberg S , 1966. High-Speed Scanning in Human Memory. Science 153 , 652–654. 10.1126/science.153.3736.652 5939936
Stopford CL , Thompson JC , Neary D , Richardson AMT , Snowden JS , 2012. Working memory, attention, and executive function in Alzheimer’s disease and frontotemporal dementia. Cortex 48 , 429–446. 10.1016/j.cortex.2010.12.002 21237452
Timothy LT , Krishna BM , Nair U , 2017. Classification of mild cognitive impairment EEG using combined recurrence and cross recurrence quantification analysis. Int. J. Psychophysiol 120 , 86–95. 10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2017.07.006 28711698
Tippett WJ , Black SE , 2008. Regional cerebral blood flow correlates of visuospatial tasks in Alzheimer’s disease. J. Int. Neuropsychol. Soc 14 , 1034–1045. 10.1017/S1355617708081241 18954483
Trzepacz PT , Yu P , Sun J , Schuh K , Case M , Witte MM , Hochstetler H , Hake A , 2014. Comparison of neuroimaging modalities for the prediction of conversion from mild cognitive impairment to Alzheimer’s dementia. Neurobiol. Aging 35 , 143–151. 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2013.06.018 23954175
U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 2020. Enhancing the Diversity of Clinical Trial Populations - Eligibility Criteria, Enrollment Practices, and Trial Designs Guidance for Industry. U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
Vannini P , Almkvist O , Dierks T , Lehmann C , Wahlund L , 2007. Reduced Neuronal Efficacy in Progressive Mild Cognitive Impairment: a Prospective fMRI Study on Visuospatial Processing. Psychiatry Research 156 , 43–57. 10.1016/j.psychresns.2007.02.003 17719211
Vannini P , Lehmann C , Dierks T , Jann K , Viitanen M , Wahlund L-O , Almkvist O , 2008. Failure to modulate neural response to increased task demand in mild Alzheimer’s disease: fMRI study of visuospatial processing. Neurobiol. Dis 31 , 287–297. 10.1016/j.nbd.2008.04.013 18619845
Vasquez BP , Buck BH , Black SE , Leibovitch FS , Lobaugh NJ , Caldwell CB , Behrmann M , 2011. Visual attention deficits in Alzheimer’s disease: Relationship to HMPAO SPECT cortical hypoperfusion. Neuropsychologia 49 , 1741–1750. 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2011.02.052 21377483
Vemuri P , Wiste HJ , Weigand SD , Knopman DS , Shaw LM , Trojanowski JQ , Aisen PS , Weiner M , Petersen RC , Jack CR , on behalf of the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative, 2009. Effect of APOE on biomarkers of amyloid load and neuronal pathology in AD. Ann. Neurol NA–NA. 10.1002/ana.21953
Vossel KA , Beagle AJ , Rabinovici GD , Shu H , Lee SE , Naasan G , Hegde M , Cornes SB , Henry ML , Nelson AB , Seeley WW , Geschwind MD , Gorno-Tempini ML , Shih T , Kirsch HE , Garcia PA , Miller BL , Mucke L , 2013. Seizures and Epileptiform Activity in the Early Stages of Alzheimer Disease. JAMA Neurol. 70 , 1158. 10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.136 23835471
Vossel KA , Ranasinghe KG , Beagle AJ , Mizuiri D , Honma SM , Dowling AF , Darwish SM , Van Berio V , Barnes DE , Mantle M , Karydas AM , Coppola G , Roberson ED , Miller BL , Garcia PA , Kirsch HE , Mucke L , Nagarajan SS , 2016. Incidence and impact of subclinical epileptiform activity in Alzheimer’s disease: Subclinical Epileptiform Activity in AD. Ann. Neurol 80 , 858–870. 10.1002/ana.24794 27696483
Vossel KA , Tartaglia MC , Nygaard HB , Zeman AZ , Miller BL , 2017. Epileptic activity in Alzheimer’s disease: causes and clinical relevance. Lancet Neurol. 16 , 311–322. 10.1016/S1474-4422(17)30044-3 28327340
Waninger S , Berka C , Meghdadi A , Karic MS , Stevens K , Aguero C , Sitnikova T , Salat DH , Verma A , 2018. Event-related potentials during sustained attention and memory tasks: Utility as biomarkers for mild cognitive impairment. Alzheimers Dement. Diagn. Assess. Dis. Monit 10 , 452–460. 10.1016/j.dadm.2018.05.007
Wei L , Li Y , Yang X , Xue Q , Wang Y , 2015. Altered characteristic of brain networks in mild cognitive impairment during a selective attention task: An EEG study. Int. J. Psychophysiol 98 , 8–16. 10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2015.05.015 26048737
Weuve J , Barnes LL , Mendes de Leon CF , Rajan KB , Beck T , Aggarwal NT , Hebert LE , Bennett DA , Wilson RS , Evans DA , 2018. Cognitive Aging in Black and White Americans: Cognition, Cognitive Decline, and Incidence of Alzheimer Disease Dementia. Epidemiology 29 , 151–159. 10.1097/EDE.0000000000000747 28863046
Wiesman A , O’Neill J , Mills M , Robertson K , Fox H , Swindells S , Wilson T , 2018. Aberrant Occipital Dynamics Differentiate HIV-Infected Patients With and Without Cognitive Impairment. Brain 141 , 1678–1690. 10.1093/brain/awy097 29672678
Wiesman AI , Mundorf VM , Casagrande CC , Wolfson SL , Johnson CM , May PE , Murman DL , Wilson TW , 2021a. Somatosensory dysfunction is masked by variable cognitive deficits across patients on the Alzheimer’s disease spectrum. EBioMedicine 73 , 103638. 10.1016/j.ebiom.2021.103638 34689085
Wiesman AI , Murman DL , Losh RA , Schantell M , Christopher-Hayes NJ , Johnson HJ , Willett MP , Wolfson SL , Losh KL , Johnson CM , May PE , Wilson TW , 2022. Spatially resolved neural slowing predicts impairment and amyloid burden in Alzheimer’s disease. Brain awab430 . 10.1093/brain/awab430
Wiesman AI , Murman DL , May PE , Schantell M , Losh RA , Johnson HJ , Willet MP , Eastman JA , Christopher-Hayes NJ , Knott NL , Houseman LL , Wolfson SL , Losh KL , Johnson CM , Wilson TW , 2021b. Spatio-spectral relationships between pathological neural dynamics and cognitive impairment along the Alzheimer’s disease spectrum. Alzheimers Dement. Diagn. Assess. Dis. Monit 13 . 10.1002/dad2.12200
Wiesman AI , Murman DL , May PE , Schantell M , Wolfson SL , Johnson CM , Wilson TW , 2021c. Visuospatial alpha and gamma oscillations scale with the severity of cognitive dysfunction in patients on the Alzheimer’s disease spectrum. Alzheimers Res. Ther 13 , 139. 10.1186/s13195-021-00881-w 34404472
Wilson TW , Heinrichs-Graham E , Proskovec AL , McDermott TJ , 2016. Neuroimaging with magnetoencephalography: A dynamic view of brain pathophysiology. Transl. Res. J. Lab. Clin. Med 175 , 17–36. 10.1016/j.trsl.2016.01.007
Wu Y-T , Ali G-C , Guerchet M , Prina AM , Chan KY , Prince M , Brayne C , 2018. Prevalence of dementia in mainland China, Hong Kong and Taiwan: an updated systematic review and meta-analysis. Int. J. Epidemiol 47 , 709–719. 10.1093/ije/dyy007 29444280
Yener GG , Güntekin B , Öniz A , Başar E , 2007. Increased frontal phase-locking of event-related theta oscillations in Alzheimer patients treated with cholinesterase inhibitors. Int. J. Psychophysiol 64 , 46–52. 10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2006.07.006 17011650
Yener GG , Güntekin B , Tülay E , Başar E , 2009. A comparative analysis of sensory visual evoked oscillations with visual cognitive event related oscillations in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurosci. Lett 462 , 193–197. 10.1016/j.neulet.2009.07.036 19616074
Yetkin F , Rosenberg R , Weiner M , Purdy P , Cullum C , 2006. fMRI of Working Memory in Patients with Mild Cognitive Impairment and Probable Alzheimer’s Disease. European Radiology 16 , 193–206. 10.1007/s00330-005-2794-x 16402259
Zhang Z , Hayward MD , Yu Y-L , 2016. Life Course Pathways to Racial Disparities in Cognitive Impairment among Older Americans. J. Health Soc. Behav 57 , 184–199. 10.1177/0022146516645925 27247126
