LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


7806090
6166
Neurosci Biobehav Rev
Neurosci Biobehav Rev
Neuroscience and biobehavioral reviews
0149-7634
1873-7528

37597700
10591841
10.1016/j.neubiorev.2023.105358
NIHMS1930464
Article
Declining locus coeruleus–dopaminergic and noradrenergic modulation of long-term memory in aging and Alzheimer’s disease
http://orcid.org/0000-0003-3525-0539
Dahl Martin J. 12*
http://orcid.org/0000-0003-1046-7248
Kulesza Agnieszka 1
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-6399-9996
Werkle-Bergner Markus 1°
http://orcid.org/0000-0003-4331-6112
Mather Mara 2°
1 Center for Lifespan Psychology, Max Planck Institute for Human Development, 14195 Berlin, Germany
2 Leonard Davis School of Gerontology, University of Southern California, 90089 Los Angeles, CA, USA
° These authors contributed equally (shared senior authorship).

* Corresponding author: MJD (dahl@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)
23 9 2023
10 2023
17 8 2023
01 10 2024
153 105358105358
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Memory is essential in defining our identity by guiding behavior based on past experiences. However, aging leads to declining memory, disrupting older adult’s lives. Memories are encoded through experience-dependent modifications of synaptic strength, which are regulated by the catecholamines dopamine and noradrenaline. While cognitive aging research demonstrates how dopaminergic neuromodulation from the substantia nigra–ventral tegmental area regulates hippocampal synaptic plasticity and memory, recent findings indicate that the noradrenergic locus coeruleus sends denser inputs to the hippocampus. The locus coeruleus produces dopamine as biosynthetic precursor of noradrenaline, and releases both to modulate hippocampal plasticity and memory. Crucially, the locus coeruleus is also the first site to accumulate Alzheimer’s-related abnormal tau and severely degenerates with disease development. New in-vivo assessments of locus coeruleus integrity reveal associations with Alzheimer’s markers and late-life memory impairments, which likely stem from impaired dopaminergic and noradrenergic neurotransmission. Bridging research across species, the reviewed findings suggest that degeneration of the locus coeruleus results in deficient dopaminergic and noradrenergic modulation of hippocampal plasticity and thus memory decline.

Episodic memory
neuromodulation
hippocampus
synaptic plasticity
dopamine
noradrenaline
norepinephrine
locus coeruleus
substantia nigra–ventral tegmental area
aging
Alzheimer’s disease

pmc1. Introduction

Our memories define who we are (Kandel, Dudai, &amp; Mayford, 2014) by guiding behavior based on past experiences (McGaugh, 2015). However, on average, memory deteriorates with advancing adult age (Nyberg, Lövdén, Riklund, Lindenberger, &amp; Bäckman, 2012), disrupting the lives of many older adults (Crook et al., 1986; Prince et al., 2015). For decades, much theorizing in cognitive aging research has focused on how declining dopaminergic neuromodulation from the substantia nigra–ventral tegmental area is linked to declining cognition (Bäckman, Nyberg, Lindenberger, Li, &amp; Farde, 2006; S.-C. Li, Lindenberger, &amp; Sikström, 2001). This research was in part based on the proposal of a ventral tegmental area–hippocampal circuit by which dopaminergic neuromodulatory inputs facilitate the consolidation of salient experiences in the hippocampus, a brain region crucial for learning and memory (Gruber &amp; Ranganath, 2019; Lisman &amp; Grace, 2005; Lisman, Grace, &amp; Duzel, 2011; Otmakhova, Duzel, Deutch, &amp; Lisman, 2013). New evidence, however, indicates that while the substantia nigra–ventral tegmental area sparsely projects to the hippocampus, another neuromodulatory nucleus, the noradrenergic locus coeruleus, sends much denser inputs (Gálvez-Márquez et al., 2022; Kempadoo, Mosharov, Choi, Sulzer, &amp; Kandel, 2016; Petter et al., 2023; C. C. Smith &amp; Greene, 2012; Takeuchi et al., 2016; Tsetsenis et al., 2021). Interestingly, locus coeruleus neurons also produce dopamine as biosynthetic precursor of noradrenaline (Devoto &amp; Flore, 2006; C. C. Smith &amp; Greene, 2012), and can co-release both catecholamines to modulate hippocampal synaptic plasticity and memory (Chowdhury et al., 2022; Duszkiewicz, McNamara, Takeuchi, &amp; Genzel, 2019; Gálvez-Márquez et al., 2022; Kempadoo et al., 2016; Takeuchi et al., 2016; Wagatsuma et al., 2018; Wilmot, Puhger, Roshgadol, Tian, &amp; Wiltgen, 2022). The locus coeruleus, however, is also one of the first brain sites to accumulate Alzheimer’s related abnormal tau (see Glossary; Braak, Thal, Ghebremedhin, &amp; Del Tredici, 2011; Ehrenberg et al., 2017; Stratmann et al., 2016) and severely degenerates with disease development (Lyness, Zarow, &amp; Chui, 2003; Theofilas et al., 2017). Accordingly, novel in-vivo assessments of locus coeruleus integrity (Betts et al., 2019; Engels-Domínguez et al., 2023) reveal consistent associations with markers for Alzheimer’s disease (Cassidy et al., 2022; Dahl, Mather, Werkle-Bergner, et al., 2022; Jacobs et al., 2021, 2022) and late-life memory impairments (Dahl, Bachman, et al., 2022; Dahl et al., 2019; Elman et al., 2021; Jacobs et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2020) that likely result from impaired dopaminergic and noradrenergic neurotransmission (Hagena, Hansen, &amp; Manahan-Vaughan, 2016; Hansen &amp; Manahan-Vaughan, 2014).

In the following, we first provide a brief overview of the anatomy of the catecholaminergic systems and how dopamine and noradrenaline mechanistically modulate memory-related hippocampal processing. Our specific focus on the two catecholamines is not meant to imply that only these neuromodulators play a role in aging memory, but rather to summarize important recent findings regarding the source of hippocampal dopamine. For an overview of other neuromodulatory systems and their changes in aging and disease, see (Berry &amp; Harrison, 2023; Engels-Domínguez et al., 2023; Orlando, Shine, Robbins, Rowe, &amp; O’Callaghan, 2023) in this special issue. Similarly, the release of noradrenaline and dopamine in large parts of the brain implicates these neuromodulatory systems in a broad range of physiological and cognitive processes beyond memory, for overviews see (Berridge &amp; Waterhouse, 2003; Mather &amp; Harley, 2016; Poe et al., 2020) and (Berke, 2018; Costa &amp; Schoenbaum, 2022; Robbins &amp; Arnsten, 2009; Sippy &amp; Tritsch, 2023), respectively.

After focusing on anatomy and mechanism, we next review recent animal research indicating a locus coeruleus-dependent dopaminergic modulation of hippocampal memory processing. Finally, we synthesize in-vivo human findings linking locus coeruleus integrity and its decline in aging and disease specifically to late-life episodic memory. Bridging animal and human research, this review provides a new view on the source of hippocampal dopamine and why locus coeruleus degeneration may play a crucial role in late-life memory decline.

2. Activation of β-adrenergic and D1-type dopaminergic receptors modulates hippocampal synaptic plasticity

Dopaminergic and noradrenergic neurons cluster in small subcortical nuclei in the midbrain substantia nigra–ventral tegmental area and brainstem locus coeruleus that can readily be identified due to their characteristic dark color. Inside these neurons, the amino acid L-tyrosine is converted to L-DOPA by the enzyme tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), and in a next step to dopamine by DOPA decarboxylase (Figure 1). While the two catecholaminergic systems share the first parts of synthesis, the final step, the conversion of dopamine to noradrenaline by the enzyme dopamine beta-hydroxylase (DBH), is specific to locus coeruleus cells. Interestingly, noradrenaline is synthesized from dopamine in the vesicles of locus coeruleus cells, opening the door for the co-release of both neuromodulators (Figure 1; Devoto &amp; Flore, 2006; Duszkiewicz et al., 2019; C. C. Smith &amp; Greene, 2012). Moreover, the noradrenergic transporter (NET) not only clears noradrenaline after release but also facilitates the transport of dopamine (back) to presynaptic locus coeruleus terminals (Figure 1; Borgkvist, Malmlöf, Feltmann, Lindskog, &amp; Schilström, 2012; C. C. Smith &amp; Greene, 2012).

The substantia nigra–ventral tegmental area and locus coeruleus fire in a steady (tonic) rhythm that fluctuates across the waking cycle (Carter et al., 2010; Costa &amp; Schoenbaum, 2022; Hayat et al., 2020; Martel &amp; Gatti McArthur, 2020; Monti &amp; Monti, 2007). In addition, transient (phasic) bursts of activity release dopamine and noradrenaline in response to salient events, for instance, novel, emotional, or rewarding experiences, and promote their encoding into long-term memory (Harley, 2004; Lisman et al., 2011; Sara, 2009). Although these neuromodulators are produced in distinct nuclei, they are released via widely branching axons throughout large parts of the brain (Figure 2), where their effects are mediated by dopaminergic and (nor)adrenergic receptors. By contrast to fast-acting ionotropic receptors that directly regulate the flow of ions across the cell membrane, noradrenaline and dopamine bind to slow-acting metabotropic receptors (G-protein coupled receptors), which activate intracellular signaling cascades. These cascades indirectly lead to changes in gene expression, the release of neurotransmitters, and alterations in the flow of ions or other signaling molecules. In particular, noradrenergic receptors are grouped into three major families, α1, α2, and β, whereas the dopaminergic receptors are sub-grouped into the D1-type and D2-type families. With regard to hippocampal memory processing, the low-affinity β-adrenergic and D1-type dopaminergic receptors are of particular interest (Figure 1; Hagena et al., 2016; Hansen &amp; Manahan-Vaughan, 2014; Harley, 2004; McGaugh, 2000), which may require may require phasic burst firing to activate (Costa &amp; Schoenbaum, 2022; Martel &amp; Gatti McArthur, 2020).

Activation of β-adrenergic and D1-type dopaminergic receptors leads to changes in synaptic plasticity and thus memory (Kandel et al., 2014; Whitlock, Heynen, Shuler, &amp; Bear, 2006), mediated by various kinases and phosphatases (e.g., cAMP-dependent protein kinase [PKA]), enzymes that increase or decrease the activity of target proteins (for comprehensive reviews, see Hagena et al., 2016; Hansen &amp; Manahan-Vaughan, 2014; James et al., 2020; Lynch, 2004). While there are some differences between receptor subtypes, β-adrenergic and D1-type receptors have in common that their activation ultimately results in transcription and translation of plasticity-related genes via cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) activation (see Figure 1 and below; Hansen &amp; Manahan-Vaughan, 2014; Kandel et al., 2014; Lynch, 2004; O’Dell, Connor, Guglietta, &amp; Nguyen, 2015; Sara, 2009).

Taken together, the dopaminergic and noradrenergic systems share several common features, including (1) a largely shared biosynthesis in small subcortical nuclei, (2) similar antecedent conditions leading to phasic neuromodulator release, and (3) their modulation of persistent hippocampal plasticity and memory.

3. Hippocampal subregions engage in different aspects of creating a memory trace

While both β-adrenergic and D1-type dopaminergic receptors increase synaptic plasticity through CREB-dependent signaling (cf. Figure 1), they differ in their expression across the hippocampal circuitry (see below). Note that this review focuses primarily on rodent studies targeting the dorsal hippocampus, which has been implicated in more memory-related processing rather than the ventral hippocampus (corresponding to the posterior and anterior hippocampus of primates, respectively (Fanselow &amp; Dong, 2010; Knierim, 2015)). The uneven catecholaminergic innervation of the hippocampus is important because different subregions are associated with different memory processes (see Figure 2; Kandel et al., 2014; Knierim, 2015).

Specifically, the dentate gyrus is involved in a process called pattern separation, that aids the mnemonic discrimination of similar memories by reducing the degree of representational similarity among overlapping experiences to minimize interference. This means that the dentate gyrus helps to create distinct memory representations of similar experiences. By contrast, mainly the Cornu Ammonis 3 (CA3) region is implicated with retrieving a complete memory representation from partial cues, a process called pattern completion (Guzowski, Knierim, &amp; Moser, 2004; Yassa &amp; Stark, 2011). Finally, the Cornu Ammonis 1 (CA1) receives and integrates information from the other subfields. It is moreover involved in detecting discrepancies between our current experiences and expectations based on stored memories, a process called novelty detection (Duncan, Ketz, Inati, &amp; Davachi, 2012; Lisman &amp; Grace, 2005). This process is important for updating and modifying memories to better reflect our current understanding of the world, and is closely related to catecholaminergic neuromodulation (Palacios-Filardo &amp; Mellor, 2019).

Dopaminergic and noradrenergic neuromodulation differs across hippocampal subregions

The functional gateway to the hippocampal circuit, the dentate gyrus, expresses the highest density of β-adrenergic receptors, as compared to other hippocampal subfields and may be more sensitive to noradrenergic control (Babushkina &amp; Manahan-Vaughan, 2022; Hagena et al., 2016; Kemp &amp; Manahan-Vaughan, 2007; Swanson-Park et al., 1999). By contrast, D1-type dopaminergic receptors are relatively evenly distributed across the hippocampus (Duszkiewicz et al., 2019; Hansen &amp; Manahan-Vaughan, 2014; Palomero-Gallagher, Kedo, Mohlberg, Zilles, &amp; Amunts, 2020). However, the effects of dopamine release may vary across subfields. In particular, compared to the dentate gyrus, the CA1 subfield appears more sensitive to D1-type receptor mediated effects (Hansen &amp; Manahan-Vaughan, 2014; Kemp &amp; Manahan-Vaughan, 2007; Swanson-Park et al., 1999).

In addition to the distribution of receptors, also the density of projections varies across catecholaminergic systems. In stark contrast to the abundant expression of dopaminergic receptors in the hippocampus, recent studies found only sparse fibers from the substantia nigra–ventral tegmental area (Gálvez-Márquez et al., 2022; Kempadoo et al., 2016; Petter et al., 2023; C. C. Smith &amp; Greene, 2012; Takeuchi et al., 2016; Tsetsenis et al., 2021), suggesting additional dopamine sources beyond the midbrain. Given that the vesicles of locus coeruleus neurons contain both catecholamines (see above; C. C. Smith &amp; Greene, 2012) and its profuse innervation of the hippocampus (Gálvez-Márquez et al., 2022; Kempadoo et al., 2016; Takeuchi et al., 2016; Wagatsuma et al., 2018), the noradrenergic brainstem nucleus was hypothesized to constitute this source. Indeed, optogenetic stimulation (Emiliani et al., 2022) of locus coeruleus–hippocampus fibers evoked release of both noradrenaline and dopamine, as confirmed by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), a laboratory technique for quantifying chemical components in a mixture (Kempadoo et al., 2016; for similar findings, also see Gálvez-Márquez et al., 2022; Wilmot et al., 2022). Moreover, selective lesions of locus coeruleus projections reduced hippocampal dopamine levels by about 70 % (Kempadoo et al., 2016), indicating substantial brainstem contribution to hippocampal dopaminergic tone.

Projections from the locus coeruleus dominantly terminate in more memory-relevant areas of the rodent dorsal hippocampus (posterior hippocampus in primates), whereas fibers from the substantia nigra–ventral tegmental area primarily target areas of the ventral hippocampus; anterior hippocampus in primates (Dubovyk &amp; Manahan-Vaughan, 2019; Fanselow &amp; Dong, 2010; Hansen &amp; Manahan-Vaughan, 2014; James et al., 2020; Kempadoo et al., 2016). Regarding subfield-specificity, several reports suggested a preferential locus coeruleus–dentate gyrus innervation (Hagena et al., 2016; Loy, Koziell, Lindsey, &amp; Moore, 1980; Swanson &amp; Hartman, 1975), while some recent studies do not seem to support this bias (Kempadoo et al., 2016; Takeuchi et al., 2016; Wagatsuma et al., 2018). By contrast the (sparser) substantia nigra–ventral tegmental area projection preferentially targets the CA1 (Broussard et al., 2016; McNamara, Tejero-Cantero, Trouche, Campo-Urriza, &amp; Dupret, 2014; Puighermanal et al., 2017; Rosen, Cheung, &amp; Siegelbaum, 2015; Tsetsenis et al., 2021; Tsetsenis, Broussard, &amp; Dani, 2023).

In sum, the two catecholaminergic systems share several common features and may provide complementary learning signals for the hippocampus (Harley, 2004; Manahan-Vaughan, 2017). However, they also demonstrate crucial differences. First and foremost, the locus coeruleus projections are denser than the substantia nigra–ventral tegmental area projections and provide hippocampal noradrenaline and potentially a majority of its dopamine. Moreover, noradrenaline may modulate the dentate gyrus more than other hippocampal subregions, whereas dopamine may affect processing in CA1 more, implying differential roles of the catecholamines in pattern separation and novelty processing (Hagena et al., 2016; Yassa &amp; Stark, 2011).

4. The catecholaminergic modulation of hippocampal long-term potentiation and long-term depression contributes to persistent memory

Most of our memories fade with time. However, experiences that are novel, emotional or rewarding remain remarkably vivid and seem to resist the ravages of time. Interestingly, these are the situations that elicit heightened dopamine and noradrenaline release (Lisman et al., 2011; Sara, 2009), which contributes to the resilience of these memories (Hagena et al., 2016; Hansen &amp; Manahan-Vaughan, 2014).

On a cellular level, memories are encoded by the experience-dependent modification of synapses (Kandel et al., 2014; Kemp &amp; Manahan-Vaughan, 2007; Manahan-Vaughan, 2017). Specifically, it has been proposed that the strength of the synaptic connection changes when a presynaptic neuron repeatedly contributes to the firing of a postsynaptic neuron, also known as Hebbian learning (Hebb, 1949). Since shortly after Hebb’s proposal, the surgical removal of the hippocampus was found to cause lasting memory loss (Scoville &amp; Milner, 1957), the search for memory-related synaptic changes focused on this brain region. Rhythmic electrical stimulation of fibers reaching the dentate gyrus, the functional gateway to the hippocampus, produced a long-lasting increase in the efficiency of synaptic transmission and amplified the excitability of postsynaptic cells (cf. Figure 1; Bliss &amp; Lømo, 1973). This phenomenon, termed long-term potentiation (LTP), has meanwhile been demonstrated to occur during memory formation in behaving animals (Whitlock et al., 2006), and is widely considered a key mechanism underlying learning and memory (Bliss &amp; Collingridge, 1993).

4.1 Catecholaminergic modulation of hippocampal long-term potentiation

LTP is not a uniform phenomenon, however (Kandel et al., 2014; Malenka &amp; Bear, 2004). Specifically, LTP-related synaptic changes involve at least two distinct phases. First, an early, short-lived form (&lt; 2–3 h) that is induced by an activity-related elevation of intracellular calcium levels and which progressively decays (McHugh, Blum, Tsien, Tonegawa, &amp; Wilson, 1996; Morris, Anderson, Lynch, &amp; Baudry, 1986). Second, a persistent form, lasting several hours to days, that requires protein synthesis to stabilize the synaptic changes (Eschenko, 2019; Kandel et al., 2014; Manahan-Vaughan, 2017). In other words, the newly stored experiences will slowly fade as early-LTP decays, unless additional signals trigger protein synthesis (Lisman et al., 2011; Otmakhova et al., 2013). The activation of D1-type dopaminergic (Frey, Matthies, Reymann, &amp; Matthies, 1991; Hansen &amp; Manahan-Vaughan, 2014; W. B. Smith, Starck, Roberts, &amp; Schuman, 2005) and β-adrenergic receptors (Hagena et al., 2016; Seidenbecher, Reymann, &amp; Balschun, 1997; Walling &amp; Harley, 2004) leads to the transcription and translation of such plasticity-related proteins through the CREB-signaling cascade (see above and Figure 1; Lynch, 2004). Thus, the stabilization of synaptic plasticity involves catecholaminergic signals, which in turn depend on the salience of the experience and contribute to the storage of events that are likely to be meaningful (Mather, Clewett, Sakaki, &amp; Harley, 2016; McGaugh, 2000).

4.2 Catecholaminergic modulation of hippocampal long-term depression

The durability of memories, however, is not only encoded by increases in synaptic strength (LTP), but synaptic plasticity can also take the form of persistent decreases in the connections between neurons, termed long-term depression (LTD; (Alger &amp; Teyler, 1976; Manahan-Vaughan, 1997)), and that is sometimes considered a twin of LTP (Manahan-Vaughan, 2017). Persistent LTD also depends on protein synthesis- and positively correlates with the precision of long-term memory (Eschenko, 2019; Kandel et al., 2014; Kemp &amp; Manahan-Vaughan, 2007). Together, experience-related increases and decreases in synaptic strength contribute to hippocampal information storage and memory.

The catecholamines dopamine and noradrenaline regulate persistent plasticity, regardless of the directionality of synaptic change (LTP or LTD; (Manahan-Vaughan, 2017)), in line with their role in the synthesis of plasticity-related proteins. Generally, D1-type dopaminergic agonists in combination with high-frequency stimulation of the hippocampus facilitate LTP, whereas antagonists prevent or reduce it (Hansen &amp; Manahan-Vaughan, 2014). By contrast, decreases in synaptic strength (LTD) have been reported after patterned low-frequency stimulation in combination with D1-type dopaminergic agonists, which were prevented by antagonists. Consistent with the role of synaptic plasticity in learning and memory (Whitlock et al., 2006), matching effects of D1-type dopaminergic agonists and antagonists on hippocampus-dependent learning have been observed (for a comprehensive review, see Hansen &amp; Manahan-Vaughan, 2014). Similarly, β-adrenergic agonists tend to reinforce hippocampal plasticity (LTP, LTD) and hippocampus-dependent learning, whereas pharmacological blockade suppresses this (Manahan-Vaughan, 2017; for a comprehensive review, see Hansen &amp; Manahan-Vaughan, 2014). The dual action of dopamine and noradrenaline in increasing or decreasing synaptic strength (LTP or LTD) may be due to a concentration-dependent effect of neuromodulators on intracellular signaling cascades (Hagena et al., 2016; Hansen &amp; Manahan-Vaughan, 2014).

Taken together, catecholaminergic neuromodulation plays a decisive role in hippocampus-dependent memory by facilitating the synthesis of plasticity-related proteins which stabilize LTP and LTD. By these means, hippocampal plasticity and memory are modulated in response to novelty, reward, and emotionality, which is mediated by dopamine and noradrenaline (Kandel et al., 2014; McGaugh, 2000).

5. Two sources of dopamine for the hippocampus: locus coeruleus–dopamine modulates hippocampus-dependent memory in rodents

Inspired by evidence from animal studies that dopamine facilitates persistent synaptic plasticity (Frey et al., 1991; Hansen &amp; Manahan-Vaughan, 2014; Huang &amp; Kandel, 1995; S. Li, Cullen, Anwyl, &amp; Rowan, 2003) and converging findings in humans relating midbrain activation to improved long-term memory (Adcock, Thangavel, Whitfield-Gabrieli, Knutson, &amp; Gabrieli, 2006; Düzel et al., 2009; Gruber, Gelman, &amp; Ranganath, 2014; Wittmann et al., 2005), influential frameworks on the role of dopamine in hippocampal memory emerged (Gruber &amp; Ranganath, 2019; Hansen &amp; Manahan-Vaughan, 2014; Lisman &amp; Grace, 2005; Lisman et al., 2011; Otmakhova et al., 2013). In particular, a functional loop was proposed through which the hippocampus signals the detection of novelty to the midbrain, which in turn releases dopamine to enhance hippocampal plasticity and the encoding of new information into long-term memory (Lisman &amp; Grace, 2005).

Consistent with this framework, direct dopaminergic midbrain projections reach the hippocampus (Broussard et al., 2016; McNamara et al., 2014; Otmakhova et al., 2013; Tsetsenis et al., 2021, 2023) and their optogenetic activation improves long term memory (McNamara et al., 2014; Tsetsenis et al., 2021). However, these connections are sparse (Gálvez-Márquez et al., 2022; Kempadoo et al., 2016; Petter et al., 2023; Takeuchi et al., 2016; Tsetsenis et al., 2021), accounting for about 30 % of catecholaminergic fibers (i.e., tyrosine hydroxylase + fibers; (Tsetsenis et al., 2021, 2023)), whereas the locus coeruleus contributes approximately 70 % to hippocampal dopaminergic tone (Kempadoo et al., 2016). Accordingly, evidence for a locus coeruleus-dependent dopaminergic modulation of hippocampal memory processing in rodents has accumulated in recent years (see Table 1).

5.1 Locus coeruleus–dopaminergic influences on memory processing in Cornu Ammonis 1

The hippocampal CA1 subfield is the primary model system for studying synaptic plasticity (Otmakhova et al., 2013) and sensitive to dopaminergic modulation (Hansen &amp; Manahan-Vaughan, 2014; Lisman et al., 2011). Recent work indicates that this dopaminergic modulation may stem from an unexpected source.

In a first study (Takeuchi et al., 2016), unexpected novelty—elicited by the exploration of an unfamiliar environment after encoding—led to improved retention of spatial memories, as well as increased firing in the locus coeruleus and substantia nigra–ventral tegmental area. Post-encoding optogenetic stimulation of the locus coeruleus but not substantia nigra–ventral tegmental area mimicked these novelty effects and led to sustained memory, suggesting a catecholaminergic basis of the memory enhancement. To further clarify the neuromodulators mediating this effect, either dopaminergic or noradrenergic transmission was suppressed. D1-type dopaminergic antagonists or pharmacological locus coeruleus inhibition prevented the stimulation-induced memory enhancement. Interestingly, however, blocking β-adrenergic receptors did not alter the persistence of spatial memories, which suggests the locus coeruleus provides dopaminergic memory modulation. Finally, rhythmic stimulation of CA3–CA1 synapses in combination with optogenetic activation of locus coeruleus fibers resulted in enhanced LTP, indicating a potential mechanism underlying the memory improvement (see Figure 1; Takeuchi et al., 2016). Taken together, this study suggests enhanced memory consolidation mediated by locus coeruleus activation, potentially through a dopaminergic mechanism.

Similarly, in a second study (Kempadoo et al., 2016), optogenetic stimulation of locus coeruleus–CA1 fibers during the encoding phase of a spatial recognition memory task improved subsequent performance. To identify the neuromodulatory basis of this increase in spatial learning, locus coeruleus stimulation was repeated while blocking either D1-type dopaminergic or β-adrenergic receptors. Importantly, the memory-enhancing optogenetic effect was suppressed by dopaminergic but not noradrenergic antagonists, again pointing to the role of locus coeruleus–dopamine in hippocampal memory (Kempadoo et al., 2016). In sum, this suggests that not only the consolidation but also the encoding of memories in hippocampal circuits is facilitated by dopaminergic modulation originating from the brainstem.

While these investigations indicate that memories corresponding to individual experiences are boosted through neuromodulation (Kempadoo et al., 2016; Takeuchi et al., 2016), a third study (Chowdhury et al., 2022) explored the role of catecholamines in the linking of memories acquired close in time. Mice first explored a novel context (A) and were later fear conditioned in a different context (B). If they showed more freezing in the subsequent days in the non-conditioned context (A) compared to a neutral control context (C), this indicates a linkage of memories across contexts that were encountered close in time (A and B). Inhibition of locus coeruleus–CA1 fibers during exploration of the first context (A) prevented memory linking, suggesting catecholaminergic involvement. In line with the other reviewed studies, reductions in memory linking were also observed after pharmacological blockade of dopaminergic but not noradrenergic receptors. By contrast, if locus coeruleus–CA1 inhibition was combined with a selective activation of D1-type dopaminergic receptors, memory linking was rescued (i.e., freezing in non-conditioned context A). On a neural level, locus coeruleus–CA1 inhibition reduced the overlap of memory ensembles corresponding to context A and B, suggesting a mechanism through which dopamine regulates memory linking.

Finally, two further studies on catecholaminergic effects in CA1 reached similar conclusions with different experimental designs. In one (Gálvez-Márquez et al., 2022), rodents learned the spatial location of objects and then—reflecting a change in the environment—were required to update (reconsolidate; (Kandel et al., 2014)) the existing spatial memory. Crucially, optogentic inhibition of locus coeruleus–CA1 fibers during memory updating impaired subsequent performance, while suppressing midbrain inputs did not have this effect. Consistent with the other studies, D1-type dopaminergic receptors mediated locus coeruleus’ memory updating-enhancing effect. Moreover, hippocampal LTP was suppressed when inhibiting locus coeruleus–CA1 axons, suggesting a potential catecholaminergic mechanisms for memory updating.

In the other study (Wilmot et al., 2022), optogenetic locus coeruleus stimulation during trace fear conditioning enhanced the formation of long-term memories. While blocking D1-type dopaminergic receptors reduced fear learning, administration of noradrenergic (α and β) antagonists did not result in behavioral differences (Wilmot et al., 2022).

Overall, across different stages of memory processing (encoding, consolidation, and reconsolidation), these studies paint a remarkably consistent picture of improved hippocampus-dependent memory mediated by locus coeruleus–dopaminergic neuromodulation.

5.2 Locus coeruleus–dopaminergic influences on memory processing in other hippocampal subfields

While fewer studies explored locus coeruleus–dopaminergic effects in other subfields, the existing data point in a similar direction. A first study (Wagatsuma et al., 2018) investigated which neuromodulatory inputs convey novelty signals to mediate rapid hippocampal learning (Lisman &amp; Grace, 2005; Lisman et al., 2011). Locus coeruleus–CA3 axonal terminals of mice that explored a novel context were optogenetically inhibited, which resulted in impaired memory encoding. To examine which locus coeruleus-related neuromodulators supported memory formation, either D1-type dopaminergic or β-adrenergic receptors were blocked, but only the former compromised behavior. Finally, optogenetic and chemogenetic locus coeruleus silencing during encoding was shown to disrupt the formation of a stable representation of space in CA3 (also see Kaufman, Geiller, &amp; Losonczy, 2020, for further evidence for a role of the locus coeruleus in hippocampal place cell organization). In sum, this study demonstrates that locus coeruleus inputs to CA3 play a crucial role in encoding a novel spatial context, likely mediated by dopamine.

Finally, the only investigation that focused on the dentate gyrus examined the neuromodulatory signals that contribute to the repetition of behaviors that are reinforced by reward (Petter et al., 2023). Midbrain–dopamine release in the striatum plays a prominent role in learning from reward (Costa &amp; Schoenbaum, 2022; Schultz, Dayan, &amp; Montague, 1997; Sippy &amp; Tritsch, 2023), but the role of hippocampal neuromodulation is less clear. Mice learned to press a lever for optogenetic activation of locus coeruleus–dentate gyrus fibers (operant conditioning with self-stimulation). Interestingly, this learned behavior was remarkably persistent and was maintained for days even after reinforcement was discontinued. Pharmacological blockade of dentate gyrus D1-type dopaminergic but not β-adrenergic receptors attenuated self-stimulation, revealing a role of locus coeruleus–dopamine in reinforcement learning.

Taken together, the reviewed studies (see Table 1) consistently demonstrate that catecholaminergic neuromodulation facilitates memory performance. Moreover, they reveal a crucial role of locus coeruleus–dopaminergic regulation across stages of memory processing (encoding, consolidation, and reconsolidation) and hippocampal subfields (CA1, CA3, dentate gyrus). All in all, this body of work sheds new light on the mechanisms through which the locus coeruleus, commonly thought to be a (purely) noradrenergic structure, promotes long-term memory.

6. Catecholaminergic neuromodulation shapes hippocampus-dependent memory in humans

In general agreement with findings from animal studies (cf. Table 1), several recent frameworks based on evidence from healthy humans describe how dopaminergic and noradrenergic neuromodulation determines which of our experiences resist forgetting (Clewett &amp; Murty, 2019; Dunsmoor, Murty, Clewett, Phelps, &amp; Davachi, 2022; Mather et al., 2016; Rouhani, Niv, Frank, &amp; Schwabe, 2023). Specifically, these accounts suggest that (1) locus coeruleus activation biases perception and memory encoding to salient features, with implications for subsequent consolidation and retrieval (Clewett &amp; Murty, 2019; Mather et al., 2016). Moreover, following novel or emotional events, (2) catecholamines stabilize hippocampal memory traces of temporally adjacent experiences through the production of plasticity-related proteins (Dunsmoor et al., 2022). Of note, (3) catecholamine release and its memory enhancement has been associated not only with the affective value of an event, but also with the extent to which it deviates from our expectations (i.e., elicits a prediction error; (Rouhani et al., 2023)). Taken together, recent reviews highlight dopaminergic and noradrenergic modulations of hippocampal memory across stages of processing (Clewett &amp; Murty, 2019; Dunsmoor et al., 2022; Mather et al., 2016; Rouhani et al., 2023).

To determine catecholaminergic effects on memory, in-vivo human studies frequently rely on physiological proxies, such as pupil dilation (e.g., (Clewett, Gasser, &amp; Davachi, 2020)), systemic pharmacological manipulations (e.g., (Hauser, Eldar, Purg, Moutoussis, &amp; Dolan, 2019)), and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI; e.g., (Jacobs et al., 2020)). While this research has provided important insights into system-level catecholaminergic effects, recent animal work can add to this by clarifying how neuromodulatory systems shape memory. Specifically, incorporating evidence from animal research that (1) dopaminergic midbrain regions sparsely project to the hippocampus and (2) many brainstem memory effects may be mediated by dopamine co-release in addition to noradrenaline can help interpreting findings from human studies that lack a comparable specificity.

7. Locus coeruleus degeneration in aging and Alzheimer’s disease is related to memory decline in humans

As summarized in the preceding sections, catecholaminergic neuromodulation mechanistically regulates hippocampal plasticity (Hagena et al., 2016; Hansen &amp; Manahan-Vaughan, 2014) and thereby enhances memory for salient experiences (Kandel et al., 2014; Lisman et al., 2011; Mather et al., 2016; McGaugh, 2000). Recent research in rodents suggests that this catecholaminergic modulation originates predominantly from the brainstem (Kempadoo et al., 2016; Takeuchi et al., 2016). At the same time, a separate line of studies in humans has revealed the locus coeruleus as one of the first brain sites to accumulate Alzheimer’s-related abnormally phosphorylated tau (Braak et al., 2011; Ehrenberg et al., 2017; Stratmann et al., 2016; Theofilas, Dunlop, Heinsen, &amp; Grinberg, 2015) and its degeneration with disease development (see Figure 3; Lyness et al., 2003). Abnormal tau accumulation begins during the first decades of life and is thought to spread with increasing age from the brainstem to locus coeruleus targets, including the medial temporal lobe (Braak &amp; Del Tredici, 2016; Braak et al., 2011; Ghosh et al., 2019; Omoluabi et al., 2021), which contributes to neural and cognitive decline (Hanseeuw et al., 2019; Jagust, 2018; La Joie et al., 2020; Mather &amp; Harley, 2016; Weinshenker, 2018; R. S. Wilson et al., 2013). In particular, locus coeruleus neurons first shrink and then degenerate as tau pathology spreads (Ehrenberg et al., 2017; Kelly et al., 2017; Theofilas et al., 2017), with reductions in neuronal counts detectable already at prodromal disease stages (Arendt, Brückner, Morawski, Jäger, &amp; Gertz, 2015; Kelly et al., 2017). Thus, locus coeruleus integrity has been proposed as biomarker for early Alzheimer’s-related neural and cognitive changes (Betts et al., 2019; Jacobs et al., 2021). However, its small size and location deep in the brainstem made in vivo studies of changes in the locus coeruleus almost impossible for a long time (Astafiev, Snyder, Shulman, &amp; Corbetta, 2010; Keren, Lozar, Harris, Morgan, &amp; Eckert, 2009). Recent advances in structural MRI reveal catecholaminergic brainstem and midbrain structures as focal hyperintensity on dedicated MRI scans and provide proxies for their integrity (see Figure 3; for recent reviews, see Betts et al., 2019; Engels-Domínguez et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2017; Sulzer et al., 2018), opening the door for in-vivo assessments.

Corroborating earlier post-mortem analyses (Lyness et al., 2003), the first imaging studies show reduced locus coeruleus integrity in Alzheimer’s patients relative to controls (Cassidy et al., 2022; Dahl, Mather, Werkle-Bergner, et al., 2022; Jacobs et al., 2021). Moreover, in cognitively healthy lifespan samples, cross-sectional data suggest declines in locus coeruleus integrity starting around 60 years of age (Bachman et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2019; Shibata et al., 2006), which may be linked to impending pathology (Dahl, Mather, Werkle-Bergner, et al., 2022; Jacobs et al., 2021, 2022; Murray et al., 2022; Van Egroo et al., 2023). In general agreement with recent animal research relating locus coeruleus neuromodulation to hippocampal plasticity (Table 1; Duszkiewicz et al., 2019; Hagena et al., 2016; Hansen &amp; Manahan-Vaughan, 2014), a series of large-scale in-vivo imaging studies found reliable locus coeruleus–cognition associations in aging humans (Dahl et al., 2019; Elman et al., 2021; Jacobs et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2020), and particularly with episodic memory (Bell et al., 2022; Ciampa et al., 2022; Dahl et al., 2019; Jacobs et al., 2021). Specifically, one study contrasted the associations of substantia nigra-ventral tegmental area integrity and locus coeruleus integrity with three domains of aging cognition (working memory, episodic memory, and fluid intelligence; Dahl, Bachman, et al., 2022). The integrity of the locus coeruleus was particularly related to better episodic memory, while the integrity of the dopaminergic midbrain was linked to working memory, potentially reflecting differences in their innervation of the hippocampus (Figure 2; Kempadoo et al., 2016; Takeuchi et al., 2016). Moreover, longitudinal changes in late-life locus coeruleus integrity over a delay of about two years predicted future episodic memory performance (Dahl, Bachman, et al., 2022). Taken together, this suggests that a declining locus coeruleus-related catecholaminergic modulation of hippocampal processing in later life may be linked to memory decline.

While in-vivo studies in humans currently lack the tools to decipher the relative dopaminergic and noradrenergic contributions to aging memory, they can be informed by more direct assessments in rodents (Table 1 and Figure 2). At the same time, they complement animal research by providing a comprehensive picture of the cognitive correlates of catecholaminergic neuromodulation and its decline in aging and disease. Overall, recent advances in MRI techniques allow detecting age- and Alzheimer’s-related changes in locus coeruleus integrity that are specifically related to the fidelity of episodic memory in later life.

7.1 Catecholaminergic decline may exacerbate age-related changes in hippocampal memory processes

As reviewed above, several memory processes take place in the hippocampal network (see Figure 2): pattern separation in the DG, pattern completion in CA3 (Yassa &amp; Stark, 2011) and novelty detection in CA1, which regulates the entry of relevant information into long-term memory(Lisman &amp; Grace, 2005). A crucial neural basis for age-related memory decline involves a shift in hippocampal network dynamics from pattern separation to pattern completion, resulting in an inability to distinguish similar but not identical stimuli (Leal &amp; Yassa, 2018). The overreliance on pattern separation in aging is associated with reduced synaptic inputs to the DG (I. A. Wilson, Gallagher, Eichenbaum, &amp; Tanila, 2006), and may be exacerbated by declining locus coeruleus-dependent neuromodulation of this subfield (Hagena et al., 2016). On the other hand, dopamine modulates the novelty detection role of CA1 (Hansen &amp; Manahan-Vaughan, 2014; Lisman &amp; Grace, 2005). With age, declining dopaminergic modulation of CA1 may interfere with the detection of whether newly received information is not yet stored in long-term memory, thus impairing encoding. These alterations may be closely linked to age-related locus coeruleus and substantia nigra–ventral tegmental area degenerations. Beyond dopamine and noradrenaline, declining cholinergic neuromodulation has been associated with biasing CA3 towards pattern completion (I. A. Wilson et al., 2006). Notably, the locus coeruleus has been identified as a prominent regulator of cholinergic basal forebrain structures (Berridge &amp; Waterhouse, 2003). Taken together, age-related changes across hippocampal subfields (DG, CA3, and CA1; see * in Figure 2) promote an overreliance on pattern completion and entail failures to detect novelty when sensory stimuli are similar but not identical to stored memory representations (Leal &amp; Yassa, 2018; I. A. Wilson et al., 2006), but further research is needed on the effects of age-related catecholaminergic degeneration on memory processes in the hippocampus.

7.2 Potential of catecholaminergic modulations for the treatment of age-related memory impairment

In line with the prominent locus coeruleus degeneration in Alzheimer’s (Lyness et al., 2003), dopaminergic and noradrenergic drugs may have the potential to alleviate cognitive deficits by modulating noradrenaline and dopamine release (for reviews, see Ehrenberg et al., 2023; Matt et al., 2023). In a recent meta analysis, drugs with mainly noradrenergic action showed promise in treating cognitive symptoms and apathy in Alzheimer’s disease (David et al., 2022); also see Levey et al., 2021 for a recent phase-II clinical trial. Of note, putative noradrenergic medication affecting the locus coeruleus will also modulate dopaminergic co-release and dopamine re-uptake. Interestingly, MRI-based assessments of neuromodulatory integrity may have the potential to predict the patients who would benefit most from catecholaminergic medication (O’Callaghan et al., 2021).

However, interventions targeting locus coeruleus firing patterns, such as vagus nerve stimulation (Collins, Boddington, Steffan, &amp; McCormick, 2021; Hulsey et al., 2017), may offer advantages over systemic pharmacological treatments (Ludwig, Wienke, Betts, Zaehle, &amp; Hämmerer, 2021) and have shown promising results in improving associative memory, particularly in older individuals (Jacobs, Riphagen, Razat, Wiese, &amp; Sack, 2015). Ongoing trials (e.g., ClinicalTrials.gov ID NCT04908358) are exploring similar neuromodulatory interventions.

8. Conclusions

On a cellular level, memories are encoded by the experience-dependent modification of synaptic strength (Kandel et al., 2014). The stability of these synaptic changes is regulated by the catecholamines dopamine and noradrenaline (Hagena et al., 2016; Hansen &amp; Manahan-Vaughan, 2014) that are produced in the midbrain substantia nigra–ventral tegmental area and the brainstem locus coeruleus. Specifically, catecholamine release in the hippocampus facilitates the synthesis of plasticity-related proteins, which stabilize synaptic plasticity (LTP and LTD; (Lisman et al., 2011; Manahan-Vaughan, 2017)). By these means, hippocampal plasticity and memory are modulated in response to novelty, reward, and emotionality, which is mediated by dopamine and noradrenaline (Lisman et al., 2011; Mather et al., 2016; McGaugh, 2000). Recent findings in rodents indicate that much of the catecholaminergic regulation of the hippocampus may originate from the brainstem locus coeruleus (Duszkiewicz et al., 2019; Kempadoo et al., 2016; Takeuchi et al., 2016). At the same time, recent research in humans reveals that the locus coeruleus degenerates with age and Alzheimer’s disease, contributing specifically to senescent memory decline (Dahl, Bachman, et al., 2022; Jacobs et al., 2021). Bridging research across species, we hypothesize that late-life degeneration of the locus coeruleus results in deficient dopaminergic and noradrenergic modulation of hippocampal synaptic plasticity and thus memory decline.

While we have focused on the neuromodulation of hippocampal synaptic plasticity, dopamine and noradrenaline are also known to enhance memory through their regulation of other processes, such as perception (Mather et al., 2016) and attention (Arnsten, Wang, &amp; Paspalas, 2012; Dahl, Mather, &amp; Werkle-Bergner, 2022; Thiele &amp; Bellgrove, 2018).

Taken together, the catecholaminergic neuromodulatory systems are critical hubs for the regulation of cellular processes underlying long-term memory. The reviewed finding highlight how declining locus coeruleus-related dopaminergic and noradrenergic regulation shapes memory in aging and Alzheimer’s disease (Ehrenberg et al., 2023; Mather &amp; Harley, 2016).

Acknowledgements:

MW-B received support from the German Research Foundation (DFG, WE 4269/5-1) and the Jacobs Foundation (Early Career Research Fellowship 2017–2019).

MM’s work was supported by an Alexander von Humboldt fellowship and by National Institutes of Health grant R01AG025340 and R01AG080652.

During the work on her dissertation, AK was a pre-doctoral fellow of the International Max Planck Research School on Computational Methods in Psychiatry and Ageing Research (COMP2PSYCH, https://www.mps-ucl-centre.mpg.de/comp2psych; participating institutions: Max Planck Institute for Human Development, University College London).

This work was in part conducted at the Max Planck Dahlem Campus of Cognition (MPDCC) of the Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Berlin, Germany.

Glossary:

Alzheimer’s disease: Alzheimer’s disease is a progressive and irreversible neurological disorder characterized by cognitive decline and memory loss, which ultimately leads to functional impairment and a decline in quality of life. It is the most common cause of dementia in older adults and is characterized by the accumulation of abnormal proteins, such as beta-amyloid and tau, in the brain

Abnormally phosphorylated tau: Abnormally phosphorylated tau refers to a form of tau protein that has undergone a chemical modification, specifically excessive phosphorylation, which can lead to the formation of tau tangles and is associated with various neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease

Catecholamines: A class of monoamine neurotransmitters that are synthesized from the amino acid tyrosine and contain a catechol group and an amine group. Catecholamines include dopamine, noradrenaline, and epinephrine, which are involved in the regulation of mood, arousal and other physiological processes

L-tyrosine: An amino acid that is a precursor to catecholamines, and is necessary for the production of neurotransmitters such as dopamine and noradrenaline

Tyrosine hydroxylase (TH): An enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of L-tyrosine to L-DOPA, a precursor to catecholamines

Dopamine beta-hydroxylase (DBH): An enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of dopamine to noradrenaline, a process that occurs in noradrenergic neurons

Vesicles: Small membrane-bound structures within cells that are responsible for storing and releasing neurotransmitters

Noradrenergic transporter (NET): A protein that transports norepinephrine and dopamine back into presynaptic neurons after it has been released into the synaptic cleft

Phasic activity: A type of neuronal activity that occurs in brief bursts or spikes, typically in response to specific stimuli. This type of activity is thought to be important for the encoding of salient information and the modulation of behavior

Tonic activity: A type of neuronal activity that occurs at a relatively constant rate or level, typically in the absence of specific stimuli. This type of activity is thought to be important for maintaining a baseline level of activity and for the regulation of neural and physiological processes

Neuromodulators: Neuromodulators, like dopamine and noradrenaline, are released via diffuse projections from subcortical cell clusters (nuclei). In target neurons, neuromodulators modify cellular properties and the effectiveness of their synaptic transmission

G-protein coupled receptors: A type of receptor protein that spans the cell membrane and interacts with G-proteins to initiate intracellular signaling pathways

α1, α2, β receptors: Different subtypes of adrenergic receptors that respond to the neurotransmitters noradrenaline and epinephrine

D1-type and D2-type: Different subtypes of dopamine receptors that are classified based on their molecular structure and pharmacological properties

Low-affinity: Refers to the binding of a ligand to a receptor with low affinity, meaning that the ligand has a low tendency to bind to the receptor. Low affinity receptors require a high transmitter concentration to elicit a response

Kinases: Enzymes that catalyze the transfer of a phosphate group from ATP to another molecule, typically a protein, which can activate or inhibit its function

Phosphatases: Enzymes that remove phosphate groups from molecules, which can also modulate their function

cAMP-dependent protein kinase [PKA]: An enzyme that is activated by cyclic AMP (cAMP) and plays a key role in intracellular signaling pathways that regulate a wide range of cellular processes, including synaptic plasticity, gene expression, and metabolism. PKA is involved in many biological processes and is a target of many drugs

Transcription: The process by which genetic information in DNA is copied into RNA

Translation: The process by which RNA is used to synthesize a protein

cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB): A transcription factor that regulates the expression of genes involved in neural plasticity and memory formation

Pattern separation: The process by which similar input patterns are transformed into distinct and non-overlapping representations in the brain

Pattern completion: The process by which incomplete or degraded input patterns are used to retrieve a complete or original memory

Novelty detection: The ability of the brain to detect and respond to differences between expected and actual sensory input. Also termed match/mismatch detection

Optogenetic stimulation: A technique that involves the use of genetically encoded light-sensitive proteins (such as channelrhodopsin) to selectively activate or inhibit specific neurons or neural circuits in response to light. This approach can be used to study the function of specific neurons or circuits in vivo with high temporal precision

Hebbian learning: A type of synaptic plasticity in which the strength of synaptic connections is changed when presynaptic activity is paired with postsynaptic activity

Long-term potentiation (LTP): A type of synaptic plasticity in which the strength of synaptic connections is increased for an extended period of time following high-frequency stimulation

Long-term depression (LTD): A type of synaptic plasticity in which the strength of synaptic connections is decreased for an extended period of time following low-frequency stimulation

Agonists: Chemicals that activate receptors or neurotransmitters by binding to them and mimicking the effects of endogenous ligands

Antagonists: Chemicals that block the activity of receptors or neurotransmitters by binding to them without activating them

High-frequency stimulation: A technique that involves the delivery of electrical pulses to a specific region of the brain at high frequencies, typically in the range of 100 Hz or higher. This technique can be used to modulate neural activity and has been shown to induce long-lasting changes in synaptic plasticity

Trace fear conditioning: A type of associative learning that involves the pairing of a neutral stimulus (such as a tone) with an aversive stimulus (such as a mild electric shock) that is presented after a short delay (the trace interval). This type of conditioning requires the hippocampus and is thought to involve the formation of a temporal association between the two stimuli

Chemogenetics: A set of techniques that use engineered receptors to selectively activate or inhibit specific neurons or neural circuits in response to a specific drug or compound. This approach can be used to study the function of specific neurons or circuits in vivo and has potential applications in the development of novel therapies for neurological and psychiatric disorders

Place cells: Hippocampal place cells are neurons that are selectively activated when an animal is in a specific spatial location. They are implicated in encoding a cognitive map of the animal’s environment, and are essential for spatial navigation and memory

Operant conditioning: Operant conditioning is a type of learning where the strength of a behavior is modified by its consequences, either through reinforcement or punishment, resulting in an increased or decreased likelihood of the behavior being repeated in the future. It involves the association between a behavior and its consequences, and the behavior is more likely to occur if it is reinforced with a reward or positive consequence

Figure 1. Synthesis and release of catecholamines and its effect on hippocampal plasticity.

(A) Dopamine (orange) and noradrenaline (blue) are synthesized from the amino acid tyrosine. The last step of conversion, from dopamine to noradrenaline, takes place in the vesicles of noradrenergic neurons.

(B) Dopamine and noradrenaline are released in the hippocampus in response to salient events. Crucially, the two catecholamines can be co-released from locus coeruleus terminals (Devoto &amp; Flore, 2006; Kempadoo et al., 2016; C. C. Smith &amp; Greene, 2012). Activation of postsynaptic D1-type dopaminergic and β-adrenergic receptors modulates synaptic plasticity through cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB)-dependent signaling (Hagena et al., 2016; Hansen &amp; Manahan-Vaughan, 2014). After release, dopaminergic (DAT) and noradrenergic (NET) transporters clear the catecholamines, with NET facilitating the transport of dopamine and noradrenaline (back) to presynaptic locus coeruleus terminals (Borgkvist et al., 2012).

(C) Electrical stimulation of the hippocampus (LTP) results in long-term potentiation that slowly decays over time (dark brown line). Pairing of hippocampal stimulation with optogenetic locus coeruleus stimulation enhances and stabilizes LTP (dark brown line) through a D1-type dopaminergic mechanism, as confirmed by pharmacological blockade (not shown; cf. Lisman et al., 2011). Panel C adapted from (Takeuchi et al., 2016).

Figure 1 was in part created with BioRender.

Figure 2. Dopamine and noradrenaline modulate hippocampal memory processes.

(A) Projections of the dopaminergic substantia nigra–ventral tegmental area (SN–VTA; orange) and catecholaminergic locus coeruleus (LC; blue) to the hippocampus (dark grey).

(B) Locus coeruleus–hippocampus projections are denser than those of the substantia nigra–ventral tegmental area and provide hippocampal noradrenaline and potentially a majority of its dopamine (Kempadoo et al., 2016). Noradrenaline may have a stronger modulatory impact in the dentate gyrus (green; (Hagena et al., 2016)), whereas dopamine may affect processing in CA1 more (red; (Hansen &amp; Manahan-Vaughan, 2014)), implying differential roles of the catecholamines in pattern separation and novelty processing (Yassa &amp; Stark, 2011). Different effects in the different subfields of the hippocampus are schematically represented by the coloring of the pie charts. For CA3, more data are required. (C) Different hippocampal subregions are associated with different memory processes. The dentate gyrus (green) is implicated in a process called pattern separation, that aids the mnemonic discrimination of similar memories by reducing the degree of representational similarity among overlapping experiences. By contrast, mainly the Cornu Ammonis 3 (purple) region is involved in retrieving a complete memory representation from partial cues, a process called pattern completion.

Asterisks (*) indicate pathways and processes that show pronounced age-related changes.

CA, Cornu Ammonis; DG, dentate gyrus. Figure 2 was in part created with BioRender.

Figure 3. Locus coeruleus (LC)-sensitive magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) reveals LC integrity differences between Alzheimer’s patients and controls that are corroborated by histopathology.

(A) The location of the LC in the brainstem, which can be detected in LC-MRI as a cluster of hyperintense voxels bordering the fourth ventricle.

(B) Lower in-vivo LC-MRI hyperintensity in Alzheimer’s disease corresponds to locus coeruleus neurodegeneration, which can be detected by depigmentation of neuromelanin and the presence of neurofibrillary tangles and tau-positive threads in LC neurons (upper and lower slices, respectively).

Reproduced, with permission, from (Dahl et al., 2019; Dahl, Mather, &amp; Werkle-Bergner, 2022; Dahl, Mather, Werkle-Bergner, et al., 2022).

Table 1: Overview of recent rodent studies probing locus coeruleus-catecholaminergic effects on hippocampal memory

Publication	Source	Target	Receptor	Type and time of modulation	Memory assessment	Neuromodulatory effects on long-term memory	
	
Takeuchi et al., 2016	LC, SN-VTA	CA1	D1-type dopaminer gic; β-adrenergic	Post-encoding novelty, Post-encoding optogenetic stimulation	Spatial object recognition	Post-encoding locus coeruleus stimulation promotes the consolidation of hippocampus-dependent memory through D1-type dopaminergic receptors.	
Kempadoo et al., 2016	LC	CA1	D1-type dopaminergic; β-adrenergic	Optogenetic stimulation during encoding	Spatial object recognition	Locus coeruleus stimulation during encoding promotes hippocampus-dependent Spatial object recognition through D1-type dopaminergic receptors.	
Chowdhury et al., 2022	LC; RN	CA1; CA3	D1-type dopaminergic; β-adrenergic	Chemogenetic inhibition during encoding; Optogenetic stimulation during encoding	Contextual fear conditioning (memory linking)	Locus coeruleus inhibition during encoding inhibits the hippocampus-dependent linking of contextual memories through D1-type dopaminergic receptors.	
Gálvez-Márquez et al., 2022	LC; SN-VTA	CA1	D1-type dopaminergic; β-adrenergic	Optogenetic inhibition during memory updating	Spatial object recognition (memory updating)	Locus coeruleus inhibition during memory updating impairs hippocampus-dependent spatial object recognition through D1-type dopaminergic receptors.	
Wilmot et al., 2022	LC	CA1	D1-type dopaminergic; α and β-adrenergic	Optogenetic stimulation during encoding; Chemogenetic stimulation (without behavior)	Trace fear conditioning	Locus coeruleus stimulation during encoding promotes hippocampus-dependent trace fear learning through D1-type dopaminergic receptors.	
Wagatsuma et al., 2018	LC	CA3; CA1; DG	D1-type dopaminergic; β-adrenergic	Optogenetic inhibition during encoding; Chemogenetic inhibition during encoding;	Context recognition	Locus coeruleus inhibition during encoding impairs hippocampus-dependent context recognition through D1-type dopaminergic receptors.	
Petter et al., 2023	LC	DG	D1-type dopaminergic; β- adrenergic	Optogenetic stimulation after behavior	Appetitive operant conditioning	Locus coeruleus selfstimulation after behavior promotes hippocampus-dependent operant learning through D1-type dopaminergic receptors.	
Note: LC, locus coeruleus; SN-VTA, substantia nigra-ventral tegmental area; RN, raphe nuclei; CA, Cornu Ammonis; DG, dentate gyrus

Table color indicates the investigated subfield; cf. Figure 2.

Competing interests:

The authors declare no competing interests.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


References

Adcock RA , Thangavel A , Whitfield-Gabrieli S , Knutson B , &amp; Gabrieli JDE (2006). Reward-motivated learning: mesolimbic activation precedes memory formation. Neuron, 50 (3 ), 507–517. 10.1016/J.NEURON.2006.03.036 16675403
Alger BE , &amp; Teyler TJ (1976). Long-term and short-term plasticity in the CA1, CA3, and dentate regions of the rat hippocampal slice. Brain Research, 110 (3 ), 463–480. 10.1016/0006-8993(76)90858-1 947467
Arendt T , Brückner MK , Morawski M , Jäger C , &amp; Gertz HJ (2015). Early neurone loss in Alzheimer’s disease: cortical or subcortical? Acta Neuropathologica Communications, 3 , 10. 10.1186/s40478-015-0187-1 25853173
Arnsten AFT , Wang MJ , &amp; Paspalas CD (2012). Neuromodulation of thought: flexibilities and vulnerabilities in prefrontal cortical network synapses. Neuron, 76 (1 ), 223. 10.1016/J.NEURON.2012.08.038 23040817
Astafiev SV , Snyder AZ , Shulman GL , &amp; Corbetta M (2010). Comment on “Modafinil shifts human locus coeruleus to low-tonic, high-phasic activity during functional MRI” and “Homeostatic sleep pressure and responses to sustained attention in the suprachiasmatic area.” Science, 328 (5976 ), 309. 10.1126/science.1177200 20395497
Babushkina N , &amp; Manahan-Vaughan D (2022). Frequency–dependency of the involvement of dopamine D1/D5 and beta-adrenergic receptors in hippocampal LTD triggered by locus coeruleus stimulation. Hippocampus. 10.1002/HIPO.23419
Bachman SL , Dahl MJ , Werkle-Bergner M , Düzel S , Forlim CG , Lindenberger U , … Mather M (2020). Locus coeruleus MRI contrast is associated with cortical thickness in older adults. Neurobiology of Aging, 100 , 72–82. 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2020.12.019 33508564
Bäckman L , Nyberg L , Lindenberger U , Li S-C , &amp; Farde L (2006). The correlative triad among aging, dopamine, and cognition: Current status and future prospects. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 30 (6 ), 791–807. 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2006.06.005 16901542
Bell TR , Elman JA , Beck A , Fennema-Notestine C , Gustavson DE , Hagler DJ , … Kremen WS (2022). Rostral-middle locus coeruleus integrity and subjective cognitive decline in early old age. Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society : JINS, 1–12. 10.1017/S1355617722000881 33658102
Berke JD (2018, June 1). What does dopamine mean? Nature Neuroscience, Vol. 21 , pp. 787–793. Nature Publishing Group. 10.1038/s41593-018-0152-y 29760524
Berridge CW , &amp; Waterhouse BD (2003). The locus coeruleus-noradrenergic system: Modulation of behavioral state and state-dependent cognitive processes. Brain Research Reviews, 42 (1 ), 33–84. 10.1016/S0165-0173(03)00143-7 12668290
Berry AS ., &amp; Harrison TM . (2023). New perspectives on the basal forebrain cholinergic system in Alzheimer’s disease. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 150 . 10.1016/J.NEUBIOREV.2023.105192
Betts MJ , Kirilina E , Otaduy MCG , Ivanov D , Acosta-Cabronero J , Callaghan MF , … Hämmerer D (2019). Locus coeruleus imaging as a biomarker for noradrenergic dysfunction in neurodegenerative diseases. Brain, 142 (9 ), 2558–2571. 10.1093/brain/awz193 31327002
Bliss TVP , &amp; Collingridge GL (1993). A synaptic model of memory: long-term potentiation in the hippocampus. Nature 1993 361:6407, 361 (6407 ), 31–39. 10.1038/361031a0
Bliss TVP , &amp; Lømo T (1973). Long-lasting potentiation of synaptic transmission in the dentate area of the anaesthetized rabbit following stimulation of the perforant path. The Journal of Physiology, 232 (2 ), 331–356. 10.1113/JPHYSIOL.1973.SP010273 4727084
Borgkvist A , Malmlöf T , Feltmann K , Lindskog M , &amp; Schilström B (2012). Dopamine in the hippocampus is cleared by the norepinephrine transporter. The International Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology, 15 (4 ), 531–540. 10.1017/S1461145711000812 21669025
Braak H , &amp; Del Tredici K (2016). Potential Pathways of Abnormal Tau and α-Synuclein Dissemination in Sporadic Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s Diseases. Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Biology, 8 (11 ), a023630. 10.1101/CSHPERSPECT.A023630 27580631
Braak H , Thal DR , Ghebremedhin E , &amp; Del Tredici K (2011). Stages of the pathologic process in Alzheimer disease: Age categories from 1 to 100 years. Journal of Neuropathology and Experimental Neurology, 70 (11 ), 960–969. 10.1097/NEN.0b013e318232a379 22002422
Broussard JI , Yang K , Levine AT , Tsetsenis T , Jenson D , Cao F , … Dani JA (2016). Dopamine Regulates Aversive Contextual Learning and Associated In Vivo Synaptic Plasticity in the Hippocampus. Cell Reports, 14 (8 ), 1930–1939. 10.1016/J.CELREP.2016.01.070 26904943
Carter ME , Yizhar O , Chikahisa S , Nguyen H , Adamantidis A , Nishino S , … De Lecea L (2010). Tuning arousal with optogenetic modulation of locus coeruleus neurons. Nature Neuroscience, 13 (12 ), 1526–1535. 10.1038/nn.2682 21037585
Cassidy CM , Therriault J , Pascoal TA , Cheung V , Savard M , Tuominen L , … Rosa-Neto P (2022). Association of locus coeruleus integrity with Braak stage and neuropsychiatric symptom severity in Alzheimer’s disease. Neuropsychopharmacology 2022 , 1–9. 10.1038/s41386-022-01293-6
Chowdhury A , Luchetti A , Fernandes G , Filho DA , Kastellakis G , Tzilivaki A , … Silva AJ (2022). A locus coeruleus-dorsal CA1 dopaminergic circuit modulates memory linking. Neuron. 10.1016/J.NEURON.2022.08.001
Ciampa CJ , Parent JH , Harrison TM , Fain RM , Betts MJ , Maass A , … Berry AS (2022). Associations among locus coeruleus catecholamines, tau pathology, and memory in aging. Neuropsychopharmacology 2022 , 1–8. 10.1038/s41386-022-01269-6
Clewett D , Gasser C , &amp; Davachi L (2020). Pupil-linked arousal signals track the temporal organization of events in memory. Nature Communications, 11 (1 ), 4007. 10.1038/s41467-020-17851-9
Clewett D , &amp; Murty VP (2019). Echoes of Emotions Past: How Neuromodulators Determine What We Recollect. ENeuro, 6 (2 ). 10.1523/ENEURO.0108-18.2019
Collins L , Boddington L , Steffan PJ , &amp; McCormick D (2021). Vagus nerve stimulation induces widespread cortical and behavioral activation. Current Biology, 31 (10 ), 2088–2098.e3. 10.1016/j.cub.2021.02.049 33740425
Costa KM , &amp; Schoenbaum G (2022). Dopamine. Current Biology, 32 (15 ), R817–R824. 10.1016/j.cub.2022.06.060 35944478
Crook T , Bartus RT , Ferris SH , Whitehouse P , Cohen GD , &amp; Gershon S (1986). Age-associated memory impairment: Proposed diagnostic criteria and measures of clinical change—Report of a National Institute of Mental Health Work Group. Developmental Neuropsychology, 2 (4 ), 261–276. 10.1080/87565648609540348
Dahl MJ , Bachman SL , Dutt S , Düzel S , Bodammer NC , Lindenberger U , … Mather M (2023). The integrity of dopaminergic and noradrenergic brain regions is associated with different aspects of late-life memory performance. Nature Aging 2023 , 1–16. 10.1038/s43587-023-00469-z
Dahl MJ , Mather M , Düzel S , Bodammer NC , Lindenberger U , Kühn S , &amp; Werkle-Bergner M (2019). Rostral locus coeruleus integrity is associated with better memory performance in older adults. Nature Human Behaviour, 3 (11 ), 1203–1214. 10.1038/s41562-019-0715-2
Dahl MJ , Mather M , &amp; Werkle-Bergner M (2022). Noradrenergic modulation of rhythmic neural activity shapes selective attention. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 26 (1 ), 38–52. 10.1016/J.TICS.2021.10.009 34799252
Dahl MJ , Mather M , Werkle-Bergner M , Kennedy BL , Guzman S , Hurth K , … Ringman JM (2022). Locus coeruleus integrity is related to tau burden and memory loss in autosomal-dominant Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiology of Aging, 112 , 39–54. 10.1016/J.Neurobiolaging.2021.11.006 35045380
David MCB , Giovane M. Del , Liu KY ., Gostick B ., Rowe JB ., Oboh I ., … Malhotra PA . (2022). Cognitive and neuropsychiatric effects of noradrenergic treatment in Alzheimer’s disease: systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery &amp; Psychiatry, 0 , jnnp-2022–329136. 10.1136/JNNP-2022-329136
Devoto P , &amp; Flore G (2006). On the Origin of Cortical Dopamine: Is it a Co-Transmitter in Noradrenergic Neurons? Current Neuropharmacology, 4 (2 ), 115. 10.2174/157015906776359559 18615131
Dubovyk V , &amp; Manahan-Vaughan D (2019). Gradient of Expression of Dopamine D2 Receptors Along the Dorso-Ventral Axis of the Hippocampus. Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience, 11 , 28. 10.3389/FNSYN.2019.00028/BIBTEX 31680927
Duncan K , Ketz N , Inati SJ , &amp; Davachi L (2012). Evidence for area CA1 as a match/mismatch detector: A high-resolution fMRI study of the human hippocampus. Hippocampus, 22 (3 ), 389. 10.1002/HIPO.20933 21484934
Dunsmoor JE , Murty VP , Clewett D , Phelps EA , &amp; Davachi L (2022). Tag and capture: how salient experiences target and rescue nearby events in memory. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 0 (0 ). 10.1016/J.TICS.2022.06.009
Duszkiewicz AJ , McNamara CG , Takeuchi T , &amp; Genzel L (2019). Novelty and dopaminergic modulation of memory persistence: A tale of two systems. Trends in Neurosciences, 42 (2 ), 102–114. 10.1016/J.TINS.2018.10.002 30455050
Düzel E , Bunzeck N , Guitart-Masip M , Wittmann B , Schott BH , &amp; Tobler PN (2009). Functional imaging of the human dopaminergic midbrain. Trends in Neurosciences, 32 (6 ), 321–328. 10.1016/j.tins.2009.02.005 19446348
Ehrenberg AJ , Kelberman MA , Liu KY , Dahl MJ , Weinshenker D , Falgàs N , … Grinberg LT (2023). Priorities for research on neuromodulatory subcortical systems in Alzheimer’s disease: Position paper from the NSS PIA of ISTAART. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia, 8 , 21. 10.1002/ALZ.12937
Ehrenberg AJ , Nguy AK , Theofilas P , Dunlop S , Suemoto CK , Di Lorenzo Alho AT , … Grinberg LT (2017). Quantifying the accretion of hyperphosphorylated tau in the locus coeruleus and dorsal raphe nucleus: The pathological building blocks of early Alzheimer’s disease. Neuropathology and Applied Neurobiology, 43 (5 ), 393–408. 10.1111/nan.12387 28117917
Elman JA , Puckett OK , Beck A , Panizzon MS , Sanderson-Cimino ME , Gustavson DE , … Kremen WS (2021). MRI-assessed locus coeruleus integrity is heritable and associated with cognition, Alzheimer’s risk, and sleep-wake disturbance. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia, 17 (6 ), 1017–1025. 10.1002/alz.044862
Emiliani V , Entcheva E , Hedrich R , Hegemann P , Konrad KR , Lüscher C , … Yizhar O (2022). Optogenetics for light control of biological systems. Nature Reviews Methods Primers 2022 2:1, 2 (1 ), 1–25. 10.1038/s43586-022-00136-4
Engels-Domínguez N , Koops EA , Prokopiou PC , Van Egroo M , Schneider C , Riphagen JM , … Jacobs HIL (2023). State-of-the-art imaging of neuromodulatory subcortical systems in aging and Alzheimer’s disease: Challenges and opportunities. Neuroscience &amp; Biobehavioral Reviews, 144 , 104998. 10.1016/J.NEUBIOREV.2022.104998 36526031
Eschenko O (2019). The role of the locus coeruleus in cellular and systems memory consolidation. In Manahan-Vaughan D (Ed.), Handbook of behavioral neuroscience: Handbook of in vivo neural plasticity techniques (Vol. 28 , pp. 327–347). London: Elsevier. 10.1016/B978-0-12-812028-6.00018-5
Fanselow MS , &amp; Dong HW (2010). Are The Dorsal and Ventral Hippocampus functionally distinct structures? Neuron, 65 (1 ), 7. 10.1016/J.NEURON.2009.11.031 20152109
Frey U , Matthies H , Reymann KG , &amp; Matthies H (1991). The effect of dopaminergic D1 receptor blockade during tetanization on the expression of long-term potentiation in the rat CA1 region in vitro. Neuroscience Letters, 129 (1 ), 111–114. 10.1016/0304-3940(91)90732-9 1833673
Gálvez-Márquez DK , Salgado-Ménez M , Moreno-Castilla P , Rodríguez-Durán L , Escobar ML , Tecuapetla F , &amp; Bermudez-Rattoni F (2022). Spatial contextual recognition memory updating is modulated by dopamine release in the dorsal hippocampus from the locus coeruleus. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 119 (49 ), e2208254119. 10.1073/PNAS.2208254119
Ghosh A , Torraville SE , Mukherjee B , Walling SG , Martin GM , Harley CW , &amp; Yuan Q (2019). An experimental model of Braak’s pretangle proposal for the origin of Alzheimer’s disease: The role of locus coeruleus in early symptom development. Alzheimer’s Research and Therapy, 11 (1 ), 59. 10.1186/s13195-019-0511-2
Gruber MJ , Gelman BD , &amp; Ranganath C (2014). States of curiosity modulate hippocampus-dependent learning via the dopaminergic circuit. Neuron, 84 (2 ), 486–496. 10.1016/J.NEURON.2014.08.060 25284006
Gruber MJ , &amp; Ranganath C (2019). How curiosity enhances hippocampus-dependent memory: The prediction, appraisal, curiosity, and exploration (PACE) Framework. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 23 (12 ), 1014–1025. 10.1016/J.TICS.2019.10.003 31706791
Guzowski JF , Knierim JJ , &amp; Moser EI (2004). Ensemble dynamics of hippocampal regions CA3 and CA1. Neuron, 44 (4 ), 581–584. 10.1016/j.neuron.2004.11.003 15541306
Hagena H , Hansen N , &amp; Manahan-Vaughan D (2016). β-adrenergic control of hippocampal function: Subserving the choreography of synaptic information storage and memory. Cerebral Cortex, 26 (4 ), 1349–1364. 10.1093/CERCOR/BHV330 26804338
Hanseeuw BJ , Betensky RA , Jacobs HIL , Schultz AP , Sepulcre J , Becker JA , … Johnson K (2019). Association of amyloid and tau with cognition in preclinical Alzheimer disease. JAMA Neurology, Advance online publication. 10.1001/jamaneurol.2019.1424
Hansen N , &amp; Manahan-Vaughan D (2014). Dopamine D1/D5 Receptors Mediate Informational Saliency that Promotes Persistent Hippocampal Long-Term Plasticity. Cerebral Cortex, 24 (4 ), 845–858. 10.1093/CERCOR/BHS362 23183712
Harley CW (2004). Norepinephrine and dopamine as learning signals. Neural Plasticity, 11 (3–4 ), 191–204. 10.1155/NP.2004.191 15656268
Hauser TU , Eldar E , Purg N , Moutoussis M , &amp; Dolan RJ (2019). Distinct roles of dopamine and noradrenaline in incidental memory. The Journal of Neuroscience : The Official Journal of the Society for Neuroscience, 0401–0419. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0401-19.2019
Hayat H , Regev N , Matosevich N , Sales A , Paredes-Rodriguez E , Krom AJ , … Nir Y (2020). Locus coeruleus norepinephrine activity mediates sensory-evoked awakenings from sleep. Science Advances, 6 (15 ), eaaz4232. 10.1126/sciadv.aaz4232 32285002
Hebb DO (1949). The organization of behavior; a neuropsychological theory. In The organization of behavior; a neuropsychological theory. Oxford, England: Wiley.
Huang YY , &amp; Kandel ER (1995). D1/D5 receptor agonists induce a protein synthesis-dependent late potentiation in the CA1 region of the hippocampus. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 92 (7 ), 2446–2450. 10.1073/PNAS.92.7.2446
Hulsey DR , Riley JR , Loerwald KW , Rennaker RL , Kilgard MP , &amp; Hays SA (2017). Parametric characterization of neural activity in the locus coeruleus in response to vagus nerve stimulation. Experimental Neurology, 289 , 21–30. 10.1016/j.expneurol.2016.12.005 27988257
Jacobs HIL , Becker JA , Kwong K , Engels-Domínguez N , Prokopiou PC , Papp KV , … Johnson KA (2021). In vivo and neuropathology data support locus coeruleus integrity as indicator of Alzheimer’s disease pathology and cognitive decline. Science Translational Medicine, 13 (612 ), eabj2511. 10.1126/scitranslmed.abj2511 34550726
Jacobs HIL , Becker JA , Kwong K , Munera D , Ramirez-Gomez L , Engels-Domínguez N , … Quiroz YT (2022). Waning locus coeruleus integrity precedes cortical tau accrual in preclinical autosomal dominant Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia : The Journal of the Alzheimer’s Association. 10.1002/ALZ.12656
Jacobs HIL , Priovoulos N , Poser BA , Pagen LHG , Ivanov D , Verhey FRJ , &amp; Uludağ K (2020). Dynamic behavior of the locus coeruleus during arousal-related memory processing in a multi-modal 7T fMRI paradigm. ELife, 9 , 1–30. 10.7554/eLife.52059
Jacobs HIL , Riphagen JM , Razat CM , Wiese S , &amp; Sack AT (2015). Transcutaneous vagus nerve stimulation boosts associative memory in older individuals. Neurobiology of Aging, 36 (5 ), 1860–1867. 10.1016/J.NEUROBIOLAGING.2015.02.023 25805212
Jagust W (2018). Imaging the evolution and pathophysiology of Alzheimer disease. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 19 , 687–700. 10.1038/s41583-018-0067-3 30266970
James T , Kula B , Choi S , Khan SS , Bekar LK , &amp; Smith NA (2020). Locus coeruleus in memory formation and Alzheimer’s disease. European Journal of Neuroscience, ejn.15045. 10.1111/ejn.15045
Kandel ER , Dudai Y , &amp; Mayford MR (2014). The Molecular and Systems Biology of Memory. Cell, 157 (1 ), 163–186. 10.1016/J.CELL.2014.03.001 24679534
Kaufman AM , Geiller T , &amp; Losonczy A (2020). A Role for the Locus Coeruleus in Hippocampal CA1 Place Cell Reorganization during Spatial Reward Learning. Neuron, 105 (6 ), 1018–1026.e4. 10.1016/J.NEURON.2019.12.029 31980319
Kelly SC , He B , Perez SE , Ginsberg SD , Mufson EJ , &amp; Counts SE (2017). Locus coeruleus cellular and molecular pathology during the progression of Alzheimer’s disease. Acta Neuropathologica Communications, 5 (1 ), 8. 10.1186/s40478-017-0411-2 28109312
Kemp A , &amp; Manahan-Vaughan D (2007). Hippocampal long-term depression: master or minion in declarative memory processes? Trends in Neurosciences, 30 (3 ), 111–118. 10.1016/J.TINS.2007.01.002 17234277
Kempadoo KA , Mosharov EV , Choi SJ , Sulzer D , &amp; Kandel ER (2016). Dopamine release from the locus coeruleus to the dorsal hippocampus promotes spatial learning and memory. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 113 (51 ), 14835–14840. 10.1073/pnas.1616515114 27930324
Keren NI , Lozar CT , Harris KC , Morgan PS , &amp; Eckert MA (2009). In vivo mapping of the human locus coeruleus. NeuroImage, 47 (4 ), 1261–1267. 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.06.012 19524044
Knierim JJ (2015). The hippocampus. Current Biology, 25 (23 ), R1116–R1121. 10.1016/J.CUB.2015.10.049 26654366
La Joie R , Visani AV , Baker SL , Brown JA , Bourakova V , Cha J , … Rabinovici GD (2020). Prospective longitudinal atrophy in Alzheimer’s disease correlates with the intensity and topography of baseline tau-PET. Science Translational Medicine, 12 (524 ), eaau5732. 10.1126/scitranslmed.aau5732 31894103
Leal SL , &amp; Yassa MA (2018). Integrating new findings and examining clinical applications of pattern separation. Nature Neuroscience, 21 (2 ), 163–173. 10.1038/S41593-017-0065-1 29371654
Lee J-Y , Martin-Bastida A , Murueta-Goyena A , Gabilondo I , Cuenca N , Piccini P , &amp; Jeon B (2022). Multimodal brain and retinal imaging of dopaminergic degeneration in Parkinson disease. Nature Reviews Neurology 2022, 0123456789 , 1–18. 10.1038/s41582-022-00618-9
Levey AI , Qiu D , Zhao L , Hu WT , Duong DM , Higginbotham L , … Weinshenker D (2021). A phase II study repurposing atomoxetine for neuroprotection in mild cognitive impairment. Brain, 139 (4 ), 16–17. 10.1093/BRAIN/AWAB452
Li S-C , Lindenberger U , &amp; Sikström S (2001). Aging cognition: From neuromodulation to representation. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 5 (11 ), 479–486. 10.1016/S1364-6613(00)01769-1 11684480
Li S , Cullen WK , Anwyl R , &amp; Rowan MJ (2003). Dopamine-dependent facilitation of LTP induction in hippocampal CA1 by exposure to spatial novelty. Nature Neuroscience 2003 6:5, 6 (5 ), 526–531. 10.1038/nn1049
Lisman JE , &amp; Grace AA (2005, June 2). The hippocampal-VTA loop: Controlling the entry of information into long-term memory. Neuron, Vol. 46 , pp. 703–713. Neuron. 10.1016/j.neuron.2005.05.002 15924857
Lisman JE , Grace AA , &amp; Duzel E (2011). A neoHebbian framework for episodic memory; role of dopamine-dependent late LTP. Trends in Neurosciences, 34 (10 ), 536–547. 10.1016/J.TINS.2011.07.006 21851992
Liu KY , Acosta-Cabronero J , Cardenas-Blanco A , Loane C , Berry AJ , Betts MJ , … Hämmerer D (2019). In vivo visualization of age-related differences in the locus coeruleus. Neurobiology of Aging, 74 , 101–111. 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2018.10.014 30447418
Liu KY , Kievit RA , Tsvetanov KA , Betts MJ , Düzel E , Rowe JB , … Hämmerer D (2020). Noradrenergic-dependent functions are associated with age-related locus coeruleus signal intensity differences. Nature Communications, 11 (1 ), 1712. 10.1038/s41467-020-15410-w
Liu KY , Marijatta F , Hämmerer D , Acosta-Cabronero J , Düzel E , &amp; Howard RJ (2017). Magnetic resonance imaging of the human locus coeruleus: A systematic review. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 83 , 325–355. 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2017.10.023 29107830
Loy R , Koziell DA , Lindsey JD , &amp; Moore RY (1980). Noradrenergic innervation of the adult rat hippocampal formation. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 189 (4 ), 699–710. 10.1002/CNE.901890406 7381046
Ludwig M , Wienke C , Betts MJ , Zaehle T , &amp; Hämmerer D (2021). Current challenges in reliably targeting the noradrenergic locus coeruleus using transcutaneous auricular vagus nerve stimulation (taVNS). Autonomic Neuroscience : Basic &amp; Clinical, 236 . 10.1016/J.AUTNEU.2021.102900
Lynch MA (2004). Long-Term Potentiation and Memory. Physiological Reviews, 84 (1 ), 87–136. 10.1152/PHYSREV.00014.2003/ASSET/IMAGES/LARGE/9J0140284006.JPEG 14715912
Lyness SA , Zarow C , &amp; Chui HC (2003). Neuron loss in key cholinergic and aminergic nuclei in Alzheimer disease: A meta-analysis. Neurobiology of Aging, 24 (1 ), 1–23. 10.1016/S0197-4580(02)00057-X 12493547
Malenka RC , &amp; Bear MF (2004). LTP and LTD: An Embarrassment of Riches. Neuron, 44 (1 ), 5–21. 10.1016/J.NEURON.2004.09.012 15450156
Manahan-Vaughan D (1997). Group 1 and 2 Metabotropic Glutamate Receptors Play Differential Roles in Hippocampal Long-Term Depression and Long-Term Potentiation in Freely Moving Rats. The Journal of Neuroscience, 17 (9 ), 3303. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.17-09-03303.1997 9096163
Manahan-Vaughan D (2017). Learning-Related Hippocampal Long-Term Potentiation and Long-Term Depression. The Curated Reference Collection in Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Psychology, 585–609. 10.1016/B978-0-12-809324-5.21104-8
Martel JC , &amp; Gatti McArthur S (2020). Dopamine Receptor Subtypes, Physiology and Pharmacology: New Ligands and Concepts in Schizophrenia. Frontiers in Pharmacology, 11 , 557887. 10.3389/FPHAR.2020.01003/BIBTEX
Mather M , Clewett D , Sakaki M , &amp; Harley CW (2016). Norepinephrine ignites local hotspots of neuronal excitation: How arousal amplifies selectivity in perception and memory. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 39 , e200. 10.1017/S0140525X15000667 26126507
Mather M , &amp; Harley CW (2016). The locus coeruleus: Essential for maintaining cognitive function and the aging brain. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 20 (3 ), 214–226. 10.1016/j.tics.2016.01.001 26895736
Matt RA , Martin RS , Evans AK , Gever JR , Vargas GA , Shamloo M , &amp; Ford AP (2023). Locus Coeruleus and Noradrenergic Pharmacology in Neurodegenerative Disease. 1–62. 10.1007/164_2023_677
McGaugh JL (2000). Memory--a century of consolidation. Science, 287 (5451 ), 248–251. 10.1126/SCIENCE.287.5451.248 10634773
McGaugh JL (2015). Consolidating Memories. Annual Review of Psychology, 66 (1 ), 1–24. 10.1146/annurev-psych-010814-014954
McHugh TJ , Blum KI , Tsien JZ , Tonegawa S , &amp; Wilson MA (1996). Impaired Hippocampal Representation of Space in CA1-Specific NMDAR1 Knockout Mice. Cell, 87 (7 ), 1339–1349. 10.1016/S0092-8674(00)81828-0 8980239
McNamara CG , Tejero-Cantero Á , Trouche S , Campo-Urriza N , &amp; Dupret D (2014). Dopaminergic neurons promote hippocampal reactivation and spatial memory persistence. Nature Neuroscience 2014 17:12, 17 (12 ), 1658–1660. 10.1038/nn.3843
Monti JM , &amp; Monti D (2007). The involvement of dopamine in the modulation of sleep and waking. Sleep Medicine Reviews, 11 (2 ), 113–133. 10.1016/J.SMRV.2006.08.003 17275369
Morris RGM , Anderson E , Lynch GS , &amp; Baudry M (1986). Selective impairment of learning and blockade of long-term potentiation by an N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antagonist, AP5. Nature, 319 (6056 ), 774–776. 10.1038/319774A0 2869411
Murray ME ., Moloney CM ., Kouri N ., Syrjanen JA ., Matchett BJ ., Rothberg DM ., … Mielke MM . (2022). Global neuropathologic severity of Alzheimer’s disease and locus coeruleus vulnerability influences plasma phosphorylated tau levels. Molecular Neurodegeneration, 17 (1 ), 85. 10.1186/S13024-022-00578-0 36575455
Nyberg L , Lövdén M , Riklund K , Lindenberger U , &amp; Bäckman L (2012). Memory aging and brain maintenance. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 16 (5 ), 292–305. 10.1016/j.tics.2012.04.005 22542563
O’Callaghan C , Hezemans FH , Ye R , Rua C , Jones PS , Murley AG , … Rowe JB (2021). Locus coeruleus integrity and the effect of atomoxetine on response inhibition in Parkinson’s disease. Brain, 144 (8 ), 2513–2526. 10.1093/BRAIN/AWAB142 33783470
O’Dell TJ , Connor SA , Guglietta R , &amp; Nguyen PV (2015). β-Adrenergic receptor signaling and modulation of long-term potentiation in the mammalian hippocampus. Learning &amp; Memory, 22 (9 ), 461–471. 10.1101/lm.031088.113 26286656
Omoluabi T , Torraville SE , Maziar A , Ghosh A , Power KD , Reinhardt C , … Correspondence Qi Yuan C (2021). Novelty-like activation of locus coeruleus protects against deleterious human pretangle tau effects while stress-inducing activation worsens its effects. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia: Translational Research &amp; Clinical Interventions, 7 (1 ), e12231. 10.1002/TRC2.12231
Orlando IF , Shine JM , Robbins TW , Rowe JB , &amp; O’Callaghan C (2023). Noradrenergic and cholinergic systems take centre stage in neuropsychiatric diseases of ageing. Neuroscience &amp; Biobehavioral Reviews, 149 , 105167. 10.1016/J.NEUBIOREV.2023.105167 37054802
Otmakhova N , Duzel E , Deutch AY , &amp; Lisman J (2013). The hippocampal-VTA loop: The role of novelty and motivation in controlling the entry of information into long-term memory. Intrinsically Motivated Learning in Natural and Artificial Systems, 9783642323 , 235–254. 10.1007/978-3-642-32375-1_10
Palacios-Filardo J , &amp; Mellor JR (2019). Neuromodulation of hippocampal long-term synaptic plasticity. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 54 , 37–43. 10.1016/J.CONB.2018.08.009 30212713
Palomero-Gallagher N , Kedo O , Mohlberg H , Zilles K , &amp; Amunts K (2020). Multimodal mapping and analysis of the cyto- and receptorarchitecture of the human hippocampus. Brain Structure &amp; Function, 225 (3 ), 881. 10.1007/S00429-019-02022-4 31955294
Petter EA , Fallon IP , Hughes RN , Watson GD , Meck WH , Ulloa Severino FP , &amp; Yin HH (2023). Elucidating a locus coeruleus-dentate gyrus dopamine pathway for operant reinforcement. ELife, 12 . 10.7554/ELIFE.83600
Poe GR , Foote S , Eschenko O , Johansen JP , Bouret S , Aston-Jones G , … Sara SJ (2020). Locus coeruleus: a new look at the blue spot. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 21 (11 ), 644–659. 10.1038/s41583-020-0360-9 32943779
Prince MJ , Wimo A , Guerchet MM , Ali GC , Wu Y-T , &amp; Prina M (2015). World Alzheimer Report 2015 - The global impact of dementia: An analysis of prevalence, incidence, cost and trends. London: Alzheimer’s Disease International. Retrieved from https://kclpure.kcl.ac.uk/portal/en/publications/world-alzheimer-report-2015--the-global-impact-of-dementia(ae525fda-1938-4892-8daa-a2222a672254)/export.html
Puighermanal E , Cutando L , Boubaker-Vitre J , Honoré E , Longueville S , Hervé D , &amp; Valjent E (2017). Anatomical and molecular characterization of dopamine D1 receptor-expressing neurons of the mouse CA1 dorsal hippocampus. Brain Structure and Function, 222 (4 ), 1897–1911. 10.1007/S00429-016-1314-X/FIGURES/6 27678395
Robbins TW , &amp; Arnsten AFT (2009). The neuropsychopharmacology of fronto-executive function: Monoaminergic modulation. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 32 (1 ), 267–287. 10.1146/annurev.neuro.051508.135535
Rosen ZB , Cheung S , &amp; Siegelbaum SA (2015). Midbrain dopamine neurons bidirectionally regulate CA3-CA1 synaptic drive. Nature Neuroscience 2015 18:12, 18 (12 ), 1763–1771. 10.1038/nn.4152
Rouhani N , Niv Y , Frank MJ , &amp; Schwabe L (2023). Multiple routes to enhanced memory for emotionally relevant events. Trends in Cognitive Sciences. 10.1016/J.TICS.2023.06.006
Sara SJ (2009). The locus coeruleus and noradrenergic modulation of cognition. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 10 (3 ), 211–223. 10.1038/nrn2573 19190638
Schultz W , Dayan P , &amp; Montague PR (1997). A neural substrate of prediction and reward. Science (New York, N.Y.), 275 (5306 ), 1593–1599. 10.1126/SCIENCE.275.5306.1593 9054347
Scoville WB , &amp; Milner B (1957). Loss of recent memory after bilateral hippocampal lesions. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 20 (1 ), 11–21. 10.1136/JNNP.20.1.11 13406589
Seidenbecher T , Reymann KG , &amp; Balschun D (1997). A post-tetanic time window for the reinforcement of long-term potentiation by appetitive and aversive stimuli. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 94 (4 ), 1494–1499. 10.1073/PNAS.94.4.1494/ASSET/9771C0A0-16BE-4D67-9043-5D47C2771CFB/ASSETS/GRAPHIC/PQ0471013004.JPEG 9037081
Shibata E , Sasaki M , Tohyama K , Kanbara Y , Otsuka K , Ehara S , &amp; Sakai A (2006). Age-related changes in locus coeruleus on neuromelanin magnetic resonance imaging at 3 Tesla. Magnetic Resonance in Medical Sciences, 5 (4 ), 197–200. 10.2463/mrms.5.197 17332710
Sippy T , &amp; Tritsch NX (2023). Unraveling the dynamics of dopamine release and its actions on target cells. Trends in Neurosciences, 46 (3 ). 10.1016/J.TINS.2022.12.005
Smith CC , &amp; Greene RW (2012). CNS dopamine transmission mediated by noradrenergic innervation. The Journal of Neuroscience : The Official Journal of the Society for Neuroscience, 32 (18 ), 6072–6080. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.6486-11.2012 22553014
Smith WB , Starck SR , Roberts RW , &amp; Schuman EM (2005). Dopaminergic stimulation of local protein synthesis enhances surface expression of GluR1 and synaptic transmission in hippocampal neurons. Neuron, 45 (5 ), 765–779. 10.1016/J.NEURON.2005.01.015 15748851
Stratmann K , Heinsen H , Korf HW , Del Turco D , Ghebremedhin E , Seidel K , … Rüb U (2016). Precortical phase of Alzheimer’s disease (AD)-related tau cytoskeletal pathology. Brain Pathology, 26 (3 ), 371–386. 10.1111/bpa.12289 26193084
Sulzer D , Cassidy C , Horga G , Kang UJ , Fahn S , Casella L , … Zecca L (2018). Neuromelanin detection by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and its promise as a biomarker for Parkinson’s disease. Npj Parkinson’s Disease, 4 (1 ), 11. 10.1038/s41531-018-0047-3
Swanson-Park JL , Coussens CM , Mason-Parker SE , Raymond CR , Hargreaves EL , Dragunow M , … Abraham WC (1999). A double dissociation within the hippocampus of dopamine D1/D5 receptor and beta-adrenergic receptor contributions to the persistence of long-term potentiation. Neuroscience, 92 (2 ), 485–497. 10.1016/S0306-4522(99)00010-X 10408599
Swanson LW , &amp; Hartman BK (1975). The central adrenergic system. An immunofluorescence study of the location of cell bodies and their efferent connections in the rat utilizing dopamine-beta-hydroxylase as a marker. The Journal of Comparative Neurology, 163 (4 ), 467–505. 10.1002/CNE.901630406 1100685
Takeuchi T , Duszkiewicz AJ , Sonneborn A , Spooner PA , Yamasaki M , Watanabe M , … Morris RGM (2016). Locus coeruleus and dopaminergic consolidation of everyday memory. Nature, 537 (7620 ), 357–362. 10.1038/nature19325 27602521
Theofilas P , Dunlop S , Heinsen H , &amp; Grinberg LT (2015). Turning on the light within: Subcortical nuclei of the isodentritic core and their role in Alzheimer’s disease pathogenesis. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 46 (1 ), 17–34. 10.3233/JAD-142682
Theofilas P , Ehrenberg AJ , Dunlop S , Di Lorenzo Alho AT , Nguy A , Leite REP , … Grinberg LT (2017). Locus coeruleus volume and cell population changes during Alzheimer’s disease progression: A stereological study in human postmortem brains with potential implication for early-stage biomarker discovery. Alzheimer’s and Dementia, 13 (3 ), 236–246. 10.1016/j.jalz.2016.06.2362
Thiele A , &amp; Bellgrove MA (2018). Neuromodulation of attention. Neuron, 97 (4 ), 769–785. 10.1016/j.neuron.2018.01.008 29470969
Tsetsenis T , Badyna JK , Wilson JA , Zhang X , Krizman EN , Subramaniyan M , … Dani JA (2021). Midbrain dopaminergic innervation of the hippocampus is sufficient to modulate formation of aversive memories. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 118 (40 ), e2111069118. 10.1073/pnas.2111069118
Tsetsenis T , Broussard JI , &amp; Dani JA (2023). Dopaminergic regulation of hippocampal plasticity, learning, and memory. Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience, 16 , 547. 10.3389/FNBEH.2022.1092420/BIBTEX
Van Egroo M , Riphagen JM , Ashton NJ , Janelidze S , Sperling RA , Johnson KA , … Jacobs HIL (2023). Ultra-high field imaging, plasma markers and autopsy data uncover a specific rostral locus coeruleus vulnerability to hyperphosphorylated tau. Molecular Psychiatry 2023 , 1–11. 10.1038/s41380-023-02041-y
Wagatsuma A , Okuyama T , Sun C , Smith LM , Abe K , &amp; Tonegawa S (2018). Locus coeruleus input to hippocampal CA3 drives single-trial learning of a novel context. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 115 (2 ), E310–E316. 10.1073/pnas.1714082115 29279390
Walling SG , &amp; Harley CW (2004). Locus ceruleus activation initiates delayed synaptic potentiation of perforant path input to the dentate gyrus in awake rats: a novel beta-adrenergic- and protein synthesis-dependent mammalian plasticity mechanism. The Journal of Neuroscience : The Official Journal of the Society for Neuroscience, 24 (3 ), 598–604. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4426-03.2004 14736844
Weinshenker D (2018). Long road to ruin: Noradrenergic dysfunction in neurodegenerative disease. Trends in Neurosciences, 41 (4 ), 211–223. 10.1016/j.tins.2018.01.010 29475564
Whitlock JR , Heynen AJ , Shuler MG , &amp; Bear MF (2006). Learning induces long-term potentiation in the hippocampus. Science, 313 (5790 ), 1093–1097. 10.1126/SCIENCE.1128134 16931756
Wilmot JH , Puhger K , Roshgadol J , Tian L , &amp; Wiltgen BJ (2022). Phasic locus coeruleus activity facilitates hippocampus-dependent trace fear memory formation. BioRxiv, 2022.10.17.512590. 10.1101/2022.10.17.512590
Wilson IA , Gallagher M , Eichenbaum H , &amp; Tanila H (2006). Neurocognitive aging: prior memories hinder new hippocampal encoding. Trends in Neurosciences, 29 (12 ), 662–670. 10.1016/J.TINS.2006.10.002 17046075
Wilson RS , Nag S , Boyle PA , Hizel LP , Yu L , Buchman AS , … Bennett DA (2013). Neural reserve, neuronal density in the locus ceruleus, and cognitive decline. Neurology, 80 (13 ), 1202–1208. 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182897103 23486878
Wittmann BC , Schott BH , Guderian S , Frey JU , Heinze HJ , &amp; Düzel E (2005). Reward-related FMRI activation of dopaminergic midbrain is associated with enhanced hippocampus-dependent long-term memory formation. Neuron, 45 (3 ), 459–467. 10.1016/J.NEURON.2005.01.010 15694331
Yassa MA , &amp; Stark CEL (2011). Pattern separation in the hippocampus. Trends in Neurosciences, 34 (10 ), 515–525. 10.1016/j.tins.2011.06.006 21788086
