LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


0423161
5008
J Neurol
J Neurol
Journal of neurology
0340-5354
1432-1459

35320398
10184567
10.1007/s00415-022-11073-3
NIHMS1891599
Article
Frontotemporal lobar degeneration with TAR DNA binding protein 43 (TDP-43): its journey of more than 100 years
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-2100-5033
Carlos Arenn F. MD
http://orcid.org/0000-0003-2930-8634
Josephs Keith A. MD, MST, MSc
Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA
Author contributions

A.F.C performed the literature search and prepared the original draft. K.A.J. had the idea for the article and critically revised the manuscript.

Correspondence to: Keith A. Josephs, M.D., M.S.T., M.Sc., Professor of Neuroscience and Neurologym, Ani Professor of Alzheimer’s Disease Research, Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, 200 1st St S.W., Rochester, MN 55905, USA, Tel/Fax: (507)-538-1038/ (507)-538-6012, josephs.keith@mayo.edu
7 5 2023
8 2022
23 3 2022
15 5 2023
269 8 40304054
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) with TDP-43-immunoreactive inclusions (FTLD-TDP) is a neurodegenerative disease associated with clinical, genetic, and neuropathological heterogeneity. An association between TDP-43, FTLD and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) was first described in 2006. However, a century before immunohistochemistry existed, atypical dementias displaying behavioral, language and/or pyramidal symptoms and showing non-specific FTLD with superficial cortical neuronal loss, gliosis and spongiosis were often confused with Alzheimer’s or Pick’s disease. Initially this pathology was termed dementia lacking distinctive histopathology (DLDH), but this was later renamed when ubiquitinated inclusions originally found in ALS were also discovered in (DLDH), thus warranting a recategorization as FTLD-U (ubiquitin). Finally, the ubiquitinated protein was identified as TDP-43, which aggregates in cortical, subcortical, limbic and brainstem neurons and glial cells. The topography and morphology of TDP-43 inclusions associate with specific clinical syndromes and genetic mutations which implies different pathomechanisms that are yet to be discovered; hence, the TDP-43 journey has actually just begun. In this review, we describe how FTLD-TDP was established and defined clinically and neuropathologically throughout the past century.

Frontotemporal lobar degeneration
DLDH
FTLD-U
FTLD-TDP
TDP-43
Hippocampal sclerosis

pmcIntroduction

K. Onari and H. Spatz once said that there were two types of pathological anatomy research: one that tracked the location and spread of the disease and one that investigated the nature of the pathological changes [1]. The “localizing direction” began with Wernicke while the “histopathological direction” started with Nissl on the basis of Kraepelin’s clinical school. For a long time, these two ways of thinking diverged, but in order to understand a disease, we must consider them altogether [1].

Frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) is an umbrella term used to describe a heterogenous group of pathological disorders characterized by deposition of proteins in the brain [2, 3]. These proteins include the microtubule-associated protein, tau [4], the transactive response DNA-binding protein of 43 kD (TDP-43) [5, 6], and the tumor-related fused in sarcoma (FUS) protein [7]. Thus, depending on the type of protein involved, FTLD can be classified into 3 main groups: FTLD-tau, FTLD-TDP, and FTLD-FUS [3]. Frontotemporal dementia (FTD), on the other hand, encompasses a group of clinical syndromes associated with degeneration of the frontotemporal lobes including behavioral variant FTD (bvFTD), nonfluent agrammatic primary progressive aphasia (naPPA), and semantic variant primary progressive aphasia (svPPA) or semantic dementia (SD) [3, 8, 9].

In FTLD-TDP, TDP-43 aberrantly deposits within the cytoplasm, nucleus, and neurites of neurons and within glial cells, producing a neuronal loss in the superficial layers of the frontotemporal cortex (mainly layers II and III) accompanied by gliosis and occasional spongiosis. Without the sophisticated histological and immunohistochemical staining methods made available in recent decades, it would not have been possible to identify the characteristic TDP-43-positive lesions. In fact, for over a hundred years, neuropathologists, neurologists, and psychiatrists alike could only report an unspecific, unremarkable histopathological pattern found in association with behavioral, language, and cognitive problems. Many names have been used to describe the pathology we now associate with FTLD-TDP: “Pick’s disease,” “atypical dementia,” “unclassifiable dementia,” “frontal lobe degeneration of non-Alzheimer type,” “dementia of frontal lobe,” “dementia lacking distinct histopathology,” “FTLD-U,” and finally “FTLD-TDP.” In this paper, we describe the journey that led to the establishment of FTLD-TDP, including how it was defined clinically and neuropathologically throughout the decades.

Circumscribed cortical atrophy: A. Pick and H. Chiari

Between 1892 and 1906, A. Pick and neuropathologist H. Chiari described a series of cases of senile dementia associated with circumscribed (focal) atrophy of either temporal or frontal lobes [10–17]. Their intentions were to prove that — contrary to what was believed at the time — a generally diffuse process such as senile dementia also produced focal symptoms through local accentuation of pathology within specific locations [10, 15]. Pick claimed that the overall decline seen in later stages of dementia was caused by a simultaneous expression of symptoms occurring at multifocal sites, impeding the identification of each singular focal symptom [11, 16]. He was uninterested in the disease that would later bear his name, but in any symptomatology related to focal atrophies of the brain independent of their etiology, providing it was not vascular; therefore, it is not a surprise that only two of the cases originally described match the modern criteria of Pick’s disease [18].

Pick described circumscribed atrophies predominantly involving the left temporal lobe and presenting with focal symptoms such as aphasia and behavioral abnormalities along with cognitive decline. The first patient described in 1892 had a language disorder that resembled transcortical sensory aphasia [10]. Many modern authors have subsequently considered this the first description of primary progressive aphasia (PPA) [19, 20]. This patient’s impaired recognition, naming, and description of objects and another patient’s described devastation of concepts (Verodung des Vorstellungsinhaltes) with relatively spared day-to-day memory [12, 17] would favor a clinical diagnosis of svPPA today [21–24]. Yet another patient had stereotypies, apathy, neglect of hygiene, flattening of affect, and language disturbance [13], which modern authors believe was the first description of bvFTD [23, 25]. It was not until 1906 that Pick reported a case of frontal lobe atrophy associated with amnesic aphasia, apathy, and ideational apraxia [14]. See Table 1 for clinical syndrome descriptions.

Localization, pathology, and clinical presentation of Pick’s circumscribed atrophy

Since Pick belonged to the “localizing research” arm, he was mainly interested in the macroscopic descriptions [1]. According A. Gans [26], the first to report the histopathological characteristics of circumscribed atrophies was Stransky in 1903, who discovered significant cortical fiber loss in the areas with strongest atrophy, with individual atrophic cells containing pigments or fats, increased superficial glial layer, and perivascular gliosis throughout the cortex. In 1910, Fischer reported “spongy cortical wasting” (spongiöser Rindenschwund) associated with severe frontal lobe atrophy [26]. A year later, Alois Alzheimer [27, 28] compared two cases of circumscribed atrophy similar to Pick’s with cases of what is now considered Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and found that the former showed neither drusen (plaques) nor extensive fibrillary degeneration in the atrophied areas. Instead, these two cases displayed intracellular argyrophilic globes in the small pyramidal cells of cortical layers II and III with Bielschowsky stain and swollen large pyramidal cells containing eccentric nuclei accompanied by neuronal loss and spongiosis. The argyrophilic globes (Pick bodies) and ballooned neurons (Pick cells) are now included in the main criteria for Pick’s Disease (PiD) [29].

By 1923, Gans [26] described a case of circumscribed frontal atrophy associated with findings similar to Stransky’s but with the addition of ballooned neurons, sporadic amyloid deposits, and intense “pigment atrophy” (Pigmentatrophie) in Ammon’s horn and the spinal cord. Gans first used the term “Pick’s atrophy” to describe focal cerebral atrophies affecting specifically, although not exclusively, the Regio frontalis of Brodmann and were histopathologically distinct from atherosclerosis, dementia paralytica (now called neurosyphilis, which primarily involved the association areas), and AD (then considered presenile dementia). Gans believed a hereditary predisposition to stress accelerated the aging-related degeneration of these phylogenetically younger association areas involved in higher brain functions. He thus considered circumscribed atrophy a heredodegenerative (hereditary and degenerative) disease.

Later, Onari and Spatz [1] coined the term “Pick’s disease” in 1926 and clearly defined its localization and histopathology. They categorized it as an atypical subtype of senile dementia capable of manifesting itself earlier when prompted by a local process implicating the frontal and/or temporal lobes but sparing the central, posterior temporal, and occipital regions. Macroscopically, the atrophic areas only slightly followed the cyto-architectural field of Brodmann. Frontal atrophy involved the orbital region, including the gyrus rectus; the medial frontal areas, including the cingulate gyrus; the 1st frontal gyrus; and the anterior operculum. The temporal atrophy involved the 2nd and 3rd temporal gyri, the fusiform gyrus, and the hippocampal gyrus. Neuronal loss and gliosis in the superficial cortical layers were found microscopically. Argyrophilic globes and ballooned neurons were present occasionally (in 2 and 3 cases out of 5, respectively); their presence or absence did not affect the overall picture. Their histopathological criteria focused more on the “negative findings,” such as the lack of other focal processes like atherosclerotic (bleeding, softening, scarring), inflammatory, or tumoral changes, and the absence of plaques and fibrillary changes. From here onwards, many authors considered circumscribed atrophy of any lobe as Pick’s disease.

Not long after, C. Schneider [30, 31] proposed two clinical phenotypes of Pick’s disease: a chronic, indolent form characterized by a slowly progressing dementia lasting years and a “stormy” form related to accelerated dementia and severe weight loss or marasmus followed closely by death. The former displayed a more uniform, bland cortical atrophy while the latter showed asymmetrical atrophy with neuronal-cell and myelin-sheath swelling, glial activation, and occasional pathological changes reaching the brainstem [30, 31]. Schneider also suggested a three-stage clinical progression of the disease: stage one - disinhibition and impaired judgment (frontal involvement) or amnesic aphasia (temporal involvement); stage two - cognitive decline and focal symptoms, such as apathy for frontal and sensory aphasia for temporal; and stage three - progressive dementia and severe language dysfunction resulting in vegetative state and death [30, 31].

Is Pick’s disease a heredodegenerative disease?

Beginning in the 1930s, occurrence of Pick’s disease in siblings and in different generations of the same family indicated a hereditary component [32–34]. Some authors suggested a dominant pattern of inheritance [35, 36]. Others believed that an early presentation (3rd decade of life) correlated with pronounced white-matter degeneration, with myelin-sheath damage, fiber loss, and presence of large glial cells with iron deposits called iron grain cells [33]. Others, like A. Ferraro and A. Jervis [37], questioned the heredodegenerative notion and instead suggested an vascular cause.

The occurrence in family members allowed E. Grünthal [32] to describe the anatomical progression of the disease. He reported a case of two brothers with no previously known family history who, at ages 42 and 45, began manifesting symptoms a year apart from each other. At onset, both presented with behavioral changes such as disinhibition, impulsivity, and impaired attention. Both then progressed following Schneider’s stages, with one brother having a rapid deterioration and dying prematurely of pneumonia and the other having a more indolent course lasting &gt;5 years. Although right-left asymmetry was found at autopsy, Grünthal believed their brains would reveal the same pathological process but at different time points (beginning versus end). He identified some primary foci of atrophy in Pick’s disease: the orbital frontal area, adjacent insular region, the temporal pole, Ammon’s horn area, caudate nucleus, medial thalamus, and substantia nigra. The frontal cortex and pallidum were affected as the pathology progressed. Microscopically, he noted a systematic involvement of the cortex, with early neuronal loss in cortical layer III and delayed involvement of layer V. Of note, both brothers lacked argyrophilic globes and ballooned neurons. The clinical diagnoses of the two brothers would fit today’s criteria for bvFTD [2].

Pick’s circumscribed atrophy, Pick’s disease, or Alzheimer’s disease? The confusion within the scientific community

Confusion quickly rose within the scientific community regarding the differences between Pick’s atrophy (any focal atrophy observed with the naked eye), Pick’s disease (any circumscribed lobar atrophy with histopathological description) and AD [38, 39]. A short description of different pathological diagnoses is found in Table 2. Both Pick’s disease and AD were then considered to be presenile dementias. While from a macroscopic standpoint, AD and Pick’s disease were easier to differentiate due to the diffuse atrophy present in the former and the focal atrophy in the later (Fig. 1), there was a lack of consensus regarding both gross and histopathological findings in Pick’s disease [40]. The basis for Pick’s disease was the absence of other focal disease and the absence of pathological hallmarks of AD (plaques and neurofibrillary tangles) [1]. The ballooned neurons and the argyrophilic inclusions supposedly served to further distinguish it from AD but were inconsistent findings [1, 30, 32, 35]. Some authors also discarded the idea that ballooned neurons were a pathognomic sign [41]. W. Verhaart [34] called Pick’s disease a “negative disease” and also argued that, without the “positive” findings or obvious macroscopic atrophy of later stages, Pick’s disease was indistinguishable from senile dementias. Whenever concurrent AD pathology was found, diagnoses like “Pick’s disease with senile plaques” or “AD with Pick’s atrophy” were reported [38, 39]. Furthermore, the fact that Alois Alzheimer described both their histopathologic hallmarks helped fuel the confusion [24].

From a clinical standpoint, the onset age of reported Pick’s disease varied greatly, from as young as 29 [33] to as old as 72 [10] with the majority of cases falling between the ages of 45 and 70 [30, 42, 43]. This raised the question whether it was a senile or presenile disease. Both Pick’s disease and AD were believed to present with cognitive decline, aphasia, and apraxia, such that clinical differentiation was considered almost impossible [37, 43–45]. K. Löwenberg found that Pick’s original view of a senile disease was no longer tenable with most of the cases beginning in the presenile years and posited that Pick’s disease affected a wide range of age groups [42].

The overlapping features led some authors, like the French L. Marchand [45, 46], to consider Pick’s disease, AD, and senile dementia without cerebral atheroma as syndromes suggestive of encephaloses, a degenerative state of the brain characterized clinically by intellectual and language deficits and pathologically by premature loss of neurons with lipid overload, gliosis, and lack of inflammatory and vascular lesions. For Marchand, the “clinical peculiarities” seen in these syndromes differed merely based on the age at disease onset [45]. Conversely, other authors continued to sustain the notion of two separate identities and provided evidence to distinguish one from the other [41, 47, 48]. According to G. Hassin and D. Levitin [41], one unique feature of Pick’s disease was the discrepancy between the slightly mild parenchymatous changes and the severe glial reactions. Distinguishing it from other diseases was involvement of both gray and white substances in the brain, basal ganglia, cerebellum, pons, medulla, and spinal cord [41].

Clinical and anatomopathological distinction between Pick’s disease and Alzheimer’s disease: J. Delay and the French School of Saint-Anne Hospital

Led by J. Delay, French authors from Saint-Anne Hospital in Paris finally established the distinction between Pick’s disease and AD. In 1957, Delay et al. [38, 39] reviewed the clinical and anatomical findings of 192 cases of Pick’s disease. From a clinical standpoint, behavioral changes and language deficits were the core symptoms, and symptoms typical of AD, such as aphasia, agnosia, and apraxia, were rare. Three stages of disease progression were identified. The initial stage (lasting 2–5 years) presents deficits in abstraction, judgment, insight, attention, behavior, affect, and moral sense and two types of psychomotor changes (impulsive-euphoric type or apathetic type with loss of initiative). The steady state (lasting 2–4 years) with atypical dementia, stereotypies, inattention, and language impairment presents with anomias, dysarthria, echolalia and palilalia, and progressive decline of speech output leading to mutism. The terminal stage (months-1 year) manifests deterioration of all symptoms and the appearance of contractures and primitive reflexes.

In terms of anatomic-pathological characteristics, Delay identified Pick’s disease as a frontotemporal atrophy always sparing the occipital and posterior temporal lobes and never involving the parietal lobe alone [38, 39, 47]. In stark contrast, AD usually affects the areas spared by Pick’s disease. Regarding histological findings, the authors insisted on the absence of fibrillary tangles and senile plaques and the presence of shrinking cells, cytoplasmic swelling, and argyrophilic neuronal inclusions. However, they also acknowledged the possible co-occurrence of AD pathology.

Because Delay and colleagues [38, 39] frequently found neuronal swelling or Pick bodies (110/192 cases), they considered it a core pathological feature of Pick’s disease. Like Onari, Spatz and Schneider, they believed it to be a phenomenon representing earlier stages of acute changes and less seen in already macroscopically atrophic areas [38, 39]. In one of their previous studies, R. Escourolle [49] reported neuronal swelling in 59% of cases, while the argyrophilic inclusions were present only in 20%.

Canadians N.B. Rewcastle and M.J. Ball [50] described the 100 Å neurofilaments composing the argyrophilic inclusions in 1968. S. Brion et al.[51, 52] confirmed their findings and added that Pick bodies and Pick cells were two distinct entities: the former composed neurofilaments of 100 to 120 Å surrounded by lipofuscin, while the latter consisted of large granular cytoplasmic areas filled with disseminated 200 Å neurotubules without neurofilaments. The authors concluded this contrasted with the “twisted tubular type” lesion seen in AD, further confirming the distinction between the two diseases.

Pathological subtypes of Pick’s disease: J. Constantinidis and the Genevan classification

In early 1970s, it was clear that Pick cells and Pick bodies were typical but not constant findings of Pick’s disease. In 1974, Constantinidis et al.[53] analyzed 32 cases from a typical “Pick disease cohort” and proposed three different groups based on the absence or presence of these features. Group A (10 cases) showed cortical temporal atrophy and gliosis of the amygdaloid nucleus, hippocampus, and indusium griseum, with possible extension to the temporo-insulo-orbito-cingulo-frontal areas. Gliosis was accompanied by a proportional demyelination of the corresponding white matter. Argyrophilic inclusions were frequent in, but not exclusive to, the small neurons of the dentate fascia and in the pyramidal cells of subiculum and Sommer’s sector. Neuronal swelling and gliosis were observed in cortical layers III and V. Group A translated clinically into core symptoms of moria, inappropriate behavior and humor, and fixation amnesia, with some apathy, hyperorality, and stereotypies.

Neuronal swelling without argyrophilic inclusions was the main finding in Group B. Neuronal swelling (occasionally with proximal axonal swelling) was found in atrophic frontal convexity and precentral area. Severe gliosis of the corpus callosum, centrum ovale, pallidum, and substantia nigra was also found but without evidence of white-matter demyelination. The symptomatology consisted of apathy, frontal-type amnesia, hyperorality, PES syndrome (palilalia, echolalia, stereotypies), and possible progression to mutism. Dysarthria and extrapyramidal and pyramidal symptoms were frequent findings.

Group C was characterized by cortical atrophy and gliosis but with neither swelling nor argyrophilic inclusions. Two subtypes were identified: C1, temporal atrophy; and C2, frontal atrophy. In C1, atrophy and gliosis typically began in the temporal pole, amygdaloid nucleus-accumbens nucleus-stria terminalis complex and juxta-allocortical temporal cortex, progressing to the insulo-orbita-cingular regions. Of particular interest was the constant sparing of the hippocampal allocortex. Corresponding demyelination of white matter was present albeit to a lesser level compared to gliosis. On the other hand, the cortical atrophy in C2 approximated the pattern seen in group B, with the addition of cingular, orbital, insular, and temporal areas, and the important involvement of the neostriatum, pallidum, thalamus, and substantia nigra. Strong gliosis with lesser demyelination was seen. The symptoms of C1 resembled those of group A, while C2 symptoms were comparable to those of group B.

Today, we would consider Group A to be the classic FTLD-Pick’s disease with Pick bodies and Pick cells. Type B with only ballooned cells fits the description of corticobasal degeneration (CBD). Group C corresponds to the findings in FTLD-TDP. In the past, a variety of authors had reported cases with symptoms resembling modern day bvFTD or svPPA, a positive family history, and absence of Pick bodies and Pick cells. These cases were reported by Grunthal [32], Verhaart [34], and Lowenberg [42]. Lowenberg [42] described four cases of presumed Pick’s disease, two of which resembled Group C pathological findings. The first was a 65-year-old with behavioral changes and memory loss, whose brain revealed severe atrophy of both frontal convexities and temporal lobes, particularly of the pole. The second had a family history of mental disease and, at age 59, started manifesting forgetfulness, restlessness, and irritability, with involvement of the frontal and the temporal convexities. Constantinidis concluded that the localization of the cerebral damage, and not structural differences, determined the variations in clinical presentation [53]. A recent in-depth analysis of the Geneva historical data collected between 1929 and 1999 has found that 46% of the cases with a diagnosis of FTD and available brain tissues showed TDP-43 pathology, while 27% had Pick’s disease [54].

Pick-Alzheimer spectrum and what lies in between: the ‘atypical presenile dementia’ and the ‘non-specific’ neurodegeneration

“Atypical presenile dementia” was a term used to described cases not befitting the well-accepted definitions of diseases of Pick, Alzheimer, and Creutzfeldt-Jakob [55, 56]. By late 1970s, the topographical distribution of pathological changes in Pick’s disease was clearly defined – it involved the frontotemporal region and the anterior cingulate gyrus [57]. This was in stark contrast with the topography of AD, which involved temporoparieto-occipital and posterior cingulate gyrus degeneration [58]. Neurofibrillary tangles and senile plaques became the pathological hallmarks for AD and Pick cells and Pick bodies for Pick’s disease (Fig. 1).

According to Masse et al. [56], atypical presenile dementias included the cases first described by D. Oksala in 1923 (later named Kraepelin’s disease) and the cases described by Neumann in 1949. The clinical presentation of Kraepelin’s disease resembled that of organic psychosis with disorientation and stereotypies [56]. Pathologically, the atrophy was more frequently diffuse than focal frontal or frontotemporal, with relevant pyknosis of superficial cortical neurons, cortical and subcortical gliosis, and minimal involvement of the cerebellum, striatum, and diencephalon [56]. In 1949, M.A. Neumann described a second type of histopathological findings associated with focal cerebral atrophy. This ‘Pick’s disease, type II’ was associated with widespread fibrillary and cellular gliosis seen with Holzer technique that was disproportionate to the minimal demyelination in subcortical areas (including the descending motor pathways) with less prominent cortical degeneration, and some ballooned neurons but no argyrophilic inclusions nor AD pathology [40, 59]. A constant feature was astrocytosis of the spinal ventral horns without changes in motor neurons [59]. While the “classical type I” reported by Alzheimer [27] affected the frontal or temporal poles asymmetrically, Pick’s type II showed a symmetrical, either focal or diffuse, cortical atrophy (with possible involvement of the parietal and occipital lobe) with changes in the pallidum, tegmentum, and thalamus [40, 59]. Neumann mentioned similarity to cases previously published by Pick [14], Hassin and Levitin [41], Stern and Reed [44] and Akelaitis [60]. According to Constantinidis [53], about one-third of Escourolle’s cases [49] were comparable to Neumann’s Pick’s type 2. Later, in 1967, Neumann and Cohn presented an additional four cases with similar findings and coined the term “progressive subcortical gliosis (PSG)” [59]. They believed that astrogliosis was the primary alteration causing disruption and, later, destruction of the neuronal architecture.

The latter half of the century saw increased reports in the literature of progressive dementia and language dysfunction diagnosed clinically but without characteristic pathological features. They lacked the pathological hallmarks of other diseases, but all shared the same cardinal characteristics: focal cerebral atrophy more accentuated frontally or frontotemporally (macroscopically) and superficial cortical neuronal loss, pyknosis, astrocytosis, and spongiosis (ranging from mild microvacuolation of the neuropil to a total destruction of all cellular elements called status spongiosus) with subcortical white-matter changes consisting of pallor and rarefaction with demyelination (microscopically) [56, 61–64]. The pathological findings were described as “non-specific” [61–63] or “non-distinct” [64], and the disease was often considered an “unclassifiable dementia” [65]. Most of these cases were also familial [61, 62, 65]. Morris et al.[65] suggested the heading “primary cortical degeneration” due to the central characteristic of neuronal cortical loss of undetermined cause.

Aside from the cardinal pathological features, some authors reported additional atrophy of the basal ganglia (particularly of the caudate head), thalamus, cerebral peduncles, pyramids, and cerebellum [62] or specific involvement of the dorsomedial nucleus of the thalamus and the Sommer’s sector of the hippocampus [61]. Others highlighted the prominent gliosis present in the deep layers, subcortical nuclei, cerebellum, and anterior horns and the apparent similarity with Kraepelin’s disease and PSG [56]. Clinically, this ‘unspecific’ neurodegeneration correlated with muscle weakness and wasting, spasticity, hyperreflexia, Babinski sign, bulbar signs, and primitive reflexes [64] or language dysfunction (hesitancy of speech, reduced output, dysnomia, paraphasia, impaired repetition, with dysgraphia and alexia) [65]. Given the clinicopathological heterogeneity, the prospect of a single disease entity was discarded, and these case reports were considered part of a spectrum of dementing illness [64].

Progressive aphasias with or without dementia

Language disorders had always been a part of the FTD history, from the very first cases described by Pick more than 120 years ago [10, 12–14]. Pick reported aphasia with anomia, loss of concepts, or pure word-deafness type [10, 12, 13]. Progressive aphasia was a common finding in dementing diseases such as Pick’s disease and Alzheimer’s disease; however, it almost never occurred in isolation as the presenting symptom, and it always matched the severity of changes in cognition, behavior, and personality [19].

In a preliminary report in 1979 by Cole et al. [66], the authors described cases in which progressive aphasia was the primary underlying affliction in 10 patients from three generations of the same family. Pathological findings in four family members included neuronal loss and alterations, astrocytosis, and spongiosis in cortical layers II and III. The ‘twisted tubules’ of AD were absent, as well as Pick bodies, but Cole attributed the cases to familial Pick’s disease with autosomal dominant transmission. In the later full publication [67], it became clear that dementia eventually developed in almost all patients although at a lesser degree than the aphasia. The presence of some senile plaques and neurofibrillary tangles in some, along with the constant absence of Pick cells and Pick bodies led Cole and colleagues to the conclusion that Pick’s disease and Alzheimer’s disease were two extremes of the same spectrum, with the familial aphasia with diffuse spongy degeneration constituting the middle part of said spectrum. Further analysis of the clinicopathological, ultrastructural and transmissibility of the disease led to the introduction of “hereditary dysphasic dementia” by Morris et al. [65]. It was later renamed “hereditary dysphasic disinhibition dementia” [68] and was found to be associated with ubiquitin-positive inclusions and progranulin (PGRN) gene mutations [69]. A form of progressive aphasia with dementia associated with non-specific pathology was also found to occur sporadically, in which case it was called “nonfamilial dysphasic dementia” [70].

In 1982, Mesulam et al.[19] described six cases of “slowly progressive aphasia” emerging exclusively and progressing for years without generalized cognitive decline or behavioral symptoms of dementia. One of the cases showed decreased, labored spontaneous speech, impaired naming, and dysarthria. On biopsy, the patient lacked any of the distinct histological features of other diseases. Mesulam then concluded that these cases of slowly progressive aphasia without generalized dementia belonged to a primary degenerative disease of unknown cause, which predominantly affected the left perisylvian areas. Mesulam further believed that these cases were similar to the case of progressive pure-word deafness without dementia associated with pyramidal neuronal loss, gliosis, and loss of intracortical fibers described in 1897 by Dejerine and Serieux [71]. Other authors supported the existence of a language disorder distinct from AD or Pick’s disease on the basis of clinical, neuropsychological, electroencephalographic, and neuroimaging grounds [72–74]. The term “primary progressive aphasia” was later used [75–77]. Alternatively, Snowden et al. used the term “progressive language disorder due to lobar atrophy” [78].

In late 1980s, Kirshner et al. [79] reported the pathological findings of two cases of progressive aphasia without dementia described in a previous study [74] and noted the same features described by Cole [66] but restricted to layer II of the left frontal and/or temporal cortex. They also reported mild astrocytosis of the deeper cortical layers and at the gray-white matter junction, without significant disturbance of the subcortical white matter. As in a previous case [74], Alzheimer’s and Pick’s disease pathognomic changes were absent. These non-specific findings were again reported by Mehler et al.[70], although their cases involved initial progressive aphasia followed by cognitive and behavioral problems later in the disease course. As some cases of primary aphasias eventually progressed to dementia, it was unclear whether they were a distinct entity or simply a prodromal symptom of cortical degeneration [74]. Their possible link with underlying AD pathology or non-specific neurodegeneration was explored by Green et al. [80], who also concluded that progressive aphasia was a precursor to global dementia.

In 1975, Warrington [81] described three patients with selective impairment of semantic memory; these patients presented with failure to recognize or identify common objects, not because of sensory impairment or language deficit, but due to loss of knowledge of their meaning or significance. Later, Snowden and colleagues [82] described similar cases of semantic dementia with impaired naming, impaired comprehension, and severe loss of semantic knowledge in both verbal and non-verbal domains. The language disorder had similarities with transcortical sensory aphasia. The authors described clinical similarities with both Mesulam’s slowly progressive aphasia [19] and Neary’s frontal-type dementia (described below) [83]; they hypothesized that semantic dementia had the same underlying disease pathology.

Dementia with motor neuron disease

J.M. Charcot introduced the term “amyotrophic lateral sclerosis” in 1874 and described its clinicopathologic features [84]. Charcot associated the clinical symptoms of upper motor neuron (UMN) signs with corticospinal tract involvement and of amyotrophy (muscular atrophy) with degeneration of the anterior horn cells [84]. The degenerative process in ALS involves the giant pyramidal (Betz) cells or upper motor neurons (UMN) with extension to the lower motor neurons (LMN) of the spinal cord [85]. Although Charcot’s descriptions failed to mention the occurrence of mental symptoms, subsequent authors drew attention to the psychotic and emotional phenomena associated with ALS [86, 87]. In 1925, Westphal observed schizophrenic, paranoic, and manic-depressive states in ALS, although he would not confirm a correlation given the few cases available [87]. Later, Wechsler and Davison [88] showed cases of ALS coexisting with a cerebral degenerative process characterized by mental decline (childishness, stubbornness, emotional instability, lack of cooperation, eutrophia, and aphasia). Histopathologically, ALS was confirmed along with cortical changes, such as fewer and poorly staining ganglion cells with little Nissl substance in layers III, V, and VI of the frontal and temporal cortices (with marked involvement of layer V) associated with neuronophagy, cortical gliosis of mostly protoplasmic astrocyte type, mild white-matter gliosis, and some demyelination of the pallidal fibers. Since organic psychosis was deemed rare in ALS, the same underlying pathology responsible for the motor symptoms could also trigger the psychotic-like symptoms [88]. Other authors reported findings similar to those of Wechsler and Davison [85, 89]. Cases of Pick’s disease also involved the basal ganglia and the long descending tracts [90].

In 1961, Hirano et al. [91] described 47 patients from Guam with Parkinsonism-dementia complex, eight of whom had UMN symptoms while nine had both UMN and LMN symptoms suggestive of ALS. On gross pathology, there was cortical atrophy and depigmentation of the substantia nigra and locus ceruleus. Microscopically, ganglion-cell degeneration with reactive gliosis was severe in the cortex of the frontal and temporal lobes, Ammon’s horn, amygdala, hypothalamus, globus pallidus, thalamus, periaqueductal structures, brainstem tegmentum, and substantia nigra. Intracytoplasmic granulovacuolar inclusions and Alzheimer’s neurofibrillary changes were found, but senile plaques, Pick bodies or Pick cells, and Lewy bodies were absent.

In Paris, Bonduelle et al. [92] described cases with symptoms of ALS, extrapyramidal syndrome, and dementia. However, unlike the cases in Guam, substantia nigra neuronal loss, gliosis, and loss of pigment were absent. Instead, cortical lesions, including patchy neuronal loss accompanied by gliosis in layers II and III and slight spongiosis in layer II, were found. The pathology clearly differed from that seen in Pick’s, Alzheimer’s, and Creutzfeldt-Jakob diseases [92].

In 1970 in Japan, Mitsuyama and Takamiya [93] reported 11 cases of presenile dementia with motor neuron disease. Although ALS was suspected, the patients lacked the definite pyramidal signs and pathological reflexes. Distinct from the Guam cases, there was no parkinsonism, and the pathological examination revealed only neuronal loss, gliosis, and spongiosis of the upper cortical layers of the frontal, temporal, and central regions. There were neither neurofibrillary tangles nor granulovacuolar degeneration. Numerous other reports of dementia and motor neuron disease with similar pathological features followed. Horoupian et al. [94] suggested the term “dementia of motor neuron disease (MND),” while Neary et al. [95, 96] preferred “frontotemporal dementia + motor neurone disease (FTD + MND).” Two independent groups later found similar pathologies restricted to the frontal and anterior parts of the temporal, cingulate, and insular cortex with degenerative changes of the substantia nigra reminiscent of PSG [95–97]. The spongiosis differed from Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD), and the dementia with ALS was non-transmissible [98].

Frontal lobe degeneration of non-Alzheimer type: The Lund Dementia Research Group

By late 1960s, AD dominated the field of dementias. Indeed, any dementia presenting in middle and later life was likely to be diagnosed clinically as AD, even in cases with marked or purely frontal symptoms [63, 83, 99, 100]. Although Pick’s disease was still the most commonly accepted cause of dementia with frontotemporal cortical degeneration [101], it was considered a rare disease [100]. To complicate matters further, a few pathologically verified AD cases at the time had a focal frontal localization [99, 102], and a minority of dementia cases showed no specific histological features [100]. In 1986, the Lund Dementia Research Group of the University of Lund (Sweden) gave a name to this minority group characterized by frontal lobe dementia but with clinical and pathological features distinct from both Pick’s and Alzheimer’s disease – frontal lobe degeneration of non-Alzheimer type (FLD) [101–105].

A longitudinal study of organic dementia had participants undergo antemortem clinical evaluations, neuropsychiatric testing, electroencephalography (EEG), and regional blood flow measurements as well as postmortem neuropathologic exam. This led to the discovery of frontal dementia with “unspecific gray-matter degeneration” of superficial cortical layers without markers for Alzheimer’s, Pick’s, or Lewy body disease and underlying 80% of cases with frontal or frontotemporal degeneration [101–105]. The gray-matter findings consisted of bilateral, diffuse cortical atrophy with right-left asymmetry associated with mildly reduced brain weight [102]. Neuronal loss, slight gliosis, and spongiosis of laminae I to III were present microscopically [102, 105]. They were “simple” and “unspecific” and could have been easily mistaken for an artifact had it not been for the accompanying severe dementia [99]. The topography of gray-matter changes in FLD included the frontal lobe convexities, basal frontal cortex, insula, anterior cingulate gyrus, anterior temporal lobe, amygdala, hippocampus, cerebellar cortex, inferior olive, and substantia nigra [102]. Thioflavin S staining did not reveal neurofibrillary tangles, senile plaques, Pick bodies. Congo S did not reveal amyloid. Gliofibrillary acid protein (GFAP) and Holzer staining revealed white-matter changes such as gliosis (mostly of fibrillary astrocytic type) affecting the subcortical u-fibers and some deep white matter, and Luxol fast blue stain showed mild depletion of myelin [104]. The severity of white-matter changes roughly matched those of the gray matter with regards to topography and degree of severity. These FLD cases presented with features similar to the “non-specific” or “non-distinct” gray-matter findings reported previously [56, 61–65] and to some initial reports from the 1930s [32, 34, 42]. FLD also matched the clinical and pathological descriptions of Group C described by Constandinidis [53].

The neuropathological findings correlated well with both symptomatology and regional cerebral blood-flow measurements, further supporting the existence of a new disease entity. The clinical picture of FLD was that of frontal-lobe dementia closely mimicking Pick’s disease. The early symptoms were personality and behavioral changes, loss of insight, disinhibition, and progressive aphasia later followed by stereotypy, increased apathy, mutism, and amimia. Distinct from Pick’s disease, disinhibition, oral/dietary hyperactivity, and echolalia were found less consistently in this cohort. Positive heredity was found in 50% of both FLD and Pick’s disease. Regional cerebral blood flow was decreased in the frontal, especially pre-frontal, areas bilaterally [103].

Compared to Pick’s Disease, FLD lacked the typical circumscribed or knife-blade atrophy, the characteristic Pick cells and Pick bodies, the basal frontal predominance of degeneration, and the blurring of the gray-white matter border. Contrarily, there were no dissimilarities in the white-matter changes. There was hardly any overlap of AD with FLD; the clinical picture and regional blood-flow pattern differed greatly, and the lack of senile plaques, neurofibrillary tangles, and congophilic vessels (except for a few senile FLD subjects believed to be related to aging) created a pattern that clearly separated the two diseases. Furthermore, the gliosis in FLD was not strictly of the fibrillary-astrocytic type as in AD; the subcortical u-fibers were affected in the former but spared in the latter. For these reasons, “frontal lobe degeneration” was used to distinguish it from Pick’s disease, and the ‘non-Alzheimer type’ added to separate it from AD with frontal predominance. The Lund Dementia Research Group, led by Gustafson, Englund, Risberg, and Brun, presented their findings to what then became the first international conference on FTD held in Lund, Sweden, in 1986 [106].

Dementia of frontal lobe type: the Manchester Research Group

Concurrently, in the mid-1980s, a prospective study of patients with presenile dementia in Manchester, UK [100] identified a group of patients (17%) with changes in personality and social conduct, forgetfulness, distractibility, and mild anomia. Unlike AD patients, this group displayed no anomalies on EEG, no specific pathology on biopsy, and no reduction in cholinergic activity [100]. At the time, cortical biopsies of patients with cerebral atrophy using conventional computed tomography were a novel practice. Whenever Alzheimer’s or Pick’s disease hallmarks could not be identified, clinical diagnoses such as “degenerative dementia of the Alzheimer type” or “Alzheimer-like disease” were made. In their study, Neary et al. [100] confirmed AD pathologically in only 75% of presenile dementia cases, while the remaining 25% probably belonged to a heterogenous group of conditions. In a subsequent study, Neary and colleagues [83] defined the clinical picture corresponding to the frontotemporal atrophy lacking Alzheimer’s and Pick’s pathognomic pathologies previously characterized by the Lund Dementia Research group and proposed the diagnosis of “dementia of frontal lobe type” (DFT), a clinical diagnosis that correlated with the topography rather than the nature of the underlying pathology [83]. In essence, DFT could be the clinical presentation of many diseases involving the frontal lobe. It was later suggested that at least 20% of patients with presenile dementia had FLD, nearly 50% of whom had a positive history [95]. The late 1980s witnessed the initial distinction between a clinical diagnosis of DFT and a pathological diagnosis of either Pick’s disease or FLD. Additional clinical and neuropsychological features of FLD were later published [107–109].

Dementia lacking distinct histopathology (DLDH): D. Knopman and the Minnesota Research Group

Meanwhile, in a cohort of 460 dementia patients whose brains were studied at the St. Paul Ramsey-University of Minnesota (USA) Brain Bank between 1980 and 1986, Knopman et al. [110] identified a small percentage of cases (3% overall and 10% of those &lt;70 years old) without any distinctive subcellular features such as neurofibrillary tangles, Pick bodies, ballooned cells, or Lewy bodies, which they designated as “dementia lacking distinct histopathology (DLDH)” (Fig. 1). Although DLDH resembled FLD and DFT with regards to the absence of other dementing disease hallmarks, there were some dissimilarities. In DLDH the parietal cortex was more involved than the temporal, degeneration of the substantia nigra was a necessary feature, vacuolation was found in cortical layer II, and astrocytosis was common in the deep layers [110]. There was also frequent cell loss and gliosis in the hippocampal formation, particularly the subiculum and CA1 regions, and inconsistent involvement of the amygdala [110]. Clinically, personality changes at presentation overshadowed the deficits in memory and cognition. Those who presented with dementia only or dementia with late rigidity and dysarthria typically had a longer disease duration (6–9 years), while those with dementia and motor neuron disease deteriorated rapidly (&lt;5 years). Moreover, &gt;50% had a positive family history. On neuropsychometric evaluations, recent memory and frontal lobe-based functions were severely affected.

In a successive publication, Knopman [111] established four neuropathological subgroups of DLDH: 1) cortical DLDH, which translated clinically into language and behavioral/personality changes and encompassed the clinical features of FLD described by Gustafson [101] and the DFT defined by Neary [83]; 2) thalamostriate DLDH, characterized by prominent cell loss and astrogliosis in subcortical regions, especially the thalamus and the striatum, and presented clinically with impaired new learning and dysexecutive symptoms, particularly disinhibition and poor judgment; 3) DLDH with motor neuronopathy, described as neuronal loss in the motor nuclei of the brainstem and anterior horn cells of the spinal cord with cortical and subcortical involvement, which manifested as initial cognitive impairment or dysphagia followed by muscle atrophy, fasciculations, and bulbar palsy; and 4) DLDH with leukogliosis, characterized by more intense gliosis of the white matter compared to the gray matter, and changes in language, cognition and personality.

Defining Frontotemporal dementia and Frontotemporal lobar degeneration: the role of immunohistochemistry

After the first international conference, several authors described cases like FLD but without a consensus. They all used different terminologies to describe it: from the UK, Neary called it “DFT”[83]; from Canada, Clark used “primary degenerative dementia without Alzheimer’s pathology”[63]; from the United States, Knopman described it as “DLDH”[110] while Miller called it “frontal lobe degeneration”[112]; and from Japan, Mitsuyama coined “presenile dementia with motor neuron disease” [93]. A second international conference was held in Lund in 1992 to find a consensus on the name, diagnostic criteria, and methods to study the new disease entity, which was later called frontotemporal dementia (FTD). Numerous authors provided updates on the clinical [113], neuroimaging [114–116], genetic [117], biochemical [118, 119], and neuropathological [111, 120, 121] characteristics of FTD.

The rising popularity of immunohistochemistry (IHC) in late 1980s led to new discoveries in the field of FTD. The superficial localization of cortical degeneration was confirmed by anti-ubiquitin and GFAP analysis, which revealed reactivity only in layers I to III and not in deeper layers [120]. Using antibodies to synaptophysin, a 40% diminution of synaptic density in prefrontal cortex layers I to III of FLD patients was found [122], which differed from the synaptic loss in all six layers associated with normal aging or AD [123]. This was then suggested as the inciting event causing the neurodegeneration, symptomatology, and regional metabolic decline [123].

Additionally, IHC proved to be more valuable than traditional histochemical methods in discerning the many distinctive pathologies underlying FTD [121, 124]. With IHC (Fig. 1), tau-immunoreactivity was mainly seen in AD neurofibrillary tangles and neuritic plaques, corticobasal degeneration (CBD) nigral and cortical inclusions, and Pick’s disease cytoplasmic inclusions, while ubiquitin-positive inclusions were tightly associated with FTD+MND. Anti-alpha-B crystalline was mainly used to detect Pick cells [121, 124]. Immunohistochemistry thus became fundamental to the publication of the first clinical and neuropathological criteria for FTD in 1994 [125]. FTD was now defined as dementia resulting from a bilateral, mostly symmetrical degeneration of the frontotemporal lobes. The clinical features included behavioral, affective and/or speech disorders. Three types of neuropathological changes were identified: 1) frontal lobe degeneration type, which corresponded to the FLD pathology; 2) Pick-type, with the asymmetrical circumscribed or knife-type degeneration, presence of Pick cells and Pick bodies, tau and ubiquitin reactivity, and more intense white-matter changes; and 3) motor neuron disease type, which presented similarly to the first group but with additional spinal motor-neuron degeneration and ubiquitin-positive inclusions in motor neurons, cortical layer II neurons, and dentate gyrus neurons. By 1998, another consensus [8] on the clinical syndromes associated with frontotemporal degeneration included frontotemporal dementia, progressive nonfluent aphasia, and semantic dementia.

In 2000, a Work Group on Frontotemporal Dementia and Pick’s Disease [2] recommended IHC to complement traditional histochemical methods. Because the various clinical features were unreliable in predicting the neuropathology, the Work Group also suggested reserving the term FTD for the clinical syndrome and using the term frontotemporal lobe degeneration (FTLD) for the neuropathological findings [2]. FTLD, a renaming of DLDH, was recommended as a diagnosis in cases where frontotemporal neuronal loss and gliosis were present, but tau or ubiquitin immunostaining failed to reveal any inclusion and prion disease was excluded [2]. Whenever neuronal loss and gliosis were accompanied by tau-positive inclusions, three other categories, based on the accumulated predominant tau isoform, were identified [2]. These groups (later called tauopathies or FTLD-tau [126, 127]) included diseases like Pick’s disease, CBD, progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), and FTD with parkinsonism linked to chromosome-17 (FTLD-17). A final category was characterized by tau-negative, ubiquitin-positive inclusions with MND or without MND but with MND-type inclusions [2]. This last group, together with FTLD(DLDH), comprised the non-tauopathies group [128]. Neuronal loss and gliosis characteristic of FTLD(DLDH) linked all FTLD subtypes.

From FTLD(DLDH) to FTLD-U: K. Josephs and the Mayo Clinic Research Group

At the dawn of ubiquitin-IHC, ubiquitin-immunoreactive (IR) spheroids and “skein-like’ filaments were found in the spinal anterior horn cells of patients with MND, occasionally in the presence of Bunina bodies [129, 130]. In early 1990s, ubiquitin-IR inclusions were also found in FTD+MND. Ubiquitin-positive, tau- and silver-negative inclusions were located in the hippocampal dentate gyrus, entorhinal area, and cortical lamina II of cases of ALS with dementia and were believed responsible for cognitive decline [131, 132]. These ubiquitin-positive inclusions were also later found in dementia patients without clinical or pathological signs of motor system degeneration [124, 133]. Because these ubiquitinated inclusions were first described in MND, Jackson [133] coined the term “MND-inclusion dementia” (MNDID), which implied presence of MND-related inclusions but not of MND clinical features. In 1993, Brun also published a new cohort of patients with FLD, which showed ubiquitin-positive inclusions in layers I to III of the frontotemporal cortex in association with astrogliosis seen with GFAP staining [120]. Ubiquitin-positive neurites were then later described in layers I to V of the frontotemporal cortex, with some ubiquitin-positive inclusions in the dentate gyrus (Fig. 1) in cases of FLD without MND [134].

Since ubiquitinated inclusions were considered characteristic of MND, the Work Group on FTD and Pick’s disease suggested the use of FTLD with MND or FTLD with MND-type inclusions without MND [2]. Some authors applied this criteria [135], while others used FTLD-MND irregardless of MND findings [136, 137]. In 2004, Josephs et al. [138] proposed the term FTLD-U, a pathological diagnosis based on the presence of ubiquitin-positive, tau- and α-synuclein- negative abnormal neurites and/or intraneuronal cytoplasmic inclusions in frontotemporal cortex and/or hippocampal-dentate granule cells in the absence of MND. In short, FTLD-U replaced FTLD with MND-type inclusions while FTLD-MND continued to be used in case of clinical or pathological evidence of MND. Other authors then supported the proposal and recommended that FTLD-U be used in cases with clinical diagnosis of FLD, SD, or progressive aphasia [139].

The initially reported percentage of non-tauopathies was between 55 and 62% [138–140], but reports of IHC analyses suggested only a small percentage of FTLD-U cases, which ranged from 16 to 24% or 8 to 14%, depending on whether cases with MND clinical or pathological features were included, respectively [121, 124]. These low percentages contrasted with one report where 100% of FLD cases without MND showed ubiquitin reactivity [134]. With more sensitive ubiquitin-IHC staining methods made available in the early 2000s, many of the tau-negative cases previously considered DLDH were then revealed to have ubiquitin-positive inclusions in the frontotemporal cortex and/or dentate gyrus, raising the prevalence of FTLD-U close to 40 to 60% and making FTLD-U the most common neuropathology underlying FTLD [135, 138, 141]. In particular, three different publications reported a staggering percentage (&gt;80%) of DLDH being reclassified as FTLD-U [138, 141, 142]. This indicated that DLDH was actually a rare phenomenon [135, 141]. In the past, the reported frequencies of DLDH were between 18 and 48% [124, 136, 137].

The discrepancies in the FTLD(DLDH) and FTLD-U frequencies reported in the literature could be attributed to many factors. First, there was a lack of diagnostic criteria. While some authors followed the original descriptions of ubiquitin-positive inclusions in the frontotemporal cortex and hippocampal dentate [124, 131–133, 143], others diagnosed FTLD-U with inclusions in just one of these areas [135–138]. Others even failed to consider the frontotemporal cortex [135, 137]. Lipton et al.[135] acknowledged that most diagnoses of FTLD(DLDH) were made solely upon inspection of the hippocampus and dentate, which missed ubiquitin inclusions present only in the cortex; therefore, the cortex should be thoroughly inspected. Second, there was a lack of familiarity with the many ubiquitin pathologies; these included small, spherical or crescent-shaped intracytoplasmic inclusions in cortical layer II, coiled or curvilinear bodies within neurites (ubiquitin dystrophic neurites); smaller, more rounded inclusion bodies within the dentate granule cells; and “cat’s eye” or “lentiform” intranuclear inclusions in cortex and striatum [135, 139, 141, 144]. Finally, there was no standardized protocol, and the ubiquitin IHC methods were less sensitive [141].

FTLD-U: clinical, genetic, and neuropathological correlations

Notably, all patients with clinical MND exhibited ubiquitin pathology [128, 137], whereas patients with SD displayed either tau- or ubiquitin-positive inclusions [137]. The presence of MND correlated with younger age at onset and shorter disease duration [128, 145]. FTLD-U and FTLD(DLDH) patients showed similar clinical presentations, as both manifested behavioral/social changes and language deficits at onset with absent extrapyramidal signs (more frequent in tauopathies) [128].

Mackenzie et al. later identified three histological subtypes of FTLD-U [146] based on ubiquitin pathology: Type 1 (32% of cases) – presence of numerous ubiquitin-positive dystrophic neurites (DN) and intraneuronal cytoplasmic inclusion (NCI) in frontotemporal cortical layer II and within dentate granule cells, with neuronal intranuclear inclusion (NII) of “cat’s eye” or “lentiform” appearance; Type 2 (27%) – predominant ubiquitin-positive neurites, with or without few NCIs in cortical layer II; and Type 3 (42%) – NCIs within cortical layer II or dentate-granule cells, with few or no neurites. Sampathu et al. published a parallel classification, albeit with a different numbering system [147], at the roughly same time; they used monoclonal antibodies generated against insoluble material derived from FTLD-U brains. Correlations with clinical phenotypes and histological subtypes were later noted: Mackenzie type 1 (Sampathu type 3) correlated with FTD or progressive non-fluent aphasia (PNFA); Mackenzie type 2 (Sampathu type 1) with SD; and Mackenzie type 3 (Sampathu type 2) with FTD with or without MND [9, 146].

Associations between FTLD-U and genetic mutations also existed. In a subset of multiple families with FLD and linkage to chromosome 17q21, the microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT) gene mutation (typically associated with FTDP-17) was absent; instead, there were mutations in the progranulin gene (PGRN) [148]. PGRN mutations have then been linked to Mackenzie type 1 (Sampathu type 3) pathology [9, 146, 149, 150]. Similarly, a locus on chromosome 9 was reported to increase susceptibility to ALS and FTD with FTLD-U pathology [151, 152]. Furthermore, FTD with inclusion-body myositis and Paget disease of the bone (IBMPFD) caused by mutations in the valosin-containing protein (VCP) gene contained ubiquitin-positive NII and DN in the neocortex (abundantly) and in the limbic and subcortical nuclei (less frequently), with sparing of the dentate gyrus [153]. This was believed to be a novel (fourth) pattern of ubiquitin pathology specifically associated with VCP mutations presenting as IBMPFD.

FTLD-TDP: Transactive response (TAR) DNA-binding protein of 43 kda (TDP-43) and the TDP-proteinopathies

In 2006, two independent research groups led by Arai [5] and Neumann [6] identified the transactive response (TAR) DNA-binding protein of 43 kDa (TDP-43) as the major culprit protein behind the ubiquitinated inclusions found in FTLD-U, FTLD-MND, and ALS. Cairns et al. [154] later suggested grouping these neurodegenerative diseases under the heading of “TDP-43 proteinopathies.” TDP-43 is a nuclear protein that normally contributes to exon skipping, transcription regulation, and messenger-RNA stability; it is involved in apoptosis, cell division, and axonal transport [155]. Pathological TDP-43 was found to be hyperphosphorylated, ubiquitinated and cleaved to generate C-terminal fragments, and was retrieved only from areas with ubiquitin-positive inclusions, like the hippocampus, neocortex, and spinal cord [6]. Soon after, several other authors confirmed TDP-43 as the main component of ubiquitin-IR NCIs, NIIs, and DNs [154, 156–158]. Due to the high concordance between ubiquitin and TDP-43 IHC profiles, the previously reported classification in FTLD-U was validated [154, 156].

Other TDP-43-positive inclusions in the cortical underlying white matter, limbic and subcortical regions.

TDP-43 IHC surprisingly detected new types of inclusions, including glial cytoplasmic inclusions (GCIs) and infrequent thread-like inclusions in the white matter that were not stainable with ubiquitin, tau, or a-synuclein [157], although some GCIs stained poorly with ubiquitin, simulating an early event in the pathogenesis [154]. Further improvements in IHC protocols as used by Hatanpaa et al. [159] revealed thin, weakly labeled DNs in the CA1 region of the hippocampus, which were either frequently present or completely absent, and two new types of cortical inclusions: long DNs like the CA1 DNs and dot-like DNs [159]. Similarly, Josephs et al. [160] found TDP-43-positive inclusions in the subcortical and brainstem areas. Using the Mackenzie classification, NCIs and DNs were found diffusely but less so in the brainstem than supratentorial structures in type 1, while type 2 showed NCIs in the amygdala and basal ganglia with few DNs in the diencephalon and brainstem. Finally, type 3 had paucity of DNs at all levels, with more NCI in the hypoglossal nucleus [160]. Josephs et al. [160] also discovered other types of inclusion morphology: granular or crescent-shaped NCIs in type 1; numerous round, dense and Pick body-like inclusions in the dentate, amygdala, and putamen in type 2; and, poorly defined, granular inclusions resembling “pre-inclusions” in the hippocampus and cortex of type 3 [160]. The DNs possessed short processes in type 1, thick longer ones in type 2, and were often scant or absent in type 3. The fine neurites in CA1 were common in type 1 and in patients dying relatively young [160]. These findings were subsequently validated [161, 162].

Ultrastructure of TDP-43 inclusions

Using a transmission electron microscope, Thorpe et al. revealed the ultrastructure of TDP-43-positive inclusions [163]. NCIs contained heavily labeled granular regions intermixed with less densely stained filamentous components, with filaments having a 9-nm (range 4–16) diameter. DN processes were of two types: narrow (200–300 nm wide) containing 10-nm filaments (range 5–15), or swollen and dystrophic (1–5 µm wide) with mixed granular and filamentous components. Finally, NIIs contained broader filaments 18-nm wide (range 9–50), which assembled in bundles aligned with the nuclear envelope.

According to the original publications on FTLD-TDP, TDP-43-positive inclusions consisted mainly of phosphorylated C-terminal fragments [5, 6]. Conversely, later studies showed an important contribution of normal full-length TDP-43 [6, 164], especially in the early stage of pathogenesis, with fragmentation possibly occurring after its accumulation [165]. One study found abundant C-terminal fragments in cortical inclusions and predominant full-length TDP-43 in spinal-cord motor neurons containing both N- and C-terminals [166]. The nature and the ratio of involved TDP-43 species also varied based on the FTLD-TDP lesion type but not according to genetic mutations [164]. While some authors stated that NIIs were composed of both C-terminal species and full-length TDP-43 [166], others found only C-terminal species [164]. Impaired shuttling into the nucleus through physical blockage by NII or sequestering of normal TDP-43 by the C-terminal fragments could account for the lack of full-length specie [164]. With regard to NCIs and DN, C-terminal fragments were found in bigger quantities than full-length TDP-43 in FTLD-TDP types A and C, while pre-inclusions were rich in full-length species, especially in FTLD-TDP type B, which raises the question of whether type B correlates with a different disease mechanism [164].

This topographical heterogeneity of fragments implies that they are unnecessary for TDP-43-mediated neurodegeneration [165, 167]. Kametani et al. [165] identified a central region consisting of residues 180–330 of TDP-43 that appeared significant for neurodegeneration. This region contained a glycine-rich region believed to favor fiber formation and aggregation, a RNA-recognition motif 2 (RRM2) domain involved in aggregation, and a part of the C-terminal region rich in GQN (glycine [G], glutamine [Q], asparagine [N]) with prion-like properties [165]. In TDP-43 proteinopathies, TDP-43 accumulates in the cytoplasm, depriving affected neurons of the normal nuclear TDP-43 protein. Impaired trafficking of normal TDP-43 between the nucleus and the cytoplasm apparently leads to aggregate formation [168]. Although TDP-43 phosphorylation, cleavage, and cytoplasmic translocation are associated with aggregation, the loss of nuclear function was ultimately linked to neurodegeneration [167].

FTLD-TDP: Clinical, genetic, and neuropathological associations

The clinical syndromes associated with FTLD-TDP include FTD, PNFA (naPPA), SD (svPPA), and FTD-MND (FTD-ALS) [9]. The clinical presentation most highly predictive of FTLD-TDP pathology is FTD-ALS (almost 100% of cases show TDP-43 pathology at autopsy [3, 9]), followed by svPPA (69–100%) [3, 9, 169], bvFTD (50%) [3], and finally naPPA (19–25%) [3, 169], although one study reported up to 89% of naPPA cases showing TDP-43 pathology [9]. The clinical presentation is highly influenced by the topography of neurodegeneration (Fig. 2): the atrophied regions are the motor and prefrontal cortices in FTD-ALS, bilateral anterior temporal pole with severe involvement of the inferior temporal area in svPPA, left posterior frontoinsular region in naPPA, and frontal and anterior temporal regions in bvFTD [8, 9, 169–173].

Tight associations between clinical syndromes and pathological subtypes were found by Josephs et al. [160]: naPPA was associated with Mackenzie type 1, accounting for 42% of cases; svPPA was only found in type 2 and constituted 71% of cases; and bvFTD was found in all types, making up 58% and 100% of type 1 and 3 cases, respectively. Clinical MND features (FTD-ALS) were often found in relation with types 2 and 3, with upper MND often seen in the former and lower MND in the latter.

Cairns et al. [154] studied the relationship between TDP-43 and FTLD-U cases occurring either within families with mutations in PGRN, VCP, CHMP2B, chromosome 9p, or IFT74 gene or arising sporadically. The study revealed TDP-43 was a major component of the pathological inclusions in: 1) familial FTD with mutations in PGRN, VCP or chromosome 9p; 2) familial FTD with yet unknown genetic association; 3) sporadic FTD; and 4) FTD+MND. A noteworthy correlation between mutation type and FTLD-U subtype that existed in familial cases was not found in sporadic cases. Particularly, PGRN mutations showed exclusively Sampathu type 3 pathology; chromosome 9p mutations were all type 2, and VCP mutations were all type 4 (as described in familial FTLD-U presenting with IBMPFD) [153]. The mutated gene associated with chromosome 9p was later discovered to concern a hexanucleotide repeat expansion in the C9orf72 gene [174, 175].

Since relevant clinical and pathological associations were established regarding the four subtypes, and various authors would use either Sampathu’s or Mackenzie’s classification, Mackenzie et al. [176] finally proposed a harmonized classification system for FTLD-TDP pathology based on previously published works to avoid confusion. This harmonized classification was as follows: type A – numerous short DNs and crescentic or oval NCIs predominantly in layer II with occasional NIIs, with clinical presentation of bvFTD or PNFA and PGRN mutations; type B – moderate NCIs in all layers with few DNs, with clinical symptoms of bvFTD or MND with FTD and C9orf72 mutations; type C – many long DN and few NCI particularly in layer 2 and clinical presentation of SD or bvFTD; type D – many short DNs and lentiform NIIs with few NCI in all layers and with familial IBMPFD and VCP mutations. A fifth subtype – type E – was later defined by Lee et al. [177], which was characterized by granulofilamentous neuronal inclusions (GFNI) and fine dot-like neuropil aggregates affecting all cortical layers with curvilinear oligodendroglial inclusions in the white matter. These newly described TDP-43 inclusions were negative for ubiquitin and predominantly negative for p62. Clinically, type E presented with rapidly progressive FTD (bvFTD) [177]. Interestingly, in the late 1920s, Schneider had already described a “stormy” form of what was considered “Pick’s disease” with behavioral symptoms and rapid clinical decline (&lt;5 years) [30, 31]. Other authors found TDP-43 pathology similar to Type E in association with ALS [178] or PPA/ALS [179]. The frequencies of Types D and E were found to be low [153, 177]. Examples of lesions characteristic of various FTLD-TDP subtypes are shown in Fig. 3.

The harmonized criteria based on the FTLD-U classification system readily classified about 81 to 96% of FTLD-TDP cases into types A, B, or C; however, the remaining minority remained unclassifiable as they presented with cortical pathology belonging to different subtypes [161, 180, 181]. These cases showed cortical NCI, short DNs, and NII in layer II (type A) in concomitance with granular NCI in deeper cortical layers (type B) [161] or predominantly type B features with NII (typical of type A) [180]. Others showed a combination of type B pathology with long DNs (characteristic of type C) or type C with NII (characteristic of type A) [180]. Studies have reported that 80% of the type A + B cases exhibited C9orf72 repeat expansion, with the remaining cases associated with FTD-ALS [161, 180]. It was later discovered that analyzing the pathological inclusions in subcortical regions, as first reported by Josephs [160] in 2009, provided a better classification of the mixed subtypes, as each FTLD-TDP subtype showed a distinct and diverse pattern of pathology in these regions [162]. Thus, in a recent study, Neumann, Lee, and Mackenzie [181] proposed an upgrade of the current classification system taking into consideration the TDP-43-positive lesions found in limbic, subcortical, and brainstem regions. The authors also revisited type E and given its similarities with type B pathology and its association with ALS, they hypothesized that types E and B represent a continuum, with type-E lesions representing early stage, immature type-B lesions. They also speculated that type E is a more virulent form, with the spreading pathology in the brain and the spinal cord and the accelerated clinical decline preventing lesions from maturing completely. With specific pathologic subtypes strongly correlating with a specific clinical syndrome or genetic mutation, each subtype may reflect a distinct, aberrant pathway or mechanism involved in mis-metabolism or accumulation of TDP-43 [161].

TDP-43 and hippocampal sclerosis

Hippocampal lesions associated with epilepsy and insanity were already recognized in 1825; however, hippocampal sclerosis (HpScl), previously called Ammon’s horn sclerosis, was first methodically studied by Sommer only in 1880 [182, 183]. Sommer described smaller, gray-colored, and rigid Ammon’s horn with loss of all pyramidal cells, particularly in the region adjacent to the medial wall of the lower-horn ventricles (later named “Sommer’s sector”) [183]. While HpScl studies during most of the 20th century revolved around epilepsy [183], its association with other diseases was later explored. In mid-1980s, Clarke et al. [63] reported patients with presenile dementia with behavioral changes and speech-language disorders related to hippocampal and temporal-lobe sclerosis. Later, Crystal et al. [184] found that 40% of “demented” subjects presented with HpScl, leuokoencephalopathy, and multiple lacunae, all of which potentially contributed to vascular dementia. In a study of “very old” subjects (≥80 years old) with cardiovascular risk factors, Dickson et al. [185] found HpScl in 16% of the total cohort and in 26% of those with dementia — but not in cognitively normal subjects. Similar findings in people without cardiovascular-risk factors were also reported [186]. HpScl frequently co-occurred with AD, Lewy body dementia, argyrophilic grain disease, vascular dementia, other diseases like CJD, encephalitis, and PSG, but a small percentage (0.4–2%) remained “pure HS” with no other identifiable cause of dementia [187–189]. While some claimed that “pure HpScl” or HpScl dementia (HSD) clinically resembled AD [187, 188, 190], others stated that the behavioral symptoms at onset, the mutism, and the rapid clinical decline implied a closer resemblance to FTD [191, 192]. In fact, Blass et al. [192] reported that 57% of HSD cases met the clinical criteria for FTD [2]. Of note, in his original publication, Knopman found HpScl in 10/14 subjects with DLDH [110].

With ubiquitin IHC, HpScl was found in cases of ALS with FTD [143] and MND inclusion dementia (MNDID) [193, 194]. Conversely, FTD was found in 12% of HpScl cases [195]. This led to the theory that HSD is a variant of FTD [194]. Successively, several studies by Josephs and colleagues [196–198] found that HpScl was actually more frequent in FTLD-U than FTLD-MND (79% vs 26%). Furthermore, FTLD-U cases without HpScl did not differ clinically from those with HpScl but instead demonstrated minimal or no cortical atrophy on neuroimaging or neuropathology [198]. However, this finding does not support the bvFTD phenocopy syndrome later described in non-progressing probable bvFTD patients without significant brain atrophy [199].

Amador-Ortiz et al. discovered that FTLD-associated HpScl differed from HSD (pure HpScl) [200]. The authors found that HSD occurred more frequently in the elderly and was accompanied by more severe neuronal and synaptic loss and greater gliosis, which implied different pathogenesis. A subsequent study by Amador-Ortiz and colleagues [201] revealed the presence of TDP-43 in &gt;70% of HpScl as well as in 23% of AD cases. The relationships between HpScl, AD, FTLD, and TDP-43 remain objects of investigation to this day.

TDP-43 and other neurodegenerative diseases

Although TDP-43 pathology was first identified in association with FTLD in 2006, over the past 15 years, it has been since associated with other well-identified clinico-pathological entities. Consequently, Josephs and an international group of experts [202] recommended dividing the TDP-43 proteinopathies into two groups: primary and secondary (mixed). The primary TDP-43 proteinopathies included: FTLD-TDP [5, 6], ALS [5, 6], and Perry syndrome [203]. In contrast, the secondary or mixed TDP-43 proteinopathies, where TDP-43 pathology can be found concomitant with other pathologies, consisted of: FTLD-tau, including PSP [204, 205], CBD [206, 207], Pick’s disease [208], parkinsonism-dementia complex of Guam [209]; chronic traumatic encephalopathy [210]; AD [201]; Primary Age Related Tauopathy [211]; Lewy Body disease [212]; and polyglutamine diseases like Huntington’s disease [213], Machado-Joseph disease [214], and spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 [215]. Interestingly, TDP-43 pathology has also been reported in normal aging [216, 217].

Conclusions

More than a century after Arnold Pick first described presenile dementias reminiscent of bvFTD or svPPA and the history of FTD began, the main culprit protein depositing in atrophic areas showing only non-specific neurodegeneration was finally discovered to be TDP-43. The peculiar patterns of associations found with certain topography and morphology of inclusions, clinical syndromes, and genetic mutations imply different disease mechanisms underlying the different FTLD-TDP subtypes. Consequently, much is yet to be discovered, and the TDP-43 journey has barely begun.

Acknowledgments:

We are grateful to Ms. Lea Dacy, Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester for her assistance. We also wish to thank the Mayo Clinic Libraries for providing materials for the literature review.

Funding:

This study was funded by the National Institutes of Health grants R01 AG037491 and RF1 NS120992

Fig. 1 Macro- and microscopic neuropathological changes in AD, FTLD-PiD, and FTLD-TDP. Uppermost row shows: generalized atrophy of the brain in AD (a), frontotemporal “knife-blade” atrophy of Pick’s Disease (b), and frontotemporal atrophy without sharp transitions in FTLD-TDP with relatively intact parietal and occipital lobes (c). Bielschowsky stain reveals senile plaque (blue arrowhead) and NFT (blue arrow) (d) and Pick bodies (blue arrows) (e). The non-distinctive neuronal loss, gliosis and spongiosis of the superficial cortical layers in FTLD-DLDH and FTLD-U are seen with H&amp;E (f). Similarly, immunohistochemical staining for tau shows senile plaques (arrowheads) and NFTs (arrow) (g) and Pick bodies (arrow) (h). Staining with anti-ubiquitin antibodies shows cytoplasmic inclusions in dentate cells in FTLD-U (i). Scale bar = 60um (f,g), 30um (i), and 20um (d,e,h). AD = Alzheimer’s disease; DLDH = dementia lacking distinctive histopathology; FTLD= Frontotemporal lobar degeneration; FTLD-U = frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitin inclusions; NFT = neurofibrillary tangle; PiD = Pick’s disease

Fig. 2 Clinical syndromes associated with FTLD-TDP pathology. NaPPA mainly involves the left posterior frontoinsular region. svPPA is limited to the left anterior temporal lobe. bvFTD affects the prefrontal lobe and anterior temporal pole. FTD-ALS damages the motor cortex and part of the prefrontal area. Abbreviations: bvFTD = behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia; FTD-ALS = frontotemporal dementia – amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; naPPA = nonfluent agrammatic primary progressive aphasia; svPPA = semantic variant primary progressive aphasia

Fig. 3 Histopathological characteristics of FTLD-TDP subtypes (A to E). Type A shows compact (arrowhead) and ring (short arrow) neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions (cNCI), some dystrophic neurites (DN) and neuronal intranuclear inclusions (NII) (long arrow and inset) in superficial cortical layers (a); NCIs and NII (arrow) within dentate cells (b), and fine neurites in the CA1 sector of the hippocampus (c). Type B presents with mostly compact NCIs in the superficial layers (d) and combination of compact and diffuse (arrows) NCIs in deeper cortical layers (e), accompanied by threads and dots (d,e). Compact and dense NCIs are also found in the hippocampus (f). Type C has predominant long DN in the cortex (g), with Pick-body like inclusions (arrow and inset) in the hippocampus (h). Type D is rich in NII throughout the cortex, although here NIIs in the amygdala are shown (i). Finally, Type E displays granulofilamentous neuronal inclusions and grains (j), with frequent curvilinear glial cytoplasmic inclusions in the subcortical white matter (k), and NCIs within motor neurons (l). In this case of Type E presenting with ALS, shrunken neurons containing Bunina bodies were found (m). Scale bar = 30um (a-h, j-l), 10um (i, m, inset on a and h)

Table 1 Descriptions of clinical syndromes associated with Alzheimer’s Disease and Frontotemporal lobar degeneration.

CLINICAL SYNDROMES	
Alzheimer’s Disease (AD)
In 1906, A. Alzheimer described a case of “a peculiar severe disease process of the cerebral cortex” [218], which E. Kraepelin later called Alzheimer’s disease (AD) [219]. AD is characterized by cognitive and/or behavioral impairment, with impaired ability to learn and recall new information; poor reasoning, judgment, and handling of complex tasks; impaired visuospatial abilities, including inability to recognize faces or common objects; language dysfunction, with impaired speaking, reading and writing; and changes in personality, behavior or comportment [220]. The amnestic presentation is the most common presentation, followed by language, visuospatial or executive dysfunction.	
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)
J.M. Charcot coined the term “amyotrophic lateral sclerosis” in 1874 and clearly described its clinicopathologic features [84]. Also known as motor neuron disease (MND) or Lou Gehrig’s disease, ALS is caused by progressive degeneration of both upper motor neurons (UMN) from cortex to brainstem and spinal cord, and lower motor neurons (LMN) from brainstem or spinal cord to muscle [221]. UMN signs include muscle weakness, spasticity, clonus, while LMN signs consist of weakness, atrophy, and fasciculations. Up to 50% of ALS cases present with cognitive and behavioral disorders, with 13% presenting with FTD and involvement of the frontotemporal brain regions [222].	
Dementia of frontal lobe type (DFT)
DFT was introduced by the Manchester Research Group to describe the clinical picture corresponding to the frontotemporal atrophy lacking Alzheimer’s and Pick’s pathognomic pathologies called Frontal lobe degeneration of non-Alzheimer type (FLD) by the Lund Research Group. DFT was associated with changes in personality and social conduct, forgetfulness, distractibility, and mild anomia [83]. DFT was later replaced by frontotemporal dementia (FTD) [125].	
Frontotemporal Dementia (FTD)
FTD was first defined clinically in 1994 [125]. The core diagnostic features of FTD include: an insidious onset with gradual progression, early decline in personal and interpersonal conduct, emotional blunting, and loss of insight, leading to impaired social or occupational functioning [2, 8]. These features can be accompanied by varying degrees of character or behavioral symptoms and speech and language disorder. Typically, severe amnesia, aphasia or perceptuospatial disorders are absent. Presently, the core FTD spectrum includes behavioral variant FTD, nonfluent/agrammatic variant primary progressive aphasia, and semantic variant primary progressive aphasia [223]. Other related disorders include, FTD with motor neuron disease, progressive supranuclear palsy syndrome, and corticobasal syndrome [223].	
Behavioral variant Frontotemporal Dementia (bvFTD)
BvFTD is characterized by changes in character and behavior, with lack of inhibition, impulsive or inappropriate behavior, self-neglect, apathy, emotional blunting, loss of empathy, stereotypies, hyperorality or dietary changes, hypersexuality, and reduced pain response [2, 8, 224]. All these are accompanied by the core symptoms of FTD [8]. In bvFTD with underlying TDP-43 pathology, there is more psychosis sub-syndrome present and less hyperorality, hypersexuality or stereotypies [3].	
Frontotemporal dementia – Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (FTD-ALS)
FTD-ALS presents with combined symptoms of behavioral variant FTD and ALS and is usually caused by chromosome C9orf72 gene repeat expansion [174, 175].	
Pick’s disease (PiD)
Since A. Pick published a series of cases of circumscribed cortical atrophy associated with dementia, language problems and behavioral changes between 1892 and 1906, many authors had been quick to ascribe these clinicopathological findings to Pick’s disease for the greater part of the 1900s. Today, a definite diagnosis of Pick’s disease is made through neuropathological evaluation, but its classical clinical presentation includes marked personality deterioration and inappropriate behaviors, with some patients presenting with apathy or withdrawal and others manifesting disinhibition and impulsivity [225]. As the disease progresses, patients develop dementia with mutism. Early language deterioration, Kluver-Bucy syndrome, and some apraxias can also develop depending on the brain regions more involved.	
Primary Progressive Aphasia (PPA)
The term “primary progressive aphasia” (PPA) was coined by M.M. Mesulam in 1987 [77] after being initially called “slowly progressive aphasia without generalized dementia” [19], although it is believed that the first description of PPA was that of Dejerine and Serieux in 1897 [71]. In PPA, the most prominent clinical impairment at disease onset and for the initial phases of the disease is isolated language deficit or aphasia [76, 172]. There is a gradual and progressive impairment of language production, object naming, syntax or word comprehension that impairs daily living activities. Cognitive deficits may appear as disease progresses, but language remains the most impaired domain [76]. Today, PPA encompasses a nonfluent/agrammatic variant, a semantic variant, and a logopenic variant [172].	
Nonfluent/agrammatic variant PPA (naPPA)
The core symptoms are agrammatism and effortful, halting speech [8, 172]. The agrammatism consists of short, simple phrases, decreased use of passive sentences and omissions of grammatical morphemes. There is slow, labored speech production and inconsistent sound errors and distortions (apraxia of speech). Prosody and rate of speech are both impaired, as well are comprehension of syntactically complex sentences. Single word comprehension and object knowledge are spared.	
Semantic dementia (SD) or semantic variant PPA (svPPA)
In svPPA, a semantic disorder or loss of knowledge of object identity or word meaning is the dominant feature, leading to symptoms of impaired confrontation naming and single word comprehension [82, 172]. Impaired object knowledge is worse for low-frequency or low-familiarity items. There are also surface dyslexia and/or dysgraphia for irregularly spelled words. Repetition and speech output are preserved.	

Table 2 Descriptions of neuropathological diagnoses.

NEUROPATHOLOGICAL DIAGNOSES	
Pick’s atrophy
Between 1892 and 1906, A. Pick described a series of cases of circumscribed cortical atrophy associated with dementia, language disorders and behavioral changes. In the following decades, many authors considered any circumscribed (focal) atrophy affecting cortical areas as Pick’s atrophy [38].	
Pick’s Disease (PiD)
The original description by Onari and Spatz was that of circumscribed frontal or temporal lobar atrophy occurring occasionally with Pick bodies (argyrophilic intracellular globes) and Pick cells (ballooned neurons), but not in the presence of atherosclerotic, inflammatory and tumoral changes nor plaques and fibrillary changes [1]. For much of the middle third of the 20th century, PiD was used to define any circumscribed lobar atrophy with histopathological description. Currently, Pick’s Disease is considered part of the FTLD-tau spectrum and its neuropathological diagnosis is based on the presence Pick bodies consisting of 3-repeat tau isoforms [2, 29].	
Alzheimer’s disease (AD)
The histopathological hallmarks of AD are the senile plaques (extracellular deposits of B-amyloid) and neurofibrillary tangles (mostly intraneuronal fibrils of abnormal tau) [27, 226]. A subset of senile plaques is called neuritic plaques, characterized by dystrophic neurites containing tau, synaptic loss, and glial activation [226]. The neuropathological diagnosis of AD is currently based on these pathological findings [227].	
Frontal lobe degeneration of non-Alzheimer type (FLD)
FLD was a pathological diagnosis given by the Lund Dementia Research Group in the 1980s to the ‘unspecific gray matter degeneration’ of superficial cortical layers without markers of Alzheimer’s, Pick’s or Lewy body disease seen in frontal type dementia [105]. The only pathological features were neuronal loss, slight gliosis and spongiosis of cortical layers I to III, with gliosis and demyelination of the subcortical white matter [102, 104]. FLD was later replaced by FTLD(DLDH).	
Dementia lacking distinctive histopathology (DLDH)
DLDH was a pathological diagnosis introduced by D. Knopman in 1990, which consisted in the presence of non-specific neuronal loss, gliosis and spongiosis in superficial cortical layers of the frontal and/or temporal lobes, without distinctive subcellular dysmorphic features or cellular inclusions, such as neurofibrillary tangles, Pick bodies, Lewy bodies or ballooned neurons [110, 111]. It was later renamed FTLD(DLDH) after advances in immunohistochemistry revealed absence of tau- or ubiquitin-immunoreactive inclusions [2].	
Motor neuron disease-inclusion dementia (MNDID)
Ubiquitin-positive neuronal inclusions were initially only described in association with motor neuron disease (MND). However, cases of ubiquitin-positive inclusions were also found in dementia without clinical or pathological signs of MND, thus M. Jackson coined the term “MNDID” in 1996 [133]. In 2001, the designation “FTLD with MND-type inclusions but without MND” was proposed[2]. until K. Josephs finally suggested the term “FTLD-U” (ubiquitin) in 2004 [138].	
Frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD)
Frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) was a term proposed in 2001 by the Work Group on Frontotemporal Dementia and Pick’s Disease to describe the pathological findings associated with FTD [2]. FTLD resulted from the renaming of DLDH once IHC became widely used. FTLD(DLDH) was the neuropathological diagnosis given to clinical FTD cases showing predominant frontotemporal neuronal loss and gliosis without tau- or ubiquitin/p62-positive inclusions [2, 127].	
Frontotemporal lobar degeneration with tau-positive inclusions (FTLD-tau)
FTLD-tau presents with frontotemporal neuronal loss and gliosis together with tau-positive inclusions and insoluble tau with predominance of the 3-repeat, 4-repeat or 3 + 4-repeat isoform [2, 126, 127]. FTLD-tau includes FTLD-PiD (with Pick bodies), corticobasal degeneration, progressive supranuclear palsy, argyrophilic grain disease among others.	
Frontotemporal lobar degeneration with MND (FTLD-MND)
In the first clinical and neuropathological FTD criteria by the Lund and Manchester Research Groups, a “motor neuron disease type” of pathology associated with FTD was described [125]. In 2001, it was renamed “FTLD with MND”, which is characterized by predominant frontotemporal neuronal loss and gliosis with ubiquitin-positive, tau-negative inclusions. It is a diagnosis given to those who presented clinically with FTD with MND[2]	
Frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitin-positive inclusions (FTLD-U)
FTLD-U was a term suggested by K. Josephs in 2004 to describe cases showing frontotemporal lobar degeneration accompanied by ubiquitin-positive, tau-negative and a-synuclein-negative abnormal neurites and/or intraneuronal cytoplasmic inclusions in the frontotemporal cortex and/or hippocampal dentate granule cells in the absence of clinical or pathological signs of MND [138]. It replaced MNDID and FTLD with MND-type inclusions but without MND. With immunohistochemistry, many cases initially considered DLDH were found to harbor ubiquitin-immunoreactive inclusions, and thus recategorized as FTLD-U.	
Frontotemporal lobar degeneration with TDP-43-positive inclusions (FTLD-TDP)
In 2006, two groups led each by T. Arai and M. Neumann found TDP-43 in the ubiquitinated inclusions detected in FTLD-U, FTLD-MND and ALS [5, 6]. FTLD-TDP consists of frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitin-positive, tau-negative inclusions with or without MDN [154]. The TDP-43 positive inclusions include neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions (NCI), neuronal intranuclear inclusions (NII), dystrophic neurites (DN), glial cytoplasmic inclusions (GCIs), granulofilamentous neuronal inclusions (GFNI) and threads and dots found in the neocortical layers, hippocampus, subcortical regions and brainstem [159, 160, 176, 177]. Distinct patterns of lesion types and distribution and associated clinical and genetic features form different types of FTLD-TDP subtypes (from A to E) [176, 177].	
Hippocampal sclerosis (HpScl)
HpScl was first described by W. Sommer in 1880 [182] in association with epilepsy. It is characterized by severe loss of neurons and gliosis in the hippocampal CA1 region and subiculum[194]. It has since then been associated with other diseases such as AD, vascular dementia, and FTD[185, 194]. TDP-43 was found to be present in &gt;70% of HpScl cases [201].	

Competing interests:

The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.


References:

1. Onari K , Spatz H (1926) Anatomische Beiträge zur Lehre von der Pickschen umschriebenen Großhirnrinden-Atrophie (“Picksche Krankheit”) [Anatomical contributions to the theory of Pick’s circumscribed cerebral cortex atrophy (Pick’s disease]. Z Ges Neurol Psychiat 101 :470–511
2. McKhann GM , Albert MS , Grossman M , Miller B , Dickson D , Trojanowski JQ (2001) Clinical and pathological diagnosis of frontotemporal dementia: report of the Work Group on Frontotemporal Dementia and Pick’s Disease. Arch Neurol 58 :1803–1809 11708987
3. Josephs KA , Hodges JR , Snowden JS , Mackenzie IR , Neumann M , Mann DM , Dickson DW (2011) Neuropathological background of phenotypical variability in frontotemporal dementia. Acta Neuropathol 122 :137–153 21614463
4. Hutton M , Lendon CL , Rizzu P , Baker M , Froelich S , Houlden H , Pickering-Brown S , Chakraverty S , Isaacs A , Grover A , Hackett J , Adamson J , Lincoln S , Dickson D , Davies P , Petersen RC , Stevens M , de Graaff E , Wauters E , van Baren J , Hillebrand M , Joosse M , Kwon JM , Nowotny P , Che LK , Norton J , Morris JC , Reed LA , Trojanowski J , Basun H , Lannfelt L , Neystat M , Fahn S , Dark F , Tannenberg T , Dodd PR , Hayward N , Kwok JB , Schofield PR , Andreadis A , Snowden J , Craufurd D , Neary D , Owen F , Oostra BA , Hardy J , Goate A , van Swieten J , Mann D , Lynch T , Heutink P (1998) Association of missense and 5’-splice-site mutations in tau with the inherited dementia FTDP-17. Nature 393 :702–705 9641683
5. Arai T , Hasegawa M , Akiyama H , Ikeda K , Nonaka T , Mori H , Mann D , Tsuchiya K , Yoshida M , Hashizume Y , Oda T (2006) TDP-43 is a component of ubiquitin-positive tau-negative inclusions in frontotemporal lobar degeneration and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 351 :602–611 17084815
6. Neumann M , Sampathu DM , Kwong LK , Truax AC , Micsenyi MC , Chou TT , Bruce J , Schuck T , Grossman M , Clark CM , McCluskey LF , Miller BL , Masliah E , Mackenzie IR , Feldman H , Feiden W , Kretzschmar HA , Trojanowski JQ , Lee VM (2006) Ubiquitinated TDP-43 in frontotemporal lobar degeneration and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Science 314 :130–133 17023659
7. Kwiatkowski TJ Jr , Bosco DA , Leclerc AL , Tamrazian E , Vanderburg CR , Russ C , Davis A , Gilchrist J , Kasarskis EJ , Munsat T , Valdmanis P , Rouleau GA , Hosler BA , Cortelli P , de Jong PJ , Yoshinaga Y , Haines JL , Pericak-Vance MA , Yan J , Ticozzi N , Siddique T , McKenna-Yasek D , Sapp PC , Horvitz HR , Landers JE , Brown RH Jr . (2009) Mutations in the FUS/TLS gene on chromosome 16 cause familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Science 323 :1205–1208 19251627
8. Neary D , Snowden JS , Gustafson L , Passant U , Stuss D , Black S , Freedman M , Kertesz A , Robert PH , Albert M , Boone K , Miller BL , Cummings J , Benson DF (1998) Frontotemporal lobar degeneration: a consensus on clinical diagnostic criteria. Neurology 51 :1546–1554 9855500
9. Snowden J , Neary D , Mann D (2007) Frontotemporal lobar degeneration: clinical and pathological relationships. Acta Neuropathol 114 :31–38 17569065
10. Pick A (1892) Über die Beziehungen der senilen Hirnatrophie zur Aphasie [The relation between senile brain atrophy and aphasia]. Prag Med Wochenschr 17 :165–167
11. Pick A (1901) Senile Hirnatrophie als Grundlage von Herderscheinungen [Senile brain atrophy as the basis of focal symptoms]. Wien Klin Wochenschr 14 :403–404
12. Pick A (1904) Zur Symptomatologie der linksseitigen Schläfenlappenatrophie [On the symptomatology of left-sided temporal lobe atrophy]. Monatsschr Psychiatr Neurol 16 :378–388
13. Pick A (1904) Über primäre progressive Demenz bei Erwachsenen [On primary progressive dementia of adults]. Prag Med Wochenschr 29 :417–420
14. Pick A (1906) Über einen weiteren symptomencomplex in Rahmen des Dementia senilis, bedingt durch umschriebene sträkere Hirnatrophie (gemischte Apraxie) [About another complex of symptoms in the context of dementia senilis, caused by circumscribed severe cerebral atrophy (mixed apraxia)]. Monatsschr Psychiatr Neurol 19 :97–108
15. Pick A , Girling DM , Berrios GE (1994) On the relationship between senile cerebral atrophy and aphasia History of Psychiatry 5 :542–547
16. Pick A , Girling DM , Markova IS (1995) Senile Hirnatrophie als Grundlage von Herderscheinungen. [Senile cerebral atrophy as the origin of focal symptoms.] Hist Psychiatry 6 :533–537
17. Pick A , Girling DM , Berrios GE (1997) On the symptomatology of left-sided temporal lobe atrophy History of Psychiatry 8 :149–159 11619205
18. Brion S , Plas J , Jeanneau A (1991) [Pick’s disease. Anatomo-clinical point of view]. Rev Neurol (Paris) 147 :693–704 1775822
19. Mesulam MM (1982) Slowly progressive aphasia without generalized dementia. Ann Neurol 11 :592–598 7114808
20. Poeck K , Luzzatti C (1988) Slowly progressive aphasia in three patients. The problem of accompanying neuropsychological deficit. Brain 111 (Pt 1 ):151–168 3365545
21. Kertesz A , Davidson W , McCabe P (1998) Primary progressive semantic aphasia: a case study. J Int Neuropsychol Soc 4 :388–398 9656612
22. Hodges JR , Patterson K , Oxbury S , Funnell E (1992) Semantic dementia. Progressive fluent aphasia with temporal lobe atrophy. Brain 115 (Pt 6 ):1783–1806 1486461
23. Spatt J (2003) Arnold Pick’s concept of dementia. Cortex 39 :525–531 12870825
24. Derouesne C (2014) [From Arnold Pick’s original descriptions to frontotemporal dementia: the present enlightened by the past an historical approach]. Geriatr Psychol Neuropsychiatr Vieil 12 :74–84 24647241
25. Kertesz A (2004) Frontotemporal dementia/Pick’s disease. Arch Neurol 61 :969–971 15210543
26. Gans A (1923) Betrachtungen über Art und Ausbreitung des krankhaften Prozesses in einem Fall von Pickscher Atrophie des Stirnhirns [Reflections on the nature and spread of the disease process in a case of Pick’s atrophy of the frontal lobe]. Z Ges Neurol Psychiat 80 :10–28
27. Alzheimer A (1911) Über eigenartige Krankheitsfälle des späteren Alters [On certain peculiar diseases of old age]. Z Ges Neurol Psychiat 4 :356–385
28. Alzheimer A (1991) Über eigenartige Krankheitsfälle des späteren Alters: (On certain peculiar diseases of old age). . History of Psychiatry 2 :74–101
29. Dickson DW (2001) Neuropathology of Pick’s disease. Neurology 56 :S16–20 11402145
30. Schneider C (1927) Üeber Picksche Krankheit. [Pick’s disease]. . Monatsschr Psychiatr Neurol 65 :230–275.
31. Schneider C (1929) Weitere Beiträge zur Lehre von der Pickschen Krankheit [Further contributions to the theory of Pick’s disease]. Z Ges Neurol Psychiat 120 :340–384
32. Grünthal E (1930) Über ein Brüderpaar mit Pickscher Krankheit: Eine vergleichende Untersuchung, zugleich ein Beitrag zur Kenntnis der Verursachung und des Verlaufs der Erkrankung. [Two brothers with Pick’s disease: A comparative study and contribution to the knowledge of the cause and the course of the disease.]. Z Ges Neurol Psychiat 129 :350–375
33. v. Braunmühl A , Leonhard K (1934) Über ein Schwesternpaar mit Pickscher Krankheit [On a pair of sisters with Pick’s disease]. Z Ges Neurol Psychiat 150 :209–241
34. Verhaart WJC (1930) Over de ziekte van Pick [About Pick’s disease]. Nederl Tijdschr Geneesk 74 :5586–5598
35. Malamud N , Waggoner RW (1943) Genealogic and clinicopathologic study of Pick’s disease. Arch Neurol Psychiat 50 :288–303
36. Keddie KM (1967) Presenile dementia, clinically of the Pick’s disease variety, occurring in a mother and daughter. International Journal of Neuropsychiatry, 3 :182–187 6029993
37. Ferraro A , Jervis A (1936) Pick’s disease: Clinicopathologic study with report of two cases. Arch NeurPsych 36 :739–767
38. Delay J , Brion S , Escourolle R (1957) Limites et conception actuelle de la maladie de Pick : son diagnostic différentiel [Limits &amp; current concept of Pick’s disease; its differential diagnosis]. Ann Med Psychol (Paris) 115 :609–634 13425127
39. Thibodeau MP , Miller BL (2013) ‘Limits and current knowledge of Pick’s disease: its differential diagnosis’. A translation of the 1957 Delay, Brion, Escourolle article. Neurocase 19 :417–422 22554132
40. Neumann MA (1949) Pick’s disease. Journal of Neuropathology &amp; Experimental Neurology 8 :255–282 18153924
41. Hassin GB , Levitin D (1941) Pick’s disease: clinicopathologic study and report of a case. Arch NeurPsych 45 :814–833
42. Löwenberg K (1936) Pick’s disease: A clinicopathologic contribution. Archives of Neurology &amp; Psychiatry 36 :768–789
43. Kahn E , Thompson LJ (1934) Concerning Pick’s disease. Am J Psychiatry 90 :937–946
44. Stern K , Reed GE (1945) Presenile dementia (Alzheimer’s disease). Am J Psychiatry 102 :191–197
45. Marchand L , Anglade R , Fretet J , Rougean M , Roan P (1938) La maladie de Pick, la maladie d’Alzheimer, et la démence sénile sans athérome cérébral sont-elles les trois modalités d’un même processus dégénératif [Are Pick’s disease, Alzheimer’s disease and senile dementia without atherosclerosis all the same degenerative process]. Ann Med Psychol (Paris) 96 :249–255
46. Marchand L (1937) La démence sénile sans atherome cérébral. Ses rapports avec la maladie d’Alzheimer et la maladie de Pick. Considerations sur les encephaloses [Senile dementia without atherosclerosis; Its relation with Alzheimer’s and Pick’s disease. Considerations on encephalosis]. Ann Med Psychol (Paris) 95 :680–735
47. Delay J , Brion S , Badaracco JC (1955) Le diagnostic différentiel des maladies de Pick et d’Alzhiemer (A propos de 12 observations anatomo-cliniques) [Differential diagnosis of Pick’s disease from Alzheimer’s disease; anatomical and clinical observations on 12 cases]. Encephale 44 :454–499 13305504
48. Spatz H (1952) La maladie de Pick les atrophies systématisées progressives et la sénescence cérébrale prématurée localisée. 1er congres international d’histopathologie du système nerveux [Pick’s disease, progressive atrophy and premature localized cerebral senescence. 1st international conference on nervous system histopathology] 2 :375–406
49. Escourolle R (1956) La maladie de Pick. Etude d’ensemble et synthèse anatomo-clinique [Pick’s disease: critical study and anatomo-clinical summary]. In:Dissertation, Paris
50. Rewcastle NB , Ball MJ (1968) Electron microscopic structure of the “inclusion bodies” in Pick’s disease. Neurology 18 :1205–1213 4178657
51. Brion S , Mikol J (1971) [Ultrastructural study of Pick’s disease. Apropos of 3 cases]. Rev Neurol (Paris) 125 :273–286 4340948
52. Brion S , Mikol J , Psimaras A (1973) Recent findings in Pick’s Disease. In: Zimmerman HM (ed) Progress in neuropathology. Grune and Stratton, New York, pp 421–452
53. Constantinidis J , Richard J , Tissot R (1974) Pick’s disease. Histological and clinical correlations. Eur Neurol 11 :208–217 4137107
54. Papageorgiou SG , Beratis IN , Horvath J , Herrmann FR , Bouras C , Kövari E (2016) Amnesia in frontotemporal dementia: shedding light on the Geneva historical data. J Neurol 263 :657–664 26810723
55. Brion S (1977) Les demences preseniles [Presenile dementias]. In: Encycl. Med. Chir. 37 545, A10, Paris, pp 1–16
56. Masse G , Mikol J , Brion S (1981) Atypical presenile dementia: Report of an anatomo-clinical case and review of the literature. J Neurol Sci 52 :245–267 7310435
57. Brun A , Gustafson L (1978) Limbic lobe involvement in presenile dementia. Arch Psychiatr Nervenkr (1970) 226 :79–93 367312
58. Brun A , Gustafson L (1976) Distribution of cerebral degeneration in Alzheimer’s disease. A clinico-pathological study. Arch Psychiatr Nervenkr (1970) 223 :15–33 828039
59. Neumann MA , Cohn R (1967) Progressive subcortical gliosis, a rare form of presenile dementia. Brain 90 :405–418 5339109
60. Akelaitis AJ (1944) Atrophy of Basal Ganglia in Pick’s Disease. Clinicopathologic study. Arch Neurol Psychiatr 51 :27–34
61. Kim RC , Collins GH , Parisi JE , Wright AW , Chu YB (1981) Familial dementia of adult onset with pathological findings of a ‘non-specific’ nature. Brain 104 :61–78 7470845
62. Schaumburg HH , Suzuki K (1968) Non-specific familial presenile dementia. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatr 31 :479–486
63. Clark AW , White CL , Manz HJ , Parhad IM , Curry B , Whitehouse PJ , Lehmann J , Coyle JT (1986) Primary Degenerative Dementia Without Alzheimer Pathology. Can J Neurol Sci 13 :462–470 3791063
64. Hughes CP , Myers FK , Smith K , Torack RM (1973) Nosologic problems in dementia. A clinical and pathologic study of 11 cases. Neurology 23 :344–351 4736122
65. Morris JC , Cole M , Banker BQ , Wright D (1984) Hereditary dysphasic dementia and the Pick-Alzheimer spectrum. Ann Neurol 16 :455–466 6497355
66. Cole M , Wright D , Banker BQ (1979) Familial aphasia due to Pick’s disease. Ann Neurol 6 :158
67. Cole M , Wright D , Banker BQ (1979) Familial aphasia: the Pick-Alzheimer spectrum. Trans Am Neurol Assoc 104 :175–179 553401
68. Lendon CL , Lynch T , Norton J , McKeel DW Jr , Busfield F , Craddock N , Chakraverty S , Gopalakrishnan G , Shears SD , Grimmett W , Wilhelmsen KC , Hansen L , Morris JC , Goaste AM (1998) Hereditary dysphasic disinhibition dementia: a frontotemporal dementia linked to 17q21–22. Neurology 50 :1546–1555 9633693
69. Behrens MI , Mukherjee O , Tu PH , Liscic RM , Grinberg LT , Carter D , Paulsmeyer K , Taylor-Reinwald L , Gitcho M , Norton JB , Chakraverty S , Goate AM , Morris JC , Cairns NJ (2007) Neuropathologic heterogeneity in HDDD1: a familial frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitin-positive inclusions and progranulin mutation. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 21 :1–7 17334266
70. Mehler MF , Horoupian DS , Davies P , Dickson DW (1987) Reduced somatostatin-like immunoreactivity in cerebral cortex in nonfamilial dysphasic dementia. Neurology 37 :1448–1453 2888051
71. Dejerine J , Serieux P (1897) Un cas de surdité verbale pure, terminée par aphasie sensorielle, suivi d’autopsie [A case of pure word deafness terminating in sensory aphasia, followed by autopsy]. C R Soc Biol (Paris) 49 :1074–1077
72. Heath PD , Kennedy P , Kapur N (1983) Slowly progressive aphasia without generalized dementia. Ann Neurol 13 :687–688
73. Chawluk JB , Mesulam MM , Hurtig H , Kushner M , Weintraub S , Saykin A , Rubin N , Alavi A , Reivich M (1986) Slowly progressive aphasia without generalized dementia: studies with positron emission tomography. Ann Neurol 19 :68–74 3484931
74. Kirshner HS , Webb WG , Kelly MP , Wells CE (1984) Language disturbance. An initial symptom of cortical degenerations and dementia. Arch Neurol 41 :491–496 6721714
75. Mesulam MM , Weintraub S (1992) Spectrum of primary progressive aphasia. Baillieres Clin Neurol 1 :583–609 1344204
76. Mesulam MM (2001) Primary progressive aphasia. Ann Neurol 49 :425–432 11310619
77. Mesulam MM (1987) Primary progressive aphasia--differentiation from Alzheimer’s disease. Ann Neurol 22 :533–534 3324947
78. Snowden JS , Neary D , Mann DM , Goulding PJ , Testa HJ (1992) Progressive language disorder due to lobar atrophy. Ann Neurol 31 :174–183 1575456
79. Kirshner HS , Tanridag O , Thurman L , Whetsell WO Jr . (1987) Progressive aphasia without dementia: two cases with focal spongiform degeneration. Ann Neurol 22 :527–532 3435071
80. Green J , Morris JC , Sandson J , McKeel DW Jr , Miller JW (1990) Progressive aphasia: a precursor of global dementia? Neurology 40 :423–429 2314582
81. Warrington EK (1975) The selective impairment of semantic memory. Q J Exp Psychol 27 :635–657 1197619
82. Snowden J , Goulding P , Neary D (1989) Semantic Dementia: a form of circumscribed cerebral atrophy. Behav Neurol 2 :167–182
83. Neary D , Snowden JS , Northen B , Goulding P (1988) Dementia of frontal lobe type. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 51 :353–361 3258902
84. Rowland LP (2001) How amyotrophic lateral sclerosis got its name: the clinical-pathologic genius of Jean-Martin Charcot. Arch Neurol 58 :512–515 11255459
85. Androp S (1940) Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with psychosis. Psychiatric Quarterly 14 :818–825
86. Ziegler LH (1930) Psychotic and emotional phenomena associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Arch Neurol Psychiatry 24 :930–936
87. Westphal A (1925) Schizophrene Krankheitsprozesse und amyotrophische Lateralsklerose [Schizophrenic disease processes and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis]. Arch Psychiat Nervenkr 74 :310–325
88. Wechsler IS , Davison C (1932) Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with mental symptoms. Arch Neurol Psychiatr 27 :859–880
89. Meyer A (1929) Über eine der amyotrophischen Lateralsklerose nahestehende Erkrankung mit psychischen Störungen [About a disease related to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with mental disorders]. Z Ges Neurol Psychiat 121 :107–138
90. v. Bagh K (1941) Über anatomische Befunde bei 30 Fällen von systematischer Atrophie der Großhirnrinde (Pickscher Krankheit) mit besonderer Berücksichtigung der Stammganglien und der langen absteigenden Leitungsbahnen. Eine vorläufige Mitteilung [Anatomic findings in 30 cases of systemic atrophy of the cerebral cortex (Pick’s disease) with particular attention to the basal ganglia and the long descending pathways. A preliminary communication]. Arch Psychiat Nervenkr 114 :68–70
91. Hirano A , Kurland LT , Krooth RS , Lessell S (1961) Parkinsonism-dementia complex, an endemic disease on the island of Guam. I. Clinical features. Brain 84 :642–661 13907609
92. Bonduelle M , Bouygues P , Escourolle R , Lormeau G (1968) [Simultaneous development of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Parkinson’s syndrome and progressive dementia. Apropos of 2 anatomoclinical cases. Attempted interpretation]. J Neurol Sci 6 :315–332 5707430
93. Mitsuyama Y , Takamiya S (1979) Presenile dementia with motor neuron disease in Japan. A new entity? Arch Neurol 36 :592–593 475629
94. Horoupian DS , Thal L , Katzman R , Terry RD , Davies P , Hirano A , DeTeresa R , Fuld PA , Petito C , Blass J , (1984) Dementia and motor neuron disease: morphometric, biochemical, and Golgi studies. Ann Neurol 16 :305–313 6148912
95. Neary D , Snowden JS , Mann DM , Northen B , Goulding PJ , Macdermott N (1990) Frontal lobe dementia and motor neuron disease. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 53 :23–32 2303828
96. Neary D , Snowden J , Mann D (2005) Frontotemporal dementia. Lancet Neurol 4 :771–780 16239184
97. Morita K , Kaiya H , Ikeda T , Namba M (1987) Presenile dementia combined with amyotrophy: a review of 34 Japanese cases. Arch Gerontol Geriatr 6 :263–277 3318745
98. Salazar AM , Masters CL , Gajdusek DC , Gibbs CJ Jr . (1983) Syndromes of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and dementia: relation to transmissible Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. Ann Neurol 14 :17–26 6351721
99. Brun A (2007) Identification and characterization of frontal lobe degeneration: historical perspective on the development of FTD. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 21 :S3–4 18090420
100. Neary D , Snowden JS , Bowen DM , Sims NR , Mann DM , Benton JS , Northen B , Yates PO , Davison AN (1986) Neuropsychological syndromes in presenile dementia due to cerebral atrophy. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 49 :163–174 2419511
101. Gustafson L (1987) Frontal lobe degeneration of non-Alzheimer type. II. Clinical picture and differential diagnosis. Arch Gerontol Geriatr 6 :209–223 3689054
102. Brun A (1987) Frontal lobe degeneration of non-Alzheimer type. I. Neuropathology. Arch Gerontol Geriatr 6 :193–208 3689053
103. Risberg J (1987) Frontal lobe degeneration of non-Alzheimer type. III. Regional cerebral blood flow. Arch Gerontol Geriatr 6 :225–233 3689055
104. Englund E , Brun A (1987) Frontal lobe degeneration of non-Alzheimer type. IV. White matter changes. Arch Gerontol Geriatr 6 :235–243 3689056
105. Gustafson L , Brun A , Passant U (1992) Frontal lobe degeneration of non-Alzheimer type. Baillieres Clin Neurol 1 :559–582 1344203
106. Brun A , Gustafson L (2011) The birth and early evolution of the frontotemporal dementia (FTD) concept. J Mol Neurosci 45 :324–329 21647707
107. Johanson A , Hagberg B (1989) Psychometric characteristics in patients with frontal lobe degeneration of non-Alzheimer type. Arch Gerontol Geriatr 8 :129–137 2735785
108. Förstl H , Hentschel F , Besthorn C , Geiger-Kabisch C , Sattel H , Schreiter-Gasser U , Bayerl JR , Schmitz F , Schmitt HP (1994) [Frontal and temporal onset of brain atrophy. Clinical and instrumental findings]. Nervenarzt 65 :611–618 7991007
109. Filley CM , Kleinschmidt-De Masters BK , Gross KF (1994) Non-Alzheimer fronto-temporal degenerative dementia. A neurobehavioral and pathologic study. Clin Neuropathol 13 :109–116 8088029
110. Knopman DS , Mastri AR , Frey WH 2nd , Sung JH , Rustan T (1990) Dementia lacking distinctive histologic features: a common non-Alzheimer degenerative dementia. Neurology 40 :251–256 2300243
111. Knopman DS (1993) Overview of dementia lacking distinctive histology: pathological designation of a progressive dementia. Dementia 4 :132–136 8401780
112. Miller BL , Cummings JL , Villanueva-Meyer J , Boone K , Mehringer CM , Lesser IM , Mena I (1991) Frontal lobe degeneration: clinical, neuropsychological, and SPECT characteristics. Neurology 41 :1374–1382 1891084
113. Benson DF (1993) Progressive frontal dysfunction. Dementia 4 :149–153 8401783
114. Risberg J , Passant U , Warkentin S , Gustafson L (1993) Regional cerebral blood flow in frontal lobe dementia of non-Alzheimer type. Dementia 4 :186–187 8401790
115. Miller BL , Chang L , Mena I , Boone K , Lesser IM (1993) Progressive right frontotemporal degeneration: clinical, neuropsychological and SPECT characteristics. Dementia 4 :204–213 8401793
116. Friedland RP , Koss E , Lerner A , Hedera P , Ellis W , Dronkers N , Ober BA , Jagust WJ (1993) Functional imaging, the frontal lobes, and dementia. Dementia 4 :192–203 8401792
117. Brown J , Gydesen S , Sorensen SA , Brun A , Duff K , Houlden H , Fidani L , Kullkarni S , Cummings J , Goate A , (1993) Exclusion mapping in familial non-specific dementia. Dementia 4 :163–166 8401786
118. Edvinsson L , Minthon L , Ekman R , Gustafson L (1993) Neuropeptides in cerebrospinal fluid of patients with Alzheimer’s disease and dementia with frontotemporal lobe degeneration. Dementia 4 :167–171 8401787
119. Francis PT , Holmes C , Webster MT , Stratmann GC , Procter AW , Bowen DM (1993) Preliminary neurochemical findings in non-Alzheimer dementia due to lobar atrophy. Dementia 4 :172–177 8401788
120. Brun A (1993) Frontal lobe degeneration of non-Alzheimer type revisited. Dementia 4 :126–131 8401779
121. Mann DM , South PW , Snowden JS , Neary D (1993) Dementia of frontal lobe type: neuropathology and immunohistochemistry. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 56 :605–614 8509772
122. Liu X , Brun A (1996) Regional and laminar synaptic pathology in frontal lobe degeneration of non-alzheimer type. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 11 :47–55
123. Liu X , Erikson C , Brun A (1996) Cortical synaptic changes and gliosis in normal aging, Alzheimer’s disease and frontal lobe degeneration. Dementia 7 :128–134 8740626
124. Cooper PN , Jackson M , Lennox G , Lowe J , Mann DM (1995) Tau, ubiquitin, and alpha B-crystallin immunohistochemistry define the principal causes of degenerative frontotemporal dementia. Arch Neurol 52 :1011–1015 7575218
125. Groups TLaM (1994) Clinical and neuropathological criteria for frontotemporal dementia. . J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 57 :416–418 8163988
126. Dickson DW , Kouri N , Murray ME , Josephs KA (2011) Neuropathology of frontotemporal lobar degeneration-tau (FTLD-tau). J Mol Neurosci 45 :384–389 21720721
127. Cairns NJ , Bigio EH , Mackenzie IRA , Neumann M , Lee VMY , Hatanpaa KJ , White CL , Schneider JA , Grinberg LT , Halliday G , Duyckaerts C , Lowe JS , Holm IE , Tolnay M , Okamoto K , Yokoo H , Murayama S , Woulfe J , Munoz DG , Dickson DW , Ince PG , Trojanowski JQ , Mann DMA (2007) Neuropathologic diagnostic and nosologic criteria for frontotemporal lobar degeneration: consensus of the Consortium for Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration. Acta Neuropathol 114 :5–22 17579875
128. Forman MS , Farmer J , Johnson JK , Clark CM , Arnold SE , Coslett HB , Chatterjee A , Hurtig HI , Karlawish JH , Rosen HJ , Van Deerlin V , Lee VM , Miller BL , Trojanowski JQ , Grossman M (2006) Frontotemporal dementia: clinicopathological correlations. Ann Neurol 59 :952–962 16718704
129. Leigh PN , Anderton BH , Dodson A , Gallo JM , Swash M , Power DM (1988) Ubiquitin deposits in anterior horn cells in motor neurone disease. Neurosci Lett 93 :197–203 2853844
130. Lowe J , Lennox G , Jefferson D , Morrell K , McQuire D , Gray T , Landon M , Doherty FJ , Mayer RJ (1988) A filamentous inclusion body within anterior horn neurones in motor neurone disease defined by immunocytochemical localisation of ubiquitin. Neurosci Lett 94 :203–210 2853853
131. Wightman G , Anderson VE , Martin J , Swash M , Anderton BH , Neary D , Mann D , Luthert P , Leigh PN (1992) Hippocampal and neocortical ubiquitin-immunoreactive inclusions in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with dementia. Neurosci Lett 139 :269–274 1376881
132. Okamoto K , Murakami N , Kusaka H , Yoshida M , Hashizume Y , Nakazato Y , Matsubara E , Hirai S (1992) Ubiquitin-positive intraneuronal inclusions in the extramotor cortices of presenile dementia patients with motor neuron disease. J Neurol 239 :426–430 1333007
133. Jackson M , Lennox G , Lowe J (1996) Motor neurone disease-inclusion dementia. Neurodegeneration 5 :339–350 9117546
134. Tolnay M , Probst A (1995) Frontal lobe degeneration: novel ubiquitin-immunoreactive neurites within frontotemporal cortex. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 21 :492–497 8745238
135. Lipton AM , White CL 3rd , Bigio EH (2004) Frontotemporal lobar degeneration with motor neuron disease-type inclusions predominates in 76 cases of frontotemporal degeneration. Acta Neuropathol 108 :379–385 15351890
136. Johnson JK , Diehl J , Mendez MF , Neuhaus J , Shapira JS , Forman M , Chute DJ , Roberson ED , Pace-Savitsky C , Neumann M , Chow TW , Rosen HJ , Forstl H , Kurz A , Miller BL (2005) Frontotemporal lobar degeneration: demographic characteristics of 353 patients. Arch Neurol 62 :925–930 15956163
137. Hodges JR , Davies RR , Xuereb JH , Casey B , Broe M , Bak TH , Kril JJ , Halliday GM (2004) Clinicopathological correlates in frontotemporal dementia. Ann Neurol 56 :399–406 15349867
138. Josephs KA , Holton JL , Rossor MN , Godbolt AK , Ozawa T , Strand K , Khan N , Al-Sarraj S , Revesz T (2004) Frontotemporal lobar degeneration and ubiquitin immunohistochemistry. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 30 :369–373 15305982
139. Shi J , Shaw CL , Du Plessis D , Richardson AMT , Bailey KL , Julien C , Stopford C , Thompson J , Varma A , Craufurd D , Tian J , Pickering-Brown S , Neary D , Snowden JS , Mann DMA (2005) Histopathological changes underlying frontotemporal lobar degeneration with clinicopathological correlation. Acta Neuropathol 110 :501–512 16222525
140. Neary D , Snowden JS , Mann DM (2000) Classification and description of frontotemporal dementias. Ann N Y Acad Sci 920 :46–51 11193176
141. Mackenzie IR , Shi J , Shaw CL , Duplessis D , Neary D , Snowden JS , Mann DM (2006) Dementia lacking distinctive histology (DLDH) revisited. Acta Neuropathol 112 :551–559 16900341
142. Josephs KA , Jones AG , Dickson DW (2004) Hippocampal sclerosis and ubiquitin-positive inclusions in dementia lacking distinctive histopathology. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 17 :342–345 15178950
143. Nakano I (2000) Frontotemporal dementia with motor neuron disease (amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with dementia). Neuropathology 20 :68–75 10935441
144. Mackenzie IR , Feldman H (2003) The relationship between extramotor ubiquitin-immunoreactive neuronal inclusions and dementia in motor neuron disease. Acta Neuropathol 105 :98–102 12536219
145. Josephs KA , Knopman DS , Whitwell JL , Boeve BF , Parisi JE , Petersen RC , Dickson DW (2005) Survival in two variants of tau-negative frontotemporal lobar degeneration: FTLD-U vs FTLD-MND. Neurology 65 :645–647 16116138
146. Mackenzie IR , Baborie A , Pickering-Brown S , Du Plessis D , Jaros E , Perry RH , Neary D , Snowden JS , Mann DM (2006) Heterogeneity of ubiquitin pathology in frontotemporal lobar degeneration: classification and relation to clinical phenotype. Acta Neuropathol 112 :539–549 17021754
147. Sampathu DM , Neumann M , Kwong LK , Chou TT , Micsenyi M , Truax A , Bruce J , Grossman M , Trojanowski JQ , Lee VM (2006) Pathological heterogeneity of frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitin-positive inclusions delineated by ubiquitin immunohistochemistry and novel monoclonal antibodies. Am J Pathol 169 :1343–1352 17003490
148. Baker M , Mackenzie IR , Pickering-Brown SM , Gass J , Rademakers R , Lindholm C , Snowden J , Adamson J , Sadovnick AD , Rollinson S , Cannon A , Dwosh E , Neary D , Melquist S , Richardson A , Dickson D , Berger Z , Eriksen J , Robinson T , Zehr C , Dickey CA , Crook R , McGowan E , Mann D , Boeve B , Feldman H , Hutton M (2006) Mutations in progranulin cause tau-negative frontotemporal dementia linked to chromosome 17. Nature 442 :916–919 16862116
149. Josephs KA , Ahmed Z , Katsuse O , Parisi JF , Boeve BF , Knopman DS , Petersen RC , Davies P , Duara R , Graff-Radford NR , Uitti RJ , Rademakers R , Adamson J , Baker M , Hutton ML , Dickson DW (2007) Neuropathologic features of frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitin-positive inclusions with progranulin gene (PGRN) mutations. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 66 :142–151 17278999
150. Mackenzie IR , Baker M , Pickering-Brown S , Hsiung GY , Lindholm C , Dwosh E , Gass J , Cannon A , Rademakers R , Hutton M , Feldman HH (2006) The neuropathology of frontotemporal lobar degeneration caused by mutations in the progranulin gene. Brain 129 :3081–3090 17071926
151. Morita M , Al-Chalabi A , Andersen PM , Hosler B , Sapp P , Englund E , Mitchell JE , Habgood JJ , de Belleroche J , Xi J , Jongjaroenprasert W , Horvitz HR , Gunnarsson LG , Brown RH Jr . (2006) A locus on chromosome 9p confers susceptibility to ALS and frontotemporal dementia. Neurology 66 :839–844 16421333
152. Vance C , Al-Chalabi A , Ruddy D , Smith BN , Hu X , Sreedharan J , Siddique T , Schelhaas HJ , Kusters B , Troost D , Baas F , de Jong V , Shaw CE (2006) Familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with frontotemporal dementia is linked to a locus on chromosome 9p13.2–21.3. Brain 129 :868–876 16495328
153. Forman MS , Mackenzie IR , Cairns NJ , Swanson E , Boyer PJ , Drachman DA , Jhaveri BS , Karlawish JH , Pestronk A , Smith TW , Tu PH , Watts GD , Markesbery WR , Smith CD , Kimonis VE (2006) Novel ubiquitin neuropathology in frontotemporal dementia with valosin-containing protein gene mutations. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 65 :571–581 16783167
154. Cairns NJ , Neumann M , Bigio EH , Holm IE , Troost D , Hatanpaa KJ , Foong C , White CL 3rd , Schneider JA , Kretzschmar HA , Carter D , Taylor-Reinwald L , Paulsmeyer K , Strider J , Gitcho M , Goate AM , Morris JC , Mishra M , Kwong LK , Stieber A , Xu Y , Forman MS , Trojanowski JQ , Lee M , Mackenzie IR (2007) TDP-43 in familial and sporadic frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitin inclusions. Am J Pathol 171 :227–240 17591968
155. Kawakami I , Arai T , Hasegawa M (2019) The basis of clinicopathological heterogeneity in TDP-43 proteinopathy. Acta Neuropathol 138 :751–770 31555895
156. Davidson Y , Kelley T , Mackenzie IR , Pickering-Brown S , Du Plessis D , Neary D , Snowden JS , Mann DM (2007) Ubiquitinated pathological lesions in frontotemporal lobar degeneration contain the TAR DNA-binding protein, TDP-43. Acta Neuropathol 113 :521–533 17219193
157. Neumann M , Kwong LK , Truax AC , Vanmassenhove B , Kretzschmar HA , Van Deerlin VM , Clark CM , Grossman M , Miller BL , Trojanowski JQ , Lee VM (2007) TDP-43-positive white matter pathology in frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitin-positive inclusions. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 66 :177–183 17356379
158. Neumann M , Mackenzie IR , Cairns NJ , Boyer PJ , Markesbery WR , Smith CD , Taylor JP , Kretzschmar HA , Kimonis VE , Forman MS (2007) TDP-43 in the ubiquitin pathology of frontotemporal dementia with VCP gene mutations. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 66 :152–157 17279000
159. Hatanpaa KJ , Bigio EH , Cairns NJ , Womack KB , Weintraub S , Morris JC , Foong C , Xiao G , Hladik C , Mantanona TY , White CL 3rd (2008) TAR DNA-binding protein 43 immunohistochemistry reveals extensive neuritic pathology in FTLD-U: a midwest-southwest consortium for FTLD study. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 67 :271–279 18379440
160. Josephs KA , Stroh A , Dugger B , Dickson DW (2009) Evaluation of subcortical pathology and clinical correlations in FTLD-U subtypes. Acta Neuropathol 118 :349–358 19455346
161. Mackenzie IR , Neumann M (2017) Reappraisal of TDP-43 pathology in FTLD-U subtypes. Acta Neuropathol 134 :79–96 28466142
162. Mackenzie IR , Neumann M (2020) Subcortical TDP-43 pathology patterns validate cortical FTLD-TDP subtypes and demonstrate unique aspects of C9orf72 mutation cases. Acta Neuropathol 139 :83–98 31501924
163. Thorpe JR , Tang H , Atherton J , Cairns NJ (2008) Fine structural analysis of the neuronal inclusions of frontotemporal lobar degeneration with TDP-43 proteinopathy. J Neural Transm (Vienna) 115 :1661–1671 18974920
164. Josephs KA , Zhang YJ , Baker M , Rademakers R , Petrucelli L , Dickson DW (2019) C-terminal and full length TDP-43 specie differ according to FTLD-TDP lesion type but not genetic mutation. Acta Neuropathol Commun 7 :100 31266542
165. Kametani F , Obi T , Shishido T , Akatsu H , Murayama S , Saito Y , Yoshida M , Hasegawa M (2016) Mass spectrometric analysis of accumulated TDP-43 in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis brains. Sci Rep 6 :23281 26980269
166. Igaz LM , Kwong LK , Xu Y , Truax AC , Uryu K , Neumann M , Clark CM , Elman LB , Miller BL , Grossman M , McCluskey LF , Trojanowski JQ , Lee VM (2008) Enrichment of C-terminal fragments in TAR DNA-binding protein-43 cytoplasmic inclusions in brain but not in spinal cord of frontotemporal lobar degeneration and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Am J Pathol 173 :182–194 18535185
167. Lee EB , Lee VM , Trojanowski JQ (2011) Gains or losses: molecular mechanisms of TDP43-mediated neurodegeneration. Nat Rev Neurosci 13 :38–50 22127299
168. Winton MJ , Igaz LM , Wong MM , Kwong LK , Trojanowski JQ , Lee VM (2008 ) Disturbance of nuclear and cytoplasmic TAR DNA-binding protein (TDP-43) induces disease-like redistribution, sequestration, and aggregate formation. The Journal of biological chemistry 283 :13302–13309 18305110
169. Jung Y , Duffy JR , Josephs KA (2013) Primary progressive aphasia and apraxia of speech. Semin Neurol 33 :342–347 24234355
170. Whitwell JL , Josephs KA (2012) Recent advances in the imaging of frontotemporal dementia. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep 12 :715–723 23015371
171. Whitwell JL (2019) FTD spectrum: Neuroimaging across the FTD spectrum. Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci 165 :187–223 31481163
172. Gorno-Tempini ML , Hillis AE , Weintraub S , Kertesz A , Mendez M , Cappa SF , Ogar JM , Rohrer JD , Black S , Boeve BF , Manes F , Dronkers NF , Vandenberghe R , Rascovsky K , Patterson K , Miller BL , Knopman DS , Hodges JR , Mesulam MM , Grossman M (2011) Classification of primary progressive aphasia and its variants. Neurology 76 :1006–1014 21325651
173. Gorno-Tempini ML , Dronkers NF , Rankin KP , Ogar JM , Phengrasamy L , Rosen HJ , Johnson JK , Weiner MW , Miller BL (2004) Cognition and anatomy in three variants of primary progressive aphasia. Ann Neurol 55 :335–346 14991811
174. DeJesus-Hernandez M , Mackenzie IR , Boeve BF , Boxer AL , Baker M , Rutherford NJ , Nicholson AM , Finch NA , Flynn H , Adamson J , Kouri N , Wojtas A , Sengdy P , Hsiung GY , Karydas A , Seeley WW , Josephs KA , Coppola G , Geschwind DH , Wszolek ZK , Feldman H , Knopman DS , Petersen RC , Miller BL , Dickson DW , Boylan KB , Graff-Radford NR , Rademakers R (2011) Expanded GGGGCC hexanucleotide repeat in noncoding region of C9ORF72 causes chromosome 9p-linked FTD and ALS. Neuron 72 :245–256 21944778
175. Renton AE , Majounie E , Waite A , Simón-Sánchez J , Rollinson S , Gibbs JR , Schymick JC , Laaksovirta H , van Swieten JC , Myllykangas L , Kalimo H , Paetau A , Abramzon Y , Remes AM , Kaganovich A , Scholz SW , Duckworth J , Ding J , Harmer DW , Hernandez DG , Johnson JO , Mok K , Ryten M , Trabzuni D , Guerreiro RJ , Orrell RW , Neal J , Murray A , Pearson J , Jansen IE , Sondervan D , Seelaar H , Blake D , Young K , Halliwell N , Callister JB , Toulson G , Richardson A , Gerhard A , Snowden J , Mann D , Neary D , Nalls MA , Peuralinna T , Jansson L , Isoviita VM , Kaivorinne AL , Hölttä-Vuori M , Ikonen E , Sulkava R , Benatar M , Wuu J , Chiò A , Restagno G , Borghero G , Sabatelli M , Heckerman D , Rogaeva E , Zinman L , Rothstein JD , Sendtner M , Drepper C , Eichler EE , Alkan C , Abdullaev Z , Pack SD , Dutra A , Pak E , Hardy J , Singleton A , Williams NM , Heutink P , Pickering-Brown S , Morris HR , Tienari PJ , Traynor BJ (2011) A hexanucleotide repeat expansion in C9ORF72 is the cause of chromosome 9p21-linked ALS-FTD. Neuron 72 :257–268 21944779
176. Mackenzie IR , Neumann M , Baborie A , Sampathu DM , Du Plessis D , Jaros E , Perry RH , Trojanowski JQ , Mann DM , Lee VM (2011) A harmonized classification system for FTLD-TDP pathology. Acta Neuropathol 122 :111–113 21644037
177. Lee EB , Porta S , Michael Baer G , Xu Y , Suh E , Kwong LK , Elman L , Grossman M , Lee VM , Irwin DJ , Van Deerlin VM , Trojanowski JQ (2017) Expansion of the classification of FTLD-TDP: distinct pathology associated with rapidly progressive frontotemporal degeneration. Acta Neuropathol 134 :65–78 28130640
178. Takeuchi R , Tada M , Shiga A , Toyoshima Y , Konno T , Sato T , Nozaki H , Kato T , Horie M , Shimizu H , Takebayashi H , Onodera O , Nishizawa M , Kakita A , Takahashi H (2016) Heterogeneity of cerebral TDP-43 pathology in sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: Evidence for clinico-pathologic subtypes. Acta Neuropathol Commun 4 :61 27338935
179. Tan RH , Guennewig B , Dobson-Stone C , Kwok JBJ , Kril JJ , Kiernan MC , Hodges JR , Piguet O , Halliday GM (2019) The underacknowledged PPA-ALS: A unique clinicopathologic subtype with strong heritability. Neurology 92 :e1354–e1366 30770429
180. Nishihira Y , Gefen T , Mao Q , Appin C , Kohler M , Walker J , Rademakers R , Rademaker A , Rogalski E , Weintraub S , Geula C , Mesulam MM , Bigio EH (2019) Revisiting the utility of TDP-43 immunoreactive (TDP-43-ir) pathology to classify FTLD-TDP subtypes. Acta Neuropathol 138 :167–169 31065833
181. Neumann M , Lee EB , Mackenzie IR (2021) Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration TDP-43-Immunoreactive Pathological Subtypes: Clinical and Mechanistic Significance. Adv Exp Med Biol 1281 :201–217 33433877
182. Sommer W (1880) Erkrankung des Ammonshornes als aetiologisches Moment der Epilepsie [Disease of the Ammon’s horn as an etiological element of epilepsy]. Arch Psychiatr Nervenkr 10 :361– 375
183. Thom M (2009) Hippocampal sclerosis: progress since Sommer. Brain Pathol 19 :565–572 18761661
184. Crystal HA , Dickson DW , Sliwinski MJ , Lipton RB , Grober E , Marks-Nelson H , Antis P (1993) Pathological markers associated with normal aging and dementia in the elderly. Ann Neurol 34 :566–573 8215244
185. Dickson DW , Davies P , Bevona C , Van Hoeven KH , Factor SM , Grober E , Aronson MK , Crystal HA (1994) Hippocampal sclerosis: a common pathological feature of dementia in very old (&gt; or = 80 years of age) humans. Acta Neuropathol 88 :212–221 7810292
186. Jellinger KA (1994) Hippocampal sclerosis: a common pathological feature of dementia in very old humans. Acta Neuropathol 88 :599 7879610
187. Ala TA , Beh GO , Frey WH , 2nd (2000) Pure hippocampal sclerosis: a rare cause of dementia mimicking Alzheimer’s disease. Neurology 54 :843–848 10690974
188. Jellinger K (2000) Pure hippocampal sclerosis: a rare cause of dementia mimicking Alzheimer’s disease. Neurology 55 :739–740 10980757
189. Leverenz JB , Agustin CM , Tsuang D , Peskind ER , Edland SD , Nochlin D , DiGiacomo L , Bowen JD , McCormick WC , Teri L , Raskind MA , Kukull WA , Larson EB (2002) Clinical and neuropathological characteristics of hippocampal sclerosis: a community-based study. Arch Neurol 59 :1099–1106 12117357
190. Corey-Bloom J , Sabbagh MN , Bondi MW , Hansen L , Alford MF , Masliah E , Thal LJ (1997) Hippocampal sclerosis contributes to dementia in the elderly. Neurology 48 :154–160 9008511
191. Rasmusson DX , Brandt J , Steele C , Hedreen JC , Troncoso JC , Folstein MF (1996) Accuracy of clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer disease and clinical features of patients with non-Alzheimer disease neuropathology. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 10 :180–188 8939276
192. Blass DM , Hatanpaa KJ , Brandt J , Rao V , Steinberg M , Troncoso JC , Rabins PV (2004) Dementia in hippocampal sclerosis resembles frontotemporal dementia more than Alzheimer disease. Neurology 63 :492–497 15304580
193. Toyoshima Y , Piao YS , Tan CF , Morita M , Tanaka M , Oyanagi K , Okamoto K , Takahashi H (2003) Pathological involvement of the motor neuron system and hippocampal formation in motor neuron disease-inclusion dementia. Acta Neuropathol 106 :50–56 12669241
194. Hatanpaa KJ , Blass DM , Pletnikova O , Crain BJ , Bigio EH , Hedreen JC , White CL 3rd , Troncoso JC (2004) Most cases of dementia with hippocampal sclerosis may represent frontotemporal dementia. Neurology 63 :538–542 15304590
195. Barker WW , Luis CA , Kashuba A , Luis M , Harwood DG , Loewenstein D , Waters C , Jimison P , Shepherd E , Sevush S , Graff-Radford N , Newland D , Todd M , Miller B , Gold M , Heilman K , Doty L , Goodman I , Robinson B , Pearl G , Dickson D , Duara R (2002) Relative frequencies of Alzheimer disease, Lewy body, vascular and frontotemporal dementia, and hippocampal sclerosis in the State of Florida Brain Bank. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 16 :203–212 12468894
196. Josephs KA , Parisi JE , Knopman DS , Boeve BF , Petersen RC , Dickson DW (2006) Clinically undetected motor neuron disease in pathologically proven frontotemporal lobar degeneration with motor neuron disease. Arch Neurol 63 :506–512 16606762
197. Josephs KA , Dickson DW (2007) Hippocampal sclerosis in tau-negative frontotemporal lobar degeneration. Neurobiol Aging 28 :1718–1722 16930776
198. Josephs KA , Whitwell JL , Jack CR , Parisi JE , Dickson DW (2006) Frontotemporal lobar degeneration without lobar atrophy. Arch Neurol 63 :1632–1638 17101834
199. Kipps CM , Hodges JR , Hornberger M (2010) Nonprogressive behavioural frontotemporal dementia: recent developments and clinical implications of the ‘bvFTD phenocopy syndrome’. Curr Opin Neurol 23 :628–632 20962637
200. Amador-Ortiz C , Ahmed Z , Zehr C , Dickson DW (2007) Hippocampal sclerosis dementia differs from hippocampal sclerosis in frontal lobe degeneration. Acta Neuropathol 113 :245–252 17195931
201. Amador-Ortiz C , Lin WL , Ahmed Z , Personett D , Davies P , Duara R , Graff-Radford NR , Hutton ML , Dickson DW (2007) TDP-43 immunoreactivity in hippocampal sclerosis and Alzheimer’s disease. Ann Neurol 61 :435–445 17469117
202. Josephs KA , Mackenzie I , Frosch MP , Bigio EH , Neumann M , Arai T , Dugger BN , Ghetti B , Grossman M , Hasegawa M , Herrup K , Holton J , Jellinger K , Lashley T , McAleese KE , Parisi JE , Revesz T , Saito Y , Vonsattel JP , Whitwell JL , Wisniewski T , Hu W (2019) LATE to the PART-y. Brain 142 :e47 31359030
203. Wider C , Dickson DW , Stoessl AJ , Tsuboi Y , Chapon F , Gutmann L , Lechevalier B , Calne DB , Personett DA , Hulihan M , Kachergus J , Rademakers R , Baker MC , Grantier LL , Sujith OK , Brown L , Calne S , Farrer MJ , Wszolek ZK (2009) Pallidonigral TDP-43 pathology in Perry syndrome. Parkinsonism Relat Disord 15 :281–286 18723384
204. Yokota O , Davidson Y , Bigio EH , Ishizu H , Terada S , Arai T , Hasegawa M , Akiyama H , Sikkink S , Pickering-Brown S , Mann DM (2010) Phosphorylated TDP-43 pathology and hippocampal sclerosis in progressive supranuclear palsy. Acta Neuropathol 120 :55–66 20512649
205. Koga S , Sanchez-Contreras M , Josephs KA , Uitti RJ , Graff-Radford N , van Gerpen JA , Cheshire WP , Wszolek ZK , Rademakers R , Dickson DW (2017) Distribution and characteristics of transactive response DNA binding protein 43 kDa pathology in progressive supranuclear palsy. Mov Disord 32 :246–255 28009087
206. Uryu K , Nakashima-Yasuda H , Forman MS , Kwong LK , Clark CM , Grossman M , Miller BL , Kretzschmar HA , Lee VM , Trojanowski JQ , Neumann M (2008) Concomitant TAR-DNA-binding protein 43 pathology is present in Alzheimer disease and corticobasal degeneration but not in other tauopathies. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 67 :555–564 18520774
207. Koga S , Kouri N , Walton RL , Ebbert MTW , Josephs KA , Litvan I , Graff-Radford N , Ahlskog JE , Uitti RJ , van Gerpen JA , Boeve BF , Parks A , Ross OA , Dickson DW (2018) Corticobasal degeneration with TDP-43 pathology presenting with progressive supranuclear palsy syndrome: a distinct clinicopathologic subtype. Acta Neuropathol 136 :389–404 29926172
208. Freeman SH , Spires-Jones T , Hyman BT , Growdon JH , Frosch MP (2008) TAR-DNA binding protein 43 in Pick disease. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 67 :62–67 18091558
209. Hasegawa M , Arai T , Akiyama H , Nonaka T , Mori H , Hashimoto T , Yamazaki M , Oyanagi K (2007) TDP-43 is deposited in the Guam parkinsonism-dementia complex brains. Brain 130 :1386–1394 17439983
210. McKee AC , Gavett BE , Stern RA , Nowinski CJ , Cantu RC , Kowall NW , Perl DP , Hedley-Whyte ET , Price B , Sullivan C , Morin P , Lee HS , Kubilus CA , Daneshvar DH , Wulff M , Budson AE (2010) TDP-43 proteinopathy and motor neuron disease in chronic traumatic encephalopathy. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 69 :918–929 20720505
211. Josephs KA , Murray ME , Tosakulwong N , Whitwell JL , Knopman DS , Machulda MM , Weigand SD , Boeve BF , Kantarci K , Petrucelli L , Lowe VJ , Jack CR Jr , Petersen RC , Parisi JE , Dickson DW (2017) Tau aggregation influences cognition and hippocampal atrophy in the absence of beta-amyloid: a clinico-imaging-pathological study of primary age-related tauopathy (PART). Acta Neuropathol 133 :705–715 28160067
212. Arai T , Mackenzie IR , Hasegawa M , Nonoka T , Niizato K , Tsuchiya K , Iritani S , Onaya M , Akiyama H (2009) Phosphorylated TDP-43 in Alzheimer’s disease and dementia with Lewy bodies. Acta Neuropathol 117 :125–136 19139911
213. Schwab C , Arai T , Hasegawa M , Yu S , McGeer PL (2008) Colocalization of transactivation-responsive DNA-binding protein 43 and huntingtin in inclusions of Huntington disease. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 67 :1159–1165 19018245
214. Tan CF , Yamada M , Toyoshima Y , Yokoseki A , Miki Y , Hoshi Y , Kaneko H , Ikeuchi T , Onodera O , Kakita A , Takahashi H (2009) Selective occurrence of TDP-43-immunoreactive inclusions in the lower motor neurons in Machado-Joseph disease. Acta Neuropathol 118 :553–560 19526244
215. Toyoshima Y , Tanaka H , Shimohata M , Kimura K , Morita T , Kakita A , Takahashi H (2011) Spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (SCA2) is associated with TDP-43 pathology. Acta Neuropathol 122 :375–378 21830155
216. Wilson AC , Dugger BN , Dickson DW , Wang DS (2011) TDP-43 in aging and Alzheimer’s disease - a review. Int J Clin Exp Pathol 4 :147–155 21326809
217. Arnold SJ , Dugger BN , Beach TG (2013) TDP-43 deposition in prospectively followed, cognitively normal elderly individuals: correlation with argyrophilic grains but not other concomitant pathologies. Acta Neuropathol 126 :51–57 23604587
218. Alzheimer A (1906) Über einen eigenartigen schweren Erkrankungsprozeβ der Hirnrincle [About a peculiar severe disease process of the cerebral cortex]. Neurol Central 25 :1129–1136
219. Hippius H , Neundörfer G (2003) The discovery of Alzheimer’s disease. Dialogues Clin Neurosci 5 :101–108 22034141
220. McKhann GM , Knopman DS , Chertkow H , Hyman BT , Jack CR Jr , Kawas CH , Klunk WE , Koroshetz WJ , Manly JJ , Mayeux R , Mohs RC , Morris JC , Rossor MN , Scheltens P , Carrillo MC , Thies B , Weintraub S , Phelps CH (2011) The diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer’s disease: recommendations from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement 7 :263–269 21514250
221. Brooks BR , Miller RG , Swash M , Munsat TL (2000) El Escorial revisited: revised criteria for the diagnosis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Amyotroph Lateral Scler Other Motor Neuron Disord 1 :293–299 11464847
222. Al-Chalabi A , Hardiman O , Kiernan MC , Chiò A , Rix-Brooks B , van den Berg LH (2016) Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: moving towards a new classification system. Lancet Neurol 15 :1182–1194 27647646
223. Olney NT , Spina S , Miller BL (2017) Frontotemporal Dementia. Neurol Clin 35 :339–374 28410663
224. Snowden JS , Thompson JC , Stopford CL , Richardson AM , Gerhard A , Neary D , Mann DM (2011) The clinical diagnosis of early-onset dementias: diagnostic accuracy and clinicopathological relationships. Brain 134 :2478–2492 21840888
225. Dickson DW (1998) Pick’s disease: a modern approach. Brain Pathol 8 :339–354 9546291
226. Hyman BT , Phelps CH , Beach TG , Bigio EH , Cairns NJ , Carrillo MC , Dickson DW , Duyckaerts C , Frosch MP , Masliah E , Mirra SS , Nelson PT , Schneider JA , Thal DR , Thies B , Trojanowski JQ , Vinters HV , Montine TJ (2012) National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association guidelines for the neuropathologic assessment of Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement 8 :1–13 22265587
227. Montine TJ , Phelps CH , Beach TG , Bigio EH , Cairns NJ , Dickson DW , Duyckaerts C , Frosch MP , Masliah E , Mirra SS , Nelson PT , Schneider JA , Thal DR , Trojanowski JQ , Vinters HV , Hyman BT , National Institute on A , Alzheimer’s A (2012) National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association guidelines for the neuropathologic assessment of Alzheimer’s disease: a practical approach. Acta Neuropathol 123 :1–11 22101365
