LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


0376425
6457
Photochem Photobiol
Photochem Photobiol
Photochemistry and photobiology
0031-8655
1751-1097

36681894
10065968
10.1111/php.13781
NIHMS1877940
Article
Chemiexcitation: Mammalian Photochemistry in the Dark†
Brash Douglas E. *12
Goncalves Leticia C. P. 13
1 Department of Therapeutic Radiology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520-8040, USA
2 Yale Cancer Center, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520-8028, USA
3 Institut de Chimie de Nice CNRS UMR7272, Université Côte d’Azur, 28 Avenue Valrose 06108 Nice, France
* Corresponding author: douglas.brash@yale.edu (Douglas E. Brash).
† This article is part of a Special Issue celebrating the 50th Anniversary of the American Society for Photobiology.

9 3 2023
3 2023
07 2 2023
01 3 2024
99 2 251276
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Light is one way to excite an electron in biology. Another is chemiexcitation, birthing a reaction product in an electronically excited state rather than exciting from the ground state. Chemiexcited molecules, as in bioluminescence, can release more energy than ATP. Excited states also allow bond rearrangements forbidden in ground states. Molecules with low-lying unoccupied orbitals, abundant in biology, are particularly susceptible. In mammals, chemiexcitation was discovered as energy transferred directly from excited melanin to DNA, creating the lethal and carcinogenic cyclobutane pyrimidine dimer. That process was initiated by nitric oxide and superoxide, radicals triggered by ultraviolet light or inflammation. Several poorly understood chronic diseases share two properties: inflammation generates those radicals across the tissue, and cells that die are those containing melanin or neuromelanin. Chemiexcitation may therefore be a pathogenic event in noise- and drug-induced deafness, Parkinson’s disease, and Alzheimer’s; it may prevent macular degeneration early in life but turn pathogenic later. Beneficial results of evolutionary selection for excitable biomolecules may thus have conferred an Achilles heel. This review of recent findings on chemiexcitation in mammalian cells also describes the underlying physics, biochemistry, and potential pathogenesis, with the goal of making this interdisciplinary phenomenon accessible to researchers within each field.

Graphical Abstract

A 1,2-dioxetane, which thermally decomposes between the two oxygens and two carbons to yield two carbonyls, one of which is excited to a high-energy triplet state in a process termed “chemiexcitation”. Chemiexcited molecules underlie invertebrate bioluminescence but recently have been found to occur in mammalian cells, sometimes causing pathogenic effects.


pmcINTRODUCTION

Chemiexcitation in mammalian biology involves fields usually covered only in graduate courses, so this review aims to facilitate interdisciplinary conversations and cross-over experiments. We begin with basic concepts and history, followed by an update on recent findings. We then dive into mechanisms for exciting electrons, pathways channeling an excited molecule’s energy into subsequent reactions, and characterization of the molecular species that can undergo these reactions. The review ends by asking where in biology these molecules occur, what events in their vicinity will elicit electron excitation, and whether this cause-effect pairing offers a new research path toward understanding disease. A less technical synopsis of these facets can be found in (1).

A BRIEF HISTORY OF EXCITED ELECTRONS IN BIOLOGY

Ground states and light excitation

Photochemistry excites an electron from one of a molecule’s fully-occupied molecular orbitals to a higher-energy unoccupied orbital. Typically this excitation is from the molecule’s highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) – the highest-energy orbital containing a pair of electrons – to its lowest-energy unoccupied orbital (LUMO) (Fig. 1) (2, 3). Electronic excitation is an exception to the reactions of ordinary biochemistry, in which electrons shared between atoms are rearranged while remaining in their ground state, the molecule’s lowest energy state. When those reactions require activation energy, molecular collisions excite a molecule’s vibrational or rotational states, not its electron states. Even one-electron or partial-charge transfers (4) are ground state events if they involve an electron migrating from one molecule’s HOMO to a molecule whose LUMO, or a singly-occupied orbital, lies lower – filled from the bottom up according to the Aufbau principle and Hund’s Rule (5).

Excitation of an electron is best known from light-activated processes such as photosynthesis or the synthesis of vitamin D. There, a photon excites the electron to a higher-energy molecular orbital, with the electron’s partner left behind and the newly occupied orbital having an energy 10-fold higher than provided by ATP hydrolysis. These high energies – 100 kcal/mol, 4 eV, 50,000 K for a UVB photon – are accompanied by drastically altered orbital shapes (Fig. 2), together allowing reactions that cannot occur by thermal activation of reactants in their ground state. These reactions are said to be “forbidden” by the orbital-symmetry constraints of the Woodward-Hoffman rules of quantum chemistry. An example is the concerted reaction of a double-bonded pair of atoms in one molecule with a similar pair in a nearby molecule. This “[2+2] cycloaddition” reaction underlies the lethal, mutagenic, and carcinogenic cyclobutane pyrimidine dimer (CPD) created between adjacent thymine or cytosine bases when a high energy UV photon is absorbed by DNA (6–8). In addition, an excited state’s newly-unpaired electron pair converts a double bond to a single bond that allows intramolecular rotation, reacts like two radicals, and can be a stronger oxidizing agent or reducing agent than the unexcited molecule.

A key distinction is between singlet states and triplet states (9, 10). Singlet states retain, even after excitation, the Pauli exclusion principle’s requirement that the two electrons have opposite spins (Fig. 1). In an excited triplet state, the spins of the two electrons in half-filled orbitals are instead parallel. Triplet states have a lower energy than the corresponding singlet (Fig. 3) (9). Because the two spins are no longer opposed, the pair now has a net magnetic moment, making the molecule and its chemical reactions sensitive to very weak magnetic fields (11). Crucially, the triplet state has a much longer lifetime: A triplet can decay to the singlet ground state only if one electron reverses its spin direction, flipping its spin vector; this is a “forbidden” process that occurs infrequently. Singlet states decay rapidly to the ground state and can generate fluorescence. A triplet state’s difficulty in decaying allows only the dim and prolonged dribble of photons that is phosphorescence. Yet the triplet’s long lifetime provides ample time for the excited molecule to collide with another molecule and initiate unusual chemical reactions or energy transfers; within a molecule it allows energy transfer over longer distance. Whether a chemical reaction can occur depends critically on how well the reactant molecule facilitates a spin “flip” or reversal, the process termed “intersystem crossing” (Fig. 3).

Chemiexcitation

The universe of excited-electron reactions can instead be entered by a path not involving light, termed “chemiexcitation” (12, 13, 2, 14, 5, 15–18). Here, a chemical reaction is the instigator of the electron’s appearance in an excited orbital. Once thought to be energetically impossible in a biological system, this physical chemistry process is now known to underlie the bioluminescence of jellyfish and fireflies (19, 20). It involves the same electron configurations shown in Fig. 1 (left) but does not arrive there by the energy transitions shown in Fig. 1 (right), as explained later. Chemical excitation in vertebrates had been observed in vivo only as ultraweak visible or infrared bioluminescence resulting from radical recombinations or lipid peroxidation, detectable using photon-counting instruments (21–23), and was considered adventitious. In parallel with the emergence of photobiology as a field 50 years ago, several laboratories wondered whether metabolism might use these excited-state reactions. After working out the structure of firefly luciferin, E. White at Johns Hopkins looked into the biochemical and biological literature for metabolites that would be preferentially synthesized from an excited state (12). G. Cilento at the University of São Paulo compiled an analogous list after noticing the singlet-triplet transduction property of the iodines on thyroid hormone (9, 24). On the mammalian enzymology side, the Ullrich/Cadenas/Sies group found that the heme enzymes cytochrome P450 and cyclooxygenase generate red luminescence attributable to O2 excited by energy transfer from triplet-state enzyme products (25, 26). The nascent field was propelled by the synthesis of the thermally activatable triplet-state precursors 1,2-dioxetane and 1,2-dioxetanone by K. Kopecky and W. Adam, respectively (27, 28). The field quickly became known as “Photochemistry in the Dark” (29). In the test tube, mammalian enzymes, flavins, and metabolites participated in chemiluminescence reactions, and the in vivo hormonal activity of substituted thyroid hormone analogs paralleled the ability of the substituents to alter intersystem crossing from triplet to singlet state (9, 24, 12, 30). Some of these chemiexcited reactions could be carried out directly using a synthetic dioxetane. Yet, in vivo roles for these processes in mammals remained elusive (31, 16).

Recently our laboratory discovered that chemiexciting the skin pigment melanin sends melanocytes down the path to melanoma even in the dark (32, 33). In the first step of that reaction, a brief UV exposure activates the enzymes nitric oxide synthase (NOS) and NADPH oxidase (NOX) to generate the radicals nitric oxide (•NO) and superoxide (O2•−) for hours afterward; the mechanism of induction is still not known. These radicals combine instantly to form the powerful oxidant peroxynitrite (ONOO−) (34). In the second step, a molecule like melanin or its precursor monomer is oxidized to a radical. Based on analogous reactions in the literature, it is proposed that ambient O2 adds to create a peroxyl radical, which then cyclizes to create a strained 4-atom ring containing C–O–O–C, termed a dioxetane (Fig. 4a). Peroxynitrite is one of the few biological molecules capable of creating a dioxetane moiety. Peroxidase enzymes such as horseradish peroxidase and lipoxygenase can also create dioxetanes (12, 31, 14, 35, 16, 36). In the third step, the chemiexcitation step, heat-induced twisting of the dioxetane’s high-energy strained ring gives the ground and triplet states nearly the same energy, facilitating excitation and a spin flip. The dioxetane splits between the two Os and two Cs to yield a pair of carbonyls (C=O), one of which receives most of the energy from the split bonds, creating a long-lived triplet state with as much energy as a UVB or UVA photon. Physics then takes over, with the excited carbonyl transferring its energy to nearby DNA, without photons, to make the lethal and mutagenic cyclobutane pyrimidine dimer (33). For clarity, we will distinguish these from the CPDs made by direct photon absorption by referring to the identical photoproducts made in the dark by chemiexcitation as “dark CPDs” (dCPDs). The chemiexcitation events were discovered in melanocyte cell cultures and in murine skin, using a fluorescent triplet-state reporter to detect the transient triplet state, blocking these events with the radical scavenger vitamin E or the triplet-specific quencher sorbate, and identifying dCPDs using mass spectrometry and immunohistochemistry. Melanin is thereby not only a beneficial sunscreen but also a pro-mutagen.

Chemiexcitation updates

Since the initial finding, UV-induced chemiexcitation has been confirmed in keratinocyte cell cultures and human skin (37–39). In keratinocytes, the dCPDs were blocked by vitamin E. Vitamin E is now known to also act as a triplet-state quencher (40). In addition, a study of “CPD hyperhotspots”, sites at which UVB or UVC induces CPDs more than 100-fold more frequently than the genomic average, encountered a DNA sequence motif specific to melanocytes at which CPDs were present before the experiment began and at which dCPDs appeared over time and were poorly repaired, as if dCPDs had been generated by melanogenesis during prior cell culture (41).

The precise chemistry leading to melanin-related dioxetanes has not yet been solved. For example, photoexciting putative degradation products of dioxetanes on indoles did not induce dCPDs; nor were the measured triplet energies of these products high enough to do so (42). This result suggests that melanin-like reactants might be creating dCPDs by a reaction other than the indole ring dioxetane proposed in reference (32). A potential alternative dioxetane site is the catechol ring (43). Yet an underlying assumption was that the ability to create a triplet state by decomposition of a dioxetane on the precursor is the same as that for UV excitation of the decomposition product, both energetically and sterically. This is often the case but not always (44).

A range of biomolecules were found to possess triplet-state quenching activity, including β-carotene, resveratrol, curcumin, polyphenols, vitamin E, and glutathione (40). These fell into three broad levels of activity, with the most active dissipating the energy by isomerization. Their quenching activity was separate from the ground-state antioxidant activity of the same compounds.

BIOCHEMICAL REACTIONS THAT EXCITE ELECTRONS

How does mammalian chemiexcitation work, and how unusual is it?

Singlet excitations

Radical recombination reactions that lead to excited states are well known. The result is typically a singlet state created at low quantum yield and generating weak fluorescence (12, 21). Fluorescence in the infrared or red region is accounted for by the creation of singlet oxygen: O2 is one of the few molecules, natural or synthetic, that is a triplet in its ground state so its lowest excited state is a singlet, which we will write as 1O2* using the chemist’s symbol * for an excited state. When two peroxyl radicals combine and then split unequally to a carbonyl and hydroxyl, 1O2* is released. Enzymes such as cytochrome P450, cyclooxygenase, and lipoxygenase also generate 1O2*, evidently by donating electrons that reduce lipid hydroperoxides to peroxyl radicals, and they account for much of metabolic chemiluminescence (21). Lipid reactions will be revisited later.

Triplet-state carbonyls

Five biochemical pathways generate excited electrons that create triplet carbonyls (Fig. 4b) (2, 14, 5, 15, 19, 16, 17). Although “triplet carbonyl” is a common shorthand, the more precise picture is that the triplet state orbitals are a property of the entire molecule while the excited orbital is more localized on the C=O moiety. Excited carbonyls differ from the ground-state “carbonyl stress” protein adducts detected by Western blot assays, which are created by ground-state radicals or dicarbonyls and then disrupt protein function by ground-state chemistry (45–47).

Alkoxyl radical dismutation.

Two –O• radicals, each linked to a carbon chain such as a lipid, encounter each other. One abstracts H from the other, becoming an alcohol and converting the other to a carbonyl. Each radical had stored the substantial energy that is required make a radical by removing or adding an electron; this energy allows the carbonyl to be in a triplet state (C=O*).

Alkylperoxyl radical annihilation (Russell reaction).

Two – O–O• radicals, each attached to a carbon chain, encounter each other and thereby pair the two unpaired electrons. The new molecule eventually splits unequally into a carbonyl, an O2 molecule, and an alcohol. Often the O2 product is an excited 1O2*, as described above, but an alternative outcome is a ground state O2 and triplet state C=O* (5). Together these account for not only the red and infrared light generated enzymatically but also the short wavelength luminescence (48).

These two types of radical encounter can be common in a cell membrane because their lipids are sensitive to oxidation and the lipid radicals diffuse in only two dimensions. They excite electrons without a dioxetane intermediate.

One-electron transfer.

Removing an electron from an orbital other than the HOMO would create an excited state without adding an atom (12, 5). Evidence for its occurrence in semiquinones and catechols is inferential (49, 50). A related phenomenon is that the unpaired electrons of two nearby semiquinone radicals can couple through their π clouds, allowing even ambient heat (~0.01 eV) to flip the spin of one of the radicals so the two radicals have the same spin direction, putting the radical pair into a triplet state (51). Semiquinones and catechols are constituents of some melanins, the electron transport chain, and neurotransmitters.

Dioxetanone cleavage.

A dioxetane with an adjoining carbonyl is a dioxetanone, another strained 4-atom ring containing C–O–O–C. Invertebrate bioluminescence is produced by an enzymatic reaction that injects an electron into a dioxetanone’s O–O bond, resulting in a singlet-excited carbonyl that fluoresces.

Dioxetane cleavage.

Ambient heat will break the strained O–O bond in a dioxetane. The C–C then also breaks, resulting in two carbonyls; one is in an excited triplet state and the other remains in the ground state. The dioxetane can instead be cleaved by introducing an electron from, e.g., a fluoride ion (chemically initiated electron exchange luminescence, CIEEL); in this case, excitation is to the singlet state (52, 53).

The amount of energy stored in the triplet carbonyl after dioxetane cleavage depends on the surrounding molecule. Dioxetane-related compounds give carbonyls of the highest energy; these can luminesce in the UVA-blue region (375-455 nm, ~3 eV) or down to yellow, depending on the host molecule and on the enzyme’s active site if the dioxetane was created enzymatically (19). By comparison, products of radical-radical reactions typically emit in the green to yellow (500-560 nm, ~2.3 eV) (49, 23), while singlet oxygen emits in the red and infrared (54).

Dioxetanes

Where do the dioxetanes come from? Dioxetanes or dioxetanones are created in three ways (14–17): Invertebrate luciferases add ambient O2 to a luciferin to form –O–OH. This hydroperoxide then cyclizes at a C bonded to a leaving group, creating a dioxetanone ring containing C–O–O–C. Firefly luciferase also requires ATP, but not for the light, which has 10-fold higher energy. ATP replaces the OH of luciferin’s O=C–OH with a phosphate leaving group, enabling the cyclization (19).

Alternatively, a molecule that has been oxidized to a radical – by peroxynitrite, horseradish peroxidase, myeloperoxidase, or lipoxygenase – is then a target for ambient O2, which has four lone pairs of unbonded electrons. An example is the mechanism proposed for eumelanin (Fig. 4c). The O2 attack spontaneously creates a peroxyl radical that cyclizes to an electron-deficient site to form the dioxetane (35, 55–59). The peroxynitrite route is important biologically because •NO, O2•−, and ONOO– are each stable enough to diffuse across a cell and •NO can cross membranes (34). In addition, it may be important that these radicals are generated during inflammation and other stress-induced states; the association with disease will be discussed later.

Singlet oxygen, 1O2*. Unlike normal triplet-state O2, 1O2* is no longer forbidden from reacting with ground-state singlet molecules and can add to an electron-rich bond to create a peroxy adduct that cyclizes to a dioxetane (60).

Dioxetanes and dioxetanones generate the excited state when their O–O bond is cleaved in one of several competing ways. In bioluminescence, Western blot visualization kits, and light sticks, an electron is injected into the O–O bond of a dioxetanone; the bond splits rapidly and leads to short-lived singlet states that release their energy as visible fluorescence (19, 61). Cleavage can also be triggered by UV, leaving primarily singlet states (62, 63), or by another excited molecule (including the excited carbonyl created when a neighboring molecule cleaved) (64, 65). An autonomous path is thermolysis – decomposition by ambient heat, usually leading to triplet states.

The energy required to create the strained ring ultimately came from the high energy contained in free radicals, such as the precursors •NO and O2•− or lipid radicals, and the electron-attracting power of O2. The energy of the radicals is traceable to the ability of enzymes such as NOS or cytochrome oxidase to transfer electrons.

The uniqueness of dioxetanes and carbonyls

Why dioxetanes? The dioxetane family are perhaps unique in nature for their ability to release large amounts of energy in a single reaction and, unlike the explosive TNT, direct it toward creating long-lived, high-energy, electronically excited triplet states (19). This deceptively simple process is a confluence of quantum mechanical events that showcase the dioxetane’s roster of eight special properties, which we will divide into three categories.

First, its energy-release properties (66, 13, 2, 67, 3, 68, 69).

1. An O–O bond is weak, especially when in the strained peroxide ring. Little energy is required to split first the O–O and then the C–C bonds in the dioxetane (~30 kcal/mol, much less than the individual energies of 35 and 80 kcal/mol when not in a peroxide ring). Heat-induced vibration twists the two Os in opposite directions around the C–C axis (Fig. 4a) until, at an angle of ~70°, the two Os form a ground-state intermediate resembling two O• radicals (a “diradicaloid” structure) (68). If the activation energy of ~30 kcal/mol is reached, the bond angle increases to as much as 180° and the O–O bond breaks, followed by rapid breakage of the C–C bond. Then formation of the two very strong C=O bonds frees ~90 kcal/mol. Dioxetanes can be stabilized by preventing the Os from twisting, by adding a moiety that confers steric hindrance.

2. The net energy difference is often not enough to support excitation to a carbonyl’s singlet state, but it will suffice for a triplet state carbonyl (~75 kcal/mol) if most of the energy goes to just one of the two carbonyls. Energy will partition between the two carbonyls according to their triplet state energies, which are determined by the surrounding molecule. Because partition follows the Boltzmann distribution, an exponential function, the carbonyl with the slightly lower triplet energy gets nearly all the energy (70). Competing options are singlet states and dissipation as heat, depending on the rest of the molecule.

Second, the dioxetane’s geometric properties (71, 13, 2, 15, 3, 72, 68). Here is where chemiexcitation differs from photoexcitation. The evanescence of the reaction intermediate means that this picture relies heavily on computational chemistry agreeing with the few experimental measurements available.

3. A molecule’s energy depends on its exact shape at the moment, as it vibrates and twists. A 3D plot of energy vs two of the geometrical coordinates – such as bond distances or the angle between two bonds – forms an uneven 2D surface, with the ground state surface below surfaces for triplet and singlet states (Fig. 5a) (68). For some molecules, at a specific geometry, the independence of electron states from nuclear vibrational states (the Born-Oppenheimer approximation) breaks down and these quantum states are no longer neatly distinguishable. The ground state energy rises like a stalagmite and the singlet state energy drops like a stalactite, sometimes touching. At this site, termed a “conical intersection”, it is easy for the molecule to cross between the ground and excited states because no energy need be acquired or lost and the geometries are similar (73, 74). More precisely, the quantum system is in a mixed state that oscillates between singlet and triplet (75). Dioxetane’s states are similar but the shape is instead a long ridge in the ground state (termed a “seam”), along which the S0, T1, and S1 surfaces are nearly identical (Fig. 5a) (68). For a dioxetane, this seam arises whenever the two C–O bonds have twisted apart by a relative angle of 70° to 180° – the diradicaloid region. The diradicaloid is also the transition state between reactant and product. Therefore dioxetane has a large range of geometries within which it is easy for the ground-state transition state to cross isoenergetically to an excited transition state such as the triplet. Molecular geometry has allowed a nearly horizontal crossing to an excited state, in contrast to the vertical energy transition of photochemistry seen in Fig. 1, right. If twisting continues and breaks both O–O and C–C bonds, one of the carbonyls is born already in the triplet state. Notice that the transition to an excited state occurs before the C–C bond has broken. Adding CH3 groups slows O–O twisting and extends the length of the seam, allowing more time to cross to the triplet state and enhancing the quantum efficiency 170 fold (76, 77).

4. Diradicaloids, including the dioxetane’s O•–O• diradicaloid reaction intermediate, have a particularly small energy gap between the ground state and excited states, making it easier to cross into the excited state (2, 67, 3).

5. The longer O–O bond in the diradicaloid gives the normally planar C=O a pyramidal structure, with bond angles and lengths resembling the pyramidal structure of an excited carbonyl (67, 72). Structural resemblance between reactant and product facilitates a reaction (15). The similarity of the electron configuration of an excited state to a diradical (Fig. 1) provides some intuition for how a ground-state diradicaloid could morph into an excited state without exciting an electron from the ground state.

6. A special property of the carbonyl functional group, C=O, is that its excited state energy lies particularly close to that of the ground state, allowing even biologically relevant energies to generate an excited state from this moiety (78, 22, 23). Non-bonding n orbitals lie at high energies and one of the non-bonding lone pairs on O gives rise to the π-type n orbital that is relatively close to the π* LUMO (Fig. 2), facilitating crossing to an n,π* excited state. The polarizability of C=O facilitates photoexcitation and might also be relevant here (22).

Third, the dioxetane’s intersystem-crossing properties explain why, given an n,π* excited state, the result is a triplet. We mentioned that the triplet state lies at a lower energy than the singlet (Fig. 5a). Nevertheless, creating a triplet state in significant quantities is unusual in nature because the ground state of almost all molecules is a singlet. Converting it to a triplet requires reversing a spin, which violates the law of conservation of spin angular momentum. The dioxetane has properties that facilitate flipping an electron’s spin to convert a singlet to a triplet:

7. Although crossing from n to π* is disfavored (“forbidden”), the orbital shapes involved are well-suited to flipping an electron’s spin to convert a singlet to a triplet, due to a quantum mechanical process termed “spin-orbit coupling”. Spin is allowed to flip during an n →π* transition; in fact, it must. This is because a spin flip changes the electron’s spin angular momentum from −1/2 to +1/2, a change of +1. To conserve angular momentum, some other momentum must change by −1. The favored way to do this is by trading spin angular momentum for the angular momentum of the electron’s orbit around the nucleus. This trade, the spin-orbit coupling, is allowed only in certain situations; the n and π* orbitals happen to have a geometry that allows the trade. It works as follows (2). A spinning unpaired electron, e.g. one that occupies a half-filled orbital and lacks its opposite-spin partner, generates a magnetic field that is not canceled by an opposite-spin partner. An example is an electron in a non-bonding, n, orbital. The charged electron’s orbit around the nucleus generates a separate magnetic field. In non-spherical orbitals such as n and π*, electrons pass near the nucleus and are accelerated to relativistic speed, making the magnetic field large enough to put a torque on the magnetic field generated by the electron’s spin. The spin reverses from, say, clockwise to counterclockwise. (This happens orders of magnitude more frequently in molecules containing atoms with heavy nuclei such as Br or I.) But this flip requires a compensating change of orbital angular momentum. Now, orbital angular momentum is quantized as −1, 0, or 1 and these correspond to the distinction between the orthogonal px, py, pz lobes of an n orbital. Hence a change of 1 in n’s orbital angular momentum amounts to changing from occupying px to py. The excited n electron can therefore flip its spin if it also moves to an orbital 90° apart. It now looks like a π* orbital (Fig. 2) and hence the n,π* geometries can accommodate the excitation.

8. A dioxetane is particularly efficient at spin reversal because of the O• diradical in its reaction intermediate. Radicals of atoms with “lone pair” unpaired electrons, especially O, are exceptionally susceptible to spin-orbit coupling, by the El-Sayed rules (3).

Remarkably, torque from macroscopic heat twisting the two O’s has microscopically reversed the electron spin and allowed that electron to cross to a triplet-state excited orbital of the transition state, where it remains when it becomes a reaction product.

The reader will have noticed that O and C=O appeared both in dioxetanes and in the radical-radical excitation reactions (Fig. 4b). Of all the atoms and functional groups, why do excited states have O as a recurring theme? Their special place is the outcome of unique chemical properties of oxygen. First, O2 is ubiquitous. This is because, on Earth, water is ubiquitous and both prebiotic UV and later photosynthesis split water vapor into H2 and O2 (79). Second, O2 has an almost unique ground state (80, 81). Oxygen lies in a row of the periodic table where the diatomic molecule has two outer orbitals of the same energy. When orbitals are filled with electrons following Hund’s Rule, which fills all equal orbitals with one electron before filling any of them with two, O2’s lowest energy state gets two outer electrons in separate orbitals and with parallel spins. Hence O2’s ground state is a triplet and resembles a diradical. As a result, O2 seeks one or two electrons; this quest drives biology’s energy reactions on earth. (Except in anoxic environments, where sulfur is the driver.) Yet, O2 is less chemically reactive than one might expect: the molecules it could react with are in the singlet state, with electron pairs that have opposing spins, so they cannot form covalent bonds with both of oxygen’s unpaired electrons. Exciting O2 to the singlet state removes this spin barrier and eventually puts both electrons in the same orbital, leaving a completely vacant orbital. O2 can, however, accept single electrons from metals, radicals, or mitochondrial leakage, making first O2•− and then O2= (superoxide and peroxide). Another property of O is that C and O form a much stronger bond than O2 – the bond has a much lower energy – so O2’s organic reactions tend to create C=O.

As a result of these unique properties of dioxetanes, carbonyls, and O2, only a small set of rather unusual biochemical reactions lead to electronically excited states.

BIOMOLECULES THAT READILY ACQUIRE AN ELECTRONICALLY EXCITED STATE

How broad is the range of biomolecules susceptible to chemiexcitation?

Physical and chemical requirements

To excite electrons chemically – chemiexcitation – the target molecule needs to excite an electron easily. This limits the candidates to molecules with a small energy gap between HOMO and LUMO orbitals, often molecules with π-bond electrons photoexcitable even by the low energies provided by visible light. The electron transport chain has the same requirement, for different reasons, accounting for the fact that its members have color (4).

For chemiexcitation there are constraints on the precursor molecule in addition to those required by photoexcitation. One constraint is easy electron loss from the precursor molecule. The peroxyl radical in Fig. 4b tends to form on unsaturated lipids because an •H is easier to abstract from a C–H bond where the radical’s unpaired electron can delocalize over an adjacent double bond. Converting the C–H (a ground-state singlet) to a radical frees it to react with triplet ground-state O2: the radical’s lone electron needs only to find an O2 electron with opposite spin to form a bond, creating a peroxyl radical. These radicals can then follow the radical annihilation pathways to create excited carbonyls. In creating a dioxetane, the typical first steps are also abstraction of an electron as •H and addition of ambient O2 to form the peroxyl radical. Other constraints on the precursor molecule are that the electron loss needs to occur on a host predisposed to the chemical reactions that create both a carbonyl and its low-lying excited triplet state.

The dioxetane route has an additional requirement. After abstraction of the electron and addition of ambient O2 to form the peroxyl radical, the –O–O• radical must find an adjacent electron-deficient region in order to cyclize to form the dioxetane (Fig. 4c). It finds this in an electron-delocalized conjugated ring or a polyunsaturated lipid. When the dioxetane is formed by addition of singlet oxygen (O=O*), there is no spin barrier to surmount and no radical is needed but an electron-rich bond is (60).

A roster of excitable biomolecules

Which mammalian molecules are susceptible to forming dioxetanes, and why?

1. Melanin is an exotic polymer (82–86). Its structure is not certain, but it appears to be a stack of planar aromatic oligomers. Eumelanin, the melanin of dark hair and skin, consists of a variety of hydroquinone, semiquinone, and quinone subunits having different redox states and thus a range of HOMO-LUMO separations, giving a range of light absorbance peaks (87, 88). As a result, eumelanin is a strong light absorber from UV to infrared. The energy is then dissipated vibrationally the same way in each subunit (89). Eumelanin’s 5,6-indolequinones have a very low energy LUMO, which therefore readily accepts electrons from other molecules; a dimer of these has such a low LUMO that the excited state is a bonding orbital instead of antibonding (90). These orbitals form pi clouds within which electrons are mobile. The LUMO is only slightly higher than the HOMO, so the semiquinone multimer requires little energy for an electron to be excited from HOMO to LUMO (90). The excited electron’s energy can transfer to O2 to make 1O2* (91) or the electron can be ejected completely to generate a free electron and thence O2•−, particularly in pheomelanin, the melanin of individuals with red or blonde hair (92, 91). One result of these loosely coupled electrons is that, in amorphous solid form, eumelanin can act as both a proton conductor and an electron semiconductor (93, 94). It also resembles a graphene quantum dot (88). The resulting broad and peakless light absorption spectrum, and ability to rapidly dissipate absorbed energy by vibration and by coupled electron and proton transfer, likely underlie eumelanin’s role as a sunscreen (95–97).

Semiquinones, with stable oxygen-centered radicals, provide one of the few functional groups capable of 1-electron transfer and so are used in the mitochondrial electron transport chain and ‘transduce’ between 1-electron and 2-electron transfer reactions. Transient eumelanin semiquinone radicals are generated upon exposure to even low energy visible light because excited quinones abstract an electron from hydroquinones to create two semiquinones (98, 99). The semiquinones also facilitate charge transfer and form charge-transfer complexes that tightly bind drugs which are facile electron donors (100–102). The eumelanin polymer also contains stable carbon-centered radicals and scavenges free radicals, and both eu- and pheomelanin bind large amounts of Ca++ and Fe, Cu, and Zn ions (103, 104). A proposed structure contains an inner ring of four N atoms each separated by three C atoms, resembling porphyrin, and there is evidence that melanin can transduce energy (83, 105, 106). The structure lends itself to the summation of triplet state energy by triplet-triplet annihilation (2).

Euelanin’s energy is dissipated as heat, i.e., phonons (quantized vibrations). Its electron→phonon coupling is so strong that energy from excited electrons is dissipated ≥106 fold faster as heat than by emitting light (107). In the reverse direction, eumelanin is also one of the strongest absorbers of sound and vibration known (108, 109). Phonon absorption then increases the electrical conductivity of eumelanin and related polymers (110, 109). It appears that these interesting biological properties that rely on mobile electrons also confer a sensitivity to dioxetane formation and excitation.

2. The family of indoles, of which the eumelanin monomer DHICA is a member, contain a pyrrole ring and a catechol ring. The pyrrole ring was implicated as the site of a dioxetane (Fig. 4c) (32); the catechol ring of eumelanin has also been proposed as a site for dioxetane formation (43). The indole family includes tryptophan, dozens of which are used for electron transfer during photosynthesis; the hormone melatonin; and the neurotransmitter serotonin. Each can form a dioxetane or shows evidence of doing so (111, 112). The pyrrole ring is a key component of the heme porphyrin ring and of heme-cofactor enzymes such as cytochrome c oxidase, whose function again involves electron transfer.

3. The catechol ring is also present in catecholamine neurotransmitters such as dopamine and norepinephrine.

4. Neuromelanins are polymers of eumelanin and pheomelanin assembled from oxidized serotonin, dopamine, norepinephrine, or related neurotransmitters, bound to protein and dolichol lipid in autolysosomes within neurons (113). They are found in the brain’s premotor cortex, cerebellum, putamen, substantia nigra, locus coeruleus, dorsal nucleus of the vagus, and raphe nuclei (114). Unlike melanocyte melanin, neuromelanins are not synthesized by tyrosinase in melanosomes.

5. A family containing three rings of delocalized electrons includes flavins, which have two N that can accept an electron as •H, also facilitating one- or two-electron transfers. FAD and FMN (flavin adenine dinucleotide and flavin mononucleotide) have electron transfer as their function (115), particularly in the mitochondria. The archetype, riboflavin, acquires a dioxetane when illuminated, due to cycloaddition of 1O2* produced by excited riboflavin (115).

6. Even more aromatic than flavins are polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, compounds found in petroleum and tobacco smoke. Benzo[a]pyrene can host a dioxetane via a peroxide radical, and this has been proposed to be an inflammation-related activation pathway (116). The dioxetanes in these fused-ring structures have a high efficiency for forming excited states when cleaved (117).

Non-aromatic molecules can also host a dioxetane:

7. A long chain of conjugated double bonds, such as a polyunsaturated lipid, can be oxidized to a radical by heme or peroxynitrite and then host a dioxetane by the O2 cyclization mechanism (56).

8. Carbonyls and imines (C=N, including Schiff bases) are electron rich and host dioxetanes. For example, a sugar that acquires a =N moiety through a Maillard reaction with an amino acid can host a dioxetane (118), as apparently can the pyrazinium ring produced by condensation between two Maillard products (119). Pyrazinium rings also form by glycation of histone H1, in close proximity to DNA (120); pyridinium rings form during lipofuscin generation during macular degeneration (121).

9. Diketones such as acetoacetate, a normal product of energy metabolism but present in excess in type 1 diabetes, and malonaldehyde, a product of arachidonic acid metabolism or lipid peroxidation, can host a dioxetane. The adjacent carbonyls form a π electron system able to conduct 1-electron transfers (122). If one of the carbonyls isomerizes to an –OH (enol form), an oxidizing agent can abstract the •H to convert the molecule to a C radical centered between what were the carbonyls. Ambient O2 adds to form a peroxyl radical, which again cyclizes to a dioxetane (123). Alternatively, peroxynitrite can add to one of the two carbonyls, cleave, and decompose to generate the same carbon-centered radical and dioxetane.

In summary, cells contain a surprisingly large collection of molecules that can be electronically excited, even if excitation is not their normal function. One wonders how much of this potential Achilles heel is a byproduct of evolutionary history. For flavins and hemes, the susceptibility to chemiexcitation follows naturally from their role in the electron transport chain. Neurotransmitters and melatonin are more curious; why would the brain use electron-labile signal carriers? One wonders whether, like H2O2 (124), electronically excitable molecules carry reversible signals, a strategy that leaves them susceptible to pathologic effects.

THE FATE OF EXCITED-STATE ENERGY

Is chemiexcitation useful or dangerous? An excited state eventually returns to the ground state, and its energy goes somewhere. From a medical point of view, excited molecules would ideally dissipate their energy as heat or visible light. The triplet carbonyl has several options, some harmless and some detrimental (16) (Fig. 6).

1. Heat. The simplest path is heat: occasionally the excited electron’s spin flips and the molecule undergoes intersystem crossing to a high nuclear vibrational level of a singlet state of the same energy; typically this is the ground state (Fig. 3). This vibrational energy soon dissipates as heat, i.e., collision with surrounding molecules.

2. Photons. In a rigid molecule, the energy can be dissipated as a photon. When starting at a triplet state, this is the prolonged process of phosphorescence that underlies “ultraweak luminescence”. For some excited carbonyl compounds, such as the acetone that results from cleavage of simple dioxetanes, the emission can be in the UVA region. But the low photon intensity means that this cannot be the basis of significant triplet energy transfer to other molecules (31).

3. Direct energy transfer. Triplet energy can transfer to another molecule within ~5 Å by exchanging electrons: moving the donor’s high energy electron from its HOMO (Fig. 1) to the acceptor’s LUMO and moving one of the acceptor’s low-energy HOMO electrons to the donor’s half-empty HOMO. This process, Dexter energy exchange, is the only electronic energy transfer mechanism available to triplet states; Dexter transfer is thus the pathway by which the melanin fragment’s triplet state energy transfers to DNA. It is after this transfer that chemiexcitation resembles “photochemistry in the dark”. Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) is a different process that works only for singlets. Dexter transfer also differs from Förster in that the Dexter acceptor’s energy should be lower than the donor’s, rather than equal (125). Acceptors that readily acquire triplet energy and efficiently convert it to fluorescent singlets, such as 9,l0-dibromoanthracene-2-sulfonate (DBAS), are a useful tool for detecting poorly luminescing triplet states and for demonstrating their triplet character (126).

4. Singlet oxygen. The most common triplet energy transfer is to ambient O2. This is because O2 is a triplet in the ground state, 3O2, so no overall spin flip is required. Conversely, this reaction makes O2 an effective quencher of luminescence or chemical reactions from triplet carbonyls. The energy transfer excites O2 to singlet oxygen, 1O2*, which is much more reactive than ordinary O2 because it can now react with the plethora of compounds that are singlets (127). If it does not initiate a chemical reaction, 1O2* can discharge its energy as a low-energy infrared photon (54). This creation of singlet oxygen is a light-independent analog of “Type II photosensitization” that underlies photodynamic therapy. Effective 1O2* generators include riboflavin and excited ring-opened indoles, like the end product of eumelanin chemiexcitation, with tryptophan and histidine residues in proteins being sensitive targets (128). 1O2* is able to efficiently react with eumelanin precursors (129).

The remaining options for dissipating triplet energy are easily understood if we recall that the excited state can resemble a diradical (with caveats (9)) (Fig. 6, top).

5. Isomerization. After energy transfer, the acceptor molecule is now excited. For a molecule having conjugated double bonds, such as sorbate or β-carotene, the diradical character of the newly excited π, π* double bond allows it to isomerize around the remaining single bond, dissipating the excess energy as heat by vibrational relaxation (130). This, rather than antioxidant activity, is the function of cis-β-carotene and lycopene in the chloroplast’s reaction center; it prevents an excess of triplet states on sunny days from creating destructive 1O2* (131). Other biomolecules that isomerize when excited are the 11-cis-retinal in rhodopsin, the blueberry natural product pterostilbene, the stilbenoid resveratrol, and vitamin D (132, 133).

6. Cycloaddition. An excited carbonyl’s diradical character lets the carbonyl add directly across the double bond of another molecule, the Paterno-Buchi [2+2] cycloaddition reaction (Fig. 6).

7. Electron abstraction. The excited molecule’s unpaired electron can abstract an electron from another molecule, often as an •H atom. Typical targets are alcohols; others are double bonds separated by two single bonds, as in polyunsaturated fatty acids like linoleic or arachidonic acid. The resulting radical attracts O2, triggering peroxidation and new dioxetane formation. If creating a new dioxetane from an old one seems to violate thermodynamics, recall that the energy for excitation reactions derives from the incoming O2. A triplet carbonyl from dioxetane can also abstract an electron from guanine in DNA, creating 8-oxo-7,8-dihydroguanine (8-oxodGuo) (134). 1O2* can similarly abstract an electron from guanine to make 8-oxodGuo, while avoiding DNA strand breaks or other nucleobase oxidation products including the ring-opened purine, 2,6-diamino-5-hydroxy-5-formamido pyrimidine (FapydGuo) (135). A triplet carbonyl can abstract •H from carbohydrates, including 2-deoxyribose (136, 137, 16). If this abstraction happens in the DNA sugar-phosphate backbone, it can lead to strand breaks (136, 63) or provide the initial step in forming the bulky lesion 8,5′-cyclo-2′-deoxyguanosine (cyclo-dGuo) (138).

8. C–C bond homolysis. The excited carbonyl diradical is prone to cleaving adjacent to the C (“Norrish Type I cleavage”), leaving two radicals that can undergo further reactions. Although tri- and tetramethyl dioxetanes produce mostly dCPDs, dioxetanes with larger substituents and higher activation energies more often cause oxidatively generated nucleobase damage and DNA strand breaks. The larger substituents lead to singlet states that carry out electron abstraction (pathway 7) or triplet states that undergo homolysis to create radicals (pathway 8); it appears that the latter are responsible for the DNA base damage (139). The consequences of a molecule’s dioxetane will therefore depend on that host molecule. The dCPD is useful because it is informative as to its origin. The other products can have alternative causes including •OH and 1O2*, so they do not indicate the cause. Studying them requires special measures to prevent oxidatively generated damage during DNA isolation (140).

Even after the carbonyl has returned to the ground state by dissipating energy, it can still be disruptive:

1. Reactive aldehydes. For some dioxetane hosts, including melanin, the post-cleavage carbonyl will be an aldehyde R–CH=O, Fig. 4c). The aldehyde is chemically reactive because the O renders the C positively charged, and aldehydes are known to cause DNA adducts and mutations (141).

2. Crosslinkers. Acetoacetate is a dicarbonyl generated when lipids are used as an energy source or when certain amino acids are catabolized. It is a constituent of ketone bodies and its blood levels reach millimolar in diabetes, during an Atkins diet, or with strenuous exercise. Acetoacetate and other β-ketoacids host dioxetanes or dioxetanones that cleave to yield reactive α-dicarbonyls like methylglyoxal (123, 142). These products crosslink DNA, proteins, and carbohydrates; crosslinking reactions like these are involved in the lipid-protein-melanin aggregates termed melanolipofuscin that are seen in macular degeneration and neurodegenerative diseases (143, 144).

3. Photosensitizers. The expected chemiexcitation products of eumelanin, DHICA, or serotonin (32) are very similar to 6-formylindolo[3,2-b]carbazole (FICZ), a degradation product of UV-exposed tryptophan. A similar tryptophan photo-oxidation product is N-formyl-kynurenine. The ground states of these molecules can be excited by UVA or blue light, becoming a photosensitizer that creates 1O2* or O2•− (128, 145).

4. Signaling. FICZ is the most potent ligand of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) (146), a promiscuous receptor that binds a wide range of ligands and upregulates transcription of cytochrome P450 genes, regulates immune responses, and activates the MAPK signaling pathway that, among other endpoints, activates iNOS and NADPH oxidase – perhaps prolonging the state of chemiexcitation.

In summary, the energy from electronically excited states can cause biological havoc in three ways: creating new excited molecules by direct energy transfer; initiating chemical reactions facilitated by an excited state; and creating ground state molecules that are chemically or biologically reactive. The small set of energy dissipation pathways emanating from a modest set of excitable targets ultimately affect nucleic acids, proteins, sugars, lipids, and small molecules such as neurotransmitters and hormones. Most of these consequences could have resulted from events not involving electronic excitation, so the most reliable traces of chemiexcitation may be the dCPD and perhaps molecular isomerization; these may make it possible to identify a disease’s excitational origin.

EFFECTS ON MAMMALIAN BIOLOGY

Rules for a search

The field’s initial questions remain unsolved, such as whether electronically excited states allow thyroxin to directly regulate the mitochondrial electron transport chain, without the hormone receptor (147), or whether excited states regulate normal physiology via molecules such as neurotransmitters. Instead of asking which biomolecules might require excitation for their synthesis or activity we now ask, Which biological processes involve biomolecules known to participate in chemiexcitation?

A remarkable fact suggests that chemiexcitation may underlie a diverse set of unsolved chronic diseases. Inflammation and ischemia-reperfusion injury generate •NO, O2•−, and ONOO– broadly across tissues (34), yet the cells that die or over-proliferate are only those containing melanin or neuromelanin: Melanosomes are present in the retinal pigment epithelium, cochlea, and heart. Neuromelanins accumulate without melanosomes in the human brain’s substantia nigra, locus coeruleus, dorsal nucleus of the vagus, and raphe nuclei (Table 1), some of which have been chemically and structurally characterized (113). These melanin-containing epithelia and neurons are in fact the cells that die in macular degeneration, deafness induced by noise or drugs, Parkinson’s disease, and Alzheimer’s. The same diseases are often accompanied by inflammation, whereas inflammation at non-melanized body sites or in other diseases does not lead to cell death. Chemiexcitation may therefore be a key event in these disorders. Indeed, the chemiexcitation reaction cannot fail to occur in these tissues; the question is whether electronically excited states are rate-limiting for the disease. We now enter the realm of assembling circumstantial evidence into hypotheses that are experimentally testable in amenable biological systems.

To demonstrate a causal role for chemiexcitation, it is important to gather evidence satisfying the Bradford Hill criteria for disease etiology (148). This successor to Koch’s postulates is more appropriate when the disease is not caused by an invading micro-organism.

Specificity:

Causation is likely if a specific cell population at a specific site is targeted in the disease and not in other diseases.

Strength:

The larger the association across a cell or patient population, the more likely it is causal.

Biological gradient:

The response should be related to the dose of the causal agent or exposure.

Temporality:

The effect must occur after the cause.

Consistency:

Consistent findings in different patients and different centers.

Coherence:

Coherence between epidemiological, clinical, and laboratory findings.

Plausibility:

A plausible mechanism is available.

Analogy:

Known effects of similar factors.

Experiment:

Experimental evidence.

The Plausibility and Analogy criteria are fulfilled by the discovery of the •NO/O2•−/dCPD pathway in skin melanocytes (32). The co-occurrence of •NO/O2•− and melanin supports Specificity. For several diseases, we now point out what is known about Specificity, Strength, Biological gradient, Coherence, and Experiment.

A roster of candidate degenerative diseases

Age-related macular degeneration.

AMD is the loss of central vision with age, due to loss of retinal photoreceptors caused by degeneration of the underlying retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) (149, 150). The RPE is a monolayer of epithelial cells containing melanosomes, at very high oxygen concentration and lying above the vascular choroid layer (which contains melanocytes). RPE cells enfold the photoreceptor cells and phagocytose their ‘spent’ tips daily, ingesting lipid, trans-retinal that isomerized during rhodopsin activation, and retinal-lipid products termed bis-retinoids. The trans-retinal is recycled to cis for new rhodopsin, and the disc is digested in the lysosome and melanosome, but bis-retinoids are undigestible. As a result, RPE cells accumulate lipofuscin and melanolipofuscin granules adjacent to their own nuclei (151–153, 150). Fluorescent pigment accumulates throughout the retina, but cell death occurs predominantly in the macula (154). Melanolipofuscin accumulates most in the macula, especially where rods and cones are dense. Degenerating RPE cells then create extracellular deposits termed drusen between the RPE and Bruch’s membrane, which separates the RPE from the choroid layer and maintains the retina’s immune-privileged status. Drusen contain molecules indicative of prior immune responses such as amyloid, complement factors, and complement regulatory molecules such as apolipoprotein E; drusen can also trigger inflammation (152). Extracellular drusen are not invariably associated with vision loss, so other factors are involved (150). Inflammation has a causal role because variants in complement factor H confer AMD susceptibility and symptoms are ameliorated by anti-inflammatories (155).

This pathogenesis leaves unsolved the eventual lethal event, why that occurs only in the RPE, and how it is prevented in young individuals. Circumstantial evidence suggests that melanin chemiexcitation is beneficial at young ages but, as with skin, becomes detrimental as its side-reactions accumulate.

Epidemiologically, RPE melanin is protective. AMD is 40-fold more frequent in light-skinned individuals and their lipofuscin concentration is significantly higher, but RPE melanin is not considered responsible because it is equally dense in ethnicities with light and dark skin (151, 156). Some protection results from the greater blue light filtering by a dark iris, which correlates with dark skin (157). Eumelanin in melanolipofuscin been proposed to be protective by scavenging reactive oxygen species generated by lipofuscin (158).

The elements for chemiexcitation in the RPE are each present. UV does not reach the human RPE, but reactive oxygen species are produced during disc phagocytosis (159) and are expected from the macrophages or microglia activated during inflammation; they are causal because disease progression is slowed by antioxidants (150). iNOS, •NO, and ONOO– are detected (the latter as 3-nitrotyrosine adducts on proteins) (152, 150). Blue light is linked with AMD epidemiologically (160) and it stimulates retinal metabolites, lipofuscin, and RPE melanin to generate O2•−, triplet states, and 1O2* (158, 161, 153, 91). Blue also coincides with a peak in the action spectrum for DNA damage types also generated by dioxetanes (162). Other chromophores that absorb blue light and then eject electrons to form O2•− include Fe-S clusters, heme, mitochondrial complexes I-IV, which contain Fe-S clusters and heme groups, and the flavin-containing co-factors FAD and riboflavin. These flavins are present at 10 μM in the retina and RPE, usually considered to be acting as blue light filters (163).

If these elements lead to chemiexcitation of RPE melanin, would this prevent AMD? Young individuals appear able to remove RPE lipofuscin and this defense requires melanin. AMD onset is more closely correlated with melanolipofuscin appearance than accumulation of lipofuscin alone (164). The Abca4−/− mouse model for AMD accumulates lipofuscin faster and develops retinal degeneration earlier in albino than pigmented strains (165–167). Transfecting the eyes of albino mice with tyrosinase to generate new RPE melanin reduces lipofuscin accumulation (168). Strikingly, the lipofuscin component of melanolipofuscin can be degraded following intravitreal injection with generators of O2•− or •NO, in both monkeys and Abca4−/− mice, with some even rescuing retinal degeneration in an advanced Stargardt mouse model. The radical generators used include drugs, riboflavin, and light (169–173, 168). Lipofuscin removal from cultured human RPE was blocked by a radical scavenger (171). Yet, •NO was ineffective in albino mice (168); if radicals per se were the effector, the absence of melanin would not matter. Horseradish peroxidase can also degrade melanolipofuscin (174), raising the possibility that these turnover pathways share the common property of chemiexciting melanin and using the excitation energy to degrade lipofuscin. Synthesis of bis-retinoids involves an excited state step and they can be photodegraded (121, 170), so chemiexcitation may be the normal removal pathway for the bis-retinoids.

The increasing incidence of AMD with age suggests that melanin may also have the competing detrimental effect of creating damage lethal to the cell. Patients with Cockayne syndrome or trichothiodystrophy exhibit accelerated AMD (175, 176). These inherited syndromes feature, in addition to defects in transcription, deficiencies in nucleotide excision repair, which repairs bulky lesions such as the CPD or the benzo(a)pyrene adduct from cigarette smoke (177). Chemiexcitation near the nucleus would create dCPDs. Therefore, as in skin, molecules with mobile electrons may be a double-edged sword: evolution by natural selection can select for beneficial effects before reproductive age but cannot select against negative effects that arise at later ages (178).

Deafness.

Intense sound and certain drugs lead to deafness, ultimately due to death of hair cells in the cochlea’s organ of Corti. This loss is typically preceded by cell death in the stria vascularis, an epithelium responsible for the cochlea’s endolymphatic voltage potential, and is accompanied by death of neurons in the modiolus, the spongy bone axis of the cochlea that contains the spiral ganglion. The prevailing view is that hearing loss results from reactive oxygen species generated after trauma or drugs (179–183).

The intermediate layer of the stria vascularis contains melanocytes, whose processes adjoin the underlying capillaries; the modiolus in humans contains perivascular melanocytes (184, 185). The inner ear also contains melanocytes in the endolymphatic sac and vestibular organ, with the latter also containing neuromelanin (184). Mice lacking melanocytes in the stria vascularis fail to generate the endolymphatic potential, leading to degeneration of the stria vascularis, outer hair cells in the organ of Corti, inner hair cells, and neurons of the spiral ganglion, in that order (186, 187). The melanin has been proposed to function as a Ca++ buffer (184). Because eumelanin is also one of the most effective biological absorbers of sound and vibration known (108, 109), it has been implicated in protecting the cochlea against sound. A human marker for low eumelanin (light eye color) and sunlight sensitivity of skin correlate with reduced inner ear melanin, greater temporary hearing loss after loud sounds, and noise-induced deafness (188, 184, 189, 190). Meniere’s disease (hearing loss, vertigo, and tinnitus) is rare in Africans but common in Africa’s European subpopulation (184). Conversely, hearing loss due to ototoxic drugs is greatest in individuals with dark eye and skin color (184, 191). In rodents, drugs accumulate at melanin sites in proportion to the amount of melanin (192); in humans, the drug cisplatin accumulates preferentially and permanently in the stria vascularis (193). Certain antibiotics, DNA-crosslinking anti-cancer drugs, or intense sound trigger •NO, O2•−, and ONOO– as well as reduction in strial blood flow, detachment of melanocytes from capillaries, loss of the endolymphatic potential, elevated melanogenesis, Cox-2, and prostaglandins – killing strial melanocytes and hair cells for days afterward and resulting in deafness (185, 179–183, 194, 195). The ingredients for chemiexcitation are therefore present in the complete absence of UV.

Hints of active chemiexcitation comes from the inherited syndrome xeroderma pigmentosum. These patients have frequent skin cancers because they are defective in nucleotide excision repair, which removes a short stretch of DNA containing a bulky lesion such as the CPD caused by sunlight. Smaller lesions such as 8-oxodGuo are instead removed by base excision repair, which detaches a damaged base from the DNA backbone. Surprisingly, xeroderma pigmentosum patients were found to have profound hearing loss in the absence of intense sound, with atrophy of the stria vascularis, organ of Corti, and spiral ganglion (196, 197). Cockayne syndrome, with a deficiency in nucleotide excision repair limited to actively transcribed genes (plus a mild effect on repair of oxidative damage (198)), also features hearing loss with death of hair cells and the spiral ganglion (175, 199). Evidently, cochlear cell death and deafness in the repair deficiency syndromes result from a DNA modification that occurs in normal individuals in the complete absence of sunlight, but is repairable by nucleotide excision repair. These genetic experiments of nature raise the possibility that deafness is not due to reactive oxygen species per se, but to a bulky DNA adduct such as a CPD generated by chemiexcitation or a cyclo-purine generated by chemiexcitation or •OH (138, 135). The biological relevance of oxidatively generated cyclo-dGuo is unclear because of their low frequency in vitro: gamma rays induce cyclo-dGuo ~100-fold less efficiently than 8-oxodGuo (135). Experimentally, convincing evidence for chemiexcitation would be detection of CPDs in tissue exposed to loud sounds. The technical challenges include obtaining such tissue from animal models and the likelihood that in human autopsy material the cells that accumulate the most CPDs are the ones that died and disappeared.

Parkinson’s Disease.

The movement disorders in Parkinson’s (PD) are due to loss of neurons in a specific region of the midbrain’s substantia nigra: the ventrolateral tier of the dopamine-releasing pars compacta. There is less neuronal loss in the dorsal and medial tiers, the substantia nigra’s pars reticulata, or the adjacent Ventral Tegmental Area, no loss of astrocytes, and no loss of neurons in the nearby red nucleus (200–202). Lower, in the pons, an earlier loss of neurons in the locus coeruleus alters mood, sleep, and posture. Still lower in the brainstem, PD patients lose neurons in the raphe nuclei of the reticular formation (regulating mood and depression) and the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus (controlling vocal cords and swallowing). There is also loss of catecholamine neurons in the periphery (202), including cardiac innervation at the ventricles, right atrium, and sinus node (orthostatic hypotension), as well as in the enteric nervous system (constipation, an early disease stage). The prevailing paradigm is that PD is related to intraneuronal Lewy bodies containing α-synuclein aggregates that escaped normal degradation or autophagy (200, 203, 204). Other common hypotheses are that the lethal events are autoimmune or are oxidatively generated neuronal damage from injured mitochondria, neurotransmitter turnover reactions, or neurotransmitter quinones, perhaps as sequelae of excitotoxicity in these constitutively active neurons (205, 114, 206, 202, 204). However, additional factors are required to target the disease to specific cells in specific people: Lewy bodies often appear in neurons without killing them (207, 206) and the chemical events mentioned above occur even in neurons that are not casualties of this disease. Moreover, all these phenomena occur in people who never get PD. The subregions of the substantia nigra losing neurons in PD differ from the pattern during normal aging (208).

Patient-specificity.

This specificity may reflect the particular step in a single pathway that was that patient’s tipping point. The full pathway to parkinsonism may be clearest for environmental poisons. Exposure to rotenone or the parkinsonism-inducing drug MPTP (1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine) poisons the oxidative phosphorylation system, which then leaks electrons from the mitochondrial electron transport chain to create O2•−. In addition, the corresponding ATP depletion causes neuronal depolarization and thus irreversible opening of the NMDA receptor/channel (“excitotoxicity”), allowing an influx of Ca++. The Ca++ activates iNOS to synthesize •NO, resulting in ONOO–; it also depolarizes the mitochondria, exacerbating electron leakage, O2•− production, and neuronal death (205). Microglia, the resident innate immune cells of the brain, are abundant in the substantia nigra of PD patients and when activated by local neurodegeneration they generate bursts of O2•−, •NO, ONOO–, and pro-inflammatory cytokines that kill additional neurons (209–213). A potent activator of microglia is neuromelanin released by degenerating neurons, inducing neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration (114, 212). α-Synuclein modified by ONOO− or oxidized dopamine forms aggregates and Lewy bodies (214) that further activate microglia (211). Neuronal presentation of α-synuclein fragments activates T cells which then attack neurons, thereby inducing an autoimmune process of neurodegeneration (215).

Other etiologies may enter the same pathway at later points: The endogenous excitotoxin glutamate also induces •NO in neurons (216) and is released during ischemia-reperfusion such as in stroke or sleep apnea, which are accompanied by ONOO– (34). Head trauma, viral infection, air pollution, and other stimuli trigger microglial activation (217, 218, 210). Individual genetic susceptibilities can impact each of these steps (204). Further self-amplification would come from the facts that dopamine autooxidizes to give O2•− (219) and ONOO– also oxidizes dopamine (220). Finally, this pathway is in fact a recursive positive feedback loop. Not only do activated microglia release pro-inflammatory cytokines, but they release the excitotoxins glutamate and quinolinic acid (221) and •NO directly inhibits oxidative phosphorylation (218). As a result, once triggered the neuroinflammatory state can persist for years after the toxin exposure (222, 223). The vicious cycle of excitotoxicity-neuroinflammation-neurodegeneration contributes to the steady progression of PD (210). But these events could occur in any neuron, so a cell-specificity factor remains.

Cell specificity.

This specificity can be provided by chemiexcitation’s requirement for •NO and O2•− plus a dioxetane host like melanin. A causal role for neuromelanin has long been suggested: The substantia nigra neurons lost are those containing neuromelanin (224, 225, 208, 113). The nigra’s neuromelanin derives from dopamine and occurs in autolysosomes rather than melanosomes (226). Locus coeruleus neurons contain norepinephrine-derived neuromelanin (227, 228); the dorsal motor nucleus of vagus contains neuromelanin that may be dopaminergic (202); and the raphe nuclei contain neuromelanin derived from their neurotransmitter, serotonin. Brain nuclei containing neuromelanin form a nearly contiguous chain from the midbrain to the brainstem (229–231). Cardiac melanocyte-like cells are observed in the pulmonary veins and atrium and the cardiac sinus (232). Neuromelanin is sparse or absent in lower animals (229, 233–235), which do not contract sporadic PD (236). Correspondingly, artificial induction of PD in mice requires 100-fold the mg/kg dose of MPTP required in rhesus monkeys (237, 238). Light hair color and the red hair alleles of the MC1R gene are risk factors for both melanoma and PD, while PD patients have a 7-fold elevated risk for melanoma (239, 240); this correlation is a mystery because neuromelanin is not synthesized by tyrosinase; it might reflect a separate function regulated by the MC1R receptor such as DNA repair (241). Dying neurons release autolysosomal organelles containing neuromelanin and these extracellular granules become the sites where activated microglia proliferate (114, 212). In postmortem tissue, NADPH oxidase – the major source of O2•− – is elevated in the substantia nigra of PD patients but not in controls; the same is true of 3-nitrotyrosine, a product of ONOO– (242, 243). The neuromelanin-related cell specificity for neurodegeneration is exacerbated by the fact that the neuronal groups lost in PD are also distinctive in being pacemaker neurons that are perched at the edge of excitotoxicity: they have long, thinly-myelinated axons dense in synaptic boutons; they spike continually with long depolarizations; and they lack Ca-buffering protein and so may rely on neuromelanin for Ca++ binding (244). They “do all the wrong things” (245). Therefore, chemiexcitation as a final common pathway in people experiencing chronic inflammation or excitotoxicity could explain PD’s predilection for neuromelanin-containing neurons in a subset of people, whereas proposals that involve solely α-synuclein, mitochondrial reactive oxygen, excitotoxicity, or oxidized neurotransmitters do not.

Summarizing, the proposal is that Parkinson’s disease starts with CNS inflammation low in the brainstem, as in the Braak hypothesis (246), or with excitotoxic events anywhere, producing microglial •NO and O2•− and causing α-synuclein aggregates and Lewy bodies. Coupled inflammation and excitotoxicity then progress up the brainstem with little cell death until encountering neuromelanin-containing neurons. Triplet energy on neuromelanin components transfers to DNA and creates dark CPDs or an unknown bulky lesion repaired by nucleotide excision repair. A hint of DNA lesions repairable by nucleotide excision repair is that children with xeroderma pigmentosum have disturbed REM sleep patterns resembling those of PD patients (247). As a speculation, triplet energy transfer might also enhance α-synuclein aggregation, inasmuch as conformational change is required for native soluble α-synuclein to form the β-sheets that aggregate ((214) and see (248)); triplet energy routinely isomerizes molecules such as β-carotene (131); and rare α-synuclein modifications can seed further events in a prion-like manner (249).

Multiple system atrophy (MSA) and progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP).

These common but lesser known neurodegenerative diseases are parkinsonian syndromes and may follow a similar molecular scheme. Despite having very different clinical signs, both result from neuron death in the substantia nigra, locus coeruleus, raphe nuclei, and dorsal nucleus of the vagus, plus additional brain nuclei where neuromelanin may not be a factor (201). The hallmarks of MSA are aggregates of α-synuclein, but these accumulate in oligodendroglia not neurons. In PSP, aggregates of tau protein accumulate in neurons, oligodendroglia, and astrocytes, but it is the neurons that die.

Alzheimer’s Disease.

Alzheimer’s is best known for loss of neurons in the cortex. But an earlier event is pronounced neuron loss in the locus coeruleus, a site of neuromelanin accumulation and the first site to develop the intracellular inclusions of tau protein termed neurofibrillary tangles (250, 251). Yet the extent of neuron loss is not correlated with the extent of neurofibrillary tangles; tangles are present in normal brain and there is a long delay between the appearance of tangles and the onset of neuronal death (252, 251, 253). These tau events are followed later by extracellular aggregates of amyloid-β protein (plaques), whose cortical pathogenicity involves tau and cellular prion protein (254, 255). It is interesting that amyloid-β protein and neuromelanin share structural and functional properties (256, 257). Lower primates, which do not harbor as much neuromelanin as humans, appear not to contract Alzheimer’s (258). Inflammation, activated microglia, NADPH oxidase, and 3-nitrotyrosine are prominent in Alzheimer’s, and inflammation is stimulated by tau and amyloid-β aggregates (221). The elements of chemiexcitation – neuromelanin and inflammation – are therefore present, but correlate only with early stages of the disease.

Late-stage Down Syndrome.

Down syndrome patients over the age of 35 undergo a series of events in the locus coeruleus very similar to the events in Alzheimer’s disease (233).

Hypertrophic scar.

Thick, elevated scars are more than a cosmetic problem: they interfere with re-epithelialization, can lead to contracture, and itch persistently (259). In burn patients they are a significant source of morbidity. They differ from keloids in physiology and in tending to stay within the bounds of the original wound. Hypertrophic scars contain excessive collagen type I and are arranged in whorls instead of the parallel bundles characteristic of normal skin. They arise when inflammation, the second stage of wound healing that prevents infection, is prolonged beyond 1-2 weeks; this leads to excessive proliferation of fibroblasts and myofibroblasts (260, 261). The prevailing view is that excessive scarring is related to abnormally high levels of fibroproliferative or pro-fibrotic cytokines, such as IGF-1 and TGFβ1, produced during hemostasis and inflammation (259, 261). Notably, activated mast cells are more abundant in hypertrophic scars than in normal scars; they release cytokines, histamine, and serotonin, and they are required for myofibroblast proliferation, wound contracture, and the hypertrophic scarring (262–264). Inflammatory cells, including mast cells, generate both •NO and O2•−; the former triggers vasodilation, while activated neutrophils and macrophages use O2•− from NADPH oxidase to kill their targets (259). Histamine from mast cells activates xanthine oxidase in the plasma, generating more O2•− (265). TGFβ1 induces fibrosis by activating NADPH oxidase subunit NOX4 in fibroblasts, generating O2•− and H2O2 as signals in a normal Redox Code signaling system (266). By this means, TGFβ1 induces Type I collagen, smooth muscle actin, fibronectin 1, and fibrosis (267).

These events alone do not explain a strong correlation between hypertrophic scar burden and increased skin pigmentation. Hypertrophic scars are most common in Black and Native American patients and are a clinical problem for Hispanic and Asian patients. In Native Americans and Asians, these scars correlate with an allele of the MC1R gene that codes for pheomelanin and red hair (268). In animals, the Red Duroc pig develops significant hypertrophic scarring whereas the Yorkshire White does not (259). The Red Duroc also becomes hyperpigmented at wound margins (269, 270). In the pig, scarring is associated with •NO production (271).

The correlation of hypertrophic scar with pigmentation could arise in several ways, some involving excited states and some not, and all more complex than simple cell death.

• Chemiexcitation of melanin by inflammation-induced ONOO–, thereby inducing the DNA damage response, thus inducing inflammatory cytokines that abnormally prolong inflammation (272).

• Melanin chemiexcitation generating a post-excitation melanin derivative (32) that resembles the most potent ligand for the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (146), which is the trigger for mast cell degranulation (273).

• O2•− produced by melanin synthesis (274). Melanized skin may be poised for hyperfibrotic healing when a wound’s inflammatory stage generates additional O2•− and H2O2. Moreover, O2•− can trigger mast cell degranulation (275). Excited states need not be involved in this route.

Unlike the other disorders, the mechanisms here would alter tissue differentiation rather than killing cells.

In summary, each of these poorly understood disease states contains the reactants needed for chemiexcitation and contains them in the appropriate location. To varying degrees, the Bradford Hill criteria are met. Yet, people do not get sick unless several things go wrong, a reflection of strong homeostasis. The challenge is to design experiments that determine which events are causal.

PREVENTING CHRONIC DISEASE BY PREVENTING OR QUENCHING CHEMIEXCITATION

Physicochemical methods for preventing chemiexcitation or dissipating excited-state energy are known, either in a test tube (276–279) or in plants, which have been defending themselves against photoexcited states for eons (280). The hours-long production of dark CPDs after UVR exposure provides several points at which it could be blocked, each having pros and cons.

Triplet-state preventers

Blocking enzymes that produce ROS and RNS.

This route seems inviable as a long-term prevention strategy, due to the alternative functions of these enzymes and the key role of nanomolar levels of •NO, O2•−, and H2O2 in normal cell regulation via the Redox Code (281, 266, 282).

Scavenging ROS and RNS.

Antioxidants that scavenge •NO, O2•−, their product ONOO–, or singlet oxygen 1O2* (283, 284) will prevent the triplet state from being created. To distinguish these agents from the bulk of antioxidants, we term them triplet-state preventers. A caveat to this approach is that several chemoprevention trials of antioxidants such as β-carotene and retinol (CARET) or selenium and vitamin E (SELECT) have shown increased incidence of cancer, heart disease, and diabetes (285, 286). Presumably the adverse effects reflect unintended radical chains or the interference of high chronic doses of antioxidants with the normal Redox Code signaling functions.

Chemical cleavage of dioxetanes.

Electron donors such as transition metal ions, amines, glutathione, vitamin C, vitamin E, NADH, and FADH2 split the O–O bond of a dioxetane in a way that is not followed by the C–C cleavage and so yields harmless diols (276, 287, 65, 277, 278, 288). However, metal ions can be harmful due to •OH produced by via metal-catalysed Haber-Weiss reactions, such as the Fenton reaction, while NADH and FADH2 have high triplet energies and so could transfer energy from UV or chemiexcitation hosts to DNA. Glutathione requires relatively high concentrations, but it is present at high concentrations in the body (40).

Triplet-state quenchers

Physical quenching of triplet carbonyl energy by a compound having a triplet energy lower than that of DNA will siphon the donor’s energy by Dexter electron transfer before it can damage DNA, if steric relations are favorable. This is the role of cis-β-carotene in a chloroplast (131). Other triplet quenchers include sorbate, vitamin D3, ferrocene, natamycin, coenzyme Q10, riboflavin, curcumin, lycopene, and indigoids (289–291, 132, 292–294, 279, 295). Triplet quenchers need to be chosen carefully because some, such as riboflavin, efficiently pass their energy to ambient O2, creating 1O2*, which is dangerous in its own right. β-carotene avoids this problem because its triplet energy (0.91 eV) is below the lowest energy of 1O2*, 0.97 eV. The 1O2* generation could also be avoided by a quencher possessing a conical intersection seam, because the rapid dissipation of energy to the ground state would occur before the quencher encountered an O2 molecule.

A challenge for the triplet-quencher strategy is the short time available for diffusion and collision with the excited donor, so the effective quencher concentration may need to be mM rather than μM. Natural products are good candidates because a) plants require the same triplet-quenching activities and b) the FDA’s benefit/risk bar for preventive agents is relatively high, yet humankind’s long experience with natural products often allows them to be used at pharmacologically high concentrations with little risk.

Many compounds well-known as antioxidants possess triplet-state preventer and quencher activity; examples include β-carotene, resveratrol, polyphenols, vitamin E, and glutathione (40). This duality may reflect the fact that electron π clouds in conjugated bond systems facilitate both electron release, for antioxidant activity, and Dexter electron exchange, for triplet-quenching activity. One wonders how much of the effect of “antioxidants” is due to their triplet-quenching activity. A challenge for either activity is delivery to the body site. In skin delivery, for example, lipophilicity favors passage across the stratum corneum whereas water solubility is required for transport across the epidermis (296).

Our knowledge of triplet quenchers and triplet prevention strategies in organic compounds has been obtained for relatives of a small set of model compounds discovered in the 1960s and 1970s. To date, no high throughput screen has been conducted. It therefore seems possible to discover novel agents and even novel principles useful in preventing cutaneous or neurodegenerative diseases.

Endogenous prevention

Do mammalian cells have endogenous triplet preventers or quenchers? Regarding chemical cleavage of dioxetanes, cells certainly contain metals, amines, glutathione, vitamins C and E, NADH, and FADH2, and melanin acts as a depot for metal ions. Some of these compounds are present in human plasma at 0.1-300 μM (130). Whether they function as triplet-state preventers in vivo needs to be determined. Their effectiveness will depend on being in the same cell compartment as the triplet host. They also have side effects which must be avoided: NADH’s triplet energy of 2.9 eV lies above that of DNA (297), so it could create dCPDs if excited. Triplet-state quenchers present in cells include vitamin D3, coenzyme Q10, riboflavin, and the water-soluble carotenoids lutein and zeaxanthin (298). The eye contains 8 μM riboflavin as FAD (163), despite the fact that exposing riboflavin to blue light generates 1O2*(295). The macula contains up to 1 mM lutein and zeaxanthin, 1000-fold more than in liver or serum (298). These act as blue light filters yet are now known to also quench triplet states and scavenge 1O2* (299). The skin, liver, and kidney contain vitamin D3 and related compounds that may have similar triplet energies (300). The stable radicals of eumelanin should also quench triplet states. Whether these compounds act as triplet-state quenchers in mammalian cells awaits determination. The fact that many of these compounds are acquired through the diet emphasizes the importance of eating vegetables and fruits.

The ultimate endogenous prevention is structural. Evolution resulted in several structural ways to protect the genome from excited-electron states, showing that it took the threat seriously. These were discovered for excitation by photons, but will also protect DNA against a chemiexcited state in an internal organ.

1. Evolution selected nucleobases with low-energy conical intersections that transfer UV energy ultra-rapidly from the excited state to ground state (301–304, 8). For a CPD to form, normal geometric fluctuations from heat must have already diminished the 36° angle between bases and brought the two pyrimidines closer than normal at the instant the photon was absorbed (7). Once adjacent pyrimidines are excited, their 5-6 double bond becomes a single bond and their substituents and orbitals can twist around the bond. How much energy is required to reach the excited state depends on the degree to which fluctuations caused rotation and brought the two pyrimidines in close proximity. What happens next depends on this geometry (Fig. 5b). If the excited state was reached during a modest deviation in both of these parameters, the molecule finds itself near the leftmost funnel of a conical intersection, localized in one base or the other. Then, when the 5-6 bond on one base untwists, that base dissipates the energy and both bases quickly return to ground state as two normal bases (Fig. 5b, left). However, if the excited state was reached by a large decrease of the separation between the two bases, or by following the downward sloping energy surface after being excited on the left, the molecule finds itself near a second conical intersection (Fig. 5b, right). Here, the molecule forms 5-5 and 6-6 bonds and when it drops to the ground carries the ring that is a cyclo-butane pyrimidine dimer. Nucleobase analogs that evolution did not select for DNA lack the low-deviation conical intersection; for example, adenine (6-aminopurine) has one but 2-aminopurine does not (305–307). This design is a success; we don’t get skin cancer from visible light.

2. Microbial spores need to prevent CPDs and other lethal DNA damage for long time periods. UV shielding by protein is only a 2-fold effect. So spores instead shift their DNA conformation from B-form to an A-like form that can’t make CPDs, using small acid soluble proteins that bind the DNA helix (308).

3. Watson-Crick base pairing employs the lone pairs on O and N of DNA bases. This stabilizes the n orbitals, making them harder to excite (73).

4. Base pairing also stabilizes bases after excitation. Excited guanine often ejects a delocalized electron, leading to base damage of the type generated oxidatively (140). But in a G:C base pair, the electron jumps from G to C. Subsequent migration of a proton from N1 of G to its hydrogen bond partner, N3 of C, creates a conical intersection on the base pair, allowing rapid dissipation of the energy and a safe return to the ground state while the electron and proton return to G (309).

5. DNA’s base stacking facilitates excited-state complexes of adjacent bases, ensuring that CPDs are created within one strand rather than joining complementary strands. Preventing both strands from being damaged at the same site allows the undamaged complementary strand to be used as a template for DNA excision repair (310).

6. Photoexcited nucleobases repair nearby CPDs, a “self-healing” process (311). Exciting G and A on the same strand leads to a charge separation, with the excess electron going to A. In the test tube, this electron can transfer to an adjacent CPD, splitting the cyclobutane ring and reverting the CPD to normal in the same way that the photolyase repair enzyme does.

PRIORITIES FOR LIFTOFF

The nascent field of mammalian chemiexcitation can transform into a field of excited state biology and medicine with the advent of new experiments and tools:

Experiments

• Identify biomolecules besides melanin that host dioxetanes in vivo.

• Identify additional mammalian enzymes that generate dCPDs or other traces of excited states shown not to be generated by ground-state reactions.

• Determine how UV activates the enzymes that produce •NO and O2•−.

• Observe melanin degradation products entering the nucleus.

• Observe an inflammatory response generating dCPDs.

• Observe dCPDs, UV signature mutations, or other traces of excited states at early stages of a melanin-related internal degenerative disease before the target cells have vanished, or in adjacent cell types.

New Tools

• Devise a fluorescent triplet-state acceptor probe for living cells and image its location at subcellular resolution.

• Devise a stable triplet-state trap for living cells, to identify traces of past excited state events by HPLC, fluorescence, or antibodies.

• Devise computational methods to quickly identify compounds possessing conical intersections, and for understanding the dynamics governing chemiexcitation.

• Identify compounds that cross the skin’s stratum corneum or the brain’s blood-brain barrier, enter cells, and prevent triplet states or dissipate triplet-state energy as heat or light, thereby preventing or slowing chronic disease.

These steps take molecular medicine toward the quantum level. You are welcome to join in.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

For illuminating discussions we thank EL Bastos, L Zecca, H Sies, W Adam, FA Augusto, WJ Baader, EJH Bechara, L Blancafort, J Costa, B Epe, E Gaillard, B Kohler, J O’Malley, G Payne, FH Quina, D Roca-Sanjuan, T Sarna, JW Shupp, H Sies, D Sulzer, WK Surewicz, J-S Taylor, GS Timmins, A Vortmeyer, and G Wondrak. Writing was supported by grants R01AR070851 from the National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, A150244Avt3 C131121 from L’Oreal, Inc., and the Yale Skin Cancer SPORE grant P50 CA121974-12A1 from the National Cancer Institute. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health.

Figure 1. Exciting electrons in a simple molecule. Left: Electron configuration in the outer molecular orbitals of the C=O of the simplest carbonyl compound, formaldehyde (H2C=O). In the ground state S0, paired electrons in an orbital have opposing spins per the Pauli exclusion principle (a “singlet state”). Exciting one electron to a higher-energy orbital can retain the opposing spins, giving singlet excited states S1 or the higher energy S2. This is a “spin allowed” process. If the excited electron’s spin flips, giving the former partners parallel spins, the excited state – the aggregate of all the orbitals – is a triplet state T1 and this state has lower energy than S1. Returning to the ground state S0 requires the spin to spontaneously reverse (“flip”) and is “spin forbidden”; since triplet states cannot readily return to S0, they have long lifetimes that allow a variety of harmless and harmful modes of dissipating the energy. σ and π are bonding orbitals, n is nonbonding, and σ* and π* are antibonding. Only the highest-energy of two n orbitals is shown (both are shown in Fig. 2). HOMO is the highest occupied molecular orbital, after filling with electrons from the lowest energy orbital up according to the Aufbau principle. LUMO is the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital, available for entry of an electron or electron pair. Right: The transition between orbitals for each state, with arrow length proportional to the energy required. Modified from (312, 313, 1).

Figure 2. Orbital shapes of the ground state and excited states of a carbonyl. Left: Computed molecular orbitals of formaldehyde. Zero eV is the energy of an isolated electron in a vacuum; larger negative values reflect stronger bonding. Right: Enlargement showing ground-state electron configurations and frontier molecular orbitals of the C=O bond. Note the apparent 90° rotation between n and π* orbitals. Both electrons occupy both red and blue components of the wavefunction. Updated from (312, 313) with computations using Chemissian software.

Figure 3. The available transitions between the ground state and electronically excited states (Jablonski diagram). A molecule in the ground state, usually the singlet state S0, can be excited by absorbing a photon that excites an electron to one of the vibrational states of a higher electronic energy level such as S1 or S2. For O2, the ground state is T1. The vibrational energy quickly dissipates by collision (vibrational relaxation), leaving the molecule in the lowest vibrational state of its new electronic energy level. In S2, this electronic energy can convert to an isoenergetic vibrational state of a lower electronic level S1 (internal conversion) and again drop to the lowest vibrational level. In a flexible molecule, it can then return to the ground state by vibrational relaxation (gray energy levels); in a rigid molecule, it can instead emit a photon as fluorescence. It is generally “forbidden” (i.e. rare) for the excited electron to flip its spin to create a triplet state T1 (intersystem crossing), or for a T state to cross to S. Exceptions occur if the two states involve different orbitals (the “El-Sayed rules”), e.g. singlet (π,π*) → triplet (n,π*), especially if the molecule contains a heavy atom such as Br or I (the “heavy atom effect” due to “spin-orbital coupling”) as described in the text. Because the return from T1 to S0 is forbidden, triplet states have long lifetimes that make them important for subsequent energy-transfer or chemical events. Triplet energy can be dissipated by slow emission of photons as phosphorescence. Jablonski energy levels reflect one geometry of a molecule. A different molecular geometry can give rise to unusual energy level regions in which the S0 and T1 state energies are close together or identical and allow a singlet ground state to cross to an excited triplet state without adding energy other than that which altered the ground state geometry; chemiexcitation operates in this way (see text). Adapted from (9, 313).

Figure 4. Paths to an excited-state carbonyl. (a) The dioxetane, a strained four-atom ring usually found as a moiety on a larger molecule. It is unusual in being able to release large amounts of energy in a single reaction, creating long-lived, high-energy, electronically excited triplet states. Mild heat twists the two Os in opposite directions around the C–C bond (top), cleaving the O–O bond and then the C–C bond, leaving two carbonyls one of which becomes electronically excited. (b) A triplet-state carbonyl can be created by a reaction between two alkoxyl radicals or two alkylperoxyl radicals, which are produced by lipid oxidation or peroxidation, respectively. Electron transfer from a hydroquinone leaves a triplet carbonyl in the resulting semiquinone, a second transfer leaves a second excited carbonyl in the resulting quinone. When a dioxetanone or dioxetane cleaves, triplet carbonyls of higher energy arise. Firefly bioluminescence appears to rely on dioxetanone cleavage initiated by an enzyme. The mechanism is described in the text. Adapted from (16). (c) The apparent chemiexcitation reaction leading to a dioxetane on the eumelanin monomer DHICA, followed by cleavage to yield an excited triplet-state carbonyl (32, 1). UV radiation activates enzymes that synthesize the radicals •NO and O2•− for hours afterward. These radicals form peroxynitrite, ONOO−, which oxidizes eumelanin or its monomer DHICA (5,6- dihydroxyindole-2-carboxylic acid) and allows ambient O2 to create a dioxetane on the melanin. Thermolytic cleavage of the dioxetane creates an electronically excited triplet state (*).

Figure 5. Potential energy surfaces for dioxetane cleavage and CPD creation. (a) The energy contained in a dioxetane depends on the geometry of the O–O and C–C bonds. As heat-induced vibration twists the two Os apart at an increasingly large angle, the O–O bond stretches and the dioxetane’s ground-state energy S0 increases until it matches that of an excited triplet state T1, allowing easy intersystem crossing to T1 at the diradicaloid transition state seam (TS). Further stretching lowers the ground-state energy, making reversal unlikely, and cleaves the C–C bond. The reaction product with two carbonyls is then born already in the excited state. The dark blue region on the right is the underside of the ground state surface which, on the left, is seen from the top. (b) The energy of a pair of adjacent pyrimidines in DNA also depends on their geometry. The energy required to reach the excited singlet state, as after UVC, depends on the degree to which heat-induced fluctuations twisted substituents around the 5=6 double bond or brought the two pyrimidines in close vertical and angular alignment (y and x axes). Torsion around the 5=6 double bond begins to resemble an excited diradicaloid state, in which the 5-6 is a single bond and the substituents and orbitals are freer to twist around the bond. Given sufficient twist and a close proximity of the two nucleobases, the energy approaches that of the excited state in the region near the conical intersection on the left. Small amounts of energy from a photon or triplet carbonyl then suffice to excite an electron from the S0 ground state to an excited singlet state such as S1. Conversely an excited molecule can rapidly dissipate energy and return to the ground state through the conical intersection, recreating the original two bases. With greater twist and closer proximity, however, the molecule finds itself near the conical intersection on the right. The pyrimidine pair forms 5-5 and 6-6 bonds joining them and, if the energy dissipates here, they drop to the ground state carrying the ring that makes a cyclo-butane pyrimidine dimer. Panel (a) from (68), copyright by the American Chemical Society (2013). Panel (b) courtesy of L. Blancafort, Univ. Girona.

Figure 6. Where triplet-state energy goes. The energy of an excited triplet carbonyl, which has diradical character, is dissipated along both harmless and harmful pathways. Left to right: Energy is converted to heat (thermal deactivation) or to light emission (phosphorescence, Ph). A molecule in the triplet state can transfer its excited electron to another triplet state molecule, converting the latter to a singlet that generates fluorescence (triplet-triplet annihilation) (2). When a donor collides with an acceptor A, direct energy transfer can occur by Dexter electron exchange, with a high energy electron in the donor exchanging places with a lower energy electron in the acceptor. This is the likely mechanism for creating CPDs in the dark. Triplet acceptors that readily cross to the singlet state and fluoresce are useful for detecting poorly luminescing triplet states. Electron exchange with ambient molecular oxygen, which is a triplet in the ground state, creates singlet oxygen – an excited state of O2 that is much more reactive because it can now react with the plethora of compounds that are singlets. If energy is transferred to a molecule having conjugated double bonds, such as sorbate or β-carotene, the diradical character of the newly excited double bond allows it to isomerize around the remaining single bond, dissipating the excess energy as heat by vibrational relaxation. This protection is the function of β-carotene and lycopene in the chloroplast’s reaction center. An excited carbonyl’s diradical character can also initiate [2+2] cycloaddition reactions (Paterno-Buchi reaction). Alternatively, it can facilitate hydrogen abstraction from an H donor (e.g., alcohols and 1,4-dienes), sometimes with C-C bond homolysis. Adapted from (16, 33).

Table 1. Potential targets of melanin chemiexcitation related to disease.

Melanin exists in unintuitive anatomic sites harboring melanocytes, melanosomes, or autolysosomes that contain neuromelanin formed apparently non-enzymatically. In skin, melanocytes reside in the epidermis and the dermal hair follicle; in the cochlea, they constitute the intermediate layer of the stria vascularis epithelium and also reside in the spongy bone of the modiolus that houses the spiral ganglion. Melanocyte-like cells reside in the heart’s pulmonary veins and atrium and the cardiac sinus. Other sites are self-explanatory. Several chronic disorders are associated with these sites, often in conjunction with inflammation, but not with nearby sites lacking melanin.

Location	Melanin origin	Melanin-Correlated Diseases	
Skin	Melanocytes	Melanoma, hypertrophic scar	
Cochlea	Melanocytes	Deafness from drugs, intense sound	
Heart	Melanocyte-like cells	Parkinson’s	
Retinal pigment epithelium	Melanosomes in epithelial cells	Age-related macular degeneration	
Brain:			
Substantia nigra pars compacta	Neuromelanin (dopamine autolysosomes)	Parkinson’s, Alzheimer’s Multiple System Atrophy Progressive Supranuclear Palsy	
Locus coeruleus	Neuromelanin (norepinephrine)	Parkinson’s, Alzheimer’s Multiple System Atrophy Progressive Supranuclear Palsy Late-stage Down’s	
Raphe nuclei	Neuromelanin (serotonin)	Parkinson’s Multiple System Atrophy Progressive Supranuclear Palsy	
Dorsal nucleus of vagus	Neuromelanin	Parkinson’s Multiple System Atrophy Progressive Supranuclear Palsy	


REFERENCES

1. Brash DE , Goncalves LCP , Bechara EJH and Group E-SMW (2018) Chemiexcitation and its implications for disease. Trends in molecular medicine 24 , 527–541.29751974
2. Turro NJ (1978) Modern Molecular Photochemistry. Benjamin/Cummings, Inc., Menlo Park, CA.
3. Anslyn EV and Dougherty DA (2006) Modern Physical Organic Chemistry. University Science Books.
4. Szent-Gyorgi A (1960) Introduction to a Submolecular Biology. Academic Press, New York.
5. Cilento G and Adam W (1995) From free radicals to electronically excited species. Free Radic Biol Med 19 , 103–114.7635351
6. Middleton CT , de La Harpe K , Su C , Law YK , Crespo-Hernandez CE and Kohler B (2009) DNA excited-state dynamics: from single bases to the double helix. Annu Rev Phys Chem 60 , 217–239.19012538
7. Schreier WJ , Gilch P and Zinth W (2015) Early events of DNA photodamage. Annu Rev Phys Chem 66 , 497–519.25664840
8. Improta R , Santoro F and Blancafort L (2016) Quantum mechanical studies on the photophysics and the photochemistry of nucleic acids and nucleobases. Chem. Rev 116 , 3540–3593.26928320
9. McGlynn SP , Smith FJ and Cilento G (1964) Some aspects of the triplet state. Photochem Photobiol 3 , 269–294.
10. Lower SK and El-Sayed MA (1966) The triplet state and molecular electronic processes in organic molecules. Chem. Rev 66 , 199–241.
11. Turro NJ and Kraeutler B (1980) Magnetic field and magnetic isotope effects in organic photochemical reactions. A novel probe of reaction mechanisms and a method for enrichment of magnetic isotopes. Acc. Che. Res 13 , 369–377.
12. White E , Miano J , Watkins C and Breaux E (1974) Chemically produced excited states. Angw. Chem. Internat. Edit 13 , 229–243.
13. Adam W (1975) Biological light. alpha-peroxylates as bioluminescent intermediates. J. Chem. Educ 52 , 138–145.
14. Adam W and Cilento G (1982) Chemical and Biological Generation of Excited States. Academic Press, New York.
15. Baader WJ , Stevani CV and Bastos EL (2006) Chemiluminescence of organic peroxides. In The Chemistry of Peroxides, Vol. 2 . (Edited by Rappoport Z ), pp. 1211–1278. John Wiley &amp; Sons, New York, NY.
16. Baader WJ , Stevani CV and Bechara EJH (2015) “Photo” chemistry without light? J. Braz. Chem. Soc 12 , 2430–2447.
17. Bastos EL , Farahani P , Bechara EJH and Baader WJ (2017) Four-membered cyclic peroxides: carriers of chemical energy. J Phys Org Chem e3725 , 1–18.
18. Pospisil P , Prasad A and Rac M (2019) Mechanism of the formation of electronically excited species by oxidative metabolic processes: role of reactive oxygen species. Biomolecules 9 .
19. Wilson T and Hastings JW (2013) Bioluminescence: Living Lights, Lights for Living Harvard Univ. Press, Cambridge, MA.
20. Lee J (2017) Perspectives on bioluminescence mechanisms. Photochem Photobiol 93 , 389–404.27748947
21. Cadenas E (1984) Biological chemiluminescence. Photochem Photobiol 40 , 823–830.6395146
22. Slawinski J (1988) Luminescence research and its relation to ultraweak cell radiation. Experientia 44 , 559–571.3294031
23. Murphy ME and Sies H (1990) Visible-range low-level chemiluminescence in biological systems. In Oxygen Radicals in Biological Systems. Part B. Oxygen Radicals and Antioxidants, Vol. 186 . (Edited by L Packer and Glazer AN ), pp. 595–610. Academic Press, New York.
24. Cilento G (1973) Excited electronic states in dark biological processes. Q Rev Biophys 6 , 485–501.4790840
25. Cadenas E , Sies H , Graf H and Ullrich V (1983) Oxene donors yield low-level chemiluminescence with microsomes and isolated cytochrome P-450. Eur J Biochem 130 , 117–121.6825683
26. Cadenas E , Sies H , Nastainczyk W and Ullrich V (1983) Singlet oxygen formation detected by low-level chemiluminescence during enzymatic reduction of prostaglandin G2 to H2. Hoppe Seylers Z Physiol Chem 364 , 519–528.6409778
27. Kopecky KR and Mumford C (1969) Luminescence in the thermal decomposition of 3,3,4-trimethyl-B92-dioxetane. Can. J. Chem 47 , 709–711.
28. Adam W and Liu J-C (1972) An alpha-peroxy lactone. Synthesis and chemiluminescence. J. Am. Chem. Soc 94 , 2894–2895.
29. Cilento G (1980) Photochemistry in the dark. In Photochemical and Photobiological Reviews (Edited by Smith K ), pp. 199–228. Plenum Press, New York, NY.
30. Rivas-Suarenze E , Duran N and Cilento G (1979) Energy transfer from enzyme-generated triplet acetone to riboflavin perturbed by molecules related to thyroxine. Photochem Photobiol 30 , 111–115.
31. Cilento G (1982) Electronic excitation in dark biological processes. In Chemical and Biological Generation of Excited States (Edited by Adam W and Cilento G ), pp. 277–307. Academic Press, New York.
32. Premi S , Wallisch S , Mano CM , Weiner AB , Bacchiocchi A , Wakamatsu K , Bechara EJ , Halaban R , Douki T and Brash DE (2015) Chemiexcitation of melanin derivatives induces DNA photoproducts long after UV exposure. Science 347 , 842–847.25700512
33. Premi S and Brash DE (2016) Chemical excitation of electrons: A dark path to melanoma. DNA Repair (Amst) 44 , 169–177.27262612
34. Pacher P , Beckman JS and Liaudet L (2007) Nitric oxide and peroxynitrite in health and disease. Physiol Rev 87 , 315–424.17237348
35. Schulte-Herbruggen T and Sies H (1989) The peroxidase/oxidase activity of soybean lipoxygenase--I. Triplet excited carbonyls from the reaction with isobutanal and the effect of glutathione. Photochem Photobiol 49 , 697–704.2502778
36. Bechara EJH , Stevani CV and Baader WJ (2017) Hydrogen peroxide and other peroxides in chemiluminescence, bioluminescence, and photo(bio)chemistry in the dark. In Hydrogen Peroxide Metabolism in Health and Disease, Vol. 1 . (Edited by Margreet CM , Hampton MB and Kettle TJ ), pp. 17–48. CRC Press, Boca Raton.
37. Lawrence KP , Douki T , Sarkany RPE , Acker S , Herzog B and Young AR (2018) The UV/visible radiation boundary region (385-405 nm) damages skin cells and induces “dark” cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers in human skin in vivo. Scientific reports 8 , 12722.30143684
38. Delinasios GJ , Karbaschi M , Cooke MS and Young AR (2018) Vitamin E inhibits the UVAI induction of “light” and “dark” cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers, and oxidatively generated DNA damage, in keratinocytes. Scientific reports 8 , 423.29323251
39. Fajuyigbe D , Douki T , van Dijk A , Sarkany RPE and Young AR (2021) Dark cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers are formed in the epidermis of Fitzpatrick skin types I/II and VI in vivo after exposure to solar-simulated radiation. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res 34 , 575–584.33369222
40. Angele-Martinez C , Goncalves LCP , Premi S , Augusto FA , Palmatier MA , Amar SK and Brash DE (2022) Triplet-energy quenching functions of antioxidant molecules. Antioxidants (Basel) 11 .
41. Premi S , Han L , Mehta S , Knight J , Zhao D , Palmatier MA , Kornacker K and Brash DE (2019) Genomic sites hypersensitive to ultraviolet radiation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 116 , 24196–24205.31723047
42. Wang Y , Cacchillo EM , Niedzwiedzki DM and Taylor JS (2022) Ability of the putative decomposition products of 2,3-dioxetanes of indoles to photosensitize cyclobutane pyrimidine dimer (CPD) formation and its implications for the “dark” (chemisensitized) pathway to CPDs in melanocytes. Photochem Photobiol 98 , 442–454.34558720
43. Slawinska D and Slawinski J (1982) Electronically excited molecules in the formation and degradation of melanins. Physiol Chem Phys 14 , 363–374.7186132
44. Roca-Sanjuan D , Delcey MG , Navizet I , Ferre N , Liu YJ and Lindh R (2011) Chemiluminescence and fluorescence states of a small model for Coelenteramide and Cypridina oxyluciferin: a CASSCF/CASPT2 study. J Chem Theory Comput 7 , 4060–4069.26598351
45. Wondrak GT , Cervantes-Laurean D , Roberts MJ , Qasem JG , Kim M , Jacobson EL and Jacobson MK (2002) Identification of alpha-dicarbonyl scavengers for cellular protection against carbonyl stress. Biochem. Pharmacol 63 , 361–373.11853687
46. Krisko A and Radman M (2010) Protein damage and death by radiation in Escherichia coli and Deinococcus radiodurans. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107 , 14373–14377.20660760
47. Maisonneuve E , Ducret A , Khoueiry P , Lignon S , Longhi S , Talla E and Dukan S (2009) Rules governing selective protein carbonylation. PLoS One 4 , e7269.19802390
48. Cadenas E and Sies H (2000) Formation of electronically excited states during the oxidation of arachidonic acid by prostaglandin endoperoxide synthase. Methods Enzymol 319 , 67–77.10907500
49. Stauff J and Bartolmes P (1970) Chemiluminescence on oxidative formation of triplet states of anthrasemiquinone- and anthraquinone-2-sulfonate. Angew. Chem. Internat. Edit 9 , 307–308.
50. Villablanca M and Cilento G (1985) Enzymatic generation of electronically excited states by electron transfer. Photochem. Photobiol 42 , 591–597.
51. Najder-Kozdrowska L , Pilawa B , Buszman E , Więckowski AB , Şwiătkowska L , Wrzeşniok D and Wojtowicz W (2010) Triplet states in DOPA-melanin and in its complexes with kanamycin and copper Cu(II) ions. Acta Physica Polonica A 118 , 613–618.
52. Trofimov AV , Vasil’ev RF , Mielke K and Adam W (1995) Energy transfer-enhanced chemiluminescence of adamantone (n,pi*) and ester (pi,pi*) singlet and triplet excited states in the thermolysis of silyoxyaryl-substituted spiroadamantyl dioxetanes. Photochem. Photobiol 62 , 35–43.
53. Trofimov AV , Mielke K , Vasil’ev RF and Adam W (1996) Chemically initiated electron exchange luminescence of silyloxyaryl-substituted spiroadamantyl dioxetanes: kinetics and excited state yields. Photochem. Photobiol 63 , 463–467.
54. Mano CM , Prado FM , Massari J , Ronsein GE , Martinez GR , Miyamoto S , Cadet J , Sies H , Medeiros MH , Bechara EJ and Di Mascio P (2014) Excited singlet molecular O(2)((1)Deltag) is generated enzymatically from excited carbonyls in the dark. Sci. Rep 4 , 5938.25087485
55. Cilento G , Casadei de Baptista R and Brunetti IL (1994) Triplet carbonyls: from photophysics to biochemistry. J. Mol. Struct 324 , 45–48.
56. Timmins GS , dos Santos RE , Whitwood AC , Catalani LH , Di Mascio P , Gilbert BC and Bechara EJ (1997) Lipid peroxidation-dependent chemiluminescence from the cyclization of alkylperoxyl radicals to dioxetane radical intermediates. Chem Res Toxicol 10 , 1090–1096.9348430
57. Knudsen FS , Penatti CA , Royer LO , Bidart KA , Christoff M , Ouchi D and Bechara EJ (2000) Chemiluminescent aldehyde and beta-diketone reactions promoted by peroxynitrite. Chem Res Toxicol 13 , 317–326.10813647
58. Ximenes VF , Campa A and Catalani LH (2001) The oxidation of indole derivatives catalyzed by horseradish peroxidase is highly chemiluminescent. Arch Biochem Biophys 387 , 173–179.11370838
59. Ximenes VF , Silva SO , Rodrigues MR , Catalani LH , Maghzal GJ , Kettle AJ and Campa A (2005) Superoxide-dependent oxidation of melatonin by myeloperoxidase. J Biol Chem 280 , 38160–38169.16148002
60. Di Mascio P , Martinez GR , Miyamoto S , Ronsein GE , Medeiros MHG and Cadet J (2019) Singlet molecular oxygen reactions with nucleic acids, lipids, and proteins. Chem Rev 119 , 2043–2086.30721030
61. Augusto FA , de Souza GA , de Souza Junior SP , Khalid M and Baader WJ (2013) Efficiency of electron transfer initiated chemiluminescence. Photochem Photobiol 89 , 1299–1317.23711099
62. Turro NJ , Lechtken P , Lyons A , Hautala RR , Carnahan E and Katz TJ (1973) Photochemical generation of electronically excited organic products in adiabatic pericyclic photoreactions. An unexpected propensity toward spin inversion in a retrocycloaddition and in a valence isomerization. J. A. Chem. Soc 95 , 2035–2037.
63. Epe B , Muller E , Adam W and Saha-Moller CR (1992) Photochemical DNA modifications induced by 1,2-dioxetanes. Chem Biol Interact 85 , 265–281.1337314
64. Turro NJ and Lechtken P (1972) Molecular photochemistry. LII. Thermal decomposition of tetramethyl-1,2-dioxetane. Selective and efficient chemelectronic generation of triplet acetone. J. Am. Chem. Soc 94 , 2886–2888.
65. Bartlett PD and Landis ME (1979) The 1,2-dioxetanes. In Singlet Oxygen (Edited by Wasserman HH and Murray RW ), pp. 243–286. Academic Press, New York.
66. Turro NJ and Lechtken P (1973) Thermal generation of organic molecules in electronically excited states. Evidence for a spin forbidden, diabatic pericyclic reaction. J. Am. Chem. Soc 95 , 264–266.
67. Wilson T and Halpern AM (1995) Dioxetane decomposition revisited: A semi-empirical study of the potential energy surface. J. Phys. Org. Chem 8 , 359–363.
68. Farahani P , Roca-Sanjuán D , Felipe Zapata F and Lindh R (2013) Revisiting the nonadiabatic process in 1,2-dioxetane. J. Chem. Theory Computat 9 , 5404–5411.
69. Yue L , Yu L , Xu C , Zhu C and Liu Y (2020) Quantum yields of singlet and triplet chemiexcitation of dimethyl 1,2-dioxetane: ab initio nonadiabatic molecular dynamic simulations. Phys Chem Chem Phys 22 , 11440–11451.32390027
70. Richardson WH , Lovett MB , Price ME and Anderegg JH (1979) Excited-state energy distribution between dissimilar carbonyl molecules produced from 1,2-dioxetanes. J. Am. Chem. Soc 101 , 4683–4687.
71. Turro NJ and Lechtken P (1973) Thermal and photochemical generation of electronically excited organic molecules. Tetramethyl-1,2-dioxetane and naphthvalene. Pure Appl. Chem 33 , 363–388.
72. De Vico LD , Liu YJ , Krogh JW and Lindh R (2007) Chemiluminescence of 1,2-dioxetane. Reaction mechanism uncovered. The journal of physical chemistry. A 111 , 8013–8019.17636973
73. Klessinger M and Michl J (1995) Excited States and Photochemistry of Organic Molecules. VCH Publishers, New York, NY.
74. Blancafort L (2014) Photochemistry and photophysics at extended seams of conical intersection. Chemphyschem 15 , 3166–3181.25157686
75. Woodward JR (2002) Radical pairs in solution. Progr. Reaction Kinetics Mech 27 , 165–207.
76. Vacher M , Farahani P , Valentini A , Frutos LM , Karlsson HO , Fdez Galvan I and Lindh R (2017) How do methyl groups enhance the triplet chemiexcitation yield of dioxetane? J Phys Chem Lett 8 , 3790–3794.28749694
77. Fdez Galvan I , Brakestad A and Vacher M (2022) Role of conical intersection seam topography in the chemiexcitation of 1,2-dioxetanes. Phys Chem Chem Phys 24 , 1638–1653.34989378
78. Kasha M (1961) The nature and significance of n → π* transitions. In Light and Life. (Edited by McElroy WD and Glass B ), pp. 31–68. Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore.
79. Margulis L , Walker JCG and Rambler M (1976) Reassessment of roles of oxygen and ultraviolet light in Precambrian evolution. Nature 264 , 620–624.
80. Laustriat G (1986) Molecular mechanisms of photosensitization. Biochimie 68 , 771–778.3019431
81. Shaw BP , Sahu SK and Mishra RK (2004) Heavy metal induced oxidative damage in terrestrial plants. In Heavy Metal Stress in Plants. (Edited by Prasad MNV ), pp. 84–126. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
82. Meredith P and Sarna T (2006) The physical and chemical properties of eumelanin. Pigment Cell Res 19 , 572–594.17083485
83. Kaxiras E , Tsolakidis A , Zonios G and Meng S (2006) Structural model of eumelanin. Phys Rev Lett 97 , 218102.17155775
84. Watt AAR , Bothmab JP and Meredith P (2009) The supramolecular structure of melanin. Soft Matter 5 , 3754–3760.
85. Simon JD and Peles DN (2010) The red and the black. Acc Chem Res 43 , 1452–1460.20734991
86. Micillo R , Panzella L , Koike K , Monfrecola G , Napolitano A and d’Ischia M (2016) “Fifty shades” of black and red or how carboxyl groups fine tune eumelanin and pheomelanin properties. Int J Mol Sci 17 .
87. Tran ML , Powell BJ and Meredith P (2006) Chemical and structural disorder in eumelanins: a possible explanation for broadband absorbance. Biophys J 90 , 743–752.16284264
88. Kohl FR , Grieco C and Kohler B (2019) Ultrafast spectral hole burning reveals the distinct chromophores in eumelanin and their common photoresponse. Chem Sci 11 , 1248–1259.34123249
89. Grieco C , Kohl FR , Hanes AT and Kohler B (2020) Probing the heterogeneous structure of eumelanin using ultrafast vibrational fingerprinting. Nat Commun 11 , 4569.32917892
90. Pullman A and Pullman B (1961) The band structure of melanins. Biochim Biophys Acta 54 , 384–385.14489199
91. Szewczyk G , Zadlo A , Sarna M , Ito S , Wakamatsu K and Sarna T (2016) Aerobic photoreactivity of synthetic eumelanins and pheomelanins: generation of singlet oxygen and superoxide anion. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res 29 , 669–678.27505632
92. Chedekel MR , Smith SK , Post PW , Pokora A and Vessell DL (1978) Photodestruction of pheomelanin: role of oxygen. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A 75 , 5395–5399.281688
93. Mostert AB , Rienecker SB , Sheliakina M , Zierep P , Hanson GR , Harmer JR , Schenk G and Meredith P (2020) Engineering proton conductivity in melanin using metal doping. J Mater Chem B 8 , 8050–8060.32780061
94. Reali M , Gouda A , Bellemare J , Ménard D , Nunzi J-M , Soavi F and Santato C (2020) Electronic transport in the biopigment Sepia melanin. ACS Appl. Bio. Mater 3 , 5244–5252.
95. Huijser A , Pezzella A and Sundstrom V (2011) Functionality of epidermal melanin pigments: current knowledge on UV-dissipative mechanisms and research perspectives. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys 13 , 9119–9127.21468447
96. Marchetti B and Karsili TNV (2016) Theoretical insights into the photo-protective mechanisms of natural biological sunscreens: building blocks of eumelanin and pheomelanin. Phys Chem Chem Phys 18 , 3644–3658.26753793
97. Nogueira JJ , Corani A , El Nahhas A , Pezzella A , d’Ischia M , Gonzalez L and Sundstrom V (2017) Sequential proton-coupled electron transfer mediates excited-state deactivation of a eumelanin building block. J. Phys. Chem. Lett 8 , 1004–1008.28195487
98. Felix CC , Hyde JS and Sealy RC (1979) Photoreactions of melanin: a new transient species and evidence for triplet state involvement. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 88 , 456–461.223559
99. Mostert AB , Rienecker SB , Noble C , Hanson GR and Meredith P (2018) The photoreactive free radical in eumelanin. Sci Adv 4 , eaaq1293.29600273
100. Forrest IS , Gutmann F and Keyzer H (1966) In vitro interaction of chlorpromazine and melanin. Agressologie 7 , 147–153.5930990
101. Gan EV , Haberman HF and Menon IA (1974) Oxidation of NADH by melanin and melanoproteins. Biochim Biophys Acta 370 , 62–69.4371849
102. Menter JM and Willis I (1997) Electron transfer and photoprotective properties of melanins in solution. Pigment Cell Res 10 , 214–217.9263328
103. Drager UC (1985) Calcium binding in pigmented and albino eyes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 82 , 6716–6720.3863122
104. Hong L and Simon JD (2007) Current understanding of the binding sites, capacity, affinity, and biological significance of metals in melanin. J Phys Chem B 111 , 7938–7947.17580858
105. Meng S and Kaxiras E (2008) Theoretical models of eumelanin protomolecules and their optical properties. Biophys J 94 , 2095–2105.17993493
106. Dadachova E , Bryan RA , Huang X , Moadel T , Schweitzer AD , Aisen P , Nosanchuk JD and Casadevall A (2007) Ionizing radiation changes the electronic properties of melanin and enhances the growth of melanized fungi. PLoS One 2 , e457.17520016
107. Crippa PR and Viappiani C (1990) Photoacoustic studies of non-radiative relaxation of excited states in melanin. Eur Biophys J 17 , 299–305.2307137
108. Marmor MF , Wickramasinghe HK and Lemons RA (1977) Acoustic microscopy of the human retina and pigment epithelium. Investigative ophthalmology &amp; visual science 16 , 660–666.873726
109. Kono R , Yamaoka T , Yoshizaki H and McGinness J (1979) Anomalous absorption and dispersion of sound waves in diethylamine melanin. J. Appl. Phys 50 , 11236–11244.
110. Bolto BA , McNeill R and Weiss DE (1963) Electronic conduction in polymers. III. Electronic properties of polypyrrole. Austral. J. Chem 16 , 1090–1103
111. Ronsein GE , Oliveira MC , Miyamoto S , Medeiros MH and Di Mascio P (2008) Tryptophan oxidation by singlet molecular oxygen [O2(1Deltag)]: mechanistic studies using 18O-labeled hydroperoxides, mass spectrometry, and light emission measurements. Chem Res Toxicol 21 , 1271–1283.18457429
112. Slominski AT (2012) Melatoninergic system in the skin. In Sensing the Environment: Regulation of Local and Global Homeostasis by the Skin’s Neuroendocrine System (Edited by Slominski AT , Zmijewski MA and Skobowiat C ), pp. 27–115. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
113. Zucca FA , Capucciati A , Bellei C , Sarna M , Sarna T , Monzani E , Casella L and Zecca L (2022) Neuromelanins in brain aging and Parkinson’s disease: synthesis, structure, neuroinflammatory, and neurodegenerative role. IUBMB Life.
114. Zecca L , Wilms H , Geick S , Claasen JH , Brandenburg LO , Holzknecht C , Panizza ML , Zucca FA , Deuschl G , Sievers J and Lucius R (2008) Human neuromelanin induces neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration in the rat substantia nigra: implications for Parkinson’s disease. Acta Neuropathol 116 , 47–55.18343932
115. Jung MY , Oh YS , Kim DK , Kim HJ and Min DB (2007) Photoinduced generation of 2,3-butanedione from riboflavin. J. Agric. Food Chem 55 , 170–174.17199329
116. Stansbury KH , Noll DM , Groopman JD and Trush MA (2000) Enzyme-mediated dialdehyde formation: an alternative pathway for benzo[a]pyrene 7,8-dihydrodiol bioactivation. Chem Res Toxicol 13 , 1174–1180.11087440
117. Adam W (1982) Determination of chemiexcitation yields in the thermal generation of electronic excitation from 1,2-dioxetanes. In Chemical and Biological Generation of Excited States. (Edited by Adam W and Cilento G ), pp. 115–152. Academic Press, New York.
118. Bechara EJ , Dutra F , Cardoso VE , Sartori A , Olympio KP , Penatti CA , Adhikari A and Assuncao NA (2007) The dual face of endogenous alpha-aminoketones: pro-oxidizing metabolic weapons. Comp Biochem Physiol C Toxicol Pharmacol 146 , 88–110.16920403
119. Wondrak G , Pier T and Tressl R (1995) Light from Maillard reaction: photon counting, emission spectrum, photography and visual perception. J Biolumin Chemilumin 10 , 277–284.8533609
120. Wondrak GT , Varadarajan S , Butterfield DA and Jacobson MK (2000) Formation of a protein-bound pyrazinium free radical cation during glycation of histone H1. Free Radic Biol Med 29 , 557–567.11025199
121. Parish CA , Hashimoto M , Nakanishi K , Dillon J and Sparrow J (1998) Isolation and one-step preparation of A2E and iso-A2E, fluorophores from human retinal pigment epithelium. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 95 , 14609–14613.9843937
122. Szent-Gyorgi A (1976) The electronic theory of cancer. Int. J. Quantum Chem 10 , 45–50.
123. Royer LO , Knudsen FS , de Oliveira MA , Tavares MF and Bechara EJ (2004) Peroxynitrite-initiated oxidation of acetoacetate and 2-methylacetoacetate esters by oxygen: potential sources of reactive intermediates in keto acidoses. Chem Res Toxicol 17 , 1725–1732.15606150
124. Sies H , Belousov VV , Chandel NS , Davies MJ , Jones DP , Mann GE , Murphy MP , Yamamoto M and Winterbourn C (2022) Defining roles of specific reactive oxygen species (ROS) in cell biology and physiology. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 23 , 499–515.35190722
125. Quina FH (1982) Photophysical concepts in condensed media. In Chemical and Biological Generation of Excited States. (Edited by Adam W and Cilento G ), pp. 1–36. Academic Press, New York.
126. Catalani LH , Wilson T and Bechara EJH (1987) Two water-soluble fluorescence probes for chemiexcitation studies. Photochem Photobiol 45 , 273–281.
127. Briviba K , Saha-Moller CR , Adam W and Sies H (1996) Formation of singlet oxygen in the thermal decomposition of 3-hydroxymethyl-3,4,4-trimethyl-1,2-dioxetane, a chemical source of triplet-excited ketones. Biochem Mol Biol Int 38 , 647–651.8728092
128. Walrant P and Santus R (1974) N-formyl-kynurenine, a tryptophan photooxidation product, as a photodynamic sensitizer. Photochem Photobiol 19 , 411–417.4839495
129. Ito S , Wakamatsu K and Sarna T (2017) Photodegradation of eumelanin and pheomelanin and its pathophysiological implications. Photochem Photobiol.
130. Sies H and Stahl W (1995) Vitamins E and C, beta-carotene, and other carotenoids as antioxidants. Am J Clin Nutr 62 , 1315S–1321S.7495226
131. Koyama Y (1991) Structures and functions of carotenoids in photosynthetic systems. J. Photochem. Photobiol. B 9 , 265–280.
132. Gielen JWJ , Koolstra RB , Jacobs HJC and Havinga E (1980) Triplet-sensitized interconversion and photooxygenation of Vitamin D and trans-Vitamin D. Recueil. J. Royal Netherlands Chem. Soc 99 , 306–311.
133. Fotiou S , Fotiou D , Alamanou A and Deliconstantinos G (2010) Resveratrol activation of nitric oxide synthase in rabbit brain synaptosomes: singlet oxygen (1O2) formation as a causative factor of neurotoxicity. In Vivo 24 , 49–53.20133975
134. Adam W , Saha-Moller CR , Schonberger A , Berger M and Cadet J (1995) Formation of 7,8-dihydro-8-oxoguanine in the 1,2-dioxetane-induced oxidation of calf thymus DNA: evidence for photosensitized DNA damage by thermally generated triplet ketones in the dark. Photochem Photobiol 62 , 231–238.7480132
135. Cadet J , Davies KJA , Medeiros MH , Di Mascio P and Wagner JR (2017) Formation and repair of oxidatively generated damage in cellular DNA. Free Radic Biol Med 107 , 13–34.28057600
136. Medeiros MH and Sies H (1989) Chemiluminescent oxidation of ribose catalyzed by horseradish peroxidase in presence of hydrogen peroxide. Free Radic Biol Med 6 , 565–571.2502483
137. Flitter WD and Mason RP (1990) The horseradish peroxidase catalysed oxidation of deoxyribose sugars. Free. Radic. Res. Commun 9 , 297–302.2167268
138. Chatgilialoglu C , Ferreri C and Terzidis MA (2011) Purine 5’,8-cyclonucleoside lesions: chemistry and biology. Chem Soc Rev 40 , 1368–1382.21221459
139. Adam W , Arnold MA and Saha-Moller CR (2001) Photooxidative damage of guanine in DG and DNA by the radicals derived from the alpha cleavage of the electronically excited carbonyl products generated in the thermolysis of alkoxymethyl-substituted dioxetanes and the photolysis of alkoxyacetones. J Org Chem 66 , 597–604.11429836
140. Cadet J and Wagner JR (2014) Oxidatively generated base damage to cellular DNA by hydroxyl radical and one-electron oxidants: similarities and differences. Arch Biochem Biophys 557 , 47–54.24820329
141. Voulgaridou GP , Anestopoulos I , Franco R , Panayiotidis MI and Pappa A (2011) DNA damage induced by endogenous aldehydes: current state of knowledge. Mutat Res 711 , 13–27.21419140
142. Ganini D , Christoff M , Ehrenshaft M , Kadiiska MB , Mason RP and Bechara EJ (2011) Myoglobin-H2O2 catalyzes the oxidation of beta-ketoacids to alpha-dicarbonyls: mechanism and implications in ketosis. Free Radic Biol Med 51 , 733–743.21609760
143. Ulfig N (1989) Altered lipofuscin pigmentation in the basal nucleus (Meynert) in Parkinson’s disease. Neurosci Res 6 , 456–462.2771203
144. Zhou J , Ueda K , Zhao J and Sparrow JR (2015) Correlations between photodegradation of bisretinoid constituents of retina and dicarbonyl adduct deposition. J Biol Chem 290 , 27215–27227.26400086
145. Park SL , Justiniano R , Williams JD , Cabello CM , Qiao S and Wondrak GT (2015) The tryptophan-derived endogenous aryl hydrocarbon receptor ligand 6-formylindolo[3,2-b]carbazole Is a nanomolar UVA photosensitizer in epidermal keratinocytes. J Invest Dermatol 135 , 1649–1658.25431849
146. Fritsche E , Schafer C , Calles C , Bernsmann T , Bernshausen T , Wurm M , Hubenthal U , Cline JE , Hajimiragha H , Schroeder P , Klotz LO , Rannug A , Furst P , Hanenberg H , Abel J and Krutmann J (2007) Lightening up the UV response by identification of the arylhydrocarbon receptor as a cytoplasmatic target for ultraviolet B radiation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104 , 8851–8856.17502624
147. Cioffi F , Senese R , Lanni A and Goglia F (2013) Thyroid hormones and mitochondria: with a brief look at derivatives and analogues. Mol Cell Endocrinol 379 , 51–61.23769708
148. Hill AB (1965) The environment and disease: association or causation? Proc. Royal Soc. Med 58 , 295–300.
149. Jager RD , Mieler WF and Miller JW (2008) Age-related macular degeneration. N Engl J Med 358 , 2606–2617.18550876
150. Bowes Rickman C , Farsiu S , Toth CA and Klingeborn M (2013) Dry age-related macular degeneration: mechanisms, therapeutic targets, and imaging. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci 54 , ORSF68–80.24335072
151. Schraermeyer U and Heimann K (1999) Current understanding on the role of retinal pigment epithelium and its pigmentation. Pigment Cell Res 12 , 219–236.10454290
152. Murdaugh LS , Wang Z , Del Priore LV , Dillon J and Gaillard ER (2010) Age-related accumulation of 3-nitrotyrosine and nitro-A2E in human Bruch’s membrane. Exp Eye Res 90 , 564–571.20153746
153. Wielgus AR and Roberts JE (2012) Retinal photodamage by endogenous and xenobiotic agents. Photochem Photobiol 88 , 1320–1345.22582903
154. Weiter JJ , Delori FC , Wing GL and Fitch KA (1986) Retinal pigment epithelial lipofuscin and melanin and choroidal melanin in human eyes. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci 27 , 145–152.3943941
155. McGeer EG , Klegeris A and McGeer PL (2005) Inflammation, the complement system and the diseases of aging. Neurobiol Aging 26 Suppl 1 , 94–97.16198446
156. Hu DN , Simon JD and Sarna T (2008) Role of ocular melanin in ophthalmic physiology and pathology. Photochem Photobiol 84 , 639–644.18346089
157. Weiter JJ , Delori FC , Wing GL and Fitch KA (1985) Relationship of senile macular degeneration to ocular pigmentation. Am J Ophthalmol 99 , 185–187.3970124
158. Rozanowska M , Jarvis-Evans J , Korytowski W , Boulton ME , Burke JM and Sarna T (1995) Blue light-induced reactivity of retinal age pigment. In vitro generation of oxygen-reactive species. J Biol Chem 270 , 18825–18830.7642534
159. Miceli MV , Liles MR and Newsome DA (1994) Evaluation of oxidative processes in human pigment epithelial cells associated with retinal outer segment phagocytosis. Exp Cell Res 214 , 242–249.8082727
160. Margrain TH , Boulton M , Marshall J and Sliney DH (2004) Do blue light filters confer protection against age-related macular degeneration? Prog Retin Eye Res 23 , 523–531.15302349
161. Gaillard ER , Atherton SJ , Eldred G and Dillon J (1995) Photophysical studies on human retinal lipofuscin. Photochem Photobiol 61 , 448–453.7770505
162. Kielbassa C , Roza L and Epe B (1997) Wavelength dependence of oxidative DNA damage induced by UV and visible light. Carcinogenesis 18 , 811–816.9111219
163. Pirie A (1943) The relation of riboflavin to the eye. A review article. Br J Ophthalmol 27 , 291–301.18169936
164. Feeney-Burns L , Hilderbrand ES and Eldridge S (1984) Aging human RPE: morphometric analysis of macular, equatorial, and peripheral cells. Investigative ophthalmology &amp; visual science 25 , 195–200.6698741
165. Radu RA , Hu J , Yuan Q , Welch DL , Makshanoff J , Lloyd M , McMullen S , Travis GH and Bok D (2011) Complement system dysregulation and inflammation in the retinal pigment epithelium of a mouse model for Stargardt macular degeneration. J Biol Chem 286 , 18593–18601.21464132
166. Taubitz T , Fang Y , Biesemeier A , Julien-Schraermeyer S and Schraermeyer U (2019) Age, lipofuscin and melanin oxidation affect fundus near-infrared autofluorescence. EBioMedicine 48 , 592–604.31648994
167. Wu L , Nagasaki T and Sparrow JR (2010) Photoreceptor cell degeneration in Abcr (−/−) mice. Adv Exp Med Biol 664 , 533–539.20238056
168. Lyu Y , Tschulakowa AV and Schraermeyer U (2022) Melanosomes degrade lipofuscin and precursors that are derived from photoreceptor membrane turnover in the retinal pigment epithelium—an explanation for the origin of the melanolipofuscin granule. In bioRxiv Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, NY.
169. Julien S and Schraermeyer U (2012) Lipofuscin can be eliminated from the retinal pigment epithelium of monkeys. Neurobiol Aging 33 , 2390–2397.22244091
170. Ueda K , Zhao J , Kim HJ and Sparrow JR (2016) Photodegradation of retinal bisretinoids in mouse models and implications for macular degeneration. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 113 , 6904–6909.27274068
171. Schraermeyer UB , Senn-Bilfinger J , Sturm E and Hanauer G (2019) Methods for the determination of compounds or compositions for the treatment of lipofuscin related diseases and compounds or compositions Germany.
172. Julien-Schraermeyer S , Illing B , Tschulakow A , Taubitz T , Guezguez J , Burnet M and Schraermeyer U (2020) Penetration, distribution, and elimination of remofuscin/soraprazan in Stargardt mouse eyes following a single intravitreal injection using pharmacokinetics and transmission electron microscopic autoradiography: Implication for the local treatment of Stargardt’s disease and dry age-related macular degeneration. Pharmacol Res Perspect 8 , e00683.33164337
173. Fang Y , Taubitz T , Tschulakow AV , Heiduschka P , Szewczyk G , Burnet M , Peters T , Biesemeier A , Sarna T , Schraermeyer U and Julien-Schraermeyer S (2022) Removal of RPE lipofuscin results in rescue from retinal degeneration in a mouse model of advanced Stargardt disease: Role of reactive oxygen species. Free Radic Biol Med 182 , 132–149.35219849
174. Wu Y , Zhou J , Fishkin N , Rittmann BE and Sparrow JR (2011) Enzymatic degradation of A2E, a retinal pigment epithelial lipofuscin bisretinoid. J Am Chem Soc 133 , 849–857.21166406
175. Nance MA and Berry SA (1992) Cockayne syndrome: review of 140 cases. Am J Med Genet 42 , 68–84.1308368
176. Brooks BP , Thompson AH , Clayton JA , Chan CC , Tamura D , Zein WM , Blain D , Hadsall C , Rowan J , Bowles KE , Khan SG , Ueda T , Boyle J , Oh KS , DiGiovanna JJ and Kraemer KH (2011) Ocular manifestations of trichothiodystrophy. Ophthalmology 118 , 2335–2342.21959366
177. Friedberg EC , Walker GC , Seide W , Wood RD , Schultz RA and Ellenberger T (2005) DNA Repair and Mutagenesis. ASM Press, Washington, DC.
178. Williams GC (1957) Pleiotropy, natural selection, and the evolution of senescence. Evolution 11 , 398–411.
179. Takumida M , Popa R and Anniko M (1999) Free radicals in the guinea pig inner ear following gentamicin exposure. ORL J. Otorhinolaryngol. Rel. Spec 61 , 63–70.
180. Lee JE , Nakagawa T , Kim TS , Iguchi F , Endo T , Dong Y , Yuki K , Naito Y , Lee SH and Ito J (2003) A novel model for rapid induction of apoptosis in spiral ganglions of mice. Laryngoscope 113 , 994–999.12782811
181. Shi X and Nuttall AL (2003) Upregulated iNOS and oxidative damage to the cochlear stria vascularis due to noise stress. Brain Res. 967 , 1–10.12650960
182. Yamashita D , Jiang HY , Schacht J and Miller JM (2004) Delayed production of free radicals following noise exposure. Brain Res. 1019 , 201–209.15306254
183. Henderson D , Bielefeld EC , Harris KC and Hu BH (2006) The role of oxidative stress in noise-induced hearing loss. Ear Hear 27 , 1–19.16446561
184. Meyer zum Gottesberge AM (1988) Physiology and pathophysiology of inner ear melanin. Pigment Cell Res. 1 , 238–249.3070525
185. Tachibana M (1999) Sound needs sound melanocytes to be heard. Pigment Cell Res 12 , 344–354.10614574
186. Schrott A and Spoendlin H (1987) Pigment anomaly-associated inner ear deafness. Acta Otolaryngol. 103 , 451–457.3618172
187. Zhang W , Dai M , Fridberger A , Hassan A , Degagne J , Neng L , Zhang F , He W , Ren T , Trune D , Auer M and Shi X (2012) Perivascular-resident macrophage-like melanocytes in the inner ear are essential for the integrity of the intrastrial fluid-blood barrier. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109 , 10388–10393.22689949
188. Thomas G , Williams C and Hoger N (1981) Some non-auditory correlates of the hearing threshold levels of an aviation noise-exposed population. Aviat Space Environ Med 52 , 531–536.7283902
189. Barrenas ML and Lindgren F (1990) The influence of inner ear melanin on susceptibility to TTS in humans. Scand Audiol 19 , 97–102.2371541
190. Barrenas ML and Lindgren F (1991) The influence of eye colour on susceptibility to TTS in humans. Br J Audiol 25 , 303–307.1742556
191. Todd NW , Alvarado CS and Brewer DB (1995) Cisplatin in children: hearing loss correlates with iris and skin pigmentation. J Laryngol Otol 109 , 926–929.7499942
192. Larsson BS (1993) Interaction between chemicals and melanin. Pigment Cell Res 6 , 127–133.8234197
193. Breglio AM , Rusheen AE , Shide ED , Fernandez KA , Spielbauer KK , McLachlin KM , Hall MD , Amable L and Cunningham LL (2017) Cisplatin is retained in the cochlea indefinitely following chemotherapy. Nat Commun 8 , 1654.29162831
194. Seidman MD , Tang W , Bai VU , Ahmad N , Jiang H , Media J , Patel N , Rubin CJ and Standring RT (2013) Resveratrol decreases noise-induced cyclooxygenase-2 expression in the rat cochlea. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 148 , 827–833.23380763
195. Zhang F , Dai M , Neng L , Zhang JH , Zhi Z , Fridberger A and Shi X (2013) Perivascular macrophage-like melanocyte responsiveness to acoustic trauma--a salient feature of strial barrier associated hearing loss. FASEB J 27 , 3730–3740.23729595
196. Totonchy MB , Tamura D , Pantell MS , Zalewski C , Bradford PT , Merchant SN , Nadol J , Khan SG , Schiffmann R , Pierson TM , Wiggs E , Griffith AJ , DiGiovanna JJ , Kraemer KH and Brewer CC (2013) Auditory analysis of xeroderma pigmentosum 1971-2012: hearing function, sun sensitivity and DNA repair predict neurological degeneration. Brain 136 , 194–208.23365097
197. Viana LM , Seyyedi M , Brewer CC , Zalewski C , DiGiovanna JJ , Tamura D , Totonchy M , Kraemer KH and Nadol JB Jr. (2013) Histopathology of the inner ear in patients with xeroderma pigmentosum and neurologic degeneration. Otol Neurotol 34 , 1230–1236.23928520
198. Khobta A and Epe B (2013) Repair of oxidatively generated DNA damage in Cockayne syndrome. Mech Ageing Dev 134 , 253–260.23518175
199. Nagtegaal AP , Rainey RN , van der Pluijm I , Brandt RM , van der Horst GT , Borst JG and Segil N (2015) Cockayne syndrome group B (Csb) and group a (Csa) deficiencies predispose to hearing loss and cochlear hair cell degeneration in mice. J Neurosci 35 , 4280–4286.25762674
200. Jellinger KA (2005) The pathology of Parkinson’s disease – recent advances. In Scientific Basis for the Treatment of Parkinson’s Disease (Edited by Gálvez-Jiménez N ), pp. 53–85. Taylor &amp; Francis, New York.
201. Dickson DW (2012) Parkinson’s disease and Parkinsonism: neuropathology. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2 , a009258.22908195
202. Sulzer D and Surmeier DJ (2013) Neuronal vulnerability, pathogenesis, and Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord 28 , 715–724.23589357
203. Martinez-Vicente M , Talloczy Z , Kaushik S , Massey AC , Mazzulli J , Mosharov EV , Hodara R , Fredenburg R , Wu DC , Follenzi A , Dauer W , Przedborski S , Ischiropoulos H , Lansbury PT , Sulzer D and Cuervo AM (2008) Dopamine-modified alpha-synuclein blocks chaperone-mediated autophagy. J Clin Invest 118 , 777–788.18172548
204. Mullin S and Schapira AH (2015) Pathogenic mechanisms of neurodegeneration in Parkinson disease. Neurol Clin 33 , 1–17.25432720
205. Beal MF (1998) Excitotoxicity and nitric oxide in Parkinson’s disease pathogenesis. Ann Neurol 44 (Suppl 1 ), S110–S114.9749581
206. Hirsch EC , Jenner P and Przedborski S (2013) Pathogenesis of Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord 28 , 24–30.22927094
207. Mizuno Y , Mochizuki H and Hattori N (2005) a-Synuclein, nigral degeneration, and parkinsonianism. In Scientific Basis for the Treatment of Parkinson’s Disease (Edited by Gálvez-Jiménez N ), pp. 87–104. Taylor &amp; Francis, New York.
208. Fearnley JM and Lees AJ (1991) Ageing and Parkinson’s disease: substantia nigra regional selectivity. Brain 114 ( Pt 5 ), 2283–2301.1933245
209. Kim YS and Joh TH (2006) Microglia, major player in the brain inflammation: their roles in the pathogenesis of Parkinson’s disease. Exp. Mol. Med 38 , 333–347.16953112
210. Block ML , Zecca L and Hong JS (2007) Microglia-mediated neurotoxicity: uncovering the molecular mechanisms. Nat Rev Neurosci 8 , 57–69.17180163
211. Tansey MG and Goldberg MS (2010) Neuroinflammation in Parkinson’s disease: its role in neuronal death and implications for therapeutic intervention. Neurobiol Dis 37 , 510–518.19913097
212. Zhang W , Phillips K , Wielgus AR , Liu J , Albertini A , Zucca FA , Faust R , Qian SY , Miller DS , Chignell CF , Wilson B , Jackson-Lewis V , Przedborski S , Joset D , Loike J , Hong JS , Sulzer D and Zecca L (2011) Neuromelanin activates microglia and induces degeneration of dopaminergic neurons: implications for progression of Parkinson’s disease. Neurotox Res 19 , 63–72.19957214
213. Cebrian C , Loike JD and Sulzer D (2015) Neuroinflammation in Parkinson’s disease animal models: a cell stress response or a step in neurodegeneration? Curr Top Behav Neurosci 22 , 237–270.25293443
214. Schildknecht S , Gerding HR , Karreman C , Drescher M , Lashuel HA , Outeiro TF , Di Monte DA and Leist M (2013) Oxidative and nitrative alpha-synuclein modifications and proteostatic stress: implications for disease mechanisms and interventions in synucleinopathies. J Neurochem 125 , 491–511.23452040
215. Cebrian C , Zucca FA , Mauri P , Steinbeck JA , Studer L , Scherzer CR , Kanter E , Budhu S , Mandelbaum J , Vonsattel JP , Zecca L , Loike JD and Sulzer D (2014) MHC-I expression renders catecholaminergic neurons susceptible to T-cell-mediated degeneration. Nat Commun 5 , 3633.24736453
216. Zecca L , Fariello RG , Galimberti M , Racagni G and Ambrosini A (1997) Changes in nitric oxide metabolite levels in stimulated substantia nigra neurons. Neuroreport 8 , 2121–2125.9243596
217. Elizan TS and Casals J (1983) The viral hypothesis in Parkinsonianism. In Extrapyramidal Disorders. (Edited by Birkmayer W and Duvoisin RC ), pp. 75–88. Springer-Verlag, New York.
218. Jenner P (2003) Oxidative stress in Parkinson’s disease. Ann Neurol 53 Suppl 3 , S26–36.12666096
219. Munoz P , Huenchuguala S , Paris I and Segura-Aguilar J (2012) Dopamine oxidation and autophagy. Parkinsons Dis 2012 , 920953.22966478
220. LaVoie MJ and Hastings TG (1999) Peroxynitrite- and nitrite-induced oxidation of dopamine: implications for nitric oxide in dopaminergic cell loss. J Neurochem 73 , 2546–2554.10582617
221. Akiyama H , Barger S , Barnum S , Bradt B , Bauer J , Cole GM , Cooper NR , Eikelenboom P , Emmerling M , Fiebich BL , Finch CE , Frautschy S , Griffin WS , Hampel H , Hull M , Landreth G , Lue L , Mrak R , Mackenzie IR , McGeer PL , O’Banion MK , Pachter J , Pasinetti G , Plata-Salaman C , Rogers J , Rydel R , Shen Y , Streit W , Strohmeyer R , Tooyoma I , Van Muiswinkel FL , Veerhuis R , Walker D , Webster S , Wegrzyniak B , Wenk G and Wyss-Coray T (2000) Inflammation and Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol Aging 21 , 383–421.10858586
222. Langston JW , Forno LS , Tetrud J , Reeves AG , Kaplan JA and Karluk D (1999) Evidence of active nerve cell degeneration in the substantia nigra of humans years after 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine exposure. Ann Neurol 46 , 598–605.10514096
223. McGeer PL , Schwab C , Parent A and Doudet D (2003) Presence of reactive microglia in monkey substantia nigra years after 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine administration. Ann Neurol 54 , 599–604.14595649
224. Proctor P , McGinness J and Corry P (1974) A hypothesis on the preferential destruction of melanized tissues. J Theor Biol 48 , 19–22.4456038
225. Hirsch E , Graybiel AM and Agid YA (1988) Melanized dopaminergic neurons are differentially susceptible to degeneration in Parkinson’s disease. Nature 334 , 345–348.2899295
226. Zucca FA , Basso E , Cupaioli FA , Ferrari E , Sulzer D , Casella L and Zecca L (2014) Neuromelanin of the human substantia nigra: an update. Neurotox Res 25 , 13–23.24155156
227. Zecca L , Stroppolo A , Gatti A , Tampellini D , Toscani M , Gallorini M , Giaveri G , Arosio P , Santambrogio P , Fariello RG , Karatekin E , Kleinman MH , Turro N , Hornykiewicz O and Zucca FA (2004) The role of iron and copper molecules in the neuronal vulnerability of locus coeruleus and substantia nigra during aging. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101 , 9843–9848.15210960
228. Wakamatsu K , Tabuchi K , Ojika M , Zucca FA , Zecca L and Ito S (2015) Norepinephrine and its metabolites are involved in the synthesis of neuromelanin derived from the locus coeruleus. J Neurochem 135 , 768–776.26156066
229. Bogerts B (1981) A brainstem atlas of catecholaminergic neurons in man, using melanin as a natural marker. J Comp Neurol 197 , 63–80.7229126
230. Saper CB and Petito CK (1982) Correspondence of melanin-pigmented neurons in human brain with A1-A14 catecholamine cell groups. Brain 105 , 87–101.7066676
231. van Domburg PH and ten Donkelaar HJ (1991) The human substantia nigra and ventral tegmental area. A neuroanatomical study with notes on aging and aging diseases. Adv Anat Embryol Cell Biol 121 , 1–132.2053466
232. Levin MD , Lu MM , Petrenko NB , Hawkins BJ , Gupta TH , Lang D , Buckley PT , Jochems J , Liu F , Spurney CF , Yuan LJ , Jacobson JT , Brown CB , Huang L , Beermann F , Margulies KB , Madesh M , Eberwine JH , Epstein JA and Patel VV (2009) Melanocyte-like cells in the heart and pulmonary veins contribute to atrial arrhythmia triggers. J Clin Invest 119 , 3420–3436.19855129
233. Mann DM (1983) The locus coeruleus and its possible role in ageing and degenerative disease of the human central nervous system. Mech Ageing Dev 23 , 73–94.6228698
234. DeMattei M , Levi AC and Fariello RG (1986) Neuromelanic pigment in substantia nigra neurons of rats and dogs. Neurosci Lett 72 , 37–42.3492690
235. Capucciati A , Zucca FA , Monzani E , Zecca L , Casella L and Hofer T (2021) Interaction of neuromelanin with xenobiotics and consequences for neurodegeneration; promising experimental models. Antioxidants (Basel) 10 .
236. Cotzias GC , Papavasiliou PS , Vanwoert MH and Sakamoto A (1964) Melanogenesis and extrapyramidal diseases. Fed Proc 23 , 713–718.14193793
237. He XJ and Nakayama H (2015) Transiently impaired neurogenesis in MPTP mouse model of Parkinson’s disease. Neurotoxicology 50 , 46–55.26215120
238. Masilamoni GJ , Groover O and Smith Y (2017) Reduced noradrenergic innervation of ventral midbrain dopaminergic cell groups and the subthalamic nucleus in MPTP-treated parkinsonian monkeys. Neurobiol Dis 100 , 9–18.28042095
239. Gao X , Simon KC , Han J , Schwarzschild MA and Ascherio A (2009) Genetic determinants of hair color and Parkinson’s disease risk. Ann Neurol 65 , 76–82.19194882
240. Bertoni JM , Arlette JP , Fernandez HH , Fitzer-Attas C , Frei K , Hassan MN , Isaacson SH , Lew MF , Molho E , Ondo WG , Phillips TJ , Singer C , Sutton JP and Wolf JE Jr. (2010) Increased melanoma risk in Parkinson disease: a prospective clinicopathological study. Arch Neurol 67 , 347–352.20212233
241. Kadekaro AL , Leachman S , Kavanagh RJ , Swope V , Cassidy P , Supp D , Sartor M , Schwemberger S , Babcock G , Wakamatsu K , Ito S , Koshoffer A , Boissy RE , Manga P , Sturm RA and Abdel-Malek ZA (2010) Melanocortin 1 receptor genotype: an important determinant of the damage response of melanocytes to ultraviolet radiation. FASEB J 24 , 3850–3860.20519635
242. Good PF , Hsu A , Werner P , Perl DP and Olanow CW (1998) Protein nitration in Parkinson’s disease. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 57 , 338–342.9600227
243. Choi DH , Cristovao AC , Guhathakurta S , Lee J , Joh TH , Beal MF and Kim YS (2012) NADPH oxidase 1-mediated oxidative stress leads to dopamine neuron death in Parkinson’s disease. Antioxid Redox Signal 16 , 1033–1045.22098189
244. Biesemeier A , Eibl O , Eswara S , Audinot JN , Wirtz T , Pezzoli G , Zucca FA , Zecca L and Schraermeyer U (2016) Elemental mapping of neuromelanin organelles of human substantia nigra: correlative ultrastructural and chemical analysis by analytical transmission electron microscopy and nano-secondary ion mass spectrometry. J Neurochem 138 , 339–353.27121280
245. Surmeier DJ and Sulzer D (2013) The pathology roadmap in Parkinson disease. Prion 7 , 85–91.23324593
246. Hawkes CH , Del Tredici K and Braak H (2009) Parkinson’s disease: the dual hit theory revisited. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1170 , 615–622.19686202
247. Iwakawa Y , Shimohira M , Kondo S and Sato Y (1990) Neurophysiological studies on group A xeroderma pigmentosum in early childhood. No To Hattatsu 22 , 546–550.2175631
248. Jones EM and Surewicz WK (2005) Fibril conformation as the basis of species- and strain-dependent seeding specificity of mammalian prion amyloids. Cell 121 , 63–72.15820679
249. Goedert M , Masuda-Suzukake M and Falcon B (2017) Like prions: the propagation of aggregated tau and alpha-synuclein in neurodegeneration. Brain 140 , 266–278.27658420
250. Lyness SA , Zarow C and Chui HC (2003) Neuron loss in key cholinergic and aminergic nuclei in Alzheimer disease: a meta-analysis. Neurobiol Aging 24 , 1–23.12493547
251. Theofilas P , Ehrenberg AJ , Dunlop S , Di Lorenzo Alho AT , Nguy A , Leite REP , Rodriguez RD , Mejia MB , Suemoto CK , Ferretti-Rebustini REL , Polichiso L , Nascimento CF , Seeley WW , Nitrini R , Pasqualucci CA , Jacob Filho W , Rueb U , Neuhaus J , Heinsen H and Grinberg LT (2017) Locus coeruleus volume and cell population changes during Alzheimer’s disease progression: A stereological study in human postmortem brains with potential implication for early-stage biomarker discovery. Alzheimers Dement 13 , 236–246.27513978
252. Zweig RM , Ross CA , Hedreen JC , Steele C , Cardillo JE , Whitehouse PJ , Folstein MF and Price DL (1988) The neuropathology of aminergic nuclei in Alzheimer’s disease. Ann Neurol 24 , 233–242.3178178
253. Tsartsalis S , Xekardaki A , Hof PR , Kovari E and Bouras C (2018) Early Alzheimer-type lesions in cognitively normal subjects. Neurobiol Aging 62 , 34–44.29107845
254. Braak H and Del Tredici K (2015) The preclinical phase of the pathological process underlying sporadic Alzheimer’s disease. Brain 138 , 2814–2833.26283673
255. Kostylev MA , Kaufman AC , Nygaard HB , Patel P , Haas LT , Gunther EC , Vortmeyer A and Strittmatter SM (2015) Prion-Protein-interacting amyloid-beta oligomers of high molecular weight are tightly correlated with memory impairment in multiple alzheimer mouse models. J Biol Chem 290 , 17415–17438.26018073
256. Rao KS , Hegde ML , Anitha S , Musicco M , Zucca FA , Turro NJ and Zecca L (2006) Amyloid beta and neuromelanin--toxic or protective molecules? The cellular context makes the difference. Prog Neurobiol 78 , 364–373.16682109
257. Zecca L , Bellei C , Costi P , Albertini A , Monzani E , Casella L , Gallorini M , Bergamaschi L , Moscatelli A , Turro NJ , Eisner M , Crippa PR , Ito S , Wakamatsu K , Bush WD , Ward WC , Simon JD and Zucca FA (2008) New melanic pigments in the human brain that accumulate in aging and block environmental toxic metals. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105 , 17567–17572.18988735
258. Finch CE and Austad SN (2015) Commentary: is Alzheimer’s disease uniquely human? Neurobiol Aging 36 , 553–555.25533426
259. Seaton M , Hocking A and Gibran NS (2015) Porcine models of cutaneous wound healing. ILAR J 56 , 127–138.25991704
260. Visscher MO , Bailey JK and Hom DB (2014) Scar treatment variations by skin type. Facial Plast Surg Clin North Am 22 , 453–462.25049129
261. Zhu Z , Ding J and Tredget EE (2016) The molecular basis of hypertrophic scars. Burns Trauma 4 , 2.27574672
262. Kischer CW and Bailey JF (1972) The mast cell in hypertrophic scars. Tex Rep Biol Med 30 , 327–338.4121148
263. Gallant-Behm CL , Hildebrand KA and Hart DA (2008) The mast cell stabilizer ketotifen prevents development of excessive skin wound contraction and fibrosis in red Duroc pigs. Wound Repair Regen 16 , 226–233.18318808
264. Wilgus TA and Wulff BC (2014) The importance of mast cells in dermal scarring. Adv Wound Care (New Rochelle) 3 , 356–365.24757590
265. Shupp JW , Nasabzadeh TJ , Rosenthal DS , Jordan MH , Fidler P and Jeng JC (2010) A review of the local pathophysiologic bases of burn wound progression. J Burn Care Res 31 , 849–873.21105319
266. Jones DP and Sies H (2015) The Redox Code. Antioxid Redox Signal 23 , 734–746.25891126
267. Dosoki H , Stegemann A , Taha M , Schnittler H , Luger TA , Schroder K , Distler JH , Kerkhoff C and Bohm M (2017) Targeting of NADPH oxidase in vitro and in vivo suppresses fibroblast activation and experimental skin fibrosis. Exp Dermatol 26 , 73–81.27576129
268. Sood RF , Hocking AM , Muffley LA , Ga M , Honari S , Reiner AP , Rowhani-Rahbar A and Gibran NS (2015) Race and melanocortin 1 receptor polymorphism R163Q are associated with post-burn hypertrophic scarring: a prospective cohort study. J Invest Dermatol 135 , 2394–2401.26030184
269. Gallant CL , Olson ME and Hart DA (2004) Molecular, histologic, and gross phenotype of skin wound healing in red Duroc pigs reveals an abnormal healing phenotype of hypercontracted, hyperpigmented scarring. Wound Repair Regen 12 , 305–319.15225209
270. Travis TE , Ghassemi P , Ramella-Roman JC , Prindeze NJ , Paul DW , Moffatt LT , Jordan MH and Shupp JW (2015) A multimodal assessment of melanin and melanocyte activity in abnormally pigmented hypertrophic scar. J Burn Care Res 36 , 77–86.25162947
271. Zhu KQ , Engrav LH , Armendariz R , Muangman P , Klein MB , Carrougher GJ , Deubner H and Gibran NS (2005) Changes in VEGF and nitric oxide after deep dermal injury in the female, red Duroc pig-further similarities between female, Duroc scar and human hypertrophic scar. Burns 31 , 5–10.15639358
272. Rodier F , Coppe JP , Patil CK , Hoeijmakers WA , Munoz DP , Raza SR , Freund A , Campeau E , Davalos AR and Campisi J (2009) Persistent DNA damage signalling triggers senescence-associated inflammatory cytokine secretion. Nat Cell Biol 11 , 973–979.19597488
273. Sibilano R , Pucillo CE and Gri G (2015) Allergic responses and aryl hydrocarbon receptor novel pathway of mast cell activation. Mol Immunol 63 , 69–73.24656327
274. Smit NP , van Nieuwpoort FA , Marrot L , Out C , Poorthuis B , van Pelt H , Meunier JR and Pavel S (2008) Increased melanogenesis is a risk factor for oxidative DNA damage--study on cultured melanocytes and atypical nevus cells. Photochem Photobiol 84 , 550–555.18435613
275. Ranadive NS , Shirwadkar S , Persad S and Menon IA (1986) Effects of melanin-induced free radicals on the isolated rat peritoneal mast cells. J Invest Dermatol 86 , 303–307.2427606
276. Lee DCS and Wilson T (1973) Oxygen in chemiluminescence. A competitive pathway of dioxetane decomposition catalyzed by electron donors. In Chemiluminescence and Bioluminescence (Edited by Cormier MJ ), pp. 265–283. Springer, New York.
277. Adam W , Epe B , Schiffmann D , Vargas F and Wild D (1988) Facile reduction of 1,2-dioxetanes by thiols as potential protective measure against photochemical damage of cellular DNA. Angew Chem Int Ed 27 , 429–431.
278. Adam W , Vargas F , Epe B , Schiffmann D and Wild D (1989) Single-electron-transfer in the reduction of 1,2-dioxetanes by biologically active substrates. Free radical research communications 5 , 253–258.2496009
279. Velosa AC , Baader WJ , Stevani CV , Mano CM and Bechara EJ (2007) 1,3-diene probes for detection of triplet carbonyls in biological systems. Chem Res Toxicol 20 , 1162–1169.17630714
280. Gao Q and Garcia-Pichel F (2011) Microbial ultraviolet sunscreens. Nat. Rev. Microbiol 9 , 791–802.21963801
281. Forman HJ , Maiorino M and Ursini F (2010) Signaling functions of reactive oxygen species. Biochemistry 49 , 835–842.20050630
282. Sies H (2017) Hydrogen peroxide as a central redox signaling molecule in physiological oxidative stress: Oxidative eustress. Redox Biol 11 , 613–619.28110218
283. Sies H (1993) Strategies of antioxidant defense. Eur J Biochem 215 , 213–219.7688300
284. Sies H , Berndt C and Jones DP (2017) Oxidative Stress. Annu Rev Biochem 86 , 715–748.28441057
285. Omenn GS (2007) Chemoprevention of lung cancers: lessons from CARET, the beta-carotene and retinol efficacy trial, and prospects for the future. Eur J Cancer Prev 16 , 184–191.17415088
286. Klein EA , Thompson IM Jr. , Tangen CM , Crowley JJ , Lucia MS , Goodman PJ , Minasian LM , Ford LG , Parnes HL , Gaziano JM , Karp DD , Lieber MM , Walther PJ , Klotz L , Parsons JK , Chin JL , Darke AK , Lippman SM , Goodman GE , Meyskens FL Jr. and Baker LH (2011) Vitamin E and the risk of prostate cancer: the Selenium and Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial (SELECT). JAMA 306 , 1549–1556.21990298
287. Wilson T , Landis ME , Baumstark AL and Bartlett PD (1973) “Solvent effects” on the chemiluminescent decomposition of tetramethyl-1,2-dioxetane. Competitive dark pathways. J. Am. Chem. Soc 95 , 4765–4766.
288. Adam W , Beinhauer A , Mosandl T , Saha-Moller C , Vargas F , Epe B , Muller E , Schiffmann D and Wild D (1990) Photobiological studies with dioxetanes in isolated DNA, bacteria, and mammalian cells. Environ. Health Perspect 88 , 89–97.2125562
289. Posthuma J and Berends W (1960) Triplet-triplet transfer as a mechanism of a photodynamic reaction. Biochim Biophys Acta 41 , 538–541.14434410
290. Amouyal E , Bensasson R and Land EJ (1974) Triplet states of ubiquinone analogs studied by ultraviolet and electron nanosecond irradiation. Photochem Photobiol 20 , 415–422.
291. Herkstroeter WG (1975) The triplet energies of azulene, beta-carotene, and ferrocene. J. Am. Chem. Soc 97 , 4161–4167.
292. Sundquist AR , Hanusch M , Stahl W and Sies H (1993) Cis/trans isomerization of carotenoids by the triplet carbonyl source 3-hydroxymethyl-3,4,4-trimethyl-1,2-dioxetane. Photochem Photobiol 57 , 785–791.8337249
293. Gorman AA , Hamblett I , Srinivasan VS and Wood PD (1994) Curcumin-derived transients: a pulsed laser and pulse radiolysis study. Photochem Photobiol 59 , 389–398.8022881
294. Beutner S , Bloedorn B , Frixel S , Blanco IH , Hoffmann T , Martin HD , Mayer B , Noack P , Ruck C , Schmidt M , Schulke I , Sell S , Ernst H , Haremza S , Seybold G , Sies H , Stahl W and Walsh R (2001) Quantitative assessment of antioxidant properties of natural colorants and phytochemicals: carotenoids, flavonoids, phenols and indigoids. The role of beta-carotene in antioxidant functions. J. Sci. Food Agr 81 , 559–568.
295. Cardoso DR , Libardi SH and Skibsted LH (2012) Riboflavin as a photosensitizer. Effects on human health and food quality. Food Funct 3 , 487–502.22406738
296. Chuang SY , Lin YK , Lin CF , Wang PW , Chen EL and Fang JY (2017) Elucidating the skin delivery of aglycone and glycoside flavonoids: How the structures affect cutaneous absorption. Nutrients 9 .
297. Tanaka M , Ohkubo K and Fukuzumi S (2006) DNA cleavage by UVA irradiation of NADH with dioxygen via radical chain processes. J. Phys. Chem. A 110 , 11214–11218.16986858
298. Landrum JT , Bone RA , Chen Y , Herrero C , Llerena CM and Twarowska E (1999) Carotenoids in the human retina. Pure Appl. Chem 71 , 2237–2244.
299. Junghans A , Sies H and Stahl W (2001) Macular pigments lutein and zeaxanthin as blue light filters studied in liposomes. Arch Biochem Biophys 391 , 160–164.11437346
300. Wacker M and Holick MF (2013) Sunlight and Vitamin D: A global perspective for health. Dermatoendocrinol 5 , 51–108.24494042
301. Boggio-Pasqua M , Groenhof G , Schafer LV , Grubmuller H and Robb MA (2007) Ultrafast deactivation channel for thymine dimerization. J Am Chem Soc 129 , 10996–10997.17696541
302. Blancafort L and Migani A (2007) Modeling thymine photodimerizations in DNA: mechanism and correlation diagrams. J Am Chem Soc 129 , 14540–14541.17983225
303. Roca-Sanjuan D , Olaso-Gonzalez G , Gonzalez-Ramirez I , Serrano-Andres L and Merchan M (2008) Molecular basis of DNA photodimerization: intrinsic production of cyclobutane cytosine dimers. J Am Chem Soc 130 , 10768–10779.18627152
304. Serrano-Andrés L and Merchán M (2009) Are the five natural DNA/RNA base monomers a good choice from natural selection? A photochemical perspective. J. Photochem. Photobiol. C: Photochem. Rev 10 , 21–32.
305. Kang H , Lee KT , Jung B , Ko YJ and Kim SK (2002) Intrinsic lifetimes of the excited state of DNA and RNA bases. JACS Commun. 124 , 12958–12959.
306. Serrano-Andres L , Merchan M and Borin AC (2006) Adenine and 2-aminopurine: paradigms of modern theoretical photochemistry. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103 , 8691–8696.16731617
307. Gustavsson T , Improta R and Markovitsi D (2010) DNA/RNA: building blocks of life under UV irradiation. J. Phys. Chem. Lett 1 , 2025–2030.
308. Douki T , Setlow B and Setlow P (2005) Effects of the binding of a/b type small, acid-soluble spore proteins on the photochemistry of DNA in spores of Bacillus subtilis and in vitro. Photochem. Photobiol 81 , 163–169.15458366
309. Sauri V , Gobbo JP , Serrano-Pérez JJ , Lundberg M , Coto PB , Serrano-Andrés L , Borin AC , Lindh R , Merchán M and Roca-Sanjuán D (2013) Proton/hydrogen transfer mechanisms in the guanine-cytosine base pair: photostability and tautomerism. J. Chem. Theory Computat 9 , 481–496.
310. Crespo-Hernandez C , Cohen B and Kohler B (2005) Base stacking controls excited-state dynamics in A.T DNA. Nature 436 , 1141–1144.16121177
311. Bucher DB , Kufner CL , Schlueter A , Carell T and Zinth W (2016) UV-Induced charge transfer states in DNA promote sequence selective self-repair. J Am Chem Soc 138 , 186–190.26651219
312. Kasha M (1960) Paths of molecular excitation. Radiat Res Suppl 2 , 243–275.
313. Lamola AA (1972) Fundamental aspects of the spectroscopy and photochemistry of organic compounds; electronic energy transfer in biologic systems; and photosensitization. In Sunlight and Man. (Edited by Pathak MA , Harber LC , Seiji M and Kukita A ), pp. 17–55. University of Tokyo Press, Tokyo.
