LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101231978
33173
Alzheimers Dement
Alzheimers Dement
Alzheimer's &amp; dementia : the journal of the Alzheimer's Association
1552-5260
1552-5279

37218539
10524180
10.1002/alz.13104
NIHMS1892796
Article
Global rural health disparities in Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias: State of the science
Wiese Lisa Ann Kirk Ph.D., MSN, GERO-BC, PHNA-BC, CNE Florida Atlantic University, College of Nursing, 33431

Gibson Allison Ph.D. University of Kentucky, College of Social Work, 40506

Gibson Allison University of Kentucky, Sanders-Brown Center on Aging, 40504

Guest M. Aaron Ph.D. Center for Innovation in Healthy and Resilient Aging, Edson College of Nursing and Health Innovation, Arizona State University, 85004

Nelson Amy R. Ph.D. University of South Alabama, Frederick P. Williams College of Medicine, Department of Physiology &amp; Cell Biology, Mobile, AL, USA, 36688

Weaver Raven Ph.D. Washington State University, Department of Human Development, Pullman, WA 99164

Gupta Aditi MD Department of Nephrology and Hypertension, University of Kansas, Kansas City, KS, 66103

Carmichael Owen Ph.D. Pennington Biomedical Research Center, Baton Rouge, LA 70808

Lewis Jordan P. Ph.D., MSW Memory Keepers Medical Discovery Team, University of Minnesota Medical School, Duluth campus, 55812

Lindauer Allison Ph.D. Associate Professor, Oregon Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center, Oregon Health &amp; Science University, 97239

Loi Samantha MD Neuropsychiatry, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, Victoria Australia 3050; Department of Psychiatry, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia 3052

Peterson Rachel Ph.D. University of Montana School of Public and Community Health Sciences, Missoula, Montana, 59812

Radford Kylie Ph.D. MAPS, Senior Research Scientist and Group Leader, Conjoint Senior Lecturer, School of Psychology, UNSW Science Fellow, APS College of Clinical Neuropsychologist, UNSW Sydney NSW 2052

Rhodus Elizabeth K. Ph.D., OTR/L University of Kentucky, Department of Behavioral Science, Sanders-Brown Center on Aging, University of Kentucky Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center, Center for Health Equity Transformation, Lexington, Kentucky, USA 40504

Wong Christina G. Ph.D. Staff Neuropsychologist, Brain Health Cleveland Clinic Lou Ruvo Center for Brain Health, 888 W. Bonneville Ave, Las Vegas, NV 89106

Zuelsdorff Megan Ph.D. University of Wisconsin - Madison School of Nursing, Madison, WI 53705

Zuelsdorff Megan Ph.D. University of Wisconsin – Madison School of Nursing, Madison, WI 53705; Wisconsin Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI, 53792

Saidi Ladan Ghazi Ph.D. Department of Communication Disorders, College of Education, University of Nebraska at Kearney, Kearney, Nebraska, 68849

Valdivieso Esmeralda Ph.D. Department of Psychology and Public Health, Universidad Centroamericana José Simeón Cañas, El Salvador, 01-168

Franzen Sanne Ph.D. Department of Neurology and Alzheimer Center, Erasmus MC University Medical Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands 015 GD

Pope Caitlin N. Ph.D. Department of Health, Behavior, &amp; Society, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA 40506

Killian Timothy S. Ph.D. Human Development and Family Sciences, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR, 72701

Shrestha Hom L. Ph.D. Laurentian University, School of Kinesiology and Health Sciences, Sudbury, ON, Canada, P3E2C6

Heyn Patricia C. Ph.D FGSA, FACRM, Director, Center for Optimal Aging Professor, Department of Physical Therapy, Marymount University, 4040 Fairfax Drive, Room 211, Arlington VA 22203

Ng Ted Kheng Siang Ph.D. Psychological Medicine, BSc. Biomedical Science with Honours Professor (Assistant) at Arizona State University, 85004

Prusaczyk Beth Ph.D., MSW Instructor, Institute for Informatics (I2), Center for Population Health Informatics at I2, Washington University in St. Louis, School of Medicine, 63110

John Samantha Ph.D. Assistant Professor, Department of Brain Health, School of Integrated Health Sciences, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, 89154

Kulshreshtha Ambar MD, Ph.D., FAHA, FAAFP Associate Professor, Department of Family and Preventive Medicine, Jointly Appointed: Department of Epidemiology, Division of Hospital Medicine, Emory University School of Medicine, 30322

Sheffler Julia Ph.D. Integrative Science for Healthy Aging Program, 32306

Besser Lilah Ph.D., MSPH Comprehensive Center for Brain Health, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, 33433

Daniels E. Valerie Ph.D. Comprehensive Center for Brain Health, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, 33433

Tolea Magdalena I. Ph.D. Comprehensive Center for Brain Health, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, 33433

Miller Justin PH.D. Cleveland Clinic Lou Ruvo Center for Brain Health, 89106

Musyimi Christine Ph.D. Africa Mental Health Research and Training Foundation, Kenya, 00000

Corkey Jon M.S. Amissa, 28223

Yank Veronica MD Department of Medicine, University of California San Francisco, 94143

Williams Christine L DNSc Professor Emeritus, C.E. Lynn College of Nursing, Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, FL 33431

Rahemi Zahra Ph.D. School of Nursing, Clemson University, 29634

Park JuYoung Ph.D., MSW College of Social Work, Florida Atlantic University, 33431

Magzamen Sheryl Ph.D., MPH Department of Environmental and Radiological Health Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO, USA, 80523

Newton Robert L. Jr. Ph.D. Associate Professor, Director, Physical Activity and Ethnic Minority Health Laboratory, Pennington Biomedical Research Center, Perkins Rd., Baton Rouge, LA 70808

Harrington Candace Ph.D., DNP Assistant Professor, Gerontology NP Professor, Office 4054, 555 South Floyd Street K Bldg, U of L School of Nursing, 40202

Flatt Jason D. Ph.D., MPH Assistant Professor, School of Public Health, Department of Social &amp; Behavioral Health University of Nevada, Las Vegas, 89154

Arora Sonakshi Ph.D. Neuropsychology Postdoctoral Fellow, Cleveland Clinic Lou Ruvo Center for Brain Health, 888 W Bonneville Ave, Las Vegas, NV 89106

Walter Sarah Sarah Walter, MSc, Program Administrator, Alzheimer’s Therapeutic Research Institute, Alzheimer’s Clinical Trials Consortium, 92121

Griffin Percy Ph.D. Director, Scientific Engagement, Medical &amp; Scientific Relations | Alzheimer’s Association, 02452

Babulal Ganesh M. Ph.D. Washington University School of Medicine, Department of Neurology, St. Louis, MO, USA 63110; University of Johannesburg, Department of Psychology, Faculty of Humanities, South Africa, Auckland Park, 2006; The George Washington University School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Department of Clinical Research and Leadership, Washington, D.C., USA, 20052

CORRESPONDING AUTHOR: Lisa Ann Kirk Wiese, PhD, MSN, RN, GERO-BC, C.E. Lynn College of Nursing, Florida Atlantic University, 777 Glades Road, BC 84, #333, Boca Raton, FL 33431, lwiese@health.fau.edu
24 4 2023
9 2023
23 5 2023
01 9 2024
19 9 42044225
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Introduction

Individuals living in rural communities are at heightened risk for ADRD, which parallels other persistent place-based health disparities. Identifying multiple potentially modifiable risk factors specific to rural areas which contribute to ADRD is an essential first step in understanding the complex interplay between various barriers and facilitators.

Methods

An interdisciplinary, international group of ADRD researchers convened to address the overarching question of: “What can be done to begin minimizing the rural health disparities that contribute uniquely to ADRD?”. In this state of the science appraisal, we explore what is known about the biological, behavioral, sociocultural, and environmental influences on ADRD disparities in rural settings.

Results

A range of individual, interpersonal, and community factors were identified, including strengths of rural residents in facilitating healthy aging lifestyle interventions.

Discussion

A location dynamics model, and ADRD-focused future directions, are offered for guiding rural practitioners, researchers, and policymakers in mitigating rural disparities.

rural
health disparities
modifiable ADRD risk factors
location dynamics
community engagement
underrepresented
underserve
facilitators and barriers to ADRD diagnosis and treatment
global disparities
rural culture
community-based action

pmc1. Introduction

Globally, Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias (ADRD)-related deaths have steadily increased in the past twenty years largely due to the aging of the population [1]. In contrast to a worldwide decline in stroke mortality, ADRD-related deaths have steadily increased in the past twenty years due to population aging [2]. It is estimated that 55 million adults worldwide have ADRD, but approximately 75% remain undiagnosed, reaching up to 90% in Lower and Middle Income Countries (LMICs) [3]. Although much of the available research originates from urban populations, the prevalence of ADRD in rural areas appears to be at least twice that of urban areas [4–6]. This is attributed to a large proportion of the older population residing in rural communities [7], and dementia prevalence tends to double after every five years among persons aged 65 and above. ADRD prevalence also differs across countries, regions, and ethnoracial groups. For example, ADRD estimates in rural communities in the United States (U.S.) suggest greater incidence, lower survival rate post-diagnosis, but also lower prevalence compared to metropolitan counties [4]. For older rural residents, especially in LMICs, which are defined by gross national income, higher prevalence of ADRD and risk factors are coupled with insufficient resources [8]. ADRD-related economic costs are highest in LMICs [9], ranging from $1 million in Vanuatu to $195 billion annually in China (U.S. Dollars). While there is no cure for ADRD, there are numerous potentially modifiable risk factors that can be leveraged to decrease ADRD risk [10], which is important for rural areas.

The variety and complexity of rural environments have, to date, limited attempts to identify consensus on the facilitators and barriers influencing ADRD treatment and diagnosis in rural communities. The lack of documented collaboration and consensus has hindered international collaborations and proved challenging for those from LMIC to contribute to the science of ADRD treatment and diagnosis in rural environments. Therefore, the aim of this manuscript is to catalyze a first step to addressing these challenges and provide a consensus for future efforts in the field. To accomplish this goal, an international, interdisciplinary team of investigators, scientists, and clinicians was convened by the Alzheimer’s Association. Their work was guided by the overarching question of: “What can be done to begin minimizing the rural health disparities that contribute uniquely to Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Dementias?” This paper represents the first outcome towards a truly interdisciplinary and international approach to rural ADRD. Thus, the aims of this paper are threefold to (1) identify the barriers in addressing disparities in ADRD clinical care and research within rural populations, 2) suggest opportunities for reducing rural ADRD disparities, and (3) introduce a new rural health disparities framework that can guide rural practitioners and researchers in overcoming these barriers.

When exploring these areas of contribution to ADRD, the authors evaluated the existing literature with the following question: Does this factor contribute to (or alleviate) ADRD burden when in a rural area? Despite limited published research studies, we explore what is known about the biological, sociocultural, and environmental contributors to ADRD disparities in rural settings from individual, interpersonal, and community perspectives. Opportunities and actionable items to reduce disparities are provided. We summarize the strength and resilience of rural residents in pursuing healthy aging lifestyle interventions. We offer a model to illustrate facilitators and barriers to ADRD management based on location dynamics (Figure 1). Finally, we discuss ADRD-focused opportunities and future directions for rural practitioners, researchers, and policymakers.

2. Defining Rural in International Dementia and Alzheimer’s Research

Rurality is a dynamic construct, and perhaps no more evident than when attempting to define the concept for disparate places and peoples. At the most basic level, any definition of rurality is shaped by what it is in opposition - namely urban environments. As noted by the European Union, “rural definitions are often based on dispersed populations, an agricultural-based economy, and distance from major urban centers.” [11]. Yet, it is difficult to establish the discerning features of rural areas globally, largely due to differences in geographic, political, economic, and population structures throughout the world. The United Nations has previously endorsed the European Union’s original assessment that “each country should decide which areas are to be classified as urban and which as rural, in accordance with their own circumstances.” [12]. Even individual countries, such as the U.S., may have multiple definitions of rurality, depending on the purpose for identification and the context (i.e., economic, population, service delivery, or infrastructure). Although the distinction between urban and rural populations is not amenable to a single definition applicable to all countries, having quantitative indicators of rurality is important for making comparisons across time within each country and between other countries in similar regions [12].

Thus, any single definition of rurality would be incapable of reconciling the diversity that exists within and between countries. As a result, it is impossible to set a standard definition by which articles selected for this State of the Science could be readily included/excluded. Rather, selected articles recognize the breadth, depth, and dynamics of rurality and the shared characteristics of global rural environments. These shared domains include economic activity stability, population density, social connection and cohesion, access to healthcare, housing, stable infrastructure, food security, accessible transportation, communication infrastructure, and other essential dimensions. We refer to these places, interchangeably, as rural areas and rural communities. We recognize our limitation in being unable to address all factors impacting global ADRD management based on location dynamics. Dixon and Chartier (2016) suggest an urban-rural continuum rather than a dichotomy [13]. Our hope is that this paper will stimulate further assessments guided by our location dynamics model, which embraces a continuum approach (Figure 1).

3. Non-Modifiable Risk Factors Contributing to ADRD burden in Rural Areas

Before moving to the central focus of this paper; decreasing ADRD risk by modifiable risk factors, the non-modifiable factors require some discussion. Age is by far the largest risk factor for ADRD, and aging in rural regions often increases the risk of poorer health and clinical outcomes compared to residing in urban areas [14,15]. The proportion of rural older adults globally varies widely across continents and countries. Regardless of the continent or country, however, the proportion of older adults living in rural areas continues to increase compared to their urban counterparts [16,17]. The rapid aging of these rural areas is driven both by population aging in place, but also by the out-migration of younger age groups to urban centers [18,19]. For example, in China, while the number of individuals living in urban environments has increased to 60% in 2019 from 19% in 1980, rural areas average 5% more older persons than their urban counterparts [20]. In the U.S., 19% of the rural population is 65 years or older, compared with 15 percent in urban areas. This is in contrast to 20% of older adults in the European Union residing in rural areas compared to 42% in urban regions [21]. In the United States, rural counties comprise the majority (84%) of counties designated as “older-age counties”, defined as those with more than 20 percent of their population age 65 or older [22]. Older adults are likely to experience an age-associated decline in cognitive function and neurodegenerative processes in the brain, with nearly one in three adults diagnosed with dementia after the age of 90 [23]. With advancements in medicine and the overall trend of increases in the average life span, age-associated neurocognitive changes are of heightened importance.

Women have a higher prevalence of ADRD and a larger lifetime risk of developing ADRD [24–26], including in many rural areas [27]. A recent meta-analysis found that after the age of 80 years, women had a higher risk of developing dementia (odds ratio 1.37, 95% CI 1.03–1.83), though no difference was observed before the age of 80 years [25]. The burden of ADRD also impacts women more than men, in part due to their longer life span and because women fulfill the majority of caregiving roles for people living with ADRD [28]. The differences in prevalence by sex cannot be explained by age alone. The survival advantage of women is associated with numerous other sex and gender-associated biological (e.g., hormonal differences) and non-biological (e.g., access to care, education, employment) variables.

A small percentage of all Alzheimer’s disease (AD) cases, the most common type of dementia, are autosomal-dominant AD (ADAD) caused by known mutations in PSEN1, PSEN2, and APP genes [29]. Most AD cases are sporadic, without a primary genetic cause. However, numerous genome-wide association studies have identified genetic risk factors associated with sporadic AD [29]. These studies largely encompassed Europeans or Americans of European descent, and repeatedly identify APOE4 as the greatest genetic risk factor for sporadic AD [30]. In another review that included data from community dwellers without dementia in 38 countries globally, Africans and Caucasians were shown to be the most common carriers of APOE4, revealing a need to further conduct studies with these populations [31]. We did not find studies that addressed genetic risk factors for AD from a rural health disparities perspective, although researchers often note the importance of investigating rural-urban differences [32,33].

4. Modifiable Factors Contributing to ADRD burden in Rural Areas

The focus of this paper is on modifiable factors that contribute to ADRD burden in rural areas. Rural residents face long-standing unfair treatment and health disparities that accelerate cognitive decline. [34]. There is a growing need for earlier detection and diagnosis of ADRD in underrepresented and underserved groups–a need amplified by rurality. After applying the NIH/NIMHD Social Determinants of Health Framework [35] to rural settings, numerous areas of concern were identified. In addition to access, linguistic and cultural differences, racism, low education, and literacy levels are barriers to research efforts. Consequently, much of the research related to ADRD detection and diagnosis has been conducted in Western, Educated, Industrialized, Rich, Democratic (WEIRD) samples [36]. Conversely, underrepresented groups are relatively over-represented in rural areas (e.g., indigenous peoples, migrant farmworkers). Furthermore, many LMICs have large rural populations, with more complex diagnostic needs, compared to urban populations. Disease prevention strategies range from the increasing availability of local clinics and community providers who are equipped to conduct cognitive screening and manage follow-up to encouraging family and community participation in supporting persons living with ADRD. These overlapping challenges highlight the current limitations of assessment tools to detect and diagnose across culturally diverse rural settings to support brain health equity.

4.1 Individual Factors

Chronic Disease (Obesity, Hypertension, and Diabetes).

Worldwide obesity has nearly tripled since 1975 with 1.9 billion overweight and 650 million obese adults [37]. A recent study with &gt; 112 million adults described that more than 55% of this global rise in mean body-mass index (BMI) was due to BMI increases in rural areas [38]. Obesity is closely associated with metabolic syndrome, hyperlipidemia, insulin resistance, and diabetes [29]. Obesity, together with several of these chronic illnesses is associated with increased ADRD risk [10]. In a similar vein, hypertension is the leading modifiable risk factor for ADRD. Globally, the number of individuals aged 30-79 years old with hypertension doubled from 1990 to 2019 [39]. Hypertension is widely underdiagnosed in rural areas and in the US, the self-reported rates of hypertension are at least 10% higher in rural areas compared to urban areas [40]. Furthermore, risk factors for hypertension (e.g., obesity, physical inactivity, unhealthy diet, and cigarette smoking) are more prevalent in rural areas [40]. Maintaining a healthy blood pressure, including with antihypertensive treatments, may reduce the risk of ADRD in rural communities. More than 422 million adults worldwide have type 2 diabetes, with the majority living in LMICs [41]. Addressing preventable obesity may help reduce the prevalence of diabetes and cardiovascular disease, and perhaps AD, in rural areas, globally. Diabetes can be modified via healthy eating and exercise, and culturally effective ways of addressing either of these would aid in decreasing the negative health impacts within this triad of dementia risk factors.

Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI).

Multiple global studies in rural areas point to the increased risk of ADRD in persons with TBI [42–44], likely related to barriers to early intervention. For example, rural residents have less access to persons trained in concussive care or neuroimaging services, and are less likely to seek mental health services or ambulatory care following a head injury [45]. Veterans in rural locations experience more post-traumatic stress disorder, which can exacerbate their increased risk for post-concussion syndromes [45]. Low use of standardized neurocognitive assessments and the availability of telehealth services in rural areas are other roadblocks to early intervention [45].

Malnutrition.

Accessing healthy foods in rural areas is challenging due to limited transportation and high cost [46]. Malnutrition is more common among older adults with cognitive decline, and nutritional problems or lack of appetite may be associated with individuals experiencing neuropsychiatric symptoms of dementia [47–49]. Undernutrition was a risk factor for mortality among older adults with dementia in eight LMICs [50]. Fortunately, nutritional interventions have shown positive associations with decreased progression of deterioration in mental function for ADRD [47,48].

Physical Inactivity.

Despite the absence of abundant infrastructure to support formal exercise programs in many rural areas, a number of physical activity promotion interventions have been conducted in rural areas [51–54]. These studies have targeted a range of outcomes including physical activity, physical function, and/or quality of life. While some interventions have shown substantial benefits on overall physical function and even depressive symptoms [47], no studies could be identified that directly measured ADRD outcomes in rural populations.

Psychosocial Stress.

Beginning early in life, children in rural areas experience higher rates of adversities (e.g., abusive experiences, household dysfunction, low socioeconomic status [SES]) [55]. These complex biopsychosocial pathways across the lifespan lead to chronic stress [55]. Rural/urban differences in rates of poverty may partially drive the association between early chronic stress and risk for health problems, early mortality, and cognitive problems in adulthood [55,56]. In addition to greater levels of stress, rural individuals also have access to fewer resources for overcoming or addressing the sequelae of early adversity [57]. Cultural beliefs about the importance of self-reliance and independence may further contribute to this divide [58].

Poor Oral Health.

Although regular preventive care of teeth and gums may help promote cognitive health, oral health is one of the most understudied and underserved health domains in rural communities [59]. Low SES and poor health status are the strongest predictors of teeth loss or extraction (edentulism). Rural counties have the highest percentages of individuals (55.6%) with partial or full edentulism when compared to urban adults (38.4%) [60]. A recent study of older adults in South Korea found dementia to be independently associated with rural residence and having removable dentures [61].

Sleep Disturbance.

A chronic lack of sleep is associated with increased ADRD risk [62] and impacts complex activities like driving [63]. Studies suggest there are rural/urban differences in circadian patterns and distinct environmental risks associated with sleep problems in rural areas. These include early and late work hours, and machinery noises during the day that interrupt shift worker sleep [64]. Investigators examining sleep complaints among 16,680 persons in rural LMIC from the 10-66 study [65] also found that being female, with high levels of pain, depression, comorbidities, memory impairment, and low levels of education and physical activity were associated with reports of poor sleep.

Alcohol Abuse.

Observational studies show that low-to-moderate alcohol consumption is associated with a lower risk of incident dementia compared to abstention. Whether or not low-to-moderate alcohol consumption is protective against dementia is confounded by lifestyle, behavior, and comorbidities. Heavy alcohol consumption seems to increase incident dementia, but the results are far from conclusive [10]. Globally, alcohol abuse seems to be higher in rural versus urban settings, may begin during adolescence, and is often associated with lower years of education [66–68]. Inconsistency in findings may be influenced by misclassification bias, lack of consensus on alcohol consumption categories, poor and varied approaches in identifying and adjusting confounders and covariates, and use of limited longitudinal data and models [69,70].

Smoking.

Smoking is an important risk factor for ADRD. In 2019, there were 1.14 billion smokers worldwide [71]. Although there was a reduction in smoking prevalence globally, the absolute number of smokers has increased with the population growth [62]. Smoking rates are higher in rural areas than in urban areas in many countries, and rural populations have become the focus of tobacco-related disparities [72].

4.2 Interpersonal Factors

Mistrust with Providers.

One hallmark element of rurality is independence and self-reliance in daily living [73]. This culture of independence and self-reliance within rural communities can result in the misconception that receiving support or seeking new knowledge is a sign of dependency. Paternalism or maternalism elicits both positive (protection from harm) or negative (unwarranted loss of autonomy) influences in rural settings based on the degree of illness and involvement by caregivers [74]. Beliefs and attitudes towards seeking help and receiving care from family/friends versus receiving care from formal providers influences whether dementia care is adequate. In addition, primary care providers in rural settings often avoid the term dementia, instead referring to it as “memory problems” due to perceived stigma. While lab/imaging facilities required for diagnosis are available in most rural health settings, individuals experience similar barriers related to accessing healthcare resources [74].

Studies conducted in rural settings report limited resources on education about dementia and dementia care, as well as services such as adapted transportation, respite, and day-care programs [75,76]. Receptiveness to receiving formal caregiving may be influenced by cultural or political beliefs, the distance between the home of the patient and their provider, or misunderstandings about dementia or delayed diagnosis that can isolate the individual with dementia [76]. Dual relationships (e.g., providers are neighbors, or a friend from church) can either alleviate or add to the burdens of caregivers and persons with dementia. Overall, there is a dearth of research about different rural cultural beliefs and practices regarding dementia care.

Social Isolation.

Social isolation is composed of three interrelated aspects, social isolation, social disconnectedness, and perceived isolation, and all three were putatively associated with global and specific domains of cognition (memory, executive function, attention, and language) [77]. Predictors of social isolation include sociodemographics, physical health, psychological and cognition, and social and cultural factors [77]. Lower social contact is associated with reduced cognitive function, after adjusting for age, gender, education, and physical health conditions, social isolation [78]. Social isolation does not necessarily translate to loneliness, and while the perception of loneliness is associated with ADRD incidence, the social network is not associated [79]. Loneliness is perceived as a type of vulnerability and a personal preference or characteristic; it is also associated with boredom and security [80]. Being a widow/widower, having low SES, and a perception of mental and physical illness are among the strongest predictors of loneliness [81]. Although rural communities are often known for neighborliness, loneliness may be the reality, due to barriers to socialization between older adults, including persons with dementia and their caregivers [82].

Family Caregiver Challenges.

Rural-dwelling individual’s caregivers often report assistance from multiple caregivers; however, current caregiver programs typically focus on the caregiver-dyad (often spouses), which risks ignoring other individuals who may be contributing time and support to the individual. Familial care is core in rural regions due to cultural expectations, limited care provider resources, and fewer economic resources for paid caregiving [83]. It is important to ask individuals what their preferences are, as they may differ from expectations [84]. Mechanisms that identify and characterize the entire care network need to be delineated in order to support clinical care and outcome assessment for all caregivers [75,85].

4.3 Community and Societal Factors

Rurality.

The culture of rurality is a social determinant that influences health behaviors and outcomes. The shared norms, customs, and values of those residing in rural areas reflect the community’s composition; however, culture, as it relates to healthcare and rural residence, is heterogenous, multifactorial, and not confined to a geographical location [86]. That is, when a health outcome is considered preventable, it is considered a health disparity and implies an inequity or injustice [87]. Compared to their urban counterparts, individuals living within rural communities experience more health disparities and adverse health outcomes [88–90], reinforcing the notion that place matters [91,92]. Healthcare access has long been a priority for rural health policy given documented disparities like tobacco use, obesity, and nutritionally deprived diets that are more prevalent in rural areas and drive place-based disparities [93]. Not surprisingly, there are significantly higher rates of both dementia and Alzheimer’s disease in rural populations [68,94]. Individuals in rural communities may also face greater challenges related due to age, sexual identity, immigration status, or gender expression due to entrenched belief systems [95–99]. At times though, these factors may also be protective. For example, emerging research has shown sexual and gender minority people experience health inequalities in rural areas, including greater depression, and barriers to healthcare access in terms of inclusion and legal protections [100–102]. Yet, research also indicates that sexual and gender minority populations living in rural areas may have access to more supportive social networks and report a greater sense of community [103,104]. Access to culturally safe and appropriate dementia care is a major challenge that should be prioritized as part of rural dementia action research.

Economic Burdens (SES, Labor/Work, Education).

Understanding the relationship between SES and rural dementia disparities across high-income countries (HICs) and LMICs presents a critical opportunity to reduce dementia disparities between rural and urban settings. In both HICs and LMICs, rural areas tend to have a larger proportion of individuals with lower SES compared with urban areas. Accordingly, rural dwellers are at heightened risk for dementia due to their lower SES, yet they have fewer community or individual resources available to care for individuals and families living with dementia [105]. Additionally, since rural residence and SES are so intertwined, the potential effect of rural-dwelling earlier in the life course on dementia risk may persist even among populations that relocate to urban areas in adulthood [56,106,107]. SES and resulting potential intervention targets vary across settings. For example, in HICs, educational attainment often serves as a central indicator of SES. Education has been identified as a key modifiable risk factor for dementia [10], and likely operates through direct pathways (e.g., education engenders better cognition) and indirect pathways (e.g., higher education is associated with better health behaviors). In rural LMICs, indicators like food security or access to electricity may be more appropriate measures of SES and more effective as intervention targets that reduce dementia risk [108]. It is well established that increases in education level and continued learning can lower dementia risk [10]. Rural older adults often have fewer years of education, particularly in farmworker communities [109], and less access to specialty teachers and services. This disparity is heightened in LMIC, where access to primary education is scarce [59].

4.4 Environmental Hazards

Air Pollution.

The role of environmental factors in ADRD risk is an emerging area of research. One particular focus has been on air pollution [110,111], which is considered a significant risk factor for ADRD and cognitive decline. Globally, epidemiological studies that examine the association between long-term air pollution and ADRD [112] or cognitive decline in older adults are conducted in urban settings [113–120]. While ambient air pollution is often considered an environmental exposure prevalent in urban areas, rural areas have unique profiles due to behaviors and practices related to the ambient environment as well as the household environment. In the U.S. and abroad, agricultural burning is a practice to reduce crop residue and facilitate harvest or cultivation. While there are no studies on smoke from agricultural fires and ADRD, research indicates that Black residents in the U.S. shoulder a disproportionate burden of smoke exposure from agricultural sources [121]. Racially diverse communities that already face increased ADRD risk, are exposed in many global regions to household air pollution such as biomass burning for indoor cooking [122]. As SES and air pollution exposure are strongly correlated [123], it is difficult to disentangle the impacts of air pollution exposure from other sociodemographic factors that are jointly independently associated with ADRD, such as educational attainment and poverty.

Inadequate Water Resources.

Many rural residents rely on off-system water sources, such as wells, for drinking water, which is not subject to public water system regulations [124]. In some instances, rural areas are protected from industrial and runoff pollutants from motor vehicles, unlike in urban areas. In other locations, rural communities are uniquely at risk for exposure to toxins through drinking water due to the presence of agriculture, mining, and logging industries. Wastes from these different sources can result in aquifer contamination [125]. For example, residue from pesticides and fertilizers used on crops can infiltrate aquifers that supply water to nearby homes [126]. Furthermore, challenges related to maintaining infrastructure in rural areas can contribute to corrosion of piping that results in contaminated water [127]. Among rural-dwelling participants of Project FRONTIER, current and long-term groundwater arsenic exposure was associated with worse language, visuospatial, and executive function performance [128]. LMICs face more extreme challenges with providing safe drinking water, especially in rural areas, which can contribute to poor health outcomes across the lifespan [129–131]. Multiple water source use, and communal watering sources, are common practices in LMIC with several using supplemental unimproved source use, which is frequently contaminated and can be a health hazard [132]. Research in rural communities directly linking water contaminants to cognitive outcomes is limited.

4.5 Limited Rural Services

Healthcare Access.

Limited access to healthcare, lower rates of insured individuals, and challenges with transportation contributes to rural health disparities. In rural settings, there are fewer opportunities to engage in healthy behaviors such as healthy food consumption, physical exercise, and dynamic social engagement. For example, worse health outcomes occur when rural residents cannot reach emergency services quickly enough [27]. Rural residents and providers report that even if a diagnosis of dementia is provided and accepted, the lack of services and personnel in dementia care prevents further care, thus accelerating decline [133]. A global lack of local providers, specialty services, and telehealth services due to digital illiteracy and low digital access are barriers, as is the lack of young persons willing to remain in rural areas who could help address these gaps [134]. There are local health centers in rural and remote areas (e.g., primary care clinics, health promoters, or indigenous systems of health), which tend to be the initial contact for rural older adults. However, these centers may not be equipped with providers available to engage in ADRD detection, diagnosis, and management; some developing nations provide services with a limited team of specialists that often does not include neuropsychologists or geriatricians [135]. This challenge intensifies when seeking specialized dementia diagnostic services/infrastructure (e.g., MRI scanners, neuropsychology). In LMICs, these services are often located in urban areas, if available at all, and with high out-of-pocket costs. Also, community providers may lack familiarity with dementia literacy. The misperception that nothing can be done and a lack of confidence in the disclosure of diagnosis has also been identified as key barriers, though this is not specific to rural areas [3].

Utilizing Healthcare Services.

Prior studies of cognitive health in rural vs. urban environments have focused on the influence of social factors, such as education, but health management is a large driver of the vulnerability to cognitive impairment that exists in rural communities, in part due to the limited access to medical infrastructure [136]. Rural-dwelling individuals have a higher risk for ED encounters for preventable visits than urban dwellers, driven by a range of factors, primarily among them the lack of mental health professionals [14]. Among those with ADRD admitted to the hospital, length of stay does not appear to differ across rural and urban settings [137]. However, there are multiple contributors that impact rates of cognitive decline in rural settings. For instance, rural residents may not access care until late in the disease process and often face little to no follow-up care. Women in particular are at risk of insufficient care due to cultural norms and stigma that leave decision-making capacity to their partners or in-laws. Rural cultures encourage independence rather than help-seeking [138] and can view formal care as a threat to independence, which delays care-seeking. Older adults who migrate to rural settings for retirement may not be aware of the systemic challenges related to accessing healthcare services and other support resources in many rural settings [139].

Transportation Barriers.

Limited transportation is a major barrier to healthcare access and treatment for adults living with ADRD but also other chronic conditions. Transportation disadvantage is defined as the person is unable to participate in social activities due to a transportation problem; for every additional self-reported medical condition and the use of any assistive devices for activities of daily living, the likelihood of experiencing transportation increases [140]. A diagnosis of probable dementia was associated with a lower likelihood of transportation disadvantage and was not significantly associated with geographical regions or living in a metropolitan area [140]. Consequently, transportation barriers have been associated with negative health and treatment outcomes [140,141] and lower quality of life [142].

The importance of driving and concerns about driving cessation may be more salient to rural than urban-dwelling older adults. According to Strogatz et al. (2020), 83.8% of rural participants indicated that driving was “completely important,” as compared to 76.9% of their urban and 79.0% of their suburban counterparts [143]. Rural residents in this study also reported driving cessation would have a greater impact on what they wanted and needed to do as compared to their non-rural counterparts. Rural, older drivers were more concerned about animal crossings, lack of public transportation options, and the economics of driving (e.g., gas prices and tolls) as compared to non-rural older drivers [144]. While traffic fatalities in rural areas decreased by 10% during the past decade, the fatality rate per 100 million miles traveled was 1.9 times higher in rural areas compared to urban areas; however, driving fatalities were higher in the age group 65 to 84 among those in rural areas [145].

Insufficient Digital Access.

The COVID-19 pandemic exposed the magnitude of the digital divide across the world, consequently exacerbating place-based health disparities. Approximately 3.7 billion of the world’s population have no access to the internet, particularly those in LMIC [146]. The cost to build digital infrastructure can be prohibitive [147]. The COVID-19-associated lockdowns in many countries forced the ADRD research field to confront many of the isolation challenges that also plague rural areas’ approach to ADRD diagnosis, treatment and care, and engagement in research [148]. To address the need for remote clinical assessment, virtual visits, and remote data collection, the field is investing in the development of remote tools and assessments that will generate clinical and neuropsychological data from the participant’s home. However, in order to ensure this does not exacerbate existing health disparities, providers and researchers will need to ensure access to technology via a stronger and more equitable digital infrastructure.

Built Environments.

The impact of built and social structures on cognitive function and ADRD-related outcomes vary by community. Among rural older adults in China, the presence of more outdoor exercise facilities, higher community SES, and greater community social activity participation has been associated with higher baseline global cognition [149]. Greater access to facilities that accommodate physical impairments has been associated with slower decline in global cognition over time [150]. In an English cohort of rural-dwelling older adults, greater land use mix (e.g., of retail and residential) in the residential neighborhood was associated with lower odds of cognitive impairment [151]. One study of rural-dwelling older adults in Japan found that hilliness and elevation were associated with greater odds of cognitive decline over time, an association attributed to the barriers of being socially and physically engaged (e.g., walking in the neighborhood) [152]. Another study of older adults in Japan found that greater sidewalk coverage was related to a lower incidence of dementia among urban but not rural residents [153]. Studies investigating the role of green space with cognition are mixed [151,154,155] and need to focus on amount of green/open space in rural areas and dementia risk [154]. One example is measuring and operationalizing greenspace. A common approach in geoanalytic research is to use satellite imagery to determine land use cover or to measure vegetated land using the Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) [156]. While these approaches can differentiate types of greenspaces (e.g., grassland, forest, or agricultural lands common in rural areas), they do not allow researchers to understand the context of a given land type in a community. As such, they may lead to potentially null findings and limit our understanding of the pathways by which greenspace contributes to health in urban and rural contexts. A scoping review of 32 articles investigating the role of green space indeed found that the availability of local businesses, community-use structures, and open spaces were related to the degree of social interactions [157]. Despite these few preliminary studies, the neighborhood and environmental living, working, and learning conditions in rural locales have been understudied to date in relation to ADRD, particularly in regions other than Europe, Japan, and China.

5. Opportunities for Alleviating Rural Health Disparities

Researchers predict that a 10-25% reduction in seven key modifiable risk factors, including behavioral and lifestyle choices, could prevent 1.3 million ADRD cases. Current evidence has supported focusing on physical activity, diet, greater education in childhood and throughout the life stages, and cardiometabolic disease management [158]. However, research related to these lifestyle factors and their relationship to ADRD-related cognitive variables or biomarkers is limited. There are many benefits of living in rural areas where the location is often cited as being incredibly resilient–mostly due to their supportive social networks [159]. Rural areas frequently offer lower costs of living, safer communities with potential reduced exposure to environmental pollution, less exposure to crime, and lower levels of traumatic stress, more access to green space, active faith communities, and individuals experience more informal social support provided by family, friends, and neighbors [159]. Rural communities frequently leverage their community’s strengths to serve their local residents. Interest in lifestyle modifications, diet, and healthy living is apparent in rural areas and can be geared toward dementia research programs. Though multilevel barriers (e.g., cultural, geographical, religious, societal, political) have been identified, rural areas also have many facilitators, including their willingness to receive education, positive attitudes, and trust in the community.

5.1 Individual Interventions

Cognitive Stimulation.

Rural older adults often lack opportunities for engaging in adequate cognitive stimulation. Cognitive stimulation refers to individual or group activities that aim to improve cognition and/or prevent normal or pathological cognitive decline [160]. A recent meta-analysis reported a medium effect size for the effectiveness of cognitive stimulation on cognition and quality of life, especially for memory, activities of daily living, and depression [161]. In another review, moderate positive effects were reported for general cognition, language, and quality of life, with weaker effects for single cognitive domains or any of the psychosocial measures [162]. A meta-analysis on cognitive stimulation for persons with ADRD reported promising effects in combination with pharmaceutical treatments [163]. Among persons with dementia in sub-Saharan Africa (Tanzania and Nigeria), cognitive stimulation contributed to positive outcomes for cognition and behavioral symptoms [164,165]. We did not identify any studies that tested the effectiveness of cognitive stimulation in rural settings. Methodological limitations, including a lack of control groups, lack of uniformity in intervention and assessment methods, and lack of randomized controlled trial designs limit the interpretability of extant evidence and the sustainability of these effects [161].

Healthy Lifestyle (Healthy Eating, Exercise, Restful Sleep, Stress-Reduction Activities).

Individuals in rural areas often struggle to maintain a healthy lifestyle due to lower SES and/or reduced access to healthy food [166]. While we were unable to identify dietary lifestyle interventions for ADRD specific to rural older adults, many nutrition and diet interventions have been tested in rural older adults to address risk correlates of ADRD (e.g., obesity &amp; cardiometabolic risks) with good success. Nutrition interventions with the most efficacy evidence include the Mediterranean diet [167], Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension [168], the Mediterranean-DASH Intervention for Neurodegenerative Delay diet [168,169], and the ketogenic and Mediterranean ketogenic diet [170–173]. Although the mechanisms of action vary across these diets, commonalities include the consumption of high-quality fats and reduced intake of refined carbohydrates.

Closely tied to nutrition is exercise, and the Rural Health Information Hub [174] offers dozens of examples for increasing exercise among all ages which are rural-specific. Many could be scaled to reach a global audience, which has the resources to help lead and guide others in maintaining a daily exercise regimen, such as neighbor-centric walking groups. Physical activity was also shown to improve sleep indirectly as a result of improved mental health among Chinese older adults [175]. Other strategies to improve sleep specific to rural areas are sparsely available in the literature, but uninterrupted sleep for 7-8 hours is important in preventing harmful build-up of proteins associated with ADRD [176]. Providing earplugs, black-out curtains when noise or light levels hinder sleep, and teaching sleep strategies such as meditation, can help to improve sleep patterns. Teaching meditation, mindfulness [177], and ways to increase resilience have been shown to decrease ADRD-associated stress levels and inflammation [178]. For any lifestyle program attempting to improve brain health and decrease ADRD risk, it is imperative to offer baseline and post-intervention surveys to determine whether the intervention facilitates positive change, particularly in areas with limited resources.

Mindfulness.

Researchers have employed interventions targeting multiple lifestyle factors, including a combination of cognitive and physical components to slow cognitive decline among older adults [177,179–182]. Multi-component intervention studies in rural settings were not found, nor were studies that targeted sleep, yoga, tai chi, or similar mindful movement practices [183]. We encourage researchers to adapt multi-component interventions for rural populations that are culturally relevant. Evidence for mindfulness-based interventions among older adults with subjective cognitive decline has been mixed, with some studies suggesting no benefit [184] and others suggesting benefits to cognitive function and biomarkers [185]. On the other hand, positive effects of mindfulness-based interventions on biomarkers were found in individuals with mild cognitive impairment, including effects on inflammatory markers [186,187], the gut microbiome [188], anxiety [189], and immune cell populations [190]. These findings have important implications for rural settings, where mindfulness interventions could be taught using culturally specific practices and without significant cost burden.

Spirituality and Religion.

Although institutional means of practicing spirituality vary widely across rural settings, universal constructs of spirituality are prevalent, such as finding meaning in life through interconnectedness with other beings [191]. Engagement in spiritual practices is closely linked to health and wellbeing across the globe [192]. However, religion-driven discriminatory practices can lead to harmful effects on health and wellbeing [193]. Most studies addressing the relationship between spirituality and wellbeing have been observational rather than interventional, and not specific to rural settings. Furthermore, without addressing discrimination of others based on cultural, religious, and sexual preferences, the pursuit of health will be stymied. Attempts to minimize discrimination in rural settings face particular challenges [194]. Culturally-specific beliefs and practices need to be the first component addressed in writing any health-promotion and disease prevention plans of care, and persons should subjectively define their own health to advance their spiritual wellbeing [195].

Social Support and Engagement.

A myriad of caregivers provides assistance and social support to persons with ADRD [196], including family members, fictive kin, friends, neighbors, faith-based groups, and others. These caregivers often provide a means of social support and engagement for individuals residing in rural areas [197]. Social engagement refers to the maintenance of social connections and participation in social activities [198]. Social engagement has been considered to be a factor that can reduce risk of dementia[199–201]. Individuals with stronger social relationships have a 50% increased likelihood of survival compared to those with poor social relationships or that experience social isolation [202]. It has been posited that globally we could see a 4% reduction in dementia prevalence if social isolation were eliminated as a risk factor in later life [10]. Interventions that can increase social engagement and offer meaningful socialization may help to reduce risk of ADRD burden. For example, increasing built environments that encourage people to gather, such as pergolas for shade in parks where trees are scarce, providing tables/chairs for group games, and classes such as tai-chi, yoga, and art, which may promote social engagement [203]. Other means of increasing socialization in addition to group activities are intergenerational connections. These include connecting rural older adults who live alone with daily “sunshine calls” (a brief conversational phone call) from local organizations [204,205], “drop-in” or telehealth visits from a neighborhood contact list [206], or weekly contact through high school student service outreaches.

5.2 Community and Societal Factors

Transportation Improvements.

Given that most older adults prefer to age in place [207], transportation access is an influential determinant of health. Globally, there is a need to develop sustainable modes of transportation that encourage individuals to seek preventative healthcare. There is a need for investment in both transportation infrastructure (i.e., bridges, roadways) and shared transportation methods (e.g., trains, subways, buses) that provide access to care. The advent and popularity of rideshare services have sparked a discussion in the transportation community on the feasibility, accessibility, safety, and acceptability of these services to meet the needs of older adults. Using a socioecological perspective, barriers to using rideshare services include an individual’s needs and perspectives on rideshare services, as well as public policy and legislative concerns that influence how these services operate [208,209].

Opportunities in Technology.

The past two decades have witnessed an exponential boom in wireless communication infrastructure and technology adoption. Interacting with friends and family, along with accessing healthcare, educational resources, and shopping and banking services, are increasingly integrated with and dependent on reliable Internet [210,211]. Smartphones and wearable devices have the potential to change how patients living with ADRD and their families access and use healthcare services and supports. However, not all families have access to internet-based communication options, resulting in disparate assessment and care options. Technological advances widen existing disparities and create new ones. For example, researchers have shown that urban populations are twice as likely to engage in online healthcare activities when compared with rural telemedicine users [212]. In addition, individuals without access to or who cannot afford services are often from minoritized populations and of low SES [213].

Training and Incentivizing the Workforce.

Training and retaining a gerontological workforce is challenging, especially for dementia expertise. Researchers recommend employing/training interprofessional teams that include social workers, nurses, and caregivers, to help meet demands [214]. In addition, engaging a myriad of stakeholders, including non-governmental organizations, universities and colleges, local villages, towns, and rural communities, can benefit society. This holistic approach is effective at the outset [215]; in global areas, providers could sign up to volunteer for travel to an area to work with residents to design, train, and launch programs that are similar to the “Operation Smile” [216] and other volunteer healthcare delivery programs. Further work is needed to develop, provide, and incentivize training opportunities for promoting specialized care providers in rural communities who are a part of communities.

Strategies to Promote Education.

Many rural communities are home to social capital that builds on strong beliefs in community safety and social cohesion, which are cornerstones of educational opportunities. Rural communities contain the largest percentage of two-parent families, who are more likely to regularly read to their children. Pre-pandemic, U.S. 8th-grade students in rural settings scored higher on reading tests than their urban counterparts [217]. In 2022 however, high school graduation rates were similar between rural (80%) and urban (81%) or suburban (85%). Forty-one percent of rural U.S. residents with high school degrees completed a college degree within six years, compared with 36% of urban [218]. In LMIC, despite desires for quality education, disparities persist among rural residents in receiving primary education, let alone a college degree, which has been shown to effectively diminish cognitive decline [219]. Interventions that promote education should also be applied to older adults and 1) establish small local schools 2) ensure flexible school hours, e.g., evenings and holidays, 3) provide a modest meal, and 4) offer mini-courses that emphasize key content.

6. A Model for Mapping ADRD-related Health Disparities: Location Dynamics

The place where an individual lives is multifaceted and ever-changing; we refer to this as a term newly applied to health science; “location dynamics.” An individual, their interpersonal relationships, community, and society not only characterize the place where they live, but these intersections also have an impact on the individual. Location dynamics have differential protective and risk factors on physical and sociocultural environments, behaviors, health services, and genetics (e.g., epigenetics), which can decrease or increase ADRD burden, respectively. The purpose of this paper was to identify and discuss the ways in which these factors are particularly relevant to rural areas. Just as the NIH/NIMHD Health Disparities Framework [35] informed our approach (Figure 1), the Framework guided our outcome: we propose a model (Figure 2) to organize these factors. This model can be used to map a rural community’s unique facilitators and barriers to decreasing ADRD disparities. First, the Community/Society, Interpersonal, and Individual factors are listed, with the salient contributors to ADRD risk factors plotted along the red “increased burden” line. Similarly, community strengths and opportunities serving as protective factors against ADRD risk are placed along the green “decreased burden” line. Factors could be either barriers or facilitators, depending on their status. The resulting diagram aims to identify where more work in protective factors is needed.

We recognize the challenge of adequately capturing all rural health disparities, particularly those impacting global rural communities. Apart from non-modifiable factors such as age, race, sex, and genetics, there are numerous factors not addressed explicitly in this paper, such as physical ability, language, and dementia awareness that can differ between rural and urban settings [220] and countries. Few studies, let alone clinical trials, have addressed the issue of the breadth of diversity within rural settings, and most studies lack control groups/conditions. Future studies should include randomized clinical trials, and meta-analyses, strictly following methodological standards and considering this rural diversity. These studies should focus on the effectiveness of awareness and education about dementia, as well as accessibility and effectiveness of dementia management, specifically as it relates to rural communities.

7. The Future of ADRD Research in Rural Areas

Addressing Underrepresentation in Research

Rural areas have a high prevalence of dementia [221] and other chronic diseases yet are often left behind in research and medical advancements. In part, this is due to a lack of representation in the scientific literature. With inadequate representation, priorities identified in general populations may not be applicable to rural populations. Rather, the needs and existing barriers of the rural population need to be evaluated. Lack of representation in datasets can be corrected by including variables that capture residential location and life course exposure to rural residences.

Underrepresentation in research is compounded by a reliance on publicly available data sources that may be overused across multiple published studies [222] leading to biased estimates, study dependency, and contradictory findings from the same sample. To combat these issues, researchers can make their data publicly available, thereby increasing the data options of the larger community of researchers. Publicly available datasets can also impose pre-registration and more extensive documentation of analysis questions [222].

Incorporating Technology &amp; Testing

Most methodologies employed for conducting ADRD research were developed in urban settings and may make assumptions that do not hold true in rural areas. However, geospatial measures of resources and deprivation hold the potential for more nuanced comparisons between urban and rural contexts or different rural contexts. These approaches do not assume a dichotomy of rural versus urban but allow for an examination by levels of rurality. Geospatial analysis promises to enhance and advance research into understanding ADRD risk and protective factors for rural-dwelling populations. Yet, conducting rigorous geospatial research requires thoughtful consideration of measurement and the development of new indices that better capture nuances within and between rural and urban communities.

As technology use continues to penetrate even the remotest regions (e.g., smartphones), neuropsychological testing can be done using apps that make assessment more accessible. Subsequently, specialist telehealth clinics can support local primary care services to enhance detection and diagnosis [135]. Providing culturally tailored, cost-effective, and simple solutions for ADRD diagnosis and management is an important step for capacity building in LMICs, indigenous peoples, and other rural populations [228]. Developing, adapting, and validating cognitive assessment tools informed by local values is underway at an international level [229]. Training local providers regarding the importance of timely and accurate diagnosis of ADRD and reducing stigma in rural populations should be an ongoing priority for local health systems [228,230]. In addition, capacity building to improve referral pathways for better diagnosis and management using a consensus-based approach is critical.

Stakeholder and Community Engagement

Stakeholder engagement is essential to bridging the gap in dementia research between rural and non-rural areas. Building a sense of purpose and coalition between researchers and rural communities can result in higher recruitment and ecologically valid results [223–225]. New research programs become sustainable with a collaborative community-based participatory-research program. An interdisciplinary team with ADRD specialists, local healthcare providers [e.g., primary care physicians (PCPs), health promoters, or members of the local systems of health], and members of the community can prioritize rural dementia health, lower commonly found barriers, and reduce the gap between research and continuity of care [226].

Additional training for research personnel on social and cultural differences will increase participation of local communities and individuals. Though priorities such as improving health literacy, education on dementia risk factors, early identification of risk factors, and dementia screening processes have been identified, implementation of effective processes will need an understanding of local communities and challenges. For individuals who are not able to participate, alternative methods may be needed to receive full engagement from all stakeholders- researchers, policy-makers, healthcare providers, community groups, and residents.

A Call to Action

We highlight these critical tenants of ADRD rural research and encourage their incorporation in all research moving forward:

1: Define Your Rural: Rural environments exist on a continuum of varied characteristics both in opposition and as part of a larger environmental context. ADRD researchers, whose work has theoretical underpinnings relevant to any of these dimensions, should search for a definition of rurality that includes the dimension(s) most relevant to their work – or create new ones in collaboration with people and communities in rural areas. Resources for defining rural are “Guidelines on Defining Rural Areas and Compiling Indicators for Development Policy” from the United Nations [223], “The Placemaking Toolkit” [224], and the “Community Engagement Toolkit” for community members affected by health inequities [225].

2. Consider Location Dynamics: Facilitators and barriers to diminishing ADRD risk are often unique across rural settings. Designing opportunities for improving ADRD-related rural health outcomes need to be grounded in the understanding that factors can be both barriers and facilitators, depending on the location dynamics. Ultimately, the key to begin diminishing ADRD-related disparities is engaging rural residents as team members to identify existing opportunities in primary prevention and co-create plans for addressing relevant problems. Researchers must recognize the unique strengths and needs of rural communities, considering a range of factors to diminish rural health disparities Working with stakeholders such as informal leaders of tribes, clans, faith-based groups, and formal leaders of service organizations to apply the SWOT analysis (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats) with Internal and External Factor Summary and Strategy to a community is helpful [226].

3. Engage the Community, Experts and/or Leaders: Community and stakeholder engagement is needed to ensure the voices of those impacted are heard. Any future work to increase representation by those most at risk for ADRD, such as those living in underserved rural settings, should be designed, led, implemented, and evaluated by those in the community. They are the experts in their location dynamics. To effectively address ADRD-related rural health disparities, innovative and creative approaches to design, data collection, analysis, and dissemination must be developed with local members [227]. In addition to the stakeholders noted above in #2, we recommend inviting managers of senior living facilities (when available), and leaders of local service organizations such as the Area on Aging, Alzheimer’s Association, Diabetes Coalition, and American Heart Association to serve on community advisory boards [227]. Local faith-based leaders should be asked to identify congregation members as potential research assistants, which has been shown to be effective in increasing levels of ADRD knowledge, screening, diagnosis rates [228], and care management after diagnosis in rural areas [229]. The collaboration of community members ensures buy-in and support for culturally responsive education programs and interventions to reduce ADRD-related health disparities in rural communities [227].

4. Increase Research Funding: Policies and practices often have socially (or physically) limited opportunities for underrepresented groups to receive care and participate in research. Increases in infrastructure and funding to support rural ADRD research and pursue policy changes should be a priority. In addition to the local service organizations as those mentioned above in #3, PIVOT funding for Black, Indigenous, and People of Color, SPIN (Sponsored Programs Information Network), Grant Forward, health profession groups, and crowdfunding can help meet funding needs [230]. Finally, more international partnerships for raising dementia as a public health issue in diverse populations and seeking clinical trial recruitment to ensure better representation of participants can go hand in hand with building better services in rural regions. To do so, they need the support of funding agencies, governments, and non-governmental organizations to fully engage rural communities in research by them and for them.

Conclusions: Future Directions

We recognize the challenge of adequately capturing all rural health disparities, particularly those impacting global rural communities. Apart from non-modifiable factors such as age, race, sex, and genetics, there are numerous factors not addressed explicitly in this paper, such as physical ability, SES, language, and dementia awareness that can differ between in rural and urban settings [220] and countries. Furthermore, our state of the science is limited based on the expertise and access to scientific studies by those who participated in the working group.

What we know is that few studies, let alone clinical trials, have focused on the breadth of diversity within rural settings, and most studies lack control groups/conditions. Future studies should include randomized clinical trials, and meta-analyses, strictly following the methodological standards and considering this rural diversity. Future studies should investigate large numbers of patients and multiple geographical areas. They should also include different cultures and countries, diverse demographics (gender/sex identities, age, ethnicities/race, nationalities, etc.), and should factor in social determinants of health, such as access to transportation, technology, population density, and levels of built environments and green spaces. Psychosocial aspects should be compared, such as personality types, types of socialization (e.g., professional vs family vs friends/neighbors; in-person vs virtual; deep friendship vs acquaintances), and the cognitive effects of socialization in rural and urban populations, while controlling for demographic factors, SES, and psychosocial characteristics. These studies should focus on the effectiveness of awareness and education about dementia, as well as accessibility and effectiveness of dementia management, specifically as it relates to rural communities. The development of established minimum data standards and questions can increase comparability across studies and rural geographies.

Acknowledgement:

This manuscript was facilitated by the Alzheimer’s Association International Society to Advance Alzheimer’s Research and Treatment (ISTAART), through the Diversity and Disparities Professional Interest Area (PIA). The views and opinions expressed by authors in this publication represent those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the PIA membership, ISTAART, or the Alzheimer’s Association.

FUNDING:

The following researchers received support during manuscript development.

1. Lisa Ann Kirk Wiese, Ph.D., MSN, C.E. Lynn College of Nursing, Florida Atlantic University

Funding: National Institute of Health/National Institute on Aging, K01AG064047-93, Florida Department of Health. Ed and Ethel Moore Research Foundation

#1 Christine L. Williams, PhD C.E. Lynn College of Nursing, Florida Atlantic University cwill154@health.fau.edu is supported by NIH/NIA R01 56AG064094

3. Allison Gibson, PhD, MSW University of Kentucky, Sanders-Brown Center on Aging

Funding: National Institute of Health/National Institute on Aging P30AG072946, University of Kentucky, Sanders-Brown Center on Aging Allison.Gibson@uky.edu

5. Amy Nelson, Ph.D. University of South Alabama, Frederick P. Williams College of Medicine, Department of Physiology &amp; Cell Biology, Mobile, AL, USA

Funding: National Institute on Aging/ National Institutes of Health (R00AG058780) and AlzOut (https://alzout.org/)

arnelson@southalabama.edu

#7 Aditi Gupta, MD supported by funding K23AG055555 and R61/33AG068483

#8 Owen Carmichael, PhD Pennington Biomedical Research Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana Owen.Carmichael@pbrc.edu is supported by funding from NIH, grants AG078533, AG078558, AG07425801, AG077497, AG077000, AG067765 , AG041200, AG062309, AG062200, AG069476

#10 Allison Lindauer, PhD Oregon Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center, Oregon Health &amp; Science University lindauer@ohsu.edu is supported by funding from NIH/NIA: R01AG067596; P30AG066518; P30AG042978

12. Rachel Peterson, Ph.D. - University of Montana School of Public and Community Health Sciences; Funding: National Institute of Health/National Institute on Aging 4R00AG073457-02 rachel.peterson@mso.umt.edu

(3). Elizabeth K. Rhodus, Ph.D., OTR/L, University of Kentucky, Department of Behavioral Science, Sanders-Brown Center on Aging, University of Kentucky Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center, Center for Health Equity Transformation Lexington, Kentucky, USA

Funding: National Institute of Health/National Institute on Aging P30AG072946; NIH/NIA K23AG075262 elizabeth.rhodus@uky.edu

14. Christina G. Wong, Ph.D., Staff Neuropsychologist

Cleveland Clinic Lou Ruvo Center for Brain Health

888 W. Bonneville Ave, Las Vegas, NV 89106

Funding: Nevada Exploratory Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center under Award Number P20 AG068053 and the National Institute of Graduate Medical Studies (NIGMS) under Award Number P20 GM109025.

WONGC7@ccf.org

15. Megan Zuelsdorff, Ph.D. - University of Wisconsin - Madison School of Nursing

16. Wisconsin Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health mlzuelsd@wisc.edu

#17 Justin Miller, PhD Nevada Exploratory Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center under Award Number P20 AG068053 and the National Institute of General Medical Sciences (NIGMS) under Award Number P20 GM109025

19. Sanne Franzen, Ph.D. - Department of Neurology and Alzheimer Center, Erasmus MC University Medical Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands s.franzen@erasmusmc.nl

Funding Disclosures: S.F. has received consulting fees from Biogen (paid to her organization). She has also received honoraria for lectures and speaking at panels. SF receives support through the ABOARD project, a public-private partnership funded by ZonMW (#73305095007) and Health~Holland, Topsector Life Sciences &amp; Health (PPP-allowance; #LSHM20106).

#23 Pope, Caitlin N. PhD University of Kentucky

Caitlin.Pope@uky.edu Dr. Caitlin Pope is supported by a research career development award (K12DA035150: Building Interdisciplinary Research Careers in Women’s Health Program-BIRCWH) from the National Institutes of Health Office of Research on Women’s Health and the National Institute on Drug Abuse.

26. Patricia C. Heyn, Ph.D., FGSA, FACRM, Director, Center for Optimal Aging Professor, Department of Physical Therapy, Marymount University, 4040 Fairfax Drive, Room 211, Arlington VA 22203, Patricia.Heyn@Marymount.edu

Funding: National Institute of Health 5TR13AG072884-02, NIH 1R13AT011146-01

#28 Beth Prusaczyk, PhD, Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, beth.prusaczyk@wustl.edu, Funding supported by NIH/NIA K01AG071749

#30, 31 Ambar Kulshreshtha, MD Family and Preventive Medicine, Emory University School of Medicine ambarkul@gmail.com is supported by funding from NIH/NIA, K23 AG066931-01A1

32. Veronica Yank MD, Department of Medicine, University of California San Francisco

Funding: National Institute of Health/National Institute on Aging R01AG057855 &amp; NIA R01AG072057 Veronica.Yank@ucsf.edu

# 33 Lilah Besser, PhD

Comprehensive Center for Brain Health, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, lmb9767@med.miami.edu is supported by funding from NIH/NIA K01AG063895, NIH/NIA R21AG075291, and an Alzheimer’s Association Research Grant (AARG-21-850963).

#35 Jon Corkey Amissa Corporation, is supported by funding from the NIH /National Institute on Aging, 1R43AG072981-01A1; National Science Foundation, #2127407

38. Ganesh M. Babulal WUSL babulalg@wustl.edu

Washington University School of Medicine, Department of Neurology, St. Louis, MO, USA

39. University of Johannesburg, Department of Psychology, Faculty of Humanities, South Africa

40. The George Washington University School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Department of Clinical Research and Leadership, Washington, D.C., USA

Funding

Ganesh Babulal is supported by the National Institute of Health/National Institute on Aging (grant numbers: R01 AG074302, R01 AG068183, R01 AG067428, R01 AG056466) and by the BrightFocus Foundation (A2021142S).

#39: Sheryl Magzamen,PhD

Colorado State University, Sheryl.Magzamen@colostate.edu supported by funding from the NASA Health and Air Quality Applied Sciences Team

Figure 1. Barriers and Facilitators to Rural ADRD Disparities. Created with BioRender.com

Figure 2. Location Dynamics Model to Address Rural ADRD Disparities. Created with BioRender.com

Research in Context

State of the Science: The authors summarize their inspection of the peer-reviewed scientific literature within PubMed combining the search terms “rural”, “Alzheimer’s disease, “dementia”, and over 20 health factors. We evaluate the state of knowledge of global rural health disparities as they relate to Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias. Relevant citations are included.

Interpretation: Our findings provide an overview of the modifiable biological, sociocultural, and environmental contributors to ADRD disparities in rural settings from individual, interpersonal, and community perspectives. We summarize the strength and the resilience of rural residents in pursuing healthy aging lifestyle interventions.

Future directions: We offer a model to illustrate facilitators and barriers to ADRD diagnosis and treatment based on a term to reflect the diversity in rural settings: Location Dynamics. We discuss opportunities and future implications for addressing rural disparities through ADRD research.

Rural residents face heightened ADRD risks and burdens due to health disparities.

Defining unique rural barriers and facilitators to cognitive health yields insight.

Strengths and resiliency of rural residents can mitigate ADRD-related challenges.

A novel “Location Dynamics” model guides assessment of rural-specific ADRD issues.

Conflicts of Interest:

There are no conflicts of interest by any of the authors on this manuscript.


REFERENCES

[1] GBD 2019 Collaborators. Global mortality from dementia: Application of a new method and results from the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019. Alzheimers Dement (N Y) 2021;7 :e12200. 10.1002/trc2.12200.34337138
[2] Feigin VL , Stark BA , Johnson CO , Roth GA , Bisignano C , Abady GG , Global, regional, and national burden of stroke and its risk factors, 1990–2019: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019. The Lancet Neurology 2021;20 :795–820. 10.1016/S1474-4422(21)00252-0.34487721
[3] World Alzheimer Report 2022: Life after diagnosis: Navigating treatment, care and support 2022.
[4] Rahman M , White EM , Mills C , Thomas KS , Jutkowitz E . Rural-urban differences in diagnostic incidence and prevalence of Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias. Alzheimers Dement 2021;17 :1213–30. 10.1002/alz.12285.33663019
[5] Abner EL , Jicha GA , Christian WJ , Schreurs BG . Rural-Urban Differences in Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Disorders Diagnostic Prevalence in Kentucky and West Virginia. J Rural Health 2016;32 :314–20. 10.1111/jrh.12155.26515331
[6] Babulal GM , Quiroz YT , Albensi BC , Arenaza-Urquijo E , Astell AJ , Babiloni C , Perspectives on ethnic and racial disparities in Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias: Update and areas of immediate need. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 2019;15 :292–312. 10.1016/j.jalz.2018.09.009.
[7] Morgan D , Innes A , Kosteniuk J . Dementia care in rural and remote settings: a systematic review of formal or paid care. Maturitas 2011;68 :17–33. 10.1016/j.maturitas.2010.09.008.21041045
[8] GBD 2019 Dementia Forecasting Collaborators. Estimation of the global prevalence of dementia in 2019 and forecasted prevalence in 2050: an analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019. Lancet Public Health 2022;7 :e105–25. 10.1016/S2468-2667(21)00249-8.34998485
[9] Mattap SM , Mohan D , McGrattan AM , Allotey P , Stephan BC , Reidpath DD , The economic burden of dementia in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs): a systematic review. BMJ Glob Health 2022;7 :e007409. 10.1136/bmjgh-2021-007409.
[10] Livingston G , Huntley J , Sommerlad A , Ames D , Ballard C , Banerjee S , Dementia prevention, intervention, and care: 2020 report of the Lancet Commission. Lancet 2020;396 :413–46. 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30367-6.32738937
[11] Wineman A , Alia DY , Anderson CL . Definitions of “rural” and “urban” and understandings of economic transformation: Evidence from Tanzania. J Rural Stud 2020;79 :254–68. 10.1016/j.jrurstud.2020.08.014.33132492
[12] Dirven M , Perico RE , Sabalain C , Rodríguez A , Baeza DC , Peña C , Towards a new definition of “rural” with statistical purposes in Latin America [Hacia una nueva definición de “rural” con fines estadísticos en América Latina]. .N Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean, ECLAC 2011.
[13] Dixon MA , Chartier KG . Alcohol Use Patterns Among Urban and Rural Residents: Demographic and Social Influences. Alcohol Res 2016;38 :69–77.27159813
[14] Wang N , Amaize A , Chen J . Accountable Care Hospitals and Preventable Emergency Department Visits for Rural Dementia Patients. J Am Geriatr Soc 2021;69 :185–90. 10.1111/jgs.16858.33026671
[15] Baljepally VS , Metheny W . Rural-urban disparities in baseline health factors and procedure outcomes. J Natl Med Assoc 2022;114 :227–31. 10.1016/j.jnma.2022.01.001.35109969
[16] Kinsella K . Urban and rural dimensions of global population aging: an overview. J Rural Health 2001;17 :314–22. 10.1111/j.1748-0361.2001.tb00280.x.12071553
[17] Skinner MW , Winterton R . Interrogating the Contested Spaces of Rural Aging: Implications for Research, Policy, and Practice. Gerontologist 2018;58 :15–25. 10.1093/geront/gnx094.29106552
[18] Bele S , Jiang W , Lu H , You H , Fan H , Huang L , Population aging and migrant workers: bottlenecks in tuberculosis control in rural China. PLoS One 2014;9 :e88290. 10.1371/journal.pone.0088290.24498440
[19] de Brauw A Migration Out of Rural Areas and Implications for Rural Livelihoods. Annu Rev Resour Econ 2019;11 :461–81. 10.1146/annurev-resource-100518-093906.
[20] World Urbanization Prospects - Population Division - United Nations 2018. https://population.un.org/wup/ (accessed December 21, 2022).
[21] Older people in the European Union’s rural areas: Issues and challenges | Think Tank | European Parliament 2020. https://www.europarl.europa.eu/thinktank/en/document/EPRS_IDA(2020)659403 (accessed December 21, 2022).
[22] Cromartie J Rural America at a Glance, 2018 Edition 2018. http://www.ers.usda.gov/publications/pub-details/?pubid=90555 (accessed December 12, 2022).
[23] Ismail Z , Smith EE , Geda Y , Sultzer D , Brodaty H , Smith G , Neuropsychiatric symptoms as early manifestations of emergent dementia: Provisional diagnostic criteria for mild behavioral impairment. Alzheimers Dement 2016;12 :195–202. 10.1016/j.jalz.2015.05.017.26096665
[24] Mielke MM , Vemuri P , Rocca WA . Clinical epidemiology of Alzheimer’s disease: assessing sex and gender differences. Clin Epidemiol 2014;6 :37–48. 10.2147/CLEP.S37929.24470773
[25] Sindi S , Kåreholt I , Ngandu T , Rosenberg A , Kulmala J , Johansson L , Sex differences in dementia and response to a lifestyle intervention: Evidence from Nordic population-based studies and a prevention trial. Alzheimers Dement 2021;17 :1166–78. 10.1002/alz.12279.34255432
[26] Nebel RA , Aggarwal NT , Barnes LL , Gallagher A , Goldstein JM , Kantarci K , Understanding the impact of sex and gender in Alzheimer’s disease: A call to action. Alzheimers Dement 2018;14 :1171–83. 10.1016/j.jalz.2018.04.008.29907423
[27] Ho JY , Franco Y . The rising burden of Alzheimer’s disease mortality in rural America. SSM Popul Health 2022;17 :101052. 10.1016/j.ssmph.2022.101052.35242995
[28] Brooker D , Peel E , Erol R . Women and Dementia: A global research review 2015.
[29] Saiyasit N , Butlig E-AR , Chaney SD , Traylor MK , Hawley NA , Randall RB , Neurovascular Dysfunction in Diverse Communities With Health Disparities-Contributions to Dementia and Alzheimer’s Disease. Front Neurosci 2022;16 :915405. 10.3389/fnins.2022.915405.35844216
[30] Kunkle BW , Grenier-Boley B , Sims R , Bis JC , Damotte V , Naj AC , Genetic meta-analysis of diagnosed Alzheimer’s disease identifies new risk loci and implicates Aβ, tau, immunity and lipid processing. Nat Genet 2019;51 :414–30. 10.1038/s41588-019-0358-2.30820047
[31] Wang Y-Y , Ge Y-J , Tan C-C , Cao X-P , Tan L , Xu W . The Proportion of APOE4 Carriers Among Non-Demented Individuals: A Pooled Analysis of 389,000 Community-Dwellers. J Alzheimers Dis 2021;81 :1331–9. 10.3233/JAD-201606.33935087
[32] Cronjé HT , Elliott HR , Nienaber-Rousseau C , Pieters M . Leveraging the urban-rural divide for epigenetic research. Epigenomics 2020;12 :1071–81. 10.2217/epi-2020-0049.32657149
[33] Davidson T , Boardman J , Hunter L . Exploring Rural-Urban Differences in Polygenic Associations for Health among Older Adults in the United States. Journal of Rural Social Sciences 2022;37.
[34] Saenz JL , Downer B , Garcia MA , Wong R . Cognition and Context: Rural-Urban Differences in Cognitive Aging Among Older Mexican Adults. J Aging Health 2018;30 :965–86. 10.1177/0898264317703560.28553815
[35] National Minority Health and Health Disparities Research Framework. NIMHD 2022. https://www.nimhd.nih.gov/researchFramework (accessed December 13, 2022).
[36] Are your findings “WEIRD”? 2010. https://www.apa.org/monitor/2010/05/weird (accessed December 21, 2022).
[37] Obesity and overweight 2021. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/obesity-and-overweight (accessed June 13, 2022).
[38] NCD Risk Factor Collaboration (NCD-RisC). Rising rural body-mass index is the main driver of the global obesity epidemic in adults. Nature 2019;569 :260–4. 10.1038/s41586-019-1171-x.31068725
[39] NCD Risk Factor Collaboration (NCD-RisC). Worldwide trends in hypertension prevalence and progress in treatment and control from 1990 to 2019: a pooled analysis of 1201 population-representative studies with 104 million participants. Lancet 2021;398 :957–80. 10.1016/S0140-6736(21)01330-1.34450083
[40] Samanic CM , Barbour KE , Liu Y , Wang Y , Fang J , Lu H , Prevalence of Self-Reported Hypertension and Antihypertensive Medication Use by County and Rural-Urban Classification - United States, 2017. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2020;69 :533–9. 10.15585/mmwr.mm6918a1.32379728
[41] Diabetes 2022. https://www.who.int/health-topics/diabetes#tab=tab_1 (accessed December 12, 2022).
[42] Chu S-F , Chiu W-T , Lin H-W , Chiang Y-H , Liou T-H . Hazard Ratio and Repeat Injury for Dementia in Patients With and Without a History of Traumatic Brain Injury: A Population-Based Secondary Data Analysis in Taiwan. Asia Pac J Public Health 2016;28 :519–27. 10.1177/1010539516662956.27614252
[43] Magalhães MO de C , Peixoto JM de S , Frank MH , Gomes I , Rodrigues BM , Menezes C , Risk factors for dementia in a rural area of Northeastern Brazil. Arq Neuropsiquiatr 2008;66 :157–62. 10.1590/s0004-282x2008000200003.18545774
[44] Wang X-J , Xu W , Li J-Q , Cao X-P , Tan L , Yu J-T . Early-Life Risk Factors for Dementia and Cognitive Impairment in Later Life: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. J Alzheimers Dis 2019;67 :221–9. 10.3233/JAD-180856.30636739
[45] Yue JK , Upadhyayula PS , Avalos LN , Phelps RRL , Suen CG , Cage TA . Concussion and Mild-Traumatic Brain Injury in Rural Settings: Epidemiology and Specific Healthcare Considerations. J Neurosci Rural Pract 2020;11 :23–33. 10.1055/s-0039-3402581.32214697
[46] Losada-Rojas LL , Ke Y , Pyrialakou VD , Konstantina Gkritza. Access to healthy food in urban and rural areas: An empirical analysis. Journal of Transport &amp; Health 2021;23 :101245. 10.1016/j.jth.2021.101245.
[47] Kimura A , Sugimoto T , Kitamori K , Saji N , Niida S , Toba K , Malnutrition is Associated with Behavioral and Psychiatric Symptoms of Dementia in Older Women with Mild Cognitive Impairment and Early-Stage Alzheimer’s Disease. Nutrients 2019;11 :1951. 10.3390/nu11081951.31434232
[48] Navrátilová M , Jarkovský J , Cešková E , Leonard B , Sobotka L . Alzheimer disease: malnutrition and nutritional support. Clinical and Experimental Pharmacology and Physiology 2007;34 :S11–3. 10.1111/j.1440-1681.2007.04761.x.
[49] Kocatürk RR , Temizyürek A , Özcan ÖÖ , Ergüzel TT , Karahan M , Konuk M , Effect of nutritional supports on malnutrition, cognition, function and biomarkers of Alzheimer’s disease: a systematic review. Int J Neurosci 2022:1–19. 10.1080/00207454.2022.2079506.
[50] Piovezan RD , Oliveira D , Arias N , Acosta D , Prince MJ , Ferri CP . Mortality Rates and Mortality Risk Factors in Older Adults with Dementia from Low- and Middle-Income Countries: The 10/66 Dementia Research Group Population-Based Cohort Study. J Alzheimers Dis 2020;75 :581–93. 10.3233/JAD-200078.32310178
[51] Dent E , Hoon E , Karnon J , Kitson A , Dollard J , Newbury J , Management of Musculoskeletal Conditions in Rural South Australia: A Randomised Controlled Trial. J Frailty Aging 2017;6 :212–5. 10.14283/jfa.2017.27.29165539
[52] Bennett JA , Young HM , Nail LM , Winters-Stone K , Hanson G . A telephone-only motivational intervention to increase physical activity in rural adults: a randomized controlled trial. Nurs Res 2008;57 :24–32. 10.1097/01.NNR.0000280661.34502.c1.18091289
[53] Jindo T , Tsunoda K , Kitano N , Tsuji T , Abe T , Muraki T , Pedometers Affect Changes in Lower-Extremity Physical Function During a Square-Stepping Exercise Program in Older Japanese Adults. J Geriatr Phys Ther 2016;39 :83–8. 10.1519/JPT.0000000000000054.26135887
[54] McMahon SK , Wyman JF , Belyea MJ , Shearer N , Hekler EB , Fleury J . Combining Motivational and Physical Intervention Components to Promote Fall-Reducing Physical Activity Among Community-Dwelling Older Adults: A Feasibility Study. Am J Health Promot 2016;30 :638–44. 10.4278/ajhp.130522-ARB-265.26389979
[55] Crouch E , Radcliff E , Probst JC , Bennett KJ , McKinney SH . Rural-Urban Differences in Adverse Childhood Experiences Across a National Sample of Children. J Rural Health 2020;36 :55–64. 10.1111/jrh.12366.30938864
[56] Herd P , Sicinski K , Asthana S . Does Rural Living in Early Life Increase the Risk for Reduced Cognitive Functioning in Later Life? J Alzheimers Dis 2021;82 :1171–82. 10.3233/JAD-210224.34151799
[57] Radcliff E , Crouch E , Strompolis M . Rural-urban differences in exposure to adverse childhood experiences among South Carolina adults. Rural Remote Health 2018;18 :4434. 10.22605/RRH4434.29471666
[58] Fischer EP , McSweeney JC , Wright P , Cheney A , Curran GM , Henderson K , Overcoming Barriers to Sustained Engagement in Mental Healthcare: Perspectives of Rural Veterans and Providers. J Rural Health 2016;32 :429–38. 10.1111/jrh.12203.27557334
[59] Hosseinpoor AR , Itani L , Petersen PE . Socio-economic inequality in oral healthcare coverage: results from the World Health Survey. J Dent Res 2012;91 :275–81. 10.1177/0022034511432341.22205634
[60] Mitchell J , Bennett K , Brock-Martin A . Edentulism in high poverty rural counties. J Rural Health 2013;29 :30–8. 10.1111/j.1748-0361.2012.00440.x.23289652
[61] Lee KH , Choi YY . Association between oral health and dementia in the elderly: a population-based study in Korea. Sci Rep 2019;9 :14407. 10.1038/s41598-019-50863-0.31594986
[62] Lucey BP , Wisch J , Boerwinkle AH , Landsness EC , Toedebusch CD , McLeland JS , Sleep and longitudinal cognitive performance in preclinical and early symptomatic Alzheimer’s disease. Brain 2021;144 :2852–62. 10.1093/brain/awab272.34668959
[63] Doherty JM , Roe CM , Murphy SA , Johnson AM , Fleischer E , Toedebusch CD , Adverse driving behaviors are associated with sleep apnea severity and age in cognitively normal older adults at risk for Alzheimer’s disease. Sleep 2022;45 :zsac070. 10.1093/sleep/zsac070.35303111
[64] Carvalho FG , Hidalgo MP , Levandovski R . Differences in circadian patterns between rural and urban populations: an epidemiological study in countryside. Chronobiol Int 2014;31 :442–9. 10.3109/07420528.2013.846350.24397277
[65] Mazzotti DR , Guindalini C , Sosa AL , Ferri CP , Tufik S . Prevalence and correlates for sleep complaints in older adults in low and middle income countries: a 10/66 Dementia Research Group study. Sleep Med 2012;13 :697–702. 10.1016/j.sleep.2012.02.009.22503944
[66] Donath C , Grässel E , Baier D , Pfeiffer C , Karagülle D , Bleich S , Alcohol consumption and binge drinking in adolescents: comparison of different migration backgrounds and rural vs. urban residence--a representative study. BMC Public Health 2011;11 :84. 10.1186/1471-2458-11-84.21299841
[67] Kim J-M , Shin I-S , Stewart R , Yoon J-S . Alcoholism in older Korean men: prevalence, aetiology, and comorbidity with cognitive impairment and dementia in urban and rural communities. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 2002;17 :821–7. 10.1002/gps.687.12221655
[68] Jia J , Wang F , Wei C , Zhou A , Jia X , Li F , The prevalence of dementia in urban and rural areas of China. Alzheimers Dement 2014;10 :1–9. 10.1016/j.jalz.2013.01.012.23871765
[69] Wallach JD , Serghiou S , Chu L , Egilman AC , Vasiliou V , Ross JS , Evaluation of confounding in epidemiologic studies assessing alcohol consumption on the risk of ischemic heart disease. BMC Med Res Methodol 2020;20 :64. 10.1186/s12874-020-0914-6.32171256
[70] Brennan SE , McDonald S , Page MJ , Reid J , Ward S , Forbes AB , Long-term effects of alcohol consumption on cognitive function: a systematic review and dose-response analysis of evidence published between 2007 and 2018. Syst Rev 2020;9 :33. 10.1186/s13643-019-1220-4.32054517
[71] GBD 2019 Tobacco Collaborators. Spatial, temporal, and demographic patterns in prevalence of smoking tobacco use and attributable disease burden in 204 countries and territories, 1990-2019: a systematic analysis from the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019. Lancet 2021;397 :2337–60. 10.1016/S0140-6736(21)01169-7.34051883
[72] Buettner-Schmidt K , Miller DR , Maack B . Disparities in Rural Tobacco Use, Smoke-Free Policies, and Tobacco Taxes. West J Nurs Res 2019;41 :1184–202. 10.1177/0193945919828061.30774036
[73] Page-Carruth A , Windsor C , Clark M . Rural self-reliance: the impact on health experiences of people living with type II diabetes in rural Queensland, Australia. Int J Qual Stud Health Well-Being 2014;9 :24182. 10.3402/qhw.v9.24182.24964859
[74] Specker Sullivan L , Niker F . Relational Autonomy, Paternalism, and Maternalism. Ethical Theory and Moral Practice 2018;21 :649–67. 10.1007/s10677-018-9900-z.
[75] Bacsu J-D , Viger M , Johnson S , Novik N , Jeffery B . Rural Older Adults’ Perspectives of Activities to Support Cognitive Health. Activities, Adaptation &amp; Aging 2020;44 :177–91. 10.1080/01924788.2019.1626203.
[76] Innes A , Morgan D , Kosteniuk J . Dementia care in rural and remote settings: a systematic review of informal/family caregiving. Maturitas 2011;68 :34–46. 10.1016/j.maturitas.2010.10.002.21093996
[77] Ejiri M , Kawai H , Ishii K , Oka K , Obuchi S . Predictors of older adults’ objectively measured social isolation: A systematic review of observational studies. Arch Gerontol Geriatr 2021;94 :104357. 10.1016/j.archger.2021.104357.33529865
[78] Evans IEM , Llewellyn DJ , Matthews FE , Woods RT , Brayne C , Clare L , Social isolation, cognitive reserve, and cognition in healthy older people. PLoS One 2018;13 :e0201008. 10.1371/journal.pone.0201008.30118489
[79] DiNapoli EA , Wu B , Scogin F . Social isolation and cognitive function in Appalachian older adults. Res Aging 2014;36 :161–79. 10.1177/0164027512470704.25650688
[80] McHugh Power JE , Hannigan C , Carney S , Lawlor BA . Exploring the meaning of loneliness among socially isolated older adults in rural Ireland: a qualitative investigation. Qualitative Research in Psychology 2017;14 :394–414. 10.1080/14780887.2017.1329363.
[81] De Koning JL , Stathi A , Richards S . Predictors of loneliness and different types of social isolation of rural-living older adults in the United Kingdom. Ageing and Society 2017;37 :2012–43. 10.1017/S0144686X16000696.
[82] Winterton R , Warburton J . Models of care for socially isolated older rural carers: barriers and implications. Rural Remote Health 2011;11 :1678.21819164
[83] Williamson HJ , McCarthy MJ , Garcia YE , Bacon R , Dunn DJ , Baldwin JA . Addressing the Needs of Rural Caregivers of Individuals With Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Dementias During and Beyond Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19). Public Policy Aging Rep 2020;30 :178–80. 10.1093/ppar/praa024.33185627
[84] Weaver RH , Roberto KA , Blieszner R . Older Adults in Rural Appalachia: Preference and Expectations for Future Care. Int J Aging Hum Dev 2018;86 :364–81. 10.1177/0091415017720891.28814109
[85] Musyimi CW , Ndetei DM , Evans-Lacko S , Oliveira D , Mutunga E , Farina N . Perceptions and experiences of dementia and its care in rural Kenya. Dementia (London) 2021;20 :2802–19. 10.1177/14713012211014800.33928810
[86] Farmer J , Bourke L , Taylor J , Marley JV , Reid J , Bracksley S , Culture and rural health. Aust J Rural Health 2012;20 :243–7. 10.1111/j.1440-1584.2012.01304.x.22998197
[87] Hebert PL , Sisk JE , Howell EA . When does a difference become a disparity? Conceptualizing racial and ethnic disparities in health. Health Aff (Millwood) 2008;27 :374–82. 10.1377/hlthaff.27.2.374.18332492
[88] Artiga S , Hinton E . Beyond Healthcare: The Role of Social Determinants in Promoting Health and Health Equity. KFF 2018. https://www.kff.org/racial-equity-and-health-policy/issue-brief/beyond-health-care-the-role-of-social-determinants-in-promoting-health-and-health-equity/ (accessed December 13, 2022).
[89] Wolfe MK , McDonald NC , Holmes GM . Transportation Barriers to Healthcare in the United States: Findings From the National Health Interview Survey, 1997-2017. Am J Public Health 2020;110 :815–22. 10.2105/AJPH.2020.305579.32298170
[90] Henning-Smith C , Kozhimannil K , Casey M , Prasad S , Moscovice I . Rural-Urban Differences in Medicare Quality Outcomes and the Impact of Risk Adjustment. Med Care 2017;55 :823–9. 10.1097/MLR.0000000000000761.28800000
[91] Bolin JN , Bellamy GR , Ferdinand AO , Vuong AM , Kash BA , Schulze A , Rural Healthy People 2020: New Decade, Same Challenges. J Rural Health 2015;31 :326–33. 10.1111/jrh.12116.25953431
[92] Douthit N , Kiv S , Dwolatzky T , Biswas S . Exposing some important barriers to healthcare access in the rural USA. Public Health 2015;129 :611–20. 10.1016/j.puhe.2015.04.001.26025176
[93] Hartley D Rural health disparities, population health, and rural culture. Am J Public Health 2004;94 :1675–8. 10.2105/ajph.94.10.1675.15451729
[94] Russ TC , Batty GD , Hearnshaw GF , Fenton C , Starr JM . Geographical variation in dementia: systematic review with meta-analysis. Int J Epidemiol 2012;41 :1012–32. 10.1093/ije/dys103.22798662
[95] Coombs NC , Meriwether WE , Caringi J , Newcomer SR . Barriers to healthcare access among U.S. adults with mental health challenges: A population-based study. SSM Popul Health 2021;15 :100847. 10.1016/j.ssmph.2021.100847.34179332
[96] FitzGerald C , Hurst S . Implicit bias in healthcare professionals: a systematic review. BMC Med Ethics 2017;18 :19. 10.1186/s12910-017-0179-8.28249596
[97] Guest MA , Hunter EG . Identifying barriers to care and support: Aging in Central Kentucky. Local Development &amp; Society 2022;3 :153–65. 10.1080/26883597.2021.1928534.
[98] Wainberg ML , Scorza P , Shultz JM , Helpman L , Mootz JJ , Johnson KA , Challenges and Opportunities in Global Mental Health: a Research-to-Practice Perspective. Curr Psychiatry Rep 2017;19 :28. 10.1007/s11920-017-0780-z.28425023
[99] Ng R , Chow TYJ . Aging Narratives Over 210 Years (1810-2019). J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci 2021;76 :1799–807. 10.1093/geronb/gbaa222.33300996
[100] Mielke MM , Aggarwal NT , Vila-Castelar C , Agarwal P , Arenaza-Urquijo EM , Brett B , Consideration of sex and gender in Alzheimer’s disease and related disorders from a global perspective. Alzheimers Dement 2022. 10.1002/alz.12662.
[101] Sharma A , Shaver JC , Stephenson RB . Rural primary care providers’ attitudes towards sexual and gender minorities in a midwestern state in the USA. Rural Remote Health 2019;19 :5476. 10.22605/RRH5476.31675243
[102] Rosenkrantz DE , Black WW , Abreu RL , Aleshire ME , Fallin-Bennett K . Health and healthcare of rural sexual and gender minorities: A systematic review. Stigma and Health 2017;2 :229–43. 10.1037/sah0000055.
[103] Dakin EK , Williams KA , MacNamara MA . Social Support and Social Networks among LGBT Older Adults in Rural Southern Appalachia. J Gerontol Soc Work 2020;63 :768–89. 10.1080/01634372.2020.1774028.32558626
[104] Movement Advancement Project. Where We Call Home: LGBT People in Rural America 2019. https://www.lgbtmap.org/policy-and-issue-analysis/rural-lgbt (accessed December 21, 2022).
[105] Peterson RL , Fain MJ , A Butler E , Ehiri JE , Carvajal SC . The role of social and behavioral risk factors in explaining racial disparities in age-related cognitive impairment: a structured narrative review. Neuropsychol Dev Cogn B Aging Neuropsychol Cogn 2020;27 :173–96. 10.1080/13825585.2019.1598539.30955411
[106] Hilal S , Brayne C . Epidemiologic Trends, Social Determinants, and Brain Health: The Role of Life Course Inequalities. Stroke 2022;53 :437–43. 10.1161/STROKEAHA.121.032609.35000426
[107] Peterson RL , George KM , Gilsanz P , Mayeda ER , Glymour MM , Meyer OL , Lifecourse socioeconomic changes and late-life cognition in a cohort of U.S.-born and U.S. immigrants: findings from the KHANDLE study. BMC Public Health 2021;21 :920. 10.1186/s12889-021-10976-6.33985461
[108] Kaiser BN , Hruschka D , Hadley C . Measuring material wealth in low-income settings: A conceptual and how-to guide. Am J Hum Biol 2017;29 . 10.1002/ajhb.22987.
[109] Arcury TA , Smith SA , Talton JW , Chen H , Laurienti PJ , Quandt SA . Depressive Symptoms of Latinx Women in Rural Farmworker and Urban Non-Farmworker Families in North Carolina. J Racial Ethn Health Disparities 2022;9 :2351–60. 10.1007/s40615-021-01172-8.34697765
[110] Schmidt CW . Environmental Factors in Successful Aging: The Potential Impact of Air Pollution. Environ Health Perspect 2019;127 :102001. 10.1289/EHP4579.31573833
[111] Peters R , Ee N , Peters J , Booth A , Mudway I , Anstey KJ . Air Pollution and Dementia: A Systematic Review. J Alzheimers Dis 2019;70 :S145–63. 10.3233/JAD-180631.30775976
[112] Younan D , Wang X , Millstein J , Petkus AJ , Beavers DP , Espeland MA , Air quality improvement and cognitive decline in community-dwelling older women in the United States: A longitudinal cohort study. PLoS Med 2022;19 :e1003893. 10.1371/journal.pmed.1003893.35113870
[113] Wellenius GA , Burger MR , Coull BA , Schwartz J , Suh HH , Koutrakis P , Ambient air pollution and the risk of acute ischemic stroke. Arch Intern Med 2012;172 :229–34. 10.1001/archinternmed.2011.732.22332153
[114] Gatto NM , Henderson VW , Hodis HN , St John JA , Lurmann F , Chen J-C , Components of air pollution and cognitive function in middle-aged and older adults in Los Angeles. Neurotoxicology 2014;40 :1–7. 10.1016/j.neuro.2013.09.004.24148924
[115] Ailshire JA , Clarke P . Fine particulate matter air pollution and cognitive function among U.S. older adults. J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci 2015;70 :322–8. 10.1093/geronb/gbu064.24906394
[116] Oudin A , Forsberg B , Adolfsson AN , Lind N , Modig L , Nordin M , Traffic-Related Air Pollution and Dementia Incidence in Northern Sweden: A Longitudinal Study. Environ Health Perspect 2016;124 :306–12. 10.1289/ehp.1408322.26305859
[117] Carey IM , Anderson HR , Atkinson RW , Beevers SD , Cook DG , Strachan DP , Are noise and air pollution related to the incidence of dementia? A cohort study in London, England. BMJ Open 2018;8 :e022404. 10.1136/bmjopen-2018-022404.
[118] Colicino E , Wilson A , Frisardi MC , Prada D , Power MC , Hoxha M , Telomere Length, Long-Term Black Carbon Exposure, and Cognitive Function in a Cohort of Older Men: The VA Normative Aging Study. Environ Health Perspect 2017;125 :76–81. 10.1289/EHP241.27259001
[119] Power MC , Weisskopf MG , Alexeeff SE , Coull BA , Spiro A , Schwartz J . Traffic-related air pollution and cognitive function in a cohort of older men. Environ Health Perspect 2011;119 :682–7. 10.1289/ehp.1002767.21172758
[120] Zhang X , Chen X , Zhang X . The impact of exposure to air pollution on cognitive performance. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2018;115 :9193–7. 10.1073/pnas.1809474115.30150383
[121] Tessum CW , Paolella DA , Chambliss SE , Apte JS , Hill JD , Marshall JD . PM2.5 polluters disproportionately and systemically affect people of color in the United States. Sci Adv 2021;7 :eabf4491. 10.1126/sciadv.abf4491.33910895
[122] Smith KR , Pillarisetti A . Household Air Pollution from Solid Cookfuels and Its Effects on Health. In: Mock CN , Nugent R , Kobusingye O , Smith KR , editors. Injury Prevention and Environmental Health. 3rd ed., Washington (DC): The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank; 2017.
[123] O’Neill MS , Jerrett M , Kawachi I , Levy JI , Cohen AJ , Gouveia N , Health, wealth, and air pollution: advancing theory and methods. Environ Health Perspect 2003;111 :1861–70. 10.1289/ehp.6334.14644658
[124] Lukens J Running Clear: Preventing Private Water Sources from Becoming a Health Hazard in Rural America. The Rural Monitor 2019. https://www.ruralhealthinfo.org/rural-monitor/private-water-sources/ (accessed December 12, 2022).
[125] American Ground Water Trust 2022. https://agwt.org/ (accessed December 13, 2022).
[126] US EPA O. Water Topics 2016. https://www.epa.gov/environmental-topics/water-topics (accessed December 13, 2022).
[127] NCEH. Healthy Housing Reference Manual 2018. https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/publications/books/housing/housing.htm (accessed December 13, 2022).
[128] O’Bryant SE , Edwards M , Menon CV , Gong G , Barber R . Long-term low-level arsenic exposure is associated with poorer neuropsychological functioning: a Project FRONTIER study. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2011;8 :861–74. 10.3390/ijerph8030861.21556183
[129] Water and Sanitation. US Agency for International Development 2022. https://www.usaid.gov/water-and-sanitation (accessed December 13, 2022).
[130] World Bank. The World Bank Annual Report 2019: Ending Poverty, Investing in Opportunity. Washington, DC: World Bank; 2019. 10.1596/978-1-4648-1470-9.
[131] Khurana I , Sen R . Drinking water quality in rural India: issues and approaches. vol. 20.500.12592/77cngw, 2008.
[132] Daly SW , Lowe J , Hornsby GM , Harris AR . Multiple water source use in low- and middle-income countries: a systematic review. J Water Health 2021;19 :370–92. 10.2166/wh.2021.205.34152293
[133] 2022 Alzheimer’s disease facts and figures. Alzheimers Dement 2022. 10.1002/alz.12638.
[134] Kerwin D , Abdelnour C , Caramelli P , Ogunniyi A , Shi J , Zetterberg H , Alzheimer’s disease diagnosis and management: Perspectives from around the world. Alzheimers Dement (Amst) 2022;14 :e12334. 10.1002/dad2.12334.35898519
[135] Adjorlolo S Can Teleneuropsychology Help Meet the Neuropsychological Needs of Western Africans? The Case of Ghana. Appl Neuropsychol Adult 2015;22 :388–98. 10.1080/23279095.2014.949718.25719559
[136] Kim C , Chang EJ , Kim C-Y . Regional Differences in the Effects of Social Relations on Depression Among Korean Elderly and the Moderating Effect of Living Alone. J Prev Med Public Health 2021;54 :441–50. 10.3961/jpmph.21.337.34875827
[137] Opoku STY , Apenteng BA , Lin G . Temporal Trends and Rural-Urban Differences in Hospital Length of Stay for Alzheimer Disease and Related Disorders. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 2017;31 :244–8. 10.1097/WAD.0000000000000183.28296666
[138] Cheesmond N , Davies K , Inder KJ . The role of the peer support worker in increasing rural mental health help-seeking. Aust J Rural Health 2020;28 :203–8. 10.1111/ajr.12603.32281184
[139] Wenger GC , Keating N . The evolution of networks of rural older adults. In: Keating N , editor. Rural ageing: A good place to grow old?, Policy Press; 2008, p. 0. 10.1332/policypress/9781861349019.003.0004.
[140] Ryvicker M , Bollens-Lund E , Ornstein KA . Driving Status and Transportation Disadvantage Among Medicare Beneficiaries. J Appl Gerontol 2020;39 :935–43. 10.1177/0733464818806834.30362863
[141] Syed ST , Gerber BS , Sharp LK . Traveling towards disease: transportation barriers to healthcare access. J Community Health 2013;38 :976–93. 10.1007/s10900-013-9681-1.23543372
[142] Pope CN , Stavrinos D , Fazeli PL , Vance DE . Transportation Barriers and Health-Related Quality of Life in a Sample of Middle-Aged and Older Adults Living with HIV in the Deep South. AIDS Behav 2022;26 :2148–58. 10.1007/s10461-021-03560-x.35066731
[143] Strogatz D , Mielenz TJ , Johnson AK , Baker IR , Robinson M , Mebust SP , Importance of Driving and Potential Impact of Driving Cessation for Rural and Urban Older Adults. J Rural Health 2020;36 :88–93. 10.1111/jrh.12369.31022317
[144] Payyanadan RP , Lee JD , Grepo LC . Challenges for Older Drivers in Urban, Suburban, and Rural Settings. Geriatrics (Basel) 2018;3 :14. 10.3390/geriatrics3020014.31011058
[145] National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. Rural/urban comparison of motor vehicle traffic fatalities: 2019 data (Traffic Safety Facts. Report No. DOT HS 813 206) 2021.
[146] Gordon MN , Heneka MT , Le Page LM , Limberger C , Morgan D , Tenner AJ , Impact of COVID-19 on the Onset and Progression of Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Dementias: A Roadmap for Future Research. Alzheimers Dement 2022;18 :1038–46. 10.1002/alz.12488.34874605
[147] Pohle J , Voelsen D . Centrality and power. The struggle over the techno-political configuration of the Internet and the global digital order. Policy &amp; Internet 2022;14 :13–27. 10.1002/poi3.296.
[148] Cohen SA , Kunicki ZJ , Nash CC , Drohan MM , Greaney ML . Rural-Urban Differences in Caregiver Burden Due to the COVID-19 Pandemic among a National Sample of Informal Caregivers. Gerontol Geriatr Med 2021;7 :23337214211025124. 10.1177/23337214211025124.
[149] Luo Y , Zhong Y , Pang L , Zhao Y , Liang R , Zheng X . The effects of indoor air pollution from solid fuel use on cognitive function among middle-aged and older population in China. Sci Total Environ 2021;754 :142460. 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.142460.33254849
[150] Luo Y , Zhang L , Pan X . Neighborhood Environments and Cognitive Decline Among Middle-Aged and Older People in China. J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci 2019;74 :e60–71. 10.1093/geronb/gbz016.30726959
[151] Wu Y-T , Prina AM , Jones A , Matthews FE , Brayne C , Medical Research Council Cognitive Function and Ageing Study Collaboration. The Built Environment and Cognitive Disorders: Results From the Cognitive Function and Ageing Study II. Am J Prev Med 2017;53 :25–32. 10.1016/j.amepre.2016.11.020.28082001
[152] Motohiro A , Abe T , Okuyama K , Onoda K , Ito T , Isomura M , Environmental Factors Affecting Cognitive Function among Community-Dwelling Older Adults: A Longitudinal Study. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2021;18 :8528. 10.3390/ijerph18168528.34444276
[153] Tani Y , Hanazato M , Fujiwara T , Suzuki N , Kondo K . Neighborhood Sidewalk Environment and Incidence of Dementia in Older Japanese Adults. Am J Epidemiol 2021;190 :1270–80. 10.1093/aje/kwab043.33604662
[154] Besser L Outdoor green space exposure and brain health measures related to Alzheimer’s disease: a rapid review. BMJ Open 2021;11 :e043456. 10.1136/bmjopen-2020-043456.
[155] Zagnoli F , Filippini T , Jimenez MP , Wise LA , Hatch EE , Vinceti M . Is Greenness Associated with Dementia? A Systematic Review and Dose-Response Meta-analysis. Curr Environ Health Rep 2022;9 :574–90. 10.1007/s40572-022-00365-5.35857243
[156] Zhang H , Ma J , Chen C , Tian X . NDVI-Net: A fusion network for generating high-resolution normalized difference vegetation index in remote sensing. ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 2020;168 :182–96. 10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2020.08.010.
[157] Sugiyama M , Chau H-W , Abe T , Kato Y , Jamei E , Veeroja P , Third Places for Older Adults’ Social Engagement: A Scoping Review and Research Agenda. The Gerontologist 2022:gnac180. 10.1093/geront/gnac180.
[158] Grasset L , Proust-Lima C , Mangin J-F , Habert M-O , Dubois B , Paquet C , Explaining the association between social and lifestyle factors and cognitive functions: a pathway analysis in the Memento cohort. Alzheimers Res Ther 2022;14 :68. 10.1186/s13195-022-01013-8.35585559
[159] Wells M Resilience in rural community-dwelling older adults. J Rural Health 2009;25 :415–9. 10.1111/j.1748-0361.2009.00253.x.19780924
[160] Tardif S , Simard M . Cognitive stimulation programs in healthy elderly: a review. Int J Alzheimers Dis 2011;2011 :378934. 10.4061/2011/378934.21876829
[161] Cafferata RMT , Hicks B , von Bastian CC . Effectiveness of cognitive stimulation for dementia: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Psychol Bull 2021;147 :455–76. 10.1037/bul0000325.34292011
[162] Lobbia A , Carbone E , Faggian S , Gardini S , Piras F , Spector A , The efficacy of cognitive stimulation therapy (CST) for people with mild-to-moderate dementia: A review. European Psychologist 2019;24 :257–77. 10.1027/1016-9040/a000342.
[163] Chen J , Duan Y , Li H , Lu L , Liu J , Tang C . Different durations of cognitive stimulation therapy for Alzheimer’s disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Interv Aging 2019;14 :1243–54. 10.2147/CIA.S210062.31371930
[164] Mkenda S , Olakehinde O , Mbowe G , Siwoku A , Kisoli A , Paddick S-M , Cognitive stimulation therapy as a low-resource intervention for dementia in sub-Saharan Africa (CST-SSA): Adaptation for rural Tanzania and Nigeria. Dementia (London) 2018;17 :515–30. 10.1177/1471301216649272.27328694
[165] Olakehinde O , Adebiyi A , Siwoku A , Mkenda S , Paddick S-M , Gray WK , Managing dementia in rural Nigeria: feasibility of cognitive stimulation therapy and exploration of clinical improvements. Aging Ment Health 2019;23 :1377–81. 10.1080/13607863.2018.1484883.30246561
[166] McGrattan AM , McGuinness B , McKinley MC , Kee F , Passmore P , Woodside JV , Diet and Inflammation in Cognitive Ageing and Alzheimer’s Disease. Curr Nutr Rep 2019;8 :53–65. 10.1007/s13668-019-0271-4.30949921
[167] Román GC , Jackson RE , Gadhia R , Román AN , Reis J . Mediterranean diet: The role of long-chain ω-3 fatty acids in fish; polyphenols in fruits, vegetables, cereals, coffee, tea, cacao and wine; probiotics and vitamins in prevention of stroke, age-related cognitive decline, and Alzheimer disease. Rev Neurol (Paris) 2019;175 :724–41. 10.1016/j.neurol.2019.08.005.31521398
[168] van den Brink AC , Brouwer-Brolsma EM , Berendsen AAM , van de Rest O . The Mediterranean, Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH), and Mediterranean-DASH Intervention for Neurodegenerative Delay (MIND) Diets Are Associated with Less Cognitive Decline and a Lower Risk of Alzheimer’s Disease-A Review. Adv Nutr 2019;10 :1040–65. 10.1093/advances/nmz054.31209456
[169] Morris MC , Tangney CC , Wang Y , Sacks FM , Bennett DA , Aggarwal NT . MIND diet associated with reduced incidence of Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement 2015;11 :1007–14. 10.1016/j.jalz.2014.11.009.25681666
[170] Włodarek D Role of Ketogenic Diets in Neurodegenerative Diseases (Alzheimer’s Disease and Parkinson’s Disease). Nutrients 2019;11 :169. 10.3390/nu11010169.30650523
[171] Rusek M , Pluta R , Ułamek-Kozioł M , Czuczwar SJ . Ketogenic Diet in Alzheimer’s Disease. Int J Mol Sci 2019;20 :3892. 10.3390/ijms20163892.31405021
[172] Phillips MCL , Deprez LM , Mortimer GMN , Murtagh DKJ , McCoy S , Mylchreest R , Randomized crossover trial of a modified ketogenic diet in Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Res Ther 2021;13 :51. 10.1186/s13195-021-00783-x.33622392
[173] Taylor MK , Sullivan DK , Mahnken JD , Burns JM , Swerdlow RH . Feasibility and efficacy data from a ketogenic diet intervention in Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement (N Y) 2018;4 :28–36. 10.1016/j.trci.2017.11.002.29955649
[174] Rural Data Explorer – Rural Health Information Hub 2022. https://www.ruralhealthinfo.org/data-explorer (accessed January 24, 2022).
[175] Yuan Y , Li J , Jing Z , Yu C , Zhao D , Hao W , The role of mental health and physical activity in the association between sleep quality and quality of life among rural elderly in China: A moderated mediation model. J Affect Disord 2020;273 :462–7. 10.1016/j.jad.2020.05.093.32560941
[176] Cordone S , Annarumma L , Rossini PM , De Gennaro L . Sleep and β-Amyloid Deposition in Alzheimer Disease: Insights on Mechanisms and Possible Innovative Treatments. Front Pharmacol 2019;10 :695. 10.3389/fphar.2019.00695.31281257
[177] Innis AD , Tolea MI , Galvin JE . The Effect of Baseline Patient and Caregiver Mindfulness on Dementia Outcomes. J Alzheimers Dis 2021;79 :1345–67. 10.3233/JAD-201292.33427746
[178] Salinas J , O’Donnell A , Kojis DJ , Pase MP , DeCarli C , Rentz DM , Association of Social Support With Brain Volume and Cognition. JAMA Netw Open 2021;4 :e2121122. 10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2021.21122.34398201
[179] Rosenberg A , Mangialasche F , Ngandu T , Solomon A , Kivipelto M . Multidomain Interventions to Prevent Cognitive Impairment, Alzheimer’s Disease, and Dementia: From FINGER to World-Wide FINGERS. J Prev Alzheimers Dis 2020;7 :29–36. 10.14283/jpad.2019.41.32010923
[180] Huang Z , Guo Y , Ruan Y , Sun S , Lin T , Ye J , Associations of Lifestyle Factors With Cognition in Community-Dwelling Adults Aged 50 and Older: A Longitudinal Cohort Study. Front Aging Neurosci 2020;12 :601487. 10.3389/fnagi.2020.601487.33240081
[181] Joshi MS , Galvin JE . Cognitive Resilience in Brain Health and Dementia Research. J Alzheimers Dis 2022;90 :461–73. 10.3233/JAD-220755.36093713
[182] Li MJ , Black DS , Garland EL . The Applied Mindfulness Process Scale (AMPS): A process measure for evaluating mindfulness-based interventions. Pers Individ Dif 2016;93 :6–15. 10.1016/j.paid.2015.10.027.26858469
[183] Su K , Yuan J , Liu H , Luo M , Li Q , Liu S , The Comparative Effectiveness of Traditional Chinese Medicine Exercise Therapies in Elderly People With Mild Cognitive Impairment: A Systematic Review and Network Meta-Analysis. Front Neurol 2022;13 :775190. 10.3389/fneur.2022.775190.35370918
[184] Liu F , Chen X , Nie P , Lin S , Guo J , Chen J , Can Tai Chi Improve Cognitive Function? A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials. J Altern Complement Med 2021;27 :1070–83. 10.1089/acm.2021.0084.34314596
[185] Gu R , Gao Y , Zhang C , Liu X , Sun Z . Effect of Tai Chi on Cognitive Function among Older Adults with Cognitive Impairment: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med 2021;2021 :6679153. 10.1155/2021/6679153.34394392
[186] Ng TKS , Fam J , Feng L , Cheah IK-M , Tan CT-Y , Nur F , Mindfulness improves inflammatory biomarker levels in older adults with mild cognitive impairment: a randomized controlled trial. Transl Psychiatry 2020;10 :21. 10.1038/s41398-020-0696-y.32066726
[187] Ng TKS , Feng L , Fam J , Rawtaer I , Kumar AP , Rane G , Mindfulness Awareness Practice (MAP) to Prevent Dementia in Older Adults with Mild Cognitive Impairment: Protocol of a Randomized Controlled Trial and Implementation Outcomes. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2021;18 :10205. 10.3390/ijerph181910205.34639513
[188] Khine WWT , Voong ML , Ng TKS , Feng L , Rane GA , Kumar AP , Mental awareness improved mild cognitive impairment and modulated gut microbiome. Aging (Albany NY) 2020;12 :24371–93. 10.18632/aging.202277.33318317
[189] Wang Z , Liu S , Xu X , Xiao Y , Yang M , Zhao X , Gut Microbiota Associated With Effectiveness And Responsiveness to Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy in Improving Trait Anxiety. Front Cell Infect Microbiol 2022;12 :719829. 10.3389/fcimb.2022.719829.35281444
[190] Dunn TJ , Dimolareva M . The effect of mindfulness-based interventions on immunity-related biomarkers: a comprehensive meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Clin Psychol Rev 2022;92 :102124. 10.1016/j.cpr.2022.102124.35078038
[191] Burkhardt MA . Spirituality: an analysis of the concept. Holist Nurs Pract 1989;3 :69–77. 10.1097/00004650-198905000-00011.2670980
[192] Singh K , Junnarkar M , Singh D , Suchday S , Mitra S , Dayal P . Associations Between Religious/Spiritual Practices and Well-Being in Indian Elderly Rural Women. J Relig Health 2020;59 :2753–74. 10.1007/s10943-019-00877-9.31278629
[193] Dakin E , Levy DL , Williams KA . Religious and spiritual journeys of LGBT older adults in rural Southern Appalachia. Journal of Religion, Spirituality &amp; Aging 2022;34 :323–43. 10.1080/15528030.2021.1985035.
[194] Walsh DD , Snodgrass JL , Stewart-Sicking JA , Brown IT . Addressing religion and spirituality in counseling in rural Iowa. Journal of Rural Mental Health 2021;45 :141–53. 10.1037/rmh0000172.
[195] Boykin A , Schoenhofer S . Nursing as caring: a model for transforming practice. NLN Publ 1993:i–xxxii, 1-108.
[196] Qualls SH . Chapter 14 - Family caregiving. In: Ferraro KF , Carr D , editors. Handbook of Aging and the Social Sciences (Ninth Edition), Academic Press; 2021, p. 221–38. 10.1016/B978-0-12-815970-5.00014-0.
[197] Seeman TE , Lusignolo TM , Albert M , Berkman L . Social relationships, social support, and patterns of cognitive aging in healthy, high-functioning older adults: MacArthur studies of successful aging. Health Psychol 2001;20 :243–55. 10.1037//0278-6133.20.4.243.11515736
[198] Krueger KR , Wilson RS , Kamenetsky JM , Barnes LL , Bienias JL , Bennett DA . Social engagement and cognitive function in old age. Exp Aging Res 2009;35 :45–60. 10.1080/03610730802545028.19173101
[199] Bennett DA , Schneider JA , Tang Y , Arnold SE , Wilson RS . The effect of social networks on the relation between Alzheimer’s disease pathology and level of cognitive function in old people: a longitudinal cohort study. Lancet Neurol 2006;5 :406–12. 10.1016/S1474-4422(06)70417-3.16632311
[200] Biddle KD , d’Oleire Uquillas F , Jacobs HIL , Zide B , Kirn DR , Rentz DM , Social Engagement and Amyloid-β-Related Cognitive Decline in Cognitively Normal Older Adults. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 2019;27 :1247–56. 10.1016/j.jagp.2019.05.005.31248770
[201] Zhou Z , Wang P , Fang Y . Social Engagement and Its Change are Associated with Dementia Risk among Chinese Older Adults: A Longitudinal Study. Sci Rep 2018;8 :1551. 10.1038/s41598-017-17879-w.29367696
[202] Holt-Lunstad J , Smith TB , Layton JB . Social relationships and mortality risk: a meta-analytic review. PLoS Med 2010;7 :e1000316. 10.1371/journal.pmed.1000316.20668659
[203] Besser LM , Chang L-C , Hirsch JA , Rodriguez DA , Renne J , Rapp SR , Longitudinal Associations between the Neighborhood Built Environment and Cognition in US Older Adults: The Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2021;18 :7973. 10.3390/ijerph18157973.34360264
[204] Kahlon MK , Aksan N , Aubrey R , Clark N , Cowley-Morillo M , Jacobs EA , Effect of Layperson-Delivered, Empathy-Focused Program of Telephone Calls on Loneliness, Depression, and Anxiety Among Adults During the COVID-19 Pandemic: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Psychiatry 2021;78 :616–22. 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2021.0113.33620417
[205] Sunshine Calls and Senior Services from 211. 211 Helpline Palm Beach and Treasure Coast 2022. https://211palmbeach.org/sunshine (accessed December 21, 2022).
[206] Donovan NJ , Blazer D . Social Isolation and Loneliness in Older Adults: Review and Commentary of a National Academies Report. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 2020;28 :1233–44. 10.1016/j.jagp.2020.08.005.32919873
[207] Pruchno R Not your mother’s old age: Baby Boomers at age 65. Gerontologist 2012;52 :149–52. 10.1093/geront/gns038.22391869
[208] Freund K , Bayne AI , Siegfried A , Warren J , Nadel T , Natarajan A , Environmental Scan of Ride Share Services Available for Older Adults 2019.
[209] Holden A , Pusey H . The impact of driving cessation for people with dementia - An integrative review. Dementia (London) 2021;20 :1105–23. 10.1177/1471301220919862.32326750
[210] Lythreatis S , Singh SK , El-Kassar A-N . The digital divide: A review and future research agenda. Technological Forecasting and Social Change 2022;175 :121359. 10.1016/j.techfore.2021.121359.
[211] Eruchalu CN , Pichardo MS , Bharadwaj M , Rodriguez CB , Rodriguez JA , Bergmark RW , The Expanding Digital Divide: Digital Health Access Inequities during the COVID-19 Pandemic in New York City. J Urban Health 2021;98 :183–6. 10.1007/s11524-020-00508-9.33471281
[212] Chen J , Amaize A , Barath D . Evaluating Telehealth Adoption and Related Barriers Among Hospitals Located in Rural and Urban Areas. J Rural Health 2021;37 :801–11. 10.1111/jrh.12534.33180363
[213] Yoon H , Jang Y , Vaughan PW , Garcia M . Older Adults’ Internet Use for Health Information: Digital Divide by Race/Ethnicity and Socioeconomic Status. J Appl Gerontol 2020;39 :105–10. 10.1177/0733464818770772.29661052
[214] Howe JL , Penrod JD , Gottesman E , Bean A , Kramer BJ . The rural interdisciplinary team training program: a workforce development workshop to increase geriatrics knowledge and skills for rural providers. Gerontology &amp; Geriatrics Education 2019;40 :3–15. 10.1080/02701960.2018.1454917.29583103
[215] Flaherty E , Bartels SJ . Addressing the Community-Based Geriatric Healthcare Workforce Shortage by Leveraging the Potential of Interprofessional Teams. J Am Geriatr Soc 2019;67 :S400–8. 10.1111/jgs.15924.31074849
[216] Operation Smile 2022. https://www.operationsmile.org/ (accessed December 12, 2022).
[217] National Assessment of Educational Progress. Reading and mathematics scores decline during COVID-19 pandemic 2020.
[218] Chen G What Parents Should Know About Graduation Rates - PublicSchoolReview.com. Public School Review 2022. https://www.publicschoolreview.com/blog/what-parents-should-know-about-graduation-rates (accessed December 21, 2022).
[219] Clouston SAP , Smith DM , Mukherjee S , Zhang Y , Hou W , Link BG , Education and Cognitive Decline: An Integrative Analysis of Global Longitudinal Studies of Cognitive Aging. J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci 2020;75 :e151–60. 10.1093/geronb/gbz053.31059564
[220] Rowlands D , Love H . Mapping rural America’s diversity and demographic change. Brookings 2021. https://www.brookings.edu/blog/the-avenue/2021/09/28/mapping-rural-americas-diversity-and-demographic-change/ (accessed December 12, 2022).
[221] Weden MM , Shih RA , Kabeto MU , Langa KM . Secular Trends in Dementia and Cognitive Impairment of U.S. Rural and Urban Older Adults. Am J Prev Med 2018;54 :164–72. 10.1016/j.amepre.2017.10.021.29246677
[222] Mroczek DK , Weston SJ , Graham EK , Willroth EC . Data overuse in aging research: Emerging issues and potential solutions. Psychol Aging 2022;37 :141–7. 10.1037/pag0000605.33914579
[223] United Nations. Guidelines on Defining Rural Areas and Compiling Indicators for Development Policy 2018. https://www.fao.org/3/ca6392en/ca6392en.pdf.
[224] Project for Public Spaces. What is Placemaking? 2020. https://www.pps.org/category/placemaking (accessed December 28, 2022).
[225] Rural Health Information Hub. Engaging Community Members Affected by Health Inequities - RHIhub Health Equity Toolkit 2022. https://www.ruralhealthinfo.org/toolkits/health-equity/2/context-and-priorities/engaging-community-members (accessed December 28, 2022).
[226] Susanto PC . Initiation of a Rural Edutourism Destination in Bali Indonesia based on SWOT Analysis 2022. https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=4043865.
[227] Wiese LK , Williams CL , Hain D , Newman D , Houston CP , Kaack C , Detecting dementia among older, ethnically diverse residents of rural subsidized housing. Geriatr Nurs 2021;42 :524–32. 10.1016/j.gerinurse.2020.09.005.33039199
[228] Wiese LK , Williams IC , Schoenberg NE , Galvin JE , Lingler J . Overcoming the COVID-19 Pandemic for Dementia Research: Engaging Rural, Older, Racially and Ethnically Diverse Church Attendees in Remote Recruitment, Intervention and Assessment. Gerontol Geriatr Med 2021;7 :23337214211058920. 10.1177/23337214211058919.
[229] Epps F , Moore M , Chester M , Gore J , Sainz M , Adkins A , The Alter Program: A Nurse-Led, Dementia-Friendly Program for African American Faith Communities and Families Living With Dementia. Nurs Adm Q 2022;46 :72–80. 10.1097/NAQ.0000000000000506.34860803
[230] Dolgin E The hunt for the lesser-known funding source. Nature 2019;570 :127–9. 10.1038/d41586-019-01734-1.31160746
