LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


100962781
22270
Nat Rev Neurosci
Nat Rev Neurosci
Nature reviews. Neuroscience
1471-003X
1471-0048

36456807
10041987
10.1038/s41583-022-00661-x
NIHMS1880820
Article
A tripartite view of the posterior cingulate cortex
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-2621-5574
Foster Brett L. 1
http://orcid.org/0000-0001-7737-1377
Koslov Seth R. 1
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-2810-5408
Aponik-Gremillion Lyndsey 23
Monko Megan E. 4
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-7678-4281
Hayden Benjamin Y. 45
Heilbronner Sarah R. 4
1 Department of Neurosurgery, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
2 Department of Neurosurgery, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
3 Department of Health Sciences, Dumke College for Health Professionals, Weber State University, Ogden, UT, USA.
4 Department of Neuroscience, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
5 Center for Magnetic Resonance Research and Center for Neural Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
Correspondence should be addressed to Brett L. Foster. brett.foster@pennmedicine.upenn.edu
Author contributions

All authors contributed to researching data for the article and writing the article. B.L.F., S.R.K., S.R.H. and B.Y.H. contributed significantly to discussion of article content and reviewed and/or edited the article.

17 3 2023
3 2023
01 12 2022
27 3 2023
24 3 173189
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
The posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) is one of the least understood regions of the cerebral cortex. By contrast, the anterior cingulate cortex has been the subject of intensive investigation in humans and model animal systems, leading to detailed behavioural and computational theoretical accounts of its function. The time is right for similar progress to be made in the PCC given its unique anatomical and physiological properties and demonstrably important contributions to higher cognitive functions and brain diseases. Here, we describe recent progress in understanding the PCC, with a focus on convergent findings across species and techniques that lay a foundation for establishing a formal theoretical account of its functions. Based on this converging evidence, we propose that the broader PCC region contains three major subregions – the dorsal PCC, ventral PCC and retrosplenial cortex – that respectively support the integration of executive, mnemonic and spatial processing systems. This tripartite subregional view reconciles inconsistencies in prior unitary theories of PCC function and offers promising new avenues for progress.


pmcIntroduction

The posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) is one of the most poorly understood regions of the cerebrum1-3. In general, the PCC has not received the consistent empirical and theoretical research attention given to other neocortical regions such as the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC)4,5. However, this comparative absence of knowledge has not arisen because the PCC lacks interesting properties or has failed to capture the interest of neuroscientists. Anatomically, the PCC is a large cortical expanse (with an unfolded size of approximately 18 cm2 in humans6) and serves as a central connectivity hub for many large-scale brain networks7. Physiologically, it is a site of peak metabolic activity within the neocortex8. The PCC is also acknowledged as critically important in the development of neurodegenerative and psychiatric diseases1 (Box 1) and appears to be especially implicated in the progression of Alzheimer disease9-11. Functionally, the PCC has been implicated in many domains, including memory, learning, navigation, decision-making, emotion, creativity and executive control1. Despite these myriad points of interest, focused efforts to study the PCC have been limited, leaving us with a poor understanding of the region and its unique role in health and disease.

Multiple factors may account for the overall lack of focus on the PCC. First, it is noteworthy that a consensus on the basic anatomical definition and nomenclature for the PCC is lacking12. Second, there is currently no central theory as to its specific function that can serve as a focal point to motivate research or as the fulcrum of debates that drive questions, answers and scholarly progress; theory can drive new research into a brain area, as was the case, for example, with ACC and cognitive control4,5,13-15. Third, there is no single cognitive function for which the PCC is proposed to be the central and causal locus, yet such proposed functions can propel and organize new focus a brain area. Finally, there are unique empirical challenges that have restricted study of the PCC owing to its distinct anatomy and physiology. Most importantly, focal damage to the PCC is rare, meaning that the neuropsychological foundation of classic case studies that are common to many other brain structures16 are limited for the PCC.

These challenges notwithstanding, there remains a sizable body of convergent empirical research on the PCC, which is ripe for integrative theorizing. The goal of the present Perspective is to synthesize such work and render a new framework for studying the PCC. In short, we will argue that past literature on the PCC can be reconciled with a tripartite approach (three subdivisions) to understanding its structure and functions. Although much work is needed to adjudicate on our proposed tripartite view, particularly regarding the retrosplenial cortex (RSC), we argue that this approach will aid in the development of new, testable theories of PCC function, reconciling prior discrepancies in the literature, and provides a foundation for progress in understanding this important brain structure.

PCC anatomy

PCC gross anatomy

The cingulate (derived from the Latin word for girdle) is the cortical tissue that surrounds and borders the full length of the corpus callosum on the medial surface of the brain17. Therefore, the cingulate cortex includes the callosal sulcus, cingulate gyrus and cingulate sulcus. In primates, the PCC is differentiable from and caudal to the ACC and the mid-cingulate cortex (MCC) and extends posteriorly around the splenium of the corpus callosum6,17 (Fig. 1).

While lacking consistent and overt sulcal boundaries, the rostral border between the PCC and MCC is approximately demarcated by the medial aspect of the central sulcus, whereas its caudal border occurs at the convergence of the parahippocampal gyrus and parieto-occipital sulcus. As the PCC follows the curvature of the splenium, its dorsal borders are approximated by the marginal ramus of the cingulate sulcus, superiorly, and the arc of the splenial sulcus, posteriorly6,12 (Fig. 1). The splenial sulcus also serves as a gross anatomical boundary with the related but distinct precuneus (area 7m; see below). Within the PCC gyrus, particularly in humans, several shallow or tertiary sulci have been noted12,17. A recent large-scale analysis of PCC sulcal morphology suggests that one of these tertiary sulci in particular, the infra-marginal sulcus, is a common morphological feature in humans and some non-human primates (NHPs)12. In addition, the infra-marginal sulcus may serve as a useful anatomical landmark in humans as it is observed to be both consistently posterior (by approximately 0.5–1 cm) to delineations of the PCC–MCC boundary12,17,18 and often superior to the isthmus19 of the corpus callosum (Fig. 1a).

PCC architecture

Although we use the term PCC, the posterior or caudal portion of the cingulate cortex has historically been associated with two differing nomenclatures. In some cases, the term PCC includes the posterior cingulate gyrus (area 23), splenial sulcus (area 31; also termed the sub-parietal (or PCC) sulcus20) and the RSC (areas 29 and 30)21-25. In other cases, the term PCC excludes the RSC, which occupies the callosal sulcus in primates6,17,26 (Box 2). However, using this narrower definition, there is no single term that then describes the entire caudal aspect of the cingulate region. Thus, in this Perspective, we will use PCC as a general term for this larger cingulate region, including areas 29, 30, 23 and 31 (ref.6). Importantly, the PCC is distinct from but functionally related to the precuneus27, which is not cingulate cortex (although often these terms are used synonymously in the literature). Together, the PCC (as defined here) and the precuneus form the posterior medial cortex (PMC)28. In this Perspective, we anchor our focus specifically on the PCC but note the importance of also understanding the role of the precuneus within the PMC region27,29-32.

Importantly, as emphasized below, there appear to be structural and functional differences between the dorsal and ventral aspects of areas 23 and 31 in the human brain17,33-35. Thus, based on convergent anatomical evidence from studies of cytoarchitecture and connectivity as well as function (discussed below), we propose that the primate PCC is best thought of as consisting of three key subregions (Fig. 1a,b): the RSC (areas 29 and 30), the ventral PCC (vPCC; the ventral and posterior portion of areas 23 and 31) and the dorsal PCC (dPCC; the dorsal and anterior portion of areas 23 and 31). Figure 1b shows equivalent regions in NHPs. The RSC resides chiefly within the callosal sulcus and its rostral to caudal extent aligns with the anterior boundary of the dPCC and the inferior boundary of the vPCC (Fig. 1 and Box 2). An approximate division of the posterior cingulate gyrus indicates that two-thirds of it comprises the dPCC and one-third the vPCC (with the dPCC–vPCC boundary being proximal to the start of the ventral branch of the splenial sulcus in humans; Fig. 1a). We emphasize that these subregional divisions have been proposed previously and are consistent with contemporary anatomical demarcation33,34,36-38. However, most studies investigating PCC function do not incorporate these formal distinctions or do so using alternative borders. Throughout this Perspective, when feasible, we will attempt to interpret prior results with these divisions in mind rather than the original designations of the authors.

Receptor architecture can also allow us to differentiate between the subregions of the PCC as well as to distinguish the PCC from the ACC (although it is not entirely clear how these divisions should be interpreted functionally). For example, the dPCC contains higher densities of GABAB receptors, muscarinic M3 receptors, and serotoninergic 5-HT1A receptors and a lower density of M1 receptors compared to the vPCC39. In addition, the PCC has greater acetylcholine receptor binding densities than the ACC39,40.

Finally, we note that obtaining detailed cytoarchitectural data is empirically challenging and results in few targeted studies for any brain region, of which the PCC is no exception. As contemporary methods of studying cortical cytoarchitecture progress, particularly in the human brain, it will be important to see how the demarcations employed here are supported or further refined. For example, efforts such as the Julich–Brain Atlas41, which has yet to report on the PCC, will provide an important test of the tripartite framework outlined here by, for example, determining the cytoarchitectural demarcation of human RSC areas 29 and 30 (Box 2).

PCC connectivity

Broadly speaking, the PCC connects with regions involved in memory, emotion and executive control. However, tracer injection studies in NHPs have made it clear that the three subregions of the PCC have different connectivity profiles (although with substantial overlap). Regarding thalamic projections, the dPCC preferentially receives inputs from the posterolateral nucleus (associated with somatosensory information), the central nucleus (associated with basal ganglia feedback), the mediodorsal nucleus (which also connects heavily with the prefrontal cortex (PFC)), the ventral anterior nucleus (strongly associated with basal ganglia connectivity), the ventral lateral nucleus (associated with motor functions)33, and the limbic-associated anterior dorsal, anterior ventral and anterior medial nuclei28. The vPCC preferentially receives input from the anterior medial nucleus (a limbic nucleus associated with memory) and the pulvinar and lateral dorsal nuclei (associated with memory)33. The RSC preferentially receives inputs from the anterior thalamic nuclei (strongly associated with limbic circuitry, including the hippocampus) and the medial pulvinar nucleus33. The majority of these PCC–thalamic projections are reciprocal28,33.

Regarding cortical projections, the entire PCC connects with the dorsolateral PFC, ACC, lateral parietal lobe, temporal pole and entorhinal cortex28,42. However, there are also connections that differentiate these subregions, both quantitatively and qualitatively. Relative to the rest of the PCC, the vPCC receives fewer projections from the PFC and also receives more projections from the temporal cortex (not including the hippocampus) than does the dPCC. The RSC, relative to the vPCC and dPCC, receives more input from the hippocampus, parahippocampal cortex and dorsolateral PFC26,43,44. The RSC does not directly connect with the precuneus, whereas the vPCC and dPCC do so reciprocally28. Whether any parts of the PCC connect with cortical sensory areas is difficult to know given the inconsistent literature. Parvizi et al.28 noted an absence of connections between the PCC and primary sensory areas. However, Morecraft et al.45 reported connectivity between the PCC (mainly dPCC) and a variety of sensory areas, including the primary somatosensory cortex, area V3, medial superior temporal area and auditory association cortex.

Together, the connectivity of the PCC supports our tripartite view of the region. That is, the dPCC is more intimately coupled with frontal regions, whereas the vPCC is more intimately connected with both frontal and temporal lobe regions. By contrast, the RSC is particularly innervated by connections from the medial temporal lobe. While these data are derived from NHPs, tractography in the human brain also supports distinct dorsal and ventral pathway convergence within the PCC46. These connectivity profiles help to set a foundation for putative functional roles for these subregions, discussed below.

Comparative issues

As detailed above, the human and NHP PCC show a high level of anatomical homology (Fig. 1). The situation is more complex when considering a homologous PCC region in rodents. The traditional neuroanatomical view holds that there is no homologue of areas 23 or 31 in rodents47 based on a specific cytoarchitectural feature of primate versus rodent PCC tissue. In primates, areas 23 and 31 can be differentiated from areas 29 and 30 by the number of layer IV stellate cells that they contain, which is higher in areas 23 and 31 (ref.48). Rodents do not possess an area with this larger number of layer IV stellate cells, and therefore may lack an equivalent of primate areas 23 and 31 (refs.47,48). However, rodents have a large retrosplenial region (areas 29 and 30) occupying much of the posterior medial surface2,47. Thus, within our tripartite division, rodents only possess the RSC and lack vPCC and dPCC homologues. However, PCC homologies have not received the attention that ACC homologies have (largely because ACC homologies are considered in the broader context of the PFC, which is the subject of extensive study), and thus remain largely unclear (see refs.49-51). It is for these reasons that we have focused this Perspective on the primate brain.

PCC function

In reviewing the functions of the PCC, we use PCC as a general regional term, as defined above, or when discussing data for which further anatomical precision is not possible. Otherwise, we employ the distinctions of dPCC, vPCC and RSC whenever appropriate. Importantly, we note that, unlike many other brain regions, the PCC lacks the canonical lesion studies that often serve to orient a field as to the putative core or unique function of an area16. The PCC is among the most densely vascularized regions of the brain52,53 and receives a dual blood supply from the posterior and middle cerebral arteries, greatly reducing the rate of ischaemic stroke (for comparison, ischaemic stroke in the neighbouring precuneus accounts for less than 1% of cases54). In addition, the anatomical location of the PCC limits the occurrence of focal lesions and, when cases of insult do affect the PCC, they typically incorporate major pathways, like the cingulum bundle or corpus callosum55, complicating functional interpretation. Therefore, we note a general paucity of causal studies of PCC function but do acknowledge key examples within the context of specific sections below. Finally, as discussed in Box 2, the demarcation of the RSC, particularly in humans, varies widely in the literature. Contemporary anatomical findings differ greatly from the common translations of Brodmann’s maps56, presenting a serious challenge when interpreting the literature. In light of this, and given several recent reviews57-59, we provide only a limited discussion of RSC function.

Neuroimaging studies of the PCC

Early neuroimaging studies repeatedly observed that the PCC was one of several brain regions showing consistent reductions or ‘deactivations’ in haemodynamic measures of activity across a wide range of attention-demanding tasks60. Conversely, the PCC and the precuneus were routinely observed as regions of peak blood flow and metabolism during resting or non-task states61. Together, these findings established the PCC as a common node within a unique network of brain regions showing high basal levels of haemodynamic activity that is greatly reduced during many forms of cognitive effort – now commonly referred to as the default mode network (DMN)61-63. This peculiar ‘task-negative’ property of the PCC and precuneus led them to be referred to collectively as the ‘medial mystery parietal area’64. As to what function this paradoxical suppression of activity during ‘cognition’ served, it was initially speculated that “the PCC and adjacent precuneus can be posited as a tonically active region of the brain that may continuously gather information about the world around, and possibly within, us”61. The PCC was viewed as a region supporting a type of surveillance of ongoing cognitive processes that is transiently suspended by tasks with high attentional demand31. A rapidly growing contemporary literature has further examined these links between ongoing spontaneous thought and the DMN65-67.

Following this early work, the functional MRI (fMRI) literature has examined PCC function primarily as part of studying the DMN or the larger PMC region. However, although deactivation within the PCC during attention-demanding tasks has been widely replicated68, a large literature now demonstrates that many task-evoked cognitive states reliably produce increased haemodynamic activity within the PCC, consistent with early positron emission tomography (PET) observations69-72. In particular, PCC haemodynamic activation occurs during tasks relying on episodic memory, spatial navigation, self-referential cognition or other types of higher-order, abstract thought related to contextual and semantic processing73-75. Indeed, the role of the PCC in episodic memory is characterized by its opposing directionality of responses at different stages of memory processing76: PCC activity is typically suppressed during episodic memory encoding and enhanced during episodic memory retrieval. During encoding, PCC deactivation is greater for items more likely to be subsequently remembered77-79. Likewise, PCC activity is more enhanced during successful episodic memory retrieval across a variety of stimulus types80-84. Building on early observations, PCC activation has generally been framed as occurring under conditions that require ‘internal’ or ‘self-referential’ focus, and PCC deactivation as occurring under conditions that require ‘external’ or ‘non-self-referential’ focus85. More specific theories have implicated PCC activation in spatial and environmental processing (such as scene construction75,86), abstract associative processing (such as contextual or semantic processing74) and, more recently, reinforcement learning87. It is important to again note that such accounts are often not specific to the PCC and its subregions but rather incorporate the PCC as a key node of the DMN or larger posterior medial or ‘midline’ regions. However, subsequent progress in brain network parcellation, together with targeted cognitive paradigms, have further detailed the network memberships and putative functions of the human PCC.

Brain networks and PCC subdivisions

Using patterns of correlated blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) fMRI activity during resting states together with network statistics, researchers have made great progress in identifying distinct large-scale networks in the human brain88-91 that often recapitulate patterns of fMRI activity evoked during task performance92,93 and are believed to reflect the putative network architecture of functional brain circuits94,95. While early network neuroscience studies incorporated the entire PCC within a larger PMC ‘node’ (Fig. 2a), more recent work has indicated a heterogeneous subregional organization96. When directly comparing whole-brain patterns of correlated resting-state activity between the vPCC and dPCC, a clear division emerges. The dPCC is regularly coupled with frontoparietal or executive control networks, whereas the vPCC is more strongly connected to the DMN97-99 (Fig. 2a). In addition, the vPCC (often reported as RSC) is routinely coupled with a memory or association network that includes the medial temporal lobe and inferior parietal lobule91,100. Using complementary approaches, large-scale meta-analyses of task-based coactivations have also reported that the dPCC, vPCC and RSC can be functionally dissociated37,96,101. Together, these data provide compelling links to the tripartite anatomical divisions of the PCC.

Since the first fMRI-based network analyses, an incredible amount of progress has been made in refining putative network boundaries and then utilizing these networks as a lens for exploring functional neuroanatomy102. Recently, researchers have been able to harness a combination of high-resolution functional imaging techniques (such as 7 T fMRI) with precision neuroimaging protocols (where the same individual is repeatedly scanned over many sessions at high spatial resolution) to estimate functional networks not from a group average but from individuals themselves103,104. Such approaches have recapitulated the main results from group parcellation maps and have found that the dPCC, vPCC and RSC are most often members of dissociable functional networks105,106. In addition, they have shown a degree of topographic variability, which promotes further use of such precision methods within the PCC. Thus, these more contemporary neuroimaging studies of putative functional brain networks, like the anatomical studies described above, support a tripartite division of the PCC. Importantly, we acknowledge that, as a haemodynamic-based measurement (that is, one sensitive to vascular organization), fMRI parcellations may not perfectly recapitulate cytoarchitectural boundaries. By considering these network divisions and specifically focusing on PCC activation profiles, the putative functions of PCC subregions start to emerge.

PCC subregions and episodic memory.

Consistent with its anatomical connections with the medial temporal lobe, the PCC has been regularly implicated in episodic memory by neuroimaging studies80,83,107,108, in which its activity increases with subjective memory strength and detail of retrieved stimuli. Such findings have motivated consideration of the PCC as a key node in a larger medial temporal lobe–neocortical memory system30,108,109. Within these extended memory system theories, the PCC is thought to be part of a memory retrieval or elaboration network that represents the context or gist associated with previous experience109. Indeed, in the limited number of case studies reporting on PCC damage, the reported deficits relate to ‘retrosplenial’ or ‘topographic’ amnesia, where spatial memory is particularly impaired110-112, highlighting the association between the PCC and episodic and spatial memory behaviour113. However, the unique contribution of the PCC to episodic memory is still poorly understood. We believe that consideration of subregions may help delineate the functional roles of the PCC. For example, the locus of the encoding–retrieval response flip within the PCC, noted above, differs between PCC subregions depending on the mnemonic task conditions being contrasted (see ref.114). Thus, extant data already highlight unique subregional effects within the PCC during different kinds of memory retrieval behaviour.

To study episodic memory, researchers often use autobiographical recall tasks, wherein individuals freely recollect details of real-world experiences. While these tasks are ecologically valid, they are challenging to implement, and it is difficult to verify subjective reports. Therefore, researchers often prefer more controlled item-recognition tasks, wherein individuals are presented with lists of stimuli (such as images) and, after some delay (of varying durations), are asked which stimuli they recognize from the studied list (that is, whether a stimulus presented is old/studied or new/unstudied). Interestingly, these two types of retrieval tasks tend to produce strikingly different patterns of activity, which may be best explained by a subregional account of the PCC. While activity in the vPCC increases during autobiographical retrieval and recall, activity in the dPCC is related to performing item-recognition tasks115,116 (Fig. 2b and Supplementary Information). This distinct pattern of PCC responses persists even when the same stimuli are employed to probe both tasks117. Given that the dPCC shows activation in response to item-recognition decisions118 but often not to autobiographical recall116, what role does it perform during item recognition? The dPCC has been implicated in tasks that involve balancing attention between internal/mnemonic and external/perceptual sources119, and is responsive to the familiarity of a stimulus even outside of overt memory contexts114,120; it has also been implicated in long-term memory-guided attention121. This suggests that the dPCC serves as a bridge between mnemonic and control processes. Furthermore, it is interesting to note that, while visuo-spatially relevant mnemonic processes (such as recalling details about your favourite park growing up) are associated with vPCC activity, visuo-spatially relevant control processes (like using environmental cues to decide where to allocate attention) have been associated with dPCC activity122,123.

What factors account for the task–region functional dissociation within the PCC? Closer examination of previous results reveals that levels of BOLD activity within the vPCC can be directly linked to effortful memory retrieval76. Additionally, the vPCC has been implicated as part of a semantic processing network74,124,125 as well as in the representation of details about the self and others126-128. Further insight may be found by looking outside of the PCC and towards distributed neocortical regions implicated in mnemonic processing. The distinct activation patterns observed in the vPCC versus dPCC mirror the relative contributions of the two dissociable cortical–hippocampal memory systems that are proposed by the PMAT framework109. The PMAT framework specifies a network of brain regions with a posterior medial (PM) core, including the parahippocampal cortex, PCC, RSC and precuneus, that also extends to the ventral medial prefrontal cortex and angular gyrus. This PM network is involved in representing spatial and contextual memory features as well as egocentric information, and is crucial for autobiographical and episodic memory retrieval129. Conversely, the anterior temporal (AT) network, including the perirhinal cortex, amygdala, anterior ventral temporal and lateral orbitofrontal cortices, is involved in item recognition and associative memory and may be essential for assigning significance or value to stimuli. The response profile and intrinsic connectivity of the vPCC described above strongly implicates the region in the PM network, while the dPCC more aptly aligns with the AT network130,131.

Alternatively, according to the ‘integrative memory model’ of recollection and familiarity, the dPCC is closely connected with frontoparietal control regions responsible for generating and evaluating familiarity signals, while the vPCC is more strongly linked to memory association and representational processes that underlie recollection. In this framework, the RSC is also considered an important connectivity hub but thought to have critical involvement in mnemonic reinstatement132. Finally, it has also been suggested that the differential functional response and connectivity profiles of the dPCC and vPCC may link the subregions to mnemonic concepts that have been proposed as primary axes of retrieval processes such as allocentric processing versus egocentric processing133-136, the degree to which a memory has undergone consolidation137,138, or the degree to which control is necessary for memory search or post-retrieval monitoring116,139,140.

The dichotomies common to these theories raise the question of whether the activity observed in the dPCC during recognition tasks is best viewed strictly through a mnemonic lens114 or whether there are alternative accounts that may help better isolate dPCC function and the dissociation with the vPCC. We return to this topic later, when we review compelling literature from the fields of decision-making and cognitive control that also routinely identifies dPCC activation, shedding light on the activity observed during mnemonic decisions.

PCC subregions and visuo-spatial processing.

Given the clear implication of the PCC in episodic memory, it is not surprising that, like the medial temporal lobe, it has also been associated with visuo-spatial processing134. In particular, substantial literature across species has focused specifically on the role of the RSC in scene perception and navigational coding. Detailed discussion of this literature is beyond our current scope and this topic has been previously reviewed (see refs.2,59,141). However, it is noteworthy that this literature raises important issues regarding the anatomical and functional definitions of the RSC, particularly in the human brain141,142 (Box 2).

Related to these observations is a growing literature which indicates distinctions between PCC subregions in their visual coding for places and people (both common attributes of episodic memory). For example, several recent fMRI studies have directly compared responses within the PMC region to place and face stimuli and reported that the vPCC, extending into the parieto-occipital sulcus (referred to as the medial place area), is selectively responsive to place stimuli. By contrast, a region of the dPCC centred around the splenial sulcus is selectively responsive to face stimuli143-146. When comparing perceptual versus mnemonic processing of place and face items, there is some evidence of overlapping regional responses to these conditions within the PCC144. However, there may also be a systematic anterior perception-to-memory shift in functional responses particularly to place stimulus conditions147,148. Further work is needed to understand these data as the PCC has historically not been routinely implicated in higher-order visual category selectivity149,150. Interestingly, putative place and face ‘areas’ of the PCC display particularly strong responses during perception of personally familiar stimuli when compared to unfamiliar stimuli143,145, implicating a memory facet to these responses. It will be important to further understand the nature of these visual/semantic category responses and how they relate to the PCC memory retrieval processes detailed above.

PCC subregions in decision-making and cognitive control.

While being routinely implicated in item-recognition memory, the dPCC is also consistently engaged in studies of decision-making (Fig. 2). However, the substantial human neuroimaging literature implicating the dPCC in decision-making has not been well integrated with the findings from memory studies. Early observations from neuroimaging showed that activity in the dPCC, together with other brain regions, was associated with gain (that is, a positive decision outcome)151 and with the subjective value of economic decisions152-154. Unlike objective value, subjective value considers all factors that may influence valuation such as the delay in receiving a reward or the effort required (explaining, for example, the popular delay-discounting effect152,155,156). Activity in the dPCC, as well as its functional relationship with other regions, is sensitive to a number of contextual factors that influence subjective value such as the riskiness (the probability of a low-likelihood reward compared to a more likely option) of a stimulus leading to a reward157 and how well the subjective value of a stimulus aligns with current task goals158. However, the subjective value of stimuli often correlates with other experimenter-controlled environmental factors such as the contextual predictability of receiving rewards. Indeed, many researchers have found that, rather than being involved in the processing of subjective values of individual stimuli, the dPCC is more likely involved in tracking environmental uncertainty or probability159. For example, activity in the dPCC has been found to correlate with decision-making variables such as context prediction errors (the mismatch between expectations and experienced events or outcomes)160,161, uncertainty or riskiness of decisions162-164, updating of values based on contextual information165,166, and change points in context167. While the unique contributions of the dPCC to decision-making remain to be delineated, these findings suggest a role for the dPCC as a bridge linking local reward contingencies with broader contextual schemes, possibly relying on or operating upon memory retrieval processes.

Importantly, multiple meta-analyses have shown the striking consistency of dPCC engagement during decision-making153,154,168, while responses within the vPCC and RSC are comparatively uncommon (however, see ref.169). More work will be needed to merge findings from the separate decision-making and memory literature170 to better pinpoint the involvement of the dPCC. As detailed below, this executive role, specific to the dPCC, provides a compelling homology with NHP electrophysiology.

Electrophysiological studies of the PCC

Electrophysiology offers an important complement to neuroimaging studies. While human neuroimaging of the PCC has tended to focus on interrogating memory-related processes, electrophysiological work in NHPs has focused on decision-making and cognitive control3,171-173 and, to some extent, on spatial encoding174-176. Thus, the two types of study have provided complementary information rather than direct crossspecies replications (however, see ref.177). These apparent differences in research foci may suggest species differences in function as revealed by the two methods. However, we caution against this view; in fact, we believe that there is tentative evidence for functional homology across methods (and therefore species).

NHP single-unit studies.

Early single-unit studies of the PCC in primates were motivated by the goal of understanding its relationship with the parietal cortex and, in particular, its role in spatial processing173-176. Because of the interest in the parietal cortex, these studies targeted the area with the strongest parietal connections (area CGp). As this region best approximates what we refer to as the dPCC (Fig. 3), we will herein use the term dPCC for this region. Recordings from the dPCC of the macaque have highlighted a host of coding attributes, including the capacity to encode spatial information, value, and other cognitive and mnemonic variables3.

The studies that identified spatial coding in the PCC, broadly speaking, found evidence of coding of gaze direction and saccade target location; these responses did co-vary with reward size as do responses in many parietal regions. For example, neurons in the dPCC respond to targets that cue saccades and are active at the time of the saccades themselves174-176; these responses are modestly spatially selective, generally to contralateral cues and contraversive saccades. Some tentative evidence supports the hypothesis that spatial coding in the dPCC is allocentric175, orienting objects in space relative to one another rather than relative to the self, which would make it hippocampal-like. More recent work in this domain has used novel paradigms, such as a moving platform, to probe the spatial repertoire of the dPCC and has shown stronger spatial selectivity in the dPCC than in the RSC178. These studies typically emphasize the importance of post-saccadic timing of dPCC responses21, which suggests that the dPCC may be specifically selective for monitoring functions (that is, indicating important information in light of a recent action or decision)171,179. It is important to note that studies of the human dPCC have generally avoided these questions; therefore, these NHP studies provide a complementary source of information that broadens our understanding of the function of the dPCC and highlight key areas for comparative work in the future. One intriguing point of potential homology in this domain is the cingulate sulcus visual area within the dPCC, which is associated with spatial and visuo-motor processing in both humans and NHPs180.

Showing closer links to the human findings detailed above, the NHP dPCC also plays a prominent role in decision-making, valuation and choice, a functionality it also shares with the parietal cortex181,182. Studies of value coding in the NHP dPCC have shown that dPCC neurons encode the values associated with completed saccades171,173,179 and that their firing rates track the variance of risky offers (which varies with their subjective but not with their objective expected values183; Fig. 3). These findings are consistent with the idea that the dPCC is part of a set of regions whose activity varies with subjective value168, often termed the subjective value network170, which may relate to its connections with the orbitofrontal cortex (among other reward structures)184. However, a subsequent study that carefully dissociated value (the preference for certain choices) from salience (the absolute difference between a choice outcome and baseline outcome) found that salience provided a better explanation for dPCC firing172. This may help to explain why this region only appears in certain human neuroimaging studies of subjective value, far fewer than do regions such as the ventral striatum and ventromedial PFC. As above, all of these studies targeted single-unit activity within the dPCC.

In one example of specific homology between NHPs and humans, neurons in the NHP dPCC show tonic deactivation as might be expected given the role of this area in the DMN173. For example, in a simple delayed saccade task (with or without a working memory component), tonic firing rate activity is reduced during the task period relative to the delay between trials177 (Fig. 3). Indeed, during the more demanding active maintenance of information in working memory, the firing rate in the dPCC is further reduced177. These findings are reminiscent of the idea that dPCC activity reflects processes antagonistic to successful task performance as noted above185. In an environment with multiple interleaved tasks, dPCC activity is reduced following task switches186, which are presumably more cognitively demanding trials; consistent with this idea, activity systematically increases with time (number of trials) since a task switch. Likewise, dPCC firing rates predict switch or change decisions in a bandit task (where a decision between exploiting a current and known option versus exploring other options must be made) and in a foraging task (where a decision is made between exploiting a current and depleting reward source versus spending time exploring in order to find a new reward source)187,188. As other studies have shown, inter-trial activity is not redundant – instead, it likely reflects a record of the outcome of the past trial and predicts (and even causes) upcoming adjustments in behaviour171. These results are of particular interest as they relate to a growing human neuroimaging literature indicating the PCC and precuneus as two of several cortical regions with long windows of temporal integration189,190. Thus, activity within the PCC at any given moment is influenced by a prior history of neural events that extends much further back in time than that observed in sensory cortices.

Beyond these findings, there is a paucity of work focused on learning and memory within the NHP PCC. However, one study has directly examined the neuronal correlates of memory formation within this region191, and therefore provides a crucial bridge between the larger memory-focused human neuroimaging literature and NHP physiology. This particular study, which was inspired by conditional visuomotor learning tasks192,193, found that dPCC neurons signal performance errors and that their activity is greatest around the time that the error occurs. While this result appears to be consistent with the idea that dPCC activity is inimical to learning, findings in which localized muscimol inactivation was used argue otherwise; paradoxically, inactivation of the dPCC reduced learning191 (Fig. 3). These results suggest that dPCC activation is seen at the time that an error occurs in cognitively demanding situations because it is a consequence of processes implemented to reduce control errors. A role for this region in learning is also suggested by Pearson et al.187 who reported enhanced tonic dPCC activity during explore trials (associated with greater learning), compared to exploit trials, in an explore–exploit task.

Just as they can be compared to findings of human neuroimaging studies of the dPCC, these electrophysiological findings in the PCC can be contextualized by comparing them with responses of neurons in the NHP dorsal ACC (dACC). Relative to the dPCC, neurons in the dACC tend to have much more task-related activity and much stronger task-evoked responses. For example, post-trial reward-encoding responses tend to last several seconds in the dPCC171 and a few hundred milliseconds in the dACC194. Indeed, neurons in the dACC tend to respond to reward and then return to a pre-trial baseline within a few hundred milliseconds, whereas neurons in the dPCC remain modulated for several seconds, often lasting several trials. Neurons in the dACC appear to encode both the values of offers and their salience, whereas dPCC responses appear to be dominated by salience signals4,172,195. Both regions carry modest spatial information, although the selectivity appears to be sharper in the dACC than in the dPCC186,196. Both regions also display spiking modulation during arousal events that elicit activity in the locus coeruleus and drive pupil dilation197. Together, these results illustrate that there are clear differences between the areas but just as many (if not more) similarities, and raise the possibility of a broad trans-cingulate functional repertoire involving monitoring and adjustment functions.

Human electrophysiological studies.

Non-invasive methodologies that are common in human neuroscience (such as electroencephalography and magnetoencephalography) are limited in their capacity to reliably isolate PCC-specific electrophysiological signals given the deep medial location of this region and its proximity to key sensorimotor regions198. Therefore, invasive recordings from the human brain, while rare, provide a critical opportunity to directly capture PCC electrophysiology. Such recordings are performed in patients with pharmaco-resistant epilepsy who are undergoing invasive monitoring for potential neurosurgical treatment199. This clinically motivated invasive monitoring involves the surgical insertion of subdural electrode arrays on the cortical surface (electrocorticography) and/or penetrating depth electrodes (stereo-encephalography) targeting deep cortical and subcortical structures.

Motivated primarily by observations from human neuroimaging, electrophysiological investigation of the human PCC has focused on its role as a member of the DMN198. Common to these studies (and others in the field) is a focus on changes in high-frequency activity (70–200 Hz) as a robust signature of local population spiking and associated synaptic events200-204, which closely correlates with BOLD fMRI activity patterns205. Consistent with human neuroimaging, intracranial recordings from the human PCC have shown event-related suppression or deactivation of high-frequency activity during externally directed tasks such as target detection206, visual search207,208, mental calculation209,210 and sustained attention211 (Fig. 3). Also consistent with neuroimaging and NHP single-unit findings, greater high-frequency deactivation within the PCC correlates with improved task performance208,210,211. Such data provide an electrophysiological basis for the neuroimaging findings and reveal important temporal information. For example, event-related suppression of the PCC occurs relatively late (&gt;300 ms) after event-related suppression in other nodes of the DMN (such as the lateral temporal cortex) but before others (such as the medial PFC208). In addition, high-frequency activity in the PCC displays deactivation after the engagement of the dorsal attention network (which includes the dorsolateral frontal and parietal cortices and typically occurs ~200 ms after trial onset211,212) as might be expected from a hub of the DMN. Task-related suppression of activity within the PCC is currently the only common electrophysiological finding between human and NHP studies.

Similar to the neuroimaging findings, while externally directed tasks induce PCC deactivation, a variety of internally directed cognitive tasks result in increased high-frequency activity within the PCC, including shifts into resting non-task states and autobiographical memory retrieval205,209,210,213 (Fig. 3). The latter responses typically have late onset (&gt;300 ms) relative to task cues but are closely aligned with those of other DMN regions associated with memory retrieval205. In addition, high-frequency responses to autobiographical memory within the PCC are greater than those observed for similar semantic or personal judgements205,213. High-frequency increases in activity during autobiographical memory retrieval are larger, more reliable and shorter in onset latency within the vPCC than in the rest of the PCC when considering individual anatomy, consistent with neuroimaging findings209,210. However, high-frequency responses during autobiographical memory search can be observed throughout the PCC. Increased high-frequency activity within the dPCC is also observed for successful word-list free recall214. To date, there has been no systematic human intracranial PCC investigation specific to mnemonic decisions or decision-making in general. However, of note, non-mnemonic responses to more executive task conditions, such as task-switches or numerical processing, do produce increased high-frequency activity within the dPCC213. Most recently, this dissociation was directly examined via human intracranial recordings showing a clear selectivity for executive tasks (visual search and number addition) within dPCC recordings in contrast to vPCC recordings215 (Fig. 3). These results were also supported at the single-unit level in the same study, where the majority of dPCC cells showed firing selectivity to only specific executive task conditions. These findings provide further functional evidence linking the dPCC to executive cognitive control brain networks215.

Intracranial recordings have also shed light on lower-frequency oscillations within the PCC, which have a number of proposed roles in coordinating neural activity. For example, during rest, the intrinsic oscillatory activity of the PCC peaks in the theta band range (4–7 Hz), which is distinct from the oscillatory activity in neighbouring brain regions such as the occipital alpha rhythm (8–10 Hz)216. In addition, the phase of PCC theta oscillations exhibits cross-frequency coupling with high-frequency amplitude216. This intrinsic oscillatory activity is similar to that of the hippocampus and, potentially, the DMN more generally217. Indeed, theta synchronization between the vPCC and the medial temporal lobe cortex occurs prior to high-frequency activation within the vPCC during autobiographical memory retrieval218 and item recall214. Such findings add further support to the hypothesis that the vPCC is intimately involved with the memory retrieval functions of the medial temporal lobe30. Additional support for this view comes from electrophysiological studies of resting state connectivity, focusing on slow (&lt;1 Hz) fluctuations of high-frequency activity219: recordings within the PCC show close temporal coordination with distant recording sites specifically within DMN regions during resting non-task states205,217,220.

Overall, these studies corroborate human fMRI findings suggesting a role for the PCC in episodic memory retrieval and recapitulate common physiological features of the DMN198. While suboptimal for spatially mapping neural responses, intracranial findings suggest a more complex functional organization across the PCC213, which requires further examination. However, far less electrophysiological evidence of human PCC engagement during tasks of decision-making and cognitive control have been observed. This focus contrasts not only with the neuroimaging literature reviewed above but, importantly, with many of the extant findings from the NHP PCC. This raises a potentially challenging divergence of PCC electrophysiology between species. What factors may account for such differences? Primarily, it is noteworthy that far fewer human intracranial studies have focused specifically on economic decision-making paradigms, whereas NHP studies have not been able to disentangle memory effects – suggesting an absence of required experiments rather than findings. Secondly, NHP studies have chiefly focused on single-unit activity, while only one such study has been reported in the human PCC215. However, as noted above, within the context of task-induced PCC suppression, when comparable tasks and measurements (such as local field potential spectra) are considered, there is a striking similarity between NHP and human electrophysiology177,198,205,210,215. A third factor may lie in the subregional organization of the PCC. As noted above, work in the NHP has exclusively focused on the dPCC (sometimes referred to as area CGp), while human studies (where electrode targeting is clinically determined) has been more anatomically varied. Future studies would therefore greatly benefit from systematic electrophysiological investigation of non-mnemonic coding within the human dPCC via both standard recording methods and single-unit studies215.

Invasive recordings in humans also allow for direct electrical stimulation of cortical tissue to probe the causal role of specific regions199. When considering studies reporting on large cohorts of clinical stimulations within the PCC, findings range from no reported subjective experiences or observed behavioural effects221 to heterogeneous clinical symptoms, including somatosensory and motor responses as well as complex subjective experiences such as derealization (such as an ‘out of body’ experience)222. Given the proximity of the PCC to both primary motor (dorsal) and visual areas (ventral), it is likely that some reports of sensory motor effects reflect stimulation spread at the boundaries of these brain areas221,223. However, smaller-sample case studies have also suggested that PCC stimulation disrupts conscious awareness. For example, stimulation of white matter fibres proximal to the dPCC, after resection of the region, can lead to altered consciousness and dissociation, reflected by a loss of task performance and subjective report224,225. These data have been interpreted as supporting a role for the PCC in regulating conscious awareness and its apparent importance for self-referential cognition. However, confounding clinical factors challenge this interpretation226. More recently, both focal stimulation and endogenous seizure events within the PCC, specifically area 31, produced subjective reports of altered states of self227. During seizure events beginning within the PCC, one individual remained conscious but experienced a dissociated sense of self along with altered egocentric spatial awareness. Similar subjective effects occurred when electrical stimulation was performed227.

While these stimulation studies provide intriguing causal insight, again linking the PCC (and DMN) to self-referential processing, small sample sizes, limited controls and clinical factors must be considered when interpreting such findings. For example, focal epilepsy commonly produces localized seizure events that cause a transient loss of awareness and non-responsiveness. In addition, systematic quantification of specific behavioural deficits is also critical for inferring causal impact. While conducting such experiments is challenging, stimulation of the PCC during word-list encoding has been related to worse subsequent word recall. This stimulation also results in increased power of hippocampal gamma oscillations, the magnitude of which predicted reduced recall performance228. These data causally implicate the PCC in memory encoding via an improved approach to studying PCC stimulation while still requiring further replication229. Overall, there remains a dearth of well-controlled causal studies of human PCC function. Future studies are needed to examine behaviour modulation during task execution, with sufficient controls and sample sizes, particularly during mnemonic and decision-making paradigms across PCC subregions.

Conclusions and future directions

As reviewed above, anatomical and physiological data support the view of the PCC comprising at least three functional divisions. This tripartite parcellation provides clearer links between observations made across species and techniques and, in some cases, reconciles prior conflicting findings. In brief, the dPCC appears to be much more associated with executive and decision features across both mnemonic and non-mnemonic tasks. In contrast, the vPCC is more strongly associated with primarily mnemonic processes and environmental and contextual features. While the RSC has been associated with both spatial memory and navigation, its anatomical definition varies greatly in the literature (Box 2). Moreover, it seems likely that the focus on mnemonic versus decision-making functions in the human versus NHP literature is a ‘spotlight effect’ (that is, publications demonstrating a link between an anatomical region and a specific function beget more similar investigations) and reflects the relative concentration of NHP studies on the dPCC. Moving forward, it will therefore be critical that investigators account for PCC subregional organization. This is particularly important for better understanding the potentially distinct functions of the RSC, whose complex anatomy in the primate requires careful consideration.

While we have focused on the unique functions of PCC subregions, what can be said for their collective functional role? Do the three divisions have any common features? One possibility is that the PCC, as a whole, collectively serves the integration of internal information (non-sensory or post-sensory), which would naturally include mnemonic information (primarily vPCC) and uses that to influence ongoing learning and decisions (primarily dPCC). We can understand the PCC by analogy to the lateral parietal cortex (LPC), which supports the integration of sensory evidence towards action; the PCC similarly supports the integration of internal and mnemonic evidence (defined broadly) towards future actions and strategies (that is, mnemonic decisions). Given this distinction, it is not surprising that, while sensory data (and systems) operate on much more rapid time scales (present, very recent past/future), mnemonic data and the PCC operate on much longer time scales (present, remote past and distant future). This view accounts for much of the extant functional data and also links to emerging evidence about the nature of associative cortices in general, and the PCC in particular, suggesting that these regions have a long ‘temporal receptive window’ and integration timescale and are functionally and anatomically ‘distant’ from sensory processing within the cortical hierarchy189,230-232.

Several important tests of our tripartite view remain to be confirmed, defining key avenues for future work. While the tripartite organization we highlight is directly motivated by extant anatomical data, such studies are challenging and few in number. Advances in mapping human cytoarchitecture will be important for refining the borders of the dPCC, vPCC and RSC41. Relatedly, advances in precision neuroimaging and connectivity will also be important to assess the degree to which functional neuroanatomy confirms, consolidates or further divides these subregions.

This progress recapitulates a strikingly similar discourse regarding the organization of the human LPC and the relationship between memory and attention233-236, in which debate surrounded the degree of functional overlap between executive attentional processes and specific mnemonic processes within the LPC234. This debate motivated several efforts focused on establishing the functional neuroanatomy of the human LPC236, which included careful consideration for how distinct memory processes may be dissociated across the LPC114,233,237, adding to further parallels with the medial parietal cortex. We hope that a similar discourse will occur for the PCC. Specifically, targeted examination of the dPCC within the context of decision-making, as it relates to memory behaviour, is of great importance. Perhaps more important is focused study of the RSC through its full rostro-caudal extent. As recently remarked, the subtle morphology of the RSC may require specific adjustments to common methods of group analysis in neuroimaging238. We note that the RSC, as defined here, can be inadvertently excised from cortical surface reconstructions in neuroimaging data processing pipelines, which generally seek to exclude the corpus callosum and favour visualization of the lateral convexity (for example, cortical flat maps). These future efforts will help to further establish principles of functional organization within the PCC, which may differ greatly from those common to sensory cortices. Causal studies of function and connectivity in humans and NHPs, with comparable behavioural assays, will also provide much-needed data.

As noted in our introductory remarks, our understanding of the PCC is in stark contrast to that of the ACC. Therefore, it is hoped that, as was the case for the ACC, empirical progress will spur more formal computational theories of PCC function. Promising starting points would be the adaptation of existing models of memory and decision-making processes. Finally, consideration of PCC subregions within the context of disease progression is already under way132 and will serve to test and update the tripartite view. As progress is made in understanding the, to date elusive, functions of the PCC, important insights are likely to be made on the neural basis of higher-order cognitive functions that are particularly specialized in the primate and, in turn, may help to lessen the health impact of its aberrancy in disease.

Supplementary Material

Supp mat.

Acknowledgements

B.L.F. is supported by NIH R01MH129439 and NIH R01MH116914; B.Y.H. is supported by NIH R01DA038615 and R01MH125377; S.R.H. is supported by NIH R01MH118257.

Data availability

The Neurosynth data for the term-based meta-analyses shown in Fig. 2 are available at https://neurosynth.org/analyses/terms/.

Glossary

Brodmann’s maps Maps of distinct cytoarchitectural areas in the human cerebral cortex created by Korbinian Brodmann in 1909

Connectivity hub A node within a network that is connected to many other nodes

Episodic memory Conscious memory for prior lived experiences and events in the recent and remote past

Executive control Higher level cognitive functions allowing and supporting the control of other cognitive processes

Familiarity Memory recognition that lacks conscious details of past items or events

Recollection Memory retrieval involving conscious details of past events

Reinstatement The reoccurrence of brain activity patterns associated with a prior stimulus or behaviour

Resting-state activity Spontaneous physiological brain activity during the absence of explicitly instructed task requirements

Saccade Rapid and short movements of the eyes to a new point of visual focus

Self-referential cognition Cognitive processes focused on consideration of or in relation to oneself

Temporal receptive window The length of time before a neural response during which sensory information may affect that response

Fig. 1 ∣ Comparative anatomy of the PCC.

a,b, Anatomy of the posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) is shown for the human (part a) and non-human primate (macaque; part b). Focusing on the posteromedial region of the brain, major sulci are shown for both species (red lines), along with the homologous cytoarchitectural regions. Based on data from refs.27,181, the anatomical locations of the dorsal PCC (dPCC; d23/d31), ventral PCC (vPCC; v23/v31) and retrosplenial cortex (RSC; 29/30) are shown. The dashed white line indicates the cytoarchitectural division between area 23 and area 31. Note that area 31 occupies more restricted territory in the macaque than in the human, where it extends caudally and ventrally into the vPCC239. In addition, there is a small amount of ectocallosal cingulate cortex present in human area 26 (not shown) that does not occur in the macaque. c, Schematic of the shared reciprocal connectivity between both the dPCC and vPCC and other brain structures based on tract tracer studies in the macaque (part b; data from refs.28,42-44). ACC, anterior cingulate cortex; DLPFC, dorso-lateral prefrontal cortex; IPL, inferior parietal lobule; MTL, medial temporal lobe; OFC, orbito-frontal cortex; PrC, precuneus; TPO, temporal-parietal-occipital area.

Fig. 2 ∣ Functional neuroimaging of the PCC.

a, Progress in network identification and parcellation of the posterior cingulate cortex (PCC). An inflated cortical surface is shown with approximate cytoarchitectural boundaries indicated (left panel). In 2005, the PCC was identified through functional imaging as part of a singular posterior medial cortex component of the default mode network (DMN). Green regions reflect a negative correlation (that is, deactivation) with brain regions that are activated during goal-directed attention62. Subsequent connectivity analysis conducted in 2008 dissociated the DMN (shown in orange) from a cognitive control-related network (shown in green) within the dorsal PCC (dPCC)97 when focusing on these specific networks. In 2011, a large-sample group connectivity analysis that considered the entire brain further divided the PCC (here, blue/grey regions are part of the cognitive control network, yellow regions are part of the DMN and dark blue regions are part of a temporo-parietal memory network)91. Finally, more recent (2015) large sampling of an individual (same person scanned multiple times) revealed more fine grained parcellations within the PCC240 (here, distinct colours reflect putatively distinct areas and shared colours reflect members of the same putative network). Approximate cytoarchitectural boundaries are overlaid (white dashed line). The areal parcellations based on functional MRI (fMRI) show some correspondence and divergence from these putative architectural boundaries, differing in terms of where and how the dorsal and ventral divisions occur and whether or not a retrosplenical cortex perisplenial parcel is identified. Multiple analytical factors will influence the number and location of functional parcel boundaries. b, The left panel shows an anatomical scan of the human brain, highlighting the posteromedial region. PCC cytoarchitecture is shown in the inset panel (see also Fig. 1). The right panels show the results of term-based meta-analyses of neuroimaging studies derived from the Neurosynth platform. The images show thresholded z-scores from Neurosynth’s meta-analytic ‘association test’ for each term, with lighter colours representing higher values. Details of the method used to create these images are provided in the Supplementary Information. The terms ‘recognition memory’, ‘value’ and ‘cognitive control’ (top row) are associated with reports of activation within the dPCC. In contrast, meta-analytic term associations for ‘autobiographical memory’, ‘navigation’ and ‘default network’ (bottom row) are associated with reports of activation within the ventral PCC (vPCC). These images highlight the dissociation of PCC subregions across episodic memory tasks, related cognitive domains and brain networks discussed in this Perspective. c, Image shows the centroids of each meta-analysis association map in part b. Part a, second panel from the left, is adapted with permission from ref.62. Part a, third panel from the left, is adapted with permission from ref.97. Part a, fourth panel from the left, is adapted with permission from ref.91. Part a, right panel, is adapted with permission from ref.240.

Fig. 3 ∣ Electrophysiology of the PCC.

a, Schematic of the proposed tripartite division of the posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) in the macaque and human, with sites of prior recordings indicated within boxes. b, Firing rates are suppressed in the macaque dorsal PCC (dPCC) during attentional task engagement177. In this figure, the average trial-aligned firing rates of a population of neurons in two macaques completing an attentional task (fixating on a visual target to detect a colour change) is shown; firing rate is systematically suppressed at the onset of attention (time 0 on the plot). Moreover, tonic firing rate is lower in task states that are associated with faster reaction times (RT), presumably reflecting greater task engagement177,186. c, Firing rates are enhanced after a saccadic decision in macaque dPCC. Firing rate increases are greater for more risky decisions183. d, Within human dPCC, high-frequency activity (amplitude in the 70–150 Hz range) is increased during the execution of executive tasks such as visual search (identifying a target rotated letter or number in an array of the same letter or number) and addition (adding five single-digit numbers). This increase is far greater than that observed during episodic tasks relating to past or future event scenarios215. e, By contrast, within ventral PCC (vPCC), high-frequency activity is suppressed during an executive task (addition) but is greatly increased during an episodic task in which individuals recalled past event scenarios205,210. f, Muscimol injections (which strongly inhibit local neural activity) to the dPCC in the macaque cause a reduction in the performance of a visually cued associative item learning task for low-value (small juice reward) but not high-value (large juice reward) decisions191 (proportion correct reflects the number of correctly selected target items via saccade to one of two locations, based on a learned visual cue). ns, nonsignificant; RSC, retrosplenial cortex. Part b is adapted from ref.186. Part c is adapted from ref.183. Part d is adapted from ref.215. Part e is adapted from ref.210. Part f is adapted from ref.191.

Box 1 PCC and disease

The posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) has been implicated in a wide range of neurological and psychiatric disorders, as reviewed previously1,6. In brief, the PCC is a site of prominent, early hypometabolism in Alzheimer disease9. In autism spectrum disorders, its hypometabolism and abnormal functional connectivity have been related to social impairments241-243. The cingulum bundle, which is a major carrier of PCC (and other cingulate) fibres, displays reduced tract integrity in schizophrenia244,245. Finally, studies of major depressive disorder frequently implicate the PCC in particular, and the default mode network (of which the PCC is a part) more broadly, as being overactive and hyper-connected in the disordered state246,247.

At present, most studies of PCC abnormality do not explicitly use the tripartite dorsal PCC (dPCC)–ventral PCC (vPCC)–retrosplenial cortex framework that we have described here. Indeed, areas of pathology often span two or three of these subregions. Nevertheless, there are some studies for which disease-related pathology in the PCC appears to be more confined to one subregion or another. For example, rumination in major depressive disorder is associated with enhanced activity in what we here term the dPCC relative to controls248. Deep brain stimulation of the subgenual cingulate for depression appears to decrease activity in an area corresponding to the vPCC249. While it is possible that these studies point to different roles for the dPCC versus the vPCC in the pathology and treatment of depression, it is difficult to make such judgments without direct comparisons across the three divisions within a study. Nevertheless, given the frequent identification of the PCC in studies of brain disease, consideration of its organization may prove useful in dissociating the cognitive impairments resulting from distinct subregional pathophysiology132.

Box 2 Demarcation of the RSC

Historically, the retrosplenial cortex (RSC; areas 29 and 30) has been a neglected region of study2 but, in recent years, it has become a key focus in the fields of learning, memory and navigation57,59,250. However, debate surrounds the appropriate demarcation of the RSC in relation to gross anatomy (see the figure, part a), particularly in the primate brain when comparing contemporary studies of cytoarchitecture with the earlier work of Brodmann (see the figure, part b).

A likely contributing factor to this confusion are the differences in the organization of the RSC in the rodent and primate. Unlike primates, rodents lack a posterior cingulate cortex (PCC; areas 23/31), with much of the posterior medial surface being composed of the RSC2,47. By contrast, in non-human primates, where the PCC is present, the RSC forms an arc around the splenium of the corpus callosum, being restricted to the callosal sulcus and typically not extending to the medial surface26,35,38,239. The human RSC shows a highly similar organization, with the possible exception of area 30, which may partially extend out of the callosal sulcus and onto the most ventral aspect of the medial surface (termed the isthmus) where the posterior cingulate gyrus transitions into the parahippocampal gyrus (see refs.17,56,251,252 and see the figure parts a and c). In descriptive terms, the primate RSC is a thin region forming a ‘C-shaped’ arc around the splenium, primarily reflecting the anterior sulcal rim of the posterior cingulate gyrus. This ‘perisplenial’ anatomy contrasts with the commonly depicted maps of Brodmann, in which the RSC is restricted to a posteroventral region, comprising much of the medial gyral surface posteriorly between the callosal and postero-occipital sulci (see the figure, part b). However, it has long been noted that this demarcation is likely due to a misrepresentation of Brodmann’s original findings56,251. While modern anatomical work shows subtle distinctions in the medial surface extent of area 30 (refs.26,35,38), no extant findings recapitulate common interpretations of the RSC derived from Brodmann. As presciently noted by Vogt et al.56: “… Brodmann’s map understates the rostral extent of retrosplenial cortex, overstates its caudoventral extent, and abridges the caudomedial extent of area 23”. We note that part b of the figure shows area 29/30 as previously translated from Brodmann’s drawings56 and as incorporated into a common neuroimaging cytoarchitecture atlas253. Therefore, we echo prior suggestions to utilize the convergent findings of modern anatomical studies in the human and non-human primate, noted above, over translations of Brodmann’s maps for the RSC56,251,254. Ongoing work to develop improved probabilistic maps of human cytoarchitecture will provide important updates and corrections in this regard41.

It is important to note that this anatomical demarcation of the primate RSC does not affect the consistency or veracity of functional studies. Rather, it represents progress in understanding the functional neuroanatomy of the posteromedial region and allows for better terminological and comparative consensus. Consequently, some but not all prior observations previously ascribed to the RSC in the primate may be better credited to the ventral PCC. Indeed, such a scenario has been documented in human studies of spatial scene processing, where consideration of anatomy has motived progress in determining that previously reported ‘RSC’ activations do not fall within areas 29 or 30 but rather within proximal regions of the ventral PCC and the parieto-occipital sulcus141,142,255. In a similar fashion, the under-appreciated arcing rostral extent of the RSC is consistent with recent multi-modal cortical parcellations that show a perisplenial organization238 (see the figure, part d). The figure shows schematic representations of three historic descriptions of the demarcation of the RSC. cas, callosal sulcus; cs, calcarine sulcus; ifrms, inframarginal sulcus; mcgs, marginal ramus cingulate sulcus; pos, parieto-occipital sulcus; prcus, precuneal sulcus; spls, splenial sulcus.

Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interests.

Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41583-022-00661-x.


References

1. Leech R &amp; Sharp DJ The role of the posterior cingulate cortex in cognition and disease. Brain 137 , 12–32 (2014).23869106
2. Vann SD , Aggleton JP &amp; Maguire EA What does the retrosplenial cortex do? Nat. Rev. Neurosci 10 , 792–802 (2009).19812579
3. Pearson JM , Heilbronner SR , Barack DL , Hayden BY &amp; Platt ML Posterior cingulate cortex: adapting behavior to a changing world. Trends Cogn. Sci 15 , 143–151 (2011).21420893
4. Heilbronner SR &amp; Hayden BY Dorsal anterior cingulate cortex: a bottom-up view. Annu. Rev. Neurosci 39 , 149–170 (2016).27090954
5. Ebitz RB &amp; Hayden BY Dorsal anterior cingulate: a Rorschach test for cognitive neuroscience. Nat. Neurosci 19 , 1278–1279 (2016).27669987
6. Vogt BA The cingulate cortex in neurologic diseases: history, structure, overview. Handb. Clin. Neurol 166 , 3–21 (2019).31731918
7. Hagmann P Mapping the structural core of human cerebral cortex. PLoS Biol. 6 , e159 (2008).18597554
8. Gusnard DA , Raichle ME &amp; Raichle ME Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 2 , 685–694 (2001).11584306
9. Minoshima S Metabolic reduction in the posterior cingulate cortex in very early Alzheimer’s disease. Ann. Neurol 42 , 85–94 (1997).9225689
10. Butterfield DA &amp; Halliwell B Oxidative stress, dysfunctional glucose metabolism and Alzheimer disease. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 20 , 148–160 (2019).30737462
11. Strom A Cortical hypometabolism reflects local atrophy and tau pathology in symptomatic Alzheimer’s disease. Brain 145 , 713–728 (2021).
12. Willbrand EH Uncovering a tripartite landmark in posterior cingulate cortex. Sci. Adv 8 , eabn9516 (2022).36070384
13. Yeung N , Botvinick MM &amp; Cohen JD The neural basis of error detection: conflict monitoring and the error-related negativity. Psychol. Rev 111 , 931–959 (2004).15482068
14. Shenhav A , Cohen JD &amp; Botvinick MM Dorsal anterior cingulate cortex and the value of control. Nat. Neurosci 19 , 1286–1291 (2016).27669989
15. Kolling N Value, search, persistence and model updating in anterior cingulate cortex. Nat. Neurosci 19 , 1280–1285 (2016).27669988
16. Vaidya AR , Pujara MS , Petrides M , Murray EA &amp; Fellows LK Lesion studies in contemporary neuroscience. Trends Cogn. Sci 23 , 653–671 (2019).31279672
17. Vogt BA , Nimchinsky EA , Vogt LJ &amp; Hof PR Human cingulate cortex: surface features, flat maps, and cytoarchitecture. J. Comp. Neurol 359 , 490–506 (1995).7499543
18. Vogt BA Pain and emotion interactions in subregions of the cingulate gyrus. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 6 , 533–544 (2005).15995724
19. Luders E , Thompson PM &amp; Toga AW The development of the corpus callosum in the healthy human brain. J. Neurosci 30 , 10985–10990 (2010).20720105
20. Ono M , Kubik S &amp; Abernathey CD Atlas of the Cerebral Sulci (Thieme, 1990).
21. Vogt BA , Finch DM &amp; Olson CR Functional heterogeneity in cingulate cortex: the anterior executive and posterior evaluative regions. Cereb. Cortex 2 , 435–443 (1992).1477524
22. Yukie M Neural connections of auditory association cortex with the posterior cingulate cortex in the monkey. Neurosci. Res 22 , 179–187 (1995).7566698
23. Vogt BA Retrosplenial cortex in the rhesus monkey: a cytoarchitectonic and Golgi study. J. Comp. Neurol 169 , 63–97 (1976).821976
24. Goldman-Rakic PS , Selemon LD &amp; Schwartz ML Dual pathways connecting the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex with the hippocampal formation and parahippocampal cortex in the rhesus monkey. Neuroscience 12 , 719–743 (1984).6472617
25. Aggleton JP Understanding retrosplenial amnesia: insights from animal studies. Neuropsychologia 48 , 2328–2338 (2010).19800900
26. Kobayashi Y &amp; Amaral DG Macaque monkey retrosplenial cortex: I. three-dimensional and cytoarchitectonic organization. J. Comp. Neurol 426 , 339–365 (2000).10992242
27. Margulies DS Precuneus shares intrinsic functional architecture in humans and monkeys. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 106 , 20069–20074 (2009).19903877
28. Parvizi J , Van Hoesen GW , Buckwalter J &amp; Damasio A Neural connections of the posteromedial cortex in the macaque. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 103 , 1563–1568 (2006).16432221
29. Cavanna AE &amp; Trimble MR The precuneus: a review of its functional anatomy and behavioural correlates. Brain 129 , 564–583 (2006).16399806
30. Ritchey M &amp; Cooper RA Deconstructing the posterior medial episodic network. Trends Cogn. Sci 24 , 451–465 (2020).32340798
31. Buckner RL , Andrews-Hanna JR &amp; Schacter DL The brain’s default network: anatomy, function, and relevance to disease. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci 1124 , 1–38 (2008).18400922
32. Buckner RL &amp; DiNicola LM The brain’s default network: updated anatomy, physiology and evolving insights. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 20 , 593–608 (2019).31492945
33. Shibata H &amp; Yukie M Differential thalamic connections of the posteroventral and dorsal posterior cingulate gyrus in the monkey. Eur. J. Neurosci 18 , 1615–1626 (2003).14511340
34. Vogt BA &amp; Laureys S Posterior cingulate, precuneal and retrosplenial cortices: cytology and components of the neural network correlates of consciousness. Prog. Brain Res 150 , 205–217 (2005).16186025
35. Vogt BA , Pandya DN &amp; Rosene DL Cingulate cortex of the rhesus monkey: I. Cytoarchitecture and thalamic afferents. J. Comp. Neurol 262 , 256–270 (1987).3624554
36. Vogt BA , Vogt L &amp; Laureys S Cytology and functionally correlated circuits of human posterior cingulate areas. Neuroimage 29 , 452–466 (2006).16140550
37. Bzdok D Subspecialization in the human posterior medial cortex. Neuroimage 106 , 55–71 (2015).25462801
38. Morris R , Petrides M &amp; Pandya DN Architecture and connections of retrosplenial area 30 in the rhesus monkey (Macaca mulatta). Eur. J. Neurosci 11 , 2506–2518 (1999).10383640
39. Palomero-Gallagher N , Vogt BA , Schleicher A , Mayberg HS &amp; Zilles K Receptor architecture of human cingulate cortex: evaluation of the four-region neurobiological model. Hum. Brain Mapp 30 , 2336–2355 (2009).19034899
40. Palomero-Gallagher N , Mohlberg H , Zilles K &amp; Vogt B Cytology and receptor architecture of human anterior cingulate cortex. J. Comp. Neurol 508 , 906–926 (2008).18404667
41. Amunts K , Mohlberg H , Bludau S &amp; Zilles K Julich-Brain: a 3D probabilistic atlas of the human brain’s cytoarchitecture. Science 369 , 988–992 (2020).32732281
42. Vogt BA &amp; Pandya DN Cingulate cortex of the rhesus monkey: II. Cortical afferents. J. Comp. Neurol 262 , 271–289 (1987).3624555
43. Kobayashi Y &amp; Amaral DG Macaque monkey retrosplenial cortex: III. Cortical efferents. J. Comp. Neurol 502 , 810–833 (2007).17436282
44. Kobayashi Y &amp; Amaral DG Macaque monkey retrosplenial cortex: II. Cortical afferents. J. Comp. Neurol 466 , 48–79 (2003).14515240
45. Morecraft RJ , Cipolloni PB , Stilwell-Morecraft KS , Gedney MT &amp; Pandya DN Cytoarchitecture and cortical connections of the posterior cingulate and adjacent somatosensory fields in the rhesus monkey. J. Comp. Neurol 469 , 37–69 (2004).14689472
46. Greicius MD , Supekar K , Menon V &amp; Dougherty RF Resting-state functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the default mode network. Cereb. Cortex 19 , 72–78 (2009).18403396
47. Vogt BA &amp; Paxinos G Cytoarchitecture of mouse and rat cingulate cortex with human homologies. Brain Struct. Funct 219 , 185–192 (2014).23229151
48. Vogt BA &amp; Peters A Form and distribution of neurons in rat cingulate cortex: areas 32, 24, and 29. J. Comp. Neurol 195 , 603–625 (1981).7462444
49. Heilbronner SR , Rodriguez-Romaguera J , Quirk GJ , Groenewegen HJ &amp; Haber SN Circuit-based corticostriatal homologies between rat and primate. Biol. Psychiatry 80 , 509–521 (2016).27450032
50. Carlen M What constitutes the prefrontal cortex? Science 358 , 478–482 (2017).29074767
51. Preuss TM Do rats have prefrontal cortex? The Rose-Woolsey-Akert program reconsidered. J. Cogn. Neurosci 7 , 1–24 (1995).23961750
52. Bernier M , Cunnane SC &amp; Whittingstall K The morphology of the human cerebrovascular system. Hum. Brain Mapp 39 , 4962–4975 (2018).30265762
53. Mavridis IN , Kalamatianos T , Koutsarnakis C &amp; Stranjalis G Microsurgical anatomy of the precuneal artery: does it really exist? Clarifying an ambiguous vessel under the microscope. Oper. Neurosurg 12 , 68–76 (2016).
54. Kumral E , Bayam FE &amp; Ozdemir HN Cognitive and behavioral disorders in patients with precuneal infarcts. Eur. Neurol 84 , 157–167 (2021).33827093
55. Pflugshaupt T Bottom-up visual integration in the medial parietal lobe. Cereb. Cortex 26 , 943–949 (2016).25331599
56. Vogt BA , Vogt LJ , Perl DP &amp; Hof PR Cytology of human caudomedial cingulate, retrosplenial, and caudal parahippocampal cortices. J. Comp. Neurol 438 , 353–376 (2001).11550177
57. Milczarek MM &amp; Vann SD The retrosplenial cortex and long-term spatial memory: from the cell to the network. Curr. Opin. Behav. Sci 32 , 50–56 (2020).32715030
58. Miller AM , Vedder LC , Law LM &amp; Smith DM Cues, context, and long-term memory: the role of the retrosplenial cortex in spatial cognition. Front. Hum. Neurosci 8 , 586 (2014).25140141
59. Mitchell AS , Czajkowski R , Zhang N , Jeffery K &amp; Nelson AJD Retrosplenial cortex and its role in spatial cognition. Brain Neurosci. Adv 2 , 2398212818757098 (2018).30221204
60. Shulman GL Common blood flow changes across visual tasks: II. Decreases in cerebral cortex. J. Cogn. Neurosci 9 , 648–663 (1997).23965122
61. Raichle ME A default mode of brain function. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 98 , 676–682 (2001).11209064
62. Fox MD The human brain is intrinsically organized into dynamic, anticorrelated functional networks. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 102 , 9673–9678 (2005).15976020
63. Harrison BJ Consistency and functional specialization in the default mode brain network. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 105 , 9781–9786 (2008).18621692
64. Raichle ME &amp; Snyder AZ A default mode of brain function: a brief history of an evolving idea. Neuroimage 37 , 1083–1090 (2007).17719799
65. Smallwood J &amp; Schooler JW The science of mind wandering: empirically navigating the stream of consciousness. Annu. Rev. Psychol 66 , 487–518 (2015).25293689
66. Christoff K , Irving ZC , Fox KC , Spreng RN &amp; Andrews-Hanna JR Mind-wandering as spontaneous thought: a dynamic framework. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 17 , 718–731 (2016).27654862
67. Andrews-Hanna JR , Smallwood J &amp; Spreng RN The default network and self-generated thought: component processes, dynamic control, and clinical relevance. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci 1316 , 29–52 (2014).24502540
68. Anticevic A The role of default network deactivation in cognition and disease. Trends Cogn. Sci 16 , 584–592 (2012).23142417
69. Fletcher PC Brain systems for encoding and retrieval of auditory-verbal memory. An in vivo study in humans. Brain 118 , 401–416 (1995).7735882
70. Shallice T Brain regions associated with acquisition and retrieval of verbal episodic memory. Nature 368 , 633–635 (1994).8145849
71. Andreasen NC Remembering the past: two facets of episodic memory explored with positron emission tomography. Am. J. Psychiatry 152 , 1576–1585 (1995).7485619
72. Stiernman LJ Dissociations between glucose metabolism and blood oxygenation in the human default mode network revealed by simultaneous PET-fMRI. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 118 , e2021913118 (2021).34193521
73. Spreng RN , Mar RA &amp; Kim AS The common neural basis of autobiographical memory, prospection, navigation, theory of mind, and the default mode: a quantitative meta-analysis. J. Cogn. Neurosci 21 , 489–510 (2009).18510452
74. Binder JR &amp; Desai RH The neurobiology of semantic memory. Trends Cogn. Sci 15 , 527–536 (2011).22001867
75. Hassabis D &amp; Maguire EA Deconstructing episodic memory with construction. Trends Cogn. Sci 11 , 299–306 (2007).17548229
76. Huijbers W Explaining the encoding/retrieval flip: memory-related deactivations and activations in the posteromedial cortex. Neuropsychologia 50 , 3764–3774 (2012).22982484
77. Otten LJ &amp; Rugg MD When more means less: neural activity related to unsuccessful memory encoding. Curr. Biol 11 , 1528–1530 (2001).11591321
78. Daselaar SM , Prince SE &amp; Cabeza R When less means more: deactivations during encoding that predict subsequent memory. Neuroimage 23 , 921–927 (2004).15528092
79. de Chastelaine M &amp; Rugg MD The relationship between task-related and subsequent memory effects. Hum. Brain Mapp 35 , 3687–3700 (2014).24615858
80. Wheeler ME &amp; Buckner RL Functional-anatomic correlates of remembering and knowing. Neuroimage 21 , 1337–1349 (2004).15050559
81. Kahn I , Davachi L &amp; Wagner AD Functional-neuroanatomic correlates of recollection: implications for models of recognition memory. J. Neurosci 24 , 4172–4180 (2004).15115812
82. Daselaar SM Posterior midline and ventral parietal activity is associated with retrieval success and encoding failure. Front. Hum. Neurosci 3 , 13 (2009).19680466
83. Wagner AD , Shannon BJ , Kahn I &amp; Buckner RL Parietal lobe contributions to episodic memory retrieval. Trends Cogn. Sci 9 , 445–453 (2005).16054861
84. Shannon BJ &amp; Buckner RL Functional-anatomic correlates of memory retrieval that suggest nontraditional processing roles for multiple distinct regions within posterior parietal cortex. J. Neurosci 24 , 10084–10092 (2004).15537877
85. Buckner RL &amp; Carroll DC Self-projection and the brain. Trends Cogn. Sci 11 , 49–57 (2007).17188554
86. Mullally SL &amp; Maguire EA Memory, imagination, and predicting the future: a common brain mechanism? Neuroscientist 20 , 220–234 (2013).23846418
87. Dohmatob E , Dumas G &amp; Bzdok D Dark control: the default mode network as a reinforcement learning agent. Hum. Brain Mapp 41 , 3318–3341 (2020).32500968
88. Fox MD &amp; Raichle ME Spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity observed with functional magnetic resonance imaging. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 8 , 700–711 (2007).17704812
89. Bullmore E &amp; Sporns O Complex brain networks: graph theoretical analysis of structural and functional systems. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 10 , 186–198 (2009).19190637
90. Power JD Functional network organization of the human brain. Neuron 72 , 665–678 (2011).22099467
91. Yeo BT The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity. J. Neurophysiol 106 , 1125–1165 (2011).21653723
92. Cole MW , Bassett DS , Power JD , Braver TS &amp; Petersen SE Intrinsic and task-evoked network architectures of the human brain. Neuron 83 , 238–251 (2014).24991964
93. Smith SM Correspondence of the brain’s functional architecture during activation and rest. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 106 , 13040–13045 (2009).19620724
94. Lu J Focal pontine lesions provide evidence that intrinsic functional connectivity reflects polysynaptic anatomical pathways. J. Neurosci 31 , 15065–15071 (2011).22016540
95. Vincent JL Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthetized monkey brain. Nature 447 , 83–86 (2007).17476267
96. Andrews-Hanna JR , Reidler JS , Sepulcre J , Poulin R &amp; Buckner RL Functional-anatomic fractionation of the brain’s default network. Neuron 65 , 550–562 (2010).20188659
97. Vincent JL , Kahn I , Snyder AZ , Raichle ME &amp; Buckner RL Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity. J. Neurophysiol 100 , 3328–3342 (2008).18799601
98. Fan Y Dorsal and ventral posterior cingulate cortex switch network assignment via changes in relative functional connectivity strength to noncanonical networks. Brain Connect. 9 , 77–94 (2019).30255708
99. Spreng RN , Stevens WD , Chamberlain JP , Gilmore AW &amp; Schacter DL Default network activity, coupled with the frontoparietal control network, supports goal-directed cognition. Neuroimage 53 , 303–317 (2010).20600998
100. Kahn I , Andrews-Hanna JR , Vincent JL , Snyder AZ &amp; Buckner RL Distinct cortical anatomy linked to subregions of the medial temporal lobe revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity. J. Neurophysiol 100 , 129–139 (2008).18385483
101. Wang S , Tepfer LJ , Taren AA &amp; Smith DV Functional parcellation of the default mode network: a large-scale meta-analysis. Sci. Rep 10 , 16096 (2020).32999307
102. Eickhoff SB , Yeo BTT &amp; Genon S Imaging-based parcellations of the human brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 19 , 672–686 (2018).30305712
103. Braga RM &amp; Buckner RL Parallel interdigitated distributed networks within the individual estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity. Neuron 95 , 457–471.e5 (2017).28728026
104. Braga RM , Van Dijk KRA , Polimeni JR , Eldaief MC &amp; Buckner RL Parallel distributed networks resolved at high resolution reveal close juxtaposition of distinct regions. J. Neurophysiol 121 , 1513–1534 (2019).30785825
105. Gordon EM Individual-specific features of brain systems identified with resting state functional correlations. Neuroimage 146 , 918–939 (2017).27640749
106. Gordon EM Precision functional mapping of individual human brains. Neuron 95 , 791–807.e7 (2017).28757305
107. Vincent JL Coherent spontaneous activity identifies a hippocampal-parietal memory network. J. Neurophysiol 96 , 3517–3531 (2006).16899645
108. Rugg MD &amp; Vilberg KL Brain networks underlying episodic memory retrieval. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol 23 , 255–260 (2013).23206590
109. Ranganath C &amp; Ritchey M Two cortical systems for memory-guided behaviour. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 13 , 713–726 (2012).22992647
110. Valenstein E Retrosplenial amnesia. Brain 110 , 1631–1646 (1987).3427404
111. Rudge P &amp; Warrington EK Selective impairment of memory and visual perception in splenial tumours. Brain 114 , 349–360 (1991).2004246
112. Takahashi N , Kawamura M , Shiota J , Kasahata N &amp; Hirayama K Pure topographic disorientation due to right retrosplenial lesion. Neurology 49 , 464–469 (1997).9270578
113. Ferguson MA A human memory circuit derived from brain lesions causing amnesia. Nat. Commun 10 , 3497 (2019).31375668
114. Gilmore AW , Nelson SM &amp; McDermott KB A parietal memory network revealed by multiple MRI methods. Trends Cogn. Sci 19 , 534–543 (2015).26254740
115. McDermott KB , Szpunar KK &amp; Christ SE Laboratory-based and autobiographical retrieval tasks differ substantially in their neural substrates. Neuropsychologia 47 , 2290–2298 (2009).19159634
116. Chen HY , Gilmore AW , Nelson SM &amp; McDermott KB Are there multiple kinds of episodic memory? An fMRI investigation comparing autobiographical and recognition memory tasks. J. Neurosci 37 , 2764–2775 (2017).28179554
117. Elman JA , Cohn-Sheehy BI &amp; Shimamura AP Dissociable parietal regions facilitate successful retrieval of recently learned and personally familiar information. Neuropsychologia 51 , 573–583 (2013).23287568
118. Kim H Differential neural activity in the recognition of old versus new events: an activation likelihood estimation meta-analysis. Hum. Brain Mapp 34 , 814–836 (2013).22110008
119. Kim H Parietal control network activation during memory tasks may be associated with the co-occurrence of externally and internally directed cognition: a cross-function meta-analysis. Brain Res. 1683 , 55–66 (2018).29456134
120. Gilmore AW High-fidelity mapping of repetition-related changes in the parietal memory network. Neuroimage 199 , 427–439 (2019).31175969
121. Rosen ML , Stern CE , Devaney KJ &amp; Somers DC Cortical and subcortical contributions to long-term memory-guided visuospatial attention. Cereb. Cortex 28 , 2935–2947 (2018).28968648
122. Mesulam MM , Nobre AC , Kim YH , Parrish TB &amp; Gitelman DR Heterogeneity of cingulate contributions to spatial attention. Neuroimage 13 , 1065–1072 (2001).11352612
123. Small DM The posterior cingulate and medial prefrontal cortex mediate the anticipatory allocation of spatial attention. Neuroimage 18 , 633–641 (2003).12667840
124. Liuzzi AG , Aglinskas A &amp; Fairhall SL General and feature-based semantic representations in the semantic network. Sci. Rep 10 , 8931 (2020).32488152
125. Fairhall SL &amp; Caramazza A Brain regions that represent amodal conceptual knowledge. J. Neurosci 33 , 10552–10558 (2013).23785167
126. Qin P &amp; Northoff G How is our self related to midline regions and the default-mode network? Neuroimage 57 , 1221–1233 (2011).21609772
127. Thornton MA &amp; Mitchell JP Consistent neural activity patterns represent personally familiar people. J. Cogn. Neurosci 29 , 1583–1594 (2017).28557690
128. Davey CG &amp; Harrison BJ The brain’s center of gravity: how the default mode network helps us to understand the self. World Psychiatry 17 , 278–279 (2018).30192084
129. Ritchey M , Libby LA &amp; Ranganath C Cortico-hippocampal systems involved in memory and cognition: the PMAT framework. Prog. Brain Res 219 , 45–64 (2015).26072233
130. Barnett AJ Intrinsic connectivity reveals functionally distinct cortico-hippocampal networks in the human brain. PLoS Biol. 19 , e3001275 (2021).34077415
131. Bonasia K Prior knowledge modulates the neural substrates of encoding and retrieving naturalistic events at short and long delays. Neurobiol. Learn. Mem 153 , 26–39 (2018).29474955
132. Bastin C An integrative memory model of recollection and familiarity to understand memory deficits. Behav. Brain Sci 42 , e281 (2019).30719958
133. Vogeley K Neural correlates of first-person perspective as one constituent of human self-consciousness. J. Cogn. Neurosci 16 , 817–827 (2004).15200709
134. Kravitz DJ , Saleem KS , Baker CI &amp; Mishkin M A new neural framework for visuospatial processing. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 12 , 217–230 (2011).21415848
135. Riva G , Di Lernia D , Serino A &amp; Serino S The role of reference frames in memory recollection. Behav. Brain Sci 42 , e296 (2020).31896357
136. Guterstam A , Bjornsdotter M , Gentile G &amp; Ehrsson HH Posterior cingulate cortex integrates the senses of self-location and body ownership. Curr. Biol 25 , 1416–1425 (2015).25936550
137. Gilmore AW Evidence supporting a time-limited hippocampal role in retrieving autobiographical memories. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 118 , e2023069118 (2021).33723070
138. Bird CM , Keidel JL , Ing LP , Horner AJ &amp; Burgess N Consolidation of complex events via reinstatement in posterior cingulate cortex. J. Neurosci 35 , 14426–14434 (2015).26511235
139. Dobbins IG , Rice HJ , Wagner AD &amp; Schacter DL Memory orientation and success: separable neurocognitive components underlying episodic recognition. Neuropsychologia 41 , 318–333 (2003).12457757
140. Kim H An integrative model of network activity during episodic memory retrieval and a meta-analysis of fMRI studies on source memory retrieval. Brain Res. 1747 , 147049 (2020).32781090
141. Epstein RA &amp; Baker CI Scene perception in the human brain. Annu. Rev. Vis. Sci 5 , 373–397 (2019).31226012
142. Silson EH , Steel AD &amp; Baker CI Scene-selectivity and retinotopy in medial parietal cortex. Front. Hum. Neurosci 10 , 412 (2016).27588001
143. Silson EH , Steel A , Kidder A , Gilmore AW &amp; Baker CI Distinct subdivisions of human medial parietal cortex support recollection of people and places. eLife 8 , e47391 (2019).31305238
144. Gilmore AW Dynamic content reactivation supports naturalistic autobiographical recall in humans. J. Neurosci 41 , 153–166 (2021).33203742
145. Afzalian N &amp; Rajimehr R Spatially adjacent regions in posterior cingulate cortex represent familiar faces at different levels of complexity. J. Neurosci 41 , 9807–9826 (2021).34670848
146. Hill PF , King DR &amp; Rugg MD Age differences in retrieval-related reinstatement reflect age-related dedifferentiation at encoding. Cereb. Cortex 31 , 106–122 (2021).32829396
147. Silson EH A posterior-anterior distinction between scene perception and scene construction in human medial parietal cortex. J. Neurosci 39 , 705–717 (2019).30504281
148. Bainbridge WA , Hall EH &amp; Baker CI Distinct representational structure and localization for visual encoding and recall during visual imagery. Cereb. Cortex 31 , 1898–1913 (2021).33285563
149. Grill-Spector K , Weiner KS , Kay K &amp; Gomez J The functional neuroanatomy of human face perception. Annu. Rev. Vis. Sci 3 , 167–196 (2017).28715955
150. Hesse JK &amp; Tsao DY The macaque face patch system: a turtle’s underbelly for the brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 21 , 695–716 (2020).33144718
151. Kuhnen CM &amp; Knutson B The neural basis of financial risk taking. Neuron 47 , 763–770 (2005).16129404
152. Kable JW &amp; Glimcher PW The neural correlates of subjective value during intertemporal choice. Nat. Neurosci 10 , 1625–1633 (2007).17982449
153. Clithero JA &amp; Rangel A Informatic parcellation of the network involved in the computation of subjective value. Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci 9 , 1289–1302 (2014).23887811
154. Oldham S The anticipation and outcome phases of reward and loss processing: a neuroimaging meta-analysis of the monetary incentive delay task. Hum. Brain Mapp 39 , 3398–3418 (2018).29696725
155. Levy DJ &amp; Glimcher PW The root of all value: a neural common currency for choice. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol 22 , 1027–1038 (2012).22766486
156. Levy DJ &amp; Glimcher PW Comparing apples and oranges: using reward-specific and reward-general subjective value representation in the brain. J. Neurosci 31 , 14693–14707 (2011).21994386
157. Kolling N , Wittmann M &amp; Rushworth MFS Multiple neural mechanisms of decision making and their competition under changing risk pressure. Neuron 81 , 1190–1202 (2014).24607236
158. Fromer R , Dean Wolf CK &amp; Shenhav A Goal congruency dominates reward value in accounting for behavioral and neural correlates of value-based decision-making. Nat. Commun 10 , 4926 (2019).31664035
159. Platt ML &amp; Plassmann H Neuroeconomics: Chapter 13. Multistage Valuation Signals and Common Neural Currencies (Academic Press, 2013).
160. Waskom ML , Frank MC &amp; Wagner AD Adaptive engagement of cognitive control in context-dependent decision making. Cereb. Cortex 27 , 1270–1284 (2017).26733531
161. Corlett PR , Mollick JA &amp; Kober H Meta-analysis of human prediction error for incentives, perception, cognition, and action. Neuropsychopharmacology 47 , 1339–1349 (2022).35017672
162. McGuire JT , Nassar MR , Gold JI &amp; Kable JW Functionally dissociable influences on learning rate in a dynamic environment. Neuron 84 , 870–881 (2014).25459409
163. Lebreton M , Abitbol R , Daunizeau J &amp; Pessiglione M Automatic integration of confidence in the brain valuation signal. Nat. Neurosci 18 , 1159–1167 (2015).26192748
164. Glascher J , Hampton AN &amp; O’Doherty JP Determining a role for ventromedial prefrontal cortex in encoding action-based value signals during reward-related decision making. Cereb. Cortex 19 , 483–495 (2009).18550593
165. Kobayashi K &amp; Hsu M Neural mechanisms of updating under reducible and irreducible uncertainty. J. Neurosci 37 , 6972–6982 (2017).28626019
166. Visalli A , Capizzi M , Ambrosini E , Mazzonetto I &amp; Vallesi A Bayesian modeling of temporal expectations in the human brain. Neuroimage 202 , 116097 (2019).31415885
167. Kao CH , Lee S , Gold JI &amp; Kable JW Neural encoding of task-dependent errors during adaptive learning. eLife 9 , e58809 (2020).33074104
168. Bartra O , McGuire JT &amp; Kable JW The valuation system: a coordinate-based meta-analysis of BOLD fMRI experiments examining neural correlates of subjective value. Neuroimage 76 , 412–427 (2013).23507394
169. Shenhav A &amp; Karmarkar UR Dissociable components of the reward circuit are involved in appraisal versus choice. Sci. Rep 9 , 1958 (2019).30760824
170. Acikalin MY , Gorgolewski KJ &amp; Poldrack RA A coordinate-based meta-analysis of overlaps in regional specialization and functional connectivity across subjective value and default mode networks. Front. Neurosci 11 , 1 (2017).28154520
171. Hayden BY , Nair AC , McCoy AN &amp; Platt ML Posterior cingulate cortex mediates outcome-contingent allocation of behavior. Neuron 60 , 19–25 (2008).18940585
172. Heilbronner SR , Hayden BY &amp; Platt ML Decision salience signals in posterior cingulate cortex. Front. Neurosci 5 , 55 (2011).21541308
173. McCoy AN , Crowley JC , Haghighian G , Dean HL &amp; Platt ML Saccade reward signals in posterior cingulate cortex. Neuron 40 , 1031–1040 (2003).14659101
174. Dean HL , Crowley JC &amp; Platt ML Visual and saccade-related activity in macaque posterior cingulate cortex. J. Neurophysiol 92 , 3056–3068 (2004).15201314
175. Dean HL &amp; Platt ML Allocentric spatial referencing of neuronal activity in macaque posterior cingulate cortex. J. Neurosci 26 , 1117–1127 (2006).16436597
176. Olson CR , Musil SY &amp; Goldberg ME Single neurons in posterior cingulate cortex of behaving macaque: eye movement signals. J. Neurophysiol 76 , 3285–3300 (1996).8930273
177. Hayden BY , Smith DV &amp; Platt ML Electrophysiological correlates of default-mode processing in macaque posterior cingulate cortex. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 106 , 5948–5953 (2009).19293382
178. Liu B , Tian Q &amp; Gu Y Robust vestibular self-motion signals in macaque posterior cingulate region. eLife 10 , e64569 (2021).33827753
179. Li YS , Nassar MR , Kable JW &amp; Gold JI Individual neurons in the cingulate cortex encode action monitoring, not selection, during adaptive decision-making. J. Neurosci 39 , 6668–6683 (2019).31217329
180. Smith AT Cortical visual area CSv as a cingulate motor area: a sensorimotor interface for the control of locomotion. Brain Struct. Funct 226 , 2931–2950 (2021).34240236
181. Platt ML &amp; Glimcher PW Neural correlates of decision variables in parietal cortex. Nature 400 , 233–238 (1999).10421364
182. Sugrue LP , Corrado GS &amp; Newsome WT Matching behavior and the representation of value in the parietal cortex. Science 304 , 1782–1787 (2004).15205529
183. McCoy AN &amp; Platt ML Risk-sensitive neurons in macaque posterior cingulate cortex. Nat. Neurosci 8 , 1220–1227 (2005).16116449
184. Wang MZ , Hayden B &amp; Heilbronner S Anatomically distinct OFC-PCC circuits relay choice from value space to action space. Nat. Commun 13 , 1–12 (2022).34983933
185. Weissman DH , Roberts KC , Visscher KM &amp; Woldorff MG The neural bases of momentary lapses in attention. Nat. Neurosci 9 , 971–978 (2006).16767087
186. Hayden BY , Smith DV &amp; Platt ML Cognitive control signals in posterior cingulate cortex. Front. Hum. Neurosci 4 , 223 (2010).21160560
187. Pearson JM , Hayden BY , Raghavachari S &amp; Platt ML Neurons in posterior cingulate cortex signal exploratory decisions in a dynamic multioption choice task. Curr. Biol 19 , 1532–1537 (2009).19733074
188. Barack DL , Chang SWC &amp; Platt ML Posterior cingulate neurons dynamically signal decisions to disengage during foraging. Neuron 96 , 339–347.e5 (2017).29024659
189. Hasson U , Chen J &amp; Honey CJ Hierarchical process memory: memory as an integral component of information processing. Trends Cogn. Sci 19 , 304–313 (2015).25980649
190. Lerner Y , Honey CJ , Silbert LJ &amp; Hasson U Topographic mapping of a hierarchy of temporal receptive windows using a narrated story. J. Neurosci 31 , 2906–2915 (2011).21414912
191. Heilbronner SR &amp; Platt ML Causal evidence of performance monitoring by neurons in posterior cingulate cortex during learning. Neuron 80 , 1384–1391 (2013).24360542
192. Bussey TJ , Wise SP &amp; Murray EA The role of ventral and orbital prefrontal cortex in conditional visuomotor learning and strategy use in rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta). Behav. Neurosci 115 , 971–982 (2001).11584930
193. Wirth S Single neurons in the monkey hippocampus and learning of new associations. Science 300 , 1578–1581 (2003).12791995
194. Hayden BY , Pearson JM &amp; Platt ML Neuronal basis of sequential foraging decisions in a patchy environment. Nat. Neurosci 14 , 933–939 (2011).21642973
195. Azab H &amp; Hayden BY Correlates of economic decisions in the dorsal and subgenual anterior cingulate cortices. Eur. J. Neurosci 47 , 979–993 (2018).29431892
196. Strait CE Neuronal selectivity for spatial positions of offers and choices in five reward regions. J. Neurophysiol 115 , 1098–1111 (2016).26631146
197. Joshi S , Li Y , Kalwani RM &amp; Gold JI Relationships between pupil diameter and neuronal activity in the locus coeruleus, colliculi, and cingulate cortex. Neuron 89 , 221–234 (2016).26711118
198. Fox KCR , Foster BL , Kucyi A , Daitch AL &amp; Parvizi J Intracranial electrophysiology of the human default network. Trends Cogn. Sci 22 , 307–324 (2018).29525387
199. Parvizi J &amp; Kastner S Promises and limitations of human intracranial electroencephalography. Nat. Neurosci 21 , 474–483 (2018).29507407
200. Nir Y Coupling between neuronal firing rate, gamma LFP, and BOLD fMRI is related to interneuronal correlations. Curr. Biol 17 , 1275–1285 (2007).17686438
201. Manning JR , Jacobs J , Fried I &amp; Kahana MJ Broadband shifts in local field potential power spectra are correlated with single-neuron spiking in humans. J. Neurosci 29 , 13613–13620 (2009).19864573
202. Ray S , Crone NE , Niebur E , Franaszczuk PJ &amp; Hsiao SS Neural correlates of high-gamma oscillations (60–200 Hz) in macaque local field potentials and their potential implications in electrocorticography. J. Neurosci 28 , 11526–11536 (2008).18987189
203. Ray S &amp; Maunsell JH Different origins of gamma rhythm and high-gamma activity in macaque visual cortex. PLoS Biol. 9 , e1000610 (2011).21532743
204. Belitski A Low-frequency local field potentials and spikes in primary visual cortex convey independent visual information. J. Neurosci 28 , 5696–5709 (2008).18509031
205. Foster BL , Rangarajan V , Shirer WR &amp; Parvizi J Intrinsic and task-dependent coupling of neuronal population activity in human parietal cortex. Neuron 86 , 578–590 (2015).25863718
206. Miller KJ , Weaver KE &amp; Ojemann JG Direct electrophysiological measurement of human default network areas. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 106 , 12174–12177 (2009).19584247
207. Jerbi K Exploring the electrophysiological correlates of the default-mode network with intracerebral EEG. Front. Syst. Neurosci 4 , 27 (2010).20661461
208. Ossandon T Transient suppression of broadband gamma power in the default-mode network is correlated with task complexity and subject performance. J. Neurosci 31 , 14521–14530 (2011).21994368
209. Dastjerdi M Differential electrophysiological response during rest, self-referential, and non-self-referential tasks in human posteromedial cortex. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 108 , 3023–3028 (2011).21282630
210. Foster BL , Dastjerdi M &amp; Parvizi J Neural populations in human posteromedial cortex display opposing responses during memory and numerical processing. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 109 , 15514–15519 (2012).22949666
211. Kucyi A &amp; Parvizi J Pupillary dynamics link spontaneous and task-evoked activations recorded directly from human insula. J. Neurosci 40 , 6207–6218 (2020).32631937
212. Raccah O , Daitch AL , Kucyi A &amp; Parvizi J Direct cortical recordings suggest temporal order of task-evoked responses in human dorsal attention and default networks. J. Neurosci 38 , 10305–10313 (2018).30315126
213. Daitch AL &amp; Parvizi J Spatial and temporal heterogeneity of neural responses in human posteromedial cortex. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 115 , 4785–4790 (2018).29666262
214. Lega B , Germi J &amp; Rugg M Modulation of oscillatory power and connectivity in the human posterior cingulate cortex supports the encoding and retrieval of episodic memories. J. Cogn. Neurosci 29 , 1415–1432 (2017).28387588
215. Aponik-Gremillion L Distinct population and single-neuron selectivity for executive and episodic processing in human dorsal posterior cingulate. eLife 11 , e80722 (2022).36169132
216. Foster BL &amp; Parvizi J Resting oscillations and cross-frequency coupling in the human posteromedial cortex. Neuroimage 60 , 384–391 (2012).22227048
217. Hacker CD , Snyder AZ , Pahwa M , Corbetta M &amp; Leuthardt EC Frequency-specific electrophysiologic correlates of resting state fMRI networks. Neuroimage 149 , 446–457 (2017).28159686
218. Foster BL , Kaveh A , Dastjerdi M , Miller KJ &amp; Parvizi J Human retrosplenial cortex displays transient theta phase locking with medial temporal cortex prior to activation during autobiographical memory retrieval. J. Neurosci 33 , 10439–10446 (2013).23785155
219. Foster BL Spontaneous neural dynamics and multi-scale network organization. Front. Syst. Neurosci 10 , 7 (2016).26903823
220. Kucyi A Intracranial electrophysiology reveals reproducible intrinsic functional connectivity within human brain networks. J. Neurosci 38 , 4230–4242 (2018).29626167
221. Foster BL &amp; Parvizi J Direct cortical stimulation of human posteromedial cortex. Neurology 88 , 685–691 (2017).28100728
222. Balestrini S Multimodal responses induced by cortical stimulation of the parietal lobe: a stereo-electroencephalography study. Brain 138 , 2596–2607 (2015).26129769
223. Richer F , Martinez M , Cohen H &amp; Saint-Hilaire JM Visual motion perception from stimulation of the human medial parieto-occipital cortex. Exp. Brain Res 87 , 649–652 (1991).1783033
224. Herbet G Disrupting posterior cingulate connectivity disconnects consciousness from the external environment. Neuropsychologia 56 , 239–244 (2014).24508051
225. Herbet G , Lafargue G &amp; Duffau H The dorsal cingulate cortex as a critical gateway in the network supporting conscious awareness. Brain 139 , e23 (2016).26719382
226. Fox KCR in Handbook of Spontaneous Thought: Mind-Wandering, Creativity, and Dreaming (eds Fox KCR &amp; Christoff K ) 165–179 (Oxford University Press, 2018).
227. Parvizi J Altered sense of self during seizures in the posteromedial cortex. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 118 , e2100522118 (2021).34272280
228. Natu VS Stimulation of the posterior cingulate cortex impairs episodic memory encoding. J. Neurosci 39 , 7173–7182 (2019).31358651
229. Read ML &amp; Lissaman R Commentary: stimulation of the posterior cingulate cortex impairs episodic memory encoding. Front. Hum. Neurosci 14 , 334 (2020).33005136
230. Margulies DS Situating the default-mode network along a principal gradient of macroscale cortical organization. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113 , 12574–12579 (2016).27791099
231. Smallwood J The default mode network in cognition: a topographical perspective. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 22 , 503–513 (2021).34226715
232. Raut RV , Snyder AZ &amp; Raichle ME Hierarchical dynamics as a macroscopic organizing principle of the human brain. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 117 , 20890–20897 (2020).32817467
233. Nelson SM A parcellation scheme for human left lateral parietal cortex. Neuron 67 , 156–170 (2010).20624599
234. Nelson SM , McDermott KB &amp; Petersen SE In favor of a ‘fractionation’ view of ventral parietal cortex: comment on Cabeza et al. Trends Cogn. Sci 16 , 399–400 (2012).22795558
235. Cabeza R , Ciaramelli E &amp; Moscovitch M Cognitive contributions of the ventral parietal cortex: an integrative theoretical account. Trends Cogn. Sci 16 , 338–352 (2012).22609315
236. Hutchinson JB , Uncapher MR &amp; Wagner AD Posterior parietal cortex and episodic retrieval: convergent and divergent effects of attention and memory. Learn. Mem 16 , 343–356 (2009).19470649
237. Hutchinson JB Functional heterogeneity in posterior parietal cortex across attention and episodic memory retrieval. Cereb. Cortex 24 , 49–66 (2014).23019246
238. Glasser MF A multi-modal parcellation of human cerebral cortex. Nature 536 , 171–178 (2016).27437579
239. Vogt BA , Vogt L , Farber NB &amp; Bush G Architecture and neurocytology of monkey cingulate gyrus. J. Comp. Neurol 485 , 218–239 (2005).15791645
240. Laumann TO Functional system and areal organization of a highly sampled individual human brain. Neuron 87 , 657–667 (2015).26212711
241. Haznedar MM Limbic circuitry in patients with autism spectrum disorders studied with positron emission tomography and magnetic resonance imaging. Am. J. Psychiatry 157 , 1994–2001 (2000).11097966
242. Kennedy DP &amp; Courchesne E Functional abnormalities of the default network during self- and other-reflection in autism. Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci 3 , 177–190 (2008).19015108
243. Kennedy DP , Redcay E &amp; Courchesne E Failing to deactivate: resting functional abnormalities in autism. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 103 , 8275–8280 (2006).16702548
244. Nestor PG Neuropsychological disturbance in schizophrenia: a diffusion tensor imaging study. Neuropsychology 22 , 246–254 (2008).18331167
245. Fitzsimmons J Cingulum bundle abnormalities and risk for schizophrenia. Schizophr. Res 215 , 385–391 (2020).31477373
246. Mayberg HS Reciprocal limbic-cortical function and negative mood: converging PET findings in depression and normal sadness. Am. J. Psychiatry 156 , 675–682 (1999).10327898
247. Berman MG Depression, rumination and the default network. Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci 6 , 548–555 (2011).20855296
248. Cooney RE , Joormann J , Eugene F , Dennis EL &amp; Gotlib IH Neural correlates of rumination in depression. Cogn. Affect. Behav. Neurosci 10 , 470–478 (2010).21098808
249. Lozano AM Subcallosal cingulate gyrus deep brain stimulation for treatment-resistant depression. Biol. Psychiatry 64 , 461–467 (2008).18639234
250. Todd TP , Fournier DI &amp; Bucci DJ Retrosplenial cortex and its role in cue-specific learning and memory. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev 107 , 713–728 (2019).31055014
251. Morris R , Paxinos G &amp; Petrides M Architectonic analysis of the human retrosplenial cortex. J. Comp. Neurol 421 , 14–28 (2000).10813770
252. Ding SL Comprehensive cellular-resolution atlas of the adult human brain. J. Comp. Neurol 524 , 3127–3481 (2016).27418273
253. Van Essen DC A population-average, landmark- and surface-based (PALS) atlas of human cerebral cortex. Neuroimage 28 , 635–662 (2005).16172003
254. Zilles K &amp; Palomero-Gallagher N Cyto-, myelo-, and receptor architectonics of the human parietal cortex. Neuroimage 14 , S8–S20 (2001).11373127
255. Nasr S Scene-selective cortical regions in human and nonhuman primates. J. Neurosci 31 , 13771–13785 (2011).21957240
