LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101638820
42950
J Prev Alzheimers Dis
J Prev Alzheimers Dis
The journal of prevention of Alzheimer's disease
2274-5807
2426-0266

38230711
10794852
10.14283/jpad.2023.88
NIHMS1940957
Article
The room where it happens: Clinician reflections on returning preclinical Alzheimer’s biomarker results to research participants
Erickson Claire M. a
Chin Nathaniel A. b
Ketchum Fred B. c
Eveler Marcella L. b
Conway Camille E. d
Coughlin DaRae M. e
Clark Lindsay R. bf
a Department of Medical Ethics and Health Policy, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine
b Department of Medicine, Division of Geriatrics &amp; Gerontology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health
c Department of Neurology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health
d Department of Mental Health Research, William S. Middleton Memorial Veterans Hospital
e Department of Medicine, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health
f Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center, William S. Middleton Memorial Veterans Hospital
Corresponding Author: Lindsay Clark, PhD, lrclark@medicine.wisc.edu, Clinical Science Center, 600 Highland Ave. J5/1 Mezzanine, Madison, WI 53792
30 10 2023
2024
18 1 2024
11 1 16
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Disclosing Alzheimer’s disease (AD) biomarkers to research participants is a growing practice. Here, we aim to synthesize the experiences of clinicians leading preclinical AD biomarker disclosure. Semi-structured interviews were conducted individually with each of the four clinicians conducting biomarker disclosure as a part of a longitudinal, observational AD cohort study. Study clinicians emphasized the importance of participant education, having adequate time available for the disclosure visit, and forms to facilitate disclosure. To train and support future clinicians conducting AD biomarker disclosure, our study clinicians highlighted providing information about AD and biomarkers, shadowing a disclosure visit, having team debriefing sessions, and collating a frequently asked questions document. To date, this is the first characterization of clinician reflections on disclosing AD biomarker result to cognitively unimpaired research participants. As more clinicians in research or clinical settings seek to disclose AD biomarker results, best practices for training clinicians to lead disclosure are necessary.

Biomarker disclosure
Disclosure practices
Research clinician experiences

pmc1. Introduction

Disease-modifying therapies, novel, lower cost, blood-based testing methods, and patient interest are shifting disclosure of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) biomarker results from theory to practice. FDA approval of the anti-amyloid drugs aducanumab1 and lecanemab2 marks the beginning of a new era for Alzheimer’s drug development and will necessitate disclosure of AD biomarkers, namely beta-amyloid, clinically3. These shifts spotlight the burgeoning role of biomarkers as tools for AD prediction and intervention.

The rapidly changing landscape in AD research has invigorated interest in disclosure practices and instigated discussion about implementing disclosure in clinical settings4. Previous AD biomarker disclosure studies demonstrate cognitively unimpaired participants understand their results and experience minimal psychological impact after learning their results4–10. With the rapidly changing landscape of Alzheimer’s research and treatment, it is possible that clinicians and researchers will soon be ordering or reviewing amyloid test results with regularity. However, to date there is no information about how clinicians conduct disclosure, what challenges they face, and how they can best be supported. As biomarker disclosure expands into clinical settings, disclosure practices and informed perspectives that can be translated into clinical practice will be needed to train clinicians prior to ordering and disclosing tests, especially for training clinicians without extensive AD biomarker knowledge.

Here, we present reflections from study clinicians who disclosed amyloid PET results to cognitively unimpaired research participants enrolled in the Wisconsin Registry for Alzheimer’s Prevention11 (WRAP). We detail aspects of the protocol design and elements for training and supporting clinicians that contributed to the success of our disclosure study. Our hope is that these reflections can contribute to discussions of how to prepare clinicians to conduct disclosure in research and clinical settings and in the design of pragmatic disclosure practices.

2. Methods

2.1 Study Design

Participants opted into the Amyloid Disclosure Study12, which included three virtual core study visits comprising an education session, disclosure of amyloid PET scan results, and care planning session on reducing modifiable risk factors for dementia as well as three follow-up phone calls to assess additional research outcomes of interest. Total study duration was about 9 months. During the first study visit, participants met virtually with study staff to complete the informed consent process and participate in a 15-minute interactive presentation providing education on AD and the significance of potential amyloid PET results. The virtual disclosure visit was conducted two to four weeks later by a study physician or nurse practitioner. Study clinicians first assessed the appropriateness of returning results (e.g., participant’s psychological readiness) then proceeded to disclose the amyloid PET result using standardized language. Participants received a result sheet which provided their amyloid result (elevated or not elevated) and descriptions of the meaning of results. After disclosing the result, clinicians answered participant questions. Within a few days of the disclosure visit, study staff called participants to check on their well-being. About one month after disclosure, participants engaged in a virtual dementia risk-reduction counseling visit led by study staff to identify lifestyle changes the participant wanted to make. Follow up for participant data collection occurred two- and seven-months post-disclosure.

2.2 Sample

Participants (n=99; age=72.0 ± 4.8) were recruited from WRAP, a longitudinal observational research cohort of largely cognitively unimpaired adults who enrolled in late-midlife and have been followed over time. The cohort is enriched for parental family history of Alzheimer’s disease clinical syndrome11. A subset of the cohort had completed an amyloid Pittsburgh compound B (PiB) PET scan13,14 within 18 months of study enrollment as a part of the parent WRAP study, were aged 65 or older, had no active DSM-5 diagnoses (including active major mood disorders, psychotic disorders, alcohol/substance use disorder within the past year, history of bipolar I or schizophrenia spectrum disorders), and were cognitively unimpaired. Additionally, participants were screened for current symptoms of depression, anxiety, and suicidality, at the first study visit and excluded from study participation if scores indicated moderate to severe depression or anxiety, suicidal ideation within the past month, or history of suicide attempt. Overall, participants in the Amyloid Disclosure study were predominantly women (n=66, 66.7%), White (n=94, 94.9%), and college-educated (n=68, 69.4%). 28.3% (n=28) had an elevated amyloid PET scan at their most recent visit. Approval to conduct this human-subjects research was obtained by the University of Wisconsin-Madison Institutional Review Board. All participants provided informed consent to participate in the study.

2.3 Clinician Interviews

Semi-structured interviews about the disclosure visit were conducted (by CME) with each of the study clinicians (NAC, MLE, CEC, DMC). An interview guide was used which was based on our experiences designing a disclosure protocol, and included questions about clinicians’ experiences with the disclosure process (e.g., challenges encountered, what went well, and frequently asked questions from study participants) and training and competency for future investigative staff (e.g., preparedness for disclosing, who should disclose, and advice for those starting to disclose). Each interview was recorded. On average, the interviews lasted 40 minutes. Each of the study clinicians consented to the interview and recording.

2.4 Analysis

Consistent with our goal of sharing pragmatic reflections from experienced practitioners in our disclosure process, the interviewee (CE) took notes during the interview, which formed the basis for identifying perspectives shared across interviews. Interview recordings were reviewed as needed to ensure fidelity of notes. To increase trustworthiness15, member checking was performed, as study clinicians (one geriatrician and three nurse practitioners) provided feedback on the summary of the main concepts discussed in the interview. The study clinicians are included as co-authors to ensure accurate representation of their respective experiences and reflections.

3. Results

Overall, clinician reflections and feedback focused on protocol design and clinician training considerations.

3.1 Protocol Design Considerations

All clinicians emphasized participant-centered disclosure protocols, including but not limited to assuring participant safety and understanding of information. Our clinicians found the most important aspects of the disclosure protocol included a participant education session, ample time for disclosure, and standardized forms to facilitate disclosure (Table 1).

3.1.1 Participant Education

Study clinicians reported that standardized education was critical to preparing participants and functioned to (re)introduce participants to important concepts and language for understanding their results. Though, they also reported finding balance between burden and thoroughness was difficult. Ultimately, the education session in this disclosure study was designed so participants met a threshold of knowledge necessary for understanding and contextualizing biomarker results. Topics covered included background on Alzheimer’s (e.g., pathophysiology), defining Alzheimer’s vs. dementia, potential results, and possible personal implications for learning results (e.g., distress, stigma, insurance discrimination).

Our clinicians encountered participants who needed additional clarification about what they would learn and why. Most commonly, cognitively unimpaired participants were unsure if they were recruited because the study team already knew that they had elevated amyloid or if the study had concerns about their cognitive testing (i.e., if they were impaired). Clinicians addressed these areas of confusion before returning results.

3.1.2 Technology Preparation

When discussing challenges and aspects of the disclosure visits that went well, study clinicians reported that conducting the visits virtually was surprisingly not an issue. They explained that they believed this was due to the technology tutorial soon after enrollment. The purpose of the technology tutorial was to ensure participant access and comfortability using the televideo software. In preparation for the disclosure visit, clinicians found having all materials necessary for the visit open and organized on their screen helped the visit run smoothly.

3.1.3 Adequate Time for the Disclosure Visit

We found that disclosure visits typically lasted around 30 minutes but could last up to 60 minutes. Our study clinicians reported the visits that took the longest included disclosing elevated results and disclosing to people with a family history of dementia or dementia caregiving experience Our clinicians emphasized that the process required time to ensure readiness to proceed with disclosure, result understanding, and have all questions answered.

3.1.4 Disclosure Visit Forms

Our clinicians found use of standardized forms helped facilitate disclosure. Participants received a sheet containing their biomarker result, information on elevated and non-elevated results, and an example of how to interpret risk (e.g., high cholesterol and heart disease). Our clinicians reported that this form was useful for participants to view while they described the result.

Clinicians were provided a form that served as a checklist, included prompts to engage the participant and standardized language for disclosure. Clinicians asked about stressful events since their last visit, how they thought their experiences with dementia (e.g., family history) may impact their result reception, and verbally confirmed desire to proceed with learning results. Our clinicians reported that these questions provided context and framed the post-disclosure discussion to ensure participant understanding and answer questions. After returning the result, our clinicians found it useful to ask participants to repeat their result and share their result interpretation (i.e., “What does this information mean to you?”).

Over the duration of the Amyloid Disclosure Study, we amended the amyloid disclosure clinician form, with particular emphasis on the section after the result is returned. Originally, there were no post-disclosure participant prompts. After learning their results, it was left to participants to ask further questions. Our study clinicians found that participants did not ask many questions after learning their result. In an effort to facilitate a more robust conversation, we added a checklist of possible prompts for specific issues and topics to the clinician form. Issues and topics included effect on family and loved ones, accuracy of risk estimate or scan result, concern about discrimination or privacy, preventative measures, and clinical trials. Study clinicians found the inclusion of these prompts lead to a more helpful discussion with the participant and guided them to ask more questions.

3.2 Training and Supporting Clinicians

Our experiences suggest the necessity of having a clinician with expertise in AD and AD biomarkers on staff for training and ongoing supervision of others conducting disclosure who may not have as much AD experience. We offer key strategies that streamlined and improved clinician training and support (Table 1).

3.2.1 Education on AD and Biomarkers

When discussing who would be appropriate to provide disclosure, our clinicians reported that while clinicians do not need an extensive AD background, at a minimum, they should understand the difference between AD and cognitive impairment and understand the contributions of AD biomarkers to dementia risk. Our clinicians also emphasized understand the science of amyloid PET scans. They stated this knowledge was important to answer participant questions about test validity, result determination, and to address the underrepresentation in amyloid PET studies, particularly when providing results to people of color. Our clinicians noted that their comfort with interpreting AD biomarkers shaped their interactions with participants, noting if they were uncomfortable, the participant was too. They endorsed role play as a method to familiarize themselves with the process, practicing explaining results as a provider and imagining being the participant learning their result.

3.2.2 Shadow Disclosure Visit

One of the most valuable elements of training our clinicians reported was shadowing disclosure visits with an experienced clinician. The training clinician had time with the leading clinician to discuss the visit afterwards and ask lingering questions. After shadowing, training clinicians then lead a supervised disclosure visit, followed by a debriefing session.

3.2.3 Frequently Asked Questions

Our clinicians reported a learning curve to predicting participant questions and being prepared with appropriate responses. In some cases, the line between clinic and research was difficult to toe. Our clinicians ultimately relied on standardized language from the script when describing the meaning of the result and answered questions based on their knowledge, experience, and information provided in participant study materials. We developed an FAQ table based on participant questions described by the clinicians and accompanying responses (Table 2).

3.2.4 Debriefing Sessions and Continuing Education

Lastly, our clinicians said regularly scheduled time for the clinical team to meet as a group was important to discuss visits and solicit feedback on questions or situations that arise. They also said these meetings served to promote cohesion in the disclosure experience provided to participants. Occasionally, it may also be appropriate for clinical and research teams to meet to provide updates.

4. Discussion

Disclosure practices in AD and dementia have been a fraught, but important element for providing holistic care. Historically, dementia diagnoses have not always been communicated to patients and their loved ones because of stigma and perceived lack of actionability once the diagnosis is made16. Today, even, clinicians do not always disclose a dementia diagnosis17 for reasons including not wanting to give a diagnosis that is not definite, lack of training or confidence in ability to diagnose and communicate diagnosis, perceived lack of diagnosis benefit, stigma, and concern for patient or family response (e.g., lack of desire for diagnosis, psychological distress, etc.)16. This is despite desire reported by an overwhelming proportion of both cognitively unimpaired individuals and those with cognitive impairment to learn a timely dementia diagnosis18,19.

One of the barriers to dementia diagnosis is driven by clinicians reporting that they feel unprepared to communicate the diagnosis and its meaning20–22. One interview study (n=15) focused on characterizing how clinicians, primarily neurologists and family medicine/geriatrics physicians, learned to disclose a dementia diagnosis23. Findings identified two major themes: formal training and self-taught methods. Most commonly, the clinicians reported learning from their mentors or attending clinicians during their medical education. For those indicating self-taught methods, clinicians reported learning from their own experiences and searching online and in the literature for diagnosis communication strategies. Clinicians shared that they pursued self-taught methods because they did not feel their medical education adequately prepared them to make and disclose dementia diagnoses23. Additional findings from the same interview study found clinician recommendations for best practices in disclosing a dementia diagnosis included fostering relationships (e.g., use empathic communication), educating patients and family (e.g., explain the diagnosis), and taking a family-centered approach (e.g., involve loved ones when delivering information)16.

Though AD biomarker disclosure does not constitute a diagnosis, it is relevant disease information that may inform risk assessment for developing AD dementia and be potentially stigmatizing24,25. Concerns, like those mentioned above with dementia diagnoses, regarding the clinical validity and utility of biomarkers have shaped the discussion about and studies of AD biomarker disclosure4. As with other types of disclosure in AD and dementia, it is clear guidelines are needed to prepare clinicians, with and without AD knowledge, to have these conversations to not perpetuate barriers in results disclosure associated with stigma or lack of training or confidence in communicating results.

Reflections from our study mirror the recommendations from clinicians disclosing dementia diagnoses. Our clinicians highlight the need for participant education, appropriate time for the visit, and importance of consistent language. Given current limitations surrounding the predictive validity of AD biomarkers and stigma associated with dementia, facilitating disclosure and contextualizing the result is necessary. This requires time. In our study, participants went through a pre-disclosure education session lasting 30 minutes and then a separate disclosure visit lasting on average 45 to 60 minutes. As the risk conferred by AD biomarkers is better understood and, importantly, as treatments become available, the time required to disclose results will decrease, improving clinical translatability.

Prior work highlights the limited training clinicians were provided in learning how to disclose a dementia diagnosis. To improve clinician preparedness for AD biomarker disclosure, we provide concrete considerations and examples for building a training infrastructure. Our clinicians highlighted the utility of hands-on learning and collaboration (e.g., shadowing a disclosure visit, one supervised disclosure, and team debriefing sessions), and robust materials to aid in the facilitation of the disclosure visit (e.g., clinician disclosure form with checklist and prompts). We collated the frequently asked questions our clinicians reported and examples of responses (Table 2). This may be used by other studies seeking to train or prepare clinicians to disclose AD biomarkers. As more is known about AD and AD biomarkers, continuing clinician education is necessary for up-to-date information on biomarker results, prognosis and dementia risk within the study’s cohort and other cohorts.

Clinicians will have to use their clinical judgement to decide when not to disclose to a participant. This can include when a participant makes comments or jokes about suicide or expresses distress/worry about learning their result during the pre-disclosure interviewing. These situations, both what the participant said or did and how the clinician responded, may be documented for future training purposes. Ultimately, while this occurred infrequently (n=3) in our study, clinical judgement was necessary for determining appropriateness of disclosure, highlighting the value of clinician-led disclosure as opposed to non-clinical study staff.

It is important to note the limitations of the Amyloid Disclosure Study. The participants disclosed to through this study were predominantly White, college-educated, and female. This sample is not representative of the broader population, nor of the patient population impacted by AD. Disclosure conversations may likely vary by individual’s cultural, educational, and ethnic backgrounds and identities. Additional research utilizing samples more representative of the general population are needed to refine disclosure practices to address people’s intersecting backgrounds and identities. Further, there are many elements of our study that are not readily scalable to clinical practice. This includes the time dedicated for the disclosure visit and the time spent educating participants.

While the question of who should conduct AD biomarker disclosure continues to be debated and exceptions will be appropriate, based on our experiences those best suited to conducting disclosure have both a science background and clinical experience. The specific degree is not a necessary criterion but rather previous experience, especially with delivering difficult news. Clinicians must be willing to learn about the nuances of AD and interpreting biomarker results but need not possess that knowledge already. Training materials and opportunities to shadow disclosure visits can prepare clinicians for disclosure. In the future, considerations for preparing primary care clinicians will be necessary for clinical translatability. Ultimately, given the specialized information and required time for disclosure, primary care clinicians may not be as well-suited for AD biomarker disclosure as specialty providers. This remains an important consideration for clinical translatability, as demand for dementia specialists far outweighs the pool of trained clinicians. The field of AD biomarkers is evolving quickly, and with-it disclosure practices. Thus, continuous discussion is necessary to shape appropriate disclosure protocols and build clinician training to ensure a thoroughly prepared clinician force is ready to disclose AD biomarkers.

Acknowledgements

This publication was supported by a Supplement to the National Institute on Aging R01 AG021155. We extend our deepest thanks to the WRAP participants for their invaluable contributions to the study.

Table 1. Key takeaways

	Protocol Consideration	Clinician Training Consideration	
Pre-Disclosure Preparation	• Participant education	• Clinician education
• Shadow disclosure visit
• Utilize a Frequently Asked Questions document	
Disclosure Visit	• Schedule adequate time for visit
• Results summary form for participant
• Establish guidelines for when not to disclose	• Clinician form with checklist and prompts
• One supervised disclosure visit	
Post-Disclosure		• Team debriefing sessions	

Table 2. Frequently asked questions from participants at the disclosure visit

Topic	Question Phrasing	Clinician Response	
Test results	• Does an elevated result mean I have Alzheimer’s disease?	No, an elevated result does not mean you have Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimer’s is defined by the presence of both amyloid and tau. The test was only for amyloid.	
Other biomarkers	• What is tau?	Tau is a protein found in the brain. In Alzheimer’s disease, an abnormal form of Tau builds up and is the second hallmark of Alzheimer’s disease. This accumulation causes tangles to form and spread throughout the brain causing brain cell damage and death.	
Amount of elevation	• How high am I?
• How low am I?
• How much amyloid is in my brain?	I don’t have that information. We determine an elevated result by looking at your brain scan and seeing if amyloid has accumulated in multiple brain regions.	
Rate of accumulation	• How quickly does it [amyloid] accumulate?	Once elevated, we believe that amyloid continues to accumulate. We don’t yet know the rate, but we know that amyloid accumulates over many years.	
Treatments	• Is there anything I can do to remove the amyloid?	Currently there is nothing you can do to remove the amyloid. There are drugs being studied to remove it. You can consider enrolling in a clinical trial testing anti-amyloid treatments.	
Next steps	• What should I do now?	The best thing you can do is live a brain healthy lifestyle which may reduce overall dementia risk.
• Try to stay active and get at least 30 minutes of exercise 5 days per week.
• Eat a healthy diet
• Get adequate sleep (7-9 hours are recommended)
• Engage in cognitive enrichment (brain games, pursue new interests, learn new skills)
• Keep socially engaged (stay connected to family and friends, join a club or group)
• Manage stress and develop coping skills (practice mindfulness)
• Control medical risk factors (HTN, HLD, DM, obesity, depression/anxiety)
• Stop smoking and quit drinking alcohol or reduce to 1 drink daily	
Cognitive complaints	• Is this the reason I’m having symptoms?	Cognition is complicated. Amyloid could be a cause of your memory symptoms. But so could poor sleep, stress, depression, or other factors. We recommend discussing your symptoms with your doctor to further evaluate potential causes and recommendations.	
Risk for dementia	• Am I going to get dementia?	We don’t know yet. Alzheimer’s dementia is defined by the presence of amyloid and tau plus cognitive symptoms, like challenges with thinking and memory. Not everyone with amyloid develops tau. Not everyone with amyloid and tau develop dementia. However, if you have elevated amyloid, you are at a higher risk for developing dementia than those with non-elevated amyloid.	
Heritability of risk	• Does this increase the risk of my children getting Alzheimer’s?	Explain genetic risk (APOE). Amyloid is a protein in the brain. Having amyloid in your brain does not mean your kids will develop amyloid in their brains. However, having elevated amyloid may suggest an increased genetic risk for Alzheimer’s disease. This test result, though, was for brain amyloid and not a genetic test.	

Conflict of Interest Statement: CME, NAC, FBK, MLE, CEC, DMC, LRC have no relevant conflicts of interest to disclose.


References

1. Aducanumab (marketed as Aduhelm) Information. FDA Press Announcements. Published December 1, 2022. Accessed January 17, 2023. https://www.fda.gov/drugs/postmarket-drug-safety-information-patients-and-providers/aducanumab-marketed-aduhelm-information
2. FDA Grants Accelerated Approval for Alzheimer’s Disease Treatment. FDA. Published January 6, 2023. Accessed January 10, 2023. https://www.fda.gov/news-events/press-announcements/fda-grants-accelerated-approval-alzheimers-disease-treatment
3. Erickson CM , Clark LR , Ketchum FB , Chin NA , Gleason CE , Largent EA . Implications of preclinical Alzheimer’s disease biomarker disclosure for US policy and society. Alzheimers Dement Amst Neth. 2022;14 (1 ):e12339. doi:10.1002/dad2.12339
4. Erickson CM , Chin NA , Johnson SC , Gleason CE , Clark LR . Disclosure of preclinical Alzheimer’s disease biomarker results in research and clinical settings: Why, how, and what we still need to know. Alzheimers Dement Diagn Assess Dis Monit. 2021;13 (1 ):e12150. doi:10.1002/dad2.12150
5. Largent EA , Harkins K , Dyck CH van , Hachey S , Sankar P , Karlawish J . Cognitively unimpaired adults’ reactions to disclosure of amyloid PET scan results. PLOS ONE. 2020;15 (2 ):e0229137. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0229137 32053667
6. Grill JD , Cox CG , Harkins K , Karlawish J . Reactions to learning a “not elevated” amyloid PET result in a preclinical Alzheimer’s disease trial. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2018;10 :125. doi:10.1186/s13195-018-0452-1 30579361
7. Grill JD , Raman R , Ernstrom K , Short-term Psychological Outcomes of Disclosing Amyloid Imaging Results to Research Participants Who Do Not Have Cognitive Impairment. JAMA Neurol. 2020;77 (12 ):1504–1513. doi:10.1001/jamaneurol.2020.2734 32777010
8. Erickson CM , Chin NA , Coughlin DM , Virtual disclosure of preclinical Alzheimer’s biomarkers: Preliminary experiences. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2021;69 (7 ):2044–2047. doi:10.1111/jgs.17184 33960399
9. Bemelmans SASA , Tromp K , Bunnik EM , Psychological, behavioral and social effects of disclosing Alzheimer’s disease biomarkers to research participants: a systematic review. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2016;8 . doi:10.1186/s13195-016-0212-z
10. de Wilde A , van Buchem MM , Otten RHJ , Disclosure of amyloid positron emission tomography results to individuals without dementia: a systematic review. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2018;10 :72. doi:10.1186/s13195-018-0398-3 30055660
11. Johnson SC , Koscik RL , Jonaitis EM , The Wisconsin Registry for Alzheimer’s Prevention: A review of findings and current directions. Alzheimers Dement Diagn Assess Dis Monit. 2017;10 :130–142. doi:10.1016/j.dadm.2017.11.007
12. Erickson CM , Chin NA , Rosario HL , Peterson A , Johnson SC , Clark LR . Feasibility of virtual Alzheimer’s biomarker disclosure: Findings from an observational cohort. Rev.
13. Racine AM , Clark LR , Berman SE , Associations between Performance on an Abbreviated CogState Battery, Other Measures of Cognitive Function, and Biomarkers in People at Risk for Alzheimer’s Disease. J Alzheimers Dis JAD. 2016;54 (4 ):1395–1408. doi:10.3233/JAD-160528 27589532
14. Johnson SC , Christian BT , Okonkwo OC , Amyloid burden and neural function in people at risk for Alzheimer’s Disease. Neurobiol Aging. 2014;35 (3 ):576–584. doi:10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2013.09.028 24269021
15. Creswell JW . Qualitative Inquiry and Research Design: Choosing among Five Traditions. Sage Publications, Inc; 1998:xv, 403.
16. Wollney EN , Armstrong MJ , Bedenfield N , Barriers and Best Practices in Disclosing a Dementia Diagnosis: A Clinician Interview Study. Health Serv Insights. 2022;15 :11786329221141828. doi:10.1177/11786329221141829
17. 2021 Alzheimer’s disease facts and figures. Alzheimers Dement. 2021;17 (3 ):327–406. doi:10.1002/alz.12328 33756057
18. Dungen P van den , Kuijk L van , Marwijk H van , Preferences regarding disclosure of a diagnosis of dementia: a systematic review. Int Psychogeriatr. 2014;26 (10 ):1603–1618. doi:10.1017/S1041610214000969 24933479
19. Watson R , Bryant J , Sanson-Fisher R , Mansfield E , Evans TJ . What is a ‘timely’ diagnosis? Exploring the preferences of Australian health service consumers regarding when a diagnosis of dementia should be disclosed. BMC Health Serv Res. 2018;18 (1 ):612. doi:10.1186/s12913-018-3409-y 30081889
20. Phillips J , Pond CD , Paterson NE , Difficulties in disclosing the diagnosis of dementia: a qualitative study in general practice. Br J Gen Pract. 2012;62 (601 ):e546–e553. doi:10.3399/bjgp12X653598 22867678
21. Aminzadeh F , Molnar FJ , Dalziel WB , Ayotte D . A Review of Barriers and Enablers to Diagnosis and Management of Persons with Dementia in Primary Care. Can Geriatr J. 2012;15 (3 ):85–94. doi:10.5770/cgj.15.42 23259021
22. Wangler J , Jansky M . Dementia diagnostics in general practitioner care. Wien Med Wochenschr 1946. 2020;170 (9 ):230–237. doi:10.1007/s10354-019-00722-4
23. Wollney EN , Bylund CL , Bedenfield N , Clinician approaches to communicating a dementia diagnosis: An interview study. PLoS ONE. 2022;17 (4 ):e0267161. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0267161 35421205
24. Rosin ER , Blasco D , Pilozzi AR , Yang LH , Huang X . A Narrative Review of Alzheimer’s Disease Stigma. J Alzheimers Dis. 78 (2 ):515–528. doi:10.3233/JAD-200932
25. Stites SD , Gill J , Largent EA , The relative contributions of biomarkers, disease modifying treatment, and dementia severity to Alzheimer’s stigma: A vignette-based experiment. Soc Sci Med 1982. 2021;292 :114620. doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2021.114620
