LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101128963
29630
Ageing Res Rev
Ageing Res Rev
Ageing research reviews
1568-1637
1872-9649

37544432
10515314
10.1016/j.arr.2023.102027
NIHMS1924227
Article
Alzheimer’s disease and its related dementias in US Native Americans: A major public health concern
Sehar Ujala 1
Kopel Jonathan 1
Reddy P. Hemachandra 123456
1. Department of Internal Medicine, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, Lubbock, TX 79430, USA
2. Nutritional Sciences Department, College of Human Sciences, Texas Tech University, on Ave, Lubbock, TX 79409, USA
3. Neurology, Departments of School of Medicine, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, Lubbock, TX 79430, USA
4. Public Health Department of Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, Lubbock, TX 79430, USA
5. Department of Speech, Language and Hearing Sciences, School Health Professions, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, Lubbock, TX 79430, USA
6. Department of Pharmacology and Neuroscience, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, Lubbock, TX 79430, USA
Author Contributions: U. S. and P.H.R. are responsible for the conceptualization and formatting the article. U.S. J.K. and P.H.R. are responsible for writing, original draft preparation, finalization of the manuscript. P.H.R. were responsible for the funding acquisition.

Correspondence to: P. Hemachandra Reddy, Ph.D. Department of Internal Medicine, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, School of Medicine, Lubbock, Texas 79430, Fax: 806-743-2334, hemachandra.reddy@ttuhsc.edu
18 9 2023
9 2023
05 8 2023
01 9 2024
90 102027102027
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and Alzheimer’s related dementias (ADRD) are growing public health concerns in aged populations of all ethnic and racial groups. AD and ADRD are caused by multiple factors, such as genetic mutations, modifiable and non-modifiable risk factors, and lifestyle. Studies of postmortem brains have revealed multiple cellular changes implicated in AD and ADRD, including the accumulation of amyloid beta and phosphorylated tau, synaptic damage, inflammatory responses, hormonal imbalance, mitochondrial abnormalities, and neuronal loss. These changes occur in both early-onset familial and late-onset sporadic forms. Two-thirds of women and one-third of men are at life time for AD. A small proportion of total AD cases are caused by genetic mutations in amyloid precursor protein, presenilin 1, and presenilin 1 genes, and the APOE4 allele is a risk factor. Tremendous research on AD/ADRD, and other comorbidities such as diabetes, obesity, hypertension, and cancer has been done on almost all ethnic groups, however, very little biomedical research done on US Native Americans. AD/ADRD prevalence is high among all ethnic groups. In addition, US Native Americans have poorer access to healthcare and medical services and are less likely to receive a diagnosis once they begin to exhibit symptoms, which presents difficulties in treating Alzheimer’s and other dementias. One in five US Native American people who are 45 years of age or older report having memory issues. Further, the impact of caregivers and other healthcare aspects on US Native Americans is not yet. In the current article, we discuss the history of Native Americans of United States (US) and health disparities, occurrence, and prevalence of AD/ADRD, and shedding light on the culturally sensitive caregiving practices in US Native Americans. This article is the first to discuss biomedical research and healthcare disparities in US Native Americans with a focus on AD and ADRD, we also discuss why US Native Americans are reluctant to participate in biomedical research.

Native Americans
Dementia
Alzheimer’s disease
Amyloid beta
Phosphorylated tau
American Indians

pmc1. Introduction

An estimated 6.5 million Americans over the age of 65 suffer from Alzheimer’s disease which is the most common form of dementia (Association, 2019) and is characterized by aberrant neurodegeneration and a loss of cognitive, behavioral, and functional capacities due to amyloid beta-amyloid and phosphorylated tau accumulation (Sehar et al., 2022b). In Alzheimer’s disease patients cognitive decline and weakened behavioral skills accompany brain atrophy and aberrant protein accumulations such as beta-amyloid and tau, which leads to the loss of autonomous functioning. Alzheimer’s disease (AD) can affect both men and women, two-thirds of women are lifetime for AD. Genetics contributes to the disease’s onset even if the exact origin of the condition is not yet known. APP, PSEN1, and PSEN2 gene mutations have been discovered to cause AD, and the APOE4 allele raises the risk of the condition (Wang and Ding, 2008). While the APOE4 allele of the APOE gene has repeatedly been linked to an elevated risk, the level of risk may vary depending on factors like age, gender, ethnicity, specific risk factors, and perhaps other genes (Tang et al., 1996).

Age of onset, co-morbidities, family history, APOE gene status, and changes in cognitive function over time may all be impacted by ethnicity in AD. Converging data has indicated that the likelihood of getting dementia is more prevalent in marginalized and minoritized racial and ethnic groupings, even though Alzheimer’s disease and related illnesses are common, debilitating conditions in all cultures. Given this expanding knowledge, academics studying cognitive diseases must concentrate their efforts on groups that have consistently experienced historical and present-day injustices (Hamilton and Goins, 2022). African Americans, Alaskans, and Hawaiians have higher probabilities of early-onset AD, suggesting that ethnic groups may be more susceptible to AD at a younger age (Chen and Panegyres, 2016). Although culturally varied and distributed across the country, American Indians and Alaska Natives have a high prevalence of established risk factors for AD, such as insufficient physical activity, a low socioeconomic position, hypertension, type 2 diabetes, obesity, smoking, and high cholesterol (Jernigan et al., 2020).

The methods used by American Indian and Alaska Native people to comprehend and cure AD and Alzheimer’s disease-related dementia (ADRD) have historically been influenced by their culture, environment, and worldview. Investigating cultural beliefs on AD/ADRD can help shed light on the connections between chronic stressors, disease, prevention and treatment, and the role of substance abuse. As a result, culturally based prevention, service, and caregiving are essential to achieving the best results (Crouch et al., 2023a). Future research on AD racial or ethnic groups must consider measures of racial/ethnic homogeneity as well as assessments of the environment and the components that make up the ethnicity of the groups under study due to the complex interactions between race, ethnicity, lifestyle, and environmental factors, such as climate and diet (Weiner, 2008).

Given the lack of standards for screening and evaluation of neurocognitive disorders, patients, caregivers, and clinicians must navigate a frequently complex healthcare environment when it comes to dementia diagnostics and management. Systemic healthcare disparities and the historical and ongoing marginalization of Indigenous populations may make this situation worse (Jacklin et al., 2022). Compared to White respondents, minorities are less likely to trust medical research, predict greater barriers to receiving dementia care, and are less confident that healthcare practitioners would understand their ethnic and racial background and experiences. The influence of dementias on individuals, families, social and healthcare institutions, and society is becoming more and more prominent as population aging continues to dominate national and international policy conversations (Browne et al., 2017). Now, we have a greater understanding of the pathology and course of dementia, the variety of forms dementia can take, and, most crucially, the fact that family caregivers provide most care, which has a substantial impact on their well-being (Kanaya et al., 2022). High levels of participation and collaboration are required to address the demands of dementia patients to ensure early diagnosis, start caregiver support, and delay institutional care (Mcainey et al., 2009).

Given these considerations, this review aims to discuss the history of Native Americans of United States and health disparities, occurrence, and prevalence of Alzheimer’s disease and its related dementias, and shedding light on the culturally sensitive caregiving practices in US Native Americans. With an emphasis on AD and ADRD, this paper is the first to address the discrepancies in US Native Americans’ healthcare and skepticism toward biomedical research. In this article, we also discuss reasons for US Native Americans’ unwillingness to participate in biomedical research.

2. Who are Native Americans?

There is a great deal of disagreement over the timing and volume of prehistoric migrations that contributed to the settlement of the American continent (Forster et al., 1996). Native tribes from the contiguous United States as well as Alaska Natives are included in the United States Census’ definition of “Native Americans.” Indigenous peoples are the heirs of the groups of people that lived in the Americas, the Pacific, and regions of Asia and Africa before the arrival of the European explorers. Numerous investigations utilizing linguistic, dental, and genetic evidence have put forth the hypothesis that the settlement of the New World occurred through three distinct waves of migration originating from North-East Asia. A study conducted by Monsalve and colleagues evaluated contrasting migration theories by employing molecular-typed HLA class II alleles to compare the connections between linguistic and genetic data within contemporary Native American populations. Their findings indicated that gene flow and genetic drift have played significant roles in shaping the genetic diversity of Native American populations. Notably, they observed significant correlations between genetic and geographical distances in both Native American and East Asian populations. However, the relationship between genetic distances and linguistic affiliation appears less definitive (Monsalve et al., 1999). Another study suggested that the initial divergence of ancestral Native Americans from East Asian ancestors likely occurred around 23,000 years ago. This was followed by a brief isolation period of approximately 8,000 years before their entrance and dispersion throughout the Americas. The data supports the idea of a single-migration model for all Native Americans, with later gene flow from sources related to East Asians and indirectly from Australo-Melanesians. Around 13,000 years ago, a single wave of migration led to the diversification of present-day Native Americans into northern and southern branches within the Americas (Raghavan et al., 2015).

According to the National Congress of American Indians, original Native Americans of North America are divided into two groups: American Indians and Alaska Natives. Since their first encounter with European settlers, tribal countries have been regarded as sovereign. This distinct political status and relationship are still acknowledged by the US, and there are 574 Native Nations, also known as tribes, nations, bands, pueblos, communities, and native villages in the United States. American Indians (AI) and US Native Americans are the most prevalent racial and ethnic labels used to define the broad population of Indigenous people in the United States (Bird, 1999). These terms have, however, generated disagreement, and it is unclear whether one is better than the other. The majority of Native Peoples frequently have personal preferences about how they want to be addressed.

According to US Census 2022, US American Indians and Alaska Natives make up 1.3% of the total population of the US, refer to Figure 1. The median income for American Indian and Alaska Native population households was $43,825 during 2015–2019 (Guzman, 2020). US Native Americans have the greatest rate of poverty of any minority group, according to statistics from the 2018 US Census. US Native Americans had a poverty rate of 25.4% in the country, compared to 20.8% for Black or African Americans. Nearly all indigenous groups in the eastern and western United States were forcibly transferred to remote, rural areas by the US government throughout the nineteenth century (Foreman, 1953; Garrison, 2002; Prucha, 1995). During the nineteenth century, they had lost a lot of their land due to forced displacement to the west, a series of treaties (which were frequently broken by white authority), and military defeat by the USA as it increased its control over the American West (Boxer, 2009). Due to their lack of political independence, limited economic development, and exclusion from urban labor markets, these areas had extremely high rates of impoverishment (Snipp, 1997).

2.1. History and Background of Native Americans

Human migrations from Eurasia to the Americas used the Beringia land bridge, which connected the two continents over what is now the Bering Strait. It is still up for contention how many people migrated and whether Amin was one among them (Calloway, 2015; Lewis, 1993; Pritchett and Vasquez, 2023; Snipp and Thornton, 1990). The Bering land bridge, which connected Siberia to Alaska some 60–25,000 years ago, was made possible by declining sea levels linked to a severe Quaternary glacial episode. The Great Plains and Great Lakes of the present-day United States of America and Canada, as well as nearby territories in the West and Southwest, were home to several Paleoindian societies, which were among the many prehistoric cultures that once called North America home. Several of the indigenous peoples of the Americas claim to have lived on this continent since their origins, which are described in a variety of ancient creation myths. Stories from other tribes describe travels over vast stretches of land and what is thought to be the Mississippi River. The native inhabitants of this continent have linguistic and genetic ties to prehistoric northeast Asians. Scholars have been able to learn about some of the migrations inside the Americas through linguistic and archaeological evidence (Lewis, 1993; Pritchett and Vasquez, 2023; Snipp and Thornton, 1990).

The exploration and colonization of the Americas by Europeans beginning in 1492 fundamentally altered how the Old and New Worlds saw themselves (Calloway, 2015). When the conquistador Juan Ponce de León landed in La Florida in April 1513, it marked one of the earliest significant interactions in what would come to be known as the American Deep South. Other Spanish explorers, such as Pánfilo de Narváez in 1528 and Hernando de Soto in 1539, came after him. Later European settlers in North America frequently justified their imperial expansion by claiming that by spreading Christian civilization, they were rescuing a primitive, pagan planet. Native Americans in northern New Spain were forced to convert to Catholicism because of the Indian Reductions policy during the Spanish colonization of the Americas (Calloway, 2015). They had long-standing spiritual, religious, and theological practices, including the practice of human sacrifice. The religion of New Spain transformed during the colonial era and ever since, became a syncretic Catholicism that included and mirrored native traditions. The Iroquois and the Hurons, the northern Algonquians, and their French allies fought for the fur trade during the Beaver Wars in the middle of the 17th century (Calloway, 2015). The Iroquois became dominant in the area and expanded their territory throughout the battle by destroying several significant tribal confederacies, including the Huron, Neutral, Erie, Susquehannock, and Shawnee.

Several Native American tribes participated in the French and Indian War/Seven Years’ War between 1754 and 1763 (Calloway, 2015). To fight British colonial militias, northern fur traders frequently sided with French armies. Native Americans participated in the fighting on both sides. In hopes of stopping British progress, more tribes joined the French in battle. The British had fewer allies, but those tribes who supported treaties to protect their territories wanted to demonstrate assimilation and allegiance. When such agreements were eventually invalidated, they were frequently disappointed. The tribes used their ties with the European powers to fight against their traditional Native foes to forward their agendas. Native Americans fought the spread of the new nation’s settlers in a few regions, from the Northwest to the Southeast, and later in the West as settlers came across the tribes of the Great Plains (Calloway, 2015). Tecumseh, a Shawnee chief, and well-known orator led an intertribal force that engaged in several battles in the Northwest during the 1811–1812 era known as Tecumseh’s War east of the Mississippi River. Tecumseh’s group joined forces with the British army in the War of 1812’s later phases, which helped to liberate Detroit. The Creek War and the Seminole Wars, which took place both before and after the Indian Removals of most of the Five Civilized Tribes, are two conflicts that took place in the Southeast. Throughout the 19th century, Native American tribes on the western plains and the United States fought in wars that were referred to as “Indian Wars.” One of the greatest Native American triumphs was at the Battle of Little Bighorn (1876). The Sand Creek Massacre (1864), the Sioux Rebellion (1862), and Wounded Knee (1890) were among the defeats. The Indian Wars persisted until the first decade of the 20th century.

All Native Americans born in the United States and its territories who were not already citizens acquired citizenship when Republican President Calvin Coolidge of the United States signed the Indian Citizenship Act on June 2, 1924 (Calloway, 2015). Almost two-thirds of Native Americans were already citizens of the United States when the act was passed. The U.S. Constitution guarantees all American Indians the right to vote, participate in elections, and run for public office. The extent to which tribal issues, sovereignty, and traditional customs fall under the purview of the federal government has been a source of debate. Native Americans continued to move into metropolitan areas, with 70% of them living there in 2012, up from 45% in 1970 and 8% in 1940. Rapid City, Minneapolis, Oklahoma City, Denver, Phoenix, Tucson, Seattle, Chicago, Houston, and New York City are among the cities having sizable Native American populations (Calloway, 2015). Many people have experienced poverty and discrimination. Indian social service organizations, like the Little Earth housing complex in Minneapolis, have tried to address racism, unemployment, narcotics, and gangs as common issues.

Indigenous Peoples have endured widespread and disastrous intergenerational enormous group trauma as well as escalating racism, prejudice, and persecution. There is a lack of information regarding Indigenous Peoples’ emotional reactions to collective trauma and losses, as well as the most effective ways to intervene to reduce psychological suffering and unresolved grief (Brave Heart et al., 2011). American Indians experience mental difficulties throughout their lifespans and across generations, including depression, substance misuse, exposure to collective trauma, interpersonal losses, unresolved sorrow, and other issues (Beals et al., 2005). Some studies show greater levels of PTSD and depression among American Indians and Alaska Natives, notwithstanding the dearth of research on Indigenous Peoples residing in the United States (Manson et al., 1996). According to American Psychiatric Association, due to forced displacement, land confiscation, and the loss of spiritual traditions, language, and culture, Indigenous peoples have endured intergenerational and unconscious grief from their historical trauma that is handed down from one generation to the next. Depression, anxiety, PTSD, and substance abuse can be visible signs of intergenerational trauma and unresolved historical grief if they are not properly handled and acknowledged.

3. Research Mistrust and healthcare disparities

American Indians continue to experience significant inequities in their health status and access to services even though health care is a legal right for those who belong to federally recognized Tribes, refer to figure 2. When compared to other American communities, they experience higher rates of illness, drug use issues, and mental discomfort. While living in remote places or on reservations, where access to healthcare is more challenging, AIs are also substantially less likely to have health insurance coverage. There is less data on the health, insurance status, and access to healthcare of American Indian elders, who are particularly impacted by these discrepancies (Willging et al., 2018). Although researchers have frequently lamented the paucity of data on US Native American communities, doing research with these populations poses several difficulties. Finding and recruiting a sample is one of the difficulties that researchers have while attempting to research US Native populations. In the past, researchers have taken advantage of US Native Americans for their purposes. Several studies have yielded articles for the researchers but no discoveries or advantages for the communities (Weaver, 2012). For instance, beginning in 1990, members of the tiny, remote tribe, Havasupai Indians, who inhabit the Grand Canyon’s crimson cliffs and turquoise waterfalls, provided DNA samples to researchers from Arizona State university in the expectation that they may reveal hereditary hints to the group’s tragic diabetes prevalence. Nevertheless, they discovered that their blood samples had been used to investigate a variety of other topics, such as mental illness and speculations about the tribe’s geographic origins that ran counter to their myths. In response to a banishment order from the tribe the university’s Board of Regents agreed to provide the Havasupai tribe various sorts of aid in addition to returning the blood samples and paying $700,000 to 41 of the tribe’s members (Harmon, 2010).

In the Western United States, which contains most Native American territories, more than 160,000 abandoned mines are the result of more than a century of hard rock mining. According to recent research, Native Americans who live close to closed uranium mines are more likely to suffer from hypertension, kidney disease, and other chronic illnesses because of their exposure to mine waste and their daily activities that bring them into contact with it (Flett et al., 2021). The New Mexico Supreme Court declared on February 6, 2014, that the state’s designation of 400 000 acres near Mount Taylor as “traditional cultural property” for the local Native American tribes does not contravene state law. Some people think that the decision will help Native Americans in their fight against future uranium mines proposals. For five of the Native American tribes in the state, Mount Taylor is a holy peak. It also contains one of North America’s greatest deposits of uranium ore. Plans to open new mines there have revived Native Americans’ suspicion, as they are concerned about the continued contamination of soil and water by mine waste and recall how the US Government and the uranium business failed to notify miners of the risks of lung cancer (Furlow, 2014).

Communities on tribal grounds in the Southwest of the United States have been exposed to residual environmental contamination because of commercial uranium mining in the Navajo Nation. A study conducted by Sanchez and colleagues demonstrated that serum from mice exposed to ambient abandoned uranium mine-derived dust in the central Navajo Nation (Claim 28) causes substantial alterations in the expression of murine miRNA in cells as determined by the serum cumulative inflammatory potential (SCIP) assay. Based on their transfection tests, these miRNAs have a significant impact on cell development and differentiation, and mmu-let-7a may be involved in changes to the cerebrovascular cultured mouse cerebrovascular endothelial cells after exposure to inhaled dust (Sanchez et al., 2020).

The regions of North America were colonized by European explorers and the newly established American government between 1500 and 1900 (Fong et al., 2014) led to the genocide of 60% to 99% of the US Native Americans. Every tribe and nation in the Americas experienced this tremendous loss of life, which caused widespread grief and loss. The Lakota people’s sense of self was closely linked to the welfare of the tribe and the ancestors. These circumstances were made worse when the few remaining tribes were forbidden from preserving their traditional spiritual and cultural practices (Hanna et al., 2017). This oppression significantly contributed to the forced assimilation of tribal members into White culture by robbing them of their shared identity (Prucha, 1984). The Lakota people did not endure forced integration for the first time; many other native tribes and countries did as well. Additionally, it is frequently noted that forced relocation and geographic isolation of US Native American populations, both on reservations and in some urban areas, is a contributing factor to many of the systemic disparities this population currently faces, including those in the health, mental health, economic, educational, and child welfare systems (Hanna et al., 2017).

Among all racial and ethnic groups in the United States, American Indians suffer some of the worst-known health outcomes (Sequist et al., 2011), including some of the highest rates of obesity, diabetes, and early death. Additionally, screening rates for cancer and other disorders are much lower in AIs. Healthcare officials and the public health community frequently ignore them. The essential need for effective preventative measures and therapeutic strategies in this underserved group is highlighted by rising mortality rates (National Cancer Institute, 2010). The best clinical and public health approaches must be evaluated and developed through research. Although many Native people have reservations about taking part in research, some are open to it if it is carried out with careful consideration of study style, institutional sponsorship, community engagement, possible risks and benefits, and topic (Buchwald et al., 2006).

4. Alzheimer’s Disease and Its Related Dementias

The number of AI/AN people with ADRD is rising, and the Alaska Native Health system is ill-equipped to handle the issues brought on by the expanding number of people at risk for ADRD, particularly alarming are the high cost of care, the paucity of caregiver support programs, and the poor training of healthcare professionals (Lewis et al., 2021). In contrast to all other racial/ethnic groupings in the United States, AI/AN people are disproportionately affected by substance use disorders and their health repercussions. The fact that AI/AN people suffer from serious health disparities and a high illness burden is concerning. These problems are made worse by settler-colonial traumas, which manifest as prejudice, stigma, discrimination, and institutional and structural injustices. For AI/AN patients, ADRD is one such compounded condition that is anticipated to rise yet nothing is known about it (Crouch et al., 2023a). The population of US Native Americans is growing three times more quickly than that of the US. Older age is the main known risk factor for AD. In US Native American communities, concern about AD has grown because of the aging population and the high frequency of AD risk factors (Boyd et al., 2022). In 2019, there were 301,418 American Indian and Alaska Natives (AI/AN) 65 and older; by 2060, that number is projected to rise to more than 648,000 (Gaugler et al., 2022). The initial clinical manifestation of ADRD is now understood to be the subjective or mild cognitive deterioration that 1 in 5 AI/AN people age 45 and older report experiencing (Gaugler et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2020), refer to figure 3. Investigating cultural beliefs on ADRD can help shed light on the connections between chronic stressors, disease, prevention and treatment, and the role of substance abuse. As a result, culturally based prevention, service, and caregiving are essential to achieving the best results (Crouch et al., 2023a).

A significant amount of literature points (Folstein et al., 1975; Henderson et al., 2002; Meng et al., 2006) to potential differences between ethnic groups in risk factors for AD and sensitivity to AD (Weiner et al., 2007; Xue and Jia, 2006). Despite a preliminary discovery demonstrating decreased vulnerability to AD in connection to the degree of US Native American origin, they have not yet gotten much attention (Wollmer et al., 2006). Since they are geographically spread across the Country, frequently reside in remote places, and only make up a small part of the population, US Native Americans have proven to be challenging to study (Weiner et al., 2007). A systematic review was conducted to study the prevalence of dementia across different ethnic/racial populations of the US, and it has been found that for the American Indian, most Asian, and Pacific Islander populations, further data is required. Large racial and ethnic groupings should be broken down because incidence and prevalence vary among populations. Studies on Hispanics from the Caribbean and Africa revealed greater dementia incidence. It has been suggested that to identify groups at high risk and provide culturally relevant services in accordance, a national strategy is required(Mehta and Yeo, 2017). A study reported that in comparison to non-Hispanic white patients, American Indian patients had a decreased likelihood of being diagnosed with depression and tobacco use disorders, but a higher risk of being diagnosed with ADRD, hypertension, and diabetes. Furthermore, they discovered that being female or being married/having a life partner was associated with a lower risk of having an ADRD diagnosis, whereas age and a diagnosis of hypertension, depression, hyperlipidemia, or diabetes were significantly associated with a higher risk of an ADRD diagnosis in AI patients (Carty et al., 2020).

According to the Alzheimer’s Association, 53% of US Native Americans believe that major memory or cognitive deficits are a natural part of aging, also 92% of US Native Americans believe that caregivers for people with Alzheimer’s and dementia must comprehend their ethnic or racial history and experiences (Association, 2023). However, just 49% of US Native Americans claim to have access to medical professionals who are aware of their culture (Association, 2023). Despite being poorly understood in the American Indian population, ADRD is significant due to the high incidence of associated risk factors. In comparison to other states, Alaska has the fastest-growing population of those 65 and over, and 20% of Alaska’s population is Alaska Native and American Indian. As a result, healthcare institutions will need to adjust their offerings in front of a rise in the number of ADRD patients (Schaefer et al., 2019).

4.1. Attitudes and perceptions toward Alzheimer’s Disease

In addition to having worse overall physical and mental health than Whites, AI/ANs also have higher rates of diabetes, cancer, cardiovascular disease, comorbid diseases, depression, post-traumatic stress disorder, and impairments (Barnes et al., 2010). Researchers found that older adults receive relatively fewer outpatient mental healthcare services despite recent initiatives to enhance access and treatment for this population. Prior studies on older persons have shown that 50% of those with affective symptoms do not seek mental health professionals; in particular, older adults are three times less likely to report having received therapy than younger adults (Karlin et al., 2008).

Although empirical research on US Native Americans’ cultural perspectives on dementia is rare, the literature that is currently available implies that AI/ANs may have a different perspective on cognitive decline and dementia than other American populations (Griffin-Pierce et al., 2008; Hulko et al., 2010; Jervis and Manson, 2002). Roh and colleagues conducted a study to assess the attitude of American Indians toward mental health services (Roh et al., 2015). In the study, a sample of older-older American Indian individuals of age 65 and above, and younger-older American Indian adults of age 540–64 were used to evaluate the factors that influence attitudes toward mental health care. It has been found that females and individuals with greater social support are more likely to report having favorable attitudes toward mental health care. Among American Indian younger-older individuals, negative views about mental health care were linked to culture-influenced personal beliefs. Negative attitudes toward mental health care were substantially correlated with age and the presence of more chronic medical illnesses. In elder American Indian persons, health insurance was positively correlated with favorable attitudes toward mental health care. Results suggest that while working with older American Indians, practitioners should consider how social support, culture, and chronic conditions affect the response to mental health requirements (Roh et al., 2015).

Jernigan and colleagues surveyed 341 members of the AI/AN community who were attending cultural activities to assess their knowledge of Alzheimer’s Disease. The results of the study showed that AI/ANs living in the Pacific Northwest of North America have a moderate degree of awareness of AD, and it was also discovered that knowledge about AD was positively associated with greater levels of education but did not differ by age, sex, or area of residence (Jernigan et al., 2020).

A recent study surveyed to test relationships between demographic factors and perceived risk of AD, knowledge of AD, willingness to participate in research, and preferred source of AD information in the AI/AN community and found that study participants had low-risk perceptions of AD, and only about half of the participants believed it to be a serious health issue for AI/AN community. They also possessed a fair amount of understanding about AD. The willingness to participate in the study increased with perceived personal risk for AD and was highest among individuals living in cities as opposed to reservations (Boyd et al., 2022).

4.2. Aging and Comorbidities in US Native American Elders

Minority aging which is a study of how ethnic minorities differ in their experiences of gaining uncovers a shared theme that is of inequity. Despite this similarity, most ethnic populations have very few in common when it comes to addressing the inequalities they face. The long-ignored mental health of older American Indian/Alaska Native seniors is now becoming a pandemic that will astound social workers and medical professionals (Garrett et al., 2015). Like many other ethnocultural groups, US Native American cultures frequently blame normal aging for the symptoms of AD and other types of dementia (Kramer, 2014). Increased longevity affects native elders and their families in a way that is like other cultures (Kitzes and Domer, 2004). Due to cultural concerns about death and a lack of assistance, native seniors and their families historically did not have many end-of-life care issues (John and Baldridge, 1996).

The literature survey highlights the value of Indigenous cultural traditions and a person’s sense of place in promoting health throughout life and into old age. For Indigenous older individuals, involvement with and connection to relatives, community, culture, and subsistence are important factors in well-being (Lewis, 2014). AIs report worse physical and mental health compared to non-Hispanic whites, and they are less likely to visit a doctor or use a regular source of healthcare (Kim et al., 2012). The prevalence of cerebral vascular disease, diabetes mellitus, heart disease, hypertension, obesity, and stroke are disproportionately high in AI adults (Denny et al., 2005; Goins and Pilkerton, 2010; Holm et al., 2010; Kim et al., 2012), and they are also more prone to experience substance use disorders and emotional distress (Beals et al., 2002; Beals et al., 2005; Beals et al., 2003; Landen et al., 2014). Nearly one-fourth of AIs are handicapped (Smith-Kaprosy et al., 2012). Although AI and Alaska Natives are culturally diverse and dispersed across the United States, they share a high prevalence of well-known AD risk factors, including hypertension, high cholesterol, limited physical activity, low socioeconomic status, type 2 diabetes, obesity, and smoking (Jernigan et al., 2020). Even while it is acknowledged that chronic diseases particularly mental health, and more specifically, depression and dementia are at an epidemic level, they are still not a priority (Sequist et al., 2011). This epidemic is still little understood, neglected, and largely untreated.

More than 40% of tribes receive direct health care services from the Indian Health Service (IHS), a federally established agency in 1955, which was primarily designed to solely provide hospital-based, acute care. Nearly 60% of tribes administer all or a portion of their health systems and receive funding and support from the IHS. With the lowest per capita budget of most government health programs today, the system accomplishes far more. American Indians and Alaska Natives currently face some of the biggest health inequalities of any American population. The disparities in behavioral health—the term the IHS prefers to refer to mental health and addiction—are especially glaring, as evidenced by the fact that AI/ANs have higher rates of substance use disorders, post-traumatic stress disorder, and attachment disorders than the general population (Dataset). Diabetes is substantially more common in US Native Americans than in white people (Keim et al., 2004), and cancer has become a significant health issue and the second leading cause of death for US Native Americans (Simon, 2006). Tuberculosis, liver, and kidney disease, illnesses linked to smoking, pneumonia, and malnutrition are other major health disparities. In comparison to other groups, native elders are less likely to rate their health as outstanding or good. Native seniors are at risk due to high alcohol misuse rates, and alcohol is the primary cause of accidents, cirrhosis of the liver, suicide, and homicide that affect native elders (Gone, 2004). Given the growing cohort of the elderly, there will likely be a major increase in the number of older persons needing substance misuse treatment on a national level (Treatment, 2006).

There are some recent studies like Strong Heart Study, and Memory Keepers Medical Discovery are focusing on US Native Americans and aiming to increase research in this marginalized groups. The Strong Heart Study investigates cardiovascular disease and its risk factors in American Indians, with field centers situated in Arizona, North and South Dakotas, and Oklahoma. The Strong Heart Study (SHS) initially recruited American Indians aged 45–75 from 13 tribes in the U.S. Northern Plains, Southern Plains, and Southwest, focusing on cardiovascular disease and diabetes. The Cerebrovascular Disease and its Consequences in American Indians (CDCAI) study, an ancillary to SHS, later examined vascular and Alzheimer’s dementias among survivors. Both studies involved detailed cognitive testing and clinical examination. During a 7-year follow-up period involving 818 individuals aged 65–89 years, the overall brain volume loss was 0.5% per year. Particularly in the right hemisphere, significant volume loss was observed in association with diabetes. Men, older age, diabetes, hypertension, and stroke showed worse annualized hippocampal, parahippocampal, and entorhinal atrophy, which were also linked to both encoding and retrieval memory declines. The study highlighted diabetes as a significant risk factor for cortical atrophy and memory loss in American Indians (Suchy-Dicey et al., 2023).

Whereas, primary focus of the Memory Keepers Medical Discovery Team is to conduct collaborative research aimed at enhancing dementia outcomes in Indigenous and rural communities. A recent study from Memory keepers Medical Discovery Team emphasizes the importance of practice-based evidence in Indigenous research, focusing on culturally grounded and multifaceted methods. The objective of the study was to outline the key principles of Elder-centered research using Alaska Native studies. Semi-structured interviews with Alaska Native Elders and caregivers were conducted to explore cultural understandings of memory and successful aging. The research actively involved Elders at all stages, ensuring cultural relevance and dissemination. The results demonstrated the benefits of engaging Alaska Native Elders in research and provided best practices for Elder-centered methodology, highlighting the importance of Indigenous values and meaningful, culturally rooted approaches for older adults’ involvement (Crouch et al., 2023b). Increasing the number of such research initiatives that involve key stakeholders, such as leaders from urban Indian health organizations, tribal leaders, research scientists, administrators, and policymakers, is essential. This approach is critical for fostering ethical research practices and building the capacity of rural and urban American Indian/Alaska Native communities.

4.3. Risk Factors

There is very less literature available on how dementia affects Native people and their families, but the evidence from the research that does exist suggests that dementia is a major issue (Braun and Browne, 1998). Due in part to their much lower life expectancy relative to Whites, American Indians, Alaska Natives, and Native Hawaiian groups’ risk and prevalence of dementia may be understated in current demographic estimates (Espey et al., 2014; Garrett et al., 2015). Due to the paucity of research, prevalence estimates for Native Hawaiians are unavailable. At the time of hospital discharge, Native Hawaiian adults with a dementia diagnosis tended to be younger than similarly diagnosed adults of non-Hawaiian ethnicities, according to a study on the prevalence of dementia in a disaggregated Asian and Pacific Islander adult population hospitalized in Hawai’i (Sentell et al., 2015). More research in this area will make it possible to comprehend the dangers of dementia that develops at a young age.

4.3.1. Behavioral

According to the International Association of indigenous aging, many indigenous tribes place a high value on elders, which complicates issues if elderly members require care that goes beyond what they can receive at home. Depending on the situation, even dementia symptoms can be understood in a variety of ways. Some US Native Americans may find a condition to be proud of where a clinician could detect dementia symptoms or other neurocognitive problems. The prevalence of AD in AI/AN populations has increased significantly because of these shifting demographics. Additionally, they emphasize the necessity of a vigorous campaign to increase awareness of AD and address its effects on AI/ANs. A crucial initial step in creating and assessing educational campaigns is characterizing community understanding of AD, yet little is known about the knowledge of AI/ANs regarding AD (Jernigan et al., 2020).

4.3.2. Physiological

Even though it has not been studied across a wide range of demographics, particularly minoritized cultures that are disproportionately at risk of dementia, psychological well-being is linked to cognition in later life (Wyman et al., 2022). Finding modifiable elements that promote older persons’ brain health is of growing interest to lower the risk of dementia and lengthen lifespan. Throughout life, particularly in later years, psychological well-being is linked to greater physical and mental health (Steptoe et al., 2015).

In a cognitively healthy cohort of Black, American Indian/Alaska Native (AI/AN), and older white persons enrolled in the Wisconsin Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center’s (ADRC) Clinical Core, an investigation was carried out to understand the relationships between three aspects of psychological well-being and cognitive test performance. Positive affect or life purpose ratings showed no racial differences, however, Black and AI/AN participants reported lower life satisfaction. Consistent correlations between life happiness and processing speed were also found. The results of the study suggested further research into population-specific upstream determinants of life satisfaction and triangulation with AD biomarkers, both of which can help guide well-being-focused intervention initiatives (Wyman et al., 2021). Through physiological and behavioral mechanisms, such as the reduction of neuroinflammation and cardiovascular dysfunction (Allerhand et al., 2014), as well as the facilitation of more efficient emotional coping or management of medical comorbidities linked to dementia risk, higher levels of well-being may plausibly attenuate the risk for accelerated cognitive decline or incident dementia (Wyman et al., 2022).

4.3.3. Genetic

Many genes controlling diseases like breast cancer, heart disease, and Alzheimer’s disease have been identified by researchers since the first draft of the human genome was sequenced. Sadly, most of the genetic research does not adequately represent Black people, US Native Americans, or other people of color. As a result, our understanding of the genetics of many diseases is distorted and lacking.

Not many studies have been done on the genetic susceptibility of getting dementia in US Native Americans. A study was carried out to investigate the association between APOE4 allele type, genetic degree of Cherokee ancestry, and the onset of AD among residents of the Cherokee Nation in northeastern Oklahoma. A higher genetic degree of Cherokee ancestry appears to be beneficial as it lowers the likelihood of getting AD. This protective genetic component declines with age and is independent of the APOE allele type (Rosenberg et al., 1996). In another study, tau haplotyping and apolipoprotein genotyping were done on several dementia cases and controls from the Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma. When compared to Caucasians, the Choctaw had lower frequencies of the tau H2 haplotype and the apolipoprotein E4 allele, and the E4 allele might have had a reduced link with dementia (Henderson et al., 2002). The risk of neurodegeneration and AD is increased by the apolipoprotein E (APOE) 4 allele, but this risk varies by race and ethnicity. A recent study investigated this connection among American Indians (Suchy-Dicey et al., 2022). The study was carried out on a population-based cohort of American Indians aged 64 to 95 between 2010 and 2013. Participants’ neurological histories, assessments of their cognitive and functional abilities, and magnetic resonance imaging were all obtained and analyzed by the researchers. It has been found that both brain sizes and cognitive function were similar between APOE4 carriers and noncarriers. Astonishingly, there was no difference in APOE4 carrier status between American Indian people who had memory problems and those who did not. According to these findings, APOE4 is not associated with neurodegeneration or cognitive decline among American Indians (Suchy-Dicey et al., 2022).

5. Caregiving Practices in US Native Americans

Native Hawaiians, Alaskan Natives, and American Indians are separate populations with a common history of forcible colonization in the US. Each population is diverse in terms of culture, with people affected by their histories, various tribal and family affiliations, linguistic customs, geographical locations, and care preferences that may fall at any point along a broad spectrum of engagement with traditional Native and/or majority American cultures (Mokuau, 2011). Though AI/AN caregivers and other caregivers have certain things in common, there are also cultural customs that have an impact on AI/AN caregiving, and different Tribes have different cultural practices than others. The high incidence of family caregiving—16 to 17% of people provide care for a family member or friend—could be attributed to the scarcity of resources in rural and tribal areas as well as to cultural emphasis on dependency among family members (Jervis and Manson, 2002). According to research, AI/AN caregivers typically rely on shared caregiving and tribal and communal ties (Goins et al., 2011; Jervis et al., 2010). Although caregiving difficulties have received a lot of attention in the gerontological literature, American Indians’ specific caregiving issues are far less well-known than those of other racial and ethnic groups. Adult caregiving difficulties in this community have only been covered in a few published research, almost exclusively with a burden or stress focus (Hennessy and John, 1995; John et al., 2001). The little knowledge there is on how cultural influences affect caregiving practices in American Indian communities is based on anecdotal data or studies with tiny sample sizes (Goins et al., 2011). This might be because American Indians have been mostly left out of gerontological studies. After all, there aren’t enough data on them (Rhoades, 2006).

In Indigenous communities, the family is frequently seen as the main or only caregiver (Jacklin et al., 2015). This is sometimes due to necessity, but more frequently it occurs because of cultural values such as reciprocity and respect, which place a strong emphasis on family dependency (Jervis et al., 2010). However, because many First Nations reserves lack residential care facilities or employees who are qualified to provide home care for people in the later stages of dementia, relying on family members for caregiving is occasionally the only choice (Jacklin and Walker, 2020). American Indian elders receive most of their long-term care from informal caregivers, like other racial and ethnic groups (John, 1988). Informal/family caregivers offer ongoing support or care to a friend or family member who is ill or disabled (Sehar et al., 2022a). Despite frequently being enjoyable, informal caring has been linked to significant rates of immunosuppression, general morbidity and mortality, stress, anxiety, and depression. To gain a general understanding of the frequency of caregiving, caregiver and recipient characteristics, caregiving duties, support needs, and financial, emotional, and physical strains because of caregiving, a recent study surveyed a total of 225 American Indians and Alaska Natives (AI/ANs) who were present at two cultural, community events in the Pacific Northwest (Strachan and Buchwald, 2022). Out of the 225 respondents who completed the study, 40% participants said they have provided unpaid care for a month or longer, and 12% said they still do so today. In line with earlier studies, most caregivers 84% expressed happiness in helping others, but this 84% also mentioned “increased stress,” “financial strain,” and “decreased health” as consequences of their work. The findings of the study also indicated that AI/AN women will be disproportionately affected since they are more likely to be caregivers than other populations and receive less community support (Strachan and Buchwald, 2022).

A mixed-method study by Jervis and colleagues (Jervis et al., 2010) examined the drawbacks and benefits of providing elder care for 19 American Indians from the northern plains. Due to societal attitudes toward elders and caring, communal care provision, strong reciprocal connections with elders, the pleasure of the elderly, and relatively low levels of care provision, these caregivers expressed low levels of load and high levels of reward. Caregiving took the form of a multifaceted interchange of help rather than a one-way flow of aid from a family member to an elderly person. It is a testament to the significant roles that elders frequently continue to play in these communities that providing care emerges as such an overwhelmingly positive experience in a community that struggles with poverty, alcohol disorders, trauma, and cultural traumatization.

A recently reported study conducted interviews of AI/AN caregivers of individuals with ADRD to assess their knowledge and understanding of ADRD. The health care professionals and caregivers voiced concern regarding ANs in both rural and urban populations’ lack of knowledge, access to resources, and awareness of ADRD (Lewis et al., 2021). Both caregivers and providers agreed that it was important to have an early diagnosis, combine Western and conventional medicine, encourage food and lifestyle modifications, and support caregiver training. Healthcare professionals acknowledged their limited exposure to AN and awareness of ADRD and expressed a need to get training that is culturally appropriate to effectively serve AN (Lewis et al., 2021).

To facilitate American Indian and Alaska Native communities’ veterans, the dementia caregiving intervention Resources for Enhancing Alzheimer’s Caregivers Health in the VA (REACH VA) has been applied abroad, at community organizations, and in the VA. American Indian and Alaska Native tribes have lately been given access to REACH. Local Public Health Nursing programs run by Indian Health Service and Tribal Health programs, as well as Tribal Aging program employees currently employed in each town are responsible for carrying out implementation efforts. The necessity to modify the program to match the distinctive communities and the cultural perspectives of dementia and caring are among the implementation problems faced by caregivers of people with AI/AN dementia. Lessons learned emphasize the significance of using a clinically successful intervention, the necessity of support and buy-in from leadership and staff, the fit of the intervention into ongoing routines and practices, the critical role of modifications based on caregiver, staff, and organization needs, and feedback, the necessity of an easy-to-learn intervention, and the crucial significance of community receptivity to the services offered (Martindale-Adams et al., 2017).

Making one’s own choices regarding needs and wants is known as self-determination among adults with intellectual and/or developmental disabilities. It is essential for quality of life and required for resolving health inequities (Schalock et al., 2002; Shogren et al., 2006). Self-determination is viewed by Native Nations and tribes within a broader framework of sociocultural and sociopolitical frameworks (Lomawaima and McCarty, 2006). Even when one has physical or cognitive limitations, the research suggests that among indigenous people there is a strong desire to age in place (in one’s native community). According to caregiving literature, many Indigenous people consider formally institutionalized caregiving as problematic (Jacklin and Walker, 2020). A recent study found that patients and family’s quality of life and satisfaction with hospice care depend on the timing of the hospice referral. The study looked at racial/ethnic differences in hospice utilization and risk factors for home dying among Medicare beneficiaries who passed away in 2018 (n=1,998,282) (Jarrín et al., 2022). Hospice use was most prevalent (55.8%) among beneficiaries who were non-Hispanic white, followed by beneficiaries who were Hispanic (46.2%), Asian American (44.5%), Black (42.7%), and American Indian (42.1%) (Jarrín et al., 2022).

5.1. Cultural Influence

Culture may do more than only emphasize certain emotions differently; it may also provide special labels to the strength of an emotion’s experience and manifestation. So, it may not be as easy to discern between mood, symptom, and disorder, which are thought to change along a continuum (Kleinman et al., 1985). Socioeconomic position, education, the availability of health resources, and physicians’ lack of awareness of unique cultural differences in knowledge, attitudes, symptom presentation, and perceptions of disease and care all contribute to the exacerbation of AD/ADRD inequities (Boustani et al., 2005; Van De Vorst et al., 2016). The way that patients and their families understand and manage cognitive impairment as well as caregiving experiences may be influenced by cultural ideas and values (Knight and Sayegh, 2010). Strong data indicates that social and cultural norms and dementia-related issues prevent people from seeking care, getting evaluated, and receiving treatment early on (Chin et al., 2011; Herrmann et al., 2018).

AI/AN communities have a long history of being used and mistreated in the context of mental health studies and related sectors. When Europeans began colonizing North America more than 500 years ago, American Indians endured a history of persecution, repression, and generational trauma that has an impact on their lives today (DeBruyn and Heart, 1998). US Native American tribes are reluctant to take part in research studies because of their skepticism of government-sponsored research and researchers because of a long history of unethical government actions (Burhansstipano et al., 2005; Christopher, 2005). This past is perpetuated through prejudice, disrespect for traditional culture, and practices of assimilation that are rooted in historical pain, cultural loss, and loss of knowledge, with this background, it is crucial that researchers use culturally sensitive strategies that take into account the context of tribal groups to better treat mental health issues for AI/AN people (White et al., 2023).

Different racial and ethnic groups’ interpretations of dementia might be influenced by their cultural values and beliefs about health and sickness. These values and convictions can also affect who provides care and why, as well as whether caregivers look for assistance outside of the family (Dilworth-Anderson and Gibson, 2002). As a result, depending on the specific cultural group, demented older people’s activities may not be brought to the attention of medical professionals but may instead be normalized or self-treated (Chrisman and Kleinman, 1983).

6. Barriers to Service Utilization

American Indians frequently experience access issues to healthcare, and they are less likely than Caucasians to make use of the local healthcare system (Zuckerman et al., 2004). The majority of American Indians reside in rural locations with less access to specialized medical care (Norris et al., 2012). AI/ANs may not have access to health services, and insurance coverage due to characteristics like poverty, education, the accessibility to and usage of services, lesser public and private coverage, poorer health status, and larger unmet needs among AI/ANs (Brown et al., 2000; Zuckerman et al., 2004). Transportation, phone accessibility, prejudice (based on color, ethnicity, or socioeconomic status), a sterile and bureaucratic culture, access to healthcare, prejudice, and mistrust, and restrictive rules were among other stated obstacles (Wille et al., 2017).

American Indians and Alaska Natives as a group face several obstacles when utilizing healthcare services. These barriers have caused a wide range of inequities in health conditions among the population. These discrepancies are substantially more common in the AI/AN population than in all other races. Access to and use of health care services have a direct impact on a population’s health state. Therefore, evidence suggests that those impacted people or populations are likely to experience poor health outcomes when barriers to healthcare access or utilization are present (Cromer et al., 2019). For US Native Americans, patient-related factors that are barriers to service utilization might include mistrust of doctors or hospitals or a lack of knowledge about or health literacy regarding preventable diseases (Call et al., 2006). Physician-related factors might include a lack of cultural competency in treating this racial/ethnic group. Health-system-related factors might involve problems with the healthcare system (and its funding status) under which many US Native Americans receive medical care (Lillie-Blanton and Roubideaux, 2005; Roubideaux, 2002). Socioeconomic status, cultural diversity, and low health literacy are patient-related factors that contribute to inequities. Trust between healthcare professionals and vulnerable communities is necessary for many interventions aimed at removing these obstacles (Guadagnolo et al., 2009).

More attention is needed in this area, even though researchers and organizations have been focusing more on the degenerative cognitive illnesses that affect American Indian people in recent years (Hamilton and Goins, 2022). The lengthy moral arc of our field can be bent toward justice and equity by concentrating more emphasis on underrepresented and marginalized populations. But concentrating on these groups also raises the standard of clinical research. Researchers studying cognition must continue to deepen their understanding of geographically and socio-demographically diverse populations to create more effective treatment interventions and clinical care that is more sensitive to cultural differences considering mounting evidence that structural and social determinants of health play a crucial role in cognitive health (Hamilton and Goins, 2022).

7. Conclusion and Future Directions

Alzheimer’s Disease is the most common form of dementia and is a fatal condition. This dreadful disease has had a devastating impact on the elderly population, and many families are struggling with the caregiving responsibilities of their loved ones who have been affected by Alzheimer’s. US Native American communities are not unfamiliar with AD, the number of elderly Native Americans is rising, yet little is known about how dementia, or any form of dementia, impacts this demographic. As compared to White or Asian Americans, US Native Americans are more prone to get Alzheimer’s disease or other types of dementia. In addition, Native Americans have poorer access to healthcare and medical services and are less likely to receive a diagnosis once they begin to exhibit symptoms, which presents difficulties in treating Alzheimer’s and other dementias. According to Alzheimer’s Association, one in five US Native American people who are 45 years of age or older report having memory or thinking issues that could be dementia-related. Understanding the reasons why gaps in Indigenous people’s health status persist after public health initiatives may depend significantly on understanding inequalities in health care access and utilization among Indigenous communities. To improve the health and overall well-being of US Native American elders, it is important to create elder US Native Americans-focused health education, dementia awareness, and prevention programs. Also, dedicating more funds by the federal government to remove health inequities, and improve quality and accessibility to senior health care in US Native American communities would help.

Funding:

The research and relevant findings presented in this article was supported by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) grants AG042178, AG047812, NS105473, AG060767, AG069333, AG066347 and AG079264.

Data Availability Statement:

Not applicable

Abbreviations:

AD Alzheimer’s disease

ADRD Alzheimer’s related dementias

P-Tau Phosphorylated tau

PSEN1 Presenilin 1

PSEN2 Presenilin 1

SCIP Serum cumulative inflammatory potential

US United States

AI/AN American Indian and Alaska Native

ApoE4 apolipoprotein E allele 4

ADRC Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center

Figure 1. US population by race/ethnicity. The data is retrieved from United States Census Bureau website.

Figure 2. Reasons for health disparities among older US Native American community. Healthcare disparities have undoubtedly been exacerbated by the native American community’s demographic variations, underfunding, and the failure of government healthcare policy.

Figure 3. Facts and figures regarding Dementia and Alzheimer’s Disease in American Indians and Alaska Natives. The data is retrieved from the website of the International Association for indigenous aging.

Highlights:

Alzheimer’s disease is the most prevalent form of dementia, characterized by cognitive impairment, including memory loss, that is severe enough to affect daily functioning.

Concerns about Alzheimer’s disease (AD) in US Native American communities are developing as a result of the significant growth of the aged population among them.

There is ample evidence of mental health disparities among US Native American communities, the history of Indigenous peoples’ colonization, and the generational repercussions of forced cultural ideology suppression are to blame for these differences.

US Native American people have lesser satisfaction with the healthcare system and higher levels of medical mistrust due to a history of instances of unethical research.

Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.

Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.

Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


References

Allerhand M , Gale CR , Deary IJ , 2014. The dynamic relationship between cognitive function and positive well-being in older people: a prospective study using the English Longitudinal Study of Aging. Psychology and aging 29 , 306.24955999
Association A.s. , 2019. 2019 Alzheimer’s disease facts and figures. Alzheimer’s &amp; dementia 15 , 321–387.
Association A.s. , 2023. 2023 Alzheimer’s disease facts and figures. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia.
Barnes PM , Adams PF , Powell-Griner E , 2010. Health characteristics of the American Indian or Alaska native adult population, United States, 2004–2008.
Beals J , Novins D , Mitchell C , Shore J , Manson S , 2002. Comorbidity between Alcohol Abuse/Dependence and Psychiatric Disorders: Prevalence, Treatment Implications. and New Directions for Research among American Indian Populations. In Alcohol Use among American Indians and Alaska Natives: Multiple Perspectives on a Complex Problem. Patricia Mail , Suzanne Heurtin-Roberts , Susan Martin , and Jan Howard , eds, 371–410.
Beals J , Novins DK , Whitesell NR , Spicer P , Mitchell CM , Manson SM , American Indian Service Utilization, P.E., Risk, Team, P.F.P., 2005. Prevalence of mental disorders and utilization of mental health services in two American Indian reservation populations: Mental health disparities in a national context. American Journal of Psychiatry 162 , 1723–1732.16135633
Beals J , Spicer P , Mitchell CM , Novins DK , Manson SM , Team A-S , 2003. Racial disparities in alcohol use: Comparison of 2 American Indian reservation populations with national data. American journal of public health 93 , 1683–1685.14534221
Bird MY , 1999. What we want to be called: Indigenous peoples’ perspectives on racial and ethnic identity labels. American Indian Quarterly 23 , 1–21.
Boustani M , Callahan CM , Unverzagt FW , Austrom MG , Perkins AJ , Fultz BA , Hui SL , Hendrie HC , 2005. Implementing a screening and diagnosis program for dementia in primary care. Journal of general internal medicine 20 , 572–577.16050849
Boxer A , 2009. Native Americans and the federal government. History Review 64 , 7–12.
Boyd AD , Railey AF , Kirkpatrick AW , Hsu YC , Muller C , Buchwald D , 2022. Communication about Alzheimer’s disease and research among American Indians and Alaska Natives. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia: Translational Research &amp; Clinical Interventions 8 , e12302.35592690
Braun KL , Browne CV , 1998. Perceptions of dementia, caregiving, and help seeking among Asian and Pacific Islander Americans. Health &amp; social work 23 , 262–274.9834879
Brave Heart MYH , Chase J , Elkins J , Altschul DB , 2011. Historical trauma among indigenous peoples of the Americas: Concepts, research, and clinical considerations. Journal of psychoactive drugs 43 , 282–290.22400458
Brown ER , Ojeda VD , Wyn R , Levan R , 2000. Racial and ethnic disparities in access to health insurance and health care.
Browne CV , Ka’opua LS , Jervis LL , Alboroto R , Trockman ML , 2017. United States indigenous populations and dementia: Is there a case for culture-based psychosocial interventions? The Gerontologist 57 , 1011–1019.27048710
Buchwald D , Mendoza-Jenkins V , Croy C , McGough H , Bezdek M , Spicer P , 2006. Attitudes of urban American Indians and Alaska Natives regarding participation in research. Journal of General Internal Medicine 21 , 648–651.16808751
Burhansstipano L , Christopher S , Schumacher A Sr , 2005. Lessons learned from community-based participatory research in Indian country. Cancer control 12 , 70–76.16327753
Call KT , McAlpine DD , Johnson PJ , Beebe TJ , McRae JA , Song Y , 2006. Barriers to care among American Indians in public health care programs. Medical care, 595–600.16708009
Calloway CG , 2015. First Peoples: A Documentary Survey of American Indian History. Bedford/St. Martin’s, New York, New York.
Carty CL , Noonan C , Muller C , Saner D , Reiman EM , Buchwald D , Bell RA , Nelson LA , 2020. Risk factors for Alzheimer’s disease and related dementia diagnoses in American Indians. Ethnicity &amp; Disease 30 , 671.32989367
Chen H-Y , Panegyres PK , 2016. The role of ethnicity in Alzheimer’s disease: findings from the C-PATH online data repository. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 51 , 515–523.
Chin AL , Negash S , Hamilton R , 2011. Diversity and disparity in dementia: The impact of ethnoracial differences in Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimer disease and associated disorders 25 , 187.21399486
Chrisman NJ , Kleinman A , 1983. Popular health care, social networks, and cultural meanings: The orientation of medical anthropology. Handbook of health, health care, and the health professions, 569–590.
Christopher S , 2005. Recommendations for conducting successful research with Native Americans. Journal of Cancer Education 20 , 47–51.15916521
Cromer KJ , Wofford L , Wyant DK , 2019. Barriers to healthcare access facing American Indian and Alaska Natives in rural America. Journal of community health nursing 36 , 165–187.31621433
Crouch MC , Cheromiah Salazar MB , Harris SJ , Rosich RM , 2023a. Dementia, Substance Misuse, and Social Determinants of Health: American Indian and Alaska Native Peoples’ Prevention, Service, and Care. Chronic Stress 7 , 24705470221149479.
Crouch MC , Kim SM , Asquith-Heinz Z , Decker E , Andrew NT , Lewis JP , Rosich RM , 2023b. Indigenous Elder-centered methodology: research that decolonizes and indigenizes. AlterNative: An International Journal of Indigenous Peoples 19 , 447–456.
Dataset P , American Psychological Association (APA), 2017. Crossref, doi 10.
DeBruyn LM , Heart MYHB , 1998. The American Indian holocaust: Healing historical unresolved grief. American Indian and Alaska Native Mental Health Research 8 , 56.9842066
Denny CH , Holtzman D , Goins RT , Croft JB , 2005. Disparities in chronic disease risk factors and health status between American Indian/Alaska Native and White elders: findings from a telephone survey, 2001 and 2002. American journal of public health 95 , 825–827.15855458
Dilworth-Anderson P , Gibson BE , 2002. The cultural influence of values, norms, meanings, and perceptions in understanding dementia in ethnic minorities. Alzheimer Disease &amp; Associated Disorders 16 , S56–S63.12351916
Espey DK , Jim MA , Cobb N , Bartholomew M , Becker T , Haverkamp D , Plescia M , 2014. Leading causes of death and all-cause mortality in American Indians and Alaska Natives. American journal of public health 104 , S303–S311.24754554
Flett L , McLeod CL , McCarty JL , Shaulis BJ , Fain JJ , Krekeler MP , 2021. Monitoring uranium mine pollution on Native American lands: Insights from tree bark particulate matter on the Spokane Reservation, Washington, USA. Environmental Research 194 , 110619.33378700
Folstein MF , Folstein SE , McHugh PR , 1975. “Mini-mental state”: a practical method for grading the cognitive state of patients for the clinician. Journal of psychiatric research 12 , 189–198.1202204
Fong R , Dettlaff A , James J , Rodriguez C , 2014. Addressing racial disproportionality and disparities in human services: Multisystemic approaches. Columbia University Press.
Foreman G , 1953. Indian removal: The emigration of the five civilized tribes of Indians. University of Oklahoma Press.
Forster P , Harding R , Torroni A , Bandelt H-J , 1996. Origin and evolution of Native American mtDNA variation: a reappraisal. American journal of human genetics 59 , 935.8808611
Furlow B , 2014. Uranium mines: Lung disease and mistrust among Native Americans. The Lancet Respiratory Medicine 2 , 178–179.24745049
Garrett MD , Baldridge D , Benson W , Crowder J , Aldrich N , 2015. Mental health disorders among an invisible minority: Depression and dementia among American Indian and Alaska Native elders. The Gerontologist 55 , 227–236.26035598
Garrison TA , 2002. The legal ideology of removal: the southern judiciary and the sovereignty of Native American nations. University of Georgia Press.
Gaugler J , James B , Johnson T , Reimer J , Solis M , Weuve J , Buckley RF , Hohman TJ , 2022. 2022 Alzheimer’s disease facts and figures. ALZHEIMERS &amp; DEMENTIA 18 , 700–789.
Goins RT , Pilkerton CS , 2010. Comorbidity among older American Indians: the native elder care study. Journal of Cross-Cultural Gerontology 25 , 343–354.20532973
Goins RT , Spencer SM , McGuire LC , Goldberg J , Wen Y , Henderson JA , 2011. Adult caregiving among American Indians: The role of cultural factors. The Gerontologist 51 , 310–320.21148253
Gone JP , 2004. Mental Health Services for Native Americans in the 21st Century United States. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice 35 , 10.
Griffin-Pierce T , Silverberg N , Connor D , Jim M , Peters J , Kaszniak A , Sabbagh MN , 2008. Challenges to the recognition and assessment of Alzheimer’s disease in American Indians of the southwestern United States. Elsevier, pp. 291–299.
Guadagnolo BA , Cina K , Helbig P , Molloy K , Reiner M , Cook EF , Petereit DG , 2009. Medical mistrust and less satisfaction with health care among Native Americans presenting for cancer treatment. Journal of health care for the poor and underserved 20 , 210.19202258
Guzman G , 2020. Household Income by Race and Hispanic Origin, 2005–2009 and 2015–2019. US Department of Commerce, Economics and Statistics Administration, US ….
Hamilton RH , Goins RT , 2022. Improving Our Understanding of Cognitive Aging in American Indian Peoples. AAN Enterprises, pp. 1075–1076.
Hanna MD , Boyce ER , Yang J , 2017. The impact of historical trauma and mistrust on the recruitment of resource families of color. Adoption Quarterly 20 , 65–82.
Harmon A , 2010. Indian tribe wins fight to limit research of its DNA. New York Times 21 , 2010.
Henderson JN , Crook R , Crook J , Hardy J , Onstead L , Carson-Henderson L , Mayer P , Parker B , Petersen R , Williams B , 2002. Apolipoprotein E4 and tau allele frequencies among Choctaw Indians. Neuroscience letters 324 , 77–79.11983299
Hennessy CH , John R , 1995. The interpretation of burden among Pueblo Indian caregivers. Journal of Aging Studies 9 , 215–229.
Herrmann LK , Welter E , Leverenz J , Lerner AJ , Udelson N , Kanetsky C , Sajatovic M , 2018. A systematic review of dementia-related stigma research: Can we move the stigma dial? The American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry 26 , 316–331.29426607
Holm JE , Vogeltanz-Holm N , Poltavski D , McDonald L , 2010. Assessing health status, behavioral risks, and health disparities in American Indians living on the northern plains of the US. Public Health Reports 125 , 68–78.
Hulko W , Camille E , Antifeau E , Arnouse M , Bachynski N , Taylor D , 2010. Views of First Nation elders on memory loss and memory care in later life. Journal of Cross-Cultural Gerontology 25 , 317–342.20593232
Jacklin K , Ketcher D , Blind MJ , Lambrou NH , Pederson C , Johnson J , Hill A , Dertinger M , Koski J , Trudeau R , 2022. What does it take to get a diagnosis? Dementia recognition and diagnosis pathways among Indigenous peoples. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 18 , e064269.
Jacklin K , Pace JE , Warry W , 2015. Informal dementia caregiving among Indigenous communities in Ontario, Canada. Care Management Journals 16 , 106–120.26171510
Jacklin K , Walker J , 2020. Cultural understandings of dementia in indigenous peoples: A qualitative evidence synthesis. Canadian Journal on Aging/La Revue canadienne du vieillissement 39 , 220–234.31179965
Jarrín O , Lin H , Wu B , Duberstein P , Lopez M , Zafar A , 2022. HOSPICE UTILIZATION AND PLACE OF DEATH BY DEMENTIA DIAGNOSIS AND RACE/ETHNICITY. Innovation in Aging 6 , 354.
Jernigan M , Boyd AD , Noonan C , Buchwald D , 2020. Alzheimer’s disease knowledge among American Indians and Alaska Natives. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia: Translational Research &amp; Clinical Interventions 6 , e12101.33344749
Jervis LL , Boland ME , Fickenscher A , 2010. American Indian family caregivers’ experiences with helping elders. Journal of cross-cultural gerontology 25 , 355–369.21063902
Jervis LL , Manson SM , 2002. American Indians/Alaska natives and dementia. Alzheimer Disease &amp; Associated Disorders 16 , S89–S95.12351922
John R , 1988. Ethnic Families in America.
John R , Baldridge D , 1996. The NICOA report: Health and long-term care for Indian elders. National Indian Policy Center.
John R , Hennessy CH , Dyeson TB , Garrett MD , 2001. Toward the conceptualization and measurement of caregiver burden among Pueblo Indian family caregivers. The gerontologist 41 , 210–219.11327487
Kanaya AM , Hsing AW , Panapasa SV , Kandula NR , Araneta MRG , Shimbo D , Wang P , Gomez SL , Lee J , Narayan KV , 2022. Knowledge gaps, challenges, and opportunities in health and prevention research for Asian Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Pacific Islanders: a report from the 2021 National Institutes of Health Workshop. Annals of internal medicine 175 , 574–589.34978851
Karlin BE , Duffy M , Gleaves DH , 2008. Patterns and predictors of mental health service use and mental illness among older and younger adults in the United States. Psychological Services 5 , 275.
Keim KS , Taylor C , Sparrer A , Van Delinder J , Parker S , 2004. Peer Reviewed: Social and Cultural Barriers to Diabetes Prevention in Oklahoma American Indian Women. Preventing Chronic Disease 1 .
Kim G , Bryant AN , Goins RT , Worley CB , Chiriboga DA , 2012. Disparities in health status and health care access and use among older American Indians and Alaska Natives and non-Hispanic Whites in California. Journal of Aging and Health 24 , 799–811.22556392
Kitzes JA , Domer T , 2004. Palliative care: an emerging issue for American Indians and Alaskan Natives. Journal of Pain &amp; Palliative Care Pharmacotherapy 17 , 201–210.
Kleinman A , Good BJ , Good B , 1985. Culture and depression: Studies in the anthropology and cross-cultural psychiatry of affect and disorder. Univ of California Press.
Knight BG , Sayegh P , 2010. Cultural values and caregiving: The updated sociocultural stress and coping model. The Journals of Gerontology: Series B 65 , 5–13.
Kramer BJ , 2014. Dementia and American Indian populations, Ethnicity and the dementias. Taylor &amp; Francis, pp. 175–181.
Landen M , Roeber J , Naimi T , Nielsen L , Sewell M , 2014. Alcohol-attributable mortality among American Indians and Alaska natives in the United States, 1999–2009. American journal of public health 104 , S343–S349.24754661
Lewis DR , 1993. Still Native: The Significance of Native Americans in the History of the Twentieth-Century American West. The Western Historical Quarterly 24 , 203–227.
Lewis J , 2014. The role of the social engagement in the definition of successful ageing among Alaska native elders in Bristol Bay, Alaska. Psychology and Developing Societies 26 , 263–290.
Lewis JP , Manson SM , Jernigan VB , Noonan C , 2021. “Making sense of a disease that makes no sense”: Understanding Alzheimer’s Disease and related disorders among caregivers and providers within Alaska Native communities. The Gerontologist 61 , 363–373.32789474
Lillie-Blanton M , Roubideaux Y , 2005. Understanding and addressing the health care needs of American Indians and Alaska Natives. American Journal of Public Health 95 , 759–761.15855447
Lomawaima KT , McCarty TL , 2006. “ To remain an Indian”: Lessons in democracy from a century of Native American education. Teachers College Press.
Manson S , Beals J , O’Nell T , Piasecki J , Bechtold D , Keane E , Jones M , 1996. Wounded spirits, ailing hearts: PTSD and related disorders among American Indians.
Martindale-Adams J , Tah T , Finke B , LaCounte C , Higgins BJ , Nichols LO , 2017. Implementation of the REACH model of dementia caregiver support in American Indian and Alaska Native communities. Translational behavioral medicine 7 , 427–434.28585164
Mcainey CA , Harvey D , Schulz ME , 2009. First Link: strengthening primary care partnerships for dementia support. Canadian Journal of Community Mental Health 27 , 117–127.
Mehta KM , Yeo GW , 2017. Systematic review of dementia prevalence and incidence in United States race/ethnic populations. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 13 , 72–83.
Meng Y , Baldwin CT , Bowirrat A , Waraska K , Inzelberg R , Friedland RP , Farrer LA , 2006. Association of polymorphisms in the Angiotensin-converting enzyme gene with Alzheimer disease in an Israeli Arab community. The American Journal of Human Genetics 78 , 871–877.16642441
Mokuau N , 2011. Culturally based solutions to preserve the health of Native Hawaiians. Journal of Ethnic &amp; Cultural Diversity in Social Work 20 , 98–113.
Monsalve MV , Helgason A , Devine DV , 1999. Languages, geography and HLA haplotypes in native American and Asian populations. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series B: Biological Sciences 266 , 2209–2216.
National Cancer Institute N , 2010. Cancer trends progress report–2009/2010 update.
Norris T , Vines PL , Hoeffel EM , 2012. The american indian and alaska native population: 2010. US Department of Commerce, Economics and Statistics Administration, US ….
Pritchett EN , Vasquez R , 2023. History of Race in America. Dermatol Clin 41 , 335–343.36933923
Prucha FP , 1984. The great father: the United States government and the American Indians. 2 (1984). University of Nebraska Press.
Prucha FP , 1995. The great father: the United States government and the American Indians. U of Nebraska Press.
Raghavan M , Steinrücken M , Harris K , Schiffels S , Rasmussen S , DeGiorgio M , Albrechtsen A , Valdiosera C , Ávila-Arcos MC , Malaspinas A-S , 2015. Genomic evidence for the Pleistocene and recent population history of Native Americans. Science 349 , aab3884.26198033
Rhoades DA , 2006. National health data and older American Indians and Alaska Natives. Journal of applied gerontology 25 , 9S–26S.
Roh S , Brown-Rice KA , Lee KH , Lee Y-S , Yee-Melichar D , Talbot EP , 2015. Attitudes toward mental health services among American Indians by two age groups. Community mental health journal 51 , 970–977.25862435
Rosenberg RN , Richter RW , Risser RC , Taubman K , Prado-Farmer I , Ebalo E , Posey J , Kingfisher D , Dean D , Weiner MF , 1996. Genetic factors for the development of Alzheimer disease in the Cherokee Indian. Archives of neurology 53 , 997–1000.8859062
Roubideaux Y , 2002. Perspectives on American Indian Health. American Journal of Public Health 92 , 1401–1403.12197964
Sanchez B , Zhou X , Gardiner AS , Herbert G , Lucas S , Morishita M , Wagner JG , Lewandowski R , Harkema JR , Shuey C , 2020. Serum-borne factors alter cerebrovascular endothelial microRNA expression following particulate matter exposure near an abandoned uranium mine on the Navajo Nation. Particle and Fibre Toxicology 17 , 1–14.31900181
Schaefer KR , Noonan C , Mosley M , Smith J , Galbreath D , Fenn D , Robinson RF , Manson SM , 2019. Differences in service utilization at an urban tribal health organization before and after Alzheimer’s disease or related dementia diagnosis: A cohort study. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 15 , 1412–1419.
Schalock RL , Verdugo MA , Braddock DL , 2002. Handbook on quality of life for human service practitioners. American Association on Mental Retardation Washington, DC.
Sehar U , Rawat P , Choudhury M , Boles A , Culberson J , Khan H , Malhotra K , Basu T , Reddy PH , 2022a. Comprehensive Understanding of Hispanic Caregivers: Focus on Innovative Methods and Validations. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease Reports, 1–18.
Sehar U , Rawat P , Reddy AP , Kopel J , Reddy PH , 2022b. Amyloid beta in aging and Alzheimer’s disease. International journal of molecular sciences 23 , 12924.36361714
Sentell TL , Valcour N , Ahn HJ , Miyamura J , Nakamoto B , Chow D , Masaki K , Seto TB , Chen JJ , Shikuma C , 2015. High rates of Native Hawaiian and older Japanese adults hospitalized with dementia in Hawai ‘i. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society 63 , 158–164.25537987
Sequist TD , Cullen T , Acton KJ , 2011. Indian Health Service innovations have helped reduce health disparities affecting American Indian and Alaska Native people. Health Affairs 30 , 1965–1973.21976341
Shogren KA , Wehmeyer ML , Reese RM , O’Hara D , 2006. Promoting self-determination in health and medical care: A critical component of addressing health disparities in people with intellectual disabilities. Journal of Policy and Practice in Intellectual Disabilities 3 , 105–113.
Simon CE , 2006. Breast cancer screening: cultural beliefs and diverse populations. Health &amp; Social Work 31 , 36–43.16550846
Smith-Kaprosy N , Martin PP , Whitman K , 2012. An overview of American Indians and Alaska Natives in the context of social security and supplemental security income. Soc. Sec. Bull 72 , 1.
Snipp CM , 1997. The size and distribution of the American Indian population: Fertility, mortality, migration, and residence. Population Research and Policy Review 16 , 61–93.
Snipp CM , Thornton R , 1990. American Indian Holocaust and Survival: A Population History Since 1492. American Indian Quarterly 14 , 85.
Steptoe A , Deaton A , Stone AA , 2015. Psychological wellbeing, health and ageing. Lancet 385 , 640.25468152
Strachan E , Buchwald D , 2022. Informal Caregiving Among American Indians and Alaska Natives in the Pacific Northwest. Journal of Community Health, 1–6.
Suchy-Dicey A , Howard B , Longstreth W Jr , Reiman EM , Buchwald D , 2022. APOE genotype, hippocampus, and cognitive markers of Alzheimer’s disease in American Indians: Data from the Strong Heart Study. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia.
Suchy-Dicey A , Su Y , Buchwald DS , Manson SM , Reiman EM , 2023. Volume atrophy in medial temporal cortex and verbal memory scores in American Indians: Data from the Strong Heart Study. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 19 , 2298–2306.
Tang M , Maestre G , Tsai W-Y , Liu X , Feng L , Chung W-Y , Chun M , Schofield PR , Stern Y , Tycko B , 1996. Effect of age, ethnicity, and head injury on the association between APOE genotypes and Alzheimer’s disease.
Treatment C.f.S.A , 2006. Substance abuse: clinical issues in intensive outpatient treatment.
Van De Vorst IE , Koek HL , Stein CE , Bots ML , Vaartjes I , 2016. Socioeconomic disparities and mortality after a diagnosis of dementia: results from a nationwide registry linkage study. American journal of epidemiology 184 , 219–226.27380760
Wang X-P , Ding H-L , 2008. Alzheimer’s disease: epidemiology, genetics, and beyond. Neuroscience bulletin 24 .
Wang X , Huang W , Su L , Xing Y , Jessen F , Sun Y , Shu N , Han Y , 2020. Neuroimaging advances regarding subjective cognitive decline in preclinical Alzheimer’s disease. Molecular Neurodegeneration 15 , 1–27.31964406
Weaver HN , 2012. Urban and indigenous: The challenges of being a Native American in the city. Journal of Community Practice 20 , 470–488.
Weiner MF , 2008. Perspective on race and ethnicity in Alzheimer’s disease research. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 4 , 233–238.
Weiner MF , Hynan LS , Beekly D , Koepsell TD , Kukull WA , 2007. Comparison of Alzheimer’s disease in American Indians, whites, and African Americans. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 3 , 211–216.
White EJ , Demuth MJ , Wiglesworth A , Coser AD , Garrett BA , Kominsky TK , Jernigan V , Thompson WK , Paulus M , Aupperle R , 2023. Five recommendations for using large-scale publicly available data to advance health among American Indian peoples: the Adolescent Brain and Cognitive Development (ABCD) StudySM as an illustrative case. Neuropsychopharmacology 48 , 263–269.36385331
Wille SM , Kemp KA , Greenfield BL , Walls ML , 2017. Barriers to healthcare for American Indians experiencing homelessness. Journal of social distress and the homeless 26 , 1–8.29375241
Willging CE , Sommerfeld DH , Jaramillo ET , Lujan E , Bly RS , Debenport EK , Verney SP , Lujan R , 2018. Improving Native American elder access to and use of health care through effective health system navigation. BMC health services research 18 , 1–16.29291745
Wollmer MA , Kapaki E , Hersberger M , Muntwyler J , Brunner F , Tsolaki M , Akatsu H , Kosaka K , Michikawa M , Molyva D , 2006. Ethnicity-dependent genetic association of ABCA2 with sporadic Alzheimer’s disease. American Journal of Medical Genetics Part B: Neuropsychiatric Genetics 141 , 534–536.
Wyman MF , Umucu E , Livingston S , Lambrou NH , Carter FP , Van Hulle CA , Johnson SC , Asthana S , Gleason CE , Zuelsdorff M , 2021. Relationships between well-being and cognitive function among Native American, Black, and White participants in the Wisconsin Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 17 , e051173.
Wyman MF , Van Hulle CA , Umucu E , Livingston S , Lambrou NH , Carter FP , Johnson SC , Asthana S , Gleason CE , Zuelsdorff M , 2022. Psychological well-being and cognitive aging in Black, Native American, and White Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center participants. Frontiers in human neuroscience 16 .
Xue S , Jia J , 2006. Genetic association between ubiquitin carboxy-terminal hydrolase-L1 gene S18Y polymorphism and sporadic Alzheimer’s disease in a Chinese Han population. Brain research 1087 , 28–32.16626667
Zuckerman S , Haley J , Roubideaux Y , Lillie-Blanton M , 2004. Health service access, use, and insurance coverage among American Indians/Alaska Natives and Whites: what role does the Indian Health Service play? American journal of public health 94 , 53–59.14713698
