LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


0271103
34200
Coord Chem Rev
Coord Chem Rev
Coordination chemistry reviews
0010-8545

37305445
10249757
10.1016/j.ccr.2023.215172
NIHMS1894199
Article
Vector enabled CRISPR gene editing – A revolutionary strategy for targeting the diversity of brain pathologies
Forgham Helen a
Liu Liwei a
Zhu Jiayuan a
Javed Ibrahim a
Cai Weibo b*
Qiao Ruirui a*
Davis Thomas P. a
a Australian Institute of Bioengineering &amp; Nanotechnology, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland 4072, Australia
b Departments of Radiology and Medical Physics, University of Wisconsin – Madison, Madison, WI, USA
* Corresponding authors wcai@uwhealth.org (W. Cai), r.qiao@uq.edu.au (R. Qiao).
23 4 2023
15 7 2023
20 4 2023
15 7 2024
487 215172This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Brain pathologies are considered one of the greatest contributors of death and disability worldwide. Neurodegenerative Alzheimer’s disease is the second leading cause of death in adults, whilst brain cancers including glioblastoma multiforme in adults, and pediatric-type high-grade gliomas in children remain largely untreatable. A further compounding issue for patients with brain pathologies is that of long-term neuropsychiatric sequela - as a symptom or arising from high dose therapeutic intervention. The major challenge to effective, low dose treatment is finding therapeutics that successfully cross the blood–brain barrier and target aberrant cellular processes, while having minimum effect on essential cellular processes, and healthy bystander cells. Following over 30 years of research, CRISPR technology has emerged as a biomedical tour de force with the potential to revolutionise the treatment of both neurological and cancer related brain pathologies. The aim of this review is to take stock of the progress made in CRISPR technology in relation to treating brain pathologies. Specifically, we will describe studies which look beyond design, synthesis, and theoretical application; and focus instead on in vivo studies with translation potential. Along with discussing the latest breakthrough techniques being applied within the CRISPR field, we aim to provide a prospective on the knowledge gaps that exist and challenges that still lay ahead for CRISPR technology prior to successful application in the brain disease treatment field.

Clustered regularly interspaced short
palindromic repeats (CRISPR)
Gene editing
Blood–brain barrier (BBB)
Brain
Cancer
Central nervous system (CNS)

pmc1. Introduction

In 2016, brain disease resulted in 9 million deaths and accounted for 16.5% of all deaths worldwide [1]. This number is a 15% increase from data collected twenty five-years previously and sadly, numbers are said to continue rising dramatically over the next twenty five-years [1]. Notable types of brain pathologies include Alzheimer’s disease, brain cancers, movement disorders (Parkinson’s, Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and Huntington’s disease), and pediatric neurological disorders. Finding effective treatments is challenging for these often-deadly maladies. Likewise, delivering treatments presents as a logistics nightmare for brain pathologies because of the blood–brain barrier.

1.1. The blood–brain barrier

The blood–brain barrier (BBB) is a structurally unique micro-vascularized network governing the passage of select metabolites and signalling molecules to the brain connected through intracellular adhesion sites called tight junctions [2]. Only very small molecules such as H2O can cross unaided and so embedded inside of the luminal and abluminal membrane of brain specific endothelial cells (BSECs) lie transporters. Some enable access to water soluble molecules via carrier-mediated transport and other larger molecules such as insulin and transferrin via receptor-mediated transport [3,4]. Tight junction regulation is governed by tetraspan transmembrane Claudin proteins, zonula Occluden scaffold proteins and enzyme Occludin [2]. Together, these proteins work in harmony to regulate the high resistance of the tight junctions and control permeability of ions and molecules traveling through the junctions into the brain. Intertwined along the BBB network are neurovascular units (NVU) made up of pericytes, astrocytes, micro glia cell types and an extracellular matrix (basal membrane) [5] (Fig. 1).

The presence of the heterogeneous NVUs also helps regulate BBB permeability and integrity in health [5]. Given the level of complexity and interwoven nature of this highly dynamic process, a failure in just one of the BBB components can lead to a pathological outcome and as such, diseases of the brain are highly correlated with poor BBB health. This is exemplified in the case of epilepsy, stroke, Alzheimer’s, and Parkinson’s disease where studies have identified a direct correlation between poor BBB health and onset of symptoms [6–10].

In the instance of brain cancer, the BBB can become both compromised and pathologically modified. The latter relates to the formation of a blood–brain-tumour barrier (BBTB); a non-uniform, ill formed neovascularized structural barrier composed of cancer cells mixed with BBB specific cells [4]. The BBTB is characterized by changes to the NVUs, most notably irregular pericyte arrangement and a lack of neuronal connections; and attached astrocytic endfeet [11]. Formation of a BBTB happens as a result of the deregulated expression of angiogenic promotors, predominantly, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) which promotes the formation of aberrant blood vessels; providing nourishment for the tumour to grow, disrupt and then intermingle with the BBB [12]. An upregulation of VEGF associated with a hypoxic microenvironment as a consequence of rapid growth encourages further tumour growth. Although VEGF inhibition has indeed demonstrated therapeutic benefit for glioblastoma multiforme patients, this therapeutic intervention may be transient, with the cancer cells rapidly adapting in a process known as “evasive resistance” [13]. Moreover, large scale VEGF inhibition was shown to initiate a hypoxia-related increase in cancer cell invasion [14]. Lastly, given the role of VEGF in controlling BBB permeability in health, high dose inhibition may actually result in a reduction in reduced permeability of alternative drugs. Therefore, the challenge remains as how to control angiogenic inhibition for an optimal outcome.

An additional permeability issue faced by prospective drugs is that the BBTB, much like the BBB, still retains fully functional efflux transporters including multidrug-resistant ABC transporters, breast cancer resistance protein, multidrug resistance proteins and P-glycoprotein, which alone recognises 60% of approved therapeutics and promotes their rapid efflux from the brain [15,16]. Collectively, these transporters are said to be capable of preventing approximately 98% of all clinically approved drugs from accessing a pathological site and exerting an optimal therapeutic effect [17].

Several drug-based therapeutic approaches rely on the drug being both small and lipophilic, allowing it to passively diffuse through the BBB. Temozolomide used to treat glioblastoma multi-forme is a perfect example of a drug that adopts this approach. Unfortunately, drug accumulation within the brain and more specifically towards the intended cells remains suboptimal for temozolomide because quantitatively, only 20% of the plasma concentrations are suggested to reach the brain [18]. In contrast to temozolomide, Levodopa used in the moderation of Parkinson’s disease symptoms has been designed to cross the BBB using an active transport approach [19]. However, here too delivery is suboptimal with only 1% of the ingested dose reaching the brain [20]. The shortfall between what is being administer and what actually reaches the target leads to high dose exposure and a plethora of side effects in both instances [21–23]. The suboptimal delivery of drugs targeted towards brain pathologies in other areas is also well documented as are the associated side effects [24].

If we are to believe the theory that most of the small molecule combinations have indeed all been explored for brain pathologies, innovative efforts should be enhanced and directed towards newer approaches that allow for improved - more tissue specific delivery and better treatment response [25]. In attempts to tackle the issues presented, viral and non-viral vectors are being developed to perform the role of a Trajan horse. Specifically, therapeutics that may not normally enter the brain, enter but at suboptimal concentrations, or are rapidly effluxed can be encapsulated within the core or adsorbed to the surface of the vectors [26]. The vectors then work to protect the cargo and are designed to hijack or manipulate known mechanisms of BBB transcytosis. In addition to drug delivery, viral and non-viral vector development also opens the door to exploring newer targeted approaches for brain pathologies - most notably those aimed towards gene therapy.

1.2. Gene therapy

Gene therapy refers to the treatment of a pathological condition by up-regulating gene expression or rendering the causal gene less effective or redundant and may include insertion of a heathy replacement genetic sequence. For several years messenger RNA (mRNA) and RNA interference (RNAi) has led the way in modulating gene expression; as evidenced by the successes observed for mRNA COVID-19 vaccines and four Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved siRNA formulations and six others (vutrisiran, nedosiran, fitusiran, teprasiran, cosdosiran, and tivanisiran) in trials [27]. mRNA and siRNA are both transient processes that has proven invaluable in defining, and targeting various pathogens including COVID-9, and so called “undruggable” mediators of cancer to excellent effect [28,29]. However, if these treatments are required repeatedly, it could prove to be expensive to the patient. For instance, inclisiran, used to treat atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease costs £1987.36 per injection. Injections are required after three months and then every six months after that, and so this type of treatment strategy may prove difficult to maintain long-term for some patients [30]. Specifically, this may be the case for patients with pathologies that arise from inherited gene mutations or diseases in post-mitotic cells where acquired mutations are the root cause of the problem. The emergence of clustered regularly inter-spaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) gene editing technology is a giant step forward in the biomedical-nanomedicine field in this respect.

CRISPR is a thriving area of research that presents an ever-growing set of tools for the better understanding, and long-term treatment of highly challenging pathologies. Importantly, CRISPR may unravel previously unanswerable questions of how to target currently incurable brain pathologies.

2. CRISPR technology

2.1. Origin and concept

Nearly all archaea and 50% of bacteria contain CRISPR associated (Cas) genes that provide immune protection, thereby preventing the bacteria’s genome against viral DNA insertion [31,32]. The identification of this adaptive immune CRISPR-CRISPR-associated protein (Cas) process was first recognized in Escherichia coli in 1987 but was later fully established in bacteria Streptococcus pyo-genes (SpCas9) in 2011 [33,34]. CRISPR’s exploitation for biomedical application in humans was substantiated the following year when it was demonstrated that the way in which bacterial DNA protects and repairs itself can easily be levied against disease causing genes in humans [35]. These findings won Jennifer Doudna and Emmanuelle Charpentier the illustrious Nobel prize in chemistry (2020) [34]. Through their work, Doudna and Charpentier were able to identify three initial CRISPR-Cas systems, each made exclusive through the presence of a ‘signature protein’ i.e. Cas3 for type I, Cas9, type II, and Cas10 type III. Today, CRISPR systems are broadly split into two independent classes. While class 1 is reliant on the process performed by multi-subunit protein complexes, class 2 only require a single effector protein to elicit an affect [31]. The class 2, type II Ca9 system proved early on to be the most compelling for translation in humans and currently, still remain the most widely utilized method of gene editing for targeting brain pathologies in vivo [36]. The Cas9 signature protein consists of a single polypeptide chain and is composed of six separate domains. Notable domains include the protospacer adjacent motif (PAM) interacting domain (PI), responsible for identifying the PAM sequence though displaying complimentary charge and shape; and the HNC and RuvC nuclease domains, responsible for cutting the DNA through their nuclease function [37].

Broadly speaking, the CRISPR process begins with universal Cas1 and Cas 2 enzymes that scan through the bacteria’s DNA specifically searching for a PAM site [35,38]. The major differences between bacteria are found in the PAM sites. For example, in SpCas9 the PAM site is made up of 2–6 base pairs and consists of any nucleotide followed by two guanines (GG). Whereas for Staphylococcus aureus the PAM sequence is two random nucleotides, followed by guanine, a guanine / adenine repeat, and any nucleotide (5’-NNGRR(N)-3’) and because Cas9 binds to a specific PAM sequence, the cut sites are restricted by the number of PAMs available. A full list of the Cas9 orthologs and their characteristics are beyond the scope of this review but eloquently described by Anza-lone et al., [37].

The PAM is unique to an invading virus or plasmid and thus not part of the bacteria’s genome – preventing the system from attacking itself. Once a PAM site is identified, Cas1 and Cas 2 localize to the 5-prime end on the complementary strand (coding strand). Here, both enzymes work to cut out the section of DNA in and around the PAM; approximately 25 bases, which are subsequently turned into a genome-targeting sequence (spacer) and integrated within a CRISPR array at the 5-prime end as a new CRISPR repeat [34]. The length of the CRISPR array is determined by the number of spacers that it contains; with each spacer representing and protecting the bacteria from a previously conquered infection. The CRISPR array is transcribed into pre- clustered, regularly inter-spaced, short palindromic repeats RNA (pre-crRNA), a single RNA molecule made-up of repeats and spacers [39]. To continue the process of maturation, unprocessed tracer RNA binds in a complementary manner to the repeat regions in the pre-crRNA. Once bound, RNase cuts through the repeats leaving a segment of RNA from the spacer and tracer RNA that are held together through hydrogen bonds [39]. The cr:tracer RNA is primed for unification with Cas9 [40]. Cas9 with assistance from the cr:tracer RNA holds the crRNA; now given the nomenclature of guide RNA (gRNA) in position within Cas9. Cas9 is now classified as immune functional and able to elicit an adaptive immune response when it identifies a PAM sequence within its DNA. If a PAM is identified, Cas9 will open the foreign DNA segment and determine whether the Cas9-gRNA is complementary to the sequence of DNA bases upstream of the PAM, but on the non-coding strand. A complimentary sequence causes Cas9 to cut both the coding and non-coding strands at the 5-prime end approximately 4 bases upstream of the PAM site, resulting in removal of the viral sequence and the initiation of DNA repair.

DNA repair occurs either through non-homologous end joining (NHEJ), Homology directed repair (HDR), or double strand break repair (DSBR). During NHEJ, the naturally occurring protein Ku70/80 positions itself on the exposed ends of the host DNA. The presence of Ku70/80 attracts DNA protein kinase catalytic subunit (DNA-PKcs). Together, Ku70/80 and DNA-PKcs invite DNA repair duo XRCC4 and XLF to the break site where they accumulate around the broken double strand, drawing the ends back together. Finally, enzyme DNA ligase 4 forms a sugar phosphate bond between the sugar of one nucleotide and the phosphate of another, effectively joining the two ends together. HDR relies first on enzyme exodeoxyribonuclease V (RecBCD), to resect the 5-prime end of the broken strand back until it reaches a recombinant Chi site. Next the RecA protein draws the 3-prime ends in to create a d-loop interaction with intact donor homologous DNA [41]. Here, DNA polymerase extends the 3 prime end until it reaches a Chi site. Arrival at the Chi site causes the strand to break free from the donor strand and realign with its original complimentary pairing partner. Once adjoined, DNA polymerase will extend the 3 prime end using the repaired piece of DNA as a template. DSBR is similar to HDR with resection back to the Chi site followed by RecA drawing the broken strands down into a d-loop. However, in the case of DSBR, because the 3-prime end is positioned up against the top of the d-loop, it can use the d-loop as a template. Therefore, both strands can be repaired simultaneously. This action presents with a unique situation where the DNA strand becomes interlaced with the donor DNA in a development referred to as a holiday junction. Having completed the joining step, the holiday junction must be removed by resolvases to prevent permanent joining which would lead to extreme genetic instability [42]. In humans, CRISPR-Cas apparatus can be programmed to target any DNA molecule at any predetermined site and cut out any gene in the human genome. The innate repair mechanisms that are triggered can cause a mutation that silences gene expression or, when a new gene template is used, completely replace a faulty gene with a new synthetic functional alternative.

Although current literature suggests that CRISPR-Cas9 is universally the most readily utilized platform, CRISPR-Cas9 has one significant limitation in that it is restricted by the number of possible gene edits in areas with high GC content as a result of PAM demand [43,44]. Whilst research is promising for the creation of Cas9 PAMless variants other notable systems targeted towards DNA have emerged - as such the CRISPR portfolio now includes a range of newly developed DNA targeting subtypes; type IV, Cas12a protein system and type V, Cas12 [45,46]. Although Cas12a and Cas12 are not yet being explored in vivo as a therapeutic for brain pathologies, Cas12a in particular has shown promise in other areas [47]. Cas12a’s growing favour comes down to the fact that unlike Cas9, Cas12a uses simpler gRNA that is not reliant on trans-activating CRISPR (tracr) RNA - essential for pre-crRNA processing as well as target recognition and cleavage in Cas9 platforms [48]. Also, Cas12a is capable of producing double strand breaks with jagged ends and importantly, capable of targeting T-rich genomic loci in areas unreachable using Cas9 due to PAM needs [43].

CRSPR-Cas system that target invading RNA viral phage’s have also been humanised; further expanding the grouping to include type VI, Cas13. Cas13 is reliant on a single effector so sits within the class 2 classification. However, unlike Cas9, it is an RNA guided RNAse that promotes RNA interference by targeting viral RNA sequences [31]. From this classification spawned the Cas13d platform, a class 2 type VI CRISPR effector protein that cuts through single-stranded RNA in bacteria [49]. First characterized by Konnerman et. al., in 2018, Cas13d is capable of knocking down genes found in most primary transcripts [50]. But, unlike previously characterized CRISPR-RNA systems that recognize 20–30 nucleotide (nt) RNA sequences made up of approximately 1,200 amino acids, Cas13d recognises smaller sequences and thus the CRISPR-Cas complex, including crRNA can more easily be packed inside of delivery vectors [50]. Additionally, the Cas13d platform is reported to have a greater targeting specificity and efficiency [51]. The literature suggests that Cas13d is the only RNA targeting CRISPR system currently being investigated for brain pathologies in vivo [52].

2.2. Delivery vectors

The first step for any CRISPR-Cas system is effective biological delivery and uptake by target cells. The CRISPR-Cas platform can be endocytosed into cells in the form of a plasmid, mRNA sequence or a ribonucleotide protein (RNP), which is composed of both the CRISPR-Cas9 protein and sgRNA sequence fused together (Fig. 2) [53,54,55]. All forms are large in size, making them unsuitable for cellular uptake and in the case of mRNA in particular, regarded as foreign in the blood which means they are highly susceptible to disassembly and elimination. These characteristics dictate that the delivery process is solely reliant on one or two biologically viable delivery vectors that protect the cargo from immune response and nuclease degradation; and facilitate uptake. Delivery vectors can be categorized into either viral or non-viral. Viral vectors are primarily designed from empty retroviruses, adenoviruses, or adeno-associated viruses (AAVs). These vectors are generally small which means the CRISPR-Cas9 and sgRNA need to be delivered in two separate vectors. Non-viral vectors are composed of organic and inorganic materials. Because non-viral nanoparticle vectors are synthesized from raw materials, this presents an opportunity for the nanoparticles to be custom designed to carry the whole CRISPR-Cas9 sgRNA cargo in a single vector.

Currently, AAV viral vectors are the most commonly used vector for all areas of therapeutic research including within the brain pathologies field; however, non-viral approaches are beginning to emerge because of the flexibility in design that non-viral vectors afford.

2.2.1. Gold vectors

Gold nanoparticles continue to be heavily investigated in the medical field because of their various notable characteristics. As delivery vehicles they display a large surface area which can be readily coated with various therapeutic entities. As probes, gold nanoparticles scatter light making them ideal as molecular imaging agents and their innate photodynamic property enables them to kill tumor cells in a process known as hyperthermia [57,58]. Additionally, using short, pulsed laser irradiation gold nanoparticles produce nanobubble formation and can be used to instigate membrane permeabilization. This last innate property was explored by Bošnja et. al., as a way of introducing CRISPR-spCas9 and crRNA:tracrRNA targeting mouse CCR7 (mCCR7) [59]. In their study the authors used a combination of nanotechnology and laser physics to reach a 65% knockout of the mCCR7 gene in the trans fected mouse fibroblast cells line SC-1. The ability to apply this approach to characteristically difficult to transfect cells was further validated by targeting the cytokine CXCR3 in primary mouse CD8 + T cells. Here, the authors calculate a 25% knockout efficiency for CXCR3 following gold nanoparticle mediated laserporation. However, as outlined by the authors; although a promising addition to high throughput applications, this method requires further optimization if it is to become comparable to other prominent delivery strategies.

Gold nanoparticles can be designed to carry the whole functional CRISPR cargo in one go as demonstrated by Lee. et al., This group established CRISPR-Gold nanoparticles where donor DNA was coated onto gold nanoparticles [59]. The DNA coating displayed significant affinity to Cas9 RNP, resulting in its adsorption to the nanoparticles. In their study the authors used CRISPR-Gold nanoparticles to elicit HDR-mediated genome editing, targeting mutations in the dystrophin gene associated with Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Because HDR channels are only operational during cellular division, the group used cardiotoxin to promote the activation and proliferation of muscle stem cells in order to hijack the HDR process in mdx mice [60]. Following a single injection and 2-week waiting period, harvested muscle cells were found to have corrected dystrophin gene expression resembling the wildtype sequence [59]. Although extremely promising, as Glass et. al., discusses in their view of this work, cardiotoxin may not be feasible for translational applications [60]. Moreover, without the addition of cardiotoxin within the treatment regime, the effect is significantly decreased. Nevertheless, this was a landmark study demonstrating the first example of successful in vivo HDR effect achieved through non-viral vector delivery of Cas9, sgRNA, and donor DNA [61].

2.2.2. Lipid vectors

Lipid nanoparticles have been highly cited as vectors for CRISPR-Cas9 delivery [62,63]. However, they are yet to reach the optimal requirements for clinical translation - as determined by insufficient uptake by primary cells and in animal experiments [56]. However, it has been proposed that modifications including the addition of cationic surfactant Dioleoyl-3-trimethylammonium propane (DOTAP) during synthesis will help better protect the CRISPR-Cas9 and sgRNA; and promote better uptake. For instance, Wei et al., developed 5A2-SC8-DOTAP lipid nanoparticles that self-assembled with CRISPR-Cas9 fused to a sgRNA to form a RNP complex [64]. In this study, different percentages of DOTAP (5–60 mol%) were investigated with the results illustrating that 10–20% was preferable for the formation of stable RNP-loaded nanoparticles (&lt;200 nm) [64]. Cheng et al., also used DOTAP in their Selective organ targeting (SORT) nanoparticles; however, in this study they identified the optimal percentage of DOTAP as 50% for CRISPR-Cas9 delivery [65]. Zwitterionic amino lipids (ZAL) nanoparticles have also shown to be effective in delivery of CRISPR-Cas9 platforms. Miller et al., developed ZAL nanoparticles with a zwitterionic sulfobetaine head group, an amine rich linker region, and assorted hydrophobic tails and demonstrated effective dual delivery of ~ 100 nt sgRNA and 1,000 to 4,500 nt CRISPR mRNA [55].

2.2.3. Polymer vectors

Polymer-based nanoparticles benefit from highly diverse chemical and functional properties that endows them with arguably, greater flexibility in shape and size, and a better control over charge than lipid nanoparticle vectors. To date, polyethyleneimine (PEI) and chitosan nanoparticles are the most widely explored as CRISPR-Cas vectors, although various other strategies have been applied [53,66–68].

2.2.4. Hybrid vectors

Hybrid nanoparticles containing inorganic matter such as gold and iron oxide are of significant interest within the CRISPR field [53,67]. The properties of iron oxide mean that polymer or lipid iron oxide hybrids can be used to deliver CRISPR-Cas platforms and because iron oxide can be utilized as a contrast agent for molecular resonance imaging (MRI), be used as a detector for determining uptake in a target area and therapeutic effect. This provides the oportunity to be a theranostic platform rather than just a therapeutic platform [69]. Rohiwal et al., for instance synthesized PEI coated iron oxide nanoparticles to deliver CRISPR-Cas9 as a plasmid (Fig. 3) [53]. To concentrate the hybrid vectors to target cells they used a transfection protocol known as magnetofection which used magnetic fields to draw the nanoparticles towards the cells, thereby increasing the potential for uptake [70]. The addition of polyglutamic acid (PGA) has also proven to be a positive move for polymer based vectors, with Nguyen et al., demonstrating the addition of PGA encouraged a greater delivery efficiency and affect, and reduced toxicity regardless of the sgRNA; and importantly, this was independent of the Cas9 nuclease manufacturer [71].

Hybrid nanoparticles combining the arete of lipid and gold nanoparticles for plasmid delivery of Cas9-PLK1-sgRNA was recently explored by Wang et al., [72]. The authors condensed CPsonTATpeptide-amorphous calcium phosphate (ACP) modified gold nanoparticles using electrostatic interaction (AuNPs/CP, ACP). Lipids composed of DOTAP, DOPE, cholesterol, PEG 2000-DSPE encapsulated the gold nanoparticles as the finished product. The authors demonstrate successful gene silencing of Polo-Like-Kinase 1 (PLK1) and a reduction in melanoma growth in mice with subcutaneous development of A375 cell line melanoma in the first arm of the study. In the second arm of the study, the authors assessed the potential for photothermal therapy. Here, the nanoparticles were injected into the tumors and the mice irradiated using a 514 nm laser. Following 10 min of irradiation under 24 mW cm − 2 laser, the temperature of the skin above the tumor rose to 36.8 °C, by 20 min the temperature had further increased to 41.4 °C. The final aim of the study was to determine whether the photothermal effect produced by the nanoparticles could trigger plasmid release. Using a xenograft model of human melanoma, nanoparticles were administered directly into the tumor and irradiation given at 24 mW cm − 2 for 20 min. Tumor volume was significantly decreased following 10 combined treatments over 20 days, as compared to the controls.

2.2.5. Exosomes as vectors

More recently, exosomes as delivery vectors for CRISPR-Cas9 have been investigated and shown promising results for targeting liver diseases, pancreatic cancer, and Duchenne muscular dystrophy [73–75]. Exosomes present as potentially the most biologically ready delivery vectors for CRISPR-Cas platforms because they are naturally occurring lipid vesicles produced by all cells in the body. The natural occurrence of exosomes means they display no obvious immunogenicity and are fully biocompatible. Wan et al., recently demonstrated effective loading of CRISPR-Cas9-RNP into exosomes from hepatic stellate cells for investigating the potential of treating liver fibrosis and hepatic ischemia reperfusion injury, drug-induced injury [73]. Cas9 fused with either sgPUMA, sgCcnE1, or sgKAT5 were encapsulated within exosomes using electroporation. The results of therapeutic intervention with Cas9-sgPUMA resulted in an extension in survival. Whereas Cas9-sgCcnE1 attenuated chronic liver fibrosis and Cas9- sgKAT5 produced significant antifibrotic effects. The main drawbacks for exosomal vectors area lack of consistency in vector size and difficulty in scale-up.

At present viral vectors dominate the CRISPR brain pathologies space. However, this actuality may be transient, as researchers search to find more biologically friendly alternatives. As time passes non-viral vector nanoparticle design is becoming better and more attuned to creating biological synergy, and as such better results. Additionally, the exosome field is developing at an unprecedented speed which guarantees that before long we will see a solution to effective scale-up. In short, if it is indeed the delivery vehicles holding the reins of CRISPR technology, the studies outlined here demonstrate that progress is forthcoming. Moreover, that it remains paramount to the future success of CRISPR for brain pathologies that research into tuneable non-viral vectors continues to blossom.

3. In vivo applications of CRISPR technology for treating brain pathologies

3.1. Brain cancer

Primary malignant brain cancers are a highly heterogeneous category of cancers emerging from aberrant cells located within different regions throughout the brain. Overall, this category of cancers presents as one of the most challenging to treat. Glioblastoma multiforme (GMB) arising from astrocytic cells in the cerebrum proffers the greatest lethality of all adult brain cancers - leaving adults affected with extremely low 5-year survival rates (~35%) [76]. Brain cancers are also prevalent during childhood and adolescence. In these populations, brain cancers are the leading cause of cancer related mortality [77,78]. Pediatric-type high-grade gliomas, accounting for 10% of reported brain cancer cases are the most deadly and reports suggest that up to 90% of patients will succumb to this cancer sub-category within two years of diagnosis [77]. Genome sequencing and DNA methylome profiling of brain cancers has identified significant genetic alterations and improved both understanding and prognosis for a select few adult and childhood brain tumours; however, to date, therapeutic advances in the field remain modest and the challenge remains in how best to translate this new knowledge into potent, safe, effective treatments.

CRISPR technology is emerging as an excellent tool for cutting out cancer driving genes with high specificity. Whilst as of yet we were unable to identify literature documenting in vivo CRISPR studies aimed at eradicating pediatric brain malignancies, we did observe some important examples of where CRSPR was being used to model disease and perform in-depth investigations on oncogenic drivers of cancer formation [79–82]. However, in the case of GBM we identified three noteworthy pre-clinical in vivo studies [83–85]. The Zou et al, and Ruan et al., studies present as great examples of progression and the potential for CRISPR technology to directly target oncogenic driver PLK1, whereas Ye et al., showcase the way in which CRISPR can be utilized to improve immunotherapies within the brain cancer research field. A significant proportion of CRISPR-Cas9 studies aimed at targeting brain diseases have utilized empty viral vectors; notably, both Zou and Ruan opted to circumnavigate the safety concerns directed towards viral vectors by designing polymeric vectors designed for low immunogenicity and large-scale production.

Zou used a glutathione-sensitive polymer nanoparticle with a dual-purpose angiopep-2 peptide ligand that effectively bound to low-density lipoprotein receptor–related protein-1 (LRP-1). Binding was both beneficial in helping the nanoparticle vector to cross the BBB, and in targeting GBM cells, known to harbour an excess of LRP-1 receptors on their surface.

The finished result produced through free-radical in situ polymerization was a 30 nm disulfide–cross-linked polymeric vector embellished with angiopep-2 peptides and carrying a Cas9 and sgRNA [ANCSS(Cas9/sgRNA)] cargo. In vivo studies were performed on mice bearing orthotopic U87MG-Luc tumors. The authors determined that one single systemic injection of ANCSS (Cas9/sgRNA) resulted in effective BBB penetration and tumour uptake. Additionally, when the sgRNA was targeted towards the known oncogene PLK1, the results demonstrated effective gene and protein inhibition of the target and a reduction in tumour burden. Notably, in this study the authors increased both the impact and potential translation of this CRISPR led therapeutic when they initiated the final phase of their investigations in a newly developed patient derived tumor model (Fig. 4). Importantly, the results in the patient derived model were consistent with those of the earlier U87MG model. Finally, to ensure off-target sequence toxicity was not a side effect of treatment, deep sequencing was performed. No toxic gene disruption was observed in either the U87MG or patient derived, CSC2 GSC mice administered with ANCSS(Cas9/sgPLK1).

Ruan et. al., devised a slightly different approach in their study, choosing to combine cationic guanidinated and fluorinated polymers to encourage better in vivo stability; and through the hydrophobic and lipophobic characteristics of fluoroalkyl chains within the fluorinated polymers, enhancement in protein encapsulation [85]. Cas9/gRNA RNP was subsequently bound to the polymer nanoparticles via electrostatic interaction. Much like Zou et al., the authors also chose to decorate their nanoparticles with angiopep-2 peptides to encourage better BBB transcytosis. The finished product (Ang-NP@RNP) was obtained by complexation between angiopep-2 decorated poly(ethylene glycol)-block-poly(N-(3-methacrylamidopropyl) guanidinium) (Ang-PEG-b-PGu)/poly(ethylene glycol)-block-poly[(N-(3-methacrylamidopropyl) guanidinium-co-2,2,3,3-tetrafluoropropyl methacrylate] (PEG-b-P (GuF)) mixture and Cas9/gRNA RNP. In vivo studies utilized a U87MG-Luc orthotopic xenograft tumor model in Balb/c nude mice. Biodistribution measured by fluorometry demonstrated that the brain tumor accumulation of Ang-NP@RNP was up to 12.9% of injected dose per gram of tissue; a percentage far greater than controls (NP@RNP and RNP, respectively). Genome-editing efficiency was measured 48 h after tail vein administration, with complexes able to produce a 62% reduction in luciferase expression. Lastly, when Ang-NP@RNP-gPLK1 was delivered via tail vein injection every two days for 5 cycles to mice with orthotopic tumors, tumor burden was reduced, and median survival time was extended to 40 days.

Cancer immunotherapy refers to a therapeutic intervention that either leads to the activation or enrichment of a patient’s own immune system to seek out and destroy cancer cells [86]. Immunotherapies have had a huge impact on cancer survivorship; however, this is yet to be reflected in GBM and high-risk pediatric brain cancers. Whilst a lack of success in pediatric has been accredited to tumours actively escaping anti-tumour immunity, the failings in GBM have been attributed to the fact that checkpoint blockade has minimal antitumour effect and possible lethal side effects [86,87]. For instance, clinical trial NCT02017717 aimed at determining the effect of blocking programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1) in GBM patients showed that a combination of anti-PD-1 and anti-CTLA-4 (cytotoxic T lymphocyte–associated protein 4) did not prove efficacious in ameliorating patient outcome due to severe reported side effects in trial participants [87]. Whilst O’Rourke and colleagues describe insufficient survival benefit in human trials using EGFR-vIII chimeric antigen receptor (CAR)-T therapy [NCT02209376] [88]. As suggested by Ye et, al., these example eloquently illustrate a need to evaluate alternative immunologically relevant targets for treating GBM and pediatric high risk brain cancer [84]. For their study Ye and colleagues describe the design of a hybrid AAV CRISPR vector platform containing the sleeping Beauty transposon (SB) which was used to insert target DNA into primary mouse T cells (AAV–SB100x) - constructed by gBlock fragments (IDT) followed by Gibson assembly (NEB). Validated targets for gene editing included Pdia3, Mgat5, Emp1 or Lag3. The results identified an increase in the survival of GBM-bearing mice in both syngeneic and T-cell receptor transgenic models following exposure to the T cells. Moreover, transcriptome profiling, single cell sequencing, cytokine assays and T cell signalling analysis showed that Pdia3 editing in T cells enhances effector functions, and finally, that PDIA3 mutant EGFRvIII chimeric antigen T cells were better antigen-specific killing machines of human GBM cells.

Given the significant challenge in treating GBM long-term, these three salient studies promote CRISPR platforms and show when delivered affectively, CRISPR technology presents as an intriguing, non-invasive addition to the GBM therapeutic arsenal.

3.2. Neurological disorders and neurodegenerative diseases:

Neurological and neurodegenerative disorders are routinely the result of inherited gene mutations (Table 1). For these patients, genome editing using CRISPR technology presents an attractive, highly promising therapeutic approach. Here, we present some of the latest study data where CRISPR technology is helping researchers to better understand and treat these highly complex maladies. Table 1 is by no means an exhaustive list of potential gene targets but does provide a strong indication of the far-reaching possibilities for CRISPR intervention, in relation to brain pathologies.

3.2.1. Alzheimer’s disease

Of all neurodegenerative diseases Alzheimer’s disease (AD) has proven to be the costliest to life and is currently considered to be the second greatest cause of deaths globally each year. Although much has been unravelled regarding the pathology of sporadic disease, as of yet no unretractable answer to its origin or definitive cure has been found [116]. The current paradigm, although somewhat shrouded in contradiction after various failed clinical trials, is the amyloid hypothesis [117]. The amyloid hypothesis suggests that amyloid beta (Aβ) oligomers predominantly composed of the Aβ42 isoform specifically interact with neuronal cell membranes and are responsible for synaptic loss and neurodegeneration in AD [118,119]. As well as sporadic formation in older populations, AD is known to develop in earlier life and form as a result of dominant mutations passed down during reproduction (familial AD) in genes that encode for the Aβ precursor protein (APP), as well as genes that encode γ-secretase complex proteins - presenilin 1 and presenilin 2 (PSEN1 and PSEN2) [120]. In all AD cases, the disease presents in the same way - an increase in the Aβ42/40 ratio, formation of amyloid plaques in inter-neuronal spaces, and hyper-phosphorylated tau protein neurofibrillary tangles; the latter two both consistent histopathological hallmarks of AD disease [121]. To date, the amyloid hypothesis being at the forefront of AD pathology dictates that the majority of therapeutic efforts be towards either inhibiting Aβ self-assembly or break and removal of preformed fibrils from tissues [116,122,123].

A disruption or knockout of the particular disease initiating gene presents as an attractive way to prevent the build-up of plaques and therefore a rational treatment approach for early onset/-familial AD (eo/fAD). eo/fAD routinely involves monogenic mutations - where only one gene and allele are affected [124]. This could suggest that a single targeted treatment may be enough to eradicate this disease. Given the well-established findings that all three genes (APP, PSEN1 and PSEN2) are safely targetable, we identified that most CRISPR studies were assigned towards the goal of eradicating eo/fAD. In actual fact, of the fifty-one identified studies targeted towards brain pathologies, one third were designed specifically for this area of brain related research [120,124–137]. β-site amyloid precursor protein (APP) cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1) is, alongside γ-secretase the enzyme responsible for cleavage of APP into Aβ, thus making it a notable therapeutic target for AD. However, recent inhibitors designed for BACE1 have failed to benefit patients in trials, instead increasing both cognitive decline and instigating a range of adverse effects [117,138–142]. These results are allegedly attributed to late intervention or, drug structure [143]. CRISPR could be a way of targeting BACE1 without bringing about the notable side effects observed using inhibitory drug formulations.

One of the most well characterized mutation associated with eo/fAD was identified in 1992. The mutation is indigenous to Sweden and thus was given the nomenclature APP Swedish (APPswe). The mutation associated with this subgroup of patients is located at the β-secretase enzyme - BACE1 site and creates a stronger affinity for BACE1 than normal APP protein, causing an augmentation of APP cleavage and thus over production of Aβ [144,145]. In attempts to address this problem and ameliorate the symptoms consistent with the over production of Aβ, studies have looked at the impact of using CRISPR to selectively target the APPswe mutation in an attempt to slow down the production of Aβ [120,146]. Work by Duan. et al., showcases the most recent investigations for use of CRISPR technology in combating APPswe eo/fAD (Fig. 5).

For their study the authors used a modified adeno-associated virus (AAV) delivery vector designed to cross the BBB and deliver Cas9-single-guide RNA (pX601-AAV-CMV∷NLS-SaCas9-NLS-3xH A-bGHpA;U6∷BsaI-sgRNA) specifically targeting the APPswe mutation. The therapeutic was administered either by intrahippocampal injection or systemically via tail vein to five familial Alzheimer’s disease (5XFAD) transgenic mice. The authors describe a reduction in Aβ deposits, microgliosis, and neurite dystrophy following systemic delivery of the treatment suggesting effective crossing of BBB and uptake by cells. Most importantly, improvements to cognitive function were demonstrated. Remarkably, this notable accomplishment continued for over six months in the mice; possibly because of continued correction over time [120]. Whereas Duan et. al., chose to target the mutant APP protein, Park et. al., explored the direct targeting of BACE1, specifically, the effects of amphiphilic R7L10 peptide micelles carrying Cas9 and BACE1 sgRNA in five familial Alzheimer’s disease (5XFAD) and amyloid precursor protein (APP) knock-in Alzheimer’s disease mouse models [129]. The authors observed a 34% reduction in expression of BACE1 in the CA3 hippocampal region of the brain after just one injection and notably, the inhibitory effect was greater than that of a chemical inhibitor (β-Secretase inhibitor IV). A reduction in Aβ42 expression and plaque formation continued to be observed over a twelve-week period in the 5XFAD model. When the CRISPR platform was tested in the transgenic AD mouse model, the results were consistent – a reduction in BACE1 expression, reduction in Aβ42 and additionally, suppression of cognitive decline relative to the control group.

More recently Park has published their work with CRISPR towards specifically slowing down cognitive decline in AD [128]. In this latest study, the authors demonstrated the potential of CRISPR-Cas9 to target type 1 and type 2 melatonin receptor (Mt1&amp;Mt2). The rationale being the direct correlation observed between dwindling amounts of melatonin, the main substrate for Mt receptors, and AD progression associated with cognitive decline. Synthetic administration of melatonin has previously been demonstrated to alleviate the symptoms of AD in transgenic mice [147]. Additionally, further reports suggest that a similar effect could also be derived from the overexpression of melatonin receptors [148,149]. CRISPR technology continues to improve and now includes catalytically inactive Cas9; designed with an absence of nuclease activity [150]. From this amendment has spawned an advanced technology given the nomenclature, CRISPR/Cas9 activator [151]. Unlike the original CRISPR systems, CRISPR/Cas9 fuses with transcriptional activators, enhancing the transcription of the target gene, but without permanently modifying it [125,151]. In their study Park &amp; Kim pioneered the use of CRISPR/Cas9 activator as a safe and effective therapeutic for AD. This group opted for an empty lentiviral expression vector for delivery of sgRNAs to activate endogenous Mt1 and Mt2. A 189 Mt1 sgRNA (−189 bp from the ATG start codon) and − 103 Mt2 sgRNA (−103 bp from the ATG start codon) was found to initiate the greatest Mt1 and Mt2 expression. Moreover, 189 sgRNA targeting Mt1 (not Mt2) was shown to significantly reduce cells death in vitro.

Neuroinflammation is known to drive the progression of AD. However, studies suggest that melatonin is able to work as an anti-inflammatory agent against microglial activation [152]. Following exposure to CRISPR/Cas9 activator-189 Mt1 sgRNA, p-mTOR, known to drive an inflammatory (M1) microglial response was repressed in primary neural cells. In in vivo studies using a 5XFAD mouse model, Cas9 activators targeting Mt1 were injected into the hypothalamus of 3-month-old mice. Two months after a single dose injection the expression of Mt1 in wild-type and AD mouse brains was significantly greater than the control group. Consistent with previous findings, the Cas9 activator system significantly increased pAKT and pERK1/2 signalling associated with synaptic plasticity [153]. Importantly, no in vivo toxicity was observed in 10 potential off-target sites. In terms of the direct pathology of AD, a notable reduction in Alzheimer’s Aβ42 peptide expression and plaque formation was reported two months after the bolus was administered. The data obtained in the biochemical analysis was reflected in the behavior tests, which demonstrated that the CRISPR led treatment prevented the loss of learning ability and enhanced memory in the AD mouse model.

3.2.2. Huntington’s disease

Huntington’s disease (HD) is an autosomal dominant disorder arising from a mutation in the HTT gene - located on the short arm of chromosome four - that encodes the huntingtin protein [154–156]. Considered the most common of all monogenic neurological disorders, those with a HTT gene mutation have an expanded cytosine, adenine, and guanine (CAG) trinucleotide repeat sequence that manifests in severe neuropsychiatric symptoms such as amnesia, delusions, anxiety, and depression; and muscular abnormalities including choreatic and hypokinetic movements. Together, these manifestations can make life for patients wretched [156]. The symptoms are brought about by progressive degeneration of medium spiny neurons (MSN) of the basal ganglia - housed within the cerebrum area of the brain [157]. Pneumonia is the most common cause of death, with sufferers predicted to succumb within 10–30 years. To date, there are no treatments available that can slow down disease progression and as such, HD remains incurable. The difficulty in finding a therapeutic to work effectively against HD is exemplified in reports by McColgan, &amp; Tabrizi that show; in the ninety-nine documented clinical trials between 2008 and 2018, as little as 3.5% made it beyond the initial testing phase [158]. Nonetheless, recent evidence suggests that knocking down expression of the HTT gene within affected cells can reduce the normal progression time of HD – a hypothesis tested using both RNA interference and antisense oligonucleotide therapeutics (short-term) [159–161].

Given the potential permanence of CRISPR mediated gene knockdown, this technology could provide a potent long-term solution to targeting the HTT gene. Indeed, several notable studies have established CRISPR mediated gene regulation as a highly promising therapeutic for treating the effects of HD [52,161–164]. For instance, Ekman, using R6/2 mice that carry exon I of the human HTT gene with ~ 115–150 CAG repeats - demonstrated that an injection of AAV1-SaCas9-HTT directly into the basal ganglia caused disruption to the HTT gene. Immunohistochemistry showed that 85% of cells expressing MSN marker, DARPP-32 in the basal ganglia locale were positive for SaCas9 four weeks post injection; moreover, that the infusion increased the lifespan of R6/2 mice [161]. One of the newer CRISPR systems (Cas13b) developed using Cas13d nuclease from Ruminococcus flavefaciens XPD3002 (RfxCas13d) to target RNA rather than DNA has also been explored in HD [50]. In a study by Powell et. al., used an AAV vector was used to deliver CRISPR-Cas13d with a crRNA designed to target the HTT gene. A single dose administration direct into the basal ganglia of R6/2 transgenic mice resulted in a significant reduction in the protein and mRNA for the HTT mutation when compared to the control, and a 50% reduction in the number of cells positive for HTT immunoreactive inclusions (Fig. 6), suggesting that CRISPR-Cas13d is effective at helping to slow the progress of Huntington’s disease. Although CRISPR studies have not been able to demonstrate efficacy in replacing lost aberrant cell populations, this technology shows excellent compatibility with the transplantation of neural progenitor cells - observed to form new synaptic connections with endogenous neurons [165]. Hence, CRISPR mediated knockdown in combination with stem cell replacement could potentially lead to a selective and robust treatment strategy for HD.

3.2.3. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is an equally devastating and fatal neurodegenerative disease that targets motor neuron function. ALS, much like AD can occur as a sporadic entity or as a result of an inherited autosomal dominant gene; as observed in approximately 10% of cases [166]. Although approximately thrity genes have been identified as causal in ALS, four mutant genes stand out as the most common (C9orf72, TARDBP, SOD1 and FUS), and account for more than 70% of familial cases diagnosed. Because encoded proteins are involved in numerous cellular processes (DNA repair, transport, and mitochondrial function), these proteins are always abundant; and the question as to why mutations cause escalating damage to motor neurons remains largely unknown. TAR DNA binding protein 43, superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1), and neurofilament aggregation localized within neurons are molecular hallmarks of this disease [166]. However, it remains to be determined if the proteins themselves cause toxic events or if it is the aggregates that cause death to neuronal cells [167].

A mutation in C9orf72 is the most frequently identified cause of inherited ALS (40%) and may also be present in sporadic forms [168,169]. CRISPR in treating ALS has produced noteworthy results when targeting C9orf72, with data illustrating isogenic correction, restoration of gene expression; and abolishment of pathological phenotypes - albeit in vitro [170]. In terms of SOD1, Powell et al., alongside their investigations in HD examined the efficacy of CRISPR-Cas13d in targeting SOD1 in ALS. For this arm of their study, the authors designed crRNA to target a mutation in Cu-Zn superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1), responsible for 20% of inherited ALS and the development of 2% of all cases [171]. Notably, over 100 mutations in the SOD1 gene have been reported [171]. However, for this study the authors performed in vivo experiments in mice with the G93A mutation. Intrathecal delivery of AAV9-RfxCas13d-hSOD1 significantly slowed disease progression and increased survival in the G93A-SOD1 mice as evidenced by an increase in the length of time observed between onset and death in the treatment and control group (50.7 ± 12.4 days and 38.1 ± 9. 6 days, respectively).

Other important CRISPR studies targeted towards ALS include work by Duan et. al., and Gaj. et al., who use the CRISPR-Cas9 system to effectively disrupt mutant SOD1 expression, also in G93A-SOD1 mice [171,172]. Here an AAV vector was used to deliver the CRISPR-Cas9 system, originating from Staphylococcus coccus aureus Cas9 (AAV9-SaCas9-hSOD1). The authors both demonstrate a reduction in protein expression, delay onset of disease and improve motor function in mutant SOD1 mice following Intracerebroventricular (Duan et. al.,) or intrathecal administration (Gaj et. al.,) of AAV9-SaCas9-hSOD1. However, in both of these studies the sgSOD1 does not distinguish between mutant and wild-type human SOD1, needed for normal cell function. Although this means that the treatment is mutation-independent, whether this presents as an issue long-term is yet to be determined. But considering a phase I trial where both mutant and wild-type forms of SOD1 are targeted using an antisense oligonucleotides, and did not result in significant side effects; this may not be a notable problem [NCT01041222] [173]. An additional finding for the Gaj study was that once the disease emerged, the treatment did not slow progression. This was attributed to incomplete gene editing in astrocytes associated with disease spread in SOD1-linked forms of ALS.

The lack of uptake by astrocytes could potentially be the fault of the AAV vector which has been suggested to hold a relatively small cargo, but also highlights a need to either fine tune the delivery process or find an alternative delivery vector in order to exact the full potential of this promising therapeutic. In the Lim et. al., paper Gaj has done just that with their improved cytidine base editor CRISPR model. In this current study, the authors claim that the translation of Cas9 therapeutics is limited because of a need to produce DNA cleavage, and that cleavage has the potential to cause toxic deletions and chromosomal rearrangements - an argument previously described by Kosicki et. al., [174]. To overcome this, they present the concept of cytidine base editors as a potential substitution. Suggesting that whereas CRISPR-Cas9 is reliant on homology-directed repair to enact single-base substitutions, cytidine and adenine base editors use the process of base excision and DNA mismatch repair to target C &gt; T or A &gt; G base alterations rather than cleavage sites [175]. Routinely, cytidine base editors are composed of a Cas9 nickase fused together with a rat APOBEC1 cytidine deaminase domain [176,177]. APOBEC1 facilitates the deamination of a cytosine target and converts it into a thymine, or TadA adenine deaminase able to transform an adenosine target into a guanosine [177]. Importantly, this method ensures that both dividing and non-dividing cells can be modified - and genes silenced, which means that this technology can be used to edit cells in the brain that do not readily divide, such as neurons. Using this rationale, Lim and colleagues used dual AAV vectors particles (pAAV-CAG-N-Int-CBE-U6-sgRNA and pAAV-CAG-C-Int-CBE-U6-sgRNA) (Fig. 7) encoding a split-intein CBE engineered to trans-splice and induce a nonsense mutation into the hSOD1 gene in eight-week-old, male G93A-SOD1 mice. Delivered intrathecally, the therapeutic improved overall survival, and was particularly effective at slowing late-stage disease progression in ALS transgenic mice Also noticeable was the reduction in SOD1 immunoreactive inclusions within areas of the spinal cord and 40% decrease in muscle atrophy; suggesting that CRISPR base editors hold great potential for treating neurological disorders such as ALS.

3.2.4. Parkinson’s disease

Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a movement disorder affecting approximately 3% of adults over the age of sixty-five years [178]. Although often idiopathic in origin, PD is also familial in 5–10% of cases - where mutations in the SNCA gene encoding the protein α-synuclein are complicit. Despite being non-fatal, a diagnosis of PD can seriously impact quality of life due to physical symptoms including tremors, involuntary movements, muscle rigidity and problems with balance and co-ordination; and cognitive difficulties such as, amnesia and dementia. The effects observed in PD patients are the direct result of neuronal cell death in the substantia nigra area of the brain which leads to a significant decrease in the concentration of striatal dopamine. Phenotypically, the formation of intracellular aggregates composed of α-synuclein are the molecular hallmark of this disease; however, many different molecular processes are involved in PD development besides α-synuclein proteostasis. These include oxidative stress, mitochondrial function, calcium homeostasis, axonal transport and neuroinflammation [178].

Current treatment approaches are focused on synthetic administration of striatal dopamine, as well deep brain stimulation – the insertion of electrodes into one of the five pairs of nuclei housed in the basal ganglia; and other therapies targeted towards relieving motor and non-motor related symptoms [178,179]. Unfortunately, PD treatments are often administered quite far into disease progression because early disease markers are yet to be fully substantiated. As our knowledge and understanding of PD grows, gene-based therapeutics that target the mutations driving PD are playing an important role in the helping to control the outcome of this harrowing disease.

Of the identified mutations in the SNCA gene causal to PD, A53T is the most well described for familial cases [180]. Editing A53T using CRISPR technology could potentially prevent PD onset, or in the least slow down progression and therefore, this is currently an important area of investigation. Yoon. et al., have recently published their findings when targeting the A53T mutation. For this study the authors used an AAV SaCas9-KKH vector with sgRNA, targeting A53T-SNCA. To study the effects in vivo, male Wistar rats were administered AAV-A53T-SNCA virus into the substantia nigra pars compacta, previously demonstrated to recapitulate the onset of PD motor skill abnormalities. An AAV SaCas9-KKH vector with sgRNA, targeting A53T-SNCA was subsequently used to determine whether motor dysfunction was less after treatment. Whereas impaired usage of forelimbs in the cylinder test was observed for the control group – consistent with PD, rats administered with AAV SaCas9-KKH vectors with sgRNA, targeting A53T-SNCA were less impaired, suggesting better all-round motor function. Analysis of brain tissue by immunohistochemistry demonstrated a significant reduction in α-synuclein levels relative to the control, indicating that the difference in motor function was directly correlated to the ability of the CRISPR platform to remove the A53T-SNCA gene [180].

Many neurodegenerative diseases including PD are associated with a loss of neurons, therefore one notable area of interest lies in replacing the faulty or dying neurons with cells genetically manipulated to become fully functional neurons or downregulating genes to convert astrocytes to functional neurons - CRISPR technology is at the forefront of these exciting new strategy. For the former, Zhou et. al., recently applied CRISPR technology to reprogramme fibroblasts by down regulating the gene for RNA binding protein, polypyrimidine tract-binding protein 1 (Ptbp1) [51]. For the study the authors chose CRISPR-Cas13d directed towards RNA - knocking down Ptbp1 in Muller glia (MG). The rationale - previous studies have demonstrated trans-differentiation of MG into retinal ganglion cells as a potential treatment for glaucoma [181]. Zhou and colleagues were able to effectively knockdown the Ptbp1 gene in the striatum promoting localized transition of MGs to dopamine expressing neurons. Moreover, the newly transitioned dopamine expressing neurons were capable of reducing defective motor function.

For the in vivo test model of PD, 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) was infused into the right medial forebrain bundle, resulting in a loss of dopamine neurons in the ipsilateral ventral midbrain and degeneration of dopaminergic projection in the ipsilateral striatum (Fig. 8). Following a three-week waiting period, AAV-GFAPCasRx-Ptbp1 (or AAV-GFAP-CasRx as a control) together with AAV-GFAP-mCherry were injected into the ipsilateral striatum of the mice. In contrast to the control group, mice injected with AAV-GFAP-CasRx-Ptbp1 and AAV-GFAP-mCherry showed a high percentage of cells expressing both tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) and mCherry after a month, which further increase after three months. Examination of dopamine transporter Slc6a3 (DAT), present in midbrain dopamine neurons was identified at high concentrations in the striatum on mice treated with mCherry + DAT + cells in the AAV-GFAP-CasRx-Ptbp1. Additional co-immunostaining of TH and DAT demonstrated that most induced neurons expressed the mature dopaminergic marker. Notably, the data presented by Zhou and colleagues potentially demonstrate a dopamine release that was effective enough to alleviate motor disfunction associated with PD.

3.2.5. Pediatric neurological disorders

Neurological disorders that occur during childhood, although rare are often severe and chronic – everyday life, and ongoing quality of life is categorically affected for both the child and parent. Rett syndrome is predominantly a female associated neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by a decreased brain size and severe cognitive, and physical disabilities [182,183]. Rett is caused by mutations in gene, MECP2 encoding for X-linked methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MeCP2); a chromatin-associated protein containing a methyl-CpG binding domain - capable of activating or repressing transcription [183]. How mutations in MECP2 leads to onset of symptoms after a period of healthy development, is yet to be fully determined. However, finding ways to target aberrant MeCP2 protein function using biologic-based therapeutics is an active area of research [184]. CRISPR-Cas9 technology is playing a vital role in unravelling this highly complex disease. Because MeCP2 has an essential role in learning, knockout has a detrimental effect, and thus MeCP2 cannot be targeted therapeutically; however, fully characterizing MeCP2 activity could potentially lead to a targetable downstream mediator. Swiech et. al., in their comprehensive, analytical study used the CRISPR-Cas9 platform to study MECP2 gene functions in routine brain processes and characterized the effects of genome modifications in postmitotic neurons (Fig. 9) [185].

For this study, an AAV dual-vector system was developed to carry SpCas9 and sgRNAs targeting exon 3 of the mouse MECP2 gene. For in vivo analysis, the vectors were injected into the hippocampal dentate gyrus of adult male mice. An 80% transduction efficiency was recorded in hippocampal granule cells four weeks post administration. The authors developed a new protocol to purify intact nuclei of transduced cells from dissected brain tissue. Then used next generation sequencing to quantify indel formation in the targeted MeCP2 locus at the single-cell level. Sixty-eight percent of the target cells showed indel mutations two weeks post injection. Moreover, the number of MeCP2-positive nuclei in the dentate gyrus was reduced by 70% in the mice. The cognitive consequence of modulating MECP2 gene activity was a loss of contextual memory, as determined by the contextual fear-conditioning paradigm [186]. Swiech and colleagues also utilized the CRISPR platform to understand transcription and its ability to effect learning; under the premise that previous studies have identified transcriptional dysregulation following gene silencing [187]. From FACS-purified mRNA, the data showed that thirty-four candidate genes were differentially expressed between the sg MECP2 group and control. The importance of this work is underpinned by the fact that characterization of any of the thirty-four identified genes could identify a targetable driver and reveal the key to what steers the progression of Rett syndrome.

CRISPR platforms have also proven to be a valuable asset in better understanding the molecular basis of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). ASD is regarded as an extremely heterogenous disease and despite recent advances, mechanistic drivers of ASD are not well understood. The complexity of ASD is exemplified in the fact that there are eight-hundred risk associated alleles for this neurological disorder [188–192]. One of the most conclusive gene effectors for ASD is chromodomain helicase DNA-binding protein 8 (CHD8). CHD8 encodes for chromodomain-helicase-DNA-binding protein 8 (CHD8) – where haploinsufficiency is directly linked to a disruption in neurodevelopmental trajectories [193]. CRISPR mediated rodent models of ASD offer one of the most comprehensive study models for increasing insight into ASD development. Through manipulation of the rodent genome, CRISPR can be utilized to create mutations that epitomize the human disorder [194–196]. Platt et. al., applied this rationale in their study, developing a mice model with CHD8 heterozygous loss-of-function (LOF) mutations using CRISPR- SpCas9 with sgCHD8 delivered into either the nucleus accumbens or the dorsal striatum of Cas9 knock-in mice; a method previously published by the group [197]. Phenotypically, the mice presented with macrocephaly, craniofacial abnormalities, and behavioural deficits [194]. Additionally, genome wide analysis performed by the authors alongside CHD8 binding sites and brain-wide gene expression profiles, shows brain region-specific enrichments for other ASD-associated genes as well as histone and chromatin modification, mRNA processing, protein folding, and cell cycle [194]. The findings of this study provide further evidence of the function of CHD8 in ASD; furthermore, present a robust animal model for further research that accurately recapitulates the human disorder – a model that can subsequently be used as a test platform for advancing ASD therapies towards the clinic.

An additional form of autism, referred to as fragile X syndrome (FXS) may also benefit from CRISPR mediated gene therapy. FXS occurs through a repeat expansion mutation in the fragile X mental retardation 1 (FMR1) gene. The FMR1 gene encodes for an mRNA-binding protein with the same name – FMRP. Current treatment protocols include a cocktail of psychostimulants, antidepressants and antipsychotics that generate many unwanted side effects; and ultimately, treat the symptoms rather than the underlying cause [198,199]. Several gene targets have been identified for FXS, of which, GRM5 - linked with other forms of ASD is considered particularly appealing. The encoded metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 (mGluR5) protein is a receptor for glutamate, an excitatory neurotransmitter in the brain implicated in various neuropsychiatric conditions [200]. Whilst mGluR5 is considered a valid target for inhibition, clinical development of small molecule inhibitors have proven unremarkable in trials [201,202].

The ability to execute local delivery of a CRISPR-Cas knockout system could overcome the shortfall of small molecule inhibitors by directly targeting localized cell pockets within the brain - as explored by Lee et. al., This group opted for a vector composed of gold nanoparticles conjugated to DNA and complexed with cationic endosomal disruptive polymers. Unlike many AAV vector systems, the non-viral gold-polymer delivery vectors were capable of carrying Cas9, sgRNA and donor DNA together in one vector - determined by the group in a previous study of Duchenne muscular dystrophy [59]. In this recent study the authors compared the use of Cas9 and Cas12a CRISPR systems to elicit GRM5 knockout. For this arm of the study, one- to two-month-old wild-type or Fmr1 knockout mice (model of FXS) received an injection of CRISPR-Cas9-sgGRM5 or CRISPR-Cas12a-sgGRM5 to the striatum of both hemispheres. The injection was given separately into three spots in each hemisphere with a 0.4 mm interval as the authors wanted to examine focal versus global knockout effects on ameliorating specific behavioural phenotypes. Indels were tracked using decomposition (TIDE) analysis, showing a frequency of 14.6% in mGluR5 gene mutations. Additionally, gene and protein expression was reduced (40–50%) and no off-target effects were observed. To determine whether the CRISPR platforms delivered to the striatum were able to reduce known repetitive behaviours associated with mice with an autistic phenotype, the marble-burying assay was performed; and the rate of repetitive jumping observed in the Fmr1 knockout mice. Whilst the control group receiving saline compulsively buried the marbles, the CRISPR treatment altered the excessive digging phenotype of the Fmr1 knockout mice back to the normal range observed in the wild-type mice. The effect was also notable for jumping, with the CRISPR groups displaying a much more wild-type phenotype. Taken together, these results demonstrate the ability of CRISPR to rescue specific behavioural traits in the local brain region associated with ASD.

Vanishing white matter (VWM) is associated with chronic progressive ataxia, spasticity, and variable optic atrophy, as well as seizures [203]. At diagnosis, an abnormal pattern of cerebral white matter is observed via MRI; however, as the disease progresses, this disappears, leaving pockets of cerebrospinal fluid or tissue water [204]. VWM has no cure and most patients succumb within just a few years [205]. VWM occurs through a mutation in genes encoding the eIF2B subunits (EIF2B1–EIF2B5) [206]. eIF2B is a well characterized guanine exchange factor involved in protein translation [207]. Whilst both oligodendrocytes and astrocytes are the cells most affected, studies have identified astrocytes as the main pathogenic drivers of VWM through aberrant activity of the integrated stress response (ISR) [207,208]. Early intervention with CRISPR gene editing therapies could, in the long run be a promising strategy for treating this devastating disease. However, some work remains to be done in understanding the pathological drivers before CRISPR technology can be effective. This fact is exemplified in a noteworthy, recent CRISPR-Cas9 study by Dietrich et. al., The authors describe the use of dual AAV vectors to carry the full CRISPR system (pMH2_eGFP_sgRNA-EIF2B5 and pMH4_SaCas9). For the study, sgRNA was designed for EIF2B5, a gene that encodes for the epsilon subunit of eIF2B – the regulatory subunit for protein production [209]. For in vivo investigations, mice pups harbouring a Eif2b5R191H mutation (Eif2b5R191H VWM mice) were administered an intracerebroventricular injection of the full CRISPR system. Regrettably, five days post injection the treatment group rapidly declined and then died abruptly without notable symptoms or gross observations of organ toxicity. Notably, both the CRISPRhom and CRISPRhet groups were equally affected. Because only one death was observed in the control group receiving SaCas9, the deaths in the treatment groups were attributed to the functional CRISPR system as a whole. Surprisingly, rather than reducing the symptoms associated with VWM, the treatment actually amplified the VWM phenotype, a result attributed to CRSPR-Cas9 induced indel mutations in Eif2b5. These data demonstrate in this instance that CRISPRCas9 targeting of Eif2b5R191H is hazardous, potentially because targeting of the gene pathologically disrupts other necessary functions - proving incompatible with life. This study is extremely important as it showcases current shortcoming in potential CRISPRCas9 systems that can be used to move CRISPR research forward and make it better. It also allows researchers to be given forewarning of methods that don’t work and encourage exploration into more targeted systems that do.

In summary, pediatric neurodegenerative disorders, although rarer than adult maladies present with devastating symptoms and are often lethal. Areas of pediatric, developmental research are notoriously challenging because of low patient numbers, limited funding, and the number of currently accepted therapeutics. Furthermore, often, known drivers of pathology have other essential roles - which means that targeting these known drivers can be hugely detrimental. Therefore, patients could benefit significantly from the new, superior level of gene based diagnostic and therapeutic technologies that CRISPR promises. As CRISPR-based gene editing technology continues to revise and upgrade, a CRISPR model that prevents indel formation and better controls HDR effectiveness could be developed, and then this technology may indeed hold the key in how to better approach some, if not all of these devastating pediatric disorders.

4. Conclusion and future perspectives

The scope and depth of knowledge within the CRISPR field continues to grow daily, as does the raft of new CRISPR platforms and potential gene targets. In theory, CRISPR technology could be used to treat any brain related malady linked to a gene abnormality, including psychological ailments affecting mental health - where an aberrant gene has been identified as causal - such as schizophrenia, depression, and anxiety. This is an attractive prospect given that World Health Organization statistics have shown that 20% of children and adolescents suffer from a mental health condition; alongside a 13% overall recorded increase in incidence of mental health over time. Research in this area is relatively new but is rapidly developing and has already produced some noteworthy results in high profile studies [107,210–212]. Other prominent areas where CRISPR could prove invaluable include helping reduce immune orchestrated damage following ischemic stroke - which makes up 87% of all stroke cases [213]. As the second most prevalent cause of death and disability in low and middle-income countries, CRISPR research is well positioned to play a very important future function in helping improve patient quality of life [112,214]. Lastly, CRISPR is playing an invaluable role in helping to better understand one of the most scientifically elusive and deadly brain diseases, prion disease [112,214].

The overall enthusiasm and faith in this technology is very much evidenced by the surge of CRISPR related studies reaching clinical trial status. As of September 2022, there are sixty-seven readily identifiable trials underway, with twenty-seven of those studies targeted towards cancer treatment. However, at present none of the trials are proposed as treatments for brain cancer, and none are aimed at treating any other neurological pathology. The most obvious assumption for why the brain pathologies field in general appears to be less well-established than other areas, is the presence of the BBB, making it challenging to reach target cells. However, CRISPR’s lack of presence in trials for brain pathologies may run much deeper; and in fact, by inscribed within the target cells themselves. For neurodegenerative disorders for instance, most often it is postmitotic neurons that are the target cells and in general, neurons play multiple integral roles, meaning these cells exhibit a carefully controlled process of regulation [129]. Interestingly, it has been demonstrated that rather than effectively coping with changes to regulation, neurons instead would potentially opt to initiate apoptosis. Prime examples of some of the fundamental and detrimental attributes are eloquently demonstrated by Sweich and Dietrich in studies for Rett syndrome and VWM, respectively that showed gene knockout to be potentially damaging to a child’s ability to learn and for VWM, overall survival – as demonstrated in mice. Ultimately, these studies and others tell us that significant gaps still exist in our understanding of the inner workings of neuronal type cell populations. In this respect, CRISPR has the potential to play a different, but essential role in helping close the knowledge gap though the development of model cell lines and animal models. The value of CRISPR in this area is already being exemplified in AD, PD, and pediatric brain cancer [124,129].

Additional challenges more relating to safety include the potential for generating unsanctioned mutations through the process of CRISPR gene editing [215–217]. In particular, poor gRNA choice and gRNA’s known proclivity towards mismatch binding [218]. In this instance, mutations or large DNA rearrangements could promote the likelihood of damage to the brain and formation of secondary cancers [219]. The latter is particularly related to potential of generating genetic interruptions in genes that perform a cancer suppressor function. Notably, this detrimental effect has already been demonstrated for arguably one of the most important tumour suppressors, P53 [215–217]. To irradicate this problem the obvious answer is to make the choice and arrangement of gRNA better. The introduction of algorithms based on the mouse and human genomes are a good way of helping to predict an optimum gRNA sequence. However, it is important to note that the algorithms may promote selective towards coding regions when non-coding regions could potentially be of importance [220]. Additionally, methods to alter the gRNA as a way of improving selectivity have also been explored. In this respect, altering the length of the gRNA, modifying the chemical make-up, and examining how the GC content and its positioning may help to bring about better specificity – each method is currently under considerable investigation [221–224]. Lastly, because regions within the gRNA are able to withstand modification – this may prove to be a promising area of research. For instance, Mullally et. al., suggest that modification to the Upper Stem, first Hairpin and 3’end of a gRNA sequence can help increase the likelihood of producing a superior gRNA sequence that is less prone to off-target effects [225].

Researchers are also trying to eliminate the problem of off target editing by the progressive development of CRISPR-Cas9 variants. One notable example is that of SpCas9-HF1, a variant designed and characterized by Kleinstiver et. al., which under in vitro testing conditions has proven far superior in terms of specificity than the wild-type SpCas9 model; even for atypical, repetitive target sites [226,227]. Along with this, the techniques used to track unwarranted editing sites must be sharpened to ensure all possible off target modifications are picked up during analysis. This requirement is perhaps exemplified by Schaefer. et. al., who demonstrated that some algorithms may potentially miss mutations; whilst whole-genome sequencing, used to determine small insertions or indels, should also routinely be used to determine single-nucleotide variants (SNV) [228]. This is somewhat important given the authors observations that CRISPR-Cas9 promotes gross formation of SNV; a commentary which is contrary to the current paradigm that suggests CRISPR causes predominantly indel accumulation. Additionally, there currently seems to be sparse data available on the potential for genomic damage following an extended exposure time to CRISPR–Cas9 and sgRNA; an important factor respectfully detailed and explored by Deng et. al., but which is yet to be included in most papers documenting CRISPR led brain investigations.

The other significant challenge for CRISPR led brain therapeutics to overcome is finding what delivery platform provides the safest and most effective method of crossing the BBB and reaching target cells. The literature suggests that viral vectors, in particular AAV serotypes are currently the most widely explored delivery vector for CRISPR-Cas9 models targeting brain pathologies. This is potentially because AAV vectors have already proven themselves in clinical trials for a number of pathologies, most notably those associated with eye abnormalities; and importantly, AAV serotypes are the only viral vectors that have been shown to effectively cross the BBB. Moreover, transduce actively mitotic and post-mitotic cells in proof-of-concept studies in mice [229–232]. But, whether this translates well to brain related pathologies and importantly human maladies is yet to be fully elucidated for CRISPR systems [233].

One of the predominant stumbling blocks for viral delivery of Cas9 models is the comparatively large size of the CRISPR-Cas9 cargo and small loading capacity of AAV vectors [234]. These compounding factors mean two vectors are required for effective delivery, as demonstrated in the Lim, Sweich and Dietrich studies [176]. This need for two vectors has been highlighted a number of times as a potential obstacle, ultimately resulting in a decrease in editing ability, and a suboptimal therapeutic effect. To help overcome this potential bottle neck to CRISPR-Cas9 translation, newer CRISPR-Cas9 systems are being invented that enable the whole CRISPR-Cas9 cargo to fit into a single vector, a potential solution effectively demonstrated in the Ekman study [161].

Although currently studies are less abundant, non-viral delivery platforms for CRISPR are also starting to be more widely explored within the brain pathologies field. The most obvious benefit to non-viral vectors is the cost-effective production, ability to control shape, size; and cargo loading capacity [53,61]. Moreover, reduce the likelihood of an immune effect, an issue that remains a potential concern for viral vectors [235]. However, to date AAV vectors have proven to be better at crossing the BBB and thus more work remains to be done to fine tune the BBB crossing capacity for non-viral vectors. Additionally, although considered to be a potentially safer delivery medium than viral vectors, studies have also catalogued exaggerated immune system activation following exposure to various different compositions of non-viral vectors. Moreover, concerns remain over the potential brain accumulation of inorganic vector materials following repeat exposure to the nanoparticles as highlighted in the CRSPR-Gold studies [67]. These potentially toxic events must be addressed prior to any potential candidates reaching the clinic.

Whilst CRISPR technology for brain pathologies lags marginally behind for now in terms of trial status at least, once perfected for use within the brain, this technology most definitely promises to be the most beneficial of all therapeutic classes, with the potential to transform the lives of many patients with hugely debilitating symptoms and currently incurable brain pathologies.

Funding

This work was supported, in part, by the University of Wisconsin - Madison and the National Institutes of Health (P30 CA014520). T. P. D. is grateful for the National Health and Medical Research Council (APP1197373), R. Q is grateful for the National Health and Medical Research Council (APP1196850), UQ Amplify Women’s Academic Research Equity (UQAWARE), and Advance Queensland Women’s Research Assistance Program (AQWRAP). The authors acknowledge the use of the facilities at the Queensland node of the Australian National Fabrication Facility. A company established under the National Collaborative Research Infrastructure Strategy to provide nano and microfabrication facilities for Australia’s researchers.

Data availability

No data was used for the research described in the article.

Fig. 1. Schematic depicting transverse plane through the blood–brain barrier. Modified from [4] Copyright 2020, Nature Portfolio.

Fig. 2. Schematic demonstrating the three ways that CRISPR)-Cas9 can be introduced into cells. Cas9 plasmid DNA, RNA, or protein delivery via viral or non-viral nanoparticle vectors for precision genome editing. Reproduced with permission from [56] Copyright 2020, Frontiers Media SA.

Fig. 3. Schematic representation of the synthesis of magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs). MNPs generated by co-precipitation then complexed with CRISPR/Cas9 plasmids to form a complex, which is transferred into HEK 293-TLE-3 cell line by magnetofection. The nanoparticles are internalized by the cells via endocytosis due to the cationic PEI, which after endocytosis triggers endosomal disruption and causes into the cytoplasm. Reproduced with permission from [53] Copyright 2020, Nature Portfolio.

Fig. 4. Blood-brain barrier–penetrating single CRISPR-Cas9 nanocapsules for effective and safe glioblastoma gene therapy. (A) Schematic of timeline for U87MG orthotopic tumor study. (B) Quantified luminescence levels of mice following the indicated treatments. Data are means ± SD (***P &lt; 0.001). (C) Body weight changes in mice. Data are means ± SD (*P &lt; 0.05). (D) Luminescence images following treatment with PBS (left), ANCSS(Cas9/sgPLK1) (middle), or ANCSS(Cas9/sgScr) (right). (E) Mice survival rates (n = 7). (F) Indel frequency of PLK1 gene in tumor tissues excized from mice on day 20. (G) H&amp;E staining of whole brain (H) Western blot of PLK1 protein expression in tumor tissues (I) Quantitation of Western blotting of PLK1 protein expression relative to β-actin. Data are means ± SD (n = 3; **P &lt; 0.01). (J) Sequencing results of PLK1 gene editing in U87MG-bearing mice treated with ANCSS(Cas9/sgPLK1) (1.5 mg of Cas9 equiv./kg). Reproduced with permission from [83] Copyright 2022, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

Fig. 5. Design and validation of CRISPR–Cas9-mediated genome editing to disrupt the mutant APPswe allele. The APPswe double-base mutation (K670N/M671L) is close to the β-secretase site. Two sgRNAs—SW1 and SW2—were designed to target the APPswe mutation using SaCas9. The arrowhead indicates the SaCas9 cleavage site. b, Schematic of the EGxxFP system used to analyse the editing efficiency of the CRISPR–Cas9 system in vitro. The APPWT and APPswe sequences were separately inserted between EGFP fragments with overlapping arms. SaCas9 (blue) editing resulted in homology-directed-repair-mediated DNA repair and reconstitution of the EGFP expression cassette, which yielded GFP signals. c, In vitro validation of allele-specific editing using the EGxxFP system. Cas9-SW1 and Cas9-SW2 were co-transfected with EGxxFP reporter plasmids containing APPWT or APPswe (EGxxFP-APPWT or EGxxFP-APPswe), respectively, into HEK 293 T cells. Scale bar, 100 μm. d, A single AAV vector, EFS∷Cas9-SW1, was constructed to express haemagglutinin (HA)-tagged SaCas9 and sgRNA SW1 for intrahippocampal injection. ITR, inverted terminal repeat; pA, poly(A) tail; U6, human U6 promoter. e, T7 endonuclease I assay for AAV-mediated Cas9-SW1 editing in virus-transduced hippocampi from 5XFAD mice. Arrowheads indicate the CRISPR–Cas9-edited DNA fragments. Con., un-transduced hippocampal region of 5XFAD mice. f, Percentage of insertion/deletion (indel) mutations. CRISPR–Cas9 editing led to the formation of such mutations, the percentage of which indicates the editing efficiency. Values are mean ± s.e.m. n = 3 mice per group; ***P &lt; 0.001; unpaired two-tailed t-test. Reproduced with permission from [120] Copyright 2022, Nature Portfolio.

Fig. 6. RfxCas13d can reduce HTT protein and mRNA, and reduce HTT immunoreactive inclusions in the brain of a mouse model of HD. (A) hHTT protein (n = 4) and (B) hHTT mRNA (n = 3) from striatal tissue 4 weeks after R6/2 mice were injected with 6 × 1010 vg of AAV1-RfxCas13d-hHTT or AAV1-RfxCas13d-NTG. hHTT protein in each sample was normalized to β-actin protein. (C) Representative immunofluorescence staining of striatal tissue 4 weeks after R6/2 mice were injected with either 6 × 1010 vg of AAV1-RfxCas13d-hHTT or AAV1-RfxCas13d-NTG. Scale bars, 30 μm. (D) Quantification of the percentage of RfxCas13d + cells with measurable HTT immunoreactive inclusions, as determined by immunofluorescence staining of the striatum 4 weeks after R6/2 mice were injected with 6 × 1010 vg of AAV1-RfxCas13d-hHTT or AAV1-RfxCas13d-NTG. A total of greater than 100 cells were counted per animal (n = 7). Values represent means, and error bars indicate SEM. *P &lt; 0.05; **P &lt; 0.01; ****P &lt; 0.0001. (A, B, and D) One-tailed unpaired t test. Reproduced with permission from [52] Copyright 2022, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

Fig. 7. In Vivo Base Editing Improves Therapeutic Outcomes in the G93A-SOD1 Mouse Model of ALS. (A) Schematic of AAV vectors encoding the split-intein CBE. (B) Representative immunofluorescence staining of the lumbar spinal cord 4 weeks after G93A-SOD1 mice were injected (C) Percent before disease onset, (D) percent survival, (E) disease duration, (F) rotarod, and (G) weight of G93A-SOD1 mice injected with 8 × 1010 particles of dual AAV encoding the hSOD1- or mRosa26-targeting N- and C-terminal split-intein CBE. (C–E and G) hSOD1 (n = 15) and mRosa26 (n = 15); (F) hSOD1 (n = 10) and mRosa26 (n = 10). (F and G) Mean rotarod and weights for each mouse were normalized to day 63 values for the same mice. (G) Linear regression analysis was used to calculate the rate of weight loss. Values indicate means and error bars indicate (E) SD or (F and G) SEM. *p &lt; 0.05, **p &lt; 0.01, ***p &lt; 0.001; (C and D) log-rank Mantel-Cox test; (E) one-tailed unpaired t test; (F) two-way ANOVA followed by a Bonferroni post hoc test. Reproduced with permission from [176] Copyright 2022, Cell Press.

Fig. 8. Induction of Neurons with Dopaminergic Features in PD Model Mice. (A) Outline of the experiment. (B) Staining shows depletion of TH + neurons (green) in the ipsilateral substantia nigra (relative to the side of 6-OHDA infusion). Scale bar, 100 μm. (C) DAT staining shows depletion of dopamine neuron fibers (green) in the ipsilateral striatum. Scale bar, 500 μm. (D, E) Representative confocal images showing mCherry + TH + and mCherry + DAT + cells at different time points after AAV injection, and Quantification of mCherry + TH + and mCherry + DAT + cells. n &gt; = 3 mice per group. Scale bar, 50 μm. (F) The absolute number of TH + cells in PD model mice. (G) Confocal images of mCherry + TH + cells and percentage of mCherry + TH + cells in TH + cells, n = 5 mice per group. Scale bar, 50 μm. (H) The percentage of mCherry + TH + cells in mCherry + cells. (J, K) Confocal images of mCherry + DDC + cells and percentage of mCherry + DDC + cells in mCherry + cells, n = 5 mice per group. DDC is a dopamine neuron marker. Scale bar, 50 μm. (L, M) Representative images showing colocalization of FOXA2 and mCherry (yellow arrowheads), and percentage of mCherry + FOXA2 + cells in mCherry + cells. n = 5 mice per group. FOXA2 is a dopamine neuron-marker. Scale bar, 30 μm. (N) Representative images showing mCherry + TH + cells did not colocalize with representative striatal interneuron markers PV, SST and CR. Yellow arrowheads indicate mCherry + TH + cells, and blue arrowheads indicate PV+, SST + or CR + cells. Scale bar, 20 μm. (O) Comparison of the number of net rotations before and one month after AAV injection. Number above the dots indicates the number of mice per group. (P) Net rotations (rotations/min) induced by apomorphine injection. Behavior was assessed at 1 month and 3 months for each mouse, n = 3 mice per group. (Q) Net rotations (rotations/min) induced by Amphetamine injection, n = 3 mice per group. Reproduced with permission from [51] Copyright 2020, Cell Press.

Fig. 9. Targeting of Mecp2 locus in the adult mouse brain with SpCas9. (a) AAV-SpCas9 and AAV-SpGuide expression vectors. The sgRNA vector contains encoding sequence of the GFP-KASH fusion protein for identification of transduced neurons. (b) Strategy for cell nuclei purification of CRISPR-Cas9 targeted cells from the mouse brain. Scale bars: 3 mm (brain), 50 μm (sorted nuclei). (c) Graphical representation of the mouse Mecp2 locus showing SpCas9 target location; targeted genomic locus indicated in blue. PAM sequence marked in magenta. Representative mutation patterns detected by sequencing of Mecp2 locus shown below: top, wild-type sequence; red dashes, deleted bases; red bases: insertion or mutations (indel); red arrowhead indicates CRISPR-Cas9 cutting site. (d) Indel frequency in SpCas9 targeted Mecp2 locus. Distribution of indel length in single sorted nuclei is shown on the bar graph below. (e) Immunostaining of dorsal DG region 2 weeks after CRISPR-Cas9 targeting of Mecp2 locus in male mice. Scale bar, 150 μm. (f) Quantification of MeCP2 positive cells population within all detected cells (DAPI staining) in DG compare to control. (g) Western blot analysis of MeCP2 protein expression 2 weeks after AAV injection and quantification of MeCP2 protein levels in dorsal DG. (h) Contextual learning deficits after targeting Mecp2 using SpCas9 in the dorsal DG region of hippocampus, tested in training and altered context 3 weeks after AAV delivery. ITR, inverted terminal repeat; HA, hemagglutinin tag; NLS, nuclear localization signal; spA, synthetic polyadenylation signal; U6, Pol III promoter; sgRNA, single guide RNA; hSyn, human synapsin 1 promoter; GFP, green fluorescent protein; KASH, Klarsicht, ANC1, Syne Homology nuclear transmembrane domain; bGH pA, bovine growth hormone polyadenylation signal; WPRE, Woodchuck Hepatitis virus posttranscriptional regulatory element. Reproduced with permission from [185] Copyright 2015, Nature Portfolio.

Table 1 Inherited gene mutations observed in neurological and neurodegenerative pathologies.

Disease	Target gene	Protein encoded	Cellular function	Reference	
Alzheimer’s disease	PSEN1&amp;2	Proteolytic subunit of γ secretase	Catalyzes the membrane proteins cleavage	[89]	
	APP	Amyloid precursor protein	Key transmembrane protein, function undetermined	[90]	
	APOE	Apolipoprotein E	Glycoprotein that metabolizes fat in the liver	[89]	
	MT1&amp;MT2	Pineal cortical melatonin receptor	Involved in light dark cycle, seasonal circadian rhythm and neuroprotection	[91]	
	BDNF	Brain-derived neurotrophic factor	Supports and promotes neuronal growth and synaptic plasticity	[92]	
	BACE1	β secretase 1	β amyloid generation and housekeeping, it catalyzes the initial cleavage of APP and generate Aβ	[93,94]	
Huntington’s disease	HTT	Huntingtin	Mediates axonal trafficking of organelles and vesicles	[95]	
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis	C9orf72	C9orf72	Modulator of GTPases involved in autophagy, membrane trafficking and the maintenance of axon and synapse	[96,97]	
	TARDBP	TAR DNA-binding protein 43	Gene expression regulator, involved in RNA splicing, trafficking and stabilization	[98]	
	Cu/Zn SOD1	Superoxide dismutase	Act as antioxidant defense against oxidative stress by converting superoxide anion to hydrogen peroxide	[99]	
	FUS	RNA binding protein Fused in Sarcoma	Regulates cell metabolism, such as transcription, mRNA splicing and its transport	[100]	
Parkinson’s disease	SNCA	α - Synuclein	Facilitates neurotransmitter release through various lipid signaling pathways	[101]	
	PTBP1	Polypyrimidine tract-binding protein 1	Involved in neuronal induction and alternative splicing events, also regulates RNA stability, translation, transport and metabolism	[102]	
Rett syndrome	MECP2	Methyl-CpG-binding protein 2	Involved in epigenetic regulation and transcriptional repression	[103]	
Autism spectrum disorder	CHD8	Chromodomain helicase DNA-binding protein 8	Mediates chromatin dynamics and cell survival, also regulates transcription with chromatin remodeling and histone recruiting	[104]	
Fragile X syndrome	FMR1	Fragile X mental retardation protein	Mediates translational repression, involved in cytoskeleton, synaptic structure and function	[105]	
Vanishing white matter	eIF2B	Eukaryotic initiation factor 2B	Guanine nucleotide exchange factor for initiation factor eIF2, involved in mRNA translation and tertiary complex formation	[106]	
Depression	5-HT6R	Brain serotonin 5HT receptor	Stimulates adenylyl cyclase activity which helps to release cAMP, involved in the regulation of releases of neurotransmitters like acetylcholine, glutamate and norepinephrine	[107]	
	NEGR1	Neuronal growth regulator 1	Regulates neurogenesis and neuron projection development like neurite growth and synapse formation	[108]	
	RRAGA	Ras-related GTP-binding protein A	Regulates mTORC1 kinase in lysosome and other organelles, involved in hedgehog signaling pathway	[109]	
Ischemic stroke	TRPC6	Transient receptor potential cation channel, member 6	Involved in neurite outgrowth and neuronal survival, regulates Ca2+ homeostasis and plays a crucial role in neuroprotection	[110]	
	PCSK9	Proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9	Regulates low-density lipoprotein (LDL) metabolism, promotes cellular degradation of LDLR and reduces cellular uptake of LDL cholesterol from the plasma	[111]	
	Mib2	Mind bomb-2, E3 ubiquitin ligase	Modulates Notch signaling and participates in NF-κB signaling	[112]	
Prion disease	PrP	Endogenous prion protein	Involved in neuronal homeostasis, neuritogenesis, cellular signaling and adhesion	[113]	
Frontotemporal dementia	TMEM106B	Transmembrane protein 106B	Involved in regulation of lysosomal functions like pH, exocytosis and movement, and associates with neuronal proportion and brain aging/disorders	[114]	
Angelman syndrome	Ube3a	Ubiquitin-protein ligase E3A	Involved in neuron morphogenesis, synaptic plasticity and neuronal development for both dendrites and axons	[115]	

Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.


References

[1] Global, regional, and national burden of neurological disorders, 1990–2016: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2016. Lancet Neurol 18 , 459–480, 10.1016/s1474-4422(18)30499-x (2019).30879893
[2] Zihni C , Mills C , Matter K , Balda MS , Tight junctions: from simple barriers to multifunctional molecular gates, Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol 17 (2016) 564–580, 10.1038/nrm.2016.80.27353478
[3] Pardridge WM , Drug transport across the blood-brain barrier, J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab 32 (2012) 1959–1972, 10.1038/jcbfm.2012.126.22929442
[4] Arvanitis CD , Ferraro GB , Jain RK , The blood–brain barrier and blood–tumour barrier in brain tumours and metastases, Nat. Rev. Cancer 20 (2020) 26–41, 10.1038/s41568-019-0205-x.31601988
[5] Tiedt S , The neurovascular unit and systemic biology in stroke — implications for translation and treatment, Nat. Rev. Neurol 18 (2022) 597–612, 10.1038/s41582-022-00703-z.36085420
[6] Cai Z , Role of Blood-Brain Barrier in Alzheimer’s Disease, J. Alzheimers Dis 63 (2018) 1223–1234, 10.3233/JAD-180098.29782323
[7] Oby E , Janigro D , The blood-brain barrier and epilepsy, Epilepsia 47 (2006) 1761–1774, 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2006.00817.x.17116015
[8] Wicha P , Das S , Mahakkanukrauh P , Blood-brain barrier dysfunction in ischemic stroke and diabetes: the underlying link, mechanisms and future possible therapeutic targets, Anat. Cell Biol 54 (2021) 165–177, 10.5115/acb.20.290.33658432
[9] Al-Bachari S , Naish JH , Parker GJ , Emsley HC , Parkes LM , Blood–brain barrier leakage is increased in Parkinson’s disease, Front. Physiol. 11 (2020).
[10] Sweeney MD , Zhao Z , Montagne A , Nelson AR , Zlokovic BV , Blood-brain barrier: from physiology to disease and back, Physiol. Rev 99 (2019) 21–78, 10.1152/physrev.00050.2017.30280653
[11] Dubois LG , Gliomas and the vascular fragility of the blood brain barrier, Front. Cell. Neurosci 8 (2014) 418.25565956
[12] Goel HL , Mercurio AM , VEGF targets the tumour cell, Nat. Rev. Cancer 13 (2013) 871–882, 10.1038/nrc3627.24263190
[13] Paez-Ribes M , Antiangiogenic therapy elicits malignant progression of tumors to increased local invasion and distant metastasis, Cancer Cell 15 (2009) 220–231, 10.1016/j.ccr.2009.01.027.19249680
[14] Casanovas O , Hicklin DJ , Bergers G , Hanahan D , Drug resistance by evasion of antiangiogenic targeting of VEGF signaling in late-stage pancreatic islet tumors, Cancer Cell 8 (2005) 299–309.16226705
[15] Segarra M , Aburto MR , Acker-Palmer A , Blood-brain barrier dynamics to maintain brain homeostasis, Trends Neurosci. 44 (2021) 393–405, 10.1016/j.tins.2020.12.002.33423792
[16] van Tellingen O , Overcoming the blood-brain tumor barrier for effective glioblastoma treatment, Drug Resist. Updat 19 (2015) 1–12, 10.1016/j.drup.2015.02.002.25791797
[17] Pardridge WM , The blood-brain barrier: bottleneck in brain drug development, NeuroRx 2 (2005) 3–14, 10.1602/neurorx.2.1.3.15717053
[18] Portnow J , The neuropharmacokinetics of temozolomide in patients with resectable brain tumors: potential implications for the current approach to chemoradiationneuropharmacokinetics of temozolomide, Clin. Cancer Res 15 (2009) 7092–7098.19861433
[19] Teymourian H , Closing the loop for patients with Parkinson disease: where are we?, Nat Rev. Neurol 18 (2022) 497–507, 10.1038/s41582-022-00674-1.35681103
[20] Waller DG &amp; Sampson AP in Medical Pharmacology and Therapeutics (Fifth Edition) (eds Waller Derek G. &amp; Sampson Anthony P. ) 325–336 (Elsevier, 2018).
[21] Berthaut I , Effect of temozolomide on male gametes: an epigenetic risk to the offspring?, J Assist. Reprod. Genet 30 (2013) 827–833, 10.1007/s10815-013-9999-8.23652788
[22] Ata F , Fatal temozolomide induced aplastic anemia in a female with Glioblastoma multiforme : A case report and literature review, Clin. Case Rep 9 (2021) 1641–1646, 10.1002/ccr3.3860.33768906
[23] Tambasco N , Romoli M , Calabresi P , Levodopa in Parkinson’s disease: current status and future developments, Curr. Neuropharmacol 16 (2018) 1239–1252, 10.2174/1570159x15666170510143821 28494719
[24] Gong Y , Novel elvitegravir nanoformulation for drug delivery across the blood-brain barrier to achieve HIV-1 suppression in the CNS macrophages, Sci. Rep 10 (2020) 3835, 10.1038/s41598-020-60684-1.32123217
[25] Shen HH Circumventing the blood–brain barrier. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 114 , 11261–11263, 10.1073/pnas.1716187114 (2017).
[26] Kimura S , Harashima H , Non-invasive gene delivery across the blood-brain barrier: present and future perspectives, Neural Regen. Res 17 (2022) 785–787, 10.4103/1673-5374.320981.34472471
[27] Padda IS , Mahtani AU &amp; Parmar M in StatPearls (2022).
[28] Forgham H , Kakinen A , Qiao R &amp; Davis TP Keeping up with the COVID’s—Could siRNA-based antivirals be a part of the answer? Exploration n/a, 20220012, 10.1002/EXP.20220012.
[29] Forgham H , Zhu J , Qiao R , Davis TP , Star polymer nanomedicines─challenges and future perspectives, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater 4 (2022) 6784–6796, 10.1021/acsapm.2c01291.
[30] Greener M , The role of RNA interference in modern pharmacotherapy, Prescriber 32 (2021) 21–25, 10.1002/psb.1946.
[31] Abudayyeh OO , C2c2 is a single-component programmable RNA-guided RNA-targeting CRISPR effector, Science 353 (2016) aaf5573, 10.1126/science.aaf5573.27256883
[32] Barrangou R , CRISPR provides acquired resistance against viruses in prokaryotes, Science 315 (2007) 1709–1712, 10.1126/science.1138140.17379808
[33] Ishino Y , Shinagawa H , Makino K , Amemura M , Nakata A , Nucleotide sequence of the iap gene, responsible for alkaline phosphatase isozyme conversion in Escherichia coli, and identification of the gene product, J. Bacteriol 169 (1987) 5429–5433.3316184
[34] Jinek M , A programmable dual-RNA-guided DNA endonuclease in adaptive bacterial immunity, Science 337 (2012) 816–821, 10.1126/science.1225829.22745249
[35] Gasiunas G , Sinkunas T , Siksnys V , Molecular mechanisms of CRISPR-mediated microbial immunity, Cell. Mol. Life Sci 71 (2014) 449–465, 10.1007/s00018-013-1438-6.23959171
[36] Koonin EV , Makarova KS , Origins and evolution of CRISPR-Cas systems, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B 374 (2019) 20180087.
[37] Anzalone AV , Koblan LW , Liu DR , Genome editing with CRISPR–Cas nucleases, base editors, transposases and prime editors, Nat. Biotechnol 38 (2020) 824–844, 10.1038/s41587-020-0561-9.32572269
[38] Yosef I , Goren MG , Qimron U , Proteins and DNA elements essential for the CRISPR adaptation process in Escherichia coli, Nucleic Acids Res 40 (2012) 5569–5576.22402487
[39] Wiedenheft B , Sternberg SH , Doudna JA , RNA-guided genetic silencing systems in bacteria and archaea, Nature 482 (2012) 331–338.22337052
[40] Karvelis T , crRNA and tracrRNA guide Cas9-mediated DNA interference in Streptococcus thermophilus, RNA Biol 10 (2013) 841–851.23535272
[41] Ayora S , Double-strand break repair in bacteria: a view from Bacillus subtilis, FEMS Microbiol. Rev 35 (2011) 1055–1081, 10.1111/j.1574-6976.2011.00272.x.21517913
[42] Górecka KM , RuvC uses dynamic probing of the Holliday junction to achieve sequence specificity and efficient resolution, Nat. Commun 10 (2019) 4102, 10.1038/s41467-019-11900-8.31506434
[43] Bandyopadhyay A , Kancharla N , Javalkote VS , Dasgupta S , Brutnell TP , CRISPR-Cas12a (Cpf1): a versatile tool in the plant genome editing tool box for agricultural advancement, Front. Plant Sci 11 (2020), 10.3389/fpls.2020.584151.
[44] Walton RT , Christie KA , Whittaker MN , Kleinstiver BP , Unconstrained genome targeting with near-PAMless engineered CRISPR-Cas9 variants, Science 368 (2020) 290–296.32217751
[45] Zhuo C , Spatiotemporal control of CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing, Signal Transduct. Target. Ther 6 (2021) 238, 10.1038/s41392-021-00645-w.34148061
[46] Zetsche B , Cpf1 is a single RNA-guided endonuclease of a class 2 CRISPR-Cas system, Cell 163 (2015) 759–771.26422227
[47] Broughton JP , CRISPR–Cas12-based detection of SARS-CoV-2, Nat. Biotechnol 38 (2020) 870–874, 10.1038/s41587-020-0513-4.32300245
[48] Faure G , Comparative genomics and evolution of trans-activating RNAs in Class 2 CRISPR-Cas systems, RNA Biol 16 (2019) 435–448, 10.1080/15476286.2018.1493331.30103650
[49] Zhang C Structural Basis for the RNA-Guided Ribonuclease Activity of CRISPR-Cas13d. Cell 175 , 212–223 e217, 10.1016/j.cell.2018.09.001 (2018).30241607
[50] Konermann S Transcriptome engineering with RNA-targeting type VI-D CRISPR effectors. Cell 173 , 665–676. e614 (2018).29551272
[51] Zhou H Glia-to-Neuron Conversion by CRISPR-CasRx Alleviates Symptoms of Neurological Disease in Mice. Cell 181 , 590–603 e516, 10.1016/j.cell.2020.03.024 (2020).32272060
[52] Powell JE , Targeted gene silencing in the nervous system with CRISPRCas13, Sci. Adv 8 (2022) eabk2485, 10.1126/sciadv.abk2485.35044815
[53] Rohiwal SS , Polyethylenimine based magnetic nanoparticles mediated non-viral CRISPR/Cas9 system for genome editing, Sci. Rep 10 (2020) 4619, 10.1038/s41598-020-61465-6.32165679
[54] Kaufmann KB , Büning H , Galy A , Schambach A , Grez M , Gene therapy on the move, EMBO Mol. Med 5 (2013) 1642–1661, 10.1002/emmm.201202287.24106209
[55] Miller JB , Non-Viral CRISPR/Cas gene editing in vitro and in vivo enabled by synthetic nanoparticle co-delivery of Cas9 mRNA and sgRNA, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl 56 (2017) 1059–1063, 10.1002/anie.201610209.27981708
[56] Duan L , Nanoparticle delivery of CRISPR/Cas9 for genome editing, Front. Genet 12 (2021), 10.3389/fgene.2021.673286.
[57] Zhang L , All-in-one inorganic nanoagents for near-infrared-II photothermal-based cancer theranostics, Mater. Today Adv 14 (2022), 10.1016/j.mtadv.2022.100226.
[58] Zhang L , Forgham H , Shen A , Qiao R , Guo B , Recent advances in single Fe-based nanoagents for photothermal-chemodynamic cancer therapy, Biosensors (Basel) 12 (2022), 10.3390/bios12020086.
[59] Lee K , Nanoparticle delivery of Cas9 ribonucleoprotein and donor DNA in vivo induces homology-directed DNA repair, Nat. Biomed. Eng 1 (2017) 889–901, 10.1038/s41551-017-0137-2.29805845
[60] Glass Z , Li Y , Xu Q , Nanoparticles for CRISPR–Cas9 delivery, Nat. Biomed. Eng 1 (2017) 854–855, 10.1038/s41551-017-0158-x.30147994
[61] Xu Z , Carrier strategies boost the application of CRISPR/Cas system in gene therapy, Exploration 2 (2022) 20210081, 10.1002/EXP.20210081.
[62] Finn JD , A single administration of CRISPR/Cas9 lipid nanoparticles achieves robust and persistent in vivo genome editing, Cell Rep 22 (2018) 2227–2235, 10.1016/j.celrep.2018.02.014.29490262
[63] Musunuru K , In vivo CRISPR base editing of PCSK9 durably lowers cholesterol in primates, Nature 593 (2021) 429–434, 10.1038/s41586-021-03534-y.34012082
[64] Wei T , Cheng Q , Min Y-L , Olson EN , Siegwart DJ , Systemic nanoparticle delivery of CRISPR-Cas9 ribonucleoproteins for effective tissue specific genome editing, Nat. Commun 11 (2020) 3232, 10.1038/s41467-020-17029-3.32591530
[65] Cheng Q , Selective organ targeting (SORT) nanoparticles for tissue-specific mRNA delivery and CRISPR–Cas gene editing, Nat. Nanotechnol 15 (2020) 313–320, 10.1038/s41565-020-0669-6.32251383
[66] Cheng WJ , Chen LC , Ho HO , Lin HL , Sheu MT , Stearyl polyethylenimine complexed with plasmids as the core of human serum albumin nanoparticles noncovalently bound to CRISPR/Cas9 plasmids or siRNA for disrupting or silencing PD-L1 expression for immunotherapy, Int. J. Nanomed 13 (2018) 7079–7094, 10.2147/ijn.S181440.
[67] Lee B , Nanoparticle delivery of CRISPR into the brain rescues a mouse model of fragile X syndrome from exaggerated repetitive behaviours, Nat. Biomed. Eng 2 (2018) 497–507, 10.1038/s41551-018-0252-8.30948824
[68] O’Keeffe Ahern J , Non-viral delivery of CRISPR–Cas9 complexes for targeted gene editing via a polymer delivery system, Gene Ther 29 (2022) 157–170, 10.1038/s41434-021-00282-6.34363036
[69] Li Y , Polymer-assisted magnetic nanoparticle assemblies for biomedical applications, ACS Applied Bio Materials 3 (2020) 121–142, 10.1021/acsabm.9b00896.
[70] Plank C , Zelphati O , Mykhaylyk O , Magnetically enhanced nucleic acid delivery. Ten years of magnetofection-progress and prospects, Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev 63 (2011) 1300–1331, 10.1016/j.addr.2011.08.002.21893135
[71] Nguyen DN , Polymer-stabilized Cas9 nanoparticles and modified repair templates increase genome editing efficiency, Nat. Biotechnol 38 (2020) 44–49, 10.1038/s41587-019-0325-6.31819258
[72] Wang P , Thermo-triggered release of CRISPR-Cas9 system by lipid-encapsulated gold nanoparticles for tumor therapy, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed 57 (2018) 1491–1496, 10.1002/anie.201708689.
[73] Wan T , Exosome-mediated delivery of Cas9 ribonucleoprotein complexes for tissue-specific gene therapy of liver diseases, Sci. Adv 8 (2022) eabp9435, 10.1126/sciadv.abp9435.36103526
[74] McAndrews KM Exosome-mediated delivery of CRISPR/Cas9 for targeting of oncogenic Kras(G12D) in pancreatic cancer. Life Sci Alliance 4 , 10.26508/lsa.202000875 (2021).
[75] Majeau N , Serum extracellular vesicles for delivery of CRISPR-CAS9 ribonucleoproteins to modify the dystrophin gene, Mol. Ther 30 (2022) 2429–2442, 10.1016/j.ymthe.2022.05.023.35619556
[76] Lapointe S , Perry A , Butowski NA , Primary brain tumours in adults, Lancet 392 (2018) 432–446, 10.1016/S0140-6736(18)30990-5.30060998
[77] Cohen AR , Brain tumors in children, N. Engl. J. Med 386 (2022) 1922–1931, 10.1056/NEJMra2116344.35584157
[78] Li BK , Al-Karmi S , Huang A , Bouffet E , Pediatric embryonal brain tumors in the molecular era, Expert Rev. Mol. Diagn 20 (2020) 293–303, 10.1080/14737159.2020.1714439.31917601
[79] Zuckermann M , Somatic CRISPR/Cas9-mediated tumour suppressor disruption enables versatile brain tumour modelling, Nat. Commun 6 (2015) 7391, 10.1038/ncomms8391.26067104
[80] Vo BT , Mouse medulloblastoma driven by CRISPR activation of cellular Myc, Sci. Rep 8 (2018) 8733, 10.1038/s41598-018-24956-1.29880921
[81] Roussel MF , Stripay JL , Modeling pediatric medulloblastoma, Brain Pathol 30 (2020) 703–712, 10.1111/bpa.12803.31788908
[82] Peng K-L , Miat and interacting protein Metadherin maintain a stem-like niche to promote medulloblastoma tumorigenesis and treatment resistance, in: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 119 , 2022, 10.1073/pnas.2203738119.
[83] Zou Y , Blood-brain barrier–penetrating single CRISPR-Cas9 nanocapsules for effective and safe glioblastoma gene therapy, Sci. Adv 8 (2022) eabm8011, 10.1126/sciadv.abm8011.35442747
[84] Ye L , In vivo CRISPR screening in CD8 T cells with AAV–Sleeping Beauty hybrid vectors identifies membrane targets for improving immunotherapy for glioblastoma, Nat. Biotechnol 37 (2019) 1302–1313, 10.1038/s41587-019-0246-4.31548728
[85] Ruan W , Brain-targeted CRISPR/Cas9 nanomedicine for effective glioblastoma therapy, J. Control. Release 351 (2022) 739–751, 10.1016/j.jconrel.2022.09.046.36174804
[86] Xiao L , Yeung H , Haber M , Norris MD , Somers K , Immunometabolism: a ‘hot’ switch for ‘cold’ pediatric solid tumors, Trends Cancer 7 (2021) 751–777, 10.1016/j.trecan.2021.05.002.34183305
[87] Omuro A , Nivolumab with or without ipilimumab in patients with recurrent glioblastoma: results from exploratory phase I cohorts of CheckMate 143, Neuro Oncol 20 (2018) 674–686.29106665
[88] O’Rourke DM , A single dose of peripherally infused EGFRvIII-directed CAR T cells mediates antigen loss and induces adaptive resistance in patients with recurrent glioblastoma, Sci. Transl. Med 9 (2017) eaaa0984.28724573
[89] Van Cauwenberghe C , Van Broeckhoven C , Sleegers K , The genetic landscape of Alzheimer disease: clinical implications and perspectives, Genet. Med 18 (2016) 421–430, 10.1038/gim.2015.117.26312828
[90] Zhang Y-W , Thompson R , Zhang H , Xu H , APP processing in Alzheimer’s disease, Mol. Brain 4 (2011) 3, 10.1186/1756-6606-4-3.21214928
[91] Brunner P , Pineal and cortical melatonin receptors MT1 and MT2 are decreased in Alzheimer’s disease, Eur. J. Histochem 50 (2006) 311–316.17213040
[92] Ng TKS , Ho CSH , Tam WWS , Kua EH , Ho RC , Decreased serum brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) levels in patients with Alzheimer’s disease (AD): a systematic review and meta-analysis, Int. J. Mol. Sci 20 (2019), 10.3390/ijms20020257.
[93] Cole SL , Vassar R , The Alzheimer’s disease β-secretase enzyme, BACE1, Mol. Neurodegener 2 (2007) 22, 10.1186/1750-1326-2-22.18005427
[94] Koelsch G , BACE1 function and inhibition: implications of intervention in the amyloid pathway of alzheimer’s disease pathology, Molecules 22 (2017), 10.3390/molecules22101723.
[95] Schulte J , Littleton JT , The biological function of the Huntingtin protein and its relevance to Huntington’s Disease pathology, Curr. Trends Neurol 5 (2011) 65–78.22180703
[96] Smeyers J , Banchi E-G , Latouche M , C9ORF72: what it is, what it does, and why it matters, Front. Cell. Neurosci 15 (2021), 10.3389/fncel.2021.661447.
[97] Balendra R , Isaacs AM , C9orf72-mediated ALS and FTD: multiple pathways to disease, Nat. Rev. Neurol 14 (2018) 544–558, 10.1038/s41582-018-0047-2.30120348
[98] Meneses A , TDP-43 pathology in Alzheimer’s disease, Mol. Neurodegener 16 (2021) 84, 10.1186/s13024-021-00503-x.34930382
[99] Jaarsma D , Human Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD1) overexpression in mice causes mitochondrial vacuolization, axonal degeneration, and premature motoneuron death and accelerates motoneuron disease in mice expressing a familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis mutant SOD1, Neurobiol. Dis 7 (2000) 623–643, 10.1006/nbdi.2000.0299.11114261
[100] Ishigaki S , Sobue G , Importance of functional loss of FUS in FTLD/ALS, Front. Mol. Biosci 5 (2018), 10.3389/fmolb.2018.00044.
[101] Stefanis L , α-Synuclein in Parkinson’s disease, Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med 2 (2012), 10.1101/cshperspect.a009399.
[102] Contardo M , Targeting PTB for glia-to-neuron reprogramming in vitro and in vivo for therapeutic development in neurological diseases, Biomedicines 10 (2022) 399.35203608
[103] Amir RE , Rett syndrome is caused by mutations in X-linked MECP2, encoding methyl-CpG-binding protein 2, Nat. Genet 23 (1999) 185–188, 10.1038/13810.10508514
[104] Xu Q , Autism-associated CHD8 deficiency impairs axon development and migration of cortical neurons, Mol. Autism 9 (2018) 65, 10.1186/s13229-018-0244-2.30574290
[105] Jacquemont S , Hagerman RJ , Hagerman PJ , Leehey MA , Fragile-X syndrome and fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome: two faces of FMR1, Lancet Neurol 6 (2007) 45–55, 10.1016/S1474-4422(06)70676-7.17166801
[106] Slynko I , Vanishing white matter: eukaryotic initiation factor 2B model and the impact of missense mutations, Mol. Genet. Genomic Med 9 (2021) e1593.33432707
[107] Wang Q , Constitutive activity of serotonin receptor 6 regulates human cerebral organoids formation and depression-like behaviors, Stem Cell Rep 16 (2021) 75–88, 10.1016/j.stemcr.2020.11.015.
[108] Noh K , Negr1 controls adult hippocampal neurogenesis and affective behaviors, Mol. Psychiatry 24 (2019) 1189–1205, 10.1038/s41380-018-0347-3.30651602
[109] Sekiguchi T , RagA, an mTORC1 activator, interacts with a hedgehog signaling protein, WDR35/IFT121, Genes Cells 24 (2019) 151–161, 10.1111/gtc.12663.30570184
[110] Liu L , Novel targets for stroke therapy: special focus on TRPC channels and TRPC6, Front. Aging Neurosci 12 (2020) 70, 10.3389/fnagi.2020.00070.32256338
[111] Lambert G , Sjouke B , Choque B , Kastelein JJ , Hovingh GK , The PCSK9 decade, J. Lipid Res 53 (2012) 2515–2524, 10.1194/jlr.R026658.22811413
[112] Li X Mib2 Deficiency Inhibits Microglial Activation and Alleviates Ischemia-Induced Brain Injury. Aging Dis 11 , 523–535, 10.14336/ad.2019.0807 (2020).32489699
[113] Legname G , Elucidating the function of the prion protein, PLoS Pathog 13 (2017) e1006458.28859171
[114] Feng T , Lacrampe A , Hu F , Physiological and pathological functions of TMEM106B: a gene associated with brain aging and multiple brain disorders, Acta Neuropathol 141 (2021) 327–339, 10.1007/s00401-020-02246-3.33386471
[115] Mezzena R , Study of adhesion and migration dynamics in ubiquitin E3A ligase (UBE3A)-silenced SYSH5Y neuroblastoma cells by micro-structured surfaces, Nanotechnology 32 (2021), 10.1088/1361-6528/abbb03.
[116] Javed I , Inhibition of amyloid beta toxicity in zebrafish with a chaperone-gold nanoparticle dual strategy, Nat. Commun 10 (2019) 3780, 10.1038/s41467-019-11762-0.31439844
[117] Mullard A BACE failures lower AD expectations, again. Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 17 , 385–385, 10.1038/nrd.2018.94 (2018).
[118] Morris GP , Clark IA , Vissel B , Inconsistencies and Controversies Surrounding the Amyloid Hypothesis of Alzheimer’s Disease, Acta Neuropathol. Commun 2 (2014) 135, 10.1186/s40478-014-0135-5.25231068
[119] Selkoe DJ , Hardy J , The amyloid hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease at 25 years, EMBO Mol. Med 8 (2016) 595–608.27025652
[120] Duan Y , Brain-wide Cas9-mediated cleavage of a gene causing familial Alzheimer’s disease alleviates amyloid-related pathologies in mice, Nat. Biomed. Eng 6 (2022) 168–180, 10.1038/s41551-021-00759-0.34312508
[121] Kwak SS , Amyloid-β42/40 ratio drives tau pathology in 3D human neural cell culture models of Alzheimer’s disease, Nat. Commun 11 (2020) 1377, 10.1038/s41467-020-15120-3.32170138
[122] Javed I , In vivo mitigation of amyloidogenesis through functional-pathogenic double-protein coronae, Nano Lett 18 (2018) 5797–5804, 10.1021/acs.nanolett.8b02446.30088935
[123] Kakinen A , Javed I , Davis TP , Ke PC , In vitro and in vivo models for anti-amyloidosis nanomedicines, Nanoscale Horiz 6 (2021) 95–119, 10.1039/D0NH00548G.33438715
[124] Bhardwaj S , CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing: new hope for Alzheimer’s disease therapeutics, J. Adv. Res 40 (2022) 207–221, 10.1016/j.jare.2021.07.001.36100328
[125] Park H , Kim J , Activation of melatonin receptor 1 by CRISPR-Cas9 activator ameliorates cognitive deficits in an Alzheimer’s disease mouse model, J. Pineal Res 72 (2022) e12787.35133672
[126] Konstantinidis E , CRISPR-Cas9 treatment partially restores amyloid-β 42/40 in human fibroblasts with the Alzheimer’s disease PSEN 1 M146L mutation, Mol. Ther. Nucleic Acids 28 (2022) 450–461, 10.1016/j.omtn.2022.03.022.35505961
[127] Chen F , CRISPR/Cas9-mediated CysLT1R deletion reverses synaptic failure, amyloidosis and cognitive impairment in APP/PS1 mice, Aging (Albany NY) 13 (2021) 6634–6661, 10.18632/aging.202501.33591941
[128] Park H , Hwang Y , Kim J , Transcriptional activation with Cas9 activator nanocomplexes rescues Alzheimer’s disease pathology, Biomaterials 279 (2021), 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2021.121229.
[129] Park H , In vivo neuronal gene editing via CRISPR–Cas9 amphiphilic nanocomplexes alleviates deficits in mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease, Nat. Neurosci 22 (2019) 524–528, 10.1038/s41593-019-0352-0.30858603
[130] Sun J , CRISPR/Cas9 editing of APP C-terminus attenuates β-cleavage and promotes α-cleavage, Nat. Commun 10 (2019) 53, 10.1038/s41467-018-07971-8.30604771
[131] György B , CRISPR/Cas9 mediated disruption of the swedish APP allele as a therapeutic approach for early-onset Alzheimer’s disease, Mol. Ther. Nucleic Acids 11 (2018) 429–440, 10.1016/j.omtn.2018.03.007.29858078
[132] Sun J , A CRISPR/Cas9 based strategy to manipulate the Alzheimer’s amyloid pathway, bioRxiv 310193 (2018), 10.1101/310193.
[133] Nagata K , Generation of App knock-in mice reveals deletion mutations protective against Alzheimer’s disease-like pathology, Nat. Commun 9 (2018) 1800, 10.1038/s41467-018-04238-0.29728560
[134] Cheng-Hathaway PJ , The Trem2 R47H variant confers loss-of-function-like phenotypes in Alzheimer’s disease, Mol. Neurodegener 13 (2018) 29, 10.1186/s13024-018-0262-8.29859094
[135] Xiang X , The Trem2 R47H Alzheimer’s risk variant impairs splicing and reduces Trem2 mRNA and protein in mice but not in humans, Mol. Neurodegener 13 (2018) 49, 10.1186/s13024-018-0280-6.30185230
[136] Ortiz-Virumbrales M , CRISPR/Cas9-Correctable mutation-related molecular and physiological phenotypes in iPSC-derived Alzheimer’s PSEN2N141Ineurons, Acta Neuropathol. Commun 5 (2017) 77, 10.1186/s40478-017-0475-z.29078805
[137] Huang YA , Zhou B , Wernig M , Südhof TC , ApoE2, ApoE3, and ApoE4 differentially stimulate app transcription and Aβ secretion, Cell 168 (2017) 427–441.e421, 10.1016/j.cell.2016.12.044.28111074
[138] Egan MF , Randomized trial of verubecestat for mild-to-moderate Alzheimer’s disease, N. Engl. J. Med 378 (2018) 1691–1703.29719179
[139] Egan MF , Randomized trial of verubecestat for prodromal Alzheimer’s disease, N. Engl. J. Med 380 (2019) 1408–1420.30970186
[140] Henley D , Preliminary results of a trial of atabecestat in preclinical Alzheimer’s disease, N. Engl. J. Med 380 (2019) 1483–1485.30970197
[141] Wessels AM , Efficacy and safety of lanabecestat for treatment of early and mild Alzheimer disease: the AMARANTH and DAYBREAK-ALZ randomized clinical trials, JAMA Neurol 77 (2020) 199–209.31764959
[142] Wessels AM , Cognitive outcomes in trials of two BACE inhibitors in Alzheimer’s disease, Alzheimers Dement 16 (2020) 1483–1492.33049114
[143] Moussa-Pacha NM , Abdin SM , Omar HA , Alniss H , Al-Tel TH , BACE1 inhibitors: current status and future directions in treating Alzheimer’s disease, Med. Res. Rev 40 (2020) 339–384, 10.1002/med.21622.31347728
[144] Mullan M , A pathogenic mutation for probable Alzheimer’s disease in the APP gene at the N–terminus of β–amyloid, Nat. Genet 1 (1992) 345–347.1302033
[145] Li S , Swedish mutant APP-based BACE1 binding site peptide reduces APP β-cleavage and cerebral Aβ levels in Alzheimer’s mice, Sci. Rep 5 (2015) 11322, 10.1038/srep11322.26091071
[146] György B , CRISPR/Cas9 mediated disruption of the swedish APP allele as a therapeutic approach for early-onset Alzheimer’s disease, Mol. Ther. Nucleic Acids 11 (2018) 429–440, 10.1016/j.omtn.2018.03.007.29858078
[147] O’Neal-Moffitt G , Delic V , Bradshaw PC , Olcese J , Prophylactic melatonin significantly reduces Alzheimer’s neuropathology and associated cognitive deficits independent of antioxidant pathways in AβPP(swe)/PS1 mice, Mol. Neurodegener 10 (2015) 27, 10.1186/s13024-015-0027-6.26159703
[148] Liu J , MT1 and MT2 melatonin receptors: a therapeutic perspective, Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol 56 (2016) 361–383, 10.1146/annurev-pharmtox-010814-124742.26514204
[149] Sulkava S , Melatonin receptor type 1A gene linked to Alzheimer’s disease in old age, Sleep 41 (2018), 10.1093/sleep/zsy103.
[150] Qi LS , Repurposing CRISPR as an RNA-guided platform for sequence-specific control of gene expression, Cell 184 (2021) 844.33545038
[151] Konermann S , Genome-scale transcriptional activation by an engineered CRISPR-Cas9 complex, Nature 517 (2015) 583–588, 10.1038/nature14136.25494202
[152] Hardeland R , Melatonin and microglia, Int. J. Mol. Sci 22 (2021), 10.3390/ijms22158296.
[153] Khezri MR , Yousefi K , Esmaeili A , Ghasemnejad-Berenji M , The role of ERK1/2 pathway in the pathophysiology of Alzheimer’s disease: an overview and update on new developments, Cell. Mol. Neurobiol (2022), 10.1007/s10571-022-01191-x.
[154] Bates GP , Huntington disease, Nat. Rev. Dis. Primers 1 (2015) 15005, 10.1038/nrdp.2015.5.27188817
[155] MacDonald ME , A novel gene containing a trinucleotide repeat that is expanded and unstable on Huntington’s disease chromosomes, Cell 72 (1993) 971–983.8458085
[156] Heemskerk AW &amp; Roos RA Aspiration pneumonia and death in Huntington’s disease. PLoS Curr 4 , Rrn1293 , 10.1371/currents.RRN1293 (2012).
[157] Reiner A , Differential loss of striatal projection neurons in Huntington disease, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci 85 (1988) 5733–5737, 10.1073/pnas.85.15.5733.2456581
[158] McColgan P , Tabrizi SJ , Huntington’s disease: a clinical review, Eur. J.Neurol 25 (2018) 24–34, 10.1111/ene.13413.28817209
[159] Harper SQ , RNA interference improves motor and neuropathological abnormalities in a Huntington’s disease mouse model, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci 102 (2005) 5820–5825.15811941
[160] Carroll JB , Potent and selective antisense oligonucleotides targeting single-nucleotide polymorphisms in the Huntington disease gene/allele-specific silencing of mutant huntingtin, Mol. Ther 19 (2011) 2178–2185.21971427
[161] Ekman FK , CRISPR-Cas9-mediated genome editing increases lifespan and improves motor deficits in a Huntington’s disease mouse model, Mol. Ther. Nucleic Acids 17 (2019) 829–839, 10.1016/j.omtn.2019.07.009.31465962
[162] Yang S , CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene editing ameliorates neurotoxicity in mouse model of Huntington’s disease, J. Clin. Invest 127 (2017) 2719–2724, 10.1172/jci92087.28628038
[163] Monteys AM , Ebanks SA , Keiser MS , Davidson BL , CRISPR/Cas9 editing of the mutant huntingtin allele in vitro and in vivo, Mol. Ther 25 (2017) 12–23, 10.1016/j.ymthe.2016.11.010.28129107
[164] Wu J , Ryskamp D , Birnbaumer L , Bezprozvanny I , Inhibition of TRPC1-dependent store-operated calcium entry improves synaptic stability and motor performance in a mouse model of huntington’s disease, J. Huntingtons Dis 7 (2018) 35–50, 10.3233/jhd-170266.29480205
[165] Reidling JC , Human neural stem cell transplantation rescues functional deficits in R6/2 and Q140 Huntington’s disease mice, Stem Cell Rep 10 (2018) 58–72.
[166] Coyne AN , Rothstein JD , Nuclear pore complexes — a doorway to neural injury in neurodegeneration, Nat. Rev. Neurol 18 (2022) 348–362, 10.1038/s41582-022-00653-6.35488039
[167] Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Nature Reviews Disease Primers 3 , 17072, 10.1038/nrdp.2017.72 (2017).
[168] DeJesus-Hernandez M , Expanded GGGGCC hexanucleotide repeat in noncoding region of C9ORF72 causes chromosome 9p-linked FTD and ALS, Neuron 72 (2011) 245–256.21944778
[169] Renton AE , A hexanucleotide repeat expansion in C9ORF72 is the cause of chromosome 9p21-linked ALS-FTD, Neuron 72 (2011) 257–268.21944779
[170] Ababneh NA , Correction of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis related phenotypes in induced pluripotent stem cell-derived motor neurons carrying a hexanucleotide expansion mutation in C9orf72 by CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing using homology-directed repair, Hum. Mol. Genet 29 (2020) 2200–2217, 10.1093/hmg/ddaa106.32504093
[171] Gaj T In vivo genome editing improves motor function and extends survival in a mouse model of ALS. Science Advances 3 , eaar3952, 10.1126/sciadv.aar3952.
[172] Duan W , The deletion of mutant SOD1 via CRISPR/Cas9/sgRNA prolongs survival in an amyotrophic lateral sclerosis mouse model, Gene Ther 27 (2020) 157–169, 10.1038/s41434-019-0116-1.31819203
[173] Miller TM , An antisense oligonucleotide against SOD1 delivered intrathecally for patients with SOD1 familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a phase 1, randomised, first-in-man study, Lancet Neurol 12 (2013) 435–442.23541756
[174] Kosicki M , Tomberg K , Bradley A , Repair of double-strand breaks induced by CRISPR-Cas9 leads to large deletions and complex rearrangements, Nat. Biotechnol 36 (2018) 765–771, 10.1038/nbt.4192.30010673
[175] Rees HA , Liu DR , Base editing: precision chemistry on the genome and transcriptome of living cells, Nat. Rev. Genet 19 (2018) 770–788.30323312
[176] Lim CKW , Treatment of a mouse model of ALS by in vivo base editing, Mol. Ther 28 (2020) 1177–1189, 10.1016/j.ymthe.2020.01.005.31991108
[177] Komor AC , Kim YB , Packer MS , Zuris JA , Liu DR , Programmable editing of a target base in genomic DNA without double-stranded DNA cleavage, Nature 533 (2016) 420–424.27096365
[178] Poewe W , Parkinson disease, Nat. Rev. Dis. Prim 3 (2017) 17013, 10.1038/nrdp.2017.13.28332488
[179] Okun MS , Deep-brain stimulation for Parkinson’s disease, N. Engl. J. Med 367 (2012) 1529–1538, 10.1056/NEJMct1208070.23075179
[180] Yoon HH , CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing protects from the A53T-SNCA Overexpression-induced pathology of parkinson’s disease in vivo, CRISPR J 5 (2022) 95–108, 10.1089/crispr.2021.0025.35191750
[181] Quigley HA , Broman AT , The number of people with glaucoma worldwide in 2010 and 2020, Br. J. Ophthalmol 90 (2006) 262, 10.1136/bjo.2005.081224.16488940
[182] Vidal S , Genetic landscape of rett syndrome spectrum: improvements and challenges, Int. J. Mol. Sci 20 (2019).
[183] Kadam SD , Sullivan BJ , Goyal A , Blue ME , Smith-Hicks C , Rett Syndrome and CDKL5 deficiency disorder: from bench to clinic, Int. J. Mol. Sci 20 (2019), 10.3390/ijms20205098.
[184] Zhang X , Dose-dependent nuclear delivery and transcriptional repression with a cell-penetrant MeCP2, ACS Cent. Sci 9 (2023) 277–288, 10.1021/acscentsci.2c01226.36844491
[185] Swiech L , In vivo interrogation of gene function in the mammalian brain using CRISPR-Cas9, Nat. Biotechnol 33 (2015) 102–106, 10.1038/nbt.3055.25326897
[186] Moretti P , Learning and memory and synaptic plasticity are impaired in a mouse model of Rett syndrome, J. Neurosci 26 (2006) 319–327.16399702
[187] Chahrour M , MeCP2, a key contributor to neurological disease, activates and represses transcription, Science 320 (2008) 1224–1229.18511691
[188] Abrahams BS , Geschwind DH , Advances in autism genetics: on the threshold of a new neurobiology, Nat. Rev. Genet 9 (2008) 341–355.18414403
[189] Iossifov I , De novo gene disruptions in children on the autistic spectrum, Neuron 74 (2012) 285–299.22542183
[190] O’Roak BJ , Exome sequencing in sporadic autism spectrum disorders identifies severe de novo mutations, Nat. Genet 43 (2011) 585–589.21572417
[191] Sanders SJ , De novo mutations revealed by whole-exome sequencing are strongly associated with autism, Nature 485 (2012) 237–241.22495306
[192] Parikshak NN , Integrative functional genomic analyses implicate specific molecular pathways and circuits in autism, Cell 155 (2013) 1008–1021.24267887
[193] Villa CE , CHD8 haploinsufficiency links autism to transient alterations in excitatory and inhibitory trajectories, Cell Rep 39 (2022), 10.1016/j.celrep.2022.110615.
[194] Platt RJ , Chd8 mutation leads to autistic-like behaviors and impaired striatal circuits, Cell Rep 19 (2017) 335–350, 10.1016/j.celrep.2017.03.052.28402856
[195] Dodge A , Generation of a novel rat model of angelman syndrome with a complete Ube3a gene deletion, Autism Res 13 (2020) 397–409, 10.1002/aur.2267.31961493
[196] Wu S-H , Induction of core symptoms of autism spectrum disorder by in vivo CRISPR/Cas9-based gene editing in the brain of adolescent rhesus monkeys, Sci. Bull 66 (2021) 937–946, 10.1016/j.scib.2020.12.017.
[197] Platt RJ , CRISPR-Cas9 knockin mice for genome editing and cancer modeling, Cell 159 (2014) 440–455, 10.1016/j.cell.2014.09.014.25263330
[198] Ji NY , Findling RL , Pharmacotherapy for mental health problems in people with intellectual disability, Curr. Opin. Psychiatry 29 (2016) 103–125.26779860
[199] Politte LC , Henry CA , McDougle CJ , Psychopharmacological interventions in autism spectrum disorder, Harv. Rev. Psychiatry 22 (2014) 76–92.24614763
[200] Terbeck S , Akkus F , Chesterman LP , Hasler G , The role of metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 in the pathogenesis of mood disorders and addiction: combining preclinical evidence with human Positron Emission Tomography (PET) studies, Front. Neurosci 9 (2015) 86, 10.3389/fnins.2015.00086.25852460
[201] Jacquemont S Epigenetic modification of the FMR1 gene in fragile X syndrome is associated with differential response to the mGluR5 antagonist AFQ056. Science translational medicine 3 , 64ra61–64ra61 (2011).
[202] Raspa M , Wheeler AC , Riley C , Public health literature review of fragile X syndrome, Pediatrics 139 (2017) S153–S171.28814537
[203] Li W , Wang X , Knaap MSVD , Proud CG , Mutations linked to leukoencephalopathy with vanishing white matter impair the function of the eukaryotic initiation factor 2B complex in diverse ways, Mol. Cell. Biol 24 (2004) 3295–3306, 10.1128/MCB.24.8.3295-3306.2004.15060152
[204] van der Knaap MS , A new leukoencephalopathy with vanishing white matter, Neurology 48 (1997) 845–855, 10.1212/wnl.48.4.845.9109866
[205] van der Knaap MS , Pronk JC , Scheper GC , Vanishing white matter disease, Lancet Neurol 5 (2006) 413–423.16632312
[206] Stellitano LA , Winstone AM , Van der Knaap MS , Verity CM , Leukodystrophies and genetic leukoencephalopathies in childhood: a national epidemiological study, Dev. Med. Child Neurol 58 (2016) 680–689.26866636
[207] Dooves S , Astrocytes are central in the pathomechanisms of vanishing white matter, J. Clin. Invest 126 (2016) 1512–1524, 10.1172/JCI83908.26974157
[208] Wong YL , eIF2B activator prevents neurological defects caused by a chronic integrated stress response, Elife 8 (2019) e42940.30624206
[209] Dietrich J , EIF2B5 mutations compromise GFAP+ astrocyte generation in vanishing white matter leukodystrophy, Nat. Med 11 (2005) 277–283, 10.1038/nm1195.15723074
[210] Li S , Regulatory mechanisms of major depressive disorder risk variants, Mol. Psychiatry 25 (2020) 1926–1945, 10.1038/s41380-020-0715-7.32214206
[211] Zhuo C , Genomic editing of non-coding RNA genes with CRISPR/Cas9 ushers in a potential novel approach to study and treat schizophrenia, Front. Mol. Neurosci 10 (2017) 28, 10.3389/fnmol.2017.00028.28217082
[212] Sun Y , Fu J , Yang J , Zhao J , Rong J , Generation of a RRAGA knockout human iPSC line GIBHi002-A-5 using CRISPR/Cas9 technology, Stem Cell Res 63 (2022), 10.1016/j.scr.2022.102859.
[213] Schmid RS , CRISPR/Cas9 directed to the Ube3a antisense transcript improves Angelman syndrome phenotype in mice, J. Clin. Invest 131 (2021), 10.1172/jci142574.
[214] Walia R , Ho CC , Lee C , Gilch S , Schatzl HM , Gene-edited murine cell lines for propagation of chronic wasting disease prions, Sci. Rep 9 (2019) 11151, 10.1038/s41598-019-47629-z.31371793
[215] Haapaniemi E , Botla S , Persson J , Schmierer B , Taipale J , CRISPR–Cas9 genome editing induces a p53-mediated DNA damage response, Nat. Med 24 (2018) 927–930.29892067
[216] Ihry RJ , p53 inhibits CRISPR–Cas9 engineering in human pluripotent stem cells, Nat. Med 24 (2018) 939–946.29892062
[217] Pineda M , Lear A , Collins JP , Kiani S , Safe CRISPR: Challenges and Possible Solutions, Trends Biotechnol 37 (2019) 389–401, 10.1016/j.tibtech.2018.09.010.30352704
[218] Feng H , Guo J , Wang T , Zhang C , Xing X-H , Guide-target mismatch effects on dCas9–sgRNA binding activity in living bacterial cells, Nucleic Acids Res 49 (2021) 1263–1277, 10.1093/nar/gkaa1295.33503261
[219] Tao J , Wang Q , Mendez-Dorantes C , Burns KH , Chiarle R , Frequency and mechanisms of LINE-1 retrotransposon insertions at CRISPR/Cas9 sites, Nat. Commun 13 (2022) 3685, 10.1038/s41467-022-31322-3.35760782
[220] Malik A , Evaluating the cleavage efficacy of CRISPR-Cas9 sgRNAs targeting ineffective regions of Arabidopsis thaliana genome, PeerJ 9 (2021) e11409.34055482
[221] Ryan DE , Improving CRISPR-Cas specificity with chemical modifications in single-guide RNAs, Nucleic Acids Res 46 (2018) 792–803, 10.1093/nar/gkx1199.29216382
[222] Fu Y , High-frequency off-target mutagenesis induced by CRISPR-Cas nucleases in human cells, Nat. Biotechnol 31 (2013) 822–826, 10.1038/nbt.2623.23792628
[223] Konstantakos V , Nentidis A , Krithara A , Paliouras G , CRISPR–Cas9 gRNA efficiency prediction: an overview of predictive tools and the role of deep learning, Nucleic Acids Res 50 (2022) 3616–3637, 10.1093/nar/gkac192.35349718
[224] Ryan DE , Phosphonoacetate modifications enhance the stability and editing yields of guide RNAs for Cas9 editors, Biochemistry (2022), 10.1021/acs.biochem.1c00768.
[225] Mullally G , 5’ modifications to CRISPR-Cas9 gRNA can change the dynamics and size of R-loops and inhibit DNA cleavage, Nucleic Acids Res 48 (2020) 6811–6823, 10.1093/nar/gkaa477.32496535
[226] Kleinstiver BP , High-fidelity CRISPR–Cas9 nucleases with no detectable genome-wide off-target effects, Nature 529 (2016) 490–495, 10.1038/nature16526.26735016
[227] Kleinstiver BP , 731. High-Fidelity CRISPR-Cas9 Nucleases with No Detectable Genome-Wide Off-Target Effects, Mol. Ther 24 (2016) S288, 10.1016/S1525-0016(16)33539-0.
[228] Schaefer KA , Unexpected mutations after CRISPR–Cas9 editing in vivo, Nat. Methods 14 (2017) 547–548, 10.1038/nmeth.4293.28557981
[229] Nathwani AC , Long-term safety and efficacy of factor IX gene therapy in hemophilia B, N. Engl. J. Med 371 (2014) 1994–2004.25409372
[230] MacLaren RE , Retinal gene therapy in patients with choroideremia: initial findings from a phase 1/2 clinical trial, Lancet 383 (2014) 1129–1137.24439297
[231] Bainbridge JW , Effect of gene therapy on visual function in Leber’s congenital amaurosis, N. Engl. J. Med 358 (2008) 2231–2239.18441371
[232] Yang Y , Xu J , Ge S , Lai L , CRISPR/Cas: advances, limitations, and applications for precision cancer research, Front. Med 8 (2021).
[233] Chen W , BBB-crossing adeno-associated virus vector: an excellent gene delivery tool for CNS disease treatment, J. Control. Release 333 (2021) 129–138, 10.1016/j.jconrel.2021.03.029.33775685
[234] Senís E , CRISPR/Cas9-mediated genome engineering: an adeno-associated viral (AAV) vector toolbox, Biotechnol. J 9 (2014) 1402–1412.25186301
[235] Wu P , Non-viral gene delivery systems for tissue repair and regeneration, J. Transl. Med 16 (2018) 1–20.29316942
