LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101311472
34100
Cell Stem Cell
Cell Stem Cell
Cell stem cell
1934-5909
1875-9777

36736288
10082636
10.1016/j.stem.2023.01.002
NIHMS1865123
Article
Adult hippocampal neurogenesis in Alzheimer’s disease: a roadmap to clinical relevance
Salta Evgenia 1
Lazarov Orly 4
Fitzsimons Carlos P. 3
Tanzi Rudolph 2*
Lucassen Paul J. 35*
Choi Se Hoon 2*
1 Laboratory of Neurogenesis and Neurodegeneration, Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience, Meibergdreef 47, 1105 BA, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
2 Genetics and Aging Research Unit, MassGeneral Institute for Neurodegenerative Disease, Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, McCance Center for Brain Health, 114 16th Street, 02129, MA, USA
3 Brain Plasticity group, Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences, Faculty of Science, University of Amsterdam, Science Park 904, 1098 XH, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
4 Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, The University of Illinois at Chicago, 808 S Wood St, 60612, Chicago, IL, USA
5 Center for Urban Mental Health, University of Amsterdam, Kruislaan 404, 1098 SM, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
* Correspondence: tanzi@helix.mgh.harvard.edu; p.j.lucassen@uva.nl; choi.sehoon@mgh.harvard.edu
3 4 2023
02 2 2023
02 2 2024
30 2 120136
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Adult hippocampal neurogenesis (AHN) drops sharply during early stages of Alzheimer’s disease (AD), via unknown mechanisms, and correlates with cognitive status in AD patients. Understanding AHN regulation in AD could provide a framework for innovative pharmacological interventions. We here combine molecular, behavioral, and clinical data, and critically discuss the multicellular complexity of the AHN niche in relation to AD pathophysiology. We further present a roadmap towards a better understanding of the role of AHN in AD, by probing the promises and caveats of the latest technological advancements in the field, and addressing the conceptual and methodological challenges ahead.

Graphical Abstract

Adult hippocampal neurogenesis (AHN) drops in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and correlates with cognitive status in AD patients. We discuss the significance of the multicellular complexity of the AHN niche in AD, and present a roadmap to better understand the AHN role in AD and address emerging conceptual and methodological challenges.

Alzheimer’s disease
adult hippocampal neurogenesis
cognition
memory
resilience
human
niche
cellular complexity
therapy

pmcIntroduction

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common form of age-related dementia, causing progressive memory loss and cognitive impairment. AD is traditionally characterized by two main pathological hallmarks: extracellular plaques, primarily consisting of the β amyloid peptide (Aβ), and intracellular neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs), composed of hyperphosphorylated TAU (pTAU) 1. Previous research has shown that aberrant deposition of Aβ and NFTs leads to synaptic damage, neuronal dysfunction, and ultimately, progressive cognitive decline 2,3.

The hippocampus, a critical hub for cognition and memory, is one of the first brain regions to be affected in AD patients 4. The dentate gyrus (DG), a hippocampal subfield implicated in learning and memory, particularly in pattern separation, shows substantial age-related functional decline in humans 5,6, non-human primates 7,8 and rodents 8,9. The DG is further unique as it contains the so-called ‘neurogenic niche’, wherein stem cells continue to generate new neurons in the adult brain, in a special form of cellular plasticity referred to as ‘adult hippocampal neurogenesis’ (AHN) 10. Adult-born dentate granule cells (aDGCs) functionally incorporate into the granule cell layer of the DG as part of the hippocampal circuitry, where they, via their unique physiological properties, play key roles in neural plasticity and cognition 11–15. AHN has been shown to be impacted by (several aspects of) AD pathology in both rodents and humans 16,17.

Despite a substantial focus on amyloid and TAU pathologies over the past decades, disease-modifying therapies for AD are still lacking. Hence, ‘mapping’ the full mechanistic heterogeneity of AD, i.e. beyond Aβ and TAU, is an important critical step to developing novel therapeutic targets 18. Key mechanistic questions as to what renders an individual vulnerable, or resilient to developing AD, remain unanswered, but may be ‘hidden’ in the brains of a unique group of elderly individuals with preserved cognition, despite the presence of substantial AD pathology 19,20. This ‘cognitive reserve’ that is apparent in these subjects, may likely increase resilience towards developing dementia 19. Notably, AHN levels in postmortem brains were recently correlated to ante-mortem cognition in mild cognitive impaired (MCI) and AD patients, pointing towards a potential active role of AHN in the build-up of cognitive reserve, which can later on confer resilience to AD-related dementia 21,22.

As AHN can modulate the DG, the gateway to memory formation, changes in AHN may have physiological implications for the greater hippocampal formation and its cortical inputs, and from there, functional effects on learning and memory 12,23,24. Yet, the exact characteristics of the neurogenic cell populations that exist in the adult and aging human brain, how they impact function and are impacted themselves by AD progression, whether or not they are involved in cognitive reserve, and what is the therapeutic relevance of specific pro-neurogenic signals, are all questions that remain to be elucidated.

Here, we critically discuss current knowledge on the putative role of AHN in AD pathophysiology and resilience, focusing primarily on the human brain. We emphasize the importance of the multicellular complexity of the neurogenic niche where AHN resides, and hence the relevance of integrating both intrinsic and extrinsic signals from distinct cellular populations, into any future therapeutic strategies aimed to ‘rejuvenate’ the AD brain. Lastly, we probe the promises and challenges that novel technologies aimed at profiling human AHN entail, and from there, propose a framework to move the field forward.

Profiling adult hippocampal neurogenesis in the human brain: current state-of-the-art

Determining the presence of hippocampal neurogenesis in the human brain and the putative resemblance to its rodent counterpart has been difficult due to technical and methodological limitations and the study of human brains per se. A series of recent studies have employed either distinct histological approaches or single-nucleus transcriptomics to study AHN in postmortem human hippocampal tissue 25–29. Their opposing results have, yet again, re-ignited a debate on the occurrence and relevance of AHN in humans 30,31.

The first convincing support for human AHN in postmortem human brain specimens was based on bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) labeling, traditionally used to label dividing cells and trace their progeny in vivo. In an early, highly influential study, neurogenesis was demonstrated in a small series of postmortem hippocampal samples of cancer patients, where BrdU had been administered for diagnostic purposes 32. Taking an alternative route, Jonas Frisen’s group later confirmed the presence of neurons generated during adult life in the DG using carbon-14 (14C)-based retrospective birth dating, providing further support for the existence of human AHN 33. However, subsequent immunohistochemical studies aiming at identifying neural progenitor cells (NPCs) or immature neurons in the adult human hippocampus have reported highly variable degrees of AHN, that might to some extent be explained by methodological variables 27,30,34–40.

There is also substantial, yet indirect, support for human neurogenesis from studies in which neurogenic subpopulations, such as NPCs, could be isolated from the adult human brain, further revealing its neurogenic potential, and sometimes even correlating it with antemortem cognitive measures 41–44. Currently, each of the experimental strategies used to identify and visualize NPCs and progeny in human brain comes with its own limitations and possible methodological confounders, that have to be cautiously considered. Ultimately, monitoring AHN in living subjects would provide the ultimate proof for its occurrence in the adult human brain. Yet, although much progress has been made 45, non-invasive imaging approaches to visualize potential NPCs in humans have until now lacked the required degree of cell type specificity 46.

Single-cell transcriptomics as a novel tool to survey human neurogenesis

Given the cellular complexity of the neurogenic niche in humans, single-cell transcriptomics was put forward as a promising method that could help advance the field 31,39,47–49. Using single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNAseq) in mouse DG, we and others recently demonstrated that the adult neurogenic niche is a spatially defined complex multicellular system 50–53; within this small subfield, neural stem cells (NSCs) and their progeny form a tightly regulated continuum of cell states 50–52, supported by other niche-resident cells, like diverse neuronal populations, niche-specific microglia, astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, and specialized vasculature 50,54–58.

ScRNAseq has also been deployed to profile the human hippocampus 26,28,29,47,59,60. In an earlier study, Habib et al. identified a small population of cells in the adult human hippocampus, annotated as ‘NSCs’ based on the expression of some putative neurogenic markers 60. However, a recent meta-analysis of this dataset 31 concluded that this cellular cluster could consist of hippocampal ependymal cells, that may have been mis-classified in the original study. More recently, Ayhan et al. reported the single-cell transcriptomic profiling of the hippocampal anterior-to-posterior axis, using surgically resected samples from five epilepsy patients. Yet, apart from the major neuronal (including DGCs and pyramidal neurons) and glial subtypes, no NSC- or other progenitor- like cells were identified in this relatively small dataset 59.

Very recently, three comprehensive single-nucleus transcriptomic studies focusing on the adult human DG have yielded conflicting results: two did depict populations with NSC or immature neuronal characteristics 28,29, while one failed to identify any neurogenic populations 26. With respect to AD, only Zhou et al. employed a small cohort of AD patients in their single-nucleus transcriptomic profiling of the DG, as discussed below 29. In addition, there is currently one preprint reporting on the profiling of single-nucleus transcriptomes in the whole hippocampus and entorhinal cortex (thus not focusing on the DG per se) of 65 individuals from the ROSMAP cohort at early and late pathology stages, which reported only the main neuronal and glial (sub)populations 47. Hence, despite the application of these novel technologies, several questions remain largely unanswered: how widespread is human AHN, which cellular populations and biological pathways are critical to sustain or boost it, and how does it mechanistically interact with AD.

Evidence for impaired adult hippocampal neurogenesis in Alzheimer’s disease patients

Recent evidence suggests that cellular populations with putative neurogenic or immature features in the adult human hippocampus are affected in AD (for a systematic review of all prior studies, see 61). Moreno-Jiménez et al. studied the extent of AHN in high-quality and optimally preserved human brains of 58 individuals (13 neurologically healthy control subjects and 45 patients with AD at distinct Braak stages) and observed a marked and progressive decline of the number of DCX+-cells (defined as immature neurons by co-expression of DCX and other immature neuronal markers) as the disease advanced 30. Although the DCX+-population was further reduced in patients at severe disease stages, a significant decrease in AHN already started in individuals at Braak stages I/II, relative to neurologically healthy subjects, which did not match the mild decline in healthy subjects during physiological aging. These findings strongly support AD as a condition that differs from physiological aging and suggest that, in addition to mild AHN reductions owing to normal aging, independent neuropathological mechanisms could contribute, or be related to the AHN impairment in AD. Shortly after, putative Nestin+/SOX2+/Ki67+-neural progenitors and DCX+-cells with neuroblast/immature neuronal characteristics were detected in 18 individuals aged 79–99 years during healthy aging, and in MCI and AD 21. Notably the numbers of these populations could be correlated to cognitive performance as a measure of disease progression. The number of DCX+-cells was lower, not only in patients with severe cognitive decline, but also in those with MCI. Further, there was a positive correlation between the number of neuroblasts and cognitive diagnosis across patient cohorts 21. Deficits of AHN in MCI patients may thus precede and possibly promote cognitive deficits in AD.

A recent study employing single-cell transcriptomics in the AD human postmortem DG confirmed a decrease in a neuronal population with immature transcriptional profile compared to samples from healthy control individuals 29, supporting previous evidence derived from immunohistochemical studies 21,30. Quantitative analysis within this cellular subpopulation identified 14 downregulated genes in AD, associated with synaptic plasticity and signaling. Interestingly, familial and sporadic AD-derived induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) also exhibited early neurogenic changes, and although such systems are far from recapitulating the full complexity of the adult neurogenic niche, these findings again suggest that impairments in AHN could be a potential intrinsic feature of early AD 62–65.

Multicellular complexity at the adult hippocampal neurogenic niche in AD

The neurogenic niche in the adult brain is a spatially defined hippocampal subfield, wherein NSCs and their progeny are in continuous communication with each other and with other niche-resident, cellular populations and vascular elements and scaffolds (Figure 1). As such, a systematic molecular and cellular profiling of the presumable hippocampal neurogenic niche in human (AD) brain will be key to assessing the role of AHN in AD progression and resilience, and will help identify distinct cell types and cell states involved in AD etiology that may be differentially amenable to possible therapeutic interventions.

Neuronal subtypes

Granule cells are the most abundant neuronal population in the DG. In the rodent brain, DGCs have been shown to receive excitatory inputs from distinct cortical, subcortical and hippocampal subfields, and subsequently relay pertinent signals onto NSCs and immature aDGCs via secretion of soluble factors 66–71. Rather surprisingly, not much is known about the impact of AD pathology on mature DGCs in the human brain. While amyloid plaques have been observed, they appear minor in the DG, which is a subfield that does not undergo major cell loss nor prominent atrophy in AD 72–74. A significant decrease in the dendritic length of DGCs and differential effects between distal and apical branching at late stages of AD progression have been observed in a small cohort of patients 75, but whether and how these alterations may impact NSCs and their progeny at the onset of disease progression, requires further research.

In rodents, DGCs recruit circuit signals transduced by a wide range of inhibitory interneurons and mossy cells and likely thereby modulate NSC homeostasis, progenitor proliferation and survival, and maturation of aDGCs in a stage-specific manner 13,67,76–79. Adult NSCs also receive direct inputs from parvalbumin interneurons, which helps them remain quiescent 80. Reversely, GABAergic signaling onto hippocampal NPCs induces neuronal differentiation 81. Hence, local network activity appears to be an important determinant of NSC activation. This notion becomes particularly critical from an AHN perspective, considering that the DG circuitry cannot be only positively regulated (e.g. by physical exercise 82–84), but also negatively impacted along physiological aging and in AD 24,85.

Interestingly, enrichment of pTAU inclusions is observed in interneurons residing in the subgranule zone (SGZ) and hilus of the DG in AD patients and AD mouse models 86. Of note, overexpression of human TAU in GABAergic interneurons in the mouse brain induced local neural network hyperactivation, increased NSC-derived astrogliosis and impaired neurogenesis 86. Thus, widespread hippocampal network dysfunction is a prominent feature of AD pathology, which also impacts the neurogenic niche 87. Yet, the functional implications of these neuron-specific AD alterations for the neurogenic process along AD progression in the human brain, remain largely unknown.

Microglia

Microglia are the brain-resident macrophages, contributing to neuronal homeostasis by continuously surveilling and phagocytosing apoptotic cells and debris, and by signaling onto different cellular populations 88. In the rodent adult hippocampal neurogenic niche, microglia are in close contact with NPCs and DGCs, where they are responsible for the phagocytosis and elimination of both newborn and mature neurons, as well as for the pruning of selected synapses 89–91.

Recent evidence suggests that niche-resident microglia display unique morphological and transcriptomic signatures specific to the neurogenic niche, by upregulating activation-like transcriptional programs and downregulating homeostatic gene expression 50,54–56,92. Phagocytosis of apoptotic cells promotes a coordinated transcriptional program in DG-resident microglia, which alters their secretome, inhibiting neurogenesis both in vivo and in vitro 93. While selective microglial ablation in the DG reduced survival of adult-born neuroblasts 55, differential context- and activation state-specific effects of microglia on AHN have been reported as well 67,94,95, consistent with our current understanding of the complexity and diversity of microglial responses and properties 88,96.

In an earlier study, AHN in mice was induced upon controlled activation by microglial cytokines, mimicking adaptive immunity 97. Similarly, interleukin-4 (IL-4)-activated microglia increase NPC proliferation and neuronal differentiation in mouse DG 98, while voluntary running induces insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) expression in DG microglia of aged mice, presumably shifting them from an inflammatory towards a more neuroprotective state 99,100. Of note, microglia from hippocampi of animals that were exposed to exercise (i.e. running), were able to activate latent NPCs when added to neurosphere preparations from sedentary mice, suggesting that the running-induced increase of AHN is, at least partly, mediated by microglia 94. Reversely, inflammation-associated microglial activation impairs NPC proliferation, neuronal maturation and cognition 97,101–104. Similarly, alterations in the microglial secretome in the aged mouse hippocampus is correlated with the natural decline in NPC activity, mediated primarily via CX(3)CL1, a chemokine associated with a more neuroprotective microglial phenotype 94.

Similarly to the healthy brain, accumulating evidence suggests divergent and multilayered functions of microglia in AD pathology 88. Microglia residing in the DG of human AD brain were shown to develop an aberrant morphological profile that was linked to the accumulation of toxic soluble pTAU species, although the functional implications for the neurogenic capacity within the hippocampal niche of the AD brain remain to be explored 105. In co-culture with mouse NPCs, microglia carrying familial mutations of presenilin 1 (PS1) could block the inductive effect of IL-4 on NPC proliferation 106. Interestingly, inhibition of microglial activation or microglial depletion in mouse models of familial AD, restored AHN and improved memory and anxiety behaviour 107,108.

Taken together, it will be important for future therapeutic approaches to better understand the functional implications of the differential activation of distinct microglial populations in AD. Also, a systematic characterization of the different microglial subtypes and cell states in the human neurogenic niche -along the AD trajectory- will be particularly instructive.

Astrocytes

In the adult mouse DG, astrocytes are derived from a proliferating local astrocytic population generated by adult NSCs 58,109. Niche-resident astrocytes are implicated in the proper survival, maturation and functional integration of aDGCs 67,110. These effects are mediated by both juxtacrine and paracrine signaling pathways. In vitro, astrocytes inhibit neuronal differentiation of cultured neurospheres via Notch signaling 111. In vivo, newly formed synapses of aDGCs are ensheathed by astrocytic processes. Astrocyte-specific blockade of vesicular release reduced glutamatergic synaptic input and spine density in newborn but not mature DGCs 110, while inhibition of astrocytic glutamate re-uptake also decreased postsynaptic currents in aDGCs 112, highlighting a close interaction between astrocytes and aDGC function. Recently, single-nucleus transcriptomics in adult human hippocampus revealed distinct molecular signatures between astrocytes isolated from the entorhinal cortex and those residing in DG, with the latter overall expressing remarkably lower levels of GFAP 113. A gradual increase in GFAP levels with advancing age was, however, observed for both cortical and hippocampal astrocytes 113. Similarly, a general decrease in the number of S100β-expressing astrocytes with aging was recently observed in the mouse DG 114, however, the possible functional implications for adult AHN remain unknown.

Similarly to microglia, astrocytes can provide neurotrophic support via secreting BDNF and increasing dendritic outgrowth and spine density in cultured neurons 115. Interestingly, astroglia-specific secretion of BDNF in the 5xFAD mouse model of AD increased hippocampal synaptic density, LTP and improved cognitive performance 115. Whether and how astrocytic BDNF signals onto aDGCs in the AD hippocampal niche has not been studied, however, BDNF overexpression in hippocampal astrocytes can induce AHN 116. The proneurogenic properties of astrocytes seem to be specific to DG-residing astrocytic populations, since co-culture of adult NSCs with spinal cord-derived astrocytes did not induce neuronal differentiation 117. Interestingly, astrocytic proliferation in the adult mouse DG increases upon physical exercise, similarly to what is observed in adult hippocampal NPCs 109, putatively suggesting an interaction between the enhanced astrocytic pool and the neurogenic trajectory.

In the human AD brain, an aberrant accumulation of TAU was recently observed in astrocytes residing in the hilus of the DG 118. Tau overexpression in hilar astrocytes in mice reduced the numbers of both newborn neurons and interneurons, and in parallel induced spatial memory impairment 118. Although these observations were associated with abnormal astrocytic mitochondrial transport and function, other mechanisms, like altered gliotransmitter or cytokine release, cannot be ruled out. Indeed, astrocyte-specific release of interleukin-6 (IL-6) in adult mouse DG impaired NPC proliferation, survival and neuronal differentiation 119. Further insights from single-cell profiling studies, specifically in human (AD) DG, could shed light on niche-specific mechanistic correlates between astrocytes, other glial populations and the neurogenic process per se.

Vasculature

The DG is a highly vascularized brain region, where blood vessels provide trophic and neurogenic factors, nutrients and structural support to both aDGCs and mature DGCs 120,121. Also, NPCs and NSCs are in close proximity to blood vessels 57,122, as a number of capillaries cross the granule cell layer towards the hilar side and then change direction and align with the SGZ in a rostral-to-caudal direction 122. Blood flow velocity is correlated with exercise-induced AHN 123, while neurovascular coupling is required for the induction of AHN in a novel environment 124. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-induced DG neovascularization was further shown to be associated with a significant increase in AHN 125–127. In addition, vasculature-derived IGF-1 can promote neurogenesis 124,128,129.

In vitro, human hippocampal NPCs treated with human serum from older donors showed increased apoptosis compared to those incubated with serum from young individuals, further supporting the importance of the systemic milieu for the survival of NPCs in the aged brain 130. Of note, in a similar assay, increased apoptosis in human hippocampal NPCs was associated with an increased propensity of the serum donors for developing dementia 131. Along the same lines, heterochronic parabiosis experiments in mice demonstrated that an old ‘systemic environment’ decreases AHN and impairs memory in younger animals, possibly due to the secretion of proinflammatory cytokines, like CCL11 132,133. In mice, an age-dependent decline in vascularization and increases in blood-brain barrier leakiness have been reported 114. In addition, vasculature impairment in the hippocampus, and in particular in the molecular layer of the DG, was reported in AD mouse models 134. Vasculature alterations in the DG of aged individuals or AD patients have not been studied extensively. However, recent evidence showed decreased angiogenesis, neuroplasticity and progenitor numbers in the anterior DG of older individuals compared to younger tissue 34.

Intercellular cross-talk

Adult NSCs and their progeny need to precisely integrate a plethora of signals from the niche, including those from DGCs, microglia, astrocytes, endothelia, and long-range neuronal projections to the DG, notably in an activity- and age-dependent manner 67,87,135–137. Actually, despite its name, NSC quiescence was actually suggested to reflect a rather ‘active’ state, maintained by distinct signaling interactions within the niche 138. Of interest, several secreted factors (e.g. Notch, Wnt, SHH, FGF, BMP) that have been reported as AHN regulators, are deregulated in AD, yet the direct impact of these aberrations on the neurogenic process remains largely elusive (for systematic reviews, see 67,139).

Rather surprisingly, adult NSCs harbour intrinsic inflammatory properties under homeostatic conditions, which need to be proactively suppressed in order to enable their proliferative and differentiation capacity 140,141. Conditioned medium from cultured NPCs could induce microglial functions, such as phagocytosis, chemotaxis and proliferation, primarily via VEGF 142. Interestingly, a pathology-dependent loss of immunomodulatory and neurotrophic properties of NPCs derived from the subventricular zone (SVZ) of AD mice has been previously observed 143. Thus, while the putative physiological relevance of this gene ontology remains unclear, these findings underscore the significance of the local intercellular crosstalk between AHN and immunomodulatory signaling in both physiological and pathological conditions.

As part of another intricate intercellular communication network, DG interneurons secrete the endogenous neuropeptide cholecystokinin (CCK), which via an astrocyte-mediated glutamatergic signaling cascade, induces neuronal differentiation of adult NSCs 144. Similarly, neuron-derived fractalkine promotes AHN via binding its receptor, i.e. CX3CR1, in microglia 94,145. In conditions of chronic stress, IL-4-activated microglia promote AHN via BDNF signaling in mice 98. Such interactions may become particularly important under inflammation-prone conditions, like aging and neurodegeneration. Indeed, during aging, decreased AHN has been linked to increased corticosteroids, BMP signaling and neuroinflammation, also in the human brain 28,146,147. Interestingly, an increase in microglia-blood vessel contacts along aging has been recently reported in mouse DG 114, however, the functional significance of this observation warrants further research. Apolipoprotein E4 (APOE4), the strongest genetic risk factor for developing late-onset AD, was shown in earlier studies to impair aDGC maturation via GABA signaling inhibition 148. Recent in vitro evidence suggested that APOE4 impairs microglial lipid homeostasis triggering pro-inflammatory signals that disrupt neuronal activity 149. Moreover, adult NPCs derived from the AD mouse SVZ, were shown to exhibit decreased trophic properties and a diminished potential for supporting microglial phagocytic activity and Aβ clearance 143,150, further highlighting the putative functional significance of the niche microenvironment in AD. Yet, the precise mechanistic underpinnings of such intercellular interactions in the human AD niche remain to be elucidated.

Cellular senescence and quiescence at the neurogenic niche

A dramatic reduction in hippocampal neurogenesis takes place in early adulthood, followed by a slower, more gradual decline during aging in both mice 151 and humans 30,33,34. Cellular senescence is a dynamic, multifaceted process that results in cell cycle arrest upon a variety of stressors or physiological signals 152. Cellular senescence can be attributed to both intrinsic characteristics of neural stem cells and the niche micro-environment, and has been directly linked to not only physiological but also pathological aging, including AD 153,154. Senescence-like molecular signatures were recently profiled in neuronal populations in human AD brain and in AD patient-derived directly induced neurons in culture, involving - among others- metabolic alterations and pro-inflammatory signals 155. Whether such signatures are also present in postmitotic DGC (sub)populations in AD and, if so, how they may impact niche-resident neurogenic populations, is not known. Age-dependent transcriptional, genetic, epigenetic, metabolic, hormonal, inflammatory and proteostatic alterations in adult NSCs and other niche-resident cellular populations have been all implicated in reduced NSC functionality in the aged brain 114,136,156–161. Increased inflammatory signals and non-canonical Wnt signaling, in particular, were shown to shift adult NSCs in the aged SVZ towards quiescence, limiting their activation and proliferation potential, although senescence signatures were not monitored in the same context 141. An age-dependent increase of the expression of specific senescence markers was also observed in the NSCs of the SVZ 162. However, NSC and progenitor senescence in the aged (human) DG has not been systematically studied to date.

Declined progenitor numbers and function were found to be correlated with p16Ink4a, which is a cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor negatively regulating the cell cycle and linked to senescence, in the SVZ, but not in the DG 163. However, in another study, senescent NPCs were found in the DG of mice, and their ablation increased NPC proliferation and neurogenesis 164. Increased genetic and epigenetic instability and neuroinflammation were also observed in the non-human primate DG upon aging 165. A shift towards quiescence was recently shown to impair homeostasis and function of adult NSCs in the aged mouse hippocampus, promoting distinct molecular signatures related to epigenetic and transcriptional dysregulation, inflammation, metabolic and proteostatic alterations, cellular stress, and DNA repair 166, however, whether these dynamic changes involve senescence-related pathways remains unknown.

Mitochondrial dysfunction in adult hippocampal NSCs has also been associated with reduced neurogenesis in the aged brain 167. Interestingly, NSCs isolated from human AD postmortem tissue showed decreased viability and precocious senescence compared to NSCs from controls 43. Even though the implications of these findings in pathological conditions have not been studied yet, it has been proposed that elimination of certain subpopulations of senescent and/or quiescent progenitors could potentially be employed to reverse the slow AHN rate in AD 136. Overall, cellular quiescence and senescence are two relatively understudied phenotypes with some major putative functional implications for physiological aging and AD. Evidently, further research into quiescence- and senescence- related cellular and molecular profiles in the AD DG is required to identify mechanistic checkpoints that could be potentially targeted in therapeutic strategies.

AHN and AD: a potential link to resilience?

Human studies

Somewhat counterintuitive, histopathological changes associated with AD, Aβ and TAU pathologies, have also been documented in post-mortem brains of non-demented, older individuals. Several terms have been used to describe these non-demented subjects, including -but not limited to- resilient to AD, non-demented with AD neuropathology (NDAN), and ‘cognitive reserve’ individuals [for review, see 168]. The existence of resilient individuals, who remain cognitively intact despite the presence of substantial Aβ and TAU pathology, suggests that the human brain can naturally resist, or significantly delay the effects of these neurotoxic events that may otherwise lead to cognitive impairment in AD. However, the mechanistic underpinnings of this increased tolerance to AD pathology and what underlies an enhanced cognitive resilience remain largely unknown.

Briley et al. found that the number of SOX2+-cells with putative NSC-like characteristics was significantly increased in the DG of NDAN individuals as compared to AD subjects 169. The prevalence of this cellular subpopulation positively correlated with preserved cognitive function, and these authors concluded that sustained AHN in the DG of NDAN subjects is an important factor in preserving their intact cognition, notably despite the presence of plaques and NFTs. In support, we also demonstrated that the prevalence of DCX+-cells positively correlates with better cognitive scores in both AD and MCI patients 21 and further showed that the levels of a DCX+- and PCNA+- cellular subpopulation (possibly reflecting neuroblasts) were associated with the functional interaction of the presynaptic SNAP Receptor (SNARE) proteins, syntaxin and SNAP-25 21.

Thus, the level of AHN is associated with both higher cognitive score and increased levels of critical synaptic proteins, and is associated with intact cognition, irrespective of the presence of AD pathology in a subgroup of patients. Of note, AD, and also MCI, patients are furthermore often impaired in AHN-related tasks, like spatial orientation and pattern separation 170,171. These observations together suggest that targeting AHN could be a valuable putative therapeutic target to counteract cognitive impairment and promote synaptic resilience in AD, and that reduced AHN in AD may -partially- account for cognitive dysfunction in the disease.

Animal studies: Contribution of AHN impairment to cognitive decline in AD

Studies using AD transgenic mouse models have generated mounting evidence implicating alterations of AHN in AD pathology. These mouse lines include combinations of familial AD (FAD)-associated mutations in amyloid precursor protein (APP) and/or PS1, as well as in the gene encoding the microtubule-associated protein TAU (MAPT). The majority of these studies reported decreased AHN in early stages of AD 172–174. More specifically, the APPswePS1ΔE9 mouse model showed severe reduction in NPC proliferation as well as neuronal differentiation at 2 months of age, when Aβ plaques were not yet evident 153, and notably before the occurrence of cognitive deficits 175. 5×FAD mice also exhibited impaired AHN starting at 2–3 months of age 176 prior to amyloid deposition 177 or cognitive dysfunction 176. Reduced AHN was detected in 3×Tg mice already starting at 2 months, before the accumulation of Aβ plaques and pTau/NFTs 178 with memory impairments not apparent before 4–5 months in this line 179.

The observation that AHN impairment occurs prior to the accumulation of AD hallmarks and the appearance of cognitive dysfunction suggests that AHN impairment may have a causative role in the cognitive decline along AD disease progression. Along these lines, ablation of AHN indeed exacerbated cognitive dysfunction in APPswePS1ΔE9 mice 180 and in 5×FAD mice 176. In two other studies from the same group, ablation of neurogenic populations was reported to improve synaptic plasticity and cognitive function in APP/PS1 and hAPP-J20 mice 181,182. In the first, Gfap-expressing cells were depleted, while in the second one, all proliferating cells were eliminated. Both approaches targeted a wide range of populations that included all astrocytes in the former, and all proliferating cells in the brains of familial AD mice in the latter, which may have comprised -among others- microglia and astrocytes. Elimination of disease-associated microglial and astrocytic subpopulations in AD may underlie the apparently beneficial effect 108,183.

While AHN-specific tests for changes in pattern separation, as those also found in AD patients 171, still need to be performed in most AD models, this already demonstrates that AHN impairment per se induces cognitive deficits in rodent models of AD. Therefore, enhancing -functional- AHN, preferentially in the earlier stages of AD, may help to increase brain reserve, which could be a potential therapeutic strategy for AD treatment.

Animal studies: Strategies to modify AHN in AD models - Impact on cognition

A series of studies aiming at increasing AHN in rodent models of AD have further provided experimental proof-of-concept for the notion that AHN stimulation may benefit cognitive functions in AD. Recently, we identified miR-132, a microRNA strongly downregulated in AD, as a potent positive regulator of AHN in mice and in cultured human NSCs 53. Overexpression of miR-132, by intracerebroventricular injection of a synthetic miR-132 mimic oligonucleotide, ameliorated AHN deficits in APP/PS1 and APP knock-in (AppNL-G-F) mice, and in parallel successfully restored memory deficits in AppNL-G-F mice in passive avoidance and pattern separation tests. Subsequently, blocking the proliferation of progenitor cells in miR-132-overexpressing AD mice abolished memory rescue in the passive avoidance task, confirming that AHN is a prime component of miR-132 regulation of contextual memory performance in this task. Interestingly, the miR-132-related processes included NPC proliferation, neuronal differentiation, survival, functional integration and neurotrophic signaling (like e.g. BDNF), suggesting that a synergistic contribution of cell-intrinsic and cell-extrinsic signals is necessary for a potent pro-neurogenic effect 53.

Along the same lines, increasing AHN alone, either genetically (by a viral infection to express WNT3 protein) or pharmacologically (P7C3, a compound that improves the survival of new neurons) had minimal effects in ameliorating cognitive dysfunction in 5×FAD mice 176. However, increasing AHN by exercise did improve cognitive abilities in 5×FAD mice. In addition to an increase in AHN, exercise led to an increase in the levels of hippocampal BDNF. Genetic and pharmacological treatments that simultaneously induced AHN combined with a treatment to increase levels of BDNF ameliorated cognitive dysfunction in 5×FAD mice despite the presence of stable levels of amyloid plaques. Although BDNF infusion into the hippocampus could improve cognitive performance in a rat model of AD induced by Aβ42 184, increasing BDNF alone, without promoting AHN, was not sufficient to improve cognitive function in 5×FAD mice 176. Together, these findings highlight the significance of considering the ‘fitness’ of the entire niche microenvironment as a sine qua non for AHN targeting.

Enhancing maturation and functional integration of aDGCs into the existing granule cell network, without increasing their number, has also been shown to improve cognitive function in AD. Richetin et al. identified Neurod1 as a potent candidate to direct adult hippocampal progenitors towards an exclusive neuronal fate and to stimulate their terminal neuronal differentiation 185. Selective Neurod1 gene delivery to adult neural progenitors increased dendritic spine density only of the newborn neurons in APPswePS1ΔE9 mice to the same level as that observed in wild-type mice. The increased connectivity of only the adult-born neurons in this mouse model led to a restoration of spatial memory, further highlighting the important role of AHN for cognition in AD.

Novel approaches, remaining challenges, and open questions

A series of conceptual and methodological roadblocks, discussed below, could -at least partially- explain the conflicting findings and the current scarcity of a mechanistic understanding of the exact role of AHN in human AD 39,49 (Figure 2). Overcoming these will yield more consistent results, and will also enable a better application of current findings to future therapeutic development.

Human brain tissue quality

As discussed before, studies on human AHN in AD have, to date, been primarily performed in postmortem, fixative-preserved, brain tissue. Such approaches come with considerable limitations, mostly due to variable postmortem delay (PMD) and suboptimal tissue fixation, both of which can critically impact the quality of immunolabeling against specific neurogenic markers: target antigens decay at different rates following death or differentially react to distinct fixation conditions or agonal states 37,39,61,186,187.

Similarly, tissue quality and RNA stability, as reflected in the RNA integrity number (RIN), are also pivotal for successful scRNAseq applications 188–191. Having access to high quality, short-PMD and high-RIN archived brain tissue samples is challenging but pivotal 27,39,192: tissue collection and processing practices at biobanks worldwide differ and often do not align with the requirements for optimal AHN detection, which becomes critical when comparing matched groups of disease versus control cases.

Sample stratification

Another major issue complicating data interpretation is the observation that next to environmental factors like exercise, stress or medication, neurogenesis rates have been associated with pathological conditions (e.g. status epilepticus, depression, AD) and additionally, with the effects of medication. Hence, a thorough clinical documentation for each donor is a prerequisite not only for accurate patient stratification, but also for the inclusion of properly matched control samples. Confounding factors that can compromise the results and impact their interpretation include, among others, co-existing pathologies and comorbidities, medication, agonal state, and ante-mortem cognitive performance 39.

Evidently, identifying donors who fulfill specific selection criteria becomes particularly challenging in aged cohorts, as is the case for sporadic, late-onset AD. Even though scRNAseq approaches could in principle hold great promise for the assessment of the neurogenic potential of the adult human brain, some of the recent single-nucleus RNA sequencing (snRNAseq) studies in adult human hippocampus either did not provide adequate clinicopathological information on their donors, or used brain specimens with possibly interfering pathologies (e.g. epilepsy) 28,59,60.

Marker specificity in human brain

As all our current knowledge on ‘neurogenic’ markers has been inferred from rodent studies, the choice of markers for the study of human AHN is another key variable contributing to inconsistencies across the literature 26,31,39,193,194. Earlier histological studies and more recent single-nucleus transcriptomics in human hippocampus, have questioned the specificity, and hence the uniform use across species, of such markers for human adult NSCs and their progeny 26,28,29,31,48,194. Apart from a putative issue in histological studies, the current paucity of reliable human neurogenic markers can also impact the validity of single-cell transcriptomic approaches that base cell type annotation on pre-defined sets of mouse-inferred markers 26,50.

Indeed, snRNAseq datasets from the human adult hippocampus suggest that the transcriptional profiles derived from human and mouse DG, do not fully overlap 28,29,59,194. Yet, one of the recent snRNAseq studies that actively attempted to identify NSCs and progenitors in the adult human DG, but yielded negative results, still assumed a high degree of cross-species conservation 26: the authors searched for overlap between mouse and human datasets and employed mouse-specific markers with questionable specificity in human brain 31. However, in two of these very recent snRNAseq studies, both NSCs 28 and immature neurons 28,29 were successfully identified in the human adult neurogenic niche.

Different factors might account for these discrepancies. Wang et al. 28 proposed that a low inflammatory index is critical for the preservation of neurogenic populations and that increased inflammation levels may have impeded their identification in the Franjic et al. 26 dataset. In addition, Zhou et al. 29 had to implement machine learning analytical approaches in order to reliably delineate an immature neuronal cluster in their dataset, again suggesting that conventional marker-based strategies may not be sufficient for the profiling of rare (as discussed below) and previously uncharacterized populations in the adult human neurogenic niche. Interestingly, although small progenitor-like cell clusters (LPAR1+- and PAX6+ - cells) 47,59) have been identified in some of these datasets, these findings were not further investigated.

Scarcity of neuronal stem cells and progenitors

Of note, based on current histological data, putative bona fide adult NSCs and their progeny may be particularly rare in the aged human neurogenic niche, and might further decline in AD. Reliable identification of such scarce populations, using for instance snRNAseq, also requires the profiling of adequate cell numbers, notably at a sufficiently high sequencing depth. In addition, reconstructing differentiation trajectories (which would be particularly necessary to identify lineage relationships between NSCs and progeny in adult brain 26,52,194) from single-cell transcriptomic data heavily relies on sufficient sampling of cells that transition between different states in the lineage trajectory 195. Along these lines, analyzing anatomical substructures of the DG targeted by microdissection, may be necessary to enrich for cellular populations of interest and thereby ensure that any significant alterations between groups of individuals can be detected 47.

Not all recent studies deploying snRNAseq to profile the adult human hippocampus were adequately powered, in terms of either granule cell numbers or sequencing depth. This may interfere with the resolution or the accuracy of the subsequent cell type clustering and annotation. In addition, cellular populations of putative interest for AHN were in certain cases removed from the analysis due to their small size 26,59, suggesting that some valuable information might have been missed.

Methodological and computational challenges

Mapping the full complexity of the AHN niche in AD, and identifying the cell types and cell states that may be most amenable to therapeutic intervention, is challenging and cannot be solely achieved by tissue level resolution (bulk) approaches or immunohistochemical studies 47,196–198. Single-cell resolution, genome-wide, molecular profiling can offer valuable complementary insights, as recently demonstrated in rodent or primate dentate gyrus 26,28,29,50–52,194. Among others, analysis of these datasets further enables in silico reconstruction of lineage trajectories, or ‘trees’, by projecting cells onto a ‘pseudotime’ axis, according to their activation/differentiation transcriptomic profile, or by predicting the direction of differentiation of a given cellular population 199,200.

Yet, such retrospective differentiation trajectories do not necessarily reflect clonal relationships between cells, as genetic lineage tracing methods would do 195. In addition, these approaches cannot differentiate between adult-born, immature neurons and developmentally generated granule cells with retained immature profiles due to -among others-protracted differentiation 29. Hence, when profiling the human AHN niche in postmortem brain, novel computational tools that can address these issues would be of particular relevance to identify rare stem cell and progenitor populations in a more unbiased and reliable way 195,201–203. Notably, fate mapping of newborn neurons in adult human brain sections, was recently implemented, demonstrating the intrinsic regenerative potential of these cells ex vivo 29. Such approaches are instrumental, as they provide proof-of concept for the ability of the adult brain to generate new neurons and will therefore be particularly informative in delineating mechanisms that could be used to leverage neurogenesis in AD.

In addition, integration of single-cell transcriptomics, epigenomics and spatial transcriptomics from the same tissue was recently shown to increase robustness and validity of cell type classification and cell state identification in complex populations, such as the hippocampal neurogenic niche 204–206. Such cross-modal analysis was recently also implemented to reconstruct a multimodal cell census and atlas of the mammalian primary motor cortex within the BRAIN Initiative Cell Census Network 204. Similarly, multi-omics integration recently allowed the identification of cell type- and state-specific, disease-associated cis-regulatory elements, their candidate genes, and of their association with genetic risk in human AD cortex 205.

Future perspectives: Is AHN a realistic therapeutic target in AD?

Taken together, the evidence discussed here suggests that AHN may play a critical role in the progression of, or the resilience to AD pathology. Restoring and/or stimulating endogenous AHN, along with enhancing the ‘fitness’ of the DG niche in subjects at high risk for AD, could emerge as an effective strategy to prevent the onset and/or counteract the progression of the disease by promoting the regenerative and recovery process. Given the interaction between AHN and AD pathology (e.g. amyloid and pTAU), such strategies could be also used as adjunct therapeutics to existing treatments to maintain cognition or prevent its decline by providing synergistic effects on hippocampal function and plasticity.

Yet, could the (re)activation of ‘resting’ NSCs and a mere and timely addition of new neurons to the AD hippocampus be sufficient to halt or prevent memory decline? Recently, we reported that augmenting hippocampal neurogenesis in 5xAD mice rescues hippocampus-dependent memory, not only by increasing the recruitment of immature neurons into the memory circuit, but also by restoring spine density deficits in mature granule neurons in the DG 15, suggesting that newborn neurons can exert non cell-autonomous effects on the DG neuronal network. Yet, aDGCs are low in number as compared to the degenerating neurons in AD, and AD pathology extends beyond the hippocampus. Therefore, it is unlikely that stimulating AHN will achieve global repair in advanced stages of AD. However, the selective presence of AHN in the DG represents a highly strategic location in the trisynaptic circuit of memory processing and formation, and ‘rejuvenating’ the origin of that circuit, provided intervention starts on time, could help preserve and possibly even promote its function and from there, the hippocampus as a whole, and the subsequent cortical regions that receive its input.

Although the causal links between AHN decline and AD in humans still need to be addressed 136, it will be important to understand how AHN impacts functional connectivity and hippocampus-dependent behaviours. Previous reports suggest that the DG withstands the formation of amyloid plaques, NFTs and neuronal death until late stages of AD. However, more subtle intrinsic morphological, transcriptional or epigenetic alterations may contribute to memory alterations observed already at early stages of AD 207. Indeed, a recently postulated, interesting hypothesis has proposed a link between AHN and early AD degeneration of the lateral entorhinal cortex, which provides the main afferent connections to newly born neurons in DG: early exposure of axonal terminals to a putatively toxic cellular and molecular environment in the AD niche may result in retrograde damage of neuronal bodies in the lateral entorhinal cortex 208. Since causal relationships cannot be definitively established from cross-sectional data in postmortem studies, experimental validation is required to probe putative, cell type-specific molecular mechanisms, that became available from genome-wide screening studies, allowing a better understanding of the links between AHN and AD pathophysiology.

Human-relevant systems [e.g. mice carrying human AD mutations or engrafted with human progenitors, or patient-derived ex vivo (two- or three-dimensional) cell cultures] can address not only causality regarding novel hub regulators of AHN in AD, but also the contribution of common genetic risk factors. Notably, adult-born neurons in rodents have been shown to be pivotal not only for encoding novel experiences, but also for forgetting previously learned ones 209. Future studies will therefore need to dissociate these two functional aspects in order to leverage AHN to beneficially impact memory in AD. NPCs isolated from human AD brain retain the potential to proliferate and differentiate in vitro 43. Hence, even if AHN levels are attenuated in AD, identifying tractable cell populations, cellular states and early molecular mechanisms that could be selectively targeted to (re)stimulate the neurogenic process could hold great promise in developing novel therapeutic strategies for AD.

Adult NSCs are commonly perceived as a poor target for regenerative interventions, because they are limited in numbers and are stated to have limited self-renewal capability, suggesting that NSC proliferation that is prematurely or inappropriately induced, will presumably result in a depletion of the stem cell pool 210. Nevertheless, there is evidence for heterogeneous populations of molecularly distinct NSCs and progenitors, some of which may remain more plastic than others 13,58,166,211. Hence, identifying tractable and putatively druggable targets involved in the intrinsic regulation of quiescence, reactivation or inflammatory response of NSC or progenitor subsets, during AD progression or in AD resilience, could provide a framework to design novel pharmacological interventions tailored for AD 136.

As discussed above, the AHN niche is a complex, multicellular system receiving regulatory input from a multitude of intracellular, juxtacrine and paracrine signals that are disrupted in AD 58. Of note, our previous work suggests that, along with enhancing AHN, increasing the ‘fitness’ of the niche per se (by e.g. boosting neurotrophic signaling) and from early on, is required to reverse memory deficits in AD mice 176. Strikingly, aberrant de-differentiation and ‘hypo-mature’ cellular states have also been reported in vitro and in vivo as a possible sign of neuronal vulnerability and risk for neurodegeneration in AD 65,212–214. This further highlights the relevance of an intricate cytoarchitecture that may impact the functional significance of immature neuronal states in such a niche, for the DG network, and the hippocampus, in general. Taken together, these findings emphasize the importance of profiling, understanding, and considering the molecular and cellular complexity of the niche microenvironment when approaching AHN targeting as a therapeutic strategy in AD.

Acknowledgements

E.S. receives funding from Alzheimer Nederland (WE.03-2020-04), Health Holland (LSHM20095) and the EU Joint Programme - Neurodegenerative Disease Research (JPND2022-106). O.L. is supported by the National Institute on Aging (AG076940, AG033570, and AG060238). C.P.F. is funded by Alzheimer Nederland (WE. 03-2020-07). P.J.L. receives funding from Alzheimer Nederland, Zon-MW Memorabel (MODEM consortium) and the Center for Urban Mental Health. S.H.C. and R.E.T. are supported by Cure Alzheimer’s Fund and S.H.C. additionally by Edward N. and Della L. Thome Memorial Foundation.

Figure 1. Disruption of homeostasis at the hippocampal neurogenic niche in Alzheimer’s disease: putative cellular and molecular correlates.

AD pathology, as reflected in the accumulation of amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles and the loss of neurons in the neurogenic niche of the dentate gyrus, impacts distinct niche-resident cellular populations and inter-cellular signaling pathways. Captions with question marks indicate observations that have not been directly validated in AD. DGC, dentate gyrus granule cells; RGL, radial glia-like adult neural stem cells; NPC, neural precursor cells; ImN, immature neurons; aDGC, adult-born granule cells; InN, interneurons; NFT, neurofibrillary tangles.

Figure 2. Adult hippocampal neurogenesis in Alzheimer’s disease: open questions.

Remaining issues to address in order to ‘map’ the potential role of AHN in healthy (human) brain and in AD pathology, and to identify AHN-specific signatures of resilience or vulnerability to disease. Missing mechanistic insights will help assess the therapeutic relevance and the potential of recruiting AHN in to ‘rejuvenate’ the hippocampal network and boost memory in AD. SGZ, subgranular zone; GCL, granular cell layer; RG-like NSCs, radial glia-like neural stem cells.

Declaration of interests

The authors declare no competing interests.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


References

1. Tanzi RE , and Bertram L . (2005). Twenty years of the Alzheimer’s disease amyloid hypothesis: a genetic perspective. Cell 120 , 545–555. 10.1016/j.cell.2005.02.008.15734686
2. Hardy J , and Selkoe DJ (2002). The amyloid hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease: progress and problems on the road to therapeutics. Science 297 , 353–356. 10.1126/science.1072994.12130773
3. Karran E , and De Strooper B . (2022). The amyloid hypothesis in Alzheimer disease: new insights from new therapeutics. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 21 , 306–318. 10.1038/s41573-022-00391-w.35177833
4. Braak H , Braak E , and Bohl J . (1993). Staging of Alzheimer-related cortical destruction. Eur. Neurol. 33 , 403–408. 10.1159/000116984.8307060
5. Small SA ., Tsai WY ., DeLaPaz R ., Mayeux R ., and Stern Y . (2002). Imaging hippocampal function across the human life span: is memory decline normal or not? Ann. Neurol. 51 , 290–295. 10.1002/ana.10105.11891823
6. Yassa MA , Mattfeld AT , Stark SM , and Stark CEL (2011). Age-related memory deficits linked to circuit-specific disruptions in the hippocampus. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 108 , 8873–8878. 10.1073/pnas.1101567108.21555581
7. Hara Y , Punsoni M , Yuk F , Park CS , Janssen WGM , Rapp PR , and Morrison JH (2012). Synaptic distributions of GluA2 and PKMζ in the monkey dentate gyrus and their relationships with aging and memory. J. Neurosci. 32 , 7336–7344. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0605-12.2012.22623679
8. Small SA , Chawla MK , Buonocore M , Rapp PR , and Barnes CA (2004). Imaging correlates of brain function in monkeys and rats isolates a hippocampal subregion differentially vulnerable to aging. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 101 , 7181–7186. 10.1073/pnas.0400285101.15118105
9. Moreno H , Wu WE , Lee T , Brickman A , Mayeux R , Brown TR , and Small SA (2007). Imaging the Abeta-related neurotoxicity of Alzheimer disease. Arch. Neurol. 64 , 1467–1477. 10.1001/archneur.64.10.1467.17923630
10. Kempermann G , Song H , and Gage FH (2015). Neurogenesis in the Adult Hippocampus. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 7 . 10.1101/CSHPERSPECT.A018812.
11. McHugh SB , Lopes-Dos-Santos V , Gava GP , Hartwich K , Tam SKE , Bannerman DM , and Dupret D . (2022). Adult-born dentate granule cells promote hippocampal population sparsity. Nat. Neurosci. 25 , 1481–1491. 10.1038/s41593-022-01176-5.36216999
12. Baptista P , and Andrade J . (2018). Adult Hippocampal Neurogenesis: Regulation and Possible Functional and Clinical Correlates. Front. Neuroanat. 12 . 10.3389/FNANA.2018.00044.
13. Denoth-Lippuner A , and Jessberger S . (2021). Formation and integration of new neurons in the adult hippocampus. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 22 , 223–236. 10.1038/S41583-021-00433-Z.33633402
14. Marín-Burgin A , Mongiat LA , Pardi MB , and Schinder AF (2012). Unique processing during a period of high excitation/inhibition balance in adult-born neurons. Science 335 , 1238–1242. 10.1126/science.1214956.22282476
15. Mishra R , Phan T , Kumar P , Morrissey Z , Gupta M , Hollands C , Shetti A , Lopez KL , Maienschein-Cline M , Suh H , (2022). Augmenting neurogenesis rescues memory impairments in Alzheimer’s disease by restoring the memory-storing neurons. J. Exp. Med. 219 . 10.1084/jem.20220391.
16. Mu Y , and Gage FH (2011). Adult hippocampal neurogenesis and its role in Alzheimer ‘ s disease. Mol. Neurodegener. 6 , 85. 10.1186/1750-1326-6-85.22192775
17. Farioli-Vecchioli S ., Ricci V ., and Middei S . (2022). Adult Hippocampal Neurogenesis in Alzheimer’s Disease: An Overview of Human and Animal Studies with Implications for Therapeutic Perspectives Aimed at Memory Recovery. Neural Plast. 2022 , 9959044. 10.1155/2022/9959044.35075360
18. Hampel H , Vergallo A , Aguilar LF , Benda N , Broich K , Cuello AC , Cummings J , Dubois B , Federoff HJ , Fiandaca M , (2018). Precision pharmacology for Alzheimer’s disease. Pharmacol. Res. 130 , 331–365. 10.1016/j.phrs.2018.02.014.29458203
19. Imbimbo BP , and Watling M . (2021). What have we learned from past failures of investigational drugs for Alzheimer’s disease? Expert Opin. Investig. Drugs 30 , 1175–1182. 10.1080/13543784.2021.2017881.
20. Dumitrescu L , Mahoney ER , Mukherjee S , Lee ML , Bush WS , Engelman CD , Lu Q , Fardo DW , Trittschuh EH , Mez J , (2020). Genetic variants and functional pathways associated with resilience to Alzheimer’s disease. Brain 143 , 2561–2575. 10.1093/brain/awaa209.32844198
21. Tobin M , Musaraca K , Disouky A , Shetti A , Bheri A , Honer W , Kim N , Dawe R , Bennett D , Arfanakis K , (2019). Human Hippocampal Neurogenesis Persists in Aged Adults and Alzheimer’s Disease Patients. Cell Stem Cell 24 , 974–982.e3. 10.1016/J.STEM.2019.05.003.31130513
22. Yassa MA , Stark SM , Bakker A , Albert MS , Gallagher M , and Stark CEL (2010). High-resolution structural and functional MRI of hippocampal CA3 and dentate gyrus in patients with amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment. Neuroimage 51 , 1242–1252. 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.03.040.20338246
23. Luna VM , Anacker C , Burghardt NS , Khandaker H , Andreu V , Millette A , Leary P , Ravenelle R , Jimenez JC , Mastrodonato A , (2019). Adult-born hippocampal neurons bidirectionally modulate entorhinal inputs into the dentate gyrus. Science 364 , 578–583. 10.1126/science.aat8789.31073064
24. McAvoy KM , Scobie KN , Berger S , Russo C , Guo N , Decharatanachart P , Vega-Ramirez H , Miake-Lye S , Whalen M , Nelson M , (2016). Modulating Neuronal Competition Dynamics in the Dentate Gyrus to Rejuvenate Aging Memory Circuits. Neuron 91 , 1356–1373. 10.1016/j.neuron.2016.08.009.27593178
25. Ammothumkandy A , Ravina K , Wolseley V , Tartt AN , Yu P-N , Corona L , Zhang N , Nune G , Kalayjian L , Mann JJ , (2022). Altered adult neurogenesis and gliogenesis in patients with mesial temporal lobe epilepsy. Nat. Neurosci. 25 , 493–503. 10.1038/s41593-022-01044-2.35383330
26. Franjic D , Skarica M , Ma S , Arellano JI , Tebbenkamp ATN , Choi J , Xu C , Li Q , Morozov YM , Andrijevic D , (2022). Transcriptomic taxonomy and neurogenic trajectories of adult human, macaque, and pig hippocampal and entorhinal cells. Neuron 110 , 452–469.e14. 10.1016/j.neuron.2021.10.036.34798047
27. Terreros-Roncal J ., Moreno-Jiménez EP ., Flor-García M ., Rodríguez-Moreno CB ., Trinchero MF ., Cafini F ., Rábano A ., and Llorens-Martín M . (2021). Impact of neurodegenerative diseases on human adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Science 374 , 1106–1113. 10.1126/science.abl5163.34672693
28. Wang W , Wang M , Yang M , Zeng B , Qiu W , Ma Q , Jing X , Zhang Q , Wang B , Yin C , (2022). Transcriptome dynamics of hippocampal neurogenesis in macaques across the lifespan and aged humans. Cell Res. 32 , 729–743. 10.1038/s41422-022-00678-y.35750757
29. Zhou Y , Su Y , Li S , Kennedy BC , Zhang DY , Bond AM , Sun Y , Jacob F , Lu L , Hu P , (2022). Molecular landscapes of human hippocampal immature neurons across lifespan. Nature 607 , 527–533. 10.1038/s41586-022-04912-w.35794479
30. Moreno-Jiménez E , Flor-García M , Terreros-Roncal J , Rábano A , Cafini F , Pallas-Bazarra N , Ávila J , and Llorens-Martín M . (2019). Adult hippocampal neurogenesis is abundant in neurologically healthy subjects and drops sharply in patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Med. 25 , 554–560. 10.1038/S41591-019-0375-9.30911133
31. Sorrells SF , Paredes MF , Zhang Z , Kang G , Pastor-Alonso O , Biagiotti S , Page CE , Sandoval K , Knox A , Connolly A , (2021). Positive Controls in Adults and Children Support That Very Few, If Any, New Neurons Are Born in the Adult Human Hippocampus. J. Neurosci. 41 , 2554–2565. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0676-20.2020.33762407
32. Eriksson PS , Perfilieva E , Björk-Eriksson T , Alborn AM , Nordborg C , Peterson DA , and Gage FH (1998). Neurogenesis in the adult human hippocampus. Nat. Med. 4 , 1313–1317. 10.1038/3305.9809557
33. Spalding KL , Bergmann O , Alkass K , Bernard S , Salehpour M , Huttner HB , Boström E , Westerlund I , Vial C , Buchholz BA , (2013). Dynamics of hippocampal neurogenesis in adult humans. Cell 153 , 1219–1227. 10.1016/j.cell.2013.05.002.23746839
34. Boldrini M , Fulmore CA , Tartt AN , Simeon LR , Pavlova I , Poposka V , Rosoklija GB , Stankov A , Arango V , Dwork AJ , (2018). Human Hippocampal Neurogenesis Persists throughout Aging. Cell Stem Cell 22 , 589–599.e5. 10.1016/j.stem.2018.03.015.29625071
35. Cipriani S , Ferrer I , Aronica E , Kovacs GG , Verney C , Nardelli J , Khung S , Delezoide A-L , Milenkovic I , Rasika S , (2018). Hippocampal Radial Glial Subtypes and Their Neurogenic Potential in Human Fetuses and Healthy and Alzheimer’s Disease Adults. Cereb. Cortex 28 , 2458–2478. 10.1093/cercor/bhy096.29722804
36. Dennis CV ., Suh LS ., Rodriguez ML ., Kril JJ ., and Sutherland GT . (2016). Human adult neurogenesis across the ages: An immunohistochemical study. Neuropathol. Appl. Neurobiol. 42 , 621–638. 10.1111/nan.12337.27424496
37. Flor-García M , Terreros-Roncal J , Moreno-Jiménez EP , Ávila J , Rábano A , and Llorens-Martín M . (2020). Unraveling human adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Nat. Protoc. 10.1038/s41596-019-0267-y.
38. Knoth R , Singec I , Ditter M , Pantazis G , Capetian P , Meyer RP , Horvat V , Volk B , and Kempermann G . (2010). Murine Features of Neurogenesis in the Human Hippocampus across the Lifespan from 0 to 100 Years. PLoS One 5 , e8809. 10.1371/journal.pone.0008809.20126454
39. Lucassen P , Fitzsimons C , Salta E , and Maletic-Savatic M . (2020). Adult neurogenesis, human after all (again): Classic, optimized, and future approaches. Behav. Brain Res. 381 . 10.1016/J.BBR.2019.112458.
40. Sorrells SF , Paredes MF , Cebrian-Silla A , Sandoval K , Qi D , Kelley KW , James D , Mayer S , Chang J , Auguste KI , (2018). Human hippocampal neurogenesis drops sharply in children to undetectable levels in adults. Nature. 10.1038/nature25975.
41. Coras R , Siebzehnrubl FA , Pauli E , Huttner HB , Njunting M , Kobow K , Villmann C , Hahnen E , Neuhuber W , Weigel D , (2010). Low proliferation and differentiation capacities of adult hippocampal stem cells correlate with memory dysfunction in humans. Brain 133 , 3359–3372. 10.1093/brain/awq215.20719879
42. Kukekov VG , Laywell ED , Suslov O , Davies K , Scheffler B , Thomas LB , O’Brien TF , Kusakabe M , and Steindler DA (1999). Multipotent Stem/Progenitor Cells with Similar Properties Arise from Two Neurogenic Regions of Adult Human Brain. Exp. Neurol. 156 , 333–344. 10.1006/exnr.1999.7028.10328940
43. Lovell MA , Geiger H , Van Zant GE , Lynn BC , and Markesbery WR (2006). Isolation of neural precursor cells from Alzheimer’s disease and aged control postmortem brain. Neurobiol. Aging 27 , 909–917. 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2005.05.004.15979211
44. Park TIH , Waldvogel HJ , Montgomery JM , Mee EW , Bergin PS , Faull RLM , Dragunow M , and Curtis MA (2022). Identifying Neural Progenitor Cells in the Adult Human Brain. In, pp. 125–154. 10.1007/978-1-0716-1783-0_12.
45. Just N , Chevillard P-M , and Migaud M . (2022). Imaging and spectroscopic methods to investigate adult neurogenesis in vivo: New models and new avenues. Front. Neurosci. 16 , 933947. 10.3389/fnins.2022.933947.35992937
46. Manganas LN ., Zhang X ., Li Y ., Hazel RD ., Smith SD ., Wagshul ME ., Henn F ., Benveniste H ., Djuric PM ., Enikolopov G ., . (2007). Magnetic resonance spectroscopy identifies neural progenitor cells in the live human brain. Science 318 , 980–985. 10.1126/science.1147851.17991865
47. Davila-Velderrain J . (2021). Single-cell anatomical analysis of human hippocampus and entorhinal cortex uncovers early-stage molecular pathology in Alzheimer’s disease. bioRxiv. 10.1101/2021.07.01.450715.
48. Duque A , Arellano JI , and Rakic P . (2021). An assessment of the existence of adult neurogenesis in humans and value of its rodent models for neuropsychiatric diseases. Mol. Psychiatry. 10.1038/s41380-021-01314-8.
49. Kempermann G , Gage FH , Aigner L , Song H , Curtis MA , Thuret S , Kuhn HG , Jessberger S , Frankland PW , Cameron HA , (2018). Human Adult Neurogenesis: Evidence and Remaining Questions. Cell Stem Cell. 10.1016/j.stem.2018.04.004.
50. Artegiani B , Lyubimova A , Muraro M , van Es J , van Oudenaarden A , and Clevers H . (2017). A Single-Cell RNA Sequencing Study Reveals Cellular and Molecular Dynamics of the Hippocampal Neurogenic Niche. Cell Rep. 21 , 3271–3284. 10.1016/J.CELREP.2017.11.050.29241552
51. Hochgerner H , Zeisel A , Lönnerberg P , and Linnarsson S . (2018). Conserved properties of dentate gyrus neurogenesis across postnatal development revealed by single-cell RNA sequencing. Nat. Neurosci. 10.1038/s41593-017-0056-2.
52. Shin J , Berg D , Zhu Y , Shin J , Song J , Bonaguidi M , Enikolopov G , Nauen D , Christian K , Ming G , (2015). Single-Cell RNA-Seq with Waterfall Reveals Molecular Cascades underlying Adult Neurogenesis. Cell Stem Cell 17 , 360–372. 10.1016/J.STEM.2015.07.013.26299571
53. Walgrave H ., Balusu S ., Snoeck S ., Vanden Eynden E ., Craessaerts K ., Thrupp N ., Wolfs L ., Horré K ., Fourne Y ., Ronisz A ., . (2021). Restoring miR-132 expression rescues adult hippocampal neurogenesis and memory deficits in Alzheimer’s disease. Cell Stem Cell. 10.1016/J.STEM.2021.05.001.
54. Chintamen S . (2021). Unique Microglial Transcriptomic Signature within the Hippocampal Neurogenic Niche. bioRxiv. 10.1101/2021.08.29.457876.
55. Kreisel T , Wolf B , Keshet E , and Licht T . (2019). Unique role for dentate gyrus microglia in neuroblast survival and in VEGF-induced activation. Glia 67 , 594–618. 10.1002/GLIA.23505.30453385
56. Marshall GP , Deleyrolle LP , Reynolds BA , Steindler DA , and Laywell ED (2014). Microglia from neurogenic and non-neurogenic regions display differential proliferative potential and neuroblast support. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 8 . 10.3389/fncel.2014.00180.
57. Palmer TD , Willhoite AR , and Gage FH (2000). Vascular niche for adult hippocampal neurogenesis. J. Comp. Neurol. 425 , 479–494. 10.1002/1096-9861(20001002)425:4&lt;479::aid-cne2&gt;3.0.co;2-3.10975875
58. Penning A , Tosoni G , Abiega O , Bielefeld P , Gasperini C , De Pietri Tonelli D , Fitzsimons CP , and Salta E . (2022). Adult Neural Stem Cell Regulation by Small Non-coding RNAs: Physiological Significance and Pathological Implications. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 15 . 10.3389/fncel.2021.781434.
59. Ayhan F , Kulkarni A , Berto S , Sivaprakasam K , Douglas C , Lega BC , and Konopka G . (2021). Resolving cellular and molecular diversity along the hippocampal anterior-to-posterior axis in humans. Neuron 109 , 2091–2105.e6. 10.1016/j.neuron.2021.05.003.34051145
60. Habib N , Li Y , Heidenreich M , Swiech L , Avraham-Davidi I , Trombetta JJ , Hession C , Zhang F , and Regev A . (2016). Div-Seq: Single-nucleus RNA-Seq reveals dynamics of rare adult newborn neurons. Science (80-. ). 353 , 925–928. 10.1126/science.aad7038.27471252
61. Terreros-Roncal J , Flor-García M , Moreno-Jiménez EP , Rodríguez-Moreno CB , Márquez-Valadez B , Gallardo-Caballero M , Rábano A , and Llorens-Martín M . (2022). Methods to study adult hippocampal neurogenesis in humans and across the phylogeny. Hippocampus. 10.1002/hipo.23474.
62. Arber C , Toombs J , Lovejoy C , Ryan NS , Paterson RW , Willumsen N , Gkanatsiou E , Portelius E , Blennow K , Heslegrave A , (2019). Familial Alzheimer’s disease patient-derived neurons reveal distinct mutation-specific effects on amyloid beta. Mol. Psychiatry. 10.1038/s41380-019-0410-8.
63. Arber C , Lovejoy C , Harris L , Willumsen N , Alatza A , Casey JM , Lines G , Kerins C , Mueller AK , Zetterberg H , (2021). Familial Alzheimer’s Disease Mutations in PSEN1 Lead to Premature Human Stem Cell Neurogenesis. Cell Rep. 34 , 108615. 10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108615.33440141
64. Ochalek A ., Mihalik B ., Avci HX ., Chandrasekaran A ., Téglási A ., Bock I ., Giudice M . Lo, Táncos Z , Molnár K , László L , . (2017). Neurons derived from sporadic Alzheimer’s disease iPSCs reveal elevated TAU hyperphosphorylation, increased amyloid levels, and GSK3B activation. Alzheimers. Res. Ther. 9 , 90 . 10.1186/s13195017-0317-z.
65. Mertens J , Herdy JR , Traxler L , Schafer ST , Schlachetzki JCM , Böhnke L , Reid DA , Lee H , Zangwill D , Fernandes DP , (2021). Age-dependent instability of mature neuronal fate in induced neurons from Alzheimer’s patients. Cell Stem Cell 28 , 1533–1548.e6. 10.1016/j.stem.2021.04.004.33910058
66. Miller SM , and Sahay A . (2019). Functions of adult-born neurons in hippocampal memory interference and indexing. Nat. Neurosci. 22 , 1565–1575. 10.1038/s41593-019-0484-2.31477897
67. Vicidomini C , Guo N , and Sahay A . (2020). Communication, Cross Talk, and Signal Integration in the Adult Hippocampal Neurogenic Niche. Neuron 105 , 220–235. 10.1016/J.NEURON.2019.11.029.31972145
68. Ma DK , Jang MH , Guo JU , Kitabatake Y , Chang ML , Pow-Anpongkul N , Flavell RA , Lu B , Ming GL , and Song H . (2009). Neuronal activity-induced Gadd45b promotes epigenetic DNA demethylation and adult neurogenesis. Science 323 , 1074–1077. 10.1126/SCIENCE.1166859.19119186
69. Jang MH , Bonaguidi MA , Kitabatake Y , Sun J , Song J , Kang E , Jun H , Zhong C , Su Y , Guo JU , (2013). Secreted Frizzled-Related Protein 3 Regulates Activity-Dependent Adult Hippocampal Neurogenesis. Cell Stem Cell 12 , 215–223. 10.1016/J.STEM.2012.11.021.23395446
70. Han J , Calvo C-F , Kang TH , Baker KL , Park J-H , Parras C , Levittas M , Birba U , Pibouin-Fragner L , Fragner P , (2015). Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 3 controls neural stem cell activation in mice and humans. Cell Rep. 10 , 1158–1172. 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.01.049.25704818
71. Brooker SM , Gobeske KT , Chen J , Peng CY , and Kessler JA (2017). Hippocampal bone morphogenetic protein signaling mediates behavioral effects of antidepressant treatment. Mol. Psychiatry 22 , 910–919. 10.1038/MP.2016.160.27698430
72. Simić G ., Kostović I ., Winblad B ., and Bogdanović N . (1997). Volume and number of neurons of the human hippocampal formation in normal aging and Alzheimer’s disease. J. Comp. Neurol. 379 , 482–494. 10.1002/(sici)1096-9861(19970324)379:4&lt;482::aid-cne2&gt;3.0.co;2-z.9067838
73. Furcila D , Domínguez-Álvaro M , DeFelipe J , and Alonso-Nanclares L . (2019). Subregional Density of Neurons, Neurofibrillary Tangles and Amyloid Plaques in the Hippocampus of Patients With Alzheimer’s Disease. Front. Neuroanat. 13 , 99. 10.3389/fnana.2019.00099.31920568
74. de Flores R , La Joie R , and Chételat G . (2015). Structural imaging of hippocampal subfields in healthy aging and Alzheimer’s disease. Neuroscience 309 , 29–50. 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2015.08.033.26306871
75. Márquez-Valadez B , Rábano A , and Llorens-Martín M . (2022). Progression of Alzheimer’s disease parallels unusual structural plasticity of human dentate granule cells. Acta Neuropathol. Commun. 10 , 125. 10.1186/s40478-022-01431-7.36038918
76. Yeh C-Y , Asrican B , Moss J , Quintanilla LJ , He T , Mao X , Cassé F , Gebara E , Bao H , Lu W , (2018). Mossy Cells Control Adult Neural Stem Cell Quiescence and Maintenance through a Dynamic Balance between Direct and Indirect Pathways. Neuron 99 , 493–510.e4. 10.1016/j.neuron.2018.07.010.30057205
77. Bao H , Asrican B , Li W , Gu B , Wen Z , Lim S-A , Haniff I , Ramakrishnan C , Deisseroth K , Philpot B , (2017). Long-Range GABAergic Inputs Regulate Neural Stem Cell Quiescence and Control Adult Hippocampal Neurogenesis. Cell Stem Cell 21 , 604–617.e5. 10.1016/j.stem.2017.10.003.29100013
78. Song J , Zhong C , Bonaguidi MA , Sun GJ , Hsu D , Gu Y , Meletis K , Huang ZJ , Ge S , Enikolopov G , (2012). Neuronal circuitry mechanism regulating adult quiescent neural stem-cell fate decision. Nature 489 , 150–154.22842902
79. Song J , Sun J , Moss J , Wen Z , Sun GJ , Hsu D , Zhong C , Davoudi H , Christian KM , Toni N , (2013). Parvalbumin interneurons mediate neuronal circuitry-neurogenesis coupling in the adult hippocampus. Nat. Neurosci. 16 , 1728–1730. 10.1038/nn.3572.24212671
80. Song J , Zhong C , Bonaguidi MA , Sun GJ , Hsu D , Gu Y , Meletis K , Huang ZJ , Ge S , Enikolopov G , (2012). Neuronal circuitry mechanism regulating adult quiescent neural stem-cell fate decision. Nature 489 , 150–154. 10.1038/nature11306.22842902
81. Tozuka Y , Fukuda S , Namba T , Seki T , and Hisatsune T . (2005). GABAergic excitation promotes neuronal differentiation in adult hippocampal progenitor cells. Neuron 47 , 803–815. 10.1016/j.neuron.2005.08.023.16157276
82. Sah N , Peterson BD , Lubejko ST , Vivar C , and van Praag H . (2017). Running reorganizes the circuitry of one-week-old adult-born hippocampal neurons. Sci. Rep. 7 , 10903. 10.1038/s41598-017-11268-z.28883658
83. Zhou XA , Blackmore DG , Zhuo J , Nasrallah FA , To X , Kurniawan ND , Carlisle A , Vien K-Y , Chuang K-H , Jiang T , (2021). Neurogenic-dependent changes in hippocampal circuitry underlie the procognitive effect of exercise in aging mice. iScience 24 , 103450. 10.1016/j.isci.2021.103450.34877505
84. Schoenfeld TJ , Rada P , Pieruzzini PR , Hsueh B , and Gould E . (2013). Physical exercise prevents stress-induced activation of granule neurons and enhances local inhibitory mechanisms in the dentate gyrus. J. Neurosci. 33 , 7770–7777. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5352-12.2013.23637169
85. Hazra A , Gu F , Aulakh A , Berridge C , Eriksen JL , and Ziburkus J . (2013). Inhibitory neuron and hippocampal circuit dysfunction in an aged mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. PLoS One 8 , e64318. 10.1371/journal.pone.0064318.23691195
86. Zheng J , Li H-L , Tian N , Liu F , Wang L , Yin Y , Yue L , Ma L , Wan Y , and Wang J-Z (2020). Interneuron Accumulation of Phosphorylated tau Impairs Adult Hippocampal Neurogenesis by Suppressing GABAergic Transmission. Cell Stem Cell 26 , 462–466. 10.1016/j.stem.2020.01.021.32142666
87. Wander CM , and Song J . (2021). The neurogenic niche in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurosci. Lett. 762 , 136109. 10.1016/j.neulet.2021.136109.34271133
88. Paolicelli RC , Sierra A , Stevens B , Tremblay M-E , Aguzzi A , Ajami B , Amit I , Audinat E , Bechmann I , Bennett M , (2022). Microglia states and nomenclature: A field at its crossroads. Neuron 110 , 3458–3483. 10.1016/j.neuron.2022.10.020.36327895
89. Guedes JR , Ferreira PA , Costa JM , Cardoso AL , and Peça J . (2022). Microglia-dependent remodeling of neuronal circuits. J. Neurochem. 163 , 74–93. 10.1111/jnc.15689.35950924
90. Ribak CE , Shapiro LA , Perez ZD , and Spigelman I . (2009). Microglia-associated granule cell death in the normal adult dentate gyrus. Brain Struct. Funct. 214 , 25–35. 10.1007/s00429-009-0231-7.19936784
91. Sierra A , Encinas JM , Deudero JJ , Chancey JH , Enikolopov G , Overstreet-Wadiche LS , Tsirka SE , and Maletic-Savatic M . (2010). Microglia shape adult hippocampal neurogenesis through apoptosis-coupled phagocytosis. Cell Stem Cell 7 , 83–495. 10.1016/J.STEM.2010.08.014.
92. Askew K , Li K , Olmos-Alonso A , Garcia-Moreno F , Liang Y , Richardson P , Tipton T , Chapman MA , Riecken K , Beccari S , (2017). Coupled Proliferation and Apoptosis Maintain the Rapid Turnover of Microglia in the Adult Brain. Cell Rep. 18 , 391–405. 10.1016/j.celrep.2016.12.041.28076784
93. Diaz-Aparicio I , Paris I , Sierra-Torre V , Plaza-Zabala A , Rodríguez-Iglesias N , Márquez-Ropero Maletic-Savatic M , Beccari S , Huguet P , Abiega O , Alberdi E , (2020). Microglia Actively Remodel Adult Hippocampal Neurogenesis through the Phagocytosis Secretome. J. Neurosci. 40 , 1453–1482. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0993-19.2019.31896673
94. Vukovic J , Colditz MJ , Blackmore DG , Ruitenberg MJ , and Bartlett PF (2012). Microglia modulate hippocampal neural precursor activity in response to exercise and aging. J. Neurosci. 32 , 6435–6443. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5925-11.2012.22573666
95. Russo I , Barlati S , and Bosetti F . (2011). Effects of neuroinflammation on the regenerative capacity of brain stem cells. J. Neurochem. 116 , 947–956. 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2010.07168.x.21198642
96. Doorn KJ , Brevé JJP , Drukarch B , Boddeke HW , Huitinga I , Lucassen PJ , and van Dam A-M (2015). Brain region-specific gene expression profiles in freshly isolated rat microglia. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 9 , 84. 10.3389/fncel.2015.00084.25814934
97. Butovsky O , Ziv Y , Schwartz A , Landa G , Talpalar AE , Pluchino S , Martino G , and Schwartz M . (2006). Microglia activated by IL-4 or IFN-gamma differentially induce neurogenesis and oligodendrogenesis from adult stem/progenitor cells. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 31 , 149–160. 10.1016/J.MCN.2005.10.006.16297637
98. Zhang J , Rong P , Zhang L , He H , Zhou T , Fan Y , Mo L , Zhao Q , Han Y , Li S , (2021). IL4-driven microglia modulate stress resilience through BDNF-dependent neurogenesis. Sci. Adv. 7 . 10.1126/sciadv.abb9888.
99. Kohman RA , DeYoung EK , Bhattacharya TK , Peterson LN , and Rhodes JS (2012). Wheel running attenuates microglia proliferation and increases expression of a proneurogenic phenotype in the hippocampus of aged mice. Brain. Behav. Immun. 26 , 803–810. 10.1016/j.bbi.2011.10.006.22056294
100. Littlefield AM ., Setti SE ., Priester C ., and Kohman RA . (2015). Voluntary exercise attenuates LPS-induced reductions in neurogenesis and increases microglia expression of a proneurogenic phenotype in aged mice. J. Neuroinflammation 12 , 138 . 10.1186/s12974-015-0362-0.
101. Ekdahl CT , Claasen JH , Bonde S , Kokaia Z , and Lindvall O . (2003). Inflammation is detrimental for neurogenesis in adult brain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 100 , 13632–13637. 10.1073/PNAS.2234031100.14581618
102. Appel JR , Ye S , Tang F , Sun D , Zhang H , Mei L , and Xiong W-C (2018). Increased Microglial Activity, Impaired Adult Hippocampal Neurogenesis, and Depressive-like Behavior in Microglial VPS35-Depleted Mice. J. Neurosci. 38 , 5949–5968. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3621-17.2018.29853629
103. Monje ML , Toda H , and Palmer TD (2003). Inflammatory blockade restores adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Science 302 , 1760–1765. 10.1126/SCIENCE.1088417.14615545
104. Kiyota T , Gendelman HE , Weir RA , Higgins EE , Zhang G , and Jain M . (2013). CCL2 affects β-amyloidosis and progressive neurocognitive dysfunction in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Aging 34 , 1060–1068. 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2012.08.009.23040664
105. Sanchez-Mejias E , Navarro V , Jimenez S , Sanchez-Mico M , Sanchez-Varo R , Nuñez-Diaz C , Trujillo-Estrada L , Davila JC , Vizuete M , Gutierrez A , (2016). Soluble phospho-tau from Alzheimer’s disease hippocampus drives microglial degeneration. Acta Neuropathol. 132 , 897–916. 10.1007/s00401-016-1630-5.27743026
106 Choi SH , Veeraraghavalu K , Lazarov O , Marler S , Ransohoff RM , Ramirez JM , and Sisodia SS (2008). Non-cell-autonomous effects of presenilin 1 variants on enrichment-mediated hippocampal progenitor cell proliferation and differentiation. Neuron 59 , 568–580. 10.1016/j.neuron.2008.07.033.18760694
107. Biscaro B , Lindvall O , Tesco G , Ekdahl CT , and Nitsch RM (2012). Inhibition of microglial activation protects hippocampal neurogenesis and improves cognitive deficits in a transgenic mouse model for Alzheimer’s disease. Neurodegener. Dis. 9 , 1119 187–198. 10.1159/000330363.22584394
108. Ortega-Martinez S , Palla N , Zhang X , Lipman E , and Sisodia SS (2019). Deficits in Enrichment-Dependent Neurogenesis and Enhanced Anxiety Behaviors Mediated by Expression of Alzheimer’s Disease-Linked Ps1 Variants Are Rescued by Microglial Depletion. J. Neurosci. 39 , 6766–6780. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0884-19.2019.31217332
109. Schneider J , Weigel J , Wittmann M-T , Svehla P , Ehrt S , Zheng F , Elmzzahi T , Karpf J ., Paniagua-Herranz L ., Basak O ., . (2022). Astrogenesis in the murine dentate gyrus is a life-long and dynamic process. EMBO J. 41 , e110409. 10.15252/embj.2021110409.35451150
110. Sultan S , Li L , Moss J , Petrelli F , Cassé F , Gebara E , Lopatar J , Pfrieger FW , Bezzi P , Bischofberger J , (2015). Synaptic Integration of Adult-Born Hippocampal Neurons Is Locally Controlled by Astrocytes. Neuron 88 , 957–972. 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.10.037.26606999
111. Wilhelmsson U , Faiz M , de Pablo Y , Sjöqvist M , Andersson D , Widestrand A , Potokar M , Stenovec M , Smith PLP , Shinjyo N , (2012). Astrocytes negatively regulate neurogenesis through the Jagged1-mediated Notch pathway. Stem Cells 30 , 2320–2329. 10.1002/stem.1196.22887872
112. Krzisch M , Temprana SG , Mongiat LA , Armida J , Schmutz V , Virtanen MA , Kocher-Braissant J , Kraftsik R , Vutskits L , Conzelmann K-K , (2015). Pre-existing astrocytes form functional perisynaptic processes on neurons generated in the adult hippocampus. Brain Struct. Funct. 220 , 2027–2042. 10.1007/s00429-014-0768-y.24748560
113. Su Y , Zhou Y , Bennett ML , Li S , Carceles-Cordon M , Lu L , Huh S , Jimenez-Cyrus D , Kennedy BC , Kessler SK , (2022). A single-cell transcriptome atlas of glial diversity in the human hippocampus across the postnatal lifespan. Cell Stem Cell 29 , 1594–1610.e8. 10.1016/j.stem.2022.09.010.36332572
114. Cole JD , Sarabia Del Castillo J , Gut G , Gonzalez-Bohorquez D , Pelkmans L , and Jessberger S . (2022). Characterization of the neurogenic niche in the aging dentate gyrus using iterative immunofluorescence imaging. Elife 11 . 10.7554/eLife.68000.
115. de Pins B , Cifuentes-Díaz C , Farah AT , López-Molina L , Montalban E , Sancho-Balsells A , López A , Ginés S , Delgado-García JM , Alberch J , (2019). Conditional BDNF Delivery from Astrocytes Rescues Memory Deficits, Spine Density, and Synaptic Properties in the 5xFAD Mouse Model of Alzheimer Disease. J. Neurosci. 39 , 2441–2458. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2121-18.2019.30700530
116. Quesseveur G , David DJ , Gaillard MC , Pla P , Wu MV , Nguyen HT , Nicolas V , Auregan G , David I , Dranovsky A , (2013). BDNF overexpression in mouse hippocampal astrocytes promotes local neurogenesis and elicits anxiolytic-like activities. Transl. Psychiatry 3 , e253. 10.1038/tp.2013.30.23632457
117. Song H , Stevens CF , and Gage FH (2002). Astroglia induce neurogenesis from adult neural stem cells. Nature 417 , 39–44. 10.1038/417039A.11986659
118. Richetin K , Steullet P , Pachoud M , Perbet R , Parietti E , Maheswaran M , Eddarkaoui S , Bégard S , Pythoud C , Rey M , (2020). Tau accumulation in astrocytes of the dentate gyrus induces neuronal dysfunction and memory deficits in Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Neurosci. 23 , 1567–1579. 10.1038/s41593-020-00728-x.33169029
119. Vallières L , Campbell IL , Gage FH , and Sawchenko PE (2002). Reduced hippocampal neurogenesis in adult transgenic mice with chronic astrocytic production of interleukin-6. J. Neurosci. 22 , 486–492.11784794
120. Kim TA , Chen L , and Ge S . (2021). The interplay of neurovasculature and adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Neurosci. Lett. 760 , 136071. 10.1016/j.neulet.2021.136071.34147540
121. Wang J , Cui Y , Yu Z , Wang W , Cheng X , Ji W , Guo S , Zhou Q , Wu N , Chen Y , (2019). Brain Endothelial Cells Maintain Lactate Homeostasis and Control Adult Hippocampal Neurogenesis. Cell Stem Cell 25 , 754–767.e9. 10.1016/j.stem.2019.09.009.31761722
122. Licht T , Sasson E , Bell B , Grunewald M , Kumar S , Kreisel T , Ben-Zvi A , and Keshet E . (2020). Hippocampal neural stem cells facilitate access from circulation via apical cytoplasmic processes. Elife 9 . 10.7554/eLife.52134.
123. Pereira AC , Huddleston DE , Brickman AM , Sosunov AA , Hen R , McKhann GM , Sloan R , Gage FH , Brown TR , and Small SA (2007). An in vivo correlate of exercise-induced neurogenesis in the adult dentate gyrus. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 104 , 5638–5643. 10.1073/pnas.0611721104.17374720
124. Shen J , Wang D , Wang X , Gupta S , Ayloo B , Wu S , Prasad P , Xiong Q , Xia J , and Ge S . (2019). Neurovascular Coupling in the Dentate Gyrus Regulates Adult Hippocampal Neurogenesis. Neuron 103 , 878–890.e3. 10.1016/j.neuron.2019.05.045.31257104
125. Cao L , Jiao X , Zuzga DS , Liu Y , Fong DM , Young D , and During MJ (2004). VEGF links hippocampal activity with neurogenesis, learning and memory. Nat. Genet. 36 , 827–835. 10.1038/ng1395.15258583
126. Jin K , Zhu Y , Sun Y , Mao XO , Xie L , and Greenberg DA (2002). Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) stimulates neurogenesis in vitro and in vivo. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 99 , 11946–11950. 10.1073/pnas.182296499.12181492
127. Licht T , Goshen I , Avital A , Kreisel T , Zubedat S , Eavri R , Segal M , Yirmiya R , and Keshet E . (2011). Reversible modulations of neuronal plasticity by VEGF. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 108 , 5081–5086. 10.1073/pnas.1007640108.21385942
128. Nieto-Estévez V , Oueslati-Morales CO , Li L , Pickel J , Morales AV , and Vicario-Abejón C . (2016). Brain Insulin-Like Growth Factor-I Directs the Transition from Stem Cells to Mature Neurons During Postnatal/Adult Hippocampal Neurogenesis. Stem Cells 34 , 2194–2209. 10.1002/stem.2397.27144663
129. Aberg MA , Aberg ND , Hedbäcker H , Oscarsson J , and Eriksson PS (2000). Peripheral infusion of IGF-I selectively induces neurogenesis in the adult rat hippocampus. J. Neurosci. 20 , 2896–2903.10751442
130. de Lucia C , Murphy T , Maruszak A , Wright P , Powell TR , Hartopp N , de Jong S ., O’Sullivan MJ ., Breen G ., Price J ., . (2021). Serum from Older Adults Increases Apoptosis and Molecular Aging Markers in Human Hippocampal Progenitor Cells. Aging Dis. 12 , 2151–2172. 10.14336/AD.2021.0409.34881092
131. Du Preez A , Lefèvre-Arbogast S , Houghton V , de Lucia C , Low DY , Helmer C , Féart C , Delcourt C , Proust-Lima C , Pallàs M , (2022). The serum metabolome mediates the concert of diet, exercise, and neurogenesis, determining the risk for cognitive decline and dementia. Alzheimers. Dement. 18 , 654–675. 10.1002/alz.12428.34402599
132. Villeda SA , Plambeck KE , Middeldorp J , Castellano JM , Mosher KI , Luo J , Smith LK , Bieri G , Lin K , Berdnik D , (2014). Young blood reverses age-related impairments in cognitive function and synaptic plasticity in mice. Nat. Med. 20 , 659–663. 10.1038/NM.3569.24793238
133. Villeda SA , Luo J , Mosher KI , Zou B , Britschgi M , Bieri G , Stan TM , Fainberg N , Ding Z , Eggel A , (2011). The ageing systemic milieu negatively regulates neurogenesis and cognitive function. Nature 477 , 90–94. 10.1038/nature10357.21886162
134. Zhang X , Yin X , Zhang J , Li A , Gong H , Luo Q , Zhang H , Gao Z , and Jiang H . (2019). High-resolution mapping of brain vasculature and its impairment in the hippocampus of Alzheimer’s disease mice. Natl. Sci. Rev. 6 , 1223–1238. 10.1093/nsr/nwz124.34692000
135. Sheehy RN , Quintanilla LJ , and Song J . (2022). Epigenetic regulation in the neurogenic niche of the adult dentate gyrus. Neurosci. Lett. 766 , 136343. 10.1016/j.neulet.2021.136343.34774980
136. Gillotin S , Sahni V , Lepko T , Hanspal MA , Swartz JE , Alexopoulou Z , and Marshall FH (2021). Targeting impaired adult hippocampal neurogenesis in ageing by leveraging intrinsic mechanisms regulating Neural Stem Cell activity. Ageing Res. Rev. 71 , 101447. 10.1016/j.arr.2021.101447.34403830
137. Li Y-D , Luo Y-J , Chen Z-K , Quintanilla L , Cherasse Y , Zhang L , Lazarus M , Huan Z-L ., and Son J . (2022). Hypothalamic modulation of adult hippocampal neurogenesis in mice confers activity-dependent regulation of memory and anxiety-like behavior. Nat. Neurosci. 25 , 630–645. 10.1038/s41593-022-01065-x.35524139
138. Urbán N , Blomfield IM , and Guillemot F . (2019). Quiescence of Adult Mammalian Neural Stem Cells: A Highly Regulated Rest. Neuron 104 , 834–848. 10.1016/J.NEURON.2019.09.026.31805262
139. Hollands C , Bartolotti N , and Lazarov O . (2016). Alzheimer’s Disease and Hippocampal Adult Neurogenesis; Exploring Shared Mechanisms. Front. Neurosci. 10 . 10.3389/fnins.2016.00178.
140. Shariq M , Sahasrabuddhe V , Krishna S , Radha S , Nruthyathi , Bellampalli R , Dwivedi A , Cheramangalam R , Reizis B , Hébert J , (2021). Adult neural stem cells have latent inflammatory potential that is kept suppressed by Tcf4 to facilitate adult neurogenesis. Sci. Adv. 7 , eabf5606. 10.1126/SCIADV.ABF5606.
141. Kalamakis G , Brüne D , Ravichandran S , Bolz J , Fan W , Ziebell F , Stiehl T , Catalá-Martinez F , Kupke J , Zhao S , (2019). Quiescence Modulates Stem Cell Maintenance and Regenerative Capacity in the Aging Brain. Cell 176 , 1407–1419.e14. 10.1016/j.cell.2019.01.040.30827680
142. Mosher KI , Andres RH , Fukuhara T , Bieri G , Hasegawa-Moriyama M , He Y , Guzman R , and Wyss-Coray T . (2012). Neural progenitor cells regulate microglia functions and activity. Nat. Neurosci. 15 , 1485–1487. 10.1038/nn.3233.23086334
143. Fainstein N , Dan-Goor N , and Ben-Hur T . (2018). Resident brain neural precursor cells develop age-dependent loss of therapeutic functions in Alzheimer’s mice. Neurobiol. Aging 72 , 40–52. 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2018.07.020.30205359
144. Asrican B , Wooten J , Li Y-D , Quintanilla L , Zhang F , Wander C , Bao H , Yeh C-Y , Luo Y-J , Olsen R , (2020). Neuropeptides Modulate Local Astrocytes to Regulate Adult Hippocampal Neural Stem Cells. Neuron 108 , 349–366.e6. 10.1016/j.neuron.2020.07.039.32877641
145. Bachstetter AD , Morganti JM , Jernberg J , Schlunk A , Mitchell SH , Brewster KW , Hudson CE , Cole MJ , Harrison JK , Bickford PC , (2011). Fractalkine and CX 3 CR1 regulate hippocampal neurogenesis in adult and aged rats. Neurobiol. Aging 32 , 2030–2044. 10.1016/J.NEUROBIOLAGING.2009.11.022.20018408
146. Apple DM , Solano-Fonseca R , and Kokovay E . (2017). Neurogenesis in the aging brain. Biochem. Pharmacol. 141 , 77–85. 10.1016/j.bcp.2017.06.116.28625813
147. Willis CM , Nicaise AM , Krzak G , Ionescu R-B , Pappa V , D’Angelo A , Agarwal R ., Repollés-de-Dalmau M ., Peruzzotti-Jametti L ., and Pluchino S . (2022). Soluble factors influencing the neural stem cell niche in brain physiology, inflammation, and aging. Exp. Neurol. 355 , 114124. 10.1016/j.expneurol.2022.114124.35644426
148. Li G , Bien-Ly N , Andrews-Zwilling Y , Xu Q , Bernardo A , Ring K , Halabisky B , Deng C , Mahley RW , and Huang Y . (2009). GABAergic interneuron dysfunction impairs hippocampal neurogenesis in adult apolipoprotein E4 knockin mice. Cell Stem Cell 5 , 634–645. 10.1016/j.stem.2009.10.015.19951691
149. Victor MB , Leary N , Luna X , Meharena HS , Scannail AN , Bozzelli PL , Samaan G , Murdock MH , von Maydell D , Effenberger AH , (2022). Lipid accumulation induced by APOE4 impairs microglial surveillance of neuronal-network activity. Cell Stem Cell 29 , 1197–1212.e8. 10.1016/j.stem.2022.07.005.35931030
150. Lachish M , Fainstein N , Ganz T , Sofer L , and Ben-Hur T . (2022). Failure of Alzheimer’s Mice Brain Resident Neural Precursor Cells in Supporting Microglia-Mediated Amyloid β Clearance. Cells 11 . 10.3390/cells11050876.
151. Demars MP , Hollands C , Zhao KDT , and Lazarov O . (2013). Soluble amyloid precursor protein-α rescues age-linked decline in neural progenitor cell proliferation. Neurobiol. Aging 34 , 2431–2440. 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2013.04.016.23683827
152. Gorgoulis V , Adams PD , Alimonti A , Bennett DC , Bischof O , Bishop C , Campisi J , Collado M , Evangelou K , Ferbeyre G , (2019). Cellular Senescence: Defining a Path Forward. Cell 179 , 813–827. 10.1016/j.cell.2019.10.005.31675495
153. Demars M , Hu Y-S , Gadadhar A , and Lazarov O . (2010). Impaired neurogenesis is an early event in the etiology of familial Alzheimer’s disease in transgenic mice. J. Neurosci. Res. 88 , 2103–2117. 10.1002/jnr.22387.20209626
154. Guerrero A , De Strooper B , and Arancibia-Cárcamo IL (2021). Cellular senescence at the crossroads of inflammation and Alzheimer’s disease. Trends Neurosci. 44 , 714–727. 10.1016/j.tins.2021.06.007.34366147
155. Herdy JR , Traxler L , Agarwal RK , Karbacher L , Schlachetzki JCM , Boehnke L , Zangwill D , Galasko D , Glass CK , Mertens J , (2022). Increased post-mitotic senescence in aged human neurons is a pathological feature of Alzheimer’s disease. Cell Stem Cell 29 , 1637–1652.e6. 10.1016/j.stem.2022.11.010.36459967
156. Audesse AJ , and Webb AE (2020). Mechanisms of enhanced quiescence in neural stem cell aging. Mech. Ageing Dev. 191 , 111323. 10.1016/j.mad.2020.111323.32781077
157. Dulken BW , Buckley MT , Navarro Negredo P , Saligrama N , Cayrol R , Leeman DS , George BM , Boutet SC , Hebestreit K , Pluvinage JV , (2019). Single-cell analysis reveals T cell infiltration in old neurogenic niches. Nature 571 , 205–210. 10.1038/s41586-019-1362-5.31270459
158. Fitzsimons CP , van Hooijdonk LWA , Schouten M , Zalachoras I , Brinks V , Zheng T , Schouten TG , Saaltink DJ , Dijkmans T , Steindler DA , (2013). Knockdown of the glucocorticoid receptor alters functional integration of newborn neurons in the adult hippocampus and impairs fear-motivated behavior. Mol. Psychiatry 18 , 993–1005.22925833
159. Kempermann G . (2015). Activity Dependency and Aging in the Regulation of Adult Neurogenesis. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 7 . 10.1101/cshperspect.a018929.
160. Morrison SJ , and Spradling AC (2008). Stem cells and niches: mechanisms that promote stem cell maintenance throughout life. Cell 132 , 598–611. 10.1016/j.cell.2008.01.038.18295578
161. Schouten M , Bielefeld P , Garcia-Corzo L , Passchier EMJ , Gradari S , Jungenitz T , Pons-Espinal M , Gebara E , Martín-Suárez S , Lucassen PJ , (2020). Circadian glucocorticoid oscillations preserve a population of adult hippocampal neural stem cells in the aging brain. Mol. Psychiatry 25 , 1382–1405. 10.1038/S41380-019-0440-2.31222184
162. Ahlenius H , Visan V , Kokaia M , Lindvall O , and Kokaia Z . (2009). Neural stem and progenitor cells retain their potential for proliferation and differentiation into functional neurons despite lower number in aged brain. J. Neurosci. 29 , 4408–4419. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.6003-08.2009.19357268
163. Molofsky AV , Slutsky SG , Joseph NM , He S , Pardal R , Krishnamurthy J , Sharpless NE , and Morrison SJ (2006). Increasing p16INK4a expression decreases forebrain progenitors and neurogenesis during ageing. Nature 443 , 448–452. 10.1038/nature05091.16957738
164. Fatt MP , Tran LM , Vetere G , Storer MA , Simonetta JV , Miller FD , Frankland PW , and Kaplan DR (2022). Restoration of hippocampal neural precursor function by ablation of senescent cells in the aging stem cell niche. Stem Cell Reports 17 , 259–275. 10.1016/j.stemcr.2021.12.010.35063124
165. Zhang H , Li J , Ren J , Sun S , Ma S , Zhang W , Yu Y , Cai Y , Yan K , Li W , (2021). Single-nucleus transcriptomic landscape of primate hippocampal aging. Protein Cell 12 , 695–716. 10.1007/s13238-021-00852-9.34052996
166. Ibrayeva A , Bay M , Pu E , Jörg DJ , Peng L , Jun H , Zhang N , Aaron D , Lin C , Resler G , (2021). Early stem cell aging in the mature brain. Cell Stem Cell 28 , 1329 955–966.e7. 10.1016/j.stem.2021.03.018.33848469
167. Beckervordersandforth R , Ebert B , Schäffner I , Moss J , Fiebig C , Shin J , Moore DL , Ghosh L , Trinchero MF , Stockburger C , (2017). Role of Mitochondrial Metabolism in the Control of Early Lineage Progression and Aging Phenotypes in Adult Hippocampal Neurogenesis. Neuron 93 , 560–573.e6. 10.1016/j.neuron.2016.12.017.28111078
168. Kok FK , van Leerdam SL , and de Lange ECM (2022). Potential Mechanisms Underlying Resistance to Dementia in Non-Demented Individuals with Alzheimer’s Disease Neuropathology. J. Alzheimers. Dis. 87 , 51–81. 10.3233/JAD-210607.35275527
169. Briley D , Ghirardi V , Woltjer R , Renck A , Zolochevska O , Taglialatela G , and Micci M-A (2016). Preserved neurogenesis in non-demented individuals with AD neuropathology. Sci. Rep. 6 , 27812. 10.1038/srep27812.27298190
170. Ally BA , Hussey EP , Ko PC , and Molitor RJ (2013). Pattern separation and pattern completion in Alzheimer’s disease: Evidence of rapid forgetting in amnestic mild cognitive impairment. Hippocampus 23 , 1246–1258. 10.1002/hipo.22162.23804525
171. Wesnes KA , Annas P , Basun H , Edgar C , and Blennow K . (2014). Performance on a pattern separation task by Alzheimer’s patients shows possible links between disrupted dentate gyrus activity and apolipoprotein E ∈4 status and cerebrospinal fluid amyloid-β42 levels. Alzheimers. Res. Ther. 6 , 20. 10.1186/alzrt250.24735568
172. Hanspal MA , and Gillotin S . (2022). A new age in understanding adult hippocampal neurogenesis in Alzheimer’s disease. Neural Regen. Res. 17 , 2615–2618. 10.4103/1673-5374.339472.35662190
173. Disouky A , and Lazarov O . (2021). Adult hippocampal neurogenesis in Alzheimer’s disease. Prog. Mol. Biol. Transl. Sci. 177 , 137–156. 10.1016/bs.pmbts.2020.09.002.33453939
174. Marlatt MW , and Lucassen PJ (2010). Neurogenesis and Alzheimer’s disease: Biology and pathophysiology in mice and men. Curr. Alzheimer Res. 7 , 113–125. 10.2174/156720510790691362.19860727
175. Park JH , Widi GA , Gimbel DA , Harel NY , Lee DHS , and Strittmatter SM (2006). Subcutaneous Nogo receptor removes brain amyloid-beta and improves spatial memory in Alzheimer’s transgenic mice. J. Neurosci. 26 , 13279–13286. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4504-06.2006.17182778
176. Choi S , Bylykbashi E , Chatila Z , Lee S , Pulli B , Clemenson G , Kim E , Rompala A , Oram M , Asselin C , (2018). Combined adult neurogenesis and BDNF mimic exercise effects on cognition in an Alzheimer’s mouse model. Science 361 . 10.1126/SCIENCE.AAN8821.
177. Moon M , Cha M-Y , and Mook-Jung I . (2014). Impaired hippocampal neurogenesis and its enhancement with ghrelin in 5XFAD mice. J. Alzheimers. Dis. 41 , 233–241. 10.3233/JAD-132417.24583405
178. Rodríguez JJ , Jones VC , Tabuchi M , Allan SM , Knight EM , LaFerla FM , Oddo S , and Verkhratsky A . (2008). Impaired adult neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus of a triple transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. PLoS One 3 , e2935. 10.1371/journal.pone.0002935.18698410
179. Billings LM ., Oddo S ., Green KN ., McGaugh JL ., and LaFerla FM . (2005). Intraneuronal Abeta causes the onset of early Alzheimer’s disease-related cognitive deficits in transgenic mice. Neuron 45 , 675–688. 10.1016/j.neuron.2005.01.040.15748844
180. Hollands C , Tobin MK , Hsu M , Musaraca K , Yu T-S , Mishra R , Kernie SG , and Lazarov O . (2017). Depletion of adult neurogenesis exacerbates cognitive deficits in Alzheimer’s disease by compromising hippocampal inhibition. Mol. Neurodegener. 12 , 64. 10.1186/s13024-017-0207-7.28886753
181. Zhang X , Mei Y , He Y , Wang D , Wang J , Wei X , Yang E , Zhou D , Shen H , Peng G , (2021). Ablating Adult Neural Stem Cells Improves Synaptic and Cognitive Functions in Alzheimer Models. Stem cell reports 16 , 89–105. 10.1016/j.stemcr.2020.12.003.33382977
182. Zhang X , Wei X , Mei Y , Wang D , Wang J , Zhang Y , Li X , Gu Y , Peng G , and Sun B . (2021). Modulating adult neurogenesis affects synaptic plasticity and cognitive functions in mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease. Stem cell reports 16 , 3005–3019. 10.1016/j.stemcr.2021.11.003.
183. Deczkowska A , Keren-Shaul H , Weiner A , Colonna M , Schwartz M , and Amit I . (2018). Disease-Associated Microglia: A Universal Immune Sensor of Neurodegeneration. Cell 173 , 1073–1081. 10.1016/j.cell.2018.05.003.29775591
184. Zhang L , Fang Y , Lian Y , Chen Y , Wu T , Zheng Y , Zong H , Sun L , Zhang R , Wang Z , (2015). Brain-derived neurotrophic factor ameliorates learning deficits in a rat model of Alzheimer’s disease induced by aβ1–42. PLoS One 10 , e0122415. 10.1371/journal.pone.0122415.25849905
185. Richetin K , Leclerc C , Toni N , Gallopin T , Pech S , Roybon L , and Rampon C . (2015). Genetic manipulation of adult-born hippocampal neurons rescues memory in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Brain 138 , 440–455. 10.1093/brain/awu354.25518958
186. Casettari L , and Illum L . (2014). Chitosan in nasal delivery systems for therapeutic drugs. J. Control. Release 190 , 189–200. 10.1016/j.jconrel.2014.05.003.24818769
187. Lucassen PJ , Toni N , Kempermann G , Frisen J , Gage FH , and Swaab DF (2019). Limits to human neurogenesis—really? Mol. Psychiatry. 10.1038/s41380-018-0337-5.
188. Nguyen QH , Pervolarakis N , Nee K , and Kessenbrock K . (2018). Experimental Considerations for Single-Cell RNA Sequencing Approaches. Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 6 . 10.3389/fcell.2018.00108.
189. Ferreira PG , Muñoz-Aguirre M , Reverter F , Sá Godinho CP , Sousa A , Amadoz A , Sodaei R , Hidalgo MR , Pervouchine D , Carbonell-Caballero J , (2018). The effects of death and post-mortem cold ischemia on human tissue transcriptomes. Nat. Commun. 9 , 490. 10.1038/s41467-017-02772-x.29440659
190. Madissoon E , Wilbrey-Clark A , Miragaia RJ , Saeb-Parsy K , Mahbubani KT , Georgakopoulos N , Harding P , Polanski K , Huang N , Nowicki-Osuch K , (2019). scRNA-seq assessment of the human lung, spleen, and esophagus tissue stability after cold preservation. Genome Biol. 21 , 1. 10.1186/s13059-019-1906-x.31892341
191. Pozhitkov AE , Neme R , Domazet-Lošo T , Leroux BG , Soni S , Tautz D , and Noble PA (2017). Tracing the dynamics of gene transcripts after organismal death. Open Biol. 7 . 10.1098/rsob.160267.
192. Gault N , and Szele FG (2021). Immunohistochemical evidence for adult human neurogenesis in health and disease. WIREs Mech. Dis. 13 . 10.1002/wsbm.1526.
193. Paredes MF , Sorrells SF , Cebrian-Silla A , Sandoval K , Qi D , Kelley KW , James D , Mayer S , Chang J , Auguste KI , (2018). Does Adult Neurogenesis Persist in the Human Hippocampus? Cell Stem Cell 23 , 780–781. 10.1016/j.stem.2018.11.006.30526879
194. Hao Z-Z , Wei J-R , Xiao D , Liu R , Xu N , Tang L , Huang M , Shen Y , Xing C , Huang W , (2022). Single-cell transcriptomics of adult macaque hippocampus reveals neural precursor cell populations. Nat. Neurosci. 10.1038/s41593-022-01073-x.
195. Kester L , and van Oudenaarden A . (2018). Single-Cell Transcriptomics Meets Lineage Tracing. Cell Stem Cell 23 , 166–179. 10.1016/j.stem.2018.04.014.29754780
196. Khrameeva E , Kurochkin I , Han D , Guijarro P , Kanton S , Santel M , Qian Z , Rong S , Mazin P , Sabirov M , (2020). Single-cell-resolution transcriptome map of human, chimpanzee, bonobo, and macaque brains. Genome Res. 30 , 776–789. 10.1101/gr.256958.119.32424074
197. Olah M , Menon V , Habib N , Taga MF , Ma Y , Yung CJ , Cimpean M , Khairallah A , Coronas-Samano G , Sankowski R , (2020). Single cell RNA sequencing of human microglia uncovers a subset associated with Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Commun. 11 , 6129. 10.1038/s41467-020-19737-2.33257666
198. Wang X , Allen M , Li S , Quicksall ZS , Patel TA , Carnwath TP , Reddy JS , Carrasquillo MM ., Lincoln SJ ., Nguye TT ., . (2020). Deciphering cellular transcriptional alterations in Alzheimer’s disease brains. Mol. Neurodegener. 15 , 38 .10.1186/s13024-020-00392-6.
199. Trapnell C , Cacchiarelli D , Grimsby J , Pokharel P , Li S , Morse M , Lennon NJ , Livak KJ , Mikkelsen TS , and Rinn JL (2014). The dynamics and regulators of cell fate decisions are revealed by pseudotemporal ordering of single cells. Nat. Biotechnol. 32 , 381–386. 10.1038/nbt.2859.24658644
200. La Manno G , Soldatov R , Zeisel A , Braun E , Hochgerner H , Petukhov V , Lidschreiber K , Kastriti ME , Lönnerberg P , Furlan A , (2018). RNA velocity of single cells. Nature 560 , 494–498. 10.1038/s41586-018-0414-6.30089906
201. Lange M , Bergen V , Klein M , Setty M , Reuter B , Bakhti M , Lickert H , Ansari M , Schniering J , Schiller HB , (2022). CellRank for directed single-cell fate mapping. Nat. Methods 19 , 159–170. 10.1038/s41592-021-01346-6.35027767
202. Wegmann R , Neri M , Schuierer S , Bilican B , Hartkopf H , Nigsch F , Mapa F , Waldt A , Cuttat R , Salick MR , (2019). CellSIUS provides sensitive and specific detection of rare cell populations from complex single-cell RNA-seq data. Genome Biol. 20 , 142. 10.1186/s13059-019-1739-7.31315641
203. Wagner DE , and Klein AM (2020). Lineage tracing meets single-cell omics: opportunities and challenges. Nat. Rev. Genet. 21 , 410–427. 10.1038/s41576-020-0223-2.32235876
204. Callaway EM , Dong H-W , Ecker JR , Hawrylycz MJ , Huang ZJ , Lein ES , Ngai J , Osten P , Ren B , Tolias AS , (2021). A multimodal cell census and atlas of the mammalian primary motor cortex. Nature 598 , 86–102. 10.1038/s41586-021-03950-0.34616075
205. Morabito S , Miyoshi E , Michael N , Shahin S , Martini AC , Head E , Silva J , Leavy K , Perez-Rosendahl M , and Swarup V . (2021). Single-nucleus chromatin accessibility and transcriptomic characterization of Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Genet. 53 , 1143–1155. 10.1038/s41588-021-00894-z.34239132
206. Li C , Virgilio MC , Collins KL , and Welch JD (2022). Multi-omic single-cell velocity models epigenome-transcriptome interactions and improves cell fate prediction. Nat. Biotechnol. 10.1038/s41587-022-01476-y.
207. Ohm TG (2007). The dentate gyrus in Alzheimer’s disease. Prog. Brain Res. 163 , 1467 723–740. 10.1016/S0079-6123(07)63039-8.17765747
208. Young JK (2020). Neurogenesis Makes a Crucial Contribution to the Neuropathology of Alzheimer’s Disease. J. Alzheimer’s Dis. reports 4 , 365–371. 10.3233/ADR-200218.
209. Akers KG , Martinez-Canabal A , Restivo L , Yiu AP , De Cristofaro A , Hsiang H-LL ., Wheeler AL ., Guskjolen A ., Niibori Y ., Shoji H ., . (2014). Hippocampal neurogenesis regulates forgetting during adulthood and infancy. Science 344 , 598–602. 10.1126/science.1248903.24812394
210. Sierra A , Martín-Suárez S , Valcárcel-Martín R , Pascual-Brazo J , Aelvoet SA , Abiega O , Deudero JJ , Brewster AL , Bernales I , Anderson AE , (2015). Neuronal hyperactivity accelerates depletion of neural stem cells and impairs hippocampal neurogenesis. Cell Stem Cell 16 , 488–503. 10.1016/J.STEM.2015.04.003.25957904
211. Harris L , Rigo P , Stiehl T , Gaber ZB , Austin SHL , Masdeu M . del M , Edwards A , Urbán N , Marciniak-Czochra A , and Guillemot F . (2021). Coordinated changes in cellular behavior ensure the lifelong maintenance of the hippocampal stem cell population. Cell Stem Cell 28 , 863–876.e6. 10.1016/j.stem.2021.01.003.33581058
212. Arendt T . (2012). Cell Cycle Activation and Aneuploid Neurons in Alzheimer’s Disease. Mol. Neurobiol. 46 , 125–135. 10.1007/s12035-012-8262-0.22528601
213. ARENDT T , HOLZER M , STÖBE A , GÄRTNER U , LÜTH H-J , BRÜCKNER MK , and UEBERHAM U . (2006). Activated Mitogenic Signaling Induces a Process of Dedifferentiation in Alzheimer’s Disease That Eventually Results in Cell Death. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 920 , 249–255. 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2000.tb06931.x.
214. Yang Y , Geldmacher DS , and Herrup K . (2001). DNA Replication Precedes Neuronal Cell Death in Alzheimer’s Disease. J. Neurosci. 21 , 2661–2668. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.21-08-02661.2001.11306619
