LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9505803
8623
Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol
Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol
Arteriosclerosis, thrombosis, and vascular biology
1079-5642
1524-4636

37650329
10521805
10.1161/ATVBAHA.123.319816
NIHMS1925971
Article
Endothelial Cell APOE3 Regulates Neurovascular, Neuronal, and Behavioral Function
Marottoli Felecia, M. 1
Zhang Hui 1
Flores-Barrera Eden 1
de la Villarmois Emilce Artur 1
Damen Frederick C. 2
Fernández Anabel M.M. Miguelez 1
Blesson Hannah V. 1
Chaudhary Rohan 1
Nguyen Anthony L. 1
Nwokeji Amanda E. 1
Talati Ruju 1
John Ashwin S. 1
Madadakere Kushi 1
Lutz Sarah E. 1
Cai Kejia 23
Tseng Kuei Y. 1
Tai Leon M. 1*
1 Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States
2 Department of Radiology, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States
3 Department of Bioengineering, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States
* Corresponding author: leontai@uic.edu
30 8 2023
10 2023
31 8 2023
01 10 2024
43 10 19521966
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Background:

Specialized brain endothelial cells and human APOE3 are independently important for neurovascular function, yet whether APOE3 expression by endothelial cells contributes to brain function is currently unknown. In the present study, we determined whether the loss of endothelial cell APOE3 impacts brain vascular and neural function.

Methods:

We developed APOE3fl/fl/Cdh5(PAC)-CreERT2+/− (APOE3Cre+/−) and APOE3fl/fl/Cdh5(PAC)-CreERT2−/− (APOE3Cre−/−, control) mice, and induced endothelial cell APOE3 knockdown with tamoxifen at ~4-5 weeks of age. Neurovascular and neuronal function were evaluated by biochemistry, immunohistochemistry, behavioral testing, and electrophysiology at 9 months of age.

Results:

We found that the loss of endothelial APOE3 expression was sufficient to cause neurovascular dysfunction including higher permeability and lower vessel coverage in tandem with deficits in spatial memory and fear memory extinction and a disruption of cortical excitatory-inhibitory balance.

Conclusions:

Our data collectively support the novel concept that endothelial APOE3 plays a critical role in the regulation of the neurovasculature, neural circuit function and behavior.

Graphical Abstract

APOE3
endothelial cells
neurovascular function
cortical excitatory-inhibitory balance
behavior

pmcHuman APOE plays a key role in brain function, which is highlighted in neurodegenerative disorders. Compared to APOE3, APOE4 is associated with greater cognitive decline during aging, poorer outcomes following stroke and traumatic brain injury, and higher risk of developing Alzheimer’s disease1,2. Although APOE modulates multiple functions throughout the body, increasing evidence suggests that APOE impacts neurovascular function. Compared to APOE3, markers of neurovascular dysfunction are greater with APOE4 including higher permeability, lower vessel coverage and altered cerebral blood flow with aging and neurodegeneration in humans and mouse models3–12. Therefore, identifying fundamental mechanisms by which APOE regulates neurovascular function is important for ultimately understanding neurodegenerative disorders.

Endothelial cells comprising the neurovasculature are highly specialized compared to other vascular beds. The unique properties of brain endothelial cells selectively control bi-directional movement of molecules, regulate inflammation, and control cerebral blood flow. Ongoing research into the effects of APOE genotype on the neurovasculature has primarily focused on how APOE expression by astrocytes, pericytes, and macrophages affects brain endothelial cells13–16. Although these studies have identified novel mechanisms by which APOE impacts neurovascular function, the contribution of APOE expressed by brain endothelial cells has been potentially overlooked.

The physiological role(s) played by endothelial APOE in neurovascular function is unclear and controversial. Human and in vivo research is limited to expression data and although studies have shown endothelial cells express APOE, levels are varied, and functionality is debated17–23. In vitro models have also produced conflicting results on whether there are functional differences comparing APOE3 and APOE4 brain endothelial cells16,24,25. Therefore, at present, it is still unknown whether brain endothelial cell APOE modulates neurovascular function. Addressing this issue is crucial to advance our fundamental knowledge of APOE biology and its impact on the neurovasculature.

The goal of this study was to determine if endothelial APOE3 regulates neural function in vivo. To achieve this goal, we addressed whether the loss of endothelial cell APOE3 impacts brain function. APOE3 is used as the control genotype in APOE research. We reasoned that if endothelial cell APOE was functional, then we would be most likely to find changes after APOE3 knockdown, without the confounds of APOE4 expression by other cells. Therefore, we created a mouse model to enable the conditional knockdown of APOE3 in endothelial cells and measured neurovascular, behavioral, and neuronal function.

Methods

The authors declare that all supporting data are available within the article (and its online supplementary files).

Mouse Model and General Design

All experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at the University of Illinois at Chicago. Mice were group housed on a 12 h light/dark cycle with food (Teklad 7912 from Inotiv) and water ad libitum. The overall design is presented in Figure S1. APOE3fl/fl/Cdh5(PAC)-CreERT2 mice were developed via MTA with Cure Alzheimer’s Fund (to obtain APOE3fl/fl mice) and contract with Taconic. APOE3fl/fl/Cdh5(PAC)-CreERT2 mice were generated by crossing APOE3fl/fl mice, which express floxed human APOE3 under the endogenous mouse APOE promoter26, with Cdh5(PAC)-CreERT2 mice that express CreERT under the control of the cadherin-5/VE-cadherin endothelial cell specific promoter27. We refer to APOE3fl/fl/Cdh5(PAC)-CreERT2 mice as APOE3Cre+/− mice, and control mice as APOE3Cre−/− mice. For APOE knockdown, 4–5-week-old APOE3Cre+/− and APOE3Cre−/− mice were injected with 100μl of tamoxifen (i.p. 20 mg/ml in corn oil) every 24 hours for 5 days. Experiments were conducted at 9 mo of age.

Mice were weaned at P21, prior to determining Cre genotype; this provided a natural randomization of genotypes in each cage. For cohort assignment, cages containing mice of similar age were selected such that the number of APOE3Cre+/− and APOE3Cre−/− mice per group were near equal in number. Cages contained four-five mice at the start of housing, which continued unless there was premature loss of mice due to natural causes or fighting prior to the start of experiments. For quantification of all experiments, investigators were blinded to Cre genotype. Behavior was conducted in the mouse active/dark cycle (except trace fear conditioning) following our previously described protocols11,28,29 with slight modifications and analyzed using ANY-maze video tracking software (Stoelting Co) unless stated otherwise. Mice were placed in the room for 30 min before behavior tests for acclimatization, except for trace fear conditioning.

Open Field

Mice were placed in an opaque, white arena (46 cm × 46 cm × 40 cm: Ugo Basile) for 10 min and the total distance travelled was measured.

Novel Object Recognition

Novel object recognition was conducted 24 hours after open field, using an opaque, white arena (46 cm × 46 cm × 40 cm: Ugo Basile) and 3D printed novel objects that were magnetically attached to the arena floor. Mice were placed in the arena for 7 min with two familiar objects (red shot glass shaped plastic) and then back in the arena 1 hour later for 7 min with a familiar (red shot glass shaped plastic) and novel (grey flag shaped plastic) object. Total investigation time and preference index (time spend with novel object / total investigation time) were calculated by 4 investigators.

Morris Water Maze

Morris water maze (MWM) was performed 2 days after novel object recognition in a white-walled pool, 120 cm in diameter, containing a circular escape platform (10 cm in diameter) submerged 7 mm below the surface of the water. Water was maintained at a temperature of 20 °C ± 1 °C and made opaque using non-toxic white paint. High-contrast visual cues were affixed to the top of the pool walls for spatial orientation (3D printed black plastic circle, square, cross and triangle). MWM consisted of visual acuity, acquisition, and probe trial phases. Visual acuity was performed in a nonspatial context for habituation and to ensure no visual impairment. A red plastic flag was placed on the platform in the center of the MWM pool without spatial cues. Two trials of 60 seconds were performed with entry positions different from any of those used in the acquisition or probe trial phases. All mice found the platform within the two trials (observational data). Two days later the spatial learning acquisition phase was conducted, where mice were trained for 5 days to locate the platform, with each day consisting of four trials separated by a 25-30 min inter trial interval (ITI). Trials ended either when the mice found the platform, or 60 seconds had elapsed; mice that did not find the platform were guided by following the investigator’s hand. Mice were left of the platform for 15 seconds, or if they had performed at least one full investigative rotation on the platform. The platform location remained constant, and starting location changed with each trial; mice were never placed in the quadrant containing the platform or starting point of the probe trial. The time to locate the submerged platform from each of the four trials was averaged and plotted for each day. The platform was placed in the SW quadrant and the mouse entry order was N, E, SE, NW (day 1), SE, N, NW, E (day 2), NW, SE, E, N (day 3), E, NW, N, SE (day 4), N, SE, E, NW (day 5). To test memory retention, the platform was removed 24 hours after the final acquisition trial, mice were placed in the NE quadrant and allowed to swim in the arena for 60 seconds. The number of entries and time spent in the previous platform area were measured.

Trace Fear Conditioning

Fear conditioning was conducted over three days30,31. The conditioning phase consisted of 2 min habituation, followed by 5 paired trails of a neutral tone (10 s, 1500 Hz, 85 dB) with a foot shock (1 s, 0.4 mA) at a delay of 20 s from the end of the tone, with an ITI of 220-280 s. Cue-induced fear extinction was evaluated 24 h after conditioning (Day 2) by measuring the freezing response to the conditioned tone over 15 trials at 60 s interval, and then again 24 h later (Day 3). On days 2 and 3, the average freezing response over three trials was calculated and used for statistical analysis.

In vitro Brain Endothelial Cell Isolation

Brain endothelial cells were isolated from 9-month-old mice as described in Marottoli, et al (2021) 24 with slight modification. Briefly, cortical tissue was diced, centrifuged (1,000 × g, 5 min, 4 °C), resuspended in papain (20 U/ml)/DNase (2,000 U/ml) and lightly triturated through a 19G needle. Brain homogenates were then incubated for exactly 15 min at 37 °C, triturated with a 21G needle, mixed thoroughly with 2 ml of 25% BSA per cortex, vortexed and centrifuged (4,000 × g, 5 min, 4 °C) to separate out the myelin. The supernatant was collected, vortexed, and centrifuged a second time (4,000 × g, 5 min, 4 °C). Pellets from both centrifugations were combined in complete growth media (EBM-2 containing EGM™-2 MV Microvascular Endothelial SingleQuots™ and 5.5 U/ml heparin), passed through a 100 μm cell strainer and pelleted (1,000 × g, 5 min, 4 °C). Resuspended cells were plated at approximately 1 cortex (i.e., 2 hemispheres) to 1.32 cm2 (i.e., 4 wells of a 96-well plate) on a growth matrix of fibronectin, collagen and laminin, and placed at 37 °C with 5% CO2. The following morning, cells were incubated in 8 μg/ml puromycin for 48 h to negatively select for brain endothelial cells. Puromycin was removed and brain endothelial cells were grown to confluence (1 week) in complete growth media. All experiments were conducted 48 h after the final media change at passage 0.

In vivo Brain Endothelial Cell Isolation

For in vivo applications, the above procedure was modified to enrich for a single-cell suspension of brain endothelial cells without the need for culture. Cortices were homogenized and myelin was removed as above. Following the myelin separation, the pellets were combined and incubated in ACK buffer for 5 min followed by a 1 h digestion in collagenase/dispase (Roche) and passed through a 70 μm strainer to produce a single-cell suspension. Samples were enriched for brain endothelial cells by depletion of remaining myelin debris with Myelin Separation Beads and 3 rounds of positive selection with CD31 Beads on a MulitMACS™ Cell24 Separator Plus. A fraction of the brain endothelial cell-enriched sample (15%) was assessed by flow cytometry. The remaining sample was pelleted for extraction of protein or RNA (see qRT-PCR section). For protein extraction, pellets were lysed in 70 μl of RIPA buffer + 1X HALT® protease inhibitor cocktail, sonicated (20% amplification, 3 cycles), centrifuged (25,000 × g for 20 min at 4 °C), and supernatant was collected. Protein was not quantified as the BSA in the elution buffers masked the true protein levels of the samples. Experiments that typically require normalization to protein were instead normalized to actin values measured by western blot.

Flow Cytometry

Brain endothelial cells were incubated in Zombie Green viability dye (1:200) for 15 min at room temperature and washed with 1%BSA/PBS. Fc receptors were blocked for 10 min with TruStain FcX™ PLUS (1:200). Cells were then incubated with CD31-PE (1:100) for 1 h at room temperature, washed with 1% BSA/PBS and fixed overnight at 4 °C in 1X True-Nuclear™ Fix. The following morning, cells were washed and resuspended in 1% BSA/PBS and measured on a CytoFLEX S. Analysis was performed using Kaluza software.

qRT-PCR

qRT-PCR and bioinformatics analysis was performed by the Genomics Research Core and Research Informatics Core at the UIC. RNA was extracted from brain endothelial cell-enriched samples with a miRNeasy Micro Kit (Qiagen) according to manufacturer protocol. RNA samples were quantified with a Qubit RNA HS Assay Kit (Invitrogen) and evaluated for quality using a RNA ScreenTape Assay and Agilent 4200 TapeStation (Agilent Technologies). All steps of RNA processing were performed according to the manufacturer protocol “Gene Expression Analysis with the GE 96.96 IFC Using TaqMan Assays”. TaqMan gene expression assays (Actb, APOE, Cldn5, Ocln, Cdh5, Ctnnb1, Ctnnd1, Ccl3, Cd74, Cxcl1, B2m, Vcam1, Vwf) were ordered from Life technologies (Thermo Fisher Scientific (See Major Resources Table)). In brief, RNA in the amount of 0.5 −5 nanograms per sample was converted to cDNA and followed by Target Specific Amplification (TSA) pre-amplification performed with a master mix of all intended assays according to the protocol “Gene Expression Preamplification with Fluidigm Preamp Master Mix and TaqMan Assay” (P/N 100-5876 C2). All samples were pre-amplified with 18 PCR cycles. Final cDNA products were diluted 1:1 and 1:5 and both dilutions were used for setting up RT-PCR reactions with each individual assay. Each sample was tested in 3 technical replicates. The setup included No Temple (NT) controls. Reaction setup was performed according to the protocol “Gene Expression with the 96.96 IFC Using Fast TaqMan Assays” (PN 100-2638 E1). After the completion of the run IFC was checked for the quality of loading, consistency of the technical replications, and absence of the amplification signal in NT control wells. Expression profiling was performed using the 96.96 Gene Expression (GE) Dynamic Array IFC and data was collected using a BioMark HD Real-Time PCR system (Standard Biotools). Fluidigm Real-Time PCR Analyses software was used to collect the data.

Raw data (CT values) were processed in R. Briefly, raw CT values for each assay were filtered to remove any assays in which the quality score was less than 0.65. The mean CT value for each gene for each sample was computed from the retained values. Normalized, i.e., ΔCT, values were computed using Actb as the reference assay for each sample. Differential analysis of the normalized (ΔCT) values was performed using limma (v3.50.3) in R32. Prior to differential analysis genes were removed in which more than 12 samples did not have a detectable signal. Furthermore, normalized values were multiplied by −1 to create log scaled values required by limma. The transformed, normalized values were modeled as a function of the experimental covariates, i.e., sex and genotype, with batch as a controlling factor as samples were collected in three batches of 8 that contained two of each group. Specific contrasts of the experimental covariates were then tested using empirical Bayes moderated t-statistic (limma R package v3.50.3), i.e., Empirical Bayes function. For graphical representation, ΔΔCT was calculated for each sample using ΔCT (sample) - ΔCT (control average) using either male APOE3Cre−/−, APOE3Cre−/− or male mice as the control group average as supported by statistical analysis. Fold gene expression was then calculated as 2−ΔΔCT.

Cortical Harvest

Mice were anesthetized via i.p. injection with ketamine (100 mg/kg) and xylazine (10 mg/kg). For plasma isolation, blood was drawn by cardiac puncture of the right ventricle followed by centrifugation at 1,500 × g for 20 min at 4 °C. Plasma was flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 °C. Following blood draw, transcardial perfusion was performed with ice-cold TBS at a rate of 4 ml/min for 4 min. For immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis, left hemi brains were frozen in O.C.T. and stored at −80 °C until processing. For biochemical analysis, right hemi-cortices were isolated and homogenized using a bead mill (Fisherbrand) at 6 m/s for 1 cycle of 30 seconds in SDS lysis buffer (1% SDS + 10 mM NaF + 1X HALT® protease inhibitor cocktail in 20 mM HEPES; pH = 7.4). Samples were then centrifuged at 500 × g for 5 min at 4°C, sonicated (20% amplification, 3 cycles), and then centrifuged again (25,000 × g for 20 min at 4 °C). Aliquots of the resulting supernatant were then flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80°C. Total protein was quantified using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit. Brains from a separate cohort of mice were drop-fixed overnight in 4% PFA, cryopreserved in 30% sucrose, sectioned and then stored at 4 °C in cryoprotectant until processing.

Western Blot

Gel electrophoresis was used to separate either 10.5 μl of brain endothelial cell lysate (total sample volume of 15 μl) or 20 μg of protein from cortical lysates on 26-well 4-12% Bis-Tris Midi gels (Invitrogen). Proteins were transferred onto low-fluorescence PVDF membranes, which were cut, blocked with 5% milk in TBS, and probed with primary antibody (list of antibody and dilutions provided in Major Resources Table) in 1% bovine serum albumin in TBS with 0.02% sodium azide overnight at 4 °C. After washing (3 × 5 min, 0.1%Tween-20 in TBS (TBS-T)), membranes were incubated for 45 min in the appropriate secondary fluorescent secondary antibody (LI-COR) in 1% milk in TBS-T and 0.01% SDS. Proteins were imaged and quantified using the Odyssey ® Fc Imaging System. When required, blots were reprobed for a second antigen. To ensure signal specificity in reprobing, all antibodies were paired so there was no overlap between signals and, where possible, primary antibodies from another host species were paired with secondaries conjugated to a different fluorophore. Optical densities were quantified with Image Studio Lite v5.2 and normalized to β-actin.

The nature of our study required us to evaluate the contribution APOE3Cre genotype, sex, and their interaction to each readout. For our study, this is difficult as all of the samples from every group will not fit on a single gel (4 groups: 2 x APOECre; APOE3Cre−/− and APOE3Cre+/− x 2 sex; male and female, n = ~12). Furthermore, running a portion of each group across multiple gels can result in variability across blots from sample loading, transferring, probing, etc. Therefore, dividing our groups evenly across multiple gels could potentially result in artificial alterations in data such as bimodal populations, false positives, and false negatives. To compensate for this variability, and to enable a reliable evaluation across all groups, cortical samples were run across three different western blots to calculate a correction factor/ratio to compare all samples at once. This correction factor allows us to express all data relative to male APOE3Cre−/− mice and, therefore, analyze the contributions of both Cre genotype and sex to changes in protein levels analyzed by western blot. In the first blot, male and female APOE3Cre−/− mice were analyzed. All data were normalized to the average of male APOE3Cre−/− mice and the normalized ratio of female APOE3Cre−/− mice: male APOE3Cre−/− mice was used as the female correction factor for subsequent analysis. In the second blot, female APOE3Cre−/− mice were run with female APOE3Cre+/− mice. All values were normalized to the average of female APOE3Cre−/− mice and then multiplied by the female correction factor. In the third blot, all male APOE3Cre−/− mice were run with male APOE3Cre+/− mice and values were normalized to the average of male APOE3Cre−/− mice. Normalized data from blot two and blot three were then used for plotting and statistical analysis. The following is a summary of our normalization approach on actin-normalized data: (1) On blot 1, divide each value by the average of the APOE3Cre−/− male values to normalize the all values to APOE3Cre−/− male mice; (2) Average the normalized APOE3Cre−/− female values to determine the female correction factor; (3) On blot 2, divide each value by the average of the APOE3Cre−/− values to normalize the all values to APOE3Cre−/− mice; (4) Multiply the normalized values from blot 2 by the female correction factor; (5) Repeat step 3 on blot 3. Both blots 2 (female) and 3 (male) are now normalized to their respective APOE3Cre−/− group; (6) All data is now normalized to the APOE3Cre−/− male group for statistical analysis.

IHC

CD31, Laminin, IgG and Fibrinogen

Fluorescent IHC for CD31, laminin, IgG and fibrinogen was performed on fresh frozen samples as previously described11,28 with slight modifications. To summarize, 9 x 12 μm nonadjacent sagittal sections per animal were fixed with 3% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in TBS for 10 min. Sections were then permeabilized with 0.25% Triton X-100 in TBS (dilution media), blocked in 5% BSA in dilution media, and incubated in primary antibodies diluted in 2% BSA and 0.1% Triton X-100 in TBS (list of antibodies and dilutions provided in Major Resources Table) overnight at 4 °C in a humidified chamber. Following the primary incubation, sections were washed 3 × 5 min in dilution media and incubated in the appropriate Alexa Fluor-conjugated secondary antibodies in 2% BSA and 0.1%Triton X-100 in TBS, followed by 3 × 5-min washes in dilution media, and 1 x 5-min wash in TBS. Following immunohistochemical staining, sections were cover slipped and imaged at 10X magnification on an ImageXpress Micro (Molecular Devices) under identical exposure settings and equally thresholded. The area fraction of CD31 and laminin were quantified in the full cortex in ImageJ (Fiji) software.

GLUT1 and PDGFRβ

To expand upon our vascular analysis, drop-fixed brains were sectioned at 40 μm on a sliding microtome and IHC was performed according to the above procedure on free-floating sections. Following immunohistochemical staining, sections were mounted, cover slipped and 10 images per animal were acquired at 25X magnification on a Zeiss LSM710 confocal microscope. An established script33 was used in ImageJ (Fiji) software to measure area fraction of vessels and pericytes, vessel segment length, vascular branching, and distance between blood vessels. Briefly, images were processed to remove noise and binarized. After measuring the area fraction, binarized images were skeletonized for quantification of total length, number of branches and nearest neighbor distance. To quantify pericyte coverage, the pericyte area fraction was divided by the vessel area fraction.

ApoE

Immunohistochemical detection of apoE was performed as previously described34 with slight modification. Sections were fixed with 3% PFA in PBS overnight at 4 °C, washed (2 x 5 min in PBS), permeabilized for 30 min (0.1% Triton X-100 in PBS) and background PFA quenched (0.05 M ammonium chloride, 10 min). Sections were then rinsed (1 x PBS), blocked (4% BSA in PBS, 30 min), rinsed (1x PBS), incubated in primary antibodies overnight (4 °C, humidified chamber, 1% BSA in PBS), washed (3 x 5 min in PBS), incubated with Alexa Fluor-conjugated secondary antibodies (2 h, room temperature), washed (3 x 5 min in PBS) and cover slipped. Slides were viewed on a Zeiss LSM710 confocal microscope at 200X.

In situ Hybridization

APOE mRNA was measured in isolated brain endothelial cells and brain tissue sections using BaseScope™ Detection Reagent kit v2- Red (ACD) following the manufacturers protocol and as described in Marottoli, et al (2021) 24 with minor modifications. Briefly, samples were fixed in 3% PFA (30 min, 4 °C), washed (PBS), incubated with hydrogen peroxide (10 min, room temperature), washed (3 x PBS), treated with RNAscope protease III (diluted 1:15, cultured brain endothelial cells, 10 min) or protease IV (tissue sections, 30 min) solution, and washed (2 x PBS). Probe hybridization and amplification were performed according to manufacturer instructions except PBS was used in place of distilled water for the final washes. Isolated brain endothelial cells were then stained for ZO1 and tissue sections for FITC-lectin and then counterstained with DAPI.

ELISA

ApoE was measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) in brain endothelial cell-enriched lysates (1:8 dilution), cortical lysates (1:160 dilution) and plasma (1:20,000 dilution) as described in11,28 using anti-apoE (1:2000, Millipore) and biotinylated anti-apoE (1:5000, Meridian) for capture and detection antibodies, respectively. Cortical lysates were analyzed for fibrinogen (1:10,000 dilution), IgG (1:10,000 dilution) and albumin (1:500,000 dilution) with commercial ELISA kits (Immunology Consultants) with two minor modifications to the manufacturer’s protocol; sample incubation time was increased to 2 hours at 37 °C, and secondary antibody was increased to 1 h at 37 °C, and standards were buffer matched. Cortical samples were normalized to protein concentration and isolated brain endothelial cell samples were normalized to actin quantified by western blot. Plasma levels (1:10 dilution) of cardiovascular dysfunction were measured using MILLIPLEX MAP CVD magnetic bead panel according to the manufacturer’s protocol.

Dextran Extravasation

Dextran extravasation was performed as previously described35,36 with modification. 100 μl of fluorescently conjugated 10 kDa (Alexa Fluor-555; Invitrogen) and 70 kDa (Texas Red; Invitrogen) dextran tracers were injected i.p. at a concentration of 3.75 mg/ml and left to circulate for 30 min. Animals were then transcardially perfused with TBS. Cortices were dissected, weighed, and incubated in formamide for 48 h at 56 °C. Dye fluorescence was then measured using a SpectraMax i3x multi-mode plate reader (Molecular Devices) at the appropriate emission and excitation wavelength and normalized to tissue weight.

Cerebral Blood Flow

To quantify cerebral blood flow (CBF), endogenous Arterial Spin Labeling (ASL) MRI based on Flow-sensitive Alternating Inversion Recovery (FAIR) was performed on a Varian Horizon 9.4T small animal MRI (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) to acquire two interleaved inversion recovery datasets, a global select (gs) and a slab select (ss), with 85 inversion times (TI) varying from 1 ms to 12 s. The slab thickness was 8 times of the slice thickness (1 mm). Images were acquired with magnetization prepared steady state free precession (FID-SSFP) pulse sequence using center-out k-space order with variable flip angles to start acquisition in a pseudo steady state, with a FOV of 18x18 mm2, 1 mm slice thickness, imaging TR/TE of 1.9/1 ms, a per TI TR of 10 s, and an acquisition time of 38 min. To reduce respiratory effects on the images, both the inversion pulse and the image acquisition were respiratory triggered. The actual TI(s) were recorded using an Arduino Nano connected to the system TTL output of the scanner and used in the curve fitting.

The complex inversion recovery data (Sss,Sgs) was phase corrected to bipolar real values and fitted pixel-by-pixel for inversion recovery via: SIR(TI)=M0(1-2αe−TI/T1app) . M0 is the signal of tissue at the fully relaxed equilibrium, α is the inversion efficiency, and T1app is the apparent spin-lattice relaxation time T1 of tissue (including blood).

The blood flow contrast data, Sss – Sgs, were fitted using SBF(TI)=Sss(TI)-Sgs(TI)=M0BW(1-e−(TI-t0)/τ)e−TI/T1BW. M0BW is the signal of blood water at the fully relaxed equilibrium, t0 is the initial arrival time of the blood, τ is the voxel filling time rate. and T1BW is the T1 of the blood water. The blood flow CBF=λ·M0bw/M0 (ml blood per g of tissue, where λ is the tissue-blood partition coefficient, 0.9 (g of water per g of tissue)/(g of water per ml of blood). The cortex was manually drawn in reference to T2-weighted MRI images. The mean signal withing each ROI was used during regression.

Electrophysiological Recordings

Ex-vivo whole-cell patch-clamp recordings from layer V pyramidal neurons of the medial prefrontal cortex (PFC, prelimbic region) were conducted as described in30,31. Briefly, 350 μm PFC slices were obtained using a vibrating blade microtome (PELCO, Ted Pella, CA) in ice-cold artificial cerebrospinal fluid (aCSF, 95% O2–5% CO2). PFC slices were then incubated in warm aCSF (33–35 °C) with constant oxygenation (95% O2– 5% CO2) for at least 60 min before transferring them to the recording chamber. All recordings were conducted at 33–35 °C using a low chloride-based internal solution and an external solution free of glutamate and GABA blockers to enable concurrent acquisition of excitatory and inhibitory postsynaptic currents at the single cell level37. The internal solution also contained 0.1% Neurobiotin (Vector Laboratories, CA) and (in mM): 10 CsCl, 130 Gluconic acid, 10 HEPES, 2 MgCl2, 5 NaATP, 0.6 NaGTP, and 3 QX-314 (pH: 7.23-7.28, 280-282 mOsm). Both spontaneous excitatory and GABA-inhibitory synaptic events can be readily assessed by recording the frequency of postsynaptic currents at the −60 mV (PSC−60mV) and +15 mV (PSC+15mV) holding potentials, respectively. Only neurons with at least 10 min of stable baseline activity were included for analyses. Changes in the frequency of PSC−60mV and PSC+15mV events across the different experimental groups were determined from at least 2 non-contiguous epochs of 60 s each.

Statistical Analysis

All data are expressed as either the mean ± SEM or as a box plot depicting the minimum score, the lower quartile (25%), the median (50%, horizontal line), upper quartile (75%), maximum values and mean (+). Due to the nature and feasibility of in vivo research, we considered the n value too low to give an accurate representation of normality or the variance between our groups. As our primary question was related to the mean differences, data was analyzed with general linear models (GLM) in SPSS (v28.0.1.1) (15) with Bonferroni Post hoc as required. For all data except behavior, the GLMs report between-subject significance for Cre, Sex and Cre x Sex. For the acquisition phase of Morris water maze and for trace fear conditioning we included trial as a repeated measure in the GLM which therefore reports significance for within-subject (trial, trial x Sex, trial x Cre, trial x Cre x Sex using Pilai’s Trace, Wilks’ Lamdba, Hoteling’s trace or Roy’s largest Root) and between-subjects effects (Cre, Sex and Cre x Sex). Most data in this manuscript were significant due to a Cre effect or a Sex effect with no interaction. To visually represent the results of that statistical analysis, we therefore plotted data as either Cre genotype (our main comparison of interest, Figures 1–4) or Sex (Supplementary Figures) due to the absence of a Cre x Sex interaction. Cre x Sex interactions were found for data presented in Figure S3 and Figure S6. We also conducted Pearson Correlation coefficient and linear regression analysis in Figure 4C. All n sizes, data points, GLM details, and statistical analysis are available in Source Data File 1. Statistical analysis for qRT-PCR is described above.

Results

Whether APOE expression by brain endothelial cells plays a role in regulating brain function remains controversial. To gain insight on this issue, we evaluated the extent that endothelial APOE3 knockdown impacts neurovascular and neural function. To achieve our goal, humanized APOE3fl/fl mice obtained from the Cure Alzheimer’s Fund were used to develop APOE3fl/f/Cdh5(PAC)-CreERT2+/− (APOE3Cre+/−) and APOE3fl/fl/Cdh5(PAC)-CreERT2−/− (APOE3Cre−/−, control) mice, which enable tamoxifen inducible knockdown of endothelial cell APOE3. We treated mice with tamoxifen at ~ 4-5 weeks of age and evaluated brain function at 9 months (see Figure S1 for study design). Although the goal was not the comparison of APOE3 and APOE4, 9 months was selected based on our previous studies on the role of human APOE (hAPOE) in neurovascular and neural function during aging in vivo. We found deficits in neurovascular function and cognition at 9 months of age with APOE4 compared to APOE39,11,29. Therefore, we predicted that if endothelial APOE3 is functional, then APOE3 knock down in endothelial cells may produce a phenotype by 9 months of age.

Brain Endothelial Cell ApoE3 Levels are Lower in APOE3Cre+/− Mice

The extent that APOE (gene) is expressed by and contributes to brain endothelial cell apoE (protein) levels is highly contested. We first validated APOE3 expression in endothelial cells cultured from APOE3Cre−/− mice and its knockdown in APOE3Cre+/− mice (Figure 1A–B). Due to the controversy, we next focused on evaluating levels of APOE (Figure 1C–D) and apoE (Figure 1E–G) in vivo. When assessed by in situ hybridization, in APOE3Cre−/− mice we found perinuclear expression of APOE3 in brain endothelial cells, which was greatly reduced in APOE3Cre+/− mice (Figure 1C). To quantify APOE levels, we positively selected brain endothelial cells from cortical homogenates (~97% enriched for brain endothelial cells, Figure S2). Consistent with our in situ results, APOE transcripts were very low in brain endothelial cell-enriched samples from APOE3Cre+/− mice compared to APOE3Cre−/− mice when measured by qRT-PCR (Figure 1D). We next confirmed that APOE knockdown resulted in lower apoE levels in brain endothelial cells. Immunohistochemical analysis showed apoE located within the brain endothelial cells which was reduced in APOE3Cre+/− mice (Figure 1E). We also found ~41% and ~86% lower apoE levels by ELISA (Figure 1F) and western blot (Figure 1G), respectively in brain endothelial cell-enriched samples. The difference in the relative lowering of apoE levels in brain endothelial cells between the two techniques is most likely due to the nonspecific protein binding of the apoE capture antibody (see Figure S2). Lower APOE3 expression in brain endothelial cells did not affect overall cortical (Figure 1H; Figure S2) or plasma (Figure 1I) apoE levels. Overall, our data provide evidence that brain endothelial cells do express APOE3, which was knocked down in APOE3Cre+/− mice and resulted in lower levels of apoE.

Endothelial Knockdown of APOE3 is Sufficient to Cause Neurovascular Dysfunction

As APOE is implicated in regulation of the neurovasculature10, we evaluated the functional impact of endothelial APOE3 knockdown on common markers of neurovascular dysfunction: higher permeability, lower vessel coverage, and altered cerebral blood flow.

Higher permeability to plasma proteins is a prominent marker of neurovascular dysfunction. We began by measuring extravasated plasma proteins in the cortex by ELISA. We found that cortical levels of both IgG and fibrinogen were ~29% higher in APOE3Cre+/− mice (Figure 2A–B, Figure S3) while levels of albumin were unchanged (Figure S3). Albumin transport at endothelial cells is complex and can involve both transcellular and paracellular routes 38–42, potentially in a bi-directional manner 40. Therefore, the lack of an effect on albumin extravasation in APOE3Cre+/− mice may be related to changes in these transport processes in a way to compensate for higher paracellular permeability after endothelial cell APOE3 knockdown. Evaluation of neurovascular permeability by ELISA reflects the physiological accumulation of plasma proteins over 9 months. To determine neurovascular permeability at 9 months of age, we measured cortical extravasation of exogenously administered fluorescent dextrans. For both 10 kDa and 70 kDa dextrans there was a sex effect with females showing higher dextran extravasation than males (Figure S3). In addition, there was an interaction between Cre genotype and sex, driven by higher permeability with APOE3 knockdown in males (10 kDa dextran and trending for 70 kDa dextran). In female mice, with endothelial cell knockdown of APOE, the higher accumulation of endogenous plasma proteins but no effect on exogenously added dextran may be due to a combination of the technique and age. Plasma protein levels reflect accumulation over time, whereas dextran permeability represents a single timepoint. Thus, it is possible age-dependent increases in permeability in female mice resulted in comparable dextran extravasation between APOE3Cre−/− and APOE3Cre+/− at 9 months. Tight junctions between brain endothelial cells are crucial for maintaining the integrity and selective permeability of the neurovasculature43–45. Therefore, we next evaluated if differences in levels of junctional proteins were associated with the increased cortical extravasation of IgG and fibrinogen in APOE3Cre+/− mice. At the mRNA level we did not find any differences between APOE3Cre−/− and APOE3Cre+/− mice for tight junction (Ocln, Cldn5) and adherens junction (Cdh5, Ctnnb1, Ctnnd1) proteins (Figure 2C and Figure S4). However, at the protein level and consistent with higher neurovascular permeability, APOE3 knockdown resulted in lower levels of the tight junction protein claudin-5 when assessed by western blot (Figure 2C and Figure S4), which may suggest greater degradation. Therefore, endothelial cell APOE3 knockdown resulted in higher markers of neurovascular permeability and lower levels of claudin-5.

We next used immunohistochemical staining to quantify alterations in vessel coverage with knockdown of endothelial APOE. APOE3Cre+/− mice had both a lower vessel area fraction (Figure 2E–F) and a lower total vessel length (Figure 2G) compared to APOE3Cre−/− mice, but there were no differences in the number of branches or the distance to the nearest vascular neighbor (Figure S5). Consistent with these data, multiplex ELISA of a vascular damage panel revealed that plasma levels of ICAM-1 were also higher in APOE3Cre+/− mice (Figure S5). We also measured levels of inflammatory and adhesion molecule molecules (Ccl3, Cd74, Cxcl1, B2m, Vcam1, Vwf) in brain endothelial cells via qRT-PCR, as changes in their levels may also indicate cellular dysfunction. Out of these markers, we found that levels of Ccl3 and Cd74 were higher in APOE3Cre+/− mice compared to APOE3Cre−/− mice (Figure S5). This data supports the idea that lowering endothelial cell APOE expression results in brain endothelial cell dysfunction, including lower vessel coverage and higher levels of inflammatory markers.

Interestingly, cortical cerebral blood flow, another common marker of neurovascular dysfunction, was reduced only in female APOE3Cre+/− mice (Figure S6). Pericytes have been reported to be involved in regulation of cerebral blood flow46. We looked at pericyte coverage by immunohistochemistry to determine if there were changes in pericyte coverage that corresponded to the reduced cerebral blood flow and vascular deficits. However, we found that pericyte coverage was unaffected by APOE3 knockdown in both male and female mice (Figure 2H).

In summary, our data supports the idea that endothelial cell APOE3 plays a role in the regulation of neurovascular function, as endothelial cell APOE3 knockdown results in higher levels of plasma proteins in the brain and lower vessel coverage/length.

Endothelial Knockdown of APOE3 Disrupts Behavior

Our finding that the loss of endothelial cell APOE3 increased markers of neurovascular dysfunction led us to evaluate if there was an impact on behavior. APOE3Cre mice were tested with a range of behavioral tasks including open field, novel object recognition (Figure S7), Morris water maze (MWM) and trace fear conditioning (Figure 3). Out of these behavioral tasks, we found that the loss of endothelial cell APOE caused dysfunction in MWM and trace fear conditioning. In MWM both APOE3Cre+/− mice and APOE3Cre−/− mice learned the location of the platform (Figure 3A), however memory was lower in APOE3Cre+/− mice (Figure 3B–D). Trace fear conditioning tests the natural response of a rodent to acquire, remember and then extinguish a fear-conditioned response30,31. We found that APOE3Cre+/− and APOE3Cre−/− mice both acquired the fear conditioned response, although APOE3Cre+/− mice had slightly lower overall freezing behavior (Figure 3E). In the memory extinction phase, the level of conditioned freezing to the tone diminished over repeated trials in APOE3Cre−/− mice that is consistent with normal memory extinction. However, APOE3Cre+/− mice exhibited a level of fear response to the tone that remained high throughout the end of the session (Figure 3F–G), which is indicative of an impairment of fear memory extinction. Therefore, the loss of endothelial cell APOE3 results in deficits to spatial memory and fear memory extinction.

Endothelial Knockdown of APOE3 Preferentially Disrupts GABAergic Activity

As the loss of endothelial cell APOE3 caused behavior dysfunction, our final goal was to evaluate if there were also changes in neuron function. The prefrontal cortex is important for cognitive function including memory retrieval and extinction. In fact, changes in neuron activity in the prefrontal cortex have been directly linked to deficits in extinction fear responses30,31, which therefore may have been impacted by endothelial APOE knockdown. To address this, pyramidal neurons from the prefrontal cortex of APOE3Cre+/− and APOE3Cre−/− mice were recorded using a protocol that enables concurrent acquisition of excitatory (E) and GABA-inhibitory (I) synaptic activity30,31. We found that APOE3Cre+/− mice exhibited a lower frequency of inhibitory postsynaptic currents (PSC+15mV) whereas the level of excitatory (PSC−60mV) events remained unaltered (Figure 4A). As a result, pyramidal neurons recorded from APOE3Cre+/− mice exhibited an imbalanced (&gt;1) E-I ratio (Figure 4B) in a manner that correlated linearly with the frequency of inhibitory postsynaptic currents (Figure 4C). These results indicate that endothelial cell APOE3 knockdown preferentially reduces GABA function. Interestingly, the levels of multiple neuronal markers in the cortex were not affected by endothelial cell APOE knockdown (Figure 4E), supporting the view that the loss of endothelial APOE3 results in neuronal functional deficits that are not apparent at the synaptic protein level measured via western blot. Thus, consistent with our behavior data, the loss of endothelial cell APOE3 preferentially reduced GABAergic activity in the prefrontal cortex, resulting in a higher E/I ratio.

Discussion

The link between human APOE genotype and age-related neurodegenerative disorders demonstrates the involvement of apoE in regulating brain function. Previous studies have identified APOE modulated functions in models of aging and disease. Compared to APOE3, APOE4 is associated with detrimental changes in behavior, neuron function, metabolism, inflammation, neurovascular function, lipoprotein biology, and disease-specific pathology47–49. Research is now further defining these functions for therapeutic development. As a result of these studies, the need for a complementary strategy of identifying cell type-specific functions of APOE has emerged. The major sources of apoE in the body are hepatocytes and astrocytes13–15,50,51. However, it is now recognized that APOE is also expressed by multiple cell types52 including neurons53,54, macrophages34,55–57, pericytes16, adipocytes58–60, epithelial cells61, and microglia26. Although they might not contribute to global apoE levels, local cell type APOE expression has been found to have significant functional effects52,57. Therefore, further investigation of the cell type-specific role of APOE in regulating peripheral and central biology will ultimately allow a deeper understanding of the fundamental functions of APOE, which can then be applied to disease and therapeutic development.

APOE4 is associated with higher permeability and lower vessel coverage during aging, in AD and in respective in vivo models8–12,28,29,62–65. Specialized brain endothelial cells are central to the neurovascular function, primarily controlling the bi-directional movement of essential and unwanted molecules to and from the brain. Mechanistically, research focuses on how APOE genotype-dependent modulation of peripheral and central functions impact brain endothelial cells (e.g., signaling molecules, inflammation). In addition, the contribution of APOE expressed by astrocytes, pericytes and macrophages to endothelial cell/neurovascular function is under investigation13–16. These studies are logical given what is known about APOE expression and function and have identified novel pathways. However, the importance of endothelial cell APOE may have been overlooked. We previously found that mouse brain endothelial cells express APOE in vitro, prompting us to re-evaluate our own conceptions about APOE. Based on this finding, we proposed the concept that in a cell as specialized as brain endothelial cells, there may be a distinct advantage of using apoE for maintaining proper cellular function. However, the idea that endothelial cells express APOE to result in functional effects is contested.

The extent that brain endothelial cells express APOE is unclear. APOE expression by human and mouse brain endothelial cells has been demonstrated in both single cell transcriptomic studies17–23 and in vitro24,66. However, there is variability in human data, leading some to argue endothelial cell APOE expression is negligible. Likely contributing to the variability is difficulty in isolating healthy brain endothelial cells in high yield and the extent that mRNA is degraded post-mortem in different tissues67 and cell types. Although cultured brain endothelial cells have been shown to produce apoE at the protein level, in vivo data are lacking. Thus, there are questions on whether brain endothelial apoE exists and, if it does, its origin (i.e., production versus uptake from interstitial fluid and plasma). Our data demonstrate that APOE is expressed by brain endothelial cells and that knockdown results in much lower levels of the protein. This data supports the concept that a significant proportion of intracellular endothelial cell apoE is derived autonomously. This idea is somewhat surprising given that apoE endocytosis occurs in other cell types via multiple receptors (e.g., LDLR, VLDLR, LRP1), which are also expressed by brain endothelial cells68,69. However, relatively low rates of apoE clearance from the brain parenchyma by brain endothelial cells has been reported in vivo70, and apoE does not readily cross into the brain from the plasma71. Future studies could focus on understanding the relative contribution and subcellular localization of apoE from endogenous and exogenous sources.

In terms of whether endothelial cell APOE is functional, all data thus far are in vitro16,25. It has been previously shown in mouse brain endothelial cells that there is higher permeability in response to stress with APOE4 compared to APOE324. In addition, APOE4 expression by endothelial/epithelial cells differentiated from human iPSC is associated with cellular dysfunction compared to APOE325. In contrast, a separate study found no effect of APOE genotype on basal endothelial cell permeability in isolated mouse brain endothelial cells16. Due to the expression controversies and these in vitro functional data, there is debate on whether endothelial cell APOE is important for brain function. On one side is the opinion that endothelial cell APOE expression is too low to be functional, especially as other sources may compensate and functional data are an in vitro artifact. On the other side is evidence that APOE is expressed by brain endothelial cells in humans and mice, which has been demonstrated as functional in vitro. Our findings agree with in vitro data and support a novel cell type-specific role of endothelial cell APOE3 in regulating brain function. This concept raises important future questions including whether APOE3 expression is altered by age and disease, and whether APOE4 is a loss of positive function or a toxic gain of function.

Our findings raise the question of which protective pathways are regulated by APOE3 in endothelial cells. In general, most research on the cellular function of APOE compares APOE3 with APOE4 and differences have been found in signaling, metabolism, inflammation, reactive oxygen species and organelle damage. Overall, APOE appears to be integral to maintaining cellular function in response to acute and chronic stress (e.g., age, disease, injury, inflammation) which may be particularly important for brain endothelial cells. Brain endothelial cells are critical for maintaining homeostasis of the central nervous system, while being continually exposed to acute and chronic fluctuations in circulating molecules from the brain and plasma in physiological and pathological states. Thus, APOE may help maintain brain endothelial function in normal physiology, particularly in response to convergent stressors. More specifically, APOE has been found to modulate metabolism and stress or inflammatory pathways in brain endothelial cells in vitro24,25. In fact, we previously proposed that compared to APOE3, APOE4 brain endothelial cells have altered metabolism resulting in generation of mitochondrial reactive oxygen species, oxidative stress, and inflammation, which lowers the threshold of endothelial cells to dysfunction in the presence of stressors. In this study we also found higher levels of Ccl3 and Cd74 at the mRNA level, and plasma ICAM levels, which may indicate that the loss of endothelial cell APOE3 has resulted in an activated or stressed phenotype. Indeed, Ccl372 and Cd7473,74 are upregulated in brain endothelial cells in response to stress and we previously found higher CCL3 production by APOE4 brain endothelial cells after LPS treatment compared to APOE3 24. Therefore, the loss of endothelial cell APOE3 may have triggered metabolic and stress related pathways during aging. Future studies could reveal if brain endothelial cell APOE3 regulates metabolism and stress responses in vivo and the difference compared to APOE4.

Integrating endothelial cell APOE with other identified pathways may allow a more complete understanding of how APOE regulates neurovascular function. In general, most data on this topic are comparisons between APOE genotypes, which is different to the physiological role of APOE in neurovascular function. Nonetheless, broadly, APOE-dependent modulation of inflammatory and metabolic signaling molecules in the periphery and within the brain can impact brain endothelial cells. In addition, APOE expressed by specific cell types has been shown to modulate pathways that alter brain endothelial cells. Astrocyte produced apoE3 is thought to bind LRP1 on pericytes initiating a cascade that suppresses MMP9 production to limit basement membrane and tight junction degradation13, and lower endothelial cell permeability in vitro15. ApoE3 production by pericytes has also been reported to promote extracellular matrix production and barrier function of brain endothelial cells in vitro16. Peripherally, hepatocyte apoE3 alters brain endothelial cell function in a way that is considered protective14. Thus, APOE3 expressed by astrocytes, pericytes, endothelial cells and hepatocytes are all involved in protecting neurovascular integrity. Such complex regulation by APOE3 may serve the advantage of allowing changes in peripheral and central environment (astrocytes, pericytes and hepatocytes) to signal to brain endothelial cells for protection. In this context, brain endothelial apoE3 may be important for maintaining local homeostatic cellular function.

We also found that the loss of endothelial cell APOE3 caused deficits in the cortical E/I balance due to a preferential lowering of GABAergic activity and associated dysfunction in fear extinction behavior. The alterations in GABAergic activity could be mediated via changes in permeability, vessel coverage or other brain endothelial cell functions such as signaling crosstalk between neurons and brain endothelial cells. Independent of precise functional connection, these data raise the novel idea that GABAergic synapses are particularly vulnerable to deficits in conditions with altered endothelial cell function, such as aging or neurodegeneration.

We would like to acknowledge limitations in this study. One limitation is the unresolved question of why cerebral blood flow was lower in female mice, but not male mice, with endothelial cell knockdown. A potential explanation is that with endothelial cell APOE knockdown, alterations in neurovascular function are age- and sex-dependent, such that cerebral blood flow alterations would occur in older male mice. Alternatively, the phenotype may be unique to female mice, due to sex-related changes in endothelial cells, smooth muscle cells or pericytes that increases susceptibility to cerebral blood dysregulation after endothelial cell APOE3 knockdown. For example, sex hormones, or stress and inflammatory processes are all known to modulated by sex and can alter cerebral blood flow. In addition, due to technical limitations, we could not evaluate whether vasoreactivity/neurovascular coupling was altered by endothelial cell APOE knockdown in male and female mice. By design, our studies were focused on resolving if endothelial cell APOE3 is functional and therefore there is the unresolved question of how endothelial cell APOE3 maintains brain endothelial cell function. For example, as described above, metabolism, stress-related signals or inflammation may be proximal to brain endothelial cell degeneration. In addition, our data suggest that claudin-5 degradation may contribute to the higher permeability after endothelial cell APOE3 knockdown, which could be related to recycling, signaling and/or proteasomal degradation. To aid in pathway identification it will be important to track age-dependent changes in neuronal function after endothelial cell APOE knockdown. Also, an important question is whether endothelial cell APOE4 is a toxic gain of function or loss of positive function. Our planned future studies are to identify whether the loss of endothelial cell APOE4 impacts neural function in a positive or negative manner and then to dissect the underlying pathways for APOE3 and APOE4.

In summary, our data demonstrate that the loss of endothelial cell APOE3 is sufficient to disrupt neurovascular, neuronal, and behavioral function. This data supports the novel cellular mechanism that endothelial APOE directly impacts neural function in normal physiology and could therefore play a role in neurodegenerative disorders.

Supplementary Material

Supplemental Materials

Source Data File 1

Acknowledgements

We would like to acknowledge the Cure Alzheimer’s Fund for supplying the humanized APOE3fl/fl mice.

Sources of Funding

This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grants R01AG061114 (LMT), R61NS114353 (LMT), R01MH086507 (KYT), and University of Illinois at Chicago Institutional funds (LMT &amp; KYT). qRt-PCR was performed by the UIC Genomics Research Core and Bioinformatics analysis by the UIC Research Informatics Core, supported in part by NCATS through Grant UL1TR002003.

Nonstandard Abbreviations and Acronyms

ApoE apolipoprotein E3

APOE3Cre+/− mice APOE3fl/fl/Cdh5(PAC)-CreERT2+/− mice

APOE3Cre−/− mice APOE3fl/fl/Cdh5(PAC)-CreERT2−/− mice

MWM Morris water maze

PSC Postsynaptic currents

E Excitatory

I inhibitory

Figure 1. Endothelial cell APOE3 knockdown disrupts neurovascular function in APOE3Cre+/− mice.

A, In situ hybridization of APOE (Red) with immunostaining for ZO1 (green) in cultured brain endothelial cells at passage 0. No APOE3 was found in brain endothelial cells isolated from APOE3Cre+/− mice. Scale bar = 25 μm. B, ApoE measured in the media from cultured brain endothelial cells (ELISA). ApoE levels were at the limit of detection for APOE3Cre+/− mice, n = 6. C, Confocal images of APOE (red, in situ hybridization) with a FITC-lectin stain for endothelial cells (green) and DAPI nuclear stain (blue). In APOE3Cre−/− mice there is APOE expression (white arrowheads) in and around brain endothelial nuclei that is absent in APOE3Cre+/− mice. Scale bar = 5 μm. Images representative from 4 mice per Cre genotype. D, qRT-PCR for APOE in brain endothelial cells. APOE3 levels are substantially lower in brain endothelial cells from APOE3Cre+/− mice compared to APOE3Cre−/− mice [Cre genotype p = 0.008 using Empirical Bayes method], n = 11/12 per Cre genotype. Data presented as 2−ΔΔCT using the average of APOE3Cre−/− mice for calculations. E, Immunostaining of apoE (red), CD31 (green) and DAPI in the cortex of APOE3Cre+/− and APOE3Cre−/− mice. There are reduced levels of apoE (white arrowheads) in brain endothelial cells of APOE3Cre+/− mice. Scale bar = 5 μm. Images representative from 4 mice per Cre genotype. F-G, ApoE levels in isolated brain endothelial cells. Brain endothelial cells demonstrated 40.66% lower ApoE levels by (F) ELISA [F(1,15) = 7.16, p = 0.017], n = ~5 and 86.19% lower levels by (G) western blot [F(1,15) = 50.76, p &lt; 0.001], n = ~5. Differences are due to antibody specificity (see Figure S2). H-I, Cortical and plasma levels of apoE measured by ELISA. There were no effects of endothelial cell APOE3 knockdown on (H) cortical [F(1,36) = 2.08, p = 0.16], n = 10, or (I) plasma [F(1,36) = 1.33, p = 0.26], n = 10, apoE levels. All data expressed as a box plot depicting the minimum score, the lower quartile (25%), the median (50%, horizontal line), upper quartile (75%), maximum values and mean (+). Data were analyzed using general linear models. (D) was analyzed using the Empirical Bayes method. *p &lt; 0.05 for APOE3Cre+/− vs APOE3Cre−/− mice.

Figure 2. Endothelial cell APOE3 knockdown disrupts neurovascular function in APOE3Cre+/− mice.

A-B, Levels of IgG and fibrinogen in cortical homogenates (ELISA). There was an effect of Cre genotype on extravascular (A) IgG [F(1,51) = 4.9, p = 0.031] and (B) fibrinogen [F(1,53) = 4.5, p = 0.038] levels, n = ~29 per Cre genotype. Representative images highlight the higher levels of IgG and fibrinogen in APOE3Cre+/− mice. There was also an effect of sex for IgG (Figure S3). Scale bar = 10 μm. C, qRT-PCR for Cldn5 in brain endothelial cells. There were no effects of Cre on Cldn5 levels [Cre genotype p = 0.7 using Empirical Bayes method], n = 11/12 per Cre genotype. Data presented as 2−ΔΔCT using the average of APOE3Cre−/− mice for calculations. (C) Cortical levels of Claudin-5 were lower in APOE3Cre+/− mice when measured by western blot [F(1,42) = 5.32, p = 0.026]. n = 24 per Cre genotype. E-F, Vessel area fraction quantified from laminin and CD31 immunostaining in the cortex. Cre genotype impacted (E) laminin [F(1,27) = 14.79, p &lt; 0.001] and (F) CD31 [F(1,27) = 23.89, p &lt; 0.001] levels. Scale bar, 10 μm. n = ~16 per Cre genotype. G, Cortical vessel length quantified from GLUT1 immunostaining was in APOE3Cre+/− mice [F(1,16) = 4.8, p = 0.044], n = 10 per Cre genotype. H, Pericyte coverage quantified from GLUT1 and PDGFRβ immunostaining showed no difference between in APOE3Cre+/− and in APOE3Cre−/− mice [F(1,16) = 0.78, p = 0.39]. All data expressed as a box plot depicting the minimum score, the lower quartile (25%), the median (50%, horizontal line), upper quartile (75%), maximum values and mean (+). Data were analyzed using general linear models. (C) was analyzed using the Empirical Bayes method. *p &lt; 0.05 for APOE3Cre+/− vs APOE3Cre−/− mice.

Figure 3. Endothelial cell APOE3 knockdown disrupts behavior.

A-D, Spatial learning and memory assessed in the Morris water maze test. In the acquisition phase (A), there was an effect of trial ([F(4,37) = 21.7, p &lt;0.001], p &lt; 0.05 for day 1 vs 2, 3, 4 and 5 when assessed by Bonferroni post hoc comparisons, see Source Data File 1) but not Cre genotype. In the probe trial phase that tests memory (B,C) the number of entries [F(1,40) = 6.16, p = 0.017] and time spent [F(1,40) = 4.31, p = 0.044] in the previous platform area were lower in APOE3Cre+/− mice compared to APOE3Cre−/− mice. n = 20 per Cre group. Data expressed as a box plot depicting the minimum score, the lower quartile (25%), the median (50%, horizontal line), upper quartile (75%), maximum values and mean (+),and analyzed using general linear models. *p &lt; 0.05 for APOE3Cre+/− vs APOE3Cre−/− mice. D, Representative track plot of the probe trial phase. E-G, Acquisition and extinction of fear conditioned freezing measured in trace fear conditioning. E, In the acquisition phase there was an effect of Cre genotype [F(1,34) = 7.15, p = 0.011] with overall responses lower in APOE3Cre+/− mice. In the extinction phases, there was no effect of Cre genotype on day 2 [F(1,34) = 0.19, p = 0.66] (F), however on day 3 (G) there was a Cre genotype x trial interaction [F(4,31) = 3.76, p = 0.013]. Post hoc analysis revealed that these differences were driven by a lack of extinction in APOE3Cre+/− mice and therefore higher freezing responses compared to APOE3Cre−/− mice in later trials. There was also an effect of sex on the fear conditioned response (Figure S8), but no Cre x Sex interaction. n = ~20 per Cre genotype. (A, E-G) Data expressed as mean ± SEM analyzed using general linear models with repeated measures. *p &lt; 0.05 for APOE3Cre+/− vs APOE3Cre−/− mice when assessed by Bonferroni post hoc comparisons.

Figure 4. Endothelial cell APOE3 knockdown disrupts and preferentially reduces GABAergic synaptic events in APOE3Cre+/− mice.

A, Ex-vivo recordings of spontaneous postsynaptic current (PSC) from excitatory (−60mV) and inhibitory (+15mV) synapses onto layer V pyramidal neurons from the prefrontal cortex (n = 10-14 neurons per Cre group). The frequency of inhibitory events (PSC+15mV) were lower in APOE3Cre+/− mice compared to APOE3Cre−/− mice [F(1,21) = 62.41, p &lt; 0.001]. Such a difference was not apparent when neurons were held at −60 mV (PSC−60mV) [F(1,21) = 0.051, p = 0.82], indicating that the level of excitatory synaptic events were not affected by the endothelial cell APOE3 knockdown. B, Summary of the E-I ratio (PSC−60mV/PSC+15mV) analyses. Relative to APOE3Cre−/− mice, APOE3Cre−/− mice exhibited an imbalanced (&gt; 1) E-I ratio [F(1,21) = 49.31, p &lt; 0.001] due to the lower inhibitory activity. C, The frequency of PSC+15mV (inhibitory component) and the E-I ratio (E/I) were correlated when evaluated by Pearson Correlation coefficient [p &lt; 0.0001, r2 = 0.7649] D, Traces of spontaneous postsynaptic events recorded at both −60mV and +15mV holding potentials (scale bar, 40pA / 1s). E, Level of synaptic proteins in cortical lysates from APOE3Cre+/− mice (protein levels normalized to actin, and then to APOE3Cre−/− mice). There were no effects of Cre genotype on general (left), glutamatergic (center) or GABAergic (right) neuronal markers (See Source Data File 1). There was an effect of sex on some synaptic markers (Figure S9). n = 24 per Cre genotype. All data expressed as a box plot depicting the minimum score, the lower quartile (25%), the median (50%, horizontal line), upper quartile (75%), maximum values and mean (+). Data were analyzed using general linear models (A, E-G). *p &lt; 0.05 for APOE3Cre+/− vs APOE3Cre−/− mice.

Highlights

Knockdown of endothelial cell APOE3 resulted in higher neurovascular permeability and lower vessel coverage in vivo.

Reducing endothelial cell APOE3 expression also resulted in deficits in behavior and neural circuit function in the prefrontal cortex.

We propose that endothelial APOE3 plays an important role in the regulation of neural function in both physiological aging and neurodegeneration.

Disclosures

None.


References

1. Chen Y , Strickland MR , Soranno A , Holtzman DM . Apolipoprotein E: Structural Insights and Links to Alzheimer Disease Pathogenesis. Neuron. 2020. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2020.10.008
2. Molecular Huang Y. and cellular mechanisms of apolipoprotein E4 neurotoxicity and potential therapeutic strategies. Curr Opin Drug Discov Devel. 2006;9 :627–641.
3. Alata W , Ye Y , St-Amour I , Vandal M , Calon F . Human apolipoprotein E varepsilon4 expression impairs cerebral vascularization and blood-brain barrier function in mice. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2015;35 :86–94. doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.2014.172 25335802
4. Damen FC , Tain RW , Thomas R , Li W , Tai L , Cai K . Evaluation of B0-correction of relative CBF maps using tagging distance dependent Z-spectrum (TADDZ). Magn Reson Imaging. 2020;65 :83–89. doi: 10.1016/j.mri.2019.10.002 31669538
5. Koizumi K , Hattori Y , Ahn SJ , Apoepsilon4 disrupts neurovascular regulation and undermines white matter integrity and cognitive function. Nat Commun. 2018;9 :3816. doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-06301-2 30232327
6. Montagne A , Nation DA , Sagare AP , APOE4 leads to blood-brain barrier dysfunction predicting cognitive decline. Nature. 2020;581 :71–76. doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-2247-3 32376954
7. Montagne A , Nikolakopoulou AM , Huuskonen MT , APOE4 accelerates advanced-stage vascular and neurodegenerative disorder in old Alzheimer’s mice via cyclophilin A independently of amyloid-beta. Nat Aging. 2021;1 :506–520. doi: 10.1038/s43587-021-00073-z 35291561
8. Salloway S , Gur T , Berzin T , Effect of APOE genotype on microvascular basement membrane in Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurol Sci. 2002;203-204 :183–187.12417381
9. Tai LM , Balu D , Avila-Munoz E , Abdullah L , Thomas R , Collins N , Valencia-Olvera AC , LaDu MJ . EFAD Transgenic Mice as a Human APOE Relevant Preclinical Model of Alzheimer’s Disease. J Lipid Res. 2017. doi: 10.1194/jlr.R076315
10. Tai LM , Thomas R , Marottoli FM , Koster KP , Kanekiyo T , Morris AW , Bu G . The role of APOE in cerebrovascular dysfunction. Acta Neuropathol. 2016;131 :709–723. doi: 10.1007/s00401-016-1547-z 26884068
11. Thomas R , Zuchowska P , Morris AW , Marottoli FM , Sunny S , Deaton R , Gann PH , Tai LM . Epidermal growth factor prevents APOE4 and amyloid-beta-induced cognitive and cerebrovascular deficits in female mice. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2016;4 :111. doi: 10.1186/s40478-016-0387-3 27788676
12. Zipser BD , Johanson CE , Gonzalez L , Berzin TM , Tavares R , Hulette CM , Vitek MP , Hovanesian V , Stopa EG . Microvascular injury and blood-brain barrier leakage in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol Aging. 2007;28 :977–986. doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2006.05.016 16782234
13. Bell RD , Winkler EA , Singh I , Apolipoprotein E controls cerebrovascular integrity via cyclophilin A. Nature. 2012;485 :512–516. doi: 10.1038/nature11087 22622580
14. Liu CC , Zhao J , Fu Y , Peripheral apoE4 enhances Alzheimer’s pathology and impairs cognition by compromising cerebrovascular function. Nat Neurosci. 2022;25 :1020–1033. doi: 10.1038/s41593-022-01127-0 35915180
15. Nishitsuji K , Hosono T , Nakamura T , Bu G , Michikawa M . Apolipoprotein E regulates the integrity of tight junctions in an isoform-dependent manner in an in vitro blood-brain barrier model. J Biol Chem. 2011;286 :17536–17542. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.225532 21471207
16. Yamazaki Y , Shinohara M , Yamazaki A , Ren Y , Asmann YW , Kanekiyo T , Bu G . ApoE (Apolipoprotein E) in Brain Pericytes Regulates Endothelial Function in an Isoform-Dependent Manner by Modulating Basement Membrane Components. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2020;40 :128–144. doi: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.119.313169 31665905
17. Cao Y , Zhu J , Jia P , Zhao Z . scRNASeqDB: A Database for RNA-Seq Based Gene Expression Profiles in Human Single Cells. Genes (Basel). 2017;8. doi: 10.3390/genes8120368 29283431
18. He L , Vanlandewijck M , Mae MA , Single-cell RNA sequencing of mouse brain and lung vascular and vessel-associated cell types. Sci Data. 2018;5 :180160. doi: 10.1038/sdata.2018.160 30129931
19. Song HW , Foreman KL , Gastfriend BD , Kuo JS , Palecek SP , Shusta EV . Transcriptomic comparison of human and mouse brain microvessels. Sci Rep. 2020;10 :12358. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-69096-7 32704093
20. Vanlandewijck M , He L , Mae MA , A molecular atlas of cell types and zonation in the brain vasculature. Nature. 2018;554 :475–480. doi: 10.1038/nature25739 29443965
21. Yang AC , Vest RT , Kern F , A human brain vascular atlas reveals diverse mediators of Alzheimer’s risk. Nature. 2022;603 :885–892. doi: 10.1038/s41586-021-04369-3 35165441
22. Zhang Y , Chen K , Sloan SA , An RNA-sequencing transcriptome and splicing database of glia, neurons, and vascular cells of the cerebral cortex. J Neurosci. 2014;34 :11929–11947. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1860-14.2014 25186741
23. Zhang Y , Sloan SA , Clarke LE , Purification and Characterization of Progenitor and Mature Human Astrocytes Reveals Transcriptional and Functional Differences with Mouse. Neuron. 2016;89 :37–53. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.11.013 26687838
24. Marottoli FM , Trevino TN , Geng X , Arbieva Z , Kanabar P , Maienschein-Cline M , Lee JC , Lutz SE , Tai LM . Autocrine Effects of Brain Endothelial Cell-Produced Human Apolipoprotein E on Metabolism and Inflammation in vitro. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2021;9 :668296. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.668296 34178992
25. Rieker C , Migliavacca E , Vaucher A , Baud G , Marquis J , Charpagne A , Hegde N , Guignard L , McLachlan M , Pooler AM . Apolipoprotein E4 Expression Causes Gain of Toxic Function in Isogenic Human Induced Pluripotent Stem Cell-Derived Endothelial Cells. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2019;39 :e195–e207. doi: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.118.312261 31315437
26. Huynh TV , Wang C , Tran AC , Lack of hepatic apoE does not influence early Abeta deposition: observations from a new APOE knock-in model. Mol Neurodegener. 2019;14 :37. doi: 10.1186/s13024-019-0337-1 31623648
27. Benedito R , Roca C , Sorensen I , Adams S , Gossler A , Fruttiger M , Adams RH . The notch ligands Dll4 and Jagged1 have opposing effects on angiogenesis. Cell. 2009;137 :1124–1135. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.03.025 19524514
28. Marottoli FM , Katsumata Y , Koster KP , Thomas R , Fardo DW , Tai LM . Peripheral Inflammation, Apolipoprotein E4, and Amyloid-beta Interact to Induce Cognitive and Cerebrovascular Dysfunction. ASN Neuro. 2017;9 :1759091417719201. doi: 10.1177/1759091417719201 28707482
29. Thomas R , Morris AWJ , Tai LM . Epidermal growth factor prevents APOE4-induced cognitive and cerebrovascular deficits in female mice. Heliyon. 2017;3 :e00319. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2017.e00319 28626809
30. Caballero A , Flores-Barrera E , Thomases DR , Tseng KY . Downregulation of parvalbumin expression in the prefrontal cortex during adolescence causes enduring prefrontal disinhibition in adulthood. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2020;45 :1527–1535. doi: 10.1038/s41386-020-0709-9 32403119
31. Flores-Barrera E , Thomases DR , Tseng KY . MK-801 Exposure during Adolescence Elicits Enduring Disruption of Prefrontal E-I Balance and Its Control of Fear Extinction Behavior. J Neurosci. 2020;40 :4881–4887. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0581-20.2020 32430298
32. Ritchie ME , Phipson B , Wu D , Hu Y , Law CW , Shi W , Smyth GK . limma powers differential expression analyses for RNA-sequencing and microarray studies. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015;43 :e47. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv007 25605792
33. Rust R , Kirabali T , Gronnert L , A Practical Guide to the Automated Analysis of Vascular Growth, Maturation and Injury in the Brain. Front Neurosci. 2020;14 :244. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2020.00244 32265643
34. Bellosta S , Mahley RW , Sanan DA , Murata J , Newland DL , Taylor JM , Pitas RE . Macrophage-specific expression of human apolipoprotein E reduces atherosclerosis in hypercholesterolemic apolipoprotein E-null mice. J Clin Invest. 1995;96 :2170–2179. doi: 10.1172/JCI118271 7593602
35. Boye K , Geraldo LH , Furtado J , Endothelial Unc5B controls blood-brain barrier integrity. Nat Commun. 2022;13 :1169. doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-28785-9 35246514
36. Richards M , Nwadozi E , Pal S , Claudin5 protects the peripheral endothelial barrier in an organ and vessel-type-specific manner. Elife. 2022;11. doi: 10.7554/eLife.78517
37. Flores-Barrera E , Thomases DR , Cass DK , Bhandari A , Schwarcz R , Bruno JP , Tseng KY . Preferential Disruption of Prefrontal GABAergic Function by Nanomolar Concentrations of the alpha7nACh Negative Modulator Kynurenic Acid. J Neurosci. 2017;37 :7921–7929. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0932-17.2017 28729445
38. Alkabie S , Basivireddy J , Zhou L , Roskams J , Rieckmann P , Quandt JA . SPARC expression by cerebral microvascular endothelial cells in vitro and its influence on blood-brain barrier properties. J Neuroinflammation. 2016;13 :225. doi: 10.1186/s12974-016-0657-9 27581191
39. Predescu D , Predescu S , Malik AB . Transport of nitrated albumin across continuous vascular endothelium. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002;99 :13932–13937. doi: 10.1073/pnas.212253499 12370442
40. Shasby DM , Shasby SS . Active transendothelial transport of albumin. Interstitium to lumen. Circ Res. 1985;57 :903–908. doi: 10.1161/01.res.57.6.903 4064263
41. Sorets AG , Rosch JC , Duvall CL , Lippmann ES . Caveolae-Mediated Transport at the Injured Blood-Brain Barrier as an Underexplored Pathway for Central Nervous System Drug Delivery. Curr Opin Chem Eng. 2020;30 :86–95. doi: 10.1016/j.coche.2020.08.009 32953427
42. Vogel SM , Minshall RD , Pilipovic M , Tiruppathi C , Malik AB . Albumin uptake and transcytosis in endothelial cells in vivo induced by albumin-binding protein. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2001;281 :L1512–1522. doi: 10.1152/ajplung.2001.281.6.L1512 11704548
43. Hashimoto Y , Greene C , Munnich A , Campbell M . The CLDN5 gene at the blood-brain barrier in health and disease. Fluids Barriers CNS. 2023;20 :22. doi: 10.1186/s12987-023-00424-5 36978081
44. Hussain B , Fang C , Huang X , Feng Z , Yao Y , Wang Y , Chang J . Endothelial beta-Catenin Deficiency Causes Blood-Brain Barrier Breakdown via Enhancing the Paracellular and Transcellular Permeability. Front Mol Neurosci. 2022;15 :895429. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2022.895429 35615065
45. Sugiyama S , Sasaki T , Tanaka H , The tight junction protein occludin modulates blood-brain barrier integrity and neurological function after ischemic stroke in mice. Sci Rep. 2023;13 :2892. doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-29894-1 36806348
46. You TY , Dong Q , Cui M . Emerging Links between Cerebral Blood Flow Regulation and Cognitive Decline: A Role for Brain Microvascular Pericytes. Aging Dis. 2023. doi: 10.14336/AD.2022.1204
47. Flowers SA , Rebeck GW . APOE in the normal brain. Neurobiol Dis. 2020;136 :104724. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2019.104724 31911114
48. Liu CC , Liu CC , Kanekiyo T , Xu H , Bu G . Apolipoprotein E and Alzheimer disease: risk, mechanisms and therapy. Nat Rev Neurol. 2013;9 :106–118. doi: 10.1038/nrneurol.2012.263 23296339
49. Mahley RW , Huang Y , Weisgraber KH . Detrimental effects of apolipoprotein E4: potential therapeutic targets in Alzheimer’s disease. Curr Alzheimer Res. 2007;4 :537–540. doi: 10.2174/156720507783018334 18220516
50. Mahan TE , Wang C , Bao X , Choudhury A , Ulrich JD , Holtzman DM . Selective reduction of astrocyte apoE3 and apoE4 strongly reduces Abeta accumulation and plaque-related pathology in a mouse model of amyloidosis. Mol Neurodegener. 2022;17 :13. doi: 10.1186/s13024-022-00516-0 35109920
51. Xiong M , Wang C , Gratuze M , Astrocytic APOE4 removal confers cerebrovascular protection despite increased cerebral amyloid angiopathy. Mol Neurodegener. 2023;18 :17. doi: 10.1186/s13024-023-00610-x 36922879
52. Kockx M , Traini M , Kritharides L . Cell-specific production, secretion, and function of apolipoprotein E. J Mol Med (Berl). 2018;96 :361–371. doi: 10.1007/s00109-018-1632-y 29516132
53. Koutsodendris N , Blumenfeld J , Agrawal A , Neuronal APOE4 removal protects against tau-mediated gliosis, neurodegeneration and myelin deficits. Nat Aging. 2023;3 :275–296. doi: 10.1038/s43587-023-00368-3 37118426
54. Zalocusky KA , Najm R , Taubes AL , Neuronal ApoE upregulates MHC-I expression to drive selective neurodegeneration in Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Neurosci. 2021;24 :786–798. doi: 10.1038/s41593-021-00851-3 33958804
55. Dove DE , Linton MF , Fazio S . ApoE-mediated cholesterol efflux from macrophages: separation of autocrine and paracrine effects. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2005;288 :C586–592. doi: 10.1152/ajpcell.00210.2004 15509658
56. Driscoll DM , Getz GS . Extrahepatic synthesis of apolipoprotein E. J Lipid Res. 1984;25 :1368–1379.6530593
57. Zanotti I , Pedrelli M , Poti F , Stomeo G , Gomaraschi M , Calabresi L , Bernini F . Macrophage, but not systemic, apolipoprotein E is necessary for macrophage reverse cholesterol transport in vivo. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2011;31 :74–80. doi: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.110.213892 20966401
58. Huang ZH , Gu D , Mazzone T . Role of adipocyte-derived apoE in modulating adipocyte size, lipid metabolism, and gene expression in vivo. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2009;296 :E1110–1119. doi: 10.1152/ajpendo.90964.2008 19223650
59. Huang ZH , Reardon CA , Getz GS , Maeda N , Mazzone T . Selective suppression of adipose tissue apoE expression impacts systemic metabolic phenotype and adipose tissue inflammation. J Lipid Res. 2015;56 :215–226. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M050567 25421060
60. Huang ZH , Reardon CA , Mazzone T . Endogenous ApoE expression modulates adipocyte triglyceride content and turnover. Diabetes. 2006;55 :3394–3402. doi: 10.2337/db06-0354 17130485
61. Ishida BY , Bailey KR , Duncan KG , Chalkley RJ , Burlingame AL , Kane JP , Schwartz DM . Regulated expression of apolipoprotein E by human retinal pigment epithelial cells. J Lipid Res. 2004;45 :263–271. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M300306-JLR200 14594998
62. Halliday MR , Pomara N , Sagare AP , Mack WJ , Frangione B , Zlokovic BV . Relationship between cyclophilin a levels and matrix metalloproteinase 9 activity in cerebrospinal fluid of cognitively normal apolipoprotein e4 carriers and blood-brain barrier breakdown. JAMA Neurol. 2013;70 :1198–1200. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.3841 24030206
63. Halliday MR , Rege SV , Ma Q , Zhao Z , Miller CA , Winkler EA , Zlokovic BV . Accelerated pericyte degeneration and blood-brain barrier breakdown in apolipoprotein E4 carriers with Alzheimer’s disease. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2015. doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.2015.44
64. Poels MM , Vernooij MW , Ikram MA , Hofman A , Krestin GP , van der Lugt A , Breteler MM . Prevalence and risk factors of cerebral microbleeds: an update of the Rotterdam scan study. Stroke. 2010;41 :S103–106. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.110.595181 20876479
65. Zlokovic BV . Cerebrovascular effects of apolipoprotein E: implications for Alzheimer disease. JAMA Neurol. 2013;70 :440–444. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.2152 23400708
66. Wells JM , Amaratunga A , McKenna DC , Abraham CR , Fine RE . Amyloid beta-protein precursor and apolipoprotein E production in cultured cerebral endothelial cells isolated from brains of patients with neurodegenerative disorders at autopsy. Amyloid. 1995;2 :229–233. doi: Doi 10.3109/13506129508999004
67. Sampaio-Silva F , Magalhaes T , Carvalho F , Dinis-Oliveira RJ , Silvestre R . Profiling of RNA degradation for estimation of post mortem [corrected] interval. PLoS One. 2013;8 :e56507. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056507 23437149
68. Herz J , Chen Y , Masiulis I , Zhou L . Expanding functions of lipoprotein receptors. J Lipid Res. 2009;50 Suppl :S287–292. doi: 10.1194/jlr.R800077-JLR200 19017612
69. Martinez-Martinez AB , Torres-Perez E , Devanney N , Del Moral R , Johnson LA , Arbones-Mainar JM . Beyond the CNS: The many peripheral roles of APOE. Neurobiol Dis. 2020;138 :104809. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2020.104809 32087284
70. Deane R , Sagare A , Hamm K , Parisi M , Lane S , Finn MB , Holtzman DM , Zlokovic BV . apoE isoform-specific disruption of amyloid beta peptide clearance from mouse brain. J Clin Invest. 2008;118 :4002–4013. doi: 10.1172/JCI36663 19033669
71. Linton MF , Gish R , Hubl ST , Butler E , Esquivel C , Bry WI , Boyles JK , Wardell MR , Young SG . Phenotypes of apolipoprotein B and apolipoprotein E after liver transplantation. J Clin Invest. 1991;88 :270–281. doi: 10.1172/JCI115288 2056122
72. Chui R , Dorovini-Zis K . Regulation of CCL2 and CCL3 expression in human brain endothelial cells by cytokines and lipopolysaccharide. J Neuroinflammation. 2010;7 :1. doi: 10.1186/1742-2094-7-1 20047691
73. Farr L , Ghosh S , Moonah S . Role of MIF Cytokine/CD74 Receptor Pathway in Protecting Against Injury and Promoting Repair. Front Immunol. 2020;11 :1273. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.01273 32655566
74. Sauler M , Zhang Y , Min JN , Leng L , Shan P , Roberts S , Jorgensen WL , Bucala R , Lee PJ . Endothelial CD74 mediates macrophage migration inhibitory factor protection in hyperoxic lung injury. FASEB J. 2015;29 :1940–1949. doi: 10.1096/fj.14-260299 25609432
