LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


8809320
1600
Neuron
Neuron
Neuron
0896-6273
1097-4199

37295421
10720399
10.1016/j.neuron.2023.05.017
NIHMS1941712
Article
Blood-based biomarkers for Alzheimer’s disease: Current state and future use in a transformed global healthcare landscape
Hampel Harald 1*
Hu Yan 1*
Cummings Jeffrey 2
Mattke Soeren 3
Iwatsubo Takeshi 4
Nakamura Akinori 56
Vellas Bruno 7
O’Bryant Sid 8
Shaw Leslie M. 9
Cho Min 1
Batrla Richard 1
Vergallo Andrea 1
Blennow Kaj 10
Dage Jeffrey 11
Schindler Suzanne E. 12
1 Alzheimer’s Disease and Brain Health, Eisai Inc., Nutley, NJ, USA
2 Chambers-Grundy Center for Transformative Neuroscience, Pam Quirk Brain Health and Biomarker Laboratory, Department of Brain Health, School of Integrated Health Sciences, University of Nevada Las Vegas (UNLV), Las Vegas, NV, USA
3 Center for Improving Chronic Illness Care, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA
4 Department of Neuropathology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
5 Department of Biomarker Research, National Center for Geriatrics and Gerontology, Obu, Japan
6 Department of Cognition and Behavior Science, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan
7 University Paul Sabatier, Gérontopôle, Toulouse University Hospital, UMR INSERM 1285, Toulouse, France
8 Institute for Translational Research, Texas College of Osteopathic Medicine, Department of Family Medicine, University of North Texas Health Science Center, Fort Worth, TX, USA
9 Perelman School of Medicine, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA
10 Clinical Neurochemistry Laboratory, Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, University of Gothenburg, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Mölndal, Sweden
11 Stark Neurosciences Research Institute, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA
12 Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

H.H. conceptualized the article, performed a critical review of the literature, wrote and revised the manuscript. Y.H. performed a critical review of the literature, wrote, and revised the manuscript. M.C. contributed to the writing and revision of the article. J.C., S.M., T.I., A.N., B.V., S.O., L.M.S., R.B., A.V., K.B., J.D., and S.E.S. supported the critical review of the literature, the writing, and/or the revision of the article. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

* Correspondence: harald_hampel@eisai.com (H.H.), helen_hu@eisai.com (Y.H.)
1 12 2023
20 9 2023
08 6 2023
20 9 2024
111 18 27812799
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
SUMMARY

Timely detection of the pathophysiological changes and cognitive impairment caused by Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is increasingly pressing because of the advent of biomarker-guided targeted therapies that may be most effective when provided early in the disease. Currently, diagnosis and management of early AD are largely guided by clinical symptoms. FDA-approved neuroimaging and cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers can aid detection and diagnosis, but the clinical implementation of these testing modalities is limited because of availability, cost, and perceived invasiveness. Blood-based biomarkers (BBBMs) may enable earlier and faster diagnoses as well as aid in risk assessment, early detection, prognosis, and management. Herein, we review data on BBBMs that are closest to clinical implementation, particularly those based on measures of amyloid-β peptides and phosphorylated tau species. We discuss key parameters and considerations for the development and potential deployment of these BBBMs under different contexts of use and highlight challenges at the methodological, clinical, and regulatory levels.


pmcINTRODUCTION

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a progressive neurological disease and the most common cause of dementia in older adults. While dementia syndromes may be caused by many different conditions, AD refers to a specific etiology defined by the characteristic neuropathology of amyloid-β (Aβ) plaques and neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs). AD includes a continuum of preclinical, prodromal, and dementia stages lasting several decades. ‘‘Symptomatic AD’’ refers to cognitive impairment caused by AD brain pathophysiology and includes mild cognitive impairment (MCI) due to AD, in which there is objective evidence of cognitive impairment but no significant functional impairment, as well as AD dementia, in which both cognition and function are impaired. ‘‘Early AD dementia’’ refers to MCI or mild dementia due to AD. Individuals with early AD dementia are a major target population for current clinical trials.

A disease-modifying therapy (DMT) for AD is defined as an intervention that produces enduring changes in the clinical progression of AD by interfering with the underlying pathophysiological mechanisms of the disease that lead to cell death.1 Efforts in developing DMT in the last two decades have focused on targeting these underlying pathophysiological processes, such as Aβ, tau, inflammation, and metabolism. Two amyloid-targeting monoclonal antibody therapies were recently approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA).2,3 This historic change in the AD therapeutic landscape calls for a transformation in the patient journey that allows for more timely detection, diagnosis, and treatment.

There is a critical unmet need in the AD patient clinical care pathway, namely more accessible tests for AD. This unmet need has stimulated tremendous growth in basic and translational research. Development of blood-based biomarkers (BBBMs) has proceeded at an unprecedented pace, and the momentum will likely continue. The objective of this review is to summarize information on BBBMs that is relevant for near-term clinical implementation and, more importantly, to describe the key concepts and considerations for evaluating BBBM data scientifically to facilitate planning for timely clinical implementation. We use a context-of-use (COU) framework to organize the complex evidence-driven information.

EVOLUTION OF AD DIAGNOSTIC FRAMEWORK AND INCLUSION OF BIOLOGY

Until the 21st century, a presumptive diagnosis of AD dementia was based on clinical features, with a definitive diagnosis requiring postmortem pathological confirmation. In the early 2000s, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers and positron emission tomography (PET) with radiotracers that bound to amyloid plaques enabled antemortem detection of molecular and cellular signatures of AD pathophysiology. Biochemical analyses of CSF revealed changes in various forms of Aβ and tau over the disease course.4 In 2002, development of Pittsburgh compound B (PiB) allowed visualization of cerebral amyloid plaques in living persons over the disease continuum.5,6 CSF and PET biomarker availability allowed studies to correlate underlying pathological changes to clinical manifestations and set the stage for use of these biomarkers in the diagnosis of AD. These developments led to the advancement of clinical-biological research criteria for AD.7,8 More recently, a comprehensive biological research framework was formulated for amyloid, tau, and neurodegeneration status (i.e., ATN research framework).9,10 This system was incorporated into the 2018 National Institute on Aging and Alzheimer’s Association’s research framework to create a scheme for defining and staging the disease across its continuum.10 As understanding of AD pathophysiology expands, the ATN system is evolving toward ATX(N), where ‘‘X’’ refers to additional pathophysiological markers such as inflammation (e.g., GFAP, sTREM2, YKL40, CXCL10) or vascular factors (e.g., sPDGFR).11 While initial studies on these ‘‘X’’ biomarkers were conducted in CSF, emerging data generated with plasma suggest that these biomarkers may be useful as BBBMs for prediction of cognitive performance, Aβ accumulation, conversion from MCI to AD dementia or for differential diagnosis.12–18 Research efforts are ongoing to determine the identity and range of ‘‘X’’ as a potential addition to enhance the battery of BBBMs in AD, and more evidence is warranted before future biomarkers based on X can be incorporated for clinical use. The current limitations precluding clinical implementation include, but are not limited to, the exact role and timing of glial or other ‘‘X’’ dysfunction in the AD pathophysiological process, the unclear nature of the spatiotemporal interconnection between X with other components of ATX(N), and the obscuration of CNS-derived X changes in blood by peripherally derived X.

CURRENT AD CLINICAL CARE PATHWAY AND ITS LIMITATIONS

The vast majority of patients with symptomatic AD have the sporadic, late-onset form, with symptom onset at 65 years or older.19 The clinical journey typically starts when cognitive decline is noticed by the patient or their family, and concerns are expressed to the primary care doctor, who sometimes performs brief cognitive testing; in some cases, the patient is referred for further evaluation. If the patient sees a neurologist or dementia specialist, a comprehensive diagnostic workup is performed to identify the underlying cause(s) of cognitive impairment. Although the elements of diagnostic evaluations are individualized based on the patient’s medical history and clinical presentation, the workup can include a detailed history from someone who knows the patient well; physical, neurological, and cognitive examinations; routine blood tests and structural brain imaging; and in some countries, especially Europe, a lumbar puncture (LP) with CSF biomarkers for AD. Currently, the diagnosis of MCI or dementia due to AD is still largely a diagnosis of exclusion that is assigned after other causes (e.g., medical conditions, medication side effects, cerebrovascular disease, other neurodegenerative conditions, psychiatric conditions) have been ruled out. The complex diagnostic pathway, combined with the very limited number of dementia specialists in most regions, often results in substantial delays in diagnosing early AD dementia. Given that DMTs for AD are most likely to be effective when given early in the disease, there is a critical need for diagnostic tools that can complement and potentially replace current approaches, increasing the capacity to rapidly identify patients with early symptoms of AD.

WHY DO WE NEED BBBMs FOR AD?

PET and CSF biomarkers of the Aβ pathway are already approved by the FDA to aid in diagnosis of AD and are widely used in clinical research. However, AD biomarkers are not routinely incorporated into clinical care for the vast majority of patients presenting with memory and thinking concerns. A national clinical utility study in the United States that included &gt;11,000 participants with MCI or dementia of uncertain cause showed that knowledge of amyloid PET status changed patient management in approximately 60% of patients.20 However, use of amyloid PET in routine practice is very limited because it is expensive, not typically reimbursed by insurance, and not widely available. CSF biomarker tests are highly concordant with amyloid PET, but their routine use is also very limited because many providers do not perform LPs and some patients perceive LPs as invasive or risky. Amyloid PET or CSF biomarker tests are typically used only after a full workup and only if the information is expected to affect management, setting a high threshold to obtain these tests and greatly limiting their use.

The unmet need for BBBMs is made more pressing by the enormous number of cases that will require prompt evaluation and treatment if new therapies became available. A 2021 report estimated that 12.23 million individuals in the United States live with MCI in 2020 and that this number will grow to 21.55 million in 2060.21 Most of those patients have not been tested for AD pathology because of the assumption that a more certain diagnosis would not change clinical management. With the advent of therapies that specifically target AD pathophysiology and will require confirmation of AD pathology prior to initiation of treatment,22,23 more patients will require a rapid and accurate diagnosis before their disease progress beyond the early stage. Delays in diagnosis could reduce the impact of treatments, which may be more effective the earlier they are given. Global healthcare systems are not prepared to handle this challenge, with the main constraint being specialists’ limited capacity to evaluate and diagnose patients.24

CONTEXTS OF USE FOR AD BBBMs

The AD research field has been attempting to develop BBBMs for many years, but only in the past several years have technical innovations in analytical methods reached sufficient sensitivity, precision, and scalability to make BBBMs use a possibility in clinical practice. BBBMs have been rapidly integrated into clinical trials to accelerate trial enrollment, reduce costs, and assess the efficacy of treatments.25–29 AD clinical trial enrollment is a slow and expensive process, partly because of a high screen-failure rate in enrolling participants: trials of participants with mild AD dementia have an average screen-failure rate of 44%; some trials enrolling cognitively normal participants with AD pathology have a substantially higher screen failure rate of 88%.30 Even if amyloid and tau PET or CSF tests are used during trial screening to ensure patients have underlying AD pathology, use of BBBMs as a prescreen can reduce the recruitment time and cost of trials. A study evaluated four paradigms that incorporated an AD blood test at different points during enrollment and concluded that use of a BBBM could reduce enrollment time by 50% and cost by ≥75%.31 BBBMs have been examined in recent trials to assess the relationship to amyloid PET, inform clinical outcomes, and measure responses to therapy.32–35

While BBBMs are now increasingly important in clinical trials, they may also play a transformative role in clinical care because they may be the only modality that can enable broad patient access to AD biomarker testing. A suite of BBBMs with different COU could transform the care pathway for patients with cognitive concerns. Potential touchpoints of BBBMs along the next-generation patient-care pathway are illustrated in Figure 1. Currently, the most pressing need and the area where BBBMs will initially have the biggest impact is identifying patients with AD pathophysiology as part of the early diagnostic journey of those with cognitive symptoms. BBBM tests developed for the primary care setting could have an even bigger impact when used in a multistep diagnostic pathway, e.g., in conjunction with cognitive tests for informing specialist referrals.36 These tests could significantly alleviate the burden on specialists and reduce wait times for diagnosis and treatment.37 A recent modeling study that examined potential implications if an effective AD treatment were available showed that if specialist referral also required a positive BBBM test (in additional to a brief cognitive test), wait times for AD treatment could be reduced from approximately 50 months to 12 months.38 A challenging but worthwhile task is to introduce a scalable BBBM test as part of brain health annual screening for older adults (e.g., ≥50 years), as is done for breast, prostate, and colorectal cancer screenings. Screenings would allow for monitoring of at-risk groups, such as those with a strong family history of AD dementia, and early intervention.

BBBMs may have useful applications in AD treatment support, including treatment decision making and monitoring. For example, the prescribing information for the first two FDA-approved amyloid-targeting treatments mandates the confirmation of amyloid pathology prior to initiating treatment, consistent with the mechanism of action of those compounds as well as the patient inclusion criteria in pivotal trials.2,3 Currently, confirmation of amyloid pathology is accomplished with amyloid PET scans or CSF testing. Given the limited capacity of the health care system to perform amyloid PET and LP, use of a highly accurate BBBM test that can replace amyloid PET or CSF testing will be a much more attractive option for the confirmation step. As additional AD therapies become available, BBBMs may facilitate decisions on treatment selection and patient stratification. During treatment, BBBMs may provide a faster and more quantifiable indication of efficacy than cognitive or functional assessments.

CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION OF BBBMs UNDER DIFFERENT COUs

Clinical performance

Requirements for clinical performance of a biomarker depend on its specific COU. In clinical diagnosis, accuracy, defined as the ability of a test to discriminate between those with and without the disease, is the most important consideration. Diagnostic accuracy can be measured by sensitivity and specificity, overall accuracy, positive and negative predictive values, likelihood ratios, the area under the receiver operating characteristics curve (AUC), the Youden index, and the diagnostic odds ratio. In most published studies, the commonly reported metrics on BBBMs in AD are the AUC, sensitivity, and specificity (see Box 1 for glossary of terms).

In most AD BBBM studies, diagnostic performance is reported for the cut point selected based on the maximum Youden index, which is the combined sensitivity and specificity. The Youden index does not take into consideration the test’s intended use, and the optimal cut point may vary according to the intended use. For example, to use a biomarker as a rule-in test, a cut point should be selected to achieve high specificity, thereby minimizing false-positive results. Conversely, for a rule-out test, a high sensitivity should be prioritized to minimize false-negative results. It is also possible to have more than one cut point. In a laboratory-developed test (LDT) that uses the combination of plasma Aβ42/40, apolipoprotein E (ApoE) proteotype, and age, a risk score was derived for assessing brain amyloid status, and two cut points were chosen to define high-risk, low-risk, and intermediate/indeterminate categories.39 Clinical validation data showed that patients in the intermediate category (14% of total) had an almost even chance of being amyloid positive or negative by PET. Characterizing these patients into either a positive or a negative classification would create a high likelihood of misclassification. Therefore, an intermediate category (where the blood test result is not informative) may be a warranted trade-off, improving diagnostic confidence and accuracy for the high- and low-risk categories. Similarly, the Lumipulse G CSF Aβ42/40 test for brain amyloid plaque, recently approved by the FDA as in vitro diagnostic (IVD) for AD, also has two cut points, with the intermediate category defined as ‘‘likely positive.’’40 Applying a two-cut-point approach to the Elecsys assays measuring CSF pTau181/Aβ42 was shown to enhance the prognostic performance of the biomarker in the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) cohort.41 Because of increased uncertainty in the intermediate category, care should be taken when interpreting the intermediate biomarker result for patients.

The requirements for diagnostic performance should be set with the test’s intended purpose in mind. For example, a test used in a clinical trial to pre-screen participants for amyloid positivity prior to amyloid PET does not need to be as accurate as a test intended to replace amyloid PET. The risks, costs, and benefits of each scenario should be carefully considered, such as the consequences of false positives or false negatives, and the benefits of having incremental or marginal improvement in a chosen diagnostic parameter. Considerations of risks, benefits, and performance characteristics of a test under different COUs are summarized in Table 1. For example, Schindler et al. evaluated the time and financial cost of using the BBBM in screening potential participants for enrollment in AD clinical trials. The reduction in enrollment time and the financial savings were only marginally improved with a nearly perfect AD blood test (sensitivity, 0.95; specificity, 0.90) compared with a highly accurate AD blood test (sensitivity, 0.85; specificity, 0.80).31 The incremental benefit-cost relationship is dependent on the COU and must be evaluated on a case-by-case basis.

The intended-use population is a critical consideration because it impacts positive and negative predictive values (PPVs and NPVs) through disease prevalence. Using amyloid PET positivity as a proxy for the disease, the prevalence of AD in people aged 65 to 69 years with MCI is around 50%.42 In this population, a BBBM test with 75% sensitivity and 80% specificity would have a PPV of 0.79, meaning that ~8 of 10 individuals with a positive BBBM test would be amyloid PET positive. However, the prevalence of AD in people aged 55 to 59 years with normal cognition is only 11.6%,42 and the same BBBM test would have a PPV of only 0.33, meaning that 67% of individuals in this population with a positive BBBM test would in fact be amyloid PET negative. Given that the prevalence of AD in dementia clinic settings is much higher than in primary care settings and varies considerably by age and cognitive symptoms, caution is needed in interpreting the results of BBBM tests in different types of populations.

The performance of BBBM tests should be evaluated in cohorts that are relevant to the COU. In most BBBM studies, multiple comparisons are performed based on grouping patients by cognitive status (cognitively unimpaired [CU], subjective memory complaint, MCI, AD, etc.), and multiple results are reported (e.g., AUCs or correlation coefficient). The ability of a test to distinguish extremes (e.g., amyloid-negative CU from amyloid-positive AD dementia) may be substantially different from the ability to distinguish between similar groups (e.g., amyloid-negative CU vs. amyloid-positive CU). For diagnosing individuals with cognitive symptoms, clinical performance in distinguishing amyloid negative vs. positive results in cognitively impaired individuals would be most relevant. Similarly, for prevention trial enrollment and risk assessment, comparison between amyloid-negative CU from amyloid-positive CU is most relevant. Taken together, when considering and assessing the clinical performance of a biomarker, it is essential to consider the intended-use population and COU and to apply a fit-for-purpose approach for cut point selection.

Implementation

For wide adoption of a BBBM, scalability and ease of implementation and interpretation must be considered. For example, a test that requires immediate centrifugation of samples may be difficult to implement in a primary care office because most practices are not equipped to centrifuge or freeze samples. Additionally, in large-scale laboratory testing facilities, complex tests are typically outsourced, and these facilities rarely have the capacity to centrifuge or even freeze blood samples. Therefore, blood tubes are typically collected, stored, and shipped at room temperature, which is very different from protocols used by most AD research centers in clinical research studies. Ideally, BBBM tests would require little to no sample processing and be transportable at ambient temperature.

The complexity of a test may affect the ability of clinicians to interpret the results. For example, a test that integrates multiple BBBMs or a BBBM with other diagnostic modalities (i.e., digital biomarker, genetic information, cognitive testing, or clinical information) is conceptually appealing. However, in practice, performing multiple types of tests and integrating the information is more difficult, especially in a primary care setting. To have the best chance of changing the clinical standard of care, the test should be easy to perform and provide a readily understandable result that can be integrated to electronic health records for longitudinal monitoring.

MAJOR BBBMs THAT ARE CLOSEST TO CLINICAL IMPLEMENTATION

The latest advances in BBBMs for AD have been extensively reviewed.43,44 The purpose of this review is not to present a comprehensive summary of all promising candidates but rather to focus on BBBMs currently available in the clinic or closest to clinical implementation, namely plasma Aβ42/40 ratio and plasma concentrations of several pTau isoforms. Neurofilament light chain (NfL) and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) will be briefly discussed, as there have been many recent studies on these two BBBMs. NfL is a biomarker of neuroaxonal damage, which is not specific for AD, and it is therefore unlikely to be used on its own for AD diagnosis. Plasma GFAP is an emerging AD BBBM and shows promise for AD diagnosis and prognosis. Both NfL and GFAP are being explored as biomarkers of treatment effects in AD clinical trials.

Plasma Aβ42/40

It was first reported in 1995 that Aβ42 concentration was significantly reduced in the CSF of patients with AD dementia.45 Subsequent studies confirmed this finding and demonstrated that lower CSF Aβ42 was associated with brain amyloid pathology, likely due to sequestration of Aβ42 into amyloid plaques.46–48 It was also found that the CSF Aβ42/40 corresponds better than Aβ42 to brain amyloid pathology owing to the normalization effect of Aβ40, which essentially controls for interindividual differences in the production of Aβ peptides in the brain.49 Similar effects were found in plasma several years ago, when technological advancements enabled precise measurement of Aβ40 and Aβ42 at a much lower abundance and in a much more complex matrix.50–56 While individuals with amyloid pathology have reductions in CSF Aβ42/Aβ40 of approximately 50%, reduction in plasma Aβ42/Aβ40 are only 10%–15%.39,50,52,57 The smaller effect size could be due to peripheral production of Aβ that is not impacted by AD pathophysiology, thus diluting brain-derived Aβ and reducing the dynamic range of this measure. Analysis of discordant cases among fluid (CSF and plasma) amyloid biomarkers, amyloid PET, and results of longitudinal studies suggests that changes in CSF and plasma amyloid may be detected earlier than the typical detection threshold for amyloid PET.52,58 Various assays for Aβ42/40 can be divided into two broad categories: immunoassay based vs. mass spectrometry (MS) based, which have been previously reviewed in depth.57,59,60

Phosphorylated-tau (pTau) isoforms

In addition to amyloid plaques, a pathological hallmark of AD is NFTs composed of highly phosphorylated, microtubule-associated protein tau. Hyperphosphorylated tau inclusions in neurons or glial cells are also found in some non-AD neurodegenerative diseases, such as frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism-17, Pick’s disease, progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), and corticobasal degeneration (CBD), which together are referred to as tauopathies.61 CSF total tau (tTau) and tau phosphorylated at position 181 (pTau181) are elevated in AD dementia compared with normal controls.62 CSF tTau is elevated relatively nonspecifically in AD and non-AD dementia, whereas elevated pTau181 is more specific to AD dementia.63,64 Studies of individuals carrying autosomal dominant AD mutations suggest that CSF tau is phosphorylated at different sites over the course of AD.65,66 Some studies suggest that phosphorylation of tau at threonine 231 (pTau231) increases early, followed by an increase in phosphorylation at threonine 217 (pTau217), then at threonine 181 (pTau181), and later at threonine 205 (pTau205).67,68 These initial increases in tau phosphorylation occur at approximately the same time that amyloid PET SUVR begins to increase, well before the formation of significant NFT burden in the brain.

Because of technical challenges in measuring low-abundance analytes in a complex matrix, consistent data on plasma pTau isoforms started to emerge only recently, and the literature has been rapidly growing since. As with CSF findings, elevation in pTau isoforms occurs early in the disease process and increase along the AD continuum, with worsening severity of NFT pathology as assessed by tau PET or neuropathology.69–72 Some studies suggest that changes in plasma pTau231 precede those of pTau217 and pTau181, extending the findings from CSF.68,73–75 Neuroimaging studies have demonstrated that plasma pTau isoforms reliably predict the status of both brain amyloid PET and tau PET.76–78 Consistent with this, neuropathological findings from a small population-based cohort (n = 35) revealed that both Tau and Aβ neuropathology are significant predictors of plasma pTau217 concentrations.79 However, soluble pTau isoforms correlate better to Aβ than neuroimaging-derived tau pathology. In a cross-sectional study of 2 observational cohorts, plasma pTau181 and pTau231 are shown to more closely associate with 18F-AZD4694 amyloid PET than 18F-MK6240 tau PET.80 Longitudinal studies in sporadic AD showed that CSF and plasma pTau217 mediate the association between Aβ and tau PET change, consistent with findings from longitudinal study in autosomal dominant AD.67,70,81 When interpreting findings from biofluid, neuroimaging, and neuropathological biomarker studies, it is important to recognize that results not only reflect the underlying pathophysiology but are also impacted by the sensitivity of the different analytical measures. For example, tau PET has been shown to only detect tau pathology once it reaches Braak stage V/VI, suggesting that it may not be sensitive enough for study earlier clinicopathological stages of disease.82 The biomarker findings, combined with insights obtained from studies of cell cultures and transgenic mice, suggest a model in which tau phosphorylation occurs as an early event in the Aβ cascade, closely linked with Aβ pathology, and precedes downstream events that further lead to accumulation and maturation of NFTs.79,83,84 Simply put, changes in the concentrations of pTau isoforms reflect a pathophysiological dynamic between the formation of Aβ plaques and tau aggregation.

A number of assays have been developed to measure pTau isoforms in blood, which were recently reviewed in Karikari et al.85 Most published pTau studies have employed immunoassays on either the Meso Scale Discovery (MSD) platform86–88 or the single-molecule array (Simoa) platform,76 both with analytical sensitivity below the pg/mL range. In addition, a liquid chromatography-MS/MS approach, similar to the one developed to measure plasma Aβ42/40, was reported in 2020.65 A side-by-side comparison demonstrated that clinical and analytical performance of various Simoa pTau assays are largely comparable and that their results correlated moderately to strongly.89 pTau species are less abundant than amyloid peptides in plasma, with pTau181 and pTau231 having similar abundance and pTau217 having a much lower concentration.65,73,89 One important distinction between plasma pTau isoforms and Aβ42/40 as biomarkers is their effect size. In contrast with the 10%–15% average difference in plasma Aβ42/40 between amyloid-positive and -negative groups, differences in concentrations of pTau isoforms are dependent on disease stage, showing a 42%–77% increase in cognitively unimpaired, older, amyloid-positive individuals and 2- to 4-fold or higher levels in amyloid-positive individuals with MCI or AD.78,89–91

NfL and GFAP

NfL is a component of the axonal cytoskeleton and found primarily in larger myelinated axons.92 It is released upon axonal injury, resulting in an increase in concentration in CSF and blood. Elevated CSF NfL was first associated with neurodegenerative diseases in 1996.93 CSF and blood concentrations of NfL strongly correlate with each other and have been shown to increase in MCI and AD dementia.94,95 To date, a substantial body of evidence has been built on blood-based measurement of NfL as a sensitive, but non-disease-specific biomarker for all causes of neuronal damages, such as various dementia, traumatic brain injury, cerebrovascular diseases, and multiple sclerosis.96

GFAP is an intermediate filament-III protein. In the CNS, it is uniquely found in astrocytes, cells that provide both structural and functional support for neurons. Following CNS injury, GFAP and its breakdown products are rapidly released into biofluids, making them suitable biomarkers. Studies have shown that plasma GFAP is increased along the AD continuum: it is higher among individuals with preclinical AD (as defined by brain Aβ pathology in CU elderly) and even higher in symptomatic stages of AD.97,98 Analyses of paired plasma and CSF samples showed that plasma GFAP outperforms its CSF counterpart, with a higher magnitude of change for plasma GFAP and more accurate discrimination of Aβ-positive from Aβ-negative individuals.97 In the context of the ATX(N) framework, NfL represents (N), whereas GFAP reflects the neuroinflammatory ‘‘X’’ component.11

Almost all recent studies on GFAP and NfL in AD used the same commercially available Simoa-based research use only (RUO) assays that are well established and validated, but similar results have been generated by GFAP assays on fully automated platforms.51 Compared to Aβ42/40 and pTau isoforms, where a multitude of assays and platforms are employed, the relatively standard assays for NfL and GFAP facilitates comparison and reconciliation of results from different studies and accelerates the development of such biomarkers toward clinical implementation. Notably, a clinical test for NfL (in the form of CLIA-approved LDT) has been developed and received breakthrough-device designation from the US FDA intended for clinical management of multiple sclerosis.99

EVIDENCE SUPPORTING THE USE OF BBBMs IN VARIOUS COUs

Diagnosis

Major previous findings on plasma Aβ42/40 and pTau isoforms are summarized in Tables S1 and S2. The AUC is widely reported and is therefore provided in the table as a measure of clinical performance. Studies with small cohorts or those that did not report AUC were not included.

Studies have demonstrated that lower plasma Aβ42/40 is associated with the presence of cerebral amyloid plaques, regardless of cognitive status. Adding age and APOE genotype to models including plasma Aβ42/40 generally improves diagnostic performance, although this effect may depend on the cohort. However, major differences have been identified in the performance of Aβ42/40 assays. MS-based assays have generally demonstrated higher performance, while Simoa-based kit assays, including single plex, 3-plex, or 4-plex, have yielded low and, in some cases, even poor performance. In one study, the Simoa assay underperformed the basic model (age, sex, and APOE ε4 status), and in a few other studies, it yielded AUC values just slightly above 0.50.100–102 The value of Aβ42/40 in differential diagnosis has rarely been assessed. In one study, Aβ42/40 was measured in patients with AD dementia (based on clinical diagnosis and confirmed by CSF Aβ42/40) and other neurodegenerative diseases (confirmed by clinical diagnosis) and yielded an AUC of 0.62.91 Because the assay used in that study is one of the lower-performing Aβ42/40 assays,57 it is not clear whether the modest performance is a result of the assay or the underlying pathophysiology.

Previous findings on concentrations of plasma pTau isoforms are summarized in Table S2. Overall, the various plasma pTau isoforms (181, 217, and 231) have shown moderate to excellent concordance with CSF biomarkers, amyloid PET, tau PET, neuropathological findings, and clinical diagnosis across the AD continuum (Table S2). In general, plasma pTau isoforms perform better at distinguishing amyloid PET status in cognitively impaired cohorts compared with cognitively normal cohorts, consistent with continued increases in pTau isoforms during the symptomatic stages of AD.69,70,77,86,103,104 Some studies comparing pTau181 with pTau217 demonstrated that pTau217 is superior across different reference standards (CSF biomarkers, amyloid PET, tau PET, neuropathological findings, and clinical diagnosis) and different assay platforms (MSD, MS, Simoa),65,91,100,105,106 consistent with findings in CSF.107,108 Higher clinical performance is correlated with a bigger effect size for pTau217, suggesting that threonine 217 phosphorylation is considerably increased in AD compared with threonine 181. A few head-to-head studies have been conducted recently to compare the performance of the various pTau assays and have demonstrated that pTau biomarkers, as a class, perform consistently well in discriminating brain Aβ status, with AUCs &gt; 0.9 and approaching the same biomarkers in the CSF.89,106,109,110 These data suggest that pTau biomarkers might be the earliest to be widely adopted in clinical practice.

Concerning differential diagnosis, several studies lend strong support to the clinical value of pTau isoforms, in contrast to the limited data on the utility of plasma Aβ42/40. Frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) is a clinically and pathologically heterogeneous syndrome sometimes misdiagnosed as AD. Insoluble tau deposition in neurons and glia is found in a subset of patients with FTLD.111 Two studies reported excellent performance (AUC 0.88–0.93) of plasma pTau181 in differentiating AD from FTLD, using clinical diagnosis or neuropathology as the reference standard.88,112 Karikari et al. showed that pTau181 can differentiate clinically diagnosed AD (n = 33) from frontotemporal dementia (FTD, n = 8) with 100% accuracy; with a larger cohort, the authors showed that pTau181 can differentiate AD from a variety of non-AD neurodegenerative diseases, with AUC ranging from 0.82 to 0.92.76 Another group reported that pTau181 differentiated AD dementia from non-AD neurodegenerative diseases with an accuracy similar to that of tau PET and CSF pTau181 (AUC 0.94–0.98) and detected AD neuropathology in an autopsy-confirmed cohort (AUC, 0.854).77

It is worth noting a recent study that examined brain-derived tau (BD-tau) in blood.113 An ultra-sensitive immunoassay was developed using a monoclonal antibody that selectively binds to CNS tau isoforms, allowing the measurement of the portion of total tau (tTau) in blood that is derived from the brain. Unlike plasma tTau, which is poorly correlated with CSF tTau, BD-tau is strongly correlated with CSF tTau. Using a neuropathology cohort, the authors showed that BD-tau was increased in AD versus other neurodegenerative diseases with an AUC of 0.864. In addition, BD-tau was correlated with the severity of AD neuropathology. More studies are needed to further explore the potential utility of BD-tau in differential diagnosis.

Two studies have evaluated the combination of plasma Aβ42/40 and pTau217 in predicting amyloid positivity. Adding plasma Aβ42/40 to pTau217 slightly improved its ability to detect abnormal brain Aβ status in cognitively normal individuals (i.e., AUC improved from 0.83 to 0.86) and did not change its AUC performance in MCI individuals.114 In another study that used different assay platforms, adding pTau181 to Aβ42/40 marginally increased the performance in distinguishing Aβ-positive results in CU and MCI populations (by 3–4 percentage points in AUC).115 More data are needed to determine whether combining plasma Aβ42/40 with pTau measurements will enhance accuracy significantly enough to warrant the increased test complexity.

As biomarkers for neurodegeneration, CSF and plasma NfL measures are not specific for AD. NfL is increased in other primary neurodegenerative diseases, such as FTD, PSP, CBD, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.116 The ability of NfL to discriminate individuals with or without AD based on clinical diagnosis or Aβ pathology is typically not as good as Aβ42/40 or pTau isoforms. NfL often does not add a significant value when combined with other biomarkers.100,104,114,117–119 Therefore, NfL likely will not be useful in AD diagnosis. Plasma GFAP has a positive association with cortical Aβ deposition (as determined by amyloid PET) in the early stages of AD, including the pre-clinical stage.120 Plasma GFAP correlates well with amyloid pathology, with an AUC of approximately 0.80 in multiple studies.17,98,117,119 When combined with base model information (age, sex, and APOE ε4 carrier status), the AUC improves to 0.91.98 There are limited data on blood GFAP in other primary neurodegenerative diseases. In one study, GFAP distinguished AD vs. behavioral variant FTD (bvFTD) with an AUC of 0.85; it also distinguished Parkinson’s disease dementia (PDD) or dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) from control participants (AUC 0.87), Parkinson’s disease without cognitive impairment (AUC 0.88) and bvFTD (AUC 0.79).121

As evident from Tables S1 and S2, most studies are of the discovery type, where the cutoff and model are established to maximize the diagnostic performance of a given cohort. In a few cross-validation studies, a model or cutoff derived from one cohort was tested on a different cohort. Few of those studies represent a true clinical validation, in which a cutoff or model is established from a prespecified discovery cohort and then applied to an independent, prespecified, and prospective validation cohort.50,51 Such external validation establishes a biomarker’s performance in a completely independent dataset not used during initial testing. Validation must be established using data from different time frames, institutions, or geographic regions. An independent validation cohort is needed to ensure that findings from the discovery cohort are not due to bias or overfitting of data and to build confidence in the biomarker findings. The validation cohort’s clinical performance is reported as the test’s performance and is usually not as good as that of the discovery cohort.50,57 It is also critical that validation be performed in the intended-use population to establish the clinically relevant performance. Of note, many studies reflect discovery or replication rather than validation. In fact, the term ‘‘validation’’ is used loosely in some biomarker publications. In certain instances, validation refers to replication of clinical performance in a different cohort with its own Youden index-derived performance data.

The choice of reference standard is critical in evaluating clinical performance. The reference standards used for evaluating diagnostic performance of the BBBMs include postmortem neuropathological examination, amyloid or tau PET, CSF Aβ42/40, and clinical diagnosis (Tables S1 and S2). While postmortem neuropathological confirmation is the true gold standard, its availability is very limited. The three FDA-approved amyloid PET tracers 18F-labeled compounds florbetapir, flutemetamol, and florbetaben and the tau PET tracer 18F-labeled flortaucipir were approved by FDA based on their concordance with postmortem neuropathology. Two CSF tests, Lumipulse Aβ42/40 and Elecsys pTau181/Aβ42, were recently approved by the FDA based on their concordance with amyloid PET.40,122 Even though PET or CSF Aβ42/40 have generally been accepted as an appropriate reference standard for AD pathology, they may not capture the same information as postmortem pathology. For example, the binding of 18F-labeled flortaucipir to brain tissues does not correlate 100% with AT8 immunostaining, the standard method to assess NFT pathology in postmortem brain.123 While most of the BBBM studies were done with PET or CSF as reference standard, there are a number of studies that use neuropathology as a reference standard to determine the performance of pTau181, pTau217, and pTau231 in differential diagnosis. The AUCs of these plasma pTau isoforms in differentiating autopsy-confirmed AD cases vs. autopsy-confirmed other neurodegenerative diseases ranged from 0.72 to 1.00.72,77,78,88,91,124 In one study that evaluated neuropathologically confirmed AD (n = 62) vs. control (n = 41) cases, pTau181 yielded an AUC of 0.82.125 In another similar study (AD/control = 33/80), pTau181 and pTau217 yielded AUCs of 0.77 and 0.84, respectively.100 There are few studies evaluating the concordance of plasma Aβ42/40 and neuropathological findings. In two studies that assessed the ability of plasma Aβ42/40 to discriminate neuropathologically confirmed AD vs. controls, the AUCs were 0.72 and 0.58, respectively.91,100 Of note, the Aβ42/40 assays employed in those two studies were not the best-performing plasma Aβ42/40 assays.

Although FDA-approved use of amyloid PET tracers specifies visual read to determine positivity, most plasma Aβ42/40 studies used more sophisticated approaches to quantify amyloid PET burden. For example, many studies used tracer-specific or study-specific standardized uptake value ratios (SUVRs) or Centiloid, a standardized scale to harmonize all four tracers.126 Another potential caveat is that while visual amyloid PET reads are typically used in clinics and clinical trials, BBBM cutoffs are typically established by comparison to quantitative amyloid PET measures, which, when set at the optimal threshold, have been shown to be more sensitive than classification based on visual read.127–129 Similarly, when CSF Aβ42/40 was employed as reference standard, different assays and different cut points for defining amyloid positivity were used. Complexities with reference standards present a challenge to comparing test performance across studies.

Prognosis

As a prognostic biomarker, two COUs have been explored by research studies: firstly, abnormal biomarker levels are prognostic of progression from CU to MCI or to AD dementia; and secondly, biomarker levels are associated with cognitive decline as measured by neuropsychological testing. Several longitudinal studies have examined the ability of baseline plasma Aβ42/40 to predict progression from MCI to AD and/or cognitive decline, yielding moderate performance overall (Table S3). Two studies showed that plasma Aβ42/40 analyzed on a fully automated platform predicted progression to AD dementia with an AUC of 0.73–0.77.130,131 Compared with studies assessing concordance of plasma Aβ42/40 with amyloid PET, these prognostic studies are even more difficult to assess because of differences in length of follow-up, cognitive domains/scores evaluated, and statistical analyses used. While it is useful to explore relationships between biomarkers and outcomes in a variety of ways in clinical research, studies that focus on assessing biomarkers as a dichotomized variable in predicting a definitive clinical outcome will likely be most translatable to clinical practice.

In contrast to plasma Aβ42/40, more studies have been published on the ability of plasma pTau isoforms to predict cognitive decline or conversion to AD dementia (Table S3). Most of these studies use conversion to AD dementia as a clinical outcome over a follow-up period such as 4 years. Across different studies, pTau181 and pTau217 predicted progression to AD dementia in individuals who were initially cognitively unimpaired or had MCI. In one study, individuals with abnormal baseline plasma pTau181 were almost 11 times more likely to develop AD dementia within 8 years.77 In another study, pTau217 had an AUC of approximately 0.80 in predicting conversion to AD.132 Adding genetic and clinical information (APOE genotype, memory, executive function) further improved the AUC to approximately 0.90. This performance was replicated in the validation cohort, using an unbiased (mean and 2 standard deviations) and nonoptimized cutoff for pTau217 that was established in the discovery cohort.133 Most recently, Janelidze et al. conducted a head-to-head comparison of pTau181, pTau217, and pTau231 measured using 10 assays to detect abnormal brain Aβ status and predict progression from MCI to AD dementia over an average of 4.9 years.110 Several assays (pTau217Lilly, pTau217Janss, pTau181ADx, and pTau181WashU) showed relatively high and consistent accuracy across both outcomes, with the highest-performing assay having performance approaching the gold standards of Aβ PET and CSF biomarkers.

NfL has been shown to moderately predict cognitive decline or conversion to AD in longitudinal studies, albeit often not as good as other BBBMs in the same study. In one study that examined the development of incident dementia during 3 year follow-up of cognitive normal people, it was outperformed by GFAP.18 In two studies that used the biomarker model to predict cognitive decline in CU and MCI subjects, NfL contributes to the best-fitting model but does not have a significant individual effect, in contrast to pTau217 or pTau181.130,131 GFAP predicted conversion from MCI to AD dementia with an AUC of 0.84 in one study but was outperformed by pTau217 in a recent study that evaluated longitudinal measures of cognition in 564 preclinical AD subjects.17,132

Treatment monitoring

Insights on the potential utility of BBBMs in treatment monitoring are gathered from recent monoclonal antibody (mAb) trials that target various forms of Aβ. Because the concentrations of these therapeutic antibodies in blood are usually high and they bind to monomeric Aβ with varying affinity, changes in the concentrations of monomeric Aβ40, Aβ42, or Aβ42/40 likely reflect target engagement. In two trials of a mAb targeting Aβ protofibrils with weak binding to monomers, Aβ42/40 ratio in the treatment arm increased (i.e., approaching normal levels) and correlated with the reduction of brain amyloid as measured by PET.33,35 This could have resulted from the reduction of amyloid plaque, hence less Aβ42 being sequestered in the brain, an indirect effect of target engagement.

pTau isoforms, such as pTau181 and pTau217, have been shown to decrease (i.e., approaching normal levels) and correlate with the reduction of amyloid PET in trials across three different Aβ-targeting mAbs, with one of them being a pivotal trial showing positive outcomes.32–35 Interestingly, in one trial, during the gap period between the core phase and the open label extension phase, pTau181 levels began to return toward prerandomization levels more quickly than amyloid PET. Similar treatment responses have been shown for GFAP.33,34 However, NfL levels do not show a treatment response in the two trials that assessed NfL concentrations in blood.33,34 In contrast, NfL is a more dynamic biomarker is other diseases and is being used to monitor treatment responses in several other neurological diseases, such as multiple sclerosis (MS), and several pediatric diseases, such as spinal muscular atrophy (SMA).116 In a recent observational study of multiple cohorts, the authors found that in a cross-sectional comparison, both pTau231 and Aβ42/40 reached a plateau and had no further changes in participants with more abnormal levels of Aβ pathology.134 In contrast, pTau217 and pTau181 demonstrated continued increases in participants with higher Aβ burden. In the same study, longitudinal comparison showed that only pTau217 demonstrated marked amyloid-dependent changes over 4–6 years in both preclinical and symptomatic stages of the disease, with no such changes observed in pTau231, pTau181, Aβ42/40, GFAP, or NfL. Together with the findings from clinical trial, that evidence suggests the utility of certain pTau species as a dynamic biomarker and its potential use in monitoring treatment efficacy.

Lacking from published trial results are the correlation data between the changes in biomarker concentrations and the change in clinical endpoint to unequivocally demonstrate the relationship of the biomarker and treatment efficacy. Furthermore, most of the reported BBBM data from trials are derived from group-level analyses (i.e., treatment vs. placebo). To utilize biomarker information in personalized decision making, biomarker changes on an individual level require further characterization to establish reference change values that can guide medical decisions, such as continuing the treatment, halting it, or adjusting the dose.135

CHALLENGES

Technical challenges

Challenges are associated with existing BBBMs. Most published cohort studies reflect an analytical best-case scenario, in which samples were acquired in a standardized way after study completion, i.e., measurements were performed in one lab, with one instrument, with one reagent lot. For the plasma Aβ42/40 ratio, the biggest challenge is the low effect size, manifested as an approximately 10%–15% difference in average value between amyloid-positive vs. -negative groups. If even a small drift or bias occurs due to variance in preanalytical sample handling, batch-to-batch reagent changes, or population, the assay’s clinical performance could change dramatically. This small effect size necessitates high analytical precision with minimal assay drift over time. For clinical application, the assay must be robust enough to tolerate the bias or variability associated with routine management of clinical samples (e.g., in processing and shipping) and with changing lots of reagents and other conditions over weeks, months, or years. Plasma pTau isoforms have much larger effect sizes, but their concentrations are much lower, down to sub-pg/mL levels. Even on the highly sensitive Simoa platform, concentrations of some pTau isoforms in controls are below the lower limit of quantitation.89 When an analyte is present at low concentrations, high precision and accuracy are harder to achieve.

Analytical variations of a test can significantly impact its performance. In two studies, the authors took real biomarker data (e.g., Aβ42/40, pTau, GFAP) from ADNI and BioFINDER cohorts, respectively, and simulated different coefficients of variance (CVs) to evaluate the impact of analytical variations (e.g., instrument to instrument, run to run, day to day, site to site) on the assay performance. They found that biomarkers with smaller effect sizes (e.g., plasma Aβ42/40) dropped significantly in performance even at CVs commonly seen with lab testing while the performance of biomarkers with larger effect sizes (e.g., pTau isoforms, CSF biomarkers) remained relatively stable, even at simulated imprecision of 20% CV.102,136 In another study, the authors examined plasma samples collected from the same individual weeks apart and found test-retest variability to be 4.1% for Aβ42/40 and 20.0% for pTau217.137 Both intra-individual variability and assay-related variability contribute to test-retest variability, the former being an important consideration in the real-world implementation but so far less studied than assay-related variability. More studies are needed to show that a chosen cutoff for a given BBBM consistently classifies individuals over an extended period of time and across different cohorts.

Real-world population challenges

Most studies of BBBMs have used cohorts composed of relatively healthy (i.e., lacking comorbidities), well-educated, non-Hispanic White (NHW) individuals. However, substantial evidence shows that increased risk for cognitive impairment is associated with common conditions such as diabetes, hypertension, dyslipidemia, and chronic kidney disease (CKD).138,139 Recent data have demonstrated that medical conditions may impact biomarker concentrations in the blood. In a large study of cognitively unimpaired participants in the multiethnic, community-based Health and Aging Brain Among Latino Elders (HABLE), medical conditions including dyslipidemia, hypertension, diabetes, and CKD each impacted plasma biomarkers of Aβ40, Aβ42, total tau, and NfL.138 Biomarker analyses of 996 samples from Mayo Clinic Study of Aging, a population-based study cohort, revealed that hypertension, previous cancer diagnosis, and CKD were associated with a higher Aβ42, as well as a slightly but significantly higher Aβ42/40 ratio after adjusting for age and sex among CU participants.140 Among CU individuals, a history of stroke, atrial fibrillation, history of cancer, and CKD were associated with higher NfL levels. Similarly, plasma pTau181 and pTau217 measurements from the same cohort with a slightly larger sample size demonstrated that CKD was highly correlated with higher levels of both pTau181 and pTau217 isoforms in the plasma to the extent that the difference between participants with and without CKD was similar to the difference between participants with and without elevated brain amyloid.105 Emerging evidence suggests that AD BBBM levels are also impacted by certain therapies, such as menopause hormone therapy.141 Future work should seek to develop biomarker measures that perform consistently despite medical conditions. Notably, the ratio of phosphorylated to non-phosphorylated tau at position 217, which has very high performance in distinguishing amyloid PET status,110 has reduced associations with kidney function relative to pTau217 concentrations. 142

Some recent studies have explored the relationship between plasma biomarkers and race and ethnicity. In the same HABLE study that evaluated the impact of comorbidities on BBBMs, it was also discovered that plasma Aβ42/40 (analyzed using a Simoa platform) was significantly higher in Mexican American patients (n = 445) than NHW patients (n = 520).138 In a covariate-matched cohort of Black and NHW research participants, plasma Aβ42/40 consistently predicted brain amyloid across racial groups, while plasma pTau181 or pTau231 concentrations were associated with a lower risk of brain amyloid in Black participants.143 A study that compared Black and Latino individuals with matched NHWs in the ADNI cohort found no significant differences in plasma pTau181 concentrations with or without adjustment for covariates.144

While the performance of BBBMs in highly selected populations provides initial information, a broader understanding of how these biomarkers behave within the community at large is needed to provide clinical guidance. It is imperative to conduct rigorous validation studies in more representative, real-world populations to determine which measures perform most consistently and to establish cutoffs and reference intervals that perform reliably across all patient groups. A recent study created a reference database for serum NfL, which has been shown to vary with age, body mass index (BMI), blood volume, kidney function, and presence of cardiovascular comorbidities.96 Age and BMI-adjusted serum NfL levels from thousands of subjects/samples from the general population were statistically converted to percentiles and Z scores, making it possible to define levels of pathological increase independent of BMI, age, and (potentially) comorbidities.145 Such a reference database will not only be useful in detection and diagnosis but also in assessing therapeutic efficacy and monitoring disease progression. Similar approaches can be considered for AD BBBMs that are near ready for clinical implementation.

Future directions and conclusions

BBBMs, when implemented clinically on a large scale, could transform the AD patient care pathway. Currently, most biomarker studies are focused on screening, diagnosis, and prognosis as COU. With the continued and accelerated research in this field, we anticipate more data will be produced to support other COUs such as predicting disease risk, tracking progression, and monitoring treatment response. The Alzheimer’s Association has recently published appropriate-use recommendations for BBBMs in AD based on currently available evidence.146 It is conceivable that these recommendations will require an update soon, considering the rapid progress in this field. As illustrated in Figure 1, BBBM tests potentially could be implemented in both the primary care and dementia specialist settings. BBBMs are already being used in select patients by some dementia specialists who have expertise in understanding and interpreting biomarker results. Wider use by dementia specialists is likely to occur, followed by implementation at the primary care/community health setting for early detection, for informing decisions about referral to specialists, and eventually for diagnosis. At the primary care level, BBBMs have the potential to become part of a multistep neurodiagnostic process by initially ruling out those who do not yet need further testing, thereby reducing anxiety, cost, and burden. Additionally, this approach could offer broad access and availability, especially to underserved and rural communities as well as developing countries.

A word of caution must be noted given the evolving state of biomarker development, regulatory approval, and real-world implementation. BBBMs as they exist should not be used as the sole modality in the diagnostic evaluation of AD, nor as a replacement for a thorough diagnostic evaluation. Biomarker information should be integrated with patient history, brain imaging, routine laboratory tests, and other testing as appropriate to arrive at a diagnosis. A patient presenting with cognitive symptoms might test positive for AD biomarkers but have treatable conditions causing or contributing to cognitive symptoms, such as depression, adverse effects of medications, sleep apnea, metabolic conditions, etc. It could be harmful to patients if treatable causes were not addressed because cognitive symptoms were attributed solely to AD because of positive biomarkers.

A large amount of research and development on BBBMs for AD has occurred in the last few years, with the two biomarkers that have gathered the most data being Aβ42/40 and pTau isoforms as biomarkers of core AD pathologies. The Geneva roadmap describes a five-phase framework for biomarker development.147 Using that framework, we have summarized the developmental status of various Aβ42/40 and pTau assays in Table 2. Some of these assays are for RUO, some are still at the prototype stage, and three are clinically available as LDT under Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments. Across all assays, data are lacking on clinical validation using prospective, longitudinal cohorts that more closely represent the diverse real-world population. Being cleared as IVD devices by the US FDA allows assays to be performed in multiple laboratories using standardized test kits and therefore is the ideal regulatory pathway for large-scale, decentralized testing implementation. Recently, the FDA has granted breakthrough-device designation to a few BBBM tests intended for AD diagnosis. Getting IVD clearance is a lengthy and costly process. In the short term, offering a clinical assay as an LDT is a typical strategy for diagnostics companies, at least during the initial commercialization period, because of the lower barrier to entry. Regardless of regulatory path, rigorous clinical validation in the intended-use population with prospective cohorts and prespecified cutoffs is critical to vetting the test’s performance.

With so many tests in development, it is conceivable there will be multiple manufacturers in the clinical testing space, even for the same biomarker or analyte. This situation may create a need for standardization (e.g., reference methods and materials, quality control programs) to harmonize readouts across assays, as has been done for CSF-based tests. In order to standardize CSF Aβ measurement across different assay platforms and different laboratories and to provide a traceability standard for assay calibrators, CSF-certified reference materials (CRMs) for Aβ42 were developed by a Working Group for CSF Proteins created by the International Federation of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine.163 Three automation platforms were recalibrated using the CRMs. Although the concentration values for CSF Aβ42 are different before recalibration, they are all within 2-fold of each other’s values.164 In contrast, a head-to-head comparison of various plasma biomarkers assays reported Aβ42 concentrations with &gt;100-fold differences across different assay platforms.57 Similarly, a comparison study of pTau assays on a common Simoa platform revealed ≥10-fold differences in pTau181 concentrations among three pTau181 immunoassays.89 As such, standardizing quantification of these blood biomarkers will likely be a much bigger technical challenge.

In summary, although substantial progress has been made to advance BBBMs for AD diagnosis, they do not now provide a standalone diagnosis of AD but rather may help clinicians improve the accuracy of their diagnosis when integrated with patient history, cognitive tests, digital assessments, and genetic information. Effective use of BBBMs will require collaboration of various stakeholders in developing thoughtful approaches to reduce the burden of implementation and facilitate interpretation of results. For BBBMs to have a true impact on a large scale, regional and global healthcare systems will need to incorporate biomarkers and digital tools, train more healthcare providers in MCI and dementia care, and standardize diagnostic pathways to shift the initial patient workup to primary care clinicians. BBBMs may facilitate the transition from clinical-pathological medicine to clinical-biological pathway-based medicine, providing a pathway toward precision medicine for neurodegenerative diseases and dementia disorders.135

Supplementary Material

Supplementary Tables S1-S3

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

J.C. is supported by NIGMS grant P20GM109025; NINDS grant U01NS093334; NIA grant R01AG053798; NIA grant P20AG068053; NIA grant P30AG072959; NIA grant R35AG71476; Alzheimer’s Disease Drug Discovery Foundation (ADDF); Ted and Maria Quirk Endowment; and the Joy Chambers-Grundy Endowment. S.O. is supported by NIA grant U19AG078109 and NIA grant R01AG058533. L.M.S. receives funding from the NIH (grants U19 ADNI4 and U19AG024904 and Penn ADRC P30-AG-072979). A.N. receives research support from Japan Agency for Medical Research and Development (AMED: JP18dk0207022, JP20dk0207027, JP22ae0101077, and JP22dk0207052). S.E.S. is supported by NIA grant R01AG070941 and the Cure Alzheimer’s Fund.

Figure 1. An overarching illustration of integration of BBBMs into patient journey

Depicted in the figure is the patient journey (also referred to as clinical care pathway) that starts with a visit to a primary care physician (light green line) and to a dementia specialist (brown line). At present, a validated BBBM can be used as an aid during the diagnostic workup, in conjunction with clinical assessment, as a pathology confirmation tool for the initiation of treatment with existing and approved therapeutics (red drop). As more evidence accrues, BBBMs may be used for screening healthy adults at risk for AD (as determined based on age, family history, comorbidities, etc.), as well as for the monitoring of treatment response and disease progression (purple drop). Aβ, amyloid beta; AD, Alzheimer’s disease; BBBM, blood-based biomarker; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; PET, positron emission tomography; pTau, phosphorylated tau; tTau, total tau.

Table 1. Considerations of risks, benefits, and performance characteristics for BBBM under different contexts of use during screening and diagnosis

COU	Benefit	Risk	Desired test characteristics	Most suited population	
Screening test in cognitively normal people for risk assessment	• improved public health
• improved care options for underrepresented/minority populations
• implementation of timely preventive strategies (modifiable risk factors)
• early detection of incipient disease for timely treatment	• false positive: distress/depression or adverse decisions
• false negative: individuals who may benefit from interventions are not correctly identified	high sensitivity; high NPV; low false-negative rate	most reasonable in people at low risk of AD	
Rule-in test for amyloid pathology in symptomatic individuals, with subsequent amyloid PET or CSF testing in those with a positive blood test	• reduce number of individuals requiring amyloid PET or CSF testing
• more timely diagnosis
• may be helpful for clinical trials where the goal is rapid enrollment of amyloid-positive individuals	• false positive (with later negative confirmatory test): undue distress and confusion
• false negative: delay in diagnosis and lack of inclusion in trials	high specificity, high PPV, low false-positive rate	most reasonable in people at high risk of AD (e.g., older individuals); people being evaluated for cognitive issues	
Rule-out test for amyloid pathology in symptomatic individuals	• reduce the number of individuals requiring amyloid PET or CSF testing
• more timely diagnosis
• facilitate clinical trial enrollment and reduce cost
• could be helpful if an effective AD treatment is identified
• triage tool to prioritize patients with cognitive impairment for further evaluation	• false negative: delay in diagnosis and treatment	high sensitivity, high NPV, low false-negative rate	most reasonable in people at low risk of AD	
Replacement for amyloid PET or CSF as a diagnostic test for amyloid pathology	• increased availability, reduced cost, reduced burden on the healthcare system
• provide an option for individuals who have contraindications to CSF testing
• more timely diagnosis	• false positive: risk of treating an individual with no AD pathology, with downstream health risks (e.g., adverse events), patient distress, and improper resource investments
• false negative: delay in diagnosis and treatment	highly accurate performance with diagnostic accuracy and performance close to amyloid PET and CSF tests	most reasonable in people with contraindications to LP or radiotracer injection, desirable in all individuals with high-risk or suspected AD to facilitate the implementation of accessible biomarker-guided decision making	
AD, Alzheimer’s disease; BBBM, blood-based biomarker; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; LP, lumbar puncture; NPV, negative predictive value; PET, positron emission tomography; PPV, positive predictive value.

Table 2. Summary of evidence and commercial status of plasma Aβ42/40 and pTau assays developed by commercial entities

	Phase 1: preclinical exploratory studies
Phase 4: prospective studies, longitudinal studies, and real-world performance
Phase 5: implementation and impact on clinical outcomes		
Phase 2	Phase 3	Current status	
Manufacturer/test name	Test components (analytes)	Assay platform	Assay development and analytical validation	Retrospective studies	RUO	CLIA	IVD status	
C2N/Precivity	Aβ42/40+ APOE (+age)	IP-LC-MS/MS	Kirmess et al.148	clinical performance evaluated in a cross-validation type of study,39 as well as in an independent cohort149		x	granted Breakthrough Device designation by FDA150	
Quest/AD-Detect	Aβ42/40	IP-LC-MS/MS	unpublished	unpublished		x		
Araclon/ABtest-IA	Aβ42/40	immunoassay	Pérez-Grijalba et al.151	clinical performance evaluated in a few discovery-type studies151,152		CE mark		
Araclon/ABtest-MS	Aβ42/40	LC-MS	unpublished	clinical performance evaluated in a few discovery-type studies57,153	x			
Quanterix	Aβ42/40	Simoa	Song et al.154	clinical performance evaluated in a few discovery-type studies53,71,100,101,118,155	x			
Sysmex	Aβ42/40	HISCL	Yamashita et al.156	clinical performance evaluated in a validation-type study where discovery and validation populations are from the same cohort157	x			
Shimadzu	Aβ-based composite	MS	unpublished	clinical performance evaluated in a few studies, including a validation-type study50,57,155	x			
Roche/Amyloid Plasma Panel	pTau181+ APOE4	Elecsys	unpublished	clinical performance evaluated in a discovery-type study115	x		granted Breakthrough Device designation by FDA158	
Eli Lilly	pTau181	MSD, Simoa	Bayoumy et al.89	clinical performance evaluated in discovery-type studies77,86,89,90,100,105,110		xa		
Adx	pTau181	Simoa	Bayoumy et al.89	clinical performance evaluated in discovery-type studies89,110	x			
Quanterix	pTau181	Simoa	Karikari et al.76; Bayoumy et al.89	clinical performance evaluated in discovery-type studies89,90		x	granted Breakthrough Device designation by FDA159	
Fujirebio	pTau181	Lumipulse G	unpublished	clinical performance evaluated in a discovery-type study110	x			
Eli Lilly	pTau217	MSD, Simoa	Bayoumy et al.89	clinical performance evaluated in a few studies, including cross-validation studies71,89,90,100,105,110,114,160	x	xa		
Janssen	pTau217	Simoa	Triana-Baltzer et al.161	clinical performance evaluated in discovery-type studies110,160–162	x			
Adx	pTau217	Simoa	Bayoumy et al.89	clinical performance evaluated in a discovery-type study89	x			
Adx	pTau231	Simoa	Bayoumy et al.89	clinical performance evaluated in a discovery-type study89	x			
a For clinical trial use only. Not commercially available for physicians to order.

Box 1. Measures of diagnostic test accuracy

Sensitivity is the proportion of people with disease X who have a positive test. Specificity is the proportion of people without disease X who have a negative test. These two metrics reflect the intrinsic discriminative power of a test—i.e., the ability to detect true-positive and true-negative results, respectively—at a given cutoff and are not influenced by the disease prevalence, and as such, they state nothing about the predictive values or about the contribution of the test in rule-in and rule-out diagnosis scenarios. Overall accuracy refers to the proportion of correctly classified patients among all patients.

In the context of biomarker evaluation, the receiver operating characteristic AUC is interpreted as the probability that a randomly chosen individual with a disease is rated or ranked as more likely to have the disease than a randomly chosen individual without the disease. For example, in a study that evaluates low plasma Aβ42/40 ratio in predicting brain amyloid positivity using amyloid PET as the reference standard: when randomly picking an individual from the PET-positive group and another individual from the PET-negative group, the AUC is the probability of the former having a lower Aβ42/40 ratio. A value of 0.5 means the test has no better accuracy than random guessing, while a value of 1 reflects a perfectly accurate test. AUC is not impacted by cutoff values. Two tests that have identical AUCs can have different sensitivity, specificity, and overall accuracy.

PPV is the proportion of true-positive tests out of all positive test results, and NPV is the proportion of true-negative tests out of all negative tests. These two metrics are arguably the most relevant for clinical management and are directly dependent on the prevalence rates of the disease within the specific COU and patient population. They inform a clinician of the likelihood that a patient who tests positive actually has the disease (PPV) and that a patient who tests negative actually does not have the disease (NPV). PPV and NPV are determined by sensitivity, specificity, and prevalence of the disease/condition.

SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION

Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2023.05.017.

DECLARATION OF INTERESTS

H.H. is an employee of Eisai and serves as reviewing editor for the journal Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia. H.H. is the inventor of 11 patents and has received no royalties for: In Vitro Multiparameter Determination Method for The Diagnosis and Early Diagnosis of Neurodegenerative Disorders patent no. 8916388; In Vitro Procedure for Diagnosis and Early Diagnosis of Neurodegenerative Diseases patent no. 8298784; Neurodegenerative Markers for Psychiatric Conditions publication no. 20120196300; In Vitro Multiparameter Determination Method for The Diagnosis and Early Diagnosis of Neurodegenerative Disorders publication no. 20100062463; In Vitro Method for The Diagnosis and Early Diagnosis of Neurodegenerative Disorders publication no. 20100035286; In Vitro Procedure for Diagnosis and Early Diagnosis of Neurodegenerative Diseases publication no. 20090263822; In Vitro Method for The Diagnosis of Neurodegenerative Diseases patent no. 7547553; CSF Diagnostic in Vitro Method for Diagnosis of Dementias and Neuroinflammatory Diseases publication no. 20080206797; In Vitro Method for The Diagnosis of Neurodegenerative Diseases publication no. 20080199966; Neurodegenerative Markers for Psychiatric Conditions publication no. 20080131921; and Method for diagnosis of dementias and neuroinflammatory diseases based on an increased level of procalcitonin in cerebrospinal fluid: US patent no. 10921330.

J.C. has provided consultation to Acadia, Actinogen, Alkahest, Alpha Cognition, AriBio, Biogen, BioVie, Cassava, Cerecin, Corium, Cortexyme, Diadem, EIP Pharma, Eisai, GemVax, Genentech, Green Valley, GAP Innovations, Grifols, Janssen, Karuna, Lilly, Lundbeck, LSP, Merck, NervGen, Novo Nordisk, Oligomerix, OptoCeutics, Ono, Otsuka, PRODEO, Prothena, reMYND, Resverlogix, Roche, Sage Therapeutics, Signant Health, Simcere, Sunbird Bio, Suven, TrueBinding, and Vaxxinity pharmaceutical, assessment, and investment companies.

A.N. ha no personal conflicts to declare, but his employer NCGG shares some patents with Shimadzu and receives royalty.

S.M. serves on the board of directors of Senscio Systems and the scientific advisory board of AiCure Technologies, ALZpath, and Boston Millennia Partners and has received consulting fees from Biogen, C2N, Eisai, Novartis, and Roche/Genentech.

S.O. has multiple patents on precision medicine for neurodegenerative diseases and is the founding scientist of Cx Precision Medicine, Inc.

L.M.S. has received compensation for teaching activities from Biogen. Y.H., M.C., and R.B. are employees of Eisai.

A.V. declares no competing interests related to the present paper. A.V.’s contribution to this paper reflects entirely and exclusively his own academic expertise on the matter. A.V. was an employee of Eisai (November 2019–June 2021). A.V. has not received any fees or honoraria since November 2019. Before November 2019, A.V. received lecture honoraria from Roche, MagQu, and Servier.

K.B. has served as a consultant and on advisory boards for Acumen, ALZPath, BioArctic, Biogen, Eisai, Lilly, Moleac Pte. Ltd, Novartis, Ono Pharma, Prothena, Roche Diagnostics, and Siemens Healthineers; has served on data monitoring committees for Julius Clinical and Novartis; has given lectures, produced educational materials, and participated in educational programs for AC Immune, Biogen, Celdara Medical, Eisai and Roche Diagnostics; and is a co-founder of Brain Biomarker Solutions in Gothenburg AB (BBS), which is a part of the Gothenburg University Ventures Incubator Program.

S.E.S. has analyzed data provided by C2N Diagnostics to Washington University and served on an advisory board for Eisai.


REFERENCES

1. Cummings J , and Fox N (2017). Defining disease modifying therapy for Alzheimer’s disease. J. Prev. Alzheimers Dis 4 , 109–115.29071250
2. (2023). Highlights of prescribing information: Leqembi (lecanemab-irmb). Eisai Inc https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2023/761269s000lbl.pdf
3. (2022). Highlights of prescribing information: Aduhelm (aducanumab-avwa). Biogen https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2022/761178s005lbl.pdf
4. Blennow K , and Hampel H (2003). CSF markers for incipient Alzheimer’s disease. Lancet Neurol 2 , 605–613.14505582
5. Klunk WE , Engler H , Nordberg A , Wang Y , Blomqvist G , Holt DP , Bergström M , Savitcheva I , Huang GF , Estrada S , (2004). Imaging brain amyloid in Alzheimer’s disease with Pittsburgh Compound-B. Ann. Neurol 55 , 306–319.14991808
6. Krishnadas N , Villemagne VL , Doré V , and Rowe CC (2021). Advances in Brain Amyloid Imaging. Semin. Nucl. Med 51 , 241–252.33482999
7. McKhann GM , Knopman DS , Chertkow H , Hyman BT , Jack CR Jr. , Kawas CH , Klunk WE , Koroshetz WJ , Manly JJ , Mayeux R , (2011). The diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer’s disease: recommendations from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement 7 , 263–269.21514250
8. Dubois B , Feldman HH , Jacova C , DeKosky ST , Barberger-Gateau P , Cummings J , Delacourte A , Galasko D , Gauthier S , Jicha G , (2007). Research criteria for the diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease: Revising the NINCDS–ADRDA criteria. Lancet Neurol 6 , 734–746.17616482
9. Jack CR Jr. , Bennett DA , Blennow K , Carrillo MC , Feldman HH , Frisoni GB , Hampel H , Jagust WJ , Johnson KA , Knopman DS , (2016). A/T/N: An unbiased descriptive classification scheme for Alzheimer disease biomarkers. Neurology 87 , 539–547.27371494
10. Jack CR Jr. , Bennett DA , Blennow K , Carrillo MC , Dunn B , Haeberlein SB , Holtzman DM , Jagust W , Jessen F , Karlawish J , (2018). NIA-AA Research Framework: Toward a biological definition of Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement 14 , 535–562.29653606
11. Hampel H , Cummings J , Blennow K , Gao P , Jack CR Jr. , and Vergallo A (2021). Developing the ATX(N) classification for use across the Alzheimer disease continuum. Nat. Rev. Neurol 17 , 580–589.34239130
12. Bradburn S , McPhee J , Bagley L , Carroll M , Slevin M , Al-Shanti N , Barnouin Y , Hogrel JY , Pääsuke M , Gapeyeva H , (2018). Dysregulation of C-X-C motif ligand 10 during aging and association with cognitive performance. Neurobiol. Aging 63 , 54–64. 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2017.11.009.29223680
13. Tsai H-H , Chen Y-F , Yen R-F , Lo Y-L , Yang K-C , Jeng J-S , Tsai L-K , and Chang C-F (2021). Plasma soluble TREM2 is associated with white matter lesions independent of amyloid and tau. Brain 144 , 3371–3380. 10.1093/brain/awab332.34515756
14. Vergallo A , Lista S , Lemercier P , Chiesa PA , Zetterberg H , Blennow K , Potier MC , Habert MO , Baldacci F , Cavedo E , (2020). Association of plasma YKL-40 with brain amyloid-β levels, memory performance, and sex in subjective memory complainers. Neurobiol. Aging 96 , 22–32. 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2020.07.009.32920471
15. Villar-Piqué A , Schmitz M , Hermann P , Goebel S , Bunck T , Varges D , Ferrer I , Riggert J , Llorens F , and Zerr I (2019). Plasma YKL-40 in the spectrum of neurodegenerative dementia. J. Neuroinflammation 16 , 145. 10.1186/s12974-019-1531-3.31299989
16. Zhao A , Jiao Y , Ye G , Kang W , Tan L , Li Y , Deng Y , and Liu J ; Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative ADNI (2022). Soluble TREM2 levels associate with conversion from mild cognitive impairment to Alzheimer’s disease. J. Clin. Invest 132 , e158708. 10.1172/JCI158708.36519540
17. Cicognola C , Janelidze S , Hertze J , Zetterberg H , Blennow K , Mattsson-Carlgren N , and Hansson O (2021). Plasma glial fibrillary acidic protein detects Alzheimer pathology and predicts future conversion to Alzheimer dementia in patients with mild cognitive impairment. Alzheimer’s Res. Ther 13 , 68. 10.1186/s13195-021-00804-9.33773595
18. Verberk IMW , Laarhuis MB , van den Bosch KA , Ebenau JL , van Leeuwenstijn M , Prins ND , Scheltens P , Teunissen CE , and van der Flier WM (2021). Serum markers glial fibrillary acidic protein and neurofilament light for prognosis and monitoring in cognitively normal older people: a prospective memory clinic-based cohort study. Lancet. Healthy Longev 2 , e87–e95. 10.1016/S2666-7568(20)30061-1.36098162
19. Awada AA (2015). Early and late-onset Alzheimer’s disease: What are the differences? J. Neurosci. Rural Pract 6 , 455–456.26167048
20. Rabinovici GD , Gatsonis C , Apgar C , Chaudhary K , Gareen I , Hanna L , Hendrix J , Hillner BE , Olson C , Lesman-Segev OH , (2019). Association of amyloid positron emission tomography with subsequent change in clinical management among Medicare beneficiaries with mild cognitive impairment or dementia. JAMA 321 , 1286–1294.30938796
21. Rajan KB , Weuve J , Barnes LL , McAninch EA , Wilson RS , and Evans DA (2021). Population estimate of people with clinical Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment in the United States (2020–2060). Alzheimers Dement 17 , 1966–1975. 10.1002/alz.12362.34043283
22. Cummings J , Rabinovici GD , Atri A , Aisen P , Apostolova LG , Hendrix S , Sabbagh M , Selkoe D , Weiner M , and Salloway S (2022). Aducanumab: Appropriate Use Recommendations Update. J. Prev. Alzheimers Dis 9 , 221–230. 10.14283/jpad.2022.34.35542993
23. Cummings J , Apostolova L , Rabinovici GD , Atri A , Aisen P , Greenberg S , Hendrix S , Selkoe D , Weiner M , Petersen RC , and Salloway S (2023). Lecanemab: Appropriate Use Recommendations. J. Prev. Alz. Dis 10.14283/jpad.2023.30.
24. Mattke S (2022). From Trials to Practice: Are We Ready for a Disease-Modifying Treatment. In Alzheimer’s Disease Drug Development: Research and Development Ecosystem, Fillit H , Kinney J , and Cummings J , eds. (Cambridge University Press), pp. 345–347.
25. Frank R , and Hargreaves R (2003). Clinical biomarkers in drug discovery and development. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov 2 , 566–580.12838269
26. Frank RA , Galasko D , Hampel H , Hardy J , de Leon MJ , Mehta PD , Rogers J , Siemers E , and Trojanowski JQ ; National Institute on Aging Biological Markers Working Group (2003). Biological markers for therapeutic trials in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Aging 24 , 521–536.12714109
27. Hampel H , Frank R , Broich K , Teipel SJ , Katz RG , Hardy J , Herholz K , Bokde ALW , Jessen F , Hoessler YC , (2010). Biomarkers for Alzheimer’s disease: academic, industry and regulatory perspectives. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov 9 , 560–574.20592748
28. Hampel H , O’Bryant SE , Molinuevo JL , Zetterberg H , Masters CL , Lista S , Kiddle SJ , Batrla R , and Blennow K (2018). Blood-based biomarkers for Alzheimer disease: mapping the road to the clinic. Nat. Rev. Neurol 14 , 639–652.30297701
29. Hampel H , Lista S , and Khachaturian ZS (2012). Development of biomarkers to chart all Alzheimer’s disease stages: The royal road to cutting the therapeutic Gordian knot. Alzheimers Dement 8 , 312–336.22748938
30. Malzbender K , Lavin-Mena L , Hughes L , Bose N , Goldman D , and D P (2020). Key Barriers to Clinical Trials for Alzheimer’s Disease (USC Schaeffer Center for Health Policy &amp; Economics)
31. Schindler SE , Li Y , Li M , Despotis A , Park E , Vittert L , Hamilton BH , Womack KB , Saef B , Holtzman DM , (2023). Using Alzheimer disease blood tests to accelerate clinical trial enrollment. Alzheimers Dement 19 , 1175–1183.35934777
32. Budd Haeberlein S , Aisen PS , Barkhof F , Chalkias S , Chen T , Cohen S , Dent G , Hansson O , Harrison K , von Hehn C , (2022). Two randomized phase 3 studies of aducanumab in early Alzheimer’s disease. J. Prev. Alzheimers Dis 9 , 197–210.35542991
33. van Dyck CH , Swanson CJ , Aisen P , Bateman RJ , Chen C , Gee M , Kanekiyo M , Li D , Reyderman L , Cohen S , (2023). Lecanemab in Early Alzheimer’s Disease. N. Engl. J. Med 388 , 9–21. 10.1056/NEJMoa2212948.36449413
34. Pontecorvo MJ , Lu M , Burnham SC , Schade AE , Dage JL , Shcherbinin S , Collins EC , Sims JR , and Mintun MA (2022). Association of Donanemab Treatment With Exploratory Plasma Biomarkers in Early Symptomatic Alzheimer Disease: A Secondary Analysis of the TRAILBLAZER-ALZ Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Neurol 79 , 1250–1259. 10.1001/jamaneurol.2022.3392.36251300
35. McDade E , Cummings JL , Dhadda S , Swanson CJ , Reyderman L , Kanekiyo M , Koyama A , Irizarry M , Kramer LD , and Bateman RJ (2022). Lecanemab in patients with early Alzheimer’s disease: Detailed results on biomarker, cognitive, and clinical effects from the randomized and open-label extension of the phase 2 proof-of-concept study. Alzheimer’s Res. Ther 14 , 191. 10.1186/s13195-022-01124-2.36544184
36. Mattke S , Cho SK , Bittner T , Hlávka J , and Hanson M (2020). Blood-based biomarkers for Alzheimer’s pathology and the diagnostic process for a disease-modifying treatment: projecting the impact on the cost and wait times. Alzheimers Dement. (Amst.) 12 , e12081.32832590
37. Hampel H , Au R , Mattke S , van der Flier WM , Aisen P , Apostolova L , Chen C , Cho M , De Santi S , Gao P , (2022). Designing the next-generation clinical care pathway for Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Aging 2 , 692–703.37118137
38. Mattke S , and Hanson M (2022). Expected wait times for access to a disease-modifying Alzheimer’s treatment in the United States. Alzheimers Dement 18 , 1071–1074.34569686
39. Hu Y , Kirmess KM , Meyer MR , Rabinovici GD , Gatsonis C , Siegel BA , Whitmer RA , Apgar C , Hanna L , Kanekiyo M , (2022). Assessment of a plasma amyloid probability score to estimate amyloid positron emission tomography findings among adults with cognitive impairment. JAMA Netw. Open 5 , e228392.35446396
40. FDA. (2022). Evaluation of Elecsys B-Amyloid (1–42) Csf II, Elecsys Phospho-Tau (181p) CSF Decision Summary https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/cdrh_docs/pdf22/K221842.pdf
41. Brum WS , de Bastiani MA , Bieger A , Therriault J , Ferrari-Souza JP , Benedet AL , Saha-Chaudhuri P , Souza DO , Ashton NJ , Zetterberg H , (2022). A three-range approach enhances the prognostic utility of CSF biomarkers in Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement 8 , e12270. 10.1002/trc2.12270.
42. Jansen WJ , Janssen O , Tijms BM , Vos SJB , Ossenkoppele R , Visser PJ , Amyloid Biomarker Study Group, Aarsland D , Alcolea D , Altomare D (2022). Prevalence estimates of amyloid abnormality across the Alzheimer disease clinical spectrum. JAMA Neurol 79 , 228–243.35099509
43. Zetterberg H , and Blennow K (2021). Moving fluid biomarkers for Alzheimer’s disease from research tools to routine clinical diagnostics. Mol. Neurodegener 16 , 10.33608044
44. Leuzy A , Mattsson-Carlgren N , Palmqvist S , Janelidze S , Dage JL , and Hansson O (2022). Blood-based biomarkers for Alzheimer’s disease. EMBO Mol. Med 14 , e14408.34859598
45. Motter R , Vigo-Pelfrey C , Kholodenko D , Barbour R , Johnson-Wood K , Galasko D , Chang L , Miller B , Clark C , Green R , (1995). Reduction of beta-amyloid peptide42 in the cerebrospinal fluid of patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Ann. Neurol 38 , 643–648.7574461
46. Hampel H , Teipel SJ , Fuchsberger T , Andreasen N , Wiltfang J , Otto M , Shen Y , Dodel R , Du Y , Farlow M , (2004). Value of CSF beta-amyloid1–42 and tau as predictors of Alzheimer’s disease in patients with mild cognitive impairment. Mol. Psychiatry 9 , 705–710.14699432
47. Patterson BW , Elbert DL , Mawuenyega KG , Kasten T , Ovod V , Ma S , Xiong C , Chott R , Yarasheski K , Sigurdson W , (2015). Age and amyloid effects on human central nervous system amyloid-beta kinetics. Ann. Neurol 78 , 439–453.26040676
48. Strozyk D , Blennow K , White LR , and Launer LJ (2003). CSF Abeta 42 levels correlate with amyloid-neuropathology in a population-based autopsy study. Neurology 60 , 652–656.12601108
49. Lewczuk P , Matzen A , Blennow K , Parnetti L , Molinuevo JL , Eusebi P , Kornhuber J , Morris JC , and Fagan AM (2017). Cerebrospinal fluid Aβ42/40 corresponds better than Aβ42 to amyloid PET in Alzheimer’s disease. J. Alzheimers Dis 55 , 813–822.27792012
50. Nakamura A , Kaneko N , Villemagne VL , Kato T , Doecke J , Doré V , Fowler C , Li QX , Martins R , Rowe C , (2018). High performance plasma amyloid-beta biomarkers for Alzheimer’s disease. Nature 554 , 249–254.29420472
51. Palmqvist S , Janelidze S , Stomrud E , Zetterberg H , Karl J , Zink K , Bittner T , Mattsson N , Eichenlaub U , Blennow K , and Hansson O (2019). Performance of fully automated plasma assays as screening tests for Alzheimer disease-related beta-amyloid status. JAMA Neurol 76 , 1060–1069.31233127
52. Schindler SE , Bollinger JG , Ovod V , Mawuenyega KG , Li Y , Gordon BA , Holtzman DM , Morris JC , Benzinger TLS , Xiong C , (2019). High-precision plasma beta-amyloid 42/40 predicts current and future brain amyloidosis. Neurology 93 , e1647–e1659.31371569
53. Verberk IMW , Slot RE , Verfaillie SCJ , Heijst H , Prins ND , van Berckel BNM , Scheltens P , Teunissen CE , and van der Flier WM (2018). Plasma amyloid as prescreener for the earliest Alzheimer pathological changes. Ann. Neurol 84 , 648–658.30196548
54. Ovod V , Ramsey KN , Mawuenyega KG , Bollinger JG , Hicks T , Schneider T , Sullivan M , Paumier K , Holtzman DM , Morris JC , (2017). Amyloid beta concentrations and stable isotope labeling kinetics of human plasma specific to central nervous system amyloidosis. Alzheimers Dement 13 , 841–849.28734653
55. Kaneko N , Nakamura A , Washimi Y , Kato T , Sakurai T , Arahata Y , Bundo M , Takeda A , Niida S , Ito K , (2014). Novel plasma biomarker surrogating cerebral amyloid deposition. Proc. Jpn. Acad. Ser. B Phys. Biol. Sci 90 , 353–364. 10.2183/pjab.90.353.
56. Pannee J , Törnqvist U , Westerlund A , Ingelsson M , Lannfelt L , Brinkmalm G , Persson R , Gobom J , Svensson J , Johansson P , (2014). The amyloid-β degradation pattern in plasma–a possible tool for clinical trials in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurosci. Lett 573 , 7–12.24796810
57. Janelidze S , Teunissen CE , Zetterberg H , Allué JA , Sarasa L , Eichenlaub U , Bittner T , Ovod V , Verberk IMW , Toba K , (2021). Head-to-head comparison of 8 plasma amyloid-beta 42/40 assays in Alzheimer disease. JAMA Neurol 78 , 1375–1382.34542571
58. Palmqvist S , Mattsson N , and Hansson O ; Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (2016). Cerebrospinal fluid analysis detects cerebral amyloid-β accumulation earlier than positron emission tomography. Brain 139 , 1226–1236.26936941
59. Pannee J , Shaw LM , Korecka M , Waligorska T , Teunissen CE , Stoops E , Vanderstichele HMJ , Mauroo K , Verberk IMW , Keshavan A , (2021). The global Alzheimer’s Association round robin study on plasma amyloid beta methods. Alzheimers Dement. (Amst.) 13 , e12242.34692980
60. Brand AL , Lawler PE , Bollinger JG , Li Y , Schindler SE , Li M , Lopez S , Ovod V , Nakamura A , Shaw LM , (2022). The performance of plasma amyloid beta measurements in identifying amyloid plaques in Alzheimer’s disease: a literature review. Alzheimer’s Res. Ther 14 , 195. 10.1186/s13195-022-01117-1.36575454
61. Zhang Y , Wu K-M , Yang L , Dong Q , and Yu J-T (2022). Tauopathies: new perspectives and challenges. Mol. Neurodegener 17 , 28.35392986
62. Blennow K , Wallin A , Agren H , Spenger C , Siegfried J , and Vanmechelen E (1995). Tau protein in cerebrospinal fluid: a biochemical marker for axonal degeneration in Alzheimer disease? Mol. Chem. Neuropathol 26 , 231–245.8748926
63. Hampel H , Buerger K , Zinkowski R , Teipel SJ , Goernitz A , Andreasen N , Sjoegren M , DeBernardis J , Kerkman D , Ishiguro K , (2004). Measurement of phosphorylated tau epitopes in the differential diagnosis of Alzheimer disease: A comparative cerebrospinal fluid study. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 61 , 95–102.14706948
64. Buerger K , Zinkowski R , Teipel SJ , Tapiola T , Arai H , Blennow K , Andreasen N , Hofmann-Kiefer K , DeBernardis J , Kerkman D , (2002). Differential diagnosis of Alzheimer disease with cerebrospinal fluid levels of tau protein phosphorylated at threonine 231. Arch. Neurol 59 , 1267–1272.12164722
65. Barthélemy NR , Horie K , Sato C , and Bateman RJ (2020). Blood plasma phosphorylated-tau isoforms track CNS change in Alzheimer’s disease. J. Exp. Med 217 , e20200861.32725127
66. Stefanoska K , Gajwani M , Tan ARP , Ahel HI , Asih PR , Volkerling A , Poljak A , and Ittner A (2022). Alzheimer’s disease: Ablating single master site abolishes tau hyperphosphorylation. Sci. Adv 8 , eabl8809.35857446
67. Barthélemy NR , Li Y , Joseph-Mathurin N , Gordon BA , Hassenstab J , Benzinger TLS , Buckles V , Fagan AM , Perrin RJ , Goate AM , (2020). A soluble phosphorylated tau signature links tau, amyloid and the evolution of stages of dominantly inherited Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Med 26 , 398–407.32161412
68. Ashton NJ , Benedet AL , Pascoal TA , Karikari TK , Lantero-Rodriguez J , Brum WS , Mathotaarachchi S , Therriault J , Savard M , Chamoun M , (2022). Cerebrospinal fluid p-tau231 as an early indicator of emerging pathology in Alzheimer’s disease. EBioMedicine 76 , 103836.35158308
69. Moscoso A , Grothe MJ , Ashton NJ , Karikari TK , Rodriguez JL , Snellman A , Suárez-Calvet M , Zetterberg H , Blennow K , and Schöll M ; Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (2021). Time course of phosphorylated-tau181 in blood across the Alzheimer’s disease spectrum. Brain 144 , 325–339.33257949
70. Mattsson-Carlgren N , Janelidze S , Palmqvist S , Cullen N , Svenningsson AL , Strandberg O , Mengel D , Walsh DM , Stomrud E , Dage JL , and Hansson O (2020). Longitudinal plasma p-tau217 is increased in early stages of Alzheimer’s disease. Brain 143 , 3234–3241.33068398
71. Janelidze S , Berron D , Smith R , Strandberg O , Proctor NK , Dage JL , Stomrud E , Palmqvist S , Mattsson-Carlgren N , and Hansson O (2021). Associations of plasma phospho-tau217 levels with tau positron emission tomography in early Alzheimer disease. JAMA Neurol 78 , 149–156.33165506
72. Ashton NJ , Pascoal TA , Karikari TK , Benedet AL , Lantero-Rodriguez J , Brinkmalm G , Snellman A , Schöll M , Troakes C , Hye A , (2021). Plasma p-tau231: A new biomarker for incipient Alzheimer’s disease pathology. Acta Neuropathol 141 , 709–724.33585983
73. Tissot C , Therriault J , Kunach P , L Benedet A , Pascoal TA , Ashton NJ , Karikari TK , Servaes S , Lussier FZ , Chamoun M , (2022). Comparing tau status determined via plasma pTau181, pTau231 and [(18)F]MK6240 tau-PET. EBioMedicine 76 , 103837.35134647
74. Suárez-Calvet M , Karikari TK , Ashton NJ , Lantero Rodríguez J , Milà-Alomà M , Gispert JD , Salvadó G , Minguillon C , Fauria K , Shekari M , (2020). Novel tau biomarkers phosphorylated at T181, T217 or T231 rise in the initial stages of the preclinical Alzheimer’s continuum when only subtle changes in Aβ pathology are detected. EMBO Mol. Med 12 , e12921.33169916
75. Milà-Alomà M , Ashton NJ , Shekari M , Salvadó G , Ortiz-Romero P , Montoliu-Gaya L , Benedet AL , Karikari TK , Lantero-Rodriguez J , Vanmechelen E , (2022). Plasma p-tau231 and p-tau217 as state markers of amyloid-beta pathology in preclinical Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Med 28 , 1797–1801. 10.1038/s41591-022-01925-w.35953717
76. Karikari TK , Pascoal TA , Ashton NJ , Janelidze S , Benedet AL , Rodriguez JL , Chamoun M , Savard M , Kang MS , Therriault J , (2020). Blood phosphorylated tau 181 as a biomarker for Alzheimer’s disease: a diagnostic performance and prediction modelling study using data from four prospective cohorts. Lancet Neurol 19 , 422–433.32333900
77. Janelidze S , Mattsson N , Palmqvist S , Smith R , Beach TG , Serrano GE , Chai X , Proctor NK , Eichenlaub U , Zetterberg H , (2020). Plasma P-tau181 in Alzheimer’s disease: Relationship to other biomarkers, differential diagnosis, neuropathology and longitudinal progression to Alzheimer’s dementia. Nat. Med 26 , 379–386.32123385
78. Thijssen EH , La Joie R , Strom A , Fonseca C , Iaccarino L , Wolf A , Spina S , Allen IE , Cobigo Y , Heuer H , (2021). Plasma phosphorylated tau 217 and phosphorylated tau 181 as biomarkers in Alzheimer’s disease and frontotemporal lobar degeneration: A retrospective diagnostic performance study. Lancet Neurol 20 , 739–752. 10.1016/S1474-4422(21)00214-3.34418401
79. Murray ME , Moloney CM , Kouri N , Syrjanen JA , Matchett BJ , Rothberg DM , Tranovich JF , Sirmans TNH , Wiste HJ , Boon BDC , (2022). Global neuropathologic severity of Alzheimer’s disease and locus coeruleus vulnerability influences plasma phosphorylated tau levels. Mol. Neurodegener 17 , 85. 10.1186/s13024-022-00578-0.36575455
80. Vermeiren M , Therriault J , Servaes S , Lussier FZ , Tissot C , Pascoal TA , Chamoun M , Bezgin G , Benedet AL , Ashton NJ , (2022). Tau phosphorylation is more closely associated with amyloid-β plaques than with tau neurofibrillary tangles. Alzheimer’s Dementia 18 . 10.1002/alz.064231.
81. Mattsson-Carlgren N , Andersson E , Janelidze S , Ossenkoppele R , Insel P , Strandberg O , Zetterberg H , Rosen HJ , Rabinovici G , Chai X , (2020). Aβ deposition is associated with increases in soluble and phosphorylated tau that precede a positive Tau PET in Alzheimer’s disease. Sci. Adv 6 , eaaz2387. 10.1126/sciadv.aaz2387.32426454
82. Fleisher AS , Pontecorvo MJ , Devous MD , Lu M , Arora AK , Truocchio SP , Aldea P , Flitter M , Locascio T , Devine M , ; A16 Study Investigators (2020). Positron Emission Tomography Imaging With [18F]flortaucipir and Postmortem Assessment of Alzheimer Disease Neuropathologic Changes. JAMA Neurol 77 , 829–839. 10.1001/jamaneurol.2020.0528.32338734
83. Kaeser SA , Häsler LM , Lambert M , Bergmann C , Bottelbergs A , Theunis C , Mercken M , and Jucker M (2022). CSF p-tau increase in response to Abeta-type and Danish-type cerebral amyloidosis and in the absence of neurofibrillary tangles. Acta Neuropathol 143 , 287–290. 10.1007/s00401-021-02400-5.34961894
84. Sato C , Barthélemy NR , Mawuenyega KG , Patterson BW , Gordon BA , Jockel-Balsarotti J , Sullivan M , Crisp MJ , Kasten T , Kirmess KM , (2018). Tau Kinetics in Neurons and the Human Central Nervous System. Neuron 97 , 1284–1298.e7. 29566794
85. Karikari TK , Ashton NJ , Brinkmalm G , Brum WS , Benedet AL , Montoliu-Gaya L , Lantero-Rodriguez J , Pascoal TA , Suárez-Calvet M , Rosa-Neto P , (2022). Blood phospho-tau in Alzheimer disease: Analysis, interpretation, and clinical utility. Nat. Rev. Neurol 18 , 400–418.35585226
86. Mielke MM , Hagen CE , Xu J , Chai X , Vemuri P , Lowe VJ , Airey DC , Knopman DS , Roberts RO , Machulda MM , (2018). Plasma phospho-tau181 increases with Alzheimer’s disease clinical severity and is associated with tau- and amyloid-positron emission tomography. Alzheimers Dement 14 , 989–997.29626426
87. Janelidze S , Stomrud E , Smith R , Palmqvist S , Mattsson N , Airey DC , Proctor NK , Chai X , Shcherbinin S , Sims JR , (2020). Cerebrospinal fluid p-tau217 performs better than p-tau181 as a biomarker of Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Commun 11 , 1683.32246036
88. Thijssen EH , La Joie R , Wolf A , Strom A , Wang P , Iaccarino L , Bourakova V , Cobigo Y , Heuer H , Spina S , (2020). Diagnostic value of plasma phosphorylated tau181 in Alzheimer’s disease and frontotemporal lobar degeneration. Nat. Med 26 , 387–397.32123386
89. Bayoumy S , Verberk IMW , den Dulk B , Hussainali Z , Zwan M , van der Flier WM , Ashton NJ , Zetterberg H , Blennow K , Vanbrabant J , (2021). Clinical and analytical comparison of six Simoa assays for plasma P-tau isoforms P-tau181, P-tau217, and P-tau231. Alzheimer’s Res. Ther 13 , 198.34863295
90. Mielke MM , Frank RD , Dage JL , Jeromin A , Ashton NJ , Blennow K , Karikari TK , Vanmechelen E , Zetterberg H , Algeciras-Schimnich A , (2021). Comparison of plasma phosphorylated tau species with amyloid and tau positron emission tomography, neurodegeneration, vascular pathology, and cognitive outcomes. JAMA Neurol 78 , 1108–1117.34309632
91. Palmqvist S , Janelidze S , Quiroz YT , Zetterberg H , Lopera F , Stomrud E , Su Y , Chen Y , Serrano GE , Leuzy A , (2020). Discriminative accuracy of plasma phospho-tau217 for Alzheimer disease vs other neurodegenerative disorders. JAMA 324 , 772–781.32722745
92. Schlaepfer WW , and Lynch RG (1977). Immunofluorescence studies of neurofilaments in the rat and human peripheral and central nervous system. J. Cell Biol 74 , 241–250. 10.1083/jcb.74.1.241.326799
93. Rosengren LE , Karlsson JE , Karlsson JO , Persson LI , and Wikkelsø C (1996). Patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and other neurodegenerative diseases have increased levels of neurofilament protein in CSF. J. Neurochem 67 , 2013–2018. 10.1046/j.1471-4159.1996.67052013.x.8863508
94. Zetterberg H , Skillbäck T , Mattsson N , Trojanowski JQ , Portelius E , Shaw LM , Weiner MW , and Blennow K ; Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (2016). Association of Cerebrospinal Fluid Neurofilament Light Concentration With Alzheimer Disease Progression. JAMA Neurol 73 , 60–67. 10.1001/jamaneurol.2015.3037.26524180
95. Mattsson N , Andreasson U , Zetterberg H , and Blennow K ; Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (2017). Association of Plasma Neurofilament Light With Neurodegeneration in Patients With Alzheimer Disease. JAMA Neurol 74 , 557–566. 10.1001/jamaneurol.2016.6117.28346578
96. Mak G , Menon S , and Lu J-Q (2022). Neurofilaments in neurologic disorders and beyond. J. Neurol. Sci 441 , 120380.36027641
97. Benedet AL , Milà-Alomà M , Vrillon A , Ashton NJ , Pascoal TA , Lussier F , Karikari TK , Hourregue C , Cognat E , Dumurgier J , (2021). Differences Between Plasma and Cerebrospinal Fluid Glial Fibrillary Acidic Protein Levels Across the Alzheimer Disease Continuum. JAMA Neurol 78 , 1471–1483. 10.1001/jamaneurol.2021.3671.34661615
98. Chatterjee P , Pedrini S , Stoops E , Goozee K , Villemagne VL , Asih PR , Verberk IMW , Dave P , Taddei K , Sohrabi HR , (2021). Plasma glial fibrillary acidic protein is elevated in cognitively normal older adults at risk of Alzheimer’s disease. Transl. Psychiatry 11 , 27. 10.1038/s41398-020-01137-1.33431793
99. Siemens Healthineers (2022). Siemens Healthineers Receives FDA Breakthrough Device Designation for sNfL test in Multiple Sclerosis https://www.siemens-healthineers.com/en-us/press-room/press-releases/snfl-breakthrough-device-designation.
100. Brickman AM , Manly JJ , Honig LS , Sanchez D , Reyes-Dumeyer D , Lantigua RA , Lao PJ , Stern Y , Vonsattel JP , Teich AF , (2021). Plasma p-tau181, p-tau217, and other blood-based Alzheimer’s disease biomarkers in a multi-ethnic, community study. Alzheimers Dement 17 , 1353–1364.33580742
101. Keshavan A , Pannee J , Karikari TK , Rodriguez JL , Ashton NJ , Nicholas JM , Cash DM , Coath W , Lane CA , Parker TD , (2021). Population-based blood screening for preclinical Alzheimer’s disease in a British birth cohort at age 70. Brain 144 , 434–449.33479777
102. Benedet AL , Brum WS , Hansson O , Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative, Karikari TK , Zimmer ER , Zetterberg H , Blennow K , and Ashton NJ (2022). The accuracy and robustness of plasma biomarker models for amyloid PET positivity. Alzheimer’s Res. Ther 14 , 26.35130933
103. Karikari TK , Benedet AL , Ashton NJ , Lantero Rodriguez J , Snellman A , Suárez-Calvet M , Saha-Chaudhuri P , Lussier F , Kvartsberg H , Rial AM , (2021). Diagnostic performance and prediction of clinical progression of plasma phospho-tau181 in the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative. Mol. Psychiatry 26 , 429–442.33106600
104. Tosun D , Veitch D , Aisen P , Jack CR Jr. , Jagust WJ , Petersen RC , Saykin AJ , Bollinger J , Ovod V , Mawuenyega KG , (2021). Detection of beta-amyloid positivity in Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative participants with demographics, cognition, MRI and plasma biomarkers. Brain Commun 3 , fcab008.33842885
105. Mielke MM , Dage JL , Frank RD , Algeciras-Schimnich A , Knopman DS , Lowe VJ , Bu G , Vemuri P , Graff-Radford J , Jack CR Jr. , and Petersen RC (2022). Performance of plasma phosphorylated tau 181 and 217 in the community. Nat. Med 28 , 1398–1405.35618838
106. Therriault J , Servaes S , Tissot C , Rahmouni N , Ashton NJ , Benedet AL , Karikari TK , Macedo AC , Lussier FZ , Stevenson J , (2023). Equivalence of plasma p-tau217 with cerebrospinal fluid in the diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimer’s Dementia 10.1002/alz.13026.
107. Leuzy A , Janelidze S , Mattsson-Carlgren N , Palmqvist S , Jacobs D , Cicognola C , Stomrud E , Vanmechelen E , Dage JL , and Hansson O (2021). Comparing the clinical utility and diagnostic performance of CSF P-Tau181, P-Tau217, and P-Tau231 assays. Neurology 97 , e1681–e1694.34493616
108. Barthélemy NR , Bateman RJ , Hirtz C , Marin P , Becher F , Sato C , Gabelle A , and Lehmann S (2020). Cerebrospinal fluid phospho-tau T217 outperforms T181 as a biomarker for the differential diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease and PET amyloid-positive patient identification. Alzheimer’s Res. Ther 12 , 26.32183883
109. Ashton NJ , Puig-Pijoan A , Milà-Alomà M , Fernández-Lebrero A , García-Escobar G , González-Ortiz F , Kac PR , Brum WS , Benedet AL , Lantero-Rodriguez J , (2022). Plasma and CSF biomarkers in a memory clinic: Head-to-head comparison of phosphorylated tau immunoassays. Alzheimers Dement 19 , 1913–1924. 10.1002/alz.12841.36370462
110. Janelidze S , Bali D , Ashton NJ , Barthélemy NR , Vanbrabant J , Stoops E , Vanmechelen E , He Y , Dolado AO , Triana-Baltzer G , (2023). Head-to-head comparison of 10 plasma phospho-tau assays in prodromal Alzheimer’s disease. Brain 146 , 1592–1601.36087307
111. Bodea LG , Eckert A , Ittner LM , Piguet O , and Götz J (2016). Tau physiology and pathomechanisms in frontotemporal lobar degeneration. J. Neurochem 138 , 71–94. 10.1111/jnc.13600.27306859
112. Benussi A , Karikari TK , Ashton N , Gazzina S , Premi E , Benussi L , Ghidoni R , Rodriguez JL , Emeršič A , Simrén J , (2020). Diagnostic and prognostic value of serum NfL and p-Tau181 in frontotemporal lobar degeneration. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 91 , 960–967.32611664
113. Gonzalez-Ortiz F , Turton M , Kac PR , Smirnov D , Premi E , Ghidoni R , Benussi L , Cantoni V , Saraceno C , Rivolta J , (2023). Brain-derived tau: A novel blood-based biomarker for Alzheimer’s disease-type neurodegeneration. Brain 146 , 1152–1165. 10.1093/brain/awac407.36572122
114. Janelidze S , Palmqvist S , Leuzy A , Stomrud E , Verberk IMW , Zetterberg H , Ashton NJ , Pesini P , Sarasa L , Allué JA , (2022). Detecting amyloid positivity in early Alzheimer’s disease using combinations of plasma Abeta42/Abeta40 and p-tau. Alzheimers Dement 18 , 283–293.34151519
115. Palmqvist S , Stomrud E , Cullen N , Janelidze S , Manuilova E , Jethwa A , Bittner T , Eichenlaub U , Suridjan I , Kollmorgen G , (2023). An accurate fully automated panel of plasma biomarkers for Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement 19 , 1204–1215. 10.1002/alz.12751.35950735
116. Yuan A , and Nixon RA (2021). Neurofilament Proteins as Biomarkers to Monitor Neurological Diseases and the Efficacy of Therapies. Front. Neurosci 15 , 689938.34646114
117. Verberk IMW , Thijssen E , Koelewijn J , Mauroo K , Vanbrabant J , de Wilde A , Zwan MD , Verfaillie SCJ , Ossenkoppele R , Barkhof F , (2020). Combination of plasma amyloid beta((1–42/1–40)) and glial fibrillary acidic protein strongly associates with cerebral amyloid pathology. Alzheimer’s Res. Ther 12 , 118. 10.1186/s13195-020-00682-7.32988409
118. Simrén J , Leuzy A , Karikari TK , Hye A , Benedet AL , Lantero-Rodriguez J , Mattsson-Carlgren N , Schöll M , Mecocci P , Vellas B , (2021). The diagnostic and prognostic capabilities of plasma biomarkers in Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement 17 , 1145–1156.33491853
119. Chatterjee P , Pedrini S , Ashton NJ , Tegg M , Goozee K , Singh AK , Karikari TK , Simrén J , Vanmechelen E , Armstrong NJ , (2022). Diagnostic and prognostic plasma biomarkers for preclinical Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement 18 , 1141–1154.34494715
120. Asken BM , Elahi FM , La Joie R , Strom A , Staffaroni AM , Lindbergh CA , Apple AC , You M , Weiner-Light S , Brathaban N , (2020). Plasma Glial Fibrillary Acidic Protein Levels Differ Along the Spectra of Amyloid Burden and Clinical Disease Stage. J. Alzheimers Dis 78 , 265–276. 10.3233/JAD-200755.32986672
121. Oeckl P , Halbgebauer S , Anderl-Straub S , Steinacker P , Huss AM , Neugebauer H , von Arnim CAF , Diehl-Schmid J , Grimmer T , Kornhuber J , (2019). Glial Fibrillary Acidic Protein in Serum is Increased in Alzheimer’s Disease and Correlates with Cognitive Impairment. J. Alzheimers Dis 67 , 481–488. 10.3233/jad-180325.30594925
122. (2022). Evaluation of Automatic Class III Designation for Lumipulse G 13-Amyloid Ratio (1–42/1–40) Decision Summary https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/cdrh_docs/reviews/DEN200072.pdf
123. Liang Q , Lin Y-G , Gomez F , Mintun M , and Attardo G (2016). [18F]-AV1451 Autoradiography Signal Correlates with Anti-pathological Tau IHC Signal in AD Post-Mortem Cortical Tissue Sections. J. Nucl. Med 57 , 1027.26917706
124. Lantero Rodriguez J , Karikari TK , Suárez-Calvet M , Troakes C , King A , Emersic A , Aarsland D , Hye A , Zetterberg H , Blennow K , and Ashton NJ (2020). Plasma p-tau181 accurately predicts Alzheimer’s disease pathology at least 8 years prior to post-mortem and improves the clinical characterisation of cognitive decline. Acta Neuropathol 140 , 267–278.32720099
125. Morrison MS , Aparicio HJ , Blennow K , Zetterberg H , Ashton NJ , Karikari TK , Tripodis Y , Martin B , Palmisano JN , Sugarman MA , (2022). Ante-mortem plasma phosphorylated tau (181) predicts Alzheimer’s disease neuropathology and regional tau at autopsy. Brain 145 , 3546–3557. 10.1093/brain/awac175.35554506
126. Klunk WE , Koeppe RA , Price JC , Benzinger TL , Devous MD , Jagust WJ , Johnson KA , Mathis CA , Minhas D , Pontecorvo MJ , (2015). The Centiloid Project: Standardizing quantitative amyloid plaque estimation by PET. Alzheimers Dement 11 , 1–15.25443857
127. Hanseeuw BJ , Malotaux V , Dricot L , Quenon L , Sznajer Y , Cerman J , Woodard JL , Buckley C , Farrar G , Ivanoiu A , and Lhommel R (2021). Defining a Centiloid scale threshold predicting long-term progression to dementia in patients attending the memory clinic: An [(18)F] flutemetamol amyloid PET study. Eur. J. Nucl. Med. Mol. Imaging 48 , 302–310.32601802
128. Salvadó G , Molinuevo JL , Brugulat-Serrat A , Falcon C , Grau-Rivera O , Suárez-Calvet M , Pavia J , Niñerola-Baizán A , Perissinotti A , Lomeña F , (2019). Centiloid cut-off values for optimal agreement between PET and CSF core AD biomarkers. Alzheimer’s Res. Ther 11 , 27.30902090
129. Milà-Alomà M , Salvadó G , Shekari M , Grau-Rivera O , Sala-Vila A , Sánchez-Benavides G , Arenaza-Urquijo EM , González-de-Echávarri JM , Simon M , Kollmorgen G , (2021). Comparative analysis of different definitions of amyloid-beta positivity to detect early downstream pathophysiological alterations in preclinical Alzheimer. J. Prev. Alzheimers Dis 8 , 68–77.33336227
130. Cullen NC , Leuzy A , Janelidze S , Palmqvist S , Svenningsson AL , Stomrud E , Dage JL , Mattsson-Carlgren N , and Hansson O (2021). Plasma biomarkers of Alzheimer’s disease improve prediction of cognitive decline incognitively unimpaired elderly populations. Nat. Commun 12 , 3555.34117234
131. Cullen NC , Leuzy A , Palmqvist S , Janelidze S , Stomrud E , Pesini P , Sarasa L , Allué JA , Proctor NK , Zetterberg H , (2021). Individualized prognosis of cognitive decline and dementia in mild cognitive impairment based on plasma biomarker combinations. Nat. Aging 1 , 114–123.37117993
132. Mattsson-Carlgren N , Salvadó G , Ashton NJ , Tideman P , Stomrud E , Zetterberg H , Ossenkoppele R , Betthauser TJ , Cody KA , Jonaitis EM , (2023). Prediction of Longitudinal Cognitive Decline in Preclinical Alzheimer Disease Using Plasma Biomarkers. JAMA Neurol 80 , 360–369. 10.1001/jamaneurol.2022.5272.36745413
133. Palmqvist S , Tideman P , Cullen N , Zetterberg H , Blennow K , Hansson O , Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative, Dage JL , Stomrud E , Janelidze S , and Mattsson-Carlgren N (2021). Prediction of future Alzheimer’s disease dementia using plasma phospho-tau combined with other accessible measures. Nat. Med 27 , 1034–1042.34031605
134. Ashton NJ , Janelidze S , Mattsson-Carlgren N , Binette AP , Strandberg O , Brum WS , Karikari TK , González-Ortiz F , Di Molfetta G , Meda FJ , (2022). Differential roles of Abeta42/40, p-tau231 and p-tau217 for Alzheimer’s trial selection and disease monitoring. Nat. Med 28 , 2555–2562. 10.1038/s41591-022-02074-w.36456833
135. Hampel H , Gao P , Cummings J , Toschi N , Thompson PM , Hu Y , Cho M , and Vergallo A (2023). The foundation and architecture of precision medicine in neurology and psychiatry. Trends Neurosci 46 , 176–198. 10.1016/j.tins.2022.12.004.36642626
136. Rabe C , Bittner T , Jethwa A , Suridjan I , Manuilova E , Friesenhahn M , Stomrud E , Zetterberg H , Blennow K , and Hansson O ; Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative and the Swedish BioFINDER study (2023). Clinical performance and robustness evaluation of plasma amyloid-beta42/40 prescreening. Alzheimers Dement 19 , 1393–1402.36150024
137. Cullen NC , Janelidze S , Mattsson-Carlgren N , Palmqvist S , Bittner T , Suridjan I , Jethwa A , Kollmorgen G , Brum WS , Zetterberg H , (2022). Test-retest variability of plasma biomarkers in Alzheimer’s disease andits effects on clinical prediction models. Alzheimers Dement 19 , 797–806.
138. O’Bryant SE , Petersen M , Hall J , and Johnson LA ; HABS-HD Study Team (2023). Medical comorbidities and ethnicity impact plasma Alzheimer’s disease biomarkers: Important considerations for clinical trials and practice. Alzheimers Dement 19 , 36–43. 10.1002/alz.12647.35235702
139. Nianogo RA , Rosenwohl-Mack A , Yaffe K , Carrasco A , Hoffmann CM , and Barnes DE (2022). Risk factors associated with Alzheimer disease and related dementias by sex and race and ethnicity in the US. JAMA Neurol 79 , 584–591.35532912
140. Syrjanen JA , Campbell MR , Algeciras-Schimnich A , Vemuri P , Graff-Radford J , Machulda MM , Bu G , Knopman DS , Jack CR Jr. , Petersen RC , and Mielke MM (2022). Associations of amyloid and neurodegeneration plasma biomarkers with comorbidities. Alzheimers Dement 18 , 1128–1140.34569696
141. Depypere H , Vergallo A , Lemercier P , Lista S , Benedet A , Ashton N , Cavedo E , Zetterberg H , Blennow K , Vanmechelen E , and Hampel H ; Neurodegeneration Precision Medicine Initiative (NPMI) (2023). Menopause hormone therapy significantly alters pathophysiological biomarkers of Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement 19 , 1320–1330.36218064
142. Janelidze S , Barthélemy NR , He Y , Bateman RJ , and Hansson O (2023). Mitigating the Associations of Kidney Dysfunction With Blood Biomarkers of Alzheimer Disease by Using Phosphorylated Tau to Total Tau Ratios. JAMA Neurol 80 , 516–522. 10.1001/jamaneurol.2023.0199.36987840
143. Schindler SE , Karikari TK , Ashton NJ , Henson RL , Yarasheski KE , West T , Meyer MR , Kirmess KM , Li Y , Saef B , (2022). Effect of race on prediction of brain amyloidosis by plasma Abeta42/Abeta40, phosphorylated tau, and neurofilament light. Neurology 99 , e245–e257.35450967
144. Windon C , Iaccarino L , Mundada N , Allen I , Boxer AL , Byrd D , Rivera-Mindt M , and Rabinovici GD ; ADNI (2022). Comparison of plasma and CSF biomarkers across ethnoracial groups in the ADNI. Alzheimers Dement. (Amst.) 14 , e12315.35510092
145. Benkert P , Meier S , Schaedelin S , Manouchehrinia A , Yaldizli Ö , Maceski A , Oechtering J , Achtnichts L , Conen D , Derfuss T , (2022). Serum neurofilament light chain for individual prognostication of disease activity in people with multiple sclerosis: A retrospective modelling and validation study. Lancet Neurol 21 , 246–257. 10.1016/S1474-4422(22)00009-6.35182510
146. Hansson O , Edelmayer RM , Boxer AL , Carrillo MC , Mielke MM , Rabinovici GD , Salloway S , Sperling R , Zetterberg H , and Teunissen CE (2022). The Alzheimer’s Association appropriate use recommendations for blood biomarkers in Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement 18 , 2669–2686.35908251
147. Frisoni GB , Boccardi M , Barkhof F , Blennow K , Cappa S , Chiotis K , Démonet JF , Garibotto V , Giannakopoulos P , Gietl A , (2017). Strategic roadmap for an early diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease based on biomarkers. Lancet Neurol 16 , 661–676.28721928
148. Kirmess KM , Meyer MR , Holubasch MS , Knapik SS , Hu Y , Jackson EN , Harpstrite SE , Verghese PB , West T , Fogelman I , (2021). The PrecivityAD test: Accurate and reliable LC-MS/MS assays for quantifying plasma amyloid beta 40 and 42 and apolipoproteinE proteotype for the assessment of brain amyloidosis. Clin. Chim. Acta 519 , 267–275.34015303
149. Fogelman I , West T , Braunstein JB , Verghese PB , Kirmess KM , Meyer MR , Contois JH , Shobin E , Ferber KL , Gagnon J , (2023). Independent study demonstrates amyloid probability score accurately indicates amyloid pathology. Ann. Clin. Transl. Neurol 10 , 765–778. 10.1002/acn3.51763.36975407
150. C2N Diagnostics (2019). C₂N Diagnostics receives breakthrough device designation from U.S. FDA for blood test to screen for Alzheimer’s disease risk https://c2n.com/news-releases/2019/01/29/2019-1-24-c2n-diagnostics-receives-breakthrough-device-designation-from-us-fda-for-blood-test-to-screen-for-alzheimers-disease-risk.
151. Pérez-Grijalba V , Romero J , Pesini P , Sarasa L , Monleón I , San-José I , Arbizu J , Martínez-Lage P , Munuera J , Ruiz A , (2019). Plasma Abeta42/40 ratio detects early stages of Alzheimer’s disease and correlates with CSF and neuroimaging biomarkers in the AB255 study. J. Prev. Alzheimers Dis 6 , 34–41.30569084
152. Doecke JD , Pérez-Grijalba V , Fandos N , Fowler C , Villemagne VL , Masters CL , Pesini P , and Sarasa M ; AIBL Research Group (2020). Total Aβ(42)/Aβ(40) ratio in plasma predicts amyloid-PET status, independent of clinical AD diagnosis. Neurology 94 , e1580–e1591.32179698
153. Jang H , Kim JS , Lee HJ , Kim CH , Na DL , Kim HJ , Allué JA , Sarasa L , Castillo S , Pesini P , (2021). Performance of the plasma Abeta42/Abeta40 ratio, measured with a novel HPLC-MS/MS method, as a biomarker of amyloid PET status in a DPUK-KOREAN cohort. Alzheimer’s Res. Ther 13 , 179.34686209
154. Song L , Lachno DR , Hanlon D , Shepro A , Jeromin A , Gemani D , Talbot JA , Racke MM , Dage JL , and Dean RA (2016). A digital enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for ultrasensitive measurement of amyloid-β 1–42 peptide in human plasma with utility for studies of Alzheimer’s disease therapeutics. Alzheimer’s Res. Ther 8 , 58.27978855
155. Zicha S , Bateman RJ , Shaw LM , Zetterberg H , Bannon AW , Horton WA , Baratta M , Kolb HC , Dobler I , Mordashova Y , (2022). Comparative analytical performance of multiple plasma Abeta42 and Abeta40 assays and their ability to predict positron emission tomography amyloid positivity. Alzheimers Dement 19 , 956–966. 10.1002/alz.12697.
156. Yamashita K , Watanabe S , Ishiki K , Miura M , Irino Y , Kubo T , Matsui J , Hagino K , Iwanaga S , and Yoshida T (2021). Fully automated chemiluminescence enzyme immunoassaysshowing high correlation with immunoprecipitation mass spectrometry assays for beta-amyloid (1–40) and (1–42) in plasma samples. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun 576 , 22–26.34478915
157. Yamashita K , Miura M , Watanabe S , Ishiki K , Arimatsu Y , Kawahira J , Kubo T , Sasaki K , Arai T , Hagino K , (2022). Fully automated and highly specific plasma β-amyloid immunoassays predict β-amyloid status defined by amyloid positron emission tomography with high accuracy. Alzheimer’s Res. Ther 14 , 86.35739591
158. Roche Diagnostics (2022). Roche’s Elecsys Amyloid Plasma Panel granted FDA Breakthrough Device Designation to enable a timely diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease https://diagnostics.roche.com/us/en/news-listing/2022/elecsys-amyloid-plasma-panel-fda-breakthrough-device-designation-alzheimers.html.
159. Quanterix (2022). Quanterix launches first PTau-181 plasma laboratory developed test for clinical diagnostic and research applications in the U.S.. News release
160. Groot C , Cicognola C , Bali D , Triana-Baltzer G , Dage JL , Pontecorvo MJ , Kolb HC , Ossenkoppele R , Janelidze S , and Hansson O (2022). Diagnostic and prognostic performance to detect Alzheimer’s disease and clinical progression of a novel assay for plasma p-tau217. Alzheimer’s Res. Ther 14 , 67.35568889
161. Triana-Baltzer G , Moughadam S , Slemmon R , Van Kolen K , Theunis C , Mercken M , and Kolb HC (2021). Development and validation of a high-sensitivity assay for measuring p217+tau in plasma. Alzheimers Dement. (Amst.) 13 , e12204.34095436
162. Dore V , Doecke JD , Saad ZS , Triana-Baltzer G , Slemmon R , Krishnadas N , Bourgeat P , Huang K , Burnham S , Fowler C , (2022). Plasma p217+tau versus NAV4694 amyloid and MK6240 tau PET across the Alzheimer’s continuum. Alzheimers Dement. (Amst.) 14 , e12307.35415202
163. Kuhlmann J , Andreasson U , Pannee J , Bjerke M , Portelius E , Leinenbach A , Bittner T , Korecka M , Jenkins RG , Vanderstichele H , (2017). CSF Aβ(1–42) - an excellent but complicated Alzheimer’s biomarker - a route to standardisation. Clin. Chim. Acta 467 , 27–33.27216941
164. Boulo S , Kuhlmann J , Andreasson U , Brix B , Venkataraman I , Herbst V , Rutz S , Manuilova E , Vandijck M , Dekeyser F , (2020). First amyloid b1–42 certified reference material for re-calibrating commercial immunoassays. Alzheimers Dement 16 , 1493–1503.32755010
