LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9416830
21050
Gait Posture
Gait Posture
Gait &amp; posture
0966-6362
1879-2219

37487365
10720398
10.1016/j.gaitpost.2023.07.277
NIHMS1941721
Article
Cognitive-motor dual-task interference in Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, and prodromal neurodegeneration: A scoping review
Longhurst Jason K. a*
Rider John V. bc
Cummings Jeffrey L. d
John Samantha E. d
Poston Brach e
Landers Merrill R. f
a Department of Physical Therapy and Athletic Training, Saint Louis University, 3437 Caroline St. Suite, 1011 St. Louis, MO, USA
b School of Occupational Therapy, Touro University Nevada, Henderson, NV, USA
c Department of Physical Therapy, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, NV, USA
d Department of Brain Health, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, NV, USA
e Department of Kinesiology and Nutrition, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, NV, USA
f Department of Physical Therapy, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, NV, USA
* Corresponding author. jason.longhurst@health.slu.edu (J.K. Longhurst), jrider@touro.edu (J.V. Rider), jcummings@cnsinnovations.com (J.L. Cummings), samantha.john@unlv.edu (S.E. John), brach.poston@unlv.edu (B. Poston), merrill.landers@unlv.edu (M.R. Landers).
29 11 2023
9 2023
17 7 2023
01 9 2024
105 5874
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Background:

Cognitive-motor interference (CMI) is a common deficit in Alzheimer’s (AD) disease and Parkinson’s disease (PD) and may have utility in identification of prodromal neurodegeneration. There is lack of consensus regarding measurement of CMI resulting from dual task paradigms.

Research question:

How are individuals with AD, PD, and prodromal neurodegeneration impacted by CMI as measured by dual-task (DT) performance?

Methods:

A systematic literature search was performed in six datasets using the PRISMA guidelines. Studies were included if they had samples of participants with AD, PD, or prodromal neurodegeneration and reported at least one measure of cognitive-motor DT performance.

Results:

4741 articles were screened and 95 included as part of this scoping review. Articles were divided into three non-mutually exclusive groups based on diagnoses, with 26 articles in AD, 56 articles in PD, and 29 articles in prodromal neurodegeneration, and results presented accordingly.

Significance:

Individuals with AD and PD are both impacted by CMI, though the impact is likely different for each disease. We found a robust body of evidence regarding the utility of measures of DT performance in the detection of subtle deficits in prodromal AD and some signals of utility in prodromal PD. There are several key methodological challenges related to DT paradigms for the measurement of CMI in neurodegeneration. Overall, DT paradigms show good potential as a clinical method to probe specific brain regions, networks, and function; however, task selection and effect measurement should be carefully considered.

Dual task
Multi-tasking behavior
Automaticity
Preclinical disease
Alzheimer disease
Parkinson disease

pmc1. Introduction

Cognitive-motor interference (CMI) is a phenomenon by which simultaneous completion of cognitive task and motor task results in a decrement in performance of one or both tasks [1–3]. Several models have been proposed to explain the mechanisms of CMI, most prominent are the central capacity sharing and the central bottle neck models. The central bottle neck model proposes that central processing acts on only one task at a time; this results in a bottleneck where tasks are processed serially rather than parallel [4–6]. The central capacity sharing model postulates that processing occurs in parallel, but it is limited in capacity, resulting in a division of resources among the tasks [7–10]. In considering these theories, it is important that both tasks (cognitive and motor) which combine to result in CMI possess a degree of complexity, and that each require varied central nervous system (CNS) processes, functions, and resources [2,3]. They are both reliant on structures throughout the CNS, including cortical and subcortical structures, for their performance [3]. A deficit in any one of the involved structures can result in changes to cognitive and motor performance, which manifests as a reduction in automaticity [11].

Reduced automaticity is common among individuals with neurodegenerative disease [11–13]. Declines in automaticity often impact daily life and are associated with decreased gait velocity, cognition, and falls [14,15]. It is a principal deficit in Parkinson’s disease (PD) and a crucial target of rehabilitation and motor retraining for individuals with PD [16–18]. Automaticity has been shown to worsen with Alzheimer’s disease (AD) progression [13,19]. Individuals with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) also have poorer automaticity relative to healthy individuals [13]. Additionally, there is evidence that individuals with MCI who demonstrate poorer automaticity progress to dementia more rapidly than those with relatively intact automaticity, underscoring the importance of identifying automaticity deficits early [12,19].

Dual-task (DT) paradigms often assess automaticity and CMI wherein a motor task and a cognitive task are performed concurrently [11,20, 21]. However, there is no consensus on the best methods or measures for assessing DT ability [22–24]. Currently, one of the most accepted measures for assessing DT interference is calculating the motor or cognitive dual-task effect (DTE), which relates DT performance to single-task (ST) performance [22,23]. Increasingly, efforts have been made to categorize attentional prioritization (the task to which individuals place more attention on during completion of the DT) and quantify the degree of prioritization using measures such as the attention allocation index (AAI) [25–28]. Despite the utility of these measures, few studies have reported results using these metrics, and even fewer have harnessed all these metrics to provide a more complete understanding of the processes that contributes to CMI.

There is a need to better understand what occurs when individuals with AD and PD perform cognitive-motor DTs. Different disease processes that involve distinct CNS regions and networks are likely to exhibit different CMI profiles. CMI also has the potential to identify early disease states by drawing out subtle deficits. Therefore, the objective of this review was to gain insights into how individuals with AD and PD are impacted by CMI. Additionally, we aimed to gain a better understanding of the role of CMI and automaticity deficits in early and prodromal disease states. Lastly, we investigated how CMI has been measured in individuals with AD, PD, prodromal neurodegeneration.

2. Methods

This review was guided using the Joanna Briggs Institute (JBI) framework and followed the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta- Analyses extension for Scoping Reviews (PRISMA-ScR) [29]. A scoping review was selected, given the intention to address a broad topic and map it nature of the research questions in this review and the intention of the authors to map the relevant literature in the field (inclusive of many study designs) [30,31]. Quality appraisal of studies was not conducted as this review aimed to explore the general scope of research conducted in this field. An a priori protocol was designed in consultation with a research librarian.

2.1. Search strategy

The search strategy aimed to find published literature and unpublished studies. A three-step search was utilized. An initial limited search of Medline (PubMed) and CINAHL (EBSCO) was undertaken to identify relevant articles. This was followed by an analysis of the title and abstract, and of the index terms used to describe relevant articles. A second search using the identified keywords and index terms was then undertaken across all included databases (see Supplementary Material 1). Third, the reference list of all included studies was searched for additional studies. Only studies published in English were considered for inclusion with no limit on publication date. The databases searched included MEDLINE (PubMed), Scopus (Elsevier), APA Psychinfo (EBSCO), and CINAHL (EBSCO). Gray literature was searched through Papers First (OCLC) and ProQuest Dissertations and Theses (ProQuest). All databases were searched on October 29, 2020.

2.2. Study selection

The results were reviewed by the authors to ensure validity of the search strategy. Results from each database search were then imported to a single library in the Mendeley 1.19.4 software. Duplicate studies were identified and removed. Title and abstract screening were guided by the PRISMA framework [32]. Application of further eligibility criteria ensured that the content of the included studies was relevant to the aims. This review considered studies that include a measure of CMI during gait or gait-related tasks among adults 18 years of age and older with evidence of AD, PD, or prodromal neurodegeneration. For this review, we considered studies to be inclusive of prodromal neurodegeneration if they included at least one group meeting the following characteristics: MCI, subjective cognitive impairment (SCI), cognitively healthy with biomarkers or genetic risk for AD, or idiopathic rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder (iRBD). Additionally, studies including an early PD group were also included in prodromal neurodegeneration after initial screening. Studies were excluded if: (1) they focused only on case reporting, (2) full-text could not be obtained, (3) they were investigating the effect of a treatment, (4) they did not utilize a gait or gait-related motor task as part of the DT, and (5) the group of interest was of participants with dementia of any other cause than AD or PD. We did not consider setting of the study or participants (community dwelling, aged care, etc.) in the selection of the studies. Additionally, this review considered experimental, quasi-experimental, observational, and qualitative study designs.

The two reviewers (first and second authors) used the inclusion criteria to determine the eligibility of the identified studies and subsequently conducted full-text screening of all eligible articles. Article selection and exclusion required agreement between the two reviewers. Disagreements in study selection (n = 2) were managed through discussion until a consensus was reached.

2.3. Data extraction

Data were extracted from selected studies by two independent reviewers using a data extraction tool developed by the authors based on the JBI System for the Unified Management, Assessment and Review of Information [33]. Bibliographic details, sample, motor tasks, cognitive tasks, DT outcomes, and key findings relevant to the review objectives were extracted. A narrative report and tabular format were produced to summarize the extracted data around the following: the impact of CMI (i.e. how DT paradigms influence motor/cognitive performance, etc.), the methods of CMI assessments, and the utility of CMI measurement (i.e. how CMI is related to behaviors, health outcomes, neuroimaging and biomarkers of neurodegenerative disease) in individuals with AD, PD, and prodromal neurodegeneration.

3. Results

A total of 5534 citations were retrieved, of which 95 articles were considered relevant and included in the evaluation and synthesis (Fig. 1). The articles were grouped into three non-mutually exclusive categories: AD (26 articles), PD (56 articles), and prodromal neurodegeneration (29 articles).

3.1. Alzheimer’s disease

A total of 26 articles included a sample of participants with AD and combined had a total of 878 participants with AD (see Table 1). Of those articles, 17 included a healthy comparison group, 12 had a MCI comparison group, two had other comparison groups (PD [40], frontotemporal dementia [50]), and eight did not include a comparison group.

3.1.1. DT paradigms in AD

Analysis of the motor tasks utilized in the DT revealed that 20 studies utilized a gait task (ranging from self-selected gait to complex gait with turning, obstacles, or adaptation) as the motor task. Six studies utilized the Timed Up and Go (TUG), a measure of functional mobility which incorporates rising from a chair, gait initiation, gait acceleration, gait deceleration, and turning [58]. The cognitive components of the DTs were more varied and many studies incorporated multiple cognitive tasks. There were 16 studies that utilized arithmetic tasks, eight utilized controlled oral word association tasks, and seven utilized other cognitive tasks (phone dialing task [34,35,42], forward digit span [14,51], n-back tasks [56], and reciting months in reverse order [53]). Multiple types of measures of DT performance were often utilized; however, the most utilized metrics (25 articles) were measures that included only performance during the dual task and did not capture change in performance from ST to DT. We termed these types of measurements as “absolute measures of performance”. Among the 25 articles that included absolute measures of performance, 16 articles reported only absolute measures of performance. The remaining ten articles utilized measures of DTE [27]. The standard equation is found below: DTE%=DT-STST×100%

All ten studies included motor DTE (mDTE), five including cognitive DTE (cogDTE), and two included an average of mDTE and cogDTE [14, 56]. Hunter et al. also included performance-operating characteristic plots to assess for attentional prioritization strategies during DT with resultant task trade-offs [43].

3.1.2. CMI profile of AD

Overall, the findings of these studies indicated that DT results in CMI which impacts individuals with AD; however, that impact varied among studies. The following themes were found among the included studies. First, performance of a DT negatively impacted gait. Specifically, individuals with AD exhibited decreased cadence [39,44,47], velocity [13, 37,41,44–49,51], and stride length [39,41,47], while also exhibiting increased stride time [13,39,47,48], swing time [39,47], and gait variability [13,36,39,41,44,47,51,55] during DT compared to ST gait. Next, DT gait was also found to interfere with cognitive performance during DT, resulting in poorer cognitive performance during DT [43,47,52]. Additionally, poorer DT performance was related to lower cognition [53,57] and more impaired visuospatial, executive function, and fluency abilities [34,51]. Cognitive-motor DTs also resulted in more interference than did motor-motor DTs in individuals with AD [13,14,40,46,50]. Another theme was that more complex motor tasks resulted in motor (gait) prioritization [43,52], a strategy in which more attention is allocated to the motor task than to the cognitive task. This results in a greater decline in DT cognitive performance than DT motor performance when compared respectively to ST performance. One of the most consistent and important findings was that DT performance discriminated between participants with AD and healthy older adults [13,35,37,40,41,44–46,49,50,56,57], as well as those with AD and those with MCI [13,35,44–46,57]. However, two studies had contradictory results, reporting no difference on DT performance between participants with AD and those with MCI [41,49]. Interestingly, both of these studies utilized absolute measures of performance and not measures of DTE to quantify DT performance.

3.1.3. DT and neuroimaging or biomarkers in AD

Among the 26 articles that included participants with AD, there were three which investigated the relationships between DT performance and neuroimaging or AD biomarkers. These studies included a total of 76 individuals with AD, and all included healthy comparison groups, with two articles including MCI comparison groups. Most notable of the findings was that two studies found moderate relationships between DT performance and cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) tau level, such that a poorer DT performance was associated with increased levels of tau [55,57]. In contrast, there were conflicting results regarding the relationship between Amyloid β (Aβ). While Nielsen et al. showed that poorer DT performance was associated with lower levels of Aβ in the CSF [57], Muurling et al. did not find any relationship between them [55]. This discrepancy may be explained by the different DT measures utilized. Nielsen et al. utilized mDTE, while Muurling et al. utilized only absolute measures of performance during DT, which Nielsen et al. also found to not be related to CSF Aβ levels [55,57]. Nadkarni et al. investigated the relationship between subcortical hyperintensities on MRI and DT performance and found that the presence of hyperintensities was associated with poorer DT performance [56].

3.2. Parkinson’s disease

56 articles that included a total of 2235 participants with PD were included (see Table 2). Of these, 38 utilized a comparison group, with the majority comparing to healthy older adults. Additional comparison groups included PD-MCI [59], healthy fallers [113], and PD with freezing of gait (PD-FOG) [101–109]. Additionally, four articles investigated the relationship of DT performance to neuroimaging findings in PD [110–113], while an additional two articles investigate the same relationship in individuals with PD-FOG [106,109]. One study utilized a qualitative methodology and did not report on collected DT outcomes, but on perceptions of DT performance [76].

3.2.1. DT paradigms in PD

Gait was the most frequently used motor task (45 articles). Apart from basic gait, several articles investigated specific aspects of gait; three investigated gait initiation [66,67,78], two investigated arm swing during gait [61,89], and four utilized complex gait tasks [75,77,83,107]. Other motor tasks utilized in PD included the TUG [40,64,70,95,100], protective stepping reactions [82,103], cycling [73], turning in place [102,109], and auditory cued ankle movements [112]. In PD, similar to AD, we found that there was more variety in the cognitive components of the DT compared to the motor tasks. Arithmetic tasks were the most prevalent, utilized in 26 articles. The next most common were inhibition tasks, with 18 articles utilizing tasks such as the Stroop test [61,62,66, 67,73–75,80–82,87,90,93,94,104,106,108,109,112]. Other commonly used tasks were controlled oral word association tasks [61,69,70,80,81, 99,103,105,113] and digit span [61,80,81,85,93,94,100]. Additionally, n-back tasks, in which participants were asked to respond when presented with a stimulus that matched one presented n stimuli prior, were utilized in four articles [61,78,80,81]. Other cognitive tasks included a digit monitoring task [65,83,101,107], reciting every other letter of the alphabet [68], memory tasks [80,81,86,100], comprehension tasks [96, 98], other counting tasks [88,96,98], a word searching task [89], and a phone dialing task [93,94]. When considering DT measurement tools, the most utilized in PD were absolute measures of performance (43 articles), of which 34 utilized only these measures of DT performance. Of the 22 articles which utilized a measure of DTE, the majority used mDTE [62,63,68,71–75,77,82,85,90,92–94,100,104,110], and many also used cogDTE [61,72–75,77,82,85,90,93,94,96]. Similar to AD, two articles reported utilizing a composite DTE that considers more aspects of CMI, in these instances summing mDTE to cogDTE [72,77]. A few studies also included the AAI [99] or the modified AAI (mAAI) [74,75,82], which quantifies the degree to which individuals place their attention on a specific task during competing attentional demands.

3.2.2. CMI profile of PD

One of the most prominent themes of this review was that DT tends to negatively impact gait performance in PD [64,73,79–81,87,89–92,97, 98,100,105]. Specifically, DT was found to disrupt normal arm swing kinematics [61] and was associated with reduced gait velocity [40,65, 79,80,90,97–99], local dynamic stability at heel strike [68,89,97], weight transfer during gait [68], step time [89], and stride length [90]. It was also associated with increased step width [89] and gait variability [84,98,99]. Some of these DT-related gait changes were found to be associated with cognitive impairment, particularly reductions in step length and increased gait variability [59,60,95]. Additionally, these same metrics were found to be predictive of future executive function and attention deficits [59,60,95]. When investigating predictors of cognitive abilities, DT performance (mDTE) explained 8% of the variance in cognition [71,92]. Another consistent finding was that DT performance was different between those with PD and healthy older adults [77,85,87,88,110]. Specifically, people with PD exhibited reduced step width [85], gait velocity [87], and stride frequency [87]; with increased gait variability [85,88] during DT compared to healthy older adults. Additionally, PD participants had poorer DT performance as measured by DTEs when compared to healthy older adults [110,111]. Of note, both mDTE and cogDTE demonstrate excellent reliability in participants with PD, and were more reliable than absolute measures of performance during DT [93]. While there were not functional performance changes observed during gait initiation with the addition of a concurrent cognitive task [66,78], EMG analyses revealed slower activation time and lower activation values of the tibialis anterior than healthy older adults [67]. One article investigated the impact of DT during protective stepping and found that DT was associated with increased reaction time; however, step response remained similar to ST performance [82]. In addition to gait decrements, DT was also associated with poorer concurrent task performance [69,88]. The cognitive decrements during DT were found to be associated with greater levels of disability [69] and more akinesia [73].

When we consider the makeup of the DT paradigms utilized, several studies reported that gait was more impacted by a concurrent cognitive task than a concurrent motor task [63,70,80,81]. However, Christofoletti et al. found the opposite [40], and O’Shea et al. found no difference between the impact of cognitive and motor current tasks during gait [79]. The impact of attentional prioritization may explain the conflicting results of these studies. Kelly et al. found that people with PD can modify their attention prioritization during DT with a trade-off in performance between the tasks [74]. Several studies provide evidence in support of this notion showing specific attentional resource management in individuals with PD that may be dependent on individual and task factors [68,69,75,82,96,99]. Finally, DT performance was related to falls [72,84,90,113], with the sum of mDTE and cogDTE showing the greatest sensitivity as a predictor of falls [72].

3.2.3. CMI findings specific to PD-FOG

There were nine articles included in this section that investigated CMI on a total of 154 participants. The most notable finding was that DT performance increases FOG frequency and severity [101,104,106,108, 109]. Most notably, this occurs during 360 degree turns while performing a concurrent cognitive task [108]. However, Bertoli et al. found contradictory results, noting that turning worsened similarly between individuals regardless of FOG [102]. Interestingly, Beck et al. found that DT-related gait changes in individuals with FOG can be mitigated by the use of visual cues [101]. When confronted with a DT, participants with FOG were more likely to use a maladaptive cognitive prioritization during turning compared to others with PD [108]. Unlike the findings of Peterson et al. in individuals with PD without FOG, individuals with FOG were more likely to fall during protective stepping when concurrently completing a cognitive task [103]. DT performance in participants with PD-FOG was also found to be correlated with executive function [107], spatial planning [107], inhibition [106], and reaction time [106]. Finally, two studies utilized neuroimaging techniques to investigate brain activity in individuals with FOG related to DT performance. In combination, these articles revealed hypoconnectivity between caudate and superior temporal lobe [109], hyperconnectivity between dorsal putamen and precuneus [109], and asymmetric structural connectivity in the pedunculopontine nucleus [106] associated with DT performance.

3.2.4. DT and neuroimaging in PD

There were four articles that used a sample of individuals with PD without FOG that investigated how DT performance related to data obtained through neuroimaging modalities. These studies included 141 participants with PD. Hirata et al. found no relationship between DT performance and DaT scan [110]. Frontal activation was constant between ST and DT in participants with PD, whereas healthy participants had increased frontal activation during DT [111]. In contrast, during DT activities, individuals with PD activated a region of ventrolateral putamen, which in healthy participants was associated with poorer DT performance [112]. Lastly, Pelosin et al. found that poorer DT performance was associated with increased levels of cholinergic inhibitory activity in the sensory motor cortex [113].

3.3. Prodromal neurodegeneration

29 articles investigated CMI in prodromal neurodegeneration (26 prodromal AD). With one exception [116], all studies utilized comparison groups. Regarding prodromal population of interest, 15 articles included participants with MCI, eight articles included participants with SCI, three articles included cognitively healthy older adults with AD biomarkers or genetic risk of AD, and three articles included participants with early PD or iRBD (See Table 3).

3.3.1. DT paradigms in prodromal neurodegeneration

Gait was the most common motor task, utilized in 20 of the articles. The remaining eight articles utilized the TUG [34,35,42,46,57,115,117, 118]. The cognitive tasks used varied greatly. Arithmetic tasks were the most used, being utilized in 18 articles, with controlled oral word association tasks next most frequent (ten articles). Other cognitive tasks utilized in the DT paradigms included a phone dialing task [34,35,42, 126], spelling backwards task [123,125], inhibition tasks [126,127], digit span [85], recall tasks [127], and n-back tasks [126]. Measurement of DT performance was most often done using absolute measures of performance, although 16 of the studies utilized one or more measures of DTE. Among the 16 articles that utilized DTE measures, all 16 utilized mDTE [13,34,35,42,57,77,85,115–118,120–122,126,127], six utilized cogDTE [34,35,77,85,126,127], one utilized a composite DTE, adding mDTE to cogDTE [77], and one utilized performance-operating characteristics plots for assessing task trade-off [127].

3.3.2. CMI findings in MCI

There were 15 articles included that included a sample of individuals with MCI, including a total of 566 participants. Participants with MCI exhibited differences in DT performance compared to participants with AD [13,35,41,44,45,54]. Specifically, gait variability was greater [13, 41,44,57], while stride length [41], gait velocity [13,44,45], and cadence [44] were reduced in AD participants. Additionally, time to complete TUG was greater in those with AD [46]. In contrast, one study showed no differences between those with MCI and those with AD, though this study was limited by a small sample size and may have been underpowered [49]. There was not a consensus regarding DT differences between those with MCI and healthy older adults. While six studies found DT differences exist between MCI and healthy older adults [13,41, 45,46,54,57], two studies found no differences between these groups [35,44]. Among the studies that did find DT related differences between MCI and healthy older adults, they specifically noted that MCI participants had reduced gait velocity [41,45], stride frequency [41], and increased time to complete functional mobility [46]. Three articles investigated the utility of DT measures to distinguish between different healthy older adults, those with MCI, and those with AD. De Melo Borges et al. found that cognitive-motor DT performance had higher area under the curve than either ST performance, or motor-motor DT performance during analysis of receiver-operating characteristic curves [46]. Tarnanas et al. found that motor performance during DT were more reliable marker for early diagnosis of MCI [54], when compared to ST; Nielsen et al. found similar results with mDTE [57]. Additionally, DT performance was also shown to be different in those with MCI who later developed AD [114].

Overall, DTs worsen performance on both cognitive and motor tasks [46] with more complex cognitive tasks resulting in greater impact on gait for individuals with MCI [13]. DT performance was associated with falls and visuospatial skill in those with MCI [34,42]. Additionally, mDTE was related to entorhinal cortex volumes in participants with MCI, such that poorer DT performance was related to smaller volumes [116].

Three articles reported on the relationship between DT performance and AD biomarkers. Conflicting results were found with CSF Aβ42 with one study noting no relationship with DT performance [55], while another study found that participants with greater decline in mDTE had lower levels of Aβ42 [57]. The relationship between DT performance and tau was more consistent, with three studies identifying moderately strong associations between them, such that decrements in DT performance were associated with greater levels of CSF total tau (T-tau) and phosphorylated tau (P-tau) [55,57,115].

3.3.3. CMI findings in SCI

Eight articles were included with a total of 508 participants with SCI. Four articles reported DT performance differences between cognitively healthy participants and those with SCI, with those with SCI having poorer performance during DT [117,119,121,122]. Furthermore, two studies found that participants with SCI and those with MCI had comparable DT performance [120,123]. Additionally, poorer DT performance among individuals with clinical dementia rating (CDR) of 0 or 0.5 was found to precede a diagnosis of dementia by more than 36 months [121]. Discrimination between individuals that are cognitively healthy, those with SCI, and those with MCI improved when DT performance decrements were added to the AD Assessment Scale – Cognitive Subscale (ADAS-cog) [122]. Åhman et al. found that cognitive performance during DT was more responsive to group difference, reporting a standardized odds ratio between cognitively healthy participants and those with SCI of 2.98 [117]. They also found that cognitive performance during DT was associated with CSF T-tau and P-tau levels; however, they found no relationship with Aβ42 [118]. Two articles reported difference between participants with SCI and those with MCI on DT performance [123,124]. Similar to the results of Åhman et al., Lowe et al. found that measures of cognitive performance during DT were more effective at discriminating between SCI and MCI [123]. Lastly, Rantalainen et al. found that gait variability during DT was lower in those with SCI than those with mild dementia [124].

3.3.4. Cognitively healthy with AD biomarkers or genetic risk of AD

Three articles included investigated CMI in cognitively healthy individuals that demonstrated increased risk for AD development. Combined between these studies there were 89 participants that were apolipoprotein E (APOE) ε4 allele carries, and 16 participants with amyloid positive positron emission tomography (PET) scan. Two articles reported the impact of DTs in participants that carried at least one APOE ε4 allele. They both found that DT performance was different between participants that did and those that did not carry an ε4 allele [125,127]. Specifically, MacAulay et al. found that ε4 carriers had decreased stride length, and increase stride length variability, compared to those who did not carry an ε4 allele [125]. MacAulay et al. also found that cognitive performance decreased during DT [125], while Whitson et al. found that more challenging cognitive tasks impacted gait more than cognition [127]. Nadkarni et al. compared DT performance of cognitively healthy older adults with positive amyloid PET scans to healthy older adults with negative amyloid PET scans. They found that those that were amyloid positive had higher mDTEs but not cogDTEs. Additionally, DT performance was moderately and inversely associated with standardized uptake value ratio (SUVR), such that worse DT performance was correlated with elevated SUVR [126].

3.3.5. CMI in iRBD and early PD

Three articles were included with a total of 143 participants with early PD and 24 with iRBD. Two found mDTE was different between those with early PD and healthy older adults, but found no difference on cogDTE [77,85]. Additionally, Rochester et al. found that DT was associated with reduced step width and increased gait variability in individuals with early PD and not healthy older adults [85]. Ehgoetz Martens et al. made similar comparisons between participants with iRBD and healthy adults. Participants with iRBD exhibited increased step width variability in response to DT, but no change in step width. Whereas healthy adults increased step width in response to DT, without increasing step width variability [128].

4. Discussion

The primary aim of this scoping review was to gain insights into how individuals with AD, PD, and prodromal neurodegeneration are impacted by CMI. The findings of this review can be used to better characterize the impact of CMI in AD and PD. These findings confirm that individuals with AD and PD are impacted by CMI more than their healthy counterparts and that individuals with AD respond differently to CMI than do those with PD (Fig. 2). AD was impacted most consistently in gait variability and gait velocity, though measures of DTE appear to be more robust and sensitive than are absolute measures of performance. This may be because absolute measures of performance are inherently biased by the lack of control for ST performance. Individuals with AD also appear to be more impacted by cognitive-motor DTs than motor-motor DTs. Conversely, mediolateral stability and gait velocity appear to be most impacted during DT in PD, though this profile was shown to be prone to change based on allocation of attention during DT [74]. However, it is important to note that, though AD and PD were consistently found to have different responses to CMI, no specific CMI profile was clearly demonstrated for either AD or PD. This is likely due to the diverse combination of motor and cognitive tasks utilized in the DT paradigms, and their varying degrees of novelty and complexity. Research has shown that there is an optimal combination of novelty and complexity required to maximize CMI effects [23]. While this combination is likely related to individual factors, it is also impacted by disease status and severity. The development of distinct and well characterized CMI profiles for specific neurodegenerative disease states and severities would allow for better comparison across diseases and among differing stages of degenerative disease and would lend itself to creation of applications or “calculators” to increase ease of use by clinicians and facilitate widespread implementation.

DT performance had consistent weak to moderate correlations with motor abilities (gait, mobility functions, etc.) as well as cognitive abilities (executive function, attention, etc.), regardless of population. One possible explanation for these associations is that DT performance is simply an expression of similar deficits in one of the domains being probed with DT paradigm. If this were the case, DT paradigms would offer little benefit over simply observing the outcome of interest in ST conditions. However, an alternative explanation is that only a portion of DT performance is obtained through contributions from the underlying ST domains. This notion is supported by the lack of strong correlations observed and is in line with the previously discussed capacity sharing and central bottleneck theories [4–10]. This explanation gains evidence from neuroimaging studies that identify additional brain regions active during DT, that are not activated during either of the component tasks when performed individually [112], as well as studies showing that ST performance explains only a small portion of the variance in DT performance [94].

There was much more evidence for the impact of CMI in prodromal AD than prodromal or early PD. CMI was found to exert a greater impact as the disease states become more severe. It was consistently found to elicit subtle deficits in individuals that would later develop AD and those that were at elevated risk for AD development. This ability to compare generally across the severity of AD is facilitated by the multistate model that describe the development and progression of AD in distinct stages, which includes as many as six prodromal stages and has been implemented extensively in the literature [129]. Beyond AD, DT paradigms have been implicated as a useful marker for the detection of cognitive impairment and dementia. While this review was limited in primary cognitive disorders to AD and prodromal neurodegeneration, our findings are in line with the literature regarding cognitive impairment and dementia generally [122,130]. Conversely, in PD the CMI pattern across disease severity is more difficult to observe as the prodromal states of PD are less investigated, and the distinction between early/mild disease, moderate disease, and severe disease states are not well reported in the literature. Despite this, it is important to note that subtle deficits were elicited by CMI even in the earliest prodromal state [128]. These subtle changes in the prodromal state were different and more pronounced in the clinically defined disease state. Overall, two gaps in the existing literature would be the most impactful in better understanding the influence of the CMI in prodromal neurodegeneration. These are the lack of clearly defined prodromal and early disease states in PD and consistency of DT paradigms and DT measures utilized.

Recently, attempts have been made to better characterize CMI through the use of more robust measures across multiple task domains [22,25,131]. Particularly key in the understanding of CMI is insight into the attentional strategies utilized during DT paradigms [74,75]. The utilization of attentional strategies can be categorized into four primary strategies as described by Plummer et al. [25,26]: 1) Mutual facilitation in which the performance of DT results in improved performance of both the motor and cognitive tasks; 2) Motor-priority trade-off where attention is more allocated to the motor task resulting minimal to no decline in motor performance, but at the cost of cognitive performance; 3) Cognitive-priority trade-off in which cognitive performance is prioritized and has minimal decrements but motor performance worsens; and, 4) Mutual facilitation wherein both cognitive and motor task performance deteriorate during DT. Beyond these classifications, the degree of attention allocation can be quantified using the AAI [27,28]. Reporting of dominant attentional strategies and the degree to which tasks are prioritized can greatly influence how DT paradigms are interpreted. For example, if mDTE is the only measure obtained and no differences are observed, the conclusion is often that there was no or sufficiently minimal impact from CMI; however, this same finding could result from allocating attentional resources to the motor task and attending minimally to the cognitive task. Comparison of the interference observed in both the cognitive and motor tasks then provides more insight into DT performance as well as attentional strategy selection.

Several themes emerged when investigating DT outcome measures utilized across the groups. There were a wide variety of component tasks utilized across all three groups, indicating the lack of standardization within the field. However, standardization may have limited benefit as the impact of DTs is reliant on several factors many of which may be influenced by individual characteristics. For example, while calculation tasks were clearly the most common cognitive task utilized among all three groups, an individual may respond differently to this task given their educational history, presence of math anxiety, and premorbid math skills [100]. This could result in interindividual variability among individuals with the same pathology and similar disease severity. While there is potential for specific cognitive tasks to be better suited to individuals with a given pathology or severity of disease, this review did not find sufficient evidence to recommend a specific set of cognitive tasks based on diagnosis. Considerations regarding the selection of component tasks for DT paradigms can be found in Table 4. Another theme was that the most frequently utilized outcomes were absolute measures of performance, which, have many inherent drawbacks. Among DTEs, the most frequently utilized was mDTE; however, nearly 60% of articles used it without capturing other DTE outcomes. As noted above, this creates a gap, and potential bias in the interpretation of the results. Next most frequently employed was cogDTE, followed by measures of attention allocation, which were utilized sparingly. Few studies utilized measures of composite interference which appear to be the more sensitive and robust than either mDTE or cogDTE in isolation [14,56,72, 77,85]. In the populations of relevance to this review, the two methods utilized for creating a composite interference value were averaging or summing mDTE and cogDTE. Two additional methods for creating a composite value have been proposed. Both are shown graphically in Fig. 3. One method utilizes an approach that quantifies the change in “area under the curve” between ST and DT performance taking into account two task domains [15,132,133]. The other method proposes utilizing the Euclidean distance. Both methods are attempts to quantify the “total” interference [134]. The benefit to these approaches, as well as the summing approach, is that regardless of attention allocation, theoretically, the overall magnitude of interference would remain constant.

The primary limitation of this review is that only articles that utilized gait-related motor tasks were considered, omitting studies that utilized postural stability motor tasks. This review was primarily interested in tasks that involved complex processes that have good evidence of overlap with disease processes of both AD and PD. While PD impacts postural stability and gait, the literature identifies the primary motor changes associated with AD being gait-related changes. Additionally, in summarizing and reporting the results of the included studies, statistically significant findings were more emphasized than non-significant findings. An additional limitation among the neuroimaging studies was that only one of the studies utilized imaging concurrently with the DT paradigm, using a mobile brain imaging technique [111]. The neuroimaging results should be interpreted cautiously and in this context. Future studies should utilize mobile brain imaging approaches assessing brain function during DT performance. Also, this review did not include studies of individuals with dementia of sources other than AD. Future reviews should consider the difference in CMI related to motor task selection for inclusion in the DT paradigms. Additionally, as this review was primarily interested in the impact of CMI, it did not include studies that included interventions that could potentially mitigate the effects of CMI, by either improving automaticity or modifying of attentional strategies.

5. Conclusion

This review investigated the current state of the literature to provide better insights into the impact of CMI on individuals with AD and PD. The findings demonstrate that AD and PD are both impacted by CMI, though the impact is likely different for each disease. Additionally, we found a robust body of evidence regarding the utility of CMI in the detection of subtle deficits in prodromal AD, and some evidence of utility in prodromal PD. Several key methodological challenges related to the use of DT paradigms for measurement of CMI in neurodegeneration were identified and discussed. Overall, DT paradigms show good potential as a clinical method to probe specific brain regions and networks; however, task selection and effect measurement must be carefully considered.

Supplementary Material

Supplementary Materials 1

Funding

This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.

Fig. 1. PRISMA flow diagram showing results of search and process of study selection.

Fig. 2. Visualization of A) themes found within and between Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, and prodromal neurodegeneration and B) specific DT related findings in motor, cognitive, and neuroimaging or biomarker domains within and between Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, and prodromal neurodegeneration.

Fig. 3. Example of compound interference measures. Red lines represent single task performance, while black lines indicate dual task performance. The compound measure proposed by Longhurst et al. is represent with the area in grey, while the Euclidean distance method proposed by Wahn &amp; Sinnett is represented by the dashed blue line. Both methods represent the difference between single and dual task performance.

Table 1 Articles included in this review with a sample of Alzheimer’s disease. Table organized by primary population / findings of interest into 2 sections: A) Alzheimer’s disease and B) Neuroimaging and Alzheimer’s disease biomarker findings related CMI.

Article	Sample	Motor task	Cognitive task	DT measurement tools	Key findings related to CMI	
	
A. Alzheimer’s disease					
Ansai et al. (2018) [34]	38 AD
40 MCI
40 Healthy	TUG	Phone dialing task	(1)mDTE
(2)cogDTE
(3)Absolute measures of performance	DT performance was associated with visuospatial skills in all groups. Executive function and fluency were the strongest predictors of DT performance in AD.	
Ansai et al. (2017) [35]	38 AD
40 MCI
40 Healthy	TUG	Phone dialing task	(1)mDTE
(2)cogDTE
(3)Absolute measures of performance	DT performance worse for AD than MCI or healthy. No items distinguished MCI from the healthy group.	
Beauchet et al. (2014)[36]	86 AD	Gait	Serial subtraction by 1	Absolute measures of performance	DT worsens gait variability more in those with AD who don’t use Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors.	
Camicioli et al. (1997)[37]	15 AD
20 Healthy	Gait	Controlled oral word association task	Absolute measures of performance	Gait of those with AD slowed more than healthy under DT.	
Camicioli et al. (2006)[38]	42 AD	Gait	Count by 1	Absolute measures of performance	DT decreases cadence. DT increases stride time, swing time, and variability. DT performance does not differ in AD between those with and without Extra-pyramidal signs.	
Cedervall et al. (2014)[39]	21 Mild AD	Gait	Controlled oral word association task	(1)mDTE
(2)Absolute measures of performance	DT increases gait disturbance in AD, specifically in increases temporal disturbances, spatial disturbances, and instability in single limb stance. DT performances declines over 2 years in AD.	
Christofoletti et al. (2014)[40]	38 AD
43 PD
45 Healthy	TUG	Counting by 2	Absolute measures of performance	PD and AD both are impacted differently by DT. AD more impacted by a cognitive secondary task, whereas PD more impacted by motor secondary task.	
Cocchini et al. (2004)[14]	15 AD
15 Healthy	Gait	(1)Controlled oral word association task
(2)Forward digit span	(1)Average of mDTE and cogDTE
(2)Absolute measures of performance	DT results in more impact to gait in AD than healthy older adults. Average of mDTE and cogDTE distinguished groups when the secondary tasks was the controlled oral word association task but not with the digit span.	
Gillain et al. (2009)[41]	6 AD
14 MCI
14 Healthy	Gait	Serial subtraction by 1	Absolute measures of performance	Gait of MCI and AD groups during DT is more impaired than controls. The MCI group demonstrated reduced gait velocity and stride frequency compared to the healthy group. The AD group had reduced gait velocity, stride length, and increased gait variability. Gait variability and stride length distinguished between MCI and AD.	
Gonçalves et al. (2018)[42]	38 AD
40 MCI	TUG	Phone dialing task	(1)mDTE
(2)Absolute measures of performance	mDTE was associated with more falls in MCI but not AD.	
Hunter et al. (2020)[43]	23 AD	(1)Gait
(2)Groningen meander test
(3) Figure 8 path	Serial subtraction by 1	(1)mDTE
(2)cogDTE
(3)Performance operating characteristic plots for task trade-offs
(4)Absolute measures of performance	DT worsens gait and cognitive performance in AD, the more complex the motor task the greater the motor prioritization.	
Konig et al. (2017) [44]	23 AD
24 MCI
22 Healthy	Gait	Serial subtraction by 1	Absolute measures of performance	DT gait differences between AD and MCI, with the AD group having slower gait velocity, decreased cadence, and increased step time variability. There were not differences between MCI and healthy groups.	
Maquet et al. (2010)[45]	6 AD
14 MCI
14 Healthy	Gait	Counting (unspecified)	Absolute measures of performance	Gait velocity during DT varies between all groups, with AD exhibiting the slowest and healthy the fastest gait velocity.	
de Melo Borges et al. (2015)[46]	26 mild AD
42 MCI
36 Healthy	TUG	Controlled oral word association task	Absolute measures of performance	DT-TUG differentiates mild AD, MCI, and healthy, with worse performance in the AD group and the best performance in the healthy group. Receiver-operating characteristic curve analysis showed higher area under the curve for cognitive-motor DT, than for ST TUG, or motor-motor DT. DT worsens functional performance for all groups.	
Muir et al. (2012) [13]	23 AD
29 MCI
22 Healthy	Gait	(1)Serial subtraction by 7
(2)Controlled oral word association task	(1)mDTE
(2)Absolute measures of performance	Difference between AD and MCI during DT on gait velocity, stride time, stride time variability and were different from controls. More complex cognitive tasks exert greater interference on gait.	
Oh et al. (2020) [47]	14 AD	Gait	(1)Serial subtraction by 1
(2) Controlled oral word association task	Absolute measures of performance	DT negatively impacted all gait variables and also was associated with poorer cognitive performance.	
Orcioli-Silva et al. (2012)[48]	17 AD	(1)Free gait (2) Adapted gait	Serial subtraction by 1	Absolute measures of performance	DT results in increased double support time and stride duration, with a reduction in stride velocity.	
Pettersson et al. (2007)[49]	6 AD
6 MCI
25 Healthy	Gait with turn	Controlled oral word association task	Differences on absolute measures of performance	Subjects with AD had lower walking speed and greater time change between single and dual task compared with healthy controls.	
Rucco et al. (2017) [50]	22 AD
23 FTD
20 Healthy	Gait	Serial Subtraction by 7	Absolute measures of performance	During the cognitive DT, the gait performance of the AD group markedly deteriorated compared to during the motor DT.	
Sheridan et al. (2003)[51]	28 AD	Gait	Forward digit span	Absolute measures of performance	DT reduced gait speed and increased gait variability. Poorer executive function were associated with increased gait variability during DT	
Simieli et al. (2015)[52]	15 AD
15 Healthy	(1)Gait
(2)Gait with obstacle crossing	Serial subtraction by 1	Absolute measures of performance	AD used a motor prioritization strategy and showed decreased attention to executive task while walking.	
Sobol et al. (2016) [53]	185 Mild AD	Gait	(1)Serial subtraction by 1
(2)Months in reverse order	(1)mDTE,
(2)Absolute measures of performance	All tests of cognition correlated with DT performance. DT performance accounted for 7–15% of variation in cognitive performance, with shorter time to complete DT being associated with better cognitive performance.	
Tarnanas et al. (2015)[54]	86 early AD
65 MCI
76 Healthy	Gait	(1)Serial subtraction by 1
(2) Controlled oral word association task	Intra-individual variability on absolute measures of performance	Motor variables during the DT tasks were a more reliable marker for early diagnosis of MCI than ST.	
B) Neuroimaging and Alzheimer’s disease biomarker findings related CMI			
Muurling et al. (2020)[55]	26 AD
58 MCI
58 Healthy	Fast walking with turning	Serial subtraction by 1	Absolute measures of performance	No relationship between DT gait and Aβ42. Total tau was higher in those with more DT gait variability, but no relationship was seen with ST gait.	
Nadkarni et al. (2012)[56]	24 AD
20 Healthy	Treadmill gait	(1)1-back
(2)2-back	(1)mDTE
(2)cogDTE
(3)Average of mDTE and cogDTE	AD shows poorer DT performance globally than MCI or healthy. Subcortical hyperintensities on MRI were associated with poorer average DTE.	
Nielsen et al. (2018)[57]	26 AD
17 MCI
41 Healthy	TUG	Serial subtraction by 1	(1)mDTE
(2)Absolute measures of performance	DT performances (mDTE) distinguishes groups. mDTE more strongly associated with cognitive decline than DT-TUG time and ST-TUG time. mDTE has moderate associations with Mini Mental State Examination and CSF Aβ42, such that worse DT performance is associated with lower score on the Mini Mental State Examination and lower levels of CSF A β42. Similar moderate association between mDTE and CSF T-tau and P-tau were observed; however, in the opposite direction. Specifically, poorer DT performance was associated with elevated levels of T-tau and P-tau in the CSF.	
DT: dual task, CMI: cognitive-motor interference, AD: Alzheimer’s disease, MCI: mild cognitive impairment, TUG: Timed Up and Go, mDTE: motor dual task effect, cogDTE: cognitive dual task effect, PD: Parkinson’s disease, DT-TUG: dual task Timed Up and Go, ST: single task, Aβ: Amyloid β, DTE: dual task effect, CSF: cerebral spinal fluid, T-tau: total tau, P-tau: phosphorylated tau, FTD: frontotemporal dementia, MRI: magnetic resonance imaging.

Table 2 Articles included in this review with sample of Parkinson’s disease. Table organized by primary population / findings of interest into 3 sections: A) Parkinson’s disease, B) Parkinson’s disease with freezing of gait, C) Neuroimaging findings related CMI.

Article	Sample	Motor task	Cognitive task	DT measurement tools	Key findings related to CMI	
	
A. Parkinson’s disease					
Amboni et al. (2012)[59]	19 PD
24 PD-MCI
20 Healthy	Gait	Serial subtraction by 7	Absolute measures of performance	DT results in reduced step length, reduced swing time and increased step length variability in individuals with PD-MCI.	
Amboni et al. (2018)[60]	39 PD	Gait	Serial subtraction by 7	Absolute measures of performance	DT step length reduction precedes and is associated with future executive function / attention deficits by as much as 3 years.	
Baron et al. (2018) [61]	23 PD	Arm swing during gait	(1)N-back test
(2)Serial subtraction by 7
(3)Forward digit span
(4)Controlled oral word association task
(5)Visual Stroop	(1)cogDTE
(2)Absolute measures of performance	Arm swing kinematics during gait are more impacted by more challenging cognitive secondary tasks.	
Canning et al. (2006)[62]	16 PD
22 Healthy	Gait	Color classification task	mDTE	No relationship between mDTE and six-minute walk test.	
Chawla et al. (2014)[63]	25 PD	Gait	Serial subtraction by 3	mDTE	DT impacts gait more with a cognitive secondary task than a motor secondary task. These results persist with auditory cueing.	
Christofoletti et al. (2014)[40]	38 AD
43 PD
45 Healthy	TUG	Counting by 2	Absolute measures of performance	PD and AD both are impacted differently by DT. AD more impacted by a cognitive secondary task, whereas PD more impacted by motor secondary task.	
Criminger &amp; Swank (2020)[64]	31 PD	TUG	Serial subtraction by 3	Absolute measures of performance	DT impacts all mobility elements during the TUG except turn strategy.	
Ehgoetz et al. (2018)[65]	52 PD
18 Healthy	Gait	Digit monitoring task	Absolute measures of performance	DT reduces gait speed; DT reduces the effects of high anxiety on gait.	
Fernandes et al. (2016)[66]	9 PD
10 Healthy	Gait initiation	Stroop test	Absolute measures of performance	DT did not impact gait initiation.	
Fernandes et al. (2017)[67]	9 PD
10 Healthy	Gait initiation	Stroop test	Absolute measures of performance	DT resulted in slower activation times and lower activation values on electromyography among individuals with PD.	
Fino et al. (2018)[68]	95 PD
50 Healthy	Gait	Reciting every other letter of the alphabet	(1)mDTE
(2)cogDTE	Differences found between PD and healthy for local dynamic stability during heal strike and weight transfer. This result indicates that declines in DT performance occurs only during times where cortical activity is needed for planning and postural adjustments for individuals with PD.	
Fuller et al. (2013) [69]	154 PD	Gait	Controlled Oral Word Association Test	Absolute measures of performance	DT results in reduced correct response rate. Lower correct response rates were associated with greater disability. PD prioritizes gait performance.	
Galletly &amp; Brauer (2005)[70]	16 PD
16 Healthy	TUG	(1)Serial subtraction by 3,
(2)Controlled Oral Word Association Test	Absolute measures of performance	Cognitive tasks exert greater DT interference on gait than motor secondary tasks.	
Gaßner et al. (2017)[71]	67 PD	Gait	Serial Subtraction by 3	mDTE	DT performance explains 8% of variance in cognition.	
Heinzel et al. (2016)[72]	40 PD	Gait	Serial Subtraction by 7	(1)mDTE
(2)cog DTE
(3)mDTE + cogDTE	Motor-motor DT may be more related to falls in PD than cognitive-motor DT. The composite of mDTE and cogDTE was more sensitive and predictive of falls.	
Hsiu-Chen et al. (2020)[73]	27 PD	(1)Gait
(2)Cycling	(1)Serial subtraction by 3
(2)Spatial memory task
(3)Stroop test	(1)mDTE
(2)cog DTE	DT worsens performance of cognitive tasks and gait/cycling. Akinesia score most related to walking cogDTE.	
Kelly et al. (2012) [74]	15 PD
15 Healthy	Gait	Auditory Stroop	(1)mDTE
(2)cogDTE,
(3)mAAI
(4)Absolute differences in measures of performance	People with PD can modify their attentional prioritization, but at the trade-off of the other task.	
Kelly &amp; Shumway-Cook (2014)[75]	11 PD
12 Healthy	(1)Normal velocity gait
(2)Fast velocity gait
(3)Narrow gait	Auditory Stroop	(1)mDTE
(2)cogDTE
(3)Absolute measures of performance	In PD the ability to modify walking depends on the complexity of the walking task, with more complex walking tasks requiring more attentional resources in PD compared to healthy older adults.	
Leavy et al. (2016) [76]	13 PD	NA	NA	NA	Participant reported increased difficulty of tasks when a DT was performed.	
Micó-Amigo et al. (2019)[77]	22 Early PD
27 Middle PD
25 Healthy	Fast gait in a circle	Serial subtraction by 7	(1)mDTE
(2)cogDTE
(3)mDTE + cogDTE	DT did not improve assessment for predicting progression within PD, although there were differences between PD and healthy.	
Nocera et al. (2013) [78]	13 PD
13 Healthy	Gait initiation	2-back task	Absolute measures of performance	Gait initiation not influenced by DT.	
O’Shea et al. (2002)[79]	15 PD
15 Healthy	Gait	Serial Subtraction by 3	Absolute measures of performance	DT worsens temporal spatial gait parameters generally. There was no difference between cognitive and motor secondary tasks.	
Penko et al. (2020) [80]	23 PD	Treadmill gait	(1)1-back,
(2)2-back
(3)Serial subtraction by 7
(4)Digit recall (5) Controlled Oral Word Association Test
(6)Stroop test	Absolute measures of performance	Joint range of motion at the ankle, knee, and hip were reduced during DT gait. DT gait was associated with slower gait speed regardless of cognitive task.	
Penko et al. (2018) [81]	23 PD	Treadmill gait	(1)1-back,
(2)2-back
(3)Serial subtraction by 7
(4)Digit recall (5) Controlled Oral Word Association Test
(6)Stroop test	Absolute measures of performance	Temporal spatial gait parameters worsen with DT, serial subtraction by 7 resulted in the greatest level of gait interference.	
Peterson et al. (2020)[82]	16 PD
14 Healthy	Backward protective step	Auditory Stroop	(1)mDTE
(2)cogDTE
(3)mAAI,
(4)Absolute measures of performance	Reaction time and muscle latency were worse during DT, but not step response. Individuals with PD prioritize protective step over cognitive task.	
Pieruccini-Faria et al. (2014a) [83]	18 PD
15 Healthy	Gait over obstacle	Digit monitoring task	Absolute measures of performance	DT performance worse in individuals with PD during obstacle crossing.	
Plotnik et al. (2011)[84]	30 PD	Gait	Serial subtraction by 3 and 7	Absolute measures of performance	DT impacts for gait variability and bilateral coordination more in PD fallers than non-fallers.	
Rochester et al. (2014)[85]	121 Early PD
189 Healthy	Gait	(1)Forward Digit span
(2)Digit span + 1	(1)mDTE
(2)cogDTE
(3)Absolute measures of performance	DT inference was present for gait (mDTE) but not cognition (cogDTE). DT resulted in reduced step width, and increased gait variability in individuals with PD.	
Rochester et al. (2004)[86]	20 PD
10 Healthy	Gait	Long-term autobiographical memory task	Absolute measures of performance	DT results in reduced gait velocity and step length.	
Salazar et al. (2017)[87]	19 PD
13 Healthy	Gait	Oral Trail Making Test–Part B	Absolute measures of performance and variability	DT reduces walking speed and stride frequency more in PD than healthy controls.	
Sarbaz &amp; Pourakbari (2019)[88]	20 PD
18 Healthy	Gait	Counting stride number	Difference in absolute measures of performance	DT results in counting errors and higher variance of stride time interval in PD compared to healthy participants.	
Siragy &amp; Nantel (2020)[89]	20 PD	Gait with and without arm swing	Word searching task	Absolute measures of performance	DT reduced step time, increased step width variation, and increased mediolateral angular velocity and variability. Mediolateral foot placement is main means of maintaining walking stability during DT.	
Smulders et al. (2012)[90]	263 PD	Gait	Auditory Stroop	(1)mDTE
(2)cogDTE	DT decreased gait speed and stride lengths. Recurrent fallers did not exhibit different DT performance compared to nonrecurrent fallers.	
Speciali et al. (2014)[91]	14 PD
9 Healthy	Gait	Serial Subtraction by 7	Absolute measures of performance	DT resulted in worse performance on Gait Profile Score and Movement Analysis Profile.	
Stegemöller et al. (2014)[92]	35 PD	Gait	Serial subtraction by 3	(1)mDTE
(2)Absolute measures of performance	All gait measures were impacted by the DT. The addition of mDTE to raw gait variables improves the regression models fitting to predict cognitive performance.	
Strouwen et al. (2016a)[93]	62 PD	Gait	(1)Backwards digit span
(2)Auditory Stroop (3) Phone dialing task	(1)mDTE
(2)cogDTE
(3)Absolute measures of performance	Evidence for reliability of DT measures (ICCs =0.86–0.95) good to excellent for reaction time of cognitive measures (ICCs=0.75–0.82) for individuals with PD.	
Strouwen et al. (2016b)[94]	121 PD	Gait	(1)Backwards digit span
(2)Auditory Stroop (3) Phone dialing task	(1)mDTE
(2)cogDTE
(3)Absolute measures of performance	ST gait velocity, executive function, and disease severity correlate with DT gait performance (mDTE). These variables explain up 73% of variation on DT gait velocity.	
Varalta et al. (2015)[95]	20 PD	TUG	Serial subtraction by 1	Absolute measures of performance	DT TUG correlates with cognitive impairment and ability to switch attention between 2 tasks.	
Wild et al. (2013) [96]	18 PD
18 Healthy	Gait	(1)Text comprehension task
(2)Phoneme counting task
(3)Serial subtraction by 7	(1)cogDTE
(2)Absolute measures of performance	Individuals with PD gave priority to gait while cognitive performance suffered. cogDTE increased with task complexity in PD.	
Xu et al. (2018) [97]	9 PD
9 Healthy	Gait	Serial subtraction by 3	Absolute measures of performance	PD group showed reduced gait velocity, cadence, and increased mediolateral center of mass acceleration when walking on irregular terrain with DT.	
Yogev et al. (2005) [98]	30 PD
28 Healthy	Gait	(1)Text comprehension task
(2)Phoneme counting task
(3)Serial subtraction by 7	Absolute measures of performance	Gait velocity reduced during DT. Gait variability increased compared to usual walking. DT gait velocity correlates with measures of executive function.	
Yogev-Seligmann et al. (2012)[99]	20 PD
20 Healthy	Gait	Controlled oral word association task	(1)AAI
(2)Absolute measures of performance	DT associated reduced gait velocity in the neutral prioritization DT condition. Gait velocity increased when prioritizing walking and maintained when prioritizing the cognitive task. All prioritization conditions increased gait variability. Task prioritization abilities were similar in PD and healthy.	
Zirek et al. (2018) [100]	65 PD
57 Healthy	TUG	(1)Delayed memory task
(2)Forward digit span
(3)Backwards digit span
(4)Serial subtraction by 7	(1)mDTE
(2)Absolute measures of performance	DT resulted in increased time to complete TUG when secondary task probed complex attention (serial subtractions test) compared with other DT conditions.	
B. Parkinson’s disease with freezing of gait				
Beck et al. (2015) [101]	20 PD
20 PD-FOG	Gait with and without visual cues and visual feedback	Digit monitoring task	Absolute measures of performance	DT increases FOG when visual cues are not present. Visual cues improve gait in FOG regardless of DT. Attention is not exclusively responsible for FOG, FOG may be the result of overload of processing resources and visual cues by decrease processing demand.	
Bertoli et al. (2019) [102]	18 PD
24 PD-FOG	(1)360 degree turn in place, (2)180 degree turn in gait	Serial subtraction by 3	mDTE	Turning worsens under DT similarly between PD and PD with FOG.	
Jacobs et al. (2014) [103]	10 PD-FOG
10 Healthy	Protective step	Controlled Oral Word Association Test	Absolute measures of performance related to FOG	DT increased fall rate during reactive stepping, did not increase FOG during perturbations.	
Kleiner et al. (2018)[104]	33 PD-FOG
14 Healthy	Gait	Stroop Test	(1)mDTE
(2)Absolute measures of performance	DT exerts negative impact on gait in PD-FOG more so than for healthy controls.	
Myers et al. (2020) [105]	31 PD
13 PD-FOG	Gait	Controlled Oral Word Association Test	Absolute measures of performance	DT results in reduced joint angle magnitude and peak angle timing in PD and PDFOG.	
Peterson et al. (2015)[106]	12 PD
13 PD-FOG	Gait	Choice reaction head-turning task	Difference in absolute measures of performance	DT impacts gait more for individuals with FOG. Among those with FOG, DT performance correlates with asymmetry pedunculopontine nucleus structural connectivity on DTI, Go-No-Go task, and reaction time.	
Pieruccini-Faria et al. (2014b) [107]	13 PD
14 PD-FOG
14 Healthy	Gait over obstacle	Digit monitoring task	Difference in absolute measures of performance	DT makes obstacle crossing less consistent in PD-FOG, and is associated with lower cognition, poorer executive function, and poorer spatial planning in PD-FOG.	
Spildooren et al. (2010)[108]	14 PD
14 PD-FOG
14 Healthy	Turning	Color classification task	Absolute measures of performance related to FOG and cognition	DT increases freezing when turning, and number of steps to turn. DT increases cadence during turning in those with PD-FOG whereas in PD it decreases cadence. 360 degree turning in combination with a dual task is the most important trigger for freezing. Freezers prioritized cognition, whereas PD prioritized turning.	
Vervoort et al. (2016)[109]	60 PD
13 PD-FOG
20 Healthy	(1)Gait
(2) 360 degree turns	Auditory Stroop	Absolute measures of performance	DT results in longer stance time, short swing time, and more step length asymmetry in PD compared to healthy. PD-FOG also had increase double limb support compared to PD. PD-FOG had hypoconnectivity between caudate and superior temporal lobe and hyperconnectivity between dorsal putamen and precuneus from rs-fMRI correlated with DT performance.	
C. Neuroimaging findings related to CMI				
Hirata et al. (2020) [110]	21 PD
12 Healthy	Fast gait	Serial Subtraction by 7	mDTE	mDTE worse in PD than healthy, no relationship reported between DT and DaT scan.	
Maidan et al. (2016)[111]	68 PD
38 Healthy	Gait	Serial Subtraction by 3	(1)mDTE
(2)Absolute measures of performance	Frontal activation on fNIRS during DT was not different from ST in PD. Healthy participants had increased frontal activation during DT. PD had higher DT costs.	
Nieuwhof et al. (2017)[112]	19 PD
26 Healthy	Auditory cued ankle movements	Switch-stay task	Absolute measures of performance	DT associated with more performance errors in PD than control. Based on fMRI, DT activates a region of ventrolateral putamen not activated during ST. Activation of this region was associated with worse DT performance in healthy controls.	
Pelosin et al. (2016)[113]	33 PD
17 Healthy fallers
14 Healthy	Gait	Controlled oral word association task	Absolute measures of performance	DT performance associated with level of cholinergic inhibitory activity in sensory motor cortex (obtained via TMS) and was associated with fall status.	
DT: dual task, CMI: cognitive-motor interference, PD: Parkinson’s disease, PD-MCI: Parkinson’s disease - mild cognitive impairment, cogDTE: cognitive dual task effect, PD-FOG: Parkinson’s disease with freezing of gait, FOG: freezing of gait, mDTE: motor dual task effect, TUG: Timed Up and Go, AD: Alzheimer’s disease, DT-TUG: dual task Timed Up and Go, DaT: dopamine transporter, mAAI: modified attention allocation index, AAI: attention allocation index, DTI: diffusion tensor imaging, rs-fMRI: resting state function magnetic resonance imaging, fMRI: functional magnetic resonance imaging, TMS: Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation.

Table 3 Articles included in this review with a sample of prodromal neurodegenerative disease. Table organized by primary population of interest into 4 sections: A) mild cognitive impairment, B) subjective cognitive impairment, C) healthy with Alzheimer’s disease biomarkers or genetic risk, D) idiopathic rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder or early PD.

Article	Sample	Motor task	Cognitive task	DT measurement tools	Key findings related to CMI	
	
A. Mild cognitive impairment					
Ansai et al. (2018) [34]	40 MCI
38 AD
40 Healthy	TUG	Phone dialing task	(1)mDTE
(2)cogDTE
(3)Absolute measures of performance	DT performance was associated with visuospatial skills in all groups. Executive function and fluency were the strongest predictors of DT performance in AD.	
Ansai et al. (2017) [35]	40 MCI
38 AD
40 Healthy	TUG	Phone dialing task	(1)mDTE
(2)cogDTE
(3)Absolute measures of performance	DT performance worse for AD than MCI or healthy, with AD group. No items differentiated MCI from the healthy group.	
Gillain et al. (2016) [114]	9 MCI that progressed to AD within 4 years 4 stable MCI	Gait	Serial subtraction by 1	Absolute measures of performance	At baseline, there was a reduction in gait velocity and symmetry during DT gait for those MCI who develop AD compared to those with stable MCI that did not progress.	
Gillain et al. (2009) [41]	14 MCI
6 AD
14 Healthy	Gait	Serial subtraction by 1	Absolute measures of performance	DT gait was more impaired in MCI and AD than controls. With the MCI group having reduced gait velocity and stride frequency compared to healthy. The AD group had reduced gait velocity, stride length, and increased gait variability. Gait variability and stride length distinguished between MCI and AD.	
Gonçalves et al. (2018)[42]	40 MCI
38 AD	TUG	Phone dialing task	(1)mDTE
(2)Absolute measures of performance	mDTE was associated with more falls in MCI but not AD.	
Konig et al. (2017) [44]	24 MCI
23 AD
22 Healthy	Gait	Serial subtraction by 1	Absolute measures of performance	DT gait differences between AD and MCI, with the AD group having slower gait velocity, decreased cadence, and increased step time variability. There were not differences between MCI and healthy.	
Maquet et al. (2010)[45]	14 MCI
6 AD
14 Healthy	Gait	Counting (unspecified)	Absolute measures of performance	Gait velocity during DT varies between all groups, with AD exhibiting the slowest and healthy the fastest gait velocity.	
de Melo Borges et al. (2015)[46]	42 MCI
26 mild AD
36 Healthy	TUG	Controlled oral word association task	Absolute measures of performance	DT-TUG differentiates mild AD, MCI, and healthy, with worse performance in the AD group and the best performance in the healthy group. Receiver-operating characteristic curve analysis showed higher area under the curve for cognitive-motor DT, than for ST TUG, or motor-motor DT. DT worsens functional performance for all groups.	
Muir et al. (2012) [13]	29 MCI
23 AD
22 Healthy	Gait	(1)Serial subtraction by 7
(2)Controlled oral word association task	(1)mDTE
(2)Absolute measures of performance	Difference between AD and MCI during DT on gait velocity, stride time, stride time variability and were different from controls. More complex cognitive tasks exert greater interference on gait.	
Muurling et al. (2020)[55]	58 MCI
26 AD
58 Healthy	Fast gait with turning	Serial subtraction by 1	Absolute measures of performance	No relationship between DT gait and Aβ42. Total tau was higher in those with more DT gait variability but not with ST gait.	
Nielsen et al. (2018)[57]	17 MCI
26 AD
41 Healthy	TUG	Serial subtraction by 1	(1)mDTE
(2)Absolute measures of performance	DT performances (mDTE) distinguishes groups. mDTE more strongly associated with cognitive decline than DT-TUG time or ST TUG time. mDTE has moderate associations with Mini Mental State Examination, CSF Aβ42, T-tau, and P-tau. These findings indicate that poorer DT performance was associated with lower score on the Mini Mental State Examination, lower levels of CSF Aβ42, and higher levels of CSF T-tau, and P-tau.	
Nilsson et al. (2020)[115]	124 MCI
175 Healthy	TUG	Serial subtraction by 3	(1)mDTE
(2)Absolute measures of performance	In the whole sample CSF P-tau was associated with DT performance using both mDTE and DT-TUG time, such that a decline in DT performance was associated with higher levels of P-tau. These findings were maintained when analyzed just in the MCI, however they were not found in the healthy group alone.	
Pettersson et al. (2007)[49]	6 MCI
6 AD
25 Healthy	Gait with turn	Controlled oral word association task	Absolute measures of performance	Subjects with AD had lower walking speed and greater time change between single and dual task compared with healthy controls.	
Sakurai et al. (2019)[116]	40 MCI	Gait	(1)Serial subtraction by 1 and 7
(2)Controlled oral word association task	mDTE	Smaller left entorhinal cortex volumes (obtained via MRI) were positively associated with mDTE, such that poorer DT performance was associated with smaller entorhinal cortex volumes.	
Tarnanas et al. (2015)[54]	65 MCI
86 early AD
76 Healthy	Gait	(1)Serial subtraction by 1
(2) Controlled oral word association task	Intra-individual variability on absolute measures of performance	Motor variables during the DT tasks were a more reliable marker for early diagnosis of MCI than ST.	
B. Subjective cognitive impairment					
Åhman et al. (2020)[117]	77 SCI
135 MCI
86 Dementia
166 Healthy	TUG	Controlled oral word association task	(1)mDTE
(2)Absolute measures of performance	Correct response rate during DT discriminates between groups. Between groups standardized odds ratios for healthy and SCI was 2.98, for SCI and MCI was 2.15, and for MCI and dementia was 3.29.	
Åhman et al. (2019)[118]	8 SCI
52 MCI
28 Dementia	TUG	Controlled oral word association task	(1)mDTE
(2)Absolute measures of performance	Correct response rate during DT had a moderate positive association with CSF T-tau and P-tau (r = 0.2–0.3). There was no relationship between DT performance and Aβ42.	
Beauchet et al. (2017)[119]	10 SCI (relative)
69 SCI (participant)
32 SCI (both)
15 Healthy	Gait	Serial subtraction by 1	Absolute measures of performance	Increased stride time variability during DT, but not during ST, was associated with SCI reported by a relative.	
Cullen et al. (2019) [120]	46 SCI
77 MCI
71 Dementia	Gait	(1)Serial subtraction by 1 and 7
(2)Controlled oral word association task	(1)mDTE
(2)Absolute measures of performance	Proportion of decline in gait velocity during DT (mDTE) is greater in MCI than dementia. Gait velocity slows when combined with a DT for all groups. SCI and MCI groups had statistically comparable DTEs.	
De Cock et al. (2019)[121]	71 CDR 0
122 CDR 0.5
168 CDR 1
51 CDR 2
18 CDR 3
127 progressed to dementia	Gait	(1)Serial subtraction by 2
(2)Controlled oral word association task	(1)mDTE
(2)Absolute measures of performance	DT performance (mDTE of step width) in those with CDR of 0 or 0.5 was associated with later (33 –41 months) diagnosis of dementia.	
Kueper et al. (2020)[122]	19 SCI
84 MCI
12 Healthy
8 (of the above) converted to dementia within 36 months	Gait	Serial subtraction by 1	mDTE	Pooled index (ADAS-COG + ST gait velocity + mDTE) discriminates well between healthy, SCI, and MCI. The pooled index improved responsiveness to cognitive decline over time. Adding motor function assessments to the ADAS-Cog may improve responsiveness in pre- dementia populations.	
Lowe et al. (2020) [123]	133 SCI
119 MCI	Gait	Spelling 5 letter words backwards	Absolute measures of performance	MCI had greater impact of DT on gait velocity and on number of correct responses on cognitive task during DT gait. Additionally, those with MCI had poorer performance of measures of executive attention. Executive attention explains 25% of the variance in motor performance during DT.	
Rantalainen et al. (2020)[124]	24 SCI
9 mild dementia	Gait	Serial subtraction by 7	Absolute measures of performance	No differences in DT performance noted between SCI and mild dementia with the exception of gait variability, which was higher in dementia group.	
C. Cognitively healthy with Alzheimer’s disease biomarkers or genetic risk			
MacAulay et al. (2016)[125]	75 Healthy with APOE ε4
224 Healthy	Gait	Spelling 5 letter words backwards	Absolute measures of performance	APOE ε4 group showed poorer cognitive performance during DT. Decreased stride length during DT and increased stride length variability during DT associated with those that carried at least one APOE ε4 allele.	
Nadkarni et al. (2017)[126]	16 Healthy amyloid+
11 Healthy amyloid−	Gait	(1)2-back
(2)Go No-Go task,
(3)Phone dialing task	(1)mDTE
(2)cogDTE	Those that were amyloid positive (per PiB PET) had higher mDTEs but not cogDTEs than that were amyloid negative. Specifically, mDTE for DT gait with secondary task of working memory (2-back) and phone dialing task were different between groups. Overall, standardized uptake value ratio correlated moderately and inversely with mDTEs, such that as gait performance during DT declined standardized uptake value ratio increased.	
Whitson et al. (2018)[127]	14 Healthy with APOE ε4 allele
15 Healthy	Gait	(1)Word recall task
(2)“Stop/Go” task	(1)mDTE
(2)cogDTE
(3)Performance-operating characteristic plots for task trade-off
(4)Absolute measures of performance	Compared to low-risk participants, APOE ε4 carriers tended to be more impacted by DT. Both the memory (word recall) and executive function (“stop/go”) tasks resulted in DT related decrements on gait, with the executive function task exhibiting larger effect sizes. DT with the executive function task, resulted in larger effect sizes for group difference on mDTE than cogDTE.	
D. Idiopathic rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder and early Parkinson’s disease		
Ehgoetz Martens et al. (2019) [128]	24 iRBD
14 Healthy	Gait	(1)Serial subtraction by 1,4, and 7
(2)Controlled oral word association task	Absolute measures of performance	During DT those with iRBD increased step width variability without increasing step width, while controls increased step width without increase step width variability.	
Micó-Amigo et al. (2019)[77]	22 Early PD
27 Middle PD
25 Healthy	Fast gait in a circle	Serial subtraction by 7	(1)mDTE
(2)cogDTE
(3)mDTE + cogDTE	DT did not improve assessment for predicting progression within PD although there were differences between PD and healthy.	
Rochester et al. (2014)[85]	121 Early PD
189 Healthy	Gait	(1)Forward Digit span
(2)Digit span + 1	(1)mDTE
(2)cogDTE
(3)Absolute measures of performance	DT inference was present for gait (mDTE) but not cognition (cogDTE). DT resulted in reduced step width, and increased gait variability in individuals with early PD compared to healthy older adults.	
DT: dual task, CMI: cognitive-motor interference, MCI: mild cognitive impairment, AD: Alzheimer’s disease, TUG: Timed Up and Go, mDTE: motor dual task effect, cogDTE: cognitive dual task effect, DT-TUG: dual task Timed Up and Go, ST: single task, Aβ: Amyloid β, CSF: cerebral spinal fluid, T-tau: total tau, P-tau: phosphorylated tau, MRI: magnetic resonance imaging, SCI: subjective cognitive impairment, CDR: clinical dementia rating scale, ADAS-COG: Alzheimer’s Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive Subscale, APOE: Apolipoprotein E, amyloid+ : amyloid positive, amyloid−: amyloid negative, PiB: Pittsburgh compound B, PET: position emission tomography, iRBD: idiopathic rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder, PD: Parkinson’s disease.

Table 4 Recommendations for the construction of cognitive-motor dual-task paradigms and the measurement of dual-task performance in individuals with neurodegeneration.

Construction of cognitive-motor dual-task paradigms	
Most frequently utilized tasks in included studies (percent of included studies that utilized the task)	
Motor tasks (top 3 for each group)	Alzheimer’s disease	Parkinson's disease	Prodromal	
Straight line gait (preferred pace, fast pace, treadmill)	69.2%	66.1%	62.1%	
Timed Up and Go	23.1%	8.9%	27.6%	
Adapted Gait (gait with turn, obstacle, figure eight, narrow, circular pattern, etc.)	19.2%	7.1%	10.3%	
Cognitive tasks (top 3 for each group)				
Calculations (subtraction by 1, 3, 4, 7; addition by 1, 2)	57.1%	44.6%	58.6%	
Controlled oral word association tasks	30.8%	16.1%	34.5%	
Phone dialing task	11.5%	3.6%	13.8%	
Stroop task (visual, auditory)	0%	25%	0%	
Recommendation	There is a lack of consistent motor or cognitive task utilized in dual-task paradigms within the existing literature, though there is a trend towards straight line gait and calculation tasks. Despite this trend, it is the recommendation of the authors that novelty, difficulty, and salience of each task be considered when selecting component tasks in constructing dual-task paradigms. Additionally, consideration of the overall level of difficulty of the combined dual-task is likely to improve paradigm construction. Individual adaptations may be necessary to optimize a given dual-task paradigm.	
Measurement of dual-task performance	
Frequency of reporting absolute measures of performance and dual-task effects among dual-task constructs (percent of all included studies that reported the corresponding dual-task measure)	
Dual-task construct	Absolute measures of performance	Dual-task effect	Total	
Motor task interference	83.2%	41.1%	98.9%	
Cognitive task interference	18.9%	21.1%	26.3%	
Task prioritization	N/A	N/A	10.5%	
Combined motor and cognitive task interference	N/A	4.2%	4.2%	
Recommendations	The findings among the included studies demonstrate poor measurement and reporting on multiple domains of dual-task performance and an underutilization of more robust measures of dual-task performance (such as dual-task effects). Measurement and reporting of dual-task performance should prioritize utilizing measures of dual-task effects and include measures across each dual-task construct (task specific interference, task prioritization, and combined interference).	

Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Appendix A. Supporting information

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at doi:10.1016/j.gaitpost.2023.07.277.


References

[1] Abernethy B , Dual-task methodology and motor skills research: some applications and methodological constraints, J. Hum. Mov. Stud. (1988).
[2] Al-Yahya E , Dawes H , Smith L , Dennis A , Howells K , Cockburn J , Cognitive motor interference while walking: a systematic review and meta-analysis, Neurosci. Biobehav Rev. 35 (3 ) (2011) 715–728.20833198
[3] Yogev-Seligmann G , Hausdorff JM , Giladi N , The role of executive function and attention in gait, Mov. Disord. 23 (3 ) (2008) 329–342, quiz 472. 18058946
[4] Pashler H , Dual-task interference in simple tasks: data and theory, Psychol. Bull. 116 (2 ) (1994) 220–244.7972591
[5] Pashler H , Processing stages in overlapping tasks: evidence for a central bottleneck, J. Exp. Psychol. Hum. Percept. Perform. 10 (3 ) (1984) 358–377.6242412
[6] Navon D , Miller J , Queuing or sharing? A critical evaluation of the single-bottleneck notion, Cogn. Psychol. 44 (3 ) (2002) 193–251.11971632
[7] Tombu M , Jolicoeur P , Testing the predictions of the central capacity sharing model, J. Exp. Psychol. Hum. Percept. Perform. 31 (4 ) (2005) 790–802.16131250
[8] Tombu M , Jolicoeur P , A central capacity sharing model of dual-task performance, J. Exp. Psychol. Hum. Percept. Perform. 29 (1 ) (2003) 3–18.12669744
[9] Pashler H , Graded capacity-sharing in dual-task interference? J. Exp. Psychol. Hum. Percept. Perform 20 (2 ) (1994) 330–342.8189196
[10] Lehle C , Hubner R , Strategic capacity sharing between two tasks: evidence from tasks with the same and with different task sets, Psychol. Res 73 (5 ) (2009) 707–726.18841390
[11] Wu T , Hallett M , Chan P , Motor automaticity in Parkinson’s disease, Neurobiol. Dis. 82 (2015) 226–234.26102020
[12] Montero-Odasso M , Almeida QJ , Bherer L , , Consensus on shared measures of mobility and cognition: from the Canadian consortium on neurodegeneration in aging (CCNA), J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med Sci. 74 (6 ) (2019) 897–909.30101279
[13] Muir SW , Speechley M , Wells J , Borrie M , Gopaul K , Montero-Odasso M , Gait assessment in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease: the effect of dual-task challenges across the cognitive spectrum, Gait Posture 35 (1 ) (2012) 96–100.21940172
[14] Cocchini G , Della Sala S , Logie RH , Pagani R , Sacco L , Spinnler H , Dual task effects of walking when talking in Alzheimer’s disease, Rev. Neurol. 160 (1 ) (2004) 74–80.14978396
[15] Longhurst JK , Wise MA , Krist DJ , Moreland CA , Basterrechea JA , Landers MR , Brain volumes and dual-task performance correlates among individuals with cognitive impairment: a retrospective analysis, J. Neural Transm. 127 (7 ) (2020) 1057–1071.32350624
[16] Chomiak T , Watts A , Meyer N , Pereira FV , Hu B , A training approach to improve stepping automaticity while dual-tasking in Parkinson’s disease: a prospective pilot study, Medicine 96 (5 ) (2017), e5934.28151878
[17] Huang CY , Chen YA , Hwang IS , Wu RM , Improving Dual-Task Control With a Posture-Second Strategy in Early-Stage Parkinson Disease, Arch. Phys. Med Rehabil. 99 (8 ) (2018) 1540–1546, e1542.29608901
[18] Rochester L , Baker K , Hetherington V , , Evidence for motor learning in Parkinson’s disease: acquisition, automaticity and retention of cued gait performance after training with external rhythmical cues, Brain Res 1319 (2010) 103–111.20064492
[19] Montero-Odasso MM , Sarquis-Adamson Y , Speechley M , , Association of Dual-Task Gait With Incident Dementia in Mild Cognitive Impairment: Results From the Gait and Brain Study, JAMA Neurol. 74 (7 ) (2017) 857–865.28505243
[20] Wu T , Kansaku K , Hallett M , How self-initiated memorized movements become automatic: a functional MRI study, J. Neurophysiol. 91 (4 ) (2004) 1690–1698.14645385
[21] Koziol LF , Budding DE , Subcortical structures and cognition, Implic. Neuropsychol. Assess. (2009) 1–405.
[22] Yang L , Lam FMH , Liao LR , Huang MZ , He CQ , Pang MYC , Psychometric properties of dual-task balance and walking assessments for individuals with neurological conditions: a systematic review, Gait Posture 52 (2017) 110–123.27893997
[23] McIsaac TL , Lamberg EM , Muratori LM , Building a framework for a dual task taxonomy, Biomed. Res Int 2015 (2015), 591475.25961027
[24] Cardon-Verbecq C , Loustau M , Guitard E , , Predicting falls with the cognitive timed up-and-go dual task in frail older patients, Ann. Phys. Rehabil. Med 60 (2 ) (2017) 83–86.27542314
[25] Plummer P , Eskes G , Measuring treatment effects on dual-task performance: a framework for research and clinical practice, Front Hum. Neurosci. 9 (2015) 225.25972801
[26] Plummer P , Eskes G , Wallace S , , Cognitive-motor interference during functional mobility after stroke: state of the science and implications for future research, Arch. Phys. Med Rehabil. 94 (12 ) (2013) 2565–2574, e2566.23973751
[27] Kelly VE , Janke AA , Shumway-Cook A , Effects of instructed focus and task difficulty on concurrent walking and cognitive task performance in healthy young adults, Exp. Brain Res 207 (1–2 ) (2010) 65–73.20931180
[28] Siu KC , Woollacott MH , Attentional demands of postural control: the ability to selectively allocate information-processing resources, Gait Posture 25 (1 ) (2007) 121–126.16554158
[29] Tricco AC , Lillie E , Zarin W , , PRISMA extension for scoping reviews (PRISMA-ScR): checklist and explanation, Ann. Intern Med 169 (7 ) (2018) 467–473.30178033
[30] Arksey H , O’Malley L , Scoping studies: towards a methodological framework, Int. J. Soc. Res. Methodol. 8 (1 ) (2005) 19–32.
[31] Levac D , Colquhoun H , O’Brien KK , Scoping studies: advancing the methodology, Implement. Sci. 5 (1 ) (2010) 69.20854677
[32] Liberati A , Altman DG , Tetzlaff J , , The PRISMA statement for reporting systematic reviews and meta-analyses of studies that evaluate healthcare interventions: explanation and elaboration, BMJ 339 (2009) b2700.19622552
[33] Peters MDJ , Godfrey CM , McInerney P , Munn Z , Tricco AC , Khalil H Chapter 11: Scoping reviews (2020 version). 2020.
[34] Ansai JH , Andrade LP , Rossi PG , Almeida ML , Carvalho Vale FA , Rebelatto JR , Association Between Gait and Dual Task With Cognitive Domains in Older People With Cognitive Impairment, J. Mot. Behav 50 (4 ) (2018) 409–415.28901834
[35] Ansai JH , Andrade LP , Rossi PG , Takahashi ACM , Vale FAC , Rebelatto JR , Gait, dual task and history of falls in elderly with preserved cognition, mild cognitive impairment, and mild Alzheimer’s disease, Braz. J. Phys. Ther. 21 (2 ) (2017) 144–151.28460713
[36] Beauchet O , Launay CP , Allali G , Herrmann FR , Annweiler C , Gait changes with anti-dementia drugs: a prospective, open-label study combining single and dual task assessments in patients with Alzheimer’s disease, Drugs Aging 31 (5 ) (2014) 363–372.24683126
[37] Camicioli R , Howieson D , Lehman S , Kaye J , Talking while walking: the effect of a dual task in aging and Alzheimer’s disease, Neurology 48 (4 ) (1997) 955–958.9109884
[38] Camicioli R , Bouchard T , Licis L , Dual-tasks and walking fast: relationship to extra-pyramidal signs in advanced Alzheimer disease, J. Neurol. Sci. 248 (1–2 ) (2006) 205–209.16759668
[39] Cedervall Y , Halvorsen K , Aberg AC , A longitudinal study of gait function and characteristics of gait disturbance in individuals with Alzheimer’s disease, Gait Posture 39 (4 ) (2014) 1022–1027.24491520
[40] Christofoletti G , Andrade LP , Beinotti F , Borges G , Cognition and dual-task performance in older adults with Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s disease, Int J. Gen. Med 7 (2014) 383–388.25092996
[41] Gillain S , Warzee E , Lekeu F , , The value of instrumental gait analysis in elderly healthy, MCI or Alzheimer’s disease subjects and a comparison with other clinical tests used in single and dual-task conditions, Ann. Phys. Rehabil. Med 52 (6 ) (2009) 453–474.19525161
[42] Goncalves J , Ansai JH , Masse FAA , Vale FAC , Takahashi ACM , Andrade LP , Dual-task as a predictor of falls in older people with mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer’s disease: a prospective cohort study, Braz. J. Phys. Ther. 22 (5 ) (2018) 417–423.29636306
[43] Hunter SW , Omana H , Madou E , , Effect of dual-tasking on walking and cognitive demands in adults with Alzheimer’s dementia experienced in using a 4-wheeled walker, Gait Posture 77 (2020) 164–170.32044696
[44] Konig A , Klaming L , Pijl M , Demeurraux A , David R , Robert P , Objective measurement of gait parameters in healthy and cognitively impaired elderly using the dual-task paradigm, Aging Clin. Exp. Res 29 (6 ) (2017) 1181–1189.28130713
[45] Maquet D , Lekeu F , Warzee E , , Gait analysis in elderly adult patients with mild cognitive impairment and patients with mild Alzheimer’s disease: simple versus dual task: a preliminary report, Clin. Physiol. Funct. Imaging 30 (1 ) (2010) 51–56.19799614
[46] Borges Sde M , Radanovic M , Forlenza OV , Functional mobility in a divided attention task in older adults with cognitive impairment, J. Mot. Behav. 47 (5 ) (2015) 378–385.25610990
[47] Oh C , Morris RJ , LaPointe LL , Stierwalt JAG , Spatial-temporal parameters of gait associated with Alzheimer disease: a longitudinal analysis, J. Geriatr. Psychiatry Neurol. 34 (1 ) (2021) 46–59.32129132
[48] Orcioli-Silva D , Simieli L , Barbieri FA , Stella F , Gobbi LT , Adaptive walking in Alzheimer’s disease, Int J. Alzheimers Dis. 2012 (2012), 674589.22991684
[49] Pettersson AF , Olsson E , Wahlund LO , Effect of divided attention on gait in subjects with and without cognitive impairment, J. Geriatr. Psychiatry Neurol. 20 (1 ) (2007) 58–62.17341772
[50] Rucco R , Agosti V , Jacini F , , Spatio-temporal and kinematic gait analysis in patients with Frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer’s disease through 3D motion capture, Gait Posture 52 (2017) 312–317.28038340
[51] Sheridan PL , Solomont J , Kowall N , Hausdorff JM , Influence of executive function on locomotor function: divided attention increases gait variability in Alzheimer’s disease, J. Am. Geriatr. Soc. 51 (11 ) (2003) 1633–1637.14687395
[52] Simieli L , Barbieri FA , Orcioli-Silva D , Lirani-Silva E , Stella F , Gobbi LT , Obstacle crossing with dual tasking is a danger for individuals with Alzheimer’s disease and for healthy older people, J. Alzheimers Dis. 43 (2 ) (2015) 435–441.25096621
[53] Sobol NA , Hoffmann K , Vogel A , , Associations between physical function, dual-task performance and cognition in patients with mild Alzheimer’s disease, Aging Ment. Health 20 (11 ) (2016) 1139–1146.26161932
[54] Tarnanas I , Papagiannopoulos S , Kazis D , Wiederhold M , Widerhold B , Tsolaki M , Reliability of a novel serious game using dual-task gait profiles to early characterize aMCI, Front Aging Neurosci. 7 (2015) 50.25954193
[55] Muurling M , Rhodius-Meester HFM , Parkka J , , Gait disturbances are associated with increased cognitive impairment and cerebrospinal fluid Tau levels in a memory clinic Cohort, J. Alzheimers Dis. 76 (3 ) (2020) 1061–1070.32597806
[56] Nadkarni NK , Levine B , McIlroy WE , Black SE , Impact of subcortical hyperintensities on dual-tasking in Alzheimer disease and aging, Alzheimer Dis. Assoc. Disord. 26 (1 ) (2012) 28–35.21502852
[57] Nielsen MS , Simonsen AH , Siersma V , Hasselbalch SG , Hoegh P , The diagnostic and prognostic value of a dual-tasking paradigm in a memory clinic, J. Alzheimers Dis. 61 (3 ) (2018) 1189–1199.29278887
[58] Shumway-Cook A , Brauer S , Woollacott M , Predicting the probability for falls in community-dwelling older adults using the Timed Up &amp; Go Test, Phys. Ther. 80 (9 ) (2000) 896–903.10960937
[59] Amboni M , Barone P , Iuppariello L , , Gait patterns in Parkinsonian patients with or without mild cognitive impairment, Mov. Disord. 27 (12 ) (2012) 1536–1543.23032876
[60] Amboni M , Iuppariello L , Iavarone A , , Step length predicts executive dysfunction in Parkinson’s disease: a 3-year prospective study, J. Neurol. 265 (10 ) (2018) 2211–2220.30014240
[61] Baron EI , Miller Koop M , Streicher MC , Rosenfeldt AB , Alberts JL , Altered kinematics of arm swing in Parkinson’s disease patients indicates declines in gait under dual-task conditions, Park. Relat. Disord. 48 (2018) 61–67.
[62] Canning CG , Ada L , Johnson JJ , McWhirter S , Walking capacity in mild to moderate Parkinson’s disease, Arch. Phys. Med Rehabil. 87 (3 ) (2006) 371–375.16500171
[63] Chawla H , Walia S , Behari M , Noohu MM , Effect of type of secondary task on cued gait on people with idiopathic Parkinson’s disease, J. Neurosci. Rural Pr. 5 (1 ) (2014) 18–23.
[64] Criminger C , Swank C , Impact of dual-tasking on mobility tasks in Parkinson’s disease as described through 2D kinematic analysis, Aging Clin. Exp. Res 32 (5 ) (2020) 835–840.31270689
[65] Ehgoetz Martens KA , Silveira CRA , Intzandt BN , Almeida QJ , Overload from anxiety: a non-motor cause for gait impairments in Parkinson’s disease, J. Neuropsychiatry Clin. Neurosci. 30 (1 ) (2018) 77–80.28712343
[66] Fernandes A , Sousa AS , Rocha N , Tavares JM , Parkinson’s disease and cognitive-motor dual-task: is motor prioritization possible in the early stages of the disease? J. Mot. Behav. 48 (4 ) (2016) 377–383.27159414
[67] Fernandes A , Sousa ASP , Rocha N , Tavares J , The influence of a cognitive task on the postural phase of gait initiation in Parkinson’s disease: an electromyographic-based analysis, Mot. Control 21 (3 ) (2017) 249–264.
[68] Fino PC , Mancini M , Curtze C , Nutt JG , Horak FB , Gait stability has phase-dependent dual-task costs in Parkinson’s disease, Front Neurol. 9 (2018) 373.29899724
[69] Fuller RL , Van Winkle EP , Anderson KE , , Dual task performance in Parkinson’s disease: a sensitive predictor of impairment and disability, Park. Relat. Disord. 19 (3 ) (2013) 325–328.
[70] Galletly R , Brauer SG , Does the type of concurrent task affect preferred and cued gait in people with Parkinson’s disease? Aust. J. Physiother. 51 (3 ) (2005) 175–180.16137243
[71] Gassner H , Marxreiter F , Steib S , , Gait and cognition in Parkinson’s disease: cognitive impairment is inadequately reflected by gait performance during dual task, Front Neurol. 8 (2017) 550.29123499
[72] Heinzel S , Maechtel M , Hasmann SE , , Motor dual-tasking deficits predict falls in Parkinson’s disease: a prospective study, Park. Relat. Disord. 26 (2016) 73–77.
[73] Hsiu-Chen C , Chiung-Chu C , Jiunn-Woei L , , The effects of dual-task in patients with Parkinson’s disease performing cognitive-motor paradigms, J. Clin. Neurosci. 72 (2020) 72–78.31952973
[74] Kelly VE , Eusterbrock AJ , Shumway-Cook A , The effects of instructions on dual-task walking and cognitive task performance in people with Parkinson’s disease, Park. Dis. 2012 (2012), 671261.
[75] Kelly VE , Shumway-Cook A , The ability of people with Parkinson’s disease to modify dual-task performance in response to instructions during simple and complex walking tasks, Exp. Brain Res. 232 (1 ) (2014) 263–271.24162861
[76] Leavy B , Roaldsen KS , Nylund K , Hagstromer M , Franzen E , “Pushing the limits”: rethinking motor and cognitive resources after a highly challenging balance training program for Parkinson disease, Phys. Ther. 97 (1 ) (2017) 81–89.27515945
[77] Mico-Amigo ME , Kingma I , Heinzel S , , Dual vs. single tasking during circular walking: what better reflects progression in Parkinson’s disease? Front Neurol. 10 (2019) 372.31139130
[78] Nocera JR , Roemmich R , Elrod J , Altmann LJ , Hass CJ , Effects of cognitive task on gait initiation in Parkinson disease: evidence of motor prioritization? J. Rehabil. Res Dev. 50 (5 ) (2013) 699–708.24013917
[79] O’Shea S , Morris ME , Iansek R , Dual task interference during gait in people with Parkinson disease: effects of motor versus cognitive secondary tasks, Phys. Ther. 82 (9 ) (2002) 888–897.12201803
[80] Penko AL , Streicher MC , Dey T , Rosenfeldt AB , Alberts JL , Parkinson’s gait kinematics deteriorates across multiple cognitive domains under dual-task paradigms, Clin. Neurol. Neurosurg. 197 (2020), 106083.32683199
[81] Penko AL , Streicher MC , Koop MM , , Dual-task interference disrupts Parkinson’s gait across multiple cognitive domains, Neuroscience 379 (2018) 375–382.29577998
[82] Peterson DS , Barajas JS , Denney L , Mehta SH , Backward protective stepping during dual-task scenarios in people with Parkinson’s disease: a pilot study, Neurorehabil Neural Repair 34 (8 ) (2020) 702–710.32633614
[83] Pieruccini-Faria F , Ehgoetz Martens KA , Silveira CR , Jones JA , Almeida QJ , Interactions between cognitive and sensory load while planning and controlling complex gait adaptations in Parkinson’s disease, BMC Neurol. 14 (2014) 250.25528474
[84] Plotnik M , Giladi N , Dagan Y , Hausdorff JM , Postural instability and fall risk in Parkinson’s disease: impaired dual tasking, pacing, and bilateral coordination of gait during the “ON” medication state, Exp. Brain Res. 210 (3–4 ) (2011) 529–538.21279632
[85] Rochester L , Galna B , Lord S , Burn D , The nature of dual-task interference during gait in incident Parkinson’s disease, Neuroscience 265 (2014) 83–94.24508154
[86] Rochester L , Hetherington V , Jones D , , Attending to the task: interference effects of functional tasks on walking in Parkinson’s disease and the roles of cognition, depression, fatigue, and balance, Arch. Phys. Med Rehabil. 85 (10 ) (2004) 1578–1585.15468014
[87] Salazar RD , Ren X , Ellis TD , , Dual tasking in Parkinson’s disease: cognitive consequences while walking, Neuropsychology 31 (6 ) (2017) 613–623.28414497
[88] Sarbaz Y , Pourakbari H , The effects of counting the stride numbers on the Parkinsonian gait: suggesting a possible reason for dual task interference, Basic Clin. Neurosci. 10 (3 ) (2019) 269–279.31462981
[89] Siragy T , Nantel J , Absent arm swing and dual tasking decreases trunk postural control and dynamic balance in people with Parkinson’s disease, Front Neurol. 11 (2020) 213.32362863
[90] Smulders K , Esselink RA , Weiss A , Kessels RP , Geurts AC , Bloem BR , Assessment of dual tasking has no clinical value for fall prediction in Parkinson’s disease, J. Neurol. 259 (9 ) (2012) 1840–1847.22294215
[91] Speciali DS , Oliveira EM , Cardoso JR , Correa JC , Baker R , Lucareli PR , Gait profile score and movement analysis profile in patients with Parkinson’s disease during concurrent cognitive load, Braz. J. Phys. Ther. 18 (4 ) (2014) 315–322.25054382
[92] Stegemoller EL , Wilson JP , Hazamy A , , Associations between cognitive and gait performance during single- and dual-task walking in people with Parkinson disease, Phys. Ther. 94 (6 ) (2014) 757–766.24557652
[93] Strouwen C , Molenaar EA , Keus SH , Munks L , Bloem BR , Nieuwboer A , Test-retest reliability of dual-task outcome measures in people with Parkinson disease, Phys. Ther. 96 (8 ) (2016) 1276–1286.26847010
[94] Strouwen C , Molenaar EA , Keus SH , , Are factors related to dual-task performance in people with Parkinson’s disease dependent on the type of dual task? Park. Relat. Disord. 23 (2016) 23–30.
[95] Varalta V , Picelli A , Fonte C , , Relationship between cognitive performance and motor dysfunction in patients with Parkinson’s disease: a pilot cross-sectional study, Biomed. Res Int 2015 (2015), 365959.25918713
[96] Wild LB , de Lima DB , Balardin JB , , Characterization of cognitive and motor performance during dual-tasking in healthy older adults and patients with Parkinson’s disease, J. Neurol. 260 (2 ) (2013) 580–589.23052601
[97] Xu H , Merryweather A , Foreman KB , Zhao J , Hunt M , Dual-task interference during gait on irregular terrain in people with Parkinson’s disease, Gait Posture 63 (2018) 17–22.29702370
[98] Yogev G , Giladi N , Peretz C , Springer S , Simon ES , Hausdorff JM , Dual tasking, gait rhythmicity, and Parkinson’s disease: which aspects of gait are attention demanding? Eur. J. Neurosci. 22 (5 ) (2005) 1248–1256.16176368
[99] Yogev-Seligmann G , Rotem-Galili Y , Dickstein R , Giladi N , Hausdorff JM , Effects of explicit prioritization on dual task walking in patients with Parkinson’s disease, Gait Posture 35 (4 ) (2012) 641–646.22342204
[100] Zirek E , Ersoz Huseyinsinoglu B , Tufekcioglu Z , Bilgic B , Hanagasi H , Which cognitive dual-task walking causes most interference on the timed up and go test in Parkinson’s disease: a controlled study, Neurol. Sci. 39 (12 ) (2018) 2151–2157.30232665
[101] Beck EN , Ehgoetz Martens KA , Almeida QJ , Freezing of gait in Parkinson’s Disease: An Overload Problem? PLoS One 10 (12 ) (2015), e0144986.26678262
[102] Bertoli M , Croce UD , Cereatti A , Mancini M , Objective measures to investigate turning impairments and freezing of gait in people with Parkinson’s disease, Gait Posture 74 (2019) 187–193.31539800
[103] Jacobs JV , Nutt JG , Carlson-Kuhta P , Allen R , Horak FB , Dual tasking during postural stepping responses increases falls but not freezing in people with Parkinson’s disease, Park. Relat. Disord. 20 (7 ) (2014) 779–781.
[104] Kleiner AFR , Pagnussat AS , Prisco GD , , Analyzing gait variability and dual-task interference in patients with Parkinson’s disease and freezing by means of the word-color Stroop test, Aging Clin. Exp. Res 30 (9 ) (2018) 1137–1142.29198058
[105] Myers PS , Rawson KS , Harrison EC , , Cross-sectional analysis of backward, forward, and dual task gait kinematics in people with Parkinson disease with and without freezing of gait, J. Appl. Biomech. 36 (2020) 1–11.31968308
[106] Peterson DS , Fling BW , Mancini M , Cohen RG , Nutt JG , Horak FB , Dual-task interference and brain structural connectivity in people with Parkinson’s disease who freeze, J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 86 (7 ) (2015) 786–792.25224677
[107] Pieruccini-Faria F , Jones JA , Almeida QJ , Motor planning in Parkinson’s disease patients experiencing freezing of gait: the influence of cognitive load when approaching obstacles, Brain Cogn. 87 (2014) 76–85.24727559
[108] Spildooren J , Vercruysse S , Desloovere K , Vandenberghe W , Kerckhofs E , Nieuwboer A , Freezing of gait in Parkinson’s disease: the impact of dual-tasking and turning, Mov. Disord. 25 (15 ) (2010) 2563–2570.20632376
[109] Vervoort G , Heremans E , Bengevoord A , , Dual-task-related neural connectivity changes in patients with Parkinson’ disease, Neuroscience 317 (2016) 36–46.26762801
[110] Hirata K , Hattori T , Kina S , Chen Q , Ohara M , Yokota T , Striatal dopamine denervation impairs gait automaticity in drug-naive Parkinson’s disease patients, Mov. Disord. 35 (6 ) (2020) 1037–1045.32163636
[111] Maidan I , Nieuwhof F , Bernad-Elazari H , , The role of the frontal lobe in complex walking among patients with Parkinson’s disease and healthy older adults: an fNIRS study, Neurorehabil Neural Repair 30 (10 ) (2016) 963–971.27221042
[112] Nieuwhof F , Bloem BR , Reelick MF , , Impaired dual tasking in Parkinson’s disease is associated with reduced focusing of cortico-striatal activity, Brain 140 (5 ) (2017) 1384–1398.28335024
[113] Pelosin E , Ogliastro C , Lagravinese G , , Attentional control of gait and falls: is cholinergic dysfunction a common substrate in the elderly and Parkinson’s disease? Front Aging Neurosci. 8 (2016) 104.27242515
[114] Gillain S , Drame M , Lekeu F , , Gait speed or gait variability, which one to use as a marker of risk to develop Alzheimer disease? A pilot study, Aging Clin. Exp. Res 28 (2 ) (2016) 249–255.26076908
[115] Nilsson MH , Tangen GG , Palmqvist S , , The effects of Tau, amyloid, and white matter lesions on mobility, dual tasking, and balance in older people, J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med Sci. 76 (4 ) (2021) 683–691.32506119
[116] Sakurai R , Bartha R , Montero-Odasso M , Entorhinal cortex volume is associated with dual-task gait cost among older adults with MCI: results from the gait and brain study, J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med Sci. 74 (5 ) (2019) 698–704.29767690
[117] Ahman HB , Cedervall Y , Kilander L , , Dual-task tests discriminate between dementia, mild cognitive impairment, subjective cognitive impairment, and healthy controls - a cross-sectional cohort study, BMC Geriatr. 20 (1 ) (2020) 258.32727472
[118] Ahman HB , Giedraitis V , Cedervall Y , , Dual-task performance and neurodegeneration: correlations between timed up-and-go dual-task test outcomes and Alzheimer’s disease cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers, J. Alzheimers Dis. 71 (s1 ) (2019) S75–S83.31104024
[119] Beauchet O , Launay CP , Chabot J , Levinoff EJ , Allali G , Subjective memory impairment and gait variability in cognitively healthy Individuals: results from a cross-sectional pilot study, J. Alzheimers Dis. 55 (3 ) (2017) 965–971.27802231
[120] Cullen S , Borrie M , Carroll S , , Are cognitive subtypes associated with dual-task gait performance in a clinical setting? J. Alzheimers Dis. 71 (s1 ) (2019) S57–S64.31322559
[121] De Cock AM , Fransen E , Perkisas S , , Comprehensive quantitative spatiotemporal gait analysis identifies gait characteristics for early dementia subtyping in community dwelling older adults, Front Neurol. 10 (2019) 313.31024419
[122] Kueper JK , Lizotte DJ , Montero-Odasso M , Speechley M , Alzheimer’s disease neuroimaging i. cognition and motor function: the gait and cognition pooled index, PLoS One 15 (9 ) (2020), e0238690.32915845
[123] Lowe DA , MacAulay RK , Szeles DM , Milano NJ , Wagner MT , Dual-task gait assessment in a clinical sample: implications for improved detection of mild cognitive impairment, J. Gerontol. B Psychol. Sci. Soc. Sci. 75 (7 ) (2020) 1372–1381.31550369
[124] Rantalainen T , Teo WP , Ridgers ND , Nuzum ND , Valente L , Macpherson H , Laboratory-based gait variability and habitual gait entropy do not differentiate community-dwelling older adults from those with subjective memory complaints, Gait Posture 80 (2020) 20–25.32480194
[125] MacAulay RK , Allaire T , Brouillette R , Foil H , Bruce-Keller AJ , Keller JN , Apolipoprotein E genotype linked to spatial gait characteristics: predictors of cognitive dual task gait change, PLoS One 11 (8 ) (2016), e0156732.27486898
[126] Nadkarni NK , Lopez OL , Perera S , , Cerebral amyloid deposition and dual-tasking in cognitively normal, mobility unimpaired older adults, J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med Sci. 72 (3 ) (2017) 431–437.27803098
[127] Whitson HE , Potter GG , Feld JA , , Dual-task gait and Alzheimer’s disease genetic risk in cognitively normal adults: a pilot study, J. Alzheimers Dis. 64 (4 ) (2018) 1137–1148.30010120
[128] Ehgoetz Martens KA , Matar E , Hall JM , , Subtle gait and balance impairments occur in idiopathic rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder, Mov. Disord. 34 (9 ) (2019) 1374–1380.31242336
[129] Brookmeyer R , Abdalla N , Kawas CH , Corrada MM , Forecasting the prevalence of preclinical and clinical Alzheimer’s disease in the United States, Alzheimers Dement 14 (2 ) (2018) 121–129.29233480
[130] Montero-Odasso M , Pieruccini-Faria F , Ismail Z , , CCCDTD5 recommendations on early non cognitive markers of dementia: a Canadian consensus, Alzheimers Dement 6 (1 ) (2020), e12068.
[131] McIsaac TL , Fritz NE , Quinn L , Muratori LM , Cognitive-motor interference in neurodegenerative disease: a narrative review and implications for clinical management, Front Psychol. 9 (2018) 2061.30425673
[132] Longhurst JK , Rider JV , Cummings JL , , A novel way of measuring dual task interference: the reliability and construct validity of the dual task effect battery in healthy adults and individuals with neurodegenerative disease, Neurorehabil Neural Repair (2022) (Online First).
[133] Longhurst JK , Cummings JL , John SE , , Dual task performance is associated with amyloidosis in cognitively healthy adults, J. Prev. Alzheimer’S. Dis. 9 (2 ) (2022) 297–305.35543003
[134] Wahn B , Sinnett S , Shared or distinct attentional resources? Confounds in dual task designs, countermeasures, and guidelines, Multisens. Res 32 (2 ) (2019) 145–163.31059470
