LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


8710523
21484
Adv Drug Deliv Rev
Adv Drug Deliv Rev
Advanced drug delivery reviews
0169-409X
1872-8294

37353152
10528676
10.1016/j.addr.2023.114968
NIHMS1914607
Article
siRNA drug delivery across the blood-brain barrier in Alzheimer’s Disease
Sajid Muhammad Imran ab
Sheikh Fahad Sultan c
Anis Faiza d
Nasim Nourina e
Sumbria Rachita K. af
Nauli Surya M. a
Tiwari Rakesh Kumar a*
a Department of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Harry and Diane Rinker Health Science Campus, Chapman University School of Pharmacy, Irvine, CA 92618, USA
b Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Central Punjab, Lahore 54000, Pakistan
c Shifa College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Shifa Tameer-e-Millat University, Islamabad 44000, Pakistan
d Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Federal Urdu University of Arts, Science and Technology, Karachi, Pakistan
e Department of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Syed Baber Ali School of Science and Engineering, Lahore University of Management Sciences, 54792 Lahore, Pakistan
f Department of Neurology, University of California, Irvine, CA, 92868, USA
Author Contributions

Conceptualization M.I.S, R.K.S., S.M.N, and R.K.T.; Introduction, Conclusion and Future Prospects M.I S., R.K.S; Pathophysiology F.K.; Clinical Trials N.N; siRNA therapeutics for AD, Challenges with siRNA therapy of Alzheimer’s Disease, Novel siRNA delivery systems for addressing blood-brain barrier in AD, Target genes for siRNA in AD, siRNA delivery systems targeting selected genes for AD therapy F.S.S. writing original draft, M.I.S, S.N, R.K.T, and R.K.S; writing, review and editing, M.I.S, R.K.S, S.N, and R.K.T.; supervision, R.K.T, and S.M.N. The manuscript was approved by all authors.

* Correspondence: Rakesh K. Tiwari, Ph.D. tiwari@chapman.edu, Assistant Professor, Department of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Harry and Diane Rinker Health Science Campus, Chapman University School of Pharmacy, 9401 Jeronimo Road, Suite 263, Irvine, CA 92618, USA, Phone: +1 714-516-5483, Fax: +1 714-516-5481
10 7 2023
8 2023
21 6 2023
01 8 2024
199 114968114968
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disease with a few FDA-approved drugs that provide modest symptomatic benefits and only two FDA-approved disease-modifying treatments for AD. The advancements in understanding the causative genes and non-coding sequences at the molecular level of the pathophysiology of AD have resulted in several exciting research papers that employed small interfering RNA (siRNA)-based therapy. Although siRNA is being sought by academia and biopharma industries, several challenges still need to be addressed. We comprehensively report the latest advances in AD pathophysiology, druggable targets, ongoing clinical trials, and the siRNA-based approaches across the blood-brain barrier for addressing AD. This review describes the latest delivery systems employed to address this barrier. Critical insights and future perspectives on siRNA therapy for AD are also provided.

Graphical abstract

Alzheimer’s disease
Target genes
RNAi
siRNA therapeutics
Mitigation strategies
Coding genes
non-coding sequences
Gene Silencing
AD models

pmc1. Introduction

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a devastating, progressive neurodegenerative disease known to cause dementia in the elderly [1, 2], contributing to 60–70% of all dementia cases [3, 4] that have affected more than 37 million people across the globe. The massiveness of the economic burden of AD and other dementias can be determined by the fact that the annual patient care cost in 2021 in the United States alone was a minimum of $355 billion [5]. It is further estimated that by 2050, these costs could rise to as high as $1.1 trillion. Moreover, more than 6 million Americans are living with AD. By 2050, this number is projected to grow to nearly 13 million [6]. Besides, AD is one of the top 10 primary reasons for death in the United States [4]. It is also pertinent to mention that the mortalities due to AD are more than those from prostate and breast cancer combined [6]. Figure 1 shows the percentage of AD prevalence among different age groups of 65 and above [7].

Unfortunately, except for the recent approval of Aducanumab and Lecanemab, both anti-amyloid antibodies associated with significant adverse effects, other FDA-approved drugs are ineffective in preventing or reversing this disease and only provide modest symptomatic benefits [3]. Motivated by the unequivocal need and growing understanding of the molecular pathophysiology of AD, a dramatic increase has been observed in developing many entities to bring a solution to the table. It is also interesting to note that “disease-modifying” treatments that aim at the fundamental mechanisms of AD have now touched the late stages of human clinical trials. The details of ongoing clinical trials are presented in the last section of this review.

Formation of Aβ aggregates (by amyloidogenic pathway [2]), neurofibrillary tangles (abnormal tau-protein accumulation due to faulty proteostasis [8]), and destruction of cortical cholinergic neurons are the characteristic features of AD [9–11]. The other factors that cause AD [12] include excitotoxicity, autoimmune responses, mitochondrial dysfunction, excessively high calcium levels, and mitophagy [13]. These events are attributed to genetic makeup, environmental factors [14, 15], and molecular interactions [16]. Over the years, scientists have been trying to identify the hidden clues of the disease at the genetic level. Eventually, these findings would help humanity avoid the inevitable signs and symptoms of the disease, such as dementia, confusion, difficulty in understanding situations, inability to solve problems, losing personal belongings, social isolation, and uncontrolled emotions [17]. Several small molecules have been investigated to manage this disease at its best; however, a disease-modifying definitive cure is yet a quest of scientists across the globe.

Almost all small molecule drugs approved or investigated in AD aim to provide symptomatic relief. They either reduce the severity of the disease to improve quality of life or slow down neurodegeneration. With respect to the anti-amyloid antibodies recently approved for AD, though both the anti-amyloid antibodies reduce brain amyloid, the effect of slowing clinical disease progression remains questionable or modest[18]. Additional work is needed to determine if the anti-amyloid antibodies result in a clinical meaningful effect[18]. Further, the existing therapies cause several side effects that compromise AD therapy. Figure 2 describes the overview of AD drugs and their side effects. Therefore, newer personalized treatment strategies need to be developed that target the underlying cause of the illness, with precision, without compromising safety and cost-effectiveness.

Gene therapy using small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) can serve as an avenue in this regard. siRNAs are non-coding RNAs with no more than 20-24 nucleotides in length that can cause post-transcriptional silencing of the desired gene. Their mechanism of action is based on microRNAs that are naturally produced in the body and play an essential role in regulating gene expression [19, 20]. Recently, a review was published on recent advances for AD [21], and another review highlighted the role of siRNA nanocarriers in neurodegenerative diseases [22]. However, to our understanding, no comprehensive review delineates the advances in nucleic acid-based therapeutics, particularly siRNA for AD. This review aims to identify the siRNA target genes implicated in AD and to provide the readers with the latest advances in AD therapeutics, focusing on AD pathology and the carriers that cross the blood-brain barrier. We have thoroughly discussed the latest developments in treating AD. We rigorously describe the latest siRNA-based in-vitro and in-vivo studies that point toward the future of AD therapy. Finally, we explain the challenges and opportunities for the concerned scientific community.

2. Latest developments in AD Pathology

There are two major forms of AD: Early-onset AD (EOAD) [23] and Late-Onset AD (LOAD) [24]. Sporadic AD falls under the LOAD category, and Familial AD (FAD) [25–30] is categorized under EOAD. Figure 3 distinguishes the types of AD. Several factors are implicated in the manifestation of AD. The latest developments concerning these factors are presented in the following subsections.

2.1 Tau proteostasis dysfunction

Microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT) plays a crucial role in maintaining axonal microtubule networks [31] and protecting the axon from enzymatic actions [32]. There are six isoforms of tau proteins (2N4R, 1N4R, ON4R, 2N3R, 1N3R, 0N3R) [33, 34] formed due to alternative mRNA splicing [35] and are involved in causing different tauopathies [36, 37]. AD is caused by the 4R isoform of the tau protein [38]. In a healthy cell, the degraded, accumulated, and mutant tau proteins are cleared up by several protein homeostasis mechanisms, such as the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) [39]. However, these mutant proteins are sometimes not cleared up as proteasomes get impaired, leading to misfolded tau proteins [40]. The soluble misfolded tau protein mediates neurotoxicity by enhancing microtubule breakdown at high concentrations, while at low concentrations, the role of mitochondria is affected throughout the neuron.

The misfolded hyperphosphorylated tau protein (p-tau) forms oligomers [31], resulting in neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs), one of the characteristic features of AD [41], and causes neuronal death [42]. The p-tau is also sent outside the neuronal cells by exocytosis to the neighboring neurons and glial cells [43], causing the spread of misfolded tau protein throughout the brain, leading to brain shrinkage. Internalization of tau protein aggregates [44, 45] occurs at the somatodendritic compartment or on the axon terminals, followed by their transport either anterogradely or retrogradely, forming an endosome [46, 47]. A portion of tau proteins is destroyed in the endosome, while the remaining form aggregates, resulting in disease progression [48]. Table 1 enlists various mechanisms opted by the tau protein to leave the neuron and enter neighboring cells. Figure 4 illustrates the role of tau proteins in AD pathology.

2.2 Overproduction of amyloid-β (Aβ protein and role of metal ions

Amyloid Precursor Protein (APP) maintains synaptic plasticity and enhances memory and brain development. Most people with Down’s syndrome develop AD due to overexpression of APP [54]. In a healthy brain, soluble forms of Amyloid-β (Aβ) are also present, but in the brain of an AD patient, Aβ aggregates are present in the neocortical regions of the brain [55] due to the metabolism of APP majorly by β and γ-secretase [56, 57] leading to the formation of peptide chains of different sizes, Aβ1–38 to Aβ1–43, and Aβ1. These peptide oligomers aggregate to form senile plaques in the synapses that inhibit neurotransmission and, eventually, neuronal death (Figure 5). Zinc, iron, and copper are the prominent transition metals that work as modulators in the aggregation of Aβ oligomers that later form Aβ fibrils [58]. Figure 6 illustrates the role of these metals. The copper, iron, and zinc ions concentration is threefold higher in AD patients’ brains than in healthy individuals [58].

In the amyloidogenic pathway, APP is cleaved enzymatically to form monomers of Aβ. These monomers aggregate together to form oligomers. Extracellular Zn2+ ions increase as the reuptake of released ions is reduced due to decreased mitochondrial energy in aging [59]. Also, after menopause, low estrogen levels release excessive zinc ions in the synapse [60]. The availability of excess Zn2+ ions forms aggregates of Aβ oligomers. Elevated Zn2+ ions in the cytoplasm also promote tau phosphorylation. Copper ions (Cu2+) in the synapse bind with the Aβ oligomers complex to produce hydrogen peroxide, which reduces antioxidants [61]. The extracellular iron ions (Fe3+) form a complex with aggregates of Aβ oligomers. The iron ions accumulate in the neuron due to mutated APP and reduced soluble tau. Subsequently, ferroproteins cannot function properly and cannot export the ions, which leads to increased iron ions that produce hydrogen peroxide. Hydroxyl radicals generated from hydrogen peroxides react with phospholipid membranes creating lipid peroxides and initiating lipid radical propagation that disrupts the overall membrane causing ferroptosis [62].

2.3 Excitotoxicity and reduced synaptic plasticity

Neuronal excitation and synaptic plasticity are essential for a neuron to function correctly. However, excitotoxicity happens due to excessive release, reduced reuptake, and recycling of astrocytic glutamate, an excitatory neurotransmitter. Aβ and tau proteins significantly promote neuronal excitotoxicity and reduce synaptic plasticity mediated by the NMDA and AMPA receptors [63]. Neuronal inflammation further triggers the release of glutamate by the presynaptic neurons. Glutamate then binds to the NMDA and AMPA receptors in the postsynaptic neurons and causes excessive calcium ion influx that leads to excitotoxicity and ROS production [64] (Fig 5).

Aβ oligomers promote excitotoxicity by disrupting the glutamatergic synapses and plasticity, which explains the cognitive deficits seen in AD. This eventually reduces AMPA and NMDA receptors at the neuronal plasma membrane through endocytosis [65]. Aβ oligomers interact with AMPA receptors (AMPAR) that reduce Aβ binding to neurons, leading to synaptic dysfunction. The Aβ-dependent synaptotoxicity leads to the dephosphorylation of AMPARs, which promotes the removal of the receptors from the post-synaptic sites. This reduction of AMPAR-mediated currents leads to depression, which correlates with dendritic spine degeneration and memory loss. The Aβ oligomers bind to synaptic membranes, affecting the synapse and downregulating the trafficking. At lower concentrations, the Aβ oligomers promote the function of NMDAR, whereas, at higher concentrations, they endocytose the NMDARs in cortical neurons, leading to depression.

Besides maintaining axons, tau protein promotes synaptic plasticity, which can be disrupted by continuous glutamate exposure to neurons. Tau protein concentration at dendrites and soma increase due to the resulting activation of the AMPA and NMDA receptors. This is done by extensive translation of tau mRNA. The hyperphosphorylated tau protein accumulates at the dendrites and produces neurofibrillary tangles, leading to tauopathy [66].

2.4 Autoimmune Response

AD can also be initiated as an immune response by various immune cells such as microglia, monocytes, macrophages, neutrophils, and NK cells [67]. The detection of Aβ antibodies and T cells are also indicators of the role of immunity in the progression of AD [68]. Microglia move towards accumulated Aβ [69] and phagocytose it to play a significant role in immune response in healthy individuals [70]. Their presence around the affected neuron increases abruptly as the disease onsets [71]. During the early stage, microglia release various chemicals, such as cytokines (IL-1β and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α), which promote neuroinflammation that causes neuronal death [72] (Fig 7). However, the microglia number decrease as the disease progresses [73].

2.5 Mitochondrial Dysfunction or Mitophagy

Mitophagy or mitochondrial autophagy is the process by which damaged mitochondria are removed selectively. In AD, mitophagy is defective due to the accumulation of Aβ and p-tau [74]. This promotes oxidative stress in the neurons [75] by involving various proteins [76]. Mitochondria are the energy-producing organelle that dictates cell death by apoptosis-inducing signals [77]; however, their dysfunction leads to oxidative stress and free radical generation. The mitochondriopathies are mainly genetically inherited (mtDNA, mitochondrial DNA) or acquired from toxins. Due to mitochondrial dysfunction, regional hypometabolism or impaired glucose tolerance occurs [78], following which the brain utilizes amino acids and fatty acids as an energy source [79]. Neuronal mitochondria also undergo oxidative stress and produce reactive oxygen species (ROS), which destroy DNA, lipids, and proteins. Further, the accumulated Aβ assembly docks on the sodium pump inhibit the relaxation of blood vessels through the ROS-PKC pathway in the brain, reducing the blood flow to the brain. Thus, increase in the chances of producing AD [80].

2.6 Role of Astrocytes in AD

Astrocytes are neuroglia that provide structural and metabolic support to neurons and play a significant role in the reuptake and recycling of glutamate from the synaptic cleft and providing lactate to neurons. A healthy brain releases antioxidants and other neurotrophic factors that detoxify reactive oxygen and other metabolic products, such as nitrogen species [81]. In AD, these functions are altered, increasing calcium ions’ intracellular concentration and mitochondrial dysfunction within astrocytes, which leads to increased excitotoxicity and free radical accumulation in the neurons [82]. These reactive astrocytes then produce more oxidants, cytokines, and other inflammatory chemicals that lead to astrocytic stress, leading to neuronal apoptosis (Fig 7).

2.7 Calcium dyshomeostasis in AD: Effect on endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria

In the brain of the AD patient, calcium ions level is disturbed, which plays a significant role in pathogenesis by Aβ aggregation and abnormal tau protein accumulation. Recent studies have shown that excessive calcium ions produced by mitochondria and the endoplasmic reticulum can lead to neuronal death [83]. Mitochondria are responsible for producing ATP to provide energy and store calcium ions. Ca2+ ions play a role in mitochondrial metabolism and depolarization of the mitochondrial membrane, but its excess can cause neuronal death. Increased calcium ions can cause oxidative stress (ROS is overproduced) that induces mitochondrial DNA mutations and affects calcium homeostasis. On overstimulation of neurons by glutamate, neuronal nitric oxide synthase is activated, producing abundant nitrogen oxide (NO). NO unfolds proteins and causes damage to the mitochondrial membrane when excessive calcium ions are present within the neurons. Moreover, calcium ions increased influx in mitochondria would diminish ATP production due to ROS overproduction.

Calcium ions are the central regulators of neurons, producing endoplasmic stress leading to neuronal death. Due to increased calcium ions, the ER cannot fold the proteins into tertiary and quaternary structures; therefore, the misfolded protein accumulates and aggregates [84].

3. siRNA therapeutics for AD

Almost all small molecule drugs approved and/or investigated aim to provide symptomatic relief against AD. They either reduce the severity of the disease or improve the quality of life. Therefore, it is imperative to develop newer individualized treatment strategies that precisely target the underlying cause of the illness and are safe and cost-effective for use. Gene therapy using siRNAs can serve as an avenue in this regard. siRNAs are non-coding RNAs with no more than 20-24 nucleotides involved in the post-transcriptional silencing of the gene of interest. Their mechanism of action is modeled after naturally produced microRNAs in the body that plays an essential role in regulating gene expression [85]. The mechanism by which siRNA functions, as illustrated in Fig 8, can affect post-transcriptional gene silencing of the genes involved in the pathogenesis of AD. A detailed description of the gene involved in AD pathophysiology that has been tried as a siRNA target is provided below.

4. Challenges of siRNA therapy for AD

Systemic siRNA delivery for AD therapy via intravenous or intramuscular routes is preferable due to patient compliance and cost-effectiveness. However, siRNA has to overcome various intracellular and extracellular barriers through this route [85, 86]. Also, the siRNA must bypass the blood-brain barrier (BBB) to reach its site of action (the neurons damaged due to AD) [87]. Several research groups have tried to avoid these systemic barriers by using intraventricular, intracranial, and intranasal routes. For instance, in a recent study by Shyam and colleagues, siRNA delivery against BACE 1 and APP was achieved through the intraventricular route using copolymer-based micellar nanoparticles made up of linear polyethyleneimine (LPEI)-g-polyethylene glycol (PEG) [88]. The siRNA remained stable and effectively knocked down the BACE33 and APP35 genes in mice after the complexes were infused into the brain’s lateral ventricles alongside the spinal cord [88]. In another attempt, intracranial administration of PEG-PEI/ROCK II-siRNA into AD mouse models also exhibited cognitive improvement [89]. Finally, the nasal route was tried using solid lipid nanoparticles (SLNs) for siRNA-based AD therapy. SLNs have demonstrated outstanding potential where nose-to-brain delivery of BACE 1 siRNA using Solid Lipid nanoparticles (SLNs) has been achieved. Notably, coating and non-coating of the SLNs increased epithelial cell penetration [90]. Lately, Yang et al. employed intranasal delivery of BACE1 siRNA and Rapamycin and reported that the multifunctional siRNA nanocarrier improved cognitive function of transgenic AD mice after intranasal administration, and this strategy can be further explored for combination therapy of AD [91].

Besides the studies mentioned above, systemic administration is still the most desirable route for siRNA-based therapeutics and is expected to have high clinical translatability. Scientists are struggling to bypass or avoid the barriers to successful siRNA delivery. Still, the scientific community has sought to optimize nanomaterials for nucleic acid-based AD therapy.

5. Novel siRNA delivery systems to bypass the BBB in AD

Despite intracellular and extracellular barriers, the biggest challenge for AD therapy is the BBB [92]. Figure 9 illustrates the structural components of BBB and the extensively studied transport mechanisms across BBB[93].Lately, several groups thoroughly reviewed the pathophysiology of BBB from AD perspective; readers are encouraged to follow these recent papers for a detailed understanding of BBB in AD pathophysiology [92, 94–98].

Several research groups attempted to solve these complicated challenges using intricate siRNA delivery strategies and used multiple delivery systems for siRNA-based AD therapeutics. PEGylated nanoparticles, magnetic nanoparticles, SLNs, peptide-linked nanoparticles, viral glycoprotein-linked nanoparticles, micellar nanoparticles, liposomes, and dendrimers have been investigated. Table 2 and Figure 10 illustrate these delivery systems. For instance, Zheng and colleagues have developed a hybrid siRNA delivery complex consisting of MPEG-PDMAEMA (poly(2-(N, N-dimethylamino) ethyl methacrylate), 50% CGN-PEG-PDMAEMA, and 25% QSH-PEG-PDMAEMA where the complex was successfully able to protect the siRNA from enzymatic degradation, showed effective penetration across the BBB, and exhibited minimal toxicity to neuronal cells in AD mouse models. The CGN peptide’s sequence was d-CGNHPHLAKYNGT, which targets the BBB, and the sequence of the QSH peptide was d-QSHYRHISPAQV that specifically binds to Aβ1-42 [99]. Similarly, neuron-specific delivery of siRNA against Aβ Precursor enzyme using nanocomplexes which comprise of a combination of PEGylated poly(2-(N, N-dimethylamino) ethyl methacrylate) (PEG-PDMAEMA) modified with both the CGN peptide’ (d-CGNHPHLAKYNGT) for BBB penetration and the Tet1 peptide (HLNILSTLWKYR) for neuron-specific binding has been demonstrated with significant efficacy [100].

In another study, Guo et al. designed siRNA nanocomplexes against BACE1, penetrating the BBB and preventing Aβ aggregates. They also used a modified CGN peptide (PEG-PDMAEMA) for BBB penetration and added a QSH peptide to carry out targeted delivery to Aβ. Their results indicated significantly high amounts of siRNA near the amyloid plaques and downregulated BACE1 levels in mouse models [101]. BBB penetration has also been achieved using a synthetic delivery complex comprising osmotically active poly(mannitol-co-PEI) modified with rabies virus glycoprotein. The siRNA was successfully delivered to the target site in-vitro and in-vivo [102].

Moreover, Cai et al. created a siRNA delivery system by combining dendrigraft poly-l-lysines (DGL)-based siRNA nano delivery system decorated with D peptide (Dp), T7 peptide, and Tet1 peptide [103]. DGL is a cationic polymer for gene delivery with high nucleic acid transfection efficiency. An all D-amino acid inhibitor (Dp) (sequence D-TLKIVWGKKKC) has been shown to inhibit tau phosphorylation and reduce tau fibril formation [104, 105], T7 peptide (Sequence HAIYPRH) targets explicitly transferrin receptors at the BBB, and Tet 1 peptide targets the diseased neurons in AD [103]. After being tested in mouse models, the system exhibited a significantly marked decrease in neurodegeneration resulting from Aβ aggregation and tau hyperphosphorylation, thus providing a much more targeted and nuanced approach to gene therapy not only for AD but also for other neurodegenerative disorders.

Cell-penetrating peptides for effective siRNA delivery in the AD mouse model is also a viable strategy. Haroon and colleagues developed a recombinant fusion protein designed for siRNA delivery to the target site in AD using a monosialoganglioside (GM-1)-binding brain targeting peptide Tet-1 [106]. They tethered the double-stranded RNA binding domain (dsRBD) to the targeting peptide that binds to GM1. The dsRBD was the binding domain of the human Trans Activation response element (TAR) RNA Binding Protein (TARBP2). The results revealed minimal cytotoxicity after in vitro testing in Neuro-2a, IMR32, and HepG2 cells and significant BACE1 knockdown in vivo using the Aβ/PS1 AD mouse models [106].

Zhou et al. have employed a Trojan horse strategy where they used a glycosylated “triple-interaction” stabilized polymeric siRNA nanomedicine (Gal-NP@siRNA) for effective BBB penetration to target BACE1 in APP/PS1 transgenic AD mouse model [107]. The therapeutic bypassed the BBB using glucose transporter-1 (Glut1)–mediated transport, ensuring that siRNAs decrease BACE1 expression [107]. Min et al. utilized GLUT1 transporter for the delivery of antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) by successfully constructing GLUT1-targeted ASO-loaded glucosylated-polyion complex micelles (Glu-PIC/Ms) and reported their significant brain accumulation by intravenous administration. The multiple glucose-modified PIC/Ms enhanced brain accumulation due to their multivalent binding with GLUT1 present on the brain capillary endothelial cells [108]; these novel glycosylated nanocarriers provide a valuable technique for the siRNA delivery across the BBB and can be explored further for AD therapy. Recently in 2023, Wang et al. screened a library of glutathione (GSH)-responsive silica nanocapsules (SNCs) encapsulating nucleic acids for targeting and reported that systemically delivered SNCs conjugated with glucose and rabies virus glycoprotein peptide can efficiently bypass the BBB using glycemic control [108].

Barbosa and colleagues developed a delivery system for siRNA to treat AD. They have formulated PEGylated magnetite nanoparticles carrying the siRNA against the BACE1 gene. The complex was used to carry out RNAi in vitro using HF-1 cells. Results indicated minimal cytotoxicity and a significant reduction in BACE1 levels, thus providing another option for the optimum siRNA delivery for gene therapy in AD [109].

Magnetic nanoparticles have also been used as a successful delivery tool for siRNA specific to microglia that cause neurodegeneration in AD by activating multiple inflammatory pathways [110]. Malhotra and colleagues have also developed a nanoparticle-based delivery system for siRNA delivery in neurodegenerative disease; they formulated a 5nm nanoparticle and used it to deliver a siRNA in neuronal cells (Neuro 2a) for silencing of Ataxin-1 gene in an in vitro established model of an ND Spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA1) over-expressing ataxin protein. Their results showed minimal toxicity and successful RNAi, proving the potential utility in siRNA delivery for AD [111].

Also, an epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) and β-site amyloid precursor protein (APP) cleaving enzyme-1 antisense (BACE1-AS) shRNA-encoded plasmid have been developed. The plasmid was loaded onto Rabies Virus Glycoprotein 29 (RVG29), which is a 29 amino acid peptide to form peptide-targeted multifunctional nanoparticles (NPs) (REGS-PN) [112]. When the shRNA-peptide complex was injected, significant improvement in spatial learning in APP/PS1 mouse models was seen as determined by the Morris Water Maze (MZM) test.

Alongside nanoparticles, other delivery strategies for targeted therapy in AD are also under investigation. One such delivery modality is the use of Liposomes. Amphiphilicity, enhanced bioavailability, and ease in biodegradability make liposomes attractive in delivering therapeutic agents with increased accuracy to the desired site of action. Moreover, they can encapsulate the Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient (API), siRNA, thus protecting it from the harsh external environment essential when delivering nuclei acids for disease treatment. Regarding drug dissolution characteristics, molecules are captured inside the liposome, inserted into the lipid bilayer, or adsorbed directly onto the surface; this approach can improve drug stability and facilitate slow release. Modified liposomes have targeted specificity and can become potential multifunctional AD nano-platforms [113–116].

For instance, Mancini and associates, in an attempt to target Aβ aggregates, formulated (mApoE-PA-LIP) comprising a phospholipid acid (PA) that can bind to Aβ and a synthetic peptide (mApoE) containing the apolipoprotein-E receptor [117]. Building upon this work, Kong et al. [118] wrapped osthole (Ost) in transferrin (Tf)-modified liposome to obtain Tf-Ost-Lip. The subsequently developed liposome components’ function was as follows: Tf through transferrin receptors (TfRs) situated at the capillary endothelial cells of the cerebrum penetrated the BBB, allowing the accumulation of Ostin in the brain. The average particle size of the liposome was about 100 nm, the encapsulation rate was over 90%, and the drug load was 3.71%±0.038%. The in vivo and in vitro studies showed that Tf-Ost-Lip could protect APP-SH-SY5Y cells from neurotoxicity, reduce the deposition of Aβ, and inhibit apoptosis, oxidative stress, and neuroinflammation in APP/PS1 mice. Furthermore, studies have shown that liposomes modified by curcumin or curcumin derivatives have high Aβ affinity and have a specific inhibitory effect on Aβ aggregation [113, 119, 120]. Like curcumin and its derivatives, the siRNA is negatively charged; thus, it can be inferred that siRNA and liposomes can show high compatibility for AD therapy.

Dendrimers are another delivery system used for the targeted delivery of therapeutic agents. They are a class of highly structurally controlled, dendritic polymers built from branched repeat units called “branch cell monomers” [121]. They comprise three domains: the central core, the branches attached to the core as repetition units (their number would determine the DD generation), and the terminal functional groups, which would interact with other molecules and be subject to modifications. There are many types of dendrimers, such as polyamidoamine (PAMAM), phosphodendrimers, poly-propylene imine, carbosilane, poly-l-lysine (PLL), and triazine [122]. They have proven efficient in delivering intact siRNA to the desired site of action. Dendrimers are being investigated as a critical delivery system in treating neurodegenerative diseases. For example, Ke and associates brought about chemical modification in the traditional polyamidoamine dendrimers (PAMAM) by fusing it with Angiopep (targets Low-density Lipoprotein related receptor) and a bifunctional PEG/DNA complex [123]. The delivery system exhibited intense BBB penetration and significant accumulation in the brain, which showed that it could serve as a potential tool in delivering siRNA effectively in treating neurodegenerative diseases such as AD.

Furthermore, Huang and colleagues formulated a PAMAM-bound pEGylated dendrimer fused with transferrin protein and investigated the capability of the dendrimer complex to carry out effective gene delivery to the brain [124]. Using various radiochemical methods, the results indicated a 225% increase in BBB penetration and CNS accumulation of the transferrin-conjugated dendrimer compared to a simple PAMAM pEGylated dendrimer. Peptide-tethered dendrimers have also been investigated, where an Arg-His dendrimer has exhibited high potential in treating individuals with ischemic stroke [125]. Moreover, PAMAM dendrimer nanocarrier functionalized by Serine-Arginine-Leucine (SRL) peptide for targeted gene delivery to the brain were synthesized where they exhibited low toxicity in vitro and after being injected intravenously into the tails of rats, employing endocytosis, passed through into the CNS at a much higher frequency than the controls (Unmodified nanoparticles) [127]. Carbosilane dendrimers delivered siRNA in vivo to carry out post-transcriptional gene silencing in HIV-1-infected astrocytes [126]. It was observed that significant inhibition of the target gene with minimal cytotoxicity showed that dendrimer formulations presented a high potential in treating neurological disorders.

Specific to AD, it has been additionally detailed that cationic phosphorous dendrimers, at high concentrations, could disturb Aβ and MAP-TAU (microtubule-related protein-Tau) accumulation [128]. Also, a G0-PAMAM dendrimer with tetra-maleimidopropionyl groups on its surface and characterized by helical β-peptide foldamers have shown to prevent a decline in Aβ-prompted long-term potentiation (LTP) in mouse hippocampal samples, which prompted the inference that the dendrimer formulation could aid in slowing down and possibly prevent dementia associated with AD [129]. Dendrimers have also been used in animal AD models for their intrinsic properties to prevent Aβ or α-synuclein fibrillation. So, G3/G4 polypropylenimine dendrimers with maltose groups on their surface could reduce the Aβ burden in APP/PS1 mice [130].

Recently, focused ultrasound (FUS) has been used to disrupt the BBB for the treatment of AD and to facilitate brain drug delivery with precise spatial and temporal specificity [131–133]. It has been reported that low-intensity FUS with microbubbles can transiently enhance BBB permeability non-invasively, and this phenomenon can be exploited for the siRNA therapy of multiple targets, as discussed in the sections below, non-invasively [132]. However, the safety and efficacy of this technique depend on the ultrasound parameters and the physical characteristics of the therapeutic agent, and risk vs. benefits are still pending further exploration [132, 134, 135].

6. Target genes for siRNA in AD

Decades of research revealed multiple genes implicated in the onset and pathogenesis of AD. These genes can be further classified into protein-encoding sequences -genetic sequences which produce proteins- and non-protein sequences -genetic sequences that regulate the function of protein-coding sequences but do not produce proteins of their own. Table 3 explains the protein-coding sequences that can be used as a siRNA targets for AD therapy, and Table 4 illustrates the non-coding target sequences. The protein-coding sequences, including APP, APoE, PSEN1, and Presenilin 2 (PSEN2), have been discussed below [26, 136, 137]. Furthermore, new genes have also been identified as essential players in AD pathogenesis, namely BACE 1, the gene that encodes for the β-amyloid cleavage enzyme, SHIP 1, that encodes for the enzyme inositol polyphosphate-5-phosphatase (IPP5D), PLA2G4E, Acat1, SORL1, SELPLG, SPHK1 and CAV1 and Voltage-Dependent Anion Selective Channel (VDAC 1) [27, 28, 138–140]. The non-coding sequences involve microRNAs, circular RNAs, and long non-coding RNAs (lncRNA) that play vital roles in the onset and progression of AD [141–149].

6.1 Protein Coding Sequences

6.1.1 APP gene

APP gene is responsible for encoding a transmembrane protein called the amyloid precursor protein, which, if subjected to enzymatic cleavage, will form toxic β-amyloid aggregates leading to EOAD [26, 150]. The types of Aβ aggregates formed include Aβ40 and Aβ42, forming plaques in the brain that impair cognitive activity. Multiple mutations in the APP have been implicated as one of the causes of AD. The most important is the Swedish double variant called APPsw (in which two consecutive missense changes alter adjacent amino acids near the β cleavage site) is a preferred target of gene therapy for the disease [9, 151, 152]. Moreover, it has also been observed that the gene for β Amyloid Cleavage Enzyme (BACE 1), the enzyme that cleaves APP, is also involved in enhancing the signs and symptoms of AD and is also a preferred molecular target of gene therapy strategies against the disease [100, 153].

6.1.2 Apolipoprotein E (ApoE) gene

Another gene that has been shown to play a vital role in the pathogenesis of AD is the Apolipoprotein E (ApoE) gene. The ApoE gene directs the formation of a 299-amino-acid ApoE protein involved in the metabolism and transport of lipids, including cholesterol and triglycerides. The ApoE gene is highly expressed in the liver and the brain. In the brain, it is mainly expressed in astrocytes and microglia, from which ApoE is released to extracellular space and plays a vital role in delivering lipoproteins into the neurons [154]. It has been demonstrated that the activation of the ApoE gene is known to stimulate the transcription of APP, which will yield Aβ aggregates upon cleavage. A recent study by Huang and colleagues has identified three isoforms of ApoE that increase APP transcription. The severity of AD caused due to these isoforms is ApoE4 &gt; ApoE3 &gt; ApoE2 [155]. Li et al. thoroughly reviewed ApoE4 reduction as a promising therapeutic strategy for AD therapy [156]. ApoE4 is shown to provoke neuroinflammation and exacerbate amyloid and tau pathologies and ApoE inhibition, particularly the APOE ε4 allele, using siRNA can significantly improve AD pathology and merits further investigation.

6.1.3 PSEN1 Gene

Another genetic target for the potential treatment of AD is PSEN1 which encodes for a subunit of the enzyme γ-secretase responsible for cleaving Aβ from the APP, causing aggregation of amyloid proteins in the brain [157–160]. Multiple genetic mutations have been identified and targeted to alleviate AD symptoms regarding the PSEN1 gene. One such mutation, unique to the Chinese population, is a Guanine to Thymine single base substitution at position 289 and subsequent valine replacement to leucine at position 97 of the protein. As a result, Amyloid protein Aβ42 increases in the brain, causing FAD [157]. Furthermore, the PSEN1 component, in a recent study conducted by Tanaka and colleagues, was shown to play a regulatory role by acting as the scaffold of the BCR–CK2a–p65 complex to induce NF-kB–mediated inflammation [161].

Henceforth, the knockdown of the PSEN1 gene, alongside mitigation of Aβ aggregates, can be a new treatment strategy for treating chronic inflammatory conditions, especially in AD. Interestingly, Tambini et al. observed that γ-secretase activity could be decreased by knocking out the homozygous PSEN1L435F gene in rats, significantly improving FAD [158].

6.1.4 Novel Genes

Pottier et al. have discovered a new gene that is also involved in the pathogenesis of EOAD. The gene is SORL1 and encodes a protein called Sortilin-related receptor LR11/SorLA, where mutations in the gene lead to dysregulation of Aβ levels in the brain [162].

Another potential genetic target in FAD has been identified in individuals who can retain the higher brain function called the PLA2G4E gene [30]. The critical features observed regarding this gene were that PLA2G4E was up-regulated in cognitively resilient aged-Tg2576 AD mouse models. Moreover, the same PLA2G4E gene loss was evident in the brain of late-stage AD patients as well as this gene is upregulated in dementia-resistant patients and can serve as potential therapy through knock-in strategies to treat AD, suggesting the hypothesis that increased expression of the PLA2G4E gene could prevent AD-associated dementia and improve cognitive function. This hypothesis was proved in an experiment conducted by Gonzalez and colleagues. The results indicated that overexpression of PLA2G4E in aged-APP/PS1 mice (the conventional animal model used in AD experiments) restores spatial memory deficits.

The genes discussed are known to be associated with EOAD. However, one gene found in the brain’s immune cells called microglia called SHIP 1 for the enzyme inositol polyphosphate-5-phosphatase (INPP5D) has been associated with enhanced Aβ plaque density in the brains of patients with LOAD [27]. Using 5xFAD mouse models, a successful knockout of the INPP5D gene was achieved, resulting in a decreased amyloid plaque density in the mouse models, highlighting that the INPP5D gene could be a potential therapeutic target for LOAD gene therapy [27]. Majercak and colleagues using 15,200 gene-specific siRNA pools transfected in HEK293/APPNEV cell lines, have also identified a gene implicated in LOAD pathogenesis referred to as Leucine-rich repeat transmembrane 3 (LRRTM3) that enhances Aβ42 levels in the brain by amplifying the activity of BACE 1 enzyme that cleaves APP [163]. Furthermore, Murphy and colleagues using an AAV containing inhibitory microRNAs, knocked down Acat1 successfully - the gene that encodes for the enzyme Acyl CoA: cholesterol acyltransferase (ACAT) enzymes in Triple Transgenic (3xTg-AD) mouse models. These enzymes regulate the storage of cholesterol and cellular cholesterol homeostasis. Results showed a drastic decrease in Aβ40 and Aβ42 levels in the mice subjected to Acat1 knockout, thus proving that the Acat1 gene can also be a potential gene therapy target in AD [138].

Three identical genes, SELPLG, SPHK1, and CAV1, have also been determined as potential gene therapy targets in AD, and it has been demonstrated that reversal of the expression of these genes from aberrant to healthy can restore normal functioning of impaired sphingolipids, which are essential bioactive lipids in the brain and are pathologically affected in AD. Multiple genes have also been proven to undergo Hydroxy-methylation in AD [164].

6.1.5 Microglia-associated genes

Alongside the formation of Aβ plaques, one of the characteristic features of AD is the proliferation and accumulation of microglia around the plaques [165]. When activated, the microglia cause severe neurodegeneration through synapse loss by engulfment of synapses, likely via a complement-dependent mechanism; they can also exacerbate tau pathology and secrete inflammatory factors that can injure neurons directly or via activation of neurotoxic astrocytes [165]. The role of microglia in AD pathophysiology has been investigated from a genetic standpoint, and a wide variety of genes have been implicated in exaggerating microglial activity in AD. These genes are referred to as microglia-associated genes.

The most distinct of these genes is TREM2. TREM2 stands for triggering receptor expressed in myeloid cells 2, a cell surface protein extensively expressed in brain microglia and peripheral myeloid cells [165]. Multiple gene variants in the TREM2 gene have been positively associated with AD. One of the most prominent genetic mutations is the loss of function mutation in the TREM2 gene. A recent study by Guerreiro and associates identified 22 variants within the TREM2 gene implicated in AD. One distinct TREM2 variant called rs75932628, responsible for inducing an R47H substitution within the primary sequence of the cell surface protein, was highly associated with AD (p&lt;0.001) [166]. Interestingly, the afore-discussed INPP5D/SHIP1 gene has also been implicated in microglial activation due to extensive accumulation of Aβ plaques in the brains of patients suffering from LOAD [27, 165]. Another microglia-associated gene involved in AD pathogenesis includes the CD33 gene [165].

A member of the sialic acid-binding Ig-like lectin (SIGLEC) family of receptors, the CD33 gene consists of 7 exons where exons 2,4, 6, and 7 are of great significance as they encode the conventional IgV domain, IgC structural domain, and cytosolic immunotyrosine inhibitory motifs (ITIMs) of the SIGLEC receptors [167]. The gene regulates innate immunity but plays no role in the brain [168]. After a thorough investigation, the gene is subjected to SNPs, and researchers have identified variants of the CD33 gene implicated in AD.

The first variant- rs3865444C-has shown a positive association with a lack of internalization of the Aβ42 peptide, commonly seen in AD patients, as well as increased activation of microglial cells in humans as per the study conducted by Bradshaw and colleagues, whereas the minor(T) rs3865444 allele confers protection against AD [168, 169]. Another SNP variant, rs3826656, has been associated with LOAD [168]. The rs12459419 variant has also been implicated with acute myeloid leukemia influences RNA splicing of exon 2 (the function is discussed above), where the minor variant rs12459419T has shown to have protective effects where two copies of the rs12459419T minor allele decreases the risk of AD by 25% [167, 170].

Using APPSWE/PS1 mouse model, Griciuc et al. conducted a successful knockout of the CD33 gene, resulting in a marked reduction in insoluble amyloid plaques in the brain, thus providing a potential novel therapeutic strategy in AD [168].

6.2 Non-Protein Coding Sequences

Alongside protein-coding sequences, non-protein encoding sequences such as microRNA and circular RNA are also thought to play a distinct role in the progression of AD; for example, two microRNAs referred to as miR-20b-5p and miR-148a-3p have been discovered to date which plays a specific role in inducing and attenuating neuronal apoptosis by carrying out post-transcriptional gene silencing of Ras homolog gene family, member C (RhoC) and Protein Kinase 1 (Rock 1) genes respectively [141, 143].

In patients with AD, sporadic increases in Aβ levels have been observed, and it is now thought to be due to post-transcriptional regulation through microRNAs. The absence of microRNAs, miR-137, −181c, −9, and 29a/b-1, has been shown to increase serine palmitoyl transferase enzyme levels, leading to enhanced Aβ aggregates in the brains of AD patients [145]. Furthermore, using RNA-seq analysis in triple transgenic AD (3xTg-AD) mice expressing PSEN1 (PS1M146V), APP (APPSwe), and Tau (TauP301L) transgenes, it was observed that the absence of a regulatory non-coding RNA miR-132/212 plays a distinct role in AD pathogenesis by enhancing Aβ levels and effecting tau protein levels [146]. It has also been reported that Aβ aggregates increase cytokine production through astroglia. This results in hyper-inflammatory effects that, in turn, contribute to neuronal destruction. Three miRNAs: miR-146, miR-21, and miR-155, have been discovered to regulate cytokine release [144]. These miRNAs can be synthesized and may serve as a potential siRNA therapeutic for treating astroglia-induced inflammatory neuronal destruction in patients with AD [145].

Furthermore, another non-coding sequence called circTulp4, a circular RNA that regulates the expression of a Tulp4 in APP/PS1 mice, participates in precipitating AD [142]. Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNA) are a sequence of RNA nucleotides that modulate gene expression in many ways. One such example is XIST, which is transcribed from the X chromosome and plays an essential role in physiologic X chromosome inactivation by a repressive “cloak” on the X chromosome from which it is transcribed, resulting in gene silencing [171]. LncRNA is implicated in AD as well. Researchers have recently discovered lncRNA EBF3-AS, which is upregulated in AD, subsequently causing the enhanced expression of the gene EBF3 (early B cell factor 3), rendering neuronal apoptosis [147]. While exploring the role of lncRNAs in AD, LncRNA 17A has also been discovered to be dysregulated in AD. Using in vitro apoptosis, migration, invasion, and ELISA assays on the SH-SY5Y cell line as an in vitro AD model, it has been elucidated that the lncRNA 17A fails to regulate the 17A gene, which subsequently causes autophagy, induces neurodegeneration, and deactivates GABA signaling [148]. Another long non-coding RNA called LncRNA BC200 has been observed to be over-expressed in AD, where the regulatory sequence is thought to modulate the expression of BACE 1, which is responsible for cleaving APP to form Aβ aggregates in the brain [149]. In conclusion, these non-coding regulatory genetic sequences play a distinct role in AD pathophysiology. They can serve as diagnostic tools and potential targets for gene therapy in AD.

7. siRNA delivery systems targeting selected genes for AD therapy

As discussed in the above section, several genes coding for specific proteins and non-coding sequences have been discovered to be involved in AD pathophysiology. Silencing these genes using suitable siRNA delivery systems can result in a significant breakthrough in AD therapy. Several researchers have investigated siRNA delivery systems for the above-described genes and non-coding sequences discussed below. Table 5 describes some of the siRNA sequences used in targeting the selected genes for AD therapy.

7.1 siRNA delivery systems against APP and BACE-1

Miller et al. successfully created siRNAs against the APPsw where siT10/C11, the siRNA in which the double mismatch is placed immediately across from the presumed RISC cleavage site, showed the most significant gene silencing potential [9]. Furthermore, it has also been determined that RNA silencing of genes involved in AD: APP, Tau protein, and VDAC 1 reduces oxidative stress, H2O2 levels, and the concentration of mitochondrial RNA fusion and fission proteins in AD patients [173].

McSwiggen and associates patented 325 siRNAs that target beta-secretase (BACE), PIN-1, presenillin-1 (PS-1), and presenillin-2 (PS-2) polypeptide and polynucleotide targets [174]. The patent covers arrangements with different artificially changed siRNAs that incorporate 2’-deoxy, 2’-F, and 2’- OMe pyrimidine and purine nucleotides, phosphorothioate internucleotide linkages, and rearranged deoxyabasic covers. Four siRNAs decreased BACE articulation by 40-90% at 25 nM fixation, yet there was no information on whether this changed Aβ40 and Aβ42 articulation. Basi et al. made a siRNA that decreased the BACE1 mRNA level by half and the BACE protein level by over 90% [151]. It diminished the discharge of the Aβ peptide without influencing BACE2 articulation, demonstrating specificity for BACE1. Kao et al. additionally synthesized siRNAs, where two siRNAs decreased BACE1 mRNA by over 90% and Aβ creation by 36-41% [175]. Pretreatment of neurons with the siRNA expanded neuroprotection against hydrogen peroxide-actuated oxidative pressure. Modarresi et al. infused LNA-altered siRNAs focusing on BACE1 antisense records into the third ventricle of Tg-19959 mice to downregulate BACE1 and BACE1 antisense records, which prompted lower BACE1 protein levels and less Aβ creation in the brain [152]. Cai et al. showed that siRNAs focusing on BACE1 repressed it in mice and expanded choroidal neovascularization; BACE1 is additionally communicated in the neural retina and in vitro and in vivo angiogenesis. Even though BACE1 hindrance might be remedially gainful in AD, it might add to retinal pathologies and compound conditions, for example, age-related macular degeneration [176].

The physiology of the Central Nervous System (CNS) and, more importantly, the brain is highly complex and poorly understood. Silencing of the BACE1 gene could have severe off-target complications. Until those complications are not entirely determined, the therapeutic potential of the BACE1 gene silencing will go unrealized. An investigation was carried out by Sridharan and associates, where the electrophysiological alterations resulting from BACE1 silencing were checked. The researchers used E18 mouse hippocampal cultured neurons (&gt; DIV14), transfected them with BACE1 siRNA, and observed changes in the action potentials of these neurons, where the results showed significant functional changes in the action potential patterns, which could have dire consequences at organism level [177]. Moreover, it must be kept in mind that BACE1 is also involved in a wide variety of physiological functions alongside significant therapeutic potential, and silencing BACE1 can lead to multiple side effects. In a study conducted by Laird and researchers, it was observed that inhibition of the BACE1 gene in mouse models leads to impaired cognitive activity, emotional responsiveness, memory deficits, and alteration in synaptic plasticity of the hippocampus [178]. This confirmed that emotional alteration was mitigated in mice undergoing BACE1 silencing but expressed the APPswe; PS1ΔE9 transgenes. Memory impairment, nonetheless, persisted in these BACE1 mouse models. Also, it has been determined that BACE1 has multiple substrates, bar APP, and its silencing of the BACE1 gene interferes with the metabolism of these substrates. BACE1 mouse models exhibit multiple phenotypic differences compared to their wildtype counters, such as reduced myelination, decreased spine density, altered neurogenesis and astrogenesis, axonal targeting errors, growth cone collapse impairments, reduced number of muscle spindles, retinal pathology, schizophrenia-like phenotypes, and epileptic-like seizures [179]. These effects can likely be translated into humans, subsequently doing more harm than good.

7.2 siRNA against APoE gene

RNAi against the APoE gene using siRNA was also conducted. In a study performed by Xian et al., a novel therapeutic approach against LOAD was developed where siRNA (pLKO.1-shNHE5) was transfected to carryout successful knockdown of the NHE6, primary proton leak channel in the early endosome, which resulted in the restoration of the Reelin-mediated modulation of excitatory synapses that ApoE4 impairs and induced complete reversal ApoE4-induced recycling block of the ApoE receptor Apoer2/Lrp8 and the AMPA- and NMDA-type glutamate receptors that are regulated by, and co-endocytosed in a complex with, Apoer2 [180]. Similarly, tissue-specific siRNAs have been developed against the ApoE pools in the brain, where silencing the ApoE gene in the CNS has led to robust reduction of amyloid plaque formation through modulation of immune systems and metabolic pathways with minimal off-target effects as determined by RNA-seq analysis [181].

7.3 siRNA against PSEN1 gene

RNAi was also conducted in vitro against the PSEN1 gene. Three concentrations of the PSEN1 siRNA (50 pmoles, 75 pmoles, and 100 pmoles) were injected into the IMR-32 neuronal cell line. A dose-dependent reduction in the expression of the PSEN 1 peptide was seen. At 50 pmoles, PSEN1 siRNA decreased the production of Aβ42. However, the expression was fully inhibited at the remaining two concentrations (75 pmoles and 100 pmoles) of PSEN1 siRNA [182]. RNAi therapeutics against PSEN1 were also investigated by Luo and colleagues where researchers transfected a pSilencer 3.1-H1 plasmid, which could transcribe siRNA containing three sites of action of RNAi against PSEN1 into CHO/APP/PS1 cell lines where it was observed that RNAi site 3 showed the most significant reduction is in PSEN1 mRNA levels. Decrease in the expression of PS 1 peptide and Aβ42 levels on days two and three after transfection, thus creating a novel drug target site for siRNA against the PSEN1 gene [183].

Moreover, siRNA synthesized must be able to specifically target the mutant variants instead of the functional wildtype to ensure targeted therapy and minimize off-target effects. Sierant and associates used various analytical techniques to develop a siRNA that could discriminate between the wildtype and mutant (1174 C→G) alleles of the human Presenilin1 gene, where the latter is responsible for inducing an L392V amino acid switch that, in turn, causes Early-Onset Alzheimer’s disease [184]. Thus, it is possible that siRNA that can differentiate between aberrant and normal alleles can be created to provide higher accuracy in gene therapy of complex diseases, especially neurodegenerative disorders such as AD.

7.4 siRNA for neuronal regeneration

One of the principal features of AD is the progressive degeneration of cholinergic neurons in the brain’s cortical regions [101]. siRNA therapeutics designed to tackle this aspect of the pathophysiology of AD are under investigation. Recently, researchers developed a complex consisting of PEG–PEI/ROCK-II-siRNA designed to carry out post-transcriptional gene silencing of the ROCK-II mRNA, subsequently inducing axonal regeneration, and tested it in vitro in C17.2 neural stem cells [185]. The results reported minimal cytotoxicity and a significant reduction in ROCK-II mRNA levels, thus opening a new avenue of siRNA therapeutics for AD.

Another distinguishing feature of AD is oxidative stress which causes neuronal destruction and subsequent cognitive decline. Current strategies involving injecting neuronal stem cells do not circumvent this problem, as the prevailing oxidative stress factors will also destroy the newly developed neuronal cells. Thus, a more intricate strategy must be developed to promote neuronal differentiation and protect the neurons from oxidative attack. Yu and colleagues designed antioxidative nanozymes (ceria) and metal-organic frameworks (MOF) to enhance neurogenesis synergistically. They loaded siRNA (siSOX9) and retinoic acid (RA) with the MOF [186]. This complex can be investigated in mouse models and can be an alternative to promote neurogenesis in patients with AD. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) stimulates neurogenesis in the brain; however, it cannot pass the BBB. If it does bypass the BBB, BDNF can promote neurogenesis and mitigate the progressive degeneration of cortical cholinergic neurons in AD. Building upon this premise, Wang and colleagues employed a synergistic therapy to administer BDNF and Nogo Receptor-siRNA (NgR-siRNA) responsible for inducing axonal repair[187]. Both components were loaded onto nanocomplexes of multiple co-polymers and injected into the lateral tail vein of AD mouse models. The drug showed effective passage through the BBB and achieved effective promotion, regeneration, and repair of the cholinergic neurons in the basal forebrain and the temporal hippocampus of the mice.

8. Ongoing Clinical Trials for AD

The medication permitted by the FDA for treating Alzheimer’s falls into two categories; drugs that may change disease progression in people living with Alzheimer’s and remedies that temporarily mitigate some symptoms of AD [188]. Motivated by the unequivocal need and growing understanding of the molecular pathophysiology of AD, a dramatic increase has been observed in developing entities to bring a solution to the table [3]. Most of these clinical trials employed the targets discussed above. For instance, several clinical trials exploited the BACE1 gene, ApoE, particularly ApoE4, P-tau, Aβ, and retinoid receptor. Table 6 describes the ongoing clinical trials for AD and their outcomes.

Nonetheless, developing more efficacious and less expensive disease-modifying drugs with a better safety and tolerability profile is still needed. As discussed above, siRNA-based knockdown of target genes may bring several candidates to clinical trials in the coming years.

9. Future Prospects

A growing understanding of AD’s molecular mechanisms has led to disease-modifying treatments. One such therapy is Aducanumab; more therapies are under clinical investigation. Although the FDA has approved only four siRNA-based therapeutics, those therapies target diseases that affect a comparatively small patient population. Also, the approved therapies are costly, considering the massive amount of money spent on their research and development. For instance, the annual cost of Patisiran (Onpattro) is between $451,430 and $677,145 per patient. The other approved siRNA-based therapeutics fall in the same price range as well. However, with many pharmaceutical companies and government agencies venturing into the R&amp;D of new disease conditions affecting larger patient populations, the cost is hoped to become affordable. We can safely assume that the next decade will witness a mushrooming of siRNA therapeutics, particularly for AD.

As discussed above, many attractive targets have been identified by extensive research. For instance, β amyloid cleavage enzyme involved in the pathogenesis of AD is a preferred molecular target for siRNA therapy. ApoE protein can be another lucrative gen target for RNA interference technology to treat AD. Targeting PSEN-1 for siRNA therapy has shown good promise in the FAD mouse model, leading to a significant breakthrough in its treatment. A newly discovered gene, SORL1, involved in the pathogenesis of EOAD, has attracted the attention of scientists to address AD. INPP5D has been implicated in LOAD. A successful knockout of the INPP5D gene in the FAD mouse model significantly improved the AD symptoms and can be an excellent target for RNA interference.

Similarly, Acat1 knockout in diseased mice improved AD symptoms and is indicated as a target for gene therapy. Other newer genes discovered and attracted scientists’ attention are PLA2G4E, SELPLG, SPHK1 and CAV1 and VDAC 1. Besides, the non-coding sequences involved in the pathogenesis of AD have been identified, including microRNAs, circular RNAs, and lncRNA, that are lucrative targets for AD’s gene therapy. Considering dozens of targets that can be exploited for AD therapy, it is plausible that the next decade will witness new AD therapies. However, most gene therapy studies on AD are based on mice models. Still, more funding from government agencies and the pharmaceutical industry is needed to translate these therapies from the bench to the bedside.

Besides identifying the gene targets, the BBB is another big challenge in AD therapy and other neurodegenerative diseases. Several research groups mentioned in the manuscript tried to address this massive challenge by trying various nanocomplexes, polymeric nanoparticles, lipid nanoparticles, liposomes, dendrimers, and magnetic nanoparticles. Approval of four siRNA-based therapeutics employing lipid nanoparticles has engendered a renewed hope that the BBB can also be solved in years to come [273]. Significant obstacles to siRNA, such as short half-life, excretion by the kidneys, capture by the reticuloendothelial system, membrane impermeability, endosomal trap, and off-target effects, are being investigated [85]. With more research conducted by biopharmaceutical companies and academia, more cost-effective and easy solutions will appear, resulting in more siRNA-based therapeutics at the bedside.

10. Conclusion

AD is a progressive and devastating neurodegenerative disease that affects a vast population and poses a massive economic burden on healthcare systems across the globe. The approach to solving this challenging health condition has largely been to mitigate the symptoms and increase the quality of life of the affected patients. However, with disease-modifying agents such as Aducanumab and Lecanemab receiving approval, the FDA approval of nucleic acid-based-therapeutics, a growing in-depth understanding of the molecular mechanisms, identification of molecular targets, and successful reversal of AD symptoms in mice models are shifting the paradigm in addressing the neurodegenerative disorders. Although more than two dozen pharmaceutical companies are investing colossal capital, government agencies need more funding to investigate this exciting area of research to result in successful and cost-effective therapies for the AD-affected population. Observing the trend in the past two decades of research and the success achieved in this area of research, we can safely conclude that the next decade will witness a plethora of nucleic-acid-based therapeutics, particularly the siRNA-based products that will be cost-effective and will be far better in efficacy compared to the existing small molecule-based therapies.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors acknowledge the funding support from the Chapman University School of Pharmacy, California, and from NIH grants, i.e., RKT (1R41AI164997-01A1), RKS (R01AG072896 and R01AG062840), and SMN (HL147311 and HL147311-S1).

Fig. 1. Numbers, age groups, and % prevalence of AD in the United States, 2021

Fig 2. Current AD therapeutics and their adverse effects

Fig. 3. Types of Alzheimer’s disease

Fig. 4. The role of tau proteins in AD pathogenesis [53]. Tau proteins stabilize axonal microtubules. Due to dysregulated activity of a kinase (Cdk5, GSK3β, MARK, and ERK2), hyperphosphorylation of tau protein occurs. As a result, the microtubule disintegrates, and hyperphosphorylated protein misfolds, forming soluble oligomers that enhance microtubule disintegration by causing neuronal toxicity. Due to proteostasis dysfunction, the misfolded proteins are not eliminated and, thereby, cause aggregation of oligomers to form NFTs within the neuron. P-tau also externalizes through several mechanisms where they are up-taken (internalized) by neighboring neurons, causing neuronal death in the limbic regions, which leads to the shrinking of the brain’s overall size in the last stages of the disease.

Fig. 5. APP is enzymatically cleaved by β-secretase followed by γ-secretase to produce Aβ monomers by the amyloidogenic pathway, which is responsible for the formation and accumulation of Aβ oligomers that compile to create senile plaques within the synaptic cleft. When glutamate binds to the AMPA receptor (AMPAR) and NMDA receptor (NMDAR), the influx of sodium and calcium ions happens, leading to neuronal depolarization, causing excitotoxicity. Due to excessive calcium ions, ATP production is decreased, and ROS production is increased within the mitochondria, while the endoplasmic reticulum cannot fold the protein properly. Aβ: Amyloid β; AMPAR: α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-isoxazolepropionic acid receptors; APP: Amyloid precursor protein; ER: Endoplasmic reticulum; NMDAR: N-methyl d-aspartate receptors; ROS: Reactive oxygen species.

Fig. 6 Formation of amyloid-β (Aβ) by an amyloidogenic pathway in AD and the role of metal ions

Fig. 7. Microglia move towards the Aβ senile plaques to phagocytose them and produce cytokines that promote neuronal inflammation, dramatically increasing the release of glutamate neurotransmitters from the presynaptic neurons. Also, Aβ accumulation causes astrocytes to become reactive, their calcium levels to increase, and mitochondrial dysfunction; all these factors lead to enhanced neuronal apoptosis in AD patients.

Fig. 8. RNAi mechanism: (1) micro-RNA (miRNA) gene makes primary miRNA (pri-miRNA), (2) tales are removed from the Pri-miRNA, and the Pre-miRNA is formed, (3) the Exportin-5 takes up Pre-miRNA that exports it out of the nucleus, (4) Exportin dissociated from the pre-miRNA, (5, 6) pre-miRNA is taken up by the tar binding protein (TRBP) and Dicer, (7) TRBP and Dicer chops off the head of pre-miRNA, and a double-stranded structure is produced, (8) double-stranded structure is taken up by the RISC loading complex (RLC), (9) RLC separates the sense and anti-sense strand, (10), Anti-sense strand is recognized by the RNA induced silencing complex (RISC) that destroys the target mRNA.

Figure 9. Structural components and different transport mechanisms across BBB. (A) Illustration of neurovascular unit and its composition (B) Schematic presentation of the Junctional Complex in endothelial cells of brain capillaries (I) Tight junctions: composed by Junctional Adhesion Molecules (JAMS), claudins and occludins. Zona occludins (ZO) proteins are represented in yellow (ZO-1), green (ZO-2) and blue (ZO-3); (II) Adherens Junction, cadherins are represented in green and caterins in gray; (III) GAP junctions. (C) Schematic representation of the transport mechanisms across the BBB. Reproduced and adapted from Bernardo-Castro, S., et al. [93] under the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

Fig. 10. Delivery systems for siRNA therapeutics in AD comprise PEGylated nanoparticles, magnetic nanoparticles, viral glycoprotein-coated nanoparticles, peptide-linked nanoparticles, solid lipid nanoparticles, micellar nanoparticles, liposomes, and dendrimers.

Table 1 Externalization and internalization pathways of Tau protein

  •	Lysosomal dysfunction	[49]	
  •	Positive feedback by extracellular Tau protein aggregations	[50]	
  •	Exosome dependent pathway	[51]	
  •	Macropinocytosis	[52]	
  •	HSPGs (heparan sulfate proteoglycans) dependent macropinocytosis	
  •	CME (clathrin-mediated endocytosis)	
  •	Lipid raft dependent	
  •	Lipid raft independent	
  •	Phospholipid disruption	
  •	TNTs (Tunneling nanotubes)	
  •	Phagocytosis	

Table 2 siRNA delivery systems targeting the blood-brain barrier

siRNA delivery System	Target Gene	Outcome	Reference	
25% MPEG-PDMAEMA, 50% CGN-PEG-PDMAEMA, and 25% QSH-PEG-PDMAEMA	BACE1	36.4% knockdown of BACE, better neuron protection, protection of siRNA against enzymatic degradation	[99]	
PEG-PDMAEMA modified with both the CGN peptide and Tet1 peptide	BACE1	50% reduction in BACE1 expression, higher brain accumulation, colocalization with neurons, reduction in amyloid plaques, suppression of phosphorylated tau protein, hippocampal neurogenesis, and restoration of cognitive performance.	[100]	
Nanocomplexes composed of PEG-PDMAEMA, CGN peptide, and the QSH peptide	BACE 1	high distribution in the Aβ deposits-enriched hippocampus, BACE 1 downregulation, reduction of Aβ and amyloid plaques to the level of wild-type mice, increased the level of synaptophysin and rescued memory loss of the AD transgenic mice, no hematological or histological toxicity	[101]	
Rabies virus glycoprotein (RVG) modified poly(mannitol-co-PEI) gene transporter termed R-PEG-PMT.	BACE 1	The RVG ligand directed the PMT/siRNA complexes toward the brain through binding to nicotinic acetylcholine receptors expressed on BBB that resulted in enhanced brain-targeted RNAi effect in vitro and in vivo	[102]	
a dendrigraft poly-l-lysines (DGL)-based siRNA nanoparticle linked with D peptide, T7 peptide and Tet peptide, and PEG	BACE 1	The system programmatically targets the BBB and neurons, reducing β amyloid plaques and neurotoxicity, and improving cognition in AD mice.	[103]	
A multifunctional nanocarrier composed of DGL based siRNA delivery system containing RVG29 peptide and D peptide (DGLs-PEG-RVG29-Dpeptide/pshBACE1-AS nanoparticle)	BACE 1	Down-regulation of the BACE 1, reduction of neurofibrillary tangles, and memory loss rescue in AD mice	[104]	
Complex composed of recombinant fusion protein linked with Tet 1 peptide	BACE1	The distinctive localization of the complex in the cerebral hemisphere with significant knockdown of BACE1 in the brain in both ΑβPP-PS1 mice and wild-type C57BL/6.	[106]	
a glycosylated nanodelivery system exploiting glucose transporters to deliver siRNA	BACE1	Restoration of cognitive capacity in AD mice without notable side effects.	[107]	
PEGylated magnetite nanoparticles with immobilized siRNA	BACE 1	Significant BACE1 suppression in HFF-1 cells	[109]	
magnetic nanoparticles and a magnet to transfect primary microglia cells with different small interfering RNAs	TREM2 and CD33	partial knockdown of TREM2 expression in both mice and rats and a decreased NOS2 expression in mice	[110]	
peptide-tagged polyethylene glycol (PEG)ylated chitosan polymer nanoparticles	Ataxin-1 gene	Significant knock down of ND Spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA1) protein	[111]	
BACE1-AS shRNA-encoded plasmid loaded on to RVG29 peptide-targeted multifunctional nanoparticles	BACE1	Significant downregulation of BACE1 with improved spatial learning and memory capabilities of APP/PS1 mice	[112]	
PAMAM dendrimers modified with angiopep through bifunctional PEG and complexed with DNA termed PAMAM–PEG–Angiopep/DNA nanoparticles (NPs)	pEGFP	BCECs internalized the NPs through clathrin- and caveolae-mediated energy-depending endocytosis	[123]	
PAMAM-PEG-Transferrin (Tf)dendrimers	pEGFP-N2 and pGL2-control vector	The transfection efficiency of the PAMAM-PEG-Tf/DNA complex was much higher than PAMAM/DNA and PAMAM-PEG/DNA complexes in BCECs	[124]	
Histidine and Arginine conjugated with polyamidoamine dendrimers (PG2HR)	pDNA	The dendrimers have higher brain transfection efficiency	[125]	
Carbosilane dendrimers	HIV-1 Nef	A high efficiency in Nef silencing, reducing HIV-1 infectivity, was observed in astrocytes.	[126]	

Table 3 Protein coding genetic sequences and their specific roles in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s Disease

Genetic Sequence	Type of sequence	Function	Mutation(s)	Disease	References	
APP	Protein coding sequence	Encodes Amyloid Precursor Protein	A673T, T48 P, L52 P, K53 N	Early Onset Alzheimer’s	[29, 136]	
APoE	Protein coding sequence	Activates transcription factor Ap-1 enhances APP production	ApoE3, ApoE4	Late-Onset Alzheimer’s	[137]	
PSEN1 PSEN2	Protein coding sequence	Encodes subunit of APP cleaving enzyme γ-secretase	N141I, T289G, V97L, PSEN1L435F	Early Onset Alzheimer’s	[29, 155, 157]	
SHIP 1	Protein coding sequence	Encodes enzyme INPP5D	Wildtype	Late-Onset Alzheimer’s	[27]	
PLA2G4E	Protein coding sequence	Improves dementia	Wildtype	Familial Alzheimer’s disease	[30]	
BACE 1	Protein coding sequence	Encodes β Amyloid Cleavage Enzyme	Wildtype	Early Onset Alzheimer’s disease	[100, 153]	
LRRTNM3	Protein coding sequences	Enhances Aβ43 levels by promoting BACE1 cleavage of APP	Wildtype	Late-Onset Alzheimer’s disease	[171]	
Acat	Protein coding sequence	Encodes Acyl-CoA: cholesterol acyltransferase (ACAT) enzymes (also known as sterol-O-acyltransferases)	Acat1	Not specified	[138]	
SORL1	Protein coding sequence	encodes the Sortilin-related receptor LR11/SorLA involved in the control of Aβ peptide production	Wildtype	Early Onset Alzheimer’s disease	[162]	
SELPLG, SPHK1, and CAV1	Protein coding sequence	Regulate Sphingolipid Pathways	Wildtype	Not specified	[164]	
TREM2	Protein coding sequence	encodes Triggering Receptor Expressed in Myeloid Cells 2 cell surface protein	rs75932628 variant responsible for causing R47H loss of function mutation	Alzheimer’s disease	[166]	
CD33	Protein coding sequence	sialic acid-binding Ig-like lectin (SIGLEC) family of receptors	rs3865444,, rs382665, rs12459419	Alzheimer’s disease, LOAD	[167–170]	

Table 4 Non-protein-coding Genetic Sequences and their specific roles in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease

Genetic Sequence	Type of sequence	Function	Disease	References	
MicroRNA-20b-5p	Non-protein coding sequence	Induces neuronal apoptosis by downregulating RhoC mRNA expression	Familial Alzheimer’s disease	[143]	
miR-148a-3p	Non-protein coding sequence	Attenuates Aβ25–35 induced neurotoxicity by downregulating ROCK1	Familial Alzheimer’s disease	[141]	
miR-146, miR-21 and miR-155	Non-protein coding sequences	Reduces astroglia mediated Inflammation induced by the presence of Aβ aggregates	Familial Alzheimer’s disease	[144]	
miR-132/212	Non-Protein coding sequence	Regulates Aβ- and Tau Protein levels	Alzheimer’s disease	[172]	
miR-137, −181c, −9, and 29a/b-	Non-protein coding sequence	Regulates Serine Palmitoyl Transferase levels, thus regulating aggregation of Aβ- in the brain	Sporadic Alzheimer’s disease	[145]	
circTulp4	Non-protein coding sequence	Modulates Tulp4 by interacting with U1 snRNP and RNA polymerase II	Familial Alzheimer’s disease	[142]	
LncRNA EBF3-AS	Non-protein coding sequence	Upregulates EBF3-AS gene causing neuronal apoptosis	Alzheimer’s disease	[147]	
LncRNA17A	Non-protein coding sequence	Regulates gene 17A, which is responsible for causing autophagy, induces neurodegener ation, and deactivates GABAB signaling	Alzheimer’s disease	[148]	
LncRNA BC200	Non-protein coding sequence	Regulates Expression of the BACE1 gene	Alzheimer’s disease	[149]	

Table 5 siRNA sequences and their target genes used for the treatment of AD

Gene	siRNA sequence	Delivery system	Effect	Ref	
BACE1	sense: GCUUUGUGGAGAUGGUGGATT
antisense: UCCACCAUCUCCACAAAGCTT	CGN, QSH peptide nanocomplexes	Significant decline of BACE1 mRNA and protein levels. Reduction in Aβ and amyloid plaques in wild-type mice. Increased synaptophysin and memory loss rescue of the AD transgenic mice	[101]	
BACE1	B1 sense, CAGGAUCUGAAAAUGGACUGtt;
B1 anti-sense, CAGUCCAUUUUCAGAUCCUGtt	N/A	85% suppression of BACE1 mRNA and 88-94% suppression of BACE1 protein were achieved alongside a reduction in Aβ in HEK293 cells	[151]	
APP	sense: 5′CAAGGAUCAGUUACGGAAATT3′
antisense: 5′UUUCCGUAACUGAUCCUUGGT3’	SiRNA–Lipofectamine 2000 complex	Successful silencing of APP gene in human neuroblastoma (SHSY5Y) cells, leading to decreased H2O2 production, lipid peroxidation, fission-linked GTPase activity, and increased cytochrome oxidase activity and ATP production	[173]	
APP35
BACE33	Sense-5′-GCGGAUGGAUSUUUGUGAGACCCAU; Antisense-5′-AUGGGUCUCACAAACAUCCAUCCGC
Sense-5′-GAGCCCUUCUUUGACUCCCUGGUGA; Antisense-5′-UCACCAGGGAGUCAAAGAAGGGCUC	Intraventricular administration of linear polyethyleneimine (LPEI)-g-polyethylene glycol (PEG) copolymer-based micellar nanoparticle system (LPEI-siRNA nanoparticles)	Selective knockdown of APP and BACE genes in cultured mouse neuroblastoma (N2a) cells. Efficient silencing in the brain and spinal cord of the BACE gene.	[153]	
PSEN1	P8 Antisense 3’-TTGUCACAACACCAACCAUUU-5’
P9 Anti sense 3’-TTUGUCACAACACCAAC CAUU-5’
P10 Antisense 3’-TTAUGUCACAACACCA ACCAU-5’
P11 Antisense 3’-TTGAUGUCACAACACC AACCA-5’	Lipofectamine 2000	Successful silencing of mutant allele but no effect on wildtype allele	[184]	

Table 6 Ongoing clinical trials for AD

Type of molecules/Drug	Clinical trial phase	Mechanism of action /targets	Developer/Responsible Party	NCT	Remarks	Ref	
Neflamapimod	Phase 2	Selective p38 MAPK Alpha Inhibitor	EIP Pharma Inc.	NCT03402659	Phase 2, double-blind, Randomized, placebo-controlled, 24-week treatment with 40 mg Neflamapimod twice daily, did not improve episodic memory in patients with mild Alzheimer’s disease. However, Neflamapimod treatment lowered CSF biomarkers of synaptic dysfunction. Combined with PK–PD findings, the results indicate that a more comprehensive study of Neflamapimod at a higher dose level is warranted to assess effects on AD progression.	[189, 190]	
NGP 555	Phase 1	Reduce Alzheimer’s disease amyloid buildup by targeting Abeta 42 production.	NeuroGenetic Pharmaceuticals Inc.	NCT02534480	Phase 1, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled, NGP 555 is a gamma-secretase modulator with a selective mechanism to reduce Abeta 42 while raising shorter Abeta forms such as Abeta 37 and 38.	[191]	
Gene Therapy for APOE4 Homozygote of AD	Phase I	conversion of the APOE protein isoforms in the CSF of APOE4 homozygotes from APOE4 to APOE2-APOE4.	Lexeo Therapeutics	NCT03634007	Phase 1, Non-Randomized, Interventional (Clinical Trial)	[192]	
Drug: AAV-hTERT	Phase 1	Extend the telomeres to prevent, delay, or even reverse the development of AD pathology.	Libella Gene Thera peutics	NCT04133454	treating subjects with hTERT delivered via transduction using AAV	[193]	
Drug: Donepezil	Phase 4	Clinical Response of Choline Acetyltransferase and Apolipoprotein Epsilon Gene Polymorphis ms to Donepezil in Alzheimer’s Disease	Eisai Korea Inc.	NCT00381381	Non-Randomized, Single Group Assignment	[194]	
miRNA 107, BACE1	NA	NA
microRNA 107 (miRNA 107) and Beta-amyloid Precursor Protein-cleaving Enzyme 1 (BACE1) Messenger Ribonucleic Acid (mRNA) Gene Expression in Cerebrospinal Fluid and Peripheral Blood of Alzheimer’s Disease	Shanghai Mental Health Center	NCT01819545	Observational, Case-Control, no intervention	[195–197]	
Drug: ALZ-801	Phase 2	NA	Alzheon Inc.	NCT04693520	investigate the effects of oral ALZ-801 in subjects with Early AD who have the APOE4/4 or APOE3/4 genotype, Interventional (Clinical Trial), Single Group Assignment,	[198]	
Drug: Rosiglitazone	Phase 3	Adjunctive Therapy to Acetylcholinesterase Inhibitors	GlaxoSmithKline	NCT00348140	Phase 3, Randomized, Double-blind, Placebo-controlled	[199, 200]	
Drug: Epigallocatechin-Gallate (EGCG) Drug: Placebo	Drug: Epigallocatechin-Gallate (EGCG) (Phase 2) Drug: Placebo (Phase 3)	induction of alpha-secretase and the endothelin-converting enzyme, as well as to prevent Aβ aggregation to toxic oligomers through direct binding to the unfolded peptide.	Charite UniversityBerlin, Germany	NCT00951834	Phase2,3, Interventional (Clinical Trial), Randomized, EGCG is a promising compound that has proven efficacious in AD animal models	[201]	
Drug: S -Equol	Phase 1	platelet mitochondria COX activity	Russell Swerdlow, Ausio Pharmaceuticals, LLC	NCT02142777	Phase 1, Interventional (Clinical Trial), Single Group Assignment

We will determine if the intervention (S-equol) alters platelet mitochondria COX activity.	[202]	
Drug: Oxaloacetate (OAA)	Phase 1	shown to have an effect on brain mitochondrial activity and brain energy in non-human animals	Russell Swerdlow	NCT02593318	Phase 1, Interventional (Clinical Trial), Non-Randomized, Parallel Assignment, 1 gram per day of OAA was found safe.	[203]	
Drug: F 18 T807 Flortaucipir	NA	target to treat dementia in APOE4 carriers	Tammie L. S. Benzinger, Washington University School of Medicine	NCT03816228	The ApoE4 genotype status appears to have a more significant deleterious effect on gross hippocampal pathology and memory performance in women than men.	[204, 205]	
Drug: EPAX 1050TG	NA	Omega-3 Fatty Acid Treatment	Karolinska University Hospital	NCT00211159	Randomized Double-blind Trial	[206–208]	
Drug: lorazepam	NA	NA	Mayo Clinic, National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)	NCT00586430	Randomized, Crossover Assignment, A single 2 mg dose of lorazepam will cause more cognitive impairment in carriers of the ApoE4 allele than in noncarriers.	[209, 210]	
Amyloid Load in Alzheimer’s Disease	NA	NA	Institute National de la Santé Et de la Recherche Médicale, France	NCT01095744	They wanted to find whether the amount of amyloïd protein may be lower in LOAD than EOAD in patients showing the same level of dementia.	[211]	
Drug: Omega 3 PUFA	Phase 2	NA	Gene L. Bowman, ND, MPH, Oregon Health and Science University	NCT01953705	Phase 2, Randomized, Interventional (Clinical Trial), Clinical trial will determine whether an omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA) therapy can promote brain health by supporting the small blood vessels in the brain over three years in older adults at high risk for cognitive decline and dementia of Alzheimer’s type.	[212, 2131	
CAD106	Phase 2	stimulate Aβ-specific antibody responses while avoiding T-cell autoimmune responses	Novartis	NCT00795418	Phase 2, Placebo-controlled randomized, Double-blind	[214–216]	
CNP520 (50 mg)	Phase 2	β-Amyloid	Novartis Pharmaceuticals	NCT03131453	Phase 2, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group	[215, 217]	
CNP520 (15 mg)	Phase 3	β-Amyloid	Novartis Pharmaceuticals	NCT03131453	Phase 2, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group	[214, 217]	
BAN2401 Lecanemab	Phase 3	β-Amyloid	Eisai Inc.	NCT04468659	Phase 3, randomized, double-blind, placebo-control	[215, 218]	
Crenezumab	Phase 3	β-Amyloid	Hoffmann-La Roche	NCT03491150	Phase 3, Interventional, Single Group Assignment	[215, 219]	
Aducanumab	Phase 2	β-Amyloid	Biogen	NCT03639987	Phase 2, Randomized, Parallel-Group, Multicenter, Double-Blind	[220]	
UB-311	Phase 2	β-Amyloid	United Neuroscience Ltd.	NCT02551809	Phase 2, Randomized, Placebo-controlled, Double-blind	[215, 221]	
Gantenerumab	Phase 3	β-Amyloid	Hoffmann-La Roche	NCT02051608	Phase 3, Randomized, Placebo-Controlled, Multicenter, Double-Blind, Parallel-Group	[215, 222, 223]	
Solanezumab	Phase 3	β-Amyloid	Eli Lilly and Company	NCT00905372	Phase 3, Randomized, completed	[224]	
CT1812	Phase 1	β-Amyloid	Cognition Therapeutics	NCT03522129	Phase 1, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled parallel-group trial in adults	[225]	
Thiethylperazine (TEP)	Phase 2	β-Amyloid	Immunogenetics AG	NCT03417986	Phase 2, an Open-label, Multicenter	[215, 226]	
ID1201	Phase 2	β-Amyloid	IlDong Pharmaceutical Co Ltd	NCT03363269	Placebo-controlled Phase II Clinical Trial, A Multi-center, Randomized, Double-blind	[215, 227]	
NPT088	Phase1	β-Amyloid	Proclara Biosciences, Inc.	NCT03008161	Multicenter Phase 1, double-blind, randomized, multiple-dose, placebo-controlled,	[215, 225, 228]	
Lu AF20513	Phase 1	β-Amyloid	H. Lundbeck A/S	NCT03819699	The study was conducted to study the effects of monthly dosing with a single dose of Lu AF20513 with and without the presence of a booster vaccine.	[215, 229]	
ABvac40	Phase 2	β-Amyloid	Araclon Biotech S.L.	NCT03461276	A Multi-center, Double-blind, Randomized, Placebo-controlled	[215, 230, 231]	
Ponezumab	Phase 2	β-Amyloid	Pfizer	NCT00945672	A Phase 2 Double-Blinded, Randomized, Multicenter Study Evaluating the Safety, Placebo-Controlled	[215, 232]	
ACC-001	Phase 2	β-Amyloid	Pfizer	NCT01227564	A Phase 2, Multicenter, 24-month, Third-party, Unblinded, Placebo-controlled, Randomized	[215, 233, 234]	
KHK6640	Phase 1	β-Amyloid	Kyowa Kirin Co., Ltd.	NCT03093519	A Phase 1 Randomized, Placebo-controlled, Double-blind,	[215, 235]	
GSK933776	Phase 1	β-Amyloid	GlaxoSmithKline	NCT01424436	Non-Randomized, Parallel Assignment	[215, 236–238]	
UB-311	Phase 1	β-Amyloid	United Biomedical	NCT00965588	A Phase I, Open-Label Study to Evaluate the Safety	[215, 239, 240]	
ABvac40	Phase 1	β-Amyloid	Araclon Biotech S.L.	NCT03113812	A Randomized, Placebo-controlled, Single-center Phase-I, Parallel-Group, Double-blinded	[215, 231, 241]	
JNJ-54861911	Phase 2	BACEI	Janssen Research &amp; Development, LLC	NCT02260674	A Phase 2a Randomized, Placebo-Controlled, Double-blind Parallel-Group	[242]	
Elenbecestat	Phase 3, terminated)	BACEI	Eisai Inc. (Eisai Co., Ltd.)	NCT02956486	A Placebo-Controlled, Parallel-Group, Double-Blind	[243, 244]	
Verubecestat	Phase 3	BACEI	Merck Sharp &amp; Dohme Corp.	NCT01739348	A Randomized, Parallel-Group, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled	[245, 246]	
LY450139	Phase 3 is not effective	BACEI	Eli Lilly and Company	NCT01035138	Phase 3, Double-Blind Studies	[215, 247]	
IONIS-MAPTRx	Phase 1,2	P-tau	Ionis Pharmaceuticals, Inc.	NCT03186989	A Randomized, Placebo-Controlled Study, Double-Blind, Followed by an Open-Label Extension	[248]	
JNJ-63733657	Phase 1	P-tau	Janssen Research &amp; Development, LLC	NCT03375697	A 2-Part Randomized, Placebo-Controlled, Single and Multiple Ascending Dose, Double-Blind	[215, 249]	
RO7105705	Phase 2	P-tau	Genentech, Inc.	NCT03828747	Phase II, multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized	[250, 251]	
ABBV-8E12	Phase 2	P-tau	AbbVie	NCT02880956	Phase 2 Multiple Dose, Randomized, Double-Blind, Multicenter	[252–254]	
AADvac1	Phase 2	P-tau	Axon Neuroscience SE	NCT02579252	A 24 Months Randomised, Parallel Group, Double-Blinded, Placebo-controlled, multi-center, Phase 2 Study	[255–258]	
BIIB-092	Phase 2	P-tau	Biogen	NCT03352557	Randomized, Placebo-Controlled, Double-Blind, Parallel-Group Study to Assess the Safety,	[259, 260]	
BIIB-080	Phase 1	P-tau	Biogen	NCT01677572	A Randomized, Placebo-Controlled Multiple Dose Study to Assess the Safety, Double-Blinded	[261]	
TPI-287	Phase 1	P-tau	Adam Boxer, University of California, San Francisco	NCT01966666	Phase 1, Double-Blind, Randomized, Placebo-Controlled, Sequential Cohort	[262]	
TRx0237	Phase 3	P-tau	TauRx Therapeutics Ltd	NCT03446001	Randomized, Placebo-Controlled, Double-Blind, Three-Arm, 12-Month, Safety and Efficacy Study	[263, 264]	
LY3303560	Phase 1	P-tau	Eli Lilly and Company	NCT02754830	Phase 1, Single-Dose, randomized	[265, 266]	
Posiphen	Phase 1	APP	Annovis Bio Inc.	NCT01072812	An Open-Label, Two-Stage Study	[267, 268]	
Azeliragon	Phase 3	RAGE	vTv Therapeutics	NCT02080364	Randomized, Multicenter Registration Trial, Double-blind, Placebo-Controlled	[269, 270]	
Acitretin	Phase 2	Retinoid receptor	K. Lieb, Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz	NCT01078168	Randomized, Placebo-controlled Parallel-group Study	[271]	
Bexarotene	Phase 2	Retinoid receptor	The Cleveland Clinic	NCT01782742	Randomized, A Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Randomized Study	[272]	

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare no competing financial interest.


References

[1] Giri M , Zhang M , Lü Y , Genes associated with Alzheimer’s disease: an overview and current status, Clinical Interventions in Aging, 11 (2016) 665–681.27274215
[2] Hampel H , Vassar R , De Strooper B , Hardy J , Willem M , Singh N , Zhou J , Yan R , Vanmechelen E , De Vos A , The β-secretase BACE1 in Alzheimer’s disease, Biological psychiatry, 89 (2021) 745–756.32223911
[3] Rafii MS , Aisen PS , Recent developments in Alzheimer’s disease therapeutics, BMC medicine, 7 (2009) 1–4.19134183
[4] WHO, https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/dementia, 2021.
[5] Monica Moore M , Díaz-Santos M , Vossel K , Alzheimer’s Association 2021 Facts and Figures Report.
[6] ALZ.org, https://www.alz.org/alzheimers-dementia/facts-figures, 2021.
[7] A.s. Association, Alzheimer’s Association. 2021 Alzheimer’s Disease Facts and Figures. Alzheimer’s Dement, 17 (2021).
[8] Hipp MS , Kasturi P , Haiti FU , The proteostasis network and its decline in ageing, Nature reviews Molecular cell biology, 20 (2019) 421–435.30733602
[9] Miller VM , Gouvion CM , Davidson BL , Paulson HL , Targeting Alzheimer’s disease genes with RNA interference: an efficient strategy for silencing mutant alleles, Nucleic acids research, 32 (2004) 661–668.14754988
[10] Giri M , Zhang M , Lü Y , Genes associated with Alzheimer’s disease: an overview and current status, Clinical interventions in aging, 11 (2016) 665.27274215
[11] Gupta GL , Samant NP , Current druggable targets for therapeutic control of Alzheimer’s disease, Contemporary Clinical Trials, (2021) 106549.34464763
[12] Long JM , Holtzman DM , Alzheimer disease: an update on pathobiology and treatment strategies, Cell, 179 (2019) 312–339.31564456
[13] Hampel H , Nisticò R , Seyfried NT , Levey AI , Modeste E , Lemercier P , Baldacci F , Toschi N , Garaci F , Perry G , Omics Sciences for Systems Biology in Alzheimer’s Disease: State-of-the-Art of the Evidence, Ageing Research Reviews, (2021) 101346.33915266
[14] Amakiri N , Kubosumi A , Tran J , Reddy PH , Amyloid beta and microRNAs in Alzheimer’s disease, Frontiers in neuroscience, 13 (2019) 430.31130840
[15] George EK , Reddy PH , Can healthy diets, regular exercise, and better lifestyle delay the progression of dementia in elderly individuals?, Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 72 (2019) S37–S58.
[16] Castrillo JI , Oliver SG , Alzheimer’s as a systems-level disease involving the interplay of multiple cellular networks, Systems Biology of Alzheimer’s Disease, (2016) 3–48.
[17] Rosenberg PB , Nowrangi MA , Lyketsos CG , Neuropsychiatric symptoms in Alzheimer’s disease: what might be associated brain circuits?, Molecular aspects of medicine, 43 (2015) 25–37.26049034
[18] Perneczky R , Jessen F , Grimmer T , Levin J , Flöel A , Peters O , Froelich L , Anti-amyloid antibody therapies in Alzheimer’s disease, Brain, (2023).
[19] Singer O , Marr RA , Rockenstein E , Crews L , Coufal NG , Gage FH , Verma IM , Masliah E , Targeting BACE1 with siRNAs ameliorates Alzheimer disease neuropathology in a transgenic model, Nature neuroscience, 8 (2005) 1343–1349.16136043
[20] Sajid MI , Moazzam M , Cho Y , Kato S , Xu A , Way J , Lohan S , Tiwari RK , siRNA Therapeutics for the Therapy of COVID-19 and Other Coronaviruses, Molecular Pharmaceutics, 18 (2021) 2105–2121.33945284
[21] Athar T , Al Balushi K , Khan SA , Recent advances on drug development and emerging therapeutic agents for Alzheimer’s disease, Molecular Biology Reports, (2021) 1–17.
[22] Mishra N , Ashique S , Garg A , Rai VK , Dua K , Goyal A , Bhatt S , Role of siRNA-based nanocarriers for the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases, Drug Discovery Today, (2022).
[23] Dekker AD , Strydom A , Coppus AM , Nizetic D , Vermeiren Y , Naudé PJ , Van Dam D , Potier M-C , Fortea J , De Deyn PP , Behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia in Down syndrome: Early indicators of clinical Alzheimer’s disease?, Cortex, 73 (2015) 36–61.26343344
[24] Stefaniak JD , Su L , Mak E , Sheikh-Bahaei N , Wells K , Ritchie K , Waldman A , Ritchie CW , O’brien JT , Cerebral small vessel disease in middle age and genetic predisposition to late-onset Alzheimer’s disease, Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia, 14 (2018) 253–258.
[25] Villar-Vesga J , Henao-Restrepo J , Voshart DC , Aguillon D , Villegas A , Castaño D , Arias-Londoño JD , Zuhorn IS , Ribovski L , Barazzuol L , Differential profile of systemic extracellular vesicles from sporadic and familial Alzheimer’s disease leads to neuroglial and endothelial cell degeneration, Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience, 12 (2020) 383.
[26] Rahman S , Datta M , Kim J , Jan AT , CRISPR/Cas: An intriguing genomic editing tool with prospects in treating neurodegenerative diseases, Seminars in Cell &amp; Developmental Biology, 96 (2019) 22–31.31102655
[27] Tsai AP , Lin PB-C , Dong C , Moutinho M , Casali BT , Liu Y , Lamb BT , Landreth GE , Oblak AL , Nho K , INPP5D expression is associated with risk for Alzheimer’s disease and induced by plaque-associated microglia, Neurobiology of Disease, 153 (2021) 105303.33631273
[28] Pérez-González M , Mendioroz M , Badesso S , Sucunza D , Roldan M , Espelosín M , Ursua S , Luján R , Cuadrado-Tejedor M , Garcia-Osta A , PLA2G4E, a candidate gene for resilience in Alzheimer’s disease and a new target for dementia treatment, Progress in Neurobiology, 191 (2020) 101818.32380223
[29] Rahman S , Datta M , Kim J , Jan AT , CRISPR/Cas: An intriguing genomic editing tool with prospects in treating neurodegenerative diseases, Seminars in cell &amp; developmental biology, Elsevier, 2019, pp. 22–31.
[30] Pérez-González M , Mendioroz M , Badesso S , Sucunza D , Roldan M , Espelosín M , Ursua S , Luján R , Cuadrado-Tejedor M , Garcia-Osta A , PLA2G4E, a candidate gene for resilience in Alzheimer s disease and a new target for dementia treatment, Progress in neurobiology, 191 (2020) 101818.32380223
[31] Wang Y , Mandelkow E , Tau in physiology and pathology, Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 17 (2016) 22–35.26656254
[32] Weng F-I , He L , Disrupted Ubiquitin Proteasome System Underlying Tau Accumulation in Alzheimer’s Disease, Neurobiology of Aging, (2020).
[33] Goedert M , Spillantini M , Cairns N , Crowther R , Tau proteins of Alzheimer paired helical filaments: abnormal phosphorylation of all six brain isoforms, Neuron, 8 (1992) 159–168.1530909
[34] Park SA , Ahn SI , Gallo J-M , Tau mis-splicing in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disorders, BMB reports, 49 (2016) 405.27222125
[35] Goedert M , Spillantini M , Jakes R , Rutherford D , Crowther R , Multiple isoforms of human microtubule-associated protein tau: sequences and localization in neurofibrillary tangles of Alzheimer’s disease, Neuron, 3 (1989) 519–526.2484340
[36] Annadurai N , De Sanctis JB , Hajdúch M , Das V , Tau secretion and propagation: Perspectives for potential preventive interventions in Alzheimer’s disease and other tauopathies, Experimental Neurology, (2021) 113756.33989658
[37] Josephs KA , Tauopathies: Classification, clinical features, and genetics, Movement Disorders, Elsevier 2015, pp. 815–828.
[38] Papanikolopoulou K , Skoulakis EMC , Altered Proteostasis in Neurodegenerative Tauopathies, in: Barrio R , Sutherland JD , Rodriguez MS (Eds.) Proteostasis and Disease : From Basic Mechanisms to Clinics, Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2020, pp. 177–194.
[39] Papanikolopoulou K , Skoulakis E , Altered proteostasis in neurodegenerative tauopathies, Proteostasis and Disease, (2020) 177–194.
[40] Thibaudeau TA , Anderson RT , Smith DM , A common mechanism of proteasome impairment by neurodegenerative disease-associated oligomers, Nature communications, 9 (2018) 1–14.
[41] Lane CA , Hardy J , Schott JM , Alzheimer’s disease, European Journal of Neurology, 25 (2018) 59–70.28872215
[42] Clavaguera F , Hench J , Goedert M , Tolnay M , Invited review: Prion-like transmission and spreading of tau pathology, Neuropathology and applied neurobiology, 41 (2015) 47–58.25399729
[43] Mohamed NV , Herrou T , Plouffe V , Piperno N , Leclerc N , Spreading of tau pathology in A lzheimer’s disease by cell-to-cell transmission, European Journal of Neuroscience, 37 (2013) 1939–1948.23773063
[44] Kolarova M , Sengupta U , Bartos A , Ricny J , Kayed R , Tau oligomers in sera of patients with Alzheimer’s disease and aged controls, Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 58 (2017) 471–478.
[45] Usenovic M , Niroomand S , Drolet RE , Yao L , Gaspar RC , Hatcher NG , Schachter J , Renger JJ , Parmentier-Batteur S , Internalized tau oligomers cause neurodegeneration by inducing accumulation of pathogenic tau in human neurons derived from induced pluripotent stem cells, Journal of Neuroscience, 35 (2015) 14234–14250.26490863
[46] Guo JL , Lee VM-Y , Seeding of normal Tau by pathological Tau conformers drives pathogenesis of Alzheimer-like tangles, Journal of Biological Chemistry, 286 (2011) 15317–15331.21372138
[47] Wu JW , Herman M , Liu L , Simoes S , Acker CM , Figueroa H , Steinberg JI , Margittai M , Kayed R , Zurzolo C , Small misfolded Tau species are internalized via bulk endocytosis and anterogradely and retrogradely transported in neurons, Journal of Biological Chemistry, 288 (2013) 1856–1870.23188818
[48] Clavaguera F , Bolmont T , Crowther RA , Abramowski D , Frank S , Probst A , Fraser G , Stalder AK , Beibel M , Staufenbiel M , Transmission and spreading of tauopathy in transgenic mouse brain, Nature cell biology, 11 (2009) 909–913.19503072
[49] Martini-Stoica H , Xu Y , Ballabio A , Zheng H , The autophagy–lysosomal pathway in neurodegeneration: a TFEB perspective, Trends in neurosciences, 39 (2016) 221–234.26968346
[50] Congdon EE , Sigurdsson EM , Tau-targeting therapies for Alzheimer disease, Nature Reviews Neurology, 14 (2018) 399–415.29895964
[51] Delpech J-C , Herron S , Botros MB , Ikezu T , Neuroimmune crosstalk through extracellular vesicles in health and disease, Trends in neurosciences, 42 (2019) 361–372.30926143
[52] Zhao J , Wu H , Tang X.-q. , Tau Internalization: A Complex Step in Tau Propagation, Ageing Research Reviews, (2021) 101272.33571704
[53] Gorantla NV , Chinnathambi S , Tau protein squired by molecular chaperones during Alzheimer’s disease, Journal of Molecular Neuroscience, 66 (2018) 356–368.30267382
[54] Zis P , Strydom A , Clinical aspects and biomarkers of Alzheimer’s disease in Down syndrome, Free Radical Biology and Medicine, 114 (2018) 3–9.28870521
[55] Dorostkar MM , Zou C , Blazquez-Llorca L , Herms J , Analyzing dendritic spine pathology in Alzheimer’s disease: problems and opportunities, Acta neuropathologica, 130 (2015) 1–19.26063233
[56] Checler F , Afram E , Pardossi-Piquard R , Lauritzen I , Is γ-secretase a beneficial inactivating enzyme of the toxic APP C-terminal fragment C99?, Journal of Biological Chemistry, (2021) 100489.33662398
[57] Nalivaeva NN , Turner AJ , The amyloid precursor protein: a biochemical enigma in brain development, function and disease, FEBS letters, 587 (2013) 2046–2054.23684647
[58] Cheignon C , Tomas M , Bonnefont-Rousselot D , Faller P , Hureau C , Collin F , Oxidative stress and the amyloid beta peptide in Alzheimer’s disease, Redox biology, 14 (2018) 450–464.29080524
[59] Palmiter RD , Cole TB , Quaife CJ , Findley SD , ZnT-3, a putative transporter of zinc into synaptic vesicles, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 93 (1996) 14934–14939.
[60] Lee J-Y , Kim J-H , Hong SH , Lee JY , Cherny RA , Bush AI , Palmiter RD , Koh J-Y , Estrogen decreases zinc transporter 3 expression and synaptic vesicle zinc levels in mouse brain, Journal of biological chemistry, 279 (2004) 8602–8607.14681234
[61] Reybier K , Ayala S , Alies B , Rodrigues JV , Bustos Rodriguez S , La Penna G , Collin F , Gomes CM , Hureau C , Faller P , Free superoxide is an intermediate in the production of H2O2 by copper (I)-Aβ peptide and O2, Angewandte Chemie, 128 (2016) 1097–1101.
[62] Guo C , Wang P , Zhong M-L , Wang T , Huang X-S , Li J-Y , Wang Z-Y , Deferoxamine inhibits iron induced hippocampal tau phosphorylation in the Alzheimer transgenic mouse brain, Neurochemistry international, 62 (2013) 165–172.23262393
[63] Babaei P , NMDA and AMPA receptors dysregulation in Alzheimer’s disease, European Journal of Pharmacology, (2021) 174310.34265291
[64] Olloquequi J , Cornejo-Córdova E , Verdaguer E , Soriano FX , Binvignat O , Auladell C , Camins A , Excitotoxicity in the pathogenesis of neurological and psychiatric disorders: Therapeutic implications, Journal of Psychopharmacology, 32 (2018) 265–275.29444621
[65] Rajmohan R , Reddy PH , Amyloid-beta and phosphorylated tau accumulations cause abnormalities at synapses of Alzheimer’s disease neurons, Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 57 (2017) 975–999.
[66] Kobayashi S , Tanaka T , Soeda Y , Almeida OF , Takashima A , Local somatodendritic translation and hyperphosphorylation of tau protein triggered by AMPA and NMDA receptor stimulation, EBioMedicine, 20 (2017) 120–126.28566250
[67] Castellani G , Schwartz M , Immunological features of non-neuronal brain cells: implications for Alzheimer’s disease immunotherapy, Trends in Immunology, (2020).
[68] Gate D , Saligrama N , Leventhal O , Yang AC , Unger MS , Middeldorp J , Chen K , Lehallier B , Channappa D , Mark B , Clonally expanded CD8 T cells patrol the cerebrospinal fluid in Alzheimer’s disease, Nature, 577 (2020) 399–404.31915375
[69] Feng W , Zhang Y , Wang Z , Xu H , Wu T , Marshall C , Gao J , Xiao M , Microglia prevent beta-amyloid plaque formation in the early stage of an Alzheimer’s disease mouse model with suppression of glymphatic clearance, Alzheimer’s research &amp; therapy, 12 (2020) 1–15.
[70] Madore C , Yin Z , Leibowitz J , Butovsky O , Microglia, lifestyle stress, and neurodegeneration, Immunity, 52 (2020) 222–240.31924476
[71] Mathys H , Davila-Velderrain J , Peng Z , Gao F , Mohammadi S , Young JZ , Menon M , He L , Abdurrob F , Jiang X , Single-cell transcriptomic analysis of Alzheimer’s disease, Nature, 570 (2019) 332–337.31042697
[72] Meda L , Cassatella MA , Szendrei GI , Otvos L Jr. , Baron P , Villalba M , Ferrari D , Rossi F , Activation of microglial cells by beta-amyloid protein and interferon-gamma, Nature, 374 (1995) 647–650.7715705
[73] Fan Z , Brooks DJ , Okello A , Edison P , An early and late peak in microglial activation in Alzheimer’s disease trajectory, Brain, 140 (2017) 792–803.28122877
[74] Cummins N , Tweedie A , Zuryn S , Bertran-Gonzalez J , Götz J , Disease-associated tau impairs mitophagy by inhibiting Parkin translocation to mitochondria, The EMBO journal, 38 (2019) e99360.30538104
[75] Pradeepkiran JA , Reddy PH , Defective mitophagy in Alzheimer’s disease, Ageing Research Reviews, (2020) 101191.33022416
[76] Youle RJ , Narendra DP , Mechanisms of mitophagy, Nature reviews Molecular cell biology, 12 (2011) 9–14.21179058
[77] Bhola PD , Letai A , Mitochondria—judges and executioners of cell death sentences, Molecular cell, 61 (2016) 695–704.26942674
[78] Flockhart M , Nilsson LC , Tais S , Ekblom B , Apró W , Larsen FJ , Excessive exercise training causes mitochondrial functional impairment and decreases glucose tolerance in healthy volunteers, Cell metabolism, 33 (2021) 957–970. e956.33740420
[79] Toledo JB , Arnold M , Kastenmüller G , Chang R , Baillie RA , Han X , Thambisetty M , Tenenbaum JD , Suhre K , Thompson JW , Metabolic network failures in Alzheimer’s disease: a biochemical road map, Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia, 13 (2017) 965–984.
[80] Sasahara T , Satomura K , Tada M , Kakita A , Hoshi M , Alzheimer’s Aβ assembly binds sodium pump and blocks endothelial NOS activity via ROS-PKC pathway, bioRxiv, (2020).
[81] Rizor A , Pajarillo E , Johnson J , Aschner M , Lee E , Astrocytic oxidative/nitrosative stress contributes to Parkinson’s disease pathogenesis: the dual role of reactive astrocytes, Antioxidants, 8 (2019) 265.31374936
[82] Lampinen R , Belaya I , Boccuni I , Kanninen T , KM Mitochondrial function in Alzheimer’s disease: focus on astrocytes, Astrocyte Physiol. Pathol, 10 (2017).
[83] Calvo-Rodriguez M , Hou SS , Snyder AC , Kharitonova EK , Russ AN , Das S , Fan Z , Muzikansky A , Garcia-Alloza M , Serrano-Pozo A , Increased mitochondrial calcium levels associated with neuronal death in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease, Nature communications, 11 (2020) 1–17.
[84] Bahar E , Kim H , Yoon H , ER stress-mediated signaling: Action potential and Ca2+ as key players, International journal of molecular sciences, 17 (2016) 1558.27649160
[85] Sajid MI , Moazzam M , Kato S , Yeseom Cho K , Tiwari RK , Overcoming barriers for siRNA therapeutics: From bench to bedside, Pharmaceuticals, 13 (2020) 294.33036435
[86] Zahir-Jouzdani F , Mottaghitalab F , Dinarvand M , Atyabi F , siRNA delivery for treatment of degenerative diseases, new hopes and challenges, Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology, 45 (2018) 428–441.
[87] Zhou Y , Zhu F , Liu Y , Zheng M , Wang Y , Zhang D , Anraku Y , Zou Y , Li J , Wu H , Blood-brain barrier–penetrating siRNA nanomedicine for Alzheimer’s disease therapy, Science advances, 6 (2020) eabc7031.33036977
[88] Shyam R , Ren Y , Lee J , Braunstein KE , Mao H-Q , Wong PC , Intraventricular Delivery of siRNA Nanoparticles to the Central Nervous System, Molecular Therapy - Nucleic Acids, 4 (2015) e242.25965552
[89] Wen X , Wang L , Liu Z , Liu Y , Hu J , Intracranial injection of PEG-PEI/ROCK II-siRNA improves cognitive impairment in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease, International Journal of Neuroscience, 124 (2014) 697–703.24350994
[90] Rassu G , Soddu E , Posadino AM , Pintus G , Sarmento B , Giunchedi P , Gavini E , Nose-to-brain delivery of BACE1 siRNA loaded in solid lipid nanoparticles for Alzheimer’s therapy, Colloids and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces, 152 (2017) 296–301.28126681
[91] Yang X , Yang W , Xia X , Lei T , Yang Z , Jia W , Zhou Y , Cheng G , Gao H , Intranasal Delivery of BACE1 siRNA and Rapamycin by Dual Targets Modified Nanoparticles for Alzheimer’s Disease Therapy, Small, 18 (2022) 2203182.
[92] Kurz C , Walker L , Rauchmann BS , Perneczky R , Dysfunction of the blood–brain barrier in Alzheimer’s disease: Evidence from human studies, Neuropathology and Applied Neurobiology, 48 (2022) e12782.34823269
[93] Bernardo-Castro S , Sousa JA , Brás A , Cecília C , Rodrigues B , Almendra L , Machado C , Santo G , Silva F , Ferreira L , Pathophysiology of blood–brain barrier permeability throughout the different stages of ischemic stroke and its implication on hemorrhagic transformation and recovery, Frontiers in Neurology, 11 (2020) 1605.
[94] Barisano G , Montagne A , Kisler K , Schneider JA , Wardlaw JM , Zlokovic BV , Blood–brain barrier link to human cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease, Nature cardiovascular research, 1 (2022) 108–115.
[95] Sharma C , Woo H , Kim SR , Addressing Blood–Brain Barrier Impairment in Alzheimer’s Disease, Biomedicines, 10 (2022) 742.35453494
[96] Deane R , Zlokovic BV , Role of the blood-brain barrier in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease, Current Alzheimer Research, 4 (2007) 191–197.17430246
[97] Cai Z , Qiao P-F , Wan C-Q , Cai M , Zhou N-K , Li Q , Role of blood-brain barrier in Alzheimer’s disease, Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 63 (2018) 1223–1234.
[98] Zenaro E , Piacentino G , Constantin G , The blood-brain barrier in Alzheimer’s disease, Neurobiology of disease, 107 (2017) 41–56.27425887
[99] Zheng X , Pang X , Yang P , Wan X , Wei Y , Guo Q , Zhang Q , Jiang X , A hybrid siRNA delivery complex for enhanced brain penetration and precise amyloid plaque targeting in Alzheimer’s disease mice, Acta Biomaterialia, 49 (2017) 388–401.27845275
[100] Wang P , Zheng X , Guo Q , Yang P , Pang X , Qian K , Lu W , Zhang Q , Jiang X , Systemic delivery of BACE1 siRNA through neuron-targeted nanocomplexes for treatment of Alzheimer’s disease, Journal of Controlled Release, 279 (2018) 220–233.29679667
[101] Guo Q , Zheng X , Yang P , Pang X , Qian K , Wang P , Xu S , Sheng D , Wang L , Cao J , Lu W , Zhang Q , Jiang X , Small interfering RNA delivery to the neurons near the amyloid plaques for improved treatment of Alzheimer’s disease, Acta Pharmaceutica Sinica B, 9 (2019) 590–603.31193846
[102] Park T-E , Singh B , Li H , Lee J-Y , Kang S-K , Choi Y-J , Cho C-S , Enhanced BBB permeability of osmotically active poly(mannitol-co-PEI) modified with rabies virus glycoprotein via selective stimulation of caveolar endocytosis for RNAi therapeutics in Alzheimer’s disease, Biomaterials, 38 (2015) 61–71.25457984
[103] Cai L , Yang C , Jia W , Liu Y , Xie R , Lei T , Yang Z , He X , Tong R , Gao H , Endo/Lysosome-Escapable Delivery Depot for Improving BBB Transcytosis and Neuron Targeted Therapy of Alzheimer’s Disease, Advanced Functional Materials, 30 (2020) 1909999.
[104] Liu Y , An S , Li J , Kuang Y , He X , Guo Y , Ma H , Zhang Y , Ji B , Jiang C , Brain-targeted co-delivery of therapeutic gene and peptide by multifunctional nanoparticles in Alzheimer’s disease mice, Biomaterials, 80 (2016) 33–45.26706474
[105] Sievers SA , Karanicolas J , Chang HW , Zhao A , Jiang L , Zirafi O , Stevens JT , Münch J , Baker D , Eisenberg D , Structure-based design of non-natural amino-acid inhibitors of amyloid fibril formation, Nature, 475 (2011) 96–100.21677644
[106] Haroon MM , Dar GH , Jeyalakshmi D , Venkatraman U , Saba K , Rangaraj N , Patel AB , Gopal V , A designed recombinant fusion protein for targeted delivery of siRNA to the mouse brain, Journal of Controlled Release, 228 (2016) 120–131.26948382
[107] Zhou Y , Zhu F , Liu Y , Zheng M , Wang Y , Zhang D , Anraku Y , Zou Y , Li J , Wu H , Pang X , Tao W , Shimoni O , Bush AI , Xue X , Shi B , Blood-brain barrier–penetrating siRNA nanomedicine for Alzheimer’s disease therapy, Science Advances, 6 (2020) eabc7031.33036977
[108] Min HS , Kim HJ , Naito M , Ogura S , Toh K , Hayashi K , Kim BS , Fukushima S , Anraku Y , Miyata K , Systemic brain delivery of antisense oligonucleotides across the blood-brain barrier with a glucose-coated polymeric nanocarrier, Angewandte Chemie International Edition, 59 (2020) 8173–8180.31995252
[109] Lopez-Barbosa N , Garcia JG , Cifuentes J , Castro LM , Vargas F , Ostos C , Cardona-Gomez GP , Hernandez AM , Cruz JC , Multifunctional magnetite nanoparticles to enable delivery of siRNA for the potential treatment of Alzheimer’s, Drug Delivery, 27 (2020) 864–875.32515999
[110] Carrillo-Jimenez A , Puigdellivol M , Vilalta A , Venero JL , Brown GC , StGeorge-Hyslop P , Burguillos MA , Effective Knockdown of Gene Expression in Primary Microglia With siRNA and Magnetic Nanoparticles Without Cell Death or Inflammation, Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience, 12 (2018) 313.30297984
[111] Malhotra M , Tomaro-Duchesneau C , Prakash S , Synthesis of TAT peptide-tagged PEGylated chitosan nanoparticles for siRNA delivery targeting neurodegenerative diseases, Biomaterials, 34 (2013) 1270–1280.23140978
[112] Lv L , Yang F , Li H , Yuan J , Brain-targeted co-delivery of β-amyloid converting enzyme 1 shRNA and epigallocatechin-3-gallate by multifunctional nanocarriers for Alzheimer’s disease treatment, IUBMB Life, 72 (2020) 1819–1829.32668504
[113] Antimisiaris SG , Potential of nanoliposomes for the therapy and/or diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease: recent progress, Clinical lipidology, 9 (2014) 477–481.
[114] Mourtas S , Lazar AN , Markoutsa E , Duyckaerts C , Antimisiaris SG , Multifunctional nanoliposomes with curcumin–lipid derivative and brain targeting functionality with potential applications for Alzheimer disease, European journal of medicinal chemistry, 80 (2014) 175–183.24780594
[115] Ordóñez-Gutiérrez L , Wandosell F , Nanoliposomes as a therapeutic tool for Alzheimer’s disease, Frontiers in Synaptic Neuroscience, 12 (2020) 20.32523525
[116] Ross C , Taylor M , Fullwood N , Allsop D , Liposome delivery systems for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease, International journal of nanomedicine, 13 (2018) 8507.30587974
[117] Mancini S , Balducci C , Micotti E , Tolomeo D , Forloni G , Masserini M , Re F , Multifunctional liposomes delay phenotype progression and prevent memory impairment in a presymptomatic stage mouse model of Alzheimer disease, Journal of Controlled Release, 258 (2017) 121–129.28501671
[118] Kong L , Li X.-t. , Ni Y.-n. , Xiao H.-h. , Yao Y.-j. , Wang Y.-y. , Ju R.-j. , Li H.-y. , Liu J.-j. , Fu M , Transferrin-modified osthole pegylated liposomes travel the blood-brain barrier and mitigate Alzheimer’s disease-related pathology in APP/PS-1 mice, International Journal of Nanomedicine, 15 (2020) 2841.32425521
[119] Mourtas S , Canovi M , Zona C , Aurilia D , Niarakis A , La Ferla B , Salmona M , Nicotra F , Gobbi M , Antimisiaris SG , Curcumin-decorated nanoliposomes with very high affinity for amyloid-β1-42 peptide, Biomaterials, 32 (2011) 1635–1645.21131044
[120] Lazar AN , Mourtas S , Youssef I , Parizot C , Dauphin A , Delatour B , Antimisiaris SG , Duyckaerts C , Curcumin-conjugated nanoliposomes with high affinity for Aβ deposits: possible applications to Alzheimer disease, Nanomedicine: Nanotechnology, Biology and Medicine, 9 (2013) 712–721.
[121] Yang J , Zhang Q , Chang H , Cheng Y , Surface-engineered dendrimers in gene delivery, Chemical reviews, 115 (2015) 5274–5300.25944558
[122] De la Torre C , Ceña V , The delivery challenge in neurodegenerative disorders: the nanoparticles role in Alzheimer’s disease therapeutics and diagnostics, Pharmaceutics, 10 (2018) 190.30336640
[123] Ke W , Shao K , Huang R , Han L , Liu Y , Li J , Kuang Y , Ye L , Lou J , Jiang C , Gene delivery targeted to the brain using an Angiopep-conjugated polyethyleneglycol-modified polyamidoamine dendrimer, Biomaterials, 30 (2009) 6976–6985.19765819
[124] Huang R-Q , Qu Y-H , Ke W-L , Zhu J-H , Pei Y-Y , Jiang C , Efficient gene delivery targeted to the brain using a transferrin-conjugated polyethyleneglycol-modified polyamidoamine dendrimer, The FASEB journal, 21 (2007) 1117–1125.17218540
[125] Lee Y , Lee J , Kim M , Kim G , Choi JS , Lee M , Brain gene delivery using histidine and arginine-modified dendrimers for ischemic stroke therapy, Journal of Controlled Release, 330 (2021) 907–919.33152393
[126] Serramía MJ , Álvarez S , Fuentes-Paniagua E , Clemente MI , Sánchez-Nieves J , Gómez R , de la Mata J , Muñoz-Fernández MÁ , In vivo delivery of siRNA to the brain by carbosilane dendrimer, Journal of Controlled Release, 200 (2015) 60–70.25559178
[127] Zarebkohan A , Najafi F , Moghimi HR , Hemmati M , Deevband MR , Kazemi B , Synthesis and characterization of a PAMAM dendrimer nanocarrier functionalized by SRL peptide for targeted gene delivery to the brain, European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 78 (2015) 19–30.26118442
[128] Wasiak T , Ionov M , Nieznanski K , Nieznanska H , Klementieva O , Granell M , Cladera J , Majoral J-P , Caminade AM , Klajnert B , Phosphorus dendrimers affect Alzheimer’s (Aβ1–28) peptide and MAP-Tau protein aggregation, Molecular pharmaceutics, 9 (2012) 458–469.22206488
[129] Fülöp L , Mándity IM , Juhász G , Szegedi V , Hetényi A , Wéber E , Bozsó Z , Simon D , Benkó M , Király Z , A foldamer-dendrimer conjugate neutralizes synaptotoxic β-amyloid oligomers, (2012).
[130] Klementieva O , Aso E , Filippini D , Benseny-Cases N , Carmona M , Juvés S , Appelhans D , Cladera J , Ferrer I , Effect of poly (propylene imine) glycodendrimers on β-amyloid aggregation in vitro and in APP/PS1 transgenic mice, as a model of brain amyloid deposition and Alzheimer’s disease, Biomacromolecules, 14 (2013) 3570–3580.24004423
[131] Dauba A , Delalande A , Kamimura HA , Conti A , Larrat B , Tsapis N , Novell A , Recent advances on ultrasound contrast agents for blood-brain barrier opening with focused ultrasound, Pharmaceutics, 12 (2020) 1125.33233374
[132] Meng Y , Pople CB , Lea-Banks H , Abrahao A , Davidson B , Suppiah S , Vecchio LM , Samuel N , Mahmud F , Hynynen K , Safety and efficacy of focused ultrasound induced blood-brain barrier opening, an integrative review of animal and human studies, Journal of controlled release, 309 (2019) 25–36.31326464
[133] Bosch S , Rilla K , Schirmer J , Aaltonen N , Leppänen M , Ranjan S , Focused ultrasound assisted Nanoplexes for siRNA delivery, Itä-Suomen yliopisto, 2022.
[134] Park SH , Baik K , Jeon S , Chang WS , Ye BS , Chang JW , Extensive frontal focused ultrasound mediated blood–brain barrier opening for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease: a proof-of-concept study, Translational neurodegeneration, 10 (2021) 1–11.33390174
[135] Mei L , Zhang Z , Advances in biological application of and research on low-frequency ultrasound, Ultrasound in Medicine &amp; Biology, 47 (2021) 2839–2852.34304908
[136] Guyon A , Rousseau J , Bégin F-G , Bertin T , Lamothe G , Tremblay JP , Base editing strategy for insertion of the A673T mutation in the APP gene to prevent the development of AD in vitro, Molecular Therapy-Nucleic Acids, 24 (2021) 253–263.33815938
[137] Huang Y-WA , Zhou B , Wernig M , Südhof TC , ApoE2, ApoE3, and ApoE4 differentially stimulate APP transcription and Aβ secretion, Cell, 168 (2017) 427–441. e421.28111074
[138] Murphy SR , Chang CC , Dogbevia G , Bryleva EY , Bowen Z , Hasan MT , Chang T-Y , Acat1 knockdown gene therapy decreases amyloid-β in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease, Molecular Therapy, 21 (2013) 1497–1506.23774792
[139] Giovagnoni C , Ali M , Eijssen LM , Maes R , Choe K , Mulder M , Kleinjans J , Del Sol A , Glaab E , Mastroeni D , Altered sphingolipid function in Alzheimer’s disease; a gene regulatory network approach, Neurobiology of Aging, 102 (2021) 178–187.33773368
[140] Pottier C , Hannequin D , Coutant S , Rovelet-Lecrux A , Wallon D , Rousseau S , Legallic S , Paquet C , Bombois S , Pariente J , High frequency of potentially pathogenic SORL1 mutations in autosomal dominant early-onset Alzheimer disease, Molecular psychiatry, 17 (2012) 875–879.22472873
[141] Zhang H , Liu W , Ge H , Li K , Aberrant expression of miR-148a-3p in Alzheimer’s disease and its protective role against amyloid-β induced neurotoxicity, Neuroscience Letters, 756 (2021) 135953.33979697
[142] Ma N , Pan J , Wen Y , Wu Q , Yu B , Chen X , Wan J , Zhang W , circTulp4 functions in Alzheimer’s disease pathogenesis by regulating its parental gene, Tulp4, Molecular Therapy, 29 (2021) 2167–2181.33578037
[143] Tian Z , Dong Q , Wu T , Guo J , MicroRNA-20b-5p aggravates neuronal apoptosis induced by β-Amyloid via down-regulation of Ras homolog family member C in Alzheimer’s disease, Neuroscience Letters, 742 (2021) 135542.33278507
[144] De D , Mukherjee I , Guha S , Paidi RK , Chakrabarti S , Biswas SC , Bhattacharyya SN , Rheb-mTOR activation rescues Aβ-induced cognitive impairment and memory function by restoring miR-146 activity in glial cells, Molecular Therapy-Nucleic Acids, 24 (2021) 868–887.34094708
[145] Geekiyanage H , Chan C , MicroRNA-137/181c regulates serine palmitoyltransferase and in turn amyloid β, novel targets in sporadic Alzheimer’s disease, Journal of Neuroscience, 31 (2011) 14820–14830.21994399
[146] Hernandez-Rapp J , Rainone S , Goupil C , Dorval V , Smith PY , Saint-Pierre M , Vallée M , Planel E , Droit A , Calon F , microRNA-132/212 deficiency enhances Aβ production and senile plaque deposition in Alzheimer’s disease triple transgenic mice, Scientific reports, 6 (2016) 1–11.28442746
[147] Gu C , Chen C , Wu R , Dong T , Hu X , Yao Y , Zhang Y , Long noncoding RNA EBF3-AS promotes neuron apoptosis in Alzheimer’s disease, DNA and cell biology, 37 (2018) 220–226.29298096
[148] Wang X , Zhang M , Liu H , LncRNA17A regulates autophagy and apoptosis of SH-SY5Y cell line as an in vitro model for Alzheimer’s disease, Bioscience, biotechnology, and biochemistry, 83 (2019) 609–621.30652945
[149] Li H , Zheng L , Jiang A , Mo Y , Gong Q , Identification of the biological affection of long noncoding RNA BC200 in Alzheimer’s disease, Neuroreport, 29 (2018) 1061–1067.29979260
[150] Guyon A , Rousseau J , Bégin F-G , Bertin T , Lamothe G , Tremblay JP , Base editing strategy for insertion of the A673T mutation in the APP gene to prevent the development of AD in vitro, Molecular Therapy - Nucleic Acids, 24 (2021) 253–263.33815938
[151] Basi G , Frigon N , Barbour R , Doan T , Gordon G , McConlogue L , Sinha S , Zeller M , Antagonistic effects of β-site amyloid precursor protein-cleaving enzymes 1 and 2 on β-amyloid peptide production in cells, Journal of Biological Chemistry, 278 (2003) 31512–31520.12801932
[152] Modarresi F , Faghihi MA , Patel NS , Sahagan BG , Wahlestedt C , Lopez-Toledano MA , Knockdown of BACE1-AS nonprotein-coding transcript modulates beta-amyloid-related hippocampal neurogenesis, International Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 2011 (2011).
[153] Shyam R , Ren Y , Lee J , Braunstein KE , Mao H-Q , Wong PC , Intraventricular delivery of siRNA nanoparticles to the central nervous system, Molecular Therapy-Nucleic Acids, 4 (2015) e242.25965552
[154] Nilsson P , Iwata N , Muramatsu S.i. , Tjernberg LO , Winblad B , Saido TC , Gene therapy in Alzheimer’s disease–potential for disease modification, Journal of cellular and molecular medicine, 14 (2010) 741–757.20158567
[155] Tambini MD , D’Adamio L , Knock-in rats with homozygous PSEN1L435F Alzheimer mutation are viable and show selective γ-secretase activity loss causing low Aβ40/42 and high Aβ43: Loss of γ-secretase activity in Presenilin-1 L435F KI rat, Journal of Biological Chemistry, 295 (2020) 7442–7451.32265300
[156] Li Y , Macyczko JR , Liu C-C , Bu G , ApoE4 reduction: an emerging and promising therapeutic strategy for Alzheimer’s disease, Neurobiology of aging, (2022).
[157] Fang B , Jia L , Jia J , Chinese Presenilin-1 V97L mutation enhanced Aβ42 levels in SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells, Neuroscience letters, 406 (2006) 33–37.16916581
[158] Tambini MD , D’Adamio L , Knock-in rats with homozygous PSEN1 Alzheimer mutation are viable and show selective γ-secretase activity loss causing low Aβ40/42 and high Aβ43, Journal of Biological Chemistry, 295 (2020) 7442–7451.32265300
[159] Pires C , Schmid B , Petræus C , Poon A , Nimsanor N , Nielsen TT , Waldemar G , Hjermind LE , Nielsen JE , Hyttel P , Generation of a gene-corrected isogenic control cell line from an Alzheimer’s disease patient iPSC line carrying a A79V mutation in PSEN1, Stem cell research, 17 (2016) 285–288.27879212
[160] Lou F , Luo X , Li M , Ren Y , He Z , Very early–onset sporadic Alzheimer’s disease with a de novo mutation in the PSEN1 gene, Neurobiology of aging, 53 (2017) 193. e191–193. e195.
[161] Tanaka Y , Sabharwal L , Ota M , Nakagawa I , Jiang J-J , Arima Y , Ogura H , Okochi M , Ishii M , Kamimura D , Presenilin 1 regulates NF-κB activation via association with breakpoint cluster region and casein kinase II, The Journal of Immunology, 201 (2018) 2256–2263.30201812
[162] Pottier C , Hannequin D , Coutant S , Rovelet-Lecrux A , Wallon D , Rousseau S , Legallic S , Paquet C , Bombois S , Pariente J , Thomas-Anterion C , Michon A , Croisile B , Etcharry-Bouyx F , Berr C , Dartigues J-F , Amouyel P , Dauchel H , Boutoleau-Bretonnière C , Thauvin C , Frebourg T , Lambert J-C , Campion D , High frequency of potentially pathogenic SORL1 mutations in autosomal dominant early-onset Alzheimer disease, Molecular Psychiatry, 17 (2012) 875–879.22472873
[163] Majercak J , Ray WJ , Espeseth A , Simon A , Shi X-P , Wolffe C , Getty K , Marine S , Stec E , Ferrer M , LRRTM3 promotes processing of amyloid-precursor protein by BACE1 and is a positional candidate gene for late-onset Alzheimer’s disease, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 103 (2006) 17967–17972.
[164] Giovagnoni C , Ali M , Eijssen LMT , Maes R , Choe K , Mulder M , Kleinjans J , del Sol A , Glaab E , Mastroeni D , Delvaux E , Coleman P , Losen M , Pishva E , Martinez-Martinez P , van den Hove DLA , Altered sphingolipid function in Alzheimer’s disease; a gene regulatory network approach, Neurobiology of Aging, 102 (2021) 178–187.33773368
[165] Hansen DV , Hanson JE , Sheng M , Microglia in Alzheimer’s disease, Journal of Cell Biology, 217 (2018) 459–472.29196460
[166] Guerreiro R , Wojtas A , Bras J , Carrasquillo M , Rogaeva E , Majounie E , Cruchaga C , Sassi C , Kauwe J , Younkin S , Alzheimer Genetic Analysis G (2013) TREM2 variants in Alzheimer’s disease, N Engl J Med, 368 (2013) 117–127.23150934
[167] Malik M , Simpson JF , Parikh I , Wilfred BR , Fardo DW , Nelson PT , Estus S , CD33 Alzheimer’s risk-altering polymorphism, CD33 expression, and exon 2 splicing, Journal of Neuroscience, 33 (2013) 13320–13325.23946390
[168] Griciuc A , Serrano-Pozo A , Parrado AR , Lesinski AN , Asselin CN , Mullin K , Hooli B , Choi SH , Hyman BT , Tanzi RE , Alzheimer’s disease risk gene CD33 inhibits microglial uptake of amyloid beta, Neuron, 78 (2013) 631–643.23623698
[169] Bradshaw EM , Chibnik LB , Keenan BT , Ottoboni L , Raj T , Tang A , Rosenkrantz LL , Imboywa S , Lee M , Von Korff A , CD33 Alzheimer’s disease locus: altered monocyte function and amyloid biology, Nature neuroscience, 16 (2013) 848–850.23708142
[170] Malik M , Chiles III J , Xi HS , Medway C , Simpson J , Potluri S , Howard D , Liang Y , Paumi CM , Mukherjee S , Genetics of CD33 in Alzheimer’s disease and acute myeloid leukemia, Human molecular genetics, 24 (2015) 3557–3570.25762156
[171] Majercak J , Ray WJ , Espeseth A , Simon A , Shi X-P , Wolffe C , Getty K , Marine S , Stec E , Ferrer M , Strulovici B , Bartz S , Gates A , Xu M , Huang Q , Ma L , Shughrue P , Burchard J , Colussi D , Pietrak B , Kahana J , Beher D , Rosahl T , Shearman M , Hazuda D , Sachs AB , Koblan KS , Seabrook GR , Stone DJ , LRRTM3 promotes processing of amyloid-precursor protein by BACE1 and is a positional candidate gene for late-onset Alzheimer’s disease, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 103 (2006) 17967–17972.
[172] Hernandez-Rapp J , Rainone S , Goupil C , Dorval V , Smith PY , Saint-Pierre M , Vallée M , Planel E , Droit A , Calon F , Cicchetti F , Hébert SS , microRNA-132/212 deficiency enhances Aβ production and senile plaque deposition in Alzheimer’s disease triple transgenic mice, Scientific Reports, 6 (2016) 30953.27484949
[173] Manczak M , Reddy PH , RNA silencing of genes involved in Alzheimer’s disease enhances mitochondrial function and synaptic activity, Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - Molecular Basis of Disease, 1832 (2013) 2368–2378.24063855
[174] McSwiggen J , RNA interference mediated treatment of Alzheimer’s disease using short interfering RNA, Google Patents, 2003.
[175] Kao S-C , Krichevsky AM , Kosik KS , Tsai L-H , BACE1 Suppression by RNA Interference in Primary Cortical Neurons, Journal of Biological Chemistry, 279 (2004) 1942–1949.14600149
[176] Cai J , Qi X , Kociok N , Skosyrski S , Emilio A , Ruan Q , Han S , Liu L , Chen Z , Bowes Rickman C , Golde T , Grant MB , Saftig P , Serneels L , de Strooper B , Joussen AM , Boulton ME , β-Secretase (BACE1) inhibition causes retinal pathology by vascular dysregulation and accumulation of age pigment, EMBO Molecular Medicine, 4 (2012) 980–991.22903875
[177] Sridharan A , Muthuswamy J , BACE1 silencing using siRNA shows immediate, dynamic changes in spontaneous electrical activity of cultured neurons, Journal of Neuroscience and Neuroengineering, 2 (2013) 491–503.
[178] Laird FM , Cai H , Savonenko AV , Farah MH , He K , Melnikova T , Wen H , Chiang H-C , Xu G , Koliatsos VE , BACE1, a major determinant of selective vulnerability of the brain to amyloid-β amyloidogenesis, is essential for cognitive, emotional, and synaptic functions, Journal of Neuroscience, 25 (2005) 11693–11709.16354928
[179] Barño S , Moechars D , Lichtenthaler SF , De Strooper B , BACE1 physiological functions may limit its use as therapeutic target for Alzheimer’s disease, Trends in neurosciences, 39 (2016) 158–169.26833257
[180] Xian X , Pohlkamp T , Durakoglugil MS , Wong CH , Beck JK , Lane-Donovan C , Plattner F , Herz J , Reversal of ApoE4-induced recycling block as a novel prevention approach for Alzheimer’s disease, eLife, 7 (2018) e40048.30375977
[181] Ferguson C , Modulating ApoE with Tissue Specific siRNAs in Alzheimer’s Disease, GSBS Dissertations and Theses, (2021).
[182] Kandimalla RJ , Wani WY , Bk B , Gill KD , siRNA against presenilin 1 (PS1) down regulates amyloid b42 production in IMR-32 cells, (2012) 9.
[183] Luo H.-m. , Deng H , Xiao F , Gao Q , Weng W , Zhang P.-f. , Li X.-g. , Down-regulation amyloid beta-protein 42 production by interfering with transcript of presenilin 1 gene with siRNA, Acta Pharmacologica Sinica, 25 (2016) 1613618–1611618.
[184] Sierant M , Paduszynska A , Kazmierczak-Baranska J , Nacmias B , Sorbi S , Bagnoli S , Sochacka E , Nawrot B , Specific Silencing of L392V PSEN1 Mutant Allele by RNA Interference, International Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 2011 (2011) e809218.
[185] Liu Y , Liu Z , Wang Y , Liang Y-R , Wen X , Hu J , Yang X , Liu J , Xiao S , Cheng D , Investigation of the performance of PEG–PEI/ROCK-II-siRNA complexes for Alzheimer’s disease in vitro, Brain Research, 1490 (2013) 43–51.23103413
[186] Yu D , Ma M , Liu Z , Pi Z , Du X , Ren J , Qu X , MOF-encapsulated nanozyme enhanced siRNA combo: Control neural stem cell differentiation and ameliorate cognitive impairments in Alzheimer’s disease model, Biomaterials, 255 (2020) 120160.32540758
[187] Wang Z , Cheng Y , Zhao D , Pliss A , Liu J , Luan P , Synergic treatment of Alzheimer’s disease with brain targeted nanoparticles incorporating NgR-siRNA and brain derived neurotrophic factor, Smart Materials in Medicine, 1 (2020) 125–130.
[188] ALZ.org, https://www.alz.org/alzheimers-dementia/treatments/medications-for-memory, 2021.
[189] Prins ND , Harrison JE , Chu H-M , Blackburn K , Alam JJ , Scheltens P , A phase 2 double-blind placebo-controlled 24-week treatment clinical study of the p38 alpha kinase inhibitor neflamapimod in mild Alzheimer’s disease, Alzheimer’s research &amp; therapy, 13 (2021) 1–12.
[190] E.P. Inc, Proof-of-Concept Study of a Selective p38 MAPK Alpha Inhibitor, Neflamapimod, in Subjects With Mild Alzheimer’s Disease (REVERSE-SD https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03402659., 2021.
[191] ClinicalTrials.gov, Neurogenetic Pharmaceuticals (NGP) 555 in Healthy Young Volunteers (Single-ascending Dose).https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02534480,, 2021.
[192] ClinicalTrials.gov, Gene Therapy for APOE4 Homozygote of Alzheimer’s Disease https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03634007, 2021.
[193] ClinicalTrials.gov, Evaluation of Safety and Tolerability of Libella Gene Therapy for Alzheimer’s Disease: AAV-hTERT https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03634007, 2019.
[194] ClinicalTrials.gov, The Clinical Response of Choline Acetyltransferase and Apolipoprotein Epsilon Gene Polymorphisms to Donepezil in Alzheimer’s Disease https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00381381, 2012.
[195] ClinicalTrials.gov, The Study of microRNA 107 (miRNA 107) and Beta-amyloid Precursor Protein-cleaving Enzyme 1 (BACE1) Messenger Ribonucleic Acid (mRNA) Gene Expression in Cerebrospinal Fluid and Peripheral Blood of Alzheimer’s Disease, 2014.
[196] Wang T , Chen K , Li H , Dong S , Su N , Liu Y , Cheng Y , Dai J , Yang C , Xiao S , The feasibility of utilizing plasma MiRNA107 and BACE1 messenger RNA gene expression for clinical diagnosis of amnestic mild cognitive impairment, The Journal of clinical psychiatry, 76 (2015) 0–0.
[197] Wang T , Shi F , Jin Y , Jiang W , Shen D , Xiao S , Abnormal changes of brain cortical anatomy and the association with plasma MicroRNA107 level in amnestic mild cognitive impairment, Frontiers in aging neuroscience, 8 (2016) 112.27242521
[198] ClinicalTrials.gov, Biomarker Effects of ALZ-801 in APOE4 Carriers With Early Alzheimer’s Disease https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04693520, 2021.
[199] ClinicalTrials.gov, Rosiglitazone (Extended Release Tablets) As Adjunctive Therapy In Subjects With Mild To Moderate Alzheimer’s Disease (REFLECT-3) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00348140, 2017.
[200] Harrington C , Sawchak S , Chiang C , Davies J , Donovan C , M Saunders A , Irizarry M , Jeter B , Zvartau-Hind M , H van Dyck C , Rosiglitazone does not improve cognition or global function when used as adjunctive therapy to AChE inhibitors in mild-to-moderate Alzheimer’s disease: two phase 3 studies, Current Alzheimer Research, 8 (2011) 592–606.21592048
[201] ClinicalTrials.gov, Sunphenon EGCg (Epigallocatechin-Gallate) in the Early Stage of Alzheimer’s Disease (SUN-AK) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00951834, 2021.
[202] ClinicalTrials.gov, S-Equol in Alzheimer’s Disease (SEAD) Trial (SEAD) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02142777, 2016.
[203] ClinicalTrials.gov, Trial of Oxaloacetate in Alzheimer’s Disease (TOAD) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02593318, 2021.
[204] ClinicalTrials.gov, Imaging of Brain Structural/Functional Connectivity and Amyloid and Tau Lesions in APOE4 Carriers. (Protocol Z) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03816228, 2021.
[205] Fleisher A , Grundman M , Jack CR , Petersen RC , Taylor C , Kim HT , Schiller DH , Bagwell V , Sencakova D , Weiner MF , Sex, apolipoprotein E ε4 status, and hippocampal volume in mild cognitive impairment, Archives of neurology, 62 (2005) 953–957.15956166
[206] ClinicalTrials.gov, OmegAD (Omega-3 and Alzheimer’s Disease) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00211159, 2017.
[207] Faxen-Irving G , Falahati F , Basun H , Eriksdotter M , Vedin I , Wahlund L-O , Schultzberg M , Hjorth E , Palmblad J , Cederholm T , Does Fatty Acid Composition in Subcutaneous Adipose Tissue Differ between Patients with Alzheimer’s Disease and Cohabiting Proxies?, Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 61 (2018) 515–519.
[208] Karimi M , Vedin I , Freund Levi Y , Basun H , Faxén Irving G , Eriksdotter M , Wahlund L-O , Schultzberg M , Hjorth E , Cederholm T , DHA-rich n–3 fatty acid supplementation decreases DNA methylation in blood leukocytes: the OmegAD study, The American journal of clinical nutrition, 106 (2017) 1157–1165.28855224
[209] ClinicalTrials.gov, The Impact of Lorazepam on Cognition in APOE e4 Carriers https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00586430, 2008.
[210] Stonnington CM , Snyder PJ , Hentz JG , Reiman EM , Caselli RJ , Double-blind crossover study of the cognitive effects of lorazepam in healthy apolipoprotein E (APOE)-ε4 carriers, The Journal of clinical psychiatry, 70 (2009) 0–0.
[211] ClinicalTrials.gov, Influence of Age on Amyloid Load in Alzheimer’s Disease and in Atypical Focal Cortical Alzheimer’s Disease (BIOMAGE) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01095744, 2012.
[212] ClinicalTrials.gov, n-3 PUFA for Vascular Cognitive Aging https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01953705, 2020.
[213] Bowman GL , Silbert LC , Dodge HH , Lahna D , Hagen K , Murchison CF , Howieson D , Kaye J , Quinn JF , Shinto L , Randomized trial of marine n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids for the prevention of cerebral small vessel disease and inflammation in aging (PUFA Trial): rationale, design and baseline results, Nutrients, 11 (2019) 735.30934894
[214] ClinicalTrials.gov, A Study of CAD106 and CNP520 Versus Placebo in Participants at Risk for the Onset of Clinical Symptoms of Alzheimer’s Disease (GS1) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02565511?term=CAD106&amp;cond=Alzheimer+Disease&amp;draw=2&amp;rank=1, 2021.
[215] Weller J , Budson A , Current understanding of Alzheimer’s disease diagnosis and treatment, F1000Research, 7(2018).29527296
[216] Farlow MR , Andreasen N , Riviere M-E , Vostiar I , Vitaliti A , Sovago J , Caputo A , Winblad B , Graf A , Long-term treatment with active Aβ immunotherapy with CAD106 in mild Alzheimer’s disease, Alzheimer’s research &amp; therapy, 7 (2015) 1–13.
[217] ClinicalTrials.gov, A Study of CNP520 Versus Placebo in Participants at Risk for the Onset of Clinical Symptoms of Alzheimer’s Disease (GS2) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03131453?term=CNP520&amp;cond=Alzheimer+Disease&amp;draw=2&amp;rank=1, 2021.
[218] ClinicalTrials.gov, AHEAD 3-45 Study: A Study to Evaluate Efficacy and Safety of Treatment With Lecanemab in Participants With Preclinical Alzheimer’s Disease and Elevated Amyloid and Also in Participants With Early Preclinical Alzheimer’s Disease and Intermediate Amyloid https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04468659?term=BAN2401&amp;cond=Alzheimer+Disease&amp;draw=2&amp;rank=4, 2021.
[219] ClinicalTrials.gov, An Open-Label Crenezumab Study in Participants With Alzheimer’s Disease (CREAD OLE) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03491150?term=Crenezumab&amp;cond=Alzheimer+Disease&amp;draw=2&amp;rank=1, 2021.
[220] ClinicalTrials.gov, A Study of Aducanumab in Participants With Mild Cognitive Impairment Due to Alzheimer’s Disease or With Mild Alzheimer’s Disease Dementia to Evaluate the Safety of Continued Dosing in Participants With Asymptomatic Amyloid-Related Imaging Abnormalities (EVOLVE) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03639987?term=Aducanumab%2C.+amyloid&amp;cond=Alzheimer+Disease&amp;draw=2&amp;rank=1 2021.
[221] ClinicalTrials.gov, Evaluate the Safety, Tolerability, Immunogenicity and Efficacy of UB-311 in Mild Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) Patients https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02551809?term=Amyloid%2C+UB-311&amp;cond=Alzheimer+Disease&amp;draw=2&amp;rank=3 2021.
[222] ClinicalTrials.gov, A Study of Gantenerumab in Participants With Mild Alzheimer Disease https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02051608?term=Gantenerumab%2C+Amyloid&amp;cond=Alzheimer+Disease&amp;draw=2&amp;rank=4 2021.
[223] Klein G , Delmar P , Voyle N , Rehal S , Hofmann C , Abi-Saab D , Andjelkovic M , Ristic S , Wang G , Bateman R , Gantenerumab reduces amyloid-β plaques in patients with prodromal to moderate Alzheimer’s disease: a PET substudy interim analysis, Alzheimer’s research &amp; therapy, 11 (2019) 1–12.
[224] ClinicalTrials.gov, Effect of LY2062430 on the Progression of Alzheimer’s Disease (EXPEDITION) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00905372?term=Solanezumab%2C+Amyloid&amp;cond=Alzheimer+Disease&amp;draw=2&amp;rank=1 2021.
[225] ClinicalTrials.gov, Study to Evaluate the Effect of CT1812 Treatment on Amyloid Beta Oligomer Displacement Into CSF in Subjects With Mild to Moderate Alzheimer’s Disease https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03522129?term=CT1812%2C+Amyloid&amp;cond=Alzheimer+Disease&amp;draw=2&amp;rank=1 2021.
[226] ClinicalTrials.gov, Clinical Trial to Explore the the Amyloid Beta Draining Effect of Thiethylperazine (TEP) in Subjects With Newly Diagnosed Early-to-mild Dementia Due to Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) in Comparison to Healthy Volunteers (drainAD) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03417986?term=Thiethylperazine&amp;cond=Alzheimer+Disease&amp;draw=2&amp;rank=1 2021.
[227] ClinicalTrials.gov, Evaluate the Efficacy and Safety of ID1201 for Dose-finding in Mild Alzheimer’s Disease https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03363269?term=ID1201&amp;cond=Alzheimer+Disease&amp;draw=2&amp;rank=1 2021.
[228] Tirals C , Multiple Dose Safety Study of NPT088 in Patients With Mild to Moderate Probable Alzheimer’s Disease https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03008161, 2019.
[229] ClinicalTrials.gov, Study With Lu AF20513 in Patients With Mild Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) or Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) Due to AD https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03819699?term=Lu+AF20513%2C+Amyloid&amp;cond=Alzheimer+Disease&amp;draw=2&amp;rank=1 2021.
[230] ClinicalTrials.gov, Safety and Immunogenicity of Repeated Doses of ABvac40 in Patients With a-MCI or Vm-AD https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03461276?term=ABvac40&amp;cond=Alzheimer+Disease&amp;draw=2&amp;rank=2 2021.
[231] Lacosta A-M , Pascual-Lucas M , Pesini P , Casabona D , Pérez-Grijalba V , Marcos-Campos I , Sarasa L , Canudas J , Badi H , Monleón I , Safety, tolerability and immunogenicity of an active anti-Aβ 40 vaccine (ABvac40) in patients with Alzheimer’s disease: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase I trial, Alzheimer’s research &amp; therapy, 10 (2018) 1–13.
[232] ClinicalTrials.gov, A Multiple Dose Study of PF-04360365 In Patients With Mild to Moderate Alzheimer’s Disease https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00945672?term=Ponezumab%2C+amyloid&amp;cond=Alzheimer+Disease&amp;draw=2&amp;rank=2 2021.
[233] ClinicalTrials.gov, Amyloid Imaging And Safety Study Of ACC-001 In Subjects With Early Alzheimer’s Disease https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01227564?term=ACC-001%2C+amyloid&amp;cond=Alzheimer+Disease&amp;draw=2&amp;rank=2 2021.
[234] Van Dyck C , Sadowsky C , Le Prince Leterme G , Booth K , Peng Y , Marek K , Ketter N , Liu E , Wyman B , Jackson N , Vanutide Cridificar (ACC-001) and QS-21 Adjuvant in Individuals with Early Alzheimer’s Disease: Amyloid Imaging Positron Emission Tomography and Safety Results from a Phase 2 Study, The journal of prevention of Alzheimer’s disease, 3 (2016) 75–84.
[235] ClinicalTrials.gov, A Repeated Dose Study of KHK6640 in Japanese Patients With Alzheimer’s Disease https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03093519?term=KHK6640&amp;cond=Alzheimer+Disease&amp;draw=2&amp;rank=3 2021.
[236] ClinicalTrials.gov, Modulation of Abeta Levels by GSK933776 in Alzheimer’s Disease Patient https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01424436?term=GSK933776&amp;cond=Alzheimer+Disease&amp;draw=2&amp;rank=1 2021.
[237] Andreasen N , Simeoni M , Ostlund H , Lisjo PI , Fladby T , Loercher AE , Byrne GJ , Murray F , Scott-Stevens PT , Wallin A , First administration of the Fc-attenuated anti-β amyloid antibody GSK933776 to patients with mild Alzheimer’s disease: a randomized, placebo-controlled study, PloS one, 10 (2015) e0098153.25789616
[238] Leyhe T , Andreasen N , Simeoni M , Reich A , von Arnim CA , Tong X , Yeo A , Khan S , Loercher A , Chalker M , Modulation of β-amyloid by a single dose of GSK933776 in patients with mild Alzheimer’s disease: a phase I study, Alzheimer’s research &amp; therapy, 6 (2014) 1–10.
[239] ClinicalTrials.gov, Study to Evaluate Safety, Tolerability and Immunogenicity of Vaccine (UB 311) in Subjects With Alzheimer’s Disease https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00965588?term=UB-311+%2C+amyloid&amp;cond=Alzheimer+Disease&amp;draw=2&amp;rank=2 2021.
[240] Wang CY , Finstad CL , Walfield AM , Sia C , Sokoll KK , Chang T-Y , De Fang X , Hung CH , Hutter-Paier B , Windisch M , Site-specific UBITh® amyloid-β vaccine for immunotherapy of Alzheimer’s disease, Vaccine, 25 (2007) 3041–3052.17287052
[241] ClinicalTrials.gov, Repeated Subcutaneous Administration of ABvac40 in Mild to Moderate Alzheimer’s Disease Patients https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03113812?term=ABvac40&amp;cond=Alzheimer+Disease&amp;draw=2&amp;rank=1 2021.
[242] Novak G , Streffer JR , Timmers M , Henley D , Brashear HR , Bogert J , Russu A , Janssens L , Tesseur I , Tritsmans L , Long-term safety and tolerability of atabecestat (JNJ-54861911), an oral BACE1 inhibitor, in early Alzheimer’s disease spectrum patients: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study and a two-period extension study, Alzheimer’s research &amp; therapy, 12 (2020) 1–16.
[243] Bigica A , Elenbecestat Trials in Early Alzheimer Disease Terminated for Poor Risk-Benefit Profile, 2019.
[244] PhD PI , Phase 3 Trials of Elenbecestat in Early Alzheimer’s Stopped for Lack of Benefit, Eisai and Biogen Say, 2019.
[245] ClinicalTrials.gov, An Efficacy and Safety Trial of Verubecestat (MK-8931) in Mild to Moderate Alzheimer’s Disease (P07738) (EPOCH) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01739348, 2021.
[246] Egan MF , Mukai Y , Voss T , Kost J , Stone J , Furtek C , Mahoney E , Cummings JL , Tariot PN , Aisen PS , Further analyses of the safety of verubecestat in the phase 3 EPOCH trial of mild-to-moderate Alzheimer’s disease, Alzheimer’s research &amp; therapy, 11 (2019) 1–12.
[247] ClinicalTrials.gov, A Study of Semagacestat for Alzheimer’s Patients (Identity XT) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01035138?term=LY450139&amp;cond=Alzheimer+Disease&amp;draw=2&amp;rank=5 2021.
[248] ClinicalTrials.gov, Safety, Tolerability, Pharmacokinetics, and Pharmacodynamics of IONIS-MAPTRx in Patients With Mild Alzheimer’s Disease https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03186989?term=IONIS-MAPTRx&amp;cond=Alzheimer+Disease&amp;draw=2&amp;rank=1 2021.
[249] ClinicalTrials.gov, A Study to Investigate Safety and Tolerability, Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics of JNJ-63733657 in Healthy Subjects and Subjects With Alzheimer’s Disease https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03375697?term=JNJ-63733657&amp;cond=Alzheimer+Disease&amp;draw=2&amp;rank=1 2021.
[250] ClinicalTrials.gov, A Study of Semorinemab in Patients With Moderate Alzheimer’s Disease https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03828747 2021.
[251] SA AI , AC Immune Announces Anti-Tau Monoclonal Antibody Entering Second Phase 2 Trial in Moderate Alzheimer’s Disease https://www.globenewswire.com/news-release/2019/02/20/1738228/0/en/AC-Immune-Announces-Anti-Tau-Monoclonal-Antibody-Entering-Second-Phase-2-Trial-in-Moderate-Alzheimer-s-Disease.html, 2019.
[252] ClinicalTrials.gov, A Study to Evaluate the Efficacy and Safety of ABBV-8E12 in Subjects With Early Alzheimer’s Disease https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02880956?term=ABBV-8E12&amp;cond=Alzheimer+Disease&amp;draw=2&amp;rank=2 2021.
[253] A.s. News, ABBV-8E12.
[254] Mullard A , Failure of first anti-tau antibody in Alzheimer disease highlights risks of history repeating, (2020).
[255] ClinicalTrials.gov, 24 Months Safety and Efficacy Study of AADvac1 in Patients With Mild Alzheimer’s Disease (ADAMANT) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02579252?term=AADvac1&amp;cond=Alzheimer+Disease&amp;draw=2&amp;rank=3 2021.
[256] Kontsekova E , Zilka N , Kovacech B , Skrabana R , Novak M , Identification of structural determinants on tau protein essential for its pathological function: novel therapeutic target for tau immunotherapy in Alzheimer’s disease, Alzheimer’s research &amp; therapy, 6 (2014) 1–16.
[257] Kontsekova E , Zilka N , Kovacech B , Novak P , Novak M , First-in-man tau vaccine targeting structural determinants essential for pathological tau–tau interaction reduces tau oligomerisation and neurofibrillary degeneration in an Alzheimer’s disease model, Alzheimer’s research &amp; therapy, 6 (2014) 1–12.
[258] Novak P , Schmidt R , Kontsekova E , Zilka N , Kovacech B , Skrabana R , Vince-Kazmerova Z , Katina S , Fialova L , Prcina M , Safety and immunogenicity of the tau vaccine AADvac1 in patients with Alzheimer’s disease: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 1 trial, The Lancet Neurology, 16 (2017) 123–134.27955995
[259] ClinicalTrials.gov, Phase 2 Study of BIIB092 in Participants With Early Alzheimer’s Disease (TANGO) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03352557?term=BIIB-092&amp;cond=Alzheimer+Disease&amp;draw=2&amp;rank=1 2021.
[260] Relations I , Biogen Announces Topline Results From Phase 2 Study of Gosuranemab, an Anti-Tau Antibody, for Alzheimer’s Disease https://investors.biogen.com/news-releases/news-release-details/biogen-announces-topline-results-phase-2-study-gosuranemab-anti, 2021.
[261] Alzheimersnewstoday, AAIC21 – BIIB080 Safely Lowered Tau Levels in Patients in Phase 1 Trial https://alzheimersnewstoday.com/2021/08/16/aaic21-biib080-safely-lowered-tau-levels-inpatients-in-phase-1-trial/ 2021.
[262] ClinicalTrials.gov, A Safety, Tolerability, Pharmacokinetics, Pharmacodynamics and Preliminary Efficacy Study of TPI-287 in Alzheimer’s Disease https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01966666?term=TPI-287&amp;cond=Alzheimer+Disease&amp;draw=2&amp;rank=1 2021.
[263] Alzforum, Therapeutics LMTM, Tau aggregation inhibitor (TAI) https://www.alzforum.org/therapeutics/lmtm 2021.
[264] ClinicalTrials.gov, Safety and Efficacy of TRx0237 in Subjects With Alzheimer’s Disease Followed by Open-Label Treatment https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03446001?term=TRx0237&amp;cond=Alzheimer+Disease&amp;draw=2&amp;rank=5 2021.
[265] ClinicalTrials.gov, A Study of LY3303560 in Healthy Participants and Participants With Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02754830 2021.
[266] Alzheimersnewstoday, Zagotenemab (Formerly LY3303560) https://alzheimersnewstoday.com/eli-lilly-zagotenemab-ly3303560-alzheimers-tau-antibody/ 2021.
[267] ClinicalTrials.gov, Study of the Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics of POSIPHEN® in Subjects With Amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01072812?term=Posiphen&amp;cond=Alzheimer+Disease&amp;draw=2&amp;rank=3 2021.
[268] Alzforum, Therapeutics, Posiphen https://www.alzforum.org/therapeutics/posiphen 2021.
[269] ClinicalTrials.gov, Evaluation of the Efficacy and Safety of Azeliragon (TTP488) in Patients With Mild Alzheimer’s Disease (STEADFAST) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02080364?term=Azeliragon&amp;cond=Alzheimer+Disease&amp;rank=2, 2021.
[270] A.s.N. Today, Azeliragon, https://alzheimersnewstoday.com/azeliragon/, 2021.
[271] ClinicalTrials.gov, Alzheimer’s Disease Acitretin Medication (ADAM) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01078168?term=Acitretin&amp;cond=Alzheimer+Disease&amp;draw=2&amp;rank=1 2018.
[272] ClinicalTrials.gov, Bexarotene Amyloid Treatment for Alzheimer’s Disease (BEAT-AD) https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01782742?term=Bexarotene&amp;cond=Alzheimer+Disease&amp;draw=2&amp;rank=1, 2021.
[273] Zatsepin TS , Kotelevtsev YV , Koteliansky V , Lipid nanoparticles for targeted siRNA delivery–going from bench to bedside, International journal of nanomedicine, 11 (2016) 3077.27462152
