LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


0205742
41325
Psychol Learn Motiv
Psychol Learn Motiv
The psychology of learning and motivation
0079-7421
1557-802X

37139101
10153623
10.1016/bs.plm.2022.08.001
NIHMS1845356
Article
A healthy mind in a healthy body: Effects of arteriosclerosis and other risk factors on cognitive aging and dementia
Fabiani Monica ab*
Asnakew Bethlehem A. ab
Bowie Daniel C. ab
Chism Sydney M. ab
Clements Grace M. ab
Gardner Jennie C. ab
Islam Samia S. ab
Rubenstein Samantha L. ab
Gratton Gabriele ab
a Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, IL, United States
b Psychology Department, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, IL, United States
* Corresponding author: mfabiani@illinois.edu
29 10 2022
2022
07 9 2022
07 9 2023
77 69123
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
In this review we start from the assumption that, to fully understand cognitive aging, it is important to embrace a holistic view, integrating changes in bodily, brain, and cognitive functions. This broad view can help explain individual differences in aging trajectories and could ultimately enable prevention and remediation strategies. As the title of this review suggests, we claim that there are not only indirect but also direct effects of various organ systems on the brain, creating cascades of phenomena that strongly contribute to age-related cognitive decline. Here we focus primarily on the cerebrovascular system, because of its direct effects on brain health and close connections with the development and progression of Alzheimer’s Disease and other types of dementia. We start by reviewing the main cognitive changes that are often observed in normally aging older adults, as well as the brain systems that support them. Second, we provide a brief overview of the cerebrovascular system and its known effects on brain anatomy and function, with a focus on aging. Third, we review genetic and lifestyle risk factors that may affect the cerebrovascular system and ultimately contribute to cognitive decline. Lastly, we discuss this evidence, review limitations, and point out avenues for additional research and clinical intervention.


pmcOrandum est ut sit mens sana in corpore sano

You should pray for a healthy mind in a healthy body

Quote from Satire X of the Roman poet Juvenal (120 AD)

1. Introduction

Aging is often accompanied by cognitive decline in a range of domains, including fluid intelligence, working memory, executive function and attention/cognitive control, long-term memory, and speed of reactions (see Fabiani, 2012; Park et al., 2002). A number of individuals convert from age-related decline, which is largely benign, to mild cognitive impairment (MCI; 1–4% per year for age 65–80, for a total of 10–20% over this age span; Jack et al., 2005; Petersen et al., 1999). In turn, approximately 40% of MCI cases convert to Alzheimer’s Disease (AD)a or other forms of dementia within 5 years (Mielke, Vemuri, &amp; Rocca, 2014), with tremendous personal, societal, and economic costs.

The relationship between benign and pathological forms of cognitive decline is yet unclear and dominated by large individual differences. This partly intersects with the concepts of cognitive and brain reserve (Stern, 2012; see Fig. 1), suggesting that older adults differ in their likelihood of crossing a threshold for objectively recognizable cognitive impairment or dementia. In this article, we review some of the factors that affect the risk of crossing this hypothesized threshold. Some of them, such as genetics and exposure to chronic stress, are largely outside a person’s control. The majority, however, are related to lifestyle habits. As such, they are largely controllable and could be harnessed to engender the prevention, or at least the slowing, of cognitive decline. Because AD and other forms of dementia cannot be cured or reversed, strategies to stave off or prevent their onset become of paramount importance.

AD has been traditionally described as a syndrome characterized by specific microstructural brain hallmarks (beta-amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles, leading to brain inflammation and atrophy; DeTure &amp; Dickson, 2019; Duyckaerts, Delatour, &amp; Potier, 2009; Long &amp; Holtzman, 2019) and significant long-term memory decline linked to hippocampal dysfunction, which eventually spreads to all other cognitive domains. However, more recently, a more complex view of AD has emerged. First, amyloid plaques and tangles are present in the brains of normally aging older adults (e.g., Groot et al., 2021; Rodrigue et al., 2012; Ziontz et al., 2019). Second, recent evidence suggests a relationship between AD and tau pathology, in the absence of beta-amyloid load (Gordon et al., 2018; Guo, Landau, &amp; Jagust, 2021), implicating the vascular system. Third, findings are mixed with respect to the existence of a tight dose-response relationship between beta-amyloid load (as assessed by the Pittsburgh Compound-B, PiB, and fluorodeoxyglucose, FDG, positron emission tomography, PET scans) and the degree of cognitive decline (e.g., Cohen &amp; Klunk, 2014; Hedden, Oh, Younger, &amp; Patel, 2013). Finally, the close relationship that is expected to exist between increasing memory loss and advancing AD pathology has also been moderated by evidence that suggests that there may be different presentations and trajectories of decline in AD, and that the cognitive domain for which decline is first apparent depends on the brain area(s) where the dysfunction is onsetting (Dickerson et al., 2017), although a medial temporal onset with amnestic symptoms remains the most common.

Within this more complex view of cognitive aging and dementia, cardiovascular and cerebrovascular risk factors emerge as important, accelerating contributors to a pathway leading to MCI and dementia (Fig. 2; Barnes, 2015; de la Torre, 2012). Here we will focus on such factors, which appear to be involved in both the known genetic predispositions and the lifestyle choices that may lead toward negative aging outcomes. In fact, some of the known genes that contribute to heightened risk of developing AD are related to changes in the cholesterol cycle and to increased risks of developing arteriosclerosis (stiffening of the arteries). Similarly, lifestyle factors such as low levels of physical activity and poor nutrition can lead to obesity, the development of diabetes, and related cerebrovascular complications. High levels of stress and other factors can lead to hypertension, once again promoting and exacerbating arteriosclerosis. Smoking, another lifestyle choice, also affects vascular health through endothelial arterial tissue damage (as well as damage to other small blood vessels; cerebral small vessel disease, CSVD, Li et al., 2018). Over the lifespan these factors can converge into an impaired arterial system, which may reduce blood flow to the brain (hypoperfusion), leading to tissue loss and inflammation, diminished responsivity to physiological and psychological challenges, altered brain function and ultimately heightened risks for cognitive decline, dementia, and stroke (Zimmerman, Rypma, Gratton, &amp; Fabiani, 2021; see Fig. 2).

A central tenet of this review is that the brain is a bodily organ, tightly interconnected with all other physiological systems. As such, changes in other bodily functions are bound to profoundly affect brain and cognitive function, and vice-versa. This cross-connection is especially evident in moments of rapid developmental changes (such as adolescence) as well as in aging, where dysfunctions can emerge in multiple organ systems. A case in point is the close link that has been recently described between dysfunction of the gut-brain axis and Parkinson’s Disease (e.g., Bhattacharyya &amp; Bhunia, 2021), as well as the tight relationship between arterial function and brain and cognitive decline, which is the central theme of this review. Therefore, when trying to understand age-related differences, or outcome differences across older adults, it is of paramount importance to keep this holistic mind-body view at the forefront.

In this article, we first review the main changes that are often observed in long-term memory, working memory, and attention/cognitive control/executive function in normally aging older adults, as well as in the brain systems that support them. Second, we provide a brief overview of the cerebrovascular system and its integral support to brain structure and function. We then overview genetic, stress and lifestyle risk factors that may affect this system and ultimately contribute to cognitive decline, either directly or indirectly. Lastly, we summarize and discuss this evidence and point out avenues for additional research and clinical intervention.

2. Typical cognitive changes in aging and the brain systems supporting them

2.1 Long-term memory

Long-term memory (LTM) allows us to retain large amounts of information for long periods of time, from a few hours to a lifetime. Progressive memory loss is considered a prototypical symptom of AD, at least in its most common medial temporal presentation (Dickerson et al., 2017). Some level of LTM decline is also demonstrated experimentally in normally aging older adults, although it is typically of small to moderate significance and can be largely moderated by providing more time and/or contextual support (e.g., suggesting effective mnemonic strategy usage can ameliorate performance; Anderson, 2018; Hampstead, Stringer, Stilla, &amp; Sathian, 2020).

LTM can be subdivided into declarative (or explicit) and nondeclarative (or implicit) memory (Camina &amp; Güell, 2017; Graf &amp; Schacter, 1985; James, 1890; Stark, 2010; Thompson &amp; Kim, 1996). Declarative memory refers to two categories of conscious memory: episodic and semantic (Camina &amp; Güell, 2017; Squire, 1987; Stark, 2010; Thompson &amp; Kim, 1996; Tulving, 1972). Episodic memory is memory for personal facts and events (Squire, 1987; Stark, 2010; Thompson &amp; Kim, 1996). As such, it is linked with temporal, and/or other contextual cues integral to retrieval, and it is therefore also labeled relational memory (Cohen, Poldrack, &amp; Eichenbaum, 1997; Cohen et al., 1999; Konkel &amp; Cohen, 2009). For example, remembering the day that you graduated from high school would qualify as an episodic memory, because it is bundled with specific details of that event (e.g., when and where, who attended, the weather on that day, etc.). However, knowing that “Pomp and Circumstance” is a typical graduation march would be classified as a semantic memory, because it is general knowledge that can be used in many different contexts, and because specific details about when this knowledge was first acquired are typically lost. Nondeclarative/implicit memory, on the other hand, refers to memories that are not consciously and actively retrieved, such as memories for motor sequences (procedural memory; e.g., knowing how to ride a bike), and priming (e.g., retrieving information because of previous exposure to the same or strongly associated information, without being aware of the connection; revealed by faster responses or other behavioral facilitation; Camina &amp; Güell, 2017). While episodic/relational memory typically diminishes with age, semantic memory, as indexed by vocabulary or other crystallized knowledge, can continue to increase until late in life (Baltes &amp; Lindenberger, 1988, 1997; Lindenberger &amp; Baltes, 1997). Priming and other forms of nondeclarative memory are also largely spared in normal aging (Craik, 1994; De Wit et al., 2022; Mokhber et al., 2019) and can even be enhanced in older compared to younger adults under specific circumstances, in which distractors in a study phase are primes for seemingly unrelated tasks occurring at a later time (e.g., Healey, Campbell, &amp; Hasher, 2008). Therefore, here we primarily focus on episodic/relational memory because of its apparent changes in normal and pathological aging.

There are many neuropsychological tests and experimental tasks used to assess episodic/relational memory, both in the laboratory and in clinical/diagnostic settings, whose detailed description is beyond the scope of this review. The vast majority of these tasks involve encoding information within a particular context (e.g., experiment), consolidating it into LTM, and retrieving it at some later time. Much research is devoted to isolating which of these stages are most affected by aging and/or other experimental manipulations (e.g., Sander, Fandakova, &amp; Werkle-Bergner, 2021). By and large, differences in performance between younger and older adults in these tasks decrease when contextual information, cues or other environmental support are provided to aid retrieval (e.g., older adults’ performance is higher in recognition or cued recall compared to free recall) and they increase when participants are required to retrieve more precise information (e.g., sequential recall vs. free recall vs. forced-choice recognition; Rhodes, Greene, &amp; Naveh-Benjamin, 2019). Gist information is typically more accessible even with incipient AD, but it can lead to false memories and other memory errors (Fabiani, Kazmerski, Cycowicz, &amp; Friedman, 1996; Gallo, Hargis, &amp; Castel, 2019; Loftus, 1997; Marsh, Balota, &amp; Roediger, 2005).

2.1.1 Brain systems supporting LTM and how they are influenced by aging

The medial temporal lobe is undoubtedly one of the most critical structures involved in LTM (Cohen &amp; Eichenbaum, 1993; Squire, 1992; Stark, 2010). It includes the hippocampus, and the entorhinal, perirhinal, and parahippocampal cortices. These brain structures are organized such that the perirhinal and parahippocampal cortices have bidirectional communication with the entorhinal cortex, which is the main input/output of the hippocampus (particularly hippocampal subfields CA1, CA3, dentate gyrus, and subiculum; Bakker, Kirwan, Miller, &amp; Stark, 2008; Camina &amp; Güell, 2017; Moser, Kropff, &amp; Moser, 2008; Nakashiba, Young, McHugh, Buhl, &amp; Tonegawa, 2008; Squire, 2009; Stark, 2010). The medial temporal lobe is also highly interconnected with other brain areas (Fig. 3), including frontal and parietal regions, which provide important contributions to episodic/relational memory.

It is generally accepted that the medial temporal lobe serves as the primary brain region responsible for the generation of new episodic memories, and it is also postulated to have an important role in the retrieval of old memories via its interconnections with other cortical regions (Camina &amp; Güell, 2017). The idea that the hippocampus is involved in memory retrieval has to do with the notion that the hippocampus is also critical for pattern completion (Cohen &amp; Eichenbaum, 1993; Hindy, Ng, &amp; Turk-Browne, 2016; Leutgeb &amp; Leutgeb, 2007; Marr, 1971). In other words, exposure to a portion of a prior experience will likely prompt retrieval of the entire relational memory bundle (Duncan, Tompary, &amp; Davachi, 2014; Hindy et al., 2016; Leutgeb &amp; Leutgeb, 2007). This theory has been backed up by the finding that hippocampal subfield CA1 is involved in pattern completion and subfields CA1 and CA3 are both connected to each other and activated during retrieval (Duncan et al., 2014; Hindy et al., 2016; Leutgeb &amp; Leutgeb, 2007). The hippocampus also has direct communication with the perirhinal cortex, which is involved in visual object recognition, and the parahippocampal cortex, which is involved in processing spatial information, as well as the diencephalon, including the anterior thalamic nuclei and the mammillary bodies (Camina &amp; Güell, 2017; Eichenbaum, Yonelinas, &amp; Ranganath, 2007; Stark, 2010). The entorhinal cortex serves as the main connection between the hippocampus and various higher order cortical areas, such as the neocortex (Camina &amp; Güell, 2017; Squire, 1992; Stark, 2010). Other subcortical regions, such as the amygdala, are involved in processing different aspects of memory, but are not necessarily critical for declarative memory (Stark, 2010). Although the frontal lobe is involved in LTM, damage to the prefrontal cortex does not typically result in amnesia. However, such damage affects the way in which LTM is utilized (Squire, 2009). For instance, patients with frontal lobe damage may have difficulties with contextual aspects of LTM, such as remembering the order in which certain events occurred, source memory, and prospective memory (Shimamura, Janowsky, &amp; Squire, 1991; Squire, 2009). This is also often the case for older adults, albeit to a much more limited extent, as some degree of prefrontal cortex atrophy is common in normal aging (Fabiani &amp; Friedman, 1997; Gordon et al., 2008).

One of the mechanisms proposed to account for age-related memory decline is an increase in brain atrophy (Park, 2000). On average, age-related atrophy is particularly evident in the medial temporal lobe, albeit with large individual differences (see Fig. 4A and B; Buckner, 2004; Gordon et al., 2008; Henskens et al., 2008; Kemper, 1994; Park, 2000; Raz, 2000; Singer, Trollor, Baune, Sachdev, &amp; Smith, 2014; Stark, 2010; Zimmerman et al., 2021). Vascular changes such as a decline in cerebrovascular angiogenesis, increased tortuosity of arterioles, capillary loss, and overall decrease in cerebral blood flow can all contribute to accelerate atrophy (Brown &amp; Thore, 2011; Fletcher et al., 2016; Lähteenvuo &amp; Rosenzweig, 2012). Hippocampal volume is correlated with the ability to reactivate relational memories (Walker, Low, Cohen, Gratton, &amp; Fabiani, 2017), and regional increases in gray matter atrophy and structural white matter abnormalities negatively impact the frontal/hippocampal circuit, resulting in impairments in the binding of information essential for relational memory and in the ability to convert information from working memory to LTM (Benear, Ngo, &amp; Olson, 2020; Mitchell, Johnson, Raye, &amp; D’Esposito, 2000; Park, 2000; Schwarb et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2021).

Several studies have examined the links between arterial health and memory decline. For example, a study by Pase et al. (2010) sought to determine whether arterial stiffening results in cognitive decline in healthy middle-aged subjects. They found that cognitive performance on tasks of LTM, but not working memory, were associated with arterial stiffness. Another study found that higher arterial stiffness, evaluated by pulse wave velocity (PWV) is associated with greater cortical and subcortical lesions, higher cognitive impairment, and lower personal independence (Scuteri, Brancati, Gianni, Assisi, &amp; Volpe, 2005). A third study examined the association of arterial stiffening with cognition, AD biomarkers, and the apolipoprotein ε (APOE-ε) genotype and found that increased arterial stiffening was associated with decreased executive function. Specifically, individuals with AD-positive APOE-ε genotype biomarkers were at greater risk for increased arterial stiffening and decreased memory performance (Bangen et al., 2021). Overall, these studies suggest that the arterial stiffening that occurs with age is a critical variable affecting LTM.

In addition to the role of increasing gray matter atrophy and white matter abnormalities, it has also been proposed that aging is associated with changing patterns of brain activation during memory encoding and retrieval. For instance, older adults tend to have less activation of the left prefrontal cortex and medial temporal lobe structures during encoding compared to younger adults (Cabeza et al., 1997; Grady et al., 1995; Park, Polk, Mikels, Taylor, &amp; Marshuetz, 2001; Schacter, Savage, Alpert, Rauch, &amp; Albert, 1996). Older adults also tend to have bilateral activation in dorsolateral prefrontal cortex during retrieval, whereas younger adults tend to only have activation of their right prefrontal cortex (Cabeza et al., 1997; Madden et al., 1999; Park et al., 2001). However, this may intersect with the increased difficulty of retrieval that older adults may experience, compared to their younger counterparts (see Fabiani, 2012; Schneider-Garces et al., 2010).

These age-related structural and functional changes may, at least in part, be promoted by a common neurovascular pathway, as described in Fig. 2. It is interesting to observe that some brain regions tend to become atrophic earlier in life and more commonly than others (Chiarelli et al., 2017; Fletcher et al., 2016; Gordon et al., 2008; Persson et al., 2016; Raz, Ghisletta, Rodrigue, Kennedy, &amp; Lindenberger, 2010; Raz et al., 2005). The reasons for this differential vulnerability are not completely clear, but we have hypothesized that this phenomenon may reflect, among other causes, a differential susceptibility to insults of the corresponding regional cerebrovascular system (Chiarelli et al., 2017; Fletcher et al., 2016; Kong et al., 2020). Studies using mice have shown that the hippocampus has decreased blood flow and blood oxygenation compared to the neocortex (Shaw et al., 2021), and various studies have demonstrated that the hippocampus is highly affected by episodes of anoxia, with more devastating consequences for the hippocampus than for other brain regions (Perosa et al., 2020). Although cardiorespiratory fitness plays a key role in determining the effects of hypoxia on cognitive outcomes (Wang et al., 2022), this increased susceptibility is thought to be the result of a limited vascular reserve supporting hippocampal function (Perosa et al., 2020). Without a sufficient blood supply to the hippocampus (low to start with and further limited by upstream arterial stiffening), neurogenesis can no longer be supported, resulting in hippocampal gray matter volumetric loss and cognitive decline, manifesting in the form of MCI or AD (Kirschen, Kery, &amp; Ge, 2018; Shaw et al., 2021). However, hippocampal susceptibility to hypoxia can be reduced with improved cardiorespiratory fitness (Wang et al., 2022). In support of these ideas, a study by Perosa et al. (2020) found that hippocampi with increased circulation due to a mixed blood supply from both the posterior cerebral artery and the anterior choroidal artery, as opposed to a single blood supply from only the posterior cerebral artery, are more likely to have a larger vascular reserve and result in better cognitive outcomes for individuals with cerebral small vessel disease (CSVD). Given this context, hardening of the arteries perfusing the medial temporal lobe can have consequences on hippocampal atrophy and function, leading to adverse cognitive outcomes in the form of neurodegenerative disease. The severity of arterial hardening on hippocampal function can, however, be reduced with improvements in fitness, as further discussed in Section 4.2.2.

2.2 Working memory

Working memory (WM) is hypothesized to support the temporary maintenance and manipulation of the information required to carry out cognitive tasks such as language comprehension and reasoning (Baddeley, 1992). According to Baddeley, WM can be divided into three subcomponents: (i) the central executive, a cognitive construct assumed to be an attentional-control system, (ii) a visuospatial sketchpad for maintaining visual representations, and (iii) a phonological loop, which maintains and rehearses verbal representations. A more recent model proposed by Cowan (2001, 2010) further specifies the interaction between these subcomponents. Specifically, Cowan suggests that an attentional system with a capacity of 2–5 chunks is the key limiting component of WM. In this view, attentional focus can combine activated portions of LTM to build and manipulate new chunks of information.

The capacity limits of WM can be assessed through storage-specific measures that prevent or control processing strategies (Cowan, 2010). Turner and Engle (1989) and Engle (2002) developed the operation-span (or OSPAN) task to estimate a “loaded” working memory span. Research using OSPAN has suggested that this measure of WM is both accurate and reproducible (Klein &amp; Fiss, 1999). OSPAN predicts behavior in several different tasks, ranging from vocabulary learning to contract bridge playing (Engle, 2001), pointing to the significance of WM in cognitive function at large. Although characterized by large individual differences, age-related deficits in cognition include declines in WM performance, especially evident in tasks requiring speeded information processing and decision-making (Murman, 2015; Park et al., 2002). In fact, prominent theoretical views of cognitive aging ascribe a central role to WM decline (Hasher, Lustig, &amp; Zacks, 2008; Hasher &amp; Zacks, 1988; Healey et al., 2008).

Reduced WM function can emerge from either weakened attentional processing (a top-down phenomenon) or weakened sensory representations (a bottom-up phenomenon; Fabiani, Zimmerman, &amp; Gratton, 2015). Inefficient management of distinct sensory representations is associated with impairments in the suppression of interfering information and diminished inhibitory function, giving rise to degraded WM performance in older as compared to younger adults (Fabiani, 2012; Hasher &amp; Zacks, 1988; see also Gordon, Tse, Gratton, &amp; Fabiani, 2014). Research also suggests that the speed at which processing operations related to the encoding of information are performed can also play a pivotal role in age-related variations of WM function (Salthouse, 1992, 1994; Verhaeghen, 2014). Nonetheless, as mentioned, there may exist situations in which distractions are actually relevant to subsequent tasks and reductions in inhibition turn out to be advantageous for older adults. Healey et al. (2008) view inefficient inhibitory processing and distractibility as a wider scope of attention, which may result in positive consequences within the context of implicit memory.

Fluid abilities, which are correlated with comprehension and reasoning, decline more in older adults than crystallized intelligence, which involves vocabulary and other general knowledge (Lindenberger &amp; Baltes, 1997; Park et al., 2002). Fluid intelligence is theorized to be at least partly reliant on WM capacity (Carpenter, Just, &amp; Shell, 1990), supporting the idea that variance in fluid, as opposed to crystallized intelligence, may be sensitive to age (Bugg, Zook, Delosh, Davalos, &amp; Davis, 2006). Peltz, Gratton, and Fabiani (2011) found a relationship between WM and fluid intelligence and components of the ERP (P3b and P3a, respectively) in a sample of younger and older adults performing a choice-reaction time task. These data suggest some degree of independence between these two cognitive constructs, with WM linked to dynamic changes in representations (P3b) and fluid intelligence linked to the orienting of attention (P3a). Further, these data show that these relationships are present in both younger and older adults, supporting the idea of lifelong individual differences in cognitive abilities that are maintained in healthy aging (Fabiani, 2012).

2.2.1 Brain systems supporting WM and how they are influenced by aging

Frontal and parietal regions, with broad connections to the hippocampus, are thought to support WM and executive function. Various attention networks connecting these regions, such as the frontoparietal network, the cingulo-opercular network, and the dorsal attention network, have also emerged as crucial for these functions (Gratton, Sun, &amp; Petersen, 2018). The prefrontal cortex is also assumed to be actively involved in coordinating executive functions (Friedman &amp; Miyake, 2017). Neuroimaging research points to consistent activation in prefrontal regions while participants perform WM tasks. However, older adults tend to show weakened functional activity and coherence within the frontoparietal network due to their increased distractibility (Campbell, Grady, Ng, &amp; Hasher, 2012; D’Esposito, Postle, &amp; Rypma, 2000). Also, as WM load increases, bilateral frontal activation appears, and is directly related to individuals’ span in both younger and older adults (Schneider-Garces et al., 2010).

The P300 component of the event-related potential (ERP) is hypothesized to be generated by multiple regions overlapping with the frontoparietal network and is among the most widely studied neural responses to incoming stimuli (Polich, 2007). Because P300 amplitude is sensitive to local sequential effects, it has been hypothesized that it may reflect aspects of WM (Brumback, Low, Gratton, &amp; Fabiani, 2005; Nittono, Nageishi, Nakajima, &amp; Ullsperger, 1999; Peltz et al., 2011). As such, the amplitude of the P300 can be used to index the degree to which a stimulus representation has decayed in WM since its previous activation. Peltz et al. (2011) showed that inactive representations elicit larger P300 amplitudes due to the need for WM “updating,” and that this is evident in both older and younger adults. Other P300 changes also observed in older adults include weakened amplitudes at parietal electrodes due to difficulties keeping up with memory processing, along with intensified amplitudes at frontal locations, which may be a direct result of the need to employ executive processes to a greater extent in the presence of a weakened frontal system (Fabiani &amp; Friedman, 1995; Fabiani, Friedman, &amp; Cheng, 1998; Fjell &amp; Walhovd, 2001).

Given the central role of WM function in cognition, and the fact that WM is supported by frontal and parietal regions that are known to be vulnerable to aging both structurally and functionally, it is not surprising that correlations are found between losses in WM function and the presence of various risk factors. For example, Tan et al. (2019) showed significant correlations between optical measures of cerebral arteriosclerosis and white matter abnormalities in older adults (see also Badji et al., 2019; Suri et al., 2020). They also showed that these same arterial elasticity measures were correlated with fluid intelligence, although this relationship was partially mediated by white matter lesions, leading to a hypothesized causal sequence connecting arterial hardening with white matter degradation and cognitive decline in fluid intelligence in aging.

2.3 Cognitive/attention control and executive function

Cognitive control (also referred to as executive function or attention control) includes general control mechanisms that are known to support the dynamics of human cognition and action and are linked to activity in the prefrontal cortex (Miyake &amp; Friedman, 2012), and in several networks that overlap those supporting attention and WM (Gratton, Sun, et al., 2018). More specifically, this set of processes is involved in generating and maintaining representations of task-relevant information, while suppressing those that are no longer relevant. Cognitive control also describes how current goal representations are being used to modify attentional biases to improve task performance (Gratton, Cooper, Fabiani, Carter, &amp; Karayanidis, 2018; Miller &amp; Cohen, 2001).

There are close ties between WM and cognitive control functions, as exemplified by WM models such as Cowan’s (2010). However, in the last 20years it has become evident that cognitive control encompasses a large set of processes, some of which may be more strictly dependent on WM than others (Miyake &amp; Friedman, 2012). The demarcation between these strongly related concepts is informed by paradigms specifically designed to separate them. When studying cognitive control in laboratory settings, there are several different classes of tasks that are used, emphasizing conflict, inhibition, proactive or reactive processing, and sometimes requiring continuous performance, and/or attention or task switching (Fig. 5). Varying degrees of age-related performance decrements are observed in all these tasks, with tasks that are faster-paced, use more potent conflict stimuli, or require noncued randomized switching showing the largest age effects. For example, major, consistent age-related effects have been found in tasks using global switching costs, perhaps reflecting deficits in dual-tasking or dividing attention (Verhaeghen, 2011).

In summary, there is evidence of age-related declines in cognitive control functions (Braver &amp; Barch, 2002), although the extent of this decline has been challenged (Verhaeghen, 2011) and broad individual differences have been found (Carr et al., 2017). Braver and Barch (2002) state that performing control tasks successfully largely depends on how individuals can prepare and adjust to the contextual information presented to them. Declines in cognitive control processes have far reaching consequences because they are important for making decisions not only in laboratory settings but also in real life.

2.3.1 Brain systems supporting cognitive/attention control and how they are influenced by aging

The dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and anterior cingular cortex (ACC) and their broad connections are thought to be crucial for supporting cognitive control functions (e.g., Banich, 2009; Braver, 2012; Braver, Reynolds, &amp; Donaldson, 2003; Miller &amp; Cohen, 2001). According to the conflict monitoring theory (Botvinick, Braver, Barch, Carter, &amp; Cohen, 2001), the ACC and DLPFC coordinate to create a feedback loop connecting conflict monitoring (ACC) to the implementation of attentional control (DLPFC). The frontoparietal network (FPN) and cingulo-opercular network (CON) are also known to support cognitive control functions. The CON is thought to be involved in the long-term maintenance of task goals and task sets whereas the FPN is involved in fast, trial-by-trial adjustments in the amount of prominence given to tasks (Gratton, Sun, et al., 2018). The FPN is commonly activated during cueing and commission of errors, suggesting it has a top-down and adaptive role in cognitive control (Gratton, Sun, et al., 2018).

Interestingly, cognitive control processes have lifespan developmental trajectories that appear to mirror those of the DLPFC, with lower control functions through childhood and adolescence and again late in life, when the frontal cortex and its connections are not fully developed or start to decline, respectively (Chini &amp; Hanganu-Opatz, 2021). Age-related volumetric loss in gray and white matter is particularly pronounced in prefrontal regions (Gordon et al., 2008; Raz et al., 2010), and older adults also show differences in the patterns of activation of the PFC during certain tasks (Hedden &amp; Gabrieli, 2004). Additionally, age-related differences in cognitive control tasks are correlated with a decrease in the volume of prefrontal regions (Hedden &amp; Gabrieli, 2004).

3. Brief overview of the cerebrovascular system, its assessment, and the effects of aging

Similarly to the composition of the vascular system in the rest of the body, the cerebrovascular system comprises three major compartments: (a) the arterial compartment, which brings oxygenated blood to the brain; (b) the capillary compartment, where exchanges of gases, nutrients, hormones and cellular signaling substances, as well as the clearing of substances no longer useful, occur; and (c) the venous compartment, draining deoxygenated blood from the brain (see Box 1 and Fig. 6 for further details). All these compartments are significantly affected by age, as well as by a number of pathologies that are more likely to occur in older than in younger individuals. Because of the critical role that the vascular system has in the health of tissue, alterations in the vascular system may have important consequences on brain health, both anatomically and functionally, and all those conditions that affect the cerebrovascular system are potentially important risk factors for accelerated brain and cognitive aging.

3.1 Measuring arterial stiffening

Most studies of the relationship between arterial function and brain and cognitive decline are based on measures taken outside the brain (such as pulse pressure and PWV, between the aorta or carotid and the femoral artery; Qiu, Winblad, Viitanen, &amp; Fratiglioni, 2003; Waldstein et al., 2008). Others (Silvestrini et al., 2011) include carotid sonograms, which provide exquisite details about the various layers of the arterial wall and the presence of plaques at specific points along the carotid arteries, but little direct information about the state of arteries within the brain. Direct information can be obtained using MR-based arteriograms, which, however, provide anatomical but not functional data (Edelman &amp; Koktzoglou, 2019). Transcranial Doppler sonography (TCD) does provide highly significant functional information, such as the Pulsatility or Resistivity Index (PI or RI; Markus, 2000). However, TCD only provides data about very few points in the head.

We have recently developed an imaging approach (pulse-DOT, arterial pulse measured with diffuse optical tomography) for studying arterial elasticity across the cortical mantle, providing reliable and valid regional estimates of arteriosclerotic status in different brain areas (Fabiani, Low, et al., 2014; Tan et al., 2017). Specifically useful is the pulse relaxation function, or PReFx, a pulse-DOT measure of the shape of the pulse wave, based on the well-known relationship between the speed of wave propagation and the elasticity of medium explicated by the Windkessel model (see Fig. 7; Chiarelli et al., 2017). PReFx provides information about the stiffness of cerebral arteries, by measuring changes in pulse wave shape that are due to the relative temporal separation of the arterial expansions due to the systolic pressure wave and that due to the recoil pressure wave, with higher values of PReFx indicating greater separation and lower stiffness. Two additional parameters of the optical pulse wave can be measured: (a) pulse amplitude (PA), which is larger for larger arteries and provides a regional index of pulse pressure. PA in the cortex is correlated with systemic and carotid pulse pressure (the difference between systolic and diastolic blood pressure), which increases after age 50 and is an indirect indicator of arterial stiffening. PA is also sensitive to vasodilation generated by hypercapnia and by functional brain activation (Tan et al., 2016); (b) pulse transit time (PTT), the timing of the systolic pulse in different brain regions, which shortens with increasing arterial stiffening and provides estimates of PWV inside the head (Fabiani, Low, et al., 2014). Higher pulse pressure, low PReFx and faster PTT are typically associated with older age, lower fitness, greater brain atrophy (both globally and regionally), more white matter abnormalities and lower cognitive performance (Tan et al., 2019, 2017).

3.2 Arterial stiffening, aging and their brain and cognitive consequences

During the aging process, many changes occur within the vasculature that impact brain anatomy and function. For instance, arterial inflammation and, subsequently, arterial stiffening tend to increase with age (Dai, Chen, Johnson, Szeto, &amp; Rabinovitch, 2012; de Almeida et al., 2020; Jain, Khera, Corrales-Medina, Townsend, &amp; Chirinos, 2014; Mills &amp; Bhatt, 2004; Mozos et al., 2017; Raz &amp; Daugherty, 2018; Zimmerman et al., 2021), and eventually lead to an overall decrease in vascular function (Zimmerman et al., 2021). Arteriosclerosis can be worsened by atherosclerosis (plaque formation), which causes a narrowing of the arteries (Falk, 2006; Kattoor, Pothineni, Palagiri, &amp; Mehta, 2017; Libby, 2012; Ross, 1995). As arteries stiffen, pulsatility increases and severely damages the microvasculature (Zimmerman et al., 2021). This leads to a cascade of downstream effects, including increased gray matter atrophy, structural white matter abnormalities and axonal degeneration (Badji, Noriega de la Colina, et al., 2019; Buckner, 2004; Gordon et al., 2008; Henskens et al., 2008; Kemper, 1994; Park, 2000; Raz, 2000; Singer et al., 2014; Stark, 2010).

Arterial stiffening is a known risk factor for hypertension, stroke, as well as MCI, AD, and ultimately mortality (Cambronero et al., 2018; Durier et al., 2003; Jia, Aroor, Martinez-Lemus, &amp; Sowers, 2018). There is an overlap between AD and cardiovascular disease (CVD) populations due to overlapping risk factors, such as genetics, an inactive lifestyle, diabetes, and smoking (de Bruijn &amp; Ikram, 2014; Santos et al., 2017). Cardiovascular diseases such as hypertension, atrial fibrillation, and hyperlipidemia (high cholesterol) have all been found to increase the incidence of AD (Luchsinger &amp; Mayeux, 2004). In addition, AD and CVD share common vascular pathology such as lacunes, white matter hyperintensities, and microbleeds (Badji &amp; Westman, 2020). Vascular pathology in AD leads to reduced cerebral blood flow, microvascular degeneration, and changes in the blood-brain barrier, all of which lead to downstream cognitive impairment (de Bruijn &amp; Ikram, 2014; Santos et al., 2017). Some studies suggest that amyloid and white matter lesions in AD could independently lead to cognitive impairment via AD neuropathology (Vemuri et al., 2015). Other studies suggest that reduced clearance of potentially neurotoxic or inflammatory substances is also linked to hypoperfusion (Casserly &amp; Topol, 2004; Kalaria, 2012).

4. Risk factors for age-related decline, MCI and dementia

4.1 Genetic factors related to arterial stiffening and their implications for cognition

Many factors influence cognition and neural integrity, including genetics. When considering complex and comprehensive “traits,” such as cognition or arterial stiffening (arteriosclerosis), it is assumed that many genes work together to produce these traits, each with small effects (Cambronero et al., 2018; Darst et al., 2017). Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) and genetic risk scores (see Box 2 for more details) are used to identify the effect of multiple genes toward arterial stiffening, cardiovascular and cerebrovascular disease, cognition, and their potential interactions. Other cognition and genetic studies of arterial stiffening and coronary heart disease focus on related biological pathways, where differences in gene expression could lead to disease. Understanding the role of the genetics of arterial health in cognitive decline could lead to new approaches for treatment and prevention and could also increase our understanding of the complex relationship between genetics and cognition (Hajjar, Marmerelis, Shin, &amp; Chui, 2014; Verhaaren et al., 2013).

Studies have suggested that genetics can impact brain health by affecting brain volume, growth factors, neurotransmitter modulation, cardiovascular functioning, and arterial health (Durier et al., 2003; Plomin &amp; Kosslyn, 2001; Savitz, Solms, &amp; Ramesar, 2006). Many early studies examined the relationship between genetics and cognition, by measuring the genetic heritability of g, the general intelligence factor (Plomin &amp; Kosslyn, 2001; Thompson et al., 2001), and suggested that up to 50% of cognitive variation among adults could be accounted for by genetics (Plomin &amp; Kosslyn, 2001). Twin studies have found small correlations between genetics and gray matter volume in brain areas thought to be related to intelligence, executive function, processing speed and working memory (Luciano et al., 2001; Savitz et al., 2006). These small genetic contributions to cognitive functions may be reflected in genetically determined differences in cognitive, brain, and vascular reserve (Davenport, Hogan, Eskes, Longman, &amp; Poulin, 2012; Stern, Barnes, Grady, Jones, &amp; Raz, 2019), and as such may contribute to variations in cognitive aging trajectories (see Fig. 1).

Risk scores constructed from genes involved in AD have been found to predict cognitive outcomes in memory performance and cognitive decline (Durier et al., 2003; O’Donoghue, Murphy, Zamboni, Nobre, &amp; Mackay, 2018; Verhaaren et al., 2013). Among these genes, the APOE ε4 allele, which codes for an apolipoprotein, is one of the strongest predictors of poor cognitive aging and the biggest known risk factor for AD (Verhaaren et al., 2013). Specifically, the ε4 allele is one of three common alleles (ε2, ε3, ε4) of the APOE gene, and has been implicated in brain aging, cardiovascular health, and cognitive impairment (Darst et al., 2017). APOE ε4 has associated dosage effects, where two copies of the ε4 allele result in increased risk by 12-fold and one ε4 allele results in 3-fold increased risk of developing AD (Cambronero et al., 2018; Carmona, Hardy, &amp; Guerreiro, 2018; Corder et al., 1993). There are also pronounced gender differences given ε4 allele status, where women ε4-allele carriers have decreased working memory performance and more brain atrophy compared to men (Rocca, Mielke, Vemuri, &amp; Miller, 2014). Two ε4 alleles as opposed to one allele or non-carriers are associated with faster cognitive decline in women compared to men (Lin et al., 2015). In AD at large, women are subject to faster rates of cognitive decline, more brain atrophy, and quicker neurofibrillary tangle aggregation (Lin et al., 2015).

4.1.1 Genetics, arterial health, and cognition

As discussed, preserving arterial elasticity is important to cognition because homeostasis needs to be maintained in the regulation of cerebral blood flow by the vasculature to sustain cognitive processes. Genetics is thought to account for 40% of the heritability of arterial stiffening. It can influence arterial stiffening directly by affecting the arterial wall or indirectly through sensitivity to stress, blood pressure, or other cardiovascular factors (Cecelja &amp; Chowienczyk, 2016; Laurent, Boutouyrie, &amp; Lacolley, 2005). There are several possible biological phenomena, outlined in Table 1 and Fig. 8, that could contribute to arterial stiffening, including arterial calcification, changes in extracellular matrix (ECM) protein composition, and blood pressure regulation (Cecelja &amp; Chowienczyk, 2016). The arterial walls are supported by elastin, collagen, and smooth muscle cells, which allow for arteries to be flexible and elastic (Zimmerman et al., 2021). Age, mechanical stress, arterial calcification, and untreated hypertension can cause loss of elastin fibers and laminae within the arterial wall, which are then replaced by collagen, resulting in stiffer arteries (Cecelja &amp; Chowienczyk, 2016; Demer &amp; Tintut, 2008; Lacolley et al., 2009; Laurent et al., 2005; Zimmerman et al., 2021). Arterial stiffening, white matter lesions, and decreased brain volume are associated with coronary artery disease, hypertension, and eventual cognitive decline (Fabiani, Low, et al., 2014; Gordon et al., 2008; Hajjar, Goldstein, Martin, &amp; Quyyumi, 2016; Tan et al., 2019; Zimmerman et al., 2021). These changes can impact multiple cognitive domains, including those reviewed here.

4.2 Lifestyle-related risk factors

4.2.1 Stress

Theories surrounding the definition, causes, and effects of stress and their cerebrovascular implications have been around for decades (for a recent review see Thayer, Mather, &amp; Koenig, 2021). McEwen (2000) coined the term allostasis to characterize the body’s adaptive ability to maintain stability when faced with challenges, or stressors, experienced by the individual. The autonomic nervous system (ANS) is composed of the sympathetic nervous system (SNS) and parasympathetic nervous system (PNS), which work in tandem to maintain a balance that allows the body to adapt to changing environmental or biological demands. When faced with a stressor, the SNS rapidly reallocates energy resources for functions that maximize survival while the PNS uses hormonal mechanisms to restore homeostasis (see Fig. 9; O’Connor, Thayer, &amp; Vedhara, 2021; Wulsin, Herman, &amp; Thayer, 2018). Autonomic imbalance between these two systems was recognized by Julius (1995) who argued that sympathetic dominance was evolutionarily beneficial but has become maladaptive with contemporary stressors. The psychological nature of modern stressors leads to repeated activation of the SNS, as these stressors occur more frequently without adequate time to recover (Thayer et al., 2021). ANS deficiencies cause an accumulation of systemic wear-and-tear that is especially deleterious on the cerebrovascular system (see Fig. 10; Thayer et al., 2021).

When the stress response is activated chronically, these effects are magnified. The PNS does not have adequate time to restore homeostasis, which wreaks havoc across many bodily systems. Increased heart rate and stronger contractions force the heart to work harder more frequently than it otherwise would, increasing the likelihood of cardiovascular events and ischemic injury (Wulsin et al., 2018). Persistent increases in blood pressure and decreased pulse transit time (the time it takes for blood from the heart to get to the brain) damage the arterial wall, increasing the likelihood of plaque formation (atherosclerosis) and subsequent inflammation (Tarumi et al., 2015; Wang, Monticone, &amp; McGraw, 2018). Atherosclerotic arteries then compensate for the reduced blood flow, leading to chronic vasodilation at rest so tissues are not deprived of oxygen and other nutrients. Deficits in neurovascular coupling interfere with the function of brain regions, such as the hippocampus and thalamus, which are both involved in the stress response (Zimmerman et al., 2021). Cardiorespiratory and arterial health decline progressively, so degradation of the vascular system influences cognition through neurovascular coupling deficits in the brain (Fabiani, Gordon, et al., 2014; Rypma, Gratton, &amp; Fabiani, 2021). While hypertension often precedes arterial stiffening, atherosclerosis, and inflammation from PNS disruptions in the immune response aggravate arteriosclerotic progression (Tarumi et al., 2015). Within this altered cascade, stress also induces physiological changes in the brain such as alterations in cortical thickness and dendritic shrinkage (Fjell et al., 2015). Increased circulating cortisol is linked to decreases in hippocampal volume resulting in memory impairments (McEwen, Nasca, &amp; Gray, 2016; Plieger &amp; Reuter, 2020). Stress seems to affect cognitive processes more generally rather than in specific domains. Effects on brain regions strongly implicated in the stress response, such as the prefrontal cortex and hippocampus, may lead to alterations in executive function and to memory impairments (Plieger &amp; Reuter, 2020).

The effects of chronic stress are cumulative and can create negative feedback loops that exacerbate vascular damage. Heart rate variability (HRV) is a good measure of PNS activity, with higher values indicating higher efficiency in switching between PNS and SNS activation, achieving a better ANS balance. SNS dominance increases with age while HRV decreases, leading to diminished reactive flexibility and predisposing individuals to stronger stress reactions (Thayer et al., 2021).

Chronic stress can also play a role in developing hypertension and cardiovascular disease by dysregulating hormones, such as cortisol, triglycerides, and glucose (Akazawa, Tanahashi, Kosaki, Hamasaki, et al., 2020; Akazawa, Tanahashi, Kosaki, Kumagai, et al., 2020; Jennings et al., 2021). The hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal cortex (HPA) axis regulates cortisol in response to stress and can have negative downstream effects on other systems when chronically active (Dempster et al., 2021). HPA axis dysregulation causes exaggerated or blunted reactions to cortisol. Exaggerated responses cause the body to work harder through a hyperactive SNS, increasing the risk of atherosclerotic progression, hypertension, and ischemic stroke (Gianaros &amp; Jennings, 2018). Systemic desensitization to cortisol creates prediction errors between actual and anticipated metabolic needs, so that more cortisol is required to elicit appropriate stress reactions (Gianaros &amp; Jennings, 2018). Cortisol can cross the blood-brain barrier to alter the extracellular space, increasing the likelihood of neurotoxicity (Zimmerman et al., 2021). This illustrates how chronic stress bypasses autoregulatory mechanisms resulting in system-wide dysfunction.

Individual differences exist in both stress reactivity and stress management. Individuals who are genetically predisposed to stress or who have long-term stress exposure may experience earlier arterial stiffening and worse cardiovascular health, leading to disease and cognitive impairment (Akazawa, Tanahashi, Kosaki, Hamasaki, et al., 2020; Le-Ha et al., 2016). Emotional regulation is synonymous with effective stress management and can reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease when effective (Roy, Riley, &amp; Sinha, 2018; Thayer et al., 2021) and may improve with aging (Mather, 2012). Higher HRV and thus more autonomic control is associated with increased brain activity in regions related to emotional regulation and the stress response (Thayer et al., 2021). Pronounced reactions to stress, both physiologically and emotionally, are a risk factor for cardiovascular disease comparable to the effects of smoking, improper diet, or lack of exercise (Gianaros &amp; Jennings, 2018). Sleep, which is regulated by cortisol and the ANS, is a restorative period in which HRV and PNS activity increase and SNS activity decreases. However, stress dampens the HRV increase at night demonstrating how chronic imbalances due to stress decrease the system’s flexibility to adapt (Hall et al., 2004). Unfortunately, chronic stress also negatively influences lifestyle choices regarding diet, activity, and substance abuse. Effective stress management and better physical health may lead to more cardiovascular reactivity, therefore acting as a protective factor against SNS damage within the cerebrovascular system.

4.2.2 Nutrition and physical activity

Given the focus of this article, here we review primarily the role of cardiorespiratory fitness (CRF) in counteracting the negative effects of aging on the cerebrovascular system. We note, however, that nutrition also contributes to a healthy vasculature, working with exercise in a synergistic way (for a review see Rendeiro &amp; Rhodes, 2021). Along with being more physically active, it has been found that caloric restriction, weight loss, and appropriate dietary content can prevent, mitigate, or even reverse the effects of arterial stiffness (Dengo et al., 2010; Jefferson et al., 2016). Specific nutrients, such as dietary flavanols, facilitate cerebrovascular reactivity under challenge (hypercapnia) and aid performance even in younger adults (Gratton et al., 2020).

Consistent aerobic exercise, resulting in higher CRF, contributes to vascular/cerebrovascular health with a cascade of effects, which include (1) Promoting an increase in trophic factors (such as brain-derived neurotrophic factor [BDNF]; Leckie et al., 2014; Voss et al., 2013; Voss, Nagamatsu, Liu-Ambrose, &amp; Kramer, 2011); (2) Promoting spine and dendritic growth and hippocampal neurogenesis (Van Praag, Shubert, Zhao, &amp; Gage, 2005; Xie et al., 2019); (3) Promoting angiogenesis (capillary growth which increases local perfusion; e.g., Isaacs, Anderson, Alcantara, Black, &amp; Greenough, 1992); (4) Preserving arterial elasticity (see Fig. 11; Seals, DeSouza, Donato, &amp; Tanaka, 2008); (5) Preventing or even reversing brain atrophy (Dougherty et al., 2021; Gordon et al., 2008); and (6) Ultimately resulting in the preservation of cognitive function. Other, possibly secondary, effects of exercise also include stress reduction (Edenfield &amp; Blumenthal, 2011; Esch &amp; Stefano, 2010) and other hormonal effects (Heijnen, Hommel, Kibele, &amp; Colzato, 2016; for a more in-depth review see Bowie, Clements, Gratton, &amp; Fabiani, 2021).

With respect to CRF effects on brain atrophy, aerobic exercise has been shown to increase hippocampal volume (Erickson et al., 2011). This is likely due to exercise-induced increases in neurogenesis and angiogenesis (Kissane &amp; Egginton, 2019; Van Praag et al., 2005). In fact, CRF has the potential to counteract the negative effects of genetic predispositions in APOE ε4 carriers (e.g., Tokgöz &amp; Claassen, 2021). Zimmerman et al. (2014) found that CRF mediates the effects of age on cerebral blood flow in the gray matter. This suggests that age-related changes in brain perfusion are dependent on physical fitness and that CRF has the potential of mitigating the effects of age.

On the functional side, higher CRF is associated with improvements in cerebral circulation (Barnes &amp; Corkery, 2018). Higher CRF is also associated with better neurovascular coupling (the relationship between neural activity and regional blood flow), and with decreases in vascular inflammation, arterial stiffness, and oxidative stress (Davenport et al., 2012). For example, Fabiani, Low, et al. (2014) found that, even though older adults showed equivalent neuronal responses to stimuli, the higher-fit older adults had more of an influx of oxygenated blood to the activated brain regions compared to lower-fit older adults and did not differ significantly from younger adults.

Several cross-sectional and intervention studies have also demonstrated that increased CRF is associated with better cognitive outcomes with age (Colcombe &amp; Kramer, 2003; Erickson et al., 2011; Kramer, Erickson, &amp; Colcombe, 2006). Increased physical fitness has the most influence on aspects of cognition that are heavily impacted by aging, such as executive control processes supported by the prefrontal cortex (Colcombe &amp; Kramer, 2003; Colcombe et al., 2004; Daniels, Toth, &amp; Jacoby, 2006; Kramer et al., 2006, 1999; Voss et al., 2011). Therefore, aerobic exercise can potentially mitigate, prevent or even reverse the negative effects of aging on the hippocampus as well as other brain areas associated with executive function, and result in the protection of hippocampal-dependent cognitive function and the prevention of neurodegeneration.

5. Summary, conclusions, and future directions

The evidence reviewed and discussed in this article shows the importance of interpreting age-related and individual differences in cognitive decline in the broader context of bodily health, and cerebrovascular health more specifically. All the risk factors that accelerate cognitive decline reviewed here also engender cerebrovascular dysfunction, with a cascade of consequences leading to MCI, AD, and other related dementias and brain pathologies (e.g., CSVD, stroke). The elasticity of cerebral arteries has been shown to account for some of the variance in cognitive performance across individuals, over and above the effects of age, and to also account for regional variations in brain atrophy (Chiarelli et al., 2017). Variations in arterial elasticity are also correlated with white matter abnormalities, an early sign of vascular distress, which can influence structural and functional brain connectivity (Jolly et al., 2013; Tan et al., 2019). Finally, individual differences in arterial health also correlate with the segregation of functional networks, even when the effects of age are removed. Functional segregation is high in younger adults but decreases with age (Chen, He, Rosa-Neto, Gong, &amp; Evans, 2011). However, older adults with high cerebral arterial elasticity maintain higher levels of segregation (Kong et al., 2020). The effects of exercise, with their potent protective influences on the vasculature, prevent brain atrophy both in gray and white matter, promote arterial health, cerebral blood flow, as well as higher executive function and LTM performance.

Although this evidence provides a framework for the interpretation of existing data and the planning of future research, many questions remain open. For example, it is not clear to what extent cerebrovascular health is generically protective of cognition, or whether its protective effects are domain specific. Some of the research reviewed here suggests that cerebrovascular health may be especially beneficial to the hippocampus, given its limited vascular reserve. Similarly, aerobic fitness intervention studies also suggest that the largest benefits may be obtained in executive control functions, compared to other domains of cognition. It is possible that these cognitive domains and related brain regions are specifically affected by poor vascular health, because of their location in the vascular feeding tree. However, these are also the cognitive domains (and corresponding brain areas) that are most susceptible to the negative effects of aging and cerebrovascular dysfunction to start with. In other words, cerebrovascular health, as promoted by exercise and nutrition, could still be largely domain general, but be more easily noticeable in domains/brain areas that are susceptible to lifespan wear and tear earlier in the lifespan.

With respect to intervention strategies (e.g., diet, exercise), sweet spots for maximum effectiveness, appropriate dose-response relationships, best implementation modalities and so on are all highly debated issues and provide open questions for future research (Iwasaki, Zhang, Zuckerman, &amp; Levine, 2003; Nystoriak &amp; Bhatnagar, 2018; Shibata et al., 2018). Regardless, it is clear that positive lifestyle choices promoting cerebrovascular health are largely under a person’s control and can go a long way to prevent both benign and pathological cognitive decline, and even counteract genetic predispositions. This is emphasized by Fig. 12 (Barnes &amp; Yaffe, 2011), which estimates the number of AD cases that could be prevented by controlling these common risk factors. Understanding cognitive decline within this integrated framework could allow us to create personalized-medicine oriented strategies that delay the negative effects of age on the cerebral and bodily vasculature, and consequently on cognition.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by NIA grants R01AG059878 and RF1AG062666 to M.F. and G.G.

Abbreviations

AD Alzheimer’s Disease

CSVD cerebral small vessel disease

MCI mild cognitive impairment

Fig. 1 This hypothetical figure illustrates how memory function changes over time in individuals with high and low reserve. In the absence of AD pathology, it is likely that individuals with higher reserve will perform better on memory tests, although this has not been universally observed. AD pathology begins to advance prior to any observation of change in memory performance. However, at some point the pathology is sufficient to begin to cause noticeable declines in memory test scores. This point where performance begins to decline occurs later in individuals with higher reserve because they can tolerate more pathology before it affects performance. The figure hypothesizes a point where pathology is so severe that memory performance is nil. This point is the same for both individuals with high and low reserve. Given this common endpoint, the figure hypothesizes that once memory decline does begin, the rate of decline should be more rapid in individuals with higher reserve than in those with lower reserve. This theoretical model can explain observations of more rapid clinical decline in AD patients with higher reserve. According to this model, this differential rate of decline can be observed both in individuals who already have diagnosed AD as well as in those for whom memory has begun to decline. Reprinted from Stern, Y. (2012). Cognitive reserve in ageing and Alzheimer’s disease. The Lancet Neurology, 11(11), 1006–1012. doi:10.1016/S1474-4422(12)70191-6, with permission from Elsevier.

Fig. 2 Hypothesized cascade of effects. Aging and inactivity lead to low cardiorespiratory fitness, which, together with other risk factors for cerebrovascular disease, lead to arteriosclerosis, promoting brain hypoperfusion and lower clearance. This increases inflammation, and over time leads to structural and functional brain changes and ultimately to cognitive decline, MCI and dementia.

Fig. 3 Hippocampal connections generated with diffusion tractography imaging for a single participant from the Human Connectome Project dataset. The tractography is from a transparent view through the brain, with parasagittal and axial slices of the human brain overlaid to show the trajectory of the pathways in the context of the brain. Voxels in the left hippocampus were seeded for the case illustrated. Streamlines from the hippocampus reach local areas such as the entorhinal and perirhinal cortex, and the parahippocampal gyrus (violet). However, in addition, streamlines reach more distant areas, including early visual cortical areas bilaterally via the (dorsal) hippocampal commissure (purple, pink), and the parietal cortex (yellow), the orbitofrontal cortex (magenta), the anterior cingulate cortex via the cingulum just above the corpus callosum (light green), and the anterior thalamus and mammillary bodies via the fornix (light blue). The hippocampus is shown in white with slight opacity and appears small posteriorly just because it rotates laterally (S, superior/inferior; L, left/right; A, anterior/posterior). Reprinted from Huang, C. C., Rolls, E. T., Hsu, C. C. H., Feng, J., &amp; Lin, C. P. (2021). Extensive cortical connectivity of the human hippocampal memory system: Beyond the “what” and “where” dual stream model. Cerebral Cortex, 31(10), 4652–4669. doi:10.1093/cercor/bhab113, with permission from Oxford University Press.

Fig. 4 (A) Meta-regression of atrophy rate and mean age. The size of circles is proportional to the weight given to the study. Larger studies and more precise studies are given more weight in the meta-analysis. Magenta circles represent studies using manual segmentation and blue circles represent studies using automated segmentation. The magenta line is the predicted mean atrophy rate change with age with manual segmentation and the blue line represents the predicted mean atrophy rate with age for automated segmentation. (B) Histogram distribution of hippocampal (HC) volume as a function of age group. The shaded area highlights the HC volume ranges of the age groups as a function of the lowest quartile of HC volume in the youngest age group (18–24 years) of the study. Hippocampal volumes over the entire population ranged from 2.57 to 5.13 cm3. Panel (A): Reprinted from Fraser, M. A., Shaw, M. E., &amp; Cherbuin, N. (2015). A systematic review and meta-analysis of longitudinal hippocampal atrophy in healthy human ageing. Neuroimage, 112, 364–374. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.03.035, with permission from Elsevier. Panel (B): Reprinted from Lupien, S. J., Evans, A., Lord, C., Miles, J., Pruessner, M., Pike, B., et al. (2007). Hippocampal volume is as variable in young as in older adults: Implications for the notion of hippocampal atrophy in humans. Neuroimage, 34(2), 479–485. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2006.09.041 with permission from Elsevier.

Fig. 5 Exemplars of typical cognitive control paradigms. (A) N-back task: Participants decide whether the current stimulus matches the stimulus presented N trials earlier. For example, 2-back instructions would require a response to the second occurrence of 4, whereas 3-back instructions would require a response to the second 7. (B) Eriksen Flanker task: Participants respond left or right, consistent with the direction of a central “target” stimulus that is flanked by distractors. These distractors may be congruent (i.e., be associated with the same response as the target), incongruent (i.e., be associated with the other response) or neutral (i.e., not be linked to any response). (C) Go-Nogo task: Participants perform a simple choice-reaction time task (e.g., press left for X and right for O), but must withhold their response to occasional nogo stimuli (here designated by red font). (D) Task switching paradigm: Participants alternate between two or more simple choice-reaction time tasks (e.g., magnitude vs. parity of a digit). Here we depict a cued-trials paradigm, where the cues (M for magnitude, P for parity) indicate the task to be completed on the next target stimulus. When trial N + 1 requires the same task as trial N, it is a repeat trial. When trial N + 1 requires a different task than trial N, it is a switch trial. Reprinted from Gratton, G., Cooper, P., Fabiani, M., Carter, C. S., &amp; Karayanidis, F. (2018). Dynamics of cognitive control: Theoretical bases, paradigms, and a view for the future. Psychophysiology, 55(3), e13016. https://doi.org/10.1111/psyp.13016, with permission from Wiley.

Fig. 6 Schematic diagram of the main arteries feeding the human brain constructed from a free available image from Servier: https://smart.servier.com/smart_image/brain-arteries/.

Fig. 7 Arterial Pulse Wave Generation. The circulatory system is responsible for delivering adequate blood flow to the brain via progressively branching elastic arteries. Once these arteries reach the brain, they branch into smaller muscular arteries and arterioles that dilate and contract to regulate blood flow, providing peripheral resistance. Then, the blood reaches the capillaries, which allows for the transfer of oxygen and nutrients to the brain tissue. Venules and veins drain deoxygenated blood from the brain, returning it to the heart and lungs. As blood moves through the arteries, arterioles, and capillaries, the pulse pressure generated by the contraction of the heart gradually decreases. The pulse wave depicts the sum of the forward wave from the heart and the recoil/backward wave caused by peripheral resistance. The health of the arteries as one ages affects pulse pressure and the pulse waveform generated by the contraction of the heart as the blood reaches the brain. Young, elastic arteries that more flexibly respond to the systolic pressure, slow the speed of pulse transmission, creating distinct forward and backward peaks. In older individuals, stiff arteries are less responsive to the pressure changes, resulting in increased wave velocity and the merging of the forward and backward waves. This figure was created using items from BioIcons.com and smart.servier.com under the Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported License. Some of the images above were modified by adding labels and removing the background to make the graphs clearer.

Fig. 8 Multiple systems converge to contribute to arterial stiffening and are involved in its genetic complexity. The complexity of arterial walls is maintained by several genes and gene interactions. The angiotensin-renin system, as well as other genes relating to other bodily system, have been associated with cardiovascular diseases and arterial stiffening, which in turn are risk factors contributing to Alzheimer’s Disease. These factors can overlap and interact with each other to contribute to arterial stiffening and cognitive decline with age. This figure was created using items from BioIcons.com and smart.servier.com under the Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported License.

Fig. 9 Acute stress is detected by the amygdala, which sends signals to the hypothalamus to activate the two stress response systems. The hypothalamus stimulates the sympathetic branch of the autonomic nervous system (sympatho-adrenal-medullary axis). This direct pathway from the hypothalamus to the medulla of the adrenal glands causes rapid release of catecholamines (epinephrine and norepinephrine) using synaptic mechanisms in what is known as the fight-or-flight response. These effects stop approximately 10min after the cessation of the stressor. In the parasympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system, the slower acting hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis relies on a hormonal-based signaling cascade. The hypothalamus releases corticotrophin-releasing factor (CRF), which travels through the pituitary portal system to the pituitary gland and stimulates it to release adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). ACTH then stimulates the adrenal cortex to produce cortisol, which initially increases access to energy stores for the body to use during the stress response. The hypothalamus and pituitary glands have cortisol receptors that create a negative feedback loop. When stimulated, CRF and ACTH production is suppressed, thus reversing the effects. These initial effects begin roughly 10–15min after stressor onset and continue for hours past stressor cessation, in order to restore system-wide homeostasis. This figure was created using items from BioIcons.com and smart.servier.com under the Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported License.

Fig. 10 Systemic changes that occur during acute (left) and chronic (right) stress. Initial stimulation of the SNS dilates the pupils to allow more light in to better see threatening stimuli. Cognitive changes such as increased cognition and faster decision-making help elicit context-appropriate responses to a stressor. Increased respiration allows for more intake of oxygen. The cardiovascular system increases blood flow to necessary muscles. Digestion is inhibited as energy resources are reallocated. The liver converts glycogen to glucose, increasing the amount of energy available. The adrenal medulla secrete adrenaline, which leads to release of cortisol from the adrenal cortex and the immune system is suppressed. PNS restorative functions largely reverse these effects, slowing down respiration, heart rate, and blood pressure. Digestion is stimulated and energy reserves are restored. Inflammation is increased as the body increases natural killer cells, T-cells, and total lymphocytes that were suppressed, to promote healing and other immune functions. Chronic stress degrades these systems leading to dysfunction. This figure was created using items from BioIcons.com and smart.servier.com under the Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported License.

Fig. 11 Optical measures of cerebral arterial elasticity (PReFx) for three older individuals of similar age, but varying in cardiorespiratory fitness (as assessed by VO2max). Two effects are evident. First, elasticity is higher for the most fit participant (left), and lowest for the least fit participant (right). Second, regional variations of elasticity can also be seen. Brain is displayed as seen from the top. LF = Left frontal. Highest elasticity/PReFx is in blue colors, lowest in red colors.

Fig. 12 The numbers of AD cases that could potentially be prevented worldwide through risk factor reductions of 10% or 25% were estimated by multiplying present prevalence estimates by 0·90 and 0·75, respectively, and subtracting the revised number of attributable cases from the original number. These estimates assume that a causal relation exists between the risk factor and AD and that the relative risk estimate is a good approximation of the effect of risk factor reduction. Therefore, the actual number of cases prevented could be higher or lower, depending on the extent to which these assumptions are valid. Additionally, the combined estimate assumes that the individual risk factors are independent and have an additive relationship. Because several of the risk factors examined are interrelated, the combined PAR estimates should be considered as maximums. AD = Alzheimer’s disease. Reprinted from Barnes, D., &amp; Yaffe, K. (2011). O3-06-06: The projected impact of risk factor reduction on Alzheimer’s disease prevalence. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia, 7, S511 doi:10.1016/S1474-4422(11)70072-2, with permission from Elsevier.

Table 1 Genetic risks for arteriosclerosis and AD, grouped by the functions/systems being affected.

System	Genes	Function	
AD risk genes (Neuropathology)	APP, PSEN1, PSEN2	APP, PSEN1, and PSEN2 are all related to the formation of Aβ aggregation. PSEN1 and PSEN2 code for secretases that cleave the APP protein resulting in Aβ oligomers that aggregate and lead to cognitive impairment (Carmona et al., 2018)	
AD risk genes (Cholesterol metabolism)	APOE, CLU, ABCA7, BDNF	Genes such as APOE and CLU are involved in cholesterol metabolism and can lead to downstream arterial stiffening and cognitive decline (Carmona et al., 2018). BDNF, which is important for the health of neural and arterial cells, in combination with the APOE ε4 allele can cause greater cognitive decline in women (Lin et al., 2015)	
AD risk genes (Immune-related)	CR1, CD33, MS4A, CRP	CR1, CD33, and MS4A all play roles in immune function within cells that when dysregulated can lead to increased beta-amyloid aggregation (Carmona et al., 2018)	
Arterial calcification	Collagen genes (COL1A1 and COL4A), elastin (ELN), fibrillin1 (FBN1), and ENPP1	Increased collagen, less ELN and FBN1 expression, and reduced inhibition of calcification by genes such as ENPP1 lead to arterial stiffening (Cecelja &amp; Chowienczyk, 2016; Lacolley, Challande, Osborne-Pellegrin, &amp; Regnault, 2009; Medley, Cole, Dart, Gatzka, &amp; Kingwell, 2004; Tarasov et al., 2009). Arterial calcification has been related to reduced brain volume, and lower cognitive scores (Bos et al., 2011)	
Extracellular matrix (ECM) of arteries	Matrix metalloproteinases (MMP3 and MMP8)	Matrix metalloproteinases lead to arterial stiffening when their dysregulation doesn’t allow for the maintenance of the ECM (Cecelja &amp; Chowienczyk, 2016)	
High Blood Pressure and Angiotensin system	Angiotensin receptor genes (AGTR1, ADRB1, ADRB2, ADRB3)	Sustained hypertension, as controlled by renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, can affect the components of the arterial wall, impact cerebrovascular health, increase inflammation, leading to arterial stiffening and cognitive deficits (Jennings, Muldoon, Allen, Ginty, &amp; Gianaros, 2021; Laurent et al., 2005)	
Kidney system	ACE gene, and aldosterone synthase (CYP11B2)	The ACE gene and aldosterone synthase in combination with mutations in the AGTR1 gene are related to increased risk for hypertension and arterial stiffening (Lacolley et al., 2009)	
Stress	Cortisol, ACTH, DHEA, IL-1, IL-6, and TNF-alpha	Stress is associated with cardiovascular disease, since it can cause imbalances in stress hormones (DHEA, cortisol) and inflammation (IL-1, IL-6,) leading to arterial stiffening (Akazawa, Tanahashi, Kosaki, Hamasaki, &amp; Maeda, 2020; Dempster, O’Leary, MacNeil, Hodges, &amp; Wade, 2021)	

BOX 1 The cerebrovascular system.

The arterial compartment.

The brain arterial compartment includes three types of arteries: large elastic arteries, which branch out in smaller muscular arteries and then in even smaller arterioles. Large elastic arteries cover much of the distance between the heart and the brain. The intracranial cavity and brain are fed by three major elastic arteries: the left and right internal carotids (which emerge in lateral locations inside the skull) and the basilar artery (which emerges at a posterior location, ventral to the medulla, as a fusion of the two vertebral arteries). These three large arteries divide into branches, some of which may connect to each other (anastomosis) generating an arterial ring at the basis of the forebrain, the Circle of Willis (which is completely closed only in a minority of individuals; Iqbal, 2013). From this circle emerge three pairs of arteries (Fig. 6) that feed most of the forebrain: the left and right anterior, middle, and posterior cerebral arteries. Branches of the anterior cerebral arteries perfuse the anterior and medial areas of the two cerebral hemispheres; branches of the middle cerebral arteries feed most of the lateral surfaces of the two hemispheres, and branches of the posterior cerebral arteries feed occipital and inferior regions of the two hemispheres (including the medial temporal lobe). Note that, for the most part, these large arteries run on the surface of the brain. Also, large elastic arteries have limited cumulated cross-sectional surfaces, meaning that pressure waves generated by the heart pulsations propagate through them with limited loss of amplitude (i.e., arterial pressure is kept uniformly high across their length). This has important consequences. First, these arteries need to have a very thick wall to avoid breakages, which could generate potentially devastating hemorrhages. Because blood is neurotoxic, and can destroy neural tissue if it gets into direct contact with it, any damage to these arterial walls may engender significant brain damage. Second, the arterial pulse wave is transmitted along this type of arteries, with a speed inversely proportional to the elasticity of the arterial walls. In other words, measurement of the delay of arrival of the arterial pulse at different points along elastic arteries (which can be measured using optical imaging methods, pulse-DOT, over the entire surface of the brain; Fabiani, Low, et al., 2014), or of the speed of propagation of the blood pulsating within these arteries (which can be measured using TCD sonography in specific points), can be used to estimate the elasticity of the arterial walls. Elasticity of these large arteries changes significantly over the life span; specifically, elasticity declines with age due to arteriosclerosis (i.e., arterial hardening). This process may be accelerated by the formation of cholesterol plaques, calcification, inflammation, endothelial damage, etc. These phenomena may in turn largely depend on risk factors, such as genetic conditions (e.g., APOE ε4 alleles), nutritional factors and obesity, inactivity, hypertension, smoking, chronic stress, diabetes, etc. All these risk factors are significant precursors for strokes (the majority of which are related to arteriosclerosis), but the contribution of arteriosclerosis to age-related cognitive decline and dementia is now the focus of much research.

Other components of the arterial system are the muscular arteries and arterioles (also labeled small vessels, together with capillaries and venules). These smaller arteries have two main functions. First, they reduce the peak blood pressure from &gt;80mmHg to &lt;10mmHg. This is critical because the next blood vessel compartment, the capillaries, is characterized by extremely thin walls (made up of only one layer of endothelial cells) which would not withstand higher pressure levels. Second, they contain smooth muscle fibers that can actively regulate blood flow to brain regions (cerebrovascular reactivity). There are various factors that may induce the small arteries to contract, including physical factors (such as temperature, position, etc.), chemical factors (such as the concentration of oxygen or CO2, cellular signaling factors), and neural activity. One of the consequences of cerebrovascular reactivity is to produce changes in blood flow, which can be revealed by methodologies such as BOLD and ASL MR measures (Sleight, Stringer, Marshall, Wardlaw, &amp; Thrippleton, 2021; Taneja et al., 2020), or functional near-infrared spectroscopy, fNIRS (Gratton, Chiarelli, &amp; Fabiani, 2017). However, another consequence of cerebrovascular reactivity is a change in peripheral resistance (the pressure induced by downstream branches in the arterial tree), which in turn influences an aspect of the pulse measured in the large arteries, the recoil or backward wave (also measurable with pulse-DOT; see Fig. 7). The function of small arteries is influenced by the same genetic and lifestyle factors that negatively affect the large arteries. This has led to the grouping of multidetermined conditions affecting small cerebral blood vessels (i.e., small arteries, arterioles, venules, and capillaries) under the umbrella term of cerebral small vessel disease, or CSVD.

The brain capillary compartment.

The capillary compartment is where most of the interaction between the vascular system and neural tissue occurs. This is permitted by the thin one-cell endothelial layer making up the capillary wall. In addition, this wall also includes an additional layer called “basal membrane,” which selectively filters what may or may not go through, thereby protecting brain tissue (blood-brain barrier). The blood-brain barrier is of critical importance for brain function, and any alteration of its function (i.e., increased, or reduced, permeability) may have significant consequences. Damage to the endothelium and the blood-brain barrier may occur in many different conditions, including chronic inflammation, CSVD (possibly secondary to the loss of small arteries’ function), as well as the deposition of beta-amyloid around the capillaries (cerebral amyloid angiopathy, CAA). Impaired clearance of beta-amyloid from the brain, presumably secondary to capillary damage, has been implicated as a critical contributor to AD.

Venous and lymphatic compartments.

Another component of the vascular system is the draining section, which includes the venous and lymphatic compartments. The draining of fluid and other substances from any part of the body is critical to homeostasis (and therefore tissue health) as it is its perfusion. However, notwithstanding its theoretical importance, relatively little attention has been paid to this component, and to the role of age-related changes in its function in cognitive aging, which is largely unknown. Recently, a few studies have begun to investigate this issue (Benveniste et al., 2019; Natale et al., 2021; Reddy &amp; van der Werf, 2020), examining the role of the cerebral lymphatic system in clearing the interstitial fluid present in the brain parenchyma of unwanted substances (such as beta-amyloid), a function that may occur during sleep. This is considered to be a mechanism by which age-related sleep dysfunctions could contribute to the pathogenesis of AD.

BOX 2 Genetics 101.

While humans are 99.9% similar, the remaining genetic variation plays a role in individual differences in traits and disease susceptibility. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are one nucleotide differences at a specific location within a gene. Not all SNPs will result in increased susceptibility for specific disease states, but they are important for our understanding of gene-gene and gene-environment interactions in disease. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) are commonly used to study how genetic variations are associated with disease states. GWAS require very large sample sizes to capture both common and rare genetic variants. Genetic risk scores combine the reported effects of multiple genes and SNPs that have been identified via GWAS and evaluate their capacity to predict disease states.

Another component of genetics is related to levels of active gene expression. Gene expression refers to the processing of genetic information before it becomes an active gene product. Gene expression can be controlled at many different points of gene processing, including epigenetic, transcriptional, posttran-scriptional, translational, and posttranslational levels. Ultimately, gene expression can affect the function and structure of cells. First, epigenetics controls whether a gene is expressed within a cell and is determined by whether the area around the gene is accessible for transcription by RNA polymerase. This is controlled by how tightly the DNA is wound, which is partially influenced by histone deacetylates (HDACs) and methyl transferases, which tighten DNA conformations into heterochromatin or loosen them into euchromatin. Second, transcriptional control of genes is regulated by promoters, repressors and enhancers that are often influenced by the methylation of regions of the genome known as 5′-C-phosphate-G-3′ (CpG) islands. Transcription factors bind to promoter regions and RNA polymerase to initiate transcription. Third, some gene products must go through posttranscriptional modifications, such as RNA splicing, before they can become active, typically through the addition of a poly-A tail and cap. Gene expression can also be further changed by posttranslational modifications that influence the level of the gene product that can be found within the cell. MicroRNAs (miRNAs), small single-stranded noncoding pieces of RNA, can target molecules for degradation, thereby regulating genetic activity. Fourth, translational regulation of gene expression occurs after the messenger RNA (mRNA) has reached the cytoplasm, where it is translated into a protein. This step of gene expression depends on mRNA stability, and how long the mRNA is translated in the cytoplasm prior to degradation. Lastly, posttranslational regulation modifies the protein to control its activity. The modifications can be the addition of a methyl, phosphate, or acetyl group, which specify the location of the protein’s activity in the cell, including the nucleus or cytoplasm. Adding ubiquitin to the protein usually tags the protein for proteosome degradation.

There are several limitations to genetics studies, especially when attempting to predict very complex and often not well-defined traits, such as brain and cognitive ones, or disease states. Several genes can also jointly contribute to cognition with small effects. The same genes can be involved in the expression of multiple traits (pleiotropy) and this can also lead to unclear findings. It is also difficult to precisely account for the role of the environment in promoting gene expression. Together, these difficulties can lead to false positive associations between genes and cognitive outcomes. In addition, genetics studies require extremely large sample sizes to produce large enough effects for statistical analyses, which may be infeasible to combine with the methods needed to carefully characterize (phenotype) individual cognitive and brain status, or individual differences in cerebral arteriosclerosis, for example. Even then, these studies can miss rare genetic variants. Nonetheless, some knowledge of the genes that may contribute to cognitive and brain aging can provide a more comprehensive picture. For further details see Brown (1981).

a We are referring here to late-onset AD. Early-onset, familial AD is linked to autosomal dominant genes that induce mutations in the presenilin proteins (PSEN1; PSEN2) or the amyloid precursor protein (APP), leading to massive accumulation of beta-amyloid, brain inflammation and midlife onset of cognitive decline (Mendez, 2019).


References

Akazawa N , Tanahashi K , Kosaki K , Hamasaki A , &amp; Maeda S (2020). Association between mental health and arterial stiffness in middle-aged and older adults. Artery Research, 26 (4 ), 223–227.
Akazawa N , Tanahashi K , Kosaki K , Kumagai H , Oikawa S , Hamasaki A , (2020). The impact of aerobic fitness on arterial stiffness and adrenal cortex hormones in middle-aged and older adults. Endocrine Journal, 67 (12 ), 1199–1205. 10.1507/endocrj.EJ20-0211.32741887
Anderson ND (2018). Memory rehabilitation in healthy aging. Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Psychology. 10.1093/acrefore/9780190236557.013.447.
Baddeley A (1992). Working memory. Science, 255 (5044 ), 556–559. 10.1126/science.1736359.1736359
Badji A , Noriega de la Colina A , Karakuzu A , Duval T , Desjardins-Cr epeau L , Joubert S , (2019). Arterial stiffness and white matter integrity in the elderly: A diffusion tensor and magnetization transfer imaging study. NeuroImage, 186 , 577–585. 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.11.015.30448213
Badji A , &amp; Westman E (2020). Cerebrovascular pathology in Alzheimer’s disease: Hopes and gaps. Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging, 306 , 111184. 10.1016/j.pscychresns.2020.111184.32950333
Bakker A , Kirwan CB , Miller M , &amp; Stark CE (2008). Pattern separation in the human hippocampal CA3 and dentate gyrus. Science, 319 (5870 ), 1640–1642. 10.1126/science.1152882.18356518
Baltes PB , &amp; Lindenberger U (1988). On the range of cognitive plasticity in old age as a function of experience: 15 Years of intervention research. Behavior Therapy, 19 (3 ), 283–300. 10.1016/S0005-7894(88)80003-0.
Baltes PB , &amp; Lindenberger U (1997). Emergence of a powerful connection between sensory and cognitive functions across the adult life span: A new window to the study of cognitive aging? Psychology and Aging, 12 (1 ), 12–21. 10.1037/0882-7974.12.1.12.9100264
Bangen KJ , Smirnov DS , Delano-Wood L , Wierenga CE , Bondi MW , Salmon DP , (2021). Arterial stiffening acts synergistically with APOE genotype and AD biomarker status to influence memory in older adults without dementia. Alzheimer’s Research &amp; Therapy, 13 (1 ), 1–11. 10.1186/s13195-021-00851-2.
Banich MT (2009). Executive function: The search for an integrated account. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 18 (2 ), 89–94. 10.1111/j.1467-8721.2009.01615.x.
Barnes JN (2015). Exercise, cognitive function, and aging. Advances in Physiology Education, 39 (2 ), 55–62. 10.1152/advan.00101.2014.26031719
Barnes JN , &amp; Corkery AT (2018). Exercise improves vascular function, but does this translate to the brain? Brain Plasticity, 4 (1 ), 65–79. 10.3233/BPL-180075.30564547
Barnes D , &amp; Yaffe K (2011). O3-06-06: The projected impact of risk factor reduction on Alzheimer’s disease prevalence. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia, 7 , S511. 10.1016/S1474-4422(11)70072-2.
Benear SL , Ngo CT , &amp; Olson IR (2020). Dissecting the fornix in basic memory processes and neuropsychiatric disease: A review. Brain Connectivity, 10 (7 ), 331–354. 10.1089/brain.2020.0749.32567331
Benveniste H , Liu X , Koundal S , Sanggaard S , Lee H , &amp; Wardlaw J (2019). The glymphatic system and waste clearance with brain aging: A review. Gerontology, 65 , 106–119. 10.1159/000490349.29996134
Bhattacharyya D , &amp; Bhunia A (2021). Gut-Brain axis in Parkinson’s disease etiology: The role of lipopolysaccharide. Chemistry and Physics of Lipids, 235 , 105029. 10.1016/j.chemphyslip.2020.105029.33338469
Bos D , Ikram MA , Elias-Smale SE , Krestin GP , Hofman A , Witteman JCM , (2011). Calcification in major vessel beds relates to vascular brain disease. Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis, and Vascular Biology, 31 (10 ), 2331–2337. 10.1161/ATVBAHA.111.232728.21868705
Botvinick MM , Braver TS , Barch DM , Carter CS , &amp; Cohen JD (2001). Conflict monitoring and cognitive control. Psychological Review, 108 (3 ), 624–652. 10.1037/0033-295x.108.3.624.11488380
Bowie DC , Clements GM , Gratton G , &amp; Fabiani M (2021). Chapter 36. The effects of cardiorespiratory fitness on brain and cognitive aging. In Martin C , Preedy VR , &amp; Rajendram R (Eds.), Factors affecting neurological aging: Genetics, neurology, behavior, and diet (pp. 415–426). The Netherlands: Elsevier.
Braver TS (2012). The variable nature of cognitive control: A dual mechanisms framework. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 16 (2 ), 106–113. 10.1016/j.tics.2011.12.010.22245618
Braver TS , &amp; Barch DM (2002). A theory of cognitive control, aging cognition, and neuromodulation. Neuroscience &amp; Biobehavioral Reviews, 26 (7 ), 809–817. 10.1016/s0149-7634(02)00067-2.12470692
Braver TS , Reynolds JR , &amp; Donaldson DI (2003). Neural mechanisms of transient and sustained cognitive control during task switching. Cell Press, 39 (4 ), 713–726. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0896627303004665.
Brown DD (1981). Gene expression in eukaryotes. Science, 211 (4483 ), 667–674. 10.1126/science.6256857.6256857
Brown WR , &amp; Thore CR (2011). Review: Cerebral microvascular pathology in ageing and neurodegeneration. Neuropathology and Applied Neurobiology, 37 (1 ), 56–74. 10.1111/j.1365-2990.2010.01139.x.20946471
Brumback CR , Low KA , Gratton G , &amp; Fabiani M (2005). Putting things into perspective: Individual differences in working-memory span and the integration of information. Experimental Psychology, 52 (1 ), 21–30. 10.1027/1618-3169.52.1.21.15779527
Buckner RL (2004). Memory and executive function in aging and AD: Multiple factors that cause decline and reserve factors that compensate. Neuron, 44 (1 ), 195–208. 10.1016/j.neuron.2004.09.006.15450170
Bugg JM , Zook N , Delosh EL , Davalos DB , &amp; Davis HP (2006). Age differences in fluid intelligence: Contributions of general slowing and frontal decline. Brain and Cognition, 62 , 9–16. 10.1016/j.bandc.2006.02.006.16603300
Cabeza R , Grady CL , Nyberg L , McIntosh AR , Tulving E , Kapur S , (1997). Age-related differences in neural activity during memory encoding and retrieval: A positron emission tomography study. Journal of Neuroscience, 17 (1 ), 391–400. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.17-01-00391.1997.8987764
Cambronero FE , Liu D , Neal JE , Moore EE , Gifford KA , Terry JG , (2018). APOE genotype modifies the association between central arterial stiffening and cognition in older adults. Neurobiology of Aging, 67 , 120–127. 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2018.02.009.29656011
Camina E , &amp; Güell F (2017). The neuroanatomical, neurophysiological and psychological basis of memory: Current models and their origins. Frontiers in Pharmacology, 8 , 438. 10.3389/fphar.2017.00438.28713278
Campbell KL , Grady CL , Ng C , &amp; Hasher L (2012). Age differences in the frontoparietal cognitive control network: Implications for distractibility. Neuropsychologia, 50 (9 ), 2212–2223. 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2012.05.025.22659108
Carmona S , Hardy J , &amp; Guerreiro R (2018). The genetic landscape of Alzheimer disease. Handbook of Clinical Neurology, 148 , 395–408. 10.1016/b978-0-444-64076-5.00026-0.29478590
Carpenter PA , Just MA , &amp; Shell P (1990). What one intelligence test measures: A theoretical account of the processing in the Raven progressive matrices test. Psychological Review, 97 (3 ), 404–431. 10.1037/0033-295X.97.3.404.2381998
Carr VA , Bernstein JD , Favila SE , Rutt BK , Kerchner GA , &amp; Wagner AD (2017). Individual differences in associative memory among older adults explained by hippocampal subfield structure and function. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 114 (45 ), 12075–12080. 10.1073/pnas.1713308114.
Casserly I , &amp; Topol EJ (2004). Convergence of atherosclerosis and Alzheimer’s disease: Inflammation, cholesterol, and misfolded proteins. The Lancet, 363 (9415 ), 1139–1146. 10.1016/s0140-6736(04)15900-x.
Cecelja M , &amp; Chowienczyk P (2016). Molecular mechanisms of arterial stiffening. Pulse, 4 (1 ), 43–48. 10.1159/000446399.27493903
Chen ZJ , He Y , Rosa-Neto P , Gong G , &amp; Evans AC (2011). Age-related alterations in the modular organization of structural cortical network by using cortical thickness from MRI. Neuroimage, 56 (1 ), 235–245. 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.01.010.21238595
Chiarelli AM , Fletcher MA , Tan CH , Low KA , Maclin EL , Zimmerman B , (2017). Individual differences in regional cortical volumes across the life span are associated with regional optical measures of arterial elasticity. NeuroImage, 162 , 199–213. 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.08.064.28866349
Chini M , &amp; Hanganu-Opatz IL (2021). Prefrontal cortex development in health and disease: Lessons from rodents and humans. Trends in Neurosciences, 44 (3 ), 227–240. 10.1016/j.tins.2020.10.017.33246578
Cohen NJ , &amp; Eichenbaum H (1993). Memory, amnesia, and the hippocampal system. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Cohen AD , &amp; Klunk WE (2014). Early detection of Alzheimer’s disease using PiB and FDG PET. Neurobiology of Disease, 72 (Pt A ), 117–122. 10.1016/j.nbd.2014.05.001.24825318
Cohen NJ , Poldrack RA , &amp; Eichenbaum H (1997). Memory for items and memory for relations in the procedural/declarative memory framework. Memory, 5 (1–2 ), 131–178. 10.1080/741941149.9156097
Cohen NJ , Ryan J , Hunt C , Romine L , Wszalek T , &amp; Nash C (1999). Hippocampal system and declarative (relational) memory: Summarizing the data from functional neuroimaging studies. Hippocampus, 9 (1 ), 83–98. 10.1002/(SICI)1098-1063(1999)9:1&lt;83∷AID-HIPO9&gt;3.0.CO;2-7.10088903
Colcombe S , &amp; Kramer AF (2003). Fitness effects on the cognitive function of older adults: A meta-analytic study. Psychological Science, 14 (2 ), 125–130. 10.1111/1467-9280.t01-1-01430.12661673
Colcombe SJ , Kramer AF , Erickson KI , Scalf P , McAuley E , Cohen NJ , (2004). Cardiovascular fitness, cortical plasticity, and aging. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 101 (9 ), 3316–3321. 10.1073/pnas.0400266101.
Corder EH , Saunders AM , Strittmatter WJ , Schmechel DE , Gaskell PC , Small G , (1993). Gene dose of apolipoprotein E type 4 allele and the risk of Alzheimer’s disease in late onset families. Science, 261 (5123 ), 921–923. 10.1126/science.8346443.8346443
Cowan N (2001). The magical number 4 in short-term memory: A reconsideration of mental storage capacity. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 24 (1 ), 87–114. 10.1017/S0140525X01003922.11515286
Cowan N (2010). The magical mystery four: How is working memory capacity limited, and why? Current Directions in Psychological Science, 19 (1 ), 51–57. 10.1177/0963721409359277.20445769
Craik FIM (1994). Memory changes in normal aging. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 5 , 155–158. https://www.jstor.org/stable/20182295.
Dai D-F , Chen T , Johnson SC , Szeto H , &amp; Rabinovitch PS (2012). Cardiac aging: From molecular mechanisms to significance in human health and disease. Antioxidants &amp; Redox Signaling, 16 (12 ), 1492–1526. 10.1089/ars.2011.4179.22229339
Daniels K , Toth J , &amp; Jacoby L (2006). The aging of executive functions. In Bialystok E , &amp; Craik FIM (Eds.), Lifespan cognition: Mechanisms of change (pp. 96–111). Oxford University Press.
Darst BF , Koscik RL , Racine AM , Oh JM , Krause RA , Carlsson CM , (2017). Pathway-specific polygenic risk scores as predictors of amyloid-β deposition and cognitive function in a sample at increased risk for Alzheimer’s disease. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 55 (2 ), 473–484. 10.3233/JAD-160195.
Davenport MH , Hogan DB , Eskes GA , Longman RS , &amp; Poulin MJ (2012). Cerebrovascular reserve: The link between fitness and cognitive function? Exercise and Sport Sciences Reviews, 40 , 153–158. 10.1097/JES.0b013e3182553430.22504726
de Almeida AJPO , de Almeida Rezende MS , Dantas SH , de Lima Silva S , de Oliveira JCPL , de Lourdes Assunção Araújo de Azevedo F , (2020). Unveiling the role of inflammation and oxidative stress on age-related cardiovascular diseases. Oxidative Medicine and Cellular Longevity, 2020 , 20. 10.1155/2020/1954398.e1954398.
de Bruijn RF , &amp; Ikram MA (2014). Cardiovascular risk factors and future risk of Alzheimer’s disease. BMC Medicine, 12 (1 ), 130. 10.1186/s12916-014-0130-5.25385322
de la Torre JC (2012). Cardiovascular risk factors promote brain hypoperfusion leading to cognitive decline and dementia. Cardiovasc Psychiatry Neurology, 2012 , 367516. 10.1155/2012/367516.
Demer LL , &amp; Tintut Y (2008). Vascular calcification. Circulation, 117 (22 ), 2938–2948. 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.107.743161.18519861
Dempster KS , O’Leary DD , MacNeil AJ , Hodges GJ , &amp; Wade TJ (2021). Linking the hemodynamic consequences of adverse childhood experiences to an altered HPA axis and acute stress response. Brain, Behavior, and Immunity, 93 , 254–263. 10.1016/j.bbi.2020.12.018.33358983
Dengo AL , Dennis EA , Orr JS , Marinik EL , Ehrlich E , Davy BM , (2010). Arterial destiffening with weight loss in overweight and obese middle-aged and older adults. Hypertension, 55 (4 ), 855–861. 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.109.147850.20212267
D’Esposito M , Postle BR , &amp; Rypma B (2000). Prefrontal cortical contributions to working memory: Evidence from event-related fMRI studies. In Schneider WX , Owen AM , &amp; Duncan J (Eds.), Executive control and the frontal lobe: Current issues. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer. 10.1007/978-3-642-59794-7_2.
DeTure MA , &amp; Dickson DW (2019). The neuropathological diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease. Molecular Neurodegeneration, 14 , 32. 10.1186/s13024-019-0333-5.31375134
De Wit L , Kessels R , Kurasz A , Amofa P , O’Shea D , Marsiske M , (2022). Declarative learning, priming, and procedural learning performances comparing individuals with amnestic mild cognitive impairment, and cognitively unimpaired older adults. Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society, 1–13. 10.1017/S1355617722000029.
Dickerson B , McGinnis S , Xia C , Price B , Atri A , Murray M , (2017). Approach to atypical Alzheimer’s disease and case studies of the major subtypes. CNS Spectrums, 22 (6 ), 439–449. 10.1017/S109285291600047X.28196556
Dougherty RJ , Jonaitis EM , Gaitán JM , Lose SR , Mergen BM , Johnson SC , (2021). Cardiorespiratory fitness mitigates brain atrophy and cognitive decline in adults at risk for Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia: Diagnosis, Assessment &amp; Disease Monitoring, 13 (1 ), e12212. 10.1002/dad2.12212.
Duncan K , Tompary A , &amp; Davachi L (2014). Associative encoding and retrieval are predicted by functional connectivity in distinct hippocampal area CA1 pathways. Journal of Neuroscience, 34 , 11188–11198. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0521-14.2014.25143600
Durier S , Fassot C , Laurent S , Boutouyrie P , Couetil J-P , Fine E , (2003). Physiological genomics of human arteries. Circulation, 108 (15 ), 1845–1851. 10.1161/01.CIR.0000091407.86925.7A.14530203
Duyckaerts C , Delatour B , &amp; Potier MC (2009). Classification and basic pathology of Alzheimer disease. Acta Neuropathologica, 118 (1 ), 5–36. 10.1007/s00401-009-0532-1.19381658
Edelman RR , &amp; Koktzoglou I (2019). Noncontrast MR angiography: An update. Journal of Magnetic Resonance Imaging, 49 (2 ), 355–373. 10.1002/jmri.26288.30566270
Edenfield TM , &amp; Blumenthal JA (2011). Exercise and stress reduction. In Contrada RJ , &amp; Baum A (Eds.), The handbook of stress science: Biology, psychology, and health (pp. 301–319). Springer Publishing Company.
Eichenbaum H , Yonelinas AP , &amp; Ranganath C (2007). The medial temporal lobe and recognition memory. Annual Reviews of Neuroscience, 30 , 123–152. 10.1146/annurev.neuro.30.051606.094328.
Engle RW (2001). What is working memory capacity? In Roediger HL III , Nairne JS , Neath I , &amp; Surprenant AM (Eds.), The nature of remembering: Essays in honor of Robert G. Crowder (pp. 297–314). American Psychological Association. 10.1037/10394-016.
Engle RW (2002). Working memory capacity as executive attention. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 11 (1 ), 19–23. 10.1111/1467-8721.00160.
Erickson KI , Voss MW , Prakash RS , Basak C , Szabo A , Chaddock L , (2011). Exercise training increases size of hippocampus and improves memory. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 108 (7 ), 3017–3022. 10.1073/pnas.1015950108.
Esch T , &amp; Stefano GB (2010). Endogenous reward mechanisms and their importance in stress reduction, exercise and the brain. Archives of Medical Science: AMS, 6 (3 ), 447. 10.5114/aoms.2010.14269.22371784
Fabiani M (2012). It was the best of times, it was the worst of times: A psychophysiologist’s view of cognitive aging. Psychophysiology, 49 (3 ), 283–304. 10.1111/j.1469-8986.2011.01331.x.22220910
Fabiani M , &amp; Friedman D (1995). Changes in brain activity patterns in aging: The novelty oddball. Psychophysiology, 32 (6 ), 579–594. 10.1111/j.1469-8986.1995.tb01234.x.8524992
Fabiani M , &amp; Friedman D (1997). Dissociations between memory for temporal order and recognition memory in aging. Neuropsychologia, 35 (2 ), 129–141. 10.1016/S0028-3932(96)00073-5.9025117
Fabiani M , Friedman D , &amp; Cheng JC (1998). Individual differences in P3 scalp distribution in older adults, and their relationship to frontal lobe function. Psychophysiology, 35 (6 ), 698–708. 10.1111/1469-8986.3560698.9844431
Fabiani M , Gordon BA , Maclin EL , Pearson MA , Brumback-Peltz CR , Low KA , (2014). Neurovascular coupling in normal aging: A combined optical, ERP, and fMRI study. NeuroImage, 85 , 592–607. 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.04.113.23664952
Fabiani M , Kazmerski VA , Cycowicz YM , &amp; Friedman D (1996). Naming norms for brief environmental sounds: Effects of age and dementia. Psychophysiology, 33 (4 ), 462–475. 10.1111/j.1469-8986.1996.tb01072.x.8753947
Fabiani M , Low KA , Tan C , Zimmerman B , Fletcher MA , Schneider-Garces N , (2014). Taking the pulse of aging: Mapping pulse pressure and elasticity in cerebral arteries with optical methods. Psychophysiology, 51 (11 ), 1072–1088. 10.1111/psyp.12288.25100639
Fabiani M , Zimmerman B , &amp; Gratton G (2015). Chapter 11: Working memory and aging: A review. In Jolicoeur P , Lefebvre C , &amp; Marinez-Trujillo J (Eds.), Attention &amp; Performance XXV: Mechanisms of sensory working memory (pp. 131–148). Elsevier. https://www.elsevier.com/books/mechanisms-of-sensory-working-memory/jolicoeur/978-0-12-811042-3.
Falk E (2006). Pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. Journal of the American College of Cardiology, 47 (8 ), C7–C12. 10.1016/j.jacc.2005.09.068.16631513
Fjell AM , Grydeland H , Krogsrud SK , Amlien I , Rohani DA , Ferschmann L , (2015). Development and aging of cortical thickness correspond to genetic organization patterns. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112 (50 ), 15462–15467. 10.1073/pnas.1508831112.
Fjell AM , &amp; Walhovd KB (2001). P300 and neuropsychological tests as measures of aging: Scalp topography and cognitive changes. Brain Topography, 14 (1 ), 25–40. 10.1023/A:1012563605837.11599530
Fletcher MA , Low KA , Boyd R , Zimmerman B , Gordon BA , Tan CH , (2016). Comparing aging and fitness effects on brain anatomy. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 10 , 286. 10.3389/fnhum.2016.00286.27445740
Friedman NP , &amp; Miyake A (2017). Unity and diversity of executive functions: Individual differences as a window on cognitive structure. Cortex, 86 , 186–204. 10.1016/j.cortex.2016.04.023.27251123
Gallo HB , Hargis MB , &amp; Castel AD (2019). Memory for weather information in younger and older adults: Tests of verbatim and gist memory. Experimental Aging Research, 45 (3 ), 252–265. 10.1080/0361073X.2019.1609163.31021695
Gianaros PJ , &amp; Jennings RJ (2018). Host in the machine: A neurobiological perspective on psychological stress and cardiovascular disease. American Psychological Association, 73 (8 ), 1031–1044. 10.1037/amp0000232.
Gordon BA , McCullough A , Mishra S , Blazey TM , Su Y , Christensen J , (2018). Cross-sectional and longitudinal atrophy is preferentially associated with tau rather than amyloid β positron emission tomography pathology. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia: Diagnosis, Assessment &amp; Disease Monitoring, 10 , 245–252. 10.1016/j.dadm.2018.02.003.
Gordon BA , Rykhlevskaia EI , Brumback CR , Lee Y , Elavsky S , Konopack JF , (2008). Neuroanatomical correlates of aging, cardiopulmonary fitness level, and education. Psychophysiology, 45 (5 ), 825–838. 10.1111/j.1469-8986.2008.00676.x.18627534
Gordon BA , Tse CY , Gratton G , &amp; Fabiani M (2014). Spread of activation and deactivation in the brain: Does age matter? Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience, 6 , 288. 10.3389/fnagi.2014.00288.25360115
Grady CL , McIntosh AR , Horwitz B , Maisog JM , Ungerleider LG , Mentis MJ , (1995). Age-related reductions in human recognition memory due to impaired encoding. Science, 269 (5221 ), 218–221. 10.1126/science.7618082.7618082
Graf P , &amp; Schacter DL (1985). Implicit and explicit memory for new associations in normal and amnesic subjects. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 11 (3 ), 501–518. 10.1037/0278-7393.11.3.501.3160813
Gratton G , Chiarelli AM , &amp; Fabiani M (2017). From brain to blood vessels and back: A non-invasive optical imaging approach. Neurophotonics, 4 (3 ), 031208. 10.1117/1.NPh.4.3.031208.28413807
Gratton C , Sun H , &amp; Petersen SE (2018). Control networks and hubs. Psychophysiology, 55 (3 ), e13032. 10.1111/psyp.13032.
Gratton G , Cooper P , Fabiani M , Carter CS , &amp; Karayanidis F (2018). Dynamics of cognitive control: Theoretical bases, paradigms, and a view for the future. Psychophysiology, 55 (3 ), e13016. 10.1111/psyp.13016.
Gratton G , Weaver SR , Burley CV , Low KA , Maclin EL , Johns PW , (2020). Dietary flavanols improve cerebral cortical oxygenation and cognition in healthy adults. Scientific Reports, 10 (1 ). 10.1038/s41598-020-76160-9.
Groot C , Dor e V , Robertson J , Burnham SC , Savage G , Ossenkoppele R , (2021). Mesial temporal tau is related to worse cognitive performance and greater neocortical tau load in amyloid-β–negative cognitively normal individual. Neurobiology of Aging, 97 , 41–48. 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2020.09.017.33130455
Guo T , Landau SM , &amp; Jagust WJ (2021). Age, vascular disease, and Alzheimer’s disease pathologies in amyloid negative elderly adults. Alzheimer’s Research &amp; Therapy, 13 (1 ), 1–12. 10.1186/s13195-021-00913-5.
Hajjar I , Goldstein FC , Martin GS , &amp; Quyyumi AA (2016). Roles of arterial stiffness and blood pressure in hypertension-associated cognitive decline in healthy adults. Hypertension, 67 , 171–175. 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.115.06277.26527049
Hajjar I , Marmerelis V , Shin DC , &amp; Chui H (2014). Assessment of cerebrovascular reactivity during resting state breathing and its correlation with cognitive function in hypertension. Cerebrovascular Diseases (Basel, Switzerland), 38 (1 ), 10–16. 10.1159/000365349.25171390
Hall M , Vasko R , Buysse D , Ombao H , Chen Q , Cashmere JD , (2004). Acute stress affects heart rate variability during sleep. Psychosomatic Medicine, 66 (1 ), 56–62. 10.1097/01.psy.0000106884.58744.09.14747638
Hampstead BM , Stringer AY , Stilla RF , &amp; Sathian K (2020). Mnemonic strategy training increases neocortical activation in healthy older adults and patients with mild cognitive impairment. International Journal of Psychophysiology, 154 , 27–36. 10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2019.04.011.31067489
Hasher L , Lustig C , &amp; Zacks R (2008). Inhibitory mechanisms and the control of attention. In Conway ARA , Jarrold C , Kane MJ , Miyake A , &amp; Towse JN (Eds.), Variation in working memory (pp. 227–249). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Hasher L , &amp; Zacks RT (1988). Working memory, comprehension, and aging: A review and a new view. Psychology of Learning and Motivation, 22 , 193–225. 10.1016/s0079-7421(08)60041-9.
Healey MK , Campbell KL , &amp; Hasher L (2008). Cognitive aging and increased distractibility: Costs and potential benefits. Progress in Brain Research, 169 , 353–363. 10.1016/S0079-6123(07)00022-2.18394486
Hedden T , &amp; Gabrieli JDE (2004). Insights into the ageing mind: A view from cognitive neuroscience. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 5 (2 ), 87–96. 10.1038/nrn1323.14735112
Hedden T , Oh H , Younger AP , &amp; Patel TA (2013). Meta-analysis of amyloid-cognition relations in cognitively normal older adults. Neurology, 80 (14 ), 1341–1348. 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31828ab35d.23547267
Heijnen S , Hommel B , Kibele A , &amp; Colzato LS (2016). Neuromodulation of aerobic exercise—A review. Frontiers in Psychology, 6 , 1890. 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01890.26779053
Henskens LHG , Kroon AA , van Oostenbrugge Robert J , Gronenschild EHBM , Fuss-Lejeune Monique MJJ , Hofman Paul AM , (2008). Increased aortic pulse wave velocity is associated with silent cerebral small-vessel disease in hypertensive patients. Hypertension, 52 (6 ), 1120–1126. 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.108.119024.18852384
Hindy NC , Ng FY , &amp; Turk-Browne NB (2016). Linking pattern completion in the hippocampus to predictive coding in visual cortex. Nature Neuroscience, 19 (5 ), 665–667. 10.1038/nn.4284.27065363
Iqbal S (2013). A comprehensive study of the anatomical variations of the circle of Willis in adult human brains. Journal of Clinical and Diagnostic Research, 7 (11 ), 2423–2427. 10.7860/JCDR/2013/6580.3563.24392362
Isaacs KR , Anderson BJ , Alcantara AA , Black JE , &amp; Greenough WT (1992). Exercise and the brain: Angiogenesis in the adult rat cerebellum after vigorous physical activity and motor skill learning. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow Metabolism, 12 , 110–119. 10.1038/jcbfm.1992.14.1370068
Iwasaki KI , Zhang R , Zuckerman JH , &amp; Levine BD (2003). Dose-response relationship of the cardiovascular adaptation to endurance training in healthy adults: How much training for what benefit? Journal of Applied Physiology, 95 (4 ), 1575–1583. 10.1152/japplphysiol.00482.2003.12832429
Jack CR , Shiung MM , Weigand SD , O’Brien PC , Gunter JL , Boeve BF , (2005). Brain atrophy rates predict subsequent clinical conversion in normal elderly and amnestic MCI. Neurology, 65 (8 ), 1227–1231. 10.1212/01.wnl.0000180958.22678.91.16247049
Jain S , Khera R , Corrales-Medina VF , Townsend RR , &amp; Chirinos JA (2014). Inflammation and arterial stiffness in humans. Atherosclerosis, 237 (2 ), 381–390. 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2014.09.011.25463062
James W (1890). The perception of reality. Principles of Psychology, 2 , 283–324.
Jefferson ME , Nicklas BJ , Chmelo EA , Crotts CI , Shaltout HA , Diz DI , (2016). Effects of resistance training with and without caloric restriction on arterial stiffness in overweight and obese older adults. American Journal of Hypertension, 29 (4 ), 494–500. 10.1093/ajh/hpv139.26297029
Jennings JR , Muldoon MF , Allen B , Ginty AT , &amp; Gianaros PJ (2021). Cerebrovascular function in hypertension: Does high blood pressure make you old? Psychophysiology, e13654. 10.1111/psyp.13654.
Jia G , Aroor AR , Martinez-Lemus LA , &amp; Sowers JR (2018). Potential role of anti-hypertensive medications in preventing excessive arterial stiffening. Current Hypertension Reports, 20 (9 ), 1–7. 10.1007/s11906-018-0876-9.29349522
Jolly TAD , Bateman GA , Levi CR , Parsons MW , Michie P , &amp; Karayanidis F (2013). Early detection of microstructural white matter changes associated with arterial pulsatility. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 7 , 782. 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00782.24302906
Julius S (1995). The defense reaction: A common denominator of coronary risk and blood pressure in neurogenic hypertension? Clinical and Experimental Hypertension, 17 (1–2 ), 375–386. 10.3109/10641969509087078.7735282
Kalaria RN (2012). Cerebrovascular disease and mechanisms of cognitive impairment: Evidence from clinicopathological studies in humans. Stroke, 43 (9 ), 2526–2534. 10.1161/STROKEAHA.112.655803.22879100
Kattoor AJ , Pothineni NVK , Palagiri D , &amp; Mehta JL (2017). Oxidative stress in atherosclerosis. Current Atherosclerosis Reports, 19 (11 ), 42. 10.1007/s11883-017-0678-6.28921056
Kemper TL (1994). Neuroanatomical and neuropathological changes during aging and in dementia. In Albert ML , &amp; Knoepfel EJE (Eds.), Clinical neurology of aging (2nd ed., pp. 3–67). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Kirschen GW , Kery R , &amp; Ge S (2018). The hippocampus neuro-glio-vascular network: Metabolic vulnerability and potential neurogenic regeneration in disease. Brain Plasticity, 3 (2 ), 129–144. 10.3233/BPL-170055.30151338
Kissane RW , &amp; Egginton S (2019). Exercise-mediated angiogenesis. Current Opinion in Physiology, 10 , 193–201. 10.1016/j.cophys.2019.06.005.
Klein K , &amp; Fiss WH (1999). The reliability and stability of the Turner and Engle working memory task. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, &amp; Computers, 31 (3 ), 429–432. 10.3758/BF03200722.
Kong TS , Gratton C , Low KA , Tan CH , Chiarelli AM , Fletcher MA , (2020). Age-related differences in functional brain network segregation are consistent with a cascade of cerebrovascular, structural, and cognitive effects. Network Neuroscience, 4 (1 ), 89–114. 10.1162/netn_a_00110.32043045
Konkel A , &amp; Cohen NJ (2009). Relational memory and the hippocampus: Representations and methods. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 3 , 23. 10.3389/neuro.01.023.2009.
Kramer AF , Erickson KI , &amp; Colcombe SJ (2006). Exercise, cognition, and the aging brain. Journal of Applied Physiology, 101 (4 ), 1237–1242. 10.1152/japplphysiol.00500.2006.16778001
Kramer AF , Hahn S , Cohen NJ , Banich MT , McAuley E , Harrison CR , (1999). Ageing, fitness and neurocognitive function. Nature, 400 (6743 ), 418–419. 10.1038/22682.10440369
Lacolley P , Challande P , Osborne-Pellegrin M , &amp; Regnault V (2009). Genetics and pathophysiology of arterial stiffness. Cardiovascular Research, 81 (4 ), 637–648. 10.1093/cvr/cvn353.19098299
Lähteenvuo J , &amp; Rosenzweig A (2012). Effects of aging on angiogenesis. Circulation Research, 110 (9 ), 1252–1264. 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.111.246116.22539758
Laurent S , Boutouyrie P , &amp; Lacolley P (2005). Structural and genetic bases of arterial stiffness. Hypertension, 45 (6 ), 1050–1055. 10.1161/01.HYP.0000164580.39991.3d.15851625
Leckie RL , Oberlin LE , Voss MW , Prakash RS , Szabo-Reed A , Chaddock-Heyman L , (2014). BDNF mediates improvements in executive function following a 1-year exercise intervention. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8 , 985. 10.3389/fnhum.2014.00985.25566019
Le-Ha C , Herbison CE , Beilin LJ , Burrows S , Henley DE , Lye SJ , (2016). Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis activity under resting conditions and cardiovascular risk factors in adolescents. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 66 , 118–124. 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2016.01.002.26802599
Leutgeb S , &amp; Leutgeb JK (2007). Pattern separation, pattern completion, and new neuronal codes within a continuous CA3 map. Learning &amp; Memory, 14 (11 ), 745–757. 10.1101/lm.703907.18007018
Li Q , Yang Y , Reis C , Tao T , Li W , Li X , (2018). Cerebral Small Vessel Disease. Cell Transplantation, 27 (12 ), 1711–1722. 10.1177/0963689718795148.30251566
Libby P (2012). Inflammation in atherosclerosis. Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis, and Vascular Biology, 32 (9 ), 2045–2051. 10.1161/ATVBAHA.108.179705.22895665
Lin KA , Choudhury KR , Rathakrishnan BG , Marks DM , Petrella JR , &amp; Doraiswamy PM (2015). Marked gender differences in progression of mild cognitive impairment over 8 years. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia: Translational Research &amp; Clinical Interventions, 1 (2 ), 103–110. 10.1016/j.trci.2015.07.001.
Lindenberger U , &amp; Baltes PB (1997). Intellectual functioning in old and very old age: Cross-sectional results from the Berlin aging study. Psychology and Aging, 12 (3 ), 410. 10.1037/0882-7974.12.3.410.9308090
Loftus EF (1997). Memory for a past that never was. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 6 (3 ), 60–65. https://www.jstor.org/stable/20182449.
Long JM , &amp; Holtzman DM (2019). Alzheimer disease: An update on pathobiology and treatment strategies. Cell, 179 (2 ), 312–339. 10.1016/j.cell.2019.09.001.31564456
Luchsinger JA , &amp; Mayeux R (2004). Cardiovascular risk factors and Alzheimer’s disease. Current Atherosclerosis Reports, 6 , 261–266. 10.1007/s11883-004-0056-z.15191699
Luciano M , Wright MJ , Smith GA , Geffen GM , Geffen LB , &amp; Martin NG (2001). Genetic covariance among measures of information processing speed, working memory, and IQ. Behavior Genetics, 31 (6 ), 581–592. 10.1023/A:1013397428612.11838535
Madden DJ , Turkington TG , Provenzale JM , Denny LL , Hawk TC , Gottlob LR , (1999). Adult age differences in the functional neuroanatomy of verbal recognition memory. Human Brain Mapping, 7 (2 ), 115–135. 10.1002/(SICI)1097-0193(1999)7:2&lt;115∷AID-HBM5&gt;3.0.CO;2-N.9950069
Markus HS (2000). Transcranial doppler ultrasound. British Medical Bulletin, 56 (2 ), 378–388. 10.1258/0007142001903021.11092087
Marr D (1971). Simple memory: A theory for archicortex. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences, 262 (841 ), 23–81. 10.1098/rstb.1971.0078.4399412
Marsh EJ , Balota DA , &amp; Roediger HL III . (2005). Learning facts from fiction: Effects of healthy aging and early-stage dementia of the Alzheimer type. Neuropsychology, 19 (1 ), 115. 10.1037/0894-4105.19.1.115.15656769
Mather M (2012). The emotion paradox in the aging brain. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1251 (1 ), 33–49. 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2012.06471.x.22409159
McEwen B (2000). Allostasis and allostatic load: Implications for neuropsychopharmacology. Neuropsychopharmacology, 22 (2 ), 108–124. 10.1016/S0893-133X(99)00129-3.10649824
McEwen BS , Nasca C , &amp; Gray JD (2016). Stress effects on neuronal structure: Hippocampus, amygdala, and prefrontal cortex. Neuropsychopharmacology, 41 (1 ), 3–23. 10.1038/npp.2015.171.26076834
Medley TL , Cole TJ , Dart AM , Gatzka CD , &amp; Kingwell BA (2004). Matrix metalloproteinase-9 genotype influences large artery stiffness through effects on aortic gene and protein expression. Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis, and Vascular Biology, 24 (8 ), 1479–1484. 10.1161/01.ATV.0000135656.49158.95.15191941
Mendez MF (2019). Early-onset Alzheimer disease and its variants. Continuum (Minneapolis, Minn.), 25 (1 ), 34–51. 10.1212/CON.0000000000000687.30707186
Mielke MM , Vemuri P , &amp; Rocca WA (2014). Clinical epidemiology of Alzheimer’s disease: Assessing sex and gender differences. Clinical Epidemiology, 6 , 37. 10.2147/CLEP.S37929.24470773
Miller EK , &amp; Cohen JD (2001). An integrative theory of prefrontal cortex function. Annual Reviews of Neuroscience, 24 (1 ), 167–202. 10.1146/annurev.neuro.24.1.167.
Mills R , &amp; Bhatt DL (2004). The yin and yang of arterial inflammation. Journal of the American College of Cardiology, 44 (1 ), 50–52. 10.1016/j.jacc.2004.04.002.15234405
Mitchell KJ , Johnson MK , Raye CL , &amp; D’Esposito M (2000). fMRI evidence of age-related hippocampal dysfunction in feature binding in working memory. Cognitive Brain Research, 10 (1–2 ), 197–206. 10.1016/S0926-6410(00)00029-X.10978709
Miyake A , &amp; Friedman NP (2012). The nature and organization of individual differences in executive functions. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 21 (1 ), 8–14. 10.1177/0963721411429458.22773897
Mokhber N , Avan A , Delbari A , Shojaeianbabaei G , Azarpazhooh M , &amp; Chaimowitz G (2019). Aging and cognitive function: A mini-review. EC Neurology, 11 , 475–480.
Moser EI , Kropff E , &amp; Moser MB (2008). Place cells, grid cells, and the brain’s spatial representation system. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 31 (1 ), 69–89. 10.1146/annurev.neuro.31.061307.090723.
Mozos I , Malainer C , Horbańczuk J , Gug C , Stoian D , Luca CT , (2017). Inflammatory markers for arterial stiffness in cardiovascular diseases. Frontiers in Immunology, 8 , 1058. 10.3389/fimmu.2017.01058.28912780
Murman DL (2015). The impact of age on cognition. Seminars in Hearing, 36 (3 ), 111–121. 10.1055/s-0035-1555115.27516712
Nakashiba T , Young JZ , McHugh TJ , Buhl DL , &amp; Tonegawa S (2008). Transgenic inhibition of synaptic transmission reveals role of CA3 output in hippocampal learning. Science, 319 (5867 ), 1260–1264. 10.1126/science.1151120.18218862
Natale G , Limanaqi F , Busceti CL , Mastroiacovo F , Nicoletti F , Puglisi-Allegra S , (2021). Glymphatic system as a gateway to connect neurodegeneration from periphery to CNS. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 15 , 92. 10.3389/fnins.2021.639140.
Nittono H , Nageishi Y , Nakajima Y , &amp; Ullsperger P (1999). Event-related potential correlates of individual differences in working memory capacity. Psychophysiology, 36 (6 ), 745–754. 10.1111/1469-8986.3660745.10554588
Nystoriak MA , &amp; Bhatnagar A (2018). Cardiovascular effects and benefits of exercise. Frontiers in Cardiovascular Medicine, 5 , 135. 10.3389/fcvm.2018.00135.30324108
O’Connor DB , Thayer JF , &amp; Vedhara K (2021). Stress and health: A review of psychobiological processes. Annual Review of Psychology, 71 (1 ), 663–688. 10.1146/annurev-psych-062520-122331.
O’Donoghue MC , Murphy SE , Zamboni G , Nobre AC , &amp; Mackay CE (2018). APOE genotype and cognition in healthy individuals at risk of Alzheimer’s disease: A review. Cortex, 104 , 103–123. 10.1016/j.cortex.2018.03.025.29800787
Park DC (2000). The basic mechanisms accounting for age-related decline in cognitive function. In Park DC , &amp; Schwarz N (Eds.), Cognitive aging: A primer (pp. 3–22). Philadelphia, Pa: Psychology Press.
Park DC , Lautenschlager G , Hedden T , Davidson NS , Smith AD , &amp; Smith PK (2002). Models of visuospatial and verbal memory across the adult life span. Psychology and Aging, 17 (2 ), 299–320. 10.1037/0882-7974.17.2.299.12061414
Park DC , Polk TA , Mikels JA , Taylor SF , &amp; Marshuetz C (2001). Cerebral aging: Integration of brain and behavioral models of cognitive function. Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience, 3 (3 ), 151. 10.31887/DCNS.2001.3.3/dcpark.22034448
Pase MP , Pipingas A , Kras M , Nolidin K , Gibbs AL , Wesnes KA , (2010). Healthy middle-aged individuals are vulnerable to cognitive deficits as a result of increased arterial stiffness. Journal of Hypertension, 28 (8 ), 1724–1729. 10.1097/HJH.0b013e32833b1ee7.20485193
Peltz CB , Gratton G , &amp; Fabiani M (2011). Age-related changes in electrophysiological and neuropsychological indices of working memory, attention control, and cognitive flexibility. Frontiers in Psychology, 2 , 190. 10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00190.21887150
Perosa V , Priester A , Ziegler G , Cardenas-Blanco A , Dobisch L , Spallazzi M , (2020). Hippocampal vascular reserve associated with cognitive performance and hippocampal volume. Brain, 143 (2 ), 622–634. 10.1093/brain/awz383.31994699
Persson N , Ghisletta P , Dahle CL , Bender AR , Yang Y , Yuan P , (2016). Regional brain shrinkage and change in cognitive performance over two years: The bidirectional influences of the brain and cognitive reserve factors. Neuroimage, 126 , 15–26. 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.11.028.26584866
Petersen RC , Smith GE , Waring SC , Ivnik RJ , Tangalos EG , &amp; Kokmen E (1999). Mild cognitive impairment: Clinical characterization and outcome. Archives of Neurology, 56 (3 ), 303–308. 10.1001/archneur.56.3.303.10190820
Plieger T , &amp; Reuter M (2020). Stress &amp; executive functioning: A review considering moderating factors. Neurobiology of Learning and Memory, 173 , 107254. 10.1016/j.nlm.2020.107254.32485224
Plomin R , &amp; Kosslyn SM (2001). Genes, brain and cognition. Nature Neuroscience, 4 (12 ), 1153–1154. 10.1038/nn1201-1153.
Polich J (2007). Updating P300: An integrative theory of P3a and P3b. Clinical Neurophysiology, 118 (10 ), 2128–2148. 10.1016/j.clinph.2007.04.019.17573239
Qiu C , Winblad B , Viitanen M , &amp; Fratiglioni L (2003). Pulse pressure and risk of Alzheimer disease in persons aged 75 years and older: A community-based longitudinal study. Stroke, 34 (3 ), 594–599. 10.1161/01.STR.0000060127.96986.F4.12624277
Raz N (2000). Aging of the brain and its impact on cognitive performance: Integration of structural and functional findings. In Craik FIM , &amp; Salthouse TA (Eds.), The handbook of aging and cognition (2nd ed., pp. 1–90). Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers.
Raz N , &amp; Daugherty AM (2018). Pathways to brain aging and their modifiers: Free-radical-induced energetic and neural decline in senescence (FRIENDS) model–A mini-review. Gerontology, 64 (1 ), 49–57. 10.1159/000479508.28858861
Raz N , Ghisletta P , Rodrigue KM , Kennedy KM , &amp; Lindenberger U (2010). Trajectories of brain aging in middle-aged and older adults: Regional and individual differences. NeuroImage, 51 , 501–511. 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.03.020.20298790
Raz N , Lindenberger U , Rodrigue KM , Kennedy KM , Head D , Williamson A , (2005). Regional brain changes in aging healthy adults: General trends, individual differences and modifiers. Cerebral Cortex, 15 (11 ), 1676–1689. 10.1093/cercor/bhi044.15703252
Reddy OC , &amp; van der Werf YD (2020). The sleeping brain: Harnessing the power of the glymphatic system through lifestyle choices. Brain Sciences, 10 (11 ), 868. 10.3390/brainsci10110868.33212927
Rendeiro C , &amp; Rhodes JS (2021). In Martin CR , Preedy VR , &amp; Rajendram R (Eds.), Chapter 51–Dietary flavonoids and brain health in aging: Food for thought (pp. 589–601). Academic Press. 10.1016/B978-0-12-817990-1.00051-2.
Rhodes S , Greene NR , &amp; Naveh-Benjamin M (2019). Age-related differences in recall and recognition: A meta-analysis. Psychonomic Bulletin &amp; Review, 26 (5 ), 1529–1547. 10.3758/s13423-019-01649-y.31396816
Rocca WA , Mielke MM , Vemuri P , &amp; Miller VM (2014). Sex and gender differences in the causes of dementia: A narrative review. Maturitas, 79 (2 ), 196–201. 10.1016/j.maturitas.2014.05.008.24954700
Rodrigue KM , Kennedy KM , Devous MD Sr. , Rieck JR , Hebrank AC , Diaz-Arrastia R , (2012). β-Amyloid burden in healthy aging: Regional distribution and cognitive consequences. Neurology, 78 (6 ), 387–395. 10.1212/WNL.0b013e318245d295.22302550
Ross R (1995). Cell biology of atherosclerosis. Annual Review of Physiology, 57 (1 ), 791–804. 10.1146/annurev.ph.57.030195.004043.
Roy B , Riley C , &amp; Sinha R (2018). Emotion regulation moderates the association between chronic stress and cardiovascular disease risk in humans: A cross-sectional study. Stress, 21 (6 ), 548–555. 10.1080/10253890.2018.1490724.30084712
Rypma B , Gratton G , &amp; Fabiani M (Eds.). (2021). Aging and cerebrovascular health: Structural, functional, cognitive, and methodological implications. Psychophysiology, 58 (7 ). Special issue. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/toc/14698986/2021/58/7.
Salthouse TA (1992). Influence of processing speed on adult age differences in working memory. Acta Psychologica, 79 (2 ), 155–170. 10.1016/0001-6918(92)90030-H.1598844
Salthouse TA (1994). The aging of working memory. Neuropsychology, 8 (4 ), 535–543. 10.1037/0894-4105.8.4.535.
Sander MC , Fandakova Y , &amp; Werkle-Bergner M (2021). Effects of age differences in memory formation on neural mechanisms of consolidation and retrieval. In 116. Seminars in cell &amp; developmental biology (pp. 135–145). Academic Press. 10.1016/j.semcdb.2021.02.005.
Santos CY , Snyder PJ , Wu W-C , Zhang M , Echeverria A , &amp; Alber J (2017). Pathophysiologic relationship between Alzheimer’s disease, cerebrovascular disease, and cardiovascular risk: A review and synthesis. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia: Diagnosis, Assessment &amp; Disease Monitoring, 7 , 69–87. 10.1016/j.dadm.2017.01.005.
Savitz J , Solms M , &amp; Ramesar R (2006). The molecular genetics of cognition: Dopamine, COMT and BDNF. Genes, Brain and Behavior, 5 (4 ), 311–328. 10.1111/j.1601-183X.2005.00163.x.16716201
Schacter DL , Savage CR , Alpert NM , Rauch SL , &amp; Albert MS (1996). The role of hippocampus and frontal cortex in age-related memory changes: A PET study. NeuroReport, 7 (6 ), 1165–1169. 10.1097/00001756-199604260-00014.8817525
Schneider-Garces NJ , Gordon BA , Brumback-Peltz CR , Shin E , Lee Y , Sutton BP , (2010). Span, CRUNCH and beyond: Working memory capacity and the aging brain. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 22 (4 ), 655–669. 10.1162/jocn.2009.21230.19320550
Schwarb H , Johnson CL , Dulas MR , McGarry MD , Holtrop JL , Watson PD , (2019). Structural and functional MRI evidence for distinct medial temporal and prefrontal roles in context-dependent relational memory. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 31 (12 ), 1857–1872. 10.1162/jocn_a_01454.31393232
Scuteri A , Brancati AM , Gianni W , Assisi A , &amp; Volpe M (2005). Arterial stiffness is an independent risk factor for cognitive impairment in the elderly: A pilot study. Journal of Hypertension, 23 (6 ), 1211–1216. 10.1097/01.hjh.0000170384.38708.b7.15894897
Seals DR , DeSouza CA , Donato AJ , &amp; Tanaka H (2008). Habitual exercise and arterial aging. Journal of Applied Physiology, 105 (4 ), 1323–1332. 10.1152/japplphysiol.90553.2008.18583377
Shaw K , Bell L , Boyd K , Grijseels DM , Clarke D , Bonnar O , (2021). Neurovascular coupling and oxygenation are decreased in hippocampus compared to neocortex because of microvascular differences. Nature Communications, 12 (1 ), 1–16. 10.1038/s41467-021-23508-y.
Shibata S , Fujimoto N , Hastings JL , Carrick-Ranson G , Bhella PS , Hearon CM Jr. , (2018). The effect of lifelong exercise frequency on arterial stiffness. The Journal of Physiology, 596 (14 ), 2783–2795. 10.1113/JP275301.29781119
Shimamura AP , Janowsky JS , &amp; Squire LR (1991). What is the role of frontal lobe damage in memory disorders? In Levin HD , Eisenberg HM , &amp; Benton AL (Eds.), Frontal lobe functioning and dysfunction (pp. 173–195). New York: Oxford UP.
Silvestrini M , Viticchi G , Falsetti L , Balucani C , Vernieri F , Cerqua R , (2011). The role of carotid atherosclerosis in Alzheimer’s disease progression. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 25 (4 ), 719–726. 10.3233/JAD-2011-101968.
Singer J , Trollor JN , Baune BT , Sachdev PS , &amp; Smith E (2014). Arterial stiffness, the brain and cognition: A systematic review. Ageing Research Reviews, 15 , 16–27. 10.1016/j.arr.2014.02.002.24548924
Sleight E , Stringer MS , Marshall I , Wardlaw JM , &amp; Thrippleton MJ (2021). Cerebrovascular reactivity measurement using magnetic resonance imaging: A systematic review. Frontiers in Physiology, 12 , 182. 10.3389/fphys.2021.643468.
Squire LR (1987). Memory and brain. Oxford University Press.
Squire LR (1992). Memory and the hippocampus: A synthesis from findings with rats, monkeys, and humans. Psychological Review, 99 (2 ), 582. 10.1037/0033-295X.99.2.195.
Squire LR (2009). The legacy of patient HM for neuroscience. Neuron, 61 (1 ), 6–9. 10.1016/j.neuron.2008.12.023.19146808
Stark CEL (2010). The neural basis of declarative memory. In Koob G , LeMoal M , &amp; Thompson R (Eds.), Encyclopedia of behavioral neuroscience, Elsevier.
Stern Y (2012). Cognitive reserve in ageing and Alzheimer’s disease. The Lancet Neurology, 11 (11 ), 1006–1012. 10.1016/S1474-4422(12)70191-6.23079557
Stern Y , Barnes CA , Grady C , Jones RN , &amp; Raz N (2019). Brain reserve, cognitive reserve, compensation, and maintenance: Operationalization, validity, and mechanisms of cognitive resilience. Neurobiology of Aging, 83 , 124–129. 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2019.03.022.31732015
Suri S , Chiesa ST , Zsoldos E , Mackay CE , Filippini N , Griffanti L , (2020). Associations between arterial stiffening and brain structure, perfusion, and cognition in the Whitehall II Imaging Sub-study: A retrospective cohort study. PLoS Medicine, 17 (12 ), e1003467. 10.1371/journal.pmed.1003467.33373359
Tan CH , Low KA , Chiarelli AM , Fletcher MA , Navarra R , Burzynska AZ , (2019). Optical measures of cerebral arterial stiffness are associated with white matter signal abnormalities and cognitive performance in normal aging. Neurobiology of Aging, 84 , 200–207. 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2019.08.004.31500910
Tan CH , Low KA , Kong T , Fletcher MA , Zimmerman B , Maclin EL , (2017). Mapping cerebral pulse pressure and arterial compliance over the adult lifespan with optical imaging. PLoS One, 12 (2 ), e0171305. 10.1371/journal.pone.0171305.28234912
Tan CH , Low KA , Schneider-Garces N , Zimmerman B , Fletcher MA , Maclin EL , (2016). Optical measures of changes in cerebral vascular tone during voluntary breath holding and a Sternberg memory task. Biological Psychology, 118 , 184–194. 10.1016/j.biopsycho.2016.05.008.27235126
Taneja K , Liu P , Xu C , Turner M , Zhao Y , Abdelkarim D , (2020). Quantitative cerebrovascular reactivity in normal aging: Comparison between phase-contrast and arterial spin labeling MRI. Frontiers in Neurology, 11 , 758. 10.3389/fneur.2020.00758.32849217
Tarasov KV , Sanna S , Scuteri A , Strait JB , Orrù M , Parsa A , (2009). COL4A1 is associated with arterial stiffness by genome-wide association scan. Circulation: Cardiovascular Genetics, 2 (2 ), 151–158. 10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.108.823245.20031579
Tarumi T , de Jong DLK , Zhu DC , Tseng BY , Liu J , Hill C , (2015). Central artery stiffness, baroreflex sensitivity, and brain white matter neuronal fiber integrity in older adults. NeuroImage, 110 , 162–170. 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.01.041.25623500
Thayer JF , Mather M , &amp; Koenig J (2021). Stress and aging: A neurovisceral integration perspective. Psychophysiology, 58 (7 ). 10.1111/psyp.13804.
Thompson PM , Cannon TD , Narr KL , van Erp T , Poutanen V-P , Huttunen M , (2001). Genetic influences on brain structure. Nature Neuroscience, 4 (12 ), 1253–1258. 10.1038/nn758.11694885
Thompson RF , &amp; Kim JJ (1996). Memory systems in the brain and localization of a memory. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 93 (24 ), 13438–13444. 10.1073/pnas.93.24.13438.
Tokgöz S , &amp; Claassen J (2021). Exercise as potential therapeutic target to modulate Alzheimer’s disease pathology in APOE ε4 carriers: A systematic review. Cardiology and Therapy, 10 (1 ), 67–88. 10.1007/s40119-020-00209-z.33403644
Tulving E (1972). Episodic and semantic memory. In Tulving E , &amp; Donaldson W (Eds.), Organization of memory (pp. 381–403). New York: Academic Press.
Turner ML , &amp; Engle RW (1989). Is working memory capacity task dependent? Journal of Memory and Language, 28 (2 ), 127–154. 10.1016/0749-596X(89)90040-5.
Van Praag H , Shubert T , Zhao C , &amp; Gage FH (2005). Exercise enhances learning and hippocampal neurogenesis in aged mice. Journal of Neuroscience, 25 (38 ), 8680–8685. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1731-05.2005.16177036
Vemuri P , Lesnick TG , Przybelski SA , Knopman DS , Preboske GM , Kantarci K , (2015). Vascular and amyloid pathologies are independent predictors of cognitive decline in normal elderly. Brain, 138 (3 ), 761–771. 10.1093/brain/awu393.25595145
Verhaaren BFJ , Vernooij MW , Koudstaal PJ , Uitterlinden AG , van Duijn CM , Hofman A , (2013). Alzheimer’s disease genes and cognition in the nondemented general population. Biological Psychiatry, 73 (5 ), 429–434. 10.1016/j.biopsych.2012.04.009.22592056
Verhaeghen P (2011). Aging and executive control: Reports of a demise greatly exaggerated. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 20 (3 ), 174–180. 10.1177/0963721411408772.25866452
Verhaeghen P (2014). The elements of cognitive aging meta-analyses of age-related differences in processing speed and their consequences. Oxford University Press.
Voss MW , Erickson KI , Prakash RS , Chaddock L , Kim JS , Alves H , (2013). Neurobiological markers of exercise-related brain plasticity in older adults. Brain, Behavior, and Immunity, 28 , 90–99. 10.1016/j.bbi.2012.10.021.23123199
Voss MW , Nagamatsu LS , Liu-Ambrose T , &amp; Kramer AF (2011). Exercise, brain, and cognition across the life span. Journal of Applied Physiology, 1115 , 1505–1513. 10.1152/japplphysiol.00210.2011.
Waldstein SR , Rice SC , Thayer JF , Najjar SS , Scuteri A , &amp; Zonderman AB (2008). pulse pressure and pulse wave velocity are related to cognitive decline in the Baltimore longitudinal study of aging. Hypertension, 51 (1 ), 99–104. 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.107.093674.18025297
Walker JA , Low KA , Cohen NJC , Gratton G , &amp; Fabiani M (2017). Hippocampal volume and white matter integrity predict cortical indices of reactivation of related items. Neuropsychologia, 95 , 182–192. 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2016.12.005.27939369
Wang M , Monticone RE , &amp; McGraw KR (2018). Proinflammatory arterial stiffness syndrome: A signature of large arterial aging. Journal of Vascular Research, 55 (4 ), 210–223. 10.1159/000490244.30071538
Wang ZX , Su R , Li H , Dang P , Zeng TA , Chen DM , (2022). Changes in hippocampus and amygdala volume with hypoxic stress related to cardiorespiratory fitness under a high-altitude environment. Brain Sciences, 12 (3 ), 359. 10.3390/brainsci12030359.35326315
Wulsin L , Herman J , &amp; Thayer JF (2018). Stress, autonomic imbalance, and the prediction of metabolic risk: A model and a proposal for research. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 86 , 12–20. 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2017.12.010.29277456
Xie Q , Cheng J , Pan G , Wu S , Hu Q , Jiang H , (2019). Treadmill exercise ameliorates focal cerebral ischemia/reperfusion-induced neurological deficit by promoting dendritic modification and synaptic plasticity via up regulating caveolin-1/VEGF signaling pathways. Experimental Neurology, 313 , 60–78. 10.1016/j.expneurol.2018.12.005.30552877
Zhang J , Liu Y , Lan K , Huang X , He Y , Yang F , (2021). Gray matter atrophy in amnestic mild cognitive impairment: A voxel-based meta-analysis. Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience, 13 , 126. 10.3389/fnagi.2021.627919.
Zimmerman B , Rypma B , Gratton G , &amp; Fabiani M (2021). Age-related changes in cerebrovascular health and their effects on neural function and cognition: A comprehensive review. Psychophysiology, 58 (7 ), e13796. 10.1111/psyp.13796.33728712
Zimmerman B , Sutton BP , Low KA , Fletcher MA , Tan CH , Schneider-Garces N , (2014). Cardiorespiratory fitness mediates the effects of aging on cerebral blood flow. Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience, 6 , 59. 10.3389/fnagi.2014.00059.24778617
Ziontz J , Bilgel M , Shafer AT , Moghekar A , Elkins W , Helphrey J , (2019). Tau pathology in cognitively normal older adults. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia: Diagnosis, Assessment &amp; Disease Monitoring, 11 , 637–645. 10.1016/j.dadm.2019.07.007.
