LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101524122
37467
Proc SPIE Int Soc Opt Eng
Proc SPIE Int Soc Opt Eng
Proceedings of SPIE--the International Society for Optical Engineering
0277-786X
1996-756X

38130873
10731988
10.1117/12.2654369
NIHMS1942211
Article
Normative Modeling using Multimodal Variational Autoencoders to Identify Abnormal Brain Volume Deviations in Alzheimer’s Disease
Kumar Sayantan ab
Payne Philip R. O. b
Sotiras Aristeidis bc
a Department of Computer Science, Washington University in St Louis, St Louis, USA
b Institute for Informatics, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, USA
c Department of Radiology, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, USA
14 11 2023
2 2023
07 4 2023
07 4 2024
12465 1246503This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Normative modelling is a method for understanding the underlying heterogeneity within brain disorders like Alzheimer Disease (AD), by quantifying how each patient deviates from the expected normative pattern that has been learned from a healthy control distribution. Existing deep learning based normative models have been applied on only single modality Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) neuroimaging data. However, these do not take into account the complementary information offered by multimodal M RI, which is essential for understanding a multifactorial disease like AD. To address this limitation, we propose a multi-modal variational autoencoder (mmVAE) based normative modelling framework that can capture the joint distribution between different modalities to identify abnormal brain volume deviations due to AD. Our multi-modal framework takes as input Freesurfer processed brain region volumes from T1-weighted (cortical and subcortical) and T2-weighed (hippocampal) scans of cognitively normal participants to learn the morphological characteristics of the healthy brain. The estimated normative model is then applied on AD patients to quantify the deviation in brain volumes and identify abnormal brain pattern deviations due to the progressive stages of AD. We compared our proposed mmVAE with a baseline unimodal VAE having a single encoder and decoder and the two modalities concatenated as unimodal input. Our experimental results show that deviation maps generated by mmVAE are more sensitive to disease staging within AD, have a better correlation with patient cognition and result in higher number of brain regions with statistically significant deviations compared to the unimodal baseline model.

normative modeling
Alzheimer Disease
multimodal variational autoencoders

pmc1. INTRODUCTION

Brain disorders like Alzheimer Disease (AD) are highly heterogeneous with significant variations in the clinical presentation and disease course. Traditional case-control analyses on AD assume that there is a single pattern that distinguishes the two contrasted groups and focus on 1st order statistics (group means) to estimate it, effectively ignoring the underlying disease heterogeneity.1,2 Normative modelling is a technique for parsing disease heterogeneity, while allowing inferences at an individual subject level. Normative models learn the morphological characteristics of healthy brains from a control population and provide a statistical measure of normality. Thus, the application of a normative model to a disease cohort allows for quantifying how disease patients deviate from the norm.3–8

Regression models, such as hierarchical linear models, support vector regression, and gaussian process regression (GPR), have traditionally been used as normative models.2 However, separate regression models need to be trained for each individual brain region which is computationally costly. To address this limitation, deep learning models have been proposed for normative modelling that takes all brain regions as input and learn interactions between the different regions. Such deep learning models typically use autoencoders to learn the morphological structure of healthy brains and subsequently detect deviations from it due to AD.9–11 However, these studies leverage only single modality neuroimaging data and do not take into account the correlation between multiple modalities (e.g. T1-weighted MRI and T2-weighted MRI), which is essential for understanding a multifactorial disease like AD.10,11

In this work, we aim to capture the joint distribution between multiple MRI modalities by proposing a multimodal variational autoencoder normative modelling framework(mmVAE). We use mmVAE as a normative model to learn the brain regional volumes of healthy subjects and subsequently quantify the deviation in brain volumes of AD patients. We compared our proposed mmVAE with a baseline unimodal VAE with a single encoder and decoder, that takes multiple MRI modalities concatenated as unimodal input. We hypothesize that deviations generated by our proposed multimodal framework are more sensitive to disease staging within AD, have a better correlation with patient cognition and have more regions with statistically significant deviations compared to the unimodal baseline model. To the best of our knowledge, ours is the first work on developing a multimodal normative modelling framework that can capture the joint distribution between multiple MRI modalities to identify abnormal brain volume deviations due to the progressive stages of AD.

2. METHODS

2.1 Joint distribution between multiple modalities

Our proposed mmVAE has separate modality-specific encoders and decoders for individual modalities. The main idea is to assume that the joint distribution over the multiple modalities factorizes into a product of single-modality data-generating distributions when conditioned on the latent space. This assumption is used to derive the structure and factorization of the variational posterior. Without loss of generality, we assume that we have M modalities x1,…,xM, which are conditionally independent given the common latent variable z. So, we assume a generative model of the form pθ(x1,..xM,z)=p(z)∏i=1Mpθ(xi∣z). The conditional independence assumptions in the generative model imply a relation among the joint-modality posterior p(z∣x1,..,xM) and the single-modality posteriors p(z∣xi) as shown below.

p(z∣x1,..,xM)=p(x1,..,xM∣z)*p(z)p(x1,..,xM)=p(z)p(x1,..,xM)*∏i=1Mp(xi∣z)=p(z)p(x1,..xM)*∏i=1Mp(z∣xi)p(xi)p(z)=∏i=1Mp(z∣xi)∏i=1M−1p(z)*∏i=1Mp(xi)p(x1,..xM)∝∏i=1Mp(z∣xi)∏i=1M−1p(z)

We see that the joint-modality posterior p(z∣x1,..,xM) is a product of individual single-modality posteriors p(z∣xi), with an additional quotient by the prior p(z). If we approximate p(z∣xi)=q(z∣xi)≡q˜(z∣xi)p(z) where q˜(z∣xi) the underlying inference network for each modality, we can avoid the quotient term p(z). Now, we can approximate the joint posterior as shown below (Equation 1): (1) p(z∣x1,..,xM)∝∏i=1Mp(z∣xi)∏i=1M−1p(z)≡∏i=1M[q˜(z∣x1)p(z)]∏i=1M−1p(z)=p(z)∏i=1M−1q˜(z∣xi)

The joint modality posterior represents the joint distribution between the multiple modalities. This is called the Product-of-Experts (POE) approach (Equation 1) where we approximate the distribution of the joint posterior p(z∣x1,..,xM) by the product of a prior-expert pz and the approximate modality-specific posterior q˜(z∣xi). This product distribution shown in Equation 1 is not solvable in closed form. However, if we approximate both p(z) and q˜(z∣xi) as Gaussian, then a product of Gaussian experts is itself Gaussian with mean μ (Equation 2) and variance σ (Equation 3) where μi and σi are parameters of the i-th Gaussian expert and Ti=σi−1.12 (2) μ=(∑iμi*Ti)(∑iTi)−1

(3) σ=(∑iTi)−1

In our proposed multimodal framework mmVAE, data from the individual modalities are fed into the corresponding encoders to form their respective latent space parameters (mean and variance). The modality-specific latent space parameters are then combined by Equation 2 and Equation 3 to estimate the combined mean and variance. The combined latent space is sampled and fed into the modality-specific decoders to obtain the corresponding reconstructions. The loss function (Equation 4) was optimized by the Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO) which consisted of 2 terms: summation of log liklihood or recomstruction loss for each modality (1st term) and the KL divergence between the joint modality posterior and prior (2nd term). (4) ELBO(X)=Eq(z∣X)[∑xi∈Xλilogpθ(xi∣z)]−βKL(qϕ(z∣X)∥p(z))

where X=x1,x2,…xM denotes the set of M modalities and z represents the latent space sample. KL[p,q] is the Kullback-Leibler divergence between distributions p and q. qϕ(z∣X) and pθ(xi∣z) denote the encoder and decoder respectively. λ and β represent the coefficient weights of the reconstruction loss and KL divergence.

2.2 Multimodal VAE (mmVAE) for normative modeling

Although mmVAE can work for any M number of modalities, we experimented with M=2 in this work (Figure 1). Brain volumes from the cortical and subcortical regions were extracted from T1-weighted MRI scans by the FreeSurfer software (version 5.1).14 Similarly, FreeSurfer was also used to extract the hippocampal region volumes from T2-weighted MRI scans. The regional volumes from the T1-weighted and T2-weighted modalities were used as input to two modality-specific encoders to obtain their corresponding latent space parameters (mean and variance). The latent space parameters of the two modalities were combined by Equation 2 and Equation 3 to estimated the shared latent space. As theoretically proved in the earlier section (Equation 1), the shared latent space models the joint distribution between the two MRI modalities. The shared latent parameters (mean and variance) are then passed through modality-specific decoders to obtain the corresponding reconstructions. We also conditioned mmVAE on covariates (i.e the age and sex of patients, represented as one-hot encoding vectors), to ensure that the deviations in regional brain volumes reflect only the disease pathology and not deviations due to effects of covariates (for details see Section 2.3).

Training on healthy controls

mmVAE was first trained on multimodal MRI (T1-weighted and T2-weighted MRI) of healthy controls. In the training step, mmVAE learns to encode the healthy brain regional volumes of both modalities into a latent distribution and then uses the encoded representation to try to reconstruct the input (brain region volumes) as closely as possible to the original. Next mmVAE is applied on patients with different stages of AD to assess the model sensitivity in estimating the extent to which AD patients deviate from the normal trend. The main idea of the normative approach is that since mmVAE only learns how to reconstruct the brain region volumes of healthy controls, it will be less precise in reconstructing the brain volumes of AD patients.

Calculating deviations of disease patients

For each disease patient (different stages of AD), the deviations dij with respect to the healthy controls were calculated as the absolute signed difference between the original and reconstructed brain region volumes. Here i and j represent the i-th patient and j-th brain region respectively. To account for the fact that the proposed model is not able to perfectly reconstruct the brain region volumes of the healthy subjects, the deviations dij were normalized with respect to the mean μnorm and variance σnorm of deviations dijnorm of the healthy participants, calculated from a separate held-out validation cohort. The final normalized deviations (Z scores) are represented by dijˆ as shown in Equation 5.

(5) dijˆ=dij−μnorm(dijnorm)σnorm(dijnorm)

We identified the brain regions of each patient whose deviations (Z-scores) were significantly different from those of the HC subjects (p&lt;0.05). Since the normalized deviations dijˆ were estimated independently for each brain region for every patient, FDR (False Discovery Rate) correction was applied to control the Type 1 error rate (false positive correction).15 Our proposed framework has been summarized in Figure 1.

2.3 Experimental design

Data

In our analysis, we used two datasets: the UK Biobank16 and the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI)17 For training, we selected multimodal neuroimaging MRI data from 9633 healthy controls (HC) from the UK Biobank dataset after excluding all subjects with recent history of anxiety and depression, and subjects having previous hospitalization associated with diagnosis of mental and behavioral disorders, disease of the nervous system, cerebrovascular diseases, benign neoplasm of meninges, brain and other parts of the central nervous system. The estimated normative model on the UK Biobank was then applied on the multi-modal neuroimaging MRI data of 1136 patients from the ADNI dataset. To ensure data harmonization between UKBB and ADNI participants, the normative model estimated on UKB was fine-tuned on ADNI by a transfer learning approach. The ADNI dataset included 269 cognitively normal (CN) controls and 862 patients: 106 significant memory concern (SMC), 312 early mild cognitive impairment (EMCI), 263 late mild cognitive impairment (LMCI) and 181 AD patients. As patients progress from SMC to the AD stage, the severity of impairment increases. In the ADNI dataset, the MCI stages included participants with different levels of cognitive impairment with the EMCI groups showing milder impairment than the LMCI group.

Image preprocessing

We used the the brain regions’ volumes from the T1-weighted and T2-weighted MRI images as multimodal input for our model. These brain region volumes were preprocessed through the FreeSurfer software (version 5.1)14 and were available in the ADNI data website (http://adni.loni.usc.edu/data-samples/access-data/). The Freesurfer estimation was performed using the “recon-all” command (see14 for more information). From T1-weighted MRI scans, the cortical surface of each hemisphere was parcellated according to the Desikan–Killiany atlas18 and anatomical volumetric measures were obtained via a whole-brain segmentation procedure (Aseg atlas).14 The final data included 64 cortical regions (32 per hemisphere), 31 subcortical regions and 16 hippocampal regions.

As part of the feature pre-processing step, the brain region volumes of each subject were normalized by their intracranial volume (ICV). The healthy controls from UK Biobank data were split into two datasets: 80% for training and 20% was used for validation. The validation set was used for early stopping and preventing overfitting. The 269 CN participants in ADNI were split into 70% for model training and validation, a 15% held-out validation set for estimating the parameters of the normative population (μnorm and σnorm in Equation 5) and a 15% for evaluating the deviations. The volumes of each region were scaled between 0 and 1 using MinMax scaling. The mean and variance calculated in the training set were also used to scale the data in validation and test sets.

Conditioning on covariates (age and sex)

We conditioned our proposed mmVAE on the age and sex of patients, to ensure that the deviations in regional brain volumes reflect only disease pathology and not deviations due to effects of covariates. Both age and sex were transformed into one-hot encoding vectors. After this transformation, each subject had an age vector with 44 positions, where each position corresponds to a year within the range of 47–91 years. In this vector, all positions have value zero except the one that indicates the subject’s age which has a value equal to 1. The subject’s sex was represented in a one-hot encoded vector with two positions, one for male and one for female. Both the modality-specific decoders used these vectors together with the latent code to reconstruct the brain data.

Baselines and implementation details

We compared our proposed framework with a baseline VAE having a unimodal structure with a single encoder and decoder. The baseline framework required the cortical, subcortical and hippocampal region volumes into a concatenated single-modality input. Similar to our proposed mmVAE, the baseline unimodal model was also conditioned on the age and sex of patients. Both VAE models were trained using the Adam optimizer with model hyperparameters as follows: epochs = 500, learning rate = 10−5, batch size = 256 and latent dimension = 64. The encoder and decoder networks consisted of four fully-connected layers of sizes 512, 256, 128, 64 and 64, 128, 256, 512, respectively.

Evaluation metrics

We evaluate the deviations generated by both our proposed mmVAE and the baseline on the following three aspects: (i) sensitivity towards disease staging, (ii) correlation with cognition and (iii) frequency of significance.

Sensitivity towards disease staging: For each disease patient in the ADNI test set, we calculated the mean deviations across all the R brain regions, represented by dimean in Equation 6. We also calculated for each brain region, the mean deviation across all N disease patients in the ADNI test set (djmean in Equation 7). i and j denote patient and brain region respectively. We analyzed both dimean and djmean across different disease categories to validate higher deviations across progressive stages (SMC → EMCI → LMCI → AD.) (6) dimean=∑j=1Rdijˆ=∑j=1R(dij−μnorm(dijnorm)σnorm(dijnorm))

(7) djmean=∑i=1Ndijˆ=∑i=1N(dij−μnorm(dijnorm)σnorm(dijnorm))

Correlation with Cognition: Pearson Correlation Coeffcient between dimean (Equation 6) with 2 measures of cognition AD Assessment Scale (ADAS13)19 and Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test (RAVLT).20 ADAS13 test is a series of 13 cognitive tasks that can be used to assess the level of cognitive dysfunction in AD. RAVLT is a neuropsychological assessment to evaluate the nature and severity of memory impairment over time. High scores of ADAS13 and low scores of RAVLT indicate greater loss in memory and cognition. We hypothesize that more severity in deviation (higher dimean values) will result in worse cognition.

Frequency of significance: Frequency of significance can be defined as the number of times % each region had statistically significant deviations from the healthy subjects (p&lt;0.05 after false positive correction) across all N patients in the ADNI test set. We calculated the frequency of significance for each cortical, subcortical and hippocampal region. The regions with higher frequency of significance correspond to the regions with abnormal brain deviations.

3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Sensitivity of deviation maps towards disease staging

The mean deviations of each patient across all 115 brain regions (dimean in Equation 6) reflect the severity of abnormality or neuroanatomical alteration in the brain due to the AD progression (SMC → EMCI → LMCI → AD.) For both proposed multimodal and baseline unimodal framework, the patients exhibited more abnormality (mean deviations) with increasing disease severity (Figure 2A). We quantify sensitivity by fitting a regression model and calculating the slope across the deviations of each disease category. Higher slope indicates that the proposed multimodal can better capture the neuroanatomical alterations in brain volumes with progressing AD stages (Figure 2A). The pairwise differences in mmvAE-generated deviations between the disease categories were statistically significant (pFDR&lt;0.05) except for the SMC and EMCI pair (Figure 2B).

We also analyzed the mean deviation maps (djmean in Equation 7) of each cortical and subcortical region (T1-weighted MRI) across the different categories of disease patients in the ADNI test set, generated by our proposed mmVAE (Figure 3). Our aim was to validate the observation in Figure 2A that the region-wise deviations increase with the severity of the disease. We can observe that the deviations do not increasingly significantly in the early stages from SMC to EMCI but as we move towards the later stages (i.e LMCI and AD).

Correlation of deviation maps with patient cognition

We analyzed the correlation between the patient-level deviations (dimean in Equation 6) and cognitive assessment scores, ADAS13 and RAVLT. We calculated the Pearson correlation coefficient between the patient-level deviations and ADAS13 and RAVLT (Figure 4) with r indicating the correlation coefficient. Our proposed framework exhibited higher correlation with patient cognition, compared to the baseline.

Identifying brain regions with abnormal deviations

We identified the brain regions whose deviations in brain volumes compared to the healthy controls were statistically significant after false positive correction (pFDR&lt;0.05). For both the T1-weighted MRI and T2-weighted MRI modalities, we calculated the frequency of significance or percent times each cortical, subcortical region (Figure 5) and hippocampal region had statistically significant deviations across all disease patients in the ADNI test set. Regional deviations were more frequently significant for the proposed model compared to the baseline (Figure 5).

The regions with higher frequency of significance across both the models (proposed and baseline) correspond to the regions with abnormal brain deviations. In other words, we can get ideas which of the brain regions have significantly higher deviation in brain volumes due to the progressive stages of AD compared to the other regions. Some of the regions with high frequency of deviations include (i) cortical: Left entorhinal, Left lateralorbitofrontal, Left fusiform, Right precuneus, Right superiorfrontal, (ii) subcortical : Left hippocampus, Right hippocampus, Right amygdala, Corpus Callosum Posterior and (iii) hippocampal: Left presubiculum, Right presubiculum.

4. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

In this work, we proposed multi-modal variational autoencoder (mmVAE) that can capture the joint distribution between multiple modalities and subsequently used as a normative model to identify brain volume deviations in AD. mmVAE takes as input Freesurfer processed brain region volumes from T1-weighted (cortical and subcortical) and T2-weighed (hippocampal) scans of cognitively normal participants to learn the morphological characteristics of the healthy brain. The estimated normative model can then be applied on AD patients to quantify the abnormal deviation in brain volumes due to the effect of the progressive AD stages. We compared our proposed mmVAE with a baseline unimodal VAE with a single encoder and decoder, that takes multiple modalities concatenated as unimodal input. Our experimental results show that modeling joint distribution between the multiple MRI modalities generates deviation maps that are more sensitive to disease staging within AD, have a better correlation with patient cognition and result in higher number of brain regions with statistically significant deviations compared to the unimodal baseline model.

In this work, we demonstrated the utility of mmvAE on a single disease AD. However, our pipeline is generalizable and can easily be extended to other neurogenerative and neuropsychiatric disorders too. The patient-level deviations generated by mmVAE can also be used for clustering patients into data-driven neuroanatomical AD subtypes. We believe that using the deviation maps will provide more interpretable clusters compared to just using brain region volumes alone. We also aim to test the discriminative power of the normative approach by using the deviation maps to classify AD patients vs healthy controls and compare the classification performance with traditional classifier taking only regional brain volumes as input.

Acknowledgments

This work was kindly supported by National Institutes of Health (NIH) grant number NIH R01-AG067103.

Data and Code availability

UK Biobank data are available through a procedure described at http://www.ukbiobank.ac.uk/using-the-resource/. ADNI data are available through an access procedure described at http://adni.loni.usc.edu/data-samples/access-data/.

Figure 1. Our proposed multimodal normative modeling framework (mmVAE). Cortical and subcortical brain volumes extracted from T1-weighted MRI scans (FreeSurfer) and hippocampal volumes extracted from T2-weighted MRI scans (Freesurfer) are used as input to two modality specific encoders. The encoder and decoder networks have 4 fully-connected layers of sizes 512, 256, 128, 64 and 64, 128, 256, 512, respectively, with a latent dimension of 64. The latent space parameters of the individual modalities are combined by the Product of Experts (POE) layer12,13 to form the shared latent space, which feeds the modality-specific decoders for reconstructions. The deviations in brain volumes of disease patients are calculated, normalized with respect to the healthy controls to form Z-scores. The regions with statistically significant deviations are identified (pFDR&lt;0.05) after correcting for false positives using the False Discovery Rate (FDR) procedure.

Figure 2. A: Box plot showing the mean deviation across all 115 brain regions (dimean in Equation 6) across all patients for each of the four AD disease categories. The slope values shown in the figure legend are obtained by fitting a linear regression model across the average patient deviation value of each category (shown by * within each box plot). B: Statistical annotations on dimean generated by our proposed multimodal framework, showing the pairwise statistical comparison (pFDR&lt;0.05) between each disease category. Abbreviations: SMC: Significant Memory Concern, EMCI: Early Mild Cognitive Impairment, LMCI: Late Mild Cognitive Impairment, AD: Alzheimer Disease.

Figure 3. Mean deviation maps (djmeanin Equation 7) of each cortical and subcortical brain region (derived from T1-weighted MRI) generated by our proposed multimodal mmVAE. The deviation maps from left to right represent the lateral and medial surfaces of the left and right hemisphere of the Desikan–Killiany cortical atlas, and coronal and saggital of the aseg subcortical segmentation respectively. The 4 rows represent the different disease categories and the number of patients in each category across which the deviations were averaged. The colormap represents the mean deviation values of each region, with ligher colors indicating more mean deviations. Abbreviations: SMC: Significant Memory Concern, EMCI: Early Mild Cognitive Impairment, LMCI: Late Mild Cognitive Impairment, AD: Alzheimer Disease.

Figure 4. Pearson Correlation between patient-level deviations (dimean in Equation 6) and patient cognition represented by ADAS13 (top row) and RAVLT (bottom row). r indicates the correlation coefficient value. Each point in the plot represents a patient and the dark red line denotes the linear regression fit of the points. Abbreviations: ADAS13: Alzheimer Disease Assessment Scale (ADAS13), RAVLT: Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test.

Figure 5. Frequency of significance: Number of times (%) each cortical and subcortical region volume, derived from T1-weighted MRI data exhibited statistically significant deviations (pFDR&lt;0.05) across all disease patients in the ADNI test set for both proposed multimodal (top) and baseline (unimodal). The frequency maps from left to right represent the lateral and medial surfaces of the left and right hemisphere of the Desikan–Killiany cortical atlas, and coronal and saggital of the aseg subcortical segmentation respectively. The colormap shows the frequency of significance in % with lighter colours representing higher frequency.

Figure 6. Frequency of significance: Number of times (%) each hippocampal region volume, derived from T2-weighted MRI data exhibited statistically significant deviations (pFDR&lt;0.05). across all disease patients in the ADNI test set.


REFERENCES

[1] Dong A , Toledo JB , Honnorat N , Doshi J , Varol E , Sotiras A , Wolk D , Trojanowski JQ , Davatzikos C , and Initiative ADN , “Heterogeneity of neuroanatomical patterns in prodromal alzheimer’s disease: links to cognition, progression and biomarkers,” Brain 140 (3 ), 735–747 (2017).28003242
[2] Marquand AF , Kia SM , Zabihi M , Wolfers T , Buitelaar JK , and Beckmann CF , “Conceptualizing mental disorders as deviations from normative functioning,” Molecular psychiatry 24 (10 ), 1415–1424 (2019).31201374
[3] Marquand AF , Rezek I , Buitelaar J , and Beckmann CF , “Understanding heterogeneity in clinical cohorts using normative models: beyond case-control studies,” Biological psychiatry 80 (7 ), 552–561 (2016).26927419
[4] Huizinga W , Poot DH , Vernooij MW , Roshchupkin GV , Bron EE , Ikram MA , Rueckert D , Niessen WJ , Klein S , Initiative ADN , , “A spatio-temporal reference model of the aging brain,” NeuroImage 169 , 11–22 (2018).29203452
[5] Ziegler G , Ridgway GR , Dahnke R , Gaser C , Initiative ADN , , “Individualized gaussian process-based prediction and detection of local and global gray matter abnormalities in elderly subjects,” NeuroImage 97 , 333–348 (2014).24742919
[6] Kia SM and Marquand AF , “Neural processes mixed-effect models for deep normative modeling of clinical neuroimaging data,” in [International Conference on Medical Imaging with Deep Learning], 297–314, PMLR (2019).
[7] Bethlehem RA , Seidlitz J , Romero-Garcia R , Trakoshis S , Dumas G , and Lombardo MV , “A normative modelling approach reveals age-atypical cortical thickness in a subgroup of males with autism spectrum disorder,” Communications biology 3 (1 ), 1–10 (2020).31925316
[8] Wolfers T , Doan NT , Kaufmann T , Alnæs D , Moberget T , Agartz I , Buitelaar JK , Ueland T , Melle I , Franke B , , “Mapping the heterogeneous phenotype of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder using normative models,” JAMA psychiatry 75 (11 ), 1146–1155 (2018).30304337
[9] Kumar S and Sotiras A , “Normvae: Normative modeling on neuroimaging data using variational autoencoders,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.04903 (2021).
[10] Pinaya WH , Mechelli A , and Sato JR , “Using deep autoencoders to identify abnormal brain structural patterns in neuropsychiatric disorders: A large-scale multi-sample study,” Human brain mapping 40 (3 ), 944–954 (2019).30311316
[11] Pinaya WH , Scarpazza C , Garcia-Dias R , Vieira S , Baecker L , F da Costa P , Redolfi A , Frisoni GB , Pievani M , Calhoun VD , , “Using normative modelling to detect disease progression in mild cognitive impairment and alzheimer’s disease in a cross-sectional multi-cohort study,” Scientific reports 11 (1 ), 1–13 (2021).33414495
[12] Cao Y and Fleet DJ , “Generalized product of experts for automatic and principled fusion of gaussian process predictions,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1410.7827 (2014).
[13] Wu M and Goodman N , “Multimodal generative models for scalable weakly-supervised learning,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 31 (2018).
[14] Fischl B , Salat DH , Busa E , Albert M , Dieterich M , Haselgrove C , Van Der Kouwe A , Killiany R , Kennedy D , Klaveness S , , “Whole brain segmentation: automated labeling of neuroanatomical structures in the human brain,” Neuron 33 (3 ), 341–355 (2002).11832223
[15] Benjamini Y and Hochberg Y , “Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and powerful approach to multiple testing,” Journal of the Royal statistical society: series B (Methodological) 57 (1 ), 289–300 (1995).
[16] Sudlow C , Gallacher J , Allen N , Beral V , Burton P , Danesh J , Downey P , Elliott P , Green J , Landray M , , “Uk biobank: an open access resource for identifying the causes of a wide range of complex diseases of middle and old age,” PLoS medicine 12 (3 ), e1001779 (2015).25826379
[17] Mueller SG , Weiner MW , Thal LJ , Petersen RC , Jack CR , Jagust W , Trojanowski JQ , Toga AW , and Beckett L , “Ways toward an early diagnosis in alzheimer’s disease: the alzheimer’s disease neuroimaging initiative (adni),” Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 1 (1 ), 55–66 (2005).
[18] Desikan RS , Ségonne F , Fischl B , Quinn BT , Dickerson BC , Blacker D , Buckner RL , Dale AM , Maguire RP , Hyman BT , , “An automated labeling system for subdividing the human cerebral cortex on mri scans into gyral based regions of interest,” Neuroimage 31 (3 ), 968–980 (2006).16530430
[19] Mohs RC , Knopman D , Petersen RC , Ferris SH , Ernesto C , Grundman M , Sano M , Bieliauskas L , Geldmacher D , Clark C , , “Development of cognitive instruments for use in clinical trials of antidementia drugs: additions to the alzheimer’s disease assessment scale that broaden its scope.,” Alzheimer disease and associated disorders (1997).
[20] Matloubi S , Mohammadzadeh A , Jafari Z , and Baghban AA , “Effect of background music on auditory-verbal memory performance.,” Audiology 23 (5 ) (2014).
