LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9814863
21942
J Alzheimers Dis
J Alzheimers Dis
Journal of Alzheimer's disease : JAD
1387-2877
1875-8908

36530084
10105523
10.3233/JAD-220783
NIHMS1890166
Article
Rationale and Design of the PARTNER Trial: Partnered Rhythmic Rehabilitation for Enhanced Motor-Cognition in Prodromal Alzheimer’s Disease
Cao Ke a
Bay Allison A. a
Hajjar Ihab b
Wharton Whitney c
Goldstein Felicia d
Qiu Deqiang e
Prusin Todd a
McKay J. Lucas dg
Perkins Molly M. ai
Hackney Madeleine E. PhD acfhi*
a Division of Geriatrics and Gerontology, Department of Medicine, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA
b Department of Neurology, University of Texas Southwestern, Dallas, TX, USA
c Emory University School of Nursing, Atlanta, GA, USA
d Department of Neurology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA
e Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA
f Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA
g Department of Bioinformatics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA
h Atlanta VA Center for Visual and Neurocognitive Rehabilitation, Decatur, GA, USA
i Birmingham/Atlanta VA Geriatric Research, Education, and Clinical Center (GRECC), Atlanta, GA, USA
* Correspondence to: Madeleine E. Hackney, PhD, Associate Professor, Department of Medicine, Division of Geriatrics and Gerontology, Emory University School of Medicine, Research Health Scientist, Rehabilitation R&amp;D Center, Atlanta VA Health Care System, 1841 Clifton Rd. NE, Atlanta, GA 30329, USA. mehackn@emory.edu; madeleine.hackney@gmail.com; madeleine.hackney@va.gov.
9 4 2023
2023
15 4 2023
91 3 10191033
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Background:

Functional decline in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is impacted by impaired ability to integrate and modulate complex cognitive and motor abilities, commonly known as motor-cognitive integration. Impaired motor-cognitive integration occurs in the early stages of AD, prodromal AD (pAD), and may precede other symptoms. Combined motor and cognitive training have been recommended for people with pAD and need to be better researched. Our data suggest that partnered rhythmic rehabilitation (PRR) improves motor-cognitive integration in older adults with cognitive impairment. PRR is an ideal intervention to simultaneously target cardiovascular, social, and motor-cognitive domains important to AD.

Objective/Methods:

We propose to conduct a 1-year Phase II, single-blind randomized controlled trial using PRR in 66 patients with pAD. Participants will be assigned to three months of biweekly sessions, followed by nine months of weekly sessions of PRR or group walking (WALK) with 1 : 1 allocation. Group walking in the control group will allow us to compare physical exercise alone versus the added benefit of the cognitively engaging elements of PRR.

Results/Conclusion:

Using an intent-to-treat approach, this innovative pilot study will 1) Determine acceptability, safety, tolerability, and satisfaction with PRR; 2) Compare efficacy of PRR versus WALK for improving motor-cognitive integration and identify the most sensitive endpoint for a Phase III trial from a set of motor-cognitive, volumetric MRI, and cognitive measures. The study will additionally explore potential neural, vascular, and inflammatory mechanisms by which PRR affects pAD to derive effect size of these intermediary measures and aid us in estimating sample size for a future trial.

Dance therapy
exercise
multitasking behavior
neuroprotection

pmcINTRODUCTION

As of 2019, an estimated 5.8 million Americans live with Alzheimer’s disease (AD) [1]. Limited interventions exist that prevent deterioration of function in persons with AD, a complex disease with multiple risk factors. With the current AD epidemic, therapies are needed to curb symptoms and alter the underlying disease course. Interventions that target multiple factors implicated in AD rather than a single factor are more likely to be successful. Shortcomings of available treatments may be innovatively addressed by targeting cardiovascular systems while also targeting motor-cognitive integration.

Motor-cognitive integration, such as dual tasking, involves concurrent use of systems crucial for balance (vestibular, visual, and somatosensory) and cognitive domains (executive function, visuospatial, and attentional/working memory). AD impairs motor-cognitive integration, which is needed during activities with both motor and cognitive components [2–5]. Impaired dual tasking can lead to falls in prodromal AD (pAD) [6]. Lower gray matter volume and poor balance, which are both associated with motor-cognitive impairment, are predictive of falls in older adults with pAD [7]. In 20 individuals with pAD, those with slowed gait in a motor-cognitive task had a 2.05-fold greater risk of smaller cortical volume and a 63% higher probability of exhibiting abnormal metabolite ratios in the primary motor cortex [8]. As such, motor-cognitive stimulation is recommended for older adults with cognitive impairment [9].

Executive function deficits, commonly occurring with AD, negatively impact autonomy and functional performance and motor-cognitive ability [10–12]. Therapy to improve motor-cognition should involve executive function skills like selective attention, inhibition, and switching combined with physical exercise [13]. Such skills are required by partnered rhythmic rehabilitation (PRR), a partnered social dance of moderate intensity that involves walking in different step patterns to varied rhythms with a partner [14]. PRR may rehabilitate motor-cognitive integration because we believe it requires cognitive engagement in the following domains: 1) Attention because participants need to divide attention between postural control, the current pattern, trajectory and their partner [15]; 2) Executive function underlying the planning and organization of steps, and the inhibition and switching needed to leave one step or rhythm and begin another [16, 17]; 3) Spatial cognition since PRR involves learning coordinated spatial relationships between people, places, and objects; 4) Memory for storing new steps and recalling previously learned steps in a sequence [18]; 5) Auditory processes for detecting and interpreting musical beats and coordinating body movement with external musical source and partner; 6) Working memory for learning steps and practicing them immediately; and 7) Language for new vocabulary for a dance context and linking steps into phrases [19]. Also, PRR involves frequent and consistent human-human contact, which may aid therapy in pAD. Therapeutic touch benefits emotion and behavior for those with dementia, which leads to reduced anxiety, decreased dysfunctional behavior, and reduced overall agitation [20–23].

A multi-domain and efficient intervention (Fig. 1), PRR trains motor-cognitive integration and affects cardiovascular, neural, and socio-behavioral areas. These areas are directly and indirectly affected by AD [24]. Cardiovascular exercise can address vascular dysfunction, which is common in AD and further aggravates AD neurodegeneration [25, 26]. Increased arterial stiffness predicts future cognitive decline by propagating amyloid deposition in the brain [27, 28]. Angiotensin II elevates blood pressure, causes smooth muscle hypertrophy, and releases endothelial-related inflammatory mediators that increase stiffness [29, 30]. Cardiovascular fitness and increased regional brain volumes in the medial temporal and parietal cortices in pAD are associated, suggesting maintained cardiovascular fitness may alter AD-related brain atrophy [31].

We have compelling data that PRR improves mobility and gait deficits in older adults with Parkinson’s disease [32–35], older adults with low vision [36], motor-cognition in older adults with cognitive impairment [37], and impaired spatial cognition in individuals with Parkinson’s disease [38]. Other work showed 129 people with amnestic mild cognitive impairment (MCI) who participated in ballroom dancing performed better post-treatment on neuropsychological assessments than controls [39]. In a cross-sectional study of older adults with MCI, participants with previous dancing experience performed better at learning and memory tasks [40]. In long-term care residents with mild-moderate cognitive impairment, 93% completed the study [41]. However, no previous randomized controlled trials have examined benefits of PRR in individuals with pAD, for whom there is evidence of concern about a change in cognition, in comparison with the person’s previous level. The concern can be obtained from the patient, an informant, or a clinician. Impaired episodic memory is most commonly seen in MCI patients who subsequently progress to a diagnosis of AD dementia [42].

We present the design and rationale of a pilot clinical trial to evaluate whether PRR can enhance motor-cognition in pAD compared to a walking program—a cardiovascular exercise that demands less coordination. This trial will also determine whether PRR is efficacious in improving cognitive domains, which include executive function, visuospatial, memory, vascular function, increasing hippocampal and cortical thickness, and decreasing systemic inflammatory markers. We hypothesize that 12 months of the PRR training dose and structured syllabus are safe and tolerable for subjects with pAD and will result in improved motor-cognitive integration.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

The PARTNER study is approved by Emory University Institutional Review Board (IRB00110350, NCT04029623). NCT04029623 was first posted July 23, 2019. The study is funded by the United States National Institutes of Health/National Institute of Aging (NH/NIA) (1R01AG062691–01). The study will take place at an MCI day program facility in a university healthcare system in a large metro area in the Southeast United States.

Overall study design

The PARTNER study is a phase II single-blind randomized clinical trial to assess the safety, tolerability, and efficacy of PRR in individuals with pAD. Participants will be randomly assigned with 1 : 1 allocation to either PRR or WALK interventions for one year and will be exposed to de-escalating doses: 3 months of biweekly 90 minutes sessions (Training phase) and nine months of weekly 90 minutes sessions (Maintenance phase). The walking group will serve as a control to isolate the cognitively engaging elements of PRR. The walk intervention is considered highly standardized, widely used and is recommended by primary care doctors and geriatricians nationwide to patients with a variety of health conditions. Therefore, the safety of the walk intervention is not in question.

To improve efficiency in this phase II trial, we will use stratified randomization to ensure equal distribution of potential confounders (age and gender). Randomization will be performed by the study coordinator after entry of appropriate covariates (e.g., baseline physical activity levels) using the REDCap randomization module. Investigators and staff but not instructors will be blinded to treatment assignment. Participants will know their treatment but will not know if it is experimental or control. Participants will be randomized after their baseline assessments.

The proposed study has two aims. The first aim determines the acceptability, safety, tolerability, and satisfaction with PRR in pAD. Acceptability is determined by the barriers and facilitators that are revealed in the qualitative approach using focus groups prior to the beginning of the trial. Safety is defined as less than 1 fall occurring during PRR classes. Tolerability is defined as the attrition rate for classes, and satisfaction will be revealed with the Exit questionnaire which indicates the level of agreement with statements that participants enjoyed the class and would continue.

The second aim examines the efficacy of PRR versus WALK for improving motor-cognitive integration in pAD and identify sensitive endpoints to power a future phase III trial. Further, the PARTNER trial has sub aims that explore potential mechanisms by which PRR affects pAD via functional brain measures, vascular, and inflammatory measures.

Primary outcomes are the number of injurious falls during PRR participation, attrition rate, acceptability and satisfaction qualitative measures via pre- and post-session focus group and Four-Square Step Test (FSST). Secondary outcomes include neuropsychological, motor, and psychosocial metrics. All measures are thoroughly described below in Study Visits Specifics. Table 1 below shows the measures at their various stages.

Power and sample size

Previous trials demonstrated differential effect sizes of PRR versus Education contact control of Cohen’s standardized d = 1.2 on the FSST. This effect was obtained in a sample of community dwelling older adults with MoCA scores indicating cognitive impairment (M = 22.4, SD = 2.01) [37]. As these individuals were not definitively diagnosed as pAD, we have conservatively assumed an attenuated estimated effect of d = 0.50 in FSST after PRR in pAD. At present, the effects of WALK on FSST in pAD are unknown. For secondary outcomes, based on the previous three-month study of community dwelling older adults, we expect medium effects sizes of d ≥ 0.70, according to Cohen’s suggested cutoff values [43]. A one-way ANOVA with two groups (PRR versus WALK) performed at posttest would be able to discriminate an effect size difference of 1.2–0.5 = 0.7 with &gt; 90% power at alpha = 0.05. As described below, this analysis is used for power estimation purposes as an approximation of the planned analysis using linear mixed models.

To account for 25% attrition, we will enroll an extra 18 pAD patients (total n = 66) to achieve a total of 48 participants projected to have complete data at posttest. All data points collected will be entered into analyses with treatment group coded as determined during initial randomization in an intent to treat approach.

Participants

We plan to recruit 66 participants (≥50 years of age) with pAD, i.e., MCI due primarily due to AD, as judged by a clinician [42]. Therefore, patients have amnestic MCI, as defined by the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative criteria. Interested participants will be invited to complete a phone screening with research staff. The phone screening involves a medical questionnaire, blind Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA), Subjective Memory Concerns Questionnaire, Telephone Interview for Cognitive Status, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) history and screening questionnaire. After screening eligible participants will be evaluated by a board-certified neuropsychologist to determine whether they meet diagnostic criteria for MCI. This will be accomplished through a review of the phone screening results and their available records including cognitive testing and Clinical Dementia Rating Scale with a score of 0.5 required in the memory domain. Participants must be able to walk for 10 or more feet with or without an assistive device, have completed six grades of education or have a stable work history, and achieve less than 150 minutes of moderate intensity or 75 minutes of vigorous intensity aerobic activity per week. Exclusion criteria include acute medical illness that requires hospitalization, history of stroke in the past 3 years, on medication that could adversely affect cognition, or diagnosis of confounding neurological or psychological conditions.

Participants are recruited through the Emory University Goizueta Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center, in collaboration with their Minority Engagement Core/Outreach and Recruitment Core, community activities, health fairs, advertisements, recruitment flyers, and our previous related research studies. We will obtain informed consent from the participants prior to participation in the study. Participants are compensated with monetary gift cards (in an amount approved by the IRB) for each completed study visit.

Adverse events

The study will use widely used and approved procedures including valid clinical, standard and reliable mobility exams, commonly used neuropsychological assessments, psychosocial questionnaires and interview materials, blood pressure measurements, brain MRI, pulse wave velocity (PWV), and blood draws. Neuropsychological assessment may be accompanied by anxiety, frustration, and overall fatigue. The attachment and removal of a blood pressure cuff, cuffs for venous occlusion, and PWV probe on the neck may cause mild discomfort. In rare instances, conductive gel may cause a transient skin reaction. The procedure will be stopped in that case. Blood draws can cause mild pain in the arm and may cause bruising, infection, and occasional fainting. All blood draws will be performed by an experienced certified phlebotomist. Brain imaging requires the participant to stay still and lie down for a prolonged time which may cause boredom and minimal reversible back pain. Because of the closed space and noise, undergoing an MRI may be associated with anxiety or panic reactions. Claustrophobic-prone individuals will not undergo MRI. We have found that preparation of the patients for brain imaging and communication with them during the procedure mitigates discomfort in those patients who are anxious about scanning.

Since the study procedures are not greater than minimal risk, severe adverse events (SAEs) are not expected. However, if any unanticipated problems related to the research involving risks to subjects or others happen during the study (including SAEs) these will be reported to the IRB in accordance with Emory IRB and NIA guidelines. AEs that are not serious but that are notable and could involve risks to subjects will be summarized in narrative or other format and submitted to the IRB at the time of continuing review.

INTERVENTION

Partnered rhythmic rehabilitation

PRR is adapted from Argentine Tango, that targets the postural control system. PRR involves learning complex stepping patterns and fosters tactile communication of motor goals between partners, enhancing social interaction’s effect on cognition. PRR was initially adapted for older adults with Parkinson’s disease [44]. Instructors have undergone 12 hours of American Council on Exercise-certified training on PRR methods, motor impairments, and fall detection and prevention trained by the principal investigator. All participants will be carefully monitored, and classes will consist of 10 or fewer people with pAD to maximize safety. During the pandemic, classes will be smaller with 4–6 people with pAD in each class. The class includes practicing previously learned steps, a 20-minute standing warmup, 45 minutes of partnering and rhythmic enhancing exercises, and a 5-minute cool down. Novel steps will be amalgamated with previously learned steps. Participants dance both leading and following roles, learn how to interpret motor goals through touch, and perform activities to foster understanding of temporal relationship of movement to music. Participants will dance with a new partner every 15–20 minutes.

WALK

Participants in WALK will receive equivalent dose, volume, frequency, intensity, and duration of exercise to PRR. Walking for exercise expends 4.28 metabolic equivalents [45], similar to 4.3 metabolic equivalents spent on tango dancing [46]. Instructors will be trained in a manualized plan for the WALK intervention. The walking session consists of a 20-minute warmup and tips for safe walking mechanics such as head up, shoulders relaxed, abdominals engaged, heel strike, roll and toe off; keep natural stride length, and speed up cadence if increased speed is desired, 45 minutes of walking with breaks ad libitum, and 5 minutes of stretching and balance exercises. Per American Heart Association guidelines for walking groups, we encourage walkers to drink about a cup of water every 15 minutes [47]. Participants will start slowly and work their way up to 60–65% HRmax, set clear goals regarding speed and length of walking, and document the way they felt after the walk. We will use a designated, safe, non-cluttered area for walking. The walking session will take place in small groups with research assistants and family members to control for the social effects of intervention.

Intervention dosage

The intervention dose is determined by the amount of time spent in class and the frequency of weekly attendance. One class lasts 90 minutes. In the Training phase, participants will receive 20 biweekly (90 minutes) lessons over 12–14 weeks. In the Maintenance phase, participants will attend a weekly (90 minutes) lesson at least 3 times per month for nine months. Participants will therefore be asked to attend once per week during Maintenance phase. All classes (walk or PRR) will begin with a 20-minute warm-up followed by 45 minutes of allocation specific training, e.g., walk or dance, and a 15-minute cool-down. Polar Heart rate monitors paired with a tablet for readings will be used to record patients’ heart rates five times: at the beginning of class, after the warmup and thrice (at 15 minutes intervals) during the 45-minute phase. Participants will also be asked for their RPE (Rate of Perceived Exertion) on the Borg rating scale each time their heart rate is recorded. During the 45-minute phase all participants are expected to work in the 60–65% HRmax range and give values of 4–6 for their RPE. They will be coached accordingly to ease up or exert themselves a little more if the values do not fall within that range. The main question of this trial regards whether the type of exercise matters for improving motor-cognitive function, therefore the intensity is matched between groups.

Intervention development

Between October – November 2019, we conducted two preintervention focus groups with 15 pAD participants to assess barriers and facilitators of PRR as a therapy for motor-cognitive performance of functional activity issues [48]. Findings from the pre-intervention focus group showed that most participants understand the benefits of exercises and the importance of social interactions through group exercise. Many reported barriers to exercises, such as increased caregiver responsibilities, active pain, and concerns about falling. Results from pre-intervention focus group informed implementation of interventions. To increase social interactions, engagement, and reduce multiple responsibilities, we invited caregivers to take part in interventions. To reduce concerns about falling and pain, we disseminated education packages and provided verbal reminders regarding safe exercise strategies.

At year 4 we will conduct two post-intervention focus groups with 8–10 participants each to assess: 1) Satisfaction with PRR; 2) Perceived effect of PRR on participation in life’s activities and on psychosocial support; 3) Impact of touch and connection on therapy; 4) Overall perceived impact of cognitive impairment on benefits/results from PRR; and 5) Solicit recommendations for future trials. The study team will use these year 4 qualitative data to document strengths, challenges, and lessons learned on feasibility and implementation for future studies.

Similarities and differences between PRR and WALK

Both classes have a similar format, report to the same facilities, and interact with the same research assistants. All participants wear heart rate monitors, report their Rate of Perceived Exertion (RPE) several times during classes and are provided feedback regarding their target heart rate range. We expect that heart rates will be similar between PRR and WALK. For differences, PRR involves short but complex walking patterns, varied rhythms and human-human physical interactions via touch. Through touch, cognitive engagement, and enriched environment, we hypothesize PRR’s effect on motor-cognition will be superior to WALK.

Fidelity and safety

To ensure intervention fidelity, the investigators and coordinators will stay in frequent contact with the interventionists via weekly email or calls. The instructors will follow a codified syllabus for the PRR intervention with 24 distinct lesson plans that allow flexibility within each plan. The PRR syllabus has been disseminated and implemented in an older adult cohort with cognitive impairment and for people with PD. [44]. Trained monitors and investigators will attend the classes and ascertain that the correct syllabus is being taught on a given day in adherence to PRR instruction principles and guidelines. For the WALK intervention, investigators and coordinators will make bimonthly random checks of the walking groups to ensure adherence to the American Heart Association guidelines for walking groups [49].

Instructor and staff training

To minimize the risk of exercise related injuries, all interventionists, assistants, and involved caregivers will be trained by the principal investigator in an effective Balance Management program. During all testing and classes, the interventionist and trained assistants will continually monitor participants for reasons to discontinue evaluations and training including fatigue and postural instability. Only trained assistants with no mobility or neurological impairments will partner individuals with pAD.

In addition to already having national certification from an accredited exercise organization, all WALK and PRR Instructors must undergo a 12-hour instructor training course in general community exercise for older adults with movement and cognitive impairments, created and offered by Dr. Hackney and physical therapy colleagues. The General Exercise instructor training course will be based on the successful course Dr. Hackney and colleagues created for people with Parkinson’s disease (individuals with both motor and cognitive impairments), which is approved by the American Council on Exercise. With this training, instructors will obtain a working knowledge of the pathophysiology of aging and MCI, medical interventions, and disease progression.

After training, the instructors will understand how sensory, motor and cognitive symptoms impact walking, balance, flexibility, strength and function in older adults; understand the research on exercise interventions for older adults, including physical, cognitive, and emotional benefits; learn to develop an individual and/or group exercise plan that is safe and addresses specific impairments found in older adults; recognize how to collaborate with healthcare professionals across the continuum of care to facilitate improved outcomes. All instructors must pass a written and practical exam after the training course.

In addition, the PRR training is a manualized intervention and PRR instructors will undergo 12 hours of PRR-specific training before instructing any classes. The PRR training has been American Council on Exercise approved. The 12 hour training program consists of information about motor and cognitive impairments, safe exercise principles for older, deconditioned adults, falls risk and prevention; how to maintain safety in the class and experiential falls prevention techniques; the sections of the PRR class; exercises designed to enhance partnering communication skills and rhythmic entrainment; breaking down and learning a complete syllabus that describes the plan for each lesson including rhythms, steps of the day, and embellishments; skills for effective class management. All instructors must pass a written and practical exam after the training course.

Intervention adherence

Participants will be encouraged to attend their lessons regularly on a twice-weekly basis during Training phase and on a weekly basis during Maintenance phase. They will be encouraged to attend on the same days and times every week. If participants do not show up for a regularly scheduled class, they will be immediately called to determine reasons for not participating. Participants without reliable transportation will be offered transportation. Study staff will troubleshoot with all participants to alleviate all barriers to participation. Study staff will track attendance with careful records.

Potential approaches to use during pandemic

To enhance the safety of our participants during in-person visits during pandemic, we will adhere to the Center for Disease Control and Prevention COVID-19 guidelines by wearing gloves, goggles, masks, and other personal protective equipment as required, reducing class size, and encouraging hand washing before, during and after sessions. For the PRR intervention, participants will dance with a hula hoop between partners to create social distance. A temperature check and a COVID-19 screening will be conducted prior to all in-person meetings and intervention sessions. Should a pandemic require increased social distancing or lock down, there are procedures in place to enable virtual training for participants if necessary. However, virtual training will be used as a last resort. During virtual sessions, participants and their caregivers will be provided with an Emergency Preparedness procedure handout and contact information will be exchanged to prevent emergencies.

Screening, baseline, post-training, 7–8 month follow up, post maintenance

Measures are detailed in Tables 1 and 2. All eligible participants will attend a screening visit one month prior to baseline assessments. The screening visit will include reviewing and signing informed consent, completing health questionnaires about participant’s demographic and health background, fall risk using the Stay Independent Screener as recommended by The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Stopping Elderly Accidental Deaths and Injuries Initiative [50], Edinburgh Handedness Survey, Telehealth Technology and Skills Access Survey, and the Logical Memory subtest from the Wechsler Memory Scale-Revised [51].

Participants will be assessed at baseline, 3 months (immediately post-Training), and 12 months (immediately post-Maintenance). The assessment includes cognitive and motor examinations, clinical blood tests, brain MRI, and non-invasive vascular assessments. Between 7 and 8 months, MoCA [52], Stay Independent Screener [50], Timed Up and Go, 30 s Chair Stand [53], and Tandem Stance [54] will be re-administered to screen for deteriorated cognitive status and heightened risk of falling based on age-normed published cut-offs for each test. Participants with a MoCA score less than 18 will be referred to a board-certified neuropsychologist for a Clinical Dementia Rating Scale [55]. If the participant achieves a Clinical Dementia Rating Scale score greater than 0.5 in the memory box, the study team will consult with the study physician to evaluate the safety of the participant to continue the study. See Table 2, study timeline for recruitment schedule.

STUDY VISIT SPECIFICS

Tables 3 and 4 list the respective psychosocial questionnaires and neuropsychological assessments that are administered during the trial.

Self-administered psychosocial questionnaires

Motor-cognitive integration assessment

Primary measure: Four Square Step Test

The Four-Square Step Test (FSST) is associated with cognitive function and mobility dual tasks [77–79] and is predictive of fall risk in older adults [80]. FSST requires participants to step clockwise then counterclockwise into four squares created by rods arranged on the ground in a plus sign. Participants are instructed to perform FSST “as quickly and as safely as you can,” to not touch the rods and make both feet contact the floor in each square. Timing begins when the participant initiates movement and stops when both feet are back in the starting square after completing the sequence. Trials will be repeated if the participant does not understand the instructions, fails to complete the sequence accurately, loses balance, or touches a rod. A practice and two successful trials will be recorded, and the fastest time will be selected for analyses.

Secondary measures: Timed Up and Go – Cognitive, Body Position Spatial Task, and other mobility assessments

The Timed Up and Go (TUG)-Cognitive assessment involves the TUG test while also counting backwards by 3 s (serial 3 s) from a number between 20 and 100 [81]. The Body Position Spatial Task (BPST) is modeled after the Reverse Corsi Blocks, a validated visuospatial memory task [82, 83]. The BPST incorporates spatial memory and navigational skills while maintaining posture. The examiner verbally and visually shows a series of side, forward and turning steps, which the participant repeats. Demand for postural control, navigation, spatial imagery and memory, and dual-tasking makes the BPST appropriate for evaluating motor-cognitive function after PRR participation [37, 38]. Other mobility endpoints include Short Physical Performance Battery [84], the Mini-BESTest [85], the 6-minute walk test [86], preferred, backward and fast gait speed, using stopwatch, and the APDM opal wearable sensors. (APDM Inc, Portland, OR)

Neuroimaging

Volumetric and ASL-MRI approach and processing

A volumetric MRI scan will be conducted to examine hippocampal volume, cortical thickness, and white matter hyperintensity (WMH). High-resolution 3T anatomical images (T1 s) will be acquired using a 3D MPRAGE Sequence and WMH regions will be identified by a 3D T2 Fluid Attenuated Inversion Recovery (FLAIR) Fast Spin Echo sequence. Obtained images will be co-registered using a within-subject inter-modal alignment between structural and perfusion images. A 3D multi-echo gradient echo sequence for quantitative susceptibility mapping (QSM) (repetition time (TR)/first echo time (TE)/ΔTE=44 ms/5.3 ms/4.3 ms, 8 echoes, base resolution 256×256, slice thickness 2 mm, GRAPPA factor = 2, field of view (FOV) 220 mm) will be included to detect microbleeds, which will be defined based on Microbleed Study Group criteria [87]. FLAIR and QSM will be assessed at baseline and 12 months.

We will use a pseudo-continuous arterial spin labeling (ASL) sequence [88–90] for measuring cerebral blood flow. Resting perfusion will be calculated and converted to ml/100 g/min (global and composite ROI) [89, 91]. Regional perfusion will be quantified in each hemisphere [92]. These scans will be performed at both baseline and 12 months.

T1-weighted images will identify cerebrospinal fluid and white and gray matter (WM, GM), both global and regional. FreeSurfer analysis suite (http://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu) will conduct automated extraction of volumes of targeted regions (in mm3), including hippocampal volume and cortical thickness [93–95]. WMH volumes (in mm3) will be obtained by performing segmentation on FLAIR images. All volumes will be adjusted for intracranial volume in analyses. Although changes in these structural metrics could be small, they serve as good baseline measures to characterize patients and are used for anatomical identification. Cerebral blood flow (CBF) maps generated from ASL will be compared longitudinally to detect changes in perfusion after PRR treatment. We will also assess whether changes in CBF correlate with changes in motor-cognitive integration scores per the FSST.

Task-based functional MRI description

Laying supine, participants are engaged in a touch task with an MRI compatible bear claw in the right hand. Participants are exposed to three conditions, interweaved with rest conditions. They see a screen depicting “notice the touch”, “notice the touch, listen, and watch”, or “listen and watch”. During conditions that reference “touch”, participants feel an examiner touching their distal forearm and exerting gentle pressure in time to an audible rhythmic beat. In conditions that reference “listen”, participants hear commercial recordings of Argentine tango music. Each song is used once in a run with 15 second clips taken from the songs. Participants tap the claw when they hear the music. During conditions that reference “watch,” participants watch a screen with a man and woman, viewed from the shoulders down clasping forearms and performing simple tango-like steps. Participants are instructed, “When you see people dancing on the screen, imagine that you are the one dancing. Pretend you are dancing to the music, keeping in step with the beat. Please tap your finger along with the beat while you imagine that you are dancing”.

There are twenty-four, 15 second blocks of each of the three conditions, “touch”, “touch, listen, and watch”, and “listen and watch” across 4 runs. Block order is randomized in each functional run. Throughout the first 3 seconds of each block, a voice cue indicates whether the participant will experience a “touch”, “listen and watch”, or “touch, listen or watch” trial. With 12 second rest blocks imposed between each block; the sequence order is counter-balanced across participants. (TR = 7.24 s, TE = 32 ms, 72 slices with 10% gap, FOV = 208 mm, flip angle 52°, voxel size 2×2×2 mm3).

Clinical blood and vascular assessments

Non-invasive arterial stiffness is the strongest vascular indicator of cognitive decline and amyloid content in the brain [27, 28]. Pulse-wave velocity (PWV) will be measured between carotid and femoral arteries using the Sphygmocor device (Atcor Medical, Australia) that records sequential high-quality pressure waveforms at peripheral pulse sites using a high-fidelity tonometer [96]. PWV and AI provide complimentary information about vascular stiffness.

At baseline, 3 months, and 12 months, blood samples will be collected after an eight-hour overnight fast. Inflammatory variables include targeted indices linked to AD and change over three months [97]. We will investigate: Cytokines and chemokines (including interleukin-6 (IL-6), interleukin-7, interleukin-8, interleukin-9, interleukin-10, interferon induced protein 10, macrophage derived chemokine, monocyte chemoattractant protein 1, transforming growth factor-α, and tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α); serum amyloid protein; endothelial markers ICAM-1 and VCAM-1). Emphasis will be on TNF-α and IL-6 because they are elevated in and contribute to AD pathogenesis [98, 99]. Increased aerobic exercise linearly decreases both IL-6 and TNF-α serum levels in individuals with chronic diseases associated with elevated inflammation levels [100, 101].

ANALYTIC PLAN

Qualitative outcomes

The NVIVO 12 software is used to manage and facilitate qualitative data analysis [102]. Data are analyzed and interpreted using a recursive six-phase reflexive thematic analysis approach [103].

Feasibility outcomes

Safety: To evaluate safety, the primary outcome is the number of injurious falls as a result of participation in PRR. We will conclude that PRR is safe if no injurious falls are observed during PRR classes. We prespecified this safety criterion based on the PI’s experience delivering PRR instruction to &gt; 500 older participants with sensory and motor-cognitive impairments. Tolerability: We will conclude that PRR is tolerable if attrition does not exceed the prespecified criterion of 15%. For attrition, we will use a confidence interval approach (stats:prop.test in R software) to compare observed attrition proportion to the null proportion 15%. Acceptability: We will assess acceptability by identifying barriers and facilitators to participation and beliefs regarding PRR as therapy through focus groups conducted prior to the trial using methodologies developed previously [48]. Satisfaction: Focus groups conducted after the trial will elicit themes related to satisfaction or lack thereof.

Efficacy outcomes

We will use linear mixed models (lmerTest:lmer in R software) to compare the efficacy of PRR versus WALK on improving the primary outcome measure, FSST. The FSST score is a continuous variable measured in seconds. In older people with significant fall history the median value (±IQR) of the FSST is 12.01 (9.75–14.69) [78]. Linear mixed models will be created that predict FSST scores based on Group (PRR versus WALK), Time (Study Month 0 versus 3 versus 12), Group by Time interaction (Group•Time), with a random intercept for each participant. Group indicator variables will be coded such that WALK is the reference group. We will conclude that there are significant differential effects of PRR and WALK if a significant Group•Time interaction term is identified. Separate linear mixed models with similar structure will be used to analyze secondary outcome measures, including measures of motor-cognitive function (TUG, BPST), cognition (CORSI), independence (IADL and CPF), neuroimaging (fMRI, Global, and ROI Perfusion) and vascular assessment outcomes (Pulse wave velocity and Augmentation index).

TREATMENT OF NON-COMPLIANCE AND MISSING DATA

Participants will be followed until the study ends, whether the participant is still receiving or complying with treatment. Outcomes will be analyzed according to original randomization scheme in an intent-to-treat approach. For missing data due to withdrawal, death, or other irreconcilable loss to follow-up, primary analyses will be performed using all available data with a regression-based multiple imputation procedure. To evaluate sensitivity to systematic patterns of missingness, analyses will be iterated and compared under multiple imputation, imputation, no imputation and complete case assumptions. We will regard identified models to be ‘sensitive’ if use of imputation alters identified parameters by ≥ 20%.

RESULTS

This protocol has been safely implemented and participants are currently enrolled and participating in interventions. Recruitment began in November 2020. We have enrolled 28 participants with 14 in the WALK group and 14 in PRR group. Six participants, three from PRR and three from WALK, have completed the study thus far.

DISCUSSION

Based on promising preliminary data, this trial will enhance motor-cognitive integration in pAD patients. The PRR treatment may enhance cognition needed for successful motor-cognitive performance, improve motor-cognitive integration leading to prolonged independence, and target neural cardiovascular and inflammatory pathways underlying motor-cognitive function and alter the AD process. Coupled physical and cognitive rehabilitation could become a regular part of care for cognitively impaired individuals.

Combined physical and cognitive training may benefit motor-cognitive function in humans, based on animal studies and some well-designed human studies. In PRR, physical and cognitive activity are solidly and seamlessly integrated. This project will reveal whether PRR is efficient for spatial cognitive rehabilitation. We hypothesize that PRR will rehabilitate spatial cognition in pAD. During PRR one learns coordinated relationships between people, places, and objects and one performs spatial navigation with a partner and other individuals. PRR also requires strong cognitive engagement in several domains: attention to partner; storing new steps in memory and recalling previously learned steps; detecting and interpreting musical beats, coordinating body movement with external musical source and partner; using working memory via learning steps and practicing them; and language via a new vocabulary for a dance context, stringing together steps into phrases, and holding “conversations” with their partner via non-verbal communication. The WALK group in this protocol controls aerobic exercise to isolate the cognitive elements inherent to PRR. That said, this study design is not perfect. With the proper resources, it would be perhaps enhancing for the project to include a healthy age and gender matched control group as well because it is likely these individuals could benefit and the true effects of the intervention would be better revealed.

We propose the social support, human touch, and cognitive engagement inherent to PRR will benefit participants more in cognitive function. It has not been unequivocally demonstrated that any form of exercise can slow neurodegeneration in humans, although aerobic exercise has been demonstrated to slow neurodegeneration in animal models [104]. As such, we propose using PRR as a model in humans, given PRR’s replicated beneficial effects in multiple studies. Further, the evidence of a correlation between cognitive benefits and neural activity in brain regions anatomically referable to these cognitive functions suggests a relationship between slowed neurodegeneration and the cognitive impact of PRR, which might exceed that of WALK. Given previous benefits seen with exercise modalities, and specifically with PRR, it is reasonable to expect some impact upon the neurodegenerative process which can be robustly and rigorously characterized with our biomarkers.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We acknowledge the time and energy devoted by participants and the student volunteers involved in this research.

Authors’ disclosures available online (https://www.j-alz.com/manuscript-disclosures/22-0783r1).

Fig. 1. PRR trains motor, cognitive, and social domains.

Table 1 Study procedures in project stages

Phase:	Screen	Baseline*	RAND	Post Training	Post Maintenance	
Months	1 month before Tx	0		3 months	12 months	
Informed consent/health questionnaire	x					
Weight/height/BP						
Cognitive screen	x	x		x	x	
Brain MRI		x		(task fMRI only)	x	
Vascular function (PWV, AI)		x		x	x	
Motor-cognitive &amp; psychosocial questionnaires		x		x	x	
Inflammation (blood draws)		x		x	x	
Neuropsychological battery		x		x	x	
Time (minutes)	45	150–300		150–300	150–300	
* After baseline, participants will be randomized to PRR or WALK, blue-gray shading indicates a procedure will be completed. PWV, pulse wave velocity; AI, augmentation index; Tx, treatment.

Table 2 Study Timeline

	Year 1	Year 2	Year 3	Year 4	Year 5	
Months	4	8	12	4	8	12	4	8	12	4	8	12	4	8	12	
Existing staff training &amp; conducting focus groups for barriers/facilitators	x	x														
Recruitment; Baseline assessment, Randomization and 3-month assessments		x	x	x	x	x	x	x	x	x	x					
Cumulative Enrollment – assumes 25% attrition				10	20	30	40	50	60	66						
7–8-month check ins					x	x	x	x	x	x	x	x				
12-month assessments							x	x	x	x	x	x	x	x		

Table 3 Self-Report Psychosocial Questionnaires

Measure	Time Frame	Questionnaires	
Quality of Life	Baseline, Post-Training, Post-Maintenance	Short Form Health Survey-12, Quality of Life in Alzheimer’s Disease, and Impac on Participation and Autonomy Questionnaire to assess their quality of life [56, 57]	
Functional Ability and Mobility		Instrumental Activity of Daily Living, Activities-specific Balance Confidence scale, Physical Activity Scale for the Elderly, and Life-Space Questionnaire [58–60].	
Mood		Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale revised, the Patient Health Questionnaire, and Beck Depression Index II [61–63]	
Perceived Social Support		Multidimensional Scale of Perceived Social Support (MSPSS) [64]	
Intervention Satisfaction	Post-Maintenance	Exit Questionnaire	

Table 4 Neuropsychological Assessments

Name	Time Frame	Measure	
Wide Range Achievement Test	Baseline	Reading, math, and comprehension skills [65]	
Serial 3’s	Baseline, Post-Training, Post-Maintenance	Dual-task performance [66]	
Oral Trail Making Test		Sequential set-shifting, as it is a visuomotor speeded task [67]	
Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test (Immediate and Delayed Recall)		Verbal learning and memory [68]	
Rey Osterrieth Figure Copy (Immediate and Delayed Recall)		Visuospatial ability and visuospatial memory [69].	
Brooks Spatial Task		Visuospatial working memory	
Benson’s Judgement of Line Orientation		Visuospatial judgment and skills	
Digit Span Test		Verbal short-term memory [70, 71]	
Color Word Interference Task		Inhibitory control and cognitive flexibility [72]	
Boston Naming Test		Visual confrontation naming [73]	
Trails Making Test		Executive function and deficits in planning [74, 75]	
Tower of London			
Reverse Corsi Blocks		Short-term visual memory [70, 76]	


REFERENCES

[1] Alzheimer’s Association (2019) 2019 Alzheimer’s disease facts and figures. Alzheimers Dement 15 , 321–387.
[2] Ansai JH , Andrade LP , Rossi PG , Almeida ML , Carvalho Vale FA , Rebelatto JR (2018) Association between gait and dual task with cognitive domains in older people with cognitive impairment. J Mot Behav 50 , 409–415.28901834
[3] Ansai JH , Andrade LP , Rossi PG , Takahashi ACM , Vale FAC , Rebelatto JR (2017) Gait, dual task and history of falls in elderly with preserved cognition, mild cognitive impairment, and mild Alzheimer’s disease. Braz J Phys Ther 21 , 144–151.28460713
[4] Montero-Odasso M , Oteng-Amoako A , Speechley M , Gopaul K , Beauchet O , Annweiler C , Muir-Hunter SW (2014) The motor signature of mild cognitive impairment: Results from the gait and brain study. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 69 , 1415–1421.25182601
[5] Ansai JH , Andrade LP , Nakagawa TH , Vale FAC , Caetano MJD , Lord SR , Rebelatto JR (2017) Cognitive correlates of Timed Up and Go subtasks in older people with preserved cognition, mild cognitive impairment, and Alzheimer’s disease. Am J Phys Med Rehabil 96 , 700–705.28177938
[6] Ansai JH , de Andrade LP , Masse FAA , Goncalves J , de Medeiros Takahashi AC , Vale FAC , Rebelatto JR (2019) Risk factors for falls in older adults with mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer disease. J Geriatr Phys Ther 42 , E116–E121.28786910
[7] Makizako H , Shimada H , Doi T , Park H , Yoshida D , Uemura K , Tsutsumimoto K , Liu-Ambrose T , Suzuki T (2013) Poor balance and lower gray matter volume predict falls in older adults with mild cognitive impairment. BMC Neurol 13 , 102.23915144
[8] Annweiler C , Beauchet O , Bartha R , Wells JL , Borrie MJ , Hachinski V , Montero-Odasso M (2013) Motor cortex and gait in mild cognitive impairment: A magnetic resonance spectroscopy and volumetric imaging study. Brain 136 , 859–871.23436505
[9] Gallou-Guyot M , Mandigout S , Combourieu-Donnezan L , Bherer L , Perrochon A (2020) Cognitive and physical impact of cognitive-motor dual-task training in cognitively impaired older adults: An overview. Neurophysiol Clin 50 , 441–453.33121880
[10] Godefroy O , Bakchine S , Verny M , Delabrousse-Mayoux JP , Roussel M , Pere JJ , group Rs (2016) Characteristics of Alzheimer’s disease patients with severe executive disorders. J Alzheimers Dis 51 , 815–825.26890770
[11] Martyr A , Clare L (2012) Executive function and activities of daily living in Alzheimer’s disease: A correlational meta-analysis. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 33 , 189–203.22572810
[12] Allain P , Etcharry-Bouyx F , Verny C (2013) Executive functions in clinical and preclinical Alzheimer’s disease. Rev Neurol (Paris) 169 , 695–708.24011643
[13] Kirova AM , Bays RB , Lagalwar S (2015) Working memory and executive function decline across normal aging, mild cognitive impairment, and Alzheimer’s disease. Biomed Res Int 2015 , 748212.26550575
[14] Hackney ME , Earhart GM (2010) Recommendations for implementing tango classes for persons with Parkinson disease. Am J Dance Ther 32 , 41–52.30369677
[15] Trotman M , Kennefick M , Coughlin S , van Donkelaar P , Dalton BH (2022) The effect of increased cognitive processing on reactive balance control following perturbations to the upper limb. Exp Brain Res 240 , 1317–1329.35247064
[16] Coubard OA , Duretz S , Lefebvre V , Lapalus P , Ferrufino L (2011) Practice of contemporary dance improves cognitive flexibility in aging. Front Aging Neurosci 3 , 13.21960971
[17] Noguera C , Carmona D , Rueda A , Fernández R , Cimadevilla JM (2020) Shall we dance? Dancing modulates executive functions and spatial memory. Int J Environ Res Public Health 17 , 1960.32192128
[18] Barnstaple R , Protzak J , DeSouza JFX , Gramann K (2021) Mobile brain/body Imaging in dance: A dynamic trans-disciplinary field for applied research. Eur J Neurosci 54 , 8355–8363.32544262
[19] Hackney ME , Bay AA , Jackson JM , Nocera JR , Krishnamurthy V , Crosson B , Evatt ML , Langley J , Cui X , McKay JL , Huddleston DE (2020) Rationale and design of the PAIRED trial: Partnered dance aerobic exercise as a neuroprotective, motor, and cognitive intervention in Parkinson’s Disease. Front Neurol 11 , 943.33162925
[20] Woods DL , Dimond M (2002) The effect of therapeutic touch on agitated behavior and cortisol in persons with Alzheimer’s disease. Biol Res Nurs 4 , 104–114.12408216
[21] Hawranik P , Johnston P , Deatrich J (2008) Therapeutic touch and agitation in individuals with Alzheimer’s disease. West J Nurs Res 30 , 417–434.18272750
[22] Woods DL , Craven RF , Whitney J (2005) The effect of therapeutic touch on behavioral symptoms of persons with dementia. Altern Ther Health Med 11 , 66–74.15712768
[23] Kumarappah A , Senderovich H (2016) Therapeutic touch in the management of responsive behavior in patients with dementia. Adv Mind Body Med 30 , 8–13.27925607
[24] DeTure MA , Dickson DW (2019) The neuropathological diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease. Mol Neurodegener 14 , 32.31375134
[25] Dickstein DL , Walsh J , Brautigam H , Stockton SD Jr. , Gandy S , Hof PR (2010) Role of vascular risk factors and vascular dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease. Mt Sinai J Med 77 , 82–102.20101718
[26] Guizoni DM , Dorighello GG , Oliveira HC , Delbin MA , Krieger MH , Davel AP (2016) Aerobic exercise training protects against endothelial dysfunction by increasing nitric oxide and hydrogen peroxide production in LDL receptor-deficient mice. J Transl Med 14 , 213.27435231
[27] Hughes TM , Kuller LH , Barinas-Mitchell EJ , McDade EM , Klunk WE , Cohen AD , Mathis CA , Dekosky ST , Price JC , Lopez OL (2014) Arterial stiffness and beta-amyloid progression in nondemented elderly adults. JAMA Neurol 71 , 562–568.24687165
[28] King KS (2014) Arterial stiffness as a potential determinant of beta-amyloid deposition. JAMA Neurol 71 , 541–542.24687122
[29] Park S , Lakatta EG (2012) Role of inflammation in the pathogenesis of arterial stiffness. Yonsei Med J 53 , 258–261.22318811
[30] Endtmann C , Ebrahimian T , Czech T , Arfa O , Laufs U , Fritz M , Wassmann K , Werner N , Petoumenos V , Nickenig G , Wassmann S (2011) Angiotensin II impairs endothelial progenitor cell number and function in vitro and in vivo: Implications for vascular regeneration. Hypertension 58 , 394–403.21825227
[31] Burns JM , Cronk BB , Anderson HS , Donnelly JE , Thomas GP , Harsha A , Brooks WM , Swerdlow RH (2008) Car-diorespiratory fitness and brain atrophy in early Alzheimer disease. Neurology 71 , 210–216.18625967
[32] Hackney ME , Kantorovich S , Levin R , Earhart GM (2007) Effects of tango on functional mobility in Parkinson’s disease: A preliminary study. J Neurol Phys Ther 31 , 173–179.18172414
[33] Hackney ME , Earhart GM (2009) Effects of dance on movement control in Parkinson’s disease: A comparison of Argentine tango and American ballroom. J Rehabil Med 41 , 475–481.19479161
[34] Hackney ME , Earhart GM (2010) Effects of dance on gait and balance in Parkinson’s disease: A comparison of partnered and nonpartnered dance movement. Neurorehabil Neural Repair 24 , 384–392.20008820
[35] McKay JL , Ting LH , Hackney ME (2016) Balance, body motion, and muscle activity after high-volume short-term dance-based rehabilitation in persons with Parkinson disease: A pilot study. J Neurol Phys Ther 40 , 257–268.27576092
[36] Hackney ME , Hall CD , Echt KV , Wolf SL (2015) Multi-modal exercise benefits mobility in older adults with visual impairment: A preliminary study. J Aging Phys Act 23 , 630–639.25562206
[37] Hackney ME , Byers C , Butler G , Sweeney M , Rossbach L , Bozzorg A (2015) Adapted Tango improves mobility, motor-cognitive function, and gait but not cognition in older adults in independent living. J Am Geriatr Soc 63 , 2105–2113.26456371
[38] McKee KE , Hackney ME (2013) The effects of adapted tango on spatial cognition and disease severity in Parkinson’s disease. J Mot Behav 45 , 519–529.24116748
[39] Lazarou I , Parastatidis T , Tsolaki A , Gkioka M , Karakostas A , Douka S , Tsolaki M (2017) International ballroom dancing against neurodegeneration: A randomized controlled trial in Greek community-dwelling elders with mild cognitive impairment. Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen 32 , 489–499.28840742
[40] Porat S , Goukasian N , Hwang KS , Zanto T , Do T , Pierce J , Joshi S , Woo E , Apostolova LG (2016) Dance experience and associations with cortical gray matter thickness in the aging population. Dement Geriatr Cogn Dis Extra 6 , 508–517.27920794
[41] O’Rourke HM , Sidani S , Chu CH , Fox M , McGilton KS , Collins J (2017) Pilot of a tailored dance intervention to support function in people with cognitive impairment residing in long-term care: A brief report. Gerontol Geriatr Med 3 , 2333721417734672.
[42] Albert MS , DeKosky ST , Dickson D , Dubois B , Feldman HH , Fox NC , Gamst A , Holtzman DM , Jagust WJ , Petersen RC , Snyder PJ , Carrillo MC , Thies B , Phelps CH (2011) The diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment due to Alzheimer’s disease: Recommendations from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement 7 , 270–279.21514249
[43] Cohen J (1992) A power primer. Psychol Bull 112 , 155–159.19565683
[44] Hackney ME , McKee K (2014) Community-based adapted tango dancing for individuals with Parkinson’s disease and older adults. J Vis Exp, 52066.25548831
[45] Knaggs JD , Larkin KA , Manini TM (2011) Metabolic cost of daily activities and effect of mobility impairment in older adults. J Am Geriatr Soc 59 , 2118–2123.22091979
[46] Santos-Silva PR , Duarte CC , Osorio BB , Greve JMD , Guimaraes GV (2021) Acute physiological and metabolic responses for 40-minutes of samba dance. Open Sci J 5 . 10.23954/osj.v6i1.2732
[47] Nelson ME , Rejeski WJ , Blair SN , Duncan PW , Judge JO , King AC , Macera CA , Castaneda-Sceppa C (2007) Physical activity and public health in older adults: Recommendation from the American College of Sports Medicine and the American Heart Association. Med Sci Sports Exerc 39 , 1435–1445.17762378
[48] Lazris D , Perkins MM , Bay AA , Hackney ME (2021) Qualitative evaluation informs understanding of motor cognition and therapies in older adults with mild cognitive impairment. J Alzheimers Dis 84 , 691–703.34569954
[49] Piercy KL , Troiano RP , Ballard RM , Carlson SA , Fulton JE , Galuska DA , George SM , Olson RD (2018) The physical activity guidelines for Americans. JAMA 320 , 2020–2028.30418471
[50] Lohman MC , Crow RS , DiMilia PR , Nicklett EJ , Bruce ML , Batsis JA (2017) Operationalisation and validation of the Stopping Elderly Accidents, Deaths, and Injuries (STEADI) fall risk algorithm in a nationally representative sample. J Epidemiol Community Health 71 , 1191–1197.28947669
[51] Tulsky DS , Chiaravalloti ND , Palmer BW , Chelune GJ (2003) The Wechsler Memory Scale: A new perspective. In Clinical interpretation of the WAIS-III and WMS-III, Elsevier, pp. 93–139.
[52] Ciesielska N , Sokołowski R , Mazur E , Podhorecka M , Polak-Szabela A , Kędziora-Kornatowska K (2016) Is the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) test better suited than the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) in mild cognitive impairment (MCI) detection among people aged over 60? Meta-analysis. Psychiatr Pol 50 , 1039–1052.27992895
[53] Jones CJ , Rikli RE , Beam WC (1999) A 30-s chair-stand test as a measure of lower body strength in community-residing older adults. Res Q Exerc Sport 70 , 113–119.10380242
[54] Shubert TE , Schrodt LA , Mercer VS , Busby-Whitehead J , Giuliani CA (2006) Are scores on balance screening tests associated with mobility in older adults? J Geriatr Phys Ther 29 , 33–39.
[55] Morris JC (1997) Clinical dementia rating: A reliable and valid diagnostic and staging measure for dementia of the Alzheimer type. Int Psychogeriatr 9 , 173–176.9447441
[56] Jakobsson U (2007) Using the 12-item Short Form health survey (SF-12) to measure quality of life among older people. Aging Clin Exp Res 19 , 457–464.18172367
[57] Cardol M , de Haan RJ , van den Bos GA , de Jong BA , de Groot IJ (1999) The development of a handicap assessment questionnaire: The Impact on Participation and Autonomy (IPA). Clin Rehabil 13 , 411–419.10498348
[58] Millán-Calenti JC , Tubío J , Pita-Fernández S , González-Abraldes I , Lorenzo T , Fernández-Arruty T , Maseda A (2010) Prevalence of functional disability in activities of daily living (ADL), instrumental activities of daily living (IADL) and associated factors, as predictors of morbidity and mortality. Arch Gerontol Geriatr 50 , 306–310.19520442
[59] Powell LE , Myers AM (1995) The activities-specific balance confidence (ABC) scale. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 50A , M28–M34.7814786
[60] Washburn RA , Smith KW , Jette AM , Janney CA (1993) The Physical Activity Scale for the Elderly (PASE): Development and evaluation. J Clin Epidemiol 46 , 153–162.8437031
[61] Radloff LS (1977) The CES-D Scale: A self-report depression scale for research in the general population. Appl Psychol Meas 1 , 385–401.
[62] Kroenke K , Spitzer RL , Williams JB (2001) The PHQ-9: Validity of a brief depression severity measure. J Gen Intern Med 16 , 606–613.11556941
[63] Scogin F , Beutler L , Corbishley A , Hamblin D (1988) Reliability and validity of the short form Beck Depression Inventory with older adults. J Clin Psychol 44 , 853–857.3216010
[64] Zimet GD , Powell SS , Farley GK , Werkman S , Berkoff KA (1990) Psychometric characteristics of the multidimensional scale of perceived social support. J Pers Assess 55 , 610–617.2280326
[65] Wilkinson GS , Robertson GJ (2006) Wide range achievement test (WRAT4). Psychological Assessment Resources, Lutz, FL.
[66] Hollands K , Agnihotri D , Tyson S (2014) Effects of dual task on turning ability in stroke survivors and older adults. Gait Posture 40 , 564–569.25086799
[67] Ricker JH , Axelrod BN , Houtler BD (1996) Clinical validation of the oral trail making test. Neuropsychiatry Neuropsychol Behav Neurol 9 , 50–53.
[68] Schmidt M (1996) Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test: A Handbook, Western Psychological Services Los Angeles, CA.
[69] Fastenau PS , Denburg NL , Hufford BJ (1999) Adult norms for the Rey-Osterrieth Complex Figure Test and for supplemental recognition and matching trials from the Extended Complex Figure Test. Clin Neuropsychol 13 , 30–47.10937646
[70] Kessels RP , van den Berg E , Ruis C , Brands AM (2008) The backward span of the Corsi Block-Tapping Task and its association with the WAIS-III Digit Span. Assessment 15 , 426–434.18483192
[71] Leung JL , Lee GT , Lam Y , Chan RC , Wu JY (2011) The use of the Digit Span Test in screening for cognitive impairment in acute medical inpatients. Int Psychogeriatr 23 , 1569–1574.21729426
[72] Lippa SM , Davis RN (2010) Inhibition/switching is not necessarily harder than inhibition: An analysis of the D-KEFS color-word interference test. Arch Clin Neuropsychol 25 , 146–152.20139109
[73] Kaplan E , Goodglass H , Weintraub S (2001) Boston Naming Test.
[74] Bowie CR , Harvey PD (2006) Administration and interpretation of the Trail Making Test. Nat Protoc 1 , 2277–2281.17406468
[75] Phillips LH , Wynn V , McPherson S , Gilhooly K (2001) Mental planning and the Tower of London task. Q J Exp Psychol A 54 , 579–597.11394063
[76] Vandierendonck A , Kemps E , Fastame MC , Szmalec A (2004) Working memory components of the Corsi blocks task. Br J Psychol 95 , 57–79.15005868
[77] McKee KE , Hackney ME (2014) The Four Square Step Test in individuals with Parkinson’s disease: Association with executive function and comparison with older adults. Neurorehabilitation 35 , 279–289.24990034
[78] Dite W , Temple VA (2002) A clinical test of stepping and change of direction to identify multiple falling older adults. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 83 , 1566–1571.12422327
[79] Duncan RP , Earhart GM (2013) Four square step test performance in people with Parkinson disease. J Neurol Phys Ther 37 , 2–8.23364168
[80] Cleary K , Skornyakov E (2017) Predicting falls in older adults using the four square step test. Physiother Theory Pract 33 , 766–771.28771062
[81] Morris S , Morris ME , Iansek R (2001) Reliability of measurements obtained with the Timed “Up &amp; Go” test in people with Parkinson disease. Phys Ther 81 , 810–818.11175678
[82] Hackney ME , Hall CD , Echt KV , Wolf SL (2013) Dancing for balance: Feasibility and efficacy in oldest-old adults with visual impairment. Nurs Res 62 , 138–143.23458910
[83] Battisto J , Echt KV , Wolf SL , Weiss P , Hackney ME (2018) The body position spatial task, a test of whole-body spatial cognition: Comparison between adults with and without parkinson disease. Neurorehabil Neural Repair 32 , 961–975.30317924
[84] Guralnik JM , Simonsick EM , Ferrucci L , Glynn RJ , Berkman LF , Blazer DG , Scherr PA , Wallace RB (1994) A short physical performance battery assessing lower extremity function: Association with self-reported disability and prediction of mortality and nursing home admission. J Gerontol 49 , M85–94.8126356
[85] Potter K , Brandfass K (2015) The Mini-Balance Evaluation Systems Test (Mini-BESTest). J Physiother 61 , 225.26044345
[86] Guyatt G , Drummond M (1985) Guidelines for the clinical and economic assessment of health technologies: The case of magnetic resonance. Int J Technol Assess Health Care 1 , 551–566, 582–553. 10311549
[87] Greenberg SM , Vernooij MW , Cordonnier C , Viswanathan A , Al-Shahi Salman R , Warach S , Launer LJ , Van Buchem MA , Breteler MM , Microbleed Study Group (2009) Cerebral microbleeds: A guide to detection and interpretation. Lancet Neurol 8 , 165–174.19161908
[88] Alsop DC , Detre JA (1998) Multisection cerebral blood flow MR imaging with continuous arterial spin labeling. Radiology 208 , 410–416.9680569
[89] Detre JA , Alsop DC (1999) Perfusion magnetic resonance imaging with continuous arterial spin labeling: Methods and clinical applications in the central nervous system. Eur J Radiol 30 , 115–124.10401592
[90] Vidorreta M , Wang Z , Rodriguez I , Pastor MA , Detre JA , Fernandez-Seara MA (2013) Comparison of 2D and 3D single-shot ASL perfusion fMRI sequences. Neuroimage 66 , 662–671.23142069
[91] Chao LL , Buckley ST , Kornak J , Schuff N , Madison C , Yaffe K , Miller BL , Kramer JH , Weiner MW (2010) ASL perfusion MRI predicts cognitive decline and conversion from MCI to dementia. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 24 , 19–27.20220321
[92] Dai W , Garcia D , de Bazelaire C , Alsop DC (2008) Continuous flow-driven inversion for arterial spin labeling using pulsed radio frequency and gradient fields. Magn Reson Med 60 , 1488–1497.19025913
[93] Dale AM , Fischl B , Sereno MI (1999) Cortical surface-based analysis. I. Segmentation and surface reconstruction. Neuroimage 9 , 179–194.9931268
[94] Fischl B , Salat DH , Busa E , Albert M , Dieterich M , Haselgrove C , van der Kouwe A , Killiany R , Kennedy D , Klaveness S , Montillo A , Makris N , Rosen B , Dale AM (2002) Whole brain segmentation: Automated labeling of neuroanatomical structures in the human brain. Neuron 33 , 341–355.11832223
[95] Desikan RS , Segonne F , Fischl B , Quinn BT , Dickerson BC , Blacker D , Buckner RL , Dale AM , Maguire RP , Hyman BT , Albert MS , Killiany RJ (2006) An automated labeling system for subdividing the human cerebral cortex on MRI scans into gyral based regions of interest. Neuroimage 31 , 968–980.16530430
[96] Moerland M , Kales AJ , Schrier L , van Dongen MG , Bradnock D , Burggraaf J (2012) Evaluation of the EndoPAT as a tool to assess endothelial function. Int J Vasc Med 2012 , 904141.22500237
[97] Grammatopoulos T , Morris K , Ferguson P , Weyhen-meyer J (2002) Angiotensin protects cortical neurons from hypoxic-induced apoptosis via the angiotensin type 2 receptor. Brain Res Mol Brain Res 99 , 114–124.11978402
[98] Uslu S , Akarkarasu ZE , Ozbabalik D , Ozkan S , Colak O , Demirkan ES , Ozkiris A , Demirustu C , Alatas O (2012) Levels of amyloid beta-42, interleukin-6 and tumor necrosis factor-alpha in Alzheimer’s disease and vascular dementia. Neurochem Res 37 , 1554–1559.22437436
[99] Huang CW , Wang SJ , Wu SJ , Yang CC , Huang MW , Lin CH , Cheng IH (2013) Potential blood biomarker for disease severity in the Taiwanese population with Alzheimer’s disease. Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen 28 , 75–83.23230229
[100] Koh Y , Park KS (2017) Responses of inflammatory cytokines following moderate intensity walking exercise in overweight or obese individuals. J Exerc Rehabil 13 , 472–476.29114515
[101] Beavers KM , Brinkley TE , Nicklas BJ (2010) Effect of exercise training on chronic inflammation. Clin Chim Acta 411 , 785–793.20188719
[102] Braun V , Clarke V (2012) Thematic analysis. In APA Handbook of Research Methods in Psychology, Vol. 2 . Research designs: Quantitative, qualitative, neuropsychological, and biological, Cooper H , Camic PM , Long DL , Panter AT , Rindskopf D , Sher KJ , eds. American Psychological Association, pp. 57–71.
[103] Braun V , Clarke V (2022) Conceptual and design thinking for thematic analysis. Qual Psychol 9 , 3–26.
[104] Ahlskog JE (2018) Aerobic exercise: Evidence for a direct brain effect to slow parkinson disease progression. Mayo Clin Proc 93 , 360–372.29502566
