LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


7806090
6166
Neurosci Biobehav Rev
Neurosci Biobehav Rev
Neuroscience and biobehavioral reviews
0149-7634
1873-7528

27044452
4856578
10.1016/j.neubiorev.2016.03.025
NIHMS781795
Article
Inhibiting BACE1 to reverse synaptic dysfunctions in Alzheimer’s disease
Yan Riqiang *
Fan Qingyuan
Zhou John
Vassar Robert §
Department of Neurosciences, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195
* Correspondence should be addressed to: Riqiang Yan, Ph.D., Department of Neurosciences, Lerner Research Institute, The Cleveland Clinic, 9500 Euclid Avenue/NC30, Cleveland, OH 44195; Tel: 216–445–2690, Fax: 216–444–7927, yanr@ccf.org
§ Northwestern University, the Feinberg School of Medicine, Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, 303 E. Chicago Avenue, Chicago, IL USA 60611, r-vassar@northwestern.edu

28 4 2016
01 4 2016
6 2016
01 6 2017
65 326340
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Over the past two decades, many studies have identified significant contributions of toxic β-amyloid peptides (Aβ) to the etiology of Alzheimer’s disease (AD), which is the most common age-dependent neurodegenerative disease. AD is also recognized as a disease of synaptic failure. Aβ, generated by sequential proteolytic cleavages of amyloid precursor protein (APP) by BACE1 and γ-secretase, is one of major culprits that cause this failure. In this review, we summarize current findings on how BACE1-cleaved APP products impact learning and memory through proteins localized on glutamatergic, GABAergic, and dopaminergic synapses. Considering the broad effects of Aβ on all three types of synapses, BACE1 inhibition emerges as a practical approach for ameliorating Aβ-mediated synaptic dysfunctions. Since BACE1 inhibitory drugs are currently in clinical trials, this review also discusses potential complications arising from BACE1 inhibition. We emphasize that the benefits of BACE1 inhibitory drugs will outweigh the concerns.

BACE1
Alzheimer’s β-secretase
APP
Abeta peptides
synapses
NMDA receptors
AMPA receptors
dopamine receptors

INTRODUCTION

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common age-dependent neurodegenerative disease and AD pathogenesis results in progressive loss of synapses and increasingly severe cognitive dysfunction. The so-called “toxic β-amyloid (Aβ) theory” has been the dominant theme in AD research over the past twenty years and has also attracted the most drug discovery efforts. Unfortunately, none of the clinical trials based on this “Amyloid Cascade Hypothesis” (Hardy and Selkoe, 2002) that have been completed have produced successful results. Due to the increasing numbers of failed mid- to late-stage trials, growing discussions and suspicions regarding the validity of the Amyloid Cascade Hypothesis have been provoked in the field (Castello et al., 2014; Giacobini and Gold, 2013). Considering various studies that argue against the causative role of toxic Aβ in AD pathogenesis [i.e., no correlation of plaque density with severity of dementia (Perrin et al., 2009)] and the lack of patients diagnosed with amyloid plaque-only dementia (Benilova et al., 2012; Skaper, 2012), it is legitimate to question whether work on the Amyloid Cascade Hypothesis has reached an impasse.

However, despite various controversies between encouraging pre-clinical experimental results and less favorable clinical outcomes, it remains too early to abandon research on “toxic Aβ”. There is a consensus that data from clinical mutations in APP, presenilin-1 and −2, and the ApoE4 allele support the toxic Aβ theory, in cases of both early and late onset AD (Tanzi, 2012). The dichotomy between animal studies and clinical trials has likely arisen due to multiple factors, which may include trial designs, chemical (such as BACE1 inhibitor LY2886721 showing liver toxicity) vs. mechanistic (i.e. non-selective γ-secretase inhibition due to inhibition of Notch and other signaling molecules) toxicity, and/or in vivo specificity of immunotherapy (De, 2014; Saxena, 2010; Toyn and Ahlijanian, 2014). Despite the failed clinical trials, there is still promise for developing more specifically targeted drugs to reduce Aβ-mediated synaptic toxicity.

Aβ, mainly Aβ40-Aβ42/43, is generated from amyloid precursor protein (APP) through sequential cleavages by two secretases: β- and γ-secretase. BACE1, also known as Asp2 and memapsin 2, was discovered to be the β-secretase (Hussain et al., 1999; Lin et al., 2000; Sinha et al., 1999; Vassar et al., 1999; Yan et al., 1999). γ-secretase is a complex composed mainly of four transmembrane proteins: presenilin-1 or −2, nicastrin, Aph1, and Pen2 (De Strooper et al., 1998; Francis et al., 2002; Li et al., 2000; Yu et al., 2000). Most familial mutations in presenilin-1 or −2 favor production of Aβ42/43 by shifting the normal balance between Aβ40 and Aβ42/43. Since BACE1 initiates the generation of Aβ, its activity is expected to be highly correlated with overall Aβ-mediated pathological functions. Indeed, in AD brains, BACE1 levels are increased ~2-fold compared to healthy non-demented brains (Fukumoto et al., 2002; Holsinger et al., 2002; Li et al., 2004; Yang et al., 2003). Hence, inhibition of BACE1 activity is a logical strategy for preventing or reversing Aβ-mediated impairments in AD patients. More encouragingly, phenotypes seen in BACE1-null mice are relatively mild when compared to disrupted γ-secretase functions in animals (De et al., 2010; Francis et al., 2002; Kelleher, III and Shen, 2010; Vassar et al., 2014).

Targeted inhibition of BACE1 will reduce Aβ, and pathological level of Aβ has been broadly shown to impair synaptic functions over the past two decades. A large number of publications have revealed direct interactions of Aβ with various proteins important for synaptic plasticity. It has become clear that Aβ can impact learning and memory by acting through glutamatergic, GABAergic, and dopaminergic synapses, rather than working through a single system. While some controversial results have arisen, this review aims to summarize the collective findings of how Aβ affects these systems and to sort out more commonly observed mechanistic insights. We aim to further highlight the practical benefits of BACE1 inhibition for improving synaptic functions in patients.

Brief overview of BACE1

BACE1 is a typical aspartyl protease with a classical bilobal structure; two active aspartate motifs (D93TG and D289SG) are located in a separate lobe. BACE1 is first synthesized in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) as a 501 amino acid immature precursor protein (proBACE1) and its prodomain (residues 1–21) is removed by furin-like proprotein convertases during maturation in the Golgi compartment (Bennett et al., 2000; Creemers et al., 2001). BACE1 undergoes N-glycosylation on four sites (N-153, N-172, N-223 and N254) (Haniu et al., 2000) and acetylation on seven Lys residues (Lys-126, Lys-275, Lys-279, Lys-285, Lys-299, Lys-300 and Lys-307) in the ER. Lys residues are also the targets for ubiquitination. For example, BACE1 activity is post-translationally regulated via ubiquitination at Lys-501, as mutation of this residue impairs its endocytosis to lysosomes for degradation (Kang et al., 2012; Tesco et al., 2007). Others have shown that BACE1 is also ubiquitinated at Lys-203 and Lys-382, as site-directed mutagenesis of these two residues reduces the proteasomal degradation of BACE1 and affects APP processing at the β site, as well as Aβ production (Wang et al., 2012b). In the Golgi, BACE1 deacetylation (Costantini et al., 2007) and palmitoylation in four C-terminal Cys residues (Cys474/478/482/485) for lipid raft localization (Benjannet et al., 2001; Bhattacharyya et al., 2013; Vetrivel et al., 2009) occur. Interestingly, most post-translational modifications, except for the di-sulfide linkage, are not essential for BACE1 proteolytic activity per se, as recombinant BACE1 produced in bacteria lacks these modifications but is sufficiently active. However, certain glycol modifications appear to alter its proteolytic activity in vivo due to targeted cellular trafficking. For example, BACE1 is modified by N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc), a sugar-bisecting enzyme highly expressed in brain (Kizuka et al., 2015). Loss of this modification will target BACE1 to late endosomes/lysosomes for accelerated lysosomal degradation, while enhanced bisecting GlcNAc in BACE1, as is likely the case in AD brains, facilitates Aβ generation due to increased stability. BACE1 was initially found to be phosphorylated at Ser-498 (Walter et al., 2001), and this phosphorylation is linked to BACE1 cellular trafficking (He et al., 2005; Pastorino et al., 2002). BACE1 is also phosphorylated by the p25/Cdk5 complex at Thr252, which increases BACE1 activity by cdk5/P25 (Song et al., 2015).

After maturation, BACE1 is normally transported along the secretory compartment, where the luminal BACE1 protease domain will encounter and cleave APP, which has the same type I transmembrane topology, at the β-site. As an aspartyl protease, BACE1 proteolytic activity is favored in low acidic environments, with its maximum proteolytic activity being at ~pH 4.5 as shown by in vitro assays (Tomasselli et al., 2003; Turner, III et al., 2002). It is clear that BACE1 processes its substrates such as APP more efficiently in the relatively more acidic trans-Golgi Network (TGN) and endosome compartments than in the more neutral ER compartment (Das et al., 2013). Altering trafficking of BACE1 in secretory compartments is therefore another strategy to reduce or enhance BACE1 activity (Jiang et al., 2014; Tan and Evin, 2012; Vassar et al., 2014). For instance, enhanced retention of BACE1 by an ER protein such as RTN/Nogo in the ER can significantly reduce BACE1 cleavage of APP, thereby decreasing Aβ production (Araki et al., 2012; Deng et al., 2013; He et al., 2004; Shi et al., 2014; Shi et al., 2009; Shi et al., 2013; Wojcik et al., 2007). Increased trafficking of BACE1 in the more acidic endosomes by cellular trafficking proteins such as a Vps10p domain-sorting receptor sortilin (Finan et al., 2011), the small GTPase ADP ribosylation factor 6 (ARF6) (Sannerud et al., 2011), Rab-GTPases Rab11 (Udayar et al., 2013), and Sorting nexin 12 (Zhao et al., 2012) results in significant increases in Aβ generation. Golgi-localized γ-ears containing ADP ribosylation factor-binding (GGA) family proteins can bind BACE1 via the di-leucine motif and impact not only its endosomal trafficking, but also its stability (He et al., 2002; He et al., 2005; Santosa et al., 2011; Tesco et al., 2007; von et al., 2015; Wahle et al., 2005; Walker et al., 2012). Depletion of both GGA1 and GGA3 induces a rapid and robust elevation of BACE1, and such an effect will likely be interfered with by flotillin, which can compete with GGA proteins for binding to the same dileucine motif in the BACE1 tail (John et al., 2014). In neurons, BACE1 is targeted to both axons and dendrites, and its preferential transport to the axonal terminus versus somatodendrites can be regulated by altered levels of calsyntenin-1 (Steuble et al., 2012; Vagnoni et al., 2012), retromer vps35 (Wang et al., 2012a; Wen et al., 2011), RTN3 (Deng et al., 2013), Rab11, and Eps15 homology domain proteins (Buggia-Prevot et al., 2014; Buggia-Prevot et al., 2013; Udayar et al., 2013). The localization of BACE1 in synaptic sites can impact the processing of its substrates.

Processing of APP by BACE1 to release Aβ is also affected by its neighboring secretases. ADAM10, as well as ADAM17 and ADAM9, are recognized as α-secretases and prevent Aβ formation by cleaving APP within the Aβ domain (mainly after Q16 and K17) [see reviews by (Allinson et al., 2004; Asai et al., 2003; Haass et al., 2012; Kuhn et al., 2010; Saftig and Lichtenthaler, 2015)]. BACE2 shares ~59% amino acid homology with BACE1, but it preferentially cleaves APP mainly between F19 and F20 and between F20 and A21 within the Aβ domain (Farzan et al., 2000; Sun et al., 2006; Yan et al., 2001). This is consistent with the observation that BACE1 deficiency almost abolishes the production of Aβ in mice (Cai et al., 2001; Luo et al., 2001; Roberds et al., 2001). An asparagine endopeptidase is suggested to function as a δ-secretase by cleaving APP at N373 and N585 residues, and this cleavage selectively enhances Aβ levels due to increased BACE1 accessing CTFδ fragments to initiate Aβ generation (Zhang et al., 2015).

As a protease, it is expected that BACE1 will have many cellular substrates. In addition to previously identified BACE1 substrates such as neuregulin-1 (Nrg1) (Fleck et al., 2013; Hu et al., 2008; Hu et al., 2006; Luo et al., 2011; Willem et al., 2006), voltage-gated channel proteins such as sodium channel protein β-subunits (Kim et al., 2007; Kim et al., 2011; Wong et al., 2005), the potassium channel proteins KCNE1 and 2 (Hitt et al., 2010; Sachse et al., 2013), neural cell adhesion molecule close homolog of L1 (Hitt et al., 2012; Kuhn et al., 2012; Zhou et al., 2012), Notch ligands Jagged-1 and Jagged-2 (He et al., 2014; Hu et al., 2013), and contactin-2 (Gautam et al., 2014), many more membrane-bound proteins have now been identified as BACE1 substrates by unbiased proteomic or secretome approaches using BACE1-null mouse or zebrafish models (Hemming et al., 2009; Hogl et al., 2011; Hogl et al., 2013). By comparative proteomic analyses of wild-type vs. BACE1-null mouse cerebrospinal fluid samples, ectonucleotide pyrophosphatase 5, receptor-type tyrosine-protein phosphatase N2, and plexin domain-containing 2 are the most recent additions to this substrate list (Dislich et al., 2015). Despite the identification of additional BACE1 substrates in recent years, the number of these substrates that is keenly dependent on BACE1 cleavage remains to be established in future studies. Thus far, cleavage of APP to release Aβ is still the major focus of BACE1 research because of continuing reports on the synaptic toxicity of Aβ.

Synapses and cognitive function

Synapses are interfaces that are formed by pre- (from the axonal terminus) and post-synaptic membranes (mostly from receiving dendrites or somata). Synapses mediate neuronal communications in the form of electronic or chemical transmission. Dysregulation of neuronal communications in the limbic system can lead to the progressive loss of learning and memory. Synaptic chemical transmissions occur when released presynaptic neurotransmitters, such as acetylcholine or glutamate, bind to their receptors on the postsynaptic membrane to induce neuronal polarization and depolarization. Enhanced synaptic transmission translates to stronger synaptic strength; memory formation is highly related to long-term changes in synaptic strength, which is quantifiable by electrophysiological measures (Murphy and Corbett, 2009). Enhanced synaptic connections, i.e. by high-frequency stimulation, induce long-term potentiation (LTP), while reduced LTP is mostly correlated with impaired learning and memory. On the other hand, long-term depression (LTD) results from a weakening of synaptic connections. Although mechanisms of induction, expression, and maintenance of LTP and LTD are variable in different brain regions, it is widely accepted that LTP and LTD are common models for measuring synapse-specific changes required for memory formation. The control of synaptic strength is coordinately regulated by three types of synapses: glutamatergic, GABAergic, and dopaminergic (Figure 1). To understand the interconnected effects of Aβ on these synapses, we briefly outline structural organizations of these synapses, while more detailed molecular pathways underlying the formation and induction of these synapses are discussed elsewhere.

i) Glutamatergic synapses

Glutamate is the most abundant excitatory neurotransmitter in the nervous system. Functional glutamatergic synapses are critical for learning and memory and are composed of presynaptic glutamate stored within synaptic vesicles and postsynaptic glutamate receptors. In the hippocampus and cortex, glutamate released from pyramidal neurons binds to two types of glutamate receptors with channel-gating properties: the a-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-propionic acid (AMPA)/kainate subtypes and the N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) subtypes. At the molecular level, NMDA receptors (NMDARs) are transmembrane channel-forming heteromers assembled by the obligatory NR1 subunit (GluN1) and modulatory NR2/3 subunits (GluN2A, 2B, 2C and 2D for Glu binding; GluN3A and GluN3B for Gly binding) (Low and Wee, 2010; Nong et al., 2003; Stephenson, 2001). Upon glutamate binding, activated NMDA receptors permit Ca2+ influx and an instant rise in postsynaptic Ca2+ levels; higher levels induce LTP while moderate levels induce LTD (Kennedy and Ehlers, 2006). In hippocampal pyramidal neurons, ligand-gated NMDARs are predominant in evoking Ca2+ signals in postsynapses. Receptors containing different NR2 subunits generate different intensities and durations of Ca2+ currents. It is established that Ca2+ influx through NR2B–containing receptors is larger and longest-lasting compared to NR2A-containing receptors. Multiple Ser/Thr residues in the NR2 C-terminal domain undergo phosphorylation or dephosphorylation by PKA, the Ca2+-dependent protein phosphatase calcineurin, Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII), and protein phosphatase 1 for functional regulation (Coultrap and Bayer, 2012; Thomas and Huganir, 2004).

AMPA receptors (AMPARs) are both glutamate receptors and cation channels assembled as a heterotetramer, with two dimers from a combination of any of the five GluR subunits (GluR1 to GluR5) (Greger et al., 2007). Binding of glutamate to AMPARs induces the pore to quickly open and permit ion influx for depolarization. GluR2, which usually forms a dimer with the putative second membrane (M2) domain, also known as the re-entrant loop, is critical for regulating calcium permeability (Derkach et al., 2007). GluR2-lacking AMPARs are permeable to sodium, potassium, and calcium, while GluR2-containing AMPARs will almost always render the channel impermeable to calcium. GluR2 is post-transcriptionally regulated by RNA editing in M2; the Q- to R-editing with R in the channel site renders AMPARs unfavorable for calcium to enter the cell through the pore; GluR2 in the central nervous system is mostly in the R form. Hence, AMPA receptors containing the unedited form of GluR2Q have high Ca2+ permeability, while GluR2Rs have minimum Ca2+ conductance (Sommer et al., 1991).

AMPAR activation and depolarization also regulate intracellular transient or sustained Ca2+ currents by causing NMDARs to open their pores and to increase Ca2+ permeability. Compared to relatively stationary NMDARs, trafficking of AMPARs to dendrites and spines is a key step for the control of postsynaptic plasticity; LTP promotes recruitment of more AMPAs to postsynaptic membranes for long-lasting potentials (Malinow and Malenka, 2002). On the other hand, rapid lateral diffusion cycling of AMPARs, but not NMDARs, into and out of the synaptic membrane, followed by internalization, induces long-term depression (LTD), which can in turn cause endocytosis of NMDARs, shrinkage of dendritic spines, endocytosis of AMPARs, and synapse loss (Borgdorff and Choquet, 2002; Lau and Zukin, 2007). Multiple post-translational modifications regulate this trafficking. One common observation is that phosphorylation of GluR1 by PKA increases its surface expression (Carroll et al., 1998; Roche et al., 1996). Alternatively, clustering of Ca2+-sensitive CaMKII at synapses regulates AMPAR surface expression, while src/fyn kinase, PKC, and cdk5 also regulate trafficking of different AMPARs to control their activities (Anggono and Huganir, 2012; Wang et al., 2014). A recent study suggests that Aβ-mediated AMPAR loss is due to increased AMPAR ubiquitination, as down-regulation of the ubiquitin ligase Nedd4-1, known to ubiquitinate AMPARs, prevents surface AMPAR loss and synaptic weakening (Rodrigues et al., 2016).

Although not illustrated in Figure 1, LTP induction at excitatory synapses is also modulated by another class of glutamate receptors, the metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs) (Pin and Bockaert, 1995). Synaptic mGluRs are seven transmembrane, non-ionotrophic G-protein coupled receptors. The functional core signaling receptor appears to be a dimer, although monomeric mGluR is functional (El et al., 2012). The mGluR family has eight members; type I members (mGluR1 and mGluR5) are predominantly localized on the postsynaptic membrane, while members of types II and III are mainly localized on presynaptic membranes. All members except for mGluR6 are found in cortical and hippocampal neurons. The binding of glutamate to mGluR1 and mGluR5 on the excitatory postsynaptic membrane induces certain forms of LTP by increasing inflow of Ca2+ and potentiating NMDAR activity (Anwyl, 2009). In contrast, binding of glutamate to presynaptic mGluRs appears to inhibit NMDARs, resulting in the induction of LTD (Collingridge et al., 2010).

ii) GABAergic synapses

To avoid synaptic hyperexcitation, excitatory output of pyramidal neurons is precisely counterbalanced by input from inhibitory interneurons via binding of the presynaptically released neurotransmitter GABA (γ-Aminobutyric acid) to the GABA receptor on the postsynaptic membrane. In adult brain, GABAergic synapses are mainly inhibitory synapses, which are typically formed either on soma or dendrites from neurons classified as inhibitory interneurons (Freund and Katona, 2007; Fritschy et al., 2012; Kullmann and Lamsa, 2011). The structure and synaptic plasticity of GABAergic synapses vary based on the types of interconnected neurons and the postsynaptic locations (soma, proximal vs. terminal dendrites). Unlike excitatory synapses, which have postsynaptic spines serving as an organized compartment for sensing Ca2+ influx and for sustaining long-lasting synaptic plasticity, spines are often absent on inhibitory synapses formed by interneuronal dendrites. While hippocampal inhibitory synapses have been described in more detail by others (Caroni, 2015), we briefly summarize that synapses onto hippocampal principal cells are interconnected with parvalbumin-positive fast-spiking interneurons, which are the most abundant in the hippocampus, or non-fast-spiking somatostatin-or calbindin-positive interneurons, for two distinct orchestrations of synaptic networks.

At the molecular level, GABA receptors are distinguished by two subtypes: GABAA and GABAB receptors. GABAA receptors are ligand-activated chloride channels with the channel pore symmetrically assembled by five multi-transmembrane α, β, and γ subunits in various combinations (Barrera et al., 2008). Binding of GABA to this receptor quickly opens the pore to permit inflow of Cl− into the affected neuron, which results in more negative membrane potentials. The net effect is inhibitory or hyperpolarizing and makes it more difficult for neurons to produce synaptic transmission. GABAB receptors are G protein-coupled receptors, recognized as metabotropic receptors. GABA receptors, mainly GABAA receptors, are also abundantly localized on extrasynaptic zones, and binding of GABA to these extrasynaptic receptors in an autocrine manner will also modulate synaptic plasticity (Ferando and Mody, 2014).

iii) Dopaminergic synapses

Dopaminergic synapses, formed by presynaptic axonal termini from dopaminergic neurons and dendrites from pyramidal neurons or interneurons, play a key role in protein synthesis-dependent forms of synaptic plasticity (Bjorklund and Dunnett, 2007). Dopamine released from presynaptic vesicles of dopaminergic neurons binds to postsynaptic dopamine receptors, which are metabotropic G-protein coupled receptors and have two distinct subfamilies (D1-like and D2-like). In the hippocampus and cortex, dopamine D1-like receptors (D1R; D1 and D5) are the predominant dopamine receptors on pyramidal neurons. D1 receptors are especially abundant in dendritic spines, whereas D5 receptors are present on dendritic shafts at excitatory glutamate synapses, but also at presynaptic spine-targeting varicosities (Bergson et al., 1995). Activated D1R in glutamatergic postsynapses triggers the D1R-coupled adenylyl cyclase to produce cyclic adenosine monophosphatase (cAMP) and to activate the downstream molecules protein kinase A (PKA), cAMP-responsive element binding protein (CREB), and DARPP-32, which is a small protein expressed in dopaminoceptive spiny neurons and acts as a potent inhibitor of protein phosphatase-1. While dopaminergic synapses are known to mediate various brain psychiatric or motor functions, this sequential cascade arising from D1R activation can also modulate LTP. It has been shown that D1R activation can lead to an increase in surface expression of AMPA and NMDA receptors by modulating NMDAR-dependent synaptic plasticity (Gao and Wolf, 2007; Gao and Wolf, 2008; Smith et al., 2005). Either dopamine insufficiency, such as in aging, or dopamine hyperactivity, as in acute stress, will lead to impairments in working memory, which can be ameliorated by treatment with D1 receptor agonists or antagonists. The dopamine D2-like receptors (D2R) are expressed presynaptically at inhibitory axon terminals, postsynaptically at excitatory and inhibitory synapses, as well as presynaptically at dopaminergic axon terminals (Fitzgerald et al., 2012; Negyessy and Goldman-Rakic, 2005; Pinto and Sesack, 2008). Depending on the localization of these receptors, D2R signaling maintains the cortical excitatory-inhibitory balance by downregulating cAMP signaling. For example, dopaminergic modulation of early LTP in hippocampal CA1 requires NMDARs containing NR2B subunits via D4Rs (Herwerth et al., 2012). At glutamatergic synapses on interneurons, the activation of postsynaptic D4R, a typical member of the D2R family, reduces the excitation of interneurons by modulating AMPA receptor trafficking (Yuen et al., 2010). At glutamatergic synapses on pyramidal neurons, the activation of postsynaptic D4R enhances pyramidal neuron excitation by promoting phosphorylation of the GluR1 subunit of AMAPRs by the pyramidal neuron-specific kinase αCaMKII. In contrast, at inhibitory synapses on pyramidal neurons, stimulation of postsynaptic D4Rs reduces inhibitory currents in pyramidal neurons by reducing surface expression of GABAA receptor β2/3 subunits in an actin-dependent manner. Hence, coordinated signaling actions among glutamatergic and dopaminergic synapses are essential for synaptic plasticity and proper cognitive functions.

Aβ and synaptic functions

By using biochemical and electron microscopy approaches, the protein components for Aβ generation, such as APP (Vassar and Zheng, 2014), BACE1 (Buggia-Prevot and Thinakaran, 2015), and γ-secretase (DeBoer et al., 2014; Haass et al., 2012), have all been found in the presynaptic site and Aβ can be released locally to impact postsynaptic functions (Figure 2). The lumen of presynaptic vesicles is acidic (pH=5.6), which is compatible with favored BACE1 processing under moderate acidic conditions. Processing of APP in presynaptic vesicles by BACE1 will locally release sAPPβ and APP C-terminal fragment (C99), which will be cleaved by γ-secretase to release Aβ. BACE1 activity is elevated in AD brains and BACE1-cleaved sAPPβ and Aβ are correspondingly increased. sAPPβ appears to have no measurable effect on LTP or LTD (Chasseigneaux and Allinquant, 2012), but Aβ peptides, especially containing the more readily aggregated Aβ42, do have pathophysiological impacts on synaptic function.

At the physiological level, Aβ generated at synapses in response to evoked activity of hippocampal neurons suppresses synaptic activity to avoid excitotoxicity (Kamenetz et al., 2003). Suppressed Aβ generation by γ secretase inhibition is sufficient to increase EPSC frequency (Kamenetz et al., 2003). Recording synaptic transfers at single presynaptic terminals and synaptic connections using rodent hippocampal cultures and slices shows that endogenous level of Aβ boosts ongoing activity in the hippocampal network and is required for short-term synaptic facilitation during bursts in excitatory synaptic connections (Abramov et al., 2009). Rodent hippocampal slice recording experiments also show that Aβ42 facilitates induction and maintenance of long term potentiation, whereas treatment with Aβ antibodies inhibits hippocampal LTP (Morley et al., 2010). Consistent with these findings, the addition of human Aβ42 to mice treated with Aβ antibody and siRNA against murine APP reverses impaired learning and memory behaviors in mice and reduced LTP, suggesting that endogenously produced Aβ is needed for normal LTP and memory function (Puzzo et al., 2011).

In AD brains, accumulated Aβ is regionally selective, with particularly high concentrations found in frontal cortex, entorhinal cortex, hippocampus, amygdala, and parietal association cortex (Braak and Braak, 1991). Reportedly, abnormal accumulation of Aβ in the form of dimers, trimers, or oligomers in the synaptic cleft is highly correlated with memory-related synaptic dysfunctions in AD (Haass and Selkoe, 2007; Palop and Mucke, 2010; Sheng et al., 2012). In short, various toxic forms of Aβ have gained broad attention for impairing LTP and facilitating LTD. AD is thus recognized as a disease of synaptic failure (Selkoe, 2002; Spires-Jones and Hyman, 2014; Tu et al., 2014; Westmark, 2013).

i) Aβ in glutamatergic synapses

Pathological levels of Aβ impair NMDA-dependent synaptic plasticity, mainly by inducing desensitization of NMDARs in synapses to inhibit LTP and by enhancing LTD through extrasynaptic NMDA-dependent and -independent signaling pathways (Bezprozvanny and Hiesinger, 2013; Li et al., 2009; Li et al., 2011; Minano-Molina et al., 2011; Walsh et al., 2002). Aβ, mainly in soluble multimers or oligomers, directly interacts with NMDARs in pathophysiological conditions (Lacor et al., 2007; Shankar et al., 2007). In wild-type cultured cortical neurons, treatment with either synthetic Aβ42 peptides or naturally secreted Aβ from transgenic mice overexpressing Swedish mutant APP (K670N/M671L mutation) promotes endocytosis of surface NMDARs; the reduction of surface NMDARs depresses NMDAR-dependent Ca2+ currents (Snyder EM et al., 2005). One study suggests that inhibition of N-cadherin cleavage by Aβ treatment causes the enhanced endocytosis of NMDARs (Uemura et al., 2007), but another study indicates that dephosphorylation of p-Tyr1472 in the NR2B subunit by Aβ-induced STEP61, a protein tyrosine phosphatase enriched in the postsynaptic terminal, decreases NMDARs on synaptic membranes (Kurup et al., 2010). Relatedly, STEP61 is progressively increased in the cortex of Tg2576 mice over the first year, as well as in prefrontal cortex of human AD brains. Activation of insulin signaling, on the other hand, appears to downregulate binding of Aβ to NMDARs and thus blocks synaptic impairments (De Felice et al., 2009).

Aβ can also significantly impair synaptic plasticity by directly decreasing the availability of AMPARs at excitatory synapses. Surface levels of AMPARs, which are the major excitatory neurotransmitter receptors in the brain, are directly correlated with synaptic strength; recruiting new AMPARs to the surface increases LTP, while reducing AMPARs via internalization promotes LTD (Malenka and Malinow, 2011). Surface levels of GluR1 are dependent on PKA-mediated phosphorylation of Ser845, as mice lacking phosphorylation on GluR1 S845 exhibit LTP deficits (Lee et al., 2003). It has been further shown that cultured wild-type neurons treated with Aβ oligomers have reduced GluR1 levels on the surface due to decreased levels of GluR1 p-Ser845 and increased dephosphorylation by calcium influx–activated calcineurin (Minano-Molina et al., 2011). Studies using cultured Tg2576 APP mutant neurons show clear reductions in GluR1 and its interacting downstream molecule postsynaptic density-95 (PSD-95), and these reductions can be blocked by reduced Aβ generation (Almeida et al., 2005).

Soluble Aβ oligomers also affect trafficking of other GluR subunits. For example, surface levels of GluR2 are decreased by Aβ treatments and the concentration of free cytosolic Ca2+ is therefore increased due to reduced Ca2+ extrusion and sequestration in hippocampal neurons (Hsieh et al., 2006; Liu et al., 2010). If locally produced Aβ is accumulated and laterally forms Aβ oligomers, it will induce clustering of the postsynaptic GluR5 and elevation of intracellular Ca2+, thereby causing synapse reduction (Renner et al., 2010). Hence, Aβ peptides suppress synaptic strength by downregulation of both AMPAR and NMDAR function via controlling intracellular Ca2+ currents. Decreased AMPAR surface expression, with any combination of GluRs, can cause loss of dendritic spines, which likely leads to increased endocytosis of synaptic NMDA receptors and reduced synaptic responses (Malenka and Malinow, 2011). On the other hand, reduced NMDAR activity facilitates Aβ generation, which will exacerbate synaptic toxicity, although the mechanism is not fully understood (Sheng et al., 2012).

Soluble Aβ also impairs synaptic plasticity through group I mGluRs (mGluR1 and 5). By weak low-frequency stimulation, oligomeric Aβ can bind to mGluR1/5 to induce Aβ-mediated synaptic depression (promoting LTD) and blockage of LTP (Chen et al., 2013; Kessels et al., 2013; Rammes et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2004). It has been suggested that mGluR5 may act as a scaffold for Aβ binding, perhaps through a complex with cellular prion protein (PrP), as the extracellular domain of mGluR5 interacts with both PrP and Aβ42 and this binding results in the activation of Ca2+ release from intracellular stores (Hamilton et al., 2015; Lauren et al., 2009). Blocking PrP function by anti-PrP reduces Aβ-mediated LTP impairments (Barry et al., 2011; Lauren et al., 2009). The compound glimepiride, a sulphonylurea approved for the treatment of diabetes mellitus, can reduce surface level of PrP by increased releasing of soluble PrP from neurons and may protect against Aβ-induced synapse damage by reducing Aβ-Prp interaction occurred within membrane micro-environments (Osborne et al., 2016). Intriguingly, others have failed to replicate the role of PrP in Aβ-induced synaptic depression, reduction in spine density, or blockade of LTP, regardless of whether PrP was overexpressed or ablated (Balducci et al., 2010; Calella et al., 2010; Kessels et al., 2010), arguing against a critical role of PrP as a coupling receptor.

Smaller forms of soluble Aβ, Aβ dimers or trimers, are naturally extracted from AD brains and can induce LTD by favorably acting through mGluR1 (Davis et al., 2011; Shankar et al., 2008). Postsynaptic GluN2B-containing NMDARs are essential for excitotoxicity, functioning as extracellular "death receptors". Binding of Aβ to mGluR1/5 causes a selective loss of synaptic GluN2B responses by switching GluN2B-containing NMDARs to GluN2A-containing NMDARs, a process leading to LTD, and this process is likely related to sequential stimulation of downstream kinases such as JNK, Cdk5, and p38 MAPK in response to mGluR activation.

Most recently, a role for group II mGluRs in reducing Aβ oligomer-mediated synaptic disruption has begun to gain attention. When transgenic mice that accumulate Dutch amyloid-β (Aβ) oligomers are chronically treated with BCI-838, an antagonist of Group II mGluRs, they show improved learning and reduced anxiety (Kim et al., 2014). Activation of Group II mGluRs by agonist DCG-IV, on the other hand, induces Aβ42 generation (Kim et al., 2010). Activation of mGluR7, a member of group III mGluRs, reduces NMDAR currents in basal forebrain cholinergic neurons, which are selectively impaired by soluble Aβ (Gu et al., 2014). This effect is more related to the altered surface expression of NR1, but not NR2B, via regulation of F-actin and by increases in p21-activated kinase (PAK)-mediated cofilin phosphorylation. Hence, all three groups of mGluRs are participating in Aβ-mediated synaptic impairments.

While the activity of glutamate receptors in synapses is important for LTP, soluble Aβ oligomers at low nanomolar levels induce excessive activity of NMDARs at extrasynaptic sites by high frequency stimulation (Kervern et al., 2012; Li et al., 2011). The pool of extrasynaptic GluN2B-containing NMDARs is a major target of Aβ oligomers in the hippocampus. It is likely that Aβ promotes release of glutamate from astrocytes, rather than solely from synaptic vesicles, which in turn activates extrasynaptic NMDA receptors on neurons (Talantova et al., 2013). Polyamines, such as spermidine and spermine, are positive modulators of NMDAR function and specific inhibition of de novo polyamine synthesis has been shown to block Aβ-mediated activation of extrasynaptic NMDA receptors (Gomes et al., 2014).

In addition to the direct effects on glutamate receptors, Aβ is also suggested to mediate the release of synaptic vesicles. Physiologically released Aβ binds to nicotinic acetylcholine receptors containing α7 subunits (α7-nAChRs) localized on the presynaptic zones and this binding promotes activity-dependent regulation of synaptic vesicle release (Abramov et al., 2009). However, others have shown that naturally secreted soluble Aβ, such as trimers, has no effect on presynaptic vesicle release but is potent in reducing LTP (Townsend et al., 2006). Nevertheless, presynaptic microinjection, but not extraneuronal perfusion, of 10–100 nM Aβ42 oligomers depletes the docked synaptic vesicle pool after high-frequency presynaptic stimulation and impairs synaptic transmission (Moreno et al., 2009). Normal P/Q- or N-type Ca2+ channels are high-voltage-gated calcium channels contributing to vesicle release at synaptic terminals and therefore are critical for synaptic stability; increasing N- and P/Q-type calcium currents triggers synaptic vesicle release. A recent study reported that as low as 8 nM of Aβ42 globulomer (a highly stable globular oligomeric Aβ) can impair LTP by directly reducing the threshold for channel opening of presynaptic P/Q- or N-type Ca2+ channels (Hermann et al., 2013; Mezler et al., 2012; Nimmrich et al., 2008). Specifically blocking P/Q-type or N-type calcium channels with peptide toxins completely reversed Aβ globulomer-induced deficits in glutamatergic neurotransmission. Consequently, an increase in Ca2+ current at presynaptic terminals triggers vesicle release and excitotoxicity in AD brains. Enhanced presynaptic Ca2+, on the other hand, facilitates calpain activation by increased degradation of dynamin, a protein critical for synaptic vesicle endocytosis, and depletion of dynamin interrupts synaptic vesicle recycling (Kelly and Ferreira, 2006; Kelly et al., 2005; Watanabe et al., 2010). Alternatively, Aβ42, as low as 50 nM, may disrupt the formation of synaptophysin and VAMP2 complex, followed by increasing the amount of primed vesicles and exocytosis (Russell et al., 2012), although the precise mechanism for this interaction is not yet clear.

Collectively, all of these aspects point to a central culprit: abnormally and sustained high pre- and postsynaptic Ca2+ by soluble Aβ. This abnormal calcium homeostasis can alter the function of many Ca2+-dependent proteins such as CaMKII, calcineurin, and calpain. Activated calpain in postsynaptic regions will also promote LTD by degrading NMDARs and their downstream PSD-95 at glutamatergic synapses (Dong et al., 2004; Li et al., 2011; Lu et al., 2000; Roselli et al., 2005; Vinade et al., 2001). On the hand other hand, Aβ-mediated impairments in glutamatergic synapses are far more complicated and multidimensional than a single “Ca2+ hypothesis”. Thus, it is not practical to target any specific signal receptor molecule for blocking synapto-toxic effects of Aβ.

ii) Aβ in GABAergic synapses

Comparatively speaking, the effect of Aβ on inhibitory synapses has been less intensively studied, partially because GABAergic synapses were not initially thought to be as affected in AD. More recent studies, however, have shown direct effects of Aβ on inhibitory interneurons (Palop and Mucke, 2010). The reduction of GABA functions in AD patients is related to high levels of soluble Aβ, which can decrease bursting activity and late inhibitory potentials of GABAergic neurons in the septohippocampal system (Nava-Mesa et al., 2014). Autoradiography studies show significant reductions in both GABAA and GABAB receptors in AD postmortem stratum moleculare of the dentate gyrus, stratum lacunosum-moleculare, and stratum pyramidale of CA1 (Chu et al., 1987a; Chu et al., 1987b). Extended studies indicate that GABAB receptor subunit R1 expression is stable or increased, but is decreased as in the late Braak disease stage (Iwakiri et al., 2005). These observations are further validated by studies in animal models.

In AD PS1/APP J20 mouse dentate gyrus, aberrant overexcitation is linked to high levels of Aβ, which sensitizes at least some neuronal networks due to disrupted GABA function (Palop et al., 2007). Others observed selected loss of hippocampal calretinin-positive interneurons in a PS1/APP model from 2 to 12 months of age, and this subpopulation plays a crucial role in controlling other interneurons through synchronous rhythmic activity in the hippocampus (Baglietto-Vargas et al., 2010). It has been shown that hippocampal Aβ injections in rat are sufficient to induce reductions in GABAergic input to the hippocampus and to exhibit aberrant θ oscillations (Villette et al., 2010). In a separate study of the fimbria-CA3 complex postsynaptic response, Aβ also induces a significant decrease in late inhibitory postsynaptic currents (IPSCs) (Nava-Mesa et al., 2013). Treatment of somatosensory neurons with soluble Aβ as much as 1 µM has also been found to decrease agonist-evoked GABAA responses and to depress monosynaptic GABAA receptor-mediated IPSCs to 60% of control levels on average, whereas a reversed sequence control peptide is ineffective (Ulrich, 2015). The downregulated GABAA receptors for Aβ-mediated synaptic inhibition are due to increased endocytosis of GABAA receptors, because the induced IPSC decline was prevented by intracellular applications of p4, a peptide inhibitor to block the dynamin-mediated removal of GABAA receptors from the plasma membrane. Others indicate that Aβ treatment in brain slices reduces conductance in G-protein-coupled inward rectifier potassium (GirK), which is a specific downstream effector coupled with the GABAB receptor. Relatedly, deficiency or mutations in Girk channels, particularly the GIRK2 subunit, reduce LTP and increase LTD in hippocampus (Luscher and Slesinger, 2010).

Taken together, Aβ-mediated GABA dysfunction therefore can disrupt synaptic and cognitive deficits in AD patients by deregulating excitatory/inhibitory balances, rather than neurodegeneration, through both types of receptors. Nevertheless, alternative mechanisms may be related to disruption of GABAergic interneuron functions by desensitizing α7β2-nAChRs (Liu et al., 2012). GABAergic interneurons in the CA1 subregion abundantly express α7β2-nAChRs, and as low as 1 nM oligomeric Aβ is sufficient to disrupt 10 mM choline-elicited cholinergic signaling in hippocampal GABAergic interneurons via interactions with α7β2-nAChRs. This inhibition may cause acute disruption of cholinergic signaling on interneurons and hyper-excite principal cell types (e.g., pyramidal cells), leading to synaptic deficits.

iii) Aβ in dopaminergic synapses

Studies involving dopaminergic synapses in AD synaptic failure date back to the early 1980s, with reports that DA levels in post-mortem brain tissues of AD patients were decreased and that DA receptor distribution and density in several brain structures of the temporal lobe were altered (Martorana and Koch, 2014). Although dopaminergic synaptic dysfunction is more studied in Parkinson’s disease and a direct role of DA in AD pathogenesis is debatable, the presence of extrapyramidal signs, attributable to nigrostriatal dysfunction in approximately 35–40% of AD patients, supports a contribution of DA-containing neurons to AD cognitive dysfunctions (Lopez et al., 1997). In transgenic mice overexpressing Swedish APP and PS1ΔE9, protein levels of tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), specifically from nigral dopamine neurons, are age-dependently increased (Perez et al., 2005). Moreover, TH-positive dystrophic neurites with rosette or grape-like cluster dispositions are found near amyloid plaques, indicating that dopaminergic pathology and amyloid deposition are closely interconnected, but that it is likely a downstream event of the Aβ insult. In AD mouse models, the dopamine metabolite DOPAC is significantly reduced in the striatum, further suggesting a causative role for Aβ on dopamine dysfunction. Strikingly, AD mouse models treated with either the dopamine precursor levodopa (Ambree et al., 2009), the dopamine reuptake blocker nomifensine (Guzman-Ramos et al., 2012), or even the dopamine receptor agonist apomorphine (Himeno et al., 2011) showed rescued Aβ-mediated impairments in memory and learning. However, dopamine toxicity can also in turn impair learning and memory. In an effort to determine an active effect of striatal dopamine on AD pathology, the neurotoxin 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) was injected into APPSWE/PS1E9 mice (Melief et al., 2015). The treated mice displayed significant impairments in Barnes maze performance at an early age and worsened behavioral flexibility in a task-switch phase of the water maze at older ages when compared to controls.

In AD patients, reduced DA functions, due to dramatically reduced expressions of both D1R and D2R, as well as DAT and TH, are found mainly in prefrontal cortex and hippocampus (Allard et al., 1990; Cross et al., 1984; Joyce et al., 1998; Kemppainen et al., 2003; Kumar and Patel, 2007; Murray et al., 1995; Rinne et al., 1986a; Rinne et al., 1986b). Quantitative real-time PCR further confirmed overall reduced gene expression of all DA receptors (D1R–D5R) in the temporal lobe of AD patients (Gahete et al., 2010). The use of dopaminergic drugs, in particular of the DA-D2-agonist rotigotine, exhibits beneficial effects on some cognitive domains in AD patients (Koch et al., 2014). Giving rotigotine to AD patients also revealed unexpected changes in both increased cortical excitability and restored central cholinergic transmission (Martorana A et al., 2011).

Despite these encouraging results, maintaining physiological levels of dopamine appears to be more beneficial to synaptic functions. In an in vivo microdialysis experiment to measure the release of dopamine in prefrontal cortex of freely moving mice, perfusion with soluble 100nM of Aβ42 evoked a significant release of dopamine (to approximately 170% of basal levels) (Wu et al., 2007). Such stimulated DA is mediated by presynaptic α7-nAChRs, to which oligomeric Aβ will bind. In AD and in mouse models, Aβ also up-regulates nAChRs, and this forward feeding effect induces excessive efflux of dopamine and likely leads to synaptic depression by long-term dopamine depletion. Results from this study imply that overstimulating dopamine release is likely detrimental.

At the molecular mechanistic level, Aβ-induced presynaptic calpain activation is sufficient to mediate cleavage of the dopamine- and cAMP-regulated phosphoprotein 32 kDa (DARPP-32) at Thr153 (Cho et al., 2015). This enhances cleavage of DARPP-32, a key inhibitor of protein phosphate-1 (PP-1), which regulates phosphorylation levels of CREB. CREB is a transcription factor that functions as a molecular switcher by converting short-term to long-term memory (Kandel, 2012).

On the other hand, the beneficial effects of optimal levels of dopamine are likely to mediate stimulation of D1/D5 receptors by facilitating the insertion of AMPARs into the plasma membrane. It has been shown that D1/D5 receptor activation induces PKA phosphorylation of Ser845 in AMPAR subunit GluR1 (Gao and Wolf, 2007; Smith et al., 2005). Treatment with SKF81297, a selective D1/D5 receptor agonist, shows reversal of Aβ-induced removal of AMPARs and NMDARs from the dendrites in cultured hippocampal neurons and prevents Aβ-induced impairment of LTP in hippocampal slices (Jurgensen et al., 2011). Another D1/D5R receptor agonist, SKF38393, activates Src-family tyrosine kinases, but not protein kinase A or phospholipase C pathways, and protects LTP of hippocampal CA1 synapses from oligomeric Aβ-induced deleterious synaptic actions (Yuan et al., 2016). Hence, a body of evidence suggests that optimizing DA in the striatum or prefrontal cortex, as well as maintaining normal dopamine signaling function, is beneficial to cognitive functions in AD.

Inhibiting BACE1 to benefit synaptic function

As outlined above, pathological levels of Aβ can disrupt synaptic functions by interacting with multiple cellular receptor proteins present in the pre- or post-synaptic glutamatergic, GABAergic, and dopaminergic synaptic membranes (Figure 3). Thus, substantial and long-lasting benefits for AD patients are unlikely to derive from targeting any one single synaptic system. While strategies for enhancing Aβ-degradation enzymes (Miners et al., 2008), clearance of Aβ by immunotherapy (Lemere, 2013), or chemical blocking of Aβ oligomerization (Klein, 2013) have been pursued, targeting reduced Aβ generation would be a more straightforward strategy for reducing Aβ-mediated synaptic toxicity. With increasing understanding of the toxic effects of γ-secretase inhibition, blocking BACE1 activity has emerged as the most promising approach for this purpose.

First, BACE1 is the initiating enzyme for Aβ generation, and its inhibition will significantly reduce total Aβ. In BACE1-null mice, Aβ generation is almost abolished, and significant reductions in Aβ are seen in BACE1 heterozygous mice (McConlogue et al., 2007). Based on these mouse data, potent inhibition of BACE1 activity in humans is expected to decrease Aβ generation and Aβ oligomerization. Several pharmaceutical and biotech companies have therefore developed potent brain-penetrable BACE1 inhibitors that are being tested at various stages of clinical trials [see review by (Yan and Vassar, 2014a)]. The brain-penetrable BACE1 inhibitor GRL-8234 showed a rapid decrease in soluble Aβ in the brain of Tg-2576 mice, and long-term treatment up to 7.5 months rescued cognitive defects induced by Aβ in this mouse model (Chang et al., 2011). Once-daily injection of an improved BACE1 inhibitor, GRL-8234, for 2 months showed clear improvements in memory tests in 5xFAD AD mice (Devi et al., 2015). A six-month treatment regimen of Tg-2576 mice with another BACE1 inhibitor, TAK70, also showed decreased cerebral Aβ deposition by approximately 60% and ameliorated memory deficits (Fukumoto et al., 2010). Even a potent non-brain-penetrant BACE1 inhibitor, delivered directly into the brain using intracerebroventricular infusion in aged transgenic Tg-2576 mice, has been shown to reverse learning and memory deficits (Thakker et al., 2015). Several other potent BACE1 inhibitors such as AZD3839 (Jeppsson et al., 2012), AZ-4217 (Eketjall et al., 2013), and LY2811376 (May et al., 2011) have all been shown to dramatically reduce cerebral Aβ levels in animal models, despite lacking rigorous cognitive tests.

BACE1 inhibitors are currently under clinical trials aiming at treating patients with AD (Yan and Vassar, 2014b). The compound from Merck has shown potent inhibition and safety profiles in phase I trials and is currently in phase II and III combined trials [Forman et al., 2012]. Several other companies have also shown great promise with their BACE1 inhibitors in phase I trials. There is great hope that such a BACE1 inhibitor will prevent or reverse cognitive decline in AD patients. Consistent with this, a previous study showed that preventing the formation of Aβ oligomers by either increasing Aβ degradation or reducing Aβ generation reverses impairments of hippocampal LTP (Walsh et al., 2002). Hence, inhibiting BACE1 activity should be beneficial to AD patients.

Despite BACE1 inhibitors having great promise for AD therapy, potential side effects due to long-term dramatic reductions in BACE1 must be considered. Mice with complete deficiency of BACE1 exhibit certain cognitive deficits, as demonstrated in behavioral and electrophysiological experiments [see review by (Yan and Vassar, 2014a)]. These potential side effects are likely due to the required processing of BACE1 substrates, including highly important signaling molecules for normal brain functions such as neuregulin-1, sodium channel β-subunit, CHL-1, and Jag1. Interestingly, even lower levels of Aβ are considered to be essential for optimal CA1 LTP and learning by its binding to α7-nAChRs (Abramov et al., 2009). Fortunately, drug developers are aware of these potential side effects. A non-clinically developed BACE1 inhibitor tertiary carbinamine-1 shows minimal disruption of neuregulin-1 signaling activity while dramatically reducing brain Aβ (Sankaranarayanan et al., 2008). Such a careful strategy in human applications of BACE1 inhibitors will be necessary, and proper dosage of BACE1 inhibition should improve cognitive functions in AD patients without generating significant negative side effects.

Summary

Pathological levels of Aβ, in the form of dimers up to soluble oligomers, directly interact with NMDARs and induce endocytosis of NMDARs, which disrupts NMDAR-dependent Ca2+ currents. Altered Ca2+ homeostasis due to influx of Ca2+ may also arise from ion-specific permeable channels assembled by small Aβ oligomers (Jang et al., 2008). A rapid and sustained increase in intracellular Ca2+ leads to changes in downstream signaling molecules such as PKA, calcineurin, and CaMKII, which collectively regulate the surface expression of AMPARs. Reduced surface AMPARs decrease LTP and increase LTD, which can also be alternatively affected through mGluR clustering or binding to α7-nACRs. Hence, increased intracellular Ca2+ levels in postsynaptic dendrites and dendritic spines cause synapse impairments and spine loss. As discussed above, soluble toxic Aβ disrupts dopamine and GABA functions and contributes to synaptic dysfunction. In addition to direct effects on synaptic functions, Aβ-mediated increases in intracellular Ca2+ either in pre- or postsynaptic zones cause activation of calpain, which can lead to activation of cdk5 for Tau hyperphosphorylation and mis-sorting of endogenous Tau into dendrites, as well as pronounced depletion of microtubules and mitochondria (Frandemiche et al., 2014; Zempel et al., 2010). This cross-talk, mainly from Aβ42 (Hu et al., 2014), potentially further induces tau pathology in AD brains, as discussed in recent reviews (Bloom, 2014; Spires-Jones and Hyman, 2014; Stancu et al., 2014). Hence, Aβ-mediated synaptic toxicity has more far-reaching effects than just synaptic proteins.

Because of these collective findings, the benefits of BACE1 inhibition in reducing Aβ generation from APP have been well-received and have driven a series of reports in clinical trials. Challenges also stem from multiple aspects. First, APP appears to be cleaved by another protease at a site upstream of the BACE1 site, and this coupled with γ-secretase cleavage releases an 8 kDa sodium dodecyl sulfate stable fragment; BACE1 inhibition appears to increase this product (Portelius et al., 2013; Welzel et al., 2014). Although distinct from the toxic Aβ, this longer Aβ-containing peptide can still impair synaptic plasticity (Welzel et al., 2014). A more detailed elucidation is from Willem et al., who refer this cleavage as η-secretase, which possesses membrane-bound matrix metalloproteinase activity and cleaves APP695 between residues 504–505 (Willem et al., 2015). The η-secretase-cleaved C-terminal fragment (CTFη) is about 8 kDa, and CTFη was shown to be further processed by both α-secretase and BACE1 to release long and short Aη peptides (termed Aη-α and Aη-β) by using unique antibodies recognizing the specifically cleaved neoeiptopes (Willem et al., 2015). Recombinant or synthetic Aη-α was shown to inhibit long-term potentiation and to decrease hippocampal neuronal activity. Upon BACE1 inhibition, levels of Aη-α peptide will be elevated and this may compromise the reducing effect from Aβ oligomers.

Another challenge is the possible effects of BACE1 inhibition on its growing list of natural substrates (Dislich et al., 2015). BACE1-null mice show schizophrenia-like behaviors, age-dependent neurodegeneration, and impaired cognitive functions (Vassar et al., 2014; Yan and Vassar, 2014b). It is suggested that these phenotypes are partly attributed to neuregulin-1 (Nrg1) signaling, which is known to regulate various brain functions through its actions on glutamatergic, GABAergic, and dopaminergic synapses [see updated review in (Mei and Nave, 2014) for more detailed discussion on the role of Nrg1 in synaptic function]. BACE1-dependent Nrg1 signaling is required for normal myelination during development, remyelination after injury, and maintenance of muscle spindles [see recent review by (Fleck et al., 2012; Hu et al., 2015)]. Impaired neuronal migration is due to abrogated cleavage of Sema3A-mediated CHL1 cleavage by BACE1 (Barao et al., 2015; Hitt et al., 2012; Kuhn et al., 2012; Zhou et al., 2012). Jag-Notch signaling pathway is important for synaptic function through the control of neurogenesis and brain development [see additional reviews by (Ables et al., 2011; Costa et al., 2003; Marathe and Alberi, 2015)]. BACE1 deficiency reduces neurogenesis by abolished cleavage of Jagged-1 and enhances Notch-mediated neurogenesis (Hu et al., 2013). Hence, complete inhibition of BACE1 is necessary to assess potential changes in these functions.

While these observations complicate the beneficial effects of inhibition of BACE1 on synaptic functions, APP is actually mostly cleaved by α-secretase, which cleaves APP within the Aβ region (Robakis et al., 1993; Sisodia et al., 1990). Increasing proteolytic activity of α-secretase is an alternative approach to decrease the release of toxic Aβ. Although the sAPPβ fragment has no definite effect on synaptic function, the α-secretase-cleaved sAPPα fragment has been shown to promote neurogenesis and increase LTP (Chasseigneaux and Allinquant, 2012). It should also be noted that all BACE1 substrates are alternatively cleaved by α-secretase, and this double processing is likely to ameliorate the side effects arising from complete ablation of BACE1 activity; this may also explain the relatively mild phenotypes seen in BACE1-null mice (Cai et al., 2001; Luo et al., 2001; Roberds et al., 2001). Weighing all of these benefits against potential side effects associated with complete elimination of BACE1 activity, we conclude that strong reduction of BACE1 activity, especially coupled with enhancing α-secretase activity, remains the most effective strategy for reducing Aβ generation with minimal mechanism-based side effects in human patients.

This study was supported by grants from the National Institute of Health to R Yan (NS074256, AG025493, AG046929 and NM103942). R Vassar is supported by NIH R01 AG022560, R01 AG030142, the Cure Alzheimer’s Fund, and the Baila Foundation.

Figure 1 Schematic illustration of three types of synapses

Glutamate is an amino acid neurotransmitter and is the primary excitatory neurotransmitter at almost all glutamatergic synapses in the central nervous system. This molecule binds to multiple postsynaptic receptors, including the NMDA receptor (comprising two GluN1 subunits and two GluN2A, 2B, 2C or 2D subunits) and the AMPA receptor (a tetramer formed by two dimers of GluR1, GluR2 or two GluR5 subunits). GluN3 has high affinity for Gly, and it is possible to form a functional NMDA receptor containing GluN1, GluN2 and GluN3. Different combinations of these subunits in NMDA and AMPA receptors exhibit unique synaptic profiles. Synaptic vesicles releasing other neurotransmitters such as acetylcholine for synaptic transmission are not depicted in this figure. GABA is the chief inhibitory neurotransmitter in the central nervous system and plays a principal role in suppressing neuronal excitability throughout the nervous system. It mainly binds to 2 types of postsynaptic GABA receptors, GABAAR and GABABR. GABACR are closely related to GABAAR, although differences in their transmission have been identified but are not listed separately in this figure. GABAARs are usually a ligand-gated Cl channel formed by a pentamer, while GABABRs belong to the family of seven transmembrane G-coupled protein receptors. Dopamine (DA) is a neurotransmitter of the catecholamine and phenethylamine families that play a number of important roles in cognitive functions including cognitive control, arousal, and motivation. DA mainly binds to D1-like receptors (D1 and D5) and D2-like receptors (D2, D3, and D4).

Figure 2 Soluble Aβ in synaptic dysfunction

Presynaptically expressed APP is cleaved by α-secretase (arrowhead) to release sAPPα and α-C-terminal fragment (αCTF), which is further cleaved by γ-secretase (blue arrow) to generate P83 and intracellular domain of APP (AICD). APP cleaved by BACE1 (red arrow) releases sAPPβ and βCTF, which is further cleaved by γ-secretase to generate Aβ and AICD. Pathological levels of Aβ are found to interact with NMDA receptors, which are voltage-gated Ca2+ channels, and such binding blocks Ca2+ flow. AMPA receptors regulate the exchange of Na+ or K+ via ligand-gated control. The increase in cytosolic Ca2+ leads to decreased LTP and increased LTD. In addition to the direct effects on NMDAR and AMPAR proteins, Aβ oligomers are also suggested to form annular amyloid pores, which alter the membrane dielectric barrier and allow influx of Ca2+. Aβ oligomers mediate release of glutamate from synaptic vesicles through binding to presynaptic nicotinic acetylcholine receptors containing α7 subunits (α7-nAChRs).

Figure 3 Impairments of Aβ on presynaptic and postsynaptic compartments

In Alzheimer’s brains, BACE1 levels are elevated, which will cause production of pathological level of Aβ, in the form of dimers, trimers, or various sizes of oligomers. We summarize the impacts of toxic Aβ on all possible routes based on reports in the literature. Changes in downstream signaling molecules such as PKA and CaMKII in response to disrupted glutamatergic, dopaminergic, and GABAergic synapses are omitted.

Highlights

Alzheimer’s disease is a disease of synaptic failures.

Aβ peptides have been shown to impair synaptic dysfunctions

The effect of the Aβ-mediated synaptic dysfunctions are multi-facets, and it disrupt functions in glutamatergic, GABAergic, and dopaminergic synapses

BACE1 is indispensable for the generation of Aβ peptides, and inhibition of BACE1 is most promising target for reducing Aβ-mediated synaptic dysfunctions.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


Reference List

Ables JL Breunig JJ Eisch AJ Rakic P Not(ch) just development: Notch signalling in the adult brain Nat Rev Neurosci 2011 12 269 283 21505516
Abramov E Dolev I Fogel H Ciccotosto GD Ruff E Slutsky I Amyloid-beta as a positive endogenous regulator of release probability at hippocampal synapses Nat Neurosci 2009 12 1567 1576 19935655
Allard P Alafuzoff I Carlsson A Eriksson K Ericson E Gottfries CG Marcusson JO Loss of dopamine uptake sites labeled with [3H]GBR-12935 in Alzheimer’s disease Eur Neurol 1990 30 181 185 2209670
Allinson TM Parkin ET Condon TP Schwager SL Sturrock ED Turner AJ Hooper NM The role of ADAM10 and ADAM17 in the ectodomain shedding of angiotensin converting enzyme and the amyloid precursor protein Eur J Biochem 2004 271 2539 2547 15182369
Almeida CG Tampellini D Takahashi RH Greengard P Lin MT Snyder EM Gouras GK Beta-amyloid accumulation in APP mutant neurons reduces PSD-95 and GluR1 in synapses Neurobiol Dis 2005 20 187 198 16242627
Ambree O Richter H Sachser N Lewejohann L Dere E de Souza Silva MA Herring A Keyvani K Paulus W Schabitz WR Levodopa ameliorates learning and memory deficits in a murine model of Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 2009 30 1192 1204 18079024
Anggono V Huganir RL Regulation of AMPA receptor trafficking and synaptic plasticity Curr Opin Neurobiol 2012 22 461 469 22217700
Anwyl R Metabotropic glutamate receptor-dependent long-term potentiation Neuropharmacology 2009 56 735 740 19705571
Araki W Oda A Motoki K Hattori K Itoh M Yuasa S Konishi Y Shin RW Tamaoka A Ogino K Reduction ofbeta -amyloid accumulation by reticulon 3 in transgenic mice Curr Alzheimer Res 2012
Asai M Hattori C Szabo B Sasagawa N Maruyama K Tanuma S Ishiura S Putative function of ADAM9, ADAM10, and ADAM17 as APP alpha-secretase Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2003 301 231 235 12535668
Baglietto-Vargas D Moreno-Gonzalez I Sanchez-Varo R Jimenez S Trujillo-Estrada L Sanchez-Mejias E Torres M Romero-Acebal M Ruano D Vizuete M Vitorica J Gutierrez A Calretinin interneurons are early targets of extracellular amyloid-beta pathology in PS1/AbetaPP Alzheimer mice hippocampus J Alzheimers Dis 2010 21 119 132 20413859
Balducci C Beeg M Stravalaci M Bastone A Sclip A Biasini E Tapella L Colombo L Manzoni C Borsello T Chiesa R Gobbi M Salmona M Forloni G Synthetic amyloid-beta oligomers impair long-term memory independently of cellular prion protein Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010 107 2295 2300 20133875
Barao S Gartner A Leyva-Diaz E Demyanenko G Munck S Vanhoutvin T Zhou L Schachner M Lopez-Bendito G Maness PF De SB Antagonistic Effects of BACE1 and APH1B–gamma-Secretase Control Axonal Guidance by Regulating Growth Cone Collapse Cell Rep 2015 12 1367 1376 26299962
Barrera NP Betts J You H Henderson RM Martin IL Dunn SM Edwardson JM Atomic force microscopy reveals the stoichiometry and subunit arrangement of the alpha4beta3delta GABA(A) receptor Mol Pharmacol 2008 73 960 967 18079275
Barry AE Klyubin I Mc Donald JM Mably AJ Farrell MA Scott M Walsh DM Rowan MJ Alzheimer’s disease brain-derived amyloid-beta-mediated inhibition of LTP in vivo is prevented by immunotargeting cellular prion protein J Neurosci 2011 31 7259 7263 21593310
Benilova I Karran E De SB The toxic Abeta oligomer and Alzheimer’s disease: an emperor in need of clothes Nat Neurosci 2012 15 349 357 22286176
Benjannet S Elagoz A Wickham L Mamarbachi M Munzer JS Basak A Lazure C Cromlish JA Sisodia S Checler F Chretien M Seidah NG Post-translational processing of beta-secretase (beta-amyloid-converting enzyme) and its ectodomain shedding. The pro- and transmembrane/cytosolic domains affect its cellular activity and amyloid-beta production J Biol Chem 2001 276 10879 10887 11152688
Bennett BD Denis P Haniu M Teplow DB Kahn S Louis JC Citron M Vassar R A furin-like convertase mediates propeptide cleavage of BACE, the Alzheimer’s beta -secretase J Biol Chem 2000 275 37712 37717 10956649
Bergson C Mrzljak L Smiley JF Pappy M Levenson R Goldman-Rakic PS Regional, cellular, and subcellular variations in the distribution of D1 and D5 dopamine receptors in primate brain J Neurosci 1995 15 7821 7836 8613722
Bezprozvanny I Hiesinger PR The synaptic maintenance problem: membrane recycling, Ca2+ homeostasis and late onset degeneration Mol Neurodegener 2013 8 23 23829673
Bhattacharyya R Barren C Kovacs DM Palmitoylation of amyloid precursor protein regulates amyloidogenic processing in lipid rafts J Neurosci 2013 33 11169 11183 23825420
Bjorklund A Dunnett SB Dopamine neuron systems in the brain: an update Trends Neurosci 2007 30 194 202 17408759
Bloom GS Amyloid-beta and tau: the trigger and bullet in Alzheimer disease pathogenesis JAMA Neurol 2014 71 505 508 24493463
Borgdorff AJ Choquet D Regulation of AMPA receptor lateral movements Nature 2002 417 649 653 12050666
Braak H Braak E Neuropathological stageing of Alzheimer-related changes Acta Neuropathol (Berl) 1991 82 239 259 1759558
Buggia-Prevot V Fernandez CG Riordan S Vetrivel KS Roseman J Waters J Bindokas VP Vassar R Thinakaran G Axonal BACE1 dynamics and targeting in hippocampal neurons: a role for Rab11 GTPase Mol Neurodegener 2014 9 1 24386896
Buggia-Prevot V Fernandez CG Udayar V Vetrivel KS Elie A Roseman J Sasse VA Lefkow M Meckler X Bhattacharyya S George M Kar S Bindokas VP Parent AT Rajendran L Band H Vassar R Thinakaran G A function for EHD family proteins in unidirectional retrograde dendritic transport of BACE1 and Alzheimer’s disease Abeta production Cell Rep 2013 5 1552 1563 24373286
Buggia-Prevot V Thinakaran G Significance of transcytosis in Alzheimer’s disease: BACE1 takes the scenic route to axons Bioessays 2015 37 888 898 26126792
Cai H Wang Y McCarthy D Wen H Borchelt DR Price DL Wong PC BACE1 is the major beta-secretase for generation of Abeta peptides by neurons Nat Neurosci 2001 4 233 234 11224536
Calella AM Farinelli M Nuvolone M Mirante O Moos R Falsig J Mansuy IM Aguzzi A Prion protein and Abeta-related synaptic toxicity impairment EMBO Mol Med 2010 2 306 314 20665634
Caroni P Inhibitory microcircuit modules in hippocampal learning Curr Opin Neurobiol 2015 35 66 73 26176433
Carroll RC Nicoll RA Malenka RC Effects of PKA and PKC on miniature excitatory postsynaptic currents in CA1 pyramidal cells J Neurophysiol 1998 80 2797 2800 9819284
Castello MA Jeppson JD Soriano S Moving beyond anti-amyloid therapy for the prevention and treatment of Alzheimer’s disease BMC Neurol 2014 14 169 25179671
Chang WP Huang X Downs D Cirrito JR Koelsch G Holtzman DM Ghosh AK Tang J Beta-secretase inhibitor GRL-8234 rescues age-related cognitive decline in APP transgenic mice FASEB J 2011 25 775 784 21059748
Chasseigneaux S Allinquant B Functions of Abeta, sAPPalpha and sAPPbeta : similarities and differences J Neurochem 2012 120 Suppl 1 99 108 22150401
Chen X Lin R Chang L Xu S Wei X Zhang J Wang C Anwyl R Wang Q Enhancement of long-term depression by soluble amyloid beta protein in rat hippocampus is mediated by metabotropic glutamate receptor and involves activation of p38MAPK, STEP and caspase-3 Neuroscience 2013 253 435 443 24012839
Cho K Cho MH Seo JH Peak J Kong KH Yoon SY Kim DH Calpain-mediated cleavage of DARPP-32 in Alzheimer’s disease Aging Cell 2015
Chu DC Penney JB Jr Young AB Cortical GABAB and GABAA receptors in Alzheimer’s disease: a quantitative autoradiographic study Neurology 1987a 37 1454 1459 2819782
Chu DC Penney JB Jr Young AB Quantitative autoradiography of hippocampal GABAB and GABAA receptor changes in Alzheimer’s disease Neurosci Lett 1987b 82 246 252 2827074
Collingridge GL Peineau S Howland JG Wang YT Long-term depression in the CNS Nat Rev Neurosci 2010 11 459 473 20559335
Costa RM Honjo T Silva AJ Learning and memory deficits in Notch mutant mice Curr Biol 2003 13 1348 1354 12906797
Costantini C Ko MH Jonas MC Puglielli L A reversible form of lysine acetylation in the ER and Golgi lumen controls the molecular stabilization of BACE1 Biochem J 2007 407 383 395 17425515
Coultrap SJ Bayer KU CaMKII regulation in information processing and storage Trends Neurosci 2012 35 607 618 22717267
Creemers JW Ines DD Plets E Serneels L Taylor NA Multhaup G Craessaerts K Annaert W De Strooper B Processing of beta-secretase by furin and other members of the proprotein convertase family J Biol Chem 2001 276 4211 4217 11071887
Cross AJ Crow TJ Ferrier IN Johnson JA Markakis D Striatal dopamine receptors in Alzheimer-type dementia Neurosci Lett 1984 52 1 6 6241300
Das U Scott DA Ganguly A Koo EH Tang Y Roy S Activity-induced convergence of APP and BACE-1 in acidic microdomains via an endocytosis-dependent pathway Neuron 2013 79 447 460 23931995
Davis RC Marsden IT Maloney MT Minamide LS Podlisny M Selkoe DJ Bamburg JR Amyloid beta dimers/trimers potently induce cofilin-actin rods that are inhibited by maintaining cofilin-phosphorylation Mol Neurodegener 2011 6 10 21261978
De Felice FG Vieira MN Bomfim TR Decker H Velasco PT Lambert MP Viola KL Zhao WQ Ferreira ST Klein WL Protection of synapses against Alzheimer’s-linked toxins: insulin signaling prevents the pathogenic binding of Abeta oligomers Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2009 106 1971 1976 19188609
De Strooper B Saftig P Craessaerts K Vanderstichele H Guhde G Annaert W Von Figura K Van Leuven F Deficiency of presenilin-1 inhibits the normal cleavage of amyloid precursor protein Nature 1998 391 387 390 9450754
De SB Lessons from a failed gamma-secretase Alzheimer trial Cell 2014 159 721 726 25417150
De SB Vassar R Golde T The secretases: enzymes with therapeutic potential in Alzheimer disease Nat Rev Neurol 2010 6 99 107 20139999
DeBoer SR Dolios G Wang R Sisodia SS Differential release of beta-amyloid from dendrite-versus axon-targeted APP J Neurosci 2014 34 12313 12327 25209273
Deng M He W Tan Y Han H Hu X Xia K Zhang Z Yan R Increased expression of reticulon 3 in neurons leads to reduced axonal transport of beta site amyloid precursor protein-cleaving enzyme 1 J Biol Chem 2013 288 30236 30245 24005676
Derkach VA Oh MC Guire ES Soderling TR Regulatory mechanisms of AMPA receptors in synaptic plasticity Nat Rev Neurosci 2007 8 101 113 17237803
Devi L Tang J Ohno M Beneficial effects of the beta-secretase inhibitor GRL-8234 in 5XFAD Alzheimer’s transgenic mice lessen during disease progression Curr Alzheimer Res 2015 12 13 21 25523425
Dislich B Wohlrab F Bachhuber T Mueller S Kuhn PH Hogl S Meyer-Luehmann M Lichtenthaler SF Label-free quantitative proteomics of mouse cerebrospinal fluid detects BACE1 protease substrates in vivo Mol Cell Proteomics 2015
Dong YN Waxman EA Lynch DR Interactions of postsynaptic density-95 and the NMDA receptor 2 subunit control calpain-mediated cleavage of the NMDA receptor J Neurosci 2004 24 11035 11045 15590920
Eketjall S Janson J Jeppsson F Svanhagen A Kolmodin K Gustavsson S Radesater AC Eliason K Briem S Appelkvist P Niva C Berg AL Karlstrom S Swahn BM Falting J AZ-4217: a high potency BACE inhibitor displaying acute central efficacy in different in vivo models and reduced amyloid deposition in Tg2576 mice J Neurosci 2013 33 10075 10084 23761903
El MD Granier S Doumazane E Scholler P Rahmeh R Bron P Mouillac B Baneres JL Rondard P Pin JP Distinct roles of metabotropic glutamate receptor dimerization in agonist activation and G-protein coupling Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2012 109 16342 16347 22988116
Farzan M Schnitzler CE Vasilieva N Leung D Choe H BACE2, a beta -secretase homolog, cleaves at the beta site and within the amyloid-beta region of the amyloid-beta precursor protein Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2000 97 9712 9717 10931940
Ferando I Mody I Interneuronal GABAA receptors inside and outside of synapses Curr Opin Neurobiol 2014 26 57 63 24650505
Finan GM Okada H Kim TW BACE1 retrograde trafficking is uniquely regulated by the cytoplasmic domain of sortilin J Biol Chem 2011 286 12602 12616 21245145
Fitzgerald ML Chan J Mackie K Lupica CR Pickel VM Altered dendritic distribution of dopamine D2 receptors and reduction in mitochondrial number in parvalbumin-containing interneurons in the medial prefrontal cortex of cannabinoid-1 (CB1) receptor knockout mice J Comp Neurol 2012 520 4013 4031 22592925
Fleck D Garratt AN Haass C Willem M BACE1 dependent neuregulin processing: review Curr Alzheimer Res 2012 9 178 183 22455478
Fleck D van BF Colombo A Galante C Schwenk BM Rabe L Hampel H Novak B Kremmer E Tahirovic S Edbauer D Lichtenthaler SF Schmid B Willem M Haass C Dual cleavage of neuregulin 1 type III by BACE1 and ADAM17 liberates its EGF-like domain and allows paracrine signaling J Neurosci 2013 33 7856 7869 23637177
Francis R McGrath G Zhang J Ruddy DA Sym M Apfeld J Nicoll M Maxwell M Hai B Ellis MC Parks AL Xu W Li J Gurney M Myers RL Himes CS Hiebsch R Ruble C Nye JS Curtis D aph-1 and pen-2 are required for Notch pathway signaling, gamma-secretase cleavage of betaAPP, and presenilin protein accumulation Dev Cell 2002 3 85 97 12110170
Frandemiche ML De SS Rush T Borel E Elie A Arnal I Lante F Buisson A Activity-dependent tau protein translocation to excitatory synapse is disrupted by exposure to amyloid-beta oligomers J Neurosci 2014 34 6084 6097 24760868
Freund TF Katona I Perisomatic inhibition Neuron 2007 56 33 42 17920013
Fritschy JM Panzanelli P Tyagarajan SK Molecular and functional heterogeneity of GABAergic synapses Cell Mol Life Sci 2012 69 2485 2499 22314501
Fukumoto H Takahashi H Tarui N Matsui J Tomita T Hirode M Sagayama M Maeda R Kawamoto M Hirai K Terauchi J Sakura Y Kakihana M Kato K Iwatsubo T Miyamoto M A noncompetitive BACE1 inhibitor TAK-070 ameliorates Abeta pathology and behavioral deficits in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease J Neurosci 2010 30 11157 11166 20720123
Gahete MD Rubio A Duran-Prado M Avila J Luque RM Castano JP Expression of Somatostatin, cortistatin, and their receptors, as well as dopamine receptors, but not of neprilysin, are reduced in the temporal lobe of Alzheimer’s disease patients J Alzheimers Dis 2010 20 465 475 20164562
Gao C Wolf ME Dopamine alters AMPA receptor synaptic expression and subunit composition in dopamine neurons of the ventral tegmental area cultured with prefrontal cortex neurons J Neurosci 2007 27 14275 14285 18160635
Gao C Wolf ME Dopamine receptors regulate NMDA receptor surface expression in prefrontal cortex neurons J Neurochem 2008 106 2489 2501 18673451
Gautam V D’Avanzo C Hebisch M Kovacs DM Kim DY BACE1 activity regulates cell surface contactin-2 levels Mol Neurodegener 2014 9 4 24405708
Giacobini E Gold G Alzheimer disease therapy--moving from amyloid-beta to tau Nat Rev Neurol 2013 9 677 686 24217510
Gomes GM Dalmolin GD Bar J Karpova A Mello CF Kreutz MR Rubin MA Inhibition of the polyamine system counteracts beta-amyloid peptide-induced memory impairment in mice: involvement of extrasynaptic NMDA receptors PLoS One 2014 9 e99184 24921942
Greger IH Ziff EB Penn AC Molecular determinants of AMPA receptor subunit assembly Trends Neurosci 2007 30 407 416 17629578
Gu Z Cheng J Zhong P Qin L Liu W Yan Z Abeta selectively impairs mGluR7 modulation of NMDA signaling in basal forebrain cholinergic neurons: implication in Alzheimer’s disease J Neurosci 2014 34 13614 13628 25297090
Guzman-Ramos K Moreno-Castilla P Castro-Cruz M McGaugh JL Martinez-Coria H LaFerla FM Bermudez-Rattoni F Restoration of dopamine release deficits during object recognition memory acquisition attenuates cognitive impairment in a triple transgenic mice model of Alzheimer’s disease Learn Mem 2012 19 453 460 22984283
Haass C Kaether C Thinakaran G Sisodia S Trafficking and proteolytic processing of APP Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2012 2 a006270 22553493
Haass C Selkoe DJ Soluble protein oligomers in neurodegeneration: lessons from the Alzheimer’s amyloid beta-peptide Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2007 8 101 112 17245412
Hamilton A Zamponi GW Ferguson SS Glutamate receptors function as scaffolds for the regulation of beta-amyloid and cellular prion protein signaling complexes Mol Brain 2015 8 18 25888324
Haniu M Denis P Young Y Mendiaz EA Fuller J Hui JO Bennett BD Kahn S Ross S Burgess T Katta V Rogers G Vassar R Citron M Characterization of Alzheimer’s beta -secretase protein BACE. A pepsin family member with unusual properties J Biol Chem 2000 275 21099 21106 10887202
Hardy J Selkoe DJ The amyloid hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease: progress and problems on the road to therapeutics Science 2002 297 353 356 12130773
He W Jinxuan H Xia Y Yan R BACE1 Regulates Notch Signaling by Controlling the Cleavage of Jag1 and Jag2 J Biol Chem 2014
He W Lu Y Qahwash I Hu XY Chang A Yan R Reticulon family members modulate BACE1 activity and amyloid-beta peptide generation Nat Med 2004 10 959 965 15286784
He X Chang WP Koelsch G Tang J Memapsin 2 (beta-secretase) cytosolic domain binds to the VHS domains of GGA1 and GGA2: implications on the endocytosis mechanism of memapsin 2 FEBS Lett 2002 524 183 187 12135764
He X Li F Chang WP Tang J GGA proteins mediate the recycling pathway of memapsin 2 (BACE) J Biol Chem 2005 280 11696 11703 15615712
Hemming ML Elias JE Gygi SP Selkoe DJ Identification of beta-secretase (BACE1) substrates using quantitative proteomics PLoS One 2009 4 e8477 20041192
Hermann D Mezler M Muller MK Wicke K Gross G Draguhn A Bruehl C Nimmrich V Synthetic Abeta oligomers (Abeta(1-42) globulomer) modulate presynaptic calcium currents: prevention of Abeta-induced synaptic deficits by calcium channel blockers Eur J Pharmacol 2013 702 44 55 23376566
Herwerth M Jensen V Novak M Konopka W Hvalby O Kohr G D4 dopamine receptors modulate NR2B NMDA receptors and LTP in stratum oriens of hippocampal CA1 Cereb Cortex 2012 22 1786 1798 21955919
Himeno E Ohyagi Y Ma L Nakamura N Miyoshi K Sakae N Motomura K Soejima N Yamasaki R Hashimoto T Tabira T LaFerla FM Kira J Apomorphine treatment in Alzheimer mice promoting amyloid-beta degradation Ann Neurol 2011 69 248 256 21387370
Hitt B Riordan SM Kukreja L Eimer WA Rajapaksha TW Vassar R beta-Site amyloid precursor protein (APP)-cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1)-deficient mice exhibit a close homolog of L1 (CHL1) loss-of-function phenotype involving axon guidance defects J Biol Chem 2012 287 38408 38425 22988240
Hitt BD Jaramillo TC Chetkovich DM Vassar R BACE1−/− mice exhibit seizure activity that does not correlate with sodium channel level or axonal localization Mol Neurodegener 2010 5 31 20731874
Hogl S Kuhn PH Colombo A Lichtenthaler SF Determination of the proteolytic cleavage sites of the amyloid precursor-like protein 2 by the proteases ADAM10, BACE1 and gamma-secretase PLoS One 2011 6 e21337 21695060
Hogl S van BF Dislich B Kuhn PH Haass C Schmid B Lichtenthaler SF Label-free quantitative analysis of the membrane proteome of Bace1 protease knock-out zebrafish brains Proteomics 2013 13 1519 1527 23457027
Hsieh H Boehm J Sato C Iwatsubo T Tomita T Sisodia S Malinow R AMPAR removal underlies Abeta-induced synaptic depression and dendritic spine loss Neuron 2006 52 831 843 17145504
Hu X Fan Q Hou H Yan R Neurological dysfunctions associated with altered BACE1-dependent Neuregulin-1 signaling J Neurochem 2015
Hu X He W Diaconu C Tang X Kidd GJ Macklin WB Trapp BD Yan R Genetic deletion of BACE1 in mice affects remyelination of sciatic nerves FASEB J 2008 22 2970 2980 18413858
Hu X He W Luo X Tsubota KE Yan R BACE1 regulates hippocampal astrogenesis via the Jagged1-Notch pathway Cell Rep 2013 4 40 49 23831026
Hu X Hicks CW He W Wong P Macklin WB Trapp BD Yan R Bace1 modulates myelination in the central and peripheral nervous system Nat Neurosci 2006 9 1520 1525 17099708
Hu X Li X Zhao M Gottesdiener A Luo W Paul S Tau pathogenesis is promoted by Abeta1-42 but not Abeta1-40 Mol Neurodegener 2014 9 52 25417177
Hussain I Powell D Howlett DR Tew DG Meek TD Chapman C Gloger IS Murphy KE Southan CD Ryan DM Smith TS Simmons DL Walsh FS Dingwall C Christie G Identification of a novel aspartic protease (Asp 2) as beta-secretase Mol Cell Neurosci 1999 14 419 427 10656250
Iwakiri M Mizukami K Ikonomovic MD Ishikawa M Hidaka S Abrahamson EE DeKosky ST Asada T Changes in hippocampal GABABR1 subunit expression in Alzheimer’s patients: association with Braak staging Acta Neuropathol 2005 109 467 474 15759131
Jang H Zheng J Lal R Nussinov R New structures help the modeling of toxic amyloidbeta ion channels Trends Biochem Sci 2008 33 91 100 18182298
Jeppsson F Eketjall S Janson J Karlstrom S Gustavsson S Olsson LL Radesater AC Ploeger B Cebers G Kolmodin K Swahn BM von BS Bueters T Falting J Discovery of AZD3839, a potent and selective BACE1 inhibitor clinical candidate for the treatment of Alzheimer disease J Biol Chem 2012 287 41245 41257 23048024
Jiang S Li Y Zhang X Bu G Xu H Zhang YW Trafficking regulation of proteins in Alzheimer’s disease Mol Neurodegener 2014 9 6 24410826
John BA Meister M Banning A Tikkanen R Flotillins bind to the dileucine sorting motif of beta-site amyloid precursor protein-cleaving enzyme 1 and influence its endosomal sorting FEBS J 2014 281 2074 2087 24612608
Joyce JN Murray AM Hurtig HI Gottlieb GL Trojanowski JQ Loss of dopamine D2 receptors in Alzheimer’s disease with parkinsonism but not Parkinson’s or Alzheimer’s disease Neuropsychopharmacology 1998 19 472 480 9803423
Jurgensen S Antonio LL Mussi GE Brito-Moreira J Bomfim TR De Felice FG Garrido-Sanabria ER Cavalheiro EA Ferreira ST Activation of D1/D5 dopamine receptors protects neurons from synapse dysfunction induced by amyloid-beta oligomers J Biol Chem 2011 286 3270 3276 21115476
Kamenetz F Tomita T Hsieh H Seabrook G Borchelt D Iwatsubo T Sisodia S Malinow R APP processing and synaptic function Neuron 2003 37 925 937 12670422
Kandel ER The molecular biology of memory: cAMP, PKA, CRE, CREB-1, CREB-2, and CPEB Mol Brain 2012 5 14 22583753
Kang EL Biscaro B Piazza F Tesco G BACE1 protein endocytosis and trafficking are differentially regulated by ubiquitination at lysine 501 and the Di-leucine motif in the carboxyl terminus J Biol Chem 2012 287 42867 42880 23109336
Kelleher RJ III Shen J Genetics. Gamma-secretase and human disease Science 2010 330 1055 1056 21097925
Kelly BL Ferreira A beta-Amyloid-induced dynamin 1 degradation is mediated by N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors in hippocampal neurons J Biol Chem 2006 281 28079 28089 16864575
Kelly BL Vassar R Ferreira A Beta-amyloid-induced dynamin 1 depletion in hippocampal neurons. A potential mechanism for early cognitive decline in Alzheimer disease J Biol Chem 2005 280 31746 31753 16002400
Kemppainen N Laine M Laakso MP Kaasinen V Nagren K Vahlberg T Kurki T Rinne JO Hippocampal dopamine D2 receptors correlate with memory functions in Alzheimer’s disease Eur J Neurosci 2003 18 149 154 12859348
Kennedy MJ Ehlers MD Organelles and trafficking machinery for postsynaptic plasticity Annu Rev Neurosci 2006 29 325 362 16776589
Kervern M Angeli A Nicole O Leveille F Parent B Villette V Buisson A Dutar P Selective impairment of some forms of synaptic plasticity by oligomeric amyloid-beta peptide in the mouse hippocampus: implication of extrasynaptic NMDA receptors J Alzheimers Dis 2012 32 183 196 22785392
Kessels HW Nabavi S Malinow R Metabotropic NMDA receptor function is required for beta-amyloid-induced synaptic depression Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2013 110 4033 4038 23431156
Kessels HW Nguyen LN Nabavi S Malinow R The prion protein as a receptor for amyloid-beta Nature 2010 466 E3 E4 20703260
Kim DY Carey BW Wang H Ingano LA Binshtok AM Wertz MH Pettingell WH He P Lee VM Woolf CJ Kovacs DM BACE1 regulates voltage-gated sodium channels and neuronal activity Nat Cell Biol 2007 9 755 764 17576410
Kim DY Gersbacher MT Inquimbert P Kovacs DM Reduced sodium channel Na(v)1.1 levels in BACE1-null mice J Biol Chem 2011 286 8106 8116 21190943
Kim SH Fraser PE Westaway D St George-Hyslop PH Ehrlich ME Gandy S Group II metabotropic glutamate receptor stimulation triggers production and release of Alzheimer’s amyloid(beta)42 from isolated intact nerve terminals J Neurosci 2010 30 3870 3875 20237257
Kim SH Steele JW Lee SW Clemenson GD Carter TA Treuner K Gadient R Wedel P Glabe C Barlow C Ehrlich ME Gage FH Gandy S Proneurogenic Group II mGluR antagonist improves learning and reduces anxiety in Alzheimer Abeta oligomer mouse Mol Psychiatry 2014 19 1235 1242 25113378
Kizuka Y Kitazume S Fujinawa R Saito T Iwata N Saido TC Nakano M Yamaguchi Y Hashimoto Y Staufenbiel M Hatsuta H Murayama S Manya H Endo T Taniguchi N An aberrant sugar modification of BACE1 blocks its lysosomal targeting in Alzheimer’s disease EMBO Mol Med 2015 7 175 189 25592972
Klein WL Synaptotoxic amyloid-beta oligomers: a molecular basis for the cause, diagnosis, and treatment of Alzheimer’s disease? J Alzheimers Dis 2013 33 Suppl 1 S49 S65 22785404
Kuhn PH Koroniak K Hogl S Colombo A Zeitschel U Willem M Volbracht C Schepers U Imhof A Hoffmeister A Haass C Rossner S Brase S Lichtenthaler SF Secretome protein enrichment identifies physiological BACE1 protease substrates in neurons EMBO J 2012 31 3157 3168 22728825
Kuhn PH Wang H Dislich B Colombo A Zeitschel U Ellwart JW Kremmer E Rossner S Lichtenthaler SF ADAM10 is the physiologically relevant, constitutive alpha-secretase of the amyloid precursor protein in primary neurons EMBO J 2010
Kullmann DM Lamsa KP LTP and LTD in cortical GABAergic interneurons: emerging rules and roles Neuropharmacology 2011 60 712 719 21185319
Kumar U Patel SC Immunohistochemical localization of dopamine receptor subtypes (D1R–D5R) in Alzheimer’s disease brain Brain Res 2007 1131 187 196 17182012
Kurup P Zhang Y Xu J Venkitaramani DV Haroutunian V Greengard P Nairn AC Lombroso PJ Abeta-mediated NMDA receptor endocytosis in Alzheimer’s disease involves ubiquitination of the tyrosine phosphatase STEP61 J Neurosci 2010 30 5948 5957 20427654
Lacor PN Buniel MC Furlow PW Clemente AS Velasco PT Wood M Viola KL Klein WL Abeta oligomer-induced aberrations in synapse composition, shape, and density provide a molecular basis for loss of connectivity in Alzheimer’s disease J Neurosci 2007 27 796 807 17251419
Lau CG Zukin RS NMDA receptor trafficking in synaptic plasticity and neuropsychiatric disorders Nat Rev Neurosci 2007 8 413 426 17514195
Lauren J Gimbel DA Nygaard HB Gilbert JW Strittmatter SM Cellular prion protein mediates impairment of synaptic plasticity by amyloid-beta oligomers Nature 2009 457 1128 1132 19242475
Lee HK Takamiya K Han JS Man H Kim CH Rumbaugh G Yu S Ding L He C Petralia RS Wenthold RJ Gallagher M Huganir RL Phosphorylation of the AMPA receptor GluR1 subunit is required for synaptic plasticity and retention of spatial memory Cell 2003 112 631 643 12628184
Lemere CA Immunotherapy for Alzheimer’s disease: hoops and hurdles Mol Neurodegener 2013 8 36 24148220
Li S Hong S Shepardson NE Walsh DM Shankar GM Selkoe D Soluble oligomers of amyloid Beta protein facilitate hippocampal long-term depression by disrupting neuronal glutamate uptake Neuron 2009 62 788 801 19555648
Li S Jin M Koeglsperger T Shepardson NE Shankar GM Selkoe DJ Soluble Abeta oligomers inhibit long-term potentiation through a mechanism involving excessive activation of extrasynaptic NR2B–containing NMDA receptors J Neurosci 2011 31 6627 6638 21543591
Li YM Lai MT Xu M Huang Q DiMuzio-Mower J Sardana MK Shi XP Yin KC Shafer JA Gardell SJ Presenilin 1 is linked with gamma-secretase activity in the detergent solubilized state Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2000 97 6138 6143 10801983
Lin X Koelsch G Wu S Downs D Dashti A Tang J Human aspartic protease memapsin 2 cleaves the beta-secretase site of beta-amyloid precursor protein Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2000 97 1456 1460 10677483
Liu Q Huang Y Shen J Steffensen S Wu J Functional alpha7beta2 nicotinic acetylcholine receptors expressed in hippocampal interneurons exhibit high sensitivity to pathological level of amyloid beta peptides BMC Neurosci 2012 13 155 23272676
Liu SJ Gasperini R Foa L Small DH Amyloid-beta decreases cell-surface AMPA receptors by increasing intracellular calcium and phosphorylation of GluR2 J Alzheimers Dis 2010 21 655 666 20571220
Lopez OL Wisnieski SR Becker JT Boller F DeKosky ST Extrapyramidal signs in patients with probable Alzheimer disease Arch Neurol 1997 54 969 975 9267971
Low CM Wee KS New insights into the not-so-new NR3 subunits of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor: localization, structure, and function Mol Pharmacol 2010 78 1 11 20363861
Lu X Rong Y Baudry M Calpain-mediated degradation of PSD-95 in developing and adult rat brain Neurosci Lett 2000 286 149 153 10825658
Luo X Prior M He W Hu X Tang X Shen W Yadav S Kiryu-Seo S Miller R Trapp BD Yan R Cleavage of neuregulin-1 by BACE1 or ADAM10 protein produces differential effects on myelination J Biol Chem 2011 286 23967 23974 21576249
Luo Y Bolon B Kahn S Bennett BD Babu-Khan S Denis P Fan W Kha H Zhang J Gong Y Martin L Louis JC Yan Q Richards WG Citron M Vassar R Mice deficient in BACE1, the Alzheimer’s beta-secretase, have normal phenotype and abolished beta-amyloid generation Nat Neurosci 2001 4 231 232 11224535
Luscher C Slesinger PA Emerging roles for G protein-gated inwardly rectifying potassium (GIRK) channels in health and disease Nat Rev Neurosci 2010 11 301 315 20389305
Malenka RC Malinow R Alzheimer’s disease: Recollection of lost memories Nature 2011 469 44 45 21209657
Malinow R Malenka RC AMPA receptor trafficking and synaptic plasticity Annu Rev Neurosci 2002 25 103 126 12052905
Marathe S Alberi L Notch in memories: Points to remember Hippocampus 2015 25 771 778 25565152
Martorana A Koch G "Is dopamine involved in Alzheimer’s disease?" Front Aging Neurosci 2014 6 252 25309431
May PC Dean RA Lowe SL Martenyi F Sheehan SM Boggs LN Monk SA Mathes BM Mergott DJ Watson BM Stout SL Timm DE Smith LE Gonzales CR Nakano M Jhee SS Yen M Ereshefsky L Lindstrom TD Calligaro DO Cocke PJ Greg HD Friedrich S Citron M Audia JE Robust central reduction of amyloid-beta in humans with an orally available, non-peptidic beta-secretase inhibitor J Neurosci 2011 31 16507 16516 22090477
McConlogue L Buttini M Anderson JP Brigham EF Chen KS Freedman SB Games D Johnson-Wood K Lee M Zeller M Liu W Motter R Sinha S Partial reduction of BACE1 has dramatic effects on Alzheimer plaque and synaptic pathology in APP transgenic mice J Biol Chem 2007
Mei L Nave KA Neuregulin-ERBB Signaling in the Nervous System and Neuropsychiatric Diseases Neuron 2014 83 27 49 24991953
Melief EJ Cudaback E Jorstad NL Sherfield E Postupna N Wilson A Darvas M Montine KS Keene CD Montine TJ Partial depletion of striatal dopamine enhances penetrance of cognitive deficits in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease J Neurosci Res 2015 93 1413 1422 25824456
Mezler M Barghorn S Schoemaker H Gross G Nimmrich V A beta-amyloid oligomer directly modulates P/Q-type calcium currents in Xenopus oocytes Br J Pharmacol 2012 165 1572 1583 21883149
Minano-Molina AJ Espana J Martin E Barneda-Zahonero B Fado R Sole M Trullas R Saura CA Rodriguez-Alvarez J Soluble oligomers of amyloid-beta peptide disrupt membrane trafficking of alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-propionic acid receptor contributing to early synapse dysfunction J Biol Chem 2011 286 27311 27321 21665950
Miners JS Baig S Palmer J Palmer LE Kehoe PG Love S Abeta-degrading enzymes in Alzheimer’s disease Brain Pathol 2008 18 240 252 18363935
Moreno H Yu E Pigino G Hernandez AI Kim N Moreira JE Sugimori M Llinas RR Synaptic transmission block by presynaptic injection of oligomeric amyloid beta Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2009 106 5901 5906 19304802
Morley JE Farr SA Banks WA Johnson SN Yamada KA Xu L A physiological role for amyloid-beta protein:enhancement of learning and memory J Alzheimers Dis 2010 19 441 449 19749407
Murphy TH Corbett D Plasticity during stroke recovery: from synapse to behaviour Nat Rev Neurosci 2009 10 861 872 19888284
Murray AM Weihmueller FB Marshall JF Hurtig HI Gottleib GL Joyce JN Damage to dopamine systems differs between Parkinson’s disease and Alzheimer’s disease with parkinsonism Ann Neurol 1995 37 300 312 7695230
Nava-Mesa MO Jimenez-Diaz L Yajeya J Navarro-Lopez JD Amyloid-beta induces synaptic dysfunction through G protein-gated inwardly rectifying potassium channels in the fimbria-CA3 hippocampal synapse Front Cell Neurosci 2013 7 117 23898239
Nava-Mesa MO Jimenez-Diaz L Yajeya J Navarro-Lopez JD GABAergic neurotransmission and new strategies of neuromodulation to compensate synaptic dysfunction in early stages of Alzheimer’s disease Front Cell Neurosci 2014 8 167 24987334
Negyessy L Goldman-Rakic PS Subcellular localization of the dopamine D2 receptor and coexistence with the calcium-binding protein neuronal calcium sensor-1 in the primate prefrontal cortex J Comp Neurol 2005 488 464 475 15973684
Nimmrich V Grimm C Draguhn A Barghorn S Lehmann A Schoemaker H Hillen H Gross G Ebert U Bruehl C Amyloid beta oligomers (A beta(1-42) globulomer) suppress spontaneous synaptic activity by inhibition of P/Q-type calcium currents J Neurosci 2008 28 788 797 18216187
Nong Y Huang YQ Ju W Kalia LV Ahmadian G Wang YT Salter MW Glycine binding primes NMDA receptor internalization Nature 2003 422 302 307 12646920
Osborne C West E Nolan W McHale-Owen H Williams A Bate C Glimepiride protects neurons against amyloid-beta-induced synapse damage Neuropharmacology 2016 101 225 236 26432105
Palop JJ Chin J Roberson ED Wang J Thwin MT Bien-Ly N Yoo J Ho KO Yu GQ Kreitzer A Finkbeiner S Noebels JL Mucke L Aberrant excitatory neuronal activity and compensatory remodeling of inhibitory hippocampal circuits in mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease Neuron 2007 55 697 711 17785178
Palop JJ Mucke L Amyloid-beta-induced neuronal dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease: from synapses toward neural networks Nat Neurosci 2010 13 812 818 20581818
Pastorino L Ikin AF Nairn AC Pursnani A Buxbaum JD The carboxyl-terminus of BACE contains a sorting signal that regulates BACE trafficking but not the formation of total A(beta Mol Cell Neurosci 2002 19 175 185 11860271
Perez SE Lazarov O Koprich JB Chen EY Rodriguez-Menendez V Lipton JW Sisodia SS Mufson EJ Nigrostriatal dysfunction in familial Alzheimer’s disease-linked APPswe/PS1DeltaE9 transgenic mice J Neurosci 2005 25 10220 10229 16267229
Perrin RJ Fagan AM Holtzman DM Multimodal techniques for diagnosis and prognosis of Alzheimer’s disease Nature 2009 461 916 922 19829371
Pin JP Bockaert J Get receptive to metabotropic glutamate receptors Curr Opin Neurobiol 1995 5 342 349 7580157
Pinto A Sesack SR Ultrastructural analysis of prefrontal cortical inputs to the rat amygdala: spatial relationships to presumed dopamine axons and D1 and D2 receptors Brain Struct Funct 2008 213 159 175 18340460
Portelius E Olsson M Brinkmalm G Ruetschi U Mattsson N Andreasson U Gobom J Brinkmalm A Holtta M Blennow K Zetterberg H Mass spectrometric characterization of amyloid-beta species in the 7PA2 cell model of Alzheimer’s disease J Alzheimers Dis 2013 33 85 93 22886024
Puzzo D Privitera L Fa’ M Staniszewski A Hashimoto G Aziz F Sakurai M Ribe EM Troy CM Mercken M Jung SS Palmeri A Arancio O Endogenous amyloid-beta is necessary for hippocampal synaptic plasticity and memory Ann Neurol 2011 69 819 830 21472769
Rammes G Hasenjager A Sroka-Saidi K Deussing JM Parsons CG Therapeutic significance of NR2B–containing NMDA receptors and mGluR5 metabotropic glutamate receptors in mediating the synaptotoxic effects of beta-amyloid oligomers on long-term potentiation (LTP) in murine hippocampal slices Neuropharmacology 2011 60 982 990 21310164
Renner M Lacor PN Velasco PT Xu J Contractor A Klein WL Triller A Deleterious effects of amyloid beta oligomers acting as an extracellular scaffold for mGluR5 Neuron 2010 66 739 754 20547131
Rinne JO Sako E Paljarvi L Molsa PK Rinne UK Brain dopamine D-1 receptors in senile dementia J Neurol Sci 1986a 73 219 230 2871136
Rinne JO Sako E Paljarvi L Molsa PK Rinne UK Brain dopamine D-2 receptors in senile dementia J Neural Transm 1986b 65 51 62 2870131
Robakis NK Vassilacopoulou D Efthimiopoulos S Sambamurti K Refolo LM Shioi J Cellular processing and proteoglycan nature of amyloid precursor proteins Ann N Y Acad Sci 1993 695 132 138 8239271
Roberds SL Anderson J Basi G Bienkowski MJ Branstetter DG Chen KS Freedman SB Frigon NL Games D Hu K Johnson-Wood K Kappenman KE Kawabe TT Kola I Kuehn R Lee M Liu W Motter R Nichols NF Power M Robertson DW Schenk D Schoor M Shopp GM Shuck ME Sinha S Svensson KA Tatsuno G Tintrup H Wijsman J Wright S McConlogue L BACE knockout mice are healthy despite lacking the primary beta-secretase activity in brain: implications for Alzheimer’s disease therapeutics Hum Mol Genet 2001 10 1317 1324 11406613
Roche KW O’Brien RJ Mammen AL Bernhardt J Huganir RL Characterization of multiple phosphorylation sites on the AMPA receptor GluR1 subunit Neuron 1996 16 1179 1188 8663994
Rodrigues EM Scudder SL Goo MS Patrick GN Abeta-Induced Synaptic Alterations Require the E3 Ubiquitin Ligase Nedd4-1 J Neurosci 2016 36 1590 1595 26843640
Roselli F Tirard M Lu J Hutzler P Lamberti P Livrea P Morabito M Almeida OF Soluble beta-amyloid1-40 induces NMDA-dependent degradation of postsynaptic density-95 at glutamatergic synapses J Neurosci 2005 25 11061 11070 16319306
Russell CL Semerdjieva S Empson RM Austen BM Beesley PW Alifragis P Amyloid-beta acts as a regulator of neurotransmitter release disrupting the interaction between synaptophysin and VAMP2 PLoS One 2012 7 e43201 22905234
Sachse CC Kim YH Agsten M Huth T Alzheimer C Kovacs DM Kim DY BACE1 and presenilin/gamma-secretase regulate proteolytic processing of KCNE1 and 2, auxiliary subunits of voltage-gated potassium channels FASEB J 2013 27 2458 2467 23504710
Saftig P Lichtenthaler SF The alpha secretase ADAM10: A metalloprotease with multiple functions in the brain Prog Neurobiol 2015
Sankaranarayanan S Price EA Wu G Crouthamel MC Shi XP Tugusheva K Tyler KX Kahana J Ellis J Jin L Steele T Stachel S Coburn C Simon AJ In vivo beta-secretase 1 inhibition leads to brain Abeta lowering and increased alpha-secretase processing of amyloid precursor protein without effect on neuregulin-1 J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2008 324 957 969 18156464
Sannerud R Declerck I Peric A Raemaekers T Menendez G Zhou L Veerle B Coen K Munck S De SB Schiavo G Annaert W ADP ribosylation factor 6 (ARF6) controls amyloid precursor protein (APP) processing by mediating the endosomal sorting of BACE1 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2011 108 E559 E568 21825135
Santosa C Rasche S Barakat A Bellingham SA Ho M Tan J Hill AF Masters CL McLean C Evin G Decreased expression of GGA3 protein in Alzheimer’s disease frontal cortex and increased co-distribution of BACE with the amyloid precursor protein Neurobiol Dis 2011 43 176 183 21440067
Saxena U Alzheimer’s disease amyloid hypothesis at crossroads: where do we go from here? Expert Opin Ther Targets 2010 14 1273 1277 21058918
Selkoe DJ Alzheimer’s disease is a synaptic failure Science 2002 298 789 791 12399581
Shankar GM Bloodgood BL Townsend M Walsh DM Selkoe DJ Sabatini BL Natural oligomers of the Alzheimer amyloid-beta protein induce reversible synapse loss by modulating an NMDA-type glutamate receptor-dependent signaling pathway J Neurosci 2007 27 2866 2875 17360908
Shankar GM Li S Mehta TH Garcia-Munoz A Shepardson NE Smith I Brett FM Farrell MA Rowan MJ Lemere CA Regan CM Walsh DM Sabatini BL Selkoe DJ Amyloid-beta protein dimers isolated directly from Alzheimer’s brains impair synaptic plasticity and memory Nat Med 2008 14 837 842 18568035
Sheng M Sabatini BL Sudhof TC Synapses and Alzheimer’s disease Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2012 4
Shi Q Ge Y Sharoar MG He W Xiang R Zhang Z Hu X Yan R Impact of RTN3 Deficiency on Expression of BACE1 and Amyloid Deposition J Neurosci 2014 34 13954 13962 25319692
Shi Q Prior M He W Tang X Hu X Yan R Reduced amyloid deposition in mice overexpressing RTN3 is adversely affected by preformed dystrophic neurites J Neurosci 2009 29 9163 9173 19625507
Shi Q Prior M Zhou X Tang X He W Hu X Yan R Preventing formation of reticulon 3 immunoreactive dystrophic neurites improves cognitive function in mice J Neurosci 2013 33 3059 3066 23407961
Sinha S Anderson JP Barbour R Basi GS Caccavello R Davis D Doan M Dovey HF Frigon N Hong J Jacobson-Croak K Jewett N Keim P Knops J Lieberburg I Power M Tan H Tatsuno G Tung J Schenk D Seubert P Suomensaari SM Wang S Walker D Zhao J McConlogue L John V Purification and cloning of amyloid precursor protein beta-secretase from human brain Nature 1999 402 537 540 10591214
Sisodia SS Koo EH Beyreuther K Unterbeck A Price DL Evidence that beta-amyloid protein in Alzheimer’s disease is not derived by normal processing Science 1990 248 492 495 1691865
Skaper SD Alzheimer’s disease and amyloid: culprit or coincidence? Int Rev Neurobiol 2012 102 277 316 22748834
Smith WB Starck SR Roberts RW Schuman EM Dopaminergic stimulation of local protein synthesis enhances surface expression of GluR1 and synaptic transmission in hippocampal neurons Neuron 2005 45 765 779 15748851
Sommer B Kohler M Sprengel R Seeburg PH RNA editing in brain controls a determinant of ion flow in glutamate-gated channels Cell 1991 67 11 19 1717158
Song WJ Son MY Lee HW Seo H Kim JH Chung SH Enhancement of BACE1 Activity by p25/Cdk5-Mediated Phosphorylation in Alzheimer’s Disease PLoS One 2015 10 e0136950 26317805
Spires-Jones TL Hyman BT The intersection of amyloid beta and tau at synapses in Alzheimer’s disease Neuron 2014 82 756 771 24853936
Stancu IC Vasconcelos B Terwel D Dewachter I Models of beta-amyloid induced Tau-pathology: the long and "folded" road to understand the mechanism Mol Neurodegener 2014 9 51 25407337
Stephenson FA Subunit characterization of NMDA receptors Curr Drug Targets 2001 2 233 239 11554550
Steuble M Diep TM Schatzle P Ludwig A Tagaya M Kunz B Sonderegger P Calsyntenin-1 shelters APP from proteolytic processing during anterograde axonal transport Biol Open 2012 1 761 774 23213470
Sun X He G Song W BACE2, as a novel APP theta-secretase, is not responsible for the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease in Down syndrome FASEB J 2006 20 1369 1376 16816112
Talantova M Sanz-Blasco S Zhang X Xia P Akhtar MW Okamoto S Dziewczapolski G Nakamura T Cao G Pratt AE Kang YJ Tu S Molokanova E McKercher SR Hires SA Sason H Stouffer DG Buczynski MW Solomon JP Michael S Powers ET Kelly JW Roberts A Tong G Fang-Newmeyer T Parker J Holland EA Zhang D Nakanishi N Chen HS Wolosker H Wang Y Parsons LH Ambasudhan R Masliah E Heinemann SF Pina-Crespo JC Lipton SA Abeta induces astrocytic glutamate release, extrasynaptic NMDA receptor activation, and synaptic loss Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2013 110 E2518 E2527 23776240
Tan J Evin G Beta-site APP-cleaving enzyme 1 trafficking and Alzheimer’s disease pathogenesis J Neurochem 2012 120 869 880 22171895
Tanzi RE The genetics of Alzheimer disease Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2012 2
Tesco G Koh YH Kang EL Cameron AN Das S Sena-Esteves M Hiltunen M Yang SH Zhong Z Shen Y Simpkins JW Tanzi RE Depletion of GGA3 stabilizes BACE and enhances beta-secretase activity Neuron 2007 54 721 737 17553422
Thakker DR Sankaranarayanan S Weatherspoon MR Harrison J Pierdomenico M Heisel JM Thompson LA Haskell R Grace JE Taylor SJ Albright CF Shafer LL Centrally Delivered BACE1 Inhibitor Activates Microglia, and Reverses Amyloid Pathology and Cognitive Deficit in Aged Tg2576 Mice J Neurosci 2015 35 6931 6936 25926467
Thomas GM Huganir RL MAPK cascade signalling and synaptic plasticity Nat Rev Neurosci 2004 5 173 183 14976517
Tomasselli AG Qahwash I Emmons TL Lu Y Leone JW Lull JM Fok KF Bannow CA Smith CW Bienkowski MJ Heinrikson RL Yan R Employing a superior BACE1 cleavage sequence to probe cellular APP processing J Neurochem 2003 84 1006 1017 12603825
Townsend M Shankar GM Mehta T Walsh DM Selkoe DJ Effects of secreted oligomers of amyloid beta-protein on hippocampal synaptic plasticity: a potent role for trimers J Physiol 2006 572 477 492 16469784
Toyn JH Ahlijanian MK Interpreting Alzheimer’s disease clinical trials in light of the effects on amyloid-beta Alzheimers Res Ther 2014 6 14 25031632
Tu S Okamoto S Lipton SA Xu H Oligomeric Abeta-induced synaptic dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease Mol Neurodegener 2014 9 48 25394486
Turner RT III Loy JA Nguyen C Devasamudram T Ghosh AK Koelsch G Tang J Specificity of memapsin 1 and its implications on the design of memapsin 2 (beta-secretase) inhibitor selectivity Biochemistry 2002 41 8742 8746 12093293
Udayar V Buggia-Prevot V Guerreiro RL Siegel G Rambabu N Soohoo AL Ponnusamy M Siegenthaler B Bali J Simons M Ries J Puthenveedu MA Hardy J Thinakaran G Rajendran L A paired RNAi and RabGAP overexpression screen identifies Rab11 as a regulator of beta-amyloid production Cell Rep 2013 5 1536 1551 24373285
Uemura K Kuzuya A Aoyagi N Ando K Shimozono Y Ninomiya H Shimohama S Kinoshita A Amyloid beta inhibits ectodomain shedding of N-cadherin via down-regulation of cell-surface NMDA receptor Neuroscience 2007 145 5 10 17257767
Ulrich D Amyloid-beta Impairs Synaptic Inhibition via GABAA Receptor Endocytosis J Neurosci 2015 35 9205 9210 26085642
Vagnoni A Perkinton MS Gray EH Francis PT Noble W Miller CC Calsyntenin-1 mediates axonal transport of the amyloid precursor protein and regulates Abeta production Hum Mol Genet 2012 21 2845 2854 22434822
Vassar R Bennett BD Babu-Khan S Kahn S Mendiaz EA Denis P Teplow DB Ross S Amarante P Loeloff R Luo Y Fisher S Fuller J Edenson S Lile J Jarosinski MA Biere AL Curran E Burgess T Louis JC Collins F Treanor J Rogers G Citron M (Beta-secretase cleavage of Alzheimer’s amyloid precursor protein by the transmembrane aspartic protease BACE Science 1999 286 735 741 10531052
Vassar R Kuhn PH Haass C Kennedy ME Rajendran L Wong PC Lichtenthaler SF Function, therapeutic potential and cell biology of BACE proteases: current status and future prospects J Neurochem 2014 130 4 28 24646365
Vassar R Zheng H Molecular neurodegeneration: basic biology and disease pathways Mol Neurodegener 2014 9 34 25248568
Vetrivel KS Meckler X Chen Y Nguyen PD Seidah NG Vassar R Wong PC Fukata M Kounnas MZ Thinakaran G Alzheimer disease Abeta production in the absence of S-palmitoylation-dependent targeting of BACE1 to lipid rafts J Biol Chem 2009 284 3793 3803 19074428
Villette V Poindessous-Jazat F Simon A Lena C Roullot E Bellessort B Epelbaum J Dutar P Stephan A Decreased rhythmic GABAergic septal activity and memory-associated theta oscillations after hippocampal amyloid-beta pathology in the rat J Neurosci 2010 30 10991 11003 20720106
Vinade L Petersen JD Do K Dosemeci A Reese TS Activation of calpain may alter the postsynaptic density structure and modulate anchoring of NMDA receptors Synapse 2001 40 302 309 11309846
von EB Wahler A Schips T Serrano-Pozo A Proepper C Boeckers TM Rueck A Wirth T Hyman BT Danzer KM Thal DR von Arnim CA (The Golgi-Localized gamma-Ear-Containing ARF-Binding (GGA) Proteins Alter Amyloid-beta Precursor Protein (APP) Processing through Interaction of Their GAE Domain with the Beta-Site APP Cleaving Enzyme 1 (BACE1) PLoS One 2015 10 e0129047 26053850
Wahle T Prager K Raffler N Haass C Famulok M Walter J GGA proteins regulate retrograde transport of BACE1 from endosomes to the trans-Golgi network Mol Cell Neurosci 2005 29 453 461 15886016
Walker KR Kang EL Whalen MJ Shen Y Tesco G Depletion of GGA1 and GGA3 mediates postinjury elevation of BACE1 J Neurosci 2012 32 10423 10437 22836275
Walsh DM Klyubin I Fadeeva JV Cullen WK Anwyl R Wolfe MS Rowan MJ Selkoe DJ Naturally secreted oligomers of amyloid beta protein potently inhibit hippocampal long-term potentiation in vivo Nature 2002 416 535 539 11932745
Walter J Fluhrer R Hartung B Willem M Kaether C Capell A Lammich S Multhaup G Haass C Phosphorylation regulates intracellular trafficking of beta-secretase J Biol Chem 2001 276 14634 14641 11278841
Wang CL Tang FL Peng Y Shen CY Mei L Xiong WC VPS35 regulates developing mouse hippocampal neuronal morphogenesis by promoting retrograde trafficking of BACE1 Biol Open 2012a 1 1248 1257 23259059
Wang JQ Guo ML Jin DZ Xue B Fibuch EE Mao LM Roles of subunit phosphorylation in regulating glutamate receptor function Eur J Pharmacol 2014 728 183 187 24291102
Wang Q Walsh DM Rowan MJ Selkoe DJ Anwyl R Block of long-term potentiation by naturally secreted and synthetic amyloid beta-peptide in hippocampal slices is mediated via activation of the kinases c-Jun N-terminal kinase, cyclin-dependent kinase 5, and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase as well as metabotropic glutamate receptor type 5 J Neurosci 2004 24 3370 3378 15056716
Wang R Ying Z Zhao J Zhang Y Wang R Lu H Deng Y Song W Qing H Lys(203) and Lys(382) are essential for the proteasomal degradation of BACE1 Curr Alzheimer Res 2012b 9 606 615 22299711
Watanabe T Iwasaki K Takasaki K Yamagata N Fujino M Nogami A Ii M Katsurabayashi S Mishima K Fujiwara M Dynamin 1 depletion and memory deficits in rats treated with Abeta and cerebral ischemia J Neurosci Res 2010 88 1908 1917 20127811
Welzel AT Maggio JE Shankar GM Walker DE Ostaszewski BL Li S Klyubin I Rowan MJ Seubert P Walsh DM Selkoe DJ Secreted amyloid beta-proteins in a cell culture model include N-terminally extended peptides that impair synaptic plasticity Biochemistry 2014 53 3908 3921 24840308
Wen L Tang FL Hong Y Luo SW Wang CL He W Shen C Jung JU Xiong F Lee DH Zhang QG Brann D Kim TW Yan R Mei L Xiong WC VPS35 haploinsufficiency increases Alzheimer’s disease neuropathology J Cell Biol 2011 195 765 779 22105352
Westmark CJ What’s hAPPening at synapses? The role of amyloid beta-protein precursor and beta-amyloid in neurological disorders Mol Psychiatry 2013 18 425 434 22925831
Willem M Garratt AN Novak B Citron M Kaufmann S Rittger A DeStrooper B Saftig P Birchmeier C Haass C Control of peripheral nerve myelination by the beta-secretase BACE1 Science 2006 314 664 666 16990514
Willem M Tahirovic S Busche MA Ovsepian SV Chafai M Kootar S Hornburg D Evans LD Moore S Daria A Hampel H Muller V Giudici C Nuscher B Wenninger-Weinzierl A Kremmer E Heneka MT Thal DR Giedraitis V Lannfelt L Muller U Livesey FJ Meissner F Herms J Konnerth A Marie H Haass C eta-Secretase processing of APP inhibits neuronal activity in the hippocampus Nature 2015 526 443 447 26322584
Wojcik S Engel WK Yan R McFerrin J Askanas V NOGO is increased and binds to BACE1 in sporadic inclusion-body myositis and in AbetaPP-overexpressing cultured human muscle fibers Acta Neuropathol (Berl) 2007 114 517 526 17764014
Wong HK Sakurai T Oyama F Kaneko K Wada K Miyazaki H Kurosawa M De Strooper B Saftig P Nukina N beta Subunits of voltage-gated sodium channels are novel substrates of beta-site amyloid precursor protein-cleaving enzyme (BACE1) and gamma-secretase J Biol Chem 2005 280 23009 23017 15824102
Wu J Khan GM Nichols RA Dopamine release in prefrontal cortex in response to beta-amyloid activation of alpha7 * nicotinic receptors Brain Res 2007 1182 82 89 17935702
Yan R Bienkowski MJ Shuck ME Miao H Tory MC Pauley AM Brashier JR Stratman NC Mathews WR Buhl AE Carter DB Tomasselli AG Parodi LA Heinrikson RL Gurney ME Membrane-anchored aspartyl protease with Alzheimer’s disease beta-secretase activity Nature 1999 402 533 537 10591213
Yan R Munzner JB Shuck ME Bienkowski MJ BACE2 functions as an alternative alpha-secretase in cells J Biol Chem 2001 276 34019 34027 11423558
Yan R Vassar R Targeting the beta secretase BACE1 for Alzheimer’s disease therapy Lancet Neurol 2014a 13 319 329 24556009
Yan R Vassar R Targeting the beta secretase BACE1 for Alzheimer’s disease therapy Lancet Neurol 2014b 13 319 329 24556009
Yu G Nishimura M Arawaka S Levitan D Zhang L Tandon A Song YQ Rogaeva E Chen F Kawarai T Supala A Levesque L Yu H Yang DS Holmes E Milman P Liang Y Zhang DM Xu DH Sato C Rogaev E Smith M Janus C Zhang Y Aebersold R Farrer LS Sorbi S Bruni A Fraser P George-Hyslop P Nicastrin modulates presenilin-mediated notch/glp-1 signal transduction and betaAPP processing Nature 2000 407 48 54 10993067
Yuan XP Janc O Grochowska KM Kreutz MR Reymann KG Dopamine agonists rescue Abeta-induced LTP impairment by Src-family tyrosine kinases Neurobiol Aging 2016 40 98 102 26973108
Yuen EY Zhong P Yan Z Homeostatic regulation of glutamatergic transmission by dopamine D4 receptors Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010 107 22308 22313 21135234
Zempel H Thies E Mandelkow E Mandelkow EM Abeta oligomers cause localized Ca(2+) elevation, missorting of endogenous Tau into dendrites, Tau phosphorylation, and destruction of microtubules and spines J Neurosci 2010 30 11938 11950 20826658
Zhang Z Song M Liu X Su KS Duong DM Seyfried NT Cao X Cheng L Sun YE Ping YS Jia J Levey AI Ye K Delta-secretase cleaves amyloid precursor protein and regulates the pathogenesis in Alzheimer’s disease Nat Commun 2015 6 8762 26549211
Zhao Y Wang Y Yang J Wang X Zhao Y Zhang X Zhang YW Sorting nexin 12 interacts with BACE1 and regulates BACE1-mediated APP processing Mol Neurodegener 2012 7 30 22709416
Zhou L Barao S Laga M Bockstael K Borgers M Gijsen H Annaert W Moechars D Mercken M Gevaert K De SB The neural cell adhesion molecules L1 and CHL1 are cleaved by BACE1 protease in vivo J Biol Chem 2012 287 25927 25940 22692213
Forman M Kleijn H Dockendorf M Palcza J Tseng J Canales C Egan M Kennedy M Laterza O Ma L Scott J Tanen M Apter J Backonja M Ereshefsky L Gevorkyan H Jhee S Rynders R Zari A Bryan E Wagner J Troyer M and Stone J The novel BACE inhibitor MK-8931 dramatically lowers CSF beta-amyloid in patients with mild-to-moderate Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia: The Journal of the Alzheimer’s Association 2013 9 Supplement 139
