LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


0151504
6462
Physiol Behav
Physiol. Behav.
Physiology &amp; behavior
0031-9384
1873-507X

26922873
4899204
10.1016/j.physbeh.2016.02.034
NIHMS765552
Article
Amylin-mediated control of glycemia, energy balance, and cognition
Mietlicki-Baase Elizabeth G. Translational Neuroscience Program, Department of Psychiatry, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA

Address correspondence to: Elizabeth G. Mietlicki-Baase, Ph.D., 125 S. 31st St., Philadelphia, PA 19104; ebaase@mail.med.upenn.edu; T: 215-746-3664; F: 215-898-9439
7 3 2016
27 2 2016
1 8 2016
01 8 2017
162 130140
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Amylin, a peptide hormone produced in the pancreas and in the brain, has well-established physiological roles in glycemic regulation and energy balance control. It improves postprandial blood glucose levels by suppressing gastric emptying and glucagon secretion; these beneficial effects have led to the FDA-approved use of the amylin analog pramlintide in the treatment of diabetes mellitus. Amylin also acts centrally as a satiation signal, reducing food intake and body weight. The ability of amylin to promote negative energy balance, along with its unique capacity to cooperatively facilitate or enhance the intake- and body weight-suppressive effects of other neuroendocrine signals like leptin, have made amylin a leading target for the development of novel pharmacotherapies for the treatment of obesity. In addition to these more widely studied effects, a growing body of literature suggests that amylin may play a role in processes related to cognition, including the neurodegeneration and cognitive deficits associated with Alzheimer's disease (AD). Although the function of amylin in AD is still unclear, intriguing recent reports indicate that amylin may improve cognitive ability and reduce hallmarks of neurodegeneration in the brain. The frequent comorbidity of diabetes mellitus and obesity, as well as the increased risk for and occurrence of AD associated with these metabolic diseases, suggests that amylin-based pharmaceutical strategies may provide multiple therapeutic benefits. This review will discuss the known effects of amylin on glycemic regulation, energy balance control, and cognitive/motivational processes. Particular focus will be devoted to the current and/or potential future clinical use of amylin pharmacotherapies for the treatment of diseases in each of these realms.

IAPP
obesity
pramlintide
Alzheimer's
leptin
motivation

1. Introduction

One commonly observed feature in the pancreas of individuals with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is the presence of insoluble amyloid aggregations, or deposits of protein folded in β-sheets, in the islets of Langerhans. Although the precise mechanisms by which these deposits develop are still not entirely clear, initial identification of amyloid in the pancreas of diabetic patients dates back to the early 1900s [1]. Later reports confirm the presence of pancreatic amyloid deposits in the islets of humans [2, 3], non-human primates [4, 5], and cats [6, 7] with diabetes. Characterizing the composition of the amyloid aggregations took decades, but eventually it was determined that the amyloid comprised a previously unknown 37-amino acid peptide, which was termed islet amyloid polypeptide (IAPP) [8, 9] or, less commonly, diabetes-associated peptide [10].

Intriguingly, although aggregated IAPP is a prominent feature in pancreatic tissue from diabetic individuals, IAPP was also found in the pancreatic islets of non-diabetics [9]. This suggested that IAPP might have an important role in the normal endocrine function of the pancreas. Later research provided evidence that IAPP itself is not inherently cytotoxic, supporting the notion that it may have physiologically relevant effects under normal conditions. Rather, the process of IAPP aggregation disrupts normal cellular function and can induce cell death [11, 12]. As researchers began to uncover physiological effects of IAPP in non-disease states, thus demonstrating roles for the peptide beyond its association with pathophysiological amyloid deposits, it was renamed amylin [13-15], which remains the most commonly used name today.

Indeed, we now recognize that amylin has important neuroendocrine functions in glycemic regulation (see [16-18] for review). Amylin is co-secreted with insulin from the pancreatic β-cells in response to nutrient stimuli during a meal, and suppresses postprandial blood glucose levels [18-23]. The beneficial glycemic effects of amylin led to the development and subsequent clinical usage of an FDA-approved amylin analog, pramlintide, as an adjunctive therapy for the treatment of diabetes mellitus [24, 25]. However, amylin also has potent effects on energy balance, and acts within the brain to reduce food intake and body weight [26, 27]. It is important to note that the energy balance and glycemic effects of amylin are dissociable under carefully controlled experimental conditions [28]. Collectively, these metabolic effects of amylin have brought attention to this peptide as a leading candidate for the development of new pharmacotherapies for the treatment of obesity and diabetes [27, 29-32].

Recent research has brought to light a putative novel role for amylin in processes related to cognition, including possible ameliorative effects on neurodegenerative and psychotic disorders [33, 34]. Although this area of research is still relatively new, the notion that amylin-based pharmacotherapies could be used for treatment of such disorders is already being considered [35]. Here, an overview of amylin's roles in glycemic regulation, energy balance control, and cognitive processes will be provided. In addition, the current and potential future clinical use of pharmaceuticals targeting the amylin system to treat disorders related to each of these realms will be discussed.

2. Glycemic regulation

Normal glycemic regulation involves coordinated physiological effects that maintain adequate levels of available glucose; the specific responses required depend on the energy status of the individual. Simply put, when a human or non-human animal is fasted, glycemic regulation primarily entails the conversion of stored energy to readily usable energy (e.g., conversion of liver glycogen to glucose), a process initiated by the pancreatic hormone glucagon. When a non-human animal or human is actively consuming or has recently consumed food, a different set of responses is required to control the influx of glucose from the food while suppressing the endogenous production of glucose from glycogen. Amylin is released during the feeding/fed state in response to nutrient entry into the gastrointestinal tract. Accordingly, amylin and amylin receptor agonists reduce postprandial blood glucose levels and improve glycemic control in humans and in non-human animal models [18]. The mechanisms by which this occurs, and the current use of amylin-based drugs for the treatment of diabetes mellitus, will be discussed in this section.

2.1 Amylin-mediated control of blood glucose levels in normoglycemic individuals

When a human or other animal eats, amylin is released with insulin from pancreatic β-cells [18-23]. The roles of amylin and insulin for glycemic regulation have been suggested to be complementary [16, 18], rather than a direct functional interaction. The effects of insulin on blood glucose levels are well known; this hormone facilitates transport of glucose from the bloodstream into peripheral tissues such as skeletal muscle (recently reviewed in [36]). However, blood glucose levels are influenced not only by the transport of glucose into tissue, but also the entrance of glucose from ingested food into the bloodstream. This side of the equation is controlled in part by amylin, which slows gastric emptying [37, 38], thereby delaying and controlling the entry of nutrients/glucose into the small intestine and subsequently into circulation. This effect can be observed when plasma amylin is experimentally increased to levels comparable to those normally observed in a postprandial state [39].

The available evidence indicates that amylin may act centrally to inhibit gastric emptying. In one study [40], subdiaphragmatic deafferentation was carried out in rats according to the procedure of Walls, Powley, and colleagues [41], which eliminates vagal afferent signaling while maintaining a portion of vagal efferent communication. This manipulation did not impact the ability of amylin to suppress gastric emptying in the animals [40], suggesting that the effect may be mediated by direct action in the brain. The area postrema (AP), a nucleus in the caudal hindbrain that is important for the physiological and behavioral effects of amylin [30, 42], may be one important central site of action for the effects of amylin on gastric emptying. Lesions of the AP appear to diminish the ability of amylin to suppress gastric emptying (reviewed in [43]). However, the neural mechanisms by which amylin might act in the AP to impact gastric emptying are unclear. The dorsal vagal complex of the hindbrain, comprising the AP, the nucleus of the solitary tract (NTS), and the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus (DMV), plays a critical role in the neural control of gastric emptying (reviewed in [44, 45]). Briefly, the NTS integrates relevant neural and humoral signals, including direct vagal input, and sends this information to the DMV. Gastric-projecting preganglionic neurons in the DMV then provide autonomic control over gastric emptying (reviewed in [45]). It is clear that the AP projects to the NTS [46] and that peripheral amylin induces cFos in both of these nuclei [47]. To speculate, amylin may act in the AP, or even within the NTS itself [48], to provide excitatory input to NTS neurons [47, 49], perhaps even by complementing glutamatergic vagal input to the NTS [50-52]. Excitation of the NTS can alter the activity of DMV neurons [53], and if preganglionic neurons that control gastric emptying in the stomach are impacted, this could provide a neural mechanism by which AP/NTS amylin suppresses gastric emptying. Yet, our understanding of the ability of amylin to directly or indirectly modulate the activity of dorsal vagal complex nuclei for the control of gastric emptying is currently quite limited, and clearly the ability of amylin to activate this potential pathway must be tested.

Furthermore, the possibility that amylin may act directly on the stomach to suppress gastric emptying should not be excluded. Although the primary peripheral site of amylin production is the pancreas, amylin mRNA is expressed in several other sites in rodents, including the hypothalamus [54], dorsal root ganglia [55, 56], lung [55], and gastrointestinal tract [55-57]. Indeed, amylin mRNA is expressed in the stomach and pylorus of both humans and rats [55, 58], and amylin binding is observed in the stomach fundus in rats [59]. However, the ability of amylin to impact stomach muscle relaxation has not been widely studied or reported. One paper indicates that amylin exerted a relaxant effect on isolated strips of rat ileal smooth muscle [60], a direction of effect consistent with inhibition of gastric motility and gastric emptying. Whether this effect also applies to rat stomach muscle, or indeed whether similar effects occur in vivo, are open questions. If direct actions of amylin on stomach musculature are detected, an important follow-up question will be whether the source of that amylin is pancreatic or extra-pancreatic. Amylin mRNA levels in the gastrointestinal tract are far lower than those in the pancreas [55, 57], but nevertheless, radioimmunoassay detection of gastrointestinal amylin peptide has been reported in rats [61]. The potential contributions of alternative, extra-pancreatic sources of amylin to the physiological and behavioral effects of the peptide, including effects on gastric emptying, need to be addressed empirically.

In addition to amylin's role in the normal postprandial state, it is critical to consider the effects of amylin on gastric emptying in situations where a delay in emptying would be maladaptive, such as when blood glucose levels are low. During hypoglycemia, gastric emptying is accelerated to increase available glucose as rapidly as possible [62, 63], and concomitantly, amylin's suppressive action on this process is abolished [64]. The neural mechanisms underlying this “hypoglycemic override” of amylin's gastric emptying effects are not completely understood. However, it may be mediated in part by neurons in the AP that respond to both amylin and glucose [65]. Specifically, within the AP, the majority of neurons that are activated by amylin [66] are inhibited by low concentrations of glucose [65], suggesting that prevailing hypoglycemia may block or at least diminish the capacity of these neurons to respond to amylin. The fact that destruction of the AP blocks the gastric emptying effects of amylin [43] hints at the possibility that this amylin- and glucose-responsive neuronal population may be involved in these effects, but this idea needs to be evaluated empirically.

Another important aspect of glucose regulation during the fed state is to prevent continued endogenous production of glucose from energy stores when ingested glucose is high. Amylin also is involved in this aspect of glycemic control; it suppresses glucagon release from the α-cells of the pancreas [67], thus inhibiting the actions of glucagon to promote hepatic gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis (for review, see [68]).

2.2 Dysregulation of amylin in diabetes mellitus and pharmacological treatment with pramlintide

In healthy humans, postprandial release of amylin generates plasma concentrations in the picomolar range [69, 70], concentrations sufficient to exert glycemic effects. However, amylin becomes dysregulated in individuals with diabetes mellitus, a disease characterized by long-term hyperglycemia due to a loss of or impairment in insulin signaling. Insufficiency of insulin signaling may be due to autoimmune destruction of the pancreatic β-cells themselves (type 1 diabetes mellitus, or T1DM) or to the target cells of insulin failing to respond to the hormone and, eventually, consequent reduction in insulin production as the β-cells become disrupted (T2DM; see [71] for a recent review of these subtypes). The presence of pancreatic amyloid is observed in both subtypes, although whether amyloid deposits are a cause or a consequence of diabetes mellitus remains unresolved [72, 73].

The fact that amylin levels are also disrupted in the diabetic state is logical given that its release is highly correlated with that of insulin under most conditions [74-77]. In T1DM, levels of amylin are extremely low in the plasma and in the pancreas itself [69, 78-81], as one would expect in a condition where the pancreatic source of amylin is destroyed. In contrast, amylin levels in T2DM depend on the progression of the disease. In earlier stages of T2DM, hyperamylinemia is observed [82]; however, as the disease progresses and the β-cells fail, amylin levels fall [83].

In both T1DM and more advanced cases of T2DM, amylin levels are low; this led to the notion that replacing amylin might be therapeutically useful for the treatment of diabetes [84]. In particular, it was thought that restoring amylin signaling could be beneficial for slowing the abnormally rapid gastric emptying rate of individuals with diabetes [85]. This pathophysiological effect can exacerbate postprandial hyperglycemia, as nutrients enter the small intestine and are absorbed more rapidly than normal; replacing amylin could potentially reverse this symptom and thereby normalize glycemia [84, 86, 87]. However, human amylin is highly amyloidogenic, or prone to pathological aggregation, due to the presence of amino acid sequences that are disposed to β-sheet fibril formation [88, 89]. Therefore, development of an amylin agonist that would avoid this property while still producing the beneficial glycemic effects of amylin was required, and thus the non-amyloidogenic amylin analog pramlintide was developed [90].

Today, pramlintide is FDA-approved for the treatment of both T1DM and T2DM [91]. It is used as an adjunct therapy along with exogenous replacement of insulin. It is administered subcutaneously before meals, but must be injected separately from insulin due to pH/solubility concerns [92]. Pramlintide recapitulates the glycemic effects of native amylin; it effectively suppresses postprandial blood glucose levels [86, 93], reduces the rate of gastric emptying [94-97], and inhibits glucagon [98, 99] in humans. The most commonly reported adverse effect of pramlintide is nausea [100-104]. When pramlintide is used in combination with insulin, there is also a chance of inducing severe hypoglycemia [105], so doses of each drug need to be titrated carefully to mitigate this risk.

Although pramlintide has been used clinically for about a decade, there is always an interest in improving what is already available, or even developing novel amylin-based strategies for the pharmacotherapeutic management of diabetes. As mentioned briefly, one of the downsides of pramlintide is that it must be injected separately from insulin. The rationale for this is that pramlintide is soluble in a more acidic solution (pH ~4) [106] whereas injectable insulin is formulated at a more neutral pH in the range of ~7-8 [92]. Therefore, one area of research involves identifying new amylin analogs that are more soluble at neutral pH levels, yet are non-amyloidogenic [107]. Another strategy currently being explored is to reduce degradation of endogenous amylin, thereby prolonging its beneficial effects. Renal clearance is largely responsible for the breakdown of amylin and analogs like pramlintide [108]. This may occur at least in part by the actions of insulin-degrading enzyme (IDE) [109], which is highly expressed in the kidney [110]. Blocking IDE activity in mice increased plasma amylin concentrations [111] leading some to conclude that this may be a viable strategy for treating T2DM [111, 112], perhaps by combining an anti-IDE pharmacotherapy with an existing drug like pramlintide. These areas of research are quite new, and clearly, many questions remain to be answered regarding the possible translational relevance of these strategies.

3. Energy balance control

3.1 Central sites of action for amylin in the control of food intake and body weight

In addition to its potent glycemic effects, amylin has an important role in the control of energy balance. Specifically, amylin reduces food intake and body weight, and acts as a satiation signal to promote negative energy balance [26, 113, 114]. Peripheral or central administration of amylin or an amylin receptor agonist can induce hypophagia and weight loss [113-118]; these effects are mediated via direct action in the central nervous system [119]. Amylin also influences energy expenditure [120, 121], although this has not been as extensively investigated. This section will focus on the feeding and body weight effects of amylin, which have been more widely studied.

Research on the sites of action within the brain for amylin's intake- and body weight-suppressive effects has focused primarily on the AP of the hindbrain. A large body of literature indicates that amylin receptor activation in the AP suppresses food intake [122-124]. Furthermore, reducing the ability of amylin to act at the AP via lesioning of this nucleus [42, 125] or by pharmacological blockade of amylin receptors [122] attenuates the anorectic effects of peripherally-administered amylin. The importance of the AP for amylin's effects on energy balance has been a focus of several comprehensive reviews [30, 126, 127].

Although the AP is certainly an important and physiologically relevant site of action for amylin's energy balance effects, amylin binding sites are found not only in the AP, but in fact are distributed widely throughout the brain [128-130], including areas known to be important for the control of feeding and motivated behavior such as hypothalamic nuclei, structures of the mesolimbic system, and other feeding-relevant nuclei in the caudal brainstem. Coupled with our ever-growing appreciation of the distributed nature of energy balance control [131, 132], the existence of amylin binding sites throughout the neuraxis suggests that at least some of these sites likely contribute directly to the control of energy balance by amylin. Further support for this notion comes from the fact that amylin can cross the blood-brain barrier [133, 134], presenting the intriguing hypothesis that sufficient concentrations of circulating amylin may be able to directly access numerous parenchymal targets to influence energy balance.

The hypothesis that amylin directly acts in a variety of nuclei to control food intake and body weight has begun to receive more attention in the last few years. This is an especially important empirical research theme given the recognition that the amylin system is a promising target for the development of pharmacotherapies to treat obesity [29, 31, 32]. Our laboratory has focused on the role of the ventral tegmental area (VTA), a major nucleus of the mesolimbic reward system, in mediating the energy balance effects of amylin receptor activation. The VTA is an important site for motivated behavior, including the control of food intake [135-137], and several peripherally-derived feeding-related peptides act directly in the VTA to alter food intake and motivation for food [138-142]. Our work has demonstrated that amylin receptor signaling in the VTA is both pharmacologically and physiologically relevant for the control of food intake. Activation of amylin receptors in the VTA with the amylin receptor agonist salmon calcitonin (sCT) [143, 144] or amylin itself [145] suppresses food intake in rats. Furthermore, reducing VTA amylin receptor signaling increases feeding. This effect was observed in an acute experiment using a pharmacological amylin receptor antagonist, AC187 [143], as well in a chronic study availing of a novel adeno-associated virus to knock down amylin receptor expression in the nucleus [144], supporting the relevance of the VTA for amylin-mediated control of energy balance over the short-term (~24h) and long-term (~1 month). The anorectic and body weight-suppressive effects of VTA amylin signaling appear to be mediated, at least in part, by suppression of dopaminergic signaling from the VTA to the nucleus accumbens core (NAcC), one of the major afferent targets of VTA dopamine neurons and a site that itself is important for mediating responses to internally- and externally-derived signals related to feeding [144]. Interestingly, VTA amylin receptor signaling may have more powerful suppressive effects on the intake of palatable foods than of a bland food, at least over the longer-term [144].

The nucleus accumbens (NAc) represents another major nucleus of the mesolimbic reward system and in fact was one of the first nuclei in the brain recognized for its robust binding of amylin [128]. However, the role of direct amylin signaling within the accumbens for the control of food intake is still unclear. One report suggests that injection of amylin in the nucleus accumbens shell (NAcSh), but not NAcC, subregion reduces food intake [146]. However, when an alternate, angled cannula placement was used to target the shell, thus avoiding potential ventricular diffusion of the injection, food intake was unchanged [146]. A more recent microinjection study in the NAcSh, in which the ventricles were avoided, suggests that amylin may act in the NAcSh to suppress mu-opioid-induced hyperphagia [147]. This paper also demonstrates that direct intra-NAcSh infusion of amylin reduces sucrose intake, as well as food deprivation-induced chow intake, albeit at higher doses of amylin than those required to modify opioidergic feeding [147]. These collective findings suggest that amylin in the NAcSh may impact food intake primarily by interacting with and modulating other feeding-relevant signals, in contrast to its ability to independently influence feeding via actions at other nuclei like the AP and the VTA.

3.2 Amylin production in the brain

When considering the energy balance effects of amylin in targets such as the VTA and NAc, which are protected by the blood-brain barrier, the endogenous source of amylin to these nuclei becomes an important question. The primary known source of amylin in the body is the pancreas, and although amylin can cross the blood-brain barrier [133, 134], does circulating, pancreatic-derived amylin actually access these sites to cause hypophagia and weight loss? To date, studies have only indirectly addressed this question. For example, in the VTA, acute blockade of amylin receptors with the antagonist AC187 increases food intake [143], but the source of the endogenous amylin is unknown and can only be assumed to be the pancreatic β-cells. However, exciting new research suggests that amylin may also be produced in the brain.

The first evidence of central amylin production came from studies of maternal female rats, and demonstrated expression of amylin mRNA in the preoptic area, medial preoptic nucleus, and bed nucleus of the stria terminalis in maternally-behaving female rats (post-parturition or sensitized virgin females) [148, 149]. No significant levels of amylin mRNA were observed in these brain areas in male rats or in non-maternal females [149], which led the authors to conclude that at least in these brain areas, amylin was likely exerting effects on maternal behavior specifically. It is important to note, however, that these papers examined amylin expression in fairly restricted areas of the brain, and did not test expression throughout the entire neuraxis.

More recently, Friedman's group examined hypothalamic expression of amylin in mice, within the context of feeding and energy balance. Their results indicate that amylin is expressed in numerous areas of the hypothalamus, including the preoptic area, as well as feeding-related nuclei such as the lateral hypothalamus (LH) and the arcuate nucleus [54]. Importantly, expression was observed in both female and male mice, although expression was higher in females [54]. These novel findings demonstrate the existence of a central source of amylin in both sexes, and raise many new empirical questions as to the projection targets and functions of this centrally-produced amylin. An earlier report shows that neurons in the lateral parabrachial nucleus (LPBN) that are activated by peripheral administration of amylin project to the LH [150], highlighting the possibility that amylin-expressing LH neurons may be part of a broader amylin-responsive neural network that is activated by peripheral amylin. To speculate, although these LPBN neurons inhibit neurons in the LH [150], the phenotype of these LH neurons is unknown. These could be GABAergic interneurons [151], and LPBN inactivation of this population thus might represent removal of inhibition on amylinergic LH neurons, thereby increasing LH amylin signaling and providing a central “boost” to the peripherally-derived amylin. This is purely speculative but represents an interesting possibility introduced by this new finding.

3.3 Pramlintide pharmacotherapy in humans promotes negative energy balance

Amylin and amylin receptor agonists suppress food intake and body weight not only in rodent models, but also in humans. For example, acute subcutaneous injection of the amylin analog pramlintide suppressed energy intake in normal-weight males [152]. Importantly, pramlintide is also effective to reduce feeding in obese men [153]. Other feeding-related signals such as the adipose-derived hormone leptin have diminished ability to promote negative energy balance in the obese state [154, 155]; the fact that amylin receptor agonists remain effective to suppress feeding and body weight in the obese state [153, 156-158] is a feature that makes the amylin system an attractive candidate for the development of new obesity treatments.

The use of pramlintide, or any amylin analog, to treat obesity in humans would require chronic administration; accordingly, several studies have focused on the energy balance effects of longer-term pramlintide treatment in obese humans [157, 159-161]. The results consistently demonstrate pramlintide-mediated reductions in energy intake and body weight in obese individuals with or without a concurrent diagnosis of diabetes mellitus [102, 157, 159, 162]. Using pramlintide in combination with behavioral modification may be a beneficial strategy for weight loss [160]. One study suggested that pramlintide may also provide benefits for binge eating, as chronic administration of the drug lowered self-reported binge eating scores [157]. Like glycemic studies, the most common side effect of pramlintide reported in these experiments was nausea, although this is often described as “mild” (e.g., [159, 160]). However, nausea may not be a primary explanation for weight loss, because weight loss was similar in pramlintide-treated individuals who did or did not experience nausea [159]. These data underscore the putative utility of pramlintide or other amylin-based compounds as anti-obesity pharmacotherapies, but it is critical to note that pramlintide is not currently FDA-approved for the treatment of obesity.

3.4 Amylin and leptin cooperatively interact to suppress food intake and body weight

Another feature that makes amylin an attractive candidate for anti-obesity pharmaceutical development is its ability to interact with and enhance the effects of other feeding-related neurohormonal signals. An enhanced suppression of food intake has been observed when amylin is given in combination with other feeding-related peptides such as cholecystokinin [122], peptide YY [163], and insulin [164]. Perhaps most well-studied to date is the ability of amylin to interact cooperatively with the adipose hormone leptin [165-171]. When leptin and amylin are administered together, the suppression of food intake and body weight that is produced by the combination of the two peptides is greater than would be expected based on the effects of each peptide in isolation (i.e., a greater-than-additive effect) [168, 169]. The reduction in body weight involves a selective reduction in adiposity with conservation of lean mass [165, 166, 171]. The neural mechanisms underlying this effect are still being elucidated, but several studies suggest that amylin enhances the effects of leptin. This occurs even during a state of obesity-induced leptin insensitivity or “resistance”, where amylin is able to restore sensitivity to leptin [165, 166, 169].

The neural substrates underlying the cooperative ability of amylin and leptin to enhance suppression of food intake, body weight, and adiposity are still being determined. The ventromedial nucleus of the hypothalamus (VMN) appears to be one site of interaction. Peripheral administration of amylin enhances leptin binding in this area of the brain of normal-weight animals [169]. In cell line studies, amylin and leptin engage several shared intracellular signaling pathways, including STAT3, Akt, and ERK [172-174]. To date, research has supported the importance of the STAT3 pathway in the interaction of amylin and leptin. In diet-induced obese rats with reduced sensitivity to leptin, peripheral amylin treatment restored leptin-mediated induction of phosphorylated STAT3 (pSTAT3) in the VMN [165]. Furthermore, amylin knockout mice treated with leptin have a blunted pSTAT3 response in this nucleus [169]. The ability of amylin to enhance leptin signaling in the VMN relies on amylin-mediated induction of interleukin-6 (IL-6); blocking IL-6 signaling reduced the ability of amylin to enhance leptin-induced pSTAT3 in this nucleus [175].

The VTA is also a site of interaction for amylin and leptin to cooperatively enhance suppression of food intake and body weight. Direct application of the combination of these peptides to the VTA of rats reduced chow intake to a greater degree than leptin alone or amylin alone; this was mediated by an augmented suppression of meal size [145]. Furthermore, doses of leptin and amylin that, on their own, were ineffective to alter feeding or body weight produced significant suppressive effects on both measures when administered in combination to the VTA [145]. The neural mechanisms underlying these effects in the VTA remain to be determined; it would be interesting to know, for example, whether the cooperative interaction relies on enhanced pSTAT3 and/or IL-6 signaling, similar to the effects in the VMN.

Given the focus of much of the amylin feeding literature on the AP, it is worth noting that much of the available evidence suggests that the AP is unlikely to support the interaction between amylin and leptin. Leptin receptors are not highly expressed in the AP [176-178], and the ability of amylin to enhance leptin-induced pSTAT3 signaling in the AP is inconsistent [165, 169]. However, recent single-cell PCR data indicate that some cells in the AP express mRNA for the components of the amylin receptor as well as the leptin receptor [179]. Co-expression of the receptors at the protein level remains to be evaluated, but certainly, this novel finding invites the question of whether a subset of AP neurons may indeed support an interaction between amylin and leptin. Still, most of the literature to date seems to indicate differing relevance of the VMN and VTA versus the AP for the interactive effect of amylin with leptin for the control of energy balance. This underscores the importance of identifying the distributed neural substrates at which amylin acts, as the specific consequences of amylin signaling appear to diverge among nuclei.

As monotherapies for the treatment of obesity have been largely ineffective to safely produce sustained and meaningful reductions in body weight [180], combination therapies – and particularly those targeting amylin – may prove to be a more successful strategy for inducing long-term weight loss [31]. Indeed, the cooperative interaction between amylin and leptin agonists for enhanced suppression of body weight has been recapitulated in humans [161, 165], indicating the possible effectiveness of this and other amylin-based combination strategies for the treatment of obesity [181]. The numerous feeding-relevant signals with which amylin can interact (see [182] for review) provide a variety of potential starting points for basic science research to understand the mechanisms by which amylin can facilitate and enhance the actions of these other signals to promote negative energy balance.

4. Effects on cognitive and motivational processes

The majority of research to date on the physiological and behavioral roles of amylin has focused on its metabolic consequences. However, several new reports indicate that amylin may also influence aspects of cognition. This introduces the intriguing possibility that amylin-targeting pharmacotherapies may have beneficial uses beyond energy balance and glycemic control. This section will discuss the role of amylin in the cognitive deficits and neuroanatomical pathologies that characterize Alzheimer's disease (AD). In addition, although amylin's actions in the mesolimbic system have focused on its function for energy balance control, the possibility that amylin's actions in the mesolimbic system may extend to aspects of cognition and non-food-directed motivated behavior will be considered.

4.1 Amylin in Alzheimer's disease: effects on cognition and neurodegeneration

T2DM and obesity each represent a significant risk factor for the development of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and other forms of cognitive impairment [183-187]. Insulin resistance has been proposed as a mechanism connecting these diseases [188, 189], but cannot fully explain the neuropathologies associated with AD [190]. Recently, amylin has been suggested as another potential link between cognitive impairment and the glycemic dysregulation associated with T2DM and obesity [33, 191]. As mentioned previously, amylin secretion is dysregulated in T2DM. In humans, lower levels of circulating amylin are associated with cognitive deficits [192, 193], and chronic systemic administration of amylin or an amylin receptor agonist like pramlintide can improve cognitive performance in animal models of AD [192, 194]. However, increased amylin may also be involved in some of the neuropathologies associated with AD.

Some of amylin's effects in AD pathology, whether beneficial or detrimental, may be indirect. For instance, the improvements in cognition from increased amylin levels might be mediated in part by amylin's hypophagic effects, as reduced energy intake is associated with better cognitive ability (see [195, 196] for review). In terms of damaging indirect effects, amylin can induce the production of inflammatory cytokines like interleukin-6 [175, 197] that could contribute to neurodegeneration [198, 199]. However, more direct roles of amylin in AD will be considered here.

Misfolding and subsequent inappropriate aggregation of protein is a shared pathological feature in T2DM and AD [200, 201]. As discussed above, T2DM is characterized in part by amyloid deposits consisting of aggregated amylin protein in the pancreas. Correspondingly, one of the neuropathological hallmarks of AD is the presence of amyloid plaques within the brain that consist largely of misfolded amyloid beta (Aβ) protein. Aβ is a natural product of proteolytic cleavage of amyloid precursor protein (APP). The physiological functions of APP and of Aβ are not completely clear, but it is thought that APP may play a role in neural plasticity and cell growth [202]. Aβ is normally cleared from the brain, but when this process fails, the protein begins to accumulate in the brain and eventually aggregates in the form of amyloid plaques. These plaques are highly cytotoxic and are considered a critical component of AD neuropathology (see [203] for review). Interesting new findings suggest that amyloid plaques within the brain contain not only Aβ but also amylin. In postmortem brain tissue from patients diagnosed with AD, misfolded amylin fibrils – the precursor to amylin-based amyloid – were found in blood vessels in the brain [204]. This was not observed in tissue from non-AD controls. Furthermore, amylin and Aβ were found to be colocalized in the brain, but not the pancreas, of AD patients [204, 205]. Together, these results suggest that peripherally-derived amyloidogenic amylin may circulate and penetrate into the brain, where it can promote amyloid formation. Indeed, fibrils of amylin can “seed” the aggregation of Aβ, meaning that misfolded amylin can promote amyloidogenesis by acting as a core around which proteins such as Aβ (or more amylin) can aggregate [205, 206]. Several reports suggest that the detrimental effects of Aβ on neuronal activity and cell survival are mediated by amylin receptor signaling [207-211]. However, a recent study provides contrasting data showing that amylin receptors are not activated by Aβ [212], so this question remains open for debate.

Collectively, the available literature suggests that amylin is linked in some way to AD, but many questions remain. Although elevated plasma amylin is associated with cognitive benefits [193, 213], amylin can induce neurotoxicity in the central nervous system by accumulating in the brain [214], where it can promote the formation of amyloid plaques [204-206]. In trying to understand the effects of amylin on cognition and neurodegeneration, a critical consideration is whether the peptide is misfolded or not – in other words, whether it is already more susceptible to aggregation. This distinction can drastically change the effects of the peptide. For example, in a study of primary neuronal cultures, human amylin that had been “aged” to promote fibril formation had more potent neurotoxic effects than “non-aged” amylin [215]. An additional complication is that amylin is only prone to aggregation in certain species. Although it is highly amyloidogenic in humans, non-human primates, and cats [216-218], this is not the case in rodents, where a proline substitution in a key region of the peptide stabilizes the conformation to prevent fibril formation [219]. The presence of the amyloidogenic amino acid sequence alone is not sufficient to induce fibrils; increased presence of amylin in the tissue is also important for amyloid formation [220]. The species from which experimentally administered amylin is derived, and the species and conditions in which testing occurs, are undeniably important considerations in AD research.

In trying to understand the link between AD and metabolic diseases like T2DM, and particularly in trying to elucidate the role of amylin in AD, the fluctuation in amylin levels in early versus later stages of T2DM may be an important determinant of the effects of the peptide. For example, in species prone to amyloid formation, it is possible that during the earlier, hyperamylinemic stages of T2DM, the excess amylin may promote the formation of central amyloid plaques. This would be consistent with the finding that both an amyloidogenic amino acid sequence and high local amylin levels are required for misfolding and aggregation [220]. Later in the progression of T2DM, when amylin levels fall, increasing amylin via exogenous administration may have beneficial effects. The cognitive improvements associated with increased amylin levels may be due to an ability of non-amyloidogenic amylin agonists to reduce amyloid plaques in the brain. A recent study [194] examined the effects of amylin or pramlintide administration on Aβ levels in the brain in two separate mouse models of AD. In both models, chronic treatment with either agonist reduced the number and size of amyloid plaques in the brain and also improved performance in two cognitive tasks [194]. Intriguingly, it appears that amylin receptor agonists may exert this effect by clearing the Aβ from the brain into the serum [194]. Unfortunately, the authors do not state the species from which the exogenously-administered amylin was derived, which is an important distinction. Nevertheless, one might safely conclude that the administration of a non-amyloidogenic amylin receptor agonist like pramlintide may be beneficial for the treatment of AD.

Although more research is required to elucidate the exact effects of amylin in AD, the possibility that amylin pharmacotherapies may be useful for the treatment of AD and other types of cognitive impairment is already being considered [35, 192]. Clearly, the development and application of any amylin-based pharmacological strategy for treating AD must carefully weigh the amyloidogenic potential of the amylin compounds against the possible benefits of the drug. Pramlintide is considered a viable non-amyloidogenic possibility [35], but the identification of other non-aggregating amylin receptor agonists [107] may also provide more options for drug development.

Finally, though central sources of amylin have recently been identified [54, 148, 149], the possible influence of centrally-produced amylin on AD pathology and neurodegeneration is completely untested. The fact that these sources of central amylin have been identified in rodents, in which native amylin is non-amyloidogenic, presents a hurdle. If the central sources of amylin are recapitulated in a species with amyloidogenic amylin, such as the cat – and if centrally-produced amylin, like that produced peripherally, is prone to misfolding and aggregation – this could be a useful animal model to tease apart the contributions of amylin derived from peripheral versus central sources.

4.2 Anti-psychotic effects and motivational consequences of amylin signaling: new areas of research

Although the effects of amylin on cognition have been explored most intensely in the realm of neurodegeneration and AD, possible roles for amylin in other types of cognitive processes are beginning to be considered. For example, amylin receptor activation in the mesolimbic reward system may improve deficits in sensorimotor gating, as assessed by prepulse inhibition (PPI). PPI is reduced in patients with schizophrenia [221] as well as other psychiatric conditions including obsessive-compulsive disorder [222]. The PPI paradigm has been used as a screening tool for the identification of psychiatric drugs [223, 224]. Work from Baldo and colleagues demonstrates that microinjection of amylin directly into the NAcSh of rats blocked the suppression of PPI produced by amphetamine [34], consistent with an anti-psychotic effect of amylin. This introduces a fascinating possible use for amylin-based pharmaceuticals, but more research is clearly needed to establish whether the beneficial effects observed in this single report might extend to other symptoms of psychiatric disease.

In addition, it is possible that amylin's effects in the mesolimbic reward system may impact processes related to general (i.e., non-food) motivation and cognition. Work from our laboratory demonstrates that amylin receptor activation in the VTA reduces the motivation to work for a palatable food [143]. Given the role of the VTA in motivational processes in general, it is possible that amylin may act within the VTA to reduce other types of motivated behavior, e.g. non-food-related. A small but growing body of literature supports the notion that neurohormonal signals traditionally associated with energy balance control can act at the VTA to regulate not only feeding but also other types of motivated behavior and potentially even cognitive processing. For example, ghrelin is an orexigenic hormone produced by the stomach. Ghrelin can act directly in the VTA to increase motivation to obtain food, as assessed by operant responding [140, 225], but ghrelin signaling in the VTA also affects sexual motivation in mice [226]. Additionally, the effects of VTA ghrelin extend to cognitive processes, as ghrelin receptor activation in this nucleus increases impulsive-like behavior in rodents [227]. This provides precedence for the idea that the actions of feeding-related peptides in the VTA may exert effects on motivation and cognitive processes beyond outcomes relevant for feeding. The notion that amylin signaling in the VTA might also have broader consequences for motivation and cognition is an exciting possibility that remains to be addressed empirically.

5. Conclusion

T2DM and obesity are costly diseases that affect millions of people worldwide. Pharmacotherapies to address each of these conditions are available, but effective and non-invasive options are limited, particularly for the treatment of obesity. The amylin analog pramlintide is currently FDA-approved as an adjunctive therapy for diabetes, demonstrating the proven clinical relevance of amylin-based drugs for the treatment of this disease. The amylin system also has excellent potential for use in the treatment of obesity. Amylin exerts potent suppressive effects on food intake and body weight, and can interact with other neuroendocrine signals to produce cooperative hypophagic effects, broadening its possible clinical applications. Given the frequent comorbidity of diabetes and obesity [228], developing pharmacotherapies that can effectively treat both diseases simultaneously would be beneficial and perhaps improve patient compliance [229]. The robust and well-established ability of amylin-based compounds to improve glycemic control and to promote negative energy balance make this hormonal system a likely candidate.

Recent research also suggests that amylin may exert effects on cognition. In general, higher amylin levels are associated with improvements in cognitive ability. Numerous reports have investigated the role of amylin in the etiology of AD; although many questions remain, it appears that exogenous administration of amylin may improve the neurodegenerative and cognitive effects of AD [194]. This type of treatment has not been tested in humans, but if effective, it might represent a new strategy to treat AD and other types of cognitive impairment. Furthermore, given the association of T2DM and obesity with AD, it is possible that amylin pharmacotherapies could also provide beneficial treatment for this neurodegenerative disease in patients with these types of comorbidities. Compared to the well-established effects of amylin on glycemic regulation and energy balance control, and the clear benefits of pramlintide for regulating postprandial blood glucose levels, research on its impact on cognition and any potential utility for the treatment of AD is in its infancy. Nevertheless, the amylin system may hold broader promise for the treatment of neurodegenerative and psychiatric disorders. This lively area of research will assuredly produce many exciting findings that may lead to new translational and pharmacological possibilities for amylin.

Acknowledgments

I thank David Reiner and Lauren McGrath for their helpful editorial advice. I also thank Dr. Matthew Hayes for his intellectual suggestions for this manuscript, as well as his valuable mentorship and support for my research reviewed here. This work was supported by NIH DK103804 (EGM-B).

Highlights

- Amylin is physiologically relevant for glycemic and energy balance control

- Amylin receptor agonists reduce blood glucose, feeding, and body weight

- Amylin may reduce cognitive and neurodegenerative symptoms in Alzheimer's disease

- Amylin may exert anti-psychotic effects

- Amylin-based pharmacotherapies may provide benefit to metabolic/cognitive outcomes

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


References

1 Opie EL On the Relation of Chronic Interstitial Pancreatitis to the Islands of Langerhans and to Diabetes Melutus. J Exp Med 1901 5 397 428 19866952
2 Ehrlich JC Ratner IM Amyloidosis of the islets of Langerhans. A restudy of islet hyalin in diabetic and non-diabetic individuals. Am J Pathol 1961 38 49 59 13726023
3 Westermark P Amyloid of human islets of Langerhans. II. Electron microscopic analysis of isolated amyloid. Virchows Arch A Pathol Anat Histol 1977 373 161 6 139751
4 Howard CF Jr. Palotay JL Spontaneous diabetes mellitus in Macaca cyclopis and Mandrillus leucophaeus: case reports. Lab Anim Sci 1975 25 191 6 166251
5 Howard CF Jr. Insular amyloidosis and diabetes mellitus in Macaca nigra. Diabetes 1978 27 357 64 416984
6 Johnson KH Stevens JB Light and electron microscopic studies of islet amyloid in diabetic cats. Diabetes 1973 22 81 90 4119931
7 Yano BL Hayden DW Johnson KH Feline insular amyloid: association with diabetes mellitus. Vet Pathol 1981 18 621 7 7025435
8 Westermark P Wernstedt C O'Brien TD Hayden DW Johnson KH Islet amyloid in type 2 human diabetes mellitus and adult diabetic cats contains a novel putative polypeptide hormone. Am J Pathol 1987 127 414 7 3296768
9 Westermark P Wernstedt C Wilander E Hayden DW O'Brien TD Johnson KH Amyloid fibrils in human insulinoma and islets of Langerhans of the diabetic cat are derived from a neuropeptide-like protein also present in normal islet cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1987 84 3881 5 3035556
10 Cooper GJ Willis AC Clark A Turner RC Sim RB Reid KB Purification and characterization of a peptide from amyloid-rich pancreases of type 2 diabetic patients. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1987 84 8628 32 3317417
11 Konarkowska B Aitken JF Kistler J Zhang S Cooper GJ The aggregation potential of human amylin determines its cytotoxicity towards islet beta-cells. FEBS J 2006 273 3614 24 16884500
12 Janson J Ashley RH Harrison D McIntyre S Butler PC The mechanism of islet amyloid polypeptide toxicity is membrane disruption by intermediate-sized toxic amyloid particles. Diabetes 1999 48 491 8 10078548
13 Cooper GJ Leighton B Dimitriadis GD Parry-Billings M Kowalchuk JM Howland K Amylin found in amyloid deposits in human type 2 diabetes mellitus may be a hormone that regulates glycogen metabolism in skeletal muscle. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1988 85 7763 6 3051005
14 Leighton B Cooper GJ Pancreatic amylin and calcitonin gene-related peptide cause resistance to insulin in skeletal muscle in vitro. Nature 1988 335 632 5 3050530
15 Betsholtz C Johnson KH Westermark P 'Amylin' hormone. Nature 1989 338 211 2922048
16 Young A Amylin and the integrated control of nutrient influx. Adv Pharmacol 2005 52 67 77 16492541
17 Hayes MR Mietlicki-Baase EG Kanoski SE De Jonghe BC Incretins and amylin: neuroendocrine communication between the gut, pancreas, and brain in control of food intake and blood glucose. Annu Rev Nutr 2014 34 237 60 24819325
18 Scherbaum WA The role of amylin in the physiology of glycemic control. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes 1998 106 97 102 9628238
19 Ogawa A Harris V McCorkle SK Unger RH Luskey KL Amylin secretion from the rat pancreas and its selective loss after streptozotocin treatment. J Clin Invest 1990 85 973 6 2179271
20 Kahn SE D'Alessio DA Schwartz MW Fujimoto WY Ensinck JW Taborsky GJ Jr. Evidence of cosecretion of islet amyloid polypeptide and insulin by beta-cells. Diabetes 1990 39 634 8 2185112
21 Fehmann HC Weber V Goke R Goke B Arnold R Cosecretion of amylin and insulin from isolated rat pancreas. FEBS Lett 1990 262 279 81 2185950
22 Mitsukawa T Takemura J Asai J Nakazato M Kangawa K Matsuo H Islet amyloid polypeptide response to glucose, insulin, and somatostatin analogue administration. Diabetes 1990 39 639 42 1970540
23 Nakazato M Miyazato M Asai J Mitsukawa T Kangawa K Matsuo H Islet amyloid polypeptide, a novel pancreatic peptide, is a circulating hormone secreted under glucose stimulation. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1990 169 713 8 2357227
24 Nyholm B Brock B Orskov L Schmitz O Amylin receptor agonists: a novel pharmacological approach in the management of insulin-treated diabetes mellitus. Expert Opin Investig Drugs 2001 10 1641 52
25 Ryan GJ Jobe LJ Martin R Pramlintide in the treatment of type 1 and type 2 diabetes mellitus. Clin Ther 2005 27 1500 12 16330288
26 Lutz TA Pancreatic amylin as a centrally acting satiating hormone. Curr Drug Targets 2005 6 181 9 15777188
27 Mietlicki-Baase EG Hayes MR Amylin activates distributed CNS nuclei to control energy balance. Physiol Behav 2014 136 39 46 24480072
28 Arnelo U Permert J Larsson J Reidelberger RD Arnelo C Adrian TE Chronic low dose islet amyloid polypeptide infusion reduces food intake, but does not influence glucose metabolism, in unrestrained conscious rats: studies using a novel aortic catheterization technique. Endocrinology 1997 138 4081 5 9322915
29 Hay DL Chen S Lutz TA Parkes DG Roth JD Amylin: Pharmacology, Physiology, and Clinical Potential. Pharmacol Rev 2015 67 564 600 26071095
30 Lutz TA Control of energy homeostasis by amylin. Cell Mol Life Sci 2012 69 1947 65 22193913
31 Sadry SA Drucker DJ Emerging combinatorial hormone therapies for the treatment of obesity and T2DM. Nat Rev Endocrinol 2013 9 425 33 23478327
32 Roth JD Amylin and the regulation of appetite and adiposity: recent advances in receptor signaling, neurobiology and pharmacology. Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes 2013 20 8 13 23183359
33 Lutz TA Meyer U Amylin at the interface between metabolic and neurodegenerative disorders. Front Neurosci 2015 9 216 26136651
34 Baisley SK Bremer QZ Bakshi VP Baldo BA Antipsychotic-like actions of the satiety peptide, amylin, in ventral striatal regions marked by overlapping calcitonin receptor and RAMP-1 gene expression. J Neurosci 2014 34 4318 25 24647952
35 Qiu WQ Zhu H Amylin and its analogs: a friend or foe for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease? Front Aging Neurosci 2014 6 186 25120481
36 Carnagarin R Dharmarajan AM Dass CR Molecular aspects of glucose homeostasis in skeletal muscle - A focus on the molecular mechanisms of insulin resistance. Mol Cell Endocrinol 2015 417 52 62 26362689
37 Clementi G Caruso A Cutuli VM de Bernardis E Prato A Amico-Roxas M Amylin given by central or peripheral routes decreases gastric emptying and intestinal transit in the rat. Experientia 1996 52 677 9 8698109
38 Young AA Gedulin BR Rink TJ Dose-responses for the slowing of gastric emptying in a rodent model by glucagon-like peptide (7-36) NH2, amylin, cholecystokinin, and other possible regulators of nutrient uptake. Metabolism 1996 45 1 3 8544764
39 Reidelberger RD Arnelo U Granqvist L Permert J Comparative effects of amylin and cholecystokinin on food intake and gastric emptying in rats. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 2001 280 R605 11 11171636
40 Wickbom J Herrington MK Permert J Jansson A Arnelo U Gastric emptying in response to IAPP and CCK in rats with subdiaphragmatic afferent vagotomy. Regul Pept 2008 148 21 5 18456348
41 Walls EK Wang FB Holst MC Phillips RJ Voreis JS Perkins AR Selective vagal rhizotomies: a new dorsal surgical approach used for intestinal deafferentations. Am J Physiol 1995 269 R1279 88 7503320
42 Lutz TA Senn M Althaus J Del Prete E Ehrensperger F Scharrer E Lesion of the area postrema/nucleus of the solitary tract (AP/NTS) attenuates the anorectic effects of amylin and calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) in rats. Peptides 1998 19 309 17 9493863
43 Young A Inhibition of gastric emptying. Adv Pharmacol 2005 52 99 121 16492543
44 Rogers RC McTigue DM Hermann GE Vagal control of digestion: modulation by central neural and peripheral endocrine factors. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 1996 20 57 66 8622830
45 Travagli RA Hermann GE Browning KN Rogers RC Brainstem circuits regulating gastric function. Annu Rev Physiol 2006 68 279 305 16460274
46 Shapiro RE Miselis RR The central neural connections of the area postrema of the rat. J Comp Neurol 1985 234 344 64 3988989
47 Riediger T Zuend D Becskei C Lutz TA The anorectic hormone amylin contributes to feeding-related changes of neuronal activity in key structures of the gut-brain axis. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 2004 286 R114 22 12958059
48 Gross PM Wall KM Pang JJ Shaver SW Wainman DS Microvascular specializations promoting rapid interstitial solute dispersion in nucleus tractus solitarius. Am J Physiol 1990 259 R1131 8 2260724
49 Cai Y Hay M Bishop VS Synaptic connections and interactions between area postrema and nucleus tractus solitarius. Brain Res 1996 724 121 4 8816265
50 Saha S Batten TF McWilliam PN Glutamate-immunoreactivity in identified vagal afferent terminals of the cat: a study combining horseradish peroxidase tracing and postembedding electron microscopic immunogold staining. Exp Physiol 1995 80 193 202 7786511
51 Andresen MC Yang MY Non-NMDA receptors mediate sensory afferent synaptic transmission in medial nucleus tractus solitarius. Am J Physiol 1990 259 H1307 11 1977326
52 Lu WY Bieger D Vagal afferent transmission in the NTS mediating reflex responses of the rat esophagus. Am J Physiol 1998 274 R1436 45 9612412
53 Davis SF Derbenev AV Williams KW Glatzer NR Smith BN Excitatory and inhibitory local circuit input to the rat dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus originating from the nucleus tractus solitarius. Brain Res 2004 1017 208 17 15261116
54 Li ZK L. Heiman M Greengard P Friedman JM Hypothalamic amylin acts in concert with leptin to regulate food intake. Cell Metabolism 2015 22 1059 67 26655697
55 Ferrier GJ Pierson AM Jones PM Bloom SR Girgis SI Legon S Expression of the rat amylin (IAPP/DAP) gene. J Mol Endocrinol 1989 3 R1 4 2525914
56 Nicholl CG Bhatavdekar JM Mak J Girgis SI Legon S Extra-pancreatic expression of the rat islet amyloid polypeptide (amylin) gene. J Mol Endocrinol 1992 9 157 63 1418386
57 Miyazato M Nakazato M Shiomi K Aburaya J Toshimori H Kangawa K Identification and characterization of islet amyloid polypeptide in mammalian gastrointestinal tract. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1991 181 293 300 1958199
58 Bell GD Reddy S Sun X Yang Y Krissansen GW Distribution of insulin mRNA transcripts within the human body. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2014 451 425 30 25110147
59 Bhogal R Smith DM Bloom SR Investigation and characterization of binding sites for islet amyloid polypeptide in rat membranes. Endocrinology 1992 130 906 13 1310282
60 Mulder H Ekelund M Ekblad E Sundler F Islet amyloid polypeptide in the gut and pancreas: localization, ontogeny and gut motility effects. Peptides 1997 18 771 83 9285924
61 Asai J Nakazato M Miyazato M Kangawa K Matsuo H Matsukura S Regional distribution and molecular forms of rat islet amyloid polypeptide. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1990 169 788 95 2357234
62 McCann MJ Stricker EM Gastric emptying of glucose loads in rats: effects of insulin-induced hypoglycemia. Am J Physiol 1986 251 R609 13 3529991
63 Schvarcz E Palmer M Aman J Berne C Hypoglycemia increases the gastric emptying rate in healthy subjects. Diabetes Care 1995 18 674 6 8586005
64 Gedulin BR Young AA Hypoglycemia overrides amylin-mediated regulation of gastric emptying in rats. Diabetes 1998 47 93 7 9421380
65 Riediger T Schmid HA Lutz TA Simon E Amylin and glucose co-activate area postrema neurons of the rat. Neurosci Lett 2002 328 121 4 12133570
66 Riediger T Schmid HA Lutz T Simon E Amylin potently activates AP neurons possibly via formation of the excitatory second messenger cGMP. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 2001 281 R1833 43 11705768
67 Fehmann HC Weber V Goke R Goke B Eissele R Arnold R Islet amyloid polypeptide (IAPP;amylin) influences the endocrine but not the exocrine rat pancreas. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1990 167 1102 8 1690993
68 Exton JH Mechanisms of hormonal regulation of hepatic glucose metabolism. Diabetes Metab Rev 1987 3 163 83 3032541
69 Hartter E Svoboda T Lell B Schuller M Ludvik B Woloszczuk W Reduced islet-amyloid polypeptide in insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. Lancet 1990 335 854 1969575
70 Bronsky J Prusa R Amylin fasting plasma levels are decreased in patients with osteoporosis. Osteoporos Int 2004 15 243 7 14605801
71 Zaccardi F Webb DR Yates T Davies MJ Pathophysiology of type 1 and type 2 diabetes mellitus: a 90-year perspective. Postgrad Med J 2015
72 Westermark P Andersson A Westermark GT Islet amyloid polypeptide, islet amyloid, and diabetes mellitus. Physiol Rev 2011 91 795 826 21742788
73 Tomita T Islet amyloid polypeptide in pancreatic islets from type 1 diabetic subjects. Islets 2011 3 166 74 21633185
74 O'Brien TD Westermark P Johnson KH Islet amyloid polypeptide and insulin secretion from isolated perfused pancreas of fed, fasted, glucose-treated, and dexamethasone-treated rats. Diabetes 1991 40 1701 6 1756910
75 Moore CX Cooper GJ Co-secretion of amylin and insulin from cultured islet beta-cells: modulation by nutrient secretagogues, islet hormones and hypoglycemic agents. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1991 179 1 9 1679326
76 Hartter E Svoboda T Ludvik B Schuller M Lell B Kuenburg E Basal and stimulated plasma levels of pancreatic amylin indicate its co-secretion with insulin in humans. Diabetologia 1991 34 52 4 2055340
77 Knowles NG Landchild MA Fujimoto WY Kahn SE Insulin and amylin release are both diminished in first-degree relatives of subjects with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2002 25 292 7 11815498
78 Bretherton-Watt D Ghatei MA Legon S Jamal H Suda K Bloom SR Depletion of islet amyloid polypeptide in the spontaneously diabetic (BB) Wistar rat. J Mol Endocrinol 1991 6 3 7 2015054
79 Clark A Saad MF Nezzer T Uren C Knowler WC Bennett PH Islet amyloid polypeptide in diabetic and non-diabetic Pima Indians. Diabetologia 1990 33 285 9 2198187
80 Koda JE Fineman M Rink TJ Dailey GE Muchmore DB Linarelli LG Amylin concentrations and glucose control. Lancet 1992 339 1179 80 1349407
81 Percy AJ Trainor DA Rittenhouse J Phelps J Koda JE Development of sensitive immunoassays to detect amylin and amylin-like peptides in unextracted plasma. Clin Chem 1996 42 576 85 8605675
82 Johnson KH O'Brien TD Jordan K Westermark P Impaired glucose tolerance is associated with increased islet amyloid polypeptide (IAPP) immunoreactivity in pancreatic beta cells. Am J Pathol 1989 135 245 50 2675614
83 Enoki S Mitsukawa T Takemura J Nakazato M Aburaya J Toshimori H Plasma islet amyloid polypeptide levels in obesity, impaired glucose tolerance and non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 1992 15 97 102 1541241
84 Cooper GJ Amylin and insulin co-replacement therapy for insulin-dependent (type I) diabetes mellitus. Med Hypotheses 1991 36 284 8 1787825
85 Young AA Gedulin B Vine W Percy A Rink TJ Gastric emptying is accelerated in diabetic BB rats and is slowed by subcutaneous injections of amylin. Diabetologia 1995 38 642 8 7672483
86 Kolterman OG Gottlieb A Moyses C Colburn W Reduction of postprandial hyperglycemia in subjects with IDDM by intravenous infusion of AC137, a human amylin analogue. Diabetes Care 1995 18 1179 82 7587855
87 Moyses C Young A Kolterman O Modulation of gastric emptying as a therapeutic approach to glycaemic control. Diabet Med 1996 13 S34 8 8894469
88 Betsholtz C Svensson V Rorsman F Engstrom U Westermark GT Wilander E Islet amyloid polypeptide (IAPP):cDNA cloning and identification of an amyloidogenic region associated with the species-specific occurrence of age-related diabetes mellitus. Exp Cell Res 1989 183 484 93 2670595
89 Jaikaran ET Clark A Islet amyloid and type 2 diabetes: from molecular misfolding to islet pathophysiology. Biochim Biophys Acta 2001 1537 179 203 11731221
90 Young AAV W. Gedulin BR Pittner R Janes S Gaeta LSL Percy A Moore CX Koda JE Rink TJ Beaumont K Preclinical pharmacology of pramlintide in the rat: comparisons with human and rat amylin. Drug Development Research 1996 37 231 48
91 Chawla PS Kochar MS What's new in clinical pharmacology and therapeutics. WMJ 2006 105 24 9 16749321
92 Weyer C Fineman MS Strobel S Shen L Data J Kolterman OG Properties of pramlintide and insulin upon mixing. Am J Health Syst Pharm 2005 62 816 22 15821274
93 Kolterman OG Schwartz S Corder C Levy B Klaff L Peterson J Effect of 14 days' subcutaneous administration of the human amylin analogue, pramlintide (AC137), on an intravenous insulin challenge and response to a standard liquid meal in patients with IDDM. Diabetologia 1996 39 492 9 8778001
94 Kong MF King P Macdonald IA Stubbs TA Perkins AC Blackshaw PE Infusion of pramlintide, a human amylin analogue, delays gastric emptying in men with IDDM. Diabetologia 1997 40 82 8 9028722
95 Kong MF Stubbs TA King P Macdonald IA Lambourne JE Blackshaw PE The effect of single doses of pramlintide on gastric emptying of two meals in men with IDDM. Diabetologia 1998 41 577 83 9628276
96 Samsom M Szarka LA Camilleri M Vella A Zinsmeister AR Rizza RA Pramlintide, an amylin analog, selectively delays gastric emptying: potential role of vagal inhibition. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2000 278 G946 51 10859225
97 Vella A Lee JS Camilleri M Szarka LA Burton DD Zinsmeister AR Effects of pramlintide, an amylin analogue, on gastric emptying in type 1 and 2 diabetes mellitus. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2002 14 123 31 11975712
98 Fineman M Weyer C Maggs DG Strobel S Kolterman OG The human amylin analog, pramlintide, reduces postprandial hyperglucagonemia in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Horm Metab Res 2002 34 504 8 12384827
99 Fineman MS Koda JE Shen LZ Strobel SA Maggs DG Weyer C The human amylin analog, pramlintide, corrects postprandial hyperglucagonemia in patients with type 1 diabetes. Metabolism 2002 51 636 41 11979398
100 Weyer C Maggs DG Young AA Kolterman OG Amylin replacement with pramlintide as an adjunct to insulin therapy in type 1 and type 2 diabetes mellitus: a physiological approach toward improved metabolic control. Curr Pharm Des 2001 7 1353 73 11472273
101 Marrero DG Crean J Zhang B Kellmeyer T Gloster M Herrmann K Effect of adjunctive pramlintide treatment on treatment satisfaction in patients with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2007 30 210 6 17259483
102 Singh-Franco D Perez A Harrington C The effect of pramlintide acetate on glycemic control and weight in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and in obese patients without diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabetes Obes Metab 2011 13 169 80 21199269
103 Lee NJ Norris SL Thakurta S Efficacy and harms of the hypoglycemic agent pramlintide in diabetes mellitus. Ann Fam Med 2010 8 542 9 21060125
104 Hollander PA Levy P Fineman MS Maggs DG Shen LZ Strobel SA Pramlintide as an adjunct to insulin therapy improves long-term glycemic and weight control in patients with type 2 diabetes: a 1-year randomized controlled trial. Diabetes Care 2003 26 784 90 12610038
105 Pullman J Darsow T Frias JP Pramlintide in the management of insulin-using patients with type 2 and type 1 diabetes. Vasc Health Risk Manag 2006 2 203 12 17326327
106 Nonoyama A Laurence JS Garriques L Qi H Le T Middaugh CR A biophysical characterization of the peptide drug pramlintide (AC137) using empirical phase diagrams. J Pharm Sci 2008 97 2552 67 17879973
107 Wang H Abedini A Ruzsicska B Raleigh DP Rationally designed, nontoxic, nonamyloidogenic analogues of human islet amyloid polypeptide with improved solubility. Biochemistry 2014 53 5876 84 25140605
108 Vine W Smith P LaChappell R Blase E Lumpkin R Young A Nephrectomy decreases amylin and pramlintide clearance in rats. Horm Metab Res 1998 30 514 7 9761382
109 Bennett RG Duckworth WC Hamel FG Degradation of amylin by insulin-degrading enzyme. J Biol Chem 2000 275 36621 5 10973971
110 Bondy CA Zhou J Chin E Reinhardt RR Ding L Roth RA Cellular distribution of insulin-degrading enzyme gene expression. Comparison with insulin and insulin-like growth factor receptors. J Clin Invest 1994 93 966 73 8132782
111 Maianti JP McFedries A Foda ZH Kleiner RE Du XQ Leissring MA Anti-diabetic activity of insulin-degrading enzyme inhibitors mediated by multiple hormones. Nature 2014 511 94 8 24847884
112 Costes S Butler PC Insulin-degrading enzyme inhibition, a novel therapy for type 2 diabetes? Cell Metab 2014 20 201 3 25100059
113 Lutz TA Geary N Szabady MM Del Prete E Scharrer E Amylin decreases meal size in rats. Physiol Behav 1995 58 1197 202 8623020
114 Arnelo U Permert J Adrian TE Larsson J Westermark P Reidelberger RD Chronic infusion of islet amyloid polypeptide causes anorexia in rats. Am J Physiol 1996 271 R1654 9 8997366
115 Lutz TA Del Prete E Scharrer E Reduction of food intake in rats by intraperitoneal injection of low doses of amylin. Physiol Behav 1994 55 891 5 8022910
116 Morley JE Flood JF Horowitz M Morley PM Walter MJ Modulation of food intake by peripherally administered amylin. Am J Physiol 1994 267 R178 84 8048622
117 Rushing PA Hagan MM Seeley RJ Lutz TA Woods SC Amylin: a novel action in the brain to reduce body weight. Endocrinology 2000 141 850 3 10650969
118 Rushing PA Seeley RJ Air EL Lutz TA Woods SC Acute 3rdventricular amylin infusion potently reduces food intake but does not produce aversive consequences. Peptides 2002 23 985 8 12084531
119 Lutz TA Del Prete E Scharrer E Subdiaphragmatic vagotomy does not influence the anorectic effect of amylin. Peptides 1995 16 457 62 7651899
120 Wielinga PY Alder B Lutz TA The acute effect of amylin and salmon calcitonin on energy expenditure. Physiol Behav 2007 91 212 7 17428511
121 Wielinga PY Lowenstein C Muff S Munz M Woods SC Lutz TA Central amylin acts as an adiposity signal to control body weight and energy expenditure. Physiol Behav 2010 101 45 52 20416330
122 Mollet A Gilg S Riediger T Lutz TA Infusion of the amylin antagonist AC 187 into the area postrema increases food intake in rats. Physiol Behav 2004 81 149 55 15059694
123 Potes CS Turek VF Cole RL Vu C Roland BL Roth JD Noradrenergic neurons of the area postrema mediate amylin's hypophagic action. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 2010 299 R623 31 20554938
124 Braegger FE Asarian L Dahl K Lutz TA Boyle CN The role of the area postrema in the anorectic effects of amylin and salmon calcitonin: behavioral and neuronal phenotyping. Eur J Neurosci 2014 40 3055 66 25040689
125 Lutz TA Mollet A Rushing PA Riediger T Scharrer E The anorectic effect of a chronic peripheral infusion of amylin is abolished in area postrema/nucleus of the solitary tract (AP/NTS) lesioned rats. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord 2001 25 1005 11 11443499
126 Lutz TA Effects of amylin on eating and adiposity. Handb Exp Pharmacol 2012 231 50 22249817
127 Boyle CN Lutz TA Amylinergic control of food intake in lean and obese rodents. Physiol Behav 2011 105 129 37 21324327
128 Beaumont K Kenney MA Young AA Rink TJ High affinity amylin binding sites in rat brain. Mol Pharmacol 1993 44 493 7 8396712
129 Sexton PM Paxinos G Kenney MA Wookey PJ Beaumont K In vitro autoradiographic localization of amylin binding sites in rat brain. Neuroscience 1994 62 553 67 7830897
130 Paxinos G Chai SY Christopoulos G Huang XF Toga AW Wang HQ In vitro autoradiographic localization of calcitonin and amylin binding sites in monkey brain. J Chem Neuroanat 2004 27 217 36 15261329
131 Grill HJ Hayes MR Hindbrain neurons as an essential hub in the neuroanatomically distributed control of energy balance. Cell Metab 2012 16 296 309 22902836
132 Grill HJ Kaplan JM The neuroanatomical axis for control of energy balance. Front Neuroendocrinol 2002 23 2 40 11906202
133 Banks WA Kastin AJ Differential permeability of the blood-brain barrier to two pancreatic peptides: insulin and amylin. Peptides 1998 19 883 9 9663454
134 Banks WA Kastin AJ Maness LM Huang W Jaspan JB Permeability of the blood-brain barrier to amylin. Life Sci 1995 57 1993 2001 7475950
135 Meye FJ Adan RA Feelings about food: the ventral tegmental area in food reward and emotional eating. Trends Pharmacol Sci 2014 35 31 40 24332673
136 Naef L Pitman KA Borgland SL Mesolimbic dopamine and its neuromodulators in obesity and binge eating. CNS Spectr 2015 20 574 83 26514168
137 Narayanan NS Guarnieri DJ DiLeone RJ Metabolic hormones, dopamine circuits, and feeding. Front Neuroendocrinol 2010 31 104 12 19836414
138 Alhadeff AL Rupprecht LE Hayes MR GLP-1 neurons in the nucleus of the solitary tract project directly to the ventral tegmental area and nucleus accumbens to control for food intake. Endocrinology 2012 153 647 58 22128031
139 Mietlicki-Baase EG Ortinski PI Rupprecht LE Olivos DR Alhadeff AL Pierce RC The food intake-suppressive effects of glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor signaling in the ventral tegmental area are mediated by AMPA/kainate receptors. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2013 305 E1367 74 24105414
140 Skibicka KP Hansson C Alvarez-Crespo M Friberg PA Dickson SL Ghrelin directly targets the ventral tegmental area to increase food motivation. Neuroscience 2011 180 129 37 21335062
141 Hommel JD Trinko R Sears RM Georgescu D Liu ZW Gao XB Leptin receptor signaling in midbrain dopamine neurons regulates feeding. Neuron 2006 51 801 10 16982424
142 Bruijnzeel AW Corrie LW Rogers JA Yamada H Effects of insulin and leptin in the ventral tegmental area and arcuate hypothalamic nucleus on food intake and brain reward function in female rats. Behav Brain Res 2011 219 254 64 21255613
143 Mietlicki-Baase EG Rupprecht LE Olivos DR Zimmer DJ Alter MD Pierce RC Amylin receptor signaling in the ventral tegmental area is physiologically relevant for the control of food intake. Neuropsychopharmacology 2013 38 1685 97 23474592
144 Mietlicki-Baase EG Reiner DJ Cone JJ Olivos DR McGrath LE Zimmer DJ Amylin modulates the mesolimbic dopamine system to control energy balance. Neuropsychopharmacology 2015 40 372 85 25035079
145 Mietlicki-Baase EG Olivos DR Jeffrey BA Hayes MR Cooperative interaction between leptin and amylin signaling in the ventral tegmental area for the control of food intake. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2015 308 E1116 22 25898952
146 Baldo BA Kelley AE Amylin infusion into rat nucleus accumbens potently depresses motor activity and ingestive behavior. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 2001 281 R1232 42 11557632
147 Baisley SK Baldo BA Amylin receptor signaling in the nucleus accumbens negatively modulates mu-opioid-driven feeding. Neuropsychopharmacology 2014 39 3009 17 24957819
148 Dobolyi A Central amylin expression and its induction in rat dams. J Neurochem 2009 111 1490 500 19811608
149 Szabo ER Cservenak M Dobolyi A Amylin is a novel neuropeptide with potential maternal functions in the rat. FASEB J 2012 26 272 81 21965599
150 Potes CS Lutz TA Riediger T Identification of central projections from amylin-activated neurons to the lateral hypothalamus. Brain Res 2010 1334 31 44 20382134
151 Karnani MM Szabo G Erdelyi F Burdakov D Lateral hypothalamic GAD65 neurons are spontaneously firing and distinct from orexin- and melanin-concentrating hormone neurons. J Physiol 2013 591 933 53 23184514
152 Chapman I Parker B Doran S Feinle-Bisset C Wishart J Lush CW Low-dose pramlintide reduced food intake and meal duration in healthy, normal-weight subjects. Obesity (Silver Spring) 2007 15 1179 86 17495194
153 Chapman I Parker B Doran S Feinle-Bisset C Wishart J Strobel S Effect of pramlintide on satiety and food intake in obese subjects and subjects with type 2 diabetes. Diabetologia 2005 48 838 48 15843914
154 Banks WA DiPalma CR Farrell CL Impaired transport of leptin across the blood-brain barrier in obesity. Peptides 1999 20 1341 5 10612449
155 Munzberg H Flier JS Bjorbaek C Region-specific leptin resistance within the hypothalamus of diet-induced obese mice. Endocrinology 2004 145 4880 9 15271881
156 Roth JD Hughes H Kendall E Baron AD Anderson CM Antiobesity effects of the beta-cell hormone amylin in diet-induced obese rats: effects on food intake, body weight, composition, energy expenditure, and gene expression. Endocrinology 2006 147 5855 64 16935845
157 Smith SR Blundell JE Burns C Ellero C Schroeder BE Kesty NC Pramlintide treatment reduces 24-h caloric intake and meal sizes and improves control of eating in obese subjects: a 6-wk translational research study. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2007 293 E620 7 17505051
158 Boyle CN Rossier MM Lutz TA Influence of high-fat feeding, diet-induced obesity, and hyperamylinemia on the sensitivity to acute amylin. Physiol Behav 2011 104 20 8 21550355
159 Aronne L Fujioka K Aroda V Chen K Halseth A Kesty NC Progressive reduction in body weight after treatment with the amylin analog pramlintide in obese subjects: a phase 2, randomized, placebo-controlled, dose-escalation study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2007 92 2977 83 17504894
160 Smith SR Aronne LJ Burns CM Kesty NC Halseth AE Weyer C Sustained weight loss following 12-month pramlintide treatment as an adjunct to lifestyle intervention in obesity. Diabetes Care 2008 31 1816 23 18753666
161 Ravussin E Smith SR Mitchell JA Shringarpure R Shan K Maier H Enhanced weight loss with pramlintide/metreleptin: an integrated neurohormonal approach to obesity pharmacotherapy. Obesity (Silver Spring) 2009 17 1736 43 19521351
162 Hollander P Maggs DG Ruggles JA Fineman M Shen L Kolterman OG Effect of pramlintide on weight in overweight and obese insulin-treated type 2 diabetes patients. Obes Res 2004 12 661 8 15090634
163 Roth JD Coffey T Jodka CM Maier H Athanacio JR Mack CM Combination therapy with amylin and peptide YY[3-36] in obese rodents: anorexigenic synergy and weight loss additivity. Endocrinology 2007 148 6054 61 17761760
164 Rushing PA Lutz TA Seeley RJ Woods SC Amylin and insulin interact to reduce food intake in rats. Horm Metab Res 2000 32 62 5 10741687
165 Roth JD Roland BL Cole RL Trevaskis JL Weyer C Koda JE Leptin responsiveness restored by amylin agonism in diet-induced obesity: evidence from nonclinical and clinical studies. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2008 105 7257 62 18458326
166 Trevaskis JL Coffey T Cole R Lei C Wittmer C Walsh B Amylin-mediated restoration of leptin responsiveness in diet-induced obesity: magnitude and mechanisms. Endocrinology 2008 149 5679 87 18669592
167 Trevaskis JL Lei C Koda JE Weyer C Parkes DG Roth JD Interaction of leptin and amylin in the long-term maintenance of weight loss in diet-induced obese rats. Obesity (Silver Spring) 2010 18 21 6 19543217
168 Trevaskis JL Parkes DG Roth JD Insights into amylin-leptin synergy. Trends Endocrinol Metab 2010 21 473 9 20413324
169 Turek VF Trevaskis JL Levin BE Dunn-Meynell AA Irani B Gu G Mechanisms of amylin/leptin synergy in rodent models. Endocrinology 2010 151 143 52 19875640
170 Chan JL Roth JD Weyer C It takes two to tango: combined amylin/leptin agonism as a potential approach to obesity drug development. J Investig Med 2009 57 777 83
171 Seth R Knight WD Overton JM Combined amylin-leptin treatment lowers blood pressure and adiposity in lean and obese rats. Int J Obes (Lond) 2011 35 1183 92 21179001
172 Moon HS Chamberland JP Diakopoulos KN Fiorenza CG Ziemke F Schneider B Leptin and amylin act in an additive manner to activate overlapping signaling pathways in peripheral tissues: in vitro and ex vivo studies in humans. Diabetes Care 2011 34 132 8 20870968
173 Moon HS Chamberland JP Mantzoros CS Amylin and leptin activate overlapping signalling pathways in an additive manner in mouse GT1-7 hypothalamic, C(2)C(1)(2) muscle and AML12 liver cell lines. Diabetologia 2012 55 215 25 21997794
174 Moon HS Dincer F Mantzoros CS Amylin-induced downregulation of hippocampal neurogenesis is attenuated by leptin in a STAT3/AMPK/ERK-dependent manner in mice. Diabetologia 2013 56 627 34 23224631
175 Le Foll C Johnson MD Dunn-Meynell AA Boyle CN Lutz TA Levin BE Amylin-induced central IL-6 production enhances ventromedial hypothalamic leptin signaling. Diabetes 2015 64 1621 31 25409701
176 Mercer JG Moar KM Hoggard N Localization of leptin receptor (Ob-R) messenger ribonucleic acid in the rodent hindbrain. Endocrinology 1998 139 29 34 9421394
177 Elmquist JK Bjorbaek C Ahima RS Flier JS Saper CB Distributions of leptin receptor mRNA isoforms in the rat brain. J Comp Neurol 1998 395 535 47 9619505
178 Barnes MJ Rogers RC Van Meter MJ Hermann GE Co-localization of TRHR1 and LepRb receptors on neurons in the hindbrain of the rat. Brain Res 2010 1355 70 85 20691166
179 Liberini CG Boyle CN Cifani C Venniro M Hope BT Lutz TA Amylin receptor components and the leptin receptor are co-expressed in single rat area postrema neurons. Eur J Neurosci 2016
180 Nguyen N Champion JK Ponce J Quebbemann B Patterson E Pham B A review of unmet needs in obesity management. Obes Surg 2012 22 956 66 22438220
181 Trevaskis JL Turek VF Griffin PS Wittmer C Parkes DG Roth JD Multi-hormonal weight loss combinations in diet-induced obese rats: therapeutic potential of cholecystokinin? Physiol Behav 2010 100 187 95 20206194
182 Lutz TA The interaction of amylin with other hormones in the control of eating. Diabetes Obes Metab 2013 15 99 111 22862822
183 Kivipelto M Ngandu T Fratiglioni L Viitanen M Kareholt I Winblad B Obesity and vascular risk factors at midlife and the risk of dementia and Alzheimer disease. Arch Neurol 2005 62 1556 60 16216938
184 Beydoun MA Beydoun HA Wang Y Obesity and central obesity as risk factors for incident dementia and its subtypes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obes Rev 2008 9 204 18 18331422
185 Bangen KJ Gu Y Gross AL Schneider BC Skinner JC Benitez A Relationship Between Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus and Cognitive Change in a Multiethnic Elderly Cohort. J Am Geriatr Soc 2015 63 1075 83 26096383
186 Umegaki H Type 2 diabetes as a risk factor for cognitive impairment: current insights. Clin Interv Aging 2014 9 1011 9 25061284
187 Huang CC Chung CM Leu HB Lin LY Chiu CC Hsu CY Diabetes mellitus and the risk of Alzheimer's disease: a nationwide population-based study. PLoS One 2014 9 e87095 24489845
188 Nuzzo D Picone P Baldassano S Caruana L Messina E Marino Gammazza A Insulin Resistance as Common Molecular Denominator Linking Obesity to Alzheimer's Disease. Curr Alzheimer Res 2015 12 723 35 26159189
189 Kim B Feldman EL Insulin resistance as a key link for the increased risk of cognitive impairment in the metabolic syndrome. Exp Mol Med 2015 47 e149 25766618
190 Leboucher A Laurent C Fernandez-Gomez FJ Burnouf S Troquier L Eddarkaoui S Detrimental effects of diet-induced obesity on tau pathology are independent of insulin resistance in tau transgenic mice. Diabetes 2013 62 1681 8 23250356
191 Ly H Despa F Hyperamylinemia as a risk factor for accelerated cognitive decline in diabetes. Expert Rev Proteomics 2015 12 575 7 26503000
192 Adler BL Yarchoan M Hwang HM Louneva N Blair JA Palm R Neuroprotective effects of the amylin analogue pramlintide on Alzheimer's disease pathogenesis and cognition. Neurobiol Aging 2014 35 793 801 24239383
193 Qiu WQ Li H Zhu H Scott T Mwamburi M Rosenberg I Plasma Amylin and Cognition in Diabetes in the Absence and the Presence of Insulin Treatment. J Diabetes Metab 2014 5
194 Zhu H Wang X Wallack M Li H Carreras I Dedeoglu A Intraperitoneal injection of the pancreatic peptide amylin potently reduces behavioral impairment and brain amyloid pathology in murine models of Alzheimer's disease. Mol Psychiatry 2015 20 252 62 24614496
195 Stranahan AM Mattson MP Bidirectional metabolic regulation of neurocognitive function. Neurobiol Learn Mem 2011 96 507 16 21236352
196 Stranahan AM Mattson MP Metabolic reserve as a determinant of cognitive aging. J Alzheimers Dis 2012 30 Suppl 2 S5 13 22045480
197 Gitter BD Cox LM Carlson CD May PC Human amylin stimulates inflammatory cytokine secretion from human glioma cells. Neuroimmunomodulation 2000 7 147 52 10754402
198 Steardo L Jr. Bronzuoli MR Iacomino A Esposito G Steardo L Scuderi C Does neuroinflammation turn on the flame in Alzheimer's disease? Focus on astrocytes. Front Neurosci 2015 9 259 26283900
199 Wang WY Tan MS Yu JT Tan L Role of pro-inflammatory cytokines released from microglia in Alzheimer's disease. Ann Transl Med 2015 3 136 26207229
200 Ashraf GM Greig NH Khan TA Hassan I Tabrez S Shakil S Protein misfolding and aggregation in Alzheimer's disease and type 2 diabetes mellitus. CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets 2014 13 1280 93 25230234
201 Desai GS Zheng C Geetha T Mathews ST White BD Huggins KW The pancreas-brain axis: insight into disrupted mechanisms associating type 2 diabetes and Alzheimer's disease. J Alzheimers Dis 2014 42 347 56 24858405
202 O'Brien RJ Wong PC Amyloid precursor protein processing and Alzheimer's disease. Annu Rev Neurosci 2011 34 185 204 21456963
203 Sun X Chen WD Wang YD beta-Amyloid: the key peptide in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease. Front Pharmacol 2015 6 221 26483691
204 Jackson K Barisone GA Diaz E Jin LW DeCarli C Despa F Amylin deposition in the brain: A second amyloid in Alzheimer disease? Ann Neurol 2013 74 517 26 23794448
205 Oskarsson ME Paulsson JF Schultz SW Ingelsson M Westermark P Westermark GT In vivo seeding and cross-seeding of localized amyloidosis: a molecular link between type 2 diabetes and Alzheimer disease. Am J Pathol 2015 185 834 46 25700985
206 Ono K Takahashi R Ikeda T Mizuguchi M Hamaguchi T Yamada M Exogenous amyloidogenic proteins function as seeds in amyloid beta-protein aggregation. Biochim Biophys Acta 2014 1842 646 53 24440525
207 Kimura R MacTavish D Yang J Westaway D Jhamandas JH Beta amyloid-induced depression of hippocampal long-term potentiation is mediated through the amylin receptor. J Neurosci 2012 32 17401 6 23197731
208 Jhamandas JH Li Z Westaway D Yang J Jassar S MacTavish D Actions of beta-amyloid protein on human neurons are expressed through the amylin receptor. Am J Pathol 2011 178 140 9 21224052
209 Jhamandas JH Mactavish D beta-Amyloid protein (Abeta) and human amylin regulation of apoptotic genes occurs through the amylin receptor. Apoptosis 2012 17 37 47 21947943
210 Jhamandas JH MacTavish D Antagonist of the amylin receptor blocks beta-amyloid toxicity in rat cholinergic basal forebrain neurons. J Neurosci 2004 24 5579 84 15201330
211 Fu W Ruangkittisakul A MacTavish D Shi JY Ballanyi K Jhamandas JH Amyloid beta (Abeta) peptide directly activates amylin-3 receptor subtype by triggering multiple intracellular signaling pathways. J Biol Chem 2012 287 18820 30 22500019
212 Gingell JJ Burns ER Hay DL Activity of pramlintide, rat and human amylin but not Abeta1-42 at human amylin receptors. Endocrinology 2014 155 21 6 24169554
213 Qiu WQ Au R Zhu H Wallack M Liebson E Li H Positive association between plasma amylin and cognition in a homebound elderly population. J Alzheimers Dis 2014 42 555 63 24898659
214 Srodulski S Sharma S Bachstetter AB Brelsfoard JM Pascual C Xie XS Neuroinflammation and neurologic deficits in diabetes linked to brain accumulation of amylin. Mol Neurodegener 2014 9 30 25149184
215 Lim YA Ittner LM Lim YL Gotz J Human but not rat amylin shares neurotoxic properties with Abeta42 in long-term hippocampal and cortical cultures. FEBS Lett 2008 582 2188 94 18486611
216 Hoppener JW Oosterwijk C van Hulst KL Verbeek JS Capel PJ de Koning EJ Molecular physiology of the islet amyloid polypeptide (IAPP)/amylin gene in man, rat, and transgenic mice. J Cell Biochem 1994 55 Suppl 39 53 7929617
217 Ohagi S Nishi M Bell GI Ensinck JW Steiner DF Sequences of islet amyloid polypeptide precursors of an Old World monkey, the pig-tailed macaque (Macaca nemestrina), and the dog (Canis familiaris). Diabetologia 1991 34 555 8 1718805
218 Betsholtz C Christmanson L Engstrom U Rorsman F Jordan K O'Brien TD Structure of cat islet amyloid polypeptide and identification of amino acid residues of potential significance for islet amyloid formation. Diabetes 1990 39 118 22 2210054
219 Westermark P Engstrom U Johnson KH Westermark GT Betsholtz C Islet amyloid polypeptide: pinpointing amino acid residues linked to amyloid fibril formation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1990 87 5036 40 2195544
220 Jordan K Murtaugh MP O'Brien TD Westermark P Betsholtz C Johnson KH Canine IAPP cDNA sequence provides important clues regarding diabetogenesis and amyloidogenesis in type 2 diabetes. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1990 169 502 8 2192709
221 Braff DL Geyer MA Swerdlow NR Human studies of prepulse inhibition of startle: normal subjects, patient groups, and pharmacological studies. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2001 156 234 58 11549226
222 Kohl S Heekeren K Klosterkotter J Kuhn J Prepulse inhibition in psychiatric disorders--apart from schizophrenia. J Psychiatr Res 2013 47 445 52 23287742
223 Varty GB Higgins GA Examination of drug-induced and isolation-induced disruptions of prepulse inhibition as models to screen antipsychotic drugs. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 1995 122 15 26 8711060
224 Rigdon GCV K. Prepulse inhibition as a screening tool for potential antipsychotics. Drug Development Research 1991 23 91 9
225 King SJ Isaacs AM O'Farrell E Abizaid A Motivation to obtain preferred foods is enhanced by ghrelin in the ventral tegmental area. Horm Behav 2011 60 572 80 21872601
226 Prieto-Garcia L Egecioglu E Studer E Westberg L Jerlhag E Ghrelin and GHS-R1A signaling within the ventral and laterodorsal tegmental area regulate sexual behavior in sexually naive male mice. Psychoneuroendocrinology 2015 62 392 402 26398679
227 Anderberg RH Hansson C Fenander M Richard JE Dickson SL Nissbrandt H The Stomach-Derived Hormone Ghrelin Increases Impulsive Behavior. Neuropsychopharmacology 2015
228 Shamseddeen H Getty JZ Hamdallah IN Ali MR Epidemiology and economic impact of obesity and type 2 diabetes. Surg Clin North Am 2011 91 1163 72 vii 22054146
229 Jin J Sklar GE Min Sen Oh V Chuen Li S Factors affecting therapeutic compliance: A review from the patient's perspective. Ther Clin Risk Manag 2008 4 269 86 18728716
