LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9814863
21942
J Alzheimers Dis
J. Alzheimers Dis.
Journal of Alzheimer's disease : JAD
1387-2877
1875-8908

25720408
4550582
10.3233/JAD-142682
NIHMS674947
Article
Turning on the light within: subcortical nuclei of the isodentritic core and their role in Alzheimer's disease pathogenesis
Theofilas Panos a
Dunlop Sara a
Heinsen Helmut bc
Grinberg Lea Tenenholz ab
a Memory and Aging Center, Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco Nelson A Rising Lane, P.O. Box 1207, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA
b Department of Pathology, University of Sao Paulo Medical School, Av. Dr. Arnaldo 355, Sala 1353, Sao Paulo, CEP 01246903, SP, Brazil
c Department of Psychiatrics, University of Wuerzburg, 97080, Germany
Correspondence to: Lea T. Grinberg MD, PhD, Memory and Aging Center, Department of Neurology, Sandler Neurosciences Center, Box 1207, 675 Nelson Rising Lane, Room 211B, San Francisco, CA 94158. Phone: 415-502-7229, Fax: 415-476-5573, lea.grinberg@ucsf.edu
25 3 2015
7 5 2015
07 5 2016
46 1 1734
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Pharmacological interventions in Alzheimer's disease (AD) are likely to be more efficacious if administered early in the course of the disease, foregoing the spread of irreversible changes in the brain. Research findings underline an early vulnerability of the isodendritic core (IC) network to AD neurofibrillary lesions. The IC constitutes a phylogenetically conserved subcortical system including the locus coeruleus in pons, dorsal raphe nucleus and substantia nigra in the midbrain, and nucleus basalis of Meynert in basal forebrain. Through their ascending projections to the cortex, the IC neurons regulate homeostasis and behavior by synthesizing aminergic and cholinergic neurotransmitters. Here we reviewed the evidence demonstrating that neurons of the IC system show neurofibrillary tangles in the earliest stages of AD, prior to cortical pathology, and how this involvement may explain pre-amnestic symptoms, including depression, agitation and sleep disturbances in AD patients. In fact, clinical and animal studies show a significant reduction of AD cognitive and behavioral symptoms following replenishment of neurotransmitters associated with the IC network. Therefore, the IC network represents a unique candidate for viable therapeutic intervention and should become a high priority for research in AD.

Aging
Alzheimer's disease
neurodegeneration
brainstem nuclei
human
neurofibrillary tangles
early diagnosis
monoamines
neuromodulation
pathology

Introduction

The neurodegenerative dementia epidemic that is accompanying the global exponential increase of the aging population has an extremely high economic, political and social burden [1,2]. Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the primary cause of dementia and disability in older adults with costs reaching $160 billion/year in the USA alone [3]. Thus far, treatment to cure, delay or prevent the progression of AD is elusive and only symptomatic therapies are available.

AD features two specific neuropathological hallmarks which are opposite in nature: a) positive lesions (caused by extracellular accumulation of β-amyloid (Aβ) peptides in neuritic plaques (NPs) and intracellular accumulation of phosphorylated tau protein in neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) and dystrophic neurites and b) negative lesions (neuronal and synaptic loss; [4]. Positive and negative AD lesions do not necessarily progress in parallel [5]. Nevertheless, the vast majority of studies have only focused on the positive lesions as a proxy of the AD progression. In the same line, the neuropathologic diagnosis for AD is based on a combination of Aβ plaques and NFTs [6]. According to these criteria, a case can only be called AD if deposition of plaques are present. In fact, for decades, the amyloid cascade hypothesis dominated the AD field [7]. However, in the light of recent failures in clinical trials based on Aβ modifying drugs, research is shifting its attention to understanding the characteristics of tau pathology in AD. In effect, the spread pattern of phospho-tau neurofibrillary changes is highly predictable and strongly correlates with cognitive decline [8–10], whereas, the spread pattern of Aβ plaques is predictable to a lesser extend [11,12]. This shift of focus to tau protein enhanced the interest on large group of older adults that show phospho-tau deposition in the brain without any trace of Aβ plaques. Recently, in an attempt to acknowledge these cases, a neuropathological consensus coined the term primary age related tauopathy (PART) [13,14]. Further studies will determine whether PART represents early AD stages or whether a proportion of them actually shows benign changes resembling AD tau deposition.

AD presents a long and gradually progressing a/pre- symptomatic phase [15]. Treatment is likely to be more effective if started early, before the neurons die irrevocably. Therefore, the growing effort to elucidate the role and spread of tau pathology during AD pre-symptomatic phases is very timely. Until recently, based on studies of the Braak couple, NFT pathology was believed to develop first at the transentorhinal/ entorhinal cortex in the temporal lobe (Braak stage I–II). From there, it would spread to the hippocampus and the adjacent limbic areas (Braak stage III–IV), and finally to primary neocortical areas (Braak stage V–VI; [16]). This cortical-based view of the disease origins resulted in a focused effort to these areas, in detriment of subcortical structures [17,18]. In the last years, clinical and animal studies underscore that NFT develop in subcortical nuclei related to the isodendritic core (IC) even before they are seen in the transentorhinal cortex (IC; [12,19–25]). Interestingly, all these IC structures are interconnected to the entorhinal cortex.

The aim of this review is to discuss the role and significance of the interconnected and evolutionary conserved IC network to AD pathogenesis. In this context, we will explore the selective vulnerability of each nucleus individually with respect to neuronal loss and its effects on neurotransmission in AD. Examination of the brainstem circuitries is significant as it may clarify the mechanisms of disease progression prior to clinical symptoms in AD and expedite the development of novel biomarkers and diagnostic strategies.

Brainstem and the isodentritic core network

Derived from the ectoderm in the early embryonic stages, the brainstem is continuous rostrally with the diencephalon and caudally with the spinal cord. It comprises the mesencephalon or midbrain, pons and medulla (Figure 1A, B). Despite its relatively small size, the brainstem provides the main relay point of information arriving and leaving the central nervous system (CNS) and vice versa. It also serves as an integrative hub for major critical processes for the individual's survival and homeostasis [26,27].

The gray matter of the brainstem contains the cranial nerve nuclei, the reticular formation and the pontine nuclei, while the white matter comprises fiber tracts connecting the cortex with the peripheral nerves and spinal cord. The reticular formation consists of a long column of diffusely organized neurons of different types and sizes aligned in parallel to its long axis and occupies the central and most conserved part of the brainstem, the tegmentum. The dendritic processes branching from specific neuronal groups located mostly within the reticular system intersect into a characteristic net-like pattern that justifies the name `isodendritic', while their extensive axonal outflow allows the release of neurotransmitters to very large projection areas [27,28]. Research findings underscore the significance of the reticular formation in regulating primary homeostatic functions, such as respiration and circulation, as well as the refinement of afferent and efferent signals ranging from maximum alertness to relaxed wakefulness, sleep and coma [29].

With the exception of the basal nucleus of Meynert in basal forebrain, the IC broadly corresponds to regions of the brainstem's reticular formation. The IC represents a group of interconnected nuclei with characteristic cytoarchitectonic and morphological features [30,31]. IC neurons show minimal specialization and retain an undifferentiated morphology especially regarding their dendritic features. In the coronal plane, Golgi impregnation of the IC group reveals a shared pattern of overlapping and symmetrically extending dendritic fields that form extensive interconnections between cells and expand diffusely to subcortical nuclei and the cortex. Cell bodies are mostly polygonal and their poorly myelinated axons project to the cortex. These characteristics resemble reptilian neurons. Actually, morphological similarities among IC neurons across species, ranging from humans to lower vertebrates, suggest a phylogenetically conserved network with a highly symmetric dendritic arrangement [30,31]. In contrast, neurons located at the “allodendritic” and “idiodentritic” centers display “different” or “peculiar” dendritic morphologies, respectively, heavily myelinated axons and round or ovoid cell bodies [30]. In his seminal 1960's publication, Mannen was the first to highlight this difference between generalized and specialized neuronal groups of the brainstem using the terms “noyaux ouverts” (broad or open core) and “noyaux fermés” (firm core), respectively [32].

The principal nuclei within the IC network include the noradrenergic locus coeruleus (LC) in pons, the serotoninergic dorsal raphe nucleus (DRN) and dopaminergic substantia nigra (SN) in the midbrain; and the cholinergic basal nucleus of Meynert (NbM) in the basal forebrain [30,31,33] (Figure 1 C–F). Early studies by Dahlström and Fuxe using formaldehyde-induced fluorescent histochemistry in the rat brain classified the monoaminergic nuclei based on their chemoarchitectural properties into A6 (LC), A9 (SN) and B7 (DRN) groups; A and B designate catecholaminergic and serotonergic neurons respectively, and numbers represent the order of nuclei groups beginning caudally from medulla oblongata [34]. Likewise, Mesulam and colleagues categorized NbM into the Ch4 group of the basal forebrain based on studies in monkeys, with Ch representing cholinergic neurons (Figure 1F) [35].

IC neurons, endowed with long axons and disproportional bigger cell bodies globally innervate the entire CNS via volume transmission, thus having a widespread effect in the brain following neurotransmitter release to diverse neuronal populations [36,37]. In contrast to classic synaptic transmission where neurons locally project to neighboring cells, non-synaptic/volume intercellular communication allows modulation of large areas via a long distance systemic flow of neurotransmitters released in the extrasynaptic space or cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). This characteristic organizational pattern allows a relatively small group of neurons to receive input from multiple sources and promote rapid signaling modulation in dispersed cortical regions.

Vulnerability of the isodentritic core network in early AD stages

The vulnerability of the IC network to NFT lesions in AD was recognized as early as 1960s in cases with senile dementia, showing accumulation of NFTs in the DRN, LC and SN as well as in the hypothalamus [38]. The vulnerability of the IC components to NFTs, even prior to Aβ accumulation or onset of cognitive decline, can directly impact the brain's neurochemical balance because these structures are a major source of neuromodulatory neurotransmitters [18,19,39–42](Figure 2).

The relationship between NFTs and neuronal loss in AD is still not completely understood. On one hand, studies have shown a positive correlation with increase of positive lesions paralleling a reduction in neuronal numbers as AD advances [43,44]. Others have shown that phospho-tau may accumulate in the absence of cell loss [5]. This could further explain why subjects with histopathological features of AD can be initially asymptomatic. These discrepancies may be related to methodological problems such as selection biases, the lack of an integrative approach for studying neuronal loss and protein accumulation in the same brain, as well as the use of unbiased stereology [18,20,45,46].

It is not well understood why the IC neurons are consistently susceptible to AD lesions while other neuronal types remain resistant to NFTs. Anatomically, the IC nuclei project to the cortex directly, without intermediate relay points, in contrast to the majority of ascending and descending tracts that follow a transthalamic route [47]. For instance, primary sensory cortices, except the primary olfactory cortex are very resistant to AD changes. Out of them, the olfactory cortex is the only one without relay [27]. In addition, the IC tracts have disproportionally long and thin axons that traverse the medial forebrain bundle to innervate virtually the entire cortex. Their poor or incomplete myelination, as well as being key sources of diffuse (volume) autonomic neurotransmission could expose these nuclei to triggers of AD pathology [27,48,49]. As a possible counterproof, neurons with heavy axonal myelination offer greater stability to the parent neuron by allowing efficient conduction of action potentials with reduced energy costs and possibly less exposure to oxidative stress [50]. These neurons are notably spared until later AD stages [27,49].

Although the IC is involved in AD from its earliest stage, probably years before the onset of disease-defining clinical symptoms, such lesions are unlikely benign and may explain behavioral, mood and sleep disturbances seen in AD prodromal stages and along the disease progression, although this need to be confirmed by structured studies [12,18,21,45,51]. With this in mind, the IC network represents a unique candidate for viable therapeutic intervention and should become a high priority for research in AD [12,19–21,52]. In the following sections, we will discuss how AD pathology affects each of these four IC nuclei and their corresponding neurotransmitters, aiming to lay foundations for future studies targeting early AD stages.

1. Locus coeruleus and the norepinephrine system

1.1 Anatomy and function

In the adult brains, the LC (“blue spot” in Latin) comprises a relatively homogeneous group of conspicuously pigmented noradrenergic neurons. Together with the SN, the LC makes the largest brainstem nuclei containing neuromelanin [53,54]. As neuromelanin-bearing neurons can be recognized even at gross examination, the LC and SN vulnerability to AD and Parkinson's disease (PD) have been noted since the first descriptions of these diseases [47,55].

The LC is situated laterally in the pontine central gray of the upper pons and its neurons infiltrate the nearby tegmentum (Figures 1B, C). Despite its small size in cross sections, the LC extends rostocaudally into a continuous 11–15 mm column from the upper pons to caudal midbrain. The LC harbors two primary neuronal types: medium (35–45 μm in diameter) multipolar neurons with round or oval somata and long dendrites that often extend to adjoining structures, and small, spindle-shaped neurons (15–25 μm). Both types display highly ubiquitous synaptic connections throughout the CNS [26,28]. Neurons of the LC and adjacent subcoeruleus (SubC) are the major sources of norepinephrine (NE); a catecholamine synthesized from dopamine by dopamine β-hydroxylase (DBH) with multiple biological roles including those of a hormone and neurotransmitter. Upon binding to adrenergic receptors, NE regulates critical behavioral and physiologic processes including wakefulness and attention, in both humans and animals [29,54,56]. For example, studies in rats and monkeys confirm that the LC activity increases during waking state, and it is absent during REM sleep. Furthermore, increased external stimulation induces activity in the LC, suggesting a role in vigilance and alertness [57].

1.2 Pathophysiology in Alzheimer's disease

The LC degenerates in several neurodegenerative diseases, particularly in AD and Parkinson's disease [12,18,42,58–62]. Early in the course of AD, the neurons of LC display characteristic morphological and chemical changes, including swollen cell bodies, contracted dendrites and depleted aminergic transmission [58,62–64]. The rostral portion of the nucleus that projects to the cortex and the hippocampus shows the greatest vulnerability in AD, whereas caudal cells and surrounding nuclei are relatively spared ([62,65]; Table 1). In this context, due to the LC's contribution to arousal state and mental wellbeing via noradrenergic projections, it is no surprise that non-cognitive symptoms in patients with prodromal AD include disruption of the sleep/wake cycle, lack of alertness and vigilance, and mood disturbances including depression [63,66–68]. Neuropathologically, the LC consistently shows NFTs, even in the absence of Aβ deposition in the brain and as early as 10 years prior to the expected onset of cognitive changes [12,69,70]. Braak and colleagues recently updated their staging system for neurofibrillary changes to reflect LC early involvement in AD [12]. Furthermore, atrophy in the LC is positively correlated to increased frequency of cortical NFTs, as well as severity and duration of AD [71,72]. The selective NFT propagation from LC to cortical and subcortical regions in AD may include a trans-cellular spreading of tau protein isoforms from axonal terminals to neighboring cells in a 'prion-like' manner [73,74].

Regarding the effects of AD in the LC neurotransmission, NE availability and its synthesis are reduced in the LC cortical projection areas in postmortem brains of AD patients [75–77]. Moreover, NE transport inhibitors and therapies aiming at NE augmentation have shown promising results in animal models of AD and are candidates for therapeutic trials in early AD stages [78]. Particularly interesting are studies in postmortem AD brains which identified compensatory mechanisms in surviving neurons of the LC network by means of upregulated synthesis of NE and/or a reduced reuptake of the neurotransmitter at the synaptic terminals [79]. This upregulation could explain the unexpected increase of NE levels in cerebrospinal fluid in AD patients with marked LC pathology [80,81].

In agreement to clinical findings, studies on animal models of AD demonstrate that LC pathology and related decline of NE levels predispose neurotoxicity, suppress anti-inflammatory responses and negatively impact cognition - all central hallmarks of early AD stage [82,83]. Furthermore, brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), the most abundant neurotrophic factor in the brain, is closely related to the LC neuronal growth and survival upon binding to TrkB tyrosine kinase receptors [84,85]. In this context, decreased levels of BDNF, and reduced expression of its TrkB tyrosine kinase receptor in patients with AD as well as in mouse models of the disease may accelerate AD pathogenesis. This may be due to lack of trophic support to specific neuronal populations, including the LC and other IC components such as the DRN, leading to monoamine enervation to the cortex [85–87]. Consequently, the delivery of BDNF to the brain represents an active area of translational research in the early AD stages [88].

2. Dorsal raphe nucleus and the serotonergic system

2.1 Anatomy and function

The human DRN is a heterogeneous nucleus located dorsally to the medial longitudinal fasciculus at the level of the midbrain and rostral pons ([26,54]; Figures 1B, D). The DRN can be divided into four sub-groups: the supratrochlear, interfascicular, caudal compact and lamellar subnuclei [89,90]. Its two morphological neuronal types show eccentrically located nuclei and are arranged in an irregular fashion: medium-sized neurons (22–31 μm in diameter) are round or ovoid, and smaller neurons (11–24 μm in diameter) are fusiform or triangular [91].

The DRN neurons are not confined to the midline as their Greek name raphe or “seam” implies or as is the case in the other components of the raphe system, but rather it extends laterally into the ventral periaqueductal gray and around the medial longitudinal fasciculus [91]. The DRN contains the largest population of serotonergic (5-Hydroxytryptamine; 5-HT) neurons, a monoamine neurotransmitter biochemically derived from tryptophan with essential homeostatic and behavioral functions. Upon its release, serotonin has both a direct and indirect effect in the brain via activation of serotonergic receptors and/or modulation of complementary systems related to cholinergic, glutamatergic, dopaminergic and GABAergic neurotransmission [92]. The rostral (oral) raphe complex, including the DRN, the median raphe nucleus (MnRN) and caudal linear nucleus (RL) form the main serotonergic projections to the forebrain, specifically to areas critical for cognitive functions, including the hippocampus, striatum, hypothalamus and amygdala [91,93–95].

2.2 Pathophysiology in Alzheimer's disease

DRN vulnerability to AD and increased NFT burden as disease progresses have been demonstrated by independent investigations since decades ([19,45,69,89,96]; Table 1). However, only recently a study was able to show that the DRN accumulates NFTs before the transentorhinal region does [21]. This finding restored the interest on DRN vulnerability in AD. From the rostral raphe complex, DRN consistently shows the earliest and most severe NFT lesions in AD and for this reason it is one component of the IC network most intensely studied for the development of therapeutic innervations in the initial stages of AD pathogenesis [21,89]. In this context, DRN degeneration may be partially responsible for mood disorders in prodromal AD. In particular, there is a significant correlation between DRN pathology, serotonergic denervation and behavioral changes in AD patients [89,92]. Furthermore, AD-related deficits in serotonin neurotransmission are associated with accelerated cognitive decline as determined by the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) scores [97]. In advanced AD, different serotonin receptor agonists show promising effects in enhancing memory and learning capacity according to clinical and animal studies [92,98]. In the same line, administration of serotonin re-uptake inhibitors improved memory function in AD patients [99]. Additionally, deficits in serotonergic innervation, serotonin transporters and tryptophan hydroxylase may contribute to anxiety and changes in waking/sleep cycle seen in AD [100,101]. Studies using immunohistochemistry for tryptophan hydroxylase as a marker for serotonin synthesizing neurons, points to a significant decrease of this neuronal population in AD brains [101,102]. On the other hand, in response to AD lesions, the DRN shows a high degree of plasticity via terminal sprouting as a possible adaptive strategy to take over lost cells [103].

Loss of DRN neurons and their projections to both cortical and subcortical brain regions overlap with defects in the serotonergic transmitter system and the accumulation of NFT in early AD. Dysfunction of the serotonergic transmitter system features decrease in serotonin levels and its metabolite 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) in serotonergic nerve terminals and in cerebrospinal fluid of AD patients. This effect has been shown in vivo by positron emission tomography (PET) [104]. Decreased axonal transport causes enzymes and their metabolites to accumulate in the cell bodies. In fact, AD patients show a two-fold increase of toxic serotonin oxidative metabolites in the DRN cells that may explain the selective vulnerability of these neurons [105].

On the other hand, PET studies also identified upregulated serotonin metabolism and an increase of 5-HT1A serotonin receptor densities in the hippocampus of patients with mild cognitive decline. This may reflect a possible compensatory mechanism for reduced serotonergic transmission from compromised neurons in DRN. In contrast, a dramatic decrease in receptor numbers was observed at advanced stages of AD [106,107], also in the cortex [108,109]. Further experiments using spectrophotometric analysis of cortical tissue from patients at late AD stages suggested that a reduced level of serotonin in cerebrospinal fluid and platelets correlated with AD pathology and cognitive decline severity[110,111]. Therefore, 5-HIAA should also be explored as a possible early biomarker of AD [105,112].

3. Substantia nigra and the dopaminergic system

3.1 Anatomy and function

The SN lies in the mesencephalon, dorsal to cerebral peduncles and extends ventrally along the entire midbrain tegmentum (Figure 1B, E). It is divided into two sub-regions comprising triangular/ fusiform shaped cells: the cell-sparse ventral (pars reticularis; SNR) and cell-dense dorsal regions (pars compacta; SNC) [26,113]. Similar to the LC in pons, the SN is a large nucleus, easily recognizable macroscopically, with high levels of neuromelanin in the dopaminergic neurons that give its Latin name “black substance”. Both LC and SN neurons stain positive for tyrosine hydroxylase, a key-synthesizing enzyme of dopamine and norepinephrine synthesis from L-tyrosine [54,114]. Neurons of the SNC mediate reward, addiction behavior, and movement by releasing dopamine via ascending projections to the basal ganglia and cortex [115–118]. In contrast, dopaminergic neurons from the neighboring ventral tegmental area (VTA) modulate cognitive processes via connections to nucleus accumbens and medial temporal lobe [119]. The SN comprises the largest network of dopaminergic cells in the brain and neuronal loss in this nucleus is hallmark of major neurodegenerative disorders including PD, other movement disorders and AD. Often AD and PD pathological lesions coexist, as in dementia with Lewy bodies, especially in advanced AD stages [120].

Five metabotropic receptors divided in D1 and D2 groups bind to dopamine. Dopamine synaptic levels depend on dopamine transporter (DAT), responsible for dopamine reuptake and termination of its activity at the synapses [121]. DAT became a common imaging biomarker of dopaminergic neuron density.

3.2 Pathophysiology in Alzheimer's disease

SN lesions in AD have been well documented in clinical and neuropathological studies ([122–127]; Table 1). Clinically, SN involvement in AD may include extrapyramidal motor symptoms (EPS) such as bradykinesia, muscular hypertonia, and gait difficulties. However, in contrast to PD, tremor is rare [128]. EPS signs increase in prevalence as AD advances and correlated with tau accumulation and dopaminergic neuronal loss [125,126]. EPS signs often parallel neuropsychiatric symptoms including depression, hallucination and cognitive decline, possibly reflecting deficiency of dopamine neurotransmission. Apathy, a common behavioral symptom of AD, is attributed to defects in ascending nigrostriatal projections that mediate feelings of motivation and reward-seeking behavior. Therapeutic strategies using psychostimulants can improve apathy in AD by restoring dopamine availability [129].

Neuropathological studies confirmed SN susceptibility to NFTs and neurodegeneration in AD, but severe cell loss is rarely present in this nucleus in contrast to the rest of the IC [16,124,125,127,130]. On the other hand, in pre-immunohistochemistry era studies, AD cases with SN pathology are often misclassified as having PD and are excluded from the analysis, leading to an underestimation of SN involvement in AD pathology [125]. Another confounder in SN analysis in AD is that neuromelanin may obscure visualization of intraneuronal NFTs and initial lesions could be easily overlooked [131]. Concerning chronological involvement of the SN in AD, a recent study corroborates previous findings showing NFT in the SN in a subset of early AD. They also identified a linear correlation between AD stage and NFT burden in the SN [51].

SN pathology may affect striatal function due to loss of projections on the nigrostriatal pathway in AD. For example, accumulation of NFTs in the SN parallels dopamine deficiency in the caudate nucleus and putamen [124,125]. Several studies show movement abnormalities including EPS in the majority of AD patients with neurofibrillary tau in the SN. The latter correlated best with loss of pigmented neurons in SN, suggesting tau pathology to be the morphological substrate for ESP in AD patients, in absence of PD pathology [124,127,132].

Despite evidences of SN involvement in AD, in vivo experiments show contradictory results. A study using single-photon emission tomography (SPET) with a selective D2 receptor found a significant reduction in striatal receptor density in the absence of clinical EPS signs in AD, possibly due to reduced dopaminergic projections from the SN [133]. On the other hand, another study using a ligand that binds to DAT reuptake sites found no correlation between tau pathology, neuronal death in SN, and dopamine depletion in the striatum of AD cases [134].

4. Basal nucleus of Meynert and the cholinergic system

4.1 Anatomy and function

The NbM is located within the substantia innominata of the basal forebrain, ventrally to the anterior part of the thalamus and putamen ([27,135]; Figure 1F). There is an evolutionary trend towards size increase and differentiation in this nucleus, with primates and cetaceans showing the highest development [136]. NbM neurons are heteromorphic in shape and display a characteristic pattern of overlapping and sparsely ramified dendrites, features also present in the IC neurons of the brainstem, suggesting that NbM is a telencephalic extension of brainstem's reticular core [30].

Cholinergic neurons of the NbM form wide projections to the cortex and are the activity sites of the cholinergic synthetic enzyme choline acetyltransferase (ChAT) and the hydrolytic enzyme acetylcholinesterase (AChE;[137]). Constituting a major source of cortical acetylcholine, the NbM plays a significant role in learning and memory, as well as regulation of motor control, arousal and sleep cycle, and motivation [136]. For example, stimulation of NbM in rodents induces acetylcholine release in the cortex and promotes learning [138]. In contrast, lesions of NbM or blockers of central ACh muscarinic receptors, such as scopolamine, result in cognitive deficits and transient amnesia [139]. Since deterioration of memory is a critical aspect of AD, abnormalities in central cholinergic neurotransmission originating from NbM may partly underlie the amnestic manifestations of the disease.

4.2 Pathophysiology in Alzheimer's disease

The impact of early NbM vulnerability and depletion of cholinergic transmission in AD has been well noted over the years particularly in relation to NFT burden, cell loss and cortical atrophy ([70,139–145]; Table 1). Importantly, AD lesions in the NbM were identified in clinical stages as early as MCI [52,140,144,146,147]. These cases had low ChAT, cytoplasmic loss of Nissl substance and fiber abnormalities including thickened axons and ballooned terminals, all pointing to defective NbM activity in early AD [52,146]. Moreover, Sassin and colleagues identified NFT lesions in the NbM in the tissue of preclinical stages of AD and these gradually increased in severity as AD pathology spread to the cortex [144]. Finally, cases with MCI-early AD showed reduction of low affinity p75 neurotrophin receptors in neurons of the basal forebrain including NbM, which coincides with cognitive and attention abnormalities [148]. These findings are the rationale for cholinergic therapy in AD. In fact, acetylcholinesterase inhibitors (tacrine, rivastigmine, galantamine and donepezil;) are widely used in moderate AD and promote temporary relief of symptoms [149]. Furthermore, cholinergic receptor antagonists have been shown to produce significant cognitive impairments similar to those in AD, affecting attention and memory encoding. This observation, combined with evidence of loss of cholinergic neurons, supports the cholinergic hypothesis of AD [150].

Postmortem studies indicate that large cholinergic neurons of NbM are particularly vulnerable to AD [141,142]. These findings suggest that reduced responsiveness to the nerve growth factor and loss of its neuroprotective effects may mediate to neurodegeneration in NbM and promote AD pathogenesis.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies identified a significant volume reduction in substantia innominata, suggesting neuronal loss in NbM and impaired cholinergic transmission in AD [151,152]. Reduced thickness was significantly correlated with scores from cognitive tests in patients with AD. In addition, cognitively intact subjects with basal forebrain thinning showed significant risk for developing dementia in follow-up tests, indicating the potential use of NbM as a marker for risk of cognitive decline. By integrating in vivo morphometric analysis and diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) in the basal forebrain of MCI and advanced AD patients, Teipel and colleagues identified significant atrophy in substantia innominata, including the NbM. Although similar regions were involved, atrophic changes in MCI were less pronounced than in patients with AD and were both significantly different from age-matched controls [152]. Finally, a recent study on a large sample of MCI and advanced AD subjects revealed atrophy in the NbM and adjacent basal forebrain regions and its severity was positively linked to Aβ accumulation in the cortex and clinical diagnosis of AD. The authors concluded that the volume reduction in NbM was a superior predictor of early AD pathology than hippocampal volume [145]. Overall, these findings suggest that volumetric changes in the NbM and adjacent areas precede cognitive decline in patients in the initial stages of AD.

Conclusions

The full picture of AD etiopathogenesis is yet to be revealed and treatment of this disease is still elusive. AD-type neurofibrillary lesions are found in a network of subcortical structures belonging to the IC system, in brains with no cortical neurofibrillary changes, suggesting that IC pathology represents the earliest AD stage. Being a signaling hub of neuromodulatory neurotransmission ascending to the cortex, neuronal loss and synaptic dysfunction in the IC may mediate behavioral and psychological disturbances common in patients in the earliest stages of AD by depriving the cortical neurons from their signaling input. Therefore, better understanding of how and when the subcortical nuclei of the IC become vulnerable to AD pathology will provide the necessary foundation for the development of therapies targeting these systems that may be effective for treating AD.

Acknowledgements

This study was supported by grants from the NIH (1R01AG040311) and the John Douglas French Alzheimer Foundation. We thank Maria Mejia and Xuehua Wang for histological assistance and Lauren Maltz for graphic design.

Figure 1 The human isodentritic core network extends from the brainstem to the basal forebrain. (A) Ventral (left) and dorsal (right) views of the human brainstem, depicting the caudal midbrain (i) and the rostral (ii) and mid-pons (iii) at the rostrocaudal axis. (B) 3D reconstruction of the isodentritic core nuclei in the brainstem. Despite their relative small size on the horizontal plane, each nucleus occupies large areas within the brainstem's core. Note the overlapping between the structures as well as the idiosyncrasy of their shape and location. The transparent surface represents the brainstem boundaries; green, orange and blue represent the substantia nigra, the dorsal raphe nucleus and the locus coeruleus, respectively. (C–F) Delineation of the isodentritic core nuclei in thick histological sections (300 μm) of the human brainstem and the basal forebrain stained with gallocyanin (Nissl). (C) Locus coeruleus situated laterally to the midline and ventrally to the fourth ventricle in the pons. (D) The dorsal raphe nucleus is located medially in the midbrain ventrally to the aqueduct. (E) The substantia nigra extends bilaterally in the rostral and caudal midbrain, dorsally to the cerebral peduncles. (F) The spatial arrangement of the subnuclei of the nucleus basalis of Maynert in a horizontal section through the left hemisphere. Ayala: Ayala's nucleus; Ch4 al, nucleus basalis of Meynert anterolateral part; Ch4 am: nucleus basalis of Meynert, anteromedial part; Ch4 i: nucleus basalis of Meynert, intermediate part; Ch4 p: nucleus basalis of Meynert, posterior part. Scale bars: (A) 1 cm, (C–F) 1 mm.

Figure 2 Immunostaining against hyperphosphorylated tau in the isodentritic core nuclei of the brainstem. Thin paraffin sections (5 μm) from the substantia nigra (A), locus coeruleus (B) and dorsal raphe nucleus (C) show prominent neurofibrillary lesions in Alzheimer's disease brains. Insets correspond to the framed areas and show neurofibrillary tangles (arrow) and threads (arrowhead). Scale bars: 200 μm, Insets 20 μm.

Table 1 Selected articles reporting susceptibility of the brainstems' isodentritic core nuclei in AD.

Studies on the LC	Objectives	Subjects	Materials	Results	
Tomlinson, 1981 [59]	Compare the neuronal loss in the LC in cognitively healthy controls in middle-late life versus individuals with AD.	10 middle-aged (32–59 years), 15 old control cases(62–93 years); 15 AD cases(76–88 years)	Postmortem tissue, paraffin embedded; cresyl violet staining used for identification of the LC neurons.	The mean neuronal count of control cases above 60 years was significantly higher compared to the AD group; the two groups were not matched for age or sex.	
Chan-Palay &amp; Asan, 1989 [63]	Examine the degree and topographical distribution of neuronal loss between the LC in normal and AD brains.	12 controls (43–89 years), 8 AD cases (71–85 years).	Postmortem tissue, vibratome sectioned; NE neurons stained against TH; NFTs and NPs identified with Bodian stain.	3.5% to 87.5% reductions of neuron numbers in the LC of the AD cases. Neuronal loss was greatest in the rostral, less in middle and least in the caudal part of the LC. Morphological changes of LC neurons included swollen somata with thick dendrites.	
Zweig et al., 1988 [69]	Examine neuronal loss and NFT accumulation in the neuromelanin containing neurons of the LC in AD vs control cases.	22 AD cases (mean age 72.5 years); 12 age-matched control subjects (mean age 68.9 years)	Postmortem tissue, paraffin embedded; cresyl violet staining for neuronal counts in the LC; Congo red for NFT staining.	Significant neuronal loss and NFT burden in the LC of AD vs control cases. Loss was more severe at mid-level than at caudal or rostral levels. No positive correlation was found between neuronal and NFT counts in AD.	
German et al., 1992 [65]	Compare the topographic patterns of cell loss in AD patients versus aged controls. Utilize computer graphics to map and quantify the LC neurons.	8 AD brains (61–82 years), 7 controls (62–76 years). 1 AD case had also PD.	Postmortem tissue, microtome sectioning; cresyl violet staining for neuronal counting; Schmorl's ferricyanide for neuromelanin staining and an antibody against the norepinephrine-synthesizing enzyme, TH.	Approximately 60% loss in the LC compared to aged normal subjects; positive correlation between the magnitude of LC cell loss and AD duration. Cell loss was prominent at the rostral portion of the nucleus compared to the relatively preserved caudal cells.	
Grudzie et al., 2007 [62]	Determine whether the LC displays NFTs early in the course of AD.	7 cognitively normal controls (age 83–95 years) and 5 MCI or early AD cases (age 89–99 years).	Postmortem tissue, microtome sectioning; TH and cresyl violet staining of the LC neurons; AT8 staining for NFTs and their precursors. Thioflavine-S labelled mature tangles.	AT8-positive labeling and thioflavine-S positive tangles were present in both groups of specimens and became significantly more prominent at the stages of MCI and early AD, compared to controls. Moreover, MMSE scores displayed a negative correlation with both markers of cytopathology.	
Braak &amp; Del Tredici, 2011 [42]	Examine the AD pathogenesis based on intraneuronal tau lesions in 42 individuals under the age of 30	42 cases (ages of 4–29): 14 non-demented females and 28 non-demented males (age range 4–29 years).	Postmortem tissue, microtome sectioning. AT8, 4G8 and silver stains against NFT and NP aggregates associated with AD.	19 of the 22 cases that lacked abnormal tau in the transentorhinal region but showed subcortical lesions confined to non-thalamic nuclei had pretangle material confined to the noradrenergic LC-subcoeruleus complex.	
Studies on the DRN	Objectives	Subjects	Materials	Results	
Curcio &amp; Kemper, 1984 [96]	Quantitatively study the neurofibrillary changes and neuronal packing density in the DRN of AD patients.	7 AD brains and 6 controls, matched for age (mean age 87.7 vs 86.5 years) and brain weight (1,076 vs 1,145g).	Postmortem tissue; paraffin sectioning. Staining with Luxol Fast Blue, cresyl violet and HE; NFTs stained with the Bodian silver method.	A 6-fold increase of NFTs in the AD brains compared to controls; no significant difference in neuronal packing density between the two groups.	
Zweig et al., 1988 [69]	Examine neuronal loss and the accumulation of NFTs in the DRN of AD patients.	22 patients with AD (mean age 72.5 years) and 12 age-matched controls (mean age 68.9 years)	Postmortem tissue, paraffin sectioning; cresyl violet staining for neuronal counts; Congo red for NFT staining	Neuronal loss was most severe in the caudal DRN. AD duration correlated inversely with NFT counts although neuronal and NFT counts did not correlate at individual levels.	
Aletrino et al., 1992 [100]	Determine the total neuronal population in the DRN in AD using a 3D sampling scheme throughout the entire rostrocaudal length of the nucleus.	3 cases of early onset AD and 5 late AD (age range 65–93 years), 10 control brains (age range 60–91 years).	Postmortem tissue, paraffin sectioning; cresyl violet staining used for neuronal counts and the KliJver-Barrera staining used to identify DRN neurons.	An overall 39.4% reduction in the DRN neurons of AD brains was demonstrated and was accompanied by cell shrinkage. No rostrocaudal gradient in neuronal loss was identified.	
Rub et al., 2000 [89]	Determine in which BB stage the raphe nuclei display AD-related cytoskeletal lesions and if these are correlated with the AD-related cytoskeletal pathology in the cortex.	27 cases (average age 79.6 ± 7.5 years) with BB stages I ± VI of cortical cytoskeletal lesions were examined.	Postmortem tissue embedded in polyethylene glycol. Aldehydfuchsin-Darrow red used for delimiting the raphe nuclei. Silver iodide and Gallyas technique used to visualize NFTs. 23 cases were treated with AT8 to visualize phosphorylated tau.	The DRN showed cytoskeletal lesions early in BB I±II. In stages V and VI, the DRN displayed the most severe cytoskeletal pathology within the raphe system.	
Parvizi et al., 2001 [19]	Find a correlation between the severity or absence of AD-related changes in the brainstem nuclei of AD patients vs age and gender-matched control cases.	32 AD patients (ages of 58–89) and 26 controls (ages of 56–98).	Postmortem tissue, microtome sectioning. Nissl staining for nuclei identification; thioflavin S for NFTs and NPs. Gallyas silver impregnation or staining with 10D5 for Aβ and ALZ50/AT8 for phosphorylation -independent and -dependent tau inclusions, respectively.	The DRN, along with the central subnucleus of the inferior colliculus, was positive for NFTs and NPs in 100% of the AD patients. No NFTs or NPs were found in the caudal raphe nuclei. The authors found severe pathological alterations in the rostral nuclei (DRN, paramedian, median and linear raphe nuclei) in AD cases.	
Grinberg et al., 2009 [21]	Determine during which BB stage and how frequently the DRN is affected by NFTs	118 cases: 38 staged as BB = 0 and 80 as BB ≥1; (mean age 75.98 ± 11.63 years).	Postmortem tissue, paraffin sectioning; HE used for the delineation of the ST-DR. PHF-1/ AT8 counterstained with haematoxylin was used to identify NFTs in the DRN.	Neurofibrillary changes were detected in the ST-DR in all of the BB ≥ 1 cases and in more than 1/5 of the BB = 0.	
Studies on the SN	Objectives	Subjects	Materials	Results	
Tabaton et al., 1985 [122]	Study the neuronal loss and NFT burden in the SN and NCS in AD patients.	4 AD cases (mean age 63.2 ± 3), 3 controls (62.6 ±2.8)	Postmortem tissue, paraffin sectioning; Sections stained with cresyl violet for neuronal counts and Bodian stain for NFTs identification.	Significant neuronal loss in both nuclei was present in AD cases, while the NFT burden was remarkably higher in NCS. No significant correlation between neuronal loss and NFT numbers was detected.	
Gibb et al., 1989 [124]	Establish the frequency and severity of AD pathology in the SN and VTA.	104 AD cases (38–99 years), 31 controls (61–88 years)	Postmortem tissue, paraffin sectioning; Stains included HE for neuronal counts, Bielschowsky and Palmgren's stains for quantitation of NFTs and NPs.	54% frequency of NFTs was present in AD cases versus controls. 50% of these cases had excess SN cell loss but no PD-related syndromes.	
Kazee et al., 1995 [125]	Determine the association between AD and SN pathology.	48 AD cases (mean age 81.2 years) and 18 normal elderly controls (mean age 75.3 years).	Postmortem tissue, paraffin sectioning; Stains for neuronal and NFT counts included HE, Bodian, and modified Bielschowsky. For amyloid staining, periodic acid-Schiff, Congo red, or Thioflavin S.	The prevalence of SN lesions was much greater in AD cases than in controls. 31% of the AD cases showed severe loss in the SN neurons, while 29% had moderate neuropathology in the SN. Most control brains (89%) had normal or mild pathology in the SN. EPS signs were positively correlated to increasing SN pathology.	
Pizzolato et al., 1996 [133]	Determine the relative striatal uptake of the dopamine receptor D2 receptor ligand [1231]-IBZM Using SPECT in AD patients vs controls.	15 AD patients (mean age was 67.1 ± 6.9 years) without overt EPS; 9 controls (mean age, 64 ± 6 years).	In vivo imaging. Central dopamine D2 receptors were evaluated using SPECT with [1231J-IBZM as a tracer.	Striatal regions of the AD patients showed a significant reduction of mean specific activity of the D2 receptors compared to controls. The authors suggest that alterations of striatal D2 receptors may be part of the pathologic abnormalities of AD, in particular alterations of the nigrostriatal dopaminergic system.	
Zarow et al., 2003 [130]	Compare the severity of neuronal loss in AD and PD relative to healthy elderly control subjects across 3 nuclei (NbM, LC, and SN).	86 AD (mean age 76.8 years), 19 idiopathic PD (mean age 70 years), and 13 healthy controls (mean age 71.1 years).	Postmortem tissue, paraffin sectioning; Cresyl violet staining used to visualize neurons.	The AD cases showed the greatest neuronal loss in the LC, followed by the NbM but variable loss in the SN. PD cases also showed the greatest neuronal loss in the LC, followed by the SN and the NbM. The duration of illness correlated with greater neuronal loss in the LC and NbM in AD, and greater neuronal loss in the SN in PD.	
Attems et al., 2007 [127]	Identify the differences in tau and α-synuclein in the SN and LC of AD patients with and without EPS.	160 AD cases (61–102 years), 94.4% being demented, and 21.9% with clinically reported EPS.	Postmortem tissue, paraffin sectioning; Stains included HE, cresyl violet, Kluver-Barrera, Bielschowsky's silver stain. Immunohistochemistry for 4G8 (NPs) and AT8 (NFTs).	Neuronal loss in the SN and the frequency and intensity of tau aggregates in both the SN and LC increased with advancing BB stages, α-synuclein pathology in various brain regions was seen in 25.6% of the total cohort of AD patients. Neuronal loss in the SN was more severe in EPS+ than in EPS- cases.	
Studies on the NbM	Objectives	Subjects	Materials	Results	
Arendt et al., 1983 [141]	Investigate the involvement of the NbM in AD by focusing on neuronal population estimates in the substantia innominata, the nucleus of the diagonal band of Broca and in the nucleus septi medialis.	14 AD (age 60.8±1.3 years) and 14 control cases (age 59.3±2.6 years), matched for gender.	Postmortem tissue from the basal forebrain, embedded in celloidin and stained with cresyl violet for neuronal identification.	Neuronal numbers of the NbM were reduced by 70% compared to controls.	
Vogels et al., 1990 [146]	Estimation of the total neuronal number of the entire rostrocaudal extent of the NbM and of its subdivisions in cases with AD.	5 cases of early onset AD, 5 cases of late onset AD (age 65–93 years), 1 case of PD without cognitive impairment (age 74 years), and 8 healthy controls (age 60–91 years).	Postmortem tissue, paraffin sectioning; Nissl stain was used for neuronal counting. Kltiver-Barrera-stained sections were used for identification of the NbM and its subdivisions. A 3D sampling scheme was used throughout the whole nucleus.	Total neuron numbers in controls and AD (early and late onset together) indicated neuron loss for the NbM complex as a whole and for all its subdivisions in AD except for the Ch1 + Ch2 regions. In AD, the length of the NbM was significantly reduced bilaterally. In the single PD case no significant neuronal loss in NBMC was observed.	
Geula et al., 1998 [143]	Determine the relationship between loss of cholinergic axons and density of NFTs/ NPsinthe cortex of AD brains.	13 aged controls (mean age 76.23 ± 9.8) 15 cases AD (mean age 76.6 ± 8.8)	Postmortem tissue; Microtome sectioning Sections stained with HE, Bielschowsky silver stain and thiofiavin-S for neuropathological analysis. Cresyl violet used for delineation of cytoarchitectonic boundaries. PHF-tau and the 1282 polyclonal antibody were used against tau and Aβ respectively.	The Ch1–Ch4 cholinergic cells were stained positive for both plaques and tangles within the basal forebrain. In contrast to plaque density, tangle density displayed a strong correlation with cholinergic loss in the AD cases versus controls.	
Mufson et al., 2002 [148]	Examine if the reduction of the neurotrophin receptor p75NTR, a marker of cholinergic basal forebrain neurons, in the NbM of cases with late AD, extends to individuals with MCI and mild AD. Moreover, how this reduction relates to cognitive performance in these groups.	11 cases with no cognitive impairment (mean age 82 years), 12 with MCI (mean age 84.6 years) and 6 with AD (mean age 88.3 years). Groups were comparable for age, education, and ApoE allele status but not for gender.	Postmortem tissue, Paraffin sectioning. Sections throughout the NbM were processed for p75NTR staining with a monoclonal antibody raised against human p75NTR. Cresyl violet stain was used to visualize cytoarchitectonics. Quantitative estimates of the total number of neurons containing p75NTR. An optical dissector cell counting procedure was used.	The MCI (38%) and mild AD(43%) groups showed a significant reduction in the number of NbM p75NTR-immunoreactive neurons, compared to the NCI cases. The number of p75NTR-immunoreactive neurons in the NbM was significantly correlated with MMSE scores	
Mesulam et al., 2004 [70]	Determine if cholinergic denervation occurs in early versus late stages in AD	5 early AD/MCI cases (age 89–99 years); 7 age-matched cognitively healthy controls (age 88–100 years).	Postmortem tissue, microtome sectioning. The NbM was analyzed unilaterally in 1 hemisphere with the following stains: thioflavin-S fluorescence against NFTs and two tau antibodies (AT8, Alz-50) for labeling pre-tangles.	NFT and Alz-50/AT8 positive neurons were found in the NbM in both AD and control groups. However, the NbM tau cytopathology was significantly more pronounced in the cognitively impaired than in the cognitively intact subjects.	
Teipel et al., 2011 [152]	Investigate the in vivo changes of the cholinergic basal forebrain in AD and MCI patients using MRI.	21 patients with a clinical diagnosis of probable AD (age 58–87 years), 16 subjects with MCI (age 60–88 years) compared to 20 healthy elderly subjects (age 56–83 years).	In vivo imaging using a 3.0-Tesla MRI.	AD and MCI subjects showed reduced volumes in basal forebrain areas corresponding to anterior medial and lateral, intermediate and posterior nuclei of the NbM as well as in the diagonal band of Broca nuclei. AD patients showed significant neuronal loss in the cholinergic nuclei Ch2–Ch4. The MCI group showed less pronounced effects than the AD group in similar localizations.	
	
Abbreviations: AChE, Acetylcholinesterase; AD, Alzheimer's disease; ApoE, Apolipoprotein E; Aβ, Amyloid beta; BB, Braak and Braak stage; Ch1–Ch4, Cholinergic groups 1–4 of the nucleus basalis complex; DRN, Dorsal raphe nucleus; EPS, Extrapyramidal symptoms; HE Hematoxylin and eosin stain; LC, Locus coeruleus; MCI, Mild cognitive impairment; MMSE, Mini-mental state examination; MRI, Magnetic resonance imaging; MRN, Median raphe nuclei; NbM, Nucleus basalis of Meynert; NCS, Nucleus centralis superior; NE, Norepinephrine; NFT, Neurofibrillary tangle; NP, neuritic plaques; p75NTR low affinity p75 neurotrophin receptor; PD, Parkinson's disease; PH8, antibody that cross-reacts with the serotonin synthesis enzyme, tryptophan hydroxylase; PHF, paired helical filament; SN, Substantia nigra; SPECT, Singlephoton emission computed tomography; ST-DR Supratrochlear subnucleus of the dorsal raphe nucleus; TH, Antibody against the norepinephrine-synthesizing enzyme, tyrosine hydroxylase; VTA Ventral tegmental area.


References

[1] Sosa-Ortiz AL Acosta-Castillo I Prince MJ Epidemiology of Dementias and Alzheimer's Disease Arch Med Res 2012 43 600 608 23159715
[2] Chan KY Wang W Wu JJ Liu L Theodoratou E Car J Middleton L Russ TC Deary IJ Campbell H Wang W Rudan I Epidemiology of Alzheimer's disease and other forms of dementia in China, 1990–2010: a systematic review and analysis The Lancet 2013 381 2016 2023
[3] Thies W Bleiler L Alzheimer's Association 2013 Alzheimer's disease facts and figures Alzheimers Dement 2013 9 208 245 23507120
[4] Duyckaerts C Delatour B Potier MC Classification and basic pathology of Alzheimer disease Acta Neuropathol 2009 118 5 36 19381658
[5] Andrade-Moraes CH Oliveira-Pinto AV Castro-Fonseca E da Silva CG Guimaraes DM Szczupak D Parente-Bruno DR Carvalho LR Polichiso L Gomes BV Oliveira LM Rodriguez RD Leite RE Ferretti-Rebustini RE Jacob-Filho W Pasqualucci CA Grinberg LT Lent R Cell number changes in Alzheimer's disease relate to dementia, not to plaques and tangles Brain 2013 136 3738 3752 24136825
[6] Hyman BT Phelps CH Beach TG Bigio EH Cairns NJ Carrillo MC Dickson DW Duyckaerts C Frosch MP Masliah E Mirra SS Nelson PT Schneider JA Thal DR Thies B Trojanowski JQ Vinters HV Montine TJ National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer's Association guidelines for the neuropathologic assessment of Alzheimer's disease Alzheimers Dement 2012 8 1 13 22265587
[7] Hardy JA Higgins GA Alzheimer's disease: the amyloid cascade hypothesis Science 1992 256 184 185 1566067
[8] Berg L McKeel DW Jr Miller JP Storandt M Rubin EH Morris JC Baty J Coats M Norton J Goate AM Price JL Gearing M Mirra SS Saunders AM Clinicopathologic studies in cognitively healthy aging and Alzheimer's disease: relation of histologic markers to dementia severity, age, sex, and apolipoprotein E genotype Arch Neurol 1998 55 326 335 9520006
[9] Giannakopoulos P Herrmann FR Bussiere T Bouras C Kovari E Perl DP Morrison JH Gold G Hof PR Tangle and neuron numbers, but not amyloid load, predict cognitive status in Alzheimer's disease Neurology 2003 60 1495 1500 12743238
[10] De Lacoste MC White CL 3rd The role of cortical connectivity in Alzheimer's disease pathogenesis: a review and model system Neurobiol Aging 1993 14 1 16 8450928
[11] Thal DR Rub U Orantes M Braak H Phases of A beta-deposition in the human brain and its relevance for the development of AD Neurology 2002 58 1791 1800 12084879
[12] Braak H Thal DR Ghebremedhin E Del Tredici K Stages of the pathologic process in Alzheimer disease: age categories from 1 to 100 years J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2011 70 960 969 22002422
[13] Crary JF Trojanowski JQ Schneider JA Abisambra JF Abner EL Alafuzoff I Arnold SE Attems J Beach TG Bigio EH Cairns NJ Dickson DW Gearing M Grinberg LT Hof PR Hyman BT Jellinger K Jicha GA Kovacs GG Knopman DS Kofler J Kukull WA Mackenzie IR Masliah E McKee A Montine TJ Murray ME Neltner JH Santa-Maria I Seeley WW Serrano-Pozo A Shelanski ML Stein T Takao M Thal DR Toledo JB Troncoso JC Vonsattel JP White CL 3rd Wisniewski T Woltjer RL Yamada M Nelson PT Primary age-related tauopathy (PART): a common pathology associated with human aging Acta Neuropathol 2014 128 755 766 25348064
[14] Braak H Del Tredici K Are cases with tau pathology occurring in the absence of Abeta deposits part of the AD-related pathological process? Acta Neuropathol 2014 128 767 772 25359108
[15] Jack CR Jr Knopman DS Jagust WJ Petersen RC Weiner MW Aisen PS Shaw LM Vemuri P Wiste HJ Weigand SD Lesnick TG Pankratz VS Donohue MC Trojanowski JQ Tracking pathophysiological processes in Alzheimer's disease: an updated hypothetical model of dynamic biomarkers Lancet Neurol 2013 12 207 216 23332364
[16] Braak H Braak E Neuropathological stageing of Alzheimer-related changes Acta Neuropathol 1991 82 239 259 1759558
[17] Parvizi J Corticocentric myopia: old bias in new cognitive sciences Trends Cogn Sci 2009 13 354 359 19595625
[18] Grinberg LT Rueb U Heinsen H Brainstem: neglected locus in neurodegenerative diseases Front Neurol 2011 2 42 21808630
[19] Parvizi J Van Hoesen GW Damasio A The selective vulnerability of brainstem nuclei to Alzheimer's disease Ann Neurol 2001 49 53 66 11198297
[20] Simic G Stanic G Mladinov M Jovanov-Milosevic N Kostovic I Hof PR Does Alzheimer's disease begin in the brainstem? Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 2009 35 532 554 19682326
[21] Grinberg LT Rub U Ferretti RE Nitrini R Farfel JM Polichiso L Gierga K Jacob-Filho W Heinsen H Brazilian Brain Bank Study Group The dorsal raphe nucleus shows phospho-tau neurofibrillary changes before the transentorhinal region in Alzheimer's disease. A precocious onset? Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 2009 35 406 416 19508444
[22] Attems J Thal DR Jellinger KA The relationship between subcortical tau pathology and Alzheimer's disease Biochem Soc Trans 2012 40 711 715 22817721
[23] Overk CR Kelley CM Mufson EJ Brainstem Alzheimer's-like pathology in the triple transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer's disease Neurobiol Dis 2009 35 415 425 19524671
[24] Liu L Luo S Zeng L Wang W Yuan L Jian X Degenerative alterations in noradrenergic neurons of the locus coeruleus in Alzheimer's disease Neural Regen Res 2013 8 2249 2255 25206534
[25] Kummer MP Hammerschmidt T Martinez A Terwel D Eichele G Witten A Figura S Stoll M Schwartz S Pape HC Schultze JL Weinshenker D Heneka MT Ear2 deletion causes early memory and learning deficits in APP/PS1 mice J Neurosci 2014 34 8845 8854 24966384
[26] Olszewski J Baxter D Cytoarchitecture of the Human Brain Stem 1982 Karger Basel ; New York
[27] Nieuwenhuys R Voogd J van Huijzen C The human central nervous system 2008 967
[28] Mai JK Assheuer J Paxinos G Atlas of the Human Brain 1997 Academic Press San Diego, Calif
[29] Sara SJ Bouret S Orienting and reorienting: the locus coeruleus mediates cognition through arousal Neuron 2012 76 130 141 23040811
[30] Ramon-Moliner E Nauta WJ The isodendritic core of the brain stem J Comp Neurol 1966 126 311 335 4957032
[31] Rossor MN Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's disease as disorders of the isodendritic core Br Med J (Clin Res Ed) 1981 283 1588 1590
[32] Mannen H “Noyau fermé” et “noyau ouvert.” Contribution à l'étude cytoarchitectonique du tronc cérébral envisageée du point de vue du mode d'arborisation dendritique Arch. Ital. Biol 1960 98 330 350
[33] Cadet JL A unifying theory of movement and madness: involvement of free radicals in disorders of the isodendritic core of the brainstem Med Hypotheses 1988 27 59 63 3060706
[34] Dahlstroem A Fuxe K Evidence for the Existence of Monoamine-Containing Neurons in the Central Nervous System. I. Demonstration of Monoamines in the Cell Bodies of Brain Stem Neurons Acta Physiol Scand Suppl 1964 SUPPL 232 1 55 14229500
[35] Mesulam MM Mufson EJ Levey AI Wainer BH Cholinergic innervation of cortex by the basal forebrain: cytochemistry and cortical connections of the septal area, diagonal band nuclei, nucleus basalis (substantia innominata), and hypothalamus in the rhesus monkey J Comp Neurol 1983 214 170 197 6841683
[36] Zoli M Jansson A Sykova E Agnati LF Fuxe K Volume transmission in the CNS and its relevance for neuropsychopharmacology Trends Pharmacol Sci 1999 20 142 150 10322499
[37] Fuxe K Dahlstrom A Hoistad M Marcellino D Jansson A Rivera A Diaz-Cabiale Z Jacobsen K Tinner-Staines B Hagman B Leo G Staines W Guidolin D Kehr J Genedani S Belluardo N Agnati LF From the Golgi-Cajal mapping to the transmitter-based characterization of the neuronal networks leading to two modes of brain communication: wiring and volume transmission Brain Res Rev 2007 55 17 54 17433836
[38] Ishii T Distribution of Alzheimer's neurofibrillary changes in the brain stem and hypothalamus of senile dementia Acta Neuropathol 1966 6 181 187 5963288
[39] Moceri VM Kukull WA Emanuel I van Belle G Larson EB Early-life risk factors and the development of Alzheimer's disease Neurology 2000 54 415 420 10668705
[40] Schonheit B Zarski R Ohm TG Spatial and temporal relationships between plaques and tangles in Alzheimer-pathology Neurobiol Aging 2004 25 697 711 15165691
[41] Bondi MW Jak AJ Delano-Wood L Jacobson MW Delis DC Salmon DP Neuropsychological contributions to the early identification of Alzheimer's disease Neuropsychol Rev 2008 18 73 90 18347989
[42] Braak H Del Tredici K The pathological process underlying Alzheimer's disease in individuals under thirty Acta Neuropathol 2011 121 171 181 21170538
[43] Arendt T Bigl V Tennstedt A Arendt A Neuronal loss in different parts of the nucleus basalis is related to neuritic plaque formation in cortical target areas in Alzheimer's disease Neuroscience 1985 14 1 14 3974875
[44] Kril JJ Patel S Harding AJ Halliday GM Neuron loss from the hippocampus of Alzheimer's disease exceeds extracellular neurofibrillary tangle formation Acta Neuropathol 2002 103 370 376 11904757
[45] Lyness SA Zarow C Chui HC Neuron loss in key cholinergic and aminergic nuclei in Alzheimer disease: a meta-analysis Neurobiol Aging 2003 24 1 23 12493547
[46] Theofilas P Polichiso L Wang X Lima LC Alho AT Leite RE Suemoto CK Pasqualucci CA Jacob-Filho W Heinsen H Brazilian Aging Brain Study Group Grinberg LT A novel approach for integrative studies on neurodegenerative diseases in human brains J Neurosci Methods 2014 226 171 183 24503023
[47] German DC White CL 3rd Sparkman DR Alzheimer's disease: neurofibrillary tangles in nuclei that project to the cerebral cortex Neuroscience 1987 21 305 312 3302759
[48] Braak H Braak E Development of Alzheimer-related neurofibrillary changes in the neocortex inversely recapitulates cortical myelogenesis Acta Neuropathol 1996 92 197 201 8841666
[49] Braak H Rub U Gai WP Del Tredici K Idiopathic Parkinson's disease: possible routes by which vulnerable neuronal types may be subject to neuroinvasion by an unknown pathogen J Neural Transm 2003 110 517 536 12721813
[50] Kapfhammer JP Schwab ME Inverse patterns of myelination and GAP-43 expression in the adult CNS: neurite growth inhibitors as regulators of neuronal plasticity? J Comp Neurol 1994 340 194 206 8201019
[51] Attems J Thomas A Jellinger K Correlations between cortical and subcortical tau pathology Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 2012 38 582 590 22115520
[52] Geula C Nagykery N Nicholas A Wu CK Cholinergic neuronal and axonal abnormalities are present early in aging and in Alzheimer disease J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2008 67 309 318 18379437
[53] Baker KG Tork I Hornung JP Halasz P The human locus coeruleus complex: an immunohistochemical and three dimensional reconstruction study Exp Brain Res 1989 77 257 270 2571514
[54] Paxinos G Mai JK The Human Nervous System 2004 Elsevier Academic Press Boston
[55] Gibb WR Lees AJ Anatomy, pigmentation, ventral and dorsal subpopulations of the substantia nigra, and differential cell death in Parkinson's disease J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1991 54 388 396 1865199
[56] Berridge CW Waterhouse BD The locus coeruleus-noradrenergic system: modulation of behavioral state and state-dependent cognitive processes Brain Res Brain Res Rev 2003 42 33 84 12668290
[57] Aston-Jones G Foote SL Segal M Impulse conduction properties of noradrenergic locus coeruleus axons projecting to monkey cerebrocortex Neuroscience 1985 15 765 777 4069354
[58] Mann DM Lincoln J Yates PO Stamp JE Toper S Changes in the monoamine containing neurones of the human CNS in senile dementia Br J Psychiatry 1980 136 533 541 6155966
[59] Tomlinson BE Irving D Blessed G Cell loss in the locus coeruleus in senile dementia of Alzheimer type J Neurol Sci 1981 49 419 428 7217992
[60] Gelb DJ Oliver E Gilman S Diagnostic criteria for Parkinson disease Arch Neurol 1999 56 33 39 9923759
[61] Gesi M Soldani P Giorgi FS Santinami A Bonaccorsi I Fornai F The role of the locus coeruleus in the development of Parkinson's disease Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2000 24 655 668 10940440
[62] Grudzien A Shaw P Weintraub S Bigio E Mash DC Mesulam MM Locus coeruleus neurofibrillary degeneration in aging, mild cognitive impairment and early Alzheimer's disease Neurobiol Aging 2007 28 327 335 16574280
[63] Chan-Palay V Asan E Alterations in catecholamine neurons of the locus coeruleus in senile dementia of the Alzheimer type and in Parkinson's disease with and without dementia and depression J Comp Neurol 1989 287 373 392 2570794
[64] Wilson RS Nag S Boyle PA Hizel LP Yu L Buchman AS Shah RC Schneider JA Arnold SE Bennett DA Brainstem aminergic nuclei and late-life depressive symptoms JAMA Psychiatry 2013 70 1320 1328 24132763
[65] German DC Manaye KF White CL 3rd Woodward DJ McIntire DD Smith WK Kalaria RN Mann DM Disease-specific patterns of locus coeruleus cell loss Ann Neurol 1992 32 667 676 1449247
[66] Zubenko GS Moossy J Kopp U Neurochemical correlates of major depression in primary dementia Arch Neurol 1990 47 209 214 1689144
[67] Forstl H Burns A Levy R Cairns N Neuropathological correlates of psychotic phenomena in confirmed Alzheimer's disease Br J Psychiatry 1994 165 53 59 7953058
[68] Ressler KJ Nemeroff CB Role of norepinephrine in the pathophysiology and treatment of mood disorders Biol Psychiatry 1999 46 1219 1233 10560027
[69] Zweig RM Ross CA Hedreen JC Steele C Cardillo JE Whitehouse PJ Folstein MF Price DL The neuropathology of aminergic nuclei in Alzheimer's disease Ann Neurol 1988 24 233 242 3178178
[70] Mesulam M Shaw P Mash D Weintraub S Cholinergic nucleus basalis tauopathy emerges early in the aging-MCI-AD continuum Ann Neurol 2004 55 815 828 15174015
[71] Mann DM Yates PO Marcyniuk B Correlation between senile plaque and neurofibrillary tangle counts in cerebral cortex and neuronal counts in cortex and subcortical structures in Alzheimer's disease Neurosci Lett 1985 56 51 55 4011048
[72] Marcyniuk B Mann DM Yates PO Loss of nerve cells from locus coeruleus in Alzheimer's disease is topographically arranged Neurosci Lett 1986 64 247 252 3960404
[73] Clavaguera F Bolmont T Crowther RA Abramowski D Frank S Probst A Fraser G Stalder AK Beibel M Staufenbiel M Jucker M Goedert M Tolnay M Transmission and spreading of tauopathy in transgenic mouse brain Nat Cell Biol 2009 11 909 913 19503072
[74] Brundin P Melki R Kopito R Prion-like transmission of protein aggregates in neurodegenerative diseases Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2010 11 301 307 20308987
[75] Storga D Vrecko K Birkmayer JG Reibnegger G Monoaminergic neurotransmitters, their precursors and metabolites in brains of Alzheimer patients Neurosci Lett 1996 203 29 32 8742039
[76] Palmer AM Wilcock GK Esiri MM Francis PT Bowen DM Monoaminergic innervation of the frontal and temporal lobes in Alzheimer's disease Brain Res 1987 401 231 238 2434191
[77] Francis PT Palmer AM Sims NR Bowen DM Davison AN Esiri MM Neary D Snowden JS Wilcock GK Neurochemical studies of early-onset Alzheimer's disease. Possible influence on treatment N Engl J Med 1985 313 7 11 2582256
[78] Chalermpalanupap T Kinkead B Hu WT Kummer MP Hammerschmidt T Heneka MT Weinshenker D Levey AI Targeting norepinephrine in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease Alzheimers Res Ther 2013 5 21 23634965
[79] Szot P White SS Greenup JL Leverenz JB Peskind ER Raskind MA Compensatory changes in the noradrenergic nervous system in the locus ceruleus and hippocampus of postmortem subjects with Alzheimer's disease and dementia with Lewy bodies J Neurosci 2006 26 467 478 16407544
[80] Elrod R Peskind ER DiGiacomo L Brodkin KI Veith RC Raskind MA Effects of Alzheimer's disease severity on cerebrospinal fluid norepinephrine concentration Am J Psychiatry 1997 154 25 30 8988954
[81] Hoogendijk WJ Feenstra MG Botterblom MH Gilhuis J Sommer IE Kamphorst W Eikelenboom P Swaab DF Increased activity of surviving locus ceruleus neurons in Alzheimer's disease Ann Neurol 1999 45 82 91 9894881
[82] Feinstein DL Heneka MT Gavrilyuk V Dello Russo C Weinberg G Galea E Noradrenergic regulation of inflammatory gene expression in brain Neurochem Int 2002 41 357 365 12176079
[83] Heneka MT Nadrigny F Regen T Martinez-Hernandez A Dumitrescu-Ozimek L Terwel D Jardanhazi-Kurutz D Walter J Kirchhoff F Hanisch UK Kummer MP Locus ceruleus controls Alzheimer's disease pathology by modulating microglial functions through norepinephrine Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010 107 6058 6063 20231476
[84] Fawcett JP Bamji SX Causing CG Aloyz R Ase AR Reader TA McLean JH Miller FD Functional evidence that BDNF is an anterograde neuronal trophic factor in the CNS J Neurosci 1998 18 2808 2821 9525998
[85] Matsunaga W Shirokawa T Isobe K BDNF is necessary for maintenance of noradrenergic innervations in the aged rat brain Neurobiol Aging 2004 25 341 348 15123340
[86] Murer MG Yan Q Raisman-Vozari R Brain-derived neurotrophic factor in the control human brain, and in Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease Prog Neurobiol 2001 63 71 124 11040419
[87] Holm PC Rodriguez FJ Kresse A Canals JM Silos-Santiago I Arenas E Crucial role of TrkB ligands in the survival and phenotypic differentiation of developing locus coeruleus noradrenergic neurons Development 2003 130 3535 3545 12810600
[88] Aisen PS Serum brain-derived neurotrophic factor and the risk for dementia JAMA 2014 311 1684 1685 24756518
[89] Rub U Del Tredici K Schultz C Thal DR Braak E Braak H The evolution of Alzheimer's disease-related cytoskeletal pathology in the human raphe nuclei Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 2000 26 553 567 11123722
[90] Michelsen KA Prickaerts J Steinbusch HW The dorsal raphe nucleus and serotonin: implications for neuroplasticity linked to major depression and Alzheimer's disease Prog Brain Res 2008 172 233 264 18772036
[91] Baker KG Halliday GM Tork I Cytoarchitecture of the human dorsal raphe nucleus J Comp Neurol 1990 301 147 161 2262589
[92] Rodriguez JJ Noristani HN Verkhratsky A The serotonergic system in ageing and Alzheimer's disease Prog Neurobiol 2012 99 15 41 22766041
[93] Vertes RP A PHA-L analysis of ascending projections of the dorsal raphe nucleus in the rat J Comp Neurol 1991 313 643 668 1783685
[94] Ma QP Yin GF Ai MK Han JS Serotonergic projections from the nucleus raphe dorsalis to the amygdala in the rat Neurosci Lett 1991 134 21 24 1815148
[95] Hornung JP The human raphe nuclei and the serotonergic system J Chem Neuroanat 2003 26 331 343 14729135
[96] Curcio CA Kemper T Nucleus raphe dorsalis in dementia of the Alzheimer type: neurofibrillary changes and neuronal packing density J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 1984 43 359 368 6737007
[97] Lai MK Tsang SW Francis PT Keene J Hope T Esiri MM Spence I Chen CP Postmortem serotoninergic correlates of cognitive decline in Alzheimer's disease Neuroreport 2002 13 1175 1178 12151764
[98] Geldenhuys WJ Van der Schyf CJ Role of serotonin in Alzheimer's disease: a new therapeutic target? CNS Drugs 2011 25 765 781 21870888
[99] Mossello E Boncinelli M Caleri V Cavallini MC Palermo E Di Bari M Tilli S Sarcone E Simoni D Biagini CA Masotti G Marchionni N Is antidepressant treatment associated with reduced cognitive decline in Alzheimer's disease? Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 2008 25 372 379 18354253
[100] Aletrino MA Vogels OJ Van Domburg PH Ten Donkelaar HJ Cell loss in the nucleus raphes dorsalis in Alzheimer's disease Neurobiol Aging 1992 13 461 468 1508296
[101] Chen CP Eastwood SL Hope T McDonald B Francis PT Esiri MM Immunocytochemical study of the dorsal and median raphe nuclei in patients with Alzheimer's disease prospectively assessed for behavioural changes Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 2000 26 347 355 10931368
[102] Hendricksen M Thomas AJ Ferrier IN Ince P O'Brien JT Neuropathological study of the dorsal raphe nuclei in late-life depression and Alzheimer's disease with and without depression Am J Psychiatry 2004 161 1096 1102 15169699
[103] Chen JG Rudnick G Permeation and gating residues in serotonin transporter Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2000 97 1044 1049 10655481
[104] Kepe V Barrio JR Huang SC Ercoli L Siddarth P Shoghi-Jadid K Cole GM Satyamurthy N Cummings JL Small GW Phelps ME Serotonin 1A receptors in the living brain of Alzheimer's disease patients Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2006 103 702 707 16407119
[105] Burke WJ Park DH Chung HD Marshall GL Haring JH Joh TH Evidence for decreased transport of tryptophan hydroxylase in Alzheimer's disease Brain Res 1990 537 83 87 1707735
[106] Truchot L Costes SN Zimmer L Laurent B Le Bars D Thomas-Anterion C Croisile B Mercier B Hermier M Vighetto A Krolak-Salmon P Up-regulation of hippocampal serotonin metabolism in mild cognitive impairment Neurology 2007 69 1012 1017 17785670
[107] Marner L Frokjaer VG Kalbitzer J Lehel S Madsen K Baare WF Knudsen GM Hasselbalch SG Loss of serotonin 2A receptors exceeds loss of serotonergic projections in early Alzheimer's disease: a combined [11C]DASB and [18F]altanserin-PET study Neurobiol Aging 2012 33 479 487 20510480
[108] Hamon M Gozlan H el Mestikawy S Emerit MB Bolanos F Schechter L The central 5-HT1A receptors: pharmacological, biochemical, functional, and regulatory properties Ann N Y Acad Sci 1990 600 114 29 discussion 129–31 2252305
[109] Lai MK Tsang SW Francis PT Esiri MM Keene J Hope T Chen CP Reduced serotonin 5-HT1A receptor binding in the temporal cortex correlates with aggressive behavior in Alzheimer disease Brain Res 2003 974 82 87 12742626
[110] Stuerenburg HJ Ganzer S Muller-Thomsen T 5-Hydroxyindoleacetic acid and homovanillic acid concentrations in cerebrospinal fluid in patients with Alzheimer's disease, depression and mild cognitive impairment Neuro Endocrinol Lett 2004 25 435 437 15665806
[111] Muck-Seler D Presecki P Mimica N Mustapic M Pivac N Babic A Nedic G Folnegovic-Smalc V Platelet serotonin concentration and monoamine oxidase type B activity in female patients in early, middle and late phase of Alzheimer's disease Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 2009 33 1226 1231 19602426
[112] Gottfries CG Neurochemical aspects on aging and diseases with cognitive impairment J Neurosci Res 1990 27 541 547 2079715
[113] Halliday GM Tork I Comparative anatomy of the ventromedial mesencephalic tegmentum in the rat, cat, monkey and human J Comp Neurol 1986 252 423 445 3782510
[114] Pearson J Goldstein M Markey K Brandeis L Human brainstem catecholamine neuronal anatomy as indicated by immunocytochemistry with antibodies to tyrosine hydroxylase Neuroscience 1983 8 3 32 6132348
[115] Frankle WG Laruelle M Haber SN Prefrontal cortical projections to the midbrain in primates: evidence for a sparse connection Neuropsychopharmacology 2006 31 1627 1636 16395309
[116] Goldman-Rakic PS Lidow MS Smiley JF Williams MS The anatomy of dopamine in monkey and human prefrontal cortex J Neural Transm Suppl 1992 36 163 177 1527516
[117] Szabo J Strionigral and nigrostriatal connections. Anatomical studies Appl Neurophysiol 1979 42 9 12 110260
[118] Lynd-Balta E Haber SN The organization of midbrain projections to the ventral striatum in the primate Neuroscience 1994 59 609 623 7516505
[119] Oades RD Halliday GM Ventral tegmental (A10) system: neurobiology. 1. Anatomy and connectivity Brain Res 1987 434 117 165 3107759
[120] Liu Y Stern Y Chun MR Jacobs DM Yau P Goldman JE Pathological correlates of extrapyramidal signs in Alzheimer's disease Ann Neurol 1997 41 368 374 9066358
[121] Girault JA Greengard P The neurobiology of dopamine signaling Arch Neurol 2004 61 641 644 15148138
[122] Tabaton M Schenone A Romagnoli P Mancardi GL A quantitative and ultrastructural study of substantia nigra and nucleus centralis superior in Alzheimer's disease Acta Neuropathol 1985 68 218 223 4082924
[123] Ditter SM Mirra SS Neuropathologic and clinical features of Parkinson's disease in Alzheimer's disease patients Neurology 1987 37 754 760 3033544
[124] Gibb WR Mountjoy CQ Mann DM Lees AJ The substantia nigra and ventral tegmental area in Alzheimer's disease and Down's syndrome J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1989 52 193 200 2539435
[125] Kazee AM Cox C Richfield EK Substantia nigra lesions in Alzheimer disease and normal aging Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 1995 9 61 67 7662324
[126] Burns JM Galvin JE Roe CM Morris JC McKeel DW The pathology of the substantia nigra in Alzheimer disease with extrapyramidal signs Neurology 2005 64 1397 1403 15851730
[127] Attems J Quass M Jellinger KA Tau and alpha-synuclein brainstem pathology in Alzheimer disease: relation with extrapyramidal signs Acta Neuropathol 2007 113 53 62 17031655
[128] Kischka U Mandir AS Ghika J Growdon JH Electrophysiologic detection of extrapyramidal motor signs in Alzheimer's disease Neurology 1993 43 500 505 8450990
[129] Herrmann N Rothenburg LS Black SE Ryan M Liu BA Busto UE Lanctot KL Methylphenidate for the treatment of apathy in Alzheimer disease: prediction of response using dextroamphetamine challenge J Clin Psychopharmacol 2008 28 296 301 18480686
[130] Zarow C Lyness SA Mortimer JA Chui HC Neuronal loss is greater in the locus coeruleus than nucleus basalis and substantia nigra in Alzheimer and Parkinson diseases Arch Neurol 2003 60 337 341 12633144
[131] Schneider JA Bienias JL Gilley DW Kvarnberg DE Mufson EJ Bennett DA Improved detection of substantia nigra pathology in Alzheimer's disease J Histochem Cytochem 2002 50 99 106 11748299
[132] Schneider JA Li JL Li Y Wilson RS Kordower JH Bennett DA Substantia nigra tangles are related to gait impairment in older persons Ann Neurol 2006 59 166 173 16374822
[133] Pizzolato G Chierichetti F Fabbri M Cagnin A Dam M Ferlin G Battistin L Reduced striatal dopamine receptors in Alzheimer's disease: single photon emission tomography study with the D2 tracer [123I]-IBZM Neurology 1996 47 1065 1068 8857746
[134] Colloby SJ McParland S O'Brien JT Attems J Neuropathological correlates of dopaminergic imaging in Alzheimer's disease and Lewy body dementias Brain 2012 135 2798 2808 22961551
[135] Grinberg LT Heinsen H Computer-assisted 3D reconstructionof the human basal forebrain complex Dement Neuropsychol 2007 1 140 146
[136] Mesulam MM Geula C Nucleus basalis (Ch4) and cortical cholinergic innervation in the human brain: observations based on the distribution of acetylcholinesterase and choline acetyltransferase J Comp Neurol 1988 275 216 240 3220975
[137] Selden NR Gitelman DR Salamon-Murayama N Parrish TB Mesulam MM Trajectories of cholinergic pathways within the cerebral hemispheres of the human brain Brain 1998 121 Pt 12 2249 2257 9874478
[138] McLin DE 3rd Miasnikov AA Weinberger NM Induction of behavioral associative memory by stimulation of the nucleus basalis Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2002 99 4002 4007 11904444
[139] Coyle JT Price DL DeLong MR Alzheimer's disease: a disorder of cortical cholinergic innervation Science 1983 219 1184 1190 6338589
[140] Whitehouse PJ Price DL Clark AW Coyle JT DeLong MR Alzheimer disease: evidence for selective loss of cholinergic neurons in the nucleus basalis Ann Neurol 1981 10 122 126 7283399
[141] Arendt T Bigl V Arendt A Tennstedt A Loss of neurons in the nucleus basalis of Meynert in Alzheimer's disease, paralysis agitans and Korsakoff's Disease Acta Neuropathol 1983 61 101 108 6637393
[142] Holzer M Holzapfel HP Zedlick D Bruckner MK Arendt T Abnormally phosphorylated tau protein in Alzheimer's disease: heterogeneity of individual regional distribution and relationship to clinical severity Neuroscience 1994 63 499 516 7891861
[143] Geula C Mesulam MM Saroff DM Wu CK Relationship between plaques, tangles, and loss of cortical cholinergic fibers in Alzheimer disease J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 1998 57 63 75 9600198
[144] Sassin I Schultz C Thal DR Rub U Arai K Braak E Braak H Evolution of Alzheimer's disease-related cytoskeletal changes in the basal nucleus of Meynert Acta Neuropathol 2000 100 259 269 10965795
[145] Teipel S Heinsen H Amaro E Jr Grinberg LT Krause B Grothe M Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative Cholinergic basal forebrain atrophy predicts amyloid burden in Alzheimer's disease Neurobiol Aging 2014 35 482 491 24176625
[146] Vogels OJ Broere CA ter Laak HJ ten Donkelaar HJ Nieuwenhuys R Schulte BP Cell loss and shrinkage in the nucleus basalis Meynert complex in Alzheimer's disease Neurobiol Aging 1990 11 3 13 2183081
[147] Cullen KM Halliday GM Neurofibrillary degeneration and cell loss in the nucleus basalis in comparison to cortical Alzheimer pathology Neurobiol Aging 1998 19 297 306 9733161
[148] Mufson EJ Ma SY Dills J Cochran EJ Leurgans S Wuu J Bennett DA Jaffar S Gilmor ML Levey AI Kordower JH Loss of basal forebrain P75(NTR) immunoreactivity in subjects with mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease J Comp Neurol 2002 443 136 153 11793352
[149] Palmer AM Neuroprotective therapeutics for Alzheimer's disease: progress and prospects Trends Pharmacol Sci 2011 32 141 147 21256602
[150] Hasselmo ME Sarter M Modes and models of forebrain cholinergic neuromodulation of cognition Neuropsychopharmacology 2011 36 52 73 20668433
[151] Hanyu H Shimizu S Tanaka Y Hirao K Iwamoto T Abe K MR features of the substantia innominata and therapeutic implications in dementias Neurobiol Aging 2007 28 548 554 16569466
[152] Teipel SJ Meindl T Grinberg L Grothe M Cantero JL Reiser MF Moller HJ Heinsen H Hampel H The cholinergic system in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: an in vivo MRI and DTI study Hum Brain Mapp 2011 32 1349 1362 20672311
