LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


8913461
2416
J Neuroendocrinol
J. Neuroendocrinol.
Journal of neuroendocrinology
0953-8194
1365-2826

26681259
4769676
10.1111/jne.12351
NIHMS745615
Article
Neurosteroidogenesis today: Novel targets for neuroactive steroid synthesis and action and their relevance for translational research
Porcu Patrizia 1
Barron Anna M. 2
Frye Cheryl Anne 34
Walf Alicia A. 345
Yang Song-Yu 6
He Xue-Ying 6
Morrow A. Leslie 7
Panzica Gian Carlo 8
Melcangi Roberto C. 9
1 Neuroscience Institute, National Research Council of Italy (CNR), Cagliari, Italy
2 Molecular Imaging Center, National Institute of Radiological Sciences, Anagawa, Inage-ku, Chiba, Japan
3 Institute of Arctic Biology, The University of Alaska–Fairbanks, Fairbanks, AK, USA
4 The University at Albany, Albany, NY, USA
5 Department of Cognitive Science, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY, USA
6 Department of Developmental Biochemistry, NYS Institute for Basic Research in Developmental Disabilities, Staten Island, NY, USA
7 Departments of Psychiatry and Pharmacology, Bowles Center for Alcohol Studies, University of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, USA
8 Department of Neuroscience, University of Turin, and NICO - Neuroscience Institute Cavalieri Ottolenghi, Orbassano, Italy
9 Dipartimento di Scienze Farmacologiche e Biomolecolari, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy
Correspondence: Patrizia Porcu, Ph.D., Neuroscience Institute, National Research Council of Italy (CNR), Cittadella Universitaria, 09042 Monserrato, Cagliari, Italy, Tel.: +39-070-6754163, Fax: +39-070-6754166, patrizia.porcu@in.cnr.it
19 12 2015
2 2016
01 2 2017
28 2 10.1111/jne.12351This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Neuroactive steroids are endogenous neuromodulators synthesised in the brain that rapidly alter neuronal excitability by binding to membrane receptors, in addition to the regulation of gene expression via intracellular steroid receptors. Neuroactive steroids induce potent anxiolytic, antidepressant, anticonvulsant, sedative, analgesic and amnesic effects, mainly through interaction with the γ-amino-butyric type A (GABAA) receptor. They also exert neuroprotective, neurotrophic and antiapoptotic effects in several animal models of neurodegenerative diseases.

Neuroactive steroids regulate many physiological functions such as stress response, puberty, ovarian cycle, pregnancy and reward. Their levels are altered in several neuropsychiatric and neurologic diseases and both preclinical and clinical studies emphasise a therapeutic potential of neuroactive steroids for these diseases, whereby symptomatology ameliorates upon restoration of neuroactive steroid concentrations. However, direct administration of neuroactive steroids has several challenges, including pharmacokinetics, low bioavailability, addiction potential, safety and tolerability that limit its therapeutic use. Therefore, modulation of neurosteroidogenesis to restore the altered endogenous neuroactive steroid tone may represent a better therapeutic approach.

This review summarizes recent approaches that target the neuroactive steroid biosynthetic pathway at different levels in order to promote neurosteroidogenesis. These include modulation of neurosteroidogenesis through ligands of the translocator protein 18 kDa (TSPO), and the pregnane xenobiotic receptor (PXR), as well as targeting of specific neurosteroidogenic enzymes like 17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 10 (17β-HSD10) or P450 side chain cleavage (P450scc). Enhanced neurosteroidogenesis through these targets may be beneficial for neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease and age-related dementia, but also for neuropsychiatric diseases, including alcohol use disorders.

neuroactive steroids
3α,5α-THP (allopregnanolone)
translocator protein 18 kDa (TSPO)
pregnane xenobiotic receptor (PXR)
17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 10 (17β-HSD10)
P450 side chain cleavage (P450scc)
Alzheimer's disease
alcoholism

Introduction

Neuroactive steroids are endogenous neuromodulators that rapidly alter neuronal excitability by binding to membrane receptors (1). They can be synthesized in the brain de novo from cholesterol, in which case they have been termed neurosteroids (2), or can reach the brain from peripheral steroidogenic organs such as adrenals and gonads, and are locally metabolized (i.e. aromatization of testosterone into estradiol) (3). The synthesis of neuroactive steroids requires the translocation of cholesterol across the mitochondrial membrane, which occurs through a molecular complex formed by the translocator protein 18 kDa (TSPO), the steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR), the voltage-dependent anion channel protein (VDAC), and the adenine nucleotide transporter protein (ANT). In the mitochondria, cholesterol is converted to pregnenolone by the P450 side-chain cleavage enzyme (P450scc); pregnenolone diffuses into the cytosol where it is further metabolized into different neuroactive steroids, as shown in Figure 1. Although TSPO, the rate-limiting step in neuroactive steroid synthesis, is highly expressed in microglia and astrocytes, but less abundant in neurons, neurosteroidogenesis occurs primarily in principal neurons of several brain areas that possess the necessary enzymatic machinery to convert cholesterol into neuroactive steroids (4).

The most potent neuroactive steroids are the progesterone metabolite (3α,5α)-3-hydroxypregnan-20-one (3α,5α-THP or allopregnanolone) and the deoxycorticosterone (DOC) metabolite (3α,5α)-3,21-dihydroxypregnan-20-one (3α,5α-THDOC or allotetrahydrodeoxycorticosterone), which enhance γ-amino-butyric type A (GABAA) receptor mediated neurotransmission and produce inhibitory neurobehavioral effects (5). The 3α,5α-reduced metabolites of testosterone and dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA), 3α,5α-androstandiol and 3α,5α-androsterone, respectively, also potentiate GABAA receptors, albeit with less potency (6). Specific binding sites for neuroactive steroids have been identified on the α subunits of the GABAA receptor that allosterically modulate binding to GABA and benzodiazepine recognition sites (7). At nanomolar concentrations, 3α,5α-THP enhances affinity of GABA for its receptor, while at micromolar concentrations, it directly activates the receptor channel. 3α,5α-THP and 3α,5α-THDOC modulate both synaptic and extrasynaptic GABAA receptors albeit with higher potency at extrasynaptic receptors that contain δ subunits (5, 6). 3α,5α-THP also modulates serotonin type 3 receptors, neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors, and voltage-activated calcium channels, although with micromolar potency (8). Another site of 3α,5α-THP action, the nuclear pregnane xenobiotic receptor (PXR) has been recently identified (9). In contrast, the sulfated derivative of pregnenolone inhibits GABA release, binds with high affinity to, and promotes trafficking of N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors, thus exerting excitatory actions (10). It is still unclear how neuroactive steroids act on their membrane receptor targets, whether it is through paracrine or autocrine mechanisms or by intracellular lateral diffusion through the cell membrane (11). Further, in addition to 3α,5α-THP's action at the aforementioned pharmacodynamics targets, it may also have homeostatic pharmacokinetic effects through its actions at nuclear PXR (9).

Pharmacological properties

Neuroactive steroids exert several psychopharmacological actions such as anxiolytic, antidepressant, anticonvulsant, sedative, anesthetic, analgesic and amnesic effects, likely due to their actions on GABAA receptors (12-18). Moreover, 3α,5α-THP promotes sexual behavior of female rodents (19). Neuroactive steroids also possess rewarding properties in rodents (20, 21), and can modulate ethanol or cocaine intake (22-24). Indeed, acute administration of several drugs of abuse, like alcohol, nicotine, morphine, γ-hydroxy-butyric acid (GHB) or Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol, increases brain and plasma concentrations of 3α,5α-THP and/or its precursors progesterone and pregnenolone in rats or mice (25-30) and this increase is thought to contribute to their rewarding effects.

In addition to these psychopharmacological effects, neuroactive steroids exert neuroprotective, neurotrophic and antiapoptotic effects in animal models of traumatic brain injury, spinal cord injury, peripheral neuropathy, cerebral ischemia, stroke, seizure disorder, and of neurodegenerative diseases such as multiple sclerosis, Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, Nieman Pick type C disease (31-44). More recently, an anti-tumor effect of progesterone has been reported in experimental models of glioblastoma multiforme (45).

Physiological significance

Neuroactive steroid concentrations fluctuate in response to physiological conditions like stress, development, ovarian cycle, pregnancy and post-partum and their fluctuations have been associated with changes in GABAA receptor plasticity.

Neuroactive steroids are increased in rats and humans following acute stress and this effect may represent a homeostatic mechanism to restore the altered hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis function (46, 47). The neuroactive steroid response to stress is a complex phenomenon that involves adaptations in GABAA receptor plasticity and appears to differ across species (for recent reviews see (23, 48)).

Neuroactive steroid concentrations also fluctuate across development. Brain levels of 3α,5α-THP are elevated in the embryonic rat, decrease around birth, show a transient increase on days 10-14, and remain low until puberty (49). The onset of puberty is associated with a rapid elevation in 3α,5α-THP levels and a marked increase in extrasynaptic α4βδ GABAA receptors, the main target of 3α,5α-THP, through which this steroid is thought to increase excitability and, thus exert the “paradoxical effect” of increasing anxiety in pubertal female mice (50).

Moreover, neuroactive steroids fluctuate across the ovarian cycle: progesterone and 3α,5α-THP levels are increased in mouse brain during diestrous (51) and in women's plasma during the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle (52). These changes are accompanied by increased expression of the δ subunit and decreased expression of the γ2 subunit of the GABAA receptor, with subsequent increase in tonic inhibition and decreased seizure susceptibility and anxiety (53).

Levels of progesterone and 3α,5α-THP increase markedly during pregnancy in both rats and women (54, 55) and decrease immediately prior to parturition in rats, before returning to baseline levels two days after delivery (54). These abrupt changes in steroid concentrations were associated with changes in GABAA receptor subunit expression that were thought to contribute to post-partum depressive symptoms (54, 56, 57).

Pharmacological treatments with steroids, which affect brain 3α,5α-THP levels, modify GABAA receptor plasticity. Steroid withdrawal from long-term exposure of progesterone or 3α,5α-THP markedly increases hippocampal α4 and δ subunit expression, with subsequent changes in receptor function, sensitivity to benzodiazepines and increased anxiety and seizure susceptibility (58). Long-term administration of ethinyl-estradiol and levonorgestrel, two of the synthetic steroids most frequently used in hormonal contraceptives, decreased cerebral cortical and hippocampal pregnenolone, progesterone and 3α,5α-THP concentrations and these changes were associated with increased expression of the GABAA receptor γ2 subunit, and increased anxiety-like behavior in adult female rats (59-61). Neonatal administration of β-estradiol-3-benzoate to female rats, a treatment that affects sexual differentiation of the brain (62), induces a marked and persistent decrease in the cerebrocortical and hypothalamic concentrations of 3α,5α-THP in adulthood, which is associated with compensatory changes in GABAA receptor subunit expression (63, 64). Likewise, changes in 3α,5α-THP milieu during development, induced by neonatal finasteride administration, increase the expression of hippocampal α4/δ GABAA receptors and induce anxiety-like behavior in adulthood (65).

The molecular underpinnings for the steroid-induced plasticity of GABAA receptors are not quite understood. A recent study has reported increased phosphorylation and membrane trafficking of α4 subunit-containing GABAA receptors promoted by 3α,5α-THDOC (66), a novel mechanism by which neuroactive steroids may affect GABAA receptor expression and function.

Pathological significance and therapeutic implications

Neurosteroidogenesis is impaired in several neuropsychiatric and neurodegenerative diseases (Table 1). For instance, a reduction in the concentrations of several neuroactive steroids (3α,5α-THP, 3α,5β-THP, 3α,5α-THDOC, 3α,5α- and 3α,5β-androsterone), or their precursors (pregnenolone, progesterone, DOC, DHEA) was reported in serum and/or cerebrospinal fluid of patients with major depression, premenstrual dysphoric disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder, schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and in abstinent alcoholics (67-74). Likewise, brain concentrations of progesterone and 3α,5α-THP are altered in animal models of anxiety/depression (75-77) and post-traumatic stress disorder (78). Moreover, patients with male pattern hair loss treated with the 5α-reductase blocker finasteride report increased symptoms of depression and show altered levels of pregnenolone, progesterone, dihydroprogesterone, 3α,5α-THP, testosterone, dihydrotestosterone, 3α,5α- and 3α,5β-androstandiol, and 17β-estradiol even after drug discontinuation (79). It is not clear whether the impaired neurosteroidogenesis contributes to the disease outcome or whether it is the result of altered brain homeostasis. Interestingly, pharmacological treatment with antidepressants like fluoxetine, reboxetine, venlafaxine, imipramine or mirtazapine, but also with antipsychotics like clozapine and olanzapine, or mood stabilizers like carbamazepine or lithium, restores central and peripheral concentrations of 3α,5α-THP in rats and humans (68), suggesting that neuroactive steroids may contribute to the therapeutic efficacy of antidepressant medications.

Impaired neurosteroidogenesis has also been reported in patients with schizophrenia and it has been suggested that elevations of pregnenolone and 3α,5α-THP may contribute to the therapeutic efficacy of clozapine and olanzapine (80). Indeed, adjunct treatment with pregnenolone improves cognition and negative symptoms in patients with schizophrenia (81), suggesting that neuroactive steroids contribute to schizophrenia pathophysiology.

Given their anticonvulsant properties, neuroactive steroids have also been proposed as therapeutic agents for epilepsy. Clinical trials with ganaxolone are under way in subjects with epilepsy (82). Progesterone treatment is effective at reducing seizures among women with catamenial epilepsy and 3α,5α-THP mediates these effects (83). Neuroactive steroids are preferred over the classical benzodiazepine treatment because of their lack of anticonvulsant tolerance and because of their neuroprotective properties that contribute to reduce neuroexcitotoxicity and neuronal damage (84).

The discovery of the neuroprotective, neurotrophic and anti-inflammatory properties of neuroactive steroids has prompted numerous investigations into their therapeutic potential for neurodegenerative diseases. Impaired neurosteroidogenesis has been found in animal models as well as in humans with multiple sclerosis (39, 85, 86), Alzheimer's disease (42, 87-89), Parkinson's disease (90), traumatic brain injury (91), diabetes (92), suggesting that neuroactive steroids may contribute to the neuropathological processes of these diseases (93). Indeed, the reduction in 3α,5α-THP content correlated with severity of Alzheimer's disease in humans (89). Thus, restoring neuroactive steroid concentrations may represent a useful therapeutic approach for these neurodegenerative disorders. Several preclinical studies have been successful in this respect. For instance 3α,5α-THP promotes neurogenesis, improves learning and memory and ameliorated the pathology burden in the triple transgenic AD (3xTgAD) mouse model (42, 94, 95). 3α,5α-THP has also shown therapeutic efficacy in animal models of multiple sclerosis (39), Parkinson's disease (43), Niemann-Pick type C disease (44), diabetic neuropathy (96), traumatic brain injury (31), and stroke (97).

Taken together, this evidence suggests that neuroactive steroids may have therapeutic utility in several neuropsychiatric and neurologic disorders. However, direct administration of 3α,5α-THP has several challenges that limit its therapeutic use. These include a short half-life (98), low bioavailability and poor solubility in aqueous formulations, which limits its oral administration (99), development of tolerance (100), side effects such as sedation (98), memory impairment (101), and addiction potential (20, 21, 102). Thus, different approaches to target the neuroactive steroid biosynthetic pathway have been explored. This review summarizes recent advances in neurosteroidogenesis and highlights the importance of modulating neuroactive steroid synthesis as a putative therapeutic approach for neuropsychiatric and neurodegenerative diseases that affect millions of people worldwide.

Translocator protein as a therapeutic target for Alzheimer's disease

The translocator protein (TSPO) is a five transmembrane structure located at the outer and inner mitochondrial membrane contact sites, expression of which is enriched in steroidogenic organs (103). Activation of TSPO by synthetic TSPO ligands elicits pleiotropic neuroprotective and cognitive benefits, mechanistically linked to regulation of mitochondrial function, including the facilitation of mitochondrial cholesterol import for steroidogenesis (104). Numerous endogenous ligands of TSPO have also been identified, including diazepam binding inhibitor (DBI), triakontatetraneuropeptide (TTN), phospholipase A2 (PLA2), and protoporphyrin IX, which also have the ability to stimulate mitochondrial cholesterol import and neurosteroidogenesis (104-106). Recent studies using TSPO-knockout mice indicate that TSPO function in steroidogenesis may be tissue specific, playing a crucial role in the adrenal but not the testes (107-111). Although the role of TSPO in steroidogenesis in the brain remains to be addressed using similar models, numerous studies have demonstrated the ability of TSPO ligands to increase neuroactive steroid hormone production in the brain by increasing cholesterol supply to P450scc at the inner mitochondrial membrane, which is the rate-limiting step in neurosteroidogenesis (112-118).

Alzheimer's disease is a neurodegenerative disorder that leads to memory loss and cognitive impairment; it is characterized by the accumulation of beta amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles in the brain (119). Age-related depletion of neuroactive steroid levels is an established risk factor for Alzheimer's disease, with neuroactive steroids having numerous beneficial effects in animal models of Alzheimer's disease, including reducing accumulation of the toxic beta amyloid (Aβ) peptide, thought to be the toxic principle driving Alzheimer's disease degenerative cascades (119). TSPO ligands that stimulate the synthesis of protective neuroactive steroids directly in the brain offer a novel therapeutic approach aimed at harnessing the protective actions of neuroactive steroids for the prevention and/or treatment of Alzheimer's disease.

In the brain, TSPO is predominantly expressed in astrocytes and microglia, with low levels also observed in neurons following injury or during repair (120). TSPO is a sensitive marker of gliosis, becoming markedly upregulated in glial cells during aging, following injury and in Alzheimer's disease (104). Although TSPO expression is closely linked to gliosis, the specific role of TSPO in glial function remains poorly understood. In Alzheimer's disease, elevated glial TSPO expression is observed early in the disease process and co-localizes with degeneration and neuropathology (121). Consequently TSPO ligands are also under widespread investigation as potential inflammatory biomarkers for in vivo PET imaging in Alzheimer's disease, leading to the development of many new-generation, safe TSPO ligands with the potential to be repurposed for Alzheimer's disease therapy.

The translocator protein forms part of a complex with the VDAC and ANT, and has been implicated in mitochondrial cholesterol import (104). Mitochondrial cholesterol import is the rate limiting step in neuroactive steroid formation. Once localized at the inner mitochondrial membrane, cholesterol is converted to pregnenolone, the precursor to all other neuroactive steroids (see Figure 1). TSPO has a cholesterol recognition amino acid consensus sequence (CRAC) at the C-terminal identified as a cholesterol binding site (122), which is proposed to play a functional role in mediating the transportation of cholesterol across the hydrophilic intermembrane space. Structural studies indicate that ligand binding stabilizes the tertiary structure of TSPO facilitating cholesterol import (123). A common polymorphism at the C-terminal of human TSPO results in conformational changes interfering with the cholesterol binding site (124), which is associated with impaired cholesterol binding and metabolism (122) and reduced ability to produce pregnenolone (125). In addition to cholesterol import, TSPO has also been implicated in other important mitochondrial functions including mitochondrial respiration and ATP production (126), which may also contribute to the protective actions of TSPO ligands.

TSPO ligands have been shown to promote nerve regeneration, increase neuronal survival, reduce oxidative damage, inhibit apoptosis, attenuate gliosis and decrease Aβ accumulation in animal models of traumatic brain injury, excitotoxicity, axotomy and neuropathy, inflammatory disease and Alzheimer's disease (104, 116, 120). For example, in rats, the TSPO ligand, Ro5-4864, reduced reactive gliosis and neuronal loss following kainate acid-induced excitotoxicity (127). In vitro evidence indicates TSPO ligands act directly on glia to reduce inflammatory responses (128, 129), with the TSPO ligand, PK11195, decreasing pro-inflammatory cytokine production in cultured human microglia in response to LPS stimulation. Chronic inflammation and glial dysfunction contribute to the pathological degenerative cascade in Alzheimer's disease, and anti-inflammatory drugs have shown therapeutic promise for Alzheimer's disease (130). In the triple transgenic Alzheimer's disease mouse model (3xTgAD), the TSPO ligand, Ro5-4864, has been shown to reduce gliosis as well as lower accumulation of Aβ and improve functional behavioural outcomes (116). Interestingly, protection against Alzheimer's disease-related pathology was associated with increased brain levels of the protective neuroactive steroids in young-adult but not aged animals, suggesting that neuroactive steroid regulation may not be essential for the TSPO-mediated protective effects in this model.

TSPO ligands also have diverse neuropsychiatric benefits, including anxiolytic, anti-depressive and cognitive-enhancing properties commonly attributed to their ability to increase levels of 3α,5α-THP, progesterone and testosterone (104, 116, 131). Consequently, TSPO ligands may offer symptomatic therapeutic opportunities for a range of neurological disorders, including Alzheimer's disease. For example, the new generation TSPO ligand, XBD-173, reduced anxiety-related behaviour in both rats and humans (117, 132). Mechanistically, the anxiolytic effect of XBD-173 was linked to enhanced GABA neurotransmission as a result of increased production of the neuroactive steroid 3α,5α-THP, which is an allosteric GABAA receptor modulator (117). Neuroactive steroids have well defined, potent, and broad cognitive, behavioural and psychological benefits including improved mood, and reduced anxiety and depression; this is coupled with a favourable side-effect profile, including the absence of sedation, tolerance, withdrawal symptoms or motor impairment (104). Therefore, neurosteroidogenic TSPO ligands may also be therapeutically useful for the treatment of not only the cognitive, but also the neuropsychiatric symptoms of Alzheimer's disease, including anxiety, agitation, depression, apathy and aggression. The treatment of neuropsychiatric symptoms in Alzheimer's disease is difficult and currently available therapies are not particularly effective in the management of these symptoms (133). These neuropsychiatric symptoms drive institutionalization; therefore improvement of currently offered pharmacotherapies has the potential to be valuable in terms of patient and caregiver quality of life.

TSPO offers a promising therapeutic target for Alzheimer's disease, with diverse neuroprotective and psychological benefits identified. Further, many new generation, safe TSPO ligands have been developed for in vivo imaging in humans, which may also prove therapeutically useful in the treatment of Alzheimer's disease. However, determination of the key mechanism(s) of TSPO action is critical for identifying the most efficacious TSPO ligands, optimally translating preclinical findings into clinical use, and rationally developing new TSPO ligands for therapeutic use (131). The recent development of numerous TSPO knockout mouse models will prove invaluable in addressing the role of TSPO in both normal and diseased states, as well as confirming the specificity of drug action.

Pregnane xenobiotic receptor (PXR): a novel target for neuroactive steroid synthesis and action

Neuroactive steroids can have rapid and robust actions in the central nervous system for behaviour. A model that has been utilized to elucidate the requisite role that production of pregnane steroids, such as 3α,5α-THP, have in the brain for behaviours has focused on reproductive endpoints. Several molecules, including TSPO, P450scc, StAR, 3α-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, and 5α-reductase, are downstream of cholesterol in the pregnane neurosteroidogenesis pathway (134-137). Pharmacologically blocking these at any point in this pathway reduces 3α,5α-THP formation in the brain and abolishes the lordosis response of female rodents (reviewed in (138)). More recently, the PXR has been identified as a potential factor upstream of cholesterol metabolism. PXR is a nuclear receptor that binds steroids, such as 3α,5α-THP, and influences transcription of cytochrome P450 enzymes that are involved in metabolism of many factors, including cholesterol and steroids (139-141). Although PXR is generally regarded for its role in the liver, it has been identified in brain regions, involved in motivation, affect and cognition, such as the ventral tegmental area, hippocampus, and cortex in mammals (9, 142-145). PXR is required for production of 3α,5α-THP and its actions for lordosis in the VTA, as well as for anxiety-related behaviours in the hippocampus (9, 143, 144, 146-149). Indeed, these effects of PXR may involve the well-known targets of 3α,5α-THP such as, NMDA and GABAA receptors (149). A question of interest is the role of PXR in other brain targets of steroids for behavioural plasticity, such as that underlying cognitive performance.

Pregnane steroids can enhance cognitive performance in young female rodents. Increased production of 3α,5α-THP with oestrous cycle fluctuations or replacement of progesterone or 3α,5α-THP to ovariectomised rodents is associated with better performance in hippocampal and cortical tasks, such as the object recognition task, as well as increased 3α,5α-THP in these regions (150). These effects persist in the absence of progestin receptors, which are not a typical target of 3α,5α-THP, but not with genetic knockout of 5α-reductase (151, 152). We have been examining the cognitive sequelae of rats with PXR knockout, on a Sprague-Dawley background, generated by Sage Labs. In the object recognition task, PXR-replete rats perform at chance (50 +/- 2% of object investigation time exploring the novel object); however, rats lacking functional PXRs perform below chance (40 +/- 2% of time exploring the novel object). Thus, capacity to form 3α,5α-THP may be critical for object memory among young female rodents.

With aging, there is a different pattern of effects of pregnane steroids in the hippocampus and cortex for cognitive performance, suggesting greater responses to progesterone decline and replacement in the cortex. For example, in addition to age-related decline in reproductive success, there is decline in 3α,5α-THP levels in frontal cortex of female rats (153). Variability in the cognitive response in this rat model of reproductive senescence or “menopause” is associated with 3α,5α-THP levels in the cortex (153). Thus, 3α,5α-THP can have pro-cognitive effects in healthy systems, but the target and patterns of these effects may be sensitive to aging; a question is whether pregnane steroids can improve hippocampal and cortical function in both healthy and compromised systems.

Another approach to investigate the role of pregnane neurosteroidogenesis as a critical target is to assess effects in age-related dementia. We, and others, have shown that people in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease or dementia have lower circulating levels of 3α,5α-THP than do non-demented peers matched for age, gender, education and socioeconomic factors (154). We have also used a double transgenic mouse model of early-onset familial Alzheimer's disease that co-overexpresses mutant forms of amyloid precursor protein and presenilin 1 Δ exon 9 mutation (APPswe+PSEN1Δe9; (155-157)). Comparisons were made following ovariectomy at 6 months of age and administration of chronic subcutaneous pellets of placebo (cholesterol) or progesterone for 6 months. In this mouse model, genetic mutations cause them to develop β-amyloid deposits after 5 months of age, and by 9 months old severe plaque deposits build up in the cortex and hippocampus (155). APPswe+PSEN1Δe9, compared to wild-type mice, had poorer performance on hippocampally-mediated tasks (worse object placement performance and more depressive behaviour in the forced swim task); progesterone improved responding in the wild-type, but not the APPswe+PSEN1e9, mice in these tasks (156, 157; Figure 2). Baseline differences were not observed in cortically-mediated tasks (object recognition or T maze) between the mouse strains, and progesterone improved performance of both wild-type and APPswe-PSEN1Δe9 mice in both of these tasks (156, 157; Figure 2). Additionally, progesterone, compared to vehicle, increased progesterone and 3α,5α-THP in the cortex of both wild-type and APPswe+PSEN1Δe9, but only increased 3α,5α-THP in the hippocampus of wild-type mice (156, 157). Thus, these data suggest that progesterone does not improve APPswe-PSEN1Δe9 behaviour in hippocampally-mediated tasks, like that of wild-type mice, and that they also show deficiencies in their capacity to form 3α,5α-THP in the hippocampus. Whereas, in the prefrontal cortex, they were able to form 3α,5α-THP, and wild-type and APPswe-PSEN1Δe9 mice performed similarly in these tasks, with progesterone administration improving their overall performance.

Studies in people that have been diagnosed with probable Alzheimer's disease and using other Alzheimer's disease mouse models suggests that there may be faulty metabolism effects in Alzheimer's disease relating to pregnane neuroactive steroids (as discussed herein and see (89, 99, 154)). A question of interest is the importance of PXR acting upstream of cholesterol for these effects. Levels of PXR as well as downstream enzymes required to 3α,5α-THP formation, such as P450scc, StAR, 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, and 5α-reductase, were measured by western blotting in the hippocampus and frontal cortex of behaviourally-assessed wild-type and APPswe+PSEN1Δe9 mice. The greatest increases in expression among the APPswe+PSEN1Δe9 mice, compared to their wild-type controls, was for PXR, P450scc, 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, and 5α-reductase in the hippocampus (Figure 2). A different pattern was observed in the cortex with the greatest reductions in expression being for PXR and P450scc (Figure 2). This pattern of effects complements the behavioural effects observed as well as pregnane steroid levels in the hippocampus and cortex (Figure 2), and suggests the importance of additional consideration to neurosteroidogenic enzyme expression and activity in relation to behaviour and steroid levels in future studies. For example, an important follow-up study would be to assess levels of 3α-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase. The findings that 5α-reductase was increased in the hippocampus of the APPswe+PSEN1Δe9 mice, with little difference in progesterone and dihydroprogesterone levels, but a large decrease in 3α,5α-THP levels, suggests that perhaps 3α-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase activity is altered in the transgenic mice. Of further interest is the role of PXR in models of successful cognitive aging as well as neurodegeneration.

There may be beneficial effects of low body mass index and regular fasting to protect against Alzheimer's disease and promote longevity, albeit this is a controversial notion. Although a speculation, it may be that low body mass index and/or fasting may reduce burdens associated with switching from gluconeogenesis and lipolysis and demands for clearance, which would involve PXR and related factors, such as liver X receptor (42, 158, 159). A consideration about protein aggregation is faulty cholesterol metabolism may ultimately result in a neuropathological process. How PXR is related to pro-cognitive and protective effects of pregnane and other steroids and/or as pro-hormones for 3α,5α-THP is of interest. It may be that PXR is acting in the central nervous system, much like in the liver, to regulate metabolising enzymes, receptors, and efflux transporters, to promote homeostasis and brain health. Further investigations to directly address this are needed.

Roles of 17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 10 (17β-HSD10) in neurosteroidogenesis

The circulating lipoprotein is a major source for neurosteroidogenesis even though cholesterol can be de novo synthesized from acetate in neurons and other brain cells. The molecular mechanism for lipoprotein transport into brain cells and for “free” cholesterol transport into mitochondrion has recently been reviewed (160). StAR on the outer mitochondrial membrane plays a key role in importing cholesterol into mitochondrion. StAR interacts with a complex machinery, of which the translocator protein TSPO serves as a downstream portal for cholesterol to move to the inner mitochondrial membrane where the side chain of cholesterol is cleaved by P450scc. As a result, cholesterol is converted to soluble pregnenolone. Since this is a rate-limiting step, overexpression of this side chain cleavage enzyme would generally elevate neuroactive steroid levels (161). Pregnenolone can be further oxidized to progesterone under the catalysis of 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase or exit the mitochondrion without active transport. It was reported (162) that in rat brain 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase is also present in the endoplasmic reticulum. However, the mitochondrion appears to possess a more favourable environment for an oxidative reaction catalyzed by 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, since the ratio of NAD+/NADH in mitochondrion is about two orders of magnitude greater than that in the endoplasmic reticulum. It was also reported (116) that TSPO ligands elicit pleiotropic neuroprotective and cognitive benefits. Whether these effects are linked to the regulation of neuroactive steroid synthesis remains to be determined.

Pregnenolone and progesterone become substrates for P450c17 in the endoplasmic reticulum, where they are converted to DHEA and androstenedione, respectively. As shown in Figure 1, DHEA can be oxidized to androstenedione under the catalysis of 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, and then be further converted to testosterone or estrone, and subsequently to more potent androgen (5α-dihydrotestosterone) and estrogen (17β-estradiol), respectively. On the other hand, progesterone can be oxidized to DOC under the catalysis of 21-hydroxylase. Progesterone and DOC are reduced by NADPH in the endoplasmic reticulum under the catalysis of 5α-reductase and then by AKR1C2 sequentially to form 3α,5α-THP and 3α,5α-THDOC, respectively. 3α,5α-THP as well as 3α,5α-THDOC facilitate affective and motivated social behaviour through non-genomic targets, such as GABAA receptors, glutamate, and dopamine receptors (5, 6, 9). Human AKR1C2 (3α-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type III) plays almost no actual role in the oxidation of 3α,5α-THP and/or 3α,5α-THDOC, because its catalytic efficiency is 7-fold less than that for its backward reduction and only one seventh of its oxidative reaction catalyzed by 17β-HSD10 (163). A more unfavourable factor for its oxidation in the endoplasmic reticulum is the disparity of redox coenzyme concentrations, e.g., the concentration of NADPH is at least one order of magnitude higher than that of NADP+. It seems unfeasible for 3α,5α-THP and/or 3α,5α-THDOC to be effectively inactivated by an oxidative reaction catalyzed by AKR1C2 (3α-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type III). Abnormal levels of 3α,5α-THP and/or 3α,5α-THDOC would certainly be harmful to brain functions. This puzzle was never really solved by implication of 3α-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase catalyzing a reverse reaction between 5α-DHP and 3α,5α-THP as depicted in the figure 2 of Ref. (95). In fact, it was already found (163, 164) and emphasized (165-168) that mitochondrial 17β-HSD10 is essential for the maintenance of homeostasis of 3α,5α-THP and/or 3α,5α-THDOC (see Figure 1). 3α,5α-THP and/or 3α,5α-THDOC metabolism is mainly controlled by a dual enzyme molecular switch, composed of 17β-HSD10 and 3α-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type III (AKR1C2) localized in distinct subcellular compartments, mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum, respectively (164, 168). With regard to the role of 17β-HSD10 in the metabolism of 3α,5α-THP, 17β-HSD10 had been twisted to ABAD (Aβ-binding alcohol dehydrogenase) for unknown reasons, as noticed in Figure 2 of Ref. (95).

The 17β-HSD10, a fascinating protein, is encoded by the HSD17B10 gene, which was first cloned from human brain in 1997 (GenBank accession No. AF037438). The role of 17β-HSD10, after many debates and criticisms, has been clarified in more recent studies (163-174): it plays essential roles in neurosteroidogenesis as well as in the isoleucine degradation pathway. This explains why a mutation(s) of this gene, HSD17B10, may delay the brain development and/or result in the regression of brain functions even in the absence of Aβ peptide (167, 168, 174-176).

It was reported (165, 168-170, 177) that 17β-HSD10 can catalyze the oxidative reaction of 17β-estradiol to oestrone, an inactive oestrogen (see Figure 1). Binding of the oestrogen receptor-α to 17β-HSD10 would inhibit the enzymatic activities of 17β-HSD10 whereas 17β-estradiol itself facilitates the dissociation of a 17β-HSD10-estrogen receptor-α complex (178). As is well known, 17β-estradiol exhibits significant neuroprotective effects. Elevated levels of 17β-HSD10 found in Alzheimer's disease brains (164, 165, 168, 179) may take a part in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease due to an imbalance of neuroactive steroid metabolism (164-170, 174, 177).

It was found that a weak androgen, 3α-androstanediol, could be effectively converted to the most potent androgen, 5α-dihydrotestosterone (5α-DHT), under the catalysis of 17β-HSD10 (172, 173). Mitochondrial 17β-HSD10 plays a key role in the ‘back door’ androgen synthesis pathway especially in castrated animals (165, 168, 172, 173).

17β-HSD10 is involved in the metabolism of several neuroactive steroids such as 17β-estradiol, oestrone, 3α-androstanediol and 3α,5α-THP (see Figure 1). It was demonstrated (180) that such neuroactive steroids are able to improve neuronal bioenergetics significantly. Missense mutation(s) would abolish the catalytic activity of 17β-HSD10 in the isoleucine degradation pathway such that an accumulation of tiglylglycine and 2-methyl-3- hydroxybutyric acid in blood and the excretion of such isoleucine metabolites from urine is a common symptom in patients with 17β-HSD10 deficiency, which was therefore designated as 2-methyl-3- hydroxybutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase (MHBD) deficiency (181). It was reported (174) that mental retardation did not result from the accumulation of isoleucine metabolite, while an imbalance of neuroactive steroid metabolism could be a major cause of neurological handicap associated with brain-type 17β-HSD10 deficiency patients. Elucidation of the roles of 17β-HSD10 in neurosteroidogenesis provides further supports to this hypothesis.

Among the many factors essential for keeping mitochondria healthy, the homeostasis of neuroactive steroids is particularly significant because of its impact on the bioenergetics of brain cells (180). Abnormality of mitochondrial structure and function underlies pathophysiological basis of neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease. Enzymes involved in neurosteroidogenesis are potential therapeutic targets in treatment of neurodegenerative disorders including brain-type HSD10 deficiency and Alzheimer's disease (168, 174-177, 179-181) as well as prostate cancer (172, 173).

Divergent neuroactive steroid responses across species: the case of ethanol-induced neurosteroidogenesis

Alcohol's effects on neuroactive steroid concentrations are the most well characterized among species. Pioneering studies in rats showed that systemic administration of ethanol (1-2.5 g/kg) increases plasma, cerebrocortical and hippocampal levels of the neuroactive steroids 3α,5α-THP and 3α,5α-THDOC in Sprague-Dawley rats (25, 182) and Sardinian alcohol-preferring rats (183). More recently, Cook et al. (184) showed that alcohol differentially affects cellular 3α,5α-THP immunostaining throughout the brain of Wistar rats. In fact, acute ethanol increased 3α,5α-THP immunoreactivity in the medial prefrontal cortex, the hippocampal CA1 pyramidal cell layer, the polymorph cell layer of the dentate gyrus, the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, and the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus. In contrast, ethanol decreased 3α,5α-THP immunoreactivity in the nucleus accumbens and the central nucleus of the amygdala. No changes were observed in the ventral tegmental area, dorsomedial striatum, granule cell layer of the dentate gyrus, or the lateral or basolateral amygdala (184).

The ethanol-induced increase in plasma neuroactive steroids is mediated by the HPA axis, since it is no longer observed in hypophysectomized and adrenalectomized rats (27, 185-187). However, ethanol has also been found to increase 3α,5α-THP in hippocampal minces from intact and adrenalectomized/gonadectomized rats (188, 189), suggesting that it is capable of inducing brain neurosteroidogenesis, independent from peripheral sources. Accordingly, the ethanol-induced increase in cellular 3α,5α-THP immunoreactivity is independent of adrenal activation in the CA1 pyramidal cell layer, dentate gyrus polymorphic layer, bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, and paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus of Wistar rats (190). Likewise, ethanol decreases 3α,5α-THP labelling in the nucleus accumbens “shore” (core-shell border), and central nucleus of the amygdala, independent of adrenal activation. However, in the medial prefrontal cortex ethanol increases 3α,5α-THP immunoreactivity in sham-operated animals, but not in adrenalectomized ones, suggesting that ethanol, directly and independently from peripheral sources, regulates local 3α,5α-THP levels in several subcortical regions, except for the medial prefrontal cortex (190).

Ethanol-induced elevations in neuroactive steroids reach physiologically relevant concentrations that enhance GABAergic transmission and thus, contribute to several behavioural effects of ethanol in rats. Neuroactive steroids modulate ethanol's anticonvulsant effects, sedation, impairment of spatial memory, anxiolytic-like and antidepressant-like actions (see (191) and (23) for review). Each of these behavioural responses is prevented by pre-treatment with the neuroactive steroid biosynthesis inhibitor finasteride and/or by prior adrenalectomy. The hypnotic effect of ethanol is partially blocked by adrenalectomy. Moreover, administration of 5α-dihydroprogesterone, the immediate precursor of 3α,5α-THP, to adrenalectomized rats restores effects of ethanol, showing that brain neuroactive steroid synthesis modulates effects of ethanol. Taken together, these studies suggest that elevations in neuroactive steroids influence many of the GABAergic effects of ethanol in vivo and contribute to sensitivity to behavioural effects of ethanol in rats (23, 191).

Studies on the neurosteroidogenic effects of ethanol in mice have yielded different results depending on the strains and the experimental conditions used. C57BL/6J mice have higher basal plasma neuroactive steroid levels compared to DBA/2J mice and that plasma 3α,5α-THP levels are decreased in C57BL/6J mice and not altered in DBA/2J mice following injection of 2 g/kg ethanol (182). Moreover, acute ethanol administration (1-4 g/kg) failed to alter cerebrocortical and hippocampal levels of 3α,5α-THP and progesterone in male C57BL/6J and DBA/2J mice, despite inducing a marked increase in brain and plasma corticosterone levels, a measure of HPA axis activation (192). Other studies reported that injection of 2 g/kg ethanol increased whole brain 3α,5α-THP levels in male DBA/2J (193) but not C57BL/6J mice (194), while orally consumed ethanol increased whole brain 3α,5α-THP levels in male C57BL/6J mice (194). Overall, these results highlight important species differences in ethanol's neurosteroidogenic effects between rats and mice.

The ethanol-induced changes in 3α,5α-THP content in mice appear to be related to the genetic background of the strain. In the genetic reference population of the C57BL/6J (B6) × DBA/2J (D2) (BXD) recombinant inbred strains, basal cerebral cortical 3α,5α-THP levels across selected strains ranged between 1.81 and 3.72 ng/g, while ethanol-induced changes in cerebral cortical 3α,5α-THP ranged between +4% and +63% (23). Both basal and ethanol-induced cerebral cortical 3α,5α-THP levels in the BXD strains were correlated with some phenotypes of ethanol intake, suggesting that neuroactive steroid responses to ethanol may be associated with excessive alcohol consumption (23).

The neurosteroidogenic effects of ethanol in humans have been examined in few studies, leading to inconsistent results. Elevated 3α,5α-THP plasma levels were reported in male and female adolescents seen in the emergency room for alcohol intoxication (195, 196), which likely resulted in high blood ethanol concentrations. In contrast, laboratory administration of low or moderate doses of ethanol was found not to alter plasma levels of 3α,5α-THP and other GABAergic neuroactive steroids (182, 197) or to decrease 3α,5α-THP levels (198) in healthy volunteers. Different ethanol doses, analytic methods to measure neuroactive steroids, age of the subjects or environmental factors that influence neuroactive steroid synthesis in humans may account for these inconsistent results. Indeed, the same dose of ethanol consumed in the human laboratory studies mentioned above (∼80 mg/dl) produced no effect in rats when administered systemically (182), suggesting that dose might be a key factor in the difference between rat and human studies. However, the possibility that ethanol may increase brain levels of 3α,5α-THP, without affecting its peripheral concentrations, remains open. In fact, some subjective effects of ethanol are diminished by prior administration of finasteride (199) or dutasteride (200), two inhibitors of 3α,5α-THP biosynthesis, suggesting that 3α,5α-THP may play a role in ethanol's actions in humans. Moreover, dutasteride reduced subsequent alcohol consumption in subjects classified as heavy drinkers (200). Likewise, men, who took finasteride for treatment of male pattern hair loss, reported a decrease in alcohol consumption, which was greater in those subjects who consumed the most alcohol (201). Taken together, these results further support the hypothesis that neuroactive steroids may mediate sensitivity to alcohol in humans.

Studies on the role of GABAergic neuroactive steroids in alcohol dependence have shown that chronic ethanol consumption in rats induces tolerance to the neurosteroidogenic effects of ethanol and ethanol-dependent rats have a blunted elevation in plasma and brain neuroactive steroid content, likely the result of a blunted HPA axis function (191). In ethanol-dependent C57BL/6J mice, cellular 3α,5α-THP immunoreactivity is increased in the CA3 hippocampus, but decreased in medial prefrontal cortex, ventral tegmental area, nucleus accumbens core, dorsolateral striatum and lateral amygdala (202). Likewise, 3α,5α-THP and 3α,5α-THDOC serum levels are decreased in human alcoholics during alcohol withdrawal and return to normal levels upon recovery (73). Overall, these findings suggest that chronic ethanol consumption leads to a dysregulation in neuroactive steroid biosynthesis, with a blunted neuroactive steroid tone that might attenuate ethanol sensitivity and thus contribute to alcohol dependence. Indeed, risk of alcohol dependence is associated with polymorphic variation in the enzymes 5α-reductase and 3α-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase implicated in the conversion of progesterone and deoxycorticosterone to their neuroactive metabolites 3α,5α-THP and 3α,5α-THDOC, further providing indirect evidence that neuroactive steroids may contribute to alcohol sensitivity in humans (203).

Ethanol-induced elevations of GABAergic neuroactive steroids may protect against the risk for alcohol dependence (191). Diminished elevations of GABAergic neuroactive steroids following ethanol exposure would result in reduced sensitivity to the anxiolytic, sedative, anticonvulsant, cognitive-impairing and discriminative stimulus properties of ethanol. Reduced sensitivity to ethanol is associated with greater risk for the development of alcoholism; thus, restoration of ethanol sensitivity by re-establishing the neuroactive steroid tone in alcohol-dependent subjects may have therapeutic utility for prevention of alcohol consumption and/or relapse. In agreement, preclinical studies have found that administration of endogenous (epiallopregnanolone) or synthetic (3α,5β-20-oxo-pregnane-3-carboxylic acid) neuroactive steroids, as well as of the precursor pregnenolone, reduced ethanol self-administration in alcohol-preferring rats (204, 205). Likewise, recombinant adeno-associated serotype 2 vector mediated over-expression of P450 side chain cleavage (P450scc; the rate limiting enzyme in steroid synthesis) in the ventral tegmental area of alcohol preferring rats reduced ethanol reinforcement and consumption (161). This effect was long-lasting and was associated with an increase in 3α,5α-THP immunoreactivity in this brain area, suggesting that GABAergic neuroactive steroids may contribute to ethanol reinforcement. Indeed, P450scc over-expression in the nucleus accumbens, a brain region that plays a key role in ethanol reinforcement, but is insensitive to ethanol-induced neurosteroidogenesis (184), did not alter operant ethanol self-administration or 3α,5α-THP immunoreactivity (190), suggesting that the neuroactive steroid response to ethanol plays a role in the mechanisms that regulate its voluntary consumption. Increased 3α,5α-THP levels modulate the activity of neurons in the ventral tegmental area or influence ethanol's action upon these cells, thereby reducing ethanol reinforcement and consumption.

Thus, targeted modulation of neuroactive steroid synthesis through administration of neuroactive steroid precursors or through increased expression of specific neurosteroidogenic enzymes may represent a useful therapeutic approach for alcoholism, as well as for other neurological or psychiatric diseases associated with altered neurosteroidogenesis. Species differences in the neurosteroidogenic effects of ethanol may be the result of genetic diversity, which is also often observed across individuals of the same species. Thus, it will be important to consider genetic diversity in neuroactive steroid biosynthesis for their therapeutic actions.

Conclusions

The concept that neuroactive steroids may represent potential protective agents for different pathologies of the central and peripheral nervous system has been explored in detail in several experimental models. However, since steroid receptors are widely expressed in many tissues, a therapeutic strategy that uses exogenous neuroactive steroids could also evoke endocrine side effects. Therefore, alternative strategies, based on pharmacological agents or gene therapy tools, able to increase the synthesis of endogenous neuroactive steroids directly in the nervous system have been recently explored. Thus, the present review discussed the potential therapeutic activity elicited by targeting of steroidogenic enzymes, like 17β-HSD10, or P450scc, as well as that elicited by inducers of steroidogenesis, like for instance the TSPO and PXR. Indeed, even if the role of TSPO in steroid hormone biosynthesis has been recently challenged (108, 111, 206), the protective effects exerted by ligands of this mitochondrial receptor remain a promising field of research for neurodegeneration occurring in central and peripheral nervous system (207, 208). On this line of thinking, together with PXR, it is important to recall that also the activation of liver X receptor has been demonstrated to be an interesting pharmacological tool. Indeed, liver X receptor in adrenal glands modulates StAR (209), and its activation induces genes involved in cholesterol efflux, promoting cholesterol utilization (209). Moreover, as recently demonstrated in an experimental model of diabetes, activation of liver X receptor increases neuroactive steroid levels directly in the central (210) as well as the peripheral nervous system (211). In agreement, activation of liver X receptors exerts protective effects in diabetic peripheral neuropathy (211), global or focal cerebral ischemia (212), as well as in neurodegenerative diseases, such as multiple sclerosis, Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases (93, 213).

Altogether, the observations here reported indicate that the assessment of neurosteroidogenesis and of its physiological and pharmacological control may represent a promising topic of research that deserves further exploration in preclinical and clinical studies.

The data discussed in this review were presented in a round table organized during the 8th International Meeting on Steroids and Nervous System (Torino, February 14-18, 2015) with the support of the British Society for Neuroendocrinology and of Wiley &amp; Sons publisher. We acknowledge financial support from NIH UO1-AA013641 and Sardinia Region (L.R. n3/2008) to P.P., JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number 26830038 to A.M.B., NIMH MH06769801 and RMH067698B, and NIGMS P20GM103395 to C.A.F., New York State Office for People With Developmental Disabilities to S.Y.Y., NIH UO1-AA020935 and the Bowles Center for Alcohol Studies to A.L.M., Fondazione Cavalieri Ottolenghi to G.C.P., Fondazione Cariplo (grant number 2012-0547) to R.C.M.

Figure 1 Outline of neurosteroidogenesis. Neuroactive steroids and neurosteroidogenic enzymes that are potential key therapeutic targets are shown in green. The side chain of cholesterol is cleaved by P450scc as cholesterol is transported to the inner mitochondrial membrane and thus converted to pregnenolone. Soluble pregnenolone can enter into the endoplasmic reticulum unaided. 17β-HSD10 catalyzes the oxidation of neuroactive steroids in mitochondria with NAD+ as the coenzyme. This enzyme most effectively catalyzes the oxidation of 3α,5α-THP and 3α,5α-THDOC such that it is essential for the homeostasis of these neuroactive steroids, which was controlled by a dual enzyme molecular switch, composed of 17β-HSD10 and 3α-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type III (AKR1C2) localized in distinct subcellular compartments, mitochondria and ER, respectively (164, 168). The catalytic efficiencies (kcat/Km) of 17β-HSD10 are as high as 427 and 1,381 min-1 •mM-1 for the oxidation of 3α,5α-THP and 3α,5α-THDOC, respectively (163, 164). Abbreviations: 5α-DHP, 5α-dihydroprogesterone; DOC, deoxycorticosterone; 5α-DHDOC, 5α-dihydrodeoxycorticosterone; 3α,5α-THP, (3α,5α)-3-hydroxypregnan-20-one or allopregnanolone; 3α,5α-THDOC, (3α,5α)-3,21-dihydroxypregnan-20-one or allotetrahydrodeoxycorticosterone; HSD, hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase.

Figure 2 Figure depicts behaviour, pregnane steroid concentrations, and expression patterns in the hippocampus (top panel) and cortex (bottom panel) for 12 month old transgenic mice that co-overexpress mutant forms of amyloid precursor protein and presenilin 1 Δ exon 9 mutation (APPswe+PSEN1Δe9; a murine model of early-onset familial Alzheimer's disease- AD), compared to their age-matched wild-type controls (n = 4-6). For all measures, mice had data collected at 12 months of age, following 6 months of continuous progesterone (P4) administration via subcutaneously implanted pellets (25 mg, 90-day release at 6 months of age and then 9 months of age; purchased from Innovative Research of America). Behaviour: Performance in a memory task assessing the hippocampus (object placement) and cortex (object recognition) is depicted and based upon comparing the Alzheimer's disease mice to wild-type controls (methods and raw data published in (146)). Pregnane steroid concentrations: Levels of P4, dihydroprogesterone (DHP), and 3α,5α-THP (THP) were measured using radioimmunoassay of dissected out hippocampus and cortex (methods and raw data published in (146)). Protein expression: Expression patterns in hippocampus and cortex were determined by western blotting, of specific proteins (pregnane xenobiotic receptor (PXR), cytochrome P450-dependent side chain cleavage- P450scc, steroidogenic acute regulatory protein- StAR, 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase- 3β-HSD, and 5α-reductase- 5α-R). The mean of relative intensity (relative density of protein of interest to actin control) in hippocampus and cortex of Alzheimer's disease mice were compared to that determined in wild-type controls. A standard western blotting protocol (146) was employed to assess these factors in hippocampus and prefrontal cortex tissues (a description of tissue collection from animal subjects, brain storage, dissection and preparation is described in (146)). Protein concentration for each sample was determined with a Nanodrop spectrometer. Samples of equal protein concentrations were then prepared for loading on to NuPAGE Bis-Tris Mini Gels (4-12% SDS Polyacrylamide) by combining them with 2.5 μl of NuPAGE LDS (4×) sample buffer, 1 μl of NuPAGE Reducing Agent (10×), 6.5 μl of deionized water (Invitrogen). Electrophoresis was then conducted with running gels with 1× MOPS running buffer with one lane reserved for the protein ladder and one for the positive control (liver homogenate). Protein was then transferred to nitrocellulose using 1× NuPAGE Transfer buffer. The blots were blocked in 5% milk PBS-10% tween solution. All blots were probed with primary antibodies (Ab) at 4°C overnight. Primary (1°) Ab for PXR, P450, StAR, and 5α-reductase were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology; 3β-HSD was received from Dr. Penning, and actin was purchased from Sigma. The secondary (2°) Ab was a Goat Anti-Mouse IG (H+L) Horseradish Peroxidase Conjugate (Bio-rad, Hercules, CA, USA). Concentrations of Ab were: PXR (1° Ab concentration 1:1000; 2° Ab concentration 1:2500); P450 (1° Ab concentration 1:2500; 2° Ab concentration 1:2500); StAR (1° Ab concentration 1:1000; 2° Ab concentration 1:2500); 3β-HSD (1° Ab concentration 1:2500; 2° Ab concentration 1:2500); 5α-reductase (1° Ab concentration 1:1500; 2° Ab concentration 1:2500), actin (1° Ab concentration 1:500; 2° Ab concentration 1:2500). Blots were probed with 2° Ab for 1 hour on a shaker at room temperature (Bio-rad). Results were visualized using DuoLuX Chemiluminescent/Fluorescent Substrate Kit for Peroxidase (Vector Laboratories), imaged on a ChemiDoc XRS (Bio-rad), and analyzed using ImageJ software. Expression was not detected (ND) for 3β-HSD in either group or for 5α-reductase in the wild-type controls, albeit Alzheimer's disease mice showed 2.0 relative intensity. Relative intensity values in the hippocampus (mean ± sem) for PXR (wildtype 0.4 ± 0.2; AD 1.0 ± 0.2), P450 (wildtype 0.3 ± 0.1; AD 1.4 ± 0.3), StAR (wildtype 0.6 ± 0.1; AD 1.0 ± 0.3), 3α-HSD (wildtype 0.4 ± 0.2; AD 0.8 ± 0.5) and 5α-reductase (wildtype 0.5 ± 0.2; AD 1.0 ± 0.7). Relative intensity values in the cortex (mean ± sem) for PXR (wildtype 2.2 ± 1.2; AD 1.0 ± 0.3), P450 (wildtype 1.7 ± 0.8; AD 0.6 ± 0.1), StAR (wildtype 1.4 ± 0.8; AD 0.9 ± 0.2), 3α-HSD (wildtype ND; AD ND) and 5α-reductase (wildtype ND; AD 2.0 ± 1.2).

Table 1 Preclinical and clinical evidences for dysregulation in neurosteroidogenesis in neuropsychiatric and neurologic disorders.

Disease	Experimental studies	
	
	Mouse / Rat	Human	
Neuropsychiatric disorders	
Anxiety disorders	Anxiolytic-like effects of 3α, 5α-THP in several animal models (12, 68).
Anxiolytic-like effects of TSPO ligands in animal models (117).	Increased serum levels of 3α, 5α-THP and 3α, 5β-THP, and decreased 3β, 5α-THP levels in patients with panic disorder (68).
No change in 3α, 5α-THP levels in patients with generalized anxiety disorders (68).
Decreased TSPO expression in platelets and lymphocytes (104).
Anti-panic effects of TSPO ligands in experimental induced anxiety (117).	
Depression	Antidepressant-like effects of 3α, 5α-THP (13).
Decreased brain 3α, 5α-THP levels in animal models of depression, and normalization by antidepressant treatment (75-77).	Decreased cerebrospinal fluid and serum 3α, 5α-THP levels, and normalization by antidepressant drugs (214, 215).
Decreased serum levels of pregnenolone, progesterone, 3α, 5α-THP, 3α, 5β-THP, DHEA, 3α, 5α-androsterone and 3α, 5β-androsterone in women with a history of depression (69).	
Premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD)	Progesterone withdrawal model of PMDD associated with a upregulation of extrasynaptic α4/δ GABAA receptors and decreased sensitivity to benzodiazepines (58).	Symptoms start at ovulation, paralleling the rise in progesterone and 3α, 5α-THP levels, and severity reaches its maximum at the neuroactive steroid peak (70).
Administration of progesterone or 3α, 5α-THP exacerbates negative mood symptoms in PMDD patients (70).	
Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)	Decreased brain 3α, 5α-THP in the socially isolated mouse model of PTSD (78).
Ganaxolone improves behavioral deficits in the socially isolated mouse model of PTSD (216).	Decreased cerebrospinal fluid 3α, 5α-THP concentrations (217).
Decreased TSPO expression in platelets (104).	
Bipolar disorder	--	Increased pregnenolone and DHEA levels in posterior cingulate and parietal cortex (72).
Increased plasma progesterone and 3α, 5α-THP levels (218).
Decreased TSPO expression in platelets (104).	
Schizophrenia	Increased cerebral cortical 3α, 5α-THP following olanzapine and clozapine administration in rats (80).	Increased pregnenolone and DHEA levels in posterior cingulate and parietal cortex (72).
Decreased 3α, 5α-THP levels in parietal cortex (72).
Decreased TSPO expression in platelets (104).
Pregnenolone treatment improves cognition and negative symptoms in patients with schizophrenia (81).	
Addiction	3α, 5α-THP has rewarding properties (20, 21, 219).
Neuroactive steroids have ethanol-like discriminative stimulus properties (22, 102, 191).
Acute administration of psychoactive drugs with abuse liability increases neuroactive steroid levels (25-30).
Neuroactive steroids modulate ethanol and cocaine intake (22, 204, 205, 220-222).
Overexpression of P450scc in the ventral tegmental area increases 3α, 5α-THP and reduces ethanol reinforcement and consumption (161).	Increased plasma 3α, 5α-THP levels in adolescents following alcohol intoxication (195, 196).
Decreases serum 3α, 5α-THP and 3α, 5α-THDOC during alcohol withdrawal (73).
Neuroactive steroids mediate subjective effects of ethanol (198, 200).	
Neurological disorders	
Epilepsy	Anticonvulsant effects of 3α, 5α-THP in several animal models (14, 84).	Clinical trials with ganaxolone (82) and progesterone (83).
3α, 5α-THP treatment for pediatric super-refractory status epilepticus (223).	
Alzheimer's disease	Decreased neuroactive steroid precursors in brain of 3×TgAD mice (88).
Neuroprotective and neurotrophic effects of 3α, 5α-THP in 3×TgAD mice (42, 94).
Up-regulation of glial TSPO (104).
TSPO ligands reverse AD-related neuropathology in 3×TgAD mice (116).
Progesterone administration increases progesterone and 3α, 5α-THP levels in the cortex of APPswe+PSEN1Δe9 mice; it also improves cortically-mediated but not hippocampal-mediated cognitive tasks (156, 157).
Increased 17β-HSD10 expression in brains of Alzheimer's disease mouse models (179).	Decreased prefrontal cortex 3α, 5α-THP levels, which are inversely correlated with neuropathological disease stage (89).
Decreased plasma 3α, 5α-THP levels in people in the early stages of AD (154).
Elevated glial TSPO expression appears early in disease and co-localizes with neuropathology (121).
Increased expression of 17β-HSD10 in activated astrocytes (164).	
Parkinson's disease	3α, 5α-THP restores tyrosine hydroxylase neurons and improves motor performance in MTPT-treated mice (43).	Decreased dihydroprogesterone and 3α, 5α-THP levels in plasma and liquor (90).	
Multiple sclerosis	Decreased expression of 3α-HSD and 3α, 5α-THP levels in brain of mice with experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (39).
3α, 5α-THP treatment attenuates experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis neuropathology in mice (39).
Neuroactive steroid levels in rats are altered in a brain region and sex dependent manner (85).	Decreased 5α-reductase expression and 3α, 5α-THP levels in the white matter (39).
Increased TSPO expression in white matter lesions correlates with brain damage (104).
Increased levels of neuroactive steroid precursors and decreased levels of dihydroprogesterone, 3α, 5α-THP, and dihydrotestosterone in plasma and cerebrospinal fluid of male patients (86).	
Niemann-Pick type C disease	Decreased steroidogenic enzymes expression, as well as pregnenolone and 3α, 5α-THP brain levels in NP-C mice (44).
Neuroprotective effect of 3α, 5α-THP in NP-C mice (44).	--	
Diabetic neuropathy	Decreased brain and peripheral neuroactive steroid levels in rats with streptozotocin-induced diabetes (92).
Neuroprotective effects of progesterone, dihydroprogesterone and 3α, 5α-THP in streptozotocin-induced diabetic neuropathy in rats (96).	--	
Traumatic brain injury	Neuroprotective effects of progesterone and 3α, 5α-THP in rats (31).
Progesterone and DHEA levels correlate with neurological recovery from TBI in mice (91).	Negative outcome of clinical trials with progesterone (224).	
Stroke	Neuroprotective effects of progesterone and 3α, 5α-THP in mice (97).	Increased TSPO expression in primary lesion and remote areas (104).	


1 Paul SM Purdy RH Neuroactive steroids FASEB J 1992 6 6 2311 22 1347506
2 Baulieu EE Neurosteroids: a novel function of the brain Psychoneuroendocrinology 1998 23 8 963 87 9924747
3 Charlier TD Cornil CA Patte-Mensah C Meyer L Mensah-Nyagan AG Balthazart J Local modulation of steroid action: rapid control of enzymatic activity Front Neurosci 2015 9 83 25852459
4 Agis-Balboa RC Pinna G Zhubi A Maloku E Veldic M Costa E Guidotti A Characterization of brain neurons that express enzymes mediating neurosteroid biosynthesis Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2006 103 39 14602 7 16984997
5 Belelli D Lambert JJ Neurosteroids: endogenous regulators of the GABAA receptor Nat Rev Neurosci 2005 6 7 565 75 15959466
6 Carver CM Reddy DS Neurosteroid interactions with synaptic and extrasynaptic GABAA receptors: regulation of subunit plasticity, phasic and tonic inhibition, and neuronal network excitability Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2013 230 2 151 88 24071826
7 Hosie AM Wilkins ME da Silva HM Smart TG Endogenous neurosteroids regulate GABAA receptors through two discrete transmembrane sites Nature 2006 444 7118 486 9 17108970
8 Rupprecht R Neuroactive steroids: mechanisms of action and neuropsychopharmacological properties Psychoneuroendocrinology 2003 28 2 139 68 12510009
9 Frye CA Paris JJ Walf AA Rusconi JC Effects and mechanisms of 3α,5α,-THP on emotion, motivation, and reward functions involving pregnane xenobiotic receptor Front Neurosci 2012 5 136 22294977
10 Smith CC Gibbs TT Farb DH Pregnenolone sulfate as a modulator of synaptic plasticity Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2014 231 17 3537 56 24997854
11 Akk G Covey DF Evers AS Steinbach JH Zorumski CF Mennerick S Mechanisms of neurosteroid interactions with GABAA receptors Pharmacol Ther 2007 116 1 35 57 17524487
12 Bitran D Hilvers RJ Kellogg CK Anxiolytic effects of 3α-hydroxy-5α[β]-pregnan-20-one: endogenous metabolites of progesterone that are active at the GABAA receptor Brain Res 1991 561 1 157 61 1686744
13 Khisti RT Chopde CT Jain SP Antidepressant-like effect of the neurosteroid 3α-hydroxy-5α-pregnan-20-one in mice forced swim test Pharmacol Biochem Behav 2000 67 1 137 43 11113493
14 Belelli D Bolger MB Gee KW Anticonvulsant profile of the progesterone metabolite 5α-pregnan-3α-ol-20-one Eur J Pharmacol 1989 166 2 325 9 2792198
15 Hogskilde S Wagner J Carl P Sorensen MB Anaesthetic properties of pregnanolone emulsion. A comparison with alphaxolone/alphadolone, propofol, thiopentone and midazolam in a rat model Anaesthesia 1987 42 10 1045 50 3500653
16 Kavaliers M Wiebe JP Analgesic effects of the progesterone metabolite, 3α-hydroxy-5α-pregnan-20-one, and possible modes of action in mice Brain Res 1987 415 2 393 8 3111642
17 Ladurelle N Eychenne B Denton D Blair-West J Schumacher M Robel P Baulieu E Prolonged intracerebroventricular infusion of neurosteroids affects cognitive performances in the mouse Brain Res 2000 858 2 371 9 10708689
18 Johansson IM Birzniece V Lindblad C Olsson T Backstrom T Allopregnanolone inhibits learning in the Morris water maze Brain Res 2002 934 2 125 31 11955475
19 Frye CA Bayon LE Pursnani NK Purdy RH The neurosteroids, progesterone and 3α,5α-THP, enhance sexual motivation, receptivity, and proceptivity in female rats Brain Res 1998 808 1 72 83 9795145
20 Finn DA Phillips TJ Okorn DM Chester JA Cunningham CL Rewarding effect of the neuroactive steroid 3α-hydroxy-5α-pregnan-20-one in mice Pharmacol Biochem Behav 1997 56 2 261 4 9050083
21 Sinnott RS Mark GP Finn DA Reinforcing effects of the neurosteroid allopregnanolone in rats Pharmacol Biochem Behav 2002 72 4 923 9 12062582
22 Purdy RH Valenzuela CF Janak PH Finn DA Biggio G Backstrom T Neuroactive steroids and ethanol Alcohol Clin Exp Res 2005 29 7 1292 8 16088987
23 Porcu P Morrow AL Divergent neuroactive steroid responses to stress and ethanol in rat and mouse strains: relevance for human studies Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2014 231 17 3257 72 24770626
24 Anker JJ Carroll ME The role of progestins in the behavioral effects of cocaine and other drugs of abuse: human and animal research Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2010 35 2 315 33 20398693
25 VanDoren MJ Matthews DB Janis GC Grobin AC Devaud LL Morrow AL Neuroactive steroid 3α-hydroxy-5α-pregnan-20-one modulates electrophysiological and behavioral actions of ethanol J Neurosci 2000 20 5 1982 9 10684899
26 Porcu P Sogliano C Cinus M Purdy RH Biggio G Concas A Nicotine-induced changes in cerebrocortical neuroactive steroids and plasma corticosterone concentrations in the rat Pharmacol Biochem Behav 2003 74 3 683 90 12543235
27 Porcu P Sogliano C Ibba C Piredda M Tocco S Marra C Purdy RH Biggio G Concas A Failure of gamma-hydroxybutyric acid both to increase neuroactive steroid concentrations in adrenalectomized-orchiectomized rats and to induce tolerance to its steroidogenic effect in intact animals Brain Res 2004 1012 1-2 160 8 15158173
28 Grobin AC VanDoren MJ Porrino LJ Morrow AL Cortical 3α-hydroxy-5α-pregnan-20-one levels after acute administration of Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol, cocaine and morphine Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2005 179 3 544 50 15619118
29 Concas A Sogliano C Porcu P Marra C Brundu A Biggio G Neurosteroids in nicotine and morphine dependence Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2006 186 3 281 92 16133140
30 Vallee M Vitiello S Bellocchio L Hebert-Chatelain E Monlezun S Martin-Garcia E Kasanetz F Baillie GL Panin F Cathala A Roullot-Lacarriere V Fabre S Hurst DP Lynch DL Shore DM Deroche-Gamonet V Spampinato U Revest JM Maldonado R Reggio PH Ross RA Marsicano G Piazza PV Pregnenolone can protect the brain from cannabis intoxication Science 2014 343 6166 94 8 24385629
31 Djebaili M Guo Q Pettus EH Hoffman SW Stein DG The neurosteroids progesterone and allopregnanolone reduce cell death, gliosis, and functional deficits after traumatic brain injury in rats J Neurotrauma 2005 22 1 106 18 15665606
32 Labombarda F Gonzalez S Lima A Roig P Guennoun R Schumacher M De Nicola AF Progesterone attenuates astro- and microgliosis and enhances oligodendrocyte differentiation following spinal cord injury Exp Neurol 2011 231 1 135 46 21704617
33 Panzica GC Balthazart J Frye CA Garcia-Segura LM Herbison AE Mensah-Nyagan AG McCarthy MM Melcangi RC Milestones on Steroids and the Nervous System: 10 years of basic and translational research J Neuroendocrinol 2012 24 1 1 15 22188420
34 Melcangi RC Giatti S Pesaresi M Calabrese D Mitro N Caruso D Garcia-Segura LM Role of neuroactive steroids in the peripheral nervous system Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) 2011 2 104 22654839
35 Giatti S Boraso M Melcangi RC Viviani B Neuroactive steroids, their metabolites, and neuroinflammation J Mol Endocrinol 2012 49 3 R125 34 22966132
36 Sayeed I Stein DG Progesterone as a neuroprotective factor in traumatic and ischemic brain injury Prog Brain Res 2009 175 219 37 19660659
37 Guennoun R Labombarda F Gonzalez Deniselle MC Liere P De Nicola AF Schumacher M Progesterone and allopregnanolone in the central nervous system: response to injury and implication for neuroprotection J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 2015 146 48 61 25196185
38 Ciriza I Carrero P Frye CA Garcia-Segura LM Reduced metabolites mediate neuroprotective effects of progesterone in the adult rat hippocampus. The synthetic progestin medroxyprogesterone acetate (Provera) is not neuroprotective J Neurobiol 2006 66 9 916 28 16758493
39 Noorbakhsh F Ellestad KK Maingat F Warren KG Han MH Steinman L Baker GB Power C Impaired neurosteroid synthesis in multiple sclerosis Brain 2011 134 Pt 9 2703 21 21908875
40 Giatti S Caruso D Boraso M Abbiati F Ballarini E Calabrese D Pesaresi M Rigolio R Santos-Galindo M Viviani B Cavaletti G Garcia-Segura LM Melcangi RC Neuroprotective effects of progesterone in chronic experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis J Neuroendocrinol 2012 24 6 851 61 22283602
41 Giatti S Rigolio R Romano S Mitro N Viviani B Cavaletti G Caruso D Garcia-Segura LM Melcangi RC Dihydrotestosterone as a protective agent in chronic experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis Neuroendocrinology 2015 101 4 296 308 25765436
42 Brinton RD Neurosteroids as regenerative agents in the brain: therapeutic implications Nat Rev Endocrinol 2013 9 4 241 50 23438839
43 Adeosun SO Hou X Jiao Y Zheng B Henry S Hill R He Z Pani A Kyle P Ou X Mosley T Farley JM Stockmeier C Paul I Bigler S Brinton RD Smeyne R Wang JM Allopregnanolone reinstates tyrosine hydroxylase immunoreactive neurons and motor performance in an MPTP-lesioned mouse model of Parkinson's disease PLoS One 2012 7 11 e50040 23209637
44 Griffin LD Gong W Verot L Mellon SH Niemann-Pick type C disease involves disrupted neurosteroidogenesis and responds to allopregnanolone Nat Med 2004 10 7 704 11 15208706
45 Atif F Yousuf S Stein DG Anti-tumor effects of progesterone in human glioblastoma multiforme: role of PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 2015 146 62 73 24787660
46 Purdy RH Morrow AL Moore PH Jr Paul SM Stress-induced elevations of gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptor-active steroids in the rat brain Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1991 88 10 4553 7 1852011
47 Girdler SS Straneva PA Light KC Pedersen CA Morrow AL Allopregnanolone levels and reactivity to mental stress in premenstrual dysphoric disorder Biol Psychiatry 2001 49 9 788 97 11331087
48 Gunn BG Cunningham L Mitchell SG Swinny JD Lambert JJ Belelli D GABAA receptor-acting neurosteroids: a role in the development and regulation of the stress response Front Neuroendocrinol 2015 36 28 48 24929099
49 Grobin AC Morrow AL 3α-hydroxy-5α-pregnan-20-one levels and GABAA receptor-mediated 36Cl- flux across development in rat cerebral cortex Brain Res Dev Brain Res 2001 131 1-2 31 9 11718833
50 Shen H Gong QH Aoki C Yuan M Ruderman Y Dattilo M Williams K Smith SS Reversal of neurosteroid effects at α4β2δ GABAA receptors triggers anxiety at puberty Nat Neurosci 2007 10 4 469 77 17351635
51 Corpechot C Collins BE Carey MP Tsouros A Robel P Fry JP Brain neurosteroids during the mouse oestrous cycle Brain Res 1997 766 1-2 276 80 9359616
52 Wang M Seippel L Purdy RH Backstrom T Relationship between symptom severity and steroid variation in women with premenstrual syndrome: study on serum pregnenolone, pregnenolone sulfate, 5α-pregnane-3,20-dione and 3α-hydroxy-5α-pregnan-20-one J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1996 81 3 1076 82 8772579
53 Maguire JL Stell BM Rafizadeh M Mody I Ovarian cycle-linked changes in GABAA receptors mediating tonic inhibition alter seizure susceptibility and anxiety Nat Neurosci 2005 8 6 797 804 15895085
54 Concas A Mostallino MC Porcu P Follesa P Barbaccia ML Trabucchi M Purdy RH Grisenti P Biggio G Role of brain allopregnanolone in the plasticity of γ-aminobutyric acid type A receptor in rat brain during pregnancy and after delivery Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998 95 22 13284 9 9789080
55 Gilbert Evans SE Ross LE Sellers EM Purdy RH Romach MK 3α-reduced neuroactive steroids and their precursors during pregnancy and the postpartum period Gynecol Endocrinol 2005 21 5 268 79 16373246
56 Maguire J Mody I GABAAR plasticity during pregnancy: relevance to postpartum depression Neuron 2008 59 2 207 13 18667149
57 Sanna E Mostallino MC Murru L Carta M Talani G Zucca S Mura ML Maciocco E Biggio G Changes in expression and function of extrasynaptic GABAA receptors in the rat hippocampus during pregnancy and after delivery J Neurosci 2009 29 6 1755 65 19211882
58 Smith SS Shen H Gong QH Zhou X Neurosteroid regulation of GABAA receptors: Focus on the α4 and δ subunits Pharmacol Ther 2007 116 1 58 76 17512983
59 Follesa P Porcu P Sogliano C Cinus M Biggio F Mancuso L Mostallino MC Paoletti AM Purdy RH Biggio G Concas A Changes in GABAA receptor γ2 subunit gene expression induced by long-term administration of oral contraceptives in rats Neuropharmacology 2002 42 3 325 36 11897111
60 Sassoè-Pognetto M Follesa P Panzanelli P Perazzini AZ Porcu P Sogliano C Cherchi C Concas A Fluctuations in brain concentrations of neurosteroids are not associated to changes in gephyrin levels Brain Res 2007 1169 1 8 17698049
61 Porcu P Mostallino MC Sogliano C Santoru F Berretti R Concas A Long-term administration with levonorgestrel decreases allopregnanolone levels and alters GABAA receptor subunit expression and anxiety-like behavior Pharmacol Biochem Behav 2012 102 2 366 72 22634062
62 McCarthy MM Estradiol and the developing brain Physiol Rev 2008 88 1 91 124 18195084
63 Calza A Sogliano C Santoru F Marra C Angioni MM Mostallino MC Biggio G Concas A Neonatal exposure to estradiol in rats influences neuroactive steroid concentrations, GABAA receptor expression, and behavioral sensitivity to anxiolytic drugs J Neurochem 2010 113 5 1285 95 20345753
64 Berretti R Santoru F Locci A Sogliano C Calza A Choleris E Porcu P Concas A Neonatal exposure to estradiol decreases hypothalamic allopregnanolone concentrations and alters agonistic and sexual but not affective behavior in adult female rats Horm Behav 2014 65 2 142 53 24368289
65 Modol L Casas C Navarro X Llido A Vallee M Pallares M Darbra S Neonatal finasteride administration alters hippocampal α4 and δ GABAAR subunits expression and behavioural responses to progesterone in adult rats Int J Neuropsychopharmacol 2014 17 2 259 73 24011224
66 Abramian AM Comenencia-Ortiz E Modgil A Vien TN Nakamura Y Moore YE Maguire JL Terunuma M Davies PA Moss SJ Neurosteroids promote phosphorylation and membrane insertion of extrasynaptic GABAA receptors Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2014 111 19 7132 7 24778259
67 Melcangi RC Panzica GC Allopregnanolone: state of the art Prog Neurobiol 2014 113 1 5 24121112
68 Schule C Nothdurfter C Rupprecht R The role of allopregnanolone in depression and anxiety Prog Neurobiol 2014 113 79 87 24215796
69 Girdler SS Lindgren M Porcu P Rubinow DR Johnson JL Morrow AL A history of depression in women is associated with an altered GABAergic neuroactive steroid profile Psychoneuroendocrinology 2012 37 4 543 53 21890277
70 Backstrom T Bixo M Johansson M Nyberg S Ossewaarde L Ragagnin G Savic I Stromberg J Timby E van Broekhoven F van Wingen G Allopregnanolone and mood disorders Prog Neurobiol 2014 113 88 94 23978486
71 Pinna G Targeting neurosteroidogenesis as therapy for PTSD Front Pharmacol 2014 4 166 24432002
72 Marx CE Stevens RD Shampine LJ Uzunova V Trost WT Butterfield MI Massing MW Hamer RM Morrow AL Lieberman JA Neuroactive steroids are altered in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder: relevance to pathophysiology and therapeutics Neuropsychopharmacology 2006 31 6 1249 63 16319920
73 Romeo E Brancati A De Lorenzo A Fucci P Furnari C Pompili E Sasso GF Spalletta G Troisi A Pasini A Marked decrease of plasma neuroactive steroids during alcohol withdrawal Clin Neuropharmacol 1996 19 4 366 9 8829001
74 Porcu P O'Buckley TK Morrow AL Adinoff B Differential hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal activation of the neuroactive steroids pregnenolone sulfate and deoxycorticosterone in healthy controls and alcohol-dependent subjects Psychoneuroendocrinology 2008 33 2 214 26 18096321
75 Serra M Pisu MG Littera M Papi G Sanna E Tuveri F Usala L Purdy RH Biggio G Social isolation-induced decreases in both the abundance of neuroactive steroids and GABAA receptor function in rat brain J Neurochem 2000 75 2 732 40 10899949
76 Serra M Sanna E Mostallino MC Biggio G Social isolation stress and neuroactive steroids Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 2007 17 1 1 11 16626946
77 Uzunova V Ceci M Kohler C Uzunov DP Wrynn AS Region-specific dysregulation of allopregnanolone brain content in the olfactory bulbectomized rat model of depression Brain Res 2003 976 1 1 8 12763616
78 Pibiri F Nelson M Guidotti A Costa E Pinna G Decreased corticolimbic allopregnanolone expression during social isolation enhances contextual fear: A model relevant for posttraumatic stress disorder Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2008 105 14 5567 72 18391192
79 Caruso D Abbiati F Giatti S Romano S Fusco L Cavaletti G Melcangi RC Patients treated for male pattern hair with finasteride show, after discontinuation of the drug, altered levels of neuroactive steroids in cerebrospinal fluid and plasma J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 2015 146 74 9 24717976
80 Marx CE VanDoren MJ Duncan GE Lieberman JA Morrow AL Olanzapine and clozapine increase the GABAergic neuroactive steroid allopregnanolone in rodents Neuropsychopharmacology 2003 28 1 1 13 12496935
81 Marx CE Keefe RS Buchanan RW Hamer RM Kilts JD Bradford DW Strauss JL Naylor JC Payne VM Lieberman JA Savitz AJ Leimone LA Dunn L Porcu P Morrow AL Shampine LJ Proof-of-concept trial with the neurosteroid pregnenolone targeting cognitive and negative symptoms in schizophrenia Neuropsychopharmacology 2009 34 8 1885 903 19339966
82 Pieribone VA Tsai J Soufflet C Rey E Shaw K Giller E Dulac O Clinical evaluation of ganaxolone in pediatric and adolescent patients with refractory epilepsy Epilepsia 2007 48 10 1870 4 17634060
83 Herzog AG Frye CA Allopregnanolone levels and seizure frequency in progesterone-treated women with epilepsy Neurology 2014 83 4 345 8 24944264
84 Rogawski MA Loya CM Reddy K Zolkowska D Lossin C Neuroactive steroids for the treatment of status epilepticus Epilepsia 2013 54 Suppl 6 93 8 24001085
85 Caruso D D'Intino G Giatti S Maschi O Pesaresi M Calabrese D Garcia-Segura LM Calza L Melcangi RC Sex-dimorphic changes in neuroactive steroid levels after chronic experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis J Neurochem 2010 114 3 921 32 20492360
86 Caruso D Melis M Fenu G Giatti S Romano S Grimoldi M Crippa D Marrosu MG Cavaletti G Melcangi RC Neuroactive steroid levels in plasma and cerebrospinal fluid of male multiple sclerosis patients J Neurochem 2014 130 4 591 7 24766130
87 Schumacher M Weill-Engerer S Liere P Robert F Franklin RJ Garcia-Segura LM Lambert JJ Mayo W Melcangi RC Parducz A Suter U Carelli C Baulieu EE Akwa Y Steroid hormones and neurosteroids in normal and pathological aging of the nervous system Prog Neurobiol 2003 71 1 3 29 14611864
88 Caruso D Barron AM Brown MA Abbiati F Carrero P Pike CJ Garcia-Segura LM Melcangi RC Age-related changes in neuroactive steroid levels in 3xTg-AD mice Neurobiol Aging 2013 34 4 1080 9 23122920
89 Marx CE Trost WT Shampine LJ Stevens RD Hulette CM Steffens DC Ervin JF Butterfield MI Blazer DG Massing MW Lieberman JA The neurosteroid allopregnanolone is reduced in prefrontal cortex in Alzheimer's disease Biol Psychiatry 2006 60 12 1287 94 16997284
90 di Michele F Longone P Romeo E Lucchetti S Brusa L Pierantozzi M Bassi A Bernardi G Stanzione P Decreased plasma and cerebrospinal fluid content of neuroactive steroids in Parkinson's disease Neurol Sci 2003 24 3 172 3 14598072
91 Lopez-Rodriguez AB Acaz-Fonseca E Giatti S Caruso D Viveros MP Melcangi RC Garcia-Segura LM Correlation of brain levels of progesterone and dehydroepiandrosterone with neurological recovery after traumatic brain injury in female mice Psychoneuroendocrinology 2015 56 1 11 25770855
92 Pesaresi M Maschi O Giatti S Garcia-Segura LM Caruso D Melcangi RC Sex differences in neuroactive steroid levels in the nervous system of diabetic and non-diabetic rats Horm Behav 2010 57 1 46 55 19422828
93 Melcangi RC Giatti S Calabrese D Pesaresi M Cermenati G Mitro N Viviani B Garcia-Segura LM Caruso D Levels and actions of progesterone and its metabolites in the nervous system during physiological and pathological conditions Prog Neurobiol 2014 113 56 69 23958466
94 Wang JM Singh C Liu L Irwin RW Chen S Chung EJ Thompson RF Brinton RD Allopregnanolone reverses neurogenic and cognitive deficits in mouse model of Alzheimer's disease Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010 107 14 6498 503 20231471
95 Irwin RW Brinton RD Allopregnanolone as regenerative therapeutic for Alzheimer's disease: translational development and clinical promise Prog Neurobiol 2014 113 40 55 24044981
96 Leonelli E Bianchi R Cavaletti G Caruso D Crippa D Garcia-Segura LM Lauria G Magnaghi V Roglio I Melcangi RC Progesterone and its derivatives are neuroprotective agents in experimental diabetic neuropathy: a multimodal analysis Neuroscience 2007 144 4 1293 304 17187935
97 Liu A Margaill I Zhang S Labombarda F Coqueran B Delespierre B Liere P Marchand-Leroux C O'Malley BW Lydon JP De Nicola AF Sitruk-Ware R Mattern C Plotkine M Schumacher M Guennoun R Progesterone receptors: a key for neuroprotection in experimental stroke Endocrinology 2012 153 8 3747 57 22635678
98 Timby E Balgard M Nyberg S Spigset O Andersson A Porankiewicz-Asplund J Purdy RH Zhu D Backstrom T Poromaa IS Pharmacokinetic and behavioral effects of allopregnanolone in healthy women Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2006 186 3 414 24 16177884
99 Irwin RW Solinsky CM Brinton RD Frontiers in therapeutic development of allopregnanolone for Alzheimer's disease and other neurological disorders Front Cell Neurosci 2014 8 203 25126056
100 Zhu D Birzniece V Backstrom T Wahlstrom G Dynamic aspects of acute tolerance to allopregnanolone evaluated using anaesthesia threshold in male rats Br J Anaesth 2004 93 4 560 7 15277299
101 Kask K Backstrom T Nilsson LG Sundstrom-Poromaa I Allopregnanolone impairs episodic memory in healthy women Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2008 199 2 161 8 18551282
102 Grant KA Helms CM Rogers LS Purdy RH Neuroactive steroid stereospecificity of ethanol-like discriminative stimulus effects in monkeys J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2008 326 1 354 61 18436788
103 Wang HJ Fan J Papadopoulos V Translocator protein (Tspo) gene promoter-driven green fluorescent protein synthesis in transgenic mice: an in vivo model to study Tspo transcription Cell Tissue Res 2012 350 2 261 75 22868914
104 Rupprecht R Papadopoulos V Rammes G Baghai TC Fan J Akula N Groyer G Adams D Schumacher M Translocator protein (18 kDa) (TSPO) as a therapeutic target for neurological and psychiatric disorders Nat Rev Drug Discov 2010 9 12 971 88 21119734
105 Costa E Guidotti A Diazepam binding inhibitor (DBI): a peptide with multiple biological actions Life Sci 1991 49 5 325 44 1649940
106 Do-Rego JL Mensah-Nyagan AG Feuilloley M Ferrara P Pelletier G Vaudry H The endozepine triakontatetraneuropeptide diazepam-binding inhibitor [17-50] stimulates neurosteroid biosynthesis in the frog hypothalamus Neuroscience 1998 83 2 555 70 9460762
107 Tu LN Morohaku K Manna PR Pelton SH Butler WR Stocco DM Selvaraj V Peripheral benzodiazepine receptor/translocator protein global knock-out mice are viable with no effects on steroid hormone biosynthesis J Biol Chem 2014 289 40 27444 54 24936060
108 Morohaku K Pelton SH Daugherty DJ Butler WR Deng W Selvaraj V Translocator protein/peripheral benzodiazepine receptor is not required for steroid hormone biosynthesis Endocrinology 2014 155 1 89 97 24174323
109 Banati RB Middleton RJ Chan R Hatty CR Kam WW Quin C Graeber MB Parmar A Zahra D Callaghan P Fok S Howell NR Gregoire M Szabo A Pham T Davis E Liu GJ Positron emission tomography and functional characterization of a complete PBR/TSPO knockout Nat Commun 2014 5 5452 25406832
110 Fan J Campioli E Midzak A Culty M Papadopoulos V Conditional steroidogenic cell-targeted deletion of TSPO unveils a crucial role in viability and hormone-dependent steroid formation Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2015 112 23 7261 6 26039990
111 Gut P Zweckstetter M Banati RB Lost in translocation: the functions of the 18-kD translocator protein Trends Endocrinol Metab 2015 26 7 349 56 26026242
112 Bitran D Foley M Audette D Leslie N Frye CA Activation of peripheral mitochondrial benzodiazepine receptors in the hippocampus stimulates allopregnanolone synthesis and produces anxiolytic-like effects in the rat Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2000 151 1 64 71 10958118
113 Romeo E Cavallaro S Korneyev A Kozikowski AP Ma D Polo A Costa E Guidotti A Stimulation of brain steroidogenesis by 2-aryl-indole-3-acetamide derivatives acting at the mitochondrial diazepam-binding inhibitor receptor complex J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1993 267 1 462 71 8229777
114 Serra M Madau P Chessa MF Caddeo M Sanna E Trapani G Franco M Liso G Purdy RH Barbaccia ML Biggio G 2-Phenyl-imidazo[1,2-a]pyridine derivatives as ligands for peripheral benzodiazepine receptors: stimulation of neurosteroid synthesis and anticonflict action in rats Br J Pharmacol 1999 127 1 177 87 10369471
115 Verleye M Akwa Y Liere P Ladurelle N Pianos A Eychenne B Schumacher M Gillardin JM The anxiolytic etifoxine activates the peripheral benzodiazepine receptor and increases the neurosteroid levels in rat brain Pharmacol Biochem Behav 2005 82 4 712 20 16388839
116 Barron AM Garcia-Segura LM Caruso D Jayaraman A Lee JW Melcangi RC Pike CJ Ligand for translocator protein reverses pathology in a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease J Neurosci 2013 33 20 8891 7 23678130
117 Rupprecht R Rammes G Eser D Baghai TC Schule C Nothdurfter C Troxler T Gentsch C Kalkman HO Chaperon F Uzunov V McAllister KH Bertaina-Anglade V La Rochelle CD Tuerck D Floesser A Kiese B Schumacher M Landgraf R Holsboer F Kucher K Translocator protein (18 kD) as target for anxiolytics without benzodiazepine-like side effects Science 2009 325 5939 490 3 19541954
118 Korneyev A Pan BS Polo A Romeo E Guidotti A Costa E Stimulation of brain pregnenolone synthesis by mitochondrial diazepam binding inhibitor receptor ligands in vivo J Neurochem 1993 61 4 1515 24 8397297
119 Barron AM Pike CJ Sex hormones, aging, and Alzheimer's disease Front Biosci (Elite Ed) 2012 4 976 97 22201929
120 Papadopoulos V Lecanu L Translocator protein (18 kDa) TSPO: an emerging therapeutic target in neurotrauma Exp Neurol 2009 219 1 53 7 19409385
121 Zimmer ER Leuzy A Benedet AL Breitner J Gauthier S Rosa-Neto P Tracking neuroinflammation in Alzheimer's disease: the role of positron emission tomography imaging J Neuroinflammation 2014 11 120 25005532
122 Li F Liu J Valls L Hiser C Ferguson-Miller S Identification of a key cholesterol binding enhancement motif in translocator protein 18 kDa Biochemistry 2015 54 7 1441 3 25635829
123 Jaremko L Jaremko M Giller K Becker S Zweckstetter M Structure of the mitochondrial translocator protein in complex with a diagnostic ligand Science 2014 343 6177 1363 6 24653034
124 Li F Liu J Zheng Y Garavito RM Ferguson-Miller S Protein structure. Crystal structures of translocator protein (TSPO) and mutant mimic of a human polymorphism Science 2015 347 6221 555 8 25635101
125 Costa B Pini S Gabelloni P Da Pozzo E Abelli M Lari L Preve M Lucacchini A Cassano GB Martini C The spontaneous Ala147Thr amino acid substitution within the translocator protein influences pregnenolone production in lymphomonocytes of healthy individuals Endocrinology 2009 150 12 5438 45 19846611
126 Banati RB Gehrmann J Czech C Monning U Jones LL Konig G Beyreuther K Kreutzberg GW Early and rapid de novo synthesis of Alzheimer beta A4-amyloid precursor protein (APP) in activated microglia Glia 1993 9 3 199 210 7507467
127 Veiga S Azcoitia I Garcia-Segura LM Ro5-4864, a peripheral benzodiazepine receptor ligand, reduces reactive gliosis and protects hippocampal hilar neurons from kainic acid excitotoxicity J Neurosci Res 2005 80 1 129 37 15696538
128 Veiga S Carrero P Pernia O Azcoitia I Garcia-Segura LM Translocator protein 18 kDa is involved in the regulation of reactive gliosis Glia 2007 55 14 1426 36 17674368
129 Choi HB Khoo C Ryu JK van Breemen E Kim SU McLarnon JG Inhibition of lipopolysaccharide-induced cyclooxygenase-2, tumor necrosis factor-alpha and [Ca2+]i responses in human microglia by the peripheral benzodiazepine receptor ligand PK11195 J Neurochem 2002 83 3 546 55 12390516
130 Szekely CA Thorne JE Zandi PP Ek M Messias E Breitner JC Goodman SN Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs for the prevention of Alzheimer's disease: a systematic review Neuroepidemiology 2004 23 4 159 69 15279021
131 Nothdurfter C Rammes G Baghai TC Schule C Schumacher M Papadopoulos V Rupprecht R Translocator protein (18 kDa) as a target for novel anxiolytics with a favourable side-effect profile J Neuroendocrinol 2012 24 1 82 92 21609361
132 Kita A Kinoshita T Kohayakawa H Furukawa K Akaike A Lack of tolerance to anxiolysis and withdrawal symptoms in mice repeatedly treated with AC-5216, a selective TSPO ligand Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 2009 33 6 1040 5 19497344
133 Sink KM Holden KF Yaffe K Pharmacological treatment of neuropsychiatric symptoms of dementia: a review of the evidence JAMA 2005 293 5 596 608 15687315
134 Do Rego JL Seong JY Burel D Leprince J Vaudry D Luu-The V Tonon MC Tsutsui K Pelletier G Vaudry H Regulation of neurosteroid biosynthesis by neurotransmitters and neuropeptides Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) 2012 3 4 22654849
135 King SR Manna PR Ishii T Syapin PJ Ginsberg SD Wilson K Walsh LP Parker KL Stocco DM Smith RG Lamb DJ An essential component in steroid synthesis, the steroidogenic acute regulatory protein, is expressed in discrete regions of the brain J Neurosci 2002 22 24 10613 20 12486153
136 Mellon SH Deschepper CF Neurosteroid biosynthesis: genes for adrenal steroidogenic enzymes are expressed in the brain Brain Res 1993 629 2 283 92 8111631
137 Papadopoulos V Baraldi M Guilarte TR Knudsen TB Lacapere JJ Lindemann P Norenberg MD Nutt D Weizman A Zhang MR Gavish M Translocator protein (18kDa): new nomenclature for the peripheral-type benzodiazepine receptor based on its structure and molecular function Trends Pharmacol Sci 2006 27 8 402 9 16822554
138 Frye CA Novel substrates for, and sources of, progestogens for reproduction J Neuroendocrinol 2011 23 11 961 73 21696472
139 Bertilsson G Heidrich J Svensson K Asman M Jendeberg L Sydow-Backman M Ohlsson R Postlind H Blomquist P Berkenstam A Identification of a human nuclear receptor defines a new signaling pathway for CYP3A induction Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998 95 21 12208 13 9770465
140 Kliewer SA Moore JT Wade L Staudinger JL Watson MA Jones SA McKee DD Oliver BB Willson TM Zetterstrom RH Perlmann T Lehmann JM An orphan nuclear receptor activated by pregnanes defines a novel steroid signaling pathway Cell 1998 92 1 73 82 9489701
141 Lamba V Yasuda K Lamba JK Assem M Davila J Strom S Schuetz EG PXR (NR1I2): splice variants in human tissues, including brain, and identification of neurosteroids and nicotine as PXR activators Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 2004 199 3 251 65 15364541
142 Dutheil F Dauchy S Diry M Sazdovitch V Cloarec O Mellottee L Bieche I Ingelman-Sundberg M Flinois JP de Waziers I Beaune P Decleves X Duyckaerts C Loriot MA Xenobiotic-metabolizing enzymes and transporters in the normal human brain: regional and cellular mapping as a basis for putative roles in cerebral function Drug Metab Dispos 2009 37 7 1528 38 19359404
143 Frye CA Koonce CJ Walf AA Pregnane xenobiotic receptors and membrane progestin receptors: role in neurosteroid-mediated motivated behaviours J Neuroendocrinol 2013 25 11 1002 11 24028379
144 Frye CA Koonce CJ Walf AA Involvement of pregnane xenobiotic receptor in mating-induced allopregnanolone formation in the midbrain and hippocampus and brain-derived neurotrophic factor in the hippocampus among female rats Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2014 231 17 3375 90 24781516
145 Marini S Nannelli A Sodini D Dragoni S Valoti M Longo V Gervasi PG Expression, microsomal and mitochondrial activities of cytochrome P450 enzymes in brain regions from control and phenobarbital-treated rabbits Life Sci 2007 80 10 910 7 17161434
146 Frye CA Koonce CJ Walf AA Rusconi JC Motivated behaviors and levels of 3α,5α-THP in the midbrain are attenuated by knocking down expression of pregnane xenobiotic receptor in the midbrain ventral tegmental area of proestrous rats J Sex Med 2013 10 7 1692 706 23634744
147 Frye CA Koonce CJ Walf AA Novel receptor targets for production and action of allopregnanolone in the central nervous system: a focus on pregnane xenobiotic receptor Front Cell Neurosci 2014 8 106 24782710
148 Frye CA Koonce CJ Walf AA Role of pregnane xenobiotic receptor in the midbrain ventral tegmental area for estradiol- and 3α,5α-THP-facilitated lordosis of female rats Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2014 231 17 3365 74 24435323
149 Frye CA Koonce CJ Walf AA The pregnane xenobiotic receptor, a prominent liver factor, has actions in the midbrain for neurosteroid synthesis and behavioral/neural plasticity of female rats Front Syst Neurosci 2014 8 60 24795576
150 Walf AA Rhodes ME Frye CA Ovarian steroids enhance object recognition in naturally cycling and ovariectomized, hormone-primed rats Neurobiol Learn Mem 2006 86 1 35 46 16529958
151 Frye CA Walf AA Progesterone enhances learning and memory of aged wildtype and progestin receptor knockout mice Neurosci Lett 2010 472 1 38 42 20117174
152 Frye CA Koonce CJ Walf AA Progesterone, compared to medroxyprogesterone acetate, to C57BL/6, but not 5α-reductase mutant, mice enhances object recognition and placement memory and is associated with higher BDNF levels in the hippocampus and cortex Neurosci Lett 2013 551 53 7 23872095
153 Paris JJ Walf AA Frye CA II Cognitive performance of middle-aged female rats is influenced by capacity to metabolize progesterone in the prefrontal cortex and hippocampus Brain Res 2011 1379 149 63 21044614
154 Smith CD Wekstein DR Markesbery WR Frye CA 3α,5α-THP: a potential plasma neurosteroid biomarker in Alzheimer's disease and perhaps non-Alzheimer's dementia Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2006 186 3 481 5 16231167
155 Borchelt DR Ratovitski T van Lare J Lee MK Gonzales V Jenkins NA Copeland NG Price DL Sisodia SS Accelerated amyloid deposition in the brains of transgenic mice coexpressing mutant presenilin 1 and amyloid precursor proteins Neuron 1997 19 4 939 45 9354339
156 Frye CA Walf AA Effects of progesterone administration and APPswe+PSEN1Deltae9 mutation for cognitive performance of mid-aged mice Neurobiol Learn Mem 2008 89 1 17 26 17988898
157 Frye CA Walf AA Progesterone reduces depression-like behavior in a murine model of Alzheimer's Disease Age (Dordr) 2009 31 2 143 53 19322681
158 Mandrekar-Colucci S Karlo JC Landreth GE Mechanisms underlying the rapid peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ-mediated amyloid clearance and reversal of cognitive deficits in a murine model of Alzheimer's disease J Neurosci 2012 32 30 10117 28 22836247
159 Wang K Wan YJ Nuclear receptors and inflammatory diseases Exp Biol Med (Maywood) 2008 233 5 496 506 18375823
160 Miller WL Steroid hormone synthesis in mitochondria Mol Cell Endocrinol 2013 379 1-2 62 73 23628605
161 Cook JB Werner DF Maldonado-Devincci AM Leonard MN Fisher KR O'Buckley TK Porcu P McCown TJ Besheer J Hodge CW Morrow AL Overexpression of the steroidogenic enzyme cytochrome P450 side chain cleavage in the ventral tegmental area increases 3α,5α-THP and reduces long-term operant ethanol self-administration J Neurosci 2014 34 17 5824 34 24760842
162 Pradhan DS Lau LY Schmidt KL Soma KK 3β-HSD in songbird brain: subcellular localization and rapid regulation by estradiol J Neurochem 2010 115 3 667 75 20722973
163 He XY Wegiel J Yang YZ Pullarkat R Schulz H Yang SY Type 10 17beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase catalyzing the oxidation of steroid modulators of gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptors Mol Cell Endocrinol 2005 229 1-2 111 7 15607535
164 He XY Wegiel J Yang SY Intracellular oxidation of allopregnanolone by human brain type 10 17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase Brain Res 2005 1040 1-2 29 35 15804423
165 Yang SY He XY Schulz H Multiple functions of type 10 17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase Trends Endocrinol Metab 2005 16 4 167 75 15860413
166 Yang SY He XY Miller D HSD17B10: a gene involved in cognitive function through metabolism of isoleucine and neuroactive steroids Mol Genet Metab 2007 92 1-2 36 42 17618155
167 Yang SY He XY Miller D Hydroxysteroid (17β) dehydrogenase X in human health and disease Mol Cell Endocrinol 2011 343 1-2 1 6 21708223
168 Yang SY He XY Isaacs C Dobkin C Miller D Philipp M Roles of 17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 10 in neurodegenerative disorders J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 2014 143 460 72 25007702
169 He XY Yang YZ Schulz H Yang SY Intrinsic alcohol dehydrogenase and hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase activities of human mitochondrial short-chain L-3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase Biochem J 2000 345 Pt 1 139 43 10600649
170 He XY Merz G Mehta P Schulz H Yang SY Human brain short chain L-3-hydroxyacyl coenzyme A dehydrogenase is a single-domain multifunctional enzyme. Characterization of a novel 17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase J Biol Chem 1999 274 21 15014 9 10329704
171 He XY Merz G Yang YZ Mehta P Schulz H Yang SY Characterization and localization of human type10 17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase Eur J Biochem 2001 268 18 4899 907 11559359
172 He XY Yang YZ Peehl DM Lauderdale A Schulz H Yang SY Oxidative 3α-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase activity of human type 10 17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 2003 87 2-3 191 8 14672739
173 He XY Merz G Yang YZ Pullakart R Mehta P Schulz H Yang SY Function of human brain short chain L-3-hydroxyacyl coenzyme A dehydrogenase in androgen metabolism Biochim Biophys Acta 2000 1484 2-3 267 77 10760475
174 Yang SY He XY Olpin SE Sutton VR McMenamin J Philipp M Denman RB Malik M Mental retardation linked to mutations in the HSD17B10 gene interfering with neurosteroid and isoleucine metabolism Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2009 106 35 14820 4 19706438
175 Seaver LH He XY Abe K Cowan T Enns GM Sweetman L Philipp M Lee S Malik M Yang SY A novel mutation in the HSD17B10 gene of a 10-year-old boy with refractory epilepsy, choreoathetosis and learning disability PLoS One 2011 6 11 e27348 22132097
176 Yang SY Dobkin C He XY Philipp M Brown WT A 5-methylcytosine hotspot responsible for the prevalent HSD17B10 mutation Gene 2013 515 2 380 4 23266819
177 Yang SY He XY Role of type 10 17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease Adv Exp Med Biol 2001 487 101 10 11403151
178 Jazbutyte V Kehl F Neyses L Pelzer T Estrogen receptor alpha interacts with 17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 10 in mitochondria Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2009 384 4 450 4 19422801
179 He XY Wen GY Merz G Lin D Yang YZ Mehta P Schulz H Yang SY Abundant type 10 17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase in the hippocampus of mouse Alzheimer's disease model Brain Res Mol Brain Res 2002 99 1 46 53 11869808
180 Grimm A Schmitt K Lang UE Mensah-Nyagan AG Eckert A Improvement of neuronal bioenergetics by neurosteroids: implications for age-related neurodegenerative disorders Biochim Biophys Acta 2014 1842 12 Pt A 2427 38 25281013
181 Yang SY He XY Dobkin C Isaacs C Brown WT Mental retardation and isoleucine metabolism Rajendram R Preedy VR Patel VB Branched Chain Amino Acids in Clinical Nutrition: Volume I, Nutrition and Health New York Springer 2015 157 70
182 Porcu P O'Buckley TK Alward SE Song SC Grant KA de Wit H Morrow AL Differential effects of ethanol on serum GABAergic 3α,5α/3α,5β neuroactive steroids in mice, rats, cynomolgus monkeys, and humans Alcohol Clin Exp Res 2010 34 3 432 42 20028362
183 Barbaccia ML Affricano D Trabucchi M Purdy RH Colombo G Agabio R Gessa GL Ethanol markedly increases “GABAergic” neurosteroids in alcohol-preferring rats Eur J Pharmacol 1999 384 2-3 R1 2 10611449
184 Cook JB Dumitru AM O'Buckley TK Morrow AL Ethanol administration produces divergent changes in GABAergic neuroactive steroid immunohistochemistry in the rat brain Alcohol Clin Exp Res 2014 38 1 90 9 23906006
185 Khisti RT VanDoren MJ O'Buckley T Morrow AL Neuroactive steroid 3α-hydroxy-5α-pregnan-20-one modulates ethanol-induced loss of righting reflex in rats Brain Res 2003 980 2 255 65 12867266
186 O'Dell LE Alomary AA Vallee M Koob GF Fitzgerald RL Purdy RH Ethanol-induced increases in neuroactive steroids in the rat brain and plasma are absent in adrenalectomized and gonadectomized rats Eur J Pharmacol 2004 484 2-3 241 7 14744609
187 Boyd KN Kumar S O'Buckley TK Porcu P Morrow AL Ethanol induction of steroidogenesis in rat adrenal and brain is dependent upon pituitary ACTH release and de novo adrenal StAR synthesis J Neurochem 2010 112 3 784 96 20021565
188 Sanna E Talani G Busonero F Pisu MG Purdy RH Serra M Biggio G Brain steroidogenesis mediates ethanol modulation of GABAA receptor activity in rat hippocampus J Neurosci 2004 24 29 6521 30 15269263
189 Tokuda K Izumi Y Zorumski CF Ethanol enhances neurosteroidogenesis in hippocampal pyramidal neurons by paradoxical NMDA receptor activation J Neurosci 2011 31 27 9905 9 21734282
190 Cook JB Nelli SM Neighbors MR Morrow DH O'Buckley TK Maldonado-Devincci AM Morrow AL Ethanol alters local cellular levels of (3α,5α)-3-hydroxypregnan-20-one (3α,5α-THP) independent of the adrenals in subcortical brain regions Neuropsychopharmacology 2014 39 8 1978 87 24566803
191 Morrow AL Porcu P Boyd KN Grant KA Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis modulation of GABAergic neuroactive steroids influences ethanol sensitivity and drinking behavior Dialogues Clin Neurosci 2006 8 4 463 77 17290803
192 Porcu P Locci A Santoru F Berretti R Morrow AL Concas A Failure of acute ethanol administration to alter cerebrocortical and hippocampal allopregnanolone levels in C57BL/6J and DBA/2J mice Alcohol Clin Exp Res 2014 38 4 948 58 24428156
193 Gabriel KI Cunningham CL Finn DA Allopregnanolone does not influence ethanol-induced conditioned place preference in DBA/2J mice Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2004 176 1 50 6 15083256
194 Finn DA Sinnott RS Ford MM Long SL Tanchuck MA Phillips TJ Sex differences in the effect of ethanol injection and consumption on brain allopregnanolone levels in C57BL/6 mice Neuroscience 2004 123 4 813 9 14751275
195 Torres JM Ortega E Alcohol intoxication increases allopregnanolone levels in female adolescent humans Neuropsychopharmacology 2003 28 6 1207 9 12700685
196 Torres JM Ortega E Alcohol intoxication increases allopregnanolone levels in male adolescent humans Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2004 172 3 352 5 14647956
197 Holdstock L Penland SN Morrow AL de Wit H Moderate doses of ethanol fail to increase plasma levels of neurosteroid 3α-hydroxy-5α-pregnan-20-one-like immunoreactivity in healthy men and women Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2006 186 3 442 50 16240164
198 Pierucci-Lagha A Covault J Feinn R Khisti RT Morrow AL Marx CE Shampine LJ Kranzler HR Subjective effects and changes in steroid hormone concentrations in humans following acute consumption of alcohol Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2006 186 3 451 61 16341848
199 Pierucci-Lagha A Covault J Feinn R Nellissery M Hernandez-Avila C Oncken C Morrow AL Kranzler HR GABRA2 alleles moderate the subjective effects of alcohol, which are attenuated by finasteride Neuropsychopharmacology 2005 30 6 1193 203 15702134
200 Covault J Pond T Feinn R Arias AJ Oncken C Kranzler HR Dutasteride reduces alcohol's sedative effects in men in a human laboratory setting and reduces drinking in the natural environment Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2014 231 17 3609 18 24557088
201 Irwig MS Decreased alcohol consumption among former male users of finasteride with persistent sexual side effects: a preliminary report Alcohol Clin Exp Res 2013 37 11 1823 6 23763349
202 Maldonado-Devincci AM Cook JB O'Buckley TK Morrow DH McKinley RE Lopez MF Becker HC Morrow AL Chronic intermittent ethanol exposure and withdrawal alters (3α,5α)-3-hydroxy-pregnan-20-one immunostaining in cortical and limbic brain regions of C57BL/6J mice Alcohol Clin Exp Res 2014 38 10 2561 71 25293837
203 Milivojevic V Kranzler HR Gelernter J Burian L Covault J Variation in genes encoding the neuroactive steroid synthetic enzymes 5α-reductase type 1 and 3α-reductase type 2 is associated with alcohol dependence Alcohol Clin Exp Res 2011 35 5 946 52 21323680
204 O'Dell LE Purdy RH Covey DF Richardson HN Roberto M Koob GF Epipregnanolone and a novel synthetic neuroactive steroid reduce alcohol self-administration in rats Pharmacol Biochem Behav 2005 81 3 543 50 15950269
205 Besheer J Lindsay TG O'Buckley TK Hodge CW Morrow AL Pregnenolone and ganaxolone reduce operant ethanol self-administration in alcohol-preferring p rats Alcohol Clin Exp Res 2010 34 12 2044 52 20946297
206 Papadopoulos V On the role of the translocator protein (18-kDa) TSPO in steroid hormone biosynthesis Endocrinology 2014 155 1 15 20 24364587
207 Giatti S Garcia-Segura LM Melcangi RC New steps forward in the neuroactive steroid field J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 2015 153 127 34 25797031
208 Giatti S Romano S Pesaresi M Cermenati G Mitro N Caruso D Tetel MJ Garcia-Segura LM Melcangi RC Neuroactive steroids and the peripheral nervous system: An update Steroids 2015 103 23 30 25824325
209 Cummins CL Mangelsdorf DJ Liver X receptors and cholesterol homoeostasis: spotlight on the adrenal gland Biochem Soc Trans 2006 34 Pt 6 1110 3 17073762
210 Mitro N Cermenati G Giatti S Abbiati F Pesaresi M Calabrese D Garcia-Segura LM Caruso D Melcangi RC LXR and TSPO as new therapeutic targets to increase the levels of neuroactive steroids in the central nervous system of diabetic animals Neurochem Int 2012 60 6 616 21 22406419
211 Cermenati G Giatti S Cavaletti G Bianchi R Maschi O Pesaresi M Abbiati F Volonterio A Saez E Caruso D Melcangi RC Mitro N Activation of the liver X receptor increases neuroactive steroid levels and protects from diabetes-induced peripheral neuropathy J Neurosci 2010 30 36 11896 901 20826654
212 Sironi L Mitro N Cimino M Gelosa P Guerrini U Tremoli E Saez E Treatment with LXR agonists after focal cerebral ischemia prevents brain damage FEBS Lett 2008 582 23-24 3396 400 18789330
213 Xu P Li D Tang X Bao X Huang J Tang Y Yang Y Xu H Fan X LXR agonists: new potential therapeutic drug for neurodegenerative diseases Mol Neurobiol 2013 48 3 715 28 23625315
214 Uzunova V Sheline Y Davis JM Rasmusson A Uzunov DP Costa E Guidotti A Increase in the cerebrospinal fluid content of neurosteroids in patients with unipolar major depression who are receiving fluoxetine or fluvoxamine Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998 95 6 3239 44 9501247
215 Romeo E Strohle A Spalletta G di Michele F Hermann B Holsboer F Pasini A Rupprecht R Effects of antidepressant treatment on neuroactive steroids in major depression Am J Psychiatry 1998 155 7 910 3 9659856
216 Pinna G Rasmusson AM Ganaxolone improves behavioral deficits in a mouse model of post-traumatic stress disorder Front Cell Neurosci 2014 8 256 25309317
217 Rasmusson AM Pinna G Paliwal P Weisman D Gottschalk C Charney D Krystal J Guidotti A Decreased cerebrospinal fluid allopregnanolone levels in women with posttraumatic stress disorder Biol Psychiatry 2006 60 7 704 13 16934764
218 Hardoy MC Serra M Carta MG Contu P Pisu MG Biggio G Increased neuroactive steroid concentrations in women with bipolar disorder or major depressive disorder J Clin Psychopharmacol 2006 26 4 379 84 16855455
219 Fish EW Whitman BJ DiBerto JF Robinson JE Morrow AL Malanga CJ Effects of the neuroactive steroid allopregnanolone on intracranial self-stimulation in C57BL/6J mice Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2014 231 17 3415 23 24810108
220 Anker JJ Zlebnik NE Carroll ME Differential effects of allopregnanolone on the escalation of cocaine self-administration and sucrose intake in female rats Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2010 212 3 419 29 20689941
221 Ford MM Mark GP Nickel JD Phillips TJ Finn DA Allopregnanolone influences the consummatory processes that govern ethanol drinking in C57BL/6J mice Behav Brain Res 2007 179 2 265 72 17376546
222 Finn DA Mark GP Fretwell AM Gililland-Kaufman KR Strong MN Ford MM Reinstatement of ethanol and sucrose seeking by the neurosteroid allopregnanolone in C57BL/6 mice Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2008 201 3 423 33 18758755
223 Broomall E Natale JE Grimason M Goldstein J Smith CM Chang C Kanes S Rogawski MA Wainwright MS Pediatric super-refractory status epilepticus treated with allopregnanolone Ann Neurol 2014 76 6 911 5 25363147
224 Howard RB Sayeed I Stein D Suboptimal dosing parameters as possible factors in the negative Phase III clinical trials of progesterone in TBI J Neurotrauma 2015 in press
