LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


0412041
133
Acta Neuropathol
Acta Neuropathol.
Acta neuropathologica
0001-6322
1432-0533

26659578
4879001
10.1007/s00401-015-1509-x
NIHMS785597
Article
Aging-related tau astrogliopathy (ARTAG): harmonized evaluation strategy
Kovacs Gabor G. 1gabor.kovacs@meduniwien.ac.at

Ferrer Isidro 2
Grinberg Lea T. 34
Alafuzoff Irina 5
Attems Johannes 6
Budka Herbert 7
Cairns Nigel J. 8
Crary John F. 933
Duyckaerts Charles 10
Ghetti Bernardino 11
Halliday Glenda M. 12
Ironside James W. 13
Love Seth 14
Mackenzie Ian R. 15
Munoz David G. 16
Murray Melissa E. 17
Nelson Peter T. 18
Takahashi Hitoshi 19
Trojanowski John Q. 20
Ansorge Olaf 21
Arzberger Thomas 22
Baborie Atik 23
Beach Thomas G. 24
Bieniek Kevin F. 17
Bigio Eileen H. 25
Bodi Istvan 26
Dugger Brittany N. 2427
Feany Mel 28
Gelpi Ellen 29
Gentleman Stephen M. 30
Giaccone Giorgio 31
Hatanpaa Kimmo J. 32
Heale Richard 6
Hof Patrick R. 33
Hofer Monika 21
Hortobágyi Tibor 34
Jellinger Kurt 35
Jicha Gregory A. 36
Ince Paul 37
Kofler Julia 38
Kövari Enikö 39
Kril Jillian J. 40
Mann David M. 41
Matej Radoslav 42
McKee Ann C. 43
McLean Catriona 44
Milenkovic Ivan 145
Montine Thomas J. 46
Murayama Shigeo 47
Lee Edward B. 20
Rahimi Jasmin 1
Rodriguez Roberta D. 48
Rozemüller Annemieke 49
Schneider Julie A. 5051
Schultz Christian 52
Seeley William 3
Seilhean Danielle 10
Smith Colin 13
Tagliavini Fabrizio 31
Takao Masaki 53
Thal Dietmar Rudolf 5455
Toledo Jon B. 20
Tolnay Markus 56
Troncoso Juan C. 57
Vinters Harry V. 5859
Weis Serge 60
Wharton Stephen B. 37
White Charles L. III 32
Wisniewski Thomas 616263
Woulfe John M. 64
Yamada Masahito 65
Dickson Dennis W. 17dickson.dennis@mayo.edu

1 Institute of Neurology, Medical University of Vienna, AKH 4J, Währinger Gürtel 18-20, 1097 Vienna, Austria
2 Institute of Neuropathology, Bellvitge University Hospital, University of Barcelona, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain
3 Department of Neurology, Memory and Aging Center, University of California, San Francisco, USA
4 Department of Pathology, LIM-22, University of Sao Paulo Medical School, Sao Paulo, Brazil
5 Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden
6 Institute of Neuroscience, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK
7 Institute of Neuropathology, University Hospital Zürich, Zurich, Switzerland
8 Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA
9 Department of Pathology, Friedman Brain Institute, and the Ronald M. Loeb Center for Alzheimer’s Disease, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, USA
10 Neuropathology Department, Hopital de La Salpetrière, AP-HP, UPMC-Sorbonne-University, Paris, France
11 Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA
12 GMH-Neuroscience Research Australia and the University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia
13 Centre for Clinical Brain Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
14 Institute of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Bristol, Learning and Research Level 2, Southmead Hospital, Bristol, UK
15 Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada
16 Division of Pathology, St. Michael’s Hospital, 30 Bond St, Toronto, ON, Canada
17 Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, 4500 San Pablo Road, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA
18 Department of Pathology and Sanders-Brown Center on Aging, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536, USA
19 Department of Pathology, Brain Research Institute, Niigata University, Niigata 951-8585, Japan
20 Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine of the Perelman School of Medicine, Center for Neurodegenerative Disease Research, Institute On Aging, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA
21 Department of Neuropathology, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK
22 Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Centre for Neuropathology and Prion Research, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Munich, Germany
23 Department of Neuropathology, Walton Centre, Liverpool, UK
24 Civin Laboratory for Neuropathology, Banner Sun Health Research Institute, Sun City, AZ 85351, USA
25 Northwestern ADC Neuropathology Core, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA
26 Clinical Neuropathology, King’s College Hospital, London Neurodegenerative Brain Bank, London, UK
27 Institute for Neurodegenerative Diseases, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA
28 Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
29 Neurological Tissue Bank of the Biobank-Hospital Clinic-IDIBAPS, Institut d’Investigacions Biomediques August Pi i Sunyer, Barcelona, Spain
30 Department of Medicine, Imperial College London, London, UK
31 IRCCS Foundation “Carlo Besta” Neurological Institute, Milan, Italy
32 Department of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA
33 Fishberg Department of Neuroscience, Friedman Brain Institute, and Ronald M. Loeb Center for Alzheimer’s Disease, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA
34 Department of Neuropathology, Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Pathology, University of Debrecen, Nagyerdei krt. 98, 4032 Debrecen, Hungary
35 Institute of Clinical Neurobiology, Alberichgasse 5/13, 1150 Vienna, Austria
36 Department of Neurology and Sanders-Brown Center on Aging, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536, USA
37 Sheffield Institute for Translational Neuroscience, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK
38 Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
39 Department of Mental Health and Psychiatry, University Hospitals and University of Geneva School of Medicine, Geneva, Switzerland
40 Discipline of Pathology, Sydney Medical School, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia
41 Institute of Brain, Behaviour and Mental Health, Manchester University Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, Manchester, UK
42 Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, Thomayer Hospital, Prague 4, Czech Republic
43 Department of Neurology and Pathology, Boston University School of Medicine and VA Healthcare System, Boston, MA 02118, USA
44 Department of Anatomical Pathology, Alfred Hospital, Prahran, VIC 3004, Australia
45 Department of Neurology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria
46 Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
47 Department of Neuropathology (The Brain Bank for Aging Research), Tokyo Metropolitan Geriatric Hospital and Institute of Gerontology, Tokyo, Japan
48 Physiopathology in Aging Lab/Brazilian Aging Brain Study Group-LIM22, University of Sao Paulo Medical School, Sao Paulo, Brazil
49 Netherlands Brainbank and Department of Pathology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
50 Department of Pathology, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA
51 Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA
52 Institute of Neuroanatomy, Centre for Biomedicine and Medical Technology Mannheim, Medical Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany
53 Department of Neurology, Saitama Medical University International Medical Center, Saitama, Japan
54 Laboratory of Neuropathology, Institute of Pathology, University of Ulm, 89081 Ulm, Germany
55 Department of Neuroscience, KU-Leuven, 3000 Louvain, Belgium
56 Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland
57 Division of Neuropathology, Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA
58 Section of Neuropathology, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Brain Research Institute, University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) Medical Center and David Geffen School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, USA
59 Department of Neurology, Brain Research Institute, University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) Medical Center and David Geffen School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, USA
60 Department of Pathology and Neuropathology, Laboratory of Neuropathology, Neuromed Campus, Kepler University Hospital, Medical School, Johannes Kepler University, Linz, Austria
61 Department of Neurology, Center for Cognitive Neurology, New York University School of Medicine, ERSP, 450 East 29th Street, New York, NY 10016, USA
62 Department of Pathology, Center for Cognitive Neurology, New York University School of Medicine, ERSP, 450 East 29th Street, New York, NY 10016, USA
63 Department of Psychiatry, Center for Cognitive Neurology, New York University School of Medicine, ERSP, 450 East 29th Street, New York, NY 10016, USA
64 Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Centre for Cancer Therapeutics, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada
65 Department of Neurology and Neurobiology of Aging, Kanazawa University Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kanazawa, Japan
13 5 2016
10 12 2015
1 2016
01 1 2017
131 1 87102
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Pathological accumulation of abnormally phosphorylated tau protein in astrocytes is a frequent, but poorly characterized feature of the aging brain. Its etiology is uncertain, but its presence is sufficiently ubiquitous to merit further characterization and classification, which may stimulate clinicopathological studies and research into its pathobiology. This paper aims to harmonize evaluation and nomenclature of aging-related tau astrogliopathy (ARTAG), a term that refers to a morphological spectrum of astroglial pathology detected by tau immunohistochemistry, especially with phosphorylation-dependent and 4R isoform-specific antibodies. ARTAG occurs mainly, but not exclusively, in individuals over 60 years of age. Tau-immunoreactive astrocytes in ARTAG include thorn-shaped astrocytes at the glia limitans and in white matter, as well as solitary or clustered astrocytes with perinuclear cytoplasmic tau immunoreactivity that extends into the astroglial processes as fine fibrillar or granular immunopositivity, typically in gray matter. Various forms of ARTAG may coexist in the same brain and might reflect different pathogenic processes. Based on morphology and anatomical distribution, ARTAG can be distinguished from primary tauopathies, but may be concurrent with primary tauopathies or other disorders. We recommend four steps for evaluation of ARTAG: (1) identification of five types based on the location of either morphologies of tau astrogliopathy: subpial, subependymal, perivascular, white matter, gray matter; (2) documentation of the regional involvement: medial temporal lobe, lobar (frontal, parietal, occipital, lateral temporal), subcortical, brainstem; (3) documentation of the severity of tau astrogliopathy; and (4) description of subregional involvement. Some types of ARTAG may underlie neurological symptoms; however, the clinical significance of ARTAG is currently uncertain and awaits further studies. The goal of this proposal is to raise awareness of astroglial tau pathology in the aged brain, facilitating communication among neuropathologists and researchers, and informing interpretation of clinical biomarkers and imaging studies that focus on tau-related indicators.

Aging
ARTAG
Tau astrogliopathy
Tau

Introduction

Tau is a microtubule-associated protein that binds to tubulin and promotes its polymerization and stabilization into micro-tubules. Tau isoforms, ranging from 352 to 441 amino acids, are generated by the alternative splicing of exons 2, 3, and 10 of the MAPT gene. The six isoforms differ from each other by the presence or absence of 29- or 58-amino acid inserts in the N-terminus domain and by the presence of either three (3R tau isoforms) or four (4R tau isoforms) tandem repeat sequences of 31 or 32 amino acids [24]. Mutations in the tau gene (MAPT) can cause hereditary frontotemporal dementia and associate with frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) [23, 26, 51, 63]. Following the description of a disorder in one family named ‘multiple system tauopathy with presenile dementia’ [62], the term tauopathy was introduced to refer to disorders in which tau protein deposition is the predominant feature [23]. Tauopathies are characterized by the accumulation of abnormal and hyper-phosphorylated tau protein in the brain and are also classified as primary or secondary [32, 37]. Tau pathology is characterized as 3R or 4R predominant or mixed 3R + 4R type [12, 30, 32]. Primary tauopathies are grouped also as FTLD-tau and comprise Pick disease (PiD), progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), corticobasal degeneration (CBD), argyrophilic grain disease (AGD), neurofibrillary tangle (NFT) predominant senile dementia (NFT-dementia or “tangle-only” dementia; now included in the category of PART, see below), and globular glial tauopathy (GGT) [32, 47]. In addition, many other diseases or conditions with diverse etiology, including Alzheimer disease (AD), may be associated with tau pathology [32]. The recently introduced term ‘primary age-related tauopathy’ (PART) encompasses neuronal changes previously considered as “normal aging” as well as NFT-dementia [14]. PART is distinguished from AD, largely by the absence or scarcity of amyloid (Aβ) plaques [14]. In aged individuals sex-dependent tau pathology, developing independently from AD has been also described in the hypothalamus [16, 54, 56]. Furthermore, chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE) is associated with a distinctive pattern of progressive neuronal and glial tau pathology [40–42].

The introduction of the Gallyas silver stain and particularly diagnostic tau immunohistochemistry led to the identification of astroglial tau pathology in the aging brain in people with or without AD-related changes, cognitive decline or movement disorders [5, 7, 11, 21, 25, 31, 34–36, 38, 46, 57]. There have been attempts to classify these tau astrogliopathies [34], but there is lack of consensus as to how best to describe and categorize them. We recommend the term aging-related tau astrogliopathy (ARTAG) to describe the spectrum of otherwise unclassified tau immunoreactivity in astrocytes (i.e., distinct from tufted astrocytes, astrocytic plaques, ramified astrocytes, or globular astroglial inclusions) mostly in aged individuals detected by tau immunohistochemistry using phosphorylation-specific, conformation-specific, or isoform-specific (4R) anti-tau antibodies. Both ARTAG and PART affect predominantly the elderly, but PART is characterized by neurofibrillary degeneration that is largely restricted to the medial temporal lobe (MTL), basal forebrain, brainstem, and olfactory bulb and cortex [14]. PART thus describes neuronal tau pathology, while ARTAG focuses on astrocytic tau pathology. Whether PART and ARTAG belong to separate or shared pathogenic processes is unknown.

We propose a four-step approach for the morphological classification of ARTAG. We anticipate that harmonizing the nomenclature and improving consistency in documentation of ARTAG is a necessary first step for defining diagnostic guidelines that will result in progress in clinicopathological correlation and investigation of the pathogenesis of ARTAG.

Morphology of tau-immunoreactive astrocytes in primary tauopathies and CTE

The defining lesions of tauopathies are intracellular aggregates of abnormal conformers of tau, consistently detectable by immunohistochemistry for phosphoepitopes (e.g., PHF1, CP13, and AT8), as well as epitopes to conformational epitopes (e.g., Alz50 and MC1) and tau isoform-specific epitopes (e.g., 4R tau isoforms) [32]. Regardless of the tauopathy, astroglial tau inclusions are mostly 4R tau-immunopositive, although ramified astrocytes in PiD as well as occasional protoplasmic astrocytes in PSP may show 3R-tau immunoreactivity [21]. Tufted astrocytes are characteristic of PSP, and astrocytic plaques are signature lesions of CBD, while so-called ramified astrocytes have been described in PiD [15, 32]. In addition, astroglial, argyrophilic, and intracytoplasmic flame or thorn-shaped inclusions were described by Nishimura et al. in PSP [49]. Phosphorylation-dependent anti-tau antibodies are highly sensitive and label lesions that are not consistently detectable by silver impregnation methods, but may show variable ubiquitin or p62/sequestosome immunopositivity, such as the globular astroglial inclusions (GAI) of GGT [1], or the fine granular tau immunopositivity (some with ‘bush-like’ appearance) of the astrocytes of AGD [11]. Some of the variation in the morphology of the immuno-labeled structures was interpreted as representing stages of a process of aggregation and fibrillation, analogous to progression from pretangles to neurofibrillary tangles in AD [6, 11]. The concept of early-stage tau accumulation in astrocytes has also been discussed in relation to the changes in the basal ganglia in PSP [53]. Finally, subpial and subependymal clusters of astrocytic tangles have been described in CTE [41].

Overview of astrocytic tau pathologies in the aging brain

Both neuronal and glial tau pathology increases in frequency with age. The most frequent neuronal tau inclusions are neurofibrillary tangles, threads, and argyrophilic grains. Neuronal and glial inclusions resembling PSP pathology can be seen in the elderly, even without clinical evidence of PSP [17, 18, 34], but these lack the typical multisystem degeneration seen with PSP. Furthermore, tuft-shaped astrocytes have been described in a subgroup of elderly individuals, especially in association with Lewy body pathology, in a distribution resembling that of PSP [25]. Nevertheless, converging data emphasize the presence of a tau astrogliopathy that differs from tufted astrocytes or astrocytic plaques as a common finding in the elderly. Despite its high prevalence, there is a lack of consensus on whether these astroglial tau pathologies in the elderly are clinically relevant, even as a concomitant pathology that might lower an individual’s threshold for the development of clinical symptoms. Research in this field has been hampered by the variation in staining methods, tau antibodies, and the inconsistent nomenclature for astroglial tau pathologies. Importantly, hypertrophic astrocytes, as revealed by hematoxylin and eosin staining and immunohistochemistry for glial fibrillary acidic protein and excitatory amino acid transporter 2 (EAAT2), are common in the elderly, and presumably represent a reaction to multiple types of injury. The location of such reactive astrocytes varies considerably among individuals [8, 59]. Colocalization studies have indicated that glial fibrillary acidic protein-immunoreactive reactive astrocytes are not necessarily those that are also immunoreactive for tau pathology [19].

Ikeda et al. were the first to describe tau-positive thorn-shaped astrocytes (TSA), which were similar in morphology to tau-positive astrocytes described by Nishimura et al. in PSP [49]) in the subpial or subependymal regions of the gray and white matter and frequently in the depths of gyri, as well as in the basal forebrain and brainstem, in aged individuals [27–29]. TSA may occur in multiple conditions [13]. In comparison to the tufted astrocytes of PSP, TSA showed more voluminous perinuclear cytoplasm and their processes are often thicker and shorter [27]. TSA were only occasionally found in the deep cortical layers. The authors noted that anti-ubiquitin antibodies do not label TSA. They interpreted TSA as a non-specific finding and found no relationship between the number of TSA and the severity of neurofibrillary changes. Argyrophilic, tau-positive subpial and perivascular structures were also described as common TSA [27–29].

Schultz et al. reported a high prevalence of TSA in the aged human MTL, particularly the anterior MTL, at the level of the amygdala [57]. TSA were absent in individuals under 60 years, but affected almost half of brains from those over 75 years [57]. Indeed, another study also failed to find this type of tau astrogliopathy in younger individuals [33]. Schultz et al. [57] commented that tau immunopositivity was not confined to the thorn-shaped proximal processes of astroglia, but also presented as thread-like processes in the neuropil. They found that immunolabeling with AT8 was the most sensitive for demonstrating the TSA, while silver staining was less consistent [57]. They also speculated that the preferential subpial and perivascular location could be a result of exposure to CSF or to extravasated plasma proteins due to defects in blood–brain barrier permeability commonly seen in aging and neurodegeneration [36, 57]. Interestingly, a similar distribution of TSA was reported in aged baboons [55]. A study by the MRC-CFAS group confirmed the findings of Schultz et al. and added that the TSA could be less commonly observed in the vicinity of neuronal cell bodies in gray matter areas such as amygdala and dentate gyrus [36]. Also, this study documented the 4R tau nature of TSA [36]. Variable staining for Gallyas and p62 suggest that some of these astrocytes accumulate tau in a fibrillar state [34–36, 38, 46]. Uchikado et al. also reported that the frequency of TSA increased with age and was independent of AGD [66]. All studies agree that the burden of TSA is independent of AD pathology, AGD, coiled bodies, dementia status at death, or presence of the APOE ε4 allele [27, 28, 36, 57, 66]. These studies, however, were limited to evaluation of the MTL and did not take account of cortical and subcortical tau astrogliopathy. Few studies reported tau immunopositivity in glial cells in AD cases with prolonged duration of the disease [5, 48, 68]. Finally, a report on NFT-dementia mentioned the presence of astrocytic tau pathology in white matter and cortex [31].

The possibility that TSA may have clinical significance was first raised by Munoz et al. [46]. They used the term “argyrophilic thorny astrocyte clusters (ATACs)” and observed them in the frontal, temporal, and parietal cortices and in subcortical white matter in a cohort of patients with nonfluent variant of primary progressive aphasia associated with AD pathology [46]. Subsequent reports also linked TSA to symptomatology, although not all found an association of ATACs with focal neurological syndromes [9, 43]. Munoz et al. noted ATACs in the white matter without discernible changes in sections stained for myelin. ATACs did not show a consistent topographic relationship to amyloid deposits, NFTs, or reactive astrogliosis [46]. Interestingly, focal glial tauopathy, interpreted as PSP-type, associated with progressive aphasia was reported by Wakabayashi et al. [67]. These observations suggested that TSA-like astrocytes might be detected not only in a subependymal or subpial location.

A peculiar constellation of tau pathology was documented in a subset of patients with dementia [35]. The most characteristic feature was a tau astrogliopathy, which was described as diffuse granular tau immunoreactivity in astrocytic processes [35]. The study emphasized additional neuronal pathologies, including threads and diffuse neuronal cytoplasmic tau immunoreactivity (pretangle-like). A further study distinguished four different patterns based on the anatomical distribution of the tau astrogliopathy and its combination with neuronal tau pathology, characterized mostly by pretangles and scattered threads [34]: (1) medial temporal lobe type (Group I); (2) amygdala type (Group II); (3) limbic-basal ganglia-nigral type with neuronal tauopathy (Group III); and (4) hippocampus-dentate gyrus-amygdala type with neuronal tauopathy (Group IV). Some of these might represent stages of the same process whereas others might be different. Nevertheless, evaluation of tau astrogliopathy in several anatomical regions indicated that in some cases astroglial tau pathology in the elderly extends beyond the MTL to involve the frontal and parietal cortices, striatum, substantia nigra, and medulla [34]. The morphology of tau astrogliopathy in these studies, was reminiscent of that reported by Munoz et al. as ATACs [46], although extension of the immunoreactivity into the astrocytic processes was emphasized [34, 35]. Distinct accumulation of TSA in the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus was also recognized [34, 36]. Mathematical modeling of hippocampal tau immunolabeling patterns suggested that some forms of tau astrogliopathy in the elderly involve hippocampal subregions in a different pattern from that of primary tauopathies [44]. Ferrer et al. [21, 38] showed that the biochemical signature of astroglial tau pathology in the elderly in both white and gray matter differed from that of other astrocytic tau pathologies in primary tauopathies. Specifically, astroglial tau pathologies in the white matter and gray matter in aging brains were not consistently detectable using phospho-specific anti-tau antibody Ser262 or conformational tau modifications at amino acids 312–322 (MC1), or tau truncated at aspartic acid 421 (tau-C3) [21, 38].

In addition, isolated tufted astrocytes were reported in the occipitotemporal gyrus in an elderly, population-representative cohort [36], and a tauopathy with tufted, thorny, fibrous, and protoplasmic forms of astrocytic pathology was described by Beach et al. [7], in a series of cases with hippocampal sclerosis and also in a community-based study [34]. Sakai et al. [52] reported prominent subcortical white matter astrocytic tau pathology in brains from two elderly patients in whom CBD was considered. In a study on cervical spondylotic myelopathy, AT8 immunohistochemistry revealed tau-positive, neuropil threads, astrocytic foot-like perivascular or subpial structures, and glial cells with short and thick processes, which the authors termed TSA [58]. Interestingly, prominent tau astrogliopathy may be seen in familial disorders without MAPT mutation [20].

In summary, tau-immunoreactive astrogliopathy in the elderly represent a spectrum of morphological abnormalities including those originally described as TSA (plump, peri-nuclear cytoplasmic immunoreactivity) and additional fine granular tau immunoreactivity extending into the astrocytic processes in the gray matter. These two morphologies can be present in the same brain. TSA may be seen in subpial, sub-ependymal, or perivascular areas, as well as in the white and gray matter, while the fine granular immunoreactivity is seen in the gray matter. Most likely, the different tau-immunoreactive astroglial morphologies in different locations in the aging brain, with or without clinical correlation, reflect different pathogenetic events. We propose the umbrella term ARTAG to encompass all of these, with or without accompanying morphological features of other neurodegenerative disorders, including PSP, CBD, PiD, GGT, PART, AD, AGD, and Lewy body pathology. Some clinicopathological studies suggest that ARTAG may present clinically with focal symptoms like aphasia when circumscribed to a smaller number of regions [46]; whereas, in cases with widespread pathology dementia with or without parkinsonism might be the clinical presentation [34, 35]. On the other hand, studies focusing only on the MTL have found no relationship between ARTAG and cognitive impairment or dementia [36].

Differential diagnosis

We provide the following operational criteria for the six well-defined tau-immunoreactive astrocytic cytopathologies seen in primary tauopathies and aging brain as follows (see comparison in Table 1; Fig. 1):

Tufted astrocytes Star-like tufts of tau-positive radiating fibers. The dense tau-immunoreactive tufts are detected in the proximal part of the astrocytic processes, often usually in a symmetrical fashion. They are localized to the gray matter (mostly basal ganglia and neocortex).

Astrocytic plaques Focal and densely tau-immunoreactive stubby dilatations of distal processes of astrocytes giving a senile-plaque-like appearance without amyloid core. They are localized to the gray matter (mostly basal ganglia and neocortex).

Ramified astrocytes Tau immunoreactivity occupying mostly the perikarya and ramifying into the cell processes usually localized to one side of the cell giving the appearance of eccentric nuclei of the astrocyte. They are localized to the gray matter and to the white matter in neocortices with severe neuronal loss.

Globular astroglial inclusions Tau-immunoreactive distinct globules (up to the size of the astroglial nucleus; 1–5 μm) and dots (1–2 μm) in the perikarya and proximal parts of astrocytic processes, found in gray matter.

Thorn-shaped astrocytes (TSA) Tau immunoreactivity is localized in astrocytic perikarya with extension into the proximal parts of the astrocytic processes, with inclusions also in the astrocytic endfeet at the glia limitans around blood vessels and at the pial surface. The processes are thick and short and reminiscent of thorns. They are preferentially found at subpial and perivascular locations, as well as in the white matter and less often as clusters in the gray matter.

Granular or fuzzy tau immunoreactivity in processes of astrocytes (GFA) Fine granular immunoreactivity of branching processes with a few dilations of gray matter astroyctes. The perinuclear soma is densely immunore-active in most of these astrocytes.

The two major cytomorphologies of ARTAG (i.e., TSA and GFA) may accompany tauopathies or other neurode-generative disorders, but ARTAG should be distinguished from the more specific astrocytic lesions that are characteristic of primary tauopathies. To understand the frequency and relevance of ARTAG, we recommend documenting ARTAG as an additional feature in primary tauopathies. It must be noted, that the astroglial tau immunoreactivity described by Botez et al. in the amygdala of AGD [11] fits best with the GFA now included as a form of ARTAG. Indeed, astrocytic tau pathology is variably seen in AGD [22]. Therefore, it is helpful to comment whether in a case of AGD additional ARTAG is present. Furthermore, there are other tau-related disorders with astrocytic tau pathology. For instance, astrocytic tau pathology is also a component of CTE [40–42]. CTE is associated with a history of repetitive concussive or subconcussive brain trauma and is characterized by widespread accumulation of hyper-phosphorylated tau in NFTs and astrocytes, which have similarity to TSA seen in ARTAG [41]. ARTAG has features that overlap those of CTE, including the accentuation of tau pathology around small cerebral vessels and in subpial and periventricular areas. On the other hand, tau pathology, including neuronal and astroglial, in CTE is more abundant in the depths of the convexity cerebral sulci, especially in early stages [41], an aspect that has not been reported in tau astrogliopathy in the aging brain [29, 34–36, 46, 57]. It is possible that CTE pathology has been considered to be age-related astrogliopathy, especially for lesions in the MTL, which can be severely affected in more advanced stages of CTE [42]. The characteristic patchy lesions at depths of cerebral sulci were not recognized as a specific morphological feature of CTE in earlier studies. Finally, tufted astrocytes in PSP, astrocytic plaques in CBD, globular astrocytic inclusions in GGT, and ramified astrocytes in PiD are distinct from tau-immunoreactive astrocytes in the gray matter in ARTAG (see Table 1).

These observations raise the possibility that ARTAG affects distinct astrocytic populations to those in established primary tauopathies. Ikeda et al. noted that the distribution of TSA was coexistent with prominent subpial and subependymal gliosis [29]. Corpora amylacea, which are heavily invested by reactive astrocytes, also share this distribution. Importantly, these astroglial populations of the “glia limitans” share common features with fibrous astrocytes, which predominate in the white matter and subpial zone [8] and with a subset of astrocytes in the gray matter [61], where ARTAG can be also observed. In contrast, astrocytic tau pathologies in CBD or PSP involve protoplasmic astrocytes and are independent of reactive astrogliosis [19, 65]. A few studies report association of glial fibrillary acidic protein and AT8 immunore-activity not only in subpial, but also in gray matter localization of tau astrogliopathy in elderly brains [35, 36]. Protoplasmic and fibrous astrocytes differ substantially in their glutamate uptake capabilities and capacity and have very different degrees of coupling, which are important with regard to their respective calcium wave signals, resting membrane potentials, potassium buffering, glutamate metabolism, exchange of second messengers, metabolites, and other signaling intermediates between cells [50]. In addition to these differences, reaction of astrocytes varies considerably between distinct diseases of the nervous system [60]. It is these differences that may be of pathogenetic relevance to the morphologic diversity of astrogliopathy in ARTAG.

Evaluation of ARTAG

Inconsistency in assessing, describing and documenting ARTAG has impeded research and limited our understanding of the significance of this pathology. It is not clear whether the different patterns of anatomical involvement represent a continuum or distinct abnormalities with different causes. Most previous studies have focused on the MTL, but more widespread involvement is possible [34, 35]. The relative frequency of ARTAG limited to MTL as opposed to more widespread tau astrogliopathy remains unclear. Potential etiologies are not known, although defective function of the blood–brain barrier [57], metabolic encephalopathy, neurodegenerative pathologies, hypoperfusion associated with aging, AD, or vascular dementia [39, 64], and even repeated minor trauma with possible genetic risk factors may play a role. Clinical, imaging and neuropathological data related to these aspects need to be documented precisely to allow a better understanding of the pathogenesis of ARTAG [47]. A method is needed to describe morphologies that can be widely accepted and reproducible. As silver impregnation methods are difficult to standardize and immunohistochemistry for ubiquitin and p62 does not demonstrate all forms of tau cytopathology, optimal characterization of ARTAG requires the use of immunohistochemistry for phosphorylated tau. The most widely used phosphorylation-dependent anti-tau antibodies that have allowed characterization of ARTAG to date include: AT8 (pSer202/Thr205; available from different commercial sources), CP13 (Ser202; Peter Davies, Litwin-Zucker Research Center for The Study of Alzheimer’s Disease and Memory, Manhasset, NY, USA) and PHF-1 or AD2 (Ser396/Ser404; Peter Davies, NY, USA for PHF-1 or commercial sources for AD2s). Other antibodies that may prove useful in the characterization of ARTAG include those specific for tau phosphorylated at Thr181, Ser202, Ser214, Ser396, Ser422, N-terminus region epitope-specific, 4R tau isoform-specific, and some conformation-dependent antibodies such as Alz50 (but not MC-1) [21, 35, 38].

Recommendations for sampling and staining are as follows:

Preliminary screening for ARTAG should include tau immunohistochemistry (antibodies AT8, CP13, AD2 or PHF-1 are recommended) on two sections representative of the MTL (i.e., amygdala and hippocampus at the level of the lateral geniculate body). These regions are vulnerable to TSA and GFA.

If tau astrogliopathy is noted in the screening section, a systematic characterization of ARTAG will require analysis involving additional areas of the frontal, parietal, lateral temporal, and occipital cortices, as well as anterior and posterior portion of the basal ganglia, thalamus, midbrain at the level of substantia nigra, pons at the level of locus coeruleus, and medulla oblongata.

In cases where focal cortical symptoms are reported, further cortical areas corresponding to the clinical symptoms or signal alterations detected in MRI should also be evaluated.

ARTAG should be considered when detecting either or both of the two cytomorphologies: TSA or GFA. As such, we propose the following four-step characterization TReSS algorithm (Table 2): Type? Regional involvement? Severity? Subegional involvement?

First Identify the morphologic and distribution types of ARTAG based on parenchymal localization of TSA and GFA (note that combination of these types is generally the rule):

Laminar subpial TSA (Fig. 2a) Plump perinuclear cytoplasmic tau immunoreactivity in astrocytes in subpial locations. It is important to note whether this is more pronounced in the sulcal depths in the convexity cerebral cortices, as in CTE.

Subependymal TSA Plump perinuclear cytoplasmic tau immunoreactivity in astrocytes in subpial or subependymal locations (Fig. 2b).

Perivascular TSA Plump cytoplasmic immunoreactivity with tau-immunoreactive astrocytic processes around vessels (Fig. 2c) in the gray or white matter.

White matter TSA Astrocytes in the subcortical white matter that show plump cytoplasmic immunoreactivity (Fig. 2d). Note that in the white matter these usually form small clusters (&gt;3 astrocytes) and that it may extend into the adjacent gray matter as described for ATAC [46].

Gray matter GFA Solitary (one or two/20× field) (Fig. 2e, f) or clustered (Fig. 2g, h) GFA (three or more/20× field) with fine granular immunopositivity of the cytoplasmic processes (GFA), with plump perinuclear cytoplasmic tau immunoreactivity. Less frequently, TSA can be also seen in the gray matter.

It must be noted that tau immunohistochemistry occasionally decorates astrocytes at the border of chronic vascular lesions in young and aged individuals. Therefore, this lesion-associated tau astrogliopathy is important to document, but is not considered an aging-related astrogliopathy.

Second Identify involvement of gross anatomical regions:

MTL

Lobar

Subcortical

Brainstem

Although the most frequently involved region is the MTL, involvement of further regions should be recognized. Moreover, MTL is important for comparison with neuroim-aging data on MTL atrophy.

Third Document the severity of ARTAG pathology in the region or subregion (see step four) examined. ARTAG may appear in focal clusters or in a widespread distribution. We propose documentation as to whether ARTAG involves only (1) occasional or (2) numerous astrocytes. If the latter, the focal clusters or widespread distribution should be noted. Semiquantitative scoring for ARTAG will need to be refined.

Fourth Map subregional involvement to promote future exploration and scientific discovery related to ARTAG. These are the subdivisions within the gross anatomical regions of the second step and include the following (Table 3; examples are shown in Fig. 3):

amygdala and hippocampus, inferior temporal gyrus for MTL

frontal, parietal, occipital, lateral temporal (middle and superior gyrus) for lobar

caudate nucleus, putamen, nucleus accumbens, glo-bus pallidus, thalamus, basal forebrain for subcortical

mesencephalon, pons, medulla oblongata for brainstem.

It should be noted whether ARTAG is associated with features of a particular neurodegenerative disorder, or with other disease (cerebrovascular, inflammatory, metabolic, etc.) followed by the description of the type and major regional involvement.

Some examples for the diagnostic reporting are provided as follows:

Examples for pure types:

ARTAG subpial type;

Region: MTL;

Subregion: hippocampus, inferior temporal cortex;

Extent: numerous astrocytes and widespread distribution

ARTAG subependymal type;

Region: Subcortical;

Subregion: lateral ventricle;

Extent: occasional

Examples for combinations:

(a) ARTAG gray matter type;

Region: MTL and subcortical;

Subregion: inferior temporal cortex and nucleus accumbens;

Extent: numerous astrocytes in focal clusters

plus

ARTAG white matter type;

Region: MTL;

Subregion: hippocampus, periamygdala white matter, and temporal;

Extent: numerous astrocytes with widespread distribution;

(b) ARTAG perivascular type;

Region: lobar and subcortical;

Subregion: frontal cortex and striatum;

Extent: occasional

plus

ARTAG white matter type;

Region: MTL and lobar;

Subregion: lateral temporal, frontal, and parietal lobes;

Extent: numerous astrocytes in focal clusters.

For example, the cases described by Munoz et al. [46] would be summarized in the diagnostic report as: ARTAG gray and white matter type; region: MTL and lobar; extent: numerous in focal clusters. For research purposes, the subregional involvement should be added as: gyrus ambiens, parahippocampal gyrus, fusiform gyrus, inferior, middle, and superior temporal gyri, frontal dorsolateral and orbitofrontal cortices, cingulate gyrus, and inferior parietal lobe. The cases described by Kovacs et al. [35] could be summarized as ARTAG gray matter type; region: MTL, lobar, subcortical, and brainstem; extent: numerous in focal clusters; plus white matter type; region: MTL; extent: numerous and widespread; with further details on the subregional involvement. The cases discussed by Santpere and Ferrer [53] as early PSP-like astrocytic changes also represent ARTAG with additional features of concomitant PSP-type pathology (i.e., cases 4 and 5).

Summary

ARTAG describes a spectrum of astroglial tau pathologies detected mainly in the elderly represented by TSA and GFA, which are distinct from astroglial lesions of primary tauopathies (i.e., tufted astrocytes, astrocytic plaques, ramified astrocytes, or globular astroglial inclusions). The frequency of ARTAG varies depending on the type: subpial, subependymal, and perivascular types are more frequent, while gray matter and cerebral white matter types might be less common. The etiology of different types might be different; however, all appear mostly associated with aging. Although documented in several publications, there is a lack of consensus on how ARTAG should be recorded and interpreted. Here we propose steps for a systematic characterization with the expectation that this will improve communication about and understanding of this condition, including its relation to other brain pathologies and clinical symptoms. This approach has the potential to help in several respects:

It will facilitate communication between neuropathologists and researchers. Revisiting and standardizing the terminology should help to move the field forward. It will also increase awareness of this pathology, which is under-recognized and under-studied.

A better differentiation of ARTAG types may help with assessing their relationship to other tauopathies. This may be particularly important in the context of CTE-related tau pathologies. Furthermore, this may help better understanding of differences in the pathogenesis of ARTAG types.

A regular system for typing and grading of ARTAG should facilitate comparisons between different centers, and the pooling of information in harmonized clinicopathological studies. These will potentially pave the way towards mechanistic insights and genetic studies into their pathogenesis.

Understanding the nature of ARTAG may help in the interpretation of clinical biomarker and imaging studies.

Development of such a common concept (Fig. 4) and nomenclature that allows comparisons across studies and aggregation of data for large-scale multi-institutional analyses is imperative in order to understand the phenomena and clinical implications of ARTAG. Future studies should also aim to re-evaluate these observations to validate this approach and to develop a concise classification of ARTAG for diagnostic neuropathology. To reach this goal, paradigms will need to be designed for ARTAG along the lines used to standardize evaluation and diagnostic criteria for tau, amyloid and α-synuclein and other major pathologies [2–4, 10, 45]. Subsequently, it will be possible to evaluate inter-rater reliability of the proposed evaluation and eventually to merge clinical and pathologic data from multiple centers to determine practical significance of ARTAG. At this preliminary stage, however, our recommendation is limited to an evaluation strategy focusing primarily on common nomenclature and classification of aging-related tau astrogliopathy.

We are extremely grateful to the patients, clinicians, and fellow researchers that made this effort possible. We also acknowledge the following funding sources: FP7 EU Project Develage No. 278486 (GGK); Grant “NIH P30 AG10133 (BG); NIA Grants P50 AG05681, P01 AG03991 (NJC), NIH R01 AG040311, institutional Grants NIH P01 AG019724-03 and P50 AG023501, and the tau consortium (LTG); the Nelson Family Foundation (MEM) and NIH Grants P50 AG016574 and P50 NS072187 (MEM, DWD); NIH Grant AG010124, AG017586 (JQT); NIH Grant P50 AG005138 (PRH); Alzheimer’s Research UK (ARUK), Alzheimer’s Society, National Institute for Health Research (NIHR), and UK Medical Research Council (MRC; G0400074) (JA); GMH is a National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia Senior Principal Research Fellow (#630434); Grant IGA NT12094-5 from Grant Agency of Ministry of Health of Czech Republic (RM); NIH Grant # AG028383 (PN); UK Medical Research Council (MRC; MR/L016400/1) (CS); NIA P50 AG005133 (JK); National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (1U01NS086659-01), Department of Veterans Affairs,), the National Institute of Aging Boston University Alzheimer’s Disease Center (P30AG13846; supplement 0572063345–5) (ACM); UK Medical Research Council (MC-PC-13044) (JWI and CS); National Brain Research Program, Hungary (KTIA_13_NAP-A-II/7) and Grant-in-Aid (KAKEN 26250017) (both for TH); NIH Grant P30AG12300 (KH, CLW); Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación, Instituto de Salud Carlos III—Fondos FEDER, a way to build Europe FIS Grants PI14/00757 and PI14/00328 (IF); DFG Grant (SFB 1134/ A03) (CS); Johns Hopkins Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center NIH Grant #P50AG05146 (JCT); Alzheimer’s Disease Core Center Grant P30AG008051-26 (TW); Grant AG13854 (EHB); JSPS KAK-ENHI Grant Number 26430060 (MT); Italian Ministry of Health (GG and FT); National Institute of Health Grants P50 AG05136 and P50 NS062684 (TJM). The help of Brain Banks in collecting tissue is also highly acknowledged: Vienna KIN-Neurobiobank and VITA–study (GGK); GIE NeuroCEB (funded by the patients associations France Alzheimer, France Parkinson, Fondacion ARSEP and CSC) (CD); Sydney Brain Bank (funded by Neuroscience Research Australia and the University of New South Wales) (GMH); the Sheffield and Cambridge Brain Banks (CFAS) (PI, SW); Parkinson’s UK Tissue Bank at Imperial College, funded by Parkinson’s UK, a charity registered in England and Wales (948776) and Scotland (SC037554) (SG); The Edinburgh Brain Bank is supported by the UK Medical Research Council (MR/L016400/1) (CS, JWI).

Fig. 1 Comparison of tau (using AT8 antibody) immunoreactivities seen in primary tauopathies with those observed in aging-related tau astrogliopathy (ARTAG)

Fig. 2 Representative photomicrographs of ARTAG types. Plump cytoplasmic tau immunoreactivity of astrocytes and tau-positive lining in subpial (a) and subependymal (b) location. Perivascular type: tau-immunoreactive astrocytic processes arranged around vessels (c). White matter (WM)-type: astrocytes in the subcortical white matter with plump cytoplasmic immunoreactivity (d). Gray matter (GM)-type: single-appearing (e, f) or clusters (g, h) of astrocytes with fine granular tau immunoreactivity in the processes without (e) or with (f) plump perinuclear cytoplasmic tau immunoreactivity. The bar shown in “a” represents 30 μm for a, b, f; 50 μm for d, e, h; and 100 μm for c, g

Fig. 3 Representative images of different anatomical regions showing ARTAG. a Temporal cortex and white matter (WM); b dentate gyrus (gray matter-type cluster enlarged in the right); c amygdala; d frontal cortex (gray matter-type single); e nucleus accumbens (gray matter-type clusters and single forms); f substantia nigra; g, h medulla oblongata (IO inferior olive; ML medial lemniscus; n. XII hypoglossal nucleus). The bar shown in a represents 150 μm for a, b; 100 μm for the right inset in b, and c–h

Fig. 4 Summary of the concept of ARTAG. Four distinct astroglial tau pathologies are seen in primary tauopathies: tufted astrocytes (TA), astrocytic plaques (AP), globular astroglial inclusions (GAI), and ramified astrocytes (RA). Rarely there may be slight overlap of these morphologies, but predominance of a type is significantly associated with one of the specific primary tauopathies. ARTAG is characterized by two different morphologies: thorn-shaped astrocytes (TSA) and fine granular immunoreactivity in astrocytic processes (granular/fuzzy astrocytes: GFA); these are seen in the subpial (SP), sub-ependymal (SE), perivascular (PV) areas, and in the white (WM) and gray matter (GM). TSA and GFA may be present in the same brain together. Other neurodegenerative diseases (NDDs) may coexist with ARTAG or with primary tauopathies

Table 1 Operational criteria for the six well-defined tau-immunoreactive astrocytic cytopathologies seen in primary tauopathies and aging-related tau astrogliopathy (ARTAG) (see also Fig. 1)

Name	Characteristic immunoreactivity	
Astrocytic processes	
Soma	Proximal	Distal	Gallyas	Reported	Location	
(a) Primary tauopathy-related astroglial tau pathology	
 Tufted astrocytes	Relatively spared	Dense tufts: usually symmetric	No	+	PSP	GM	
 Astrocytic plaques	Spared	No	Stubby dilatations	+	CBD	GM	
 Globular astroglial inclusions	Dense: filled with globules	1–5 μm globules	1–2 μm globules	−	GGT	GM	
Ramified astrocytes	Dense: localized to one side	Dense ramifications: usually asymmetric	No	+	PiD	GM, WM/GM junction	
(b) ARTAG-related astroglial tau pathology	
 Thorn-shaped astro - cytes (TSA)	Dense: thorn or flame shaped	Short and thick	No	−/+	With or without PSP, AGD, AD, CTE, other	GM, WM, SP, SE, PV	
 Granular or fuzzy astrocytes (GFA)	Dense: perinuclear accumulation	Fine or fuzzy granular	Fine granular	−/+	With or without AGD	GM	
In the column “Reported” those diseases are mentioned, where there are literature reports of the specific astrocytic tau pathologies. For Gallyas silver staining: + indicates consistently detectable; −/+ indicates variably detectable (for GFA the soma may be variably positive but the processes not); - indicates usually not detectable

GM gray matter, WM white matter, SP subpial, SE subependymal, PV perivascular, PSP progressive supranuclear palsy, CBD corticobasal degeneration, CTE chronic traumatic encephalopathy, PiD Pick disease, GGT globular glial tauopathy, AGD argyrophilic grain disease

Table 2 Evaluation of aging-related tau astrogliopathy (ARTAG)

Requires:	
 Presence of thorn-shaped astrocytes (TSA) and/or solitary or clustered astrocytes with plump cytoplasmic tau immunoreactivity that extend into the astroglial processes as fine granular immunopositivity (GFA) distinguishable from AP, TA, RA, and GAI	
 Four-step characterization of ARTAG:	
  Step 1: Distinguish types according to the location:	
   Subpial	
   Subependymal	
   Gray matter	
   White matter	
   Perivascular	
  Step 2: Describe major anatomical distribution	
   Medial temporal lobe	
   Lobar	
   Subcortical	
   Brainstem	
  Step 3: Document the severity of ARTAG	
   Occasional	
   Numerous	
    Focal	
    Widespread	
  Step 4: Map subregional involvement and extent (see Table 3)	
Ancillary studies:	
 Description of additional tau pathologies in specific anatomical regions:	
  Neurofibrillary degeneration	
  Neuropil threads	
  Diffuse cytoplasmic neuronal tau immunoreactivity (“pretangles“)	
  Argyrophilic grains	
  Dystrophic neurites around or within amyloid plaques	
  Oligodendroglial tau immunoreactivity	
 Characterization of tau phosphorylation, conformation, truncation, nitration, ubiquitination, immunohistochemistry for 4R a nd 3R tau; ultrastructural study; genetic studies (MAPT and other genes associated with neurodegeneration)	
 Description of concomitant neurodegenerative and non-neurodegenerative pathologies	
 Description of relation to lesions (“perilesional” astrocytic tau immunoreactivity), to corpora amylacea, and Rosenthal fibers	
TSA thorn-shaped astrocyte, GFA granular/fuzzy astrocyte, AP astrocytic plaque, TA tufted astrocyte, RA ramified astrocyte, GAI globular astroglial inclusions

Table 3 Description of aging-related tau astrogliopathy (ARTAG) based on the type and distribution of astrocytic tau pathology

	
MTL medial temporal lobe, Gy gyrus, GP globus pallidus, Caud/Put caudate and putamen, Dent Gyr dentate gyrus, Medulla obl. medulla oblongata, Aq aqueduct, LV lateral ventricle, 3V 3rd ventricle

* In the case of focal cortical symptoms the anatomical area with clinical relevance should be noted additionally. Combinations of subtypes should be expected and described


1 Ahmed Z Bigio EH Budka H Dickson DW Ferrer I Ghetti B Giaccone G Hatanpaa KJ Holton JL Josephs KA 2013 Globular glial tauopathies (GGT): consensus recommendations Acta Neuropathol 126 537 544 23995422
2 Alafuzoff I Arzberger T Al-Sarraj S Bodi I Bogdanovic N Braak H Bugiani O Del-Tredici K Ferrer I Gelpi E 2008 Staging of neurofibrillary pathology in Alzheimer’s disease: a study of the BrainNet Europe Consortium Brain Pathol 18 484 496 18371174
3 Alafuzoff I Ince PG Arzberger T Al-Sarraj S Bell J Bodi I Bogdanovic N Bugiani O Ferrer I Gelpi E 2009 Staging/typing of Lewy body related alpha-synuclein pathology: a study of the BrainNet Europe Consortium Acta Neuropathol 117 635 652 19330340
4 Alafuzoff I Thal DR Arzberger T Bogdanovic N Al-Sarraj S Bodi I Boluda S Bugiani O Duyckaerts C Gelpi E 2009 Assessment of beta-amyloid deposits in human brain: a study of the BrainNet Europe Consortium Acta Neuropathol 117 309 320 19184666
5 Arima K Izumiyama Y Nakamura M Nakayama H Kimura M Ando S Ikeda K Takahashi K 1998 Argyrophilic tau-positive twisted and non-twisted tubules in astrocytic processes in brains of Alzheimer-type dementia: an electron microscopical study Acta Neuropathol 95 28 39 9452819
6 Bancher C Brunner C Lassmann H Budka H Jellinger K Wiche G Seitelberger F Grundke-Iqbal I Iqbal K Wisniewski HM 1989 Accumulation of abnormally phosphorylated tau precedes the formation of neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer’s disease Brain Res 477 90 99 2495152
7 Beach TG Sue L Scott S Layne K Newell A Walker D Baker M Sahara N Yen SH Hutton M 2003 Hippocampal sclerosis dementia with tauopathy Brain Pathol 13 263 278 12946017
8 Beach TG Walker R McGeer EG 1989 Patterns of gliosis in Alzheimer’s disease and aging cerebrum Glia 2 420 436 2531723
9 Bigio EH Mishra M Hatanpaa KJ White CL 3rd Johnson N Rademaker A Weitner BB Deng HX Dubner SD Weintraub S 2010 TDP-43 pathology in primary progressive aphasia and frontotemporal dementia with pathologic Alzheimer disease Acta Neuropathol 120 43 54 20361198
10 Boluda S Toledo JB Irwin DJ Raible KM Byrne MD Lee EB Lee VM Trojanowski JQ 2014 A comparison of Abeta amyloid pathology staging systems and correlation with clinical diagnosis Acta Neuropathol 128 543 550 24916271
11 Botez G Probst A Ipsen S Tolnay M 1999 Astrocytes expressing hyperphosphorylated tau protein without glial fibrillary tangles in argyrophilic grain disease Acta Neuropathol 98 251 256 10483782
12 Cairns NJ Bigio EH Mackenzie IR Neumann M Lee VM Hatanpaa KJ White CL 3rd Schneider JA Grinberg LT Halliday G 2007 Neuropathologic diagnostic and nosologic criteria for frontotemporal lobar degeneration: consensus of the Consortium for Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration Acta Neuropathol 114 5 22 17579875
13 Chin SS Goldman JE 1996 Glial inclusions in CNS degenerative diseases J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 55 499 508 8627339
14 Crary JF Trojanowski JQ Schneider JA Abisambra JF Abner EL Alafuzoff I Arnold SE Attems J Beach TG Bigio EH 2014 Primary age-related tauopathy (PART): a common pathology associated with human aging Acta Neuropathol 128 755 766 25348064
15 Dickson DW Kouri N Murray ME Josephs KA 2011 Neuropathology of frontotemporal lobar degeneration-tau (FTLD-tau) J Mol Neurosci 45 384 389 21720721
16 Dugger B Uchikado H Ahmed Z Dickson DW 2008 Sex differences in perivascular tauopathy in the mediobasal tuberal hypothalamus in neurodegenerative diseases in humans Alzheimers Dementia 4 Suppl T715
17 Dugger BN Hentz JG Adler CH Sabbagh MN Shill HA Jacobson S Caviness JN Belden C Driver-Dunckley E Davis KJ 2014 Clinicopathological outcomes of prospectively followed normal elderly brain bank volunteers J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 73 244 252 24487796
18 Evidente VG Adler CH Sabbagh MN Connor DJ Hentz JG Caviness JN Sue LI Beach TG 2011 Neuropathological findings of PSP in the elderly without clinical PSP: possible incidental PSP? Parkinsonism Relat Disord 17 365 371 21420891
19 Feany MB Dickson DW 1995 Widespread cytoskeletal pathology characterizes corticobasal degeneration Am J Pathol 146 1388 1396 7778678
20 Ferrer I Legati A Garcia-Monco JC Gomez-Beldarrain M Carmona M Blanco R Seeley WW Coppola G 2015 Familial behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia associated with astrocyte-predominant tauopathy J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 74 370 379 25756587
21 Ferrer I Lopez-Gonzalez I Carmona M Arregui L Dalfo E Torrejon-Escribano B Diehl R Kovacs GG 2014 Glial and neuronal tau pathology in tauopathies: characterization of disease-specific phenotypes and tau pathology progression J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 73 81 97 24335532
22 Ferrer I Santpere G van Leeuwen FW 2008 Argyrophilic grain disease Brain 131 1416 1432 18234698
23 Ghetti B Oblak AL Boeve BF Johnson KA Dickerson BC Goedert M 2015 Invited review: frontotemporal dementia caused by microtubule-associated protein tau gene (MAPT) mutations: a chameleon for neuropathology and neuroimaging Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 41 24 46 25556536
24 Goedert M Spillantini MG Jakes R Rutherford D Crowther RA 1989 Multiple isoforms of human microtubule-associated protein tau: sequences and localization in neurofibrillary tangles of Alzheimer’s disease Neuron 3 519 526 2484340
25 Hishikawa N Hashizume Y Yoshida M Niwa J Tanaka F Sobue G 2005 Tuft-shaped astrocytes in Lewy body disease Acta Neuropathol 109 373 380 15668789
26 Hutton M Lendon CL Rizzu P Baker M Froelich S Houlden H Pickering-Brown S Chakraverty S Isaacs A Grover A 1998 Association of missense and 5′-splice-site mutations in tau with the inherited dementia FTDP-17 Nature 393 702 705 9641683
27 Ikeda K 1996 Glial fibrillary tangles and argyrophilic threads: classification and disease specificity Neuropathology 16 71 77
28 Ikeda K Akiyama H Arai T Nishimura T 1998 Glial tau pathology in neurodegenerative diseases: their nature and comparison with neuronal tangles Neurobiol Aging 19 S85 S91 9562475
29 Ikeda K Akiyama H Kondo H Haga C Tanno E Tokuda T Ikeda S 1995 Thorn-shaped astrocytes: possibly secondarily induced tau-positive glial fibrillary tangles Acta Neuropathol 90 620 625 8615083
30 Irwin DJ Cairns NJ Grossman M McMillan CT Lee EB Van Deerlin VM Lee VM Trojanowski JQ 2015 Frontotemporal lobar degeneration: defining phenotypic diversity through personalized medicine Acta Neuropathol 129 469 491 25549971
31 Jellinger KA Attems J 2007 Neurofibrillary tangle-predominant dementia: comparison with classical Alzheimer disease Acta Neuropathol 113 107 117 17089134
32 Kovacs GG 2015 Invited review: neuropathology of tauopathies: principles and practice Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 41 3 23 25495175
33 Kovacs GG Horvath MC Majtenyi K Lutz MI Hurd YL Keller E 2015 Heroin abuse exaggerates age-related deposition of hyperphosphorylated tau and p62-positive inclusions Neurobiol Aging 36 3100 3107 26254956
34 Kovacs GG Milenkovic I Wohrer A Hoftberger R Gelpi E Haberler C Honigschnabl S Reiner-Concin A Heinzl H Jungwirth S 2013 Non-Alzheimer neurodegenerative pathologies and their combinations are more frequent than commonly believed in the elderly brain: a community-based autopsy series Acta Neuropathol 126 365 384 23900711
35 Kovacs GG Molnar K Laszlo L Strobel T Botond G Honigschnabl S Reiner-Concin A Palkovits M Fischer P Budka H 2011 A peculiar constellation of tau pathology defines a subset of dementia in the elderly Acta Neuropathol 122 205 222 21437732
36 Lace G Ince PG Brayne C Savva GM Matthews FE de Silva R Simpson JE Wharton SB 2012 Mesial temporal astrocyte tau pathology in the MRC-CFAS ageing brain cohort Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 34 15 24 22868294
37 Lee VM Goedert M Trojanowski JQ 2001 Neurodegenerative tauopathies Annu Rev Neurosci 24 1121 1159 11520930
38 Lopez-Gonzalez I Carmona M Blanco R Luna-Munoz J Martinez-Mandonado A Mena R Ferrer I 2013 Characterization of thorn-shaped astrocytes in white matter of temporal lobe in Alzheimer’s disease brains Brain Pathol 23 144 153 22882361
39 Love S Miners JS 2015 White matter hypoperfusion and damage in dementia: post-mortem assessment Brain Pathol 25 99 107 25521180
40 McKee AC Cantu RC Nowinski CJ Hedley-Whyte ET Gavett BE Budson AE Santini VE Lee HS Kubilus CA Stern RA 2009 Chronic traumatic encephalopathy in athletes: progressive tauopathy after repetitive head injury J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 68 709 735 19535999
41 McKee AC Stein TD Kiernan PT Alvarez VE 2015 The neuropathology of chronic traumatic encephalopathy Brain Pathol 25 350 364 25904048
42 McKee AC Stern RA Nowinski CJ Stein TD Alvarez VE Daneshvar DH Lee HS Wojtowicz SM Hall G Baugh CM 2013 The spectrum of disease in chronic traumatic encephalopathy Brain 136 43 64 23208308
43 Mesulam M Wicklund A Johnson N Rogalski E Leger GC Rademaker A Weintraub S Bigio EH 2008 Alzheimer and frontotemporal pathology in subsets of primary progressive aphasia Ann Neurol 63 709 719 18412267
44 Milenkovic I Petrov T Kovacs GG 2014 Patterns of hippocampal tau pathology differentiate neurodegenerative dementias Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 38 375 388 25195847
45 Montine TJ Monsell SE Beach TG Bigio EH Yunqi B Cairns NJ Frosch M Henriksen J Julia K Kukull WA 2015 Multisite assessment of NIA-AA guidelines for the neuropathologic evaluation of Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimers Dementia 10.1016/j.jalz.2015.07.492
46 Munoz DG Woulfe J Kertesz A 2007 Argyrophilic thorny astrocyte clusters in association with Alzheimer’s disease pathology in possible primary progressive aphasia Acta Neuropathol 114 347 357 17637999
47 Murray ME Kouri N Lin WL Jack CR Jr Dickson DW Vemuri P 2014 Clinicopathologic assessment and imaging of tauopathies in neurodegenerative dementias Alz Res Ther 6 1
48 Nakano I Iwatsubo T Otsuka N Kamei M Matsumura K Mannen T 1992 Paired helical filaments in astrocytes: electron microscopy and immunohistochemistry in a case of atypical Alzheimer’s disease Acta Neuropathol 83 228 232 1557954
49 Nishimura M Namba Y Ikeda K Oda M 1992 Glial fibrillary tangles with straight tubules in the brains of patients with progressive supranuclear palsy Neurosci Lett 143 35 38 1436679
50 Oberheim NA Goldman SA Nedergaard M 2012 Heterogeneity of astrocytic form and function Methods Mol Biol 814 23 45 22144298
51 Poorkaj P Bird TD Wijsman E Nemens E Garruto RM Anderson L Andreadis A Wiederholt WC Raskind M Schellenberg GD 1998 Tau is a candidate gene for chromosome 17 frontotemporal dementia Ann Neurol 43 815 825 9629852
52 Sakai K Piao YS Kikugawa K Ohara S Hasegawa M Takano H Fukase M Nishizawa M Kakita A Takahashi H 2006 Corticobasal degeneration with focal, massive tau accumulation in the subcortical white matter astrocytes Acta Neuropathol 112 341 348 16804710
53 Santpere G Ferrer I 2009 Delineation of early changes in cases with progressive supranuclear palsy-like pathology. Astrocytes in striatum are primary targets of tau phosphorylation and GFAP oxidation Brain Pathol 19 177 187 18462470
54 Schultz C Braak H Braak E 1996 A sex difference in neurodegeneration of the human hypothalamus Neurosci Lett 212 103 106 8832649
55 Schultz C Dehghani F Hubbard GB Thal DR Struckhoff G Braak E Braak H 2000 Filamentous tau pathology in nerve cells, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes of aged baboons J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 59 39 52 10744034
56 Schultz C Ghebremedhin E Braak E Braak H 1999 Sex-dependent cytoskeletal changes of the human hypothalamus develop independently of Alzheimer’s disease Exp Neurol 160 186 193 10630203
57 Schultz C Ghebremedhin E Del Tredici K Rub U Braak H 2004 High prevalence of thorn-shaped astrocytes in the aged human medial temporal lobe Neurobiol Aging 25 397 405 15123344
58 Shimizu H Kakita A Takahashi H 2008 Spinal cord tau pathology in cervical spondylotic myelopathy Acta Neuropathol 115 185 192 18040698
59 Simpson JE Ince PG Lace G Forster G Shaw PJ Matthews F Savva G Brayne C Wharton SB Function MRCC 2010 Astrocyte phenotype in relation to Alzheimer-type pathology in the ageing brain Neurobiol Aging 31 578 590 18586353
60 Sofroniew MV Vinters HV 2010 Astrocytes: biology and pathology Acta Neuropathol 119 7 35 20012068
61 Sosunov AA Wu X Tsankova NM Guilfoyle E McKhann GM 2nd Goldman JE 2014 Phenotypic heterogeneity and plasticity of isocortical and hippocampal astrocytes in the human brain J Neurosci 34 2285 2298 24501367
62 Spillantini MG Goedert M Crowther RA Murrell JR Farlow MR Ghetti B 1997 Familial multiple system tauopathy with presenile dementia: a disease with abundant neuronal and glial tau filaments Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94 4113 4118 9108114
63 Spillantini MG Murrell JR Goedert M Farlow MR Klug A Ghetti B 1998 Mutation in the tau gene in familial multiple system tauopathy with presenile dementia Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95 7737 7741 9636220
64 Thomas T Miners S Love S 2015 Post-mortem assessment of hypoperfusion of cerebral cortex in Alzheimer’s disease and vascular dementia Brain 138 1059 1069 25688080
65 Togo T Dickson DW 2002 Tau accumulation in astrocytes in progressive supranuclear palsy is a degenerative rather than a reactive process Acta Neuropathol 104 398 402 12200627
66 Uchikado H Fujino Y Lin W Dickson D 2008 Frequency and relation of argyrophilic grain disease and thorn-shaped astrocytes in Alzheimer’s disease Advances in Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease: insights, progress, and perspectives New York 375 379
67 Wakabayashi K Shibasaki Y Hasegawa M Horikawa Y Soma Y Hayashi S Morita T Iwatsubo T Takahashi H 2000 Primary progressive aphasia with focal glial tauopathy Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 26 477 481 11054189
68 Yamazaki M Nakano I Imazu O Terashi A 1995 Paired helical filaments and straight tubules in astrocytes: an electron microscopic study in dementia of the Alzheimer type Acta Neuropathol 90 31 36 7572076
