LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9814863
21942
J Alzheimers Dis
J. Alzheimers Dis.
Journal of Alzheimer's disease : JAD
1387-2877
1875-8908

26967211
4866875
10.3233/JAD-150914
NIHMS769281
Article
The Vanderbilt Memory &amp; Aging Project: Study Design and Baseline Cohort Overview
Jefferson Angela L. a*
Gifford Katherine A. a
Acosta Lealani Mae Y. a
Bell Susan P. abc
Donahue Manus J. de
Davis L. Taylor e
Gottlieb JoAnn f
Gupta Deepak K. b
Hohman Timothy J. a
Lane Elizabeth M. a
Libon David J. g
Mendes Lisa A. b
Niswender Kevin h
Pechman Kimberly R. a
Rane Swati i
Ruberg Frederick L. jk
Su Yan Ru b
Zetterberg Henrik lm
Liu Dandan n
a Vanderbilt Memory &amp; Alzheimer’s Center, Department of Neurology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, USA
b Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA
c Center for Quality Aging, Division of General Internal Medicine, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA
d Department of Neurology, Department of Psychiatry, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA
e Radiology &amp; Radiological Sciences, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA
f Vanderbilt Institute for Clinical &amp; Translational Research, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA
g Rowan University - School of Osteopathic Medicine, Department of Geriatrics and Gerontology, New Jersey Institute for Successful Aging, Stratford, NJ, USA
h Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, Division of Diabetes, Endocrinology, &amp; Metabolism, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA
i Radiology, University of Washington Medical Center, Seattle, WA, USA
j Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA
k Section of Cardiovascular Medicine, Boston Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA
l Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, The Sahlgrenska Academy at University of Gothenburg, Mölndal, Sweden
m Deparment of Molecular Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, Queen Square, London, UK
n Department of Biostatistics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA
* Correspondence to: Angela L. Jefferson, PhD, Vanderbilt Memory &amp; Alzheimer’s Center, 1207 17th Avenue South, Suite 204, Nashville, TN 37212, USA. Tel.: +1 615 322 8676; Fax: +1 615 875 2727; angela.jefferson@vanderbilt.edu
25 3 2016
8 3 2016
13 5 2016
52 2 539559
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Background

Vascular health factors frequently co-occur with Alzheimer’s disease (AD). A better understanding of how systemic vascular and cerebrovascular health intersects with clinical and pathological AD may inform prevention and treatment opportunities.

Objective

To establish the Vanderbilt Memory &amp; Aging Project, a case-control longitudinal study investigating vascular health and brain aging, and describe baseline methodology and participant characteristics.

Methods

From September 2012 to November 2014, 335 participants age 60–92 were enrolled, including 168 individuals with mild cognitive impairment (MCI, 73 ± 8 years, 41% female) and 167 age-, sex-, and race-matched cognitively normal controls (NC, 72 ± 7 years, 41% female). At baseline, participants completed a physical and frailty examination, fasting blood draw, neuropsychological assessment, echocardiogram, cardiac MRI, and brain MRI. A subset underwent 24-hour ambulatory blood pressure monitoring and lumbar puncture for cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) collection.

Results

As designed, participant groups were comparable for age (p = 0.31), sex (p = 0.95), and race (p = 0.65). MCI participants had greater Framingham Stroke Risk Profile scores (p = 0.008), systolic blood pressure values (p = 0.008), and history of left ventricular hypertrophy (p = 0.04) than NC participants. As expected, MCI participants performed worse on all neuropsychological measures (p-values&lt;0.001), were more likely to be APOE ε4 carriers (p = 0.02), and had enhanced CSF biomarkers, including lower Aβ42 (p = 0.02), higher total tau (p = 0.004), and higher p-tau (p = 0.02) compared to NC participants.

Conclusion

Diverse sources of baseline and longitudinal data will provide rich opportunities to investigate pathways linking vascular and cerebrovascular health, clinical and pathological AD, and neurodegeneration contributing to novel strategies to delay or prevent cognitive decline.

Alzheimer’s disease
biomarkers
brain MRI
cardiac MRI
mild cognitive impairment
vascular risk factors

INTRODUCTION

As the population continues to age, cognitive decline and dementia are a rapidly growing public health issue. Alzheimer’s disease (AD) prevalence is expected to triple by 2050 [1]. While pharmacological targets to arrest or slow disease progression continue to be developed and evaluated, there is an urgent need to concurrently identify risk factors that contribute to the pathophysiology and clinical manifestation of AD for primary and secondary prevention purposes.

Vascular health is one major category of risk factors that is increasingly emphasized in the AD literature. Markers of systemic vascular health, such as blood pressure, vascular stiffness, and heart failure, are becoming more frequently linked to incident clinical AD [2] as well as cognitive [3], neuroimaging [4], cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) [5], and positron emission tomography [6] markers of pathological AD. Clinical and epidemiological data from members of our group suggest that, independent of shared vascular risk factors, even modest reductions in systemic hemodynamics (as assessed by cardiac output) are associated with clinically detectable neuropsychological impairment [7–9], reduced gray matter volume [9], increased white matter hyperintensities (WMH) [10], reduced normative cerebral perfusion values [11], and incident dementia, especially AD [12]. Collectively, research from our group and others suggest vascular health factors correlate with clinical AD. Whether this association is causal remains unknown.

In September 2012, we initiated a clinical research resource locally known as the Vanderbilt Memory &amp; Aging Project. The overarching goal of this study is to test cross-sectional and longitudinal associations between both systemic vascular and cerebrovascular factors and brain health for the purpose of better understanding how vascular health relates to unhealthy brain changes with age. The novelty of our study lies in the role subclinical vascular disease plays in accelerating abnormal brain aging in older adults prior to the onset of clinical dementia, utilizing neuropsychological, neuroimaging, and CSF outcomes. Insights gained from this research may contribute to future novel strategies to delay or prevent cognitive decline. In the current paper, we describe the design, sampling, methodology (with an emphasis on brain aging phenotypes), and participant characteristics of the baseline Vanderbilt Memory &amp; Aging Project cohort enrolled between September 2012 and November 2014.

MATERIAL AND METHODS

Study cohort eligibility and selection

The Vanderbilt Memory &amp; Aging Project is a case-control longitudinal study investigating vascular health and brain aging launched in September 2012 at Vanderbilt University Medical Center in Nashville, TN. Participants were recruited through postal mailings, clinical referrals, radio advertisements, newsletters, research distribution emails, community events, websites, and word of mouth. Participants were required to speak English, have adequate auditory and visual acuity for testing, and have a reliable study partner (i.e., an informant the participant knew a minimum of 2 years at study enrollment with weekly contact and knowledge of the participant’s cognitive and functional abilities). Participants were excluded if they had MRI contraindication (i.e., ferrous metal in the body or history of claustrophobia), a history of neurological disease (e.g., dementia, multiple sclerosis), stroke, heart failure, major psychiatric illness (e.g., bipolar disorder, schizophrenia), head injury with loss of consciousness &gt;5 min, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, or a systemic or terminal illness (e.g., cancer) that could impact participation in follow-up examinations. The protocol was approved by the Vanderbilt University Medical Center Institutional Review Board, and written informed consent was obtained from all participants prior to data collection.

Participants meeting initial inclusion and exclusion criteria completed a 4-h screening visit, including a medical history and record review, a Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) [13] interview with the participant and informant, an assessment of activities of daily living (Functional Activities Questionnaire) [14], and a comprehensive neuropsychological protocol (see Table 1). This information was used by a consensus team to determine study eligibility, including cognitive diagnosis (i.e., normal cognition (NC) and mild cognitive impairment (MCI)).

Participants labeled as NC were required to have (a) CDR = 0 (no dementia), (b) no deficits in activities of daily living directly attributable to cognitive impairment, and (c) no evidence of neuropsychological impairment defined as standard scores falling 1.5 standard deviations within the age-adjusted normative mean.

MCI determinations are based upon National Institute on Aging/Alzheimer’s Association Workgroup core clinical criteria [15] defined as (a) CDR = 0 or 0.5 (reflecting mild severity of impairment), (b) relatively spared activities of daily living, (c) objective impairment for any neuropsychological test within a cognitive domain (i.e., performances falling greater than 1.5 standard deviations outside the age-adjusted normative mean or pre-morbid level of functioning based on educational attainment, occupational history, and Wide Range Achievement Test 3rd Edition Reading Subtest performance [16]), (d) concern of a cognitive change by the participant, informant or clinician based on information obtained during the clinical interview, and (e) absence of a dementing syndrome.

Given the case-control design, each MCI participant was enrolled first and then an age (defined as ±4 years), sex, and race (defined as White or non-White) NC ‘match’ was enrolled. See Fig. 1 for details on participant selection. Baseline procedures, conducted between September 2012 and November 2014, are described below. Longitudinal follow-up of the cohort is underway with procedures repeating at 18-month intervals for a minimum of 3 years (i.e., baseline, 18-month follow-up, and 36-month follow-up).

Fasting blood work, lumbar puncture, and biochemical analyses

A morning fasting venous blood draw was performed. A series of blood work was immediately performed, including complete blood count with differential and platelet count, comprehensive metabolic panel, lipid profile (with high density lipoprotein), high sensitivity C-reactive protein, anti-cardiolipin antibody, thyroid stimulating hormone, and hemoglobin A1C. A serum-based insulin assay was also processed. Remaining samples (i.e., 20 mLs of whole blood without anticoagulate reagents added for collecting serum, 10 mLs of EDTA anticoagulated whole blood for collecting plasma, and 2.5 mLs of whole blood in Paxgene tube) were prepared for storage at Vanderbilt. Plasma was separated from whole blood by centrifugation at 2000 g and 4°C for 15 min and stored in ten 0.5 mL aliquots. Remaining blood (including red and white cells) was stored separately in a single 5 mL tube for DNA analysis. Serum was separated by centrifuge at 2000 g and 4°C for 15 min and stored in two 0.5 mL aliquots and seven 1 to 1.5 mL aliquots. The remaining 4 to 5 mL blood clot was stored separately as a backup resource for DNA extraction. After processing and preparation, samples were stored at −80°C, including the Paxgene tube which was immediately frozen.

Plasma samples were analyzed in batch using the Milliplex Map Kit (EMD Millipore Corporation, Billerica, MA, Cat. No. HCCBP1MAG-58K) to measure leptin, interleukin-6 (IL-6), tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) and vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGF-A) according to manufacturer instructions. Seven working standards were generated by serial dilution (1 : 3) of the reconstituted standard provided in the kit. Two quality control (QC) samples were included in each plate run. Assay plate was read on Luminex 200 with XPONENT software. Milliplex Analyst 5.0 was used for data analysis. The mean intra-assay coefficients of variation (CVs) were as follows: leptin 5.6%, IL-6 5.9%, TNF-α 6.6%, and VEGF-A 5.9%.

For apolipoprotein E (APOE) genotyping, frozen whole blood was used for white blood cell extraction. Genotyping was performed using the commercially available TaqMan® single-nucleotide polymorphism genotyping assay from Applied Biosystems (Foster City, California, USA). Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was carried out in 384-well plates in 5 μl reactions containing 5 ng of genomic DNA, Assays-on-Demand probe/primer mix, and TaqMan® Universal PCR Master Mix. Plates were scanned on a Life Technologies 7900HT real-time PCR machine after 50 cycles of standard PCR on a Life Technologies 9700 Thermal Cycler, and analyzed using Life Technologies SDS 2.4.1 software. Negative and positive controls were included on the plate for assay validation. Genotyping efficiency was &gt;99%, and all duplicates were concordant as expected.

As an optional procedure, 233 participants consented to a morning fasting lumbar puncture. A total of 155 participants successfully completed the procedure to collect a maximum of 25 mLs of CSF with polypropylene syringes using a Sprotte 25-gauge spinal needle in an intervertebral lumbar space in the region between L2 and L5. Two mLs were drawn off for waste. Three mLs were processed for gross appearance, nucleated cells, total cell count, lymphocyte percentage, monocyte/macrophage percentage, glucose, and total protein. The remaining 20 mLs were immediately mixed and centrifuged at 2000 g and 4°C for 10 min. Supernatants were aliquoted in forty 0.5 mL polypropylene tubes and stored at −80°C. Samples were analyzed in batch using commercially available enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (Fujirebio, Ghent, Belgium) to determine the levels of Aβ1-42 (INNOTEST® β-AMYLOID(1-42)), total tau (INNOTEST® hTAU), and tau phosphorylated at threonine 181 (p-tau; INNOTEST® PHOSPHO-TAU(181P)). The INNOTEST Aβ1-42 method employs antibodies that specifically bind the neo-epitopes of the first and last amino acid of the 42 amino acid-long Aβ sequence, thus measuring the full 42 amino acid-long Aβ42 form and not any N-terminally truncated species [17]. Additionally, Aβ forms ending at amino acid 38 and 40 were measured using the Aβ Triplex Assay (Meso Scale Discovery, Rockville, MD). This assay uses end-specific antibodies to capture Aβ peptides ending at amino acid 38, 40, or 42 and 6E10 (specific to amino acids 3 to 8) to detect them (the assay can thus measure both Aβ1-38/40/42 as well as N-terminally truncated Aβ forms). Meso Scale Discovery Aβ will hereafter be designated AβX-40 and AβX-42. Processing was completed by board certified laboratory technicians who were blinded to clinical information, as previously described [18]. Intra-assay CVs were &lt;10%.

Physical examination and frailty assessment

Each participant completed a physical examination, including assessment of height, weight, hip circumference, and waist circumference. Frailty was assessed using standardized criteria from the Cardiovascular Health Study [19] as follows

Shrinkage/unintentional weight loss assessed by asking the participant if s/he has lost ≥10 lbs in weight over the previous 12 months or there has been a change &gt;5% in body weight. If yes, the participant met this criterion.

Poor endurance/exhaustion assessed using two Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale [20] items: (a) I felt that everything I did was an effort, and (b) I could not get going. For each item, the participant is asked “How often in the last week did you feel this way?” with four response options: 0 = rarely or none of the time (&lt;1 day), 1 = some or a little of the time (1–2 days), 2 = moderate amount of time (3–4 days), or 3 = most of the time. Participants endorsing either item with a 2 or 3 met this criterion.

Low physical activity assessed using a short version of the Minnesota Leisure Time Activity Questionnaire (MLTA), assessing weekly physical activity [21]. Sex-stratified cut-offs defined low physical activity as follows: men &lt;383 kilo-calories per week and women &lt;270 kilocalories per week.

Slowness assessed by asking participants to complete a 15-feet walk test. Sex- and height-stratified cut-offs defined slowness as follows:≥6 s for men with a height ≤173 cm or women with a height ≤159 cm;≥7 s for men with a height &gt;173 cm or women with a height &gt;159 cm.

Weakness defined by mean dominant hand grip strength measured across 3 trials using a hand held dynamometer. Sex- and body mass index (BMI)-quartile stratified cut-offs defined weakness as BMI ≤24 and grip strength ≤29 kg, BMI &gt;24 but ≤28 and grip strength ≤30 kg, BMI &gt;28 and grip strength ≤32 for men. For women, weakness was defined as BMI ≤23 and grip strength ≤17 kg, BMI &gt;23 but ≤26 and grip strength ≤17.3 kg, BMI &gt;26 but ≤29 and grip strength ≤18 kg or BMI &gt;29 and grip strength ≤21 kg.

The presence or absence of each frailty criterion was summed for a possible range of 0–5. Participants were categorized as frail ≥3, pre-frail = 1 or 2, and not frail = 0. All frailty criterion were also recorded as continuous or ordinal measurements, including shrinkage (BMI), poor endurance (ordinal sum of exhaustion items ranging 0–6), low physical activity (kilocalories/week), slowness (gait speed in m/s), and weakness (mean dominant hand grip strength across 3 trials). Using these continuous or ordinal measurements, a composite frailty score was also constructed by converting each component raw score to a z-score using the cohort’s baseline mean stratified by sex and standard deviation and then computing an average z-score. Higher z-scores indicated poorer performance (higher frailty) [22].

Lifestyle questionnaires

Participants completed self-report questionnaires assessing physical activity, sleep, and nutrition habits as detailed below:

MLTA estimates leisure time physical activity beyond activities of daily living [21]. We applied the MLTA abbreviated version to assess caloric expenditure [19]. Participants estimated (in min/week) the frequency of physical activities performed in the past 2 weeks. Activity was expressed in expended kilocalories per week.

Community Healthy Activities Model Program for Seniors estimates physical activity by assessing caloric expenditure for activities typically undertaken by older adults [23]. Participants report frequency and duration of activities performed over a typical week during the past month, including sedentary activities (e.g., reading) to minimize social desirability. Caloric expenditure is calculated by multiplying the estimated duration of each activity by the metabolic equivalent value and then summing across activities.

National Cancer Institute Quick Food Scan estimates fat intake as a percentage of total energy [24]. Participants rate their frequency of consuming 15 food groups and reduced-fat butter or margarine over the last 12 months ranging 1 = never to 8 = more than once per day. Reduced-fat margarine usage as a replacement for butter is rated separately. Scoring is based on weighted least-squares estimates of regression coefficients for data from the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s 1994–1996 Continuing Survey of Food Intakes by Individuals [24]. The algorithm accounts for food frequency with age- and sex-specific portion sizes. The final score is expressed as total estimated percentage of dietary energy from fat.

Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index assesses sleep quality over the previous month using 19 self-rated questions covering seven components of sleep health (i.e., sleep quality, sleep latency, sleep duration, habitual sleep efficiency, sleep disturbances, use of sleeping medications, and daytime dysfunction [25]). Each component is scored from 0 = not during the past month to 3 = three or more times a week, then summed for a total ranging 0–21. Higher scores denote poorer sleep health. There are 5 additional questions for bed partners (i.e., completed by the informant if they had first-hand knowledge of the participant’s sleep behaviors), which are not included in the total score.

Subjective cognitive decline and functional activity questionnaires

Participants and their informants completed a series of questionnaires assessing perceived cognitive decline and functional activities. These questionnaires were not used for determination of diagnostic status or eligibility at screening.

Cognitive Changes Questionnaire is derived from frequently used cognitive decline questions [26–29]. Items assess memory and thinking changes, including comparing the participant’s cognition to same-aged peers, comparing the participant’s current cognition to past cognition, and rating the participant’s ability to complete daily tasks. Questions are answered on a 2-item (“yes” or “no”) or 3-item scale (“major problem, ” “minor problem, ” “no problem”). Total scores range 14–85 with higher scores indicating greater perceived change. Both participants and informants completed this questionnaire.

Everyday Cognition Questionnaire measures functional activities within memory, language, visuospatial, and executive function domains [26]. Each item rates the participant’s current ability compared to 10 years ago on a 4-item Likert scale where 1 = better or no change and 4 = consistently much worse. Total scores range 39–156 with higher scores indicating greater decline. Both participants and informants completed this questionnaire.

Cognitive Difficulties Scale is a 41-item measure of the frequency of everyday cognitive difficulties, such as trouble recalling frequently used phone numbers, trouble recalling the names of familiar people, and trouble thinking of the names of objects [28]. Questions are answered using a 5-item Likert scale where 0 = not at all and 4 = very often. Total scores range 0–164 with higher scores indicating greater cognitive difficulties. Only participants completed this questionnaire.

Memory Functioning Questionnaire measures participant ratings of current memory abilities [27]. Responses rely on a 7-item scale across six subcategories. First, global memory is rated from 1 = major problems to 7 = no problems. Second, memory failure frequency is rated on a scale of 1 = always to 7 = never. Third, individuals rate their short term memory (last month) and long term memory (6–10 years ago) on a scale of 1 = very badly to 7 = very well. Fourth, severity of actual memory failures are rated 1 = very serious to 7 = not serious. Fifth, mnemonic strategy use is rated as 1 = always to 7 = never. Finally, temporal comparisons of memory abilities are characterized as 1 = much worse to 7 = much better. Items were reverse scored so that a low score (minimum = 64) represented no memory complaints and a high score (maximum = 448) represented more memory complaints. Only participants completed this questionnaire.

Functional Capacities for Activities of Daily Living captures the participant’s changes in cognition and ability to complete everyday functional activities, such as watching television programs, using the stove, and telling time [30]. Questions are answered using a 5-item Likert scale ranging from 1 = not at all to 5 = very much. Total scores range 50–250 with higher scores indicating greater functional activity changes. Only informants complete this questionnaire.

Neuropsychological assessment

At baseline, all participants completed a common, comprehensive neuropsychological protocol assessing global cognition, language, information processing speed, executive functioning, visuospatial ability and episodic learning and memory. Measures were carefully selected to preclude floor or ceiling effects, enabling both detection of early cognitive decline and tracking of longitudinal changes. See Table 2 for details. A subset of participants (n = 231) also completed an addendum protocol assessing episodic learning and memory and visual and verbal working memory. These latter measures were selected to supplement the primary protocol to enhance detection of nuances in neuropsychological performance across the cognitive aging spectrum using an analysis of process and errors as previously suggested [31, 32]. See Table 3 for details. Note, baseline and addendum protocol performances were not used as part of the screening or selection of participants into the study.

Brain magnetic resonance imaging

Participants were scanned on a 3T Phillips Achieva system (Best, The Netherlands) with an 8-channel SENSE receiver head coil [33] at the Vanderbilt University Institute of Imaging Science to gather the following sequences (see Table 4 for acquisition parameters and summary of imaging outcomes):

T1-weighted Anatomical Imaging was acquired for tissue volume quantification and co-registration. T1-weighted images were post-processed using three methods:

FreeSurfer 5.1.0 (http://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/): Standard FreeSurfer reconstruction steps were performed to calculate regions of interest (ROIs) and cortical thickness as previously described [34–37]. White and gray matter surfaces were manually inspected and corrected for registration, topological and segmentation defects. After manual intervention, images were re-processed through FreeSurfer to update the transformation template and segmentation information.

Voxel-based morphometry in Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM8) (http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/software/spm8/): As previously described T1 images were warped into Montreal Neuroimaging Institute (MNI) standard space using an affine and non-linear registration [38]. Using a smoothed average of gray matter in MNI as spatial prior probability maps and intensity information from the image, T1 images were segmented into gray matter, white matter, and CSF. Voxel intensities were multiplied by the local value in the deformation field from normalization and convolved with an isotropic Gaussian kernel.

Multi-Atlas Segmentation [39]: Images were post-processed with an established pipeline as previously described using NiftyReg affine registration of the T1 images to MNI space that geodesically selects appropriate atlases in pairwise registration framework using NiftyReg and ANTs [40]. Next, registered atlases were statistically fused using JIST with spatially varying performance estimation. Segmentation errors were corrected using the AdaBoost segmentation adaptor framework to calculate ROIs.

T2-weighted FLAIR was acquired for quantification of WMH. T1 and FLAIR images were post-processed using the Lesion Segmentation Tool toolbox for SPM8 as previously described [41]. Each T1-weighted image voxel was classified as gray matter, white matter, or CSF. FLAIR images were bias-corrected for field inhomogeneities and registered to the T1-weighted images. FLAIR intensity distribution of the three tissue classes were assigned, enabling detection of outliers. Neighboring voxels were classified iteratively and analyzed and assigned to lesion, white matter, or gray matter until no more voxels were assigned to a lesion.

Susceptibility Weighted Image with high resolution 3D T2* weighted gradient echo was used to capture microbleeds. Both magnitude and phase images were collected. For post-processing, a Hanning filter was first applied to remove slow-varying fluctuations on the unwrapped phase images. Then, a phase mask filter was created from the original phase image and multiplied 4 times with the magnitude image. For the phase mask, a triangular filter was used for vascular enhancement at all vessel orientations [42]. Finally, minimum intensity projection images were formed by combining 5 slices. The images were reviewed by a board-certified neuroradiologist (LTD, blinded to clinical information) to manually detect total number, hemisphere (right, left, both), predominant pattern (deep hemispheric, infratentorial, lobar), location (brainstem, lentiform nucleus, caudate nucleus, cerebellum, frontal, frontal periventricular, lobar, occipital, occipital periventricular, thalamus, parietal periventricular, temporal, temporal periventricular), and distribution (cortical, subcortical) of microbleeds.

Diffusion Tensor Imaging assessed white matter integrity. Images were post-processed with Vanderbilt University Institute for Imaging Science Center of Computational Imaging resources (Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN) using an established pipeline previously described [43–46]. Standard tensor fitting methods were used to estimate the diffusion tensor and resulting tensor parameters fractional anisotropy (FA) and mean diffusivity (MD) [47]. FA maps were post-processed using two methods:

FSL Tract-Based Spatial Statistics (TBSS) was used for voxel wise analysis [48]. As previously described, TBSS projects participant FA data onto a mean FA tract skeleton [49–51]. Voxel wise cross-participant statistics were generated.

Eve White Matter Stamper was used to process FA white matter segmentation maps according to an established pipeline [52]. Mean FA values were calculated from ROIs defined by the Johns Hopkins Eve White Matter Atlas (http://cmrm.med.jhmi.edu/cmrm/atlas/human_data/file/AtlasExplanation2.htm).

Vessel-encoded Pseudo-Continuous Arterial Spin Labeling (VE-pCASL) assessed cerebral blood flow (CBF; rate of blood delivery to tissue, measured as mL blood/100 g tissue/min) in the microvasculature, separately in left and right internal carotid artery (ICA) and basilar flow territories [53]. Two general images were acquired, including a label image with signal from magnetically labeled blood water and a control image in the absence of a magnetic label. The label scenarios were acquired separately for (i) non-selective labeling of left and right ICAs and basilar artery, (ii) right ICA labeling only and (iii) basilar artery labeling only. This labeling paradigm allows for total CBF to be quantified but also for the CBF in separate flow territories to be quantified. Magnetic labeling was obtained by inverting the spins of incoming blood water using a Hanning-windowed pulse train in the major cervical arteries listed above. Data were corrected for motion applying rigid body transformations and baseline drift with FSL FLIRT. Data were post-processed using MATLAB. Whole brain CBF maps were generated by a sliding window approach subtracting a control image by an adjacent label image. CBF was calculated using a two-compartment perfusion model [54]. See Fig. 2 for illustration of reduced CBF. To allow for quantification of CBF in defined-cortical regions, a separately acquired equilibrium magnetization image (i.e., M0 image) with identical geometry and readout as the VE-pCASL scan but long repetition time (20 s) was registered to the structural T1 map. The T1 registered M0 map was registered to the standard MNI space [55]. Transformation matrices for these registrations were then applied to the CBF maps. ROIs were identified using the Multi-Atlas Segmentation, and region specific CBF values were calculated.

Hypercapnic VE-pCASL with identical scan parameters as the VE-pCASL acquisition evaluated cerebrovascular reactivity (CVR). A non-rebreathing facemask delivered 5% CO2 and 95% normoxic normocapnic medical-grade air (approximately 79% N2, 21% O2) in a 2-block paradigm from compressed cylinders at a flow rate of 12 L/min. End-tidal CO2 and estimated arterial oxygen saturation from peripheral pulse oximetry were recorded throughout the protocol. Four scan volumes before the gas challenge were removed from the calculations to allow for blood gases to equilibrate. Percentage change in CBF (from baseline values due to the induced hypercapnia) was normalized by the end-tidal CO2 measures to calculate cerebral vascular reactivity [56].

Magnetic Resonance Angiography (MRA) assessed the patency of the circle of Willis (CoW). Images were reviewed by a board-certified neuroradiologist (LTD) blinded to clinical information to manually code the patency of each of the seven segments of the CoW (i.e., anterior communicating artery, A1 segments of the left and right anterior cerebral arteries, left and right posterior communicating arteries, and P1 segments of the left and right posterior cerebral arteries). Each segment was coded as normal (≥0.8 mm), hypoplastic (&lt;0.8 mm), or aplastic (invisible by MRA [57]). The entire CoW was further classified as one of 22 variants [58, 59]. See Fig. 3 for illustration of complete versus incomplete CoW.

Vessel Wall Imaging assessed the health of the macrovasculature. This novel 3D sequence uses an anti-DRIVE module with appropriately spaced repetition time to keep CSF magnetization near zero, while nulling the blood water signal using a long turbo-spin-echo pulse train, allowing visualization of the vessel walls. The field of view covers the large cerebral arteries of the CoW and segments of the middle cerebral arteries. Images were reviewed by a board-certified neuroradiologist (LTD) blinded to clinical information to manually measure the vessel wall thickness of the supraclinoid left and right ICA, proximal anterior cerebral artery, proximal middle cerebral artery, and basilar artery. See Fig. 4 for illustration of measurements.

Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging

Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging was acquired using a 1.5T Siemens Avanto system (Erlangen, Germany) with a phased-array torso receiver coil. Left (LV) and right ventricular volumes and function were assessed using a breath-hold, electrocardiogram synchronized, cine steady-state free precession sequence with the following parameters: TR = 180 ms, TE = 1.1 ms, flip angle = 80°, field of view = 300–340 mm, and 156 × 192 matrix. Short and long axis imaging planes were acquired. Under the supervision of a board-certified cardiologist (FLR), a trained rater blinded to all clinical information coded the data. Ventricular mass and volumes were determined from the short axis image stack, 8–10 slices, 8 mm per slice, 0 mm inter-slice gap. Endocardial contours were traced in diastole and systole, and epicardial contours were traced in diastole using QMASS MR 7.6 Enterprise Solution (Medis, Leiden, Netherlands). Velocity encoded flow data was acquired from the proximal and descending thoracic aorta with slice angulation adjusted to maximize perpendicular flow. Flow data was analyzed by QFLOW 5.6 Enterprise Solution (Medis, Leiden, Netherlands), including total flow, net forward flow, and aortic area in systole and diastole. Aortic compliance was quantified from area change in systole and diastole as related to pulse pressure.

Longitudinal, circumferential, and radial strain were assessed for systole and diastole using a semiautomated algorithm in 2D Cardiac Performance Analysis MR (TomTec, Munich, Germany). Steady state free precession cine images from the 4-chamber, 2-chamber, and short axis orientations were postprocessed for strain determinations, including peak strain, strain rate, and time to peak strain. Strain results were determined per cardiac segment using the 17-segment model and averaged to yield a global value for each strain orientation. LV epicardial and endocardial contours were also traced in end diastole of standard cine short and long axis images.

Echocardiogram

Standard 2D, M-mode, and Doppler transthoracic echocardiography, including measurements of cardiac structure and function, was performed by a single research sonographer (JG) at the Vanderbilt University Medical Center Clinical Research Center on a Phillips IE33 cardiac ultrasound machine (Phillips Medical, Andover, MD). Digital images with measurements were sent to the Vanderbilt Heart Imaging Core Laboratory and confirmed by one of two board certified cardiologists (LAM, DKG) using commercially available software (HeartLab, AGFA Healthcare, Greenville, SC). All raters were blinded to clinical information.

Image acquisition and quantification was performed according to American Society of Echocardiography (ASE) guidelines [60–67]. Briefly, LV volumes and ejection fraction were calculated by the biplane Simpson’s method. LV mass was calculated from LV linear dimensions using the ASE recommended formula (0.8 × [1.04[ (LV internal diameter during diastole+posterior wall thickness during diastole+septum wall thickness during diastole)3 - (LV internal diameter during diastole)3]]+0.6 g) and indexed to body surface area. LV hypertrophy (LVH) was defined as LV mass index &gt;115 g/m2 in men or &gt;95 g/m2 in women. Left atrial (LA) maximum volume was measured by the modified Simpson’s method using apical 4- and 2-chamber views at the end-systolic frame preceding mitral valve opening and indexed to body surface area to derive LA volume index. Each valve was assessed for the presence and severity of stenosis and regurgitation with the over-reading cardiologist assigning one of the following grades: normal, trace, mild, mild to moderate, moderate, moderate to severe, or severe.

Early (E) and late (A) transmitral velocities and the E deceleration time were measured from pulsed wave spectral Doppler images acquired in the apical 4-chamber view with the sample volume positioned at the tip of the mitral leaflets. Peak lateral and septal mitral annular early relaxation and atrial contraction velocities were assessed using tissue Doppler imaging (TDI). LV filling pressures were estimated by E wave divided by average early relaxation velocities. Diastolic function was graded by the over-reading cardiologist as normal, grade I (impaired relaxation), grade II (pseudonormal), or grade III (restrictive) according to ASE recommendations. Right ventricular systolic function was assessed using TDI systolic velocity of the lateral tricuspid annulus and tricuspid annulus planar systolic excursion. Cardiac output was calculated as stroke volume × heart rate, where stroke volume was calculated from the LV outflow tract velocity time integral and diameter. The right ventricular systolic pressure was estimated from the peak tricuspid regurgitant velocity using the modified Bernoulli equation plus right atrial pressure. Right atrial pressure was estimated from the inferior vena cavamaximal diameter and change in size with inspiration.

Final values were taken from measurements of a single cardiac cycle for participants in normal sinus rhythm or the average of three cardiac cycles for those participants in atrial fibrillation. Atrial fibrillation at the time of echocardiography was determined by the absence of A waves on transmitral spectral Doppler flow and tissue Doppler mitral annular velocity profiles, as well as the lack of organized electrocardiographic P waves.

Ambulatory blood pressure monitoring

As an optional study procedure, a subset of participants (n = 301) wore a SpaceLabs 90207 monitor (SpaceLabs Inc., Redmond, WA) on the left arm for 24-consecutive hours of ambulatory blood pressure monitoring. Systolic blood pressure, diastolic blood pressure, pulse pressure, and heart rate readings were captured every 30 min for a maximum of 49 readings. Data were uploaded to a workstation using the SpaceLabs Healthcare ABP Report Management System (Version 3.0.5, 2010). For QC purposes, at least 39 readings in the 24-h monitoring period were required for inclusion, resulting in 34 exclusions. Datasets with &gt;3 h gap between readings (n = 19) were excluded, 17 of whom were excluded for &lt;39 readings, resulting in 265 datasets meeting QC.

Analytical plan

Prior to analysis, medical and vascular characteristics were calculated as follows. Systolic blood pressure was the mean of two measurements obtained prior to the echocardiogram. Diabetes mellitus included current fasting blood glucose ≥126 mg/dL, hemoglobin A1C ≥6.5%, or current oral hypoglycemic or insulin medication usage. Dyslipidemia included total cholesterol ≥200 mg/dL, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol &lt;40 mg/dL, or lipid-lowering medication usage. Self-report was used to ascertain current cigarette smoking (i.e., yes/no within the year prior to baseline examination), prior cigarette smoking (i.e., yes/no ever prior to baseline examination), medication use, history of cancer, history of transient ischemic attack, and history of head injury with loss of consciousness &lt;5 minutes. Cardiovascular disease (CVD) included coronary heart disease, angina, or myocardial infarction (note, heart failure was a study exclusion). History of sleep disorder included restless leg syndrome, sleep apnea, or REM sleep behavior disorder. Thyroid disease included self-report, thyroid stimulating hormone &lt;0.45 or &gt;4.5 mcunit/mL, prior thyroid surgery, or thyroid medication usage. Atrial fibrillation included self-report with supporting evidence from echocardiogram, CMR, or prior surgery or medication usage to treat atrial fibrillation. Framingham Stroke Risk Profile score included age, sex, systolic blood pressure, anti-hypertensive medication usage, diabetes mellitus, current cigarette smoking, LVH, CVD, and atrial fibrillation [68]. APOE ε4 carrier status was defined as positive (ε2/ε4, ε3/ε4, ε4/ε4) or negative (ε2/ε2, ε2/ε3, ε3/ε3).

Descriptive statistics for baseline demographic, genetic, biomarker, medical, and neuropsychological characteristics were calculated separately for NC and MCI participants. Between-group characteristics were statistically compared using Pearson chi-square test for categorical variables and Wilcoxon rank sum test for continuous variables. Significance was set a priori at p &lt; 0.05. All analyses were conducted using R 3.2.0 (http://www.r-project.org).

RESULTS

Demographic characteristics

Of the 566 participants who completed eligibility visits, 335 were enrolled. At baseline, the cohort was age 73 ± 7 years with an education level of 16 ± 3 years, 41% of participants being female, and 13% self-identifying as a racial or ethnic minority. Sample characteristics for the entire cohort as well as between-group differences for NC and MCI participants are presented in Table 5.

All 335 participants completed required elements of the protocol, including fasting blood work, physical examination/frailty assessment, questionnaires, neuropsychological assessment, brain MRI, cardiac MRI, and echocardiogram. The exception is that 8 participants did not complete either the cardiac MRI (n = 3) or the brain MRI (n = 7). Of note, there were some differences in sample characteristics for those participants who consented to optional study components and those participants who did not consent. Specifically, when compared to participants who did not complete the optional lumbar puncture, participants completing the procedure were more likely to be male (p = 0.006) and self-identify as White non-Hispanic (p = 0.002) with lower FSRP scores (p = 0.005), anti-hypertensive medication usage (p = 0.001), history of cigarette smoking (p = 0.006), and history of atrial fibrillation (p = 0.02). As compared to participants who did not complete the optional ambulatory blood pressure monitoring protocol, participants completing the protocol were younger (p = 0.008) with lower education levels (p = 0.04, though means for both groups were at or above the college graduate level) and history of cigarette smoking (p = 0.04).

AD genetic, family history, and biomarker characteristics

There was a between-group difference for APOE ε4 (x2 = 5.7, p = 0.017), such that the MCI group had a higher prevalence of APOE ε4 carriers (40%) compared to the NC group (28%). However, the participant groups were comparable for self-reported family history of both dementia (x2 = 0.01, p = 0.91) and AD (x2 = 0.25, p = 0.61).

The groups differed on CSF biomarkers of AD in the expected direction, including AβX-42 (W(1,153) = 6.9, p = 0.009), Aβ1-42 (W(1,153) = 5.7, p = 0.018), total tau (W(1,153) = 8.4, p = 0.004), and p-tau levels (W(1,328) = 5.5, p = 0.02). The groups did not differ for CSF AβX-40 levels (W(1,153) = 0.04, p = 0.85).

Medical characteristics

The NC and MCI groups were similar for history of cancer (x2 = 0.001, p = 0.97), head injury with loss of consciousness &lt;5 min (x2 = 1.04, p = 0.31), sleep disorder (x2 = 0.03, p = 0.85), transient ischemic attack (x2 = 0.23, p = 0.64), and thyroid disease (x2 = 2.34, p = 0.13).

The groups differed on Framingham Stroke Risk Profile (W(1,330) = 7.1, p = 0.008) with MCI participants having a higher mean risk profile score (13.0 ± 4.2) than NC participants (11.9 ± 4.1). The groups differed on LVH (x2 = 4.1, p = 0.04) with the MCI participants having a higher prevalence of LVH than the NC participants. The groups differed on systolic blood pressure (W(1,333)=7.1, p = 0.008) with MCI participants having higher mean values (144.9 ± 18.6) than NC participants (139.9 ± 17.6) despite comparable anti-hypertensive medication utilization (x2 = 0.86, p = 0.35). The groups did not differ on other vascular health characteristics, including dyslipidemia (x2 = 0.03, p = 0.87), diabetes (x2 = 2.76, p = 0.10), prevalent CVD (x2 = 0.36, p = 0.55), or atrial fibrillation (x2 = 0.05, p = 0.82). There were no group differences for prior smoking history (x2 = 0.10, p = 0.81) or current smoking prevalence (x2 = 0.14, p = 0.71). See Table 5 for details.

CDR, activities of daily living, and neuropsychological test performances

As designed, CDR global score differed between the two participant groups with 100% of NC participants having a CDR = 0 and 86% of MCI participants having a CDR = 0.5 (x2 = 251.0, p &lt; 0.001). Activities of daily living, as assessed by the Functional Activities Questionnaire, were compromised in MCI participants as compared to NC participants (W(1,333) = 264.0, p &lt; 0.001).

Between-group comparisons yielded baseline neuropsychological performance differences in all cognitive domains assessed such that MCI participants performed worse on all measures as compared to NC participants. Specifically, differences emerged for Montreal Cognitive Assessment (W(1,332) = 129.0, p &lt; 0.001), Animal Naming (W(1,332) = 65.5, p &lt; 0.001), Boston Naming Test-30 Item Even Version (W(1,332) = 46.7, p &lt; 0.001), California Verbal Learning Test-II (CVLT-II) Trials 1–5 Total Learning (W(1,332) = 159.0, p &lt; 0.001), CVLT-II Long Delay Free Recall (W(1,332) = 186.0, p &lt; 0.001), Biber Figure Learning Test (BFLT) Trials 1–5 Total Learning (W(1,330) = 180.0, p &lt; 0.001), BFLT Delayed Free Recall (W(1,330) = 148.0, p &lt; 0.001), Coding (W(1,332) = 59.1, p &lt; 0.001), Delis Kaplan Executive Function System (DKEFS) Color-Word Interference Test Word Reading (W(1,327) = 34.5, p &lt; 0.001), DKEFS Color-Word Interference Test Color Naming (W(1,324) = 50.9, p &lt; 0.001), DKEFS Number Sequencing (W(1,332)- = 47.8, p &lt; 0.001), DKEFS Number Letter Sequencing (W(1,331) = 100.0, p &lt; 0.001), DKEFS Color-Word Interference Test Inhibition (W(1,327) = 81.5, p &lt; 0.001), DKEFS Tower Test (W(1,331) = 20.4, p &lt; 0.001), Letter Fluency (W(1,333) = 63.3, p &lt; 0.001), and Hooper Visual Organization Test (W(1,332) = 24.5, p &lt; 0.001). Wide Range Achievement Test 3rd Edition Reading Subtest performance also differed between the two groups (W(1,333) = 20.3, p &lt; 0.001). See Table 6 for details, including effect sizes.

DISCUSSION

The Vanderbilt Memory &amp; Aging Project is a prospective case-control cohort study of 335 men and women diagnosed as NC or MCI who have consented to longitudinal follow-up every 18 months. Because the parent grant supporting cohort creation focuses on systemic vascular mechanisms underlying abnormal cognitive aging, study procedures are enriched for vascular assessments, including risk factor, proteomic, systemic, cardiac, and cerebrovascular data. Such detailed vascular phenotyping is coupled with a serum, plasma, and CSF biosample repository and neuropsychological assessment and multimodal brain MRI acquisition at repeat time points. Collectively, these data sources offer a unique opportunity to examine interrelations among vascular risk factors and disease, AD pathophysiology, and neurodegeneration on cognitive health among older adults. For example, applying a systems-based approach, we can examine complex pathways leading from vascular risk factors and disease to changes in cognition, CSF biomarkers of AD pathophysiology, and neuroimaging markers of microvasculature health, macrovasculature health, and neurodegeneration. Such studies will help elucidate whether the common co-occurrence of AD and cerebrovascular disease reflects convergence of two or more pathological processes or simply additive effects of independent pathological processes.

There are several existing older adult cohorts focused on cognitive aging with longitudinal follow-up. Examples include both single Center studies, such as the Oregon Brain Aging Study [69] and Religious Orders Study [70], and multi-site cooperatives like the National Alzheimer’s Coordinating Center [71] and Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative [72]. The Vanderbilt Memory &amp; Aging Project shares a few key similarities with these existing cohorts with respect to comparable demographic characteristics and AD risk profiles, such as age [71] and education levels [71, 73], AD genetic susceptibility based on APOE ε4 prevalence [74], and CSF biomarker status [75].

Despite these key similarities, there are several unique features to the Vanderbilt Memory &amp; Aging Project. First, detailed baseline assessment of vascular risk factors, systemic vascular health, and cerebrovascular health present valuable opportunities for longitudinal investigation into the intersection of vascular mechanisms, AD pathology, and neurodegeneration on cognitive decline with age. Specifically, vascular mechanisms can be explored via systemic vascular variables from echocardiogram, CMR, and ambulatory blood pressure monitoring along with innovative cerebrovascular integrity assessments, including MRA of the CoW, vessel-encoded CBF and reactivity paradigms, vessel wall imaging in the brain, and microhemorrhages. These detailed vascular measurements can be related to extensive brain aging phenotypes, including comprehensive neuropsychological features, neuroimaging markers of gray and white matter integrity, and CSF biomarkers of amyloid deposition, tau aggregation, and neuronal injury. Furthermore, given the longitudinal nature of the study’s methodology, baseline storage of DNA, serum, plasma, and CSF samples will facilitate longitudinal biomarker analyses across the cognitive aging spectrum (i.e., normal cognition, MCI, and dementia). Thus, the Vanderbilt Memory &amp; Aging Project complements the existing landscape of cohort studies by offering unique opportunities to investigate the emerging intersection of vascular disease, AD, and neurodegeneration on cognitive health.

Despite the strengths of our cohort, there are limitations. Individuals who participate in research studies, especially studies involving detailed medical assessments, are unlikely to be representative of the general population, limiting generalizability of results. For example, individuals consenting to undergo MRI are generally healthier (e.g., better systolic blood pressure, less likely to be obese, less coronary heart disease) than individuals who do not consent [76]. In the current study, we similarly observed that participants completing optional procedures in our protocol, such as lumbar puncture and ambulatory blood pressure monitoring, were healthier than participants who did not complete these optional study elements. It is likely that our cohort represents a healthier segment of the population, especially those participants completing optional procedures, which will limit generalizability of our findings. Another potential limitation is the criteria by which we enrolled individuals into the cognitively normal control group, such that all NC participants had a global CDR of 0 and no impairment on neuropsychological testing within 1.5 standard deviations of the normative data mean. We leveraged such criteria given our intention to enroll a cohort of individuals with normal cognition rather than a cognitive aging sample free of dementia or MCI. This strategy aligns with our case-control methodology, facilitating comparisons between individuals at high risk of decline and conversion (i.e., prodromal AD or dementia) and individuals at low risk of decline or conversion.

Detailed analyses from the rich resources available in this cohort will be valuable for advancing information about vascular mechanisms for cognitive decline in older adults. The longitudinal methods with repeat assessments for collecting serum, plasma, and CSF biospecimens, patient-reported outcomes, documentation of lifestyle factors, neuropsychological assessment, multi-modal brain MRI, echocardiogram, CMR, and ambulatory blood pressure monitoring will offer unique opportunities to enhance knowledge about the progression of AD and non-AD mechanisms for abnormal brain and cognitive aging. While our observational methods are unable to establish causal mechanisms independently, the data sources presented here provide a rich opportunity to examine the complex interplay among vascular risk factors and disease, AD pathophysiology, and neurodegeneration on brain health in older adults. Findings from our study can be used as converging evidence with other observational studies, animal research, and clinical trial findings to ultimately establish whether the link between vascular health and AD is correlative or causal [77].

This research was supported by Alzheimer’s Association IIRG-08-88733 (ALJ), R01-AG034962 (ALJ), R01-AG034962-S2 (ALJ), K24-AG046373 (ALJ), Paul B. Beeson Career Development Award in Aging K23-AG030962 (ALJ), R01-HL111516 (ALJ), UL1-TR000445 (Vanderbilt Clinical Translational Science Award from the National Center for Research Resources and National Institutes of Health), K12-HD043483 (KAG, SPB, TJH), K12-HL109019 (DKG), Paul B. Beeson Career Development Award in Aging K23-AG045966 (KAG), Paul B. Beeson Career Development Award in Aging K23-AG048347 (SPB), F32-AG046093 (EML), Vanderbilt Office of Clinical and Translational Scientist Development (SR), and the Vanderbilt Memory &amp; Alzheimer’s Center. The authors would like to thank the dedicated Vanderbilt Memory &amp; Aging Project participants and their loved ones, our devoted staff and trainees who contributed to recruitment, screening, and enrollment of the baseline cohort, and our biostatistics graduate research assistants, Lauren Samuels and Jacquelyn Neal.

Fig. 1 Participant Inclusion/Exclusion Details. *Exclusion categories delineated on the right side of the figure are not mutually exclusive. Specifically, of the 9 participants assigned to more than one category, 8 were included in Neuropsychological Profile Inconsistent with MCI or NC and in at least one other category (i.e., 2 in MRI Contraindication, 3 in Presence of Major Psychiatric Disorder, 2 in No Reliable Study Partner Available, and one in History of Neurological Disorder). Another participant was categorized both in Met Criteria for NC but no MCI Match and MRI Contraindication.

Fig. 2 Vessel-Encoded pseudo-Continuous Arterial Spin Labeling. The white arrow illustrates a region of decreased cerebral blood flow.

Fig. 3 Magnetic Resonance Angiography. Illustration of a complete (A) and incomplete (B) Circle of Willis.

Fig. 4 Vessel Wall Imaging. The dashed line illustrates measurement of the outer diameter of the vessel wall and the solid line illustrates measurement of the inner diameter of the vessel wall. The diameters are reported as inner/outer for each vessel as follows: (A) middle cerebral artery, 2.84/3.73 mm, (B) anterior cerebral artery 2.19/3.31 mm, and (C) internal carotid artery 3.67/4.90 mm.

Table 1 Neuropsychological Protocol – Screening Visit

Domain	Test	Description	Range	
Global Cognition	Montreal Cognitive Assessment [78]	Briefly measures global cognitive status	0–30	
Learning and Memory	Selective Reminding Test Immediate Recall [79]	Measures immediate recall of verbal material using multiple list-learning trials with a selective reminding paradigm	0–72	
Selective Reminding Test Delayed Recall [79]	Assesses delayed recall of a list of words	0–12	
Brief Visual Retention Test [80]	Measures recall for geometric designs	0–10	
Language	Vegetable Naming [81]	Assesses the ability to rapidly generate words from a specified category	n/a	
Boston Naming Test-30 Item Odd Version [82]	Assesses confrontation naming and lexical retrieval abilities	0–30	
Attention	WAIS-III Digit Span, Forward [83]	Measures auditory attention span	0–16	
Information Processing	Trail Making Test, Part A [84]	Measures speeded visual search and scanning	0–150	
Executive Functioning	WAIS-III Digit Span, Backward [83]	Measures auditory working memory	0–14	
Trail Making Test, Part B [84]	Measures sequencing and mental flexibility in a number and letter set-shifting task	0–300	
Stroop Color Word Inhibition Test [85]	Measures the ability to inhibit a rote response in favor of a novel response	0–180	
Controlled Oral Word Association [81]	Measures the ability to rapidly generate words from a specified letter category (CFL)	n/a	
Visuospatial Ability	WAIS-IV Block Design [86]	Measures visual perception and organizational abilities	0–68	
Premorbid Function	Wide Range Achievement Test-3rd Edition Reading Subtest [16]	Measures reading ability for words with irregular sound to spelling correspondence	0–57	
Mood	Geriatric Depression Scale [87]	Assesses features of depressed mood in older adults	0–30	
WAIS-III, Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale 3rd Edition; WAIS-IV, Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale 4th Edition.

Table 2 Primary neuropsychological protocol: baseline and follow-up visits

Domain	Test	Description	Range	
Global Cognition	Montreal Cognitive Assessment [78]	Briefly measures global cognitive status	0–30	
Learning and Memory	California Verbal Learning Test-II Trials 1–5 Total Learning [88]	Assesses total learning for a list of 16 words across 5 learning trials	0–80	
California Verbal Learning Test-II Long Delay Free Recall [88]	Assesses delayed retrieval for a list of 16 words after a 20-minute delay	0–16	
Biber Figure Learning Test Trials 1–5 Total Learning [89]	Assesses immediate visuospatial learning for a set of 15 geometric designs presented across 5 learning trials	0–225	
Biber Figure Learning Test Delayed Recall [89]	Assesses delayed visuospatial learning for a set of 15 geometric designs after a 20-minute delay	0–45	
Language	Boston Naming Test-30 Item Even Version [82]	Assesses confrontation naming and lexical retrieval abilities	0–30	
Animal Naming [81]	Measures the ability to rapidly generate words from a specified category	n/a	
Information Processing	WAIS-IV Coding [90]	Measures visual scanning and coding	0–93	
DKEFS Color-Word Interference Test: Color Naming [91]	Measures speed for naming colors	0–90	
DKEFS Color-Word Interference Test: Word Reading [91]	Measures speed for word reading	0–90	
DKEFS Number Sequencing [91]	Measures visual scanning and attention in a number sequencing task	0–150	
Executive Functioning	DKEFS Tower Test [91]	Measures planning and problem solving abilities	0–30	
DKEFS Number-Letter Switching [91]	Measures sequencing and mental flexibility in a number and letter set-shifting task	0–240	
DKEFS Color-Word Interference Test: Inhibition [91]	Measures ability to inhibit a conditioned response in favor of a novel response	0–180	
Letter Fluency [92]	Measures the ability to rapidly generate words from a specified letter category (FAS)	n/a	
Visuospatial Ability	Hooper Visual Organization Test [93]	Measures visual perceptual functioning and object recognition	0–30	
Mood	Geriatric Depression Scale [87]	Assesses features of depressed mood in older adults	0–30	
DKEFS = Delis Kaplan Executive Function System; WAIS-IV = Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale 4th Edition.

Table 3 Addendum neuropsychological protocol: baseline and follow-up visits

Domain	Test	Description	Range	
Learning and Memory	Philadelphia Verbal Learning Test Trials 1–5 Total Recall [94]	Measures immediate recall of verbal learning using multiple-trial list-learning task	0–60	
Philadelphia Verbal Learning Test Delayed Recall [94]	Assesses delayed recall of a list-learning task	0–12	
Working Memory	Backward Digit Task [95, 96]*	Measures auditory working memory	0–21	
WMS-IV Symbol Span [97]	Measures visual working memory	0–50	
Mental Control Subtest [98]**	Measures ability to maintain mental set	0–66	
WMS-IV, Wechsler Memory Scale 4th Edition;

* Experimental backward digit task derived from the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-Revised [99];

** Boston Revision of the Wechsler Memory Scale Mental Control Subtest [98].

Table 4 Brain MRI acquisition parameters

Sequence		Spatial resolution	TR (ms)	TE (ms)	Slices	R	Flip Angle	Additional Details	Outcome Measure	
T1-weighted	fast field echo	1×1×1 mm3	8.9	4.6	170	2	5°	–	Cortical thickness, gray matter ROIs	
T2-weighted FLAIR	turbo spin echo inversion recovery	0.45×0.45×4 mm3	11000	121	24	1.75	90°	–	WMH volume	
SWI	fast field echo	0.75×0.75×1.5 mm3	40	34	80	2	20°	–	Number and location of microhemorrhages	
DTI	spin echo echo-planar imagine	2×2×2 mm3	10000	60	–	2	90°	Δ = 28.9 ms, δ = 12.6 ms, 31 directions	FA, MD, RD, and AD	
VE-pCASL	single-shot gradient echo-planar imaging	3×3×7 mm3	3900	13	17	2	–	labeling duration = 1650 ms, post-labeling delay = 1525 ms, Hanning-windowed labeling pulse train (pulse duration = 0.7 ms)	CBF, CVR	
MRA	gradient echo	0.35×0.35×0.50 mm3	6.8	3.8	150	2	12°	–	CoW variants	
VWI	Noncontrasted 3D turbo-spin-echo anti-DRIVE	0.6 × 0.6 × 1 mm3	1500	38.5	90	1.5	90°	–	ICA, MCA, ACA, and VB wall thickness	
FLAIR, fluid attenuated inversion recovery; SWI, susceptibility weighted imaging; DTI, diffusion tensor imaging; VE-pCASL, vessel-encoded pseudo-continuous arterial spin labeling; CBF, cerebral blood flow; CVR, cerebrovascular reactivity; MRA, magnetic resonance angiography; CoW, circle of Willis; VWI, vessel wall imaging; R, SENSE factor; ROIs, regions of interest; WMH, white matter hyperintensities; ICA, internal carotid artery; MCA, middle cerebral artery; ACA, anterior cerebral artery; VB, vertebrobasilar; FA, fractional anisotropy; MD, mean diffusivity; RD, radial diffusivity; AD, axial diffusivity.

Table 5 Baseline participant characteristics

	Total n = 335	NC n = 167	MCI n = 168	p-value	
Demographic Characteristics	
Age, years	73 ± 7	72 ± 7	73 ± 8	0.31	
Sex, % female	41	41	41	0.95	
Race, % white	13	13	14	0.65	
Education, years	15 ± 9	16 ± 2	15 ± 3	&lt;0.001	
AD Genetic, Family History, and Biomarker Characteristics	
APOE ε4 %	34	28	40	0.02	
Family History of Dementia, %	51	50	51	0.91	
Family History of AD, %	25	26	24	0.61	
CSF AβX-40, pg/mL	6137 ± 1640	6211 ± 1711	6062 ± 1572	0.85	
CSF AβX-42, pg/mL	547 ± 266	593 ± 245	501 ± 279	0.009	
CSF Aβ1-42, pg/mL	714 ± 245	761 ± 224	668 ± 258	0.02	
CSF total tau, pg/mL	426 ± 226	374 ± 177	479 ± 258	0.004	
CSF p-tau, pg/mL	61.0 ± 25.7	56.2 ± 22.2	66.0 ± 28.1	0.02	
Vascular Characteristics	
Dyslipidemia, %	80	80	80	0.87	
Framingham Stroke Risk Profile, total	12.5 ± 4.2	11.9 ± 4.1	13.1 ± 4.2	0.008	
Systolic blood pressure, mm Hg	142 ± 18	140 ± 18	145 ± 18	0.008	
Anti-hypertensive medication usage, %	56	54	59	0.35	
Diabetes, %	19	15	22	0.10	
Cigarette Smoking Ever, %	31	30	32	0.75	
Cigarette Smoking Current, %	2	2	2	0.71	
Prevalent cardiovascular disease, %	4	4	3	0.55	
Atrial fibrillation, %	6	5	6	0.82	
Left ventricular hypertrophy, %	5	2	7	0.04	
Health Characteristics	
History of Cancer, %	26	26	26	0.97	
Prior Head Injury (LOC&lt;5 minutes), %	8	10	7	0.31	
History of Thyroid Disease, %	20	17	24	0.13	
History of Transient Ischemic Attack, %	6	7	5	0.64	
History of Sleep Disorder, %	28	29	27	0.85	
Values denoted as mean ± standard deviation or frequency; AD = Alzheimer’s disease; APOE = apolipoprotein E; CSF = cerebrospinal fluid; LOC = loss of consciousness.

Table 6 Baseline neuropsychological and functional characteristics

	Total n = 335	NC n = 167	MCI n = 168	p-value	d	
Clinical Dementia Rating*,†	
0, %	57	100	14	&lt;0.001	–	
0.5, %	43	0	86			
Functional Activities Questionnaire*,†	1.3 ± 2.2	0.1 ± 0.3	2.5 ± 2.6	&lt;0.001	−1.30	
Montreal Cognitive Assessment	25.4 ± 3.3	27.1 ± 2.1	23.6 ± 3.4	&lt;0.001	1.24	
Animal Naming	18.9 ± 5.4	21.1 ± 4.9	16.8 ± 5.1	&lt;0.001	0.86	
Boston Naming Test 30-item Even Version	26.8 ± 3.1	27.9 ± 2.0	25.7 ± 3.6	&lt;0.001	0.76	
Coding	52.6 ± 12.8	57.5 ± 11.4	47.6 ± 12.3	&lt;0.001	0.83	
DKEFS Number Sequencing†	42.4 ± 19.4	35.8 ± 12.3	49.0 ± 22.7	&lt;0.001	−0.72	
DKEFS Number-Letter Switching†	107.5 ± 48.9	85.8 ± 33.6	129.5 ± 52.1	&lt;0.001	−1.00	
DKEFS Tower Test	14.9 ± 4.7	16.1 ± 4.4	13.7 ± 4.7	&lt;0.001	0.53	
DKEFS Color-Word Interference Test - Color Naming†	32.2 ± 6.6	29.7 ± 4.8	34.7 ± 7.3	&lt;0.001	−0.81	
DKEFS Color-Word Interference Test - Word Naming†	24.4 ± 4.9	22.9 ± 4.2	25.8 ± 5.2	&lt;0.001	−0.61	
DKEFS Color-Word Interference Test - Inhibition†	69.4 ± 23.8	59.4 ± 13.5	79.2 ± 27.4	&lt;0.001	−0.92	
Letter Fluency	38.6 ± 11.9	43.3 ± 11.2	33.9 ± 10.6	&lt;0.001	0.86	
California Verbal Learning Test-II Trials 1–5 Total Learning	40.4 ± 11.9	47.1 ± 9.4	33.7 ± 10.3	&lt;0.001	1.36	
California Verbal Learning Test-II Long Delay Free Recall	8.0 ± 4.3	10.6 ± 3.3	5.5 ± 3.6	&lt;0.001	1.48	
Biber Figure Learning Test Trials 1–5 Total Learning	112.3 ± 40.8	136.3 ± 30.1	88.2 ± 35.6	&lt;0.001	1.46	
Biber Figure Learning Test Delayed Recall	26.8 ± 10.6	32.7 ± 7.5	21.0 ± 10.0	&lt;0.001	1.32	
Hooper Visual Organization Test	24.4 ± 3.1	25.3 ± 2.5	23.5 ± 3.4	&lt;0.001	0.60	
Wide Range Achievement Test 3rd Edition, Reading Subtest*	50.1 ± 5.1	51.4 ± 4.2	48.9 ± 5.5	&lt;0.001	0.51	
Geriatric Depression Scale†	3.6 ± 3.6	2.4 ± 2.8	4.7 ± 4.0	&lt;0.001	−0.67	
Values denoted as mean ± standard deviation or frequency; DKEFS, Delis Kaplan Executive Function System;

* variable collected at screening visit;

† lower scores denote better performances; d, Cohen’s d effect size comparing NC and MCI groups.

Authors’ disclosures available online (http://www.j-alz.com/manuscript-disclosures/15-0914r2).


1 Hebert LE Scherr PA Bienias JL Bennett DA Evans DA 2003 Alzheimer disease in the US population: Prevalence estimates using the 2000 census Arch Neurol 60 1119 1122 12925369
2 Qiu C Winblad B Marengoni A Klarin I Fastbom J Fratiglioni L 2006 Heart failure and risk of dementia and Alzheimer disease: A population-based cohort study Arch Intern Med 166 1003 1008 16682574
3 Gifford KA Badaracco M Liu D Tripodis Y Gentile A Lu Z Palmisano J Jefferson AL 2013 Blood pressure and cognition among older adults: A meta-analysis Arch Clin Neuropsychol 28 649 664 23838685
4 Vogels RL Oosterman JM van Harten B Gouw AA Schroeder-Tanka JM Scheltens P van der Flier WM Weinstein HC 2007 Neuroimaging and correlates of cognitive function among patients with heart failure Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 24 418 423 17938570
5 Nation DA Edland SD Bondi MW Salmon DP Delano-Wood L Peskind ER Quinn JF Galasko DR 2013 Pulse pressure is associated with Alzheimer biomarkers in cognitively normal older adults Neurology 81 2024 2027 24225352
6 Hughes TM Kuller LH Barinas-Mitchell EJ Mackey RH McDade EM Klunk WE Aizenstein HJ Cohen AD Snitz BE Mathis CA Dekosky ST Lopez OL 2013 Pulse wave velocity is associated with beta-amyloid deposition in the brains of very elderly adults Neurology 81 1711 1718 24132374
7 Jefferson AL Poppas A Paul RH Cohen RA 2007 Systemic hypoperfusion is associated with executive dysfunction in geriatric cardiac patients Neurobiol Aging 28 477 483 16469418
8 Jefferson AL Himali JJ Au R Seshadri S DeCarli C O’Donnell CJ Wolf PA Manning WJ Beiser AS Benjamin EJ 2011 Relation of left ventricular ejection fraction to cognitive aging (from the Framingham Heart Study) Am J Cardiol 108 1346 1351 21880293
9 Jefferson AL Himali JJ Beiser AS Au R Massaro JM Seshadri S Gona P Salton CJ DeCarli C O’Donnell CJ Benjamin EJ Wolf PA Manning WJ 2010 Cardiac index is associated with brain aging: The Framingham Heart Study Circulation 122 690 697 20679552
10 Jefferson AL Tate DF Poppas A Brickman AM Paul RH Gunstad J Cohen RA 2007 Lower cardiac output is associated with greater white matter hyperintensities in older adults with cardiovascular disease J Am Geriatr Soc 55 1044 1048 17608877
11 Jefferson AL Holland CM Tate DF Csapo I Poppas A Cohen RA Guttmann CR 2011 Atlas-derived perfusion correlates of white matter hyperintensities in patients with reduced cardiac output Neurobiol Aging 32 133 139 19269713
12 Jefferson AL Beiser AS Himali JJ Seshadri S O’Donnell CJ Manning WJ Wolf PA Au R Benjamin EJ 2015 Low cardiac index is associated with incident dementia and Alzheimer disease: The Framingham Heart Study Circulation 131 1333 1339 25700178
13 Morris JC 1993 The Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR): Current version and scoring rules Neurology 43 2412 2414 8232972
14 Pfeffer RI Kurosaki TT Harrah CH Jr Chance JM Filos S 1982 Measurement of functional activities in older adults in the community J Gerontol 37 323 329 7069156
15 Albert MS DeKosky ST Dickson D Dubois B Feldman HH Fox NC Gamst A Holtzman DM Jagust WJ Petersen RC Snyder PJ Carrillo MC Thies B Phelps CH 2011 The diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment due to Alzheimer’s disease: Recommendations from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimers Dement 7 270 279 21514249
16 Wilkinson GS 1993 Wide Range Achievement Test-3 (WRAT-3) Administration Manual The Psychological Corporation San Antonio, TX
17 Brinkmalm G Portelius E Ohrfelt A Mattsson N Persson R Gustavsson MK Vite CH Gobom J Mansson JE Nilsson J Halim A Larson G Ruetschi U Zetterberg H Blennow K Brinkmalm A 2012 An online nano-LC-ESI-FTICR-MS method for comprehensive characterization of endogenous fragments from amyloid beta and amyloid precursor protein in human and cat cerebrospinal fluid J Mass Spectrom 47 591 603 22576872
18 Palmqvist S Zetterberg H Blennow K Vestberg S Andreasson U Brooks DJ Owenius R Hagerstrom D Wollmer P Minthon L Hansson O 2014 Accuracy of brain amyloid detection in clinical practice using cerebrospinal fluid beta-amyloid 42: A cross-validation study against amyloid positron emission tomography JAMA Neurol 71 1282 1289 25155658
19 Fried LP Tangen CM Walston J Newman AB Hirsch C Gottdiener J Seeman T Tracy R Kop WJ Burke G McBurnie MA Cardiovascular Health Study Collaborative Research G 2001 Frailty in older adults: Evidence for a phenotype J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 56 M146 M156 11253156
20 Andresen EM Malmgren JA Carter WB Patrick DL 1994 Screening for depression in well older adults: Evaluation of a short form of the CES-D (Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale) Am J Prev Med 10 77 84 8037935
21 Taylor HL Jacobs DR Jr Schucker B Knudsen J Leon AS Debacker G 1978 A questionnaire for the assessment of leisure time physical activities J Chronic Dis 31 741 755 748370
22 Buchman AS Wilson RS Bienias JL Bennett DA 2009 Change in frailty and risk of death in older persons Exp Aging Res 35 61 82 19173102
23 Stewart AL Mills KM King AC Haskell WL Gillis D Ritter PL 2001 CHAMPS physical activity questionnaire for older adults: Outcomes for interventions Med Sci Sports Exerc 33 1126 1141 11445760
24 Thompson FE Midthune D Subar AF Kipnis V Kahle LL Schatzkin A 2007 Development and evaluation of a short instrument to estimate usual dietary intake of percentage energy from fat J Am Diet Assoc 107 760 767 17467371
25 Buysse DJ Reynolds CF 3rd Monk TH Berman SR Kupfer DJ 1989 The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index: A new instrument for psychiatric practice and research Psychiatry Res 28 193 213 2748771
26 Farias ST Mungas D Reed BR Cahn-Weiner D Jagust W Baynes K Decarli C 2008 The measurement of everyday cognition (ECog): Scale development and psychometric properties Neuropsychology 22 531 544 18590364
27 Gilewski MJ Zelinski EM Schaie KW 1990 The Memory Functioning Questionnaire for assessment of memory complaints in adulthood and old age Psychol Aging 5 482 490 2278670
28 McNair D Kahn R 1983 Self-assessment of cognitive deficits Mark Powley Associates New Canaan, CT
29 Reid LM Maclullich AM 2006 Subjective memory complaints and cognitive impairment in older people Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 22 471 485 17047326
30 Glosser G Gallo J Duda N de Vries JJ Clark CM Grossman M 2002 Visual perceptual functions predict instrumental activities of daily living in patients with dementia Neuropsychiatry Neuropsychol Behav Neurol 15 198 206 12218713
31 Kaplan E 1988 A process approach to neuropsychological assessment Clinical neuropsychology and brain function: Research. Measurement, and practice: Master lectures Boll TE Bryant BR American Psychological Association Washington, DC
32 Kaplan E 1990 The process approach to neuropsychological assessment of psychiatric patients J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci 2 72 87 2136065
33 Pruessmann KP Weiger M Scheidegger MB Boesiger P 1999 SENSE: Sensitivity encoding for fast MRI Magn Reson Med 42 952 962 10542355
34 Rosas HD Liu AK Hersch S Glessner M Ferrante RJ Salat DH van der Kouwe A Jenkins BG Dale AM Fischl B 2002 Regional and progressive thinning of the cortical ribbon in Huntington’s disease Neurology 58 695 701 11889230
35 Salat DH Buckner RL Snyder AZ Greve DN Desikan RS Busa E Morris JC Dale AM Fischl B 2004 Thinning of the cerebral cortex in aging Cereb Cortex 14 721 730 15054051
36 Fischl B Dale AM 2000 Measuring the thickness of the human cerebral cortex from magnetic resonance images Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 97 11050 11055 10984517
37 Fischl B Salat DH van der Kouwe AJ Makris N Segonne F Quinn BT Dale AM 2004 Sequence-independent segmentation of magnetic resonance images Neuroimage 23 Suppl 1 S69 S84 15501102
38 Ashburner J Friston KJ 2000 Voxel-based morphometry–the methods Neuroimage 11 805 821 10860804
39 Asman AJ Landman BA 2012 Formulating spatially varying performance in the statistical fusion framework IEEE Trans Med Imaging 31 1326 1336 22438513
40 Asman AJ Landman BA 2013 Non-local statistical label fusion for multi-atlas segmentation Med Image Anal 17 194 208 23265798
41 Schmidt P Gaser C Arsic M Buck D Forschler A Berthele A Hoshi M Ilg R Schmid VJ Zimmer C Hemmer B Muhlau M 2012 An automated tool for detection of FLAIR-hyperintense white-matter lesions in Multiple Sclerosis Neuroimage 59 3774 3783 22119648
42 Martínez Santiesteban FM Swanson SD Noll DC Anderson DJ 2006 Object orientation independence of susceptibility weighted imaging by using a sigmoid-type phase window Proc Intl Soc Mag Reson Med Abstract No. 2399 467
43 Harrigan RL Yvernault BC Boyd BD Damon SM Gibney KD Conrad BN Phillips NS Rogers BP Gao Y Landman BA 2016 Vanderbilt University Institute of Imaging Science Center for Computational Imaging XNAT: A multimodal data archive and processing environment Neuroimage 124 Pt B 1097 1101 25988229
44 Lauzon CB Asman AJ Esparza ML Burns SS Fan Q Gao Y Anderson AW Davis N Cutting LE Landman BA 2013 Simultaneous analysis and quality assurance for diffusion tensor imaging PLoS One 8 e61737 23637895
45 Smith SM 2002 Fast robust automated brain extraction Hum Brain Mapp 17 143 155 12391568
46 Cook PA Bai Y Nedjati-Gilani SKKS Seunarine KK Hall MG Parker GJ Alexander DC 2006 Camino: Open-source diffusion-MRI reconstruction and processing 14th Scientific Meeting of the International Society for Magnetic Resonance in Medicine Seattle, WA, USA
47 Chang LC Jones DK Pierpaoli C 2005 RESTORE: Robust estimation of tensors by outlier rejection Magn Reson Med 53 1088 1095 15844157
48 Andersson J Jenkinson M Smith S 2007 Non-linear optimisation: FMRIB Technial Report TR07JA1 FMRIB Centre Oxford, United Kingdom
49 Andersson J Jenkinson M Smith S 2007 Non-linear registration aka Spatial normalisation FMRIB Technial Report TR07JA2 FMRIB Centre Oxford, United Kingdom
50 Park Y Diez-Silva M Fu D Popescu G Choi W Barman I Suresh S Feld MS 2010 Static and dynamic light scattering of healthy and malaria-parasite invaded red blood cells J Biomed Opt 15 020506 20459219
51 Choi SW Reise SP Pilkonis PA Hays RD Cella D 2010 Efficiency of static and computer adaptive short forms compared to full-length measures of depressive symptoms Qual Life Res 19 125 136 19941077
52 Tian Q Ferrucci L Resnick SM Simonsick EM Shardell MD Landman BA Venkatraman VK Gonzalez CE Studenski SA 2015 The effect of age and microstructural white matter integrity on lap time variation and fast-paced walking speed Brain Imaging Behav 10.1007/s11682-015-9449-6
53 Donahue MJ Hussey E Rane S Wilson T van Osch M Hartkamp N Hendrikse J Ally BA 2014 Vessel-encoded arterial spin labeling (VE-ASL) reveals elevated flow territory asymmetry in older adults with substandard verbal memory performance J Magn Reson Imaging 39 377 386 23633160
54 Wang J Alsop DC Li L Listerud J Gonzalez-At JB Schnall MD Detre JA 2002 Comparison of quantitative perfusion imaging using arterial spin labeling at 1.5 and 4.0 Tesla Magn Reson Med 48 242 254 12210932
55 Jenkinson M Beckmann CF Behrens TE Woolrich MW Smith SM 2012 Fsl Neuroimage 62 782 790 21979382
56 Donahue MJ Dethrage LM Faraco CC Jordan LC Clemmons P Singer R Mocco J Shyr Y Desai A O’Duffy A Riebau D Hermann L Connors J Kirshner H Strother MK 2014 Routine clinical evaluation of cerebrovascular reserve capacity using carbogen in patients with intracranial stenosis Stroke 45 2335 2341 24938845
57 Krabbe-Hartkamp MJ van der Grond J de Leeuw FE de Groot JC Algra A Hillen B Breteler MM Mali WP 1998 Circle of Willis: Morphologic variation on three-dimensional time-of-flight MR angiograms Radiology 207 103 111 9530305
58 Lazorthes G Gouazé A Santini J-J Salamon G 1979 Lécercle arteriel du cerveau (circulus arteriosus cerebri) Anat Clin 1 241 257
59 Eftekhar B Dadmehr M Ansari S Ghodsi M Nazparvar B Ketabchi E 2006 Are the distributions of variations of circle of Willis different in different populations? - Results of an anatomical study and review of literature BMC Neurology 6 22 16796761
60 Lang RM Badano LP Mor-Avi V Afilalo J Armstrong A Ernande L Flachskampf FA Foster E Goldstein SA Kuznetsova T Lancellotti P Muraru D Picard MH Rietzschel ER Rudski L Spencer KT Tsang W Voigt JU 2015 Recommendations for cardiac chamber quantification by echocardiography in adults: An update from the American Society of Echocardiography and the European Association of Cardiovascular Imaging J Am Soc Echocardiogr 28 1 39 e14 25559473
61 Rudski LG Lai WW Afilalo J Hua L Handschumacher MD Chandrasekaran K Solomon SD Louie EK Schiller NB 2010 Guidelines for the echocardiographic assessment of the right heart in adults: A report from the American Society of Echocardiography endorsed by the European Association of Echocardiography, a registered branch of the European Society of Cardiology, and the Canadian Society of Echocardiography J Am Soc Echocardiogr 23 685 713 quiz 786–688 20620859
62 Nagueh SF Appleton CP Gillebert TC Marino PN Oh JK Smiseth OA Waggoner AD Flachskampf FA Pellikka PA Evangelista A 2009 Recommendations for the evaluation of left ventricular diastolic function by echocardiography J Am Soc Echocardiogr 22 107 133 19187853
63 Quinones MA Otto CM Stoddard M Waggoner A Zoghbi WA Doppler Quantification Task Force of the N, Standards Committee of the American Society of E 2002 Recommendations for quantification of Doppler echocardiography: A report from the Doppler Quantification Task Force of the Nomenclature and Standards Committee of the American Society of Echocardiography J Am Soc Echocardiogr 15 167 184 11836492
64 Baumgartner H Hung J Bermejo J Chambers JB Evangelista A Griffin BP Iung B Otto CM Pellikka PA Quinones M American Society of E, European Association of E 2009 Echocardiographic assessment of valve stenosis: EAE/ASE recommendations for clinical practice J Am Soc Echocardiogr 22 1 23 quiz 101–102 19130998
65 Zoghbi WA Enriquez-Sarano M Foster E Grayburn PA Kraft CD Levine RA Nihoyannopoulos P Otto CM Quinones MA Rakowski H Stewart WJ Waggoner A Weissman NJ American Society of E 2003 Recommendations for evaluation of the severity of native valvular regurgitation with two-dimensional and Doppler echocardiography J Am Soc Echocardiogr 16 777 802 12835667
66 Mor-Avi V Lang RM Badano LP Belohlavek M Cardim NM Derumeaux G Galderisi M Marwick T Nagueh SF Sengupta PP Sicari R Smiseth OA Smulevitz B Takeuchi M Thomas JD Vannan M Voigt JU Zamorano JL 2011 Current and evolving echocardiographic techniques for the quantitative evaluation of cardiac mechanics: ASE/EAE consensus statement on methodology and indications endorsed by the Japanese Society of Echocardiography J Am Soc Echocardiogr 24 277 313 21338865
67 Picard MH Adams D Bierig SM Dent JM Douglas PS Gillam LD Keller AM Malenka DJ Masoudi FA McCulloch M Pellikka PA Peters PJ Stainback RF Strachan GM Zoghbi WA American Society of E 2011 American Society of Echocardiography recommendations for quality echocardiography laboratory operations J Am Soc Echocardiogr 24 1 10 21172594
68 D’Agostino RB Wolf PA Belanger AJ Kannel WB 1994 Stroke risk profile: Adjustment for antihypertensive medication. The Framingham Study Stroke 25 40 43 8266381
69 Green MS Kaye JA Ball MJ 2000 The Oregon brain aging study: Neuropathology accompanying healthy aging in the oldest old Neurology 54 105 113 10636134
70 Bennett DA Schneider JA Arvanitakis Z Wilson RS 2012 Overview and findings from the religious orders study Curr Alzheimer Res 9 628 645 22471860
71 Morris JC Weintraub S Chui HC Cummings J Decarli C Ferris S Foster NL Galasko D Graff-Radford N Peskind ER Beekly D Ramos EM Kukull WA 2006 The Uniform Data Set (UDS): Clinical and cognitive variables and descriptive data from Alzheimer Disease Centers Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 20 210 216 17132964
72 Petersen RC Aisen PS Beckett LA Donohue MC Gamst AC Harvey DJ Jack CR Jr Jagust WJ Shaw LM Toga AW Trojanowski JQ Weiner MW 2010 Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI): Clinical characterization Neurology 74 201 209 20042704
73 Silbert LC Dodge HH Perkins LG Sherbakov L Lahna D Erten-Lyons D Woltjer R Shinto L Kaye JA 2012 Trajectory of white matter hyperintensity burden preceding mild cognitive impairment Neurology 79 741 747 22843262
74 Aisen PS Petersen RC Donohue MC Gamst A Raman R Thomas RG Walter S Trojanowski JQ Shaw LM Beckett LA Jack CR Jr Jagust W Toga AW Saykin AJ Morris JC Green RC Weiner MW Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging, Initiative 2010 Clinical Core of the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative: Progress and plans Alzheimers Dement 6 239 246 20451872
75 Hohman TJ Koran ME Thornton-Wells TA Alzheimer’s Neuroimaging, Initiative 2014 Genetic variation modifies risk for neurodegeneration based on biomarker status Front Aging Neurosci 6 183 25140149
76 DeCarli C Massaro J Harvey D Hald J Tullberg M Au R Beiser A D’Agostino R Wolf PA 2005 Measures of brain morphology and infarction in the framingham heart study: Establishing what is normal Neurobiol Aging 26 491 510 15653178
77 Page RM Cole GE Timmreck TC 1995 Basic Epidemiological Methods and Biostatistics: A Practical Guidebook Jones and Bartlett
78 Nasreddine ZS Phillips NA Bedirian V Charbonneau S Whitehead V Collin I Cummings JL Chertkow H 2005 The Montreal Cognitive Assessment, MoCA: A brief screening tool for mild cognitive impairment J Am Geriatr Soc 53 695 699 15817019
79 Klages JD Fisk JD Rockwood K 2003 APOE genotype, memory test performance, and the risk of Alzheimer’s disease in the Canadian Study of Health and Aging Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 15 1 5 12457072
80 Sivan AB 1992 Benton visual retention test Psychological Corporation San Antonio, TX
81 Goodglass H Kaplan E 1983 The assessment of aphasia and related disorders Lea &amp; Febiger Philadelphia, PA
82 Kaplan E Goodglass H Weintraub S 1983 The Boston Naming Test Lea &amp; Febiger Philadelphia, PA
83 Wechsler D 1997 Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale 3 (WAIS-III) Manual The Psychological Corporation San Antonio, TX
84 Reitan RM 1958 Validity of the Trail Making Test as an indicator of organic brain damage Percept Mot Skills 8 271 276
85 Golden C 1978 Stroop colour and word test Stoelting Co Wood Dale IL
86 Wechsler D 2008 Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale 4 Pearson San Antonio, TX
87 Yesavage JA Brink TL Rose TL Lum O Huang V Adey M Leirer VO 1983 Development and validation of a geriatric depression screening scale: A preliminary report J Psychiatr Res 17 37 49 7183759
88 Delis DC Kramer JH Kaplan E Ober BA 2000 California Verbal Learning Test 2 Psychological Corporation San Antonio
89 Glosser G Gallo JL Clark CM Grossman M 2002 Memory encoding and retrieval in frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer’s disease Neuropsychology 16 190 196 11949711
90 Wechsler D 1987 Wechsler Memory Scale-Revised Psychological Corporation San Antonio, Texas
91 Delis DC Kaplan E Kramer JH 2001 Delis-Kaplan Executive Function System (D-KEFS): Examiner’s Manual The Psychological Corporation San Antonio, TX
92 Tombaugh TN Kozak J Rees L 1999 Normative data stratified by age and education for two measures of verbal fluency: FAS and animal naming Arch Clin Neuropsychol 14 167 177 14590600
93 Hooper H 1983 Hooper Visual Organization Test (HVOT) Western Psychological Services Los Angeles, CA
94 Price CC Garrett KD Jefferson AL Cosentino S Tanner JJ Penney DL Swenson R Giovannetti T Bettcher BM Libon DJ 2009 Leukoaraiosis severity and list-learning in dementia Clin Neuropsychol 23 944 961 19370451
95 Lamar M Price CC Libon DJ Penney DL Kaplan E Grossman M Heilman KM 2007 Alterations in working memory as a function of leukoaraiosis in dementia Neuropsychologia 45 245 254 16950457
96 Kaplan E Fein D Morris R Delis D 1991 WAIS-R as a neuropsychological instrument The Psychological Corporation San Antonio TX
97 Wechsler D 2009 Wechsler Memory Scale 4 Pearson San Antonio, TX
98 Lamar M Price CC Davis KL Kaplan E Libon DJ 2002 Capacity to maintain mental set in dementia Neuropsychologia 40 435 445 11684176
99 Wechsler D 1981 Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale -Revised Manual Psychological Corporation New York, NY
