LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9504819
22458
Neuroscientist
Neuroscientist
The Neuroscientist : a review journal bringing neurobiology, neurology and psychiatry
1073-8584
1089-4098

25948650
4641826
10.1177/1073858415585108
NIHMS735361
Article
From Molecular Circuit Dysfunction to Disease: Case Studies in Epilepsy, Traumatic Brain Injury, and Alzheimer’s Disease
Dulla Chris G. 1
Coulter Douglas A. 23
Ziburkus Jokubas 4
1 Department of Neuroscience, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA
2 Department of Pediatrics and Neuroscience, University of Pennsylvania Perleman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA
3 Division of Neurology and the Research Institute of Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA
4 Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Houston, Houston, TX, USA
Corresponding Author: Chris G. Dulla, Department of Neuroscience, Tufts University School of Medicine, 136 Harrison Ave SC203, Boston, MA 02111, USA. chris.dulla@tufts.edu
4 11 2015
06 5 2015
6 2016
01 6 2016
22 3 295312
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Complex circuitry with feed-forward and feed-back systems regulate neuronal activity throughout the brain. Cell biological, electrical, and neurotransmitter systems enable neural networks to process and drive the entire spectrum of cognitive, behavioral, and motor functions. Simultaneous orchestration of distinct cells and interconnected neural circuits relies on hundreds, if not thousands, of unique molecular interactions. Even single molecule dysfunctions can be disrupting to neural circuit activity, leading to neurological pathology. Here, we sample our current understanding of how molecular aberrations lead to disruptions in networks using three neurological pathologies as exemplars: epilepsy, traumatic brain injury (TBI), and Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Epilepsy provides a window into how total destabilization of network balance can occur. TBI is an abrupt physical disruption that manifests in both acute and chronic neurological deficits. Last, in AD progressive cell loss leads to devastating cognitive consequences. Interestingly, all three of these neurological diseases are interrelated. The goal of this review, therefore, is to identify molecular changes that may lead to network dysfunction, elaborate on how altered network activity and circuit structure can contribute to neurological disease, and suggest common threads that may lie at the heart of molecular circuit dysfunction.

epilepsy
traumatic brain injury
Alzheimer’s disease
molecular dysfunction
circuits

Introduction

Understanding neural circuits (groups of synaptically connected neurons acting together to perform a specific function) has become a focus of neuroscience research. How does the brain orchestrate the activity of electrically and structurally diverse neurons, operating at great distances from each other? To deconstruct this question, we must first understand neural circuit structure and function. Multiple laboratories employ advanced genetic, optical, and pharmacological systems to accomplish this circuit dissection (Tye and Deisseroth 2012). These approaches involve the systematic activation and inactivation of specified neurons within a circuit and are aimed at identifying the functional roles of each neuronal subtype. While this is an elegant and forward approach, human brain disorders offer a different opportunity to understand circuit function: insight into a complex system can be gained when it is in disequilibrium, by examining what happens to it when parts of it break.

An early example of “circuit dissection” dates back to 1848, when Phineas Gage lost most of his left frontal lobe in a railroad construction accident. Gage experienced profound emotional, cognitive, and motor losses as well as posttraumatic epilepsy (Damasio and others 1994). From this grotesque beginning, a rich history of circuit dissection burgeoned using tools that were available at the time. Lesional studies of neural circuits have provided a wealth of insight into how activity in focal brain regions drives behavior (Steriade and others 1985). Studies of patients with partial focal epilepsies, brain tumors, and other focal brain pathologies have demonstrated how regionally specific disruptions of a brain circuit can manifest in unexpected ways including abrupt changes in personality, judgment, and demeanor (Mesad and others 2003; Partlow and others 1992). In the neurosurgical clinic, circuit dissection is utilized commonly. Direct electric cortical stimulation (pioneered by Penfield and Jasper) in semiconscious patients undergoing neurosurgery interrupts local circuit activity and allows mapping of eloquent brain regions that must be avoided during surgical resection (Penfield and Jasper 1954).

Recent experiments using optogenetics have advanced the field of neuronal circuit analysis immeasurably and demonstrate that activity in specific subset of neurons within a circuit can drive specific behaviors (Tischer and Weiner 2014). Optogenetics uses genetic delivery of light-sensitive ion channels (channelrhodopsins induce a depolarizing current; halorhodopsins induce a hyperpolarizing current) to specific subtypes of neurons. When channelrhodopsin-expressing neurons are exposed to light, a current is induced and the neuron’s activity is altered, allowing cell-type specific, reversible modulation of activity with high temporal resolution. Optogenetic activation of cholinergic neurons in brainstem can induce rapid eye movement sleep (Van Dort and others 2015); activation of inhibitory neurons in the hypothalamus can induce “voracious feeding behavior” (Jennings and others 2013); activation of estrogen-expressing neurons in the hypothalamus can induce fighting and sexual behaviors (Lee and others 2014). These studies validate, with exquisite specificity, the long-held idea that the activity of specific neurons within a larger circuit can have profound effects on behavior. Whether specific neurological pathologies can be explained by precise network dysfunction, however, remains a question.

To explore how molecular disruptions lead to neurological pathology via circuit dysfunction, we will utilize epilepsy, traumatic brain injury (TBI), and Alzheimer’s disease (AD) as case studies. We will conceptually discuss brain circuits and molecules that contribute to circuit function. Epilepsy will be examined first as a “prototypical” network dysfunction—one in which hyperexcitability and synchrony of neuronal activity leads to episodic, complete circuit failure. TBI as a model of circuit interruption will then be discussed. Here, abrupt physical injury leads to immediate disruption of circuit activity. Last, we will explore new studies that suggest pathologies associated with AD may be caused by underlying cellular and circuit dysfunctions. To move forward, we will attempt to bring together molecular disruptions across models in order to identify universal molecular and circuit level changes associated with neurological diseases.

Neuronal Circuits: Definition and Examples

We define a neuronal circuit as a “group of synaptically connected neurons that act together to generate patterned neuronal activity.” In 1937, James Papez was one of the first to theorize that a group of connected brain structures can form a circuit underlying a behavior. Papez hypothesized that the limbic circuit generated emotion based on “data derived from brain transection and stimulation experiments, developments in comparative neuroanatomy, clinical observations, and evolving neuroanatomical philosophy” (Pantel 2003). To examine how molecular changes lead to circuit-level dysfunction in our three disease case studies, we will focus on the cortico-hippocampal and thalamocortical circuits. Both are implicated in the generation and spread of seizure activity, are commonly damaged in TBI, and have significant cell loss in AD.

The Cortico-Hippocampal Circuit

The temporal lobe contains the cortico-hippocampal circuit, one of the most well studied circuits in the CNS (Fig. 1). This circuit consists of the entorhinal cortex (in the neocortex) and the dentate gyrus, Cornu Ammonis 3 (CA3), and CA1 (in the hippocampus) (Johnston and Amaral 2004). Activity from the entorhinal cortex is carried to the dentate gyrus granule cell layer via the perforant path. The dentate gyrus acts as a gate to filter activity moving through the circuit (Heinemann and others 1992). When salient signals activate dentate gyrus granule cells, their mossy fiber axons excite area CA3. Pyramidal cells in CA3 have recurrent collateral axons, which amplify activity coming from the dentate gyrus (Amaral and Witter 1989). CA3 cells synapse onto CA1 neurons via excitatory Schaeffer collateral axons. Excitatory axons from CA1 project back to the entorhinal cortex to complete the cortico-hippocampal circuit. Both feed-forward and feed-back inhibition, mediated by a wide variety of interneurons, shapes circuit activity at every stage.

This circuit constitutes the biological substrate for many forms of short-term memory. When both hippocampi are removed (as occurred famously in patient H.M.; Squire 2009), declarative short-term memory is lost and no new long-term memories can be formed. This circuit is also highly plastic. Long-term potentiation of synaptic efficacy from CA3 to CA1 is well studied (Martin and others 2000) and is mediated by postsynaptic changes in CA1 pyramidal neurons (Matsuzaki and others 2004). Furthermore, this circuit generates important oscillatory activity through finely tuned action potential firing of both inhibitory and excitatory cells (Beenhakker and Huguenard 2009; Buzsaki and Moser 2013). These precise rhythmic activity patterns synchronize activity across diverse cell types and are important for facilitating memory encoding.

The Thalamocortical Circuit

The thalamocortical loop is another of the most biologically significant and rhythmic brain circuits (Fig. 1). The thalamus, a central relay station for multiple sensory modalities, is a hub for neuronal activity (Sherman and Guillery 2004). There are extensive projections from the thalamus to the cortex (thalamocortical [TC]). TC connections emanate from excitatory thalamic relay neurons and project to excitatory and inhibitory cells in the cortex. These ascending thalamocortical inputs provide an excitatory drive to both initiate (via their synaptic inputs onto excitatory neurons [Petreanu and others 2009]) and constrain (via their synaptic inputs onto inhibitory cells [Cruikshank and others 2007; Sun and others 2006]) cortical network activity. Cortical activity then propagates back to thalamus via corticothalamic (CT) projections. CT fibers arise largely from deep layer cortical pyramidal neurons and project to both thalamic relay neurons and inhibitory neurons in the thalamic reticular nucleus. Similar to TC input to the cortex, CT input to the thalamus directly activates excitatory relay cells and provides feed-forward inhibitory drive from reticular nucleus interneurons, which constrain relay cell activity (von Krosigk and others 1993; Warren and others 1994).

The controlled activity of the thalamocortical loop mediates the integration of sensory information from multiple sensory modalities that converge in the thalamus and are relayed to the cortex. This allows the coordination of activity at distal cortical locations. Interestingly, this circuit is prominently involved in the generation of sleep rhythms and the entrance and exit from various sleep states (McCormick and Bal 1997; Steriade and Contreras 1995).

Molecules That Contribute to Circuit Function

In our discussion of molecules relevant to circuit function and neurological disease, we will focus on ion channels, neurotransmitter systems, and signaling molecules that contribute to neuronal morphology. These classes of molecules give neurons unique functional properties, serve as the targets of multiple classes of pharmacotherapeutics, and are altered by disease.

Voltage-Gated Ion Channels

By definition, neurons are electrically excitable cells. This excitability is driven by the flow of ions across neuronal membranes via a diverse group of channels (Fig. 2). Voltage-gated ion channels are a large subfamily of membrane spanning proteins that open a membrane pore in response to specific changes in neuronal membrane voltage. Among the most fundamental ion channels are calcium channels (CaCh), potassium channels (KChs), and sodium channels (NaChs). Because calcium can activate a large number of intracellular processes, CaChs play perhaps the most diverse cellular role, mediating neurotransmitter release, kinase activation, and gene transcription (Simms and Zamponi 2014). Furthermore, they can depolarize neurons via inward calcium currents and cause calcium spikes. KChs generally hyperpolarize neurons and reduce their activity. KChs regulate hyperpolarization following action potentials (Johnston and others 2010). KChs are also found in astrocytes where they mediate the inward flow of potassium, buffering it from the extracellular space following neuronal activity. NaChs activate at relatively depolarized membrane potentials and allow the depolarizing flow of sodium into neurons (Catterall 2014). NaChs are found throughout neurons and are concentrated at axon initial segments (AIS) where they initiate action potentials, and at Nodes of Ranvier, where they propagate action potentials. As NaChs are expressed in both excitatory and inhibitory neurons, the effects of NaCh dysfunction can be varied.

Neurotransmitter Systems

Molecules involved in synaptic transmission have potent effects on neuronal circuit function (Fig. 3). Although serotonergic, dopaminergic, adrenergic, cholinergic, peptidergic, and many other neurotransmitter systems are critical to brain function, they are primarily neuromodulatory and will not be discussed here. We will focus exclusively on excitatory glutamatergic and inhibitory GABAergic systems.

Glutamatergic Systems

Glutamate (the primary excitatory neurotransmitter in the brain) contained within vesicles in presynaptic terminals is released when action potential-induced depolarization opens voltage-gated calcium channels. Multiple proteins are involved in the fusion and release of glutamate-filled vesicles (Sudhof 2008). Once released, glutamate diffuses within the synaptic and extrasynaptic space where it can activate ionotropic α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) and N-Methyl-D-aspartic acid (NMDA), kainate, and metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs) (Traynelis and others 2010). Ionotropic glutamate receptors are excitatory, allowing the depolarizing influx of mainly sodium and/or calcium as well as a limited amount of potassium efflux. AMPA receptors are found largely in the synapse, are directly gated by glutamate, and inactivate rapidly. NMDA receptors are found in the synapse and extrasynaptically. They require co-activation by glutamate and either D-serine or glycine as well as membrane depolarization to activate, and have much slower activation and inactivation kinetics. Glutamate activation of mGluRs induces changes in neuronal properties via second messenger systems. At the same time that glutamate binds these receptors, high-affinity glutamate transporters compete to bind and transport glutamate into the intracellular compartment (Danbolt 2001). Glutamate transporters remove glutamate from the extracellular space and terminate its ability to act at receptors. The vast majority of glutamate transporters are found on astrocytic processes that contact and envelope synapses (although growing evidence suggests relevant uptake of glutamate by neurons; Petr and others 2015; Scimemi and others 2009). Once transported into the intracellular compartment of the astrocyte, glutamate is converted to glutamine and is transferred back to neurons via the glutamine/glutamate shuttle where it is converted to glutamate for rerelease in a local synaptic economy.

GABAergic Systems

GABA (the main inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain) is synthesized from glutamate via glutamic acid decarboxylase. The synaptic release of GABA is calcium-dependent and relies on largely the same synaptic fusion proteins. GABA receptors mediate inhibitory, chloride influx and are much more diverse that glutamate receptors (Sigel and Steinmann 2012). This receptor-level diversity allows for GABA receptors with different affinities, kinetics, trafficking, and pharmacology to be inserted in specific synapses to fine tune function. GABAA receptors can mediate phasic inhibition via low-affinity synaptic receptors or tonic inhibition via high-affinity extrasynaptic receptors. GABA can act at metabotropic GABAB receptors, which exert powerful inhibitory effects. GABA is bound and removed from the extracellular environment by GABA transporters (GATs) expressed on both axon terminals and on astrocytes (Roth and Draguhn 2012). Evidence supports both the direct recycling of GABA during times of relatively low GABAergic activity and reliance on glutamate/glutamine-based production of GABA when activity is increased (Liang and others 2006; Ortinski and others 2010).

Cell Biological Signaling and Neuronal Morphology

Intracellular signaling molecules and cytoskeletal components can also predispose a network to dysfunction. We will consider two basic cell biological molecules, mTOR and tau. The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) is a kinase that controls cell size, proliferation, motility, and survival. Tau is a tubulin binding protein highly expressed in neurons that stabilizes axonal microtubules. These molecules are basic building blocks of cells, they affect neuronal function, and they are all implicated in epilepsy, TBI, and AD.

mTor

mTOR is serine/threonine kinase expressed in multiple cell types throughout the body (Laplante and Sabatini 2012). It is central to multiple large signaling systems related to amino acid availability, growth factors, cytokines, protein synthesis, cell growth, and more. Downstream targets of mTOR are components of multiple signaling pathways, including S-6-Kinase, 4EBP1, eiF4a, AKT, Hif1/2, and others. This gives mTOR the ability to respond to multiple cellular signals by modulating a diverse array of cellular machinery. mTOR itself is two different protein complexes, mTORC1 and mTORC2, differentiated by the proteins they associate with and their downstream targets. Rapamycin, originally discovered as an antifungal, inhibits mTOR, and is now widely used as an immunosuppressant. Using rapamycin as a therapeutic agent has rapidly evolved to include potential applications in epilepsy, AD, TBI, cancer, drug addiction, and muscular dystrophy.

Tau

Tau is a protein most well-known for forming neurofibrillary tangles, a hallmark of AD pathology (Ballatore and others 2007). Tau stabilizes microtubules, is heavily expressed by neurons, and is commonly found in axons. Tau has very little secondary structure, is highly flexible, and stabilizes microtubules by crosslinking tubulin. The tubulin-binding function of tau arises from four repeated domains at its c-terminus end, which each can directly interact with tubulin (Brandt and others, 1993). Tau also interacts with a number of neurologically relevant molecules including NMDA receptors (Ittner and others 2010). Dysregulation of tau phosphorylation may contribute to the formation of neurofibrillary tangles, which are composed of hyperphosphorylated tau.

Epilepsy: The “Prototypical” Molecular Network Dysfunction

Epilepsy is one of the most common neurological diseases, affecting approximately 1% of people worldwide (65 million). Epilepsy is defined by recurrent spontaneous seizures and is an umbrella term covering dozens of different disorders. Brain injury, fever, genetic mutation, infection, hypoxic/ischemic insult, and brain tumors can all lead to epilepsy (Noebels and others 2012). Seizures, in general, result from the unconstrained, synchronous activation of neuronal circuity. As brain activity is constant, it is surprising that seizures are not more common! This is because the brain has evolved numerous mechanisms to control and constrain activity. Inhibitory systems, circuits which favor desynchronization of neuronal activity, activity-dependent depression of neurotransmission, and many other mechanisms, exist to combat “runaway excitation.” When these mechanisms fail, or are disrupted, seizures occur. Interestingly, although pathologic insults can make seizures more likely, models show that anyone’s brain can seize (Jirsa and others 2014). Fortunately, the vast majority of the time endogenous antiseizure mechanisms prevent the brain from entering seizure states, even in most patients with epilepsy.

When seizures do occur they have diverse motor, cognitive, and emotional consequences. Seizure symptomology (as measured by seizure behavior and electroencephalography) varies based on the site of seizure initiation and the circuits through which a seizure spreads. Among seizure subtypes, temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) is the most common. TLE occurs in the cortico-hippocampal circuit and accounts for approximately 60% of all epilepsy. Neocortical epilepsy, which involves the cortico-thalamic circuit, is also common and arises from a focal disruption in the neocortex. Many therapeutic options exist to treat seizures including pharmacotherapy, diet-based strategies, surgical resection, and multiple forms of electrical brain stimulation. Even with so many options, up to 30% of epilepsy remains refractory to treatment (Shorvon 2007). Fortunately, advances in both circuit and genetic analysis have allowed advances to be made in our understanding of the disease. Below, we will discuss specific molecular dysfunctions, taken from some recent studies, to illustrate the multiple ways in which molecular changes can lead to circuit dysfunction.

Sodium Channels and Dravet Syndrome

Voltage-dependent sodium channel antagonists are used widely as anticonvulsants as they inhibit neuronal activity. The link between sodium channel function and epilepsy, however, is not always so simple. Loss-of-function mutations in the SCN1A gene (which encodes NaV1.1) are linked to severe developmental epilepsies including Generalized Epilepsy with Febrile Seizures plus type 2 (GEFS+2) (Claes and others 2001) and Dravet syndrome (Claes and others 2009; Escayg and others 2000; Lossin 2009). NaV1.1 sodium channels contribute to neuronal action potential firing. How then does a loss-of-function mutation, which should decrease neuronal action potential firing, lead to seizures? The answer came when NaV1.1 was found to be preferentially expressed in inhibitory interneurons (Yu and others 2006), in the axon initial segment (Ogiwara and others 2007), where action potentials are generated (Fig. 4). SCN1A mutant mice show a deficit in interneuron, but not pyramidal cell, excitability. Input/output relationships are altered in NaV1.1 interneurons and the ability to generate high-frequency action potentials is diminished. Visualizing hippocampal circuit activity using voltage-sensitive dye imaging in acute brain slices from SCN1A mutant mice showed that neuronal activity summated faster and spread more broadly (Gu and others 2014). Additionally, when the mutant NaV1.1 channel was expressed conditionally in interneurons, but not excitatory neurons, the epilepsy phenotype persisted (Cheah and others 2012). Interrupting the ability of interneurons to respond to excitation and to produce inhibitory output compromises the control of excitatory activity, leads to aberrant circuit activity, and predisposes circuits to seize. These studies show a clear example of how a loss-of-function mutation in a molecule critical to regulating neuronal excitability leads to circuit and neurological dysfunction.

Shaping Synchrony: Oscillations and Absence Epilepsy

The thalamocortical circuit is involved in absence epilepsy, a form of epilepsy characterized by spike-wave discharges and momentary loss of consciousness (Blumenfeld 2005). In the thalamocortical circuit, multiple preclinical studies have underscored the importance of the recurrent connectivity in the TC-CT circuit, and also within the thalamic circuitry itself (Fig. 5). Because thalamic neurons express t-type calcium channels, which are inactivated at resting potentials and de-inactivate when neurons are hyperpolarized, they are able to fire calcium rebound bursts following inhibitory barrages from nRT interneurons (Llinas 1988). Increased t-type calcium currents in the thalamus enhance rebound bursting in TC neurons. This increases hypersynchronization within thalamic circuitry and leads to absence epilepsy phenotypes (Talley and others 2000). Ethosuximide, a commonly used anticonvulsant, inhibits t-type calcium channels to attenuate pathological oscillatory activity (Coulter and others 1989; Zhang and others 2004). A number of different mechanisms can drive this hyperactivation of thalamic relay neurons. Lack of a specific glutamate receptor, Gria4, at the CT-nRT synapse decreases feed-forward inhibition of thalamic relay neurons (Paz and others 2011). This allows direct activation of CT neurons via unbalanced TC excitation and initiates hypersynchronization throughout the thalamocortical circuit. Under different circumstances, decreased efficiency of GABA transport can overactivate GABAB receptors, decreasing t-type calcium channel inactivation, elevating rebound firing, and hypersynchronizing neurons (Beenhakker and Huguenard 2010). Although there is disagreement in the field regarding how spike-wave epilepsy is initiated, it is clear that hypersynchronization of the thalamic relay neuron-nRT circuit plays an important role (Paz and Huguenard 2015). When large groups of CT cells become synchronized, this activity can rapidly spread through the thalamocortical circuit and disrupt consciousness.

Signaling Molecules: “TORopathies” and Epilepsy

Changes in neuronal morphology can also alter circuit function via changes in neuronal connectivity. Multiple studies show that overactive mTOR signaling is associated with epilepsy (Wong and Crino 2012) and is known to alter neuronal morphology. Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is a form of epilepsy characterized by cortical malformations, known as tubers (Crino and others 2006). TSC is caused over 85% of the time by mutations in the TSC1 and TSC2 genes, both negative regulators of mTOR signaling. Histochemical analysis of brain tissue from TSC patients reveals large-scale cortical disorganization, the presence of large undifferentiated balloon cells, and hyperactivated mTOR signaling molecules (Crino 2011; Crino and others 2006). In model systems, loss of TSC1/2 leads to ectopic axons, and overexpression of TSC1/2 can cause axon loss (Choi and others 2008). This suggests that overactive mTOR alters neuronal morphology and migration, perhaps by its known effects on cytoskeletal dynamics, response to growth factors, and cell-cell adhesions (Guertin and Sabatini 2007). Consistent with this hypothesis, axonal abnormalities and laminar disruptions are seen in the cortex of patients with TSC. Loss of PTEN, a negative regulator of mTOR, has also been shown to alter neuronal migration, morphology, and axon outgrowth (Pun and others 2012). Mutations in STRADA, another negative regulator of mTOR, cause Pretzel syndrome, a development epilepsy disorder common in the Old Order Mennonite population. Loss of STRADA leads to overactivation of mTOR, reduces neurite outgrowth, and neuron motility in culture (Parker and others 2013). Disrupted cortical circuit structure is thought to underlie seizure generation in patients with Pretzel syndrome. Like TSC, this is likely due to altered neuronal migration, neurite outgrowth, and adhesion. In fact, many “TORopathies” lead to focal cortical malformations (disruptions in local circuitry, connectivity, and cellular composition). Importantly, both preclinical and clinical studies, in the case of Pretzel syndrome, show that using rapamycin, an inhibitor of mTOR, can reverse many of the pathologies and dramatically improve patient quality of life.

mTOR signaling controls an enormous number of downstream gene targets, besides its effects on cellular and neurite motility. Loss of TSC1 can also decrease the expression of the main glutamate transporter in the adult brain, GLT1, leading to increased extracellular glutamate signaling and enhanced neuronal activation (Wong and others 2003). GLT1 levels have been reported to be decreased and glutamate levels increased in resected human epileptic foci (Rakhade and Loeb 2008). Additionally, the uptake of glutamate by astrocytes is critical to maintaining production of both glutamate (Tani and others 2014) and GABA (Ortinski and others 2010). When GLT1 is lost in the astrocyte-specific TSC1 knockout animals, increasing GLT1 with ceftriaxone decreased extracellular glutamate levels, neuronal cell death, and seizures (Zeng and others 2008).

For Further Consideration

Control of inhibitory systems including GABA receptor expression, trafficking, and function are especially relevant to circuit disruption and epilepsy (Grabenstatter and others 2012; Grabenstatter and others 2014; Maguire and others 2005; Wyeth and others 2010). Additionally, astrocyte control of extracellular glutamate levels may be a common mechanism to a number of different molecular disruptions (Armbruster and others 2014; Robel and others 2015). Recent findings also suggest a critical role for astrocyte potassium buffering in human epilepsy (Bedner and others 2015). Finally, the link between gain or loss-of-function mutation and epilepsy is not always clear; even when mutations should logically lead to circuit abnormality, they do not cause epilepsy in every patient (Klassen and others 2011). Clearly, more research is needed to understand how changes in a single molecule can lead to circuit dysfunction and disease (Staley 2015).

Traumatic Brain Injury: The Most Acute Disruption of Network Activity

Traumatic brain injury is one of the leading causes of death worldwide and arises from a vast array of physical insults. TBI induces disruptions in white matter, can cause widespread cell loss, and decreases cortical, hippocampal, and whole brain volume (Bigler and others 1997; Goddeyne and others 2015; Trivedi and others 2007). In severe TBI, direct injury can ablate neuronal tissue. More common, however, are diffuse axon injuries (DAI) caused by the rapid acceleration/deceleration and rotation forces that cause brain movement and pressure waves within the skull. Neuronal injury also occurs in phases following TBI. Following acute changes, direct damage, and DAI, extensive secondary changes occur (Lowenstein 2009). In general, there is a direct relationship between the brain regions damaged and the circuit-level dysfunction (Kasahara and others 2010; Mayer and others 2011). Disrupted circuitry commonly includes the default mode network (the brain regions active when a person is aware but quietly at rest), the saliency network (the brain regions activated when a person is attending to behaviorally relevant events), and general long-range interactions between brain regions.

TBI is linked with a number of other neurological disorders. Posttraumatic epilepsy occurs following TBI with the severity of injury directly linked to the likelihood of developing seizures (Annegers and Coan 2000). Multiple head injuries are known to substantially increase the risk for development of AD, chronic traumatic encephalopathy, and associated dementias (Moretti and others 2012; Smith and others 2013). Dementias related to head injuries are becoming an important health concern. For example, in the National Football League (NFL), up to 20% of players report to have suffered from multiple concussions (Maroon and Bost 2011). A 2009 study commissioned by the NFL reported that Alzheimer’s disease and memory-related disorders have been diagnosed in former players at a rate 19 times the normal rate for men ages 30 through 49 (Stone 2011). Many recent advances in understanding the neurobiology of TBI have been made that will hopefully lead to novel prevention and treatment strategies. Here, we will examine how tau, an important cytoskeletal molecule involved in microtubule stabilization, engenders axons with unique physical properties making them prone to injury, how that injury leads to network dysfunction, and how neurotransmitter systems are involved in TBI.

Cytoskeletal Proteins and Diffuse Axon Injury

Diffuse axon injury is caused by mechanical stress on delicate axon fibers (Fig. 6). DAI is caused by the rapid acceleration and deceleration of the brain during TBI (Smith and others 1999; Tang-Schomer and others 2010). DAI induces microtubules fracture, inward flow of Ca2+ ions (Wolf and others 2001), and proteolytic cleavage of voltage-gated sodium channels resulting in their inability to inactivate (Iwata and others 2004). All of these changes impair the physical and electrical stability of the injured axons and are associated with axonal retraction or degeneration (Chen and others 2009). Why are axons, not cell bodies or dendrites, so susceptible to TBI-induced pathology? Recent studies suggest that tau, which is highly enriched in axons, may be the key. Tau crosslinks microtubules giving them the stable structure they require to span from point to point. A recent modeling study suggests biophysical properties of tau increase the susceptibility of axons to damage following TBI (Ahmadzadeh and others 2014). They report that tau cross-linked microtubules are capable of a high degree of flexibility when mechanical strain put on the brain is slow, as would occur during normal biological movement of the brain and body (Smith and others 1999). When the brain undergoes rapid mechanical strain, however, those same biophysical properties of tau-cross-linked microtubules lead to their fracture. This simple, but important, property of microtubule flexibility caused by tau provides insight into why axons may be such a mechanically sensitive neuronal structure. Once axons are damaged, axonal transport is disrupted, hyperphosphorylated tau aggregates, and a cascade of multiple pathological events occurs leading to axon retraction and even cell death (for a more complete review, see Blennow and others 2012). Of specific functional importance, axons disrupted by these mechanisms tend to lose connectivity with their postsynaptic targets.

Circuit-Level Dysfunction in TBI

From this local, physical disruption to axonal integrity, large-scale changes begin to occur throughout the brain (Sharp and others 2014). Axons degrade and retract and neurons die. In the normal brain, highly connected local circuits carry out specific functions appropriate to their location in cortex. These circuits also act as nodes, a connection or redistribution point to other circuits (Fig. 6). Not all circuits, or nodes, are connected to every other circuit, but any given circuit connects with most other circuits via only a few nodes in the human brain. This model of brain functional connectivity is known as the “small-world” model (He and others 2007). “Small-world connectivity” allows for flexibility in brain circuit function because different combinations of activity states (communication via different nodal pathways) can result in the same output of a circuit. Many examples of such networks exist including the default mode network, the salience network, and the central executive network (the brain areas activated during complex decision making) (Sharp and others 2011). The balanced activity of these networks allows distinct patterns of brain activity and cognitive states. After severe TBI, nodes within these networks can be directly injured. More commonly, however, connections between nodes are disrupted by DAI (Mayer and others 2011). Imaging studies support the hypothesis that DAI leads to inefficient flow of activity through networks, which requires larger brain regions required to perform tasks normally handled by smaller areas (Shumskaya and others 2012). Following TBI and DAI, flexibility associated with small-world connectivity is often lost; more limited options exist within a network to rapidly switch activation and subsequent cognitive states. A growing body of research shows that functional losses post-TBI may be partially due to decreased efficiency in brain network activation and transition caused by DAI.

Neurotransmitter Systems and TBI

Glutamatergic systems are altered by TBI. Acute loss of the astrocytic glutamate transporter GLT1 occurs immediately following TBI (Yi and others 2005). This may be related to increased glutamate levels seen in human CSF (Chamoun and others 2010). As in epilepsy, increasing glutamate transport using ceftriaxone can be protective following TBI (Goodrich and others 2013). Studies examining glutamate receptors suggest acute decreases in NMDA receptor expression (Park and others 2013). Studies examining AMPA receptors show more variability (Atkins and others 2006; Spaethling and others 2008). GABAergic systems are also compromised due to cell loss (Cantu and others 2014), changes in receptor expression (Drexel and others 2015; Raible and others 2012), and function (Faria and others 2012; Jin and others 2011; Ma and Prince 2012).

For Further Consideration

Literally dozens of other important molecular changes play a role in altering neuronal, and thus circuit-level function following TBI (Blennow and others 2012). mTOR signaling is increased following TBI and therefore could cause increased neurite outgrowth and other downstream effects. Alteration of neuronal adhesion and synaptic organization is known to occur both in humans and in animal models of TBI (Park and Biederer 2013). Microglial activation and neuro-inflammation also play a significant role in the molecular pathophysiology of TBI (Davalos and others 2005; Shitaka and others 2011; Ziebell and Morganti-Kossmann 2010). Interestingly, Aβ plaques seen in AD are also found in the human brain following TBI (Ikonomovic and others 2004; Roberts and others 1994).

Alzheimer’s Disease: Slow, Progressive Circuit Destruction

Alzheimer’s disease is the most common form of dementia. According to the Centers for Disease Control, in 2013 there were ≈5 million Americans living with AD, projected to rise to 14 million by the year 2050. The progression of AD includes memory impairment, neuronal cell loss, dementia, and death (Huang and Mucke 2012). As memory impairments are common, the cortico-hippocampal circuit is thought to be involved in AD. Indeed, there is significant loss of hippocampal volume in advanced-stage AD. Cell loss occurs throughout the brain, however, potentially implicating many other brain circuits. There is currently no cure for AD, and several existing drugs on the market show only modest efficacy. Thus, there is an urgent need to understand the synaptic and circuit abnormalities that lead to AD pathophysiology.

Tangles and Plaques in AD

The histopathology of AD is characterized by neurofibrillary tangles and “senile” plaques. Neurofibrillary tangles are formed by misfolded, hyperphosphorylated, and ubiquitinated tau protein. In this state, tau dissociates from microtubules and aggregates, creating fibrillary structures (Alonso and others 1996; Grundke-Iqbal and others 1986; Gustke and others 1992). Two important AD pathologies, the loss of synapses and cell death, are both thought to be downstream of disruptions in tau (Roberson and others 2011). The second major hallmark of AD is amyloid-β (Aβ) peptide pathology. Aβ peptides are generated from amyloid precursor protein (APP), a transmembrane protein ubiquitously expressed in all tissues. APP is metabolized by two mutually independent pathways: alpha, or beta and gamma secretases (Huang and Mucke 2012). Alpha secretase cleavage results in the generation of non-pathogenic peptides, which do not produce Aβ peptides. Sequential cleavage by beta and gamma secretases, however, generates Aβ monomers, which may be directly pathogenic (Selkoe 2008). These monomers form oligomers and aggregate to form extracellular plaques in the brain and periphery (Hardy and Selkoe 2002). Aβ plaques are located in areas of cellular dysfunction, cell loss, and network dysfunction. Interestingly, many of the pathological effects of Aβ plaques are thought to be mediated by tau, as they are lost when tau is experimentally removed.

Molecular and Cellular Targets of AD Pathology

It has been difficult to identify the precise mechanism by which any of these pathologies lead to AD cellular pathology or circuit dysfunction. Both plaques and hyperphosphorylated tau have multiple potential molecular effectors, alter numerous cellular functions, and have broad or unknown function. Even though there are many challenges, recent work has brought to light a number of potential molecular changes in AD linked to neuronal excitability and circuit function. We will discuss recent work examining their potential role on glutamate toxicity and sodium channel dysfunction in regulating inhibition in AD.

Glutamate Toxicity

As cell loss is a component of AD, it is not surprising that glutamate, glutamate receptors, and glutamate-induced excitotoxicity have been a focus of AD (Palop and Mucke 2010; Rush and Buisson 2014; Spires-Jones and Hyman 2014). A number of studies have demonstrated that Aβ plaques directly increase NMDA receptor function (Larson and others 2012; Texido and others 2011) and glutamate release (Abramov and others 2009). Interestingly, synaptic activity (Cirrito and others 2005) and NMDA receptor activation regulates APP processing and the formation of Aβ plaques. The activation of synaptic NMDA receptors appears to favor alpha-secretase activity and decreased Aβ plaque formation (Hoey and others 2009). Extrasynaptic NMDA receptor activation, on the other hand, increases beta-secretase activity, leading to more formation of Aβ plaques (Bordji and others 2010). This creates a potentially vicious cycle in which Aβ leads to increased NMDA receptor activation, which in turn leads to more Aβ. In addition, the astrocytic removal (Li and others 2009; Masliah and others 1996) and processing of glutamate (Robinson 2001) may also be reduced in AD, leading to more activation of extrasynaptic NMDA receptors. Interestingly, as Aβ load increases with disease progression, excitatory synaptic systems begin to be inhibited via receptor internalization and dendritic spine loss (Mucke and others 2000; Walsh and others 2002). This leads to a global loss of synapses in the AD brain, the degree of which correlates well with decreased cognitive function (Terry and others 1991).

Based on these findings, memantine, an NMDA receptor antagonist, was developed as an AD therapeutic. Memantine is an open channel NMDA receptor blocker that attenuates NMDA-induced neurotoxicity (Chen and others 1992). Memantine acts to decrease Glun2B-containing NMDA receptor activation and inhibits Aβ-mediated disruptions in synaptic plasticity (Hu and others 2009). It has been shown to slow the progression of dementia in AD, but does not radically improve disease outcome (Herrmann and Gauthier 2008). Treating memory loss with an NMDA antagonist seems somewhat contradictory, as NMDA receptors are key in mediating memory formation. Current thinking on this treatment suggests memantine mediates its effect by either reducing cell loss or by restoring the excitation/inhibition balance.

Inhibition and NaChs in AD

Recent findings suggest that impaired inhibition may be involved in AD (Busche and others 2008; Palop and others 2007; Palop and Mucke 2010; Sperling and others 2009). These studies indicate that Aβ plaques and tau tangles can lead to decreased function of inhibitory interneurons and increased excitation in neuronal circuits. Several studies have described inhibitory cell loss in AD, particularly in hippocampal circuits (Loreth and others 2012; Ramos and others 2006). This inhibitory dysfunction can result in aberrant neuronal activity spread in the hippocampal circuit (Hazra and others 2013). On the other hand, inhibitory axonal sprouting was observed as a potential compensatory mechanism to inhibitory cell loss (Palop and others 2007). Interestingly, high levels of beta amyloid can induce epileptic activity in mouse models of AD (Palop and Mucke 2009) and loss of inhibition could also explain high incidence of seizures in human AD (Hauser and others 1986).

New evidence suggests sodium channel dysfunctions may play a significant role in AD pathology and link directly to decreased inhibitory neurotransmission. As in the previous discussion of Dravet syndrome and SCN1A mutation, sodium channel dysfunction in interneurons may lead to AD symptoms. Using the hAPP J20 model, Verret and colleagues showed a lack of NaV1.1 in parvalbumin expressing interneurons (Verret and others 2012). This led to increased network hyperexcitation (similar to Fig. 4) and poor cognitive function. When NaV1.1 was reintroduced into interneurons genetically, epileptiform activity was decreased and cognitive performance was enhanced. Importantly, they also showed that NaV1.1 levels were decreased in the human AD brain. Together with previous studies, this work suggests circuit hyperexcitability as a core component of at least part of the progression of AD. In line with that hypothesis, levetiracetam, an anticonvulsant drug, has shown promise in reversing AD pathology in a mouse model (Sanchez and others 2012).

Circuit-Level Pathology in AD

To understand diseases like AD, we must understand the early functional and anatomical pathology in specific cell subtypes, circuits, and regions of interest. Memory encoding is primarily mediated by the limbic networks where the cortico-hippocampal circuitry is thought to serve as an anatomical entry gate for forming memory traces. Changes in brain rhythms may signal some of the earliest pathology of AD, prior to massive cell loss (Goutagny and Krantic 2013). Indeed, brain rhythms in cortico-hippocampal circuits are impaired in animal models of AD (Palop and others 2007). Additionally there are significant hypo-metabolisms, which correlate with regions of increased plaque density (Buckner and others 2005), in the default mode network in AD (Sperling and others 2009) (Fig. 6). Interestingly, plaques seem to accumulate in specific regions and cortical layers (Eriksen and Janus 2007) and disrupt activity locally. It is possible that “active plaques” cause the most harm if they are situated in specific points within neuronal circuits that are especially poised to generate abnormal activity.

Other Considerations

Many other mechanisms that we did not explore are at play in AD. It has been reported that the plaques can produce reactive oxygen species (Mayes and others 2014). There are a number of other channelopathies reported in mouse models of aging and AD, including potassium (Sachse and others 2013), calcium and calcium-dependent potassium channels (Thibault and others 2012), and muscarinic M current (Poulin and others 2010). Microglia and inflammatory signaling also play an important role (Heneka and others 2015; Johansson and others 2015). Furthermore, hyperactive mTOR signaling may be involved (Sun and others 2014). We hope that our discussion encourages readers to delve deeper into all the pathophysiological mechanisms at play in all three of the diseases discussed.

Summary

When the diverse changes that occur in epilepsy, TBI, and AD are viewed together, a few central themes emerge. Multiple molecules including neurotransmitter receptors, transporter, ion channels, and structural elements have the potential to alter neuronal function and thus circuit activity. Of particular interest are the roles of sodium channel activity in shaping inhibition within circuits, morphological changes in neuronal processes that lead to altered circuit structure, and frank cell loss, especially interneuron loss, leading to decreased circuit efficiency. Among all three diseases there appears to be a reciprocal relationship between decreased inhibition, increased excitation, and excitotoxicity. In epilepsy, both decreased inhibition and increased excitation can lead to excitotoxicity. In TBI, damage to axons can lead to uncontrolled excitatory output, downstream cell death, and loss of inhibitory interneurons. In AD, it seems harder to isolate one process from the other as protein aggregation may directly lead to increased excitation, decreased inhibition, and cell death. As we move forward, we hope a number of specific questions common to all three diseases can be addressed. Why are interneurons prone to dysfunction and death? Are there opportunities to retrain neuronal circuits to function more efficiently even when damaged? How could modulators of widely expressed molecules be delivered or utilized in new ways to restore network function? When these pathological commonalities are considered, it is not surprising that epilepsy, TBI, and AD are highly comorbid. Perhaps, if we are fortunate, treatment strategies may also be common, aiding our ability to translate therapies from one disease to another.

Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank Lauren Andresen for her helpful commentary and critique of the review.

Funding

The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: This work was supported by the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NS076885).

Figure 1 The cortico-hippocampal and thalamocortical circuits. Top. Schematic of the cortico-hippocampal circuits. Excitatory pyramidal neurons, brown pyramids; inhibitory interneurons, red circles; synaptic terminals, black circles. DG = dentate gyrus; EC = entorhinal cortex. Bottom. Same as top. Thalamic relay cells, brown circle. Superficial and cortical layers labeled. nRT = thalamic reticular nucleus; TC = thalamocortical; CT = corticothalamic.

Figure 2 Ion channels in microcircuits. Example two neuron microcircuit. Reciprocal connectivity between an excitatory neuron (brown pyramid) and an inhibitory interneuron (red circle). NaChs in the axon initial segment generate action potentials that drive synaptic output onto the connected cell. Calcium channels allow inward current and potassium channels allow outward current flow in the soma of both neuronal subtypes. Nearby astrocytes buffer extracellular potassium via inward flow of potassium ions (see synaptic figure for more roles of astrocytes). For all symbols and their corresponding molecules, see legend.

Figure 3 Synaptic molecules relevant to circuit function. Top. Example excitatory glutamatergic synapse with molecules relevant to synapse and circuit function. Bottom. Example inhibitory GABAergic synapse with molecules relevant to synapse and circuit function. For all symbols and their corresponding molecules, see legend.

Figure 4 Interneuronal sodium channel dysfunction and seizures. Loss of NaChs in the axon initial segment of inhibitory interneurons (1) leads to decreased interneuron activity and reduced inhibition (2). This leads to unconstrained excitation (3) and seizure generation (4). This dysfunction can occur throughout the brain, but here is depicted at the Ca3 to Ca1 synapse (inset).

Figure 5 Thalamocortical circuit disruption. Multiple changes can lead to generation of pathological, seizure-inducing activity in the thalamocortical circuit. These include (1) increased t-type calcium currents in excitatory neurons, (1a) decreased corticothalamic-driven excitation of thalamic interneurons, and (1b) decreased GABA transport by thalamic astrocytes. All these changes lead to increased thalamic excitatory neuron output as depicted by (2) increased rebound bursting. Increased thalamic excitatory neuron output leads to (3) increased circuit hypersynchronization and seizures.

Figure 6 Traumatic brain injury–induced axonal and network damage. (A) Diffuse axonal injury is induced when microtubules (red and blue circles) in the axon are fractured. The presence of the tau protein (blue oval) on microtubules make them able to bend when physical deformation occurs slowly, but makes them brittle when rapid physical strain is put on them (as occurs during TBI). Fracturing of microtubules increases both sodium and calcium influx leading to uncontrolled synaptic output and cell death. (B) Traumatic brain injury disrupts node connectivity and local activity in the brain. In the healthy brain nodes (red circles), or local circuits, are connected to other nodes by their axonal projections (gray lines). This allows efficient network activation and proper local activation (red highlighted areas). After TBI, frank cell loss can occur (loss of red nodes) and axon injury leads to loss of node-to-node connections. This in turns leads to inefficient network activity and reduced local activity (blue highlighted areas).

Declaration of Conflicting Interests

The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.


References

Abramov E Dolev I Fogel H Ciccotosto GD Ruff E Slutsky I Amyloid-beta as a positive endogenous regulator of release probability at hippocampal synapses Nat Neurosci 2009 12 1567 1576 19935655
Ahmadzadeh H Smith DH Shenoy VB Viscoelasticity of tau proteins leads to strain rate-dependent breaking of microtubules during axonal stretch injury: predictions from a mathematical model Biophys J 2014 106 1123 1133 24606936
Alonso AC Grundke-Iqbal I Iqbal K Alzheimer’s disease hyperphosphorylated tau sequesters normal tau into tangles of filaments and disassembles microtubules Nat Med 1996 2 783 787 8673924
Amaral DG Witter MP The three-dimensional organization of the hippocampal formation: a review of anatomical data Neuroscience 1989 31 571 591 2687721
Annegers JF Coan SP The risks of epilepsy after traumatic brain injury Seizure 2000 9 453 457 11034867
Armbruster M Hampton D Yang Y Dulla CG Laser-scanning astrocyte mapping reveals increased glutamate-responsive domain size and disrupted maturation of glutamate uptake following neonatal cortical freeze-lesion Front Cell Neurosci 2014 8 277 25249939
Atkins CM Chen S Alonso OF Dietrich WD Hu BR Activation of calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinases after traumatic brain injury J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2006 26 1507 1518 16570077
Ballatore C Lee VM Trojanowski JQ Tau-mediated neurodegeneration in Alzheimer’s disease and related disorders Nat Rev Neurosci 2007 8 663 672 17684513
Bedner P Dupper A Huttmann K Muller J Herde MK Dublin P Astrocyte uncoupling as a cause of human temporal lobe epilepsy Brain 2015 Epub Mar 12.
Beenhakker MP Huguenard JR Neurons that fire together also conspire together: is normal sleep circuitry hijacked to generate epilepsy? Neuron 2009 62 612 632 19524522
Beenhakker MP Huguenard JR Astrocytes as gatekeepers of GABAB receptor function J Neurosci 2010 30 15262 15276 21068331
Bigler ED Blatter DD Anderson CV Johnson SC Gale SD Hopkins RO Hippocampal volume in normal aging and traumatic brain injury AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 1997 18 11 23 9010515
Blennow K Hardy J Zetterberg H The neuropathology and neurobiology of traumatic brain injury Neuron 2012 76 886 899 23217738
Blumenfeld H Cellular and network mechanisms of spike-wave seizures Epilepsia 2005 46 Suppl 9 21 33 16302873
Bordji K Becerril-Ortega J Nicole O Buisson A Activation of extrasynaptic, but not synaptic, NMDA receptors modifies amyloid precursor protein expression pattern and increases amyloid-ss production J Neurosci 2010 30 15927 15942 21106831
Brandt R Lee G Functional organization of microtubule-associated protein tau. Identification of regions which affect microtubule growth, nucleation, and bundle formation in vitro J Biol Chem 268 3414 3419 8429017
Buckner RL Snyder AZ Shannon BJ LaRossa G Sachs R Fotenos AF Molecular, structural, and functional characterization of Alzheimer’s disease: evidence for a relationship between default activity, amyloid, and memory J Neurosci 2005 25 7709 7717 16120771
Busche MA Eichhoff G Adelsberger H Abramowski D Wiederhold KH Haass C Clusters of hyperactive neurons near amyloid plaques in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Science 2008 321 1686 1689 18802001
Buzsaki G Moser EI Memory, navigation and theta rhythm in the hippocampal-entorhinal system Nat Neurosci 2013 16 130 138 23354386
Cantu D Walker K Andresen L Taylor-Weiner A Hampton D Tesco G Traumatic brain injury increases cortical glutamate network activity by compromising GABAergic control Cereb Cortex 2014 Epub Mar 7.
Catterall WA Structure and function of voltage-gated sodium channels at atomic resolution Exp Physiol 2014 99 35 51 24097157
Chamoun R Suki D Gopinath SP Goodman JC Robertson C Role of extracellular glutamate measured by cerebral microdialysis in severe traumatic brain injury J Neurosurg 2010 113 564 570 20113156
Cheah CS Yu FH Westenbroek RE Kalume FK Oakley JC Potter GB Specific deletion of NaV1.1 sodium channels in inhibitory interneurons causes seizures and premature death in a mouse model of Dravet syndrome Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2012 109 14646 14651 22908258
Chen HS Pellegrini JW Aggarwal SK Lei SZ Warach S Jensen FE Open-channel block of N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) responses by memantine: therapeutic advantage against NMDA receptor-mediated neurotoxicity J Neurosci 1992 12 4427 4436 1432103
Chen XH Johnson VE Uryu K Trojanowski JQ Smith DH A lack of amyloid beta plaques despite persistent accumulation of amyloid beta in axons of long-term survivors of traumatic brain injury Brain Pathol 2009 19 214 223 18492093
Choi YJ Di NA Kramvis I Meikle L Kwiatkowski DJ Sahin M Tuberous sclerosis complex proteins control axon formation Genes Dev 2008 22 2485 2495 18794346
Cirrito JR Yamada KA Finn MB Sloviter RS Bales KR May PC Synaptic activity regulates interstitial fluid amyloid-beta levels in vivo Neuron 2005 48 913 922 16364896
Claes L Del-Favero J Ceulemans B Lagae L Van BC De JP De novo mutations in the sodium-channel gene SCN1A cause severe myoclonic epilepsy of infancy Am J Hum Genet 2001 68 1327 1332 11359211
Claes LR Deprez L Suls A Baets J Smets K Van DT The SCN1A variant database: a novel research and diagnostic tool Hum Mutat 2009 30 E904 E920 19585586
Coulter DA Huguenard JR Prince DA Characterization of ethosuximide reduction of low-threshold calcium current in thalamic neurons Ann Neurol 1989 25 582 593 2545161
Crino PB mTOR: A pathogenic signaling pathway in developmental brain malformations Trends Mol Med 2011 17 734 742 21890410
Crino PB Nathanson KL Henske EP The tuberous sclerosis complex N Engl J Med 2006 355 1345 1356 17005952
Cruikshank SJ Lewis TJ Connors BW Synaptic basis for intense thalamocortical activation of feedforward inhibitory cells in neocortex Nat Neurosci 2007 10 462 468 17334362
Damasio H Grabowski T Frank R Galaburda AM Damasio AR The return of Phineas Gage: clues about the brain from the skull of a famous patient Science 1994 264 1102 1105 8178168
Danbolt NC Glutamate uptake Prog Neurobiol 2001 65 1 105 11369436
Davalos D Grutzendler J Yang G Kim JV Zuo Y Jung S ATP mediates rapid microglial response to local brain injury in vivo Nat Neurosci 2005 8 752 758 15895084
Drexel M Puhakka N Kirchmair E Hortnagl H Pitkanen A Sperk G Expression of GABA receptor subunits in the hippocampus and thalamus after experimental traumatic brain injury Neuropharmacology 2015 88 122 133 25229716
Eriksen JL Janus CG Plaques, tangles, and memory loss in mouse models of neurodegeneration Behav Genet 2007 37 79 100 17072762
Escayg A MacDonald BT Meisler MH Baulac S Huberfeld G An-Gourfinkel I Mutations of SCN1A, encoding a neuronal sodium channel, in two families with GEFS+2 Nat Genet 2000 24 343 345 10742094
Faria LC Parada I Prince DA Interneuronal calcium channel abnormalities in posttraumatic epileptogenic neocortex Neurobiol Dis 2012 45 821 828 22172650
Goddeyne C Nichols J Wu C Anderson T Repetitive mild traumatic brain injury induces ventriculomegaly and cortical thinning in juvenile rats J Neurophysiol 2015 Epub Feb 18.
Goodrich GS Kabakov AY Hameed MQ Dhamne SC Rosenberg PA Rotenberg A Ceftriaxone treatment after traumatic brain injury restores expression of the glutamate transporter, GLT-1, reduces regional gliosis, and reduces post-traumatic seizures in the rat J Neurotrauma 2013 30 1434 1441 23510201
Goutagny R Krantic S Hippocampal oscillatory activity in Alzheimer’s disease: toward the identification of early biomarkers? Aging Dis 2013 4 134 140 23730529
Grabenstatter HL Del Angel YC Carlsen J Wempe MF White AM Cogswell M The effect of STAT3 inhibition on status epilepticus and subsequent spontaneous seizures in the pilocarpine model of acquired epilepsy Neurobiol Dis 2014 62 73 85 24051278
Grabenstatter HL Russek SJ Brooks-Kayal AR Molecular pathways controlling inhibitory receptor expression Epilepsia 2012 53 Suppl 9 71 78 23216580
Grundke-Iqbal I Iqbal K Quinlan M Tung YC Zaidi MS Wisniewski HM Microtubule-associated protein tau. A component of Alzheimer paired helical filaments J Biol Chem 1986 261 6084 6089 3084478
Gu F Hazra A Aulakh A Ziburkus J Purinergic control of hippocampal circuit hyperexcitability in Dravet syndrome Epilepsia 2014 55 245 255 24417577
Guertin DA Sabatini DM Defining the role of mTOR in cancer Cancer Cell 2007 12 9 22 17613433
Gustke N Steiner B Mandelkow EM Biernat J Meyer HE Goedert M The Alzheimer-like phosphorylation of tau protein reduces microtubule binding and involves Ser-Pro and Thr-Pro motifs FEBS Lett 1992 307 199 205 1644173
Hardy J Selkoe DJ The amyloid hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease: progress and problems on the road to therapeutics Science 2002 297 353 356 12130773
Hauser WA Morris ML Heston LL Anderson VE Seizures and myoclonus in patients with Alzheimer’s disease Neurology 1986 36 1226 1230 3092131
Hazra A Gu F Aulakh A Berridge C Eriksen JL Ziburkus J Inhibitory neuron and hippocampal circuit dysfunction in an aged mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease PLoS One 2013 8 e64318 23691195
He Y Chen ZJ Evans AC Small-world anatomical networks in the human brain revealed by cortical thickness from MRI Cereb Cortex 2007 17 2407 2419 17204824
Heinemann U Beck H Dreier JP Ficker E Stabel J Zhang CL The dentate gyrus as a regulated gate for the propagation of epileptiform activity Epilepsy Res Suppl 1992 7 273 280 1334666
Heneka MT Carson MJ Khoury JE Landreth GE Brosseron F Feinstein DL Neuroinflammation in Alzheimer’s disease Lancet Neurol 2015 14 388 405 25792098
Herrmann N Gauthier S Diagnosis and treatment of dementia: 6. Management of severe Alzheimer disease CMAJ 2008 179 1279 1287 19047609
Hoey SE Williams RJ Perkinton MS Synaptic NMDA receptor activation stimulates alpha-secretase amyloid precursor protein processing and inhibits amyloid-beta production J Neurosci 2009 29 4442 4460 19357271
Hu NW Klyubin I Anwyl R Rowan MJ GluN2B subunit-containing NMDA receptor antagonists prevent Abeta-mediated synaptic plasticity disruption in vivo Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2009 106 20504 20509 19918059
Huang Y Mucke L Alzheimer mechanisms and therapeutic strategies Cell 2012 148 1204 1222 22424230
Ikonomovic MD Uryu K Abrahamson EE Ciallella JR Trojanowski JQ Lee VM Alzheimer’s pathology in human temporal cortex surgically excised after severe brain injury Exp Neurol 2004 190 192 203 15473992
Ittner LM Ke YD Delerue F Bi M Gladbach A van EJ Dendritic function of tau mediates amyloid-beta toxicity in Alzheimer’s disease mouse models Cell 2010 142 387 397 20655099
Iwata A Stys PK Wolf JA Chen XH Taylor AG Meaney DF Traumatic axonal injury induces proteolytic cleavage of the voltage-gated sodium channels modulated by tetrodotoxin and protease inhibitors J Neurosci 2004 24 4605 4613 15140932
Jennings JH Rizzi G Stamatakis AM Ung RL Stuber GD The inhibitory circuit architecture of the lateral hypothalamus orchestrates feeding Science 2013 341 1517 1521 24072922
Jin X Huguenard JR Prince DA Reorganization of inhibitory synaptic circuits in rodent chronically injured epileptogenic neocortex Cereb Cortex 2011 21 1094 1104 20855494
Jirsa VK Stacey WC Quilichini PP Ivanov AI Bernard C On the nature of seizure dynamics Brain 2014 137 2210 2230 24919973
Johansson JU Woodling NS Wang Q Panchal M Liang X Trueba-Saiz A Prostaglandin signaling suppresses beneficial microglial function in Alzheimer’s disease models J Clin Invest 2015 125 350 364 25485684
Johnston D Amaral DG Shepherd GM Hippocampus The synaptic organization of the brain 2004 New York, NY Oxford University Press 455 498
Johnston J Forsythe ID Kopp-Scheinpflug C Going native: voltage-gated potassium channels controlling neuronal excitability J Physiol 2010 588 3187 3200 20519310
Kasahara M Menon DK Salmond CH Outtrim JG Taylor Tavares JV Carpenter TA Altered functional connectivity in the motor network after traumatic brain injury Neurology 2010 75 168 176 20625170
Klassen T Davis C Goldman A Burgess D Chen T Wheeler D Exome sequencing of ion channel genes reveals complex profiles confounding personal risk assessment in epilepsy Cell 2011 145 1036 1048 21703448
Laplante M Sabatini DM mTOR signaling in growth control and disease Cell 2012 149 274 293 22500797
Larson M Sherman MA Amar F Nuvolone M Schneider JA Bennett DA The complex PrP(c)-Fyn couples human oligomeric Abeta with pathological tau changes in Alzheimer’s disease J Neurosci 2012 32 16857-71a 23175838
Lee H Kim DW Remedios R Anthony TE Chang A Madisen L Scalable control of mounting and attack by Esr1+ neurons in the ventromedial hypothalamus Nature 2014 509 627 632 24739975
Li S Hong S Shepardson NE Walsh DM Shankar GM Selkoe D Soluble oligomers of amyloid Beta protein facilitate hippocampal long-term depression by disrupting neuronal glutamate uptake Neuron 2009 62 788 801 19555648
Liang SL Carlson GC Coulter DA Dynamic regulation of synaptic GABA release by the glutamate-glutamine cycle in hippocampal area CA1 J Neurosci 2006 26 8537 8548 16914680
Llinas RR The intrinsic electrophysiological properties of mammalian neurons: insights into central nervous system function Science 1988 242 1654 1664 3059497
Loreth D Ozmen L Revel FG Knoflach F Wetzel P Frotscher M Selective degeneration of septal and hippocampal GABAergic neurons in a mouse model of amyloidosis and tauopathy Neurobiol Dis 2012 47 1 12 22426397
Lossin C A catalog of SCN1A variants Brain Dev 2009 31 114 130 18804930
Lowenstein DH Traumatic brain injury: a glimpse of order among the chaos? Ann Neurol 2009 66 A7 A8 19847905
Ma Y Prince DA Functional alterations in GABAergic fast-spiking interneurons in chronically injured epileptogenic neocortex Neurobiol Dis 2012 47 102 113 22484482
Maguire JL Stell BM Rafizadeh M Mody I Ovarian cycle-linked changes in GABA(A) receptors mediating tonic inhibition alter seizure susceptibility and anxiety Nat Neurosci 2005 8 797 804 15895085
Maroon JC Bost J Concussion management at the NFL, college, high school, and youth sports levels Clin Neurosurg 2011 58 51 56 21916127
Martin SJ Grimwood PD Morris RG Synaptic plasticity and memory: an evaluation of the hypothesis Annu Rev Neurosci 2000 23 649 711 10845078
Masliah E Alford M DeTeresa R Mallory M Hansen L Deficient glutamate transport is associated with neurodegeneration in Alzheimer’s disease Ann Neurol 1996 40 759 766 8957017
Matsuzaki M Honkura N Ellis-Davies GC Kasai H Structural basis of long-term potentiation in single dendritic spines Nature 2004 429 761 766 15190253
Mayer AR Mannell MV Ling J Gasparovic C Yeo RA Functional connectivity in mild traumatic brain injury Hum Brain Mapp 2011 32 1825 1835 21259381
Mayes J Tinker-Mill C Kolosov O Zhang H Tabner BJ Allsop D Beta-amyloid fibrils in Alzheimer disease are not inert when bound to copper ions but can degrade hydrogen peroxide and generate reactive oxygen species J Biol Chem 2014 289 12052 12062 24619420
McCormick DA Bal T Sleep and arousal: thalamocortical mechanisms Annu Rev Neurosci 1997 20 185 215 9056712
Mesad S Laff R Devinsky O Transient postoperative prosopagnosia Epilepsy Behav 2003 4 567 570 14527501
Moretti L Cristofori I Weaver SM Chau A Portelli JN Grafman J Cognitive decline in older adults with a history of traumatic brain injury Lancet Neurol 2012 11 1103 1112 23153408
Mucke L Masliah E Yu GQ Mallory M Rockenstein EM Tatsuno G High-level neuronal expression of abeta 1–42 in wild-type human amyloid protein precursor transgenic mice: synaptotoxicity without plaque formation J Neurosci 2000 20 4050 4058 10818140
Noebels JL Avoli M Rogawski MA Olsen RW Delgado-Escueta AV Jasper’s basic mechanisms of the epilepsies 2012 Bethesda, MD National Center for Biotechnology Information
Ogiwara I Miyamoto H Morita N Atapour N Mazaki E Inoue I Nav1.1 localizes to axons of parvalbumin-positive inhibitory interneurons: a circuit basis for epileptic seizures in mice carrying an Scn1a gene mutation J Neurosci 2007 27 5903 5914 17537961
Ortinski PI Dong J Mungenast A Yue C Takano H Watson DJ Selective induction of astrocytic gliosis generates deficits in neuronal inhibition Nat Neurosci 2010 13 584 591 20418874
Palop JJ Chin J Roberson ED Wang J Thwin MT Bien-Ly N Aberrant excitatory neuronal activity and compensatory remodeling of inhibitory hippocampal circuits in mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease Neuron 2007 55 697 711 17785178
Palop JJ Mucke L Epilepsy and cognitive impairments in Alzheimer disease Arch Neurol 2009 66 435 440 19204149
Palop JJ Mucke L Amyloid-beta-induced neuronal dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease: from synapses toward neural networks Nat Neurosci 2010 13 812 818 20581818
Pantel J Book forum: Neuropsychiatry: the limbic brain Am J Psychiatry 2003 160 193
Park K Biederer T Neuronal adhesion and synapse organization in recovery after brain injury Future Neurol 2013 8 555 567 24489481
Park Y Luo T Zhang F Liu C Bramlett HM Dietrich WD Downregulation of Src-kinase and glutamate-receptor phosphorylation after traumatic brain injury J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2013 33 1642 1649 23838828
Parker WE Orlova KA Parker WH Birnbaum JF Krymskaya VP Goncharov DA Rapamycin prevents seizures after depletion of STRADA in a rare neurodevelopmental disorder Sci Transl Med 2013 5 182ra53
Partlow GD del Carpio-O’Donovan R Melanson D Peters TM Bilateral thalamic glioma: review of eight cases with personality change and mental deterioration AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 1992 13 1225 1230 1636541
Paz JT Bryant AS Peng K Fenno L Yizhar O Frankel WN A new mode of corticothalamic transmission revealed in the Gria4(−/−) model of absence epilepsy Nat Neurosci 2011 14 1167 1173 21857658
Paz JT Huguenard JR Microcircuits and their interactions in epilepsy: is the focus out of focus? Nat Neurosci 2015 18 351 359 25710837
Penfield W Jasper HH Epilepsy and the functional anatomy of the human brain 1954 Boston, MA Little, Brown
Petr GT Sun Y Frederick NM Zhou Y Dhamne SC Hameed MQ Conditional deletion of the glutamate transporter GLT-1 reveals that astrocytic GLT-1 protects against fatal epilepsy while neuronal GLT-1 contributes significantly to glutamate uptake into synaptosomes J Neurosci 2015 35 5187 5201 25834045
Petreanu L Mao T Sternson SM Svoboda K The subcellular organization of neocortical excitatory connections Nature 2009 457 1142 1145 19151697
Poulin B Butcher A McWilliams P Bourgognon JM Pawlak R Kong KC The M3-muscarinic receptor regulates learning and memory in a receptor phosphorylation/arrestin-dependent manner Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010 107 9440 9445 20439723
Pun RY Rolle IJ Lasarge CL Hosford BE Rosen JM Uhl JD Excessive activation of mTOR in postnatally generated granule cells is sufficient to cause epilepsy Neuron 2012 75 1022 1034 22998871
Raible DJ Frey LC Cruz Del AY Russek SJ Brooks-Kayal AR GABA(A) receptor regulation after experimental traumatic brain injury J Neurotrauma 2012 29 2548 2554 22827467
Rakhade SN Loeb JA Focal reduction of neuronal glutamate transporters in human neocortical epilepsy Epilepsia 2008 49 226 236 17868051
Ramos B Baglietto-Vargas D Del Rio JC Moreno-Gonzalez I Santa-Maria C Jimenez S Early neuropathology of somatostatin/NPY GABAergic cells in the hippocampus of a PS1xAPP transgenic model of Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 2006 27 1658 1672 16271420
Robel S Buckingham SC Boni JL Campbell SL Danbolt NC Riedemann T Reactive astrogliosis causes the development of spontaneous seizures J Neurosci 2015 35 3330 3345 25716834
Roberson ED Halabisky B Yoo JW Yao J Chin J Yan F Amyloid-beta/Fyn-induced synaptic, network, and cognitive impairments depend on tau levels in multiple mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease J Neurosci 2011 31 700 711 21228179
Roberts GW Gentleman SM Lynch A Murray L Landon M Graham DI Beta amyloid protein deposition in the brain after severe head injury: implications for the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1994 57 419 425 8163989
Robinson SR Changes in the cellular distribution of glutamine synthetase in Alzheimer’s disease J Neurosci Res 2001 66 972 980 11746426
Roth FC Draguhn A GABA metabolism and transport: effects on synaptic efficacy Neural Plast 2012 2012 805830 22530158
Rush T Buisson A Reciprocal disruption of neuronal signaling and Abeta production mediated by extrasynaptic NMDA receptors: a downward spiral Cell Tissue Res 2014 356 279 286 24496511
Sachse CC Kim YH Agsten M Huth T Alzheimer C Kovacs DM BACE1 and presenilin/gamma-secretase regulate proteolytic processing of KCNE1 and 2, auxiliary subunits of voltage-gated potassium channels FASEB J 2013 27 2458 2467 23504710
Sanchez PE Zhu L Verret L Vossel KA Orr AG Cirrito JR Levetiracetam suppresses neuronal network dysfunction and reverses synaptic and cognitive deficits in an Alzheimer’s disease model Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2012 109 E2895 E2903 22869752
Scimemi A Tian H Diamond JS Neuronal transporters regulate glutamate clearance, NMDA receptor activation, and synaptic plasticity in the hippocampus J Neurosci 2009 29 14581 14595 19923291
Selkoe DJ Soluble oligomers of the amyloid beta-protein impair synaptic plasticity and behavior Behav Brain Res 2008 192 106 113 18359102
Sharp DJ Beckmann CF Greenwood R Kinnunen KM Bonnelle V De B Default mode network functional and structural connectivity after traumatic brain injury Brain 2011 134 2233 2247 21841202
Sharp DJ Scott G Leech R Network dysfunction after traumatic brain injury Nat Rev Neurol 2014 10 156 166 24514870
Sherman SM Guillery RW Shepherd GM Thalamus The synaptic organization of the brain 2004 New York, NY Oxford University Press 311 360
Shitaka Y Tran HT Bennett RE Sanchez L Levy MA Dikranian K Repetitive closed-skull traumatic brain injury in mice causes persistent multifocal axonal injury and microglial reactivity J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2011 70 551 567 21666502
Shorvon S The treatment of chronic epilepsy: a review of recent studies of clinical efficacy and side effects Curr Opin Neurol 2007 20 159 163 17351485
Shumskaya E Andriessen TM Norris DG Vos PE Abnormal whole-brain functional networks in homogeneous acute mild traumatic brain injury Neurology 2012 79 175 182 22744656
Sigel E Steinmann ME Structure, function, and modulation of GABA(A) receptors J Biol Chem 2012 287 40224 40231 23038269
Simms BA Zamponi GW Neuronal voltage-gated calcium channels: structure, function, and dysfunction Neuron 2014 82 24 45 24698266
Smith DH Johnson VE Stewart W Chronic neuropathologies of single and repetitive TBI: substrates of dementia? Nat Rev Neurol 2013 9 211 221 23458973
Smith DH Wolf JA Lusardi TA Lee VM Meaney DF High tolerance and delayed elastic response of cultured axons to dynamic stretch injury J Neurosci 1999 19 4263 4269 10341230
Spaethling JM Klein DM Singh P Meaney DF Calcium-permeable AMPA receptors appear in cortical neurons after traumatic mechanical injury and contribute to neuronal fate J Neurotrauma 2008 25 1207 1216 18986222
Sperling RA LaViolette PS O’Keefe K O’Brien J Rentz DM Pihlajamaki M Amyloid deposition is associated with impaired default network function in older persons without dementia Neuron 2009 63 178 188 19640477
Spires-Jones TL Hyman BT The intersection of amyloid beta and tau at synapses in Alzheimer’s disease Neuron 2014 82 756 771 24853936
Squire LR The legacy of patient H.M. for neuroscience Neuron 2009 61 6 9 19146808
Staley K Molecular mechanisms of epilepsy Nat Neurosci 2015 18 367 372 25710839
Steriade M Contreras D Relations between cortical and thalamic cellular events during transition from sleep patterns to paroxysmal activity J Neurosci 1995 15 623 642 7823168
Steriade M Deschenes M Domich L Mulle C Abolition of spindle oscillations in thalamic neurons disconnected from nucleus reticularis thalami J Neurophys 1985 54 1473 1497
Stone K Researchers take on a preventable dementia: brain bank is giving researchers new understanding of chronic traumatic encephalopathy Ann Neurol 2011 70 A11 A14
Sudhof TC Sudhof TC Starke K Neurotransmitter release Pharmacology of neurotransmitter release 2008 Berlin, Germany Springer 1 21
Sun QQ Huguenard JR Prince DA Barrel cortex microcircuits: thalamocortical feedforward inhibition in spiny stellate cells is mediated by a small number of fast-spiking interneurons J Neurosci 2006 26 1219 1230 16436609
Sun YX Ji X Mao X Xie L Jia J Galvan V Differential activation of mTOR complex 1 signaling in human brain with mild to severe Alzheimer’s disease J Alzheimers Dis 2014 38 437 444 23979023
Talley EM Solorzano G Depaulis A Perez-Reyes E Bayliss DA Low-voltage-activated calcium channel subunit expression in a genetic model of absence epilepsy in the rat Brain Res Mol Brain Res 2000 75 159 165 10648900
Tang-Schomer MD Patel AR Baas PW Smith DH Mechanical breaking of microtubules in axons during dynamic stretch injury underlies delayed elasticity, microtubule disassembly, and axon degeneration FASEB J 2010 24 1401 1410 20019243
Tani H Dulla CG Farzampour Z Taylor-Weiner A Huguenard JR Reimer RJ A local glutamate-glutamine cycle sustains synaptic excitatory transmitter release Neuron 2014 81 888 900 24559677
Terry RD Masliah E Salmon DP Butters N DeTeresa R Hill R Physical basis of cognitive alterations in Alzheimer’s disease: synapse loss is the major correlate of cognitive impairment Ann Neurol 1991 30 572 580 1789684
Texido L Martin-Satue M Alberdi E Solsona C Matute C Amyloid beta peptide oligomers directly activate NMDA receptors Cell Calcium 2011 49 184 190 21349580
Thibault O Pancani T Landfield PW Norris CM Reduction in neuronal L-type calcium channel activity in a double knock-in mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Biochim Biophys Acta 2012 1822 546 549 22265986
Tischer D Weiner OD Illuminating cell signalling with optogenetic tools Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2014 15 551 558 25027655
Traynelis SF Wollmuth LP McBain CJ Menniti FS Vance KM Ogden KK Glutamate receptor ion channels: structure, regulation, and function Pharmacol Rev 2010 62 405 496 20716669
Trivedi MA Ward MA Hess TM Gale SD Dempsey RJ Rowley HA Longitudinal changes in global brain volume between 79 and 409 days after traumatic brain injury: relationship with duration of coma J Neurotrauma 2007 24 766 771 17518532
Tye KM Deisseroth K Optogenetic investigation of neural circuits underlying brain disease in animal models Nat Rev Neurosci 2012 13 251 266 22430017
Van Dort CJ Zachs DP Kenny JD Zheng S Goldblum RR Gelwan NA Optogenetic activation of cholinergic neurons in the PPT or LDT induces REM sleep Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2015 112 584 589 25548191
Verret L Mann EO Hang GB Barth AM Cobos I Ho K Inhibitory interneuron deficit links altered network activity and cognitive dysfunction in Alzheimer model Cell 2012 149 708 721 22541439
von Krosigk M Bal T McCormick DA Cellular mechanisms of a synchronized oscillation in the thalamus Science 1993 261 361 364 8392750
Walsh DM Klyubin I Fadeeva JV Cullen WK Anwyl R Wolfe MS Naturally secreted oligomers of amyloid beta protein potently inhibit hippocampal longterm potentiation in vivo Nature 2002 416 535 539 11932745
Warren RA Agmon A Jones EG Oscillatory synaptic interactions between ventroposterior and reticular neurons in mouse thalamus in vitro J Neurophys 1994 72 1993 2003
Wolf JA Stys PK Lusardi T Meaney D Smith DH Traumatic axonal injury induces calcium influx modulated by tetrodotoxin-sensitive sodium channels J Neurosci 2001 21 1923 1930 11245677
Wong M Crino PB Noebels JL Avoli M Rogawski MA Olsen RW Delgado-Escueta AV mTOR and epileptogenesis in developmental brain malformations Jasper’s basic mechanisms of the epilepsies 2012 4th ed. Bethesda, MD National Center for Biotechnology Information [Internet].
Wong M Ess KC Uhlmann EJ Jansen LA Li W Crino PB Impaired glial glutamate transport in a mouse tuberous sclerosis epilepsy model Ann Neurol 2003 54 251 256 12891680
Wyeth MS Zhang N Mody I Houser CR Selective reduction of cholecystokinin-positive basket cell innervation in a model of temporal lobe epilepsy J Neurosci 2010 30 8993 9006 20592220
Yi JH Pow DV Hazell AS Early loss of the glutamate transporter splice-variant GLT-1v in rat cerebral cortex following lateral fluid-percussion injury Glia 2005 49 121 133 15390098
Yu FH Mantegazza M Westenbroek RE Robbins CA Kalume F Burton KA Reduced sodium current in GABAergic interneurons in a mouse model of severe myoclonic epilepsy in infancy Nat Neurosci 2006 9 1142 1149 16921370
Zeng LH Xu L Gutmann DH Wong M Rapamycin prevents epilepsy in a mouse model of tuberous sclerosis complex Ann Neurol 2008 63 444 453 18389497
Zhang Y Vilaythong AP Yoshor D Noebels JL Elevated thalamic low-voltage-activated currents precede the onset of absence epilepsy in the SNAP25-deficient mouse mutant coloboma J Neurosci 2004 24 5239 5248 15175394
Ziebell JM Morganti-Kossmann MC Involvement of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines in the pathophysiology of traumatic brain injury Neurotherapeutics 2010 7 22 30 20129494
