LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


8004872
1436
Behav Brain Res
Behav. Brain Res.
Behavioural brain research
0166-4328
1872-7549

27185734
4931948
10.1016/j.bbr.2016.05.030
NIHMS791178
Article
Molecular and Cellular Pathophysiology of Preclinical Alzheimer's Disease
Mufson Elliott J. 1
Ikonomovic Milos D. 2
Counts Scott E. 3
Perez Sylvia E. 1
Malek-Ahmadi Michael 4
Scheff Stephen W. 5
Ginsberg Stephen D. 6
1 Department of Neurobiology, Barrow Neurological Institute, Phoenix, AZ
2 Departments of Neurology and Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh, and Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center, VA Pittsburgh Healthcare System, Pittsburgh, PA
3 Department of Translational Science and Molecular Medicine, Department of Family Medicine, Hauenstien Neuroscience Institute, Mercy Health Saint Mary's Hospital, Grand Rapids, MI
4 Banner Alzheimer's Institute, Phoenix, AZ
5 Sanders Brown Center on Aging, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY
6 Center for Dementia Research, Nathan Kline Institute, Department of Psychiatry, Department of Neuroscience &amp; Physiology, New York University Langone Medical Center, Orangeburg, NY
Address Correspondence to: Elliott J. Mufson, Ph.D., Dept. of Neurobiology, Barrow Neurological Institute, 350 West Thomas Rd, Phoenix, AZ 85013, Elliott.Mufson@dignityhealth.org, 602-406-8525
11 6 2016
13 5 2016
15 9 2016
15 9 2017
311 5469
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Although the two pathological hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease (AD), senile plaques composed of amyloid-β (Aβ) peptides and neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) consisting of hyperphosphorylated tau, have been studied extensively in postmortem AD and relevant animal and cellular models, the pathogenesis of AD remains unknown, particularly in the early stages of the disease where therapies presumably would be most effective. We and others have demonstrated that Aβ plaques and NFTs are present in varying degrees before the onset and throughout the progression of dementia. In this regard, aged people with no cognitive impairment (NCI), mild cognitive impairment (MCI, a presumed prodromal AD transitional state), and AD all present at autopsy with varying levels of pathological hallmarks. Cognitive decline, a requisite for the clinical diagnosis of dementia associated with AD, generally correlates better with NFTs than Aβ plaques. However, correlations are even higher between cognitive decline and synaptic loss. In this review, we illustrate relevant clinical pathological research in preclinical AD and throughout the progression of dementia in several areas including Aβ and tau pathobiology, single population expression profiling of vulnerable hippocampal and basal forebrain neurons, neuron plasticity, neuroimaging, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarker studies and their correlation with antemortem cognitive endpoints. In each of these areas, we provide evidence for the importance of studying the pathological hallmarks of AD not in isolation, but rather in conjunction with other molecular, cellular, and imaging markers to provide a more systematic and comprehensive assessment of the multiple changes that occur during the transition from NCI to MCI to frank AD.


Introduction

At the turn of the twentieth century, several prominent neurobiologists described the presence of extracellular lesions in the brain of people with dementia. Blocq and Marinesco (1892) reported abnormal argyrophilic extracellular plaques in post mortem brain tissue from two aged persons with dementia [1, 2], a finding confirmed by Emil Reich and Oskar Fisher (Fig. 1A) [3]. The German psychiatrist, Alois Alzheimer (Fig. 1B), was treating a 51 year old woman named Auguste Deter (Fig. 1C), who presented with signs of paranoia and memory loss, who subsequently died five years later. At autopsy, Alzheimer observed brain atrophy, neuronal loss, and dense argyrophilic fibrillary bundles in form of tangles (Fig. 1D, E) and plaques (Fig.1F). In 1910, Dr. Emil Kraepelin, suggested that this triad of signs and symptoms be termed “Alzheimer's disease”. Today, senile plaques and neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) are considered the defining pathological lesions of Alzheimer's disease (AD).

Amyloid plaques accumulate in the extracellular matrix (Fig. 1F) and consist of insoluble fibrils of amyloid-beta peptides (Aβ), which are cleaved from the larger transmembrane Aβ precursor protein (APP) by successive cleavage through the beta-site APP cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1) and the intramembrane γ secretase complex [4] [5]. NFTs are argyrophilic aggregates of hyperphosphorylated tau protein [6] [7]. Both protein aggregates display a β-pleated sheet conformation and are thought to interfere with cytoskeletal integrity, disrupt axonal transport, synapse and neuronal function. In a small portion of cases (&lt;1%), the disease has an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance termed familial AD (FAD), caused by mutations in one of three identified genes: APP, presenilin 1 (PS1), or presenilin 2 (PS2) [8]. Genotyping of tissue from the original histological slides from Deter's brain autopsy revealed she likely had PS1-linked FAD [9] [10]. In contrast to the original “amyloid cascade” hypothesis that Aβ plaques drive the neuropathological cascade leading to dementia [11], Dr. Alzheimer wrote “...the plaques are not the cause of senile dementia, but only an accompanying feature of senile involution of the central nervous system” [12] [13]. In 1999, Mesulam [14] wrote, “It seems as if the Aβ plaques appear at the wrong time and in the wrong places with respect to the clinical dementia and there is little evidence that they cause the NFT”. The revised amyloid cascade hypothesis posits that soluble Aβ oligomers initiate the pathological cascade of AD leading to synaptic dysfunction, neuronal cell death, and dementia[15]. These findings support the contention that amyloid deposition is not the singular pathogenetic cause of sporadic AD.

AD is now thought to have an extensive preclinical stage, which is initiated 15-20 years prior to emergence of clinical signs (Fig. 2) [16, 17]. The clinical concept of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) arose from memory clinics. In the 1990's, some cases were characterized by an amnestic disorder and classified as amnestic MCI (aMCI) [18]. Although memory disorder clinics reported that aMCI was a more common form, MCI comprises a heterogeneous population: those with memory deficits only are referred to as single domain aMCI, while those with a deficit in memory and another cognitive domain are termed multi-domain MCI (mdMCI) [19]. Individuals with aMCI are at a higher risk of developing AD [19]. MCI was initially characterized as an intermediate phase when NFT and Aβ lesions are increased relative to people with no cognitive impairment (NCI) [20] [21]. However, Accumulating evidence revealed that many clinically diagnosed NCI or MCI cases exhibit significant amyloid plaque (Fig. 3) as well as NFT pathology equal to or greater than what is often seen neuropathologically in mild to moderate AD, challenging the singular notion that these lesions alone drive dementia onset [21] [22] [23]. The demonstration that a cohort of NCI subjects who came to autopsy with high amyloid and NFT pathology support the developing concept of pathological aging or preclinical AD phase [24] [25].

Despite the extensive emphasis on amyloid and tau as the major factors leading to dementia onset and serving as the predominant focus of drug discovery and clinical trials, it is becoming evident that these lesions are not acting in isolation during the preclinical phases of AD [22] [26]. The fact that virtually every anti-amyloid clinical trial to date has not met its primary end-points of improving cognition [27] indicates that a monotherapy strategy may not be sufficient to treat this pervasive progressive multisystem neurodegenerative disorder [28]. On the other hand, it has been argued that AD is a disease of long projections neurons innervating the hippocampus and neocortex [26] [29], that degenerate early in the disease progression ) [26] [29], which may disrupt brain connectivity and neuroplasticity. Although not receiving as much attention as amyloid and tau pathobiology, herein we review the molecular and cellular neuropathobiology of preclinical and prodromal AD. This information is essential for the development of appropriate therapeutic targets aimed at preventing or slowing cognitive decline prior to frank AD.

Amyloid and NFT pathology

Aβ peptides, which forms the core of parenchymal Aβ plaques are generated from APP, a holoprotein that is cleaved by successive β- and γ-secretases to form toxic Aβ [8].The distribution of Aβ plaques changes with time and reflects the spread of Aβ deposition in the diseased brain [30]. Diffuse and “fleecy” plaques appear first throughout the neocortex and extend hierarchically into other brain regions [31]. In the next stages, Aβ plaques occur in allocortical areas, the basal ganglia, thalamus, hypothalamus, midbrain, medulla, pons and cerebellum. Later stages feature neuritic and dense cored Aβ plaques [32]. The other major AD pathological features are NFTs composed of aggregates of hyperphosphorylated forms of the tau protein (Fig. 1D, E) [33, 34]. NFT formation and maturation progresses according to a linear sequence of molecular and conformational alterations of the tau molecule [35]. Braak and Braak [32] described the topographic spread of NFTs from the mesial temporal lobe (MTL) to the neocortex, according to six stages depending upon location of the NFT-bearing neurons and the severity of lesions (transentorhinal stages I-II: clinically silent cases; limbic stages III-IV: incipient AD; neocortical stages V-VI: fully developed AD). Clinical subtypes of MCI as well as NCI cases display Braak staging scores ranging from stages 0-V [36]. These observations indicate that there may be no clear demarcation of neuropathology between some NCI, MCI and AD brains using the Thal staging criteria for amyloid [37] or the Braak staging criteria for NFTs [38].

NFT and cognition in preclinical AD

Although tau and Aβ pathology increase with age [39], their association with antimortem cognitive function remains relatively unexplored. NCI cases displaying AD neuropathology at autopsy despite a lack of clinically significant antemortem cognitive impairment may represent a pre-clinical disease stage [40]. Studies suggest a negative association between the presence of both Aβ plaques and NFTs with ante-mortem cognitive performance [30] suggesting that older individuals in the pre-clinical stages of AD according to their brain pathology at time of death continue to perform within normal limits on cognitive tests. Whether these individuals represent preclinical MCI remains an intriguing area of research.

While several groups have investigated the neuropathology of MCI and possible/probable AD, very few have concentrated on the relationship of Braak staging to clinical dysfunction in people with NCI [41]. An investigation of a small number of NCI subjects from the Rush Religious Orders Study (RROS) cohort revealed relatively similar percentages of low (40%) and high (60%) Braak scores compared to NCI, MCI and AD subjects examined [42] demonstrated a minor association between episodic memory and neuropathology using NIA-Reagan Institute neuropathological criteria for AD, which combines the assessment of neuritic plaques using CERAD scores and NFT pathology using Braak scores [43]. Individuals with low and high Braak scores and moderate to frequent CERAD scores displayed greater hippocampal and total brain volume loss suggesting brain volume as a variable that effects cognitive decline in the face of AD neuropathology [44]. Recently, we evaluated the association of low and high Braak NFT scores upon several cognitive domains {episodic, executive, semantic and a global cognitive score (GCS)} and plaque pathology in a cohort of elderly persons who were diagnosed as NCI at last clinical evaluation before death [22]. In this cross sectional investigation, the majority of the NCI subjects were Braak stage III (intermediate) and none were Braak stage VI (severe) (Fig. 4). Interestingly, females were significantly more likely to have higher Braak scores (III-V) despite being NCI, which is highly relevant due to the known gender differences associated with AD [45] [46]

Although the low Braak group of NCI performed better on most cognitive domains, only performance on semantic memory was significantly higher but this difference was not maintained when the data was adjusted for age, gender and years of education suggesting that this relationship was not directly related to Braak stage [36]. Hence, NFTs within the entorhinalperirhinal cortex (stages I–II), hippocampus (stages III–IV) and neocortex (stage V) may not be a necessary precondition for cognitive impairment in the elderly. We also evaluated whether Braak stage was associated with longitudinal change in the same cognitive domains [36]. Surprisingly, age but not Braak stage played a more prominent role in cognitive decline in NCI over time suggesting that the extent of NFT pathology does not directly influence cognitive decline in the elderly. Interestingly, NCI females, which displayed significantly greater NFT pathology (discussed above), performed worse than males on semantic memory and visuospatial domain tests, suggesting that NFT pathology influences cognitive decline in females to a greater degree than males. In addition, we found significant correlations between hippocampal CA1 neuritic plaques (NPs) and episodic memory or GCS [47] suggesting that this type of a lesion combining Aβ (plaque) and tau (dystrophic neurites) pathologies plays a more critical role in cognitive decline during this preclinical stage of dementia.

Amyloid deposition and cognitive decline

A review of the literature suggests that cognition is affected by NPs and not diffuse plaques (DPs) [48] [49]. Greater hippocampal burden of NPs correlated with worse episodic memory and global cognitive performance and greater hippocampal/entorhinal cortex Aβ load was associated with greater NFT pathology in cases with an antemortem clinical diagnosis of NCI and a continuum of Braak stages [22]. In this same cohort, we found that NPs but not DPs were associated with significantly lower cognitive test performance across several cognitive domains [50], supporting previous reports [30, 51]. We also observed that NPs correlated with Braak stage stronger than DPs [30] [48]. Although we found that DPs were more prevalent than NPs in early Braak stages, NPs tended to increase and were nearly equal to DPs in higher Braak stages in NCI. Moreover, we found that in pathology burdened NCI, higher Braak stages were associated with greater amyloid plaque load in the entorhinal cortex but not in the hippocampus [47]. Group analysis found no significant effects of either hippocampal or entorhinal cortex amyloid load or APOE ε4 status on Braak score. These findings demonstrate that people with NCI exhibit a wide range of Braak scores and plaque pathology similar to prodromal and frank AD.

Oxidative stress and synaptic homeostasis in the early progression of AD

Recently, we evaluated the relationship between oxidative stress and synaptic homeostasis in the early progression of AD [52] using NCI cases that may represent preclinical aMCI or preclinical AD (PCAD) from the University of Kentucky Alzheimer's Disease Brain Bank. Here, we compared age- and postmortem interval-matched hippocampus from NCI individuals who came to autopsy with high levels of AD pathology (HPNCI), low or no AD pathology (LPNCI) and an aMCI group for changes in both presynaptic (e.g., Synapsin-1, Synaptophysin) and postsynaptic (e.g., Drebrin, PSD-95 and SAP-97) proteins and markers of oxidative stress (e.g., protein carbonyls, 4-hydroxynonenal and 3-nitrotyrosine) (Fig. 5). Surprisingly, both the HPNCI and aMCI cohorts showed a significant decline in levels of the different synaptic proteins compared to LPNCI but aMCI and HPNCI groups did not differ significantly from each other (Fig. 5A, B). Measurements of oxidative stress also showed significant group differences with the greatest elevations observed in aMCI and HPNCI (Fig. 5C) and a significant association between changes in oxidative stress and synaptic proteins. The decline in both presynaptic- and postsynaptic proteins indicates a loss of synaptic homeostasis in the hippocampus early in the AD process. The increase in oxidative stress in aMCI was expected since numerous previous studies have emphasized such a scenario in the progression of the disease [53-56] Unexpected was that oxidative stress increased in the HPNCI cohort, further supporting the idea that this group may represent PCAD.

The factors underlying the decline in synaptic proteins in HPNCI cases are still to be determined. It may be related to changes in oxidative stress, since we found that levels of both pre- and postsynaptic proteins decreased as oxidative stress increased. Another possibility is that synaptic protein loss is associated with an increase in soluble Aβ1-42 (sAβ1-42), which has been shown to increase during the progression of AD and is closely associated with changes in cognition [57]. Examination of the role of sAβ1-42 in the synaptic decline of the HPNCI group synaptic decline revealed that while the levels in aMCI were significantly higher than both NCI groups, there was no difference between the LPNCI and HPNCI, suggesting that the decline in synaptic proteins was unrelated to sAβ1-42 levels (Fig. 5D). In addition, we found a significant association between CERAD scores and the levels of sAβ1-42 in aMCI suggesting that while changes in sAβ1-42 are probably downstream of synaptic changes, there are additional factors responsible for the transition from PCAD to aMCI.

During the last few years, oligomeric Aβ species have been suggested to be one of the triggering mechanism for the synaptic impairment and tau phosphorylation in AD [8, 58] [59]. Cortical levels of Aβ oligomers accumulate in MCI and mild to moderate AD compared to age matched non-demented controls [60], correlate with severity of cognitive impairment, Braak staging, and lower levels of presynaptic and postsynaptic proteins [61]. Oligomeric Aβ within synaptic terminals is associated with the accumulation of hyperphosphorylated tau in AD [59]. Interestingly, dimeric Aβ induces tau phosphorylation and dystrophic axonal profiles [62], suggesting a prion-like seeding or propagation mechanism underlying AD pathogenesis [63] or that selectively vulnerable subcortical long projection neurons may be sensitive to retrograde toxicity of Aβ oligomers. Therefore, therapeutic agents targeting synaptic Aβ oligomers early in the disease process may slow disease onset and trajectory.

Mechanisms delaying cognitive decline in non-cognitively impaired elderly

It is still unclear why some individuals with high AD pathology continue to perform well on cognitive tests. It is possible that NFTs and plaques are simply pathological bystanders and do not necessarily contribute to the initiation of cognitive dysfunction. Had these individuals lived longer they may transition to aMCI. Alternatively, one might consider the concepts of brain resilience and/or cognitive reserve as an explanation for this paradox [64] [65] [66] [67]. Brain reserve postulates a greater number of either neurons or synapses at the initiation of disease allowing the continued performance of cognitive tasks [65, 66]. On the other hand, cognitive reserve may involve the recruitment of brain regions either not or less severely affected by the disease process, which aid in task performance and even development of new brain connections [66]. Although the mechanism(s) initiating these constructs remain unknown, one mechanism may be related to brain neuroplasticity.

Brain Plasticity in MCI

The MTL memory circuit is highly neuroplastic [68] [69] and behaviorally resistant [22] to AD pathology. For example, similar entorhinal cortex amyloid loads were found between NCI, MCI and AD cases [47]. Studies using hippocampal tissue revealed a preservation of synapse number [70], synaptic protein [71], and neurotrophic factor receptors [72] in non-demented aged subjects with a wide range of Braak stages as well as an increase in dendritic spine size in prodromal AD [73]. Clinical pathological investigations also indicate preserved number and larger neuronal size in the hippocampus in “asymptomatic AD” compared with normal, MCI and clinical AD [74] indicating early reorganizational responses. A report revealed a significant increase in dendritic length (18%) and complexity (23%) in hippocampal CA1 pyramidal in MCI compared to NCI individuals (Fig. 6A-C, F) and amyloid plaques distorted the dendritic architecture of CA1 neurons (Fig. 6E) [73]. Conversely, there was a significant reduction in branch length (−39%) and arbor complexity (−25%) during progression from MCI to AD (Fig. 5). Interestingly, increased synaptic contact size has been observed early in AD [75]. These types of early structural reorganization may represent a viable window for potential therapeutic strategies aimed at restoring or maintaining hippocampal function during the transition from NCI to MCI to AD.

In addition to structural alterations, there are biochemical neuroplastic responses, as well. For example, activity levels of choline acetyltransferease (ChAT), the rate-limiting synthetic enzyme for acetylcholine, are increased significantly in the hippocampus and superior frontal cortex in MCI compared to NCI or mild-moderate AD (Fig. 7A) [68] [69]. Across the three clinical diagnostic groups examined, increased hippocampal ChAT activity correlated with progression of hippocampal and entorhinal cortex NP pathology and limbic Braak stages [69], suggesting that this elevation is indeed a compensatory response to entorhinal-hippocampal disconnection (Fig. 7B, C). Further examination of the up-regulation of frontal cortical ChAT activity in MCI revealed that it was not paralleled by an increase in cholinergic fiber density in the same cortical region [76] suggesting that structural reorganization was not the mechanism activating this cholinergic plasticity response. It is more likely the result of a biochemical process that increases ChAT production within the cholinergic cortical projection neurons located within the nucleus basalis of Meynert [77], which is anterogradely transported to its cortical projection sites. Both the hippocampal and frontal cortex ChAT responses are transient [68], suggesting that this neuroplasticity is lost during the continued onslaught of the disease.

Another example of early neural reorganization is associated with entorhinal layer II glutamatergic neurons that innervate the hippocampus and degenerate early in the disease process [78]. It has been shown that alterations in glutamate receptor subunits precedes NFT formation in these two regions [79]. An investigation using specific immunological markers of glutamatergic neurons found a pathology-dependent pattern of glutamatergic synaptic remodeling within frontal cortex across the progressive phases of AD with MCI displaying an elevation in glutamatergic presynaptic bouton density, which depletes and is lost with disease progression [29]. Increased glutamatergic presynaptic bouton density correlated with improved cognition in AD, but not MCI, in which the increase in glutamatergic presynaptic bouton density was paradoxically related with decreased cognitive ability [29]. Perhaps this late chemical upregulation indicates a type of compensatory response intended to offset the effects of preexisting synaptotoxicity, or is an uncoordinated aberrant synaptic plasticity lacking functionality late in the disease. While neither interpretation has been confirmed experimentally, in light of the cholinergic hippocampal and frontal cortex reorganization findings and their association with better cognitive performance, the former seems more likely. Memantine, an FDA-approved partial antagonist of N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) glutamate receptors, which acts to normalize glutamatergic neurotransmission has only modest symptomatic efficacy [80] [81]. New and more potent memantine-based drugs are needed to hopefully provide greater efficacy either alone or in combination with other compounds. In this regard, Namzaric, combines memantine hydrochloride extended-release (Namenda) and donepezil hydrochloride (Aricept) an anticholinersterase which inhibits degradation of acetylcholine at the synapse. The extent to which other ascending neurotransmitter systems are capable of neuroplasticity during the progression of dementia remains an active area of investigation and a potential new set of drug targets.

Apolipoprotein E (ApoE) allele status, cognition and pathology

The genetic risk factor for AD, ApoE ε4, may also play a prominent role in the development of cognitive decline and pathology in AD [82]. Cognitively normal ε4 carriers are more likely to have significant AD-related pathology relative to non-carriers, but rates of cognitive decline are not significantly different between genotypes [83]. ApoE gene status, which mediates AD-related neuropathology, affects the onset and trajectory of cognitive decline [84] [85]. ApoE ε4 carriers display significantly greater amyloid load determined by Pittsburgh compound-B (PiB) imaging and show significantly lower cognitive test scores compared to non-carriers in non-demented elderly subjects [85] suggesting that APOE ε4 modifies the harmful effect of Aβ on cognition [86]. We found that soluble Aβ1-42 and fibrillary β-amyloid protein levels within the precuneus measured by PiB binding were significantly higher in AD than MCI and NCI, but were not associated with APOE ε4 status [87] [88]. Neuropathological reports show that AD pathology is limited within the precuneus suggesting a disconnection between amyloid toxicity and histopathology in this brain region [89] [88]. Perhaps this component of the default memory network is resilient to amyloid pathology [88].

Molecular signature of prodromal AD

A major area of interest in AD, is defining the molecular and cellular substrates of dementia onset. To accomplish this it is imperative to sample gene and noncoding RNA (ncRNA) expression from homogeneous brain cell types and correlate these changes with antemortem cognitive measures. Our group developed a strategy for the evaluation of individual genes that are differentially regulated as well as characterizing relevant classes of transcripts by gene ontology (GO) grouping during dementia progression using custom-designed microarray analysis following laser capture microdissection of immunoshistochemically labelled neurons [90] [91]. For example, we observe a downregulation of transcripts during the progression of dementia in GO categories including glutamatergic neurotransmission, GABAergic neurotransmission, and synaptic-related markers [73, 90] [92] consistent with current hypotheses that synaptic degeneration, as well as deficits in excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmission underlie AD pathogenesis, which acting independent, or synergistically with amyloid deposits and NFTs [73, 92].

In contrast to observations of a gene downregulation in the majority of GO categories analyzed to date, significant upregulation of select endosomal-lysosomal pathway genes were found in CA1 pyramidal and cholinergic basal forebrain (CBF) neurons (Fig. 8). Quantitative analysis in CA1 pyramidal neurons indicated upregulation of early endosome effectors rab4 (AD&gt;MCI &amp; NCI) and rab5 (AD&gt;MCI&gt;NCI), late endosome constituent rab7 (AD &amp; MCI&gt;NCI), and the trafficking molecule rab24 (AD&gt;MCI &amp; NCI) [93]. Based on the comparison of expression level differences between MCI and AD, alterations in rab5 and rab7 were considered early, whereas rab4 and rab24 upregulation was considered a later alteration [93]. A strong negative correlation was found between cognitive scores and rab4, rab5, rab7, and rab24 CA1 neuron expression levels [93]. In addition, there was an upregulation of the acid hydrolase cathepsin D (Ctsd; AD &amp; MCI&gt;NCI), the early endosome antigen 1 (Eea1; AD &amp; MCI&gt;NCI), and lysosomal-associated membrane protein 1 (Lamp1; AD&gt;MCI &amp; NCI) [93]. In contrast, no differential regulation of rab GTPases that are not regulators of endosomes was observed across clinical groups [93]. Upregulated expression of rab4, rab5, rab7, and rab27 in CBF neurons correlated with antemortem measures of cognitive decline in MCI and AD [94]. Results were validated by sub-regional qPCR and immunoblot analysis [93] [94].

Recently, we found upregulation of select endosomal-lysosomal genes, consistent with our previous single label analyses of vulnerable CBF neurons [94] at different stages of NFT evolution [23]. Pretangle-bearing CBF neurons (marked with the tau antibody pS422) [95] displayed a significant upregulation rab5, rab7, Ctsd, and Lamp1 expression. Later stage NFT, visualized by dual-labeling immunohistochemistry using the pretangle, pS422 marker, and TauC3, a later stage tau neoepitope [96], was associated with rab4 upregulation [23]. No expression level changes were found for amyloid-beta precursor protein (APP), amyloid-beta precursor-like protein 1 (Aplp1), amyloid-beta precursor-like protein 2 (Aplp2), Bace1, presenilin 1 (Psen1), presenilin 2 (Psen2), low-density lipoprotein-related protein 1 (Lrp1), high-density lipoprotein binding protein (Hdlbp), alpha-2-macroglobulin (A2m), and beta-2-microglobulin (B2m), among other AD-related genes [23] [92] [94]. The lack of expression changes related to amyloid and presenilin genes in these highly vulnerable neurons suggests that these mRNAs are not playing a major role in cellular deregulation early in disease process. Since deficits in the endocytic system is one of the earliest disturbances in AD and precede amyloid and NFT deposition as well as clinical symptoms of AD [97], dysfunction in this gene family may underlie, in part, the early selective vulnerability of hippocampal CA1 pyramidal and CBF neurons. Future studies using RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) at the single population level during the progression of dementia will likely enable the assessment of endosomal-lysosomal and other pathways for coordinate analyses through GO queries, as well as the ncRNAs that potentially regulate their expression.

The presence of small non-coding microRNAs (miRNAs) that negatively regulate mRNA stability [98] is an under researched area in AD [99, 100]. Various miRNAs regulate a multitude of brain functions (e.g., synaptic plasticity and energy metabolism) [101-104] suggesting that perturbations in miRNA function is involved in the pathogenesis of complex neurodegenerative disorders including AD [99, 100]. AD brains display altered expression of miRNAs that regulate BACE1 enzyme [105, 106] and are linked to tau phosphorylation [107-109] and pro-inflammatory actions [107, 110-112]. The role that the dysregulation of brain miRNA networks play early in AD are unclear. Our group using microarray and quantitative PCR analyses compared levels of miRNAs isolated from frontal cortex (FC) and inferior temporal cortex (ITC) tissue obtained from cases who died with a clinical diagnosis of NCI, aMCI, or mild AD [113]. Two families of miRNAs, miR-212/132 and miR-23a/b were down regulated in the FC in aMCI and AD compared to NCI, but were preserved in the ITC. Down-regulation of either group of miRNAs was predicted to increase the deacetylase Sirtuin 1 (Sirt1), which is involved in the mediation of protective neuronal cell stress responses [114]. Sirt1 mRNA levels were greater in the aMCI FC but stable in ITC, suggesting a connection between miR-212/132 and miR-23a/b down-regulation and decreased transcriptional repression of Sirt1 expression. Experimental down-regulation of miR-212 and miR-23a in vitro up-regulated Sirt1 resulting in neuroprotection against Aβ toxicity. These data suggest that up-regulation of Sirt1 is a novel neuroprotective pathway activated early in the onset of AD.

Biomarkers during AD progression

Neuropathological examinations of older people who died with a clinical diagnosis of NCI or MCI often reveal similar pathological signatures to those with frank AD [40, 89, 115-118]. Hence, identification of individuals in the preclinical and prodromal stages of AD is essential for the timely administration of disease modifying therapies. Several initiatives have defined a panel of diagnostic and prognostic imaging as well as cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and blood biomarkers that identify people at the earliest stages of the disease, with most fluid biomarker studies focusing detecting changes in CSF Aβ peptide and tau protein levels at varying AD stages [119]. The National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer's Association (NIA-AA) developed criteria for using biomarkers to determine the likelihood of AD pathology and for classifying patients accordingly [119, 120] which included CSF Aβ42, positron emission tomography (PET) amyloid, CSF total tau, pT181 phospho-tau, MTL atrophy on Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), tempoparietal/precuneus hypometabolism or hypoperfusion on PET or single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) [119]. Findings indicate that loss of hippocampal volume and the ratio of CSF Aβ42 to total tau or phospho-tau are predictive of longitudinal changes in cognitive measures [121-124]. Arterial spin labeling MRI is used to examine the influence of changes in resting cerebral blood flow as well as blood oxygenation level dependent signal response in relation to PET-derived regional amyloid load [125, 126] or to memory encoding in the MTL [127]. It has become increasingly clear that imaging radioligands, alone or in combination with other AD biomarkers will be critical for the earliest detection of AD pathology and timely initiation of therapy.

(3H)PiB PET imaging in NCI, MCI and AD

PiB 6-OH-BTA-1; [128]2-(4’-methylaminophenyl)-6-hydroxybenzothiazole)] binds with a high affinity to β-sheet structured aggregates of fibrillar Aβ [129] and was the first PET imaging agent to differentiate AD from NCI (Fig. 9) [130]. It binds most prominently in NPs and vascular Aβ associated with cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA) [131], but does not bind to classic intracellular NFTs or other neuropathological elements [132]. In vitro [C-11]PiB binding across multiple brain regions distinguishes between clinical categories and correlates with fibrillar Aβ by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) [133, 134], and correlates with antemortem [C-11]PiB PET retention [135]. Interestingly, 10%-20% of AD patients are PiB(−), in agreement with autopsy reports [136] [40], and 20-30% of NCI are also PiB(+)[137] , which increases up to 65% in those &gt;80 years [40, 138], suggesting a clinical misdiagnosis and/or a distinct dementia syndrome. Interestingly, APOEε4 is associated with higher PiB PET retention in elderly NCI [139], while in MCI it confers an increased likelihood of converting to AD [140]. The presence of Aβ deposits in PiB negative (−) subjects questions the sensitivity of this tracer [135].

The relatively short radioactive half-life of carbon-11 (~20 minutes), limits the distribution of PiB to PET imaging centers and supports the requirement of longer lived radioligands such as F-18 flutemetamol a 3’-fluoro analog of PiB (3’-F-PiB) [141], F-18 florbetapir [142] and F-18 florbetaben [143]. PET ligands for amyloid detection will be useful tools for the differential clinical diagnosis in large populations of individuals with suspected cognitive decline. To better define clinical states the field also needs tools to image tau profiles.

Tau PET imaging

Although research efforts have been successful in developing PET tracers that specifically bind to fibrillar Aβ pathology, a positive amyloid PET scan alone may not be sufficient for a positive diagnosis for AD. Since tau pathology in form of NFT burden is a better correlate of AD dementia, a PET tracer that selectively targets tau aggregates maybe a more relevant biomarker for AD conversion and for other tauopathies.[144] In normal brain there is an equal ratio of 3-repeat (3R) and 4-repeat (4R) tau isoforms, but in pathological states, tauopathies can express different isoform ratios with diverse morphologies, making it more difficult to develop a disease-specific tau PET tracer with similar affinity for every phenotype.[144, 145] In addition, tau undergoes several posttranslational modifications, resulting in conformational changes and excessive phosphorylation in the aggregates, potentially resulting in different tau ligand binding affinities. Since tau aggregates co-occur with Aß deposits in AD, tau ligands need to be highly selective. During the past several years, several candidate tau PET imaging agents have been developed and used to image tau in different clinical phenotypes of AD (Fig. 10). [144, 146] Several groups reported tau-selective PET radioligands, including [F-18] labeled THK compounds [147] [148] [149-151] [152], PBB compounds [153] and [F-18] labeled T807 and T808 compounds [154] [155]. The latter compounds are the most widely used PET tracers for tau; they discriminated AD from control and non-AD dementias and demonstrated topographical patterns similar to neuropathological stages, suggesting their utility for assessing tau-related neuronal injury in vivo [150, 156, 157]. For example, in a study using 18F AV-1451 [155], patterns of cortical binding visualized with surface-projected SUVR thresholds were shown to be anatomically consistent with the ordinal stages of Braak pathology (0, I/II, III/IV, and V/VI) [38]. Similar to Braak stages 0, I, or II, many control cases displayed low overall or only mesial temporal lobe binding (Fig 10A–C), whereas greater neocortical binding was always associated with higher levels of temporal lobe binding in impaired cases (Fig 10D–G). The highest neocortical binding levels, consistent with Braak stages V-VI, were related with selective sparing of primary cortices (Fig 10F–G). These anatomic findings were confirmed quantitatively by voxel-wise and region of interest measures. 18FAV-1451 PET was found to be abnormally high in cortical, entorhinal, and parahippocampal regions (but not in the hippocampus) in MCI and AD compared to NCI, and greater radioligand retention in the inferior temporal gyrus correlated with impaired cognition [155]. Postmortem studies indicate that AV-1451 binds better to NFTs than Aβ plaques, but also identified off-target binding in some areas [158]. Other, less selective ligands also demonstrated good utility when compared to imaging of brain atrophy and glucose metabolism. For example, (F-18)FDDNP (2-(1-{6-[159]fluoroethyl) (methyl)amino]-2-naphthyl}ethylidene)malononitrile), a lipophilic tracer, which binds to both Aβ plaques and NFTs [160] revealed increases in regional brain uptake which correlated with greater brain atrophy on MRI and reduced FDG-PET [159]. Although (F-18)FDDNP PET and (3H)PiB PET have similar retention patterns in neocortical regions, (F-18)FDDNP retention was greater in the mesial temporal lobe [161]. Higher global cortical uptake of (F-18) FDDNP PET and (3H)PiB PET was seen in MCI and AD compared to NCI, however, (3H)PiB proved better in detecting differences among the clinical groups [162]. (F-18)AV-1451 also has a promising pattern of retention in relation to clinical severity of AD [163], with greater PET retention in MCI and AD patients compared to NCI [154].

Taken together amyloid and tau PET imaging represent major advances in AD field, however there are still a number of limitations and unresolved questions. Sensitivity of PET imaging with [C-11]PiB and related [F-18] amyloid ligands is not well characterized for relatively low but histologically detectable Aβ deposits [164]. Analyses of large numbers of PET positive and PET negative cases, with short imaging-to-autopsy interval, are required to resolve these issues and establish threshold levels of Aβ and tau pathologies necessary for in vivo PET detection. A major challenge for neuroimaging in AD is how to determine the onset of amyloid and tau accumulation in pathology burdened NCI and MCI, and its association with cognitive measures and other biomarkers. Accordingly, the focus of PET imaging studies is currently shifting from AD towards NCI with the earliest fibrillar Aβ and tau deposits, to help determine the clinical significance of pre-symptomatic pathology and identify subjects at risk for cognitive decline. More studies are needed to directly compare the relative merit of amyloid and tau PET, MRI, FDG, clinical measures and CSF biomarkers.

CSF Biomarkers

Imaging-based technologies are relatively expensive and not readily transferred to community-based clinical settings, so fluid biomarkers are still desirable should the level of sensitivity and specificity for predicting conversion to dementia remain high. Panels of plasma inflammatory marker and related proteins [165], either alone or in combination with CSF biomarkers, have been proposed. CSF concentrations of Aβ1-42 and tau are indirect measures of AD pathology in the brain, with relatively high accuracy for identifying incipient AD [122] and predicting the development and rate of cognitive decline [123] [166]. In AD, CSF Aβ1-42 is reduced and phosphorylated tau is increased, which correlates with post-mortem amyloid and NFT pathology [167]. A strong concordance between PiB PET and CSF Aβ1-42 exists in NCI [168], and mixed cohorts of NCI and AD [169] [170], with no correlation between PiB PET and CSF tau [171]. Longitudinal studies suggested that amyloid PET may be more sensitive than CSF Aβ1-42 in identifying MCI cases that will convert to AD [172] [173]. A plasma phospholipid panel was recently identified that predicted conversion to MCI or AD within a 2-3 year timeframe with over 90% accuracy [174]. However, the inherent variability of AD neuropathology in the aged NCI, MCI and AD brain is also reflected by variation in these markers, particularly CSF and blood amyloid and tau [175], resulting in equivocal specificity and sensitivity for identifying at-risk individuals. Figure 11 shows a summary of data related to CSF biomarker diagnostic performance across a large number of primary studies published after the introduction of criteria recommended by the NIA-Alzheimer's Association Workgroups [176] showing the sensitivity, specificity, and likelihood ratios of CSF core biomarkers [177], and head-to-head CSF biomarker performance based on average AD to control ratios [178]. Together in combination with clinical methods, cognitive tests and imaging, CSF biomarkers can contribute to the assessment of dementia and whether AD pathology is present in cognitively normal individuals [179]. Currently, there is a need to augment current CSF biomarker panels with novel proteins reflecting AD molecular pathogenesis to improve diagnostic accuracy in longitudinal studies assuming that AD is a multifactorial disease [180].

We discovered that protein levels of the precursor of nerve growth factor (NGF), termed proNGF, were selectively increased in postmortem neocortex [181, 182] and hippocampus [72, 183] of subjects who died with a clinical diagnosis of MCI or mild AD compared to NCI, respectively, which correlated with poorer performance on antemortem cognitive tests [181, 183]. Therefore, we tested whether CSF proNGF levels are an early marker of cognitive impairment using ventricular CSF (vCSF) obtained postmortem from the RROS cohort who came to autopsy with a clinical diagnosis of NCI, aMCI, or mild/moderate AD, and lumbar CSF collected from Washington University Knight AD Research Center subjects clinically diagnosed CDR 0 (no dementia), CDR 0.5 (MCI or very mild AD), or CDR 1 (mild AD) [184]. Quantitative western blotting of vCSF revealed a significant 55% increase in CSF proNGF levels obtained from aMCI compared to NCI and a 70% increase in AD compared to NCI, which showed a significant inverse association between increasing vCSF proNGF levels, cognitive deterioration and GCS [184]. Similarly, lumbar CSF samples revealed a significant 30% increase in proNGF levels in the CDR 0.5 and CDR 1 compared to CDR 0 cases. However, there were no differences in levels of Aβ1-42, total tau, phospho-tau, or phospho-tau/ Aβ1-42 among the groups, whereas the ratio of total tau/Aβ1-42 levels was 50% higher in CDR 1 subjects compared to CDR 0. To determine whether the inclusion of proNGF would improve the reliability of these biomarkers, we calculated proNGF/Aβ1-42, proNGF/total tau, and proNGF/phospho-tau ratios. Notably, proNGF/Aβ1-42 levels were 50% higher in CDR 0.5 and CDR 1 compared to CDR 0, whereas proNGF/total tau and proNGF/phospho-tau were not different between the groups. Our data suggest adding proNGF to a growing list of candidate biomarkers for AD. Increased CSF proNGF levels likely mirror the up regulation of this mainly proapoptotic protein seen in the neocortex and hippocampus in MCI and AD subjects, which we have suggested indicates a shift from cell survival to death [26]. Hence, we posit that increased CSF proNGF is an early pathobiological marker for disease onset. In sum, combining single or multiple tracer imaging using PET radioligands with CSF biomarkers will allow for earlier detection of AD, monitoring of pathology progression and effects of therapies, and selection of appropriate subjects for clinical trials of future AD therapies.

Concluding comments

Based on accumulating molecular, cellular, biochemical, neuroplasticity, neuroimaging, and clinical pathological findings, perhaps the field of AD research has reached a point where there is a need for a paradigm shift away from a strict interpretation of the amyloid hypothesis as it relates to the biological cascade of events that culminate in dementia. In his classic book “The Structure of Scientific Revolutions” the philosopher, Thomas Kuhn, proposed that intellectual progress is not gradual but is marked by sudden paradigm shifts [185]. The argument is made that there is a period when the field follows a paradigm that has great promise such as the amyloid cascade hypothesis. However, during the last few years this hypothesis has been challenged by clinical pathological investigations demonstrating a large population of older individuals that display extensive pathological hallmarks of this disease, amyloid and tau lesions but do not develop dementia even in the eighth and ninth decades of life [22] suggesting that these pathologies alone may not be necessary or sufficient to initiate cognitive decline [186]. Whether these lesions are primary drivers of pathology, or pathological bystanders remains to be determined. The reviewed molecular, cellular, neuroimaging, and clinical pathological findings as well as the poor efficacy of amyloid vaccine clinical trials to date suggests that the disease process is more complicated than a singular hypothesis. We posit that it is time to move away from concentrating on a unitary bio-mechanistic trigger and subsequent mono-therapeutic approach to a more inclusive molecular mechanistic concept that involves not only amyloid and tau but the disconnection of vulnerable neuronal circuits related to attention, memory, and executive functions as well as the brain's neuroplasticity early in the disease process. This paradigm shift may lead to more diverse and multidrug treatment approaches for this most intransient neurological disease of aging.

Acknowledgements

This study was supported by NIH grants PO1AG14449, RO1AG043375, P30AG010161, PO1AG107617, R21AG026032, R21AG042146, and Barrow Neurological Institute Barrow and Beyond.

Figure. 1 Photomicrographs of (A) Oskar Fisher, (B) Alois Alzheimer, (C) Auguste Deter. (D) Neurofibrillary tangle visualized by the Bielschowsky silver method from the brain of Auguste Deter, (E) NFT containing the tau epitope Alz-50 and (F) Fluorescent image of a cored amyloid beta immunostained plaque (red) surrounded by a GFAP positive glia cell (green) in AD frontal cortex.

Figure. 2 Diagram illustrating the extensive preclinical stage of Alzheimer's disease.

Figure. 3 Photomicrographs showing the distribution of β-amyloid staining within the entorhinal cortex in MCI. A. Note that the crescent shaped band of β-amyloid staining extends to the border of the perirhinal cortex. B. Higher magnification of the region outlined in panel A by curved arrows. C. Higher magnification photomicrograph of densely stained β-amyloid plaques (black arrow in B). D. Cluster of neurofibrillary tangles within layer 2 of the EC (open arrow in B). Scale bar represents: A=800μm, B=200μm, C and D=40μm. (E) Histogram showing the adjusted b-amyloid loads for each NCI, MCI, and AD case examined. The means and standard errors are indicated above each diagnostic group. Adopted with permission from [47]

Figure 4 Linear graphs showing relationships between cognitive domains (A), Braak scores, (B) APOE ε4 status and (C) gender for the cohort of cases who died with clinical diagnosis of no cognitive impairment but post mortem neuropathological evaluation revealed amyloid and plaque pathology similar to those with AD dementia. Note the significant differences between male and female for semantic memory (p=0.006) and visuospatial (p=0.04) scores. Circles and triangles represent mean z-scores, error bars represent standard deviation. Adapted from with permission from [187]

Figure 5 Scatter plots showing changes in different synaptic proteins within the hippocampus for each subject from the different cohorts: Low pathology no cognitive impairment (LPNCI), high pathology no cognitive impairment (HPNCI), amnestic mild cognitive impairment (aMCI). (A) Antibodies directed against presynaptic proteins synapsin-1 and synaptophysin are shown. (B) Antibodies directed against postsynaptic proteins Drebrin, SAP-97, and PSD-95. Horizontal lines indicate group medians. *p&lt;0.05, *p&lt;0.01, ***p&lt;0.005, #p&lt;0.001 compared to LPNCI. (C) Representative slot-blot for protein carbonyl, 4-hydroxynonenal, and 3-nitrotyrosine fractions from individuals classified as no cognitive impairment and low AD-like pathology (LPNCI), no cognitive impairment and high AD-like pathology (HPNCI), and amnestic mild cognitive impairment (aMCI). (D) Scatterplots showing the levels of soluble Aß1-42. No significant difference were observed between the two groups with individuals labeled as NCI (p &gt; 0.1). However, both the low pathology and high pathology NCI groups were significantly lower than the aMCI) cohort. *p&lt;0.05. Circles=LPNCI, Squares=HPNCI, Triangles=aMCI. Adapted from with permission from [188]

Figure. 6 Golgi impregnated hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons analyzed for dendritic branching of the basilar tree from cases with a clinical diagnosis of (A) no cognitive impairment, (B) mild cognitive impairment and (C) Alzheimer's disease. (D) Note that amyloid deposit (*) distorts the dendritic architecture of a CA1 dendrite. (E) Scholl analysis of the amount, distribution and complexity of the arbor showed a significant increase in these parameters (length, + 18%; complexity, +23%) in MCI CA1 neurons compared to NCI. Conversely, there was a significant reduction in branch length (−39%) and arbor complexity (−25%) in the progression from MCI to AD. Adopted from with permission from [22]

Figure 7 (A) Choline acetyltransferase (ChAT) activity increased in the hippocampus in MCI and returned to control levels in mild AD. (B and C) Schematic drawings of coronal section of the hippocampus illustrating the loss of innervation arising from the glutamatergic layer II entorhinal cortex neurons (red) triggering a cholinergic plasticity response (blue) in the MCI hippocampus. Abbreviations: AD: Alzheimer's disease; CA1, CA2, CA3, CA4- Cornu Ammonis hippocampal subfields; CS- collateral sulcus, DG-dentate gyrus, Ent-entorhinal cortex; f-fornix, gl-granular cell layer, ml- molecular layer; NCI- no cognitive impairment, MCI-mild cognitive impairment, pp-perforant pathway, TEC- transentorhinal cortex, Sub-subiculum.

Figure 8 (A) Heat map and histograms (B) showing changes in endosomal-lysosomal and nerve growth factor receptor gene levels during the progression of AD.

Figure 9 Representative images of [C-11]PiB PET in subjects with NCI, MCI, or AD. Some NCI and MCI subjects have positive [C-11]PiB PET scans (NCI+, MCI+) indicating an ongoing process of brain amyloidosis. Image courtesy of the University of Pittsburgh Amyloid Imaging Group.

Figure 10 Cortical patterns of F-18T807 binding. Coronal 18F T807 positron emission tomographic (PET) images (top row) and whole-brain surface renderings of standardized uptake value ratio (SUVR; cerebellar reference; second row) from 3 clinically normal (CN) and 4 impaired (2 mild cognitive impairment [MCI] and 2 mild Alzheimer dementia [43] dementia) participants. Top: (A) A 71-year-old CN subject with low amyloid β (Aβ) by Pittsburgh compound B (PiB) PET (mean cortical distribution volume ratio [DVR]=1.0) had low, nonspecific 18F T807 binding in cortex, consistent with a Braak stage less than III/IV. (B) A 74-year-old CN subject with high Aβ (DVR=1.2) with 18F T807 binding in inferior temporal cortex, left&gt;right, consistent with Braak stage III/IV. (C) A 79-year-old CN subject with high Aβ (DVR=1.8) had binding in inferior temporal neocortex, consistent with Braak stage of III/IV. B and C show focally intense subcortical uptake that is likely due to off-target binding. (D–G) Cognitively impaired participants all with high Aβ and with successively greater levels of cortical 18F T807 binding successively involving temporal, parietal, frontal, and occipital cortices. Bottom: 18F T807 SUVR calculated at vertices indicating the extent of cortical binding, with left hemisphere views (lateral, inferior, superior, medial) at left. The 52-year-old AD dementia patient (G) showed confluent 18F T807 binding that is nearly pancortical, sparing only portions of primary cortex and consistent with Braak stage V/VI. Dx=classification; MMSE=Mini-Mental State Examination; PET Braak=estimate of Braak stages based on the anatomic pattern of T807 binding assessed visually and quantitatively in regions and full volume data. Legend and figure are reproduced with permission from Annals of Neurology Volume 79, Issue 1, pages 110-119, 15 DEC 2015 DOI: 10.1002/ana.24546 http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ana.24546/full#ana24546-fig-0001.

Figure 11 Summary of CSF biomarker diagnostic performance. A) Sensitivity, specificity, and likelihood ratios of CSF core biomarkers based on primary studies published after the introduction of criteria recommended by the NIA-Alzheimer's Association Workgroups* [176]. B) Head-to-head CSF biomarker performance based on average AD to control ratios. Biomarkers are differentiated based on significant differences with good effect sizes (purple), significant differences with moderate effect sizes (purple), or non-significant or significant differences with minor effect sizes.** *Reprinted from Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience, Ferreira et al., Meta-review of CSF core biomarkers in Alzheimer's disease: the state-of-the-art after the new revised diagnostic criteria, pp. 1-24, 2014 (Open Access). [177]. *Reprinted from The Lancet Neurology, Olsson et al., CSF and blood biomarkers for the diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis, doi:10.1016/S1474-4422(16)00070-3 2016, with permission from Elsevier. [189]

Highlights

Review of Pathophysiology of prodromal Alzheimer's Disease (AD)

Novel Biomarkers for AD: Imaging and CSF

Brain plasticity in prodromal AD

Review of literature of the neurobiology of Prodromal AD suggests a rethinking of amyloid hypothesis

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


References

1 Blocq P Marinesco G Sur les lésions et la pathogénie de l'épilepsie dite essentielle. Sem Med 12 445 446
2 Zigman WB Schupf N Devenny DA Miezejeski C Ryan R Urv TK Schubert R Silverman W Incidence and prevalence of dementia in elderly adults with mental retardation without down syndrome American journal of mental retardation : AJMR 2004 109 2 126 41 15000676
3 Oliver C Holland AJ Down's syndrome and Alzheimer's disease: a review Psychol Med 1986 16 2 307 22 2941815
4 Thinakaran G Koo EH Amyloid precursor protein trafficking, processing, and function J Biol Chem 2008 283 44 29615 9 18650430
5 Shoji M Golde TE Ghiso J Cheung TT Estus S Shaffer LM Cai XD McKay DM Tintner R Frangione B Production of the Alzheimer amyloid beta protein by normal proteolytic processing Science 1992 258 5079 126 9 1439760
6 Trojanowski JQ Schmidt ML Shin RW Bramblett GT Rao D Lee VM Altered tau and neurofilament proteins in neuro-degenerative diseases: diagnostic implications for Alzheimer's disease and Lewy body dementias Brain Pathol 1993 3 1 45 54 8269083
7 Yoshiyama Y Lee VM Trojanowski JQ Therapeutic strategies for tau mediated neurodegeneration J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2013 84 7 784 95 23085937
8 Hardy J The amyloid hypothesis for Alzheimer's disease: a critical reappraisal J Neurochem 2009 110 4 1129 34 19457065
9 Muller U Winter P Graeber MB A presenilin 1 mutation in the first case of Alzheimer's disease Lancet Neurol 2013 12 2 129 30 23246540
10 Rupp C Beyreuther K Maurer K Kins S A presenilin 1 mutation in the first case of Alzheimer's disease: revisited Alzheimers Dement 2014 10 6 869 72 25130656
11 Hardy JA Higgins GA Alzheimer's disease: the amyloid cascade hypothesis Science 1992 256 5054 184 5 1566067
12 Graeber MB Kosel S Egensperger R Banati RB Muller U Bise K Hoff P Moller HJ Fujisawa K Mehraein P Rediscovery of the case described by Alois Alzheimer in 1911: historical, histological and molecular genetic analysis Neurogenetics 1997 1 1 73 80 10735278
13 Moller HJ Graeber MB The case described by Alois Alzheimer in 1911. Historical and conceptual perspectives based on the clinical record and neurohistological sections Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci 1998 248 3 111 22 9728729
14 Mesulam MM Neuroplasticity failure in Alzheimer's disease: bridging the gap between plaques and tangles Neuron 1999 24 3 521 9 10595506
15 Hardy J Testing times for the “amyloid cascade hypothesis” Neurobiol Aging 2002 23 6 1073 4 12470803
16 Sperling RA Johnson KA Doraiswamy PM Reiman EM Fleisher AS Sabbagh MN Sadowsky CH Carpenter A Davis MD Lu M Flitter M Joshi AD Clark CM Grundman M Mintun MA Skovronsky DM Pontecorvo MJ Group AAS Amyloid deposition detected with florbetapir F 18 ((18)F-AV-45) is related to lower episodic memory performance in clinically normal older individuals Neurobiol Aging 2013 34 3 822 31 22878163
17 Sperling RA Karlawish J Johnson KA Preclinical Alzheimer disease-the challenges ahead Nature reviews. Neurology 2013 9 1 54 8
18 Petersen RC Smith GE Waring SC Ivnik RJ Tangalos EG Kokmen E Mild cognitive impairment: clinical characterization and outcome Arch Neurol 1999 56 3 303 8 10190820
19 Petersen R Petersen R Conceptual Overview Mild cognitive impairment Aging to Alzheimer's disease 2003 Oxford University Press New York
20 Gamblin TC Chen F Zambrano A Abraha A Lagalwar S Guillozet AL Lu M Fu Y Garcia-Sierra F LaPointe N Miller R Berry RW Binder LI Cryns VL Caspase cleavage of tau: linking amyloid and neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer's disease Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2003 100 17 10032 7 12888622
21 Markesbery WR Neuropathologic alterations in mild cognitive impairment: a review J Alzheimers Dis 2010 19 1 221 8 20061641
22 Mufson E Malek-Ahmadi M Perez SE Chen a.K. Braak staging, plaque pathology and APOE status in elderly persons without cognitive impairment Neurobiol Aging 2016 37 147 153 26686670
23 Tiernan CT Ginsberg SD Guillozet-Bongaarts AL Ward SM He B Kanaan NM Mufson EJ Binder LI Counts SE Protein homeostasis gene dysregulation in pretangle bearing nucleus basalis neurons during the progression of Alzheimer's disease Neurobiol Aging 2016 in press
24 Jicha GA Abner EL Schmitt FA Kryscio RJ Riley KP Cooper GE Stiles N Mendiondo MS Smith CD Van Eldik LJ Nelson PT Preclinical AD Workgroup staging: pathological correlates and potential challenges Neurobiol Aging 2012 33 3 622 e1 622 e16 21507528
25 DeKosky ST Scheff SW Styren SD Structural correlates of cognition in dementia: quantification and assessment of synapse change Neurodegeneration : a journal for neurodegenerative disorders, neuroprotection, and neuroregeneration 1996 5 4 417 21
26 Mufson EJ Binder L Counts SE DeKosky ST de Toledo-Morrell L Ginsberg SD Ikonomovic MD Perez SE Scheff SW Mild cognitive impairment: pathology and mechanisms Acta Neuropathol 2012 123 1 13 30 22101321
27 Hampel H Schneider LS Giacobini E Kivipelto M Sindi S Dubois B Broich K Nistico R Aisen PS Lista S Advances in the therapy of Alzheimer's disease: targeting amyloid beta and tau and perspectives for the future Expert review of neurotherapeutics 2015 15 1 83 105 25537424
28 Selkoe DJ Hardy J The amyloid hypothesis of Alzheimer's disease at 25 years EMBO molecular medicine 2016
29 Bell KF Ducatenzeiler A Ribeiro-da-Silva A Duff K Bennett DA Cuello AC The amyloid pathology progresses in a neurotransmitter-specific manner Neurobiol Aging 2006 27 11 1644 57 16271419
30 Dowling NM Tomaszewski Farias S Reed BR Sonnen JA Strauss ME Schneider JA Bennett DA Mungas D Neuropathological associates of multiple cognitive functions in two community-based cohorts of older adults Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society : JINS 2011 17 4 602 14 21092373
31 Thal DR Sassin I Schultz C Haass C Braak E Braak H Fleecy amyloid deposits in the internal layers of the human entorhinal cortex are comprised of N-terminal truncated fragments of Abeta J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 1999 58 2 210 6 10029103
32 Braak H Braak E Demonstration of amyloid deposits and neurofibrillary changes in whole brain sections Brain Pathol 1991 1 3 213 6 1669710
33 Binder LI Frankfurter A Rebhun LI The distribution of tau in the mammalian central nervous system J Cell Biol 1985 101 4 1371 8 3930508
34 Braak H Braak E Neurofibrillary changes confined to the entorhinal region and an abundance of cortical amyloid in cases of presenile and senile dementia Acta Neuropathol 1990 80 5 479 86 2251904
35 Garcia-Sierra F Ghoshal N Quinn B Berry RW Binder LI Conformational changes and truncation of tau protein during tangle evolution in Alzheimer's disease J Alzheimers Dis 2003 5 2 65 77 12719624
36 Mufson EJ Malek-Ahmadi M Perez SE Chen K Braak staging, plaque pathology, and APOE status in elderly persons without cognitive impairment Neurobiol Aging 2016 37 147 53 26686670
37 Thal DR Rub U Orantes M Braak H Phases of A beta-deposition in the human brain and its relevance for the development of AD Neurology 2002 58 12 1791 800 12084879
38 Braak H Braak E Neuropathological stageing of Alzheimer-related changes Acta Neuropathol 1991 82 4 239 59 1759558
39 Kawas C Gray S Brookmeyer R Fozard J Zonderman A Age-specific incidence rates of Alzheimer's disease: the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging Neurology 2000 54 11 2072 7 10851365
40 Price JL Morris JC Tangles and plaques in nondemented aging and “preclinical” Alzheimer's disease Ann Neurol 1999 45 3 358 68 10072051
41 Gold G Bouras C Kovari E Canuto A Glaria BG Malky A Hof PR Michel JP Giannakopoulos P Clinical validity of Braak neuropathological staging in the oldest-old Acta Neuropathol 2000 99 5 579 82 discussion 583-4 10805104
42 Bennett DA Schneider JA Arvanitakis Z Kelly JF Aggarwal NT Shah RC Wilson RS Neuropathology of older persons without cognitive impairment from two community-based studies Neurology 2006 66 12 1837 44 16801647
43 Consensus recommendations for the postmortem diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease. The National Institute on Aging, and Reagan Institute Working Group on Diagnostic Criteria for the Neuropathological Assessment of Alzheimer's Disease Neurobiol Aging 1997 18 4 Suppl S1 2 9330978
44 Erten-Lyons D Woltjer RL Dodge H Nixon R Vorobik R Calvert JF Leahy M Montine T Kaye J Factors associated with resistance to dementia despite high Alzheimer disease pathology Neurology 2009 72 4 354 60 19171833
45 Counts SE Che S Ginsberg SD Mufson EJ Gender differences in neurotrophin and glutamate receptor expression in cholinergic nucleus basalis neurons during the progression of Alzheimer's disease J Chem Neuroanat 2011 42 2 111 7 21397006
46 Mazure CM Swendsen J Sex differences in Alzheimer's disease and other dementias Lancet Neurol 2016 15 5 451 2 26987699
47 Mufson EJ Chen EY Cochran EJ Beckett LA Bennett DA Kordower JH Entorhinal cortex beta-amyloid load in individuals with mild cognitive impairment Exp Neurol 1999 158 2 469 90 10415154
48 Bancher C Jellinger K Lassmann H Fischer P Leblhuber F Correlations between mental state and quantitative neuropathology in the Vienna Longitudinal Study on Dementia Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci 1996 246 3 137 46 8739399
49 Nelson PT Jicha GA Schmitt FA Liu H Davis DG Mendiondo MS Abner EL Markesbery WR Clinicopathologic correlations in a large Alzheimer disease center autopsy cohort: neuritic plaques and neurofibrillary tangles “do count” when staging disease severity J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2007 66 12 1136 46 18090922
50 Malek-Ahmadi M Perez SE Chen K Mufson EJ Neuritic and Diffuse Plaque Associations with Memory in Non-Cognitively Impaired Elders submitted
51 Wilson RS Leurgans SE Boyle PA Bennett DA Cognitive decline in prodromal Alzheimer disease and mild cognitive impairment Arch Neurol 2011 68 3 351 6 21403020
52 Scheff SW Ansari MA Mufson EJ Relationship between oxidative stress and hippocampal synaptic proteins: evidence for prodromal Alzheimer's disease Neurobiology of aging 2016 in press
53 Ansari MA Scheff SW Oxidative stress in the progression of Alzheimer disease in the frontal cortex J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2010 69 2 155 67 20084018
54 Keller JN Schmitt FA Scheff SW Ding Q Chen Q Butterfield DA Markesbery WR Evidence of increased oxidative damage in subjects with mild cognitive impairment Neurology 2005 64 7 1152 6 15824339
55 Nunomura A Perry G Aliev G Hirai K Takeda A Balraj EK Jones PK Ghanbari H Wataya T Shimohama S Chiba S Atwood CS Petersen RB Smith MA Oxidative damage is the earliest event in Alzheimer disease Journal of neuropathology and experimental neurology 2001 60 8 759 67 11487050
56 Pratico D Sung S Lipid peroxidation and oxidative imbalance: early functional events in Alzheimer's disease Journal of Alzheimer's disease : JAD 2004 6 2 171 5 15096701
57 Walsh DM Selkoe DJ A beta oligomers - a decade of discovery J Neurochem 2007 101 5 1172 84 17286590
58 Lesne S Koh MT Kotilinek L Kayed R Glabe CG Yang A Gallagher M Ashe KH A specific amyloid-beta protein assembly in the brain impairs memory Nature 2006 440 7082 352 7 16541076
59 Bilousova T Miller CA Poon WW Vinters HV Corrada M Kawas C Hayden EY Teplow DB Glabe C Albay R 3rd Cole GM Teng E Gylys KH Synaptic Amyloid-beta Oligomers Precede p-Tau and Differentiate High Pathology Control Cases Am J Pathol 2016 186 1 185 98 26718979
60 Morris JC The Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR): current version and scoring rules Neurology 1993 43 11 2412 4 8232972
61 Pham E Crews L Ubhi K Hansen L Adame A Cartier A Salmon D Galasko D Michael S Savas JN Yates JR Glabe C Masliah E Progressive accumulation of amyloid-beta oligomers in Alzheimer's disease and in amyloid precursor protein transgenic mice is accompanied by selective alterations in synaptic scaffold proteins The FEBS journal 2010 277 14 3051 67 20573181
62 Jin M Shepardson N Yang T Chen G Walsh D Selkoe DJ Soluble amyloid beta-protein dimers isolated from Alzheimer cortex directly induce Tau hyperphosphorylation and neuritic degeneration Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2011 108 14 5819 24 21421841
63 Walker LC Jucker M Neurodegenerative diseases: expanding the prion concept Annual review of neuroscience 2015 38 87 103
64 Perez-Nievas BG Stein TD Tai HC Dols-Icardo O Scotton TC Barroeta-Espar I Fernandez-Carballo L de Munain EL Perez J Marquie M Serrano-Pozo A Frosch MP Lowe V Parisi JE Petersen RC Ikonomovic MD Lopez OL Klunk W Hyman BT Gomez-Isla T Dissecting phenotypic traits linked to human resilience to Alzheimer's pathology Brain 2013 136 Pt 8 2510 26 23824488
65 Negash S Wilson RS Leurgans SE Wolk DA Schneider JA Buchman AS Bennett DA Arnold SE Resilient brain aging: characterization of discordance between Alzheimer's disease pathology and cognition Curr Alzheimer Res 2013 10 8 844 51 23919768
66 Stern Y Cognitive reserve Neuropsychologia 2009 47 10 2015 28 19467352
67 Arnold SE Louneva N Cao K Wang LS Han LY Wolk DA Negash S Leurgans SE Schneider JA Buchman AS Wilson RS Bennett DA Cellular, synaptic, and biochemical features of resilient cognition in Alzheimer's disease Neurobiol Aging 2013 34 1 157 68 22554416
68 DeKosky ST Ikonomovic MD Styren SD Beckett L Wisniewski S Bennett DA Cochran EJ Kordower JH Mufson EJ Upregulation of choline acetyltransferase activity in hippocampus and frontal cortex of elderly subjects with mild cognitive impairment Ann Neurol 2002 51 2 145 55 11835370
69 Ikonomovic MD Mufson EJ Wuu J Cochran EJ Bennett DA DeKosky ST Cholinergic plasticity in hippocampus of individuals with mild cognitive impairment: correlation with Alzheimer's neuropathology J Alzheimers Dis 2003 5 1 39 48 12590165
70 Scheff SW Price DA Schmitt FA DeKosky ST Mufson EJ Synaptic alterations in CA1 in mild Alzheimer disease and mild cognitive impairment Neurology 2007 68 18 1501 8 17470753
71 Counts SE He B Nadeem M Wuu J Scheff SW Mufson EJ Hippocampal drebrin loss in mild cognitive impairment Neuro-degenerative diseases 2012 10 1-4 216 9 22310934
72 Mufson EJ He B Nadeem M Perez SE Counts SE Leurgans S Fritz J Lah J Ginsberg SD Wuu J Scheff SW Hippocampal ProNGF Signaling Pathways and beta-Amyloid Levels in Mild Cognitive Impairment and Alzheimer Disease J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2012 71 11 1018 1029 23095849
73 Mufson EJ Mahady L Waters D Counts SE Perez SE DeKosky ST Ginsberg SD Ikonomovic MD Scheff SW Binder LI Hippocampal plasticity during the progression of Alzheimer's disease Neuroscience 2015 309 51 67 25772787
74 Riudavets MA Iacono D Resnick SM O'Brien R Zonderman AB Martin LJ Rudow G Pletnikova O Troncoso JC Resistance to Alzheimer's pathology is associated with nuclear hypertrophy in neurons Neurobiol Aging 2007 28 10 1484 92 17599696
75 DeKosky ST Scheff SW Synapse loss in frontal cortex biopsies in Alzheimer's disease: correlation with cognitive severity Ann Neurol 1990 27 5 457 64 2360787
76 Ikonomovic MD Abrahamson EE Isanski BA Wuu J Mufson EJ DeKosky ST Superior frontal cortex cholinergic axon density in mild cognitive impairment and early Alzheimer disease Arch Neurol 2007 64 9 1312 7 17846271
77 Mesulam MM Mufson EJ Wainer BH Levey AI Central cholinergic pathways in the rat: an overview based on an alternative nomenclature (Ch1-Ch6) Neuroscience 1983 10 4 1185 201 6320048
78 Gomez-Isla T Price JL McKeel DW Jr. Morris JC Growdon JH Hyman BT Profound loss of layer II entorhinal cortex neurons occurs in very mild Alzheimer's disease J Neurosci 1996 16 14 4491 500 8699259
79 Ikonomovic MD Mizukami K Davies P Hamilton R Sheffield R Armstrong DM The loss of GluR2(3) immunoreactivity precedes neurofibrillary tangle formation in the entorhinal cortex and hippocampus of Alzheimer brains J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 1997 56 9 1018 27 9291943
80 Reisberg B Doody R Stoffler A Schmitt F Ferris S Mobius HJ A 24-week open-label extension study of memantine in moderate to severe Alzheimer disease Arch Neurol 2006 63 1 49 54 16401736
81 Danysz W Parsons CG Alzheimer's disease, beta-amyloid, glutamate, NMDA receptors and memantine--searching for the connections Br J Pharmacol 2012 167 2 324 52 22646481
82 Roses AD Saunders AM APOE is a major susceptibility gene for Alzheimer's disease Current opinion in biotechnology 1994 5 6 663 7 7765750
83 Vos SJ van Rossum IA Verhey F Knol DL Soininen H Wahlund LO Hampel H Tsolaki M Minthon L Frisoni GB Froelich L Nobili F van der Flier W Blennow K Wolz R Scheltens P Visser PJ Prediction of Alzheimer disease in subjects with amnestic and nonamnestic MCI Neurology 2013 80 12 1124 32 23446677
84 Caselli RJ Dueck AC Osborne D Sabbagh MN Connor DJ Ahern GL Baxter LC Rapcsak SZ Shi J Woodruff BK Locke DE Snyder CH Alexander GE Rademakers R Reiman EM Longitudinal modeling of age-related memory decline and the APOE epsilon4 effect N Engl J Med 2009 361 3 255 63 19605830
85 Reiman EM Chen K Liu X Bandy D Yu M Lee W Ayutyanont N Keppler J Reeder SA Langbaum JB Alexander GE Klunk WE Mathis CA Price JC Aizenstein HJ DeKosky ST Caselli RJ Fibrillar amyloid-beta burden in cognitively normal people at 3 levels of genetic risk for Alzheimer's disease Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2009 106 16 6820 5 19346482
86 Kantarci K Yang C Schneider JA Senjem ML Reyes DA Lowe VJ Barnes LL Aggarwal NT Bennett DA Smith GE Petersen RC Jack CR Jr. Boeve BF Antemortem amyloid imaging and beta-amyloid pathology in a case with dementia with Lewy bodies Neurobiol Aging 2012 33 5 878 85 20961664
87 Ikonomovic MD Klunk WE Abrahamson EE Wuu J Mathis CA Scheff SW Mufson EJ DeKosky ST Precuneus amyloid burden is associated with reduced cholinergic activity in Alzheimer disease Neurology 2011 77 1 39 47 21700583
88 Perez SE He B Nadeem M Wuu J Scheff SW Abrahamson EE Ikonomovic MD Mufson EJ Resilience of precuneus neurotrophic signaling pathways despite amyloid pathology in prodromal Alzheimer's disease Biol Psychiatry 2015 77 8 693 703 24529280
89 Nelson PT Braak H Markesbery WR Neuropathology and cognitive impairment in Alzheimer disease: a complex but coherent relationship J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2009 68 1 1 14 19104448
90 Ginsberg SD Alldred MJ Che S Gene expression levels assessed by CA1 pyramidal neuron and regional hippocampal dissections in Alzheimer's disease Neurobiol Dis 2012 45 99 107 21821124
91 Alldred MJ Lee SH Petkova E Ginsberg SD Expression profile analysis of hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons in aged Ts65Dn mice, a model of Down syndrome (DS) and Alzheimer's disease (AD) Brain structure &amp; function 2015 220 2983 2996 25031177
92 Counts SE Alldred MJ Che S Ginsberg SD Mufson EJ Synaptic gene dysregulation within hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons in mild cognitive impairment Neuropharmacology 2014 79 172 9 24445080
93 Ginsberg SD Mufson EJ Counts SE Wuu J Alldred MJ Nixon RA Che S Regional selectivity of rab5 and rab7 protein upregulation in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease J Alzheimers Dis 2010 22 2 631 9 20847427
94 Ginsberg SD Mufson EJ Alldred MJ Counts SE Wuu J Nixon RA Che S Upregulation of select rab GTPases in cholinergic basal forebrain neurons in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease J Chem Neuroanat 2011 42 2 102 10 21669283
95 Vana L Kanaan NM Ugwu IC Wuu J Mufson EJ Binder LI Progression of tau pathology in cholinergic Basal forebrain neurons in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease Am J Pathol 2011 179 5 2533 50 21945902
96 Guillozet-Bongaarts AL Cahill ME Cryns VL Reynolds MR Berry RW Binder LI Pseudophosphorylation of tau at serine 422 inhibits caspase cleavage: in vitro evidence and implications for tangle formation in vivo J Neurochem 2006 97 4 1005 14 16606369
97 Cataldo AM Petanceska S Terio NB Peterhoff CM Durham R Mercken M Mehta PD Buxbaum J Haroutunian V Nixon RA Abeta localization in abnormal endosomes: association with earliest Abeta elevations in AD and Down syndrome Neurobiol Aging 2004 25 10 1263 72 15465622
98 Lagos-Quintana M Rauhut R Lendeckel W Tuschl T Identification of novel genes coding for small expressed RNAs Science 2001 294 5543 853 8 11679670
99 Nelson PT Wang WX Rajeev BW MicroRNAs (miRNAs) in neurodegenerative diseases Brain Pathol 2008 18 1 130 8 18226108
100 Hebert SS De Strooper B Alterations of the microRNA network cause neurodegenerative disease Trends Neurosci 2009 32 4 199 206 19268374
101 Aschrafi A Schwechter AD Mameza MG Natera-Naranjo O Gioio AE Kaplan BB MicroRNA-338 regulates local cytochrome c oxidase IV mRNA levels and oxidative phosphorylation in the axons of sympathetic neurons J Neurosci 2008 28 47 12581 90 19020050
102 Fineberg SK Kosik KS Davidson BL MicroRNAs potentiate neural development Neuron 2009 64 3 303 9 19914179
103 Rajasethupathy P Fiumara F Sheridan R Betel D Puthanveettil SV Russo JJ Sander C Tuschl T Kandel E Characterization of small RNAs in Aplysia reveals a role for miR-124 in constraining synaptic plasticity through CREB Neuron 2009 63 6 803 17 19778509
104 Schratt GM Tuebing F Nigh EA Kane CG Sabatini ME Kiebler M Greenberg ME A brain-specific microRNA regulates dendritic spine development Nature 2006 439 7074 283 9 16421561
105 Wang WX Rajeev BW Stromberg AJ Ren N Tang G Huang Q Rigoutsos I Nelson PT The expression of microRNA miR-107 decreases early in Alzheimer's disease and may accelerate disease progression through regulation of beta-site amyloid precursor protein-cleaving enzyme 1 J Neurosci 2008 28 5 1213 23 18234899
106 Hebert SS Horre K Nicolai L Papadopoulou AS Mandemakers W Silahtaroglu AN Kauppinen S Delacourte A De Strooper B Loss of microRNA cluster miR-29a/b-1 in sporadic Alzheimer's disease correlates with increased BACE1/beta-secretase expression Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2008 105 17 6415 20 18434550
107 Absalon S Kochanek DM Raghavan V Krichevsky AM MiR-26b, upregulated in Alzheimer's disease, activates cell cycle entry, tau-phosphorylation, and apoptosis in postmitotic neurons J Neurosci 2013 33 37 14645 59 24027266
108 Hebert SS Papadopoulou AS Smith P Galas MC Planel E Silahtaroglu AN Sergeant N Buee L De Strooper B Genetic ablation of Dicer in adult forebrain neurons results in abnormal tau hyperphosphorylation and neurodegeneration Human molecular genetics 2010 19 20 3959 69 20660113
109 Banzhaf-Strathmann J Benito E May S Arzberger T Tahirovic S Kretzschmar H Fischer A Edbauer D MicroRNA-125b induces tau hyperphosphorylation and cognitive deficits in Alzheimer's disease The EMBO journal 2014 33 15 1667 80 25001178
110 Cui JG Li YY Zhao Y Bhattacharjee S Lukiw WJ Differential regulation of interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase-1 (IRAK-1) and IRAK-2 by microRNA-146a and NF-kappaB in stressed human astroglial cells and in Alzheimer disease J Biol Chem 2010 285 50 38951 60 20937840
111 Li YY Alexandrov PN Pogue AI Zhao Y Bhattacharjee S Lukiw WJ miRNA-155 upregulation and complement factor H deficits in Down's syndrome Neuroreport 2012 23 3 168 73 22182977
112 Lukiw WJ Cui JG Yuan LY Bhattacharjee PS Corkern M Clement C Kammerman EM Ball MJ Zhao Y Sullivan PM Hill JM Acyclovir or Abeta42 peptides attenuate HSV-1-induced miRNA-146a levels in human primary brain cells Neuroreport 2010 21 14 922 7 20683212
113 Weinberg RB Mufson EJ Counts SE Evidence for a neuroprotective microRNA pathway in amnestic mild cognitive impairment Frontiers in neuroscience 2016
114 Bonda DJ Lee HG Camins A Pallas M Casadesus G Smith MA Zhu X The sirtuin pathway in ageing and Alzheimer disease: mechanistic and therapeutic considerations Lancet Neurol 10 3 275 9 21349442
115 Morris JC Storandt M Miller JP McKeel DW Price JL Rubin EH Berg L Mild cognitive impairment represents early-stage Alzheimer disease Arch Neurol 2001 58 3 397 405 11255443
116 Bennett DA Schneider JA Bienias JL Evans DA Wilson RS Mild cognitive impairment is related to Alzheimer disease pathology and cerebral infarctions Neurology 2005 64 5 834 41 15753419
117 Markesbery WR Schmitt FA Kryscio RJ Davis DG Smith CD Wekstein DR Neuropathologic substrate of mild cognitive impairment Arch Neurol 2006 63 1 38 46 16401735
118 Mufson EJ Chen EY Cochran EJ Beckett LA Bennett DA Kordower JH Entorhinal cortex beta-amyloid load in individuals with mild cognitive impairment Exp Neurol 1999 158 2 469 90 10415154
119 Weiner MW Veitch DP Aisen PS Beckett LA Cairns NJ Cedarbaum J Green RC Harvey D Jack CR Jagust W Luthman J Morris JC Petersen RC Saykin AJ Shaw L Shen L Schwarz A Toga AW Trojanowski JQ I. Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 2014 Update of the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative: A review of papers published since its inception Alzheimers Dement 2015 11 6 e1 120 26073027
120 Galluzzi S Marizzoni M Babiloni C Albani D Antelmi L Bagnoli C Bartres-Faz D Cordone S Didic M Farotti L Fiedler U Forloni G Girtler N Hensch T Jovicich J Leeuwis A Marra C Molinuevo JL Nobili F Pariente J Parnetti L Payoux P Del Percio C Ranjeva JP Rolandi E Rossini PM Schonknecht P Soricelli A Tsolaki M Visser PJ Wiltfang J Richardson JC Bordet R Blin O Frisoni GB PharmaCog C Clinical and biomarker profiling of prodromal Alzheimer's disease in workpackage 5 of the Innovative Medicines Initiative PharmaCog project: a ‘Eu`ropean ADNI study’ Journal of internal medicine 2016
121 Fagan AM Roe CM Xiong C Mintun MA Morris JC Holtzman DM Cerebrospinal fluid tau/beta-amyloid(42) ratio as a prediction of cognitive decline in nondemented older adults Arch Neurol 2007 64 3 343 9 17210801
122 Mattsson N Zetterberg H Hansson O Andreasen N Parnetti L Jonsson M Herukka SK van der Flier WM Blankenstein MA Ewers M Rich K Kaiser E Verbeek M Tsolaki M Mulugeta E Rosen E Aarsland D Visser PJ Schroder J Marcusson J de Leon M Hampel H Scheltens P Pirttila T Wallin A Jonhagen ME Minthon L Winblad B Blennow K CSF biomarkers and incipient Alzheimer disease in patients with mild cognitive impairment Jama 2009 302 4 385 93 19622817
123 Snider BJ Fagan AM Roe C Shah AR Grant EA Xiong C Morris JC Holtzman DM Cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers and rate of cognitive decline in very mild dementia of the Alzheimer type Arch Neurol 2009 66 5 638 45 19433664
124 Trojanowski JQ Vandeerstichele H Korecka M Clark CM Aisen PS Petersen RC Blennow K Soares H Simon A Lewczuk P Dean R Siemers E Potter WZ Weiner MW Jack CR Jr. Jagust W Toga AW Lee VM Shaw LM Update on the biomarker core of the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative subjects Alzheimers Dement 2010 6 3 230 8 20451871
125 Mattsson N Tosun D Insel PS Simonson A Jack CR Jr. Beckett LA Donohue M Jagust W Schuff N Weiner MW Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging I Association of brain amyloid-beta with cerebral perfusion and structure in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment Brain 2014 137 Pt 5 1550 61 24625697
126 Tosun D Joshi S Weiner MW I. the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Multimodal MRI-based Imputation of the Abeta+ in Early Mild Cognitive Impairment Annals of clinical and translational neurology 2014 1 3 160 170 24729983
127 Bangen KJ Restom K Liu TT Wierenga CE Jak AJ Salmon DP Bondi MW Assessment of Alzheimer's disease risk with functional magnetic resonance imaging: an arterial spin labeling study J Alzheimers Dis 2012 31 Suppl 3 S59 74 22531427
128 Law MP Osman S Davenport RJ Cunningham VJ Pike VW Camici PG Biodistribution and metabolism of [N-methyl-11C]m-hydroxyephedrine in the rat Nuclear medicine and biology 1997 24 5 417 24 9290077
129 Levine H 3rd Soluble multimeric Alzheimer beta(1-40) pre-amyloid complexes in dilute solution Neurobiol Aging 1995 16 5 755 64 8532108
130 Klunk WE Engler H Nordberg A Wang Y Blomqvist G Holt DP Bergstrom M Savitcheva I Huang GF Estrada S Ausen B Debnath ML Barletta J Price JC Sandell J Lopresti BJ Wall A Koivisto P Antoni G Mathis CA Langstrom B Imaging brain amyloid in Alzheimer's disease with Pittsburgh Compound-B Ann Neurol 2004 55 3 306 19 14991808
131 Bacskai BJ Frosch MP Freeman SH Raymond SB Augustinack JC Johnson KA Irizarry MC Klunk WE Mathis CA Dekosky ST Greenberg SM Hyman BT Growdon JH Molecular imaging with Pittsburgh Compound B confirmed at autopsy: a case report Arch Neurol 2007 64 3 431 4 17353389
132 Ikonomovic MD Klunk WE Abrahamson EE Mathis CA Price JC Tsopelas ND Lopresti BJ Ziolko S Bi W Paljug WR Debnath ML Hope CE Isanski BA Hamilton RL DeKosky ST Post-mortem correlates of in vivo PiB-PET amyloid imaging in a typical case of Alzheimer's disease Brain 2008 131 Pt 6 1630 45 18339640
133 Niedowicz DM Beckett TL Matveev S Weidner AM Baig I Kryscio RJ Mendiondo MS LeVine H 3rd Keller JN Murphy MP Pittsburgh compound B and the postmortem diagnosis of Alzheimer disease Ann Neurol 2012 72 4 564 70 23109151
134 Beckett TL Webb RL Niedowicz DM Holler CJ Matveev S Baig I LeVine H 3rd Keller JN Murphy MP Postmortem Pittsburgh Compound B (PiB) binding increases with Alzheimer's disease progression J Alzheimers Dis 2012 32 1 127 38 22766739
135 Ikonomovic MD Abrahamson EE Price JC Hamilton RL Mathis CA Paljug WR Debnath ML Cohen AD Mizukami K DeKosky ST Lopez OL Klunk WE Early AD pathology in a [C-11]PiB-negative case: a PiB-amyloid imaging, biochemical, and immunohistochemical study Acta Neuropathol 2012 123 3 433 47 22271153
136 Haroutunian V Perl DP Purohit DP Marin D Khan K Lantz M Davis KL Mohs RC Regional distribution of neuritic plaques in the nondemented elderly and subjects with very mild Alzheimer disease Arch Neurol 1998 55 9 1185 91 9740112
137 Aizenstein HJ Nebes RD Saxton JA Price JC Mathis CA Tsopelas ND Ziolko SK James JA Snitz BE Houck PR Bi W Cohen AD Lopresti BJ DeKosky ST Halligan EM Klunk WE Frequent amyloid deposition without significant cognitive impairment among the elderly Arch Neurol 2008 65 11 1509 17 19001171
138 Mathis CA Kuller LH Klunk WE Snitz BE Price JC Weissfeld LA Rosario BL Lopresti BJ Saxton JA Aizenstein HJ McDade EM Kamboh MI DeKosky ST Lopez OL In vivo assessment of amyloid-beta deposition in nondemented very elderly subjects Ann Neurol 2013 73 6 751 61 23596051
139 Morris JC Roe CM Xiong C Fagan AM Goate AM Holtzman DM Mintun MA APOE predicts amyloid-beta but not tau Alzheimer pathology in cognitively normal aging Ann Neurol 2010 67 1 122 31 20186853
140 Rowe CC Ng S Ackermann U Gong SJ Pike K Savage G Cowie TF Dickinson KL Maruff P Darby D Smith C Woodward M Merory J Tochon-Danguy H O'Keefe G Klunk WE Mathis CA Price JC Masters CL Villemagne VL Imaging beta-amyloid burden in aging and dementia Neurology 2007 68 20 1718 25 17502554
141 Curtis C Gamez JE Singh U Sadowsky CH Villena T Sabbagh MN Beach TG Duara R Fleisher AS Frey KA Walker Z Hunjan A Holmes C Escovar YM Vera CX Agronin ME Ross J Bozoki A Akinola M Shi J Vandenberghe R Ikonomovic MD Sherwin PF Grachev ID Farrar G Smith AP Buckley CJ McLain R Salloway S Phase 3 trial of flutemetamol labeled with radioactive fluorine 18 imaging and neuritic plaque density JAMA neurology 2015 72 3 287 94 25622185
142 Fleisher AS Chen K Liu X Roontiva A Thiyyagura P Ayutyanont N Joshi AD Clark CM Mintun MA Pontecorvo MJ Doraiswamy PM Johnson KA Skovronsky DM Reiman EM Using positron emission tomography and florbetapir F18 to image cortical amyloid in patients with mild cognitive impairment or dementia due to Alzheimer disease Arch Neurol 2011 68 11 1404 11 21747008
143 Richards D Sabbagh MN Florbetaben for PET Imaging of Beta-Amyloid Plaques in the Brain Neurol Ther 2014 3 2 79 88 26000224
144 Declercq L Celen S Lecina J Ahamed M Tousseyn T Moechars D Alcazar J Ariza M Fierens K Bottelbergs A Marien J Vandenberghe R Andres IJ Van Laere K Verbruggen A Bormans G Comparison of New Tau PET-Tracer Candidates With [18F]T808 and [18F]T807 Molecular imaging 2016 15
145 Villemagne VL Okamura N Tau imaging in the study of ageing, Alzheimer's disease, and other neurodegenerative conditions Curr Opin Neurobiol 2016 36 43 51 26397020
146 Abatzoglou JT Rupp DE Mote PW Questionable evidence of natural warming of the northwestern United States Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2014 111 52 5605 6
147 Harada R Okamura N Furumoto S Tago T Maruyama M Higuchi M Yoshikawa T Arai H Iwata R Kudo Y Yanai K Comparison of the binding characteristics of [18F]THK-523 and other amyloid imaging tracers to Alzheimer's disease pathology European journal of nuclear medicine and molecular imaging 2013 40 1 125 32 23100049
148 Villemagne VL Furumoto S Fodero-Tavoletti MT Mulligan RS Hodges J Harada R Yates P Piguet O Pejoska S Dore V Yanai K Masters CL Kudo Y Rowe CC Okamura N In vivo evaluation of a novel tau imaging tracer for Alzheimer's disease European journal of nuclear medicine and molecular imaging 2014 41 5 816 26 24514874
149 Lemoine L Saint-Aubert L Marutle A Antoni G Eriksson JP Ghetti B Okamura N Nennesmo I Gillberg PG Nordberg A Visualization of regional tau deposits using (3)H-THK5117 in Alzheimer brain tissue Acta Neuropathol Commun 2015 3 40 26134112
150 Chiotis K Saint-Aubert L Savitcheva I Jelic V Andersen P Jonasson M Eriksson J Lubberink M Almkvist O Wall A Antoni G Nordberg A Imaging in-vivo tau pathology in Alzheimer's disease with THK5317 PET in a multimodal paradigm European journal of nuclear medicine and molecular imaging 2016
151 Okamura N Harada R Furumoto S Arai H Yanai K Kudo Y Tau PET imaging in Alzheimer's disease Current neurology and neuroscience reports 2014 14 11 500 25239654
152 Okamura N Furumoto S Harada R Tago T Yoshikawa T Fodero-Tavoletti M Mulligan RS Villemagne VL Akatsu H Yamamoto T Arai H Iwata R Yanai K Kudo Y Novel 18F-labeled arylquinoline derivatives for noninvasive imaging of tau pathology in Alzheimer disease J Nucl Med 2013 54 8 1420 7 23857514
153 Maruyama M Shimada H Suhara T Shinotoh H Ji B Maeda J Zhang MR Trojanowski JQ Lee VM Ono M Masamoto K Takano H Sahara N Iwata N Okamura N Furumoto S Kudo Y Chang Q Saido TC Takashima A Lewis J Jang MK Aoki I Ito H Higuchi M Imaging of tau pathology in a tauopathy mouse model and in Alzheimer patients compared to normal controls Neuron 2013 79 6 1094 108 24050400
154 Chien DT Bahri S Szardenings AK Walsh JC Mu F Su MY Shankle WR Elizarov A Kolb HC Early clinical PET imaging results with the novel PHF-tau radioligand [F-18]-T807 J Alzheimers Dis 2013 34 2 457 68 23234879
155 Johnson KA Schultz A Betensky RA Becker JA Sepulcre J Rentz D Mormino E Chhatwal J Amariglio R Papp K Marshall G Albers M Mauro S Pepin L Alverio J Judge K Philiossaint M Shoup T Yokell D Dickerson B Gomez-Isla T Hyman B Vasdev N Sperling R Tau positron emission tomographic imaging in aging and early Alzheimer disease Ann Neurol 2016 79 1 110 9 26505746
156 Ossenkoppele R Schonhaut DR Scholl M Lockhart SN Ayakta N Baker SL O'Neil JP Janabi M Lazaris A Cantwell A Vogel J Santos M Miller ZA Bettcher BM Vossel KA Kramer JH Gorno-Tempini ML Miller BL Jagust WJ Rabinovici GD Tau PET patterns mirror clinical and neuroanatomical variability in Alzheimer's disease Brain 2016
157 Schwarz AJ Yu P Miller BB Shcherbinin S Dickson J Navitsky M Joshi AD Devous MD Sr. Mintun MS Regional profiles of the candidate tau PET ligand 18F-AV-1451 recapitulate key features of Braak histopathological stages Brain 2016
158 Marquie M Normandin MD Vanderburg CR Costantino IM Bien EA Rycyna LG Klunk WE Mathis CA Ikonomovic MD Debnath ML Vasdev N Dickerson BC Gomperts SN Growdon JH Johnson KA Frosch MP Hyman BT Gomez-Isla T Validating novel tau positron emission tomography tracer [F-18]-AV-1451 (T807) on postmortem brain tissue Ann Neurol 2015 78 5 787 800 26344059
159 Small GW Kepe V Ercoli LM Siddarth P Bookheimer SY Miller KJ Lavretsky H Burggren AC Cole GM Vinters HV Thompson PM Huang SC Satyamurthy N Phelps ME Barrio JR PET of brain amyloid and tau in mild cognitive impairment N Engl J Med 2006 355 25 2652 63 17182990
160 Agdeppa ED Kepe V Liu J Flores-Torres S Satyamurthy N Petric A Cole GM Small GW Huang SC Barrio JR Binding characteristics of radiofluorinated 6-dialkylamino-2-naphthylethylidene derivatives as positron emission tomography imaging probes for beta-amyloid plaques in Alzheimer's disease J Neurosci 2001 21 24 RC189 11734604
161 Shin J Lee SY Kim SH Kim YB Cho SJ Multitracer PET imaging of amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer's disease Neuroimage 2008 43 2 236 44 18694837
162 Tolboom N van der Flier WM Yaqub M Koene T Boellaard R Windhorst AD Scheltens P Lammertsma AA van Berckel BN Differential association of [11C]PIB and [18F]FDDNP binding with cognitive impairment Neurology 2009 73 24 2079 85 20018636
163 Xia CF Arteaga J Chen G Gangadharmath U Gomez LF Kasi D Lam C Liang Q Liu C Mocharla VP Mu F Sinha A Su H Szardenings AK Walsh JC Wang E Yu C Zhang W Zhao T Kolb HC [(18)F]T807, a novel tau positron emission tomography imaging agent for Alzheimer's disease Alzheimers Dement 2013 9 6 666 76 23411393
164 Ikonomovic MD Abrahamson EE Price JC Hamilton RL Mathis CA Paljug WR Debnath ML Cohen AD Mizukami K DeKosky ST Lopez OL Klunk WE Early AD pathology in a [C-11]PiB-negative case: a PiB-amyloid imaging, biochemical, and immunohistochemical study Acta Neuropathol 2012 123 3 433 47 22271153
165 Leung R Proitsi P Simmons A Lunnon K Guntert A Kronenberg D Pritchard M Tsolaki M Mecocci P Kloszewska I Vellas B Soininen H Wahlund LO Lovestone S Inflammatory proteins in plasma are associated with severity of Alzheimer's disease PLoS One 2013 8 6 e64971 23762274
166 Buchhave P Minthon L Zetterberg H Wallin AK Blennow K Hansson O Cerebrospinal fluid levels of beta-amyloid 1-42, but not of tau, are fully changed already 5 to 10 years before the onset of Alzheimer dementia Arch Gen Psychiatry 2012 69 1 98 106 22213792
167 Strozyk D Blennow K White LR Launer LJ CSF Abeta 42 levels correlate with amyloidneuropathology in a population-based autopsy study Neurology 2003 60 4 652 6 12601108
168 Fagan AM Mintun MA Shah AR Aldea P Roe CM Mach RH Marcus D Morris JC Holtzman DM Cerebrospinal fluid tau and ptau(181) increase with cortical amyloid deposition in cognitively normal individuals: implications for future clinical trials of Alzheimer's disease EMBO molecular medicine 2009 1 8-9 371 80 20049742
169 Hinrichs AL Mintun MA Head D Fagan AM Holtzman DM Morris JC Goate AM Cortical binding of pittsburgh compound B, an endophenotype for genetic studies of Alzheimer's disease Biol Psychiatry 2010 67 6 581 3 19892322
170 Grimmer T Riemenschneider M Forstl H Henriksen G Klunk WE Mathis CA Shiga T Wester HJ Kurz A Drzezga A Beta amyloid in Alzheimer's disease: increased deposition in brain is reflected in reduced concentration in cerebrospinal fluid Biol Psychiatry 2009 65 11 927 34 19268916
171 Fagan AM Mintun MA Mach RH Lee SY Dence CS Shah AR LaRossa GN Spinner ML Klunk WE Mathis CA DeKosky ST Morris JC Holtzman DM Inverse relation between in vivo amyloid imaging load and cerebrospinal fluid Abeta42 in humans Ann Neurol 2006 59 3 512 9 16372280
172 Forsberg A Engler H Almkvist O Blomquist G Hagman G Wall A Ringheim A Langstrom B Nordberg A PET imaging of amyloid deposition in patients with mild cognitive impairment Neurobiol Aging 2008 29 10 1456 65 17499392
173 Koivunen J Verkkoniemi A Aalto S Paetau A Ahonen JP Viitanen M Nagren K Rokka J Haaparanta M Kalimo H Rinne JO PET amyloid ligand [11C]PIB uptake shows predominantly striatal increase in variant Alzheimer's disease Brain 2008 131 Pt 7 1845 53 18583368
174 Mapstone M Cheema AK Fiandaca MS Zhong X Mhyre TR MacArthur LH Hall WJ Fisher SG Peterson DR Haley JM Nazar MD Rich SA Berlau DJ Peltz CB Tan MT Kawas CH Federoff HJ Plasma phospholipids identify antecedent memory impairment in older adults Nat Med 2014 20 4 415 8 24608097
175 Humpel C Identifying and validating biomarkers for Alzheimer's disease Trends in biotechnology 2011 29 1 26 32 20971518
176 McKhann GM Knopman DS Chertkow H Hyman BT Jack CR Jr. Kawas CH Klunk WE Koroshetz WJ Manly JJ Mayeux R Mohs RC Morris JC Rossor MN Scheltens P Carrillo MC Thies B Weintraub S Phelps CH The diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease: recommendations from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer's Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer's disease Alzheimers Dement 2011 7 3 263 9 21514250
177 Ferreira D Perestelo-Perez L Westman E Wahlund LO Sarria A Serrano-Aguilar P Meta-Review of CSF Core Biomarkers in Alzheimer's Disease: The State-of-the-Art after the New Revised Diagnostic Criteria Frontiers in aging neuroscience 2014 6 47 24715863
178 Firbank MJ Lloyd J Williams D Barber R Colloby SJ Barnett N Olsen K Davison C Donaldson C Herholz K O'Brien JT An evidence-based algorithm for the utility of FDG-PET for diagnosing Alzheimer's disease according to presence of medial temporal lobe atrophy The British journal of psychiatry : the journal of mental science 2016 208 5 491 6 26045347
179 Holtzman DM CSF biomarkers for Alzheimer's disease: current utility and potential future use Neurobiol Aging 2011 32 Suppl 1 S4 9 22078172
180 Storandt M Head D Fagan AM Holtzman DM Morris JC Toward a multifactorial model of Alzheimer disease Neurobiol Aging 2012 33 10 2262 71 22261556
181 Peng S Wuu J Mufson EJ Fahnestock M Increased proNGF Levels in Subjects with Mild Cognitive Impairment and Mild Alzheimer's Disease J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2004 63 6 641 649 15217092
182 Peng S Wuu J Mufson EJ Fahnestock M Increased proNGF levels in subjects with mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer disease J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2004 63 6 641 9 15217092
183 Mufson EJ He B Nadeem M Perez SE Counts SE Leurgans S Fritz J Lah J Ginsberg SD Wuu J Scheff SW Hippocampal proNGF signaling pathways and beta-amyloid levels in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer disease J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2012 71 11 1018 29 23095849
184 Counts SE He B Prout JG Michalski B Farotti L Fahnestock M Mufson EJ Cerebrospinal fluid proNGF: A putative biomarker for early Alzheimer's disease Curr Alzheimer Res 2016
185 Kuhn TS The structure of scientific revolutions 1962 University of Chicago Press Chicago
186 Herrup K The case for rejecting the amyloid cascade hypothesis Nat Neurosci 2015 18 6 794 9 26007212
187 Mufson EJ Malek-Ahmadi M Perez SE Chen a.K. Braak staging, plaque pathology and APOE status in elderly persons without cognitive impairment Neurobiol Aging 2016
188 [New perspectives for Alzheimer patients: acetylcholine inhibition with Rivastigmine. Congress of the European Neurologic Society. Nice, 6 July 199] Deutsche medizinische Wochenschrift 1998 123 48 Suppl 1 4
189 Olsson B Lautner R Andreasson U Ohrfelt A Portelius E Bjerke M Holtta M Rosen C Olsson C Strobel G Wu E Dakin K Petzold M Blennow K Zetterberg H CSF and blood biomarkers for the diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis Lancet Neurol 2016
