LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


7806090
6166
Neurosci Biobehav Rev
Neurosci Biobehav Rev
Neuroscience and biobehavioral reviews
0149-7634
1873-7528

26708713
4912955
10.1016/j.neubiorev.2015.08.021
NIHMS746160
Article
Obesity and Sex Interact in the Regulation of Alzheimer’s Disease
Moser V. Alexandra avmoser@usc.edu

Pike Christian J. abcjpike@usc.edu

a Neuroscience Graduate Program, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA USA 90089
b Davis School of Gerontology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA USA 90089
Corresponding author: Christian J. Pike, Davis School of Gerontology, University of Southern California, 3715 McClintock Avenue, Los Angeles CA 90089-0191 USA, Tel: (213) 740-4205, cjpike@usc.edu
22 12 2015
18 12 2015
8 2016
01 8 2017
67 102118
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder, for which a number of genetic, environmental, and lifestyle risk factors have been identified. A significant modifiable risk factor is obesity in mid-life. Interestingly, both obesity and AD exhibit sex differences and are regulated by sex steroid hormones. Accumulating evidence suggests interactions between obesity and sex in regulation of AD risk, although the pathways underlying this relationship are unclear. Inflammation and the E4 allele of apolipoprotein E have been identified as independent risk factors for AD and both interact with obesity and sex steroid hormones. We review the individual and cooperative effects of obesity and sex on development of AD and examine the potential contributions of apolipoprotein E, inflammation, and their interactions to this relationship.

Alzheimer’s disease
β-amyloid
apolipoprotein E
estrogen
inflammation
obesity
sex differences
testosterone

Introduction

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder that is the leading cause of dementia. The neuropathological hallmarks of AD include neuron loss, accumulation of amyloid-β (Aβ) plaques and hyperphosphorylated tau in the form of neurofibrillary tangles and neuropil threads, and gliosis (Cherry et al., 2014; Glass et al., 2010; LaFerla, 2010; Morris et al., 2014). There is compelling evidence that abnormal Aβ accumulation (Mucke and Selkoe, 2012; Tanzi, 2012) or hyperphosphorylated tau (Iqbal et al., 2010) or both (Zempel and Mandelkow, 2014) are the primary driving force(s) in the pathogenesis as well as strong support for key contributions by activated microglia and astrocytes (Cherry et al., 2014; Glass et al., 2010). Regardless of the proximal cause(s) of the neural injury in the AD brain, successful therapeutic intervention will require understanding of the factors that culminate in development of pathology.

The risk of AD is affected by numerous factors. Aging is the single greatest risk factor for AD, with the prevalence doubling every five years after the age of 65 (Hebert et al., 2003). However, the age-related physiological changes that contribute to this effect are uncertain. In addition to aging, AD risk is regulated by genetic factors. A small percentage of AD cases result from autosomal dominant mutations in the Aβ precursor protein, presenilin-1, and presenilin-2. The key consequences of these mutations appear to be increased production of A β and/or a change in the ratio of Aβ species, both of which foster Aβ accumulation (LaFerla, 2010; Tanzi, 2012). The most prevalent genetic risk factor for AD is the E4 allele (apoE4) of the cholesterol transporter apolipoprotein E (Saunders et al., 1993; Strittmatter et al., 1993), which also appears to regulate Aβ accumulation. In addition to apoE, there are a number of single nucleotide polymorphisms in genes that are associated with relatively subtle increases in AD risk. Among these are several genes associated with innate immunity (Tanzi, 2012), pointing to a role of the immune system, and microglia in particular, in AD pathogenesis. As with most diseases, AD risk is also significantly affected by several environmental and lifestyle factors, including education (Ferrari et al., 2014; Sharp and Gatz, 2011), head injury (Breunig et al., 2013), air pollution (Calderón-Garcidueñas et al., 2012), and physical exercise (Brown et al., 2013; Tolppanen et al., 2015). In recent years, an especially interesting risk factor has been obesity (Emmerzaal et al., 2015), which may contribute to links between cardiovascular diseases and AD (Hayden et al., 2006).

As with many disorders, significant sex differences exist in AD risk and development, with women being disproportionately affected by AD. These sex differences are likely to be mediated both via actions of sex steroid hormones, as well as by differences in neurophysiological substrates between men and women. Moreover, several normal age-related changes significantly increase AD risk including (i) estrogen depletion associated with menopause, (ii) age-related decreases in testosterone in men, and (iii) increasing adiposity in men and women. Since both estrogen and testosterone regulate adiposity, there are likely interactions between sex steroid hormones, adiposity, and AD risk that may be expected to exhibit sex differences.

In this review, we consider the individual and interactive effects of these AD risk factors as well as possible mechanisms that may be underlying these relationships. We begin by examining obesity as a risk factor for AD and sex differences in AD development. We then examine how sex differences and obesity interact in the context of AD, before exploring mechanisms underlying this relationship. Though there are likely to be a number of important mechanisms, our review will focus on inflammation, apoE4, and their interaction in the context of sex differences, obesity, and AD.

1. Obesity/metabolic syndrome as risk factors for AD

A. Epidemiological studies

Accumulating evidence over the past several years has identified obesity and related conditions as significant risk factors for the development of AD. Body mass index (BMI) is a commonly used measure of obesity, and though some studies show an association between BMI and AD, with an up to 40% increased risk for obese individuals (Fitzpatrick et al., 2009; Gustafson et al., 2003), others have found no association (Qizilbash et al., 2015; Yoshitake et al., 1995) (reviewed in Profenno et al., 2010). However, central adiposity may be a more important factor and better predictor of AD risk than BMI (Gustafson et al., 2009; Luchsinger et al., 2012; Whitmer et al., 2008), as visceral fat has been shown to be particularly harmful (Bloor and Symonds, 2014). Central adiposity has been shown to be a risk factor for AD as well as for cognitive impairment (Feng et al., 2013; Gustafson et al., 2009; Luchsinger et al., 2012; Whitmer et al., 2008), and visceral fat deposits are associated with lower brain volumes at middle age (Debette et al., 2010). Importantly, it appears that obesity at midlife is a particularly strong risk factor for onset of AD in late life (Emmerzaal et al., 2015; Fitzpatrick et al., 2009; Meng et al., 2014; Profenno et al., 2010; Xu et al., 2011). Intriguingly, the association between obesity and AD risk diminishes with age. Weight loss and low BMI are actually associated with increased risk of AD in older adults, whereas a higher BMI may be protective at advanced ages (Besser et al., 2014; Emmerzaal et al., 2015; Fitzpatrick et al., 2009; Hughes et al., 2009; Profenno et al., 2010). In fact, one study found that overweight and obese older adults were protected against AD, mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and vascular dementia (Doruk et al., 2010). One interpretation of these findings is that obesity at midlife may serve as a triggering factor for AD neuropathology, the effects of which do not become apparent until onset of clinical dementia later in life.

Obesity is associated with increased risk for the development of metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes (T2D), both of which are also independent risk factors for AD (Biessels et al., 2006; Samaras and Sachdev, 2012; Strachan et al., 2011). In addition, both obesity and T2D are risk factors for MCI (Samaras and Sachdev, 2012), and obesity is also linked with cognitive impairments in the absence of dementia (Benito-León et al., 2013; Gustafson et al., 2003; Mazzoccoli et al., 2014). In particular, central adiposity is a risk factor for cognitive decline, as increased visceral adipose tissue is associated with decreased performance on verbal memory and attention tasks, and with lower hippocampal volume (Isaac et al., 2011). Additionally, obesity can impair cognition even in children and young adults (Khan et al., 2014; Reinert et al., 2013; Schwartz et al., 2013; Yau et al., 2012). Thus, there are likely to be two independent pathways; one by which obesity impairs cognition and another pathway by which it promotes AD pathogenesis, that in turn impairs cognition in late life. Interestingly, while the relationship between higher visceral adipose tissue and lower cognitive performance is true in individuals under 70 years of age, this association does not exist in those over age 70 (Yoon et al., 2012), again indicating a protective effect of increased weight at older ages.

Obesity and related metabolic syndromes increase the risk of vascular dementia to an even greater extent than the risk of AD (Hayden et al., 2006; Whitmer et al., 2007; Xu et al., 2011; Yoshitake et al., 1995). Many vascular components are associated with AD neuropathology, including blood brain barrier disruption (Bell, 2012; Bell and Zlokovic, 2009) and cerebral amyloid angiopathy, the accumulation of β-amyloid (Aβ) deposits in the cerebrovasculature (Hultman et al., 2013). In addition, the presence of modifiable vascular risk factors at midlife increases risk of all types of dementia, including AD, later in life (Exalto et al., 2014; Whitmer et al., 2007). As obesity is a major risk factor for cardiovascular disease as well as AD, obesity and vascular factors likely cooperatively contribute to AD pathogenesis.

B. Experimental studies

In agreement with epidemiological findings, experimental studies in animals have demonstrated that obesity and T2D are associated with promotion of AD. First, various animal models of obesity and diabetes exhibit brain changes consistent with early AD pathology (Jayaraman and Pike, 2014). A commonly used approach is the use of high fat diet (HFD) in rodents, which yields diet-induced obesity (DIO). Using this model, our lab and others have shown that DIO in transgenic mouse models of AD increases levels of Aβ (Barron et al., 2013; L. Ho et al., 2004; Julien et al., 2010; Kohjima et al., 2010), a key protein in the initiation and progression of AD (Selkoe, 2011). Tau pathology, the other neuropathological hallmark of AD, is also increased by DIO in a number of strains of transgenic mice (Julien et al., 2010; Leboucher et al., 2013; Mehla et al., 2014; Takalo et al., 2014).

As in the human literature, DIO is also associated with cognitive deficits in animal models independent of underlying AD-related pathology. That is, rodents show impairments on a number of cognitive tasks following HFD, without apparent changes in Aβ accumulation (Davidson et al., 2013; Granholm et al., 2008; Hsu et al., 2014; Kanoski and Davidson, 2011; Kanoski et al., 2010; Knight et al., 2014; Stranahan et al., 2008). In fact, even a short 9-day exposure to HFD can cause cognitive impairment in rats (Murray et al., 2009).

In addition to DIO, genetic and pharmacological manipulations that model diabetes also increase AD-related neuropathology. For example, the BBZDR/Wor rats, a strain genetically prone to T2D, have greater neuronal loss and Aβ pathology than do BB/Wor rats, which are genetically prone to Type 1 diabetes (Li et al., 2007) Further, treatment with streptozotocin (STZ), which kills pancreatic β-cells, is commonly used to induce type I diabetes in animal models. STZ has been found to increase Aβ in both mouse (Currais et al., 2012; Jolivalt et al., 2008; Wang et al., 2010) and rat (Yang et al., 2013) models, as well as increase tau phosphorylation in brain (Jolivalt et al., 2008; Kim et al., 2009; Planel et al., 2007). Transgenic mouse models of obesity include leptin deficient mice (ob/ob) and leptin receptor deficient mice (db/db). Even in the absence of HFD, these transgenic mice show cognitive impairments and Aβ pathology (Li et al., 2012; Ramos-Rodriguez et al., 2013), as well as increased tau phosphorylation (Li et al., 2012; Kim, et al., 2013; Ramos-Rodriguez et al., 2013). Moreover, endothelial cells cultured from db/db mice show increased susceptibility to the toxic effects of Aβ (Carvalho et al., 2014). Interestingly, the antidiabetic drug metformin has been shown to reduce AD-like pathology in db/db mice, though it did not improve cognition (Li et al., 2012).

Notably, crossing the genetically obese and diabetic ob/ob and NSY mice with an AD transgenic mouse increases cognitive impairment and diabetic outcomes (Takeda et al., 2010), and is associated with severe cerebrovascular pathology (Niedowicz et al., 2014) without affecting Aβ pathology (Niedowicz et al., 2014; Takeda et al., 2010). These studies suggest that adverse metabolic outcomes can be exaggerated in the presence of AD, but genetically induced metabolic outcomes do not necessarily increase AD pathology. Interestingly, complementary findings in an AD transgenic mouse with DIO also suggest that metabolic disturbance may not be the driving force in promotion of AD pathogenesis (Barron et al., 2013). In summary, a number of studies in animal models have demonstrated increased AD-like pathology in the presence of diet- and pharmacologically-induced as well as genetically-induced obesity and metabolic disturbances. Moreover, the literature suggests that dietary components may be important in regulating AD pathology, even in the absence of obesity and metabolic syndromes.

C. Dietary components affect AD risk

Studies in both human and animal models suggest that particular dietary constituents may be important in modulating AD risk. For example, trans and saturated fatty acids are associated with higher risk of AD and MCI (Barnard et al., 2014; M. C. Morris and Tangney, 2014). In rodents, a diet high in saturated fatty acids was found to be more detrimental than a high cholesterol diet (Takechi et al., 2013). Other rodent studies have shown that trans and saturated fatty acids lead to a particularly robust increase in Aβ (Grimm et al., 2012; Oksman et al., 2006). Conversely, diets with high omega 3 polyunsaturated fatty acids are associated with decreased Aβ levels (Hjorth et al., 2013; Julien et al., 2010; Lebbadi et al., 2011; Zerbi et al., 2014), and one study found that a diet low in fat and high in oleic acid was able to reduce Aβ levels and pathology in transgenic mice (Amtul et al., 2010). In addition, the high sucrose and fructose contents of Western diets are also associated with cognitive impairment in humans (Francis and Stevenson, 2011) and increased Aβ (Lakhan and Kirchgessner, 2013; Moreira, 2013; Orr et al., 2014), and tau pathology (Orr et al., 2014) in rodents. Even in the absence of HFD, 10% sucrose water increased Aβ in a mouse model of AD (Cao et al., 2007), and a high fructose diet impaired spatial memory in rats (Ross et al., 2009). Thus, diets high in saturated fatty acids, sucrose, and fructose may contribute to AD pathogenesis, whereas diets high in certain types of fatty acids may be protective.

2. Sex differences in AD risk

The prevalence of AD is greater in women than in men, which holds true even after controlling for the fact that women have an increased lifespan (Li and Singh, 2014). Moreover, apolipoprotein E ε4 allele (ApoE4), the strongest genetic risk factor for AD, has a greater effect in women than it does in men such that a single copy of ApoE4 increases risk about 4-fold in women without significantly affecting AD risk in men (Payami et al., 1994). Similarly, ApoE4 increases rates of conversion from cognitively normal to MCI and from MCI to AD significantly more in women than in men (Altmann et al., 2014). Interestingly, in transgenic mouse models of AD, female mice are also more affected by AD in that they develop more severe AD-like neuropathology (Carroll et al., 2010; Hirata-Fukae et al., 2008; Schäfer et al., 2006), and have greater cognitive impairments (Blázquez et al., 2014; Carroll et al., 2010).

Several lines of evidence indicate that some of these sex differences in AD risk can be attributed to sex steroid hormones. That is, sex steroid hormones are protective against AD in both sexes, and age-related loss of both estrogens in women (Manly et al., 2000; Pike et al., 2009) and of androgens (Hogervorst et al., 2001; Moffat et al., 2004; Paoletti et al., 2004) in men, have been shown to increase AD risk. Moreover, low brain and circulating estrogen in women (Rosario et al., 2011; Yue et al., 2005) and testosterone in men (Rosario et al., 2011; 2004) have been associated with increased AD risk (Pike et al., 2009). Likewise, our lab and others have demonstrated similar relationships in animal models, such that in a mouse model of AD, androgen depletion in males (McAllister et al., 2010; Rosario et al., 2006) and estrogen depletion in females (Carroll et al., 2007) increases AD-like pathology, changes that are reversed by androgen and estrogen treatment. Collectively, human and rodent data suggest that the age-related depletion of sex steroid hormones, which diminishes beneficial activational effects of hormones in adult brain, places the brain at increased vulnerability for development of AD. Interestingly, emerging data also suggest that organizational effects of sex steroids hormones in the developmental sexual differentiation of the brain may confer greater risk in the female brain (Carroll et al., 2010).

3. Sex differences in obesity

A. Epidemiological studies

Rates of obesity are fairly similar between the sexes, at roughly 33% of men and 36% of women in the US being obese (Ogden et al., 2014). However, sex differences exist in the way that obesity manifests itself and in obesity-related complications. For example, some studies have found that rates of metabolic syndrome are somewhat lower in women (Hadaegh et al., 2013; Pradhan, 2013), and that women are protected against some but not all obesity-related complications (Syme et al., 2008). Yet, over a timespan of about 20 years, the prevalence of metabolic syndrome has increased most significantly among young women aged 20–39 years (Pradhan, 2013). Moreover, increases in BMI are positively associated with inflammation in women, but not men, suggesting that relative increases in BMI may be more harmful in women (Ahonen et al., 2012). In addition, one study found that obese adolescent girls have higher free fatty acid flux than do obese boys, which predicts development of insulin resistance (Adler-Wailes et al., 2013).

A number of studies have demonstrated that premenopausal women are protected against obesity, but that this protective effect is lost at menopause (Bloor and Symonds, 2014; Meyer et al., 2011; Sugiyama and Agellon, 2012). Some of these sex differences may be attributed to the way in which men and women store fat; that is, women tend to deposit excess fat in the lower body, whereas men develop mainly visceral fat deposits (Bloor and Symonds, 2014). Subcutaneous fat in the lower body has a greater capacity to store lipids and undergo tissue remodeling, which may contribute to better metabolic outcomes in premenopausal women (Bloor and Symonds, 2014). However, these sex differences diminish after menopause, suggesting a role for sex steroid hormones (discussed below).

Sex differences have also been found in brain responses to obesity. For example, men and women differ in the way they respond to food cues, suggesting that women have lower cognitive control of brain responses to food stimulation (Wang et al., 2009). In concordance with this finding, obese women have greater activation of brain regions regulating cognition and emotion in response to high calorie foods (Geliebter et al., 2013). Moreover, men have higher hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis activity to suppress food intake after consuming a meal (Martens et al., 2012), demonstrating that responses to food intake also exhibit sex differences. Finally, the adverse effects of obesity on the brain may be exaggerated in women, as one study found that although both sexes had axonal degeneration with obesity, only obese women showed a positive correlation between BMI, serum leptin levels, and myelin degeneration (Mueller et al., 2011). In summary, though there are no sex differences in rates of obesity, there appear to be significant differences in obesity-related outcomes and in brain responses between the sexes.

B. Experimental Studies

Experimental work in animal models has confirmed the existence of sex differences in obesity. Most studies have demonstrated that female rodents are protected against metabolic impairments associated with DIO. For example, despite similar inflammatory cytokine expression in adipose tissue, female mice had less infiltrating macrophages, later onset of glucose homeostasis impairments, better insulin sensitivity, and less fat deposition in the liver than did male mice (Medrikova et al., 2012). In another study, obese male mice had increased levels of inflammatory cytokines and macrophage infiltration in adipose tissue, whereas obese female mice had an increase in anti-inflammatory T cells in adipose tissue (Pettersson et al., 2012). Female rodents have greater expandability of adipocytes which may allow them to maintain insulin sensitivity in response to HFD (Amengual-Cladera et al., 2012; Medrikova et al., 2012). Additionally, female adipocytes have greater insulin sensitivity and lipid production, and higher levels of proteins involved in glucose and lipid metabolism (Macotela et al., 2009). Adipocytes of castrated male mice have increased insulin sensitivity and lipogenesis, whereas adipocytes from ovariectomized female mice have decreased lipogenesis (Macotela et al., 2009), pointing to the role of sex steroid hormones in sex differences in adipose tissue properties.

Females also appear to be protected against the adverse effects of HFD on the brain; male mice developed more metabolic and cognitive impairments and had alterations in hippocampal synaptic plasticity that female mice did not (Hwang et al., 2010). Moreover, in one mouse model of diabetes, the NSY mouse, 98% of males become diabetic by 48 weeks of age, versus only 31% of females (Ueda et al., 1995), and another study found that though both sexes became obese, only male rats lacking the leptin receptor developed T2D (Moralejo et al., 2010).

However, the opposite has also been demonstrated, in that female rats had a greater increase in body weight, despite having lower energy intake than males (Nadal-Casellas et al., 2012). Furthermore, obese female rats had reduced insulin signaling in brown adipose tissue, while males had increased mitochondrial function, which may have served to suppress oxidative damage and reduce insulin signaling impairments (Nadal-Casellas et al., 2012). Though a few studies have shown greater detrimental effects in females, the majority of research suggests that female rodents are protected against some aspects of obesity and related complications. As discussed below, evidence suggests that sex steroid hormones may be particularly important in regulating these sex differences.

C. Estrogens and Obesity

Sex differences in obesity may be partly accounted for by sex steroid hormones, and estrogens have a multitude of roles in obesity and metabolic syndrome. As mentioned previously, sex differences in fat storage are diminished after menopause, with postmenopausal women showing a shift from subcutaneous to visceral fat deposition (Brown and Clegg, 2010; Meyer et al., 2011; Shi and Clegg, 2009; White and Tchoukalova, 2014). A number of findings point to the role of a loss of estrogen in this shift after menopause. For example, aromatase is required for the conversion of androgens to estrogens, and both male and female mice lacking aromatase have increases in adiposity and insulin resistance (Jones et al., 2000; Takeda et al., 2003), which can be reversed by estrogen treatment (Takeda et al., 2003). Moreover, the main source of estrogens in postmenopausal women is the adipose tissue, where androgens are converted into estrogens. Interestingly, aromatase activity in adipose tissue increases with age as well as with obesity (Meyer et al., 2011). Estrogens also have a number of important roles in insulin homeostasis, including increasing the release of insulin from the islet of Langerhans, preventing β-cell apoptosis and improving insulin’s action (Meyer et al., 2011).

The effects of ovariectomy (OVX) and estrogen replacement in rodent models highlight the importance of estrogen in regulating adiposity, body weight, and metabolism. For instance, OVX mice were shown to have pancreatic beta cell dysfunction that could be reversed by hormone replacement (Bailey and Ahmed-Sorour, 1980). Both male and female aromatase knockout mice have a number of metabolic disturbances that can be restored with estrogen replacement (Simpson et al., 2005). Furthermore, one study found that estrogen replacement and exercise had additive beneficial effects in reversing the metabolic disturbances associated with OVX and HFD (Zoth et al., 2010). Thus, loss of ovarian hormones causes metabolic disturbances in both the presence and absence of HFD, which can be reversed by estrogen replacement.

In addition to its effects peripherally, estrogen signaling in brain is required for energy homeostasis. Specifically, estrogen receptor α (ERα) signaling is important in this regard, as both male and female mice knocked out for ERα have increased adiposity and metabolic disturbances even on a regular chow diet (Heine et al., 2000). Moreover, ERα signaling in hypothalamus appears to be especially crucial, as blocking ERα only in the ventromedial hypothalamus causes obesity, hyperphagia, and hyperglycemia in rodents (Musatov et al., 2007). Thus, estrogen has roles in adiposity, insulin homeostasis, body weight, and energy homeostasis.

D. Testosterone and obesity

Just as depletion of estrogens at menopause in women is associated with increased risk of obesity and metabolic syndrome, so too is the age-related decline of androgens in men. Low testosterone levels are associated with insulin resistance, metabolic syndrome, and development of T2D (Kapoor et al., 2007; 2005; Stellato et al., 2000; Zitzmann, 2009). Obesity, T2D, and metabolic syndrome are also associated with low testosterone levels in pre-pubertal (Mogri et al., 2013) and young men (Chandel et al., 2008; Goncharov et al., 2008).

There appears to be a bi-directional relationship between testosterone loss and obesity, such that low testosterone levels predispose to obesity, and obesity causes decreases in testosterone levels (De Maddalena et al., 2012; Grossmann et al., 2014). In accord with this idea, weight loss has been found to increase testosterone levels. For example, free testosterone levels increase in men after bariatric surgery and are associated with improved insulin and glucose sensitivity (Botella-Carretero et al., 2013), but men with low testosterone levels are at an increased risk of regaining weight (Wang et al., 2013). Conversely, testosterone supplementation can also lower risks of obesity and metabolic syndrome as long-term testosterone replacement in older men is often associated with reduced body weight, waist circumference, and BMI, and with a reduction in symptoms of metabolic syndrome (Yassin et al., 2014). Additionally, our lab has shown that loss of testosterone in male rodents exacerbates effects of DIO, whereas testosterone replacement protects against DIO-induced hyperglycemia and hyperinsulinemia (Jayaraman et al., 2014).

One mechanism by which obesity may contribute to testosterone loss is via excess adipose tissue. Levels of aromatase, which converts testosterone to estradiol, are high in adipose tissue (Meyer et al., 2011). Thus, increased adiposity would result in increased activity of aromatase and thereby increased metabolism of testosterone to estrogens (Blouin et al., 2006). Additionally, male mice maintained on HFD have decreased testosterone levels associated with apoptosis of Leydig cells in the testes and reduced testicular weight and function (Zhao et al., 2014). Thus, it is likely that both, increased metabolism of testosterone in adipose tissue and decreased testosterone production in the testes, are mechanisms by which obesity drives testosterone loss. Consistent with this possibility, obese men placed on caloric restriction have increased serum testosterone levels, due to both an improvement in testicular function and a decrease in the conversion of testosterone to estrogens in adipose tissue (Schulte et al., 2014). Moreover, testosterone inhibits adipogenesis, as testosterone supplementation has been found to inhibit pluripotent stem cells and pre-adipocytes from becoming adipocytes (White and Tchoukalova, 2014). These studies point to the existence of a vicious cycle in which low testosterone and obesity interact to promote development of both conditions.

4. Interactions between sex differences, obesity, and Alzheimer’s disease

A. Epidemiological studies

Although few studies have explored sex differences in the effects of obesity on AD risk, available evidence suggests that the adverse effects of obesity on cognition and AD risk are stronger in women than in men. One study found that only in women did obesity increase risk of AD, and diabetes increase risk of vascular dementia (Hayden et al., 2006). In contrast, Whitmer and colleagues found no sex differences in the association between BMI and AD risk (Whitmer et al., 2007). Many studies controlled for sex rather than examining sex differences (Debette et al., 2010; Exalto et al., 2014; Ho et al., 2010; Hughes et al., 2009; Isaac et al., 2011), suggesting that sex differences may be more prevalent than the literature currently reflects. Sex differences have also been demonstrated in the effects of obesity on blood brain barrier disruption (a risk factor for AD), with overweight and obese women, but not men, showing increased disruption (Gustafson et al., 2007). Interestingly, greater blood brain barrier disruption at old age correlates with availability of sex steroid hormones at middle age (Gustafson et al., 2007).

Independent of AD, sex differences are observed in the effects of obesity on age-related cognitive decline. Specifically, in contrast to the finding that obesity increases AD risk only in women; obesity, hypertension, and high adiposity were associated with cognitive decline in men but not in women (Elias et al., 2003; Kanaya et al., 2009). In addition, sex differences have been found in effects of obesity on brain structure, with obese men having gray matter loss and alterations not found in obese women (Taki et al., 2008). In contrast, increases in BMI have been associated with temporal lobe atrophy in women (Gustafson et al., 2004), and obesity is linked with myelin degeneration in women but not men (Mueller et al., 2011). Though the factors underlying the observed sex differences are unclear, the greater prevalence of vascular risk factors in men may indicate that men are more susceptible to the effects of obesity on vascular outcomes. In summary, findings on sex differences in the effects of obesity on AD, cognition, and brain structure are mixed, and future studies should address the role of sex in these relationships.

B. Experimental studies

The literature on sex differences in obesity and AD risk in experimental models is extremely limited, but studies have generally shown that male mice may be more sensitive to the effects of dietary manipulations. Our own lab has demonstrated that although both male and female AD transgenic mice become obese on HFD, only males exhibit significant ectopic fat accumulation, hyperglycemia, and hyperinsulinemia (Barron et al., 2013). Despite differential effects of HFD on metabolic outcomes, both males and females have increased Aβ deposition (Barron et al., 2013), suggesting that AD-related pathology is accelerated by other obesity-induced effects, perhaps including inflammation.

Though not directly related to AD risk, other studies in animal models have demonstrated that neural effects of obesity are generally more pronounced in males. For example, obese male mice have learning and memory impairments and reductions in synaptic plasticity that are not present in female mice (Hwang et al., 2010). Additionally, male mice have been shown to be more sensitive to the beneficial effects of diet. That is, male mice fed a rodent diet supplemented with phyto-nutrients and fish oils had improved working memory and hippocampal mitochondrial function, whereas female mice did not show improvements with diet supplementation (Wolf et al., 2012). A major limitation in our understanding of this issue is that most studies use only male rodents to examine dietary effects on brain changes and AD outcomes; thus, sex differences in obesity and cognitive decline/AD risk may be far more prevalent than currently assumed.

5. Mechanisms underlying sex differences in obesity and Alzheimer’s disease

A. Apolipoprotein ε 4

A.1. Apolipoprotein ε 4 and Alzheimer’s disease

Apolipoprotein E is a cholesterol transporter that has three isoforms that vary by a single amino acid: apoE ε2, ε3, and ε4, with the ε4 allele (apoE4) being the strongest genetic risk factor for AD (Corder et al., 1993; Saunders et al., 1993; Strittmatter et al., 1993). Only ~12% of the general population are apoE4 carriers (de-Andrade et al., 2000), yet its frequency increases to ~50% in AD patients (Ward et al., 2012). Moreover, the onset of AD occurs earlier in apoE4 carriers (Corder et al., 1993), and ~40% of healthy middle-aged versus ~8% of non-carriers have Aβ accumulation (Lathe et al., 2014; Liu et al., 2013). Apart from increasing AD risk, apoE4 is associated with greater cognitive decline over a 6 year period in healthy middle-aged adults (Blair et al., 2005). ApoE4 is also linked with greater AD-like pathology in mouse models, where it has been shown to potentiate oligomerization of Aβ (Belinson and Michaelson, 2009), and accelerate and worsen Aβ plaque formation (Youmans et al., 2012).

ApoE4 is also associated with changes in vascular pathology and in blood brain barrier function. Specifically, AD patients who are apoE4 carriers have greater arteriosclerosis and cerebral amyloid angiopathy (Premkumar et al., 1996; Yip et al., 2005), and though cerebral amyloid angiopathy is rare in the absence of AD, it is found in otherwise healthy homozygous ApoE4 carriers (Walker et al., 2000). Mice expressing human apoE4 have reduced cerebral vascularization at a young age and increased vascular atrophy at old age (Alata et al., 2015). Moreover, apoE4 is associated with increased blood brain barrier permeability and breakdown in both humans (Halliday et al., 2013) and in mouse models (Bell et al., 2012; Nishitsuji et al., 2011). Thus, apoE4 may be acting through several different mechanisms, including regulation of Aβ oligomerization and deposition, and disruption of the vasculature and the blood brain barrier.

Notably, carriers of one apoE4 allele have a ~30% lifetime risk of AD, meaning that a significant proportion of apoE4 carriers never develop the disease (Genin et al., 2011). Thus, apoE4 is neither necessary nor sufficient for AD. Consequently, apoE4 must interact with other risk factors, perhaps including obesity and diabetes, to influence AD risk.

A.2. Apolipoprotein ε4 and obesity

Abundant evidence indicates that apoE4 is a risk factor for several metabolic disturbances and adverse cardiovascular outcomes, including hypertension (Niu et al., 2009), increased systolic blood pressure and carotid artery thickness (Atabek et al., 2012), increased triglyceride and low density lipoprotein cholesterol levels (de-Andrade et al., 2000; Kypreos et al., 2009), decreased high density lipoprotein cholesterol levels (Zarkesh et al., 2012), and higher pancreatic islet amyloidosis in diabetic patients (Guan et al., 2013). Female apoE4 carriers have been found to have increased central adiposity (Oh et al., 2001) and frequency of apoE4 is increased in metabolic syndrome patients of either sex (Sima et al., 2007). Additionally, among obese men, those with apoE4 have higher insulin and glucose levels (Elosua et al., 2003; Marques-Vidal et al., 2003). In a DIO mouse model, apoE4 was associated with greater metabolic impairments and adipocyte hypertrophy (Arbones-Mainar et al., 2008). However, other studies fail to find a significant relationship between apoE4 and metabolic disturbances including insulin resistance (Meigs et al., 2000; Ragogna et al., 2011). The reason for these discordant findings is unclear, but may reflect the growing appreciation of gene-environment interactions in mediating the effects of apoE4 in aging and age-related diseases (Corella and Ordovas, 2014). For example, deleterious effects of apoE4 on heart disease risk and outcomes are preferentially observed in the context of high saturated fat diets (Corella et al., 2011; Yang et al., 2007).

A number of mechanisms that may underlie the association between obesity and apoE4 have been identified. For example, apoE isoforms have been shown to differentially interact with hormones important in nutrient sensing and homeostasis, including adiponectin (Arbones-Mainar et al., 2008) and leptin (Fewlass et al., 2004). Moreover, apoE acts in the hypothalamus to suppress food intake (Shen et al., 2008), but how this might differ by apoE genotype in not known. Importantly, apoE4 carriers have lower levels of hippocampal insulin degrading enzyme, which is also involved in Aβ clearance (Cook et al., 2003; Du et al., 2009; Edland, 2004). MCI patients with apoE4 have higher levels of the more toxic, lipid depleted Aβ, while all apoE4 carriers have an increase in lipid depleted apoE, which is less effective at clearing Aβ (Hanson et al., 2013). Interestingly, levels of lipid depleted Aβ are increased in the presence of a diet high in saturated fats and glycemic index, and decreased with a low saturated fat and glycemic index diet (Hanson et al., 2013).

As with cardiovascular disease, the combination of obesity and apoE4 may also affect AD outcomes. For example, mid-life obesity (Ghebranious et al., 2011) and high fat and calorie intake (Luchsinger et al., 2002), are associated with greater risk for AD only in apoE4 subjects. Men with both type 2 diabetes and the apoE4 allele have a 5.5 times greater risk of AD, as well as greater AD neuropathology than men with neither risk factor (Peila et al., 2002). Further, the relationship between obesity and diminished cognitive functions appears to be strongest in apoE4 carriers (Zade et al., 2013). Thus, gene-environment interactions between apoE4 and obesity appear to be important regulators of cognitive decline and AD risk.

A.3. Sex differences in apolipoprotein ε4, obesity, and Alzheimer’s disease

ApoE4 is the primary genetic risk factor for late-onset AD. Interestingly, the increased AD risk associated with apoE4 disproportionately affects women: AD risk is increased approximately 4-fold and 10-fold in women with one and two apoE4 alleles, respectively, whereas men show essentially no increased risk with one apoE4 allele and a 4-fold increase in risk with two apoE4 alleles (Payami et al., 1994). Additionally, female apoE4 carriers exhibit a significantly greater risk than male apoE4 carriers of converting to MCI, and from MCI to dementia (Altmann et al., 2014). ApoE4 is also more strongly linked to cognitive dysfunction (Beydoun et al., 2012) and brain atrophy (Holland et al., 2013; Liu et al., 2010) in women. Healthy older female, but not male, apoE4 carriers have decreased default mode network activity that is correlated with cerebrospinal fluid levels of tau protein (Damoiseaux et al., 2012). Similarly, female but not male apoE4 mice exhibit cognitive impairments (Raber et al., 2002).

The loss of estrogen at menopause appears to increase risk of AD, whereas estrogen treatments may be protective against AD (Pike et al., 2009). However, these relationships may vary depending on apoE genotype. For example, estrogen receptor polymorphisms have been associated with increased risk of AD but only in apoE4-carrying women (Fernandez-Martinez et al., 2013). Further, estrogen-based hormone therapy is associated with memory improvement and slower cognitive decline in non-apoE4 carriers, but not in apoE4-carrying women (Burkhardt et al., 2004; Yaffe et al., 2000). In fact, estradiol may have deleterious effects in the context of apoE4, as female AD patients with high estradiol and the apoE4 allele have an increase in neuropsychiatric symptoms (Xing et al., 2012). Adverse effects of estradiol and apoE4 have also been demonstrated in mice, where estrogen treatment in apoE2 and apoE3 mice reduced Aβ pathology, but increased pathology in apoE4 mice (Kunzler et al., 2014). How estradiol and apoE4 interact is unclear. Estradiol has been shown to increase apoE expression in astrocytes and microglia (Stone et al., 1997; Struble et al., 2007). The particular receptor it acts on may be important, as activation of estrogen receptor α up-regulates apoE expression, while activation of estrogen receptor β down-regulates apoE (Wang et al., 2006). One protective action of estradiol that is compromised by apoE4 is its ability to inhibit pro-inflammatory actions of microglia (Brown et al., 2008). In contrast to evidence that apoE4 may negate or even reverse the neural benefits of estradiol, other reports show that estrogen-based hormone therapy exerts cognitive benefits (Ryan et al., 2009), may reduce AD risk (Rippon et al., 2006), and slows cellular aging (Jacobs et al., 2013) in women with apoE4. Thus, although apoE4 is clearly associated with greater neural risk in women, the role of estradiol in this relationship remains unclear.

Like estrogen loss in women, age-related testosterone depletion in men is a risk factor for development of AD (Pike et al., 2009; Vest and Pike, 2013), and apoE4 interacts with the relationship between testosterone and AD. First, cognitively normal aged men that are apoE4 carriers exhibit significantly lower levels of testosterone than non-carriers (Hogervorst et al., 2002). Second, testosterone levels are inversely associated with hippocampal volume in middle-aged men with apoE4 (Panizzon et al., 2010), but positively correlated with verbal episodic memory (Panizzon et al., 2014). Conversely, one study reported testosterone levels were positively associated with cognitive performance in middle-aged men lacking apoE4, but negatively associated with performance in apoE4 carriers (Burkhardt et al., 2006); however, this study may have been limited by a small sample size. Interactions of androgens and apoE have also been demonstrated in mouse models. Androgens have reduced binding to the androgen receptor in the presence of apoE4 (Raber, 2004). Additionally, apoE4 but not apoE3 mice show cognitive impairments following testosterone depletion (Pfankuch et al., 2005) and pharmacological antagonism of the androgen receptor (Raber et al., 2002). Interestingly, androgen treatment also improves cognitive performance in female apoE4 mice (Raber et al., 2002). Collectively, the limited available data suggest that apoE4 and low testosterone are interactive risk factors for AD. As with estrogen-based hormone therapy in women, it remains unclear whether testosterone treatment in men could mitigate deleterious effects of apoE4. Also uncertain is whether obesity modulates interactions between apoE and sex steroid hormones in men and women.

B. Inflammation

B.1. Inflammation and Alzheimer’s disease

Multiple lines of evidence have established inflammation as a key component in the initiation and/or progression of AD pathogenesis (Wyss-Coray and Rogers, 2012). Aging, the most significant risk factor for late-onset AD, is associated with an increase in chronic inflammation (Singh and Newman, 2011). Age-associated increases in pro-inflammatory cytokines can increase Aβ levels, which in turn can activate microglia and astrocytes to perpetuate a cycle of inflammation and Aβ production (Blasko et al., 2004). Indeed, higher levels of circulating inflammatory cytokines are associated with increased risk of developing AD (Tan et al., 2007). In the central nervous system, pro-inflammatory cytokines including interleukin-1β (IL-1β), interleukin-6 (IL-6), and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) are upregulated in CSF even before detectable Aβ pathology (Avila-Muñoz and Arias, 2014; Eikelenboom et al., 2011). Moreover, higher levels of inflammatory cytokines are associated with greater cognitive decline (Rafnsson et al., 2007) and greater loss of entorhinal cortex volume (Avila-Muñoz and Arias, 2014), as well as greater loss of total brain volume than would be expected for a given age (Jefferson et al., 2007). Cerebral inflammation, independent of other AD pathology markers, predicts early death caused by dementia (Nägga et al., 2014).

The roles of heritability and environmental factors in the association between inflammation and AD have also been demonstrated. Recent genetic evidence links polymorphisms in several components of the immune system as risk factors for AD, including CD 33 (Bertram et al., 2008; Hollingworth et al., 2011; Naj et al., 2011), TREM2 (Kleinberger et al., 2014), clusterin, and CR1 (Harold et al., 2009; Lambert et al., 2009). Further, the production of IL-1β, TNF-α, and interferon γ in response to the pro-inflammatory stimulant lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is greater in children with a parental history of AD (van Exel et al., 2009). Environmental factors that increase inflammation are also implicated in promoting AD. Traumatic brain injury, for example, is associated with increased risk of AD, and chronic neuroinflammation has been suggested as a mediator of this relationship (Breunig et al., 2013). Increased inflammation in response to air pollution is well established, and even children living in highly polluted areas show increased pro-inflammatory cytokines in brain that correlate with Aβ and tau pathology (Calderón-Garcidueñas et al., 2012).

Activated microglia and astrocytes are found surrounding Aβ plaques in AD, and are associated with increased production of pro-inflammatory factors (Glass et al., 2010). Interestingly, response sites for NFκB, a major upstream regulator of inflammatory cytokine production, have been found in the promoters of genes involved in production of Aβ, and pro-inflammatory cytokines increase the expression of these Aβ-related genes in neurons (Glass et al., 2010; Sastre et al., 2008). LPS increases production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and Aβ in both wildtype mice (Brugg et al., 1995), and in AD-transgenic mice (Sheng et al., 2003). Conversely, anti-inflammatory treatments reduce Aβ production and Aβ plaque deposition (Yan et al., 2003) in rodent models and may have some efficacy in AD prevention (Zandi et al., 2002), although the literature in this area is mixed. The specific role of different components of neuroinflammation in AD pathogenesis is unclear, as some studies have found reduced Aβ pathology in response to increasing microglia (Boissonneault et al., 2009), whereas others have found that attenuating pro-inflammatory cascades decrease Aβ pathology (Heneka et al., 2013). Thus, some aspects of neuroinflammation appear to be beneficial while others are harmful, indicating a need for more research.

B.2. Obesity and inflammation

Strong links between obesity and chronic inflammation have been established over the last several years (Weisberg et al., 2003; Zeyda and Stulnig, 2009). Not only does obesity appear to drive inflammation, but chronic inflammation can also disrupt metabolic processes to further drive obesity (Thaler and M. W. Schwartz, 2010). For example, healthy men with high levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines in serum had an increased risk of weight gain over a 6 year period (Engström et al., 2003). Conversely, obese subjects placed on a very low calorie diet for 28 days had a decrease in pro- and an increase in anti-inflammatory cytokines (Clément et al., 2004), pointing to the role of diet in the association between obesity and inflammation. In fact, saturated fatty acids have been shown to induce secretion of pro-inflammatory factors in culture (Gupta et al., 2012), whereas polyunsaturated fatty acids improve obesity-associated inflammation (Liu et al., 2013). Inflammation also contributes to insulin resistance (McNelis and Olefsky, 2014), a central feature of the metabolic syndrome. For example, signaling through the inflammatory NFκB pathway can result in insulin resistance peripherally (Arkan et al., 2005), as well as leptin and insulin resistance in the hypothalamus (García-Cáceres et al., 2013). Thus, inflammatory cascades associated with obesity are widely believed to contribute to the relationship between obesity and development of metabolic syndrome and T2D.

Obesity is also associated with central nervous system inflammation. For example, a high fat diet has been linked with a 30% increase in immune cell infiltration into the brain (Buckman et al., 2014). Inflammation in the hypothalamus is a central feature of obesity and high fat diets (De Souza et al., 2005; Milanski et al., 2009; Thaler et al., 2012). In fact, hypothalamic inflammation precedes diet-induced obesity since it is present after even a few days of high fat diet consumption (Thaler and Schwartz, 2010), and neonatally fed mice show preservation of an increased inflammatory response in hypothalamus even in adulthood (Ziko et al., 2014). Furthermore, there are also significant interactions between the hypothalamus and periphery in diet-induced obesity and inflammation. Administering anti-inflammatory antibodies into brains of obese rats led to decreased hypothalamic inflammation, increased leptin sensitivity in hypothalamus, and increased insulin sensitivity in liver, along with restoring liver glucose production (Milanski et al., 2012), demonstrating that manipulating central inflammation has direct effects on the periphery.

A relationship between obesity, inflammation, and cognition has also been established (Freeman et al., 2014). An increase in inflammatory markers in subjects with metabolic syndrome predicted subsequent cognitive decline (Yaffe et al., 2003). Subjects with both metabolic syndrome and high levels inflammation had the worst cognitive performance (Dik et al., 2007). Interestingly, one study found that cognitive performance improved and inflammation decreased after bariatric surgery, though the two did not correlate (Hawkins et al., 2014). Similar findings have been reported in rodent models. For example, levels of the pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-1β correlated with adiposity and cognitive impairment in the db/db mouse model of obesity (Erion et al., 2014). Moreover, treatment with an IL-1β antagonist prevented obesity-associated cognitive impairments and synaptic dysfunction (Erion et al., 2014). Finally, associations between obesity and inflammation have been shown in the context of neuropsychiatric disorders such as depression, in both humans (Castanon et al., 2014; Soczynska et al., 2010; Viscogliosi et al., 2012), and in mice (André et al., 2014).

Moreover, the hypothalamus has been proposed to play a central role in the relationship between obesity, inflammation, and cognition. That is, inflammatory cytokines and infiltrating immune cells are thought to act in hypothalamus to activate local inflammation. This inflammation then causes synaptic remodeling and degeneration in hypothalamus, thereby affecting any regions to which the hypothalamus projects, including brain regions important in cognition (Miller and Spencer, 2014). Additionally, greater hypothalamic damage was associated with higher levels of inflammatory cytokines and worse cognitive performance in obese subjects (Puig et al., 2015).

Thus, there is strong evidence linking obesity with both peripheral and central inflammation, and with downstream effects including insulin resistance and development of the metabolic syndrome, and cognitive impairments. The short-term inflammatory effects of dietary components are likely to have different effects from the long-term chronic inflammation associated with obesity, though both aspects of the inflammatory cascade are likely important.

B.3. Sex differences in inflammation, obesity, and Alzheimer’s disease

The role of inflammation in obesity is observed in both males and females, but there are significant sex differences in obesity-induced inflammatory responses. For example, several studies point to greater inflammation in response to obesity in women than in men (Ahonen et al., 2012; Khera et al., 2009; Mascarenhas-Melo et al., 2013; Petty et al., 2010; Rudnicka et al., 2011). Higher levels of inflammation also correlate more strongly with risk of T2D in women than in men, independent of BMI or adiposity (Thorand et al., 2007). Interestingly, non-diabetic premenopausal women are protected against metabolic disease and inflammation, but this protective effect is lost in the presence of either, T2D or menopause (Mascarenhas-Melo et al., 2013). Thus, it appears that obesity not only induces a greater inflammatory response in women, but higher levels of inflammation are also associated with an increased risk of metabolic disturbances, including T2D, in women.

Though no studies have directly examined sex differences in inflammation in the context of AD, a few studies have evaluated this relationship in terms of cognitive performance. Some research suggests that this relationship is stronger in women. For example, high inflammation was associated with poor cognitive performance in women but not men (Canon and Crimmins, 2011; Trollor et al., 2011). Similarly, another study found a correlation between high inflammation and mild cognitive impairment only in women (Trollor et al., 2010). In contrast, men may be vulnerable to other neural consequences of neuroinflammation. In support of this idea, the association between inflammatory cytokines and decreased brain volume is reportedly stronger in men (Jefferson et al., 2007). In an AD transgenic mouse model, the immune system is more impaired in male versus female mice (Giménez-Llort et al., 2008). Overall, findings point to increased inflammation in response to obesity in females, as well as a greater association between inflammation and cognitive decline in women. These sex differences may be mediated in part by sex steroid hormones, as estrogens and androgens are known to modulate inflammation (Spence and Voskuhl, 2012; Tsilidis et al., 2013).

The anti-inflammatory role of estrogens has been well established in the literature (Arevalo et al., 2010; Ritzel et al., 2013), but this effect may be especially important in the context of obesity. For example, estradiol has been demonstrated to have anti-inflammatory effects in adipose tissue, neurons, and in the cardiovascular system, that may protect these tissues from the pro-inflammatory effects of high fat diet and obesity (Brown and Clegg, 2010). In support of this idea, ovariectomized female mice and males show higher weight gain on high fat diet, whereas mice treated with estrogen do not develop adipocyte hypertrophy nor adipose tissue inflammation, and are protected against liver steatosis and insulin resistance (Stubbins et al., 2011). Moreover, estrogen exerts its anti-inflammatory actions via ERα, as demonstrated by the fact that mice lacking ERα have increased adipose tissue inflammation even before obesity (Davis et al., 2013). Interestingly, mice lacking ERα specifically in adipocytes also have increased inflammation, and this is especially true in male mice (Davis et al., 2013). Pregnant mice on high fat diet show decreases in visceral adipose hypertrophy, inflammation, and less glucose intolerance during late gestation, a time that correlates with increases in visceral adipose tissue ERα signaling (Pedroni et al., 2014). The role of estrogens in inflammation is further supported by the fact that both ERα and ERβ are found on monocytes and macrophages, and estrogens act on these receptors to block pro-inflammatory responses (Vegeto et al., 2003). Additionally, estrogens modulate inflammation in the context of AD, such that ovariectomized mice have increased microglial reactivity around Aβ plaques, but this is reversed by estradiol treatment (Vegeto et al., 2008).

Like estrogens, androgens also have anti-inflammatory effects that may be important in the context of obesity and AD. Numerous studies have found that testosterone levels in men are inversely associated with C-reactive protein (CRP) (Kupelian et al., 2010; Tsilidis et al., 2013; Zhang et al., 2012). Even in young men, clinically low testosterone levels are associated with increased expression of TNFα and other inflammatory factors (Bobjer et al., 2013). Older men with androgen deficiency have higher levels of inflammatory cytokines (Maggio et al., 2006), which are reduced by testosterone treatment (Malkin et al., 2004). Moreover, low testosterone levels were shown to correlate with increased mortality, independent of metabolic syndrome, diabetes, or cardiovascular disease, but dependent on levels of the inflammatory enzymes, IL-6 and CRP (Laughlin et al., 2008), pointing to the interplay between androgens and inflammation. Experimental evidence suggests that androgens can reduce indices of inflammation (Norata et al., 2006; Schwinge et al., 2015). There is some evidence that testosterone treatment in aging men can lower inflammatory markers such as CRP (Giltay et al., 2008; Kalinchenko et al., 2010), though efficacy remains to be firmly established.

Testosterone and inflammation have also been demonstrated to interact in the context of obesity. Men with low testosterone are more likely to have metabolic syndrome and high levels of CRP (Laaksonen et al., 2003). In men with metabolic syndrome, lower levels of testosterone were associated with higher levels of IL-6 (Gautier et al., 2013). Similarly, men with T2D also have lower testosterone and higher CRP levels (Bhatia et al., 2006). In animal models, inflammatory effects of obesity can be attenuated by testosterone treatment (Vignozzi et al., 2011). Research on the association of testosterone and inflammation in AD are limited, however, one study demonstrated that men with AD have lower testosterone and luteinizing hormone levels, the latter of which inversely correlate with levels of TNFα (Butchart et al., 2013). Our lab recently demonstrated that testosterone depletion exacerbates metabolic, pro-inflammatory, and peripheral nerve injury outcomes of DIO in male mice, effects that were reversed by testosterone treatment (Jayaraman et al., 2014). Moreover, we have found that DIO-induced increases in Aβ levels are associated with neuroinflammation, exacerbated by testosterone loss, and prevented by testosterone treatment (unpublished observations). Thus, the anti-inflammatory effects of testosterone are likely to be important in the relationship between obesity and AD.

C. Interactions between inflammation and apoE in obesity and AD

In addition to being independent factors in AD pathogenesis, apoE4 and inflammation also have important interactions with each other and with obesity (Figure 1). One established function of apoE is regulation of inflammation. In support of this role, glia from apoE knock-out mice exhibit increased pro-inflammatory responses after exposures to Aβ (LaDu et al., 2001) and LPS (Lynch et al., 2001). Importantly, apoE isoforms differ in their inflammatory effects. That is, apoE4 is associated with greater levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines, both in humans (Colton et al., 2004; Gale et al., 2014) and in mouse models (Colton et al., 2004; Lynch et al., 2003; Ophir et al., 2005; Vitek et al., 2009). Interestingly, apoE4 carriers have lower expression of apoE and, as young adults, increased levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines that decrease with age, though this study may be limited by a small sample size (Ringman et al., 2012). However, apoE can also take on a pro-inflammatory role when overproduced by activated microglia, and this pro-inflammatory response is stronger in the presence of apoE4 than apoE3 (Guo et al., 2004). Additionally, LPS stimulation in the presence of apoE4 is associated with increased endoplasmic reticulum stress and macrophage cell death (Cash et al., 2012), greater neuron damage (Maezawa et al., 2006a), and failure to regenerate dendrites (Maezawa et al., 2006b). Effects of apoE on inflammation may vary by cell type, as one study found that apoE3 astrocytes displayed increased astrogliosis after LPS, while apoE4 astrocytes had no response (Ophir et al., 2003). Thus, apoE appears to be an important regulator of inflammatory processes, with apoE4 generally having a more pro-inflammatory effect than apoE3.

The relationship between apoE and inflammation is also important in the context of AD (Keene et al., 2011). Among AD patients, those with the apoE4 allele had greater baseline and stimulated levels of IL-1β (Olgiati et al., 2010). ApoE co-localizes with microglia around Aβ plaques (Liu et al., 2013), and apoE4 mice have greater microgliosis and astrogliosis in response to Aβ than do apoE3 mice (Belinson and Michaelson, 2009). Additionally, mice with both human apoE4 and familial AD mutations have higher levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines and increased microglial reactivity surrounding Aβ plaques than do their apoE3 counterparts (Rodriguez et al., 2014). Further, apoE4 macrophages are less effective at clearing Aβ (Zhao et al., 2009). ApoE4, but not apoE2 or apoE3, activates a pro-inflammatory factor in pericytes that causes blood brain barrier breakdown (Bell et al., 2012). Thus, apoE4’s pro-inflammatory actions may contribute to the finding that apoE4 carriers have increased blood brain barrier breakdown (Halliday et al., 2013). Interestingly, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs have been found to reduce risk for AD only in apoE4 carriers (Barger and Harmon, 1997; Schram et al., 2007), reinforcing the possibility of significant interactions between apoE4 and inflammation in AD.

The interplay between apoE and inflammation in the context of obesity has not been well studied. Unfortunately, available evidence is inconsistent. Several studies indicate that apoE knockout mice show reduced gains in fat mass and body weight in response to HFD (Arbones-Mainar et al., 2008; Bartelt et al., 2010; Pereira et al., 2012; Wang et al., 2012). Nonetheless, how apoE status affects obesity-associated inflammation is unclear, as one study reported that apoE knockout mice show a stronger pro-inflammatory response in adipose tissue than wildtype mice (Pereira et al., 2012), whereas another study found that apoE knockout mice on HFD have lower levels of inflammatory cytokines in adipose tissue and skeletal muscle (Wang et al., 2012). Interestingly, apoE4 mice fed a HFD are more susceptible to motor deficits after stroke, and this is accompanied by increased inflammation (Dhungana et al., 2013). Overall, the literature demonstrates an interaction between apoE and obesity, but more research is needed to clarify how this relationship affects inflammation.

Interestingly, there appear to be sex differences in the interactions between apoE and inflammation. For example, among nonagenarians, those who carry the apoE4 allele have lower levels of the inflammatory marker CRP, an outcome that is more robust in women (Rontu et al., 2006). Experimental work in animal models has also found sex differences in this regard, with apoE4 being associated with a greater pro-inflammatory response in males but not in females (Colton et al., 2005), suggesting that apoE4 carrying males may have an exaggerated inflammatory response. In addition, female apoE4 mice are less responsive to the anti-inflammatory effects of 17-β-estradiol (Brown et al., 2008), and male apoE4 mice are less responsive to the anti-inflammatory effects of DHT (Brown et al., 2007). Thus, both male and female apoE4 carriers may be less responsive to the anti-inflammatory effects of sex steroid hormones (Brown et al., 2008; 2007).

6. Conclusions

As reviewed in this article, there are significant sex differences in obesity and AD, as well as in mechanisms that may be underlying these disease processes (see Table 1 for a summary of sex differences in the AD risk factors discussed in this article). For one, obesity, and specifically central adiposity at midlife are significant risk factors for AD later in life (Emmerzaal et al., 2015; Fitzpatrick et al., 2009; Meng et al., 2014; Profenno et al., 2010; Xu et al., 2011). This relationship may be especially important for women, as women are both more at risk for AD (Li and Singh, 2014), and experience an increase in central adiposity at menopause (Meyer et al., 2011; Sugiyama and Agellon, 2012). While there exists some evidence of sex differences in obesity-associated AD risk (Barron et al., 2013; Hwang et al., 2010; Wolf et al., 2012), results are inconclusive and more work is needed to determine the nature of this relationship. Two factors that may be mechanistically important in the relationship between obesity and AD are apoE4 and inflammation. First, apoE4 is a risk factor for AD (Saunders et al., 1993; Strittmatter et al., 1993) and may contribute to obesity-related complications and metabolic syndrome (de-Andrade et al., 2000; Niu et al., 2009; Sima et al., 2007). Moreover, sex differences exist in the effects of apoE, with the apoE4-associated risk of AD being significantly higher in women (Altmann et al., 2014; Payami et al., 1994). Chronic inflammation is associated with both AD (Glass et al., 2010) and obesity (Engström et al., 2003; Yaffe et al., 2003) and several studies have demonstrated that the pro-inflammatory effects of obesity are stronger in women (Ahonen et al., 2012; Khera et al., 2009; Mascarenhas-Melo et al., 2013; Rudnicka et al., 2011). Finally, apoE and inflammation also interact with each other, such that apoE4 is associated with greater pro-inflammatory responses (Cash et al., 2012; Colton et al., 2004; Gale et al., 2014; Lynch et al., 2003). In summary, apoE4 and inflammation are important factors in the association between obesity and AD, and their differing actions in males and females may be significant in explaining sex differences in these conditions.

Though this article has focused mainly on apoE4 and inflammation as mechanisms underlying sex differences in obesity and AD, a number of other factors may also play important roles in this relationship. Vascular factors including blood brain barrier breakdown, are associated with both, obesity and AD. As previously discussed, a link between the blood brain barrier, inflammation and apoE4 was recently discovered. That is, apoE4 is associated with increased inflammation around pericytes that then leads to blood brain barrier breakdown (Halliday et al., 2013; Zlokovic, 2013). Though sex differences in blood brain barrier function are unknown, it has been established that men are at increased risk of a number of cardiovascular risk factors (Crea et al., 2015). Thus, it may be the case that, though obesity is a risk factor for AD in both men and women, there may be different pathways between the sexes through which obesity acts to influence AD risk. For example, several studies point to women having greater inflammation in response to obesity, whereas obese men have more cardiovascular risk factors. Yet, both inflammation and vascular risk factors are associated with AD, such that obesity may use different signaling pathways in men and women to drive AD pathogenesis. Moreover, apoE4 will also interact with these pathways and its interactions are likely to vary between the sexes.

Though a number of genetic and environmental risk factors for sporadic AD have been identified, none of these is conclusive in predicting who will develop the disease. Even amongst those who carry the apoE4 allele, there is only a 30% lifetime risk of AD (Genin 2011), so that a number of other factors must also influence risk. Research has generally focused on examining risk factors in isolation, however, AD is a multifactorial disease. Continuing AD research must consider not only the interactions between genetic and environmental factors, but also how these are differentially affected by sex.

This work was supported by NIA grants AG034103 (CJP) and AG026572 (RD Brinton and CJP/Project 3).

Figure 1 Interactions between obesity, apoE4 and inflammation in Alzheimer’s disease

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) risk and pathology are increased by a number of factors and pathways, many of which interact with each other. As diagrammed here and described in the text, apoE4 and obesity independently increase AD risk as well as inflammation, which also contributes to AD risk. Moreover, apoE4 carriers have been shown to be more at risk for a number of obesity-related complications, including increased adiposity, metabolic disturbances, and cardiovascular risk. Thus, apoE4 and obesity appear to both independently and cooperatively increase inflammation and AD risk.

Table 1 Sex differences in the Alzheimer’s disease risk factors obesity, apolipoprotein E (apoE4), and inflammation.

AD risk factor	Sex differences	
Males	Females	
Obesity	Reduced by testosterone
Causes greater visceral fat deposits
Causes stronger metabolic and neurological effects in male rodents	Reduced by estrogens
Causes greater subcutaneous fat deposits
Food cues cause greater neural activation
Increased risk of obesity after menopause	
ApoE4	Alzheimer risk increased ~4X by two apoE4 alleles
Lower testosterone in apoE4 carriers
Testosterone has beneficial cognitive effects in apoE4 humans and rodents	Alzheimer risk increased ~4X by one apoE4 alleles and ~10X by two apoE4 alleles
Greater increase in cognitive decline
Estrogen may not be beneficial in apoE4-carrying women	
Inflammation	Reduced by testosterone
Inflammatory effects of obesity attenuated by testosterone	Reduced by estrogens
Increased obesity associated with greater inflammation in women	

Highlights

Sex and obesity independently and interactively affect Alzheimer’s disease.

Alzheimer’s disease risk is increased by both apolipoprotein E and inflammation.

Sex and obesity interactions may involve apolipoprotein E and inflammation.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


Adler-Wailes DC Periwal V Ali AH Brady SM McDuffie JR Uwaifo GI Tanofsky-Kraff M Salaita CG Hubbard VS Reynolds JC Chow CC Sumner AE Yanovski JA 2013 Sex-Associated Differences in Free Fatty Acid Flux of Obese Adolescents J Clin Endocr Metab 98 1676 1684 23450055
Ahonen T Vanhala M Kautiainen H Kumpusalo E Saltevo J 2012 Sex Differences in the Association of Adiponectin and Low-Grade Inflammation With Changes in the Body Mass Index From Youth to Middle Age GENM 9 1 8
Alata W Ye Y St-Amour I Vandal M Calon F 2015 Human apolipoprotein E _4 expression impairs cerebral vascularization and blood-brain barrier function in mice J Cerebr Blood F Met 35 86 94
Altmann A Tian L Henderson VW Greicius MD Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative Investigators 2014 Sex modifies the APOE-related risk of developing Alzheimer disease Ann Neurol 75 563 573 24623176
Amengual-Cladera E Lladó I Gianotti M Proenza AM 2012 Sex differences in the effect of high-fat diet feeding on rat white adipose tissue mitochondrial function and insulin sensitivity Metabolis 61 1108 1117
Amtul Z Westaway D Cechetto DF Rozmahel RF 2010 Oleic Acid Ameliorates Amyloidosis in Cellular and Mouse Models of Alzheimer’s Disease Brain Pathol 21 321 329 21040071
André C Dinel AL Ferreira G Layé S Castanon N 2014 Diet-induced obesity progressively alters cognition, anxiety-like behavior and lipopolysaccharide-induced depressive-like behavior: focus on brain indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase activation Brain Behav Immun 41 10 21 24681251
Arbones-Mainar JM Johnson LA Altenburg MK Maeda N 2008 Differential modulation of diet-induced obesity and adipocyte functionality by human apolipoprotein E3 and E4 in mice Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord 32 1595 1605
Arevalo MA Santos-Galindo M Bellini MJ Azcoitia I Garcia-Segura LM 2010 Actions of estrogens on glial cells: Implications for neuroprotection Biochem Biophys Acta 1800 1106 1112 19818384
Arkan MC Hevener AL Greten FR Maeda S Li ZW Long JM Wynshaw-Boris A Poli G Olefsky J Karin M 2005 IKK-beta links inflammation to obesity-induced insulin resistance Nat Med 11 191 198 15685170
Atabek ME Özkul Y Eklioğlu BS Kurtoğlu S Baykara M 2012 Association between apolipoprotein E polymorphism and subclinic atherosclerosis in patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus J Clin Res Pediatr Endocrinol 4 8 13 22394699
Avila-Muñoz E Arias C 2014 When astrocytes become harmful: functional and inflammatory responses that contribute to Alzheimer’s disease Ageing Res Rev 18 29 40 25078115
Bailey CJ Ahmed-Sorour H 1980 Role of ovarian hormones in the long-term control of glucose homeostasis. Effects of insulin secretion Diabetologia 19 475 481 7004967
Barger SW Harmon AD 1997 Microglial activation by Alzheimer amyloid precursor protein and modulation by apolipoprotein E Nature 388 878 881 9278049
Barnard ND Bunner AE Agarwal U 2014 Saturated and trans fats and dementia: a systematic review Neurobiol Aging 35 S65 S73 24916582
Barron AM Rosario ER Elteriefi R Pike CJ 2013 Sex-Specific Effects of High Fat Diet on Indices of Metabolic Syndrome in 3xTg-AD Mice: Implications for Alzheimer’s Disease PLoS ONE 8 e78554 24205258
Bartelt A Beil FT Schinke T Roeser K Ruether W Heeren J Niemeier A 2010 Apolipoprotein E-dependent inverse regulation of vertebral bone and adipose tissue mass in C57Bl/6 mice: Modulation by diet-induced obesity Bone 47 736 745 20633710
Belinson H Michaelson DM 2009 ApoE4-dependent Aβ-mediated neurodegeneration is associated with inflammatory activation in the hippocampus but not the septum J Neural Transm 116 1427 1434 19370389
Bell RD 2012 The imbalance of vascular molecules in Alzheimer’s disease J Alzheimers Dis 32 699 709 22850315
Bell RD Winkler EA Singh I Sagare AP Deane R Wu Z Holtzman DM Betsholtz C Armulik A Sallstrom J Berk BC Zlokovic BV 2012 Apolipoprotein E controls cerebrovascular integrity via cyclophilin A Nature 485 512 516 22622580
Bell RD Zlokovic BV 2009 Neurovascular mechanisms and blood–brain barrier disorder in Alzheimer’s disease Acta Neuropathol 118 103 113 19319544
Benito-León J Mitchell AJ Hernández-Gallego J Bermejo-Pareja F 2013 Obesity and impaired cognitive functioning in the elderly: a population-based cross-sectional study (NEDICES) Eur J Neurol 20 899 e77 23323838
Bertram L Lange C Mullin K Parkinson M Hsiao M Hogan MF Schjeide BMM Hooli B DiVito J Ionita I Jiang H Laird N Moscarillo T Ohlsen KL Elliott K Wang X Hu-Lince D Ryder M Murphy A Wagner SL Blacker D Becker KD Tanzi RE 2008 Genome-wide association analysis reveals putative Alzheimer’s disease susceptibility loci in addition to APOE Am J Hum Genet 83 623 632 18976728
Besser LM Gill DP Monsell SE Brenowitz W Meranus DH Kukull W Gustafson DR 2014 Body mass index, weight change, and clinical progression in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer disease Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 28 36 43 24126214
Beydoun MA Boueiz A Abougergi MS Kitner-Triolo MH Beydoun HA Resnick SM O’Brien R Zonderman AB 2012 Sex differences in the association of the apolipoprotein E epsilon 4 allele with incidence of dementia, cognitive impairment, and decline Neurobiol Aging 33 720 731 20619505
Bhatia V Chaudhuri A Tomar R Dhindsa S Ghanim H Dandona P 2006 Low Testosterone and High C-Reactive Protein Concentrations Predict Low Hematocrit in Type 2 Diabetes Diabetes Care 29 2289 2294 17003308
Biessels GJ Staekenborg S Brunner E Brayne C Scheltens P 2006 Risk of dementia in diabetes mellitus: a systematic review Lancet Neurol 5 64 74 16361024
Blair CK Folsom AR Knopman DS Bray MS Mosley TH Boerwinkle E Boerwinkle E 2005 APOE genotype and cognitive decline in a middle-aged cohort Neurology 64 268 276 15668424
Blasko I Beer R Bigl M Apelt J Franz G Rudzki D Ransmayr G Kampfl A Schliebs R 2004 Experimental traumatic brain injury in rats stimulates the expression, production and activity of Alzheimer’s disease beta-secretase (BACE-1) J Neural Transm 111 523 536 15057522
Blázquez G Cañete T Tobeña A Giménez-Llort L Fernández-Teruel A 2014 Cognitive and emotional profiles of aged Alzheimer’s disease (3xTgAD) mice: Effects of environmental enrichment and sexual dimorphism Behav Brain Res 268 185 201 24746486
Bloor ID Symonds ME 2014 Sexual dimorphism in white and brown adipose tissue with obesity and inflammation Horm Behav 66 95 103 24589990
Blouin K Richard C Brochu G Hould FS Lebel S Marceau S Biron S Luu-The V Tchernof A 2006 Androgen inactivation and steroid-converting enzyme expression in abdominal adipose tissue in men J Endocrinol 191 637 649 17170221
Bobjer J Katrinaki M Tsatsanis C Lundberg Giwercman Y Giwercman A 2013 Negative Association between Testosterone Concentration and Inflammatory Markers in Young Men: A Nested Cross-Sectional Study PLoS ONE 8 e61466 23637840
Boissonneault V Filali M Lessard M Relton J Wong G Rivest S 2009 Powerful beneficial effects of macrophage colony-stimulating factor on beta-amyloid deposition and cognitive impairment in Alzheimer’s disease Brain 132 1078 1092 19151372
Botella-Carretero JI Balsa JA Gómez-Martin JM Peromingo R Huerta L Carrasco M Arrieta F Zamarron I Martin-Hidalgo A Vazquez C 2013 Circulating free testosterone in obese men after bariatric surgery increases in parallel with insulin sensitivity J Endocrinol Invest 36 227 232 22732238
Breunig JJ Guillot-Sestier MV Town T 2013 Brain injury, neuroinflammation and Alzheimer’s disease Front Aging Neurosci 5 26 23874297
Brown BM Peiffer JJ Martins RN 2013 Multiple effects of physical activity on molecular and cognitive signs of brain aging: can exercise slow neurodegeneration and delay Alzheimer’s disease? Mol Psychiatry 18 864 874 23164816
Brown CM Choi E Xu Q Vitek MP Colton CA 2008 The APOE4 genotype alters the response of microglia and macrophages to 17β-estradiol Neurobiol Aging 29 1783 1794 17553597
Brown CM Xu Q Okhubo N Vitek MP Colton CA 2007 Androgen-Mediated Immune Function Is Altered by the Apolipoprotein E Gene Endocrinology 148 3383 3390 17395708
Brown LM Clegg DJ 2010 Central effects of estradiol in the regulation of food intake, body weight, and adiposity J Steroid Biochem 122 65 73
Brugg B Dubreuil YL Huber G Wollman EE Delhaye-Bouchaud N Mariani J 1995 Inflammatory processes induce beta-amyloid precursor protein changes in mouse brain Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 92 3032 3035 7708769
Buckman LB Hasty AH Flaherty DK Buckman CT Thompson MM Matlock BK Weller K Ellacott KLJ 2014 Obesity induced by a high-fat diet is associated with increased immune cell entry into the central nervous system Brain Behav Immun 35 33 42 23831150
Burkhardt MS Foster JK Clarnette RM Chubb SAP Bruce DG Drummond PD Martins RN Yeap BB 2006 Interaction between Testosterone and Apolipoprotein E ε4 Status on Cognition in Healthy Older Men J Clin Endocr Metab 91 1168 1172 16368754
Burkhardt MS Foster JK Laws SM Baker LD Craft S Gandy SE Stuckey BGA Clarnette R Nolan D Hewson-Bower B Martins RN 2004 Oestrogen replacement therapy may improve memory functioning in the absence of APOE epsilon4 J Alzheimers Dis 6 221 228 15201477
Butchart J Birch B Bassily R Wolfe L Holmes C 2013 Male sex hormones and systemic inflammation in Alzheimer disease Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 27 153 156 22596080
Calderón-Garcidueñas L Kavanaugh M Block M D’Angiulli A Delgado-Chávez R Torres-Jardón R González-Maciel A Reynoso-Robles R Osnaya N Villarreal-Calderon R Guo R Hua Z Zhu H Perry G Diaz P 2012 Neuroinflammation, hyperphosphorylated tau, diffuse amyloid plaques, and down-regulation of the cellular prion protein in air pollution exposed children and young adults J Alzheimers Dis 28 93 107 21955814
Canon ME Crimmins EM 2011 Sex differences in the association between muscle quality, inflammatory markers, and cognitive decline J Nutr Health Aging 15 695 698 21968867
Cao D Lu H Lewis TL Li L 2007 Intake of Sucrose-sweetened Water Induces Insulin Resistance and Exacerbates Memory Deficits and Amyloidosis in a Transgenic Mouse Model of Alzheimer Disease J Biol Chem 282 36275 36282 17942401
Carroll JC Rosario ER Chang L Stanczyk FZ Oddo S LaFerla FM Pike CJ 2007 Progesterone and Estrogen Regulate Alzheimer-Like Neuropathology in Female 3xTg-AD Mice J Neurosci 27 13357 13365 18045930
Carroll JC Rosario ER Kreimer S Villamagna A Gentzschein E Stanczyk FZ Pike CJ 2010 Sex differences in β-amyloid accumulation in 3xTg-AD mice: Role of neonatal sex steroid hormone exposure Brain Res 1366 233 245 20934413
Carvalho C Katz PS Dutta S Katakam PV Moreira PI Busija DW 2014 Increased susceptibility to amyloid-β toxicity in rat brain microvascular endothelial cells under hyperglycemic conditions J Alzheimers Dis 38 75 83 23948922
Cash JG Kuhel DG Basford JE Jaeschke A Chatterjee TK Weintraub NL Hui DY 2012 Apolipoprotein E4 impairs macrophage efferocytosis and potentiates apoptosis by accelerating endoplasmic reticulum stress J Biol Chem 287 27876 27884 22730380
Castanon N Lasselin J Capuron L 2014 Neuropsychiatric comorbidity in obesity: role of inflammatory processes Front Endocrinol 5 74 74
Chandel A Dhindsa S Topiwala S Chaudhuri A Dandona P 2008 Testosterone Concentration in Young Patients With Diabetes Diabetes Care 31 2013 2017 18650372
Cherry JD Olschowka JA O Banion MK 2014 Neuroinflammation and M2 microglia: the good, the bad, and the inflamed J Neuroinflamm 11 98
Clément K Viguerie N Poitou C Carette C Pelloux V Curat CA Sicard A Rome S Benis A Zucker JD Vidal H Laville M Barsh GS Basdevant A Stich V Cancello R Langin D 2004 Weight loss regulates inflammation-related genes in white adipose tissue of obese subjects FASEB J 18 1657 1669 15522911
Colton CA Brown CM Vitek MP 2005 Sex steroids, APOE genotype and the innate immune system Neurobiol Aging 26 363 372 15639315
Colton CA Needham LK Brown C Cook D Rasheed K Burke JR Strittmatter WJ Schmechel DE Vitek MP 2004 APOE genotype-specific differences in human and mouse macrophage nitric oxide production J Neuroimmunol 147 62 67 14741429
Cook DG Leverenz JB McMillan PJ Kulstad JJ Ericksen S Roth RA Schellenberg GD Jin LW Kovacina KS Craft S 2003 Reduced hippocampal insulin-degrading enzyme in late-onset Alzheimer’s disease is associated with the apolipoprotein E-ε4 allele Am J Pathol 162 313 319 12507914
Corder EH Saunders AM Strittmatter WJ Schmechel DE Gaskell PC Small GW Roses AD Haines JL Pericak-Vance MA 1993 Gene dose of apolipoprotein E type 4 allele and the risk of Alzheimer’s disease in late onset families Science 261 921 923 8346443
Corella D Ordovas JM 2014 Aging and cardiovascular diseases: the role of gene-diet interactions Ageing Res Rev 18 53 73 25159268
Corella D Portolés O Arriola L Chirlaque MD Barrricarte A Francés F Huerta JM Larrañaga N Martínez C Martinez-Camblor P Molina E Navarro C Quirós JR Rodríguez L Sánchez MJ Ros E Sala N González CA Moreno-Iribas C 2011 Saturated fat intake and alcohol consumption modulate the association between the APOE polymorphism and risk of future coronary heart disease: a nested case-control study in the Spanish EPIC cohort The J Nutr Biochem 22 487 494 20688498
Crea F Battipaglia I Andreotti F 2015 Sex differences in mechanisms, presentation and management of ischaemic heart disease Atherosclerosis 241 157 168 25988360
Currais A Prior M Lo D Jolivalt C Schubert D Maher P 2012 Diabetes exacerbates amyloid and neurovascular pathology in aging-accelerated mice Aging Cell 11 1017 1026 22938075
Damoiseaux JS Seeley WW Zhou J Shirer WR Coppola G Karydas A Rosen HJ Miller BL Kramer JH Greicius MD Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 2012 Gender modulates the APOE ε4 effect in healthy older adults: convergent evidence from functional brain connectivity and spinal fluid tau levels J Neurosci 32 8254 8262 22699906
Davidson TL Hargrave SL Swithers SE Sample CH Fu X Kinzig KP Zheng W 2013 Inter-relationships among diet, obesity and hippocampal-dependent cognitive function Neuroscience 253 110 122 23999121
Davis KE Neinast MD Sun K Skiles WM Bills JD Zehr JA Zeve D Hahner LD Cox DW Gent LM Xu Y Wang ZV Khan SA Clegg DJ 2013 The sexually dimorphic role of adipose and adipocyte estrogen receptors in modulating adipose tissue expansion, inflammation, and fibrosis Mol Metab 2 227 242 24049737
De Maddalena C Vodo S Petroni A Aloisi AM 2012 Impact of testosterone on body fat composition J Cell Physiol 227 3744 3748 22495883
De Souza CT Araujo EP Bordin S Ashimine R Zollner RL Boschero AC Saad MJA Velloso LA 2005 Consumption of a Fat-Rich Diet Activates a Proinflammatory Response and Induces Insulin Resistance in the Hypothalamus Endocrinology 146 4192 4199 16002529
de-Andrade FM Larrandaburu M Callegari-Jacques SM Gastaldo G Hutz MH 2000 Association of apolipoprotein E polymorphism with plasma lipids and Alzheimer’s disease in a Southern Brazilian population Braz J Med Biol Res 33
Debette S Beiser A Hoffmann U DeCarli C O’Donnell CJ Massaro JM Au R Himali JJ Wolf PA Fox CS Seshadri S 2010 Visceral fat is associated with lower brain volume in healthy middle-aged adults Ann Neurol 68 136 144 20695006
Dhungana H Rolova T Savchenko E Wojciechowski S Savolainen K Ruotsalainen AK Sullivan PM Koistinaho J Malm T 2013 Western-type diet modulates inflammatory responses and impairs functional outcome following permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion in aged mice expressing the human apolipoprotein E4 allele J Neuroinflamm 10 102
Dik MG Jonker C Comijs HC Deeg DJH Kok A Yaffe K Penninx BW 2007 Contribution of Metabolic Syndrome Components to Cognition in Older Individuals Diabetes Care 30 2655 2660 17563341
Doruk H Naharci MI Bozoglu E Isik AT Kilic S 2010 The relationship between body mass index and incidental mild cognitive impairment, Alzheimer’s disease and vascular dementia in elderly J Nutr Health Aging 14 834 838 21125201
Du J Chang J Guo S Zhang Q Wang Z 2009 ApoE 4 reduces the expression of Aβ degrading enzyme IDE by activating the NMDA receptor in hippocampal neurons Neurosci Lett 464 140 145 19616072
Edland SD 2004 Insulin-degrading enzyme, apolipoprotein E, and Alzheimer’s disease J Mol Neurosci 23 213 217 15181249
Eikelenboom P Veerhuis R van Exel E Hoozemans JJM Rozemuller AJM van Gool WA 2011 The early involvement of the innate immunity in the pathogenesis of late-onset Alzheimer’s disease: neuropathological, epidemiological and genetic evidence Curr Alzheimer Res 8 142 150 21345167
Elias MF Elias PK Sullivan LM Wolf PA D’Agostino RB 2003 Lower cognitive function in the presence of obesity and hypertension: the Framingham heart study Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord 27 260 268 12587008
Elosua R Demissie S Cupples LA Meigs JB Wilson PWF Schaefer EJ Corella D Ordovas JM 2003 Obesity modulates the association among APOE genotype, insulin, and glucose in men Obes Res 11 1502 1508 14694215
Emmerzaal TL Kiliaan AJ Gustafson DR 2015 2003–2013: a decade of body mass index, Alzheimer’s disease, and dementia J Alzheimers Dis 43 739 755 25147111
Engström G Hedblad B Stavenow L Lind P Janzon L Lindgärde F 2003 Inflammation-sensitive plasma proteins are associated with future weight gain Diabetes 52 2097 2101 12882928
Erion JR Wosiski-Kuhn M Dey A Hao S Davis CL Pollock NK Stranahan AM 2014 Obesity Elicits Interleukin 1-Mediated Deficits in Hippocampal Synaptic Plasticity J Neurosci 34 2618 2631 24523551
Exalto LG Quesenberry CP Barnes D Kivipelto M Biessels GJ Whitmer RA 2014 Midlife risk score for the prediction of dementia four decades later Alzheimers Dement 10 562 570 24035147
Feng L Chong MS Lim WS Lee TS Collinson SL Yap P Ng TP 2013 Metabolic syndrome and amnestic mild cognitive impairment: singapore longitudinal ageing study-2 findings J Alzheimer Dis 34 649 657
Fernandez-Martinez M Elcoroaristizabal Martin X Blanco Martin E Galdos Alcelay L Ugarriza Serrano I Gomez Busto F Alvarez-Alvarez M Molano Salazar A Bereincua Gandarias R Ingles Borda S Uterga Valiente JM Indakoetxea Juanbeltz B Gomez Beldarrain MA Moraza Lopez J Barandiaran Amillano M de Pancorbo MM 2013 Oestrogen receptor polymorphisms are an associated risk factor for mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer disease in women APOE 4 carriers: a case-control study BMJ Open 3 e003200 e003200
Ferrari C Nacmias B Bagnoli S Piaceri I Lombardi G Pradella S Tedde A Sorbi S 2014 Imaging and Cognitive Reserve Studies Predict Dementia in Presymptomatic Alzheimer’s Disease Subjects Neurodegener Dis 13 157 159 23942061
Fewlass DC Noboa K Pi-Sunyer FX Johnston JM Yan SD Tezapsidis N 2004 Obesity-related leptin regulates Alzheimer’s Abeta FASEB J 18 1870 1878 15576490
Fitzpatrick AL Kuller LH Lopez OL Diehr P O’Meara ES Longstreth WT Luchsinger JA 2009 Midlife and late-life obesity and the risk of dementia: cardiovascular health study Arch Neurol 66 336 342 19273752
Francis HM Stevenson RJ 2011 Higher reported saturated fat and refined sugar intake is associated with reduced hippocampal-dependent memory and sensitivity to interoceptive signals Behav Neurosci 125 943 955 22023100
Freeman LR Haley-Zitlin V Rosenberger DS Granholm AC 2014 Damaging effects of a high-fat diet to the brain and cognition: A review of proposed mechanisms Nutr Neurosci 17 241 251 24192577
Gale SC Gao L Mikacenic C Coyle SM Rafaels N Murray Dudenkov T Madenspacher JH Draper DW Ge W Aloor JJ Azzam KM Lai L Blackshear PJ Calvano SE Barnes KC Lowry SF Corbett S Wurfel MM Fessler MB 2014 APOε4 is associated with enhanced in vivo innate immune responses in human subjects J Allergy Clin Immunol 134 127 134 24655576
García-Cáceres C Yi CX Tschöp MH 2013 Hypothalamic Astrocytes in Obesity Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 42 57 66 23391239
Gautier A Bonnet F Dubois S Massart C Grosheny C Bachelot A Aubé C Balkau B Ducluzeau PH 2013 Associations between visceral adipose tissue, inflammation and sex steroid concentrations in men Clin Endocrinol 78 373 378
Geliebter A Pantazatos SP McOuatt H Puma L Gibson CD Atalayer D 2013 Sex-based fMRI differences in obese humans in response to high vs. low energy food cues Behav Brain Res 243 91 96 23261871
Genin E Hannequin D Wallon D Sleegers K Hiltunen M Combarros O Bullido MJ Engelborghs S De Deyn P Berr C Pasquier F Dubois B Tognoni G Fiévet N Brouwers N Bettens K Arosio B Coto E Del Zompo M Mateo I Epelbaum J Frank-Garcia A Helisalmi S Porcellini E Pilotto A Forti P Ferri R Scarpini E Siciliano G Solfrizzi V Sorbi S Spalletta G Valdivieso F Vepsäläinen S Alvarez V Bosco P Mancuso M Panza F Nacmias B Bossù P Hanon O Piccardi P Annoni G Seripa D Galimberti D Licastro F Soininen H Dartigues JF Kamboh MI Van Broeckhoven C Lambert JC Amouyel P Campion D 2011 APOE and Alzheimer disease: a major gene with semi-dominant inheritance Mol Psychiatry 16 903 907 21556001
Ghebranious N Mukesh B Giampietro PF Glurich I Mickel SF Waring SC McCarty CA 2011 A pilot study of gene/gene and gene/environment interactions in Alzheimer disease Clin Med Res 9 17 25 20682755
Giltay EJ Haider A Saad F Gooren LJ 2008 C-reactive protein levels and ageing male symptoms in hypogonadal men treated with testosterone supplementation Andrologia 40 398 400 19032692
Giménez-Llort L Arranz L Maté I De la Fuente M 2008 Gender-specific neuroimmunoendocrine aging in a triple-transgenic 3xTg-AD mouse model for Alzheimer’s disease and its relation with longevity Neuroimmunomodulat 15 331 343
Glass CK Saijo K Winner B Marchetto MC Gage FH 2010 Mechanisms Underlying Inflammation in Neurodegeneration Cell 140 918 934 20303880
Goncharov NP Katsya GV Chagina NA Gooren LJ 2008 Three definitions of metabolic syndrome applied to a sample of young obese men and their relation with plasma testosterone Aging Male 11 118 122 18609309
Granholm AC Bimonte-Nelson HA Moore AB Nelson ME Freeman LR Sambamurti K 2008 Effects of a saturated fat and high cholesterol diet on memory and hippocampal morphology in the middle-aged rat J Alzheimers Dis 14 133 145 18560126
Grimm MOW Rothhaar TL Grösgen S Burg VK Hundsdörfer B Haupenthal VJ Friess P Kins S Grimm HS Hartmann T 2012 Trans fatty acids enhance amyloidogenic processing of the Alzheimer amyloid precursor protein (APP) J Nutr Biochem 23 1214 1223 22209004
Grossmann M Tang Fui M Dupuis P 2014 Lowered testosterone in male obesity: Mechanisms, morbidity and management Asian J Androl 16 223 24407187
Guan J Zhao HL Sui Y He L Lee HM Lai FMM Tong PCY Chan JCN 2013 Histopathological correlations of islet amyloidosis with apolipoprotein E polymorphisms in type 2 diabetic Chinese patients Pancreas 42 1129 1137 24005233
Guo L LaDu MJ Van Eldik LJ 2004 A dual role for apolipoprotein e in neuroinflammation: anti- and pro-inflammatory activity J Mol Neurosci 23 205 212 15181248
Gupta S Knight AG Gupta S Keller JN Bruce-Keller AJ 2012 Saturated long-chain fatty acids activate inflammatory signaling in astrocytes J Neurochem 120 1060 1071 22248073
Gustafson D Lissner L Bengtsson C Björkelund C Skoog I 2004 A 24-year follow-up of body mass index and cerebral atrophy Neurology 63 1876 1881 15557505
Gustafson D Rothenberg E Blennow K Steen B Skoog I 2003 An 18-year follow-up of overweight and risk of Alzheimer disease Arch Intern Med 163 1524 1528 12860573
Gustafson DR Bäckman K Waern M Ostling S Guo X Zandi P Mielke MM Bengtsson C Skoog I 2009 Adiposity indicators and dementia over 32 years in Sweden Neurology 73 1559 1566 19901247
Gustafson DR Karlsson C Skoog I Rosengren L Lissner L Blennow K 2007 Mid-life adiposity factors relate to blood-brain barrier integrity in late life J Intern Med 262 643 650 17986201
Hadaegh F Hasheminia M Lotfaliany M Mohebi R Azizi F Tohidi M 2013 Incidence of Metabolic Syndrome over 9 Years Follow-Up; the Importance of Sex Differences in the Role of Insulin Resistance and Other Risk Factors PLoS ONE 8 e76304 24086723
Halliday MR Pomara N Sagare AP Mack WJ Frangione B Zlokovic BV 2013 Relationship between cyclophilin a levels and matrix metalloproteinase 9 activity in cerebrospinal fluid of cognitively normal apolipoprotein e4 carriers and blood-brain barrier breakdown JAMA Neurol 70 1198 1200 24030206
Hanson AJ Bayer-Carter JL Green PS Montine TJ Wilkinson CW Baker LD Watson GS Bonner LM Callaghan M Leverenz JB Tsai E Postupna N Zhang J Lampe J Craft S 2013 Effect of Apolipoprotein E Genotype and Diet on Apolipoprotein E Lipidation and Amyloid Peptides JAMA Neurol 70 972 980 23779114
Harold D Abraham R Hollingworth P Sims R Gerrish A Hamshere ML Pahwa JS Moskvina V Dowzell K Williams A Jones N Thomas C Stretton A Morgan AR Lovestone S Powell J Proitsi P Lupton MK Brayne C Rubinsztein DC Gill M Lawlor B Lynch A Morgan K Brown KS Passmore PA Craig D McGuinness B Todd S Holmes C Mann D Smith AD Love S Kehoe PG Hardy J Mead S Fox N Rossor M Collinge J Maier W Jessen F Schürmann B van den Bussche H Heuser I Kornhuber J Wiltfang J Dichgans M Frölich L Hampel H Hüll M Rujescu D Goate AM Kauwe JSK Cruchaga C Nowotny P Morris JC Mayo K Sleegers K Bettens K Engelborghs S De Deyn PP Van Broeckhoven C Livingston G Bass NJ Gurling H McQuillin A Gwilliam R Deloukas P Al-Chalabi A Shaw CE Tsolaki M Singleton AB Guerreiro R Mühleisen TW Nöthen MM Moebus S Jöckel KH Klopp N Wichmann HE Carrasquillo MM Pankratz VS Younkin SG Holmans PA O’Donovan M Owen MJ Williams J 2009 Genome-wide association study identifies variants at CLU and PICALM associated with Alzheimer’s disease Nat Genet 41 1088 1093 19734902
Hawkins MAW Alosco ML Spitznagel MB Strain G Devlin M Cohen R Crosby RD Mitchell JE Gunstad J 2015 The Association Between Reduced Inflammation and Cognitive Gains After Bariatric Surgery Psychosom Med 77 688 696 25478707
Hayden KM Zandi PP Lyketsos CG Khachaturian AS Bastian LA Charoonruk G Tschanz JT Norton MC Pieper CF Munger RG Breitner JCS Welsh-Bohmer KA Welsh-Bohmer KA 2006 Vascular risk factors for incident Alzheimer disease and vascular dementia: the Cache County study Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 20 93 100 16772744
Hebert LE Scherr PA Bienias JL Bennett DA Evans DA 2003 Alzheimer disease in the US population: prevalence estimates using the 2000 census Arch Neurol 60 1119 1122 12925369
Heine PA Taylor JA Iwamoto GA Lubahn DB Cooke PS 2000 Increased adipose tissue in male and female estrogen receptor-alpha knockout mice Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97 12729 12734 11070086
Heneka MT Kummer MP Stutz A Delekate A Schwartz S Vieira-Saecker A Griep A Axt D Remus A Tzeng TC Gelpi E Halle A Korte M Latz E Golenbock DT 2013 NLRP3 is activated in Alzheimer’s disease andcontributes to pathology in APP/PS1 mice Nature 493 674 678 23254930
Hirata-Fukae C Li HF Hoe HS Gray AJ Minami SS Hamada K Niikura T Hua F Tsukagoshi-Nagai H Horikoshi-Sakuraba Y Mughal M Rebeck GW LaFerla FM Mattson MP Iwata N Saido TC Klein WL Duff KE Aisen PS Matsuoka Y 2008 Females exhibit more extensive amyloid, but not tau, pathology in an Alzheimer transgenic model Brain Res 1216 92 103 18486110
Hjorth E Zhu M Toro VC Vedin I Palmblad J Cederholm T Freund-Levi Y Faxen-Irving G Wahlund LO Basun H Eriksdotter M Schultzberg M 2013 Omega-3 fatty acids enhance phagocytosis of Alzheimer’s disease-related amyloid-β42 by human microglia and decrease inflammatory markers J Alzheimers Dis 35 697 713 23481688
Ho AJ Raji CA Becker JT Lopez OL Kuller LH Hua X Lee S Hibar D Dinov ID Stein JL Jack CR Jr Weiner MW Toga AW Thompson PM 2010 Obesity is linked with lower brain volume in 700 AD and MCI patients Neurobiol Aging 31 1326 1339 20570405
Ho L Qin W Pompl PN Xiang Z Wang J Zhao Z Peng Y Cambareri G Rocher A Mobbs CV Hof PR Pasinetti GM 2004 Diet-induced insulin resistance promotes amyloidosis in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease FASEB J 18 902 904 15033922
Hogervorst E Lehmann DJ Warden DR McBroom J Smith AD 2002 Apolipoprotein E epsilon4 and testosterone interact in the risk of Alzheimer’s disease in men Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 17 938 940 12325053
Hogervorst E Williams J Budge M Barnetson L Combrinck M Smith AD 2001 Serum total testosterone is lower in men with Alzheimer’s disease Neuroendocrinol Lett 22 163 168 11449190
Holland D Desikan RS Dale AM McEvoy LK Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 2013 Higher rates of decline for women and apolipoprotein E epsilon4 carriers Am J Neuroradiol 34 2287 2293 23828104
Hollingworth P 2011 Common variants at ABCA7, MS4A6A/MS4A4E, EPHA1, CD33 and CD2AP are associated with Alzheimer’s disease Nat Genet 43 429 435 21460840
Hsu TM Konanur VR Taing L Usui R Kayser BD Goran MI Kanoski SE 2014 Effects of sucrose and high fructose corn syrup consumption on spatial memory function and hippocampal neuroinflammation in adolescent rats Hippocampus 25 227 239 25242636
Hughe TF Borenstein AR Schofield E Wu Y Larson EB 2009 Association between late-life body mass index and dementia: The Kame Project Neurology 72 1741 1746 19451529
Hultman K Strickland S Norris EH 2013 The APOE _4/_4 genotype potentiates vascular fibrin(ogen) deposition in amyloid-laden vessels in the brains of Alzheimer’s disease patients J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 33 1251 1258 23652625
Hwang LL Wang CH Li TL Chang SD Lin LC Chen CP Chen CT Liang KC Ho IK Yang WS Chiou LC 2010 Sex differences in high-fat diet-induced obesity, metabolic alterations and learning, and synaptic plasticity deficits in mice Obesity 18 463 469 19730425
Iqbal K Liu F Gong CX Grundke-Iqbal I 2010 Tau in Alzheimer disease and related tauopathies Curr Alzheimer Res 7 656 664 20678074
Isaac V Sim S Zheng H Zagorodnov V Tai ES Chee M 2011 Adverse Associations between Visceral Adiposity, Brain Structure, and Cognitive Performance in Healthy Elderly Front Aging Neurosci 3 12 21949507
Jacobs EG Kroenke C Lin J Epel ES Kenna HA Blackburn EH Rasgon NL 2013 Accelerated Cell Aging in Female APOE-ε4 Carriers: Implications for Hormone Therapy Use PLoS ONE 8 e54713 23418430
Jayaraman A Lent-Schochet D Pike CJ 2014 Diet-induced obesity and low testosterone increase neuroinflammation and impair neural function J Neuroinflamm 11 162
Jayaraman A Pike CJ 2014 Alzheimer’s Disease and Type 2 Diabetes: Multiple Mechanisms Contribute to Interactions Curr Diab Rep 14 476 24526623
Jefferson AL Massaro JM Wolf PA Seshadri S Au R Vasan RS Larson MG Meigs JB Keaney JF Lipinska I Kathiresan S Benjamin EJ DeCarli C 2007 Inflammatory biomarkers are associated with total brain volume: The Framingham Heart Study Neurology 68 1032 1038 17389308
Jolivalt CG Lee CA Beiswenger KK Smith JL Orlov M Torrance MA Masliah E 2008 Defective insulin signaling pathway and increased glycogen synthase kinase-3 activity in the brain of diabetic mice: Parallels with Alzheimer’s disease and correction by insulin J Neurosci Res 86 3265 3274 18627032
Jones ME Thorburn AW Britt KL Hewitt KN Wreford NG Proietto J Oz OK Leury BJ Robertson KM Yao S Simpson ER 2000 Aromatase-deficient (ArKO) mice have a phenotype of increased adiposity Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97 12735 12740 11070087
Julien C Tremblay C Phivilay A Berthiaume L Emond V Julien P Calon F 2010 High-fat diet aggravates amyloid-beta and tau pathologies in the 3xTg-AD mouse model Neurobiol Aging 31 1516 1531 18926603
Kalinchenko SY Tishova YA Mskhalaya GJ Gooren LJG Giltay EJ Saad F 2010 Effects of testosterone supplementation on markers of the metabolic syndrome and inflammation in hypogonadal men with the metabolic syndrome: the double-blinded placebo-controlled Moscow study Clin Endocrinol 73 602 612
Kanaya AM Lindquist K Harris TB Launer L Rosano C Satterfield S Yaffe K Health ABC Study 2009 Total and regional adiposity and cognitive change in older adults: The Health, Aging and Body Composition (ABC) study Arch Neurol 66 329 335 19273751
Kanoski SE Davidson TL 2011 Western diet consumption and cognitive impairment: Links to hippocampal dysfunction and obesity Physiol Behav 103 59 68 21167850
Kanoski SE Zhang Y Zheng W Davidson TL 2010 The effects of a high-energy diet on hippocampal function and blood-brain barrier integrity in the rat J Alzheimers Dis 21 207 219 20413889
Kapoor D Aldred H Clark S Channer KS Jones TH 2007 Clinical and Biochemical Assessment of Hypogonadism in Men With Type 2 Diabetes: Correlations with bioavailable testosterone and visceral adiposity Diabetes Care 30 911 917 17392552
Kapoor D Malkin CJ Channer KS Jones TH 2005 Androgens, insulin resistance and vascular disease in men Clin Endocrinol 63 239 250
Keene CD Cudaback E Li X Montine KS Montine TJ 2011 Apolipoprotein E isoforms and regulation of the innate immune response in brain of patients with Alzheimer’s disease Curr Opin Neurobiol 21 920 928 21907569
Khan NA Raine LB Donovan SM Hillman CH 2014 IV The cognitive implications of obesity and nutrition in childhood Monogr Soc Res Child Dev 79 51 71 25387415
Khera A Vega GL Das SR Ayers C McGuire DK Grundy SM de Lemos JA 2009 Sex Differences in the Relationship between C-Reactive Protein and Body Fat J Clin Endocr Metab 94 3251 3258 19567538
Kim B Backus C Oh S Hayes JM Feldman EL 2009 Increased Tau Phosphorylation and Cleavage in Mouse Models of Type 1 and Type 2 Diabetes Endocrinology 150 5294 5301 19819959
Kim B Backus C Oh S Feldman EL 2013 Hyperglycemia-induced tau cleavage in vitro and in vivo: A possible link between diabetes and Alzheimer’s disease J Alzheimers Dis 34 727 739 23254634
Kleinberger G 2014 TREM2 mutations implicated in neurodegeneration impair cell surface transport and phagocytosis Sci Transl Med 6 243ra86 243ra86
Knight EM Martins IVA Gümüsgöz S Allan SM Lawrence CB 2014 High-fat diet-induced memory impairment in triple-transgenic Alzheimer’s disease (3xTgAD) mice is independent of changes in amyloid and tau pathology Neurobiol Aging 35 1821 1832 24630364
Kohjima M Sun Y Chan L 2010 Increased Food Intake Leads to Obesity and Insulin Resistance in the Tg2576 Alzheimer’s Disease Mouse Model Endocrinology 151 1532 1540 20176720
Kunzler J Youmans KL Yu C LaDu MJ Tai LM 2014 APOE modulates the effect of estrogen therapy on Aβ accumulation EFAD-Tg mice Neurosci Lett 560 131 136 24368217
Kupelian V Chiu GR Araujo AB Williams RE Clark RV McKinlay JB 2010 Association of sex hormones and C-reactive protein levels in men Clin Endocrinol 72 527 533
Kypreos KE Karagiannides I Fotiadou EH Karavia EA Brinkmeier MS Giakoumi SM Tsompanidi EM 2009 Mechanisms of obesity and related pathologies: Role of apolipoprotein E in the development of obesity FEBS J 276 5720 5728 19754875
Laaksonen DE Niskanen L Punnonen K Nyyssönen K Tuomainen TP Salonen R Rauramaa R Salonen JT 2003 Sex hormones, inflammation and the metabolic syndrome: a population-based study Eur J Endocrinol 149 601 608 14641004
LaDu MJ Shah JA Reardon CA Getz GS Bu G Hu J Guo L Van Eldik LJ 2001 Apolipoprotein E and apolipoprotein E receptors modulate A beta-induced glial neuroinflammatory responses Neurochem Int 39 427 434 11578778
LaFerla FM 2010 Pathways linking Aβ and tau pathologies Biochem Soc Trans 38 993 20658991
Lakhan SE Kirchgessner A 2013 The emerging role of dietary fructose in obesity and cognitive decline Nutr J 12 1 1 23282226
Lambert JC 2009 Genome-wide association study identifies variants at CLU and CR1 associated with Alzheimer’s disease Nat Genet 41 1094 1099 19734903
Lathe R Sapronova A Kotelevtsev Y 2014 Atherosclerosis and Alzheimer - diseases with a common cause? Inflammation, oxysterols, vasculature BMC Geriatr 14 1 30 24393272
Laughlin GA Barrett-Connor E Bergstrom J 2008 Low Serum Testosterone and Mortality in Older Men J Clin Endocr Metab 93 68 75 17911176
Lebbadi M Julien C Phivilay A Tremblay C Emond V Kang JX Calon F 2011 Endogenous conversion of omega-6 into omega-3 fatty acids improves neuropathology in an animal model of Alzheimer’s disease J Alzheimers Dis 27 853 869 21914946
Leboucher A Laurent C Fernandez-Gomez FJ Burnouf S Troquier L Eddarkaoui S Demeyer D Caillierez R Zommer N Vallez E Bantubungi K Breton C Pigny P Buée-Scherrer V Staels B Hamdane M Tailleux A Buée L Blum D 2013 Detrimental effects of diet-induced obesity on τ pathology are independent of insulin resistance in τ transgenic mice Diabetes 62 1681 1688 23250356
Li J Deng J Sheng W Zuo Z 2012 Metformin attenuates Alzheimer’s disease-like neuropathology in obese, leptin-resistant mice Pharmacol Biochem Be 101 564 574
Li R Singh M 2014 Sex differences in cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease Front Neuroendocrin 35 385 403
Li ZG Zhang W Sima AAF 2007 Alzheimer-like changes in rat models of spontaneous diabetes Diabetes 56 1817 1824 17456849
Liu CC Kanekiyo T Xu H Bu G 2013 Apolipoprotein E and Alzheimer disease: risk, mechanisms and therapy Nat Rev Neurol 9 106 118 23296339
Liu HQ Qiu Y Mu Y Zhang XJ Liu L Hou XH Zhang L Xu XN Ji AL Cao R Yang RH Wang F 2013 A high ratio of dietary n-3/n-6 polyunsaturated fatty acids improves obesity-linked inflammation and insulin resistance through suppressing activation of TLR4 in SD rats Nutr Res 33 849 858 24074743
Liu Y Paajanen T Westman E Wahlund LO Simmons A Tunnard C Sobow T Proitsi P Powell J Mecocci P Tsolaki M Vellas B Muehlboeck S Evans A Spenger C Lovestone S Soininen H Soininen H 2010 Effect of APOE ε4 allele on cortical thicknesses and volumes: the AddNeuroMed study J Alzheimers Dis 21 947 966 20693633
Luchsinger JA Cheng D Tang MX Schupf N Mayeux R 2012 Central obesity in the elderly is related to late-onset Alzheimer disease Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 26 101 105 21666429
Luchsinger JA Tang MX Shea S Mayeux R 2002 Caloric intake and the risk of Alzheimer disease Arch Neurol 59 1258 1263 12164721
Lynch JR Morgan D Mance J Matthew WD Laskowitz DT 2001 Apolipoprotein E modulates glial activation and the endogenous central nervous system inflammatory response J Neuroimmunol 114 107 113 11240021
Lynch JR Tang W Wang H Vitek MP Bennett ER Sullivan PM Warner DS Laskowitz DT 2003 APOE Genotype and an ApoE-mimetic Peptide Modify the Systemic and Central Nervous System Inflammatory Response J Biol Chem 278 48529 48533 14507923
Macotela Y Boucher J Tran TT Kahn CR 2009 Sex and Depot Differences in Adipocyte Insulin Sensitivity and Glucose Metabolism Diabetes 58 803 812 19136652
Maezawa I Nivison M Montine KS Maeda N Montine TJ 2006a Neurotoxicity from innate immune response is greatest with targeted replacement of E4 allele of apolipoprotein E gene and is mediated by microglial p38MAPK FASEB J 20 797 799 16481366
Maezawa I Zaja-Milatovic S Milatovic D Stephen C Sokal I Maeda N Montine TJ Montine KS 2006b Apolipoprotein E isoform-dependent dendritic recovery of hippocampal neurons following activation of innate immunity J Neuroinflamm 3 21
Maggio M Basaria S Ble A Lauretani F Bandinelli S Ceda GP Valenti G Ling SM Ferrucci L 2006 Correlation between Testosterone and the Inflammatory Marker Soluble Interleukin-6 Receptor in Older Men J Clin Endocr Metab 91 345 347 16263825
Malkin CJ Pugh PJ Jones RD Kapoor D Channer KS Jones TH 2004 The Effect of Testosterone Replacement on Endogenous Inflammatory Cytokines and Lipid Profiles in Hypogonadal Men J Clin Endocr Metab 89 3313 3318 15240608
Manly JJ Merchant CA Jacobs DM Small SA Bell K Ferin M Mayeux R 2000 Endogenous estrogen levels and Alzheimer’s disease among postmenopausal women Neurology 54 833 837 10690972
Marques-Vidal P Bongard V Ruidavets JB Fauvel J Hanaire-Broutin H Perret B Ferrières J 2003 Obesity and alcohol modulate the effect of apolipoprotein E polymorphism on lipids and insulin Obes Res 11 1200 1206 14569045
Martens EAP Lemmens SGT Adam TCM Westerterp-Plantenga MS 2012 Sex differences in HPA axis activity in response to a meal Physiol Behav 106 272 277 22366160
Mascarenhas-Melo F Marado D Palavra F Sereno J Coelho Á Pinto R Teixeira-Lemos E Teixeira F Reis F 2013 Diabetes abrogates sex differences and aggravates cardiometabolic risk in postmenopausal women Cardiovasc Diabetol 12 61 23570342
Mazzoccoli G Dagostino MP Vinciguerra M Ciccone F Paroni G Seripa D Addante F Montella RC De Cosmo S Sera F Greco A 2014 An association study between epicardial fat thickness and cognitive impairment in the elderly Am J Physiol Heart Circ 307 H1269 H1276
McAllister C Long J Bowers A Walker A Cao P Honda SI Harada N Staufenbiel M Shen Y Li R 2010 Genetic targeting aromatase in male amyloid precursor protein transgenic mice down-regulates beta-secretase (BACE1) and prevents Alzheimer-like pathology and cognitive impairment J Neurosci 30 7326 7334 20505099
McNelis JC Olefsky JM 2014 Macrophages, Immunity, and Metabolic Disease Immunity 41 36 48 25035952
Medrikova D Jilkova ZM Bardova K Janovska P Rossmeisl M Kopecky J 2012 Sex differences during the course of diet-induced obesity in mice: adipose tissue expandability and glycemic control Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord 36 262 272
Mehla J Chauhan BC Chauhan NB 2014 Experimental induction of type 2 diabetes in aging-accelerated mice triggered Alzheimer-like pathology and memory deficits J Alzheimers Dis 39 145 162 24121970
Meigs JB Ordovas JM Cupples LA Singer DE Nathan DM Schaefer EJ Wilson PW 2000 Apolipoprotein E isoform polymorphisms are not associated with insulin resistance: the Framingham Offspring Study Diabetes Care 23 669 674 10834428
Meng XF Yu JT Wang HF Tan MS Wang C Tan CC Tan L 2014 Midlife vascular risk factors and the risk of Alzheimer’s disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis J Alzheimers Dis 42 1295 1310 25024338
Meyer MR Clegg DJ Prossnitz ER Barton M 2011 Obesity, insulin resistance and diabetes: sex differences and role of oestrogen receptors Acta Physiol 203 259 269
Milanski M Arruda AP Coope A Ignacio-Souza LM Nunez CE Roman EA Romanatto T Pascoal LB Caricilli AM Torsoni MA 2012 Inhibition of hypothalamic inflammation reverses diet-induced insulin resistance in the liver Diabetes 61 1455 1462 22522614
Milanski M Degasperi G Coope A Morari J Denis R Cintra DE Tsukumo DML Anhe G Amaral ME Takahashi HK Curi R Oliveira HC Carvalheira JBC Bordin S Saad MJ Velloso LA 2009 Saturated Fatty Acids Produce an Inflammatory Response Predominantly through the Activation of TLR4 Signaling in Hypothalamus: Implications for the Pathogenesis of Obesity J Neurosci 29 359 370 19144836
Miller AA Spencer SJ 2014 Obesity and neuroinflammation: a pathway to cognitive impairment Brain Behav Immun 42 10 21 24727365
Moffat SD Zonderman AB Metter EJ Kawas C Blackman MR Harman SM Resnick SM 2004 Free testosterone and risk for Alzheimer disease in older men Neurology 62 188 193 14745052
Mogri M Dhindsa S Quattrin T Ghanim H Dandona P 2013 Testosterone concentrations in young pubertal and post-pubertal obese males Clin Endocrinol 78 593 599
Moralejo DH Hansen CT Treuting P Hessner MJ Fuller JM Van Yserloo B Jensen R Osborne W Kwitek AE Lernmark A 2010 Differential effects of leptin receptor mutation on male and female BBDR. Gimap5-/Gimap5- spontaneously diabetic rats Physiol Genomics 41 9 20 19996157
Moreira PI 2013 High-sugar diets, type 2 diabetes and Alzheimer_s disease Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care 16 440 445 23657152
Morris GP Clark IA Vissel B 2014 Inconsistencies and controversies surrounding the amyloid hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease Acta Neuropathol Commun 2 135 25231068
Morris MC Tangney CC 2014 Dietary fat composition and dementia risk Neurobiol Aging 35 S59 S64 24970568
Mucke L Selkoe DJ 2012 Neurotoxicity of amyloid β-protein: synaptic and network dysfunction Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2 a006338 22762015
Mueller K Anwander A Möller HE Horstmann A Lepsien J Busse F Mohammadi S Schroeter ML Stumvoll M Villringer A Pleger B 2011 Sex-Dependent Influences of Obesity on Cerebral White Matter Investigated by Diffusion-Tensor Imaging PLoS ONE 6 e18544 21494606
Murray AJ Knight NS Cochlin LE McAleese S Deacon RMJ Rawlins JNP Clarke K 2009 Deterioration of physical performance and cognitive function in rats with short-term high-fat feeding FASEB J 23 4353 4360 19667117
Musatov S Chen W Pfaff DW Mobbs CV Yang XJ Clegg DJ Kaplitt MG Ogawa S 2007 Silencing of estrogen receptor α in the ventromedial nucleus of hypothalamus leads to metabolic syndrome Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104 2501 2506 17284595
Nadal-Casellas A Bauzá-Thorbrügge M Proenza AM Gianotti M Lladó I 2012 Sex-dependent differences in rat brown adipose tissue mitochondrial biogenesis and insulin signaling parameters in response to an obesogenic diet Mol Cell Biochem 373 125 135 23108789
Naj AC 2011 Common variants at MS4A4/MS4A6E, CD2AP, CD33 and EPHA1 are associated with late-onset Alzheimer’s disease Nat Genet 43 436 441 21460841
Nägga K Wattmo C Zhang Y Wahlund LO Palmqvist S 2014 Cerebral inflammation is an underlying mechanism of early death in Alzheimer’s disease: a 13-year cause-specific multivariate mortality study Alzheimers Res Ther 6 1 8 24382028
Niedowicz DM Reeves VL Platt TL Kohler K Beckett TL Powell DK Lee TL Sexton TR Song ES Brewer LD Latimer CS Kraner SD Larson KL Ozcan S Norris CM Hersh LB Porter NM Wilcock DM Murphy MP 2014 Obesity and diabetes cause cognitive dysfunction in the absence of accelerated β-amyloid deposition in a novel murine model of mixed or vascular dementia Acta Neuropathol Comm 2 64
Nishitsuji K Hosono T Nakamura T Bu G Michikawa M 2011 Apolipoprotein E Regulates the Integrity of Tight Junctions in an Isoform-dependent Manner in an in Vitro Blood-Brain Barrier Model J Biol Chem 286 17536 17542 21471207
Niu W Qi Y Qian Y Gao P Zhu D 2009 The relationship between apolipoprotein E e2/e3/e4 polymorphisms and hypertension: a meta-analysis of six studies comprising 1812 cases and 1762 controls Hypertens Res 32 1060 1066 19816504
Norata GD Tibolla G Seccomandi PM Poletti A Catapano AL 2006 Dihydrotestosterone Decreases Tumor Necrosis Factor-α and Lipopolysaccharide-Induced Inflammatory Response in Human Endothelial Cells J Clin Endocr Metab 91 546 554 16317058
Ogden CL Carroll MD Kit BK Flegal KM 2014 Prevalence of Childhood and Adult Obesity in the United States, 2011–2012 JAMA 311 806 24570244
Oh JY Barrett-Connor E Barrett-Connor E 2001 Apolipoprotein E polymorphism and lipid levels differ by gender and family history of diabetes: the Rancho Bernardo Study Clin Genet 60 132 137 11553047
Oksman M Iivonen H Hogyes E Amtul Z Penke B Leenders I Broersen L Lütjohann D Hartmann T Tanila H 2006 Impact of different saturated fatty acid, polyunsaturated fatty acid and cholesterol containing diets on beta-amyloid accumulation in APP/PS1 transgenic mice Neurobiol Dis 23 563 572 16765602
Olgiati P Politis A Malitas P Albani D Dusi S Polito L De Mauro S Zisaki A Piperi C Stamouli E Mailis A Batelli S Forloni G De Ronchi D Kalofoutis A Liappas I Serretti A 2010 APOE epsilon-4 allele and cytokine production in Alzheimer’s disease Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 25 338 344 19618379
Ophir G Amariglio N Jacob-Hirsch J Elkon R Rechavi G Michaelson DM 2005 Apolipoprotein E4 enhances brain inflammation by modulation of the NF-κB signaling cascade Neurobiol Dis 20 709 718 15979312
Ophir G Meilin S Efrati M Chapman J Karussis D Roses A Michaelson DM 2003 Human apoE3 but not apoE4 rescues impaired astrocyte activation in apoE null mice Neurobiol Dis 12 56 64 12609489
Orr ME Salinas A Buffenstein R Oddo S 2014 Mammalian target of rapamycin hyperactivity mediates the detrimental effects of a high sucrose diet on Alzheimer’s disease pathology Neurobiol Aging 35 1233 1242 24411482
Panizzon MS Hauger R Dale AM Eaves LJ Eyler LT Fischl B Fennema-Notestine C Franz CE Grant MD Jak AJ Jacobson KC Lyons MJ Mendoza SP Neale MC Prom-Wormley EC Seidman LJ Tsuang MT Xian H Kremen WS 2010 Testosterone modifies the effect of APOE genotype on hippocampal volume in middle-aged men Neurology 75 874 880 20819998
Panizzon MS Hauger R Xian H Vuoksimaa E Spoon KM Mendoza SP Jacobson KC Vasilopoulos T Rana BK McKenzie R McCaffery JM Lyons MJ Kremen WS Franz CE 2014 Interaction of APOE genotype and testosterone on episodic memory in middle-aged men Neurobiol Aging 35 1778.e1 8 24444806
Paoletti AM Congia S Lello S Tedde D Orrù M Pistis M Pilloni M Zedda P Loddo A Melis GB 2004 Low androgenization index in elderly women and elderly men with Alzheimer’s disease Neurology 62 301 303 14745075
Payami H Montee KR Kaye JA Bird TD Yu CE Wijsman EM Schellenberg GD 1994 Alzheimer’s Disease, Apolipoprotein E4, and Gender JAMA 271 1316 1317 8158809
Pedroni SMA Turban S Kipari T Dunbar DR McInnes K Saunders PTK Morton NM Norman JE 2014 Pregnancy in Obese Mice Protects Selectively against Visceral Adiposity and Is Associated with Increased Adipocyte Estrogen Signalling PLoS ONE 9 e94680 24732937
Peila R Rodriguez BL Launer LJ 2002 Type 2 diabetes, APOE gene, and the risk for dementia and related pathologies The Honolulu-Asia Aging Study Diabetes 51 1256 1262 11916953
Pereira TM Teixeira F Aguilar E Matoso RO Soares FLP Ferreira AFB Alvarez-Leite JI 2012 Differences in adipose tissue inflammation and oxidative status in C57BL/6 and ApoE−/− mice fed high fat diet Anim Sci J 83 549 555 22776793
Pettersson US Waldén TB Carlsson PO Jansson L Phillipson M 2012 Female Mice are Protected against High-Fat Diet Induced Metabolic Syndrome and Increase the Regulatory T Cell Population in Adipose Tissue PLoS ONE 7 e46057 23049932
Petty KH Li K Dong Y Fortenberry J Stallmann-Jorgensen I Guo D Zhu H 2010 Sex dimorphisms in inflammatory markers and adiposity in African-American youth Int J Pediatr Obes 5 327 333 20078375
Pfankuch T Rizk A Olsen R Poage C Raber J 2005 Role of circulating androgen levels in effects of apoE4 on cognitive function Brain Res 1053 88 96 16054121
Pike CJ Carroll JC Rosario ER Barron AM 2009 Protective actions of sex steroid hormones in Alzheimer’s disease Front Neuroendocrin 30 239 258
Planel E Tatebayashi Y Miyasaka T Liu L Wang L Herman M Yu WH Luchsinger JA Wadzinski B Duff KE Takashima A 2007 Insulin Dysfunction Induces In Vivo Tau Hyperphosphorylation through Distinct Mechanisms J Neurosci 27 13635 13648 18077675
Pradhan AD 2013 Sex Differences in the Metabolic Syndrome: Implications for Cardiovascular Health in Women Clin Chem 60 44 52 24255079
Premkumar DR Cohen DL Hedera P Friedland RP Kalaria RN 1996 Apolipoprotein E-epsilon4 alleles in cerebral amyloid angiopathy and cerebrovascular pathology associated with Alzheimer’s disease Am J Pathol 148 2083 2095 8669492
Profenno LA Porsteinsson AP Faraone SV 2010 Meta-Analysis of Alzheimer’s Disease Risk with Obesity, Diabetes, and Related Disorders Biol Psychiatry 67 505 512 19358976
Puig J Blasco G Daunis-i-Estadella J Molina X Xifra G Ricart W Pedraza S Fernández-Aranda F Fernández-Real JM 2015 Hypothalamic Damage Is Associated With Inflammatory Markers and Worse Cognitive Performance in Obese Subjects J Clin Endocr Metab 100 E276 E281 25423565
Qizilbash N Gregson J Johnson ME Pearce N Douglas I Wing K Evans SJW Pocock SJ 2015 BMI and risk of dementia in two million people over two decades: A retrospective cohort study Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 3 431 436 25866264
Raber J 2004 Androgens, apoE, and Alzheimer’s disease Sci Aging Knowledge Environ 11 re2 15028864
Raber J Bongers G LeFevour A Buttini M Mucke L 2002 Androgens Protect against Apolipoprotein E4-Induced Cognitive Deficits J Neurosci 22 5204 5209 12077215
Rafnsson SB Deary IJ Smith FB Whiteman MC Rumley A Lowe GDO Fowkes FGR 2007 Cognitive decline and markers of inflammation and hemostasis: the Edinburgh Artery Study J Am Geriatr Soc 55 700 707 17493189
Ragogna F Lattuada G Ruotolo G Luzi L Perseghin G 2011 Lack of association of apoE ε4 allele with insulin resistance Acta Diabetol 49 25 32 21290252
Ramos-Rodriguez JJ Ortiz O Jimenez-Palomares M Kay KR Berrocoso E Murillo-Carretero MI Perdomo G Spires-Jones T Cozar-Castellano I Lechuga-Sancho AM Garcia-Alloza M 2013 Differential central pathology and cognitive impairment in pre-diabetic and diabetic mice Psychoneuroendocrino 38 2462 2475
Reinert KRS Po’e EK Barkin SL 2013 The Relationship between Executive Function and Obesity in Children and Adolescents: A Systematic Literature Review J Obes 2013 1 10
Ringman JM Elashoff D Geschwind DH Welsh BT Gylys KH Lee C Cummings JL Cole GM 2012 Plasma signaling proteins in persons at genetic risk for Alzheimer disease: influence of APOE genotype Arch Neurol 69 757 764 22689192
Rippon GA Tang MX Lee JH Lantigua R Medrano M Mayeux R 2006 Familial Alzheimer disease in Latinos: Interaction between APOE, stroke, and estrogen replacement Neurology 66 35 40 16401842
Ritzel RM Capozzi LA McCullough LD 2013 Sex, stroke, and inflammation: the potential for estrogen-mediated immunoprotection in stroke Horm Behav 63 238 253 22561337
Rodriguez GA Tai LM LaDu MJ Rebeck GW 2014 Human APOE4 increases microglia reactivity at Aβ plaques in a mouse model of Aβ deposition J Neuroinflamm 11 111
Rontu R Ojala P Hervonen A Goebeler S Karhunen PJ Nikkila M Kunnas T Jylha M Eklund C Hurme M Lehtimaki T 2006 Apolipoprotein E genotype is related to plasma levels of C-reactive protein and lipids and to longevity in nonagenarians Clin Endocrinol 64 265 270
Rosario ER Carroll JC Oddo S LaFerla FM Pike CJ 2006 Androgens Regulate the Development of Neuropathology in a Triple Transgenic Mouse Model of Alzheimer’s Disease J Neurosci 26 13384 13389 17182789
Rosario ER Chang L Head EH Stanczyk FZ Pike CJ 2011 Brain levels of sex steroid hormones in men and women during normal aging and in Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 32 604 613 19428144
Rosario ER Chang L Stanczyk FZ Pike CJ 2004 Age-related testosterone depletion and the development of Alzheimer disease JAMA 292 1431 1432 15383512
Ross AP Bartness TJ Mielke JG Parent MB 2009 A high fructose diet impairs spatial memory in male rats Neurobiol Learn Mem 92 410 416 19500683
Rudnicka AR Rumley A Whincup PH Lowe GD Strachan DP 2011 Sex differences in the relationship between inflammatory and hemostatic biomarkers and metabolic syndrome: British 1958 Birth Cohort J Thromb Haemost 9 2337 2344 22099170
Ryan J Carrière I Scali J Dartigues JF Tzourio C Poncet M Ritchie K Ancelin ML 2009 Characteristics of hormone therapy, cognitive function, and dementia: the prospective 3C Study Neurology 73 1729 1737 19933973
Samaras K Sachdev PS 2012 Diabetes and the elderly brain: sweet memories? Ther Adv Endocrinol Metab 3 189 196 23323191
Sastre M Walter J Gentleman SM 2008 Interactions between APP secretases and inflammatory mediators J Neuroinflamm 5 25
Saunders AM Strittmatter WJ Schmechel D George-Hyslop PH Pericak-Vance MA Joo SH Rosi BL Gusella JF Crapper-MacLachlan DR Alberts MJ 1993 Association of apolipoprotein E allele epsilon 4 with late-onset familial and sporadic Alzheimer’s disease Neurology 43 1467 1472 8350998
Schäfer S Wirths O Multhaup G Bayer TA 2006 Gender dependent APP processing in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease J Neural Transm 114 387 394 17075721
Schram MT Euser SM De Craen AJM Witteman JC Frölich M Hofman A Jolles J Breteler MMB Westendorp RGJ 2007 Systemic markers of inflammation and cognitive decline in old age J Am Geriatr Soc 55 708 716 17493190
Schulte D Hahn M Oberhäuser F Malchau G Schubert M Heppner C Müller N Güdelhöfer H Faust M Krone W Laudes M 2014 Caloric Restriction Increases Serum Testosterone Concentrations in Obese Male Subjects by Two Distinct Mechanisms Horm Metab Res 46 283 286 24198220
Schwartz DH Leonard G Perron M Richer L Syme C Veillette S Pausova Z Paus T 2013 Visceral fat is associated with lower executive functioning in adolescents Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord 37 1336 1343
Schwinge D Carambia A Quaas A Krech T Wegscheid C Tiegs G Prinz I Lohse AW Herkel J Schramm C 2015 Testosterone Suppresses Hepatic Inflammation by the Downregulation of IL-17, CXCL-9, and CXCL-10 in a Mouse Model of Experimental Acute Cholangitis J Immunol 194 2522 2530 25672751
Selkoe DJ 2011 Alzheimer’s Disease Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 3 a004457 a004457 21576255
Sharp ES Gatz M 2011 Relationship Between Education and Dementia Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 25 289 304 21750453
Shen L Tso P Woods SC Clegg DJ Barber KL Carey K Liu M 2008 Brain Apolipoprotein E: an Important Regulator of Food Intake in Rats Diabetes 57 2092 2098 18559657
Sheng JG Bora SH Xu G Borchelt DR Price DL Koliatsos VE 2003 Lipopolysaccharide-induced-neuroinflammation increases intracellular accumulation of amyloid precursor protein and amyloid β peptide in APPswe transgenic mice Neurobiol Dis 14 133 145 13678674
Shi H Clegg DJ 2009 Sex differences in the regulation of body weight Physiol Behav 97 199 204 19250944
Sima A Iordan A Stancu C 2007 Apolipoprotein E polymorphism--a risk factor for metabolic syndrome Clin Chem Lab Med 45 1149 1153 17848120
Simpson E Jones M Misso M Hewitt K Hill R maffei L Carani C Boon WC 2005 Estrogen, a fundamental player in energy homeostasis J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 95 3 8 16054355
Singh T Newman AB 2011 Inflammatory markers in population studies of aging Ageing Res Rev 10 319 329 21145432
Soczynska JK Kennedy SH Woldeyohannes HO Liauw SS Alsuwaidan M Yim CY McIntyre RS 2010 Mood Disorders and Obesity: Understanding Inflammation as a Pathophysiological Nexus Neuromol Med 13 93 116
Spence RD Voskuhl RR 2012 Neuroprotective effects of estrogens and androgens in CNS inflammation and neurodegeneration Front Neuroendocrinol 33 105 115 22209870
Stellato RK Feldman HA Hamdy O Horton ES McKinlay JB 2000 Testosterone, sex hormone-binding globulin, and the development of type 2 diabetes in middle-aged men: prospective results from the Massachusetts male aging study Diabetes Care 23 490 494 10857940
Stone DJ Rozovsky I Morgan TE Anderson CP Hajian H Finch CE 1997 Astrocytes and microglia respond to estrogen with increased apoE mRNA in vivo and in vitro Exp Neurol 143 313 318 9056393
Strachan MWJ Reynolds RM Marioni RE Price JF 2011 Cognitive function, dementia and type 2 diabetes mellitus in the elderly Nat Rev Endocrinol 7 108 114 21263438
Stranahan AM Norman ED Lee K Cutler RG Telljohann RS Egan JM Mattson MP 2008 Diet-induced insulin resistance impairs hippocampal synaptic plasticity and cognition in middle-aged rats Hippocampus 18 1085 1088 18651634
Strittmatter WJ Saunders AM Schmechel D Pericak-Vance M Enghild J Salvesen GS Roses AD 1993 Apolipoprotein E: high-avidity binding to beta-amyloid and increased frequency of type 4 allele in late-onset familial Alzheimer disease Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 90 1977 1981 8446617
Struble RG Nathan BP Cady C Cheng X McAsey M 2007 Estradiol regulation of astroglia and apolipoprotein E: An important role in neuronal regeneration Exp Gerontol 42 54 63 16837159
Stubbins RE Najjar K Holcomb VB Hong J Núñez NP 2011 Oestrogen alters adipocyte biology and protects female mice from adipocyte inflammation and insulin resistance Diabetes, Obes Metab 14 58 66 21834845
Sugiyama MG Agellon LB 2012 Sex differences in lipid metabolism and metabolic disease risk Biochem Cell Biol 90 124 141 22221155
Syme C Abrahamowicz M Leonard GT Perron M Pitiot A Qiu X Richer L Totman J Veillette S Xiao Y Gaudet D Paus T Pausova Z 2008 Intra-abdominal adiposity and individual components of the metabolic syndrome in adolescence: sex differences and underlying mechanisms Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 162 453 461 18458192
Takalo M Haapasalo A Martiskainen H Kurkinen KMA Koivisto H Miettinen P Khandelwal VKM Kemppainen S Kaminska D Mäkinen P Leinonen V Pihlajamäki J Soininen H Laakso M Tanila H Hiltunen M 2014 High-fat diet increases tau expression in the brain of T2DM and AD mice independently of peripheral metabolic status J Nutr Biochem 25 634 641 24746833
Takechi R Pallebage-Gamarallage MM Lam V Giles C Mamo JC 2013 Aging-Related Changes in Blood-Brain Barrier Integrity and the Effect of Dietary Fat Neurodegener Dis 12 125 135 23128303
Takeda K Toda K Saibara T Nakagawa M Saika K Onishi T Sugiura T Shizuta Y 2003 Progressive development of insulin resistance phenotype in male mice with complete aromatase (CYP19) deficiency J Endocrinol 176 237 246 12553872
Takeda S Sato N Uchio-Yamada K Sawada K Kunieda T Takeuchi D Kurinami H Shinohara M Rakugi H Morishita R 2010 Diabetes-accelerated memory dysfunction via cerebrovascular inflammation and Abeta deposition in an Alzheimer mouse model with diabetes Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107 7036 7041 20231468
Taki Y Kinomura S Sato K Inoue K Goto R Okada K Uchida S Kawashima R Fukuda H 2008 Relationship Between Body Mass Index and Gray Matter Volume in 1,428 Healthy Individuals Obesity 16 119 124 18223623
Tan ZS Beiser AS Vasan RS Roubenoff R Dinarello CA Harris TB Benjamin EJ Au R Kiel DP Wolf PA Seshadri S 2007 Inflammatory markers and the risk of Alzheimer disease: the Framingham Study Neurology 68 1902 1908 17536046
Tanzi RE 2012 The genetics of Alzheimer disease Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2 a006296 23028126
Thaler JP Schwartz MW 2010 Minireview: Inflammation and Obesity Pathogenesis: The Hypothalamus Heats Up Endocrinology 151 4109 4115 20573720
Thaler JP Yi CX Schur EA Guyenet SJ Hwang BH Dietrich MO Zhao X Sarruf DA Izgur V Maravilla KR Nguyen HT Fischer JD Matsen ME Wisse BE Morton GJ Horvath TL Baskin DG Tschöp MH Schwartz MW 2012 Obesity is associated with hypothalamic injury in rodents and humans J Clin Invest 122 153 162 22201683
Thorand B Baumert J Kolb H Meisinger C Chambless L Koenig W Herder C 2007 Sex Differences in the Prediction of Type 2 Diabetes by Inflammatory Markers: Results from the MONICA/KORA Augsburg case-cohort study, 1984–2002 Diabetes Care 30 854 860 17392546
Tolppanen AM Solomon A Kulmala J Kåreholt I Ngandu T Rusanen M Laatikainen T Soininen H Kivipelto M 2015 Leisure-time physical activity from mid- to late life, body mass index, and risk of dementia Alzheimers Dement 11 434 443.e6 24721528
Trollor JN Smith E Agars E Kuan SA Baune BT Campbell L Samaras K Crawford J Lux O Kochan NA Brodaty H Sachdev P 2011 The association between systemic inflammation and cognitive performance in the elderly: the Sydney Memory and Ageing Study Age 34 1295 1308 21853262
Trollor JN Smith E Baune BT Kochan NA Campbell L Samaras K Crawford J Brodaty H Sachdev P 2010 Systemic Inflammation Is Associated with MCI and Its Subtypes: The Sydney Memory and Aging Study Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 30 569 578 21252552
Tsilidis KK Rohrmann S McGlynn KA Nyante SJ Lopez DS Bradwin G Feinleib M Joshu CE Kanarek N Nelson WG Selvin E Platz EA 2013 Association between endogenous sex steroid hormones and inflammatory biomarkers in US men Andrology 1 919 928 24124163
Ueda H Ikegami H Yamato E Fu J Fukuda M Shen G Kawaguchi Y Takekawa K Fujioka Y Fujisawa T 1995 The NSY mouse: a new animal model of spontaneous NIDDM with moderate obesity Diabetologia 38 503 508 7489831
van Exel E Eikelenboom P Comijs H Frölich M Smit JH Stek ML Scheltens P Eefsting JE Westendorp RGJ 2009 Vascular factors and markers of inflammation in offspring with a parental history of late-onset Alzheimer disease Arch Gen Psychiatry 66 1263 1270 19884614
Vegeto E Belcredito S Etteri S Ghisletti S Brusadelli A Meda C Krust A Dupont S Ciana P Chambon P Maggi A 2003 Estrogen receptor-alpha mediates the brain antiinflammatory activity of estradiol Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100 9614 9619 12878732
Vegeto E Benedusi V Maggi A 2008 Estrogen anti-inflammatory activity in brain: A therapeutic opportunity for menopause and neurodegenerative diseases Front Neuroendocrinol 29 507 519 18522863
Vest RS Pike CJ 2013 Gender, sex steroid hormones, and Alzheimer’s disease Horm Behav 63 301 307 22554955
Vignozzi L Morelli A Sarchielli E Comeglio P Filippi S Cellai I Maneschi E Serni S Gacci M Carini M Piccinni MP Saad F Adorini L Vannelli GB Maggi M 2011 Testosterone protects from metabolic syndrome-associated prostate inflammation: an experimental study in rabbit J Endocrinol 212 71 84 22010203
Viscogliosi G Andreozzi P Chiriac IM Cipriani E Servello A Marigliano B Ettorre E Marigliano V 2012 Depressive symptoms in older people with metabolic syndrome: is there a relationship with inflammation? Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 28 242 247 22639424
Vitek MP Brown CM Colton CA 2009 APOE genotype-specific differences in the innate immune response Neurobiol Aging 30 1350 1360 18155324
Walker LC Pahnke J Madauss M Vogelgesang S Pahnke A Herbst EW Stausske D Walther R Kessler C Warzok RW 2000 Apolipoprotein E4 promotes the early deposition of Aβ42 and then Aβ40 in the elderly Acta Neuropathol 100 36 42 10912918
Wang GJ Volkow ND Telang F Jayne M Ma Y Pradhan K Zhu W Wong CT Thanos PK Geliebter A Biegon A Fowler JS 2009 Evidence of gender differences in the ability to inhibit brain activation elicited by food stimulation Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106 1249 1254 19164587
Wang J Perrard XD Perrard JL Mukherjee A Rosales C Chen Y Smith CW Pownall HJ Ballantyne CM Wu H 2012 ApoE and the role of very low density lipoproteins in adipose tissue inflammation Atherosclerosis 223 342 349 22770993
Wang JM Irwin RW Brinton RD 2006 Activation of estrogen receptor alpha increases and estrogen receptor beta decreases apolipoprotein E expression in hippocampus in vitro and in vivo Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103 16983 16988 17077142
Wang P Menheere PPCA Astrup A Andersen MR van Baak MA Larsen TM Jebb S Kafatos A Pfeiffer AFH Martinez JA Handjieva-Darlenska T Hlavaty P Viguerie N Langin D Saris WHM Mariman ECM Diogenes consortium 2013 Metabolic syndrome, circulating RBP4, testosterone, and SHBG predict weight regain at 6 months after weight loss in men Obesity 21 1997 2006 23408763
Wang X Zheng W Xie JW Wang T Wang SL Teng WP Wang ZY 2010 Insulin deficiency exacerbates cerebral amyloidosis and behavioral deficits in an Alzheimer transgenic mouse model Mol Neurodegen 5 46 46
Ward A Crean S Mercaldi CJ Collins JM Boyd D Cook MN Arrighi HM 2012 Prevalence of Apolipoprotein E4 Genotype and Homozygotes (APOE e4/4) among Patients Diagnosed with Alzheimer’s Disease: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis Neuroepidemiology 38 1 17 22179327
Weisberg SP McCann D Desai M Rosenbaum M Leibel RL Ferrante AW Jr 2003 Obesity is associated with macrophage accumulation in adipose tissue J Clin Invest 112 1796 1808 14679176
White UA Tchoukalova YD 2014 Sex dimorphism and depot differences in adipose tissue function Biochem Biophys Acta 1842 377 392 23684841
Whitmer RA Gunderson EP Quesenberry CP Zhou J Yaffe K 2007 Body mass index in midlife and risk of Alzheimer disease and vascular dementia Curr Alzheimer Res 4 103 109 17430231
Whitmer RA Gustafson DR Barrett-Connor E Haan MN Gunderson EP Yaffe K 2008 Central obesity and increased risk of dementia more than three decades later Neurology 71 1057 1064 18367704
Wolf AB Braden BB Bimonte-Nelson H Kusne Y Young N Engler-Chiurazzi E Garcia AN Walker DG Moses GSD Tran H LaFerla F Lue L Lombardo NE Valla J 2012 Broad-based nutritional supplementation in 3xTg mice corrects mitochondrial function and indicates sex-specificity in response to Alzheimer’s disease intervention J Alzheimers Dis 32 217 232 22796872
Wyss-Coray T Rogers J 2012 Inflammation in Alzheimer Disease--A Brief Review of the Basic Science and Clinical Literature Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2 a006346 a006346 22315714
Xing Y Qin W Li F Jia XF Jia J 2012 Apolipoprotein E ε4 Status Modifies the Effects of Sex Hormones on Neuropsychiatric Symptoms of Alzheimer’s Disease Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 33 35 42 22398564
Xu WL Atti AR Gatz M Pedersen NL Johansson B Fratiglioni L 2011 Midlife overweight and obesity increase late-life dementia risk A population-based twin study Neurology 76 1568 1574 21536637
Yaffe K Haan MN Byers A Tangen C Kuller L 2000 Estrogen use, APOE, and cognitive decline: Evidence of gene-environment interaction Neurology 54 1949 1954 10822435
Yaffe K Lindquist K Penninx BW Simonsick EM Pahor M Kritchevsky S Launer L Kuller L Rubin S Harris T 2003 Inflammatory markers and cognition in well-functioning African-American and white elders Neurology 61 76 80 12847160
Yan Q Zhang J Liu H Babu-Khan S Vassar R Biere AL Citron M Landreth G 2003 Anti-inflammatory drug therapy alters beta-amyloid processing and deposition in an animal model of Alzheimer’s disease J Neurosci 23 7504 7509 12930788
Yang HT Sheen YJ Kao CD Chang CA Hu YC Lin JL 2013 Association between the characteristics of metabolic syndrome and Alzheimer’s disease Metab Brain Dis 28 597 604 23644927
Yang Y Ruiz-Narvaez E Kraft P Campos H 2007 Effect of apolipoprotein E genotype and saturated fat intake on plasma lipids and myocardial infarction in the Central Valley of Costa Rica Hum Biol 79 637 647 18494374
Yassin DJ Doros G Hammerer PG Yassin AA 2014 Long-Term Testosterone Treatment in Elderly Men with Hypogonadism and Erectile Dysfunction Reduces Obesity Parameters and Improves Metabolic Syndrome and Health-Related Quality of Life J Sex Med 11 1567 1576 24712761
Yau PL Castro MG Tagani A Tsui WH Convit A 2012 Obesity and metabolic syndrome and functional and structural brain impairments in adolescence Pediatrics 130 e856 e864 22945407
Yip AG McKee AC Green RC Wells J Young H Cupples LA Farrer LA 2005 APOE, vascular pathology, and the AD brain Neurology 65 259 265 16043796
Yoon DH Choi SH Yu JH Ha JH Ryu SH Park DH 2012 The relationship between visceral adiposity and cognitive performance in older adults Age Ageing 41 456 461 22440588
Yoshitake T Kiyohara Y Kato I Ohmura T Iwamoto H Nakayama K Ohmori S Nomiyama K Kawano H Ueda K 1995 Incidence and risk factors of vascular dementia and Alzheimer’s disease in a defined elderly Japanese population: the Hisayama Study Neurology 45 1161 1168 7783883
Youmans KL Tai LM Nwabuisi-Heath E Jungbauer L Kanekiyo T Gan M Kim J Eimer WA Estus S Rebeck GW Weeber EJ Bu G Yu C LaDu MJ 2012 APOE4-specific Changes in Amyloid-Beta Accumulation in a New Transgenic Mouse Model of Alzheimer Disease J Biol Chem 287 41774 41786 23060451
Yue X Lu M Lancaster T Cao P Honda SI Staufenbiel M Harada N Zhong Z Shen Y Li R 2005 Brain estrogen deficiency accelerates Abeta plaque formation in an Alzheimer’s disease animal model Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102 19198 19203 16365303
Zade D Beiser A McGlinchey R Au R Seshadri S Palumbo C Wolf PA DeCarli C Milberg W 2013 Apolipoprotein Epsilon 4 Allele Modifies Waist-to-Hip Ratio Effects on Cognition and Brain Structure J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis 22 119 125 21835633
Zandi PP Anthony JC Hayden KM Mehta K Mayer L Breitner JCS Breitner JCS 2002 Reduced incidence of AD with NSAID but not H2 receptor antagonists: the Cache County Study Neurology 59 880 886 12297571
Zarkesh M Daneshpour MS Faam B Hedayati M Azizi F 2012 Is there any association of apolipoprotein E gene polymorphism with obesity status and lipid profiles? Tehran Lipid and Glucose Study (TLGS) Gene 509 282 285 22921891
Zempel H Mandelkow E 2014 Lost after translation: missorting of Tau protein and consequences for Alzheimer disease Trends Neurosci 37 721 732 25223701
Zerbi V Jansen D Wiesmann M Fang X Broersen LM Veltien A Heerschap A Kiliaan AJ 2014 Multinutrient diets improve cerebral perfusion and neuroprotection in a murine model of Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 35 600 613 24210253
Zeyda M Stulnig TM 2009 Obesity, inflammation, and insulin resistance–a mini-review Gerontology 55 379 386 19365105
Zhang Y Gao Y Tan A Yang X Zhang H Zhang S Wu C Lu Z Wang M Liao M Qin X Li L Hu Y Mo Z 2012 Endogenous sex hormones and C-reactive protein in healthy chinese men Clin Endocrinol 78 60 66
Zhao J Zhai L Liu Z Wu S Xu L 2014 Leptin Level and Oxidative Stress Contribute to Obesity-Induced Low Testosterone in Murine Testicular Tissue Oxid Med Cell Longev 2014 1 14
Zhao L Lin S Bales KR Gelfanova V Koger D Delong C Hale J Liu F Hunter JM Paul SM 2009 Macrophage-mediated degradation of beta-amyloid via an apolipoprotein E isoform-dependent mechanism J Neurosci 29 3603 3612 19295164
Ziko I De Luca S Dinan T Barwood JM Sominsky L Cai G Kenny R Stokes L Jenkins TA Spencer SJ 2014 Neonatal overfeeding alters hypothalamic microglial profiles and central responses to immune challenge long-term Brain Behav Immun 41 32 43 24975592
Zitzmann M 2009 Testosterone deficiency, insulin resistance and the metabolic syndrome Nat Rev Endocrinol 5 673 681 19859074
Zlokovic BV 2013 Cerebrovascular Effects of Apolipoprotein E JAMA Neurol 70 440 23400708
Zoth N Weigt C Laudenbach-Leschowski U Diel P 2010 Physical activity and estrogen treatment reduce visceral body fat and serum levels of leptin in an additive manner in a diet induced animal model of obesity J Steroid Biochem 122 100 105
