LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9500169
20475
Neurobiol Dis
Neurobiol. Dis.
Neurobiology of disease
0969-9961
1095-953X

26303889
4672943
10.1016/j.nbd.2015.08.007
NIHMS719816
Article
The Relationship between Iron Dyshomeostasis and Amyloidogenesis in Alzheimer’s Disease: Two Sides of the Same Coin
Peters Douglas G. M.S. 12
Connor James R. Ph.D. 1
Meadowcroft Mark D. Ph.D. 13
1 Department of Neurosurgery, The Pennsylvania State University – College of Medicine, Milton S. Hershey Medical Center, Hershey, Pennsylvania
2 Department of Neural and Behavioral Sciences, The Pennsylvania State University – College of Medicine, Milton S. Hershey Medical Center, Hershey, Pennsylvania
3 Department of Radiology (The Center for NMR Research), The Pennsylvania State University – College of Medicine, Milton S. Hershey Medical Center, Hershey, Pennsylvania
Corresponding Author: Mark D. Meadowcroft, Ph.D., The Pennsylvania State University – College of Medicine, Milton S. Hershey Medical Center, Department of Neurosurgery – H110, The Center for NMR Research, 500 University Drive, Hershey, PA 17033, 717-531-6069, markmeadowcroft@psu.edu
3 12 2015
22 8 2015
9 2015
01 9 2016
81 4965
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
The dysregulation of iron metabolism in Alzheimer’s disease is not accounted for in the current framework of the amyloid cascade hypothesis. Accumulating evidence suggests that impaired iron homeostasis is an early event in Alzheimer’s disease progression. Iron dyshomeostasis leads to a loss of function in several enzymes requiring iron as a cofactor, the formation of toxic oxidative species, and the elevated production of beta-amyloid proteins. Several common genetic polymorphisms that cause increased iron levels and dyshomeostasis have been associated with Alzheimer’s disease but the pathoetiology is not well understood. A full picture is necessary to explain how heterogeneous circumstances lead to iron loading and amyloid deposition. There is evidence to support a causative interplay between the concerted loss of iron homeostasis and amyloid plaque formation. We hypothesize that iron misregulation and beta-amyloid plaque pathology are synergistic in the process of neurodegeneration and ultimately cause a downward cascade of events that spiral into the manifestation of Alzheimer’s disease. In this review, we amalgamate recent findings of brain iron metabolism in healthy versus Alzheimer’s disease brains and consider unique mechanisms of iron transport in different brain cells as well as how disturbances in iron regulation lead to disease etiology and propagate Alzheimer’s pathology.

Graphical Abstract

Alzheimer’s disease
AD
iron
metallosis
dyshomeostasis
beta-amyloid
amyloidogenesis
pathology

Introduction

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common cause of dementia affecting six million people in the United States and forty million people worldwide. The literature base supports that there are two distinct clinical manifestations of Alzheimer’s disease; familial and sporadic. Both are characterized by molecular lesions attributed to the aggregation of misfolded proteins, inflammation and metabolic failure leading to neurological dysfunction. Familial Alzheimer’s disease (FAD), also characterized as Early Onset Alzheimer’s disease (EOAD), has been linked to genetic mutations, affects people under 60 years old, and makes up less than 5% of all Alzheimer’s cases. Sporadic Alzheimer’s, also referred to as Late Onset (LOAD), is the most common form affecting people over 60 and has no direct pattern of inheritance. Although AD is not a certain outcome of the aging process, age is the primary risk factor as the incidence for Late Onset AD doubles every five years after 65.1,2 The prevalence of AD is expected to triple by 2050 as the average lifespan increases in the future3.

The recognition that iron dyshomeostasis is critical in Alzheimer’s disease pathology is based on observations that patients have elevated iron levels in cortical, subcortical, and white matter areas affected by the disease4,5. MRI analysis reveals that increased iron levels in the hippocampus, an important structure perturbed early in Alzheimer’s disease, negatively correlates with memory test performance6. Increased iron loading in the brain is also associated with beta-amyloid (Aβ) plaque formation, where it is focally incorporated into the core and halo regions, and hyperphosphorylated tau (pTau) tangles in the brain7–9. Increasing the concentration of iron in vitro accelerates Aβ plaque and pTau tangle aggregation and increases their toxicity10. Iron dyshomeostasis may lead to toxic pathological features, but the same imbalance can disrupt innate biological systems that depend on iron.

Iron is one of the most abundant elements on Earth and was utilized by early organisms before our current oxygen rich atmosphere was established11. As a transition metal, iron is uniquely involved in reductive and oxidative (redox) cycling reactions and as a cofactor in iron-sulfur clusters within numerous enzymes12. The majority of the body’s iron (70%) is bound to hemoglobin within red blood cells to aid in tissue oxygen transport. The balance of non-hemoglobin bound iron is found within proteins (~6%) facilitating the metabolic energy needs of the body through cellular respiration (ATP synthesis through the TCA cycle, ferredoxin, cytochromes, and aconitase) and those involved in ribosome function, DNA repair, and synthesis13–15. The remainder is stored within globular ferritin protein complexes (~24%) for controlled iron sequestration, detoxification, and release16. Proper iron maintenance is critical for the body and in the brain; thus, there are specialized cells, regions, and organs for storing and releasing iron.

The brain has a large amount of iron, unevenly distributed to the neurons of the basal ganglia, brain capillary endothelial cells (BCECs), and glia. The basal ganglia requires iron for neurotransmitter synthesis, BCECs confer an iron shuttle between the blood and brain, and astrocytes and microglia help to distribute and sequester iron in the perenchyma17–19. The relative distribution of non-heme iron in the vertebrate body is 55% liver, 20% kidney, 15% heart, and 10% brain20. During vertebrate brain development the brain is highly permeable to iron to facilitate neural growth and intercellular connection21. After development, the brain tightly controls circulating non-heme iron entering and exiting the brain. The brain normally acquires approximately 10% of its iron from the diet where it crosses the gut and enters the blood stream, relatively less iron than any other organ: three-fold less than the liver20. Thus, the brain needs more reserve non-heme iron than any other organ to carry out its function. The reason behind this is not well understood, but there are several possibilities. Firstly; the brain is one of the most metabolically active organs in the body, consuming a significant amount of the body’s oxygen22. This requires the brain to have an iron reserve to assure that its energy requirements are met during a potential lull in iron status. Secondly; iron influx into and efflux out of the brain is tightly controlled by the blood brain barrier (BBB), brain cerebrospinal fluid interface (BCSFI), and the blood CSF barrier (BCSFB)18,23,24. This regulation resides outside the control of the brain making it difficult for the brain to finely adjust the influx and efflux of iron. Thirdly; while neuronal growth and division in the brain during adulthood is minimal, limiting the necessity for new exogenous iron to create new synaptic connections, iron rich oligodendrocytes continually require large amounts of the element25.

Brain iron is most prevalent in oligodendrocytes where it is required in the myelination of neuronal axons to form the white matter in the brain facilitating saltatory conduction over longer distances with increased speed26. Humans have proportionally more white to gray matter than any other animal, and we are the only species to have heterochronologic development with brain regions myelinating at different time points27,28. This difference may help to explain our advanced cognitive processes and IQ as well as human brain atrophy later in life29,30. Iron deficiency during infancy causes delayed neurocognitive development, impaired learning and memory, and in some cases, psychiatric disorders; all in part due to the impairment of myelination31. Oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs) propagate throughout life to form new oligodendrocytes to myelinate additional structures and to replenish damaged myelin during remyelination. As the brain ages, remyelination is outpaced by myelin breakdown leading to a loss of white matter volume28. The rate and loss of white matter due to normal aging increases free iron, which is toxic to the brain. In vivo magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) analysis illustrates that white matter damage precedes gray matter damage in AD compared to age-matched controls32. Exacerbated white matter loss late in life can contribute to increased neuronal loss associated with AD. This damage can be due to increased toxic radical production and impaired molecular systems necessary to ameliorate them.

Alterations in iron load and the proteins responsible for iron metabolism can exacerbate the excess formation and harmful effects of reactive oxygen (ROS) and nitrogen species (RNS), leading to cell death33. The increased expression of amyloid precursor protein (APP) at the site of axonal damage may underlie the need for amyloid proteins to repair tissue and manage cellular debris34. The response of amyloid and tau to free radicals and hypoxia induced ischemia, as is witnessed in brain trauma, is hypothesized to ameliorate their effects. However, over time APP and cleaved amyloid fragments harbor ferric iron (Fe3+) that cannot be stored or transported adequately35,36. Aβ bound Fe3+ is easily reduced to ferrous iron (Fe2+), escalating the production of ROS species37. This milieu favors the increased pathogenic production of toxic Aβ oligomers and plaques that propagate from monomeric Aβ42 through β-secretase cleavage38,39. Once formed, tau tangles and aberrant amyloid structures induce synaptic loss and apoptosis independent of ROS40,41.

Dietary ingredients that chelate iron and remove oxidative species are hypothesized to reduce the onset time of Alzheimer’s disease42–44. Deferoxamine (DFO), a ferric iron chelator used to treat iron overload, has been shown to decrease tau phosphorylation, slow down amyloidogenesis, and improve behavioral impairment in an Alzheimer’s mouse and rabbit models45–48. DFO also improves behavioral performance in AD patients after a 24 month administration period49. However, the longitudinal follow-up of these studies have not been adequately performed. Huperzine A (HupA), a natural inhibitor of acetylcholinesterase, is a licensed anti-AD drug in China which may possess other neuro-protective properties that are not well understood. Recent work shows that treatment with HupA reduces iron in the brain that correlates with a reduction in insoluble and soluble Aβ, amyloid plaque formation, and hyperphosphorylated tau in the cortex and hippocampus of an AD mouse model. Increasing dietary iron negates any benefit from HupA, suggesting that elevated iron is involved in AD pathoetiology50.

The relationship between iron, amyloidogenesis, and AD is multi-faceted. There are four essential questions that are important to understand how iron is associated with Alzheimer’s disease. 1) Is iron dyshomeostasis a primary or a secondary factor of Alzheimer’s disease pathoetiology? 2) Is the brain iron imbalance in AD caused by a dysfunctional or an overwhelmed iron regulatory system? 3) Is brain iron dyshomeostasis derived from peripheral iron or is it coming from endogenous brain iron? 4) How are iron, amyloidosis, and cognition related; is the etiology of AD one of Aβ plaque formation, iron dyshomeostasis, or a synergy of both processes?

The Amyloid Cascade Hypothesis

Over the last twenty years the amyloid cascade hypothesis has helped scientists unearth a slew of critical genomic and proteomic data to better characterize amyloid plaque formation as a pathological marker of AD and the mechanism behind amyloidosis. Parallel to this, researchers have accumulated data on iron level regulation in the peripheral and central nervous systems. The developing metallostasis field has emphasized the role of improper metal ion redox cycling during aging and how the improper balance of metals in the brain may lead to amyloid deposition, cell dysfunction, and apoptosis found in AD51. Iron is not the only transition metal that undergoes dyshomeostasis in the aging and diseased brain state. Copper (Cu) and zinc (Zn) play an important physiological function in the brain, however their concentrations are much lower than that of iron52. The role of APP and pathogenic Aβ derivatives as metalloproteins highlight their complex relationship with iron loading and metabolism in AD53,54. Current findings indicate that metallostasis should be included within the framework of the amyloid cascade hypothesis.

Although the association of APP to Alzheimer’s disease has been thoroughly studied there remain a number of uncertainties such as its relationship with iron transportation. APP is processed by several enzymes producing smaller fragments that participate in normal cellular function in an unknown fashion. APP is cleaved by α-secretase (ADAM) or β-secretase (BACE-1) producing the extracellular soluble fragments sAPPα or sAPPβ, respectively. The alpha pathway is a non-amyloidogenic process while the beta pathway is amyloidogenic. The membrane bound C-terminal fragments, C83 or C99 produced during α and β cleavage, are cleaved by γ-secretase to generate extracellular fragment p3 or Aβ40/42, respectively. The remaining C-terminal fragment, amyloid intracellular domain (AICD), is released into the cytoplasm after progressive cleavage by the γ-secretase/presenilin (PSEN) complex, where it is targeted to the nucleus to act as a transcription factor. Increased production of Aβ42 leads to the formation of insoluble extracellular amyloid fibrils and amyloid plaques. APP and secretase mutations were initially discovered to be related to Familial Alzheimer’s disease because they lead to increased production and aggregation of Aβ42. Transgenic mice containing these same mutations express similar hallmark pathological features and memory deficits. The transgenic pathology, however, does not completely mimic that found in human disease; potentially due to lower brain iron or APP translational regulation55,56. Transgenic plaques formed in mice do not contain the same amount of focal iron and do not bind Pittsburgh Compound B (PIB), a marker for fibrous insoluble Aβ plaques7,57. Profound Aβ plaque and pTau tangle formations in non-human vertebrates do not lead to the memory deficit observed in AD pathology. This may be due to reduced plaque toxicity in non-human Aβ plaques which do not bind iron58.

Fe2+ and Fe3+ interactions with APP and Aβ facilitates the extent and speed of amyloid beta aggregation into fibrillar forms10,59. Seeded plaques can sequester other metals (Zn, Cu, Al, Mn) and a variety of cellular products, such as lipids, impairing proper cellular function60,61. Aβ42 is increased with APP expression or BACE-1 activity or decreased ADAM activity. The Aβ42/40 ratio is dependent on γ-secretase function. Aβ42 and Aβ40 can both interact with iron; however, the Aβ42 fragment forms amyloid aggregates more rapidly. The Alzheimer’s brain shifts from a non-amyloidogenic ADAM/Aβ40 state to an amyloidogenic BACE-1/Aβ42 state. Aggregation of Aβ42 initially follows a reversible linear progression of monomers, dimers, misfolded globules, soluble oligomers, seed β-sheet intermediates, protofibrils, fibrils, and senile fibril plaques (Fig. 1). Fe3+ has the capacity to bind all amyloid formations but has difficulty disassociating from the late fibrillar forms. The seeding of Aβ42 with insoluble Fe3+ may allow the initial clearance of excess free iron in the brain through plaque formation and microglial lysosomal degradation. However, some of that Fe3+ is lost by reduction to Fe2+ facilitated by its interaction with Aβ4262. Fe2+ has also been shown to interact with Aβ amino acids, and this may confer changes to amyloid formations in a different manner than Cu and Zn63,64. When enough amyloid deposition has occurred, toxic oligomeric formations can propagate in a nonlinear amyloidogenic positive feedback-loop, bypassing the requirement for amyloid monomers to form dimers39. It is currently unknown how iron is involved in nonlinear Aβ plaque formation. The mature amyloid plaque core contains magnetite in the form of Fe2+ and Fe3+ 65. The hydrophobic nature of the plaque core is believed to occlude electron sharing within the region, while more easily accessible iron in the outer halo could feasibly be a site of increased redox cycling.

Knock-out removal of endogenous APP in mice increases neuronal iron, while overexpression of the Aβ containing APP c-terminal fragment reduces neuronal iron66,67. In addition, in vivo iron overload in the APP/PS1 AD mouse model leads to increased APP processing, altered neuronal signaling, and cognitive decline with increased amyloid plaque formation68. This suggests that brain iron load is directly tied to the initial stages of amyloid processing and plaque formation. While there are findings that suggest total brain content is not altered in the AD brain, regional analysis provides evidence that harmful macroscopic focal deposition of iron is occurring in and around amyloid plaques67,69,70. Illustrating this is the knowledge that in vivo MRI imaging of the AD brain demonstrates increased iron in the hippocampus; one of the central brain regions afflicted by amyloidogenesis4.

Brain Iron Accumulation with Aging

Iron accumulates in the brain over time, reaching an apparent plateau between thirty and forty years of age71. While the work of Hallgren and Sourander demonstrates the plateauing of brain iron levels, it is evident that the distribution between individuals becomes more variable after the age of 6071. A relative decline may reflect a brain that is decreasing its iron absorption or increasing its release. A relative increase illustrates a brain that is either increasing its iron absorption and/or decreasing its iron release. Increasing brain iron may be due to several factors including, but not limited to, the imbalance in iron transport and storage proteins, mitochondrial dysfunction, neurovascular mechanisms, and myelin breakdown and disrepair72–74. Late onset AD presents after age 65 which chronologically coincides with an increase in brain iron in subjects prone to iron overloading75 (Fig. 2). While Alzheimer’s disease is generally considered an aging disease it is of interest that early onset AD presents itself as early as 40 years of age, coinciding with the plateauing of iron levels in the brain76. This trend also is apparent in Down’s syndrome where a trisomy of chromosome 21 results in APP overexpression, a six-fold likelihood of developing amyloid plaque pathology, and brain iron deposition at 35 years old77.

Oxidative Stress and Toxic Mechanisms

The free radical theory of aging postulates that reactions with metal generated oxygen free radicals result in a pattern of increased cellular aging78. Brain aging involves structural, functional, and chemical changes that occur over time within normal health and neurodegenerative disease. Current research suggests that oxidative stress contributes to brain aging by means of altered DNA, enhanced cell death, lipid peroxidation, protein dysfunction, decreased degradation, and altered metabolism79,80.

Iron facilitates the energy needs of the growing and highly active human brain. Most physiological iron is stored and utilized as insoluble Fe3+ and iron homeostasis and cytoplasmic transportation are dependent on soluble Fe2+. Unregulated iron homeostasis leads to an increased Fe2+/Fe3+ ratio which is harmful to neuronal cells as Fe2+ drives oxidative stress through Fenton and Haber-Weiss chemistry81. In addition, the relative decrease of Fe3+ is indirectly harmful as it promotes the reduction of superoxide radicals derived from mitochondrial activity82,83. Consequently, excess superoxide may react with nitric oxide (NO) to produce other toxic species.

NO is produced from nitric oxide synthase (NOS) and neuronal damage caused by excessive NO is termed nitrosative stress84. NO is a highly diffusible gas produced by neurons, endothelial cells, and glial cells to optimize blood flow by enhancing vasodilation and VEGF production, as well as synaptic excitability85–87. Inhibition of NO increases APP expression, BACE1 activity, and Aβ production88. NO levels are increased in AD brain tissue and are hypothesized to retard amyloidogenic pathway progression. The apparent increase in NO to combat amyloid production is a double-edged sword as increased levels of NO are harmful to neural cells. Increased NO levels react with superoxide and produce peroxynitrate, which impedes tyrosine residue function89. In Alzheimer’s disease, nitration of tau proteins prevents them from stabilizing the microtubule lattice and nitrated tau has been observed in tau tangles and amyloid plaques90,91. Inflammation and excessive neuronal activation by glutamate can induce NOS, which increases the production of NO84. In addition, NO disrupts the iron-sulfur core within aconitase, altering the production of iron regulatory proteins. Therapies that can mitigate oxidative stress and inflammation may help mediate the progress of AD. It has been shown that vitamin E and Ibuprofen reduce amyloid and improve memory deficits92,93. The effect of these therapies may augment the innate antioxidant and inflammatory mechanisms that are disturbed in AD pathology.

Healthy neuronal cells have ROS and RNS detection and degradation pathways that buffer toxic molecular species. Nuclear factor E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) affects the homeostasis of ROS and RNS by initiating the antioxidant response element (ARE) pathway, resulting in catabolism of superoxide and peroxides, regeneration of oxidized cofactors and proteins, synthesis of reducing factors, expression of antioxidants, and metal chelation. Nrf2 is post-transcriptionally activated by several chemicals, including NO94. In Alzheimer’s disease transcription of Nrf2 is impaired and overexpression in an AD mouse model improves spatial memory95,96

Glutathione (GSH) is an important thiol based antioxidant found in the brain which is primarily produced by astrocytes. GSH plays a prominent role in the detoxification of ROS in the aging brain and is reduced in AD astrocytes and microglia cells. Furthermore, AD associated GSH depletion is observed in the inferior frontal and inferior temporal cortices; primarily areas damaged in AD97. Cultured astrocytes, microglia, and oligodendrocytes exposed to brief hypoxia express less GSH, reduced redox capacity, and apoptosis; partially explaining the decrease in AD cortical GSH 9899. Brain iron levels are related to damage induced by GSH depletion as the chelation of iron with DFO blocks cellular death in a reduced GSH milieu100.

Iron Storage and Transport in the Brain

The homeostatic balance of cellular iron in the brain is orchestrated through six distinct processes: transport, uptake, storage, utilization, redox cycling, and export. The bulk of iron transportation throughout the body is performed by the glycoprotein transferrin (Tf)101. Oligodendrocytes and choroid plexus cells are the only two neural cell types that produce Tf. Tf expression is decreased in AD within white matter and stains diffusely in and around the halo region of cortical Aβ plaques, suggesting that the AD brain has an impairment in this tissue5. It is unknown if the localized iron within the Aβ plaques offers a binding site for Tf where upon it becomes encapsulated within the plaque mass. In addition to its normal distribution within oligodendrocytes, Tf is also found abnormally associated within astrocytes of the AD brain which suggests a homeostatic iron imbalance in these cells9. The exact role of astrocytes in this regard is speculated to be related to the sequestration of oligodendrocyte Tf during demyelination or through the phagocytosis of amyloid with bound Tf.

Brain iron uptake is generally regulated by transferrin receptor 1 (TfR1) and divalent metal transporter 1 (DMT1)102,103. TfR1 is highly expressed on arterial endothelial cells at the BBB and choroid plexus epithelial cells at the BCSFB104. Expression on the luminal side is tightly controlled, decreasing when brain iron is replete or increasing when brain iron is depleted. TfR1 is also expressed on the surface of neuronal cells and reactive microglia, facilitating neuronal iron import and microglial iron sequestration during inflammation. Transferrin receptor expression is reduced in the Alzheimer’s disease hippocampus, a region heavily effected by early amyloidopathy105,106. The dentate gyrus (DG) of the hippocampus is a distinct region of the brain where neurogenesis occurs and newly divided cells highly express TfR1. The cause for the formation of large punctate Aβ plaques in the AD DG has not been thoroughly investigated but is hypothesized to be related to the inability of this region to limit its iron intake and a progressive increase in iron content. Iron import during non-Tf-bound-iron (NTBI) transport is facilitated by DMT1, whose gene sequence (SLC11A2) is located adjacent to regions commonly mutated in AD on the long arm of chromosome 12107. In addition, inflammatory cytokines increase the expression of DMT1 within neurons, astrocytes, and microglia in the AD brain108.

Cellular iron storage, detoxification, and necessary release is regulated by ferritin, a 450kDa protein complex consisting of 24 subunits of light (L-) and heavy (H-) ferritin 109. H-Ferritin serves as a ferroxidase, producing ferric iron within the core of the ferritin protein. L-ferritin seeds the quaternary structure with H-ferritin to hold up to 4500 ferric iron ions depending on intracellular iron levels110. Ferritin distribution during normal aging remains constant throughout the brain. The majority of ferritin is found heterogeneously in oligodendrocytes, but it is also present in neurons, protoplasmic astrocytes, and microglia. In vivo MRI measures reveals that basal ganglia ferritin is greater in younger late onset AD patients compared to controls, with the difference being absent in older late onset AD patients111. The AD brain presents with robust microglial ferritin around amyloid plaques and blood vessels112. Elevated levels of CSF ferritin are apparent in AD and it is unclear if ferritin enters the CSF from the blood or brain parenchyma. It is known that CSF ferritin increases after a subarachnoid haemorrhage and can be produced intrathecally following a bleed113,114.

Iron is utilized by mitochondrial proteins, such as frataxin, mitoNEET, and numerous other enzymes in the brain that require iron to act as an electron carrier115,116. Deficiency of frataxin is noted in Friedreich’s ataxia, the disease in which it was first described. While the physiological function of frataxin is unclear, it is believed to act as an iron chaperone in the assembly of iron-sulfur clusters for which neurons have high demand. In addition, an extra-mitochondrial frataxin was recently discovered to stabilize the Fe-S cluster in aconitase offering molecular control of cytosolic aconitase/IRP1117. MitoNEET is an integral iron containing protein in the outer leaflet of mitochondria. It is implicated in moderating the maximal respiratory rate by controlling the amount of iron imported into the mitochondria and controls oxidative species produced by mitochondrial respiration116. Reduction of mitoNEET leads to enhanced mitochondrial respiratory capacity through increased matrix incorporation of iron and elevated oxidative stress117. Damage or dysfunction of frataxin and mitoNeet is speculated to be involved in several facets of AD including ROS control, redox control, and heme metabolism; however, no studies have directly connected mitoNeet and frataxin dysfunction to amyloid production.

The reduction and oxidative (redox) cycling of iron is required to meet cellular energy demands through which ROS are generated. Careful compartmentalization during redox cycling by neural proteins facilitates detoxification and shuttling of iron throughout the brain. Extracellular and intracellular H-ferritin detoxifies and stores iron by oxidizing soluble Fe2+ to insoluble Fe3+. Ferrous iron is oxidized by ceruloplasmin and hephaestin and is subsequently effluxed as Fe2+ by means of ferroportin and Tf. Reduction of Fe3+ by an endosomal STEAP3 and peripheral membrane cellular prion protein (PrPc) facilitates the influx of iron by means of TfR and NTBI118. PrPc is present at its highest levels in neurons of the brain, but it is also present at lower levels in neural glial cells119,120. Binding of Aβ to PrPc impairs ferrireductase activity and the loss of PrPc results in the iron overloading of the brain paired with elevated Tf and TfR1 transcription, as discussed in detail in the next section121,122.

Export of iron is predominantly facilitated by the transmembrane protein ferroportin. Ferroportin transports ferrous intracellular iron in tandem with ferroxidases, such as ceruloplasmin, to oxidize and transport ferric iron into the extracellular domain. It is hypothesized that a region within the E2 domain of sAPP stabilizes ferroportin at the cell surface and leads to increased iron efflux123,124. It is unknown how this function differs before and after APP cleavage by alpha and beta secretase. Once extracellular, apo-transferrin binds ferric iron and is shuttled to a transferrin receptor on a nearby neuron or it is hypothesized to be carried out of the brain via binding to transferrin receptors on the apical surface of an arterial endothelial cell of the BBB or the basal surface of an ependymal cell at the BCSFI. Ferric iron can also be reduced and imported into the cell via NTBI transport. If iron is not oxidized in the ferroportin core, the hormone hepcidin binds to ferroportin and triggers the internalization and degradation of the receptor-ligand complex125. Hepcidin is mostly secreted by the liver to control peripheral iron levels, but neural expression is elevated on activated astrocytes and microglia exposed to inflammatory cytokines108,126. Ferroportin reduction in an AD mouse model is associated with heme granular deposits adjacent to damaged blood vessels suggesting that vascular dysfunction is altering iron flow and homeostasis in the AD brain127.

Iron protein transcription and translation

Iron balance in all cell types is regulated by the transcription of hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) 1 and 2. HIF1 and HIF2 are structurally similar, but they have unique glycolytic control, expressed in discrete cell types in the brain128–130. HIF consists of a cytosolic subunit HIFα and the nuclear subunit HIFβ. The HIF heterodimer forms in a low iron, low oxygen, or high NO conditions to produce target RNA transcripts with iron regulatory elements (IREs), including TfR1 and DMT1. HIFα degradation is mediated by the ubiquitin-proteasome system when iron and oxygen are available. Ischemic events, iron loading, or disrupted proteasomal function alter HIF function and lower TfR1 and DMT1 levels in the AD brain. Recent work reveals that PSEN1/PSEN2 modulates the functional response to hypoxia by altering HIFα expression131. Stabilizing HIF with a prolyl-hydroxylase inhibitor in normal aging mice enhances hippocampal memory, providing a potential therapy for AD132. Iron chelators, such as M30, upregulate HIF and HIF-activating compounds in cortical neurons133.

Iron regulatory protein 1 (IRP1) or IRP2 bind to hairpin IREs present in the untranslated regions (UTRs) of protein mRNA which are important for iron storage and transport134. IRP1 functions as an aconitase in a high Fe, low O2, or low NO environment. Inverse to these conditions it binds a UTR IRE at either the 5′ or 3′ position of the pre-translated RNA transcripts. When the UTR IRE is in the 5′ position, RNA polymerase is blocked from translating the target protein; as is the case for H-/L-ferritin, ferroportin, APP, HIFα, and PrPc. If the UTR IRE is in the 3′ position, IRPs stabilize the mRNA and facilitate the translation of the target protein such as TfR1 and DMT1. IRP2 acts similarly to IRP1, except that it is inactivated via ubiquitination under sufficient iron conditions. IRP has an increased affinity to IRE in the AD brain explaining the elevation of iron levels without a rise in ferritin production135. The mechanism behind this stability is not understood and is speculated to be related to the rise in endogenous ribonuclease activity observed in AD135.

Brain Perfusion

AD and iron dyshomeostasis are hypothesized to correlate to a disruption of brain vasculature. Micro-casting of AD mouse model brains reveals that there are alterations of the microvasculature accompanied by Aβ attachment and deposition. Aged transgenic mouse brain vessels are occluded and terminate at Aβ plaques, causing small gaps in the micro-vasculature net around which angiogenesis is occurring 136. While the relationship between AD, iron homeostasis, and cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA) is not fully understood, we hypothesize that brain perfusion and iron dyshomeostasis are related to amyloid generation.

Cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA) results in the deposition of Aβ in the meningeal and intracerebral vessels. CAA presents in over 50% of elderly individuals and is also found in 50% of AD cases highlighting that it is a common occurrence in the aging brain but does not always associate with AD137. There is a distinction of iron loading in AD with and without CAA; tissue from AD patients with severe CAA had significantly higher non-heme iron levels especially in the walls of large vessels138.

It is hypothesized that improper clearance of Aβ and the buildup of iron at the BBB can lead to aberrant angiogenesis and senescence of the cerebrovascular system. These environmental conditions begin a process of neurovascular uncoupling, vessel regression with vascular smooth muscle loss, brain hypoperfusion, and neurovascular inflammation. Ultimately, these conditions lead to BBB leakage, improper drainage, chemical imbalance in the neuronal environment, and synaptic dysfunction and loss73. CAA and iron deposition lead to the degradation of cytoskeletal elements and aquaporin-4 channels localized on astrocytic end feet at the BBB139. There is also a concomitant loss of glucose transporter-1 and lactate transporter in these astrocytes140. Further research needs to be conducted to illustrate if the initial ischemia and deposition of Aβ and iron at the cerebral wall is dependent on brain disease or peripheral dysfunction.

The source of amyloid deposition is heterogeneous; concussion and hemorrhage increase the risk of developing Aβ in the brain141. Aβ can bind to red blood cell (RBC) heme, a process that increases with aging, and incubation of erythrocytes with Aβ decreases NOS synthesis, causing deformity and increased cellular volume142–144. It is unclear how RBC Aβ levels correlate with CAA; however, RBC dysfunction helps explain the hypoperfusion and heme deposition at occluded vessels in AD.

Recent findings indicate that a paravascular pathway exists in the brain, which facilitates CSF flow through the brain parenchyma and allows clearance of interstitial solutes and Aβ145. This glymphatic system is dependent on aquaporin-4, arterial pulsation, and is enhanced during sleep146. It is unclear without further work describing extracellular iron clearance if impairment of this process in AD leads to poor Aβ clearance or if CAA and iron deposition precede these alterations.

Neuron

Neurons display TfR1 more than any other cell type in the brain as its expression mediates iron import into these cells (Fig. 3). Iron bound Tf has a high affinity for TfR1 and is regulated through competitive binding with HFE, a major histocompatibility complex class I-like molecule. HFE mutations (H63D and C282Y) increase Tf/TfR1 binding and lead to hemochromatosis and oxidative stress in the brain147. H63D neurons have been shown to express higher APP and Aβ42 and in vitro Aβ induces apoptosis via mitochondrial dysfunction and caspase activation148. The knowledge that 29.7% of the Caucasian population are carriers for HFE mutations highlights the importance of this polymorphism149. Transferrin (C2) and HFE mutations, leading to iron overload, are also strongly correlated to Alzheimer’s disease107,150,151. Any known population benefit for these mutations is not well understood, but recent findings suggest that Tf mutations provide a means to counteract bacterial iron piracy in primates during infection152.

When TfR1 forms a complex with Tf, it is taken into the cell via clathrin mediated endocytosis (Fig. 3a). Within the endosome, Fe3+ is released from Tf upon acidification and STEAP3 reduces the iron to Fe2+ for export from the endosome into the cytoplasm by DMT1. The endosome is recycled back to the cell surface to redeposit HFE, TfR1, and DMT1. Ferroportin shuttles ferrous iron into its channel and works in tandem with ferroxidases, such as ceruloplasmin, to shuttle ferric iron out. Released ferric iron can bind to Tf or it can be reduced and taken back into the cell via NTBI transport. It is hypothesized that Aβ modifies this process through ferric iron interaction preventing binding with Tf, hindering iron transport.

Previous work has shown that soluble tau is necessary to shuttle APP to the neuronal surface so that it can interact with ferroportin iron export (Fig. 3b). Blocking soluble tau results in neuronal iron overload, as does knocking out APP153,154. Neuronal cell cultures demonstrate that Fe3+ induces hyperphosporylated tau (pTau) aggregation and Fe2+ generated oxidative radicals can induce tau hyperphosphorylation via activation of the extracellular signal regulated kinase1/2 (Erk1/2) pathway or the mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway (MAPK)155–157. In AD, increased iron co-localizes with insoluble tau tangles and facilitates the loss of soluble tau, further perturbating tau-mediate APP shuttling and ferroportin iron export141,153. The usage of iron chelators highlights this relationship as they decrease the phosphorylation of tau and its aggregation45. The loss of soluble tau prevents the tau stabilization of microtubules, altering molecular transport important for neurotransmission, synapse stability, and cellular health158.

Phosphorylated tau tangles develop in the axon hillock, soma, and axon of neurons (Fig. 3h). Recent work has shown that tau aggregates can be transferred to adjacent cells and downstream cells synaptically connected in a prion-like manner159. This spread leads to sequential cellular degeneration at the synapse, axon, and soma 160. This agrees with the finding that the presence of pTau at the synapse has been shown to increase the synaptic toxicity of amyloid oligomers. There are two potential synergistic mechanisms by which iron-amyloid induced degeneration is related to pTau pathology. 1) Amyloid cannot sequester all of the extraneuronal iron, leading to increased transport of intraneuronal iron via NTBI, increased phosphorylation of tau, and neuronal dysfunction. 2) Elevated intraneuronal iron increases APP processing and the level of extracellular amyloid oligomers, consequentially leading to amyloid-pTau toxicity at the synapse. In addition to inter-neuronal cytoskeletal perturbations, alterations in the cholesterol dynamics modify the cellular membrane fluidity.

AD is positively correlated with increased serum cholesterol161. Cholesterol metabolites traveling in the blood from the liver elevate cholesterol levels in the brain, clarifying the interaction between serum cholesterol and de novo brain synthesis. Aβ levels are decreased in an AD mouse model that synthesizes 50% less sterol. Conversely, induced hypercholesteremia in a rabbit animal model fed a cholesterol rich diet increases amyloidosis and cortical distribution of iron162. As neuronal cholesterol increases, the fluidity of the membrane is reduced and lipid raft composition is altered, decreasing α-secretase contact with APP163. Low cholesterol is linked with increased α-secretase activity and decreased production of toxic Aβ oligomers164,165. There is evidence that β-secretase translation is upregulated by intracellular cholesterol and downregulated by cholesterol synthesis inhibition166. In addition, γ-secretase activity is dependent on cholesterol found in lipid rafts; removing cholesterol prevents γ-secretase activity and Aβ production167. Human observations reveal that alterations in CNS cholesterol synthesis are related to neurodegeneration and in particular the cerebral accumulation of pTau168. Taken together, increasing cholesterol pushes the brain into an AD amyloidogenic state (Fig. 3d). The process becomes more complex when observing the effects of cholesterol synthesis byproducts.

Brain derived 24S-hydroxycholesterol downregulates the β-cleavage of APP, decreases cholesterol synthesis, and upregulates APOE; aiding in the efflux of excess cholesterol from the brain. Peripheral 27S-hydroxycholesterol from the liver crosses the BBB and may be linked to hypercholesteremia in the brain where upon APP and Aβ metabolize cholesterol to oxysterol 7-beta hydroxycholesterol; a neurotoxic byproduct which contributes to oxidative stress169.

PrPc regulates iron influx through ferrireductase activity at the cell surface and interaction with DMT1 and the Zip Fe/Zn transporter to shuttle ferrous iron across the cellular plasma membrane independently of TfR1170. PrPc also facilitates normal cell function by modulating molecular pathways, such as stress inducible factor 1, and inducing growth and synaptic function. The binding of PrPc to amyloid oligomers present in the AD brain increases tau expression to help shuttle more APP to the cell surface; decreasing neuronal iron while increasing Aβ production. This adversely affects neurons as NMDAR expression is decreased when PrPc is exposed to amyloid oligomers171 (Fig. 3c). The depletion of NMDAR is subsequently followed by synaptic loss and cell death via the FYN pathway121. The misfolding of PrPc into PrP-scrapie in Cruetzfeldt-Jakob disease leads to iron dyshomeostasis and elevated PrPSc has been found in the AD brain122,172.

Long-lasting L-Type voltage gated calcium channels are localized to the soma and dendrites of neurons and glial cells, coupling membrane depolarization in neurons to gene expression, synaptic efficacy, and cell survival. Activation leads to a primary influx of calcium and secondary transport of iron through these channels when extracellular iron increases (Fig. 3f). This process leads to neuronal iron overloading and toxicity173,174. The same channels facilitate iron protection or iron burden depending on the cell type and iron overloading status174,175.

Iron regulatory protein production is tightly regulated by iron and oxygen concentration. Decreased oxygen levels increases TfR and DMT expression and decreased ferroportin production, leading to elevated iron loading within the cell (Fig. 3g). Increased NO may be a compensatory mechanism to improve blood flow in ischemia, underlining vascular pathology as a potential shift in iron homeostasis. Nitric oxide synthase activity is increased in AD leading to amplified free radical production as well as NO which, in turn, disrupts IRP function and reduces iron export176.

Astrocyte

Astrocytes function within the neuronal network to bridge cells and connect them to the vasculature and ventricular systems (Fig. 4). Astrocyte glia limitans end-foot processes surround endothelial cells to create the BBB and regulate traffic into the brain parenchyma. The small interstitial space separating the glia limitans and endothelial cells must be traversed to allow penetration into the brain. Under healthy conditions, astrocytes acquire iron across the interstitial space using distinct NTBI mechanisms such as citrate, ATP, ascorbic acid, DMT1, and Zip177,178 (Fig. 4a). High iron conditions stimulate astrocytes to become reactive where upon they become enlarged with cellular processes. Astrocytes strongly express ferritin upon stimulation with iron and are highly resistant to iron toxicity. They convey a neuroprotective role through the intake of excess extracellular iron via the upregulation of ferritin synthesis, DMT1, L-type Ca2+ channels, transient receptor potential (TRP) channels, ATP secretion, endocytosis of debris, and downregulation of ferroportin178–180; allowing astrocytes to act like an iron sink19. Astrocytes increase APP and β-secretase expression under high iron conditions, illustrating that these cells are similar to neurons in how they utilize APP and Aβ to regulated excess iron181. Under healthy conditions, astrocytic iron is believed to be released from ferritin via lysosomal degredation and the resulting free iron is exported with ferroportin182. Evidence suggests that iron efflux from astrocytes plays a role in remyelination through a direct interaction with oligodendrocyte precursor cells or indirectly by activating microglial cells183. However, when astrocytes fail to return to a resting state in AD they diminish their metabolic support184.

Astrocytes are the only cells in the brain that facilitate glycogen and glutamate synthase, which is utilized for glucose metabolism by hypoglycemic neurons and oligodendrocytes184. Astrocyte-neuron lactate shuttling is shown to be critical for long-term memory formation which becomes weak in AD, preventing the sharing of lactate 185–189 (Fig. 4c). Blood insulin levels play a role in astrocyte function as in vitro exposure to insulin promotes glycogen storage and cell proliferation in primary human astrocytes190. There is evidence that suggests insulin plays a role in amyloidosis as high levels of physiological insulin infusion increase APP and Aβ42 production191. Patients in early stages of type 2 diabetes show brain dysfunction while diabetic patients 55 and older on insulin sensitizer, metformin, were less likely to acquire dementia192,193. The mechanism by which this occurs is hypothesized to be related to either hyperinsulinemia upregulation of BACE1 and APP, decreased Aβ degradation activity of insulin degrading enzyme (IDE), or decreased mitochondria mitoNEET activity (Fig. 4d)194.

Apolipoprotein E (APOE), predominantly produced by astrocytes, has been identified as an associated factor with late onset AD195. APOE’s primary role is that of a cholesterol transporter, however it also regulates Aβ transport, metabolism, aggregation, and deposition196. APOE comes in three human population polymorphisms: ε2 (8%), ε3 (77%), and ε4 (15%)197. ε4 is significantly associated with the onset and severity of AD with prevelance in 40% of AD patients198,199. ε2 has been shown to be protective against AD, however it also increases the incidence of cardiovascular disease200. APOE binds Aβ in an isoform-dependent manner ε2&gt; ε3&gt; ε4 and facilitates the clearance of Aβ by either its lysosomal degradation within astrocytes or shuttling Aβ out of the brain via the BBB or BCSFI201–203. Under non-amyloidogenic conditions, APOE enables the clearance of Aβ by either facilitating its degradation in the brain or shuttling it out of the brain via the BBB or BCSFI. APOE binds LRP1, LDLR, and HSPG present on neurons, vascular endothelial cells and neurons. These receptors are responsible for lipid metabolism and are present in all major cellular pathways that clear Aβ204. Aβ not complexed with APOE has been shown to block these receptors, inhibiting APOE metabolism and transport205 (Fig. 4f).

During amyloidosis APOE seeds amyloid deposition independent of fibrilogenesis in an ε4&gt;ε3 manner and it is unknown how metals interact within this process. There is a strong positive correlation between APOE and CSF ferritin levels in ε4 carriers and patients with low APOE or high ferritin in the CSF showed greater brain atrophy206. It is hypothesized that APOE functions to lower neuronal iron as APOE KO mice exhibit elevated brain iron206. Cells overexpressing APOE have less ferritin and WT cells exposed to iron increased APOE expression206. APOE attenuates Aβ induced astrogliosis in culture, but it is unknown how astrogliosis alters APOE levels207. Reactive astrocytes elevate the expression of haptoglobin, which increases binding of Aβ with APOE208 (Fig. 4e). However, under stress conditions, APOE becomes fragmented resulting in increased Aβ deposition, mitochondrial, and cytoskeletal damage. Decreasing APOE has been shown to reduce amyloid plaque formation in AD mouse models, but the importance of APOE for cholesterol homeostasis and as a Aβ/Fe shuttle may make it harmful as a long-term treatment209.

Oligodendrocyte

Oligodendrocytes are unique to the brain as they are the only cell with intracellularly synthesized Tf, express the Tim2 ferritin transporter, and contain a large amount of the brain’s lipids and cholesterol (Fig. 5). In addition to this, oligodendrocytes contain the majority of the healthy brain’s iron in the core of ferritin complexes. High concentrations of iron are required during myelination and levels must be tightly controlled to maintain iron homeostasis. As demyelination and myelin breakdown outpace remyelination during normal aging, ferritin iron and free iron collect in the extracellular space. In the healthy brain, proper iron management by other neural cells eliminates excessive iron toxicity in this domain. Normal brain white matter atrophies and loses 20% of its volume from age 30 to 80, while gray matter atrophies less than 6%210. MR imaging of the AD brain reveals that excessive brain atrophy is initiated by myelin degradation followed by GM atrophy; forming the hypothesis that increased myelin loss may contribute to subsequent GM atrophy32. The volume of white matter lesions are inversely related to proper APOE function in middle-aged and elderly subjects, suggesting that impaired cholesterol metabolism and oligodendrocyte damage are related211. Oligodendrocytes serve as the brain’s primary pool of cholesterol and lipids. Lipidation byproducts in the blood are a biomarker for the onset of memory impairment in AD212. This is most likely due to the loss of plasma membrane from myelin and neuronal synapsis. Impaired lipid and cholesterol metabolism can also lead to hypercholesteremia, which was earlier described as being harmful in AD213,214.

The mechanism of oligodendrocytes Tim2 ferritin receptor endocytosis is unlike neuronal Tf endocytosis as ferritin is not recycled back into the extracellular space (Fig. 5a). Tim2 bound ferritin endocytosis is followed by lysosomal degredation and elevated endogenous ferritin synthesis215. Tim2 acts as the iron uptake pathway for oligodendrocytes and is integral to oligodendrocye health and iron regulation. As Aβ fragments in vitro are observed to be cytotoxic to oligodendrocytes in a dose dependent manner, damage to oligodendrocytes during AD may impair the clearance of ferritin in the brain and leave most of the iron storage to astrocytes216.

Oligodendrocytes uniquely synthesize Tf with no known secretion mechanism. While it is unclear why oligodendrocytes synthesize Tf, the current hypothesis suggests that Tf may be necessary to transport Fe along the long stretches of myelin wrappings to and from the soma. Decreased Tf in AD can impair oligodendrocytes from properly transporting iron9 (Fig. 5c). Similar to astrocytes, oligodendrocytes express APP to aid in iron export or as an iron binding agent during bouts of iron overload. Increased APP expression in white matter during brain trauma may well indicate the proteins role in the sequestration of iron during myelin damage. The high expression of APP also illustrates the cells role as a potential source for Aβ aggregation217. Myelin breakdown can expose APP to β-secretase on neighboring neurons, facilitating the amyloidogenic process (Fig. 5d).

Microglia

Quiescent microglia in the brain contain highly branched ramified processes in their resting state (Fig. 6). Hypoxia, trauma, and exposure to inflammatory molecules cause microglia to shrink into an amoeboid form that serves as the brain’s macrophage. Microglia respond to a number of molecular signals and are attracted via Aβ and ATP chemotaxis. As such, amyloidogenesis and astrogliosis mediate microglial movement toward a sites of localized inflammation218.

Microglia recognize Aβ via CD36-α6β1-CD47 leading to the phagocytosis of iron bound Aβ aggregates, lysosomal degradation, and the production of ROS. Active microglia surrounding large Aβ plaques synthesize elevated levels of ferritin to form a ferritin laden border along the microglial cell membrane219. Continued intake and degredation of Aβ and iron bound to Aβ leads to increased levels of ROS and RNS with uncontrolled iron uptake. As AD progresses in the brain, Aβ and ferritin iron overwhelm and slow the efficiency of the microglial lysosome220. In addition, the acidic environment of the microglial lysosome has been suggested to favor Aβ aggregation202,221. Improper degradation of ferritin in the microglial lysosome is hypothesized to lead to the accumulation of toxic hemosiderin and magnetite deposits, which cannot be metabolized222 (Fig. 6d).

Small homogenous microvesicles (exosomes) are shed by all neural cell types via the release of multivesicular bodies along the endocytic pathway, serving as a means of exoplasmic communication between cells (Fig. 6f). Microglial microvesicles interact with soluble Aβ and initiate the formation of Aβ oligomers that are toxic to synapses223. Macropinocytosis of exosomes produced by damaged oligodendrocytes cause microglia to release inflammatory cytokines224 (Fig. 6g). CSF microvesicle concentration is correlated with white matter damage in MCI and with hippocampal atrophy in late onset AD225. This follows the trend of white matter damage prior to gray matter atrophy in AD, as previously described. It has been suggested that hippocampal microglia activation in the presence of excess Aβ42 facilitates the formation of toxic Aβ oligomers that progress brain-wide via white matter damage and microglial activation225. Hypoxic conditions during AD increase IRP activity and TfR expression of microglial, leading to continued ROS and RNS production and further inflammatory cytokine release (Fig. 6h).

Discussion – The Big Picture

The integration of iron dyshomeostasis and amyloidogenesis denotes that concomitant features of both synergistically amalgamate along related paths towards Alzheimer’s pathology (Figs. 7 and 8). Microcapillary lesions contribute to a wide array of problems that may contribute to the AD process and propagate increased extracellular iron. Proper BBB regulation is no longer maintained allowing hemoglobin, transferrin, ferritin, and free iron from the blood to enter the brain contributing to iron overload. Cerebrovascular breakdown is linked to several factors including impaired metabolic transport across the BBB, reactive microglia bypassing the glial sheath, endothelial degeneration, and endfoot separation. Astrocytic endfeet normally contain a high concentration of mitochondria and surround the endothelial vascular tube forming the perivascular endfoot membrane226. Disruption of the AD BBB correlates with impaired GLUT1 and lactate transporter functionality as well as astrocyte endfoot withdrawal and astrogliosis; all of which precede Aβ deposition140. BBB leakage progresses with age, especially with APOE deficiency compounded with brain injury227,228. Astrocytes help distribute iron throughout the brain and clear excess extracellular iron. AD astrocytes abnormally store increased amounts of ferritin, APP, and Aβ intracellularly. It is unclear if this process contributes to plaque formation or if it is related to the failure of astrocyte or microglial lysosomal and iron export processes.

We hypothesize that amyloid production increases to ameliorate iron overload and patch the damaged vascular system. The time course of this progression is congruent with the plateauing of brain iron levels as early onset Alzheimer’s disease first presents itself during this period. The continued heterogeneity of iron levels in the aged population past this plateau and the incidence of iron incorporation in amyloid plaques further provide indication of a plausible interaction between these processes (Fig. 2). Regions which have relatively lower concentrations of iron, such as the frontal lobe and temporal lobes, form amyloid pathology71. Whereas regions with high iron content, such as the brainstem, motor cortex and cerebellum, are not affected by amyloidosis. We hypothesize that low iron brain regions are more susceptible to changes in iron homeostasis, elevated free iron, and subsequent amyloidosis compared to endogenous high iron regions which, conceivably, are better equipped to maintain iron equilibrium. Increased free neuronal iron upregulates APP translation and, when paired with aberrant secretase activity, leads to increased extracellular Aβ42, tau phosphorylation, neuronal toxicity, dysfunction, destabilization, and intraneuronal tau tangle formations.

Genetic mutations may convey a patient subset to be less suited to manage iron overload while other mutations prompt patients to follow an amyloidogenic path in a high iron milieu. The relationship between these two circumstances represent a crossroad for Alzheimer’s progression. The higher incidence of AD in women is also of interest and cannot purely be attributed to increased female longevity. Women are more susceptible to the APOE ε4 variant and female AD mouse models present greater amyloid deposition than their male counterparts229,230. Our iron-amyloid hypothesis of AD helps to explain, in part, why this may be the case. The amount and density of long-term iron stored in the male (600mg) body within ferritin is double that of women (300mg). This suggests that the useable iron reservoir in women is in constant flux between intake and redox cycling. We hypothesize that females utilize short-term iron storage for immediate or intermediate usage compared to men (eg Tf or NTBI). Iron in this state may be more susceptible to interactions with Aβ and APOE leading to the genesis of toxic amyloid species.

The pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease is heterogeneous with numerous physiological features correlated to its progression. Brain iron overload does not always lead to amyloidogenesis and Alzheimer’s disease and, conversely, amyloidogenesis does not always lead to iron overload231. Current literature supports the hypothesis that there is a link between iron and amyloid dyshomeostasis in the AD brain. However, the exact nature of this relationship remains unclear and encompasses multiple possibilities; the aging AD brain may absorb more iron, transport iron improperly, or insufficiently release iron. Further distinction between cell culture, animal model, and human studies require assessment due to differential endogenous iron levels, variations in oxygen saturation, and contributions from various cell types and pathologies making translation between these systems difficult. The finding that amyloid plaque burden does not correlate well to memory loss in a patient subset suggests that there is a plaque-independent mechanism that is responsible for AD memory impairment.

Therapies aimed at reducing amyloid have proved problematic in clinical trials as the removal of amyloid from the brain releases free iron and destabilizes microvessels232. Targeted reduction of Aβ deposition and amyloidogenesis with secretase inhibitors and immunotherapies leads to iron accumulation and cognitive deficits. These outcomes are not observed in AD model mice perhaps due to lower endogenous iron levels in mice than that found in the human brain or translational modification of humanized sequences. The data support the hypothesis that amyloid in the brain serves as part of an iron maintenance mechanism and is initially protectant against iron-mediated damage. A better understanding of the time course of iron dyshomeostasis and AD onset are needed to help guide therapies that can stabilize iron levels before they can become harmful in at-risk populations. Iron chelating agents, such as clioquinol, given at an appropriate time may be able to curb the onset of AD. HupA and J147 are experimental treatments for AD, which may function to lower amyloid levels and improve cognitive performance by reducing iron levels50,233. In the human brain it may be necessary to prophylactically treat with these types of compounds prior to amyloid formation to have an effect on brain health. To do so, the long lasting effects of such therapies and potential gender differences must be investigated.

The discovery that increased iron levels elevate APP expression along the amyloidogenic secretase pathway to efflux cellular iron reveals that iron management is central to the amyloid hypothesis67,234. An understanding of the iron regulatory systems within neural cells and its link to amyloid production will help in the generation of therapy strategies aimed to curb iron dyshomeostasis and amyloid formation as synergistic contributors to the Alzheimer’s disease process.

Funding for this project has been made available in part through the NIH-NIA (R03AG047461), The Charleston Conference on Alzheimer’s Disease Research Grant, The Barsumian Trust, The Neuroimaging Research Grant, and The George M. Leader Foundation.

Figure 1 The formation of amyloid plaques and the incorporation of iron. Amyloid plaque formation can be characterized by primary and secondary aggregation. During primary formation, ferric iron interacts with beta amyloid as it fluctuates between monomer, dimer, and tetramer formations. Iron-amyloid interactions increase ferrous iron, which can lead to the production of reactive oxygen species. Chronic interaction with iron leads to misfolded globules that can form beta-sheet intermediates and toxic soluble oligomers in the secondary aggregation phase. At a certain threshold of amyloid fibril formation, monomers can propagate the production of toxic soluble, bypassing the primary amyloid formation in a non-linear aggregation phase39. Iron can form coordinated covalent bonds with metal ions235. Magnetite iron (Fe+2 and Fe+3) is believed to become entombed within the dense mature fibril plaque core with hindered redox activity. The diffuse halo of protofibril amyloid beta 40/42 around the core contains ferric and ferrous iron and it is hypothesized that iron in this region is more susceptible to reductive-oxidative cycling. The mature amyloid plaque serves to deplete ferric iron necessary for brain function and propagate ferrous iron that leads to oxidative stress.

Figure 2 The hypothesized inverse relationship of brain iron elevation and relative cognitive decline in Alzheimer’s disease and an aging population. The mean brain iron concentration (black line) sharply increases early in life with little population variance. In midlife brain iron concentration plateaus but population variance expands71,236. Normal mental decline for an aged individual decreases slowly over time. The incidence of Early Onset AD and Late Onset AD correlate with increased iron and variability in the brain237–239.

Figure 3 The neuron in Alzheimer’s disease. A) Tf binds to TfR1 with augmentation through HFE interaction. Clathrin coat mediated endocytosis occurs, releasing ferrous iron into the cytoplasm via STEAP-3 reductase and DMT1 present in the endosome. Tf and TfR1 are recycled back the cell surface for further Tf binding240. B) Under healthy conditions soluble tau traffics APP to the membrane where it acts to stabilize ferroportin for iron export67,124. C) PrPc increases Non-Transferrin-Binding-Iron (NTBI) uptake by acting as a ferrireductase and increasing ferrous iron near the exoplasmic cell membrane118. In AD PrPC binding to amyloid oligomers disinhibits tau expression via the FYN pathway leading to increased APP expression at the cell surface121. FYN activation also causes reduced NMDA expression, which leads to synapse dysfunction and cell death121. D) Increased cell membrane cholesterol causes elevated β-secretase activity, which promotes Aβ42 levels along the amyloidogenic pathway166. E) Mitochondrial proteins help to store and reduce excessive oxidation from the TCA cycle115. Mitochondrial dysfunction is hypothesized to increase the labile iron pool241. F) High extracellular iron leads to the influx of iron into the neuron via Ca2+ channels, leading to toxicity174. G) Ischemia leads to hypoxia mediated HIF and IRP alterations; TfR1 expression is elevated and ferroportin expression is decreased leading to increased iron intake and ROS/RNS production99,242. H) Iron induced pTau aggregation throughout the neuron leads to microtubule destabilization and Aβ toxicity40,243.

Figure 4 The astrocyte in Alzheimer’s disease. A) Astrocytes acquire iron from NTBI sources, including citrate, ATP and ascorbic acid177. B) Astrocytes are scavenger cells, facilitating the cleanup of high extracellular iron concentrations via Zip, DMT1, VGCC and TRP channels. These importers become more active or upregulated during high extracellular iron conditions in Alzheimer’s disease178. C) The astrocyte-neuron shuttle facilitates a lactate energy source for neurons under high activity. This connection is weakened in AD by astrogliosis and microtubule pTau interference184. D) MitoNEET is an iron-containing protein that is an insulin sensor117. Insulin is sensed by the astrocyte, causing it to increase glycogen stores and lactate production. Insulin sensitivity is reduced in AD leading to neuronal dysfunction244. E) Astrocytes are a major source of APOE with increased export when exposed to Aβ196. Haptoglobin secretion is elevated during astrogliosis, facilitating the binding of Aβ to APOE204. F) LRP-1, LDLR, and HSPG facilitate APOE endocytosis. Aβ binds to these receptors and blocks APOE endocytosis and metabolism205. The extracellular increase in APOE is hypothesized to be a source of Aβ seeding. G) Astrogliosis protects oligodendrocytes exposed to Aβ by reducing ROS or removing Aβ through endocytosis245. H) Astrocytes produce the antioxidant glutathione and highly express ferritin. They are known to store high levels of iron while being resilient to ROS/RNS246. Decreased glutathione and ferroportin make astrocytes susceptible to iron toxicity in AD and the aging process. I) The ferroxidase ceruloplasmin is primarily expressed by astrocytes which promotes the influx of NTBI. Its activity is decreased in AD leading to an increase in the extracellular ferrous iron pool247. J) The astrocytic endfoot serves to regulate iron import into the healthy brain for which damage to these processes in AD lead to unregulated brain iron import140.

Figure 5 The oligodendrocyte in Alzheimer’s disease. A) Tim2 facilitates ferritin endocytosis and iron release via lysosomal degradation215. B) Normal breakdown and dysfunction of myelin with age releases iron and impairs trophic support248. Apoptotic oligodendrocytes release ferritin into the extracellular space. Loss of white matter can reduce ferritin storage in AD. C) Transferrin serves to transport iron precisely to metabolic regions of myelination. AD oligodendrocytes contain lower transferrin levels and have reduced myelination and remyelination9. D) Oligodendrocytes express APP and can secrete Aβ42217. Production and exposure to these proteins are heightened in demyelination and remyelination pathways. E) Loss of white matter in AD leads to neuronal cognitive decline and cell death74. F) It is likely that ROS from oligodendrocytes can lead to tau destabilization of microtubule mediated axonal trafficking, disrupting axonal transport towards and from synaptic terminals. G) Exosome release from damaged oligodendrocytes activate microglia to cause further demyelination224.

Figure 6 The microglia in Alzheimer’s disease. A) Microglia are drawn to the site of amyloidosis and astrogliosis via NTBI ATP and Aβ chemotaxis249. B) Microglia recognize Aβ via the CD36-CD47 receptor system leading to the phagocytosis Aβ fibrils and bound iron250. C) Amyloid is normally degraded via the lysosomal pathway and ferrous iron is stored in ferritin222. In the Alzheimer’s disease state, excess iron and amyloid overwhelm the lysosome and the decreased pH provides a suitable environment for amyloid aggregation. D) ROS/RNS produced from redox cycling of iron impairs the lysosomal breakdown of Aβ and promotes cleavage and neurotoxicity of tau222,251. E) Ferritin can be secreted from microglia through a non-classical secretory pathway. This process is impaired in AD, leading to an imbalance of iron transport to oligodendrocytes. F) Microvesicles secreted from activate microglia interact with soluble Aβ to form amyloid oligomers that cause oligodendrotoxicity and neurotoxicity223. G) Macropinocytosis of exosomes produced by damaged oligodendrocytes cause microglia to facilitate myelin degradation and inflammation224. H) Hypoxic conditions increase IRPs and TfR expression, leading to an increase in ROS and further cytokine release.

Figure 7 A systemic illustration of cellular iron cycling and amyloid production in the healthy brain. A) Blood and transferrin bound iron metabolites flow through a microcapillary vessel network. Transferrin receptor is highly expressed on the luminal surface of the vessel endothelial cells and binds to holo-transferrin. Tranferrin is transcytosed or endocytosed into the endothelial cell. Ferric iron is released into the interstitial space where it is temporarily bound to astrocyte secreted NTBI factors. It is then reduced by ferrireductases present on astrocyte endfoot processes and imported into the astrocyte via DMT1. B) Ferric iron is packed into astrocyte ferritin for temporary storage. C) Ferritin is broken down in a late endosome/lysosome to restore ferrous iron into the labile iron pool. D) ROS are minimized by the endogenous antioxidant glutathione. E) Ferrous iron is transported down astrocyte processes, oxidized to its ferric form by ceruloplasmin, and effluxed via ferroportin. F) Transferrin binds to ferric iron and is transported into neurons via clatherin-mediated endocytosis. G) Normal neuronal iron causes the post-translational expression of APP to occur via IRP1 inactivity. H) APP is cleaved by α-secretase and γ-secretase to produce non-amyloidogenic fragments. β-secretase activity is low due to low cell membrane cholesterol and extracellular iron levels. I) APOE is produced from the astrocyte rough endoplasmic reticulum and exported via a secretory pathway. J) Amyloid fragments bound to iron complex with APOE and are endocytosed and degraded in the astrocytic or microglial lysosome. K) Microglia import iron via transferrin endocytosis and export iron via ferroportin and ferritin exocytosis. L) Extracellular ferritin and ferric iron can be endocytosed via oligodendrocyte expressed Tim2 or NTBI import. Oligodendrocytes stabilize axons to provide insulation for action potentials and facilitate myelination-remyelination throughout life. M) Iron exits the brain through the ventricular CSF via transferrin, NTBI signaling, or APOE amyloid complexes.

Figure 8 A systemic illustration of cellular iron cycling and amyloid production in the Alzheimer’s disease brain. A) Microvascular events in the Alzheimer’s brain cause the deposition of Aβ along the luminal surface. Amyloid deposition occludes vessels and impairs the blood brain barrier allowing red blood cells to penetrate into the parenchyma, causing heme deposits to form near vessel walls. Aβ in the blood stream binds to and deforms circulating red blood cells causing impaired oxygen saturation. B) ROS present at the BBB cause astrocytes to withdraw their endfoot processes while secreting NTBI molecules and upregulating ferrous iron transporters. C) The increased influx of ferrous iron in astrocytes upregulate ferritin formation for intracellular iron storage. D) Glutathione is reduced in AD, exaggerating the effects of deleterious ROS. Activated astrocytes increase their iron load while expressing cytoplasmic APP. E) APOE secretion is elevated facilitating the sequestration of Aβ42 in the extracellular space. F) High extracellular iron concentration causes neurons to continually influx iron via NTBI and neuronal iron import. G) Neuronal iron export is enhanced through increased post-translational expression of APP which acts to export iron via ferroportin. H) Elevated cholesterol in the neuronal cell membrane alters secretase activity to elevate the production of Aβ42 production. I) Iron efflux from neuron helps seed Aβ42 progressing into Aβ fibrils and plaques. Microglia migrate toward activated astrocytes and Aβ deposits where they phagocytose Aβ plaques. J) Lysosomal degradation of Aβ plaques increase iron within the microglia which is in turn is incorporated into ferritin along their cytoplasmic border. Glutathione levels are decreased and the ferritin degradation and secretion pathway is impaired. Hemosiderin deposits form inside microglia further impairing their function. K) Reduction of ferritin export impairs oligodendrocytes iron uptake reducing remyelination. L) In addition, microvesicles communicated between microglia and oligodendrocytes cause myelinotoxicy and increased microglial inflammatory cytokine release. M) Demyelination sloughs off high amounts of toxic iron, lipids and cholesterol into the exoplasmic space. This process also exposes APP present in the myelin sheath, which can propagate amyloidosis. N) There is a reciprocal increase of iron proteins and ferrous iron in the CSF and a decrease of amyloid products in the CSF, which may reflect a failure of amyloid clearance out of parenchymal space.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


1 Den Dunnen WFA No disease in the brain of a 115-year-old woman Neurobiol Aging 29 1127 1132 2008 18534718
2 Hirtz D How common are the ‘common’ neurologic disorders? Neurology 68 326 337 2007 17261678
3 Hebert LE Scherr PA Bienias JL Bennett DA Evans DA Alzheimer disease in the US population: prevalence estimates using the 2000 census Arch Neurol 60 1119 1122 2003 12925369
4 Raven EP Lu PH Tishler Ta Heydari P Bartzokis G Increased iron levels and decreased tissue integrity in hippocampus of Alzheimer’s disease detected in vivo with magnetic resonance imaging J Alzheimer’s Dis 37 127 136 2013 23792695
5 Connor JR Snyder BS Beard JL Fine RE Mufson EJ REGIONAL DISTRIBUTION OF IRON AND IRON-REGULATORY PROTEINS IN THE BRAIN IN AGING AND ALZHEIMERS-DISEASE J Neurosci Res 31 327 335 1992 1573683
6 Ding B Correlation of iron in the hippocampus with MMSE in patients with Alzheimer’s disease J Magn Reson Imaging 29 793 8 2009 19306401
7 Meadowcroft MD Connor JR Smith MB Yang QX MRI and histological analysis of beta-amyloid plaques in both human Alzheimer’s disease and APP/PS1 transgenic mice J Magn Reson Imaging 29 997 1007 2009 19388095
8 Smith MA Harris PLR Sayre LM Perry G Iron accumulation in Alzheimer disease is a source of redox-generated free radicals Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 94 9866 9868 1997 9275217
9 Connor JR Menzies SL St Martin SM Mufson EJ A histochemical study of iron, transferrin, and ferritin in Alzheimer’s diseased brains J Neurosci Res 31 75 83 1992 1613823
10 Rottkamp CA Redox-active iron mediates amyloid-β toxicity Free Radic Biol Med 30 447 450 2001 11182300
11 Coby AJ Picardal F Shelobolina E Xu H Roden EE Repeated anaerobic microbial redox cycling of iron Appl Environ Microbiol 77 6036 6042 2011 21742920
12 Sheftel AD Mason AB Ponka P The long history of iron in the Universe and in health and disease Biochim Biophys Acta - Gen Subj 1820 161 187 2012
13 Shi Y Ghosh M Kovtunovych G Crooks DR Rouault TA Both human ferredoxins 1 and 2 and ferredoxin reductase are important for iron-sulfur cluster biogenesis Biochim Biophys Acta - Mol Cell Res 1823 484 492 2012
14 Rovira C Carloni P The iron-sulfur bond in cytochrome c J Phys Chem B 103 7031 7035 1999
15 Kennedy MC Emptage MH Dreyer JL Beinert H The role of iron in the activation-inactivation of aconitase J Biol Chem 258 11098 11105 1983 6309829
16 Ford GC Ferritin: design and formation of an iron-storage molecule Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 304 551 565 1984 6142491
17 Rouault Ta Iron metabolism in the CNS: implications for neurodegenerative diseases Nat Rev Neurosci 14 551 64 2013 23820773
18 Moos T Rosengren Nielsen T Skjørringe T Morgan EH Iron trafficking inside the brain J Neurochem 103 1730 40 2007 17953660
19 Hohnholt MC Dringen R Uptake and metabolism of iron and iron oxide nanoparticles in brain astrocytes Biochem Soc Trans 41 1588 1592 2013 24256259
20 Chen JH Shahnavas S Singh N Ong WY Walczyk T Stable iron isotope tracing reveals significant brain iron uptake in adult rats Metallomics 5 167 73 2013 23340610
21 Dallman PR Brain Iron in the Rat: Extremely Slow Turnoverin Normal Rats May Explain Long-Lasting Effects of Early Iron Deficiency J Nutr 107 1075 1081 1977 864518
22 Sasaki T Visualization of mitochondrial oxygen fixation in brain slices by gas-tissue autoradiography Brain Res 831 263 272 1999 10412005
23 Moos T Morgan EH Transferrin and transferrin receptor function in brain barrier systems Cell Mol Neurobiol 20 77 95 2000 10690503
24 Connor JR Benkovic Sa Iron regulation in the brain: histochemical, biochemical, and molecular considerations Ann Neurol 32 Suppl S51 S61 1992 1510381
25 Bartzokis G Schizophrenia: Breakdown in the well-regulated lifelong process of brain development and maturation Neuropsychopharmacology 27 672 683 2002 12377404
26 Connor JR Menzies SL Relationship of iron to oligodendrocytes and myelination Glia 17 83 93 1996 8776576
27 Rakic P Bourgeois JP Eckenhoff MF Zecevic N Goldman-Rakic PS Concurrent overproduction of synapses in diverse regions of the primate cerebral cortex Science 232 232 235 1986 3952506
28 Bartzokis G Age-related myelin breakdown: a developmental model of cognitive decline and Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 25 5 18 2004 14675724
29 Schoenemann PT Sheehan MJ Glotzer LD Prefrontal white matter volume is disproportionately larger in humans than in other primates Nat Neurosci 8 242 52 2005 15665874
30 Sherwood CC Aging of the cerebral cortex differs between humans and chimpanzees Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 108 13029 34 2011 21788499
31 Radlowski EC Johnson RW Perinatal iron deficiency and neurocognitive development Front Hum Neurosci 7 11 2013 23378833
32 Agosta F White matter damage in Alzheimer disease and its relationship to gray matter atrophy Radiology 258 853 63 2011 21177393
33 Jomova K Vondrakova D Lawson M Valko M Metals, oxidative stress and neurodegenerative disorders Mol Cell Biochem 345 91 104 2010 20730621
34 Sherriff FE Bridges LR Sivaloganathan S Early detection of axonal injury after human head trauma using immunocytochemistry for beta-amyloid precursor protein Acta Neuropathol 87 55 62 1994 8140894
35 Corrigan F Characterisation of the effect of knockout of the amyloid precursor protein on outcome following mild traumatic brain injury Brain Res 1451 87 99 2012 22424792
36 Ayton S Ceruloplasmin and β-amyloid precursor protein confer neuroprotection in traumatic brain injury and lower neuronal iron Free Radic Biol Med 69 331 7 2014 24509156
37 Khan A Dobson JP Exley C Redox cycling of iron by Abeta42 Free Radic Biol Med 40 557 69 2006 16458186
38 Zhang X Hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha (HIF-1alpha)-mediated hypoxia increases BACE1 expression and beta-amyloid generation J Biol Chem 282 10873 80 2007 17303576
39 Cohen SIA Proliferation of amyloid-β42 aggregates occurs through a secondary nucleation mechanism PNAS 110 9758 63 2013 23703910
40 Ittner LM Dendritic function of tau mediates amyloid-beta toxicity in Alzheimer’s disease mouse models Cell 142 387 397 2010 20655099
41 Lacor PN Synaptic targeting by Alzheimer’s-related amyloid beta oligomers J Neurosci 24 10191 10200 2004 15537891
42 Jiao Y Iron chelation in the biological activity of curcumin Free Radic Biol Med 40 1152 60 2006 16545682
43 Vaquero MP Mineral and vitamin status in elderly persons from Northwest Spain consuming an Atlantic variant of the Mediterranean diet Ann Nutr Metab 48 125 33 2004 15133316
44 Scarmeas N Stern Y Tang MX Mayeux R Luchsinger JA Mediterranean diet and risk for Alzheimer’s disease Ann Neurol 59 912 21 2006 16622828
45 Guo C Deferoxamine inhibits iron induced hippocampal tau phosphorylation in the Alzheimer transgenic mouse brain Neurochem Int 62 165 172 2013 23262393
46 Guo C Intranasal deferoxamine reverses iron-induced memory deficits and inhibits amyloidogenic APP processing in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 34 562 575 2013 22717236
47 Prasanthi JRP Deferiprone reduces amyloid-β and tau phosphorylation levels but not reactive oxygen species generation in hippocampus of rabbits fed a cholesterol-enriched diet J Alzheimers Dis 30 167 82 2012 22406440
48 Savory J Huang Y Wills MR Herman MM Reversal by desferrioxamine of tau protein aggregates following two days of treatment in aluminum-induced neurofibrillary degeneration in rabbit: implications for clinical trials in Alzheimer’s disease Neurotoxicology 19 209 214 1998 9553957
49 McLachlan DR Smith WL Kruck TP Desferrioxamine and Alzheimer’s disease: video home behavior assessment of clinical course and measures of brain aluminum Therapeutic drug monitoring 15 1993
50 Huang XT Reducing iron in the brain: a novel pharmacologic mechanism of huperzine A in the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 35 1045 54 2014 24332448
51 Ayton S Lei P Bush AI Metallostasis in Alzheimer’s disease Free Radic Biol Med 62 76 89 2013 23142767
52 Deibel MA Ehmann WD Markesbery WR Copper, iron, and zinc imbalances in severely degenerated brain regions in Alzheimer’s disease: Possible relation to oxidative stress J Neurol Sci 143 137 142 1996 8981312
53 Rogers JT An iron-responsive element type II in the 5′-untranslated region of the Alzheimer’s amyloid precursor protein transcript J Biol Chem 277 45518 28 2002 12198135
54 Bousejra-ElGarah F Bijani C Coppel Y Faller P Hureau C Iron(II) Binding to Amyloid-beta, the Alzheimer’s Peptide Inorg Chem 50 9024 9030 2011 21800824
55 Zecca L Iron and Other Metals in Neuromelanin, Substantia Nigra, and Putamen of Human Brain J Neurochem 62 1097 1101 2008 8113797
56 Holmes-Hampton GP Changing iron content of the mouse brain during development Metallomics 4 761 70 2012 22810488
57 Manook A Small-animal PET imaging of amyloid-beta plaques with [11C]PiB and its multi-modal validation in an APP/PS1 mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease PLoS One 7 e31310 2012 22427802
58 Heuer E Rosen RF Cintron A Walker LC Nonhuman primate models of Alzheimer-like cerebral proteopathy Curr Pharm Des 18 1159 69 2012 22288403
59 Ha C Ryu J Chan BP Metal ions differentially influence the aggregation and deposition of Alzheimer’s β-amyloid on a solid template Biochemistry 46 6118 6125 2007 17455909
60 Takeda A Essential trace metals and brain function Yakugaku Zasshi 124 577 585 2004 15340179
61 Liao CR Synchrotron FTIR reveals lipid around and within amyloid plaques in transgenic mice and Alzheimer’s disease brain Analyst 138 3991 7 2013 23586070
62 Everett J Ferrous iron formation following the co-aggregation of ferric iron and the Alzheimer’s disease peptide b-amyloid (1–42) J R Soc Interface 11 2014
63 Dahms SO Metal binding dictates conformation and function of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) E2 domain J Mol Biol 416 438 52 2012 22245578
64 Leskovjan aC Kretlow a Lanzirotti a Miller LM Synchrotron-based imaging detects metal and plaques in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Bioeng Proc Northeast Conf 54 55 2007 10.1109/NEBC.2007.4413276
65 Collingwood JF Three-dimensional tomographic imaging and characterization of iron compounds within Alzheimer’s plaque core material J Alzheimers Dis 14 235 245 2008 18560134
66 Maynard CJ Overexpression of Alzheimer’s disease amyloid-β opposes the age-dependent elevations of brain copper and iron J Biol Chem 277 44670 44676 2002 12215434
67 Duce JA Iron-Export Ferroxidase Activity of beta-Amyloid Precursor Protein Is Inhibited by Zinc in Alzheimer’s Disease Cell 142 857 867 2010 20817278
68 Becerril-Ortega J Bordji K Freret T Rush T Buisson A Iron overload accelerates neuronal amyloid-beta production and cognitive impairment in transgenic mice model of Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 35 2288 2301 2014 24863668
69 White AR Copper levels are increased in the cerebral cortex and liver of APP and APLP2 knockout mice Brain Res 842 439 444 1999 10526140
70 Schrag M Mueller C Oyoyo U Smith MA Kirsch WM Iron, zinc and copper in the Alzheimer’s disease brain: a quantitative meta-analysis. Some insight on the influence of citation bias on scientific opinion Prog Neurobiol 94 296 306 2011 21600264
71 Hallgren B Sourander P The effect of age on the non-haemin iron in the human brain 3 41 51 1958
72 Horowitz MP Greenamyre JT Mitochondrial iron metabolism and its role in neurodegeneration Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 20 2010
73 Zlokovic BV Neurovascular mechanisms of Alzheimer’s neurodegeneration Trends Neurosci 28 202 208 2005 15808355
74 Bartzokis G Alzheimer’s disease as homeostatic responses to age-related myelin breakdown Neurobiol Aging 32 1341 71 2011 19775776
75 Koedam EL Early-versus late-onset Alzheimer’s disease: More than age alone J Alzheimer’s Dis 19 1401 1408 2010 20061618
76 Mullan M Age of onset in familial early onset Alzheimer’s disease correlates with genetic aetiology Am J Med Genet 48 129 130 1993 8291565
77 Roth GM Sun B Greensite FS Lott IT Dietrich RB Premature aging in persons with Down syndrome: MR findings Am J Neuroradiol 17 1283 1289 1996 8871713
78 Harman D Aging: a theory based on free radical and radiation chemistry J Gerontol 11 298 300 1956 13332224
79 Piloni NE Fermandez V Videla LA Puntarulo S Acute iron overload and oxidative stress in brain Toxicology 314 174 82 2013 24120471
80 Yakes FM Van Houten B Mitochondrial DNA damage is more extensive and persists longer than nuclear DNA damage in human cells following oxidative stress Proc Natl Acad Sci 94 514 519 1997 9012815
81 Koppenol WH The Haber-Weiss cycle--70 years later Redox Rep 6 229 234 2001 11642713
82 Kudin AP Bimpong-Buta NYB Vielhaber S Elger CE Kunz WS Characterization of Superoxide-producing Sites in Isolated Brain Mitochondria J Biol Chem 279 4127 4135 2004 14625276
83 Aliaga ME Carrasco-Pozo C López-Alarcón C Olea-Azar C Speisky H Superoxide-dependent reduction of free Fe3+ and release of Fe2+ from ferritin by the physiologically-occurring Cu(I)-glutathione complex Bioorganic Med Chem 19 534 541 2011
84 Gu Z Nakamura T Lipton SA Redox reactions induced by nitrosative stress mediate protein misfolding and mitochondrial dysfunction in neurodegenerative diseases Molecular Neurobiology 41 55 72 2010 20333559
85 Lowenstein CJ Dinerman JL Snyder SH Nitric oxide: A physiologic messenger Annals of Internal Medicine 120 227 237 1994 8273987
86 Kimura H Hypoxia response element of the human vascular endothelial growth factor gene mediates transcriptional regulation by nitric oxide: control of hypoxia-inducible factor-1 activity by nitric oxide Blood 95 189 97 2000 10607702
87 Steinert JR Nitric Oxide Is an Activity-Dependent Regulator of Target Neuron Intrinsic Excitability Neuron 71 291 305 2011 21791288
88 Austin SA Santhanam AV Katusic ZS Endothelial nitric oxide modulates expression and processing of amyloid precursor protein Circ Res 107 1498 502 2010 21127294
89 Nakamura T Lipton SA S-nitrosylation of critical protein thiols mediates protein misfolding and mitochondrial dysfunction in neurodegenerative diseases Antioxid Redox Signal 14 1479 1492 2011 20812868
90 Reynolds MR Tau nitration occurs at tyrosine 29 in the fibrillar lesions of Alzheimer’s disease and other tauopathies J Neurosci 26 10636 10645 2006 17050703
91 Kummer MP Nitration of tyrosine 10 critically enhances amyloid β aggregation and plaque formation Neuron 71 833 844 2011 21903077
92 Wilkinson BL Ibuprofen attenuates oxidative damage through NOX2 inhibition in Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 33 2012
93 Sano M A Controlled Trial of Selegiline, Alpha-Tocopherol, or Both as Treatment for Alzheimer’s Disease New England Journal of Medicine 336 1216 1222 1997 9110909
94 Um HC Jang JH Kim DH Lee C Surh YJ Nitric oxide activates Nrf2 through S-nitrosylation of Keap1 in PC12 cells Nitric Oxide - Biology and Chemistry 25 161 168 2011
95 Mladenka P Simůnek T Hübl M Hrdina R The role of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species in cellular iron metabolism Free Radic Res 40 263 72 2006 16484042
96 Caldeira GL Ferreira IL Rego AC Impaired transcription in Alzheimer’s disease: key role in mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress J Alzheimers Dis 34 115 31 2013 23364141
97 Karelson E The cerebrocortical areas in normal brain aging and in Alzheimer’s disease: Noticeable differences in the lipid peroxidation level and in antioxidant defense Neurochem Res 26 353 361 2001 11495345
98 Makarov P Kropf S Wiswedel I Augustin W Schild L Consumption of redox energy by glutathione metabolism contributes to hypoxia/reoxygenation-induced injury in astrocytes Mol Cell Biochem 286 95 101 2006 16583144
99 Rathnasamy G Ling EA Kaur C Iron and iron regulatory proteins in amoeboid microglial cells are linked to oligodendrocyte death in hypoxic neonatal rat periventricular white matter through production of proinflammatory cytokines and reactive oxygen/nitrogen species J Neurosci 31 17982 95 2011 22159112
100 Chouraqui E Deferoxamine blocks death induced by glutathione depletion in PC 12 cells Neurotoxicology 37 221 230 2013 23680049
101 Kanninen K Intrahippocampal injection of a lentiviral vector expressing Nrf2 improves spatial learning in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106 16505 16510 2009 19805328
102 Pardridge WM Eisenberg J Yang J Human blood-brain barrier transferrin receptor Metabolism 36 892 895 1987 3306281
103 Andrews NC The iron transporter DMT1 International Journal of Biochemistry and Cell Biology 31 991 994 1999 10582331
104 Connor JR Profile of altered brain iron acquisition in restless legs syndrome Brain 134 959 968 2011 21398376
105 Reilly JF Amyloid deposition in the hippocampus and entorhinal cortex: quantitative analysis of a transgenic mouse model Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 100 4837 42 2003 12697936
106 Morris CM Candy JM Kerwin JM Edwardson JA Transferrin receptors in the normal human hippocampus and in Alzheimer’s disease Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 20 473 7 1994 7845533
107 Jamieson SE Candidate gene association study of solute carrier family 11a members 1 (SLC11A1) and 2 (SLC11A2) genes in Alzheimer’s disease Neurosci Lett 374 124 8 2005 15644277
108 Urrutia P Inflammation alters the expression of DMT1, FPN1 and hepcidin, and it causes iron accumulation in central nervous system cells J Neurochem 126 541 549 2013 23506423
109 Harrison P The ferritins: molecular properties, iron storage function and cellular regulation Biochim Biophys Acta - Bioenerg 1275 161 203 1996
110 Macara IG Hoy TG Harrison PM The formation of ferritin from apoferritin. Kinetics and mechanism of iron uptake Biochem J 126 151 162 1972 5075227
111 Bartzokis G Tishler TA Shin IS Lu PH Cummings JL Brain ferritin iron as a risk factor for age at onset in neurodegenerative diseases Ann N Y Acad Sci 1012 224 236 2004 15105269
112 Jellinger K Paulus W Grundke-Iqbal I Riederer P Youdim MBH Brain iron and ferritin in Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s diseases J Neural Transm - Park Dis Dement Sect 2 327 340 1990 2078310
113 Petzold A Cerebrospinal fluid ferritin level, a sensitive diagnostic test in late-presenting subarachnoid hemorrhage J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis 20 489 93 2011 20719531
114 Keir G Tasdemir N Thompson EJ Cerebrospinal fluid ferritin in brain necrosis: evidence for local synthesis Clin Chim Acta 216 153 66 1993 8222266
115 Busi MV Gomez-Casati DF Exploring frataxin function IUBMB Life 64 56 63 2012 22095894
116 Wiley SE Murphy AN Ross SA van der Geer P Dixon JE MitoNEET is an iron-containing outer mitochondrial membrane protein that regulates oxidative capacity Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104 5318 5323 2007 17376863
117 Kusminski CM MitoNEET-driven alterations in adipocyte mitochondrial activity reveal a crucial adaptive process that preserves insulin sensitivity in obesity Nat Med 18 1539 49 2012 22961109
118 Singh A Prion Protein Regulates Iron Transport by Functioning as a Ferrireductase J Alzheimers Dis 35 541 552 2013 23478311
119 Manson J The prion protein gene: a role in mouse embryogenesis? Development 115 117 122 1992 1353438
120 Moser M Colello RJ Pott U Oesch B Developmental expression of the prion protein gene in glial cells Neuron 14 509 517 1995 7695897
121 Um JW Alzheimer amyloid-β oligomer bound to postsynaptic prion protein activates Fyn to impair neurons Nat Neurosci 15 1227 35 2012 22820466
122 Singh A Abnormal brain iron homeostasis in human and animal prion disorders PLoS Pathog 5 2009
123 McCarthy RC Park YH Kosman DJ sAPP modulates iron efflux from brain microvascular endothelial cells by stabilizing the ferrous iron exporter ferroportin EMBO Rep 15 809 15 2014 24867889
124 Wong BX β-Amyloid Precursor Protein Does Not Possess Ferroxidase Activity but Does Stabilize the Cell Surface Ferrous Iron Exporter Ferroportin PLoS One 9 e114174 2014 25464026
125 Nemeth E Hepcidin regulates cellular iron efflux by binding to ferroportin and inducing its internalization Science 306 2090 2093 2004 15514116
126 Nicolas G The gene encoding the iron regulatory peptide hepcidin is regulated by anemia, hypoxia, and inflammation J Clin Invest 110 1037 1044 2002 12370282
127 Raha AA Vaishnav RA Friedland RP Bomford A Raha-Chowdhury R The systemic iron-regulatory proteins hepcidin and ferroportin are reduced in the brain in Alzheimer’s disease Acta Neuropathol Commun 1 55 2013 24252754
128 Hu CJ Wang LY Chodosh LA Keith B Simon MC Differential roles of hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha (HIF-1alpha) and HIF-2alpha in hypoxic gene regulation Mol Cell Biol 23 9361 9374 2003 14645546
129 Wiesener MS Widespread hypoxia-inducible expression of HIF-2α in distinct cell populations of different organs FASEB J 17 271 273 2003 12490539
130 Chávez JC Agani F Pichiule P LaManna JC Expression of hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha in the brain of rats during chronic hypoxia J Appl Physiol 89 1937 42 2000 11053346
131 Kaufmann MR Dysregulation of hypoxia-inducible factor by presenilin/γ-secretase loss-of-function mutations J Neurosci 33 1915 26 2013 23365231
132 Adamcio B Sperling S Hagemeyer N Walkinshaw G Ehrenreich H Hypoxia inducible factor stabilization leads to lasting improvement of hippocampal memory in healthy mice Behav Brain Res 208 80 4 2010 19900484
133 Avramovich-Tirosh Y Bar-Am O Amit T Youdim MBH Weinreb O Up-regulation of hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1α and HIF-target genes in cortical neurons by the novel multifunctional iron chelator anti-Alzheimer drug, M30 Curr Alzheimer Res 7 300 306 2010 20043814
134 Muckenthaler MU Galy B Hentze MW Systemic iron homeostasis and the iron-responsive element/iron-regulatory protein (IRE/IRP) regulatory network Annu Rev Nutr 28 197 213 2008 18489257
135 Piñero DJ Hu J Connor JR Alterations in the interaction between iron regulatory proteins and their iron responsive element in normal and Alzheimer’s diseased brains Cell Mol Biol 46 761 776 2000 10875438
136 Meyer EP Ulmann-Schuler A Staufenbiel M Krucker T Altered morphology and 3D architecture of brain vasculature in a mouse model for Alzheimer’s disease Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105 3587 3592 2008 18305170
137 Kövari E Herrmann FR Hof PR Bouras C The relationship between cerebral amyloid angiopathy and cortical microinfarcts in brain ageing and Alzheimer’s disease Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 39 498 509 2013 23163235
138 Schrag M Effect of cerebral amyloid angiopathy on brain iron, copper, and zinc in Alzheimer’s disease J Alzheimers Dis 24 137 149 2011 21187585
139 Wilcock DM Vitek MP Colton CA Vascular amyloid alters astrocytic water and potassium channels in mouse models and humans with Alzheimer’s disease Neuroscience 159 1055 1069 2009 19356689
140 Merlini M Meyer EP Ulmann-Schuler A Nitsch RM Vascular β-amyloid and early astrocyte alterations impair cerebrovascular function and cerebral metabolism in transgenic arcAβ mice Acta Neuropathol 122 293 311 2011 21688176
141 Randolph C Karantzoulis S Guskiewicz K Prevalence and Characterization of Mild Cognitive Impairment in Retired National Football League Players J Int Neuropsychol Soc 19 873 880 2013 23902607
142 Kiko T Amyloid β levels in human red blood cells PLoS One 7 e49620 2012 23166730
143 Misiti F Carelli-Alinovi C Sampaolese B Giardina B beta-amyloid decreases detectable endothelial nitric oxide synthase in human erythrocytes: a role for membrane acetylcholinesterase Cell Biochem Funct 30 474 479 2012 22431227
144 Jayakumar R Red cell perturbations by amyloid β-protein Biochim Biophys Acta - Gen Subj 1622 20 28 2003
145 Iliff JJ A paravascular pathway facilitates CSF flow through the brain parenchyma and the clearance of interstitial solutes, including amyloid β Sci Transl Med 4 147ra111 2012
146 Xie L Sleep drives metabolite clearance from the adult brain Science 342 373 7 2013 24136970
147 Nandar W Neely EB Unger E Connor JR A mutation in the HFE gene is associated with altered brain iron profiles and increased oxidative stress in mice Biochim Biophys Acta-Molecular Basis Dis 1832 729 741 2013
148 Mairuae N Hall EC Cheepsunthorn P Lee SY Connor JR The H63D HFE gene variant promotes activation of the intrinsic apoptotic pathway via mitochondria dysfunction following β-amyloid peptide exposure J Neurosci Res 88 3079 3089 2010 20734416
149 Flicek P Ensembl 2014 Nucleic Acids Res 42 D749 55 2014 24316576
150 Mariani S Effects of hemochromatosis and transferrin gene mutations on peripheral iron dyshomeostasis in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases Front Aging Neurosci 5 37 2013 23935582
151 Loeffler DA Transferrin and Iron in Normal, Alzheimer’s Disease, and Parkinson’s Disease Brain Regions J Neurochem 65 710 724 1995 7616227
152 Barber MF Elde NC Nutritional immunity. Escape from bacterial iron piracy through rapid evolution of transferrin Science 346 1362 6 2014 25504720
153 Lei P Tau deficiency induces parkinsonism with dementia by impairing APP-mediated iron export Nat Med 18 291 5 2012 22286308
154 Needham E Ciccotosto GD Cappai R Combined deletions of Amyloid Precursor Protein and Amyloid Precursor-like Protein 2 reveals different effects on mouse brain metal homeostasis Metallomics 598 603 2014 10.1039/c3mt00358b 24448592
155 Hanger DP Tau in Alzheimer’s disease and Down’s syndrome is insoluble and abnormally phosphorylated 275 99 104 1991
156 Chan A Shea TB Dietary and genetically-induced oxidative stress alter tau phosphorylation: influence of folate and apolipoprotein E deficiency J Alzheimers Dis 9 399 405 2006 16917148
157 Muñoz P Effect of iron on the activation of the MAPK/ERK pathway in PC12 neuroblastoma cells Biological Research 39 189 190 2006 16629179
158 Guo JL Lee VMY Seeding of normal tau by pathological tau conformers drives pathogenesis of Alzheimer-like tangles J Biol Chem 286 15317 15331 2011 21372138
159 Clavaguera F Transmission and spreading of tauopathy in transgenic mouse brain Nat Cell Biol 11 909 913 2009 19503072
160 De Calignon A Propagation of Tau Pathology in a Model of Early Alzheimer’s Disease Neuron 73 685 697 2012 22365544
161 Solomon A Kivipelto M Wolozin B Zhou J Whitmer RA Midlife serum cholesterol and increased risk of Alzheimer’s and vascular dementia three decades later Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 28 75 80 2009 19648749
162 Ghribi O Golovko MY Larsen B Schrag M Murphy EJ Deposition of iron and β-amyloid plaques is associated with cortical cellular damage in rabbits fed with long-term cholesterol-enriched diets J Neurochem 99 438 449 2006 17029598
163 Galbete JL Cholesterol decreases secretion of the secreted form of amyloid precursor protein by interfering with glycosylation in the protein secretory pathway Biochem J 348 Pt 2 307 313 2000 10816423
164 Raffai RL Weisgraber KH Cholesterol: from heart attacks to Alzheimer’s disease J Lipid Res 44 1423 1430 2003 12837845
165 Schneider A Schulz-Schaeffer W Hartmann T Schulz JB Simons M Cholesterol depletion reduces aggregation of amyloid-beta peptide in hippocampal neurons Neurobiol Dis 23 573 577 2006 16777421
166 Sidera C Parsons R Austen B The regulation of beta-secretase by cholesterol and statins in Alzheimer’s disease J Neurol Sci 229–230 269 273 2005
167 Wahrle S Cholesterol-dependent gamma-secretase activity in buoyant cholesterol-rich membrane microdomains Neurobiol Dis 9 11 23 2002 11848681
168 Popp J Cerebral and extracerebral cholesterol metabolism and CSF markers of Alzheimer’s disease Biochem Pharmacol 86 37 42 2013 23291240
169 Dasari B Prasanthi JR Marwarha G Singh BB Ghribi O The oxysterol 27-hydroxycholesterol increases beta-amyloid and oxidative stress in retinal pigment epithelial cells BMC Ophthalmol 10 22 2010 20836858
170 Pinilla-Tenas JJ Zip14 is a complex broad-scope metal-ion transporter whose functional properties support roles in the cellular uptake of zinc and nontransferrin-bound iron Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 301 C862 71 2011 21653899
171 Singh N The role of iron in prion disease and other neurodegenerative diseases PLoS Pathog 10 e1004335 2014 25232824
172 Bandyopadhyay S Novel 5′ Untranslated Region Directed Blockers of Iron-Regulatory Protein-1 Dependent Amyloid Precursor Protein Translation: Implications for Down Syndrome and Alzheimer’s Disease PLoS One 8 14 2013
173 Ludwiczek S Ca2+ channel blockers reverse iron overload by a new mechanism via divalent metal transporter-1 Nat Med 13 448 54 2007 17293870
174 Bostanci MO Bagirici F Blocking of L-type calcium channels protects hippocampal and nigral neurons against iron neurotoxicity The role of L-type calcium channels in iron-induced neurotoxicity Int J Neurosci 123 876 882 2013 23768064
175 Pelizzoni I Zacchetti D Campanella A Grohovaz F Codazzi F Iron uptake in quiescent and inflammation-activated astrocytes: a potentially neuroprotective control of iron burden Biochim Biophys Acta 1832 1326 1333 2013 23583428
176 Togo T Katsuse O Iseki E Nitric oxide pathways in Alzheimer’s disease and other neurodegenerative dementias Neurol Res 26 563 6 2004 15265275
177 Lane DJR Robinson SR Czerwinska H Bishop GM Lawen A Two routes of iron accumulation in astrocytes: ascorbate-dependent ferrous iron uptake via the divalent metal transporter (DMT1) plus an independent route for ferric iron Biochem J 432 123 132 2010 20819077
178 Pelizzoni I Zacchetti D Campanella A Grohovaz F Codazzi F Iron uptake in quiescent and inflammation-activated astrocytes: A potentially neuroprotective control of iron burden Biochim Biophys Acta-Molecular Basis Dis 1832 1326 1333 2013
179 Fujita T Tozaki-Saitoh H Inoue K P2Y1 receptor signaling enhances neuroprotection by astrocytes against oxidative stress via IL-6 release in hippocampal cultures Glia 57 244 257 2009 18756525
180 Tasdemir-Yilmaz OE Freeman MR Astrocytes engage unique molecular programs to engulf pruned neuronal debris from distinct subsets of neurons Genes Dev 28 20 33 2014 24361692
181 Zhao J O’Connor T Vassar R The contribution of activated astrocytes to Aβ production: Implications for Alzheimer’s disease pathogenesis Journal of Neuroinflammation 8 150 2011 22047170
182 Kidane TZ Sauble E Linder MC Release of iron from ferritin requires lysosomal activity Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 291 C445 55 2006 16611735
183 Schulz K Kroner A David S Iron Efflux from Astrocytes Plays a Role in Remyelination Journal of Neuroscience 32 4841 4847 2012 22492039
184 Steele ML Robinson SR Reactive astrocytes give neurons less support: implications for Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 33 423.e1 13 2012 21051108
185 Bélanger M Allaman I Magistretti PJ Brain energy metabolism: focus on astrocyte-neuron metabolic cooperation Cell Metab 14 724 38 2011 22152301
186 Chih CP Roberts EL Jr Energy substrates for neurons during neural activity: a critical review of the astrocyte-neuron lactate shuttle hypothesis J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 23 1263 81 2003 14600433
187 Parys B CÔté A Gallo V De Koninck P Sík A Intercellular calcium signaling between astrocytes and oligodendrocytes via gap junctions in culture Neuroscience 167 1032 1043 2010 20211698
188 Lundgaard I Osório MJ Kress BT Sanggaard S Nedergaard M White matter astrocytes in health and disease Neuroscience 276 161 173 2014 24231735
189 Suzuki A Astrocyte-neuron lactate transport is required for long-term memory formation Cell 144 810 823 2011 21376239
190 Heni M Insulin promotes glycogen storage and cell proliferation in primary human astrocytes PLoS One 6 e21594 2011 21738722
191 Karczewska-Kupczewska M The influence of insulin infusion on the metabolism of amyloid b peptides in plasma Alzheimer’s Dement 9 400 405 2013 23110868
192 Cheng D Type 2 diabetes and late-onset Alzheimer’s disease Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 31 424 430 2011 21757907
193 Hsu CC Wahlqvist ML Lee MS Tsai HN Incidence of dementia is increased in type 2 diabetes and reduced by the use of sulfonylureas and metformin J Alzheimer’s Dis 24 485 493 2011 21297276
194 Farris W Insulin-degrading enzyme regulates the levels of insulin, amyloid beta-protein, and the beta-amyloid precursor protein intracellular domain in vivo Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 100 4162 4167 2003 12634421
195 Morikawa M Production and characterization of astrocyte-derived human apolipoprotein E isoforms from immortalized astrocytes and their interactions with amyloid-β Neurobiol Dis 19 66 76 2005 15837562
196 Kanekiyo T Xu HX Bu GJ ApoE and A beta in Alzheimer’s Disease: Accidental Encounters or Partners? Neuron 81 740 754 2014 24559670
197 Mahley RW Apolipoprotein E: cholesterol transport protein with expanding role in cell biology Science (80-) 240 622 630 1988
198 Huang Y Mucke L Alzheimer mechanisms and therapeutic strategies Cell 148 1204 1222 2012 22424230
199 Farrer LA Effects of age, sex, and ethnicity on the association between apolipoprotein E genotype and Alzheimer disease. A meta-analysis APOE and Alzheimer Disease Meta Analysis Consortium JAMA 278 1349 1356 1997 9343467
200 Conejero-Goldberg C APOE2 enhances neuroprotection against Alzheimer’s disease through multiple molecular mechanisms Mol Psychiatry 19 1243 1250 2014 24492349
201 Castellano JM Human apoE isoforms differentially regulate brain amyloid-β peptide clearance Sci Transl Med 3 89ra57 2011
202 Li J Differential regulation of amyloid-β endocytic trafficking and lysosomal degradation by apolipoprotein E isoforms J Biol Chem 287 44593 44601 2012 23132858
203 LaDu MJ Isoform-specific binding of apolipoprotein E to β-amyloid J Biol Chem 269 23403 23406 1994 8089103
204 Spagnuolo MS Haptoglobin interacts with apolipoprotein e and Beta-amyloid and influences their crosstalk ACS Chem Neurosci 5 837 847 2014 25058565
205 Verghese PB ApoE influences amyloid-β (Aβ) clearance despite minimal apoE/Aβ association in physiological conditions Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110 E1807 16 2013 23620513
206 Bush AI Evidence for APOE protecting against brain iron overload Alzheimer’s Dement 10 P878 2014
207 Saunders AM Association of apolipoprotein-E allele epsilon-4 with late-onset familial and sporadic alzheimers-disease Neurology 43 1467 1472 1993 8350998
208 Lee M Upregulation of haptoglobin in reactive astrocytes after transient forebrain ischemia in rats J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 22 1176 1180 2002 12368655
209 Kim J Haploinsufficiency of Human APOE Reduces Amyloid Deposition in a Mouse Model of Amyloid-Amyloidosis Journal of Neuroscience 31 18007 18012 2011 22159114
210 Meier-Ruge W Ulrich J Brühlmann M Meier E Age-related white matter atrophy in the human brain Ann N Y Acad Sci 673 260 9 1992 1485724
211 Raji CA White matter lesions and brain gray matter volume in cognitively normal elders Neurobiol Aging 33 834.e7 16 2012 21943959
212 Mapstone M Plasma phospholipids identify antecedent memory impairment in older adults Nat Med 20 415 8 2014 24608097
213 Lu F Li X Suo AQ Zhang JW Inhibition of tau hyperphosphorylation and beta amyloid production in rat brain by oral administration of atorvastatin Chin Med J (Engl) 123 1864 1870 2010 20819569
214 Kurata T Atorvastatin and pitavastatin improve cognitive function and reduce senile plaque and phosphorylated tau in aged APP mice Brain Res 1371 161 170 2011 21112317
215 Han J Iron uptake mediated by binding of H-ferritin to the TIM-2 receptor in mouse cells PLoS One 6 e23800 2011 21886823
216 Xu J Amyloid-beta peptides are cytotoxic to oligodendrocytes J Neurosci 21 RC118 2001 11150354
217 Skaper SD Oligodendrocytes are a novel source of amyloid peptide generation Neurochem Res 34 2243 50 2009 19557514
218 Davalos D ATP mediates rapid microglial response to local brain injury in vivo Nat Neurosci 8 752 758 2005 15895084
219 Grundke-Iqbal I Ferritin is a component of the neuritic (senile) plaque in Alzheimer dementia Acta Neuropathol 81 105 110 1990 2082650
220 Majumdar A Activation of microglia acidifies lysosomes and leads to degradation of Alzheimer amyloid fibrils Mol Biol Cell 18 1490 1496 2007 17314396
221 Su Y Chang PT Acidic pH promotes the formation of toxic fibrils from β-amyloid peptide Brain Res 893 287 291 2001 11223020
222 Quintana C Study of the localization of iron, ferritin, and hemosiderin in Alzheimer’s disease hippocampus by analytical microscopy at the subcellular level J Struct Biol 153 42 54 2006 16364657
223 Joshi P Microglia convert aggregated amyloid-β into neurotoxic forms through the shedding of microvesicles Cell Death Differ 21 582 93 2014 24336048
224 Fitzner D Selective transfer of exosomes from oligodendrocytes to microglia by macropinocytosis J Cell Sci 124 447 58 2011 21242314
225 Agosta F Myeloid microvesicles in cerebrospinal fluid are associated with myelin damage and neuronal loss in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer disease Ann Neurol 76 813 825 2014 25087695
226 Mathiisen TM Lehre KP Danbolt NC Ottersen OP The perivascular astroglial sheath provides a complete covering of the brain microvessels: An electron microscopic 3D reconstruction Glia 58 1094 1103 2010 20468051
227 Methia N ApoE deficiency compromises the blood brain barrier especially after injury Mol Med 7 810 815 2001 11844869
228 Hafezi-Moghadam A Thomas KL Wagner DD ApoE deficiency leads to a progressive age-dependent blood-brain barrier leakage Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 292 C1256 C1262 2007 16870825
229 Damoiseaux JS Gender modulates the APOE ε4 effect in healthy older adults: convergent evidence from functional brain connectivity and spinal fluid tau levels J Neurosci 32 8254 62 2012 22699906
230 Carroll JC Sex differences in β-amyloid accumulation in 3xTg-AD mice: role of neonatal sex steroid hormone exposure Brain Res 1366 233 45 2010 20934413
231 Leskovjan AC Increased brain iron coincides with early plaque formation in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Neuroimage 55 32 38 2011 21126592
232 Joseph-Mathurin N Amyloid beta immunization worsens iron deposits in the choroid plexus and cerebral microbleeds Neurobiol Aging 34 2613 2622 2013 23796662
233 Prior M Dargusch R Ehren JL Chiruta C Schubert D The neurotrophic compound J147 reverses cognitive impairment in aged Alzheimer’s disease mice Alzheimers Res Ther 5 25 2013 23673233
234 Bodovitz S Falduto MT Frail DE Klein WL Iron levels modulate alpha-secretase cleavage of amyloid precursor protein J Neurochem 64 307 315 1995 7798927
235 Dong J Engineering metal ion coordination to regulate amyloid fibril assembly and toxicity Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104 13313 8 2007 17686982
236 Hallgren B Sourander P The non-haemin iron in the cerebral cortex in Alzheimer’s disease J Neurochem 5 307 310 1960 14399117
237 Jack CR Hypothetical model of dynamic biomarkers of the Alzheimer’s pathological cascade Lancet Neurol 9 119 128 2010 20083042
238 Jack CR Tracking pathophysiological processes in Alzheimer’s disease: An updated hypothetical model of dynamic biomarkers The Lancet Neurology 12 207 216 2013 23332364
239 Sperling RA Toward defining the preclinical stages of Alzheimer’s disease: recommendations from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimers Dement 7 280 92 2011 21514248
240 Richardson DR Mysteries of the transferrin-transferrin receptor 1 interaction uncovered Cell 116 483 485 2004 14980214
241 Urrutia PJ Mena NP Núñez MT The interplay between iron accumulation, mitochondrial dysfunction, and inflammation during the execution step of neurodegenerative disorders Frontiers in Pharmacology 5 3 2014
242 Wilkinson N Pantopoulos K The IRP/IRE system in vivo: insights from mouse models Front Pharmacol 5 176 2014 25120486
243 Yamamoto A Iron (III) induces aggregation of hyperphosphorylated tau and its reduction to iron (II) reverses the aggregation: implications in the formation of neurofibrillary tangles of Alzheimer’s disease J Neurochem 82 1137 1147 2004 12358761
244 Moloney AM Defects in IGF-1 receptor, insulin receptor and IRS-1/2 in Alzheimer’s disease indicate possible resistance to IGF-1 and insulin signalling Neurobiol Aging 31 224 243 2010 18479783
245 Roth AD Ramírez G Alarcón R Oligodendrocytes damage in Alzheimer’s disease: Beta amyloid toxicity and inflammation 381 387 2005
246 Desagher S Glowinski J Premont J Astrocytes protect neurons from hydrogen peroxide toxicity J Neurosci 16 2553 2562 1996 8786431
247 Kristinsson J Snaedal J Tórsdóttir G Jóhannesson T Ceruloplasmin and iron in Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease: A synopsis of recent studies Neuropsychiatric Disease and Treatment 8 515 521 2012 23144563
248 Nave KA Myelination and the trophic support of long axons Nat Rev Neurosci 11 275 283 2010 20216548
249 Honda S Extracellular ATP or ADP induce chemotaxis of cultured microglia through Gi/o-coupled P2Y receptors J Neurosci 21 1975 1982 2001 11245682
250 Doens D Fernández PL Microglia receptors and their implications in the response to amyloid β for Alzheimer’s disease pathogenesis J Neuroinflammation 11 48 2014 24625061
251 Khurana V Lysosomal dysfunction promotes cleavage and neurotoxicity of tau in vivo PLoS Genet 6 e1001026 2010 20664788
