LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


2985192R
5012
J Neuropathol Exp Neurol
J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol.
Journal of neuropathology and experimental neurology
0022-3069
1554-6578

26083568
4471879
10.1097/NEN.0000000000000207
NIHMS681966
Article
Cerebrospinal Fluid Particles in Alzheimer Disease and Parkinson Disease
Yang Yue PhD 1
Keene C. Dirk MD, PhD 1
Peskind Elaine R. MD 23
Galasko Douglas R. MD 4
Hu Shu-Ching MD, PhD 5
Cudaback Eiron PhD 1
Wilson Angela M. MS 1
Li Ge MD, PhD 2
Yu Chang-En PhD 67
Montine Kathleen S. PhD 1
Zhang Jing MD, PhD 1
Baird Geoffrey S. MD, PhD 18
Hyman Bradley T. MD, PhD 9
Montine Thomas J. MD, PhD 1
1 Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
2 Department of Psychiatry &amp; Behavioral Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
3 VA Northwest Network Mental Illness Research, Education, and Clinical Center, VA Puget Sound Health Care System, Seattle, WA
4 Department of Neurosciences, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA
5 Department of Neurology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
6 Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
7 Geriatric Research, Education, and Clinical Center, VA Puget Sound Health Care System, Seattle, WA
8 Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
9 Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
Send correspondence and reprint requests to: Thomas J. Montine, MD, PhD, Department of Pathology, University of Washington, PO Box 357470, Seattle, WA 98195. Phone: 206-897-5244; Fax: 206-897-5249; tmontine@u.washington.edu
23 4 2015
7 2015
01 7 2016
74 7 672687
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Human cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) contains diverse lipid particles, including lipoproteins that are distinct from their plasma counterparts and contain apolipoprotein (apo) E isoforms, apoJ, and apoAI, and extracellular vesicles, which can be detected by annexin V binding. The aim of this study was to develop a method to quantify CSF particles and evaluate their relationship to aging and neurodegenerative diseases. We used a flow cytometric assay to detect annexin V-, apoE-, apoAI-, apoJ- and amyloid (A) β42-positive particles in CSF from 131 research volunteers who were neurologically normal or had mild cognitive impairment (MCI), Alzheimer disease (AD) dementia, or Parkinson disease. APOE ε4/ε4 participants had CSF apoE-positive particles that were more frequently larger but at an 88% lower level vs. those in APOE ε3/ε3 or APOE ε3/ε4 patients; this finding was reproduced in conditioned medium from mouse primary glial cell cultures with targeted replacement of apoE. CSF apoE-positive and β-amyloid (Aβ42)-positive particle concentrations were persistently reduced one-third to one-half in middle and older age subjects; apoAI-positive particle concentration progressively increased approximately 2-fold with age. Both apoAI-positive and annexin V-positive CSF particle levels were reduced one-third to one-half in CSF of MCI and/or AD dementia patients vs. age-matched controls. Our approach provides new methods to investigate CNS lipid biology in relation to neurodegeneration and perhaps develop new biomarkers for diagnosis or treatment monitoring.

Alzheimer disease
Biomarkers
Cerebrospinal fluid
Cognitive impairment
Neurodegenerative disease
Parkinson disease

INTRODUCTION

Human cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) lipoproteins are distinct from their plasma counterparts and harbor apoE isoforms and apoAI on largely distinct particle subclasses, as well as apoJ and other proteins, on individual particles estimated as ~0.02 μm in diameter (1–5). APOE has not been associated consistently with CSF apoE concentration (6–10) in contrast to plasma apoE (11). Moreover, there is not a reproducible association between CSF apoE levels and Alzheimer disease (AD) dementia or Parkinson disease (PD) (7, 10, 12–16). Aβ peptides do bind apoE-containing CSF lipoproteins, but not apoE itself (17, 18). Polymorphisms in the apoAI gene are associated with dementia (19, 20), and apoAI plasma or serum levels are inversely associated with AD dementia and PD (21–27). ApoAI also is reported to bind Aβ in CSF and plasma. ApoAI interacts with the extracellular domain of amyloid precursor protein (APP), as well as with Aβ, where it suppresses Aβ aggregation and toxicity (28, 29). ApoJ, the product of the clusterin gene (CLU), confers risk for AD dementia (30, 31), modulates Aβ structure and toxicity in vitro (32–34), and interacts with Aβ clearance in vivo (35). CSF apoJ may be a biomarker of pre-dementia stages of AD (36). CSF clusterin concentration has not been associated reproducibly with PD (27, 37, 38).

In addition to lipoprotein particles, virtually all cells elaborate extracellular vesicles (EVs), either constitutively or in response to a variety of signals and stressors (39–41). These EVs are generally referred to as microvesicles, exosomes, ectosomes, or membrane particles and apoptotic vesicles. There is some ambiguity in the nomenclature of EVs because of incomplete knowledge of their origins and composition. Exosomes and microvesicles both present phosphatidylserine (PS) (42, 43), and overlapping characteristics such as size, morphology, density and protein composition make it difficult to discriminate between exosomes and microvesicles (44). Therefore, in this study, we conservatively use the term “extracellular vesicles” rather than microvesicles or exosomes. Several subclasses of EV have overlapping size ranges from ~40 nm up to 5 μm with particles larger than 1 μm deriving mostly from apoptotic bodies (45). Most subclasses of EVs express surface PS, and annexin V, a protein with strong affinity for PS, is often used as a probe for PS exposure (46). EVs have been identified in ovine CSF (47), and a variety of cell culture experiments have explored neurotrophic and neuroinflammatory effects of neuronal and glial EVs (48–51). In the context of neurodegenerative diseases, cell culture experiments have shown that EVs contain proteolytic fragments of APP, including Aβ peptide, tau, and α-synuclein (52–56). EVs enriched with proteolytic APP fragments have been isolated from the brains of transgenic mice overexpressing mutant human APP and from the brains of patients who died with AD dementia (57). EV proteins were enriched in amyloid plaques from brain sections of 3 AD patients (52) and tau protein was identified in EVs isolated by ultracentrifugation from ventricular CSF (55). One group reported EVs in CSF obtained by lumbar puncture from a patient with ALS (51). Given these intriguing results, we hypothesized that EVs in CSF might be useful as biomarkers for AD or PD.

Several studies have characterized the molecular composition of CSF particles using a variety of techniques but each is limited. Some techniques used to enrich particles may modify protein-lipid and protein-protein interactions; many studies did not distinguish particle-free from particle-bound proteins, and most investigations required large CSF volumes, which is impractical for application as a biomarker in the clinical setting (4, 5, 15–17, 58–63). Recently, flow cytometry has evolved to assay particles much smaller than a cell (64, 65); indeed, flow cytometry has been used extensively to study synaptosomes prepared from AD and control brains (66–70). Engineering advances have produced flow cytometers that detect polystyrene microspheres as small as 0.2 μm (71), and accurately separate and count EVs (72).

In this study, we developed a novel CSF flow cytometry method and assayed 0.5 ml aliquots from 131 individuals who had undergone clinical and neuropsychological evaluations and were without neurologic disease, or met diagnostic criteria for mild cognitive impairment (MCI), AD dementia, or PD (73–75). We hypothesized that lipid particles and EVs would show changes in concentration and composition in aging and in relation to APOE genotype and neurodegeneration.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Participants and CSF Collection

The Human Subjects Review Committee of the University of Washington and the Veterans Affairs Puget Sound Health Care System approved this study. Samples were from individuals enrolled in the University of Washington Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center or the Pacific Northwest Udall Center. All individuals provided informed consent and underwent extensive evaluation that consisted of medical history, family history, physical and neurologic examinations by clinicians who specialize in movement disorders or dementia, laboratory tests, and neuropsychological assessment; information was obtained from controls or from informants for patients (76, 77). Controls were compensated community volunteers in good health with no signs or symptoms suggesting cognitive decline or neurologic disease upon neurological and neuropsychological exam. Inclusion criteria were complete blood count, serum electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, glucose, vitamin B12, and thyroid stimulating hormone results within normal limits. Exclusion criteria for cases and controls included heavy cigarette smoking (more than 10 packs/year) and alcohol use other than social. Any psychotherapeutic use was an exclusion criterion for Controls. Any psychotherapeutic use other than for treatment of neurodegenerative disease was an exclusion criterion for cases. A total of 131 samples were selected randomly from subjects who met clinical diagnostic criteria (73–75). This resulted in the following cohort: 59 healthy Controls in Young (&lt;40 years old), Middle-aged (40 to 65 years old), and Older (&gt;65 years old) age ranges; 21 individuals with MCI (74); 27 patients with AD dementia (73); and 24 patients with PD (75). Information on the participants whose samples were used is presented in the Table. CSF was obtained by lumbar puncture and was collected between 8:00 and 11:00 AM following a 12-hour fast, as described previously (78). CSF was separated into sequential 0.5-mL aliquots at the bedside, flash frozen on dry ice, and stored at −80°C prior to assay, according to National Institutes on Aging Best Practices Guidelines (http://www.nia.nih.gov/about/policies). Brain autopsy was not performed on any subject in this study; thus, neuropathologic correlation with clinical diagnosis was not possible.

Antibodies and Fluorescent Reagents

The following antibodies were employed: rabbit anti-Aβ1-42 monoclonal antibody (clone H31L21, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA), which recognizes human and mouse Aβ1-42; cross reactivity to Aβ1-40 is not observed in sandwich ELISA according to the manufacturer’s instructions; mouse anti-human Aβ monoclonal antibody (clone 6E10, Covance, Princeton, NJ), mouse anti-human apoE monoclonal antibody (clone 1H4, Abcam, Cambridge, MA); mouse anti-human apoJ monoclonal antibody (clone 3R3/2, Lifespan Biosciences, Seattle, WA); rabbit anti-mouse apoJ polyclonal antibody (Lifespan Biosciences); fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-conjugated mouse anti-human apoAI monoclonal antibody (clone APO-1-1, Fitzgerald Industries, Acton, MA); rabbit anti-mouse apoAI polyclonal antibody (Lifespan Biosciences); FITC-conjugated annexin V (Beckman Coulter, Pasadena, CA); and mouse anti-human tau monoclonal antibody (clone TAU-5, Abcam). Isotype controls were: FITC-conjugated mouse IgG1 isotype control (eBioscience, San Diego, CA); mouse IgG1 isotype control (eBioscience), rabbit IgG isotype control (Abcam). Other reagents included Calibration BeadMix (Apogee Flow Systems, Hemel Hempstead, UK), annexin V binding buffer 10× (Beckman Coulter), CountBright absolute counting beads (Invitrogen), Zenon Alexa Fluor 488 mouse IgG1 and phycoerythrin (PE) rabbit IgG labeling kits (Invitrogen).

CSF Particle Staining for Flow Cytometric Assay

Zenon IgG labeling kit (Invitrogen) was used to generate fluorophore conjugated anti-Aβ42, tau, apoE, and apoJ antibodies prior to use. Specifically, mouse anti-apoE monoclonal antibody and mouse anti-apoJ monoclonal antibody were fluorescently labeled with the Zenon Alexa Fluor 488 mouse IgG1 labeling kit, respectively. Rabbit anti-Aβ42 monoclonal antibody was fluorescently labeled with the Zenon PE rabbit lgG labeling kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Antibodies were used in the following formats and final concentrations were determined by titration experiments: rabbit-anti-Aβ42-PE (IgG, 10 μg/mL); mouse-anti-tau-Alexa Fluor 488 (IgG1, 10 μg/mL); mouse anti-apoE-Alexa Fluor 488 (IgG1, 10 g/mL); mouse-anti-apoJ-Alexa Fluor 488 (IgG1, 10 μg/mL); mouse-anti-apoAI-FITC (IgG1, 10 μg/mL); and annexin V-FITC (10 ng/mL). To avoid cross-reactivity, primary antibodies used for double immunostaining were raised in different species, with the secondary antibodies recognizing one of the species exclusively.

All samples were co-labeled with anti-Aβ42 antibody and an apolipoprotein antibody to detect vesicle membrane (surface) protein or annexin V to detect PS; thus, quadruplicates were obtained for Aβ42 while each apolipoprotein and annexin V binding was determined once for each CSF sample. Never thawed 500 μL CSF aliquots were maintained at −80° C. Annexin V binding to phosphatidylserine was assayed by incubation with annexin V-FITC in the presence of 1 mM Ca2+ for 10 minutes on ice following incubation with anti-Aβ42-PE for 30 minutes in the dark. We used 2 negative controls for antibody assays: isotype controls of corresponding species of immunoglobulin were used at the same final concentration as the specific antibodies, and the same volume of phosphate buffered saline (PBS) was labeled by specific antibodies. Buffer without Ca2+ was used for dilution instead of binding buffer as negative control for annexin V binding. Two sets of experiments used small subsets of CSF for which we had sufficient residual volume. One set of 5 CSF samples was used to determine co-labeling of particles by apoE and apoJ. The second set was used to estimate the amount of particle associated tau protein. As recommended by others to reduce background, debris, and precipitates in particle analysis by flow cytometry (64), we used 0.1-μm pore size filters for all solutions (Millipore, Billerica, MA).

CSF Particle Analysis Using Flow Cytometry

Samples were analyzed using an Apogee A50 flow cytometer (Apogee Flow Systems). The Apogee A50 is significantly more sensitive and accurate in detecting EVs compared with other flow cytometric systems (71). Flow cytometer sheath solutions were 0.1 μm filtered prior to use. Size gates were defined based on forward angle light scattering from silica microbeads. The particle gate was determined using “Calibration BeadMix” (Apogee Flow Systems), which is a mix of 6 silica beads with diameters of 0.18, 0.24, 0.30, 0.59, 0.88 and 1.30 μm and 2 fluorescent polystyrene microbeads with diameters of 0.11 and 0.5 μm. Equivalent diameter of particles with the same forward scatter relative intensity as the silica beads was measured according to established methods (71). To characterize CSF particle size, the smaller particle gate was defined based on forward scatter intensity from immediately above instrument noise up to the 0.3-μm silica microbeads, which is equivalent to 0.4-μm-diameter cell-derived particles (71). The gate for larger particles was set from the middle of a 0.3-μm silica microbeads peak to just above the 0.59-μm silica microbeads; the latter is equivalent to cellular particles approximately 1 μm in diameter (71). For total particle counts, 100 μL CSF stained with specific antibodies was suspended in 300 μL antibody buffer or annexin V binding buffer containing Ca++. Fifty μL counting beads were added prior to the flow assay. Concentration of particles was estimated by measuring particle counts using CountBright absolute counting beads (Invitrogen), according to established methods (79).

CSF Aβ42 Pull Down Assay

One mL human CSF, or 1 mL PBS as negative control, was incubated with 2 μg mouse anti-human Aβ(6E10) antibody for 1 hour at 4°C in order to cross-link the particles binding with Aβ. Twenty μL of resuspended volume of protein A/G plus-agarose beads (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, TX) were then added, incubated with the CSF for 1 hour at 4°C under continuous gentle agitation, and the sample was then pelleted by centrifugation at 2,500 rpm for 5 minutes at 4°C. Supernatants were aspirated and then analyzed using flow cytometry with rabbit anti-Aβ42-PE antibody as described above. Pellets were washed 4 times with 1 mL RIPA buffer by centrifugation at 2,500 rpm for 5 minutes at 4°C, and then boiled in 40 μl of electrophoresis sample buffer for 2 to 3 minutes. The samples were separated by SDS-PAGE using 10% to 20% tris-tricine gel followed by transfer to 0.2-μm nitrocellulose membranes. For immunoblotting, membranes were blocked for 1 hour at room temperature in 2.5% milk in Tris-buffered saline with 0.05% Tween-20 (TBST). Membranes were incubated overnight at 4°C with anti-Aβ42 antibody (1:1000) and anti-Aβ (6E10) antibody (1:1000), respectively. After washing 3 times with TBST, membranes were incubated for 90 minutes at room temperature with anti-mouse IgG-HRP or anti-rabbit IgG-HRP in TBST with 2.5% milk. After 3 washes, membranes were incubated in Pierce ECL Western blotting substrate (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, WA) for 5 minutes, exposed to Kodak BioMax MS film (Rochester, NY) for 30 seconds to 5 minutes, and then developed.

Exosome Assay

Purified standard exosomes from human pooled serum (System Biosciences, Mountain View, CA; purified exosomes, #EXOP-300A-1) were stained using annexin V-FITC and analyzed using Apogee A50 flow cytometry. Plasma exosomes were prepared by an established technique that uses ultracentrifugation to generate fractions (called layers) enriched in exosomes; they were then analyzed by annexin V staining method used for CSF.

Animals and Primary Cultures

Wild type C57BL/6 mice were purchased from the Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME). Mice with homologous-targeted replacement (TR) of mouse apoE with human APOE ε3 (TR APOE3+/+), or APOEε4 (TR APOE4+/+) were used for primary cultures (80–84). Original strains were backcrossed greater than 10 generations to a C57BL/6 genetic background. TR APOE3+/+ or TR APOE4+/+ mice were crossed with apoE knockout (−/−) mice to generate TR APOE3+/− or TR APOE4+/− mice, respectively. All mice were housed in a temperature-controlled specific pathogen-free facility with a strict 12-hour light/dark cycle and with free access to food and water, and used with approval of the University of Washington Animal Care and Use Committee. Primary cultures of mouse cerebral cortical neurons, astrocytes, or microglia were generated as previously described (84, 85). After 1 week in culture, medium was removed, cells were washed 3 times with PBS, and then replaced with serum-free medium for additional 18 hours. This conditioned medium then was collected and particles were analyzed using flow cytometry as described above for CSF.

Statistical Analysis

Data are presented as mean ± SE unless otherwise specified. Group comparisons and correlations were performed with GraphPad Prism software (San Diego, CA) using non-parametric one-way ANOVA (Kruskall-Wallis test) followed by Dunn’s corrected repeated pair comparisons, or two-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni-corrected posttests; correlations were estimated by the method of Pearson. Outcomes are displayed graphically as *p &lt; 0.05; **p &lt; 0.01; ***p &lt; 0.001; or ****p &lt; 0.0001.

RESULTS

Subjects and Standard CSF Biomarker Results

We performed Luminex-based assays for total CSF Aβ42, total tau, and tau-P181 using a well-established method in our laboratory that has been part of a global quality assurance effort for these measurements (76, 86, 87). As expected, average CSF Aβ42 concentration was significantly different among the Older Controls, MCI, AD, and PD (p &lt; 0.0001) with corrected repeat pair comparisons showing that CSF Aβ42 was significantly lower in AD dementia (201 ± 18 pg/mL) compared to Older Controls (311 ± 29 pg/mL) (Supplemental Table 1). CSF total tau and tau-P181 also were significantly different among these 4 groups (p &lt; 0.0001 for both analytes) with corrected repeat pair comparisons for MCI (115 ± 18 pg/mL and 107 ± 17 pg/mL) and AD dementia (101 ± 7 pg/mL and 69 ± 7 pg/mL) significantly greater than Older Controls (57 ± 4 pg/mL and 39 ± 4 pg/mL) for both total tau and tau-P181 (Supplemental Table 1). PD CSF total tau and tau-P181 concentrations (39 ± 4 pg/ml and 27 ± 2 pg/ml) were lower than Older Controls, consistent with several previous reports (88–90); however, neither was significantly different by corrected repeat pair comparisons.

CSF Particle Assay Using Flow Cytometry

Polystyrene fluorescence beads (0.11 μm and 0.50 μm) and size calibrated non-fluorescent silica beads (0.18, 0.24, 0.30, 0.59, 0.88 and 1.30 μm) were resolved with forward (SALS) and side (LALS) light scatter (Fig. 1A); 0.18 μm was the lower limit for size resolution of non-fluorescent beads. The upper size limit of 0.59 μm for silica beads served to gate for particles of 1.0 μm or less (71) and to minimize contamination by debris (Fig. 1B, left and middle panels). Silica beads of 0.30 μm were used to distinguish between smaller and larger particles (Fig. 1B, middle panel). The gating of CSF particles was derived from the SALS and LALS characteristics of these non-fluorescence silica beads (Fig. 1B, right panel).

Anti-apoE-Alexa Fluor 488, anti-apoJ-Alexa Fluor 488 and anti-apoAI-FITC antibodies were used to detect apoE-positive, apoJ-positive and apoAI-positive particles in CSF (Fig. 1C, right panels). Very few background events were detected following filtration (Fig. 1C, left panels) or with fluorescence-labeled isotype antibodies (Fig. 1C, middle panels). Annexin V-positive particles were detected in CSF using annexin V-FITC in binding buffer containing Ca2+ (Fig. 1D, right panel); buffer without Ca2+ was used as negative control (Fig. 1D, middle panel). Very few positive events were detected in PBS plus annexin V-FITC (Fig. 1D, left panel).

We used 2 approaches to validate our method. First, we analyzed exosomes purified from plasma by ultracentrifugation. Plasma fractions with density expected for exosomes were incubated with annexin V with or without Ca2+ binding buffer and then analyzed using the same method as for CSF particles. Ca2+ binding buffer-dependent annexin V binding was observed in 6.2% and 5.4% particles in plasma fractions with expected density for exosomes (Supplemental Fig. 1A, layers 7–8 and layers 9–10). Ca2+ binding buffer-independent annexin V binding in these fractions was undetectable and was similar to Ca2+ binding buffer-dependent and -independent annexin V binding to plasma particles in fractions not expected to contain exosomes, including supernatant, layer 1, and layer 12. Second, we used purified standard exosomes from human pooled serum and stained them with annexin V-FITC prior to analysis using our flow cytometry method. We again observed positive annexin V-positive particles (Supplemental Fig. 1B). These data show that our method used with CSF can identify EVs from plasma with the density of exosomes and suggests that at least some of the EVs analyzed in CSF likely are exosomes.

Anti-Aβ42-PE antibody was used to detect Aβ42-positive CSF particles (Fig. 1E, lower left panel). Again, we used PBS (Fig. 1E, upper left panel) and isotype negative controls (Fig. 1E, upper right panel). Furthermore, pull down of CSF Aβ peptides by 6E10 antibody showed nearly completely removal of Aβ42-positive events from CSF (Fig. 1E, lower right panel). The pull down pellet was then examined by Western blot using 6E10 (Fig. 1F, right panel) and anti-Aβ42 antibodies (Fig. 1F, left panel), and showed the expected widely distributed molecular masses for Aβ species (91) (Fig. 1F, right panel). Anti-tau-Alexa Fluor 488 was used to assay particle associated tau. Unlike the other 5 probes that yielded clear signal in human CSF, particle associated tau was minimal, averaging (SD) 24 ± 29 events/μl (n = 5 different CSF samples). Taken together, these results demonstrate specificity and minimal non-specific signal for apoE-positive, apoJ-positive, apoAI-positive, annexin-V-positive, and Aβ42-positive particle assays in human CSF.

Each CSF sample was analyzed 4 times. To estimate the precision of measurements by this approach, we included detection of Aβ42 in each run, meaning that Aβ42-positive CSF particles were measured 4 times for each individual: once each with apoE-positive (run #1), apoJ-positive (run #2), apoAI-positive (run #3), and annexin V-positive (run #4) particles. Concentration (events/μl) of Aβ42-positive particles correlated well between runs (Supplemental Fig. 2): run #1 vs. run #2 (R2 = 0.85, p &lt; 0.0001) vs. run #3 (R2 = 0.91, p &lt; 0.0001) or vs. run #4 (R2 = 0.85, p &lt; 0.0001). Overall, the coefficient of variance for flow cytometric detection of CSF Aβ42-positive particles was 9.4% for these 131 samples assayed in quadruplicate.

Overview of CSF Particles

We used our flow cytometry assays to evaluate the molecular composition, concentration, and size distribution of CSF particles. Figure 2 presents a scatterplot with mean ± 95% confidence interval of data from the 131 samples. CSF particles were classified by the presence of apoE, apoJ, apoAI, or Aβ42 (as detected by labeled antibodies) or by binding of annexin V, and stratified by size into larger (&gt;0.30 μm) or smaller (&lt;0.30 μm) particles. One-way ANOVA for the concentration of the 5 molecularly defined particles had p &lt; 0.0001 in each size range (Fig. 2A, B). Of all possible pairs, only apoE-positive and apoJ-positive particle concentrations were not significantly different in the 2 size ranges, indicating that apoE-positive and apoJ-positive CSF particles largely overlap in concentration and size. Given these results, we determined co-labeling of particles with apoE and apoJ in a subset of 5 CSF samples for which we had sufficient residual material (Supplemental Fig. 3). ApoE-positive and apoJ-positive co-labeled particles comprised 38% ± 5% of all apoE-positive particles and 59% ± 7% of all apoJ-positive particles.

We also determined the concentration of CSF particles co-labeled for Aβ42 and each of the other analytes. Only apoE and apoJ were detectably co-labeled with Aβ42-positive; no detected Aβ42-positive particles co-labeled with apoAI or annexin V (Fig. 3A). For each individual, we added the concentration of apoE-positive/Aβ42-positive (average ± SD = 88 ± 6 events/μL) and apoJ-positive/Aβ42-positive (average ± SD = 95 ± 7 events/μL) co-labeled particles and then subtracted this sum from the total concentration of Aβ42-positive particles averaged from the 4 runs for each of the 131 individuals. The average (±SD) difference in concentration between total Aβ42-positive particle concentration and the sum of apoE-positive/Aβ42-positive and apoJ-positive/Aβ42-positive co-labeled particles was 23 ± 36 events/μL. By this calculation, the majority, and potentially all, of Aβ42-positive particles were co-labeled for apoE and/or apoJ; others have shown that these 2 apolipoproteins can be present on the same CSF lipoprotein (92). Finally, we observed a highly significant correlation between apoE-positive/Aβ42-positive co-labeled particles and apoJ-positive/Aβ42-positive co-labeled particles (Fig. 3B, slope = 0.99 ± 0.05, R2 = 0.78, p &lt; 0.0001).

Together, these data show that there are several types of CSF particles that can be identified with these molecular probes, that apoE-positive and apoJ-positive CSF particles are similar in concentration and size, and that most, if not all, Aβ-positive particles are labeled for apoE, apoJ, or both. Furthermore, our data show that approximately one-third to one-half of apoE-positive and apoJ-positive particles labeled for both proteins, and the Aβ42 distribution between apoE-positive and apoJ-positive particles was approximately equal.

ApoE-Positive and ApoJ-Positive Particles

We compared concentration and size of apoE-positive and apoJ-positive CSF particles in different age and diagnostic groups. Older Controls (gray) were used as the age appropriate comparison group for MCI or AD dementia (black), and PD (striped). The average concentration of CSF apoE-positive particles was significantly different among the 3 age groups (Fig. 4A, p &lt; 0.01) with significant difference for Young vs. Middle-aged Controls (p &lt; 0.05) and Young vs. Older Controls (p &lt; 0.01), but not for Middle-aged vs. Older Controls. CSF apoE-positive particle concentration was not significantly different among Older Controls, MCI, AD dementia, and PD. These data suggest an age-related reduction of CSF apoE-positive particle concentration in mid-life but not in association with either of these neurodegenerative diseases.

Next, we investigated associations of APOE genotype with CSF apoE-positive particle concentration. We stratified our results into those from individuals homozygous for the ε3 allele (APOE ε3/ε3, n = 64); heterozygous for ε3 and ε4 (APOE ε3/ε4, n = 54) or homozygous for the ε4 allele (APOE ε4/ε4, n = 13), regardless of age or diagnosis. CSF apoE-positive particle concentration was 2711 ± 283 events/μL in APOE ε3/ε3, 2471 ± 338 events/μL in APOE ε3/ε4, and 336 ± 54 events/μL in APOE ε4/ε4 (p &lt; 0.0001 overall with p &lt; 0.001 for APOE ε4/ε4 vs. either APOE ε3/ε3 or APOE ε3/ε4). To determine whether the genotype effect was dependent on age, we performed the same analysis restricted to individuals &gt;65 years of age and observed a similar outcome: CSF apoE-positive particle concentration was 2663 ± 384 events/μL in APOE ε3/ε3, 2842 ± 723 events/μL in APOE ε3/ε4, and 314 ± 76 events/μL in APOE ε4/ε4 (p &lt; 0.001 overall with p &lt; 0.01 for APOE ε4/ε4 vs. either APOE ε3/ε3 or APOE ε3/ε4). We further stratified by APOE genotype and by Control (CTL), diagnosis of MCI or AD dementia (M/A), or diagnosis of PD (Fig. 4B, p &lt; 0.01 overall with corrected repeated pair comparisons significant for APOE ε3/ε3 vs. APOE ε4/ε4 in CTL and M/A groups, p &lt; 0.05). Moreover, comparison across the 3 diagnostic groups (CTL, M/A and PD) for individuals with APOE ε3/ε3 or with APOE ε3/ε4 was not significant for either genotype. Given the apparent influence of age and APOE on CSF apoE-positive particle concentration, we plotted these variables in Figure 4C. This graph suggests a loss of homeostasis for CSF apoE-positive particle concentration around age 60 years that is most prominent in those individuals who are APOE ε4/ε4.

We next analyzed CSF apoE-positive particle size by APOE genotype. APOE ε3/ε3 had 35% ± 2%, APOE ε3/ε4 had 38% ± 2%, and APOE ε4/ε4 had 60% ± 3% larger particles among total apoE-positive particles (p &lt; 0.0001 overall with corrected repeated pair comparisons showing p &lt; 0.001 for APOE ε4/ε4 vs. APOE ε3/ε4 or vs. APOE ε3/ε3). Again restricting analysis to individuals &gt;65 years of age, we observed virtually identical outcomes: APOE ε3/ε3 had 33% ± 2%, APOE ε3/ε4 had 38% ± 2%, and APOE ε4/ε4 had 61% ± 3% larger particles among total apoE-positive particles. Within diagnostic groups (Fig. 4D), two-way ANOVA had p &lt; 0.0001 for APOE genotype in CTL and M/A groups, with ε3/ε4 (p &lt; 0.05 for both) and ε4 homozygotes (p &lt; 0.01 for both) showing a progressively greater fraction of larger apoE-positive particles than ε3/ε3. Fig. 4E plots apoE-positive particle size vs. concentration for each individual and shows that APOE ε4/ε4 individuals have fewer, larger CSF apoE-positive particles. Together these data indicate that APOE ε4/ε4 participants had CSF apoE-positive particles that are larger but at a lower level on average than individuals with APOE ε3/ε3 or APOE ε3/ε4.

One possibility is that APOE ε4 homozygotes are somehow generally deficient in the ability to elaborate normal amounts of appropriately sized CSF lipoproteins. One test of this hypothesis would be to compare the relationship between APOE and secretion of another CSF particle; for this we selected the closely related apoJ-positive particles. Another possibility suggested by results of others is compensatory induction of apoJ in brain of APOE ε4/ε4 AD individuals with low brain levels of apoE.(93) To test these possibilities and examine the relationship between the levels of apoE-positive particles and apoJ-positive particles as a function of APOE genotype we determined the CSF concentration and size of apoJ-positive particles, which, like apoE-positive particles, are produced by CNS cells (94). There was no difference in apoJ-positive particle concentration when stratified by age, by diagnosis (not shown), or by APOE genotype (apoJ-positive events/μL): 1585 ± 284 in APOE ε3/ε3 (n = 64); 1237 ± 170 in APOE ε3/ε4 (n = 54); and 1934 ± 445 (n = 13) in APOE ε4/ε4. Moreover, there was no difference in the % of larger apoJ-positive particles across these 3 genotypes: 43% ± 2% for APOE ε3/ε3, 42% ± 2% for APOE ε3/ε4, and 46% ± 4% for APOE ε4/ε4. These data indicate that APOE ε4/ε4 individuals are not inherently deficient in their ability to produce appropriate amounts of different sized apoJ-positive particles in the CNS and contribute these to CSF.

Our results suggested a relatively specific association of lower level but larger apoE-positive particles in CSF from APOE ε4/ε4 participants regardless of diagnosis. We tested this further using primary neuron or glial cultures from homozygous or hemizygous TR APOE3 and TR APOE4 mice. Primary cerebral cortical neuron cultures did not elaborate detectable apoE-positive particles into culture medium over 24 hours. Medium conditioned by primary cerebral cortical astrocyte cultures for 24 hours revealed a significant genotype-dependent (Fig. 5A, p &lt; 0.001) and gene dose-dependent difference in apoE-positive particle concentration (Fig. 5A, p &lt; 0.001). Corrected posttests showed that TR APOE4+/+ astrocyte conditioned medium had significantly lower apoE-positive particle concentration than TR APOE3+/+ astrocyte medium (p &lt; 0.01). Results from microglia cultures were significant for gene dose but not allele type with respect to apoE-positive particle concentration (Fig. 5B, p &lt; 0.01).

We next determined apoE-positive particle size in conditioned medium of primary cultures from TR mice. There was neither allele type nor dose effect on astrocyte conditioned medium particle size distribution (Fig. 5C). In contrast, TR APOE4 microglia conditioned medium had a significantly greater percentage of larger apoE-positive particles than did TR APOE3 microglia from both homozygous (p &lt; 0.001) and hemizygous (p &lt; 0.001) mice (Fig. 5D). These data demonstrated that the APOE genotype-dependent differences observed in apoE-positive particle concentration and size for human CSF were reproduced experimentally in primary cultures of mouse glia where there is no influence by processes of MCI or AD dementia.

Unlike apoE, apoJ is widely synthesized by neurons and glia in brain (94). Using the same conditioned medium as described above, apoJ-positive particles were detected from primary cultures of all 3 cell types with comparable concentrations between astrocytes and neurons, and microglia about half of these other cells; like CSF, there was no difference in apoJ-positive particles between TR APOE 3/3 and TR APOE4/4 for each of the 3 cell types (Supplemental Fig. 4).

ApoAI-positive CSF Particles

ApoAI in CSF exists on a subclass of lipoproteins that are largely distinct from apoE-positive CSF lipoproteins (1). Concentration of apoAI-POSITIVE particles was progressively increased across the 3 age groups (p &lt; 0.05), corrected paired comparisons significant for Young vs. Older Controls (p &lt; 0.05) (Fig. 6). In contrast, CSF apoAI-positive particle concentration was significantly lower in both MCI and AD dementia vs. Older Controls (p &lt; 0.001, corrected paired comparisons had p &lt; 0.01 for Older Controls vs. MCI and p &lt; 0.001 for Older Controls vs. AD dementia), but there was no significant difference between MCI and AD dementia. PD participants also had lower CSF apoAI-positive particle concentration than Older Controls following correction for repeated pair comparisons (p &lt; 0.05). The concentration of apoAI-positive particles did not vary by APOE genotype in the 131 samples (events/μL): 276 ± 20 for APOE ε3/ε3, 303 ± 36 for APOE ε3/ε4, and 267 ± 33 for APOE ε4/ε4. Distribution by size showed that the proportion of larger apoAI-positive particles did not vary significantly across the 6 diagnostic groups (not shown) or across APOE genotype: 37% ± 2% for APOE ε3/ε3, 38% ± 2% for APOE ε3/ε4, and 40% ± 3% for APOE ε4/ε4. These data indicate an increase in CSF apoAI-positive particle concentration with advancing age that is reversed in the early stages of AD, and in PD.

As expected from previous work showing no apoAI expression by CNS parenchymal cells (58, 95), we did not detect apoAI-positive particles in conditioned medium from mouse neurons, astrocytes, or microglia, a further demonstration of the specificity of our apoAI CSF particle assay.

Annexin V-positive CSF Particles

We observed significant variation in annexin V-positive particle levels (events/μL) among Older Controls, MCI, AD dementia, and PD groups (Fig. 7, p &lt; 0.01), but not among the 3 age groups. Annexin V-positive particle concentration was significantly lower in AD dementia than in Older Controls (p &lt; 0.01), but not for MCI vs. Older Controls; however, AD dementia was significantly different from MCI (p &lt; 0.01). There was no difference in CSF annexin V-positive particle concentration among APOE ε3/ε3 (2649 ± 226 events/μL, n = 64), APOE ε3/ε4 (2929 ± 268 events/μL, n = 54), and APOE ε4/ε4 (2310 ± 274 events/μL, n = 13) individuals. The proportion of annexin V-positive particles that were larger did not vary significantly across the 6 diagnostic groups (not shown), or with APOE: 16% ± 1% for APOE ε3/ε3, 15% ± 1% for APOE ε3/ε4, and 18% ± 1% for APOE ε4/ε4. This size distribution suggests that annexin V detected smaller subclasses of EVs in CSF, mostly exosomes and microvesicles, and not the usually larger apoptotic bodies.

Aβ42-positive CSF Particles

Aβ42-positive CSF particle concentration was significantly different across the 3 age groups (p &lt; 0.05) with p &lt; 0.05 for Young Controls vs. each of the 2 other age groups (Fig. 8). There was no significant difference across the 3 APOE genotypes with respect to Aβ42-positive particle concentration or size distribution (not shown). No Aβ42-positive particle was detected in conditioned medium from mouse primary cerebral cortical neurons, astrocytes, or microglia. Interestingly, the concentration of Aβ42-positive particles (events/μL) was not significantly associated with the concentration of CSF Aβ42 as determined by immunoassay and reported above (r = 0.12, n = 131). We interpret these data as evidence of different pools of Aβ42 in CSF measured by these 2 different methods. Because we had determined Aβ42 concentration (pg/ml) by immunoassay and Aβ42-positive particle concentration (events/μl), we calculated Aβ42 events/pg, which averaged (SD) 609 ± 62 events/pg across all CSF samples, but neither varied significantly by diagnostic group nor correlated with other CSF measurements (not shown); as expected, Aβ42 events/pg were 77% greater in APOE ε4/ε4 than the other 2 APOE genotypes (p &lt; 0.01). The average proportion of Aβ42-positive particles that were larger ranged from 41% to 51% across the 6 diagnostic groups, and 46% ± 2% for APOE ε3/ε3, 45% ± 1% for APOE ε3/ε4, and 50% ± 3% for APOE ε4/ε4; neither was significant. This particle size distribution is consistent with our earlier finding that Aβ42 is present largely on apoE and/or apoJ containing particles in CSF.

Exploratory Analyses for Correlations Among CSF Particle Concentrations

We sought insight into potential biological mechanisms by performing exploratory analysis of correlations among CSF particle concentrations, setting α = 0.01 to minimize false-positive results. We found that annexin V-positive and apoAI-positive particle concentrations were strongly positively correlated with each other for the entire cohort (r = 0.54, p &lt; 0.0001). No other significant correlation of CSF particle concentrations was observed. The correlation between levels of annexin V-positive and apoAI-positive particles was especially strong for PD (r = 0.82, p &lt; 0.0001). Investigation of this intriguing finding will require experimental models different from primary cell culture.

DISCUSSION

Here we describe a flow cytometric assay to detect annexin V-positive, apoE-positive, apoAI-positive, apoJ-positive and Aβ42-positive particles ranging from ~0.2 μm, the lower limit of size detection, to 1 μm in human CSF; we selected a particle size cutoff of 1 μm to limit the contribution of larger EVs, mostly apoptotic bodies (45). Because 0.2 μm is the cut-off for identifying particles accurately with the Apogee A50 flow cytometer, apolipoprotein or Aβ42 containing particles smaller than 0.2 μm or their free fractions could not be detected using this method. We demonstrated that apoE-positive and apoJ-positive particles are largely indistinguishable and partially co-labeled, that the vast majority if not all particle-associated Aβ42 is on apoE-positive and/or apoJ-positive particles, and that annexin V-positive particles partially overlapped but are on average smaller than particles bearing apolipoproteins. Our analyses focused on associations with APOE, aging, or the disease states MCI, AD dementia, or PD. Our data suggested that APOE ε4/ε4 participants specifically had CSF apoE-positive particles that were larger but at a lower level on average than in APOE ε3/ε3 or APOE ε3/ε4 participants. This finding was reproduced experimentally in conditioned medium from TR APOE mouse primary glia cultures. Changes related to age included reduction in CSF apoE-positive and Aβ42-positive particle concentrations in middle age that persisted into older age, and progressive age-related increase in apoAI-positive particle concentration. Both apoAI-positive and annexin V-positive CSF particle levels were significantly lower in human CSF of MCI and/or AD dementia than in age-matched controls.

APOE and CSF Particles

Peripheral apoE is generated mostly by liver and endothelial cells; CNS apoE is generated mostly by glia (96). The APOE genotype is associated reproducibly with apoE protein levels in plasma and serum, with APOE ε4 predicting lower apoE protein levels in humans (7, 11, 97–99), and in animal models (100) because of preferential isoform binding to different lipoproteins that are cleared at different rates (98, 101, 102). ApoE4 has increased affinity for low-density lipoprotein receptor with more rapid clearance of apoE-containing remnant lipoproteins. Carriers of apoE4 have increased low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels that contribute to increased risk for cardiovascular disease and may linked to subsequent neurodegenerative disease and dementia (103, 104). In contrast, the effect of APOE ε4 on CNS apoE protein levels is not clear for brain (13, 100, 105–107) or CSF (107). One potential limitation of previous CSF studies is not distinguishing particle-bound from total apoE. Our data showed a highly significant association between lower concentration of CSF apoE-positive particles in APOE ε4/ε4 CSF than in APOE ε3/ε3 or APOE ε3/ε4 CSF. Importantly, no significant association was observed between APOE genotype and particle concentration or size for any other CSF particle assayed, including similar apoJ-positive particles. Although limited by the small number of subjects, our findings that APOE ε4/ε4 subjects have apoE-positive particles that are larger but at a lower level on average than in APOE ε3/ε3 or APOE ε3/ε4 may provide insight into the marked acceleration of AD risk for APOE ε4/ε4. Indeed, it has been suggested that differential direct interaction of apoE isoforms with Aβ influences Aβ clearance and/or aggregation in the CNS. ApoE4 increases Aβ aggregation and impairs clearance relative to other apoE isoforms, thus providing a mechanistic explanation for how apoE isoforms influence the risk of AD pathogenesis (17, 108, 109). Further mechanistic studies are needed to characterize the role of these particles in relation to neurodegeneration.

We modeled the influence of APOE on generators of CNS apoE by using murine primary cerebral cultures of neurons, astrocytes, or microglia from TR APOE mice. We demonstrated that glia were the major source of particle-associated apoE, and validated our findings from human CSF, although there was a somewhat complex relationship among glial cell type, APOE gene and dose, and apoE-positive particles. The concentration of apoE-positive particles depended strongly on gene dose in astrocytes but not in microglia. Importantly, one of our major observations, i.e. that APOE ε4/ε4 associated with significantly lower apoE-positive particle concentration in human CSF, was replicated in homozygous astrocyte cultures; although the same trend was observed in hemizygous mice, the difference here was not significant. Consistent with this, others have shown that astrocytes preferentially degrade apoE4, leading to reduced apoE secretion and concentration (100). The other major observation from human CSF, i.e. apoE-positive particles from APOE ε4/ε4 CSF are larger, was not replicated in astrocytes but was replicated with microglia cultures homozygous or hemizygous for TR APOE4. Again, these results are consistent with the work of others that showed astrocyte-secreted particles are the same size whether containing apoE4 or apoE3 (110), and that microglia-produced apoE particles differ from astrocytes in size and shape (111). Interestingly, microglia-conditioned medium contained a greater concentration of apoE-positive particles than conditioned medium from astrocytes, consistent with our previous demonstration that on a per cell basis, murine primary cerebral microglia synthesize more apoE than astrocytes (112). We cannot exclude the potential contribution of neuron-derived apoE-positive-containing particles in vivo even though none were detected in neuron primary cultures under resting conditions (113). Indeed, CNS neurons can express apoE (114–116) but at lower levels than glia. In addition, others have shown neuron-derived apoE3 and apoE4 differ in their susceptibility to proteolysis, with more fragments being generated from apoE4 than from apoE3 (117).

Genetic variants of both APOE and CLU, the gene that encodes apoJ, are associated with AD risk. Others have shown that apolipoprotein-containing particles interact with Aβ peptides and may influence Aβ metabolism and clearance (118–123). Consistent with this, we observed that apoE-positive and apoJ-positive CSF particles co-labeled with Aβ42 in roughly equal proportion, and that this accounted within experimental error for all Aβ42-positive particles. Although we cannot determine relative activity with respect to Aβ metabolism from these data, our results from human CSF indicate quantitatively similar binding of Aβ42 by apoE-positive and apoJ-positive particles, perhaps even the subset of particles co-labeled with apoE and apoJ.

Aging and CSF Particles

We observed 3 different relationships between advancing age and CSF particle concentration; there was no significant relationship between age and size distribution. CSF apoE-positive particle concentration was reduced by about half and Aβ42-positive particle concentration was reduced by about one-quarter in middle-aged adults compared to young adults; this reduction persisted in older adults. Interestingly, although similar in size distribution and concentration to apoE-positive particles, CSF apoJ-positive particles did not show significant differences across age groups. Annexin V-positive particles also showed no change in concentration across age groups. Only apoAI-positive particles increased in concentration from young to middle to older age groups, approximately doubling in average concentration across the adult human lifespan.

CSF Particles in MCI, AD, or PD

Perhaps our most intriguing observation was a lack of correlation between CSF concentration of Aβ42 and Aβ42-positive particles across all groups as well in sub-analyses of MCI and AD dementia or PD groups. The failure of correlation may reflect different fractions of Aβ42 targeted by different methods; for example, particles smaller than 0.2 μm or particle-free Aβ42 would not be detected by our flow cytometric method. As mentioned, Aβ peptides are known to interact with lipid particles, and it is entirely possible that that our novel flow cytometry approach detects a subset of particle-bound Aβ42 that has a metabolism different from particle-free Aβ42. We did not detect Aβ42 in murine primary cultures from TR APOE mice and will need to pursue this potentially important finding in different models.

Our most statistically robust association with disease state was CSF apoAI-positive particle concentration; we observed that CSF concentration of apoAI-positive particles are at a lower level in MCI, AD dementia, and PD compared to the Older Controls; reversing the age-related increase in CSF apoAI-positive particle concentration discussed above. In sharp contrast to apoE, apoAI is not synthesized in the CNS and its presence in CSF indicates transit across the blood-brain barrier (124). Polymorphisms in the gene that encodes apoAI have been correlated with AD dementia or all-cause dementia (19, 20); plasma and serum apoAI levels are decreased in patients with AD dementia (22–24); and serum levels of apoAI have been associated inversely with risk of AD dementia (21). Furthermore, recent studies have shown the lack of apoAI increases cerebral amyloid angiopathy and memory deficits of AD dementia (125), and increasing plasma apoAI levels provides cognitive and neuropathological benefits in animal models of AD dementia (126). Finally, others have observed that lower plasma levels of apoAI correlate with increased risk and earlier onset of PD (26). One interpretation of our results and those from other studies is that reduction in the amount of functional apoAI in the CNS is permissive for the initiation or progression of neurodegeneration through a variety of mechanisms, or for clinical expression. This raises the possibility of increasing CNS apoAI activity as a therapeutic target for AD and PD.

Interestingly, we observed a strong correlation of the level of apoAI-positive and annexin V-positive CSF particle concentrations across all samples. Others have demonstrated an interaction between apoAI and membrane lipids with PS exofacial flopping, suggesting that apoAI and annexin V may share the ability to bind to cell surface PS (127, 128); this would readily account for the observed association. Like apoAI-positive particles, we did observe a strong association between CSF annexin V-positive particle concentration and AD dementia. In contrast to apoAI-positive particles, there was no association between annexin V-positive particle concentration and MCI or PD, suggesting that this change in CSF annexin V binding is relatively specific to later stage of AD, perhaps a reflection of large-scale cerebral neurodegeneration. We were unable to pursue this idea further in our primary culture models because, as expected, the conditioned medium from murine primary cerebral cortical neurons, astrocyte, or microglia had no detectable apoAI-positive particles. Further in vivo investigation will be needed to understand the mechanistic relationships and significance of apoAI and annexin V binding particles in CNS.

There is no consistent association of total CSF apoE or apoJ protein concentration and the diagnosis of MCI, AD dementia, or PD (7–10, 12–16, 27, 37, 38, 61, 129). Here, neither concentration nor size distribution of apoE-positive or apoJ-positive particles in CSF was associated with a diagnosis of MCI or AD dementia, or with PD. However, for these and other results, especially those stratified by disease group and genotype, some of the sample sizes are small and some of the results from our novel approach should be viewed as requiring confirmation from larger sample sets.

In summary, the aim of this work was to develop and apply flow cytometry to the quantification, molecular composition, and size distribution of CSF particles, and determine the relationship of these data to brain aging and common neurodegenerative diseases. In the absence of a validation cohort, and because cases and controls were highly selected, we did not formally analyze diagnostic sensitivity and specificity. Given the age- and diagnostic group differences identified in this novel approach to CSF particle analysis, we expect that our data may be used as a platform to develop future biomarkers. Our major findings were that APOE ε4/ε4 is associated with fewer, larger particles, that apoE-positive and apoJ-positive particles each account for approximately half of particle-bound Aβ42, that total Aβ42 concentration is not correlated with Aβ42-positive particle concentration, and that apoAI-positive particles increase in concentration with advancing age and this is reversed in patients with MCI, AD dementia, and PD. Although further observation and experimental work is needed to understand the significance of CSF particles and their relationships to exosomes, other EVs, or CSF lipoproteins (58, 110, 130), our unique approach opens a new window into translational research for neurodegenerative diseases.

Supplementary Material

Supplemental Data File _.doc_ .tif_ pdf_ etc.__1

Supplemental Data File _.doc_ .tif_ pdf_ etc.__2

Supplemental Data File _.doc_ .tif_ pdf_ etc.__3

Supplemental Data File _.doc_ .tif_ pdf_ etc.__4

Supplemental Data File _.doc_ .tif_ pdf_ etc.__5

This work was supported by P50 AG05136, P50 NS62684, P50 AG05131, the Department of Veterans Affairs, and the Nancy and Buster Alvord Endowment.

Figure 1 Measurement of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) particles using Apogee A50 flow cytometry. (A) Calibration Beadmix was used to assess light scatter and fluorescence. Shown are typical data from the BeadMix analyzed on the A50-Micro flow cytometer. The left cytogram shows that all populations included, 2 green fluorescent (488 nm laser) polystyrene beads with diameters of 0.11 μm and 0.5 μm, and 6 silica beads with diameters of 0.18, 0.24, 0.30, 0.59, 0.88 and 1.30 μm, were resolved from each other and from instrument noise. The right cytogram was gated to exclude the fluorescent latex beads so that the non-fluorescent beads can be evaluated more clearly. (B) Histograms show side scattering (left) and forward scattering (middle) from 0.18, 0.24, 0.30, 0.59, 0.88 and 1.3 μm silica microspheres (blue peaks) and the noise threshold limit (dotted line). Representative dot plot (right) of a CSF sample showing “smaller” particle gate based on forward angle light scatter from 0.30 μm silica microspheres and “larger” particle gate based on forward angle light scatter from 0.30 to 0.59 μm silica microspheres. (C) Flow cytometric analysis of CSF apolipoprotein-bearing particles in human CSF. Fluorescence analysis of CSF samples labeled with apoE-Alexa Fluor 488, apoJ-Alexa Fluor 488, or apoAI-FITC (right panels). Density plots show background from phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) labeled with the same antibodies (left panels) used as background control. Isotype control of corresponding species of IgG was used to label the same CSF samples (middle panels) as negative controls and results used to set gating for positive events. (D) Fluorescence analysis of a CSF sample labeled with annexin V-FITC with binding buffer containing Ca2+ (right). The same labeling procedure but using buffer without Ca2+ was used as negative control (middle). PBS labeled with annexin V-FITC was used as background control (left). (E) Flow cytometric analysis of β-amyloid (Aβ42)-positive particles in human CSF. PBS (upper, left) and isotype control (upper, right) was used as controls. A representative fluorescence plot shows Aβ42-positive events in CSF (lower, left) that were nearly completely removed following pull down of Aβ42 with 6E10 antibody coupled to agarose beads (lower, right). (F) The protein retrieved from the 6E10 pull down pellet was analyzed by Western blot using 6E10 (right) or Aβ42 (left) antibody to reveal expected smear of Aβ42-immunoreactive molecular masses (and immunoglobulin bands). PBS was substituted for CSF as the negative control.

Figure 2 Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) particles were classified by the presence of apoE, apoJ, apoAI, or β-amyloid (Aβ42), as detected by labeled antibodies or by binding of annexin V, and stratified by size into larger (A, 300 to 590 nm) or smaller (B, &lt; 300 nm) particles for each sample. One-way ANOVA for each molecularly-defined particle concentration (events/μL) in these 2 size ranges each had p &lt; 0.0001. Corrected multiple comparisons for CSF particle concentration had p &lt; 0.01 for all paired comparisons except for apoE-positive vs. apoJ-positive, which were not significantly different for either size range.

Figure 3 Flow cytometric analysis of the association of β-amyloid (Aβ42) with other cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) particles. (A) Dual fluorescence analysis of a representative CSF sample showing Aβ42 co-labeled with apoE-positive (upper left) or apoJ-positive (upper right) particles but not apoAI-positive (lower left) or annexin V-positive (lower right) particles. (B) Scatter plot with best-fit line for apoE associated Aβ42 particles vs. apoJ associated Aβ42 particles for all 131 participants.

Figure 4 Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) apoE-positive particle analysis using flow cytometry. (A) Older Controls were used as part of the age series (gray) and also as the control group for mild cognitive impairment (MCI), Alzheimer disease (AD) dementia (black), and Parkinson disease (PD) (striped). Horizontal lines indicate groups compared by ANOVA (3 age groups, or Older Controls, MCI, AD dementia, and PD). One-way ANOVA had **p &lt; 0.01 for 3 age groups. Corrected posttests had *p &lt; 0.05 for young vs. middle-aged or **p &lt; 0.01 for young vs. Older Controls. (B) Comparison of apoE-positive particle concentration stratified by APOE genotype and by diagnostic category as control (CTL, gray), MCI and AD dementia (M/A, black), or PD (striped). Two-way ANOVA had **p &lt; 0.01 for APOE genotype among CTL and M/A groups, and corrected posttests had *p &lt; 0.05 for APOE ε4/ε4 vs. APOE ε3/ε3 in both CLT and M/A groups. There was no significant difference between CTL and PD groups. (C) ApoE-positive particle concentrations were plotted against age for CTL and M/A groups stratified by the 3 APOE genotypes, and for PD groups stratified by the 2 APOE genotypes. (D) Percent of larger apoE-positive particles stratified by APOE genotype and by diagnostic category as control (CTL, gray), MCI and AD dementia (M/A, black), or PD (striped). Two-way ANOVA had **p &lt; 0.0001 for APOE genotype among CTL and M/A groups, and corrected posttests had **p &lt; 0.01 for APOE ε4/ε4 vs. APOE ε3/ε3 or *p &lt; 0.05 for APOE ε3/ε4 vs. APOE ε3/ε3 in both CLT and M/A groups. There was no significant difference between CTL and PD groups. (E) Scatter plot of CSF apoE-positive particle size vs. concentration for each sample shows that APOE ε4/ε4 (black) is associated with fewer, larger CSF apoE-positive particles.

Figure 5 Murine primary cultures of cerebral cortical astrocytes or microglia were prepared from homozygous (ε3+/+ or ε4+/+) or hemizygous (ε3+/− or ε4+/−) targeted replacement (TR) mice with human APOE. Following 24 hours in culture, the medium was replaced with serum-free medium. After another 24 hours in culture, conditioned medium was assayed for apoE-positive particle concentration and size distribution using flow cytometry. (A) Two-way ANOVA had significant genotype-dependent (***p &lt; 0.001) and gene dose-dependent (***p &lt; 0.001) differences in apoE-positive particle concentration from astrocyte conditioned medium. Corrected posttests had **p &lt; 0.01 for ε3+/+ vs. ε4+/+. (B) Two-way ANOVA of microglia apoE-positive particles had **p &lt; 0.01 for gene dose, but was not significant for genotype. (C) There was neither genotype- nor gene dose-dependent effects on astrocyte conditioned medium apoE-positive particle size distribution. (D) In contrast, two-way ANOVA of microglia conditioned medium particle size distribution had corrected posttests significant for homozygous (***p &lt; 0.001 for ε3+/+ vs. ε4+/+) and hemizygous microglia (***p &lt; 0.001 for ε3+/− vs. ε4+/−).

Figure 6 Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) apoAI-positive particle concentration in age and diagnostic groups. One-way ANOVA had *p &lt; 0.05 for the 3 age groups and ***p &lt; 0.001 for Older Controls, mild cognitive impairment (MCI), Alzheimer disease (AD) dementia, and Parkinson Disease (PD) groups; corrected posttests had **p &lt; 0.01 for Older Controls vs. MCI, ***p &lt; 0.001 Older Controls vs. AD dementia, and *p &lt; 0.05 for Older Controls vs. PD.

Figure 7 Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) annexin V-positive particle concentration in age and clinical diagnostic groups. One-way ANOVA had **p &lt; 0.01 for Older Controls, mild cognitive impairment (MCI), Alzheimer disease (AD) dementia, and Parkinson Disease (PD) groups; corrected posttests had **p &lt; 0.01 for Older Controls vs. AD dementia and #p &lt; 0.01 for MCI vs. AD dementia.

Figure 8 Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) β-amyloid (Aβ42)-positive particle levels in age and diagnostic groups. One-way ANOVA had *p &lt; 0.05 for 3 age groups, and *p &lt; 0.05 for Older Controls, mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and Alzheimer disease (AD) dementia groups. Corrected posttests had *p &lt; 0.05 for Young vs. Middle-aged or vs. Older Controls. There was no significance for paired comparisons in Older Controls, MCI and AD dementia groups, or between Older Controls and PD.

Table Characteristics of 131 Participants Whose Samples Were Used

	Controls	MCI	AD dementia	PD	
Young	Middle-Aged	Older	
N	15	21	23	21	27	28	
Age (year, mean ± SD)	28 ± 6	55 ± 7	73 ± 5	75 ± 10	69 ± 10	64 ± 8	
M:F (N)	4:11	11:10	11:12	14:7	16:11	12:12	
Education (mean years)	17	16	15	16	16	16	
APOE ε3/ε3 (N)	10	11	9	10	10	14	
APOE ε3/ε4 (N)	4	10	10	10	10	10	
APOE ε4/ε4 (N)	1	-	4	1	7	-	
AD, Alzheimer disease; M, male; F, female; MCI, mild cognitive impairment; PD, Parkinson disease.

Potential Conflicts of Interest. AMW, CDK, CEY, EC, GL, JG, JSB, KSM, SCH, TJM, and YY have nothing to report. DRG and ERP reports grants from National Institutes of Health during the conduct of the study. BTH reports grants and personal fees from Biogen, grants from BMS, Ipierian, and Protena, and personal fees from Calico and Genentech, outside the submitted work.


1 Montine T Montine K Swift L Central nervous system lipoproteins in Alzheimer’s disease Am J Pathol 1997 151 1571 5 9403708
2 Koch S Donarski N Goetze K Characterization of four lipoprotein classes in human cerebrospinal fluid J Lipid Res 2001 42 1143 51 11441143
3 Borghini I Barja F Pometta D Characterization of subpopulations of lipoprotein particles isolated from human cerebrospinal fluid Biochim Biophys Acta 1995 1255 192 200 7696334
4 Pitas RE Boyles JK Lee SH Lipoproteins and their receptors in the central nervous system. Characterization of the lipoproteins in cerebrospinal fluid and identification of apolipoprotein B, E(LDL) receptors in the brain J Biol Chem 1987 262 14352 60 3115992
5 Roheim PS Carey M Forte T Apolipoproteins in human cerebrospinal fluid Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1979 76 4646 9 291993
6 Cruchaga C Kauwe JS Nowotny P Cerebrospinal fluid APOE levels: an endophenotype for genetic studies for Alzheimer’s disease Hum Mol Genet 2012 21 4558 71 22821396
7 Lehtimaki T Pirttila T Mehta PD Apolipoprotein E (apoE) polymorphism and its influence on ApoE concentrations in the cerebrospinal fluid in Finnish patients with Alzheimer’s disease Hum Genet 1995 95 39 42 7814023
8 Landen M Hesse C Fredman P Apolipoprotein E in cerebrospinal fluid from patients with Alzheimer’s disease and other forms of dementia is reduced but without any correlation to the apoE4 isoform Dementia 1996 7 273 8 8872419
9 Mulder M Ravid R Swaab DF Reduced levels of cholesterol, phospholipids, and fatty acids in cerebrospinal fluid of Alzheimer disease patients are not related to apolipoprotein E4 Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 1998 12 198 203 9772023
10 Lefranc D Vermersch P Dallongeville J Relevance of the quantification of apolipoprotein E in the cerebrospinal fluid in Alzheimer’s disease Neurosci Lett 1996 212 91 4 8832646
11 Schiele F De Bacquer D Vincent-Viry M Apolipoprotein E serum concentration and polymorphism in six European countries: the ApoEurope Project Atherosclerosis 2000 152 475 88 10998477
12 Blennow K Hesse C Fredman P Cerebrospinal fluid apolipoprotein E is reduced in Alzheimer’s disease Neuroreport 1994 5 2534 6 7696597
13 Beffert U Cohn JS Petit-Turcotte C Apolipoprotein E and beta-amyloid levels in the hippocampus and frontal cortex of Alzheimer’s disease subjects are disease-related and apolipoprotein E genotype dependent Brain Res 1999 843 87 94 10528114
14 Yamauchi K Tozuka M Nakabayashi T Apolipoprotein E in cerebrospinal fluid: relation to phenotype and plasma apolipoprotein E concentrations Clin Chem 1999 45 497 504 10102909
15 Montine KS Bassett CN Ou JJ Apolipoprotein E allelic influence on human cerebrospinal fluid apolipoproteins J Lipid Res 1998 39 2443 51 9831633
16 Merched A Blain H Visvikis S Cerebrospinal fluid apolipoprotein E level is increased in late-onset Alzheimer’s disease J Neurol Sci 1997 145 33 9 9073026
17 Verghese PB Castellano JM Garai K ApoE influences amyloid-beta (Abeta) clearance despite minimal apoE/Abeta association in physiological conditions Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2013 110 E1807 16 23620513
18 LaDu MJ Munson GW Jungbauer L Preferential interactions between ApoE-containing lipoproteins and Abeta revealed by a detection method that combines size exclusion chromatography with non-reducing gel-shift Biochim Biophys Acta 2012 1821 295 302 22138302
19 Vollbach H Heun R Morris CM APOA1 polymorphism influences risk for early-onset nonfamiliar AD Ann Neurol 2005 58 436 41 16130094
20 Helbecque N Codron V Cottel D An apolipoprotein A-I gene promoter polymorphism associated with cognitive decline, but not with Alzheimer’s disease Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 2008 25 97 102 18073484
21 Saczynski JS White L Peila RL The relation between apolipoprotein A-I and dementia: the Honolulu-Asia aging study Am J Epidemiol 2007 165 985 92 17298957
22 Kawano M Kawakami M Otsuka M Marked decrease of plasma apolipoprotein AI and AII in Japanese patients with late-onset non-familial Alzheimer’s disease Clin Chim Acta 1995 239 209 11 8542660
23 Merched A Xia Y Visvikis S Decreased high-density lipoprotein cholesterol and serum apolipoprotein AI concentrations are highly correlated with the severity of Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 2000 21 27 30 10794845
24 Liu HC Hu CJ Chang JG Proteomic identification of lower apolipoprotein A-I in Alzheimer’s disease Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 2006 21 155 61 16391478
25 Wang ES Sun Y Guo JG Tetranectin and apolipoprotein A-I in cerebrospinal fluid as potential biomarkers for Parkinson’s disease Acta Neurol Scand 2010 122 350 9 20085559
26 Qiang JK Wong YC Siderowf A Plasma apolipoprotein A1 as a biomarker for Parkinson disease Ann Neurol 2013 74 119 27 23447138
27 Maarouf CL Beach TG Adler CH Cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers of neuropathologically diagnosed Parkinson’s disease subjects Neurol Res 2012 34 669 76 22889670
28 Paula-Lima AC Tricerri MA Brito-Moreira J Human apolipoprotein A-I binds amyloid-beta and prevents Abeta-induced neurotoxicity Int J Biochem Cell Biol 2009 41 1361 70 19130896
29 Koldamova RP Lefterov IM Lefterova MI Apolipoprotein A-I directly interacts with amyloid precursor protein and inhibits A beta aggregation and toxicity Biochemistry 2001 40 3553 60 11297421
30 Lambert JC Heath S Even G Genome-wide association study identifies variants at CLU and CR1 associated with Alzheimer’s disease Nat Genet 2009 41 1094 9 19734903
31 Harold D Abraham R Hollingworth P Genome-wide association study identifies variants at CLU and PICALM associated with Alzheimer’s disease Nat Genet 2009 41 1088 93 19734902
32 Ghiso J Matsubara E Koudinov A The cerebrospinal-fluid soluble form of Alzheimer’s amyloid beta is complexed to SP-40,40 (apolipoprotein J), an inhibitor of the complement membrane-attack complex Biochem J 1993 293 27 30 8328966
33 Boggs LN Fuson KS Baez M Clusterin (Apo J) protects against in vitro amyloid-beta (1-40) neurotoxicity J Neurochem 1996 67 1324 7 8752142
34 Matsubara E Frangione B Ghiso J Characterization of apolipoprotein J-Alzheimer’s A beta interaction J Biol Chem 1995 270 7563 7 7706304
35 DeMattos RB Cirrito JR Parsadanian M ApoE and clusterin cooperatively suppress Abeta levels and deposition: evidence that ApoE regulates extracellular Abeta metabolism in vivo Neuron 2004 41 193 202 14741101
36 Desikan RS Thompson WK Holland D The role of clusterin in amyloid-beta-associated neurodegeneration JAMA Neurol 2014 71 180 7 24378367
37 Prikrylova Vranova H Mares J Nevrly M CSF markers of neurodegeneration in Parkinson’s disease J Neural Transm 2010 117 1177 81 20730548
38 van Dijk KD Jongbloed W Heijst JA Cerebrospinal fluid and plasma clusterin levels in Parkinson’s disease Parkinsonism Relat Disord 2013 19 1079 83 23932065
39 Braccioli L van Velthoven C Heijnen CJ Exosomes: a new weapon to treat the central nervous system Mol Neurobiol 2014 49 113 9 23857502
40 Heijnen HF Schiel AE Fijnheer R Activated platelets release two types of membrane vesicles: microvesicles by surface shedding and exosomes derived from exocytosis of multivesicular bodies and alpha-granules Blood 1999 94 3791 9 10572093
41 Vader P Breakefield XO Wood MJ Extracellular vesicles: emerging targets for cancer therapy Trends Mol Med 2014 20 385 93 24703619
42 Gyorgy B Szabo TG Pasztoi M Membrane vesicles, current state-of-the-art: emerging role of extracellular vesicles Cell Mol Life Sci 2011 68 2667 88 21560073
43 Thery C Ostrowski M Segura E Membrane vesicles as conveyors of immune responses Nat Rev Immunol 2009 9 581 93 19498381
44 Raposo G Stoorvogel W Extracellular vesicles: exosomes, microvesicles, and friends J Cell Biol 2013 200 373 83 23420871
45 Burger D Schock S Thompson CS Microparticles: biomarkers and beyond Clin Sci (Lond) 2013 124 423 41 23249271
46 Dachary-Prigent J Freyssinet JM Pasquet JM Annexin V as a probe of aminophospholipid exposure and platelet membrane vesiculation: a flow cytometry study showing a role for free sulfhydryl groups Blood 1993 81 2554 65 8490169
47 Vella LJ Greenwood DL Cappai R Enrichment of prion protein in exosomes derived from ovine cerebral spinal fluid Vet Immunol Immunopathol 2008 124 385 93 18501435
48 Wang S Cesca F Loers G Synapsin I is an oligomannose-carrying glycoprotein, acts as an oligomannose-binding lectin, and promotes neurite outgrowth and neuronal survival when released via glia-derived exosomes J Neurosci 2011 31 7275 90 21593312
49 Xin H Li Y Buller B Exosome-mediated transfer of miR-133b from multipotent mesenchymal stromal cells to neural cells contributes to neurite outgrowth Stem Cells 2012 30 1556 64 22605481
50 Morel L Regan M Higashimori H Neuronal exosomal miRNA-dependent translational regulation of astroglial glutamate transporter GLT1 J Biol Chem 2013 288 7105 16 23364798
51 Zachau AC Landen M Mobarrez F Leukocyte-derived microparticles and scanning electron microscopic structures in two fractions of fresh cerebrospinal fluid in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a case report J Med Case Rep 2012 6 274 22943439
52 Rajendran L Honsho M Zahn TR Alzheimer’s disease beta-amyloid peptides are released in association with exosomes Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2006 103 11172 7 16837572
53 Sharples RA Vella LJ Nisbet RM Inhibition of gamma-secretase causes increased secretion of amyloid precursor protein C-terminal fragments in association with exosomes FASEB J 2008 22 1469 78 18171695
54 Bulloj A Leal MC Xu H Insulin-degrading enzyme sorting in exosomes: a secretory pathway for a key brain amyloid-beta degrading protease J Alzheimers Dis 2010 19 79 95 20061628
55 Saman S Kim W Raya M Exosome-associated tau is secreted in tauopathy models and is selectively phosphorylated in cerebrospinal fluid in early Alzheimer disease J Biol Chem 2012 287 3842 9 22057275
56 Emmanouilidou E Melachroinou K Roumeliotis T Cell-produced alpha-synuclein is secreted in a calcium-dependent manner by exosomes and impacts neuronal survival J Neurosci 2010 30 6838 51 20484626
57 Perez-Gonzalez R Gauthier SA Kumar A The exosome secretory pathway transports amyloid precursor protein carboxyl-terminal fragments from the cell into the brain extracellular space J Biol Chem 2012 287 43108 15 23129776
58 LaDu MJ Gilligan SM Lukens JR Nascent astrocyte particles differ from lipoproteins in CSF J Neurochem 1998 70 2070 81 9572293
59 Bassett CN Neely MD Sidell KR Cerebrospinal fluid lipoproteins are more vulnerable to oxidation in Alzheimer’s disease and are neurotoxic when oxidized ex vivo Lipids 1999 34 1273 80 10652986
60 Hesse C Larsson H Fredman P Measurement of apolipoprotein E (apoE) in cerebrospinal fluid Neurochem Res 2000 25 511 7 10823584
61 Wahrle SE Shah AR Fagan AM Apolipoprotein E levels in cerebrospinal fluid and the effects of ABCA1 polymorphisms Mol Neurodegener 2007 2 7 17430597
62 Chandler WL Microparticle counts in platelet-rich and platelet-free plasma, effect of centrifugation and sample-processing protocols Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis 2013 24 125 32 23249614
63 Lacroix R Judicone C Poncelet P Impact of pre-analytical parameters on the measurement of circulating microparticles: towards standardization of protocol J Thromb Haemost 2012 10 437 46 22212198
64 Lacroix R Robert S Poncelet P Overcoming limitations of microparticle measurement by flow cytometry Semin Thromb Hemost 2010 36 807 18 21049381
65 Orozco AF Lewis DE Flow cytometric analysis of circulating microparticles in plasma Cytometry A 2010 77 502 14 20235276
66 Sokolow S Henkins KM Bilousova T Pre-synaptic C-terminal truncated tau is released from cortical synapses in Alzheimer’s disease Neurochem 2014
67 Henkins KM Sokolow S Miller CA Extensive p-tau pathology and SDS-stable p-tau oligomers in Alzheimer’s cortical synapses Brain Pathol 2012 22 826 33 22486774
68 Sokolow S Henkins KM Bilousova T AD synapses contain abundant Abeta monomer and multiple soluble oligomers, including a 56-kDa assembly Neurobiol Aging 2012 33 1545 55 21741125
69 Postupna NO Keene CD Latimer C Flow cytometry analysis of synaptosomes from post-mortem human brain reveals changes specific to Lewy body and Alzheimer’s disease Lab Invest 2014 94 1161 72 25068655
70 Sokolow S Luu SH Nandy K Preferential accumulation of amyloid-beta in presynaptic glutamatergic terminals (VGluT1 and VGluT2) in Alzheimer’s disease cortex Neurobiol Dis 2012 45 381 7 21914482
71 Chandler WL Yeung W Tait JF A new microparticle size calibration standard for use in measuring smaller microparticles using a new flow cytometer J Thromb Haemost 2011 9 1216 24 21481178
72 Robert S Poncelet P Lacroix R Standardization of platelet-derived microparticle counting using calibrated beads and a Cytomics FC500 routine flow cytometer: a first step towards multicenter studies? J Thromb Haemost 2009 7 190 7 18983485
73 McKhann GM Knopman DS Chertkow H The diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer’s disease: recommendations from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimers Dement 2011 7 263 9 21514250
74 Albert MS DeKosky ST Dickson D The diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment due to Alzheimer’s disease: recommendations from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimers Dement 2011 7 270 9 21514249
75 Gibb WR Lees AJ The relevance of the Lewy body to the pathogenesis of idiopathic Parkinson’s disease J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1988 51 745 52 2841426
76 Li G Millard SP Peskind ER Cross-sectional and longitudinal relationships between cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers and cognitive function in people without cognitive impairment from across the adult life span JAMA Neurol 2014 71 742 51 24756381
77 Cholerton BA Zabetian CP Quinn JF Pacific Northwest Udall Center of excellence clinical consortium: study design and baseline cohort characteristics J Parkinsons Dis 2013 3 205 14 23938350
78 Peskind ER Riekse R Quinn JF Safety and acceptability of the research lumbar puncture Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 2005 19 220 5 16327349
79 Nielsen MH Beck-Nielsen H Andersen MN A flow cytometric method for characterization of circulating cell-derived microparticles in plasma J Extracell Vesicles 2014 3 10.3402/jev.v3.20795
80 Knouff C Hinsdale ME Mezdour H Apo E structure determines VLDL clearance and atherosclerosis risk in mice J Clin Invest 1999 103 1579 86 10359567
81 Sullivan PM Mezdour H Aratani Y Targeted replacement of the mouse apolipoprotein E gene with the common human APOE3 allele enhances diet-induced hypercholesterolemia and atherosclerosis J Biol Chem 1997 272 17972 80 9218423
82 Maezawa I Maeda N Montine TJ Apolipoprotein E-specific innate immune response in astrocytes from targeted replacement mice J Neuroinflammation 2006 3 10 16603079
83 Cudaback E Li X Montine KS Apolipoprotein E isoform-dependent microglia migration FASEB J 2011 25 2082 91 21385991
84 Cudaback E Li X Yang Y Apolipoprotein C-I is an APOE genotype-dependent suppressor of glial activation J Neuroinflammation 2012 9 192 22883744
85 Li X Rose SE Montine KS Antagonism of neuronal prostaglandin E(2) receptor subtype 1 mitigates amyloid beta neurotoxicity in vitro J Neuroimmune Pharmacol 2013 8 87 93 22718277
86 Carrillo MC Blennow K Soares H Global standardization measurement of cerebral spinal fluid for Alzheimer’s disease: an update from the Alzheimer’s Association Global Biomarkers Consortium Alzheimers Dement 2013 9 137 40 23274154
87 Li G Sokal I Quinn JF CSF tau/Abeta42 ratio for increased risk of mild cognitive impairment: a follow-up study Neurology 2007 69 631 9 17698783
88 Montine TJ Shi M Quinn JF CSF Abeta(42) and tau in Parkinson’s disease with cognitive impairment Mov Disord 2010 25 2682 5 20818673
89 Shi M Bradner J Hancock AM Cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers for Parkinson disease diagnosis and progression Ann Neurol 2011 69 570 80 21400565
90 Kang JH Irwin DJ Chen-Plotkin AS Association of cerebrospinal fluid beta-amyloid 1-42, T-tau, P-tau181, and alpha-synuclein levels with clinical features of drug-naive patients with early Parkinson disease JAMA Neurol 2013 70 1277 87 23979011
91 Woltjer RL Sonnen JA Sokal I Quantitation and mapping of cerebral detergent-insoluble proteins in the elderly Brain Pathol 2009 19 365 74 18652590
92 Suzuki T Tozuka M Kazuyoshi Y Predominant apolipoprotein J exists as lipid-poor mixtures in cerebrospinal fluid Ann Clin Lab Sci 2002 32 369 76 12458888
93 Bertrand P Poirier J Oda T Association of apolipoprotein E genotype with brain levels of apolipoprotein E and apolipoprotein J (clusterin) in Alzheimer disease Brain Res Mol Brain Res 1995 33 174 8 8774959
94 Page KJ Hollister RD Hyman BT Dissociation of apolipoprotein and apolipoprotein receptor response to lesion in the rat brain: an in situ hybridization study Neuroscience 1998 85 1161 71 9681954
95 Elshourbagy NA Liao WS Mahley RW Apolipoprotein E mRNA is abundant in the brain and adrenals, as well as in the liver, and is present in other peripheral tissues of rats and marmosets Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1985 82 203 7 3918303
96 Mahley RW Weisgraber KH Huang Y Apolipoprotein E: structure determines function, from atherosclerosis to Alzheimer’s disease to AIDS J Lipid Res 2009 50 Suppl S183 8 19106071
97 Eto M Watanabe K Ishii K Reciprocal effects of apolipoprotein E alleles (epsilon 2 and epsilon 4) on plasma lipid levels in normolipidemic subjects Clin Genet 1986 29 477 84 3461894
98 Gregg RE Zech LA Schaefer EJ Abnormal in vivo metabolism of apolipoprotein E4 in humans J Clin Invest 1986 78 815 21 3745440
99 Hanis CL Hewett-Emmett D Douglas TC Effects of the apolipoprotein E polymorphism on levels of lipids, lipoproteins, and apolipoproteins among Mexican-Americans in Starr County, Texas Arterioscler Thromb 1991 11 362 70 1998654
100 Riddell DR Zhou H Atchison K Impact of apolipoprotein E (ApoE) polymorphism on brain ApoE levels J Neurosci 2008 28 11445 53 18987181
101 Weisgraber KH Apolipoprotein E distribution among human plasma lipoproteins: role of the cysteine-arginine interchange at residue 112 J Lipid Res 1990 31 1503 11 2280190
102 Steinmetz A Jakobs C Motzny S Differential distribution of apolipoprotein E isoforms in human plasma lipoproteins Arteriosclerosis 1989 9 405 11 2719600
103 Reilly M Rader DJ Apolipoprotein E and coronary disease: a puzzling paradox PLoS Med 2006 3 e258 16729847
104 Stampfer MJ Cardiovascular disease and Alzheimer’s disease: common links J Intern Med 2006 260 211 23 16918818
105 Ramaswamy G Xu Q Huang Y Effect of domain interaction on apolipoprotein E levels in mouse brain J Neurosci 2005 25 10658 63 16291938
106 Sullivan PM Mace BE Maeda N Marked regional differences of brain human apolipoprotein E expression in targeted replacement mice Neuroscience 2004 124 725 33 15026113
107 Fryer JD Simmons K Parsadanian M Human apolipoprotein E4 alters the amyloid-beta 40:42 ratio and promotes the formation of cerebral amyloid angiopathy in an amyloid precursor protein transgenic model J Neurosci 2005 25 2803 10 15772340
108 Castellano JM Kim J Stewart FR Human apoE isoforms differentially regulate brain amyloid-beta peptide clearance Sci Transl Med 2011 3 89ra57
109 Rebeck GW Reiter JS Strickland DK Apolipoprotein E in sporadic Alzheimer’s disease: allelic variation and receptor interactions Neuron 1993 11 575 80 8398148
110 DeMattos RB Brendza RP Heuser JE Purification and characterization of astrocyte-secreted apolipoprotein E and J-containing lipoproteins from wild-type and human apoE transgenic mice Neurochem Int 2001 39 415 25 11578777
111 Xu Q Li Y Cyras C Isolation and characterization of apolipoproteins from murine microglia. Identification of a low density lipoprotein-like apolipoprotein J-rich but E-poor spherical particle J Biol Chem 2000 275 31770 7 10918055
112 Yang Y Cudaback E Jorstad NL APOE3, but not APOE4, bone marrow transplantation mitigates behavioral and pathological changes in a mouse model of Alzheimer disease Am J Pathol 2013 183 905 17 23831297
113 Chen HK Liu Z Meyer-Franke A Small molecule structure correctors abolish detrimental effects of apolipoprotein E4 in cultured neurons J Biol Chem 2012 287 5253 66 22158868
114 Han SH Einstein G Weisgraber KH Apolipoprotein E is localized to the cytoplasm of human cortical neurons: a light and electron microscopic study J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 1994 53 535 44 8083695
115 Metzger RE LaDu MJ Pan JB Neurons of the human frontal cortex display apolipoprotein E immunoreactivity: implications for Alzheimer’s disease J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 1996 55 372 80 8786396
116 Xu PT Gilbert JR Qiu HL Specific regional transcription of apolipoprotein E in human brain neurons Am J Pathol 1999 154 601 11 10027417
117 Brecht WJ Harris FM Chang S Neuron-specific apolipoprotein e4 proteolysis is associated with increased tau phosphorylation in brains of transgenic mice J Neurosci 2004 24 2527 34 15014128
118 Strittmatter WJ Weisgraber KH Huang DY Binding of human apolipoprotein E to synthetic amyloid beta peptide: isoform-specific effects and implications for late-onset Alzheimer disease Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993 90 8098 102 8367470
119 Strittmatter WJ Roses AD Apolipoprotein E and Alzheimer’s disease Annu Rev Neurosci 1996 19 53 77 8833436
120 LaDu MJ Falduto MT Manelli AM Isoform-specific binding of apolipoprotein E to beta-amyloid J Biol Chem 1994 269 23403 6 8089103
121 Bales KR Verina T Dodel RC Lack of apolipoprotein E dramatically reduces amyloid beta-peptide deposition Nat Genet 1997 17 263 4 9354781
122 Permanne B Perez C Soto C Detection of apolipoprotein E/dimeric soluble amyloid beta complexes in Alzheimer’s disease brain supernatants Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1997 240 715 20 9398632
123 Holtzman DM Bales KR Wu S Expression of human apolipoprotein E reduces amyloid-beta deposition in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease J Clin Invest 1999 103 R15 r21 10079115
124 Yu C Youmans KL LaDu MJ Proposed mechanism for lipoprotein remodelling in the brain Biochim Biophys Acta 2010 1801 819 23 20470897
125 Lefterov I Fitz NF Cronican AA Apolipoprotein A-I deficiency increases cerebral amyloid angiopathy and cognitive deficits in APP/PS1DeltaE9 mice J Biol Chem 2010 285 36945 57 20739292
126 Lewis TL Cao D Lu H Overexpression of human apolipoprotein A-I preserves cognitive function and attenuates neuroinflammation and cerebral amyloid angiopathy in a mouse model of Alzheimer disease J Biol Chem 2010 285 36958 68 20847045
127 Chambenoit O Hamon Y Marguet D Specific docking of apolipoprotein A-I at the cell surface requires a functional ABCA1 transporter J Biol Chem 2001 276 9955 60 11150301
128 Smith JD Waelde C Horwitz A Evaluation of the role of phosphatidylserine translocase activity in ABCA1-mediated lipid efflux J Biol Chem 2002 277 17797 803 11893753
129 Lindh M Blomberg M Jensen M Cerebrospinal fluid apolipoprotein E (apoE) levels in Alzheimer’s disease patients are increased at follow up and show a correlation with levels of tau protein Neurosci Lett 1997 229 85 8 9223597
130 Fagan AM Holtzman DM Munson G Unique lipoproteins secreted by primary astrocytes from wild type, apoE (−/−), and human apoE transgenic mice J Biol Chem 1999 274 30001 7 10514484
