LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


0236217
6077
Neuropharmacology
Neuropharmacology
Neuropharmacology
0028-3908
1873-7064

25979489
4537378
10.1016/j.neuropharm.2015.04.031
NIHMS690497
Article
Comorbidities in Neurology: Is Adenosine the Common Link?
Boison Detlev 1
Aronica Eleonora 23
1 Robert Stone Dow Neurobiology Laboratories, Legacy Research Institute, Portland, OR 97232, USA
2 Department of (Neuro)Pathology, Academic Medical Center and Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences, Center for Neuroscience, University of Amsterdam
3 Stichting Epilepsie Instellingen (SEIN) Nederland, Heemstede, The Netherlands
Correspondence should be addressed to: Detlev Boison, PhD, Robert Stone Dow Neurobiology Laboratories, Legacy Research Institute, Portland, OR 97232, USA, Phone: (503) 413-1754 /fax: (503) 413-5465, dboison@downeurobiology.org
15 5 2015
13 5 2015
10 2015
01 10 2016
97 1834
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Comorbidities in Neurology represent a major conceptual and therapeutic challenge. For example, temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) is a syndrome comprised of epileptic seizures and comorbid symptoms including memory and psychiatric impairment, depression, and sleep dysfunction. Similarly, Alzheimer’s disease (AD), Parkinson’s disease (PD), and Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) are accompanied by various degrees of memory dysfunction. Patients with AD have an increased likelihood for seizures, whereas all four conditions share certain aspects of psychosis, depression, and sleep dysfunction. This remarkable overlap suggests common pathophysiological mechanisms, which include synaptic dysfunction and synaptotoxicity, as well as glial activation and astrogliosis. Astrogliosis is linked to synapse function via the tripartite synapse, but astrocytes also control the availability of gliotransmitters and adenosine. Here we will specifically focus on the ‘adenosine hypothesis of comorbidities’ implying that astrocyte activation, via overexpression of adenosine kinase (ADK), induces a deficiency in the homeostatic tone of adenosine. We present evidence from patient-derived samples showing astrogliosis and overexpression of ADK as common pathological hallmark of epilepsy, AD, PD, and ALS. We discuss a transgenic ‘comorbidity model’, in which brain-wide overexpression of ADK and resulting adenosine deficiency produces a comorbid spectrum of seizures, altered dopaminergic function, attentional impairment, and deficits in cognitive domains and sleep regulation. We conclude that dysfunction of adenosine signaling is common in neurological conditions, that adenosine dysfunction can explain comorbid phenotypes, and that therapeutic adenosine augmentation might be effective for the treatment of comorbid symptoms in multiple neurological conditions.

Homeostasis
Synaptotoxicity
Inflammation
Glial Activation
Purines
Human pathology
Neurodegeneration
Mouse model

1. Introduction

Temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE), Alzheimer’s disease (AD), Parkinson’s disease (PD), and Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) share a wide range of comorbid symptoms, which involve increased neuronal excitability and a wide range of cognitive and psychiatric symptoms. This remarkable overlap suggests the existence of common pathogenic mechanisms, which include synaptic dysfunction and synaptotocicity (Jensen, 2011; Noebels, 2011; Swann and Rho, 2014; Zhou and Roper, 2012), inflammatory processes (Kobow et al., 2012; Miller and Spencer, 2014; Perry, 2012), and glial activation (Ravizza et al., 2013; Stanimirovic and Friedman, 2012; Suvisaari and Mantere, 2013). Although several mechanisms might contribute to the development of comorbid symptomatology, we will here address and focus on the ‘adenosine hypothesis of comorbidities’, which suggests that adenosine deficiency per se can be a sufficient cause for the generation of a wide spectrum of symptoms shared among seemingly distinct neurological conditions. The purine ribonucleoside adenosine is an endogenous modulator of brain activity (Boison, 2007a; Dunwiddie, 1980; Etherington and Frenguelli, 2004; Fredholm et al., 2005b; Ribeiro and Sebastiao, 2010) that acts as endogenous ligand of four types of G protein coupled adenosine receptors (A1, A2A, A2B, and A3) (Chen et al., 2013). As component of ATP, adenosine has maintained an evolutionary ancient role to adapt metabolic activity to available energy supplies (Newby, 1984). Whereas ATP degradation is a major source for adenosine, physiological adenosine levels are kept low by efficient metabolic clearance. Because physiological adenosine levels are about 100,000 times lower than ATP levels, fluctuations in adenosine tone will not affect the availability of ATP, which is primarily derived from the de novo biosynthetic pathway leading to the formation of IMP (Boison, 2013; Fredholm et al., 2005a; Fredholm et al., 2005b; Fredholm et al., 1984).

In the brain adenosine fulfills two very different, seemingly opposing roles. As a homeostatic regulator and retaliatory metabolite adenosine sets the inhibitory and general neuroprotective ‘tone’ via activation of widespread inhibitory A1Rs (Meghji and Newby, 1990). On the synaptic level however, adenosine facilitates synaptic function via activation of stimulatory A2ARs (Cunha, 2001, 2008). Whereas the tonic inhibitory pool of adenosine is thought to be largely under the control of astrocytes, the stimulatory pool of adenosine acting at the synapse level is likely derived from neurons to allow a highly localized modulation of individual synapses (Cunha, 2001, 2008; Lovatt et al., 2012; Meghji and Newby, 1990). These two parallel, but different functions of adenosine have likely evolved to increase salience of synaptic transmission in a tonically inhibited network, a mechanistic strategy to enhance the signal to noise ratio (Cunha, 2001). The ability of neuron-derived adenosine to facilitate synaptic function via A2AR activation contributes to synaptotoxicity and is a rational explanation for the neuroprotective effects of caffeine and A2AR antagonists (Cunha, 2005).

In addition to the adenosine receptor dependent effects described above, adenosine provides biochemical feedback inhibition of DNA methylation and thereby assumes a role as modulator of epigenetic functions (Williams-Karnesky et al., 2013). Through a combination of adenosine receptor dependent and independent functions, adenosine assumes the role of homeostatic network regulator capable to affect several different signaling pathways and biochemical enzyme reactions in a synergistic manner (Arch and Newsholme, 1978; Boison et al., 2013; Cunha, 2001; Newby, 1984). Adenosine homeostasis in the brain is largely under the control of metabolic clearance through adenosine kinase (ADK) expression in astrocytes (Boison, 2013). Here we propose that maladaptive changes in adenosine homeostasis occur during the pathogenesis of temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) and likewise in neurodegenerative conditions such as Alzheimer’s disease (AD), Parkinson’s disease (PD), and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).

Synaptotoxicity, immune activation, inflammatory processes, and glial activation play a major role in the pathogenesis of all four conditions (Aronica et al., 2012; Jensen et al., 2013; Lucin and Wyss-Coray, 2009), leading ultimately to astrogliosis, overexpression of ADK, and a deficiency in the availability of adenosine – a sequence, which has been identified as characteristic pathological hallmark of human TLE (Aronica et al., 2013). Through the tripartite synapse astrocytes interact with neurons (Araque et al., 1999; Halassa and Haydon, 2010) and adenosine itself affects synaptic function (Duarte et al., 2012; Matos et al., 2012a; Silva et al., 2007) with a gain of function of synaptic A2ARs contributing to synaptotoxicity and adaptive processes of astrocytes affecting glutamate homeostasis and thereby synaptic function (Matos et al., 2012a; Matos et al., 2012b; Matos et al., 2015). Thus, a self-reinforcing triad of astrocyte activation, adenosine dysfunction, and synaptotoxicity may contribute to the development of comorbid symptomatology. Here we will focus here on astrogliosis and adenosine deficiency as common pathological hallmarks in Neurology.

Because data on cause-effect relationships of adenosine dysfunction and disease pathogenesis are sparse we will present largely correlative and conceptual advances in support of our hypothesis. The development of an adenosine deficient ‘comorbidity model’ (see below) however suggests that adenosine deficiency per se might be sufficient to trigger a wide range of comorbid symptoms. The apparent common overlap of maladaptive changes in adenosine homeostasis suggests common pathogenic mechanisms, which might be tied to common triggers of disease initiation. For example, the ADK hypothesis of epileptogenesis suggests that a precipitating injury triggers an acute surge in adenosine, which facilitates inflammatory processes and glial activation, resulting in astrogliosis, overexpression of ADK and adenosine deficiency, which in turn drives hypermethylation of DNA (Boison, 2008; Li et al., 2008; Williams-Karnesky et al., 2013). Similar mechanisms might also play a role in neurodegenerative conditions. If adenosine deficiency is a common pathological hallmark in a wider range of neurological conditions, then therapeutic adenosine augmentation might have the potential to treat comorbid conditions, such as those discussed here, in a holistic manner.

2. Glial activation – a common histopathological finding in Neurology

Clinical neurological findings show a remarkable overlap in symptom presentation across seemingly unrelated neurological conditions. In the search for common substrates and mechanisms for comorbidities in Neurology, we will focus primarily on histopathological findings and astroglial pathology. Those descriptive data sets conceptually support our hypothesis that certain histopathological changes (e.g. glial activation) might provide a substrate for comorbid symptom genesis. We will first discuss clinical and histopathological data in an attempt to find common pathological substrates for comorbid symptoms found in epilepsy, AD, PD, and ALS, and then discuss the role of astrogliosis and adenosine dysregulation in more detail.

In the adult brain adenosine levels are largely under the control of metabolic clearance through astrocytes (Boison et al., 2010) and the astrocyte-based enzyme ADK, which in conjunction with equilibrative nucleoside transporters provides an efficient metabolic reuptake system for adenosine (Boison, 2013; Studer et al., 2006). Genetic disruption of the Adk gene in glial, but not in neuronal cells, induces the release of adenosine (Fedele et al., 2004). Conversely, the genetic overexpression of Adk in astrocytes is sufficient to induce epileptic seizures by reducing the tissue tone of homeostatic adenosine, which results in reduced activation of the inhibitory A1R (Li et al., 2007a; Shen et al., 2014). Reduced A1R activation promotes excitatory neurotransmitter release and decreases the postsynaptic membrane potential (Fredholm, 1995, 2010). Indeed, deficiency of A1Rs increases neuronal excitability and can be a direct cause for electrographic seizure activity (Boison, 2007b; Li et al., 2007a; Masino et al., 2011). If intracellular ADK expression levels are low, astrocytes can release adenosine directly through equilibrative nucleoside transporters; conversely, overexpression of ADK in conjunction with astrogliosis causes adenosine deficiency and spontaneous recurrent seizures (Aronica et al., 2011; Li et al., 2012; Li et al., 2008; Shen et al., 2014). New data sets from our laboratory show that astrogliosis (Fig. 1) and overexpression of ADK (Fig. 2–5) are found in human brain specimen from patients with epilepsy, AD, PD, and ALS. Although the findings presented in this section are correlative and descriptive, they suggest the existence of common pathophysiological mechanisms.

2.1. Temporal lobe epilepsy

Several clinical studies indicate that patients with epilepsy have a high prevalence of both psychiatric and somatic comorbidities, which may precede, co-occur with, or follow the diagnosis of epilepsy [for reviews see (Gaitatzis et al., 2004; Gaitatzis et al., 2012; LaFrance et al., 2008)]. Psychiatric disorders, including cognitive changes, attention deficits, psychosis, and personality changes, as well as depression, anxiety, and migraine occur more frequently in people with epilepsy than in the general population, particularly in patients with refractory epilepsy. Importantly, neurodegenerative conditions such as dementias and Alzheimer' disease (prevalence ratio 6.3 and 8, respectively) and Parkinson' disease (prevalence ratio, 3.2) appear more frequently in people with epilepsy (Gaitatzis et al., 2004; Gaitatzis et al., 2012). A recent study supports a structural basis for psychiatric comorbidities in patients with TLE, pointing to synaptic dysfunction, as well as to aberrant plasticity within hippocampal networks (Kandratavicius et al., 2012). Several studies revealed an association of dentate gyrus (DG) pathological changes with long-term seizure histories and cognitive dysfunction suggesting a compromised regenerative capacity of the DG in a subpopulation of TLE patients (Blumcke et al., 2009; Coras et al., 2010). Further evidence suggests similar mechanisms underlying cellular aging and neurodegeneration are also widespread in other forms of epilepsy such as in developmental lesions associated with chronic intractable epilepsy (Iyer et al., 2014; Prabowo et al., 2014).

Hippocampal sclerosis (HS) is the most common neuropathological finding in patients undergoing surgery for intractable TLE. Histopathologically, HS is defined by specific features, including a characteristic pattern of neuronal cell loss associated with astrogliosis (Fig. 1 A–B). The neuronal cell loss involves mainly the CA1, CA4, and CA3 subfields, whereas the CA2 subfield is often spared. As described several years ago, another characteristic feature of HS is represented by the sharp interface of neuronal loss between CA1 and the subiculum, which is preserved (Thom et al., 2009); Fig. 1 A). The criteria for the diagnosis of HS are summarized in the International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE) report, which classifies HS into 3 subtypes, based on the histological patterns of subfield neuronal loss and gliosis (Blumcke et al., 2013). Other alterations in HS include dispersion of the granule cell layer of the dentate gyrus, alterations of interneuronal populations and mossy fiber sprouting (Thom, 2014). These features may represent a useful diagnostic to distinguish HS associated with chronic epilepsy from other causes of HS [e.g. HS with dementia/neurodegeneration; (Bandopadhyay et al., 2014)]. Because the reorganization of excitatory and inhibitory networks in the dentate gyrus appears to be a characteristic of HS associated with chronic epilepsy, subtle alterations of the dentate gyrus may also occur in HS with dementia (Bandopadhyay et al., 2014).

Astrogliosis is a pathological hallmark of various types of medically refractory focal epilepsy, including TLE associated with HS (Sofroniew and Vinters, 2010; Thom et al., 2009). Activation of astrocytes is also observed in focal malformations of cortical development, such as focal cortical dysplasia (FCD) and cortical tubers in patients with tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC), which are among the most common causes of pharmacologically intractable epilepsies in children and young adults [for reviews see (Aronica and Crino, 2014; Aronica et al., 2012)]. The presence of astrogliosis in epilepsy-associated pathologies has stimulated extensive research focused on the role of reactive astrocytes in the pathophysiological processes that underlie the development of epilepsy. In both experimental and human epileptic tissues astrocytes undergo complex changes in their physiological properties (including dysregulation of astroglial Kir channels and gap junction proteins), which can alter glio-neuronal communication, contributing to seizure precipitation and recurrence and suggesting an astrocytic basis for epilepsy (Seifert et al., 2010; Seifert et al., 2006; Seifert and Steinhauser, 2013; Steinhauser et al., 2012). Astrocytes initiate, regulate and amplify immune-mediated mechanisms involved in different neurological disorders, including epilepsy (Aronica et al., 2012; Devinsky et al., 2013; Farina et al., 2007; Vezzani et al., 2008). Astrocytes also release the gliotransmitters glutamate, D-serine, and ATP, which all influence neuronal networks, and dysregulation of gliotransmitter release has been implicated in epilepsy pathophysiology (Halassa et al., 2007; Vezzani et al., 2011; Zorec et al., 2012). In addition, astrocytes can influence network excitability in epilepsy through dysfunctional adenosine homeostasis, resulting from changes in ADK expression levels (Aronica et al., 2013; Boison, 2008). Overexpression of ADK has been reported in specimens of patients undergoing surgery for pharmacologically refractory TLE with HS [(Aronica et al., 2013; Aronica et al., 2011; Masino et al., 2011); Fig. 2 B–C). Higher expression of ADK has been detected in the peritumoral infiltrated tissue of patients with epileptogenic astroglial brain tumors (de Groot et al., 2012). Increased ADK expression has likewise been observed in reactive astrocytes and balloon/giant cells of FCD and TSC specimens (Fig. 2 F–G). Increased ADK in epilepsy is expected to lower the tissue tone of adenosine and thereby to increase neuronal excitability and to precipitate seizures (Li et al., 2007a; Li et al., 2012; Li et al., 2008).

2.2. Alzheimer’s disease

Both psychiatric and somatic comorbidities have been reported in AD and may influence AD progression, accelerating cognitive decline (Amore et al., 2007; Cechetto et al., 2008; Craft, 2009; Perez-Madrinan et al., 2004; Schmidt et al., 2011). Neuropsychiatric symptoms, (including depression, apathy, agitation, or psychosis) are a key disabling component of AD and understanding their neurobiological substrates represents a crucial challenge for AD research (Geda et al., 2013). Recently, there has been growing interest in the comorbidity between AD and epilepsy (Larner, 2010). Unprovoked seizures, such as complex partial seizures, occur in AD more frequently than in the general population and it is estimated that at least 10% to 20% of all AD patients have at least one unprovoked seizure (Mendez and Lim, 2003; Rao et al., 2009; Scarmeas et al., 2009). Seizures usually are observed in later stages of the disease and may be unrecorded or interpreted as confusion or delirium [for review see (Larner, 2010, 2011)]. Early-onset AD increases the relative risk of seizure development up to 80-fold (Amatniek et al., 2006; Mendez and Lim, 2003; Rao et al., 2009; Scarmeas et al., 2009). An attractive hypothesis is that the pathogenic mechanisms underlying seizure development and cognitive impairment may overlap, suggesting a bidirectional link and possible common disease mechanisms, which include remodeling of GABAergic circuits, aberrant integration and sprouting of newborn neurons, and the ability of beta-amyloid to deregulate synaptic plasticity (Palop and Mucke, 2009).

The neuropathological hallmarks of the AD brain are represented by parenchymal deposits of Aβ peptide (extracellular accumulation as diffuse or focal deposits) and intracellular accumulation of tau protein (as neurofibrillary tangles, neuropil threads and degenerating neurites in the corona of neuritic plaques/senile plaques), associated with progressive synaptic and neuronal loss, as well as reactive processes involving activation of astrocytes and microglial cells [(Duyckaerts, 2011); Fig. 1 C–D]. The combination, density and distribution of Aβ deposits, neurofibrillary tangles, and neuritic plaques allows the neuropathological diagnosis. Recently, the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association has published a new guideline for the neuropathologic assessment of Alzheimer’s disease, which recognizes the existence of a pre-clinical stage of AD and recommends the evaluation of the severity of Aβ deposits in addition to neurofibrillary degeneration and neuritic plaque formation according to an “ABC” score (Hyman et al., 2012; Kovacs and Gelpi, 2012).

The contribution of glial activation in the onset and progress of neurodegenerative processes in AD is becoming increasingly recognized (Agostinho et al., 2010; Sofroniew and Vinters, 2010). Activated microglia and astrocytes release pro-inflammatory cytokines, chemokines, and reactive oxygen and nitrogen species, which all can disrupt nerve terminal activity and cause synaptotoxicity, which correlates with memory decline (Agostinho et al., 2010). In a seminal review article on this topic it was suggested that these phenomena precede the neuronal death associated with late stages of AD; thus, therapeutic strategies designed to control the activation of microglia and astrocytes and thereby curb the excessive production of pro-inflammatory and pro-oxidant factors hold promise for the control of neurodegeneration in dementia (Agostinho et al., 2010). Reactive astrocytes are often associated with amyloid plaques (Fig. 1 C–D) and astrogliosis increases in parallel with the progression of AD pathology (Simpson et al., 2010; Sofroniew and Vinters, 2010). Accordingly, Aβ plays a role in activating astrocytes, but particularly in the context of the more complex environment of the neuritic plaque (Nagele et al., 2004; Simpson et al., 2010). Particular attention has focused on the ability of reactive astrocytes to degrade extracellular deposits of Aβ (Pihlaja et al., 2008; Wyss-Coray et al., 2003), as well as on their involvement in the mechanisms of immune regulation in AD (Cornejo and Hetz, 2013; Fernandez et al., 2013; Mrak and Griffin, 2005; Salmina, 2009). Reactive astrocytes may increase neuronal vulnerability to excitotoxicity and oxidative stress, through different mechanisms, including uptake of glucose and release of lactate, as well as by the uptake of glutamate and the release of glutamine (Fuller et al., 2009; Steele and Robinson, 2012). Recent studies ascribe a specific role of astrocytic A2ARs in the ability of Aβ-induced impairment of glutamate uptake, which may provide an astrocyte-dependent mechanistic basis for glutamatergic synaptic dysfunction and synaptotoxicity in AD (Matos et al., 2012a). Importantly, astrocytic A2ARs were found to be upregulated in human AD (Orr et al., 2015). Since the genetic deletion of A2ARs in astrocytes and neural progenitor cells during brain development enhanced memory (Orr et al., 2015) the authors of this study concluded that AD-linked increases in astrocytic A2A receptor levels contribute to memory loss. These findings contrast with a recent study, in which the selective deletion of A2ARs in postnatal astrocytes, triggered decreased working memory through a mechanism involving the disruption of glutamate homeostasis via aberrant GLT-I activity, increased presynaptic glutamate release, NMDA-R 2B subunit upregulation, and increased internalization of AMPA-R (Matos et al., 2015). Accordingly, selective GLT-I inhibition or blockade of GluR1/2 endocytosis prevented impaired working memory in the mutant animals (Matos et al., 2015). These findings demonstrate that astroglial A2ARs critically influence synaptic function and cognitive performance. Focal dysregulation of ADK expression/function in reactive astrocytes may represent an additional mechanism potentially contributing to the pathogenesis of the disease. Interestingly, we observed an increased expression of ADK in astrocytes surrounding amyloid deposits and tangle-containing neurons in patients with AD (Fig. 3 A–D), including also patients with Down syndrome (not shown). Increased ADK is expected to generate a local deficiency in homeostatic adenosine, an endogenous neuroprotectant of the brain (Cunha, 2005; Ribeiro, 2005; Stone et al., 2009), and thereby increase the likelihood for neurodegeneration via decreased activation of neuronal A1Rs and astroglial A2ARs.

2.3. Parkinson’s disease

Apart from the impairment of motor functions, the quality of life in PD is further complicated by higher rates of cognitive and psychiatric comorbidities, in particular depression (Dobkin et al., 2011; Marsh, 2013; Menza et al., 1993; Reijnders et al., 2008) which have been related to underlying neuropathological lesions (Paulus and Jellinger, 1991), however the underlying mechanisms of comorbidities in PD remain still unknown (Marsh, 2013). Association with epilepsy has been evaluated only in a minority of population studies, although cognitive impairment and depression are also common comorbid disorders in TLE (Gaitatzis et al., 2012; Szot, 2012).

The pathological hallmarks of the PD brain are represented by α-synuclein immunoreactive deposits in both neurons (intraneuronal cytoplasmic inclusion; Lewy body, LB; Fig. 1E), as well as in dystrophic neurites, associated with progressive neuronal loss in several subcortical nuclei [i.e. substantia nigra pars compacta, locus coeruleus, nucleus basalis of Meynert; (Duyckaerts, 2011)]. The neuropathological changes may be extended supratentorially to cortical regions and α-synuclein pathology often involves the peripheral autonomic system. Recent studies suggest that neuron to neuron or a trans-synaptic spread of α-synuclein pathology underlies the disease progression (Desplats et al., 2009) and may represent a unifying pathogenetic mechanism in different neurodegenerative disorders (Hallbeck et al., 2013; Jellinger, 2010; Polymenidou and Cleveland, 2012).

The neuronal cell loss is accompanied by mild to moderate astrogliosis (Fig. 1F) and microglia upregulation (Duyckaerts, 2011; Forno et al., 1992). The neuronal cell loss in PD is accompanied by astrogliosis, and the extent of reactivity correlates with progression of neurodegeneration and disease stage in Parkinsonian syndromes (Duyckaerts, 2011; Song et al., 2009). Several studies point to the role of reactive astrocytes in mediating the effects of both genetic and environmental factors contributing to dopaminergic neurodegeneration, although neuroprotective activities have been also reported (L' Episcopo et al., 2010; McGeer and McGeer, 2008; Nam et al., 2012; Rappold and Tieu, 2010; Vila et al., 2001). Astrocytes are also a target of PD pathology, since subpopulations of astrocytes accumulate abnormal proteins such as α-synuclein, parkin, and phosho-tau (Song et al., 2009). Early dysfunction of astrocytes, associated with α-synuclein accumulation, might contribute to the recruitment of microglia and amplification of the inflammatory response, leading to neurodegeneration in restricted brain regions (Halliday and Stevens, 2011). Several studies highlight the key role of astrocytes in inflammatory and oxidative stress mechanisms, which contribute to disease progression [for review see (Niranjan, 2014)]. Moreover, increased expression of ADK is observed in reactive astrocytes in both substantia nigra and necortex of PD patients (Fig. 4 C–F). Increased ADK and resulting adenosine deficiency is expected to promote neurodegeneration and to affect motor function through altered adenosine/dopamine receptor interactions (Franco et al., 2007; Fuxe et al., 2007a; Fuxe et al., 2007b).

2.4. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis

Dementia is relatively frequent in ALS and may be a consequence of either frontotemporal lobar degeneration or result from co-existing Alzheimer’s disease (Rusina et al., 2010). Frontotemporal dementia frequently co-occurs with ALS and common cellular mechanisms between ALS and frontotemporal dementia, as well as with other neurodegenerative diseases have been suggested (Robberecht and Philips, 2013). Similarly to other neurodegenerative diseases, psychiatric comorbidities, including depressive symptoms with a prevalence of mild and severe depression of 29% and 6%, respectively, have been reported in patients with ALS (Atassi et al., 2011; Ferentinos et al., 2011; Woolley et al., 2011). A recent study reveals that the prevalence of dementia, parkinsonism, and depressive symptoms was significantly higher in the ALS cohort compared to the general population (Korner et al., 2013). In the same cohort the rate of patients with epilepsy was slightly higher in patients with ALS compared with the general population (Korner et al., 2013).

Histopathologically, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is characterized by degeneration of both upper and lower motoneurons associated with prominent astrogliosis (Fig. 1G–H) and microglia activation (Duyckaerts, 2011). Atrophy of the anterior horn and pallor of the white matter of the lateral and anterior corticospinal tracts is often detected and, particularly in patients with long-term survival, a more wide spread pathology with extramotor involvement can be observed. The presence of a large variety of intraneuronal inclusions is a key to diagnosis, representing the hallmark of ALS. Recently TDP-43 has been identified as major ubiquinated protein present in the large majority of ALS cases (Duyckaerts, 2011).

Experimental and clinical observations have suggested a role for non-neuronal cells, in particular astrocytes, in ALS pathogenesis (Hall et al., 1998; Lasiene and Yamanaka, 2011; Levine et al., 1999; Neusch et al., 2007). Mechanisms contributing to the loss of astrocyte-mediated neuroprotective functions, as well as to astrocyte-mediated neurotoxicity have been reported in ALS (Lepore et al., 2008; Martorana et al., 2012a). Accordingly, a subpopulation of spinal cord astrocytes has been shown to degenerate in ALS and impaired astrocytic functions, such as clearance of extracellular glutamate have been described (Lasiene and Yamanaka, 2011; Martorana et al., 2012b; Neusch et al., 2007). Moreover, accumulating evidence supports the involvement of astrocyte-mediated inflammatory responses in ALS pathogenesis (Lasiene and Yamanaka, 2011; McGeer and McGeer, 2002; Rizzo et al., 2014; Sta et al., 2011). Similarly to the above discussed pathologies, also in ALS we observed an upregulation of ADK expression in reactive astrocytes, compared to controls (Fig. 5 A–D). As discussed in the sections above, increased ADK and decreased tissue adenosine would promote neurodegenerative processes.

3. Epigenetic changes in epilepsy and neurodegenerative diseases

Increasing evidence suggests that epigenetic mechanisms contribute to the pathogenesis of epilepsy and neurodegenerative conditions (Kobow and Blumcke, 2011; Lubin, 2012; Millan, 2012; Qureshi and Mehler, 2010; Restrepo et al., 2011; Williams-Karnesky et al., 2013). Epigenetic changes do not affect the DNA sequence itself but affect DNA methylation or histone tail modifications, resulting in long-lasting alterations in chromatin structure and gene expression. Epigenetic mechanisms play key roles in fundamental regulatory processes in brain development, synaptic plasticity, and memory, but also play a role in neurologic disorders such as epilepsy and neurodegenerative disorders. The methylation hypothesis of epileptogenesis suggests that seizures by themselves can induce epigenetic chromatin modifications, thereby aggravating the epileptogenic condition (Kobow and Blumcke, 2011). Importantly, DNA within epileptogenic brain areas is hypermethylated, both in human specimen from resective surgeries as well as in rodent models of TLE (Kobow et al., 2009; Kobow et al., 2013; Williams-Karnesky et al., 2013; Zhu et al., 2012). Although hypermethylation of DNA in the brain has been associated with epilepsy, there has been a lack of direct evidence demonstrating a causative role for increased DNA methylation in epilepsy progression. In a recent study we therefore explored the role of adenosine in reversing epigenetic changes associated with epilepsy (Williams-Karnesky et al., 2013). We found that induction of epilepsy in a rat model led to increased hippocampal DNA methylation that was associated with increased expression of ADK and increased metabolic clearance of adenosine, which is a negative feedback inhibitor of transmethylation reactions (Boison et al., 2002b; Williams-Karnesky et al., 2013). Importantly, the transient focal therapeutic delivery of adenosine to the epileptogenic hippocampus corrected epilepsy-associated changes in DNA methylation and prevented disease progression. These findings indicate that changes in DNA methylation are tightly linked to the status of adenosine homeostasis and constitute a key determinant of the progression of epilepsy; consequently, treatments that augment adenosine may reverse DNA hypermethylation and break the cycle of increasing seizure severity (Williams-Karnesky et al., 2013). In conclusion, overexpression of ADK in epilepsy might drive DNA methylation by providing enhanced metabolic clearance of the transmethylation inhibitor adenosine, thereby inducing a status of hypermethylated DNA in the epileptic brain.

As in epilepsy, hypermethylation of DNA might also play a role in the pathophysiology of neurodegenerative diseases. In a recent study of AD patients, 5-methylcytidine (5mC) as well as 5-hydroxymethylcytidine (5hmC) immunoreactivity was significantly increased in middle frontal gyrus and middle temporal gyrus compared with age-matched controls (Coppieters et al., 2014). Global levels of 5mC and 5hmC positively correlated with each other and with markers of AD including amyloid beta, tau, and ubiquitin loads. Importantly, these findings demonstrate global hypermethylation in the AD brain (Coppieters et al., 2014). DNA methylation profiles of human hippocampus from AD patients, revealed promoter hypermethylation of the dual-specificity phosphatase 22 (DUSP22) gene, which is a likely candidate gene for the pathogenesis of AD since it determines tau phosphorylation status and CREB signaling (Sanchez-Mut et al., 2014). Distinct changes in DNA methylation patterns have also been observed in patients with PD and ALS (Martin and Wong, 2013; Masliah et al., 2013) and increased global DNA methylation has been suggested as a biomarker for ALS (Tremolizzo et al., 2014). Together, these findings suggest that epilepsy and neurodegenerative conditions may share global changes in the methylome as a consequence of altered adenosine homeostasis.

4. Evidence from adenosine-deficient comorbidity model

Although the examples from the preceding sections are based on correlative and conceptual reasoning, they suggest that a deficiency in adenosine – as might be expected as a consequence of astroglial activation and overexpression of ADK – can mechanistically explain the generation of a wide spectrum of symptoms commonly seen as comorbidities shared across several neurological conditions. To experimentally test the hypothesis that adenosine deficiency may cause a spectrum of comorbid conditions we generated a ‘comorbidity model’ in mice by ubiquitous overexpression of the cytoplasmic isoform of ADK using a human ubiquitin promoter driven transgene of mouse Adk cDNA (Fedele et al., 2005). As a result, these Adk-tg mice were characterized by constitutive overexpression of transgenic ADK throughout the brain, with particularly high levels in hippocampal pyramidal neurons. Expression of the ADK transgene resulted in a &gt;2-fold increase in global brain ADK activity and lack of modification of the EPSC response following the pharmacological blockade of A1Rs in mossy fiber CA3 synapses demonstrating a reduction in hippocampal adenosine levels (Fedele et al., 2005). Overexpression of ADK resulted in a 50% reduction of tissue levels of adenosine (Shen et al., 2011). With a set of biosensor and electrophysiological studies we demonstrated that transgenic manipulation of ADK (i) critically influences the basal tone of adenosine, (ii) determines the degree of tonic adenosine dependent synaptic inhibition, which correlates with differential plasticity at hippocampal synapses with low release probability, (iii) modulates age-dependent effects of BDNF on hippocampal synaptic transmission, an action dependent upon co-activation of adenosine A2A receptors, and (iv) influences GABAA receptor-mediated currents in CA3 pyramidal neurons (Diógenes et al., 2014). These examples demonstrate that disruption of adenosine homeostasis affects several different downstream signaling pathways of adenosine simultaneously.

Phenotypically, Adk-tg mice are characterized by (i) spontaneous recurrent electrographic hippocampal seizures at a rate of around 4 seizures per hour with each seizure lasting around 20 seconds (Li et al., 2007a; Li et al., 2008); (ii) severe learning deficits in the Morris water maze task and in Pavlovian conditioning (Yee et al., 2007) and attentional impairment as demonstrated in the latent inhibition paradigm (Shen et al., 2012); (iii) altered locomotor control as evidenced by reduced A2AR activation and lack of responsiveness to amphetamine (Shen et al., 2012); (iv) altered sleep physiology as shown by a remarkable reduction of EEG power in low frequencies in all vigilance states, by increased wake time and a 20% reduction in rapid eye movement (REM) sleep time, and by attenuation of the physiological effects of sleep deprivation.

Together, these findings represent the first – and to the best of our knowledge – only direct causal data sets demonstrating that overexpression of ADK in the brain and resulting adenosine deficiency are sufficient to precipitate a wide range of symptoms commonly found in the comorbid conditions discussed in this review. More specific work will be needed to address spatial, temporal, and cell-type specific requirements of ADK to modulate the symptomatology discussed here. New animal models and viral expression vectors have already been created, which will be used to address those questions in future studies.

5. Adenosine-dependent mechanisms and therapeutic applications

Clinical as well as experimental data suggest that a triad of synaptotoxicity, astrogliosis, and overexpression of ADK, resulting in a deficiency of homeostatic adenosine can directly cause a wide spectrum of comorbid symptoms shared across several neurological conditions (Figure 6). If adenosine deficiency is sufficient to precipitate comorbidities, then therapeutic adenosine augmentation should ameliorate those symptoms. New research data indeed suggest that therapeutic adenosine augmentation may provide benefit for a wide range of conditions in addition to seizure control. In the following we will provide conceptual advances that might provide reasonable mechanistic explanations how adenosine deficiency might functionally be linked to the development of distinct neurological symptoms. In support of our hypotheses we provide direct experimental evidence for the therapeutic benefits of adenosine augmentation therapies.

5.1. Seizures

Adenosine is an endogenous anticonvulsant of the brain and responsible for seizure arrest and postictal refractoriness (Boison, 2012b; Dragunow, 1991; Dunwiddie, 1980; During and Spencer, 1992). The anticonvulsant effects of adenosine are mediated largely via activation of pre- and postsynaptic adenosine A1 receptors, which mediate presynaptic inhibition and stabilize the postsynaptic membrane potential, respectively (Boison et al., 2010; Chen et al., 2013; Fredholm et al., 2005b; Fredholm and Dunwiddie, 1988). Consequently, therapeutic adenosine augmentation is a powerful therapeutic strategy to suppress epileptic seizures, even those that are refractory to conventional antiepileptic drugs (Boison, 2012a; Gouder et al., 2003; Huber et al., 2001). Several lines of evidence suggest that endogenous adenosine-based control mechanisms fail in chronic epilepsy. Histopathological and biochemical analyses from specimen surgically resected from patients with intractable epilepsy show decreased expression levels of A1 receptors (Glass et al., 1996) and increased expression levels of ADK (Aronica et al., 2011; Masino et al., 2011). Likewise in rodent models of temporal lobe epilepsy reduced expression of A1Rs and a general failure of adenosine-dependent endogenous anticonvulsant mechanisms has been demonstrated (Rebola et al., 2003). In line with these findings, overexpression of astroglial ADK and resulting adenosine deficiency has consistently been associated with the expression of spontaneous recurrent seizures in a wide range of clinically relevant rodent models of epilepsy (Aronica et al., 2011; Gouder et al., 2004; Li et al., 2012; Li et al., 2008). Importantly, overexpression of ADK during epileptogenesis correlated both spatially, as well as temporally with the onset of spontaneous recurrent seizures (Li et al., 2007a; Li et al., 2012), whereas spread and generalization of seizures from the ADK-overexpressing ictogenic brain area was prevented by endogenous A1R dependent control mechanisms (Fedele et al., 2006; Li et al., 2012). The most direct evidence that overexpression of ADK can trigger recurrent seizures was achieved by local overexpression of the enzyme via an adeno associated virus (AAV) based vector engineered to selectively overexpress ADK in astrocytes. AAV-based overexpression of ADK in astrocytes of hippocampus or cortex triggered recurrent seizures at a rate of 1 to 4 electrographic seizures per hour (Shen et al., 2014; Theofilas et al., 2011). These findings demonstrate that the failure of endogenous adenosine-based control mechanisms can be a direct cause for epileptic seizures.

Therapeutic adenosine augmentation (as opposed to receptor agonists that still suffer from major systemic side effects) is now a well validated strategy for the suppression of epileptic seizures in a wide range of rodent models of epilepsy (Boison, 2012a). Focal implant- or cell-based adenosine augmentation prevented seizures in two species (mice and rats), and three different models of TLE (mouse intrahippocampal kainic acid; rat systemic kainic acid; rat hippocampal kindling) (Boison et al., 2002a; Boison et al., 1999; Gouder et al., 2003; Gouder et al., 2004; Güttinger et al., 2005a; Güttinger et al., 2005b; Huber et al., 2001; Li et al., 2009; Li et al., 2008; Li et al., 2007b; Ren et al., 2007; Szybala et al., 2009; Theofilas et al., 2011; Williams-Karnesky et al., 2013; Wilz et al., 2008). Importantly, therapeutic adenosine augmentation suppressed carbamazepine-resistant seizures in the intrahippocampal kainic acid model of TLE (Gouder et al., 2003; Gouder et al., 2004). To date, the therapeutic efficacy of focal adenosine augmentation has been demonstrated in a combined total of &gt;300 epileptic rodents. Dose response studies have shown that intraventricular doses of 50–500 ng adenosine / kg body weight / d provide effective seizure suppression in rodents, whereas doses of up to 5 mg ADO / kg / d were without sedative side effects (Güttinger et al., 2005b; Huber et al., 2001; Li et al., 2008; Li et al., 2007b; Wilz et al., 2008). The therapeutic efficacy of intracranial adenosine has independently been reproduced by Robert Fisher in a study to prevent bicuculline-induced ictal and epileptiform discharges (Anschel et al., 2004). In a recent study from Paul Boon’s group adenosine has been infused with osmotic pumps into epileptic rats in which TLE was induced by systemic KA-induced SE (Van Dycke et al., 2010). In this independent validation in a TLE model, a 33% reduction in seizure rate was reported in the adenosine-treated animals. Together, our (Gouder et al., 2003; Güttinger et al., 2005a; Huber et al., 2001; Li et al., 2007b; Szybala et al., 2009; Williams-Karnesky et al., 2013; Wilz et al., 2008) and independent data sets (Van Dycke et al., 2010) demonstrate that adenosine effectively suppresses seizures in at least 3 rodent models of mTLE.

5.2. Cognition

Adenosine affects cognitive processes on several mechanistic levels through locally refined neuronal and astroglial A2AR signaling effects and modulation of glutamatergic, dopaminergic, GABAergic, and BDNF-dependent mechanisms. Hippocampal A2ARs provide essential roles for LTP at mossy fiber-CA3 and at CA3-CA1 synapses (Costenla et al., 2011). Activation of the A2AR leads to transactivation of the TrkA and TrkB receptors for BDNF, even in the absence of neurotrophins (Lee and Chao, 2001). Whereas A2AR activation facilitates BDNF release and BDNF-induced potentiation of synaptic transmission (Diogenes et al., 2004; Tebano et al., 2008), genetic or pharmacological interference with A2AR function leads to decreases in BDNF levels (Tebano et al., 2008; Wei et al., 2014), reduced TrkB expression and activation in the hippocampus, and impairment of BDNF-dependent LTP (Assaife-Lopes et al., 2010; Jeronimo-Santos et al., 2014; Lee and Chao, 2001). In line with those findings pharmacological or genetic disruption of A2AR signaling reduced LTP in hippocampal and cortico-accumbal (Costenla et al., 2011; d'Alcantara et al., 2001; Rebola et al., 2008) and cortico-striatal (Flajolet et al., 2008) synapses.

Although the convergence of epidemiological and experimental data support a role of A2ARs in neurodegenerative processes the relative (and possibly opposing) roles of neuronal vs. astroglial A2ARs are currently unknown. New findings suggest that the astroglial A2AR affects cognitive function through a novel mechanism involving astrocyte-driven neuronal adaptation processes (Matos et al., 2015). We identified a novel molecular mechanism linking astrocytic A2AR-driven control of astrocytic GLT-1 activity and dynamic adaptation processes of glutamatergic synapses to neurodegeneration, cognitive impairment, and altered motor responses (Matos et al., 2015). This mechanism might play a previously unrecognized role in the regulation of cognitive performance and suggest that deficient activation of astroglial A2ARs might compromise cognitive function. In line with this notion, a recent cell transplantation study has shown that local suprahippocampal implants of baby hamster kidney fibroblasts engineered to release therapeutic amounts of adenosine (Huber et al., 2001) reversed working memory deficits in Adk-tg mice in a delayed alternation task in the T-maze (Shen et al., 2012). Wild-type implants or implants of the adenosine releasing cells into the striatum did not affect cognition in these animals. These findings show that adenosine augmentation to the hippocampus can improve cognitive performance.

5.3. Psychosis

Psychosis, as seen in several of the comorbidities discussed here, as well as in schizophrenia, is tightly linked to hyperdopaminergic function (Tost et al., 2010), which in turn is at least partly under the control of adenosine: Reduced activation of presynaptic A1Rs can trigger increased availability of dopamine (Borycz et al., 2007) leading to increased basal activity of the dopamine D2 receptor, thus promoting psychosis (Seeman and Kapur, 2000). In addition, in the basal ganglia adenosine directly modulates dopaminergic signaling through complexes formed between adenosine and dopamine receptors (Fuxe et al., 2003; Fuxe et al., 2007a; Fuxe et al., 2007b; Fuxe et al., 2010). Although D2R-A2AR complexes remain to be documented in the prefrontal cortex, they have been suggested to be of particular relevance for the psychotic endophenotypes of schizophrenia (Rial et al., 2014). Postsynaptic D2Rs in turn form heterodimers with A2ARs and this interaction is antagonistic, whereby reduced activation of the A2AR enhances D2R function (Fredholm and Svenningsson, 2003; Fuxe et al., 2003; Trifilieff et al., 2011). Thereby, hypofunction of adenosine not only leads to increased dopamine, but also promotes the D2R mediated responses, whereby decreased activation of A2ARs would increase D2R signaling through the A2AR-D2R complexes, thus promoting the dopaminergic hyperfunction in psychosis (Ferre, 1997; Ferre et al., 1994). A link between ADO hypofunction and SZ is supported by clinical evidence demonstrating increased enzymatic degradation of adenosine in SZ patients (Brunstein et al., 2007; Dutra et al., 2010). Most recently, reduced striatal ecto-nucleotidase (adenosine producing enzyme) activity was found in schizophrenia patients (Aliagas et al., 2013). A meta-analysis of six randomized controlled trials comparing adenosine modulators with placebo as adjuvant therapy in patients with schizophrenia demonstrated benefits in overall psychopathology (especially positive symptoms) in schizophrenia (Hirota and Kishi, 2013). In particular, the adenosine reuptake inhibitor dipyramidole used as an adjuvant with the antipsychotic haloperidol significantly decreased psychotic symptoms in schizophrenia patients (Akhondzadeh et al., 2005; Akhondzadeh et al., 2000). In addition, the acute use of the competitive adenosine receptor antagonist caffeine affects dopaminergic neurotransmission and is known to worsen psychosis in persons with schizophrenia; further, an acute dose of caffeine may cause psychosis in susceptible persons (Cerimele et al., 2010; Hedges et al., 2009; Tibrewal and Dhillon, 2011; Williams and Gandhi, 2008). Together these data suggest that adenosine dysfunction might be implicated in human psychosis and that therapeutic adenosine augmentation might be a rational approach for intervention. This hypothesis was recently tested in a pre-pulse inhibition paradigm in mice that taxes gating functions commonly disrupted in schizophrenia. The ADK inhibitor ABT-702 improved pre-pulse inhibition both in normal mice, as well as in mice, in which pre-pulse inhibition was disrupted by apomorphine (Shen et al., 2012). These seminal findings strongly support a novel anti-psychotic like role of therapeutic adenosine augmentation a finding that is not necessarily in contradiction to previous findings suggesting a mood stabilizing role of chronic caffeine and A2AR antagonists (Cunha et al., 2008; Gomes et al., 2011; Lucas et al., 2011). Effects of adenosine homeostasis and signaling on psychiatric parameters likely depend on different sources of adenosine (astroglial vs. neuronal) and the fine-tuning of opposing signaling-effects orchestrated by astroglial vs. synaptic adenosine receptors and regional differences within the brain.

5.4. Depression

Although adenosine deficiency in depressive disorders has not directly been demonstrated, accumulating evidence suggests that augmentation of adenosine has potent anti-depressive like effects. One night of total sleep deprivation, known to augment adenosine signaling in the brain (Basheer et al., 2001; Benington et al., 1995; Mackiewicz et al., 2003), is one of the most effective treatments for the treatment of major depression (Hemmeter et al., 1998; Hemmeter et al., 2010). S-adenosylhomocysteine, a precursor of adenosine, is widely used for the treatment of major depression and several studies suggest therapeutic benefits (Carpenter, 2011; De Berardis et al., 2013). Likewise, complementary and alternative approaches known to increase adenosine such as sleep deprivation (Benington et al., 1995), exercise (Dworak et al., 2007), or acupuncture (Goldman et al., 2010) have demonstrated antidepressive effects (Hines and Haydon, 2014; Nahas and Sheikh, 2011). Both sleep deprivation as well as electroconvulsive therapy lead to upregulation of A1Rs (van Calker and Biber, 2005). The most conclusive direct experimental evidence for a role of adenosine in major depression has recently been provided by Phil Haydon’s group (Hines et al., 2013). Using an elegant approach combining dnSNARE mice, which are impaired in gliotransmission, with sleep deprivation and an A1R agonist, Phil Haydon’s group recently demonstrated that astrocytic signaling to A1Rs was required for the robust reduction of depressive-like behaviors in mice following 12 hours of sleep deprivation (Hines et al., 2013). These findings suggest that therapeutic adenosine augmentation might constitute a promising approach for the treatment of comorbid depression in a wide range of neurological and neuropsychiatric disorders.

5.5. Motor control

Psychomotor activity is strongly regulated and fine-tuned by A2ARs in the striatum. Whereas A2ARs on striatopallidal neurons mediate the motor-stimulant effects of caffeine (Yu et al., 2008), A2ARs on striatopallidal medium spiny neurons antagonize D2R function and potentiate psychomotor activity (Schiffmann et al., 2007). In contrast, the A2AR located on striatal glutamatergic terminals modulates glutamate release and corticostriatal synaptic transmission (Ciruela et al., 2006; Martire et al., 2011; Quiroz et al., 2009; Rosin et al., 2003; Tozzi et al., 2007). Reduced activation of A2ARs in extrastriatal forebrain neurons therefore attenuates behavioral responses to psychostimulants such as cocaine, amphetamine, or L-DOPA (Bastia et al., 2005; Fredduzzi et al., 2002; Shen et al., 2008; Xiao et al., 2006). Together, these findings suggest that any disruption in adenosine homeostasis will affect psychomotor activity. As outlined in a preceding section, Adk-tg mice have lost responsiveness to amphetamine. If adenosine deficiency is responsible for the lack of dopaminergic stimulation of psychomotor responses, then therapeutic adenosine augmentation should restore locomotor responses to amphetamine. Indeed, the transplantation of adenosine releasing BHK cells into the striatum, but not the transplantation of wild-type cells into striatum, or of adenosine releasing cells into the hippocampus, restored responsiveness to amphetamine (Shen et al., 2012). These findings suggest that adenosine augmentation to the striatum may augment dopaminergic function in neurodegenerative conditions.

5.6. Sleep

Adenosine is a key regulator of sleep homeostasis and sleep-associated cognitive performance (Basheer et al., 2004; Bjorness et al., 2009; Blutstein and Haydon, 2012; Halassa et al., 2009; Porkka-Heiskanen et al., 1997). A1R agonists and antagonists induce and suppress sleep, respectively, via basal forebrain-mediated mechanisms (Benington et al., 1995; Ticho and Radulovacki, 1991; Virus et al., 1990). Likewise, the intracerebroventricular infusion of an A2AR agonist increased sleep, whereas the same drug had no effects in A2AR knockout mice (Satoh et al., 1998; Satoh et al., 1999; Scammell et al., 2001; Urade et al., 2003). It is now widely accepted that the arousal effects of caffeine are largely based on blockade of the A2AR in the shell of the nucleus accumbens (Huang et al., 2005; Lazarus et al., 2011). In line with those findings any disruption in adenosine homeostasis is likely to result in a pathologically altered sleep phenotype. Since lower levels of adenosine promote and increase in wakefulness and since higher levels of adenosine have sleep promoting properties, therapeutic adenosine augmentation may improve overall sleep quantity and quality and thereby promote cognitive performance.

7. Outlook and Conclusions

Based on the pathophysiological and mechanistic findings and related therapeutic opportunities described in the preceding sections it is tempting to conclude that at least a subset of the epilepsies and neurodegenerative conditions discussed here are acquired syndromes that share common inflammatory processes, glial activation and resulting disruption of adenosine homeostasis. We propose that apparently distinct syndromes share common etiologies and that the nature, timing, and spatial configuration of a precipitating event (e.g. an injury or hypoxic event) determines whether those common pathogenetic mechanisms lead to the development of ‘epilepsy’ with a predominant seizure phenotype or the development of a neurodegenerative condition such as Alzheimer’s Parkinson’s, or ALS. In support of this hypothesis conditions exist that display remarkable overlapping pathologies between ALS, Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s disease. ‘Western Pacific Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and Parkinsonism-Dementia Complex’ is a neurodegenerative condition, which is precipitated by the exposure to cycad plant toxins; importantly, the resulting neuropathology is a tauopathy, which is remarkably similar to that found in Alzheimer’s disease (Kisby and Spencer, 2011; Spencer et al., 2012; Spencer et al., 2010). Interestingly, the pathophysiological course of the disease appears to depend on the dose of the precipitating toxin: those exposed to the highest dose of the toxin develop fatal ALS (with sub-clinical nigrostriatal damage) relatively shortly after exposure; those exposed to intermediate doses survive with amyotrophy long enough to develop atypical parkinsonism; those exposed to low doses reach old age and display dementia, while others with the lowest exposure levels have subclinical neurofibrillary disease reminiscent of early aging (Spencer et al., 2012; Spencer et al., 2010).

Although several pathophysiological mechanisms are likely to contribute to the development of comorbid symptomatology in Neurology, we conclude from the correlative, conceptual, and causal evidence presented here that dysfunction of adenosine signaling is common in neurological conditions, that adenosine dysfunction may explain comorbid phenotypes shared among seemingly unrelated neurological conditions, and that therapeutic adenosine augmentation might be an highly effective approach for the treatment of a comorbid spectrum of symptoms in multiple neurological conditions. Therapeutic augmentation of adenosine signaling can be achieved pharmacologically with receptor agonists, with inhibitors of adenosine metabolism, or with inhibitors of transport (Boison, 2012a; Boison et al., 2010). However, due to the ubiquitous distribution of those drug targets, wide-spread systemic side effects currently limit therapeutic implementation (Boison, 2012a). Adenosine kinase inhibitors represent some of the most promising adenosine elevating agents (Boison, 2013; Kowaluk and Jarvis, 2000; McGaraughty et al., 2005). Although the long-term use of those agents might be limited by hepatotoxicity (Boison et al., 2002b) recent findings suggest that short term adenosine augmentation provides long-term benefit via lasting adenosine-induced epigenetic changes (Williams-Karnesky et al., 2013). These findings may provide a new clinical perspective for the use of ADK inhibitors (Boison, 2013). Alternatively, dietary interventions such as therapy with a high-fat low-carbohydrate ‘ketogenic diet’ (KD) or lifestyle choices such as exercise are known to increase adenosine in the brain (Dworak et al., 2007; Masino et al., 2011). KD therapy is remarkably effective in preventing seizures in epilepsy while providing additional benefits to cognitive function and overall well-being (Freeman, 2009; Kossoff and Rho, 2009; Lutas and Yellen, 2013; Masino and Rho, 2012). Currently KD therapy is considered for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease (Aso et al., 2013; Van der Auwera et al., 2005), Parkinson’s disease (Cheng et al., 2009), and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (Zhao et al., 2006). It may well be that a therapeutic intervention known to increase adenosine signaling in the brain has therapeutic promise for a wide range of neurological and neuropsychiatric disorders.

Acknowledgments

D.B. is funded through grants from the National Institutes of Health R01 NS084920, R21 NS088024, R01MH83973, from the US Department of the Army (W81XWH-12-1-0283), from Citizens United for Research in Epilepsy (CURE), the Parkinson’s Northwest Group, and the Legacy Hospital Foundations. We are in particular grateful to Nancy Lematta for her generous support of our Parkinson’s research program. E.A. is founded through grants from the European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement n°278486 (DEVELAGE), n°602102 (EPITARGET) n° 602391 (EPISTOP).

Figure 1 Histopathological findings: astrogliosis

Panels A and B: hippocampal sclerosis (HS). A, NeuN showing a typical pattern of neuronal cell loss in HS (ILAE Type 1) associated with prominent astrogliosis (B, GFAP). Panels C and D: Alzheimer’s disease (AD), CA1 region with an amyloid plaque (asterisk in C) surrounded by reactive astrocytes (arrows in D). Panels E and F: Parkinson's disease (PD), substantia nigra; asterisk in E and F indicate neurons containing Lewy bodies surrounded by glial cells (arrows). Panels G and H: amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) spinal cord showing strong vimentin (Vim) expression in reactive astrocytes in both ventral horn (G) and white matter (H). Sections are counterstained with hematoxylin. A and B: scale bar in A: 500 µm. C–D: scale bar in G; C–D: 80 µm; E–H: 40 µm.

Figure 2 ADK immunoreactivity in epilepsy associated pathologies: hippocampal sclerosis (HS), focal cortical dysplasia (FCD) and cortical tubers in patients with tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC)

Panels A, D and E: control hippocampus (CA1) and cortex (CTX, D) and white matter (WM, E) without detectable ADK immunoreactivity (IR) in glial cells. Panels B and C: hippocampal sclerosis (B, CA1; C, hilus), showing increased ADK expression in reactive astrocytes (arrows and insert in B); insert in C: merged confocal image, showing expression of ADK (red) in astrocytes (GFAP positive, green). Panels F–G: FCDIIb (F) and TSC (G) specimens showing increased ADK expression in astroglial cells (arrows) and balloons/giant cells (asterisks). ADK is visualized using DAB (diaminobenzidine). Sections are counterstained with hematoxylin. Scale bar in H: A-B, D-E, F: 80 µm; C and G: 40 µm.

Figure 3 ADK immunoreactivity in hippocampus in Alzheimer’s disease (AD)

Panels A–D: AD hippocampus (CA1) showing strong ADK expression in reactive astrocytes surrounding pyramidal neurons (arrows in A and B) and amyloid plaques (arrows in C and D; asterisks in C and D: amyloid deposits. Insert in B shows positive astrocyes in the vicinity of amyloid deposit (asterisk) and a tangle-containing neuron (arrow-head). ADK is visualized using DAB (diaminobenzidine). Sections are counterstained with hematoxylin. Scale bar in D: A- 80 µm; B and C: 40 µm; D: 20 µm.

Figure 4 ADK immunoreactivity in substantia nigra (SN) and cortex (CTX) in Parkinson's disease (PD)

Panels A–B: control SN (CA1) without weak or not detectable ADK immunoreactivity (IR) in glial cells (arrows in B). Panels C–D: PD SN showing strong ADK expression in reactive astrocytes surrounding remaining neurons (arrows). Panels E–F: ADK expression in reactive astrocytes in frontal cortex of PD patients (arrows). ADK is visualized in red using Fast Red. Sections are counterstained with hematoxylin. Inserts in D and F: merged confocal images, showing expression of ADK (red) in astrocytes (GFAP positive, green). Scale bar in F: A, E: 80 µm; C, D, F: 40 µm; B: 20 µm.

Figure 5 ADK immunoreactivity in in the cervical spinal cord of control and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) spinal cord

Panels A–B: control cervical spinal cord showing weak or no detectable expression in the large majority of glial cells in both ventral horn (VH, A) and white matter (Wm, B); inserts in A and B: high magnification photomicrograph (arrows indicate glial cells). Panels C–D: ALS cervical spinal cord showing strong ADK expression in reactive astrocytes in both VH (C) and WM (D); insert in C and insert (a) in D: high magnification photomicrograph (arrows indicate glial cells). ADK is visualized using DAB (diaminobenzidine). Sections are counterstained with hematoxylin. Insert (b) in D: merged confocal image, showing expression of ADK (red) in astrocytes (GFAP positive, green). Scale bar in D: A–D: 140 µm.

Figure 6 Comorbidities in Neurology

Illustration of a possibly self-reinforcing triad of synaptotoxicity, astrogliosis, and adenosine deficiency, as common pathogenetic pathways which might provide a rational explanation for common cormorbid symptoms (bottom) shared across several neurological conditions (top).

Highlights

Dysfunction of adenosine signaling is common in neurological conditions.

Adenosine dysfunction can explain co-morbid phenotypes shared among seemingly unrelated neurological conditions.

Therapeutic adenosine augmentation is an effective strategy for the treatment of comorbid symptoms in multiple neurological conditions.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Author contributions

D.B. and E.A. co-wrote the manuscript. E.A. contributed to the histopathological data.

Competing financial interests

The authors declare no competing financial interests.


References

Agostinho P Cunha RA Oliveira C Neuroinflammation, oxidative stress and the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease Curr Pharm Des 2010 16 2766 2778 20698820
Akhondzadeh S Safarcherati A Amini H Beneficial antipsychotic effects of allopurinol as add-on therapy for schizophrenia: a double blind, randomized and placebo controlled trial Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 2005 29 253 259 15694232
Akhondzadeh S Shasavand E Jamilian H Shabestari O Kamalipour A Dipyridamole in the treatment of schizophrenia: adenosine-dopamine receptor interactions J Clin Pharm Ther 2000 25 131 137 10849191
Aliagas E Villar-Menendez I Sevigny J Roca M Romeu M Ferrer I Martin-Satue M Barrachina M Reduced striatal ecto-nucleotidase activity in schizophrenia patients supports the "adenosine hypothesis" Purinergic Signal 2013
Amatniek JC Hauser WA DelCastillo-Castaneda C Jacobs DM Marder K Bell K Albert M Brandt J Stern Y Incidence and predictors of seizures in patients with Alzheimer's disease Epilepsia 2006 47 867 872 16686651
Amore M Tagariello P Laterza C Savoia EM Subtypes of depression in dementia Arch Gerontol Geriatr 2007 44 Suppl 1 23 33 17317430
Anschel DJ Ortega EL Kraus AC Fisher RS Focally injected adenosine prevents seizures in the rat Exp Neurol 2004 190 544 547 15530893
Araque A Parpura V Sanzgiri RP Haydon PG Tripartite synapses: glia, the unacknowledged partner Trends Neurosci 1999 22 208 215 10322493
Arch JR Newsholme EA Activities and some properties of 5'-nucleotidase, adenosine kinase and adenosine deaminase in tissues from vertebrates and invertebrates in relation to the control of the concentration and the physiological role of adenosine Biochem J 1978 174 965 977 215126
Aronica E Crino PB Epilepsy related to developmental tumors and malformations of cortical development Neurotherapeutics 2014 11 251 268 24481729
Aronica E Ravizza T Zurolo E Vezzani A Astrocyte immune responses and epilepsy Glia 2012 60 1258 1268 22331574
Aronica E Sandau US Iyer A Boison D Glial adenosine kinase - A neuropathological marker of the epileptic brain Neurochem Int 2013 63 688 695 23385089
Aronica E Zurolo E Iyer A de Groot M Anink J Carbonell C van Vliet EA Baayen JC Boison D Gorter JA Upregulation of adenosine kinase in astrocytes in experimental and human temporal lobe epilepsy Epilepsia 2011 52 1645 1655 21635241
Aso E Semakova J Joda L Semak V Halbaut L Calpena A Escolano C Perales JC Ferrer I Triheptanoin supplementation to ketogenic diet curbs cognitive impairment in APP/PS1 mice used as a model of familial Alzheimer's disease Curr Alzheimer Res 2013 10 290 297 23131121
Assaife-Lopes N Sousa VC Pereira DB Ribeiro JA Chao MV Sebastiao AM Activation of adenosine A2A receptors induces TrkB translocation and increases BDNF-mediated phospho-TrkB localization in lipid rafts: implications for neuromodulation J Neurosci 2010 30 8468 8480 20573894
Atassi N Cook A Pineda CM Yerramilli-Rao P Pulley D Cudkowicz M Depression in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Amyotroph Lateral Scler 2011 12 109 112 21091399
Bandopadhyay R Liu JY Sisodiya SM Thom M A comparative study of the dentate gyrus in hippocampal sclerosis in epilepsy and dementia Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 2014 40 177 190 24028428
Basheer R Halldner L Alanko L McCarley RW Fredholm BB Porkka-Heiskanen T Opposite changes in adenosine A1 and A2A receptor mRNA in the rat following sleep deprivation Neuroreport 2001 12 1577 1580 11409719
Basheer R Strecker RE Thakkar MM McCarley RW Adenosine and sleep-wake regulation Prog Neurobiol 2004 73 379 396 15313333
Bastia E Xu YH Scibelli AC Day YJ Linden J Chen JF Schwarzschild MA A crucial role for forebrain adenosine A(2A) receptors in amphetamine sensitization Neuropsychopharmacology 2005 30 891 900 15602504
Benington JH Kodali SK Heller HC Stimulation of A1 adenosine receptors mimics the electroencephalographic effects of sleep deprivation Brain Res 1995 692 79 85 8548323
Bjorness TE Kelly CL Gao T Poffenberger V Greene RW Control and function of the homeostatic sleep response by adenosine A1 receptors J Neurosci 2009 29 1267 1276 19193874
Blumcke I Kistner I Clusmann H Schramm J Becker AJ Elger CE Bien CG Merschhemke M Meencke HJ Lehmann T Buchfelder M Weigel D Buslei R Stefan H Pauli E Hildebrandt M Towards a clinico-pathological classification of granule cell dispersion in human mesial temporal lobe epilepsies Acta Neuropathol 2009 117 535 544 19277686
Blumcke I Thom M Aronica E Armstrong DD Bartolomei F Bernasconi A Bernasconi N Bien CG Cendes F Coras R Cross JH Jacques TS Kahane P Mathern GW Miyata H Moshe SL Oz B Ozkara C Perucca E Sisodiya S Wiebe S Spreafico R International consensus classification of hippocampal sclerosis in temporal lobe epilepsy: a Task Force report from the ILAE Commission on Diagnostic Methods Epilepsia 2013 54 1315 1329 23692496
Blutstein T Haydon PG The Importance of astrocyte-derived purines in the modulation of sleep Glia 2012
Boison D Adenosine as a modulator of brain activity Drug News Persp 2007a 20 607 611
Boison D Adenosine, astrogliosis and seizures: a new perspective of epileptogenesis Neuron Glia Biology 2007b 2 S9 S9
Boison D The adenosine kinase hypothesis of epileptogenesis Progress in Neurobiology 2008 84 249 262 18249058
Boison D Noebels JL Avoli M Rogawski MA Olsen RW Delgado-Escueta AV Adenosine augmentation therapy for epilepsy Jasper's Basic Mechanisms of the Epilepsies 2012a Oxford Oxford University Press 1150 1160
Boison D Adenosine dysfunction in epilepsy Glia 2012b 60 1234 1243 22700220
Boison D Adenosine kinase: exploitation for therapeutic gain Pharmacological Reviews 2013 65 906 943 23592612
Boison D Chen JF Fredholm BB Adenosine signalling and function in glial cells Cell Death Differ 2010 17 1071 1082 19763139
Boison D Huber A Padrun V Deglon N Aebischer P Mohler H Seizure suppression by adenosine-releasing cells is independent of seizure frequency Epilepsia 2002a 43 788 796 12180995
Boison D Sandau US Ruskin DN Kawamura M Jr Masino SA Homeostatic control of brain function - new approaches to understand epileptogenesis Front Cell Neurosci 2013 7 109 23882181
Boison D Scheurer L Tseng JL Aebischer P Mohler H Seizure suppression in kindled rats by intraventricular grafting of an adenosine releasing synthetic polymer Exp Neurol 1999 160 164 174 10630201
Boison D Scheurer L Zumsteg V Rülicke T Litynski P Fowler B Brandner S Mohler H Neonatal hepatic steatosis by disruption of the adenosine kinase gene Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002b 99 6985 6990 11997462
Borycz J Pereira MF Melani A Rodrigues RJ Kofalvi A Panlilio L Pedata F Goldberg SR Cunha RA Ferre S Differential glutamate-dependent and glutamate-independent adenosine A1 receptor-mediated modulation of dopamine release in different striatal compartments J Neurochem 2007 101 355 363 17254024
Brunstein MG Silveira EM Jr Chaves LS Machado H Schenkel O Belmonte-de-Abreu P Souza DO Lara DR Increased serum adenosine deaminase activity in schizophrenic receiving antipsychotic treatment Neurosci Lett 2007 414 61 64 17289263
Carpenter DJ St John's wort and S-adenosyl methionine as "natural" alternatives to conventional antidepressants in the era of the suicidality boxed warning: what is the evidence for clinically relevant benefit? Altern Med Rev 2011 16 17 39 21438644
Cechetto DF Hachinski V Whitehead SN Vascular risk factors and Alzheimer's disease Expert Rev Neurother 2008 8 743 750 18457531
Cerimele JM Stern AP Jutras-Aswad D Psychosis following excessive ingestion of energy drinks in a patient with schizophrenia Am J Psychiatry 2010 167 353 20194494
Chen JF Eltzschig HK Fredholm BB Adenosine receptors as drug targets--what are the challenges? Nat Rev Drug Discov 2013 12 265 286 23535933
Cheng B Yang X An L Gao B Liu X Liu S Ketogenic diet protects dopaminergic neurons against 6-OHDA neurotoxicity via up-regulating glutathione in a rat model of Parkinson's disease Brain Res 2009 1286 25 31 19559687
Ciruela F Casado V Rodrigues RJ Lujan R Burgueno J Canals M Borycz J Rebola N Goldberg SR Mallol J Cortes A Canela EI Lopez-Gimenez JF Milligan G Lluis C Cunha RA Ferre S Franco R Presynaptic control of striatal glutamatergic neurotransmission by adenosine A1-A2A receptor heteromers J Neurosci 2006 26 2080 2087 16481441
Coppieters N Dieriks BV Lill C Faull RL Curtis MA Dragunow M Global changes in DNA methylation and hydroxymethylation in Alzheimer's disease human brain Neurobiol Aging 2014 35 1334 1344 24387984
Coras R Siebzehnrubl FA Pauli E Huttner HB Njunting M Kobow K Villmann C Hahnen E Neuhuber W Weigel D Buchfelder M Stefan H Beck H Steindler DA Blumcke I Low proliferation and differentiation capacities of adult hippocampal stem cells correlate with memory dysfunction in humans Brain 2010 133 3359 3372 20719879
Cornejo VH Hetz C The unfolded protein response in Alzheimer's disease Semin Immunopathol 2013 35 277 292 23609500
Costenla AR Diogenes MJ Canas PM Rodrigues RJ Nogueira C Maroco J Agostinho PM Ribeiro JA Cunha RA de Mendonca A Enhanced role of adenosine A(2A) receptors in the modulation of LTP in the rat hippocampus upon ageing Eur J Neurosci 2011 34 12 21 21615561
Craft S The role of metabolic disorders in Alzheimer disease and vascular dementia: two roads converged Arch Neurol 2009 66 300 305 19273747
Cunha RA Adenosine as a neuromodulator and as a homeostatic regulator in the nervous system: different roles, different sources and different receptors Neurochem Int 2001 38 107 125 11137880
Cunha RA Neuroprotection by adenosine in the brain: from A1 receptor activation to A2A receptor blockade Purinergic Signaling 2005 1 111 134
Cunha RA Different cellular sources and different roles of adenosine: A(1) receptor-mediated inhibition through astrocytic-driven volume transmission and synapse-restricted A(2A) receptor-mediated facilitation of plasticity Neurochemistry International 2008 52 65 72 17664029
Cunha RA Ferre S Vaugeois JM Chen JF Potential therapeutic interest of adenosine A(2A) receptors in psychiatric disorders Current Pharmaceutical Design 2008 14 1512 1524 18537674
d'Alcantara P Ledent C Swillens S Schiffmann SN Inactivation of adenosine A2A receptor impairs long term potentiation in the accumbens nucleus without altering basal synaptic transmission Neuroscience 2001 107 455 464 11719000
De Berardis D Marini S Serroni N Rapini G Iasevoli F Valchera A Signorelli M Aguglia E Perna G Salone A Di Iorio G Martinotti G Di Giannantonio M S-Adenosyl-L-Methionine augmentation in patients with stage II treatment-resistant major depressive disorder: an open label, fixed dose, single-blind study ScientificWorldJournal 2013 2013 204 649
de Groot M Iyer A Zurolo E Anink J Heimans JJ Boison D Reijneveld CJ Aronica E Overexpression of ADK in human astrocytic tumors and peritumoral tissue is related to tumor-associated epilepsy Epilepsia 2012 53 58 66 22092111
Desplats P Lee HJ Bae EJ Patrick C Rockenstein E Crews L Spencer B Masliah E Lee SJ Inclusion formation and neuronal cell death through neuron-to-neuron transmission of alpha-synuclein Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2009 106 13010 13015 19651612
Devinsky O Vezzani A Najjar S De Lanerolle NC Rogawski MA Glia and epilepsy: excitability and inflammation Trends Neurosci 2013 36 174 184 23298414
Diogenes MJ Fernandes CC Sebastiao AM Ribeiro JA Activation of adenosine A2A receptor facilitates brain-derived neurotrophic factor modulation of synaptic transmission in hippocampal slices J Neurosci 2004 24 2905 2913 15044529
Diógenes MJ Neves-Tomé R Fucile S Martinello K Scianni M Theofilas P Lopatář J Ribeiro JA Maggi L Frenguelli BG Limatola C Boison D Sebastião AM Homeostatic control of synaptic activity by endogenous adenosine is mediated by adenosine kinase Cerebral Cortex 2014 24 67 80 22997174
Dobkin RD Menza M Allen LA Gara MA Mark MH Tiu J Bienfait KL Friedman J Cognitive-behavioral therapy for depression in Parkinson's disease: a randomized, controlled trial Am J Psychiatry 2011 168 1066 1074 21676990
Dragunow M Adenosine and seizure termination Ann Neurol 1991 29 575 1859190
Duarte JM Agostinho PM Carvalho RA Cunha RA Caffeine consumption prevents diabetes-induced memory impairment and synaptotoxicity in the hippocampus of NONcZNO10/LTJ mice PLoS One 2012 7 e21899 22514596
Dunwiddie TV Endogenously released adenosine regulates excitability in the in vitro hippocampus Epilepsia 1980 21 541 548 7418669
During MJ Spencer DD Adenosine: a potential mediator of seizure arrest and postictal refractoriness Ann Neurol 1992 32 618 624 1449242
Dutra GP Ottoni GL Lara DR Bogo MR Lower frequency of the low activity adenosine deaminase allelic variant (ADA1*2) in schizophrenic patients Rev Bras Psiquiatr 2010 32 275 278 20414589
Duyckaerts C Disentangling Alzheimer's disease Lancet Neurol 2011 10 774 775 21802368
Dworak M Diel P Voss S Hollmann W Struder HK Intense exercise increases adenosine concentrations in rat brain: implications for a homeostatic sleep drive Neuroscience 2007 150 789 795 18031936
Etherington LA Frenguelli BG Endogenous adenosine modulates epileptiform activity in rat hippocampus in a receptor subtype-dependent manner Eur J Neurosci 2004 19 2539 2550 15128407
Farina C Aloisi F Meinl E Astrocytes are active players in cerebral innate immunity Trends Immunol 2007 28 138 145 17276138
Fedele DE Gouder N Güttinger M Gabernet L Scheurer L Rulicke T Crestani F Boison D Astrogliosis in epilepsy leads to overexpression of adenosine kinase resulting in seizure aggravation Brain 2005 128 2383 2395 15930047
Fedele DE Koch P Brüstle O Scheurer L Simpson EM Mohler H Boison D Engineering embryonic stem cell derived glia for adenosine delivery Neurosci Lett 2004 370 160 165 15488315
Fedele DE Li T Lan JQ Fredholm BB Boison D Adenosine A1 receptors are crucial in keeping an epileptic focus localized Exp Neurol 2006 200 184 190 16750195
Ferentinos P Paparrigopoulos T Rentzos M Zouvelou V Alexakis T Evdokimidis I Prevalence of major depression in ALS: comparison of a semi-structured interview and four self-report measures Amyotroph Lateral Scler 2011 12 297 302 21428731
Fernandez G Mandolesi P Rotstein NP Colombo O Agamennoni O Politi LE Eye movement alterations during reading in patients with early Alzheimer disease Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2013 54 8345 8352 24282223
Ferre S Adenosine-dopamine interactions in the ventral striatum. Implications for the treatment of schizophrenia Psychopharmacology (Berl) 1997 133 107 120 9342776
Ferre S O'Connor WT Snaprud P Ungerstedt U Fuxe K Antagonistic interaction between adenosine A2A receptors and dopamine D2 receptors in the ventral striopallidal system. Implications for the treatment of schizophrenia Neuroscience 1994 63 765 773 7898676
Flajolet M Wang Z Futter M Shen W Nuangchamnong N Bendor J Wallach I Nairn AC Surmeier DJ Greengard P FGF acts as a co-transmitter through adenosine A(2A) receptor to regulate synaptic plasticity Nat Neurosci 2008 11 1402 1409 18953346
Forno LS DeLanney LE Irwin I Di Monte D Langston JW Astrocytes and Parkinson's disease Prog Brain Res 1992 94 429 436 1287728
Franco R Lluis C Canela EI Mallol J Agnati L Casado V Ciruela F Ferre S Fuxe K Receptor-receptor interactions involving adenosine A1 or dopamine D1 receptors and accessory proteins J Neural Transm 2007 114 93 104 17024327
Fredduzzi S Moratalla R Monopoli A Cuellar B Xu K Ongini E Impagnatiello F Schwarzschild MA Chen JF Persistent behavioral sensitization to chronic L-DOPA requires A2A adenosine receptors J Neurosci 2002 22 1054 1062 11826134
Fredholm BB Adenosine receptors in the central nervous system NIPS 1995 10 122 128
Fredholm BB Adenosine receptors as drug targets Exp Cell Res 2010 316 1284 1288 20153317
Fredholm BB Chen JF Cunha RA Svenningsson P Vaugeois JM Adenosine and brain function Int Rev Neurobiol 2005a 63 191 270 15797469
Fredholm BB Chen JF Masino SA Vaugeois JM Actions of adenosine at its receptors in the CNS: Insights from knockouts and drugs Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 2005b 45 385 412 15822182
Fredholm BB Dunwiddie TV How does adenosine inhibit transmitter release? Trends Pharmacol Sci 1988 9 130 134 2907698
Fredholm BB Dunwiddie TV Bergman B Lindstrom K Levels of adenosine and adenine nucleotides in slices of rat hippocampus Brain Res 1984 295 127 136 6324948
Fredholm BB Svenningsson P Adenosine-dopamine interactions: development of a concept and some comments on therapeutic possibilities Neurology 2003 61 S5 S9 14663001
Freeman JM Seizures, EEG events, and the ketogenic diet Epilepsia 2009 50 329 330 19215282
Fuller S Munch G Steele M Activated astrocytes: a therapeutic target in Alzheimer's disease? Expert Rev Neurother 2009 9 1585 1594 19903019
Fuxe K Agnati LF Jacobsen K Hillion J Canals M Torvinen M Tinner-Staines B Staines W Rosin D Terasmaa A Popoli P Leo G Vergoni V Lluis C Ciruela F Franco R Ferre S Receptor heteromerization in adenosine A2A receptor signaling: relevance for striatal function and Parkinson's disease Neurology 2003 61 S19 S23 14663004
Fuxe K Ferre S Genedani S Franco R Agnati LF Adenosine receptor-dopamine receptor interactions in the basal ganglia and their relevance for brain function Physiol Behav 2007a
Fuxe K Marcellino D Genedani S Agnati L Adenosine A(2A) receptors, dopamine D(2) receptors and their interactions in Parkinson's disease Mov Disord 2007b
Fuxe K Marcellino D Leo G Agnati LF Molecular integration via allosteric interactions in receptor heteromers. A working hypothesis Curr Opin Pharmacol 2010 10 14 22 19942481
Gaitatzis A Carroll K Majeed A J WS The epidemiology of the comorbidity of epilepsy in the general population Epilepsia 2004 45 1613 1622 15571520
Gaitatzis A Sisodiya SM Sander JW The somatic comorbidity of epilepsy: a weighty but often unrecognized burden Epilepsia 2012 53 1282 1293 22691064
Geda YE Schneider LS Gitlin LN Miller DS Smith GS Bell J Evans J Lee M Porsteinsson A Lanctot KL Rosenberg PB Sultzer DL Francis PT Brodaty H Padala PP Onyike CU Ortiz LA Ancoli-Israel S Bliwise DL Martin JL Vitiello MV Yaffe K Zee PC Herrmann N Sweet RA Ballard C Khin NA Alfaro C Murray PS Schultz S Lyketsos CG Neuropsychiatric Syndromes Professional Interest Area of, I Neuropsychiatric symptoms in Alzheimer's disease: past progress and anticipation of the future Alzheimers Dement 2013 9 602 608 23562430
Glass M Faull RL Bullock JY Jansen K Mee EW Walker EB Synek BJ Dragunow M Loss of A1 adenosine receptors in human temporal lobe epilepsy Brain Res 1996 710 56 68 8963679
Goldman N Chen M Fujita T Xu Q Peng W Liu W Jensen TK Pei Y Wang F Han X Chen JF Schnermann J Takano T Bekar L Tieu K Nedergaard M Adenosine A1 receptors mediate local anti-nociceptive effects of acupuncture Nat Neurosci 2010 13 883 888 20512135
Gomes CV Kaster MP Tome AR Agostinho PM Cunha RA Adenosine receptors and brain diseases: neuroprotection and neurodegeneration Biochim Biophys Acta 2011 1808 1380 1399 21145878
Gouder N Fritschy JM Boison D Seizure suppression by adenosine A1 receptor activation in a mouse model of pharmacoresistant epilepsy Epilepsia 2003 44 877 885 12823569
Gouder N Scheurer L Fritschy J-M Boison D Overexpression of adenosine kinase in epileptic hippocampus contributes to epileptogenesis J Neurosci 2004 24 692 701 14736855
Güttinger M Fedele DE Koch P Padrun V Pralong W Brüstle O Boison D Suppression of kindled seizures by paracrine adenosine release from stem cell derived brain implants Epilepsia 2005a 46 1 8
Güttinger M Padrun V Pralong W Boison D Seizure suppression and lack of adenosine A1 receptor desensitization after focal long-term delivery of adenosine by encapsulated myoblasts Exp Neurol 2005b 193 53 64 15817264
Halassa MM Fellin T Haydon PG The tripartite synapse: roles for gliotransmission in health and disease Trends Mol Med 2007 13 54 63 17207662
Halassa MM Florian C Fellin T Munoz JR Lee SY Abel T Haydon PG Frank MG Astrocytic modulation of sleep homeostasis and cognitive consequences of sleep loss Neuron 2009 61 213 219 19186164
Halassa MM Haydon PG Integrated brain circuits: astrocytic networks modulate neuronal activity and behavior Annu Rev Physiol 2010 72 335 355 20148679
Hall ED Oostveen JA Gurney ME Relationship of microglial and astrocytic activation to disease onset and progression in a transgenic model of familial ALS Glia 1998 23 249 256 9633809
Hallbeck M Nath S Marcusson J Neuron-to-neuron transmission of neurodegenerative pathology Neuroscientist 2013 19 560 566 23831598
Halliday GM Stevens CH Glia: initiators and progressors of pathology in Parkinson's disease Mov Disord 2011 26 6 17 21322014
Hedges DW Woon FL Hoopes SP Caffeine-induced psychosis CNS Spectr 2009 14 127 129 19407709
Hemmeter U Bischof R Hatzinger M Seifritz E Holsboer-Trachsler E Microsleep during partial sleep deprivation in depression Biol Psychiatry 1998 43 829 839 9611673
Hemmeter UM Hemmeter-Spernal J Krieg JC Sleep deprivation in depression Expert Rev Neurother 2010 10 1101 1115 20586691
Hines DJ Haydon PG Astrocytic adenosine: from synapses to psychiatric disorders Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2014 369 20130594 25225088
Hines DJ Schmitt LI Hines RM Moss SJ Haydon PG Antidepressant effects of sleep deprivation require astrocyte-dependent adenosine mediated signaling Transl Psychiatry 2013 3 e212 23321809
Hirota T Kishi T Adenosine hypothesis in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trial of adjuvant purinergic modulators Schizophr Res 2013 149 88 95 23870805
Huang ZL Qu WM Eguchi N Chen JF Schwarzschild MA Fredholm BB Urade Y Hayaishi O Adenosine A2A, but not A1, receptors mediate the arousal effect of caffeine Nat Neurosci 2005 8 858 859 15965471
Huber A Padrun V Deglon N Aebischer P Mohler H Boison D Grafts of adenosine-releasing cells suppress seizures in kindling epilepsy Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2001 98 7611 7616 11404469
Hyman BT Phelps CH Beach TG Bigio EH Cairns NJ Carrillo MC Dickson DW Duyckaerts C Frosch MP Masliah E Mirra SS Nelson PT Schneider JA Thal DR Thies B Trojanowski JQ Vinters HV Montine TJ National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer's Association guidelines for the neuropathologic assessment of Alzheimer's disease Alzheimers Dement 2012 8 1 13 22265587
Iyer A Prabowo A Anink J Spliet WG van Rijen PC Aronica E Cell injury and premature neurodegeneration in focal malformations of cortical development Brain Pathol 2014 24 1 17 23586324
Jellinger KA Neuropathology in Parkinson's disease with mild cognitive impairment Acta Neuropathol 2010 120 829 830 author reply 831. 20922398
Jensen CJ Massie A De Keyser J Immune players in the CNS: the astrocyte J Neuroimmune Pharmacol 2013 8 824 839 23821340
Jensen FE Epilepsy as a spectrum disorder: Implications from novel clinical and basic neuroscience Epilepsia 2011 52 Suppl 1 1 6 21214533
Jeronimo-Santos A Batalha VL Muller CE Baqi Y Sebastiao AM Lopes LV Diogenes MJ Impact of in vivo chronic blockade of adenosine A2A receptors on the BDNF-mediated facilitation of LTP Neuropharmacology 2014 83 99 106 24747180
Kandratavicius L Lopes-Aguiar C Bueno-Junior LS Romcy-Pereira RN Hallak JE Leite JP Psychiatric comorbidities in temporal lobe epilepsy: possible relationships between psychotic disorders and involvement of limbic circuits Rev Bras Psiquiatr 2012 34 454 466 23429818
Kisby GE Spencer PS Is neurodegenerative disease a long-latency response to early-life genotoxin exposure? Int J Environ Res Public Health 2011 8 3889 3921 22073019
Kobow K Auvin S Jensen F Loscher W Mody I Potschka H Prince D Sierra A Simonato M Pitkanen A Nehlig A Rho JM Finding a better drug for epilepsy: antiepileptogenesis targets Epilepsia 2012 53 1868 1876 23061663
Kobow K Blumcke I The methylation hypothesis: do epigenetic chromatin modifications play a role in epileptogenesis? Epilepsia 2011 52 Suppl 4 15 19 21732935
Kobow K Jeske I Hildebrandt M Hauke J Hahnen E Buslei R Buchfelder M Weigel D Stefan H Kasper B Pauli E Blumcke I Increased reelin promoter methylation is associated with granule cell dispersion in human temporal lobe epilepsy J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2009 68 356 364 19287316
Kobow K Kaspi A Harikrishnan KN Kiese K Ziemann M Khurana I Fritzsche I Hauke J Hahnen E Coras R Muhlebner A El-Osta A Blumcke I Deep sequencing reveals increased DNA methylation in chronic rat epilepsy Acta Neuropathol 2013 126 741 756 24005891
Korner S Kollewe K Ilsemann J Muller-Heine A Dengler R Krampfl K Petri S Prevalence and prognostic impact of comorbidities in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Eur J Neurol 2013 20 647 654 23094606
Kossoff EH Rho JM Ketogenic diets: evidence for short- and long-term efficacy Neurotherapeutics 2009 6 406 414 19332337
Kovacs GG Gelpi E Clinical neuropathology practice news 3–2012: the "ABC" in AD-revised and updated guideline for the neuropathologic assessment of Alzheimer's disease Clin Neuropathol 2012 31 116 118 22551914
Kowaluk EA Jarvis MF Therapeutic potential of adenosine kinase inhibitors Expert Opin Investig Drugs 2000 9 551 564
L' Episcopo F Tirolo C Testa N Caniglia S Morale MC Marchetti B Glia as a turning point in the therapeutic strategy of Parkinson's disease CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets 2010 9 349 372 20438439
LaFrance WC Jr Kanner AM Hermann B Psychiatric comorbidities in epilepsy Int Rev Neurobiol 2008 83 347 383 18929092
Larner AJ Epileptic seizures in AD patients Neuromolecular Med 2010 12 71 77 19557550
Larner AJ Presenilin-1 mutation Alzheimer's disease: a genetic epilepsy syndrome? Epilepsy Behav 2011 21 20 22 21501974
Lasiene J Yamanaka K Glial cells in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Neurol Res Int 2011 2011 718 987
Lazarus M Shen HY Cherasse Y Qu WM Huang ZL Bass C Winsky-Sommerer R Semba K Fredholm B Boison D Hayaishi O Urade Y Chen JF Arousal effect of caffeine depends on adenosine A2A receptors in the shell of the nucleus accumbens J Neurosci 2011 31 10067 10075 21734299
Lee FS Chao MV Activation of Trk neurotrophin receptors in the absence of neurotrophins Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2001 98 3555 3560 11248116
Lepore AC Dejea C Carmen J Rauck B Kerr DA Sofroniew MV Maragakis NJ Selective ablation of proliferating astrocytes does not affect disease outcome in either acute or chronic models of motor neuron degeneration Exp Neurol 2008 211 423 432 18410928
Levine JB Kong J Nadler M Xu Z Astrocytes interact intimately with degenerating motor neurons in mouse amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) Glia 1999 28 215 224 10559780
Li T Lan JQ Fredholm BB Simon RP Boison D Adenosine dysfunction in astrogliosis: cause for seizure generation? Neuron Glia Biology 2007a 3 353 366 18634566
Li T Lytle N Lan J-Q Sandau US Boison D Local disruption of glial adenosine homeostasis in mice associates with focal electrographic seizures: a first step in epileptogenesis? Glia 2012 60 83 95 21964979
Li T Ren G Kaplan DL Boison D Human mesenchymal stem cell grafts engineered to release adenosine reduce chronic seizures in a mouse model of CA3-selective epileptogenesis Epilepsy Res 2009 84 238 241 19217263
Li T Ren G Lusardi T Wilz A Lan JQ Iwasato T Itohara S Simon RP Boison D Adenosine kinase is a target for the prediction and prevention of epileptogenesis in mice J Clin Inv 2008 118 571 582 PMCID: PMC2157568
Li T Steinbeck JA Lusardi T Koch P Lan JQ Wilz A Segschneider M Simon RP Brustle O Boison D Suppression of kindling epileptogenesis by adenosine releasing stem cell-derived brain implants Brain 2007b 130 1276 1288 17472985
Lovatt D Xu Q Liu W Takano T Smith NA Schnermann J Tieu K Nedergaard M Neuronal adenosine release, and not astrocytic ATP release, mediates feedback inhibition of excitatory activity Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2012 109 6265 6270 22421436
Lubin FD Epileptogenesis: can the science of epigenetics give us answers? Epilepsy Curr 2012 12 105 110 22690136
Lucas M Mirzaei F Pan A Okereke OI Willett WC O'Reilly EJ Koenen K Ascherio A Coffee, caffeine, and risk of depression among women Arch Intern Med 2011 171 1571 1578 21949167
Lucin KM Wyss-Coray T Immune activation in brain aging and neurodegeneration: too much or too little? Neuron 2009 64 110 122 19840553
Lutas A Yellen G The ketogenic diet: metabolic influences on brain excitability and epilepsy Trends Neurosci 2013 36 32 40 23228828
Mackiewicz M Nikonova EV Zimmerman JE Galante RJ Zhang L Cater JR Geiger JD Pack AI Enzymes of adenosine metabolism in the brain: diurnal rhythm and the effect of sleep deprivation J Neurochem 2003 85 348 357 12675911
Marsh L Depression and Parkinson's disease: current knowledge Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep 2013 13 409 24190780
Martin LJ Wong M Aberrant regulation of DNA methylation in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a new target of disease mechanisms Neurotherapeutics 2013 10 722 733 23900692
Martire A Tebano MT Chiodi V Ferreira SG Cunha RA Kofalvi A Popoli P Pre-synaptic adenosine A2A receptors control cannabinoid CB1 receptor-mediated inhibition of striatal glutamatergic neurotransmission J Neurochem 2011 116 273 280 21062287
Martorana A Bulati M Buffa S Pellicano M Caruso C Candore G Colonna-Romano G Immunosenescence, inflammation and Alzheimer's disease Longev Healthspan 2012a 1 8 24764513
Martorana F Brambilla L Valori CF Bergamaschi C Roncoroni C Aronica E Volterra A Bezzi P Rossi D The BH4 domain of Bcl-X(L) rescues astrocyte degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis by modulating intracellular calcium signals Hum Mol Genet 2012b 21 826 840 22072391
Masino SA Li T Theofilas P Sandau US Ruskin DN Fredholm BB Geiger JD Aronica E Boison D A ketogenic diet suppresses seizures in mice through adenosine A1 receptors J Clin Inv 2011 121 2679 2683
Masino SA Rho JM Noebels JL Avoli M Rogawski MA Olsen RW Delgado-Escueta AV Mechanisms of Ketogenic Diet Action Jasper's Basic Mechanisms of the Epilepsies 2012 Bethesda (MD)
Masliah E Dumaop W Galasko D Desplats P Distinctive patterns of DNA methylation associated with Parkinson disease: identification of concordant epigenetic changes in brain and peripheral blood leukocytes Epigenetics 2013 8 1030 1038 23907097
Matos M Augusto E Machado NJ dos Santos-Rodrigues A Cunha RA Agostinho P Astrocytic adenosine A2A receptors control the amyloid-beta peptide-induced decrease of glutamate uptake J Alzheimers Dis 2012a 31 555 567 22647260
Matos M Augusto E Santos-Rodrigues AD Schwarzschild MA Chen JF Cunha RA Agostinho P Adenosine A2A receptors modulate glutamate uptake in cultured astrocytes and gliosomes Glia 2012b 60 702 716 22298379
Matos M Shen H-Y Augusto E Wang Y Wei CJ Wang YT Agostinho P Boison D Cunha RA Chen J-F Deletion of adenosine A2A receptors from astrocytes disrupts glutamate homeostasis leading to psychomotor and cognitive impairment: relevance to schizophrenia Biol Psychiatry 2015 in press.
McGaraughty S Cowart M Jarvis MF Berman RF Anticonvulsant and antinociceptive actions of novel adenosine kinase inhibitors Curr Top Med Chem 2005 5 43 58 15638777
McGeer PL McGeer EG Inflammatory processes in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Muscle Nerve 2002 26 459 470 12362410
McGeer PL McGeer EG Glial reactions in Parkinson's disease Mov Disord 2008 23 474 483 18044695
Meghji P Newby AC Sites of adenosine formation, action and inactivation in the brain Neurochem Int 1990 16 227 232 20504561
Mendez M Lim G Seizures in elderly patients with dementia: epidemiology and management Drugs Aging 2003 20 791 803 12964886
Menza M Forman N Sage J Cody R Psychiatric symptoms in Parkinson's disease: a comparison between patients with and without "on-off" symptoms Biol Psychiatry 1993 33 682 684 8329503
Millan MJ An epigenetic framework for neurodevelopmental disorders: From pathogenesis to potential therapy Neuropharmacology 2012
Miller AA Spencer SJ Obesity and neuroinflammation: a pathway to cognitive impairment Brain Behav Immun 2014 42 10 21 24727365
Mrak RE Griffin WS Potential inflammatory biomarkers in Alzheimer's disease J Alzheimers Dis 2005 8 369 375 16556968
Nagele RG Wegiel J Venkataraman V Imaki H Wang KC Wegiel J Contribution of glial cells to the development of amyloid plaques in Alzheimer's disease Neurobiol Aging 2004 25 663 674 15172746
Nahas R Sheikh O Complementary and alternative medicine for the treatment of major depressive disorder Can Fam Physician 2011 57 659 663 21673208
Nam HW McIver SR Hinton DJ Thakkar MM Sari Y Parkinson FE Haydon PG Choi DS Adenosine and glutamate signaling in neuron-glial interactions: implications in alcoholism and sleep disorders Alcohol Clin Exp Res 2012 36 1117 1125 22309182
Neusch C Bahr M Schneider-Gold C Glia cells in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: new clues to understanding an old disease? Muscle Nerve 2007 35 712 724 17373702
Newby AC Adenosine and the concept of 'retaliatory metabolites' Trends Biochem Sci 1984 9 42 44
Niranjan R The role of inflammatory and oxidative stress mechanisms in the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease: focus on astrocytes Mol Neurobiol 2014 49 28 38 23783559
Noebels J A perfect storm: Converging paths of epilepsy and Alzheimer's dementia intersect in the hippocampal formation Epilepsia 2011 52 Suppl 1 39 46 21214538
Orr AG Hsiao EC Wang MM Ho K Kim DH Wang X Guo W Kang J Yu GQ Adame A Devidze N Dubal DB Masliah E Conklin BR Mucke L Astrocytic adenosine receptor A2A and Gs-coupled signaling regulate memory Nat Neurosci 2015 18 423 434 25622143
Palop JJ Mucke L Epilepsy and cognitive impairments in Alzheimer disease Arch Neurol 2009 66 435 440 19204149
Paulus W Jellinger K The neuropathologic basis of different clinical subgroups of Parkinson's disease J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 1991 50 743 755 1748881
Perez-Madrinan G Cook SE Saxton JA Miyahara S Lopez OL Kaufer DI Aizenstein HJ DeKosky ST Sweet RA Alzheimer disease with psychosis: excess cognitive impairment is restricted to the misidentification subtype Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 2004 12 449 456 15353383
Perry VH Innate inflammation in Parkinson's disease Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2012 2 a009373 22951445
Pihlaja R Koistinaho J Malm T Sikkila H Vainio S Koistinaho M Transplanted astrocytes internalize deposited beta-amyloid peptides in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer's disease Glia 2008 56 154 163 18004725
Polymenidou M Cleveland DW Prion-like spread of protein aggregates in neurodegeneration J Exp Med 2012 209 889 893 22566400
Porkka-Heiskanen T Strecker RE Thakkar M Bjørkum AA Greene RW McCarley RW Adenosine: A mediator of the sleep-inducing effects of prolonged wakefulness Science 1997 276 1265 1268 9157887
Prabowo AS Iyer AM Veersema TJ Anink JJ Schouten-van Meeteren AY Spliet WG van Rijen PC Ferrier CH Thom M Aronica E Expression of neurodegenerative disease-related proteins and caspase-3 in glioneuronal tumours Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 2014
Quiroz C Lujan R Uchigashima M Simoes AP Lerner TN Borycz J Kachroo A Canas PM Orru M Schwarzschild MA Rosin DL Kreitzer AC Cunha RA Watanabe M Ferre S Key modulatory role of presynaptic adenosine A2A receptors in cortical neurotransmission to the striatal direct pathway ScientificWorldJournal 2009 9 1321 1344 19936569
Qureshi IA Mehler MF Epigenetic mechanisms underlying human epileptic disorders and the process of epileptogenesis Neurobiol Dis 2010 39 53 60 20188170
Rao SC Dove G Cascino GD Petersen RC Recurrent seizures in patients with dementia: frequency, seizure types, and treatment outcome Epilepsy Behav 2009 14 118 120 18782632
Rappold PM Tieu K Astrocytes and therapeutics for Parkinson's disease Neurotherapeutics 2010 7 413 423 20880505
Ravizza T Kostoula C Vezzani A Immunity activation in brain cells in epilepsy: mechanistic insights and pathological consequences Neuropediatrics 2013 44 330 335 24166145
Rebola N Coelho JE Costenla AR Lopes LV Parada A Oliveira CR Soares-da-Silva P de Mendonca A Cunha RA Decrease of adenosine A1 receptor density and of adenosine neuromodulation in the hippocampus of kindled rats Eur J Neurosci 2003 18 820 828 12925008
Rebola N Lujan R Cunha RA Mulle C Adenosine A2A receptors are essential for long-term potentiation of NMDA-EPSCs at hippocampal mossy fiber synapses Neuron 2008 57 121 134 18184569
Reijnders JS Ehrt U Weber WE Aarsland D Leentjens AF A systematic review of prevalence studies of depression in Parkinson's disease Mov Disord 2008 23 183 189 quiz 313. 17987654
Ren G Li T Lan JQ Wilz A Simon RP Boison D Lentiviral RNAi-induced downregulation of adenosine kinase in human mesenchymal stem cell grafts: a novel perspective for seizure control Exp Neurol 2007 208 26 37 17716659
Restrepo A Smith CA Agnihotri S Shekarforoush M Kongkham PN Seol HJ Northcott P Rutka JT Epigenetic regulation of glial fibrillary acidic protein by DNA methylation in human malignant gliomas Neuro Oncol 2011 13 42 50 21075782
Rial D Lara DR Cunha RA The adenosine neuromodulation system in schizophrenia Int Rev Neurobiol 2014 119 395 449 25175974
Ribeiro JA What can adenosine neuromodulation do for neuroprotection? Curr Drug Targets CNS Neurol Disord 2005 4 325 329 16101552
Ribeiro JA Sebastiao AM Modulation and metamodulation of synapses by adenosine Acta Physiol (Oxf) 2010 199 161 169 20345418
Rizzo F Riboldi G Salani S Nizzardo M Simone C Corti S Hedlund E Cellular therapy to target neuroinflammation in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Cell Mol Life Sci 2014 71 999 1015 24100629
Robberecht W Philips T The changing scene of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Nat Rev Neurosci 2013 14 248 264 23463272
Rosin DL Hettinger BD Lee A Linden J Anatomy of adenosine A2A receptors in brain: morphological substrates for integration of striatal function Neurology 2003 61 S12 S18 14663003
Rusina R Ridzon P Kulist'ak P Keller O Bartos A Buncova M Fialova L Koukolik F Matej R Relationship between ALS and the degree of cognitive impairment, markers of neurodegeneration and predictors for poor outcome. A prospective study Eur J Neurol 2010 17 23 30 19572947
Salmina AB Neuron-glia interactions as therapeutic targets in neurodegeneration J Alzheimers Dis 2009 16 485 502 19276541
Sanchez-Mut JV Aso E Heyn H Matsuda T Bock C Ferrer I Esteller M Promoter hypermethylation of the phosphatase DUSP22 mediates PKA-dependent TAU phosphorylation and CREB activation in Alzheimer's disease Hippocampus 2014 24 363 368 24436131
Satoh S Matsumura H Hayaishi O Involvement of adenosine A2A receptor in sleep promotion Eur J Pharmacol 1998 351 155 162 9686998
Satoh S Matsumura H Koike N Tokunaga Y Maeda T Hayaishi O Region-dependent difference in the sleep-promoting potency of an adenosine A2A receptor agonist Eur J Neurosci 1999 11 1587 1597 10215911
Scammell TE Gerashchenko DY Mochizuki T McCarthy MT Estabrooke IV Sears CA Saper CB Urade Y Hayaishi O An adenosine A2a agonist increases sleep and induces Fos in ventrolateral preoptic neurons Neuroscience 2001 107 653 663 11720788
Scarmeas N Honig LS Choi H Cantero J Brandt J Blacker D Albert M Amatniek JC Marder K Bell K Hauser WA Stern Y Seizures in Alzheimer disease: who, when, and how common? Arch Neurol 2009 66 992 997 19667221
Schiffmann SN Fisone G Moresco R Cunha RA Ferre S Adenosine A(2A) receptors and basal ganglia physiology Prog Neurobiol 2007
Schmidt C Wolff M Weitz M Bartlau T Korth C Zerr I Rapidly progressive Alzheimer disease Arch Neurol 2011 68 1124 1130 21911694
Seeman P Kapur S Schizophrenia: more dopamine, more D2 receptors Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2000 97 7673 7675 10884398
Seifert G Carmignoto G Steinhauser C Astrocyte dysfunction in epilepsy Brain Res Rev 2010 63 212 221 19883685
Seifert G Schilling K Steinhauser C Astrocyte dysfunction in neurological disorders: a molecular perspective Nat Rev Neurosci 2006 7 194 206 16495941
Seifert G Steinhauser C Neuron-astrocyte signaling and epilepsy Exp Neurol 2013 244 4 10 21925173
Shen H-Y Coelho JE Ohtsuka N Canas PM Day Y-J Huang Q-Y Rebola N Yu L Boison D Cunha RA Linden J Tsien JZ Chen JF A critical role of the adenosine A2A receptor in extra-striatal neurons in modulating psychomotor activity as revealed by opposite phenotypes of striatum- and forebrain-A2A receptor knockouts J Neurosci 2008 28 2970 2975 18354001
Shen H-Y Sun H Hanthorn MM Zhi Z Lan J-Q Poulsen DJ Wang R Boison D Overexpression of adenosine kinase in cortical astrocytes generates focal neocortical epilepsy in mice J Neurosurg 2014 120 628 638 24266544
Shen HY Lusardi TA Williams-Karnesky RL Lan JQ Poulsen DJ Boison D Adenosine kinase determines the degree of brain injury after ischemic stroke in mice J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2011 31 1648 1659 PMCID: PMC3137468 21427729
Shen HY Singer P Lytle N Wei CJ Lan JQ Williams-Karnesky RL Chen JF Yee BK Boison D Adenosine augmentation ameliorates psychotic and cognitive endophenotypes of schizophrenia J Clin Invest 2012 122 2567 2577 22706302
Silva CG Porciuncula LO Canas PM Oliveira CR Cunha RA Blockade of adenosine A(2A) receptors prevents staurosporine-induced apoptosis of rat hippocampal neurons Neurobiol Dis 2007
Simpson JE Ince PG Lace G Forster G Shaw PJ Matthews F Savva G Brayne C Wharton SB Function MRCC Ageing Neuropathology Study, G Astrocyte phenotype in relation to Alzheimer-type pathology in the ageing brain Neurobiol Aging 2010 31 578 590 18586353
Sofroniew MV Vinters HV Astrocytes: biology and pathology Acta Neuropathol 2010 119 7 35 20012068
Song W Patel A Qureshi HY Han D Schipper HM Paudel HK The Parkinson disease-associated A30P mutation stabilizes alpha-synuclein against proteasomal degradation triggered by heme oxygenase-1 over-expression in human neuroblastoma cells J Neurochem 2009 110 719 733 19457084
Spencer PS Fry RC Palmer VS Kisby GE Western Pacific ALS-PDC: a prototypical neurodegenerative disorder linked to DNA damage and aberrant proteogenesis? Front Neurol 2012 3 180 23267344
Spencer PS Lasarev MR Palmer VS Kisby GE Neurotoxic cycad components and Western Pacific ALS/PDC Ann Neurol 2010 68 975 976 author reply 976. 21194164
Sta M Sylva-Steenland RM Casula M de Jong JM Troost D Aronica E Baas F Innate and adaptive immunity in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: evidence of complement activation Neurobiol Dis 2011 42 211 220 21220013
Stanimirovic DB Friedman A Pathophysiology of the neurovascular unit: disease cause or consequence? J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2012 32 1207 1221 22395208
Steele ML Robinson SR Reactive astrocytes give neurons less support: implications for Alzheimer's disease Neurobiol Aging 2012 33 423 e421 423 e413 21051108
Steinhauser C Seifert G Bedner P Astrocyte dysfunction in temporal lobe epilepsy: K+ channels and gap junction coupling Glia 2012 in press.
Stone TW Ceruti S Abbracchio MP Adenosine receptors and neurological disease: neuroprotection and neurodegeneration Handb Exp Pharmacol 2009 193 535 587 19639293
Studer FE Fedele DE Marowsky A Schwerdel C Wernli K Vogt K Fritschy JM Boison D Shift of adenosine kinase expression from neurons to astrocytes during postnatal development suggests dual functionality of the enzyme Neuroscience 2006 142 125 137 16859834
Suvisaari J Mantere O Inflammation theories in psychotic disorders: a critical review Infect Disord Drug Targets 2013 13 59 70 23713669
Swann JW Rho JM How is homeostatic plasticity important in epilepsy? Adv Exp Med Biol 2014 813 123 131 25012372
Szot P Common factors among Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and epilepsy: possible role of the noradrenergic nervous system Epilepsia 2012 53 Suppl 1 61 66 22612810
Szybala C Pritchard EM Wilz A Kaplan DL Boison D Antiepileptic effects of silk-polymer based adenosine release in kindled rats Exp Neurol 2009 219 126 135 19460372
Tebano MT Martire A Potenza RL Gro C Pepponi R Armida M Domenici MR Schwarzschild MA Chen JF Popoli P Adenosine A(2A) receptors are required for normal BDNF levels and BDNF-induced potentiation of synaptic transmission in the mouse hippocampus J Neurochem 2008 104 279 286 18005343
Theofilas P Brar S Stewart K-A Shen H-Y Sandau US Poulsen DJ Boison D Adenosine kinase as a target for therapeutic antisense strategies in epilepsy Epilepsia 2011 52 589 601 PMCID: PMC3075862 21275977
Thom M Review: Hippocampal sclerosis in epilepsy: a neuropathology review Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 2014 40 520 543 24762203
Thom M Eriksson S Martinian L Caboclo LO McEvoy AW Duncan JS Sisodiya SM Temporal lobe sclerosis associated with hippocampal sclerosis in temporal lobe epilepsy: neuropathological features J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2009 68 928 938 19606061
Tibrewal P Dhillon R Caffeine induced psychotic exacerbation Aust N Z J Psychiatry 2011 45 179 180 21070185
Ticho SR Radulovacki M Role of adenosine in sleep and temperature regulation in the preoptic area of rats Pharmacol Biochem Behav 1991 40 33 40 1780343
Tost H Alam T Meyer-Lindenberg A Dopamine and psychosis: theory, pathomechanisms and intermediate phenotypes Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2010 34 689 700 19559045
Tozzi A Tscherter A Belcastro V Tantucci M Costa C Picconi B Centonze D Calabresi P Borsini F Interaction of A2A adenosine and D2 dopamine receptors modulates corticostriatal glutamatergic transmission Neuropharmacology 2007 53 783 789 17889039
Tremolizzo L Messina P Conti E Sala G Cecchi M Airoldi L Pastorelli R Pupillo E Bandettini Di Poggio M Filosto M Lunetta C Agliardi C Guerini F Mandrioli J Calvo A Beghi E Ferrarese C Consortium E Whole-blood global DNA methylation is increased in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis independently of age of onset Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener 2014 15 98 105 24224837
Trifilieff P Rives ML Urizar E Piskorowski RA Vishwasrao HD Castrillon J Schmauss C Slattman M Gullberg M Javitch JA Detection of antigen interactions ex vivo by proximity ligation assay: endogenous dopamine D2-adenosine A2A receptor complexes in the striatum Biotechniques 2011 51 111 118 21806555
Urade Y Eguchi N Qu WM Sakata M Huang ZL Chen JF Schwarzschild MA Fink JS Hayaishi O Sleep regulation in adenosine A2A receptor-deficient mice Neurology 2003 61 S94 S96 14663019
van Calker D Biber K The role of glial adenosine receptors in neural resilience and the neurobiology of mood disorders Neurochem Res 2005 30 1205 1217 16341582
Van der Auwera I Wera S Van Leuven F Henderson ST A ketogenic diet reduces amyloid beta 40 and 42 in a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease Nutr Metab (Lond) 2005 2 28 16229744
Van Dycke A Raedt R Dauwe I Sante T Wyckhuys T Meurs A Vonck K Wadman W Boon P Continuous local intrahippocampal delivery of adenosine reduces seizure frequency in rats with spontaneous seizures Epilepsia 2010 51 1721 1728 20726873
Vezzani A Aronica E Mazarati A Pittman QJ Epilepsy and brain inflammation Exp Neurol 2011
Vezzani A Ravizza T Balosso S Aronica E Glia as a source of cytokines: implications for neuronal excitability and survival Epilepsia 2008 49 Suppl 2 24 32 18226169
Vila M Jackson-Lewis V Guegan C Wu DC Teismann P Choi DK Tieu K Przedborski S The role of glial cells in Parkinson's disease Curr Opin Neurol 2001 14 483 489 11470965
Virus RM Ticho S Pilditch M Radulovacki M A comparison of the effects of caffeine, 8-cyclopentyltheophylline, and alloxazine on sleep in rats. Possible roles of central nervous system adenosine receptors Neuropsychopharmacology 1990 3 243 249 2400543
Wei CJ Augusto E Gomes CA Singer P Wang Y Boison D Cunha RA Yee BK Chen JF Regulation of Fear Responses by Striatal and Extrastriatal Adenosine A Receptors in Forebrain Biol Psychiatry 2014 75 855 863 23820821
Williams-Karnesky RL Sandau US Lusardi TA Lytle NK Farrell JM Pritchard EM Kaplan DL Boison D Epigenetic changes induced by adenosine augmentation therapy prevent epileptogenesis J Clin Inv 2013 123 3552 3563
Williams JM Gandhi KK Use of caffeine and nicotine in people with schizophrenia Curr Drug Abuse Rev 2008 1 155 161 19630714
Wilz A Pritchard EM Li T Lan JQ Kaplan DL Boison D Silk polymer-based adenosine release: Therapeutic potential for epilepsy Biomaterials 2008 29 3609 3616 18514814
Woolley SC Zhang Y Schuff N Weiner MW Katz JS Neuroanatomical correlates of apathy in ALS using 4 Tesla diffusion tensor MRI Amyotroph Lateral Scler 2011 12 52 58 21271791
Wyss-Coray T Loike JD Brionne TC Lu E Anankov R Yan F Silverstein SC Husemann J Adult mouse astrocytes degrade amyloid-beta in vitro and in situ Nat Med 2003 9 453 457 12612547
Xiao D Bastia E Xu YH Benn CL Cha JH Peterson TS Chen JF Schwarzschild MA Forebrain adenosine A2A receptors contribute to L-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine-induced dyskinesia in hemiparkinsonian mice J Neurosci 2006 26 13548 13555 17192438
Yee BK Singer P Chen JF Feldon J Boison D Transgenic overexpression of adenosine kinase in brain leads to multiple learning impairments and altered sensitivity to psychomimetic drugs Eur J Neurosci 2007 26 3237 3252 18005073
Yu L Shen HY Coelho JE Araujo IM Huang QY Day YJ Rebola N Canas PM Rapp EK Ferrara J Taylor D Muller CE Linden J Cunha RA Chen JF Adenosine A2A receptor antagonists exert motor and neuroprotective effects by distinct cellular mechanisms Ann Neurol 2008 63 338 346 18300283
Zhao Z Lange DJ Voustianiouk A MacGrogan D Ho L Suh J Humala N Thiyagarajan M Wang J Pasinetti GM A ketogenic diet as a potential novel therapeutic intervention in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis BMC Neurosci 2006 7 29 16584562
Zhou FW Roper SN Impaired hippocampal memory function and synaptic plasticity in experimental cortical dysplasia Epilepsia 2012 53 850 859 22417090
Zhu Q Wang L Zhang Y Zhao FH Luo J Xiao Z Chen GJ Wang XF Increased expression of DNA methyltransferase 1 and 3a in human temporal lobe epilepsy J Mol Neurosci 2012 46 420 426 21826395
Zorec R Araque A Carmignoto G Haydon PG Verkhratsky A Parpura V Astroglial excitability and gliotransmission: an appraisal of Ca2+ as a signalling route ASN Neuro 2012 4
