LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


8218700
6054
Neuroepidemiology
Neuroepidemiology
Neuroepidemiology
0251-5350
1423-0208

26501691
4679687
10.1159/000439568
NIHMS722536
Article
Early Life Epidemiology of Alzheimer’s Disease – A Critical Review
Seifan Alon MD, MS a
Schelke Matthew b
Obeng-Aduasare Yaa MS a
Isaacson Richard MD a
a Alzheimer Prevention Clinic and Memory Disorders Program, Department of Neurology Weill Cornell Medical College
b Weill Cornell Medical College
Correspondence Address: 428 East 72nd Street, Suite 500, New York, NY 10021, als9122@med.cornell.edu, Telephone: 212 746 7621
30 10 2015
27 10 2015
12 2015
01 12 2016
45 4 237254
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Background

As adult brain structure is primarily established in early life, genetic and environmental exposures in infancy and childhood influence risk for Alzheimer Disease (AD). In this systematic review, we identify several early life risk factors and discuss the evidence and underlying mechanism for each.

Summary

Early risk factors for AD may alter brain anatomy, causing vulnerability to AD-related dementia later in life. In the perinatal period, both genes and learning disabilities have been associated with the development of distinct AD phenotypes. During early childhood, education and intellect as well as body growth may predispose to AD through alterations in cognitive and brain reserve, though the specific mediators of neural injury are disputed. Childhood socioeconomic status may predispose to AD by influencing adult socioeconomic status and cognition. Association of these risk factors with underlying AD pathology (rather than just clinical diagnosis) has not been sufficiently examined.

Key messages

Factors that impede or alter brain growth during early life could render certain brain regions or networks selectively vulnerable to the onset accumulation or spread of AD-related pathology during late-life. Careful life-course epidemiology could provide clues as to why the brain systematically degenerates during AD.


Introduction

Adult brain structure is primarily established in early life1 and is a major determinant of an individual’s susceptibility to Alzheimer Disease (AD)2. By altering both the anatomical (number and connectivity of neurons) and functional (ability to engage alternative brain networks) organization of the adult brain, early life exposures influence the vulnerability of brain regions to AD pathology and the ability of the brain to compensate in the presence of disease3. Because AD is diagnosed clinically long after early life, and the onset of pathology, the links between early exposures, premorbid brain structure, and AD pathology and symptomatology remain unclear.

Prior reviews have proposed a developmental basis for AD2, 4–8 and recent studies demonstrate evidence of atypical neurodevelopmental trajectories in people at genetic risk for AD 9, 10 and in people diagnosed with a variant of progressive aphasia (logopenic primary progressive aphasia) associated with AD pathology11. Here, we focus specifically on human epidemiological studies in English that have used incident AD as the primary outcome and excluded studies that used general or all-cause dementia as the outcome measure. Specifically, we discuss the impact of education and intellect, childhood socioeconomic status (SES), body growth, childhood adversity, learning disabilities, and genetics on late-life AD risk, in the context of brain structure and development (Table 2 and Figure 3). We suggest that the mechanisms of these risk factors are best characterized by four models— critical period, latent, cumulative and trajectory 12— that describe the effects of early exposures as timing-specific, clinically unmasked by a stressor later in life, accumulated over time, or determinant of later pathways, respectively (Figure 1). Considered In the context of final achieved adult brain connectivity, these models offer a unified conceptual framework linking early social and biological conditions, premorbid brain structure, and ultimate susceptibility or resilience to AD.

We discuss the findings in the context of the hypothesis that genetic and environmental factors that cause atypical brain development may lead to an adult brain that is more susceptible to neurodegenerative pathology in late life. Ultimately, increased awareness of the early life factors associated with risk for AD could lead not only to a better understanding of the causes of AD but also to earlier identification of at-risk individuals and more timely access to future preventative interventions.

Materials &amp; Methods

References for this review were identified by searches of PubMed between March 1970 and October 2014, including references from relevant articles. The following search terms and their synonyms were used to identify the initial list of abstracts: Alzheimer’s Disease, Childhood, Socioeconomic Status, adversity, nutrition, head circumference, stature, arm length, leg length, and learning disability. We searched for articles published in English between January 1st, 1970 and December 31st, 2014. These terms were drawn from previous reviews of the literature on early life epidemiology of cognition2, 8. Of the 2711 abstracts initially identified as potentially relevant, a total of 436 were selected for review of the full article. Of the 436 full articles reviewed for this study, a total of 43 were selected for final inclusion. We only included studies of late-onset Alzheimer’s Disease, as the early onset form has a different molecular pathogenesis and is likely affected by different risk factors. Studies in which the primary outcome included final adult cognition but not Alzheimer’s Disease diagnosis were not included. Studies in which the primary outcome included episodic memory difficulty and/or decline were retained in the final list because the most common cause of episodic memory trouble in late life is Alzheimer’s Disease.

Results

Myriad cross-sectional and longitudinal epidemiological studies were identified linking early life factors to adult brain structure and AD risk, including a few studies in which pathology-supported criteria was used for AD diagnosis. Table 1 lists the characteristics of each study in further detail. Below, we discuss the studies in order of risk factor and classified by the study design.

Genetics

Genes are major determinants of brain development and adult neuroanatomy and modify risk for AD later in life. Many studies have shown that brain network structure and function develop differently during early childhood and adolescence in individuals with genetic risk for AD, particularly carriers of the late-onset risk genes APOE4 and SORL19, 10. Infant carriers of APOE4 develop less white and gray matter volume during the first three years of life than non-carriers in temporal, parietal, and cingulate regions preferentially affected by AD9. Similarly, the left entorhinal cortex is significantly thinner in healthy children and adolescents carrying APOE4 compared to non-carriers13 and symptomatic APOE4 carriers have smaller hippocampi, with differences most pronounced prior to age 6514. In young healthy adults, APOE4 is also associated with abnormal white matter microstructure and with reduced posterior cingulate mitochondrial activity, without differences in soluble or insoluble amyloid15. Remarkably, APOE4 positive children with a family history of AD show impairment on tests of reading and language, suggesting that the early structural changes from APOE4 may cause functional impairment long before AD pathology begins16. Together, these findings indicate that the presence of the APOE4 allele significantly reduces cortical volume and connectivity in a distributed network later affected by AD and may impair cognition throughout the lifespan.

Other genetic elements may also alter brain anatomy and contribute to AD risk. Mutations in the APOE receptor SORL1 have also been linked to late-onset AD and alter neural structure in AD-affected networks17. SORL1 variant children show white matter microstructural abnormalities, and the underexpression of SORL1 mRNA in brain occurs specifically during childhood and adolescence10. Similarly, SORL1 polymorphisms, including the AD-associated SNP rs668387, were also associated with reduced hippocampal volume in a 936 healthy Caucasian young persons aged 18 to 36 years18. Though late-onset AD genes like APOE4 and SORL1 have been the focus of most studies, the early-onset AD genes presenilin 1, presenilin 2, and amyloid precursor protein are also neurodevelopmental genes that may cause similar abnormalities19,20. . Consistent with a trajectory model, AD-associated genetic and epigenetic alterations contribute not only to the molecular pathology of AD but also cause aberrant structural and functional development that may make the brain anatomically susceptible to AD.

Childhood Intellect &amp; Learning Disabilities

Here we discuss studies of innate intellect or learning disabilities, as opposed to educational levels, and late-life AD risk. Higher education has been consistently associated with reduced risk for AD in many cross-sectional and longitudinal studies, and two recent meta-analyses both found that the incidence of AD is inversely proportional to level of education21, 22. Full discussion of this extensively studied topic3 is beyond the scope of this review and thus studies on education and AD risk were not included in the final list of studies, but the mechanisms of the protective effects of education are discussed in the discussion section in the context of childhood SES.

Native intelligence may influence risk for AD. In a population-based, case-control study, participants rated their childhood school performance; “below average” performance was correlated with a fourfold higher incidence of AD23. Similarly, two longitudinal studies of adolescent handwritten memoirs from cloistered nuns found that lower idea density in the memoirs predicted greater neurofibrillary tangle and senile plaque pathology at autopsy and an increased incidence of clinical diagnosis of AD24, 25. There was no association between grammaticality and AD, indicating that the effect of idea density on AD pathology is unrelated to general writing ability developed in school.

For people with atypical neurodevelopmental trajectories, developmental or acquired alterations in the language network may lead to selective vulnerability of the language cortex to neurodegenerative pathology in later life26. Four studies have examined the association of developmental learning disabilities and specific types of dementia, particularly the atypical AD variant of logopenic-type primary progressive aphasia (PPA). Logopenic PPA from AD has the same molecular pathology as hippocampal (“typical”) AD and is affected by the same early life risk factors; we discuss it specifically in this section because a history of learning disability appears to predispose individuals not just to AD pathology but also to the unique anatomical involvement and clinical presentation seen in logopenic PPA from AD.

Cross-sectional Studies

In a study of over 600 subjects from the Northwestern Alzheimer’s Disease Center registry, 16% of the 108 individuals with PPA (of any type) and 32% of their first degree family members answered affirmatively to having a history of learning disability27. These frequencies were significantly higher than those noted in control subjects without AD, subjects with typical amnestic AD and subjects with behavioral variant FTLD. Among the families of PPA probands, remarkable clusters of learning disabilities, particularly developmental dyslexia, were noted.

A second study used a more specific breakdown of the type of PPA, with imaging-supported classification11. Specifically, 8% of all PPA subjects from the University of California San Francisco Memory and Aging Center had self- or informant-based report personal history of delay in speaking or reading at baseline medical interview. This was driven by a particularly high prevalence (25%) in the 48 subjects with logopenic PPA. This finding is important because although logopenic-type PPA is often caused by underlying FTLD pathology, it is frequently associated with AD pathology28. Logopenic PPA subjects with learning disability were younger at onset and showed atrophy in the areas affected by developmental dyslexia (posterior middle and superior temporal gyri).

The authors of the initial study demonstrating higher rates of self-reported LD in people with PPA recently published a follow-up study using pathology-supported diagnoses to attempt to address the question of whether PPA patients reporting prior LD in fact had AD or FTLD pathology. The results showed both AD and FTLD pathology were represented equally in the PPA patients reporting childhood LD, suggesting that the relationship between LD and neurodegenerative disease is not specific to neurodegeneration due to AD.29 One major caveat is that this study used family history as the proxy for LD; although LD does run in families, a family history of LD does not equate with a personal history of LD.

Finally, our group recently compared the frequency of self-reported learning disabilities in 68 typical AD cases, vs. 17 atypical AD cases (Posterior Cortical Atrophy or PCA, Logopenic type PPA, and Dysexecutive AD; we demonstrated a 13-fold higher risk of self-reported LD in the atypical group, after adjusting for demographics and disease severity30. The type of learning disability was different for PPA vs. PCA cases.

In summary, native intellect, including atypical neurodevelopment as seen in learning disabilities, likely predisposes either to AD risk/resilience or to atypical phenotypes of AD. The factor(s) that determine which people with learning disabilities develop atypical dementias remain unknown. However, it is striking that the types of learning disabilities may in fact segregate with subtypes of AD phenotypes; this would be consistent with latent model in which early changes in a specific anatomical region predispose to AD pathology in that region, rather than serving as a systemic risk factor.

Early Life Socioeconomic Status

Several studies have examined the association between early life SES and incidence of late-life AD; markers of early life SES include place of birth, literacy and education, sibship size, birth order, and parental occupation and education. Though multiple studies agree that a lower early-life SES is associated with reduced late-life cognitive ability, evidence for an association with late-life AD is equivocal. In general, SES would be expected to influence late-life AD risk via a social trajectory model as early SES has a major impact on adult health and cognition31.

Cross-sectional Studies

Various cross-sectional studies have reported that early residence, parental occupation, and sibship size increase risk for AD, though these factors interact with education level and the APOE4 genotype. In 2,212 African Americans 65 years of age or older drawn from a community-based prevalence study of AD from 29 census tracts in Indianapolis, the combination of living in a rural residence and having less than six years of schooling had the strongest effect size in increasing risk for AD32. The authors concluded that low education serves as a marker for other factors related to low SES that may increase risk for AD in late-life. In a case control study of over 700 participants of the Genetic Differences in AD study from the University of Washington Alzheimer’s Disease Patient Registry, subjects with a higher sibship size or a father in a manual occupation had a higher risk for AD but the effect was only significant in the presence of APOE433. In a community-based, case control study of over 700 individuals recruited from a health maintenance organization in the Seattle region, area of residence before age 18 years and number of siblings were associated with clinical or pathological diagnosis of AD34.

Longitudinal Studies

In contrast to the cross-sectional studies demonstrating possible links between childhood SES and AD risk, two longitudinal studies with approximately five to six years of follow-up showed associations between early life SES and overall late-life cognitive capacity but not rates of AD dementia35, 36. In a population of Chicago adults, a combined measure of parental education, occupation, and financial status showed a small but significant association with cognitive testing at age 65 or older in a population of Chicago adults35. In a study of Catholic clergy members, the socioeconomic level of the participants’ birth county and household correlated with late-life cognitive function; however, there was no association with the development of AD in either study36.

Early SES may influence late-life cognitive function through its effects on adult brain anatomy and cognition. Individuals with lower childhood SES have smaller hippocampi by volumetric MRI37 and one prospective cohort study demonstrated that higher adult reading level predicted a larger discrepancy between evidence of AD at pathology and late-life cognitive testing and thus greater resilience to AD38. Reading level accounted for the effects of early life SES, implying that the effect of childhood SES on clinical AD may be mediated indirectly through adult cognition.

Together, these studies suggest three conclusions. First, some studies have demonstrated a link between childhood SES and late-onset AD, though other results are inconsistent. Second, APOE4 status and other biological risk factors may be critical determinants of the effects of early SES on AD risk. Finally, early SES has been consistently shown to be associated with cognition, brain anatomy and SES in adulthood; any effects of early SES on later AD may thus be mediated through the adult milieu consistent with a trajectory model39. The potential relationship between early life SES and pathologically defined AD, partly addressed in only one study34, requires further exploration.

Body Growth &amp; Development

Of all the childhood risk factors for AD, early life body growth has been studied the most extensively. Adult anthropomorphic measures of early life body development such as leg length, height, head circumference and digit ratios are markers of early life nutrition influenced by a host of early environmental factors, including hormonal exposure, and have been associated with late life cognitive outcomes including clinical diagnoses of AD. As optimal body and brain development is achieved during specific periods of childhood and adolescence40, the effects of body growth on brain size, cognitive reserve, and ultimate symptomatology of AD are best described with a critical window model.

Cross-sectional Studies Included in the Analysis

Most cross-sectional studies suggest that smaller cranial and body measurements are associated with increased risk for AD. In 746 Koreans aged 65 or over, shorter arm and leg length were independently associated with clinical diagnosis of both vascular dementia and AD, but only in women41; in a similar sample, arm length but not body height was associated with cognitive function and clinical diagnosis of AD dementia in both genders42 In a convenience sample of 28 women with clinical diagnosis of Probable AD attending an outpatient memory disorders clinic in New York, lower intracranial area measured on CT scan in adulthood was associated with earlier age of onset of symptoms43. In a large, ethnically diverse, population-based sample from the Northern Manhattan Aging Project, subjects in the smallest quintile of head circumference had a higher risk for prevalent Probable or Possible AD44. Head circumference was not associated with educational attainment or premorbid cognitive capacity. Interestingly, in a small study of 20 adults diagnosed with AD and 20 controls, digit ratio - a marker of prenatal testosterone and estrogen exposure - was associated with AD risk, with opposite patterns for males vs. females (higher digit ratios in AD males and lower digit ratios in AD females)45. Finally, high childhood BMI and concomitant insulin resistance increases circulating levels of the AD-associated proteins amyloid-beta 42 and presenilin-1, suggesting a molecular link between childhood metabolism, body measurements, and later AD46.

Longitudinal Studies

Results from the longitudinal studies largely agree with those of the cross-sectional studies. Two studies have associated shorter body height with increased incidence of AD: the Honolulu Asia Aging study found that AD was significantly more common in men 61 inches or shorter in over 3000 Japanese men47, and the Israeli Ischemic Heart Disease Study found increased risk of AD in individuals with shorter stature48. Other longitudinal studies have focused on more specific measurements., while in the Cardiovascular Health Cognition Study of Medicare recipients the participants in the lowest quartile of arm span had increased risk of incident clinical AD49. Effects were not mediated by education, income or self-reported health.

Though most of these studies indicate that reduced body measurements may predispose to AD, a few studies either qualify or disagree with these results. In 215 men and women aged 66–75 years from England whose head circumference had been recorded at birth and as adults, people who had a larger head circumference as an adult, but not at birth, were less likely to show decline over a 3.5 year period in immediate and delayed recall on the Logical Memory test50. Although diagnosis of AD was not made in this study, impaired delayed recall is specifically associated with AD. Similarly, a study of 674 subjects with normal cognition, amnestic MCI, or AD found that increased intracranial volume attenuated the impact of cortical atrophy from AD on cognition51. Though body measurements are presumably determined in early life, it is possible that growth in adolescence and young adulthood contributes to adult body measurements and the risk for AD. Finally, three other studies showed no association between intracranial volume measurements and clinical diagnosis or age of onset of AD52–54.

Interactions with APOE genotype, gender and other factors may explain some of these discrepancies (although one study showed no interaction with genotype)44. Among a cohort of 1859 Japanese Americans living in Washington, followed prospectively for six years, developmental risk factors were associated with incident AD in APOE4 positive individuals, whereas vascular risk factors were more important for APOE4 negative individuals55. In 59 incident cases of probable AD identified from 1,869 individuals, the combination of low head circumference and APOE4 4 strongly predicted earlier onset of AD56.

Taken together, a few consistent and interesting findings emerge from the literature of early life body growth and dementia. There appears to be an association between early life markers of childhood body growth (height, arm length, leg length, head circumference) and clinical diagnosis of AD in some studies and the effect of body growth on AD risk likely follows a critical-window model. This association appears partly independent of education but may interact with gender, APOE status and handedness. Importantly, the relationship between early life body growth and pathologically defined AD has not been demonstrated and will be an important area of further research.

Childhood Adversity

Childhood adversity includes abuse and neglect, parental mental illness, substance abuse, criminal behavior, and domestic violence, as well as parental loss and divorce, childhood physical illness, and family economic adversity. Although the negative effect of childhood adversity on adult cognition and brain structure is well-established57, few studies have examined the relationship between exposure to childhood adversity and cognitive decline or dementia due to AD. Currently, only one study relates childhood adversity to clinical or pathological diagnosis of AD. In a population-based study of over four thousand older subjects in Utah, adults with who had suffered maternal death from eleven to seventeen years old were twice as likely to develop AD58. Though it did not study AD specifically, the Israel Heart Disease cohort study similarly demonstrated that the risk for incident dementia (of any type) was increased in individuals who reported experiencing parental death in childhood as compared to parental death in adulthood, particularly for individuals who experienced the event at a younger age in childhood59. In contrast, one study showed different relationships between childhood adversity and cognitive decline in African Americans and Caucasian, over a follow-up of 16 years60. The effects of childhood adversity on AD may follow a latent exposure model: initial sequelae of childhood trauma, such as reduced hippocampal size, would subsequently be exacerbated in the presence of late-life stressors and risk factors. Effects will likely depend upon the particular timing of the event during childhood.

Discussion

As shown in Figure 3, several early life factors have been associated with increased risk of clinical diagnosis of AD through their impact on adult brain structure. Table 1 shows the number of studies included in this review segregated by risk factor category. Below, we will briefly review the evidence and mechanistic model of risk of each of the early life exposures that are summarized in Table 2.

Genetics may influence AD risk by altering the developmental trajectories and ultimate adult connectivity of functional brain networks. As discussed above, these networks show structural and functional abnormalities as early as childhood, suggesting that their pathological trajectories may influence cognitive health long before the appearance of dementia. In addition, epigenetic modifications may play a significant role in AD pathology; recent studies in humans have identified multiple genes methylated in AD that are linked to PTK2B, a regulator of hippocampal synaptic function91. Consistent with the concept of selective vulnerability, in which the developmental history of a brain region determines the course of its later degeneration, these modified functional networks will be particularly vulnerable to late-life neurodegeneration92.

Developmental learning disabilities and low native intellect may act as latent risks for different phenotypic variants of neurodegenerative disease. Dyslexia is present in 7% of the population87 and is thought to be caused by under-activity in the left temporal and occipital regions during reading and abnormal activation of the left inferior frontal gyrus88,89, 90. In this review, we described three studies linking dyslexia to atypical neurodegenerative disease and proposed that dyslexia anatomically predisposes the brain to an atypical variant of AD that presents as logopenic PPA. It remains to be seen whether other types of LD (dyscalculia, e.g.) influence the anatomical involvement and clinical phenotype of neurodegenerative disease and better imaging methods will be required to examine whether congenitally-affected brain regions in people with specific LDs are indeed the first to be affected in late-life degeneration.

Evidence for an association between early life SES and AD is equivocal, though multiple cross-sectional studies have shown significantly increased AD risk in groups with low childhood SES. Study of SES is particularly challenging because of its close relationship with educational opportunities. Early life SES affects adult cognitive outcomes partly by influencing adult SES and education levels61–66, while unfavorable SES is an independent risk factor for AD67. Biologically, early life SES alters telomere attrition rates and hippocampal volumes37, 68 and low childhood SES is a risk factor for stroke69. In addition, education increases cognitive and brain reserve; higher education has been associated with increased cortical thickness in the temporal lobe70, as well as lower CSF tau concentrations in patients with amnestic MCI71. Importantly, education is partially separable from other risk factors: though education may determine adult SES, low education is an independent risk factor for AD72, 73. The effects of childhood SES are consistent with a trajectory model as SES may determine the later educational, cognitive, and neuroanatomical path of the individual and ultimately lead to the development of AD.

The relationship between body measurements, physiologic variables like brain size and nutrition, and late-life AD are complex. Though this may be due to increased brain reserve81 (and cognitive reserve), other causal mechanisms are likely at work. Small head size and susceptibility to AD may share genetic influences, or small head size may reflect environmental exposures that increase risk of AD independently of brain size. Importantly, the critical window for nutrition is during pregnancy and the first two years of life82 and chronic undernutrition affects about 165 million children worldwide (primarily in Sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia)83. Anthropomorphic measurements of body growth are thus markers of early nutritional status. Neurobiologically, undernutrition can delay the rate of cell division; myelination is especially vulnerable to even moderate undernourishment and the resulting hypomyelination can permanently affect the brain even after nutritional restoration84. Metabolically, IGF-1 levels were recently related to incident AD85 and may be altered by suboptimal nutrition and subsequent insulin resistance86. Further research on the mechanisms and reliability of anthropomorphic measurements as proxies for critical developmental windows on brain reserve and AD risk is necessary.

Effects of childhood adversity on brain and behavior are remarkably timing-specific74, so a critical window model applies best. Exposure to childhood adversity is surprisingly common; 73% of respondents in one study reported exposure to at least one adversity75. One longitudinal study has shown a clear association between childhood adversity and AD, and others have linked adversity and all-cause dementia. The effects of adversity may be mediated by chronic stress, increased vulnerability to neurodegeneration, cellular senescence via shortened telomere length76, 77, or ineffective coping strategies such as tobacco use and alcoholism69, 78.. Exposure to childhood adversities also increases the risk of heart disease, stroke, and diabetes, all of which are risk factors for AD79, 80

Several methodological challenges preclude our ability to draw clear associations between early life factors and AD risk. Almost all studies relied on clinical diagnosis of AD using NINDCDS/NINDS criteria rather than neuropathological diagnosis. These criteria only detect 81% of pathologically confirmed cases of AD and are only 70% specific93 as AD dementia is associated with multiple underlying pathologies including amyloidopathy, cerebrovascular disease, synucleinopathy, and TDP-4394. Also, very few studies used an a priori approach to test mediating adult life mechanisms of early life factors and instead relied on self-report and indirect measures. Few studies were prospective and survival bias was prominent because early life factors may cause selective attrition of weaker individuals. Early life factors may explain the poorly understood phenomenon of phenotypic heterogeneity in AD. The typical, late-onset phenotype of AD begins with amnestic symptoms that correlate with neurofibrillary pathology in lateral entorhinal cortex. Atypical phenotypes of AD (posterior cortical atrophy and logopenic-type primary progressive aphasia), begin with non-amnestic symptoms and neurofibrillary pathology in non-hippocampal structures95. The varying susceptibility of different brain networks to AD pathology in different individuals may relate to the concept of selective vulnerability, which posits that the brain networks that developed least optimally during early life are among the first to degenerate during late life92. Intriguingly, AD preferentially affects the evolutionarily newest regions of the human brain (higher order association cortex)96 and the neurofibrillary neurodegeneration of AD seems to spread in reverse order to that of cortical myelination, beginning in the neurons which are the last to myelinate and the most poorly myelinated97. Because myelination is mostly finished by young adulthood, this may have implications for primary prevention.

There are myriad challenges challenges for future investigation of the relationship between early life factors and AD risk. The prevalence of childhood risk factors, particularly in children at genetic risk for AD, requires more accurate measurement and interactions between exposures and genetic risk for AD remain unclear. Though some mechanisms by which early life factors influence late life cognitive outcomes are partially understood and are discussed above, detailed molecular and anatomic pathophysiology has yet to be described. Timing effects, particularly during critical windows of brain development such as adolescence, and ongoing identification of gene candidates for learning disabilities represent particularly important opportunities for exploration. Finally, more epidemiological studies need to incorporate pathological endpoints as pathology can both confirm the clinical AD diagnosis and reveals much about the anatomical specificity of these myriad early life exposures.

Careful epidemiology, linking well-measured exposures to pathologically defined dementia outcomes, may provide clues as to how the brain systematically degenerates during AD and other dementias. Ideally, a better understanding of the lifelong time-course of AD may lead to preventative interventions delivered during critical life stages; the availability of biomarkers to detect Preclinical AD holds particular promise in this regard. Ultimately, identification of early life, causative risk factors for AD, especially in at-risk individuals such as those with family history of dementia, will help reduce the global burden of disability from dementia.

Acknowledgements

Support included NIH/NIA grant 5T32NS007153 as well as the Leon Levy Foundation, the Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer’s Disease and the Aging Brain, the Henry P. Panasci Fund, and the Charles and Ann Lee Brown Fellowship Fund.

Figure 1 Models of early life risk factors for AD.

Figure 2 Histogram showing number of included studies assessing early life risk factors.

Figure 3 Conceptual model of relationship between early-life risk factors and adult AD pathology. In this model, genetically and environmentally influenced childhood brain structure determines adult brain structure and vulnerability. Subsequently, cumulative age-related brain pathologies (including cerebrovascular disease, synucleinopathy and TDP-43) and other adult risk factors influence when and whether neurodegeneration begins in the selectively vulnerable region. Interventions to address childhood risk factors for AD would work by influencing childhood brain development.

Table 1 Cross-sectional and longitudinal epidemiological studies of early life risk factors and Alzheimer’s Disease

Marker	Ref.	Sampling Method	Study Design	Strengths	Co-variates	Outcome
Measure for AD
Diagnosis	Results from fully
adjusted model (95%
CI)	Key Limitations	
Genetics	
Cross-Sectional	
White matter myelin
water fraction and
gray matter volume	9	Community-
based	Cross-sectional	APO-E4 carrier
and non-carrier
groups matched
for age,
gestational
duration, birth
weight, sex ratio,
maternal age,
education, and
socioeconomic
status.	Age,
gestational
duration, birth
weight,
maternal age
and SES	Positive APOE4
genotype	Infants carrying APOE4 had
lower white matter myelin
water fraction and gray matter
volume than noncarriers
(p&lt;0.05)	Unclear whether these metrics are also
lower in APOE4 carriers after infancy
(perhaps a temporary effect only)	
Standardized
achievement tests
and R-O complex
figure administered
to children	16	Community-
based	Retrospective
cohort	Analyzed effects
of APOE4 status
on cognition in
children	Age	Positive APOE4
genotype and
positive family
history of AD	Children with both an APOE4
allele and +FH scored
significantly lower on reading
(p=0.032), language (p=0.044),
and the R-O complex figure
test (p=0.015)	Small sample size (n=109)	
The SORL1 gene and
convergent neural
risk for Alzheimer’s
disease across the
human lifespan.	10	Community-
based	Cross-sectional	Analyzed white
matter
microstructure	Age, APOE4
status, sex	SORL1 SNP
rs689021	Lower frontotemporal white
matter fractional anisotropy in
carriers of the SORL1 SNP
(p=0.008)	Only one metric of white matter
integrity used	
Thickness of left
entorhinal cortex in
adolescence	13	Community-
based	Cross-sectional	Use of specific
cortical region for
thickness
measurements	Age, sex, race	Positive APOE4
genotype	APOE4 carriers had thicker left
entorhinal cortex (3.79 mm)
than non-carriers (3.94 mm)
(p=0.03)	High SES of participants could bias
results	
Right hippocampal
volume	14	Clinic-based	Cross-sectional	Use of extensive
testing to rule out
AD symptoms	Age, sex,
education	Positive APOE4
genotype	APOE4 carriers had smaller
right hippocampi (P=0.09)	Hippocampal volume measured in
adulthood	
Mitochondrial
activity in posterior
cingulate cortex	15	Population-
based	Case-control	Use of
pathological
histology for
mitochondrial
activity	Age at death
and
postmortem
interval	Positive APOE4
genotype	APOE4 carriers had reduced
posterior cingulate
mitochondria activity
(p=0.009)	None noted.	
Bilateral hippocampal
volume in young
adults	18	Population-
based	Cross-sectional	Large, population-
based sample	Age, sex, total
brain volume	AD-associated
SORL1 SNPs	Individuals with AD-associated
SORL1 SNPs had smaller
bilateral hippocampal volumes
(p=0.01)	Relatively homogenous Netherlandish
population.	
Learning Disability	
Cross-Sectional	
Self-report: Family
history of learning
disability	27	Community-
based	Case-control		None	McKhann, Neary
and Mesulam
criteria including
consensus of
neurologist and a
neuropsychologist.	16% of PPA (of any type) vs.
6% of behavioral variant, 7%
typical AD, 5% controls.		
Self-reported
personal history of
delay in speaking or
reading	11	Clinic-based	Consecutive
clinicopathological
series		Age, gender,
handedness,
scanner and
total
intracranial
volume	Consensus
diagnostic criteria
for PPA supported
by imaging.	25% of logopenic PPA patients
vs. 3% of semantic and 3% of
non-fluent PPA.		
Educational and
developmental
history from
neuropsychological
evaluation	30	Clinic-based	Restrospective
case-control	First to examine
connection
between LD and
atypical dementia	Age, gender,
handedness,
education and
symptom
duration	Consensus
diagnosis of PPA
and AD	Patients with probable learning
disability 13 times more likely
to be diagnosed with dementia
(OR 13.1 95% CI 1.3–128.4)	Uncertainty of learning disability
presence due to self-report of
symptoms	
Longitudinal	
Self-report: Family
history of learning
disability	29	Clinic-based	Case-control	Use of
pathological
criteria for AD and
FTLD	Not discussed.	Autopsy-based
diagnoses	LD prevalence in PPA was
about 50% with no difference
between PPA from AD and
FTLD.	Small sample size and only estimated
prevalence.	
Education &amp; Intellect	
Cross-Sectional	
Self-assessed
school
performance
(“below” or
“above”
average)	23	Population
based	Case-control	Large sample size;
adjusted for
presence of APOE4	Age, gender,
race, presence
of APOE4	NINCDS / ADRDA
criteria and DSM III
and IV criteria	Participants with “below
average” self-assessed school
performance were more likely
to have AD (OR 4.0; 1.2–14 95%
CI)		
Longitudinal	
Young adult
(∼22 years)
linguistic ability
(idea density
and
grammatical
complexity)	25	Community
based	Longitudinal
cohort	Use of
neuropathology to
confirm AD
pathology

Dissociation of idea
content and
grammar	Age, education
occupation	AD
neuropathology at
autopsy	Nuns with AD had decreased
idea density (P&lt;0.001) but not
decreased grammatical
complexity in early writings
(P=0.61)	Catholic nuns are well-educated and
thus may not represent the premorbid
mental abilities of the general
population	
Idea density in
handwritten
autobiographies
from 19 to 32
years old	24	Community-
based	Longitudinal	Use of childhood
written accounts
(rather than self-
report) and autopsy
pathology	Age at death
and location of
convent
(population of
nuns)	Neurofibrillary
tangle and senile
plaque count in
frontal, temporal,
and parietal lobes	Greater idea density in
childhood writing inversely
correlated with neurofibrillary
tangle and senile plaque count
at autopsy (∼-0.5 for tangles
and ∼-0.3 for plaques)
(p&lt;0.0001 for tangles and
p&lt;0.001 for plaques)	Only used text analysis for idea density
and not for other linguistic or writing
measures	
SES	
Cross-Sectional	
Self-reported
childhood rural
residence	32	Community-
based	Case-Control	Randomized sample	Age, gender,
education	NINCDS-ADRDA
criteria	OR 6.5 (2.6 to 16.7) for low
education/rural residence vs.
high education/urban
residence	Not adjusted for major medical
comorbidities (as would be expected in
rural and urban populations).
Cutoff for “low education” (grade 6 or
lower) may be problematic as effect of
education was only seen in rural
residents.	
Informant
reported
mother’s age at
subject’s birth,
birth order,
sibship size, and
area of
residence
before the age
of 18 years	34	Community-
based	case-control	Stratified by
presence of APOE4
Significant linear
trend for number of
siblings	Age, gender,
education,
APOE	NINCDS/ADRDA or
Definite AD by
neuropathologic
criteria	OR 1.4 (1.0 to 2.0) for sibship
size of five or more; OR 0.5 (0.3
to 0.8) for suburban childhood
residence	Proxies used for both case and control
interviews, potentially producing
misclassification of information.
Greater response rate from cases.	
Father’s
occupation,
parents’ age,
household size,
birth order,
sibship size, and
home
ownership	33	Community-
based	Case control	Stratified by
presence of APOE4.
Use of objective
data (census and
birth certificates)
rather than
interviews.	Age, gender,
education,
APOE	NINCDS / ADRDA
criteria.	OR 1.8 (1.2 to 2.7). Strong
interaction with APOE4.	Use of father’s occupation as a
surrogate for quality of early home
environment is limited (analysis did not
include maternal occupation, area of
residence, etc).	
Longitudinal	
Self-reported
parental highest
years of
schooling,
paternal
occupational
prestige, family
financial status
and cognitive
milieu	35	Population-
based	Longitudinal Cohort	Longitudinal 5 year
follow-up time	Age, gender,
race, education	Symbol Digit
Modalities Test,
East Boston Story,
MMSE	No association with cognitive
change over time (beta −0.005,
p&lt;0.10)	Self-reported recall of childhood
cognitive milieu
Even though the follow-up was five
years, perhaps a longer period is
necessary to show significant decline	
Self-reported
parental
education,
occupational
prestige, sibship
size	36	Community-
based	Longitudinal clinic-
pathologic		Age, gender,
education,
county-level
SES	NINCDS / ADRDA
criteria.	No association: RR 1.1 (0.9 to
1.4) for higher household SES
composite score.		
Paternal
occupation,
number of
public rooms in
childhood
home, and
number of
people in home
per sanitation
facility	37	Community
based	Cross-sectional
and longitudinal	Analysis of HPC
using volumetric
MRI	Mental ability
at 11 years old
adult SES
gender
education	Hippocampal
volume from MRI	Low childhood SES is
associated with lower adult
hippocampal volume (p=0.032)	Individuals with higher mental ability
at 11 years selectively participated
possibly leading to a systematic bias	
Reading level
and early SES	38	Community
based	Prospective cohort	Adjusted for APOE4
status

Use of resilience
metric, rather than
AD clinical or
pathological criteria
only	Age, gender
education	AD pathology at
autopsy
Cognitive testing
for memory

Disparity between
metrics =
“resilience”	Adult reading level associated
with greater resilience
(p&lt;0.0001) and accounts for
effects of early life SES	Study population (Caucasian
volunteers agreeing to post-mortem
examination) may not represent entire
aging population	
Body Growth	
Cross-sectional	
Arm and leg
length	41	Populatio
n-based,	Case-control	Collected culturally
relevant measures of
early life environment;
MMSE &amp; KDRS scores
from t-2 years for 64%
of current sample
(paired assessment).

Observed sex
differences in APO-E4
effect: Intrasex group
risk difference (inc risk
of dementia w e4) for
men; intra-sex group
risk difference was the
opposite for women
with e4 providing a
protecting factor.

Inclusive sampling
source; cases and
controls screened prior
to inclusion.	Age, gender,
education,
menarche,
menopause	NINCDS-ADRDA
criteria, using
two
independent
teams	In women only: OR
2.5 (1.6 to 4.0) for
5cm decrease.	Variable methods for measuring leg length (gold
standard?). No assoc of sitting height with
dementia.

Anthropometric measures were not treated as
continuous variables, why? In models adjusted
for age, education, female gender, risk of Vas
dementia 4x that of men, yet hypertension and
diabetes were not associated w risk of dementia
in this sample.

Report of AD diagnosis: No formal investigation
of APO-E4 status, limb length and AD. Reported
higher rate of AD than population estimates for
East Asia.	
Intracranial area
by CT scan	43	Clinic-
based	Retrospective
case series	Gender-specific, brain-
imaging (MRI/ CT scans)
for confirmation of
Probable AD. CT scan
suitability determined
by location of
anatomical structures.
Brain size correlated
positively with age at
first symptom.	Education, height
ethnic group	Self-reported
date of onset of
symptoms of AD
(diagnosed
using NINCDS-
ADRDA criteria
using consensus
panel)	Correlation 0.48, p
0.009 between head
size and age of onset	Use of brain imaging at diagnosis for proxy of
pre-morbid brain size; age at first symptom was
imputed with no indication of a statistical
measure). No accounting for height, weight, or
overall volume with respect to brain size.

Aside: Wouldn’t bigger brains just produce more
plagues and neurofibrillary tangles??	
Head
circumference	52	Commun
ity-based	Case-control	sampling from multiple
cognitive categories for
balancing	Age, gender,
education	NINCDS-ADRDA
criteria	OR 0.9 (0.3 to 1.9) for
HC (treated linearly)	Statistical manipulation of head circumference
and unbalanced weighting of categories, renders
findings questionable. `Specific population;
Japanese-American. Accuracy of head
circumference measurements at birth. Head
circumference was not a significant predictor of
AD for prevalent AD. Incorrect assumption of
head circumference as proxy for cognitive
reserve.

No adjustment for height or weight. Sub-sample
analyses among patients diagnosed with
probable AD didn’t attenuate the effect of “THC
with CASI score” when adjusted for height.	
Arm length	42	Populatio
n-based	cross-
sectional	Population based
sample; multi-tier
diagnosis of dementia
based on cognitive tests
and blinded
neurological
assessments.	Age, gender,
education, smoking,
alcohol
consumption, pulse
pressure,
hypertension and
diabetes	NINCDS-ADRDA
criteria using
consensus
between a
physician and
neurologist; also
change in
Korean MMSE
over three years	OR 1.2 (1.0 to 1.3) for
1cm decrease in arm
length	None other than weakness of causal or
correlative evidence	
Head
circumference	44	Populatio
n-based	Case-control		Height, weight,
education, APOE	NINCDS-ADRDA
criteria	OR 2.9 (1.4 to 6.1) for
women and 2.3 (0.6
to 9.8) for men for
lowest quintile		
Intracranial
volume by CT
scan	54	Clinic-
based	Clinic-based,
case-control	Use of gold-standard
measure of premorbid
brain size: total
intracranial volume	Gender	NINCDS-ADRDA
criteria with
consensus	No significant
differences in
intracranial volume	Why is brain size a proxy for cognitive reserve?

While women with AD had smaller head size on
average in comparison to female controls,
controlling for years of education, decreased
that difference. The finding of no association
between APO-E4, age, birth year and TIV. Even
lowest tertiles of TIV not predictive of AD.	
Intracranial
volume by CT
scan	53	Clinic
based	case-control
study	Matched controls,
blinded MRI image
analysis, results
assessed for inter-tester
variability	Age at scan, gender,
familial vs. sporadic
AD	NINCDS-ADRDA
criteria	No significant
differences in
intracranial volume	None noted.	
Prenatal sex
hormone
exposure
(measured
through 2D:4D
length ratio
proxy)	45	Clinic-
based	Case-control	Gender-specific;
determined that high
estrogen:testosterone
ratios are a risk factor in
men but protective in
women.

Ability to estimate
prenatal hormone
exposure	Age and years of
education	NINCDS-ADRDA
criteria
(consensus
diagnosis)	AD males had higher
2D:4D ratio (high E:T)
than controls
(p&lt;0.001)
AD females had lower
2D:4D ratios (low E:T)
than controls
(p&lt;0.001)	Accuracy of 2D:4D ratio as a proxy for prenatal
hormone exposure
Could not describe effects of estrogen and
testosterone individually	
Longitudinal	
Height	47	Commun
ity-based	Case-control	Longitudinal data on
height.	Age, body mass
index, years of
childhood lived in
Japan, level of
education and
father’s occupation	NINCDS-ADRDA
criteria using
consensus panel
(study
neurologist and
two other
dementia
experts)	In men only:
Prevalence of AD
higher (4.7% vs.
2.9%, p =0.18) in men
shorter than 154cm	Standing height at baseline used as
anthropometric measure, with no adjustment for
age related changes in height; Japanese heritage
vs. multiracial status not addressed. No report on
standardization of height for race.	
Head
circumference	55	Community-
based	Retrospective
cohort	Apoe4	Age, education,
gender	NINCDS-ADRDA
criteria	Combination of small head
circumference and APOE4
positivity predicted earlier onset
of AD (p=0.0007)		
Head
circumference	56	Community
based	Prospective Cohort
study	Apoe4; enhanced
follow-up for
subjects with
marked cognitive
changes (CASI ≤87)	Head
circumference,
height, verbal IQ,
income, education,
age at growth
cessation,
household
characteristics
seated BP,
anthropometrics		APOE 4 Hetero- and
homozygosity had a differential
effect on AD for men vs women:
HRheterozygosity men= 1.9 (95% CI
0.7–5.4) vs HRheterozygositywomen=
4.2 (95% CI 2.1–8.6);
HRhomozygositymen = 5.3 (95% CI
0.7–41) vs HRhomozygositywomen =
18.3 (95% CI 2.3–144)		
Height	48	Community-
based,	Nested case-
control	Blind confirmatory
diagnoses of
dementia by
neurologists +
Consensus
diagnoses (by a
blinded 2nd
neurologist)	Age, gender,
education,
occupation, and
area of birth	NINCDS-ADRDA
criteria	OR 0.6 (0.4–0.9) for highest
quartile vs. lowest quartile	TICS-m used for initial dementia
diagnosis; Healthy volunteer effect
(1999 sample overall had lower risks
factors)	
BMI and HOMA-
IR	98	Clinic-based	Prospective cohort	Use of serum-based
biomarkers of AD:	Age, gender,
fasting lipid panel,
glucose, and WBC	Aβ-42 and
PSEN1	RR: 7.1, p-value= 0.002 for Aβ-
42		
Arm length	49	Population-
based	Longitudinal
(prospective
cohort)	Gold standard
assessment tools:
MRI, Genetic
testing
MMSE and 3MSE;
Representative
cohort (across race
and age)	Age, gender,
ethnicity,
education, income,
self-reported
health, APOE4
status	NINCDS-ADRDA
criteria with
consensus (one
neurologist and
one
psychiatrist)	HR 1.7 (1.1–2.6) in women vs.
0.9 (0.8–1.0) in men	Potential misclassification (non-
differential/differential?), Conclusion of
lower knee height and arm spans
associated with increased risk of
dementia troublesome bc:
phenomenon seen only among women
for knee height and when assessed for
lowest quartile of knee height, found
not significant. However, arm span was
significantly associated with dementia
(men and women) and AD (women
only)

No record of assessment of childhood
nutritional deficiencies though!	
Fetal head
circumference
and adult head
circumference	50	Community-
based	Prospective case
control study	Comparison of
cognitive function
at study enrollment
and at 3.5 year
follow-up	Age, sex,
education, social
class at birth,
history of
cerebrovascular
disease,
Nottingham Health
Profile emotion
subscale score,
gestational age	AH4
Intelligence
Test, Logical
Memory
subtest of the
Wechsler
Memory Scale	OR for delayed recall 0.3 (0.1 to
0.9) for highest quartile	Accuracy of childhood head
circumference measurements.
Categorized adult head circumference
and used the lowest quartile as the
reference group for effects of the
measure on the Logical memory test;
once again due to nonstandardization
of anthropometric measurements.
When comparing furthermore sample
size for observed decline in WLM were
far to small and unmatched for
comparisons.	
Intracranial
volume (ICV)
and total brain
volume (TBV)
from MRI	51	Clinic-based	Longitudinal cohort	ICV is better
predictor of
premorbid brain
size than head
circumference
Use of APOE status	Age, gender,
education APOE
genotype, CV
disease presence	NINCDS-ADRDA
criteria for AD
MMSE, ADAS-
cog, and CDR
scores for
longitudinal
follow-up	Atrophy and APOE4 allele had
reduced impact on cognitive
and clinical decline in MCI with
larger ICV (p&lt;0.05)	ICV measurements taken after
diagnosis (not in childhood or mid-
adulthood)
ICV is an imperfect approximation of
premorbid brain size	
Childhood Adversity	
Longitudinal	
Early parental
death and
remarriage of
widowed
parents	58	Population
based	Prospective cohort	Use of consensus
AD diagnosis

Large, population
based sample	Age, gender
and education	NINCDS-ADRDA
criteria; consensus
diagnosis	Maternal death from age 11
17 associated with 2x risk of
AD	Adjustment for later SES from parental
death was difficult due to missing data	

Table 2 Mechanistic models describing the effects of early life risk factors on ad risk

Risk Factor	Model	Mechanism	
Childhood SES	Trajectory	Gradual accrual of risk or protection over time	
Body Growth	Critical Window	Timing-specific risk or protection	
Intellect &amp; Learning
Disability	Latent	Initial factor unmasked by a later factor	
Genetics	Trajectory	Initial factor determines later development	
Childhood Adversity	Latent	Initial factor unmasked by a later factor	


References

1 Lenroot RK Giedd JN Brain development in children and adolescents: insights from anatomical magnetic resonance imaging Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2006 30 718 729 16887188
2 Borenstein AR Copenhaver CI Mortimer JA Early-life risk factors for Alzheimer disease Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 2006 20 63 72 16493239
3 Stern Y Cognitive reserve in ageing and Alzheimer’s disease Lancet neurology 2012 11 1006 1012
4 Reiner O Shmueli A Sapir T Neuronal migration and neurodegeneration: 2 sides of the same coin Cereb Cortex 2009 19 Suppl 1 42 48
5 Miller DB O’Callaghan JP Do early-life insults contribute to the late-life development of Parkinson and Alzheimer diseases? Metabolism 2008 57 Suppl 2 44 49
6 Zawia NH Basha MR Environmental risk factors and the developmental basis for Alzheimer’s disease Rev Neurosci 2005 16 325 337 16519009
7 Lahiri DK Zawia NH Greig NH Sambamurti K Maloney B Early-life events may trigger biochemical pathways for Alzheimer’s disease: the “LEARn” model Biogerontology 2008 9 375 379 18668339
8 Whalley LJ Dick FD McNeill G A life-course approach to the aetiology of late-onset dementias Lancet neurology 2006 5 87 96
9 Dean DC 3rd Jerskey BA Chen K Brain Differences in Infants at Differential Genetic Risk for Late-Onset Alzheimer Disease: A Cross-sectional Imaging Study JAMA Neurol 2013
10 Felsky D Szeszko P Yu L The SORL1 gene and convergent neural risk for Alzheimer’s disease across the human lifespan Mol Psychiatry 2013
11 Miller ZA Mandelli ML Rankin KP Handedness and language learning disability differentially distribute in progressive aphasia variants Brain 2013 136 3461 3473 24056533
12 Liu S Jones RN Glymour MM Implications of Lifecourse Epidemiology for Research on Determinants of Adult Disease Public Health Rev 2010 32 489 511 24639598
13 Shaw P Lerch JP Pruessner JC Cortical morphology in children and adolescents with different apolipoprotein E gene polymorphisms: an observational study Lancet neurology 2007 6 494 500
14 Lind J Larsson A Persson J Reduced hippocampal volume in non-demented carriers of the apolipoprotein E epsilon4: relation to chronological age and recognition memory Neurosci Lett 2006 396 23 27 16406347
15 Valla J Yaari R Wolf AB Reduced posterior cingulate mitochondrial activity in expired young adult carriers of the APOE epsilon4 allele, the major late-onset Alzheimer’s susceptibility gene J Alzheimers Dis 2010 22 307 313 20847408
16 Bloss CS Delis DC Salmon DP Bondi MW Decreased cognition in children with risk factors for Alzheimer’s disease Biol Psychiatry 2008 64 904 906 18722591
17 Wen Y Miyashita A Kitamura N SORL1 is genetically associated with neuropathologically characterized late-onset Alzheimer’s disease J Alzheimers Dis 2013 35 387 394 23455993
18 Bralten J Arias-Vasquez A Makkinje R Association of the Alzheimer’s gene SORL1 with hippocampal volume in young, healthy adults Am J Psychiatry 2011 168 1083 1089 21730226
19 Kim DH Yeo SH Park JM Genetic markers for diagnosis and pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease Gene 2014
20 Louvi A Sisodia SS Grove EA Presenilin 1 in migration and morphogenesis in the central nervous system Development 2004 131 3093 3105 15163631
21 Xu W Tan L Wang HF Education and Risk of Dementia: Dose-Response Meta-Analysis of Prospective Cohort Studies Molecular neurobiology 2015
22 Meng X D’Arcy C Education and dementia in the context of the cognitive reserve hypothesis: a systematic review with meta-analyses and qualitative analyses PLoS One 2012 7 38268
23 Mehta KM Stewart AL Langa KM “Below average” self-assessed school performance and Alzheimer’s disease in the Aging, Demographics, and Memory Study Alzheimers Dement 2009 5 380 387 19751917
24 Snowdon DA Greiner LH Markesbery WR Linguistic ability in early life, the neuropathology of Alzheimer’s disease, cerebrovascular disease Findings from the Nun Study Ann N Y Acad Sci 2000 903 34 38 10818486
25 Snowdon DA Kemper SJ Mortimer JA Greiner LH Wekstein DR Markesbery WR Linguistic ability in early life, cognitive function Alzheimer’s disease in late life Findings from the Nun Study Jama 1996 275 528 532 8606473
26 Rogalski E Weintraub S Mesulam MM Are there susceptibility factors for primary progressive aphasia? Brain Lang 2013 127 135 138 23489582
27 Rogalski E Johnson N Weintraub S Mesulam M Increased frequency of learning disability in patients with primary progressive aphasia and their first-degree relatives Arch Neurol 2008 65 244 248 18268195
28 Sajjadi SA Patterson K Nestor PJ Logopenic, mixed, or Alzheimer-related aphasia? Neurology 2014 82 1127 1131 24574548
29 Rogalski EJ Rademaker A Wieneke C Bigio EH Weintraub S Mesulam MM Association between the prevalence of learning disabilities and primary progressive aphasia JAMA Neurol 2014 71 1576 1577 25486208
30 Seifan AAS Huey ED Mez J Tsapanou A Caccappolo E Childhood Learning Disabilities and Atypical Dementia: A Retrospective Chart Review PLoS One 2015 Accepted for Publication
31 Cohen S Janicki-Deverts D Chen E Matthews KA Childhood socioeconomic status and adult health Ann N Y Acad Sci 2010 1186 37 55 20201867
32 Hall KS Gao S Unverzagt FW Hendrie HC Low education and childhood rural residence: risk for Alzheimer’s disease in African Americans Neurology 2000 54 95 99 10636132
33 Moceri VM Kukull WA Emanual I Using census data and birth certificates to reconstruct the early-life socioeconomic environment and the relation to the development of Alzheimer’s disease Epidemiology 2001 12 383 389 11416775
34 Moceri VM Kukull WA Emanuel I van Belle G Larson EB Early-life risk factors and the development of Alzheimer’s disease Neurology 2000 54 415 420 10668705
35 Everson-Rose SA Mendes de Leon CF Bienias JL Wilson RS Evans DA Early life conditions and cognitive functioning in later life Am J Epidemiol 2003 158 1083 1089 14630604
36 Wilson RS Scherr PA Hoganson G Bienias JL Evans DA Bennett DA Early life socioeconomic status and late life risk of Alzheimer’s disease Neuroepidemiology 2005 25 8 14 15855799
37 Staff RT Murray AD Ahearn TS Mustafa N Fox HC Whalley LJ Childhood socioeconomic status and adult brain size: childhood socioeconomic status influences adult hippocampal size Ann Neurol 2012 71 653 660 22522480
38 Negash S Wilson RS Leurgans SE Resilient brain aging: characterization of discordance between Alzheimer’s disease pathology and cognition Curr Alzheimer Res 2013 10 844 851 23919768
39 Brewster PW Melrose RJ Marquine MJ Life experience and demographic influences on cognitive function in older adults Neuropsychology 2014 28 846 858 24933483
40 Wadsworth ME Hardy RJ Paul AA Marshall SF Cole TJ Leg and trunk length at 43 years in relation to childhood health, diet and family circumstances; evidence from the 1946 national birth cohort Int J Epidemiol 2002 31 383 390 11980800
41 Kim JM Stewart R Shin IS Yoon JS Limb length and dementia in an older Korean population J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2003 74 427 432 12640055
42 Jeong SK Kim JM Kweon SS Shin MH Seo MW Kim YH Does arm length indicate cognitive and functional reserve? Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 2005 20 406 412 15852453
43 Schofield PW Mosesson RE Stern Y Mayeux R The age at onset of Alzheimer’s disease, an intracranial area measurement A relationship Arch Neurol 1995 52 95 98 7826282
44 Schofield PW Logroscino G Andrews HF Albert S Stern Y An association between head circumference and Alzheimer’s disease in a population-based study of aging and dementia Neurology 1997 49 30 37 9222166
45 Vladeanu M Giuffrida O Bourne VJ Prenatal sex hormone exposure and risk of Alzheimer disease: a pilot study using the 2D:4D digit length ratio Cognitive and behavioral neurology : official journal of the Society for Behavioral and Cognitive Neurology 2014 27 102 106 24968011
46 Luciano R Barraco GM Muraca M Biomarkers of Alzheimer disease, insulin resistance, and obesity in childhood Pediatrics 2015 135 1074 1081 25963004
47 Abbott RD White LR Ross GW Height as a marker of childhood development and late-life cognitive function: the Honolulu-Asia Aging Study Pediatrics 1998 102 602 609 9738183
48 Beeri MS Davidson M Silverman JM Noy S Schmeidler J Goldbourt U Relationship between body height and dementia Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 2005 13 116 123 15703320
49 Huang TL Carlson MC Fitzpatrick AL Kuller LH Fried LP Zandi PP Knee height and arm span: a reflection of early life environment and risk of dementia Neurology 2008 70 1818 1826 18458216
50 Gale CR Walton S Martyn CN Foetal and postnatal head growth and risk of cognitive decline in old age Brain 2003 126 2273 2278 12821508
51 Guo LH Alexopoulos P Wagenpfeil S Kurz A Perneczky R Brain size and the compensation of Alzheimer’s disease symptoms: a longitudinal cohort study Alzheimers Dement 2013 9 580 586 23232272
52 Graves AB Mortimer JA Larson EB Wenzlow A Bowen JD McCormick WC Head circumference as a measure of cognitive reserve Association with severity of impairment in Alzheimer’s disease Br J Psychiatry 1996 169 86 92 8818374
53 Jenkins R Fox NC Rossor AM Harvey RJ Rossor MN Intracranial volume and Alzheimer disease: evidence against the cerebral reserve hypothesis Arch Neurol 2000 57 220 224 10681081
54 Edland SD Xu Y Plevak M Total intracranial volume: normative values and lack of association with Alzheimer’s disease Neurology 2002 59 272 274 12136069
55 Borenstein Graves A Mortimer JA Bowen JD Head circumference and incident Alzheimer’s disease: modification by apolipoprotein E Neurology 2001 57 1453 1460 11673588
56 Borenstein AR Wu Y Mortimer JA Developmental and vascular risk factors for Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 2005 26 325 334 15639310
57 Pechtel P Pizzagalli DA Effects of early life stress on cognitive and affective function: an integrated review of human literature Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2011 214 55 70 20865251
58 Norton MC Smith KR Ostbye T Early parental death and remarriage of widowed parents as risk factors for Alzheimer disease: the Cache County study Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 2011 19 814 824 21873837
59 Ravona-Springer R Beeri MS Goldbourt U Younger age at crisis following parental death in male children and adolescents is associated with higher risk for dementia at old age Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 2012 26 68 73 21537146
60 Barnes LL Wilson RS Everson-Rose SA Hayward MD Evans DA Mendes de Leon CF Effects of early-life adversity on cognitive decline in older African Americans and whites Neurology 2012 79 2321 2327 23233682
61 Fors S Lennartsson C Lundberg O Childhood living conditions, socioeconomic position in adulthood, and cognition in later life: exploring the associations J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci 2009 64 750 757 19420323
62 Kobrosly RW van Wijngaarden E Galea S Socioeconomic position and cognitive function in the Seychelles: a life course analysis Neuroepidemiology 2011 36 162 168 21508650
63 Singh-Manoux A Richards M Marmot M Socioeconomic position across the lifecourse: how does it relate to cognitive function in mid-life? Ann Epidemiol 2005 15 572 578 16118001
64 Scazufca M Menezes PR Araya R Risk factors across the life course and dementia in a Brazilian population: results from the Sao Paulo Ageing &amp; Health Study (SPAH) Int J Epidemiol 2008 37 879 890 18583392
65 Kaplan GA Turrell G Lynch JW Everson SA Helkala EL Salonen JT Childhood socioeconomic position and cognitive function in adulthood Int J Epidemiol 2001 30 256 263 11369724
66 Luo Y Waite LJ The impact of childhood and adult SES on physical, mental, and cognitive well-being in later life J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci 2005 60 S93 S101 15746030
67 Sattler C Toro P Schonknecht P Schroder J Cognitive activity, education and socioeconomic status as preventive factors for mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease Psychiatry Res 2012 196 90 95 22390831
68 Cherkas LF Aviv A Valdes AM The effects of social status on biological aging as measured by white-blood-cell telomere length Aging Cell 2006 5 361 365 16856882
69 Galobardes B Smith GD Lynch JW Systematic review of the influence of childhood socioeconomic circumstances on risk for cardiovascular disease in adulthood Ann Epidemiol 2006 16 91 104 16257232
70 Liu Y Julkunen V Paajanen T Education increases reserve against Alzheimer’s disease--evidence from structural MRI analysis Neuroradiology 2012 54 929 938 22246242
71 Rolstad S Nordlund A Eckerstrom C High education may offer protection against tauopathy in patients with mild cognitive impairment J Alzheimers Dis 2010 21 221 228 20413900
72 Evans DA Hebert LE Beckett LA Education and other measures of socioeconomic status and risk of incident Alzheimer disease in a defined population of older persons Arch Neurol 1997 54 1399 1405 9362989
73 Karp A Kareholt I Qiu C Bellander T Winblad B Fratiglioni L Relation of education and occupation-based socioeconomic status to incident Alzheimer’s disease Am J Epidemiol 2004 159 175 183 14718220
74 Maercker A Michael T Fehm L Becker ES Margraf J Age of traumatisation as a predictor of post-traumatic stress disorder or major depression in young women Br J Psychiatry 2004 184 482 487 15172941
75 McGurn B Deary IJ Starr JM Childhood cognitive ability and risk of late-onset Alzheimer and vascular dementia Neurology 2008 71 1051 1056 18579804
76 Kume K Kikukawa M Hanyu H Telomere length shortening in patients with dementia with Lewy bodies Eur J Neurol 2012 19 905 910 22288427
77 Honig LS Kang MS Schupf N Lee JH Mayeux R Association of shorter leukocyte telomere repeat length with dementia and mortality Arch Neurol 2012 69 1332 1339 22825311
78 Kananen L Surakka I Pirkola S Childhood adversities are associated with shorter telomere length at adult age both in individuals with an anxiety disorder and controls PLoS One 2010 5 10826
79 Scott KM Von Korff M Angermeyer MC Association of childhood adversities and early-onset mental disorders with adult-onset chronic physical conditions Arch Gen Psychiatry 2011 68 838 844 21810647
80 Goodwin RD Stein MB Association between childhood trauma and physical disorders among adults in the United States Psychol Med 2004 34 509 520 15259836
81 Rushton JP Ankney CD Brain size and cognitive ability: Correlations with age, sex, social class, and race Psychon Bull Rev 1996 3 21 36 24214801
82 Victora CG de Onis M Hallal PC Blossner M Shrimpton R Worldwide timing of growth faltering: revisiting implications for interventions Pediatrics 2010 125 473 480
83 UNICEF Improving child nutrition: the achievable imperative for global progress 2013
84 Royland J Klinkhachorn P Konat G Wiggins RC How much undernourishment is required to retard brain myelin development Neurochem Int 1992 21 269 274 1303155
85 Westwood AJ Beiser A Decarli C Insulin-like growth factor-1 and risk of Alzheimer dementia and brain atrophy Neurology 2014 82 1613 1619 24706014
86 Clark GM Zamenhof S Van Mathens E Grauel L Kruger L The effect of prenatal malnutrition on dimensions of cerebral cortex Brain Res 1973 54 397 402 4196753
87 Peterson RL Pennington BF Developmental dyslexia Lancet 2012 379 1997 2007 22513218
88 Paulesu E Demonet JF Fazio F Dyslexia: cultural diversity and biological unity Science 2001 291 2165 2167 11251124
89 Guttorm TK Leppanen PH Tolvanen A Lyytinen H Event-related potentials in newborns with and without familial risk for dyslexia: principal component analysis reveals differences between the groups J Neural Transm 2003 110 1059 1074 12938027
90 Raschle NM Chang M Gaab N Structural brain alterations associated with dyslexia predate reading onset Neuroimage 2011 57 742 749 20884362
91 Lord J Cruchaga C The epigenetic landscape of Alzheimer’s disease Nature neuroscience 2014 17 1138 1140
92 Mesulam MM Primary progressive aphasia, the language network: the 2013 HHouston Merritt Lecture Neurology 2013 81 456 462 23897873
93 Blacker D Albert MS Bassett SS Go RC Harrell LE Folstein MF Reliability validity of NINCDS-ADRDA criteria for Alzheimer’s disease The National Institute of Mental Health Genetics Initiative Arch Neurol 1994 51 1198 1204 7986174
94 Josephs KA Whitwell JL Weigand SD TDP-43 is a key player in the clinical features associated with Alzheimer’s disease Acta Neuropathol 2014
95 Janocko NJ Brodersen KA Soto-Ortolaza AI Neuropathologically defined subtypes of Alzheimer’s disease differ significantly from neurofibrillary tangle-predominant dementia Acta Neuropathol 2012 124 681 692 22968369
96 Braak H Del Tredici K Evolutional aspects of Alzheimer’s disease pathogenesis J Alzheimers Dis 2013 33 Suppl 1 155 161
97 Braak H Rub U Schultz C Del Tredici K Vulnerability of cortical neurons to Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases J Alzheimers Dis 2006 9 35 44 16914843
98 Luciano R Barraco GM Muraca M Biomarkers of Alzheimer Disease, Insulin Resistance, and Obesity in Childhood Pediatrics 2015
