LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9606526
21796
Neuropathology
Neuropathology
Neuropathology : official journal of the Japanese Society of Neuropathology
0919-6544
1440-1789

25619230
4593391
10.1111/neup.12189
NIHMS725365
Article
Arizona Study of Aging and Neurodegenerative Disorders and Brain and Body Donation Program
Beach Thomas G. 1
Adler Charles H. 2
Sue Lucia I. 1
Serrano Geidy 1
Shill Holly A. 1
Walker Douglas G. 1
Lue LihFen 1
Roher Alex E. 1
Dugger Brittany N. 1
Maarouf Chera 1
Birdsill Alex C. 1
Intorcia Anthony 1
Saxon-Labelle Megan 1
Pullen Joel 1
Scroggins Alexander 1
Filon Jessica 1
Scott Sarah 1
Hoffman Brittany 1
Garcia Angelica 1
Caviness John N. 2
Hentz Joseph G. 2
Driver-Dunckley Erika 2
Jacobson Sandra A. 1
Davis Kathryn J. 1
Belden Christine M. 1
Long Kathy E. 1
Malek-Ahmadi Michael 1
Powell Jessica J. 1
Gale Lisa D. 1
Nicholson Lisa R. 1
Caselli Richard J. 2
Woodruff Bryan K. 2
Rapscak Steven Z. 3
Ahern Geoffrey L. 3
Shi Jiong 4
Burke Anna D. 5
Reiman Eric M. 5
Sabbagh Marwan N. 1
1 Banner Sun Health Research Institute, Sun City
2 Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale
3 University of Arizona, Tucson
4 Barrow Neurological Institute
5 Banner Alzheimer Institute, Phoenix, Arizona, USA
Correspondence: Thomas G. Beach, MD, PhD, FRCPC, 10515 West Santa Fe Drive, Sun City, AZ 85372, USA. Email: thomas.beach@bannerhealth.com
27 9 2015
26 1 2015
8 2015
05 10 2015
35 4 354389
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
The Brain and Body Donation Program (BBDP) at Banner Sun Health Research Institute (http://www.brainandbodydonationprogram.org) started in 1987 with brain-only donations and currently has banked more than 1600 brains. More than 430 whole-body donations have been received since this service was commenced in 2005. The collective academic output of the BBDP is now described as the Arizona Study of Aging and Neurodegenerative Disorders (AZSAND). Most BBDP subjects are enrolled as cognitively normal volunteers residing in the retirement communities of metropolitan Phoenix, Arizona. Specific recruitment efforts are also directed at subjects with Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease and cancer. The median age at death is 82. Subjects receive standardized general medical, neurological, neuropsychological and movement disorders assessments during life and more than 90% receive full pathological examinations by medically licensed pathologists after death. The Program has been funded through a combination of internal, federal and state of Arizona grants as well as user fees and pharmaceutical industry collaborations. Subsets of the Program are utilized by the US National Institute on Aging Arizona Alzheimer’s Disease Core Center and the US National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke National Brain and Tissue Resource for Parkinson’s Disease and Related Disorders. Substantial funding has also been received from the Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson’s Research. The Program has made rapid autopsy a priority, with a 3.0-hour median postmortem interval for the entire collection. The median RNA Integrity Number (RIN) for frozen brain and body tissue is 8.9 and 7.4, respectively. More than 2500 tissue requests have been served and currently about 200 are served annually. These requests have been made by more than 400 investigators located in 32 US states and 15 countries. Tissue from the BBDP has contributed to more than 350 publications and more than 200 grant-funded projects.

aging
Alzheimer’s disease
autopsy
biobank
biospecimen
brain bank
cancer
freeze-thaw
Parkinson’s disease
pathology
post-mortem interval
RNA

INTRODUCTION

Purpose and mission

The purpose of brain banks, and tissue, biospecimen or biobanks in general, is at least twofold. First, autopsy and neuropathological examination allow an accurate diagnosis and hence accurate clinicopathological correlation studies. As clinical syndromes generated by most diseases are not sufficiently specific regarding the underlying pathological processes, pathological examination of diseased tissue is often the only means by which a definite diagnosis can be attained. For neurodegenerative diseases, as biopsies are generally not done, neuropathological examination after death has an even more critical role. Accurate diagnoses ensure that clinical data acquired during life may be appropriately matched to a particular diagnostic condition, providing, over time and with sufficient numbers of studied subjects, a reliable categorization that may be used to collect and enhance knowledge regarding etiology, pathogenesis, epidemiology, biomarkers, clinical characteristics, clinical diagnosis, prognosis and treatment effects.

The second major purpose of biobanks is to provide pathologically characterized control and diseased tissue to basic scientists, enabling them to discover the underlying molecular mechanisms specific to each disease and to design appropriate therapeutic interventions. A detailed understanding of the genetic and molecular processes of disease pathogenesis, obtained by comparative study of diseased and non-diseased tissue, remains the major approach to finding such interventions. It is noteworthy that for both Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases, the existing approved pharmacotherapies are all based on molecular alterations identified wholly or partially from study of post-mortem brains more than 30 years ago.1

The study population and research site

The primary population under study consists of the retirement communities of northwest greater Phoenix, especially Sun City, Sun City West and Sun City Grand. A profile of these communities has been constructed using data from the US Census Bureau (2010) and from the files of the Sun Cities Area Historical Society. The combined population of Sun City, Sun City West and Sun City Grand is approximately 80 000, with a median age of about 70 years. Sun City, established in 1960, was the first large, planned retirement community in the United States. Sun City West and Sun City Grand followed, in 1978 and 1996, respectively. Due to a lack of densification and new land availability, the populations of all three communities have stopped increasing. The population of Sun City has been maintained at about 40 000 for more than 4 decades, suggesting that a continued influx of new retirees will maintain the populations of all of the communities. However, multiple new retirement communities have been developed in the immediate vicinity and throughout the metropolitan Phoenix area and many Brain and Body Donation Program (BBDP) study subjects now reside in these areas as well. Additionally, a subset of subjects is recruited from both metropolitan Phoenix and metropolitan Tucson through neurologists associated with the Arizona Alzheimer’s Disease Core Center.

Although migration of retirees to the region occurred initially in three major waves, coinciding with the establishment and marketing of housing developments in Sun City, Sun City West and Sun City Grand, the residents are all very similar, being composed overwhelmingly of elderly, well-educated, Caucasian (greater than 90%), middle and upper income individuals originating most commonly from Midwestern US states but with considerable influx from Northeast and Western states as well. The average residency time in Sun City is 12.6 years. As there is very little outmigration, the turnover is mostly due to deaths. Of the original Sun City population, 90% were replaced by a second generation of retirees by 1990.

Banner Sun Health Research Institute

Banner Sun Health Research Institute (BSHRI) is an affiliate of Banner Health, a non-profit, regional healthcare provider. Originally named the Institute for Biogerontology Research and then Sun Health Research Institute, BSHRI was conceived and initiated by Sun Health, a community owned and operated healthcare provider that began in 1965 to serve the needs of Sun City. Sun Health grew to provide healthcare to not only the original Sun City but also Sun City West and Sun City Grand as well as northwest greater Phoenix in general, all of which have experienced rapid growth of both retirement and non-retirement populations. Services provided by Sun Health included medical insurance, two acute care hospitals, extended and hospice care, outpatient clinics and Alzheimer care residences. Due to the increasing economic difficulties associated with providing healthcare to a predominantly elderly, Medicare-dependent population, Sun Health merged with Banner Health (http://www.bannerhealth.com) in 2008. Banner Health is larger and serves a more age-diversified population with 36 000 employees and 25 hospitals.

Sun Health Research Institute was established in 1986 with funds from Sun Health operations revenue and charitable contributions to the Sun Health Foundation. The focus of the Institute’s scientific work has been, since its inception, Alzheimer’s disease, with substantial Parkinson’s disease research beginning in 1996. Since 1998, the Institute has been part of the Arizona Alzheimer’s Consortium, a state-funded alliance that also includes Banner Alzheimer’s Institute, the University of Arizona, Barrow Neurological Institute, the Mayo Clinic Arizona, Arizona State University and Midwestern University. The Consortium was awarded a US National Institute on Aging (NIA) Alzheimer’s Disease Core Center (ADCC) in 2001 and a state-funded Arizona Parkinson’s Disease Consortium (APDC) was initiated in 2002. Mayo Clinic and BSHRI together were funded in 2011 by the US National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) to form the National Brain and Tissue Resource for Parkinson’s Disease and Related Disorders.

Origin and evolution of the program

The BBDP has been in existence since 1987 and has enrolled more than 3100 subjects over that time, which constitutes more than 2% of the current combined populations of the surrounding retirement communities. Of these, more than 1600 subjects have expired and their brains have been collected and stored. Whole-body donation was started in 2005, with more than 430 subjects currently accrued. Presently there are about 900 living subjects enrolled. All subjects have volunteered specifically for the Program and are highly motivated, with an annual drop-out rate of less than 3%. Recruitment relied initially on hospital staff, who obtained consents from family members of individuals who died while admitted. Recruitment gradually became entirely done on a prospective basis, primarily through public speaking events and tours of the Institute given by Institute staff to community groups and the general public, although interactions of the population with physicians and nursing staff belonging to the Sun Health and Banner Health provider networks, and relatively frequent local media releases, also contribute. Eligibility criteria for the Program stipulate that subjects must reside in the greater Phoenix metropolitan region (except for about 8% of subjects that have been enrolled for the Arizona NIA ADCC through the University of Arizona in Tucson). Recruitment is directed at subjects with a clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease (AD), Parkinson’s disease (PD) or cancer or who are free of other major neurological conditions. Subjects must be free of hazardous infectious diseases and must consent to annual clinical assessments. Additionally, applicants’ private medical records are reviewed to exclude confounding diseases and hazardous infectious disease conditions including HIV, hepatitis B or C, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and other infectious encephalopathies. In the absence of private medical records review, the enrolling physician must complete a questionnaire responding to the presence or absence of a history of these conditions. All enrolled subjects or legal representatives sign an Institutional Review Board-approved informed consent form allowing both clinical assessments during life, several options for brain and/or bodily organ donation after death, and usage of donated biospecimens for approved future research. A separate section requests the subject to allow or disallow DNA isolation and storage as well as genetic testing.

Between 1987 and 1995 brain donors did not receive formal neuropsychological testing. Their mental status was determined by requisitioning medical records from their primary care physicians, neurologists, psychologists and psychiatrists, and through telephone interviews with family members and caregivers, both at the time of enrollment and in the immediate post-mortem period. In 1996 a clinical psychologist was hired and from then onward, a standardized neuropsychological assessment has been administered to more than 75% of enrolled subjects (more than 90% of subjects since 2005). Also since 1996, most donors have received a standardized neurological evaluation tailored to detect overt and incipient movement disorders. A neuropathologist (TGB) was hired in 1997; prior to this time post-mortem diagnosis was performed by a retired general pathologist. In 2000, the clinical operations of the Program were greatly expanded, with the hiring of a cognitive neurologist, another neuropsychologist and associated support staff, while currently participating personnel include multiple professional staff including neurologists, neuropsychologists, psychiatrists, psychometrists, coordinators, nurses and schedulers. The collective academic output of the BBDP is now described as the Arizona Study of Aging and Neurodegenerative Disorders (AZSAND).

Consideration of sampling issues

Subjects enrolled in the BBDP are not an accurate representative sample of the entire US elderly population, in that they lack racial diversity and are more highly educated, have higher incomes and live longer than the average US citizen. Although the study population lacks the diversity of the general US population, there are advantages of using a more homogeneous group. The use of homogeneous populations with minimal genetic and environmental variability decreases the subject number required to attain adequate statistical power. This has been recognized by many researchers and has been used, for example, by groups utilizing isolated populations to study inheritance.2–6 However, studying a more homogeneous group allows the possibility of missing disease characteristics resulting from alleles that may be enriched in some ethnic groups but not in others.

Autopsy studies, because of the requirement for subjects to volunteer for something that many people will not consider due to personal or religious feelings, cannot ever be considered to constitute a truly randomized population sample. At the very least, then, autopsy studies will be composed of a subset of the population that is more likely to volunteer for altruistic causes. This “volunteer bias” has been studied, and it is suggested, for example, that volunteers generally come from a higher socioeconomic background than non-volunteers.7–9 Volunteer bias may apply differentially to normal and diseased subjects, as normal subjects are almost always true volunteers while diseased subjects are often enrolled by family members after they have lost independent decision-making capacity. Despite these considerations, one study has shown that autopsied subjects do not differ appreciably from those that are not autopsied10 but this may differ with locale and methods of subject selection.

The BBDP is a longitudinal clinicopathological study of AD, PD and normal aging. The normal subjects are volunteers that are recruited from and reside in the surrounding community while the AD and PD subjects are recruited both from the community and from neurologists’ offices. While AD is so common that a population-based study of elderly subjects will obtain sufficient AD cases, PD is much less common, affecting only about 1% of the population over age 65, and so tens of thousands of normal older subjects would have to be autopsied in order to obtain an adequate number for clinical or post-mortem tissue studies. Other neurodegenerative diseases are even less common and for these, population-based sampling would yield negligible case numbers. Although the BBDP is not primarily concerned with studying conditions other than AD or PD, it is necessary to have adequate numbers of subjects with other neurodegenerative diseases so that a “disease control” group is available. For this reason, directed recruitment is necessary, and the study design of the BBDP is necessarily case-control in nature.

Governmental regulation of tissue donation after death

In the United States, as in much of the world, all medical research on human subjects is ethically and legally guided by the Declaration of Helskinki (http://www.wma.net/en/30publications/10policies/b3/). Other documents of historical importance include the Nuremburg Code and Declaration of Geneva. The principles of the Declaration of Helsinki are honored in the US legal system within the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR),11 where they are summarized as the Common Rule. The Common Rule is administered by the US Office of Human Research Protection, which exists to ensure that all human subject research will adhere to the written standards. The health information of human subjects is protected by the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA). The BBDP performs annual standardized clinical assessments and has obtained the approval of our Institutional Review Board for these and all other aspects of the Program, including the informed consent and protocol. However, the Common Rule applies only to living human subjects and therefore the US federal government does not directly regulate research performed on deceased human subjects but rather places responsibility for such regulation on individual US states.12 Each US state has their own unique set of laws applicable to research usage of tissue from deceased subjects but there is commonality in that 48 states have adopted the most recent form of the Uniform Anatomical Gift Act (UAGA). The original UAGA, enacted in 1968, was directed at increasing the availability of donor organs for transplantation, but the 2006 revision (http://www.uniformlaws.org/ActSummary.aspx?title=Anatomical%20Gift%20Act%20(2006) expressly states that tissue donation may be made for the purposes of transplantation, therapy, research or education.13 An individual may sign an informed consent for post-mortem tissue donation while still alive, or this consent may be given after death by the spouse, adult children, parents, adult siblings, grandparents or legal representative, in hierarchical order. As rapid autopsy is a major objective for the BBDP, consent for autopsy and tissue donation is always obtained well prior to the subject’s death and subjects who are not able to come into our clinic for assessments are not accepted for enrollment. An important part of the UAGA is that a consent given during life does not need to be confirmed or re-acquired after death, as it would be almost impossible to rapidly obtain written consents from family members in these circumstances. Also, the UAGA prevents others, even family members, from revoking permission for tissue donation after death when the deceased individual had given their informed consent while alive. A summary of the UAGA on the official website (see above) states,“. . . there is no reason to seek consent from the donor’s family because the family has no legal right to revoke the gift. The practice of procurement organizations seeking affirmation even when the donor has clearly made a gift results in unnecessary delays in procuring organs and the occasional reversal of the donor’s wishes.” While the UAGA has cleared up many of the uncertainties and state-to-state variability that previously existed, US domestic law still does not provide explicit guidance on the handling or ownership of post-mortem human tissue.13

Clinical assessment

Standardized general medical, neurological and movement examinations as well as cognitive assessments and sleep and autonomic symptom questionnaires are administered annually to most subjects. Olfactory testing is performed every third year (Table 1). Standardized neuropsychological exams began in 1996, movement exams in 1997 and general neurological and extended cognitive exams in 2001. It is the objective to give all these assessments to all subjects regardless of whether they are considered normal controls or have dementia or parkinsonism. In the most recent 5-year period, at BSHRI alone there have been 2543 general neurological exams on 887 subjects, 2646 movement exams on 904 subjects, 2694 neuropsychological tests on 930 subjects, 2410 sleep questionnaires on 882 subjects, 2408 autonomic questionnaires on 881 subjects and 1120 (University of Pennsylvania Smell Identification Test (UPSIT) on 945 subjects. Clinical diagnostic classification is performed after each annual assessment, at a consensus conference attended by neurologists, psychiatrists and neuropsychologists. A final clinicopathological diagnosis is assigned after death, after review of all standardized clinical data, the most recent private medical records and neuropathological examination findings.

Although it is a requirement of the Program that donors consent to annual standardized clinical assessments, and considerable efforts are expended to have every subject assessed, some die without a standardized assessment. There are various reasons why not all subjects are assessed. Some subjects are in a terminal phase of illness when they register with the Program and die or become incapacitated before an assessment can be done, while others have difficulty scheduling an appointment for various reasons. A common impediment is a lack of someone to bring them in if they are not able to drive themselves. Home visits are done to help rectify this but these are limited as they add significant cost due to travel time. Some donors had enrolled in the Program prior to the time that standardized clinical assessments became mandatory (about 1997) and are therefore allowed to remain as brain-only donors. For normal control cases that die without a standardized BBDP clinical assessment, or whose last BBDP assessment was more than 18 months prior to death, an effort is made to obtain detailed information through telephone interviews with informants. These are standardized interviews that cover basic and instrumental activities of daily living, symptoms of cognitive impairment, movement abnormalities, and questions relating to sleep and autonomic functions. Questions are drawn from published scales such as the Clinical Dementia Rating Scale, Neuropsychiatric Inventory and Functional Activities Questionnaire.

Private medical records are obtained for all subjects and these are reviewed in a standardized manner. Generally the records from the two most recent years are obtained at initial enrollment and again after death. Of 1188 subjects with completed neuropathological examinations since 1997 (medically-licensed neuropathological examinations began in 1997), only 16 have no private medical records available. The median time span covered, from earliest to latest record date, is 70 months (5.8 years). After an initial “training period” in which all medical diagnoses were recorded, a total of 498 separate diagnoses were retained and a translation query written to condense all known synonyms for a given condition to a single “approved health condition”. We have found that review of private medical records is essential to gaining a full understanding of the subject’s overall medical history. The records receive multiple reviews by support staff, a neuropsychologist, a psychiatrist, a neurologist and the neuropathologist to ensure accuracy. Subjects also fill out medical history questionnaires at BBDP visits, and by comparing these to information obtained from review of private medical records, it is evident that self-report of medical conditions consistently under-reports health conditions, as compared to private medical records review.

A narrative summary of the clinical history is written after the subject’s death and is included in the neuropathology report, using all available clinical information, including results of BBDP standardized assessments, subject health questionnaires and private medical records.

Flow of subjects through the BBDP

The flow of subjects through the BBDP over the most recent 5-year period is illustrated in Figure 1. On August 1, 2009 there were 1009 living subjects enrolled in the BBDP. This initial input of subjects was supplemented by 511 new subjects recruited over the following 5 years, giving a total of 1520 subjects that were enrolled in the BBDP over this time period (“total subject input” in Fig. 1). Five years later, 896 subjects were still living and still enrolled while 199 had dropped out of the Program and 425 had died. Of those who died, four were not autopsied because the BBDP was not notified at the time of death. Of those autopsied, 357 (84%) had had one or more standardized BBDP clinical assessments during life.

Post-mortem operations

Dedication to short post-mortem interval (PMI)

Since the inception of the Program, the overriding organizing principle has been that the organ must be removed and processed as rapidly as possible. The median PMI, defined as the time elapsing between death and the start of organ removal, for all 1611 of our autopsied subjects, is 3.0 hours. There is a moderately extensive literature on the relationship between PMI and organ tissue quality, which will not be exhaustively summarized here, but it is apparent that deterioration of molecular entities after death varies widely depending on what is being measured. Highly volatile energy storage molecules such as ATP disappear within minutes,20 catecholamines drop precipitously14,15,21,22 and phosphorylated protein concentrations (“phosphoproteome”) fluctuate widely16 within the first few hours while high-molecular-weight DNA may be stable for up to 20 days after death.17 Previous research draws conflicting conclusions about the postmortem stability of RNA in organ tissue. Many report that post-mortem RNA is stable, using measures of global RNA integrity.18,19,23–32 Studies of various individual RNA species report mixed results with some indicating stability post-mortem30,33–39 while others have found associations between PMI and expression of various individual RNA transcripts.32,40–51 Variability in post-mortem preservation of different mRNA transcripts may be due to differing tertiary structures or normal physiological half-lives, which range from minutes to days. For example, c-fos mRNA has a half-life of 15 min while that for globin mRNA is 50 h.21

We analyzed52 total RNA extracted from frozen cerebellar cortex from 79 deceased BBDP subjects (see Fig. 2). The PMI was significantly correlated with overall RNA quality measures including RNA Integrity Number (RIN) (r = −0.34, P = 0.002) and RNA quantitative yield (r = −0.25, P = 0.02). Additionally, we determined the expression of 89 genes using a PCR-based gene expression array. A greater proportion of genes had decreased rather than increased expression with increasing PMI (65/89 vs 20/89; P &lt; 0.0001). Of these, transcripts from the genes ADAM9, LPL, PRKCG and SERPINA3 had significantly decreased expression with increasing PMI (P &lt; 0.01). No individual gene transcripts had significantly increased expression with increasing PMI. Broniscer et al.,53 using a RIN of 7.5 as a definition of “minimally acceptable RNA”, found that, of samples with a PMI of less than 5 h, 70% had acceptable RNA quality, as compared with only 21% of the samples from longer PMI autopsies. From a systematic sample of more than 865 BBDP subjects, the median RIN for organ tissue is 8.9, while for 329 samples from a variety of bodily organs and tissues, the median RIN is 7.4. For organ samples, more than 85% have a RIN greater than 7.5.

These results and the brief literature review presented here indicate that a short PMI clearly allows optimal use of the resource but it is evident that all post-mortem studies must evaluate the influence of PMI as it is dependent on the specific molecular forms under investigation.

On-call autopsy teams

The maintenance of a rapid autopsy program requires sufficient staffing to prevent “burnout”. We are not aware of any other autopsy program that has had a similarly consistently short PMI. Most rapid autopsy programs fail because of understaffing that leads to burnout and resignation. Our experience has led to the conclusion that it is advisable to limit on-call periods for any one individual to no more than 4 months per year. The minimum number of persons required for each callout is two, for both safety and efficiency reasons. At present, we have four rotating on-call teams, each team consisting of two trained dissectors (one each for the brain and body, working in parallel) and two assistants. The trained dissectors are all BBDP employees and are on call every third month, while the assistants, derived from volunteers amongst the entire BSHRI scientific, technical and administrative staff, generally serve for 1–3 months per year. Trained dissectors and assistants are paid a bonus for each callout. As another strategy to avoid on-call team burnout, we continually optimize procedures to minimize tissue processing time. Generally we complete all procedures in 3–4 h and the total time a team member spends on a call, including transportation to and from their home, is between 3 and 5 h. To expedite organ processing, we always have made preparations for 2–3 autopsies into the future, prelabeling all containers and bags. Having a permanent dedicated autopsy suite enables all tools and equipment to be laid out ready for use.

Time-of-death telephone protocol and cadaver transport

When subjects registered into the Brain Donation Program die, their caregivers or family members, whether they are living at their own home (most subjects who die at home are registered in an approved hospice program) or at a care institution, follow the instructions given to them at the time of acceptance into the Program. The instructions are simple and require only that the caregiver telephone the Institute as soon as possible after death. If the call is after-hours, it is transferred to the operator at one of Banner Health’s acute care hospitals. The on-call autopsy team leader is then paged by the hospital operator and calls in to receive the contact information. The team leader then calls the contact, usually an employee of the care institution or hospice program, and conducts a short interview to ascertain the subject’s identity, confirm that they are registered in the Program, and record the subject’s current charted medical history conditions. The team leader also asks whether the subject has specific hazardous infectious diseases (see later section on safety for details). Subjects are transported to the BBDP morgue by a contracted commercial cadaver transport company. These transportation companies normally serve funeral homes on a 24-h basis and therefore are ideally suited for serving a rapid autopsy program. All charges are borne by the Program; donors and their families are not charged for any aspect relating to their clinical assessments or autopsy.

Blood and CSF draw, scalp and temporalis muscle sampling

Prior to removing the brain, CSF is drawn from the lateral ventricles and heart blood is drawn from the left ventricle by transthoracic puncture, using 30 mL disposable polyethylene syringes fitted with 8 cm long, 18 gauge needles. The CSF is ejected into 15 mL disposable polyethylene tubes for centrifugation while the blood is converted to serum by introduction into standard serum separator vacuum tubes (7 mL) prior to centrifugation. Although a small fraction of blood is also taken into EDTA vacuum tubes (4 mL each) for preparation of plasma, this is not directly comparable to plasma from living subjects as extensive post-mortem coagulation removes many clotting factors and other proteins. About 20–30 mL of CSF, 5–10 mL of serum and 4 mL of EDTA-treated serum are generally obtained. A 2–3 mL sample of blood serum is sent to a commercial clinical pathology laboratory for syphilis, HIV and hepatitis A, B and C serology. Remaining blood serum as well as CSF is centrifuged and supernatants from both blood serum and CSF are aliquotted into 0.5 mL polyethylene microcentrifuge tubes and stored frozen at −80°C.

Analysis of post-mortem CSF has been criticized but offers considerable potential for identifying predictive and diagnostic biomarkers. Cerebrospinal fluid is contiguous with the brain interstitial fluid and thus reflects brain chemistry.54 Therefore, it is likely that neurodegenerative abnormalities in the brain will ultimately produce a characteristic biochemical signature that will be most evident in the CSF. However, a critical deficiency with most CSF tests is that they have rarely been evaluated against the gold standard for diagnosis, which is neuropathological examination of the brain at autopsy. Evaluation of new biomarkers using, as a gold standard, a clinical neurological diagnosis, cannot, by definition, be shown to improve on this. Therefore the numerous CSF studies that claim 80–90% sensitivity and specificity as compared to the clinical diagnosis of AD are misleading in that they actually represent only at most 70% accuracy with respect to the true neuropathological diagnosis.55 The usage of post-mortem CSF in conjunction with neuropathological diagnosis is therefore a valuable and unique approach to biomarker evaluation.

However, it is recognized that post-mortem CSF changes56–59 must be distinguished from changes due to disease. We have conducted extensive studies on postmortem CSF60–66 using Western blot, ELISA, proteomic and metabolomic methodologies and have generally obtained results similar to those published by other groups who have used CSF drawn from living subjects who later died, were autopsied and neuropathologically diagnosed. Perhaps because our CSF studies have been from subjects with very short PMI, we have not found a correlation between measured CSF biomarkers and PMI,61 although we have found that phosphorylated tau protein appears to be depleted in the post-mortem period, suggesting that phosphorylated proteins in the CSF, as in the brain,16 may be especially vulnerable to post-mortem changes. It has often been stated that lumbar CSF has significant differences from ventricular CSF but a relatively recent comprehensive proteomics study found significant concentration differences in only two proteins.67 In our opinion, the benefits obtained by having precise neuropathological diagnoses for subjects greatly outweighs the disadvantages conferred by the presence of any minor post-mortem changes, and post-mortem CSF is thus an ideal medium for biomarker discovery. As with any post-mortem tissue study, all results must be correlated with PMI and possibly confounding peri-mortem factors as biochemical entities are heterogeneous in their behavior with respect to these. Our post-mortem CSF is stored in polypropylene tubes, as recommended by recent studies and organizations.68

Also prior to brain removal, and prior to CSF draw, samples are taken of temporalis muscle and scalp. Many neurological diseases can be diagnosed or studied in muscle or skin and therefore we fix and/or freeze these samples along with the brain tissue. We have published results for Aβ concentrations in temporalis muscle samples69 and have used scalp samples to look for both AD changes (unpublished negative results to date) and Lewy-type synucleinopathy (also negative findings to date).70

Brain removal, gross dissection and initial tissue processing

Brain removal is accomplished in the standard fashion with an oscillating electric saw. As some of our investigators regularly culture glial and vascular cells from the postmortem brain tissue,71–76 when this is being done, extra steps may be taken to minimize bacterial contamination of brain tissue, including washing of the scalp with an antibacterial solution, using sterile gloves and wiping down the cutting board with 70% ethanol. The brain is removed with as much cervical spinal cord as possible. Following brain removal, the pituitary gland is dissected from the sella turcica.

Gross neuropathologic examinations on brain external surfaces, coronal cerebral slices and parasagittal cerebellar slices may be performed by the neuropathologist during working hours but as most autopsies occur outside of working hours, all brains are photographed at the time of removal, whole and after slicing, with a digital camera and dedicated software that transmits the images directly to a computer hard-drive. By reviewing the digital images, the neuropathologist is then able to perform a gross description on brains removed and processed after-hours.

The details of the brain dissection are as follows. The olfactory bulbs and tracts as well as the pineal and pituitary glands are removed and the cerebellum and brainstem are severed from the cerebrum by a transverse cut across the rostral pons, keeping the entire substantia nigra (SN) with the coronally sectioned cerebral slices. The leptomeninges are stripped from both cerebrum and cerebellum for storage as research material.77 The cerebellum is separated from the brainstem by severing the cerebellar peduncles. Each hemicerebellum is sliced into 4–5 segments in the parasagittal plane. The brainstem is sliced into left and right halves. The cerebrum is sliced into 1 cm segments in the coronal plane. The left side slices are used for immersion fixation while the right side slices are rapidly frozen between sheets of dry ice (20 × 20 × 3 cm).

This method of brain processing differs from the conventional neuropathological examination, in which the whole or half of the brain is immersed in formaldehyde for 7–14 days before slicing. Although it has been argued that fresh-slicing detracts from the neuropathological gross exam, we feel that it is essential to slice the brain fresh, to enable both rapid freezing and optimum fixation. Freezing an intact hemisphere slowly on dry ice or by simply placing it in an ultralow-temperature freezer may result in severe ice-crystal artifact,78 rendering the tissue unsuitable for cryostat-section histological examination, which has become increasingly important as a method for molecular studies, especially those utilizing confocal laser-capture microscopic analysis. Also, the long-entrenched idea that rapid freezing in liquid nitrogen or similar fluids is essential for molecular biological studies is simplistic and incorrect. In fact, ultra-rapid freezing may cause membrane damage while slow freezing in iso-osmotic cyroprotectant is optimal for synaptosomal preparations.21 Our experience has shown that freezing rapidly between sheets of dry ice gives morphologically intact tissue suitable for a wide range of molecular biological procedures, including Western blot, ELISA, Northern blot, in situ hybridization, gene microarray, proteomics and RT-PCR.

Similarly, fixing the brain whole or as an intact hemisphere is not optimal as this results in extreme fixation gradients across the tissue, with brain surfaces becoming over-fixed while interior regions are under-fixed. These fixation gradients make even semi-quantitative immunohistochemical (IHC) evaluation very difficult, although a minority of epitopes are tolerant to this. While perfusion-fixation of the post-mortem brain through the circle of Willis (the entire cerebrum or one hemisphere can be fixed this way) is the optimal fixation method,79 this is time-consuming and we have found that fixation of 1 cm-thick slices for 24–48 h at 4°C is a reasonable compromise, although still subject to a fixation gradient.

To aid in the production of uniformly thick fresh brain slices for freezing and fixation, we have developed a brain slicing apparatus (jig) that holds the brain together while being sliced. With the assistance of a retired engineer living in Sun City and a contracted fabrication company (AvTek, Inc, Phoenix, AZ, USA), we have enabled its semiautomated duplication by entering the 3-dimensional plans for the apparatus onto a computer.

Fixation is carried out for 2 days at 4°C with a commercial formalin preparation containing 4% formaldehyde. Following fixation, diagnostic tissue blocks are taken from 28 brain regions (Table 2) for embedding in paraffin wax; additionally, eight large (about 3.5 × 5 cm) tissue blocks, representing all cerebral lobes as well as cerebellum, following cryoprotection in 2% dimethyl sulfoxide/20% glycerol, are sectioned at 40 μm and 80 μm on a sledge-type freezing microtome. These thick sections are superior to standard autopsy brain paraffin-embedded sections for both silver stains and immunohistochemistry, due to their relatively light fixation,79,80 thickness (allowing full visualization of 3-D structure), structural integrity (allowing processing as free-floating sections, which improves antibody access and washing) and lack of exposure to hot paraffin wax.81 These large-format sections also offer the opportunity for grading of cerebral white matter rarefaction and an extensive survey for microscopic infarctions. Pre-cut free-floating 40 μm and 80 μm sections, as well as unsectioned fixed wet brain blocks, are stored in 0.1 mol/L phosphate buffer with 0.1% sodium azide, in a refrigerator at 4°C (sections) or at room temperature (fixed wet brain blocks). Sections and tissue stored in this manner are excellent for IHC studies even after years of storage.

Diagnostic stains

Sections from paraffin blocks are cut at 6 μm and stained with HE. A standard set of brain sections is immunohistochemically stained for phosphorylated α-synuclein70,82 to identify Lewy bodies and Lewy-related neurites (see Fig. 3). Sections from the large frozen blocks are stained with Campbell-Switzer, Gallyas83 and Thioflavine S methods for plaques, tangles and other inclusions (see Fig. 3). While some investigators have criticized the usage of any stains other than molecularly specific IHC stains,84 we continue to use this set of stains to maintain consistency and standardization over many years of operation. The Braak neurofibrillary staging method was initially described using the Gallyas stain85 while the Thal amyloid staging method was initially described with the Campbell-Switzer stain.86 Both Braak and Thal have shown that the Campbell-Switzer silver stain very closely corresponds with IHC methods for Aβ.87–90 Previous and subsequent studies have also supported that IHC is not always or necessarily more sensitive than all other methods.91–95 We have demonstrated the equivalency of Campbell-Switzer and IHC methods for Aβ in an imaging-to-autopsy study of an amyloid imaging agent, F18 florbetapir,96,97 where cortical amyloid standardized uptake value ratio correlated with similar strength to plaque densities estimated with both Campbell-Switzer (Spearman rho = 0.76; P &lt; 0.0001) and Aβ IHC (Spearman rho = 0.71; P &lt; 0.001). Additionally, the validity and accuracy of the Campbell-Switzer method has also been established through strong correlations with autoradiographic binding of F18 florbetapir98 in post-mortem human brain sections (Spearman rho = 0.95; P &lt; 0.0001).

The 80 μm sections are stained with HE to detect and grade periventricular cerebral white matter rarefaction (leukoaraiosis)77,99 and microinfarctions (see Fig. 4). With these large, thick sections, we have found that HE is superior to Luxol Fast Blue for detection of white matter changes. Additional IHC procedures are used as needed, including those for phosphorylated tau protein to detect atypical tauopathies,100,101 ubiquitin and phosphorylated TDP-43102 to detect intraneuronal inclusions of fronto-temporolobar dementia (see Fig. 3).

Semi-quantitative assessment of histopathological lesions

Histopathological scoring is performed blinded to clinical and neuropathological diagnosis. Amyloid plaque and neurofibrillary tangle density are graded and staged at standard sites in frontal, temporal, parietal and occipital cortices as well as hippocampus and entorhinal cortex, based on the aggregate impression from the 80 μm sections stained with thioflavin S, Campbell-Switzer and Gallyas methods. The total plaque score, considering all types of plaques (cored, neuritic and diffuse) together, is predominantly derived from the Campbell-Switzer stain while the Gallyas and thioflavine S stains are especially useful for estimating neuritic plaque densities. All three stains show neurofibrillary changes and therefore this score is estimated after viewing slides stained with all three. Both total and neuritic plaque densities are rated as none, sparse, moderate and frequent, using the published CERAD (Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer Disease) templates.103 Conversion of the descriptive terms to numerical values give scores of 0–3 for each area, with a maximum score of 15 for all five areas combined. Neurofibrillary tangle abundance and distribution is also graded in these thick sections, again using the CERAD templates for this, while the original Braak protocol83 is used for estimating the topographical distribution of neurofibrillary change. We are currently engaged in retrospectively rating a subset of past cases for Thal amyloid phase,86 and re-classifying the same subset according to NIA-AA (National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association) criteria for AD.104,105

Paraffin sections stained with IHC for phosphorylated α-synuclein70,82 are graded for density of Lewy-type synucleinopathy, considering together both neuronal perikaryal inclusions and neuropil fibers (0–4) according to templates published by the Dementia with Lewy Bodies Consortium.106 Ten standard brain regions are assessed, including olfactory bulb, anterior medulla, anterior and mid-pons, midbrain with SN, amgydala, anterior cingulate gyrus and three neocortical regions (middle frontal gyrus, middle temporal gyrus, inferior parietal lobule). A summary brain score of all 10 regions is recorded to give an overall brain load estimate, with the highest possible score being 40. The topographical distribution of Lewy-type synucleinopathy is classified using the Unified Staging System for Lewy Body Disorders.70

Assessment of the nigrostriatal dopaminergic system

Accurate counting of neurons within defined brain regions requires the methods of unbiased morphometry107,108 and a complete sampling of the brain region of interest. For cases with clinical parkinsonism, as well as many control cases, we have serially sectioned the SN in a subset of subjects, to allow researchers to perform unbiased estimates of neuron numbers. The entire left side of the SN was serially sectioned at 40 μm on a sliding freezing microtome, with all sections collected and stored appropriately. There are 146 cases that have been serially sectioned in this manner. These include 36 controls, 10 with incidental Lewy body disease (ILBD), 58 with PD, nine with dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), 10 with AD with Lewy bodies (ADLB) and 19 with progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP). However, serial sectioning is very time-consuming and there has been very little demand for sets of these serial sections. To allow correlations of nigrostriatal depletion with clinical and tissue measures, we have semi-quantitative estimates (none, mild, moderate, severe) of SN pigmented neuron loss, at a standard level, available for virtually all cases. We also have measured striatal tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) concentrations by ELISA in 205 cases and the objective is to have this biochemical data available for all the relevant cases (e.g. all Lewy body disorders, normal controls and a selection of non-Lewy body neurodegenerative cases). We have also used this ELISA data to validate our semi-quantitative SN pigmented neuron loss scores; the correlation, in 205 cases, between the neuron loss scores and the striatal TH concentrations is very strong and highly significant (Spearman rho = 0.90; P &lt; 0.0001). The correlation of striatal TH with SN Lewy-type synucleinopathy density score is also strong and significant (Spearman rho = 0.94; P &lt; 0.0001). Our TH ELISA method has been previously published.109

Assessment of vascular lesions

Circle of Willis atherosclerosis is graded by gross visual external inspection, as previously published.110,111 The extent of atheromatous involvement is rated as none, mild, moderate or severe, using a schematic template. The method was validated by comparison with detailed computerized cross-sectional measurements of arterial lumen narrowing, performed on 54 cases in a separately published study. The correlation coefficient between the two methods was highly significant (Spearman rho = 0.64; P &lt; 0.0001), indicating that the gross visual grading method corresponds reasonably well to the degree of atherosclerotic narrowing of the arterial lumen. The inter-rater reliability of the method was assessed in a separate subset of 50 cases, by grading each specimen on two separate occasions. With 40 of the cases, the same grade was assigned by both observers, while in 10 cases, the score differed by one grading unit. The Spearman correlation coefficient between the two observations was 0.92 (P &lt; 0.0001).

Cerebral white matter rarefaction77,97,112–116 is graded in frontal, temporal, parietal and occipital lobes on the large 40 or 80 μm sections stained with HE. The method is analogous to that used by neuroradiologists to grade leukoaraiosis or “small vessel disease” in the cerebral white matter with MRI. Rarefaction restricted to the immediate periventricular region, occupying 25% or less of the centrum semi-ovale, is termed “mild”, while “moderate” is used when this extends to between 25% and 50%, with “severe” being reserved for rarefaction involving more than 50%. A summary score is obtained by adding the scores from all lobes, with a maximum score of 12.

Cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA) is graded on the same thick sections, primarily with the thioflavin S stain, and is a semi-quantitative estimate of the density of involved blood vessels, again by analogy with the CERAD templates. The extent of vascular circumferential amyloid deposition is not recorded. Each region receives a score of 0–3, with a maximum total score of 12.

Brain infarcts are classified by estimated age (acute, subacute, old or chronic), location and size (see Table 3). Centrum ovale infarcts are defined as those that are restricted to the centrum ovale; if the infarct involves both cerebral cortex and centrum ovale, it is classified as a cerebral cortex infarct. Deep nuclei infarcts include those of the basal ganglia, thalamus, subthalamic regions and hypothalamus. Infratentorial infarcts are those involving the brainstem and/or cerebellum. A volume is estimated for each infarct, and summary figures are recorded for brain subdivisions as well as for the entire brain. Foci of cerebellar cortical sclerosis are recorded as infarcts and are generally microscopic in size class. Acute ischemic changes are not counted as infarcts but are separately noted. It is recognized that the actual numbers of microscopic infarcts in a brain are likely to be up to 1000 times higher than what is found with standard brain sampling.117 Infarcts are very common in the BBDP population, with 43% of all subjects having one or more autopsy-confirmed infarcts. Prevalences for several subtypes of infarct are given in Table 3.

Correlation of neurodegenerative and vascular lesions with cognition

Cognitive impairment in the elderly is usually multifactorial. All of the significant causes have not yet been identified, although neuritic plaque density, Braak tangle stage and Lewy-type synucleinopathy load have all been found to be independently significant factors in most studies.118 A brief analysis of several possible influences in the BBDP population is presented in Table 4. The analysis includes 693 subjects aged 70 or over, for whom Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) score, total white matter rarefaction (WMR) score, CERAD neuritic plaque density, Braak stage, CAA total score, number of cortical microinfarcts and total brain load for Lewy-type synucleinopathy are all available. All tissue measures had a significant inverse correlation with MMSE score except the number of cortical microinfarcts. Using logistic regression analysis and including age as a covariable, only neuritic plaque density, Braak stage, Lewy-type synucleinopathy brain summary score and total white matter rarefaction score were significant independent predictors of a lower MMSE score. However, it is recognized that the presence of multicolinearity between these variables, and the overwhelming influence of neurofibrillary change, may obscure significant relationships without the employment of more sophisticated analysis methods. In particular, others have reported that the number of microscopic infarcts is associated with a greater risk of dementia.119,120

Diagnosis of neurodegenerative disorders

Diagnostic criteria have been amply discussed in the literature and will not be reviewed here. Published clinicopathological consensus criteria105,106,121–126 are used when available, incorporating clinical determinations of cognitive status and the presence or absence of other neurological signs as well as pertinent medical history. The diagnoses of cases coming to autopsy in the BBDP since 1997, when full neuropathological examinations first became a standard feature, are given in Table 5. The frequency of different conditions reflects both local prevalence and recruiting priorities, which have been focused on normal elderly controls, AD and PD. However, noteworthy are the relatively high frequencies of non-Alzheimer’s dementias, particularly DLB, vascular dementia (VaD), PSP and hippocampal sclerosis, all of which have often come to autopsy as clinically diagnosed undifferentiated dementia or AD. A recent publication is more indicative of the true incidence of these conditions in the BBDP population, as it is based on the conversion rates of BBDP subjects that were initially normal at their BBDP clinical assessments.127 Also notable is the frequent co-existence of more than one major neuropathological condition in the same subject,97,102,114,127,128 in agreement with such findings at other centers.129

Genotyping and DNA banking

Since the discovery of the molecular genetic cause of Huntington’s disease,130 technological advances in DNA sequencing have led to the identification of multiple genetic risk factors for neurodegenerative diseases. DNA has been routinely prepared from lightly fixed cerebellar cortex from more than 95% of autopsied subject since 1997.131,132 We have found this method more convenient than using fresh-frozen tissue although the method is generally unsuitable for brain tissue fixed in formalin for the standard interval of 10 days to 2 weeks; in these cases we use fresh-frozen cerebellum. The apolipoprotein E (apoE) genotype has been determined for more than 95% of subjects since 1997. Quality control studies are periodically done, consisting of having a series of apoE-genotyped cases repeated by another laboratory. Isolated DNA remaining after apoE genotyping is stored for future studies. Screening for other mutations or polymorphisms (Table 6) is performed when family history, clinical features and/or histopathology indicate increased risk for a particular condition, or when a particular study is funded. For highly penetrant mutations causing early-onset neurological dysfunction, disclosure of test results is offered, through a certified genetic counselor.133–136

Tissue quality assessment

Post-mortem tissue quality is affected by PMI, pre-mortem (agonal) conditions and post-mortem (pre-analytical) factors. Agonal status impacts tissue quality, as fever, ischemia-hypoxia and acidosis are deleterious to many molecules of interest.14,21,28,36,47,137,138 However, agonal status is difficult to determine in elderly subjects, who usually die in a nursing home without close medical supervision. The pH of CSF and/or brain tissue has been used as a surrogate marker for tissue quality.20 Some studies have reported that when the agonal state, as inferred from clinical data, is expected to have been detrimental, for example in cases of prolonged mechanical ventilation, the pH is low (e.g. pH 5.5–6.0), while in cases of sudden death it is higher, closer to normal (e.g. 7.0–7.4).137,139 Some enzyme activities and measures of RNA integrity have correlated with post-mortem pH, but not in all studies or for all subtypes of these molecules.14,28,35,140,141 Two comprehensive studies may have resolved the variability in prior reports, as it was found that only pH values under about 6.5–6.8 were associated with decreased RNA integrity.28,140 We have found that postmortem CSF pH did not correlate with viable cell yield in post-mortem glial cultures.142 A surprising result was that PMI was significantly correlated (inversely) with CSF pH (R = −0.37, P = 0.01), in agreement with one other group143 but in disagreement with several other reports.35,140,144 As CSF or brain pH is only an indirect marker of tissue quality, we have chosen instead to measure RNA integrity as a direct marker of tissue quality. Currently we have measured RNA RIN on frozen cerebellar samples of 848 cases. As mentioned, the median RIN for brain tissue is 8.9, while for 329 samples from a variety of bodily organs and tissues, the median RIN is 7.4. We also measure RNA quantitative yield; the mean for 863 cases in cerebellar cortex is 124.2 ng/μL. This effort is continuing, as the objective is to have RIN and RNA yield estimates from every brain collected since 1997.

Study of freeze-thaw effects and CSF pH on tissue RNA integrity

We have long suspected that most of the molecular degradation that occurs in banked tissue is due to repeated freeze-thaw cycles, which occur due to improper handling during dissection for tissue retrieval or due to freezer malfunctions. Previous research has indicated that thawing and refreezing of frozen brain tissue may be injurious to RNA because of damage to cellular membranes, including those of lysosomes containing ribonuclease.25,43,44 However, these investigations did not provide a quantitative estimate of RNA loss. An extensive literature search revealed only a single study that systematically addressed quantitative RNA changes due to repeated thaw-refreeze effects. This study was performed on surgically removed tonsillar tissue.145

We have systematically investigated the effects of thawing and refreezing on RNA integrity, by deliberately thawing and freezing small samples of brain tissue over varying time intervals and temperatures. Multiple frozen cerebellar samples (25–30 mg) from a single subject with initially high RIN were taken from an ultralow temperature freezer (−80 C), placed in chilled polyethylene microcentrifuge tubes and subjected to 1–6 thaw-refreeze cycles. For each cycle of thawing and subsequent refreezing, the tubes were removed from the freezer and placed in a tube rack on the lab bench at room temperature (20°C). After 30 min, the tubes were refrozen by placing back in the ultralow temperature freezer. Correlation of RIN and RNA quantitative yield with number of freeze-thaw cycles (Fig. 2) showed a trend for decreasing RIN with increasing number of freeze-thaw events but this did not reach the significance level (r = −0.67; P = 0.14). In contrast, increasing number of freeze-thaw cycles resulted in a significant decline in RNA yield (r = 0.93, P &lt; 0.008). The expression of 89 genes was determined using a PCR-based array (RT2 ProfilerTM PCR Array: Human Alzheimer’s Disease, SABiosciencesTM, Frederick, MD, USA) containing genes pertinent to AD. A greater proportion of genes had decreased rather than increased transcript concentrations with increasing cycle number (80/89 vs 5/89; chi square P &lt; 0.0001). Significantly decreased transcript concentrations occurred for 21 individual genes with increasing cycle number even after correction for total RNA concentration (unpaired, two-tailed t-tests, P &lt; 0.001). In conclusion, we determined that RNA degrades progressively with increasing number of thaw-refreeze cycles and that RIN does not appear to be as sensitive as RNA yield as a marker of RNA degradation related to repeated thaw-refreeze cycles.

When dissecting frozen tissue samples for use by researchers, the tissue must not be allowed to thaw. We dissect on dry ice with heavy razor blades (Thompson tissue slicers), letting the tissue warm slightly (to about –20°C) to avoid shattering.

To avoid loss of tissue due to freezer malfunction, multiply-redundant protective systems are required. Our freezers are currently protected by two separate temperature-sensitive alarm systems that communicate temperature range perturbations by online access, email, text and telephone. Additionally, a diesel generator provides power in the event of electrical failure, and banks of CO2 tanks are connected to allow backup, automatic cooling when triggered by out-of-range freezer temperatures. A disaster plan is evolving to meet challenges posed by local or regional environmental, geological or other exigencies.

Cryostat sections for biochemical study of small, important brain regions

One of the limitations of brain banking is that some of the most important brain regions are very small and just one or two studies requiring frozen tissue may entirely deplete the frozen tissue from that region. Examples of these small yet vital regions are the entorhinal cortex, hippocampus and SN. To overcome this limitation and distribute tissue from these regions to greater numbers of researchers, we have been sectioning these brain areas on a cryostat and providing researchers with samples of 10–20 cryostat sections per case. This has been found sufficient to allow five or six Western blot analyses for proteins of interest and/or numerous RNA analyses for studies of gene expression. Conservatively, we estimate that this increases utilization of these small brain regions by five-fold or greater, while preserving large subject sample sizes with available tissue from these critical areas.

Whole-body autopsies and tissue collection

Between 1987 and 2004, the Program limited autopsies and tissue collection to the brain, cervical spinal cord, occipital scalp and temporalis muscle. In 2005 whole-body donation was offered to all enrolled subjects and to newly recruited subjects. Many brain donors chose to become whole-body donors and whole-body donation has become the option of choice, making up 67% of all autopsies over the most recent 5-year period. We have had more than 430 whole-body donations, with a median PMI of 3.1 h and a median RIN of 7.4. A list of the 42 tissue sites collected is given in Table 7. Although this expansion was undertaken primarily in the interest of pursuing research in diseases of other organ systems, it has been increasingly recognized that medically significant interactions exist between the brain and the body, and studies of our banked bodily tissue have made significant contributions to the understanding of neurodegenerative disease.

Several established risk factors for atherosclerosis, including hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, diabetes, cigarette smoking and the apoE-ε4 allele have also been found to be risk factors for the development of dementia.146–148 However, the relationship between dementia, AD, non-AD dementias and atherosclerotic vascular disease (AVD) is complex and not completely understood. Also, while elevated midlife AVD risk factors appear to increase the probability of dementia that begins in late life,149–151 once dementia begins, these same AVD risk factors appear to diminish, perhaps due to molecular or cellular changes associated with specific dementing diseases, to decreased caloric intake and/or increased caloric expenditure, or to reduced survival of those with high AVD risk factors.152–158 Studies using BBDP data and tissue have contributed to this still-evolving body of knowledge, as we have found that elderly AD subjects have increased measures of intracranial atherosclerosis77,99,110,159–164 but decreased atherosclerosis of the coronary arteries.165 Additionally, another finding of the latter study was that mean heart weights were significantly lower in AD subjects as was the prevalence of clinically diagnosed cardiovascular disorders.165 Clinical alterations of intracardiac flow parameters have also been found to be altered in BBDP subjects.166

The divergent results for intracranial and coronary atherosclerosis are perhaps not so surprising considering that the natural history, severity and risk factors differ, in many ways, for coronary, carotid and intracranial atherosclerosis. Severe coronary artery disease may exist in the relative absence of intracranial atherosclerosis, and vice versa.167,168 Serum cholesterol is a significant risk factor for coronary and carotid atherosclerosis but has been reported to be less significant or even not significant for intracranial atherosclerosis.168–172 Similarly, the apoE-ε4 allele has been more strongly linked with coronary and carotid atherosclerosis than with intracranial atherosclerosis, where our own studies110,111 as well as three independent studies173–175 have found no link. Hypertension is more strongly associated with cerebral than with coronary atherosclerosis. Aging is the strongest risk factor and is common to all three sites.167 Autopsy studies have indicated that the earliest affected site in a US population was the carotid arteries, followed by the coronary and intracranial arteries. The typical age of onset of clinical cerebrovascular disease is 10–15 years later than that of clinically manifest coronary artery disease.167 The site-specific variability of AVD is probably due to both genetic and environmental factors, as there are considerable geographic and racial influences.167 There are multiple longitudinal studies176–180 indicating that there is progressive weight loss in people with dementia, and that this probably begins even prior to dementia diagnosis. Therefore, it seems likely that weight loss plays a major role in the apparent reversal of AVD risk factors, as well as clinically manifest cardiovascular disease, in elderly dementia subjects.

Over the last few years we have collected body mass index (BMI) measures on most BBDP subjects. Of 468 AD subjects and 196 non-demented elderly controls, both the means of repeated BMI measures and the means for final BMI are significantly lower in AD subjects, by about 1 point (mean of all BMIs for AD subjects = 24.2; for control = 25.1; P = 0.008). The final recorded BMI during life is about 1 point lower, for both AD and control subjects, than the mean of all recorded BMIs, supporting a downward trend during the final years of life. The generally lower BMI in AD subjects is a potential explanation and answer to the question posed more than 25 years ago by Wolf-Klein,157 “Are Alzheimer’s patients healthier?” The overwhelming importance of BMI to human health in general needs no review here and it is expected that many future studies will examine BMI in relation to many other clinical and pathological measures in the BBDP population.

In 2006, the Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson’s Research (MJFF) funded the Arizona Parkinson’s Disease Consortium and the BBDP, expressly for the purpose of simultaneously mapping the presence of Lewy-type synucleinopathy in both the central and peripheral nervous systems (PNS). The project resulted in a new staging system applicable to all Lewy body disorders, the Unified Staging System for Lewy Body Disorders,70 and a published PNS survey181 that provided anatomic pathology data for use in clinicopathological correlations of non-motor signs and symptoms of PD and other Lewy body disorders. Additional focused projects have extended this initial anatomic survey with much more detail, especially in the pharynx,182–184 gastrointestinal tract185 and retina.186 Currently, collaborating investigators are conducting extended studies of synucleinopathy in skin.

Of potentially direct importance to neurodegenerative disease clinical management, peripheral tissue sites and organs could be biopsied to improve clinical diagnostic accuracy. For both AD and PD, the clinical diagnostic accuracy is much lower than what most clinicians have assumed it to be.55,187 This has probably been a factor in the high failure rate of phase 2 and 3 clinical trials.188 The sponsorship of the MJFF also enabled a search for a peripheral diagnostic biopsy site. The lower esophagus and submandibular gland were identified as the peripheral sites with the highest Lewy-type synucleinopathy prevalence and a subsequent autopsy study indicated that needle biopsy of the submandibular gland would probably be feasible, sensitive and specific.189 The MJFF funded a small clinical trial in which 9/12 long-duration, clinically diagnosed PD subjects were found to be positive for Lewy-type synucleinopathy on needle biopsy.190 We are currently near the end of a second MJFF-sponsored trial, involving 25 early (signs and symptoms of less than 5 years duration) PD subjects as well as 10 age-similar control subjects. This should indicate whether submandibular needle gland biopsy will be useful for identifying early-stage PD subjects. If so, the selection of early PD subjects for clinical trials could be significantly improved, allowing lower subject numbers, lower trial costs, more trials and a higher probability of trial success, should an effective agent be tested.

For BBDP bodily tissue, just as for brain, medically licensed pathologists perform a microscopic diagnostic examination so that all tissue is confidently classified as normal or abnormal, and the type of abnormality is recorded in a standardized manner. We are currently preparing a manuscript comparing bodily autopsy diagnoses in AD and control subjects. The most common clinical and autopsy diagnoses are those expected of this age group (Table 8). Of autopsy diagnoses, aortic atherosclerosis is virtually universal in elderly BBDP individuals, and is often severe, with endothelial ulcerations and focal calcifications. About 85% of all BBDP subjects aged 65 or over have coronary atherosclerosis. Other very common diagnoses are cardiomegaly (66%), calcification of the mitral (35%) and aortic (67%) valves, myocardial infarction (50%), acute bronchopneumonia (30%), hepatic atrophy (19%), hepatic steatosis (13%) and renal atrophy and/or nephrosclerosis (63%).

A major objective since the expansion to whole-body donation has been to assemble a unique and powerful tissue bank for cancer research and so we have expended additional effort to recruit donors with cancer. In 2002, the National Dialogue on Cancer, convened to understand why the “war on cancer” was falling short of expectations, concluded that of the 10 most important roadblocks to finding cures for cancer, the single most critical one was inadequate availability of “high-quality, highly characterized human tissues for translational research” (US National Cancer Institute Office of Biorepositories and Biospecimen Research). The need for better access to high-quality tissue has been widely cited by other documents, including the Genomics and Personalized Medicine Act of 2007, the Department of Health and Human Services’ Personalized Health Care Report (2007) and the President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology: Priorities for Personalized Medicine (2008). This theme has been repeatedly emphasized in subsequent years.191–193

There are several reasons for poor availability of cancer tissue.192 Cancer tissue is collected at the time of therapeutic surgical interventions, such as biopsy, or at the time of death, by autopsy. Biopsy is only done on individuals with disease and therefore normal control tissues are generally not obtained. A major objective of cancer research is to understand the molecular causes of metastasis, but meta-static deposits are rarely biopsied. Additionally, biopsy tissue is often completely used for diagnostic purposes or is insufficient in quantity to constitute a shared resource.

Both diseased and normal control tissue could potentially be obtained at autopsy. Usually, autopsy tissue is not suitable for high-quality molecular research due to autolytic changes resulting from a long PMI. The BBDP therefore is capable of fulfilling this critical need, as the PMI from our rapid autopsies is comparable to the elapsed time between surgical removal and processing, and the RNA quality is also similar.194 Although our efforts toward cancer biobanking are still relatively new, we have made a significant contribution to prostate cancer research. We served a US National Cancer Institute-funded multi-institutional project by providing non-cancerous prostate tissue from more than 50 BBDP subjects for use as controls in gene expression studies of prostate cancer diagnostic and prognostic indicators.195 Other projects have demonstrated the value of our metastatic cancer sample availability, through the genomic analysis of a primary site as well as several different metastatic sites in samples from the same patient.196 Additional studies have included genomic analysis of a BBDP case of cholangiocarcinoma197 and comparison of the molecular genetics of lung adenocarcinoma with normal lung tissue samples from more than 50 BBDP subjects.198 Figure 5 shows our current availability of cancer tissue samples.

BBDP website and database

Since 1998, the Institute has developed a sophisticated database and database management protocols, engineered by a contracted professional industrial database consultant. The clinical and pathology components of the BBDP database were designed together and are completely integrated. The database is a customized elaboration of Microsoft Access and My Sequel programs, takes up more than 775 MB and is composed of 135 tables or matrices with more than 6800 separate data elements or fields. These collectively contain data pertaining to basic demographic information, medical history, results of standardized clinical assessments and, for deceased subjects, data obtained from gross and microscopic examinations, tissue inventory and records of tissue requests and shipments. The database contains multiple forms to facilitate data entry and to generate more than 100 different standing data reports. The database is also used to ensure that scheduling of clinical assessments is done at appropriate intervals. The US National Alzheimer’s Coordinating Center (NACC) Uniform Data Set and the Neuropathology Data Set are subsets and we are currently devising export queries to allow deposition of selected data in the NINDS Parkinson’s Disease Biomarker Project Data Management Resource. Numerous additional fields include in-house grading methods for plaques, tangles, Lewy-type synucleinopathy, infarcts and white matter rarefaction, as well as fixed tissue quality, RIN and RNA yield, and current inventory, with more than 400 fields for fixed tissue, frozen tissue, CSF and blood serum.

The database is backed up automatically every day on two servers administered by Banner Health Information Services, located at two sites about 5 miles apart. Storage of data in both locations ensures that structural damage to one server (e.g. fire) does not result in irretrievable loss. Both servers store daily copies of databases for the preceding 30 days; older copies are sent to a commercial server contracted for this purpose. Storage of older database copies allows the recovery of an intact database in the event of inadvertent errors in database operation, hardware malfunction or software malfunction.

The BBDP database has been managed by informal groups that have included the database designer, a statistician, the directors of the clinical and neuropathology cores and the major database operators. This arrangement has worked very well as it includes the individuals who use the database day-to-day, the physician-scientists that collect the data, and the database designer, who can make changes to the database as necessary.

Confidentiality of human subject data in the database is compliant with US HIPAA statutes and is assured by multiple safeguards which restrict access to personal identifying information such as name, date of birth, place of birth, place of residence, date of death, address, email address and phone number. Data entry is restricted to as few personnel as possible. Access to the database requires a unique user name and password, and all transactions are tracked and stored in an electronic log, allowing identification of inappropriate or incorrect usage by any individual.

Access to the Banner Health local area network is protected by a firewall maintained by Banner Health Information Services. Paper copies of subject records are kept in locked filing cabinets in the offices of the major database operators. Banner Sun Health Research Institute has been issued a Certificate of Confidentiality by the US Secretary of Health and Human Services, protecting human subjects’ data from court subpoena.

The BBDP has a website (http://www.brainandbodydonationprogram.org) with a public section and a private section. The private section is secure (https://www.brainandbodydonationprogram.org) and is accessible only after a user registers and is approved. Potential users are encouraged to read the information on the public side, to gain an overall understanding of the Program and a general idea of the tissue inventory. Media items featuring the BBDP, as well as a list of publications that have used BBDP tissue, are posted on the public side. Once approved as a user, restricted documents may be obtained, including a table of user fee charges and a special subset of the BBDP database designed to be user-friendly with the aid of a detailed database dictionary. Researchers may use the website database to help them select cases for tissue studies, or may use it solely for data studies, subject to the conditions on the posted data usage agreement. Tissue requests may be made on the website, and customized email support is available and recommended so that BBDP personnel may match the project needs with the most appropriate tissue and subject types.

Biospecimen allocation procedure

Requests for biological materials are granted on the basis of scientific merit. Requests for Lewy body disorder-focused projects are reviewed by an NINDS-appointed committee, as part of our NINDS-funded National Brain and Tissue Resource for Parkinson’s Disease and Related Disorders. Investigators must first establish appropriate scientific credentials through the website by providing a recent biosketch or curriculum vitae. Requests for biosamples funded through the NIA ADCC are compliant with the NIA Biospecimens Best Practices policy. Small, pilot tissue requests by researchers from not-for-profit organizations are granted free of charge, while larger requests and all requests from for-profit organizations, are assessed a user fee, from tables posted on the BBDP website. The user fee is to recover unfunded BBDP costs, including those related to subject recruitment, longitudinal clinical assessment, autopsy, neuropathological and anatomical pathology tissue characterization, BBDP personnel time assisting with study design, case selection, database searches, retrieval and/or dissection, packaging, shipping, continuing correspondence and institutional overhead charges. Banner Sun Health Research Institute is a not-for-profit organization and fees are used only to meet the costs of operating the BBDP.

We believe that, since governments world-wide often do not provide sufficient funding for comprehensive brain banking, brain banks need to seek non-governmental funding. Most US National Institutes of Health tissue resources use cost recovery or user fees to supplement their funding and our experience shows that reasonable cost recovery fees do not impair usage of the resource. Diversification of funding sources will help protect brain banks from the periodic funding cuts that are common to all government-supported science. Our Program generally receives less than 10% of its operating costs from user fees, as the majority of the funding has come from a combination of federal grants, state of Arizona grants, grants from disease-specific private organizations, including the MJFF, internal institutional overhead support and philanthropic donations from individuals in the surrounding communities.

Distribution of biospecimens to researchers and type of projects served

Over the most recent 5 year period (07/01/2009–06/30/2014), 1035 separate tissue distributions were made. Currently, more than 200 requests are served each year. Since the Program began, more than 2500 requests have been served, coming from more than 400 investigators located in 32 US states and 15 countries. Tissue and/or data from the BBDP has contributed to more than 350 publications and more than 200 grant-funded projects.

The following are types of projects served in the past and likely to be served in the future. Examples of publications are given for each category. For a full list of publications supported by BBDP tissue, please visit our website, http://www.brainandbodydonationprogram.org.

Global gene expression and genome-wide association studies (GWAS)

This technology has gone through several iterations and will likely continue to do so as the technology advances. The studies are increasingly done by large government-funded consortia as well as large pharmaceutical companies. Genome-wide association studies use DNA and do not generally require high-quality tissue, but they are increasingly being paired with global gene expression profiling, which does require a minimum RNA quality. Initially, GWAS were done mostly with clinically diagnosed subjects but there is an increasing trend to use subjects that have had neuropathological diagnoses due to the increased diagnostic accuracy that allows a smaller subject number and lower study cost. The technology is continually advancing, with “deep sequencing” having recently become economically viable. BBDP tissue has been shared with multiple global gene expression and GWAS projects that have provided critical information relating to AD, PD, PSP, pancreatitis and prostate cancer.199–235

MicroRNA profiling

MicroRNA profiling is a relatively new field but the BBDP has supported several such projects recently, some of which have published results.60,236,237

Profiling of gene-specific DNA methylation

Epigenetic changes are increasingly being scrutinized and, of several studies supported, a few have now published their results.238,239

Studies using proteomic technology

Proteins vary widely in their post-mortem stability and therefore short PMI material is crucial for proteomics. As mentioned, BSHRI scientists and collaborators have published several articles61–65 on the CSF proteomics of AD and PD, as well as proteomic analyses of AD white matter112,113 and a “synucleinomics” profile of PD cortex.240 Proteomic studies of cerebral cortex, other brain regions and even laser-captured single cells will probably become more common and will be complementary to global gene expression and GWAS.

Studies using metabolomic technology

This technology is also still relatively new, but a recent publication supported by the BBDP has investigated the metabolomic profile of PD CSF.66 As many small molecules are very volatile, short PMI material will be advantageous to these types of studies.

Preclinical development of diagnostics and therapeutics

The BBDP has collaborated with multiple pharmaceutical industry investigators, supplying tissue or CSF from diseased and control subjects that has been used to aid the development of diagnostic and therapeutic agents. In particular, we have done extensive collaborative work toward tissue-based verification of amyloid binding imaging agents97,98,241–246 and the biochemical effects of anti-amyloid therapy in human brain.247–251

Independent investigator-initiated studies

Many of the study types listed above involve multi-center, technology-driven collaborations, but the great majority of projects that have used BBDP tissue have been single-investigator, hypothesis-driven studies, and we expect that these will continue to be the most frequent users. Some areas of concentration are as follows: studies using living cells cultured from rapidly autopsied donors;73–75,223,252–260 molecular analysis of α-synuclein;261–264 the nigrostriatal dopaminergic system;109,265–268 the basal forebrain cholinergic system;269–272 neuroinflammation;229,255,273–290 and molecular changes relating to Aβ in AD.69,116,291–310

Clinicopathological correlation studies

The clinical data generated by the BBDP offers excellent opportunities for clinicopathological correlation studies, which have been the foundation upon which our knowledge of disease has been based. These investigations are essential if we are to learn more about disease progression, subtypes of disease, improvement of diagnostic accuracy and selection of subjects for clinical trials. Work by BBDP investigators has led to numerous publications about clinical and neuropathological features of essential tremor, restless legs syndrome and rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder,311–320 electrophysiological investigations of Lewy body disorders,321–330 mild cognitive impairment and functional decline in AD and PD,331–336 clinical and neuropathological findings associated with ILBD109,321,337 and other Lewy body disorders70,114,115,127,224,242,267,269,338,339 and diagnostic methods.187,189,190 Our clinical data is now available for collaborative studies to investigators world-wide; see our website for details (http://www.brainandbodydonationprogram.org).

Protection of autopsy personnel and tissue users

Health risks to individuals exposed to human tissue are minimized by the use of a number of precautionary measures. The process begins with screening of medical records at the time of enrollment and repeated screens with each clinical visit and at the time of death, the latter by a standardized telephone questionnaire. Those individuals with a medical history of a serious infectious pathogen are excluded from enrollment or autopsy. This includes individuals with active or carrier status for hepatitis B, hepatitis C, HIV, syphilis, tuberculosis, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and acute or chronic active CNS infections of any type. As BSHRI is a private research organization, not a diagnostic autopsy service, it is our option to refuse to perform an autopsy, and ethical considerations support the exclusion of serious infectious conditions to protect autopsy and research personnel. Only seven BBDP subjects have been rejected for the discovery of a probable or confirmed hazardous infectious disease at the time of death, reflecting the efficacy of our earlier screening procedures and the low rate of these infectious diseases in our study population. Three of these rejections were for high risk of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, determined through the peri-mortem telephone interview, and one of the three was later confirmed by the National Prion Disease Surveillance Laboratory at Case Reserve University in Cleveland. A fourth rejection was for sepsis with methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, while an additional three subjects were found after postmortem blood testing to be carrying hepatitis C, despite negative clinical ante-mortem medical records screening. The frozen tissue from these subjects was destroyed.

Staff involved in brain removal and tissue processing are encouraged to have hepatitis A and B vaccination; during procedures involving exposure to fresh or frozen human tissue, staff wear protective clothing including hoods or caps, eye protection, masks, gowns, gloves and boots. If potentially infectious contamination of an individual occurs, such as splashing of fresh tissue fluids into the eyes or into a wound, the individual receives appropriate first aid measures at the scene and then is taken to a nearby Emergency Room. All Institute staff must complete, upon first hiring and annually afterwards, a formal training program in laboratory safety, including biohazard safety precautions.

The future of autopsy and brain banking

The usage of autopsies has been in decline throughout the world over the last 50 years. In Japan, post-mortem imaging has become a common substitute for autopsy,340 and it has been stated in some recent publications that biomarkers measured in living subjects “. . . could replace autopsy confirmation of AD plaque and tangle pathology as the ‘gold standard’ for the diagnosis of AD in the near future”.68 We believe that this prediction may indeed come true, as amyloid imaging has been shown, through autopsy-confirmed studies, to have a high level of accuracy for the diagnosis of neuropathologically significant AD, at least in the setting of demented subjects.341 Imaging agents for tau or synuclein pathology have not yet been autopsy-confirmed but there are multiple groups working on these. However, amyloid imaging ligands are still insensitive to sparse cortical amyloid loads and it is likely that any tau or synuclein ligands will also lack the sensitivity and specificity of an autopsy with comprehensive neuropathological examination. In our opinion, autopsy and brain banks will become more important, rather than less important, in the future, as new biomarkers will continue to require autopsy validation, as has been done for amyloid imaging agents,96,342 although it is possible that brain biopsy may also help meet this need.343,344 Due to the complexity of brain disease in the elderly, with resultant heterogeneity and co-existence of major pathologies,97,114,243,345 the expansion of our understanding of these conditions will depend almost entirely on the careful study of the post-mortem human brain, in conjunction with increasing attention to the detailed collection of ante-mortem health information and genomic studies. Finally, human brain tissue will continue to serve, as it has in the past, as the most important resource for discovery of new molecularly based therapies.1

We have deep admiration and respect for the volunteer subjects who have made the BBDP possible through their altruistic and generous spirits. The BBDP has received financial support from the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (U24 NS072026 National Brain and Tissue Resource for Parkinson’s Disease and Related Disorders), the National Institute on Aging (P30 AG19610 Arizona Alzheimer’s Disease Core Center), the Arizona Department of Health Services (contract 211002, Arizona Alzheimer’s Research Center), the Arizona Biomedical Research Commission (contracts 4001, 0011, 05-901 and 1001 to the Arizona Parkinson’s Disease Consortium) and the Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson’s Research.

Fig 1 Autopsied subjects of the Brain and Body Donation Program (BBDP) 08/01/2009–07/30/2014. Percentages are calculated with respect to total subject input. Of autopsied subjects, 84% had one or more standardized clinical assessments.

Fig 2 Correlation between the number of thawing cycles and (A) RNA Integrity Number (RIN) and (B) RNA yield, measured as the concentration (ng/μL) per tissue weight (g). Dashed lines show outlines of 95% confidence intervals.

Fig. 3 Photomicrographs illustrating the histological methods used for investigating neurodegenerative diseases. Frames A–D are 40 μm large format sections stained with Campbell-Switzer silver stain to show all types of senile plaques. Frames E–H are 40 μm large format sections stained with Gallyas silver stain, showing both neurofibrillary changes (neurofibrillary tangles, dystrophic neurites and neuropil threads) and neuritic plaques. Frames I–M show, in 40 μm large format sections, changes of progressive supranuclear palsy, including neurofibrillary tangles in the substantia nigra (I), pontine nuclei (K) and dentate nucleus (L, M), and tufted astrocytes (J). Frame J was obtained from a section stained with the Gallyas method while I and K–M were from sections stained with an immunoperoxidase method for phosphorylated tau protein (AT8 antibody). Frames N and O show, in 40 μm large format sections, astrocytic plaques in a subject with corticobasal degeneration. Frames P–R show changes of Pick’s disease, including a chromatolytic “Pick cell” (P, H, E paraffin section), Pick bodies in the dentate granule cell layer (Q, 40 μm large format section stained with the Campbell-Switzer method) and oligodendroglial coiled bodies (R, 40 μm large format section stained with the Gallyas method). Frame S shows argyrophilic grains in a 40 μm large format section stained with the Gallyas method. Section T is a low-magnification image of the amgydala and adjacent temporal lobe, in a subject with dementia with Lewy bodies, from a 40 μm large format section stained with an immunoperoxidase method for phosphorylated α-synuclein. Frames U–Y are from subjects with Parkinson’s disease (PD) or dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), stained with an immunoperoxidase method for phosphorylated α-synuclein. Frames U, V and X are from paraffin sections (U – olfactory bulb; V – locus ceruleus; X – submandibular gland). Frame W is from an 80 μm large format tangential section of the lower esophagus. Frame Y is from a retinal whole-mount from a PD subject. Frame Z is from a 40 μm large format section, from a subject with frontotemporal lobar dementia, stained with an immunoperoxidase method for phosphorylated TDP-43.

Fig 4 Photographs and photomicrographs illustrating vascular lesions. Frame A shows cross-sections of the circle of Willis from cognitively normal subjects with relatively normal arteries (above) as compared to late-onset Alzheimer’s disease subjects with relatively severe atherosclerotic stenosis (below). Frames B–F are from 40 μm large format sections. Frame B shows periventricular white matter rarefaction in an HE-stained section of the frontal lobe. Frame C shows a microinfarct in the cerebral cortex while frame D shows a microscopic focus of cerebellar cortical sclerosis, both from HE-stained sections. Frame E shows amyloidotic capillaries in the primary visual cortex, stained with the Campbell-Switzer silver stain. Frame F shows a larger amyloidotic blood vessel with dyshoric diffuse perivascular amyloid, stained with the thioflavin S method.

Fig 5 Frozen cancer tissue types available. All have detailed clinical and pathological data. Many have both primary site and metastatic tissue samples.

Table 1 Clinical assessment batteries

Neurological and functional battery	Neuropsychological battery	Movement disorders battery	
General medical history, general medical examination	Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test	UPDRS parts I–IV	
Medication history	Stroop	Hoehn and Yahr scale	
Substance usage (tobacco, ethanol)	Trails A and B	Timed tapping test14,15	
General neurological examination	Controlled Oral Word Association	Purdue Pegboard Test15,16	
MMSE	Judgment of Orientation	Tremor rating	
GDS	Clock drawing	Restless legs syndrome score	
FAST	Digits Forward and Backward	Mayo Clinic sleep questionnaire17	
Montreal Cognitive Assessment	Geriatric and Hamilton Depression Scales	SCOPA autonomic questionnaire18	
Mattis Dementia Scale		UPSIT smell test19	
GDS, Global Deterioration Scale; FAST, Functional Assessment Testing; CDR, Clinical Dementia Rating Scale; MMSE, Mini Mental State Examination; UPDRS, Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale.

Table 2 Brain and spinal cord regions sampled for diagnostic histopathology and inventory

Brain Region	Paraffin6 μm sections	Frozen 40 and 80 μm sections	
Superior frontal gyrus	No	Yes	
Middle frontal gyrus	Yes	Yes	
Precentral gyrus	Yes	No	
Postcentral gyrus	Yes	No	
Superior parietal lobule	No	Yes	
Inferior parietal lobule	Yes	No	
Anterior cingulate gyrus	Yes	Yes	
Superior temporal gyrus	No	Yes	
Middle temporal gyrus	Yes	Yes	
Inferior temporal gyrus	No	Yes	
Fusiform gyrus	Yes	Yes	
Parahippocampal gyrus at amygdala	Yes	Yes	
Parahippocampal gyrus at head hip.	No	Yes	
Parahippocampal gyrus at lat.genic.	Yes	Yes	
Hippocampus at head	No	Yes	
Hippocampus at body	Yes	Yes	
Occipital cortex: primary	Yes	Yes	
Occipital cortex: association	Yes	Yes	
Cerebral white matter: all lobes	No	Yes	
Caudate nucleus: head	No	Yes	
Caudate nucleus: body	Yes	Yes	
Putamen: head	No	Yes	
Globus pallidus	Yes	Yes	
Substantia innominata	Yes	Yes	
Thalamus: anterior	Yes	Yes	
Thalamus: midpoint	Yes	Yes	
Hypothalamus	Yes	Yes	
Mammillary body	Yes	No	
Subthalamic nucleus	Yes	Yes	
Substantia nigra	No	Yes	
Midbrain tegmentum	No	Yes	
Pons:anterior	Yes	No	
Pons: midpoint	Yes	Yes	
Cerebellum: vermis	Yes	No	
Cerebellum: dentate nucleus	Yes	Yes	
Cerebellum: hemispheric cortex	Yes	Yes	
Medulla: anterior	Yes	No	
Medulla: posterior	Yes	No	
Olfactory bulb and tract	Yes	No	
Spinal cord: cervical	Yes	No	
Spinal cord: thoracic†	Yes	No	
Spinal cord; lumbar†	Yes	No	
Spinal cord: sacral†	Yes	No	
† Only from whole-body autopsies.

Table 3 Categorization and prevalence of brain infarctions by estimated time of occurrence prior to death, brain location and size

Age of infarct	Brain location of infarct	Size class of cortical infarct	
Acute (n = 101; 12%)	Any location (n = 521; 43%)	Microinfarct (n = 213; 18%)	
Subacute or chronic (n = 430; 36%)	Cerebral cortex (n = 314; 26%)	Lacunar (1 cc or less) (n = 49; 4%)	
	Centrum ovale (n = 92; 8%)	Small (1–27 cc) (n = 97; 8%)	
	Deep nuclei (n = 282; 23%)	Large (more than 27 cc) (n = 58; 5%)	
	Infratentorial (n = 235; 20%)		
Infarcts are also each assigned an estimated volume. Infarcts within the hippocampal formation and amygdala are classified with cerebral cortex infarcts. Centrum ovale infarcts are defined as those that are restricted to the centrum ovale; if the infarct involves both cerebral cortex and centrum ovale, it is classified as a cerebral cortex infarct. Deep nuclei infarcts include those of the basal ganglia, thalamus, subthalamic regions and hypothalamus. Infratentorial infarcts are those involving the brainstem and/or cerebellum. Number and percentage of subjects with each infarct type are indicated in parentheses. Microscopic infarcts are those not identified grossly and generally average about 0.1 cc in volume.

Table 4 Relationship of some neurodegenerative and vascular measures with MMSE score, from 693 BBDP subjects

Measurement	Mean (SD)	Correlation with MMSE	OR for lower MMSE	
Age	84.9 (6.7)	—	—	
MMSE	18.6 (9.5)	—	—	
Neuritic plaque density	2.1 (1.2)	−0.47 (P &lt; 0.0001)	1.3 (P = 0.002)	
Braak stage	4.1 (1.3)	−0.56 (P &lt; 0.0001)	2.1 (P &lt; 0.0001)	
Lewy type synucleinopathy brain summary score	7.8 (11.2)	−0.18 (P &lt; 0.0001)	1.02 (P = 0.02)	
White matter rarefaction score	4.2 (3.4)	−0.19 (P &lt; 0.0001)	1.08 (P = 0.02)	
Amyloid angiopathy score	3.4 (3.5)	−0.31 (P &lt; 0.0001)	1.00 (P = 0.88)	
Number of cortical microinfarcts	0.84 (2.9)	−0.04 (P = 0.25)	0.99 (P = 0.87)	
Correlations were performed with the Spearman method. Logistic regression analysis provided odds ratios (OR) for each factor’s association with a lower MMSE score (&lt;24), corrected for the influence of all other factors. MMSE, Mini Mental State Examination.

Table 5 Neuropathological diagnoses, 1997–2014, from 1173 autopsies

Neuropathological diagnosis	n	%	
Normal†	238	20	
Alzheimer’s disease	665	57	
Dementia with Lewy bodies	107	9	
Parkinson’s disease	170	14	
Vascular dementia	110	9	
Progressive supranuclear palsy	80	6.8	
Hippocampal sclerosis	64	5	
Dementia lacking distinctive histology	13	1.1	
Multiple system atrophy	8	0.7	
Frontotemporal lobar degeneration with TDP-43	18	1.5	
Motor neuron disease	12	1.0	
Corticobasal degeneration	8	0.7	
Pick’s disease	5	0.4	
Neurofibrillary tangle predominant dementia	5	0.4	
Huntington’s disease	2	0.2	
Multiple major neurodegenerative diagnoses	349	37	
Earlier autopsies before 1997 did not receive a full neuropathological examination. As more than one condition is often present in a single subject, the sum of the percentages exceeds 100. The percentage of subjects with multiple major clinicopathological conditions excludes the normal subjects from the denominator. Subjects listed as “multiple major neurodegenerative diagnoses have more than one of the listed conditions below.

† No major clinical neurological diagnosis.

Table 6 Genetic mutations and polymorphisms: results for autopsied cases

Genetic polymorphism or mutation	No. screened	No. positive (%)	
Apolipoprotein E –ε4	1302	524 (40)	
LRRK2 – G2019S polymorphism screened	237	3 (1.3)	
Glucocerebrosidase (GBA) – all exons screened	247	18 (7.3)	
Tau (MAPT) – screen of exons 1 and 9–13	45	3 (1.3)	
Presenilin 1 – mutation screen	7	4 (57)	
Progranulin (GRN) – screen of exons 1–13	31	4 (12.9)	
C9orf72 – expansion screen	21	5 (24)	
TDP43 (TARDBP)	1	0	
Valosin-containing protein (VCP)	1	0	
Charged multivesicular body protein 2B (CHMP2B)	1	0	

Table 7 Bodily tissue sites collected. All are available as both fixed and frozen samples

Organ system	Tissue site	
Cardiovascular		
Aorta, thoracic	
Aorta, abdominal	
Heart, left ventricle	
Heart, right ventricle	
Genitourinary		
Kidney	
Bladder	
Prostate gland	
Uterus	
Cervix	
Vagina	
Endocrine		
Adrenal gland	
Thyroid gland	
Ovary	
Testis	
Respiratory		
Larynx	
Bronchus, primary	
Lung	
Diaphragm	
Musculoskeletal		
Bone, rib	
Muscle, psoas	
Muscle, temporalis	
Gastrointestinal		
Submandibular gland	
Esophagus, upper	
Esophagus, lower	
Stomach, fundus	
Duodenum	
Jejunum	
Ileum	
Colon, transverse	
Colon, sigmoid	
Rectum	
Liver	
Gallbladder	
Pancreas	
Other		
Breast	
Nerve, vagus	
Nerve, sciatic	
Skin, abdominal	
Skin, scalp	
Spleen	
Lymph node, peribronchial	
Mesentery	

Table 8 Common medical history and autopsy (anatomical pathology) diagnoses for Brain and Body Donation Program whole-body autopsies

Medical history diagnosis	%	Autopsy diagnoses	%	
Metabolic	
Type II diabetes	24	Hepatic atrophy	19	
Hypertension	76	Hepatic steatosis	13	
Dyslipidemia	55	Thyroiditis	9	
Hypothyroidism	35	Thyroid goiter	7	
Osteoporosis	35	Testicular atrophy	23	
Cardiovascular	
Atrial fibrillation	25	Cardiomegaly	66	
Cardiac arrhythmia, other	30	Coronary atherosclerosis	85	
Congestive heart failure	52	Myocardial infarction	50	
Coronary artery disease	42	Aortic valve calcification	67	
Myocardial infarction	20	Mitral valve calcification	35	
Gastrointestinal	
Gastroesophageal reflux disease	58	Gastritis	13	
Diverticular disease	27	Diverticulosis	38	
Genitourinary	
Benign prostatic hypertrophy or hyperplasia	38	Renal atrophy or nephrosclerosis	63	
Renal failure	24	Cystitis	27	
Other	
Arthritis, degenerative	59	Acute bronchopneumonia	30	
Bone fractures	18	Emphysema	16	
Chronic obstructive lung disease	27	Cholecystectomy	17	
Stroke	22	Hysterectomy	49	
Depression	49	Mastectomy	12	
Percentages for gender-specific conditions are for the involved gender only. See Figure 3 for malignant neoplasms.


1 Beach TG Alzheimer’s disease and the “Valley of Death”: not enough guidance from human brain tissue? J Alzheimers Dis 2013 33 Suppl 1 S219 S233 22695622
2 Peschken CA Esdaile JM Rheumatic diseases in North America’s indigenous peoples Semin Arthritis Rheum 1999 28 368 391 10406405
3 Johanneson B Steinsson K Lindqvist AK A comparison of genome-scans performed in multicase families with systemic lupus erythematosus from different population groups J Autoimmun 1999 13 137 141 10441178
4 Lio D Pes GM Carru C Association between the HLA-DR alleles and longevity: a study in Sardinian population Exp Gerontol 2003 38 313 317 12581796
5 Mathews CA Reus VI Bejarano J Genetic studies of neuropsychiatric disorders in Costa Rica: a model for the use of isolated populations Psychiatr Genet 2004 14 13 23 15091311
6 Adachi T Inanami O Sato A Nitric oxide (NO) is involved in increased cerebral cortical blood flow following stimulation of the nucleus basalis of Meynert in anesthetized rats Neurosci Lett 1992 139 201 204 1608550
7 Gustavsson JP Asberg M Schalling D The healthy control subject in psychiatric research: impulsiveness and volunteer bias Acta Psychiatr Scand 1997 96 325 328 9395148
8 Mandel FS Weiner M Kaplan S Pelcovitz D Labruna V An examination of bias in volunteer subject selection: findings from an in-depth child abuse study J Trauma Stress 2000 13 77 88 10761175
9 Sofuoglu M Dudish-Poulsen S Nicodemus KK Babb DA Hatsukami DK Characteristics of research volunteers for inpatient cocaine studies: focus on selection bias Addict Behav 2000 25 785 790 11023020
10 Lim A Kukull W Nochlin D Cliniconeuropathological correlation of Alzheimer’s disease in a community-based case series J Am Geriatr Soc 1999 47 564 569 10323650
11 Allen MJ Powers ML Gronowski KS Gronowski AM Human tissue ownership and use in research: what laboratorians and researchers should know Clin Chem 2010 56 1675 1682 20852133
12 Nelkin D Andrews L Do the dead have interests? Policy issues for research after life Am J Law Med 1998 24 261 291 9702275
13 Kurtz SF Strong CWGD The 2006 revised Uniform Anatomical Gift Act – A law to save lives Health Lawyers News 2007 2 44 49
14 Spokes EG An analysis of factors influencing measurements of dopamine, noradrenaline, glutamate decarboxylase and choline acetylase in human postmortem brain tissue Brain 1979 102 333 346 455043
15 Spokes EG Koch DJ Post-mortem stability of dopamine, glutamate decarboxylase and choline acetyltransferase in the mouse brain under conditions simulating the handling of human autopsy material J Neurochem 1978 31 381 383 671036
16 Oka T Tagawa K Ito H Okazawa H Dynamic changes of the phosphoproteome in postmortem mouse brains PLoS ONE 2011 6 e21405 21731734
17 Ludes B Pfitzinger H Mangin P DNA fingerprinting from tissues after variable postmortem periods J Forensic Sci 1993 38 686 690 8515219
18 Morrison MR Griffin WS The isolation and in vitro translation of undegraded messenger RNAs from human postmortem brain Anal Biochem 1981 113 318 324 7283137
19 Perrett CW Marchbanks RM Whatley SA Characterisation of messenger RNA extracted postmortem from the brains of schizophrenic, depressed and control subjects J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1988 51 325 331 2452240
20 Ravid R Van Zwieten EJ Swaab DF Brain banking and the human hypothalamus – factors to match for, pitfalls and potentials Prog Brain Res 1992 93 83 95 1480765
21 Hynd MR Lewohl JM Scott HL Dodd PR Biochemical and molecular studies using human autopsy brain tissue J Neurochem 2003 85 543 562 12694381
22 Palmer AM Lowe SL Francis PT Bowen DM Are post-mortem biochemical studies of human brain worthwhile? Biochem Soc Trans 1988 16 472 475 2905309
23 Leonard S Logel J Luthman D Casanova M Kirch D Freedman R Biological stability of mRNA isolated from human postmortem brain collections Biol Psychiatry 1993 33 456 466 8098224
24 Cummings TJ Strum JC Yoon LW Szymanski MH Hulette CM Recovery and expression of messenger RNA from postmortem human brain tissue Mod Pathol 2001 14 1157 1161 11706078
25 Yasojima K McGeer EG McGeer PL High stability of mRNAs postmortem and protocols for their assessment by RT-PCR Brain Res Brain Res Protoc 2001 8 212 218 11733198
26 Preece P Cairns NJ Quantifying mRNA in postmortem human brain: influence of gender, age at death, postmortem interval, brain pH, agonal state and inter-lobe mRNA variance Brain Res Mol Brain Res 2003 118 60 71 14559355
27 Preece P Virley DJ Costandi M An optimistic view for quantifying mRNA in post-mortem human brain Brain Res Mol Brain Res 2003 116 7 16 12941456
28 Li JZ Vawter MP Walsh DM Systematic changes in gene expression in postmortem human brains associated with tissue pH and terminal medical conditions Hum Mol Genet 2004 13 609 616 14734628
29 Tomita H Vawter MP Walsh DM Effect of agonal and postmortem factors on gene expression profile: quality control in microarray analyses of postmortem human brain Biol Psychiatry 2004 55 346 352 14960286
30 Ervin JF Heinzen EL Cronin KD Postmortem delay has minimal effect on brain RNA integrity J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2007 66 1093 1099 18090918
31 Popova T Mennerich D Weith A Quast K Effect of RNA quality on transcript intensity levels in microarray analysis of human post-mortem brain tissues BMC Genomics 2008 9 91 18298816
32 Durrenberger PF Fernando S Kashefi SN Effects of antemortem and postmortem variables on human brain mRNA quality: a BrainNet Europe study J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2010 69 70 81 20010301
33 Sajdel-Sulkowska EM Majocha RE Salim M Zain SB Marotta CA The postmortem Alzheimer brain is a source of structurally and functionally intact astrocytic messenger RNA J Neurosci Methods 1988 23 173 179 3357357
34 Gilmore JH Lawler CP Eaton AM Mailman RB Postmortem stability of dopamine D1 receptor mRNA and D1 receptors Brain Res Mol Brain Res 1993 18 290 296 8326824
35 Kingsbury AE Foster OJ Nisbet AP Tissue pH as an indicator of mRNA preservation in human postmortem brain Brain Res Mol Brain Res 1995 28 311 318 7723629
36 Johnston NL Cervenak J Shore AD Torrey EF Yolken RH Multivariate analysis of RNA levels from postmortem human brains as measured by three different methods of RT-PCR. Stanley Neuropathology Consortium J Neurosci Methods 1997 77 83 92 9402561
37 Mathern GW Pretorius JK Kornblum HI Altered hippocampal kainate-receptor mRNA levels in temporal lobe epilepsy patients Neurobiol Dis 1998 5 151 176 9848088
38 Schramm M Falkai P Tepest R Stability of RNA transcripts in post-mortem psychiatric brains J Neural Transm 1999 106 329 335 10392541
39 Miller CL Diglisic S Leister F Webster M Yolken RH Evaluating RNA status for RT-PCR in extracts of postmortem human brain tissue Biotechniques 2004 36 628 633 15088381
40 Johnson SA Morgan DG Finch CE Extensive postmortem stability of RNA from rat and human brain J Neurosci Res 1986 16 267 280 2427740
41 Lukiw WJ Wong L McLachlan DR Cytoskeletal messenger RNA stability in human neocortex: studies in normal aging and in Alzheimer’s disease Int J Neurosci 1990 55 81 88 2084053
42 Burke WJ O’Malley KL Chung HD Harmon SK Miller JP Berg L Effect of pre- and postmortem variables on specific mRNA levels in human brain Brain Res Mol Brain Res 1991 11 37 41 1662743
43 Ragsdale DS Miledi R Expressional potency of mRNAs encoding receptors and voltage-activated channels in the postmortem rat brain Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1991 88 1854 1858 1705710
44 Ross BM Knowler JT McCulloch J On the stability of messenger RNA and ribosomal RNA in the brains of control human subjects and patients with Alzheimer’s disease J Neurochem 1992 58 1810 1819 1560235
45 Eastwood SL Burnet PW McDonald B Clinton J Harrison PJ Synaptophysin gene expression in human brain: a quantitative in situ hybridization and immunocytochemical study Neuroscience 1994 59 881 892 8058126
46 Pardue S Zimmerman AL Morrison-Bogorad M Selective postmortem degradation of inducible heat shock protein 70 (hsp70) mRNAs in rat brain Cell Mol Neurobiol 1994 14 341 357 7788642
47 Harrison PJ Heath PR Eastwood SL Burnet PW McDonald B Pearson RC The relative importance of premortem acidosis and postmortem interval for human brain gene expression studies: selective mRNA vulnerability and comparison with their encoded proteins Neurosci Lett 1995 200 151 154 9064599
48 Castensson A Emilsson L Preece P Jazin EE High-resolution quantification of specific mRNA levels in human brain autopsies and biopsies Genome Res 2000 10 1219 1229 10958640
49 Bauer M Gramlich I Polzin S Patzelt D Quantification of mRNA degradation as possible indicator of postmortem interval – a pilot study Leg Med (Tokyo) 2003 5 220 227 14602165
50 Barrachina M Castano E Ferrer I TaqMan PCR assay in the control of RNA normalization in human post-mortem brain tissue Neurochem Int 2006 49 276 284 16522342
51 Dumitriu A Moser C Hadzi TC Post-mortem interval influences á-synuclein expression in Parkinson disease brain J Park Dis 2012 10.1155/2012/614212 Epub 2012 March 13
52 Birdsill AC Walker DG Lue L Sue LI Beach TG Postmortem interval effect on RNA and gene expression in human brain tissue Cell Tissue Bank 2011 12 311 318 20703815
53 Broniscer A Baker JN Baker SJ Prospective collection of tissue samples at autopsy in children with diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma Cancer 2010 116 4632 4637 20589749
54 Zheng PP Luider TM Pieters R Identification of tumor-related proteins by proteomic analysis of cerebrospinal fluid from patients with primary brain tumors J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2003 62 855 862 14503641
55 Beach TG Monsell SE Phillips LE Kukull W Accuracy of the clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer disease at National Institute on Aging Alzheimer Disease Centers, 2005–2010 J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2012 71 266 273 22437338
56 Burgess JA Lescuyer P Hainard A Identification of brain cell death associated proteins in human post-mortem cerebrospinal fluid J Proteome Res 2006 5 1674 1681 16823975
57 Lescuyer P Allard L Zimmermann-Ivol CG Identification of post-mortem cerebrospinal fluid proteins as potential biomarkers of ischemia and neurodegeneration Proteomics 2004 4 2234 2241 15274117
58 Dayon L Hainard A Licker V Relative quantification of proteins in human cerebrospinal fluids by MS/MS using 6-plex isobaric tags Anal Chem 2008 80 2921 2931 18312001
59 Finehout EJ Franck Z Relkin N Lee KH Proteomic analysis of cerebrospinal fluid changes related to postmortem interval Clin Chem 2006 52 1906 1913 16887899
60 Burgos K Malenica I Metpally R Profiles of Extracellular miRNA in Cerebrospinal Fluid and Serum from Patients with Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s Diseases Correlate with Disease Status and Features of Pathology PLoS ONE 2014 9 e94839 24797360
61 Roher AE Maarouf CL Sue LI Hu Y Wilson J Beach TG Proteomics-derived cerebrospinal fluid markers of autopsy-confirmed Alzheimer’s disease Biomarkers 2009 14 493 501 19863188
62 Maarouf CL Andacht TM Kokjohn TA Proteomic analysis of Alzheimer’s disease cerebrospinal fluid from neuropathologically diagnosed subjects Curr Alzheimer Res 2009 6 399 406 19689240
63 Maarouf CL Beach TG Adler CH Cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers of neuropathologically diagnosed Parkinson’s disease subjects Neurol Res 2012 34 669 676 22889670
64 Maarouf CL Beach TG Adler CH Quantitative appraisal of ventricular cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers in neuropathologically diagnosed Parkinson’s disease cases lacking Alzheimer’s disease pathology Biomark Insights 2013 8 19 28 23533154
65 Castano EM Roher AE Esh CL Kokjohn TA Beach T Comparative proteomics of cerebrospinal fluid in neuropathologically-confirmed Alzheimer’s disease and non-demented elderly subjects Neurol Res 2006 28 155 163 16551433
66 LeWitt PA Li J Lu M Beach TG Adler CH Guo L 3-hydroxykynurenine and other Parkinson’s disease biomarkers discovered by metabolomic analysis Mov Disord 2013 28 1653 1660 23873789
67 Simonsen AH Bech S Laursen I Proteomic investigations of the ventriculo-lumbar gradient in human CSF J Neurosci Methods 2010 191 244 248 20599557
68 Shaw LM Vanderstichele H Knapik-Czajka M Qualification of the analytical and clinical performance of CSF biomarker analyses in ADNI Acta Neuropathol 2011 121 597 609 21311900
69 Kuo YM Kokjohn TA Watson MD Elevated abeta42 in skeletal muscle of Alzheimer disease patients suggests peripheral alterations of AbetaPP metabolism Am J Pathol 2000 156 797 805 10702395
70 Beach TG Adler CH Lue L Unified staging system for Lewy body disorders: correlation with nigrostriatal degeneration, cognitive impairment and motor dysfunction Acta Neuropathol 2009 117 613 634 19399512
71 Little JP Simtchouk S Schindler SM Mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) is a pro-inflammatory extracellular signaling molecule recognized by brain microglia Mol Cell Neurosci 2014 60 88 96 24769106
72 Lue LF Kuo YM Beach T Walker DG Microglia activation and anti-inflammatory regulation in Alzheimer’s disease Mol Neurobiol 2010 41 115 128 20195797
73 Walker DG Lue LF Investigations with cultured human microglia on pathogenic mechanisms of Alzheimer’s disease and other neurodegenerative diseases J Neurosci Res 2005 81 412 425 15957156
74 Lue LF Brachova L Walker DG Rogers J Characterization of glial cultures from rapid autopsies of Alzheimer’s and control patients Neurobiol Aging 1996 17 421 429 8725904
75 Lue LF Walker DG Modeling Alzheimer’s disease immune therapy mechanisms: interactions of human postmortem microglia with antibody-opsonized amyloid beta peptide J Neurosci Res 2002 70 599 610 12404514
76 Rogers J Lue LF Walker DG Elucidating molecular mechanisms of Alzheimer’s disease in microglial cultures Ernst Schering Res Found Workshop 2002 39 25 44 12066415
77 Roher AE Kuo YM Esh C Cortical and leptomeningeal cerebrovascular amyloid and white matter pathology in Alzheimer’s disease Mol Med 2003 9 112 122 12865947
78 Vonsattel JP Aizawa H Ge P An improved approach to prepare human brains for research J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 1995 54 42 56 7815079
79 Beach TG Tago H Nagai T Kimura H McGeer PL McGeer EG Perfusion-fixation of the human brain for immunohistochemistry: comparison with immersion-fixation J Neurosci Methods 1987 19 183 192 2437408
80 Leong AS Gilham PN The effects of progressive formaldehyde fixation on the preservation of tissue antigens Pathology 1989 21 266 268 2483748
81 Pollard K Lunny D Holgate CS Jackson P Bird CC Fixation, processing, and immunochemical reagent effects on preservation of T-lymphocyte surface membrane antigens in paraffin-embedded tissue J Histochem Cytochem 1987 35 1329 1338 3309048
82 Beach TG White CL Hamilton RL Evaluation of alpha-synuclein immunohistochemical methods used by invited experts Acta Neuropathol 2008 116 277 288 18626651
83 Braak H Braak E Demonstration of amyloid deposits and neurofibrillary changes in whole brain sections Brain Pathol 1991 1 213 216 1669710
84 Cummings BJ Plaques and tangles: searching for primary events in a forest of data Neurobiol Aging 1997 18 358 362 9330962
85 Braak H Braak E Neuropathological stageing of Alzheimer-related changes Acta Neuropathol (Berl) 1991 82 239 259 1759558
86 Thal DR Rub U Orantes M Braak H Phases of A beta-deposition in the human brain and its relevance for the development of AD Neurology 2002 58 1791 1800 12084879
87 Braak H Braak E Bohl J Lang W Alzheimer’s disease: amyloid plaques in the cerebellum J Neurol Sci 1989 93 277 287 2556503
88 Braak H Braak E Ohm T Bohl J Alzheimer’s disease: mismatch between amyloid plaques and neuritic plaques Neurosci Lett 1989 103 24 28 2476692
89 Braak H Braak E Kalus P Alzheimer’s disease: areal and laminar pathology in the occipital isocortex Acta Neuropathol 1989 77 494 506 2566255
90 Braak H Braak E Alzheimer’s disease: striatal amyloid deposits and neurofibrillary changes J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 1990 49 215 224 1692337
91 Akiyama H Tago H Itagaki S McGeer PL Occurrence of diffuse amyloid deposits in the presubicular parvopyramidal layer in Alzheimer’s disease Acta Neuropathol 1990 79 537 544 2183538
92 Halliday G Flowers D Baum L Analysis of staining methods for different cortical plaques in Alzheimer’s disease Acta Neuropathol 1994 87 174 186 7513488
93 Rosenwald A Reusche E Ogomori K Teichert HM Comparison of silver stainings and immunohistology for the detection of neurofibrillary tangles and extracellular cerebral amyloid in paraffin sections Acta Neuropathol 1993 86 182 186 7692696
94 Vallet PG Guntern R Hof PR A comparative study of histological and immunohistochemical methods for neurofibrillary tangles and senile plaques in Alzheimer’s disease Acta Neuropathol 1992 83 170 178 1373017
95 He Y Duyckaerts C Delaere P Piette F Hauw JJ Alzheimer’s lesions labelled by anti-ubiquitin antibodies: comparison with other staining techniques. A study of 15 cases with graded intellectual status in ageing and Alzheimer’s disease Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 1993 19 364 371 7694167
96 Clark CM Pontecorvo MJ Beach TG Cerebral PET with florbetapir compared with neuropathology at autopsy for detection of neuritic amyloid-beta plaques: a prospective cohort study Lancet Neurol 2012 11 669 678 22749065
97 Dugger BN Clark CM Serrano G Neuropathologic heterogeneity does not impair florbetapir-positron emission tomography postmortem correlates J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2014 73 72 80 24335535
98 Choi SR Schneider JA Bennett DA Correlation of amyloid PET ligand florbetapir F 18 binding with Abeta aggregation and neuritic plaque deposition in postmortem brain tissue Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 2012 26 8 16 22354138
99 Kalback W Esh C Castano EM Atherosclerosis, vascular amyloidosis and brain hypoperfusion in the pathogenesis of sporadic Alzheimer’s disease Neurol Res 2004 26 525 539 15265270
100 Arai T Ikeda K Akiyama H Distinct isoforms of tau aggregated in neurons and glial cells in brains of patients with Pick’s disease, corticobasal degeneration and progressive supranuclear palsy Acta Neuropathol 2001 101 167 173 11271372
101 Evidente VG Adler CH Sabbagh MN Neuropathological findings of PSP in the elderly without clinical PSP: possible incidental PSP? Parkinsonism Relat Disord 2011 17 365 371 21420891
102 Arnold SJ Dugger BN Beach TG TDP-43 deposition in prospectively followed, cognitively normal elderly individuals: correlation with argyrophilic grains but not other concomitant pathologies Acta Neuropathol 2013 126 51 57 23604587
103 Mirra SS Heyman A McKeel D The Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer’s Disease (CERAD) Part II. Standardization of the neuropathologic assessment of Alzheimer’s disease Neurology 1991 41 479 486 2011243
104 Hyman BT Trojanowski JQ Consensus recommendations for the postmortem diagnosis of Alzheimer disease from the National Institute on Aging and the Reagan Institute Working Group on diagnostic criteria for the neuropathological assessment of Alzheimer disease J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 1997 56 1095 1097 9329452
105 Montine TJ Phelps CH Beach TG National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association guidelines for the neuropathologic assessment of Alzheimer’s disease: a practical approach Acta Neuropathol 2012 123 1 11 22101365
106 McKeith IG Dickson DW Lowe J Diagnosis and management of dementia with Lewy bodies: third report of the DLB Consortium Neurology 2005 65 1863 1872 16237129
107 West MJ Stereological methods for estimating the total number of neurons and synapses: issues of precision and bias Trends Neurosci 1999 22 51 61 10092043
108 Gundersen HJ Bagger P Bendtsen TF The new stereological tools: disector, fractionator, nucleator and point sampled intercepts and their use in pathological research and diagnosis APMIS 1988 96 857 881 3056461
109 Beach TG Adler CH Sue LI Reduced striatal tyrosine hydroxylase in incidental Lewy body disease Acta Neuropathol 2008 115 445 451 17985144
110 Beach TG Wilson JR Sue LI Circle of Willis atherosclerosis: association with Alzheimer’s disease, neuritic plaques and neurofibrillary tangles Acta Neuropathol (Berl) 2007 113 13 21 17021755
111 Roher AE Esh C Circle of willis atherosclerosis is a risk factor for sporadic Alzheimer’s disease Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2003 23 2055 2062 14512367
112 Roher AE Maarouf CL Malek-Ahmadi M Subjects harboring presenilin familial Alzheimer’s disease mutations exhibit diverse white matter biochemistry alterations Am J Neurodegener Dis 2013 2 187 207 24093083
113 Castano EM Maarouf CL Wu T Alzheimer disease periventricular white matter lesions exhibit specific proteomic profile alterations Neurochem Int 2013 62 145 156 23231993
114 Dugger BN Adler CH Shill HA Concomitant pathologies among a spectrum of parkinsonian disorders Parkinsonism Relat Disord 2014 20 525 529 24637124
115 Choi SA Evidente VG Caviness JN Are there differences in cerebral white matter lesion burdens between Parkinson’s disease patients with or without dementia? Acta Neuropathol 2010 119 147 149 19956959
116 Roher AE Weiss N Kokjohn TA Increased A beta peptides and reduced cholesterol and myelin proteins characterize white matter degeneration in Alzheimer’s disease Biochemistry 2002 41 11080 11090 12220172
117 Westover MB Bianchi MT Yang C Schneider JA Greenberg SM Estimating cerebral microinfarct burden from autopsy samples Neurology 2013 80 1365 1369 23486880
118 Nelson PT Alafuzoff I Bigio EH Correlation of Alzheimer disease neuropathologic changes with cognitive status: a review of the literature J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2012 71 362 381 22487856
119 Kovari E Gold G Herrmann FR Cortical microinfarcts and demyelination significantly affect cognition in brain aging Stroke 2004 35 410 414 14707236
120 Arvanitakis Z Leurgans SE Barnes LL Bennett DA Schneider JA Microinfarct pathology, dementia, and cognitive systems Stroke 2011 42 722 727 21212395
121 Roman GC Tatemichi TK Erkinjuntti T Vascular dementia: diagnostic criteria for research studies. Report of the NINDS-AIREN International Workshop Neurology 1993 43 250 260 8094895
122 Mackenzie IR Neumann M Baborie A A harmonized classification system for FTLD-TDP pathology Acta Neuropathol 2011 122 111 113 21644037
123 Gelb DJ Oliver E Gilman S Diagnostic criteria for Parkinson disease Arch Neurol 1999 56 33 39 9923759
124 Dickson DW Braak H Duda JE Neuropathological assessment of Parkinson’s disease: refining the diagnostic criteria Lancet Neurol 2009 8 1150 1157 19909913
125 Dickson DW Required techniques and useful molecular markers in the neuropathologic diagnosis of neurodegenerative diseases Acta Neuropathol 2005 109 14 24 15645265
126 Hyman BT Phelps CH Beach TG National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association guidelines for the neuropathologic assessment of Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimers Dement 2012 8 1 13 22265587
127 Dugger BN Hentz JG Adler CH Clinicopathological outcomes of prospectively followed normal elderly brain bank volunteers J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2014 73 244 252 24487796
128 Sabbagh MN Sandhu SS Farlow MR Correlation of clinical features with argyrophilic grains at autopsy Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 2009 23 229 233 19812464
129 Jellinger KA Attems J Challenges of multimorbidity of the aging brain: a critical update J Neural Transm 2014 Epub ahead of print August 5
130 Gusella JF Macdonald ME Huntington’s disease Semin Cell Biol 1995 6 21 28 7620118
131 Hixson JE Vernier DT Restriction isotyping of human apolipoprotein E by gene amplification and cleavage with HhaI J Lipid Res 1990 31 545 548 2341813
132 Beach TG Sue L Scott S Hippocampal sclerosis dementia with tauopathy Brain Pathol 2003 13 263 278 12946017
133 Meiser B Dunn S Psychological impact of genetic testing for Huntington’s disease: an update of the literature J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2000 69 574 578 11032605
134 Bruni AC Conidi ME Bernardi L Genetics in degenerative dementia: current status and applicability Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 2014 28 199 205 24805970
135 Le BI Genetics of frontotemporal lobar degeneration: an up-date and diagnosis algorithm Rev Neurol (Paris) 2013 169 811 819 24011980
136 Fong JC Karydas AM Goldman JS Genetic counseling for FTD/ALS caused by the C9ORF72 hexanucleotide expansion Alzheimers Res Ther 2012 4 27 36 22808918
137 Perry EK Perry RH Tomlinson BE The influence of agonal status on some neurochemical activities of postmortem human brain tissue Neurosci Lett 1982 29 303 307 6212778
138 Morrison-Bogorad M Zimmerman AL Pardue S Heat-shock 70 messenger RNA levels in human brain: correlation with agonal fever J Neurochem 1995 64 235 246 7798918
139 Hardy JA Wester P Winblad B Gezelius C Bring G Eriksson A The patients dying after long terminal phase have acidotic brains; implications for biochemical measurements on autopsy tissue J Neural Transm 1985 61 253 264 3989524
140 Stan AD Ghose S Gao XM Human postmortem tissue: what quality markers matter? Brain Res 2006 1123 1 11 17045977
141 Yates CM Butterworth J Tennant MC Gordon A Enzyme activities in relation to pH and lactate in postmortem brain in Alzheimer-type and other dementias J Neurochem 1990 55 1624 1630 2213015
142 Beach TG Sue LI Walker DG The Sun Health Research Institute Brain Donation Program: description and experience, 1987–2007 Cell Tissue Bank 2008 9 229 245 18347928
143 Catts VS Catts SV Fernandez HR Taylor JM Coulson EJ Lutze-Mann LH A microarray study of post-mortem mRNA degradation in mouse brain tissue Brain Res Mol Brain Res 2005 138 164 177 15921819
144 Karkela JT Critical evaluation of postmortem changes in human autopsy cisternal fluid. Enzymes, electrolytes, acid-base balance, glucose and glycolysis, free amino acids and ammonia. Correlation to total brain ischemia J Forensic Sci 1993 38 603 616 8515212
145 Botling J Edlund K Segersten U Impact of thawing on RNA integrity and gene expression analysis in fresh frozen tissue Diagn Mol Pathol 2009 18 44 52 19214109
146 Nash DT Fillit H Cardiovascular disease risk factors and cognitive impairment Am J Cardiol 2006 97 1262 1265 16616038
147 Wolozin B Bednar MM Interventions for heart disease and their effects on Alzheimer’s disease Neurol Res 2006 28 630 636 16945215
148 Luchsinger JA Reitz C Honig LS Tang MX Shea S Mayeux R Aggregation of vascular risk factors and risk of incident Alzheimer disease Neurology 2005 65 545 551 16116114
149 Kivipelto M Helkala EL Laakso MP Midlife vascular risk factors and Alzheimer’s disease in later life: longitudinal, population based study BMJ 2001 322 1447 1451 11408299
150 Launer LJ Ross GW Petrovitch H Midlife blood pressure and dementia: the Honolulu-Asia aging study Neurobiol Aging 2000 21 49 55 10794848
151 Skoog I Lernfelt B Landahl S 15-year longitudinal study of blood pressure and dementia Lancet 1996 347 1141 1145 8609748
152 Astarita G Jung KM Berchtold NC Deficient liver biosynthesis of docosahexaenoic acid correlates with cognitive impairment in Alzheimer’s disease PLoS ONE 2010 5 e12538 20838618
153 Bergmann C Sano M Cardiac risk factors and potential treatments in Alzheimer’s disease Neurol Res 2006 28 595 604 16945210
154 Mielke MM Zandi PP Sjogren M High total cholesterol levels in late life associated with a reduced risk of dementia Neurology 2005 64 1689 1695 15911792
155 Rosano C Newman AB Cardiovascular disease and risk of Alzheimer’s disease Neurol Res 2006 28 612 620 16945212
156 Sanderson M Wang J Davis DR Lane MJ Cornman CB Fadden MK Co-morbidity associated with dementia Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen 2002 17 73 78 11954672
157 Wolf-Klein GP Siverstone FA Brod MS Are Alzheimer patients healthier? J Am Geriatr Soc 1988 36 219 224 3339230
158 Irina A Seppo H Arto M Paavo R Sr Hilkka S beta-amyloid load is not influenced by the severity of cardiovascular disease in aged and demented patients Stroke 1999 30 613 618 10066860
159 Roher AE Debbins JP Malek-Ahmadi M Cerebral blood flow in Alzheimer’s disease Vasc Health Risk Manag 2012 8 599 611 23109807
160 Roher AE Garami Z Tyas SL Transcranial doppler ultrasound blood flow velocity and pulsatility index as systemic indicators for Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimers Dement 2011 7 445 455 21388892
161 Roher AE Esh C Rahman A Kokjohn TA Beach TG Atherosclerosis of cerebral arteries in Alzheimer disease Stroke 2004 35 2623 2627 15375298
162 Roher AE Esh C Kokjohn T Sue L Beach T Atherosclerosis and AD: analysis of data from the US National Alzheimer’s Coordinating Center Neurology 2005 65 974 16186559
163 Roher AE Esh C Kokjohn TA Circle of willis atherosclerosis is a risk factor for sporadic Alzheimer’s disease Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2003 23 2055 2062 14512367
164 Roher AE Tyas SL Maarouf CL Intracranial atherosclerosis as a contributing factor to Alzheimer’s disease dementia Alzheimers Dement 2011 7 436 444 21388893
165 Beach TG Maarouf CL Brooks RG Reduced clinical and postmortem measures of cardiac pathology in subjects with advanced Alzheimer’s Disease BMC Geriatr 2011 11 3 21266042
166 Belohlavek M Jiamsripong P Calleja AM Patients with Alzheimer disease have altered transmitral flow: echocardiographic analysis of the vortex formation time J Ultrasound Med 2009 28 1493 1500 19854964
167 Puddu P Puddu GM Bastagli L Massarelli G Muscari A Coronary and cerebrovascular atherosclerosis: two aspects of the same disease or two different pathologies? Arch Gerontol Geriatr 1995 20 15 22 15374251
168 Reed DM The paradox of high risk of stroke in populations with low risk of coronary heart disease Am J Epidemiol 1990 131 579 588 2316492
169 Postiglione A Nappi A Brunetti A Relative protection from cerebral atherosclerosis of young patients with homozygous familial hyper-cholesterolemia Atherosclerosis 1991 90 23 30 1799396
170 Kuramoto K Ueda S Matsushita S Suzuki Y Matsumoto Y Iijima T Cholesterol, atherosclerosis and cerebro-cardiovascular complications in 3,236 elderly autopsy cases Nippon Ronen Igakkai Zasshi 1991 28 188 193 1870284
171 Konishi M Komachi Y Iso H Secular trends in atherosclerosis of coronary arteries and basal cerebral arteries in Japan. The Akita pathology study Arteriosclerosis 1990 10 535 540 2369364
172 Tanaka K Masuda J Imamura T A nation-wide study of atherosclerosis in infants, children and young adults in Japan Atherosclerosis 1988 72 143 156 3214466
173 Honig LS Kukull W Mayeux R Atherosclerosis and AD: analysis of data from the US National Alzheimer’s Coordinating Center Neurology 2005 64 494 500 15699381
174 Kosunen O Talasniemi S Lehtovirta M Relation of coronary atherosclerosis and apolipoprotein E genotypes in Alzheimer patients Stroke 1995 26 743 748 7740560
175 Traykov L Rigaud AS Caputo L Apolipoprotein E phenotypes in demented and cognitively impaired patients with and without cerebrovascular disease Eur J Neurol 1999 6 415 421 10362893
176 White H Pieper C Schmader K The association of weight change in Alzheimer’s disease with severity of disease and mortality: a longitudinal analysis J Am Geriatr Soc 1998 46 1223 1227 9777903
177 White H Pieper C Schmader K Fillenbaum G Weight change in Alzheimer’s disease J Am Geriatr Soc 1996 44 265 272 8600194
178 Wang PN Yang CL Lin KN Chen WT Chwang LC Liu HC Weight loss, nutritional status and physical activity in patients with Alzheimer’s disease. A controlled study J Neurol 2004 251 314 320 15015012
179 Barrett-Connor E Edelstein SL Corey-Bloom J Wiederholt WC Weight loss precedes dementia in community-dwelling older adults J Am Geriatr Soc 1996 44 1147 1152 8855991
180 Gu Y Scarmeas N Cosentino S Change in body mass index before and after Alzheimer’s disease onset Curr Alzheimer Res 2014 11 349 356 24251397
181 Beach TG Adler CH Sue LI Multi-organ distribution of phosphorylated alpha-synuclein histopathology in subjects with Lewy body disorders Acta Neuropathol 2010 119 689 702 20306269
182 Mu L Sobotka S Chen J Altered pharyngeal muscles in Parkinson disease J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2012 71 520 530 22588389
183 Mu L Sobotka S Chen J Parkinson disease affects peripheral sensory nerves in the pharynx J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2013 72 614 623 23771215
184 Mu L Sobotka S Chen J Alpha-synuclein pathology and axonal degeneration of the peripheral motor nerves innervating pharyngeal muscles in Parkinson disease J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2013 72 119 129 23334595
185 Annerino DM Arshad S Taylor GM Adler CH Beach TG Greene JG Parkinson’s disease is not associated with gastrointestinal myenteric ganglion neuron loss Acta Neuropathol 2012 124 665 680 22941241
186 Beach TG Carew J Serrano G Phosphorylated alpha-synuclein-immunoreactive retinal neuronal elements in Parkinson’s disease subjects Neurosci Lett 2014 571 34 38 24785101
187 Adler CH Beach TG Hentz JG Low clinical diagnostic accuracy of early vs advanced Parkinson disease: clinicopathologic study Neurology 2014 83 406 412 24975862
188 Beach TG Alzheimer’s disease and the “valley of death”: not enough guidance from human brain tissue? J Alzheimers Dis 2013 33 S219 S233 22695622
189 Beach TG Adler CH Dugger BN Submandibular Gland Biopsy for the Diagnosis of Parkinson Disease J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2013 72 130 136 23334596
190 Adler CH Dugger BN Hinni ML Submandibular gland needle biopsy for the diagnosis of Parkinson disease Neurology 2014 82 858 864 24500652
191 Hewitt RE Biobanking: the foundation of personalized medicine Curr Opin Oncol 2011 23 112 119 21076300
192 Massett HA Atkinson NL Weber D Assessing the need for a standardized cancer HUman Biobank (caHUB): findings from a national survey with cancer researchers J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 2011 2011 8 15 21672890
193 Myles R Massett HA Comey G Atkinson N Allsop D Compton C Stakeholder research on biospecimen needs and reactions to the development of a national cancer human biobank by the National Cancer Institute J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr 2011 2011 16 23 21672891
194 Rudloff U Bhanot U Gerald W Biobanking of human pancreas cancer tissue: impact of ex-vivo procurement times on RNA quality Ann Surg Oncol 2010 17 2229 2236 20162455
195 Jia Z Rahmatpanah FB Chen X Expression changes in the stroma of prostate cancer predict subsequent relapse PLoS ONE 2012 7 e41371 22870216
196 Arora S Korn RL Lenkiewicz E Clonal evolution of a case of treatment refractory maxillary sinus carcinoma PLoS ONE 2012 7 e45614 23029135
197 Liu SV Lenkiewicz E Evers L Genomic analysis and selected molecular pathways in rare cancers Phys Biol 2012 9 065004 23196986
198 Mikse OR Blake DC Jr Jones NR FOXO3 encodes a carcinogen-activated transcription factor frequently deleted in early-stage lung adenocarcinoma Cancer Res 2010 70 6205 6215 20631076
199 Hoglinger GU Melhem NM Dickson DW Identification of common variants influencing risk of the tauopathy progressive supranuclear palsy Nat Genet 2011 43 699 705 21685912
200 Hamilton G Killick R Lambert JC Functional and genetic analysis of haplotypic sequence variation at the nicastrin genomic locus Neurobiol Aging 2012 33 1848.e1 13 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2012.02.005 Epub 2012 Mar 8 22405046
201 Jun G Vardarajan BN Buros J Comprehensive search for Alzheimer disease susceptibility loci in the APOE region Arch Neurol 2012 69 1270 1279 22869155
202 Miyashita A Koike A Jun G SORL1 is genetically associated with late-onset Alzheimer’s disease in Japanese, Koreans and Caucasians PLoS ONE 2013 8 e58618 23565137
203 Reitz C Jun G Naj A Variants in the ATP-binding cassette transporter (ABCA7), apolipoprotein E 4, and the risk of late-onset Alzheimer disease in African Americans JAMA 2013 309 1483 1492 23571587
204 Coppola G Chinnathambi S Lee JJ Evidence for a role of the rare p. A152T variant in MAPT in increasing the risk for FTD-spectrum and Alzheimer’s diseases Hum Mol Genet 2012 21 3500 3512 22556362
205 Rademakers R Baker M Gass J Phenotypic variability associated with progranulin haplo-insufficiency in patients with the common 1477C--&gt;T (Arg493X) mutation: an international initiative Lancet Neurol 2007 6 857 868 17826340
206 Chen-Plotkin AS Martinez-Lage M Sleiman PM Genetic and clinical features of progranulin-associated frontotemporal lobar degeneration Arch Neurol 2011 68 488 497 21482928
207 Van DV Sleiman PM Martinez-Lage M Common variants at 7p21 are associated with frontotemporal lobar degeneration with TDP-43 inclusions Nat Genet 2010 42 234 239 20154673
208 Naj AC Jun G Beecham GW Common variants at MS4A4/MS4A6E, CD2AP, CD33 and EPHA1 are associated with late-onset Alzheimer’s disease Nat Genet 2011 43 436 441 21460841
209 Lambert JC Ibrahim-Verbaas CA Harold D Meta-analysis of 74,046 individuals identifies 11 new susceptibility loci for Alzheimer’s disease Nat Genet 2013 45 1452 1458 24162737
210 van Blitterswijk M Mullen B Heckman MG Ataxin-2 as potential disease modifier in C9ORF72 expansion carriers Neurobiol Aging 2014 35 2421 2427 24866401
211 van Blitterswijk M Mullen B Nicholson AM TMEM106B protects C9ORF72 expansion carriers against frontotemporal dementia Acta Neuropathol 2014 127 397 406 24385136
212 van Blitterswijk M Baker MC Dejesus-Hernandez M C9ORF72 repeat expansions in cases with previously identified pathogenic mutations Neurology 2013 81 1332 1341 24027057
213 van Blitterswijk M DeJesus-Hernandez M Niemantsverdriet E Association between repeat sizes and clinical and pathological characteristics in carriers of C9ORF72 repeat expansions (Xpansize-72): a cross-sectional cohort study Lancet Neurol 2013 12 978 988 24011653
214 Holton P Ryten M Nalls M Initial assessment of the pathogenic mechanisms of the recently identified Alzheimer risk Loci Ann Hum Genet 2013 77 85 105 23360175
215 Jia Z Wang Y Sawyers A Diagnosis of prostate cancer using differentially expressed genes in stroma Cancer Res 2011 71 2476 2487 21459804
216 Pio R Jia Z Baron VT Mercola D Early growth response 3 (Egr3) is highly over-expressed in non-relapsing prostate cancer but not in relapsing prostate cancer PLoS ONE 2013 8 e54096 23342084
217 Whitcomb DC LaRusch J Krasinskas AM Common genetic variants in the CLDN2 and PRSS1-PRSS2 loci alter risk for alcohol-related and sporadic pancreatitis Nat Genet 2012 44 1349 1354 23143602
218 Dumitriu A Latourelle JC Hadzi TC Gene expression profiles in Parkinson disease prefrontal cortex implicate FOXO1 and genes under its transcriptional regulation PLoS Genet 2012 8 e1002794 22761592
219 Latourelle JC Dumitriu A Hadzi TC Beach TG Myers RH Evaluation of Parkinson disease risk variants as expression-QTLs PLoS ONE 2012 7 e46199 23071545
220 Zou F Chai HS Younkin CS Brain expression genome-wide association study (eGWAS) identifies human disease-associated variants PLoS Genet 2012 8 e1002707 22685416
221 Zheng B Liao Z Locascio JJ PGC-1alpha, a potential therapeutic target for early intervention in Parkinson’s disease Sci Transl Med 2010 2 52ra73
222 Berchtold NC Sabbagh MN Beach TG Kim RC Cribbs DH Cotman CW Brain gene expression patterns differentiate mild cognitive impairment from normal aged and Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 2014 35 1961 1972 24786631
223 Walker DG Link J Lue LF Dalsing-Hernandez JE Boyes BE Gene expression changes by amyloid beta peptide-stimulated human postmortem brain microglia identify activation of multiple inflammatory processes J Leukoc Biol 2006 79 596 610 16365156
224 Stamper C Siegel A Liang WS Neuronal gene expression correlates of Parkinson’s disease with dementia Mov Disord 2008 23 1588 1595 18649390
225 Liang WS Reiman EM Valla J Alzheimer’s disease is associated with reduced expression of energy metabolism genes in posterior cingulate neurons Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2008 105 4441 4446 18332434
226 Liang WS Dunckley T Beach TG Altered neuronal gene expression in brain regions differentially affected by Alzheimer’s disease: a reference data set Physiol Genomics 2008 33 240 256 18270320
227 Liang WS Dunckley T Beach TG Gene expression profiles in anatomically and functionally distinct regions of the normal aged human brain Physiol Genomics 2007 28 311 322 17077275
228 Liang WS Dunckley T Beach TG Neuronal gene expression in non-demented individuals with intermediate Alzheimer’s Disease neuropathology Neurobiol Aging 2008 31 549 566 18572275
229 Parachikova A Agadjanyan MG Cribbs DH Inflammatory changes parallel the early stages of Alzheimer disease Neurobiol Aging 2007 28 1821 1833 17052803
230 Weeraratna AT Kalehua A Deleon I Alterations in immunological and neurological gene expression patterns in Alzheimer’s disease tissues Exp Cell Res 2007 313 450 461 17188679
231 Dunckley T Beach TG Ramsey K Gene expression correlates of neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 2006 27 1359 1371 16242812
232 Reiman EM Webster JA Myers AJ GAB2 alleles modify Alzheimer’s risk in APOE epsilon4 carriers Neuron 2007 54 713 720 17553421
233 Coon KD Valla J Szelinger S Quantitation of heteroplasmy of mtDNA sequence variants identified in a population of AD patients and controls by array-based resequencing Mitochondrion 2006 6 194 210 16920408
234 Webster JA Myers AJ Pearson JV Sorl1 as an Alzheimer’s disease predisposition gene? Neurodegener Dis 2007 5 60 64 17975299
235 Webster JA Gibbs JR Clarke J Genetic control of human brain transcript expression in Alzheimer disease Am J Hum Genet 2009 84 445 458 19361613
236 Finch N Carrasquillo MM Baker M TMEM106B regulates progranulin levels and the penetrance of FTLD in GRN mutation carriers Neurology 2011 76 467 474 21178100
237 Burgos KL Javaherian A Bomprezzi R Identification of extracellular miRNA in human cerebrospinal fluid by next-generation sequencing RNA 2013 19 712 722 23525801
238 Mastroeni D Grover A Delvaux E Whiteside C Coleman PD Rogers J Epigenetic changes in Alzheimer’s disease: decrements in DNA methylation Neurobiol Aging 2010 31 2025 2037 19117641
239 Chouliaras L Mastroeni D Delvaux E Consistent decrease in global DNA methylation and hydroxymethylation in the hippocampus of Alzheimer’s disease patients Neurobiol Aging 2013 34 2091 2099 23582657
240 Kellie JF Higgs RE Ryder JW Quantitative measurement of intact alpha-synuclein proteoforms from post-mortem control and Parkinson’s disease brain tissue by intact protein mass spectrometry Sci Rep 2014 4 5797 25052239
241 Beach TG Sue LI Walker DG Striatal amyloid plaque density predicts Braak neurofibrillary stage and clinicopathological Alzheimer’s disease: implications for amyloid imaging J Alzheimers Dis 2012 28 869 876 22112552
242 Dugger BN Serrano GE Sue LI Presence of striatal amyloid plaques in Parkinson’s disease dementia predicts concomitant Alzheimer’s disease: usefulness for amyloid imaging J Parkinsons Dis 2012 2 57 65 22924088
243 Serrano GE Sabbagh MN Sue LI Positive florbetapir PET amyloid imaging in a subject with frequent cortical neuritic plaques and frontotemporal lobar degeneration with TDP43-positive inclusions J Alzheimers Dis 2014 42 813 821 24927705
244 Lockhart A Lamb JR Osredkar T PIB is a non-specific imaging marker of amyloid-beta (Abeta) peptide-related cerebral amyloidosis Brain 2007 130 2607 2615 17698496
245 Thompson PW Ye L Morgenstern JL Interaction of the amyloid imaging tracer FDDNP with hallmark Alzheimer’s disease pathologies J Neurochem 2009 109 623 630 19226369
246 Ye L Velasco A Fraser G In vitro high affinity alpha-synuclein binding sites for the amyloid imaging agent PIB are not matched by binding to Lewy bodies in postmortem human brain J Neurochem 2008 105 1428 1437 18221373
247 Kokjohn TA Roher AE Antibody responses, amyloid-beta peptide remnants and clinical effects of AN-1792 immunization in patients with AD in an interrupted trial CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets 2009 8 88 97 19355930
248 Maarouf CL Daugs ID Kokjohn TA The biochemical aftermath of anti-amyloid immunotherapy Mol Neurodegener 2010 5 39 20929585
249 Patton RL Kalback WM Esh CL Amyloid-beta peptide remnants in AN-1792-immunized Alzheimer’s disease patients: a biochemical analysis Am J Pathol 2006 169 1048 1063 16936277
250 Roher AE Cribbs DH Kim RC Bapineuzumab alters abeta composition: implications for the amyloid cascade hypothesis and anti-amyloid immunotherapy PLoS ONE 2013 8 e59735 23555764
251 Roher AE Maarouf CL Daugs ID Neuropathology and amyloid-beta spectrum in a bapineuzumab immunotherapy recipient J Alzheimers Dis 2011 24 315 325 21263194
252 Walker DG Dalsing-Hernandez JE Lue LF Human postmortem brain-derived cerebrovascular smooth muscle cells express all genes of the classical complement pathway: a potential mechanism for vascular damage in cerebral amyloid angiopathy and Alzheimer’s disease Microvasc Res 2008 75 411 419 18048067
253 Lue LF Walker DG Rogers J Modeling microglial activation in Alzheimer’s disease with human postmortem microglial cultures Neurobiol Aging 2001 22 945 956 11755003
254 Lue LF Rydel R Brigham EF Inflammatory repertoire of Alzheimer’s disease and nondemented elderly microglia in vitro Glia 2001 35 72 79 11424194
255 Rogers J Lue LF Microglial chemotaxis, activation, and phagocytosis of amyloid beta-peptide as linked phenomena in Alzheimer’s disease Neurochem Int 2001 39 333 340 11578768
256 Walker DG Lue LF Beach TG Gene expression profiling of amyloid beta peptide-stimulated human post-mortem brain microglia Neurobiol Aging 2001 22 957 966 11755004
257 Li R Shen Y Yang LB Lue LF Finch C Rogers J Estrogen enhances uptake of amyloid beta-protein by microglia derived from the human cortex J Neurochem 2000 75 1447 1454 10987824
258 Hjelm BE Salhia B Kurdoglu A In vitro-differentiated neural cell cultures progress towards donor-identical brain tissue Hum Mol Genet 2013 22 3534 3546 23666530
259 Hjelm BE Rosenberg JB Szelinger S Induction of pluripotent stem cells from autopsy donor-derived somatic cells Neurosci Lett 2011 502 219 224 21839145
260 Truran S Franco DA Roher AE Adipose and leptomeningeal arteriole endothelial dysfunction induced by beta-amyloid peptide: a practical human model to study Alzheimer’s disease vasculopathy J Neurosci Methods 2014 235C 123 129 25004204
261 Prasad K Beach TG Hedreen J Richfield EK Critical role of truncated alpha-synuclein and aggregates in Parkinson’s disease and incidental Lewy body disease Brain Pathol 2012 22 811 825 22452578
262 Lue LF Walker DG Adler CH Biochemical increase in phosphorylated alpha-synuclein precedes histopathology of Lewy-type synucleinopathies Brain Pathol 2012 22 745 756 22369130
263 Walker DG Lue LF Adler CH Changes in properties of serine 129 phosphorylated alpha-synuclein with progression of Lewy-type histopathology in human brains Exp Neurol 2013 240 190 204 23201181
264 Henderson-Smith A Chow D Meechoovet B SMG1 identified as a regulator of Parkinson’s disease-associated alpha-synuclein through siRNA screening PLoS ONE 2013 8 e77711 24204929
265 Beach TG Walker DG Sue LI Newell A Adler CC Joyce JN Substantia nigra Marinesco bodies are associated with decreased striatal expression of dopaminergic markers J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2004 63 329 337 15099023
266 Beach TG Sue LI Walker DG Marked microglial reaction in normal aging human substantia nigra: correlation with extraneuronal neuromelanin pigment deposits Acta Neuropathol (Berl) 2007 114 419 424 17639428
267 Joyce JN Ryoo HL Beach TB Loss of response to levodopa in Parkinson’s disease and co-occurrence with dementia: role of D3 and not D2 receptors Brain Res 2002 955 138 152 12419530
268 Joyce JN Ryoo H Gurevich EV Adler C Beach T Ventral striatal D(3) receptors and Parkinson’s Disease Parkinsonism Relat Disord 2001 7 225 230 11331190
269 Adler CH Hentz JG Joyce JN Beach T Caviness JN Motor impairment in normal aging, clinically possible Parkinson’s disease, and clinically probable Parkinson’s disease: longitudinal evaluation of a cohort of prospective brain donors Parkinsonism Relat Disord 2002 9 103 110 12473400
270 Beach TG Sue LI Scott S Sparks DL Neurofibrillary tangles are constant in aging human nucleus basalis Alzheimers Rep 1998 1 375 380
271 Beach TG Kuo YM Spiegel K The cholinergic deficit coincides with Abeta deposition at the earliest histopathologic stages of Alzheimer disease J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2000 59 308 313 10759186
272 Potter PE Rauschkolb PK Pandya Y Pre- and post-synaptic cortical cholinergic deficits are proportional to amyloid plaque presence and density at preclinical stages of Alzheimer’s disease Acta Neuropathol 2011 122 49 60 21533854
273 Walker DG Dalsing-Hernandez JE Campbell NA Lue LF Decreased expression of CD200 and CD200 receptor in Alzheimer’s disease: a potential mechanism leading to chronic inflammation Exp Neurol 2009 215 5 19 18938162
274 Akiyama H Barger S Barnum S Inflammation and Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 2000 21 383 421 10858586
275 Rogers J Li R Mastroeni D Peripheral clearance of amyloid beta peptide by complement C3-dependent adherence to erythrocytes Neurobiol Aging 2006 27 1733 1739 16290270
276 Strohmeyer R Shen Y Rogers J Detection of complement alternative pathway mRNA and proteins in the Alzheimer’s disease brain Brain Res Mol Brain Res 2000 81 7 18 11000474
277 Styren SD Civin WH Rogers J Molecular, cellular, and pathologic characterization of HLA-DR immunoreactivity in normal elderly and Alzheimer’s disease brain Exp Neurol 1990 110 93 104 1698655
278 Tooyama I Sato H Yasuhara O Correlation of the expression level of C1q mRNA and the number of C1q-positive plaques in the Alzheimer Disease temporal cortex. analysis of C1q mrna and its protein using adjacent or nearby sections Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 2001 12 237 242 11351134
279 Webster S Lue LF Brachova L Molecular and cellular characterization of the membrane attack complex, C5b-9, in Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 1997 18 415 421 9330973
280 Webster S Bonnell B Rogers J Charge-based binding of complement component C1q to the Alzheimer amyloid beta-peptide Am J Pathol 1997 150 1531 1536 9137079
281 Webster S Bradt B Rogers J Cooper N Aggregation state-dependent activation of the classical complement pathway by the amyloid beta peptide J Neurochem 1997 69 388 398 9202333
282 Webster S Rogers J Relative efficacies of amyloid beta peptide (A beta) binding proteins in A beta aggregation J Neurosci Res 1996 46 58 66 8892106
283 Webster S Glabe C Rogers J Multivalent binding of complement protein C1Q to the amyloid beta-peptide (A beta) promotes the nucleation phase of A beta aggregation Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1995 217 869 875 8554610
284 Yermakova AV Rollins J Callahan LM Rogers J O’Banion MK Cyclooxygenase-1 in human Alzheimer and control brain: quantitative analysis of expression by microglia and CA3 hippocampal neurons J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 1999 58 1135 1146 10560656
285 Lue LF Brachova L Civin WH Rogers J Inflammation, A beta deposition, and neurofibrillary tangle formation as correlates of Alzheimer’s disease neurodegeneration J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 1996 55 1083 1088 8858005
286 Lue LF Walker DG Brachova L Involvement of microglial receptor for advanced glycation endproducts (rage) in alzheimer’s disease: identification of a cellular activation mechanism Exp Neurol 2001 171 29 45 11520119
287 Lue LF Yan SD Stern DM Walker DG Preventing activation of receptor for advanced glycation endproducts in Alzheimer’s disease Curr Drug Targets CNS Neurol Disord 2005 4 249 266 15975028
288 Beach TG Sue LI Walker DG Marked microglial reaction in normal aging human substantia nigra: correlation with extraneuronal neuromelanin pigment deposits Acta Neuropathol 2007 114 419 424 17639428
289 Nakahara H Konishi Y Beach TG Yamada N Makino S Tooyama I Infiltration of T lymphocytes and expression of icam-1 in the hippocampus of patients with hippocampal sclerosis Acta Histochem Cytochem 2010 43 157 162 21245982
290 Morimoto K Horio J Satoh H Expression profiles of cytokines in the brains of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) patients compared to the brains of non-demented patients with and without increasing AD pathology J Alzheimers Dis 2011 25 59 76 21368376
291 Tharp WG Lee YH Greene SM Vincellete E Beach TG Pratley RE Measurement of altered AbetaPP isoform expression in frontal cortex of patients with Alzheimer’s disease by absolute quantification real-time PCR J Alzheimers Dis 2012 29 449 457 22258516
292 Konishi Y Beach T Sue LI Hampel H Lindholm K Shen Y The temporal localization of frame-shift ubiquitin-B and amyloid precursor protein, and complement proteins in the brain of non-demented control patients with increasing Alzheimer’s disease pathology Neurosci Lett 2003 348 46 50 12893422
293 Caselli RJ Walker D Sue L Sabbagh M Beach T Amyloid load in nondemented brains correlates with APOE e4 Neurosci Lett 2010 473 168 171 20153809
294 Kane MD Lipinski WJ Callahan MJ Evidence for seeding of beta -amyloid by intracerebral infusion of Alzheimer brain extracts in beta -amyloid precursor protein-transgenic mice J Neurosci 2000 20 3606 3611 10804202
295 Kuo YM Emmerling MR Woods AS Cotter RJ Roher AE Isolation, chemical characterization, and quantitation of A beta 3- pyroglutamyl peptide from neuritic plaques and vascular amyloid deposits Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1997 237 188 191 9266855
296 Kuo YM Webster S Emmerling MR De Lima N Roher AE Irreversible dimerization/tetramerization and post-translational modifications inhibit proteolytic degradation of Abeta peptides of Alzheimer’s disease Biochim Biophys Acta 1998 1406 291 298 9630681
297 Kuo YM Kokjohn TA Kalback W Amyloid-beta peptides interact with plasma proteins and erythrocytes: implications for their quantitation in plasma Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2000 268 750 756 10679277
298 Kuo YM Kokjohn TA Beach TG Comparative analysis of amyloid-beta chemical structure and amyloid plaque morphology of transgenic mouse and Alzheimer’s disease brains J Biol Chem 2001 276 12991 12998 11152675
299 Kuo YM Emmerling MR Bisgaier CL Elevated low-density lipoprotein in Alzheimer’s disease correlates with brain abeta 1–42 levels Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1998 252 711 715 9837771
300 Lue LF Kuo YM Roher AE Soluble amyloid beta peptide concentration as a predictor of synaptic change in Alzheimer’s disease Am J Pathol 1999 155 853 862 10487842
301 Roher AE Baudry J Chaney MO Kuo YM Stine WB Emmerling MR Oligomerizaiton and fibril asssembly of the mayloid-beta protein Biochim Biophys Acta 2000 1502 31 43 10899429
302 Van Vickle GD Esh CL Kokjohn TA Presenilin-1 280Glu--&gt;Ala mutation alters C-terminal APP processing yielding longer abeta peptides: implications for Alzheimer’s disease Mol Med 2008 14 184 194 18317569
303 Kokjohn TA Van Vickle GD Maarouf CL Chemical characterization of pro-inflammatory amyloid-beta peptides in human atherosclerotic lesions and platelets Biochim Biophys Acta 2011 1812 1508 1514 21784149
304 Kuo YM Emmerling MR Lampert HC High levels of circulating Abeta42 are sequestered by plasma proteins in Alzheimer’s disease Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1999 257 787 791 10208861
305 Maarouf CL Daugs ID Spina S Histopathological and molecular heterogeneity among individuals with dementia associated with Presenilin mutations Mol Neurodegener 2008 3 20 19021905
306 Maarouf CL Daugs ID Kokjohn TA Alzheimer’s disease and non-demented high pathology control nonagenarians: comparing and contrasting the biochemistry of cognitively successful aging PLoS ONE 2011 6 e27291 22087282
307 Roher AE Kokjohn TA Esh C The human amyloid-beta precursor protein770 mutation V717F generates peptides longer than amyloid-beta-(40–42) and flocculent amyloid aggregates J Biol Chem 2004 279 5829 5836 14645225
308 Decourt B Gonzales A Beach TG BACE1 levels by APOE genotype in non-demented and Alzheimer’s post-mortem brains Curr Alzheimer Res 2013 10 309 315 23036023
309 Han P Tang Z Yin J Pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide protects against beta-amyloid toxicity Neurobiol Aging 2014 35 2064 2071 24726470
310 Han P Liang W Baxter LC Pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide is reduced in Alzheimer disease Neurology 2014 82 1724 1728 24719484
311 Boeve BF Silber MH Ferman TJ Clinicopathologic correlations in 172 cases of rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder with or without a coexisting neurologic disorder Sleep Med 2013 14 754 762 23474058
312 Adler CH Hentz JG Shill HA Probable RBD is increased in Parkinson’s disease but not in essential tremor or restless legs syndrome Parkinsonism Relat Disord 2011 17 456 458 21482171
313 Adler CH Shill HA Beach TG Essential tremor and Parkinson’s disease: lack of a link Mov Disord 2011 26 372 377 21284040
314 Shill HA Adler CH Hentz JG Purkinje cell loss in essential tremor Mov Disord 2014 29 496 500 24532134
315 Shill HA Adler CH Beach TG Pathology in essential tremor Parkinsonism Relat Disord 2012 18 Suppl 1 S135 S137 22166412
316 Shill HA Adler CH Beach TG Brain biochemistry in autopsied patients with essential tremor Mov Disord 2012 27 113 117 22038525
317 Shill HA De LV Samanta J Stacy M Motor learning in essential tremor Mov Disord 2009 24 926 928 19243062
318 Shneyder N Adler CH Hentz JG Autonomic complaints in patients with restless legs syndrome Sleep Med 2013 14 1413 1416 24152795
319 Symanski C Shill HA Dugger B Essential tremor is not associated with cerebellar Purkinje cell loss Mov Disord 2014 29 496 500 24532134
320 Shill HA Adler CH Sabbagh MN Pathologic findings in prospectively ascertained essential tremor subjects Neurology 2008 70 1452 1455 18413570
321 Caviness JN Adler CH Hentz JG Incidental Lewy body disease: electrophysiological findings suggesting pre-clinical Lewy body disorders Clin Neurophysiol 2011 122 2426 2432 21616709
322 Caviness JN Sabbagh M Connor D Quantitative electroencephalography can distinguish between Parkinson’s disease patient groups classified according to clinical cognitive dysfunction and neuropsychometric performance Neurology 2006 66 5 Suppl 2 A210 A211
323 Caviness JN Adler CH Beach TG Wetjen KL Caselli RJ Small-amplitude cortical myoclonus in Parkinson’s disease: physiology and clinical observations Mov Disord 2002 17 657 662 12210853
324 Caviness JN Smith BE Clarke SJ Motor unit number estimates in idiopathic Parkinson’s disease Parkinsonism Relat Disord 2002 8 161 164 12039425
325 Caviness JN Lue LF Beach TG Parkinson’s disease, cortical dysfunction, and alpha-synuclein Mov Disord 2011 26 1436 1442 21542019
326 Caviness JN Adler CH Sabbagh MN Connor DJ Hernandez JL Lagerlund TD Abnormal corticomuscular coherence is associated with the small amplitude cortical myoclonus in Parkinson’s disease Mov Disord 2003 18 1157 1162 14534920
327 Caviness JN Adler CH Caselli RJ Hernandez JL Electrophysiology of the myoclonus in dementia with Lewy bodies Neurology 2003 60 523 524 12578948
328 Caviness JN Hentz JG Evidente VG Both early and late cognitive dysfunction affects the electroencephalogram in Parkinson’s disease Parkinsonism Relat Disord 2007 13 348 354 17347022
329 Caviness JN Shill HA Sabbagh MN Evidente VG Hernandez JL Adler CH Corticomuscular coherence is increased in the small postural tremor of Parkinson’s disease Mov Disord 2006 21 492 499 16250028
330 Klassen BT Hentz JG Shill HA Quantitative EEG as a predictive biomarker for Parkinson disease dementia Neurology 2011 77 118 124 21633128
331 Sabbagh MN Lahti T Connor DJ Functional ability correlates with cognitive impairment in Parkinson’s disease and Alzheimer’s disease Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 2007 24 327 334 17851237
332 Sabbagh MN Cooper K DeLange J Functional, global and cognitive decline correlates to accumulation of Alzheimer’s pathology in MCI and AD Curr Alzheimer Res 2010 7 280 286 19715548
333 Sabbagh MN Silverberg N Bircea S Is the functional decline of Parkinson’s disease similar to the functional decline of Alzheimer’s disease? Parkinsonism Relat Disord 2005 11 311 315 15886042
334 Adler CH Mild cognitive impairment in Parkinson’s disease Parkinsonism Relat Disord 2009 15 Suppl 3 S81 S82 20083015
335 Caviness JN Driver-Dunckley E Connor DJ Defining mild cognitive impairment in Parkinson’s disease Mov Disord 2007 22 1272 1277 17415797
336 Sabbagh MN Shah F Reid RT Pathologic and nicotinic receptor binding differences between mild cognitive impairment, Alzheimer disease, and normal aging Arch Neurol 2006 63 1771 1776 17172618
337 Adler CH Connor DJ Hentz JG Incidental Lewy body disease: clinical comparison to a control cohort Mov Disord 2010 25 642 646 20175211
338 Caviness JN Adler CH Beach TG Wetjen KL Caselli RJ Myoclonus in Lewy body disorders Adv Neurol 2002 89 23 30 11968449
339 Damian A Adler CH Hentz JG Autonomic function, as self-reported on the SCOPA-autonomic questionnaire, is normal in essential tremor but not in Parkinson’s disease Parkinsonism Relat Disord 2012 18 1089 1093 22771283
340 Okuda T Shiotani S Sakamoto N Kobayashi T Background and current status of postmortem imaging in Japan: short history of “Autopsy imaging (Ai)” Forensic Sci Int 2013 225 3 8 22480884
341 Beach TG Schneider JA Sue LI Theoretical impact of Florbetapir (18F) amyloid imaging on diagnosis of alzheimer dementia and detection of preclinical cortical amyloid J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2014 73 948 953 25192053
342 Ikonomovic MD Klunk WE Abrahamson EE Post-mortem correlates of in vivo PiB-PET amyloid imaging in a typical case of Alzheimer’s disease Brain 2008 131 1630 1645 18339640
343 Leinonen V Koivisto AM Savolainen S Amyloid and tau proteins in cortical brain biopsy and Alzheimer’s disease Ann Neurol 2010 68 446 453 20976765
344 Rinne JO Wong DF Wolk DA [(18)F]Flutemetamol PET imaging and cortical biopsy histopathology for fibrillar amyloid beta detection in living subjects with normal pressure hydrocephalus: pooled analysis of four studies Acta Neuropathol 2012 124 833 845 23053137
345 Schneider JA Arvanitakis Z Bang W Bennett DA Mixed brain pathologies account for most dementia cases in community-dwelling older persons Neurology 2007 69 2197 2204 17568013
