LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


0370712
3660
Exp Neurol
Exp. Neurol.
Experimental neurology
0014-4886
1090-2430

26024860
4644457
10.1016/j.expneurol.2015.05.013
NIHMS694493
Article
Modeling the complex pathology of Alzheimer’s disease in Drosophila
Fernandez-Funez Pedro 123*
de Mena Lorena 1
Rincon-Limas Diego E. 123*
1 McKnight Brain Institute, Department of Neurology, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA
2 Department of Neuroscience and Center for Translational Research in Neurodegenerative Disease, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA
3 Genetics Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA
* Correspondence to: PF-F: pedro.fernandez@neurology.ufl.edu, and, DER-L: diego.rincon@neurology.ufl.edu, Department of Neurology 1149 Newell Dr. McKnight Brain Institute University of Florida Gainesville, FL 32611, USA
28 5 2015
27 5 2015
12 2015
01 12 2016
274 0 0 5871
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the leading cause of dementia and the most common neurodegenerative disorder. AD is mostly a sporadic disorder and its main risk factor is age, but mutations in three genes that promote the accumulation of the amyloid-β (Aβ42) peptide revealed the critical role of Amyloid precursor protein (APP) processing in AD. Neurofibrillary tangles enriched in tau are the other pathological hallmark of AD, but the lack of causative tau mutations still puzzles researchers. Here, we describe the contribution of a powerful invertebrate model, the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster, to uncovering the function and pathogenesis of human APP, Aβ42, and tau. APP and tau participate in many complex cellular processes, although their main function is microtubule stabilization and the to-and-fro transport of axonal vesicles. Additionally, expression of secreted Aβ42 induces prominent neuronal death in Drosophila, a critical feature of AD, making this model a popular choice for identifying intrinsic and extrinsic factors mediating Aβ42 neurotoxicity. Overall, Drosophila has made significant contributions to better understand the complex pathology of AD, although additional insight can be expected from combining multiple transgenes, performing genome-wide loss-of-function screens, and testing anti-tau therapies alone or in combination with Aβ42.


1. INTRODUCTION

1.1. Etiology and pathology of Alzheimer’s disease

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most prevalent neurodegenerative disorder and the leading cause of dementia among the elderly. The main risk factor for AD is age, with one in nine people above 65 and one-third over 85 suffering AD (Thies et al., 2013). At least 5.2 million Americans had AD in 2013, most of them over 65 years old. Since the risk for AD is the same across racial groups and geographic location, aging populations in Western Europe and Japan currently face similar economic, social, and medical burdens. Moreover, the AD burden is expected to grow for many emerging economies in Asia and Latin America over the next decades, reaching the level of a global epidemic. At a pathological level, the AD brain is characterized by the shrinkage of several regions, starting with those implicated in memory and cognition - hippocampus and cortex, which explains the early symptoms of memory loss and confusion. In addition to cell loss, the AD brain accumulates two characteristic protein deposits: amyloid plaques enriched in the amyloid-β (Aβ42) peptide and neurofibrillary tangles (NFT) enriched in hyperphosphorylated tau (Overk and Masliah, 2014). Both Aβ42 and hyperphosphorylated tau are prone to misfold and form soluble assemblies (oligomers and protofibers), which have shown to be highly toxic in some experimental settings (Benilova et al., 2012; Hardy, 2009). These oligomers continue to aggregate over time into highly organized, insoluble amyloid fibers that have a diagnostic value for AD. Despite the recent emphasis on understanding the role of oligomers in neurotoxicity, both soluble and insoluble Aβ42 and tau assemblies may contribute to disease in the complex environment of the human brain; thus, neutralizing the toxicity of different aggregates remains an unmet challenge in the field (Golde et al., 2013).

AD is a complex neurological disorder with sporadic etiology, except for a small fraction of cases with familial inheritance. Familial forms of AD are linked to mutations in three functionally related genes: the Amyloid precursor protein (APP) and Presenilis (PS) 1 and 2, two key γ-secretase components (Karch et al., 2014). APP encodes a transmembrane protein that is cleaved by combinations of α-, β-, and γ- secretases, which results in the release of several proteolytic fragments, including Aβ40 and Aβ42 (Fig. 1). Mutations in APP, PS1, and PS2 favor the production of the Aβ42 peptide, thus supporting a central role for Aβ42 in AD. The presence of Aβ42 deposits in the brain of AD patients and the genetic links that favor the production of Aβ42 led to the amyloid cascade hypothesis, which posits that the accumulation of Aβ42 is the triggering event in AD (Hardy and Higgins, 1992). Although this hypothesis was recently revised to recognize the role of both Aβ42 and tau oligomers in synaptic toxicity and neuronal loss, its basic premise still drives AD research and the search for elusive therapies (Hardy, 2009). In our current understanding, tau acts downstream of Aβ42 and plays a key role in promoting neuronal toxicity and neuronal loss. The experimental evidence for this connection came from the study of mice expressing mutant APP, PS1, and tau, in which clearance of Aβ42 reduced tau aggregation, but increasing tau burden had no effect on Aβ42 pathology (Oddo et al., 2007). In addition, reduction of tau levels rescued the memory deficits induced by Aβ42, supporting the downstream role of tau in AD pathogenesis (Roberson et al., 2007). Recent work has identified the molecular mechanisms linking extracellular Aβ42 and intracellular tau (see below), although more work is still needed to define in more detail all the factors implicated in this key pathogenic process. Overall, despite tremendous advances in our understanding of AD pathogenesis, this knowledge has not yet led to the development of disease-modifying therapies. Thus, more research is needed to better understand APP processing and the cellular pathways disrupted by Aβ42 and tau.

1.2. The winged supermodel

You may be thinking about the Victoria’s Secret angels. But the real winged supermodel is a small fruit fly (Drosophila melanogaster) with genetic superpowers. To the untrained eye, fruit flies share little anatomical similarity to humans. But the conservation at the cellular, genetic, and molecular levels is striking based on the common evolutionary origin of all animals. The two Nobel prizes awarded to Drosophila researchers in the last 20 years on early development and innate immunity underscore the universality of basic biological principles. Moreover, the tripartite organization of the Drosophila brain (proto-, deuto-, and tritocerebrum) is homologous to the forebrain, midbrain, and hindbrain of humans, supporting the ancient origin of the brain (Reichert, 2005). Drosophila has driven genetics and developmental studies for over 100 years due to its easy handling in the lab, compact genome distributed in four chromosomes, and short generation time of just ten days from fertilized embryo to adult fly. Drosophila was one of the first organisms to be fully sequenced, at last providing the blueprint for mapping thousands of existing mutations (Adams et al., 2000). Comparisons with the human genome revealed that 74% of human genes causative of diseases are conserved in Drosophila (Chien et al., 2002), indicating the relevance of studying gene function in flies. The innovative resources for generating mutant strains has helped elucidate many complex biological processes, including the development, differentiation, and function of the nervous system, as well as evolutionarily conserved behaviors such as sleep, learning and memory, foraging, and aggression (Bellen et al., 2010).

In addition, fruit flies are a hotbed for technology development and innovation, which now allows the most sophisticated animal manipulations (Kondo, 2014; Mohr et al., 2014; Venken et al., 2008). The main advantage of Drosophila is the ability to manipulate gene expression with extraordinary precision. Despite the slow penetration of gene knock-in technology, recent developments with the fast and flexible CRISPR (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats)/Cas9 (CRISPR-associated protein 9) system adds another powerful weapon to the genetic arsenal of the fruit fly (Bassett et al., 2013; Gratz et al., 2013; Yu et al., 2013). Since its introduction in 1993, massive resources based on the UAS/Gal4 system are now available, including genome-wide RNAi libraries and thousands of Gal4 strains to map single neurons and circuits (Brand and Perrimon, 1993; Jenett et al., 2012). Two new expression systems, Q and LexA, provide added flexibility for creative and sophisticated gene manipulation (Lai and Lee, 2006; Potter et al., 2010). Finally, Drosophila has introduced many genetic-based tools to study neuronal circuits and function, including optical tracers, calcium sensors, and engineered channels to regulate neuronal function like the Transient receptor potential A [TrpA1] and Channelrhodopsin. Overall, the wealth of genetic tools for manipulating gene activity and neuronal function make Drosophila the most versatile model organism for the discovery of conserved physiological and pathological conditions.

1.3. Modeling neurodegenerative disorders in Drosophila

Rodent models of neurodegenerative diseases share many anatomical, pathological, and behavioral features of the respective human disorders. They are also expensive and time consuming, making them optimal for testing candidate genes and therapeutic agents. Here, Drosophila has proven useful because expression of human genes linked to dominantly inherited disorders perturb endogenous cellular functions, providing a flexible platform for uncovering the cellular mechanisms underlying neuronal loss (Rincon-Limas et al., 2012). These models have been exploited to test candidate pathways (e.g., chaperones, kinases and phosphatases, RNA-binding proteins) and to identify novel genes and pathways in unbiased screens. The first genetic screen revealed the intricate cellular processes implicated in Ataxin1–82Q toxicity, including the ubiquitin-proteasome complex, RNA metabolism, and transcriptional machinery (Fernandez-Funez et al., 2000). Several other large screens have been performed with other disease models, including Ataxin3–78Q, tau, and Aβ42 (Ambegaokar and Jackson, 2011; Bilen and Bonini, 2007; Cao et al., 2008; Rival et al., 2009; Shulman and Feany, 2003), providing a comprehensive, unbiased view of the complex cellular pathways underlying common and disease-specific mechanisms.

In addition to mimicking key pathological features of the corresponding human disease at the tissue and cellular levels, the complex repertoire of Drosophila innate behaviors, including larval and adult olfactory learning, courtship, grooming, aggression, and circadian rhythms, can also contribute to examine human diseases at the functional / circuit level. These behaviors are highly conserved based on the molecular machinery underlying them. For instance, Drosophila has played a key role in deciphering the molecular clock supporting circadian rhythms, including the identification of period, which are conserved in humans (Hardin, 2005). The same could be said for the pathways regulating memory formation, including cAMP and Protein kinase A signaling resulting in CREB activation (Davis, 2005). Some of these evolutionarily conserved behaviors have been exploited to characterize disease models and the protective effect of genes and drugs. Unfortunately, these assays are labor intensive despite recent automation efforts, making them impractical for large-scale genetic or pharmacological screens at this time. On the other hand, a simple innate locomotor behavior based on negative geotaxis (climbing) has been extensively used in many neurodegeneration models. This robust behavior is easy to score, allowing the longitudinal analysis of multiple genotypes at once. Since the progressive loss of climbing activity precedes neuronal loss, this simple assay mimics the progressive neuronal impairment typical of movement and cognitive disorders alike. Thus, the variety of behavioral assays provides the flexibility to study neurodegeneration at multiple levels, including the activity of conserved neuronal circuits based on shared molecular machinery (e.g., molecular clock, CREB signaling in memory).

Due to its complex etiology, many different Drosophila models of AD have been published over the last 15 years. Here, we will review Drosophila studies describing the biological function of APP and its Drosophila orthologue APP-like (APPL). We will also describe Drosophila models overexpressing human APP/BACE1 (β-site APP-cleaving enzyme), Aβ42, and tau, three phenotypic models that have contributed to elucidating the molecular mechanisms mediating AD toxicity.

2. APP FUNCTION AND PROCESSING IN DROSOPHILA

2. 1. The complex APP processing and its link to AD

APP is the key AD gene that links genetics with pathology. APP encodes a type I integral membrane protein, with the 695-residue isoform being the most common in neurons (Nhan et al., 2014; Shariati and De Strooper, 2013). The longer extracellular domain of APP contains the Aβ42 fragment, one of many fragments derived from APP and the main component of amyloid plaques (Fig. 1). More than 30 pathogenic mutations on APP cause early onset, familial forms of AD (Karch et al., 2014). These mutations promote Aβ42 production through altered γ-secretase activity or increased Aβ42 stability, thus providing the genetic link to the amyloid pathology. APP is constitutively cleaved by α-, β-, and γ-secretases during maturation (Coburger et al., 2014). Several α-secretases of the ADAM (a disintegrin and metalloprotease) family can cleave APP close to the membrane in the extracellular domain, producing secreted APP (sAPPα) and a C-terminal fragment (CTFα) (Fig. 1). Since α-secretase activity breaks the Aβ42 peptide, this is considered the non-amyloidogenic pathway. Only one β-secretase can cleave APP, BACE1, generating sAPPβ and the N-terminus of the Aβ peptides. Lastly, γ-secretase is a membrane complex containing PS1 or PS2, the other two gene products associated with inherited AD, that cleaves APP in the transmembrane domain to release the amyloid intracellular domain (AICD) and the Aβ peptides, from Aβ36 to Aβ43 (Fig. 1). Although the accumulation of Aβ42 is proposed to be the main event triggering AD pathogenesis, the biology of APP is highly complex and other APP fragments could have protective or neurotoxic activities. Hence, investigating the function of APP and its close orthologues in Drosophila may shed light on the role of APP in AD pathogenesis.

2.2. Evolutionary conservation of APP

The Drosophila APP orthologue, APPL, has a 25% identity and a 39% similarity (Luo et al., 1990) and shares the basic structure of human APP (Poeck et al., 2012). Appl deficient flies show mild behavioral phenotypes associated with locomotor reactivity that are partially rescued by human APP, demonstrating the functional conservation of APP (Luo et al., 1992). Drosophila contains all the secretases for APPL processing, including a single PS (Psn) and dBACE (Carmine-Simmen et al., 2009; Greeve et al., 2004). Loss of dBACE results in late larval/early pupal lethality, although its substrates are mostly unknown (Bolkan et al., 2012; Soldano et al., 2013). Flies can produce sAPPLα through the activity of the ADAM10 orthologue Kuzbanian, suggesting that the non-amyloid pathway is conserved from flies to humans. A critical difference between APP and APPL is the poor conservation of the Aβ sequence (Luo et al., 1992; Rosen et al., 1989). However, recent evidence indicates that β- and γ-secretases cleave APPL to generate a 64 residue Aβ-like fragment that aggregates, is thioflavin-S positive, and is neurotoxic in the eye and the brain (Carmine-Simmen et al., 2009). The evolutionary conservation of the pathway leading to the production of Aβ fragments suggests that these peptides have a yet unknown but critical function in neuronal physiology.

2.3. APP / APPL in axonal trafficking

Early studies revealed critical functions of APPL in axonal transport, neuromuscular junctions, and brain development in Drosophila (Luo et al., 1990; Martin-Morris and White, 1990; Torroja et al., 1996). The axonal trafficking function is one of the most thoroughly investigated since the original description that APPL overexpression caused the axonal retention of vesicles containing synaptic proteins (Fig. 2) (Torroja et al., 1999a). Table 1 contains a list of the constructs expressed in flies for the functional characterization of APP and APPL. The potential role of APPL as a vesicular receptor for kinesin-1 was further confirmed in Appl loss-of-function studies. Both Appl mutant flies and APP overexpression displayed the same axonal traffic jams as several known axonal transport mutants. Reduced kinesin-1 levels enhanced these phenotypes, whereas reduction of dynein suppressed them, thus supporting the interaction of APP and APPL with the axonal trafficking machinery (Gunawardena and Goldstein, 2001). Surprisingly, the combination of human APP and PS1 harboring familial AD mutations reduced the axonal blockade, indicating that full-length APP, not Aβ42, is responsible for these phenotypes (Stokin et al., 2008). Moreover, reduction of Psn levels affected the axonal mobility of APP vesicles, but not of other axonal vesicles, suggesting a potential new link of PS mutations to AD pathology (Gunawardena et al., 2013). A recent study monitored APP-YFP vesicles and found that kinesin-1 and dynein compete for dynein intermediate chain to determine transport directionality (Reis et al., 2012). Another mechanism regulating APP axonal transport involves epigenetic transcriptional regulation by the histone acetyltransferase Tip60. Tip60 forms a transcriptional complex with the intracellular domain of APP and Tip60 loss-of-function leads to axonal transport phenotypes similar to those of APP (Cao and Sudhof, 2001; Slomnicki and Lesniak, 2008). Tip60 overexpression rescued the APP-mediated traffic jams through direct interaction with the C-terminal domain of APP, suggesting that this interaction is critical for preserving neuronal activity (Johnson et al., 2013).

2.4. Other cellular functions of APP / APPL

APPL is widely expressed throughout the brain, but is not homogeneously distributed. APPL accumulates mainly in axonal projections, and appears highly expressed in the mushroom bodies and central complex, which agrees with the locomotor and memory deficits described previously (Luo et al., 1992; Torroja et al., 1996). According to a recent study, APPL acts as a novel, neuronal-specific modulator of the anterograde Wnt-PCP signaling involved in axon growth and guidance (Fig. 2) (Soldano et al., 2013). In addition, APPL mutant larvae showed fewer synaptic boutons, whereas APPL overexpression increased bouton number and changed synapse structure (Torroja et al., 1999b). This is a highly conserved pathway, suggesting a similar function for APP in mammalian brains.

More details about the function of APPL have emerged in recent years (Fig. 2). APP is known to bind microtubules directly or through tau, but flies lacking sAPPL exhibit severe disorganization of actin filaments and microtubules, suggesting a tau-independent role regulating the cytoskeleton (Li et al., 2004). sAPPL also regulates neuronal excitability through the modulation of K+ channel activity (Li et al., 2004). In addition, both APP and APPL can induce post-developmental axonal arborizations, which require the conserved C-terminus and interaction with the Abelson (Abl) tyrosine kinase (Leyssen et al., 2005). APPL is also highly expressed in the R7 photoreceptors, where it is necessary for proper axonal targeting into the medulla and UV light discrimination (Mora et al., 2013). Full-length APPL seems to be toxic to glia in the eye lamina, indicating that the activity of BACE is critical to prevent glia cell death (Bolkan et al., 2012). Finally, two recent studies addressed the role of APP/APPL in the function of brain circuits. Transient silencing of APPL in the mushroom bodies, the memory center of insects, demonstrated that it is specifically involved in long-term memory, which requires changes in synapse architecture (Goguel et al., 2011). In addition, APP overexpression in the courtship circuit decreased the preference of males to mate with younger females, but the total courtship remained the same, suggesting specific alterations in this circuit (Hu et al., 2014). These results support the hypothesis that APP function is critical to maintain synaptic activity, which could be relevant in AD.

2.5. A novel protective activity for APP / APPL

Although mice lacking APP function are viable, several potential neuroprotective activities have been proposed for APP, particularly from cell culture studies (Nhan et al., 2015). Interestingly, APPL is upregulated after traumatic brain injury, which agrees with the increased post-traumatic mortality in APPL mutant flies (Leyssen et al., 2005). APP/APPL have recently demonstrated an intriguing protective activity against progressive neurodegeneration (Wentzell et al., 2012). The loechrig (loe) mutant shows spontaneous vacuolization of the Drosophila brain, a phenotype that is exacerbated by Appl mutants and rescued by APPL overexpression (Tschape et al., 2002; Wentzell et al., 2012). Actually, sAPP or sAPPL suppresses the degeneration of several well-known neurodegeneration mutants in flies. Interestingly, the protective activity of sAPPL required the direct interaction with full-length APPL (Fig. 2), further suggesting a protective role for APPL, as indicated by the vacuolar changes and reduced longevity in flies lacking APPL function.

2.6. APP + BACE: physiologic models of AD

One of the first Drosophila models of AD was based on the expression of wild type human APP-695 (Greeve et al., 2004). APP overexpression showed progressive degeneration in the eye that was dependent on the activity of endogenous Psn. Triple transgenic flies expressing human APP and BACE1 together with Psn carrying pathogenic mutations showed strong amyloid pathology, demonstrating the toxicity of Aβ42 in a physiologic fly model of AD (Greeve et al., 2004). Treating these flies with β- or γ-secretase inhibitors reduced toxicity, indicating the potential utility of Drosophila to screen for selective β- or γ-secretase inhibitors. More recently, a similar model overexpressing human APP and BACE1 demonstrated neuroanatomical defects in the mushroom bodies, Aβ42 accumulation, and deficits in locomotion and memory (Chakraborty et al., 2011). Low levels of APP and BACE1 disrupted the architecture of the adult mushroom bodies and induced progressive memory loss, indicating the physiological relevance of this model (Mhatre et al., 2014). Automated serial electron microscopy followed by 3D reconstruction in 15 day-old flies expressing APP carrying the Swedish mutation (APPswe) revealed autophagy, abnormal axons, and enlarged mitochondria, telltale signs of neurodegeneration suggesting that mutant APP alone displays AD features in flies (Park et al., 2014).

2.7. Clinical relevance of APP models

Detailed work in flies has uncovered a conserved role for APP/APPL in the axonal transport of vesicles through direct and indirect interactions with the kinesin-1 and dynein trafficking machineries. APP loss-of-function can also alter the activity of Tip60, which can result in gene expression changes critical for maintaining healthy axonal trafficking. Additional functions critical for APP include synaptic remodeling and K+ channel activity, suggesting that APP mutations can contribute to cognitive decline. Finally, APP has a neuroprotective activity that may be relevant for AD pathology. Overall, these findings suggest that alterations on APP function can have an impact on AD beyond the production of Aβ42. If this is the case, then APP function could have a role in sporadic AD as well. Understanding the role of APP endogenous function in AD is critical because it could lead to additional therapeutic approaches based on restoring axonal trafficking, Tip60 transcriptional activity, synaptic architecture, and other neuroprotective activities.

3. DROSOPHILA MODELS OF Aβ42 NEUROTOXICITY

3.1. A varied menu of flies secreting Aβ42

A more direct approach to modeling AD neurotoxicity is to generate flies expressing a secreted form of the human Aβ42 peptide, thus mimicking the extracellular distribution of the main pathogenic trigger in AD. Several independent Aβ42 models are based on the fusion of distinct expression strategies and signal peptides (SP), resulting in different toxicity (Table 2). The first model fused the rat pre-proenkephalin SP with Aβ40 and Aβ42 (Finelli et al., 2004). As expected, Aβ40 accumulated in the in SDS-soluble fraction, whereas Aβ42 accumulated in the formic acid (insoluble) fraction, confirming its higher amyloidogenicity (Finelli et al., 2004; Iijima et al., 2004). Aβ42, but not Aβ40, reduced longevity, was thioflavin-S positive, and induced progressive locomotor dysfunction and neuronal degeneration. Although both peptides showed olfactory learning defects starting at 6–7 days of age, Aβ42 induced stronger phenotypes than Aβ40 (Iijima et al., 2004). Additionally, flies expressing Aβ42, but not Aβ40, directly under the control of the Glass Multimer Reporter enhancers (GMR-Aβ) exhibited weak eye disorganization, demonstrating their potential utility in large-scale genetic screens (Finelli et al., 2004).

A different model carrying a fusion of human Aβ42 with the SP from the Drosophila Necrotic protein showed several eye and CNS phenotypes with high accumulation of Aβ42 in the secretory pathway (Crowther et al., 2005). Interestingly, another group found that the same Necrotic SP produced Aβ42 carrying an additional Gln in the N-terminus, AβQ+42 (Allan et al., 2014). Fusion with the Toll SP produced pure Aβ42 that was not toxic, suggesting that the toxicity of AβQ+42 was due to the extra Gln. These results call for caution and validation when generating fusions with small peptides. This group later generated tandem Aβ40 and Aβ42 peptides and reported that toxicity of the Aβ42 dimers correlated with the levels of soluble oligomers (Speretta et al., 2012). We also generated a unique model expressing human Aβ42 fused to the Drosophila Argos SP, but included two independent copies of the construct in the same vector to induce higher expression level, resulting in stronger eye and CNS phenotypes (Casas-Tinto et al., 2011; Tare et al., 2011). A curious model expressing a fragment of Drosophila APPL spanning amino acids 767–831 equivalent to human Aβ42 demonstrated that, despite the low sequence conservation with Aβ42, the fly Aβ64 peptide is also toxic (Carmine-Simmen et al., 2009).

3.2. Intrinsic mechanisms mediating Aβ42 toxicity

The small size of Aβ42 enables the systematic analysis of how each residue contributes to misfolding, aggregation, and toxicity. One study calculated in silico the aggregation propensity of all possible amino acid substitutions in wild type Aβ42 and Aβ42 carrying the pathogenic arctic mutation E22G (Luheshi et al., 2007). Then, they took advantage of Drosophila to test in vivo the in silico predictions in a time- and cost-efficient manner. Expressing 14 mutants in transgenic flies, the authors found a strong correlation between the propensity to form protofibrils and neurotoxicity, and described the protective activity of L17R. Another in silico approach demonstrated that single amino acid substitutions are sufficient to induce Aβ40 toxicity (E3R) and to eliminate the toxicity of Aβ42-E22G (I31E) (Brorsson et al., 2010). Both mutations alter the relative amount of prefibrillar soluble aggregates, which are though to be the most toxic species. A more limited study analyzing Aβ42-L17P and -E22G reported that pathology correlated with subcellular distribution, with Aβ42-E22G inducing neuronal loss and Aβ42-L17P neurite degeneration (Iijima et al., 2008). Overall, the study of Aβ42 variants in vivo supports the high toxicity of small aggregates, including soluble oligomers and protofibrils.

3.3. Extrinsic factors mediating Aβ42 toxicity: metals

The presence of extrinsic factors, including iron, copper, and zinc, also affects Aβ42 aggregation and toxicity. Overexpression of the iron-binding protein ferritin and the iron chelator YM-F24 rescued Aβ42 toxicity, whereas loss-of-function enhanced it, suggesting a direct link between free iron and Aβ42 toxicity (Liu et al., 2011; Rival et al., 2009). A similar enhancement of Aβ42 toxicity was later reported in flies supplemented with copper and zinc in their diet (Hua et al., 2011; Sanokawa-Akakura et al., 2010). Treatment with specific chelators or overexpression of metal responsive transcription factor 1 (MTF-1) or metallothionein A (MtnA), two detoxifying proteins, prevented the toxicity of copper and zinc. The role of copper in Aβ42 toxicity was further confirmed in studies modulating the activity of high-affinity copper importers (Ctr1A, B, and C) and exporters (ATP7, Atox1), and FKBP56, an immunophilin though to modulate the levels of intracellular copper (Lang et al., 2013; Sanokawa-Akakura et al., 2010). Interestingly, Ctr1C loss-of-function increased the insolubility of Aβ42, suggesting that both iron and copper promote Aβ42 aggregation into less toxic amyloid fibers. Similarly, overexpression of the zinc transporter Zip1 (Zrt-Irt like protein 1) promoted Aβ42 aggregation and rescued its toxicity (Lang et al., 2013). In all, these papers support the ability of iron, zinc, and copper to delay Aβ42 aggregation, stabilizing more toxic soluble conformations.

3.4. Disruption of neuronal activity

Several papers have identified Aβ42-induced perturbations in Drosophila neurons as a means to uncover the pathogenic cascades responsible for neuronal dysfunction and degeneration. For instance, expression of Aβ42 in larval motor neurons reduced neurotransmitter release in the neuromuscular junction (NMJ), whereas expression in the muscle increased neurotransmitter release (Chiang et al., 2009). An anti-Aβ42 antibody reversed this effect, indicating that secreted Aβ42 was responsible for disrupting synaptic activity. In adult flies, expression of Aβ42 induced progressive failure of transmission in the giant fiber system together with depletion of mitochondria in presynaptic terminals due to slow axonal transport (Fig. 3) (Lin et al., 2014; Zhao et al., 2010). Further studies found reduced number of presynaptic vesicles, probability of vesicle release, calcium channels, and active zones (Huang et al., 2013). These critical changes in the presynaptic terminal preceded and might be responsible for the loss of presynaptic boutons. Similar reduction in synaptic activity was confirmed in cholinergic projection neurons of the olfactory system in pupae, which resulted in altered short-term memory (Fang et al., 2012), a significant finding because AD affects mainly cholinergic systems in the human brain. A study to pinpoint the mechanisms by which Aβ42 mediates memory loss found that Aβ42 stimulated PI3K-Akt signaling, which causes reduced long-term potentiation (LTP) (Fig. 3) (Chiang et al., 2010). Genetic and pharmacologic interventions reducing PI3K signaling rescued the memory defects of flies expressing Aβ42, supporting the critical role of this pathway in mediating neuronal dysfunction.

Although not a transgenic model, the treatment of primary cholinergic larval neurons with Aβ42 preparations altered the properties of A-type K+ currents (Kidd et al., 2006; Kidd and Sattelle, 2006). A recent study also described the selective degradation of Kv4 channels in flies expressing Aβ42 leading to neuronal hyperactivity (Fig. 3) (Ping et al., 2015). Reducing the levels of Kv4 channels led to locomotor defects whereas Kv4 overexpression rescued Aβ42 neurotoxicity, supporting a critical role for K+ channel activity in Aβ42 pathogenesis.

Other recent reports have documented the disruption of circuits responsible for innate behaviors. Although the lack of a molecular clock had no effect on locomotion and survival in flies expressing Aβ42, Aβ42 disrupted the rhythmic behavior of flies (Chen et al., 2014; Long et al., 2014). Flies expressing Aβ42 lose their rhythmicity after several days in the dark despite the integrity of the clock neurons and the molecular oscillators. Interestingly, once flies expressing Aβ42 became arrhythmic, they never recovered their rhythm in light-dark cycles (Chen et al., 2014), suggesting that rhythm degradation occurs downstream of the central clock and may involve the synaptic components described above.

3.5. Disruption of endogenous cellular processes

A number of studies have identified endogenous signaling and cellular processes disrupted by Aβ42. As described above, Aβ42 causes the depletion of mitochondria in synaptic terminals and axons, which accumulate in the cell bodies of brain neurons (Iijima-Ando et al., 2009). This mislocalization of mitochondria is likely responsible for memory and locomotor deficits because disrupting the transport of mitochondria alone induced similar behavioral phenotypes. Authophagy has been identified as a protective cellular mechanism for recycling damaged organelles and degrading protein aggregates. However, Drosophila brain neurons expressing Aβ42 accumulate autophagic vesicles fused with lysosomes and their acidic contents seem to leak causing the progressive vacuolation of the cytosol (Fig. 3) (Ling et al., 2009). Although activation of autophagy was protective initially, inhibition of autophagy partially rescued Aβ42 toxicity, supporting a deleterious role for this pathway in Aβ42 pathogenesis.

Another critical cellular perturbation induced by Aβ42 is ER stress, a condition that can result in cell death. In response to ER stress, a coordinated signaling system launches the unfolded protein response (UPR), which inhibits protein translation and promotes refolding and degradative activities in the ER to restore protein homeostasis. We found that Aβ42 induces ER stress in the Drosophila eye as indicated by the activation of the unconventional splicing of the X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) (Fig. 3) (Casas-Tinto et al., 2011). Aβ42 and other amyloids are known to induce ER stress, but we showed for the first time that overexpression of Drosophila XBP1 or murine XBP1s (spliced) suppressed Aβ42 toxicity. We found that XBP1s prevented the deleterious effects of releasing calcium from the intracellular stores through ryanodine calcium channels.

A key feature of AD is the progressive neuronal cell death in specific brain regions; unfortunately, no APP mouse model shows cell death in the absence of tau transgenes (Hall and Roberson, 2012). In contrast, flies expressing Aβ42 show prominent neuronal loss in the developing eyes and in adult brains. Several pathways can promote cell death in response to intrinsic and extrinsic signals, but flies expressing Aβ42 activate the c-Jun amino terminal kinase (JNK) pathway (Fig. 3) (Tare et al., 2011). Since genetic and pharmacologic inhibition of JNK signaling rescue Aβ42 toxicity in the eye and the brain, JNK signaling plays a key role in Aβ42-mediated cell death (Hong et al., 2012; Tare et al., 2011). Moreover, jointly blocking JNK signaling and caspase activation completely restored the normal architecture of the eye, indicating that both pathways contribute to Aβ42 toxicity. Overall, these approaches demonstrated the utility of Drosophila for identifying pathogenic mechanisms of Aβ42 that may be conserved in humans.

3.6. Protective activity of candidate genes

The easy and flexible manipulation of Drosophila makes it an ideal system for testing the protective activity of candidate genes or identifying unknown factors in genetic screens. Neprilysin is one of the known Aβ42-degrading enzymes and its neuroprotective activity has been shown in fly and mouse AD models (Blurton-Jones et al., 2014; Finelli et al., 2004; Iijima-Ando et al., 2008; Marr et al., 2003). Interestingly, Neprilysin overexpression in the brain shortened lifespan and induced neuropathology associated with reduced activity of c-AMP-responsive element-binding protein (CREB), a key stimulus- dependent transcriptional regulator in neurons (Iijima-Ando et al., 2008). The authors also described an age-dependent reduction of Neprilysin expression, which they argue is a critical protective mechanism during aging, but may also contribute to the increased risk for AD. Neuroserpin is a serine protease inhibitor that binds Aβ42 and is found in amyloid plaques in AD patients (Kinghorn et al., 2006). Whereas this interaction inhibits the activity of neuroserpin, it increases the aggregation of Aβ42 into an off-pathway non-toxic species. Co-expression with Aβ42 rescued the toxicity of neuroserpin in flies, supporting the biological relevance of this interaction. Puromycin-sensitive aminopeptidase (PSA) was initially identified as a suppressor of tau pathogenesis (Karsten et al., 2006) and was later isolated as a suppressor of Aβ42 toxicity in a genetic screen, but the mechanisms mediating its protective activity remain to be elucidated (Kruppa et al., 2013). Despite the robust protective activity of molecular chaperones against several intracellular amyloids, particularly polyglutamines, the in vivo role of chaperones against extracellular amyloids such as Aβ42 have received less attention. A recent paper demonstrated that secretion of the BRICHOS chaperone domain suppressed Aβ42 toxicity and promoted the accumulation of soluble Aβ42 aggregates (Hermansson et al., 2014). Similarly, we found that a secreted form of Hsp70 (secHsp70) rescues the glassy eye, locomotor activity, longevity, neuronal architecture, and cell death without obvious changes in Aβ42 aggregation (LM, DERL, PFF, unpublished data). Thus, the protective activity of Aβ42-binding proteins could be mediated by masking the neurotoxic epitopes of Aβ42, hence preventing its interaction with substrates that mediate the deleterious signals.

3.7. Novel mechanisms of Aβ42 toxicity

Although several pathways modulating Aβ42 toxicity were originally identified in genetic screens (Casas-Tinto et al., 2011; Rival et al., 2009), the Konsolaki lab has published the only genetic screen described in detail (Cao et al., 2008). This gain-of-function screen tested 1,963 randomly inserted enhancer promoter (EP) lines that can overexpress nearby genes (Rorth, 1996). The screen identified several pathways involved in the secretory pathway, cholesterol homeostasis, innate immunity, and chromatin organization.

Some of these modifiers of Aβ42, including vesicular transport, chromatin organization, and proteostasis, are common to intracellular amyloids like tau and Huntingtin-93Q, suggesting conserved mechanisms of toxicity for different proteinopathies (Shulman and Feany, 2003). A subsequent screen of loss-of-function alleles identified Toll, a key receptor of the innate immunity pathway, as a suppressor of Aβ42 toxicity (Tan et al., 2008). Interestingly, Aβ42 activated the Toll signaling pathway, suggesting that Toll, a pattern recognition receptor (PPR), recognizes the structure of Aβ42 aggregates as a danger-associated molecular pattern (DAMP), which explains the potent inflammatory response in AD brains (Salminen et al., 2009). More recently, the Crowther lab used a transcriptomic approach to identify the mechanisms mediating Aβ42 toxicity (Favrin et al., 2013). The microarrays identified genes involved in normal aging, including oxidative stress, immune response, and protein secretion, due to high levels of Aβ42 that altered gene expression in the young flies.

3.8. Pharmacological suppression of Aβ42 toxicity

To support the utility of the Aβ42 flies, several proof-of-concept studies demonstrated the benefits of agents known to directly interact with Aβ42 or alter pathways affected by Aβ42. For instance, the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor inhibitor MK-801 and Congo Red, a dye that inhibits Aβ42 aggregation, rescue the longevity of Aβ42 flies (Crowther et al., 2005). Lithium has been used for treating psychiatric conditions for decades and also inhibits glycogen-synthase kinase 3 β (GSK3β), which affects both APP processing and tau aggregation. Flies treated with lithium show rescued toxicity through a nonspecific inhibition of translation that reduced Aβ42 levels (Sofola et al., 2010; Sofola-Adesakin et al., 2014). Similarly, doxycycline, an antibiotic with demonstrated neuroprotective activity in several models, improved locomotor performance in flies expressing Aβ42 and promoted the accumulation of smaller, non-toxic Aβ42 aggregates (Costa et al., 2011). The turmeric root extract curcumin binds Aβ42 and has many anti-inflammatory activities. Feeding Aβ42 flies with curcumin dramatically rescued lifespan and locomotor activity, and increased Aβ42 fibrillation (Caesar et al., 2012). However, curcumin is a known pan-assay interference compound (PAINS) due to its membrane disruption activity, which may explain its multiple reported benefits in laboratory assays and the lack of long-term clinical benefits (Baell and Walters, 2014). Other Chinese traditional medicine extracts such as SuHeXiang Wan, a mix of 15 herbs, and the rhizome of Gastrodia elata demonstrated benefits in flies expressing Aβ42 (Ng et al., 2013; Park et al., 2013).

Small compounds are the traditional pharmacological therapies because of their superior pharmacodynamics. Two compounds designed to stabilize the α-helix region of Aβ42 (residues 13–26) were effective in preventing Aβ42 misfolding in vitro (Nerelius et al., 2009). Both the peptide mimetic Pep1a and Dec-DETA rescued longevity and locomotor activity in Aβ42 flies, indicating that stabilization of the central Aβ42 α-helix can be pursued as a therapeutic strategy in AD.

In addition to classic compounds and extracts, peptide and protein engineering are promising approaches for blocking Aβ42 toxicity. β-sheet breakers are short peptides designed to bind the amyloidogenic domains of Aβ42 and prevent the formation of β-sheet conformations that promote aggregation (Soto et al., 1998). A hexapeptide containing five N-methyl sites blocked Aβ42 aggregation in vitro and improved longevity and locomotor activity in flies (Pratim Bose et al., 2009). Moreover, small Aβ42-binding peptides carrying R residues with inverted sequences (retro-inversal), which increase bioavailability, promoted Drosophila hatching and locomotor activity (Acerra et al., 2014). Small Aβ42-binding proteins like the ZAβ43 affibody can also be selected by phage display. ZAβ43 and a dimeric ZAβ43 construct suppressed Aβ42 toxicity by promoting Aβ42 degradation (Luheshi et al., 2010). Another approach consists on expressing antibody fragments that recognize either the Aβ42 sequence or specific conformations. The expression of a camelid heavy chain antibody targeting oligomers demonstrated selective interaction with Aβ40 instead of Aβ42, resulting in increased toxicity in flies (Wacker et al., 2014). This work exemplifies the importance of examining the activity of selective agents in vivo, highlighting the role of the environment in the performance of engineered molecules. We have expressed two known single-chain variable fragment (scFv) anti-Aβ42 antibodies to demonstrate that scFvs retain their structure / activity in flies and that Drosophila can be used as a platform to screen for effective scFvs (LM, DERL, PFF, unpublished data).

3.9. Clinical relevance of Aβ42 models

The robust toxicity of Aβ42 in flies has made this model a successful test bed for genetic and pharmaceutical experimentation. These phenotypic models have played a key role in identifying the perturbations of endogenous pathways, including K+ channel activity, axonal transport, autophagy, and cell signaling, among others. Restoring the normal activity of these pathways in patients can have symptomatic benefits that improve the quality of life. Additionally, Drosophila has provided strong experimental support for the beneficial activity of metal chelators and a few known compounds that may be added to the current standard of care for AD. An important contribution of Drosophila is the efficient and cheap testing of risky therapies that may otherwise not be tested in mice. For instance, three approaches with potential protective activity - autophagy, Neprilysin, and camelid anti-Aβ42 antibodies -induced deleterious effects, supporting the use of Drosophila as an in vivo filter for new therapies. Overall, different approaches have demonstrated the utility of Drosophila as a platform for testing potential AD therapies, which can save time by selecting those that work best in vivo before moving to more expensive mouse trials.

4. DROSOPHILA MODELS OF TAUOPATHIES

4.1. The mystifying role of tau in brain pathologies

Tau is arguably the most puzzling piece of the AD chessboard. Tau pathology in the form of NFT is critical for definitive AD diagnosis, and tau pathology correlates better with cognitive decline than Aβ42, but tau mutations do not cause AD (Overk and Masliah, 2014). Tau pathology is also present in diverse neurological disorders collectively known as tauopathies, but tau mutations only cause non-AD dementias, including frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17) and Pick’s disease (Gendron and Petrucelli, 2009). A single human microtubule associated protein tau (MAPT) gene on chromosome 17 contains 15 exons and can generate six isoforms in the CNS upon alternative splicing of exons 2, 3, and 10 (Andreadis, 2012). Tau is mainly, but not exclusively, a neuronal microtubule-associated protein (MAP) and its expression is developmentally regulated, e.g., only the shortest isoform is present in human fetal brain. One of the major functions of tau is to stabilize axonal microtubules and promote their polymerization (Beharry et al., 2014). Other functions include interaction with actin cytoskeleton, neurite outgrowth, intracellular vesicle transport, interaction with plasma membrane, and anchoring of enzymes such as protein kinases and phosphatases, to name a few (Morris et al., 2011). Strikingly, tau-deficient mice do not display developmental abnormalities (Harada et al., 1994), suggesting that other MAPs compensate for tau function.

Among the tauopathies, AD is the most prevalent. According to the amyloid hypothesis, Aβ42 deposition in the brain triggers a number of cellular perturbations, including tau detachment from microtubules, tau aggregation, and subsequent formation of paired helical filaments that assemble into NFTs (Stancu et al., 2014). Indeed, several landmark articles have confirmed that Aβ42 is upstream of tau in AD pathogenesis and induces the conversion of tau into a neurotoxic state (Gotz et al., 2001; Hurtado et al., 2010; Oddo et al., 2007; Roberson et al., 2007). Additionally, recent studies suggest that pathological tau enhances Aβ42 toxicity via a feedback loop, suggesting that tau is also critical for Aβ42 toxicity (Ittner et al., 2010; Leroy et al., 2012; Roberson et al., 2007). Despite major discoveries on tau structure and assembly, phosphorylation, and interaction with microtubules, the mechanisms triggering tau neuropathology are still poorly understood.

4.2. First tau models and phosphorylation

Over the last 14 years, more than 30 different transgenic fly models expressing human tau have addressed fundamental questions in tau pathobiology. These flies express wild type or mutant tau, contain three or four microtubule binding repeats, and carry mutant phosphorylation sites for mechanistic studies (Table 3) (Gistelinck et al., 2012). The first Drosophila model of human tauopathies targeted tau to the CNS, leading to pathological tau phosphorylation, progressive neurodegeneration, and premature death (Wittmann et al., 2001). However, bona fide NFT were not detected in this model. Interestingly, NFT-like structures appeared when tau was co-expressed with Drosophila GSK3β or upon targeted expression in glial cells (Colodner and Feany, 2010; Jackson et al., 2002).

Given that the longest tau isoform contains more than 80 potential phosphorylation sites (Sergeant et al., 2008), the link between tau phosphorylation and toxicity has received considerable attention. Research in Drosophila tau models demonstrated that PAR-1 phosphorylation at S262 and S356 were critical for the subsequent phosphorylation of GSK3β sites using 0n4R tau (Fig. 4), suggesting that phosphorylation takes place in a structurally ordered pattern (Kosmidis et al., 2010; Nishimura et al., 2004). However, a different tau isoform - 2N4R - carrying the S262A and S356A substitutions still showed normal phosphorylation at the GSK3β sites, suggesting that the downstream activity of GSK3β is isoform-specific (Chatterjee et al., 2009). Another interesting observation is that single and double mutants in S/P or T/P phosphorylation sites had no effect on human tau toxicity, but mutating all 14 sites reduced toxicity, suggesting a cooperative activity in these phosphorylation sites (Steinhilb et al., 2007a; Steinhilb et al., 2007b). Moreover, eliminating 11 of these sites on a different tau isoform had no effect on toxicity, indicating again the critical role of tau isoforms in toxicity (Chatterjee et al., 2009). Overexpression of either human or fly tau led to hyperphosphorylation and microtubule destabilization, phenotypes that could be reversed by GSK3β inhibitors (Cowan et al., 2010; Mudher et al., 2004). Interestingly, these perturbations of tau and microtubules altered axonal transport without neurodegeneration, thus dissociating these tau activities.

4.3. Candidate approaches

In addition to the phosphorylation studies, tau-expressing flies have been applied towards dissecting the mechanisms associated with tau neuropathology (Fig. 4). For instance, mutant tau interacts with F-actin, and induces its accumulation into actin-rich rods in the fly brain, resembling the Hirano bodies found in AD (Fulga et al., 2007). This group also demonstrated that reduction of F-actin decreased tau toxicity and that cytoskeleton abnormalities occurred downstream of tau phosphorylation. Another report showed that silencing antioxidant defense pathways enhanced mutant tau neurotoxicity (Dias-Santagata et al., 2007). The authors found that the antioxidant vitamin E suppressed tau toxicity and the pro-oxidant paraquat enhanced it, confirming that oxidative stress is also a critical mediator of tau toxicity. A separate study showed that genetic inhibition of cathepsin D led to an enhancement of tau toxicity, highlighting the role of the lysosomal pathway (Khurana et al., 2010). Interestingly, this lysosomal dysfunction was not linked to higher levels or hyperphosphorylation of tau; instead, it was associated with caspase activation and accumulation of a more toxic and insoluble form of truncated tau. Moreover, mutations that disrupt endogenous calpain A or B, or an engineered calpain-resistant tau construct, suppressed tau toxicity (Reinecke et al., 2011).

Another candidate approach study identified the ER stress transcription factor XBP1 as potential regulator of tau toxicity. Overexpression of tau activated the XBP1-GFP reporter and loss-of-function of XBP1 exacerbated tau toxicity (Fig. 4), indicating the involvement of the unfolded protein response in tau toxicity (Loewen and Feany, 2010). The same group also demonstrated that tau modulates mitochondrial dynamics. Pathological tau inhibited the association of the fission protein DRP1 with mitochondria, resulting in mitochondrial elongation (Fig. 4) (DuBoff et al., 2012). In addition, the NAD synthase and chaperone NMNAT was found to interact with tau oligomers and promote their clearance (Fig. 4) (Ali et al., 2012).

More recently, tau neurotoxicity was associated with widespread loss of heterochromatin in flies, mice, and human AD brains. This heterochromatin loss occurred downstream of tau phosphorylation, was a consequence of oxidative stress and DNA damage, and induced aberrant gene expression (Frost et al., 2014). Drosophila neurons overexpressing tau showed DNA damage response, which is characterized by p53 upregulation (Fig. 4) (Khurana et al., 2012). Flies lacking p53 activity displayed enhanced tau neurotoxicity, indicating the protective activity of p53. A search for genes regulated by p53 uncovered targets involved in synaptic transmission and endocytosis, which were also protective in flies expressing tau (Merlo et al., 2014). Additionally, zinc triggered tau toxicity by promoting tau phosphorylation and aggregation (Huang et al., 2014). Interestingly, reduction of zinc through diet or the regulation of zinc transporters led to partial rescue of tau toxicity. The authors also found that site-directed mutagenesis of zinc-binding sites in a pathological tau transgene eliminated its toxicity and that restoration of zinc binding reverted toxicity. Overall, tau interacts with many cellular pathways and understanding how tau perturbs cell homeostasis is critical for designing effective therapies.

4.4. Tau genetic screens

So far, three genetic screens for modifiers of tau toxicity have been reported. The first screen was conducted in flies expressing tau-V337M in the eye (Shulman and Feany, 2003). From a collection of 2,276 EP strains, the authors identified kinases and phosphatases as the most prominent group of modifiers, including the homologues of cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (CDK5) and GSK3β as well as the Cdc25 phosphatases String and Twine. Other modifiers included inhibitors of apoptosis and cytoskeleton factors. A more recent screen was conducted using tau-V337M and a different collection of 1,250 EP strains (Blard et al., 2007). In this case, components of the cytoskeleton were also identified as modifiers of tau toxicity along with transcriptional cofactors, RNA binding proteins, and different types of transporters, to name a few. The last screen expressed the longest wild type tau isoform and screened ∼1,000 P-element lethal insertions and a collection of 900 EY overexpression strains (Ambegaokar and Jackson, 2011). This screen confirmed the expected involvement of kinases and cytoskeleton components, but also identified pathways not previously linked to tau toxicity such as RNA metabolism and chromatin regulation.

4.5. Functional interaction of Aβ42 and tau

Aβ42 and tau have a complex and intricate relationship in AD pathogenesis, which prompted several groups to investigate the functional interactions in flies. Early studies demonstrated that APPL synergistically enhanced the toxicity of bovine tau in larval motor neurons (Torroja et al., 1999a). Moreover, Aβ42 and tau also demonstrated a synergistic interaction that required changes in tau phosphorylation (Fulga et al., 2007). Additionally, co-expression of Aβ42 and tau exacerbated the axonal transport and synaptic phenotypes of either construct alone (Folwell et al., 2010). Interestingly, lithium prevented this synergistic effect, suggesting that GSK3β mediated the functional interaction (Fig. 4). In support of this, flies expressing Aβ42-E22G exhibited higher GSK3β activity and premature death (Sofola et al., 2010). Of note, a null mutant tau background alleviated the toxicity of Aβ42-E22G, supporting the hypothesis that tau mediates Aβ42 neuropathology through a feedback loop (Bloom, 2014). Flies expressing Aβ42 also show tau hyperphosphorylation at Ser262, which is a target for the Checkpoint kinase 2 (Chk2) (Iijima et al., 2010). Importantly, tau-S262A blocked phosphorylation and alleviated Aβ42 toxicity. Taken together, these studies provide valuable information regarding the potential mechanisms mediating pathological interactions between Aβ42 and tau.

4.6. Clinical relevance of the tau studies

Work on Drosophila and other models have identified the main kinases responsible for tau phosphorylation, including their hierarchical activity. Thus, kinase inhibitors should reduce tau phosphorylation and reduce its toxicity. However, these kinases have a multitude of substrates and, thus, blocking their activity may result in deleterious consequences. Developing substrate-specific inhibitors is a more appropriate long-term solution, but there are no guaranties that this strategy will work. Since tau misfolds and aggregates inside the cell, tau shares several pathogenic mechanisms with other intracellular amyloids, including autophagy, ER stress, and molecular chaperones, although these pathways are hard to activate by classic compounds. The most critical therapeutic opportunities for tau may come from the recent discoveries of its implications in heterochromatin maintenance and the DNA integrity. Better understanding of these tau activities can identify therapeutic targets, including p53, with potentially large effects on neuronal survival and function.

Concluding remarks

These studies show that Drosophila has significantly advanced our understanding of the biological function of APP and tau as well as the pathways mediating Aβ42 and tau neurotoxicity. Additionally, studies on a large number of Aβ42 and tau mutants, which are only feasible in invertebrate models due to the short generation time and cost, have provided invaluable in vivo information. Despite these advances, we have only begun to scratch the surface of APP / APPL processing and the biological function of their many proteolytic products. Similarly, tau has many isoforms and complex posttranslational modifications, both physiological and pathological, including glycation, ubiquitination, nitration, deamidation, oxidation, acetylation, and truncation, which are currently not well understood. Furthermore, single and compound Drosophila models can explore the role of Aβ42 and tau in neuronal loss and the prion-like propagation at a single-cell resolution. These flies can be used for drug screens or to identify novel genes that can block concomitant Aβ42/tau pathologies. These are only a few examples of the spectrum of opportunities in which fruit flies may provide unique insights in the years to come.

Acknowledgements

We apologize to those whose work we could not cite in this review. This work was supported in part by the 1R21NS081356 grant to DERL, an Ed and Ethel Moore AD research grant from the Florida Department of Health (4085924232), and funds from the UF department of Neurology to PF-F and DER-L.

Figure 1 APP processing

APP is a single-pass transmembrane protein (purple) that is cleaved by three types of proteases. Cleavage by of α-secretase (green) releases the secreted APPα (sAPPα) fragment. The C-terminal fragment α (CTFα) is then cleaved by the γ-secretase complex (black) to produce the amyloid intracellular domain (AICD). This is considered the non-amyloidogenic pathway because the activity of α-secretase breaks the Aβ fragment. Cleavage of APP by the β-secretase activity of BACE1 releases a smaller secreted fragment (sAPPβ) and CTFβ, which is a substrate for γ-secretase. This final cleavage releases AICD and Aβ fragments of different sizes, form 36 to 43 amino acids, with Aβ42 being the pathogenic trigger.

Figure 2 APP/APPL functions uncovered in Drosophila

The main function for APP/APPL is related to the transport of specific vesicles along axons (green spheres). These vesicles transport critical synaptic proteins, including neurotransmitters, and return proteins for recycling or signaling. APP/APPL functionally interacts with the axonal trafficking machinery composed of the kinesin and dynein protein complexes. The direct interaction of APP/APPL with kinesin explains the sensitivity of axonal trafficking to APP/APPL expression levels. Additionally, APP/APPL interacts physically with tau, which links APP to the microtubules and suggests potential new mechanisms for AD pathogenesis. In addition to the role of APP in vesicular transport, APP seems to exert other critical functions at the synapse, including the regulation of signaling across the synaptic space that controls axonal pathfinding and the formation of synaptic boutons. The AICD also interacts with Tip60 to regulate transcriptional activity and axonal transport. As shown in figure 1, APP/APPL can be cleaved and produce several fragments, including the toxic Aβ42 and the neuroprotective sAPP, which regulates the actin cytoskeleton and the activity of K+ channels.

Figure 3 Mechanisms of Aβ42 toxicity and aggregation described in Drosophila

Aβ42 monomers form soluble oligomers that can continue to aggregate into insoluble fibers. Metals slow down this last step, maintaining higher levels of toxic oligomers. Aβ42 have multiple deleterious activities in synapses, glia, and can penetrate in cells through both active and passive mechanisms. Aβ42 assemblies induce ER stress, activates JNK signaling leading to cell death, blocks clearance of autophagic vesicles, induces tau phosphorylation and blocks axonal transport, and results in the selective degradation of the Kv4 potassium channels. In synapses, Aβ42 oligomers reduce the number of mitochondria and synaptic vesicles, disrupt signaling, and alter neurotransmitter release, resulting in reduced synaptic activity. In glia, Aβ42 assemblies activate Toll receptors and launch anti-inflammatory responses. Some of the remedies against Aβ42 include proteases like Neprilysin and selective Aβ42-binding agents such as single chain antibodies and secreted chaperones.

Figure 4 Tau function and toxicity described in Drosophila

Tau binds microtubules and is critical for microtubule stability. Tau phosphorylation causes conformational changes and oligomerization that reduce binding to microtubules, resulting in microtubule destabilization and disruption of axonal trafficking. Tau contains numerous phosphorylation sites that are substrates for many kinases and phosphatases. Work in Drosophila suggests a hierarchical activity of kinases, with Par-1 (MARK) playing a priming role at Ser 262 and 356. This activity is critical for the activity of other kinases, in particular GSK3β, although the priming activity of Par-1 seems to be isoform-specific. Tau is also a substrate for CDK5, JNK, Chk2, and MAPK, although the hierarchy and functional interaction of these kinases are not fully known at this time. Chk2 is a negative regulator of the phosphatase String/Cdc25 and MAPK activates GSK3β, two examples of the hidden complexity of tau phosphorylation. Tau interacts with and causes the accumulation of F-Actin. Tau also induces ER stress and prevents the fision of mitochondria. Finally, cathepsin and caspases cleave tau, causing the accumulation of a highly toxic truncated tau (t-tau). The chaperone NMNAT is one of the few proteostatic mechanisms capable of degrading tau aggregates.

Table 1 Drosophila Aβ42 models

Human APP	Features	Relevance	References	
APP	WT	Full-length APP, 695 amino acid long	Merdes 2004
Fossgreen 1998	
APP-ΔCT	C-terminal deletion	C-terminal deletion	Fossgreen 1998
Gunawardena 2001	
APP-ΔNT	N-Terminal deletion	N-Terminal deletion	Fossgreen 1998	
APP Swedish	K670N + M671L	Full-length APP with Swedish mutations	Fossgreen 1998	
APP London	V717L	Full-length APP with London mutation	Gunawardena 2001	
APP-N684A	N684A	N684A mutation in the NPTY domain	Merdes 2004	
APP-Y682A	Y682A	Y682A mutation in the NPTY domain	Merdes 2004	
APP-ΔNPTY	NPTY deletion	Deletion of internalization sequence essential for ICD function	Merdes 2004	
APP/C99	Lacks N-terminal
extracellular domain	Mimics the BACE1 cleaved protein
isoform of APP	Finelli 2004
Takasugi 2003	
BACE	WT	Full length BACE	Carmine-Simmen 2009
Greeve 2004
Gross 2008	
Drosophila APPL				
Appl	WT	Full-length Appl	Torroja 99	
Appl-S	ΔTM and CT	Secreted, neuroprotective	Merdes 2004
Carmine-simmen 2009	
Appl-ΔCT	Δ CT	Secreted, neuroprotective	Gunawardena 2001	
Appl-ΔECD 1	Deletion 85–231	Membrane-bound Appl deleted for the
extracellular domain, including E1	Merdes 2004
Carmine-Simmen 2009	
Appl-ΔECD 2	Deletion 449–740	Deletion of the extracellular domain,
including most of E2.	Merdes 2004	
Appl-ΔICD	Deletion ICD	Membrane-bound Appl deleted for ICD	Merdes 2004	
Combinations				
dAppl + htau	Both WT	Stronger axonal trafficking phenotypes	Torroja 1999	
hAPP/hAPLP2	Chimeric	Chimeric hAPP carrying Aβ42 and CT
from hAPLP2	Gunawardena 2001
Merdes 2004	
hAPP and hBACE1	Both WT	Aβ42 production and increased toxicity	Carmine-Simmen 2009
Greeve 2004
Chakravorty 2011	

Table 2 Drosophila Aβ42 models

Transgene	Signal peptide	Insertion	Features	Reference	
GMR-Aβ40, -Aβ42	Rat pre-
proenkephalin	random	Weak eye phenotype	Iijima 2004	
Aβ40*, Aβ42*	Rat pre-
proenkephalin	random	Aβ42 ↑ toxic
Aβ40 ↓toxic	Finelly 2004	
Aβ42, -E22G, -L17P	Rat pre-
proenkephalin	random	Different subcellular
phenotypes	Iijima 2008	
Aβ40*, Aβ42*,
Aβ42-E22G*	dNecrotic	random	Aβ42-E22G ↑toxic	Crowther 2005	
Aβ42-E22G, I3 1E
Aβ40-E3R	dNecrotic	random	Aβ42-E22G non toxic Aβ40-E3R toxic	Bronsson 2010	
Aβ40, Aβ42,
Aβ42-E22G	dNecrotic	attP-51D	Locomotor dysfunction	Jahn 2011	
Aβ42 + A2F, R5Y,
D7R, E11G, H14W,
K16W, L17R, F20E,
N27W, M35F	dNecrotic	random	Aggregation/toxicity	Luheshi 2007	
Aβ42-E22G + F4D,
H6W, G9T, I3 1E	dNecrotic	random	Aggregation/toxicity	Luheshi 2007	
Aβ42-E22G	No SP	attP-51D	Cytoplasmic	Kruppa 2013	
Tandem Aβ40 or Aβ42	dNecrotic	attP-51D	Aβ42 with linker are toxic.
Aβ40 is not	Speretta 2012	
AβQ+42	dNecrotic	attP-96E	Toxic	Allan 2014	
Aβ42	dToll	attP-96E	Not toxic	Allan 2014	
dAβ	No SP	random	Forms amyloids and toxic	Carmine 2009	
Aβ42–2x	dArgos	random	Two independent copies
Highly toxic	Casas-Tinto 2011	
Aβ42	dHedgehog,
No SP	Random		Hua 2011	
Aβ42, 3H&gt;R	dHedgehog	attP-86F	Mutant metal binding site	Hua 2011	
* Highly used models

Table 3 Drosophila Tau models

Transgene	Features	Relevance	References	
Tau, -R406W, -V337M	WT and FTDP-17 mutations	Tau neurotoxicity	Wittmann 2001	
GMR-Tau 4R	WT expressed in eye	Tau neurotoxicity	Jackson 2002	
Tau 3R, 4R	3 or 4 microtubule-binding
repeats	Tau neurotoxicity	Mudher Williams 2000	
Tau-S2A, -S202A	S262, S356, or S202 &gt; A	Tau phosphorylation and
neurotoxicity	Nishimura 2004	
Tau-T/S&gt;A	14 T/S individually &gt; A	Tau phosphorylation and
neurotoxicity	Steinhilb 2007a	
Tau-AP, -E14	All 14 T/S &gt; A or E	Tau phosphomimetics and
neurotoxicity	Khurana 2006;
Steinhilb 2007b	
Tau-S2A, -S11A	S262 and S356 &gt; A,
11 S/T &gt; A	Tau phosphorylation and
neurotoxicity	Chatterjee 2009	
Tau-1–421	Truncated	Tau cleavage and
neurotoxicity	Khurana 2010	
Tau-K44Q/R-230Q	Calpain-resistant	Calpain-mediated Tau
proteolysis	Reinecke 2011	
Tau-ΔZB	Zinc-binding deficient	Zinc-mediated toxicity	Huang 2014	
Tau-Δ1–44, Δ45–441, Δ45-
Δ230, Δ231–441, Δ1–421,
Δ1–394, Δ395–441	Deletions from 2N4R	Tau proteolysis, myc-tagged	Geng 2015	
dTau	Fly Tau	Memory deficits	Mershin 2004	
bovTau-GFP	Tau reporter	Axonal tracing	Murray 1998	
Aβ42 + Tau	Tau 1N4R	Aβ42, Tau interaction	Folwell 2010;
Fulga 2007	
Aβ42 + Tau, Tau-S262A	Tau 0N4R WT and S262A	Aβ42-dependent Tau
phosphorylation	Iijima 2010	
All constructs are human tau unless specified. Described in more detail in Gistelink 2012

Highlights

We summarize the molecular pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease.

We describe the relevance of Drosophila to understand the basis of human diseases.

Many conserved functions of APP were identified in Drosophila.

Drosophila expressing human Aβ42 uncovered mechanisms of pathogenesis.

Drosophila identified pathways regulating human tau aggregation and toxicity.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Competing Interests: The authors declare that no competing interests exist.


References

Acerra N Kad NM Griffith DA Ott S Crowther DC Mason JM Retro-inversal of intracellular selected beta-amyloid-interacting peptides: implications for a novel Alzheimer's disease treatment Biochemistry 2014 53 2101 2111 24601543
Adams MD Celniker SE Holt RA Evans CA Gocayne JD Amanatides PG Scherer SE Li PW Hoskins RA Galle RF George RA Lewis SE Richards S Ashburner M Henderson SN Sutton GG Wortman JR Yandell MD Zhang Q Chen LX Brandon RC Rogers YH Blazej RG Champe M Pfeiffer BD Wan KH Doyle C Baxter EG Helt G Nelson CR Gabor GL Abril JF Agbayani A An HJ Andrews-Pfannkoch C Baldwin D Ballew RM Basu A Baxendale J Bayraktaroglu L Beasley EM Beeson KY Benos PV Berman BP Bhandari D Bolshakov S Borkova D Botchan MR Bouck J Brokstein P Brottier P Burtis KC Busam DA Butler H Cadieu E Center A Chandra I Cherry JM Cawley S Dahlke C Davenport LB Davies P de Pablos B Delcher A Deng Z Mays AD Dew I Dietz SM Dodson K Doup LE Downes M Dugan-Rocha S Dunkov BC Dunn P Durbin KJ Evangelista CC Ferraz C Ferriera S Fleischmann W Fosler C Gabrielian AE Garg NS Gelbart WM Glasser K Glodek A Gong F Gorrell JH Gu Z Guan P Harris M Harris NL Harvey D Heiman TJ Hernandez JR Houck J Hostin D Houston KA Howland TJ Wei MH Ibegwam C Jalali M Kalush F Karpen GH Ke Z Kennison JA Ketchum KA Kimmel BE Kodira CD Kraft C Kravitz S Kulp D Lai Z Lasko P Lei Y Levitsky AA Li J Li Z Liang Y Lin X Liu X Mattei B McIntosh TC McLeod MP McPherson D Merkulov G Milshina NV Mobarry C Morris J Moshrefi A Mount SM Moy M Murphy B Murphy L Muzny DM Nelson DL Nelson DR Nelson KA Nixon K Nusskern DR Pacleb JM Palazzolo M Pittman GS Pan S Pollard J Puri V Reese MG Reinert K Remington K Saunders RD Scheeler F Shen H Shue BC Siden-Kiamos I Simpson M Skupski MP Smith T Spier E Spradling AC Stapleton M Strong R Sun E Svirskas R Tector C Turner R Venter E Wang AH Wang X Wang ZY Wassarman DA Weinstock GM Weissenbach J Williams SM Woodage T Worley KC Wu D Yang S Yao QA Ye J Yeh RF Zaveri JS Zhan M Zhang G Zhao Q Zheng L Zheng XH Zhong FN Zhong W Zhou X Zhu S Zhu X Smith HO Gibbs RA Myers EW Rubin GM Venter JC The genome sequence of Drosophila melanogaster Science 2000 287 2185 2195 10731132
Ali YO Ruan K Zhai RG NMNAT suppresses tau-induced neurodegeneration by promoting clearance of hyperphosphorylated tau oligomers in a Drosophila model of tauopathy Hum Mol Genet 2012 21 237 250 21965302
Allan K Perez KA Barnham KJ Camakaris J Burke R A commonly used Drosophila model of Alzheimer's disease generates an aberrant species of amyloid-beta with an additional N-terminal glutamine residue FEBS Lett 2014 588 3739 3743 25171862
Ambegaokar SS Jackson GR Functional genomic screen and network analysis reveal novel modifiers of tauopathy dissociated from tau phosphorylation Hum Mol Genet 2011 20 4947 4977 21949350
Andreadis A Tau splicing and the intricacies of dementia Journal of cellular physiology 2012 227 1220 1225 21604267
Baell J Walters MA Chemistry: Chemical con artists foil drug discovery Nature 2014 513 481 483 25254460
Bassett AR Tibbit C Ponting CP Liu JL Highly efficient targeted mutagenesis of Drosophila with the CRISPR/Cas9 system Cell reports 2013 4 220 228 23827738
Beharry C Cohen LS Di J Ibrahim K Briffa-Mirabella S Alonso Adel C Tau-induced neurodegeneration: mechanisms and targets Neuroscience bulletin 2014 30 346 358 24733656
Bellen HJ Tong C Tsuda H 100 years of Drosophila research and its impact on vertebrate neuroscience: a history lesson for the future Nat Rev Neurosci 2010 11 514 522 20383202
Benilova I Karran E De Strooper B The toxic Abeta oligomer and Alzheimer's disease: an emperor in need of clothes Nat Neurosci 2012 15 349 357 22286176
Bilen J Bonini NM Genome-wide screen for modifiers of ataxin-3 neurodegeneration in Drosophila PLoS Genet 2007 3 1950 1964 17953484
Blard O Feuillette S Bou J Chaumette B Frebourg T Campion D Lecourtois M Cytoskeleton proteins are modulators of mutant tau-induced neurodegeneration in Drosophila Hum Mol Genet 2007 16 555 566 17309878
Bloom GS Amyloid-beta and tau: the trigger and bullet in Alzheimer disease pathogenesis JAMA neurology 2014 71 505 508 24493463
Blurton-Jones M Spencer B Michael S Castello NA Agazaryan AA Davis JL Muller FJ Loring JF Masliah E LaFerla FM Neural stem cells genetically-modified to express neprilysin reduce pathology in Alzheimer transgenic models Stem cell research &amp; therapy 2014 5 46 25022790
Bolkan BJ Triphan T Kretzschmar D beta-secretase cleavage of the fly amyloid precursor protein is required for glial survival J Neurosci 2012 32 16181 16192 23152602
Brand AH Perrimon N Targeted gene expression as a means of altering cell fates and generating dominant phenotypes Development 1993 118 401 415 8223268
Brorsson AC Bolognesi B Tartaglia GG Shammas SL Favrin G Watson I Lomas DA Chiti F Vendruscolo M Dobson CM Crowther DC Luheshi LM Intrinsic determinants of neurotoxic aggregate formation by the amyloid beta peptide Biophysical journal 2010 98 1677 1684 20409489
Caesar I Jonson M Nilsson KP Thor S Hammarstrom P Curcumin promotes A-beta fibrillation and reduces neurotoxicity in transgenic Drosophila PLoS One 2012 7 e31424 22348084
Cao W Song HJ Gangi T Kelkar A Antani I Garza D Konsolaki M Identification of novel genes that modify phenotypes induced by Alzheimer's beta-amyloid overexpression in Drosophila Genetics 2008 178 1457 1471 18245849
Cao X Sudhof TC A transcriptionally [correction of transcriptively] active complex of APP with Fe65 and histone acetyltransferase Tip60 Science 2001 293 115 120 11441186
Carmine-Simmen K Proctor T Tschape J Poeck B Triphan T Strauss R Kretzschmar D Neurotoxic effects induced by the Drosophila amyloid-beta peptide suggest a conserved toxic function Neurobiol Dis 2009 33 274 281 19049874
Casas-Tinto S Zhang Y Sanchez-Garcia J Gomez-Velazquez M Rincon-Limas DE Fernandez-Funez P The ER stress factor XBP1s prevents amyloid-beta neurotoxicity Hum Mol Genet 2011 20 2144 2160 21389082
Chakraborty R Vepuri V Mhatre SD Paddock BE Miller S Michelson SJ Delvadia R Desai A Vinokur M Melicharek DJ Utreja S Khandelwal P Ansaloni S Goldstein LE Moir RD Lee JC Tabb LP Saunders AJ Marenda DR Characterization of a Drosophila Alzheimer's disease model: pharmacological rescue of cognitive defects PLoS ONE 2011 6 e20799 21673973
Chatterjee S Sang TK Lawless GM Jackson GR Dissociation of tau toxicity and phosphorylation: role of GSK-3beta, MARK and Cdk5 in a Drosophila model Hum Mol Genet 2009 18 164 177 18930955
Chen KF Possidente B Lomas DA Crowther DC The central molecular clock is robust in the face of behavioural arrhythmia in a Drosophila model of Alzheimer's disease Dis Model Mech 2014 7 445 458 24574361
Chiang HC Iijima K Hakker I Zhong Y Distinctive roles of different beta-amyloid 42 aggregates in modulation of synaptic functions FASEB J 2009 23 1969 1977 19255256
Chiang HC Wang L Xie Z Yau A Zhong Y PI3 kinase signaling is involved in Abeta-induced memory loss in Drosophila Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010 107 7060 7065 20351282
Chien S Reiter LT Bier E Gribskov M Homophila: human disease gene cognates in Drosophila Nucleic Acids Res 2002 30 149 151 11752278
Coburger I Hoefgen S Than ME The structural biology of the amyloid precursor protein APP - a complex puzzle reveals its multi-domain architecture Biological chemistry 2014 395 485 498 24516000
Colodner KJ Feany MB Glial fibrillary tangles and JAK/STAT-mediated glial and neuronal cell death in a Drosophila model of glial tauopathy J Neurosci 2010 30 16102 16113 21123557
Costa R Speretta E Crowther DC Cardoso I Testing the therapeutic potential of doxycycline in a Drosophila melanogaster model of Alzheimer disease J Biol Chem 2011 286 41647 41655 21998304
Cowan CM Bossing T Page A Shepherd D Mudher A Soluble hyper-phosphorylated tau causes microtubule breakdown and functionally compromises normal tau in vivo Acta Neuropathol 2010 120 593 604 20617325
Crowther DC Kinghorn KJ Miranda E Page R Curry JA Duthie FA Gubb DC Lomas DA Intraneuronal Abeta, non-amyloid aggregates and neurodegeneration in a Drosophila model of Alzheimer's disease Neuroscience 2005 132 123 135 15780472
Davis RL Olfactory memory formation in Drosophila: from molecular to systems neuroscience Annu Rev Neurosci 2005 28 275 302 16022597
Dias-Santagata D Fulga TA Duttaroy A Feany MB Oxidative stress mediates tau-induced neurodegeneration in Drosophila J Clin Invest 2007 117 236 245 17173140
DuBoff B Gotz J Feany MB Tau promotes neurodegeneration via DRP1 mislocalization in vivo Neuron 2012 75 618 632 22920254
Fang L Duan J Ran D Fan Z Yan Y Huang N Gu H Zhu Y Amyloid-beta depresses excitatory cholinergic synaptic transmission in Drosophila Neuroscience bulletin 2012 28 585 594 23054636
Favrin G Bean DM Bilsland E Boyer H Fischer BE Russell S Crowther DC Baylis HA Oliver SG Giannakou ME Identification of novel modifiers of Abeta toxicity by transcriptomic analysis in the fruitfly Sci Rep 2013 3 3512 24336499
Fernandez-Funez P Nino-Rosales ML de Gouyon B She WC Luchak JM Martinez P Turiegano E Benito J Capovilla M Skinner PJ McCall A Canal I Orr HT Zoghbi HY Botas J Identification of genes that modify ataxin-1-induced neurodegeneration Nature 2000 408 101 106 11081516
Finelli A Kelkar A Song HJ Yang H Konsolaki M A model for studying Alzheimer's Abeta42-induced toxicity in Drosophila melanogaster Mol Cell Neurosci 2004 26 365 375 15234342
Folwell J Cowan CM Ubhi KK Shiabh H Newman TA Shepherd D Mudher A Abeta exacerbates the neuronal dysfunction caused by human tau expression in a Drosophila model of Alzheimer's disease Exp Neurol 2010 223 401 409 19782075
Frost B Hemberg M Lewis J Feany MB Tau promotes neurodegeneration through global chromatin relaxation Nat Neurosci 2014 17 357 366 24464041
Fulga TA Elson-Schwab I Khurana V Steinhilb ML Spires TL Hyman BT Feany MB Abnormal bundling and accumulation of F-actin mediates tau-induced neuronal degeneration in vivo Nat Cell Biol 2007 9 139 148 17187063
Gendron TF Petrucelli L The role of tau in neurodegeneration Molecular neurodegeneration 2009 4 13 19284597
Gistelinck M Lambert JC Callaerts P Dermaut B Dourlen P Drosophila models of tauopathies: what have we learned? Int J Alzheimers Dis 2012 2012 970980 22701808
Goguel V Belair AL Ayaz D Lampin-Saint-Amaux A Scaplehorn N Hassan BA Preat T Drosophila amyloid precursor protein-like is required for long-term memory J Neurosci 2011 31 1032 1037 21248128
Golde TE Borchelt DR Giasson BI Lewis J Thinking laterally about neurodegenerative proteinopathies J Clin Invest 2013 123 1847 1855 23635781
Gotz J Chen F van Dorpe J Nitsch RM Formation of neurofibrillary tangles in P301l tau transgenic mice induced by Abeta 42 fibrils Science 2001 293 1491 1495 11520988
Gratz SJ Cummings AM Nguyen JN Hamm DC Donohue LK Harrison MM Wildonger J O'Connor-Giles KM Genome engineering of Drosophila with the CRISPR RNA-guided Cas9 nuclease Genetics 2013 194 1029 1035 23709638
Greeve I Kretzschmar D Tschape JA Beyn A Brellinger C Schweizer M Nitsch RM Reifegerste R Age-dependent neurodegeneration and Alzheimer-amyloid plaque formation in transgenic Drosophila J Neurosci 2004 24 3899 3906 15102905
Gunawardena S Goldstein LS Disruption of axonal transport and neuronal viability by amyloid precursor protein mutations in Drosophila Neuron 2001 32 389 401 11709151
Gunawardena S Yang G Goldstein LS Presenilin controls kinesin-1 and dynein function during APP-vesicle transport in vivo Hum Mol Genet 2013 22 3828 3843 23710041
Hall AM Roberson ED Mouse models of Alzheimer's disease Brain Res Bull 2012 88 3 12 22142973
Harada A Oguchi K Okabe S Kuno J Terada S Ohshima T Sato-Yoshitake R Takei Y Noda T Hirokawa N Altered microtubule organization in small-calibre axons of mice lacking tau protein Nature 1994 369 488 491 8202139
Hardin PE The circadian timekeeping system of Drosophila Curr Biol 2005 15 R714 R722 16139204
Hardy J The amyloid hypothesis for Alzheimer's disease: a critical reappraisal J Neurochem 2009 110 1129 1134 19457065
Hardy JA Higgins GA Alzheimer's disease: the amyloid cascade hypothesis Science 1992 256 184 185 1566067
Hermansson E Schultz S Crowther D Linse S Winblad B Westermark G Johansson J Presto J The chaperone domain BRICHOS prevents CNS toxicity of amyloid-beta peptide in Drosophila melanogaster Dis Model Mech 2014 7 659 665 24682783
Hong YK Lee S Park SH Lee JH Han SY Kim ST Kim YK Jeon S Koo BS Cho KS Inhibition of JNK/dFOXO pathway and caspases rescues neurological impairments in Drosophila Alzheimer's disease model Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2012 419 49 53 22326868
Hu Y Han Y Wang X Xue L Aging-related neurodegeneration eliminates male courtship choice in Drosophila Neurobiol Aging 2014 35 2174 2178 24684795
Hua H Munter L Harmeier A Georgiev O Multhaup G Schaffner W Toxicity of Alzheimer's disease-associated Abeta peptide is ameliorated in a Drosophila model by tight control of zinc and copper availability Biol Chem 2011 392 919 926 21801085
Huang JK Ma PL Ji SY Zhao XL Tan JX Sun XJ Huang FD Age-dependent alterations in the presynaptic active zone in a Drosophila model of Alzheimer's disease Neurobiol Dis 2013 51 161 167 23149068
Huang Y Wu Z Cao Y Lang M Lu B Zhou B Zinc binding directly regulates tau toxicity independent of tau hyperphosphorylation Cell reports 2014 8 831 842 25066125
Hurtado DE Molina-Porcel L Iba M Aboagye AK Paul SM Trojanowski JQ Lee VM A{beta} accelerates the spatiotemporal progression of tau pathology and augments tau amyloidosis in an Alzheimer mouse model Am J Pathol 2010 177 1977 1988 20802182
Iijima K Chiang HC Hearn SA Hakker I Gatt A Shenton C Granger L Leung A Iijima-Ando K Zhong Y Abeta42 mutants with different aggregation profiles induce distinct pathologies in Drosophila PLoS ONE 2008 3 e1703 18301778
Iijima K Gatt A Iijima-Ando K Tau Ser262 phosphorylation is critical for Abeta42-induced tau toxicity in a transgenic Drosophila model of Alzheimer's disease Hum Mol Genet 2010 19 2947 2957 20466736
Iijima K Liu HP Chiang AS Hearn SA Konsolaki M Zhong Y Dissecting the pathological effects of human Abeta40 and Abeta42 in Drosophila: a potential model for Alzheimer's disease Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2004 101 6623 6628 15069204
Iijima-Ando K Hearn SA Granger L Shenton C Gatt A Chiang HC Hakker I Zhong Y Iijima K Overexpression of neprilysin reduces alzheimer amyloid-beta42 (Abeta42)-induced neuron loss and intraneuronal Abeta42 deposits but causes a reduction in cAMP-responsive element- binding protein-mediated transcription, age-dependent axon pathology, and premature death in Drosophila J Biol Chem 2008 283 19066 19076 18463098
Iijima-Ando K Hearn SA Shenton C Gatt A Zhao L Iijima K Mitochondrial mislocalization underlies Abeta42-induced neuronal dysfunction in a Drosophila model of Alzheimer's disease PLoS One 2009 4 e8310 20016833
Ittner LM Ke YD Delerue F Bi M Gladbach A van Eersel J Wolfing H Chieng BC Christie MJ Napier IA Eckert A Staufenbiel M Hardeman E Gotz J Dendritic function of tau mediates amyloid-beta toxicity in Alzheimer's disease mouse models Cell 2010 142 387 397 20655099
Jackson GR Wiedau-Pazos M Sang TK Wagle N Brown CA Massachi S Geschwind DH Human wild-type tau interacts with wingless pathway components and produces neurofibrillary pathology in Drosophila Neuron 2002 34 509 519 12062036
Jenett A Rubin GM Ngo TT Shepherd D Murphy C Dionne H Pfeiffer BD Cavallaro A Hall D Jeter J Iyer N Fetter D Hausenfluck JH Peng H Trautman ET Svirskas RR Myers EW Iwinski ZR Aso Y Depasquale GM Enos A Hulamm P Lam SC Li HH Laverty TR Long F Qu L Murphy SD Rokicki K Safford T Shaw K Simpson JH Sowell A Tae S Yu Y Zugates CT A GAL4-Driver Line Resource for Drosophila Neurobiology Cell Rep 2012 2 991 1001 23063364
Johnson AA Sarthi J Pirooznia SK Reube W Elefant F Increasing Tip60 HAT levels rescues axonal transport defects and associated behavioral phenotypes in a Drosophila Alzheimer's disease model J Neurosci 2013 33 7535 7547 23616558
Karch CM Cruchaga C Goate AM Alzheimer's disease genetics: from the bench to the clinic Neuron 2014 83 11 26 24991952
Karsten SL Sang TK Gehman LT Chatterjee S Liu J Lawless GM Sengupta S Berry RW Pomakian J Oh HS Schulz C Hui KS Wiedau-Pazos M Vinters HV Binder LI Geschwind DH Jackson GR A genomic screen for modifiers of tauopathy identifies puromycin-sensitive aminopeptidase as an inhibitor of tau-induced neurodegeneration Neuron 2006 51 549 560 16950154
Khurana V Elson-Schwab I Fulga TA Sharp KA Loewen CA Mulkearns E Tyynela J Scherzer CR Feany MB Lysosomal dysfunction promotes cleavage and neurotoxicity of tau in vivo PLoS Genet 2010 6 e1001026 20664788
Khurana V Merlo P DuBoff B Fulga TA Sharp KA Campbell SD Gotz J Feany MB A neuroprotective role for the DNA damage checkpoint in tauopathy Aging Cell 2012 11 360 362 22181010
Kidd JF Brown LA Sattelle DB Effects of amyloid peptides on A-type K+ currents of Drosophila larval cholinergic neurons J Neurobiol 2006 66 476 487 16470685
Kidd JF Sattelle DB The effects of amyloid peptides on A-type K(+) currents of Drosophila larval cholinergic neurons: modeled actions on firing properties Invertebrate neuroscience : IN 2006 6 207 213 17106756
Kinghorn KJ Crowther DC Sharp LK Nerelius C Davis RL Chang HT Green C Gubb DC Johansson J Lomas DA Neuroserpin binds Abeta and is a neuroprotective component of amyloid plaques in Alzheimer disease J Biol Chem 2006 281 29268 29277 16849336
Kondo S New horizons in genome engineering of Drosophila melanogaster Genes &amp; genetic systems 2014 89 3 8 24817756
Kosmidis S Grammenoudi S Papanikolopoulou K Skoulakis EM Differential effects of Tau on the integrity and function of neurons essential for learning in Drosophila J Neurosci 2010 30 464 477 20071510
Kruppa AJ Ott S Chandraratna DS Irving JA Page RM Speretta E Seto T Camargo LM Marciniak SJ Lomas DA Crowther DC Suppression of Abeta toxicity by puromycin-sensitive aminopeptidase is independent of its proteolytic activity Biochim Biophys Acta 2013 1832 2115 2126 23911349
Lai SL Lee T Genetic mosaic with dual binary transcriptional systems in Drosophila Nat Neurosci 2006 9 703 709 16582903
Lang M Fan Q Wang L Zheng Y Xiao G Wang X Wang W Zhong Y Zhou B Inhibition of human high-affinity copper importer Ctr1 orthologous in the nervous system of Drosophila ameliorates Abeta42-induced Alzheimer's disease-like symptoms Neurobiol Aging 2013 34 2604 2612 23827522
Leroy K Ando K Laporte V Dedecker R Suain V Authelet M Heraud C Pierrot N Yilmaz Z Octave JN Brion JP Lack of tau proteins rescues neuronal cell death and decreases amyloidogenic processing of APP in APP/PS1 mice Am J Pathol 2012 181 1928 1940 23026200
Leyssen M Ayaz D Hebert SS Reeve S De Strooper B Hassan BA Amyloid precursor protein promotes post-developmental neurite arborization in the Drosophila brain EMBO J 2005 24 2944 2955 16052209
Li Y Liu T Peng Y Yuan C Guo A Specific functions of Drosophila amyloid precursorlike protein in the development of nervous system and nonneural tissues J Neurobiol 2004 61 343 358 15389603
Lin JY Wang WA Zhang X Liu HY Zhao XL Huang FD Intraneuronal accumulation of Abeta42 induces age-dependent slowing of neuronal transmission in Drosophila Neuroscience bulletin 2014 30 185 190 24733651
Ling D Song HJ Garza D Neufeld TP Salvaterra PM Abeta42-induced neurodegeneration via an age-dependent autophagic-lysosomal injury in Drosophila PLoS ONE 2009 4 e4201 19145255
Liu B Moloney A Meehan S Morris K Thomas SE Serpell LC Hider R Marciniak SJ Lomas DA Crowther DC Iron promotes the toxicity of amyloid beta peptide by impeding its ordered aggregation J Biol Chem 2011 286 4248 4256 21147772
Loewen CA Feany MB The unfolded protein response protects from tau neurotoxicity in vivo PLoS One 2010 5
Long DM Blake MR Dutta S Holbrook SD Kotwica-Rolinska J Kretzschmar D Giebultowicz JM Relationships between the circadian system and Alzheimer's disease-like symptoms in Drosophila PLoS One 2014 9 e106068 25171136
Luheshi LM Hoyer W de Barros TP van Dijk Hard I Brorsson AC Macao B Persson C Crowther DC Lomas DA Stahl S Dobson CM Hard T Sequestration of the Abeta peptide prevents toxicity and promotes degradation in vivo PLoS Biol 2010 8 e1000334 20305716
Luheshi LM Tartaglia GG Brorsson AC Pawar AP Watson IE Chiti F Vendruscolo M Lomas DA Dobson CM Crowther DC Systematic in vivo analysis of the intrinsic determinants of amyloid Beta pathogenicity PLoS Biol 2007 5 e290 17973577
Luo L Tully T White K Human amyloid precursor protein ameliorates behavioral deficit of flies deleted for Appl gene Neuron 1992 9 595 605 1389179
Luo LQ Martin-Morris LE White K Identification, secretion, and neural expression of APPL, a Drosophila protein similar to human amyloid protein precursor J Neurosci 1990 10 3849 3861 2125311
Marr RA Rockenstein E Mukherjee A Kindy MS Hersh LB Gage FH Verma IM Masliah E Neprilysin gene transfer reduces human amyloid pathology in transgenic mice J Neurosci 2003 23 1992 1996 12657655
Martin-Morris LE White K The Drosophila transcript encoded by the beta-amyloid protein precursor-like gene is restricted to the nervous system Development 1990 110 185 195 2127912
Merlo P Frost B Peng S Yang YJ Park PJ Feany M p53 prevents neurodegeneration by regulating synaptic genes Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2014 111 18055 18060 25453105
Mhatre SD Michelson SJ Gomes J Tabb LP Saunders AJ Marenda DR Development and characterization of an aged onset model of Alzheimer's disease in Drosophila melanogaster Exp Neurol 2014 261 772 781 25173219
Mohr SE Hu Y Kim K Housden BE Perrimon N Resources for functional genomics studies in Drosophila melanogaster Genetics 2014 197 1 18 24653003
Mora N Almudi I Alsina B Corominas M Serras F beta amyloid protein precursor-like (Appl) is a Ras1/MAPK-regulated gene required for axonal targeting in Drosophila photoreceptor neurons Journal of cell science 2013 126 53 59 23178937
Morris M Maeda S Vossel K Mucke L The many faces of tau Neuron 2011 70 410 426 21555069
Mudher A Shepherd D Newman TA Mildren P Jukes JP Squire A Mears A Drummond JA Berg S MacKay D Asuni AA Bhat R Lovestone S GSK-3beta inhibition reverses axonal transport defects and behavioural phenotypes in Drosophila Mol Psychiatry 2004 9 522 530 14993907
Nerelius C Sandegren A Sargsyan H Raunak R Leijonmarck H Chatterjee U Fisahn A Imarisio S Lomas DA Crowther DC Stromberg R Johansson J Alpha-helix targeting reduces amyloid-beta peptide toxicity Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2009 106 9191 9196 19458258
Ng CF Ko CH Koon CM Xian JW Leung PC Fung KP Chan HY Lau CB The Aqueous Extract of Rhizome of Gastrodia elata Protected Drosophila and PC12 Cells against Beta- Amyloid-Induced Neurotoxicity Evidence-based complementary and alternative medicine : eCAM 2013 2013 516741 24174977
Nhan HS Chiang K Koo EH The multifaceted nature of amyloid precursor protein and its proteolytic fragments: friends and foes Acta Neuropathol 2014
Nhan HS Chiang K Koo EH The multifaceted nature of amyloid precursor protein and its proteolytic fragments: friends and foes Acta Neuropathol 2015 129 1 19 25287911
Nishimura I Yang Y Lu B PAR-1 kinase plays an initiator role in a temporally ordered phosphorylation process that confers tau toxicity in Drosophila Cell 2004 116 671 682 15006350
Oddo S Caccamo A Cheng D Jouleh B Torp R LaFerla FM Genetically augmenting tau levels does not modulate the onset or progression of Abeta pathology in transgenic mice J Neurochem 2007 102 1053 1063 17472708
Overk CR Masliah E Pathogenesis of synaptic degeneration in Alzheimer's disease and Lewy body disease Biochemical pharmacology 2014 88 508 516 24462903
Park SH Lee S Hong YK Hwang S Lee JH Bang SM Kim YK Koo BS Lee IS Cho KS Suppressive effects of SuHeXiang Wan on amyloid-beta42-induced extracellular signal-regulated kinase hyperactivation and glial cell proliferation in a transgenic Drosophila model of Alzheimer's disease Biological &amp; pharmaceutical bulletin 2013 36 390 398 23238278
Park SJ Schertel A Lee KE Han SS Ultra-structural analysis of the brain in a Drosophila model of Alzheimer's disease using FIB/SEM microscopy Microscopy 2014 63 3 13 24047568
Ping Y Hahm ET Waro G Song Q Vo-Ba DA Licursi A Bao H Ganoe L Finch K Tsunoda S Linking abeta42-induced hyperexcitability to neurodegeneration, learning and motor deficits, and a shorter lifespan in an Alzheimer's model PLoS Genet 2015 11 e1005025 25774758
Poeck B Strauss R Kretzschmar D Analysis of amyloid precursor protein function in Drosophila melanogaster Experimental brain research 2012 217 413 421 21912928
Potter CJ Tasic B Russler EV Liang L Luo L The Q system: a repressible binary system for transgene expression, lineage tracing, and mosaic analysis Cell 2010 141 536 548 20434990
Pratim Bose P Chatterjee U Nerelius C Govender T Norstrom T Gogoll A Sandegren A Gothelid E Johansson J Arvidsson PI Poly-N-methylated amyloid beta-peptide (Abeta) C-terminal fragments reduce Abeta toxicity in vitro and in Drosophila melanogaster J Med Chem 2009 52 8002 8009 19908889
Reichert H A tripartite organization of the urbilaterian brain: developmental genetic evidence from Drosophila Brain Res Bull 2005 66 491 494 16144638
Reinecke JB DeVos SL McGrath JP Shepard AM Goncharoff DK Tait DN Fleming SR Vincent MP Steinhilb ML Implicating calpain in tau-mediated toxicity in vivo PLoS One 2011 6 e23865 21858230
Reis GF Yang G Szpankowski L Weaver C Shah SB Robinson JT Hays TS Danuser G Goldstein LS Molecular motor function in axonal transport in vivo probed by genetic and computational analysis in Drosophila Mol Biol Cell 2012 23 1700 1714 22398725
Rincon-Limas D Jensen K Fernandez Funez A Drosophila models of proteinopathies: the little fly that could Curr Pharm Des 2012 18 1108 1122 22288402
Rival T Page RM Chandraratna DS Sendall TJ Ryder E Liu B Lewis H Rosahl T Hider R Camargo LM Shearman MS Crowther DC Lomas DA Fenton chemistry and oxidative stress mediate the toxicity of the beta-amyloid peptide in a Drosophila model of Alzheimer's disease Eur J Neurosci 2009 29 1335 1347 19519625
Roberson ED Scearce-Levie K Palop JJ Yan F Cheng IH Wu T Gerstein H Yu GQ Mucke L Reducing endogenous tau ameliorates amyloid beta-induced deficits in an Alzheimer's disease mouse model Science 2007 316 750 754 17478722
Rorth P A modular misexpression screen in Drosophila detecting tissue-specific phenotypes Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996 93 12418 12422 8901596
Rosen DR Martin-Morris L Luo LQ White K A Drosophila gene encoding a protein resembling the human beta-amyloid protein precursor Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1989 86 2478 2482 2494667
Salminen A Ojala J Kauppinen A Kaarniranta K Suuronen T Inflammation in Alzheimer's disease: amyloid-beta oligomers trigger innate immunity defence via pattern recognition receptors Progress in neurobiology 2009 87 181 194 19388207
Sanokawa-Akakura R Cao W Allan K Patel K Ganesh A Heiman G Burke R Kemp FW Bogden JD Camakaris J Birge RB Konsolaki M Control of Alzheimer's amyloid beta toxicity by the high molecular weight immunophilin FKBP52 and copper homeostasis in Drosophila PLoS One 2010 5 e8626 20084280
Sergeant N Bretteville A Hamdane M Caillet-Boudin ML Grognet P Bombois S Blum D Delacourte A Pasquier F Vanmechelen E Schraen-Maschke S Buee L Biochemistry of Tau in Alzheimer's disease and related neurological disorders Expert review of proteomics 2008 5 207 224 18466052
Shariati SA De Strooper B Redundancy and divergence in the amyloid precursor protein family FEBS letters 2013 587 2036 2045 23707420
Shulman JM Feany MB Genetic modifiers of tauopathy in Drosophila Genetics 2003 165 1233 1242 14668378
Slomnicki LP Lesniak W A putative role of the Amyloid Precursor Protein Intracellular Domain (AICD) in transcription Acta neurobiologiae experimentalis 2008 68 219 228 18511958
Sofola O Kerr F Rogers I Killick R Augustin H Gandy C Allen MJ Hardy J Lovestone S Partridge L Inhibition of GSK-3 ameliorates Abeta pathology in an adult-onset Drosophila model of Alzheimer's disease PLoS Genet 2010 6 e1001087 20824130
Sofola-Adesakin O Castillo-Quan JI Rallis C Tain LS Bjedov I Rogers I Li L Martinez P Khericha M Cabecinha M Bahler J Partridge L Lithium suppresses Abeta pathology by inhibiting translation in an adult Drosophila model of Alzheimer's disease Frontiers in aging neuroscience 2014 6 190 25126078
Soldano A Okray Z Janovska P Tmejova K Reynaud E Claeys A Yan J Atak ZK De Strooper B Dura JM Bryja V Hassan BA The Drosophila homologue of the amyloid precursor protein is a conserved modulator of Wnt PCP signaling PLoS Biol 2013 11 e1001562 23690751
Soto C Sigurdsson EM Morelli L Kumar RA Castano EM Frangione B Beta-sheet breaker peptides inhibit fibrillogenesis in a rat brain model of amyloidosis: implications for Alzheimer's therapy Nat Med 1998 4 822 826 9662374
Speretta E Jahn TR Tartaglia GG Favrin G Barros TP Imarisio S Lomas DA Luheshi LM Crowther DC Dobson CM Expression in drosophila of tandem amyloid beta peptides provides insights into links between aggregation and neurotoxicity J Biol Chem 2012 287 20748 20754 22461632
Stancu IC Vasconcelos B Terwel D Dewachter I Models of beta-amyloid induced Tau-pathology: the long and "folded" road to understand the mechanism Molecular neurodegeneration 2014 9 51 25407337
Steinhilb ML Dias-Santagata D Fulga TA Felch DL Feany MB Tau phosphorylation sites work in concert to promote neurotoxicity in vivo Mol Biol Cell 2007a 18 5060 5068 17928404
Steinhilb ML Dias-Santagata D Mulkearns EE Shulman JM Biernat J Mandelkow EM Feany MB S/P and T/P phosphorylation is critical for tau neurotoxicity in Drosophila J Neurosci Res 2007b 85 1271 1278 17335084
Stokin GB Almenar-Queralt A Gunawardena S Rodrigues EM Falzone T Kim J Lillo C Mount SL Roberts EA McGowan E Williams DS Goldstein LS Amyloid precursor protein-induced axonopathies are independent of amyloid-beta peptides Hum Mol Genet 2008 17 3474 3486 18694898
Tan L Schedl P Song HJ Garza D Konsolaki M The Toll--&gt;NFkappaB signaling pathway mediates the neuropathological effects of the human Alzheimer's Abeta42 polypeptide in Drosophila PLoS One 2008 3 e3966 19088848
Tare M Modi RM Nainaparampil JJ Puli OR Bedi S Fernandez-Funez P Kango-Singh M Singh A Activation of JNK signaling mediates amyloid-ss-dependent cell death PLoS One 2011 6 e24361 21949710
Thies W Bleiler L Alzheimer's A 2013 Alzheimer's disease facts and figures Alzheimers Dement 2013 9 208 245 23507120
Torroja L Chu H Kotovsky I White K Neuronal overexpression of APPL, the Drosophila homologue of the amyloid precursor protein (APP), disrupts axonal transport Curr Biol 1999a 9 489 492 10322116
Torroja L Luo L White K APPL, the Drosophila member of the APP-family, exhibits differential trafficking and processing in CNS neurons J Neurosci 1996 16 4638 4650 8764652
Torroja L Packard M Gorczyca M White K Budnik V The Drosophila beta-amyloid precursor protein homolog promotes synapse differentiation at the neuromuscular junction J Neurosci 1999b 19 7793 7803 10479682
Tschape JA Hammerschmied C Muhlig-Versen M Athenstaedt K Daum G Kretzschmar D The neurodegeneration mutant lochrig interferes with cholesterol homeostasis and Appl processing Embo J 2002 21 6367 6376 12456644
Venken KJ Kasprowicz J Kuenen S Yan J Hassan BA Verstreken P Recombineering-mediated tagging of Drosophila genomic constructs for in vivo localization and acute protein inactivation Nucleic Acids Res 2008 36 e114 18676454
Wacker J Ronicke R Westermann M Wulff M Reymann KG Dobson CM Horn U Crowther DC Luheshi LM Fandrich M Oligomer-targeting with a conformational antibody fragment promotes toxicity in Abeta-expressing flies Acta neuropathologica communications 2014 2 43 24725347
Wentzell JS Bolkan BJ Carmine-Simmen K Swanson TL Musashe DT Kretzschmar D Amyloid precursor proteins are protective in Drosophila models of progressive neurodegeneration Neurobiol Dis 2012 46 78 87 22266106
Wittmann CW Wszolek MF Shulman JM Salvaterra PM Lewis J Hutton M Feany MB Tauopathy in Drosophila: neurodegeneration without neurofibrillary tangles Science 2001 293 711 714 11408621
Yu Z Ren M Wang Z Zhang B Rong YS Jiao R Gao G Highly efficient genome modifications mediated by CRISPR/Cas9 in Drosophila Genetics 2013 195 289 291 23833182
Zhao XL Wang WA Tan JX Huang JK Zhang X Zhang BZ Wang YH YangCheng HY Zhu HL Sun XJ Huang FD Expression of beta-amyloid induced age-dependent presynaptic and axonal changes in Drosophila J Neurosci 2010 30 1512 1522 20107079
