LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


0217513
1037
Biochim Biophys Acta
Biochim. Biophys. Acta
Biochimica et biophysica acta
0006-3002

26705676
4821735
10.1016/j.bbadis.2015.12.016
NIHMS748195
Article
Neurovascular Dysfunction and Neurodegeneration in Dementia and Alzheimer’s disease
Nelson Amy R.
Sweeney Melanie D.
Sagare Abhay P.
Zlokovic Berislav V. *
Department of Physiology and Biophysics and the Zilkha Neurogenetic Institute, Keck School of Medicine of the University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089
* Address correspondence: Berislav V. Zlokovic, M.D., Ph.D., Zilkha Neurogenetic Institute, 1501 San Pablo Street, Los Angeles, CA 90089, Phone: 323.442.2722 / Fax: 323.666.2184, zlokovic@usc.edu
7 1 2016
17 12 2015
5 2016
01 5 2017
1862 5 887900
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Vascular insults can initiate a cascade of molecular events leading to neurodegeneration, cognitive impairment and dementia. Here, we review the cellular and molecular mechanisms in cerebral blood vessels and the pathophysiological events leading to cerebral blood flow dysregulation and disruption of the neurovascular unit and the blood-brain barrier, which all may contribute to the onset and progression of dementia and Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Particularly, we examine the link between neurovascular dysfunction and neurodegeneration including the effects of AD genetic risk factors on cerebrovascular functions and clearance of Alzheimer’s amyloid-β peptide toxin, and the impact of vascular risk factors, environment and lifestyle on cerebral blood vessels, which in turn may affect synaptic, neuronal and cognitive functions. Finally, we examine potential experimental treatments for dementia and AD based on the neurovascular model, and discuss some critical questions to be addressed by future studies.

Graphical abstract

Alzheimer’s disease
dementia
neurovascular unit
blood-brain barrier
vascular factors
neurovascular medicine

1. Introduction

Blood vessels in the brain deliver essential nutrients to and remove metabolic waste products from the central nervous system (CNS) [1]. Although the human brain makes up only 2% of total body mass, it consumes 20% of the body’s oxygen and glucose supply [2]. Proper regulation of cerebral blood flow (CBF) is critical for brain health and survival. Loss of CBF halts brain functions in seconds and causes permanent brain damage within minutes [3]. CBF is precisely regulated by the neurovascular unit (NVU) to assure that brain energy demands are met [1,4]. The NVU is comprised of several cell types including vascular cells (endothelial cells, pericytes and vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs)), glia (astrocytes, microglia and oligodendrocytes) and neurons [1]. A schematic representation of the NVU at the level of brain capillaries is shown in Fig. 1.

The blood-brain barrier (BBB) is part of the NVU that prevents uncontrolled entry of blood-derived products and pathogens into the brain, and mediates the exchange of molecules into and out of the brain parenchyma via a specialized substrate-specific transport system expressed in brain endothelium [1,5]. The BBB is quite unique when compared to the highly permeable systemic capillaries that permit the transport of larger molecules across the vessels and into peripheral tissues [6]. Brain capillary endothelial cells are connected by tight and adherens junction proteins (e.g., claudin, occludin, junction adhesion molecules, and cytoplasmic accessory proteins including zonula occludens (ZO)-1, 2, 3, cinguilin and others), forming a continuous endothelial monolayer. This anatomical barrier permits the passage of only small circulating lipid-soluble molecules (&lt; 400 kDa) with less than nine hydrogen bonds into the brain, and allows the free exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide [1]. The BBB isolates brain interstitial fluid (ISF) and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) compartments from the plasma compartment, and thus prevents the entry of many blood-derived molecules into brain parenchyma [4]. The movement of large molecules across the BBB including proteins and peptides is only possible via highly specialized transport systems expressed in brain endothelium [7–9]. In the human brain there is an estimated 400 miles total length of capillaries with about 20 m2 of microvascular surface area available for molecular transport [10]. This makes the BBB the largest exchange transport surface area in the brain and the major clearance pathway for potentially neurotoxic molecules that are produced and/or accumulate in the brain, as for example, Alzheimer’s toxin amyloid-β peptide (Aβ) [11].

It is becoming increasingly apparent that cerebrovascular dysfunction contributes to dementia and AD [1,12–16], as well as other neurodegenerative disorders such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) [17], Parkinson’s disease (PD) [18] and Huntington’s disease (HD) [19]. NVU disruption and BBB breakdown can lead to entry of circulating neurotoxic molecules into the brain, faulty clearance of neurotoxic molecules from brain to blood, improper energy metabolite and nutrient delivery, and abnormal expression of growth factors, matrix molecules and vascular receptors, which all may eventually lead to synaptic and neuronal dysfunction [4]. Here, we review the cellular and molecular mechanisms in cerebral blood vessels leading to neurodegeneration including the effects of genetic risk factors for AD on cerebrovascular functions and Aβ clearance, and the impact of vascular risk factors, environment and lifestyle on cerebral blood vessels. Finally, we discuss potential experimental treatments for dementia and AD based on the neurovascular model, and review some critical questions in the field to be addressed by future studies.

2. Alzheimer’s disease

AD is the most common form of dementia that currently affects 5.3 million Americans [20]. The majority of cases are sporadic late-onset, and &lt; 5% of cases are early-onset autosomal-dominant AD (ADAD) [21]. Pathological hallmarks of AD include elevated brain parenchymal and vascular Aβ, hyperphosphorylated neurofibrillary tau tangles, gliosis and neuronal loss [1]. Mounting evidence demonstrates that vascular dysfunction contributes to dementia and AD [1,14,15]. Vascular risk factors (e.g., hypertension, diabetes) and some major genetic risk factors for AD (e.g., apolipoprotein E ε4 (APOE4)) lead to cerebrovascular damage [1,4,20], and cerebrovascular disorders associated with AD. Elucidating the mechanisms underlying vascular pathophysiology to aid in identifying novel therapeutic targets for AD has been declared a national research priority [14,15].

2.1. The two-hit vascular hypothesis

The two-hit vascular hypothesis of AD states that cerebrovascular damage (hit 1) is an initial insult that is self-sufficient to initiate neuronal injury and neurodegeneration, but can also promote accumulation of Alzheimer’s Aβ toxin in the brain (hit 2) (Fig. 2) [22–25,1,16]. Cerebrovascular disruption including BBB breakdown and resting CBF reductions can lead to accumulation of neurotoxic circulating molecules (e.g., thrombin, plasminogen, fibrinogen) and hypoperfusion in the brain, respectively, that can directly initiate neuronal injury [1,23]. Vascular dysfunction can also influence the amyloidogenic pathway to diminish Aβ clearance and increase Aβ production leading to elevated Aβ levels in the brain [1,11]. Thus, the Aβ-independent and Aβ-dependent pathways interact and can independently and/or synergistically lead to the onset and progression of AD dementia. Importantly, both pathways are impacted by vascular, genetic, environment and lifestyle risk factors.

2.2. AD genetic risk factors with vascular links

Age is the number one risk factor for AD, but genetic risk factors also have a significant effect on the AD disease process. Vascular implications are now known for several of AD genetic risk factors and are emerging for additional risk genes, as discussed below.

2.2.1. APOE4

APOE is a 34 kDa glycoprotein that is primarily produced by astrocytes in the brain and by the liver in the periphery, and is important for lipid metabolism [26]. In humans, there are three alleles of APOE: APOE2, APOE3 and APOE4. APOE4 is the strongest and most highly replicated risk factor for late-onset sporadic AD [21,27]. An individual’s risk of AD is increased 3.7 times in carriers of a single APOE4 allele and 12 times in carriers of two APOE4 alleles, compared to APOE3 carriers [28].

APOE4 increases BBB damage, cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA) and fibrinogen deposits in human brain [29–33]. Furthermore, young APOE4 carriers with no memory impairment have reduced cerebrovascular reactivity in response to a memory task and carbon dioxide inhalation [34]. APOE4 carriers have accelerated pericyte degeneration and BBB breakdown, compared to APOE3 carriers, that is likely related to the activation of cyclophilin A (CypA)-matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) pathway in blood vessels, particularly in pericytes [28,29]. In agreement with these findings, APOE4 transgenic mice exhibit activation of the CypA-NFκB-MMP-9 pathway in pericytes that was demonstrated to result in degradation of BBB tight junction and basement membrane proteins causing BBB disruption [35]. However, APOE2 and APOE3 expressing transgenic mice have an intact BBB compared to APOE4 mice [35,36], and are able to suppress the CypA-NFκB-MMP-9 BBB-degrading pathway in pericytes [35].

Furthermore, APOE isoforms differentially affect binding and clearance of Aβ, where APOE2-Aβ &gt; APOE3-Aβ complexes bind to a major Aβ clearance receptor the low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 (LRP1) at the abluminal side of the BBB and are rapidly cleared across the BBB into circulation, whereas APOE4-Aβ complexes interact poorly with LRP1 and are removed from the brain by the much slower and less efficient very low density lipoprotein receptor (VLDLR) clearance mechanism [37,38]. Thus, impaired Aβ clearance by APOE4 relative to APOE3 or APOE2 may ultimately accelerate Aβ accumulation in the brain.

2.2.2. PICALM

PICALM encodes the phosphatidylinositol-binding clathrin assembly protein that is involved in endocytosis and internalization of cell receptors and intracellular trafficking of endocytic proteins [39–41]. PICALM is highly expressed in the brain capillary endothelium lining the BBB [41]. Approximately 20 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the noncoding region of PICALM have been associated with AD in several genome wide association studies (GWAS) [21,42,43]. Recently, the molecular mechanism by which PICALM normally influences Aβ clearance across the BBB has been elucidated in an in vitro human model of the BBB [41]. Briefly, it has been shown that Aβ binding to LRP1 at the abluminal side of the BBB recruits PICALM and initiates rapid PICALM/clathrin-dependent endocytosis of Aβ-LRP1 complexes. PICALM then continues to guide trafficking of Aβ-containing endocytic vesicles across brain endothelium fusing sequentially with Rab5 and Rab11 and ultimately leading to intracellular transport and exocytosis of Aβ, respectively, at the luminal side of the BBB thus completing Aβ transcellular transport and clearance across the BBB [41]. Importantly, PICALM levels are reduced in AD brain endothelium, which correlates with elevated Aβ levels, Braak stage and the level of cognitive decline as shown by a recent neuropathological study [41]. Furthermore, induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived human endothelial cells carrying the protective allele of the rs3851179 PICALM variant have higher PICALM expression and increased Aβ clearance [41]. Similarly, mice deficient in brain endothelial Picalm develop accelerated Aβ accumulation in the brain and behavioral deficits, which all can be reversed by endothelial-specific expression of Picalm [41]. Altogether, these data support the view that PICALM controls Aβ transport and clearance across the BBB and therefore could have a strong vascular link to AD.

2.2.3. CLU

Clusterin (CLU), also known as apolipoprotein J (APOJ), is a disulfide linked heterodimeric glycoprotein composed of an α- and β-subunit that aids in Aβ clearance [37]. Recent GWAS studies have identified a SNP within CLU on chromosome 8p21.1, rs11136000, that is significantly associated with sporadic AD [21,42,44]. The C allele is considered an AD risk factor; whereas the minor T allele has a protective effect and reduces the risk of AD by 16% [42,44]. Individuals with the CLU rs11136000 risk C allele exhibit reduced white matter integrity and hyperactivation of the prefrontal and limbic areas during working memory tasks, as determined recently via diffusion tensor imaging magnetic resonance imaging (DTI-MRI) and functional MRI, respectively [45]. CLU binds to several different proteins including Aβ, and has been shown to prevent aggregation and promote clearance of Aβ peptides across the BBB [37]. More specifically, Aβ42 bound to CLU can be cleared rapidly across the BBB via LRP2 as shown in a murine model [37,46].

2.2.4. PSEN1

Presenilin 1 (PSEN1) and PSEN2 genes encode presenilins 1 and 2, respectively, that act as aspartyl proteases to facilitate γ-secretase cleavage of Aβ precursor protein (APP) to produce Aβ [21]. Many PSEN mutations have been identified in ADAD including 185 mutations reported in PSEN1 and 13 mutations in PSEN2 [21]. Most of these mutations increase the ratio of Aβ42:Aβ40 in the brain [21]. However, PSEN1 mutations also lead to major cerebrovascular pathology in humans including disruption of small cerebral blood vessels, degeneration of pericytes and mural cells, BBB breakdown, and Aβ deposits in small cerebral arteries, arterioles and capillaries [47,48]. Similarly, prominent cerebrovascular pathology with BBB breakdown, characterized by microhemorrhages, thinned and irregular microvessels, string vessels, a thickened basement membrane and a reduction in hippocampal microvascular density, have been shown in PSEN1 transgenic models [49,50].

2.2.5. APP

There are 24 reported mutations in APP in ADAD subjects and, like PSEN mutations, mostly result in an increased Aβ42:Aβ40 ratio in the brain [21]. Patients with hereditary CAA of the Dutch, Iowa, Arctic, Flemish, Italian or Piedmont L34V vasculotropic mutations in APP have degeneration of VSMCs leading to hemorrhagic strokes and dementia [1,4,16]. Furthermore, duplication of the gene encoding APP causes ADAD with CAA and intracerebral bleeding [1].

2.2.6. MEOX2

Mesenchyme homeobox gene 2 (MEOX2), a transcription factor expressed solely in the vasculature in brain, regulates vascular cell differentiation and remodeling [51]. A GWAS study using high-resolution array comparative genomic hybridization found a copy number variant in MEOX2 in ADAD subjects [52]. Furthermore, brain endothelial cells from AD subjects express very low levels of MEOX2 which leads to vessel regression, LRP1 proteosomal degradation and reduced Aβ clearance across the BBB, all of which were reversed by restoring MEOX2 endothelial expression [53]. Transgenic mice with a single allele of Meox2 develop cerebral endothelial hypoplasia with reduced brain perfusion and impaired Aβ efflux caused by reduced LRP1 expression [53].

3. Cerebrovascular dysfunction in AD

Vascular damage and dysfunction are frequently associated with neurodegeneration and contribute to AD [1,2,12,15,54,55]. Some indicators of BBB breakdown include accumulation of blood-derived proteins and cells in the brain and CSF, loss of pericytes and endothelial tight junction molecules, microbleeds, and alterations in BBB Aβ transporter expression (e.g., receptor for advanced glycation endproducts (RAGE) and LRP1). Some key pathophysiological, cellular and molecular mechanisms leading to cerebrovascular dysfunction in AD are discussed below.

3.1. Diminished CBF and neurovascular uncoupling

The brain microvasculature regulates its local capillary blood flow by maintaining a delicate balance between the anti-thrombotic and pro-thrombotic pathways within the capillary network, which normally prevents intra-vascular coagulation and allows blood to flow [56]. Regional CBF responses are normally controlled by local neuronal activity within the NVU modules, a process known as neurovascular coupling [2]. A number of studies have shown reductions in resting CBF in aged cognitively normal individuals that are at risk of developing AD [1,2,57] and in AD patients [1,2,58], as well as CBF dysregulation [2,54]. The CBF reductions may occur prior to cognitive impairment in humans [57], and were also found in APP transgenic models of AD [59] and pericyte deficient murine models [60].

VSMCs derived from small cerebral penetrating arteries critically regulate CBF to the brain [2]. Recent studies have shown a hypercontractile phenotype of VSMCs derived from small arteries in AD and AD models characterized with accumulation of several contractile proteins directed by elevated activity of the serum response factor (SRF)/myocardin tandem of transcription factors caused by hypoxic changes [61]. Arterial hypercontractility and impaired ability to relax can in turn diminish arterial supply of blood to the brain, which reduces CBF and creates a chronic brain hypoperfusion state that may contribute to dementia by several pathways as discussed below.

In addition to the hypercontractile phenotype, arterial VSMCs in AD also exhibit a greatly reduced ability to clear Aβ, which leads to accumulation of Aβ in the vessel wall causing CAA [62] that in turn further aggravates CBF reductions and may promote cerebral microbleeds. Recent experimental studies have suggested that in addition to a major role of VSMCs in controlling CBF [2,63], CBF can also be regulated at the capillary level by pericytes, particularly during experimental cerebral ischemia that leads to constriction of pericytes obliterating capillary blood flow during the reperfusion phase [64]. This eventually can lead to pericyte cell death and degeneration, resembling pericyte degeneration seen in AD and other neurodegenerative disorders [17–19]. However, whether pericytes play a similar role in human disease as shown in animal models remains to be addressed by future studies.

Mild chronic hypoperfusion, known as oligemia, can lead to a deleterious chain of events in neurons by impairing neuronal protein synthesis that is required for synaptic plasticity, a process critically involved in learning and memory [65]. Additionally, CBF reductions diminish oxygen delivery to brain that favors anaerobic brain metabolism, which in turn diminishes ATP synthesis required for the maintenance of the sodium pump or Na+, K+-ATPase activity that regulates ion distribution in neurons necessary for proper firing of action potentials and normal neuronal excitability [2]. Hypoperfusion also leads to imbalances in pH, electrolytes and water gradients which lead to edema, white matter lesions and ultimately neuronal death [1].

3.2. BBB breakdown

Regional BBB permeability in the living human brain during normal aging and in mild dementia patients was recently assessed quantitatively using an advanced dynamic contrast-enhanced (DCE)-MRI method [12]. This study has shown that BBB breakdown in the hippocampus increases in an age-dependent manner, worsens in individuals with mild dementia [12], and corresponds with increases in CSF levels of pericyte injury marker, soluble platelet-derived growth factor receptor-β (sPDGFRβ) [12,66]. Reflective of BBB breakdown, the CSF to plasma albumin ratio is also increased in AD patients particularly in those with vascular risk factors [67], as well as in individuals with mild dementia or mild cognitive impairment (MCI) [12] and in cognitively normal APOE4 carriers at genetic risk for AD [29].

In post-mortem studies, an accumulation of blood-derived proteins including fibrinogen, thrombin, plasminogen, immunoglobulin G and albumin were found in the hippocampus and cortex of AD subjects [30–32,68,69], which was associated with pericyte degeneration [30,69–73]. MRI studies reveal microbleeds and iron accumulation in the brain of patients with preclinical AD [74] and AD [33,75,76], especially in the hippocampus [77]. In a cohort of 174 patients, lobar microbleeds were identified in 40% of AD subjects and 24.3% of MCI patients using susceptibility-weighted imaging (SWI) MRI [74]. The incidence of lobar microbleeds was positively associated with age, APOE4 carrier status, and Aβ burden, as measured by (11)C-labeled Pittsburgh Compound-B positron emission tomography (PIB-PET) [74]. Additionally, multiple lobar microbleeds were associated with lacunar infarctions and severity of white matter hyperintensities [74]. Also, in a recent study that included 148 AD patients, 44.6% of the patients exhibited brain microbleeds [75]. Furthermore, the patients with a high number of microbleeds had several associated vascular risk factors including diabetes and hypertension [75]. Microbleeds measured by SWI-MRI and/or T2*-weighted MRI were also found in 22% of 1,504 studied dementia patients [76]. The microbleeds positively correlate with age, sex (microbleeds occur more frequently in males), and hypertension, and negatively with Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) cognitive score [76].

Pericyte injury and/or loss has been identified by post-mortem analysis in many neurodegenerative diseases including AD [30,69,71,72] as well as by CSF analysis of living MCI patients [12]. Degenerating pericytes accumulate intracellular inclusions, pinocytic vesicles, and large lipid granules, and show mitochondrial abnormalities [71,72]. These microstructural changes in pericytes correlate with capillary reductions, dilation of vessels and the appearance of tortuous vessels [71]. Simplified schematics of normal BBB and BBB breakdown with neurovascular pathways leading to neurodegenerative changes are illustrated in Fig. 3.

3.3. Reduced glucose utilization

Glucose transporter 1 (GLUT1) on cerebral microvessels is decreased in post-mortem AD brain tissue [78]. GLUT1, encoded by SLC2A1, is the major transporter of glucose across the BBB from the blood to the brain [1,4,79]. Cognitively normal individuals with genetic risk for AD or positive AD family history [80] and mild or no cognitive impairment that later develop AD [81] all have reduced glucose utilization in the hippocampus, parietotemporal cortex and/or posterior cingulate cortex measured by 2-[18F]-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose (FDG)-PET, which occurs prior to brain atrophy and neuronal dysfunction [80]. Brain glucose uptake correlates with the level of GLUT1 on cerebral microvessels [82]. In addition to glucose transport, GLUT1 is also critical for the maintenance of proper brain capillary networks, CBF, and BBB integrity, as demonstrated in humans with SLC2A1 mutations [83] and Slc2a1 transgenic mice [79] which contributes to neurodegeneration and behavioral deficits in murine model of AD and GLUT1 deficiency [79]. See Fig. 3.

3.4. Aβ clearance

In sporadic AD, faulty Aβ clearance, rather than increased Aβ production, is thought to promote elevated brain Aβ levels [84]. Experimental studies in multiple animal models have shown that under physiological conditions, 70–85% of Aβ is cleared from the brain primarily by transvascular clearance across the BBB and a small portion is removed by ISF bulk flow [11,85,86]. The primary receptor mediating BBB transcytosis of Aβ is the LRP1, that is expressed mainly at the abluminal side of the BBB [1,4,11,41,86,87]. Aβ bound to endothelial LRP1 is rapidly internalized by PICALM at the endothelium, which mediates PICALM/clathrin-dependent endocytosis of Aβ-LRP1 complexes by endothelium and guides trafficking of Aβ-containing endocytic vesicles towards exocytosis ultimately leading to Aβ transcytosis [41], as discussed above. Additionally, a soluble form of LRP1 (sLRP1) is generated by proteolytic cleavage of LRP1 by β-secretase and circulates in the plasma binding and sequestering free Aβ40 and Aβ42 and transporting them via blood to the liver and kidney for removal from systemic circulation [11,86]. See Fig. 3A inset.

3.4.1. LRP1

In normal aging and AD, there is a significant reduction in LRP1 expression in brain endothelial cells [88] and VSMCs [62]. A decrease of LRP1 on microvessels negatively correlates with an increase of Aβ in brain [88]. See Fig. 3B inset. High levels of SRF and myocardin in VSMCs [61,62] lead to elevated expression of sterol response element binding protein 2 (SREBP2), a major LRP1 transcriptional suppressor, that leads to LRP1 depletion and thereby reduced Aβ clearance across the BBB [24]. Oxidation of surface LRP1 and sLRP1 prevents them from binding Aβ and thus limits the efficient efflux of Aβ from the brain [89,90].

3.4.2. RAGE

RAGE is the major Aβ influx receptor at the BBB that transports Aβ from the blood into the brain [4,11,91]. RAGE is normally expressed at low levels at the BBB, but its expression is increased in normal aging and in AD brain endothelium and is associated with increased cerebrovascular and brain accumulation of Aβ [91–93]. See Fig. 3B inset.

3.5. Concomitant vascular abnormalities

CAA, basement membrane abnormalities, string vessel formation, microinfarcts, arteriosclerosis, and/or atherosclerosis, are frequently observed in MCI and AD patients [94] and in post-mortem AD brain tissue [95]. Brain microvasculature is structurally altered in AD and other neurodegenerative diseases and some of these vascular abnormalities are discussed below.

3.5.1. Cerebral amyloid angiopathy

CAA is the deposition of amyloid along the cerebrovasculature that occurs in both familial ADAD and sporadic AD (Fig. 3B). Patients with hereditary Dutch, Iowa, Arctic, Flemish, Italian or Piedmont L34V vasculotropic mutations develop CAA followed by rupture of blood vessels and hemorrhagic strokes in midlife [1,4,16]. CAA is known to worsen AD pathology and occurs in 80% of AD patients [1]. CAA likely develops as a result of the ineffective transvascular and perivascular clearance of Aβ [11,96], as well as poor Aβ clearance by arterial VSMCs [62]. It was recently reported that microvascular rather than parenchymal Aβ deposits are associated with early behavioral deficits in AD transgenic mice [97]. Individuals with CAA carrying APOE4 allele(s) have accelerated vascular pathology that can modulate Aβ accumulation [31]. Human post-mortem studies recently reported that AD patients that are APOE4 carriers had increased fibrinogen deposits with increased CAA disease severity compared to non-carriers, and the fibrinogen deposits associated with microvascular Aβ accumulation [31].

3.5.2. Basement membrane abnormalities

The basement membrane of the vessel wall has been shown to thicken, split, and develop abnormal inclusions (e.g., accumulation of collagen and perlecans) in the aging brain that is increased in AD as shown by post-mortem human brain tissue studies [1,98].

3.5.3. String vessels

String vessels are thin connective tissue strands composed of basement membrane that are remnants of capillaries without endothelial cells or blood flow [99]. The number of string vessels is significantly increased in AD post-mortem brain tissue [99,100] and in APOE4 carriers compared to non-carriers [100]. Preliminary studies found that Aβ accumulates substantially along string vessels [101].

4. Vascular risk factors, lifestyle and environment

In addition to genetic risk factors discussed above that can trigger neurovascular damage and cognitive decline, vascular conditions such as hypertension, diabetes, atherosclerosis, and hyperhomocysteinemia can also contribute to dementia and influence one’s risk for AD. Additionally, every person is differentially affected by lifestyle (e.g., education, sleep, diet and exercise) and environment (e.g., pollution/nanoparticles and environmental enrichment) that can further modify one’s risk for dementia. It is estimated that nearly half of AD cases might be attributed to modifiable risk factors and that effective control of vascular factors, pre-existing disease(s) and psychological condition(s), as well as lifestyle-based interventions may offer promising preventative strategies to delay disease onset and/or progression [102]. Below, we detail some of these factors related to AD.

4.1. Hypertension

Hypertension is one of the vascular risk factors for dementia. Several epidemiological studies indicate association of midlife hypertension with late-life dementia [103,104]. A meta-analysis of six longitudinal studies showed significant association of hypertension with increased risk and incidence of vascular dementia [105]. Hypertension causes regional CBF reduction and impairs cerebrovascular reactivity [54]. Compelling evidence suggests that chronic hypertension fuels atherosclerosis in cerebral arteries, and also increases the risk of microvascular damage, white matter lesions, ischemic stroke and intracranial hemorrhage in the presence of CAA [106–108]. In animal models, hypertension caused BBB impairment, induced brain Aβ accumulation, enhanced Aβ-induced neurovascular dysfunction and neurodegeneration [109–112]. Circulating plasma levels of markers of endothelial activation including soluble intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (sICAM-1), soluble vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (sVCAM-1) and endothelin-1 (ET-1), an endothelial cell-derived potent vasoconstrictor, are increased in hypertensive subjects suggesting vascular injury [107,113,114]. Anti-hypertensive agents have been shown to reduce the risk of dementia and cognitive decline [115,116], thus proper management of hypertension is an important protective strategy against cognitive impairment.

4.2. Diabetes

Increasing evidence suggests that type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is a major vascular risk factor contributing to the development of AD [117–119]. Evidence of vascular alterations and increased BBB permeability have been reported in T2DM patients [120,121] and in several experimental models of diabetes [122–125]. Multiple mechanisms may explain the link between T2DM and pathological changes in brain microvasculature, neurons and glial cells including increased levels of advanced glycation end-products (AGEs) and RAGE, vascular inflammation, oxidative stress, reduced insulin transport across the BBB, impaired insulin signaling, insulin resistance and endoplasmic reticulum stress [126,127].

4.3. Atherosclerosis

Atherosclerosis is hardening and narrowing of the inner wall of arteries due to the buildup of plaques composed of fatty deposits, cholesterol and other blood derived substances. Atherosclerosis has been implicated in the pathogenesis of dementia and AD, and it has several overlapping risk factors including diabetes, hypercholesterolemia and aging [128]. Recently, a large cohort autopsy found that 77% of 410 AD subjects had grossly apparent circle of Willis atherosclerosis, which occurred more often than in non-AD subjects [129]. In non-demented patients, the carotid intima-media thickness, a marker of atherosclerosis, was found to be inversely related to annual cognitive measures of executive function [130]. A large population-based study of 4,371 stoke-free middle-aged patients found that atherosclerosis could predict future lower cognitive scores after 7 years [131]. Furthermore, a longitudinal study of 1,651 participants found that intima-media thickness was associated with a higher risk of developing cognitive impairment in a 10 year follow up study [132].

4.4. Hyperhomocysteinemia

Elevated plasma homocysteine, known as hyperhomocysteinemia, has been reported in subjects with atherosclerosis [133], stroke [134], cerebral small vessel disease [135,136], and AD [134,136]. Cerebrovascular damage, endothelial dysfunction, oxidative stress, demethylation, and thrombosis have been proposed to elucidate the link between hyperhomocysteinemia and AD [135,137,138]. Diet induced hyperhomocysteinemia in wild-type [139] and APP/PS1 AD [140] mice leads to spatial memory deficits, microhemorrhages, neuroinflammation and increased activity of MMP-2 and MMP-9.

4.5. Traumatic brain injury

Traumatic brain injury (TBI) increases the production of Aβ and also heightens the risk of developing AD [141]. Like AD, TBI leads to BBB leakage and vascular breakdown involving NVU impairment [141]. Experimental studies in rats have demonstrated that TBI leads to focal microbleeds, BBB and endothelial damage, gliosis, macrophage-mediated inflammation and myelin loss [142].

4.6. Sleep

Sleep inadequacy and daytime sleepiness increase the risk of AD and development of Aβ pathology [143]. Sleep-wake cycle alterations in AD subjects contribute to “sundowning syndrome,” when AD patients become agitated, confused, anxious and aggressive in the late afternoon and evening. Patterns of sleep are also affected, for instance rapid eye movement sleep duration is reduced in AD, but not in normal aging, and has been proposed to be a biomarker for AD [144]. Recent studies found an increased clearance rate of Aβ in sleeping mice compared to awake mice following intracerebral injection of 125I-Aβ40 into the frontal cortex [145]. This increased Aβ clearance was mediated 40% by perivascular ISF-to-CSF bulk flow and the remaining 60% was likely due to increased transvascular transport across the BBB [86,145].

Not only is sleep impaired in AD, but it has also been proposed that disturbances in sleep can lead to AD. There is mounting evidence that obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) could contribute to AD [146]. Severe OSA leads to sleep fragmentation, intermittent hypoxia, oxidative stress and increased production of Aβ via hypoxia-inducible factor-1α and β-secretase 1 [146]. Following intermittent hypoxia, reoxygenation results in damage to blood vessels and endothelial cells, and oxidative stress [146]. Furthermore, mice undergoing chronic sleep restriction have decreased expression and function of GLUT1, impaired tight junction expression and BBB transport, and suppressed vascular reactivity with reduced inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), endothelial NOS (eNOS) and ET-1 [147]. Also, rats subjected to sleep deprivation exhibited BBB breakdown and leakage [148].

4.7. Pollution/nanoparticles

Air pollution has been shown to increase the risk of AD and AD-like brain pathologies [149,150]. Young residents of the Mexico City Metropolitan Area (MCMA) exposed to air pollution display cognitive impairment, BBB disruption, Aβ42 plaques and hyperphosphorylated tau accumulation [151], which are exacerbated in APOE4 carriers [152]. Furthermore, children from the MCMA have increased serum autoantibodies against neuronal proteins, likely due to compromised brain immunity and BBB breakdown [153]. In mouse experimental studies, aerosolized nickel nanoparticles caused a rapid and drastic increase in Aβ40 and Aβ42 [154]. Also, APOE null mice exposed to mixed vehicle exhaust have accelerated BBB breakdown, decreased expression of tight junction proteins (e.g., occludin, claudin-5) and increased generation of reactive oxygen species activity [155].

Many types of nanomaterials are emerging in medical science and research for their potential as biosensors, biomaterials, tissue engineering, DNA modification or drug delivery [156]. The sources of nanoparticles that humans are exposed to are numerous and include nanoscaled debris from hip replacements, prostheses, cosmetics, sunscreen, and many others. Unfortunately, nanoparticles have proven to be toxic in a number of host systems [156]. Highly active nanoparticles (e.g., silica coated to be hydrophilic, hydrophobic or amphiphilic) can be taken up by cellular membranes, including the BBB, and cross the membrane passively or by carrier-mediated endocytosis [156]. Experimental studies in rodents have shown that silver, copper or aluminum/aluminum oxide nanoparticles disrupt the BBB, reduce the expression of endothelial tight junctions, decrease CBF, and induce edema, synaptic dysfunction and neurodegeneration [157–160]. Interestingly, silver and copper nanoparticle exposure exacerbated BBB dysfunction when accompanying sleep deprivation [148] or diabetes [158].

4.8. Peripheral inflammation

Peripheral inflammation is being considered a possible risk factor for AD [161] and dementia [162]. Infectious agents including pneumonia, B. burgdorferi, Helicobacter pylori and herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) have been identified in AD post-mortem brain tissue [163]. Interestingly, HSV-1 infections are found more often in APOE4 carriers [164], which have increased BBB permeability [30]. Additionally, dementia patients have a two-fold increased mortality rate from pneumonia [165], and pneumonia patients have elevated MMP-9 levels in their serum [166], which is known to be linked to BBB breakdown [29]. Furthermore, poor oral hygiene, oral inflammation and tooth loss worsen with age and are risk factors for AD [167]. Recently, fungus was identified in post-mortem brain tissue from AD subjects [168], and was found to localize around blood vessels in AD brain tissue [169]. In AD, infectious agents likely enter the brain through a leaky, disrupted BBB and cause more detrimental effects than they would normally if the BBB were intact.

4.9. Alcohol and substance abuse

Alcohol abuse increases CBF and blood pressure and disrupts the BBB causing vascular remodeling by oxidative stress, endothelial tight junction phosphorylation and changes in expression of BBB-degrading gelatinases MMP-2 and MMP-9 [170,171]. Likewise, drug abuse has been shown to have detrimental effects on the BBB. Psychostimulant drugs of abuse including methamphetamine, ecstasy/MDMA (3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine), cocaine and nicotine cause increased BBB permeability through alterations in tight junction protein expression and conformation, glial activation, enzyme activation related to BBB cytoskeletal remodeling, and induction of neuroinflammation [172–174]. In addition to increased BBB permeability, experimental studies have found that even a single acute exposure to methamphetamine causes profound CBF reductions [175]. Also, recent preliminary studies have found that heroin use leads to microvascular damage and microcirculation dysfunction, collapse and fracture of the myelin sheath and vacuole formation in white matter regions around microvessels, as identified in post-mortem human brain tissue [176,177].

5. Vasculoprotective approaches

With the substantial amount of evidence supporting the vascular link to AD and related dementias, using approaches to repair neurovascular damage is intuitive and may hold promise to delay and/or slow down cognitive decline. Likely, the best approach for treatment will be multi-targeted and potentially individualized, patient-specific, since AD, CAA and vascular dementia present complex and heterogeneous etiologies. Below, we focus on some approaches that could potentially restore neurovascular functions and/or protect the neurovascular system from pathophysiological changes seen in dementia and AD.

5.1. Restoring BBB Aβ transport machinery

5.1.1. LRP1 upregulation

LRP1 expression in cerebral vessels is reduced in AD [11,84], and therefore increasing microvascular LRP1 expression levels may increase Aβ clearance to thereby prevent development of Aβ-dependent pathologies. Future studies should investigate novel therapeutic drugs and/or gene therapy vectors to restore LRP1 levels in endothelial cells and pericytes at the BBB. In addition to increasing LRP1 on cerebral microvessels, restoration or selective enhancement of LRP1 by gene therapy in the liver could function as a systemic “vacuum” to increase the concentration gradient driving Aβ out of the brain by creating a peripheral “sink” [87]. In general, gene therapy targeting neurological disorders remains challenging due to the restricted entry of vectors across the BBB into the brain. However, targeting cell surface (e.g., GLUT1, LRP1) or cytoplasmic (e.g., PICALM) proteins whose expression is reduced in AD brain endothelium (Fig. 3B) would likely be more achievable due to the favorable anatomical position, as endothelial cells are directly accessible to therapeutic interventions by intravenous administration. Importantly, studies have used in vivo phage panning to identify modifiable epitopes on adeno-associated virus type 2 (AAV2) vectors to enable endothelial-specific gene therapy delivery [178,179].

Soluble LRP1 and/or its wild-type recombinant cluster IV, WT-LRPIV, bind to free Aβ aiding in its peripheral clearance and preventing it from reentering the brain via the RAGE receptor [180]. Recently, a mutant of LRPIV (LRPIV-D3674) was developed to preferentially and selectively bind neurotoxic Aβ compared to other LRP1 ligands [181]. LRPIV-D3674 is ~25% more effective at replacing oxidized sLRP1 and clearing endogenous Aβ in hippocampus and cortex in AD transgenic mice [181]. Therefore, LRPIV-D3674 has a therapeutic potential in AD to restore reduced or oxidized sLRP1, regulate peripheral Aβ levels and reestablish the Aβ homeostatic peripheral “sink” [180].

5.1.2. PICALM upregulation

As described above, PICALM critically regulates transcytosis and clearance of Aβ across the BBB and its levels are reduced in AD brain endothelium, as well as in individuals carrying non-protective PICALM alleles [41]. To date, there are no known drugs or gene therapy vectors that can increase PICALM expression levels. Future studies are needed to determine the benefit of increasing PICALM levels in AD models and AD.

5.1.3. GLUT1 upregulation

GLUT1 levels at the BBB correlate with brain glucose uptake [82,182] and also are critical for maintaining BBB integrity [79]. Importantly, the levels of GLUT1 in cerebral microvessels are reduced in AD [78,183]. Only a few studies have investigated drugs to upregulate GLUT1 expression. For example, one study found that ginsenoside Rb1, an active component of ginseng, can activate the insulin signaling and AKT pathways to increase expression of GLUT1 and GLUT4 in adipocytes of diabetic (db/db) mice [184]. Studies in rats found that cerebrolysin, an approved neurotrophic peptide for vascular dementia treatment in humans, increased GLUT1 expression and improved hippocampal learning and memory [185]. Although these few studies demonstrate increased GLUT1 expression, the molecular mechanisms underlying GLUT1 reductions in AD remain unknown. Furthermore, it is not known whether manipulating GLUT1 expression at the BBB in dementia and in AD patients will have an effect on BBB permeability, cognitive performance and Aβ pathology as shown in an animal model of AD and GLUT1 deficiency [79].

5.1.4. Blocking RAGE

Two highly specific, low molecular weight, high affinity RAGE inhibitors, FPS2 and FPS-ZM1, have been recently reported [91]. FPS-ZM1, a novel multimodal RAGE blocker that crosses the BBB, reduced influx of Aβ into the brain, improved CBF responses, downregulated β-secretase activity, decreased amyloid load, suppressed neuroinflammatory responses, and reduced behavioral deficits in a mouse model of AD [91]. Similarly, in a rodent model of hypertension, RAGE inhibition by FPS-ZM1 significantly reduced hypertension-induced AD pathology as shown by improved cognitive performance and reduced parenchymal Aβ deposition [110]. RAGE inhibitors are currently being examined in Phase 3 clinical trials for efficacy in mild to moderate AD (NCT02080364) [186,187]. See Fig. 3B.

5.2. Microvascular stabilization

5.2.1. Activated protein C (APC)

APC is a vasculoprotective protease that promotes cytoprotective signaling in injured and ischemic brain endothelium at the BBB [188,189]. APC also stimulates post-ischemic brain angiogenesis, vascular repair and neurogenesis [188–191]. In the CNS endothelium, APC activates protease activated receptor-1 (PAR-1), which elicits protective signaling by enhancing the BBB integrity via Rac1-dependent cytoskeletal stabilization, suppression of cerebrovascular MMP-9 activity, and inhibition of proinflammatory cytokines expression and apoptosis [188,189,192–194]. A genetically engineered variant of APC, 3K3A-APC, with normal cell signaling and greatly reduced anticoagulant activity has an excellent safety profile in primates and humans [195,196] and is currently being studied as a neuroprotective agent in a Phase 2a clinical trial for ischemic stroke (NCT02222714). APC therapy holds potential to protect and restore cerebrovascular function and BBB breakdown in various other neurological disorders, as shown in different experimental models, and might have also applications in dementia and AD.

5.2.2. CypA and MMP-9 inhibitors

The detrimental effects of APOE4 on BBB and NVU function are mechanistically linked to the CypA-NFκB-MMP-9 proinflammatory pathway [29,35]. There are several new CypA inhibitors recently developed and investigated for use against hepatitis-C and HIV infections including CPI-431-32 [197], compound 25 [198], SCY-635 [199] and MM284 [200], which all may have a potential to stabilize the BBB in APOE4 carriers. In addition to CypA inhibitors, there are a number of identified MMP-9 inhibitors including minocycline [201], curcumin [202], SB-3CT(2) [203] and compound 18 [204]. For example, minocycline has been demonstrated to reduce hemorrhage frequency and increase endothelial tight junction and basement membrane proteins in aged 5xFAD/APOE4 transgenic mice [201]. Furthermore, recent studies showed that minocycline significantly reduced the infarct size, prevented tissue loss, improved perfusion, reduced BBB permeability, and increased tight junction protein levels in spontaneously hypertensive stroke-prone rats [205,206]. Future studies should determine the benefit of CypA and MMP-9 inhibitors on vascular dysfunction in AD and APOE transgenic mouse models.

5.2.3. Anti-hypertensive drugs

Many studies in experimental animal models and clinical studies show that pharmacological intervention by angiotensin receptor blocker, angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor, or RAGE inhibitor is effective in treating hypertension related vascular injury [207–209], reducing AD related pathological changes in brain [209,210], and slowing cognitive decline [209,211]. Furthermore, developing future therapies capable of lowering expression of VCAM-1, ICAM-1 and/or blocking ET-1 receptor hold promise to further reduce hypertension-induced cerebrovascular dysfunction.

5.2.4. Fibrinogen depletion

Ancrod is a drug derived from the Malayan pit viper that contains a serine protease that cleaves fibrinopeptide A (FPA), essentially preventing conversion of fibrinogen to fibrin that results in fibrinogen depletion [212]. The potentially beneficial mechanism of Ancrod is its ability to lessen fibrinogen clot propagation and improve CBF via activation of endogenous fibrinolysis [212]. Studies in TgK21p55+/− mice, a MS model that exhibits clinical symptoms of paralysis and BBB breakdown, found that Ancrod treatment delayed the onset of inflammatory demyelination by diminishing fibrinogen deposition [213]. Additionally, clinical trials of Ancrod in ischemic stroke have yielded different results depending on time of treatment; for instance, Ancrod was clinically beneficial when administered within 3 hours post-stroke [214] but exhibited no benefit when administered within 6 hours post-stroke [215]. Ancrod’s mechanism was recently studied in vitro in cultured human endothelial cells grown in ischemic conditions and in stroke subjects. In both cases Ancrod decreased fibrinogen levels and increased FPA levels and reduced clot formation [212].

5.3. Lifestyle improvements for vascular health

5.3.1. Diet

Recent studies report that diet can mediate the vasculoplastic reserve of the hippocampus. For example, consuming high levels of cocoa flavanols increased capillary density and enhanced dentate gyrus-associated cognitive function in cognitively normal healthy subjects [216]. This suggests an interaction between vasculoplasticity and neuronal plasticity during normal aging and dementia, but how this relationship is affected by lifestyle and vascular risk factors is currently unclear and should be investigated in future studies [13].

Growing evidence supports the benefits of a Mediterranean diet in protecting against dementia and prolonging one’s cognitive reserve during aging. Age-related cognitive decline was attenuated in individuals consuming a Mediterranean diet, as found in a recent study of the Mediterranean-Dietary Approach to Systolic Hypertension (DASH) diet intervention for neurodegenerative delay (MIND) [217]. In comparing Mediterranean and Western diets, the primary difference is the source and proportion of dietary fats, with olive oil specifically being the main fat consumed in the Mediterranean diet and high levels of saturated fatty acids and simple carbohydrates being consumed in Western diets [218]. Microvascular dysfunction is evident in rodent models fed unhealthy diets, namely those fed diets of Western culture [219], high fat [220], and high cholesterol [221]. An intact BBB is needed for proper cholesterol metabolism [222]. In CSF, decreased cholesterol levels correlate with decreased Aβ42 and increased CSF APPα and APPβ (products of APP processing) levels, supporting an association between disrupted cholesterol metabolism and increased amyloidogenesis [223].

Resveratrol is a biologically active plant-derived phytoalexin. Resveratrol has been shown to cross BBB, and regulate expression of MMPs, reduce pericyte loss, maintain integrity of BBB, and promote Aβ clearance [224–226]. Treatment with resveratrol completely reversed diabetes-induced vascular dysfunction by reducing capillary leakage, pericyte degeneration, and VEGF protein expression in the murine retina [227]. An earlier study has shown that resveratrol inhibits RAGE expression in vascular cells [228], which is implicated in Aβ transport into the brain and accelerated Aβ pathology in a mouse model [91]. Furthermore, long-term consumption of resveratrol reduced oxidative stress and prevented behavioral deficits in a rat model with disrupted NVU [229].

Olive oil is high in essential omega-3 fatty acids, the major component of which is docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), and has long been reported to benefit cognition and overall brain health [230]. DHA cannot be synthesized by the body and thus must be consumed, and the primary transporter of DHA from blood-to-brain is the major facilitator superfamily domain containing 2A (MFSD2A) at the BBB [231]. Individuals with AD have lower CSF DHA lipid levels, and those with mild dementia have lower CSF α-liolenic acid levels [232]. Interestingly, reduced MFSD2A expression at the BBB can lead to a loss of its important functions, including maintenance of BBB integrity and omega-3 fatty acid transport into the brain [231,233,234]. Of note, transgenic APOE4 mice also exhibit reduced uptake of DHA into the brain compared with transgenic APOE2 mice [235], but whether this is related to reduced Mfsd2a expression is currently unknown. Additional studies are needed elucidate the underlying mechanisms of MFSD2A and fatty acids in relation to dementia and AD.

5.3.2. Exercise and environmental enrichment

Regular exercise and physical activity, particularly during midlife, are associated with improved cerebrovascular function and reduced rates of dementia and AD [236]. Individuals that exercised regularly for 28 days exhibited reduced plasma homocysteine levels and increased endothelial progenitor cells in peripheral blood, factors that protect against vascular damage and cognitive impairment [237]. Experimental studies in diabetic rats have shown that treadmill exercise maintains claudin-5 expression at the BBB compared to rats not receiving exercise [238]. Mechanistically, physical activity and cognitive stimulation in the form of enriched environment (e.g., tunnels, balls, ladders, and running wheel) accelerated Aβ enzymatic degradation and enhanced transvascular Aβ clearance, reducing Aβ accumulation in brains of AD transgenic mouse models [239,240]. Additionally, physical activity promoted Aβ clearance from brain to blood via upregulation of LRP1 [241,242] and downregulation of RAGE [91] at the BBB. Mice without access to a running wheel had decreased occludin tight junction levels and disrupted BBB integrity [243]. Although recent attention has been given to exercise, additional studies are needed to more completely understand the mechanism underlying its beneficial effects.

6. Conclusions and critical questions

Here, we have described the compelling evidence supporting the neurovascular link to cognitive impairment, dementia and AD. Specifically, how cerebrovascular functions in humans and animal models are affected and/or altered by genetic risk factors for AD and modifiable vascular risk factors, lifestyle and environment, which in turn can all influence development of dementia and AD.

The exact role of the vascular system in the pathophysiogenesis of dementia and AD and whether the vascular system is a viable therapeutic target for dementia and AD still remains, however, to be better understood and/or defined by future studies. Some critical questions that perhaps need to be addressed by studies in humans are, for example: i) Do cerebrovascular changes drive the initial pathogenic events in the living human brain leading to neuronal injury, disrupted structural and functional brain connectivity and early cognitive decline in sporadic AD and/or individuals with genetic risk for AD (i.e., APOE4) or ADAD (i.e., PSEN1) compared to those at a lower risk? ii) Do cerebrovascular changes lead to cognitive decline in individuals with vascular risk factors such as diabetes or hypertension? iii) Do reductions in the resting CBF and/or CBF dysregulation and BBB breakdown precede changes in structural and functional brain connectivity in the living human brain, and can these cerebrovascular abnormalities be detected early in the disease process in AD and ADAD patients and/or in individuals with vascular risk factors?

In parallel to addressing these translational questions, there is an emerging need for novel molecular and imaging biomarkers to predict cognitive decline, dementia and AD, including development of biomarkers for neurovascular dysfunction, and to determine whether these biomarkers can serve as reliable new diagnostic and/or prognostic tools for predicting cognitive impairment and the decline to dementia. From the experimental preclinical laboratory side, it would be extremely interesting to evaluate whether genetic, vascular and/or mechanical manipulation of the cerebrovascular system to advance vascular/BBB injury functions influence the course of neurological disorders and AD-like pathology in animal models of dementia and AD, as it does in some models of human rare monogenic diseases [83,244–246].

Finally, new experimental studies should reveal whether therapeutic targeting of cerebrovascular dysfunction, including BBB breakdown and dysregulated CBF, could influence the course of disease in experimental models of AD, and importantly, could these findings then be translated to humans affected by dementia and AD.

The work of B.V.Z. is supported by the National Institutes of Health grants R01AG023084, R01NS090904, R01NS034467, and R01AG039452 and the Cure for Alzheimer’s Fund. We apologize to those authors whose original work we were not able to cite due to limited length of this review.

Figure 1 The neurovascular unit (NVU) at the level of brain capillary is comprised of vascular cells (pericytes and endothelial cells), glia (astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, and microglia) and neurons.

Figure 2 The two-hit vascular model of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) dementia. Vascular factors, such as hypertension and diabetes, and/or genetic risk factors for AD, such as apolipoprotein E ε4 (APOE4), can all lead to cerebrovascular damage (hit 1; green boxes). Within the amyloid-β peptide (Aβ)-independent pathway, cerebrovascular damage leads to blood-brain barrier (BBB) dysfunction and accumulation of blood-derived neurotoxic molecules in the brain, from one hand, and oligemia or reduced cerebral blood volume, from the other. Additionally, within the amyloidogenic Aβ pathway, BBB dysfunction can disrupt Aβ clearance across the BBB and oligemia leads to overexpression and enhanced processing of Aβ precursor protein (APP), which both can promote Aβ accumulation in the brain (hit 2; black boxes). The converging Aβ-independent and Aβ-dependent pathways can each independently and/or synergistically lead to synaptic and neuronal dysfunction, neurodegeneration, and disruption of brain structural and functional connectivity that ultimately leads to dementia.

Figure 3 Blood-brain barrier (BBB) pathways to neurodegeneration in dementia and Alzheimer’s disease (AD).

A. In the normal capillary, there is an intact BBB composed of tightly joined endothelial cells and supported by mural pericytes, as shown in this simplified schematic. The BBB normally selectively regulates the passage of molecules from blood to brain and vice versa, and restricts entry of blood-derived products and toxins into the brain. There are many transporters and receptors along the BBB that permit molecules to cross the BBB via substrate-specific transport systems, some of which are particularly relevant to AD pathophysiogenesis, as illustrated in the inset. For example, the normal BBB has high expression of the glucose transporter (GLUT1), moderate expression of low density lipoprotein receptor related protein-1 (LRP1) and minimal expression of receptor for advanced glycation end-products (RAGE).

B. In the AD capillary, there is a vicious cascade of events that can lead to neurodegeneration, as shown in this schematic and described as follows. 1. Pericytes degenerate and detach. 2. The BBB becomes leaky. 3. Blood-derived molecules like fibrinogen, thrombin and plasminogen leak from vessels and are directly toxic to neurons and can further induce BBB damage. Erythrocyte extravasation induces accumulation of hemoglobin derived-iron which causes generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and oxidative stress to neurons, and albumin promotes local tissue edema. 4. BBB transporter expression is altered, e.g., LRP1 and GLUT1 expression are significantly reduced, whereas RAGE expression is increased. The alterations in LRP1 and RAGE reduce the clearance and increase the uptake of Aβ into the brain, respectively, leading to Aβ accumulation in the brain. Also, normal cerebrovascular functions are disrupted by vascular pathologies including 5. Cerebral amyloid angiopathy, 6. Damaged and thickening of the basement membrane, and 7. String vessels.

Highlights

Cerebrovascular damage may initiate molecular events leading to neurodegeneration

Major genetic risk factors for AD are linked to brain vascular dysfunction

Vascular risk factors increase incidence of sporadic AD

Mid-life lifestyle changes may protect the neurovasculature and prevent AD

Vasculoprotective therapies may delay the onset and progression of AD

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


1 Zlokovic BV Neurovascular pathways to neurodegeneration in Alzheimer’s disease and other disorders Nat Rev Neurosci 12 2011 723 738 22048062
2 Iadecola C The pathobiology of vascular dementia Neuron 80 2013 844 866 24267647
3 Moskowitz MA Lo EH Iadecola C The science of stroke: mechanisms in search of treatments Neuron 67 2010 181 198 20670828
4 Zlokovic BV The blood-brain barrier in health and chronic neurodegenerative disorders Neuron 57 2008 178 201 18215617
5 Zhao Z Nelson AR Betsholtz C Zlokovic BV Establishment and Dysfunction of the Blood-Brain Barrier Cell 163 n.d 1064 1078 26590417
6 Mann GE Zlokovic BV Yudilevich DL Evidence for a lactate transport system in the sarcolemmal membrane of the perfused rabbit heart: kinetics of unidirectional influx, carrier specificity and effects of glucagon Biochim Biophys Acta 819 1985 241 248 4041458
7 Zlokovic BV Begley DJ Chain-Eliash DG Blood-brain barrier permeability to leucine-enkephalin, D-alanine2-D-leucine5-enkephalin and their N-terminal amino acid (tyrosine) Brain Res 336 1985 125 132 3891014
8 Zlokovid BV Lipovac MN Begley DJ Davson H Rakić L Transport of leucine-enkephalin across the blood-brain barrier in the perfused guinea pig brain J Neurochem 49 1987 310 315 3585338
9 Zlokovic BV Cerebrovascular permeability to peptides: manipulations of transport systems at the blood-brain barrier Pharm Res 12 1995 1395 1406 8584471
10 Begley DJ Brightman MW Structural and functional aspects of the blood-brain barrier Prog Drug Res Fortschritte Arzneimittelforschung Prog Rech Pharm 61 2003 39 78
11 Ramanathan A Nelson AR Sagare AP Zlokovic BV Impaired vascular-mediated clearance of brain amyloid beta in Alzheimer’s disease: the role, regulation and restoration of LRP1 Front Aging Neurosci 7 2015 136 26236233
12 Montagne A Barnes SR Sweeney MD Halliday MR Sagare AP Zhao Z Toga AW Jacobs RE Liu CY Amezcua L Harrington MG Chui HC Law M Zlokovic BV Blood-Brain Barrier Breakdown in the Aging Human Hippocampus Neuron 85 2015 296 302 25611508
13 Montagne A Pa J Zlokovic BV Vascular Plasticity and Cognition During Normal Aging and Dementia JAMA Neurol 2015
14 Montine TJ Koroshetz WJ Babcock D Dickson DW Galpern WR Glymour MM Greenberg SM Hutton ML Knopman DS Kuzmichev AN Manly JJ Marder KS Miller BL Phelps CH Seeley WW Sieber BA Silverberg NB Sutherland M Torborg CL Waddy SP Recommendations of the Alzheimer’s disease-related dementias conference Neurology 83 2014 851 860 25080517
15 Snyder HM Corriveau RA Craft S Faber JE Greenberg SM Knopman D Lamb BT Montine TJ Nedergaard M Schaffer CB Schneider JA Wellington C Wilcock DM Zipfel GJ Zlokovic B Bain LJ Bosetti F Galis ZS Koroshetz W Carrillo MC Vascular contributions to cognitive impairment and dementia including Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimers Dement J Alzheimers Assoc 11 2015 710 717
16 Sweeney MD Sagare AP Zlokovic BV Cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers of neurovascular dysfunction in mild dementia and Alzheimer’s disease J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 35 2015 1055 1068 25899298
17 Winkler EA Sengillo JD Sullivan JS Henkel JS Appel SH Zlokovic BV Blood-spinal cord barrier breakdown and pericyte reductions in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Acta Neuropathol (Berl) 125 2013 111 120 22941226
18 Korczyn AD Vascular parkinsonism-characteristics, pathogenesis and treatment Nat Rev Neurol 11 2015 319 326 25917706
19 Drouin-Ouellet J Sawiak SJ Cisbani G Lagacé M Kuan WL Saint-Pierre M Dury RJ Alata W St-Amour I Mason SL Calon F Lacroix S Gowland PA Francis ST Barker RA Cicchetti F Cerebrovascular and blood-brain barrier impairments in Huntington’s disease: Potential implications for its pathophysiology Ann Neurol 78 2015 160 177 25866151
20 Alzheimer’s Association 2015 Alzheimer’s disease facts and figures Alzheimers Dement J Alzheimers Assoc 11 2015 332 384
21 Tanzi RE The genetics of Alzheimer disease Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2 2012
22 Winkler EA Sagare AP Zlokovic BV The pericyte: a forgotten cell type with important implications for Alzheimer’s disease? Brain Pathol Zurich Switz 24 2014 371 386
23 Sagare AP Bell RD Zlokovic BV Neurovascular defects and faulty amyloid-β vascular clearance in Alzheimer’s disease J Alzheimers Dis JAD 33 Suppl 1 2013 S87 100 22751174
24 Sagare AP Bell RD Zlokovic BV Neurovascular dysfunction and faulty amyloid β-peptide clearance in Alzheimer disease Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2 2012
25 Zlokovic BV Neurovascular mechanisms of Alzheimer’s neurodegeneration Trends Neurosci 28 2005 202 208 15808355
26 Huang Y Mahley RW Apolipoprotein E: structure and function in lipid metabolism, neurobiology, and Alzheimer’s diseases Neurobiol Dis 72 Pt A 2014 3 12 25173806
27 Corder EH Saunders AM Strittmatter WJ Schmechel DE Gaskell PC Small GW Roses AD Haines JL Pericak-Vance MA Gene dose of apolipoprotein E type 4 allele and the risk of Alzheimer’s disease in late onset families Science 261 1993 921 923 8346443
28 Verghese PB Castellano JM Holtzman DM Apolipoprotein E in Alzheimer’s disease and other neurological disorders Lancet Neurol 10 2011 241 252 21349439
29 Halliday MR Pomara N Sagare AP Mack WJ Frangione B Zlokovic BV Relationship between cyclophilin a levels and matrix metalloproteinase 9 activity in cerebrospinal fluid of cognitively normal apolipoprotein e4 carriers and blood-brain barrier breakdown JAMA Neurol 70 2013 1198 1200 24030206
30 Halliday MR Rege SV Ma Q Zhao Z Miller CA Winkler EA Zlokovic BV Accelerated pericyte degeneration and blood-brain barrier breakdown in apolipoprotein E4 carriers with Alzheimer’s disease J Cereb Blood Flow Metab Off J Int Soc Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2015
31 Hultman K Strickland S Norris EH The APOEε4/ε4 genotype potentiates vascular fibrin(ogen) deposition in amyloid-laden vessels in the brains of Alzheimer’s disease patients J Cereb Blood Flow Metab Off J Int Soc Cereb Blood Flow Metab 33 2013 1251 1258
32 Zipser BD Johanson CE Gonzalez L Berzin TM Tavares R Hulette CM Vitek MP Hovanesian V Stopa EG Microvascular injury and blood-brain barrier leakage in Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 28 2007 977 986 16782234
33 Zonneveld HI Goos JDC Wattjes MP Prins ND Scheltens P van der Flier WM Kuijer JPA Muller M Barkhof F Prevalence of cortical superficial siderosis in a memory clinic population Neurology 82 2014 698 704 24477113
34 Suri S Mackay CE Kelly ME Germuska M Tunbridge EM Frisoni GB Matthews PM Ebmeier KP Bulte DP Filippini N Reduced cerebrovascular reactivity in young adults carrying the APOE ε4 allele Alzheimers Dement J Alzheimers Assoc 11 2015 648 657.e1
35 Bell RD Winkler EA Singh I Sagare AP Deane R Wu Z Holtzman DM Betsholtz C Armulik A Sallstrom J Berk BC Zlokovic BV Apolipoprotein E controls cerebrovascular integrity via cyclophilin A Nature 485 2012 512 516 22622580
36 Alata W Ye Y St-Amour I Vandal M Calon F Human apolipoprotein E ε4 expression impairs cerebral vascularization and blood-brain barrier function in mice J Cereb Blood Flow Metab Off J Int Soc Cereb Blood Flow Metab 35 2015 86 94
37 Bell RD Sagare AP Friedman AE Bedi GS Holtzman DM Deane R Zlokovic BV Transport pathways for clearance of human Alzheimer’s amyloid beta-peptide and apolipoproteins E and J in the mouse central nervous system J Cereb Blood Flow Metab Off J Int Soc Cereb Blood Flow Metab 27 2007 909 918
38 Deane R Sagare A Hamm K Parisi M Lane S Finn MB Holtzman DM Zlokovic BV apoE isoform-specific disruption of amyloid beta peptide clearance from mouse brain J Clin Invest 118 2008 4002 4013 19033669
39 Miller SE Sahlender DA Graham SC Höning S Robinson MS Peden AA Owen DJ The molecular basis for the endocytosis of small R-SNAREs by the clathrin adaptor CALM Cell 147 2011 1118 1131 22118466
40 Treusch S Hamamichi S Goodman JL Matlack KES Chung CY Baru V Shulman JM Parrado A Bevis BJ Valastyan JS Han H Lindhagen-Persson M Reiman EM Evans DA Bennett DA Olofsson A DeJager PL Tanzi RE Caldwell KA Caldwell GA Functional links between Aβ toxicity, endocytic trafficking, and Alzheimer’s disease risk factors in yeast Science 334 2011 1241 1245 22033521
41 Zhao Z Sagare AP Ma Q Halliday MR Kong P Kisler K Winkler EA Ramanathan A Kanekiyo T Bu G Owens NC Rege SV Si G Ahuja A Zhu D Miller CA Schneider JA Maeda M Maeda T Sugawara T Central role for PICALM in amyloid-β blood-brain barrier transcytosis and clearance Nat Neurosci 18 2015 978 987 26005850
42 Harold D Abraham R Hollingworth P Sims R Gerrish A Hamshere ML Pahwa JS Moskvina V Dowzell K Williams A Jones N Thomas C Stretton A Morgan AR Lovestone S Powell J Proitsi P Lupton MK Brayne C Rubinsztein DC Genome-wide association study identifies variants at CLU and PICALM associated with Alzheimer’s disease Nat Genet 41 2009 1088 1093 19734902
43 Lambert JC Ibrahim-Verbaas CA Harold D Naj AC Sims R Bellenguez C DeStafano AL Bis JC Beecham GW Grenier-Boley B Russo G Thorton-Wells TA Jones N Smith AV Chouraki V Thomas C Ikram MA Zelenika D Vardarajan BN Kamatani Y Meta-analysis of 74,046 individuals identifies 11 new susceptibility loci for Alzheimer’s disease Nat Genet 45 2013 1452 1458 24162737
44 Lambert J-C Heath S Even G Campion D Sleegers K Hiltunen M Combarros O Zelenika D Bullido MJ Tavernier B Letenneur L Bettens K Berr C Pasquier F Fiévet N Barberger-Gateau P Engelborghs S De Deyn P Mateo I Franck A Genome-wide association study identifies variants at CLU and CR1 associated with Alzheimer’s disease Nat Genet 41 2009 1094 1099 19734903
45 Lancaster TM Brindley LM Tansey KE Sims RC Mantripragada K Owen MJ Williams J Linden DEJ Alzheimer’s disease risk variant in CLU is associated with neural inefficiency in healthy individuals Alzheimers Dement J Alzheimers Assoc 2014
46 Zlokovic BV Martel CL Matsubara E McComb JG Zheng G McCluskey RT Frangione B Ghiso J Glycoprotein 330/megalin: probable role in receptor-mediated transport of apolipoprotein J alone and in a complex with Alzheimer disease amyloid beta at the blood-brain and blood-cerebrospinal fluid barriers Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 93 1996 4229 4234 8633046
47 Armstrong RA Spatial correlations between beta-amyloid (Abeta) deposits and blood vessels in familial Alzheimer’s disease Folia Neuropathol Assoc Pol Neuropathol Med Res Cent Pol Acad Sci 46 2008 241 248
48 Niwa A Matsuo K Shindo A Yata K Shiraishi T Tomimoto H Clinical and neuropathological findings in a patient with familial Alzheimer disease showing a mutation in the PSEN1 gene: Familial Alzheimer disease with PSEN1 Neuropathology 33 2013 199 203 22882713
49 Gama Sosa MA Gasperi RD Rocher AB Wang AC-J Janssen WGM Flores T Perez GM Schmeidler J Dickstein DL Hof PR Elder GA Age-related vascular pathology in transgenic mice expressing presenilin 1-associated familial Alzheimer’s disease mutations Am J Pathol 176 2010 353 368 20008141
50 Wen PH De Gasperi R Sosa MAG Rocher AB Friedrich VL Hof PR Elder GA Selective expression of presenilin 1 in neural progenitor cells rescues the cerebral hemorrhages and cortical lamination defects in presenilin 1-null mutant mice Dev Camb Engl 132 2005 3873 3883
51 Gorski DH Walsh K Control of vascular cell differentiation by homeobox transcription factors Trends Cardiovasc Med 13 2003 213 220 12922016
52 Rovelet-Lecrux A Legallic S Wallon D Flaman J-M Martinaud O Bombois S Rollin-Sillaire A Michon A Le Ber I Pariente J Puel M Paquet C Croisile B Thomas-Antérion C Vercelletto M Lévy R Frébourg T Hannequin D Campion D Investigators of the GMAJ project A genome-wide study reveals rare CNVs exclusive to extreme phenotypes of Alzheimer disease Eur J Hum Genet EJHG 20 2012 613 617 22166940
53 Wu Z Guo H Chow N Sallstrom J Bell RD Deane R Brooks AI Kanagala S Rubio A Sagare A Liu D Li F Armstrong D Gasiewicz T Zidovetzki R Song X Hofman F Zlokovic BV Role of the MEOX2 homeobox gene in neurovascular dysfunction in Alzheimer disease Nat Med 11 2005 959 965 16116430
54 Iadecola C Davisson RL Hypertension and cerebrovascular dysfunction Cell Metab 7 2008 476 484 18522829
55 Toledo JB Arnold SE Raible K Brettschneider J Xie SX Grossman M Monsell SE Kukull WA Trojanowski JQ Contribution of cerebrovascular disease in autopsy confirmed neurodegenerative disease cases in the National Alzheimer’s Coordinating Centre Brain J Neurol 136 2013 2697 2706
56 Wang L Kittaka M Sun N Schreiber SS Zlokovic BV Chronic nicotine treatment enhances focal ischemic brain injury and depletes free pool of brain microvascular tissue plasminogen activator in rats J Cereb Blood Flow Metab Off J Int Soc Cereb Blood Flow Metab 17 1997 136 146
57 Ruitenberg A den Heijer T Bakker SLM van Swieten JC Koudstaal PJ Hofman A Breteler MMB Cerebral hypoperfusion and clinical onset of dementia: the Rotterdam Study Ann Neurol 57 2005 789 794 15929050
58 Roher AE Debbins JP Malek-Ahmadi M Chen K Pipe JG Maze S Belden C Maarouf CL Thiyyagura P Mo H Hunter JM Kokjohn TA Walker DG Kruchowsky JC Belohlavek M Sabbagh MN Beach TG Cerebral blood flow in Alzheimer’s disease Vasc Health Risk Manag 8 2012 599 611 23109807
59 Paris D Patel N DelleDonne A Quadros A Smeed R Mullan M Impaired angiogenesis in a transgenic mouse model of cerebral amyloidosis Neurosci Lett 366 2004 80 85 15265595
60 Bell RD Winkler EA Sagare AP Singh I LaRue B Deane R Zlokovic BV Pericytes control key neurovascular functions and neuronal phenotype in the adult brain and during brain aging Neuron 68 2010 409 427 21040844
61 Chow N Bell RD Deane R Streb JW Chen J Brooks A Van Nostrand W Miano JM Zlokovic BV Serum response factor and myocardin mediate arterial hypercontractility and cerebral blood flow dysregulation in Alzheimer’s phenotype Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104 2007 823 828 17215356
62 Bell RD Deane R Chow N Long X Sagare A Singh I Streb JW Guo H Rubio A Van Nostrand W Miano JM Zlokovic BV SRF and myocardin regulate LRP-mediated amyloid-beta clearance in brain vascular cells Nat Cell Biol 11 2009 143 153 19098903
63 Hill RA Tong L Yuan P Murikinati S Gupta S Grutzendler J Regional Blood Flow in the Normal and Ischemic Brain Is Controlled by Arteriolar Smooth Muscle Cell Contractility and Not by Capillary Pericytes Neuron 87 2015 95 110 26119027
64 Hall CN Reynell C Gesslein B Hamilton NB Mishra A Sutherland BA O’Farrell FM Buchan AM Lauritzen M Attwell D Capillary pericytes regulate cerebral blood flow in health and disease Nature 508 2014 55 60 24670647
65 Iadecola C Neurovascular regulation in the normal brain and in Alzheimer’s disease Nat Rev Neurosci 5 2004 347 360 15100718
66 Sagare AP Sweeney MD Makshanoff J Zlokovic BV Shedding of soluble platelet-derived growth factor receptor-β from human brain pericytes Neurosci Lett 2015
67 Bowman GL Kaye JA Quinn JF Dyslipidemia and blood-brain barrier integrity in Alzheimer’s disease Curr Gerontol Geriatr Res 2012 2012 184042 22654903
68 Ryu JK McLarnon JG A leaky blood-brain barrier, fibrinogen infiltration and microglial reactivity in inflamed Alzheimer’s disease brain J Cell Mol Med 13 2009 2911 2925 18657226
69 Sengillo JD Winkler EA Walker CT Sullivan JS Johnson M Zlokovic BV Deficiency in mural vascular cells coincides with blood-brain barrier disruption in Alzheimer’s disease Brain Pathol Zurich Switz 23 2013 303 310
70 Akinyemi RO Mukaetova-Ladinska EB Attems J Ihara M Kalaria RN Vascular risk factors and neurodegeneration in ageing related dementias: Alzheimer’s disease and vascular dementia Curr Alzheimer Res 10 2013 642 653 23627757
71 Baloyannis SJ Baloyannis IS The vascular factor in Alzheimer’s disease: a study in Golgi technique and electron microscopy J Neurol Sci 322 2012 117 121 22857991
72 Farkas E Luiten PG Cerebral microvascular pathology in aging and Alzheimer’s disease Prog Neurobiol 64 2001 575 611 11311463
73 Cortes-Canteli M Mattei L Richards AT Norris EH Strickland S Fibrin deposited in the Alzheimer’s disease brain promotes neuronal degeneration Neurobiol Aging 36 2015 608 617 25475538
74 Yates PA Desmond PM Phal PM Steward C Szoeke C Salvado O Ellis KA Martins RN Masters CL Ames D Villemagne VL Rowe CC AIBL Research Group Incidence of cerebral microbleeds in preclinical Alzheimer disease Neurology 82 2014 1266 1273 24623839
75 Olazarán J Ramos A Boyano I Alfayate E Valentí M Rábano A Alvarez-Linera J Pattern of and risk factors for brain microbleeds in neurodegenerative dementia Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen 29 2014 263 269 24408753
76 Shams S Martola J Granberg T Li X Shams M Fereshtehnejad SM Cavallin L Aspelin P Kristoffersen-Wiberg M Wahlund LO Cerebral microbleeds: different prevalence, topography, and risk factors depending on dementia diagnosis—the Karolinska Imaging Dementia Study AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 36 2015 661 666 25523590
77 Raven EP Lu PH Tishler TA Heydari P Bartzokis G Increased iron levels and decreased tissue integrity in hippocampus of Alzheimer’s disease detected in vivo with magnetic resonance imaging J Alzheimers Dis JAD 37 2013 127 136 23792695
78 Horwood N Davies DC Immunolabelling of hippocampal microvessel glucose transporter protein is reduced in Alzheimer’s disease Virchows Arch Int J Pathol 425 1994 69 72
79 Winkler EA Nishida Y Sagare AP Rege SV Bell RD Perlmutter D Sengillo JD Hillman S Kong P Nelson AR Sullivan JS Zhao Z Meiselman HJ Wenby RB Soto J Abel ED Makshanoff J Zuniga E De Vivo DC Zlokovic BV GLUT1 reductions exacerbate Alzheimer’s disease vasculo-neuronal dysfunction and degeneration Nat Neurosci 18 2015 521 530 25730668
80 Protas HD Chen K Langbaum JBS Fleisher AS Alexander GE Lee W Bandy D de Leon MJ Mosconi L Buckley S Truran-Sacrey D Schuff N Weiner MW Caselli RJ Reiman EM Posterior cingulate glucose metabolism, hippocampal glucose metabolism, and hippocampal volume in cognitively normal, late-middle-aged persons at 3 levels of genetic risk for Alzheimer disease JAMA Neurol 70 2013 320 325 23599929
81 Mosconi L De Santi S Li J Tsui WH Li Y Boppana M Laska E Rusinek H de Leon MJ Hippocampal hypometabolism predicts cognitive decline from normal aging Neurobiol Aging 29 2008 676 692 17222480
82 Zeller K Rahner-Welsch S Kuschinsky W Distribution of Glut1 glucose transporters in different brain structures compared to glucose utilization and capillary density of adult rat brains J Cereb Blood Flow Metab Off J Int Soc Cereb Blood Flow Metab 17 1997 204 209
83 Wang D Kranz-Eble P De Vivo DC Mutational analysis of GLUT1 (SLC2A1) in Glut-1 deficiency syndrome Hum Mutat 16 2000 224 231 10980529
84 Mawuenyega KG Sigurdson W Ovod V Munsell L Kasten T Morris JC Yarasheski KE Bateman RJ Decreased clearance of CNS beta-amyloid in Alzheimer’s disease Science 330 2010 1774 21148344
85 Deane R Wu Z Sagare A Davis J Du Yan S Hamm K Xu F Parisi M LaRue B Hu HW Spijkers P Guo H Song X Lenting PJ Van Nostrand WE Zlokovic BV LRP/amyloid beta-peptide interaction mediates differential brain efflux of Abeta isoforms Neuron 43 2004 333 344 15294142
86 Tarasoff-Conway JM Carare RO Osorio RS Glodzik L Butler T Fieremans E Axel L Rusinek H Nicholson C Zlokovic BV Frangione B Blennow K Ménard J Zetterberg H Wisniewski T de Leon MJ Clearance systems in the brain-implications for Alzheimer disease Nat Rev Neurol 2015
87 Zlokovic BV Deane R Sagare AP Bell RD Winkler EA Low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein-1: a serial clearance homeostatic mechanism controlling Alzheimer’s amyloid β-peptide elimination from the brain J Neurochem 115 2010 1077 1089 20854368
88 Donahue JE Flaherty SL Johanson CE Duncan JA Silverberg GD Miller MC Tavares R Yang W Wu Q Sabo E Hovanesian V Stopa EG RAGE, LRP-1, and amyloid-beta protein in Alzheimer’s disease Acta Neuropathol (Berl) 112 2006 405 415 16865397
89 Sagare AP Deane R Zetterberg H Wallin A Blennow K Zlokovic BV Impaired lipoprotein receptor-mediated peripheral binding of plasma amyloid-β is an early biomarker for mild cognitive impairment preceding Alzheimer’s disease J Alzheimers Dis JAD 24 2011 25 34 21157031
90 Drake J Link CD Butterfield DA Oxidative stress precedes fibrillar deposition of Alzheimer’s disease amyloid beta-peptide (1–42) in a transgenic Caenorhabditis elegans model Neurobiol Aging 24 2003 415 420 12600717
91 Deane R Singh I Sagare AP Bell RD Ross NT LaRue B Love R Perry S Paquette N Deane RJ Thiyagarajan M Zarcone T Fritz G Friedman AE Miller BL Zlokovic BV A multimodal RAGE-specific inhibitor reduces amyloid β-mediated brain disorder in a mouse model of Alzheimer disease J Clin Invest 122 2012 1377 1392 22406537
92 Silverberg GD Miller MC Messier AA Majmudar S Machan JT Donahue JE Stopa EG Johanson CE Amyloid deposition and influx transporter expression at the blood-brain barrier increase in normal aging J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 69 2010 98 108 20010299
93 Yan SD Chen X Fu J Chen M Zhu H Roher A Slattery T Zhao L Nagashima M Morser J Migheli A Nawroth P Stern D Schmidt AM RAGE and amyloid-beta peptide neurotoxicity in Alzheimer’s disease Nature 382 1996 685 691 8751438
94 Smith EE Schneider JA Wardlaw JM Greenberg SM Cerebral microinfarcts: the invisible lesions Lancet Neurol 11 2012 272 282 22341035
95 Toledo JB Arnold SE Raible K Brettschneider J Xie SX Grossman M Monsell SE Kukull WA Trojanowski JQ Contribution of cerebrovascular disease in autopsy confirmed neurodegenerative disease cases in the National Alzheimer’s Coordinating Centre Brain J Neurol 136 2013 2697 2706
96 Weller RO Djuanda E Yow H-Y Carare RO Lymphatic drainage of the brain and the pathophysiology of neurological disease Acta Neuropathol (Berl) 117 2009 1 14 19002474
97 Xu W Xu F Anderson ME Kotarba AE Davis J Robinson JK Van Nostrand WE Cerebral microvascular rather than parenchymal amyloid-β protein pathology promotes early cognitive impairment in transgenic mice J Alzheimers Dis JAD 38 2014 621 632 24037035
98 Morris AWJ Carare RO Schreiber S Hawkes CA The Cerebrovascular Basement Membrane: Role in the Clearance of β-amyloid and Cerebral Amyloid Angiopathy Front Aging Neurosci 6 2014 251 25285078
99 Brown WR A review of string vessels or collapsed, empty basement membrane tubes J Alzheimers Dis JAD 21 2010 725 739 20634580
100 Hunter JM Kwan J Malek-Ahmadi M Maarouf CL Kokjohn TA Belden C Sabbagh MN Beach TG Roher AE Morphological and pathological evolution of the brain microcirculation in aging and Alzheimer’s disease PloS One 7 2012 e36893 22615835
101 Richard E van Gool WA Hoozemans JJM van Haastert ES Eikelenboom P Rozemuller AJM van de Berg WDJ Morphometric changes in the cortical microvascular network in Alzheimer’s disease J Alzheimers Dis JAD 22 2010 811 818 20858968
102 Xu W Tan L Wang H-F Jiang T Tan M-S Tan L Zhao Q-F Li J-Q Wang J Yu J-T Meta-analysis of modifiable risk factors for Alzheimer’s disease J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2015
103 Freitag MH Peila R Masaki K Petrovitch H Ross GW White LR Launer LJ Midlife pulse pressure and incidence of dementia: the Honolulu-Asia Aging Study Stroke J Cereb Circ 37 2006 33 37
104 Shah NS Vidal J-S Masaki K Petrovitch H Ross GW Tilley C DeMattos RB Tracy RP White LR Launer LJ Midlife blood pressure, plasma β-amyloid, and the risk for Alzheimer disease: the Honolulu Asia Aging Study Hypertension 59 2012 780 786 22392902
105 Sharp SI Aarsland D Day S Sønnesyn H Ballard C Alzheimer’s Society Vascular Dementia Systematic Review Group Hypertension is a potential risk factor for vascular dementia: systematic review Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 26 2011 661 669 21495075
106 Scuteri A Nilsson PM Tzourio C Redon J Laurent S Microvascular brain damage with aging and hypertension: pathophysiological consideration and clinical implications J Hypertens 29 2011 1469 1477 21577138
107 Uiterwijk R Huijts M Staals J Rouhl RPW De Leeuw PW Kroon AA Van Oostenbrugge RJ Endothelial Activation Is Associated With Cognitive Performance in Patients With Hypertension Am J Hypertens 2015
108 Droste DW Ritter MA Dittrich R Heidenreich S Wichter T Freund M Ringelstein EB Arterial hypertension and ischaemic stroke Acta Neurol Scand 107 2003 241 251 12675696
109 Ueno M Sakamoto H Tomimoto H Akiguchi I Onodera M Huang C-L Kanenishi K Blood-brain barrier is impaired in the hippocampus of young adult spontaneously hypertensive rats Acta Neuropathol (Berl) 107 2004 532 538 15042385
110 Carnevale D Mascio G D’Andrea I Fardella V Bell RD Branchi I Pallante F Zlokovic B Yan SS Lembo G Hypertension induces brain β-amyloid accumulation, cognitive impairment, and memory deterioration through activation of receptor for advanced glycation end products in brain vasculature Hypertension 60 2012 188 197 22615109
111 Faraco G Park L Zhou P Luo W Paul SM Anrather J Iadecola C Hypertension enhances Aβ-induced neurovascular dysfunction, promotes β-secretase activity, and leads to amyloidogenic processing of APP J Cereb Blood Flow Metab Off J Int Soc Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2015
112 Kruyer A Soplop N Strickland S Norris EH Chronic Hypertension Leads to Neurodegeneration in the TgSwDI Mouse Model of Alzheimer’s Disease Hypertension 66 2015 175 182 25941345
113 Rosei EA Rizzoni D Muiesan ML Sleiman I Salvetti M Monteduro C Porteri E CENTRO (CandEsartaN on aTherosclerotic Risk factors) study investigators Effects of candesartan cilexetil and enalapril on inflammatory markers of atherosclerosis in hypertensive patients with non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus J Hypertens 23 2005 435 444 15662233
114 Akter S Jesmin S Iwashima Y Hideaki S Rahman MA Islam MM Moroi M Shimojo N Yamaguchi N Miyauchi T Kawano S Mizutani T Kawano Y Higher circulatory level of endothelin-1 in hypertensive subjects screened through a cross-sectional study of rural Bangladeshi women Hypertens Res Off J Jpn Soc Hypertens 38 2015 208 212
115 Nagai M Hoshide S Kario K Hypertension and dementia Am J Hypertens 23 2010 116 124 19927134
116 Larson EB Yaffe K Langa KM New insights into the dementia epidemic N Engl J Med 369 2013 2275 2277 24283198
117 Profenno LA Porsteinsson AP Faraone SV Meta-analysis of Alzheimer’s disease risk with obesity, diabetes, and related disorders Biol Psychiatry 67 2010 505 512 19358976
118 Cheng G Huang C Deng H Wang H Diabetes as a risk factor for dementia and mild cognitive impairment: a meta-analysis of longitudinal studies Intern Med J 42 2012 484 491 22372522
119 Barbagallo M Dominguez LJ Type 2 diabetes mellitus and Alzheimer’s disease World J Diabetes 5 2014 889 893 25512792
120 Starr JM Wardlaw J Ferguson K MacLullich A Deary IJ Marshall I Increased blood-brain barrier permeability in type II diabetes demonstrated by gadolinium magnetic resonance imaging J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 74 2003 70 76 12486269
121 Mogi M Horiuchi M Neurovascular coupling in cognitive impairment associated with diabetes mellitus Circ J Off J Jpn Circ Soc 75 2011 1042 1048
122 Huber JD VanGilder RL Houser KA Streptozotocin-induced diabetes progressively increases blood-brain barrier permeability in specific brain regions in rats Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 291 2006 H2660 2668 16951046
123 Hawkins BT Lundeen TF Norwood KM Brooks HL Egleton RD Increased blood-brain barrier permeability and altered tight junctions in experimental diabetes in the rat: contribution of hyperglycaemia and matrix metalloproteinases Diabetologia 50 2007 202 211 17143608
124 Takeda S Sato N Uchio-Yamada K Sawada K Kunieda T Takeuchi D Kurinami H Shinohara M Rakugi H Morishita R Diabetes-accelerated memory dysfunction via cerebrovascular inflammation and Abeta deposition in an Alzheimer mouse model with diabetes Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107 2010 7036 7041 20231468
125 Ramos-Rodriguez JJ Infante-Garcia C Galindo-Gonzalez L Garcia-Molina Y Lechuga-Sancho A Garcia-Alloza M Increased Spontaneous Central Bleeding and Cognition Impairment in APP/PS1 Mice with Poorly Controlled Diabetes Mellitus Mol Neurobiol 2015
126 Jayaraman A Pike CJ Alzheimer’s disease and type 2 diabetes: multiple mechanisms contribute to interactions Curr Diab Rep 14 2014 476 24526623
127 De Felice FG Lourenco MV Brain metabolic stress and neuroinflammation at the basis of cognitive impairment in Alzheimer’s disease Front Aging Neurosci 7 2015 94 26042036
128 Gupta A Iadecola C Impaired Aβ clearance: a potential link between atherosclerosis and Alzheimer’s disease Front Aging Neurosci 7 2015 115 26136682
129 Yarchoan M Xie SX Kling MA Toledo JB Wolk DA Lee EB Van Deerlin V Lee VM-Y Trojanowski JQ Arnold SE Cerebrovascular atherosclerosis correlates with Alzheimer pathology in neurodegenerative dementias Brain J Neurol 135 2012 3749 3756
130 Frazier DT Seider T Bettcher BM Mack WJ Jastrzab L Chao L Weiner MW DeCarli C Reed BR Mungas D Chui HC Kramer JH The role of carotid intima-media thickness in predicting longitudinal cognitive function in an older adult cohort Cerebrovasc Dis Basel Switz 38 2014 441 447
131 Arntzen KA Schirmer H Johnsen SH Wilsgaard T Mathiesen EB Carotid atherosclerosis predicts lower cognitive test results: a 7-year follow-up study of 4,371 stroke-free subjects - the Tromsø study Cerebrovasc Dis Basel Switz 33 2012 159 165
132 Zhong W Cruickshanks KJ Schubert CR Acher CW Carlsson CM Klein BEK Klein R Chappell RJ Carotid atherosclerosis and 10-year changes in cognitive function Atherosclerosis 224 2012 506 510 22854188
133 Bots ML Launer LJ Lindemans J Hofman A Grobbee DE Homocysteine, atherosclerosis and prevalent cardiovascular disease in the elderly: The Rotterdam Study J Intern Med 242 1997 339 347 9366813
134 McIlroy SP Dynan KB Lawson JT Patterson CC Passmore AP Moderately elevated plasma homocysteine, methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase genotype, and risk for stroke, vascular dementia, and Alzheimer disease in Northern Ireland Stroke J Cereb Circ 33 2002 2351 2356
135 Hassan A Hunt BJ O’Sullivan M Bell R D’Souza R Jeffery S Bamford JM Markus HS Homocysteine is a risk factor for cerebral small vessel disease, acting via endothelial dysfunction Brain J Neurol 127 2004 212 219
136 Miwa K Tanaka M Okazaki S Yagita Y Sakaguchi M Mochizuki H Kitagawa K Increased Total Homocysteine Levels Predict the Risk of Incident Dementia Independent of Cerebral Small-Vessel Diseases and Vascular Risk Factors J Alzheimers Dis JAD 2015
137 Kamat PK Kyles P Kalani A Tyagi N Hydrogen Sulfide Ameliorates Homocysteine-Induced Alzheimer’s Disease-Like Pathology, Blood-Brain Barrier Disruption, and Synaptic Disorder Mol Neurobiol 2015
138 Zhuo J-M Wang H Praticò D Is hyperhomocysteinemia an Alzheimer’s disease (AD) risk factor, an AD marker, or neither? Trends Pharmacol Sci 32 2011 562 571 21684021
139 Sudduth TL Powell DK Smith CD Greenstein A Wilcock DM Induction of hyperhomocysteinemia models vascular dementia by induction of cerebral microhemorrhages and neuroinflammation J Cereb Blood Flow Metab Off J Int Soc Cereb Blood Flow Metab 33 2013 708 715
140 Sudduth TL Weekman EM Brothers HM Braun K Wilcock DM β-amyloid deposition is shifted to the vasculature and memory impairment is exacerbated when hyperhomocysteinemia is induced in APP/PS1 transgenic mice Alzheimers Res Ther 6 2014 32 24991237
141 Franzblau M Gonzales-Portillo C Gonzales-Portillo GS Diamandis T Borlongan MC Tajiri N Borlongan CV Vascular damage: a persisting pathology common to Alzheimer’s disease and traumatic brain injury Med Hypotheses 81 2013 842 845 24074832
142 Glushakova OY Johnson D Hayes RL Delayed increases in microvascular pathology after experimental traumatic brain injury are associated with prolonged inflammation, blood-brain barrier disruption, and progressive white matter damage J Neurotrauma 31 2014 1180 1193 24564198
143 Ju Y-ES Lucey BP Holtzman DM Sleep and Alzheimer disease pathology--a bidirectional relationship Nat Rev Neurol 10 2014 115 119 24366271
144 Peter-Derex L Yammine P Bastuji H Croisile B Sleep and Alzheimer’s disease Sleep Med Rev 19 2015 29 38 24846773
145 Xie L Kang H Xu Q Chen MJ Liao Y Thiyagarajan M O’Donnell J Christensen DJ Nicholson C Iliff JJ Takano T Deane R Nedergaard M Sleep drives metabolite clearance from the adult brain Science 342 2013 373 377 24136970
146 Pan W Kastin AJ Can sleep apnea cause Alzheimer’s disease? Neurosci Biobehav Rev 47 2014 656 669 25451764
147 He J Hsuchou H He Y Kastin AJ Wang Y Pan W Sleep restriction impairs blood-brain barrier function J Neurosci Off J Soc Neurosci 34 2014 14697 14706
148 Sharma A Muresanu DF Lafuente JV Patnaik R Tian ZR Buzoianu AD Sharma HS Sleep Deprivation-Induced Blood-Brain Barrier Breakdown and Brain Dysfunction are Exacerbated by Size-Related Exposure to Ag and Cu Nanoparticles Neuroprotective Effects of a 5-HT3 Receptor Antagonist Ondansetron Mol Neurobiol 2015
149 Calderón-Garcidueñas L Franco-Lira M Mora-Tiscareño A Medina-Cortina H Torres-Jardón R Kavanaugh M Early Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease pathology in urban children: Friend versus Foe responses--it is time to face the evidence BioMed Res Int 2013 2013 161687 23509683
150 Jung C-R Lin Y-T Hwang B-F Ozone, particulate matter, and newly diagnosed Alzheimer’s disease: a population-based cohort study in Taiwan J Alzheimers Dis JAD 44 2015 573 584 25310992
151 Calderón-Garcidueñas L Kavanaugh M Block M D’Angiulli A Delgado-Chávez R Torres-Jardón R González-Maciel A Reynoso-Robles R Osnaya N Villarreal-Calderon R Guo R Hua Z Zhu H Perry G Diaz P Neuroinflammation, hyperphosphorylated tau, diffuse amyloid plaques, and down-regulation of the cellular prion protein in air pollution exposed children and young adults J Alzheimers Dis JAD 28 2012 93 107 21955814
152 Calderón-Garcidueñas L Mora-Tiscareño A Franco-Lira M Zhu H Lu Z Solorio E Torres-Jardón R D’Angiulli A Decreases in Short Term Memory, IQ, and Altered Brain Metabolic Ratios in Urban Apolipoprotein ε4 Children Exposed to Air Pollution J Alzheimers Dis JAD 45 2015 757 770 25633678
153 Calderón-Garcidueñas L Vojdani A Blaurock-Busch E Busch Y Friedle A Franco-Lira M Sarathi-Mukherjee P Martínez-Aguirre X Park S-B Torres-Jardón R D’Angiulli A Air pollution and children: neural and tight junction antibodies and combustion metals, the role of barrier breakdown and brain immunity in neurodegeneration J Alzheimers Dis JAD 43 2015 1039 1058 25147109
154 Kim SH Knight EM Saunders EL Cuevas AK Popovech M Chen L-C Gandy S Rapid doubling of Alzheimer’s amyloid-β40 and 42 levels in brains of mice exposed to a nickel nanoparticle model of air pollution F1000Research 1 2012 70 24358824
155 Oppenheim HA Lucero J Guyot A-C Herbert LM McDonald JD Mabondzo A Lund AK Exposure to vehicle emissions results in altered blood brain barrier permeability and expression of matrix metalloproteinases and tight junction proteins in mice Part Fibre Toxicol 10 2013 62 24344990
156 Yang Z Liu ZW Allaker RP Reip P Oxford J Ahmad Z Ren G A review of nanoparticle functionality and toxicity on the central nervous system J R Soc Interface 7 2010 S411 S422 20519209
157 Sharma HS Hussain S Schlager J Ali SF Sharma A Influence of nanoparticles on blood-brain barrier permeability and brain edema formation in rats Acta Neurochir Suppl 106 2010 359 364 19812977
158 Sharma HS Patnaik R Sharma A Diabetes aggravates nanoparticles induced breakdown of the blood-brain barrier permeability, brain edema formation, alterations in cerebral blood flow and neuronal injury An experimental study using physiological and morphological investigations in the rat J Nanosci Nanotechnol 10 2010 7931 7945 21121280
159 Tang J Xiong L Wang S Wang J Liu L Li J Yuan F Xi T Distribution, translocation and accumulation of silver nanoparticles in rats J Nanosci Nanotechnol 9 2009 4924 4932 19928170
160 Li C-H Jhan C Cheng Y-W Tsai C-H Liu C-W Lee C-C Chen R-M Shyu M-K Kang J-J Gold nanoparticles increase endothelial paracellular permeability by altering components of endothelial tight junctions, and increase blood-brain barrier permeability in mice Toxicol Sci Off J Soc Toxicol 2015
161 Takeda S Sato N Morishita R Systemic inflammation, blood-brain barrier vulnerability and cognitive/non-cognitive symptoms in Alzheimer disease: relevance to pathogenesis and therapy Front Aging Neurosci 6 2014 171 25120476
162 Dunn N Mullee M Perry VH Holmes C Association between dementia and infectious disease: evidence from a case-control study Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 19 2005 91 94 15942327
163 Nicolson Garth L Haier Jorg Role of Chronic Bacterial and Viral Infections in Neurodegenerative Neurobehavioral, Psychiatric, Autoimmune and Fatiguing Illnesses: Part 1 2 2009 20 28
164 Lin WR Shang D Itzhaki RF Neurotropic viruses and Alzheimer disease Interaction of herpes simplex type 1 virus and apolipoprotein E in the etiology of the disease Mol Chem Neuropathol Spons Int Soc Neurochem World Fed Neurol Res Groups Neurochem Cerebrospinal Fluid 28 1996 135 141
165 Foley NC Affoo RH Martin RE A systematic review and meta-analysis examining pneumonia-associated mortality in dementia Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 39 2015 52 67 25342272
166 Bircan HA Çakir M Yilmazer Kapulu I Sütcü R Kaya S Öztürk O Elevated serum matrix metalloproteinase-2 and -9 and their correlations with severity of disease in patients with community-acquired pneumonia Turk J Med Sci 45 2015 593 599 26281325
167 Singhrao SK Harding A Simmons T Robinson S Kesavalu L Crean S Oral inflammation, tooth loss, risk factors, and association with progression of Alzheimer’s disease J Alzheimers Dis JAD 42 2014 723 737 24946875
168 Pisa D Alonso R Juarranz A Rábano A Carrasco L Direct visualization of fungal infection in brains from patients with Alzheimer’s disease J Alzheimers Dis JAD 43 2015 613 624 25125470
169 Pisa D Alonso R Rábano A Rodal I Carrasco L Different Brain Regions are Infected with Fungi in Alzheimer’s Disease Sci Rep 5 2015 15015 26468932
170 Haorah J Schall K Ramirez SH Persidsky Y Activation of protein tyrosine kinases and matrix metalloproteinases causes blood-brain barrier injury: Novel mechanism for neurodegeneration associated with alcohol abuse Glia 56 2008 78 88 17943953
171 Haorah J Knipe B Leibhart J Ghorpade A Persidsky Y Alcohol-induced oxidative stress in brain endothelial cells causes blood-brain barrier dysfunction J Leukoc Biol 78 2005 1223 1232 16204625
172 Kousik SM Napier TC Carvey PM The Effects of Psychostimulant Drugs on Blood Brain Barrier Function and Neuroinflammation Front Pharmacol 3 2012
173 Northrop NA Yamamoto BK Methamphetamine effects on blood-brain barrier structure and function Front Neurosci 9 2015 69 25788874
174 McConnell SEA O’Banion MK Cory-Slechta DA Olschowka JA Opanashuk LA Characterization of binge-dosed methamphetamine-induced neurotoxicity and neuroinflammation Neurotoxicology 2015
175 Polesskaya O Silva J Sanfilippo C Desrosiers T Sun A Shen J Feng C Polesskiy A Deane R Zlokovic B Kasischke K Dewhurst S Methamphetamine causes sustained depression in cerebral blood flow Brain Res 1373 2011 91 100 21156163
176 Yin R Lu C Chen Q Fan J Lu J Microvascular damage is involved in the pathogenesis of heroin induced spongiform leukoencephalopathy Int J Med Sci 10 2013 299 306 23423584
177 Wollman SC Alhassoon OM Stern MJ Hall MG Rompogren J Kimmel CL Perez-Figueroa AM White matter abnormalities in long-term heroin users: a preliminary neuroimaging meta-analysis Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse 41 2015 133 138 25664621
178 Chen YH Chang M Davidson BL Molecular signatures of disease brain endothelia provide new sites for CNS-directed enzyme therapy Nat Med 15 2009 1215 1218 19749771
179 Geoghegan JC Keiser NW Okulist A Martins I Wilson MS Davidson BL Chondroitin Sulfate is the Primary Receptor for a Peptide-Modified AAV That Targets Brain Vascular Endothelium In Vivo Mol Ther Nucleic Acids 3 2014 e202 25313621
180 Sagare A Deane R Bell RD Johnson B Hamm K Pendu R Marky A Lenting PJ Wu Z Zarcone T Goate A Mayo K Perlmutter D Coma M Zhong Z Zlokovic BV Clearance of amyloid-beta by circulating lipoprotein receptors Nat Med 13 2007 1029 1031 17694066
181 Sagare AP Bell RD Srivastava A Sengillo JD Singh I Nishida Y Chow N Zlokovic BV A lipoprotein receptor cluster IV mutant preferentially binds amyloid-β and regulates its clearance from the mouse brain J Biol Chem 288 2013 15154 15166 23580652
182 Choeiri C Staines W Miki T Seino S Messier C Glucose transporter plasticity during memory processing Neuroscience 130 2005 591 600 15590143
183 Kalaria RN Harik SI Reduced glucose transporter at the blood-brain barrier and in cerebral cortex in Alzheimer disease J Neurochem 53 1989 1083 1088 2769254
184 Shang W Guo C Zhao J Yu X Zhang H Ginsenoside Rb1 upregulates expressions of GLUTs to promote glucose consumption in adiopcytes China J Chin Mater Medica 39 2014 4448 4452
185 Gschanes A Boado R Sametz W Windisch M The drug cerebrolysin and its peptide fraction E021 increase the abundance of the blood-brain barrier GLUT1 glucose transporter in brains of young and old rats Histochem J 32 2000 71 77 10816070
186 Galasko D Bell J Mancuso JY Kupiec JW Sabbagh MN van Dyck C Thomas RG Aisen PS the A.D.C. Study Clinical trial of an inhibitor of RAGE-Aβ interactions in Alzheimer disease Neurology 82 2014 1536 1542 24696507
187 Burstein AH Grimes I Galasko DR Aisen PS Sabbagh M Mjalli AMM Effect of TTP488 in patients with mild to moderate Alzheimer’s disease BMC Neurol 14 2014 12 24423155
188 Zlokovic BV Griffin JH Cytoprotective protein C pathways and implications for stroke and neurological disorders Trends Neurosci 34 2011 198 209 21353711
189 Griffin JH Zlokovic BV Mosnier LO Activated protein C: biased for translation Blood 125 2015 2898 2907 25824691
190 Thiyagarajan M Fernández JA Lane SM Griffin JH Zlokovic BV Activated protein C promotes neovascularization and neurogenesis in postischemic brain via protease-activated receptor 1 J Neurosci Off J Soc Neurosci 28 2008 12788 12797
191 Guo H Zhao Z Yang Q Wang M Bell RD Wang S Chow N Davis TP Griffin JH Goldman SA Zlokovic BV An activated protein C analog stimulates neuronal production by human neural progenitor cells via a PAR1-PAR3-S1PR1-Akt pathway J Neurosci Off J Soc Neurosci 33 2013 6181 6190
192 Cheng T Liu D Griffin JH Fernández JA Castellino F Rosen ED Fukudome K Zlokovic BV Activated protein C blocks p53-mediated apoptosis in ischemic human brain endothelium and is neuroprotective Nat Med 9 2003 338 342 12563316
193 Cheng T Petraglia AL Li Z Thiyagarajan M Zhong Z Wu Z Liu D Maggirwar SB Deane R Fernández JA LaRue B Griffin JH Chopp M Zlokovic BV Activated protein C inhibits tissue plasminogen activator-induced brain hemorrhage Nat Med 12 2006 1278 1285 17072311
194 Winkler EA Sengillo JD Sagare AP Zhao Z Ma Q Zuniga E Wang Y Zhong Z Sullivan JS Griffin JH Cleveland DW Zlokovic BV Blood-spinal cord barrier disruption contributes to early motor-neuron degeneration in ALS-model mice Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111 2014 E1035 1042 24591593
195 Williams PD Zlokovic BV Griffin JH Pryor KE Davis TP Preclinical safety and pharmacokinetic profile of 3K3A-APC, a novel, modified activated protein C for ischemic stroke Curr Pharm Des 18 2012 4215 4222 22632606
196 Lyden P Levy H Weymer S Pryor K Kramer W Griffin JH Davis TP Zlokovic B Phase 1 safety, tolerability and pharmacokinetics of 3K3A-APC in healthy adult volunteers Curr Pharm Des 19 2013 7479 7485 24372304
197 Gallay PA Bobardt MD Chatterji U Trepanier DJ Ure D Ordonez C Foster R The Novel Cyclophilin Inhibitor CPI-431-32 Concurrently Blocks HCV and HIV-1 Infections via a Similar Mechanism of Action PloS One 10 2015 e0134707 26263487
198 Yan W Qing J Mei H Mao F Huang J Zhu J Jiang H Liu L Zhang L Li J Discovery of Novel Small Molecule Anti-HCV Agents via the CypA Inhibitory Mechanism Using O-Acylation-Directed Lead Optimization Mol Basel Switz 20 2015 10342 10359
199 Hopkins S Bobardt M Chatterji U Garcia-Rivera JA Lim P Gallay PA The cyclophilin inhibitor SCY-635 disrupts hepatitis C virus NS5A-cyclophilin A complexes Antimicrob Agents Chemother 56 2012 3888 3897 22585215
200 Heinzmann D Bangert A Müller A-M von Ungern-Sternberg SNI Emschermann F Schönberger T Chatterjee M Mack AF Klingel K Kandolf R Malesevic M Borst O Gawaz M Langer HF Katus H Fischer G May AE Kaya Z Seizer P The Novel Extracellular Cyclophilin A (CyPA) - Inhibitor MM284 Reduces Myocardial Inflammation and Remodeling in a Mouse Model of Troponin I -Induced Myocarditis PloS One 10 2015 e0124606 25894208
201 Yan P Zhu A Liao F Xiao Q Kraft AW Gonzales E Perez R Greenberg SM Holtzman DM Lee J-M Minocycline reduces spontaneous hemorrhage in mouse models of cerebral amyloid angiopathy Stroke J Cereb Circ 46 2015 1633 1640
202 Kundu P De R Pal I Mukhopadhyay AK Saha DR Swarnakar S Curcumin alleviates matrix metalloproteinase-3 and -9 activities during eradication of Helicobacter pylori infection in cultured cells and mice PloS One 6 2011 e16306 21283694
203 Lee M Chen Z Tomlinson BN Gooyit M Hesek D Juárez MR Nizam R Boggess B Lastochkin E Schroeder VA Wolter WR Suckow MA Cui J Mobashery S Gu Z Chang M Water-Soluble MMP-9 Inhibitor Reduces Lesion Volume after Severe Traumatic Brain Injury ACS Chem Neurosci 2015
204 Kawatani M Fukushima Y Kondoh Y Honda K Sekine T Yamaguchi Y Taniguchi N Osada H Identification of matrix metalloproteinase inhibitors by chemical arrays Biosci Biotechnol Biochem 79 2015 1597 1602 25988721
205 Yang Y Salayandia VM Thompson JF Yang LY Estrada EY Yang Y Attenuation of acute stroke injury in rat brain by minocycline promotes blood-brain barrier remodeling and alternative microglia/macrophage activation during recovery J Neuroinflammation 12 2015 26 25889169
206 Yang F Zhou L Wang D Wang Z Huang Q-Y Minocycline ameliorates hypoxia-induced blood-brain barrier damage by inhibition of HIF-1α through SIRT-3/PHD-2 degradation pathway Neuroscience 304 2015 250 259 26211444
207 Ando H Zhou J Macova M Imboden H Saavedra JM Angiotensin II AT1 receptor blockade reverses pathological hypertrophy and inflammation in brain microvessels of spontaneously hypertensive rats Stroke J Cereb Circ 35 2004 1726 1731
208 Liu W Yamashita T Kurata T Kono S Hishikawa N Deguchi K Zhai Y Abe K Protective effect of telmisartan on neurovascular unit and inflammasome in stroke-resistant spontaneously hypertensive rats Neurol Res 37 2015 491 501 25591419
209 Wang J Ho L Chen L Zhao Z Zhao W Qian X Humala N Seror I Bartholomew S Rosendorff C Pasinetti GM Valsartan lowers brain beta-amyloid protein levels and improves spatial learning in a mouse model of Alzheimer disease J Clin Invest 117 2007 3393 3402 17965777
210 Hajjar I Brown L Mack WJ Chui H Impact of Angiotensin receptor blockers on Alzheimer disease neuropathology in a large brain autopsy series Arch Neurol 69 2012 1632 1638 22964777
211 Schneider P Buerger K Teipel S Uspenskaya O Hartmann O Hansson O Minthon L Rujescu D Moeller H-J Zetterberg H Blennow K Ernst A Bergmann A Hampel H Antihypertensive therapy is associated with reduced rate of conversion to Alzheimer’s disease in midregional proatrial natriuretic peptide stratified subjects with mild cognitive impairment Biol Psychiatry 70 2011 145 151 21457948
212 Liu S Marder VJ Levy DE Wang S-J Yang F Paganini-Hill A Fisher MJ Ancrod and fibrin formation: perspectives on mechanisms of action Stroke J Cereb Circ 42 2011 3277 3280
213 Akassoglou K Adams RA Bauer J Mercado P Tseveleki V Lassmann H Probert L Strickland S Fibrin depletion decreases inflammation and delays the onset of demyelination in a tumor necrosis factor transgenic mouse model for multiple sclerosis Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101 2004 6698 6703 15096619
214 Sherman DG Atkinson RP Chippendale T Levin KA Ng K Futrell N Hsu CY Levy DE Intravenous ancrod for treatment of acute ischemic stroke: the STAT study: a randomized controlled trial Stroke Treatment with Ancrod Trial JAMA 283 2000 2395 2403 10815082
215 Levy DE del Zoppo GJ Demaerschalk BM Demchuk AM Diener H-C Howard G Kaste M Pancioli AM Ringelstein EB Spatareanu C Wasiewski WW Ancrod in acute ischemic stroke: results of 500 subjects beginning treatment within 6 hours of stroke onset in the ancrod stroke program Stroke J Cereb Circ 40 2009 3796 3803
216 Brickman AM Khan UA Provenzano FA Yeung L-K Suzuki W Schroeter H Wall M Sloan RP Small SA Enhancing dentate gyrus function with dietary flavanols improves cognition in older adults Nat Neurosci 17 2014 1798 1803 25344629
217 Morris MC Tangney CC Wang Y Sacks FM Barnes LL Bennett DA Aggarwal NT MIND diet slows cognitive decline with aging Alzheimers Dement J Alzheimers Assoc 2015
218 Hsu TM Kanoski SE Blood-brain barrier disruption: mechanistic links between Western diet consumption and dementia Front Aging Neurosci 6 2014 88 24847262
219 Kanoski SE Zhang Y Zheng W Davidson TL The effects of a high-energy diet on hippocampal function and blood-brain barrier integrity in the rat J Alzheimers Dis JAD 21 2010 207 219 20413889
220 Takechi R Pallebage-Gamarallage MM Lam V Giles C Mamo JC Aging-related changes in blood-brain barrier integrity and the effect of dietary fat Neurodegener Dis 12 2013 125 135 23128303
221 Takechi R Galloway S Pallebage-Gamarallage MM Lam V Dhaliwal SS Mamo JC Probucol prevents blood-brain barrier dysfunction in wild-type mice induced by saturated fat or cholesterol feeding Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol 40 2013 45 52 23167559
222 Saeed AA Genové G Li T Lütjohann D Olin M Mast N Pikuleva IA Crick P Wang Y Griffiths W Betsholtz C Björkhem I Effects of a disrupted blood-brain barrier on cholesterol homeostasis in the brain J Biol Chem 289 2014 23712 23722 24973215
223 Popp J Lewczuk P Kölsch H Meichsner S Maier W Kornhuber J Jessen F Lütjohann D Cholesterol metabolism is associated with soluble amyloid precursor protein production in Alzheimer’s disease J Neurochem 123 2012 310 316 22845771
224 Marambaud P Zhao H Davies P Resveratrol promotes clearance of Alzheimer’s disease amyloid-beta peptides J Biol Chem 280 2005 37377 37382 16162502
225 Shin JA Oh S Ahn J-H Park E-M Estrogen receptor-mediated resveratrol actions on blood-brain barrier of ovariectomized mice Neurobiol Aging 36 2015 993 1006 25448605
226 Wei H Wang S Zhen L Yang Q Wu Z Lei X Lv J Xiong L Xue R Resveratrol attenuates the blood-brain barrier dysfunction by regulation of the MMP-9/TIMP-1 balance after cerebral ischemia reperfusion in rats J Mol Neurosci MN 55 2015 872 879 25330860
227 Kim YH Kim YS Roh GS Choi WS Cho GJ Resveratrol blocks diabetes-induced early vascular lesions and vascular endothelial growth factor induction in mouse retinas Acta Ophthalmol (Copenh) 90 2012 e31 37
228 Jing Y-H Chen K-H Yang S-H Kuo P-C Chen J-K Resveratrol ameliorates vasculopathy in STZ-induced diabetic rats: role of AGE-RAGE signalling Diabetes Metab Res Rev 26 2010 212 222 20474069
229 Zhao H Niu Q Li X Liu T Xu Y Han H Wang W Fan N Tian Q Zhang H Wang Z Long-term resveratrol consumption protects ovariectomized rats chronically treated with D-galactose from developing memory decline without effects on the uterus Brain Res 1467 2012 67 80 22647751
230 Stonehouse W Conlon CA Podd J Hill SR Minihane AM Haskell C Kennedy D DHA supplementation improved both memory and reaction time in healthy young adults: a randomized controlled trial Am J Clin Nutr 97 2013 1134 1143 23515006
231 Nguyen LN Ma D Shui G Wong P Cazenave-Gassiot A Zhang X Wenk MR Goh ELK Silver DL Mfsd2a is a transporter for the essential omega-3 fatty acid docosahexaenoic acid Nature 509 2014 503 506 24828044
232 Fonteh AN Cipolla M Chiang J Arakaki X Harrington MG Human cerebrospinal fluid fatty acid levels differ between supernatant fluid and brain-derived nanoparticle fractions, and are altered in Alzheimer’s disease PloS One 9 2014 e100519 24956173
233 Ben-Zvi A Lacoste B Kur E Andreone BJ Mayshar Y Yan H Gu C Mfsd2a is critical for the formation and function of the blood-brain barrier Nature 509 2014 507 511 24828040
234 Zhao Z Zlokovic BV Blood-brain barrier: a dual life of MFSD2A? Neuron 82 2014 728 730 24853933
235 Vandal M Alata W Tremblay C Rioux-Perreault C Salem N Calon F Plourde M Reduction in DHA transport to the brain of mice expressing human APOE4 compared to APOE2 J Neurochem 129 2014 516 526 24345162
236 Defina LF Willis BL Radford NB Gao A Leonard D Haskell WL Weiner MF Berry JD The association between midlife cardiorespiratory fitness levels and later-life dementia: a cohort study Ann Intern Med 158 2013 162 168 23381040
237 Choi JK Moon KM Jung SY Kim JY Choi SH Kim DY Kang S Chu CW Kwon SM Regular exercise training increases the number of endothelial progenitor cells and decreases homocysteine levels in healthy peripheral blood Korean J Physiol Pharmacol Off J Korean Physiol Soc Korean Soc Pharmacol 18 2014 163 168
238 de Senna PN Xavier LL Bagatini PB Saur L Galland F Zanotto C Bernardi C Nardin P Gonçalves CA Achaval M Physical training improves non-spatial memory, locomotor skills and the blood brain barrier in diabetic rats Brain Res 1618 2015 75 82 26032744
239 Lazarov O Robinson J Tang Y-P Hairston IS Korade-Mirnics Z Lee VM-Y Hersh LB Sapolsky RM Mirnics K Sisodia SS Environmental enrichment reduces Abeta levels and amyloid deposition in transgenic mice Cell 120 2005 701 713 15766532
240 Ambrée O Leimer U Herring A Görtz N Sachser N Heneka MT Paulus W Keyvani K Reduction of amyloid angiopathy and Abeta plaque burden after enriched housing in TgCRND8 mice: involvement of multiple pathways Am J Pathol 169 2006 544 552 16877355
241 Prince M Albanese E Guerchet M Prina M World Alzheimer Report 2014: dementia and risk reduction: an analysis of protective and modifiable factors Alzheimers Dis Int 2014 1 99
242 Herring A Yasin H Ambrée O Sachser N Paulus W Keyvani K Environmental enrichment counteracts Alzheimer’s neurovascular dysfunction in TgCRND8 mice Brain Pathol Zurich Switz 18 2008 32 39
243 Wolff G Davidson SJ Wrobel JK Toborek M Exercise maintains blood-brain barrier integrity during early stages of brain metastasis formation Biochem Biophys Res Commun 463 2015 811 817 26056010
244 Alakbarzade V Hameed A Quek DQY Chioza BA Baple EL Cazenave-Gassiot A Nguyen LN Wenk MR Ahmad AQ Sreekantan-Nair A Weedon MN Rich P Patton MA Warner TT Silver DL Crosby AH A partially inactivating mutation in the sodium-dependent lysophosphatidylcholine transporter MFSD2A causes a non-lethal microcephaly syndrome Nat Genet 47 2015 814 817 26005865
245 Guemez-Gamboa A Nguyen LN Yang H Zaki MS Kara M Ben-Omran T Akizu N Rosti RO Rosti B Scott E Schroth J Copeland B Vaux KK Cazenave-Gassiot A Quek DQY Wong BH Tan BC Wenk MR Gunel M Gabriel S Inactivating mutations in MFSD2A, required for omega-3 fatty acid transport in brain, cause a lethal microcephaly syndrome Nat Genet 47 2015 809 813 26005868
246 Keller A Westenberger A Sobrido MJ García-Murias M Domingo A Sears RL Lemos RR Ordoñez-Ugalde A Nicolas G da Cunha JEG Rushing EJ Hugelshofer M Wurnig MC Kaech A Reimann R Lohmann K Dobričić V Carracedo A Petrović I Miyasaki JM Mutations in the gene encoding PDGF-B cause brain calcifications in humans and mice Nat Genet 45 2013 1077 1082 23913003
