LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


0020713
6083
Neuropsychologia
Neuropsychologia
Neuropsychologia
0028-3932
1873-3514

25701794
4402258
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2015.02.024
NIHMS668462
Article
Repetition Priming and Cortical Arousal in Healthy Aging and Alzheimer’s Disease
Kane Amy E. a
Festa Elena K. b
Salmon David P. a
Heindel William C. b
a Shiley-Marcos Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center, Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego
b Department of Cognitive, Linguistic and Psychological Sciences, Brown University
Address correspondence to: William C. Heindel, Ph.D.. Department of Cognitive, Linguistic, and Psychological Sciences Brown University. 190 Thayer Street. Providence, RI 02912 (401) 863-9715. william_heindel@brown.edu
5 3 2015
18 2 2015
4 2015
01 4 2016
70 145155
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Repetition priming refers to a form of implicit memory in which prior exposure to a stimulus facilitates the subsequent processing of the same or a related stimulus. One frequently used repetition priming task is word-stem completion priming. In this task, participants complete a series of beginning word stems with the first word that comes to mind after having viewed, in an unrelated context, words that can complete some of the stems. Patients with Alzheimer’s disease (AD) exhibit a significant deficit in word-stem completion priming, but the neural mechanisms underlying this deficit have yet to be identified. The present study examined the possibility that the word-stem completion priming deficit in AD is due to disruption of ascending neuromodulatory systems that mediate cortical arousal by comparing word-stem completion priming and behavioral measures of spatial orienting and phasic alerting. Results showed that in healthy elderly controls higher levels of phasic alerting were associated with a sharpening of the temporal dynamics of priming across two delay intervals: those with higher levels of alerting showed more immediate priming but less delayed priming than those with lesser levels of alerting. In patients with AD, priming was impaired despite intact levels of phasic alerting and spatial orienting, and group status rather than individual levels of alerting or orienting predicted the magnitude of their stem-completion priming. Furthermore, the change in priming across delays they displayed was not related to level of alerting or orienting. These findings support the role of the noradrenergic projection system in modulating the level of steady-state cortical activation (or “cortical tonus”) underlying both phasic alerting and the temporal dynamics of repetition priming. However, impaired priming in patients with AD does not appear to be due to disruption of this neuromodulatory system.

implicit memory
Alzheimer’s disease
repetition priming
attention
alerting

1. Introduction

Repetition priming refers to a fundamental form of implicit memory in which prior exposure to a stimulus facilitates the subsequent processing of the same or a related stimulus. Numerous demonstrations of intact repetition priming in profoundly amnesic patients suggest that this form of priming does not depend upon declarative or explicit memory processes mediated by medial temporal lobe structures that are damaged in these patients (e.g., Graf, Squire &amp; Mandler, 1984; Shimamura &amp; Squire, 1984; Warrington &amp; Weiskrantz, 1968; 1974). Repetition priming may, however, reflect the temporary modification of perceptual, lexical and semantic representations stored in neocortical regions that remain intact in patients with circumscribed amnesia (Gabrieli et al., 1994; Squire, 1987; Tulving &amp; Schacter, 1990). In support of this possibility, functional neuroimaging studies have shown that repetition of a stimulus is accompanied by a reduction of activation (i.e., repetition suppression) within those neocortical areas involved in the initial processing of the stimulus (e.g., Henson, 2003; Wiggs &amp; Martin, 1998). This repetition suppression may represent the neural correlate of the behavioral repetition priming effect (i.e., neural priming), but this has yet to be fully resolved (see Gotts, Chow &amp; Martin, 2012 for a review and discussion).

One repetition priming task that has been used extensively is word-stem completion priming. In this task participants are exposed to a series of words and later asked to complete a series of beginning word stems with the first word that comes to mind. Unknown to the participant, some of the stems can be completed with the previously exposed words and others cannot. Priming is reflected in the increased likelihood of completing the word stems with previously presented words rather than other appropriate words that were not presented (an unprimed baseline). Priming on word-stem completion tasks occurs without explicit memory for the words that were previously exposed, and is not diminished in patients with circumscribed amnesia (e.g., Graf et al., 1984).

Behavioral studies have shown that word-stem completion priming is dependent upon both perceptual and conceptual processes (Graf, Shimamura &amp; Squire, 1985; Nelson, Canas, Bajo &amp; Keelean, 1987; Nelson &amp; Friedrich, 1980). Consistent with these behavioral findings, neuroimaging studies have shown that stimulus repetition in this task is associated with reduced neural activation within modality-specific regions in striate and extrastriate cortex and within amodal regions of inferior temporal and frontal cortex (e.g., Buckner, Koutstaal, Schacter &amp; Rosen, 2000). Similar distinctions between perceptual and conceptual aspects of neural priming have been demonstrated with other repetition priming tasks (Schacter, Wig &amp; Stevens, 2007; Wig, Buckner &amp; Schacter, 2009; Wig, Grafton, Demos &amp; Kelley, 2005). This suggests the possibility that multiple neural mechanisms underlie repetition priming effects (e.g., Race, Shanker &amp; Wagner, 2009; Schacter et al., 2007). One mechanism may be that initial stimulus presentation leads to increased cortical tuning or sharpening of perceptual and semantic representations within posterior and temporal cortical regions, respectively. This cortical tuning may, in turn, lead to a reduction in overall neural activation within these cortical regions and facilitation in processing a stimulus during its subsequent presentations (Henson, 2003; Wiggs &amp; Martin, 1998). A second mechanism may be that initial stimulus presentation leads to reduced activation in prefrontal regions involved in the controlled retrieval of conceptual information (e.g., Badre &amp; Wagner, 2007). Reduced activation may result from a decreased reliance on top-down processing due to increased efficiency in bottom-up processing of conceptual information (Henson, 2003; Race et al., 2009) or from increased efficiency of interactions between prefrontal regions and temporal regions following stimulus presentation (Gotts et al., 2012). In support of this latter possibility, stimulus repetition has been found to increase neural synchrony between prefrontal and temporal cortical regions, with the timing of this increased synchrony correlated with the magnitude of behavioral priming (Ghuman, Bar, Dobbins &amp; Schnyer, 2008).

In striking contrast to preserved repetition priming in patients with circumscribed amnesia, patients with Alzheimer’s disease (AD) are impaired on word-stem completion priming tasks (for reviews, see Fleischman, 2007; Fleischman &amp; Gabrieli, 1998; Meiran &amp; Jelicic, 1995; Millet, Le Goff, Bouisson, Dartigues &amp; Amieva, 2010). The neural mechanisms underlying impaired priming in patients with AD have yet to be identified. The presence of intact repetition priming on perceptual identification tasks in AD patients who have stem-completion priming deficits (e.g., Fleischman et al., 1995; Keane, Gabrieli, Fennema, Growdon &amp; Corkin, 1991) suggests that the neural mechanisms mediating perceptual priming are intact in these patients. Thus, their stem-completion priming deficit may be due instead to disruption within the neural systems that mediate conceptual priming. This view is consistent with the observation that AD pathology is typically more extensive in temporal and frontal cortical regions that support conceptual processing than in posterior sensory regions that support perceptual/structural processing (Brun &amp; Englund, 1981; Terry &amp; Katzman, 1983) and with findings that AD leads to a systematic disruption of corticocortical projections that connect distinct but functionally related cortical regions (Braak &amp; Braak, 1991; Delacoste &amp; White, 1993; Delacourte et al., 1999; Hof &amp; Morrison, 1999; Morrison &amp; Hof, 2002; Price &amp; Morris, 1999). In this view, impaired repetition priming in AD results from degradation of semantic representations stored within temporal lobe neocortical regions or reduced efficiency in interactions between frontal and temporal neocortical regions due to impaired corticocortical connectivity.

Other findings, however, suggest that a disruption in conceptual priming may not completely account for the stem-completion priming deficit in patients with AD. First, posterior perceptual systems have been found to be disrupted in AD (e.g., Festa, Insler, Salmon, Paxton, Hamilton &amp; Heindel, 2005; Hof &amp; Morrison, 1990; Paxton et al., 2007; Velarde, Perelstein, Ressmann &amp; Duffy, 2012) and perceptual repetition priming is not entirely intact (e.g., Backman, Almkvist, Nyberg &amp; Andersson, 2000; Bondi &amp; Kaszniak, 1991; Heindel, Salmon &amp; Butters, 1990; Heindel, Salmon, Fennema-Notestine &amp; Chan, 1998). Second, meta-analyses of word-stem completion priming studies in AD have confirmed the overall presence of a significant priming deficit (Meiran &amp; Jelicic, 1995; Millet et al., 2010), but have also noted considerable variability in the magnitude of the deficit. Even though there appears to be a substantial impairment overall (e.g., Bondi, Kaszniak, Rapcsak &amp; Butters, 1993; Keane et al., 1991; Perani et al., 1993; Randolph, 1991) some studies show only mild impairment or even normal priming (e.g., Deweer et al., 1994; Huberman, Moscovitch &amp; Freedman, 1994). Attempts to explain the variation in the results of these studies in terms of differences in cognitive processes engaged by the particular procedures of the word completion task that was used, or by differences in the characteristics of the subjects in the various studies, have been largely unsuccessful (Fleischman, 2007; Fleischman &amp; Gabrieli, 1998; Meiran &amp; Jelicic, 1995; Millet et al., 2010). Nevertheless, the variability suggests that something other than conceptual processes may contribute to impaired priming in AD. One possibility supported by recent neural network simulation models is that impaired repetition priming reflects disruption of neuromodulatory systems that enhance the processing of neural signals rather than disruption of the neural systems themselves (Gotts, 2003).

The possibility that the word-stem completion priming deficit of patients with AD is due to disruption of ascending neuromodulatory systems is consistent with neuroanatomical studies that show neuron loss in the nucleus basalis of Meynert and the locus coeruleus in AD (Bondareff, Mountjoy &amp; Roth, 1982; Bondareff et al., 1987; Mann, Yates &amp; Marcyniuk, 1986; Whitehouse et al., 1982; Zweig et al., 1988). These structures are the primary locus of ascending cholinergic and noradrenergic projection systems in the brain that are thought to enhance sensory processing by increasing the signal-to-noise ratio of target neurons in the neocortex (Carrasco, Penpeci-Talga &amp; Eckstein, 2000; Dosher &amp; Lu, 2000; Lu &amp; Dosher, 2000; Picciotto, Higley &amp; Mineur, 2012; Sara, 1985a; Servan-Schreiber, Printz &amp; Cohen 1990). Evidence for a potential role of ascending neuromodulatory systems in the priming deficit of patients with AD comes from a combined pharmacological/fMRI study in healthy adults that demonstrated attenuated behavioral expression of word-stem completion priming, and abolishment of the neural repetition suppression effects normally observed within left extrastriate, middle frontal and inferior frontal cortices, following administration of a cholinergic antagonist (Thiel, Henson, Morris, Friston &amp; Dolan, 2001).

Behavioral studies have implicated the cholinergic system in the modulation of spatially selective orienting of attention (e.g., Davidson, Cutrell &amp; Marrocco, 1999; Davidson &amp; Marrocco, 2000; Murphy &amp; Klein, 1998; Stewart, Burke &amp; Marrocco, 2001; Witte, Davidson &amp; Marrocco, 1997) and the noradrenergic system in the modulation of nonselective phasic and tonic alerting processes (Aston-Jones, Rajkowski &amp; Cohen, 1999; Foote &amp; Morrison, 1987; Sara, 1985a, 1985b, Sara &amp; Bouret, 2012). Moreover, AD patients have been found to display deficits in both spatial orienting and phasic alerting (e.g., Faust &amp; Balota, 1997; Festa-Martino, Ott &amp; Heindel, 2004, Maruff &amp; Currie, 1995; Parasuraman, Greenwood, Haxby &amp; Grady, 1992; Tales, Muir, Bayer &amp; Snowden, 2002). Thus, to the degree that behavioral measures of orienting and alerting reflect the corresponding integrity of the cholinergic and noradrenergic systems, respectively, then disruptions to either system may contribute to the priming deficit of AD patients. However, this deficit may be influenced more by disruption to the alerting system than the spatial orienting system because the noradrenergic system projects more diffusely to all cortical regions in order to influence the level of steady-state cortical activation (i.e., “cortical tonus”) and modulate the moment-by-moment efficiency of sensory processing (Aston-Jones et al., 1999; Sara, 1985a, 1985b; Sara &amp; Bouret, 2012).

To determine if the repetition priming deficit in patients with AD is differentially related to breakdown in either the noradrenergic or cholinergic neuromodulatory systems, we examined the relationship between word-stem completion priming and behavioral measures of spatial orienting and phasic alerting as putative markers of cholinergic and noradrenergic functioning in patients with AD and healthy elderly individuals. Spatial orienting and phasic alerting were assessed in a single task that used a modified pre-cuing paradigm originally developed by Posner and colleagues (Posner, 1980; Posner &amp; Cohen, 1984; Posner, Cohen &amp; Rafal, 1982). We also assessed stem-completion priming over two delay intervals to determine if orienting and alerting are differentially related to the temporal dynamics (e.g., rate of decay) of repetition priming (e.g., Arnott, Chenery, Murdoch &amp; Silburn, 2001; Milberg, McGlinchey-Berroth, Duncan &amp; Higgins, 1999).

If repetition priming is influenced by the neuromodulatory systems that have been suggested to mediate orienting and alerting, we predict that these cognitive processes will be associated either with overall levels of stem-completion priming or with changes in the dynamics of repetition priming over time in healthy elderly individuals. These relationships have not been previously examined in neurologically intact populations. We also predicted that if the word-stem completion priming deficit of patients with AD is attributable to deficiencies within these neuromodulatory systems, then AD patients should show deficits in orienting or alerting and the magnitude of those deficits should be associated with the severity of their stem-completion priming impairment. If, on the other hand, the word-stem completion priming deficit in patients with AD is due to degradation of representations or a disruption of cross-cortical interaction between posterior temporal and prefrontal regions, then the magnitude of their priming deficit should be independent of their orienting or alerting ability. Thus, findings from this study should not only inform our understanding of the neural locus of the word-stem completion priming deficit in AD patients, but should also provide insight into the neural mechanisms that mediate normal repetition priming.

2. Methods

2.1. Participants

Twenty patients with mild-to-moderate AD and 20 cognitively-healthy elderly control (EC) subjects participated in this study. Written informed consent was obtained from each participant after the study had been fully described. The study was approved by the institutional review board at UCSD. All patients and controls were recruited from the UCSD Shiley-Marcos Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center (ADRC) through which they received annual medical, neurological, and neuropsychological evaluations. The diagnosis of probable AD was made by a senior staff neurologist according to criteria developed by the National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke (NINCDS) and the Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Disorders Association (ADRDA) (McKhann et al., 1984). To ensure that AD patients were able to comprehend and follow task instructions, only those patients with Mattis Dementia Rating Scale (DRS; Mattis, 1976) scores above 110 were included in the study. Participants were excluded if English was not their first language or if they had a history of stroke, brain tumor, brain surgery, head injury with loss of consciousness greater than 5 minutes, or substance abuse/dependence within the past year. The EC participants received a full neuropsychological evaluation as a result of their participation in the ADRC, scored normally on all cognitive screening tests, reported no cognitive impairments or difficulty in activities of daily living, and were deemed cognitive healthy by a clinical neuropsychologist or neurologist. The AD and EC groups did not differ significantly in age, t(38)=0.74, p=.46; education, t(38)=0.24, p=.81; or gender distribution, χ2=1.62, p=.20, (Table 1). As expected, the AD patients scored significantly lower than the EC participants on the DRS, t(38)=9.34, p&lt;.001, and the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), t(38)=6.32, p&lt;.001.

2.2. Procedure

Each participant was individually tested on both the word-stem completion and the alerting/orienting tasks (described in greater detail below). The overall experimental design is illustrated in Figure 1. The word-stem completion priming task was similar to the one used by Shimamura and colleagues (1987) in which participants first rated the likeability of words, and then performed a stem completion task where they were asked to complete three-letter word stems with the first word that came to mind. Half of the stems could be completed with words seen in the likeability task, while the other half could not (the latter stems were used to assess baseline guessing rates). There were two separate rating/stem completion sessions: (1) an immediate condition, where the likeability rating task was immediately followed by the stem completion task, and (2) a delay condition, where the stem completion task was completed after a 10-minute delay period filled with the alerting/orienting task. The order of the immediate and delay conditions was counterbalanced across participants in each group. Following the second word-stem completion task (either delayed or immediate condition depending on the counterbalancing order), each participant received a recall and recognition test for the words from the most recent rating session.

The alerting/orienting task was a modified version of the pre-cuing paradigm originally developed by Posner and colleagues (Posner, 1980; Posner &amp; Cohen, 1984; Posner et al., 1982) that included conditions that allowed for the simultaneous assessment of both spatial orienting and alerting (Festa-Martino et al., 2004). The alerting/orienting task was administered during the 10-minute interval of the delayed word-stem completion condition (whenever that happened for each participant). Testing was conducted in a quiet, well-illuminated room.

2.2.1. Word-Stem Completion Task

A total of 112 words were used in the stem completion task. Eighty of these words were selected to be target or distractor words for the two stem completion tasks while 12 of the words served as filler words during the two rating tasks. The remaining 20 words were used as foils on the recognition test. Words included nouns and verbs ranging in length from four to eight letters. The first three letters of each word (e.g., CLA__ for CLASS) could be completed to make at least ten different words as designated by the number of dictionary entries. In each condition, 20 words were used as targets that were presented during the rating task and 20 words were used as distractors that were not shown during the rating task. The assignment of words as targets or distractors was counterbalanced across delay conditions and participant groups. Thus, stems that were targets for half of each group were distractors for the other half. This allowed baseline guessing rate to be determined for each stem.

During the rating task (i.e., the exposure phase), each participant was shown a list of 26 words that included 20 target items (e.g., MOTEL) and 6 filler items. Three filler words were placed at the beginning and three at the end of the set to reduce primacy and recency effects, respectively. The words were presented on separate 3 × 5 inch cards one at a time. To ensure a deep (i.e., semantic) level of processing, subjects were asked to rate how much they liked each word on a scale from 1 to 5 (1 = extremely dislike, 5 = extremely like). After the subjects completed the initial rating of the entire set of words, they were asked to perform a second rating of the same words presented in a different order. The rating scale was also presented on a 3 × 5 inch card that remained visible to the participants during the entire rating task.

Either immediately following the rating task (immediate condition), or after a 10-minute delay (delay condition), the participant was shown 40 three-letter word stems (e.g., MOT) in a randomized order and asked to complete each stem with the first word that came to mind. The task was presented as an unrelated word puzzle and no reference was made to the previous presentation of words in the rating task. Half of the stems could be completed with the words shown in the rating task while the other half provided a measure of baseline guessing rates.

Following the second word-stem completion task (either delayed or immediate condition), recall and recognition were assessed. The participant was asked to recall as many words as possible from the most recent rating task and then given a two-alternative, forced-choice recognition test for those words. In order to minimize the possibility of explicit memory contamination of the priming task, recall and recognition were only tested after the last priming condition (i.e., half of participants were assessed for immediate recall and recognition and half for delayed recall and recognition). It should be noted, however, that this design potentially introduces an additional source memory component to the recall and recognition tasks since participants are asked to focus only on words from the last (and not the first) ratings session. Twenty word pairs were used for the forced-choice recognition test. Each word pair consisted of a target word (previously seen in the rating task) and a distractor word. The 20 distractor words used in this task were different from those used for the priming task.

2.2.2. Alerting/Orienting Task

In the alerting/orienting pre-cuing task, participants were asked to indicate as quickly and as accurately as possible when a target stimulus (i.e., black circle) appeared in a box on the right or left of a central fixation point. The stimuli were displayed on a 12-inch computer monitor at a viewing distance of approximately 50 cm. Participants were asked to focus on a fixation point at the center of the screen flanked on the left and right by two square boxes that measure 3° of visual angle on each side. The center of the box was 5.3° of visual angle from fixation. After a variable delay interval between 1000 and 1500 ms, the outline of one, both, or neither of the boxes thickened for 100 ms. After a variable inter-stimulus interval (ISI) ranging from 160 to 240 ms, the warning cue was followed by the presentation of a target at the center of one of the two boxes. This arrangement yielded a mean stimulus onset asynchrony (SOA) between the cue and the target of 300 ms, a value that has been shown to elicit maximal phasic alertness for both groups of participants (Nebes &amp; Brady, 1993; Rabbitt, 1984). The target was a black circle with a diameter of 0.7° of visual angle. Participants were asked to indicate which box contained the target by pressing one of two response keys with their left or right index fingers as quickly as possible. Reaction time (RT) and accuracy was recorded.

Participants were given a practice block of 8 trials, followed by a block of 104 trials in which the following four trial types were presented 26 times each in a randomized order: (a) double cue trials, in which both boxes brightened simultaneously; (b) no cue trials, in which neither of the boxes brightened; (c) valid cue trials, in which the box correctly predicting the location of the target brightened; and (d) invalid cue trials, in which the box opposite the subsequent target brightened. Because there was an equal number of each trial type, all cue conditions were equally probable and therefore of no predictive value. Moreover, the target appeared equally often in the left and right boxes across trials. The proportional change in RT between the valid and invalid conditions provides a measure of spatially selective orienting processes, whereas the change in RT between the double-cue condition and no-cue condition provides a measure of nonselective alerting (e.g., Festa-Martino et al., 2004).

3. Results

3.1. Word-Stem Completion Task

The mean number of target and distractor words produced by the AD and EC groups during the immediate and delay conditions of the word-stem completion priming task are shown in Table 2. Pairwise comparisons confirmed that there were no significant differences in baseline guessing rates (i.e., completing distractor stems with words designated as targets for other participants) between the groups for either the immediate, t(38)=1.59, p=.12, or the delay condition, t(38)=1.39, p=.17. Baseline guessing rates in each condition were approximately 10% to 20% for both groups as would be expected since each stem could be completed by at least 10 different words. Thus, there were no differences in the ability of the participant groups to perform the basic task of completing 3-letter stems with words. Planned pairwise comparisons also confirmed that both groups exhibited significant priming above baseline, with target hit rates significantly greater than baseline guessing rates for both the immediate, AD: t(19)=5.42, p&lt;.001; EC: t(19)=10.19, p&lt;.001, and the delayed, AD: t(19)=6.30, p&lt;.001; EC: t(19)=7.20, p&lt;.001, conditions.

To compare the magnitude of priming across the EC and AD groups, priming scores were calculated for each participant by taking a difference between the target hit rate and the distractor baseline guessing rate (Figure 2). A 2 × 2 mixed-model ANOVA was performed with group (AD, EC) as the between-subjects factor and condition (immediate, delay) as within-subjects factors. Results revealed significant main effects of group, F(1,38)=14.08, p&lt;.001, and condition, F(1,38)=4.90, p&lt;.05, but no group by condition interaction effect. Planned comparisons further confirmed that the AD group demonstrated significantly less priming than the EC group in both the immediate, t(38)=2.92, p&lt;.01, and delay, t(38)=2.67, p&lt;.01, conditions. Taken together, these results indicated that the overall magnitude of priming was significantly smaller in the AD group compared to that EC group, but that the decay of priming across the delay was similar in the two groups.

The performance of the AD patients and EC participants on the explicit recall and recognition components of the word-stem completion task is shown in Table 3. Because recall and recognition were only tested after the last priming condition, decay of explicit memory across immediate and delay conditions could not be directly compared within the same subject. Mann-Whitney U nonparametric pairwise comparisons across the groups confirmed that the AD group recalled and recognized significantly fewer target words than the EC group in both the immediate and delay conditions (all ps&lt;.01). Recall and recognition performance did not differ significantly across the immediate and delay condition for either the EC or AD groups, although a decline in recall performance by the EC group across the delay period approached significance (p =.07). The lack of significant decrements in explicit memory performance over the delay period is due in part to the presence of floor effects in the recall performance of the AD group and ceiling effects in the recognition performance of the EC group. The floor effect in recall performance displayed by the AD group may have been due in part to the additional source memory demands associated with this task.

3.2. Alerting/Orienting Task

Accuracy rates associated with the four cue conditions (i.e., double, no cue, valid, invalid) were extremely high for both groups (see Table 4). Mann-Whitney U nonparametric pairwise comparisons across the groups revealed that while the accuracy rates were similar across the groups for the valid and double cue conditions, the AD group was slightly less accurate than the EC group for the no cue (p=.01) and invalid cue (p=.002) conditions.

The mean RTs associated with the four cue conditions, calculated by including only correct responses with RTs longer than 100 ms and less than two standard deviations from the mean of each condition for each participant, are shown for each group in Figure 3. Application of the two standard deviation trim resulted in the exclusion of an average of 1.3 trials per participant (range: 0 to 3) in the AD group and 1.2 trials per participant (range: 0 to 2) in the EC group. The cue conditions associated with the alerting effect (double and no cue) and the spatial orienting effect (valid and invalid) were examined separately in 2 × 2 mixed model ANOVAs with group and cue conditions as factors. The Alerting ANOVA revealed significant main effects of group, F(1,38)=7.58, p &lt; .01, and cue condition, F(1,38)=131.34, p &lt; .001, but no group by cue condition interaction, F(1,38)=.98, p=.33.

The Orienting ANOVA similarly revealed significant main effects of group, F(1,38)=6.72, p &lt;.01, and cue condition, F(1,38)=101.34, p &lt;.001, but no group by cue condition interaction, F(1,38)=.04, p=.85. Taken together, these results indicate that: a) the EC group was significantly faster than the AD group; b) the task yielded significant alerting and orienting effects (indicated by faster RTs under double cue and valid cue conditions compared to no cue and invalid cue conditions, respectively); and c) the magnitude of the alerting and orienting effects did not differ across the groups.

To better compare the magnitude of the alerting and orienting effects across the two groups, the RTs were transformed into proportion scores by dividing the mean RT in each cue condition for each observer by their overall RT. These proportion scores were then used to compute measures corresponding to the alerting and orienting component of this task. Specifically, an alerting index was calculated by taking the difference between the proportion scores in the double cue and no cue conditions (i.e., no cue–double cue), and an orienting index was calculated by taking the difference between the proportion scores in the invalid cue and valid cue conditions (i.e., invalid cue–valid cue). The alerting and orienting indices for each group are shown in Figure 4.

A two-way mixed-model ANOVA with group (AD, EC) and index (alerting, orienting) as factors, revealed only a significant main effect of index score, F(1,38)=4.98, p&lt;.05, indicating that the overall alerting score was larger than the orienting score. The lack of a group effect or significant group by index score interaction effect confirmed that the alerting and orienting indices were not different across groups.

3.3. Relationship between Priming and Alerting/Orienting

Multiple regression analyses were used to investigate the relationship between word stem completion priming performance and the behavioral measures of alerting and orienting. Separate regression analyses were performed for the alerting and orienting measures. For these analyses, the alerting or orienting index was entered as a predictor in a stepwise linear regression model along with group status (as a dummy variable) and the interaction between group and alerting or orienting as a moderator effect (i.e., the cross-product term). To mitigate any potential multi-collinearity associated with inclusion of a multiplicative term, all independent variables that constituted an interaction term were mean centered before entering them into the regression models (e.g., Aiken &amp; West, 1991). Two different outcome measures were examined for each set of analyses: (1) priming score in the immediate condition as a measure of overall priming performance; and (2) difference score in priming performance across the immediate and delay conditions as a measure of the temporal dynamics of priming.

3.3.1. Alerting and Repetition Priming

The alerting regression models revealed that alerting performance was differentially related to the two priming performance outcome measures. In the immediate priming regression analysis, both group membership (β=0.43, p&lt;0.005) and the group by alerting interaction term (β=0.32, p&lt;0.03) were found to be significant predictors of priming performance, F(2,37)=7.32, p &lt;0.005; R2= 0.28. These findings indicated that group membership rather than alerting performance predicted the overall magnitude of priming in the EC and AD groups, and further indicated that group status moderated the relationship between alerting score and overall priming performance. Follow-up analyses revealed that while the direction of the correlation between alerting score and overall priming performance differed across the two groups, the correlation did not reach significance in either the EC group (r = .35, p = 0.14) or the AD group (r = −.36, p = 0.12).

In contrast to overall priming performance, the regression analysis for the difference score between the immediate and delay conditions found that the group by alerting interaction term was the only significant predictor of performance, F(1,38)=6.47, p &lt;0.02; R2= 0.15; β=0.38. These findings indicated that while group status per se did not predict change in priming across time points, group status moderated the relationship between the efficiency of alerting processes and the change in priming across time. Follow-up analyses confirmed that increased alerting score was significantly correlated with greater change in priming performance in the EC group (r = .50, p = 0.02) but not in the AD group (r = −.28, p = 0.23).

In order to better illustrate the moderating effect of group status on the relationship between alerting and the temporal dynamics of priming indicated by the regression analysis, the EC and AD groups were divided into “high alerting” (EC: M=0.23, n=9; AD: M=0.24, n=11) and “low alerting” (EC: M=0.10, n=11; AD: M=0.07, n=9) subgroups using an alerting cutoff score of 0.16 (Figure 5a). Rather than computing separate cutoff scores for each group, this single cutoff score was selected in order to ensure that the two “low alerting” subgroups and the two “high alerting” subgroups had equivalent levels of alerting across the EC and AD groups while also ensuring that the sample sizes were as equivalent as possible across the four subgroups. Using this shared cutoff score, the two low alerting subgroups, t(18)=1.61, p=.13, and the two high alerting subgroups, t(18)=0.68, p=.51, were indeed matched in terms of mean alerting score, and the mean alerting score was significantly larger in the high alerting subgroup than the low alerting subgroup for both the EC, t(18)=5.88, p=.001, and the AD, t(18)=7.89, p=.001, groups. With the exception of a marginal difference between the high and low alerting AD subgroups on education, t(18)=1.79, p =.09, the two subgroups in each group did not differ significantly on any demographic variable (ps &gt; .32) (Table 5).

As can be seen in Figure 5, the high alerting EC subgroup displayed a steeper slope across the two time points than the low alerting EC subgroup, such that the high alerting subgroup demonstrated greater priming than the low alerting subgroup in the immediate condition and less priming than the low alerting subgroup in the delayed condition. In contrast, the high alerting and low alerting AD subgroups did not display differential change in priming performance over the two time points, but instead displayed similar impairments in priming relative to the EC group.

To further investigate whether the association between alerting and change in priming performance across time was being driven primarily by differences in phasic or tonic alerting, a second multiple linear regression model was performed in which group status, phasic alerting score (i.e., RT in the Double Cue condition divided by overall RT), tonic alerting score (i.e., RT in the No Cue condition divided by overall RT), and the group by phasic alerting and group by tonic alerting interaction terms were entered stepwise into the model with the difference score as the outcome measure. This analysis revealed that the phasic alerting by group interaction term was the only significant predictor of change in priming performance, F(1,38)=9.15, p &lt;0.01; R2= 0.19; β= −0.44, indicating that phasic rather than tonic alerting is primarily associated with the temporal dynamics of priming performance in the EC group.

3.3.2. Orienting and Repetition Priming

In the orienting regression model, only group membership was a significant predictor of overall priming performance in the immediate condition, F(1,38)=8.52, p &lt;0.01; R2= 0.18; β=0.43, indicating that group membership per se rather than orienting performance predicted the overall magnitude of priming in the EC and AD groups. No significant predictor variables entered into the regression model with the difference score outcome measure. Taken together, these results indicated that while group status was a significant predictor of the overall magnitude of priming, group status did not predict the change in priming across time. Moreover, individual differences in the efficiency of orienting processes were not predictive of either overall priming performance or of the change in priming across time in either the EC or AD group. Follow-up analyses confirmed that the orienting score was not significantly correlated with either of the two priming performance measures in either group (ps &gt;.45). Thus, unlike alerting, orienting was not differentially associated with the temporal dynamics of priming in the two groups.

To illustrate the lack of influence of level of orienting on the temporal dynamics of priming (in contrast to that observed with alerting), the EC and AD groups were divided into “high orienting” (EC: M=0.18, n=9; AD: M=0.18, n=8) and “low orienting” (EC: M=0.07, n=11; AD: M=0.07, n=12) subgroups using an orienting cutoff score of 0.13 (Figure 5b). Rather than computing separate cutoff scores for each group this single cutoff score was selected in order to ensure that the two “low orienting” subgroups and the two “high orienting” subgroups had equivalent levels of orienting across the EC and AD groups while also ensuring that the sample sizes were as equivalent as possible across the four subgroups. The subgroups did not differ significantly on any demographic variable (ps &gt; .32) in either group (Table 5). Using this shared cutoff score, the two low orienting subgroups, t(21)=0.01, p=.99, and the two high orienting subgroups, t(15)= 0.10, p=.92, were indeed matched in terms of mean orienting score, and the mean orienting score was significantly larger in the high orienting subgroup than the low orienting subgroup for both the EC, t(18)=4.60, p&lt;.001, and the AD, t(18)=5.20, p&lt;.001, groups. As can be seen in Figure 5b, the level orienting had no effect on the slope of priming performance across the two time points in either the EC group or the AD group; rather the high and low orienting subgroups displayed comparable levels of priming within each group, with the AD subgroups displaying similar impairments in priming relative to the EC groups.

4. Discussion

The present study examined the relationship between word-stem completion priming and behavioral measures of phasic alerting and spatial orienting in order to assess whether the previously observed word-stem completion priming deficit of AD patients may be related to disruptions of the ascending neuromodulatory systems that are thought to mediate cortical arousal. Patients with AD have been found to have neuronal loss in both the nucleus basalis of Meynert and the locus coeruleus with corresponding decrements in neocortical levels of cholinergic and noradrenergic markers, respectively. Both projection systems are thought to enhance sensory processing within the neocortex by increasing the signal-to-noise ratio of target neurons. In particular, the cholinergic system has been implicated in the modulation of spatial orienting of attention and the noradrenergic system implicated in the modulation of nonselective alerting processes. Given that previous studies have found deficits in both spatial orienting and phasic alerting in patients with AD, it is possible that the repetition priming deficits could be related to disruptions to either or both neuromodulatory systems.

Findings from the present study confirmed the presence of impaired word-stem completion priming in AD patients relative to healthy elderly controls. While both groups completed stems with previously presented words significantly more often than baseline guessing rates (i.e., both groups displayed significant priming), the magnitude of the priming effect was significantly smaller in the AD group. However, to the degree that behavioral measures of orienting and alerting reflect the integrity of the cholinergic and noradrenergic projection systems, our results do not support the possibility that the priming deficit displayed by the AD group is associated with disruptions to these neuromodulatory systems. In contrast to previous studies, both AD patients and healthy elderly controls displayed significant alerting and spatial orienting effects (as reflected in RT differences between the double/no cue conditions and the valid/invalid cue conditions, respectively), and the magnitude of these effects were comparable across the two groups. Thus, AD patients exhibited impaired word-stem completion priming despite intact levels of phasic alerting and spatial orienting. In addition, regression analyses indicated that group status rather than individual levels of alerting or orienting predicted the overall magnitude of stem-completion priming suggesting that the impaired priming of the patients with AD was not associated with the neuromodulatory systems that are thought to mediate alerting and orienting.

The regression analyses also revealed that in healthy elderly controls the level of phasic alerting was significantly associated with change in level of priming across the two delay intervals. Specifically, higher levels of alerting were associated with an enhancement or sharpening of the temporal dynamics of repetition priming so that the magnitude of priming in those with higher levels of alerting was larger in the immediate condition, but smaller in the delay condition, than in those with lower levels of alerting. Indeed, in those with lower levels of phasic alerting there was a flattening of the temporal dynamics such that the magnitude of priming was smaller in the immediate condition than in those with higher levels of alerting but priming did not decay as quickly over the delay interval. An association between increased phasic alerting and sharpened temporal responsiveness of repetition priming can be interpreted within the role of the ascending noradrenergic projection system in modulating the signal-to-noise ratio within neocortical areas involved in the storage of perceptual and semantic representations (e.g., Aston-Jones et al., 1999; Clark, Geffen &amp; Geffen, 1989; Foote &amp; Morrison, 1987; Sara, 1985a, 1985b; Servan-Schreiber et al., 1990; Witte &amp; Marrocco, 1997). In this view, the diffuse noradrenergic innervation of cortical regions provided by the locus coeruleus influences the level of steady-state cortical activation or “cortical tonus” (Aston-Jones et al, 1999; Sara, 1985a, 1985b; Sara &amp; Bouret, 2012) which manifests behaviorally as both increased phasic alerting and increased temporal responsiveness in repetition priming.

Given existing evidence of cholinergic modulation of repetition priming (Thiel et al., 2001), it is perhaps surprising that levels of spatial orienting were not associated with priming performance in a manner similar to that observed with phasic alerting. It is possible, however, that spatial orienting is a less direct behavioral measure of cholinergic function than phasic alerting is of noradrenergic function. While orienting of spatial attention has been shown to be affected by cholinergic modulation (e.g., Davidson et al., 1999; Davidson &amp; Marrocco, 2000; Murphy &amp; Klein, 1998; Stewart et al., 2001), it is also critically dependent on the integrity of parietal and frontal cortical regions (Alivisatos &amp; Milner, 1989; Losier &amp; Klein, 2001; Rosen et al., 1999). Given that multiple neural systems contribute to the mediation of spatial orienting of attention, the orienting score utilized in the present study may not be sufficiently specific and sensitive to serve as a behavioral maker for cholinergic neuromodulatory functions. Despite these limitations, the demonstration that AD patients are impaired on word-stem completion priming despite intact levels of spatial orienting suggests that their priming deficit is not due to deficits in selective attention.

The observed association between level of phasic alerting and the temporal dynamics of repetition priming in healthy controls has not been previously reported. However, this association is consistent with previous studies that suggest neuromodulatory systems have a role in mediating repetition priming. Previous studies have shown, for example, that serotonin levels modulate the relative contribution of perceptual and conceptual neural systems to word-stem completion priming performance (Burgund, Marolek &amp; Luciana, 2003), and that the cholinergic antagonist scopolamine attenuates the behavioral expression of word-stem completion priming and eliminates corresponding repetition suppression (i.e., neural priming) effects (Thiel et al., 2001). Although some pharmacological studies did not find effects on behavioral (Danion et al., 1990; Knopman, 1991; Schifano &amp; Curran, 1994) or neural (Miller &amp; Desimone, 1993) aspects of repetition priming, discrepancies across studies may be due, in part, to differences in dosage levels or, perhaps more critically, to differences across studies in the time interval between the first and second presentation of the stimulus (Thiel et al., 2001).

The present findings highlight the importance of assessing repetition priming across multiple delays since they suggest that some neural mechanisms may influence the overall magnitude of priming while others may influence the dynamics of priming over time. While AD status appeared to primarily affect the overall magnitude of priming, phasic alerting affected the change in repetition priming across two time points only in elderly controls. In contrast, neuropsychological studies of short-term semantic priming suggest that AD and Parkinson’s disease both produce alterations in the temporal dynamics of semantic activation (e.g., abnormally high priming at shorter intervals and abnormally low priming at longer intervals) rather than just the overall level of priming per se (Arnott et al., 2001; Milberg et al., 1999). Within this conceptual framework it is intriguing to speculate that the reason behavioral repetition priming is consistently found to be correlated with neural priming in frontal and temporal regions but not in posterior sensory regions (Schacter et al., 2007) is because these studies have only assessed the behavioral priming effect at a single time point. Repetition suppression effects related to enhanced cross-cortical connectivity between frontal and temporal regions may be associated with overall levels of behavioral repetition priming, whereas repetition suppression within posterior areas related to enhanced sensory tuning may be associated more with changes in the dynamics of behavioral repetition priming across time.

This framework also helps to interpret the findings from the present study that AD patients are impaired in the overall level of word-stem completion priming despite intact levels of phasic alerting, and that their level of phasic alerting (unlike healthy controls) is not associated with changes in priming across the two time points. These findings suggest that the neural locus of the stem-completion priming deficit in patients with AD is more likely to be a disruption of cross-cortical interactions between posterior temporal and prefrontal regions that have been implicated in the neural priming of conceptual information (and that have been related to the overall magnitude of behavioral priming) than to disruptions of sensory tuning within posterior areas that support perceptual priming. In this view, disruption of corticocortical connectivity in AD prevents the enhancement of neural synchronization between frontal and temporal regions associated with stimulus repetition and this leads to a behavioral deficit in the conceptual component of repetition priming. This interpretation is consistent with the results of neuroanatomical studies that show a systematic disruption of corticocortical projections that connect distinct but functionally related cortical regions in AD (Braak &amp; Braak, 1991; Delacoste &amp; White. 1993; Delacourte et al., 1999; Hof &amp; Morisson, 1999; Morrison &amp; Hof, 2002; Price &amp; Morris, 1999), and with the results of recent fMRI studies that demonstrate disrupted functional connectivity in resting state brain networks of patients with AD or mild cognitive impairment (MCI) likely to progress to AD (Greicius, Srivastava, Reiss &amp; Menon, 2004; Sorg et al., 2007). This interpretation suggests that the presence of impaired functional connectivity in AD produces an overall decrement in conceptual repetition priming that overrides any fluctuations in the temporal dynamics of priming associated with neuromodulatory influences within posterior cortical regions.

While an impairment in conceptual priming due to disruption of frontal-temporal cortical connectivity may be the primary source of the deficit displayed by patients with AD on the word-stem completion priming test, it remains possible that disruption of cortical tuning in posterior regions contributes to their impairments on tests of perceptual repetition priming (e.g., Bondi &amp; Kaszniak, 1991; Heindel et al., 1990; 1998). In one study, for example, AD patients displayed normal priming for nonverbal geometric designs after immediate repetition of the stimulus but abnormally rapid dissipation of this priming effect over a delay of three intervening items (Heindel et al., 1998). This finding is consistent with a disruption to the neuromodulatory mechanisms mediating the temporal dynamics of repetition priming within posterior regions. While the word-stem completion priming deficit in AD may be driven primarily by disruption of the conceptual priming component of this task, a positron emission tomography (PET) study showed that this deficit was accompanied by increased activation in occipital cortex (rather than the reduction in activation observed in healthy elderly). This suggests that the cortical tuning processes that mediate the perceptual priming component of this task may also be disrupted in these patients (Backman et al., 2000). This interpretation is consistent with the finding that increased levels of serotonin augmentation in healthy elderly is associated with a shift from greater conceptual to greater perceptual contributions to word-stem completion priming (Burgund et al., 2003).

A number of reviews and meta-analyses have noted considerable variability across studies in the magnitude of the word-stem completion priming impairment exhibited by patients with AD with some studies even showing normal priming in these patients (for reviews, see Fleischman, 2007; Fleischman &amp; Gabrieli, 1998; Meiran &amp; Jelicic, 1995; Millet et al., 2010). The variation in the results of these studies may be due, in part, to the possibility that multiple neural mechanisms contribute to word-stem completion priming performance and to differences across studies in the neuropathological profile of the AD patients. However, a recent review of findings suggests that much of this variability may actually be due to differences in the behavioral sensitivity of the word-stem completion tasks used across these studies (Salmon &amp; Heindel, 2014). In this review, the magnitude of priming above baseline that was achieved by patients with AD in over two dozen studies was examined as a function of the magnitude of priming obtained by the controls in each study (in ascending order of the level of priming in the controls). This analysis indicated that: a) in studies where normal control subjects showed little or no priming, AD patients appeared to have “normal” levels of priming (i.e., patients did not differ significantly from controls); and b) as the task used increased in sensitivity (i.e., the magnitude of priming in the controls increased), the discrepancy between AD patients and normal controls increased so that a priming deficit in the patients became more apparent. These findings suggest that word-stem completion priming is consistently impaired in patients with AD as long as the task is sufficiently sensitive to generate a priming effect in normal control subjects.

Overall, the present results provide support for the role of the noradrenergic neuromodulatory system in mediating the magnitude of repetition priming in neurologically intact populations. Activity within the noradrenergic system that is known to modulate the level of steady-state cortical activation (or “cortical tonus”) likely influences both the level of phasic alerting and the temporal dynamics of repetition priming. However, impaired repetition priming in patients with AD does not appear to be due primarily to a disruption of this neuromodulatory system, but rather to impairment of neural mechanisms that mediate conceptual priming (e.g., a disruption of the effective interaction between frontal and temporal cortical regions). A number of recent studies have emphasized the critical role of recurrent interactions and neural synchrony between frontal and temporal regions in effective object recognition, repetition priming, and semantic integration (Clarke, Taylor &amp; Tyler, 2011; Ghuman et al., 2008; Gilbert, Gotts, Carver &amp; Martin, 2010; Thiel et al., 2005; Wyatte, Curran &amp; O’Reilly, 2012). The unique corticocortical disconnectivity found in AD may serve as an effective model for investigating the basic neural mechanisms mediating these cognitive processes. Because patients with AD also demonstrate a deterioration in semantic memory that may be attributable to an impairment in semantic integration (Hodges, Salmon &amp; Butters, 1990; 1992; Nebes, 1989; Sugarman et al., 2012), further investigations of frontal-temporal interactions in these patients may not only identify the neural mechanisms underlying their repetition priming deficit but also increase our understanding of the nature of their semantic memory deficits. Given recent demonstrations of changes in both white matter pathways and neocortical functional connectivity in healthy controls at risk for AD (Smith et al., 2010; Sheline et al., 2010a; 2010b), examination of the nature of frontal-temporal interactions during the performance of tests of repetition priming and semantic integration may prove particularly helpful in identifying sensitive neurocognitive markers for the early detection of AD.

This work was supported by National Institute on Aging grant P50 AG05131.

Figure 1 Sequence of events within the testing session. Order of immediate and delay conditions were counterbalanced across participants.

Figure 2 Word-stem completion priming effect (i.e., target hit rate minus distractor hit rate) for both immediate and delay conditions. Error bars reflect the standard error of the mean.

Figure 3 Mean reaction times (RTs) for each cue condition in the alerting/orienting task across the two groups. Differences in RT between the double and no cue conditions and the valid and invalid cue conditions reflect the magnitude of alerting and spatial orienting, respectively. Error bars reflect the standard error of the mean.

Figure 4 Mean alerting and orienting indices for each group. Alerting score was defined as the difference between the proportion scores in the double and no cue conditions. Orienting score was defined as the difference between the proportion scores in the invalid and valid cue conditions. Error bars reflect the standard error of the mean.

Figure 5 The influence of level of alerting (Figure 5a) or level of orienting (Figure 5b) on the change in priming over the immediate and delay conditions, plotted separately for each group. Each group was divided into “High Alerting” (EC: M=0.23, n=9; AD: M=0.24, n=11) and “Low Alerting” (EC: M=0.10, n=11; AD: M=0.07, n=9) subgroups using a shared alerting cutoff score of 0.16, and was divided into “High Orienting” (EC: M=0.18, n=9; AD: M=0.18, n=8) and “Low Orienting” (EC: M=0.07, n=11; AD: M=0.07, n=12) subgroups using a shared orienting cutoff score of 0.13.

Table 1 Demographic Information of the Participant Groups

	AD (n=20)	EC (n=20)	
Age (years)	80.2 (6.6)	78.7 (6.6)	
Education (years)	15.2 (2.1)	15.4 (3.1)	
Male/Female	13/7	9/11	
MMSE score	24.3 (3.6)	29.5 (0.8)	
DRS score	124.4 (6.9)	140.4 (3.3)	
Data are presented as mean (standard deviation). MMSE = Mini-Mental State Examination, DRS = Mattis Dementia Rating Scale, AD = Alzheimer’s disease, EC = elderly healthy control.

Table 2 Number of stems completed with previously presented words from the rating task

Group	Targets	Distractors	
Immediate	Delay	Immediate	Delay	
EC	8.3 (2.2)	6.4 (2.2)	2.2 (1.4)	1.7 (1.3)	
AD	5.0 (2.8)	4.9 (1.9)	1.5 (1.4)	2.3 (1.4)	
Data are presented as mean (standard deviation).

Table 3 Recall and Recognition Performance in the Word Stem Completion Task

Group	Recall Task	Recognition Task	
Immediate	Delay	Immediate	Delay	
EC	3.73 (1.95)	2.11 (1.36)	0.99 (0.02)	0.97 (0.05)	
AD	0.00 (0.00)	0.50 (0.85)	0.75 (0.13)	0.83 (0.10)	
Data are presented as mean (standard deviation). Recall performance measure is total number of target words recalled; recognition performance measure is proportion correct. Because these tasks were completed only once after the last priming condition, each mean contains data from 10 participants.

Table 4 Mean Accuracy for the Four Cue Conditions

Group	Double Cue	No Cue	Valid Cue	Invalid Cue	
M	SD	M	SD	M	SD	M	SD	
EC	.94	.03	.95	.02	.93	.04	.95	.02	
AD	.94	.03	.91	.07	.92	.05	.90	.06	
M = mean proportion correct, SD = standard deviation.

Table 5 Demographic Information of the Participant Subgroups

Group	n	Age	Education	MMSE Score	DRS Score	
AD	
 Alerting Subgroups						
  High	11	80.6 (5.8)	15.9 (1.9)	23.7 (4.6)	125.8 (6.2)	
  Low	9	79.8 (7.8)	14.3 (2.1)	25.0 (1.9)	122.7 (7.6)	
 Orienting Subgroups						
  High	8	78.4 (7.4)	15.0 (2.4)	25.3 (2.7)	124.8 (7.1)	
  Low	12	81.4 (6.0)	15.3 (1.9)	23.7 (4.1)	124.2 (7.0)	
	
EC	
 Alerting Subgroups						
  High	9	78.8 (5.3)	15.1 (3.9)	29.6 (0.7)	140.2 (4.4)	
  Low	11	78.6 (7.8)	15.6 (2.4)	29.5 (0.8)	140.5 (2.3)	
 Orienting Subgroups						
  High	9	78.2 (7.0)	15.9 (2.1)	29.6 (0.7)	140.4 (1.6)	
  Low	11	79.0 (6.6)	15.0 (3.7)	29.5 (0.8)	140.3 (4.4)	
Data are presented as mean (standard deviation). MMSE = Mini-Mental State Examination, DRS = Mattis Dementia Rating Scale.

Highlights

Stem-completion priming is impaired in AD despite intact alerting and orienting.

Phasic alerting is associated with temporal dynamics of priming in EC but not AD.

Group status rather than alerting or orienting predicts priming impairment in AD.

Noradrenergic projection system may modulate dynamics of repetition priming in EC.

AD repetition priming impairment not due to disruptions in alerting or orienting.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


Aiken LS West SG 1991 Multiple Regression: Testing and interpreting interactions Thousand Oaks, CA Sage Publications, Inc
Alivisatos B Milner B 1989 Effects of frontal or temporal lobectomy on the use of advance information in a choice reaction-time task Neuropsychologia 27 4 495 503 10.1016/0028-3932(89)90054-7 2733822
Arnott WL Chenery HJ Murdoch BE Silburn PA 2001 Semantic priming in Parkinson’s disease: Evidence for delayed spreading activation Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology 23 4 502 519 10.1076/jcen.23.4.502.1224 11780949
Aston-Jones G Rajkowski J Cohen J 1999 Role of locus coeruleus in attention and behavioral flexibility Biological Psychiatry 46 9 1309 1320 10.1016/S0006-3223(99)00140-7 10560036
Backman L Almkvist O Nyberg L Andersson J 2000 Functional changes in brain activity during priming in Alzheimer’s disease Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 12 1 134 141 10.1162/089892900561922 10769311
Badre D Wagner AD 2007 Left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex and the cognitive control of memory Neuropsychologia 45 13 2883 2901 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2007.06.015 17675110
Bondareff W Mountjoy CQ Roth M 1982 Loss of neurons of origin of the adrenergic projection to cerebral-cortex (nucleus locus ceruleus) in senile dementia Neurology 32 2 164 168 7198741
Bondareff W Mountjoy CQ Roth M Rossor MN Iversen LL Reynolds GP Hauser DL 1987 Neuronal degeneration in locus ceruleus and cortical correlates of Alzheimer disease Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 1 4 256 262 10.1097/00002093-198701040-00005 3453748
Bondi MW Kaszniak AW 1991 Implicit and explicit memory in Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology 13 2 339 358 10.1080/01688639108401048 1864919
Bondi MW Kaszniak AW Rapcsak SZ Butters MA 1993 Implicit and explicit memory following anterior communicating artery aneurysm rupture Brain and Cognition 22 2 213 229 10.1006/brcg.1993.1035 8373574
Braak H Braak E 1991 Neuropathological staging of Alzheimer-related changes Acta Neuropathologica 82 4 239 259 1759558
Brun A Englund E 1981 Regional pattern of degeneration in Alzheimer’s disease: Neuronal loss and histopathological grading Histopathology 5 5 549 564 10.1111/j.1365-2559.1981.tb01818.x 7286917
Buckner RL Koutstaal W Schacter DL Rosen BR 2000 Functional MRI evidence for a role of frontal and inferior temporal cortex in amodal components of priming Brain 123 620 640 10.1093/brain/123.3.620 10686183
Burgund ED Marsolek CJ Luciana M 2003 Serotonin levels influence patterns of repetition priming Neuropsychology 17 1 161 170 10.1037/0894-4105.17.1.161 12597085
Carrasco M Penpeci-Talgar C Eckstein M 2000 Spatial covert attention increases contrast sensitivity across the CSF: Support for signal enhancement Vision Research 40 10–12 1203 1215 10.1016/S0042-6989(00)00024-9 10788636
Clark CR Geffen GM Geffen LB 1989 Catecholamines and the covert orientation of attention in humans Neuropsychologia 27 2 131 139 10.1016/0028-3932(89)90166-8 2538773
Clarke A Taylor KI Tyler LK 2011 The evolution of meaning: Spatio-temporal dynamics of visual object recognition Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 23 8 1887 1899 10.1162/jocn.2010.21544 20617883
Danion JM Zimmermann MA Willardschroeder D Grange D Welsch M Imbs JL Singer L 1990 Effects of scopolamine, trimipramine and diazepam on explicit memory and repetition priming in healthy volunteers Psychopharmacology 102 3 422 424 10.1007/Bf02244116 2251340
Davidson MC Cutrell EB Marrocco RT 1999 Scopolamine slows the orienting of attention in primates to cued visual targets Psychopharmacology 142 1 1 8 10.1007/s002130050855 10102776
Davidson MC Marrocco RT 2000 Local infusion of scopolamine into intraparietal cortex slows covert orienting in rhesus monkeys Journal of Neurophysiology 83 3 1536 1549 10712478
Delacoste MC White CL 1993 The role of cortical connectivity in Alzheimer’s disease pathogenesis: A review and model system Neurobiology of Aging 14 1 1 16 10.1016/0197-4580(93)90015-4 8450928
Delacourte A David JP Sergeant N Buee L Wattez A Vermersch P Ghozali F Fallet-Bianco C Pasquier F Lebert F Petit H Di Menza C 1999 The biochemical pathway of neurofibrillary degeneration in aging and Alzheimer’s disease Neurology 52 6 1158 1165 10214737
Deweer B Ergis AM Fossati P Pillon B Boller F Agid Y Dubois B 1994 Explicit memory, procedural learning and lexical priming in Alzheimer’s disease Cortex 30 1 113 126 8004981
Dosher BA Lu ZL 2000 Noise exclusion in spatial attention Psychological Science 11 2 139 146 10.1111/1467-9280.00229 11273421
Faust ME Balota DA 1997 Inhibition of return and visuospatial attention in healthy older adults and individuals with dementia of the Alzheimer type Neuropsychology 11 1 13 29 10.1037/0894-4105.11.1.13 9055266
Festa EK Insler RZ Salmon DP Paxton J Hamilton JM Heindel WC 2005 Neocortical disconnectivity disrupts sensory integration in Alzheimer’s disease Neuropsychology 19 6 728 738 10.1037/0894-4105.19.6.728 16351348
Festa-Martino E Ott BR Heindel WC 2004 Interactions between phasic alerting and spatial orienting: Effects of normal aging and Alzheimer’s disease Neuropsychology 18 2 258 268 10.1037/0894-4105.18.2.258 15099148
Fleischman DA 2007 Repetition priming in aging and Alzheimer’s disease: An integrative review and future directions Cortex 43 7 889 897 10.1016/S0010-9452(08)70688-9 17941347
Fleischman DA Gabrieli JDE 1998 Repetition priming in normal aging and Alzheimer’s disease: A review of findings and theories Psychology and Aging 13 1 88 119 10.1037/0882-7974.13.1.88 9533193
Fleischman DA Gabrieli JDE Reminger S Rinaldi J Morrell F Wilson R 1995 Conceptual priming in perceptual identification for patients with Alzheimer’s disease and a patient with right occipital lobectomy Neuropsychology 9 2 187 197
Foote SL Morrison JH 1987 Extrathalamic modulation of cortical function Annual Review of Neuroscience 10 67 95 10.1146/annurev.ne.10.030187.000435
Gabrieli JDE Keane MM Stanger BZ Kjelgaard MM Corkin S Growdon JH 1994 Dissociations among structural-perceptual, lexical-semantic, and event-fact memory-systems in Alzheimer, amnesic, and normal subjects Cortex 30 1 75 103 8004991
Ghuman AS Bar M Dobbins IG Schnyer DM 2008 The effects of priming on frontal-temporal communication Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 105 24 8405 8409 10.1073/pnas.0710674105 18541919
Gilbert JR Gotts SJ Carver FW Martin A 2010 Object repetition leads to local increases in the temporal coordination of neural responses Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 4 10.3389/Fnhum.2010.00030
Gotts SJ 2003 Mechanisms underlying enhanced processing efficiency in neural systems PhD Carneige Mellon University Pittsburgh, PA
Gotts SJ Chow CC Martin A 2012 Repetition priming and repetition suppression: A case for enhanced efficiency through neural synchronization Cognitive Neuroscience 3 3–4 227 237 10.1080/17588928.2012.670617 23144664
Graf P Shimamura AP Squire LR 1985 Priming across modalities and priming across category levels: Extending the domain of preserved function in amnesia Journal of Experimental Psychology-Learning Memory and Cognition 11 2 386 396 10.1037/0278-7393.11.2.386
Graf P Squire LR Mandler G 1984 The information that amnesic patients do not forget Journal of Experimental Psychology-Learning Memory and Cognition 10 1 164 178 10.1037/0278-7393.10.1.164
Greicius MD Srivastava G Reiss AL Menon V 2004 Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer’s disease from healthy aging: Evidence from functional MRI Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 101 13 4637 4642 10.1073/pnas.0308627101 15070770
Heindel WC Salmon DP Butters N 1990 Pictorial priming and cued-recall in Alzheimer’s and Huntington’s disease Brain and Cognition 13 2 282 295 10.1016/0278-2626(90)90053-Q 2143907
Heindel WC Salmon DP Fennema-Notestine C Chan AS 1998 Repetition priming with nonverbal stimuli in patients with dementia of the Alzheimer type Neuropsychology 12 1 43 51 10.1037/0894-4105.12.1.43 9460734
Henson RNA 2003 Neuroimaging studies of priming Progress in Neurobiology 70 1 53 81 10.1016/S0301-0082(03)00086-8 12927334
Hodges JR Salmon DP Butters N 1990 Differential impairment of semantic and episodic memory in Alzheimer’s and Huntington’s diseases: a controlled prospective study Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery &amp; Psychiatry 53 1089 1095 10.1136/jnnp.53.12.1089
Hodges JR Salmon DP Butters N 1992 Semantic memory impairment in Alzheimer’s disease: Failure of access or degraded knowledge? Neuropsychologia 30 4 301 314 10.1016/0028-3932(92)90104-T 1603295
Hof PR Morrison JH 1990 Quantitative-analysis of a vulnerable subset of pyramidal neurons in Alzheimers-disease: II. Primary and secondary visual-cortex Journal of Comparative Neurology 301 1 55 64 10.1002/cne.903010106 1706358
Hof PR Morrison JH Terry RD Katzman R Bick KL Sisodia SS 1999 The cellular basis of cortical disconnection in Alzheimer’s disease and related dementing conditions Alzheimer Disease 2 207 232 New York Lippincott Williams &amp; Wilkins
Huberman M Moscovitch M Freedman M 1994 Comparison of patients with Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease on different explicit and implicit tests of memory Neuropsychiatry Neuropsychology and Behavioral Neurology 7 3 185 193
Keane MM Gabrieli JDE Fennema AC Growdon JH Corkin S 1991 Evidence for a dissociation between perceptual and conceptual priming in Alzheimer’s disease Behavioral Neuroscience 105 2 326 342 10.1037//0735-7044.105.2.326 2043276
Knopman D 1991 Unaware learning versus preserved learning in pharmacological amnesia: Similarities and differences Journal of Experimental Psychology-Learning Memory and Cognition 17 5 1017 1029 10.1037/0278-7393.17.5.1017
Losier BJW Klein RM 2001 A review of the evidence for a disengage deficit following parietal lobe damage Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Review 25 1 1 13 10.1016/S0149-7634(00)00046-4
Lu ZL Dosher BA 2000 Spatial attention: Different mechanisms for central and peripheral temporal precues? Journal of Experimental Psychology-Human Perception and Performance 26 5 1534 1548 10.1037//0096-1523.26.5.1534 11039483
Mann DMA Yates PO Marcyniuk B 1986 A comparison of nerve-cell loss in cortical and subcortical structures in Alzheimer’s disease Journal of Neurology Neurosurgery and Psychiatry 49 3 310 312 10.1136/jnnp.49.3.310
Maruff P Currie J 1995 An attentional grasp reflex in patients with Alzheimer’s disease Neuropsychologia 33 6 689 701 10.1016/0028-3932(95)00016-V 7675161
Mattis S Bellak L Karasu TB 1976 Mental status examination for organic mental syndrome in the elderly patient Geriatric Psychiatry: A handbook for psychiatrists and primary care physicians 77 121 New York Grune &amp; Stratton, Inc
McKhann G Drachman D Folstein M Katzman R Price D Stadlan EM 1984 Clinical-diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease: Report of the NINCDS-ADRDA work group under the auspices of department of health and human services task-force on Alzheimer’s disease Neurology 34 7 939 944 6610841
Meiran N Jelicic M 1995 Implicit memory in Alzheimer’s disease: A meta-analysis Neuropsychology 9 3 291 303 10.1037//0894-4105.9.3.291
Milberg W McGlinchey-Berroth R Duncan KM Higgins JA 1999 Alterations in the dynamics of semantic activation in Alzheimer’s disease: Evidence for the gain/decay hypothesis of a disorder of semantic memory Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society 5 7 641 658 10645706
Miller EK Desimone R 1993 Scopolamine affects short-term memory but not inferior temporal neurons Neuroreport 4 1 81 84 10.1097/00001756-199301000-00021 8453043
Millet X Le Goff M Bouisson J Dartigues JF Amieva H 2010 Encoding processes influence word-stem completion priming in Alzheimer’s disease: A meta-analysis Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology 32 5 494 504 10.1080/13803390903224936 19890762
Morrison JH Hof PR 2002 Selective vulnerability of corticocortical and hippocampal circuits in aging and Alzheimer’s disease Progress in Brain Research 136 467 486 12143403
Murphy FC Klein RM 1998 The effects of nicotine on spatial and non-spatial expectancies in a covert orienting task Neuropsychologia 36 11 1103 1114 10.1016/S0028-3932(98)00012-8 9842757
Nebes RD 1989 Semantic memory in Alzheimer’s disease Psychological Bulletin 106 3 377 394 10.1037//0033-2909.106.3.377 2682718
Nebes RD Brady CB 1993 Phasic and tonic alertness in Alzheimer’s disease Cortex 29 1 77 90 8472560
Nelson DL Canas JJ Bajo MT Keelean PD 1987 Comparing word fragment completion and cued-recall with letter cues Journal of Experimental Psychology-Learning Memory and Cognition 13 4 542 552 10.1037/0278-7393.13.4.542
Nelson DL Friedrich MA 1980 Encoding and cueing sounds and senses Journal of Experimental Psychology-Human Learning and Memory 6 6 717 731 7441188
Parasuraman R Greenwood PM Haxby JV Grady CL 1992 Visuospatial attention in dementia of the Alzheimer type Brain 115 711 733 10.1093/brain/115.3.711 1628198
Paxton JL Peavy GM Jenkins C Rice VA Heindel WC Salmon DP 2007 Deterioration of visual-perceptual organization ability in Alzheimer’s disease Cortex 43 7 967 975 10.1016/S0010-9452(08)70694-4 17941353
Perani D Bressi S Cappa SF Vallar G Alberoni M Grassi F Caltagirone C Cipolotti L Franceschi M Lenzi GL Fazio F 1993 Evidence of multiple memory-systems in the human brain: A [F-18] FDG PET metabolic study Brain 116 903 919 10.1093/brain/116.4.903 8353715
Picciotto MR Higley MJ Mineur YS 2012 Acetylcholine as a neuromodulator: Cholinergic signaling shapes nervous system function and behavior Neuron 76 1 116 129 10.1016/j.neuron.2012.08.036 23040810
Posner MI 1980 Orienting of attention Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 32 Feb 3 25 10.1080/00335558008248231 7367577
Posner MI Cohen Y 1984 Components of visual orienting Attention and Performance 10 531 556
Posner MI Cohen Y Rafal RD 1982 Neural systems control of spatial orienting Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London Series B-Biological Sciences 298 1089 187 198 10.1098/rstb.1982.0081
Price JL Morris JC 1999 Tangles and plaques in nondemented aging and “preclinical” Alzheimer’s disease Annals of Neurology 45 3 358 368 10.1002/1531-8249(199903)45:3&lt;358::Aid-Ana12&gt;3.0.Co;2-X 10072051
Rabbitt P 1984 How old people prepare themselves for events which they expect Attention and Performance 10 515 527
Race EA Shanker S Wagner AD 2009 Neural priming in human frontal cortex: Multiple forms of learning reduce demands on the prefrontal executive system Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 21 9 1766 1781 10.1162/jocn.2009.21132 18823245
Randolph C 1991 Implicit, explicit, and semantic memory functions in Alzheimer’s disease and Huntington’s disease Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology 13 4 479 494 10.1080/01688639108401065 1833416
Rosen AC Rao SM Caffarra P Scaglioni A Bobholz JA Woodley SJ Hammeke TA Cunningham JM Prieto TE Binder JR 1999 Neural basis of endogenous and exogenous spatial orienting: A functional MRI study Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 11 2 135 152 10.1162/089892999563283 10198130
Salmon DP Heindel WC Nilsson L-G Ohta N 2014 Word-stem completion priming in Alzheimer’s disease Dementia and Memory New York Psychology Press
Sara SJ 1985a The locus coeruleus and cognitive function: Attempts to relate noradrenergic enhancement of signal noise in the brain to behavior Physiological Psychology 3 3 151 162
Sara SJ 1985b Noradrenergic modulation of selective attention: Its role in memory retrieval Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 444 May 178 193 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1985.tb37588.x 2990290
Sara SJ Bouret S 2012 Orienting and reorienting: The locus coeruleus mediates cognition through arousal Neuron 76 1 130 141 10.1016/j.neuron.2012.09.011 23040811
Schacter DL Wig GS Stevens WD 2007 Reductions in cortical activity during priming Current Opinion in Neurobiology 17 2 171 176 10.1016/j.conb.2007.02.001 17303410
Schifano F Curran HV 1994 Pharmacological models of memory dysfunction: A comparison of the effects of scopolamine and lorazepam on word valence ratings, priming and recall Psychopharmacology 115 3 430 434 10.1007/Bf02245086 7871085
Servan-Schreiber D Printz H Cohen JD 1990 A network model of catecholamine effects: Gain, signal-to-noise ratio, and behavior Science 249 4971 892 895 10.1126/science.2392679 2392679
Sheline YI Morris JC Snyder AZ Price JL Yan ZZ D’Angelo G Liu C Dixit S Benzinger T Fagan A Goate A Mintun MA 2010 APOE4 allele disrupts resting state fMRI connectivity in the absence of amyloid plaques or decreased CSF A beta 42 Journal of Neuroscience 30 50 17035 17040 10.1523/Jneurosci.3987-10.2010 21159973
Sheline YI Raichle ME Snyder AZ Morris JC Head D Wang SZ Mintun MA 2010 Amyloid plaques disrupt resting state default mode network connectivity in cognitively normal elderly Biological Psychiatry 67 6 584 587 10.1016/j.biopsych.2009.08.024 19833321
Shimamura AP Salmon DP Squire LR Butters N 1987 Memory dysfunction and word priming in dementia and amnesia Behavioral Neuroscience 101 3 347 351 10.1037/0735-7044.101.3.347 2955793
Shimamura AP Squire LR 1984 Paired-associate learning and priming effects in amnesia: A neuropsychological study Journal of Experimental Psychology-General 113 4 556 570 10.1037/0096-3445.113.4.556 6240522
Smith CD Chebrolu H Andersen AH Powell DA Lovell MA Xiong SL Gold BT 2010 White matter diffusion alterations in normal women at risk of Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiology of Aging 31 7 1122 1131 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2008.08.006 18801597
Sorg C Riedl V Muhlau M Calhoun VD Eichele T Laer L Drzezga A Foerstl H Kurz A Zimmer C Wohlschlager AM 2007 Selective changes of resting-state networks in individuals at risk for Alzheimer’s disease Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 104 47 18760 18765 10.1073/pnas.0708803104 18003904
Squire LR 1987 Memory and brain New York Oxford University
Stewart C Burke S Marrocco R 2001 Cholinergic modulation of covert attention in the rat Psychopharmacology 155 2 210 218 10.1007/s002130100692 11401012
Sugarman MA Woodard JL Nielson KA Seidenberg M Smith JC Durgerian S Rao SM 2012 Functional magnetic resonance imaging of semantic memory as a presymptomatic biomarker of Alzheimer’s disease risk Biochimica Et Biophysica Acta-Molecular Basis of Disease 1822 3 442 456 10.1016/j.bbadis.2011.09.016
Tales A Muir JL Bayer A Snowden RJ 2002 Spatial shifts in visual attention in normal ageing and dementia of the Alzheimer type Neuropsychologia 40 12 2000 2012 10.1016/S0028-3932(02)00057-X 12207997
Terry RD Katzman R 1983 Senile dementia of the Alzheimer type Annals of Neurology 14 5 497 506 10.1002/ana.410140502 6139975
Thiel A Haupt WF Habedank B Winhuisen L Herholz K Kessler J Markowitsch HJ Heiss WD 2005 Neuroimaging-guided rTMS of the left inferior frontal gyrus interferes with repetition priming Neuroimage 25 3 815 823 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.12.028 15808982
Thiel CM Henson RNA Morris JS Friston KJ Dolan RJ 2001 Pharmacological modulation of behavioral and neuronal correlates of repetition priming Journal of Neuroscience 21 17 6846 6852 11517272
Tulving E Schacter DL 1990 Priming and human memory systems Science 247 4940 301 306 10.1126/science.2296719 2296719
Velarde C Perelstein E Ressmann W Duffy CJ 2012 Independent deficits of visual word and motion processing in aging and early Alzheimer’s disease Journal of Alzheimers Disease 31 3 613 621 10.3233/Jad-2012-112201
Warrington EK Weiskrantz L 1968 New method of testing long-term retention with special reference to amnesic patients Nature 217 5132 972 10.1038/217972a0 5642857
Warrington EK Weiskrantz L 1974 Effect of prior learning on subsequent retention in amnesic patients Neuropsychologia 12 4 419 428 10.1016/0028-3932(74)90072-4 4437740
Whitehouse PJ Price DL Struble RG Clark AW Coyle JT Delong MR 1982 Alzheimer’s disease and senile dementia: Loss of neurons in the basal forebrain Science 215 4537 1237 1239 10.1126/science.7058341 7058341
Wig GS Buckner RL Schacter DL 2009 Repetition priming influences distinct brain systems: Evidence from task-evoked data and resting-state correlations Journal of Neurophysiology 101 5 2632 2648 10.1152/jn.91213.2008 19225167
Wig GS Grafton ST Demos KE Kelley WM 2005 Reductions in neural activity underlie behavioral components of repetition priming Nature Neuroscience 8 9 1228 1233 10.1038/Nn1515
Wiggs CL Martin A 1998 Properties and mechanisms of perceptual priming Current Opinion in Neurobiology 8 2 227 233 10.1016/S0959-4388(98)80144-X 9635206
Witte EA Davidson MC Marrocco RT 1997 Effects of altering brain cholinergic activity on covert orienting of attention: comparison of monkey and human performance Psychopharmacology 132 4 324 334 10.1007/s002130050352 9298509
Witte EA Marrocco RT 1997 Alteration of brain noradrenergic activity in rhesus monkeys affects the alerting component of covert orienting Psychopharmacology 132 4 315 323 10.1007/s002130050351 9298508
Wyatte D Curran T O’Reilly R 2012 The limits of feedforward vision: Recurrent processing promotes robust object recognition when objects are degraded Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 24 11 2248 2261 22905822
Zweig RM Ross CA Hedreen JC Steele C Cardillo JE Whitehouse PJ Folstein MF Price DL 1988 The neuropathology of aminergic nuclei in Alzheimer’s disease Annals of Neurology 24 2 233 242 10.1002/ana.410240210 3178178
