LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9814863
21942
J Alzheimers Dis
J. Alzheimers Dis.
Journal of Alzheimer's disease : JAD
1387-2877
1875-8908

26402085
4617342
10.3233/JAD-150154
NIHMS730214
Article
Subjective Cognitive Decline in Older Adults: An Overview of Self-Report Measures Used Across 19 International Research Studies
Rabin Laura A. abc*
Smart Colette M. de
Crane Paul K. f
Amariglio Rebecca E. g
Berman Lorin M. a
Boada Mercè h
Buckley Rachel F. i
Chételat Gaël jklm
Dubois Bruno no
Ellis Kathryn A. p
Gifford Katherine A. q
Jefferson Angela L. q
Jessen Frank rs
Katz Mindy J. b
Lipton Richard B. b
Luck Tobias tu
Maruff Paul v
Mielke Michelle M. wx
Molinuevo José Luis y
Naeem Farnia a
Perrotin Audrey jklm
Petersen Ronald C. wx
Rami Lorena y
Reisberg Barry zaa
Rentz Dorene M. g
Riedel-Heller Steffi G. t
Risacher Shannon L. ab
Rodriguez Octavio h
Sachdev Perminder S. ac
Saykin Andrew J. cab
Slavin Melissa J. ad
Snitz Beth E. ae
Sperling Reisa A. g
Tandetnik Caroline oaf
van der Flier Wiesje M. ag
Wagner Michael ahaiaj
Wolfsgruber Steffen ahai
the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative1
Sikkes Sietske A.M. ag
the Subjective Cognitive Decline Initiative (SCD-I) Working Group
a Department of Psychology, Brooklyn College and The Graduate Center of CUNY, Brooklyn, NY, USA
b Department of Neurology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA
c Department of Psychiatry, Dartmouth Medical School, Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, Lebanon, NH, USA
d Department of Psychology, University of Victoria, Victoria, BC, Canada
e Centre on Aging, University of Victoria, Victoria, BC, Canada
f Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Harborview Medical Center, Seattle, WA, USA
g Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA
h Fundació ACE. Barcelona Alzheimer Treatment and Research Center, Barcelona, Spain
i Melbourne School of Psychological Sciences, University of Melbourne and the Florey Institutes of Neurosciences and Mental Health, Melbourne, Australia
j INSERM, Caen, France
k Université de Caen Basse-Normandie, Caen, France
l École Pratique des Hautes Études, Caen, France
m CHU de Caen, Caen, France
n Université Pierre et Marie Curie-Paris 6, AP-HP, Hôpital de la Salpêtrière, Paris, France
o Centre des Maladies Cognitives et Comportementales, Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière (ICM), UMR-S975, Paris, France
p Academic Unit for Psychiatry of Old Age, Department of Psychiatry, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia
q Vanderbilt Memory &amp; Alzheimer’s Center, Department of Neurology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA
r Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany
s German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Bonn, Germany
t Institute of Social Medicine, Occupational Health and Public Health (ISAP), University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany
u LIFE – Leipzig Research Center for Civilization Diseases, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany
v Cogstate, Ltd., Melbourne, Australia
w Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA
x Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA
y Alzheimer’s Disease and Other Cognitive Disorders Unit, IDIBAPS, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain
z Department of Psychiatry, New York University Langone Medical Center, New York, NY, USA
aa Silberstein Aging and Dementia Research Center, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA
ab Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA
ac Centre for Healthy Brain Ageing, School of Psychiatry, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia
ad Dementia Collaborative Research Centre, School of Psychiatry, UNSW Medicine, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia
ae Department of Neurology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
af Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France
ag Alzheimer Center and Department of Neurology, Neuroscience Campus Amsterdam and Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
ah Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany
ai German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Bonn, Germany
aj Clinical Treatment and Research Center for Neurodegenerative Disease (KBFZ), University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany
* Correspondence to: Laura A. Rabin, Department of Psychology, Brooklyn College/CUNY, 2900 Bedford Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11210, USA. Tel.: +1 718 951 5601; Fax: +1 718 951 4814; lrabin@brooklyn.cuny.edu
1 Data used in preparation of this article were obtained from the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database (adni.loni.usc.edu). As such, the investigators within the ADNI contributed to the design and implementation of ADNI and/or provided data but did not participate in analysis or writing of this report. A complete listing of ADNI investigators can be found at: http://adni.loni.usc.edu/wp-content/uploads/how_to_apply/ADNI_Acknowledgement_List.pdf.

16 10 2015
24 9 2015
23 10 2015
48 0 1 S63S86
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Research increasingly suggests that subjective cognitive decline (SCD) in older adults, in the absence of objective cognitive dysfunction or depression, may be a harbinger of non-normative cognitive decline and eventual progression to dementia. Little is known, however, about the key features of self-report measures currently used to assess SCD. The Subjective Cognitive Decline Initiative (SCD-I) Working Group is an international consortium established to develop a conceptual framework and research criteria for SCD (Jessen et al., 2014, Alzheimers Dement 10, 844–852). In the current study we systematically compared cognitive self-report items used by 19 SCD-I Working Group studies, representing 8 countries and 5 languages. We identified 34 self-report measures comprising 640 cognitive self-report items. There was little overlap among measures—approximately 75% of measures were used by only one study. Wide variation existed in response options and item content. Items pertaining to the memory domain predominated, accounting for about 60% of items surveyed, followed by executive function and attention, with 16% and 11% of the items, respectively. Items relating to memory for the names of people and the placement of common objects were represented on the greatest percentage of measures (56% each). Working group members reported that instrument selection decisions were often based on practical considerations beyond the study of SCD specifically, such as availability and brevity of measures. Results document the heterogeneity of approaches across studies to the emerging construct of SCD. We offer preliminary recommendations for instrument selection and future research directions including identifying items and measure formats associated with important clinical outcomes.

Cognition
cognitive complaints
dementia
early detection
memory complaints
subjective cognition
mild cognitive impairment
preclinical Alzheimer’s disease
questionnaire
subjective cognitive impairment
subjective memory complaints

INTRODUCTION

Subjective cognitive decline (SCD) in older adults is increasingly recognized as a potential indicator of non-normative cognitive decline and eventual progression to dementia [1–5]. Moreover, there is emerging evidence of associations of SCD with Alzheimer’s disease (AD) biomarkers and neuroimaging markers [6–16], such as gray matter volume loss [6–8], cerebral hypometabolism [10], and amyloid deposition [12–14], in the absence of objective cognitive dysfunction or depression. Given research supporting SCD as a risk factor for AD in some individuals, the National Institute on Aging–Alzheimer’s Association preclinical AD working group has included SCD as a feature, highlighting its importance in disease detection and prevention [17]. In addition to preclinical AD, SCD is relevant to other conditions affecting older adults, for example: depression and anxiety [18–19], physical health problems and common chronic diseases [18, 20], and non-AD dementias [1, 21].

By definition, SCD is contingent on self-report of cognition, and this assessment approach is associated with certain practical advantages such as brevity, ease of administration, and low cost [22]. However, the field currently lacks a single accepted approach to the assessment of SCD, including the fundamental nature of the questions (present status versus decline), cognitive domains of greatest interest, and optimal items for each domain [22, 23]. Also, since the prevalence of cognitive complaints in the general adult population is relatively high [24] and can be affected by factors such as mood and personality [25], it becomes difficult to ascertain which complaints indicate underlying AD versus other neurodegenerative pathologies or psychological conditions. This underscores the need for a high degree of rigor in deriving self-report items with concurrent validity for the construct of SCD and predictive validity for future cognitive and clinical outcomes. The definition of the external validators for SCD is itself the subject of discussion [22, 23].

In contrast to extensive efforts to refine and standardize AD biomarkers [26–28] and criteria for conditions such as mild cognitive impairment (MCI) [29–33], research on the standardization and quantification of SCD is relatively limited. Many approaches are used to define and quantify SCD and related constructs, such as cognitive complaints, memory complaints, subjective memory impairment, and subjective cognitive impairment, with no agreed-upon standards [22, 23]. The variability in definition and large number of operational procedures for assessing SCD makes it difficult to compare findings and refine the construct for use in clinical and research settings.

A review of both the SCD and broader cognitive aging literature suggests heterogeneity in important aspects of cognitive self-report measures including mode of administration [34–41], number of items [42–53], and response option types [38, 54–59]. Other dimensions on which self-report measures vary are item content and complexity including whether items relate to memory exclusively [57, 60–62] or include additional cognitive domains [50, 63, 64] or non-cognitive items [51, 55, 65], whether items tap current cognitive ability or disability/impairment [65–67] versus intraindividual change [57, 68], and whether items inquire about general versus specific aspects of cognition. In terms of the origin of instruments, while some studies use complete published questionnaires [54–60, 65], others use groups of items from existing measures [69–71] or develop new items for a specific study [12, 72–77]. Finally, while selecting appropriate measures stands among the most critical decisions made in clinical research contexts, the SCD literature in many cases does not thoroughly discuss selection decisions.

An international consortium known as the Subjective Cognitive Decline Initiative (SCD-I) Working Group recently was established to develop common terminology and basic criteria for SCD to enable joint research efforts across studies and settings [23]. The current study describes the characteristics of self-report measures employed by studies represented by SCD-I investigators. Specifically, we focus on key structural and content validity issues and investigate content overlap among the questionnaire items as well as questionnaire selection decisions. Our goals are to identify areas of variability and consistency, raise issues related to the adequacy of assessment approaches, and ultimately develop improved tools for diverse research and clinical settings.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

The SCD-I

The SCD-I was launched in October 2012 and formed a working group that included AD researchers with a specific interest in SCD. Members were identified by a systematic literature search in addition to targeted inclusion of leading researchers in the field of preclinical AD assessment. The working group’s first project established a conceptual framework and research criteria for SCD [23]. Members of the SCD-I were subsequently invited to participate in the current item analysis project.

Questionnaire characteristics and coding procedures

Based on our review of the SCD literature, considerations of relevance to the field, and feasibility, we investigate the following ten issues through descriptive and content analysis of SCD-I Working Group measures: (1) number of self-report measures used by participating working group studies; (2) origin of instruments and mode of administration; (3) format and range of response options; (4) timeframe referenced by the items; (5) prevalence of items related to specific cognitive domains; (6) prevalence of items tapping cognitive ability/disability-impairment (and referents of frequency, severity, and impact) versus change or decline (and referents of temporal and atemporal); (7) item specificity and complexity; (8) overlap in measures used by working groups; (9) most commonly occurring items; and (10) considerations driving measure selection and the grouping of questionnaires within a given study. Coding of cognitive self-report items occurred prior to data analysis for research issues 1, 5, 6, 7, 9, and 10. For all coding procedures, working group member LAR carried out the initial coding. Two additional expert raters (working group members CMS and SAMS) subsequently identified items that they considered to be miscoded. Items in dispute were then reviewed and discussed until consensus was reached, occasionally after discussing disputed items with working group member PKC.

Selection of cognitive items

SCD-I Working Group members sent electronic copies of their subjective self-report measures to author LAR. For studies conducted in a language other than English, working group members sent a translated version of their measures. The raters then reviewed all measures to determine whether they merited inclusion in the current study by virtue of containing items that assess the self-perception of memory and other cognitive abilities. Notably, while the raters recognized that mood, anxiety, health complaints, and other variables are relevant to SCD and often included in cognitive self-report measures, they are not the focus of the current study.

Categorization by cognitive domain

The raters next classified items by cognitive domain. They first developed a list of cognitive domain categories under which to subsume all items. The list was revised following feedback from additional working group members and included the following categories: (1) memory (short-term/long-term/episodic/semantic/prospective memory and learning new information); (2) attention/working memory/processing speed (also includes basic attention, sustained attention, focused attention, concentration, divided attention, and alertness); (3) language (expressive and receptive language, word finding, reading, and spelling); (4) executive function (organizing, planning, switching, initiating, multi-tasking, reasoning, judgment, problem solving, decision-making, handling emergencies, impulsivity and self-regulation, clarity of mind, motor programming, handling money, and self-awareness of problems); (5) basic calculation and arithmetic tasks; (6) orientation to person, time, place, or situation; (7) general cognitive ability (memory and other thinking abilities grouped together in a single item); and (8) visuospatial skills (visuoperception, route finding, and directional orientation). The raters assigned each item to a single category using the widely-recognized neuropsychological framework suggested by Lezak and colleagues [78]. Though many items arguably could be categorized into more than one cognitive domain, the raters assigned a primary category for each item.

Categorization by ability/disability and change

The raters considered each cognitive item (both stem and response options) to determine whether the item inquired about a participant’s ability to perform a given cognitive task or whether the item inquired about change (improvement or decline). For items that assess ability versus disability/impairment, items could portray the intensity or severity of problems, their frequency, or impact on everyday life. The raters therefore coded for referents of severity (degree of seriousness), frequency (rate of occurrence), and impact (effect on real-world outcomes). For items that assess change, items could portray temporal change (relative to a general or specific timeframe) or atemporal change (relative to peers, a previous state, or rate of change). The raters therefore coded for both temporal and atemporal referents.

Categorization by item specificity and complexity

To address issues of item specificity and complexity, the raters coded memory items according to generality versus specificity and whether they were double-barreled (i.e., involved multiple sub-questions within the one item). A general memory item was defined as a cognitive self-report item that inquires about memory functioning without specifying a particular memory activity, problem, or task. The raters did not extend the coding of general versus specific items to cognitive domains other than memory because of the complexity of establishing coding criteria for non-memory domains. A double-barreled cognitive item was defined as an item that asks respondents to rate or respond to two or more different issues while allowing for only one response.

Most commonly occurring items

After close review of all items across the 34 questionnaires, the raters identified items with overlapping content (e.g., memory for recent events, memory for names, losing one’s train of thought) despite nonidentical item wording (as there were no items with verbatim wording for both item stems and response options). Subsequently, the raters generated a list of the 10 most common item themes.

Selection decisions

To understand the decision-making behind each research group’s choice of measures or development of new measures, the raters distributed a brief survey to working group members. The survey asked the following:

(1) for working groups utilizing existing cognitive self-report measures, respondents were asked to identify the “primary” self-report measure and state why the measure was initially selected for use, endorsing all responses that applied from among various options; (2) for working groups that developed their own cognitive self-report measures, respondents were asked to state why they chose to develop a new measure (free response); and (3) for working group studies that administered more than one cognitive self-report measure, respondents were asked to describe the rationale for including the specific number of measures in the study (free response).

RESULTS

Table 1 lists the names, institutional affiliations, and other key features of the 19 working group studies including country, research environment, approximate number of study participants, and number of SCD measures utilized. The United States houses the greatest number of working group studies (n = 7), followed by Germany (n = 3), Australia (n = 2), France (n = 2), and Spain (n = 2). Canada and the Netherlands house one study each, and the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) has multiple international locations including the United States, Canada, Australia, Germany, and the United Kingdom. There was substantial variability in terms of research environment, with representation of memory clinics (n = 4), volunteer samples (n = 3), community-based samples (n = 3), population-based samples (n = 2), a general practice registry (n = 1), and mixed sampling approaches (n = 6).

Below we present results related to the 10 instrument dimensions outlined in the Methods section.

(1) Number of self-report measures and items used

Table 2 presents the names and key structural and administrative features of the 34 self-report measures used by the 19 studies. The number of measures used per study ranged from 1 to 8 with a mean of 2.4 (SD = 2.1) and a mode of 1. While some measures included cognitive items exclusively, other measures primarily focused on mood or activities of daily living but included one or more cognitive items highly relevant to the current analysis. There were a total of 922 items across all measures. Of the 34 measures, 61.8% (n = 21) contained items that did not involve specific cognitive complaints. This included items related to the use of memory/other cognitive strategies, emotional and psychological functioning, reactions to cognitive changes, personality and interpersonal functioning, physical and motor functioning, vocational and social tasks, general health, fatigue or sleep behaviors, apraxia, basic activities of daily living, general health, general beliefs about memory and aging, and items that were not self-report. These non-SCD items were identified with &lt;4% discrepancies between raters, eliminated for the purposes of the current study, and not considered further. All subsequent results relate to the subset of 640 cognitive items that tap the subjective perception of memory and other cognitive abilities, representing 69.4% of the total items across the 34 questionnaires. The number of cognitive items per questionnaire ranged from 1 to 56 with a mean of 18.8 (SD = 15.5). Table 2 shows the percentage of cognitive self-report items within each questionnaire.

(2) Origin of instruments and mode of administration

With respect to the origin of their instruments, working group studies utilized existing published questionnaires and instruments developed specifically for their research studies with equal frequency (15 each, accounting for 88% of all measures). The remaining 12% of measures (n = 4) comprised subsets of items from lengthier published measures. The vast majority of measures (82.4%, n = 28) were self-administered via paper questionnaire. The remaining measures were examiner-administered by telephone (8.8%, n = 3) or in person (8.8%, n = 3); in both cases, examiners read the questions aloud to participants and recorded responses.

(3) Format and range of response options

There was considerable variability in response options with 21 measures (61.8%) having a single type of response option and the remaining 13 having between 2 to 5 different option types within a single measure (see Table 2). Traditional Likert and rank-ordered/categorical item scales were the most common, appearing on 27 (79.4%) measures. Dichotomous (yes/no) response options were also common, with 8 (23.5%) measures employing this format. An additional 7 (20.6%) measures used response options with yes/no/don’t know or yes/no/prefer not to answer formats. Four measures (11.8%) used free response options, which were primarily for reporting the age of onset of cognitive symptoms.

Figure 1 presents information related to response options in terms of the scaling methods and item response content. Five- and 7-point scales were used most often, accounting for 30.5% (n = 195) and 20.3% (n = 130) of items, respectively. We categorized response options into 12 types. Scales from “always” to “never” (or similar) were used most often, comprising 26.6% (n = 170) of all items in the form of 7-point, 5-point, 4-point, and 3-point scales. Other commonly used response options were yes/no, yes/no/don’t know, and yes/no/prefer not to answer (19.5%, n = 125); “better” to “worse” (or similar) in the form of 9-point, 7-point, 5-point, and 4-point scales (15.6%, n = 100); and “strongly disagree” to “strongly agree” in the form of 5-point and 4-point scales (9.4%, n = 60). All content categories are represented in Fig. 1.

(4) Timeframe

As shown in Table 2, the most common response timeframe referred to by the cognitive items was the recent past with 47.1% (n = 16) of measures asking participants to reflect about current functioning or functioning over the past week, 2 weeks, or 6 months. An additional 5.9% (n = 2) of measures referenced the past year. Other measures required comparisons to 5 years ago (n = 3), 10 years ago (n = 3), and lengthier timeframes including “younger,” “ever before”, and “high school or college” (n = 3). The remaining measures (n = 7) referenced more than one timeframe within a single questionnaire.

(5) Prevalence of items related to specific cognitive domains

The raters categorized each item according to one of eight neuropsychological domains, with rater discrepancies arising in &lt;4% of cases. As shown in Fig. 2, memory items represented the majority (58.6%, n = 375) of items, followed by executive function (15.8%, n = 101), attention/working memory/processing speed (10.8%, n = 69), and language (8.1%, n = 52). The remaining four domains of visuospatial skills, general cognitive ability, orientation, and basic calculation/arithmetic tasks together accounted for 6.7% of items (n = 43).

(6) Prevalence of items tapping ability/disability-impairment versus change

We further investigated item content by categorizing items as ability/disability-impairment versus change; coding discrepancies between raters arose in &lt;4% of cases. Of the 640 cognitive items, 58.4% (n = 374) tapped ability/disability-impairment and 41.6% (n = 266) assessed intraindividual change or decline. Of the 374 items tapping ability/disability-impairment, 49.5% (n = 185) assessed ability in terms of frequency, 44.7% (n = 167) assessed ability in terms of severity, and the remaining 5.9% (n = 22) of items assessed ability in terms of its impact on functioning. Of the 266 items assessing intraindividual change or decline, 97.7% (n = 260) assessed change in diachronic (or temporal) terms while 6 items (2.3%) assessed change in synchronic (or atemporal) terms. Table 3 presents example items within these various content designations.

(7) Item specificity and complexity

We next considered item stem specificity, which refers to whether an item is general or specific, and complexity, which refers to whether items are double-barreled. As noted above, we limited our coding of general and specific items to memory items and did not extend this coding to other cognitive domains. There were discrepancies in &lt;3% of cases for specificity and &lt;2% for complexity. The vast majority of the 375 memory items were specific (70.7%, n = 265) as opposed to general (29.3%, n = 110). In addition, 98 of the 640 (15.3%) cognitive items were double-barreled. Tables 4 and 5 present examples of general and specific items and double-barreled items, respectively.

(8) Overlap in measures used by working groups

Table 6 shows the overlap in use of self-report measures by the working group studies. The 34 measures were used 46 times by the 19 working group studies; each study incorporated from 1 to 8 measures. Of the 34 measures, 25 (73.5%) were used only in a single study, 7 (20.6%) were used in 2 studies, the MAC-Q was used in 3 studies, and the ECog was used in 4 studies. Note that scales called that MAC-Q were actually used in 4 studies, but one study used a different timeframe so the raters designated the versions as MAC-Qa and MAC-Qb (see Tables 2 and 6).

(9) Most commonly occurring items

We next coded the most commonly occurring items (i.e., items grouped together because they inquire about the same cognitive issue), with &lt;4% discrepancies between raters. Table 7 presents the items that appear most frequently across the 34 questionnaires and their item counts. Note that in some cases a particular item is administered more than once within a measure. Items related to memory change and memory for the names of people were most common, followed by general memory problems and remembering where the participant had put common objects. We also determined item commonality by identifying items that appear on the most measures. For this analysis we only counted each item once per questionnaire. As shown in Table 7, items relating to memory for the names of people and remembering where the individual had put common objects appeared on the greatest number of self-report measures, followed by general memory problems, word finding, and remembering appointments.

(10) Considerations driving questionnaire selection and the grouping of measures within a given study

For working groups that reported using an existing SCD measure as their “primary” cognitive self-report measure (n = 10), the most commonly endorsed reasons were the measure’s availability to the researchers, the measure’s brevity and convenience of administration, and the routine use of the measure in studies of cognitive impairment in aging (see Table 8). For working groups that reported developing their own cognitive self-report measure (n = 9), reasons cited related to one of three general themes: (1) categorization of participants into SCD versus non-SCD groups; (2) addressing concerns specific to SCD individuals not captured by other measures; and (3) enabling the researchers to tap cognitive domains of interest. For working groups that reported using more than one self-report measure within a specific study (n = 7), reasons cited related to one of four general themes: (1) use of one measure to classify SCD and additional measure(s) to quantify specific aspects of cognitive functioning; (2) for complete coverage of domains of interest; (3) to permit more variability in the distribution of responses; and (4) to replicate what is used by other studies with similar participant demographics.

DISCUSSION

Overview of findings

The current study is the first to provide a systematic descriptive summary of the cognitive self-report measures used in 19 international cognitive aging studies affiliated with the Subjective Cognitive Decline Initiative(SCD-I)Working Group. Participating studies were diverse with respect to research environment, number of participants, number of self-report measures utilized, and language in which measures were administered. Results indicated that participating studies adopted a wide range of methods to assess SCD—specifically, 34 different self-report measures—the vast majority of which used only within a single study. Measures most commonly used across studies were the MAC-Q [57] and ECog [68], each used at four sites, though two different timeframes were used for the MAC-Q. Almost all self-report measures were self-administered in paper-and-pencil format. The cognitive domain most often targeted was memory, followed by executive function. Items related to memory for the names of people, remembering placement of common objects, and general memory problems occurred on the greatest percentage of measures. The vast majority of memory items tapped specific, rather than general, aspects of memory functioning.

Results highlight wide variation across studies ostensibly interested in the same construct and suggest that many factors may affect instrument choice beyond simple measurement of SCD. Most respondents indicated that measure selection decisions were based on accessibility and convenience of administration, as well as the frequency of use in the cognitive aging literature. Given that several sites reported very large sample sizes (i.e., &gt;3,000 individuals), these decisions are understandable. Being mindful of participant and researcher burdens, this suggests that extensive batteries that fully characterize SCD may not be tractable for many sites to administer.

Our examination of currently used instruments demonstrated wide variation in the format, range, timeframe, and response options both within and across different measures. Items also varied as to whether they tapped ability/disability versus change or decline, with time referents for intraindividual change items ranging from the past 1, 2, 5, 10, or 20+ years to various other periods of life. Given that the subjective, first-person experience of SCD has been relatively understudied, such a broad swath of response options might increase the odds of successfully extracting the unique ways that various subgroups of individuals with SCD conceptualize their concerns.

There are limitations to quantifying an inherently subjective phenomenon such as a complaint. First, asking about complaints in such a large number of ways, largely a theoretical with regards to SCD, raises concern that group differences may emerge from type I error (i.e., statistical bias) incidence rather than actual distinction. In addition, large variability in reference periods has been shown to result in differing question interpretation and subsequent reporting by respondents [79, 80]. With shorter reference periods (e.g., over the past 6 months), respondents tend to report specific minor issues like forgetting names, whereas longer reference periods (e.g., over the past 5 years) tend to tap global, non-specific problems such as general age-related cognitive decline. In general, attentiveness to reference periods seems advisable [81]. Moreover, Likert (and related) formats used by many measures assume an experience of SCD continuous with that of healthy older adults, distinguished only by degree of frequency or severity of complaint, which has not been established as factually evident. Indeed the perception of severity may well vary by demographic factors, such as education [82, 83] at the very least, so endorsement of the same items may mean different things to people of different experiential backgrounds. It is also noteworthy that a significant proportion of items (15%) were double-barreled, where participants could respond to either or both semantic referents, with no systematic way to address resultant ambiguity. This is particularly problematic when directly comparing self- and informant-responses to the same subjective report items, where double-barreled items make it impossible to determine which element(s) of an item stem a given respondent has addressed [84, 85].

A previous review of the SCD literature indicated that SCD has primarily been examined in longitudinal clinical research that follows individuals who decline to MCI and dementia over the course of the studies [86]. Retrospective examination of these cases determined that individuals often complained about declines in cognition many years before decline was detected on standardized clinical assessment—as long as 15 years before manifest cognitive impairment [86, 87]. Given that episodic memory is the cognitive domain most often impaired in MCI patients who subsequently progress to AD [30, 88], one would expect cognitive self-report measures to focus heavily on memory. This was borne out by our data, where well over half of all items and the most frequently occurring items pertained to memory. However, these memory items are not necessarily the best items to include in SCD assessments. In fact, several population-based studies suggest that a large percentage of older adults will endorse some complaint about memory [24, 82], and it is questionable whether the most commonly occurring memory items have the requisite sensitivity and specificity to reliably identify individuals progressing toward MCI and dementia. A report from the Nurses’ Health Study indicated that trouble following a group conversation or finding one’s way around familiar streets were more highly associated with the risk of cognitive impairment than memory complaints such as forgetting things from one moment to the next [89]. Finding one’s way in a familiar place might be classified as orientation or as spatial memory, a specific type of memory, and following a conversation might not be considered memory at all, but rather attention or executive function. Reisberg and colleagues specifically recommended use of the term cognitive rather than memory impairment precisely because the unique phenomenology of SCD is not fully understood and may not be limited to memory [86]. Thus, memory as typically conceived might not be the primary complaint of individuals with SCD due to preclinical AD, and items from other domains may prove to have better discriminant validity at this early stage of non-normative cognitive decline.

Considerations

The current study was intended to serve as a selective overview of the cognitive self-report measures used in studies performed by SCD-I Working Group members, whose primary focus is on preclinical AD. Thus, we were unable to include every extant self-report measure, and this may have biased results to some extent. However, we feel confident that we have captured many of the instruments used to assess cognitive complaints in large aging cohort studies around the globe. In light of our findings, we provide several considerations for the measurement of SCD going forward:

First, the heterogeneity of measures used suggests the exercise of great caution in comparing findings across studies. This does not mean that every site investigating SCD should or could use exactly the same self-assessment battery. Research environment, for example, is an important consideration in selecting measures, as complaints likely mean something different in a population/volunteer sample as compared to a clinical sample. One might assume that individuals recruited from a clinic have specific concern or worry about their cognitive function, which is different from the report of complaints per se. While the literature tends to conflate complaints and concern, recent studies suggest that specific concern or worry about cognitive function has predictive value over and above complaints [21, 47].

Second, researchers might consider approaches from measurement science to inform proper selection of instruments to characterize SCD. Such approaches could be used to investigate the psychometric properties of existing measures, refine or shorten scales (by eliminating less informative items), or optimize measures for specific subgroups of the population of interest (e.g., a brief screen for SCD in a volunteer sample of highly educated older adults). Another application is computer adaptive testing, whereby participants are administered a set of self-report items tailored to their unique cognitive complaint profile estimated from previous item responses, resulting in use of the least number of items to estimate a person’s underlying subjective cognitive ability [90]. To our knowledge, computer algorithms to identify specific items to administer are not currently used. At a basic level it is necessary to investigate psychometric properties such as internal consistency, test-retest reliability, and content validity, as many of the instruments we reviewed were recently developed or not formally validated.

Third, more sophisticated and nuanced analytic approaches should be applied to the datasets on older adults available worldwide. At a minimum, this might include specificity and sensitivity analyses to derive items, for example, which discriminate SCD due to preclinical AD from healthy controls. Identifying items not only with sensitivity but also specificity for SCD is particularly salient in light of discussions about over-diagnosis and the potential to trigger a health crisis in the worried well if researchers over-screen for cognitive complaints [91].

Fourth, future research on SCD should include items related to mood, personality, and health. While the current study focused exclusively on cognitive self-report items, there is likely to be unique variance in perceived cognitive function explained by factors such as mood, personality, and health [69, 92–95]. Therefore, research on the predictive validity of self-report items should include non-cognitive measures to explain as much variance in the experience of SCD as possible. Additionally, we chose not to examine informant-report or clinician rating scales such as the Brief Cognitive Rating Scale, which incorporates various sources of information including self report of memory, objective observation of cognitive deficit on clinical interview, and assessment of functional ability [41]. These methods warrant investigation alongside self-report measures. Informant report, for example, may prove vital, not only in its own right, but also with respect to how it converges or diverges with self-report at different points along the spectrum of pathologic cognitive decline [96].

Fifth, the meaning of complaints tends to vary as a function of demographic characteristics such as level of education and age. Two previous studies [82, 83], for example, found that cognitive complaints in highly educated participants were associated with increased risk of decline to AD. In fact, self-report measures may provide the optimal approach for measuring and monitoring high-functioning individuals in the earliest stages of neurodegenerative cognitive decline, since these individuals may perform at ceiling level on neuropsychological tests [93]. Age of participants also may impact the meaning of complaints, with research suggesting that memory concerns in the young-old associate with anxiety, depression, or personality variables, while memory complaints expressed by older individuals may reflect actual impairment or decline [82]. Cross-site collaboration may be fruitful to the extent that sites share a common setting and common participant demographics. However, any sensitivity and specificity analyses may need to be conducted within the context of local norms for response frequency.

Finally, as noted by Reisberg and colleagues [86], the first-person experience of SCD remains largely unknown. While one might assume that SCD varies from MCI and AD only by degree, it may manifest as a phenomenologically distinct entity. This is likely to be true at least to the extent that individuals with SCD are assumed to have preserved awareness of their difficulties when compared to individuals further along the spectrum of pathologic cognitive decline. Likewise, the first-person experience of SCD due to mood or health complaints may differ from the preclinical AD form of SCD. Aside from the psychometric strategies already discussed, another approach to characterizing SCD could involve gathering qualitative data from persons classified as SCD to reveal their first-person experience, including the frequency and types of complaints most salient to them. This approach would be sensitive to possible cultural differences in the expression of SCD and allow researchers to develop measures specific to their sample demographic characteristics.

Conclusions and recommendations

SCD is rapidly becoming a topic of major interest in cognitive aging and dementia. The current study is the first of its kind, involving an in-depth review of self-report measures currently employed by 19 international sites focused on the study of SCD. Overall, our findings serve as a call for international collaboration to promote harmonization and pooling of cognitive self-report data and greater consistency in the measurement of SCD. The majority of instruments we reviewed were developed within the past 10 years, in some cases within the context of a specific research study, and have limited psychometric evidence. However, validation is an ongoing process, and psychometric data are hopefully forthcoming. With these caveats in mind, we offer the following recommendations:

Select measures with appropriate demographic characterization:

Ensure that your target population corresponds to the population for which the questionnaire was developed, understanding that response patterns may vary as a function of demography (e.g., general population versus clinic-based, young-old versus old-old participants). A good selection criterion is involvement of the target population in the questionnaire development process.

Select measures with adequate content coverage for the target population:

Ensure that item stems are simple and easy to understand. Questionnaires should not contain double-barreled items, which are known to confuse respondents and undermine the accuracy of responses [84, 97].

Combining multiple constructs within a single measure (e.g., items related to cognition in addition to aspects of mood, personality, or health status) may pose problems for calculating and interpreting scores and is generally not recommended.

Inquire about cognitive issues that older adults encounter frequently in their daily lives. For example, while older adults routinely face the task of recalling a loved one’s name, some have never attempted to handle financial affairs and may rely on ideas about related skills they do possess, such as basic mathematics [117]. An optimal approach may involve tailoring questions to individuals based on knowledge about their particular experiences or medical history [117].

Sample cognitive domains beyond episodic memory because items that tap into other aspects of memory, or other domains, might be more pathognomonic of non-normative decline at the early AD stages.

Utilize measures that contain a greater number of specific rather than general cognitive items. Specific items prompt older adults to search for explicit instances in which they experience memory problems in their daily lives, which leads to more accurate reporting. Broadly worded items, by contrast, may cause older adults to fall back upon global beliefs about their abilities and the cognitive aging process more generally [84, 117].

Ensure that response options correspond to the measurement purpose. When the primary purpose is to distinguish between groups, a dichotomous scale might be sufficient. For the measurement of change over time, a Likert scale might represent a better choice. Notably, to the extent that SCD implies a perceived decline, measures should include some items targeting cognitive change. Another consideration is whether response options should target the frequency of problems (how often) versus quality of performance (how well). To address frequency, it is essential to utilize manageable timeframes (e.g., number of times the individual misplaced car keys over the past week as opposed to the past year). To assess quality of performance, one should keep in mind that individuals will provide responses based on aggregated experience rather than specific problematic instances [117].

Ensure that the reference period is specific, appropriate, and narrow. Inquiring about experiences over the past month, week, or even several days is preferable to longer timeframes because these windows enable older adults to focus on concrete recent events rather than rely on beliefs about “typical” performance or the cognitive aging process as a whole [117, 118]. Commonly used longer timeframes (e.g., &gt;1 year, 5 years) may seem face valid but could pose difficulties for older adults trying to recall specific recent events. Vague reference periods should never be used.

Consider issues of psychometric adequacy:

Select questionnaires that have been published, and for which there is at least some evidence for adequate reliability, construct validity, test-retest reliability, and differences between subgroups of interest.

Validate measures in the population of interest. For example, some instruments might have self and informant versions but have only been validated for one or the other population. One cannot assume that validity will generalize across populations, particularly as individuals and their informants contribute unique sources of variance to estimates of current cognitive function.

Consider whether items appropriately measure the cognitive domains of interest. This is especially important in cross-cultural collaborative research, where cognitive complaints might not mean the same thing in Western versus non-Western settings. Western conceptualizations of executive function, for example, often include time pressure/cognitive efficiency, which may not generalize. For questionnaires adapted for use in a different culture, language, or country, two types of validation must occur: linguistic validation (established equivalence of language) and cultural validation (item revision based on cultural appropriateness of wording and potential misinterpretation due to differences in ways of thinking about cognition) [98].

Develop new measures:

There is a need to derive a small number of well-constructed, easy-to-administer items with adequate reliability across diverse samples of older adults. Ideally, these items should discriminate subgroups of SCD, for example those with SCD due to preclinical AD from healthy older adults (concurrent validity), as well as indicate who of the SCD group is likely to decline to MCI and AD (predictive validity). A multi-method approach to assessment incorporating objective cognitive and biomarker measures might help establish the validity of self-report items.

LAR was supported by the National Institutes of Health (NIA/NIGMS grant SC2AG039235) and PSC-CUNY (Award #68859-00 46); CMS was supported by the Alzheimer Society of Canada (Young Investigator Award #1216); PKC was supported by the National Institute on Aging (NIA) grants U01 AG 006781 (E Larson, PI) and R01 AG 042437 (P Crane, PI); REA was supported by NIH grant K23AG044431 and Alzheimer’s Association grant NIRG-12-243012; RFB was supported by Alzheimer’s Australia Dementia Research Foundation (Postdoctoral Fellowship); GC and AP report the following sources of financial support and funding: Fondation Plan Alzheimer (Alzheimer Plan 2008-2012), Programme Hospitalier de Recherche Clinique (PHRC National 2011, complément PHRC 2012), Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR LONGVIE 2007), Région Basse Normandie, and Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (Inserm); BD and CT (PréAl study) were supported by the national Programme Hospitalier de Recherche Clinique; KE, PM, and RFB (AIBL study) were supported by Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO), the Science and Industry Endowment Fund (http://www.sief.org.au), the National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC), and Dementia Collaborative Research Centres (DCRC), as well as industry, including Pfizer, Merck, Janssen, and GE Healthcare; MJK and RBL were supported, in part by National Institutes of Health grants NIA 2 P01 AG03949 and NIA R03 AG045474, the Leonard and Sylvia Marx Foundation, and the Czap Foundation; TL was supported by the Study on Needs, Health Service Use, Costs and Health-related Quality of Life in a large Sample of Oldest-old Primary Care Patients (85+) AgeQualiDe; funded by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research Grant 01GY1322A; BR was supported by National Institute on Aging (NIA/NIH) grants P30 AG08051 and AG03051 and by the Stringer Foundation, the Louis and June Kay Foundation, the Hagedorn Fund, and gifts from Dr. Felix and Mrs. Miriam Glaubach; LR is the recipient of a Miguel Servet II grant as a senior investigator from the Spanish Ministry of Science (CP2/00023); SLR was supported by NIA grants R01 AG19771, NIA P30 AG10133, the Alzheimer’s Association, the Indiana University Health-Indiana University School of Medicine Strategic Research Initiative, and the Indiana Clinical and Translational Science Institute; RAS and DMR were supported by NIH grants P01AG036694, R01 AG027435, K24 AG035007, and U19 AG10483; BES was supported by National Institutes of Health grants K23 AG038479, R01 AG023651, P01 AG025204, and R37 AG025516; AJS was supported by grants: NIA R01 AG19771, NIA P30 AG10133, and R01 LM011360; ADNI data and sharing was funded by the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (National Institutes of Health Grant U01 AG024904) and DOD ADNI (Department of Defense award number W81XWH-12-2-0012). ADNI is funded by the National Institute on Aging, the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering, and through contributions from Alzheimer’s Association, Alzheimer’s Drug Discovery Foundation, Araclon Biotech, BioClinica, Inc., Biogen Idec Inc., Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, Eisai Inc., Elan Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Eli Lilly and Company, EuroImmun, F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd and its affiliated company Genentech, Inc., Fujirebio, GE Healthcare, IXICO Ltd., Janssen Alzheimer Immunotherapy Research &amp; Development, LLC, Johnson &amp; Johnson Pharmaceutical Research &amp; Development LLC, Medpace, Inc., Merck &amp; Co., Inc., Meso Scale Diagnostics, LLC, NeuroRx Research, Neurotrack Technologies, Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, Pfizer Inc., Piramal Imaging, Servier, Synarc Inc., and Takeda Pharmaceutical Company. The Canadian Institutes of Health Research provides funds to support ADNI clinical sites in Canada. Private sector contributions are facilitated by the Foundation for the National Institutes of Health (http://www.fnih.org). The grantee organization is the Northern California Institute for Research and Education, and the study is coordinated by the Alzheimer’s Disease Cooperative Study at the University of California, San Diego; SAMS was supported by Stichting VUmc fonds, the Innovatiefonds Zorgverzekeraars, and a fellowship program from Alzheimer Nederland (WE. 15-2012-02).

Fig. 1 Summary of response types and options.

Notes: *14 out of 34 questionnaires include multiple response types. **Includes: &lt;10 each of “very poor” to “very well”; “major problems” to “no problems”; “no” to “most of the time”; “no” to “definitely”; “no” to “yes, a lot worse”; “no problems” to “always”; and “more often” to “about the same”. Includes one each of “no” to “yes, that worries me seriously”; “less than 6 months ago” to “more than two years ago”; “very gradually” to “suddenly”; “steadily worsened” to “got worse and then leveled off”; “not at all” to “highly”; “excellent” to “poor”; “no” to “very much”; agree/disagree; good/poor; same/worse; and suddenly/gradually”. ***Includes: “always” to “never”; “frequently” to “never”; “always or almost always” to “never or almost never”; “very often” to “never”, and “often” to “never”. †Includes: “better than ever before” to “worse than ever before”; “much better” to “much worse”; “very strong improvement” to “very sharp decline”; “ much improved” to “much worse”; “much better now” to “much poorer now”; and “better than when I was younger” to “definitely worse than when I was younger”.

Fig. 2 Percentage of items by cognitive domain.

Notes: Memory includes short-term, long-term, episodic, semantic, and prospective memory and learning new information; Attention includes basic, sustained, focused, and divided attention, working memory, concentration, processing speed, and alertness; Language includes expressive and receptive language, word finding, reading, and spelling; Executive includes executive functions such as organizing, planning, initiating, switching, multi-tasking, reasoning, problem solving, decision-making, impulsivity, and self-regulation; Calculation includes basic calculation and arithmetic; Orientation includes orientation to person, time, place, and situation; General refers to memory and other cognitive abilities grouped together in a single item; and Visuospatial includes visuoperception, route finding, and directional orientation.

Table 1 Participating Subjective Cognitive Decline Initiative (SCD-I) working group studies

Study name	Institutional affiliation	Country	Research environment	Approximate number of participants	Number of measures	
AgeCoDe Study	University of Bonn and 5 other German universities	Germany	General practice registry-based	3,327	2	
Alzheimer’s Disease Center Clinical Core and Center for Brain Health	New York University School of Medicine	United States	Volunteer	525	1	
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI)	Over 100 international affiliates: adcs.org/Research/ClinicalSite.aspx	United States, Canada, Australia, Germany, United Kingdom	Volunteer and memory clinic	1,204	1	
Amsterdam Dementia Cohort	VU University Medical Center	Netherlands	Memory clinic	1,244	2	
Australian Imaging Biomarkers and Lifestyle Flagship Study of Ageing (AIBL)	University of Melbourne	Australia	Volunteer and physician referred	851	2	
Barcelona Group	IDIBAPS, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona	Spain	Volunteer and memory clinic	400	1	
Bonn Memory Clinic	University of Bonn and the German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, Bonn	Germany	Memory clinic	120	1	
Dartmouth-Indiana Longitudinal Cohort	Dartmouth Medical School, Indiana University School of Medicine	United States	Volunteer and physician referred	269	8*	
Einstein Aging Study	Albert Einstein College of Medicine	United States	Community-based	2,500	7**	
Harvard Aging Brain Study	Harvard Medical School, Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Massachusetts General Hospital	United States	Volunteer	280	3	
IMAP Caen Group	Inserm, University and Hospital of Caen	France	Memory clinic	86	1	
Leipzig Longitudinal Study of the Aged (LEILA 75+)	University of Leipzig	Germany	Population-based	1,265	1	
Mayo Clinic Study of Aging (MCSA)	Mayo Clinic	United States	Population-based	4,500	2	
Memory Clinic -Fundació ACE	Fundació ACE. Barcelona Alzheimer Treatment and Research Center	Spain	Community-based	660	1	
PreAl Study	Hôpital de la Salpêtrière, AP-HP	France	Memory clinic	180	1	
Sydney Memory and Ageing Study	University of New South Wales	Australia	Community-based	873	3	
University of Pittsburgh Study/Monongahela-Youghiogheny Health Aging Team (MYHAT)	University of Pittsburgh	United States	Clinic-community volunteer sample and population-based	2,100	3	
Vanderbilt Memory and Alzheimer’s Center (VMAC)	Vanderbilt University School of Medicine	United States	Memory clinic, physician referred, and community-based	158	1	
Victoria Subjective Cognitive Decline Study (SCDS)	University of Victoria	Canada	Volunteer	42	5	
* A subset of participants received all 8 questionnaires. The remaining participants received 5 questionnaires.

** A subset of participants received all 7 questionnaires. The remaining participants received 3 questionnaires.

Table 2 Key structural and administrative features of self-report measures used by Subjective Cognitive Decline Initiative (SCD-I) Working Group studies

Questionnaire/item subset abbreviation	Language	5Administration mode	Total number of items	Number (percentage) of items relevant to analysis*	Response type and options	Timeframe	
ADL	English	5Self-administered paper questionnaire	63	33 (52.4%)	7 pts. “Above average ability” to “Severe disability”, plus “Not applicable”	Current	
ADL Abbrev	English	5Self-administered paper questionnaire	50	45 (90.0%)	7 pts. “Much better” to “Much worse”	Compared to 5 years ago	
AgeCoDe MQ	German	5Examiner- administered in person	2	2 (100%)	Yes/No/Don’t know; 3 pts. “No” to “Yes, that worries me seriously”, plus “Don’t know” and “Not applicable”	Unspecified and current	
AIBL Screen	English	5Examiner- administered by telephone	1	1 (100%)	Yes/No	Current	
Blessed	English	5Self-administered paper questionnaire	6	5 (83.3%)	Yes/No/Don’t know; 4 pts. “Better than when I was younger” to “Definitely worse than when I was younger”	Compared to when “younger”	
BRIEF-A	English	5Self-administered paper questionnaire	75	36 (48.0%)	3 pts. “Never” to “Often”	Past month	
CAPM-C	English	5Self-administered paper questionnaire	15	13 (86.7%)	4 pts. “Strongly disagree” to “Strongly agree”	Current	
CCI	English	5Self-administered paper questionnaire	20	20 (100%)	5 pts. “No change” to “Much worse”	Compared to 5 years ago	
CDS-Q	French	5Self-administered paper questionnaire	39	33 (84.6%)	5 pts. “Never” to “Very often”	Current	
CERAD-Self	English	5Self-administered paper questionnaire	36	22 (61.1%)	Yes/No/Don’t know; 4 pts. “Less than six months ago” to “More than two years ago”; 3 pts. “Very gradually” to “Suddenly”, plus “Other”; 3 pts. “Steadily worsened” to “Got worse then leveled off”, plus “Other” and “Don’t know”	Current	
CFQ	English	5Self-administered paper questionnaire	25	17 (68.0%)	5 pts. “Never” to “Very often”	Past 6 months	
ECog Self	English, German, French	5Self-administered paper questionnaire	40	40 (100%)	Yes/No; 4 pts. “Better or no change” to “Consistently much worse”, plus “Don’t know”	Compared to 10 years ago	
Einstein HSA	English	5Self-administered paper questionnaire	20	6 (30.0%)	Yes/No/Don’t know; 4 pts. “Frequently” to “Never”; 3 pts. “More often” to “About the same”; Free response (percent)	Unspecified; Past year; Compared to 1 and 10 years ago	
GDS Long	English	5Self-administered paper questionnaire	30	4 (13.3%)	Yes/No	Past week	
GDS Short	English, Dutch	5Self-administered paper questionnaire	15	1 (6.7%)	Yes/No	Past week	
IQCODE Short	English	5Self-administered paper questionnaire	16	15 (93.8%)	5 pts. “Much improved” to “Much worse”	Compared to 10 years ago	
LEILA 75+ Questions	German	5Examiner- administered in person	4	4 (100%)	4 pts. “No problems” to “Always”, plus “Don’t know”; 4 pts. “Not at all” to “Highly”, plus “Don’t know” and “Not applicable”; Free response (age), plus “Not applicable”	Current	
MAC-Q (a)	English	5Self-administered paper questionnaire	6**	6 (100%)	5 pts. “Much better now” to “Much poorer now”	Compared to high school or college	
MAC-Q (b)	English	5Self-administered paper questionnaire	6	6 (100%)	5 pts. “Much better now” to “Much poorer now”	Compared to 5 years ago	
MATS	English	5Examiner- administered by telephone	13	13 (100%)	Yes/No/Don’t know; The Same/Worse/Don’t know; Free response (age of onset)	Current	
MFE-30	Spanish	5Self-administered paper questionnaire	30	29 (96.7%)	5 pts. “Never or almost never” to “Always or almost always”	Current	
MFQ***	English	5Self-administered paper questionnaire	63 or 64	49 (77.8%) or 50 (78.1%)	7 pts. “Major Problems” to “No problems”; 7 pts. “Always” to “Never”; 7 pts. “Very poor” to “Very well”; 7 pts. “Very serious” to “Not serious”; 7 pts. “Much worse” to “Much better”	Current; Compared to 1, 5, 10, and 20 years ago; Compared to age 18	
MIA	English	5Self-administered paper questionnaire	108	35 (32.4%)	5 pts. “Strongly disagree” to “Strongly agree”	Current	
MMQ	German	5Self-administered paper questionnaire	57	32 (56.1%)	5 pts. “Strongly agree” to “Strongly disagree”; 5 pts. “Always” to “Never”	Past 2 weeks	
SCCS	English	5Self-administered paper questionnaire	30	27 (90.0%)	Yes/No; 4 pts. “Excellent” to “poor”; 2 pts. “Suddenly/Gradually” and “Other”; 3 pts. “Better” to “The Same”, plus “Never performed this activity”; Free response (age)	Multiple†	
SCD-SID	English	5Examiner- administered by telephone	1	1 (100%)	Yes/No	Current	
SCD-Q: Part 1 MyCog	Spanish	5Self-administered paper questionnaire	27	26 (96.3%)	Yes/No	Current and compared to 2 years ago	
SCF	Dutch	5Self-administered paper questionnaire	4	2 (50.0%)	7 pts. “Very strong improvement” to “Very sharp decline”	Past year	
SCQ	French	5Self-administered paper questionnaire	14	14 (100%)	4 pts. “The same” to “Much worse”; 4 pts. “No” to “Most of the time”; 4 pts. “No” to “Definitely”; 4 pts. “No” to “Very much”	Past year	
SMDS	German	5Examiner- administered in person	4	4 (100%)	3 pts. “No” to “Yes, a lot worse”	Compared to 10 years ago	
Squire Memory Self-Rating	English	5Self-administered paper questionnaire	18	18 (100%)	9 pts. “Worse than ever before” to “Better than ever before”	Compared to “ever before”	
STDA	English	5Self-administered paper questionnaire	7	7 (100%)	Yes/No	Current	
Sydney– SCQ Wave 1	English	5Self-administered paper questionnaire	18	16 (88.9%)	Yes/No/Don’t know; 4 pts. “No, less difficulty” to “Yes, a lot more difficulty”, plus “Not applicable”	Unspecified and compared to 5 years ago	
VMAC Cognitive Complaint Questionnaire	English	5Self-administered paper questionnaire	57	56 (98.2%)	Yes/No/Prefer not to answer; 3 pts. “Never” to “Always”; 3 pts. “No problems” to “Major problems”	Multiple‡	
* Items relevant for the current analysis relate to the subjective perception of one’s cognition (see text for details about eliminated items).

** The NYU version of the MAC-Q contains a different item stem for item 4 (bringing the total number of overall items to one more than the totals displayed in columns 3 and 4). Also, the MAC-Q was separated into versions a and b because of the different timeframe references.

*** The University of Pittsburgh’s version of the questionnaire contains one additional item.

† Timeframe includes current, compared to 1 year ago, and compared to how “you used to be”, and some items have unspecified time frames.

‡ Timeframe includes current, compared to 1 year ago, compared to 2 years ago, compared to 5 years ago, compared to 10 years ago, and compared to 20 years ago, and some items have unspecified time frames.

AIBL Screen, Melbourne Australian Imaging Biomarkers and Lifestyle Flagship Study of Ageing (AIBL) Memory Screen Question [99]; ADL, Activities of Daily Living Rating Scale Self-Version [100]; ADL Abbrev, Activities of Daily Living Rating Scale Self-Version, Abbreviated (Saykin, unpublished); AgeCoDe MQ, AgeCoDe Study Memory Questions [101]; Blessed, Blessed Memory Test [102]; BRIEF-A, Behavioral Rating Inventory of Executive Function-Adult Version [103]; CAPM-C, Comprehensive Assessment of Prospective Memory-Section C [66]; CCI, Cognitive Change Index [7]; CDS-Q, Cognitive Difficulties Scale [58]; CERAD-Self, Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer’s Disease-Self Version [104]; CFQ, Cognitive Failures Questionnaire [55]; ECog Self, Everyday Cognition-Subject/Self-Report [68]; GDS Long, Geriatric Depression Scale-Long Version [105]; GDS Short, Geriatric Depression Scale-Short Version [106]; HSA, Albert Einstein Health Self-Assessment [107]; IQCODE Short, Short Form of the Informant Questionnaire on Cognitive Decline in the Elderly [108]; LEILA 75 + Questions, Leipzig Longitudinal Study of the Aged Questionnaire [109–110]; MAC-Q(a), Memory Complaint Questionnaire [57]; MAC-Q(b), Memory Complaint Questionnaire [57]; MATS, Memory and Aging Telephone Screen [67]; MFE-30, Memory Failures Everyday [111]; MFQ, Memory Functioning Questionnaire [60]; MIA, Metamemory in Adulthood Questionnaire [65]; MMQ, Multifactorial Memory Questionnaire [54]; SCCS, Subjective Cognitive Complaint Scale-(also referred to as the Subjective Memory Scale) [74,112]; SCD-SID, Subjective Cognitive Decline Self-Identification Item [47]; SCD-Q: Part 1 MyCog, Subjective Cognitive Decline Questionnaire: Part 1 My Cognition [50]; SCF, Subjective Cognitive Functioning [113]; SCQ, Self-Evaluation of Cognition Questionnaire [114]; SMDS, Subjective Memory Decline Scale [115]; Squire Memory Self-Rating Questionnaire [116]; STDA, Adapted from Structured Telephone Dementia Assessment [13, 38]; Sydney-SCQ, Sydney Subjective Complaint Questions, Wave 1 [92]; VMAC Cognitive Complaint Questionnaire, Vanderbilt Memory and Alzheimer’s Center Cognitive Complaint Questionnaire [40].

Table 3 Sample items categorized by ability or change

Domain	Referent	Sample items	
Ability (n = 374)	Severity	Please rate your current level of ability or functioning, or the severity of any problems:
Ability to reason through a complicated problem
1 = above average ability; 2 = normal ability; 3 = mild disability; 4 = mild to moderate disability; 5 = moderate disability; 6 = moderate to severe disability; 7 = severe disability; not applicable
How would you rate your memory in terms of the kinds of problems you have?
1, 2 = major problems; 3, 4, 5 = some minor problems; 6,7 = no problems	
Frequency	How often does remembering or doing the following things present a problem for you?
Losing the thread of thought in conversation
1, 2 = always; 3, 4, 5 = sometimes; 6, 7 = never
I forget details of what I did or what happened the day before.
0 = never or almost never; 1 = rarely; 2 = sometimes; 3 = often; 4 = always or most always	
Impact	Do you feel that your everyday life is difficult now due to your memory decline?
0 = no; 1 = yes; 2 = prefer not to answer
How is your everyday life affected by the memory problems?
0 = not at all; 1 = a little; 2 = somewhat; 3 = highly	
Change (n = 266)	Temporal	Compared to 10 years ago, has there been any change in verbally giving instructions to others?
1 = better or no change; 2 = questionable/occasionally worse; 3 = consistently a little worse; 4 = consistently much worse; don’t know
My ability to pay attention to what goes on around me is:
−4 = worse than ever before; −3, −2, −1, 0 = no change; 1, 2, 3, 4 = better than ever before	
Atemporal	Are you worried or concerned about a decline in your thinking abilities, more than normal aging?
0 = no; 1 = yes
Do you feel your memory got worse suddenly or gradually?
1 = suddenly; 2 = gradually; 3 = other, specify	

Table 4 Sample memory items categorized by item stem specificity

Variable	Sample item stems	
General memory items (n = 110)	How would you rate your memory in terms of the kinds of problems you have?	
Do you have problems with your memory compared to the way it was 5 years ago?	
Do you feel that you have more problems with memory than most?	
Any other problems with your memory?	
How long ago did your memory problems start?	
Specific memory items (n = 265)	How often do you leave something behind when you meant to bring it with you?	
Do you have trouble recalling conversations a few days later?	
I am good at remembering birthdates.	
Compared to your peers, do you think you have more difficulty learning new information?	
I forget details about myself (age, telephone number).	

Table 5 Sample cognitive items with double-barreled item stems

Sample item stems	
Are you concerned that you have a memory or other thinking problem?	
Do you have any difficulty in understanding or following spoken instructions?	
Do you talk less because of memory or word-finding difficulties?	
Compared to 10 years ago, I am much worse at remembering titles of books, films or plays.	
I find it harder to remember street and city names.	
Forgets appointments, dates, or where things are stored.	
Organizing daily activities and keeping a schedule.	
I have trouble finding things in my room, closet, or desk.	
Following a story in a book, movie, or TV.	
Recalling telephone numbers or zip codes that you use on a daily or weekly basis.	
Have you sought evaluation or treatment for your memory problems?	
My ability to search through my mind and recall names or memories I know are there is.	
Do you find you forget whether you’ve turned off a light or a fire or locked the door?	
Remembering what day/date/month it is?	
I get lost or I follow the wrong directions on trips, strolls, or buildings that I have previously been in.	

Table 6 Overlap in use of cognitive self-report measures by Subjective Cognitive Decline Initiative (SCD-I) Working Group studies

	
* Questionnaire administered to a subset of participants. Columns with gray shading indicate measures administered in a language other than English, as specified below. Columns with line shading indicate measures administered in English plus one or more additional languages, as specified below. Working group study numbers: (1) AgeCoDe Study (German); (2) Alzheimer’s Disease Center Clinical Core and Center for Brain Health; (3) Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI; English, German, French); (4) Amsterdam Dementia Cohort (Dutch); (5) Australian Imaging Biomarkers and Lifestyle Flagship Study of Ageing (AIBL); (6) Barcelona Group (Spanish); (7) Bonn Memory Clinic (German); (8) Dartmouth-Indiana Longitudinal Cohort; (9) Einstein Aging Study; (10) Harvard Aging Brain Study; (11) IMAP Caen Group (French); (12) Leipzig Longitudinal Study of the Aged (LEILA 75+) (German); (13) Mayo Clinic Study of Aging (MCSA); (14) Memory Clinic -Fundació ACE (Spanish); (15) PreAl Study (French); (16) Sydney Memory and Ageing Study; (17) University of Pittsburgh Study/ Monongahela-Youghiogheny Health Aging Team (MYHAT); (18) Vanderbilt Memory and Alzheimer’s Center (VMAC); (19) Victoria Subjective Cognitive Decline Study (SCDS).

Table 7 Ten most frequently occurring cognitive self-report items

Item theme and sample item stems	n (%) of total items	n (%) of measures that contain item	
1. Memory change	36 (5.6%)	14 (41.2%)	
 How is your memory compared to the way it was 10 years ago?	
 Do you feel you remember things less well than you did a year ago?	
2. Memory for names of people (longstanding and recently acquired names)	32 (5.0%)	19 (55.9%)	
 Do you find you forget people’s names?	
 How is your ability to remember the names of close friends and relatives?	
3. General memory problems	30 (4.7%)	16 (47.1%)	
 Have you noticed difficulty with your memory?	
 Do you feel like your memory has become worse?	
4. Remembering where you put common objects/finding familiar objects	29 (4.5%)	19 (55.9%)	
 Do you feel you are forgetting where things were placed?	
 Finding everyday objects? (e.g. keys, wallet)	
5. Word finding	19 (3.0%)	15 (44.1%)	
 I’m worse at finding the word I want to use in a conversation.	
 Do you have more difficulty finding the right words (e.g. feeling like the word is on the tip of your tongue)?	
6. Remembering appointments	17 (2.7%)	15 (44.1%)	
 How is your ability to remember appointments correctly?	
 When you actually forget in the following situations, how serious of a problem do you consider the memory problem to be?: appointments	
7. Remembering recent events	16 (2.5%)	13 (38.2%)	
 Do you have more trouble remembering things that have happened recently?	
 I forget details of what I did or what happened the day before.	
8. Remembering recent conversations/things told to you	15 (2.3%)	14 (41.2%)	
 Do you have difficulty remembering a conversation from a few days ago?	
 I forget things that I was told yesterday or a few days ago.	
9. Memory for intentions	15 (2.3%)	12 (35.3%)	
 Beginning to do something and forgetting what you were doing	
 Remembering what you entered a room to do	
10. Remembering phone numbers (frequently used or just checked)	14 (2.2%)	8 (23.5%)	
 Trouble recalling frequently used phone numbers	
 Having trouble remembering a telephone number you just looked up	

Table 8 Factors driving questionnaire selection decisions for existing measures (n = 10 SCD-I Working Group studies)

Reason	Number (%) of responses	
Readily available	8 (19.5%)	
Brief/convenient for administration (low participant or researcher burden)	8 (19.5%)	
Routinely used in studies of cognitive impairment in aging	7 (17.1%)	
Cost-effective (e.g., free/public domain)	5 (12.2%)	
Already being used in existing on-site studies	4 (9.8%)	
Useful in terms of tapping specific cognitive domains of interest relevant to SCD	4 (9.8%)	
Robust in terms of psychometric properties (i.e., reliability and validity)	3 (7.3%)	
Good for discriminating differing levels of cognitive impairment	1 (2.4%)	
Other considerations	1 (2.4%)	

Authors’ disclosures available online (http://j-alz.com/manuscript-disclosures/15-0154r1).


1 Reisberg B Shulman MB Torossian C Leng L Zhu W 2010 Outcome over seven years of healthy adults with and without subjective cognitive impairment Alzheimers Dement 6 11 24 20129317
2 Jessen F Wiese B Bickel H Eiffländer-Gorfer S Fuchs A Kaduszkiewicz H Köhler M Luck T Mösch E Pentzek M Riedel-Heller SG Wagner M Weyerer S Maier W van den Bussche H for the AgeCoDe Study Group 2011 Prediction of dementia in primary care patients PLoS One 6 e16852 21364746
3 Amieva H Le Goff M Millet X Orgogozo JM Pérès K Barberger-Gateau P Jacqmin-Gadda H Dartigues JF 2008 Prodromal Alzheimer’s disease: Successive emergence of the clinical symptoms Ann Neurol 64 492 498 19067364
4 Dufouil C Fuhrer R Alpérovitch A 2005 Subjective cognitive complaints and cognitive decline: Consequence or predictor? The epidemiology of vascular aging study J Am Geriatr Soc 53 616 621 15817007
5 Mitchell AJ Beaumont H Ferguson D Yadegarfar M Stubbs B 2014 Risk of dementia and mild cognitive impairment in older people with subjective memory complaints: Meta-analysis Acta Psychiatr Scand 6 1 13
6 Jessen F Feyen L Freymann K Tepest R Maier W Heun R Schild HH Scheef L 2006 Volume reduction of the entorhinal cortex in subjective memory impairment Neurobiol Aging 27 1751 1756 16309795
7 Saykin AJ Wishart HA Rabin LA Santulli RB Flashman LA West JD McHugh TL Mamourian AC 2006 Older adults with cognitive complaints show brain atrophy similar to that of amnestic MCI Neurology 67 834 842 16966547
8 Striepens N Scheef L Wind A Popp J Spottke A Cooper-Mahkorn D Suliman H Wagner M Schild HH Jessen F 2010 Volume loss of the medial temporal lobe structures in subjective memory impairment Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 29 75 81 20110703
9 Erk S Spottke A Meisen A Wagner M Walter H Jessen F 2011 Evidence of neuronal compensation during episodic memory in subjective memory impairment Arch Gen Psychiatry 68 845 852 21810648
10 Mosconi L De Santi S Brys M Tsui WH Pirraglia E Glodzik-Sobanska L Rich KE Switalski R Mehta PD Pratico D Zinkowski R Blennow K de Leon MJ 2008 Hypometabolism and altered cerebrospinal fluid markers in normal apolipoprotein E E4 carriers with subjective memory complaints Biol Psychiatry 63 609 618 17720148
11 Scheef L Spottke A Daerr M Joe A Striepens N Kölsch H Popp J Daamen M Gorris D Heneka MT Boecker H Biersack HJ Maier W Schild HH Wagner M Jessen F 2012 Glucose metabolism, gray matter structure, and memory decline in subjective memory impairment Neurology 79 1332 1339 22914828
12 Perrotin A Mormino EC Madison CM Hayenga AO Jagust WJ 2012 Subjective cognition and amyloid deposition imaging: A Pittsburgh Compound B positron emission tomography study in normal elderly individuals Arch Neurol 69 223 229 22332189
13 Amariglio RE Becker JA Carmasin J Wadsworth LP Lorius N Sullivan C Maye JE Gidicsin C Pepin LC Sperling RA Johnson KA Rentz DM 2012 Subjective cognitive complaints and amyloid burden in cognitively normal older individuals Neuropsychologia 50 2880 2886 22940426
14 van Harten AC Visser PJ Pijnenburg YA Teunissen CE Blankenstein MA Scheltens P van der Flier WM 2013 Cerebrospinal fluid Aβ42 is the best predictor of clinical progression in patients with subjective complaints Alzheimers Dement 9 481 487 23232269
15 Kryscio RJ Abner EL Cooper GE Fardo DW Jicha GA Nelson PT Smith CD Van Eldik LJ Wan L Schmitt FA 2014 Self-reported memory complaints: Implications from a longitudinal cohort with autopsies Neurology 83 1359 1365 25253756
16 Visser PJ Verhey F Knol DL Scheltens P Wahlund LO Freund-Levi Y Tsolaki M Minthon L Wallin AK Hampel H Bürger K Pirttila T Soininen H Rikkert MO Verbeek MM Spiru L Blennow K 2009 Prevalence and prognostic value of CSF markers of Alzheimer’s disease pathology in patients with subjective cognitive impairment or mild cognitive impairment in the DESCRIPA study: A prospective cohort study Lancet Neurol 8 619 627 19523877
17 Sperling RA Aisen PS Beckett LA Bennett DA Craft S Fagan AM Iwatsubo T Jack CR Jr Kaye J Montine TJ Park DC Reiman EM Rowe CC Siemers E Stern Y Yaffe K Carrillo MC Thies B Morrison-Bogorad M Wagster MV Phelps CH 2011 Toward defining the preclinical stages of Alzheimer’s disease: Recommendations from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimers Dement 7 280 292 21514248
18 Comijs HC Deeg DJH Dik MG Twisk JWR Jonker C 2002 Memory complaints; the association with psycho-affective and health problems and the role of personality characteristics: A 6-year follow-up study J Affect Disord 72 157 165 12200206
19 Steffens DC Potter GG 2008 Geriatric depression and cognitive impairment Psychol Med 38 163 175 17588275
20 Caracciolo B Gatz M Xu W Marengoni A Pedersen N Fratiglioni L 2013 Relation of multimorbidity to subjective and objective cognitive impairment: A population-based twin study J Alzheimers Dis 36 275 284 23603395
21 Jessen F Wiese B Bachmann C Eifflaender-Gorfer S Haller F Kölsch H Luck T Mösch E van den Bussche H Wagner M Wollny A Zimmermann T Pentzek M Riedel-Heller SG Romberg HP Weyerer S Kaduszkiewicz H Maier W Bickel H German Study on Aging, Cognition and Dementia in Primary Care Patients Study Group 2010 Prediction of dementia by subjective memory impairment: Effects of severity and temporal association with cognitive impairment Arch Gen Psychiatry 67 414 422 20368517
22 Abdulrab K Heun R 2008 Subjective memory impairment. A review of its definitions indicates the need for a comprehensive set of standardised and validated criteria Eur Psychiatry 23 321 330 18434102
23 Jessen F Amariglio RE van Boxtel M Breteler M Ceccaldi M Chételat G Dubois B Dufouil C Ellis KA van der Flier WM Glodzik L van Harten AC deLeon MJ McHugh P Mielke MM Molinuevo JL Mosconi L Osorio RS Perrotin A Petersen RC Rabin LA Rami L Reisberg B Rentz DM Sachdev PS de la Sayette V Saykin AJ Scheltens P Shulman MB Slavin MJ Sperling RA Stewart R Uspenskaya O Vellas B Visser PJ Wagner M Subjective Cognitive Decline Initiative (SCD-I) Working, Group 2014 A conceptual framework for research on subjective cognitive decline in preclinical Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimers Dement 10 844 852 24798886
24 Cooper C Bebbington P Lindesay J Meltzer H McManus S Jenkins R Livingston G 2011 The meaning of reporting forgetfulness: A cross-sectional study of adults in the English 2007 Adult Psychiatric Morbidity Survey Age Ageing 40 711 717 21896556
25 Boone KB 2009 Fixed belief in cognitive dysfunction despite normal neuropsychological scores: Neurocognitive hypochondriasis? Clin Neuropsychol 23 1016 1036 18923966
26 Mattsson N Andreasson U Persson S Arai H Batish SD Bernardini S Bocchio-Chiavetto L Blankenstein MA Carrillo MC Chalbot S Coart E Chiasserini D Cutler N Dahlfors G Duller S Fagan AM Forlenza O Frisoni GB Galasko D Galimberti D Hampel H Handberg A Heneka MT Herskovits AZ Herukka SK Holtzman DM Humpel C Hyman BT Iqbal K Jucker M Kaeser SA Kaiser E Kapaki E Kidd D Klivenyi P Knudsen CS Kummer MP Lui J Lladó A Lewczuk P Li QX Martins R Masters C McAuliffe J Mercken M Moghekar A Molinuevo JL Montine TJ Nowatzke W O’Brien R Otto M Paraskevas GP Parnetti L Petersen RC Prvulovic D de Reus HP Rissman RA Scarpini E Stefani A Soininen H Schröder J Shaw LM Skinningsrud A Skrogstad B Spreer A Talib L Teunissen C Trojanowski JQ Tumani H Umek RM Van Broeck B Vanderstichele H Vecsei L Verbeek MM Windisch M Zhang J Zetterberg H Blennow K 2011 The Alzheimer’s Association external quality control program for cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers Alzheimers Dement 7 386 395 21784349
27 Blennow K Hampel H Weiner M Zetterberg H 2010 Cerebrospinal fluid and plasma biomarkers in Alzheimer’s disease Nat Rev Neurol 6 131 144 20157306
28 Molinuevo JL Blennow K Dubois B Engelborghs S Lewczuk P Perret-Liaudet A Teunissen CE Parnetti L 2014 The clinical use of cerebrospinal fluid biomarker testing for Alzheimer’s disease diagnosis: A consensus paper from the Alzheimer’s Biomarkers Standardization Initiative Alzheimers Dement 10 808 817 25150736
29 Jak AJ Bondi MW Delano-Wood L Wierenga C Corey-Bloom J Salmon DP Delis DC 2009 Quantification of five neuropsychological approaches to defining mild cognitive impairment Am J Geriat Psychiatry 17 368 375
30 Albert MS DeKosky ST Dickson D Dubois B Feldman HH Fox NC Gamst A Holtzman DM Jagust WJ Petersen RC Snyder PJ Carrillo MC Thies B Phelps CH 2011 The diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment due to Alzheimer’s disease: Recommendations from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimers Dement 7 270 279 21514249
31 Bondi MW Smith GE 2014 Mild cognitive impairment: A concept and diagnostic entity in need of input from neuropsychology J Int Neuropsychol Soc 20 129 134 24490866
32 Clark LR Delano-Wood L Libon DJ McDonald CR Nation DA Bangen KJ Jak AJ Au R Salmon DP Bondi MW 2013 Are empirically derived subtypes of mild cognitive impairment consistent with conventional subtypes? J Int Neuropsychol Soc 19 635 645 23552486
33 Sachdev PS Lipnicki DM Kochan NA Crawford JD Rockwood K Xiao S Li J Li X Brayne C Matthews FE Stephan BCM Lipton RB Katz MJ Ritchie K Carriére I Ancelin ML Seshadri S Au R Beiser AS Lam LCW Wong CHY Fung AWT Kim KW Han JW Kim TH Petersen RC Roberts RO Mielke MM Ganguli M Dodge HH Hughes T Anstey KJ Cherbuin N Butterworth P Ng TP Gao Q Reppermund S Brodaty H Meguro K Schupf N Manly J Stern Y Lobo A Lopez-Anton R Santabárbara J COSMIC 2013 COSMIC (Cohort Studies of Memory in an International Consortium): An international consortium to identify risk and protective factors and biomarkers of cognitive ageing and dementia in diverse ethnic and sociocultural groups BMC Neurol 13 165 172 24195705
34 Gallassi R Oppi F Poda R Scortichini S Maserati MS Marano G Sambati L 2010 Are subjective cognitive complaints a risk factor for dementia? Neurol Sci 31 327 336 20182898
35 Guarch J Marcos T Salamero M Blesa R 2004 Neuropsychological markers of dementia in patients with memory complaints Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 19 352 358 15065228
36 von Gunten A Fox NC Cipolotti L Ron MA 2000 A volumetric study of hippocampus and amygdala in depressed patients with subjective memory problems J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci 12 493 498 11083167
37 Hurt CS Burns A Brown RG Barrowclough C 2012 Why don’t older adults with subjective memory complaints seek help? Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 27 394 400 21560161
38 Go RCP Duke LW Harrell LE Cody H Bassett SS Folstein MF Albert MS Foster JL Sharrow NA Blacker D 1997 Development and validation of a Structured Telephone Interview for Dementia Assessment (STIDA): The NIMH Genetics Initiative J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol 10 161 167 9453683
39 Samieri C Proust-Lima C Glymour MM Okereke OI Amariglio RE Sperling RA Rentz DM Grodstein F 2014 Subjective cognitive concerns, episodic memory, and the APOE ε4 allele Alzheimers Dement 10 752 759 25256133
40 Gifford KA Liu D Lu Z Tripodis Y Cantwell NG Palmisano J Kowall N Jefferson AL 2014 The source of cognitive complaints differentially predicts diagnostic conversion in nondemented older adults Alzheimers Dement 10 319 327 23871264
41 Reisberg B Ferris SH 1988 Brief Cognitive Rating Scale (BCRS) Psychopharmacol Bull 24 629 636 3249764
42 Balash Y Mordechovich M Shabtai H Giladi N Gurevich T Korczyn AD 2013 Subjective memory complaints in elders: Depression, anxiety, or cognitive decline? Acta Neurol Scand 127 344 350 23215819
43 Benito-León J Mitchell AJ Vega S Bermejo-Pareja F 2010 A population-based study of cognitive function in older people with subjective memory complaints J Alzheimers Dis 22 159 170 20847410
44 Brucki SM Nitri R 2009 Subjective memory impairment in a rural population with low education in the Amazon rainforest: An exploratory study Int Psychogeriatr 21 164 171 19019263
45 Comijs HC Deeg DJH Dik MG Twisk JWR Jonker C 2002 Memory complaints; the association with psycho-affective and health problems and the role of personality characteristics: A 6-year follow-up study J Affect Disord 72 157 165 12200206
46 Pike KE Ellis KA Villemagne VL Good N Chételat G Ames D Szoeke C Laws SM Verdile G Martins RN Masters CL Rowe CC 2011 Cognition and beta-amyloid in preclinical Alzheimer’s disease: Data from the AIBL study Neuropsychologia 49 2384 2390 21529702
47 Smart CM Segalowitz SJ Mulligan BP MacDonald SWS 2014 Attention capacity and self-report of subjective cognitive decline: A P3 ERP study Biol Psychol 103 144 151 25204705
48 St John P Montgomery P 2002 Are cognitively intact seniors with subjective memory loss more likely to develop dementia? Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 17 814 820 12221654
49 Barnes LL Schneider JA Boyle PA Bienias JL Bennett DA 2006 Memory complaints are related to Alzheimer disease pathology in older persons Neurology 67 1581 1585 17101887
50 Rami L Mollica MA García-Sanchez C Saldaña J Sanchez B Sala I Valls-Pedret C Castellví M Olives J Molinuevo JL 2014 The Subjective Cognitive Decline Questionnaire (SCD-Q): A validation study J Alzheimers Dis 41 453 466 24625794
51 Knight RG McMahon J Green TJ Skeaff CM 2004 Some normative and psychometric data for the geriatric depression scale and the cognitive failures questionnaire from a sample of healthy older persons New Zeal J Psychol 33 163 170
52 Van der Linden M Wijns C Von Frenkell R Coyette F Seron X 1989 Un questionnaire d’auto-évaluation de la mémoire (qam) Brussels Belgium, Editest
53 Smith G Della Sala S Logie RH Maylor EA 2000 Prospective and retrospective memory in normal ageing and dementia: A questionnaire study Memory 8 311 321 11045239
54 Troyer AK Rich JB 2002 Psychometric properties of a new metamemory questionnaire for older adults Gerontology 57 19 27
55 Broadbent DE Cooper PF FitzGerald P Parkes KR 1982 The Cognitive Failures Questionnaire (CFQ) and its correlates Br J Clin Psychology 21 1 16
56 Derouesné C Dealberto MJ Boyer P Lubin S Sauron B Piette F Kohler F Alpérovitch A 1993 Empirical evaluation of the ‘Cognitive Difficulties Scale’ for assessment of memory complaints in general practice: A study of 1628 cognitively normal subjects aged 45–75 years Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 8 599 607
57 Crook THE Feher EP Larrabee GJ 1992 Assessment of memory complaint in age-associated memory impairment: The MAC-Q Int Psychogeriatr 4 165 176 1477304
58 McNair D Kahn RJ 1983 Self-assessment of cognitive deficits Assessment in Geriatric Psychopharmacology Crook T Ferris S Bartus R Mark Powley Associates Inc CT 137 143
59 Harwood D Barker W Ownby R Duara R 1998 Memory complaints in the elderly: A comparative analysis of informant and subjects reports among Hispanics and white Non-Hispanics Clin Gerontologist 18 56 60
60 Gilewski MJ Zelinski EM Schaie KW 1990 The memory functioning questionnaire for assessment of memory complaints in adulthood and old age Psychol Aging 5 482 490 2278670
61 Jessen F Wolfsgruber S Wiese B Bickel H Mösch E Kaduszkiewicz H Pentzek M Riedel-Heller SG Luck T Fuchs A Weyerer S Werle J van den Bussche H Scherer M Maier W Wagner M German Study on Aging, Cognition and Dementia in Primary Care Patients 2014 AD dementia risk in late MCI, in early MCI, and in subjective memory impairment Alzheimers Dement 10 76 83 23375567
62 Crawford JR Henry JD Ward AL Blake J 2006 The Prospective and Retrospective Memory Questionnaire (PRMQ): Latent structure, normative data and discrepancy analysis for proxy-ratings Br J Clin Psychol 45 83 104 16480568
63 Newson RS Kemps EB 2006 The nature of subjective cognitive complaints of older adults Int J Aging Hum Dev 63 139 151 17137031
64 Vestergren P Rönnlund M Nyberg L Nilsson LG 2011 Development of the Cognitive Dysfunction Questionnaire (CDQ) in a population based sample Scand J Psychol 52 218 228 21265859
65 Dixon RA Hultsch DF Hertzog C 1988 The Metamemory in Adulthood (MIA) Questionnaire Psychopharmacol Bull 24 671 688 3249770
66 Chau LT Lee JB Fleming J Roche N Shum D 2007 Reliability and normative data for the Comprehensive Assessment of Prospective Memory (CAPM) Neuropsychol Rehabil 17 707 722 17852758
67 Rabin LA Saykin AJ Wishart HA Nutter-Upham KE Flashman LA Pare N Santulli RB 2007 The Memory and Aging Telephone Screen: Development and preliminary validation Alzheimers Dement 3 109 121 19595923
68 Farias ST Mungas D Reed BR Cahn-Weiner D Jagust W Baynes K DeCarli C 2008 The measurement of everyday cognition (ECog): Scale development and psychometric properties Neuropsychology 22 531 544 18590364
69 Kliegel M Zimprich D 2005 Predictors of cognitive complaints in older adults: A mixture regression approach Eur J Ageing 2 13 23
70 Potter GG Hartman M 2006 Response inhibition and everyday memory complaints in older adult women Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 21 1115 1120 16955426
71 Rabin LA Wang C Katz MJ Derby CA Buschke H Lipton RB 2012 Predicting Alzheimer’s disease: Neuropsychological tests, self-reports, and informant reports of cognitive difficulties J Am Geriatr Soc 60 1128 1134 22690986
72 Mascherek A Zimprich D Rupprecht R Lang FR 2011 What do cognitive complaints in a sample of memory clinic outpatients reflect? GeroPsych 24 187 195
73 Singh-Manoux A Dugravot A Ankri J Nabi H Berr C Goldberg M Zins M Kivimaki M Elbaz A 2014 Subjective cognitive complaints and mortality: Does the type of complaint matter? J Psychiatr Res 48 73 78 24161314
74 Snitz BE Morrow LA Rodriguez EG Huber KA Saxton JA 2008 Subjective memory complaints and concurrent memory performance in older patients of primary care providers J Int Neuropsychol Soc 14 1004 1013 18954480
75 Stewart R Dufouil C Godin O Ritchie K Maillard P Delcroix N Crivello F Mazoyer B Tzourio C 2008 Neuroimaging correlates of subjective memory deficits in a community population Neurology 70 1601 1607 18443310
76 Stewart R Godin O Crivello F Maillard P Mazoyer B Tzourio C Dufouil C 2011 Longitudinal neuroimaging correlates of subjective memory impairment: 4-year prospective community study Br J Psychiatry 198 199 205 21357878
77 Wang L van Belle G Crane PK Kukull WA Bowen JD McCormick WC Larson EB 2004 Subjective memory deterioration and future dementia in people aged 65 and older J Am Geriatr Soc 52 2045 2051 15571540
78 Lezak MD Howieson DB Bigler ED Tranel D 2012 Neuropsychological Assessment 5 Oxford University Press Oxford, UK
79 Schwarz N 1999 Self-reports: How the questions shape the answers Am Psychol 54 93 105
80 Schwarz N Oyserman D 2001 Asking questions about behavior: Cognition, communication, and questionnaire construction Am J Eval 22 127 160
81 Streiner DL Norman GR 2008 Health Measurement Scales: A Practical Guide to Their Development and Use 4 Oxford University Press Oxford, UK
82 Jonker C Geerlings MI Schmand B 2000 Are memory complaints predictive for dementia? A review of clinical and population-based studies Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 15 983 991 11113976
83 van Oijen M de Jong F Hofman A Koudstaal P Breteler M 2007 Subjective memory complaints, education, and risk of Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimer Dement 3 92 97
84 Dillman DA Smyth JD Christian LM 2009 Internet, Mail, and Mix-Mode Surveys: The Tailored Design Method John Wiley and Sons, Inc Hoboken, NJ
85 Martyr A Nelis SM Clare L 2014 Predictors of perceived functional ability in early-stage dementia: Self-ratings, informant ratings and discrepancy scores Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 29 852 862 24753076
86 Reisberg B Gauthier S 2008 Current evidence for subjective cognitive impairment (SCI) as the pre-mild cognitive impairment (MCI) stage of subsequently manifest Alzheimer’s disease Int Psychogeriatr 20 1 16 18072981
87 Reisberg B Prichep L Mosconi L John ER Glodzik-Sobanska L Boksay I Monteiro I Torossian C Vedvyas A Ashraf N Jamil IA deLeon MJ 2008 The pre-mild cognitive impairment, subjective cognitive impairment stage of Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimers Dement 4 S98 108 18632010
88 Blacker D Lee H Muzikansky A Martin EC Tanzi R McArdle JJ Moss M Albert M 2007 Neuropsychological measures in normal individuals that predict subsequent cognitive decline Arch Neurol 64 862 871 17562935
89 Amariglio RE Townsend MK Grodstein F Sperling RA Rentz DM 2011 Specific subjective memory complaints in older persons may indicate poor cognitive function J Am Geriatr Soc 59 1612 1617 21919893
90 Snitz BE Yu L Crane PK Chang CC Hughes TF Ganguli M 2012 Subjective cognitive complaints of older adults at the population level: An item response theory analysis Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 26 344 351 22193355
91 Alzheimer’s Association International Conference 2014 http://www.alzheimers.org.uk/site/scripts/documentsinfo.php?documentID=2723&amp;pageNumber=7, Last updated 2015 Accessed on January 21, 2015
92 Slavin MJ Brodaty H Kochan NA Crawford JD Trollor JN Draper B Sachdev PS 2010 Prevalence and predictors of “subjective cognitive complaints” in the Sydney Memory and Ageing Study Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 18 701 710 21491631
93 Cargin JW Collie A Masters C Maruff P 2008 The nature of cognitive complaints in healthy older adults with and without objective memory decline J Clin Exp Neuropsychol 30 245 257 18938676
94 Dux MC Woodard JL Calamari JE Messina M Arora S Chik H Pontarelli N 2008 The moderating role of negative affect on objective verbal memory performance and subjective memory complaints in healthy older adults J Int Neuropsychol Soc 14 327 336 18282330
95 Comijs HC Deeg DJH Dik MG Twisk JW Jonker C 2002 Memory complaints: The association with psychoaffective and health problems and the role of personality characteristics: A 6-year follow-up study J Affect Disord 72 157 164 12200206
96 Edmonds EC Delano-Wood L Galasko DR Salmon DP Bondi MW Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 2014 Subjective cognitive complaints contribute to misdiagnosis of mild cognitive impairment J Int Neuropsychol Soc 20 836 847 25156329
97 de Vet HCW Terwee CB Mokkink LB Knol DL 2001 Measurement in Medicine Cambridge University Press NY
98 Beaton DE Bombardier C Guillemin F Marcos BF 2001 Guidelines for the process of cross-cultural adaptation of self-report measures Spine 25 3186 3191 11124735
99 Ellis KA Bush AI Darby D De Fazio D Foser J Hudson P Lautenschlager NT Lenzo N Martins RN Maruff P Masters C Milner A Pike K Rowe C Savage G Szoeke C Taddei K Villemagne V Woodward M Ames D AIBL Research Group 2009 The Australian Imaging, Biomarkers and Lifestyle (AIBL) study of aging: Methodology and baseline characteristics of 1112 individuals recruited for a longitudinal study of Alzheimer’s disease Int Psychogeriatr 21 672 687 19470201
100 Saykin AJ 1992 Neurobehavioral Function and Activities of Daily Living Rating Scale (NBFADL-63 item version) Dartmouth Medical School
101 Jessen F Wiese B Cvetanovska G Fuchs A Kaduszkiewicz H Kölsch H Luck T Mösch E Pentzek M Riedel-Heller SG Werle J Weyerer S Zimmermann T Maier W Bickel H 2007 Patterns of subjective memory impairment in the elderly: Association with memory performance Psychol Med 37 1753 1762 17623488
102 Mielke MM Wiste HJ Weigand SD Knopman DS Lowe VJ Roberts RO Geda YE Swenson-Dravis DM Boeve BF Senjem ML Vemuri P Petersen RC Jack CR Jr 2012 Indicators of amyloid burden in a population-based study of cognitively normal elderly Neurology 79 1570 1577 22972644
103 Roth RM Isquith PK Gioia GA 2005 Behavioral Rating Inventory of Executive Function—Adult version Psychological Assessment Resources, Inc Lutz, FL
104 Morris JC Heyman A Mohs RC Hughes JP van Belle G Fillenbaum G Mellits ED Clark C 1989 The Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer’s Disease (CERAD) Part I. Clinical and neuropsychological assessment of Alzheimer’s disease Neurology 39 1159 1159 2771064
105 Yesavage JA Brink TL Rose TL Lum O Huang V Adey M Leirer VO 1983 Development and validation of a geriatric depression screening scale: A preliminary report J Psychiatr Res 17 37 49 7183759
106 Sheikh JA Yesavage JA 1986 Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS): Recent findings and development of a shorter version Clinical Gerontology: A Guide to Assessment and Intervention Brink TL Howarth Press NY 165 173
107 Derby CA Burns LC Wang C Katz MJ Zimmerman ME L’italien G Guo Z Berman RM Lipton RB 2013 Screening for predementia AD: time-dependent operating characteristics of episodic memory tests Neurology 80 1307 1314 23468542
108 Jorm AF 1994 A short form of the Informant Questionnaire on Cognitive Decline in the Elderly (IQCODE): Development and cross-validation Psychol Med 24 145 153 8208879
109 Luck T Luppa M Briel S Matschinger H König HH Bleich S Villringer A Angermeyer MC Riedel-Heller SG 2010 Mild cognitive impairment: Incidence and risk factors: Results of the Leipzig Longitudinal Study of the Aged J Am Geriatr Soc 58 1903 1910 20840461
110 Riedel-Heller SG Matschinger H Schork A Angermeyer MC 1999 Do memory complaints indicate the presence of cognitive impairment? Results of a field study Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci 249 197 204 10449595
111 Lozoya-Delgado P Ruiz-Sanchez de Leon JM Pedrero-Perez EJ 2012 Validación de un cuestionario de quejas cognitivas para adultos jóvenes: Relación entre las quejas subjetivas de memoria, la sintomatología prefrontal y el estrés percibido Rev Neurol 54 137 150 22278890
112 Ganguli M Chang C-CH Snitz BE Saxton JA Vanderbilt J Lee C-W 2010 Prevalence of mild cognitive impairment by multiple classifications: The Monongahela-Youghiogheny Healthy Aging Team (MYHAT) project Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 18 674 683 20220597
113 Aalten P Ramakers IHGB Biessels GJ de Deyn PP Koek HL OldeRikkert MGM Oleksik AM Richard E Smits LL van Swieten JC Teune LK van der Lugt A Barkhof F Teunissen CE Rozendaal N Verhey FRJ van der Flier WM 2014 The Dutch Parelsnoer Institute - Neurodegenerative diseases; methods, design and baseline results BMC Neuro 14 254
114 Mahieux F Onen F Berr C Volteau M Habert MO Legrain S Dubois B 2009 Early detection of patients in the pre demented stage of Alzheimer’s disease: The Pre-Al Study J Nutr Health Aging 13 21 26 19151903
115 Jorm AF Christensen H Korten AE Jacomb PA Henderson AS 2001 Memory complaints as a precursor of memory impairment in older people: A longitudinal analysis over 7–8 years Psychol Med 31 441 449 11305852
116 Squire LR Wetzel CD Slater PC 1979 Memory complaint after electroconvulsive therapy: Assessment with a new self-rating instrument Biol Psychiatr 14 791 801
117 Hill NL Mogle JM Munoz E Wion R Colancecco EM 2015 Assessment of subjective cognitive impairment among older adults J Gerontol Nurs 41 28 35 25800031
118 Robinson MD Clore GL 2002 Belief and feeling: Evidence for an accessibility model of emotional self-report Psychol Bull 128 934 960 12405138
