LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9814863
21942
J Alzheimers Dis
J. Alzheimers Dis.
Journal of Alzheimer's disease : JAD
1387-2877
1875-8908

27567878
5793225
10.3233/JAD-160612
NIHMS937329
Article
Amyloid Beta and Phosphorylated Tau Accumulations Cause Abnormalities at Synapses of Alzheimer’s disease Neurons
Rajmohan Ravi 1*
Reddy P. Hemachandra 12345
1 Department of Pharmacology and Neuroscience, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, Lubbock, TX
2 Garrison Institute on Aging, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, Lubbock, TX
3 Cell Biology &amp; Biochemistry, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, Lubbock, TX
4 Neurology, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, Lubbock, TX
5 Speech, Language and Hearing Sciences, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, Lubbock, TX
* Address correspondence to ravi.rajmohan@ttuhsc.edu or (806)743-2556, 3601 4th st. Lubbock, TX 74930
26 1 2018
2017
01 2 2018
57 4 975999
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Amyloid Beta (Aβ) and hyperphosphorylated tau are hallmark lesions of Alzheimer disease (AD). However, the loss of synapses and dysfunctions of neurotransmission are more directly tied to disease severity. The role of these lesions in the pathoetiological progression of the disease remains contested. Biochemical, cellular, molecular and pathological studies provided several lines of evidence and improved our understanding of how amyloid beta and hyperphosphorylated tau accumulation may directly harm synapses and alter neurotransmission. In-vitro evidence suggests that amyloid beta and hyperphosphorylated tau have both direct and indirect cytotoxic effects that affect neurotransmission, axonal transport, signaling cascades, organelle function, and immune response in ways that lead to synaptic loss and dysfunctions in neurotransmitter release. Observations in preclinical models and autopsy studies support these findings, suggesting that while the pathoetiology of positive lesions remains elusive, their removal may reduce disease severity and progression. The purpose of this article is to highlight the need for further investigation of the role of tau in disease progression and its interactions with Aβ and neurotransmitters alike.

Amyloid
tau
synapse
neurotransmitters

Introduction

Alzheimer disease (AD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder marked by the accumulation of beta-amyloid (Aβ) plaques and hyperphosphorylated tau tangles. Although these positive lesions receive a great deal of attention, the loss of neuronal synapses is the best correlate of cognitive decline in patients with AD [1–7]. Deterioration of synapses begins at the level of dendritic spines [8–10]. As such, a great deal of focus has been placed on attempts to understand the mechanisms underlying the structural and functional plasticity of dendritic spines and synapses in AD [11].

Alterations of neurons, synapses, and neurotransmission are common observations in AD and are therefore hypothesized to play a major role in its progression [11–12]. From these studies come the observation that phosphorylated tau has been mislocalized to the postsynaptic compartment [11]. It is important to note, however, that synaptic and dendritic spine pathology is common amongst several neurodegenerative diseases and may represent the same pathogenic mechanisms across them all [11]. In the following review, we will focus on findings that are primarily unique to AD and will highlight significant areas of overlap with other neurodegenerative diseases that may be known.

Neurotransmitter abnormalities in Alzheimer’s disease

Acetylcholine

In-depth coverage of neurotransmitter changes in AD has previously been reported [13–14]. Death of cholinergic neurons was amongst the first findings in AD pathology. Given their known physiological roles, combined with the symptomology of AD, loss of cholinergic neurons was originally postulated as the cause of the disease and was dubbed “the cholinergic hypothesis” [15]. Evidence for this hypothesis came from several sources. Neuronal loss in areas with high cholinergic neuron populations, such as the nucleus Basalis of Meynert (nBM), the hippocampus and cortical areas, is well documented and consistent [16–20]. Further cholinergic system dysfunctions include a decrease in acetylcholine (ACh) synthesis, decreased choline acetyltransferase (ChAT) activity, reduced choline uptake, [21] and altered levels of acetylcholine receptors (AChRs) [22]. Additionally, severe deficits of presynaptic cholinergic markers had been noted in the cerebral cortex of patients with early-onset AD since the late 1970’s [16, 23–25]. Even in the earliest stages of AD as well as its common precursor mild cognitive impairment (MCI) decreased trophic responses in nBM neurons are consistently observed [26]. To date, cholinergic deficits are still the strongest neurochemical correlate of dementia severity in AD [1, 27–30].

However, recent studies no longer support that cholinergic depletion is solely responsible for causing AD. PET-labeled acetylcholinesterase (AChE) ligands show only mild loss of activity in patients with MCI and early stage AD [20, 31] and autopsies show no change in ChAT activity in a number of brain regions studied in these groups [20, 32] nor in the number of ChAT-positive cells in MCI patients [33]. Further support comes from the lack of efficacy of acetylcholinesterase inhibitors (AChEIs) in clinical trials [34, 35] and the finding that cholinergic depletion does not result in severe memory deficits in rats [30. 36]. Finally, basal forebrain cholinergic cell degeneration is common in many neurodegenerative disorders, including Parkinson’s disease [37–39], Down-syndrome (DS), progressive supranuclear palsy, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease [40], Korsakoff’s syndrome [41–43], and traumatic brain injury [44–45]. This led Craig, Hong, and McDonald to propose that although ACh depletion is not the cause of AD, it leads to a reduction in the ability of the brain to compensate for secondary insults. In their model, this depletion would reduce the ability of the brain to compensate for the accumulation of risk factors that occur with increasing frequency during the aging process [46]. Support for this model can be found in literature on rodents, nonhuman, and human primate models [46]. Detailed information about cholinergic dysfunctions in AD can be found elsewhere [47].

NMDA

Similar to the cholinergic deficits observed in AD, several lines of evidence suggest a role for the presynaptic N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) localization in reshaping synaptic transmission by regulating presynaptic glutamate release [48]. A combination of increased presynaptic glutamate release and decreased reuptake is believed to result in an excess of extracellular glutamate, which in turn leads to a tonic activation of these receptors [49]. This view is further supported by a study by Bell et al., which showed that MCI subjects displayed a paradoxical elevation in glutamatergic presynaptic bouton density, similar to that observed in the cholinergic system, which then depletes and drops with disease progression [50]. These findings further demonstrated that dystrophic neurite generation and reduced presynaptic bouton densities detrimentally influenced neurotransmission and cognitive function in later stages of AD [50]. More information on NDMA-based synaptic dysfunction is given in a review article by Mota and colleagues [51].

GABA

Disruption of neurotransmission in AD is not limited to excitatory pathways. Several studies indicate dysfunctions in GABAergic signaling, including results from autopsy, neuroimaging, and CNS GABA marker studies [52]. Normally, GABA is released by neurons in response to glutamate excitotoxicity [53–54] and while chronic growth factor deprivation causes GABA transmission to change from an inhibitory to an excitatory stimulus [55], the significance of this transition is not entirely clear [56].

The A class receptors (GABAARs) are crucially involved in synaptic plasticity and help to ensure that NMDARs are activated mainly during high-frequency synaptic transmission [57]. Additionally, GABAAR agonists protect neurons in culture against the neurotoxicity of Aβ and of various glutamate receptor agonists [58–60]. Because of this, stimulating GABAergic transmission has been attempted to treat behavioral and psychological dysfunctions in AD [52, 61], but these efforts are limited due to issues of tolerance after long-term use and side effects [52; 62]. Detailed information on GABA’s role in AD was given by Paula-Lima and colleagues [63].

Serotonin

Similar to GABA, loss of serotonergic activity also appears to correlate with behavioral and psychological dysfunctions, most notably the presence of neuropsychiatric symptoms (NPS) [64], which, combined with several recent reports that suggest selective and early involvement of the dorsal raphe nucleus (DRN), in the pathogenesis of AD, led Simic et al. [64] to propose a novel pathogenic scheme of AD progression. The role of serotonin receptors in AD gained prominence when observation suggested the density of 5-HT positive neurons significantly decline in AD brains [65] and that areas of the brain concerned with learning and memory show high concentrations of these receptors [66–67]. Further support came from imaging studies [68–71] and autopsies [72–78] that showed reduced serotonin levels, receptors, reuptake sites, and metabolites in the frontal and temporal areas [79]. However, the interaction of serotonin in the nervous system is complicated because 5-HT receptors co-localize on glutamatergic, cholinergic and GABAergic neurons, suggesting the serotoninergic system may regulate a variety of other neurotransmitter systems [67]. Detailed information on alteration to serotonin in AD was given in articles by Rodriguez and colleagues [80].

Dopamine

Unlike serotonin, dopamine’s involvement in AD is substantially more limited, but is still informative as it also relates to NPS. While autopsy studies show that the nigrostriatal system remains relatively intact [81], the mesolimbic system is selectively affected [82]. Neuroimaging studies confirm relative sparing of striatal dopamine metabolism and transporters. Additionally, several studies have reported that dysfunction within corticostriatal dopaminergic circuits is associated with NPS in AD. Based on the available data, greater overall behavioral disturbance is associated with lower striatal D2 receptors while higher striatal D2 receptors is associated with delusions and wandering behavior and lower dopamine transporters are associated with apathy [79].

Norepinephrine

Indeed, nearly every major neurotransmitter system is affected to some degree in AD. Perhaps the best example of a system that has been overlooked is the noradrenergic system. Although much of the histopathology of AD was documented since Alzheimer’s first case in 1906, it was not until over 100 years later that the Braak and Del Tredici [83] determined that the locus coeruleus (LC), not the entorhinal hippocampal cortex, is the first area of the brain to exhibit AD pathology. This area is the primary source of norepinephrine (NE), a neurotransmitter that has been implicated in systems of learning, attention, and wakefulness [84]. Additionally, recent data from basic research in animal models of AD indicate that loss of NE incites a neurotoxic proinflammatory condition, reduces Aβ clearance, and negatively impacts cognition [85]. Remarkably, restoration of NE reverses these effects and slows neurodegeneration in animal models, raising the possibility that treatments which increase NE transmission may have the potential to delay or reverse AD-related pathology [85].

Amyloid Beta

Physiological roles of Amyloid Precursor Protein

Now that we have some understanding of the negative lesions of AD (i.e. synaptic loss and dysfunctions of neurotransmission), we will turn our attention to the positive lesions, Aβ and hyperphosphorylated tau. Understanding the physiological roles of their precursor proteins has the potential to lead us to a greater understanding of how their aberrant products may influence the pathology of AD. Full-length amyloid precursor protein (APP) has been shown to promote synaptic activity, synapse formation, and dendritic spine formation, which suggests APP has a pivotal role in learning and memory [86]. This leads to some debate as to whether the deficiency of the functional protein or accumulation of the abnormal form is more important for the progression of the disease. However, a great deal of evidence exists implicating that aberrant proteins have pathological consequences of their own, as we shall discuss below.

Amyloid-based pathology

Aβ is created by the abnormal cleavage of APP by β- and γ-secretases [87–89]. Suspicion of its consequences may date back as far as Alzheimer’s first report [90], but strong support for the pathogenic role first arose from genetic findings in familial AD (FAD) cases, which displayed unusually high Aβ levels and identical clinical manifestations to the sporadic form, but had an earlier onset [89, 91]. A significant portion of these cases carried either APP or presenilin (PS) mutations, suggesting that dysregulation of their normal functions may lead to Aβ formation [89, 91]. These mutations were in turn the basis for several important transgenic mouse models that have been used to study AD and to evaluate potential therapeutic interventions [92–94]. These findings led to the formulation of the “amyloid hypothesis” [95], which proposed that beta amyloid accumulation is responsible for AD-related pathology, including the initiation of neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs), and eventual neuronal death [96]. However, more recent findings suggest soluble Aβ oligomers disrupt glutamatergic synaptic function, which in turn leads to the characteristic cognitive deficits [97–103]. More information on Aβ pathology is available elsewhere [104–105].

Aβ-induced memory impairment

Compelling evidence of Aβ being a causative factor in AD comes from studies in which synthetic Aβ microinjection into the brains of animal models led to impaired working memory in a manner consistent with the memory deficits seen in AD patients [106–108]. A series of studies utilizing synthetic, natural, and human AD-derived Aβ have indicated that soluble Aβ oligomers are both necessary and sufficient to disrupt normal learning and memory function [109–111]. At the two extremes of aggregation, monomers and fibrils appear to act in vivo both as sources and sinks of certain metastable conformations that disrupt synaptic plasticity [112].

Synaptic damage due to beta amyloid accumulations at the synaptic cleft

However, one difficulty with the original amyloid hypothesis is that the temporal patterns of amyloid deposits do not correlate well with the cognitive deficits in affected patients [113]. Furthermore, synaptic plasticity is impaired before Aβ deposits are detected in mouse models of AD [98, 114]. This may be explained by the existence of intraneuronal accumulations of Aβ that have been reported in transgenic mouse models of AD as well as in humans with AD and DS [115–116]. These accumulations correlate with the onset of synaptic and behavioral abnormalities in transgenic models [117–120] and marked intraneuronal accumulation was associated with early ultrastructural pathology, especially within distal processes and synaptic compartments [121].

Indeed, soluble oligomers of Aβ have a direct synaptotoxic effect at nanomolar concentrations [122]. In a mouse model of AD, the vicinity of amyloid plaques was characterized by highly dysmorphic neurites and spine turnover [123–124] causing a net loss of spines. Continuous overproduction of Aβ at dendrites or axons acts locally to reduce the number and plasticity of synapses [125–126]. In hippocampal culture, soluble Aβ produced abnormalities in spine composition, shape, and abundance that strongly support the hypothesis that soluble Aβ initiates toxic mechanisms in AD brains that account for synaptic damage [127]. Continued exposure to Aβ caused abnormal spine morphology and a significant decrease in spine density [127]. In a direct investigation of the acute effects of extracellular and intracellular Aβ42 peptides on synaptic transmission, Moreno et al. [128] noticed inhibition of synaptic transmission by nanomolar concentrations of intracellular oligomeric Aβ42, but not extracellular oligomeric Aβ42 or oligomeric Aβ40. Thus, local dendritic and axonal abnormalities associated with amyloid deposits lead to loss of synapses and the destruction of dendrites and axons in AD [124, 129]. Parihar and Brewer [130] have provided detailed on the synaptotoxic effects of Aβ in AD.

Additionally, while numerous reports indicate that Aβ causes impaired synaptic plasticity, there are paradoxical lines of evidence from both in vitro and in vivo studies that have shown that increased synaptic activity may induce Aβ secretion [102, 131–132]. This suggests that although excessive production of Aβ is synaptotoxic, lower concentrations may serve as a physiological molecule that regulates normal synaptic plasticity and memory [105]. In the following sections we will discuss how Aβ may mediate synaptic damage. A summary schematic is provided in figure 1.

Signaling Partners of Aβ

Although there is no consensus on the precise molecular pathways involved for Aβ oligomer-induced synaptic deficits a number of intracellular signaling pathways have been implicated [104]. Attempts to identify signaling partners, both those that directly bind to Aβ and those affected by its presence, offer great insights into how Aβ-induced synaptotoxicity may occur. We therefore turn our attention to some of the most promising candidates of such interactions described herein.

Cellular prion protein (PrPC)

We start with Cellular prion protein (PrPC) because the loss of synaptic markers in APP/ Presenilin 1 (PS1) mice is fully dependent on it [133] and treatment of aged APP/PS1 mice with anti-PrPC antibodies allows a recovery of depleted synaptic density in the dentate gyrus [134]. In vitro studies have described dendritic spine loss after acute Aβ oligomer exposure and imaging of spines continuously over 6h shows that Aβ oligomer treatment of dissociated hippocampal neurons induces a 10–15% loss of spines. On the other hand, PRioN Protein knockout (Prnp−/−) cultures are fully protected [135]. Further support that PrPC mediates Aβ oligomer effects on spine composition, morphology and density comes from the observation that PrPC colocalizes to synapses and is present in the postsynaptic density [135–136] similar to Aβ [127, 137–138]. See [139] for more information on PrPC’s role in AD.

Amyloid Precursor Protein (APP)

Next, we consider APP because a direct interaction between Aβ fibrils and the ectodomain of APP has been demonstrated using a variety of experimental conditions [140–142]. In contrast with fibrillar Aβ, monomeric Aβ peptide does not bind APP [140–142], suggesting that conversion of monomeric Aβ into toxic amyloid fibrils is required for binding to APP. The potential pathologic relevance of these observations is suggested by reports showing accumulation of APP at the proximity of fibrillar neuritic Aβ plaques in AD brains [143]. It is also likely that toxic Aβ assemblies other than fibrils could also bind APP including dimers, oligomers, or protofibrils. Bignante and colleagues [144] have provided detailed information on APP’s normal functioning in humans.

Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR)

Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) is an evolutionarily conserved serine/threonine protein kinase that plays an essential role in the control of mRNA translation and cell growth [145–147]. While it may be best known for its association with cancer biology, numerous reports have firmly established a pivotal role of mTOR in central nervous system function, including its effects on the consolidation of long-term memory [148–157]. Decreased mTOR signaling has been reported in the brains of an APP-PS1 AD transgenic mouse model [158], which is consistent with subsequent findings that rapamycin, a specific inhibitor of mTORC1, exacerbates neurotoxicity of Aβ [159]. More information on mTOR’s role in AD was given in a review article by Ma and Klann [105].

Receptor for Advanced Glycation End products (RAGE)

Mounting evidence suggests that the damage caused by Aβ includes immune-mediated responses, which may lead to additional neuronal injury [160]. This will be discussed in greater detail in section 2.1.6 “Aβ-induced immune responses”. Receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE), is an immunoglobulin-like cell surface receptor that is important for Aβ-mediated cellular perturbation relevant to the pathogenesis of AD [160]. The interaction of RAGE with Aβ in neurons, microglia, and vascular cells accelerates and amplifies deleterious effects on neuronal and synaptic function in vitro [160–163] and in animal models [164–168] including cognitive deficits [165]. Blockade of RAGE significantly attenuates neuronal and synaptic injury [164–166].

Fyn

In addition to immune-response reactions, Aβ may interfere with the function of synaptic receptors by synergizing with Fyn, which induces aberrant increases in neuronal activity, triggering inhibitory mechanisms that limit network overexcitation but that may also diminish the capacity for synaptic plasticity [104]. Fyn increases NMDA receptor-mediated currents, modulates release of calcium from intracellular stores, and enhances synaptic transmission [169–172]. Overexpression of Fyn and Aβ in FYN/hAPP–J9 double-transgenic mice results in severe neuronal and cognitive impairments similar to those otherwise seen only in hAPP mice with much higher levels of Aβ production (hAPP-J20 mice) [173–176]. Conversely, ablation of Fyn prevents several aspects of Aβ-induced neurotoxicity [97, 174].

Glycogen synthase kinase-3β (GSK3β)

Dysregulation of Glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK3β) activity has been observed in both sporadic and FAD and increasing evidence suggests that the relationship between GSK3β and Aβ is bidirectional [105]. For example, high GSK3β activity may interfere with normal APP processing via modulation of the function of secretases, leading to Aβ accumulation [177–179]. Suppression of GSK3β activity by either pharmacological inhibitors or genetic manipulations results in abolishment of Aβ production and reducing plaque pathology in the brains of AD transgenic mice [178, 180]. Conversely, Aβ can activate GSK3β through dephosporylation, which is linked to downregulation of the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway [181–186]. GSK3β also has been proposed to play an important role in synaptic plasticity [184, 186] and evidence is accumulating to suggest the therapeutic potential of GSK3β inhibition for AD-related synaptic dysfunction based on rescue of long term potentiation (LTP) in the hippocampus of an AD transgenic mouse by two structurally distinct GSK3β antagonists [187] and pretreatment of rat brain slices with a specific GSK3β inhibitor [181].

Aβ effects on Long-term potentiation and depression (LTP/LTD)

A plethora of studies have examined the effects of Aβ on LTP in vitro and in vivo. In most cases, LTP can be blocked by either direct exogenous Aβ application (at a concentration of 100 nM or above for synthetic Aβ), or in AD transgenic mouse models in which an abnormally high level of Aβ is present [188]. Of note, multiple lines of evidence suggest that there is an early, pre-plaque phase when learning and memory deficits are not detected in AD transgenic mice, but LTP is already impaired [117, 187, 189]. These observations are in line with the hypothesis that soluble Aβ oligomers are synaptotoxic [190, 191].

Compared to LTP, few studies have been conducted to examine the effects of Aβ on long-term depression (LTD) [192–194]. It was reported that LTD in vivo induced by low-frequency stimulation (LFS) can be facilitated by injection of different forms of synthetic Aβ [195, 196]. Additional studies on LTD in vitro have confirmed that LFS-induced LTD is enhanced by Aβ from various sources, including synthetic, cell culture, and human AD brains extracts [111, 197]. It should also be noted that LTD induced by stronger LFS protocol is not altered by Aβ [198–199].

Significant parallels were found between Aβ-induced synaptic changes and LTD suggesting that Aβ affects synaptic function and dendritic spine morphology through LTD-related signaling mechanisms [200]. Overexpression of Aβ resulted in decreased spine density and postsynaptic AMPA receptor number. Notably, expression of a mutant form of AMPA receptor that resists LTD-driven endocytosis blocked the morphological effects and synaptic depression induced by Aβ therefore implicating the endocytosis of AMPA receptors as a major mechanism through which Aβ causes synaptic dysfunction [200]. Aβ’s effects on LTP/LTD may therefore occur through interaction with calcium channel activity [201–202] or glutamate receptor dependent signaling pathways [125, 197, and 200].

Aβ effects on organelle function

Mitochondria

The properties of mitochondrial membranes are essential to their ability to transport metabolites and maintain the necessary conditions for oxidative phosphorylation. Mitochondrial dysfunction is a common finding in AD postmortem brains [203–208] and Aβ treated cell [209–218], suggesting a role for loss of energy production and generation of radical oxygen species (ROS) in the progression of the disease. Voltage-dependent anion channel proteins (VDACs) are ubiquitously located in the mitochondrial outer membrane and are thought to be the primary means for metabolite diffusion between the mitochondria and the cytosol [219–222]. Aβ interacts with VDAC1, blocking the mitochondrial permeability transition pore complex (MTP) pores, which stops transport of mitochondrial proteins from the nucleus leading to defective oxidative phosphorylation, which may in turn induce an increase in free radical production [223].

Additionally, Aβ has been suspected of affecting NMDAR activity by binding to intracellular mitochondrial cyclophilin D (CypD) or mitochondrial Aβ alcohol dehydrogenase (ABAD), as well as other targets [130]. Synaptic terminals from aged rats were shown to be more sensitive to Aβ toxicity, evidencing an age-related decline in mitochondrial activity in both resting and depolarized conditions. In addition, ultrastructural changes including increased mitochondrial size and a significant reduction of synaptic vesicle contents were also observed in presynaptic nerve endings from rat hippocampi exposed to Aβ at different ages [224].

It is likely that in pathological situations, unusually high levels of ROS are produced constantly, overwhelming the ability of the endogenous antioxidants, which then results in impairments in synaptic function. For example, AD mutant mice with decreased mitochondrial superoxide dismutase (SOD-2) expression exhibit elevated levels of brain Aβ and accelerated cognitive dysfunction [225–226]. Conversely, it has been shown that overexpression of SOD-2 in two different AD mouse models is capable of reducing brain Aβ deposition and preventing memory deficits [227–228].

More recently, it was demonstrated using both pharmacological and genetic approaches that AD-associated synaptic plasticity impairments can be prevented and reversed by targeting ROS derived from mitochondrial, but not NADPH oxidase [229]. An interesting implication that arises from these studies is that ROS play different roles in synaptic plasticity, depending either on their subcellular localization or on the age of the animals being studied [105, 230–232].

Alternatively, Aβ has been shown to interact with dynamin-related protein 1 (Drp1), which leads to increased mitochondrial fission and decreased fusion that ultimately results in increased mitochondrial fragmentation [233]. Mitochondrial fragmentation may lead to accelerated ROS production and we can therefore see that Aβ has multiple effects on mitochondria that may occur simultaneously, leading to synaptic damage and neuronal loss.

The Endoplasmic Reticulum and Golgi

Likewise, microarray analyses demonstrated that exposure of SN56.B5.G4 cells to oligomeric β-amyloid (1–42) affected the expression level of a number of genes that were not influenced by non-specific oxidative stress, suggesting that Aβ displays a particular toxicity for cholinergic neurons [234]. Many of the gene products affected were present in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), Golgi apparatus or were otherwise involved in protein modification and degradation (chaperones, ATF6) indicating a possible role for ER-mediated stress in Aβ-mediated toxicity [234].

Lysosome

Finally, new insight into the broad dysfunction of the lysosomal system in AD was obtained following the identification of cathepsins in Aβ plaques. These findings combined with our understanding of APP cleavage to bring proteases to the forefront of investigation in neurodegenerative diseases [235].

Aβ-induced immune responses

Under ideal circumstances, organelle dysfunctions like those discussed above may elicit immune responses that prevent damaged neurons from having deleterious effects on others. However, immune responses may overreact and exacerbate local cellular damage. Microglia play a critical role in Aβ-mediated neuronal dysfunction and death in the pathogenesis of AD [236–242] and many inflammatory mediators detected in AD brains are of microglial origin [236, 242–247]. Increased microglial activation, microglial association with senile plaques, and elevated levels of proinflammatory mediators (i.e. cytokines, chemokines and free radicals) have all been observed in the AD brain and AD mouse models and evidence indicates that these processes contribute to neuronal damage [236, 248–249]. Observations of brains from AD patients and AD mouse models show that activated microglia and astrocytes accumulate to the greatest extent in the proximity of amyloid plaques [236]. Furthermore, studies carried out with an in vitro cell culture model show that direct administration of Aβ to multiple cell types can induce cellular stress, and this effect is probably increased in the presence of activated microglia [236, 240]. Information Aβ-mediated responses was given by Yan and colleagues [250].

Aβ effects on synaptic vesicle transport

Although we have now seen how Aβ may damage neurons through several direct and indirect process, arguably its most fundamental effect is the disruption of neurotransmission. Endogenous Aβ peptides appear to have a crucial role in activity dependent regulation of synaptic vesicle release [251]. Deleterious effects of Aβ oligomers were shown to be present on multiple steps of synaptic vesicle trafficking [252] and acute treatment of cultured rat hippocampal neurons with Aβ oligomers decreased vesicle endocytosis and regeneration, which led to weakened synaptic transmission [252]. Furthermore, these effects were prevented by an antibody against Aβ [252]. Electron microscopy (EM) studies demonstrate that oligomeric Aβ is localized within the synaptic compartment [121] or that it is bound to the extracellular surface of the spine suggesting that oligomeric Aβ may interact directly at the synapse to cause dysfunction and spine collapse [253].

Presynaptic proteins such as SNAP-25, synaptophysin, and synaptotagmin were reduced in brains of patients with AD [254] and in the hippocampus of Tg2576 mice one month after injection of Aβ into the third ventricle [255]. Russell et al. [256] demonstrated a time-dependent interaction of Aβ with synaptophysin in presynaptic terminals of hippocampal neurons and electrophysiology recordings in hippocampal brain slices confirmed that Aβ affects baseline neurotransmission. Additionally, Aβ oligomers can alter dynamin-1, a neuron-specific GTPase that pinches off synaptic vesicles, allowing them to re-enter the synaptic vesicle pool [257–258]. For more information on how Aβ affects synaptic vesicle trafficking, see [51].

Aβ-induced Neurotransmitter Modulation

In addition to synaptic changes, Aβ is suspected of altering the actions of several major neurotransmitter systems. A summary of Aβ’s proposed effects is depicted in figure 2.

Acetylcholine

Physiological levels of Aβ (within the picomolar range) can activate presynaptic nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChR) and evoke changes in Ca2+ levels in rat hippocampus and neocortex while toxic levels (within the nanomolar range) inhibit both the presynaptic nAChR and presynaptic Ca2+ levels [259]. Binding of Aβ to nAChR can modulate presynaptic glutamate-mediated synaptic transmission or glutamate release, which suggests Aβ42 activates a signal transduction mechanism that results in synaptic transmission and memory consolidation via nAChR [260].

However, it is unknown if these effects are due to a direct physical interaction of Aβ peptide and nAChRs [130]. Immunohistochemical (IHC) studies on human sporadic AD brains show that Aβ42 and nAChR are both present in neuritic plaques and co-localize in individual cortical neurons [261], but Aβ may regulate nAChR function through binding of membrane lipids [262]. Aβ42 acting through nAChRs, can elicit ERK/MAPK activation in hippocampal cultures [263–264] via Ca2+ influx [265–266]. ERK may then phosphorylate CREB and Elk-1 [267], which help initiate transcription of memory associated genes that contain their respective regulatory elements [268]. Therefore, Aβ may lead to an overactivation of nAChRs and excessive Ca2+ influx that impairs the signaling cascades of memory formation [16, 25]. For more information on ACh and Aβ, see [130 and 269].

Glutamate

There is an abundant literature on the interactions of glutamatergic neurons and Aβ [51, 63, 104, 130, 270–272]. In brief, Aβ promotes glutamatergic excitotoxicity and disrupts glutamatergic synapses and plasticity providing an explanation for the cognitive deficits seen in AD [190]. Although Aβ greatly reduces levels of AMPA and NMDA receptors at the neuronal plasma membrane through endocytosis [127, 138, 272], it is unclear how this loss is induced [273].

AMPA

Aβ oligomers are believed to interact with complexes containing the glutamate alpha-2 (GluA2) subunit of AMPA receptors (AMPAR) based on co-immunoprecipitation and photoactivated amino acid cross-linking studies [274] as well as the observation that pharmacological inhibition and removal of surface AMPARs reduce Aβ binding to neurons [274–276]. Similarly, a mouse model of AD showed that the synaptic removal of AMPAR plays a key role in the Aβ-induced synaptic dysfunction [277]. D’Amelio et al., [277] demonstrated an increase of Aβ-dependent synaptotoxicity leading to a synaptic activation of mitochondrial-dependent protease, caspase-3, which activates calcineurin. Calcineurin then dephosphorylates GluR1 subunit of AMPARs triggering their removal from post-synaptic sites. This reduction of AMPAR mediated currents leads to an increase of LTD, which correlates with dendritic spine degeneration and memory loss [271].

NMDA

The binding of Aβ oligomers to synapses may involve the assembly of a multi-protein receptor complex created by interaction with NMDAR [278]. Once bound to synaptic membranes, Aβ instigates synaptic failure by down-regulating plasticity-related receptors, which leads to abnormal trafficking or degradation [63]. Although Aβ selectively enhances NMDAR-mediated currents and synaptic transmission at physiological levels [258, 279] at higher concentrations it promotes endocytosis of NMDARs in cortical neurons and produces a rapid and persistent depression of NMDA-evoked currents via activation of nAChRs [138, 280–281]. Activation of NMDARs and mGluRs, in turn, promotes the amyloidogenic processing of APP, increasing Aβ levels in vitro [282–283]. Thus Aβ instigates a positive feedback cycle, in which Aβ induces glutamate receptor overactivation, leading to the generation of more Aβ [63]. Aβ can also promote cytotoxicity through increased Ca2+ influx and elevated levels of potentially toxic ROS in an NMDAR dependent manner [258, 284]. Collectively, these findings suggest that NMDARs are specifically required for pathogenic Aβ binding to dendrites and that binding induces the endocytosis of NMDAR and other plasticity-related membrane receptors, culminating in synapse failure and elimination [63].

Norepinephrine

In contrast, very little work has examined the effects of Aβ on NE. We were only able to find one such study [285]. In it, they examined the effects of Aβ1–40 on the release of [3H] NE from rat brain cortical slices and synaptosomes, respectively. The results show that 3nM Aβ1–40 decreased electrically stimulated [3H]NE release approximately 50%, and increased [Ca2]i by 78%. Complete prevention of both effects was observed when the free radical scavenger 1mM N-tert-butyl-α-phenylnitrone (PBN) was present or used as pretreatment. This led them to conclude that Aβ1–40 allows a PBN-sensitive free radical to deleteriously effect both evoked [3H]NE release and [Ca2+]i regulation in rat cortical slices and synaptosomes [285].

GABA

Also like NE, little work has been done on Aβ’s interaction with GABA. This is likely because soluble Aβ oligomers do not bind to GABAergic neurons [127, 286] and, as previously mentioned, the significance of the transition of GABAergic neurons from inhibitory to excitatory in AD is not yet understood. GABA is often known as the major inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain and Aβ has been observed to inhibit whole-cell and single-channel nicotinic currents from rat GABAergic interneurons by directly blocking the postsynaptic a7-nAChR channels [241]. For more information of GABA’s interaction with Aβ, see [104 and 271].

Tau

Physiological role of Tau proteins

Tau proteins play an important role in the assembly of tubulin monomers into microtubules and in stabilizing microtubules to other cytoskeletal elements in neurons [287]. Microtubule formation is a dynamic process of assembly and disassembly that is crucial for axonal transport. Disruption of this process by abnormal phosphorylation of tau may therefore lead to synaptic transmission dysfunction and neuronal death.

Tau-based pathology

Observations from molecular analyses suggest that the aggregation of tau filaments inside of neurons may be caused by abnormal phosphorylation. This, combined with the observation that a direct correlation between the progressive involvement of the neocortical areas and the increasing severity of dementia, suggests that pathological tau proteins may be a reliable marker of the neurodegenerative process [287]. The conformation and hydrophobicity of tau oligomers play a critical role in the initiation and spread of tau pathology in the naïve host in a manner reminiscent of sporadic AD. These oligomers were shown to be potent inhibitors of LTP in hippocampal brain slices and to disrupt memory in wild type mice [288]. Furthermore, intracerebral injection of brain extracts containing tau aggregates in transgenic animals can induce tau pathology and tau oligomers directly extracted from the cerebral cortex of an AD brain can propagate abnormal tau conformation of endogenous murine tau after prolonged incubation [288]. These findings highlight how abnormal phosphorylation of tau can lead to impairment of neuronal functioning and spread in a prion-like fashion.

Synaptic damage due to phosphorylated tau accumulations

Transgenic mouse models of AD have implicated tau as a major mediator of Aβ toxicity at the postsynaptic compartment and dendritic spines [11]. Crossing of APP transgenic mice with tau transgenic mice, promoted NFT pathology [289–291] and immunization of APP/Psn/tau triple transgenic (3xTg-AD) mice with antibodies against Aβ reduced the levels of hyperphosphorylated tau [292]. Consistent with previous work in cultured neurons [293], removing endogenous tau can prevent Aβ-induced behavioral deficits in an AD mouse model expressing human APP and block excitotoxin-induced neuronal dysfunction in both transgenic and nontransgenic mice [294]. Synaptic physiological data also indicate that tau reduction corrects several abnormalities in multiple hippocampal subregions of hAPPJ20 mice [295]. Together, these studies support the notion that tau phosphorylation abnormalities contribute to disease pathogenesis [100] via promoting the accumulation of the toxic Aβ peptides [11].

It may seem confusing as to how tau, a normally presynaptic protein, could end up influencing Aβ in the postsynaptic compartment, but a study by [296] indicated that phosphorylated tau could accumulate in dendritic spines where it may affect the synaptic trafficking and/or anchoring of glutamate receptors, which in turn affects postsynaptic function; thus revealing a critical role for tau phosphorylation in causing mislocalization of tau and subsequent synaptic impairment, thereby establishing dendritic spines as pathogenic targets of tau action. Conversely, Aβ could enhance the production of hyperphosphorylated tau by activating a number of kinases, including cyclin-dependent kinase-5 (CDK5) [297–298], Fyn kinase [174, 299], GSK3β [300], and MARK [301–303]. Ittner et al. [304] showed that the interaction of tau with Fyn leads to the targeting of Fyn to dendritic spines, where Fyn can phosphorylate NMDA receptor subunit 2 (GluR2), resulting in stabilization of the interaction between GluR2 and post synaptic density-95 (PSD-95), which leads to enhanced excitotoxicity. PSD-95 also interacts with tau, further supporting a dendritic role of tau outside of its axonal function [304]. Importantly, the toxic effects of APP/Aβ were attenuated by interfering with GluR2/PSD-95 interaction with a cell-permeable peptide [304], supporting that dendritic tau-mediated Fyn recruitment and GluR2/PSD-95 interaction confer Aβ toxicity at the postsynapse. Thus, a “tau hypothesis” has been postulated which states: Aβ triggers the phosphorylation of tau, causing tau to dissociate from the microtubules and accumulate at the dendritic compartments. Phosphorylated tau then interacts with Fyn, localizing Fyn to dendritic spines. Fyn then sensitizes the NMDA receptors, which renders neurons more vulnerable to the toxicity of Aβ in the postsynaptic compartment (see figure 3) [305].

Effects of phosphorylated tau on mitochondria

Similar to Aβ, phosphorylated tau has been shown to interact with VDAC1 in AD postmortem brains and in 3xTg-AD mice [223]. This interaction may interrupt axonal transport to the mitochondria resulting in synaptic damage [306]. Likewise, phosphorylated tau also interacts with Drp1[307], as did Aβ, highlighting the dual site of interaction for these lesions within the mitochondria and further supporting the notion that phosphorylated tau-mediated disruption of axonal transport to the mitochondria may lead to synaptic damage.

Factors affecting tau accumulation

In addition to the factors we have already discussed, SRPK2, and S6K1 have been implicated as phosphorylating tau leading to its toxic accumulation [308–309]. Factors specifically involved in the “tau hypothesis” mentioned above include PAR-1/MARK and its activator, LKB1 [11] as well as ALOX5 [310], and PS1 [311]. Conversely, magnesium has been suggested to reduce tau accumulations, which is believed to occur via increased inhibitory phosphorylation of GSK-3β [312].

mTOR

mTOR’s interactions with Aβ were previously discussed, but upregulation of mTOR has also been reported in tangle-bearing neurons of postmortem AD brains [313]. This finding is in agreement with a recent report showing that mTOR signaling is enhanced in the 3xTg-AD mouse model [314]. However, studies using other mouse models have not found the same results [187; 315] suggesting that mTOR’s response to excess Aβ is driven by PS or tau mutations. Observations on mTOR’s role in AD remain unclear as studies often contain several differences in methodology including the mouse model used, the age of the mice, and the experimental conditions making it difficult to draw interpretations across experiments [187, 314, and 315]. However, mTOR’s involvement connects Aβ and tau to work on the insulin-PI3K-Akt pathway in AD, as this pathway is a well-established upstream regulator of mTOR [182; 183; 316–319]. More information on phosphorylated tau’s interactions with mTOR was given in a review article by Ma and Klann [105].

Neurotransmitter abnormalities due to phosphorylated tau accumulations at the synaptic cleft

Far fewer investigations appear to have examined the role of tau on neurotransmitter dysfunction than Aβ. The only substantial literature appears to deal with tau’s potential interaction with the cholinergic system.

Acetylcholine

Patients with MCI and AD have been shown to have tau pathology in cholinergic basal forebrain neurons [30, 320–323]. Single cell gene expression profiling of human cholinergic basal forebrain neurons revealed a shift in the ratio of three-tandem repeat to four-tandem repeat tau within the nBM and CA1 hippocampal neurons that is exclusive to the progression of AD compared to normal aging [324]. Furthermore, observations of pretangles and tangles in the basal forebrain prior to entorhinal/perirhinal cortex pathology suggest that abnormalities in cortical cholinergic neurons and tau formations within the basal forebrain cholinergic system occur early in life and increase in frequency in old age and AD [30, 325–326]. Additional findings from a tau transgenic mouse model, are consistent with observations in humans and suggest tau pathology may participate in cholinergic degeneration [327].

Conversely, nAChR activation results in a significant increase in tau phosphorylation, whereas muscarinic acetylcholine receptor (mAChR) activation may prevent this [328–329]; for reviews see [269, 330]. Nicotine was also found to induce tau phosphorylation at sites that were also hyperphosphorylated in AD [331]. Support for a nicotine-induced phosphorylation of tau model also comes from a study in which five months of nicotine administration to one-month-old 3xTg-AD mice did not change soluble Aβ levels but increased phosphorylation and aggregation of tau. This appears to be mediated by p38-MAP kinase [331]. Detailed information on phosphorylated tau’s interaction with Ach was given in a review article by Schlieb and Arendt [47].

The nicotine-induced phosphorylation of tau model is assumed to work through the a7 AChR [329]. Upon activation by either nicotine or Aβ, a7 AChR has been shown to mediate high Ca2+ permeability, which leads to dramatic increases in intracellular Ca2+ levels [265]. This rise in intracellular Ca2+ activates Ca2+-dependent kinases, which may phosphorylate tau [328–329]. Therefore, accumulation of intraneuronal Aβ may occur prior to plaque and neurofibrilar tangle formation and initiate tau pathology through the a7 AChR. This view is supported by evidence that a selective decrease in Aβ-42 markedly delays the progression of tau pathology [332]. Conversely, a7 nicotinic agonists predictably increase phosphorylation of tau protein [328], yet simultaneously attenuate Aβ-mediated toxicity [333]. Hence, in vitro and in vivo evidence suggests that a7 AChR may operate as a link between Aβ and tau pathology (figure 3) [334].

Amyloid Beta and hyperphosphorylated tau-independent mechanisms of synaptic damage

Although the intent of this review is to discuss amyloid and tau-mediated synaptic and neurotransmitter dysfunctions, it is important to acknowledge several other major factors that are associated with these dysfunctions as well. Some factors, like PS1, are known for their interactions with Aβ and tau, but have independent synaptotoxic mechanisms as well. Similar alterations in ACh and NMDA receptor-mediated components of synaptic plasticity are evident in 3×TgAD mice with PS1, amyloid precursor protein and tau mutations, suggesting that the adverse effects of mutant PS1 on synaptic plasticity can occur in the absence or presence of amyloid and tau pathologies [335]. Likewise, Aβ-independent mechanisms of apolipoprotein E4 (APOE4) include differential effects of apoE on cerebral energy metabolism, neuroinflammation, neurovascular function, neurogenesis, and synaptic plasticity. ApoE is believed to effect synaptic plasticity via low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 (LRP1), syndecan, and LRP8/ApoER2 [336].

Other factors, such as nitric oxide (NO) and estrogen may reduce synaptic damage. At the early stages of the disease in AD mouse models, evidence of abnormal synaptic function presents as increased LTD revealed only when homeostasis is challenged; suggesting compensatory mechanisms are recruited to maintain a functionally normal hippocampal circuit. Chakraborty et al. [337] concluded that recruitment of NO, which acts presynaptically to boost vesicle release and glutamatergic transmission, serves a compensatory role to boost synaptic transmission and plasticity during early-stage AD. However, NO’s dual role in neuroprotection and neurodegeneration may convert to maladaptive functions as the disease progresses [313]. Additionally, estrogen replacement in postmenopausal women appears to decrease the risk of developing AD [338] as estrogens promote axonal and dendritic plasticity in the limbic neurons of male and female brains [339–343]. In female mice, ovariectomy severely impairs the reactive hippocampal synaptogenesis that follows entorhinal damage, but this effect was reversed by estrogen replacement [344]. Postmenopausal estrogen deficiency may thus suppress the potential for neuroplasticity [345].

Conclusion

Throughout this review, we focused on how Aβ and phosphorylated tau could influence the accumulation of one another, impair synaptic integrity, and alter neurotransmission. From this we have seen that the potential interplay between these two lesions can be at times synergistic, antagonistic, and almost always complicated. Following our review of the literature a few points are readily noticeable. First, there is considerably more literature on Aβ’s involvement than tau’s. We identified 169 articles specific to Aβ versus 26 for tau and only 16 explicitly looked at both. However, whether that is because Aβ is truly more responsible for a wider variety of issue or if this is simply because it has received more scrutiny given its historical precedent is not entirely clear. We say this because although it is reasonable for works before the early 2000s to have focused primarily on Aβ of the aforementioned articles on Aβ only 20 of them are from before 2000. Therefore the vast majority of work that we have discussed herein comes from after that time, yet shows little attention to tau; often making it unclear if observations noted for Aβ are absent from similar manipulations of tau or more likely that they simply have not been investigated. Given the relatively recent reassertion of tau’s importance from Braak and Del Tredici [83] observation that its accumulation in the LC is the first positive lesion of AD and Brier et al.’s [346] conclusion from PET imaging that tau may be a more informative predictor of a person’s cognitive decline and potential response to treatment than Aβ, investigations on the significance of tau, both at the cellular and clinical level, are imperative in order to achieve a fuller understanding of AD.

Likewise, while investigations of cholinergic and glutamatergic systems have provided great insights and offer potential targets for novel therapies [56] more work needs to be done on the GABAergic and noradrenergic systems. Understanding how the GABAergic system is affected is important for two reasons. First, because it is the major inhibitory system in healthy individuals, but we know that it can shift to an excitatory system in the presence of AD; the full consequences of which are unknown [56]. Second, as novel therapeutics that rely on restoring excitatory systems undergo clinical trials these drugs may face hurdles from side effects that are induced by a lack of inhibitory feedback from GABA thereby rendering otherwise successful treatments as impractical; similar to the current problem of using GABAergic agonists to treat NPS as previously discussed [52]. NE, on the other hand, has received surprisingly little attention given that the destruction of its largest source of cells, the LC, is known to be the first to show AD pathology [83] and its physiological function is believed to be involved in both memory and attention [84]; two of the hallmark aspects of AD pathology.

For these reasons, it is our recommendation that investigations of the interaction between tau and NE receive a renewed sense of priority. Although neither the formation of phosphorylated tau nor loss of NE has been observed to result in the most severe of pathologies related to AD, their unique position as the earliest events in disease progression provides reason to investigate these processes with greater scrutiny as an understanding of how these early events occur may lead to greater insights into how the disease may be delayed, prevented, or even cured.

Figure 1 Amyloid beta’s many sites of neuronal damage. 1) Soluble intracellular oligomers of Aβ are cytotoxic [122,128]. 2) Interaction with PrPC leads to dendritic spine damage [139] (top right). Aβ fibril binds to APP during formation of extracellular plaques [144] (middle left). Aβ inappropriately activates GSK3β [105] (middle right). Aβ synergizes with Fyn to disrupt synaptic receptors [104] (bottom left). mTOR may inhibit Aβ [105] (bottom right). 3) Mounting evidence suggests Aβ-mediated destruction of spines and synapses leads to LTP impairment and LTD enhancement [105]. 4) Mitochondrial distress may lead to production of ROS that may accelerate Aβ formation. Aβ may then affect NMDAR activity by binding to intracellular mitochondrial CypD or mitochondrial ABAD [130] (Top). Aβ-mediated cytotoxicity may be particularly damaging to the endoplasmic reticulum, affecting its production and modification of crucial proteins [234] (middle). Identification of cathepsins in Aβ plaques suggest protease dysfunctions from lysosomes may play a critical role in advancement of pathology [235] (bottom). 5) RAGE may play a prominent role in the increased microglial activation and proinflammatory markers commonly associated with senile plaques [160]. 6) Aβ interacts with synaptophysin in presynaptic terminals of the hippocampus [256] to impair neurotransmission (top). Aβ also interferes with dynamin-1 allowing synaptic vesicles to reenter the synaptic pool [257,258] (bottom).

Figure 2 Summary of amyloid beta’s interaction with neurotransmitters at neuronal synapses. 1) Aβ may lead to an overactivation of nAChRs and excessive Ca2+ influx that impairs the signaling cascades of memory formation [16, 25]. 2) Aβ oligomers are believed to interact with the GluA2 subunit of AMPAR [274] leading to increased LTD (top). Aβ promotes endocytosis of NMDARs in cortical neurons and produces a rapid and persistent depression of NMDA-evoked currents via activation of nAChRs [138, 280, 281] (bottom). 3) Aβ1–40 allows a PBN-sensitive free radical to deleteriously effect evoked NE release [285]. Aβ inhibits nicotinic currents from GABAergic interneurons by directly blocking the postsynaptic a7-nAChR channels [263].

Figure 3 Tau at the synapse. 1) Phosphorylated tau accumulates in dendritic spines where it may affect the synaptic trafficking and anchoring of GluR [296]. 2) Dendritic tau-mediated Fyn recruitment and GluR2/PSD-95 interaction confer Aβ toxicity at the postsynapse. 3) Upon activation by Aβ, a7 AChR mediates a rise in intracellular Ca2+, which may activate kinases that phosphorylate tau [328, 329]. Thus, Aβ and hyperphosphorylated tau may promote each other’s role in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease.


1 DeKosky ST Scheff SW 1990 Synapse loss in frontal cortex biopsies in Alzheimer disease: correlation with cognitive severity Annals of neurology 27 5 457 464 2360787
2 Scheff SW DeKosky ST Price DA 1990 Quantitative assessment of cortical synaptic density in Alzheimer disease Neurobiology of aging 11 1 29 37 2325814
3 Scheff SW Price DA 1993 Synapse loss in the temporal lobe in Alzheimer disease Annals of neurology 33 2 190 199 8434881
4 Scheff SW Price DA Schmitt FA DeKosky ST Mufson EJ 2007 Synaptic alterations in CA1 in mild Alzheimer disease and mild cognitive impairment Neurology 68 18 1501 1508 17470753
5 Terry RD Masliah E Salmon DP Butters N DeTeresa R Hill R Hansen LA Katzman R 1991 Physical basis of cognitive alterations in Alzheimer disease: synapse loss is the major correlate of cognitive impairment Ann Neurol 30 4 572 580 10.1002/ana.410300410 1789684
6 Masliah E Mallory M Hansen L Richard D Alford M Terry R 1994 Synaptic and neuritic alterations during the progression of Alzheimer disease Neuroscience letters 174 1 67 72 7970158
7 Ingelsson M Fukumoto H Newell KL Growdon JH Hedley-Whyte ET Frosch MP Albert MS Hyman BT Irizarry MC 2004 Early Aβ accumulation and progressive synaptic loss, gliosis, and tangle formation in AD brain Neurology 62 6 925 931 15037694
8 Harris KM Kater SB 1994 Dendritic spines: cellular specializations imparting both stability and flexibility to synaptic function Annu Rev Neurosci 17 341 371 8210179
9 Carlisle HJ Kennedy MB 2005 Spine architecture and synaptic plasticity Trends Neurosci 28 182 187 15808352
10 Segal M 2005 Dendritic spines and long-term plasticity Nat Rev Neurosci 6 277 284 15803159
11 Yu W Lu B 2012 Synapses and dendritic spines as pathogenic targets in Alzheimer’s disease Neural plasticity 2012
12 Spires-Jones T Knafo S 2011 Spines, plasticity, and cognition in Alzheimer’s model mice Neural plasticity 2012
13 Lai MK Ramírez MJ Tsang SW Francis PT 2007 Alzheimer’s disease as a neurotransmitter disease Neurobiology of Alzheimer’s Disease 245 281
14 Heii A Yosuke I Kenji K Takashi M Reiji I 1992 Neurotransmitter changes in early-and late-onset Alzheimer-type dementia Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry 16 6 883 890 1381103
15 Bartus RT Dean RL Beer B Lippa AS 1982 The cholinergic hypothesis of geriatric memory dysfunction Science 217 4558 408 414 7046051
16 Davies P Maloney AJ 1976 Selective loss of central cholinergic neurons in Alzheimer’s disease Lancet 2 1403
17 Perry EK Tomlinson BE Blessed G Bergmann K Gibson PH Perry RH 1978 Correlation of cholinergic abnormalities with senile plaques and mental test scores in senile dementia Br Med J 2 6150 1457 1459 719462
18 Whitehouse PJ Price DL Clark AW Coyle JT DeLong MR 1981 Alzheimer disease: evidence for selective loss of cholinergic neurons in the nucleus basalis Annals of neurology 10 2 122 126 7283399
19 Whitehouse PJ Price DL Struble RG Clark AW Coyle JT Delon MR 1982 Alzheimer’s disease and senile dementia: loss of neurons in the basal forebrain Science 215 4537 1237 1239 7058341
20 Davis KL Mohs RC Marin D Purohit DP Perl DP Lantz M Austin G Haroutunian V 1999 Cholinergic markers in elderly patients with early signs of Alzheimer disease JAMA 281 1401 6 10217056
21 Slotkin TA Seidler FJ Crain BJ Bell JM Bissette G Nemeroff CB 1990 Regulatory changes in presynaptic cholinergic function assessed in rapid autopsy material from patients with Alzheimer disease: implications for etiology and therapy Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 87 2452 2455 2320567
22 Xu Y Yan J Zhou P Li J Gao H Xia Y Wang Q 2012 Neurotransmitter receptors and cognitive dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease Prog Neurobiol 97 1 13 22387368
23 Bowen DM Smith CB White P Davison AN 1976 Neurotransmitter-related enzymes and indices of hypoxia in senile dementia and other abiotrophies Brain 99 459 96 11871
24 Perry EK Gibson PH Blessed G Perry RH Tomlinson BE 1977 Neurotransmitter enzyme abnormalities in senile dementia. Choline acetyltransferase and glutamic acid decarboxylase activities in necropsy brain tissue J Neurol Sci 34 247 65 144789
25 Perry EK Perry RH Blessed G Tomlinson BE 1977 Necropsy evidence of central cholinergic deficits in senile dementia Lancet 1 189
26 Mufson EJ Counts SE Fahnestock M Ginsberg SD 2007 Cholinotrophic molecular substrates of mild cognitive impairment in the elderly Curr Alzheimer Res 4 340 350 17908035
27 Blessed G Tomlinson BE Roth M 1968 The association between quantitative measures of dementia and of senile change in the cerebral grey matter of elderly subjects Br J Psychiatry 114 797 811 5662937
28 Bierer LM Haroutunian V Gabriel S Knott PJ Carlin LS Purohit DP Perl DP Schmeidler J Kanof P Davis KL 1995 Neurochemical correlates of dementia severity in Alzheimer’s disease: relative importance of the cholinergic deficits J Neurochem 64 749 760 7830069
29 DeKosky ST Harbaugh RE Schmitt FA Bakay RA Chui HC Knopman DS Reeder TM Shetter AG Senter HJ Markesbery WR 1992 Cortical biopsyin Alzheimer’s disease: diagnostic accuracy and neurochemical, neuropathological, and cognitive correlations Intraventricular Bethanecol Study Group Ann Neurol 32 625 632 1360195
30 Mesulam M 2004 The cholinergic lesion of Alzheimer’s disease: pivotal factor or side show? Learning &amp; Memory 11 1 43 49 14747516
31 Shinotoh H Namba H Fukushi K Nagatsuka S Tanaka N Aotsuka A Ota T Tanada S Irie T 2000 Progressive loss of cortical acetylcholinesterase activity in association with cognitive decline in Alzheimer’s disease: a positron emission tomography study Ann Neurol 48 194 200 10939570
32 Tiraboschi P Hansen LA Alford M Masliah E Thal LJ Corey-Bloom J 2000 The decline in synapses and cholinergic activity is asynchronous in Alzheimer’s disease Neurology 55 1278 83 11087768
33 Gilmor ML Erickson JD Varoqui H Hersh LB Bennett DA Cochran EJ Mufson EJ Levey AI 1999 Preservation of nucleus basalis neurons containing choline acetyltransferase and the vesicular acetylcholine transporter in the elderly with mild cognitive impairment and early Alzheimer’s disease J Comp Neurol 411 693 704 10421878
34 Mohs RC Doody RS Morris JC Ieni JR Rogers SL Perdomo CA Pratt RD 2001 “312” Study Group, A 1-year, placebo-controlled preservation of function survival study of donepezil in AD patients Neurology 57 481 488 11502917
35 Winblad B Engedal K Soininen H Verhey F Waldemar G Wimo A Wetterholm AL Zhang R Haglund A Subbiah P 2001 Donepezil Nordic Study Group, A 1-year, randomized, placebo-controlled study of donepezil in patients with mild to moderate AD Neurology 57 489 495 11502918
36 Parent MB Baxter MG 2004 Septohippocampal acetylcholine: involved in but not necessary for learning and memory? Learn Mem 11 9 20 14747512
37 Arendt T Bigl V Arendt A Tennstedt A 1983 Loss of neurons in the nucleus basalis of Meynert in Alzheimer’s disease, paralysis agitans and Korsakoff’s disease Acta Neuropathol (Berl) 61 101 8 6637393
38 Jellinger KA 2000 Morphological substrates of mental dysfunctions in Lewy body disease: an update J Neural Transm Suppl 59 185 212 10961431
39 Whitehouse PJ Hedreen JC White CL 3rd Price DL 1983 Basal forebrain neurons in the dementia of Parkinson disease Ann Neurol 13 243 8 6847136
40 Arendt T Bigl V Arendt A 1984 Neuron loss in the nucleus basalis of Meynert in Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease Acta Neuropathol (Berl) 65 85 8 6393684
41 Arendt T 1994 Impairment in memory function and neurodegenerative changes in the cholinergic basal forebrain system induced by chronic intake of ethanol J Neural Transm Suppl 44 173 87 7897389
42 Bohnen NI Kaufer DI Ivanco LS Lopresti B Koeppe RA Davis JG Mathis CA Moore RY DeKosky ST 2003 Cortical cholinergic function is more severely affected in Parkinsonian dementia than in Alzheimer’s disease: an in vivo positron tomography study Arch Neurol 60 1745 8 14676050
43 Terry AV Jr Buccafusco JJ 2003 The cholinergic hypothesis of age and Alzheimer’s disease-related cognitive deficits: recent challenges and their implications for novel drug development J Pharmacol Exp Ther 306 821 7 12805474
44 Salmond CH Chatfield DA Menon DK Pickard JD Sahakian BJ 2005 Cognitive sequelae of head injury: involvement of basal forebrain and associated structures Brain 128 Pt 1 189 200 15548553
45 Donat CK Walter B Kayser T Deuther-Conrad W Schliebs R Nieber K Bauer R Härtig W Brust P 2010 Effects of lateral fluid percussion injury on cholinergic markers in the newborn piglet brain Int J Dev Neurosci 28 31 8 19822201
46 Craig LA Hong NS McDonald RJ 2011 Revisiting the cholinergic hypothesis in the development of Alzheimer’s disease Neuroscience &amp; Biobehavioral Reviews 35 6 1397 1409 21392524
47 Schliebs R Arendt T 2011 The cholinergic system in aging and neuronal degeneration Behavioural brain research 221 2 555 563 21145918
48 Corlew R Wang Y Ghermazien H Erisir A Philpot BD 2007 Developmental switch in the contribution of presynaptic and postsynaptic NMDA receptors to long-term depression J Neurosci 27 9835 9845 17855598
49 Revett TJ Baker GB Jhamandas J Kar S 2013 Glutamate system, amyloid ss peptides and tau protein: functional interrelationships and relevance to Alzheimer disease pathology J Psychiatry Neurosci 38 6 23 22894822
50 Bell KF Bennett DA Cuello AC 2007 Paradoxical upregulation of glutamatergic presynaptic boutons during mild cognitive impairment J Neurosci 27 10810 10817 17913914
51 Mota SI Ferreira IL Rego AC 2014 Dysfunctional synapse in Alzheimer’s disease–A focus on NMDA receptors Neuropharmacology 76 16 26 23973316
52 Lanctôt KL Herrmann N Mazzotta P Khan LR Ingber N 2004 GABAergic function in Alzheimer’s disease: evidence for dysfunction and potential as a therapeutic target for the treatment of behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia Can J Psychiatry 49 439 453 15362248
53 Saransaari P Oja SS 1997 Taurine release from the developing and ageing hippocampus: stimulation by agonists of ionotropic glutamate receptors Mech Ageing Dev 99 219 232 9483494
54 Vignes M 2001 Regulation of spontaneous inhibitory synaptic transmission by endogenous glutamate via non-NMDA receptors in cultured rat hippocampal neurons Neuropharmacology 40 737 748 11369028
55 Lagostena L Rosato-Siri M D’Onofrio M Brandi R Arisi I Capsoni S Franzot J Cattaneo A Cherubini E 2010 In the adult hippocampus, chronic nerve growth factor deprivation shifts GABAergic signaling from the hyperpolarizing to the depolarizing direction J Neurosci 30 885 893 20089897
56 Anand R Gill KD Mahdi AA 2014 Therapeutics of Alzheimer’s disease: Past, present and future Neuropharmacology 76 27 50 23891641
57 Collingridge GL Isaac JTR Wang YT 2004 Receptor trafficking and synaptic plasticity Nat Rev Neurosci 5 952 962 15550950
58 Paula-Lima AC Louzada PR De Mello FG Ferreira ST 2003 Neuroprotection against Abeta and glutamate toxicity by melatonin: are GABA receptors involved? Neurotox Res 5 323 327 14715451
59 Paula-Lima AC De Felice FG Brito-Moreira J Ferreira ST 2005 Activation of GABA(A) receptors by taurine and muscimol blocks the neurotoxicity of beta-amyloid in rat hippocampal and cortical neurons Neuropharmacology 49 1140 1148 16150468
60 Louzada PR Paula Lima AC Mendonca-Silva DL No€el F De Mello FG Ferreira ST 2004 Taurine prevents the neurotoxicity of beta-amyloid and glutamate receptor agonists: activation of GABA receptors and possible implications for Alzheimer’s disease and other neurological disorders FASEB J 18 511 518 15003996
61 Möhler H 2011 The rise of a new GABA pharmacology Neuropharmacology 60 1042 1049 21035473
62 Wallace SJ 2001 Newer antiepileptic drugs: advantages and disadvantages Brain Dev 23 277 283 11504596
63 Paula-Lima AC Brito-Moreira J Ferreira ST 2013 Deregulation of excitatory neurotransmission underlying synapse failure in Alzheimer’s disease Journal of neurochemistry 126 2 191 202 23668663
64 Simic G Stanic G Mladinov M Jovanov-Milosevic N Kostovic I Hof PR 2009 Does Alzheimer’s disease begin in the brainstem? Neuropathology and applied neurobiology 35 6 532 554 19682326
65 Reynolds GP Mason SL Meldrum A De Keczer S Parnes H Eglen RM Wong EH 1995 5-Hydroxytryptamine (5-HT)4 receptors in post mortem human brain tissue: distribution, pharmacology and effects of neurodegenerative diseases Br J Pharmacol 114 993 998 7780656
66 Cifariello A Pompili A Gasbarri A 2008 5-HT(7) receptors in the modulation of cognitive processes Behav Brain Res 195 171 179 18243350
67 King MV Marsden CA Fone KC 2008 A role for the 5-HT(1A), 5-HT4 and 5-HT6 receptors in learning and memory Trends Pharmacol Sci 29 482 492 19086256
68 Zweig RM Ross CA Hedreen JC Steele C Cardillo JE Whitehouse PJ Folstein MF Price DL 1988 The neuropathology of aminergic nuclei in Alzheimer’s disease Ann Neurol 24 233 242 3178178
69 Baker GB Reynolds GP 1989 Biogenic amines and their metabolites in Alzheimer’s disease: noradrenaline, 5-hydroxytryptamine and 5-hydroxyindole-3-acetic acid depleted in hippocampus but not in substantia innominata Neurosci Lett 100 335 339 2474777
70 Nazarali AJ Reynolds GP 1992 Monoamine neurotransmitters and their metabolites in brain regions in Alzheimer’s disease: a postmortem study Cell Mol Neurobiol 12 581 587 1283363
71 Palmer AM Francis PT Benton JS Sims NR Mann DM Neary D Snowden JS Bowen DM 1987 Presynaptic serotonergic dysfunction in patients with Alzheimer’s disease J Neurochem 48 8 15 2432177
72 Palmer AM Stratmann GC Procter AW Bowen DM 1988 Possible neuro-transmitter basis of behavioral changes in Alzheimer’s disease Ann Neurol 23 616 620 2457353
73 D’Amato RJ Zweig RM Whitehouse PJ Wenk GL Singer HS Mayeux R Price DL Snyder SH 1987 Aminergic systems in Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease Ann Neurol 22 229 236 3477996
74 Bowen DM Allen SJ Benton JS Goodhardt MJ Haan EA Palmer AM Sims NR Smith CC Spillane JA Esiri MM Neary D Snowdon JS Wilcock GK Davison AN 1983 Biochemical assessment of serotonergic and cholin-ergic dysfunction and cerebral atrophy in Alzheimer’s disease J Neurochem 41 266 272 6306169
75 Cross AJ Crow TJ Johnson JA Joseph MH Perry EK Perry RH Blessed G Tomlinson BE 1983 Monoamine metabolism in senile dementia of Alzheimertype J Neurol Sci 60 383 392 6195313
76 Volicer L Langlais PJ Matson WR Mark KA Gamache PH 1985 Serotoninergic system in dementia of the Alzheimer type. Abnormal forms of5-hydroxytryptophan and serotonin in cerebrospinal fluid Arch Neurol 42 1158 1161 2415092
77 Sparks DL 1989 Aging and Alzheimer’s disease Altered cortical serotonergic binding Arch Neurol 46 138 140 2916952
78 Bowen DM White P Spillane JA Goodhardt MJ Curzon G Iwangoff P Meier-Ruge W Davison AN 1979 Accelerated ageing or selective neuronal loss asan important cause of dementia? Lancet 1 11 14 83462
79 Hirao K Pontone GM Smith GS 2015 Molecular imaging of neuropsychiatric symptoms in Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease Neuroscience &amp; Biobehavioral Reviews 49 157 170 25446948
80 Rodríguez JJ Noristani HN Verkhratsky A 2012 The serotonergic system in ageing and Alzheimer’s disease Progress in neurobiology 99 1 15 41 22766041
81 Palmer AM 1996 Neurochemical studies of Alzheimer’s disease Neurodegeneration 5 381 391 9117551
82 Trillo L Das D Hsieh W Medina B Moghadam S Lin B Dang V Sanchez MM De Miguel Z Ashford JW Salehi A 2013 Ascending monoaminergic systems alterations in Alzheimer’s disease. Translating basic science into clinical care Neurosci Biobehav Rev 37 1363 1379 23707776
83 Braak H Del Tredici K 2011 The pathological process underlying Alzheimer’s disease in individuals under thirty Acta neuropathologica 121 2 171 181 21170538
84 Berridge CW 2008 Noradrenergic modulation of arousal Brain research reviews 58 1 1 17 18199483
85 Chalermpalanupap T Kinkead B Hu WT Kummer MP Hammerschmidt T Heneka MT Weinshenker D Levey AI 2013 Targeting norepinephrine in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimers Res Ther 5 2 21 23634965
86 Hoe HS Lee HK Pak DT 2012 The upside of APP at synapses CNS neuroscience &amp; therapeutics 18 1 47 56 21199446
87 Esch F Keim P Beattie E Blacher R Culwell A Oltersdorf T McClure D Ward P 1990 Cleavage of amyloid beta peptide during constitutive processing of its precursor Science 248 1122 1124 2111583
88 Kang J Lemaire H-G Unterbeck A Salbaum JM Masters CL Grzeschik K-H Multhaup G Beyreuther K Muller-Hill B 1987 The precursor of Alzheimer’s disease amyloid A4 protein resembles a cell-surface receptor Nature 325 733 736 2881207
89 Selkoe DJ 1998 The cell biology of beta-amyloid precursor protein and presenilin in Alzheimer’s disease Trends Cell Biol 8 447 453 9854312
90 Alzheimer Alois 1907 Über eine eigenartige Erkrankung der Hirnrinde [About a peculiar disease of the cerebral cortex] Allgemeine Zeitschrift fur Psychiatrie und Psychisch-Gerichtlich Medizin 64 1–2 146 148 (German)
91 Chapman PF Falinska AM Knevett SG Ramsay MF 2001 Genes, models and Alzheimer’s disease Trends Genet 17 254 261 11335035
92 Ashe KH 2001 Learning and memory in transgenic mice modeling Alzheimer’s disease Learn Mem 8 301 308 11773429
93 Janus C Westaway D 2001 Transgenic mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease Physiol Behav 73 873 886 11566220
94 Zahs KR Ashe KH 2010 ‘Too much good news’ - are Alzheimer mouse models trying to tell us how to prevent, not cure, Alzheimer’s disease? Trends Neurosci 33 381 389 20542579
95 Hardy JA Higgins GA 1992 Alzheimer’s disease: the amyloid cascade hypothesis Science 256 184 185 1566067
96 Tanzi RE Bertram L 2005 Twenty years of the Alzheimer’s disease amyloid hypothesis: a genetic perspective Cell 120 545 555 15734686
97 Lambert MP Barlow AK Chromy BA Edwards C Freed R Liosatos M Morgan TE Rozovsky I Trommer B Viola KL Wals P Zhang C Finch CE Krafft GA Klein WL 1998 Diffusible, nonfibrillar ligands derived from Aβ1-42 are potent central nervous system neurotoxins Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95 6448 6453 9600986
98 Hsia AY Masliah E McConlogue L Yu GQ Tatsuno G Hu K Kholodenko D Malenka RC Nicoll RA Mucke L 1999 Plaque-independent disruption of neural circuits in Alzheimer’s disease mouse models Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96 3228 3233 10077666
99 Klein WL Krafft GA Finch CE 2001 Targeting small Abeta oligomers: the solution to an Alzheimer’s disease conundrum? Trends Neurosci 24 219 224 11250006
100 Hardy JA Selkoe DJ 2002 The amyloid hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease: progress and problems on the road to therapeutics Science 297 353 356 12130773
101 Klein WL 2002 Abeta toxicity in Alzheimer’s disease: globular oligomers (ADDLs) as new vaccine and drug targets Neurochem Int 41 345 352 12176077
102 Kamenetz F Tomita T Hsieh H Seabrook G Borchelt D Iwatsubo T Sisodia S Malinow R 2003 APP processing and synaptic function Neuron 37 925 937 12670422
103 Walsh DM Selkoe DJ 2004 Deciphering the molecular basis of memory failure in Alzheimer’s disease Neuron 44 181 193 15450169
104 Venkitaramani DV Chin J Netzer WJ Gouras GK Lesne S Malinow R Lombroso PJ 2007 β-amyloid modulation of synaptic transmission and plasticity The Journal of Neuroscience 27 44 11832 11837 17978019
105 Ma T Klann E 2012 Amyloid β: linking synaptic plasticity failure to memory disruption in Alzheimer’s disease Journal of neurochemistry 120 s1 140 148 22122128
106 Cleary J Hittner JM Semotuk M Mantyh P O’Hare E 1995 Beta-amyloid(1–40) effects on behavior and memory Brain Res 682 69 74 7552329
107 McDonald M Dahl E Overmier J Mantyh P Cleary J 1994 Effects of an exogenous beta-amyloid peptide on retention for spatial learning Behav Neural Biol 62 60 67 7945146
108 Stéphan A Laroche S Davis S 2001 Generation of aggregated beta-amyloid in the rat hippocampus impairs synaptic transmission and plasticity and causes memory deficits J Neurosci 21 5703 5714 11466442
109 Cleary JP Walsh DM Hofmeister JJ Shankar GM Kuskowski MA Selkoe DJ Ashe KH 2005 Natural oligomers of the amyloid-beta protein specifically disrupt cognitive function Nat Neurosci 8 79 84 15608634
110 Lesné S Koh MT Kotilinek L Kayed R Glabe CG Yang A Gallagher M Ashe KH 2006 A specific amyloid-beta protein assembly in the brain impairs memory Nature 440 352 357 16541076
111 Shankar GM Li S Mehta TH Garcia-Munoz A Shepardson NE Smith I Brett FM Farrell MA Rowan MJ Lemere CA Regan CM Walsh DM Sabatini BL Selkoe DJ 2008 Amyloid-beta protein dimers isolated directly from Alzheimer’s brains impair synaptic plasticity and memory Nat Med 14 837 842 18568035
112 Klyubin I Cullen WK Hu NW Rowan MJ 2012 Alzheimer’s disease Aβ assemblies mediating rapid disruption of synaptic plasticity and memory Molecular brain 5 1 1 22217152
113 Katzman R Terry R DeTeresa R Brown T Davies P Fuld P Renbing X Peck A 1988 Clinical, pathological, and neurochemical changes in dementia: a subgroup with preserved mental status and numerous neocortical plaques Ann Neurol 23 138 144 2897823
114 Larson J Lynch G Games D Seubert P 1999 Alterations in synaptic transmission and long-term potentiation in hippocampal slices from young and aged PDAPP mice Brain Res 840 23 35 10517949
115 Gouras GK Almeida CG Takahashi RH 2005 Intraneuronal Abeta accumulation and origin of plaques in Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 26 1235 1244 16023263
116 LaFerla FM Green KN Oddo S 2007 Intracellular amyloid-beta in Alzheimer’s disease Nat Rev Neurosci 8 499 509 17551515
117 Oddo S Caccamo A Kitazawa M Tseng BP LaFerla FM 2003 Amyloid deposition precedes tangle formation in a triple transgenic model of Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 24 1063 70 14643377
118 Echeverria V Ducatenzeiler A Alhonen L Janne J Grant SM Wandosell F Muro A Baralle F Li H Duff K Szyf M Cuello AC 2004 Rat transgenic models with a phenotype of intracellular Abeta accumulation in hippocampus and cortex J Alzheimers Dis 6 209 219 15201476
119 Billings LM Oddo S Green KN McGaugh JL LaFerla FM 2005 Intraneuronal Abeta causes the onset of early Alzheimer’s disease-related cognitive deficits in transgenic mice Neuron 45 675 688 15748844
120 Knobloch M Konietzko U Krebs DC Nitsch RM 2007 Intracellular Abeta and cognitive deficits precede beta-amyloid deposition in transgenic arc Abeta mice Neurobiol Aging 28 1297 1306 16876915
121 Takahashi RH Almeida CG Kearney PF Yu F Lin MT Milner TA Gouras GK 2004 Oligomerization of Alzheimer’s β-amyloid within processes and synapses of cultured neurons and brain J Neurosci 24 3592 3599 15071107
122 Walsh DM Selkoe DJ 2007 A beta oligomers - a decade of discovery J Neurochem 101 1172 1184 17286590
123 Meyer-Luehmann M Spires-Jones TL Prada C Garcia-Alloza M de Calignon A Rozkalne A Koenigsknecht-Talboo J Holtzman DM Bacskai BJ Hyman BT 2008 Rapid appearance and local toxicity of amyloid-beta plaques in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Nature 451 720 724 18256671
124 Tsai J Grutzendler J Duff K Gan WB 2004 Fibrillar amyloid deposition leads to local synaptic abnormalities and breakage of neuronal branches Nat Neurosci 7 1181 1183 15475950
125 Shankar GM Bloodgood BL Townsend M Walsh DM Selkoe DJ Sabatini BL 2007 Natural oligomers of the Alzheimer amyloid-beta protein induce reversible synapse loss by modulating an NMDA-type glutamate receptor-dependent signaling pathway J Neurosci 27 2866 2875 17360908
126 Wei W Nguyen LN Kessels HW Hagiwara H Sisodia S Malinow R 2010 Amyloid beta from axons and dendrites reduces local spine number and plasticity Nat Neurosci 13 190 196 20037574
127 Lacor PN Buniel MC Furlow PW Clemente AS Velasco PT Wood M Viola KL Klein WL 2007 Abeta oligomer-induced aberrations in synapse composition, shape, and density provide a molecular basis for loss of connectivity in Alzheimer’s disease J Neurosci 27 796 807 17251419
128 Moreno H Yu E Pigino G Hernandez AI Kim N Moreira JE Sugimori M Llinas RR 2009 Synaptic transmission block by presynaptic injection of oligomeric amyloid beta Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106 5901 5906 19304802
129 Spires TL Meyer-Luehmann M Stern EA McLean PJ Skoch J Nguyen PT Bacskai BJ Hyman BT 2005 Dendritic spine abnormalities in amyloid precursor protein transgenic mice demonstrated by gene transfer and intravital multiphoton microscopy J Neurosci 25 7278 7287 16079410
130 Parihar MS Brewer GJ 2010 Amyloid-β as a modulator of synaptic plasticity Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 22 3 741 763
131 Cirrito JR Kang J-E Lee J Stewart FR Verges DK Silverio LM Bu G Mennerick S Holtzman DM 2008 Endocytosis is required for synaptic activity-dependent release of amyloid-beta in vivo Neuron 58 42 51 18400162
132 Cirrito JR Yamada KA Finn MB Sloviter RS Bales KR May PC Schoepp DD Paul SM Mennerick S Holtzman DM 2005 Synaptic activity regulates interstitial fluid amyloid-beta levels in vivo Neuron 48 913 922 16364896
133 Gimbel DA Nygaard HB Coffey EE Gunther EC Laurén J Gimbel ZA Strittmatter SM 2010 Memory impairment in transgenic Alzheimer mice requires cellular prion protein J Neurosci 30 6367 74 http://dx.doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0395-10.2010 20445063
134 Chung E Ji Y Sun Y Kascsak RJ Kascsak RB Mehta PD Strittmatter SM Wisniewski T 2010 Anti-PrPC monoclonal antibody infusion as a novel treatment for cognitive deficits in an Alzheimer’s disease model mouse BMC Neurosci 11 130 http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1471-2202-11-130 20946660
135 Um JW Nygaard HB Heiss JK Kostylev MA Stagi M Vortmeyer A Wisniewski T Gunther EC Strittmatter SM 2012 Alzheimer amyloid-β oligomer bound to postsynaptic prion protein activates Fyn to impair neurons Nat Neurosci 15 1227 35 http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nn.3178 22820466
136 Collins MO Husi H Yu L Brandon JM Anderson CN Blackstock WP Choudhary JS Grant SG 2006 Molecular characterization and comparison of the components and multiprotein complexes in the postsynaptic proteome J Neurochem 97 Suppl 1 16 23 http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1471-4159.2005.03507.x 16635246
137 Laurén J Gimbel DA Nygaard HB Gilbert JW Strittmatter SM 2009 Cellular prion protein mediates impairment of synaptic plasticity by amyloid-beta oligomers Nature 457 1128 32 http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature07761 19242475
138 Snyder EM Nong Y Almeida CG Paul S Moran T Choi EY Nairn AC Salter MW Lombroso PJ Gouras GK Greengard P 2005 Regulation of NMDA receptor trafficking by amyloid-beta Nat Neurosci 8 1051 1058 16025111
139 Um JW Strittmatter SM 2013 Amyloid-β induced signaling by cellular prion protein and Fyn kinase in Alzheimer disease Prion 7 1 37 41 22987042
140 Lorenzo A Yuan M Zhang Z Paganetti PA Sturchler-Pierrat C Staufenbiel M Mautino J Vigo FS Sommer B Yankner BA 2000 Amyloid beta interacts with the amyloid precursor protein: a potential toxic mechanism in Alzheimer’s disease Nat Neurosci 3 460 464 10769385
141 Melchor JP Van Nostrand WE 2000 Fibrillar amyloid beta-protein mediates the pathologic accumulation of its secreted precursor in human cerebrovascular smooth muscle cells J Biol Chem 275 9782 9791 10734132
142 Wagner MR Keane DM Melchor JP Auspaker KR Van Nostrand WE 2000 Fibrillar amyloid beta-protein binds protease nexin-2/amyloid beta-protein precursor: stimulation of its inhibition of coagulation factor XIa Biochemistry 39 7420 7427 10858290
143 Rozemuller AJ Roos RA Bots GT Kamphorst W Eikelenboom P Van Nostrand WE 1993 Distribution of beta/A4 protein and amyloid precursor protein in hereditary cerebral hemorrhage with amyloidosis-Dutch type and Alzheimer’s disease Am J Pathol 142 1449 1457 7684195
144 Bignante EA Heredia F Morfini G Lorenzo A 2013 Amyloid β precursor protein as a molecular target for amyloid β–induced neuronal degeneration in Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiology of aging 34 11 2525 2537 23714735
145 Averous J Proud CG 2006 When translation meets transformation: the mTOR story Oncogene 25 6423 6435 17041627
146 Hay N Sonenberg N 2004 Upstream and downstream of mTOR Genes Dev 18 1926 1945 15314020
147 Yang Q Guan K-L 2007 Expanding mTOR signaling Cell Res 17 666 681 17680028
148 Hoeffer CA Cowansage KK Arnold EC Banko JL Moerke NJ Rodriguez R Schmidt EK Klosi E Chorev M Lloyd RE Pierre P Wagner G LeDoux JE Klann E 2011 Inhibition of the interactions between eukaryotic initiation factors 4E and 4G impairs long-term associative memory consolidation but not reconsolidation Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 108 3383 3388 21289279
149 Richter JD Klann E 2009 Making synaptic plasticity and memory last: mechanisms of translational regulation Genes Dev 23 1 11 19136621
150 Antion MD Merhav M Hoeffer CA Reis G Kozma SC Thomas G Schuman EM Rosenblum K Klann E 2008 Removal of S6K1 and S6K2 leads to divergent alterations in learning, memory, and synaptic plasticity Learn Mem 15 29 38 18174371
151 Banko JL Merhav M Stern E Sonenberg N Rosenblum K Klann E 2007 Behavioral alterations in mice lacking the translation repressor 4E-BP2 Neurobiol Learn Mem 87 248 256 17029989
152 Banko JL Poulin F Hou L DeMaria CT Sonenberg N Klann E 2005 The translation repressor 4E-BP2 is critical for eIF4F complex formation, synaptic plasticity, and memory in the hippocampus J Neurosci 25 42 9581 9590 16237163
153 Blundell J Kouser M Powell CM 2008 Systemic inhibition of mammalian target of rapamycin inhibits fear memory reconsolidation Neurobiol Learn Mem 90 28 35 18316213
154 Hoeffer CA Klann E 2010 mTOR signaling: At the crossroads of plasticity, memory and disease Trends Neurosci 33 67 75 19963289
155 Gafford GM Parsons RG Helmstetter FJ 2011 Consolidation and reconsolidation of contextual fear memory requires mammalian target of rapamycin-dependent translation in the dorsal hippocampus Neuroscience 182 98 104 21439355
156 Stoica L Zhu PJ Huang W Zhou H Kozma SC Costa-Mattioli M 2011 Selective pharmacogenetic inhibition of mammalian target of Rapamycin complex I (mTORC1) blocks long-term synaptic plasticity and memory storage Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 108 3791 3796 21307309
157 Parsons RG Gafford GM Helmstetter FJ 2006 Translational control via the mammalian target of rapamycin pathway is critical for the formation and stability of long-term fear memory in amygdala neurons J Neurosci 26 12977 12983 17167087
158 Lafay-Chebassier C Paccalin M Page G Barc-Pain S Perault-Pochat MC Gil R Pradier L Hugon J 2005 mTOR/p70S6k signaling alteration by Abeta exposure as well as in APP-PS1 transgenic models and in patients with Alzheimer’s disease J Neurochem 94 215 225 15953364
159 Lafay-Chebassier C Pérault-Pochat MC Page G Bilan AR Damjanac M Pain S Houeto J-L Gil R Hugon J 2006 The immunosuppressant rapamycin exacerbates neurotoxicity of Abeta peptide J Neurosci Res 84 1323 1334 16955484
160 Yan SD Chen X Fu J Chen M Zhu H Roher A Slattery T Zhao L Nagashima M Morser J Migheli A Nawroth P Stem D Schmidt AM 1996 RAGE and amyloid-beta peptide neurotoxicity in Alzheimer’s disease Nature 382 685 691 8751438
161 Du Yan S Zhu H Fu J Yan SF Roher A Tourtellotte WW Rajavashisth T Chen X Godman GC Stem D Schmidt AM 1997 Amyloid-beta peptide-receptor for advanced glycation end product interaction elicits neuronal expression of macrophage-colony stimulating factor: a proinflammatory pathway in Alzheimer disease Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94 5296 5301 9144231
162 Hadding A Kaltschmidt B Kaltschmidt C 2004 Overexpression of receptor of advanced glycation end products hypersensitizes cells for amyloid beta peptide-induced cell death Biochim Biophys Acta 1691 67 72 15053925
163 Onyango IG Tuttle JB Bennett JP Jr 2005 Altered intracellular signaling and reduced viability of Alzheimer’s disease neuronal cybrids is reproduced by beta-amyloid peptide acting through receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE) Mol Cell Neurosci 29 333 343 15911356
164 Origlia N Capsoni S Cattaneo A Fang F Arancio O Yan SD Domenici L 2009 Abeta-dependent Inhibition of LTP in different intracortical circuits of the visual cortex: the role of RAGE J Alzheimers Dis 17 59 68 19221410
165 Arancio O Zhang HP Chen X Lin C Trinchese F Puzzo D Liu S Hegde A Yan SF Stem A Luddy JS Lue LF Walker DG Roher A Buttini M Mucke L Li W Schmidt AM Kindy M Hyslop PA Stern DM Du Yan SS 2004 RAGE potentiates Abeta-induced perturbation of neuronal function in transgenic mice Embo J 23 4096 4105 15457210
166 Origlia N Righi M Capsoni S Cattaneo A Fang F Stern DM Chen JX Schmidt AM Arancio O Yan SD Domenici L 2008 Receptor for advanced glycation end product-dependent activation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase contributes to amyloid-beta-mediated cortical synaptic dysfunction J Neurosci 25 3521 3530
167 Origlia N Bonadonna C Rosellini A Leznik E Arancio O Yan SS Domenici L 2010 Microglial Receptor for Advanced Glycation End Product-Dependent Signal Pathway Drives {beta}-Amyloid-Induced Synaptic Depression and Long-Term Depression Impairment in Entorhinal Cortex J Neurosci 30 11414 11425 20739563
168 Deane R Du Yan S Submamaryan RK LaRue B Jovanovic S Hogg E Welch D Manness L Lin C Yu J Zhu H Ghiso J Frangione B Stern A Schmidt AM Armstrong DL Arnold B Liliensiek B Nawroth P Hofman F Kindy M Stern D Zlokovic B 2003 RAGE mediates amyloid-beta peptide transport across the blood-brain barrier and accumulation in brain Nature medicine 9 907 913
169 Kojima N Ishibashi H Obata K Kandel ER 1998 Higher seizure susceptibility and enhanced tyrosine phosphorylation on N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor subunit 2B in fyn transgenic mice Learn Mem 5 429 445 10489260
170 Lu YF Kojima N Tomizawa K Moriwaki A Matsushita M Obata K Matsui H 1999 Enhanced synaptic transmission and reduced threshold for LTP induction in fyn-transgenic mice Eur J Neurosci 11 75 82 9987012
171 Cui J Matkovich SJ deSouza N Li S Rosemblit N Marks AR 2004 Regulation of the type 1 inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor by phosphorylation at tyrosine 353 J Biol Chem 279 16311 16316 14761954
172 Salter MW Kalia LV Src kinases: a hub for NMDA receptor regulation 2004 Nat Rev Neurosci 5 317 328 15034556
173 Palop JJ Jones B Kekonius L Chin J Yu G-Q Raber J Masliah E Mucke L 2003 Neuronal depletion of calcium-dependent proteins in the dentate gyrus is tightly linked to Alzheimer’s disease-related cognitive deficits Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100 9572 9577 12881482
174 Chin J Palop JJ Yu G-Q Kojima N Masliah E Mucke L 2004 Fyn kinase modulates synaptotoxicity, but not aberrant sprouting, in human amyloid precursor protein transgenic mice J Neurosci 24 4692 4697 15140940
175 Chin J Palop JJ Puoliväli J Massaro C Bien-Ly N Gerstein H Scearce-Levie K Masliah E Mucke L 2005 Fyn kinase induces synaptic and cognitive impairments in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease J Neurosci 25 9694 9703 16237174
176 Palop JJ Chin J Bien-Ly N Massaro C Yeung BZ Yu G-Q Mucke L 2005 Vulnerability of dentate granule cells to disruption of Arc expression in human amyloid precursor protein transgenic mice J Neurosci 25 9686 9693 16237173
177 Hooper C Killick R Lovestone S 2008 The GSK3 hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease J Neurochem 104 1433 1439 18088381
178 Phiel CJ Wilson CA Lee VM-Y Klein PS 2003 GSK-3alpha regulates production of Alzheimer’s disease amyloid-beta peptides Nature 423 435 439 12761548
179 Sun X Sato S Murayama O Murayama M Park J Yamaguchi H Takashima A 2002 Lithium inhibits amyloid secretion in COS7 cells transfected with amyloid precursor protein C100 Neurosci Lett 321 61 64 11872257
180 Su Y Ryder J Li B Wu X Fox N Solenberg P Brune K Paul S Zhou Y Liu F Ni B 2004 Lithium, a common drug for bipolar disorder treatment, regulates amyloid-beta precursor protein processing Biochemistry 43 6899 6908 15170327
181 Jo J Whitcomb DJ Olsen KM Kerrigan TL Lo S-C Bru-Mercier G Dickinson B Scullion S Sheng M Collingridge G Cho K 2011 Aβ(1–42) inhibition of LTP is mediated by a signaling pathway involving caspase-3, Akt1 and GSK-3β Nat Neurosci 14 545 547 21441921
182 Lee H-K Kumar P Fu Q Rosen KM Querfurth HW 2009 The insulin/Akt signaling pathway is targeted by intracellular beta-amyloid Mol Biol Cell 20 1533 1544 19144826
183 Magrané J Rosen KM Smith RC Walsh K Gouras GK Querfurth HW 2005 Intraneuronal beta-amyloid expression downregulates the Akt survival pathway and blunts the stress response J Neurosci 25 47 10960 10969 16306409
184 Peineau S Bradley C Taghibiglou C Doherty A Bortolotto ZA Wang YT Collingridge GL 2008 The role of GSK-3 in synaptic plasticity Br J Pharmacol 153 S428 437 18311157
185 Terwel D Muyllaert D Dewachter I Borghgraef P Croes S Devijver H Leuven FV 2008 Amyloid activates GSK-3beta to aggravate neuronal tauopathy in bigenic mice Am J Pathol 172 786 798 18258852
186 Peineau S Taghibiglou C Bradley C Wong TP Liu L Lu J Lo E Wu D Saule E Bouschet T Matthews P Isaac JT Bortolotto ZA Wang YT Collingridge GL 2007 LTP inhibits LTD in the hippocampus via regulation of GSK3beta Neuron 2007 53 703 717
187 Ma T Hoeffer CA Capetillo-Zarate E Yu F Wong H Lin MT Tampellini D Klann E Blitzer RD Gouras GK 2010 Dysregulation of the mTOR pathway mediates impairment of synaptic plasticity in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease PLoS One 5 e12845 20862226
188 Rowan MJ Klyubin I Wang Q Anwyl R 2005 Synaptic plasticity disruption by amyloid beta protein: modulation by potential Alzheimer’s disease modifying therapies Biochem Soc Trans 33 563 567 16042545
189 Jacobsen JS Wu C-C Redwine JM Comery TA Arias R Bowlby M Martone R Morrison JH Pangalos MN Reinhart PH Bloom FE 2006 Early-onset behavioral and synaptic deficits in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103 5161 5166 16549764
190 Haass C Selkoe DJ 2007 Soluble protein oligomers in neurodegeneration: lessons from the Alzheimer’s amyloid beta-peptide Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 8 101 112 17245412
191 Querfurth HW LaFerla FM 2010 Alzheimer’s disease N Engl J Med 362 329 344 20107219
192 Artola A Singer W 1993 Long-term depression of excitatory synaptic transmission and its relationship to long-term potentiation Trends Neurosci 16 480 487 7507622
193 Malenka RC Bear MF 2004 LTP and LTD: an embarrassment of riches Neuron 44 5 21 15450156
194 Stanton PK 1996 LTD, LTP, and the sliding threshold for long-term synaptic plasticity Hippocampus 6 35 42 8878740
195 Cheng L Yin WJ Zhang JF Qi JS 2009 Amyloid beta-protein fragments 25–35 and 31–35 potentiate long-term depression in hippocampal CA1 region of rats in vivo Synapse 63 206 214 19072840
196 Kim J-H Anwyl R Suh Y-H Djamgoz MBA Rowan MJ 2001 Use-dependent effects of amyloidogenic fragments of (beta)-amyloid precursor protein on synaptic plasticity in rat hippocampus in vivo J Neurosci 21 1327 1333 11160403
197 Li S Hong S Shepardson NE Walsh DM Shankar GM Selkoe D 2009 Soluble oligomers of amyloid Beta protein facilitate hippocampal long-term depression by disrupting neuronal glutamate uptake Neuron 62 788 801 19555648
198 Raymond CR Ireland DR Abraham WC 2003 NMDA receptor regulation by amyloid-beta does not account for its inhibition of LTP in rat hippocampus Brain Res 968 263 272 12663096
199 Wang H-W Pasternak JF Kuo H Ristic H Lambert MP Chromy B Viola KL Klein WL Stine WB Krafft GA Trommer BL 2002 Soluble oligomers of beta amyloid (1–42) inhibit long-term potentiation but not long-term depression in rat dentate gyrus Brain Res 924 133 140 11750898
200 Hsieh H Boehm J Sato C Iwatsubo T Tomita T Sisodia S Malinow R 2006 AMPAR removal underlies Abeta-induced synaptic depression and dendritic spine loss Neuron 52 5 831 843 17145504
201 Arispe N Rojas E Pollard HB 1993 Alzheimer disease amyloid β protein forms calcium channels in bilayer membranes: blockade by tromethamine and aluminum Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 90 2 567 571 8380642
202 Lashuel HA Hartley D Petre BM Walz T Lansbury PT 2002 Neurodegenerative disease: amyloid pores from pathogenic mutations Nature 418 6895 article 291 291
203 Manczak M Park BS Jung Y Reddy PH 2004 Differential expression of oxidative phosphorylation genes in patients with Alzheimer’s disease: implications for early mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative damage Neuromolecular Med 5 147 162 15075441
204 Devi L Prabhu BM Galati DF Avadhani NG Anandatheerthavarada HK 2006 Accumulation of amyloid precursor protein in the mitochondrial import channels of human Alzheimer’s disease brain is associated with mitochondrial dysfunction J Neurosci 26 9057 9068 16943564
205 Hirai K Aliev G Nunomura A Fujioka H Russell RL Atwood CS Johnson AB Kress Y Vinters HV Tabaton M Shimohama S Cash AD Siedlak SL Harris PL Jones PK Petersen RB Perry G Smith MA 2001 Mitochondrial abnormalities in Alzheimer’s disease J Neurosci 21 3017 3023 11312286
206 Parker WD Jr Filley CM Parks JK 1990 Cytochrome oxidase deficiency in Alzheimer’s disease Neurology 40 1302 1303 2166249
207 Maurer I Zierz S Möller HJ 2000 A selective defect of cytochrome c oxidase is present in brain of Alzheimer disease patients Neurobiol Aging 21 455 462 10858595
208 Smith MA Perry G Richey PL Sayre LM Anderson VE Beal MF Kowall N 1996 Oxidative damage in Alzheimer’s Nature 382 120 121
209 Manczak M Calkins MJ Reddy PH 2011 Impaired mitochondrial dynamics and abnormal interaction of amyloid beta with mitochondrial protein Drp1 in neurons from patients with Alzheimer’s disease: implications for neuronal damage Hum Mol Genet 20 2495 2509 21459773
210 Calkins MJ Reddy PH 2011 Amyloid beta impairs mitochondrial anterograde transport and degenerates synapses in Alzheimer’s disease neurons Biochim Biophys Acta 1812 507 513 21241801
211 Calkins MJ Manczak M Mao P Shirendeb U Reddy PH 2011 Impaired mitochondrial biogenesis, defective axonal transport of mitochondria, abnormal mitochondrial dynamics and synaptic degeneration in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Hum Mol Genet 20 4515 4529 21873260
212 Manczak M Mao P Calkins MJ Cornea A Reddy AP Murphy MP Szeto HH Park B Reddy PH 2010 Mitochondria-targeted antioxidants protect against amyloid-beta toxicity in Alzheimer’s disease neurons J Alzheimers Dis 20 609 631
213 Wang X Su B Siedlak SL Moreira PI Fujioka H Wang Y Casadesus G Zhu X 2008 Amyloid-beta overproduction causes abnormal mitochondrial dynamics via differential modulation of mitochondrial fission/fusion proteins Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105 19318 19323 19050078
214 Wang X Su B Lee HG Li X Perry G Smith MA Zhu X 2009 Impaired balance of mitochondrial fission and fusion in Alzheimer’s disease J Neurosci 29 9090 9103 19605646
215 Wang X Perry G Smith MA Zhu X 2010 Amyloid-beta-derived diffusible ligands cause impaired axonal transport of mitochondria in neurons Neurodegener Dis 7 56 59 20160460
216 Diana A Simic G Sinforiani E Orru N Pichiri G Bono G 2008 Mitochondria morphology and DNA content upon sublethal exposure to beta-amyloid (1-42) peptide Coll Antropol 32 51 58 18405058
217 Schmidt C Lepsverdize E Chi SL Das AM Pizzo SV Dityatev A Schachner M 2008 Amyloid precursor protein and amyloid beta-peptide bind to ATP synthase and regulate its activity at the surface of neural cells Mol Psychiatry 13 953 969 17726461
218 Matsumoto K Akao Y Yi H Shamoto-Nagai M Maruyama W Naoi M 2006 Overexpression of amyloid precursor protein induces susceptibility to oxidative stress in human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells J Neural Transm 113 125 135 15959846
219 Hodge T Colombini M 1997 Regulation of metabolite flux through voltage-gating of VDAC channels J Membr Biol 157 271 279 9178614
220 Xu X Colombini M 1997 Autodirected insertion: preinserted VDAC channels greatly shorten the delay to the insertion of new channels Biophys J 72 2129 2136 9129814
221 Rostovtseva T Colombini M 1997 VDAC channels mediate and gate the flow of ATP: implications for the regulation of mitochondrial function Biophys J 72 1954 1962 9129800
222 Colombini M 2012 VDAC structure, selectivity, and dynamics Biochim Biophys Acta 1818 1457 1465 22240010
223 Manczak M Reddy PH 2012 Abnormal interaction of VDAC1 with amyloid beta and phosphorylated tau causes mitochondrial dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease Human molecular genetics dds360
224 Quiroz-Baez R Flores-Dominguez D Arias C 2013 Synaptic aging is associated with mitochondrial dysfunction, reduced antioxidant contents and increased vulnerability to amyloid-beta toxicity Curr Alzheimer Res 10 324 331 23305068
225 Esposito L Raber J Kekonius L Yan F Yu G-Q Bien-Ly N Puoliväli J Scearce-Levie K Masliah E Mucke L 2006 Reduction in mitochondrial superoxide dismutase modulates Alzheimer’s disease-like pathology and accelerates the onset of behavioral changes in human amyloid precursor protein transgenic mice J Neurosci 26 5167 5179 16687508
226 Li F Calingasan NY Yu F Mauck WM Toidze M Almeida CG Takahashi RH Carlson GA Beal MF Lin MT Gouras GK 2004 Increased plaque burden in brains of APP mutant MnSOD heterozygous knockout mice J Neurochem 89 1308 1312 15147524
227 Dumont M Wille E Stack C Calingasan NY Beal MF Lin MT 2009 Reduction of oxidative stress, amyloid deposition, and memory deficit by manganese superoxide dismutase overexpression in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease FASEB J 23 2459 2466 19346295
228 Massaad CA Washington TM Pautler RG Klann E 2009 Overexpression of SOD-2 reduces hippocampal superoxide and prevents memory deficits in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106 13576 13581 19666610
229 Ma T Hoeffer CA Wong H Massaad CA Zhou P Iadecola C Murphy MP Pautler RG Klann E 2011 Amyloid β-induced impairments in hippocampal synaptic plasticity are rescued by decreasing mitochondrial superoxide J Neurosci 31 5589 5595 21490199
230 Hu D Cao P Thiels E Chu CT Wu G-Y Oury TD Klann E 2007 Hippocampal long-term potentiation, memory, and longevity in mice that overexpress mitochondrial superoxide dismutase Neurobiol Learn Mem 87 372 384 17129739
231 Hu D Serrano F Oury TD Klann E 2006 Aging-dependent alterations in synaptic plasticity and memory in mice that overexpress extracellular superoxide dismutase J Neurosci 26 3933 3941 16611809
232 Kamsler A Segal M 2003 Paradoxical actions of hydrogen peroxide on long-term potentiation in transgenic superoxide dismutase-1 mice J Neurosci 23 10359 10367 14614095
233 Manczak M Calkins MJ Reddy PH 2011 Impaired mitochondrial dynamics and abnormal interaction of amyloid beta with mitochondrial protein Drp1 in neurons from patients with Alzheimer’s disease: implications for neuronal damage Human molecular genetics 20 13 2495 2509 21459773
234 Heinitz K Beck M Schliebs R Perez-Polo JR 2006 Cholinotoxicity mediated by soluble oligomers of β-amyloid(1–42) differs from cholinotoxic effects of oxidative stress as revealed by gene expression analysis J Neurochem 98 1930 45 16945109
235 Nixon RA Cataldo AM 2006 Lysosomal system pathways: genes to neurodegeneration in Alzheimer’s disease Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 9 3 Supplement 277 289
236 Fang F Lue LF Yan S Xu H Luddy JS Chen D Walker DG Stern DM Schmidt AM Chen JX Yan SS 2010 RAGE-dependent signaling in microglia contributes to neuroinflammation, Abeta accumulation, and impaired learning/memory in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease FASEB J 24 1043 1055 19906677
237 Harper SJ Wilkie N 2003 MAPKs: new targets for neurodegeneration Expert Opin Ther Targets 7 187 200 12667097
238 Van Eldik LJ Thompson WL Ranaivo HR Behanna HA Watterson DM 2007 Glia proinflammatory cytokine upregulation as a therapeutic target for neurodegenerative diseases: function-based and target-based discovery approaches Int Rev Neurobiol 82 277 296 17678967
239 Munoz L Ranaivo HR Roy SM Hu W Craft JM McNamara LK Chico LW Van Eldik LJ Watterson DM 2007 A novel p38 alpha MAPK inhibitor suppresses brain proinflammatory cytokine up-regulation and attenuates synaptic dysfunction and behavioral deficits in an Alzheimer’s disease mouse model J Neuroinflammation 4 21 17784957
240 Lue LF Walker DG Rogers J 2001 Modeling microglial activation in Alzheimer’s disease with human postmortem microglial cultures Neurobiology of aging 22 945 956 11755003
241 Johnson GV Bailey CD 2003 The p38 MAP kinase signaling pathway in Alzheimer’s disease Exp Neurol 183 263 268 14552867
242 Hensley K Floyd RA Zheng NY Nael R Robinson KA Nguyen X Pye QN Stewart CA Geddes J Markesbery WR Patel E Johnson GV Bing G 1999 p38 kinase is activated in the Alzheimer’s disease brain J Neurochem 72 2053 2058 10217284
243 Dudal S Krzywkowski P Paquette J Morissette C Lacombe D Tremblay P Gervais F 2004 Inflammation occurs early during the Abeta deposition process in TgCRND8 mice Neurobiology of aging 25 861 871 15212840
244 Britschgi M Wyss-Coray T 2007 Immune cells may fend off Alzheimer disease Nat Med 13 408 409 17415372
245 Fan R Xu F Previti ML Davis J Grande AM Robinson JK Van Nostrand WE 2007 Minocycline reduces microglial activation and improves behavioral deficits in a transgenic model of cerebral microvascular amyloid J Neurosci 27 3057 3063 17376966
246 Walker DG Lue LF 2005 Investigations with cultured human microglia on pathogenic mechanisms of Alzheimer’s disease and other neurodegenerative diseases Journal of neuroscience research 81 412 425 15957156
247 Morgan D Gordon MN Tan J Wilcock D Rojiani AM 2005 Dynamic complexity of the microglial activation response in transgenic models of amyloid deposition: implications for Alzheimer therapeutics J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 64 743 753 16141783
248 Griffin WS Liu L Li Y Mrak RE Barger SW 2006 Interleukin-1 mediates Alzheimer and Lewy body pathologies J Neuroinflammation 3 5 16542445
249 McGeer PL Rogers J McGeer EG 2006 Inflammation, anti-inflammatory agents and Alzheimer disease: the last 12 years J Alzheimers Dis 9 271 276 16914866
250 Yan SS Chen D Yan S Guo L Chen JX 2012 RAGE is a key cellular target for Aβ-induced perturbation in Alzheimer’s disease Frontiers in bioscience (Scholar edition) 4 240 22202057
251 Abramov E Dolev I Fogel H Ciccotosto GD Ruff E Slutsky I 2009 Amyloid beta as a positive endogenous regulator of release probability at hippocampal synapses Nat Neurosci 12 1567 1576 19935655
252 Park J Jang M Chang S 2013 Deleterious effects of soluble amyloid-beta oligomers on multiple steps of synaptic vesicle trafficking Neurobiol Dis 55 129 139 23523634
253 Koffie RM Meyer-Luehmann M Hashimoto T Adams KW Mielke ML Garcia-Alloza M Micheva KD Smith SJ Kim ML Lee VM Hyman BT Spires-Jones TL 2009 Oligomeric amyloid beta associates with postsynaptic densities and correlates with excitatory synapse loss near senile plaques Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106 4012 4017 19228947
254 Reddy PH Mani G Park BS Jacques J Murdoch G Whetsell W Jr Kaye J Manczak M 2005 Differential loss of synaptic proteins in Alzheimer’s disease: implications for synaptic dysfunction J Alzheimers Dis 7 103 117 15851848
255 Chauhan NB Siegel GJ 2002 Reversal of amyloid beta toxicity in Alzheimer’s disease model Tg2576 by intraventricular antiamyloid beta antibody J Neurosci Res 69 10 23 12111811
256 Russell CL Semerdjieva S Empson RM Austen BM Beesley PW Alifragis P 2012 Amyloid-beta acts as a regulator of neurotransmitter release disrupting the interaction between synaptophysin and VAMP2 PLoS One 7 e43201 22905234
257 Kelly BL Vassar R Ferreira A 2005 Beta-amyloid-induced dynamin 1 depletion in hippocampal neurons. A potential mechanism for early cognitive decline in Alzheimer disease J Biol Chem 280 31746 31753 16002400
258 Kelly BL Ferreira A 2006 beta-Amyloid-induced dynamin 1 degradation is mediated by N-methyl-D aspartate receptors in hippocampal neurons J Biol Chem 281 28079 28089 16864575
259 Dougherty JJ Wu J Nichols RA 2003 Beta-amyloid regulation of presynaptic nicotinic receptors in rat hippocampus and neocortex J Neurosci 23 6740 6747 12890766
260 Garcia-Osta A Alberini CM 2009 Amyloid beta mediates memory formation Learn Mem 16 267 272 19318468
261 Wang HY Lee DH D’Andrea MR Peterson PA Shank RP Reitz AB 2000 beta-Amyloid(1-42) binds to alpha7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor with high affinity. Implications for Alzheimer’s disease pathology J Biol Chem 275 5626 5632 10681545
262 Small DH Maksel D Kerr ML Ng J Hou X Chu C Mehrani H Unabia S Azari MF Loiacono R Aguilar MI Chebib M 2007 The beta-amyloid protein of Alzheimer’s disease binds to membrane lipids but does not bind to the alpha7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor J Neurochem 101 1527 1538 17286584
263 Pettit DL Shao Z Yakel JL 2001 beta-Amyloid(1-42) peptide directly modulates nicotinic receptors in the rat hippocampal slice J Neurosci 21 1–5 RC120 11150356
264 Liu Q Kawai H Berg DK 2001 beta -Amyloid peptide blocks the response of alpha 7-containing nicotinic receptors on hippocampal neurons Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 98 4734 4739 11274373
265 Dineley KT Bell KA Bui D Sweatt JD 2002 beta -Amyloid peptide activates alpha 7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptors expressed in Xenopus oocytes J Biol Chem 277 25056 25061 11983690
266 Seguela P Wadiche J Dineley-Miller K Dani JA Patrick JW 1993 Molecular cloning, functional properties, and distribution of rat brain alpha 7: a nicotinic cation channel highly permeable to calcium J Neurosci 13 596 604 7678857
267 Sweatt JD 2001 The neuronal MAP kinase cascade: a biochemical signal integration system subserving synaptic plasticity and memory J Neurochem 76 1 10 11145972
268 Chwang WB O’Riordan KJ Levenson JM Sweatt JD 2006 ERK/MAPK regulates hippocampal histone phosphorylation following contextual fear conditioning Learn Mem 13 322 328 16741283
269 Buckingham SD Jones AK Brown LA Sattelle DB 2009 Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor signaling: roles in Alzheimer’s disease and amyloid neuroprotection Pharmacol Rev 61 39 61 19293145
270 Hu NW Ondrejcak T Rowan MJ 2012 Glutamate receptors in preclinical research on Alzheimer’s disease: update on recent advances Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior 100 4 855 862
271 D’Amelio M Rossini PM 2012 Brain excitability and connectivity of neuronal assemblies in Alzheimer’s disease: from animal models to human findings Progress in neurobiology 99 1 42 60 22789698
272 Roselli F Tirard M Lu J Hutzler P Lamberti P Livrea P Morabito M Almeida OF 2005 Soluble beta-amyloid1-40 induces NMDA-dependent degradation of postsynaptic density-95 at glutamatergic synapses J Neurosci 25 11061 11070 16319306
273 Gu Z Liu W Yan Z 2009 {beta}-Amyloid impairs AMPA receptor trafficking and function by reducing Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II synaptic distribution J Biol Chem 284 10639 10649 19240035
274 Zhao W-Q Santini F Breese R Ross D Zhang XD Stone DJ Ferrer M Townsend M Wolfe AL Seager MA Kinney GG Shughrue PJ Ray WJ 2010 Inhibition of calcineurin mediated endocytosis and alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) receptors prevents amyloid beta oligomer-induced synaptic disruption J Biol Chem 285 7619 7632 20032460
275 Liu S-J Gasperini R Foa L Small DH 2010 Amyloid-beta decreases cell-surface AMPA receptors by increasing intracellular calcium and phosphorylation of GluR2 J Alzheimers Dis 21 655 666 20571220
276 Small DH 2012 Dysregulation of Ca2+ homeostasis in Alzheimer’s disease: role in acetylcholinesterase production and AMPA receptor internalization Neurodegenerative Diseases 10 1–4 76 79 22301681
277 D’Amelio M Cavallucci V Middei S Marchetti C Pacioni S Ferri A Diamantini A De Zio D Carrara P Battistini L Moreno S Bacci A Ammassari-Teule M Marie H Cecconi F 2011 Caspase-3 triggers early synaptic dysfunction in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Nature Neuroscience 14 69 76 21151119
278 Ferreira ST Klein WL 2011 The Ab oligomer hypothesis for synapse failure and memory loss in Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Learn Mem 96 529 543 21914486
279 Domingues A Almeida S Da Cruz e Silva EF Oliveira CR Rego AC 2007 Toxicity of beta-amyloid in HEK293 cells expressing NR1/NR2A or NR1/NR2B N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor subunits Neurochem Int 50 872 880 17403555
280 Coan EJ Irving AJ Collingridge GL 1989 Low-frequency activation of the NMDA receptor system can prevent the induction of LTP Neurosci Lett 105 205 210 2577224
281 Zorumski CF Izumi Y 1998 Modulation of LTP induction by NMDA receptor activation and nitric oxide release Prog Brain Res 118 173 182 9932441
282 Lesné S Ali C Gabriel C Croci N MacKenzie ET Glabe CG Plotkine M Marchand-Verrecchia C Vivien D Buisson A 2005 NMDA receptor activation inhibits alpha-secretase and promotes neuronal amyloid-beta production J Neurosci 25 9367 9377 16221845
283 Kim SH Fraser PE Westaway D St George-Hyslop PH Ehrlich ME Gandy S 2010 Group II metabotropic glutamate receptor stimulation triggers production and release of Alzheimer’s amyloid(beta)42 from isolated intact nerve terminals J Neurosci 30 3870 3875 20237257
284 De Felice FG Velasco PT Lambert MP Viola K Fernandez SJ Ferreira ST Klein WL 2007 Abeta oligomers induce neuronal oxidative stress through an N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor-dependent mechanism that is blocked by the Alzheimer drug memantine J Biol Chem 282 11590 11601 17308309
285 Li M Smith CP 1996 β-Amyloid 1–40 inhibits electrically stimulated release of [3 H] norepinephrine and enhances the internal calcium response to low potassium in rat cortex: Prevention with a free radical scavenger Brain research bulletin 39 5 299 303 8705317
286 Lacor PN Buniel MC Chang L Fernandez SJ Gong Y Viola KL Lambert MP Velasco PT Bigio EH Finch CE Krafft GA Klein WL 2004 Synaptic targeting by Alzheimer’s-related amyloid beta oligomers J Neurosci 24 10191 10200 15537891
287 Buée L Bussiere T Buée-Scherrer V Delacourte A Hof PR 2000 Tau protein isoforms, phosphorylation and role in neurodegenerative disorders Brain Research Reviews 33 1 95 130 10967355
288 Lasagna-Reeves CA Castillo-Carranza DL Sengupta U Guerrero-Munoz MJ Kiritoshi T Neugebauer V Jackson GR Kayed R 2012 Alzheimer brain-derived tau oligomers propagate pathology from endogenous tau Scientific reports 2
289 Lewis J Dickson DW Lin WL Chisholm L Corral A Jones G Yen SH Sahara N Skipper L Yager D Eckman C Hardy J Hutton M McGowan E 2001 Enhanced neurofibrillary degeneration in transgenic mice expressing mutant tau and APP Science 293 5534 1487 1491 11520987
290 Götz J Chen F van Dorpe J Nitsch RM 2001 Formation of neurofibrillary tangles in P301L tau transgenic mice induced by Aβ42 fibrils Science 293 5534 1491 1495 11520988
291 Oddo S Caccamo A Shepherd JD Murphy MP Golde TE Kayed R Metherate R Mattson MP Akbari Y LaFerla FM 2003 Triple-transgenic model of Alzheimer’s disease with plaques and tangles: intracellular Abeta and synaptic dysfunction Neuron 39 409 421 12895417
292 Oddo S Billings L Kesslak JP Cribbs DH LaFerla FM 2004 Aβ immunotherapy leads to clearance of early, but not late, hyperphosphorylated tau aggregates via the proteasome Neuron 43 3 321 332 15294141
293 Rapoport M Dawson HN Binder LI Vitek MP Ferreira A 2002 Tau is essential to β-amyloid-induced neurotoxicity Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 99 9 6364 6369 11959919
294 Roberson ED Scearce-Levie K Palop JJ Yan F Cheng IH Wu T Gerstein H Yu GQ Mucke L 2007 Reducing endogenous tau ameliorates amyloid β-induced deficits in an Alzheimer’s disease mouse model Science 316 5825 750 754 17478722
295 Roberson ED Halabisky B Yoo JW Yao J Chin J Yan F Wu T Hamto P Devidze N Yu GQ Palop JJ Noebels JL Mucke L 2011 Amyloid-β/Fyn–induced synaptic, network, and cognitive impairments depend on tau levels in multiple mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease The Journal of neuroscience 31 2 700 711 21228179
296 Hoover BR Reed MN Su J Penrod RD Kotilinek LA Grant MK Pitstick R Carlson GA Lanier LM Yuan LL Ashe KH Liao D 2010 Tau mislocalization to dendritic spines mediates synaptic dysfunction independently of neurodegeneration Neuron 68 6 1067 1081 21172610
297 Patrick GN Zukerberg L Nikolic M de la Monte S Dikkes P Tsai LH 1999 Conversion of p35 to p25 deregulates Cdk5 activity and promotes neurodegeneration Nature 402 6762 615 622 10604467
298 Cruz JC Kim D Moy LY Dobbin MM Sun X Bronson RT Tsai LH 2006 p25/cyclin-dependent kinase 5 induces production and intraneuronal accumulation of amyloid β in vivo The Journal of Neuroscience 26 41 10536 10541 17035538
299 Zhang C Qiu HE Krafft GA Klein WL 1996 Aβ peptide enhances focal adhesion kinase/Fyn association in a rat CNS nerve cell line Neuroscience letters 211 3 187 190 8817572
300 Baum L Hansen L Masliah E Saitoh T 1996 Glycogen synthase kinase 3 alteration in Alzheimer disease is related to neurofibrillary tangle formation Molecular and chemical neuropathology 29 2–3 253 261 8971700
301 Drewes G Ebneth A Preuss U Mandelkow EM Mandelkow E 1997 MARK, a novel family of protein kinases that phosphorylate microtubule- associated proteins and trigger microtubule disruption Cell 89 2 297 308 9108484
302 Nishimura I Yang Y Lu B 2004 PAR-1 kinase plays an initiator role in a temporally ordered phosphorylation process that confers tau toxicity in Drosophila Cell 116 5 671 682 15006350
303 Chin JY Knowles RB Schneider A Drewes G Mandelkow EM Hyman BT 2000 Microtubule-affinity regulating kinase (MARK) is tightly associated with neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer brain: a fluorescence resonance energy transfer study Journal of Neuropathology and Experimental Neurology 59 11 966 971 11089574
304 Ittner LM Ke YD Delerue F Bi M Gladbach A van Eersel J Wölfing H Chieng BC Christie MJ Napier IA Eckert A Staufenbiel M Hardeman E Götz J 2010 Dendritic function of tau mediates amyloid-β toxicity in Alzheimer’s disease mouse models Cell 142 3 387 397 20655099
305 Ittner LM Götz J 2011 Amyloid-β and tau—a toxic pas de deux in Alzheimer’s disease Nature Reviews Neuroscience 12 2 65 72 21193853
306 Calkins MJ Manczak M Mao P Shirendeb U Reddy PH 2011 Impaired mitochondrial biogenesis, defective axonal transport of mitochondria, abnormal mitochondrial dynamics and synaptic degeneration in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Hum Mol Genet 20 4515 4529 21873260
307 Manczak M Reddy PH 2012 Abnormal interaction between the mitochondrial fission protein Drp1 and hyperphosphorylated tau in Alzheimer’s disease neurons: implications for mitochondrial dysfunction and neuronal damage Human molecular genetics 21 11 2538 2547 22367970
308 Hong Y Chan CB Kwon IS Li X Song M Lee HP Liu X Sompol P Jin P Lee HG Yu SP Ye K 2012 SRPK2 phosphorylates tau and mediates the cognitive defects in Alzheimer’s disease The Journal of Neuroscience 32 48 17262 17272 23197718
309 Caccamo A Branca C Talboom JS Shaw DM Turner D Ma L Messina A Huang Z Wu J Oddo S 2015 Reducing ribosomal protein S6 kinase 1 expression improves spatial memory and synaptic plasticity in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease The Journal of Neuroscience 35 41 14042 14056 26468204
310 Joshi YB Giannopoulos PF Chu J Sperow M Kirby LG Abood ME Praticò D 2014 Absence of ALOX5 gene prevents stress-induced memory deficits, synaptic dysfunction and tauopathy in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Human molecular genetics ddu412
311 Peethumnongsin E Yang L Kallhoff-Muñoz V Hu L Takashima A Pautler RG Zheng H 2010 Convergence of presenilin-and tau-mediated pathways on axonal trafficking and neuronal function The Journal of Neuroscience 30 40 13409 13418 20926667
312 Xu ZP Li L Bao J Wang ZH Zeng J Liu EJ Li XG Huang RX Gao D Li MZ Zhang Y Liu GP Wang JZ 2014 Magnesium protects cognitive functions and synaptic plasticity in streptozotocin-induced sporadic Alzheimer’s model PloS one 9 9 e108645 25268773
313 An W-L Cowburn RF Li L Braak H Alafuzoff I Iqbal K Iqbal I-G Winblad B Pei J-J 2003 Upregulation of phosphorylated/activated p70 S6 kinase and its relationship to neurofibrillary pathology in Alzheimer’s disease Am J Pathol 163 591 607 12875979
314 Caccamo A Majumder S Richardson A Strong R Oddo S 2010 Molecular interplay between mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), amyloid-beta, and Tau: effects on cognitive impairments J Biol Chem 285 13107 13120 20178983
315 Spilman P Podlutskaya N Hart MJ Debnath J Gorostiza O Bredesen D Richardson A Strong R Galvan V 2010 Inhibition of mTOR by rapamycin abolishes cognitive deficits and reduces amyloid beta levels in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease PLoS One 5 e9979 20376313
316 De Felice FG Vieira MN Bomfim TR Decker H Velasco PT Lambert MP Viola KL Zhao WQ Ferreira ST Klein WL 2009 Protection of synapses against Alzheimer’s-linked toxins: insulin signaling prevents the pathogenic binding of Abeta oligomers Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106 1971 1976 19188609
317 Townsend M Mehta T Selkoe DJ 2007 Soluble Abeta inhibits specific signal transduction cascades common to the insulin receptor pathway J Biol Chem 282 33305 33312 17855343
318 Reger MA Watson GS Green PS Wilkinson CW Baker LD Cholerton B Fishel MA Plymate SR Breitner JC DeGroodt W Mehta P Craft S 2008 Intranasal insulin improves cognition and modulates beta-amyloid in early AD Neurology 70 440 448 17942819
319 Cohen E Paulsson JF Blinder P Burstyn-Cohen T Du D Estepa G Adame A Pham HM Holzenberger M Kelly JW Masliah E Dillin A 2009 Reduced IGF-1 signaling delays age-associated proteotoxicity in mice Cell 139 1157 1169 20005808
320 Counts SE Mufson EJ 2005 The role of nerve growth factor receptors in cholinergic basal forebrain degeneration in prodromal Alzheimer disease J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 64 263 72 15835262
321 Mufson EJ Counts SE Ginsberg SD 2002 Gene expression profiles of cholinergic nucleus basalis neurons in Alzheimer’s disease Neurochem Res 27 1035 48 12462403
322 Forman MS Mufson EJ Leurgans S Pratico D Joyce S Leight S Lee VM Trojanowski JQ 2007 Cortical biochemistry in MCI and Alzheimer disease: lack of correlation with clinical diagnosis Neurology 68 757 63 17339583
323 Ginsberg SD Che S Counts SE Mufson EJ 2006 Shift in the ratio of three-repeat tau and four-repeat tau mRNAs in individual cholinergic basal forebrain neurons in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease J Neurochem 96 1401 8 16478530
324 Ginsberg SD Che S Counts SE Mufson EJ 2006 Single cell gene expression profiling in Alzheimer’s disease NeuroRx 3 302 18 16815214
325 Geula C Nagykery N Nicholas A Wu CK 2008 Cholinergic neuronal and axonal abnormalities are present early in aging and in Alzheimer disease J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 67 309 18 18379437
326 Sassin I Schultz C Thal DR Rüb U Arai K Braak E Braak H 2000 Evolution of Alzheimer’s disease-related cytoskeletal changes in the basal nucleus of Meynert Acta Neuropathol 100 259 69 10965795
327 Belarbi K Schindowski K Burnouf S Caillierez R Grosjean ME Demeyer D Hamdane M Sergeant N Blum D Buée L 2009 Early Tau pathology involving the septohippocampal pathway in a Tau transgenic model: relevance to Alzheimer’s disease Curr Alzheimer Res 6 152 7 19355850
328 Hellstrom-Lindahl E Moore H Nordberg A 2000 Increased levels of tau protein in SH-SY5Y cells after treatment with cholinesterase inhibitors and nicotinic agonists J Neurochem 74 777 84 10646530
329 Wang HY Li W Benedetti NJ Lee DH 2003 α7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptors mediate β-amyloid peptide-induced tau protein phosphorylation J BiolChem 278 31547 53
330 Bencherif M Lippiello PM 2010 Alpha7 neuronal nicotinic receptors: the missing link to understanding Alzheimer’s etiopathology? Med Hypotheses 74 281 5 19800174
331 Oddo S Caccamo A Green KN Liang K Tran L Chen Y Leslie FM LaFerla FM 2005 Chronic nicotine administration exacerbates tau pathology in a transgenic model of Alzheimer’s disease Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102 3046 51 15705720
332 Oddo S Caccamo A Tseng B Cheng D Vasilevko V Cribbs DH LaFerla FM 2008 Blocking Abeta42 accumulation delays the onset and progression of tau pathology via the C terminus of heat shock protein70-interacting protein: a mechanistic link between Abeta and tau pathology J Neurosci 28 12163 12175 19020010
333 Kihara T Shimohama S Sawada H Honda K Nakamizo T Shibasaki H Kume T Akaike A 2001 alpha 7 nicotinic receptor transduces signals to phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase to block A beta-amyloid-induced neurotoxicity J Biol Chem 276 13541 13546 11278378
334 Barrantes FJ Borroni V Vallés S 2010 Neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor–cholesterol crosstalk in Alzheimer’s disease FEBS letters 584 9 1856 1863 19914249
335 Wang Y Greig NH Yu QS Mattson MP 2009 Presenilin-1 mutation impairs cholinergic modulation of synaptic plasticity and suppresses NMDA currents in hippocampus slices Neurobiology of aging 30 7 1061 1068 18068871
336 Kim J Yoon H Basak J Kim J 2014 Apolipoprotein E in synaptic plasticity and Alzheimer’s disease: potential cellular and molecular mechanisms Mol Cells 37 11 767 776 25358504
337 Chakroborty S Kim J Schneider C West AR Stutzmann GE 2015 Nitric oxide signaling is recruited as a compensatory mechanism for sustaining synaptic plasticity in Alzheimer’s disease mice The Journal of Neuroscience 35 17 6893 6902 25926464
338 Kawas C Resnick S Morrison A Brookmeyer R Corrada M Zonderman A Bacal C Lingle DD Metter E 1997 A prospective study of estrogen replacement therapy and the risk of developing Alzheimer’s disease The Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging Neurology 48 6 1517 1521 9191758
339 Ferreira A Caceres A 1991 Estrogen-enhanced neurite growth: evidence for a selective induction of Tau and stable microtubules The Journal of neuroscience 11 2 392 400 1899446
340 Lorenzo A Diaz H Carrer H Caceres A 1992 Amygdala neurons in vitro: neurite growth and effects of estradiol J Neurosci Res 33 418 435 1469745
341 Woolley CS Wenzel HJ Schwartzkroin PA 1996 Estradiol increases the frequency of multiple synapse boutons in the hippocampal CA1 region of the adult female rat Journal of Comparative Neurology 373 1 108 117 8876466
342 McEwen BS Alves SE Bulloch K Weiland NG 1997 Ovarian steroids and the brain implications for cognition and aging Neurology 48 5 Suppl 7 8S 15S
343 Teter B Harris-White ME Frautschy SA Cole GM 1999 Role of apolipoprotein E and estrogen in mossy fiber sprouting in hippocampal slice cultures Neuroscience 91 3 1009 1016 10391478
344 Stone DJ Rozovsky I Morgan TE Anderson CP Finch CE 1998 Increased synaptic sprouting in response to estrogen via an apolipoprotein E-dependent mechanism: implications for Alzheimer’s disease The Journal of neuroscience 18 9 3180 3185 9547226
345 Mesulam MM 1999 Neuroplasticity failure in Alzheimer’s disease: bridging the gap between plaques and tangles Neuron 24 3 521 529 10595506
346 Brier MR Gordon B Friedrichsen K McCarthy J Stern A Christensen J Owen C Aldea P Su Y Hassenstab J Cairns NJ Holtzman DM Fagan AM Morris JC Benzinger TL Ances BM 2016 Tau and Aβ imaging, CSF measures, and cognition in Alzheimer’s disease Science translational medicine 8 338 338ra66 338ra6
