LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


2985190R
5004
J Neurochem
J. Neurochem.
Journal of neurochemistry
0022-3042
1471-4159

29341130
5897151
10.1111/jnc.14308
NIHMS934848
Article
Mitochondrial function and autophagy: integrating proteotoxic, redox, and metabolic stress in Parkinson’s disease
Zhang Jianhua 123
Culp M Lillian 12
Craver Jason G 12
Darley-Usmar Victor 12
1 Center for Free Radical Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham
2 Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham
3 Department of Veterans Affairs, Birmingham VA Medical Center
Corresponding author: Jianhua Zhang, Ph.D, Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Biomedical Research Building II, 901 19th Street South, Birmingham, Alabama 35294, Tel: 205-996-5153, Fax: 205-934-7447, jianhuazhang@uabmc.edu
DR. JIANHUA ZHANG (Orcid ID : 0000-0002-2128-9574)

16 1 2018
14 2 2018
3 2018
01 3 2019
144 6 691709
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a movement disorder with widespread neurodegeneration in the brain. Significant oxidative, reductive, metabolic, and proteotoxic alterations have been observed in PD postmortem brains. The alterations of mitochondrial function resulting in decreased bioenergetic health is important and needs to be further examined to help develop biomarkers for PD severity and prognosis. It is now becoming clear that multiple hits on metabolic and signaling pathways are likely to exacerbate PD pathogenesis. Indeed, data obtained from genetic and genome association studies have implicated interactive contributions of genes controlling protein quality control and metabolism. For example, loss of key proteins that are responsible for clearance of dysfunctional mitochondria through a process called mitophagy has been found to cause PD, and a significant proportion of genes associated with PD encode proteins involved in the autophagy-lysosomal pathway. In this review, we highlight the evidence for the targeting of mitochondria by proteotoxic, redox and metabolic stress and the role autophagic surveillance in maintenance of mitochondrial quality. Furthermore, we summarize the role of α-synuclein, LRRK2, and tau in modulating mitochondrial function and autophagy. Among the stressors that can overwhelm the mitochondrial quality control mechanisms, we will discuss 4-hydroxynonenal (HNE) and nitric oxide. The impact of autophagy is context depend and as such can have both beneficial and detrimental effects. Furthermore, we highlight the potential of targeting mitochondria and autophagic function as an integrated therapeutic strategy and the emerging contribution of the microbiome to PD susceptibility.

Graphical Abstract

This review provides highlights on recent observations regarding the multifacet impact of pathological proteins, endogenously produced reactive species, environmental toxins, and metabolism including glucose and fatty acid metabolism, on mitochondria - autophagy function, in the context of Parkinson’s disease. The review also discuss future studies of designing targeted strategies to aid the treatment of Parkinson’s Disease.

Bioenergetic health index
4-hydroxynonenal
thiol
post-translational modification
glucose metabolism
endosome-lysosomes
microglia
α-synuclein
cathepsin D

Introduction

Parkinson’s disease (PD) was described 200 years ago as a disease of shaking palsy (Obeso et al. 2017). We now know that PD is a condition with both motor and non-motor symptoms including cognitive impairment, due to neurodegeneration of dopaminergic and non-dopaminergic neurons, with prodromal symptoms with gastrointestinal, olfactory, and REM sleep disturbances. Approximately 1 in 100 Americans older than 60 years are affected by this disease and it is estimated that between 2010 and 2030, the number of individuals 65 years or older with PD will increase by 77% (Dorsey et al. 2013, Fritsch et al. 2012). The Parkinson’s Disease Foundation has estimated that the combined annual direct and indirect cost of PD in the United States is $25 billion. Worldwide, it affects 1–3% of the population of 50 years or older (Dehay et al. 2015).

A key pathological feature of PD is the appearance of Lewy bodies and Lewy Neurite in the brain. Protease resistant α-synuclein aggregates are a major component in the Lewy Bodies and Lewy Neurites. A 140 amino acid protein, α-synuclein has been found in the cytoplasm, mitochondria, and the nucleus, although its physiological function is still unclear other than it may be involved in synaptic function (Abeliovich et al. 2000). Pathologically α-synuclein may exert neurotoxicity by disrupting protein trafficking, or interfering with autophagy-lysosomal and mitochondrial function, thus contributing to neurodegeneration and PD pathogenesis and progression (Lee &amp; Trojanowski 2006, Lashuel et al. 2013, Schmid et al. 2013). Cellular damage can also be spread from a donor cell to neighboring cells by inter-cellular transfer of α-synuclein (Luk et al. 2012a, Luk et al. 2012b, Volpicelli-Daley et al. 2011, Luk et al. 2009, Steiner et al. 2011).

There are currently no available pharmacological approaches for preventing or attenuating neuronal loss in PD; consequently, treatment options are limited to symptomatic management. Therefore, a better understanding of the fundamental processes that affect PD development and progression is of paramount importance and has been an area of intense research. Because of the importance of mitochondria and the autophagy-lysosomal activities in neurons and PD, in this review, we highlight some of the recent studies that focused on oxidative, metabolic and proteotoxic stress and discuss how they affect mitochondrial and autophagic function. Finally, we will overview the progress in developing mitochondria and autophagy targeted therapeutic strategies (Fig. 1).

A. The mitochondrial-autophagy axis in Parkinson’s disease

Accumulation of toxic proteins and damaged mitochondria have been noted as key features of PD (Goedert et al. 2017). Damaged mitochondria can be a source and further increase reactive species production (Murphy 2009). Removal of these toxic cellular components is therefore essential for neuronal health, and this is largely dependent on the lysosomal-mediated autophagic function. Both mitochondrial and autophagy-lysosomal dysfunction have been found in postmortem Parkinson’s disease brains (Chu Y 2009, Schapira 2007, Ryan et al. 2015, Swerdlow 2009, Beal 2003, Parker &amp; Swerdlow 1998, Schapira et al. 1990, Bindoff et al. 1989), as well as dopaminergic neurons derived from patients with idiopathic and familial PD (Burbulla et al. 2017, Wang et al. 2017). A recent study also demonstrated downregulation of mRNAs for key autophagy genes in the peripheral blood mononuclear cells of patients with PD (Miki et al. 2017). Here we will review the evidence of mitochondrial and autophagy dysfunction in PD. Understanding of the cause and consequences of this dysfunction is crucial to help find interventions for therapeutics for PD.

1. Mitochondria as targets for environmental toxins that contribute to Parkinson’s disease risk

The mitochondrion is a multifunctional organelle that plays an essential role not only in energy production, but also in thermogenesis, calcium homeostasis, generating and maintaining key cellular metabolites, and redox signaling (Hill et al. 2012). With age, mitochondrial function declines, while mtDNA damage/mutations increase, leading to increased risk for PD (Schapira &amp; Gegg 2011, Reeve et al. 2013). In this section, we will discuss how environmental toxins contribute to proteotoxicity and the formation of Lewy bodies.

Mitochondria contain several hundred redox centers that have the potential to react with xenobiotics generating secondary reactive metabolites or can be secondary targets of ROS (reactive oxygen species) generated within the cell. Since these damaged redox proteins in mitochondria can exhibit a gain of function in which they amplify oxidative damage or disrupt normal redox signaling then it is essential that they are removed. If this does not occur, damaged respiratory proteins and mtDNA can impair the capacity of the organelle quality control mechanisms and thereby amplify the initial insult through a progressively increased metabolic dysfunction and oxidative stress (Hill et al. 2012, Murphy 2009). These patterns of responses have been shown experimentally in the models of PD, which have used xenobiotics that are mitochondrial toxins. For example, 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1, 2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP), a by-product in the drug abused by a group of young adults in California was found to be responsible for causing parkinsonism, through a mechanism which was later found to be associated with mitochondrial complex I inhibition (Ramsay et al. 1987, Nicklas et al. 1987, Mizuno et al. 1987). Analogous data has been reported for the complex I inhibitor rotenone which is found in plants and used to control fish populations (Clark 1933). There are possibly a range of environmental toxins which increase the susceptibility to PD including pesticides such as paraquat which directly or indirectly target mitochondrial function (Priyadarshi et al. 2001, Priyadarshi et al. 2000, van der et al. 2012, Tanner et al. 2011, Giordano et al. 2012, Giordano et al. 2014b) (Fig. 1).

The targets involved in the environmental xenobiotics are concordant with the biological pathways that are thought to be critical for the development of PD. For example, it has been shown that mitochondrial dysfunction in dopaminergic neurons leads to parkinsonian phenotypes (Ekstrand et al. 2007). Further, the protein α-synuclein associated with PD pathogenesis, targets the mitochondria and decreases mitochondrial function (Devi et al. 2008, Liu et al. 2009, Loeb et al. 2010b, Elkon et al. 2002, Ryan et al. 2015, Martinez &amp; Greenamyre 2012, Swerdlow 2009, Schapira 2007, Beal 2003, Parker &amp; Swerdlow 1998, Schapira et al. 1990, Bindoff et al. 1989). If these mechanisms act together, exposure to a xenobiotic, such as rotenone, can exacerbate an underlying synucleinopathy since the cell will be less capable of meeting the energetic requirements for protection against proteotoxicity. In this paradigm, sub-threshold levels of proteotoxicity or metabolic impairment can synergize to promote disease progression. It is likely that these effects are not solely confined to the central nervous system and can be expressed in other tissues and organs. This raises the possibility that circulating peripheral blood mononuclear cells or platelets can serve as biomarkers of deteriorating mitochondrial quality control (Kramer et al. 2014). This is now amenable to testing in human populations. Cellular Bioenergetics can be determined using the mitochondrial stress test which is based on the sequential addition of well-characterized inhibitors of oxidative phosphorylation to cells while measuring their rate of oxygen consumption and extracellular acidification (Hill et al. 2012). We have proposed that the resulting bioenergetic profile in cells isolated from normal compared to patients can be used to determine a Bioenergetic Health Index (BHI) (Chacko et al. 2014). Cellular bioenergetics health can then be compared to mitochondrial function in a parallel experiment using the same cells, by assessing the activity of protein complexes involved in oxidative phosphorylation including complex I and IV (Salabei et al. 2014). This new concept may help in developing a modifiable biomarker for PD development, prognosis and response to therapy as well as lead to a better understanding of mitochondrial damage and quality control in the disease.

2. Autophagy and mitophagy in neurodegeneration

Since different mechanisms converge to promote proteotoxicity and disrupt metabolic function, enhancing repair pathways would be beneficial irrespective of these diverse mechanisms of cell impairment. The removal of damaged proteins and mitochondria rely on the highly regulated lysosomal-mediated autophagy pathway (Zhang 2013). Autophagy integrates signals ranging from nutrient availability to cellular stress and, as shown recently, oxidative protein damage including oxidized lipids (Levonen et al. 2014, de Duve &amp; Wattiaux 1966, Takeshige et al. 1992, Mizushima et al. 2008, Zhang 2015). Since its discovery in the 1960s and the identification of the genes encoding the autophagic machinery in the 1990s (de Duve &amp; Wattiaux 1966, Takeshige et al. 1992), autophagy has been found to play an important role in health and disease (Mizushima et al. 2008). More than 38 autophagy related proteins and many lysosomal proteins are involved in the process (Zhang 2015).

At a technical level, the extension of the autophagy field to encompass a broad range of pathologies has been enabled by straightforward experimental strategies (Klionsky et al. 2016, Liang et al. 2013, Mitchell et al. 2013). For example, the formation and degradation by the lysosomes of the double membraned vesicles, which contain lipidated microtubule associated protein 1A/1B light chain 3 (LC3-II), has been used for assessment of autophagic activities (Klionsky et al. 2016, Liang et al. 2013, Mitchell et al. 2013). Accumulation of p62 protein in the absence of its transcription activation, and accumulated ubiquitinated proteins have been used as additional markers for autophagy inhibition (Jaber et al. 2012a, Jaber et al. 2012b, Parekh et al. 2013, Parekh et al. 2017). It is now technically possible to monitor autophagy and mitophagy in live cells. For example, RFP-GFP-LC3, MitoKeima and Mito-QC mice have been generated to facilitate autophagy/mitophagy flux analyses based on sensitivity of green fluorescent protein to the acidic environment of the lysosome. Using these approaches translocation of autophagosomes and mitochondria to the lysosomes for degradation can be monitored over a broad range of conditions (Li et al. 2014, Sun et al. 2015, Williams et al. 2017) (Fig. 2).

Key findings from these studies supporting the pathological importance of the autophagy pathway have come from a number of different model systems. For example, deficits in key autophagy genes, Atg5 or Atg7, in knockout mice, leads to accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins and neurodegeneration (Hara et al. 2006, Komatsu et al. 2006). Mitophagy plays a key role in mitochondrial quality control (Kim &amp; Lemasters 2011, Lemasters 2005) and proteins that regulate mitophagy such as Parkin, PINK1 and DJ-1, are associated with familial PD (Redmann et al. 2016, Lubbe &amp; Morris 2014, Redmann et al. 2014). Recent studies demonstrate that the most frequently mutated protein for familial PD, LRRK2, also plays a role in regulating autophagy, and its mutation may be synergistic with α-synuclein in impairing autophagic flux (Saha et al. 2015). With more studies and a better understanding of mitophagy regulation (Kim et al. 2016, Williams et al. 2017), there is hope that new effective therapeutic targets may be developed to focus on improving mitochondrial quality control and cellular metabolism.

3. The importance of the lysosome

In the previous sections, we focused on mitochondria as both an initiator and target of proteotoxicity. Of course dysfunctional protein responses can have broad affects in the cell and in this regard as a key player in the autophagy pathway, lysosomes play a central role in integrating autophagic and endosomal activities and in degrading damaged lipids, proteins, and organelles. Fifty hydrolases perform degradative activities in the lysosomes. Nonetheless, many of the hydrolases are essential for lysosomal activities and organismal health. A single enzyme deficiency could produce lysosomal storage diseases (LSD) and neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (NCL) (Schneider &amp; Zhang 2010). A significant proportion of the loci associated with PD are involved in or disrupt vesicular trafficking and the autophagy-lysosome pathway, including LRRK2 and GBA (Gan-Or et al. 2015, Diana Chang 2017, Schneider &amp; Zhang 2010, Benitez et al. 2016, Chiasserini et al. 2015, Mata et al. 2015), suggesting a significant impact of lysosomal perturbation in the disease. Among the studies worth noting, a recent study further demonstrated deficient lysosomal enzyme alpha-Galactosidase A in sporadic PD postmortem brains (Nelson et al. 2018). LRRK2 has been shown to impact endolysosomes and autophagy, and may have both autophagy promoting and autophagy inhibitory roles depending on the time/location/cellular context (Manzoni 2017).

Insufficient lysosomal turnover of the pathologic α-synuclein can result in α-synuclein accumulation. This is most evident from studies with the cathepsins that are lysosomal proteases responsible for autophagic degradation. For example, it has been shown that cathepsin D levels are decreased in substantia nigra neurons of PD patients compared to age-matched controls (Chu Y 2009). Furthermore, overexpression of cathepsin D, but not cathepsin B, in C. elegans, decreases α-synuclein toxicity (Qiao et al. 2008). Interestingly, cathepsin B is implicated in genome-wide association studies to be associated with PD (Diana Chang 2017). It has been shown that microglial secreted cathepsin B induces neuronal cell death (Kingham &amp; Pocock 2001) and that cathepsin B enhances aggregate formation and production of reactive oxygen species induced by exogenous α-synuclein fibrils (Tsujimura et al. 2014, Freeman et al. 2013).

B. Proteotoxic signaling regulates mitochondrial function and autophagy

As introduced above the proteotoxic potential of α-synuclein is an important aspect of the molecular mechanisms of cell dysfunction in neurodegenerative disease. The pathologies of PD are known to involve Lewy bodies and Lewy neurites, while the major component of these structures was identified as α-synuclein. Among others, α-synuclein, LRRK2 and PARK7 gene mutations have been found to be responsible for a subset of familial PD (Obeso et al. 2017). α-synuclein is a 140 amino acid protein expressed in neurons, while its accumulation occurs in PD, Alzheimer’s disease, and Dementia with Lewy Bodies brains. Because α-synuclein is associated with pathology, the appearance of phosphorylated or oligomerized forms of α-synuclein in the cerebral spinal fluid are being explored as potential biomarkers with more improved and specific antibodies (Majbour et al. 2016). LRRK2 is a large protein of 2,537 amino acids encompassing both kinase and GTPase domains, its mutations are the most frequently found among familial PD (Obeso et al. 2017). Parkin, PINK1 and PARK7/DJ-1 are recessive PD, whose loss of function contribute to PD pathogenesis and all of these three genes are implicated in regulating mitophagy (Obeso et al. 2017).

1. α-synuclein

Although exact mechanisms are unclear, α-synuclein is normally involved in synaptic function (Abeliovich et al. 2000), and misfolding, mutation, or post-translational modification leading to its accumulation is potentially pathogenic (Lashuel et al. 2013, Goedert et al. 2017). Deficiencies in lysosomal-dependent α-synuclein protein degradation lead to α-synuclein accumulation and neurodegeneration in animal models (Qiao et al. 2008, Cullen et al. 2009). Lysosomal perturbation has been implicated in PD or parkinsonism genetic mutations or polymorphisms, including LRRK2, SNCA, LAMP3, GBA, and ATP13A2 (Gan-Or et al. 2015). Pathological α-synuclein can disrupt protein trafficking, induce neuroinflammation, and interfere with the autophagy-lysosomal pathway and mitochondrial function (Lee &amp; Trojanowski 2006, Lashuel et al. 2013, Schmid et al. 2013, Zhou et al. 2016), toxicity is not only intracellular, but also can be intercellular due to the fact that α-synuclein can spread from a donor cell to neighboring cells and thus propagate cellular damage (Luk et al. 2012a, Luk et al. 2012b, Volpicelli-Daley et al. 2011, Luk et al. 2009, Steiner et al. 2011, Rutherford et al. 2015). Endocytosis, direct penetration, trans-synaptic transmission, membrane receptors, and Parkin regulation of lipid rafts have all been suggested to mediate α-synuclein spreading (Lashuel et al. 2013, Cha et al. 2015). Autophagic failure has been shown to promote the intercellular transfer of α-synuclein (Desplats et al. 2009, Lee et al. 2013, Ejlerskov et al. 2013).

Not surprisingly, α-synuclein interacts with key redox regulated pathways and proteins in the cell. In the cytosol, α-synuclein interacts with Cu, Zn superoxide dismutase and affects its dimerization without affecting its activity (Helferich et al. 2016). α-synuclein targets mitochondria and perturbs mitochondrial function in cell culture and transgenic mouse studies (Elkon et al. 2002, Devi et al. 2008, Shavali et al. 2008, Parihar et al. 2009, Liu et al. 2009, Loeb et al. 2010a, Chinta et al. 2010, Loeb et al. 2010b, Zhu et al. 2011, Imaizumi et al. 2012, Braidy et al. 2013, Perfeito et al. 2014, Chen et al. 2015a, Di Maio et al. 2016). A recent study using a novel protein oxidation detection method also demonstrated α-synuclein radical formation after exposure to the pesticides Maneb and paraquat and caused cytochrome c release to the cytosol (Kumar et al. 2016). In total, one of the key mediators of the proteotoxicity associated with PD has clear mechanistic links to metabolism and redox biology.

2. Other neurotoxic proteins

In addition to α-synuclein, a few other proteins are also either prone to aggregation or connected to autophagy/mitophagy regulation in PD. Mechanisms of their actions may involve their interactions with α-synuclein or each other. The microtubule associated protein tau has been shown to co-localize with α-synuclein in dopaminergic neurons (Wills et al. 2010). The co-localization may play a role in sequestering tau from its normal function as α-synuclein fibrils have been shown to promote tau aggregation, resulting in decreased microtubule polymerization (Oikawa et al. 2016). The ability of LRRK2 to interact with tau has been demonstrated in HEK-293 cells, where LRRK2 overexpression can increase tau protein, its formation of oligomers/aggregates in these cells, and its secretion with the underlying mechanism involving proteasomal but not autophagy impairment (Guerreiro et al. 2016). LRRK2 G2019S mutant induced dendrite degeneration in Drosophila in a tau dependent manner (Lin et al. 2010). Interestingly, as Tau, LRRK2 has also been shown to interact with cytoskeleton proteins, and may play a role in microtubule dynamics, and microtubule-mediated vesicular transport (Blanca Ramirez et al. 2017).

The impact of LRRK2 on autophagy and protein trafficking pathway is complicated, and observations vary depending on the cell type and on whether LRRK2 mutation, silencing, or kinase inhibition was used (Manzoni 2017). Among potential mechanisms of LRRK2 regulation of autophagy, in SH-SY5Y cells and in rat cortical neurons, overexpression of wild type and G2019S mutant LRRK2 induces mitochondrial fragmentation, and this appears to be dependent on Drp1 in SH-SY5Y cells (Wang et al. 2012). In HEK294 cells, it has been shown that LRRK2 overexpression can induce autophagy by a calcium-dependent mechanism mediated by CaMKK-β/AMPK pathway, LRRK2 has been found to phosphorylate NSF at T645 in the ATP binding pocket and thereby increases SNARE disassembly (Belluzzi et al. 2016), which in turn modulates autophagosome-lysosome fusion (Zhang 2015, Yu et al. 2017). Although autophagy can be neuroprotective in clearance of damaged proteins and organelles, excessive autophagy in mouse cortical dendrites promoted by overexpression of LRRK2 mutant protein can be detrimental and this is also associated with calcium imbalance, and may be mediated by a pathological increase in mitochondrial calcium uptake (Verma et al. 2017) (Cherra et al. 2013).

PD recessive genes, Parkin, PINK1 and PARK7/DJ-1, have also been shown to play a role in mitochondrial quality control and development of approaches targeting these proteins as therapeutic strategies will likely be important (Goedert et al. 2017, Obeso et al. 2017, Zhang et al. 2017b, Barodia et al. 2016, Scott et al. 2017). As α-synuclein, PARK7/DJ-1 accumulates in PD brains (Choi et al. 2006), and can be a substrate of chaperone-mediated autophagy (Cuervo et al. 2004, Wang et al. 2016). In a mouse midbrain dopamine neuron progenitor cell line, MPP+ exposure increased DJ-1 carbonyl formation and degradation (Wang et al. 2016). Overexpression of LAMP2A, the lysosomal receptor of chaperone-mediated autophagy, enhances DJ-1 degradation and cell survival in response to MPP+ (Wang et al. 2016). Interestingly, recent studies also demonstrated a role of DJ-1 in microglia in autophagy and α-synuclein uptake and clearance (Nash et al. 2017).

C. Redox stress in the regulation of mitochondrial function and autophagy

1. Redox stress

The redox regulation of cellular environments is now emerging as an important area of research integrating metabolic and redox-dependent signaling. Interestingly, maintaining a stable intracellular redox environment is critical in both preventing proteotoxicity, and removing by autophagy the resulting damage that occurs before the toxic proteins are removed. It is now abundantly clear that both oxidative and reductive stress can arise if at a given cellular location and time the redox tone is not maintained within physiological boundaries. The regulation of these redox specific intracellular domains is controlled by the Keap1/Nrf2 system (Dodson et al. 2015). Interestingly, Nrf2 over activation increases the expression of pro-reductant pathways leading to a reductive stress and proteotoxicity in the heart (Dodson et al. 2015, Badia et al. 2013, Ralser &amp; Benjamin 2008, Rajasekaran et al. 2008, Russell et al. 1999). Whether this also occurs in the brain is not well understood. In the context of the “redox signaling paradigm”, reactive oxygen species are produced by controlled by specific pathways and dysfunction arises not from non-specific oxidation of macromolecules but the loss of domain controlled signaling (Dodson et al. 2013a). In this context although it is well known that mitochondria can produce reactive oxygen species including superoxide and hydrogen peroxide it is less well appreciated that these can be tightly controlled through and play a role in cell signaling (Murphy 2009, Lee et al. 2012a, Dodson et al. 2013a, Quinlan et al. 2013, Wong et al. 2017, Brand 2016). In addition, NADPH oxidase, dual oxidases, monoamine oxidase, cytochrome p450, and xanthine oxidase also generate hydrogen peroxide and superoxide as their normal cellular function (Halliwell &amp; Gutteridge 2015). Excessive reactive oxygen species are dynamically reduced by superoxide dismutases and catalase. Without these enzymes, these reactive species, together with nitric oxide generated by nitric oxide synthases can damage lipid and proteins, and resulting lipid peroxidation product such as HNE can cause further damage to cellular constituents (Dodson et al. 2013a). Oxidative post-translational modification of DNA, lipid, and protein is associated with a number of age related pathologies including PD (Halliwell 2012, Kalyanaraman 2013, Sies 2015). Interestingly, reactive lipid species also have a signaling function so the interface between pathological and physiological oxidative lipid signaling is critical to understand (Levonen et al. 2014, Higdon et al. 2012b). Since redox protein and lipid modifications are essential for normal physiology, the emerging concept is that pathology arises from loss of control of non-physiological redox modifications and the toxic gain of function of oxidized proteins and lipids (Wende et al. 2016b).

2. Oxidative stress and dopaminergic neurodegeneration

In neurons, there are some specific mechanism that can promote oxidative protein modification and result in toxicity. For example, a robust literature has reported an increased in oxidative stress markers in Parkinson’s postmortem brains, including elevated lipid peroxidation-protein adducts and protein carbonyls, oxidized complex I subunits, nitration of α-synuclein, increased thiol-DOPA conjugates, and increased glutathione and Coenzyme Q10 oxidation (Giordano et al. 2014a, Selley 1998, Yoritaka et al. 1996). Oxidation of proteins can contribute to proteotoxicity by blocking the sites needed for proteasomal degradation, or by promoting the formation of insoluble aggregates. An example of a lipid peroxidation-dependent modification is the lipid aldehyde 4-hydroxynonenal (HNE) which forms stable adducts which change protein function by modification of histidine, arginine, lysine and cysteine residues (Higdon et al. 2012a). Once formed, the protein adducts can only be removed by controlled degradation of the protein. Their accumulation can result in a toxic gain of function through promotion of protein aggregation or, in the case of redox proteins, such as those found in the mitochondrion, increased levels of reactive oxygen species. Because of the physiological role of oxidized lipids in signaling, it is thus important to distinguish what constitutes a pathological level of these molecules which may vary according to cell type and age (Higdon et al. 2012c). As will be discussed further below α-synuclein can be modified by HNE and the modification promotes its aggregation and toxicity (Xiang et al. 2015). Aldehyde dehydrogenase 1A1 (ALDH1A1), an enzyme important for metabolizing nonenal as well as dopamine metabolites, is decreased in PD brains, and ALDH1A1 and ALDH2 double knockout mice exhibited increased HNE and 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetaldehyde (DOPAL) and significant dopaminergic neurodegeneration (Grunblatt &amp; Riederer 2016).

3. Oxidative stress and mitochondria

Since the reactive lipid species or neuronal specific reactive species discussed above can target mitochondria impaired detoxification can lead to the slow accumulation of adducted proteins and a greater demand on the autophagy pathway. In support of this concept experimental evidence has established that the mitochondria are a nexus for both the physiological and pathological effects of reactive lipid species and as such are an important target for potential dysfunction in neurodegenerative disease (Higdon et al. 2012b). Indeed, mitochondrial dysfunction occurs in the brains of PD patients (Ryan et al. 2015, Swerdlow 2009, Schapira 2007, Beal 2003, Parker &amp; Swerdlow 1998, Schapira et al. 1990, Bindoff et al. 1989). Neurotoxins have been shown to target mitochondria in Parkinsonism patients and in animal models (Martinez &amp; Greenamyre 2012, Bove et al. 2005). Specifically, mitochondria are a target for HNE modification and this can influence bioenergetic function in a variety of cell types (Dranka et al. 2011a, Dranka et al. 2011b, Ravi et al. 2015). HNE adducts with mitochondrial respiratory chain subunits have been reported and are associated with enhanced reactive species production and a decrease in the mitochondrial bioenergetic reserve capacity, all of which contribute to a decreased ability of the cell to combat metabolic and proteotoxic stress (Reed et al. 2008, Lee et al. 2012b, Breitzig et al. 2016, Galam et al. 2016, Harris et al. 2015, Fritz et al. 2011, Singh et al. 2015). If these damaged mitochondria, which are capable of generating secondary reactive oxygen species and amplifying the initial oxidative insult, are not removed, the threshold for pathology is lowered (Hill et al. 2012, Lee et al. 2012a, Redmann et al. 2014).

4. Oxidative stress and autophagy

The importance of thresholds for toxicity in neuronal cells depends on age, genetics and other factors and can be assessed in vitro. For example, in primary neurons, HNE inhibits mitochondrial function and although autophagy is initially protective, it can be overwhelmed as HNE concentrations increase in neurons (Dodson et al. 2017, Zhang et al. 2017a). It is now possible to identify the HNE modified proteins using sensitive tagging techniques that can help relate specific targets to changes in metabolism and autophagy (Dodson et al. 2017, Dodson et al. 2013a, Dodson et al. 2015, Dodson et al. 2013b). Protein thiols targeted by HNE and other oxidants have been demonstrated for autophagy-lysosomal pathway proteins including ATG4, LC3, PARK7/DJ-1, and cathepsins that in the cysteine proteinases family (Lee et al. 2012a, Dodson et al. 2015, Dodson et al. 2013a, Wani et al. 2015). ATG4 thiol modification at Cys81 decreases its activity by suppressing LC3 delipidation (Scherz-Shouval et al. 2007). The lipidation mechanism is a possible link to inflammation since a 12/15-lipoxygenase-derived oxidized phospholipid, 12-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid-phosphatidylethanolamine, was found to be a preferred substrate compared to native phosphatidylethanolamine for yeast Atg8 lipidation (Morgan et al. 2015). Sulfinic acid formation at Cys106 of PARK7/DJ-1, a protein encoded by a recessive PD gene, is important for its function in maintaining mitochondrial connectivity and in cell protection when exposed to the mitochondrial toxin rotenone (Blackinton et al. 2009). A recent study demonstrated that wildtype but not C106 mutant PARK7/DJ-1 can convert methylglyoxal (pyruvaldehyde)-adducted glutathione to free glutathione and lactate suggesting that it is potentially involved in aldehyde detoxification (Matsuda et al. 2017).

Lysosomal cysteine proteases cathepsin B and L, but not aspartate proteases are inactivated when murine macrophage-like cells are exposed to protein hydroperoxides, consistent with the sensitivity of the active site thiol to oxidative stress (Rahmanto et al. 2010). Nonetheless, cathepsin D oxidative modification has been found in the brains of Down syndrome patients with a slight increase of enzyme activity, which could be viewed as a potential compensatory response to increased plaques and tangles (Di et al. 2016). We propose that autophagy is critical in maintaining cellular redox homeostasis and by removing damaged mitochondria and oxidized proteins it serves a cellular antioxidant function in removing toxic proteins and organelles (Giordano et al. 2014a). α-synuclein contains 1 histidine (H50) and 15 lysine residues that are targets for modification by electrophilic lipid peroxidation products such as HNE. Interestingly, it has been shown that HNE promotes α-synuclein toxicity (Xiang et al. 2013). This result is intriguing as H50Q is responsible for a subset of familial PD cases (Kiely et al. 2015). It turns out that although H50Q α-synuclein is less susceptible to HNE modification than wildtype α-synuclein, it forms more aggregates and cells expressing H50Q are more sensitive to hydrogen peroxide-induced cell death (Xiang et al. 2015).

5. The impact of nitric oxide on mitochondrial function and autophagy in the context of Parkinson’s disease

The previous discussion has focused on either endogenous xenobiotics or the products of lipid or protein oxidation as mediators of toxicity. However, it is important to note that the controlled production of reactive species is an important part of normal physiology. This in itself is potential vulnerability if control of these pathways is disrupted. An important example is nitric oxide (NO) has contrasting roles in neurodegeneration with evidence for both protective and toxic effects. As we have discussed previously, these are best understood in the concentration dependent engagement of distinct cellular targets in the cell (Hill et al. 2010). There are essentially two heme based targets; guanylate cyclase and cytochrome c oxidase. The effects on mitochondrial function are more complex. Nitric oxide can reversibly inhibit mitochondrial complex IV at high concentrations or when oxygen tension is low (Cleeter et al. 1994, Benavides et al. 2013). This can be protective by maintaining physiological oxygen gradients but if NO compromises ATP production then it will become detrimental (Shiva et al. 2005). When nitric oxide reacts with superoxide to generate peroxynitrite, the effects on the modified lipid and proteins can be irreversible and detrimental (Benavides et al. 2013, Radi et al. 1991a, Radi et al. 1991b, Ischiropoulos et al. 1992, Beckman &amp; Crow 1993, Szabo et al. 2007). Interestingly, the mitochondria are thought to be one of the main targets of peroxynitrite in neuronal cells (Estevez et al. 2017). In the central nervous system, nitric oxide is generated in the neurons by nNOS, induced by NMDA and glutamate receptor activation, and in microglia by iNOS induced by inflammatory signals. nNOS variants have been found to be associated with PD in conjunction with organophosphate pesticides (Paul et al. 2016). Nitric oxide produced by either neurons or glia significantly impacts susceptibility of neurons to toxic insults, as evidence by that nNOS or iNOS gene deletion protects mice against MPTP induced dopaminergic neurodegeneration (Przedborski et al. 1996, Liberatore et al. 1999). As iNOS production in microglia can be induced by LPS and TNFα, it has been hypothesized that neuroinflammation may play a role in nitric oxide production and impact PD pathogenesis. The important role of microglia, a major source of nitric oxide, in PD is further demonstrated by the finding that a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the human leukocyte antigen (HLA-DRA) gene, which encodes HLA-DR antigens expressed in microglia, has been identified as a risk factor for PD (Wissemann et al. 2013, Tansey &amp; Goldberg 2010). It remains to be determined whether microglial expansion, activation or morphological changes are beneficial or detrimental factors in PD pathogenesis.

Although a direct hit of excessive nitric oxide to neurons appear to be detrimental to its mitochondrial function, the role of systemic nitric oxide is dependent on its source and cellular context. Nitric oxide generated from inorganic nitrite has been shown to play a protective role in variety of pathologies including cardiovascular diseases (Weitzberg et al. 2010, Rocha et al. 2016). Nitrite administration in zebrafish protected dopaminergic neurodegeneration induced by 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP+), in rat protected dopaminergic neurodegeneration induced by rotenone or 6-hydroxydopamine, and in dermal fibroblasts from human PD patients with LRRK2 mutations (Chiara Milanese 2017). Since, as mentioned above, nNOS appears to be detrimental in this context then an alternative mechanism of action for nitrite is implied. Indeed, in MPP+ treated SH-SY5Y cells, it appeared that the mechanisms of nitrite protection involve nitrosation of mitochondrial complex I as well as activation of transcription factor Nrf2 (Chiara Milanese 2017).

It has been shown that in a variety of cell types, nitric oxide can inhibit autophagy (Benavides et al. 2013, Sarkar et al. 2011), although how the regulation of autophagy by nitric oxide affects PD pathogenesis is still unclear. Transient autophagosome accumulation is induced by kainic acid, an agonist of glutamate receptors, and delayed increase of p-Akt and p-mTOR follows (Shacka et al. 2007). The regulation of autophagy by kainic acid may be mediated by nitric oxide as glutamate receptor activation has been shown to activate nNOS (Dawson &amp; Dawson 1998). Inhibition of autophagy by nitric oxide during hypoxia-reoxygenation may contribute to bioenergetics impairment and promote cell death in neurons (Benavides et al. 2013).

D. Metabolic signaling regulates mitochondrial function and autophagy

1. Glucose metabolism

From the previous discussion it is evident that physiological metabolism utilizes a broad range of redox reactions and is essential for normal neuronal function. For this reason, attention has increasingly focused on cellular bioenergetics and metabolism in health and diseases (Holmes et al. 2008). Deficiencies of PD genes, Parkin and PINK1, affect mitochondrial homeostasis or quality control (Narendra et al. 2012). Parkinsonism gene Atg13a2 mutations have been shown to cause lysosomal (Ramirez et al. 2006, Usenovic et al. 2012), mitochondrial (Grunewald et al. 2012), and glycolytic dysfunction (Park et al. 2016). As introduced above, MPTP and pesticides that induce Parkinsonism or increase PD risk target mitochondrial complex I, thereby depressing mitochondrial function (Ramsay et al. 1987, Nicklas et al. 1987, Mizuno et al. 1987, Priyadarshi et al. 2001, Priyadarshi et al. 2000, van der et al. 2012, Tanner et al. 2011, Giordano et al. 2012, Giordano et al. 2014b). In addition to direct targeting of mitochondrial electron transport proteins, additional signaling mechanisms may impact PD pathogenesis, including modification of mitochondrial fission and fusion, and modification of mitochondrial movement within the neuron (Yan et al. 2013). Because complex and chronic diseases such as PD are affected by systemic as well as organ-specific metabolism, changes in metabolic activities may be monitored as biomarkers for progression of the diseases as well as therapeutic responses (Chacko et al. 2014).

While there is some emphasis on glycolysis to provide ATP in the brain, glucose metabolism is also essential to provide NADPH to maintain lipid oxidation products including HNE within the physiological range. This link between metabolism and redox signaling is an important part of normal physiology. In addition, it is known that glucose metabolism can regulate autophagy through several signaling mechanisms in a variety of cell types (Moruno et al. 2012). Key enzymes in the glucose metabolism pathway, hexokinase and GAPDH, have been shown to interact with mTOR or Rheb and decreases mTOR signaling when glucose is low (Eng &amp; Abraham 2011, Roberts &amp; Miyamoto 2015). The integration of glucose metabolism and autophagy has also been demonstrated by a recent study that autophagy proteins, ULK1 and ULK2, can also directly phosphorylate enzymes in the glycolytic and gluconeogenic pathways to enhance glucose uptake and decrease gluconeogenesis in order to maintain cellular ATP production and redox homeostasis (Li et al. 2016). Whether similar regulatory mechanisms play a role in neurons and in the pathogenesis of PD is currently unclear. Assessment of glucose metabolism by 18-F-2-fluoro-deoxyglucose and positron emission tomography has shown a decline of glucose metabolism in aging (Zuendorf et al. 2003). This assessment has been used in Alzheimer’s disease diagnosis (Nordberg et al. 2010). Furthermore, it has been shown that diabetes increases Alzheimer’s disease risk (Holscher 2011). Despite of these findings, the association between glucose metabolism and non-demented PD has not been firmly established (Cereda et al. 2013, Hu et al. 2000).

A significant amount of glucose is metabolized through the hexosamine biosynthetic pathway, which produces UDP-GlcNAc. UDP-GlcNAc can be added to protein Ser/Thr residues and modify protein functions. This modification may be of importance to Alzheimer’s and PD through direct modification of tau or α-synuclein (Yuzwa et al. 2008, Yuzwa et al. 2012, Yuzwa et al. 2014, Wani et al. 2016, Wani et al. 2017), and through regulation of mitochondrial function and autophagy (Hu et al. 2009, Makino et al. 2011, Pekkurnaz et al. 2014, Lozano et al. 2014, Dassanayaka et al. 2015, Trapannone et al. 2016, Wani et al. 2017, Guo et al. 2014, Roberts et al. 2014, Jo et al. 2016). The extent and biological impact of O-GlcNAc modification of proteins in the context of mitochondrial function, autophagy and PD still needs to be further defined. Other metabolites that have been shown to play an important role in regulating mitochondrial and autophagic activities include glutamine and acetyl CoA (Tan et al. 2017, Hjelmeland &amp; Zhang 2016, Marino et al. 2014, Shi &amp; Tu 2015). Although studies have been performed regarding changes of metabolites in toxin and transgenic mice, the involvement of particular metabolites in PD are currently uncertain (Chen et al. 2015b, Worth et al. 2014).

2. Fatty acid oxidation

Although glucose is the preferred fuel for the brain, fatty acid oxidation products are also important substrates under conditions of hypoglycemia (Romano et al. 2017). A higher uptake of hydrogenated and saturated fat in the brain has been associated with development of insulin resistance and Alzheimer’s disease (Holscher 2011), while a ketogenic diet has been shown to be neuroprotective in a variety of conditions (Danial et al. 2013, Romano et al. 2017). The connection between lipid metabolism and autophagy has been further demonstrated by the finding that SREBP1 and SREBF1 can regulate autophagy and mitophagy (Ivatt et al. 2014, Jegga et al. 2011). As SREBF1 is a risk locus for sporadic PD, this finding provides insight into the connection between fatty acid metabolism, mitochondria, and mitophagy in PD pathogenic mechanisms. This important link between metabolism and PD is further supported by the observations that gastrointestinal abnormalities and sleep perturbations are often symptoms preceding motor dysfunction in PD patients.

3. Systemic regulation of metabolism

Naturally, we have largely focused on the local effects of metabolism and protein quality control in the central nervous system. An important and emerging area relates to how the systemic effects of metabolism and redox regulation interact with the pathophysiology of neurodegenerative disease. α-synuclein pathology has been shown to occur early in the enteric nervous system in PD patients (Del Tredici &amp; Braak 2016). A recent study has shown benefit for motor function of a glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist approved for treatment of type 2 diabetes on PD patients in a clinical trial (Athauda et al. 2017). Furthermore, systemic control of metabolism is particularly interesting with respect to the microbiome which has recently been shown to be a potential player in PD (Nair et al. 2018, Hill-Burns et al. 2017). Recent studies identified differences in microbiome in PD patients compared to controls (Scheperjans et al. 2015). In mice overexpressing α-synuclein, both germ-free condition and antibiotic treatment have shown to ameliorate motor deficits, α-synuclein accumulation, microglial activation and cytokine production (Sampson et al. 2016). Colonization with microbiota from PD patients, or oral administration of short-chain fatty acids, which are produced during viral infection by the gut microbiome and are decreased by germ-free condition or antibiotic treatment, exacerbates these phenotypes (Sampson et al. 2016). The interconnection of the gut environment, the metabolites generated, and PD pathogenesis warrants further investigation.

Circadian rhythms integrate metabolism with time-of-day demands for normal physiology, and disruption is associated with increased susceptibility to disease (Wende et al. 2016a, Abbott et al. 2018). Indeed, sleep perturbation is an important clinical feature of PD with as many as 64% PD patients reporting sleep problems. The mechanisms are still emerging but it has been shown that BMAL1, a clock regulatory protein, is decreased in the peripheral blood of PD patients and is no longer rhythmic (Breen et al. 2014). As circadian clock is a strong regulator of metabolism, and recent studies identified key autophagy genes under circadian regulation (Wende et al. 2016a), the clock-metabolism-autophagy connection may play a key role in PD pathogenesis and may be targeted for therapeutic purposes (Musiek &amp; Holtzman 2016, Breen et al. 2014, Wende et al. 2016a).

Therapeutic strategies and future directions

In this review, we have highlighted the integrated nature of metabolism, the response to stress and how the limited capacity of repair systems contributes to the pathophysiology of PD. At the level of the proteotoxicity mechanisms, multiple strategies have been explored to target α-synuclein for the development of new therapies for PD (Olanow &amp; Kordower 2017, Valera &amp; Masliah 2016). Proteasomal and lysosomal pathways can degrade α-synuclein in vivo but these functions decline both with age and with the development of PD (Chu Y 2009). There is an urgent unmet need to investigate novel approaches to enhance the clearance of α-synuclein protein. Autophagy is an attractive therapeutic strategy because it has the potential to not only remove excessive or toxic α-synuclein species, but also degrade other damaged cellular constituents. In this regard, rapamycin and other autophagy activators have been shown to be protective in cell and animal models of neurodegenerative diseases (Hochfeld et al. 2013). However, rapamycin may promote a starvation response that degrades both healthy and unhealthy components of the cells. Furthermore, the potential benefits of inducing autophagy initiation are dependent on optimal lysosomal function, which appears to be inhibited in PD. Thus, it is important to find a strategy to restore the efficiency of clearing damaged cellular proteins and organelles in the lysosomes, without depleting those that are still functional. Studies have identified roles of TFEB as a transcription factor activating the expression of genes encoding lysosomal proteins (Decressac et al. 2013, Settembre et al. 2011). Transcriptional activation of a wide range of autophagy proteins is effective in animal models (Decressac et al. 2013), although it may also lead to excessive autophagy which depletes cellular contents and is then detrimental. Thus, it is important to increase the efficiency of the clearance of damaged cellular proteins and organelles without affecting the undamaged cell constituents.

In this regard, lysosomal cathepsin D is a viable target for enhancement of autophagic clearance. As discussed early, cathepsin D is a major lysosomal aspartate protease, its levels are decreased to &lt;50% in PD substantia nigra neurons with α-synuclein inclusions compared to age-matched controls (Chu Y 2009), and its deficiencies have pathological consequences. Cathepsin D inactivation in humans caused neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis and early lethality (Siintola et al. 2006, Steinfeld et al. 2006). In humans, sheep and mice, cathepsin D mutations resulted in accumulation of α-synuclein (Qiao et al. 2008, Cullen et al. 2009). The therapeutic potential of overexpression of cathepsin D has been demonstrated in worms and mammalian cells to decrease α-synuclein aggregation and toxicity (Qiao et al. 2008), although its effectiveness in mammalian models in vivo has not been examined. Strategies need to be explored for enhancing cathepsin D activities in vivo by neutraceutical and pharmaceutical agents or by allosteric activators (Ambrosi et al. 2015, McNeill et al. 2014, Parker et al. 2017) or by better delivery strategies that allow BBB penetration (Spencer et al. 2015). In addition to lysosomal enhancement, in light of the special importance of mitochondrial quality control, specific mitophagy enhancement strategies may be effective in disease cases when mitochondrial damage occurs (Hertz et al. 2013, Zhang et al. 2017b).

Since oxidative stress has been associated with PD, various antioxidants have been tested and found to show efficacy in pre-clinical models of PD, although so far largely ineffective in clinical trials (Giordano et al. 2014a). An important and emerging aspect of redox biology is the recognition that the redox state of the cell must be retained at defined set points which vary within different regions of the cell. This finding in itself requires that redox modulatory therapeutics must be targeted to the intracellular compartment that is in a hyperoxidative or reductive state relative to the physiological set point. At the present time, we know little about how the redox status of the intracellular organelles varies in PD and this is an essential piece of information for the development of targeted therapeutics in this area. Nevertheless, testing natural products and anti-inflammatory reagents are still ongoing with majority of studies relying on pre-clinical models (Baranyi et al. 2016, Chen et al. 2015c, Zhou et al. 2016). A more mechanistic approach with an underlying understanding of the different phases of redox biology which occur during the life history of the disease is an urgent need as more potent and druggable targets emerge from the pre-clinical studies.

Because of the importance of mitochondria as an energy generating and signaling organelle and autophagy as the cellular quality control machinery, therapeutics targeting both mitochondria and the autophagy pathway are being actively considered. In this regard, several mito-centric approaches have been used. For example, toxin-resistant complex I subunit, enhancing complex II activities, mitochondrially targeted therapeutics, or stabilizing mitochondrial membrane potential, have all shown some degree of efficacy (Marella et al. 2008, Tieu et al. 2003, Reeves et al. 2007). A recent study also demonstrated that administration of inorganic nitrite ameliorates pathology in animal models of PD by complex I S-nitrosation and activation of antioxidant Nrf2 pathway (Chiara Milanese 2017). Enhancement of mitochondrial biogenesis has been shown to be neuroprotective in human dopaminergic neurons (Makela et al. 2016). In further support for enhancing mitochondrial function as a therapeutic development, it has also been shown that an FDA approved anti-helminth drug nitazoxanide may induce mitochondrial uncoupling and protects against MPP+ toxin-induced parkinsonism in mice (Amireddy et al. 2017). Mitochondrial targeted antioxidants show promises in some but not all clinical scenarios that involve oxidative stress, and thus more effective means to counter cellular damage need to be developed (Logan &amp; Murphy 2017, Jin et al. 2014). Efforts have also been made to directly target potential antioxidant or modulatory molecules (catalase, SS-31 peptide or mitoQ) to the mitochondria (Basisty et al. 2016, Dai et al. 2016, Chaturvedi &amp; Beal 2013, Reily et al. 2013, Dashdorj et al. 2013, Solesio et al. 2013, Gioscia-Ryan et al. 2014, Miquel et al. 2014, Dare et al. 2015, Stucki et al. 2016, Rehman et al. 2016, Logan &amp; Murphy 2017). Effectiveness of these approaches on PD needs to be further investigated. Metabolomics studies have also help identify new targets for cardioprotection (Chouchani et al. 2014, Vinje et al. 2014). Similar strategies may also help develop new target for PD therapeutics. Last but not least, with better understanding of how circadian rhythm plays a role in regulating metabolism, mitochondrial function and autophagy, pharmacological regulation of circadian behavior and metabolic processes is an area which is as yet relatively unexplored (Breen et al. 2014, Solt et al. 2012) (Fig. 3).

Although progress has been made regarding mitochondrial and autophagy function regulated by redox, metabolic and proteotoxic signaling, there is still a great deal we do not know. Some key questions include the following:

In susceptible neurons and glia, are there specific targets for specific redox signals, metabolites, and/or toxic protein species?

Which steps are reversible or can be counteracted to attenuate disease progression?

Can we design targeted and effective antioxidants, efficient and stress resistant mitochondria, and specific lysosomal enhancement strategies to attenuate Parkinson’s disease?

Can targeting the microbiome change the progression or susceptibility to neurodegenerative disease?

Research effort to address these questions will be informative in the next decades.

This work was partially supported by UAB Blue Sky program, UAB AMC21 reload multi-investigator grant, Nathan Shock Center P30 G050886, and NIHR01-NS064090.

Abbreviation List

3MA 3-methyladenine

ADH1A1 aldehyde dehydrogenase 1A1

ADH2 aldehyde dehydrogenase 2

AMPK adenosine monophosphate (AMP)-activated protein kinase

ATG5 autophagy related 5

ATG7 autophagy related 7

ATP13A2 ATPase type 13A2

BECN1 beclin 1, autophagy related

BHI bioenergetic health index

BMAL1 brain and muscle Arnt-like protein 1

CaMKK calcium-dependent protein kinase kinase

CQ chloroquine

Drp1 dynamin 1-like

FCCP carbonyl cyanide 4-(trifluoromethoxy)phenylhdrazone

GAPDH glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase

GBA glucosidase, β, acid

HBP hexosamine biosynthetic pathway

HK hexokinase

HNE 4-hydroxynonenal

LRRK2 leucine-rich repeat kinase 2

LC3 microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3 alpha/beta

MFN1 mitofusin 1

MFN2 mitofusin 2

mtDNA mitochondrial DNA

mTOR mechanistic target of rapamycin (serine/threonine kinase)

NO nitric oxide

NRF2 Nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2)-like 2

OCR oxygen consumption rate

OPA1 mitochondrial dynamin like GTPase

PD Parkinson’s Disease

PINK1 PTEN-induced putative kinase 1

PGC1α peroxisome proliferative activated receptor, gamma, coactivator 1 alpha

PPP pentose phosphate pathways

REM rapid eye movement

SNARE Soluble NSF-Attachment protein Receptor

SOD2 superoxide dismutase 2, mitochondrial

SQSTM1/p62 sequestosome 1

SREBF1 sterol regulatory element binding transcription factor 1

TCA tricarboxylic acid

TFAM transcription factor A, mitochondrial

TFEB transcription factor EB

ULK unc-51 Like Autophagy Activating Kinase

VDAC1 voltage-dependent anion channel 1

Figure 1 Mitochondrial function and autophagy: integrating redox, metabolic and proteotoxic stress in Parkinson’s disease

Mitochondria and the autophagy machinery are essential for neuronal function and health. Mitochondria are not only the major source of cellular energy but also a signaling nexus for metabolites and modulating redox status and the bioenergetic health may be used as biomarkers for disease prognosis and response to thereapeutics. Because of the high demand of cellular energy and the high content of fatty acids in neurons, reactive oxygen and nitrogen species can be generated intracellularly, as well as from neighboring glia cells, or even due to exposure to environmental toxins. Metabolic regulation of redox signaling, mitochondrial function and autophagy is of importance in the central nervous system via pathways including but not limited to glycolysis, hexoamine biosynthesis, and fatty acid oxidation. Furthermore, protein homeostasis, as represented by α-synuclein and tau homeostasis is important for Parkinson’s disease. α-synuclein can target to and inhibit mitochondrial function, and itself is subject to HNE modification and nitration. Autophagy is a major pathway for α-synuclein degradation and the clearance of damaged mitochondria, but is also targeted by proteotoxic proteins including α-synuclein, tau and LRRK2. In this review, we highlight the evidence of how mitochondria are targeted by proteotoxic, redox and metabolic stress, while maintained by the autophagic surveillance. These areas present opportunities to better understand Parkinson’s disease pathogenesis and potential for development of effective therapies.

Figure 2 Assessment of autophagic and mitophagic flux

A. The amount of LC3II in the presence and absence of inhibitors that blocks lysosomal degradation of LC3II, and the p62 accumulation in the absence of enhanced p62 transcription activation is used to assess autophagic flux. B. Cells or animals expressing reporter gene RFP-GFP-LC3 can also be examined for autophagic flux based on the amount of LC3 that reaches the lysosomes due to the pH sensitivity of GFP. C. Cells or animals expressing reporter gene mitochondrial matrix targeted Cherry-GFP-LC3 can be examined for mitophagic flux based on the amount of LC3 that reaches the lysosomes due to the pH sensitivity of GFP.

Figure 3 Potential targets and therapeutic strategies for treating Parkinson’s disease based on autophagy-lysosomal pathway, bioenergetics and metabolism, as well as redox signaling and oxidative-reductive stress

Major efforts have been made in recent years to develop broad spectrum and/or organelle targeted antioxidant strategies, and enhanced autophagy, mitophagy, and lysosomal activities. Highlighted in this figure are some of the key events of metabolic, oxidative-reductive, and proteotoxic stress (in boxes), as well as molecules that have been tested in in vitro and animal models (in green) that target metabolism and autophagy/mitophagy/lysosomal pathways.

Conflict of interest: none


Abbott SM Knutson KL Zee PC 2018 Health implications of sleep and circadian rhythm research in 2017 Lancet Neurol 17 17 18 29262995
Abeliovich A Schmitz Y Farinas I 2000 Mice lacking alpha-synuclein display functional deficits in the nigrostriatal dopamine system Neuron 25 239 252 10707987
Ambrosi G Ghezzi C Zangaglia R Levandis G Pacchetti C Blandini F 2015 Ambroxol-induced rescue of defective glucocerebrosidase is associated with increased LIMP-2 and saposin C levels in GBA1 mutant Parkinson’s disease cells Neurobiol Dis 82 235 242 26094596
Amireddy N Puttapaka SN Vinnakota RL Ravuri HG Thonda S Kalivendi SV 2017 The Unintended Mitochondrial Uncoupling Effects of the FDA Approved Anti-Helminth Drug Nitazoxanide Mitigates Experimental Parkinsonism in Mice J Biol Chem
Athauda D Maclagan K Skene SS 2017 Exenatide once weekly versus placebo in Parkinson’s disease: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial Lancet 390 1664 1675 28781108
Badia MC Giraldo E Dasi F Alonso D Lainez JM Lloret A Vina J 2013 Reductive stress in young healthy individuals at risk of Alzheimer disease Free Radic Biol Med 63 274 279 23665394
Baranyi M Porceddu PF Goloncser F 2016 Novel (Hetero)arylalkenyl propargylamine compounds are protective in toxin-induced models of Parkinson’s disease Mol Neurodegener 11 6 26758813
Barodia SK Creed RB Goldberg MS 2016 Parkin and PINK1 functions in oxidative stress and neurodegeneration Brain Res Bull
Basisty N Dai DF Gagnidze A 2016 Mitochondrial-targeted catalase is good for the old mouse proteome, but not for the young: ‘reverse’ antagonistic pleiotropy? Aging Cell 15 634 645 27061426
Beal MF 2003 Mitochondria, oxidative damage, and inflammation in Parkinson’s disease Ann N Y Acad Sci 991 120 131 12846981
Beckman JS Crow JP 1993 Pathological implications of nitric oxide, superoxide and peroxynitrite formation Biochem Soc Trans 21 330 334 8395426
Belluzzi E Gonnelli A Cirnaru MD 2016 LRRK2 phosphorylates pre-synaptic N-ethylmaleimide sensitive fusion (NSF) protein enhancing its ATPase activity and SNARE complex disassembling rate Mol Neurodegener 11 1 26758690
Benavides GA Liang Q Dodson M Darley-Usmar V Zhang J 2013 Inhibition of autophagy and glycolysis by nitric oxide during hypoxia-reoxygenation impairs cellular bioenergetics and promotes cell death in primary neurons Free Radic Biol Med 65 1215 1228 24056030
Benitez BA Davis AA Jin SC 2016 Resequencing analysis of five Mendelian genes and the top genes from genome-wide association studies in Parkinson’s Disease Mol Neurodegener 11 29 27094865
Bindoff LA Birch-Machin M Cartlidge NE Parker WD Jr Turnbull DM 1989 Mitochondrial function in Parkinson’s disease Lancet 2 49
Blackinton J Lakshminarasimhan M Thomas KJ Ahmad R Greggio E Raza AS Cookson MR Wilson MA 2009 Formation of a stabilized cysteine sulfinic acid is critical for the mitochondrial function of the parkinsonism protein DJ-1 J Biol Chem 284 6476 6485 19124468
Blanca Ramirez M Lara Ordonez AJ Fdez E Hilfiker S 2017 LRRK2: from kinase to GTPase to microtubules and back Biochem Soc Trans 45 141 146 28202667
Bove J Prou D Perier C Przedborski S 2005 Toxin-induced models of Parkinson’s disease NeuroRx 2 484 494 16389312
Braidy N Gai WP Xu YH 2013 Uptake and mitochondrial dysfunction of alpha-synuclein in human astrocytes, cortical neurons and fibroblasts Transl Neurodegener 2 20 24093918
Brand MD 2016 Mitochondrial generation of superoxide and hydrogen peroxide as the source of mitochondrial redox signaling Free Radic Biol Med 100 14 31 27085844
Breen DP Vuono R Nawarathna U Fisher K Shneerson JM Reddy AB Barker RA 2014 Sleep and circadian rhythm regulation in early Parkinson disease JAMA Neurol 71 589 595 24687146
Breitzig M Bhimineni C Lockey R Kolliputi N 2016 4-Hydroxy-2-nonenal: a critical target in oxidative stress? Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 311 C537 C543 27385721
Burbulla LF Song P Mazzulli JR 2017 Dopamine oxidation mediates mitochondrial and lysosomal dysfunction in Parkinson’s disease Science 357 1255 1261 28882997
Cereda E Barichella M Pedrolli C Klersy C Cassani E Caccialanza R Pezzoli G 2013 Diabetes and risk of Parkinson’s disease Mov Disord 28 257 23032425
Cha SH Choi YR Heo CH Kang SJ Joe EH Jou I Kim HM Park SM 2015 Loss of parkin promotes lipid rafts-dependent endocytosis through accumulating caveolin-1: implications for Parkinson’s disease Mol Neurodegener 10 63 26627850
Chacko BK Kramer PA Ravi S 2014 The Bioenergetic Health Index: a new concept in mitochondrial translational research Clin Sci (Lond) 127 367 373 24895057
Chaturvedi RK Beal MF 2013 Mitochondria targeted therapeutic approaches in Parkinson’s and Huntington’s diseases Mol Cell Neurosci 55 101 114 23220289
Chen L Xie Z Turkson S Zhuang X 2015a A53T human alpha-synuclein overexpression in transgenic mice induces pervasive mitochondria macroautophagy defects preceding dopamine neuron degeneration J Neurosci 35 890 905 25609609
Chen X Xie C Sun L Ding J Cai H 2015b Longitudinal Metabolomics Profiling of Parkinson’s Disease-Related alpha-Synuclein A53T Transgenic Mice PLoS One 10 e0136612 26317866
Chen Y Zhang DQ Liao Z 2015c Anti-oxidant polydatin (piceid) protects against substantia nigral motor degeneration in multiple rodent models of Parkinson’s disease Mol Neurodegener 10 4 26013581
Cherra SJ 3rd Steer E Gusdon AM Kiselyov K Chu CT 2013 Mutant LRRK2 elicits calcium imbalance and depletion of dendritic mitochondria in neurons Am J Pathol 182 474 484 23231918
Chiara Milanese VT Gabriels Sylvia Cerri Silvia Levandis Giovanna Blandini Fabio Tresini Maria Shiva Sruti Timothy Greenamyre J Gladwin Mark T Mastroberardino Pier G 2017 Mitochondrial complex I reversible S-nitrosation improves bioenergetics and is protective in Parkinson’s disease Antioxidants and Redox Signaling
Chiasserini D Paciotti S Eusebi P 2015 Selective loss of glucocerebrosidase activity in sporadic Parkinson’s disease and dementia with Lewy bodies Mol Neurodegener 10 15 25881142
Chinta SJ Mallajosyula JK Rane A Andersen JK 2010 Mitochondrial alpha-synuclein accumulation impairs complex I function in dopaminergic neurons and results in increased mitophagy in vivo Neurosci Lett 486 235 239 20887775
Choi J Sullards MC Olzmann JA 2006 Oxidative damage of DJ-1 is linked to sporadic Parkinson and Alzheimer diseases J Biol Chem 281 10816 10824 16517609
Chouchani ET Pell VR Gaude E 2014 Ischaemic accumulation of succinate controls reperfusion injury through mitochondrial ROS Nature 515 431 435 25383517
Chu YDH Aebischer P Olanow CW Kordower JH 2009 Alterations in lysosomal and proteasomal markers in Parkinson’s disease: relationship to alpha-synuclein inclusions Neurobio Dis 35 385 398
Clark EP 1933 The Occurrence of Rotenone and Related Compounds in the Roots of Cracca Virginiana Science 77 311 312 17820328
Cleeter MW Cooper JM Darley-Usmar VM Moncada S Schapira AH 1994 Reversible inhibition of cytochrome c oxidase, the terminal enzyme of the mitochondrial respiratory chain, by nitric oxide. Implications for neurodegenerative diseases FEBS Lett 345 50 54 8194600
Cuervo AM Stefanis L Fredenburg R Lansbury PT Sulzer D 2004 Impaired degradation of mutant alpha-synuclein by chaperone-mediated autophagy Science 305 1292 1295 15333840
Cullen V Lindfors M Ng J 2009 Cathepsin D expression level affects alpha-synuclein processing, aggregation, and toxicity in vivo Mol Brain 2 5 19203374
Dai W Cheung E Alleman RJ Perry JB Allen ME Brown DA Kloner RA 2016 Cardioprotective Effects of Mitochondria-Targeted Peptide SBT-20 in two Different Models of Rat Ischemia/Reperfusion Cardiovasc Drugs Ther 30 559 566 27747447
Danial NN Hartman AL Stafstrom CE Thio LL 2013 How does the ketogenic diet work? Four potential mechanisms J Child Neurol 28 1027 1033 23670253
Dare AJ Logan A Prime TA 2015 The mitochondria-targeted anti-oxidant MitoQ decreases ischemia-reperfusion injury in a murine syngeneic heart transplant model J Heart Lung Transplant 34 1471 1480 26140808
Dashdorj A Jyothi KR Lim S 2013 Mitochondria-targeted antioxidant MitoQ ameliorates experimental mouse colitis by suppressing NLRP3 inflammasome-mediated inflammatory cytokines BMC Med 11 178 23915129
Dassanayaka S Readnower RD Salabei JK 2015 High glucose induces mitochondrial dysfunction independently of protein O-GlcNAcylation Biochem J 467 115 126 25627821
Dawson VL Dawson TM 1998 Nitric oxide in neurodegeneration Prog Brain Res 118 215 229 9932444
de Duve C Wattiaux R 1966 Functions of lysosomes Annu Rev Physiol 28 435 492 5322983
Decressac M Mattsson B Weikop P Lundblad M Jakobsson J Bjorklund A 2013 TFEB-mediated autophagy rescues midbrain dopamine neurons from alpha-synuclein toxicity Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110 E1817 E1826 23610405
Dehay B Bourdenx M Gorry P 2015 Targeting alpha-synuclein for treatment of Parkinson’s disease: mechanistic and therapeutic considerations Lancet Neurol 14 855 866 26050140
Del Tredici K Braak H 2016 Review: Sporadic Parkinson’s disease: development and distribution of alpha-synuclein pathology Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 42 33 50 26662475
Desplats P Lee HJ Bae EJ Patrick C Rockenstein E Crews L Spencer B Masliah E Lee SJ 2009 Inclusion formation and neuronal cell death through neuron-to-neuron transmission of alpha-synuclein Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106 13010 13015 19651612
Devi L Raghavendran V Prabhu BM Avadhani NG Anandatheerthavarada HK 2008 Mitochondrial import and accumulation of alpha-synuclein impair complex I in human dopaminergic neuronal cultures and Parkinson disease brain J Biol Chem 283 9089 9100 18245082
Di DF Tramutola A Perluigi M 2016 Cathepsin D as a therapeutic target in Alzheimer’s disease Expert Opin Ther Targets 20 1393 1395 27805462
Di Maio R Barrett PJ Hoffman EK 2016 alpha-Synuclein binds to TOM20 and inhibits mitochondrial protein import in Parkinson’s disease Sci Transl Med 8 342ra378
Diana Chang MAN Hallgrímsdóttir Ingileif B Hunkapiller Julie van der Brug Marcel Cai Fang Kerchner Geoffrey A Ayalon Gai Bingol Baris Sheng Morgan Hinds David Behrens Timothy W Singleton Andrew B Bhangale Tushar R Graham Robert R International Parkinsons Disease Genomics Consortium, 23andMe Research Team 2017 A meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies identifies 17 new Parkinson’s disease risk loci Nature Genetics
Dodson M Darley-Usmar V Zhang J 2013a Cellular metabolic and autophagic pathways: traffic control by redox signaling Free Radic Biol Med 63 207 221 23702245
Dodson M Liang Q Johnson MS Redmann M Fineberg N Darley-Usmar VM Zhang J 2013b Inhibition of glycolysis attenuates 4-hydroxynonenal-dependent autophagy and exacerbates apoptosis in differentiated SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells Autophagy 9 1996 2008 24145463
Dodson M Redmann M Rajasekaran NS Darley-Usmar V Zhang J 2015 KEAP1-NRF2 signalling and autophagy in protection against oxidative and reductive proteotoxicity Biochem J 469 347 355 26205490
Dodson M Wani WY Redmann M 2017 Regulation of autophagy, mitochondrial dynamics and cellular bioenergetics by 4-hydroxynonenal in primary neurons Autophagy
Dorsey ER George BP Leff B Willis AW 2013 The coming crisis: obtaining care for the growing burden of neurodegenerative conditions Neurology 80 1989 1996 23616157
Dranka BP Benavides GA Diers AR 2011a Assessing bioenergetic function in response to oxidative stress by metabolic profiling Free Radic Biol Med 51 1621 1635 21872656
Dranka BP Benavides GA Diers AR 2011b Assessing bioenergetic function in response to oxidative stress by metabolic profiling Free Radical Biology and Medicine 51 1621 1635 21872656
Ejlerskov P Rasmussen I Nielsen TT Bergstrom AL Tohyama Y Jensen PH Vilhardt F 2013 Tubulin polymerization-promoting protein (TPPP/p25alpha) promotes unconventional secretion of alpha-synuclein through exophagy by impairing autophagosome-lysosome fusion J Biol Chem 288 17313 17335 23629650
Ekstrand MI Terzioglu M Galter D 2007 Progressive parkinsonism in mice with respiratory-chain-deficient dopamine neurons Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104 1325 1330 17227870
Elkon H Don J Melamed E Ziv I Shirvan A Offen D 2002 Mutant and wild-type alpha-synuclein interact with mitochondrial cytochrome C oxidase J Mol Neurosci 18 229 238 12059041
Eng CH Abraham RT 2011 The autophagy conundrum in cancer: influence of tumorigenic metabolic reprogramming Oncogene
Estevez AG Ramdial K Franco MC 2017 Cellular mechanisms of peroxynitrite-induced neuronal death. In Brain Res Bull
Freeman D Cedillos R Choyke S 2013 Alpha-synuclein induces lysosomal rupture and cathepsin dependent reactive oxygen species following endocytosis PLoS One 8 e62143 23634225
Fritsch T Smyth KA Wallendal MS Hyde T Leo G Geldmacher DS 2012 Parkinson disease: research update and clinical management South Med J 105 650 656 23211499
Fritz KS Galligan JJ Smathers RL Roede JR Shearn CT Reigan P Petersen DR 2011 4-Hydroxynonenal inhibits SIRT3 via thiol-specific modification Chem Res Toxicol 24 651 662 21449565
Galam L Rajan A Failla A Soundararajan R Lockey RF Kolliputi N 2016 Deletion of P2X7 attenuates hyperoxia-induced acute lung injury via inflammasome suppression Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 310 L572 L581 26747786
Gan-Or Z Dion PA Rouleau GA 2015 Genetic perspective on the role of the autophagy-lysosome pathway in Parkinson disease Autophagy 11 1443 1457 26207393
Giordano S Darley-Usmar V Zhang J 2014a Autophagy as an essential cellular antioxidant pathway in neurodegenerative disease Redox Biol 2 82 90 24494187
Giordano S Dodson M Ravi S Redmann M Ouyang X Darley-Usmar VM Zhang J 2014b Bioenergetic adaptation in response to autophagy regulators during rotenone exposure J Neurochem 131 625 633 25081478
Giordano S Lee J Darley-Usmar VM Zhang J 2012 Distinct Effects of Rotenone, 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium and 6-hydroxydopamine on Cellular Bioenergetics and Cell Death PLoS ONE 7 e44610 22970265
Gioscia-Ryan RA LaRocca TJ Sindler AL Zigler MC Murphy MP Seals DR 2014 Mitochondria-targeted antioxidant (MitoQ) ameliorates age-related arterial endothelial dysfunction in mice J Physiol 592 2549 2561 24665093
Goedert M Jakes R Spillantini MG 2017 The Synucleinopathies: Twenty Years On J Parkinsons Dis 7 S53 S71 28282814
Grunblatt E Riederer P 2016 Aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) in Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease J Neural Transm (Vienna) 123 83 90 25298080
Grunewald A Arns B Seibler P Rakovic A Munchau A Ramirez A Sue CM Klein C 2012 ATP13A2 mutations impair mitochondrial function in fibroblasts from patients with Kufor-Rakeb syndrome Neurobiol Aging 33 1843e1841 1847
Guerreiro PS Gerhardt E Lopes da Fonseca T Bahr M Outeiro TF Eckermann K 2016 LRRK2 Promotes Tau Accumulation, Aggregation and Release Mol Neurobiol 53 3124 3135 26014385
Guo B Liang Q Li L 2014 O-GlcNAc-modification of SNAP-29 regulates autophagosome maturation Nat Cell Biol 16 1215 1226 25419848
Halliwell B 2012 Free radicals and antioxidants: updating a personal view Nutr Rev 70 257 265 22537212
Halliwell B Gutteridge JM 2015 Free Radicals in biology and medicine booksgooglecom
Hara T Nakamura K Matsui M 2006 Suppression of basal autophagy in neural cells causes neurodegenerative disease in mice Nature 441 885 889 16625204
Harris PS Roy SR Coughlan C Orlicky DJ Liang Y Shearn CT Roede JR Fritz KS 2015 Chronic ethanol consumption induces mitochondrial protein acetylation and oxidative stress in the kidney Redox Biol 6 33 40 26177469
Helferich AM McLean PJ Weishaupt JH Danzer KM 2016 Commentary: alpha-synuclein interacts with SOD1 and promotes its oligomerization J Neurol Neuromedicine 1 28 30 27853754
Hertz NT Berthet A Sos ML Thorn KS Burlingame AL Nakamura K Shokat KM 2013 A neo-substrate that amplifies catalytic activity of parkinson’s-disease-related kinase PINK1 Cell 154 737 747 23953109
Higdon A Diers AR Oh JY Landar A Darley-Usmar VM 2012a Cell signalling by reactive lipid species: new concepts and molecular mechanisms Biochem J 442 453 464 22364280
Higdon A Diers AR Oh JY Landar A Darley-Usmar VM 2012b Cell signalling by reactive lipid species: new concepts and molecular mechanisms The Biochemical journal 442 453 464 22364280
Higdon AN Landar A Barnes S Darley-Usmar VM 2012c The Electrophile Responsive Proteome: Integrating Proteomics and Lipidomics with Cellular Function Antioxidants &amp; redox signaling
Hill-Burns EM Debelius JW Morton JT 2017 Parkinson’s disease and Parkinson’s disease medications have distinct signatures of the gut microbiome Mov Disord 32 739 749 28195358
Hill BG Benavides GA Lancaster JR Jr Ballinger S Dell’italia L Zhang J Darley-Usmar VM 2012 Integration of cellular bioenergetics with mitochondrial quality control and autophagy Biol Chem 393 1485 1512 23092819
Hill BG Dranka BP Bailey SM Lancaster JR Jr Darley-Usmar VM 2010 What part of NO don’t you understand? Some answers to the cardinal questions in nitric oxide biology J Biol Chem 285 19699 19704 20410298
Hjelmeland A Zhang J 2016 Metabolic, autophagic, and mitophagic activities in cancer initiation and progression Biomed J 39 98 106 27372165
Hochfeld WE Lee S Rubinsztein DC 2013 Therapeutic induction of autophagy to modulate neurodegenerative disease progression Acta Pharmacol Sin 34 600 604 23377551
Holmes E Wilson ID Nicholson JK 2008 Metabolic phenotyping in health and disease Cell 134 714 717 18775301
Holscher C 2011 Diabetes as a risk factor for Alzheimer’s disease: insulin signalling impairment in the brain as an alternative model of Alzheimer’s disease Biochem Soc Trans 39 891 897 21787319
Hu MT Taylor-Robinson SD Chaudhuri KR 2000 Cortical dysfunction in non-demented Parkinson’s disease patients: a combined (31)P-MRS and (18)FDG-PET study Brain 123 Pt 2 340 352 10648441
Hu Y Suarez J Fricovsky E 2009 Increased enzymatic O-GlcNAcylation of mitochondrial proteins impairs mitochondrial function in cardiac myocytes exposed to high glucose J Biol Chem 284 547 555 19004814
Imaizumi Y Okada Y Akamatsu W 2012 Mitochondrial dysfunction associated with increased oxidative stress and alpha-synuclein accumulation in PARK2 iPSC-derived neurons and postmortem brain tissue Mol Brain 5 35 23039195
Ischiropoulos H Zhu L Chen J Tsai M Martin JC Smith CD Beckman JS 1992 Peroxynitrite-mediated tyrosine nitration catalyzed by superoxide dismutase Arch Biochem Biophys 298 431 437 1416974
Ivatt RM Sanchez-Martinez A Godena VK Brown S Ziviani E Whitworth AJ 2014 Genome-wide RNAi screen identifies the Parkinson disease GWAS risk locus SREBF1 as a regulator of mitophagy Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111 8494 8499 24912190
Jaber N Dou Z Chen JS 2012a Class III PI3K Vps34 plays an essential role in autophagy and in heart and liver function Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109 2003 2008 22308354
Jaber N Dou Z Lin RZ Zhang J Zong WX 2012b Mammalian PIK3C3/VPS34: the key to autophagic processing in liver and heart Autophagy 8 707 708 22498475
Jegga AG Schneider L Ouyang X Zhang J 2011 Systems biology of the autophagy-lysosomal pathway Autophagy 7 477 489 21293178
Jin H Kanthasamy A Ghosh A Anantharam V Kalyanaraman B Kanthasamy AG 2014 Mitochondria-targeted antioxidants for treatment of Parkinson’s disease: preclinical and clinical outcomes Biochim Biophys Acta 1842 1282 1294 24060637
Jo YK Park NY Park SJ 2016 O-GlcNAcylation of ATG4B positively regulates autophagy by increasing its hydroxylase activity Oncotarget 7 57186 57196 27527864
Kalyanaraman B 2013 Teaching the basics of redox biology to medical and graduate students: Oxidants, antioxidants and disease mechanisms Redox Biol 1 244 257 24024158
Kiely AP Ling H Asi YT 2015 Distinct clinical and neuropathological features of G51D SNCA mutation cases compared with SNCA duplication and H50Q mutation Mol Neurodegener 10 41 26306801
Kim I Lemasters JJ 2011 Mitochondrial degradation by autophagy (mitophagy) in GFP-LC3 transgenic hepatocytes during nutrient deprivation Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 300 C308 C317 21106691
Kim J Fiesel FC Belmonte KC Hudec R Wang WX Kim C Nelson PT Springer W Kim J 2016 miR-27a and miR-27b regulate autophagic clearance of damaged mitochondria by targeting PTEN-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1) Mol Neurodegener 11 55 27456084
Kingham PJ Pocock JM 2001 Microglial secreted cathepsin B induces neuronal apoptosis J Neurochem 76 1475 1484 11238732
Klionsky DJ Abdelmohsen K Abe A 2016 Guidelines for the use and interpretation of assays for monitoring autophagy (3rd edition) Autophagy 12 1 222 26799652
Komatsu M Waguri S Chiba T 2006 Loss of autophagy in the central nervous system causes neurodegeneration in mice Nature 441 880 884 16625205
Kramer PA Ravi S Chacko B Johnson MS Darley-Usmar VM 2014 A review of the mitochondrial and glycolytic metabolism in human platelets and leukocytes: Implications for their use as bioenergetic biomarkers Redox Biol 2 206 210 24494194
Kumar A Ganini D Mason RP 2016 Role of cytochrome c in alpha-synuclein radical formation: implications of alpha-synuclein in neuronal death in Maneb- and paraquat-induced model of Parkinson’s disease Mol Neurodegener 11 70 27884192
Lashuel HA Overk CR Oueslati A Masliah E 2013 The many faces of alpha-synuclein: from structure and toxicity to therapeutic target Nat Rev Neurosci 14 38 48 23254192
Lee HJ Cho ED Lee KW Kim JH Cho SG Lee SJ 2013 Autophagic failure promotes the exocytosis and intercellular transfer of alpha-synuclein Exp Mol Med 45 e22 23661100
Lee J Giordano S Zhang J 2012a Autophagy, mitochondria and oxidative stress: cross-talk and redox signalling Biochem J 441 523 540 22187934
Lee VM Trojanowski JQ 2006 Mechanisms of Parkinson’s disease linked to pathological alpha-synuclein: new targets for drug discovery Neuron 52 33 38 17015225
Lee WC Wong HY Chai YY Shi CW Amino N Kikuchi S Huang SH 2012b Lipid peroxidation dysregulation in ischemic stroke: plasma 4-HNE as a potential biomarker? Biochem Biophys Res Commun 425 842 847 22898049
Lemasters JJ 2005 Selective mitochondrial autophagy, or mitophagy, as a targeted defense against oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, and aging Rejuvenation Res 8 3 5 15798367
Levonen AL Hill BG Kansanen E Zhang J Darley-Usmar VM 2014 Redox regulation of antioxidants, autophagy, and the response to stress: Implications for electrophile therapeutics Free Radic Biol Med 71C 196 207
Li L Wang ZV Hill JA Lin F 2014 New autophagy reporter mice reveal dynamics of proximal tubular autophagy J Am Soc Nephrol 25 305 315 24179166
Li TY Sun Y Liang Y 2016 ULK1/2 Constitute a Bifurcate Node Controlling Glucose Metabolic Fluxes in Addition to Autophagy Mol Cell 62 359 370 27153534
Liang Q Benavides GA Vassilopoulos A Gius D Darley-Usmar V Zhang J 2013 Bioenergetic and autophagic control by Sirt3 in response to nutrient deprivation in mouse embryonic fibroblasts Biochem J 454 249 257 23767918
Liberatore GT Jackson-Lewis V Vukosavic S Mandir AS Vila M McAuliffe WG Dawson VL Dawson TM Przedborski S 1999 Inducible nitric oxide synthase stimulates dopaminergic neurodegeneration in the MPTP model of Parkinson disease Nat Med 5 1403 1409 10581083
Lin CH Tsai PI Wu RM Chien CT 2010 LRRK2 G2019S mutation induces dendrite degeneration through mislocalization and phosphorylation of tau by recruiting autoactivated GSK3ss J Neurosci 30 13138 13149 20881132
Liu G Zhang C Yin J 2009 alpha-Synuclein is differentially expressed in mitochondria from different rat brain regions and dose-dependently down-regulates complex I activity Neurosci Lett 454 187 192 19429081
Loeb V Yakunin E Saada A Sharon R 2010a The Transgenic Overexpression of {alpha}-Synuclein and Not Its Related Pathology Associates with Complex I Inhibition J Biol Chem 285 7334 7343 20053987
Loeb V Yakunin E Saada A Sharon R 2010b The transgenic overexpression of alpha-synuclein and not its related pathology associates with complex I inhibition J Biol Chem 285 7334 7343 20053987
Logan A Murphy MP 2017 Using chemical biology to assess and modulate mitochondria: progress and challenges Interface Focus 7 20160151 28382206
Lozano L Lara-Lemus R Zenteno E varado-Vasquez N 2014 The mitochondrial O-linked N-acetylglucosamine transferase (mOGT) in the diabetic patient could be the initial trigger to develop Alzheimer disease Exp Gerontol 58 198 202 25148700
Lubbe S Morris HR 2014 Recent advances in Parkinson’s disease genetics J Neurol 261 259 266 23798000
Luk KC Kehm V Carroll J Zhang B O’Brien P Trojanowski JQ Lee VM 2012a Pathological alpha-synuclein transmission initiates Parkinson-like neurodegeneration in nontransgenic mice Science 338 949 953 23161999
Luk KC Kehm VM Zhang B O’Brien P Trojanowski JQ Lee VM 2012b Intracerebral inoculation of pathological alpha-synuclein initiates a rapidly progressive neurodegenerative alpha-synucleinopathy in mice J Exp Med 209 975 986 22508839
Luk KC Song C O’Brien P Stieber A Branch JR Brunden KR Trojanowski JQ Lee VM 2009 Exogenous alpha-synuclein fibrils seed the formation of Lewy body-like intracellular inclusions in cultured cells Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106 20051 20056 19892735
Majbour NK Vaikath NN van Dijk KD 2016 Oligomeric and phosphorylated alpha-synuclein as potential CSF biomarkers for Parkinson’s disease Mol Neurodegener 11 7 26782965
Makela J Tselykh TV Kukkonen JP Eriksson O Korhonen LT Lindholm D 2016 Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPARgamma) agonist is neuroprotective and stimulates PGC-1alpha expression and CREB phosphorylation in human dopaminergic neurons Neuropharmacology 102 266 275 26631533
Makino A Suarez J Gawlowski T Han W Wang H Scott BT Dillmann WH 2011 Regulation of mitochondrial morphology and function by O-GlcNAcylation in neonatal cardiac myocytes Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 300 R1296 R1302 21346246
Manzoni C 2017 The LRRK2-macroautophagy axis and its relevance to Parkinson’s disease Biochem Soc Trans 45 155 162 28202669
Marella M Seo BB Nakamaru-Ogiso E Greenamyre JT Matsuno-Yagi A Yagi T 2008 Protection by the NDI1 gene against neurodegeneration in a rotenone rat model of Parkinson’s disease PLoS ONE 3 e1433 18197244
Marino G Pietrocola F Eisenberg T 2014 Regulation of autophagy by cytosolic acetyl-coenzyme A Mol Cell 53 710 725 24560926
Martinez TN Greenamyre JT 2012 Toxin models of mitochondrial dysfunction in Parkinson’s disease Antioxid Redox Signal 16 920 934 21554057
Mata IF Jang Y Kim CH 2015 The RAB39B p.G192R mutation causes X-linked dominant Parkinson’s disease Mol Neurodegener 10 50 26399558
Matsuda N Kimura M Queliconi BB 2017 Parkinson’s disease-related DJ-1 functions in thiol quality control against aldehyde attack in vitro Sci Rep 7 12816 28993701
McNeill A Magalhaes J Shen C 2014 Ambroxol improves lysosomal biochemistry in glucocerebrosidase mutation-linked Parkinson disease cells Brain 137 1481 1495 24574503
Miki Y Shimoyama S Kon T 2017 Alteration of autophagy-related proteins in peripheral blood mononuclear cells of patients with Parkinson’s disease Neurobiol Aging 63 33 43 29223072
Miquel E Cassina A Martinez-Palma L 2014 Neuroprotective effects of the mitochondria-targeted antioxidant MitoQ in a model of inherited amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Free Radic Biol Med 70 204 213 24582549
Mitchell T Johnson MS Ouyang X 2013 Dysfunctional mitochondrial bioenergetics and oxidative stress in Akita+/Ins2-derived beta-cells Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 305 E585 E599 23820623
Mizuno Y Sone N Saitoh T 1987 Effects of 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine and 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium ion on activities of the enzymes in the electron transport system in mouse brain J Neurochem 48 1787 1793 3106573
Mizushima N Levine B Cuervo AM Klionsky DJ 2008 Autophagy fights disease through cellular self-digestion Nature 451 1069 1075 18305538
Morgan AH Hammond VJ Sakoh-Nakatogawa M Ohsumi Y Thomas CP Blanchet F Piguet V Kiselyov K O’Donnell VB 2015 A novel role for 12/15-lipoxygenase in regulating autophagy Redox Biol 4 40 47 25498966
Moruno F Perez-Jimenez E Knecht E 2012 Regulation of autophagy by glucose in Mammalian cells Cells 1 372 395 24710481
Murphy MP 2009 How mitochondria produce reactive oxygen species Biochem J 417 1 13 19061483
Musiek ES Holtzman DM 2016 Mechanisms linking circadian clocks, sleep, and neurodegeneration Science 354 1004 1008 27885006
Nair AT Ramachandran V Joghee NM Antony S Ramalingam G 2018 Gut Microbiota Dysfunction as Reliable Non-invasive Early Diagnostic Biomarkers in the Pathophysiology of Parkinson’s Disease: A Critical Review J Neurogastroenterol Motil 24 30 42 29291606
Narendra D Walker JE Youle R 2012 Mitochondrial quality control mediated by PINK1 and Parkin: links to parkinsonism Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 4
Nash Y Schmukler E Trudler D Pinkas-Kramarski R Frenkel D 2017 DJ-1 deficiency impairs autophagy and reduces alpha-synuclein phagocytosis by microglia J Neurochem 143 584 594 28921554
Nelson MP Boutin M Tse TE Lu H Haley ED Ouyang X Zhang J Auray-Blais C Shacka JJ 2018 The lysosomal enzyme alpha-Galactosidase A is deficient in Parkinson’s disease brain in association with the pathologic accumulation of alpha-synuclein Neurobiol Dis 110 68 81 29196214
Nicklas WJ Youngster SK Kindt MV Heikkila RE 1987 MPTP, MPP+ and mitochondrial function Life Sci 40 721 729 3100899
Nordberg A Rinne JO Kadir A Langstrom B 2010 The use of PET in Alzheimer disease Nat Rev Neurol 6 78 87 20139997
Obeso JA Stamelou M Goetz CG 2017 Past, present, and future of Parkinson’s disease: A special essay on the 200th Anniversary of the Shaking Palsy Mov Disord 32 1264 1310 28887905
Oikawa T Nonaka T Terada M Tamaoka A Hisanaga S Hasegawa M 2016 alpha-Synuclein Fibrils Exhibit Gain of Toxic Function, Promoting Tau Aggregation and Inhibiting Microtubule Assembly J Biol Chem 291 15046 15056 27226637
Olanow CW Kordower JH 2017 Targeting alpha-Synuclein as a therapy for Parkinson’s disease: The battle begins Mov Disord 32 203 207 28218461
Parekh VV Pabbisetty SK Wu L Sebzda E Martinez J Zhang J Van Kaer L 2017 Autophagy-related protein Vps34 controls the homeostasis and function of antigen cross-presenting CD8alpha+ dendritic cells Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 114 E6371 E6380 28716903
Parekh VV Wu L Boyd KL 2013 Impaired autophagy, defective T cell homeostasis, and a wasting syndrome in mice with a T cell-specific deletion of Vps34 J Immunol 190 5086 5101 23596309
Parihar MS Parihar A Fujita M Hashimoto M Ghafourifar P 2009 Alpha-synuclein overexpression and aggregation exacerbates impairment of mitochondrial functions by augmenting oxidative stress in human neuroblastoma cells Int J Biochem Cell Biol
Park JS Koentjoro B Davis RL Sue CM 2016 Loss of ATP13A2 impairs glycolytic function in Kufor-Rakeb syndrome patient-derived cell models Parkinsonism Relat Disord 27 67 73 27039055
Parker CG Galmozzi A Wang Y 2017 Ligand and Target Discovery by Fragment-Based Screening in Human Cells Cell 168 527 541 28111073
Parker WD Jr Swerdlow RH 1998 Mitochondrial dysfunction in idiopathic Parkinson disease Am J Hum Genet 62 758 762 9529370
Paul KC Sinsheimer JS Rhodes SL Cockburn M Bronstein J Ritz B 2016 Organophosphate Pesticide Exposures, Nitric Oxide Synthase Gene Variants, and Gene-Pesticide Interactions in a Case-Control Study of Parkinson’s Disease, California (USA) Environ Health Perspect 124 570 577 26383258
Pekkurnaz G Trinidad JC Wang X Kong D Schwarz TL 2014 Glucose regulates mitochondrial motility via Milton modification by O-GlcNAc transferase Cell 158 54 68 24995978
Perfeito R Lazaro DF Outeiro TF Rego AC 2014 Linking alpha-synuclein phosphorylation to reactive oxygen species formation and mitochondrial dysfunction in SH-SY5Y cells Mol Cell Neurosci 62 51 59 25109238
Priyadarshi A Khuder SA Schaub EA Priyadarshi SS 2001 Environmental risk factors and Parkinson’s disease: a metaanalysis Environ Res 86 122 127 11437458
Priyadarshi A Khuder SA Schaub EA Shrivastava S 2000 A meta-analysis of Parkinson’s disease and exposure to pesticides Neurotoxicology 21 435 440 11022853
Przedborski S Jackson-Lewis V Yokoyama R Shibata T Dawson VL Dawson TM 1996 Role of neuronal nitric oxide in 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP)-induced dopaminergic neurotoxicity Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 93 4565 4571 8643444
Qiao L Hamamichi S Caldwell KA 2008 Lysosomal enzyme cathepsin D protects against alpha-synuclein aggregation and toxicity Mol Brain 1 17 19021916
Quinlan CL Perevoshchikova IV Hey-Mogensen M Orr AL Brand MD 2013 Sites of reactive oxygen species generation by mitochondria oxidizing different substrates Redox Biol 1 304 312 24024165
Radi R Beckman JS Bush KM Freeman BA 1991a Peroxynitrite-induced membrane lipid peroxidation: the cytotoxic potential of superoxide and nitric oxide Arch Biochem Biophys 288 481 487 1654835
Radi R Beckman JS Bush KM Freeman BA 1991b Peroxynitrite oxidation of sulfhydryls. The cytotoxic potential of superoxide and nitric oxide J Biol Chem 266 4244 4250 1847917
Rahmanto AS Morgan PE Hawkins CL Davies MJ 2010 Cellular effects of peptide and protein hydroperoxides Free Radic Biol Med 48 1071 1078 20109544
Rajasekaran NS Firpo MA Milash BA Weiss RB Benjamin IJ 2008 Global expression profiling identifies a novel biosignature for protein aggregation R120GCryAB cardiomyopathy in mice Physiol Genomics 35 165 172 18628338
Ralser M Benjamin IJ 2008 Reductive stress on life span extension in C. elegans BMC Res Notes 1 19 18710529
Ramirez A Heimbach A Grundemann J 2006 Hereditary parkinsonism with dementia is caused by mutations in ATP13A2, encoding a lysosomal type 5 P-type ATPase Nat Genet 38 1184 1191 16964263
Ramsay RR Kowal AT Johnson MK Salach JI Singer TP 1987 The inhibition site of MPP+, the neurotoxic bioactivation product of 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine is near the Q-binding site of NADH dehydrogenase Arch Biochem Biophys 259 645 649 2827583
Ravi S Johnson MS Chacko BK 2015 Modification of platelet proteins by 4-hydroxynonenal: Potential Mechanisms for inhibition of aggregation and metabolism Free Radic Biol Med
Redmann M Darley-Usmar V Zhang J 2016 The Role of Autophagy, Mitophagy and Lysosomal Functions in Modulating Bioenergetics and Survival in the Context of Redox and Proteotoxic Damage: Implications for Neurodegenerative Diseases Aging Dis 7 150 162 27114848
Redmann M Dodson M Boyer-Guittaut M Darley-Usmar V Zhang J 2014 Mitophagy mechanisms and role in human diseases Int J Biochem Cell Biol 53C 127 133
Reed T Perluigi M Sultana R Pierce WM Klein JB Turner DM Coccia R Markesbery WR Butterfield DA 2008 Redox proteomic identification of 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal-modified brain proteins in amnestic mild cognitive impairment: insight into the role of lipid peroxidation in the progression and pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Dis 30 107 120 18325775
Reeve A Meagher M Lax N Simcox E Hepplewhite P Jaros E Turnbull D 2013 The impact of pathogenic mitochondrial DNA mutations on substantia nigra neurons J Neurosci 33 10790 10801 23804100
Reeves MB Davies AA McSharry BP Wilkinson GW Sinclair JH 2007 Complex I binding by a virally encoded RNA regulates mitochondria-induced cell death Science 316 1345 1348 17540903
Rehman H Liu Q Krishnasamy Y 2016 The mitochondria-targeted antioxidant MitoQ attenuates liver fibrosis in mice Int J Physiol Pathophysiol Pharmacol 8 14 27 27186319
Reily C Mitchell T Chacko BK Benavides G Murphy MP Darley-Usmar V 2013 Mitochondrially targeted compounds and their impact on cellular bioenergetics Redox Biol 1 86 93 23667828
Roberts DJ Miyamoto S 2015 Hexokinase II integrates energy metabolism and cellular protection: Akting on mitochondria and TORCing to autophagy Cell Death Differ 22 248 257 25323588
Roberts DJ Tan-Sah VP Ding EY Smith JM Miyamoto S 2014 Hexokinase-II positively regulates glucose starvation-induced autophagy through TORC1 inhibition Mol Cell 53 521 533 24462113
Rocha BS Lundberg JO Radi R Laranjinha J 2016 Role of nitrite, urate and pepsin in the gastroprotective effects of saliva Redox Biol 8 407 414 27156250
Romano A Koczwara JB Gallelli CA Vergara D Micioni Di Bonaventura MV Gaetani S Giudetti AM 2017 Fats for thoughts: An update on brain fatty acid metabolism Int J Biochem Cell Biol 84 40 45 28065757
Russell RL Siedlak SL Raina AK Bautista JM Smith MA Perry G 1999 Increased neuronal glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase and sulfhydryl levels indicate reductive compensation to oxidative stress in Alzheimer disease Arch Biochem Biophys 370 236 239 10510282
Rutherford NJ Sacino AN Brooks M Ceballos-Diaz C Ladd TB Howard JK Golde TE Giasson BI 2015 Studies of lipopolysaccharide effects on the induction of alpha-synuclein pathology by exogenous fibrils in transgenic mice Mol Neurodegener 10 32 26223783
Ryan BJ Hoek S Fon EA Wade-Martins R 2015 Mitochondrial dysfunction and mitophagy in Parkinson’s: from familial to sporadic disease Trends Biochem Sci 40 200 210 25757399
Saha S Ash PE Gowda V Liu L Shirihai O Wolozin B 2015 Mutations in LRRK2 potentiate age-related impairment of autophagic flux Mol Neurodegener 10 26 26159606
Salabei JK Gibb AA Hill BG 2014 Comprehensive measurement of respiratory activity in permeabilized cells using extracellular flux analysis Nat Protoc 9 421 438 24457333
Sampson TR Debelius JW Thron T 2016 Gut Microbiota Regulate Motor Deficits and Neuroinflammation in a Model of Parkinson’s Disease Cell 167 1469 1480 e1412 27912057
Sarkar S Korolchuk VI Renna M 2011 Complex inhibitory effects of nitric oxide on autophagy Mol Cell 43 19 32 21726807
Schapira AH 2007 Mitochondrial dysfunction in Parkinson’s disease Cell Death Differ 14 1261 1266 17464321
Schapira AH Cooper JM Dexter D Clark JB Jenner P Marsden CD 1990 Mitochondrial complex I deficiency in Parkinson’s disease J Neurochem 54 823 827 2154550
Schapira AH Gegg M 2011 Mitochondrial contribution to Parkinson’s disease pathogenesis Parkinsons Dis 2011 159160 21687805
Scheperjans F Aho V Pereira PA 2015 Gut microbiota are related to Parkinson’s disease and clinical phenotype Mov Disord 30 350 358 25476529
Scherz-Shouval R Shvets E Fass E Shorer H Gil L Elazar Z 2007 Reactive oxygen species are essential for autophagy and specifically regulate the activity of Atg4 EMBO J 26 1749 1760 17347651
Schmid AW Fauvet B Moniatte M Lashuel HA 2013 Alpha-synuclein Post-translational Modifications as Potential Biomarkers for Parkinson Disease and Other Synucleinopathies Mol Cell Proteomics 12 3543 3558 23966418
Schneider L Zhang J 2010 Lysosomal function in macromolecular homeostasis and bioenergetics in Parkinson’s disease Mol Neurodegener 5 14 20388210
Scott L Dawson VL Dawson TM 2017 Trumping neurodegeneration: Targeting common pathways regulated by autosomal recessive Parkinson’s disease genes Exp Neurol 298 191 201 28445716
Selley ML 1998 (E)-4-hydroxy-2-nonenal may be involved in the pathogenesis of Parkinson’s disease Free Radic Biol Med 25 169 174 9667492
Settembre C Di MC Polito VA 2011 TFEB links autophagy to lysosomal biogenesis Science 332 1429 1433 21617040
Shacka JJ Lu J Xie ZL Uchiyama Y Roth KA Zhang J 2007 Kainic acid induces early and transient autophagic stress in mouse hippocampus Neurosci Lett 414 57 60 17223264
Shavali S Brown-Borg HM Ebadi M Porter J 2008 Mitochondrial localization of alpha-synuclein protein in alpha-synuclein overexpressing cells Neurosci Lett 439 125 128 18514418
Shi L Tu BP 2015 Acetyl-CoA and the regulation of metabolism: mechanisms and consequences Curr Opin Cell Biol 33 125 131 25703630
Shiva S Oh JY Landar AL Ulasova E Venkatraman A Bailey SM Darley-Usmar VM 2005 Nitroxia: the pathological consequence of dysfunction in the nitric oxide-cytochrome c oxidase signaling pathway Free Radic Biol Med 38 297 306 15629859
Sies H 2015 Oxidative stress: a concept in redox biology and medicine Redox Biol 4 180 183 25588755
Siintola E Partanen S Stromme P Haapanen A Haltia M Maehlen J Lehesjoki AE Tyynela J 2006 Cathepsin D deficiency underlies congenital human neuronal ceroid-lipofuscinosis Brain 129 1438 1445 16670177
Singh P Sharma R McElhanon K Allen CD Megyesi JK Benes H Singh SP 2015 Sulforaphane protects the heart from doxorubicin-induced toxicity Free Radic Biol Med 86 90 101 26025579
Solesio ME Prime TA Logan A Murphy MP Del Mar Arroyo-Jimenez M Jordan J Galindo MF 2013 The mitochondria-targeted anti-oxidant MitoQ reduces aspects of mitochondrial fission in the 6-OHDA cell model of Parkinson’s disease Biochim Biophys Acta 1832 174 182 22846607
Solt LA Wang Y Banerjee S 2012 Regulation of circadian behaviour and metabolism by synthetic REV-ERB agonists Nature 485 62 68 22460951
Spencer B Valera E Rockenstein E Trejo-Morales M Adame A Masliah E 2015 A brain-targeted, modified neurosin (kallikrein-6) reduces alpha-synuclein accumulation in a mouse model of multiple system atrophy Mol Neurodegener 10 48 26394760
Steiner JA Angot E Brundin P 2011 A deadly spread: cellular mechanisms of alpha-synuclein transfer Cell Death Differ 18 1425 1433 21566660
Steinfeld R Reinhardt K Schreiber K Hillebrand M Kraetzner R Bruck W Saftig P Gartner J 2006 Cathepsin D deficiency is associated with a human neurodegenerative disorder Am J Hum Genet 78 988 998 16685649
Stucki DM Ruegsegger C Steiner S Radecke J Murphy MP Zuber B Saxena S 2016 Mitochondrial impairments contribute to Spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 progression and can be ameliorated by the mitochondria-targeted antioxidant MitoQ Free Radic Biol Med 97 427 440 27394174
Sun N Yun J Liu J 2015 Measuring In Vivo Mitophagy Mol Cell 60 685 696 26549682
Swerdlow RH 2009 The neurodegenerative mitochondriopathies J Alzheimers Dis 17 737 751 19542616
Szabo C Ischiropoulos H Radi R 2007 Peroxynitrite: biochemistry, pathophysiology and development of therapeutics Nat Rev Drug Discov 6 662 680 17667957
Takeshige K Baba M Tsuboi S Noda T Ohsumi Y 1992 Autophagy in yeast demonstrated with proteinase-deficient mutants and conditions for its induction J Cell Biol 119 301 311 1400575
Tan HWS Sim AYL Long YC 2017 Glutamine metabolism regulates autophagy-dependent mTORC1 reactivation during amino acid starvation Nat Commun 8 338 28835610
Tanner CM Kamel F Ross GW 2011 Rotenone, paraquat, and Parkinson’s disease Environ Health Perspect 119 866 872 21269927
Tansey MG Goldberg MS 2010 Neuroinflammation in Parkinson’s disease: its role in neuronal death and implications for therapeutic intervention Neurobiol Dis 37 510 518 19913097
Tieu K Perier C Caspersen C 2003 D-beta-hydroxybutyrate rescues mitochondrial respiration and mitigates features of Parkinson disease J Clin Invest 112 892 901 12975474
Trapannone R Mariappa D Ferenbach AT van Aalten DM 2016 Nucleocytoplasmic human O-GlcNAc transferase is sufficient for O-GlcNAcylation of mitochondrial proteins Biochem J 473 1693 1702 27048592
Tsujimura A Taguchi K Watanabe Y Tatebe H Tokuda T Mizuno T Tanaka M 2014 Lysosomal enzyme cathepsin B enhances the aggregate forming activity of exogenous alpha-synuclein fibrils Neurobiol Dis 73C 244 253
Usenovic M Tresse E Mazzulli JR Taylor JP Krainc D 2012 Deficiency of ATP13A2 leads to lysosomal dysfunction, alpha-synuclein accumulation, and neurotoxicity J Neurosci 32 4240 4246 22442086
Valera E Masliah E 2016 Therapeutic approaches in Parkinson’s disease and related disorders J Neurochem 139 Suppl 1 346 352
van der MM Brouwer M Kromhout H Nijssen P Huss A Vermeulen R 2012 Is pesticide use related to Parkinson disease? Some clues to heterogeneity in study results Environ Health Perspect 120 340 347 22389202
Verma M Callio J Otero PA Sekler I Wills ZP Chu CT 2017 Mitochondrial Calcium Dysregulation Contributes to Dendrite Degeneration Mediated by PD/LBD-Associated LRRK2 Mutants J Neurosci 37 11151 11165 29038245
Vinje S Stroes E Nieuwdorp M Hazen SL 2014 The gut microbiome as novel cardio-metabolic target: the time has come! Eur Heart J 35 883 887 24216389
Volpicelli-Daley LA Luk KC Patel TP Tanik SA Riddle DM Stieber A Meaney DF Trojanowski JQ Lee VM 2011 Exogenous alpha-synuclein fibrils induce Lewy body pathology leading to synaptic dysfunction and neuron death Neuron 72 57 71 21982369
Wang B Cai Z Tao K Zeng W Lu F Yang R Feng D Gao G Yang Q 2016 Essential control of mitochondrial morphology and function by chaperone-mediated autophagy through degradation of PARK7 Autophagy 12 1215 1228 27171370
Wang C Telpoukhovskaia MA Bahr BA Chen X Gan L 2017 Endo-lysosomal dysfunction: a converging mechanism in neurodegenerative diseases Curr Opin Neurobiol 48 52 58 29028540
Wang X Yan MH Fujioka H Liu J Wilson-Delfosse A Chen SG Perry G Casadesus G Zhu X 2012 LRRK2 regulates mitochondrial dynamics and function through direct interaction with DLP1 Hum Mol Genet 21 1931 1944 22228096
Wani WY Boyer-Guittaut M Dodson M Chatham J Darley-Usmar V Zhang J 2015 Regulation of autophagy by protein post-translational modification Lab Invest 95 14 25 25365205
Wani WY Chatham JC Darley-Usmar V McMahon LL Zhang J 2016 O-GlcNAcylation and neurodegeneration Brain Res Bull
Wani WY Ouyang X Benavides GA Redmann M Cofield S Shacka JJ Darley-Usmar V Chatham JC Zhang J 2017 O-GlcNAc regulation of autophagy and α-synuclein homeostasis; implications for Parkinson’s disease Molecular Brain
Weitzberg E Hezel M Lundberg JO 2010 Nitrate-nitrite-nitric oxide pathway: implications for anesthesiology and intensive care Anesthesiology 113 1460 1475 21045638
Wende AR Young ME Chatham J Zhang J Rajasekaran NS Darley-Usmar VM 2016a Redox biology and the interface between bioenergetics, autophagy and circadian control of metabolism Free Radic Biol Med 100 94 107 27242268
Wende AR Young ME Chatham J Zhang J Rajasekaran NS Darley-Usmar VM 2016b Redox biology and the interface between bioenergetics, autophagy and circadian control of metabolism Free Radic Biol Med 100 94 107 27242268
Williams JA Zhao K Jin S Ding WX 2017 New methods for monitoring mitochondrial biogenesis and mitophagy in vitro and in vivo Exp Biol Med (Maywood) 242 781 787 28093935
Wills J Jones J Haggerty T Duka V Joyce JN Sidhu A 2010 Elevated tauopathy and alpha-synuclein pathology in postmortem Parkinson’s disease brains with and without dementia Exp Neurol 225 210 218 20599975
Wissemann WT Hill-Burns EM Zabetian CP 2013 Association of Parkinson disease with structural and regulatory variants in the HLA region Am J Hum Genet 93 984 993 24183452
Wong HS Dighe PA Mezera V Monternier PA Brand MD 2017 Production of superoxide and hydrogen peroxide from specific mitochondrial sites under different bioenergetic conditions J Biol Chem 292 16804 16809 28842493
Worth AJ Basu SS Snyder NW Mesaros C Blair IA 2014 Inhibition of neuronal cell mitochondrial complex I with rotenone increases lipid beta-oxidation, supporting acetyl-coenzyme A levels J Biol Chem 289 26895 26903 25122772
Xiang W Menges S Schlachetzki JC Meixner H Hoffmann AC Schlotzer-Schrehardt U Becker CM Winkler J Klucken J 2015 Posttranslational modification and mutation of histidine 50 trigger alpha synuclein aggregation and toxicity Mol Neurodegener 10 8 25886189
Xiang W Schlachetzki JC Helling S 2013 Oxidative stress-induced posttranslational modifications of alpha-synuclein: specific modification of alpha-synuclein by 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal increases dopaminergic toxicity Mol Cell Neurosci 54 71 83 23369945
Yan MH Wang X Zhu X 2013 Mitochondrial defects and oxidative stress in Alzheimer disease and Parkinson disease Free Radic Biol Med 62 90 101 23200807
Yoritaka A Hattori N Uchida K Tanaka M Stadtman ER Mizuno Y 1996 Immunohistochemical detection of 4-hydroxynonenal protein adducts in Parkinson disease Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 93 2696 2701 8610103
Yu L Chen Y Tooze SA 2017 Autophagy pathway: cellular and molecular mechanisms Autophagy
Yuzwa SA Cheung AH Okon M McIntosh LP Vocadlo DJ 2014 O-GlcNAc modification of tau directly inhibits its aggregation without perturbing the conformational properties of tau monomers J Mol Biol 426 1736 1752 24444746
Yuzwa SA Macauley MS Heinonen JE 2008 A potent mechanism-inspired O-GlcNAcase inhibitor that blocks phosphorylation of tau in vivo Nat Chem Biol 4 483 490 18587388
Yuzwa SA Shan X Macauley MS Clark T Skorobogatko Y Vosseller K Vocadlo DJ 2012 Increasing O-GlcNAc slows neurodegeneration and stabilizes tau against aggregation Nat Chem Biol 8 393 399 22366723
Zhang J 2013 Autophagy and Mitophagy in Cellular Damage Control Redox Biol 1 19 23 23946931
Zhang J 2015 Teaching the basics of autophagy and mitophagy to redox biologists—Mechanisms and experimental approaches Redox Biology 4 242 259 25618581
Zhang S Eitan E Mattson MP 2017a Early involvement of lysosome dysfunction in the degeneration of cerebral cortical neurons caused by the lipid peroxidation product 4-hydroxynonenal J Neurochem 140 941 954 28095639
Zhang Y Nguyen DT Olzomer EM Poon GP Cole NJ Puvanendran A Phillips BR Hesselson D 2017b Rescue of Pink1 Deficiency by Stress-Dependent Activation of Autophagy Cell Chem Biol 24 471 480 e474 28366621
Zhou Y Lu M Du RH Qiao C Jiang CY Zhang KZ Ding JH Hu G 2016 MicroRNA-7 targets Nod-like receptor protein 3 inflammasome to modulate neuroinflammation in the pathogenesis of Parkinson’s disease Mol Neurodegener 11 28 27084336
Zhu Y Duan C Lu L Gao H Zhao C Yu S Ueda K Chan P Yang H 2011 alpha-Synuclein overexpression impairs mitochondrial function by associating with adenylate translocator Int J Biochem Cell Biol 43 732 741 21310263
Zuendorf G Kerrouche N Herholz K Baron JC 2003 Efficient principal component analysis for multivariate 3D voxel-based mapping of brain functional imaging data sets as applied to FDG-PET and normal aging Hum Brain Mapp 18 13 21 12454908
