LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


100892858
30235
Epilepsy Behav
Epilepsy Behav
Epilepsy &amp; behavior : E&amp;B
1525-5050
1525-5069

29097123
5756681
10.1016/j.yebeh.2017.09.016
NIHMS909068
Article
Epilepsy as a network disorder: What can we learn from other network disorders such as dementia and schizophrenia, and what are the implications for translational research?
Scharfman Helen E. 1
Kanner Andres M. 2
Friedman Alon 3
Blumcke Ingmar 4
Crocker Candice E. 5
Cendes Fernando 6
Diaz-Arrastia Ramon 7
Förstl Hans 8
Fenton André A. 9
Grace Anthony A. 10
Palop Jorge 11
Morrison Jason 12
Nehlig Astrid 13
Prasad Asuri 14
Wilcox Karen S. 15
Jette Nathalie 16
Pohlmann-Eden Bernd 17
1 Professor of Child &amp; Adolescent Psychiatry, Neuroscience &amp; Physiology and Psychiatry, and Investigator, Neuroscience Institute, New York University Langone Medical Center New York, NY 10016 and The Nathan Kline Institute, Orangeburg, NY, USA
2 Professor of Clinical Neurology, University of Miami, Miller School of Medicine 1120 NW 14th Street, Room #1324, Miami, FL, 33136, USA
3 Professor of Neuroscience, Dennis Chair in Epilepsy Research, Departments of Medical Neuroscience and Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Dalhousie University Halifax, NS, Canada, and Department of Physiology and Cell Biology, Zlotowski Center for Neuroscience, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel
4 Director Neuropathological Institute, University Hospitals Erlangen, Germany
5 Nova Scotia Early Psychosis Program, Department of Psychiatry, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada
6 Professor and Chair, Department of Neurology, University of Campinas, 13083-888 Campinas, Sao Paulo, Brazil
7 Director of Clinical Research, Centre for Neuroscience &amp; Regenerative Medicine Professor of Neurology, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences 12725 Twinbrook Parkway, Rockville, MD 20852, USA
8 Professor, Chair, Department of Psychiatry, University of Munich, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Ismaninger Strabe 22, D-81675 Munich, Germany
9 Professor of Neural Sciences, Centre for Neural Science, New York University, 4 Washington Place, Room 809, New York, NY 10003, USA
10 Distinguished Professor of Neuroscience, Professor of Psychiatry &amp; Psychology, University of Pittsburgh, 456 Langley Hall, 4200 Fifth Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15269, USA
11 Gladstone Institute of Neurological Disease, Department of Neurology, Gladstone Institute1650 Owens Street, San Francisco, CA 94158-2261, USA
12 Department of Psychiatry, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada
13 INSERM U 1129, Hôpital Necker, Paris, Faculty of Medicine, Strasbourg, France
14 Professor in Pediatrics &amp; Clinical Neurosciences, Department of Pediatrcs Children’s Hospital of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada
15 Professor and Chair, Department of Pharmacology &amp; Toxicology, Director, Anticonvulsant Drug Development Program, University of Utah Salt Lake City, Utah, USA
16 Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, Department of Neurology, New York, NY and Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta
17 Bernd Pohlmann-Eden, Professor of Neurology, Brain Repair Center, Life Science Research Institute, Dalhousie University, Room 229, PO Box 15000, Halifax, Nova Scotia, B3H4R2, Canada
1 10 2017
31 10 2017
1 2018
01 1 2019
78 302312
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
There is common agreement that many disorders of the central nervous system are ‘complex’ meaning that there are many potential factors that influence the development of the disease, underlying mechanisms and successful treatment. Most of these disorders, unfortunately, have no cure at the present time and therapeutic strategies often have debilitating side effects. Interestingly, some of the ‘complexities’ of one disorder are found in another, and the similarities are often network defects. It seems likely that more discussion of these commonalities could advance our understanding and therefore have clinicial implications or translational impact. With this in mind, the Fourth International Halifax Epilepsy Conference and Retreat was held as described in the prior paper, and this companion paper focuses on the second half of the meeting. Leaders in varies subspecialities of epilepsy research were asked to address Aging and Dementia or Psychosis in people with epilepsy (PWE). Commonalities between Autism, Depression, Aging and Dementia, Psychosis, and Epilepsy were the focus of the presentations and discussion. In the last session, additional experts commented on new conceptualization of translational epilepsy research efforts. Here the presentations are reviewed and salient points are highlighted.

seizure
Alzheimer’s disease
psychosis
preclinical
circuit
systems
neuroscience
neurology

Introduction

After decades of focused research into complex disorders such as dementia, schizophrenia, and epilepsy, it has become clear that there are overlapping components. Often this interrelationship is simplified by stating that seizures are a “comorbidity” of what is considered to be “another” disorder like Alzheimer’s disease, or epilepsy is a “risk factor”’ for Alzheimer’s disease. The implication is that “neurology” and “psychiatry” are less divided than one might think, and our approach to research and treatment should be adapted accordingly.

To reassess the relationships between neurological and psychiatric conditions in general, and specifically Autism, Depression, Alzheimer’s disease, Schizophrenia and Epilepsy, a recent meeting entitled “Epilepsy as a Network Disorder,” brought together basic researchers and clinician scientists. This was the fourth in a biennial series of conferences, the “Fourth International Halifax Epilepsy Conference and Retreat.” The proceeding publication by Kanner et al. (in this issue) describes the first presentations of the meeting which summarized the current understanding of epidemiological data on all the medical conditions listed above in relation to their co-occurrence with epilepsy (Session “A” of the meeting program). The prior paper also discussed the second session of the program (“B”) which provided perspectives on the overlap and/or bidirectional relationship of autism and epilepsy. This was followed by a discussion of depression and epilepsy in the next session (“C”). Below, the second half of the program, sessions D–F, are summarized. First, an overview of session “D” is provided, which focused on the reasons and potential common pathophysiology underlying the comorbidity of aging and dementia. Session D was followed by different viewpoints about psychosis in people with epilepsy (“E”). The last session of the meeting (“F”), included presentations of diverse researchers who tried to address a very difficult topic, the current conceptual thinking in translational research with respect to brain networks and abnormalities in neuronal circuitry in epilepsy.

Aging, dementia and epilepsy (Part “D” of the meeting program)

A very common complaint in patients with epilepsy is a change in memory and behavior [1, 2]. In addition, it has been noted that patients have seizures when the primary diagnosis is dementia [3–6], the prototype being Alzheimer’s disease. These clinical observations have led to a great deal of research to clarify the extent of these associations epidemiologically, and led to extensive efforts to develop and use animal models to understand potential mechanisms. In the past decade the extent of the research has expanded greatly, making it timely to discuss the current state of knowledge. In addition, whether a new direction or set of directions in research should be taken is important to consider.

As pointed out by Nathalie Jette (University of Calgary) in manuscript 1 (Kanner et al., in this issue), epidemiological studies are very heterogeneous in their methods so it is not clear whether any given comorbidity is common or rare. For example, self-report is not always accurate (and certainly poor in those with dementia), population-based data may include screening tools that are not validated, and under-diagnosis and under-ascertainment are further limitations. It is also problematic that ‘dementia’ is increasingly called ‘neurocognitive disorder.’ The extent of epilepsy (spontaneous recurrent seizures) in dementia is not as clear as the degree that single seizures occur with dementia. Regarding dementia itself, Erkinjunitti et al. [7] report estimates of dementia alone in the range of 3.1–29.1%, depending on diagnostic criteria. The pooled period prevalence of epilepsy in dementia is around 5%, while the period prevalence of dementia in epilepsy ranges from 8.1 to 17.5% (for review see [8]).

1 The neurovascular unit in aging and epilepsy

Alon Friedman

The “neurovascular unit” includes the vasculature and its functional interactions with the adjacent brain neuropil, including pericytes and adjacent extracellular matrix, neurons, and glia. Current animal research demonstrated in several models the role of compromised blood-brain barrier (BBB) in seizures and epileptogenesis, cognitive decline and neurodegeneration.

Injury to a brain blood vessel results not only in activation of clotting mechanisms but also followed by a progressive, often long-lasting increase in endothelial permeability [9]. BBB dysfunction following insults to the brain may last months and even years after injury [10, 11]. BBB dysfunction triggers the activation of astrocytes and neuroinflammation [12, 13] which depending on the brain region involved and age of the animal will result in epileptogenesis and seizures [14, 15]. One reported mechanism is the leak of serum proteins from blood into the brain neuropil. Albumin, for example, has been shown to leak and activate transforming growth factor TGFβ receptors and activate a pro-inflammatory signaling system. Mediated by phosphorylation of the Smad2/3 pathways, changes in gene expression underlie glial transformation [12] with altered extracellular homeostasis, neuroinflammatory response with rapid increase in IL-6 release as well as other pro-inflammatory cytokines [13, 16], changes in extracellular matrix with reduced GABAergic transmission [17] and excitatory synaptogenesis with pathological plasticity [18]. The presence of serum albumin within the hippocampus will lead to further aberrant adult neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus which has been suggested to alter the threshold for seizures [19–21]. Recent development of imaging methods allow quantitative imaging of BBB dysfunction after injuries to the cerebral cortex and white matter tracts (e.g. in American football players [22].

Importantly, not only endothelial dysfunction triggers an neuroinflammatory response and epileptogenesis, but prolonged seizures and status epilepticus – well known inducers of the epileptogenesis process are associated with vascular pathology [23, 24] and leaky BBB [25]. In epileptic animals, vascular pathology was also reported to reflect angiogenesis [26] probably due to increased VEGF, which is important because VEGF can have anti-seizure effects [23, 24, 27]. Changes in BBB integrity are also observed with aging and were recently associated with cognitive decline [28]. The increased occurrence of BBB dysfunction in the aging brain may also explain the well-known increase in the incidence of epilepsy with age. Together with the development of novel imaging methods for the detection of BBB pathology, it has been suggested that a leaky BBB may become a method for the identification of injury- or age-related brain regions with hypersynchronous activity, or undergoing epileptogenesis, thus allowing the prediction of epilepsy [29] and related cognitive dysfunction. Overrall, this presentation emphasized the close association of BBB leakages resulting from non-specific injuries and age-related factors with seizure threshold reduction [22].

2 Network abnormalities and interneuron dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease

Jorge Palop

There is increasing evidence of commonalities between epilepsy and Alzheimer’s disease in experimental findings in mice that overexpress a mutated form of amyloid precursor protein (APP), so that amyloid Aβ is increased. The original research demonstrated hyperexcitabiity in several animals models that simulate Alzheimer’s disease neuropathology (for review see [30]).

These laboratory findings have been replicated, especially with models using the mice with APP overexpression and mutation [31–35]. Several clinical studies have found sporadic seizures in people with Alzheimer’s disease. In one study [36], seizures were found particularly in patients with an onset of Alzheimer’s disease that was relatively young (e.g. 50–70). In a recent paper by Zarea et al [6], 132 patients of dominantly inherited Alzheimer’s disease had seizures. However, these studies of familial Alzheimer’s disease reflect the minority of patients because the vast majority are sporadic.

A critical factor in memory encoding is the activation of brain regions by the default mode network (DMN). Here DMN deactivation is followed by hippocampal activation. In general, low performance on cognitive tasks occurs with high activation of the hippocampus, suggesting that suppressing the activation is critical to cognitive function. Interestingly, the deactivation of the DMN is decreased in Alzheimer’s disease. This was found at various stages (e.g. mild cognitive impairment, early onset and late onset). Buckner et al [37] showed amyloid deposition in the DMN in Alzheimer’s disease which could be a mechanism for the loss of suppressed activation.

Current research addresses the paradox that there is synaptic depression in Alzheimer’s disease despite the presence of seizures. There is evidence that gamma oscillations are altered in the mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease which commonly is considered to result from interneuron activity. This led to a closer examination of interneurons. Decreased voltage-gated sodium channels, specifically NaV1.1, was found in interneurons in mice with overexpression and mutation of APP (J20 mice). This finding led to experiments using NaV1.1 overexpression in interneurons, which rescued the deficits in gamma and also stopped seizures. 30–50 Hz is most affected in the J20 mice. Faster gamma (&gt;50 Hz) is currently considered to be driven by the entorhinal cortex. It has been suggested that normally there is “competition” and the entorhinal cortical influence usually “wins” but the data from Dr. Palop’s laboratory suggest that the entorhinal cortex is not dominant in the J20 mouse model. This could potentially explain the reduced cognitive function in the J20 mice. It is very interesting that J20 mice frequently have sudden unexplained death in epilepsy (SUDEP), a phenomenon found in epilepsy which has prompted intensive research. Preliminary animal data suggest that overexpression of NaV1.1 improves survival, opening a novel approach to understand SUDEP.

One of the barriers to translating these findings is using overexpression of NaV as a therapy in humans. Current on-going work is focusing on an approach that uses transplantation. Medial ganglionic eminence (MGE) cells were chosen as they develop into interneurons. As a first step, his laboratory has transplanted MGE cells lacking NaV1.1 into J20 mice to determine if this improves the cognitive deficits. Nav1.1 activators are also being used to determine if they are helpful.

3 When and how epilepsy is relevant to Alzheimer’s disease

Helen E. Scharfman

Findings in animal models of Alzheimer’s disease in Dr. Scharfman’s laboratory support the view that seizures in Alzheimer’s disease are much more common than people often think [38, 39]. Literature both in humans and animals show robust evidence for seizures. This is most common in individuals who have familial Alzheimer’s disease and mouse models that simulate the familial form of Alzheimer’s disease. It is important to recognize that seizures may be underestimated because they are nonconvulsive, a type of seizure which has been documented in mouse models [40].

EEG abnormalities can be observed as early as the first month of life in mouse models [35]. This was also found in mice as young as 3 months which simulate Down’s syndrome (Ts65Dn mice; [35]), of which almost all develop dementia. The mice that simulate Alzheimer’s disease pathology were the mouse lines with mutations in APP that are found in Swedish or London families with Alzheimer’s disease (APPSwe or APPLon mice; APPSwe mice are often called Tg2576 mice).

The EEG abnormalities that are found in young mice appear to be interictal spikes (IIS) based on comparisons to recordings from mice with epilepsy (e.g. the pilocarpine model) using the same EEG equipment [35]. However, seizures appear to be rare in the APPSwe or APPLon mice compared to pilocarpine, so attention has been focused on understanding the IIS. One clue came from recordings with continuous video EEG which showed that IIS occurred primarily in rapid eye movement (REM) sleep [35]. Current efforts focus on the novel hypothesis that septohippocampal cholinergic neurons appear to be overly active early in life, leading to IIS in REM sleep. Later in life there appears to be a deterioration of the septohippocampal pathway, consistent with older views of cholinergic deterioration in Alzheimer’s disease. In contrast, the existing view of Dr. Scharfman is that early in life there is hyperactivity of the cholinergic system and then the cholinergic system degenerates. This has not been found before because the brain has mostly examined late in life. In support of this hypothesis, several measures of cholinergic neuron activity were shown to be high in young Tg2576 mice, and systemic injection of the muscarinic cholinergic antagonist atropine decreased the IIS in Tg2576 mice [35].

4 Features of creatures subjected to seizures

Hans Förstl

“There are many sinks (in life) and if you “don’t fall into one of them you get demented.”

There is a need for novel ways to conceptualize dementia relative to other conditions. These comparisons are problematic, because many diseases can lead to dementia. However, diseases may seem to have a lot in common but the similarity may only be due to the fact that there are so many contributing factors to each condition.

Complex presentations with both dementia and seizures have a wide range of etiologies from rare fatal familial insomnia [41] to dementia with Lewy bodies [42], a disorder with a delicate neurotransmitter imbalance in the upper brainstem.

The single most important cause of dementia is Alzheimer’s disease. The most prevalent type of dementia is so-called “mixed dementia,” because the elderly usually do not have only one clinical condition and age-related changes to vascular factors certainly play a significant role in most of these scenarios. The current operational definition of dementia is a loss of cognitive function affecting several domains that is so severe that the usual activities of daily living are significantly impaired. Historically, Alzheimer’s disease as a disease concept started when Alois Alzheimer studied the brain of a 52 year-old with symptoms of what is now considered Alzheimer’s dementia. He saw plaques, which had already been described by others, and identified a new staining method for neurofibrillary tangles. These observations led him to call the condition presenile dementia, but his superior suggested he call the condition Alzheimer’s disease. During that period, Solomon Carter Fuller (1872–1953), a guest in Alzheimer’s laboratory, had invested even more time into the investigation of senile dementia and saw similar neurodegenerative changes. Oskar Fischer (1876–1942) had also described a “sphaerotrichia multiplex cerebri” (= amyloid plaques) in the brains of patients with senile dementia. Heiko Braak clearly described the systematic development of neurofibrillary tangle pathology over a lifetime. The clinico-pathological MRC-CFAS-study demonstrated that there was not categorical, but only a gradual difference regarding plaque-, tangle and vascular pathology between epidemiologically representative groups of demented and not (yet)-demented individuals [43]. Mckhann et al [44] published the recent National Institutes of Aging criteria clearly distinguishing between Alzheimer’s disease (biology, aetiology, brain change) and Alzheimer’s dementia (the clinical syndrome of significant cognitive impairment due to Alzheimer’s disease). There is evidence from neuropathological studies, that first tangles occur already in childhood. The current goal is to identify Alzheimer’s disease at an early stage.

A limited number of interventions are currently available for the symptomatic pharmacological treatment of Alzheimer’s dementia. Memantine is an NMDA receptor antagonist with modest effects. Cholinesterase inhibitors are helpful if there are no serious contraindications or side effects. A promising treatment is immunization [45] but some drugs that have reached clinical trials had to be discontinued because of encephalitis. Later passive immunization was developed as an alternative approach, but that appears to be problematic also, possibly because treatment may be too late. Monoclonal antibodies for amyloid are being tested [46]. One of the reasons treatments based on antibodies may not work well is based on research from Busche and Konnerth [47]. What may be better is a gamma secretase inhibitor, but these drugs also have side effects.

There is a need for novel ways to conceptualize dementia relative to other conditions. These comparisons are problematic, as almost any severe disease can lead to dementia. Diseases may seem to have a lot in common but the similarity may only be due to the fact that there are so many contributing factors to each condition.

Complex presentations with both dementia and seizures have a wide range of etiologies. They are found in rare fatal familial insomnia [41] or in more common types of dementia with Lewy bodies [42] a disorder with defects in brainstem, substantia nigra, as well as in the basal forebrain cholinergic neurons.

Schizophrenia (Part “E” of the meeting program)

For decades it has been noted that seizures and schizophrenia may coexist and share relevant pathophysiological mechanisms. The following contributions will provide diverse perspectives on the two disorders from both a clinical and experimental view.

1 The face of post-ictal psychosis: The meeting of epilepsy and schizophrenia

Candice E. Crocker

Brain diseases with neurological functional deficits in general tend to increase susceptibility to psychiatric diseases. For example, psychiatric co-morbidities in epilepsy such as anxiety and depression are well recognized. There has been also striking evidence for a long time that individuals with epilepsy are at greater risk of experiencing psychotic episodes than the general population and conversely, people with schizophrenia may develop epilepsy [48]. It is estimated that 10–30% of epilepsy patients may have psychotic symptoms [49, 50]. When these symptoms evolve into clear psychotic episodes, they are referred to as the psychoses of epilepsy.

The classification of the psychoses of epilepsy is traditionally based on the timing of the psychotic symptoms relative to seizure occurrence (i.e., ictal, postictal and interictal [48]. “Alternative psychosis” is well known to occur in relation to successful seizure control as a result of AED treatment or after epilepsy surgery [51]. Interictal psychosis of epilepsy is likely the most common and best characterized psychotic disorder in patients with epilepsy. In post-ictal psychosis (PIP) psychotic symptoms occur after a seizure or series of seizures, a lucid interval and within 7 days of the seizures, delusions and hallucinations occur (often associated with post-ictal confusion) but there is preserved orientation and alertness; the presentation can have a strong affective component [52]. The psychotic event can be prolonged, lasting days or sometimes weeks, and it terminates on its own. The prevalence of post-ictal psychosis has been estimated to occur in as many as 10% of people with pharmacoresistant TLE but a meta-analysis suggests that the overall rate is closer to 2% of people with epilepsy [50, 52].

How close the psychoses of epilepsy are to primary psychotic disorders such as schizophrenia is debated. Psychotic disorders are characterized by abnormal thinking and perception and a loss of touch with reality. Schizophrenia has both positive and negative symptoms (emotional flatness, apathy, lack of speech) and cognitive impairments as well as challenges with social functioning. Schizophrenia is characterized by periods of psychosis that vary in duration. By comparison, post-ictal psychosis (PIP) lacks negative symptoms. PIP is also usually of comparatively short duration. However, there are points of convergence as well. There is some evidence of overlap in genetic abnormalities that can been seen in both schizophrenia and epilepsy but the possible associations have not been well studied [53]. Schizophrenia can develop following post-ictal psychosis and patients with chronic psychoses of epilepsy can have enlarged ventricles similar to those seen in patients with schizophrenia [54]. These comparisons raise the possibility of overlap in brain structure and neuronal networks between the two conditions. A pressing question is why negative symptoms are absent in post-ictal psychosis, and why this condition is generally time-limited. The answers might be very important to understand in which way psychosis in epilepsy and schizophrenia share certain networks and circuits.

With regards to MRI documented structural changes, defects in white matter networks may play a role in which patients with epilepsy develop PIP. A diffusion tensor study suggested that duration of epilepsy and fractional anisotropy value of the right arcuate fasciculus were independent risk factors of psychoticism in epilepsy patients [55]. Another study showed significant decreases in white matter volume (corpus callosum and cingulum bundle) in people with TLE and psychosis compared to TLE alone [56]. This MRI evidence suggests there is a structural abnormality leading to psychosis in epilepsy, but further investigation is needed.

2 Temporal lobe epilepsy and schizophrenia psychosis have common substrate in hippocampal dysregulation of the dopamine system

Anthony A. Grace

Clinical practice and human studies show that many individuals with temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) have hallucinations and delusions similar to schizophrenia [57], except that the person with TLE often has insight into the abnormal nature of the psychic phenomenon. In this context, it is relevant that animal models of schizophrenia often reveal hyperactivity in the hippocampus [58, 59]. It is believed that this phenomenon is driven by parvalbumin interneuron loss [60, 61] and hyper-responsivity of the mesolimbic dopamine (DA) system [62].

Evaluation of the DA system in the well-validated methyl axozymethanol acetate (MAM) prenatal disruption model provided interesting new insights. Pregnant rats are given MAM at gestational day 17 and, as adults, recapitulate many of the behavioral, anatomical, pharmacological, and molecular characteristics observed in schizophrenia patients [63, 64]. This includes a behavioral hyper-responsivity to amphetamine in both humans and rats, consistent with a hyper-responsive DA system. There was also a selective loss of parvalbumin interneurons in the hippocampus [65, 66] and an increase in DA neuron population activity. DA neuron activity in vivo can be defined in three ways: the proportion of DA neurons that are spontaneously active (population activity), their firing pattern (burst firing) and their firing rate [64]. Burst firing represents the rapid, behaviorally relevant phasic response of the DA neurons to salient environmental stimuli. However, for a DA neuron to be driven to fire in bursts, it must be firing spontaneously. The ventral pallidum regulates this baseline spontaneous activity via potent GABAergic afferents. By regulating the number that are active, the pallidum can regulate the responsivity of the system. This pathway is in turn controlled by the hippocampus via the hippocampal-ventral striatal-ventral pallidal pathway ([67]; Figure 1)). This system is modulated in a context dependent manner. In a benign environment when significant threats or reward opportunities are unlikely, the hippocampus keeps the DA system in a low activity state, so that stimuli can produce a simple orienting response via burst activation of the small population of active DA neurons. However, in a highly threatening environment or one associated with potential significant reward (e.g., an animal hunting for food) in which environmental stimuli are likely to be highly salient, the hippocampus causes the DA system to be in a highly responsive state, so that a large population of active DA neurons will burst fire and ready the organism for an immediate response. However, in the MAM rat and presumably in schizophrenia, the constant hippocampal hyperactivity driven by the developmental loss of parvalbumin interneurons causes the DA system to remain in a state in which the system is hyper-responsive to all stimuli whether they are salient or not. The resultant hyper-responsive DA system would constantly alert the individual to the threatening nature of all stimuli, flooding them with input that overwhelms their ability to selectively ignore irrelevant events and over-interpret benign events [64]. This is proposed to underlie the psychotic features of schizophrenia [64].

The state of the DA system in TLE was examined in the pilocarpine model of this disorder [68]. After intrahippocampal administration of pilocarpine, the rats were found to also show a significant increase in DA neuron population activity. However, only the rats that had substantial seizure activity showed a near doubling in the number of active DA neurons in the ventral tegmentum [69], which was similar to that observed in MAM rats [59]. Furthermore, as in MAM rats, the pilocarpine responsive rats that showed increased DA population activity were also hyper-responsive to amphetamine administration [69]. This is interesting given that in TLE and MAM animals there is hyperactivity in the hippocampus presumably driven by a loss of parvalbumin interneurons. However, there is one significant difference in the MAM rats: the parvalbumin loss appears to occur early in adolescence, and is accompanied by a loss of parvalbumin-containing GABA interneurons in the adult [65]. In contrast, in the pilocarpine model, there is a loss of parvalbumin protein without GABA neuron loss, likely indicative of a loss of parvalbumin interneuron drive [70]. Given the resistance of TLE psychosis to antipsychotic drug therapy, this suggests that in TLE a drug that may selectively restore parvalbumin interneuron drive could potentially be highly therapeutic in restoring balance to the disrupted system.

3 Excitation-inhibition coordination and discoordination in the judicious and pathological use of information

André Fenton

Information processing in the brain operates at spatial scales from the molecular to the social, and time scales from milliseconds to decades. Accordingly, traditional univariate approaches to understanding brain networks and brain disorders have likely been over simplistic. Fresh conceptual frameworks such as Neural Coding, Neural Dynamics and Neural States, many derived from the physics of dynamical physical systems, offer new opportunities to understand how brain networks function and hopefully also offer new treatment strategies.

Regarding neural coding, the conventional view is that the action potential is the primary unit of information, and the rate of discharge is how a neuron encodes information [71]. While useful, modern techniques that record the simultaneous activity of many individual neurons suggest that that a distributed “ensemble coding” concept may be more accurate. Ensemble coding is analogous to a stadium jumbotron’s display, in which distributed patterns of on-and-off lights encode information but the activity of an individual light is not meaningful [72, 73].

Regarding neural dynamics, a major advantage of ensemble codes is they can generate huge numbers of patterns, which offers a potentially feasible way to encode all of an individual’s experiences. Practically, ensemble coding requires that the patterns change in time and the ways in which the patterns change is called the “dynamics.” If neural dynamics are crucial to information processing, it is important to understand the dynamics that organize the ensemble activity patterns and how the patterns constitute items of information (‘words’) and sequences of items of information (‘sentences’) within a neural syntax. One salient shortcoming is that it is essentially unknown how information is readout from a neural ensemble code [74, 75].

Nonetheless, these notions illustrate the need for neural coordination. This is shown schematically in Figure 2, where the message “EXPERIENCE” is distributed across four display cubes, each able to participate in encoding “EXPERIENCE” as well as potentially three other words. While the cubes all revolve on an axis, the turning of the cubes must be properly coordinated and remain sufficiently synchronized for the set of four blocks to collectively convey the message. Discoordination causes catastrophic loss of the ability to encode the message, even though the signals carried by the four individual elements are unchanged.

Regarding Neural States, this can be explained by again considering the individual cubes of Figure 1, which are analogous to individual neurons. Each cube is fundamentally independent, but by design, each turns at a particular frequency. If the turning frequency is the same across the cubes, it would lead to a functional state of the system, where “EXPERIENCE” is readily decoded as the message. If the individual cubes turned at different frequencies, this would define a distinct state, perhaps one signifying dysfunction because decoding EXPERIENCE would be become problematic.

While these considerations of neural coding, dynamics and states are theoretical, adopting these concepts has important practical consequences for understanding diseases like schizophrenia. Rather than emphasizing the information carrying processes, these concepts emphasize the network coordination processes and the properties that emerge from these network interactions [73].

To illustrate these concepts in experimental work with relevance to schizophrenia, consider the use of phencyclidine (PCP), a drug that induces psychosis in humans. Using hippocampal area CA1 place cells as a model system, we find that systemic administration of PCP impairs cognitive control in spatial behaviors, but does not change the spatial tuning of the neurons – under PCP, place cells maintain the same firing rates and place fields as before PCP [76, 77]. Yet PCP significantly discoordinates how the cells discharge together in time, increasing errors and uncertainty when the rat’s location is decoded against the pre-PCP ensemble discharge in the place cell population. Under PCP, the place cell population discharges in an abnormal pattern, indicating that the maintained place cells adopt an abnormal neural activity state. PCP also disturbs when individual cells fire action potentials relative to ~8Hz theta oscillations in the ongoing local field potential (LFP) - LFP oscillations reflect time-synchronized synaptic input. PCP discoordinates how ~70Hz gamma oscillation amplitudes are coupled to the phases of theta oscillations, indicating that synaptic activity is abnormally timed under PCP. Such diverse forms of neural discoordination within the hippocampus and other brain circuits may account for the failures of cognitive control and other disorders of thought under PCP, with possible relevance for conceptualizing the network dysfunction in schizophrenia.

4 Schizophrenia as a network disorder: The clinical perspective

Jason Morrison

On a clinical level, schizophrenia is a challenging but treatable illness, with several effective treatments available. Despite this, the pathophysiology remains unknown. Network models have grown increasingly influential as a rubric for conceptualizing this complex illness from a biological perspective. A strength of these models is they provide an account of how with time, dysfunction in one brain region can spread to other linked regions causing deficits in several domains. This temporal dimension of network models is important as it can explain the progressive accumulation of deficits seen clinically in untreated schizophrenia.

To date, network accounts of schizophrenia have yet to lead to insights that can be used clinically. Animal network models have grown increasingly sophisticated and shed light on how the brain regions and neurotransmitter systems implicated in psychosis from human research may be linked in a pathophysiological sequence [64]. A weakness of animal models is that they cannot incorporate the phenomenological aspects of schizophrenia that define the illness. For example, it is not possible to say whether a mouse is hallucinating or having a delusion, and indeed it is unclear what an analogous experience might be for a rodent. Human network model research primarily uses functional neuroimaging as a tool and has moved from brief cross-sectional recordings (e.g. what brain areas are active when someone is hearing voices) to modeling how different brain regions interconnect and affect each other over time. This is achieved by applying graph theory mathematics to recorded brain activations over time to map putative brain networks involved in a brain function of interest, such as cognitive impairment or voice hearing, or to describe general characteristics of a network [78].

While individual papers from human research have linked network changes to specific symptoms in schizophrenia, findings are not consistent [79]. This is not surprising given the challenges of achieving consistent, generalizable results with this approach. Most papers group subjects according only to DSM diagnosis of schizophrenia vs. control with the assumption that (i) the clinical group shares a common underlying biological disturbance, and (ii) this disturbance will not be present in the control population. It is unclear if this is a solid assumption. The clinical concept of schizophrenia is highly heterogeneous, and symptoms and deficits can vary widely both between individuals, and within individuals depending on the stage of illness. The underlying biology likely shows a similar individual and temporal variability. If the underlying pathophysiology is not common, then the heterogeneity within comparison groups would prevent finding consistent or significant results. A modern neuroimaging protocol trying to model massive amounts of data points sequenced over time may amplify heterogeneity-related noise even further.

One way to address heterogeneity is to try and tighten the phenotype studied to people with schizophrenia and a certain symptom (e.g. voice hearer or blunted affect) or an endophenotype (e.g. P50 suppression or prepulse inhibition deficits). Alternatively, research designs that use individuals as their own control such as a within-subjects statistical analysis, or even single case design may lead to new insights that between-subjects designs cannot. While single case designs may lack generalizability, they can be useful for the exploratory research phase that psychiatry is still in (although pretends not to be). Remember that modern neurological phenotypes were discovered in this manner during the 19th century by careful clinicians like Charcot and Gowers. The fuzziness of current clinical phenotypes in psychiatry is reminiscent of neurological phenotypes during the mid 19th century. More resources may need to be spent on complementary techniques with an exploratory purpose for our understanding of the neurobiology of schizophrenia to move forward.

5 Temporal lobe epilepsy and schizophrenia- is there a link? A basic science perspective

Astrid Nehlig

There is general agreement that there are common etiologies, pathophysiology and genetics between schizophrenia and TLE. In both conditions one often finds a pre- or postnatal insult that precedes the diagnosis, which is considered to be the cause of the disorder. There are also data suggesting disconnection/misconnection within brain circuits, and interactions between the genetic background and environment which play an important role. The burning question is whether we currently have suitable animal models to address this complex issue and identify similarities between the two disorders. It is intriguing to compare a TLE model induced in the immature brain by lithium and then pilocarpine administration versus a schizophrenia model that is produced by ibotenic acid injection. In the model of schizophrenia, or a schizophrenia-like condition, ibotenic acid is injected bilaterally at postnatal day 7 in rats, and it produces ventral hippocampal damage. It is often called the neonatal ventral hippocampal lesion (NVHL) model [80]. In the NVHL model, lesioned rats develop a sensorimotor gating deficit when adult. They also show abnormal EEG activity reflected by thalamocortical oscillations called spike-wave discharges (SWDs) [81] There are changes in cortical excitability reflected by the higher susceptibility to SWDs and decreased susceptibility to clonic seizures induced by the convulsant pentylenetetrazol [82]. Data on neuronal damage outside the hippocampus in this model are missing. After the insult, active brain reorganization occurs, mainly around the 3rd week of age, but this reorganization translates only into subtle activity changes in adult rats [82]

In the NVHL model, which is also a TLE-like condition, spontaneous non-convulsive seizures occur in 25% of adult rats after an initial period of severe seizures early in life. The severe seizures are status epilepticus (SE) and they are induced at PD12 by the convulsant pilocarpine. Prior to pilocarpine the drug lithium is administered and this increases the effects of pilocarpine. There is an important developmental window in the effects of lithium-pilocarpine [83]. The only link with schizophrenia that we have in the latter model is that the efficacy of sensorimotor gating is not affected when SE is induced in adult rats [84] while data from rats at PD12 are not available.

A very important issue is how to compare ages in rats and humans. This is important when discussing developmental disorders because it has implications for predictions about humans based on the animal data. The problem is that a rodent appears to be born at a time equivalent developmentally to the 6th month of gestation in humans. It is suggested that a PD7 rat brain is considered equivalent to the end of gestation in humans. Two weeks of age might be similar to 2–3 years in humans. However, little is known about the respective developmental ages that would render the brain specifically vulnerable either to schizophrenia or epilepsy after an early insult to the hippocampus.

In this respect, we are still missing some directly comparable data. For example, to what extent would the bilateral injection of pilocarpine into the hippocampus at PD7 differ from the changes induced by ibotenate? How late in development can the NVHL lead to behaviors like schizophrenia? A combination of the models of schizophrenia and TLE is likely the next step. For example, one could use a different model of schizophrenia from the NVHL model, one where injection of an NMDA receptor antagonist early in life leads to discrete lesions that are closer to schizophrenia in humans in this respect, and combine it with a model of TLE where SE is induced at young ages. A comparison of how pathologies develop in this context would be fruitful.

Translation and Epilepsy (Part “F” of the meeting program)

1 Shared focal cortical dysplasia pathology in autism and epilepsy

Ingmar Blümcke

An obvious commonality between autism and epilepsy is that both diseases are mainly cortical. Another commonality is that both diseases share partial and generalized manifestations. Presurgical evaluation in patients with drug-resistant focal epilepsy often identified focal lesions on MRI, which were post-surgically confirmed by histopathological examination. It is also common to see focal lesions in autism. It is surprising that MRI is not applied more often in autism to document these changes and potentially allow new insights into this disorder.

Currently, the best neuropathological information regarding co-occurrence of autism spectrum disorder and focal epilepsy originates from the European Epilepsy Brain Bank consortium, which has collected more than 10.000 patients from 36 centers. Unpublished observations from the Vogtareuth Epilepsy Center in Southern Bavaria, Germany, identified 33 (out of 312) children with drug-resistant epilepsy also having pervasive developmental disorders (10 female, 23 male; Anja Karlmeier, personal communication). Most were 1 year of age (26/33) at seizure onset. Focal cortical dysplasia (ILAE Type I–III; [85–87]) were most common in these patients. In autism spectrum disorder there is also a high risk of malformations of cortical development, such as polymicrogyria and tuberous sclerosis complex. Forme fruste of polymicrogyria (without epilepsy) was reported in autism [88].

In conclusion, it is anticipated that David Taylor’s original description of FCD [89] will likely include acquired autism spectrum disorders. Sporadic observation that autism improved after early epilepsy surgery in young children will need further confirmation and was controversially discussed during the meeting.

2 Brain networks in epilepsies: what we have learned by recent neuroimaging studies?

Fernando Cendes

“It takes the world to understand the brain” [90].

Multimodal imaging techniques are crucial in the definition of the epilepsy etiology, including those that combine metabolic and functional investigation, such as fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET), single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT), diffusion MRI and magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS). Familiarity with the different protocols of imaging studies is required for the optimized investigation of seizure etiology [91]. The application of neuroimaging in epilepsy has advanced our understanding of mechanisms underlying the epilepsies and helped guide decisions for treatment on an individual basis [92]. Structural neuroimaging may be able to identify patients more likely to respond to anti-epileptic drug (AED) treatment and patients who are better candidates for earlier surgical treatment. In the last decades, quantitative analyses have also improved our knowledge about epileptogenic lesions and networks as well as prognosis on seizure control, cognitive outcome and comorbidities.

Functional MRI has helped to improve our understanding about deficits affecting memory and language in patients with epilepsy. For example, memory encoding fMRI paradigms that activate language areas in both hemispheres have been used for predicting memory decline after surgery for mesial temporal epilepsy with hippocampal sclerosis (MTLE-HS) with mixed results [93–97]. However, new methods of data analyses are improving this approach. For example, the presence of a positive fMRI lateralization index within the mesial temporal and frontal lobes is associated with postoperative verbal memory decline, with a sensitivity of 87.5%, and specificity of 80% [98]; this suggests a stronger engagement of extra-temporal neocortex during memory tasks in patients with bilateral hippocampal dysfunction. This is important because it explains why these subjects cannot maintain their memory scores after temporal lobe resections, especially in the language-dominant hemisphere. This concept is consistent with the concept that MTLE-HS is a network disorder with widespread microstructural brain damage and dysfunction [99–101].

Another example of the power of fMRI is a study showing that a complex network including parietal and frontal cortices are involved in verbal memory encoding and retrieval tasks in normal controls and patients with MTLE-HS [100]. However, these activations are more intense and widespread, particularly in the frontal lobes, in patients with left MTLE-HS, suggesting a functional reorganization of verbal memory processing due to the failure of left hippocampal network system, or perhaps a bilateral limbic dysfunction [100].

There is also structural MRI evidence that atrophy of gray matter in the cingulate and orbito-frontal cortices are independently associated with verbal memory performance, suggesting that atrophy and dysfunction of limbic and frontal structures contribute to memory impairment in MTLE-HS [102].

Studies of quantification of gray matter in MTLE-HS have demonstrated a network of subtle gray matter atrophy beyond the mesial or neocortical temporal structures, including predominantly other limbic areas as bilateral thalamus, but also extra-limbic structures as the frontal lobes [103–105]. Although this gray matter damage is more evident in pharmacoresistant MTLE-HS and it has been correlated with seizure frequency [106], there is also evidence of diffuse atrophy in MTLE-HS patients with well controlled seizures [107, 108]. In addition, this atrophy may progress even in patients who are seizure-free on medication [109]. Studies analyzing functional and structural networks have shown diffuse and distinct abnormalities when comparing left and right MTLE-HS patients, which involves the default mode networks [110] as well as an aberrant topological organization of the whole brain volumetric network, with disruption of patterns of cortical/subcortical morphology that is different between left and right MTLE-HS, indicating that these are indeed different diseases in several biological aspects [111].

New advanced neuroimaging techniques (such as diffusion tensor imaging and functional MRI), and the development of biomarkers that reflect inflammation or genetic mutations, will add further knowledge about epilepsy, as well as normal brain network function.

3 Network disorders: genetic, biochemical and molecular connections

Asuri Prasad

Epilepsy can be a primary or a comorbid feature and there is a biological continuum of expression of genetic and inherited biochemical defects in children. Affected individuals exhibit phenotypes that include overlapping features of epileptic seizures, autistic traits, cognitive, mood and behavioral impairments. Evidence suggests that shared molecular, biochemical, and signaling pathways particularly at the synapse and subcellular levels are involved in the genesis of the epilepsy and comorbid features of different unrelated conditions.

Case studies from the pediatric epilepsy clinic in South-Western Ontario nicely illustrate how changes at synaptic and post-synaptic subcellular level influence network behavior: early onset epilepsy with evolution to a developmental disability in child with a microdeletion involving the neurexin NRXN1 gene; a 22q133 microdeletion syndrome involving the SHANK3 gene (Phelan-Mcdiarmid syndrome); Tuberous sclerosis with mutation in the TSC1 gene, Rett syndrome with MECP2 gene mutation; infantile spasms evolving to intractable epilepsy and severe developmental disability due to methylene tetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) deficiency.

These case examples show altered protein -protein interactions at the synapse and post-synaptic signaling pathways. The mutations and their pathogenic effects demonstrate; the critical role of anchoring proteins at the synapse (neurexin NRXN1), through interactions in signal transduction or transcriptional pathways (SHANK3, TSC1 in the mTOR pathway), epigenetic changes involving methylation (MECP2 in Rett syndrome and in MTHFR deficiency) that lead to dysregulation of transcription and resultant changes in network behavior.[112–116]. Cellular metabolism and epigenetic cross talk add another layer of complexity [117, 118]. Fortuitously, these pathways can be modulated by a variety of pharmacological and other interventions. The ketogenic diet, for instance, appears to have a favourable effect by elevating BDNF levels and the mTOR pathway.

Studying the “molecular interactome” will open up fresh insights into network function, epileptogenesis and co-morbid conditions as well as help identify novel drug targets for treatment.

4 Inflammation and neural circuit behavior in brain disorders

Karen S. Wilcox

A common underlying factor in brain network diseases is likely inflammation. A new animal model of epilepsy has been established in Utah where an initial infection using Theiler’s Murine Encephalomyelitis Virus (TMEV) is the stimulus to cause chronic seizures. This concept is further supported by the fact that common viral infections have been associated with acute seizures and the subsequent development of temporal lobe epilepsy include human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), Japanese Encephalitis Virus, West Nile virus, Herpes Simplex Virus-1 (HSV1), and Human Herpes Simplex Virus-6 (HHV6; [119, 120]). TMEV infection in C57BL6 mice led to 3–7 days of seizures immediately after virus exposure [121]. On day 8 the seizures stopped, and much later the animals develop epilepsy, with both convulsive and nonconvulsive seizures [122, 123]. These mice develop significant neuronal loss and persistent astro and microgliosis in the hippocampus, cortex and limbic system [124], as well as behavioral comorbidities [125].

Current research focuses on TNFα and its regulation of seizures in the TMEV model. Interestingly, TNFα knockout mice have a reduced seizure burden. TNFα normally binds to two membrane receptors (TNFR1 or 2) with TNFR1 having “good effects” and TNFR2 having “bad effects.” Seizures in response to the TMEV virus increased seizures in the TNFR2 knockout, but if both receptors are deleted, seizures are reduced [126]. The TMEV model is the only viral model of epilepsy at the present time and shows promise for future drug development. Along those lines, the NINDS Epilepsy Therapy Screening Program (ETSP) recently implemented the TMEV model into its compound screening efforts, and it has been demonstrated that this model is an etiologically relevant platform for therapy discovery [127]. New drug targets for disease modification of temporal lobe epilepsy have been identified. For example, novel anti-inflammatory agents that target diverse molecular targets such as the prostaglandin E2 receptor [128], TGF-α signaling [15], and Il-Iβ [129] are potential disease modifying inflammatory targets that might provide protection against the development of seizures or associated comorbidities following brain insults if they are blocked. Recent work in the TMEV model suggests that interleukin 6 (Il-6) and TNFα may also be important inflammatory signaling systems that could be exploited for disease modifying therapies following CNS insults that lead to epilepsy [130, 131]; Patel et al., 2017).

Future work will focus on strategies to blocking signaling through inflammatory pathways to prevent the epileptogenesis in the TMEV model.

5 Endophenotypes of traumatic brain injury: Designing the next generation of clinical trials for post traumatic epilepsy

Ramon Diaz-Arrastia

Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is very important to address because of its devastating consequences to cognition and behavior. TBI is a major risk factor for Alzheimer’s disease. TBI also is a common finding in epilepsy. From the Rochester study of 888 patients, 4% of individuals had head trauma in their history [132]. This statistic underestimates the importance of trauma in epilepsy however. For example, in the 15–24 year-old age range, approximately 40% of individuals with symptomatic epilepsy had head trauma [132]. If one studies the cumulative probability of post-traumatic seizures, up to 15% percent of individuals with severe injury developed seizures [132]. More recent data from the Veterans Administration supports the importance of TBI in epilepsy [133].

Trauma results in both focal and diffuse injury and both can result in epileptogenesis. Thus, post traumatic epilepsy (PTE) is heterogeneous. Between 25–30% of cases of intractable epilepsy after TBI are associated with mesial temporal sclerosis and therefore TLE is a major concern. Surgery is a viable option in selected cases. Animal models have been developed that reproduce some of the features of human PTE and they are helpful [134–136].

What do we need to know for the next generation of clinical trials? Endophenotyping can potentially help. An endophenotype (also called an endotype, or a subphenotype) is an internal or intermediate phenotype that is closer to the underlying pathophysiology of disease (whether genetic or environmental). It is a continuous quantitative variable, in contrast to a phenotype which is usually a categorical variable. An endophenotype can be measured quantitatively using physiologic, biochemical or imaging techniques. Endophenotypes should be developed iteratively between clinical and preclinical studies. The studies in humans can provide the natural history of endophenotpes and possibly subtypes that will be most likely to benefit from therapy. Preclinical studies can confirm the benefits of therapy, advance a more mechanistic understanding, and establish pharmacodynamics.

Summary, conclusions, and future directions

A number of disorders, particularly those of developmental origin, often show comorbidity as well as tendency to occur in families. Furthermore, there is increasing evidence that metabolic disturbances, particularly those related to oxidative stress and neuroinflammation, have recently been linked to the etiology of many of these disorders. Epilepsy itself is known to put a high metabolic load on systems, which could exacerbate the damage caused by susceptibility to oxidative stress. Particularly sensitive to metabolic load and oxidative stress are the interneuron populations. Given that this neuronal class is the last to develop, emerging as a mechanism to stabilize excitatory networks, it is likely that this class of neurons is more vulnerable to insults [64]. Therefore, destabilization of excitatory/inhibitory balance, combined with the metabolic overdrive associated with ictal activity, could be a driving force in the pathophysiology underlying many of these disorders and their link to epilepsy.

The type of format chosen by the 4th Halifax International Epilepsy Conference (HIECR) appeared to be successful in many ways. The post meeting evaluation was outstanding. The conference bridged specialties in neuroscience, neurology and psychiatry, engaging individuals who would usually not even meet let alone talk in such a small group setting with focused and often intense dialogue. The nature of the meeting, allowed informal discussions throughout, induced an inspiring out-of the-box-thinking, and created a superb opportunity for educating one another about the most current activity in each specialty. It also clarified where some of the most controversial and difficult issues lie and the challenge to address those in the future. We all believe that interdisciplinary “think tanks” such as the HIECR will significantly enrich our understanding of complex diseases. Stepping out of our usual day-to-day activity and general mindsets opens unexpected opportunities to develop innovative perspectives and helps rewire our own way of thinking and approaching these issues.

The 4th International Halifax Conference and Retreat was supported by the Brain Repair Center, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Citizens United for Research against Epilepsy (CURE), Eisai Limited, Sunovion Pharmaceuticals Canada Inc. and UCB Canada Inc.

Supported for the authors comes from NIH R01 NS-081203, R01 MH-109305, R01 AG-055328, and the New York State Office of Mental Health (HES); IB is supported by the European Union (FP7 DESIRE grant agreement # 602531). BP received grants from the Epilepsy Association of Nova Scotia, Nova Scotia Health Research Foundation, Brain Repair Center, Dalhousie University.

Figure 1 DA neuron activity states are regulated by distinct afferent circuits. In the baseline condition, approximately half of the DA neurons are firing spontaneously; the rest are held in a hyperpolarized, inactive state by strong inhibitory input from the ventral pallidum. The ventral pallidum in turn is controlled by a circuit originating in the ventral hippocampus. In contrast, the burst firing pattern is controlled by a glutamatergic input activated by salient stimuli. Therefore, when an animal is exposed to a behaviorally salient event, DA neurons are driven to fire in a rapid, phasic burst firing state. However, to burst fire, a DA neuron must be spontaneously active. Whether it is active or not is controlled by the hippocampus-ventral striatum-ventral pallidum circuit. Therefore, in environmental contexts where rapid responses are required, the hippocampus drives the DA system into a highly responsive state via activation of silent neurons. However, if the hippocampus is pathologically hyperactive, the DA system is rendered hyper-responsive to stimuli, leading to overactivation by stimuli and overinterpretation of events, which is proposed to be the basis for psychosis.

Figure 2 Neural Coordination. Example illustrating the need for coordination in a system where information is distributed across multiple (here only 4) potentially independent elements. Although each cube only reports a particular subset of information, the message “EXPERIENCE” is only encoded when the synchronous display of all four cube faces is accomplished. Here analogous to neural coordination, coordinating mechanisms are crucial for keeping the four cubes synchronous in space and time.

HIGHLIGHTS

Alzheimer’s disease is a risk factor for epilepsy, and many patients with epilepsy have cognitive impairments and psychosis.

The relationships between Alzheimer’s disease, schizophrenia and epilepsy suggest some aspects of the underlying pathophysiology may be shared..

Much of the evidence comes from studies of neural networks and circuits.

There are many potential targets for treatment suggested by the commonalities such as inflammation, cellular stress or injury, and genetics.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


1 Keezer MR Sisodiya SM Sander JW Comorbidities of epilepsy: current concepts and future perspectives Lancet Neurol 2016 15 106 15 26549780
2 Kanner AM Management of psychiatric and neurological comorbidities in epilepsy Nat Rev Neurol 2016 12 106 16 26782334
3 Nicastro N Assal F Seeck M From here to epilepsy: the risk of seizure in patients with Alzheimer’s disease Epileptic Disord 2016 18 1 12
4 Giorgi FS Baldacci F Dini E Tognoni G Bonuccelli U Epilepsy occurrence in patients with Alzheimer’s disease: clinical experience in a tertiary dementia center Neurol Sci 2016 37 645 7 26694176
5 Vossel KA Ranasinghe KG Beagle AJ Mizuiri D Honma SM Dowling AF Darwish SM Van Berlo V Barnes DE Mantle M Karydas AM Coppola G Roberson ED Miller BL Garcia PA Kirsch HE Mucke L Nagarajan SS Incidence and impact of subclinical epileptiform activity in Alzheimer’s disease Ann Neurol 2016 80 858 870 27696483
6 Zarea A Charbonnier C Rovelet-Lecrux A Nicolas G Rousseau S Borden A Pariente J Le Ber I Pasquier F Formaglio M Martinaud O Rollin-Sillaire A Sarazin M Croisile B Boutoleau-Bretonniere C Ceccaldi M Gabelle A Chamard L Blanc F Sellal F Paquet C Campion D Hannequin D Wallon D Collaborators PG Seizures in dominantly inherited Alzheimer disease Neurology 2016 87 912 9 27466472
7 Erkinjuntti T Ostbye T Steenhuis R Hachinski V The effect of different diagnostic criteria on the prevalence of dementia N Engl J Med 1997 337 1667 74 9385127
8 Subota A Pham T Jette N Sauro K Lorenzetti D Holroyd-Leduc J The association between dementia and epilepsy: A systematic review and meta-analysis Epilepsia 2017 58 962 972 28397967
9 Schoknecht K Prager O Vazana U Kamintsky L Harhausen D Zille M Figge L Chassidim Y Schellenberger E Kovacs R Heinemann U Friedman A Monitoring stroke progression: in vivo imaging of cortical perfusion, blood-brain barrier permeability and cellular damage in the rat photothrombosis model J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2014 34 1791 801 25160672
10 Tomkins O Shelef I Kaizerman I Eliushin A Afawi Z Misk A Gidon M Cohen A Zumsteg D Friedman A Blood-brain barrier disruption in post-traumatic epilepsy J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2008 79 774 7 17991703
11 Hay JR Johnson VE Young AM Smith DH Stewart W Blood-Brain Barrier Disruption Is an Early Event That May Persist for Many Years After Traumatic Brain Injury in Humans J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2015 74 1147 57 26574669
12 David Y Cacheaux LP Ivens S Lapilover E Heinemann U Kaufer D Friedman A Astrocytic dysfunction in epileptogenesis: consequence of altered potassium and glutamate homeostasis? J Neurosci 2009 29 10588 99 19710312
13 Cacheaux LP Ivens S David Y Lakhter AJ Bar-Klein G Shapira M Heinemann U Friedman A Kaufer D Transcriptome profiling reveals TGF-b signaling involvement in epileptogenesis J Neurosci 2009 29 8927 35 19605630
14 Friedman A Kaufer D Heinemann U Blood-brain barrier breakdown-inducing astrocytic transformation: novel targets for the prevention of epilepsy Epilepsy Res 2009 85 142 9 19362806
15 Bar-Klein G Cacheaux LP Kamintsky L Prager O Weissberg I Schoknecht K Cheng P Kim SY Wood L Heinemann U Kaufer D Friedman A Losartan prevents acquired epilepsy via TGF-b signaling suppression Ann Neurol 2014 75 864 75 24659129
16 Levy N Milikovsky DZ Baranauskas G Vinogradov E David Y Ketzef M Abutbul S Weissberg I Kamintsky L Fleidervish I Friedman A Monsonego A Differential TGF-b Signaling in Glial Subsets Underlies IL-6-Mediated Epileptogenesis in Mice J Immunol 2015 195 1713 22 26136430
17 Kim SY Senatorov VV Jr Morrissey CS Lippmann K Vazquez O Milikovsky DZ Gu F Parada I Prince DA Becker AJ Heinemann U Friedman A Kaufer D TGF-b signaling is associated with changes in inflammatory gene expression and perineuronal net degradation around inhibitory neurons following various neurological insults Sci Rep 2017 7 7711 28794441
18 Lippmann K Kamintsky L Kim SY Lublinsky S Prager O Nichtweiss JF Salar S Kaufer D Heinemann U Friedman A Epileptiform activity and spreading depolarization in the blood-brain barrier-disrupted peri-infarct hippocampus are associated with impaired GABAergic inhibition and synaptic plasticity J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 37 1803 1819
19 Scharfman HE Functional implications of seizure-induced neurogenesis Adv Exp Med Biol 2004 548 192 212 15250595
20 Scharfman HE McCloskey DP Postnatal neurogenesis as a therapeutic target in temporal lobe epilepsy Epilepsy Res 2009 85 150 61 19369038
21 Scharfman HE Hen R Neuroscience. Is more neurogenesis always better? Science 2007 315 336 8 17234934
22 Weissberg I Veksler R Kamintsky L Saar-Ashkenazy R Milikovsky DZ Shelef I Friedman A Imaging blood-brain barrier dysfunction in football players JAMA Neurol 2014 71 1453 5 25383774
23 Nicoletti JN Shah SK McCloskey DP Goodman JH Elkady A Atassi H Hylton D Rudge JS Scharfman HE Croll SD Vascular endothelial growth factor is up-regulated after status epilepticus and protects against seizure-induced neuronal loss in hippocampus Neuroscience 2008 151 232 41 18065154
24 Croll SD Goodman JH Scharfman HE Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in seizures: a double-edged sword Adv Exp Med Biol 2004 548 57 68 15250585
25 Vazana U Veksler R Pell GS Prager O Fassler M Chassidim Y Roth Y Shahar H Zangen A Raccah R Onesti E Ceccanti M Colonnese C Santoro A Salvati M D’Elia A Nucciarelli V Inghilleri M Friedman A Glutamate-Mediated Blood-Brain Barrier Opening: Implications for Neuroprotection and Drug Delivery J Neurosci 2016 36 7727 39 27445149
26 Morin-Brureau M Lebrun A Rousset MC Fagni L Bockaert J de Bock F Lerner-Natoli M Epileptiform activity induces vascular remodeling and zonula occludens 1 downregulation in organotypic hippocampal cultures: role of VEGF signaling pathways J Neurosci 2011 31 10677 88 21775611
27 McCloskey DP Croll SD Scharfman HE Depression of synaptic transmission by vascular endothelial growth factor in adult rat hippocampus and evidence for increased efficacy after chronic seizures J Neurosci 2005 25 8889 97 16192378
28 Montagne A Barnes SR Sweeney MD Halliday MR Sagare AP Zhao Z Toga AW Jacobs RE Liu CY Amezcua L Harrington MG Chui HC Law M Zlokovic BV Blood-brain barrier breakdown in the aging human hippocampus Neuron 2015 85 296 302 25611508
29 Bar-Klein G Lublinsky S Kamintsky L Noyman I Veksler R Dalipaj H Senatorov VV Jr Swissa E Rosenbach D Elazary N Milikovsky DZ Milk N Kassirer M Rosman Y Serlin Y Eisenkraft A Chassidim Y Parmet Y Kaufer D Friedman A Imaging blood-brain barrier dysfunction as a biomarker for epileptogenesis Brain 2017 140 1692 1705 28444141
30 Palop JJ Mucke L Network abnormalities and interneuron dysfunction in Alzheimer disease Nat Rev Neurosci 2016 17 777 792 27829687
31 Harris JA Devidze N Verret L Ho K Halabisky B Thwin MT Kim D Hamto P Lo I Yu GQ Palop JJ Masliah E Mucke L Transsynaptic progression of amyloid-b-induced neuronal dysfunction within the entorhinal-hippocampal network Neuron 2010 68 428 41 21040845
32 Roberson ED Scearce-Levie K Palop JJ Yan F Cheng IH Wu T Gerstein H Yu GQ Mucke L Reducing endogenous tau ameliorates amyloid b-induced deficits in an Alzheimer’s disease mouse model Science 2007 316 750 4 17478722
33 Born HA Kim JY Savjani RR Das P Dabaghian YA Guo Q Yoo JW Schuler DR Cirrito JR Zheng H Golde TE Noebels JL Jankowsky JL Genetic suppression of transgenic APP rescues Hypersynchronous network activity in a mouse model of Alzeimer’s disease J Neurosci 2014 34 3826 40 24623762
34 Bezzina C Verret L Halley H Dahan L Rampon C Environmental enrichment does not influence hypersynchronous network activity in the Tg2576 mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Front Aging Neurosci 2015 7 178 26441640
35 Kam K Duffy AM Moretto J LaFrancois JJ Scharfman HE Interictal spikes during sleep are an early defect in the Tg2576 mouse model of b-amyloid neuropathology Sci Rep 2016 6 20119 26818394
36 Amatniek JC Hauser WA DelCastillo-Castaneda C Jacobs DM Marder K Bell K Albert M Brandt J Stern Y Incidence and predictors of seizures in patients with Alzheimer’s disease Epilepsia 2006 47 867 72 16686651
37 Buckner RL Snyder AZ Shannon BJ LaRossa G Sachs R Fotenos AF Sheline YI Klunk WE Mathis CA Morris JC Mintun MA Molecular, structural, and functional characterization of Alzheimer’s disease: evidence for a relationship between default activity, amyloid, and memory J Neurosci 2005 25 7709 17 16120771
38 Scharfman HE “Untangling” Alzheimer’s disease and epilepsy Epilepsy Curr 2012 12 178 83 23118602
39 Scharfman HE Alzheimer’s disease and epilepsy: insight from animal models Future Neurol 2012 7 177 192 22723738
40 Minkeviciene R Rheims S Dobszay MB Zilberter M Hartikainen J Fulop L Penke B Zilberter Y Harkany T Pitkanen A Tanila H Amyloid b-induced neuronal hyperexcitability triggers progressive epilepsy J Neurosci 2009 29 3453 62 19295151
41 Frobose T Forstl H Forschler A Fatal familial insomnia (FFI) complicated by posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES) Clin Neuroradiol 2014 24 289 91 24141307
42 McKeith IG Clinical Lewy body syndromes Ann N Y Acad Sci 2000 920 1 8 11193136
43 Neuropathology Group. Medical Research Council Cognitive F, Aging S Pathological correlates of late-onset dementia in a multicentre, community-based population in England and Wales. Neuropathology Group of the Medical Research Council Cognitive Function and Ageing Study (MRC CFAS) Lancet 2001 357 169 75 11213093
44 McKhann GM Knopman DS Chertkow H Hyman BT Jack CR Jr Kawas CH Klunk WE Koroshetz WJ Manly JJ Mayeux R Mohs RC Morris JC Rossor MN Scheltens P Carrillo MC Thies B Weintraub S Phelps CH The diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer’s disease: recommendations from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimers Dement 2011 7 263 9 21514250
45 Holmes C Boche D Wilkinson D Yadegarfar G Hopkins V Bayer A Jones RW Bullock R Love S Neal JW Zotova E Nicoll JA Long-term effects of Ab42 immunisation in Alzheimer’s disease: follow-up of a randomised, placebo-controlled phase I trial Lancet 2008 372 216 23 18640458
46 Sevigny J Chiao P Bussiere T Weinreb PH Williams L Maier M Dunstan R Salloway S Chen T Ling Y O’Gorman J Qian F Arastu M Li M Chollate S Brennan MS Quintero-Monzon O Scannevin RH Arnold HM Engber T Rhodes K Ferrero J Hang Y Mikulskis A Grimm J Hock C Nitsch RM Sandrock A The antibody aducanumab reduces Ab plaques in Alzheimer’s disease Nature 2016 537 50 6 27582220
47 Busche MA Konnerth A Impairments of neural circuit function in Alzheimer’s disease Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2016 371
48 Kanner AM Rivas-Grajales AM Psychosis of epilepsy: a multifaceted neuropsychiatric disorder CNS Spectr 2016 21 247 57 27322691
49 Onuma T Adachi N Ishida S Katou M Uesugi S Prevalence and annual incidence of psychosis in patients with epilepsy Psychiatry and clinical neurosciences 1995 49 S267 S268 8612169
50 Clancy MJ Clarke MC Connor DJ Cannon M Cotter DR The prevalence of psychosis in epilepsy; a systematic review and meta-analysis BMC Psychiatry 2014 14 75 24625201
51 Buranee K Teeradej S Chusak L Michael M Epilepsy-related psychoses and psychotic symptoms are significantly reduced by resective epilepsy surgery and are not associated with surgery outcome or epilepsy characteristics: A cohort study Psychiatry Research 2016 245 333 339 27573056
52 Devinsky O Postictal psychosis: common, dangerous, and treatable Epilepsy Currents 2008 8 31 34 18330462
53 Cascella NG Schretlen DJ Sawa A Schizophrenia and epilepsy: is there a shared susceptibility? Neuroscience research 2009 63 227 235 19367784
54 Bruton CJ Stevens JR Frith CD Epilepsy, psychosis, and schizophrenia: clinical and neuropathologic correlations Neurology 1994 44
55 Mao L-Y Ding J Peng W-F Ma Y Zhang Y-H Chen C-Z Cheng W-Z Wang H Fan W Wang X Disease duration and arcuate fasciculus abnormalities correlate with psychoticism in patients with epilepsy Seizure 2011 20 741 747 21798770
56 Sundram F Cannon M Doherty CP Barker GJ Fitzsimons M Delanty N Cotter D Neuroanatomical correlates of psychosis in temporal lobe epilepsy: voxel-based morphometry study Br J Psychiatry 2010 197 482 92 21119155
57 Bear DM Temporal lobe epilepsy--a syndrome of sensory-limbic hyperconnection Cortex 1979 15 357 84 540509
58 Heckers S Konradi C GABAergic mechanisms of hippocampal hyperactivity in schizophrenia Schizophr Res 2015 167 4 11 25449711
59 Lodge DJ Grace AA Aberrant hippocampal activity underlies the dopamine dysregulation in an animal model of schizophrenia J Neurosci 2007 27 11424 30 17942737
60 Benes FM Searching for unique endophenotypes for schizophrenia and bipolar disorder within neural circuits and their molecular regulatory mechanisms Schizophr Bull 2007 33 932 6 17575303
61 Benes FM Lim B Matzilevich D Walsh JP Subburaju S Minns M Regulation of the GABA cell phenotype in hippocampus of schizophrenics and bipolars Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2007 104 10164 9 17553960
62 Lodge DJ Behrens MM Grace AA A loss of parvalbumin-containing interneurons is associated with diminished oscillatory activity in an animal model of schizophrenia J Neurosci 2009 29 2344 54 19244511
63 Moore H Jentsch JD Ghajarnia M Geyer MA Grace AA A neurobehavioral systems analysis of adult rats exposed to methylazoxymethanol acetate on E17: implications for the neuropathology of schizophrenia Biol Psychiatry 2006 60 253 64 16581031
64 Grace AA Dysregulation of the dopamine system in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia and depression Nat Rev Neurosci 2016 17 524 32 27256556
65 Gill KM Grace AA Corresponding decrease in neuronal markers signals progressive parvalbumin neuron loss in MAM schizophrenia model Int J Neuropsychopharmacol 2014 17 1609 19 24787547
66 Lodge DJ Grace AA Gestational methylazoxymethanol acetate administration: a developmental disruption model of schizophrenia Behav Brain Res 2009 204 306 12 19716984
67 Floresco SB West AR Ash B Moore H Grace AA Afferent modulation of dopamine neuron firing differentially regulates tonic and phasic dopamine transmission Nat Neurosci 2003 6 968 73 12897785
68 de Furtado MA Braga GK Oliveira JA Del Vecchio F Garcia-Cairasco N Behavioral, morphologic, and electroencephalographic evaluation of seizures induced by intrahippocampal microinjection of pilocarpine Epilepsia 2002 43 Suppl 5 37 9
69 Cifelli P Grace AA Pilocarpine-induced temporal lobe epilepsy in the rat is associated with increased dopamine neuron activity Int J Neuropsychopharmacol 2012 15 957 64 21745437
70 Knopp A Kivi A Wozny C Heinemann U Behr J Cellular and network properties of the subiculum in the pilocarpine model of temporal lobe epilepsy J Comp Neurol 2005 483 476 88 15700275
71 Barlow HB Single units and sensation: a neuron doctrine for perceptual psychology? Perception 1972 1 371 94 4377168
72 Fenton AA Excitation-inhibition discoordination in rodent models of mental disorders Biol Psychiatry 2015 77 1079 88 25895430
73 Yuste R From the neuron doctrine to neural networks Nat Rev Neurosci 2015 16 487 97 26152865
74 Buzsaki G Neural syntax: cell assemblies, synapsembles, and readers Neuron 2010 68 362 85 21040841
75 Watson BO Buzsaki G Neural syntax in mental disorders Biol Psychiatry 2015 77 998 1000 26005113
76 Fenton AA Coordinating with the “Inner GPS” Hippocampus 2015 25 763 9 25800714
77 Kao H-Y Dvorak D Kelemen E Fenton AA Phencyclidine discoordinates hippocampal network activity but not place fields Journal of Neuroscience in revision
78 Fornito A Zalesky A Breakspear M The connectomics of brain disorders Nat Rev Neurosci 2015 16 159 72 25697159
79 Kambeitz J Kambeitz-Ilankovic L Cabral C Dwyer DB Calhoun VD van den Heuvel MP Falkai P Koutsouleris N Malchow B Aberrant Functional Whole-Brain Network Architecture in Patients With Schizophrenia: A Meta-analysis Schizophr Bull 2016 42 Suppl 1 S13 21 27460615
80 Tseng KY Chambers RA Lipska BK The neonatal ventral hippocampal lesion as a heuristic neurodevelopmental model of schizophrenia Behav Brain Res 2009 204 295 305 19100784
81 Lee H Dvorak D Fenton AA Targeting neural synchrony deficits is sufficient to improve cognition in a schizophrenia-related neurodevelopmental Model Front Psychiatry 2014 5 15 24592242
82 Francois J Ferrandon A Koning E Angst MJ Sandner G Nehlig A Selective reorganization of GABAergic transmission in neonatal ventral hippocampal-lesioned rats Int J Neuropsychopharmacol 2009 12 1097 110 19267957
83 Kubova H Mares P Suchomelova L Brozek G Druga R Pitkanen A Status epilepticus in immature rats leads to behavioural and cognitive impairment and epileptogenesis Eur J Neurosci 2004 19 3255 65 15217382
84 Wolf DC Bueno-Junior LS Lopes-Aguiar C Do Val Da Silva RA Kandratavicius L Leite JP The frequency of spontaneous seizures in rats correlates with alterations in sensorimotor gating, spatial working memory, and parvalbumin expression throughout limbic regions Neuroscience 2016 312 86 98 26582750
85 Blumcke I Muhlebner A Neuropathological work-up of focal cortical dysplasias using the new ILAE consensus classification system - practical guideline article invited by the Euro-CNS Research Committee Clin Neuropathol 2011 30 164 77 21726501
86 Blumcke I Thom M Aronica E Armstrong DD Vinters HV Palmini A Jacques TS Avanzini G Barkovich AJ Battaglia G Becker A Cepeda C Cendes F Colombo N Crino P Cross JH Delalande O Dubeau F Duncan J Guerrini R Kahane P Mathern G Najm I Ozkara C Raybaud C Represa A Roper SN Salamon N Schulze-Bonhage A Tassi L Vezzani A Spreafico R The clinicopathologic spectrum of focal cortical dysplasias: a consensus classification proposed by an ad hoc Task Force of the ILAE Diagnostic Methods Commission Epilepsia 2011 52 158 74 21219302
87 Blumcke I Spreafico R An international consensus classification for focal cortical dysplasias Lancet Neurol 2011 10 26 7 21094091
88 Stoner R Chow ML Boyle MP Sunkin SM Mouton PR Roy S Wynshaw-Boris A Colamarino SA Lein ES Courchesne E Patches of disorganization in the neocortex of children with autism N Engl J Med 2014 370 1209 1219 24670167
89 Taylor DC Falconer MA Bruton CJ Corsellis JA Focal dysplasia of the cerebral cortex in epilepsy J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1971 34 369 87 5096551
90 Huang ZJ Luo L Neuroscience: It takes the world to understand the brain Science 2015 350 42 4 26430110
91 Cendes F Theodore WH Brinkmann BH Sulc V Cascino GD Neuroimaging of epilepsy Handb Clin Neurol 2016 136 985 1014 27430454
92 Coan AC Cendes F Understanding the spectrum of temporal lobe epilepsy: contributions for the development of individualized therapies Expert Rev Neurother 2013 13 1383 94 24236904
93 Sidhu MK Stretton J Winston GP Bonelli S Centeno M Vollmar C Symms M Thompson PJ Koepp MJ Duncan JS A functional magnetic resonance imaging study mapping the episodic memory encoding network in temporal lobe epilepsy Brain 2013 136 1868 88 23674488
94 Bonelli SB Powell RH Yogarajah M Samson RS Symms MR Thompson PJ Koepp MJ Duncan JS Imaging memory in temporal lobe epilepsy: predicting the effects of temporal lobe resection Brain 2010 133 1186 99 20157009
95 Binder JR Preoperative prediction of verbal episodic memory outcome using FMRI Neurosurg Clin N Am 2011 22 219 32 ix 21435573
96 Binder JR Gross WL Allendorfer JB Bonilha L Chapin J Edwards JC Grabowski TJ Langfitt JT Loring DW Lowe MJ Koenig K Morgan PS Ojemann JG Rorden C Szaflarski JP Tivarus ME Weaver KE Mapping anterior temporal lobe language areas with fMRI: a multicenter normative study Neuroimage 2011 54 1465 75 20884358
97 Binder JR Functional MRI is a valid noninvasive alternative to Wada testing Epilepsy Behav 2011 20 214 22 20850386
98 Sidhu MK Stretton J Winston GP Symms M Thompson PJ Koepp MJ Duncan JS Memory fMRI predicts verbal memory decline after anterior temporal lobe resection Neurology 2015 84 1512 9 25770199
99 Blumenfeld H What is a seizure network? Long-range network consequences of focal seizures Adv Exp Med Biol 2014 813 63 70 25012367
100 Alessio A Pereira FR Sercheli MS Rondina JM Ozelo HB Bilevicius E Pedro T Covolan RJ Damasceno BP Cendes F Brain plasticity for verbal and visual memories in patients with mesial temporal lobe epilepsy and hippocampal sclerosis: an fMRI study Hum Brain Mapp 2013 34 186 99 22038783
101 Coan AC Cendes F Epilepsy as progressive disorders: what is the evidence that can guide our clinical decisions and how can neuroimaging help? Epilepsy Behav 2013 26 313 21 23127969
102 Bonilha L Alessio A Rorden C Baylis G Damasceno BP Min LL Cendes F Extrahippocampal gray matter atrophy and memory impairment in patients with medial temporal lobe epilepsy Hum Brain Mapp 2007 28 1376 90 17370345
103 Bonilha L Rorden C Castellano G Pereira F Rio PA Cendes F Li LM Voxel-based morphometry reveals gray matter network atrophy in refractory medial temporal lobe epilepsy Arch Neurol 2004 61 1379 84 15364683
104 Bernasconi N Duchesne S Janke A Lerch J Collins DL Bernasconi A Whole-brain voxel-based statistical analysis of gray matter and white matter in temporal lobe epilepsy Neuroimage 2004 23 717 23 15488421
105 Keller SS Cresswell P Denby C Wieshmann U Eldridge P Baker G Roberts N Persistent seizures following left temporal lobe surgery are associated with posterior and bilateral structural and functional brain abnormalities Epilepsy Res 2007 74 131 9 17412561
106 Coan AC Appenzeller S Bonilha L Li LM Cendes F Seizure frequency and lateralization affect progression of atrophy in temporal lobe epilepsy Neurology 2009 73 834 42 19752449
107 Bilevicius E Yasuda CL Silva MS Guerreiro CA Lopes-Cendes I Cendes F Antiepileptic drug response in temporal lobe epilepsy: a clinical and MRI morphometry study Neurology 2010 75 1695 701 21060092
108 Labate A Cerasa A Gambardella A Aguglia U Quattrone A Hippocampal and thalamic atrophy in mild temporal lobe epilepsy: a VBM study Neurology 2008 71 1094 101 18824674
109 Alvim MK Coan AC Campos BM Yasuda CL Oliveira MC Morita ME Cendes F Progression of gray matter atrophy in seizure-free patients with temporal lobe epilepsy Epilepsia 2016 57 621 9 26865066
110 de Campos BM Coan AC Lin Yasuda C Casseb RF Cendes F Large-scale brain networks are distinctly affected in right and left mesial temporal lobe epilepsy Hum Brain Mapp 2016 37 3137 52 27133613
111 Yasuda CL Chen Z Beltramini GC Coan AC Morita ME Kubota B Bergo F Beaulieu C Cendes F Gross DW Aberrant topological patterns of brain structural network in temporal lobe epilepsy Epilepsia 2015 56 1992 2002 26530395
112 Curran S Ahn JW Grayton H Collier DA Ogilvie CM NRXN1 deletions identified by array comparative genome hybridisation in a clinical case series - further understanding of the relevance of NRXN1 to neurodevelopmental disorders J Mol Psychiatry 2013 1 4 25408897
113 Inoki K Corradetti MN Guan KL Dysregulation of the TSC-mTOR pathway in human disease Nat Genet 2005 37 19 24 15624019
114 McDaniel SS Wong M Therapeutic role of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibition in preventing epileptogenesis Neurosci Lett 2011 497 231 9 21354266
115 Kriaucionis S Bird A DNA methylation and Rett syndrome Hum Mol Genet 2003 12 Spec No 2 R221 7 12928486
116 Banerjee A Castro J Sur M Rett syndrome: genes, synapses, circuits, and therapeutics Front Psychiatry 2012 3 34 22586411
117 Henshall DC Kobow K Epigenetics and epilepsy Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2015 5
118 Lu C Thompson CB Metabolic regulation of epigenetics Cell Metab 2012 16 9 17 22768835
119 Moog C Mayr L Tolstrup M New insights on the phenotype of HIV reservoirs AIDS 2016 30 1675 6 27243776
120 Misra UK Tan CT Kalita J Viral encephalitis and epilepsy Epilepsia 2008 49 Suppl 6 13 8
121 Libbey JE Kirkman NJ Smith MC Tanaka T Wilcox KS White HS Fujinami RS Seizures following picornavirus infection Epilepsia 2008 49 1066 74 18325012
122 Stewart KA Wilcox KS Fujinami RS White HS Theiler’s virus infection chronically alters seizure susceptibility Epilepsia 2010 51 1418 28 20002148
123 Stewart KA Wilcox KS Fujinami RS White HS Development of postinfection epilepsy after Theiler’s virus infection of C57BL/6 mice J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2010 69 1210 9 21107134
124 Loewen JL Barker-Haliski ML Dahle EJ White HS Wilcox KS Neuronal injury, gliosis, and glial proliferation in two models of temporal lobe epilepsy J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2016 75 366 78 26945036
125 Umpierre AD Remigio GJ Dahle EJ Bradford K Alex AB Smith MD West PJ White HS Wilcox KS Impaired cognitive ability and anxiety-like behavior following acute seizures in the Theiler’s virus model of temporal lobe epilepsy Neurobiol Dis 2014 64 98 106 24412221
126 Patel DC Wallis G Dahle EJ McElroy PB Thomson KE Tesi RJ Szymkowski DE West PJ Smeal RM Patel M Fujinami RS White HS Wilcox KS Hippocampal TNFa signaling contributes to seizure generation in an infection-Induced mouse model of limbic epilepsy eNeuro 2017 4
127 Barker-Haliski ML Dahle EJ Heck TD Pruess TH Vanegas F Wilcox KS White HS Evaluating an etiologically relevant platform for therapy development for temporal lobe epilepsy: effects of carbamazepine and valproic acid on acute seizures and chronic behavioral comorbidities in the Theiler’s murine encephalomyelitis virus mouse model J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2015 353 318 29 25755209
128 Rojas A Ganesh T Manji Z O’Neill T Dingledine R Inhibition of the prostaglandin E2 receptor EP2 prevents status epilepticus-induced deficits in the novel object recognition task in rats Neuropharmacology 2016 110 419 30 27477533
129 Wilcox KS Vezzani A Does brain inflammation mediate pathological outcomes in epilepsy? Adv Exp Med Biol 2014 813 169 83 25012376
130 Libbey JE Kennett NJ Wilcox KS White HS Fujinami RS Interleukin-6, produced by resident cells of the central nervous system and infiltrating cells, contributes to the development of seizures following viral infection J Virol 2011 85 6913 22 21543484
131 Kirkman NJ Libbey JE Wilcox KS White HS Fujinami RS Innate but not adaptive immune responses contribute to behavioral seizures following viral infection Epilepsia 2010 51 454 64 19845729
132 Annegers JF Hauser WA Coan SP Rocca WA A population-based study of seizures after traumatic brain injuries N Engl J Med 1998 338 20 4 9414327
133 Pugh MJ Orman JA Jaramillo CA Salinsky MC Eapen BC Towne AR Amuan ME Roman G McNamee SD Kent TA McMillan KK Hamid H Grafman JH The prevalence of epilepsy and association with traumatic brain injury in veterans of the Afghanistan and Iraq wars J Head Trauma Rehabil 2015 30 29 37 24695268
134 Curia G Eastman CL Miller JW D’Ambrosio R Modeling post-traumatic epilepsy for therapy development Laskowitz D Grant G Translational Research in Traumatic Brain Injury Boca Raton (FL) 2016
135 Bolkvadze T Pitkanen A Development of post-traumatic epilepsy after controlled cortical impact and lateral fluid-percussion-induced brain injury in the mouse J Neurotrauma 2012 29 789 812 22023672
136 Pitkanen A McIntosh TK Animal models of post-traumatic epilepsy J Neurotrauma 2006 23 241 61 16503807
