LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


0370623
1028
Biochemistry
Biochemistry
Biochemistry
0006-2960
1520-4995

27649271
5539764
10.1021/acs.biochem.6b00718
NIHMS878190
Article
Transmembrane substrate determinants for γ-secretase processing of APP CTFβ
Fernandez Marty A. 1
Biette Kelly 1
Dolios Georgia 2
Seth Divya 1
Wang Rong 2
Wolfe Michael S. 1*
1 Ann Romney Center for Neurologic Diseases, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115 USA
2 Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029 USA
* Correspondence: mswolfe@partners.org
24 5 2017
30 9 2016
11 10 2016
11 10 2017
55 40 56755688
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
The amyloid β-peptide (Aβ) of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is generated by proteolysis within the transmembrane domain (TMD) of a C-terminal fragment of the amyloid β protein-precursor (APP CTFβ) by the γ-secretase complex. This processing produces Aβ ranging from 38 to 49 residues in length. Evidence suggests that this spectrum of Aβ peptides is the result of successive γ-secretase cleavages, with endoproteolysis first occurring at the ε sites to generate Aβ48 or Aβ49, followed by C-terminal trimming mostly every three residues along two product lines to generate shorter, secreted forms of Aβ: the primary Aβ49-46-43-40 line and a minor Aβ48-45-42-38 line. The major secreted Aβ species are Aβ40 and Aβ42, and an increased proportion of the longer, aggregation-prone Aβ42 compared to Aβ40 is widely thought to be important in AD pathogenesis. We examined TMD substrate determinants of the specificity and efficiency of ε site endoproteolysis and carboxypeptidase trimming of CTFβ by γ-secretase. We determined that the C-terminal negative charge of the intermediate Aβ49 does not play a role in its trimming by γ-secretase. Peptidomimetic probes suggest that γ-secretase has S1’, S2’, and S3’ pockets, through which trimming by tripeptides may be determined. However, deletion of residues around the ε sites demonstrates that a depth of three residues within the TMD is not a determinant of the location of endoproteolytic ε cleavage of CTFβ. We also show that instability of the CTFβ TMD helix near the ε site significantly increases endoproteolysis, and that helical instability near the carboxypeptidase cleavage sites facilitates C-terminal trimming by γ-secretase. In addition, we found that CTFβ dimers are not endoproteolyzed by γ-secretase. These results support a model in which initial interaction of the array of residues along the undimerized single helical TMD of substrates dictates the site of initial ε cleavage and that helix unwinding is essential for both endoproteolysis and carboxypeptidase trimming.


The production and aggregation of the amyloid β-peptide (Aβ) is thought to initiate the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease (AD).1 Aβ is generated by successive proteolysis of the amyloid β-protein precursor (APP), a type I transmembrane protein. Initial β-secretase cleavage within the luminal portion of APP releases the soluble ectodomain and leaves the remaining C-terminal stub, known as CTFβ, in the membrane.2 CTFβ then undergoes scission within its transmembrane domain (TMD) by the presenilin (PS)-containing γ-secretase complex, releasing the APP intracellular domain (AICD) and generating Aβ.3 Cleavage of CTFβ by γ-secretase is heterogeneous, yielding a range of secreted Aβ peptides of 38–43 residues in length varying at their C-termini. While Aβ40 is the major secreted species, Aβ42, with its two additional hydrophobic transmembrane residues, is more prone to aggregation4 and is the predominant Aβ species deposited in neuritic plaques, a defining pathological feature of AD.5 Many dominant mutations in PS1 and APP that cause early-onset familial AD (FAD) increase the ratio of Aβ42 produced relative to Aβ40, suggesting the importance of aggregation-prone Aβ in precipitating AD pathogenesis.6–11 In addition to Aβ42, the aggregation propensity and potential pathogenic role of Aβ43 has recently been suggested.12–14

Evidence in cells and in vitro demonstrates that these various Aβ species are the result of successive γ-secretase cleavages of CTFβ, starting with an initial endoproteolytic cut at the ε sites.15–17 This cut releases AICD and generates Aβ48 or Aβ49, which remain in the membrane and undergo C-terminal trimming by γ-secretase mostly every three residues at the ζ and then γ sites to produce the shorter, secreted forms of Aβ. Specifically, two product lines are thought to exist depending on the initial ε site: a primary line with ε cleavage producing Aβ49 and subsequent trimming generating Aβ46→43→40, and a minor line with ε cleavage first generating Aβ48 and leading to Aβ45→42→38 (this last step trimming off a tetrapeptide).18–23 This model of γ-secretase cleavage is outlined in Figure 1A.

γ-Secretase is a membrane-embedded aspartyl protease complex consisting of PS, presenilin enhancer 2 (Pen-2), anterior pharynx-defective 1 (Aph1), and nicastrin.24–26 The active site of γ-secretase, contained within PS,27–29 is sequestered from the hydrophobic membrane environment; substrates first bind to a docking site on the external surface of the enzyme, followed by lateral entry to gain access to the active site.3, 30, 31 γ-Secretase exhibits broad substrate specificity and cleaves the stubs of many type I membrane proteins with shed ectodomains,32 including that of the Notch receptor.33 While not as well characterized as APP processing, γ-secretase has been shown to cleave Notch and CD44 substrates in an analogous manner, with cleavage occurring both at ε-like sites near the membrane-cytoplasm border and at γ-like sites in the middle of the TMD34, 35 Thus, the γ-secretase complex can cut a broad range of TMDs, some at multiple sites.

Because γ-secretase is capable of cleaving such a wide range of hydrophobic amino acid sequences, and because the production of aggregation-prone Aβ42 relative to Aβ40 closely correlates with AD, determinants of the precise locations of γ-secretase cleavage along the CTFβ TMD to generate Aβ40 and Aβ42 are of great interest. Mutagenesis of the APP TMD has shown that the production of Aβ42 versus Aβ40 is sensitive to point mutations and is therefore influenced by the TMD amino acid sequence.36, 37 In addition, naturally-occurring FAD-causing point mutations within the APP TMD have been shown to increase the ratio of Aβ42 to Aβ40.10, 11 It is now clear based on the sequential cleavage model, however, that the production of Aβ42 versus Aβ40 is primarily dictated by the specific ε endoproteolysis that generates either Aβ48 or Aβ49 and subsequent trimming every three residues. While some studies have shown that FAD mutations within the APP TMD can shift the site of ε cleavage,20, 38 many previous studies of TMD mutations that alter Aβ42 and Aβ40 production were performed before the clear demonstration of the model for sequential proteolysis, and thus the effects of many of these mutations on the precise location of ε site cleavage and the entire trimming pathway were not examined. Therefore, little is known about substrate TMD determinants of the specific sites of initial ε cleavage and subsequent C-terminal trimming by γ-secretase.

It is also clear from the sequential cleavage model that, in addition to the efficiency of ε site endoprotoeolysis, which determines the level of total Aβ generated39, the extent of trimming is another critical determinant of the production of toxic Aβ peptides, as reduced trimming can result in the production of increased Aβ42 and Aβ43 compared to shorter Aβ38 and Aβ40. While specific residues within the juxtamembrane region of APP have been shown to affect the lengths of Aβ peptides generated,40, 41 little is known about transmembrane determinants of the degree of cleavage at the trimming sites. Yet another level of complexity in TMD substrate recognition by γ-secretase is the question of whether APP CTFβ must dimerize for processing to Aβ peptides, an issue with important implications for the design of potential therapeutic agents.

In this study we examined TMD determinants of the specificity and efficiency of ε site endoproteolysis and C-terminal trimming of CTFβ by γ-secretase. We show that the C-terminal charge of long Aβ intermediates is not necessary for γ-secretase trimming every three residues. We also analyzed whether depth within the TMD determines the location of ε site cleavage. Additionally, we show that instability of the CTFβ transmembrane helix plays an important role in endoproteolysis and C-terminal trimming by γ-secretase and that CTFβ dimers are not endoproteolyzed by γ-secretase.

Experimental procedures

γ-Secretase preparations

Purified γ-secretase complexes from S20 cells, CHO cells overexpressing all four γ-secretase components, were prepared as previously described.42 S20 cells were scraped from plates and lysed in buffer containing 50 mM MES, pH 6.0, 150 mM NaCl, 5mM MgCl2, and 5 mM CaCl2 using a French pressure cell at 1000 p.s.i. The lysate was first spun at 3,000 × g to remove nuclei, large debris, and unbroken cells, followed by a spin at 100,000 × g. The resulting membrane pellet was washed in 100 mM sodium bicarbonate, pH 11.3, and then solubilized in 1% CHAPSO. γ-Secretase was purified from this CHAPSO-solubilized fraction by sequential affinity purifications using Ni-NTA agarose beads (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) and M2 anti-Flag agarose beads (Sigma-Aldrich).

Plasmids and C100-FLAG mutagenesis

The pET2–21b plasmid containing the coding sequence for C100-FLAG has been previously described.43 Helix-stabilizing, helix-destabilizing, and deletion mutations were introduced into C100-FLAG or full-length APP containing the Swedish FAD mutation using the Quick-Change Lightning Site Directed Mutagenesis kit (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA).

C100-FLAG preparation

C100-FLAG substrates (APP CTFβ with an N-terminal methionine and a C-terminal FLAG tag) were expressed in E. coli BL21(DE3) cells (Stratagene, Kirkland, WA) (with the exception of the mutant with LL inserted between the ε and ζ sites, which would not express in BL21(DE3) cells, but did express in C43(DE3) cells (Lucigen, Middleton, WI)). Cells were grown to an OD of 0.8, and C100-FLAG expression was induced with 1 mM IPTG for 2 h at 37 oC. Cells were pelleted and lysed in buffer containing 10 mM Tris pH 7.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1% TritonX-100, and a protease inhibitor cocktail by 3 passages through a French pressure cell at 1000 p.s.i. The lysate was spun at 3000 × g to remove unbroken cells and larger debris, and the lysate was bound to M2 anti-FLAG affinity gel (Sigma-Aldrich) by rocking overnight at 4 oC. The resin was then washed twice for 20 min at room temperature in lysis buffer, and C100-FLAG was eluted from the resin by rocking in buffer containing 100 mM glycine, pH 2.7, and 1% NP-40 for 2 h at room temperature. The protein concentration in each purified C100-FLAG preparation was determined by BCA assay (Pierce, Waltham, MA).

γ-secretase assays

γ-secretase was incubated with substrate in assay buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.0 and 150 mM NaCl) with 0.1% phosphatidylcholine, 0.025% phosphatidylethanolamine, 0.00625% cholesterol, and a final CHAPSO concentration of 0.25%. To compare the trimming of Aβ49 to the trimming of Aβ49 with a C-terminal amide (both from AnaSpec, Fremont, CA), reactions were carried out for 4 h, the time frame needed for maximal product formation; to analyze the cleavage of C100-FLAG deletion and helical mutants, 2 µM substrate was used in all reactions (with the exception of the analysis of the rate of substrate cleavage across different substrate concentrations (Figure 5C), for which the substrate concentrations are indicated) and reactions were carried out for 90 min, within the linear range of product formation.

Gel electrophoresis and western blotting

For analysis of AICD-FLAG generated from C100-FLAG, equal volumes of reaction mixture were combined with SDS sample buffer and incubated at room temperature for 10 min. The samples were run on 12% Bis Tris gels (Biorad, Hercules, CA), followed by transfer to PVDF membrane and western blotting with M2 anti-FLAG antibody (Sigma). The signal was captured using ECL (GE Healthcare, Pittsburgh, PA), and densitometry was performed using ImageQuant software (GE Healthcare).

The Aβ products generated from C100-FLAG substrates were analyzed by bicine urea gel electrophoresis as previously described.44 Briefly, bicine urea gels were hand-cast with a 13.5 cm separating layer containing 8 M urea and an acrylamide concentration of 11% T/2.6% C, a 10.5 cm spacer layer with 4 M urea and the same acrylamide concentration as the separating layer, and comb layer with 4% T/3.3% C acrylamide. Reaction samples were incubated with SDS sample buffer at room temperature for 10 min and loaded into the wells of the gel, and the gel was run at 12 mA for 1 h and at 34 W for approximately 4 h, until the dye front reached the bottom of the gel. The gel was cut based on the mobility of the standards in Novex Sharp prestained protein ladder (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA), and proteins running below the 15 kDa marker were transferred to a PVDF membrane for 2 hours at 400 mA in Tris-glycine transfer buffer containing 20% methanol. The membranes were blotted for Aβ using 6E10 (Covance, Dedham, MA); the epitope for 6E10 is at the N-terminus of Aβ, and thus it detects all C-terminal Aβ species.

Mass spectrometry analysis

Aβ products were immunoprecipitated from reaction mixtures using 4G8 (Covance), which targets Aβ residues 17–24. 6 µL of saturated 4-hydroxy-α-cyanocinnamic acid matrix (4HCCA) in a 1:4:4 (v/v/v) mixture of formic acid, water, and isopropanol (FWI) was used for the elution from the IP beads, and 2 µL of elute was placed on the sample plate. The supernatant then went through an anti-FLAG IP with 4 µL of M2 beads (Sigma-Aldrich). 3 µL of saturated 4HCCA matrix in FWI 1:4:4 was used for the elution from the second IP beads and 1.5 µL of elute was placed on the sample plate. Mass spectra were collected using a TOF/TOF 5800 mass spectrometer (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA). Each mass spectrum was accumulated from 2,500 laser shots and calibrated using bovine insulin (an internal mass calibrant). Mass error of 500 ppm was used in annotating the spectra peaks.

Cell culture, transfection, and analysis

HEK293 FT cells were grown in DMEM with 10% fetal bovine serum. 100,000 cells were seeded into the wells of 24 well plates. Cells were transfected the next day with full-length APP containing either the Swedish FAD mutation or both the Swedish and GG ε to ζ site mutations. The media and cells were harvested 24 h post-transfection., and cells were lysed in radioimmune precipitation assay buffer. The concentration of intracellular protein was quantified by BCA assay (Pierce, Waltham, MA), and APP expression was examined by western blot using 6E10. The blot was scanned using an Odyssey infrared imager (Li-cor, Lincoln, NE). Aβ40, Aβ42, and Aβ38 levels in the conditioned media were measured using a triplex ELISA (Meso Scale Discovery, Rockville, MD).

Statistical analysis

Statistical significance was determined by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Dunnett’s post hoc test, using WT values as the control group.

Results

The C-terminal charge of Aβ intermediates plays no role in trimming

We first sought to examine how γ-secretase measures by three amino acids in carrying out C-terminal trimming of long Aβ intermediates. Upon endoproteolysis of CTFβ by γ-secretase at the ε sites, a new C-terminus is generated. We considered whether this newly-formed, negatively-charged C-terminus would then move a distance of roughly three residues in an extended conformation due to attraction to positively charged residues on the cytosolic side of the enzyme, setting up the subsequent cut 3 residues from the initial cleavage site. This cut would then generate a new C-terminus, and the process could be repeated until the trimmed Aβ peptide is released from the enzyme (Figure 1B).

We have previously reported that synthetic ε-cleaved Aβs are trimmed by γ-secretease in vitro to generate Aβ40 and Aβ42.45 Specifically, we found that synthetic Aβ49 substrate is primarily trimmed to Aβ40, and synthetic Aβ48 to Aβ42. These results were consistent with tripeptide trimming of each ε-cleaved Aβ,22 but also demonstrated that a small degree of crossover of the primary Aβ40 and Aβ42 generating pathways is possible, as the trimming of Aβ49 led to a minor amount of Aβ42, and Aβ48 to a minor amount of Aβ40. Having established this system for monitoring C-terminal trimming by γ-secretase, we could examine the role of the C-terminal charge of Aβ intermediates in this process by comparing the trimming of Aβ49 to that of Aβ49 with a C-terminal amide, which has a neutral C-terminus. As shown in Figure 1C, the amide was trimmed by purified γ-secretase identically to Aβ49, producing equivalent levels of Aβ42 and Aβ40 and therefore the same ratio of these two products. All reactions were run under CHAPSO-solubilized conditions. In addition, we found that a transition-state analogue inhibitor with three C-terminal residues extending from the hydroxyl moiety was equally potent toward purified enzyme whether the C-terminus of the inhibitor contained a methyl ester or a carboxylic acid (Figure 1D); if the charge hypothesis had been correct, the carboxylic acid should have been the more potent inhibitor. Thus, we conclude that the C-terminal charge of long Aβ intermediates is not involved in setting up a trimming event every three residues.

Determinants of ε site specificity

The residues of protease substrates on either side of the scissile amide bond are referred to as P1, P2, P3, etc. moving toward the N-terminus, and as P1’, P2’, P3’, etc. moving toward the C-terminus. These substrate residues around the cleavage site typically bind to the enzyme active site in an extended conformation, each interacting with a corresponding pocket on the enzyme. The pockets interacting with the P residues are referred to as S1, S2, S3, etc, and the pockets interacting with the P’ residues as S1’, S2’, S3’, etc.3 The S2-S4’ pockets of the γ-secretase active site have been previously examined using transition-state analogue inhibitors with systematically varied amino acid substituents to probe the corresponding pocket on the enzyme.46 The data obtained using these peptidomimetics suggest that γ-secretase has an S1’, an S2’, and an S3’ pocket, but no S4’ pocket: the addition of a substituent to the P3’ position of the peptidomimetic dramatically increased the potency of the compounds, while the addition of a substituent at the P4’ position had essentially no effect on potency. 46 The potencies of these inhibitors were previously examined in cells, so we first validated these results in vitro using purified enzyme complexes and purified C100-FLAG substrate. As shown in Figure 2, the compound with a p3’ substituent inhibited γ-secretase activity with an IC50 of roughly 1 µM under these conditions, while the compound lacking a p3’ substituent did not inhibit γ-secretase activity at any concentration tested, confirming the data obtained in cells suggesting the presence of an S3’ pocket on γ-secretase. Once the substrate binds to the γ-secretase active site for proteolysis, these three hydrophobic pockets can accommodate three residues downstream of the scissile amide bond, explaining why carboxypeptidase trimming of long Aβ intermediates occurs in intervals of 3 amino acids47. The three S’ pocket model could also potentially explain why ε cleavage primarily occurs exactly three residues within the CTFβ TMD to generate Aβ49 (Figure 1A). To address this latter possibility, we asked if a depth of three hydrophobic residues within the TMD, dictated by these three pockets, is a determinant of which peptide bond will be endoproteolytically cleaved at the ε site.

If the site of the initial ε cut is primarily determined by a distance of three residues from the cytosolic triple lysine sequence of CTFβ, then deletion of one residue from the C-terminus of the TMD (L52, Aβ numbering) should shift the primary site of ε cleavage by one residue, maintaining the location of ε cleavage as three residues within the TMD and therefore generating Aβ48 as the predominant ε cleavage product. Subsequent trimming would result in Aβ42 as the predominant final product (Figure 3A). Deletion of an additional residue (both M51 and L52) should shift ε cleavage to generate Aβ47, with Aβ40 as the primary trimmed product, as Aβ47 was recently shown to be processed mainly to Aβ4348 (with perhaps some Aβ41 generated, as Aβ47 may also be processed to a lesser degree to Aβ4448). Deletion of one more residue, for a total of three (V50, M51, and L52), should result in Aβ46 production, thus restoring cleavage back to the original register and leading to Aβ40 as the major product (Figure 3A). Systematic deletion of residues L49, T48, and I47 would yield similar shifts in cleavage products if endoproteolysis primarily occurs three residues within the TMD: deletion of residue L49 should result in endoproteolysis generating Aβ48 and therefore Aβ42 as the primary trimmed product. Deletion of both L49 and T48 should result in Aβ47 production and subsequently Aβ40 (and possibly some Aβ41), and deletion of I47-L49 should lead to Aβ46 generation and Aβ40 as the primary final product (Figure 3A).

We first analyzed the AICD species generated from these mutants with purified γ-secretase by mass spectrometry to determine the precise locations of ε site cleavage, and the results are shown in Figures 3B and S1. For both WT substrate and the L52 deletion mutant, ε site cleavage primarily generates Aβ49 and Aβ48 (with no shift toward increased ε cleavage at Aβ48 for the deletion mutant, as was predicted). Double deletion of L52 and M51 and triple deletion of L52, M51, and V50 resulted in Aβ46 as the major ε cleavage product. Systematic deletion of residues 47–49 also gave results that were inconsistent with our hypothesis, as deletion of L49 resulted in ε cleavage that primarily generates Aβ47, and both double deletion of L49 and T48 and triple deletion of I47, T48, and L49 resulted in Aβ46 as the major ε cleavage product. We also analyzed the Aβ peptides generated from each substrate, which corroborated our AICD results and confirmed that fundamental shifts in product lines did not occur with C-terminal TMD deletions. As shown in Figure 3C, deletion of residue L52, instead of leading to a shift toward Aβ42 production, resulted in little change in the spectrum of Aβs generated by γ-secretase compared to wildtype (WT) substrate, with a slight shift toward increased Aβ40 and Aβ43 production. Deletion of L49 also did not result in a shift toward Aβ42 production, instead resulting primarily in Aβ40, Aβ43, and Aβ46+ production, consistent with ε cleavage generating Aβ47. In addition, double deletion of L52 and M51, as well as double deletion of L49 and T48, led to Aβ40 and Aβ43 production, with no Aβ41 or Aβ44 products detected, consistent with ε cleavage primarily occurring at Aβ46. We also performed mass spectrometry analysis of the Aβ products to confirm the results obtained by urea gel electrophoresis. It is important to note that this analysis is not quantitative, and that longer Aβ peptides are difficult to detect by mass spectrometry due to their hydrophobicity. Therefore, Aβ43-Aβ49, although readily detected by gel, were not reliably detected by mass spectrometry. Nevertheless, the mass spectrometry results largely confirm what we observed by gel, with the deletions generating primarily Aβ40 and Aβ43, and not leading to the predicted shifts in Aβ products (Figure 3B and Figure S2). Analysis of the level of AICD product by western blot shows that each deletion resulted in a decrease in γ-secretase proteolysis at the ε site (Figure 3D).

The locations of the primary ε cleavage sites and subsequent trimming sites along the APP TMD helix for these substrates are indicated in Figure 4. With each deletion, ε cleavage primarily occurs on the same face of the TMD helix as it does for WT substrate, regardless of depth within the membrane. An exception is the L49 deletion mutant, for which ε site cleavage on a different face of the TMD helix, between Aβ residues 47 and 48, was favored. Taken together, these results indicate that upstream sequences, and not a depth of three hydrophobic residues within the TMD, are the determinants of ε site cleavage specificity. This suggests that the sequence of amino acids arranged along the CTFβ transmembrane helix dictates which face of the helix initially interacts with γ-secretase. This interaction between enzyme and substrate sets up the site of endoproteolysis and does not necessarily change when deletions are made near the C-terminal end of the TMD (Figure 4).

Helical stability of CTFβ and γ-secretase processing

The transmembrane substrates of intramembrane cleaving proteases are typically folded into α helices.3, 49 This conformation is energetically favored for single pass TMDs, as the polar groups of the peptide backbone form hydrogen bonds with each other within the hydrophobic membrane environment. Experimental evidence demonstrates that the TMD of CTFβ is indeed α helical within a lipid bilayer.50 In addition, helical peptides based on the APP TMD are potent inhibitors of γ-secretase, and disruption of their helical conformation abolishes their inhibitory activity; this is consistent with the APP TMD being in a helical conformation upon initial interaction with γ-secretase.31, 51 Moreover, the data we obtained from the deletion mutants highlights the importance of the initial binding of the α helical substrate to the enzyme, as this interaction apparently dictates the position of ε site endoproteolysis. However, upon access to the internal active site, this α helical structure would render amide bonds inaccessible for hydrolysis.3 Therefore, at least partial instability of the helical substrate should be important for exposing peptide bonds for proteolysis. A requirement for helix-destabilizing residues in substrates has been demonstrated for other intramembrane-cleaving proteases,49, 52, 53 but has never been shown for γ-secretase, and the role of CFTβ helical stability in trimming has not been investigated.

We examined the role of helical instability in endoproteolysis and trimming by γ-secretase by introducing helix-destabilizing (GG and GA) and helix-promoting (LL) motifs between the ε, ζ, and γ cleavage sites of C100-FLAG as shown in Figure 5 A. Glycine and alanine have more conformational flexibility than larger amino acids and thus destabilize constrained α helical structures, while leucine has a high propensity to form α helices.54 The effects of these mutations on endoproteolysis at the ε site were measured by quantitating the levels of AICD generated from each mutant substrate in reactions with purified γ-secretase complexes, and the effects on trimming were analyzed by monitoring the spectrum of Aβ products.

We first analyzed the effects of the mutations most proximal to the ε site (Figure 5B). We found that the helix-destabilizing residues inserted between the ε and ζ sites significantly increase ε site cleavage when compared to WT by roughly 3.5-fold, while this cleavage was significantly decreased for the helix-promoting residues by about 4-fold (Figure 5B). This result is consistent with the hypothesis that at least partial instability of the CTFβ transmembrane helix is important for exposing the peptide bond at the ε site for endoproteolysis by γ-secretase. We attempted to do kinetic analysis of endoproteolysis of these substrates (Figure 5C). While western blot analysis of AICD was not quantitative enough to obtain Km and Vmax values, the curves in Figure 5C and the fact that AICD production quantified in Figure 5B was measured using saturating 2 µM substrate suggest that Vmax (and therefore kcat) is increased for the GG and GA mutants and decreased for the LL mutant.

Once endoproteolysis of these mutant substrates occurs, the mutation is still presumably present in the resulting long Aβ intermediate, so the effects of these ε-to-ζ site mutations on subsequent trimming are also worth examining. The helix-destabilizing mutations decreased the proportion of Aβ46–49 to the trimmed Aβ40–43 products compared to WT substrate, and the helix-promoting mutation increased the proportion of Aβ46–49 to Aβ40–45 compared to WT (Figure 6A). This data is consistent with the hypothesis that, after endoproteolysis, helical instability facilitates subsequent trimming at the ζ site. In addition, the GG and GA mutants resulted in cleavage only along the Aβ49-46-43-40 pathway, with no Aβ42 or Aβ45 detected. We verified our analysis of Aβ production by mass spectrometry (Figure 6B and Figure S3). Again, the analysis was not quantitative, and the longest Aβ peptides were not consistently detected. However, the production of solely Aβ40 and Aβ43, and the lack of Aβ42, from the GG and GA mutant substrates were confirmed by this analysis. We next analyzed the AICD species generated from these mutants by mass spectrometry to better elucidate why this pattern of Aβ species emerged (Figure 6B and Figure S4). We found that for WT substrate, AICD50–99 and 49–99 predominate, with minor AICD48–99 and 47–99 products. For the GG mutant, AICD50–99 (cleavage that generates Aβ49) predominated, while AICD49–99 (cleavage that generates Aβ48) became a minor product, along with minor AICD48–99 and 47–99 products. For the GA mutant, again, AICD49–99 became a minor product and AICD50–99 remained a major product; in addition, endoproteolysis between the destabilizing residues themselves increased greatly for this mutant, generating substantial amounts of AICD48–99. Thus, reduced generation of Aβ48 seems to be the reason behind the pattern of Aβ products observed. We suggest that this reduction in Aβ48 production is a result of the nature of the amino acids that have been substituted into the WT amino acid sequence. Previous studies have demonstrated that small residues at the P1 and P2 positions of substrates or transition state analog inhibitors are disfavored for binding to the apparently large S1 and S2 pockets of the enzyme.55, 56 Substrate binding to the active site to generate Aβ48 would place a disfavored small residue in both the S1 and S2 positions, while binding to generate Aβ49 would only result in one disfavored interaction. We also note that, because small residues have shown to be disfavored for binding to the S1 and S2 pockets of the active site, the increase in endoproteolysis observed with the GG and GA mutations present in the corresponding substrate positions are likely a result of decreased helical stability of the substrate.

We also examined the effect of helix-destabilization between the ε and ζ sites in cells. We introduced the GG ε-to-ζ site mutation into full-length APP containing the Swedish FAD mutation, which increases cleavage by β-secretase. We expressed APP with the either the Swedish mutation alone or with both the Swedish and GG mutations in HEK293 FT cells and measured the levels of Aβ38, Aβ40, and Aβ42 secreted into the conditioned media by ELISA (Figure S5). Although the levels of secreted Aβ are not a direct measure of CTFβ endoproteolysis at the ε cleavage site, AICD production could not be monitored, as the AICD fragment is readily degraded and difficult to quantify in cells. Nevertheless, we found that the GG mutation led to substantially increased Aβ40 secretion, consistent with our in vitro results. We also found that Aβ42 and Aβ38 levels were significantly decreased with the GG mutation, consistent with our observation that this mutant is only cleaved along the Aβ49-46-43-40 pathway.

We then examined the effects of these helix-promoting and helix-destabilizing mutations on endoproteolysis when they are inserted between the ζ and γ sites and between the γ and γ’ sites. As shown in Figure 7A, the placement of these mutations between these trimming sites did not have a significant effect on endoproteolysis at the ε site, with the notable exceptions of the GG and GA γ-to-γ’ mutants, which were not cleaved by γ-secretase. During purification, we found that the GG γ-to-γ’ site mutant runs as an SDS-stable dimer on a gel (Figure 7B), and inspection of the CTFβ sequence reveals that the insertion of the GG and GA mutations between the γ and γ’ sites generates an additional contiguous GxxxG motif along the CTFβ TMD (Figure 7A). The dimerization of CTFβ through three naturally-occurring contiguous TMD GxxxG motifs, which promote helix-helix interactions,57 and the cleavage of CTFβ dimers by γ-secretase has been previously suggested58. Moreover, this dimerization has been linked to increased pathogenic Aβ42 production58. However, our results suggest that the dimerization of substrate completely prevents γ-secretase cleavage.

To examine the effects of these mutations on trimming, we again performed urea gel electrophoresis of the reactions to analyze the Aβ spectrum. Our results were at first unclear because several bands, indicated with asterisks in Figure 8A, were running aberrantly in the gel compared to the Aβ standards, most likely because the presence of the mutations in the Aβ products altered the mobility of those Aβs in the gel. Therefore, mass spectrometric analysis was essential to determine the identity of these Aβ products. Based on the mass spectrometry data (Figure 8B and Figure S6), we were able to identify the products as follows: the bands running aberrantly in the GG, GA, and LL ζ-to-γ lanes contain mutant Aβ45, and the bands in the LL γ-to-γ’ lane contain mutant Aβ42 and Aβ43. Comparison of the relative levels of Aβ products detected by western blot shows that, for the LL ζ-to-γ substrate, there is hardly any Aβ40, Aβ42, or Aβ43, suggesting that trimming is impaired after Aβ45 is formed. Similarly, for LL γ-to-γ’, Aβ42 and Aβ43 are accumulating at the expense of Aβ40. For each of these LL mutants, the presence of the helix-stabilizing residues seems to impair further trimming at the subsequent site compared to WT substrate (Figure 8A). However, the destabilizing mutations inserted between the ζ and γ sites did not have the opposite effect of the LL mutation inserted at the same site, as the level of shorter products that would be generated by trimming past the mutation site does not seem to be increased compared to the longer Aβ45 product (Figure 8A). It may be that, once the TMD is cut at the ζ site, it is so destabilized that further helix disruption is not facilitating further trimming. The effects of the GG and GA γ to γ’ mutations on trimming could not be examined, as these mutants are not cleaved at all, giving no AICD-FLAG product, due to dimerization.

We also analyzed the AICD species generated in these reactions by mass spectrometry (Figure 8B and Figure S7). We found that, while AICD49–99 and 50–99 were major ε cleavage products of WT substrate, all of the ζ-to-γ and γ-to-γ’ site mutations resulted in ε cleavage that primarily generates AICD49–99, with little AICD50–99 detected. That these upstream changes in the TMD sequence shift the site of ε cleavage to occur primarily at Aβ48 (as opposed to the deletion of residues L52 and L49, which did not have this effect) again supports our previous conclusions that the TMD sequence is crucial for determining the preferred ε site. We also found that the GG and GA ζ-to-γ site mutations resulted in small but detectable amounts of AICD45–99 and 46–99 products, which were not detected at all for WT substrate, suggesting that endoproteolysis can occur further upstream within the TMD if helical instability there is increased.

Discussion

The intramembrane cleavage of transmembrane substrates by γ-secretase is an important event in biology and disease. Our results provide novel information about how γ-secretase interacts with, cleaves, and trims the TMD of CTFβ to generate the Aβ peptides implicated in AD pathogenesis. We first examined determinants of ε site and trimming site specificity. We found that the C-terminal charge of long Aβ intermediates is not involved in proteolysis every three residues at the trimming sites, as Aβ49 and Aβ49 with a C-terminal amide were trimmed the same way, to the same degree and with the same ratio of Aβ42 to Aβ40 generated from each substrate.

We next examined the hypothesis that initial endoproteolysis occurs three residues within the TMD, dictated by the hydrophobic S1’, S2’, and S3’ pockets on the enzyme. We instead found that the deletion of residues from the C-terminus of the TMD, predicted to shift the position of the ε cleavage site by one residue with each deletion, did not result in the predicted shifts in ε site cleavage or in the primary Aβ product line, suggesting that depth within the TMD is not a determinant of ε site specificity. Instead, endoproteolysis of these mutants preferentially occurred on the same face of the TMD helix as WT substrate. These results are consistent with the model that the arrangement of amino acid side chains along the transmembrane helix of CTFβ determines the initial binding mode to the enzyme, and that this interaction positions the ε site for endoproteolytic cleavage.

This interaction between enzyme and substrate does not change simply due to a few deletions at the C-terminal end of the helix. Our results are consistent with similar studies in which C-terminal residues of the APP TMD were deleted. These previous studies found that such deletions did not have a dramatic effect on the Aβ40 to Aβ42 ratio.59, 60 Moreover, a previous study of systematic insertions at the APP C-terminus demonstrated that Aβ42/40 was increased no matter how many residues were added to the C-terminal end, and thus shifts in product lines did not correlate with the number of C-terminal residues added.61 However, all of these studies were performed in cells, where the expression and trafficking of mutants can be issues that affect Aβ production. Our examination of CTFβ C-terminal deletions provides important direct in vitro validation of these previous studies.

Our results suggesting that the sequence of amino acids along the TMD, and not simply depth within the membrane, is important in dictating the location of the ε site are also supported by the demonstration that some missense FAD mutations within the APP TMD can increase the degree of ε site cleavage at position 48 compared to WT APP.20, 38 In addition, a recent study demonstrated that APP CTFβ residues A42, V44, I45, L49, M51, and L52 directly interact with the C-terminal or N-terminal fragments of PS1 62. These results are consistent with our observations that deleting substrate residues around the ε sites significantly reduces ε site cleavage, as interactions between PS1 and CTFβ at positions L49, M51, and L52 would be lost. Moreover, these results are consistent with our conclusion that sequences upstream of the ε site dictate ε-site specificity, as several upstream residues were found to contact PS1. Detailed mutagenesis studies should now be carried out to determine what specific upstream sequence elements dictate the location of ε site cleavage.

We also examined requirements for γ-secretase endoproteolysis and carboxypeptidase trimming. Specifically, we analyzed the role of flexibility of the APP transmembrane helix in CTFβ processing. A requirement for helix-destabilizing residues within the TMD of substrates has been previously demonstrated for signal peptide peptidase, site-2 protease, and rhomboid protease, with specific helix-destabilizing motifs distinguishing substrates from non-substrates.49, 52, 53, 63 Not only has such a requirement not been demonstrated for γ-secretase, but it has even been suggested that helical instability is actually not a requirement for γ-secretase cleavage.49 This is partly because γ-secretase exhibits such broad sequence specificity and, in contrast to the other intramembrane proteases, there is no apparent motif or sequence that distinguishes a protein as a γ-secretase substrate. In addition, it is likely that a requirement for helix-destabilization for γ-secretase cleavage of CTFβ was not previously uncovered experimentally because endoproteolytic cleavage by γ-secretase had historically been assumed to occur in the middle of the TMD to generate Aβ40 and Aβ42, as those were the major species detected. As we show, altering helical stability near the γ sites does not affect overall endoproteolytic cleavage by γ-secretase, so previous mutagenesis in this area could have led to erroneous conclusions about γ-secretase cleavage and substrate helicity.

Our results show that helix destabilization near the site of endoproteolysis does in fact increase endoproteolysis by γ-secretase. To our knowledge, no other mutations within CTFβ that increase γ-secretase cleavage have been reported. Significantly, we found that CTFβ substrate with a helix-promoting mutation inserted near the ε site substantially decreased γ-secretase endoproteolysis below the WT level. Interestingly, the CTFβ sequence has β-branched amino acids proximal to the ε site (threonine at Aβ position 47 and isoleucine at Aβ position 48) that were mutated in this study. β-branched residues are also known to destabilize α helices, most likely due to their increased bulkiness near the peptide backbone.54 Therefore, this motif could provide the necessary flexible conformation for WT CTFβ endoproteolysis.

We also examined the effects of conformational flexibility on substrate trimming by γ-secretase. A helix-promoting mutation inserted between each cleavage site led to a reduction in trimming past that site compared to WT, resulting in the accumulation of longer Aβ species, and the helix-destabilizing mutations proximal to the ε site resulted in reduced accumulation of longer Aβ products. Interestingly, these same destabilizing mutations inserted between the ζ and γ sites did not seem to affect trimming. These results suggest that unwinding and extension of the helix is necessary for cleavage at the trimming sites, but that ζ-cleaved products are perhaps flexible enough that further destabilization does not facilitate trimming. As with the residues near the ε site, β-branched isoleucines and valines predominate along the CTFβ TMD at the trimming sites and were mutated in this study, and again they potentially provide the instability needed for γ-secretase trimming. Although we demonstrate these effects for APP, the role of helical stability and requirements for helix destabilization within other γ-secretase substrates should be investigated experimentally. Such an analysis could reveal if some degree of helical instability is a defining feature of all γ-secretase substrates or if the degree of instability within different substrate TMDs influences how efficiently they are cleaved by γ-secretase. In addition, although γ-secretase has seemingly loose substrate requirements, it does exhibit some degree of selectivity, as certain TMDs have been identified that are not cleaved by γ-secretase.64 It would be interesting to examine these non-substrate TMDs in the same way to determine if conformational flexibility provides a basis for this observed selectivity.

This mutagenesis study, while designed to test the effects of helicity on γ-secretase cleavage, also inadvertently allowed us to examine the effects of substrate dimerization as a TMD determinant of γ-secretase processing. The dimerization of APP and the effects of this dimerization on Aβ production have been widely studied. Full-length APP has dimerization motifs within the ectodomain, as well as three consecutive GxxxG motifs within the TMD.58, 65 The dimerization of full-length APP has been clearly demonstrated, and has also been shown to affect β-secretase cleavage and therefore Aβ production.66 Moreover, small molecule inhibitors of APP dimerization have been identified that lower Aβ production by reducing β-secretase cleavage.67 However, the dimerization of CTFβ via the transmembrane GxxxG motifs and the effects of this dimerization on γ-secretase cleavage have remained unclear and controversial.

It has been suggested that CTFβ dimers are cleaved by γ-secretase 68, and that CTFβ dimerization is specifically linked to an increase in Aβ42 production.58 Moreover, binding to the dimerization site and interfering with CTFβ dimer formation has been proposed as the mechanism of action of certain γ-secretase modulators, compounds that increase Aβ38 production and reduce Aβ42 levels.69 A subsequent study in which the CTFβ GxxxG motifs were mutated reported that increased dimerization of CTFβ did not affect AICD levels, but led to decreased Aβ40 and Aβ42 levels.70 In contrast, multiple studies have reported that γ-secretase does not cleave dimerized substrates. For example, a study in Drosophila demonstrated that the dimeric glycophorin A TMD was not cleaved by γ-secretase, but was cleaved upon point mutation to prevent dimerization.71 In addition, inducing APP or CTFβ dimerization via an FKBP/rapamycin system has been reported to result in reduced Aβ production by reducing γ-secretase cleavage.72

We realized that the insertion of GG and GA motifs between the γ and γ’ sites of C100-FLAG added a GxxxG motif into the TMDs of these substrates. The GG mutant indeed runs as a dimer when examined by SDS-PAGE. Our in vitro system, using purified C100-FLAG substrates, the direct substrate for γ-secretase, and isolated enzyme directly demonstrates that dimerization of CTFβ does not allow γ-secretase cleavage. These results are consistent with a similar report in which CTFβ dimerization, induced via a triple lysine mutation at the ectodomain-TMD border, also eliminated γ-secretase cleavage in vitro.73 Thus, our findings suggest that reducing the dimerization of CTFβ would not be an effective therapeutic strategy.

Finally, the findings described here are complimentary to another recent report from our laboratory showing the importance of the three active site pockets S1’, S2’ and S3’ in endoproteolysis and trimming. Although we show here that upstream sequences in the APP TMD can dictate the site of ε endoproteolysis and which of the two main product lines is operative, these three pockets are nevertheless critical sites of interaction. A Phe residue was found to be completely unacceptable to the relatively small S2’ pocket, and sites of endoproteolysis and trimming could thereby be precisely controlled through Phe substitution. A string of consecutive Phe mutations dramatically slowed down processing by γ-secretase, yet substrate could still bind to enzyme, further evidence for a two-stage interaction between substrate and enzyme. After initial binding of substrate TMD to a docking site on the outside of the enzyme, local unwinding is coupled with entry into the active site and filling of the three pockets to set up the transition state for proteolysis. While a string of Phe residues in the C-terminal half of the APP TMD slows down processing by γ-secretase, endoproteolysis nevertheless occurs after the Gly-Gly motif at Aβ positions 37 and 38, providing further evidence that helical instability facilitates achievement of the transition state. We conclude that recognition of the substrate TMD per se and its processing by γ-secretase is dictated by the TMD sequence upstream from the ε cleavage site, local helical instability and three hydrophobic S’ pockets. Further investigation into the interplay between these factors may ultimately allow computational tools to identify the full range of γ-secretase substrates and how they are processed, along with a deeper understanding of the many roles of γ-secretase in biology.

Supplementary Material

Supplementary material

This work was supported by a Graduate Minority Fellowship from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute (M.A.F.) and Grants NS81498 (M.S.W.) and NS61777 (R.W.) from the National Institutes of Health.

Abbreviations

Aβ amyloid β-peptide

AD Alzheimer’s disease

AICD amyloid β-protein precursor intracellular domain

APP amyloid β-protein precursor

CTF C-terminal fragment

FAD familial Alzheimer’s disease

CHAPSO 3-[(3-cholamidopropyl)dimethylammonio]-2-hydroxymethyl)propane- 1,3-diol

ANOVA analysis of variance

Bicine N,N-bis(2-hydroxyethyl)glycine

SDS sodium dodecyl sulfate

TMD transmembrane domain

WT wildtype

Figure 1 γ-secretase trims Aβ49 and Aβ49 C-amide to generate primarily Aβ40

(A) The transmembrane domain of APP CTFβ is processed by γ-secretase by sequential cleavage at the ε, ζ, and γ sites to generate the Aβ peptides with the indicated C-termini. ε site cleavage at position Aβ49 leads to subsequent trimming at Aβ46, 43, and 40 to generate primarily secreted Aβ40, while ε cleavage at position Aβ48 leads to cleavage at position Aβ45, Aβ42, and Aβ38 to generate primarily secreted Aβ42. (B) A model for γ-secretase trimming of long Aβ intermediates every three residues. The negatively charged C-terminus, generated upon scission at the ε site, would move three residues due to attraction to positive charges on the cytosolic side of the enzyme, setting up the next cut at the subsequent cleavage site. This process would then repeat until the Aβ is secreted from the membrane. (C) Aβ40 and Aβ42 production from Aβ49 or Aβ49 C-amide and CHAPSO-solubilized membranes containing overexpressed γ-secretase. Aβ40 and Aβ42 products were measured by ELISA. +I reactions contain the γ-secretase inhibitor L-685,458. Mean +/− S.E.M, n=2. (D) Concentration-dependent γ-secretase inhibition by transition-state analogue inhibitors with a methyl ester or a carboxylic acid at their C-termini. Mean +/− S.E.M. n=3.

Figure 2 γ-secretase has S1’, S2’, and S3’ pockets

Concentration-dependent γ-secretase inhibition by hydroxyethylurea-type transition-state analogue γ-secretase inhibitors with and without a p3’ substituent. Mean +/− S.E.M. n=3.

Figure 3 Deletion of residues around the ε sites does not alter the primary Aβ cleavage products

(A) C100-FLAG deletion mutants. One, two, or three residues on either side of the primary ε site (between Aβ residues 49 and 50) were deleted. The transmembrane domain is in red. The predicted sites of ε and γ site cleavage are in bold and indicated with arrows. (B) A summary of the mass spectrometric analysis of the Aβ and AICD products of each deletion mutant. The C-termini of the Aβ species detected by mass spectrometry are indicated by solid vertical bars above, the N-termini of AICD species are indicated by dashed bars below; the larger bars indicate products with larger peaks in the mass spectra. (C) Aβ products of C100-FLAG deletion mutants were separated by bicine urea gel electrophoresis. Aβ signal was visualized by western blotting with anti-Aβ antibody 6E10. A representative result of five independent experiments is shown. (D) AICD production from the deletion mutants was monitored by anti-FLAG western blotting and was quantified and normalized to WT. For each mutant, AICD production was significantly lower than for WT. *p&lt;0.05, **p&lt;0.01, ***p&lt;0.001 versus WT. Mean +/− S.E.M. n=2.

Figure 4 Depth within the TMD is not a determinant of ε-site specificity

The top row of helices demonstrates how the cleavage sites would be predicted to shift if initial ε site cleavage always occurred three residues within the transmembrane domain. The bottom row of helices summarizes the results obtained in Figure 3.

Figure 5 Helical instability between the ε and ζ sites is important for endoproteolysis at the ε site

(A) Helix-promoting (LL) and helix-destabilizing motifs (GG and GA) were inserted between cleavage sites. The mutated residues are indicated in red. (B) C100-FLAG substrates with GG, GA, and LL mutations between the ε and ζ sites (in red) were used as substrates in in vitro γ-secretase assays. AICD production was monitored by anti-FLAG western blotting. AICD signal was quantified by densitometry and normalized to WT. ** p&lt;0.01, ***p&lt;0.001 versus WT. Mean +/− S.E.M. n=4. A representative blot is shown, and the lower blot is a longer exposure of the upper blot. (C) Cleavage reactions were carried out with the indicated concentrations of substrate. For each blot, an equal amount of a standard AICD loading control (LC) was included. AICD signal was quantified by densitometry and normalized to that of the LC. Data were fit using GraphPad prism 6 non-linear regression analysis. Representative blots and curves of three independent experiments are shown.

Figure 6 Effect of helical propensity between the ε and ζ sites on trimming

(A) Aβ generated in enzyme assays using the same substrates in Figure 5 were analyzed by bicine urea gel electrophoresis. Aβ was detected by 6E10 western blot. A representative blot of four independent experiments is shown. (B) A summary of the mass spectrometric analysis of the Aβ and AICD species generated in these reactions. The data are labeled as in Figure 3B.

Figure 7 Effect of helical propensity between ζ and γ sites and γ and γ’ sites on endoproteolysis at the ε site

(A) Enzyme assays were performed using C100-FLAG substrates with helix-promoting and helix-destabilizing residues between the ζ and γ and γ and γ’ sites. AICD production was detected by anti-FLAG western blot. AICD signal was quantified by densitometry and normalized to WT. Mean +/− S.E.M. n=5. A representative blot is shown No significant differences in AICD levels were found between the mutants and WT, with the exception of the γ to γ’ site GG and GA mutants, for which AICD product levels were too low to be consistently quantified. (B) All C100-FLAG substrates were purified by anti-FLAG affinity chromatography, and the purifications were examined by SDS-PAGE. The GG γ to γ’ mutant runs as a dimer and is shown with a purification of WT C100-FLAG, which largely runs as a monomer, for comparison.

Figure 8 Effects of helical propensity between ζ and γ sites and γ and γ’ sites on trimming

(A) Aβ products generated from the same substrates used in Figure 7 were analyzed by bicine urea gel electrophoresis. Asterisks indicate Aβ products running differently than the Aβ standards due to the presence of the mutations. These bands were identified by mass spectrometry as follows: the products in the GG ζ- to-γ lane, GA ζ-to-γ lane, and LL ζ to γ lane are Aβ45 containing each respective mutation, and the products in the LL γ-to-γ’ lane are Aβ42 and Aβ43 containing the LL mutation. A representative blot of three independent experiments is shown. (B) A summary of the mass spectrometric analysis of the Aβ and AICD products generated from these substrates. The data are labeled as in Figure 3B.


1 Selkoe DJ Hardy J 2016 The amyloid hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease at 25 years EMBO Mol Med 8 595 608 27025652
2 Yan R Vassar R 2014 Targeting the beta secretase BACE1 for Alzheimer’s disease therapy Lancet Neurol 13 319 329 24556009
3 Wolfe MS 2009 Intramembrane proteolysis Chem Rev 109 1599 1612 19226105
4 Jarrett JT Berger EP Lansbury PT Jr 1993 The carboxy terminus of the beta amyloid protein is critical for the seeding of amyloid formation: implications for the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease Biochemistry 32 4693 4697 8490014
5 Iwatsubo T Odaka A Suzuki N Mizusawa H Nukina N Ihara Y 1994 Visualization of A beta 42(43) and A beta 40 in senile plaques with end-specific A beta monoclonals: evidence that an initially deposited species is A beta 42(43) Neuron 13 45 53 8043280
6 Bentahir M Nyabi O Verhamme J Tolia A Horre K Wiltfang J Esselmann H De Strooper B 2006 Presenilin clinical mutations can affect gamma-secretase activity by different mechanisms J Neurochem 96 732 742 16405513
7 Citron M Westaway D Xia W Carlson G Diehl T Levesque G Johnson-Wood K Lee M Seubert P Davis A Kholodenko D Motter R Sherrington R Perry B Yao H Strome R Lieberburg I Rommens J Kim S Schenk D Fraser P St George Hyslop P Selkoe DJ 1997 Mutant presenilins of Alzheimer’s disease increase production of 42-residue amyloid beta-protein in both transfected cells and transgenic mice Nat Med 3 67 72 8986743
8 Duff K Eckman C Zehr C Yu X Prada CM Perez-tur J Hutton M Buee L Harigaya Y Yager D Morgan D Gordon MN Holcomb L Refolo L Zenk B Hardy J Younkin S 1996 Increased amyloid-beta42(43) in brains of mice expressing mutant presenilin 1 Nature 383 710 713 8878479
9 Scheuner D Eckman C Jensen M Song X Citron M Suzuki N Bird TD Hardy J Hutton M Kukull W Larson E Levy-Lahad E Viitanen M Peskind E Poorkaj P Schellenberg G Tanzi R Wasco W Lannfelt L Selkoe D Younkin S 1996 Secreted amyloid beta-protein similar to that in the senile plaques of Alzheimer’s disease is increased in vivo by the presenilin 1 and 2 and APP mutations linked to familial Alzheimer’s disease Nat Med 2 864 870 8705854
10 Selkoe DJ 2001 Alzheimer’s disease: genes, proteins, and therapy Physiol Rev 81 741 766 11274343
11 Tanzi RE Bertram L 2005 Twenty years of the Alzheimer’s disease amyloid hypothesis: a genetic perspective Cell 120 545 555 15734686
12 Saito T Suemoto T Brouwers N Sleegers K Funamoto S Mihira N Matsuba Y Yamada K Nilsson P Takano J Nishimura M Iwata N Van Broeckhoven C Ihara Y Saido TC 2011 Potent amyloidogenicity and pathogenicity of Abeta43 Nat Neurosci 14 1023 1032 21725313
13 Kretner B Trambauer J Fukumori A Mielke J Kuhn PH Kremmer E Giese A Lichtenthaler SF Haass C Arzberger T Steiner H 2016 Generation and deposition of Abeta43 by the virtually inactive presenilin-1 L435F mutant contradicts the presenilin loss-of-function hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease EMBO Mol Med 8 458 465 26988102
14 Veugelen S Saito T Saido TC Chavez-Gutierrez L De Strooper B 2016 Familial Alzheimer’s Disease Mutations in Presenilin Generate Amyloidogenic Abeta Peptide Seeds Neuron 90 410 416 27100199
15 Gu Y Misonou H Sato T Dohmae N Takio K Ihara Y 2001 Distinct intramembrane cleavage of the beta-amyloid precursor protein family resembling gamma-secretase-like cleavage of Notch J Biol Chem 276 35235 35238 11483588
16 Sastre M Steiner H Fuchs K Capell A Multhaup G Condron MM Teplow DB Haass C 2001 Presenilin-dependent gamma-secretase processing of beta-amyloid precursor protein at a site corresponding to the S3 cleavage of Notch EMBO Rep 2 835 841 11520861
17 Weidemann A Eggert S Reinhard FB Vogel M Paliga K Baier G Masters CL Beyreuther K Evin G 2002 A novel epsilon-cleavage within the transmembrane domain of the Alzheimer amyloid precursor protein demonstrates homology with Notch processing Biochemistry 41 2825 2835 11851430
18 Funamoto S Morishima-Kawashima M Tanimura Y Hirotani N Saido TC Ihara Y 2004 Truncated carboxyl-terminal fragments of beta-amyloid precursor protein are processed to amyloid beta-proteins 40 and 42 Biochemistry 43 13532 13540 15491160
19 Okochi M Tagami S Yanagida K Takami M Kodama TS Mori K Nakayama T Ihara Y Takeda M 2013 gamma-secretase modulators and presenilin 1 mutants act differently on presenilin/gamma-secretase function to cleave Abeta42 and Abeta43 Cell Rep 3 42 51 23291095
20 Sato T Dohmae N Qi Y Kakuda N Misonou H Mitsumori R Maruyama H Koo EH Haass C Takio K Morishima-Kawashima M Ishiura S Ihara Y 2003 Potential link between amyloid beta-protein 42 and C-terminal fragment gamma 49–99 of beta-amyloid precursor protein J Biol Chem 278 24294 24301 12707272
21 Qi-Takahara Y Morishima-Kawashima M Tanimura Y Dolios G Hirotani N Horikoshi Y Kametani F Maeda M Saido TC Wang R Ihara Y 2005 Longer forms of amyloid beta protein: implications for the mechanism of intramembrane cleavage by gamma-secretase J Neurosci 25 436 445 15647487
22 Takami M Nagashima Y Sano Y Ishihara S Morishima-Kawashima M Funamoto S Ihara Y 2009 gamma-Secretase: successive tripeptide and tetrapeptide release from the transmembrane domain of beta-carboxyl terminal fragment J Neurosci 29 13042 13052 19828817
23 Zhao G Mao G Tan J Dong Y Cui MZ Kim SH Xu X 2004 Identification of a new presenilin-dependent zeta-cleavage site within the transmembrane domain of amyloid precursor protein J Biol Chem 279 50647 50650 15485850
24 Edbauer D Winkler E Regula JT Pesold B Steiner H Haass C 2003 Reconstitution of gamma-secretase activity Nat Cell Biol 5 486 488 12679784
25 Kimberly WT LaVoie MJ Ostaszewski BL Ye W Wolfe MS Selkoe DJ 2003 Gamma-secretase is a membrane protein complex comprised of presenilin, nicastrin, Aph-1, and Pen-2 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 100 6382 6387 12740439
26 Takasugi N Tomita T Hayashi I Tsuruoka M Niimura M Takahashi Y Thinakaran G Iwatsubo T 2003 The role of presenilin cofactors in the gamma-secretase complex Nature 422 438 441 12660785
27 Wolfe MS Xia W Ostaszewski BL Diehl TS Kimberly WT Selkoe DJ 1999 Two transmembrane aspartates in presenilin-1 required for presenilin endoproteolysis and gamma-secretase activity Nature 398 513 517 10206644
28 Li YM Xu M Lai MT Huang Q Castro JL DiMuzio-Mower J Harrison T Lellis C Nadin A Neduvelil JG Register RB Sardana MK Shearman MS Smith AL Shi XP Yin KC Shafer JA Gardell SJ 2000 Photoactivated gamma-secretase inhibitors directed to the active site covalently label presenilin 1 Nature 405 689 694 10864326
29 Esler WP Kimberly WT Ostaszewski BL Diehl TS Moore CL Tsai JY Rahmati T Xia W Selkoe DJ Wolfe MS 2000 Transition-state analogue inhibitors of gamma-secretase bind directly to presenilin-1 Nat Cell Biol 2 428 434 10878808
30 Esler WP Kimberly WT Ostaszewski BL Ye W Diehl TS Selkoe DJ Wolfe MS 2002 Activity-dependent isolation of the presenilin- gamma -secretase complex reveals nicastrin and a gamma substrate Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 99 2720 2725 11867728
31 Kornilova AY Bihel F Das C Wolfe MS 2005 The initial substrate-binding site of gamma-secretase is located on presenilin near the active site Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 102 3230 3235 15722417
32 Haapasalo A Kovacs DM 2011 The many substrates of presenilin/gamma-secretase J Alzheimers Dis 25 3 28 21335653
33 De Strooper B Annaert W Cupers P Saftig P Craessaerts K Mumm JS Schroeter EH Schrijvers V Wolfe MS Ray WJ Goate A Kopan R 1999 A presenilin-1-dependent gamma-secretase-like protease mediates release of Notch intracellular domain Nature 398 518 522 10206645
34 Lammich S Okochi M Takeda M Kaether C Capell A Zimmer AK Edbauer D Walter J Steiner H Haass C 2002 Presenilin-dependent intramembrane proteolysis of CD44 leads to the liberation of its intracellular domain and the secretion of an Abeta-like peptide J Biol Chem 277 44754 44759 12223485
35 Okochi M Steiner H Fukumori A Tanii H Tomita T Tanaka T Iwatsubo T Kudo T Takeda M Haass C 2002 Presenilins mediate a dual intramembranous gamma-secretase cleavage of Notch-1 The EMBO journal 21 5408 5416 12374741
36 Lichtenthaler SF Ida N Multhaup G Masters CL Beyreuther K 1997 Mutations in the transmembrane domain of APP altering gamma-secretase specificity Biochemistry 36 15396 15403 9398269
37 Lichtenthaler SF Wang R Grimm H Uljon SN Masters CL Beyreuther K 1999 Mechanism of the cleavage specificity of Alzheimer’s disease gamma-secretase identified by phenylalanine-scanning mutagenesis of the transmembrane domain of the amyloid precursor protein Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 96 3053 3058 10077635
38 Chavez-Gutierrez L Bammens L Benilova I Vandersteen A Benurwar M Borgers M Lismont S Zhou L Van Cleynenbreugel S Esselmann H Wiltfang J Serneels L Karran E Gijsen H Schymkowitz J Rousseau F Broersen K De Strooper B 2012 The mechanism of gamma-Secretase dysfunction in familial Alzheimer disease The EMBO journal 31 2261 2274 22505025
39 Kakuda N Funamoto S Yagishita S Takami M Osawa S Dohmae N Ihara Y 2006 Equimolar production of amyloid beta-protein and amyloid precursor protein intracellular domain from beta-carboxyl-terminal fragment by gamma-secretase J Biol Chem 281 14776 14786 16595682
40 Kukar TL Ladd TB Robertson P Pintchovski SA Moore B Bann MA Ren Z Jansen-West K Malphrus K Eggert S Maruyama H Cottrell BA Das P Basi GS Koo EH Golde TE 2006 Lysine 624 of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) is a critical determinant of amyloid beta peptide length: support for a sequential model of gamma-secretase intramembrane proteolysis and regulation by the amyloid beta precursor protein (APP) juxtamembrane region J Biol Chem 286 39804 39812
41 Ren Z Schenk D Basi GS Shapiro IP 2007 Amyloid beta-protein precursor juxtamembrane domain regulates specificity of gamma-secretase-dependent cleavages J Biol Chem 282 35350 35360 17890228
42 Cacquevel M Aeschbach L Osenkowski P Li D Ye W Wolfe MS Li H Selkoe DJ Fraering PC 2008 Rapid purification of active gamma-secretase, an intramembrane protease implicated in Alzheimer’s disease J Neurochem 104 210 220 17986218
43 Li YM Lai MT Xu M Huang Q DiMuzio-Mower J Sardana MK Shi XP Yin KC Shafer JA Gardell SJ 2000 Presenilin 1 is linked with gamma-secretase activity in the detergent solubilized state Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 97 6138 6143 10801983
44 Quintero-Monzon O Martin MM Fernandez MA Cappello CA Krzysiak AJ Osenkowski P Wolfe MS 2011 Dissociation between the processivity and total activity of gamma-secretase: implications for the mechanism of Alzheimer’s disease-causing presenilin mutations Biochemistry 50 9023 9035 21919498
45 Fernandez MA Klutkowski JA Freret T Wolfe MS 2014 Alzheimer presenilin-1 mutations dramatically reduce trimming of long amyloid beta-peptides (Abeta) by gamma-secretase to increase 42-to-40-residue Abeta J Biol Chem 289 31043 31052 25239621
46 Esler WP Das C Wolfe MS 2004 Probing pockets S2-S4’ of the gamma-secretase active site with (hydroxyethyl)urea peptidomimetics Bioorg Med Chem Lett 14 1935 1938 15050631
47 Bolduc DM Montagna DR Seghers MC Wolfe MS Selkoe DJ 2016 The amyloid-beta forming tripeptide cleavage mechanism of gamma-secretase eLife 5
48 Matsumura N Takami M Okochi M Wada-Kakuda S Fujiwara H Tagami S Funamoto S Ihara Y Morishima-Kawashima M 2014 gamma-Secretase associated with lipid rafts: multiple interactive pathways in the stepwise processing of beta-carboxyl-terminal fragment J Biol Chem 289 5109 5121 24375443
49 Urban S Freeman M 2003 Substrate specificity of rhomboid intramembrane proteases is governed by helix-breaking residues in the substrate transmembrane domain Mol Cell 11 1425 1434 12820957
50 Barrett PJ Song Y Van Horn WD Hustedt EJ Schafer JM Hadziselimovic A Beel AJ Sanders CR 2012 The amyloid precursor protein has a flexible transmembrane domain and binds cholesterol Science 336 1168 1171 22654059
51 Das C Berezovska O Diehl TS Genet C Buldyrev I Tsai JY Hyman BT Wolfe MS 2003 Designed helical peptides inhibit an intramembrane protease J Am Chem Soc 125 11794 11795 14505382
52 Lemberg MK Martoglio B 2002 Requirements for signal peptide peptidase-catalyzed intramembrane proteolysis Mol Cell 10 735 744 12419218
53 Ye J Dave UP Grishin NV Goldstein JL Brown MS 2000 Asparagine-proline sequence within membrane-spanning segment of SREBP triggers intramembrane cleavage by site-2 protease Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 97 5123 5128 10805775
54 O’Neil KT DeGrado WF 1990 A thermodynamic scale for the helix-forming tendencies of the commonly occurring amino acids Science 250 646 651 2237415
55 Chau DM Crump CJ Villa JC Scheinberg DA Li YM 2012 Familial Alzheimer disease presenilin-1 mutations alter the active site conformation of gamma-secretase J Biol Chem 287 17288 17296 22461631
56 Moore CL Leatherwood DD Diehl TS Selkoe DJ Wolfe MS 2000 Difluoro ketone peptidomimetics suggest a large S1 pocket for Alzheimer’s gamma-secretase: implications for inhibitor design J Med Chem 43 3434 3442 10978191
57 Brosig B Langosch D 1998 The dimerization motif of the glycophorin A transmembrane segment in membranes: importance of glycine residues Protein Sci 7 1052 1056 9568912
58 Munter LM Voigt P Harmeier A Kaden D Gottschalk KE Weise C Pipkorn R Schaefer M Langosch D Multhaup G 2007 GxxxG motifs within the amyloid precursor protein transmembrane sequence are critical for the etiology of Abeta42 The EMBO journal 26 1702 1712 17332749
59 Lichtenthaler SF Beher D Grimm HS Wang R Shearman MS Masters CL Beyreuther K 2002 The intramembrane cleavage site of the amyloid precursor protein depends on the length of its transmembrane domain Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 99 1365 1370 11805291
60 Murphy MP Hickman LJ Eckman CB Uljon SN Wang R Golde TE 1999 gamma-Secretase, evidence for multiple proteolytic activities and influence of membrane positioning of substrate on generation of amyloid beta peptides of varying length J Biol Chem 274 11914 11923 10207012
61 Ousson S Saric A Baguet A Losberger C Genoud S Vilbois F Permanne B Hussain I Beher D 2013 Substrate determinants in the C99 juxtamembrane domains differentially affect gamma-secretase cleavage specificity and modulator pharmacology J Neurochem 125 610 619 23253155
62 Fukumori A Steiner H 2016 Substrate recruitment of gamma-secretase and mechanism of clinical presenilin mutations revealed by photoaffinity mapping The EMBO journal 35 1628 1643 27220847
63 Moin SM Urban S 2012 Membrane immersion allows rhomboid proteases to achieve specificity by reading transmembrane segment dynamics eLife 1 e00173 23150798
64 Hemming ML Elias JE Gygi SP Selkoe DJ 2008 Proteomic profiling of gamma-secretase substrates and mapping of substrate requirements PLoS Biol 6 e257 18942891
65 Scheuermann S Hambsch B Hesse L Stumm J Schmidt C Beher D Bayer TA Beyreuther K Multhaup G 2001 Homodimerization of amyloid precursor protein and its implication in the amyloidogenic pathway of Alzheimer’s disease J Biol Chem 276 33923 33929 11438549
66 Kaden D Munter LM Joshi M Treiber C Weise C Bethge T Voigt P Schaefer M Beyermann M Reif B Multhaup G 2008 Homophilic interactions of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) ectodomain are regulated by the loop region and affect beta-secretase cleavage of APP J Biol Chem 283 7271 7279 18182389
67 So PP Zeldich E Seyb KI Huang MM Concannon JB King GD Chen CD Cuny GD Glicksman MA Abraham CR 2012 Lowering of amyloid beta peptide production with a small molecule inhibitor of amyloid-beta precursor protein dimerization Am J Neurodegener Dis 1 75 87 22822474
68 Sato T Tang TC Reubins G Fei JZ Fujimoto T Kienlen-Campard P Constantinescu SN Octave JN Aimoto S Smith SO 2009 A helix-to-coil transition at the epsilon-cut site in the transmembrane dimer of the amyloid precursor protein is required for proteolysis Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 106 1421 1426 19164538
69 Richter L Munter LM Ness J Hildebrand PW Dasari M Unterreitmeier S Bulic B Beyermann M Gust R Reif B Weggen S Langosch D Multhaup G 2010 Amyloid beta 42 peptide (Abeta42)-lowering compounds directly bind to Abeta and interfere with amyloid precursor protein (APP) transmembrane dimerization Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 107 14597 14602 20679249
70 Kienlen-Campard P Tasiaux B Van Hees J Li M Huysseune S Sato T Fei JZ Aimoto S Courtoy PJ Smith SO Constantinescu SN Octave JN 2008 Amyloidogenic processing but not amyloid precursor protein (APP) intracellular C-terminal domain production requires a precisely oriented APP dimer assembled by transmembrane GXXXG motifs J Biol Chem 283 7733 7744 18201969
71 Struhl G Adachi A 2000 Requirements for presenilin-dependent cleavage of notch and other transmembrane proteins Mol Cell 6 625 636 11030342
72 Eggert S Midthune B Cottrell B Koo EH 2009 Induced dimerization of the amyloid precursor protein leads to decreased amyloid-beta protein production J Biol Chem 284 28943 28952 19596858
73 Jung JI Premraj S Cruz PE Ladd TB Kwak Y Koo EH Felsenstein KM Golde TE Ran Y 2014 Independent relationship between amyloid precursor protein (APP) dimerization and gamma-secretase processivity PLoS One 9 e111553 25350374
