LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9602487
21197
Curr Pharm Des
Curr. Pharm. Des.
Current pharmaceutical design
1381-6128
1873-4286

28034353
5466080
10.2174/1381612822666161230144517
NIHMS858160
Article
New Therapeutics to Modulate Mitochondrial Function in Neurodegenerative Disorders
Wilkins Heather M. 12
Morris Jill K. 12*
1 Department of Neurology University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, USA
2 University of Kansas Alzheimer’s Disease Center, Kansas City, KS, USA
* Address correspondence to this author at the University of Kansas School of Medicine, University of Kansas Alzheimer’s Disease Center MS 6002, 3901 Rainbow Blvd, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA; jmorris2@kumc.edu
28 3 2017
2017
09 6 2017
23 5 731752
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Background

Mitochondrial function and energy metabolism are impaired in neurodegenerative diseases. There is evidence for these functional declines both within the brain and systemically in Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, and Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis. Due to these observations, therapeutics targeted to alter mitochondrial function and energy pathways are increasingly studied in pre-clinical and clinical settings.

Methods

The goal of this article was to review therapies with specific implications on mitochondrial energy metabolism published through May 2016 that have been tested for treatment of neurodegenerative diseases.

Results

We discuss implications for mitochondrial dysfunction in neurodegenerative diseases and how this drives new therapeutic initiatives. Conclusion: Thus far, treatments have achieved varying degrees of success. Further investigation into the mechanisms driving mitochondrial dysfunction and bioenergetic failure in neurodegenerative diseases is warranted.

Mitochondria
Alzheimer’s disease
Parkinson’s disease
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis
Bioenergetics
Oxidative Stress
neurodegeneration

INTRODUCTION

Despite decades of research, the underlying etiology of the most common neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer’s disease (AD), Parkinson’s disease (PD), and Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) remains unknown. This is possibly because the cause of these disorders involves a combination of both environmental and genetic factors. By definition, neurodegenerative diseases involve the loss of neurons, cells unique in their role of transmitting information through chemical and electrical signals. This transmission of information requires high energy demand, and it is often cited that while comprising only 2% of an individual’s body weight, the brain consumes 20–25% of the body’s oxygen. Maintenance of ion gradients for neurotransmission is the primary source of this energy demand, with half of the brain’s energy allotment used to maintain membrane potentials [1]. Thus, a great deal of current research into therapeutics targeting neurodegeneration involves brain metabolic processes.

Glucose is an essential source of energy for neuronal tissues. In vivo declines in glucose metabolism, as measured by Fluorodeoxyglucose-Positron Emission Tomography (FDG-PET), are observed in AD, PD (including non-demented PD subjects), and ALS, providing additional evidence for bioenergetic failure in clinical neurodegenerative diseases [2–4]. Glucose catabolism provides key intermediates for the citric acid cycle (or Kreb’s cycle, tricarboxylic acid cycle; TCA), where the conversion of pyruvate (or other substrates) to NADH and FADH2 fuels substrate level oxidative phosphorylation and the generation of ATP (Fig. 1); see Magistetti et al. for an excellent review on brain energy metabolism [5]. These bioenergetic pathways within the mitochondria are the most efficient way to generate energy, while at the same time giving rise to a variety of physiologically-relevant intermediate molecules. Thus, it is not surprising that mitochondrial dysfunction is widely-recognized as a common theme to neurodegenerative diseases. The current review will address mitochondrial dysfunction as a common contributing factor to neurodegenerative diseases. Further, novel therapeutics that target mitochondrial function and their mechanisms of action will be addressed.

ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE

AD is the most common neurodegenerative disease. Clinical diagnosis is confirmed at autopsy by the presence of cerebral amyloid beta (Aβ) plaques and tau tangles. Both postmortem pathology and genetic studies have fueled the development of the Aβ cascade hypothesis. This hypothesis asserts that Aβ drives neurodegeneration in AD. While this hypothesis is still widely accepted, and Aβ still has diagnostic utility, a primary role of Aβ in AD etiology is beginning to be questioned. This is in part due to several Phase 3 clinical trials targeting Aβ that failed to affect primary outcomes of clinical or neuroimaging measures of disease progression [6–10].

In light of these recent findings, the role of mitochondrial dysfunction in AD etiology is increasingly being considered. The mitochondrial cascade hypothesis proposes that functional deficits occur early in mitochondria, preceding and driving the observed Aβ and tau pathologies [11–13]. In preclinical models, it has been shown that reactive oxygen species (ROS) from mitochondria can enhance Aβ production [14]. Mitochondrial deficits occur prior to Aβ accumulation in AD transgenic mouse models [15]. In human studies, AD subjects are known to exhibit systemic mitochondrial deficits [16, 17]. Here, we discuss the relevance of mitochondrial dysfunction to the pathological hallmarks of AD.

Cytoplasmic Hybrid (Cybrid) Studies

Studies of cytoplasmic hybrid (cybrid) cells suggest mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) drives pathological processes observed in AD. Cybrid cells provide a model to study the contribution of mtDNA to specific disease hallmarks. Cybrid cells are generated by transferring patient-specific cytoplasts (usually platelets) to a cell lacking mtDNA (ρ0) (Fig. 2). Over time, the only known perpetuating material within the cytoplasm (mtDNA from the subject) remains, with a constant nuclear background [18].

Several studies have examined the contributions of mtDNA from sporadic AD subjects to AD-relevant pathologies. Cybrids generated from AD subjects have reduced cytochrome oxidase (Complex IV, COX) activity, increased ROS, and decreased mitochondrial membrane potential [19]. AD cybrids recapitulate changes in Aβ as well, with higher levels of secreted Aβ1–40 and Aβ1–42, elevated intracellular Aβ1–40, and Congored positive Aβ deposits. Increased markers of apoptosis area also observed, including the presence of cytoplasmic cytochrome c and caspase-3 activation [19]. This suggests mtDNA may play an important role in driving pathological changes observed in AD.

Independent studies of AD cybrids have recapitulated many of these observations, including reduced COX activity [17, 20]. The observed changes in mitochondrial function are worsened with higher passage number in AD cybrids [20]. Further, changes can be observed not only in cybrids generated from AD subjects, but also those from subjects diagnosed with mild-cognitive impairment (MCI). Cybrids generated from AD and MCI subject platelet mtDNA had reductions in mitochondrial respiration with an increase in the mitochondrial leak rate, as well as reduced glycolysis. This manifested in lower NAD/NADH, but higher ADP/ATP ratios. However, mitochondrial mass appeared increased, and proteins which control mitochondrial fission were elevated in the AD cybrids [17]. A detailed review of cybrid studies is available elsewhere [18].

Pre-Clinical AD Models

Mitochondrial dysfunction is evident in pre-clinical AD mouse models, and appears to precede other pathological hallmarks. In the 3XTg-AD (transgenic mice bearing Swedish mutant amyloid precursor protein (APP)- K670N/M671L, tau mutant-P301L, and presenilin mutant-M146V) mouse model, mitochondrial respiration was reduced and ROS was increased early, prior to changes in Aβ [15]. This is further exemplified by observations of mitochondrial dysfunction in hippocampal neurons derived from embryonic mice. These data are consistent with mitochondrial dysfunction preceding brain Aβ deposition [15].

Further studies have examined the relationship between Aβ levels and mitochondrial dysfunction. Mice bearing the Swedish APP mutation (K670N/M671L) alone or in combination with mutant presenilin (M146V) mitochondria in the hippocampus and cortex show increased markers of damage and dysfunction. High Aβ is observed in these regions, with the most severe deficits in synaptic mitochondria [21]. In a separate study, synaptosomal mitochondria were significantly impaired in the 5xFAD (transgenic mice bearing Swedish, Florida, and London mutations in APP- K670N/M671L, I716V, V717I; with two presenilin mutations-M146L and L286V) mouse model. Mitochondria at synaptosomes were skewed towards increased fission, with elevated markers of autophagy. These observations correlated with memory impairment. Synaptosomal mitochondria had a reduced respiratory control ratio and state III respiration, with reduced ATP production [22]. These findings are important, because mitochondria localized to synaptosomes are critical to neuronal function and signal transduction.

A strong relationship between mitochondrial dysfunction and APP exists. Full-length APP protein is trafficked to mitochondria, where it associates with mitochondrial translocase machinery. APP may prohibit protein import into mitochondria, leading to mitochondrial dysfunction. In models where APP is localized to mitochondria, reductions in COX activity, reduced ATP production, and depolarized mitochondrial membrane potential were observed. Localization of APP to mitochondria occurs in vitro, in vivo, and in AD human subjects [23, 24]. Enzymes which process APP into its fragments are also found within mitochondria. A functional γ-secretase was shown to cleave mitochondria-localized APP into the P3, APP intracellular domain (AICD), and possibly Aβ fragments [25]. Further, in the 5xFAD mouse model, the C99 APP fragment localized to mitochondria and this could be modulated by a heterozygous deletion of β-secretase (BACE) [26]. Overall, data suggest APP localizes to mitochondria where it can be processed into C-terminal fragments, resulting in P3, AICD, and Aβ generation within mitochondria. These findings are further supported by studies where Aβ is localized to mitochondria and is associated with mitochondrial dysfunction [21, 27, 28]. However, a classical question remains, is Aβ causing mitochondrial dysfunction or is mitochondrial dysfunction causing Aβ?

AD Human Studies

Mitochondrial dysfunction is observed in human AD subjects, both within the brain and systemically. Pronounced metabolic deficits are first observed in the posterior cingulate, prior to dementia onset. Early FDG-PET imaging shows reduced glucose metabolism in the posterior cingulate cortex and cingulate parietal transitional area very early in clinical AD [29]. These metabolic changes are accompanied by reductions in mitochondrial COX activity. In a post-mortem study, quantitative immunochemistry staining for COX showed a significant reduction in AD subjects within six layers of the posterior cingulate [30]. An additional study observed reductions in COX activity in the frontal, temporal, and parietal cortex [31].

Numerous studies have replicated the finding of decreased COX activity in AD subject post-mortem brain. One study found COX activity is significantly decreased in the frontal, temporal, parietal, and occipital cortex. Complex I and Complex II–III activities were slightly decreased but only in the occipital cortex [32]. A separate study found a non-significant decrease in Complex I and II in AD brain postmortem. A decrease in Complex III was found, but the most striking ETC deficit was in COX [33], while cytochrome aa3, b, and c levels were unchanged. Immunohistochemical analyses revealed that AD subjects had higher levels of COX-deficient neuronal cells in the hippocampus. A similar effect was observed in epithelial choroid cells [34]. Further analysis of single COX-deficient neurons found increased mtDNA deletions [35]. Studies have also shown abnormal kinetic properties of the COX enzyme in AD brain postmortem. At low substrate levels, a Km (substrate concentration at half the maximum velocity-Michaelis constant) was not identifiable. However, at high substrate levels the Km in the AD COX samples was higher than the control [36]. The underlying cause for these observations is unknown.

Beyond brain tissue, COX activity is reduced in AD subject platelets. [16, 37]. While COX activity is lower, COX expression is unchanged, ATP levels are reduced, and ROS are higher in platelets from AD subjects [37]. Since COX directly provides electrons to ATP synthase (or Complex V), reductions in COX activity could lead to impaired ATP production (Fig. 1). One study found reduced COX activity in AD subject platelets, but no significant effects were observed for other ETC complexes including Complex I and Complex II [16].

A mitochondrial etiology of AD is further exemplified by an association of AD risk with maternal inheritance. mtDNA is almost entirely derived maternally, and those whose mother is afflicted with AD have a higher risk to develop AD [38, 39]. Early AD-associated changes are observed in individuals whose mother, but not father, have AD. These include aberrant brain glucose metabolism, decreased platelet COX activity, and decreased gray matter volume [40–43]. Given the emerging role of mitochondria and energy metabolism in AD pathogenesis, development of new therapeutic strategies which target mitochondria is imperative. A summary of some of the primary mitochondrial mechanisms that are currently being targeted is given in Fig. (3). These targets are described in more detail below.

MITOCHONDRIAL MEDICINE AND ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE

Diet

Mitochondrial medicine can include both pharmacological and lifestyle interventions. One such lifestyle intervention is diet. Brain energy metabolism, including mitochondrial function, is altered with the ketogenic diet in pre-clinical mouse models [44–46]. Caloric restriction alters energy pathways through activation of sirtuin 1 (SIRT1), which can initiate downstream mitochondrial biogenesis [47]. Other dietary factors and diets, such as fatty acids and the Mediterranean diet may modulate AD risk. Evidence for diet-based therapeutics in modulating AD pathology are discussed below.

Mediterranean Diet

Both the Mediterranean-Dietary Approach to Stop Hypertension (MIND) and the Mediterranean diet are associated with a decreased risk of developing AD [48, 49]. The Mediterranean diet is rich in fruits, vegetables, nuts, fish, and olive oil. The MIND diet is very similar and includes foods such as olive oil, green leafy vegetables, whole grains, nuts, berries, beans, fish, and poultry. Individuals participating in this diet are also encouraged to avoid sweets (such as pastries), cheese, red meat, butter, and margarine. In addition to decreased risk for AD, subjects who adhere to the Mediterranean diet had increased cortical thickness in brain regions afflicted by AD, including the entorhinal, orbitofrontal, and the posterior cingulate cortex [50].

Fatty Acids

Specific dietary components, such as fatty acids, have also been assessed in relation to AD. While omega-3- fatty acids did not alter the rate of cognitive decline (as measured by mini-mental state exam or MMSE) in moderate to severe AD subjects, a significant slowing of cognitive decline was found in subjects who had mild AD [51]. The omega-3- polyunsaturated fatty acid, docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) was beneficial to the Tg2576 (transgenic mouse overexpressing Swedish mutant APP- KM670/671NL) AD mouse model. Tg2576 mice that received a diet highly enriched with DHA had less Aβ1–40 and Aβ1–42, reduced plaque burden, reduced APP C-terminal fragments, and altered APP cellular localization [52]. A separate pre-clinical study combined DHA with either peptamen (high protein supplement) or a low-fat diet in the TgCRND8 (transgenic mouse overexpressing Swedish and Indiana mutant APP- KM670/671NL and V717F) AD mouse model. Peptamen in combination with DHA increased Aβ levels and plaques, while the low-fat diet in combination with DHA reduced Aβ levels and plaques [53]. These data suggest it is important to study how different dietary additives interact.

DHA is an important dietary consideration throughout lifespan, with regards to cognitive function and overall brain health [54]. In middle aged, cognitively-healthy subjects, DHA was related to better performance on tasks such as working memory, vocabulary, and nonverbal reasoning [55]. Higher consumption of DHA has also been linked to reduced AD risk, although there is disparity regarding DHA blood levels and risk of dementia [56–58]. Further, in a randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial, DHA had no effect on cognitive decline in AD subjects [59].

An additional fatty acid, Oleic acid, is linked to longer life span in C. elegans [60]. Oleic acid may also alter APP processing, and has been shown to reduce secreted Aβ in Cos-7 cells overexpressing APP. Transgenic mice expressing a mutant human APP (Swedish and Indiana mutations- KM670/671NL and V717F) fed a low-fat cholesterol free diet enriched with Oleic acid, displayed decreased Aβ plaques, reduced BACE and presenilin, and elevated levels of soluble APPα (sAPPα) [61]. These data suggest that Oleic acid alters APP processing both in vitro and in vivo, however to date no clinical studies have tested the efficacy of Oleic acid on cognition in either cognitively normal or AD subjects.

Caloric Restriction

Caloric restriction is known to increase life span and insulin sensitivity across several species and may be modulated in part by ROS and/or the activity of an enzyme family called the sirtuins [62–66]. Caloric restriction also alters APP processing. In particular, caloric restriction lowered Aβ production, decreased Aβ plaques, increased sAPPα levels, and increased the activity of α-secretase, in the Tg2576 AD mouse model [67]. Positive benefits were also observed in squirrel monkeys with caloric restriction; Aβ1–40 and Aβ1–42 were reduced in the temporal cortex, with no change in APP expression. This study also observed caloric restriction increased α-secretase activity [68]. While clinical studies examining caloric restriction in subjects with MCI are ongoing, completed studies have not yet published results (clinicaltrials.gov IDs NCT01286389, NCT01219244, NCT01504854).

Ketogenic Diet

Other dietary measures have proven beneficial in neurological disorders, such as the ketogenic diet in epilepsy [69, 70]. The ketogenic diet has further shown promise in AD pre-clinical models. For example, female mice bearing the Indiana (V717I) APP mutation had reduced brain Aβ levels, but no change in behavioral outcomes when fed a ketogenic diet [71]. In the APP/PS1 knock-in AD mouse model, the ketogenic diet had no effect on Aβ levels in the brain or skeletal muscle, but these mice did show significant improvement on the rotarod motor performance test [72]. Using the APPswe/PS1dE9 mouse model (transgenic mice expressing Swedish APP mutations- KM670/671NL and PSEN1 delta E9), a ketogenic diet in combination with an anaplerotic compound, triheptanon (a triglyceride composed of three, seven carbon fatty acids), improved memory test performance, and reduced markers of neuroinflammation. However, this combination therapy did not alter Aβ levels or plaques within the brain [73]. In the 3XTgAD mouse model, a diet enriched for ketone-esters led to subtle memory and learning performance improvement, decreased Aβ deposition, and reduced brain burden of phosphorylated tau [74].

Dietary considerations for the treatment of AD may need to take into account apolipoprotein E (ApoE) genotype. Pre-clinical studies of mice bearing ApoE ε3 or ApoE ε4 alleles were found to show disparate effects with various diets. Such that, the high fat diet and ketogenic diet increased plasma levels of ApoE in the ApoE ε4 mice. However, the high fat diet decreased hippocampal levels of ApoE in the ApoE ε3 mice, and the ketogenic diet showed no effect on ApoE levels in these mice [75]. Overall, this may be an important consideration in future clinical study design.

The efficacy of the ketogenic diet in Alzheimer’s disease currently being examined. Further, the effects of the ketogenic diet in cognitively normal, elderly subjects is also underway in clinical trials. As most of these current studies are still recruiting and/or ongoing, results are not available (clinicaltrials.gov IDs NCT02521818, NCT02709356, NCT02551419, NCT02409784).

Exercise

Exercise is known to increase peripheral aerobic capacity, likely through effects on mitochondria by several mechanisms. Exercise induces acute mitochondrial biogenesis, which is maintained through increased expression of upstream PGC1-α regulators [76–78]. Moreover, both expression of ETC complexes and mitochondrial coupling efficiency are increased in active compared to sedentary subjects [79]. Aerobic capacity declines with age and mitochondrial mechanisms, such as uncoupling, are postulated to underlie declines in exercise efficiency in the elderly [80, 81]. These mechanisms could be further exacerbated by disease, as AD subjects exhibit both peripheral and central markers of mitochondrial dysfunction [17, 82, 83].

Pre-Clinical Studies

Pre-clinical studies support potential benefits of exercise in AD. Voluntary exercise improved learning and memory and decreased Aβ plaques within the frontal cortex and hippocampus of TgCRND8 AD mice. Exercise was postulated to influence APP processing, because APP C-terminal fragments were reduced [84]. More recent studies in Tg2576 AD mice also found that exercise mitigated brain levels of Aβ1–42, and in APPswe/PS1dE9 mice, treadmill exercise was associated with improved spatial memory, more Brain-Derived Neurotrophic Factor (BDNF) positive cells and less activated microglia in the brain, but no change in brain Aβ [85, 86].

There is also evidence that exercise may modulate tau phosphorylation. In the Tg601 mouse model (which overexpresses wild-type human tau), treadmill exercise training increased tau phosphorylation and exacerbate neuroinflammation [87]. However, this effect may be dependent upon the mouse model studied, as exercise has also been shown to mitigate inflammatory markers in mouse blood and cortex [88].

The mechanism of exercise benefits may involve several factors that converge to increase hippocampal neurogenesis, including neurotrophins, lactate, and mitochondrial function. In a rat model of vascular dementia, exercise increased neural progenitor cells in the subgranular zone of the hippocampus and elevated the expression of BDNF [89]. Further studies have shown that exercise above the lactate threshold, in wild-type aged mice (C57BL/6) resulted in increased hippocampal Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor-A (VEGF-A) expression, and brain expression of mitochondrial biogenesis genes. A negative correlation between doublecortin (a neurogenesis marker) and C-C motif chemokine 11 (CCL11) expression was also observed [90]. Lactate may mediate some of the changes observed with exercise. Both lactate and exercise facilitated increased expression of genes involved in mitochondrial biogenesis (PGC1 related co-activator protein, PRC) and increased VEGF-A gene expression within the brain [91]. The overall mechanism exercise mediated brain benefits warrants more investigation.

Clinical Studies

Exercise has shown positive effects in clinical studies of older cognitively normal adults. In a questionnaire based study, exercise was associated with decreased cerebral amyloid and higher Aβ1–42 CSF concentrations. Exercise appeared to associate more with these biomarkers in ApoE ε4 non-carriers [92]. However, no association between exercise and CSF tau or phosphorylated-tau 181 was observed. Dual task training (simultaneous cognitive-motor task and exercise), improves cognition (mini mental state examination) and decreases the plasma Aβ42/40 ratio [93]. The most commonly noted effect of physical activity is on the domain of executive function, an effect postulated to be mediated through change in aerobic capacity (VO2 Max) [94]. Finally, increased change in aerobic capacity due to exercise (1 year of walking) has also been related to significant increases in hippocampal volume [95]. These studies indicate exercise training is beneficial to elderly cognitively normal individuals.

Clinical studies have shown positive effects of exercise in cognitively-impaired subjects. A large, randomized controlled trial found that cognitively-impaired subjects who exercised aerobically had greater memory improvement than an education-only control group [96]. Another study of a multi-component exercise program showed improved memory and decreased brain atrophy in subjects with amnestic, but not non-amnestic MCI compared to an education only control group [97]. Other studies indicate positive effects on other areas, such as executive function, cognitive, or quality of life outcomes although not all studies are consistent [98–102]. The relationship between exercise and cognition appears to be dependent upon sample size and the sensitivity of the cognitive and neuroimaging outcome measures, although the effect of the intervention method (i.e. aerobic vs. resistance training) and the control group (education only vs. active control) warrant further exploration.

Meta analyses generally have shown a benefit of physical activity and cognition. In a meta-analysis of 18 randomized control trials for physical activity and cognitive function, a positive effect was found on cognitive function. This included aerobic only or aerobic in combination with non-aerobic exercise, at low or high frequencies, and for subjects with or without AD [103]. A separate systemic review of 13 studies, reported overall beneficial effects of exercise on cognition, neuropsychiatric scores, daily tasks, and functional capacity in AD subjects [104]. Finally, a meta-analysis of only randomized controlled trials in MCI and AD revealed exercise resulted in moderate to strong effects on cognitive function in AD subjects, but smaller effects in MCI subjects [105]. Similar to pre-clinical studies, exercise increases plasma levels of BDNF in healthy and AD subjects [106]. It has been hypothesized that exercise provides beneficial effects through increasing the action of BDNF, improving mitochondrial function and glucose metabolism, thus decreasing ROS and increasing the rate of removal of damaged mitochondria. This overall could decrease the production of mitochondria-derived damage associated molecular pattern (DAMP) molecules and sterile inflammation [107]. Additional pre-clinical and clinical studies will further the understanding surrounding the mechanism of exercise benefits to the brain.

Diet and Exercise

Combining exercise and diet interventions may further impact beneficial outcomes in AD subjects. Combined omega-3-fatty acid supplementation with aerobic exercise in subjects with MCI eliminated the gray matter volume decreases within the frontal, cingulate, and parietal cortex observed in individuals who did not receive the combined treatment. However, no change in cognitive performance, inflammatory, vascular, or metabolic markers were observed between groups [108]. Expanded efforts into combination therapeutic strategies are warranted.

Metabolic Hormones

In AD transgenic mice, diet-induced insulin resistance increased Aβ plaque burden [109]. This is consistent with clinical studies showing that insulin resistance increases AD risk [110]. Insulin and a related network of peripherally secreted “incretin” hormones including glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1), and Gastric inhibitory polypeptide (GIP; also known as glucose-dependent insulinotrophic peptide) can cross the blood brain barrier and have receptors in the hippocampus [111–115]. Insulin resistance has been associated with mitochondrial dysfunction, although the casual relationship between these two processes is unclear [116]. Intranasal insulin has shown some promise in improving memory in humans although insulin sensitizers have not and this has been reviewed elsewhere [117–123]. Incretins are also associated with mitochondrial function and both GLP-1 and GIP have shown neuroprotective properties in preclinical AD models [124–126]. In particular, the molecule Liraglutide (an agonist of the GLP-1 receptor) is protective of mitochondria in cell culture and mouse models [127, 128]. This compound is currently being investigated in clinical trials of AD subjects. One trial that examined the effect of Liraglutide on cerebral amyloid has been completed but results are not yet available (ClinicalTrials.gov ID NCT01469351) and another that aims to test the effect on cerebral metabolism and cognitive change is ongoing (clinicaltrials.gov ID NCT01843075).

Oxaloacetate

Oxaloacetate (OAA), a molecule central to several bioenergetic pathways, is a novel therapeutic approach for AD. OAA can be reduced to malate enzymatically within the cytoplasm. This reaction allows malate to be transported into mitochondria to provide substrates for the TCA cycle. Further, an enzyme within the mitochondria can oxidize malate to generate OAA. OAA can also be converted to phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) within the cytoplasm as a part of gluconeogenesis. In vitro studies have found that OAA supports glycolysis and mitochondrial respiration fluxes, promotes expression of mitochondrial biogenesis proteins (PGC1α) and enhances SIRT1 phosphorylation [129]. In vivo studies have shown that intraperitoneal injection of OAA in 4-month old C57Bl/6 male mice for two weeks enhances brain bioenergetic pathway protein expression and neurogenesis markers. OAA also increased the expression and nuclear localization of PGC1α and increased AKT signaling. OAA also increased the expression of doublecortin (a neurogenesis marker) and increased the number of doublecortin positive cells within the hippocampus of C57Bl/6 mice [130]. Currently, a clinical trial examining OAA in AD subjects is ongoing (clinicaltrials.gov IDs NCT02063308, NCT02593318).

Antioxidants

Free radicals are endogenously produced as a by-product of bioenergetic pathways [131, 132]. If allowed to go unchecked oxidative and nitrosative free radicals (such as superoxide, hydrogen peroxide, and peroxynitrite) damage cellular macromolecules. Within mitochondria, free radicals can compromise lipid membranes, ETC enzyme complexes, and DNA [133]. This can lead to the initiation of cell death cascades, such as apoptosis or necrosis [134, 135]. Whether this mechanism is a cause or effect in AD, remains to be determined. However, mitigating oxidative stress with antioxidants, may prove beneficial in AD outcomes.

Vitamin E

Vitamin E (or α-tocopherol) is a well-studied insoluble, lipophilic antioxidant. The effects of vitamin E have been addressed across numerous neurodegenerative diseases. Vitamin E dietary intake alters cognitive performance in AD pre-clinical models. Rendering mice deficient in vitamin E and folate in conjunction with an iron-enriched diet reduces cognitive performance. This effect was more profound in ApoE knockout mice [136]. Further, mice lacking the α-tocopherol transfer protein gene (Ttpa−/−) become depleted of α-tocopherol (vitamin E). Crossing the Ttpa−/− mice with the Tg2576 AD mouse model, resulted in worsening of cognitive impairment and enhanced Aβ deposition in the brain. Supplementation with α-tocopherol (vitamin E) rescued these effects [137]. In the Tg2576 AD mouse model, Vitamin E supplementation beginning at five months of age reduced Aβ brain deposition and brain oxidative stress markers. However, beginning vitamin E supplementation at an older age (13 months) did not alter disease outcome [138]. A separate study found that vitamin E reduced amyloidosis after repetitive concussive brain injury in the Tg2576 AD mouse model [139].

Vitamin E dietary intake and plasma concentrations also correlate with AD risk in human subjects. For example, dietary intake of vitamin E, C, or β-carotene are associated with decreased risk of AD. Of the three supplements, vitamin E dietary intake appeared to be more protective against AD risk [140]. Reduced plasma levels of tocopherols (including vitamin E) increases the risk for MCI and AD, while high levels of plasma vitamin E reduce the risk of AD [141, 142]. However, the use of vitamin E as a therapeutic in human AD subjects is controversial. Some studies suggest vitamin E may be harmful, while others suggest it could be beneficial [143]. A study that assessed the effects of vitamin E alone and in combination with memantine revealed that vitamin E (but not a combination of vitamin E and memantine) reduced the decline functional ability (ADCS-ADL) over a period of about 2 years [144]. As reviewed in a meta-analysis, three studies evaluated the benefits of vitamin E in AD or MCI subjects. One study reported benefits ranging from fewer participants reaching death or institutionalization, as well as benefits in the CDR score. However, the other two studies failed to find positive benefits in measured outcomes, which included the MMSE score and conversion rate of MCI to AD [145]. Stratifying subjects as vitamin E responders and non-responders may provide evidence as to why vitamin E is beneficial in some studies, but not in others. Subjects who benefited cognitively from vitamin E also had reduced markers of oxidative stress (blood GSSG). Subjects who did not cognitively benefit from vitamin E did not have a reduction in oxidative stress. This suggests that in some subjects, vitamin E lowers oxidative stress biomarkers and slows the rate of cognitive decline, while in other subjects vitamin E fails to alter either [146]. Further studies to elucidate what factors determine which subjects will respond to vitamin E are necessary.

Coenzyme Q10 and MitoQ

Coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10, ubiquinone, or ubiquinol) is a fat soluble antioxidant with a structure similar to vitamins. CoQ10 is endogenously found within mitochondria where it is a component of the ETC. It accepts electrons from Complex I and/or Complex II, passing them to Complex III (Fig. 1). While Coenzyme Q10 showed promise in pre-clinical AD models, it has failed to show clinical efficacy for neurodegenerative disease. Based on this, a novel mitochondrial targeted antioxidant, called MitoQ was developed. MitoQ (mitoquinone mesylate: [10-(4,5-dimethoxy-2-methyl-3,6-dioxo-1,4-cycloheexadienl-yl) decyl triphenylphosphonium methanesulfonate]) contains ubiquinone (CoQ10) conjugated to a triphenylalkylphosphonium (a lipophilic) cation.

MitoQ protected cells from Aβ toxicity in vitro, preserving neurite outgrowth and mitochondrial function [147]. Further studies have shown that MitoQ is protective in both in vitro and in vivo models of AD. In primary cortical neurons MitoQ protected from Aβ induced neurotoxicity, loss of mitochondrial membrane potential, and ROS production [148]. Further, female 3xTgAD mice treated with MitoQ displayed better cognitive performance, lessened oxidative stress, reduced levels of Aβ deposition, astrogliosis, and markers of cell death [148]. Thus far, MitoQ has not been tested in human AD subjects.

Szeto-Schiller (SS) Peptide Antioxidants

A well-recognized caveat to antioxidant treatment, is ensuring the antioxidants reach the appropriate cellular compartments. In particular, targeting antioxidants to the mitochondrial matrix, a major source of ROS production within the cell, may prove more efficacious with antioxidant therapies. While MitoQ is one such approach, Szeto-Schiller (SS) peptide antioxidants are a novel approach to ensure delivery of antioxidants to the mitochondrial matrix. SS peptides are small, cell-permeable peptides consisting of aromatic-cationic peptides, which are capable of scavenging hydrogen peroxide and peroxynitrite. The scavenging ability of SS peptides is attributed to a dimethyltyrosine residue. SS peptides, including SS-31 and SS-02 are protective in models of oxidative stress both in vivo and in vitro, these studies and mechanisms have been reviewed elsewhere [149, 150]. Furthermore, SS peptide antioxidants have proven beneficial to in vitro models of AD [151]. SS31 improved axonal mitochondrial transport and synaptic viability in the Tg2576 AD mouse model [147, 152]. To date, no human clinical trials are listed for SS peptide antioxidants.

Curcumin

Curcumin, a spice commonly found in curry, is a polyphenolic antioxidant. In the Tg2576 AD mouse model curcumin, at least at a low dose produced beneficial effects. These include reduced markers of brain oxidative stress and neuroinflammation, as well as reduced brain Aβ levels and plaque burden [153]. In a small pilot study of AD subjects, curcumin increased plasma vitamin E levels, but had no effect on cognitive performance [154]. An additional study, did not find positive outcomes in AD subjects with curcumin. This study also reported subjects had low levels of plasma curcumin, suggesting the bioavailability of curcumin is low [155]. Overall, more consideration into the design of how curcumin is studied may overcome these limitations. In particular, groups have targeted curcumin to the mitochondrial matrix using a similar approach used for MitoQ; conjugation of curcumin to the lipophilic triphenylphosphonium cation [156]. Further work to target curcumin to the mitochondrial matrix, has focused on using biodegradable, polymeric nanoparticles in addition to conjugation with the lipophilic triphenylphosphonium cation. This approach was shown to protect in vitro models from Aβ toxicity [157].

N-acetyl-cysteine

N-acetyl-cysteine (NAC) is a compound which provides precursors for glutathione (GSH) synthesis. GSH is an endogenous antioxidant, which is critical for mitochondrial function [158]. It can cross the blood brain barrier and has been shown to increase brain GSH levels [159]. In vitro, NAC lowers the transcription of the APP gene [160]. Further studies have shown NAC protects from Aβ induced toxicity, and reduces the amount of secreted Aβ in vitro [161]. NAC also lowered the amount of phosphorylated tau [161]. In the TgCRDN8 mouse model, NAC decreased Aβ levels [162]. In vivo, NAC protected mice which received intracerebroventricular injection of aggregated Aβ through a preservation of cognitive function, potentiation of oxidative stress markers (GSH and MDA), and preservation of ChAT activity [163]. While NAC has not been evaluated independently, it has been in a combination therapy clinical trial study. A randomized, double-blind study evaluated a combinatorial therapy of a “nutraceutical formulation” composed of NAC, folate, vitamin E, vitamin B12, s-adenosyl methionine, and acetyl-L-carnitine in AD subjects. Subjects which received this “nutraceutical formulation” showed improvements on the dementia rating scale [164].

α-Lipoic Acid

α-lipoic acid is a co-factor for several TCA enzymes, and while it is important for aerobic metabolism, it also acts as an antioxidant. α-lipoic acid treated Tg2576 AD mice, had improvements in learning but no effect on brain Aβ levels or plaque deposition [165]. Mixed outcomes have been reported in clinical studies of AD subjects with α-lipoic acid. In one study, subjects were divided into two groups, one group had AD and diabetes mellitus, the other group only had AD. In both groups, a subset of subjects showed cognitive improvement with α-lipoic acid, but not all subjects showed improvement [166]. An additional study evaluated α-lipoic acid in combination with omega-3-fatty acids. The primary outcome, an oxidative stress marker in urine, F2-isoprostane, showed no change in either group. The secondary outcome measures included MMSE, ADL/IADL, and ADAS-cog. The combination of α-lipoic acid and omega-3-fatty acids significantly improved MMSE and IADL outcomes over 12 months [167].

Stabilized NADH

NADH, is a central intermediate in metabolic pathways, including glycolysis, the TCA cycle, and oxidative phosphorylation. NADH is a redox pair with NAD+, where NADH is a reducing agent and NAD+ is an oxidizing agent. Stabilized oral NADH has been tested in two clinical trials for AD subjects. The first clinical study was an open-label design and reported that cognitive performance was improved based on the MMSE and GDS [168]. In a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial in AD subjects, NADH supplementation appeared to slow the progression of cognitive decline (MMSE and MDRS), but no effect was observed with CDR, attention, or other memory performance tests [169].

Parkinson’s Disease

PD is a chronic and progressive age-related neurodegenerative disease which primarily affects motor function. As the second most common neurodegenerative disease, PD is caused by the degeneration of dopaminergic neurons that project from the substantia nigra to the striatum. The primary PD symptoms include bradykinesia, muscle rigidity, gait disturbances, and resting tremor, although over the lengthy disease course, dementia (PD dementia) occurs in a substantial percentage of individuals [170]. The preclinical phase of PD is thought to last several decades, as the onset of motor symptoms only begins when striatal dopamine depletion is no longer compensated [171]. Clinical diagnosis occurs after motor symptom onset. The etiology of PD is unknown. However, age is the predominant risk factor and mechanisms involving mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative stress, and neuroinflammation all contribute to neuronal dysfunction and cell death [172].

Cybrid Studies

Similar to AD, the cybrid model (Fig. 2) also supports a role for mitochondrial dysfunction in PD. Cybrids generated from PD subject mtDNA show reduced Complex I activity. These studies have used several different nuclear backgrounds, including neuroblastoma, teratocarcinoma and lung carcinoma cell lines [173–178]. Cybrids from PD subjects show increased ROS, increased mitochondrial calcium, increased mitochondrial ETC proton leak, and decreased mitochondrial membrane potential [173–175, 179]. PD cybrid cells have also been shown to exhibit increased oligomerization of α-synuclein [180] and develop Lewy bodies, a hallmark PD pathology [181]. These studies are consistent with mtDNA contributing to deficits observed in PD subjects.

Pre-Clinical PD Models

Mitochondria are the primary targets of the drug 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP), which is used to induce PD in rodent and primate models [182, 183] and induces PD-like symptoms in humans [184]. MPTP is not accumulated in the brain but is converted by monoamine oxidase B to MPP,+ which accumulates in dopaminergic neurons, a process which is required for neurotoxicity of MPTP [185]. It is postulated that the primary mechanism of action for MPTP involves an overproduction of free radicals and impaired mitochondrial function [186], and MPTP remains a popular animal model of PD. As mentioned, a role for mitochondria in PD is also supported by the integral function of mitochondrial monoamine oxidases on mediating dopamine turnover [187]. Monoamine oxidases have a high potential for hydrogen peroxide generation, which physiologically serves an important role in cell signaling [188]. However, hydrogen peroxide production can also be pathological; this messenger is widely considered as the primary mechanism of toxicity of another PD-inducing chemical, 6-hydroxydomaine [189]. The substantia nigra is particularly vulnerable to hydrogen peroxide owing to its high iron content. In particular, this increases the propensity of hydrogen peroxide to undergo the Fenton reaction and produce hydroxyl radicals. Thus, an additional animal model of PD that remains highly utilized is the 6-OHDA model, which requires stereotaxic injection of this toxin into the desired location of the brain, which is generally either the striatum or fiber bundle projecting from the striatum to the substantia nigra (the nigrostriatal pathway).

PD Human Studies

Mitochondrial deficits, specifically involving Complex I, have been recognized to occur in human subjects with PDfor decades [190–192], and the number of genes associated with PD that are involved in mitochondrial associated processes continues to grow [193]. A number of the different genetic variants that are implicated in autosomal recessive PD have been shown to directly impact mitochondrial function. The gene PTEN-induced putative kinase (PINK1), which is involved in autosomal recessive PD, has been suggested to serve as a regulator of mitophagy, and PINK1 mutations may interfere with the mitophagy process [194]. PINK1 has also been implicated in the transport of mitochondria within the cell [195]. A rare variant of the ATPase ATP13A2 has also been linked to PD [196]. ATP13A2 confers protection against rotenone-induced mitochondrial stress, potentially by recognizing signaling lipids, as an interaction with these lipids increases protection against mitochondrial stress [197]. Finally, another gene involved in autosomal recessive PD, PARK7, has been implicated in the antioxidant response and may play a role in mitochondrial function [198].

Interestingly, other variations in mitochondria occur that deem certain individuals seemingly resistant against PD. For instance, the mitochondrial haplogroup B5 has been shown to be protective against PD, and cybrids from this haplogroup are resistant to exposure to the mitochondrial toxin rotenone [199]. Antioxidants, which are widely recognized to protect mitochondria, have been shown to be altered in either level or activity in PD human subjects [200] and dopamine loss has been linked to increased levels of oxidized glutathione, suggesting a potential role of oxidative stress in PD [201].

Mitochondrial Medicine in PD

Due to the potential role of mitochondria in PD etiology, several drugs in development for PD treatment target mitochondrial function. Mitochondria-related processes that are current targets for intervention include exercise, antioxidants, and calcium homeostasis. Other metabolically active molecules which also affect mitochondria, including incretin hormones and PPAR-γ agonists, are examined in detail below.

Exercise

Evidence exists that exercise could be neuroprotective in preclinical models of PD. In a rat model of PD, treadmill exercise both reduced 6-OHDA mediated neurodegeneration and improved firing rates in striatal neurons [202]. Similarly, treadmill exercise was shown markers of tyrosine hydroxylase in the SN and striatum following MPTP treatment in mice, indicating less MPTP-mediated cell loss, and exercise also improved motor balance and coordination measures in MPTP treated mice [203]. Some evidence suggests suppression of microglial activiation and decreased brain inflammation as a potential mechanism for exercise-mediated neuroprotection in the MPTP model [204] and other work suggests that exercise elicits positive effects on formation of dendritic spines after spine loss, potentially through neurotrophic factors or glutamate modulation [205]. More research into the mechanisms of exercise-mediated neuroprotection is warranted.

A number of clinical studies have evaluated the effect of exercise in PD. However, approaches differ between studies, including exercises such as walking, home-based training, and exercises targeted at improving characteristics of muscle, such as range-of-motion, strength, and muscle endurance. The modality of exercise and how the exercise is administered (group therapy, one-on-one or home based) is likely important to consider. One successful study of exercise in 60 PD subjects involved a type of therapy called LSVT BIG, which consisted of one-to-one exercise training involving whole-body movements and goal-directed activities of daily living. The BIG training, but not group exercise (Nordic walking) or educational instruction for domestic exercise, improved the UPDRS score in PD subjects [206]. A recent meta-analysis has found that resistance exercise training has a positive impact on muscle strength in PD, and that endurance exercise training can improve fitness in PD subjects. Although findings were inconsistent regarding the effect on disease severity (UPDRS score), no studies found that exercise therapy was detrimental [207]. Several studies of the effect of exercise in PD are ongoing or near completion. A randomized, single-blind pilot study to assess the effects of a home-based aerobic exercise program on cognitive outcomes and disease severity in PD subjects has been completed, but the results are not yet available (NCT01562496). Likewise, a trial assessing the effect of a 6 month stationary bike exercise program on disease severity (UPDRS) in PD subjects has been completed, but results are not yet available (NCT01741584). Finally, a study of high-intensity exercise training, which has been linked to improvements in metabolic outcomes, is currently ongoing in PD (NCT02593955).

Antioxidants

The key role of oxidative stress in modulating neurodegeneration in both MPTP and 6-OHDA animal models has made ROS an attractive drug target. Although the complex role of ROS as both secondary messengers and as damaging molecules, together with the difficulty of targeting antioxidants to the region where they are needed, has made ROS a difficult therapeutic focus [208]. Many drugs have been examined in animal and clinical models, with varying degrees of success.

Coenzyme Q10 and MitoQ

Coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) has been investigated in several clinical trials in PD, the largest and most definitive being a phase 3 trial (NCT00740714) with a goal of evaluating the impact of CoQ10 on slowing clinical decline in early PD. This large randomized, placebo controlled study showed that CoQ10 was safe but elicited no evidence of clinical benefit compared to placebo [209] and was terminated when a futility criterion was reached. As discussed earlier, MitoQ is a mitochondrially-targeted antioxidant that contains CoQ10. MitoQ was recently evaluated in a double-blind, placebo-controlled Phase 2 clinical trial (NCT00329056). This study sought to examine the disease-modifying capability of MitoQ in PD patients. Subjects were treated with placebo, 40mg, or 80mg MitoQ once daily for one year. However, neither treatment group differed in disease progression (UPDRS scale) compared to placebo [210].

N-acetyl-cysteine

N-acetyl-cysteine (NAC), which was discussed earlier in the context of AD, has also been tested in PD subjects. A small, phase I study (NCT01427517) using a single IV infusion of NAC showed a positive effect of NAC on both blood and brain glutathione levels [211]. A phase I/II trial is currently ongoing, which will evaluate the effect of one month of NAC supplementation in PD subjects (NCT01470027). An additional trial of oral NAC administration in PD subjects has been completed (NCT02212678), but the results are not yet available.

Mito-Apo/MPPE

The organic compound apocynin has anti-inflammatory properties that are linked to its role as an antioxidant. This compound has been modified to target mitochondria (Mito-Apo). Mito-Apo has been tested in preclinical PD models, where it was protective against loss of nigrostriatal neurons in response to MPTP [212]. Similarly, another drug that has shown efficacy in pre-clinical models is N-Methyl, N-propynyl-2-phenylethylamine (MPPE). This drug is an MAO-B inhibitor that protects against MPTP-induced neuronal damage. MPPE treatment has been shown to upregulate mitochondrial superoxide dismutase activity, and attenuates both damage to mitochondrial complex I and oxidative stress [213].

Pramipexole

Both the S(−) and R(+) forms of the drug pramipexole have been shown to target the mitochondria and exert antioxidant effects in cell models [214]. The S(−) enantiomer of pramipexole is currently used in human PD subjects due to its role as an agonist of the dopamine receptor, but the antioxidant properties of the R(+) enantiomer have led to investigations in both AD [215] and ALS [216]. These small, early studies have shown safety and tolerability but limited efficacy in humans.

ViNeuro

A randomized controlled trial of an additional drug with antioxidant properties, ViNeuro, in PD subjects has been completed. This drug enhances the antioxidant status of mitochondria, but the results of the trial are not yet available (clinicaltrials.gov ID NCT00517842).

Calcium Homeostasis

Calcium is also known to be an important secondary messenger in cell signaling cascades. Mitochondria are key players in calcium homeostasis, as they can accumulate and sequester calcium [217]. Calcium can, in turn, affect the expression of sirtuin proteins, which are involved in mitochondrial biogenesis. The sirtuin-2 inhibitor AK7 was found to be protective against MPTP-induced dopamine depletion and alpha-synuclein induced toxicity in animal and cell models [218]. This is in line with prior work showing that the same molecule was neuroprotective in a mouse model of Huntington’s disease [219]. Sirtuin expression is affected by the accumulation of calcium in the mitochondrial matrix, and additional research has targeted calcium homeostasis itself in Parkinson’s models [220]. Another drug, B355252, was shown to be neuroprotective against 6-OHDA in cellular models through a mechanism involving both a decrease in ROS production and through a mitochondria-mediated mechanism involving calcium sequestration [221].

Calcium influx is controlled via L-type calcium channels, and the current through these channels in the substantia nigra is known to decrease with aging [222]. Multiple studies that have targeted L-type calcium channels with antagonists such as isradipine have shown neuroprotection in preclinical models [223–226]. Isradipine has recently been translated into human studies, and a recent Phase II clinical trial showed dose-dependent tolerability [227]. Although isradipine was not shown to be effective at significantly modulating the primary motor outcome measures, there was a trend toward benefit. A more definitive Phase III clinical trial of isradipine is currently underway. (clinicaltrials.gov ID NCT02168842).

Incretin Hormones

Ghrelin

Many hormones involved in glucose metabolism also modulate mitochondrial function. Ghrelin is a hormone that is released by the gastrointestinal tract following a meal. It has been linked to diverse processes, including satiety, insulin sensitivity, and even neuronal survival. In preclinical models, ghrelin has been shown to be protective against rotenone and MPTP. In cells, pre-treatment with ghrelin protected against rotenone-induced neurotoxicity, antagonizing cytochrome c release from mitochondria and activation of caspase-3 [228]. In animal models, pre-treatment of mice with ghrelin prior to MPTP administration resulted in attenuated striatal dopamine depletion [229]. This was potentially mediated through a mechanism involving mitochondrial membrane permeability, as ghrelin increased the Bcl-2 to Bax ratio and decreased caspase-3 activation [229]. Interestingly, recent research has shown that a particular isoform of ghrelin is important for its neuroprotective properties; acylated ghrelin, but not des-acylated ghrelin, is protective against MPTP in animal models [230].

Glucagon-Like-Peptide-1 (GLP-1)

An additional gut-released hormone, glucagon-like-peptide-1 (GLP-1) is important to both central and peripheral metabolism. As an incretin hormone, it can modulate pancreatic insulin release, and both ghrelin and GLP-1 can cross the blood brain barrier. A dual agonist of GLP-1 and glucose-dependent GIP called DA-JC1 was shown to reverse MPTP induced motor impairments in a PD animal model. This study showed an effect on the mitochondrial Bcl-2 to BAX ratio [231]. Interestingly, it has been shown in peripheral cell models, that a peptide consisting of the C-terminal domain of GLP-1, GLP1 (28–36), specifically targets mitochondria and inhibits stress-induced apoptosis [232]. The GLP-1 agonist Exendin-4 has shown promising results in PD subjects. In a single blinded human trial (ClinicalTrials.gov; NCT01174810) Exendin-4 was shown to be effective at improving motor function (MDS-UPDRS) compared to control subjects, who declined on the motor outcome [233]. A Phase II double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of this drug in PD subjects is currently underway (clinicaltrials.gov ID NCT01971242).

PPAR-γ Agonists

Thiazolidinediones, including rosiglitazone and pioglitazone, have been widely used clinically to treat Type 2 Diabetes. The mechanism of action of thiazolidinediones is activation of the proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR-γ). PPARγ expression has been shown to protect mitochondria by maintaining membrane potential and preventing apoptosis in cell models [234]. These drugs have shown some promise in preventing PD, but only in certain populations. For instance, when individuals with diabetes who were taking these drugs were followed longitudinally (average 5.2 years), subjects who had taken the thiazolidinediones had a reduced incidence of PD [235]. However, a cohort study examining the use of thiazolidinediones and onset of PD found no delay in onset of PD [236]. Studies examining pioglitazone and rosiglitazone separately are discussed below.

Pioglitazone

Pioglitazone has been widely used clinically to treat Type 2 Diabetes due to its ability to lower blood glucose. In addition to its action of PPAR-γ, it has also been shown to bind to mitoNEET, a protein affiliated with the outer mitochondrial membrane, and it is argued that the mechanism of action for pioglitazone may extend beyond PPARγ [237]. Due to its effects on cellular metabolism, pioglitazone was examined in preclinical PD models and shown to be neuroprotective [238, 239]. A Phase II randomized, controlled trial of pioglitazone has recently been completed (clinicaltrials.gov ID NCT01280123). This well-performed study in subjects with early stage PD showed that pioglitazone did not significantly modify PD progression vs. placebo [240] or alter biomarker levels [241]. Moreover, a primate study showed that while pioglitazone was effective at reducing dyskinesias, it reduced the effectiveness of L-DOPA therapy, calling the potential utility of this drug in more severe stages of PD into question [242].

Rosiglitazone

In cell models, pre-treatment of neuronal cells with rosiglitazone resulted in attenuation of MPTP toxicity, likely via a mechanism involving a reduction in ROS production, but potentially independent of PPARγ [243]. In mouse models of progressive PD, rosiglitazone treatment was found to arrest neurodegeneration in the striatum and substantia nigra [244], as well as attenuate striatal dopamine depletion and microglia reactivity [245]. Despite these findings in preclinical models, no human studies of rosiglitazone in PD subjects have been published and none are ongoing.

Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis

ALS is a progressively fatal motor neuron disease. ALS is largely sporadic (90%), with approximately 10% of cases stemming from genetic mutations. Mutations in superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) account for approximately 20% of familial ALS cases [246]. Recently, mutations in TAR-DNA binding protein 43 (TDP43) have been implicated in both sporadic and familial forms of ALS [247–249]. Certain populations, such as the military, football, and soccer players have an increased risk for developing sporadic ALS [250–253]. While the underlying etiology is still unknown, in both familial and sporadic ALS, mitochondrial dysfunction is prevalent.

Cybrid Studies

As with studies in AD and PD, ALS cybrids recapitulate disease processes (Fig. 2). When cybrid cell lines were generated on an SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma nuclear background from platelets of sporadic ALS and control subjects, Complex I activity was significantly reduced and trends for reduced Complex III and IV activity were observed. ROS production was not altered in sporadic ALS cybrids, but there was a significant increase in the activity of antioxidant enzymes and reduced mitochondrial calcium concentrations [254]. Another study used osteosarcoma cells as the nuclear background and reported no difference in gross mitochondrial respiration or ROS production in ALS cybrids [255]. However, this study did not examine specific ETC enzyme activity levels, and the nuclear background used could influence outcomes. A detailed review of cybrid studies can be found elsewhere [18].

Pre-Clinical ALS Models

SOD1 is principally a cytosolic protein. However, mutant forms of SOD1 localize to mitochondria, where it is hypothesized to disrupt mitochondrial function [256–258]. Mutant forms of SOD1 have been shown to induce a loss of mitochondrial membrane potential and mitochondrial swelling, with reductions in ATP production, disrupted calcium homeostasis, and loss of mitochondrial ETC enzyme activity [259–262]. Overall, mutations in SOD1 are strongly associated with mitochondrial and bioenergetic disruption.

Mutant SOD1 may inflict mitochondrial dysfunction by binding to and interacting with mitochondrial proteins. Mutant forms of SOD1 interact with BCL-2 in both mouse and human spinal cord [258]. The interaction between mutant forms of SOD1 and BCL-2 induces a “toxic confirmation” in BCL-2, exposing the BH3 domain [257, 258]. The BH3 is known as the death domain; it is required for activation of apoptosis [263]. This “toxic” interaction could lead to mitochondrial dysfunction and cell death. Mutant forms of SOD1 interact with the mitochondrial voltage-dependent anion channel (VDAC), diminishing transport of ADP and lowering VDAC function [264]. Overall, mutant SOD1 proteins may promote mitochondrial dysfunction and bioenergetic failure by interacting with proteins which are central to mitochondrial function.

In vitro, mutant forms of SOD1 induce deficits in bioenergetic pathways, especially at the level of mitochondrial function. Overexpression of G93A mutant SOD1 in NSC34 motor neurons induces diminished ETC enzyme activity (Complex II and COX) and increases mitochondrial swelling [265]. Mutant forms of SOD1 alter redox balance (decrease GSH, increase GSSG), reduce mitochondrial ETC function (complexes I, II+III, and IV) and subsequently reduce ATP levels in the NSC34 motor neuron cell line [262]. SH-SY5Y cells transfected with G93A mutant SOD1 display loss of mitochondrial membrane potential, and increased cytosolic calcium concentrations [261]. In Neuro2A cells, localization of mutant SOD1 (both G93A and G85R) to mitochondria was associated with the release of cytochrome c and caspase-dependent apoptosis [266]. G93A mutant SOD1 expression in rat motor neurons induced deficits in mitochondrial fusion, retrograde axonal transport of mitochondria, reduced number of mitochondria, and loss of mitochondrial membrane potential [267]. These effects were specific to mutant SOD1; they were not observed with the expression of wild-type SOD1.

In vivo models of mutant SOD1 also show robust evidence of mitochondrial dysfunction. Mitochondrial dysfunction appears to occur prior to disease onset, such that G93A mutant SOD1 mice have decreased mitochondrial complex I activity at ~60 days of age, within the spinal cord [268]. Other studies have found that G93A mutant SOD1 leads to swollen and vacuolization of mitochondria within axons throughout the central nervous system (CNS). However, this particular study found no change in COX activity [269]. Other studies have shown deficits in ETC enzyme activities within the ventral horn (complex I, II, and IV) and isolated mitochondria (COX) from spinal cord [270, 271]. Reductions in COX activity could be caused by a loss of cytochrome c association with the mitochondrial membrane. Further studies have depicted changes in mitochondrial morphology and axonal transport deficits within the spinal cord of G93A mutant SOD1 mice [272, 273]. Similar to in vitro studies, in vivo studies have found enzymatically active G93A mutant SOD1 within the intermembrane space of mitochondria. Mitochondria were dysfunctional in respiration, ETC enzyme activities, ATP synthesis and showed increased mitochondrial protein and lipid oxidation [274]. Mutant SOD1 expression in cells or animals induces numerous measures of mitochondrial and bioenergetic disruption.

TDP43 is a nuclear protein involved in gene transcription regulation, and similar to mutant SOD1, it forms insoluble aggregates within the cytoplasm [275, 276]. It was recently shown that both wild-type and mutant TDP43 (both Q331K and M337V) co-localize to mitochondria, induce changes in mitochondrial structure, and reduce mitochondrial number in primary mouse motor neurons [277]. NSC34 cells transfected with mutant TDP43 (both Q331K and M337V) had lower mitochondrial complex I activity, abnormal mitochondrial morphology, and a decrease in mitochondrial membrane potential [278]. Beyond in vitro results, in vivo models of mutant TDP43 also display mitochondrial dysfunction. In particular, mice which express A315T mutant TDP43 have mitochondrial transport deficits [273]. Overall, ALS familial mutations in TDP43 are associated with mitochondrial and bioenergetic deficits.

ALS Human Subjects

There is a large body of evidence for mitochondrial dysfunction in human ALS subjects. Mitochondrial abnormalities are observed in the CNS of sporadic ALS subjects. In dorsal root ganglion cells, ALS subjects have a higher number of mitochondrial inclusions, which appear to consist of aggregates within the cristae and intermembrane space [279]. Further studies showed abnormal mitochondrial morphology and aggregation of mitochondria in the anterior horn of the spinal cord [280]. COX activity was also reduced in sporadic ALS subject spinal cord tissue [281].

Functional deficits in spinal cord mitochondria might be due to changes in mtDNA. Spinal cord tissue had decreased levels of mtDNA and increased levels of mutated mtDNA in sporadic ALS subjects. This was in conjunction with lowered citrate synthase, Complex I + Complex III, and COX activities [282]. Motor cortex mitochondria had significantly higher levels of a common mtDNA deletion (mtDNA4977) when compared to the temporal cortex [283]. Higher levels of this deletion were also found in motor neurons from sporadic ALS subjects [284]. Muscle tissue offers further confirmation of mitochondrial dysfunction in ALS subjects. Muscle biopsy specimens show increased calcium levels and mitochondrial volume in motor nerve terminals [285]. ALS subjects have more COX negative muscle fibers (when compared to age-matched control subjects). In one such study ~46% of subjects had COX negative muscle fibers [286, 287]. Further, in subjects with COX negative muscle fibers an increase in mtDNA deletions and/or a loss of mtDNA were observed [287].

Systemic mitochondrial deficits are consistently reported in ALS. Skeletal muscle mitochondria from ALS subjects have decreased Complex I, COX, citrate synthase, and succinate dehydrogenase activities and changes were also observed in fibroblasts [286–290]. However, “early” sporadic ALS subjects failed to show a change in basal, maximum, Complex I-linked, Complex II-linked, or COX-linked mitochondrial respiration from muscle biopsies [291]. As observed in the motor cortex, muscle mitochondria from ALS subjects have higher levels of the common mtDNA deletion (mtDNA4977) [292]. Mitochondrial morphology is altered in muscle biopsies [293–295]. Changes are also observed in lymphocytes. While basal mitochondrial respiration was not changed, when respiration was stimulated with an uncoupler, the response was depressed in ALS subjects. This suggests lymphocytes from ALS subjects have decreased mitochondrial spare respiratory capacity [296]. Platelet mitochondria from ALS subjects have depolarized membrane potential and a higher rate of apoptosis [297]. Further studies found a correlation between protein carbonyl concentration in blood and clinical symptom onset in sporadic ALS subjects, including higher markers of lipid peroxidation in plasma, but no change in plasma antioxidant levels [298]. Changes are also evident in erythrocytes from sporadic ALS subjects. Increased lipid peroxidation, decreased antioxidant enzyme activities (glutathione reductase), decreased activity of glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase, and reduced levels of GSH were observed [299]. The severity of these changes correlates with disease progression and is supported in other studies [299, 300]. Oxidative DNA damage is observed at a higher rate in ALS subjects, from urine, CSF, and plasma samples [301].

Mitochondrial biogenesis pathways are also affected in ALS subjects. Within the spinal cord and motor cortex, the expression of nuclear respiratory factors 1 and 2 (NRF1 and NRF2), and mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) are reduced. The motor cortex also had lower expression of PGC1α. Some of these changes were also observed in muscle, where PGC1α, NRF1, and NRF2 expression were reduced [302]. Further analysis of spinal cord revealed reduced PGC1α immunohistochemical staining in ALS spinal cord compared to control [287].

In summary, evidence of mitochondrial and bioenergetic disruption in ALS exists in both preclinical ALS models and familial and sporadic human ALS subjects. Studies have depicted mitochondrial abnormalities in cell culture, animal models, and human subjects. ETC activities, mitochondrial morphology, and ROS production appear to be aberrant. While the underlying cause for these observations is not clear, evidence of mtDNA deletions and interactions between proteins implicated in familial ALS and mitochondria are prominent. Further detailed information outlining mitochondrial dysfunction in ALS can be found in an eloquent review by Muyderman and Chen [303].

MITOCHONDRIAL MEDICINE IN ALS

Lifestyle Alterations

Diet

Ketogenic Diet

The ketogenic diet showed positive effects in the G93A mutant SOD1 mouse model. Mice that received the ketogenic diet, beginning at 50 days of age, had higher levels of serum ketone bodies (β-hydroxybutyrate and acetoacetate), maintained body weight, and displayed sustained rotarod performance when compared to G93A mutant SOD1 mice maintained on normal chow [304]. While G93A mutant SOD1 mice maintained on a ketogenic diet did not have the same number of motor neurons when compared to wild-type mice, they did have significantly more motor neurons than G93A mutant SOD1 mice maintained on normal chow. The ketone body β-hydroxybutyrate showed positive effects on spinal cord mitochondria isolated from G93A mutant SOD1 mice. β-hydroxybutyrate increased the rate of ATP synthesis in un-stressed mitochondria and mitochondria treated with rotenone. Further, β-hydroxybutyrate protected spinal cord motor neurons from rotenone induced cell death [304]. A pilot clinical study is reported through clinicaltrials.gov (NCT01016522), however the study is listed as terminated with no data or publications reported. Beyond this, the ketogenic diet in ALS subjects has not been extensively tested.

Medium Chain Triglycerides

The medium chain triglyceride caprylic triglyceride can cross the blood brain barrier and has shown promise in animal models. In G93A mutant SOD1 mice fed a diet enriched for caprylic triglyceride, enhanced motor performance (shown as latency to fall) was observed beginning at 50 days of age. Although mice did not show increased longevity, there was a significant preservation of motor neuron number within the spinal cord. The caprylic triglyceride enriched diet also increased plasma ketone levels in post-symptomatic G93A mutant SOD1 mice. Mitochondria isolated from spinal cord of G93A mutant SOD1 mice fed a caprylic triglyceride enriched diet, had an increase in basal respiration and maximum respiration compared control mice [305]. Currently, a pilot clinical study is enrolling to test caprylic triglyceride in ALS subjects (clinicaltrials.gov ID NCT02716662).

The Deana Protocol Supplement

Other dietary modulations may be beneficial in ALS. One study compared the effects of the ketogenic diet to the administration of a supplement known as the Deana protocol. The Deana protocol is a supplement which consists of, arginine alpha-ketoglutarate, gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), ubiquinol (Coenzyme Q10; CoQ10), and medium chain triglycerides. This therapy was administered beginning at ten weeks of age in the G93A mutant SOD1 mouse model. Mice which received a standard diet with the Deana Protocol supplement had improved neurological score, performed better on the rotarod and Paw Grip Endurance Test (PaGE) tests, and increased longevity. Mice that received a ketogenic diet alone did not show increased longevity but did improve on rotarod, grip strength, and PaGE testing. Mice maintained on the ketogenic diet in conjunction with the Deana protocol supplement had a significant extension in life span [306]. The ketogenic diet, ketogenic diet with Deana protocol supplement, and standard diet with Deana protocol supplement groups all had increased brown adipose tissue, but no change in body weight.

Exercise

Exercise has shown positive outcomes in pre-clinical ALS models. Exercise prior to disease onset in the G93A mutant SOD1 mouse model extended life span by approximately ten days (in male mice only, [307]). In a separate study, moderate and high-intensity exercise were compared in the G93A mutant SOD1 mouse model. Moderate exercise delayed disease onset by approximately seven days, while high-intensity exercise increased the rate of motor decline, as shown by rotarod performance [308]. The hastened motor decline observed with high-intensity exercise has been observed in other studies [309]. However, both moderate and high intensity exercise appeared to slow the loss of motor neurons in the G93A mutant SOD1 mice. The effects of exercise in the G93A mutant SOD1 mouse model appear to be “dose” dependent. Kaspar et al. found that 6 hours of exercise per week extended life-span and rotarod performance in G93A mutant SOD1 mice, and a synergistic effect was observed between exercise and insulin growth factor 1 (IGF1) overexpression [310].

A limited number of clinical trials support exercise as a therapy for ALS. In a small, randomized trial, resistance exercise improved patient outcomes when measured using the ALS Functional Rating Scale (ALSFRS-R) and upper and lower extremity subscale scores [311]. Another randomized controlled trial of exercise in ALS showed no benefits to survival or quality of life, but did report a positive outcome for the ALSFRS-R score [312]. A recent review of exercise trials for ALS has concluded more studies are needed to determine the risks and benefits of exercise in ALS [313].

Rasagaline

N-Propargyl-1(R)-aminoindan, or rasagaline, is a pharmaceutical which inhibits MAO-B. MAO-B is an outer mitochondrial membrane protein. The expression of MAO-B is increased in the brain of AD and PD subjects. MAO-B catalyzes the oxidative deamination of monamine neurotransmitters such as dopamine and serotonin, a process which produces hydrogen peroxide [314]. For this reason, rasagaline was found to be protective in PD. However, rasagaline was also found to activate antioxidant and anti-apoptotic mechanisms. In vitro studies have shown rasagaline improves mitochondrial function. Rasagaline increases the expression of the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL in neuron-like cells [315]. Further, rasagaline is protective in cell culture models against several insults, including oxidative stress and serum starvation [315–319]. In vivo, rasagaline increased survival and running wheel performance (in a dose-dependent manner) in the G93A mutant SOD1 mouse model. In addition to these findings, rasagaline in combination with riluzole displayed additive effects [320].

Rasagaline has shown positive effects in clinical trials. In white blood cells, mitochondrial membrane potential was increased. In whole blood, the Bcl-2/Bax ratio was increased. Oxidative stress, measured by an Oxygen Radical Absorbance Capacity (ORAC) assay, was reduced. However, this study failed to find changes in the ALSFRS-R score [321]. Several larger clinical trials are in progress, which include functional and biomarker outcome measurements (clinicaltrials.gov IDs NCT01879241, NCT01786603).

Antioxidants

Vitamin E

A number of studies have tested the effects of antioxidant therapies in ALS. Early studies focused on the effects of insoluble antioxidants such as Vitamin E. Pre-clinical testing of Vitamin E in the G93A mutant SOD1 mouse model revealed delayed disease onset and progression but did not extend survival [322]. Clinically, vitamin E has been associated with decreased ALS risk, as well as increased antioxidant activity and decreased oxidative stress markers in plasma [323–325]. However, clinical trials have not shown a clear benefit of vitamin E in ALS subjects. One trial assessed outcomes after one year of daily vitamin E. No effect on the primary outcome (rate of deterioration – Norris limb scale) was observed, although a secondary outcome of disease progression did show benefit, and serum oxidative stress markers were decreased in the treatment group [325]. An observational study found no beneficial effect of Vitamin E in ALS subjects [326]. In a large, double-blind, placebo-controlled study the use of high dose Vitamin E did not show significant effects on survival or rate of deterioration, although larger studies may be needed [327].

Coenzyme Q10

In pre-clinical studies, adding CoQ10 to the chow increased the probability of survival in the G93A mutant SOD1 mouse model [328]. However, CoQ10 has thus far failed to translate clinically. In a phase II trial no efficacy on outcomes were observed [329]. As discussed in the AD therapeutics section, a novel mitochondrial targeted antioxidant which contains CoQ10 (MitoQ) is being developed for clinical testing.

SS Peptide Antioxidants

SS peptide antioxidants have been evaluated for efficacy in in vivo models of ALS. In particular, SS31 increased survival and motor performance in the G93A mutant SOD1 mouse model. Indices of oxidative stress were reduced in the lumbar spinal cord, and cell loss was abrogated in G93A SOD1 mice which received SS31 [330]. However, no human clinical trials have been reported for SS peptide antioxidants.

Olexisome

Olesoxime is a lipophilic, cholesterol-like compound which is known to modulate the mitochondrial transition pore. Olesoxime binds to mitochondrial localized VDAC and is protective in several models of cell death and animal models of ALS. These studies and the pharmacological mechanism of Olesoxime are reviewed elsewhere [331]. However, a more recent phase II/III clinical trial failed to show beneficial effects in ALS subjects [332].

Glutathione

Reduced GSH is an endogenous soluble antioxidant with cellular compartmentalization within the cytoplasm, nucleus, and mitochondria. GSH is important for maintaining mitochondrial function [158]. The levels of GSH, particularly in the mitochondria are reduced in vitro when G93A mutant SOD1 is overexpressed in mice [333]. Genetic ablation of a key GSH synthesis enzyme worsens the progression of ALS symptoms in G93A mice [334]. In that model, reductions in spinal cord GSH concentration are observed and correlate with expression of apoptotic markers in motor neurons [335]. A whey protein supplement, Immunocal® has been tested in preclinical model. This supplement boosts GSH levels by providing the glutathione precursor, cysteine. In the G93A mice, Immunocal® delayed disease onset, improved rotarod performance, but failed to extend survival. While Immunocal® preserved whole blood and whole spinal cord levels of GSH in G93A mice, it failed to preserve mitochondrial GSH levels [336]. This suggests that targeting antioxidants within the mitochondria is important for disease outcomes. Overall, several key issues will need to be addressed in future clinical studies, such as GSH is not cell permeable, and targeting GSH to the mitochondria. This may explain the lack of effect of reduced GSH on disease progression in an open label clinical study [337].

Dexpramipexole

Dexpramipexole is the R(+) enantiomer of pramipexole and a dopamine receptor antagonist. Dexpramipexole has displayed protective effects in vitro, where it mitigated ROS, improved mitochondrial function and prevented apoptosis [214, 338]. However, in vivo, dexpramipexole failed to show beneficial outcomes in either G93A mutant SOD1 mice or rat cortical neurons overexpressing M337V mutant TDP43 [339]. These pre-clinical studies were published following a positive phase II, but failed phase III clinical trial of dexpramipexole in ALS subjects [340, 341].

A meta-analysis of antioxidant therapies in ALS found no beneficial effect of antioxidants within the studies examined (9 studies included in the analysis). These antioxidants included vitamin E, acetylcysteine, or a combination therapy composed of L-methionine, vitamin E, and selenium [342]. This study discussed very important issues with clinical trials of antioxidants in ALS. These issues include a low number of participants and poor study design [343, 344].

THE FUTURE OF MITOCHONDRIAL MEDICINE

A major issue for therapeutic development in neurodegenerative diseases is the disparity between pre-clinical and clinical study outcomes. Many potential therapeutics that show positive effects in cell and animal models fail to be effective in human subjects–it is estimated that more than 80% of therapeutics fail clinical testing [250, 345–348].

Hurdles to Progress

Pre-Clinical Studies

Explanations for the lack of translational success disparity vary, but likely involve a combination of factors. First, there are innate differences between humans and animal model species. For example, mice have higher uric acid levels among other endogenous antioxidant concentrations and properties [250]. Second, many animal models for neurodegenerative research are based on familial forms of the disease. While these models have been pivotal in understanding disease mechanism, they may not faithfully replicate sporadic forms of disease or perhaps emulate the asymptomatic rather than the symptomatic phase of the disease [250, 349]. Many studies in animal models use animals of the same sex, and it is also possible that sex differences in human studies may impact results. Moreover, some predications estimate that animal model studies over-predict potential success in human subjects by approximately 30%, and this might be caused by failure to publish negative results [345, 346]. Beyond not publishing negative results, others suggest animal studies are poorly designed [347, 348]. For instance, the ALS Therapy Development Institute re-tested over 100 compounds using more rigorous experimental design and found very conflicting results from published data [348]. Many issues that need to be reliably addressed in pre-clinical studies include gender matching between experimental groups and ensuring that transgenes (such as G93A SOD1 or mutant APP) are inherited in a consistent manner in an animal colony [347, 348]. More stringent study design and testing across multiple preclinical models may increase the likelihood of translational success.

Human Studies

Additional reasons that therapies may fail to translate may be linked to the design of clinical trials. In several instances, it has been suggested that the treatment was initiated too late in the course of the disease to impact the designated outcome measures. In addition, mitochondrial medicine for neurodegenerative disorders faces a somewhat unique issue related to target engagement. This is because in addition to identifying compounds which penetrate the blood brain barrier, drugs also must reach the mitochondria, which is often difficult. These factors may partially explain conflicting results of clinical trials, such as those examining the effect of various antioxidants [350].

It should be noted that most of these hurdles are not unique to mitochondrial medicine, but are a snapshot of the challenges facing neurotherapeutic drug development. In recent years, approvals for new neurological drugs have not kept pace with research funding; in fact, less than 10% of neurological drugs have a likelihood of approval from phase I [351, 352]. However, increasing translation in the neurosciences has become an area of focus [353].

Future Directions

Evidence here suggests that drugs and interventions that target mitochondria are being actively investigated in the most common neurodegenerative disorders. The bulk of investigations are being performed in pre-clinical models, but some drug candidates, such as Isradipine for Parkinson’s disease, have progressed from preclinical work all the way to ongoing Phase III clinical trials. Novel approaches including targeting antioxidants to the mitochondrial matrix using nanoparticles, and lipophilic cations are promising endeavors. Further, stem cell transplantation therapies may mitigate mitochondrial dysfunction. For example, in APP/PS1 AD mice that received neuronal stem cell transplantation, an increase in mitochondrial number, improved mitochondrial fission/fusion dynamics, and improved cognitive decline were reported [354]. Overall, the vast evidence for a role of mitochondria in neurodegenerative disorders underscores the importance of continued investigation into therapeutics that modulate mitochondrial dysfunction for the treatment of neurodegenerative disorders.

The authors are supported by the University of Kansas Alzheimer’s Disease Center (P30 AG035982), H.M.W. is supported by the Frank and Evangeline Thompson Alzheimer’s Treatment Program fund, the Kansas IDeA Network for Biomedical Research Excellence (KINBRE), the University of Kansas Medical Center Biomedical Research Training Program, and a Mabel Woodyard Fellowship award. J.K.M. is supported by K99AG050490 and would like to also thank Janet Hyndman for research support. We would like to thank Dr. Russell Swerdlow and Dr. Jeffery Burns. No conflicts of interest, financial or otherwise, are declared by the authors.

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS

6-OHDA 6-hydroxy dopamine

AD Alzheimer’s disease

ADAS-Cog The Alzheimer’s disease assessment scale. – cognition

ADCS-ADL Alzheimer’s disease co-operative study - activities of daily living inventory

ADL/IADL Activities of daily living/instrumental activities of daily living

ADP Adenosine diphosphate

AICD Amyloid precursor protein intracellular domain

ALS Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis

ALSFRS-R ALS functional rating score

ApoE Apolipoprotein E

APP Amyloid precursor protein

ATP Adenosine triphosphate

Aβ Amyloid beta

BACE β-secretase

BAX Bcl-2 associated protein X

BCL-2 B-cell lymphoma 2

BCL-XL B-cell lymphoma extra-large

BDNF Brain derived neurotrophic factor

C. elegans Caenorhabditis elegans

CCL11 C-C motif chemokine 11

CDR Clinical dementia rating

ChAT Choline acetyltransferase

CNS Central nervous system

CoQ10 Coenzyme Q10

COX Complex IV or cytochrome oxidase

CSF Cerebral spinal fluid

Cybrid Cytoplasmic hybrid

DAMP Damage associate molecular pattern

DHA Docosahexaenoic acid

DNA Deoxyribonucleic acid

ETC Electron transport chain

FADH2 Flavin adenine dinucleotide

FDG-PET Fludeoxyglucose (18F) positron emission tomography

GABA Gamma-aminobutyric acid (γ-aminobutyric acid)

GDS Geriatric depression scale

GIP Gastric inhibitory peptide

GLP-1 Glucagon like peptide 1

GSH Reduce glutathione

GSSG Oxidized glutathione

IGF1 Insulin like growth factor 1

Km Michaelis constant

L-DOPA Levodopa or L-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine

MAOB Monamine oxidase B

MCI Mild-cognitive impairment

MDA Malondialdehyde

MDRS Mattis dementia rating scale

MDS-UPDRS MDS unified Parkinson’s disease rating scale

MitoQ Mitochondrial targeted coenzyme Q10 or Phosphonium, [10-(4,5-dimethoxy-2-methyl-3,6-dioxo-1,4-cyclohexadien-1-yl)decyl]triphenyl-, methanesulfonate

MMSE Mini-mental state exam

MPPE N-Methyl, N-propynyl-2-phenylethylamine

MPTP 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine

mtDNA Mitochondrial DNA

mtDNA4977 Common deletion of mitochondrial DNA at bp 4977

NAC N-acteyl cysteine

NADH Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide

NRF1 Nuclear respiratory factor 1

NRF2 Nuclear respiratory factor 2

OAA Oxaloacetate

ORAC Oxygen radical absorbance capacity

PaGE Paw-grip endurance test

PD Parkinson’s disease

PGC1α Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1-alpha

PPAR-γ Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma

PRC PGC1 related coactivator

ROS Reactive oxygen species

SIRT1 Sirtuin 1

SOD1 Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase

SS-peptide Szeto-Schiller Peptide

TBARS Thiobarbituric acid reactive substances

TCA Citric acid cycle

TDP43 TAR DNA-binding protein 43

TFAM Mitochondrial transcription factor A

VDAC Voltage-dependent anion channel

VEGFA Vascular endothelial growth factor A

VO2 Max Maximal oxygen consumption or maximal aerobic capacity

ρ0 Rho zero- a cell lacking mtDNA

Fig. (1) Bioenergetic Pathways and neurodegenerative diseases. Glucose is catabolized in the cytoplasm to pyruvate through the glycolytic pathway. Pyruvate is used as a substrate in the TCA cycle within the mitochondria. The TCA cycle generates the intermediates NADH and FADH2. These intermediates enter the ETC at complex I (NADH) and II (FADH2). Complex IV (or COX) directly provides electrons to Complex V, driving ATP production. The ETC complexes are shown in red. Bioenergetic molecules are shown in blue. Glucose utilization is decreased in AD, PD, and ALS subjects. Within the ETC, Complex I function is reduced in PD subjects, while Complex IV (or COX) function is reduced in AD subjects. ALS subjects show deficits in several ETC complexes, depending on the tissue examined.

Fig. (2) Schematic depicting the generation of cybrid cell lines. A “normal cell” is depleted of mtDNA (shown in blue) through treatment with ethidium bromide. This cell is now a ρ0 cell, lacking mtDNA but still containing nuclear DNA encoded mitochondrial components (shown in red). Fusion of the ρ0 cell with a donor cytoplast (such as a platelet) allows transfer of donor mtDNA (shown in green) to the ρ0 cell, generating a cytoplasmic hybrid or cybrid.

Fig. (3) Schematic depicting the mechanism of mitochondria centered therapeutics

A. Antioxidants and PPARγ agonists inhibit or scavenge ROS production. B. Diet and Exercise activate mitochondrial biogenesis through the activation of SIRT1 and/or PGC1α. C. Rasagaline, PPARγ agonists, and metabolic hormones inhibit the opening of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore (MPTP) and release of cytochrome c. These therapeutics also increase Bcl-2 expression and lower Bax expression. Bax maybe a part of the MPTP. The mechanisms listed here are not all encompassing.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST

The authors confirm that this article content has no conflict of interest.


1 Attwell D Laughlin SB An energy budget for signaling in the grey matter of the brain J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2001 21 1133 45 11598490
2 Mosconi L Tsui WH De Santi S Reduced hippocampal metabolism in MCI and AD: automated FDG-PET image analysis Neurology 2005 64 1860 7 15955934
3 Peppard RF Martin WR Carr GD Cerebral glucose metabolism in Parkinson’s disease with and without dementia Arch Neurol 1992 49 1262 8 1449406
4 Pagani M Chio A Valentini MC Functional pattern of brain FDG-PET in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Neurology 2014 83 1067 74 25122207
5 Magistretti PJ Allaman I A cellular perspective on brain energy metabolism and functional imaging Neuron 2015 86 883 901 25996133
6 Liu E Schmidt ME Margolin R Amyloid-beta 11C-PiB-PET imaging results from 2 randomized bapineuzumab phase 3 AD trials Neurology 2015 85 692 700 26208959
7 Salloway S Sperling R Fox NC Two phase 3 trials of bap-ineuzumab in mild-to-moderate Alzheimer’s disease N Engl J Med 2014 370 322 33 24450891
8 Coric V Salloway S van Dyck CH Targeting Prodromal Alzheimer Disease With Avagacestat: A Randomized Clinical Trial JAMA Neurol 2015 72 1324 33 26414022
9 Green RC Schneider LS Amato DA Effect of tarenflurbil on cognitive decline and activities of daily living in patients with mild Alzheimer disease: a randomized controlled trial JAMA 2009 302 2557 64 20009055
10 Doody RS Raman R Farlow M A phase 3 trial of sema-gacestat for treatment of Alzheimer’s disease N Engl J Med 2013 369 341 50 23883379
11 Swerdlow RH Mitochondria and cell bioenergetics: increasingly recognized components and a possible etiologic cause of Alzheimer’s disease Antioxid Redox Signal 2012 16 1434 55 21902597
12 Swerdlow RH Burns JM Khan SM The Alzheimer’s disease mitochondrial cascade hypothesis: progress and perspectives Biochim Biophys Acta 2014 1842 1219 31 24071439
13 Swerdlow RH Khan SM A “mitochondrial cascade hypothesis” for sporadic Alzheimer’s disease Med Hypotheses 2004 63 8 20 15193340
14 Leuner K Schutt T Kurz C Mitochondrion-derived reactive oxygen species lead to enhanced amyloid beta formation Antioxid Redox Signal 2012 16 1421 33 22229260
15 Yao J Irwin RW Zhao L Nilsen J Hamilton RT Brinton RD Mitochondrial bioenergetic deficit precedes Alzheimer’s pathology in female mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009 106 14670 5 19667196
16 Parker WD Jr Filley CM Parks JK Cytochrome oxidase deficiency in Alzheimer’s disease Neurology 1990 40 1302 3 2166249
17 Silva DF Selfridge JE Lu J Bioenergetic flux, mitochondrial mass and mitochondrial morphology dynamics in AD and MCI cybrid cell lines Hum Mol Genet 2013 22 3931 46 23740939
18 Wilkins HM Carl SM Swerdlow RH Cytoplasmic hybrid (cybrid) cell lines as a practical model for mitochondriopathies Redox Biol 2014 2C 619 31
19 Khan SM Cassarino DS Abramova NN Alzheimer’s disease cybrids replicate beta-amyloid abnormalities through cell death pathways Ann Neurol 2000 48 148 55 10939564
20 Trimmer PA Keeney PM Borland MK Mitochondrial abnormalities in cybrid cell models of sporadic Alzheimer’s disease worsen with passage in culture Neurobiol Dis 2004 15 29 39 14751768
21 Dragicevic N Mamcarz M Zhu Y Mitochondrial amyloid-beta levels are associated with the extent of mitochondrial dysfunction in different brain regions and the degree of cognitive impairment in Alzheimer’s transgenic mice J Alzheimers Dis 2010 20 Suppl 2 S535 50 20463404
22 Wang L Guo L Lu L Synaptosomal mitochondrial dysfunction in 5xFAD mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease PLoS One 2016 11 e0150441 26942905
23 Anandatheerthavarada HK Biswas G Robin MA Avadhani NG Mitochondrial targeting and a novel transmembrane arrest of Alzheimer’s amyloid precursor protein impairs mitochondrial function in neuronal cells J Cell Biol 2003 161 41 54 12695498
24 Devi L Prabhu BM Galati DF Avadhani NG Anandatheerthavarada HK Accumulation of amyloid precursor protein in the mitochondrial import channels of human Alzheimer’s disease brain is associated with mitochondrial dysfunction J Neurosci 2006 26 9057 68 16943564
25 Pavlov PF Wiehager B Sakai J Mitochondrial gamma-secretase participates in the metabolism of mitochondria-associated amyloid precursor protein FASEB J 2011 25 78 88 20833873
26 Devi L Ohno M Mitochondrial dysfunction and accumulation of the beta-secretase-cleaved C-terminal fragment of APP in Alzheimer’s disease transgenic mice Neurobiol Dis 2012 45 417 24 21933711
27 Lustbader JW Cirilli M Lin C ABAD directly links Abeta to mitochondrial toxicity in Alzheimer’s disease Science 2004 304 448 52 15087549
28 Yan SD Stern DM Mitochondrial dysfunction and Alzheimer’s disease: role of amyloid-beta peptide alcohol dehydrogenase (ABAD) Int J Exp Pathol 2005 86 161 71 15910550
29 Minoshima S Giordani B Berent S Frey KA Foster NL Kuhl DE Metabolic reduction in the posterior cingulate cortex in very early Alzheimer’s disease Ann Neurol 1997 42 85 94 9225689
30 Valla J Berndt JD Gonzalez-Lima F Energy hypometabolism in posterior cingulate cortex of Alzheimer’s patients: superficial laminar cytochrome oxidase associated with disease duration J Neurosci 2001 21 4923 30 11425920
31 Kish SJ Bergeron C Rajput A Brain cytochrome oxidase in Alzheimer’s disease J Neurochem 1992 59 776 9 1321237
32 Mutisya EM Bowling AC Beal MF Cortical cytochrome oxidase activity is reduced in Alzheimer’s disease J Neurochem 1994 63 2179 84 7964738
33 Parker WD Jr Parks J Filley CM Kleinschmidt-DeMasters BK Electron transport chain defects in Alzheimer’s disease brain Neurology 1994 44 1090 6 8208407
34 Cottrell DA Blakely EL Johnson MA Ince PG Turnbull DM Mitochondrial enzyme-deficient hippocampal neurons and choroidal cells in AD Neurology 2001 57 260 4 11468310
35 Krishnan KJ Ratnaike TE De Gruyter HL Jaros E Turnbull DM Mitochondrial DNA deletions cause the biochemical defect observed in Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 2012 33 2210 4 21925769
36 Parker WD Jr Parks JK Cytochrome c oxidase in Alzheimer’s disease brain: purification and characterization Neurology 1995 45 482 6 7898701
37 Cardoso SM Proenca MT Santos S Santana I Oliveira CR Cytochrome c oxidase is decreased in Alzheimer’s disease platelets Neurobiol Aging 2004 25 105 10 14675736
38 Edland SD Silverman JM Peskind ER Tsuang D Wijsman E Morris JC Increased risk of dementia in mothers of Alzheimer’s disease cases: evidence for maternal inheritance Neurology 1996 47 254 6 8710088
39 Swerdlow RH Burns JM Khan SM The Alzheimer’s disease mitochondrial cascade hypothesis J Alzheimers Dis 2010 20 Suppl 2 S265 79 20442494
40 Honea RA Swerdlow RH Vidoni ED Goodwin J Burns JM Reduced gray matter volume in normal adults with a maternal family history of Alzheimer disease Neurology 2010 74 113 20 20065246
41 Mosconi L Berti V Swerdlow RH Pupi A Duara R de Leon M Maternal transmission of Alzheimer’s disease: prodromal metabolic phenotype and the search for genes Hum Genomics 2010 4 170 93 20368139
42 Mosconi L de Leon M Murray J Reduced mitochondria cytochrome oxidase activity in adult children of mothers with Alzheimer’s disease J Alzheimers Dis 2011 27 483 90 21841246
43 Mosconi L Brys M Switalski R Maternal family history of Alzheimer’s disease predisposes to reduced brain glucose metabolism Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007 104 19067 72 18003925
44 Bough K Energy metabolism as part of the anticonvulsant mechanism of the ketogenic diet Epilepsia 2008 49 Suppl 8 91 3 19049599
45 Bough KJ Wetherington J Hassel B Mitochondrial biogenesis in the anticonvulsant mechanism of the ketogenic diet Ann Neurol 2006 60 223 35 16807920
46 Selfridge JE Wilkins HM E L Effect of one month duration ketogenic and non-ketogenic high fat diets on mouse brain bioenergetic infrastructure J Bioenerg Biomembr 2015 47 1 11 25104046
47 Martin B Mattson MP Maudsley S Caloric restriction and intermittent fasting: two potential diets for successful brain aging Ageing Res Rev 2006 5 332 53 16899414
48 Morris MC Tangney CC Wang Y MIND diet associated with reduced incidence of Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimers Dement 2015 11 1007 14 25681666
49 Scarmeas N Stern Y Tang MX Mayeux R Luchsinger JA Medi-terranean diet and risk for Alzheimer’s disease Ann Neurol 2006 59 912 21 16622828
50 Mosconi L Murray J Tsui WH Mediterranean diet and magnetic resonance imaging-assessed brain atrophy in cognitively normal individuals at risk for Alzheimer’s disease J Prev Alzheimers Dis 2014 1 23 32 25237654
51 Freund-Levi Y Eriksdotter-Jonhagen M Cederholm T Omega-3 fatty acid treatment in 174 patients with mild to moderate Alzheimer disease: OmegAD study: a randomized double-blind trial Arch Neurol 2006 63 1402 8 17030655
52 Lim GP Calon F Morihara T A diet enriched with the omega-3 fatty acid docosahexaenoic acid reduces amyloid burden in an aged Alzheimer mouse model J Neurosci 2005 25 3032 40 15788759
53 Amtul Z Keet M Wang L Merrifield P Westaway D Rozmahel RF DHA supplemented in peptamen diet offers no advantage in pathways to amyloidosis: is it time to evaluate composite lipid diet? PLoS One 2011 6 e24094 21931647
54 Weiser MJ Butt CM Mohajeri MH Docosahexaenoic acid and cognition throughout the lifespan Nutrients 2016 8
55 Muldoon MF Ryan CM Yao JK Conklin SM Manuck SB Long-chain omega-3 fatty acids and optimization of cognitive performance Mil Med 2014 179 95 105 25373092
56 Schaefer EJ Bongard V Beiser AS Plasma phosphatidylcho-line docosahexaenoic acid content and risk of dementia and Alzheimer disease: the Framingham Heart Study Arch Neurol 2006 63 1545 50 17101822
57 Morris MC Evans DA Bienias JL Consumption of fish and n-3 fatty acids and risk of incident Alzheimer disease Arch Neurol 2003 60 940 6 12873849
58 Laurin D Verreault R Lindsay J Dewailly E Holub BJ Omega-3 fatty acids and risk of cognitive impairment and dementia J Alzheimers Dis 2003 5 315 22 14624027
59 Quinn JF Raman R Thomas RG Docosahexaenoic acid supplementation and cognitive decline in Alzheimer disease: a randomized trial JAMA 2010 304 1903 11 21045096
60 Goudeau J Bellemin S Toselli-Mollereau E Shamalnasab M Chen Y Aguilaniu H Fatty acid desaturation links germ cell loss to longevity through NHR-80/HNF4 in C. elegans PLoS Biol 2011 9 e1000599 21423649
61 Amtul Z Westaway D Cechetto DF Rozmahel RF Oleic acid ameliorates amyloidosis in cellular and mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease Brain Pathol 2011 21 321 9 21040071
62 Wood JG Rogina B Lavu S Sirtuin activators mimic caloric restriction and delay ageing in metazoans Nature 2004 430 686 9 15254550
63 Gredilla R Barja G Minireview: the role of oxidative stress in relation to caloric restriction and longevity Endocrinology 2005 146 3713 7 15919745
64 Bishop NA Guarente L Two neurons mediate diet-restriction-induced longevity in C. elegans Nature 2007 447 545 9 17538612
65 Aires DJ Rockwell G Wang T Potentiation of dietary restriction-induced lifespan extension by polyphenols Biochim Biophys Acta 2012 1822 522 6 22265987
66 Taguchi A Wartschow LM White MF Brain IRS2 signaling coordinates life span and nutrient homeostasis Science 2007 317 369 72 17641201
67 Wang J Ho L Qin W Caloric restriction attenuates beta-amyloid neuropathology in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease FASEB J 2005 19 659 61 15650008
68 Qin W Chachich M Lane M Calorie restriction attenuates Alzheimer’s disease type brain amyloidosis in Squirrel monkeys (Saimiri sciureus) J Alzheimers Dis 2006 10 417 22 17183154
69 Kinsman SL Vining EP Quaskey SA Mellits D Freeman JM Efficacy of the ketogenic diet for intractable seizure disorders: review of 58 cases Epilepsia 1992 33 1132 6 1464275
70 Lefevre F Aronson N Ketogenic diet for the treatment of refractory epilepsy in children: A systematic review of efficacy Pediatrics 2000 105 E46 10742367
71 Van der Auwera I Wera S Van Leuven F Henderson ST A ketogenic diet reduces amyloid beta 40 and 42 in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Nutr Metab (Lond) 2005 2 28 16229744
72 Beckett TL Studzinski CM Keller JN Paul Murphy M Niedowicz DM A ketogenic diet improves motor performance but does not affect beta-amyloid levels in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Brain Res 2013 1505 61 7 23415649
73 Aso E Semakova J Joda L Triheptanoin supplementation to ketogenic diet curbs cognitive impairment in APP/PS1 mice used as a model of familial Alzheimer’s disease Curr Alzheimer Res 2013 10 290 7 23131121
74 Kashiwaya Y Bergman C Lee JH A ketone ester diet exhibits anxiolytic and cognition-sparing properties, lessens amyloid and tau pathologies in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 2013 34 1530 9 23276384
75 Lane-Donovan C Herz J High-fat diet changes hippocampal apolipoprotein E (ApoE) in a genotype- and carbohydrate-dependent manner in mice PLoS One 2016 11 e0148099 26828652
76 Wright DC Han DH Garcia-Roves PM Geiger PC Jones TE Holloszy JO Exercise-induced mitochondrial biogenesis begins before the increase in muscle PGC-1alpha expression J Biol Chem 2007 282 194 9 17099248
77 Combes A Dekerle J Webborn N Watt P Bougault V Daussin FN Exercise-induced metabolic fluctuations influence AMPK, 38-MAPK and CaMKII phosphorylation in human skeletal muscle Physiol Rep 2015 3 9 pii.e12462
78 Holloszy JO Adaptation of skeletal muscle to endurance exercise Med Sci Sports 1975 7 155 64 173969
79 Conley KE Amara CE Bajpeyi S Higher mitochondrial respiration and uncoupling with reduced electron transport chain content in vivo in muscle of sedentary versus active subjects J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2013 98 129 36 23150693
80 Conley KE Jubrias SA Cress ME Esselman P Exercise efficiency is reduced by mitochondrial uncoupling in the elderly Exp Physiol 2013 98 768 77 23085769
81 Dill DB Yousef MK Vitez TS Goldman A Patzer R Metabolic observations on Caucasian men and women aged 17 to 88 years J Gerontol 1982 37 565 71 7096928
82 Trimmer PA Swerdlow RH Parks JK Abnormal mitochondrial morphology in sporadic Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s disease cybrid cell lines Exp Neurol 2000 162 37 50 10716887
83 Blanch M Mosquera JL Ansoleaga B Ferrer I Barrachina M Altered mitochondrial DNA methylation pattern in Alzheimer disease-related pathology and in parkinson disease Am J Pathol 2016 186 385 97 26776077
84 Adlard PA Perreau VM Pop V Cotman CW Voluntary exercise decreases amyloid load in a transgenic model of Alzheimer’s disease J Neurosci 2005 25 4217 21 15858047
85 Xiong JY Li SC Sun YX Long-term treadmill exercise improves spatial memory of male APPswe/PS1dE9 mice by regulation of BDNF expression and microglia activation Biol Sport 2015 32 295 300 26681831
86 Moore KM Girens RE Larson SK A spectrum of exercise training reduces soluble Abeta in a dose-dependent manner in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Dis 2016 85 218 24 26563933
87 Elahi M Motoi Y Matsumoto SE Hasan Z Ishiguro K Hattori N Short-term treadmill exercise increased tau insolubility and neuroinflammation in tauopathy model mice Neurosci Lett 2016 610 207 12 26592481
88 Haskins M Jones TE Lu Q Bareiss SK Early alterations in blood and brain RANTES and MCP-1 expression and the effect of exercise frequency in the 3xTg-AD mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Neurosci Lett 2016 610 165 70 26547034
89 Choi DH Lee KH Lee J Effect of exercise-induced neurogenesis on cognitive function deficit in a rat model of vascular dementia Mol Med Rep 2016 13 4 2981 90 26934837
90 Sanders LH Laganiere J Cooper O LRRK2 mutations cause mitochondrial DNA damage in iPSC-derived neural cells from Parkinson’s disease patients: reversal by gene correction Neurobiol Dis 2014 62 381 6 24148854
91 E L Lu J Selfridge JE Burns JM Swerdlow RH Lactate administration reproduces specific brain and liver exercise-related changes J Neurochem 2013 127 91 100 23927032
92 Liang KY Mintun MA Fagan AM Exercise and Alzheimer’s disease biomarkers in cognitively normal older adults Ann Neurol 2010 68 311 8 20818789
93 Yokoyama H Okazaki K Imai D The effect of cognitive-motor dual-task training on cognitive function and plasma amyloid beta peptide 42/40 ratio in healthy elderly persons: a randomized controlled trial BMC Geriatr 2015 15 60 26018225
94 Vidoni ED Johnson DK Morris JK Dose-response of aerobic exercise on cognition: a community-based, pilot randomized controlled trial PLoS One 2015 10 e0131647 26158265
95 Erickson KI Voss MW Prakash RS Exercise training increases size of hippocampus and improves memory Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2011 108 3017 22 21282661
96 Lautenschlager NT Cox KL Flicker L Effect of physical activity on cognitive function in older adults at risk for Alzheimer disease: a randomized trial JAMA 2008 300 1027 37 18768414
97 Suzuki T Shimada H Makizako H A randomized controlled trial of multicomponent exercise in older adults with mild cognitive impairment PLoS One 2013 8 e61483 23585901
98 Baker LD Frank LL Foster-Schubert K Effects of aerobic exercise on mild cognitive impairment: a controlled trial Arch Neurol 2010 67 71 9 20065132
99 Scherder EJ Van Paasschen J Deijen JB Physical activity and executive functions in the elderly with mild cognitive impairment Aging Ment Health 2005 9 272 80 16019281
100 Sacco G Caillaud C Ben Sadoun G Robert P David R Brisswalter J Exercise Plus Cognitive Performance Over and Above Exercise Alone in Subjects with Mild Cognitive Impairment J Alzheimers Dis 2015 50 19 25
101 Hoffmann K Sobol NA Frederiksen KS Moderate-to-high intensity physical exercise in patients with alzheimer’s disease: a randomized controlled trial J Alzheimers Dis 2015 50 443 53
102 Yang SY Shan CL Qing H The effects of aerobic exercise on cognitive function of alzheimer’s disease patients CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets 2015 14 1292 7 26556080
103 Groot C Hooghiemstra AM Raijmakers PG The effect of physical activity on cognitive function in patients with dementia: A meta-analysis of randomized control trials Ageing Res Rev 2016 25 13 23 26607411
104 Hernandez SS Sandreschi PF da Silva FC What are the benefits of exercise for Alzheimer’s disease? A systematic review of the past 10 years J Aging Phys Act 2015 23 659 68 25414947
105 Strohle A Schmidt DK Schultz F Drug and exercise treatment of alzheimer disease and mild cognitive impairment: A systematic review and meta-analysis of effects on cognition in randomized controlled trials Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 2015 23 1234 49 26601726
106 Coelho FG Vital TM Stein AM Acute aerobic exercise increases brain-derived neurotrophic factor levels in elderly with Alzheimer’s disease J Alzheimers Dis 2014 39 401 408 24164734
107 Peeri M Amiri S Protective effects of exercise in metabolic disorders are mediated by inhibition of mitochondrial-derived sterile inflammation Med Hypotheses 2015 85 707 9 26527493
108 Kobe T Witte AV Schnelle A Combined omega-3 fatty acids, aerobic exercise and cognitive stimulation prevents decline in gray matter volume of the frontal, parietal and cingulate cortex in patients with mild cognitive impairment Neuroimage 2016 131 226 38 26433119
109 Ho L Qin W Pompl PN Diet-induced insulin resistance promotes amyloidosis in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease FASEB J 2004 18 902 4 15033922
110 Cooper C Sommerlad A Lyketsos CG Livingston G Modifiable predictors of dementia in mild cognitive impairment: a systematic review and meta-analysis Am J Psychiatry 2015 172 323 34 25698435
111 Usdin TB Mezey E Button DC Brownstein MJ Bonner TI Gastric inhibitory polypeptide receptor, a member of the secretin-vasoactive intestinal peptide receptor family, is widely distributed in peripheral organs and the brain Endocrinology 1993 133 2861 70 8243312
112 Gupta V Pleiotropic effects of incretins Indian J Endocrinol Metab 2012 16 Suppl 1 S47 56 22701844
113 Banks WA Kastin AJ Differential permeability of the blood-brain barrier to two pancreatic peptides: insulin and amylin Peptides 1998 19 883 9 9663454
114 Kastin AJ Akerstrom V Pan W Interactions of glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) with the blood-brain barrier J Mol Neurosci 2002 18 7 14 11931352
115 Dogrukol-Ak D Tore F Tuncel N Passage of VIP/PACAP/secretin family across the blood-brain barrier: therapeutic effects Curr Pharm Des 2004 10 1325 40 15134484
116 Rieusset J Contribution of mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum dysfunction in insulin resistance: Distinct or interrelated roles? Diabetes Metab 2015 41 358 68 25797073
117 Craft S Baker LD Montine TJ Intranasal insulin therapy for Alzheimer disease and amnestic mild cognitive impairment: a pilot clinical trial Arch Neurol 2012 69 29 38 21911655
118 Reger MA Watson GS Frey WH Effects of intranasal insulin on cognition in memory-impaired older adults: modulation by APOE genotype Neurobiol Aging 2006 27 451 8 15964100
119 Reger MA Watson GS Green PS Intranasal insulin administration dose-dependently modulates verbal memory and plasma amyloid-beta in memory-impaired older adults J Alzheimers Dis 2008 13 323 31 18430999
120 Morris JK Burns JM Insulin: an emerging treatment for Alzheimer’s disease dementia? Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep 2012 12 520 7 22791280
121 Gold M Alderton C Zvartau-Hind M Rosiglitazone monotherapy in mild-to-moderate Alzheimer’s disease: results from a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase III study Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 2010 30 131 46 20733306
122 Harrington C Sawchak S Chiang C Rosiglitazone does not improve cognition or global function when used as adjunctive therapy to AChE inhibitors in mild-to-moderate Alzheimer’s disease: two phase 3 studies Curr Alzheimer Res 2011 8 592 606 21592048
123 Tzimopoulou S Cunningham VJ Nichols TE A multi-center randomized proof-of-concept clinical trial applying [(1)(8)F]FDG-PET for evaluation of metabolic therapy with rosiglitazone XR in mild to moderate Alzheimer’s disease J Alzheimers Dis 2010 22 1241 56 20930300
124 Holscher C The incretin hormones glucagonlike peptide 1 and glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide are neuroprotective in mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimers Dement 2014 10 S47 54 24529525
125 An FM Chen S Xu Z Glucagon-like peptide-1 regulates mitochondrial biogenesis and tau phosphorylation against advanced glycation end product-induced neuronal insult: Studies in vivo and in vitro Neuroscience 2015 300 75 84 25987199
126 Chen S An FM Yin L Glucagon-like peptide-1 protects hippocampal neurons against advanced glycation end product-induced tau hyperphosphorylation Neuroscience 2014 256 137 46 24183963
127 Ji W Chen X Lv J Liraglutide exerts antidiabetic effect via PTP1B and PI3K/Akt2 signaling pathway in skeletal muscle of KKAy Mice Int J Endocrinol 2014 2014 312452 25183970
128 Ogata M Iwasaki N Ide R Takizawa M Uchigata Y GLP-1-related proteins attenuate the effects of mitochondrial membrane damage in pancreatic beta cells Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2014 447 133 8 24709081
129 Wilkins HM Koppel S Carl SM Oxaloacetate enhances neuronal cell bioenergetic fluxes and infrastructure J Neurochem 2016 137 76 87 26811028
130 Wilkins HM Harris JL Carl SM Oxaloacetate activates brain mitochondrial biogenesis, enhances the insulin pathway, reduces inflammation and stimulates neurogenesis Hum Mol Genet 2014 23 6528 41 25027327
131 Quinlan CL Perevoshchikova IV Hey-Mogensen M Orr AL Brand MD Sites of reactive oxygen species generation by mitochondria oxidizing different substrates Redox Biol 2013 1 304 12 24024165
132 Sheu SS Nauduri D Anders MW Targeting antioxidants to mitochondria: a new therapeutic direction Biochim Biophys Acta 2006 1762 256 65 16352423
133 Ott M Gogvadze V Orrenius S Zhivotovsky B Mitochondria, oxidative stress and cell death Apoptosis 2007 12 913 22 17453160
134 Simon HU Haj-Yehia A Levi-Schaffer F Role of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in apoptosis induction Apoptosis 2000 5 415 8 11256882
135 Christofferson DE Yuan J Necroptosis as an alternative form of programmed cell death Curr Opin Cell Biol 2010 22 263 8 20045303
136 Mihalick SM Ortiz D Kumar R Rogers E Shea TB Folate and vitamin E deficiency impair cognitive performance in mice subjected to oxidative stress: differential impact on normal mice and mice lacking apolipoprotein E Neuromol Med 2003 4 197 202
137 Nishida Y Yokota T Takahashi T Uchihara T Jishage K Mizusawa H Deletion of vitamin E enhances phenotype of Alzheimer disease model mouse Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2006 350 530 6 17026966
138 Sung S Yao Y Uryu K Early vitamin E supplementation in young but not aged mice reduces Abeta levels and amyloid deposition in a transgenic model of Alzheimer’s disease FASEB J 2004 18 323 5 14656990
139 Conte V Uryu K Fujimoto S Vitamin E reduces amyloidosis and improves cognitive function in Tg2576 mice following repetitive concussive brain injury J Neurochem 2004 90 758 64 15255955
140 Li FJ Shen L Ji HF Dietary intakes of vitamin E, vitamin C, beta-carotene and risk of Alzheimer’s disease: a meta-analysis J Alzheimers Dis 2012 31 253 8 22543848
141 Mangialasche F Kivipelto M Mecocci P High plasma levels of vitamin E forms and reduced Alzheimer’s disease risk in advanced age J Alzheimers Dis 2010 20 1029 37 20413888
142 Mangialasche F Xu W Kivipelto M Tocopherols and to-cotrienols plasma levels are associated with cognitive impairment Neurobiol Aging 2012 33 2282 90 22192241
143 Usoro OB Mousa SA Vitamin E forms in Alzheimer’s disease: a review of controversial and clinical experiences Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr 2010 50 414 9 20373187
144 Dysken MW Sano M Asthana S Effect of vitamin E and memantine on functional decline in Alzheimer disease: the TEAM-AD VA cooperative randomized trial JAMA 2014 311 33 44 24381967
145 Farina N Isaac MG Clark AR Rusted J Tabet N Vitamin E for Alzheimer’s dementia and mild cognitive impairment Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012 11 CD002854 23152215
146 Lloret A Badia MC Mora NJ Pallardo FV Alonso MD Vina J Vitamin E paradox in Alzheimer’s disease: it does not prevent loss of cognition and may even be detrimental J Alzheimers Dis 2009 17 143 9 19494439
147 Manczak M Mao P Calkins MJ Mitochondria-targeted antioxidants protect against amyloid-beta toxicity in Alzheimer’s disease neurons J Alzheimers Dis 2010 20 Suppl 2 S609 31 20463406
148 McManus MJ Murphy MP Franklin JL The mitochondria-targeted antioxidant MitoQ prevents loss of spatial memory retention and early neuropathology in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease J Neurosci 2011 31 15703 15 22049413
149 Rocha M Hernandez-Mijares A Garcia-Malpartida K Banuls C Bellod L Victor VM Mitochondria-targeted antioxidant peptides Curr Pharm Des 2010 16 3124 31 20687871
150 Szeto HH Cell-permeable, mitochondrial-targeted, peptide antioxidants AAPS J 2006 8 E277 83 16796378
151 Calkins MJ Manczak M Reddy PH Mitochondria-targeted antioxidant SS31 prevents amyloid beta-induced mitochondrial abnormalities and synaptic degeneration in Alzheimer’s disease Pharmaceuticals (Basel) 2012 5 1103 19 23226091
152 Calkins MJ Manczak M Mao P Shirendeb U Reddy PH Impaired mitochondrial biogenesis, defective axonal transport of mitochondria, abnormal mitochondrial dynamics and synaptic degen eration in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Hum Mol Genet 2011 20 4515 29 21873260
153 Lim GP Chu T Yang F Beech W Frautschy SA Cole GM The curry spice curcumin reduces oxidative damage and amyloid pathology in an Alzheimer transgenic mouse J Neurosci 2001 21 8370 7 11606625
154 Baum L Lam CW Cheung SK Six-month randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind, pilot clinical trial of curcumin in patients with Alzheimer disease J Clin Psychopharmacol 2008 28 110 3 18204357
155 Ringman JM Frautschy SA Teng E Oral curcumin for Alzheimer’s disease: tolerability and efficacy in a 24-week randomized, double blind, placebo-controlled study Alzheimers Res Ther 2012 4 43 23107780
156 Reddy CA Somepalli V Golakoti T Mitochondrial-targeted curcuminoids: a strategy to enhance bioavailability and anticancer efficacy of curcumin PLoS One 2014 9 e89351 24622734
157 Marrache S Dhar S Engineering of blended nanoparticle platform for delivery of mitochondria-acting therapeutics Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2012 109 16288 93 22991470
158 Mari M Morales A Colell A Garcia-Ruiz C Fernandez-Checa JC Mitochondrial glutathione, a key survival antioxidant Antioxid Redox Signal 2009 11 2685 700 19558212
159 Pocernich CB Butterfield DA Elevation of glutathione as a therapeutic strategy in Alzheimer disease Biochim Biophys Acta 2012 1822 625 30 22015471
160 Studer R Baysang G Brack C N-Acetyl-L-Cystein downregulates beta-amyloid precursor protein gene transcription in human neuroblastoma cells Biogerontology 2001 2 55 60 11708617
161 Olivieri G Baysang G Meier F N-acetyl-L-cysteine protects SHSY5Y neuroblastoma cells from oxidative stress and cell cytotoxicity: effects on beta-amyloid secretion and tau phosphorylation J Neurochem 2001 76 224 33 11145996
162 Tucker S Ahl M Cho HH RNA therapeutics directed to the non coding regions of APP mRNA, in vivo anti-amyloid efficacy of paroxetine, erythromycin, N-acetyl cysteine Curr Alzheimer Res 2006 3 221 7 16842099
163 Fu AL Dong ZH Sun MJ Protective effect of N-acetyl-L-cysteine on amyloid beta-peptide-induced learning and memory deficits in mice Brain Res 2006 1109 201 6 16872586
164 Remington R Bechtel C Larsen D A phase II randomized clinical trial of a nutritional formulation for cognition and mood in Alzheimer’s Disease J Alzheimers Dis 2015 45 395 405 25589719
165 Quinn JF Bussiere JR Hammond RS Chronic dietary alpha-lipoic acid reduces deficits in hippocampal memory of aged Tg2576 mice Neurobiol Aging 2007 28 213 25 16448723
166 Fava A Pirritano D Plastino M The effect of lipoic acid therapy on cognitive functioning in patients with Alzheimer’s Disease J Neurodegener Dis 2013 2013 454253 26316990
167 Shinto L Quinn J Montine T A randomized placebo-controlled pilot trial of omega-3 fatty acids and alpha lipoic acid in Alzheimer’s disease J Alzheimers Dis 2014 38 111 20 24077434
168 Birkmayer JG Coenzyme nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide: new therapeutic approach for improving dementia of the Alzheimer type Ann Clin Lab Sci 1996 26 1 9 8834355
169 Demarin V Podobnik SS Storga-Tomic D Kay G Treatment of Alzheimer’s disease with stabilized oral nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide: a randomized, double-blind study Drugs Exp Clin Res 2004 30 27 33 15134388
170 Aarsland D Andersen K Larsen JP Lolk A Kragh-Sorensen P Prevalence and characteristics of dementia in Parkinson disease: an 8-year prospective study Arch Neurol 2003 60 387 92 12633150
171 Navntoft CA Dreyer JK How compensation breaks down in Park-inson’s disease: Insights from modeling of denervated striatum Mov Disord 2016 31 280 9 26890687
172 Schapira AH Jenner P Etiology and pathogenesis of Parkinson’s disease Mov Disord 2011 26 1049 55 21626550
173 Swerdlow RH Parks JK Miller SW Origin and functional consequences of the complex I defect in Parkinson’s disease Ann Neurol 1996 40 663 71 8871587
174 Esteves AR Domingues AF Ferreira IL Mitochondrial function in Parkinson’s disease cybrids containing an nt2 neuron-like nuclear background Mitochondrion 2008 8 219 28 18495557
175 Esteves AR Lu J Rodova M Mitochondrial respiration and respiration-associated proteins in cell lines created through Parkinson’s subject mitochondrial transfer J Neurochem 2010 113 674 82 20132468
176 Swerdlow RH Parks JK Cassarino DS Biochemical analysis of cybrids expressing mitochondrial DNA from Contursi kindred Parkinson’s subjects Exp Neurol 2001 169 479 85 11358461
177 Swerdlow RH Parks JK Davis JN Matrilineal inheritance of complex I dysfunction in a multigenerational Parkinson’s disease family Ann Neurol 1998 44 873 81 9851431
178 Gu M Cooper JM Taanman JW Schapira AH Mitochondrial DNA transmission of the mitochondrial defect in Parkinson’s disease Ann Neurol 1998 44 177 86 9708539
179 Cassarino DS Fall CP Swerdlow RH Elevated reactive oxygen species and antioxidant enzyme activities in animal and cellular models of Parkinson’s disease Biochim Biophys Acta 1997 1362 77 86 9434102
180 Esteves AR Arduino DM Swerdlow RH Oliveira CR Cardoso SM Oxidative stress involvement in alpha-synuclein oligomerization in Parkinson’s disease cybrids Antioxid Redox Signal 2009 11 439 48 18717628
181 Trimmer PA Borland MK Keeney PM Bennett JP Jr Parker WD Jr Parkinson’s disease transgenic mitochondrial cybrids generate Lewy inclusion bodies J Neurochem 2004 88 800 12 14756800
182 Heikkila RE Hess A Duvoisin RC Dopaminergic neurotoxicity of 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,5,6-tetrahydropyridine in mice Science 1984 224 1451 3 6610213
183 Nicklas WJ Youngster SK Kindt MV Heikkila RE MPTP, MPP+ and mitochondrial function Life Sci 1987 40 721 9 3100899
184 Langston JW Ballard P Tetrud JW Irwin I Chronic Parkinsonism in humans due to a product of meperidine-analog synthesis Science 1983 219 979 80 6823561
185 Javitch JA D’Amato RJ Strittmatter SM Snyder SH Parkin-sonism-inducing neurotoxin, N-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine: uptake of the metabolite N-methyl-4-phenylpyridine by dopamine neurons explains selective toxicity Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1985 82 2173 7 3872460
186 Przedborski S Jackson-Lewis V Mechanisms of MPTP toxicity Mov Disord 1998 13 Suppl 1 35 8
187 Bortolato M Chen K Shih JC Monoamine oxidase inactivation: from pathophysiology to therapeutics Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2008 60 1527 33 18652859
188 Bao L Avshalumov MV Patel JC Mitochondria are the source of hydrogen peroxide for dynamic brain-cell signaling J Neurosci 2009 29 9002 10 19605638
189 Heikkila R Cohen G Inhibition of biogenic amine uptake by hydrogen peroxide: a mechanism for toxic effects of 6-hydroxydopamine Science 1971 172 1257 8 5576164
190 Parker WD Jr Boyson SJ Parks JK Abnormalities of the electron transport chain in idiopathic Parkinson’s disease Ann Neurol 1989 26 719 23 2557792
191 Schapira AH Cooper JM Dexter D Jenner P Clark JB Marsden CD Mitochondrial complex I deficiency in Parkinson’s disease Lancet 1989 1 1269 2566813
192 Beal MF Mitochondria, oxidative damage, inflammation in Parkinson’s disease Ann N Y Acad Sci 2003 991 120 31 12846981
193 Beilina A Cookson MR Genes associated with Parkinson’s disease: regulation of autophagy and beyond J Neurochem 2016 139 Supple 1 91 107
194 Pryde KR Smith HL Chau KY Schapira AH PINK1 disables the anti-fission machinery to segregate damaged mitochondria for mitophagy J Cell Biol 2016 213 163 71 27091447
195 Liu S Sawada T Lee S Parkinson’s disease-associated kinase PINK1 regulates Miro protein level and axonal transport of mitochondria PLoS Genet 2012 8 e1002537 22396657
196 Lin CH Tan EK Chen ML Novel ATP13A2 variant associated with Parkinson disease in Taiwan and Singapore Neurology 2008 71 1727 32 19015489
197 Holemans T Sorensen DM van Veen S A lipid switch unlocks Parkinson’s disease-associated ATP13A2 Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2015 112 9040 5 26134396
198 Wang B Cai Z Tao K Essential control of mitochondrial morphology and function by chaperone-mediated autophagy through degradation of PARK7 Autophagy 2016 12 8 1215 28 27171370
199 Liou CW Chuang JH Chen JB Mitochondrial DNA variants as genetic risk factors for Parkinson disease Eur J Neurol 2016 23 8 1289 300 27160373
200 Younes-Mhenni S Frih-Ayed M Kerkeni A Bost M Chazot G Peripheral blood markers of oxidative stress in Parkinson’s disease Eur Neurol 2007 58 78 83 17565220
201 Spina MB Cohen G Dopamine turnover and glutathione oxidation: implications for Parkinson disease Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1989 86 1398 400 2919185
202 Shi K Liu X Qiao D Hou L Effects of treadmill exercise on spontaneous firing activities of striatal neurons in a rat model of parkinson’s disease Motor Control 2017 21 1 58 71 27111919
203 Shin MS Jeong HY An DI Lee HY Sung YH Treadmill exercise facilitates synaptic plasticity on dopaminergic neurons and fibers in the mouse model with Parkinson’s disease Neurosci Lett 2016 621 28 33 27080424
204 Sung YH Kim SC Hong HP Treadmill exercise ameliorates dopaminergic neuronal loss through suppressing microglial activation in Parkinson’s disease mice Life Sci 2012 91 1309 16 23069581
205 Toy WA Petzinger GM Leyshon BJ Treadmill exercise reverses dendritic spine loss in direct and indirect striatal medium spiny neurons in the 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) mouse model of Parkinson’s disease Neurobiol Dis 2014 63 201 9 24316165
206 Ebersbach G Ebersbach A Edler D Comparing exercise in Parkinson’s disease–the Berlin LSVT(R)BIG study Mov Disord 2010 25 1902 8 20669294
207 Uhrbrand A Stenager E Pedersen MS Dalgas U Parkinson’s disease and intensive exercise therapy–a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials J Neurol Sci 2015 353 9 19 25936252
208 Zhang J Wang X Vikash V ROS and ROS-mediated cellular signaling Oxid Med Cell Longev 2016 2016 4350965 26998193
209 Parkinson Study Group QEI Beal MF Oakes D A randomized clinical trial of high-dosage coenzyme Q10 in early Parkinson disease: no evidence of benefit JAMA Neurol 2014 71 543 52 24664227
210 Snow BJ Rolfe FL Lockhart MM A double-blind, placebo-controlled study to assess the mitochondria-targeted antioxidant MitoQ as a disease-modifying therapy in Parkinson’s disease Mov Disord 2010 25 1670 4 20568096
211 Holmay MJ Terpstra M Coles LD N-Acetylcysteine boosts brain and blood glutathione in Gaucher and Parkinson diseases Clin Neuropharmacol 2013 36 103 6 23860343
212 Ghosh A Langley MR Harischandra DS Mitoapocynin treatment protects against neuroinflammation and dopaminergic neurodegeneration in a preclinical animal model of Parkinson’s Disease J Neuroimmune Pharmacol 2016
213 Shin EJ Nam Y Lee JW N-Methyl, N-propynyl-2-phenylethylamine (MPPE), a selegiline analog, attenuates MPTP-induced dopaminergic toxicity with guaranteed behavioral safety: involvement of inhibitions of mitochondrial oxidative burdens and p53 gene-elicited pro-apoptotic Change Mol Neurobiol 2015
214 Ferrari-Toninelli G Maccarinelli G Uberti D Buerger E Memo M Mitochondria-targeted antioxidant effects of S(−) and R(+) pramipexole BMC Pharmacol 2010 10 2 20137065
215 Bennett J Burns J Welch P Bothwell R Safety and tolerability of R(+) pramipexole in mild-to-moderate Alzheimer’s disease J Alzheimers Dis 2015 49 1179 87
216 Wang H Larriviere KS Keller KE R+ pramipexole as a mitochondrially focused neuroprotectant: initial early phase studies in ALS Amyotroph Lateral Scler 2008 9 50 8 18270879
217 Contreras L Drago I Zampese E Pozzan T Mitochondria: the calcium connection Biochim Biophys Acta 2010 1797 607 18 20470749
218 Chen X Wales P Quinti L The sirtuin-2 inhibitor AK7 is neuroprotective in models of Parkinson’s disease but not amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and cerebral ischemia PLoS One 2015 10 e0116919 25608039
219 Chopra V Quinti L Kim J The sirtuin 2 inhibitor AK-7 is neuroprotective in Huntington’s disease mouse models Cell Rep 2012 2 1492 7 23200855
220 Marcu R Wiczer BM Neeley CK Hawkins BJ Mitochondrial matrix Ca(2)(+) accumulation regulates cytosolic NAD(+)/NADH metabolism, protein acetylation, sirtuin expression Mol Cell Biol 2014 34 2890 902 24865966
221 Gliyazova NS Ibeanu GC The chemical molecule B355252 is neuroprotective in an in vitro model of Parkinson’s Disease Cell Mol Neurobiol 2016 36 7 1109 22 26649727
222 Branch SY Sharma R Beckstead MJ Aging decreases L-type calcium channel currents and pacemaker firing fidelity in substantia nigra dopamine neurons J Neurosci 2014 34 9310 8 25009264
223 Chan CS Gertler TS Surmeier DJ A molecular basis for the increased vulnerability of substantia nigra dopamine neurons in aging and Parkinson’s disease Mov Disord 2010 25 Suppl 1 S63 70 20187241
224 Ilijic E Guzman JN Surmeier DJ The L-type channel antagonist isradipine is neuroprotective in a mouse model of Parkinson’s disease Neurobiol Dis 2011 43 364 71 21515375
225 Schuster S Doudnikoff E Rylander D Antagonizing L-type Ca2+ channel reduces development of abnormal involuntary movement in the rat model of L-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine-induced dyskinesia Biol Psychiatry 2009 65 518 26 18947822
226 Kang S Cooper G Dunne SF CaV1.3-selective L-type calcium channel antagonists as potential new therapeutics for Parkinson’s disease Nat Commun 2012 3 1146 23093183
227 Parkinson Study G Phase II safety, tolerability, dose selection study of isradipine as a potential disease-modifying intervention in early Parkinson’s disease (STEADY-PD) Mov Disord 2013 28 1823 31 24123224
228 Yu J Xu H Shen X Jiang H Ghrelin protects MES23.5 cells against rotenone via inhibiting mitochondrial dysfunction and apoptosis Neuropeptides 2016 56 69 74 26459609
229 Jiang H Li LJ Wang J Xie JX Ghrelin antagonizes MPTP-induced neurotoxicity to the dopaminergic neurons in mouse sub-stantia nigra Exp Neurol 2008 212 532 7 18577498
230 Bayliss JA Lemus M Santos VV Deo M Elsworth J Andrews ZB Acylated but not des-acyl ghrelin is neuroprotective in an MPTP mouse model of Parkinson’s Disease J Neurochem 2016 137 3 460 71 26872221
231 Ji C Xue GF Lijun C A novel dual GLP-1 and GIP receptor agonist is neuroprotective in the MPTP mouse model of Parkinson’s disease by increasing expression of BNDF Brain Res 2016 1634 1 11 26453833
232 Liu Z Stanojevic V Brindamour LJ Habener JF GLP1-derived nonapeptide GLP1(28–36)amide protects pancreatic beta-cells from glucolipotoxicity J Endocrinol 2012 213 143 54 22414687
233 Aviles-Olmos I Dickson J Kefalopoulou Z Exenatide and the treatment of patients with Parkinson’s disease J Clin Invest 2013 123 2730 6 23728174
234 Wu JS Lin TN Wu KK Rosiglitazone and PPAR-gamma overexpression protect mitochondrial membrane potential and prevent apoptosis by upregulating anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family proteins J Cell Physiol 2009 220 58 71 19229877
235 Brauer R Bhaskaran K Chaturvedi N Dexter DT Smeeth L Douglas I Glitazone treatment and incidence of Parkinson’s disease among people with diabetes: a retrospective cohort study PLoS Med 2015 12 e1001854 26196151
236 Connolly JG Bykov K Gagne JJ Thiazolidinediones and Parkinson disease: a cohort study Am J Epidemiol 2015 182 936 44 26493264
237 Colca JR McDonald WG Waldon DJ Identification of a novel mitochondrial protein (“mitoNEET”) cross-linked specifically by a thiazolidinedione photoprobe Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2004 286 E252 60 14570702
238 Prakash A Kumar A Ming LC Mani V Majeed AB Modulation of the nitrergic pathway via activation of PPAR-gamma contributes to the neuroprotective effect of pioglitazone against streptozotocin-induced memory dysfunction J Mol Neurosci 2015 56 739 50 25854775
239 Barbiero JK Santiago RM Persike DS Neuroprotective effects of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha and gamma agonists in model of parkinsonism induced by intranigral 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahyropyridine Behav Brain Res 2014 274 390 9 25127682
240 Investigators NETiPDF-Z Pioglitazone in early Parkinson’s disease: a phase 2, multicentre, double-blind, randomised trial Lancet Neurol 2015 14 795 803 26116315
241 Simon DK Simuni T Elm J Peripheral biomarkers of Parkinson’s disease progression and pioglitazone effects J Parkinsons Dis 2015 5 731 6 26444095
242 Huot P Johnston TH Fox SH Brotchie JM Pioglitazone may impair L-DOPA anti-parkinsonian efficacy in the MPTP-lesioned macaque: results of a pilot study Synapse 2015 69 99 102 25559284
243 Martin HL Mounsey RB Mustafa S Sathe K Teismann P Pharmacological manipulation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) reveals a role for anti-oxidant pro tection in a model of Parkinson’s disease Exp Neurol 2012 235 528 38 22417924
244 Carta AR Frau L Pisanu A Wardas J Spiga S Carboni E Rosiglitazone decreases peroxisome proliferator receptor-gamma levels in microglia and inhibits TNF-alpha production: new evidences on neuroprotection in a progressive Parkinson’s disease model Neuroscience 2011 194 250 61 21839812
245 Schintu N Frau L Ibba M Caboni P Garau A Carboni E Carta AR PPAR-gamma-mediated neuroprotection in a chronic mouse model of Parkinson’s disease Eur J Neurosci 2009 29 954 63 19245367
246 Rosen DR Siddique T Patterson D Mutations in Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase gene are associated with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Nature 1993 362 59 62 8446170
247 Lagier-Tourenne C Cleveland DW Rethinking ALS: the FUS about TDP-43 Cell 2009 136 1001 4 19303844
248 Vance C Rogelj B Hortobagyi T Mutations in FUS, an RNA processing protein, cause familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis type 6 Science 2009 323 1208 11 19251628
249 Kwiatkowski TJ Jr Bosco DA Leclerc AL Mutations in the FUS/TLS gene on chromosome 16 cause familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Science 2009 323 1205 8 19251627
250 Wilkins Bouchard Lorenzon Linseman Poor correlation between drug efficacies in the mutant SOD1 mouse model versus clinical trials of ALS necessitates the development of novel animal models for sporadic motor neuron disease Horizons Neurosci Res 2011 5 1 39
251 Abel EL Football increases the risk for Lou Gehrig’s disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Percept Mot Skills 2007 104 1251 4 17879657
252 Chio A Benzi G Dossena M Mutani R Mora G Severely increased risk of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis among Italian professional football players Brain 2005 128 472 6 15634730
253 Beard JD Kamel F Military service, deployments, exposures in relation to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis etiology and survival Epidemiol Rev 2015 37 55 70 25365170
254 Swerdlow RH Parks JK Cassarino DS Mitochondria in sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Exp Neurol 1998 153 135 42 9743575
255 Gajewski CD Lin MT Cudkowicz ME Beal MF Manfredi G Mitochondrial DNA from platelets of sporadic ALS patients restores normal respiratory functions in rho(0) cells Exp Neurol 2003 179 229 35 12618129
256 Higgins CM Jung C Xu Z ALS-associated mutant SOD1G93A causes mitochondrial vacuolation by expansion of the intermem-brane space and by involvement of SOD1 aggregation and peroxisomes BMC Neurosci 2003 4 16 12864925
257 Pedrini S Sau D Guareschi S ALS-linked mutant SOD1 damages mitochondria by promoting conformational changes in Bcl-2 Hum Mol Genet 2010 19 2974 86 20460269
258 Pasinelli P Belford ME Lennon N Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-associated SOD1 mutant proteins bind and aggregate with Bcl-2 in spinal cord mitochondria Neuron 2004 43 19 30 15233914
259 Wong PC Pardo CA Borchelt DR An adverse property of a familial ALS-linked SOD1 mutation causes motor neuron disease characterized by vacuolar degeneration of mitochondria Neuron 1995 14 1105 16 7605627
260 Kruman II Pedersen WA Springer JE Mattson MP ALS-linked Cu/Zn-SOD mutation increases vulnerability of motor neurons to excitotoxicity by a mechanism involving increased oxidative stress and perturbed calcium homeostasis Exp Neurol 1999 160 28 39 10630188
261 Carri MT Ferri A Battistoni A Expression of a Cu,Zn su-peroxide dismutase typical of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis induces mitochondrial alteration and increase of cytosolic Ca2+ concentration in transfected neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells FEBS Lett 1997 414 365 8 9315720
262 Ferri A Cozzolino M Crosio C Familial ALS-superoxide dismutases associate with mitochondria and shift their redox potentials Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006 103 13860 5 16945901
263 Kelekar A Thompson CB Bcl-2-family proteins: the role of the BH3 domain in apoptosis Trends Cell Biol 1998 8 324 30 9704409
264 Israelson A Arbel N Da Cruz S Misfolded mutant SOD1 directly inhibits VDAC1 conductance in a mouse model of inherited ALS Neuron 2010 67 575 87 20797535
265 Menzies FM Cookson MR Taylor RW Mitochondrial dysfunction in a cell culture model of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Brain 2002 125 1522 33 12077002
266 Takeuchi H Kobayashi Y Ishigaki S Doyu M Sobue G Mitochondrial localization of mutant superoxide dismutase 1 triggers caspase-dependent cell death in a cellular model of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis J Biol Chem 2002 277 50966 72 12393885
267 Magrane J Sahawneh MA Przedborski S Estevez AG Manfredi G Mitochondrial dynamics and bioenergetic dysfunction is associated with synaptic alterations in mutant SOD1 motor neurons J Neurosci 2012 32 229 42 22219285
268 Jung C Higgins CM Xu Z Mitochondrial electron transport chain complex dysfunction in a transgenic mouse model for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis J Neurochem 2002 83 535 45 12390515
269 Jaarsma D Haasdijk ED Grashorn JA Human Cu/Zn super-oxide dismutase (SOD1) overexpression in mice causes mitochondrial vacuolization, axonal degeneration, premature motoneuron death and accelerates motoneuron disease in mice expressing a familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis mutant SOD1 Neurobiol Dis 2000 7 623 43 11114261
270 Jung C Higgins CM Xu Z A quantitative histochemical assay for activities of mitochondrial electron transport chain complexes in mouse spinal cord sections J Neurosci Methods 2002 114 165 72 11856567
271 Kirkinezos IG Bacman SR Hernandez D Cytochrome c association with the inner mitochondrial membrane is impaired in the CNS of G93A-SOD1 mice J Neurosci 2005 25 164 72 15634778
272 De Vos KJ Chapman AL Tennant ME Familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-linked SOD1 mutants perturb fast axonal transport to reduce axonal mitochondria content Hum Mol Genet 2007 16 2720 8 17725983
273 Magrane J Cortez C Gan WB Manfredi G Abnormal mitochondrial transport and morphology are common pathological denominators in SOD1 and TDP43 ALS mouse models Hum Mol Genet 2014 23 1413 24 24154542
274 Mattiazzi M D’Aurelio M Gajewski CD Mutated human SOD1 causes dysfunction of oxidative phosphorylation in mitochondria of transgenic mice J Biol Chem 2002 277 29626 33 12050154
275 Arai T Hasegawa M Akiyama H TDP-43 is a component of ubiquitin-positive tau-negative inclusions in frontotemporal lobar degeneration and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2006 351 602 11 17084815
276 Neumann M Sampathu DM Kwong LK Ubiquitinated TDP-43 in frontotemporal lobar degeneration and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Science 2006 314 130 3 17023659
277 Wang W Li L Lin WL The ALS disease-associated mutant TDP-43 impairs mitochondrial dynamics and function in motor neurons Hum Mol Genet 2013 22 4706 19 23827948
278 Lu J Duan W Guo Y Mitochondrial dysfunction in human TDP-43 transfected NSC34 cell lines and the protective effect of dimethoxy curcumin Brain Res Bull 2012 89 185 90 22986236
279 Sasaki S Horie Y Iwata M Mitochondrial alterations in dorsal root ganglion cells in sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Acta Neuropathol 2007 114 633 9 17929040
280 Sasaki S Warita H Murakami T Abe K Iwata M Ultrastructural study of mitochondria in the spinal cord of transgenic mice with a G93A mutant SOD1 gene Acta Neuropathol 2004 107 461 74 15029445
281 Borthwick GM Johnson MA Ince PG Shaw PJ Turnbull DM Mitochondrial enzyme activity in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: implications for the role of mitochondria in neuronal cell death Ann Neurol 1999 46 787 90 10553999
282 Wiedemann FR Manfredi G Mawrin C Beal MF Schon EA Mitochondrial DNA and respiratory chain function in spinal cords of ALS patients J Neurochem 2002 80 616 25 11841569
283 Dhaliwal GK Grewal RP Mitochondrial DNA deletion mutation levels are elevated in ALS brains Neuroreport 2000 11 2507 9 10943712
284 Mawrin C Kirches E Krause G Single-cell analysis of mtDNA deletion levels in sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Neuroreport 2004 15 939 43 15076711
285 Siklos L Engelhardt J Harati Y Smith RG Joo F Appel SH Ultrastructural evidence for altered calcium in motor nerve terminals in amyotropic lateral sclerosis Ann Neurol 1996 39 203 16 8967752
286 Crugnola V Lamperti C Lucchini V Mitochondrial respiratory chain dysfunction in muscle from patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Arch Neurol 2010 67 849 54 20625092
287 Vielhaber S Kunz D Winkler K Mitochondrial DNA abnormalities in skeletal muscle of patients with sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Brain 2000 123 Pt 7 1339 48 10869047
288 Vielhaber S Winkler K Kirches E Visualization of defective mitochondrial function in skeletal muscle fibers of patients with sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis J Neurol Sci 1999 169 133 9 10540022
289 Wiedemann FR Winkler K Kuznetsov AV Impairment of mitochondrial function in skeletal muscle of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis J Neurol Sci 1998 156 65 72 9559989
290 Krasnianski A Deschauer M Neudecker S Mitochondrial changes in skeletal muscle in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and other neurogenic atrophies Brain 2005 128 1870 6 15901649
291 Echaniz-Laguna A Zoll J Ribera F Mitochondrial respiratory chain function in skeletal muscle of ALS patients Ann Neurol 2002 52 623 7 12402260
292 Ro LS Lai SL Chen CM Chen ST Deleted 4977-bp mitochondrial DNA mutation is associated with sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a hospital-based case-control study Muscle Nerve 2003 28 737 43 14639589
293 Chung MJ Suh YL Ultrastructural changes of mitochondria in the skeletal muscle of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Ultrastruct Pathol 2002 26 3 7 12028652
294 Afifi AK Aleu FP Goodgold J MacKay B Ultrastructure of atrophic muscle in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Neurology 1966 16 475 81 5949060
295 Atsumi T The ultrastructure of intramuscular nerves in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Acta Neuropathol 1981 55 193 8 7349578
296 Curti D Malaspina A Facchetti G Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: oxidative energy metabolism and calcium homeostasis in peripheral blood lymphocytes Neurology 1996 47 1060 4 8857745
297 Shrivastava M Vivekanandhan S Pati U Behari M Das TK Mitochondrial perturbance and execution of apoptosis in platelet mitochondria of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Int J Neurosci 2011 121 149 58 21138397
298 Oteiza PI Uchitel OD Carrasquedo F Dubrovski AL Roma JC Fraga CG Evaluation of antioxidants, protein, lipid oxidation products in blood from sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients Neurochem Res 1997 22 535 9 9130267
299 Babu GN Kumar A Chandra R Oxidant-antioxidant imbalance in the erythrocytes of sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients correlates with the progression of disease Neurochem Int 2008 52 1284 9 18308427
300 Cova E Bongioanni P Cereda C Time course of oxidant markers and antioxidant defenses in subgroups of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients Neurochem Int 2010 56 687 93 20152873
301 Bogdanov M Brown RH Matson W Increased oxidative damage to DNA in ALS patients Free Radic Biol Med 2000 29 652 8 11033417
302 Thau N Knippenberg S Korner S Rath KJ Dengler R Petri S Decreased mRNA expression of PGC-1alpha and PGC-1alpha-regulated factors in the SOD1G93A ALS mouse model and in human sporadic ALS J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2012 71 1064 74 23147503
303 Muyderman H Chen T Mitochondrial dysfunction in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis - a valid pharmacological target? Br J Pharmacol 2014 171 2191 205 24148000
304 Zhao Z Lange DJ Voustianiouk A A ketogenic diet as a potential novel therapeutic intervention in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis BMC Neurosci 2006 7 29 16584562
305 Zhao W Varghese M Vempati P Caprylic triglyceride as a novel therapeutic approach to effectively improve the performance and attenuate the symptoms due to the motor neuron loss in ALS disease PLoS One 2012 7 e49191 23145119
306 Ari C Poff AM Held HE Metabolic therapy with Deanna Protocol supplementation delays disease progression and extends survival in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) mouse model PLoS One 2014 9 e103526 25061944
307 Kirkinezos IG Hernandez D Bradley WG Moraes CT Regular exercise is beneficial to a mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Ann Neurol 2003 53 804 7 12783429
308 Carreras I Yuruker S Aytan N Moderate exercise delays the motor performance decline in a transgenic model of ALS Brain Res 2010 1313 192 201 19968977
309 Mahoney DJ Rodriguez C Devries M Yasuda N Tarnopolsky MA Effects of high-intensity endurance exercise training in the G93A mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Muscle Nerve 2004 29 656 62 15116368
310 Kaspar BK Frost LM Christian L Umapathi P Gage FH Synergy of insulin-like growth factor-1 and exercise in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Ann Neurol 2005 57 649 55 15852403
311 Bello-Haas VD Florence JM Kloos AD A randomized controlled trial of resistance exercise in individuals with ALS Neurology 2007 68 2003 7 17548549
312 Lunetta C Lizio A Sansone VA Strictly monitored exercise programs reduce motor deterioration in ALS: preliminary results of a randomized controlled trial J Neurol 2016 263 1 52 60 26477027
313 Dal Bello-Haas V Florence JM Therapeutic exercise for people with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis or motor neuron disease Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013 5 CD005229
314 Nagatsu T Sawada M Molecular mechanism of the relation of monoamine oxidase B and its inhibitors to Parkinson’s disease: possible implications of glial cells J Neural Transm Suppl 2006 53 65 17447416
315 Akao Y Maruyama W Yi H Shamoto-Nagai M Youdim MB Naoi M An anti-Parkinson’s disease drug, N-propargyl-1(R)-aminoindan (rasagiline), enhances expression of anti-apoptotic bcl-2 in human dopaminergic SH-SY5Y cells Neurosci Lett 2002 326 105 8 12057839
316 Goggi J Theofilopoulos S Riaz SS Jauniaux E Stern GM Brad-ford HF The neuronal survival effects of rasagiline and deprenyl on fetal human and rat ventral mesencephalic neurones in culture Neuroreport 2000 11 3937 41 11192605
317 Maruyama W Akao Y Youdim MB Naoi M Neurotoxins induce apoptosis in dopamine neurons: protection by N-propargylamine-1(R)- and (S)-aminoindan, rasagiline and TV1022 J Neural Transm Suppl 2000 171 86
318 Weinreb O Amit T Bar-Am O Chillag-Talmor O Youdim MB Novel neuroprotective mechanism of action of rasagiline is associated with its propargyl moiety: interaction of Bcl-2 family members with PKC pathway Ann N Y Acad Sci 2005 1053 348 55 16179541
319 Finberg JP Takeshima T Johnston JM Commissiong JW Increased survival of dopaminergic neurons by rasagiline, a monoamine oxidase B inhibitor Neuroreport 1998 9 703 7 9559942
320 Waibel S Reuter A Malessa S Blaugrund E Ludolph AC Rasagiline alone and in combination with riluzole prolongs survival in an ALS mouse model J Neurol 2004 251 1080 4 15372249
321 Macchi Z Wang Y Moore D A multi-center screening trial of rasagiline in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: Possible mitochondrial biomarker target engagement Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener 2015 16 345 52 25832828
322 Gurney ME Cutting FB Zhai P Benefit of vitamin E, riluzole, gabapentin in a transgenic model of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Ann Neurol 1996 39 147 57 8967745
323 Desnuelle C Dib M Garrel C Favier A A double-blind, placebo-controlled randomized clinical trial of alpha-tocopherol (vitamin E) in the treatment of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. ALS riluzole-tocopherol Study Group Amyotroph Lateral Scler Other Motor Neuron Disord 2001 2 9 18 11465936
324 Ascherio A Weisskopf MG O’Reilly EJ Vitamin E intake and risk of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Ann Neurol 2005 57 104 10 15529299
325 Michal Freedman D Kuncl RW Weinstein SJ Malila N Virtamo J Albanes D Vitamin E serum levels and controlled supplementation and risk of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener 2013 14 246 51 23286756
326 Galbussera A Tremolizzo L Brighina L Vitamin E intake and quality of life in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients: a follow-up case series study Neurol Sci 2006 27 190 3 16897634
327 Graf M Ecker D Horowski R High dose vitamin E therapy in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis as add-on therapy to riluzole: results of a placebo-controlled double-blind study J Neural Transm (Vienna) 2005 112 649 60 15517433
328 Matthews RT Yang L Browne S Baik M Beal MF Coenzyme Q10 administration increases brain mitochondrial concentrations and exerts neuroprotective effects Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998 95 8892 7 9671775
329 Kaufmann P Thompson JL Levy G Phase II trial of CoQ10 for ALS finds insufficient evidence to justify phase III Ann Neurol 2009 66 235 44 19743457
330 Petri S Kiaei M Damiano M Cell-permeable peptide antioxidants as a novel therapeutic approach in a mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis J Neurochem 2006 98 1141 8 16895581
331 Bordet T Berna P Abitbol J-L Pruss RM Olesoxime (TRO19622): A novel mitochondrial-targeted neuroprotective compound Pharmaceuticals 2010 3 345 68 27713255
332 Lenglet T Lacomblez L Abitbol JL A phase II–III trial of olesoxime in subjects with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Eur J Neurol 2014 21 529 36 24447620
333 Muyderman H Hutson PG Matusica D Rogers ML Rush RA The human G93A-superoxide dismutase-1 mutation, mitochondrial glutathione and apoptotic cell death Neurochem Res 2009 34 1847 56 19399611
334 Vargas MR Johnson DA Johnson JA Decreased glutathione accelerates neurological deficit and mitochondrial pathology in familial ALS-linked hSOD1(G93A) mice model Neurobiol Dis 2011 43 543 51 21600285
335 Chi L Ke Y Luo C Gozal D Liu R Depletion of reduced glutathione enhances motor neuron degeneration in vitro and in vivo Neuroscience 2007 144 991 1003 17150307
336 Ross EK Winter AN Wilkins HM A cystine-rich whey supplement (Immunocal((R))) delays disease onset and prevents spinal cord glutathione depletion in the hSOD1(G93A) mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Antioxidants (Basel) 2014 3 843 65 26785244
337 Chio A Cucatto A Terreni AA Schiffer D Reduced glutathione in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: an open, crossover, randomized trial Ital J Neurol Sci 1998 19 363 6 10935831
338 Cheah BC Kiernan MC Dexpramipexole, the R(+) enantiomer of pramipexole, for the potential treatment of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis IDrugs 2010 13 911 20 21154151
339 Vieira FG LaDow E Moreno A Dexpramipexole is ineffective in two models of ALS related neurodegeneration PLoS One 2014 9 e91608 25526593
340 Cudkowicz M Bozik ME Ingersoll EW The effects of dex-pramipexole (KNS-760704) in individuals with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Nat Med 2011 17 1652 6 22101764
341 Cudkowicz ME van den Berg LH Shefner JM Dex-pramipexole versus placebo for patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (EMPOWER): a randomised, double-blind, phase 3 trial Lancet Neurol 2013 12 1059 67 24067398
342 Louwerse ES Weverling GJ Bossuyt PM Meyjes FE de Jong JM Randomized, double-blind, controlled trial of acetylcysteine in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Arch Neurol 1995 52 559 64 7763202
343 Orrell RW Lane RJ Ross M Antioxidant treatment for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis / motor neuron disease Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2005 CD002829 15674899
344 Orrell RW Lane RJ Ross M A systematic review of antioxidant treatment for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis/motor neuron disease Amyotroph Lateral Scler 2008 9 195 211 18608090
345 Perrin S Preclinical research: Make mouse studies work Nature 2014 507 423 5 24678540
346 Sena ES van der Worp HB Bath PM Howells DW Macleod MR Publication bias in reports of animal stroke studies leads to major overstatement of efficacy PLoS Biol 2010 8 e1000344 20361022
347 Mak IW Evaniew N Ghert M Lost in translation: animal models and clinical trials in cancer treatment Am J Transl Res 2014 6 114 8 24489990
348 Denayer T Stöhr T Van Roy M Animal models in translational medicine: Validation and prediction New Horizons in Translational Medicine 2014 2 5 11
349 Zahs KR Ashe KH ‘Too much good news’ - are Alzheimer mouse models trying to tell us how to prevent, not cure, Alzheimer’s disease? Trends Neurosci 2010 33 381 9 20542579
350 Mecocci P Polidori MC Antioxidant clinical trials in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease Biochim Biophys Acta 2012 1822 631 8 22019723
351 Hay M Thomas DW Craighead JL Economides C Rosenthal J Clinical development success rates for investigational drugs Nat Biotechnol 2014 32 40 51 24406927
352 Dorsey ER Vitticore P De Roulet J Financial anatomy of neuroscience research Ann Neurol 2006 60 652 9 17192926
353 Moses H 3rd Martin JB What should be done to improve the productivity of neurological research? Ann Neurol 2006 60 647 51 17192925
354 Zhang W Gu GJ Shen X Zhang Q Wang GM Wang PJ Neural stem cell transplantation enhances mitochondrial biogenesis in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease-like pathology Neurobiol Aging 2015 36 1282 92 25582749
