LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101128963
29630
Ageing Res Rev
Ageing Res. Rev.
Ageing research reviews
1568-1637
1872-9649

27197071
5112157
10.1016/j.arr.2016.05.004
NIHMS793171
Article
Disorders of lysosomal acidification - the emerging role of v-ATPase in aging and neurodegenerative disease
Colacurcio Daniel J. 12
Nixon Ralph A. 123
1 Center for Dementia Research, Nathan S. Kline Institute, Orangeburg, NY 10962, USA
2 Department of Psychiatry, New York University Langone Medical Center, New York, NY 10016, USA
3 Department of Cell Biology, New York University Langone Medical Center, New York, NY 10016, USA.
Email Address:

DColacurcio@NKI.RFMH.org

Corresponding Author: Ralph A. Nixon, Nixon@NKI.RFMH.org
17 6 2016
16 5 2016
12 2016
01 12 2017
32 7588
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Autophagy and endocytosis deliver unneeded cellular materials to lysosomes for degradation. Beyond processing cellular waste, lysosomes release metabolites and ions that serve signaling and nutrient sensing roles, linking the functions of the lysosome to various pathways for intracellular metabolism and nutrient homeostasis. Each of these lysosomal behaviors is influenced by the intraluminal pH of the lysosome, which is maintained in the low acidic range by a proton pump, the vacuolar ATPase (v-ATPase). New reports implicate altered v-ATPase activity and lysosomal pH dysregulation in cellular aging, longevity, and adult-onset neurodegenerative diseases, including forms of Parkinson Disease and Alzheimer Disease. Genetic defects of subunits composing the v-ATPase or v-ATPase-related proteins occur in an increasingly recognized group of familial neurodegenerative diseases. Here, we review the expanding roles of the v-ATPase complex as a platform regulating lysosomal proteolysis and cellular homeostasis. We discuss the unique vulnerability of neurons to persistent low level lysosomal dysfunction and review recent clinical and experimental studies that link dysfunction of the v-ATPase complex to neurodegenerative diseases across the age spectrum.

Lysosome
acidification
pH
v-ATPase
endocytosis
autophagy
lysosomal storage disease
Alzheimer's Disease
Parkinson's Disease
mTORC
calcium
TFEB
cathepsin
caloric restriction

INTRODUCTION

Defective lysosomal function is a primary factor in over 40 neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative diseases of childhood and has been recently recognized to be a major factor in the pathogenesis of adult and late-age onset disorders (Menzies et al., 2015; Rubinsztein et al., 2005), including Alzheimer Disease (AD) (Nixon and Yang, 2011; Zare-Shahabadi et al., 2015), Parkinson Disease (PD) (Dehay et al., 2013), and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) (Gotzl et al., 2014). Mutations in a single lysosomal gene can cause either a congenital disorder or a late-onset neurodegenerative disease, depending on the type of mutation and the subsequent severity of lysosomal disruption. Evidence from these genetic diseases reinforces the notion that additional pathogenic factors arising in adulthood and aging (Cuervo and Dice, 2000b; Rubinsztein et al., 2011; Yogendra et al., 2009), may tip a subclinical lysosomal impairment towards a more severe lysosomal dysfunction, and ultimately, progressive neurodegenerative disease. In genetic disorders that disrupt lysosome function in cells throughout the body, the brain is commonly the organ most prominently affected, which highlights the special vulnerability of the central nervous system (CNS) to autophagic-lysosomal compromise (Boland and Platt, 2015; Hara et al., 2006; Komatsu et al., 2006). Some possible reasons for this vulnerability will be discussed in this review.

Historically, research on lysosomal diseases has been mostly devoted to characterizing gene mutations that are causative for the family of congenital diseases known as lysosomal storage disorders (LSDs). In these devastating disorders, marked or complete loss of function of a single encoded mutant enzyme leads to defective processing of a substrate critical for neuron survival and often to the accumulation of digestion products that may exert further cytotoxicity. Recently, however, increasing attention is being paid to the disease relevance of lysosomal acidification, a process influencing activities of most of the lysosome's hydrolases as well as various additional signaling functions being ascribed to lysosomes, most notably nutrient sensing and regulation of nutrient homeostasis. The regulation of lysosomal acidification involves the proper coordinated function of multiple ion channels and most notably, the vacuolar ATPase, the macromolecular complex responsible for pumping protons (H+) into lysosomes and lowering intraluminal pH to the acidic range needed to activate the dozens of hydrolases with acidic pH optima in lysosomes (Mindell, 2012). An abnormal rise in lysosomal pH, therefore, can have far-ranging effects on lysosomal digestion – strongly inhibiting hydrolases with the most acidic pH optima, but also potentially elevating activities of other hyrolases with pH optima closer to neutral. This shift would promote both substrate indigestion and atypical cleavages, possibly generating toxic digestion products and/or partially digested intermediates.

As we will discuss further in this review, altered substrate clearance is one of several key functions of lysosomes potentially affected by an acidification defect. Recognition of the broader range of regulatory influences of acidification on cell function has increased appreciation of how pH dysregulation may manifest in human disease and especially in ones involving neurodegeneration. Here, we review emerging literature linking genetic defects in v-ATPase components and lysosomal acidification to disorders varying in phenotype and age of onset, but almost invariably involving progressive neurodegenerative disease, which may be the dominant feature of v-ATPase loss of function. The rapidly growing number of identified gene mutations underscores the pathogenic importance of lysosomal compromise in late age onset neurodegenerative diseases, such as AD and PD.

LYSOSOMAL ACIDIFICATION IN HEALTHY NEURONS

1.1: The lysosomal system

The major pathways of substrate delivery to lysosomes include multiple forms of autophagy (e.g. macroautophagy, chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA), and microautophagy) (He and Klionsky, 2009) (Cuervo and Wong, 2014), and the endocytic pathway, which collectively comprise a dynamically interactive vesicular network referred to here as the lysosomal system (Figure 1). The properties of the different cellular delivery routes to lysosomes, their regulation, and their cross-talk have been well detailed in recent reviews (Behrends et al., 2010; Frake et al., 2015; Harris and Rubinsztein, 2012; Klionsky et al., 2010; Levine and Kroemer, 2008; Maxfield, 2014; Nixon, 2013a; Ravikumar et al., 2010). Macroautophagy is the cell's only option for degrading intracellular membranous organelles and large protein aggregates (Rubinsztein, 2006) while endocytosis is principally responsible for the turnover of internalized extracellular materials that are not sorted to other cellular destinations (He and Klionsky, 2009). Neurons constitutively degrade damaged and obsolete constituents (Boland et al., 2008) and, when healthy, are exceptionally efficient in clearing the diverse autophagic and endocytic substrates delivered by retrograde transport to the perikaryon. Because the final stages of digestion are mainly carried out in the perikaryon where lysosomes are concentrated, neurons are challenged, due to their extreme polar shapes, in delivering packaged waste materials from the periphery long distances to cell bodies. Given the uniquely large volumes of axonal and dendritic cytoplasm relative to the perikaryal volume of many neurons, lysosomal digestion of substrates is critically important and may be easily overwhelmed, as evidenced by the rapid build-up of waste within neurons when lysosomal proteolysis is impaired (Felbor et al., 2002; Ivy et al., 1989; Nixon, 2013b).

1.2: Lysosomal acidification and cellular regulation

The maintenance of a highly acidic pH (4.2-5.3) is essential for regulating many functions of lysosomes. With rare exceptions, lysosomal hydrolases of all classes operate optimally below neutral pH, although the pH optimum of individual acidic hydrolases varies considerably. The broadly specific protease cathepsin D, for example, is optimally active at the lowest end of the lysosomal pH range, while some other major cathepsins (such as cathepsin B) operate optimally in the range of pH 6.0. The wide range of pH optima implies that the rises in intraluminal pH that accompany introduction of substrates upon fusion with autophagosomes or endosomes and the gradual reacidification of the lysosomal lumen may coordinate the sequence of hydrolase activations that is most efficient for dismantling and digesting complex substrates, such as a mitochondrion, or for minimizing the generation of amyloidogenic or other potentially deleterious digestion products. Acidification also controls the maturation of lysosomal hydrolases, including the dissociation of newly-synthesized enzymes from mannose-6-phosphate receptors once they are delivered to late endosomes from the trans-Golgi network, and the processing of certain hydrolases via cleavage of immature pro-forms of the hydrolase within acidified lysosomes (Richo and Conner, 1994). The acidic microenvironment of the lysosome is also critical for modifying certain cargoes delivered to lysosomes for further sorting and biological use, such as dissociation of cholesterol and other lipids from carrier proteins (Singh et al., 2009), dissociation of metal ions from degraded proteins (Asano et al., 2011),and receptor-ligand dissociation (Yamashiro and Maxfield, 1984). Recently, lysosomes have become recognized not only for their capabilities for digesting all manner of substrates and for recycling the subcomponents (Nixon and Yang, 2011), but also for serving as biosensors of nutritional status and general cellular “stress” (Wang et al., 2015). Release of amino acids from lysosomes, which reflects both substrate abundance and successful lysosomal digestion (and acidification), controls an amino acid-sensing apparatus on lysosomes that modulates autophagy induction (Zoncu et al., 2011). Additional pH-dependent signaling functions have been ascribed to lysosomes, which are mediated through a release of calcium from the highly abundant stores in lysosomes (Christensen et al., 2002), which may influence fusion of lysosomes with other membranous organelles (Nakamura et al., 1997) or with the cell surface (Kukic et al., 2014). The motor proteins modulating retrograde axonal transport of LAMP-positive compartments (Lee et al., 2011) are also influenced by pH-dependent calcium efflux (Lie and Nixon, unpublished data). Altered lysosomal pH in disease-related processes may have considerable effect on these lysosome functions (Lie and Nixon, unpublished data) while promoting lipid oxidation, ROS generation (Yokomakura et al., 2012), and impaired digestion of substrates (Lee et al., 2010a; Mangieri et al., 2014), which further compromise lysosomal function (Bergmann et al., 2004) and weaken integrity of lysosomal membranes, leading ultimately to cell death (Guicciardi et al., 2004).

1.3 The vacuolar (v-type) ATPase

The acidic pH of the lysosome is generated mainly by the vacuolar-type ATPase (v-ATPase), a multimeric protein complex which acts as an ATP-dependent proton pump, which is present and active in virtually all eukaryotic cells (Forgac, 2007; Saroussi and Nelson, 2009a). The v-ATPase is homologous to the F-type mitochondrial ATP synthase and these two enzyme complexes are thought to share genetic ancestors (Nelson, 1992). The v-ATPase uses energy from ATP hydrolysis to actively transport H+ ions into the lysosome, thereby making the lumen more acidic. At least 13 different protein subunits form the complete v-ATPase complex, comprised of two “sub-complexes”; V0 (membrane-bound) and V1 (cytosolic). The V1 subcomplex includes 8 subunits, A-H, with three copies each of the catalytic A and B subunits, three copies of the “stator” (stabilizing) subunits E and G, and one copy each of the regulatory C and H subunits. The V1A and V1B subunits form a heterohexamer which mediates the ATP binding and hydrolysis that powers the v-ATPase. The V1 subcomplex also contains the subunits D and F, which form a central rotor axle. Rotation of this central rotor axle caused by the hydrolysis of ATP within the catalytic V1A/V1B subunits results in the movement of the barrel of six V0c subunits past the V0a subunit, which drives proton transport across the membrane. A stoichiometry of 2-4 protons translocated for each ATP hydrolyzed was validated in experimental models. Notably, this rate varies based on the pH of the compartment (Kettner et al., 2003). For more extensive information on the molecular biology of the v-ATPase, we refer readers to several comprehensive reviews (Cotter et al., 2015; Forgac, 2007; Marshansky et al., 2014; Masashi et al., 2010; Mindell, 2012; Muench et al., 2011; Rawson et al., 2015; Saroussi and Nelson, 2009a, b). Implicit in this complexity of the v-ATPase is the sizeable number of opportunities for v-ATPase function to be compromised in disease states.

The pH of the lysosome is also maintained through movement of anions and cations mediated by ion transporters in the lysosomal membrane. The v-ATPase is an electrogenic pump and so the electrogenic gradient generated by the v-ATPase must be dissipated by efflux of cations and/or import of anions to allow sustained proton import (Mindell, 2012; Steinberg et al., 2010). This is accomplished by counterion channels on the lysosome, such as ClC-7, a 2Cl−/1H+ antiporter (Majumdar et al., 2011) and potentially TRPML1, a cation channel which mediates lysosomal calcium release and is linked to mucolipidosis type IV (Zhang et al., 2009). Although v-ATPase is most recognized as a component of lysosomes, varying forms of the complex differing in subunit composition are present in the membranes of many organelles, including endosomes, secretory vesicles and the plasma membrane. In neurons compared to glial cells, v-ATPase subunits are expressed at disproportionately higher levels relative to the lysosomal hydrolases (Nixon, unpublished data), possibly reflecting a uniquely high acidification need, higher turnover of v-ATPase components, or additional neuron-specific roles served by the complex. Acidification of synaptic vesicles involving v-ATPase (Wienisch and Klingauf, 2006), for example, is necessary for neurotransmitter packaging (Morel, 2003; Vavassori and Mayer, 2014).

1. 4: v-ATPase regulation and roles in nutrient sensing and calcium signaling

The v-ATPase regulates, and is itself regulated by, various signaling cascades controlling nutrient supply and metabolism. These inter-relationships reflect complexity in v-ATPase regulation and underscore the importance played by lysosomal acidification in cellular homeostasis beyond simply eliminating cellular waste, including nutrient sensing, intracellular calcium homeostasis, and lysosomal exocytosis. The activity of the v-ATPase is regulated by a process known as dissociation, whereby the cytosolic V1 subcomplex separates from the membrane-bound V0 subcomplex (Figure. 2), preventing the proton-pumping functions of the v-ATPase (Forgac, 2007). v-ATPase dissociation is regulated by a number of physiologic factors and signaling proteins, but these mechanisms are not fully understood. Many studies on v-ATPase dissociation are performed in non-mammalian systems (Breton and Brown, 2013), and confirmed regulatory factors differ between mammalian and yeast models (Cotter et al., 2015). Nonetheless, several factors are known to regulate v-ATPase dissociation in mammalian cells, including glucose (Kane, 1995; Nakamura, 2004), which promotes PI3K-dependent v-ATPase assembly (Sautin et al., 2005). Conversely, amino acid starvation promotes v-ATPase assembly and addition of amino acids causes dissociation (Stransky and Forgac, 2015). Rabconnectin3α (Einhorn et al., 2012; Sethi et al., 2010) , ERK (Marjuki et al., 2011), and EGF (Xu et al., 2012) all stimulate assembly of the v-ATPase complex. Increased assembly of the v-ATPase also occurs during maturation of dendritic cells (Trombetta et al., 2003), where it is mediated by mTORC1 and PI3K (Liberman et al., 2014). Notably, factors such as organelle localization of the v-ATPase (Johnson et al., 2016; Qi and Forgac, 2007), membrane composition (Crider and Xie, 2003; Finnigan et al., 2011; Ryu et al., 2010), PKA (Tiburcy et al., 2013), and serotonin (Zimmermann et al., 2003) all modulate v-ATPase assembly in non-mammalian systems. Future studies on novel factors (including, but not limited to, factors identified in non-mammalian systems) which regulate v-ATPase assembly in neurons could allow for investigation of excessive v-ATPase dissociation as a potential mechanism underlying lysosomal dysfunction.

This association-dissociation mechanism of regulation allows the v-ATPase to respond to nutrient availability, as dissociation is in turn regulated by glucose (Sautin et al., 2005) as well as by amino acids (Stransky and Forgac, 2015). High levels of amino acids promote v-ATPase dissociation which suppresses the activity of the v-ATPase, which likely conserves energy by down-regulating ATP hydrolysis as fully acidified lysosomes become relatively dormant. When amino acids are scarce, v-ATPase is expected to be more active to support an influx of substrates from up-regulated autophagy requiring increased capacity for rapid re-acidification following autophagosome-lysosome fusion, which will accelerate digestion rate and protein recycling by the lysosome. This process occurs via amino acid-regulated associations between the v-ATPase, Rag-GTPases, and Ragulator, ultimately allowing the v-ATPase to promote lysosomal function while functioning as a signaling molecule for nutrient sensing (Efeyan et al., 2012; Sancak et al., 2010; Sancak et al., 2008). One of the key elements in the cycle of reciprocal regulation of lysosomal activity and nutrient homeostasis is an amino acid-sensing protein complex on lysosomes composed of v-ATPase, Rag-GTPases, and Ragulator, which allows the v-ATPase to function as a signaling molecule for nutrient sensing. Amino acids, in large part stemming from lysosomal proteolysis, modulate this sensing mechanism, which in turn controls the association of mTORC1 with lysosomes. In high nutrient conditions, mTORC1 is stably associated with the Ragulator complex and autophagy induction and lysosomal biogenesis are down-regulated, while the reverse is true under nutrient poor conditions (Zoncu et al., 2011).

v-ATPase-mediated lysosomal acidification is also linked to the control of Ca2+ efflux from lysosomes (Christensen et al., 2002), at least when low v-ATPase activity elevates lysosomal pH. Reducing the acidity of lysosomes by inhibiting v-ATPase activity activates the lysosomal TRPML1 channel causing a calcium efflux from lysosomes and a rise in the cytosolic level of calcium (Lee et al., 2015). Loss of function of Presenilin-1, the most common cause of early-onset AD, induces an identical sequence of events (Lee et al., 2015). Lysosomal calcium efflux in these conditions is associated with hyper-activation of calpains and CDK5, both of which are implicated in the neurodegenerative cascade in AD (McBrayer and Nixon, 2013).

1.5: v-ATPase, neurodegeneration, and aging

The importance of v-ATPase and lysosomal acidification in mechanisms of cellular aging, the sine qua non for late-onset neurodegenerative diseases, is exemplified by studies showing that increased autophagy flux is a mechanism shared by experimental manipulations that extend life-span in yeast, drosophila, and mouse models. Recently, v-ATPase-mediated acidification of the vacuole (the metazoan lysosome equivalent) has been identified as a positive regulator of long-term mitochondrial stability and lifespan in yeast (Hughes and Gottschling, 2012). Increased vacuolar pH early in life contributed to age-related mitochondrial dysfunction and a shortened lifespan in this study and vacuolar acidity further declined with aging. Vacuolar acidification seems also to be critical in mediating lifespan-extending effects of caloric restriction (Hughes and Gottschling, 2012; Molin and Demir, 2014) and methionine restriction (Ruckenstuhl et al., 2014). Additionally, overexpression of v-ATPase components promotes increased lifespan in yeast models (Hughes and Gottschling, 2012; Ruckenstuhl et al., 2014).

The role of the v-ATPase in nutrient sensing is an intriguing area of study with regard to the importance of lysosomal acidification in mammalian models of caloric restriction (Schleit et al., 2013), considering the aforementioned interactions between v-ATPase and mTORC1 signaling and nutrient sensing. mTORC1 regulates lysosomal biogenesis via signaling interactions with the transcription factor TFEB (Pena-Llopis and Brugarolas, 2011; Pena-Llopis et al., 2011; Sardiello et al., 2009). TFEB, a transcription factor which regulates expression of many lysosomal genes (Settembre et al., 2011), has been shown to promote lysosomal clearance of waste in animal models of AD (Polito et al., 2014; Xiao et al., 2015) and PD (Decressac et al., 2013). Expression of v-ATPase subunits is also regulated by TFEB (Sardiello et al., 2009), and so it is reasonable to expect that upregulated v-ATPase function promoting lysosomal acidification contributes to the positive effects of TFEB induction in these models, although this remains to be tested.

Given the vital functions served by acidification, it is not surprising that a loss-of-function mutation of a v-ATPase subunit in Drosophila induces a phenotype exhibiting failed protein degradation and aging-dependent neurodegeneration (Williamson et al., 2010). Loss of the V0a1 subunit, in particular, increases the susceptibility of neurons to Aβ- and tau-induced toxicity (Williamson and Hiesinger, 2010), but only in the context of aging or toxic stress, reminiscent of the delayed synergy among AD-related pathogenic proteins and the striking reduction in v-ATPase function caused by Presenilin-1 mutations. Similar effects of v-ATPase impairment follow the conditional deletion of the ATP6AP2 gene (which encodes for a critical v-ATPase-regulating protein). Loss of ATP6AP2, which reduces v-ATPase activity (Korvatska et al., 2013), led to neurodegeneration and cognitive impairment in both fly and mouse models, along with the appearance of autophagic vacuoles, suggesting a failure of lysosomal proteolysis (Dubos et al., 2015). These animal models highlight the importance of the v-ATPase and lysosomal acidification in the aging brain, as v-ATPase defects are sufficient to induce neuropathological phenotypes similar to those observed in AD and PD. These results also suggest that delayed effects of a partial loss-of-acidification function do not necessarily halt the autophagic-lysosomal system immediately but instead render the system more vulnerable to failure over time, which is analogous to the long-term gradual onset of aging-related neurodegenerative diseases such as AD.

v-ATPase –RELATED LYSOSOMAL ACIDIFICATION FAILURE IN DISEASE

More than 50 genetic diseases have been traced to mutations in genes encoding for lysosomal proteins (Ballabio and Gieselmann, 2009; Coutinho and Alves, 2015; Futerman and van Meer, 2004). Lysosomal storage diseases (LSDs), which are present in 1:4000 to 1:9000 live births (Meikle et al., 1999), are marked by the lysosomal accumulation of undigested cellular waste products, which contributes to disease development. As genetic diseases that most often affect infants and children, LSDs are the leading cause of pediatric neurodegeneration (Coutinho and Alves, 2015). The pathological presentation and clinical phenotype of these diseases varies depending on the gene defect and the nature of the substrate deposited within cells. Many of the genes mutated in LSDs encode for acidic hydrolases, explaining the buildup of specific macromolecular products in the lysosomal lumen, while other LSDs involve mutation in structural proteins (e.g. Danon disease (D'Souza R et al., 2014)) or ion channels (e.g. Mucolipidosis type IV (Wakabayashi et al., 2011)) of the lysosome, causing impairments of CMA, reduced vesicle maturation, and impaired acidification, which collectively may contribute to secondary failure of lysosomal hydrolysis. In less common cases, lysosomal dysfunction arises through mutations in genes encoding proteins that reside in another organelle but impact the function of a lysosomal constituent as their primary disease effect. Examples include osteopetrosis (Bhargava et al., 2012), Wolfram Syndrome (Gharanei et al., 2013), and PS1-FAD (Lee et al., 2010a; Lee et al., 2015), all of which are disorders where the mutated protein residing in the ER impairs the stability, delivery, or function of a lysosomal constituent. While most LSDs involve dysfunction of proteins that are ubiquitous in lysosomes throughout the body, it is remarkable that many LSDs have particularly devastating effects on the CNS. Well over 50% of LSDs have neuropsychiatric symptoms (Futerman and van Meer, 2004), which are frequently the dominant feature of the phenotype and may be the sole presenting clinical sign in some LSDs with adult onset (Rucker et al., 2004). The observation that later-onset lysosomal disorders usually have more prominent CNS involvement could reflect the neuron's vulnerability to cumulative lysosomal compromise exerted over decades and aging-related factors that further tip the balance toward overt disease (Boland and Platt, 2015). Although in this review we are focusing specifically on CNS disorders of lysosomal acidification, we have previously reviewed evidence that lysosomal impairments involving varying underlying mechanisms drive pathogenesis and age of onset of neurodegenerative diseases across the entire lifespan (Nixon et al., 2008).

2.1: v-ATPase-Related Mutations Linked to Congenital and Early-Onset CNS Disease

Renal tubular acidosis with deafness was the first human disease to be linked to causal mutations in a v-ATPase subunit (Blake-Palmer and Karet, 2009). Notably, in addition to impaired acid secretion by renal intercalated cells, metabolic acidosis, and bone disorders, renal tubular acidosis in its recessive, more severe form, causes neurological defects; sensorineural deafness, and mental retardation (Fry and Karet, 2007). This form of the disease is arises from loss-of-function mutations in the v-ATPase subunits V0a4 and V1B1 (Karet et al., 1999a; Karet et al., 1999b; Stover et al., 2002) and is reproduced in V1B1−/− and V0a4−/− mice (Hennings et al., 2012; Lorente-Canovas et al., 2013; Norgett et al., 2012; Paunescu et al., 2012; Vedovelli et al., 2013), which exhibit defective endocytic trafficking and build-up of lysosomal storage material in proximal tubule cells, suggesting lysosomal hydrolase impairment (Hennings et al., 2012). Mice lacking V1B1 display upregulation of the homologous V1B2 isoform (Vedovelli et al., 2013), suggesting a compensatory mechanism to promote v-ATPase assembly when certain v-ATPase components are lost. Mutations in the v-ATPase subunit V1B2, the brain-specific isoform of the V1B subunit, are found in Dominant deafness-onychodystrophy syndrome and Zimmermann-Laband syndrome, two very rare genetic disorders (Kortum et al., 2015). Besides sharing features of deafness (reversible via cochlear implant) and digital abnormalities, the latter syndrome causes intellectual disability. These familial mutations in V1B2 reduce v-ATPase function and impair lysosomal acidification (Yuan et al., 2014).

Mutations in subunits of the V0 complex are associated with several severe disorders that reduce longevity. Autosomal recessive osteopetrosis (ARO), is a severe life-threatening disorder associated with osteosclerosis (hardening of bones), auditory and visual impairments and neurodegeneration (Keith, 1968) among other systemic deficits (Tolar et al., 2004). About half of ARO patients studied carry diverse mutations in the OC116 gene, which encodes for the V0a3 subunit of the v-ATPase (Kornak et al., 2000) (Sobacchi et al., 2001). One of these mutations was shown to impair maturation and processing of V0a3 in osteoclasts. The mutated V0a3 is retained in the ER instead of being localized to lysosomes where it would normally be integrated as part of the v-ATPase (Bhargava et al., 2012). In addition to V0a3 being a component of the lysosomal v-ATPase, osteoclasts express the V0a3 isoform of the V0a subunit and use the v-ATPase to acidify extracellular compartments for bone reabsorption (Toyomura et al., 2003). Retinal degeneration was observed in mice lacking V0a3 which could explain the visual impairments observed in ARO (Kawamura et al., 2010). Mutations in the V0a2 gene cause autosomal recessive cutis laxa type II (ARCLII) and Wrinkly Skin Syndrome (WSS), two related developmental disorders characterized by decreased skin elasticity connective tissue weakness, osteoporosis, (Allanson et al., 1986; Kornak et al., 2008; Morava et al., 2008; Patton et al., 1987). Notably, these individuals are susceptible to mental retardation, CNS abnormalities, visual impairment, and risk for aging-related mental deterioration and seizures (Guillard et al., 2009; Kornak et al., 2008; Morava et al., 2008).

Mutations of accessory proteins required for v-ATPase function cause severe congenital disorders associated with neurodegeneration. X-linked Parkinson Disease with Spasticity (XPDS) is an extremely rare progressive form of Parkinsonism (Poorkaj et al., 2010) with a disease onset varying between 14 and 58 years of age. Interestingly, in the only case so far available for neuropathological evaluation, features common to AD and PD were reported, including neurofibrillary tangle pathology (Braak stage III) and amyloid-β deposits below levels necessary for an AD diagnosis, enlarged ventricles, and “mild to moderate neuronal loss” in the substantia nigra, but no Lewy Body pathology (Poorkaj et al., 2010). Genetic analysis of individuals with XPDS yielded a novel candidate gene locus on the X chromosome (Poorkaj et al., 2010) and it was later shown that a point mutation (c.345C&gt;T) in exon 4 of the ATP6AP2 gene causes altered splicing of ATP6AP2 in XPDS (Korvatska et al., 2013). ATP6AP2 (prorenin receptor) is a v-ATPase-interacting protein essential for coordinating proper v-ATPase assembly, specifically mediating the assembly of the membrane-bound V0 sub-complex (Kinouchi et al., 2010; Malkus et al., 2004). Ablation of ATP6AP2 in cells reduces expression of several V0 subunits, impairs v-ATPase function, de-acidifies intracellular compartments, and elevates numbers of autophagic vacuoles (Kinouchi et al., 2011; Kinouchi et al., 2013), Neuropathological analysis in patient brain supports these findings by showing “massive” accumulation of p62/SQSTM1 in the striatum, the brain region with the most severe ATP6AP2 protein loss (Korvatska et al., 2013). Mutations in exon 4 of the ATP6AP2 gene (c.321C&gt;T), leading to altered ATP6AP2 splicing, are also linked to another neurological condition, X-linked Mental Retardation Hedera type (MRXSH) (Hedera et al., 2002; Ramser et al., 2005), a congenital form of mental retardation with epilepsy and sometimes ataxia (Hedera et al., 2002). Recently, conditional CNS-specific knockdown of ATP6AP2 was shown to cause cognitive impairment, neurodegeneration, and autophagy failure in both mouse and fly models (Dubos et al., 2015).

A final example of v-ATPase involvement in early onset neurodegenerative disease is the childhood disorder Wolfram syndrome (Venzano et al., 1980), an autosomal-recessive neurodegenerative disease associated with broad sensory, autonomic nervous system deficits and childhood-onset diabetes mellitus often leading to premature death (Rigoli and Di Bella, 2012). It also causes optic atrophy, brain stem atrophy, peripheral neuropathy, and seizures (Genis et al., 1997; Urano, 2016). Wolfram Syndrome is caused by mutations in the gene WFS1, which encodes for a nine-pass transmembrane protein of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) (Inoue et al., 1998; Strom et al., 1998). While WFS1 itself is not involved directly in lysosomal acidification, it is required to stabilize the V1A subunit of the v-ATPase. This process occurs via interaction between ER-bound WFS1 and cytosolic V1A subunits via the cytosolic N-terminus of WFS1. The interaction of WFS1 with the V1A subunit prevents the degradation of V1A subunits through an unknown proteasome-independent mechanism, and WFS1 loss leads to reduced protein levels of V1A (Gharanei et al., 2013). WFS1 loss in pancreatic β-cells impairs the acidification of compartments (Hatanaka et al., 2011) which is thought to underlie diabetes mellitus development in Wolfram syndrome. It remains to be determined if loss or mutation of WFS1 impairs v-ATPase function in neurons.

2.2: Adult-Onset CNS Diseases Caused by v-ATPase Defects

Alzheimer Disease (AD): AD is the most prevalent neurodegenerative disease in old age although, in less than 5% of all cases, an “early onset” form of familial AD (FAD) caused by autosomal dominant mutations of Presenilin-1 (PS1), Presenilin-2 (PS2), or amyloid precursor protein (APP) genes arises mainly in the fourth to fifth decades of life (Querfurth and LaFerla, 2010). Common late-onset AD has a multifactorial origin involving brain aging as well as environmental and genetic risk factors, including most importantly the APOE4 allele (Verghese et al., 2011) but also polymorphisms in genes involved in endocytosis, lipid trafficking, or inflammatory responses. In all forms of AD, progressive abnormalities of the endosomal lysosomal system are a prominent neuropathological feature (Cataldo et al., 2000; Maxfield, 2014; Nixon and Cataldo, 2006). The diagnostic hallmarks of AD are intraneuronal aggregates of tau protein („neurofibrillary tangles”) and “neuritic plaques”, which are patches of extracellular ß-amyloid associated with dystrophic neurites (Serrano-Pozo et al., 2011). Importantly, the abundant grossly swollen neurites are filled almost exclusively with autolysosomes containing incompletely digested waste, including Aß peptide immunoreactivity, (Nixon et al., 2005). The huge burden of stored waste in AD brain, reminiscent of LSDs, reflects both an impaired lysosomal substrate hydrolysis and a slowed retrograde transport of these organelles, which in turn is linked to compromised acidification and proteolysis (Lee et al., 2011; Nixon and Yang, 2011). Interestingly, certain primary lysosomal storage disorders (LSDs) are among the very few diseases where neuropathology resembling AD, including tauopathy, robust neuritic dystrophy, and autophagy deficits are seen (Nixon, 2004). Contributing to this pathology in AD is an increased delivery of substrates to compromised lysosomes, which is due to the upregulation of both autophagy (Bordi and Nixon, unpublished data) and endocytosis – the latter driven by the ß-secretase-cleaved C-terminal fragment of APP (C99 or ßCTF) (Kim et al., 2015). Impairing lysosomal acidification or proteolysis experimentally induces a similar pathological phenotype (Lee et al., 2011; Nixon and Yang, 2011). Remediating lysosomal dysfunction ameliorates AD-related phenotypes in mouse models of AD (Butler et al., 2011; Vinicia et al., 2014; Yang et al., 2011a; Yang et al., 2014), underscoring the pathogenic significance of these lysosomal abnormalities.

Considerable evidence links v-ATPase deficiency directly to the pathogenesis of early onset AD. In the most common form of early-onset AD, mutations of Presenilin-1 confer loss of function for PS1 roles in proteolysis and lysosomal acidification (Coffey et al., 2014; Lee et al., 2010a; Lee et al., 2015; Wolfe et al., 2013a). PS1 holoprotein, a specific ligand of the v-ATPase V0a1 subunit (Lee et al., 2010a; Lee et al., 2015), is required for proper N-glycosylation, stability, and targeting to lysosomes (Lee et al., 2015; Lee et al., 2010b; Wolfe et al., 2013b). Cells from AD patients with PS1 mutations exhibit defective V0a1 maturation and increased lysosomal pH (Coffey et al., 2014; Lee et al., 2010a; Wolfe et al., 2013b). Cells lacking PS1 or both PS1 and PS2 display even greater elevations of lysosomal pH, lysosomal proteolysis impairment, and AD-like autophagic vacuole pathology (Lee et al., 2010a; Lee et al., 2015). Lysosomes isolated from PS1-KO cells have 70% lowered levels of V0a1 subunit, and commensurately reduced v-ATPase proton-pumping capacity and ATPase activity (Lee et al., 2015). Correcting the pH deficit in these cells with lysosomally-targeted acidic nanoparticles reverses all aspects of lysosome and autophagy dysfunction (Lee et al., 2015). A number of AD mouse models demonstrate lysosomal dysfunction. PS1M146L/APP751SL mice display impaired maturation and activity of cathepsins, suggesting a de-acidification of lysosomes in this model (Torres et al., 2012). In 5XFAD mice, levels of mature V0a1 subunit are reduced and can be restored by inhibiting GSK3, leading to improved lysosomal acidification and cathepsin maturation in this AD model (Avrahami et al., 2013). Notably, GSK3 inhibition also promoted mTOR activation, reduced Aβ burden, and improved cognitive function, suggesting a number of positive effects following lysosomal re-acidification by modulating this novel signaling pathway regulating v-ATPase function. Lysosome-localized V0a1 is reduced in PS/APP mutant mouse brain without changes in total cellular levels of V0a1 or V1B2, suggesting a failure of subunit localization onto lysosomes (Wolfe et al., 2013a). Reduced PS1 levels (78% of control) induced by antisense oligonucleotides in the senescence-accelerated SAMP8 mouse model are associated with increased expression of v-ATPase subunit V1B2, suggesting a possible compensatory response to impaired V0a1 maturation (Fiorini et al., 2013). Acidification deficits in late endosomes in PS1-KO cells are also responsible for abnormalities in Wnt processing (Dobrowolski et al., 2012). Although changes in v-ATPase were not detected in brains of mice after neuron-specific conditional knockdown of PS1 (Zhang et al., 2012), the knockdown of PS1 was only partial and in a subpopulation of neurons: the large pool of PS1 and V0a1 in glial cells may have masked alterations in these neurons. In a second study, primary neurons reported to lack PS1 and have normal V0a1 levels (Coen et al., 2012) displayed none of the expected phenotypic features of PS1-null cells, such as altered nicastrin modification and elevated APP-ßCTF (Lee et al., 2015).

Elevated levels of wild-type APP or FAD-mutant APP cause lysosomal dysfunction that implicates a deficit in acidification. In multiple AD mouse models in which FAD-mutant APP alone is expressed, lysosomal abnormalities develop and, where studied, these lysosomal deficits contribute substantially to the progression of AD-related neuropathological, synaptic and cognitive deficits (Manuel et al., 2012; Yang et al., 2011b; Yang et al., 2014). In cultures of primary glial cells from mice over-expressing FAD-mutant APP via a prion promoter, elevation of lysosomal pH was suggested by a markedly impaired cathepsin activation and substrate proteolysis and reduced Lysotracker signal despite expansion of the lysosomal compartment. Down syndrome (DS) causes early-onset AD mainly due to the extra copy of APP on the trisomic segment of chromosome 21. Our studies of primary DS fibroblasts and cell models of APP overexpression (Colacurcio and Jiang, unpublished data) have also revealed an APP-dependent compromise of lysosomal acidification.

The common late-onset forms of AD are strongly aging-dependent, rising exponentially in incidence after age 65. Aging-related compromise of lysosomal function is evidenced by the progressive drop in chaperone-mediated autophagy rates (Cuervo and Dice, 2000a) and oxidative modification of partially degraded proteins and lipids in autolysosomes, which gives rise to reactive oxygen species through interaction with lysosomal iron (Kurz et al., 2010), (Kiffin et al., 2006; Kurz et al., 2008). Components of lipofuscin may act as v-ATPase inhibitors and, in a positive feedback loop, promote lipofuscin accumulation and lysosomal failure (Bergmann et al., 2004). Oxidative stress is a well-recognized factor in cellular aging and AD (Barone, 2016) and, in a model of chronic oxidative stress, lysosomal acidification and autophagic flux were decreased in trabecular meshwork cells (Porter et al., 2013). Similarly, hydrogen peroxide inhibits synaptic vesicle v-ATPase activity and causes impaired uptake of glutamate into synaptic vesicles in isolated bovine brain synaptosomes (Wang and Floor, 1998). Hydrogen peroxide also impairs v-ATPase-mediated vacuolar acidification in plasmodium falciparum (van Schalkwyk et al., 2013). The v-ATPase is a target of oxidative stress in AD, DS and aging (Barone, 2016; Butterfield et al., 2014b). Proteomic screens have revealed increased nitration of the V1E1 subunit of v-ATPase in brains from patients with early AD (Butterfield and Sultana, 2007) and increased oxidative modification (carbonylation) of the V1B2 subunit in aged rat brain tissue (Di Domenico et al., 2010). Moreover, proteomic screens have found that oxidative modification of the v-ATPase is increased in both AD and DS brain tissue, compared to controls (Butterfield et al., 2014a). Such oxidative/nitrative modifications are known to impair the enzymatic function of the F-type mitochondrial ATPase (which is highly homologous to the v-ATPase) (Fujisawa et al., 2009; Haynes et al., 2010). Nitrative stress also reduces the activity of the lysosomal v-ATPase (Colacurcio, unpublished data).

Whether related to aging or other factors, V0a1 mRNA is reduced in hippocampal neurons in sporadic AD, suggesting a potential transcriptional change which could underlie reduced v-ATPase function in this common form of the disease (Ginsberg et al., 2010). V1E1 subunit expression is altered over the course of neurofibrillary pathogenesis in a mouse tauopathy model with increased expression early in the disease process, but decreased expression later in the development of the disease (Chang et al., 2013). V1A subunit protein expression is increased relative to controls in the AβPPswe/PS1dE9 mouse line (Fu et al., 2015). These studies suggest dynamic regulation of v-ATPase subunits at a transcriptional level in response to stress within the lysosomal system may alter acidification.

The APOE ε4 allele, the strongest genetic risk factor for late-onset AD, accelerates rab5 mediated upregulation of endocytosis (Cataldo et al., 2000; Ji et al., 2002; Ji et al., 2006; Mahley and Huang, 2006; Troncoso et al., 1998), which increases delivery of endocytosed cargoes to lysosomes and challenges acidification and proteolytic capabilities. Consistent with this idea, APOE ε4, but not APOE ε3, in a thiorphan-treated APP mouse model of AD, expands lysosomal compartments, increases Aβ co-localization with lysosomes, and causes learning and memory impairment (Belinson et al., 2008). Cholesterol, the principal lipid carried into neurons by ApoE, and a suspected AD risk factor (Chen et al., 2014a; Chen et al., 2014b), also induces neuronal rab5 activation and endocytic upregulation when administered to animals through a high-fat diet (Braccini et al., 2015). Evidence suggests that membrane cholesterol may also influence v-ATPase function more directly. A rise in cholesterol levels in isolated lysosomes reduces lysosomal proton import (Cox et al., 2007), while addition of exogenous ApoB-containing LDL cholesterol increases endolysosomal pH in cultured neurons (Hui et al., 2012). Factors affecting membrane composition, such as lipid rafts (Finnigan et al., 2011; Ryu et al., 2010) and sphingolipids (Chung et al., 2003; Finnigan et al., 2011) may also influence v-ATPase function and lysosomal acidification. Because the V0 component of the v-ATPase resides within the lysosomal membrane, and must rotate to transport protons into the lysosomal lumen, it is conceivable that changes in lysosomal membrane lipid composition may affect the ability of V0 to rotate.

Parkinson Disease (PD): PD, the second most common neurodegenerative disease (Poewe and Wenning, 1998) is characterized by dopaminergic neuron loss in the substantia nigra pars compacta, impaired dopaminergic signaling, and aggregation of alpha-synuclein (α-syn) within inclusions known as Lewy Bodies (Dauer and Przedborski, 2003). PD usually presents as a movement disorder, causing resting tremor, bradykinesia, stiffness, and poor balance but less commonly can also cause progressive dementia (Emre et al., 2007). Most PD cases are sporadic, but a number of genes are implicated in familial forms which point to failure of the autophagic-lysosomal system as a unifying concept in PD causation (Bras et al., 2014; Dehay et al., 2013; Gan-Or et al., 2015; Kalinderi et al., 2016).

Two early-onset, genetic forms of PD, XPDS (described above) and Kufor-Rakeb syndrome (KRS) (Di Fonzo et al., 2007; Ramirez et al., 2006) are both caused by mutations affecting lysosomal acidification, and these rare diseases give insight into how lysosomal de-acidification accelerates the development of PD-like neuropathology. In XPDS, ATP6AP2 mutations cause v-ATPase failure and lysosomal de-acidification, leading to lysosomal system failure in neurons and to juvenile-onset Parkinsonism (Kinouchi et al., 2011). KRS, a very rare autosomal-recessive hereditary form of juvenile-onset Parkinsonism, is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in the lysosomal P-type ATPase ATP13A2/PARK9 (Park et al., 2015; Ramirez et al., 2006). Interestingly, ATP13A2 mutations also cause a lysosomal storage disease, neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (NCL) (Bras et al., 2012), and NCL shares overlapping pathological features with both PD and KRS (Deng et al., 2015; van Veen et al., 2014). Murine and canine models of ATP13A2 mutation or deficiency exhibit aging-related motor deficits, cognitive decline, brain atrophy, impaired axonal trafficking, gliosis, endolysosomal abnormalities, accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins, and lipofuscinosis, strongly suggesting aging-related lysosomal system failure (Farias et al., 2011; Kett et al., 2015; Schultheis et al., 2013; Wohlke et al., 2011). Some animal models of ATP13A2 loss accumulate α-syn in the brain (Schultheis et al., 2013), but pathology can also develop independently of synucleinopathy (Kett et al., 2015). ATP13A2 may protect against toxicity of α-syn by promoting its lysosomal clearance (Gitler et al., 2009; Usenovic et al., 2012). Loss of ATP13A2 causes impaired lysosomal acidification and reduced lysosomal proteolysis (Dehay et al., 2012b), while increased lysosomal pH is observed in fibroblasts from PD patients with ATP13A2 mutations (Bourdenx et al., 2016).

Several ATP13A2 mutations were found to be risk factors for early-onset PD in separate cohorts (Chen et al., 2011; Di Fonzo et al., 2007; Djarmati et al., 2009; Lin et al., 2008). The early-onset form of PD in a subject with ATP13A2 missense mutations was found to be a milder form than that observed in KRS (Di Fonzo et al., 2007). It is speculated that ATP13A2 mutations may cause partial loss of ATP13A2 function in early PD cases, while mutations causing complete loss of ATP13A2 function lead to KRS. Single heterozygous mutations in ATP13A2 are suspected risk factors for sporadic PD, but confirmation in larger cohorts is needed (Park et al., 2015). In sporadic PD brain, ATP13A2 protein levels are reduced in dopaminergic nigral neurons, and ATP13A2 is present in the cores of Lewy body inclusions (Dehay et al., 2012b), suggesting that Lewy body formation might originate at lysosomes or undigested autophagosomes during PD (Benjamin et al., 2012; Dehay et al., 2012a). Significantly upregulated mRNA for ATP13A2 is observed in surviving dopaminergic neurons in the brains of sporadic PD patients (Ramirez et al., 2006), suggesting that ATP13A2 expression may increase occurs as a protective response to lysosomal dysfunction.

A number of mutations that cause familial PD are found on the SNCA gene, which encodes for α-synuclein (α-syn) (Polymeropoulos et al., 1997; Singleton et al., 2003). It is not known if α-syn affects the v-ATPase, but α-syn over-expression induces lysosomal de-acidification in vitro (Stefanis et al., 2001) and, in several mouse models, disrupts lysosomal function (Cuervo et al., 2004; Martinez-Vicente et al., 2008; Xilouri et al., 2009). Mutations of other genes which are causative for PD,, such as LRRK2, impair the autophagic-lysosomal system, including mitophagy (Gan-Or et al., 2015; Kalinderi et al., 2016; Su and Qi, 2013; Wang et al., 2012). The most common pathological mutation of LRRK2 (G2019S) causes a phenotype exhibiting lysosomal expansion and diminished lysosomal degradation of substrate. This phenotype is dependent on the catalytic activity of LRRK2 (Henry et al., 2015). The G2019S mutation also leads to decreased lysosomal pH and impaired cathepsin function, as well as increased expression of the lysosomal ATPase ATP13A2 in brains from mouse and human LRRK2 G2019S carriers (Henry et al., 2015), possibly as a compensatory response. Notably, in a c. elegans tauopathy model, LRRK2 mutations lead to HNE modification of the subunits V1A and V1B of v-ATPase (Di Domenico et al., 2012), reminiscent of the oxidative modifications of v-ATPase in AD and DS. Mutations in glucocerebrosidase (GBA), which can be associated with either PD or Gaucher Disease (an LSD), also impair lysosomal function, as GBA is a lysosomal enzyme essential for processing of substrates (Mazzulli et al., 2011). Additionally lysosomal de-acidification has been observed in human fibroblasts from PD patients with GBA mutations (Bourdenx et al., 2016).

Notably, a number of neurotoxic agents which promote PD and PD-like symptoms can impair lysosomal function, including pH regulation. Methamphetamine, a significant environmental risk factor for PD (Curtin et al., 2015), promotes oxidative stress and vacuolation of endocytic compartments in a dopamine-dependent manner (Callaghan et al., 2012; Cubells et al., 1994). As a weak base, methamphetamine collapses the pH gradient across acidic organelles, including lysosomes (Funakoshi-Hirose et al., 2013). Similarly, rotenone, another environmental risk factor for PD (Betarbet et al., 2000), impairs lysosomal acidification and lysosomal activity in an NADPH oxidase-dependent manner (Pal et al., 2016). MPP+, a neurotoxin which promotes Parkinsonian symptoms, also causes de-acidification of lysosomes in cultured cells (Bourdenx et al., 2016). Together, these studies suggest that lysosomal de-acidification and dysfunction are common factors in genetic, sporadic, and toxicity-induced forms of PD/Parkinsonism. Considering previous studies on how catecholamines (Martinez-Vicente et al., 2008) and oxidative stress (Kiffin et al., 2006; Porter et al., 2013) in conjunction with α-syn (Cuervo et al., 2004) may negatively affect lysosomal function, further study on the susceptibilities of dopaminergic neurons to endosomal-lysosomal dysfunction may shed light on the pathogenesis of PD.

3.1: Conclusions and prospects

Mutations of subunits composing the v-ATPase or the proteins regulating the maturation and assembly of this complex have been identified at an accelerating pace in the past 6 years. Although the v-ATPase complex is the universal proton pump acidifying lysosomes of all cells, most v-ATPase disorders preferentially involve CNS neurodegeneration, especially prominent in diseases with adult onset. The association of lysosomal dysfunction with neurological dysfunction is well appreciated from earlier research on congenital lysosomal storage disorders, but we advance the concept in this review that milder degrees of defective lysosomal acidification may remain subclinical until they are compounded by effects of cellular aging and additional disease factors. Cellular aging in experimental systems critically involves declining v-ATPase-mediated lysosomal acidification, among other possible challenges to the lysosomal network. The unique properties of neurons, including their exceptionally long life spans, large cytoplasmic volumes, and specialized functions such as synaptic transmission involving acidified vesicles, make vesicular acidification in general, and lysosomal acidification in particular, especially critical for function and survival of neurons. The growing list of cellular roles played by intraluminal pH in nutrient and stress sensing and homeostasis and in modulating cellular signaling and trafficking have also expanded the possibly ways that v-ATPase can disrupt neuronal function, subtly or catastrophically.

A further understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying lysosomal acidification and v-ATPase regulation, which are still largely uncharted research areas, holds considerable promise for pharmacological development to reverse lysosomal dysfunction in neurodegenerative conditions. As an example, stimulation of the transcription factor TFEB improves lysosomal functions in models of LSDs (Spampanato et al., 2013) and improved behavioral and synaptic functions in murine models of tauopathy, (Vinicia et al., 2014) by upregulating the expression of most lysosomal genes, including the v-ATPase components. The improved clearance of amyloid-β in PS1/APP mice by TFEB expression (Xiao et al., 2015) is particularly notable because the positive effects of TFEB occur in a PS1 mutant background that causes deficiency of the V0a1 subunit of the v-ATPase (Lee et al., 2010a). TFEB induction has also been shown to promote improved behavioral and synaptic functions in murine models of tauopathy, (Vinicia et al., 2014).

Several lines of evidence also show that lysosomal pH can also be corrected in experimental models in a v-ATPase-independent manner. While the v-ATPase is the primary driver of lysosomal acidification, the pH of the lysosome is a product of multiple factors, which can also be targeted in efforts to re-acidify lysosomes (Mindell, 2012). Application of nanomaterials is an intriguing approach towards stimulating lysosomal function, and multiple studies show that these agents can re-acidify lysosomal pH in cultured cells. Acidic nanoparticles, which can be taken up by lysosomes and promote the acidification of the lysosome, induce increased cathepsin activity and lysosomal proteolysis (Baltazar et al., 2012). Additional studies demonstrate that acidic nanoparticles restore lysosomal acidification, and subsequently lysosomal function, in cells lacking PS1 (Lee et al., 2015) and promote lysosomal proteolysis and cathepsin activity in primary glial cells from CRND8 mice, a model of AD which exhibits APP-associated lysosomal system defects (Xue et al., 2014; Yang et al., 2011a; Yang et al., 2014). Finally, β-adrenergic/cAMP/PKA pathway stimulation by the β-adrenergic receptor agonists, isoproterenol or cAMP, in cultured retinal pigment epithelial cells lowered lysosomal pH (Liu et al., 2008) and cAMP restored lysosomal acidification in primary fibroblasts from patients with FAD (Coffey et al., 2014). These recent attempts to modulate lysosomal pH are clearly just the earliest stage in development of innovative approaches to neurodegenerative disease treatment by targeting lysosomal dysfunction.

Acknowledgements

We thank past and present lab members for contributing to the described work and for helpful discussions. Studies from this laboratory are supported by the US National Institute on Aging (P01AG017617 and R01AG005604).

Figure 1 The Lysosomal System

The lysosomal system refers to the autophagic pathway and the endocytic pathway, and mediates the transport and proteolytic degradation of cellular waste. In the endocytic pathway, early endosomes (EE) mature into late endosomes (LE) prior to full acidification (Lysosome). In the autophagic (macroautophagy) pathway, a preautophagosomal structure (PAS) is formed, enveloping an area of cytoplasm or a selected substrate, and developing into a double-membrane autophagosome (AP). Lysosomes fuse with autophagosomes, generating single-membrane autolysosomes (AL), and ultimately lysosomes. Upon fusion with autophagosomes, lysosomes introduce proteolytic enzymes which carry out the degradation of substrates as the compartment becomes more acidic. The acidification of these compartments is mediated by the v-ATPase. Chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA) is another type of autophagy, during which a chaperone protein complex (Hsc70 complex) recognizes a cytoplasmic target protein via a KFERQ motif, and shuttles the target protein to the lysosomal lumen for digestion via interaction with the LAMP2 protein complex, which serves as the lysosomal CMA receptor. (Figure modified from Nixon, 2013, Nat Med).

Figure 2 v-ATPase structure and regulation by dissociation

The v-ATPase promotes the acidification of lysosomes via ATP-dependent transport of protons across the lysosomal membrane. The v-ATPase is a multimeric complex composed of two sub-complexes, the cytosolic V1, and the membrane-bound V0. These two sub-complexes can reversibly dissociate, which diminishes v-ATPase activity. In mammalian cells, v-ATPase assembly is induced by glucose, leading to a feedback mechanism by which lysosomal acidification is modulated by intracellular nutrient availability. v-ATPase assembly is also regulated by several other factors, allowing v-ATPase function and lysosomal acidification to be regulated by various intracellular signaling pathways.

Figure 3 v-ATPase defects and associated neurodegenerative diseases

Shown in the left column are disease-associated mutations in the genes encoding for individual v-ATPase subunits (bold). Shown in the right column are changes in v-ATPase-related proteins (bold) and corresponding neurodegenerative diseases. *ATP13A2, while not directly linked to v-ATPase function, is shown due to its suspected role in lysosomal acidification and its implication in both Kufor-Rakeb Syndrome and Parkinson Disease.

Highlights

pH regulates hydrolytic, signaling, and homeostatic functions of lysosomes

The v-ATPase complex is mainly responsible for lysosomal acidification

Mutations of v-ATPase components underlie numerous neurodegenerative disorders

Deregulation of lysosomal acidification is implicated in cell aging and longevity

Modulation of lysosomal pH in disease states is a promising therapeutic avenue

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Conflicts of Interest: None


References

Allanson J Austin W Hecht F Congenital cutis laxa with retardation of growth and motor development: a recessive disorder of connective tissue with male lethality. Clin Genet 1986 29 133 136 2420495
Asano T Komatsu M Yamaguchi-Iwai Y Ishikawa F Mizushima N Iwai K Distinct mechanisms of ferritin delivery to lysosomes in iron-depleted and iron-replete cells. Mol Cell Biol 2011 31 2040 2052 21444722
Avrahami L Farfara D Shaham-Kol M Vassar R Frenkel D Eldar-Finkelman H Inhibition of glycogen synthase kinase-3 ameliorates beta-amyloid pathology and restores lysosomal acidification and mammalian target of rapamycin activity in the Alzheimer disease mouse model: in vivo and in vitro studies. J Biol Chem 2013 288 1295 1306 23155049
Ballabio A Gieselmann V Lysosomal disorders: from storage to cellular damage. Biochim Biophys Acta 2009 1793 684 696 19111581
Baltazar GC Guha S Lu W Lim J Boesze-Battaglia K Laties AM Tyagi P Kompella UB Mitchell CH Acidic nanoparticles are trafficked to lysosomes and restore an acidic lysosomal pH and degradative function to compromised ARPE-19 cells. PLoS One 2012 7 e49635 23272048
Barone E Editorial: Oxidative Stress and Alzheimer Disease: Where Do We Stand? Curr Alzheimer Res 2016 13 108 111 26750609
Behrends C Sowa ME Gygi SP Harper JW Network organization of the human autophagy system. Nature 2010 466 68 76 20562859
Belinson H Lev D Masliah E Michaelson DM Activation of the amyloid cascade in apolipoprotein E4 transgenic mice induces lysosomal activation and neurodegeneration resulting in marked cognitive deficits. J Neurosci 2008 28 4690 4701 18448646
Benjamin D Marta M-V Alfredo R Celine P Christine K Miquel V Erwan B Lysosomal dysfunction in Parkinson disease: ATP13A2 gets into the groove. Autophagy 2012 8 1389 1391 22885599
Bergmann M Schutt F Holz FG Kopitz J Inhibition of the ATP-driven proton pump in RPE lysosomes by the major lipofuscin fluorophore A2-E may contribute to the pathogenesis of age-related macular degeneration. FASEB J 2004 18 562 564 14715704
Betarbet R Sherer TB MacKenzie G Garcia-Osuna M Panov AV Greenamyre JT Chronic systemic pesticide exposure reproduces features of Parkinson's disease. Nat Neurosci 2000 3 1301 1306 11100151
Bhargava A Voronov I Wang Y Glogauer M Kartner N Manolson MF Osteopetrosis mutation R444L causes endoplasmic reticulum retention and misprocessing of vacuolar H+-ATPase a3 subunit. J Biol Chem 2012 287 26829 26839 22685294
Blake-Palmer KG Karet FE Cellular physiology of the renal H+ATPase. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens 2009 18 433 438 19561496
Boland B Kumar A Lee S Platt FM Wegiel J Yu WH Nixon RA Autophagy induction and autophagosome clearance in neurons: relationship to autophagic pathology in Alzheimer's disease. J Neurosci 2008 28 6926 6937 18596167
Boland B Platt FM Bridging the age spectrum of neurodegenerative storage diseases. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab 2015 29 127 143 25987168
Bourdenx M Daniel J Genin E Soria FN Blanchard-Desce M Bezard E Dehay B Nanoparticles restore lysosomal acidification defects: Implications for Parkinson and other lysosomal-related diseases. Autophagy 2016 12 472 483 26761717
Braccini L Ciraolo E Campa CC Perino A Longo DL Tibolla G Pregnolato M Cao Y Tassone B Damilano F PI3K-C2gamma is a Rab5 effector selectively controlling endosomal Akt2 activation downstream of insulin signalling. Nat Commun 2015 6 7400 26100075
Bras J Guerreiro R Darwent L Parkkinen L Ansorge O Escott-Price V Hernandez DG Nalls MA Clark LN Honig LS Genetic analysis implicates APOE, SNCA and suggests lysosomal dysfunction in the etiology of dementia with Lewy bodies. Hum Mol Genet 2014 23 6139 6146 24973356
Bras J Verloes A Schneider SA Mole SE Guerreiro RJ Mutation of the parkinsonism gene ATP13A2 causes neuronal ceroid-lipofuscinosis. Hum Mol Genet 2012 21 2646 2650 22388936
Breton S Brown D Regulation of luminal acidification by the V-ATPase. Physiology (Bethesda) 2013 28 318 329 23997191
Butler D Hwang J Estick C Nishiyama A Kumar SS Baveghems C Young-Oxendine HB Wisniewski ML Charalambides A Bahr BA Protective effects of positive lysosomal modulation in Alzheimer's disease transgenic mouse models. PLoS One 2011 6 e20501 21695208
Butterfield DA Di Domenico F Swomley AM Head E Perluigi M Redox proteomics analysis to decipher the neurobiology of Alzheimer-like neurodegeneration: overlaps in Down's syndrome and Alzheimer's disease brain. Biochem J 2014a 463 177 189 25242166
Butterfield DA Gu L Di Domenico F Robinson RA Mass spectrometry and redox proteomics: applications in disease. Mass Spectrom Rev 2014b 33 277 301 24930952
Butterfield DA Sultana R Redox proteomics identification of oxidatively modified brain proteins in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment: insights into the progression of this dementing disorder. J Alzheimers Dis 2007 12 61 72 17851195
Callaghan RC Cunningham JK Sykes J Kish SJ Increased risk of Parkinson's disease in individuals hospitalized with conditions related to the use of methamphetamine or other amphetamine-type drugs. Drug Alcohol Depend 2012 120 35 40 21794992
Cataldo AM Peterhoff CM Troncoso JC Gomez-Isla T Hyman BT Nixon RA Endocytic pathway abnormalities precede amyloid beta deposition in sporadic Alzheimer's disease and Down syndrome: differential effects of APOE genotype and presenilin mutations. The American journal of pathology 2000 157 277 286 10880397
Chang SH Jung IS Han GY Kim NH Kim HJ Kim CW Proteomic profiling of brain cortex tissues in a Tau transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer's disease. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2013 430 670 675 23211594
Chen CM Lin CH Juan HF Hu FJ Hsiao YC Chang HY Chao CY Chen IC Lee LC Wang TW ATP13A2 variability in Taiwanese Parkinson's disease. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet 2011 156B 720 729 21714071
Chen JJ Li YM Zou WY Fu JL Relationships between CETP genetic polymorphisms and Alzheimer's disease risk: a meta-analysis. DNA Cell Biol 2014a 33 807 815 25105518
Chen X Hui L Geiger JD Role of LDL cholesterol and endolysosomes in amyloidogenesis and Alzheimer's disease. J Neurol Neurophysiol 2014b 5
Christensen KA Myers JT Swanson JA pH-dependent regulation of lysosomal calcium in macrophages. J Cell Sci 2002 115 599 607 11861766
Chung JH Lester RL Dickson RC Sphingolipid requirement for generation of a functional v1 component of the vacuolar ATPase. J Biol Chem 2003 278 28872 28881 12746460
Coen K Flannagan RS Baron S Carraro-Lacroix LR Wang D Vermeire W Michiels C Munck S Baert V Sugita S Lysosomal calcium homeostasis defects, not proton pump defects, cause endo-lysosomal dysfunction in PSEN-deficient cells. J Cell Biol 2012 198 23 35 22753898
Coffey EE Beckel JM Laties AM Mitchell CH Lysosomal alkalization and dysfunction in human fibroblasts with the Alzheimer's disease-linked presenilin 1 A246E mutation can be reversed with cAMP. Neuroscience 2014 263 111 124 24418614
Cotter K Stransky L McGuire C Forgac M Recent Insights into the Structure, Regulation, and Function of the V-ATPases. Trends Biochem Sci 2015 40 611 622 26410601
Coutinho MF Alves S From rare to common and back again: 60years of lysosomal dysfunction. Mol Genet Metab 2015
Cox BE Griffin EE Ullery JC Jerome WG Effects of cellular cholesterol loading on macrophage foam cell lysosome acidification. J Lipid Res 2007 48 1012 1021 17308299
Crider BP Xie XS Characterization of the functional coupling of bovine brain vacuolar-type H(+)-translocating ATPase. Effect of divalent cations, phospholipids, and subunit H (SFD). J Biol Chem 2003 278 44281 44288 12949075
Cubells JF Rayport S Rajendran G Sulzer D Methamphetamine neurotoxicity involves vacuolation of endocytic organelles and dopamine-dependent intracellular oxidative stress. J Neurosci 1994 14 2260 2271 8158268
Cuervo AM Dice JF Age-related decline in chaperone-mediated autophagy. J Biol Chem 2000a 275 31505 31513 10806201
Cuervo AM Dice JF When lysosomes get old. Experimental gerontology 2000b 35 119 131 10767573
Cuervo AM Stefanis L Fredenburg R Lansbury PT Sulzer D Impaired degradation of mutant alpha-synuclein by chaperone-mediated autophagy. Science 2004 305 1292 1295 15333840
Cuervo AM Wong E Chaperone-mediated autophagy: roles in disease and aging. Cell Res 2014 24 92 104 24281265
Curtin K Fleckenstein AE Robison RJ Crookston MJ Smith KR Hanson GR Methamphetamine/amphetamine abuse and risk of Parkinson's disease in Utah: a population-based assessment. Drug Alcohol Depend 2015 146 30 38 25479916
D'Souza R S Levandowski C Slavov D Graw SL Allen LA Adler E Mestroni L Taylor MR Danon disease: clinical features, evaluation, and management. Circ Heart Fail 2014 7 843 849 25228319
Dauer W Przedborski S Parkinson's disease: mechanisms and models. Neuron 2003 39 889 909 12971891
Decressac M Mattsson B Weikop P Lundblad M Jakobsson J Bjorklund A TFEB-mediated autophagy rescues midbrain dopamine neurons from alpha-synuclein toxicity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2013 110 E1817 1826 23610405
Dehay B Martinez-Vicente M Caldwell GA Caldwell KA Yue Z Cookson MR Klein C Vila M Bezard E Lysosomal impairment in Parkinson's disease. Mov Disord 2013 28 725 732 23580333
Dehay B Martinez-Vicente M Ramirez A Perier C Klein C Vila M Bezard E Lysosomal dysfunction in Parkinson disease: ATP13A2 gets into the groove. Autophagy 2012a 8 1389 1391 22885599
Dehay B Ramirez A Martinez-Vicente M Perier C Canron MH Doudnikoff E Vital A Vila M Klein C Bezard E Loss of P-type ATPase ATP13A2/PARK9 function induces general lysosomal deficiency and leads to Parkinson disease neurodegeneration. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2012b 109 9611 9616 22647602
Deng H Xiu X Jankovic J Genetic convergence of Parkinson's disease and lysosomal storage disorders. Mol Neurobiol 2015 51 1554 1568 25099932
Di Domenico F Perluigi M Butterfield DA Cornelius C Calabrese V Oxidative damage in rat brain during aging: interplay between energy and metabolic key target proteins. Neurochem Res 2010 35 2184 2192 20963486
Di Domenico F Sultana R Ferree A Smith K Barone E Perluigi M Coccia R Pierce W Cai J Mancuso C Redox proteomics analyses of the influence of co-expression of wild-type or mutated LRRK2 and Tau on C. elegans protein expression and oxidative modification: relevance to Parkinson disease. Antioxid Redox Signal 2012 17 1490 1506 22315971
Di Fonzo A Chien HF Socal M Giraudo S Tassorelli C Iliceto G Fabbrini G Marconi R Fincati E Abbruzzese G ATP13A2 missense mutations in juvenile parkinsonism and young onset Parkinson disease. Neurology 2007 68 1557 1562 17485642
Djarmati A Hagenah J Reetz K Winkler S Behrens MI Pawlack H Lohmann K Ramirez A Tadic V Bruggemann N ATP13A2 variants in early-onset Parkinson's disease patients and controls. Mov Disord 2009 24 2104 2111 19705361
Dobrowolski R Vick P Ploper D Gumper I Snitkin H Sabatini DD De Robertis EM Presenilin deficiency or lysosomal inhibition enhances Wnt signaling through relocalization of GSK3 to the late-endosomal compartment. Cell Rep 2012 2 1316 1328 23122960
Dubos A Castells-Nobau A Meziane H Oortveld MA Houbaert X Iacono G Martin C Mittelhaeuser C Lalanne V Kramer JM Conditional depletion of intellectual disability and Parkinsonism candidate gene ATP6AP2 in fly and mouse induces cognitive impairment and neurodegeneration. Hum Mol Genet 2015 24 6736 6755 26376863
Efeyan A Zoncu R Sabatini DM Amino acids and mTORC1: from lysosomes to disease. Trends Mol Med 2012 18 524 533 22749019
Einhorn Z Trapani JG Liu Q Nicolson T Rabconnectin3alpha promotes stable activity of the H+ pump on synaptic vesicles in hair cells. J Neurosci 2012 32 11144 11156 22875945
Emre M Aarsland D Brown R Burn DJ Duyckaerts C Mizuno Y Broe GA Cummings J Dickson DW Gauthier S Clinical diagnostic criteria for dementia associated with Parkinson's disease. Mov Disord 2007 22 1689 1707 quiz 1837 17542011
Farias FH Zeng R Johnson GS Wininger FA Taylor JF Schnabel RD McKay SD Sanders DN Lohi H Seppala EH A truncating mutation in ATP13A2 is responsible for adult-onset neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis in Tibetan terriers. Neurobiol Dis 2011 42 468 474 21362476
Felbor U Kessler B Mothes W Goebel HH Ploegh HL Bronson RT Olsen BR Neuronal loss and brain atrophy in mice lacking cathepsins B and L. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2002 99 7883 7888 12048238
Finnigan GC Ryan M Stevens TH A genome-wide enhancer screen implicates sphingolipid composition in vacuolar ATPase function in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Genetics 2011 187 771 783 21196517
Fiorini A Sultana R Forster S Perluigi M Cenini G Cini C Cai J Klein JB Farr SA Niehoff ML Antisense directed against PS-1 gene decreases brain oxidative markers in aged senescence accelerated mice (SAMP8) and reverses learning and memory impairment: a proteomics study. Free Radic Biol Med 2013 65 1 14 23777706
Forgac M Vacuolar ATPases: rotary proton pumps in physiology and pathophysiology. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2007 8 917 929 17912264
Frake RA Ricketts T Menzies FM Rubinsztein DC Autophagy and neurodegeneration. J Clin Invest 2015 125 65 74 25654552
Fry AC Karet FE Inherited renal acidoses. Physiology (Bethesda) 2007 22 202 211 17557941
Fu Y Zhao D Pan B Wang J Cui Y Shi F Wang C Yin X Zhou X Yang L Proteomic Analysis of Protein Expression Throughout Disease Progression in a Mouse Model of Alzheimer's Disease. J Alzheimers Dis 2015 47 915 926 26401771
Fujisawa Y Kato K Giulivi C Nitration of tyrosine residues 368 and 345 in the beta-subunit elicits FoF1-ATPase activity loss. Biochem J 2009 423 219 231 19650768
Funakoshi-Hirose I Aki T Unuma K Funakoshi T Noritake K Uemura K Distinct effects of methamphetamine on autophagy-lysosome and ubiquitin-proteasome systems in HL-1 cultured mouse atrial cardiomyocytes. Toxicology 2013 312 74 82 23933405
Futerman AH van Meer G The cell biology of lysosomal storage disorders. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2004 5 554 565 15232573
Gan-Or Z Dion PA Rouleau GA Genetic perspective on the role of the autophagy lysosome pathway in Parkinson disease. Autophagy 2015 11 1443 1457 26207393
Genis D Davalos A Molins A Ferrer I Wolfram syndrome: a neuropathological study. Acta Neuropathol 1997 93 426 429 9113209
Gharanei S Zatyka M Astuti D Fenton J Sik A Nagy Z Barrett TG Vacuolar-type H+-ATPase V1A subunit is a molecular partner of Wolfram syndrome 1 (WFS1) protein, which regulates its expression and stability. Hum Mol Genet 2013 22 203 217 23035048
Ginsberg SD Alldred MJ Counts SE Cataldo AM Neve RL Jiang Y Wuu J Chao MV Mufson EJ Nixon RA Microarray analysis of hippocampal CA1 neurons implicates early endosomal dysfunction during Alzheimer's disease progression. Biological psychiatry 2010 68 885 893 20655510
Gitler AD Chesi A Geddie ML Strathearn KE Hamamichi S Hill KJ Caldwell KA Caldwell GA Cooper AA Rochet JC Alpha-synuclein is part of a diverse and highly conserved interaction network that includes PARK9 and manganese toxicity. Nat Genet 2009 41 308 315 19182805
Gotzl JK Mori K Damme M Fellerer K Tahirovic S Kleinberger G Janssens J van der Zee J Lang CM Kremmer E Common pathobiochemical hallmarks of progranulin-associated frontotemporal lobar degeneration and neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis. Acta Neuropathol 2014 127 845 860 24619111
Guicciardi ME Leist M Gores GJ Lysosomes in cell death. Oncogene 2004 23 2881 2890 15077151
Guillard M Dimopoulou A Fischer B Morava E Lefeber DJ Kornak U Wevers RA Vacuolar H+-ATPase meets glycosylation in patients with cutis laxa. Biochim Biophys Acta 2009 1792 903 914 19171192
Hara T Nakamura K Matsui M Yamamoto A Nakahara Y Suzuki-Migishima R Yokoyama M Mishima K Saito I Okano H Suppression of basal autophagy in neural cells causes neurodegenerative disease in mice. Nature 2006 441 885 889 16625204
Harris H Rubinsztein DC Control of autophagy as a therapy for neurodegenerative disease. Nat Rev Neurol 2012 8 108 117
Hatanaka M Tanabe K Yanai A Ohta Y Kondo M Akiyama M Shinoda K Oka Y Tanizawa Y Wolfram syndrome 1 gene (WFS1) product localizes to secretory granules and determines granule acidification in pancreatic beta-cells. Hum Mol Genet 2011 20 1274 1284 21199859
Haynes V Traaseth NJ Elfering S Fujisawa Y Giulivi C Nitration of specific tyrosines in FoF1 ATP synthase and activity loss in aging. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2010 298 E978 987 20159857
He C Klionsky DJ Regulation mechanisms and signaling pathways of autophagy. Annu Rev Genet 2009 43 67 93 19653858
Hedera P Alvarado D Beydoun A Fink JK Novel mental retardation-epilepsy syndrome linked to Xp21.1-p11.4. Ann Neurol 2002 51 45 50 11782983
Hennings JC Picard N Huebner AK Stauber T Maier H Brown D Jentsch TJ Vargas-Poussou R Eladari D Hubner CA A mouse model for distal renal tubular acidosis reveals a previously unrecognized role of the V-ATPase a4 subunit in the proximal tubule. EMBO Mol Med 2012 4 1057 1071 22933323
Henry AG Aghamohammadzadeh S Samaroo H Chen Y Mou K Needle E Hirst WD Pathogenic LRRK2 mutations, through increased kinase activity, produce enlarged lysosomes with reduced degradative capacity and increase ATP13A2 expression. Hum Mol Genet 2015 24 6013 6028 26251043
Hughes AL Gottschling DE An early age increase in vacuolar pH limits mitochondrial function and lifespan in yeast. Nature 2012 492 261 265 23172144
Hui L Chen X Geiger JD Endolysosome involvement in LDL cholesterol-induced Alzheimer's disease-like pathology in primary cultured neurons. Life Sci 2012 91 1159 1168 22580286
Inoue H Tanizawa Y Wasson J Behn P Kalidas K Bernal-Mizrachi E Mueckler M Marshall H Donis-Keller H Crock P A gene encoding a transmembrane protein is mutated in patients with diabetes mellitus and optic atrophy (Wolfram syndrome). Nat Genet 1998 20 143 148 9771706
Ivy GO Kanai S Ohta M Smith G Sato Y Kobayashi M Kitani K Lipofuscin-like substances accumulate rapidly in brain, retina and internal organs with cysteine protease inhibition. Adv Exp Med Biol 1989 266 31 45 discussion 45-37 2486158
Ji Z-SS Miranda RD Newhouse YM Weisgraber KH Huang Y Mahley RW Apolipoprotein E4 potentiates amyloid beta peptide-induced lysosomal leakage and apoptosis in neuronal cells. The Journal of biological chemistry 2002 277 21821 21828 11912196
Ji Z-SS Müllendorff K Cheng IH Miranda RD Huang Y Mahley RW Reactivity of apolipoprotein E4 and amyloid beta peptide: lysosomal stability and neurodegeneration. The Journal of biological chemistry 2006 281 2683 2692 16298992
Johnson DE Ostrowski P Jaumouille V Grinstein S The position of lysosomes within the cell determines their luminal pH. J Cell Biol 2016 212 677 692 26975849
Kalinderi K Bostantjopoulou S Fidani L The genetic background of Parkinson's disease: current progress and future prospects. Acta Neurol Scand 2016
Kane PM Disassembly and reassembly of the yeast vacuolar H(+)-ATPase in vivo. J Biol Chem 1995 270 17025 17032 7622524
Karet FE Finberg KE Nayir A Bakkaloglu A Ozen S Hulton SA Sanjad SA Al-Sabban EA Medina JF Lifton RP Localization of a gene for autosomal recessive distal renal tubular acidosis with normal hearing (rdRTA2) to 7q33-34. Am J Hum Genet 1999a 65 1656 1665 10577919
Karet FE Finberg KE Nelson RD Nayir A Mocan H Sanjad SA Rodriguez-Soriano J Santos F Cremers CW Di Pietro A Mutations in the gene encoding B1 subunit of H+-ATPase cause renal tubular acidosis with sensorineural deafness. Nat Genet 1999b 21 84 90 9916796
Kawamura N Tabata H Sun-Wada GH Wada Y Optic nerve compression and retinal degeneration in Tcirg1 mutant mice lacking the vacuolar-type H-ATPase a3 subunit. PLoS One 2010 5 e12086 20711468
Keith CG Retinal atrophy in osteopetrosis. Arch Ophthalmol 1968 79 234 241 4170880
Kett LR Stiller B Bernath MM Tasset I Blesa J Jackson-Lewis V Chan RB Zhou B Di Paolo G Przedborski S alpha-Synuclein-independent histopathological and motor deficits in mice lacking the endolysosomal Parkinsonism protein Atp13a2. J Neurosci 2015 35 5724 5742 25855184
Kettner C Bertl A Obermeyer G Slayman C Bihler H Electrophysiological analysis of the yeast V-type proton pump: variable coupling ratio and proton shunt. Biophys J 2003 85 3730 3738 14645064
Kiffin R Bandyopadhyay U Cuervo AM Oxidative stress and autophagy. Antioxid Redox Signal 2006 8 152 162 16487049
Kim S Sato Y Mohan PS Peterhoff C Pensalfini A Rigoglioso A Jiang Y Nixon RA Evidence that the rab5 effector APPL1 mediates APP-betaCTF-induced dysfunction of endosomes in Down syndrome and Alzheimer's disease. Mol Psychiatry 2015
Kinouchi K Ichihara A Itoh H Functional characterization of (pro)renin receptor in association with V-ATPase. Front Biosci (Landmark Ed) 2011 16 3216 3223 21622230
Kinouchi K Ichihara A Sano M Sun-Wada GH Wada Y Kurauchi-Mito A Bokuda K Narita T Oshima Y Sakoda M The (pro)renin receptor/ATP6AP2 is essential for vacuolar H+-ATPase assembly in murine cardiomyocytes. Circ Res 2010 107 30 34 20570919
Kinouchi K Ichihara A Sano M Sun-Wada GH Wada Y Ochi H Fukuda T Bokuda K Kurosawa H Yoshida N The role of individual domains and the significance of shedding of ATP6AP2/(pro)renin receptor in vacuolar H(+)-ATPase biogenesis. PLoS One 2013 8 e78603 24223829
Klionsky DJ Codogno P Cuervo AM Deretic V Elazar Z Fueyo-Margareto J Gewirtz DA Kroemer G Levine B Mizushima N A comprehensive glossary of autophagy-related molecules and processes. Autophagy 2010 6 438 448 20484971
Komatsu M Waguri S Chiba T Murata S Iwata J Tanida I Ueno T Koike M Uchiyama Y Kominami E Loss of autophagy in the central nervous system causes neurodegeneration in mice. Nature 2006 441 880 884 16625205
Kornak U Reynders E Dimopoulou A van Reeuwijk J Fischer B Rajab A Budde B Nurnberg P Foulquier F Group A.D.-t.S. Impaired glycosylation and cutis laxa caused by mutations in the vesicular H+-ATPase subunit ATP6V0A2. Nat Genet 2008 40 32 34 18157129
Kornak U Schulz A Friedrich W Uhlhaas S Kremens B Voit T Hasan C Bode U Jentsch TJ Kubisch C Mutations in the a3 subunit of the vacuolar H(+)-ATPase cause infantile malignant osteopetrosis. Hum Mol Genet 2000 9 2059 2063 10942435
Kortum F Caputo V Bauer CK Stella L Ciolfi A Alawi M Bocchinfuso G Flex E Paolacci S Dentici ML Mutations in KCNH1 and ATP6V1B2 cause Zimmermann-Laband syndrome. Nat Genet 2015 47 661 667 25915598
Korvatska O Strand NS Berndt JD Strovas T Chen DH Leverenz JB Kiianitsa K Mata IF Karakoc E Greenup JL Altered splicing of ATP6AP2 causes X-linked parkinsonism with spasticity (XPDS). Hum Mol Genet 2013 22 3259 3268 23595882
Kukic I Kelleher SL Kiselyov K Zn2+ efflux through lysosomal exocytosis prevents Zn2+-induced toxicity. J Cell Sci 2014 127 3094 3103 24829149
Kurz T Eaton JW Brunk UT Redox activity within the lysosomal compartment: implications for aging and apoptosis. Antioxid Redox Signal 2010 13 511 523 20039839
Kurz T Terman A Gustafsson B Brunk UT Lysosomes and oxidative stress in aging and apoptosis. Biochim Biophys Acta 2008 1780 1291 1303 18255041
Lee J-HH Yu WH Kumar A Lee S Mohan PS Peterhoff CM Wolfe DM Martinez-Vicente M Massey AC Sovak G Lysosomal proteolysis and autophagy require presenilin 1 and are disrupted by Alzheimer-related PS1 mutations. Cell 2010a 141 1146 1158 20541250
Lee JH McBrayer MK Wolfe DM Haslett LJ Kumar A Sato Y Lie PP Mohan P Coffey EE Kompella U Presenilin 1 Maintains Lysosomal Ca(2+) Homeostasis via TRPML1 by Regulating vATPase-Mediated Lysosome Acidification. Cell Rep 2015 12 1430 1444 26299959
Lee JH Yu WH Kumar A Lee S Mohan PS Peterhoff CM Wolfe DM Martinez-Vicente M Massey AC Sovak G Lysosomal proteolysis and autophagy require presenilin 1 and are disrupted by Alzheimer-related PS1 mutations. Cell 2010b 141 1146 1158 20541250
Lee S Sato Y Nixon RA Primary lysosomal dysfunction causes cargo-specific deficits of axonal transport leading to Alzheimer-like neuritic dystrophy. Autophagy 2011 7 1562 1563 22024748
Levine B Kroemer G Autophagy in the pathogenesis of disease. Cell 2008 132 27 42 18191218
Liberman R Bond S Shainheit MG Stadecker MJ Forgac M Regulated assembly of vacuolar ATPase is increased during cluster disruption-induced maturation of dendritic cells through a phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/mTOR-dependent pathway. J Biol Chem 2014 289 1355 1363 24273170
Lin CH Tan EK Chen ML Tan LC Lim HQ Chen GS Wu RM Novel ATP13A2 variant associated with Parkinson disease in Taiwan and Singapore. Neurology 2008 71 1727 1732 19015489
Liu J Lu W Reigada D Nguyen J Laties AM Mitchell CH Restoration of lysosomal pH in RPE cells from cultured human and ABCA4(−/−) mice: pharmacologic approaches and functional recovery. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2008 49 772 780 18235027
Lorente-Canovas B Ingham N Norgett EE Golder ZJ Karet Frankl FE Steel KP Mice deficient in H+-ATPase a4 subunit have severe hearing impairment associated with enlarged endolymphatic compartments within the inner ear. Dis Model Mech 2013 6 434 442 23065636
Mahley RW Huang Y Apolipoprotein (apo) E4 and Alzheimer's disease: unique conformational and biophysical properties of apoE4 can modulate neuropathology. Acta Neurol Scand Suppl 2006 185 8 14 16866905
Majumdar A Capetillo-Zarate E Cruz D Gouras GK Maxfield FR Degradation of Alzheimer's amyloid fibrils by microglia requires delivery of ClC-7 to lysosomes. Molecular biology of the cell 2011 22 1664 1676 21441306
Malkus P Graham LA Stevens TH Schekman R Role of Vma21p in assembly and transport of the yeast vacuolar ATPase. Mol Biol Cell 2004 15 5075 5091 15356264
Mangieri LR Mader BJ Thomas CE Taylor CA Luker AM Tse TE Huisingh C Shacka JJ ATP6V0C knockdown in neuroblastoma cells alters autophagy-lysosome pathway function and metabolism of proteins that accumulate in neurodegenerative disease. PLoS One 2014 9 e93257 24695574
Manuel T Sebastian J Raquel S-V Victoria N Laura T-E Elisabeth S-M Irene C Jose Carlos D Marisa V Antonia G Defective lysosomal proteolysis and axonal transport are early pathogenic events that worsen with age leading to increased APP metabolism and synaptic Abeta in transgenic APP/PS1 hippocampus. Molecular Neurodegeneration 2012 7 59 23173743
Marjuki H Gornitzky A Marathe BM Ilyushina NA Aldridge JR Desai G Webby RJ Webster RG Influenza A virus-induced early activation of ERK and PI3K mediates V-ATPase-dependent intracellular pH change required for fusion. Cell Microbiol 2011 13 587 601 21129142
Marshansky V Rubinstein JL Gruber G Eukaryotic V-ATPase: novel structural findings and functional insights. Biochim Biophys Acta 2014 1837 857 879 24508215
Martinez-Vicente M Talloczy Z Kaushik S Massey AC Mazzulli J Mosharov EV Hodara R Fredenburg R Wu DC Follenzi A Dopamine-modified alpha-synuclein blocks chaperone-mediated autophagy. J Clin Invest 2008 118 777 788 18172548
Masashi T Regina S Michael F Regulation and isoform function of the V-ATPases. Biochemistry 2010 49 4715 4723 20450191
Maxfield FR Role of endosomes and lysosomes in human disease. Cold Spring Harbor perspectives in biology 2014 6
Mazzulli JR Xu YH Sun Y Knight AL McLean PJ Caldwell GA Sidransky E Grabowski GA Krainc D Gaucher disease glucocerebrosidase and alpha-synuclein form a bidirectional pathogenic loop in synucleinopathies. Cell 2011 146 37 52 21700325
McBrayer M Nixon RA Lysosome and calcium dysregulation in Alzheimer's disease: partners in crime. Biochem Soc Trans 2013 41 1495 1502 24256243
Meikle PJ Hopwood JJ Clague AE Carey WF Prevalence of lysosomal storage disorders. JAMA 1999 281 249 254 9918480
Menzies FM Fleming A Rubinsztein DC Compromised autophagy and neurodegenerative diseases. Nat Rev Neurosci 2015 16 345 357 25991442
Mindell JA Lysosomal acidification mechanisms. Annu Rev Physiol 2012 74 69 86 22335796
Molin M Demir AB Linking Peroxiredoxin and Vacuolar-ATPase Functions in Calorie Restriction-Mediated Life Span Extension. Int J Cell Biol 2014 2014 913071 24639875
Morava E Lefeber DJ Urban Z de Meirleir L Meinecke P Gillessen Kaesbach G Sykut-Cegielska J Adamowicz M Salafsky I Ranells J Defining the phenotype in an autosomal recessive cutis laxa syndrome with a combined congenital defect of glycosylation. Eur J Hum Genet 2008 16 28 35 17971833
Morel N Neurotransmitter release: the dark side of the vacuolar-H+ATPase. Biol Cell 2003 95 453 457 14597263
Muench SP Trinick J Harrison MA Structural divergence of the rotary ATPases. Q Rev Biophys 2011 44 311 356 21426606
Nakamura N Matsuura A Wada Y Ohsumi Y Acidification of vacuoles is required for autophagic degradation in the yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae. J Biochem 1997 121 338 344 9089409
Nakamura S Glucose activates H(+)-ATPase in kidney epithelial cells. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 2004 287 C97 105 15189820
Nelson N Evolution of organellar proton-ATPases. Biochim Biophys Acta 1992 1100 109 124 1535221
Nixon RA Niemann-Pick Type C disease and Alzheimer's disease: the APP-endosome connection fattens up. Am J Pathol 2004 164 757 761 14982829
Nixon RA The role of autophagy in neurodegenerative disease. Nat Med 2013a 19 983 997 23921753
Nixon RA The role of autophagy in neurodegenerative disease. Nature medicine 2013b 19 983 997
Nixon RA Cataldo AM Lysosomal system pathways: genes to neurodegeneration in Alzheimer's disease. Journal of Alzheimer's disease : JAD 2006 9 277 289 16914867
Nixon RA Wegiel J Kumar A Yu WH Peterhoff C Cataldo A Cuervo AM Extensive involvement of autophagy in Alzheimer disease: an immuno-electron microscopy study. Journal of neuropathology and experimental neurology 2005 64 113 122 15751225
Nixon RA Yang D-SS Autophagy failure in Alzheimer's disease--locating the primary defect. Neurobiology of disease 2011 43 38 45 21296668
Nixon RA Yang D-SS Lee J-HH Neurodegenerative lysosomal disorders: a continuum from development to late age. Autophagy 2008 4 590 599 18497567
Norgett EE Golder ZJ Lorente-Canovas B Ingham N Steel KP Karet Frankl FE Atp6v0a4 knockout mouse is a model of distal renal tubular acidosis with hearing loss, with additional extrarenal phenotype. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2012 109 13775 13780 22872862
Pal R Bajaj L Sharma J Palmieri M Di Ronza A Lotfi P Chaudhury A Neilson J Sardiello M Rodney GG NADPH oxidase promotes Parkinsonian phenotypes by impairing autophagic flux in an mTORC1-independent fashion in a cellular model of Parkinson's disease. Sci Rep 2016 6 22866 26960433
Park JS Blair NF Sue CM The role of ATP13A2 in Parkinson's disease: Clinical phenotypes and molecular mechanisms. Mov Disord 2015 30 770 779 25900096
Patton MA Tolmie J Ruthnum P Bamforth S Baraitser M Pembrey M Congenital cutis laxa with retardation of growth and development. J Med Genet 1987 24 556 561 3669050
Paunescu TG Rodriguez S Benz E McKee M Tyszkowski R Albers MW Brown D Loss of the V-ATPase B1 subunit isoform expressed in non-neuronal cells of the mouse olfactory epithelium impairs olfactory function. PLoS One 2012 7 e45395 23028982
Pena-Llopis S Brugarolas J TFEB, a novel mTORC1 effector implicated in lysosome biogenesis, endocytosis and autophagy. Cell Cycle 2011 10 3987 3988 22101272
Pena-Llopis S Vega-Rubin-de-Celis S Schwartz JC Wolff NC Tran TA Zou L Xie XJ Corey DR Brugarolas J Regulation of TFEB and V-ATPases by mTORC1. EMBO J 2011 30 3242 3258 21804531
Poewe WH Wenning GK The natural history of Parkinson's disease. Ann Neurol 1998 44 S1 9 9749568
Polito VA Li H Martini-Stoica H Wang B Yang L Xu Y Swartzlander DB Palmieri M di Ronza A Lee VM Selective clearance of aberrant tau proteins and rescue of neurotoxicity by transcription factor EB. EMBO Mol Med 2014 6 1142 1160 25069841
Polymeropoulos MH Lavedan C Leroy E Ide SE Dehejia A Dutra A Pike B Root H Rubenstein J Boyer R Mutation in the alpha-synuclein gene identified in families with Parkinson's disease. Science 1997 276 2045 2047 9197268
Poorkaj P Raskind WH Leverenz JB Matsushita M Zabetian CP Samii A Kim S Gazi N Nutt JG Wolff J A novel X-linked four-repeat tauopathy with Parkinsonism and spasticity. Mov Disord 2010 25 1409 1417 20629132
Porter K Nallathambi J Lin Y Liton PB Lysosomal basification and decreased autophagic flux in oxidatively stressed trabecular meshwork cells: implications for glaucoma pathogenesis. Autophagy 2013 9 581 594 23360789
Qi J Forgac M Cellular environment is important in controlling V-ATPase dissociation and its dependence on activity. J Biol Chem 2007 282 24743 24751 17565997
Querfurth HW LaFerla FM Alzheimer's disease. N Engl J Med 2010 362 329 344 20107219
Ramirez A Heimbach A Grundemann J Stiller B Hampshire D Cid LP Goebel I Mubaidin AF Wriekat AL Roeper J Hereditary parkinsonism with dementia is caused by mutations in ATP13A2, encoding a lysosomal type 5 P-type ATPase. Nat Genet 2006 38 1184 1191 16964263
Ramser J Abidi FE Burckle CA Lenski C Toriello H Wen G Lubs HA Engert S Stevenson RE Meindl A A unique exonic splice enhancer mutation in a family with X-linked mental retardation and epilepsy points to a novel role of the renin receptor. Hum Mol Genet 2005 14 1019 1027 15746149
Ravikumar B Sarkar S Davies JE Futter M Garcia-Arencibia M Green-Thompson ZW Jimenez-Sanchez M Korolchuk VI Lichtenberg M Luo S Regulation of mammalian autophagy in physiology and pathophysiology. Physiol Rev 2010 90 1383 1435 20959619
Rawson S Phillips C Huss M Tiburcy F Wieczorek H Trinick J Harrison MA Muench SP Structure of the vacuolar H+-ATPase rotary motor reveals new mechanistic insights. Structure 2015 23 461 471 25661654
Richo GR Conner GE Structural requirements of procathepsin D activation and maturation. J Biol Chem 1994 269 14806 14812 8182087
Rigoli L Di Bella C Wolfram syndrome 1 and Wolfram syndrome 2. Curr Opin Pediatr 2012 24 512 517 22790102
Rubinsztein DC The roles of intracellular protein-degradation pathways in neurodegeneration. Nature 2006 443 780 786 17051204
Rubinsztein DC DiFiglia M Heintz N Nixon RA Qin Z-HH Ravikumar B Stefanis L Tolkovsky A Autophagy and its possible roles in nervous system diseases, damage and repair. Autophagy 2005 1 11 22 16874045
Rubinsztein DC Marino G Kroemer G Autophagy and aging. Cell 2011 146 682 695 21884931
Ruckenstuhl C Netzberger C Entfellner I Carmona-Gutierrez D Kickenweiz T Stekovic S Gleixner C Schmid C Klug L Sorgo AG Lifespan extension by methionine restriction requires autophagy-dependent vacuolar acidification. PLoS Genet 2014 10 e1004347 24785424
Rucker JC Shapiro BE Han YH Kumar AN Garbutt S Keller EL Leigh RJ Neuro-ophthalmology of late-onset Tay-Sachs disease (LOTS). Neurology 2004 63 1918 1926 15557512
Ryu J Kim H Chang EJ Kim HJ Lee Y Kim HH Proteomic analysis of osteoclast lipid rafts: the role of the integrity of lipid rafts on V-ATPase activity in osteoclasts. J Bone Miner Metab 2010 28 410 417 20127130
Sancak Y Bar-Peled L Zoncu R Markhard AL Nada S Sabatini DM Ragulator-Rag complex targets mTORC1 to the lysosomal surface and is necessary for its activation by amino acids. Cell 2010 141 290 303 20381137
Sancak Y Peterson TR Shaul YD Lindquist RA Thoreen CC Bar-Peled L Sabatini DM The Rag GTPases bind raptor and mediate amino acid signaling to mTORC1. Science 2008 320 1496 1501 18497260
Sardiello M Palmieri M di Ronza A Medina DL Valenza M Gennarino VA Di Malta C Donaudy F Embrione V Polishchuk RS A gene network regulating lysosomal biogenesis and function. Science 2009 325 473 477 19556463
Saroussi S Nelson N The little we know on the structure and machinery of V-ATPase. J Exp Biol 2009a 212 1604 1610 19448070
Saroussi S Nelson N Vacuolar H(+)-ATPase-an enzyme for all seasons. Pflugers Arch 2009b 457 581 587 18320212
Sautin YY Lu M Gaugler A Zhang L Gluck SL Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-mediated effects of glucose on vacuolar H+-ATPase assembly, translocation, and acidification of intracellular compartments in renal epithelial cells. Mol Cell Biol 2005 25 575 589 15632060
Schleit J Johnson SC Bennett CF Simko M Trongtham N Castanza A Hsieh EJ Moller RM Wasko BM Delaney JR Molecular mechanisms underlying genotype-dependent responses to dietary restriction. Aging Cell 2013 12 1050 1061 23837470
Schultheis PJ Fleming SM Clippinger AK Lewis J Tsunemi T Giasson B Dickson DW Mazzulli JR Bardgett ME Haik KL Atp13a2-deficient mice exhibit neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis, limited alpha-synuclein accumulation and age-dependent sensorimotor deficits. Hum Mol Genet 2013 22 2067 2082 23393156
Serrano-Pozo A Frosch MP Masliah E Hyman BT Neuropathological alterations in Alzheimer disease. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2011 1 a006189 22229116
Sethi N Yan Y Quek D Schupbach T Kang Y Rabconnectin-3 is a functional regulator of mammalian Notch signaling. J Biol Chem 2010 285 34757 34764 20810660
Settembre C Di Malta C Polito VA Garcia Arencibia M Vetrini F Erdin S Erdin SU Huynh T Medina D Colella P TFEB links autophagy to lysosomal biogenesis. Science 2011 332 1429 1433 21617040
Singh R Kaushik S Wang Y Xiang Y Novak I Komatsu M Tanaka K Cuervo AM Czaja MJ Autophagy regulates lipid metabolism. Nature 2009 458 1131 1135 19339967
Singleton AB Farrer M Johnson J Singleton A Hague S Kachergus J Hulihan M Peuralinna T Dutra A Nussbaum R alpha-Synuclein locus triplication causes Parkinson's disease. Science 2003 302 841 14593171
Sobacchi C Frattini A Orchard P Porras O Tezcan I Andolina M Babul-Hirji R Baric I Canham N Chitayat D The mutational spectrum of human malignant autosomal recessive osteopetrosis. Hum Mol Genet 2001 10 1767 1773 11532986
Spampanato C Feeney E Li L Cardone M Lim JA Annunziata F Zare H Polishchuk R Puertollano R Parenti G Transcription factor EB (TFEB) is a new therapeutic target for Pompe disease. EMBO Mol Med 2013 5 691 706 23606558
Stefanis L Larsen KE Rideout HJ Sulzer D Greene LA Expression of A53T mutant but not wild-type alpha-synuclein in PC12 cells induces alterations of the ubiquitin-dependent degradation system, loss of dopamine release, and autophagic cell death. J Neurosci 2001 21 9549 9560 11739566
Steinberg BE Huynh KK Brodovitch A Jabs S Stauber T Jentsch TJ Grinstein S A cation counterflux supports lysosomal acidification. J Cell Biol 2010 189 1171 1186 20566682
Stover EH Borthwick KJ Bavalia C Eady N Fritz DM Rungroj N Giersch AB Morton CC Axon PR Akil I Novel ATP6V1B1 and ATP6V0A4 mutations in autosomal recessive distal renal tubular acidosis with new evidence for hearing loss. J Med Genet 2002 39 796 803 12414817
Stransky LA Forgac M Amino Acid Availability Modulates Vacuolar H+-ATPase Assembly. J Biol Chem 2015 290 27360 27369 26378229
Strom TM Hortnagel K Hofmann S Gekeler F Scharfe C Rabl W Gerbitz KD Meitinger T Diabetes insipidus, diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy and deafness (DIDMOAD) caused by mutations in a novel gene (wolframin) coding for a predicted transmembrane protein. Hum Mol Genet 1998 7 2021 2028 9817917
Su YC Qi X Inhibition of excessive mitochondrial fission reduced aberrant autophagy and neuronal damage caused by LRRK2 G2019S mutation. Hum Mol Genet 2013 22 4545 4561 23813973
Tiburcy F Beyenbach KW Wieczorek H Protein kinase A-dependent and -independent activation of the V-ATPase in Malpighian tubules of Aedes aegypti. J Exp Biol 2013 216 881 891 23197085
Tolar J Teitelbaum SL Orchard PJ Osteopetrosis. N Engl J Med 2004 351 2839 2849 15625335
Torres M Jimenez S Sanchez-Varo R Navarro V Trujillo-Estrada L Sanchez-Mejias E Carmona I Davila JC Vizuete M Gutierrez A Defective lysosomal proteolysis and axonal transport are early pathogenic events that worsen with age leading to increased APP metabolism and synaptic Abeta in transgenic APP/PS1 hippocampus. Mol Neurodegener 2012 7 59 23173743
Toyomura T Murata Y Yamamoto A Oka T Sun-Wada GH Wada Y Futai M From lysosomes to the plasma membrane: localization of vacuolar-type H+ -ATPase with the a3 isoform during osteoclast differentiation. J Biol Chem 2003 278 22023 22030 12672822
Trombetta ES Ebersold M Garrett W Pypaert M Mellman I Activation of lysosomal function during dendritic cell maturation. Science 2003 299 1400 1403 12610307
Troncoso JC Cataldo AM Nixon RA Barnett JL Lee MK Checler F Fowler DR Smialek JE Crain B Martin LJ Neuropathology of preclinical and clinical late-onset Alzheimer's disease. Annals of neurology 1998 43 673 676 9585365
Urano F Wolfram Syndrome: Diagnosis, Management, and Treatment. Curr Diab Rep 2016 16 6 26742931
Usenovic M Tresse E Mazzulli JR Taylor JP Krainc D Deficiency of ATP13A2 leads to lysosomal dysfunction, alpha-synuclein accumulation, and neurotoxicity. J Neurosci 2012 32 4240 4246 22442086
van Schalkwyk DA Saliba KJ Biagini GA Bray PG Kirk K Loss of pH control in Plasmodium falciparum parasites subjected to oxidative stress. PLoS One 2013 8 e58933 23536836
van Veen S Sorensen DM Holemans T Holen HW Palmgren MG Vangheluwe P Cellular function and pathological role of ATP13A2 and related P-type transport ATPases in Parkinson's disease and other neurological disorders. Front Mol Neurosci 2014 7 48 24904274
Vavassori S Mayer A A new life for an old pump: V-ATPase and neurotransmitter release. J Cell Biol 2014 205 7 9 24733582
Vedovelli L Rothermel JT Finberg KE Wagner CA Azroyan A Hill E Breton S Brown D Paunescu TG Altered V-ATPase expression in renal intercalated cells isolated from B1 subunit-deficient mice by fluorescence-activated cell sorting. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 2013 304 F522 532 23269648
Venzano V Conforti G Marchesi A Minetti C Iester A [The association of juvenile diabetes mellitus, primary optic atrophy and deafness (the Wolfram and Ikkos syndrome). Apropos of a personal case]. Minerva Pediatr 1980 32 685 692 7005648
Verghese PB Castellano JM Holtzman DM Apolipoprotein E in Alzheimer's disease and other neurological disorders. Lancet Neurol 2011 10 241 252 21349439
Vinicia AP Hongmei L Heidi MS Baiping W Li Y Yin X Daniel BS Michela P Alberto R Virginia M- YL Selective clearance of aberrant tau proteins and rescue of neurotoxicity by transcription factor EB. EMBO Molecular Medicine 2014 6 1142 1160 25069841
Wakabayashi K Gustafson AM Sidransky E Goldin E Mucolipidosis type IV: an update. Mol Genet Metab 2011 104 206 213 21763169
Wang S Tsun ZY Wolfson RL Shen K Wyant GA Plovanich ME Yuan ED Jones TD Chantranupong L Comb W Metabolism. Lysosomal amino acid transporter SLC38A9 signals arginine sufficiency to mTORC1. Science 2015 347 188 194 25567906
Wang X Yan MH Fujioka H Liu J Wilson-Delfosse A Chen SG Perry G Casadesus G Zhu X LRRK2 regulates mitochondrial dynamics and function through direct interaction with DLP1. Hum Mol Genet 2012 21 1931 1944 22228096
Wang Y Floor E Hydrogen peroxide inhibits the vacuolar H+-ATPase in brain synaptic vesicles at micromolar concentrations. J Neurochem 1998 70 646 652 9453558
Wienisch M Klingauf J Vesicular proteins exocytosed and subsequently retrieved by compensatory endocytosis are nonidentical. Nat Neurosci 2006 9 1019 1027 16845386
Williamson WR Hiesinger PR On the role of v-ATPase V0a1-dependent degradation in Alzheimer disease. Commun Integr Biol 2010 3 604 607 21331254
Williamson WR Wang D Haberman AS Hiesinger PR A dual function of V0-ATPase a1 provides an endolysosomal degradation mechanism in Drosophila melanogaster photoreceptors. J Cell Biol 2010 189 885 899 20513768
Wohlke A Philipp U Bock P Beineke A Lichtner P Meitinger T Distl O A one base pair deletion in the canine ATP13A2 gene causes exon skipping and late-onset neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis in the Tibetan terrier. PLoS Genet 2011 7 e1002304 22022275
Wolfe DM Lee J-HH Kumar A Lee S Orenstein SJ Nixon RA Autophagy failure in Alzheimer's disease and the role of defective lysosomal acidification. The European journal of neuroscience 2013a 37 1949 1961 23773064
Wolfe DM Lee JH Kumar A Lee S Orenstein SJ Nixon RA Autophagy failure in Alzheimer's disease and the role of defective lysosomal acidification. Eur J Neurosci 2013b 37 1949 1961 23773064
Xiao Q Yan P Ma X Liu H Perez R Zhu A Gonzales E Tripoli DL Czerniewski L Ballabio A Neuronal-Targeted TFEB Accelerates Lysosomal Degradation of APP, Reducing Abeta Generation and Amyloid Plaque Pathogenesis. J Neurosci 2015 35 12137 12151 26338325
Xilouri M Vogiatzi T Vekrellis K Park D Stefanis L Abberant alpha-synuclein confers toxicity to neurons in part through inhibition of chaperone-mediated autophagy. PLoS One 2009 4 e5515 19436756
Xu Y Parmar A Roux E Balbis A Dumas V Chevalier S Posner BI Epidermal growth factor-induced vacuolar (H+)-atpase assembly: a role in signaling via mTORC1 activation. J Biol Chem 2012 287 26409 26422 22689575
Xue X Wang L-RR Sato Y Jiang Y Berg M Yang D-SS Nixon RA Liang X-JJ Single-walled carbon nanotubes alleviate autophagic/lysosomal defects in primary glia from a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease. Nano letters 2014 14 5110 5117 25115676
Yamashiro DJ Maxfield FR Acidification of endocytic compartments and the intracellular pathways of ligands and receptors. J Cell Biochem 1984 26 231 246 6085081
Yang D-SS Stavrides P Mohan PS Kaushik S Kumar A Ohno M Schmidt SD Wesson D Bandyopadhyay U Jiang Y Reversal of autophagy dysfunction in the TgCRND8 mouse model of Alzheimer's disease ameliorates amyloid pathologies and memory deficits. Brain : a journal of neurology 2011a 134 258 277 21186265
Yang D-SS Stavrides P Mohan PS Kaushik S Kumar A Ohno M Schmidt SD Wesson DW Bandyopadhyay U Jiang Y Therapeutic effects of remediating autophagy failure in a mouse model of Alzheimer disease by enhancing lysosomal proteolysis. Autophagy 2011b 7 788 789 21464620
Yang D-SS Stavrides P Saito M Kumar A Rodriguez-Navarro JA Pawlik M Huo C Walkley SU Saito M Cuervo AM Defective macroautophagic turnover of brain lipids in the TgCRND8 Alzheimer mouse model: prevention by correcting lysosomal proteolytic deficits. Brain : a journal of neurology 2014 137 3300 3318 25270989
Yogendra SR Zoe H Ioannis B Aging: central role for autophagy and the lysosomal degradative system. Ageing research reviews 2009 8 199 213 19427410
Yokomakura A Hong J Ohuchi K Oh SE Lee JY Mano N Takahashi T Hwang GW Naganuma A Increased production of reactive oxygen species by the vacuolar-type (H(+))-ATPase inhibitors bafilomycin A1 and concanamycin A in RAW 264 cells. J Toxicol Sci 2012 37 1045 1048 23038011
Yuan Y Zhang J Chang Q Zeng J Xin F Wang J Zhu Q Wu J Lu J Guo W De novo mutation in ATP6V1B2 impairs lysosome acidification and causes dominant deafness-onychodystrophy syndrome. Cell Res 2014 24 1370 1373 24913193
Zare-Shahabadi A Masliah E Johnson GV Rezaei N Autophagy in Alzheimer's disease. Rev Neurosci 2015 26 385 395 25870960
Zhang F Jin S Yi F Li PL TRP-ML1 functions as a lysosomal NAADP-sensitive Ca2+ release channel in coronary arterial myocytes. J Cell Mol Med 2009 13 3174 3185 18754814
Zhang X Garbett K Veeraraghavalu K Wilburn B Gilmore R Mirnics K Sisodia SS A role for presenilins in autophagy revisited: normal acidification of lysosomes in cells lacking PSEN1 and PSEN2. J Neurosci 2012 32 8633 8648 22723704
Zimmermann B Dames P Walz B Baumann O Distribution and serotonin-induced activation of vacuolar-type H+-ATPase in the salivary glands of the blowfly Calliphora vicina. J Exp Biol 2003 206 1867 1876 12728008
Zoncu R Bar-Peled L Efeyan A Wang S Sancak Y Sabatini DM mTORC1 senses lysosomal amino acids through an inside-out mechanism that requires the vacuolar H(+)-ATPase. Science 2011 334 678 683 22053050
