LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101231978
33173
Alzheimers Dement
Alzheimers Dement
Alzheimer's &amp; dementia : the journal of the Alzheimer's Association
1552-5260
1552-5279

27751442
5116305
10.1016/j.jalz.2016.06.006
NIHMS796895
Article
Therapeutic Strategies for the Treatment of Tauopathies: Hopes and Challenges
Khanna Mansi R. 1
Kovalevich Jane 1
Lee Virginia M-Y.
Trojanowski John Q.
Brunden Kurt R. *
Center for Neurodegenerative Disease Research, Institute on Aging, University of Pennsylvania, 3600 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania USA 19104-6323
* Corresponding Author: Kurt R. Brunden, Center for Neurodegenerative Disease Research, University of Pennsylvania, 3600 Spruce Street, Maloney 1, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6323, kbrunden@upenn.edu
1 These authors contributed equally to the manuscript

25 6 2016
10 2016
01 10 2017
12 10 10511065
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
A group of neurodegenerative diseases referred to as tauopathies are characterized by the presence of brain cells harboring inclusions of pathological species of the tau protein. These disorders include Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) due to tau pathology, including progressive supranuclear palsy, corticobasal degeneration and Pick’s disease. Tau is normally a microtubule-associated protein that appears to play an important role in ensuring proper axonal transport, but in tauopathies tau becomes hyperphosphorylated and disengages from microtubules, with consequent misfolding and deposition into inclusions that mainly affect neurons, but also glia. A body of experimental evidence suggests that the development of tau inclusions leads to the neurodegeneration observed in tauopathies, and there is a growing interest in developing tau-directed therapeutic agents. The following review provides a summary of strategies under investigation for the potential treatment of tauopathies, highlighting both the promises and challenges associated with these various therapeutic approaches.


Introduction

The presence of inclusions comprised of the tau protein [1, 2] within brain cells is a hallmark pathological feature of a group of progressive neurodegenerative diseases referred to as tauopathies, which include Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and a major class of frontotemporal degeneration (FTD), such as progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), corticobasal degeneration (CBD) and Pick’s disease, which are associated with underlying tau pathology [3]. Further, while single or repetitive traumatic brain injury (TBI) may lead to AD or other neurodegenerative diseases [4, 5], recent studies suggest that a distinct tauopathy known as chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE) may result from repetitive brain trauma, especially in contact sports like football [4, 6, 7]. Moreover, there are a host of other very rare familial and sporadic neurodegenerative tauopathies that are characterized by prominent or mainly tau pathology [8]. Finally, a tauopathy now known as pathologic aging related tau pathology (PART), which was previously referred to as tangle predominant senile dementia, may or may not be associated with cognitive impairments or other clinical manifestations [9, 10]. Although most of the non-AD tauopathies are orphan diseases, there may be compelling economic and scientific reasons for conducting clinical trials of disease modifying therapies in these disorders, as illustrated for PSP [11].

Tau is normally a microtubule (MT)-associated protein that is thought to provide stability to axonal MTs [12, 13], where it may also affect axonal transport through modulation of MT motor function [14–16]. In humans, tau exists as 6 isoforms that are generated through alternative mRNA splicing of three exons, one of which encodes a microtubule-binding sequence such that the resulting protein has either 3- or 4-MT-binding repeat domains (i.e., 3-R or 4-R tau), as well as 0, 1 or 2 alternatively-spliced amino-terminal exon sequences. Tau becomes hyperphosphorylated in all tauopathies, which promotes its disengagement from MTs [17–20]. Hyperphosphorylated tau subsequently forms inclusions that are found predominantly within neurons, where they are referred to as neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) when found within the neuronal soma and neuritic threads when found in dendritic processes [8, 21]. There is compelling evidence that tau hyperphosphorylation and the subsequent formation of higher order multimeric structures leads to neuronal dysfunction and death. For example, there is a strong correlation between the extent of tau pathology and the degree of dementia in AD patients [22–24], and mutations within the tau gene are known to cause forms of frontotemporal lobar degeneration referred to as frontotemporal dementia with Parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17) or familial FTLD-Tau [25, 26]. The mechanism by which hyperphosphorylated and misfolded tau species lead to neuronal dysfunction is still uncertain, but the prevailing hypothesis is that one or more misfolded tau species causes a gain-of-function toxicity [27]. An alternative and not mutually exclusive theory is that reduced binding of hyperphosphorylated tau to axonal MTs results in an alteration of MT structure or function that affects axonal transport, ultimately leading to neurotoxicity. Furthermore, in different variants of FTLD-Tau disorders, as exemplified by CBD, glial tau pathology is very abundant in grey and white matter regions [3] and there is increasing recognition of other types of aging-related astroglial tau pathology [28]. However, the significance of glial tau pathology in mechanisms of neurodegenerative tauopathies and aging-related cognitive decline is still enigmatic. Nonetheless, given the high likelihood that pathologic tau species play a critical role in the onset and progression of neurodegeneration, there is great incentive to identify approaches that will mitigate gain-of-function and/or loss-of-function toxicities.

The objective of this review is to provide brief summaries of a number of tau-directed therapeutic strategies currently being pursued within academic and industry laboratories. As of this writing, most of these endeavors are still at a pre-clinical stage, although there are a growing number of clinical trials examining tau-directed therapeutics (see Table 1). Thus, there is a growing sense of optimism that a disease-modifying treatment will ultimately be identified for neurodegenerative tauopathies, although currently there is no known effective treatment for any neurodegenerative tauopathies or other forms of FTD.

1. Modulating Post-Translational Modifications of Tau

Tau undergoes a number of post-translational modifications that can modulate the function, turnover or multimeric assembly of the protein. In addition to phosphorylation, these include acetylation [29, 30] glycosylation [31, 32], methylation, nitration and sumoylation [33, 34], and several of these modifications are being investigated as potential targets for therapeutic intervention [35], as detailed further below.

a. Inhibiting Tau Phosphorylation

Phosphorylation is by far the most well-studied post-translational modification of tau, as it has been known for some time that tau hyperphosphorylation is a feature of all tauopathies. Tau is phosphorylated even in the absence of disease, but in tauopathies the extent of phosphorylation is increased ~4-fold [36–38]. At least 40 phosphorylation sites have been described for tau, and up to 25 of these may undergo increased phosphorylation within tauopathy brains [39–41]. A number of studies have revealed that hyperphosphorylation of tau greatly reduces its ability to bind to MTs [18–20], thereby leading to the hypothesis that MT structure and/or axonal transport may be affected in tauopathies [42–44]. In addition, increased phosphorylation of some ser/thr residues of tau has also been reported to increase the propensity of the protein to assemble into the fibrils that comprise NFTs and neuropil threads [45, 46]. In addition to directly enhancing tau misfolding, the increased cytosolic tau concentrations that result from hyperphosphorylated tau disengaging from MTs could also promote a concentration-dependent fibrillization of tau. Thus, increased tau phosphorylation could contribute to both loss-of-function and gain-of-function toxicities.

There has been considerable interest in identifying inhibitors of the kinases that catalyze tau phosphorylation, particularly because the pharmaceutical sector has prior experience in the development of kinase inhibitors, albeit largely for the treatment of cancers. However, there is still uncertainty as to which kinase(s) are most relevant to tau phosphorylation in neurons, and several candidate ser/thr kinases have been implicated, including glycogen synthase kinase-3β (GSK-3β), cell cycle-dependent kinase 5 (CDK5), MT-affinity regulated kinases (MARKs), protein kinase A (PKA), mitogen-activated kinases (MAPKs) and others [47–49]. Among these, the most well-studied and arguably most validated are GSK-3β and CDK5. It is beyond the scope of this brief review to summarize all of the data supporting the involvement of these kinases in tauopathies, and the reader is referred to recent reviews focused on tau phosphorylation and inhibitors of putative tau kinases [50, 51]. However, it can be briefly noted that both GSK-3β and CDK5 co-localize with tau tangles in AD brain [52–55], and there are convincing data showing that altered expression of GSK-3β [56–58] or p25 [59, 60], an activator of CDK5, affect tau pathology in transgenic (tg) mouse models. Inhibitors of GSK-3β, including lithium chloride [61–63] and certain synthetic small molecules [61, 64], have been demonstrated to decrease tau phosphorylation and/or tau deposits in tg mouse models of tauopathy, and lithium advanced to clinical testing in AD patients. However, no improvements in cognitive outcomes were observed in a Phase 2 clinical study [65]. Additionally, a non-competitive GSK-3β inhibitor (tideglusib) was recently evaluated in Phase 2 testing in PSP and AD patients, and it also failed to improve clinical outcomes [66, 67]. Given the fact that several pharmaceutical companies have previously reported tau kinase inhibitor programs, the relative paucity of such compounds advancing to clinical testing points to 1) the continued uncertainty around which kinase(s) should be preferentially targeted in tauopathies, 2) the known difficulty in developing selective kinase inhibitors, and 3) the safety challenges associated with prolonged inhibition of kinases, such as GSK-3β [68], that modify multiple proteins and cellular pathways.

b. Inhibiting Tau O-linked Glycosylation

Because of the aforementioned challenges in developing safe and effective tau kinase inhibitors, an alternative but related strategy is the modulation of tau O-glycosylation. There is evidence of tau being modified via addition of one or more N-acetylglucosamine moieties to ser and/or thr residues (O-GlcNAc) [31, 32, 69]. Importantly, O-glycosylation prevents the modified amino acid, and perhaps other nearby ser and thr residues, from being phosphorylated with what appears to be a reciprocal relationship between the extent of tau O-glycosylation and phosphorylation. Moreover, O-glycosylation of tau appears to lower its propensity to form oligomers and fibrils [70, 71]. These observations suggest that increasing O-GlcNAc modifications of tau could reduce the negative effects attributed to hyperphosphorylation; i.e., tau disengagement from MTs and fibrillization. As it is difficult to increase enzyme activity pharmacologically, current research activities have focused not on enhancing O-GlcNAc transferase activity, but rather on inhibiting the O-GlcNAcase (OGA) enzyme that is responsible for the removal of GlcNAc groups from modified ser/thr residues. Notably, an inhibitor of this enzyme, known as thiamet-G, has been demonstrated to reduce tau phosphorylation and decrease insoluble tau in tg mouse models of tauopathy [71–73]. However, one recent report noted that although thiamet-G treatment resulted in improved motor performance and survival in a tau tg mouse model, there was not an increase in tau O-glycosylation nor a decrease in tau phosphorylation, leading the authors to suggest that the salutary effects were likely mediated by changes in O-glycosylation of proteins other than tau [74]. The explanation for the discrepant findings with thiamet-G in tau tg mouse models is presently unknown. More recently, a mass spectrometry study of tau modifications has suggested that only one amino acid is O-glycosylated with very low stoichiometry in wild-type and APP tg mice, raising questions of whether inhibition of O-GlcNAcase would have a significant effect on tau phosphorylation [34]. At this time, it would seem that the inhibition of O-GlcNAcase has conceptual appeal, but additional studies are required to further validate this approach and provide clarity as to whether the reported positive effects of thiamet-G in tau tg mice result from a direct increase of tau O-GlcNAc modifications, or perhaps from enhanced O-glycosylation of other proteins. Moreover, as noted for tau kinase inhibitors, there is a concern that inhibition of O-GlcNAcase could lead to side-effects, as the glycosylation of multiple proteins would be affected by inhibition of this enzyme.

c. Inhibiting Tau Acetylation

In the past several years, it has become clear that another potentially important post-translational modification of tau is lysine acetylation. Tau acetylation was first described in 2010 [29], where a number of residues were identified that could be acetylated, and shortly thereafter a report demonstrated that acetylation of lysine 280 (K280) of tau enhanced fibrillization and altered MT interaction [30]. In addition to direct conformational effects on tau, acetylation also appears to reduce tau degradation, likely because the acetylation of lysines prevents ubiquitination and consequent proteasomal catabolism [29]. Among the acetylated residues that appear to regulate tau degradation is K174, as a recent publication [75] revealed that mutation of this residue to glutamine (an acetyl-lysine mimic) decreased tau turnover and induced cognitive deficits in mice. Moreover, treatment of tau tg mice with the drug salsalate caused inhibition of p300 acetyltransferase activity, with reduced tau K174 acetylation, decreased total tau levels and a diminution of hippocampal neuron loss [75]. As salsalate is also a cyclooxygenase inhibitor, it is possible that some of the observed improvements in the treated mice also resulted from a reduction in inflammatory eicosanoids. Nonetheless, these data suggest that acetyltransferase inhibition might hold promise for the treatment of tauopathies, although this optimism is somewhat tempered by the knowledge that p300 acetylates a plethora of proteins in addition to tau, and thus inhibition of this enzyme could result in numerous cellular changes. However, the observation that salsalate treatment in the aforementioned study appeared to be well tolerated by tau tg mice suggests that inhibition of this enzyme may be possible without undue side effects, and additional studies will be required to provide further evidence of the relative safety and efficacy of this therapeutic approach.

2. Inhibiting Proteolytic Processing of Tau

A number of studies suggest that tau cleavage by proteases such as caspases, calpain, thrombin, cathepsins and endopeptidases contributes to the generation of pathologic tau species. Perhaps the most widely studied cleavage of tau is at Asp421, resulting in a slightly truncated form of tau (ΔTau or c-tau). This cleavage can be mediated in vitro by caspases-3, -7 and -8, and less efficiently by caspases-1, and -6 [76, 77]. The formation of this truncated tau species has been demonstrated to be increased by Aβ peptides in cultured neurons [77], and its presence increases the rate and extent of tau fibril assembly in vitro [76, 77], suggesting ΔTau acts as a “seed” for fibril formation. The Asp421 form of tau has also been detected in the AD brain [76, 78, 79], specifically in NFTs and dystrophic neurites in the CA1 layer of the hippocampus [76, 77], where it also co-localizes with activated caspase-3 [76]. There is an inverse correlation between the number of cells immunoreactive for this tau fragment and cognitive function [76]. Moreover, ΔTau has been detected in other tauopathies such as Pick’s disease, PSP and CBD [79, 80]. ΔTau has also been detected in tau tg mouse models, where it appears to facilitate aggregation of endogenous tau [76, 81, 82]. More recently, it was shown in a tau tg mouse model that tau cleavage by caspase-3 was facilitated by mitochondrial carrier protein appoptosin, which may be a risk factor for PSP, and that overexpression of appoptosin led to increased levels of ΔTau and exacerbated tau pathology in these mice [80].

Tau is also subject to cleavage at Asp402 [83] and Asp13 by caspase-6 [84]. Activated caspase-6 and caspase-6 cleaved tau (TauΔCasp6) have been detected consistently in tangles, neuritic plaques and neuropil threads in mouse models of tauopathy (reviewed in [85]) and in AD brains, where their occurrence correlates inversely with cognitive performance [86, 87]. TauΔCasp6 also appears to be specifically elevated in AD CSF [87]. Tau cleaved at Glu391 is also found in tangles in AD brains and has been suggested to be a cleavage product of ΔTau mediated by an unknown protease [88].

Tau cleavage by calpain, as well as by lysosomal asparagine endopeptidase (AEP), results in neurotoxic fragments [89–93]. Notably, the level of some of the calpain-cleaved tau species can be reduced in a tau tg mouse model by overexpression of the specific calpain inhibitor, calpstatin [94]. Moreover, overexpression of calpastatin in these mice led to a decrease in tau hyperphosphorylation and aggregation, with a delay in disease onset and restoration of life span [94]. Similarly, knocking out AEP in a mouse model of tauopathy resulted in a decreased tau phosphorylation and synapse loss, with an improvement in cognition [93].

Finally, tau proteolysis by thrombin [95–97] and cathepsins [98–100] has also been described. Thrombin has been found in the AD brain associated with NFTs, as well as senile plaques [101]. Thrombin was also found to cleave tau in a cell model expressing an inducible variant of the tau repeat domain (TauRD), with a thrombin inhibitor preventing the fragmentation of TauRD [102]. Interestingly, in this same cell model it was found that cathepsin-L cleaves the tau fragment produced by thrombin [103]. Finally, cathepsin D is expressed in the brain [104–106] and is found to be increased in the brains of tau tg mice [106], with its inhibition preventing the formation of phosphorylated tau fragments in rat hippocampal cultures [107].

These various studies all build a case for tau proteases and certain specific proteolytic products as possible therapeutic targets. However, the large number of putative enzymes implicated in the cleavage of tau makes the selection of the most appropriate protease targets difficult. For example, AEP, caspases and calpain can cleave tau independently of one another [93], with all leading to fragments that are pro-aggregating or toxic. Moreover, all of the proteases implicated in tau cleavage also act on a number of additional protein substrates, so there may be negative consequences of prolonged inhibition of many or most of these enzymes. Thus, although there is a growing body of evidence that the proteolytic processing of tau likely contributes to pathological processes, additional studies will be required to gain a better understanding of the most important and druggable of these many targets. Finally, as discussed below, while tau fibrillization can occur with tau fragments, neither tau cleavage nor other posttranslational modifications are required for tau monomers to assemble into tau filaments like those seen in AD and other tauopathies.

3. Inhibiting Tau Fibrillization

Given the evidence of tau inclusions contributing to neurodegeneration in the various tauopathies, there has been a longstanding interest in targeting the tau fibrillization process to inhibit formation of intracellular tau aggregates. Fibrillization of tau and other amyloidogenic proteins under well-defined but varying in vitro conditions appears to occur through a common mechanism consisting of a slow-to-develop nucleation (lag) phase followed by a rapid fibril growth (elongation) phase [108, 109]. Once formed, fibrils can be stained by thioflavine (Th) dyes, such as ThS or ThT, which recognize cross-β-fibril structures [110, 111]. Whereas the events that precipitate tau fibrillization in disease remain unclear, normal tau proteins without any posttranslational modifications, including partial proteolysis, can be made to readily fibrillize in vitro into ThS+/ThT+ structures in the presence of heparin or other anionic molecules [112, 113]. This feature has allowed laboratories to assay a number of compounds for their ability to halt or interfere with this assembly process through disruption of protein-protein interactions.

Several small molecules have been identified that can inhibit tau fibrillization in vitro, including methylene blue (MB) [114], the cyanine dye, N744 [115], as well as a number of polyphenols, porphorins, rhodanines, anthraquinones, quinoxalines, pyrimidotriazines, and aminothienopyridazines (ATPZs) [116–121]. MB is a phenothiazine that has been used clinically for decades to treat malaria and methemoglobinemia, and recent studies have revealed that it prevents tau multimerization through a non-specific oxidation of cysteine residues within 4-R tau, resulting in a compacted tau structure that is refractory to fibrillization [118, 122]. Interestingly, MB may not inhibit 3-R tau fibrillization since it promotes the formation of an intermolecular disulfide-linked dimer that is fibrillization-competent [118]. MB has been demonstrated to reduce aggregated tau in organotypic slice cultures from a tg tauopathy mouse model [123], and has also been shown to inhibit tau aggregate formation in a preventative study in tau tg mice, although the drug did not work in an interventional study design [124]. Interestingly, MB was suggested to enhance protein degradation systems in this study [124], so it is possible that the in vivo benefits of MB do not rely entirely on inhibition of tau fibrillization. MB has progressed to clinical trials and a Phase II study suggested that MB (138 mg/day) halted disease progression in patients with moderate AD compared to placebo-treated controls [125]. However, higher doses were not efficacious and complications regarding absorption and drug stability were observed [125]. A related but distinct molecule, LMTX, has been described to possess improved absorption, tolerability, and bioavailability compared to MB [126] and has advanced to Phase III clinical trials in AD and FTD patients.

A variety of additional small molecules have been described as tau fibrillization inhibitors. For example, the cyanine dye N744 has been shown both to inhibit aggregation of 4-R tau in vitro and to disaggregate mature fibrils [115, 127]. However, this compound has also been found to form self-aggregates at high concentrations which enhance tau fibrillization [128], complicating its potential use as a therapeutic agent. A number of phenothiazines (including MB), as well as certain polyphenols and porphyrins, have also been shown to be capable of inhibiting heparin-induced tau filament formation [116]. All compounds which possessed inhibitory activity in tau aggregation assays in this study also inhibited the formation of Aβ fibrils [116]. This highlights the potential for a multi-targeted approach against both tau and Aβ fibrils, the key pathological features of AD, but also points to the lack of specificity of these compounds in disruption of protein-protein interactions. A screening assay identified a number of anthraquinones, including some clinically utilized anti-cancer agents, that were capable of both inhibiting aggregation of tau and dissolving pre-formed tau aggregates in cell-free systems [120]. Furthermore, select compounds decreased tau aggregation in a neuroblastoma cell-line (N2a) [120]. Similarly, rhodanine-based compounds were shown to inhibit the formation of tau fibrils and promote the disassembly of tau filaments in cell-free systems and in tau aggregate-bearing N2a cells [119]. However, rhodanines were determined to have a minor effect on tau-induced MT assembly [119], which could prove detrimental in cellular systems.

A high-throughput screen performed in our laboratory identified additional classes of compounds, including quinoxalines and pyrimidotriazines, which possessed inhibitory activity in a tau fibrillization assay [129]. A number of false-positive hits were identified, including many of the previously described tau aggregation inhibitors, as compound activity was found to be dependent on the generation of peroxides in the presence of the reducing agent DTT utilized in the assay [129]. A subsequent screening campaign led to identification of ATPZs as another compound class capable of inhibiting tau aggregation [117, 118]. ATPZs demonstrated tau specificity in that they were much more potent at inhibiting the formation of tau fibrils than Aβ fibrils [117]. However, the ATPZs were later found to prevent tau fibrillization by the same non-specific oxidative mechanism as MB [118].

In summary, significant challenges exist to the development of tau fibrillization inhibitors for clinical use. Most of the described inhibitors act via unknown mechanism(s) of action, and several are known promiscuous molecules with potential for off-target effects. Moreover, certain of these compounds appear to work through non-specific redox mechanisms [122, 129] that could potentially affect multiple cellular proteins. Indeed, pharmacological inhibition of protein-protein interaction has proved challenging over the years, particularly with regard to achieving required selectivity and potency [130]. However, the demonstration that MB has been used clinically for years without evidence of significant side effects suggests that compounds that affect tau fibrillization via non-specific oxidative mechanisms may be safely tolerated, and thus warrant further investigation as potential therapeutic agents for the treatment of AD and related tauopathies.

4. Improving Cellular Proteostasis

The ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) and autophagy-lysosome system (ALS) are two of the major pathways involved in maintaining cellular protein homeostasis and their lowered efficiency has been implicated in the pathophysiology of tauopathies. As summarized below, multiple literature reports suggest that improving the activities of the UPS and/or ALS to clear tau oligomers and aggregates may serve as a therapeutic strategy for the treatment of tauopathies.

Tau has been shown to be a client of the chaperone proteins that constitute the UPS [131–134] and is subject to degradation by the proteasome. Hsp90 inhibition was shown to increase the levels of Hsp70 and reduce levels of total and phosphorylated tau in cultured neurons and CHO cells expressing tau carrying the P301L mutation found in FTDP-17 [135]. Mice that overexpress inducible Hsp70 also show a significant decrease in both soluble and insoluble tau [136]. The effects of Hsp70 family proteins seem to be isoform specific, as Hsp72 can recruit carboxyl terminus of Hsp70 interacting protein (CHIP) in the presence of tau, thus enabling tau ubiquitination and subsequent degradation [137, 138]. Inhibition of Hsp90 via a small molecule inhibitor resulted in a decrease in phosphorylated tau in HeLa cells overexpressing tau and in a mouse model of tauopathy, likely due to an increase in the expression of CHIP [139]. CHIP-mediated ubiquitination of phosphorylated tau results in decreased cell death [140, 141] and deletion of CHIP results in the accumulation of hyperphosphorylated tau [142, 143]. Interestingly, the Hsp70 family member, Hsc70, interacts with tau with greater affinity than Hsp72 and stabilizes tau [137, 144], and expression of a dominant-negative variant of Hsc70 led to clearance of tau via the proteasome in HEK293T cells, as well as in brain tissue [145].

Proteasome function is also subject to the process of aging, as activity of brain proteasomes declines in aged and in AD brains [146], where activity of the proteasome is markedly decreased in regions where NFTs are abundant [147]. The latter finding is consistent with the observation that aggregated tau interacts with the proteasome and inhibits its function in vitro [148]. A more recent study found that delivering purified human proteasomes via silica nanoparticles to cells expressing inducible aggregated tau enhanced tau degradation, without affecting endogenous proteasome substrates [149].

Although the UPS may be the major pathway by which hyperphosphorylated or initially misfolded tau species are degraded, removal of tau aggregates such as NFTs by the UPS is unlikely given that the proteasome cannot physically accommodate large complexes. Thus, modulation of autophagy may be a preferred therapeutic strategy for more advanced tauopathy, particularly since it has been suggested that aggregated proteins may impair the function of the UPS [150]. In Drosophila expressing wild-type or mutant forms of tau, toxicity is alleviated by induction of autophagy by rapamycin [151]. Similarly, induction of autophagy in mouse models of AD has also resulted in decreased tau pathology [152]. In mice expressing P301S tau, treatment with the autophagy activator, trehalose, resulted in a reduction in insoluble tau and improved neuron survival in the cortex, whereas no improvement was observed in motor impairment due to lack of activation of autophagy in the spinal cord [153]. Ameliorative effects of activating autophagy with trehalose were also observed in a mouse model of tauopathy with parkinsonism [154] and in a neuronal model of tauopathy [155]. Treatment of P301S mice with rapamycin resulted in fewer cortical tau tangles, a reduction in tau hyperphosphorylation and lowering of insoluble tau in the forebrain, effects observed with preventive as well as late interventional administration of the drug [156]. Lithium can also enhance autophagy in addition to affecting GSK-3β-mediated phosphorylation of tau, and its application to P301L mice resulted in reduced tau phosphorylation and an improvement in motor deficits [157], although the pleiotropic activity of lithium chloride make it difficult to discern the relative contributions of reduced GSK-3 activity versus improved autophagy in the improved outcomes.

Modulation of the UPS and autophagy as a therapeutic strategy for tauopathies is conceptually appealing. In fact, numerous Hsp90 inhibitors are in clinical trials as anti-cancer agents [158]. However, many of these candidate drugs are unable to cross the blood-brain barrier (BBB) and since they engage a large number of client proteins, there is a concern about their ability to specifically affect misfolded tau [135, 159]. Importantly, there is some evidence that such specificity might be achievable, as it appears that at least certain Hsp90 inhibitors show a higher binding affinity to Hsp90 that is in complex with misfolded tau [139]. Similarly, care will have to be taken in modulation of Hsp70 activity since different isoforms have differing effects on pathological tau [137]. Targeting autophagy also presents challenges, as it is a key cellular proteolytic system that is involved in the clearance of multiple proteins, as well as damaged organelles, and hence increasing autophagy may result in unwanted side effects. Also, components of the autophagy pathway are involved in other cellular functions. For example, rapamycin affects mammalian Target of Rapamycin (mTOR), which plays a role in growth and metabolism [160], and the use of autophagy enhancers in a manner that is mTOR-dependent might result in untoward effects. Finally, although enhancement of autophagy has shown promise in models of AD and tauopathy, it has been suggested that autophagic protein degradation within lysosomes is impaired in AD [161, 162], and thus further initiation of autophagy may prove to be ineffective. In conclusion, although the evidence for beneficial effects after increasing cellular proteostasis in mouse models of tauopathy are compelling, there are still questions about the viability of these approaches for the treatment of human tauopathies.

5. Modulating Tau Expression

As noted in the introductory comments, tau-mediated neurodegeneration has been postulated to occur via both gain-of-function and/or loss-of-function toxicities. The belief by many that the former is the primary mechanism underlying neuronal dysfunction and death in tauopathies has led to the suggestion that a reduction of cellular tau levels could prove efficacious in the treatment of these diseases. This concept was borne largely from studies utilizing tau knockout mice, where beneficial effects have been observed when these mice are crossed with APP tg mice, as summarized briefly below. Moreover, the tau knockout mice are thought to be relatively normal and free of significant morbidities, although this view may be somewhat simplistic, as there is evidence of age-related deficiencies in these mice [163–166]. Furthermore, as with all constitutive knockout mice, there is the possibility that developmental compensatory changes mask the consequences of tau knockout, and that knockout in adulthood would result in a more severe phenotype.

Among the first studies to suggest that a reduction of tau levels may prove beneficial were those in which crossing of tau knockout mice with APP tg mice led to a reduction of behavioral deficits normally observed in the APP mice [167]. Notably, tau reduction did not alter Aβ plaque burden in the APP mice, suggesting that the effects of tau were not at the level of Aβ processing or deposition [167]. Moreover, tau reduction protected both wild-type and APP transgenic mice from excitotoxic insult [167]. Subsequent studies suggested tau involvement in mediating Aβ-induced changes in synaptic function [168], with tau reduction leading to lower epileptiform activity in APP transgenic mice [169] that may be linked to the Kv4.2 potassium channel [170]. More recently, it has been demonstrated that a reduction of endogenous tau using anti-sense oligonucleotides (ASO) delivered via intracerebroventricular infusion attenuated chemically-induced seizures in wild-type mice without other obvious detrimental cognitive effects after 1.5 months of treatment [171]. This study provides support for the concept that tau expression can be reduced in adult mice, at least for a period of time, without severe side effects and thus provides hope that a similar outcome might be observed in humans treated with tau ASOs or other agents that lower tau expression. With regard to ASO treatment for CNS disease, it is known that these agents do not readily cross the BBB, so administration would likely require direct intrathecal infusion to directly access the CSF from where the ASO could enter the brain. This methodology has worked relatively well in distributing ASOs to the brains of rhesus monkeys, although drug exposure appears to be greater in the spinal cord and cortical regions, with lesser activity in the midbrain and brainstem [172, 173]. Thus, the utilization of ASO technology to lower tau expression in tauopathies appears to be a tractable therapeutic approach, although there are still uncertainties about the long-term safety of lowering tau and whether ASOs will distribute sufficiently throughout the regions of the brain susceptible to tau pathology.

6. Decreasing MT Dynamics

Neuronal tau normally binds to and stabilizes MTs and is believed to play an important role in the transport of critical cellular proteins and organelles along axons [174, 175]. In neurodegenerative tauopathies, hyperphosphorylated tau disengages from MTs and is sequestered into pathological aggregates, which may contribute to MT instability and increased dynamicity (i.e., greater degree of MT growth and disassembly), with associated axonal transport deficits [8, 21, 176]. In this regard, MT deficits have been observed in animal models of tauopathy [177–179] and there is evidence of MT alterations in the brains of AD patients [180, 181]. Moreover, tau that is isolated from AD brain shows a reduced ability to bind to MTs [17]. These observations suggest that MT-stabilizing agents, such as those used in the treatment of cancer, might compensate for axonal abnormalities that arise from tau dysfunction in tauopathies [42].

The first study to directly test whether a MT-stabilizing agent might prove beneficial in a tauopathy model was conducted in 2005, where paclitaxel was administered to tau tg mice that developed tau inclusions and neuronal loss primarily in the spinal cord and brainstem [177]. Treatment with weekly paclitaxel for 3 months resulted in improved fast axonal transport and neuron survival, in addition to mitigating tau pathology [177]. However, paclitaxel is not BBB permeable [43], and the observed improvements in this study were likely dependent upon uptake of drug at neuromuscular junctions with retrograde transport to affected motor neurons in this mouse model [177]. Relatively few MT-stabilizing drugs have been described to penetrate the BBB, although several examples of the epothilone class show excellent brain exposure [43], and doses of epothilone D (EpoD) that were ~100-fold lower than previously utilized in cancer trials were shown to be effective in reducing tau pathology and restoring MT content and function in multiple tau tg models with brain tauopathy [178, 179, 182]. In these studies, EpoD was found to be efficacious in both preventative and interventional settings, and EpoD subsequently progressed to clinical testing in mild AD patients. This Phase 1b trial demonstrated that low doses of EpoD could be safely tolerated, but no clinical benefit or improvement in CSF biomarkers were observed over the 9 weeks of the study. Recently, the taxane TPI-287 has progressed to Phase 1 clinical testing in moderate AD patients and, in a separate trial, in CBD and PSP patients (see clinicaltrials.gov). Although most taxanes do not cross the BBB, TPI-287 was shown to have good brain exposure [183]. There are no published reports of TPI-287 being tested in a tau tg mouse model, but the compound reduced brain colonization of metastatic breast cancer cells in mice [183].

In addition to the aforementioned small molecule MT-stabilizing drugs, the peptide NAP (davunetide) was reported to be a MT-stabilizing agent that reduced tau pathology and cognitive decline in 3xTg-AD mice [184, 185], which display both amyloid and tau pathology. Moreover, NAP improved axonal transport and synaptic function in a Drosophila model of tauopathy [186]. However, NAP had no effect on phosphorylated tau levels in the latter study [186]. NAP is a small peptide (NAPVSIPQ) derived from the activity-dependent neuroprotective protein (ADNP) and it is believed to be the primary region responsible for the neuroprotective function of ADNP [187]. Interestingly, NAP has been reported to bind to tubulin and promote MT assembly [188, 189], but neuroprotection has been attributed to additional mechanisms, including interaction with inflammatory mediators and regulation of P53 [190]. Phase 1 clinical trials demonstrated no apparent side effects of intranasally administered davunetide and a subsequent Phase 2 clinical trial in patients diagnosed with amnestic mild cognitive impairment (aMCI) indicated significant improvement in cognitive testing in patients receiving davunetide for 8 or 16 weeks, but not at 12 weeks. However, a one-year Phase 2/3 trial in PSP patients failed to show improvement in the two primary efficacy measures [11], and at this time there are no reports of further clinical development of davunetide.

Challenges to the advancement of MT-stabilizers for the treatment of tauopathies include the toxicity associated with the anti-mitotic properties of these agents, as well as the lack of a good biomarker for MT target engagement in human patients. Whereas MT-stabilizing compounds have demonstrated impressive results in improving axonal function and reducing tau pathology in multiple tau tg models without notable side effects, the failure of davunetide in clinical testing raises concerns about the potential of this therapeutic strategy. However, davunetide appears to act by a number of mechanisms, and whether its primary activity in vivo relates to MT-stabilization is unknown. Furthermore, the failure of EpoD to improve clinical or biomarker outcomes in a Phase 1b study likely reflects the short 9 week trial period, as typical AD trials intended to demonstrate clinical efficacy are typically 18–24 months. In this regard, the ongoing trials with TPI-287 are also reported to be of 9 week duration. Important considerations in the development of additional MT-stabilizing drug candidates will be maximizing brain concentrations while minimizing peripheral exposure, so as to avoid toxicities related to the anti-mitotic activity of such molecules (e.g., neutropenia) and effects on peripheral nerves (i.e., peripheral neuropathy).

7. Tau Immunotherapy

As of this writing, arguably the most actively pursued strategy for reducing tau pathology in neurodegenerative disease tauopathies is immunotherapy, as evidenced by the growing literature on this topic as well as the number of early stage clinical programs [191]. The rapid ascendance of this approach is notable given the fact that, until quite recently, many researchers did not believe tau immunotherapy was likely to be a viable therapeutic tactic because the intracellular location of tau inclusions was thought to preclude accessibility to antibodies. As antibody concentration in the brain is generally only ~0.1% of that in blood, there were questions of whether effective intraneuronal antibody concentrations could be achieved in the brain, although there is some evidence that antibodies can be internalized by neurons [192, 193]. However, the concern of antibody access to the cytosol of affected neurons or glia has been mitigated by recent evidence demonstrating that the stereotypical pattern of pathology progression in AD and other neurodegenerative disorders likely results from a cell-to-cell transmission of pathologic protein species [194]. This prion-like spreading mechanism has been demonstrated in multiple tau transgenic mouse studies [195–200], and suggests that a pathologic form of extracellular tau may be released that is accessible to antibodies within the brain interstitial fluid, thereby providing an increased impetus to investigate the potential of immunotherapy treatments for tauopathies.

The initial studies examining the potential of tau immunotherapy in vivo using active vaccination revealed that wild-type mice inoculated with recombinant tau had significant morbidities, including the formation of phosphorylated tau tangle-like accumulations in neurons, gliosis and evidence of axonal damage [201]. However, shortly thereafter a report [202] indicated that vaccination of JNPL3 tau tg mice with a phospho-peptide containing the epitope recognized by the PHF1 tau antibody resulted in a reduction of PHF1-positive tau in the brains of the vaccinated mice, as well as a reduction in misfolded tau as identified with the MC1 antibody. However, there did not appear to be an overall reduction of insoluble tau. A subsequent vaccination study [203] with a mixture of phospho-tau peptides reported a significant reduction in tau pathology without adverse events. Although these latter studies suggest that vaccination with tau peptides may be safely tolerated, a more recent study [204] indicated that repeated immunization with phosphorylated tau peptides induces neuroinflammation that manifested as a paralytic phenotype, suggesting that active tau vaccination programs should be closely monitored for adverse events.

More recently, nearly all studies on tau immunotherapy have focused on passive immunization with a variety of tau monoclonal antibodies (mAbs). Since 2010, there have been a large number of publications reporting on the effects of various tau mAbs in various mouse models of tauopathy. The reader is referred to recent reviews specifically directed to this literature for greater detail [191, 205]. In summary, most of the mAbs that were utilized in these studies targeted either phospho-tau epitopes believed to be increased within tau inclusions in tauopathies, or conformational epitopes found within misfolded tau. The strategy here is to target neoepitopes generated in the disease state while avoiding mAbs that bind to normal tau. Nearly all studies reported some degree of reduction in phospho-tau species, and typically some reduction of total insoluble tau was achieved, although in many instances the extent of this decrease was relatively modest. Taken together, the passive immunization studies provide a reasonably compelling case that tau immunization could be an attractive therapeutic strategy for tauopathies, and as a result, a number of pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies have active programs in this area [191], with both active and passive immunization strategies now under clinical investigation (Table 1). However, there are still uncertainties about what species/forms of pathological tau might actually be transmitted from cell-to-cell, so the selection of the preferred tau epitope(s) to target for the generation of potentially therapeutic mAbs is at this point empirical. However, focusing on the production of mAbs that target or preferentially recognize neoepitopes generated in the disease state has plausible appeal. Moreover, there have been reports that tau might be released in exosomes [206, 207], which would largely negate the premise that released tau is more accessible to antibodies than that within the neuronal cytosol. Nonetheless, there is a great deal of anticipation and hope in the AD and tauopathy communities that one or more these drug candidates will prove to be efficacious.

8. Conclusions

As summarized in the preceding sections, there are a number of therapeutic strategies under investigation directed toward reducing the contribution of tau pathology to neurodegenerative processes in AD and other tauopathies. These approaches are summarized in tabular form in Table 2, with a listing of perceived positive aspects of each tactic, as well as challenges. Arguably, the identification and validation of druggable targets that affect tau pathology has proven to be much more difficult than for the Aβ senile plaque pathology of AD. In the latter, the identification of the β- and γ-secretase enzymes involved in Aβ cleavage from the amyloid precursor protein led to the rapid initiation of drug discovery programs targeting these proteolytic systems, although there has yet to be clinical success with drugs directed to these enzymes. Thus, while there is evidence of tau proteolysis, it is still debatable as to how much such cleavage contributes to pathology in tauopathies. Furthermore, the large number of candidate proteases has resulted in uncertainty as to which might be the most important enzyme target. A similar uncertainty exists for the tau kinases, as a large number of enzymes have been implicated in the hyperphosphorylation of tau. In contrast, the identity of tau enzyme targets that regulate post-translational O-glycosylation and acetylation are generally well understood, but these modify a large number of proteins, raising questions of whether prolonged modulation of these enzymes will lead to side-effects. A similar concern can be raised regarding the modulation of targets linked to cellular proteostatic systems, such as those involved in proteasomal protein degradation or autophagy, where specificity of action may be difficult. It is likely that many of these concerns have led to pharmaceutical interest in non-enzymatic strategies, including reduction of tau expression and tau immunotherapy. As noted, tau anti-sense oligonucleotide approaches are being considered, and a large number of ongoing tau immunotherapy trials should soon provide initial indications of the merits of this strategy. In addition, there is still interest in the potential of brain-penetrant MT-stabilizing agents in compensating for axonal transport deficiencies that may occur in tauopathies, with TPI-287 presently in Phase 1 clinical testing. Finally, MB has been shown to affect tau pathology in several models and Phase 3 clinical trials are presently ongoing with the related molecule, LMTX.

Historically, one of the key limitations for all neurodegenerative diseases drug discovery programs has been an absence of pharmacodynamic markers of target engagement [208]. However, the emergence of reliable biomarkers to measure Aβ in CSF and its deposition in brain is rapidly changing how clinical trials of new Aβ-focused therapeutic trials are being conducted and they have ushered in an entirely new approach to clinical trials of Aβ therapies, i.e. prevention trials based on Aβ biomarker positivity in the absence of clinically manifest AD [208]. The good news is that promising biomarkers to monitor the burden of tau pathology also are available now [209, 210] to similarly facilitate clinical trials of therapies that target pathological tau. Hence, the design of how these trials are done should begin to change and improve very rapidly while also making possible the design and implementation of prevention trials for neurodegenerative tauopathies. Finally, another very new approach to AD therapy that is beginning to be discussed in the research and regulatory communities is the use combination therapy, which could also be considered for tauopathies [211]. For example, by combining a tau immunotherapy intervention with a MT stabilization therapy, one could potentially address both toxic tau gain- and loss-of-function. Thus, although there are considerable challenges to developing tau-based therapeutics, the large number of strategies under active investigation provide hope that one or more efficacious drugs will be identified in the not too distant future.

Supplementary Material

The authors thank the NIA and NINDS for previous and continued funding, and the Marion S. Ware Alzheimer Disease Foundation and Woods Foundation for their support. We are also grateful for the philanthropic gifts from the Karen Cohen Segal and Christopher S. Segal Alzheimer Drug Discovery Initiative Fund, the Paula C. Schmerler Fund for Alzheimer’s Research, the Barrist Neurodegenerative Disease Research Fund, the Eleanor Margaret Kurtz Endowed Fund, the Mary Rasmus Endowed Fund for Alzheimer’s Research, and Mrs. Gloria J. Miller and Arthur Peck, M.D.

Table 1 Current clinical programs utilizing tau-directed therapeutic agents.

Therapeutic Type	Name	Company	Clinical Stage	
Vaccine	AADvac-1	Axon Neuroscience	Phase 1	
Vaccine	ACI-35	AC Immune/Janssen	Phase 1	
Antibody	BMS-986168	Bristol-Myers Squibb	Phase 1	
Antibody	ABBV-8E12	AbbVie/C2N	Phase 1	
Microtubule Stabilizer	TPI-287	Cortice Biosciences	Phase 1	
Tau aggregate inhibitor	TRx0237	TauRx	Phase 3	

Table 2 Summary of tau-directed therapeutic strategies with associated opportunities and challenges.

Target/Strategy	Opportunities	Challenges	
Tau Kinases	Enzyme targets; Industry
expertise; Clear disease relevance	Which kinase(s)?; Drug selectivity;
On/off-target toxicities	
O-GlcNacase (OGA)	Enzyme target; Prototype drug
tested in mouse models	Further target validation; Multiple
proteins modified by OGA	
Tau
Acetyltransferase(s)	Enzyme target; Increasing
literature reports of relevance	Further target validation; Multiple
proteins modified by acetyltransferase(s)	
Tau Cleavage	Enzyme targets; Compelling
literature	Which protease(s)?; Multiple proteins
cleaved by candidate proteases	
Tau Fibrillization	Clear disease relevance; Multiple
reported inhibitors; LMTX in P3
testing	Difficult to inhibit protein-protein
interactions; Many non-drug-like
example inhibitors	
Proteostasis	Clear disease relevance;
Conceptually appealing	What is best target?; Can proteostatic
systems be safely modulated?	
Tau Expression	Amenable to ASO approaches;
Intriguing in vivo data	Long-term safety of tau reduction; ASO
brain distribution	
Microtubule
stabilizer	Reasonably compelling target
validation; TPI-287 in P1 testing	Long-term safety	
Tau Immunotherapy	Target validation; Industry
expertise; Passive immunization
generally safe	Best epitope(s)?; Sufficient antibody
exposure in brain; Exosomal release of
tau?	

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


References

1 Kidd M Paired Helical Filaments in Electron Microscopy of Alzheimers Disease Nature 1963 197 192 193
2 Lee VMY Balin BJ Otvos L Trojanowski JQ A68 - A Major Subunit of Paired Helical Filaments and Derivatized Forms of Normal-Tau Science 1991 251 675 678 1899488
3 Irwin DJCNJ Grossman M McMillan CT Lee EB Van Deerlin VM Lee VM-Y Trojanowski JQ Frontotemporal lobar degeneration: defining phenotypic diversity through personalized medicine Acta Neuropathologica 2015 In press
4 Gardner A Iverson GL McCrory P Chronic traumatic encephalopathy in sport: a systematic review Br J Sports Med 2014 48 84 90 23803602
5 Hazrati LN Tartaglia MC Diamandis P Davis KD Green RE Wennberg R Absence of chronic traumatic encephalopathy in retired football players with multiple concussions and neurological symptomatology Front Hum Neurosci 2013 7 222 23745112
6 McKee AC Cairns NJ Dickson DW Folkerth RD Dirk Keene C Litvan I The first NINDS/NIBIB consensus meeting to define neuropathological criteria for the diagnosis of chronic traumatic encephalopathy Acta Neuropathol 2016 131 75 86 26667418
7 McKee AC Stein TD Kiernan PT Alvarez VE The neuropathology of chronic traumatic encephalopathy Brain Pathol 2015 25 350 364 25904048
8 Lee VMY Goedert M Trojanowski JQ Neurodegenerative tauopathies Annual Review of Neuroscience 2001 24 1121 1159
9 Crary JF Trojanowski JQ Schneider JA Abisambra JF Abner EL Alafuzoff I Primary age-related tauopathy (PART): a common pathology associated with human aging Acta Neuropathol 2014 128 755 766 25348064
10 Jellinger KA Alafuzoff I Attems J Beach TG Cairns NJ Crary JF PART, a distinct tauopathy, different from classical sporadic Alzheimer disease Acta Neuropathol 2015 129 757 762 25778618
11 Boxer AL Lang AE Grossman M Knopman DS Miller BL Schneider LS Davunetide in patients with progressive supranuclear palsy: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 2/3 trial Lancet Neurol 2014 13 676 685 24873720
12 Drechsel DN Hyman AA Cobb MH Kirschner MW Modulation of the dynamic instability of tubulin assembly by the microtubule-associated protein tau Molecular Biology of the Cell 1992 3 1141 1154 1421571
13 Gustke N Trinczek B Biernat J Mandelkow EM Mandelkow E Domains of Tau-Protein and Interactions with Microtubules Biochemistry 1994 33 9511 9522 8068626
14 Stamer K Vogel R Thies E Mandelkow E Mandelkow EM Tau blocks traffic of organelles, neurofilaments, and APP vesicles in neurons and enhances oxidative stress Journal of Cell Biology 2002 156 1051 1063 11901170
15 Vershinin M Carter BC Razafsky DS King SJ Gross SP Multiple-motor based transport and its regulation by Tau Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2007 104 87 92 17190808
16 Dixit R Ross JL Goldman YE Holzbaur ELF Differential regulation of dynein and kinesin motor proteins by tau Science 2008 319 1086 1089 18202255
17 Bramblett GT Trojanowski JQ Lee VMY Regions with Abundant Neurofibrillary Pathology in Human Brain Exhibit A Selective Reduction in Levels of Binding-Competent-Tau and Accumulation of Abnormal Tau-Isoforms (A68 Proteins) Laboratory Investigation 1992 66 212 222 1735956
18 Alonso AD GrundkeIqbal I Iqbal K Abnormally phosphorylated-tau from Alzheimer-disease brain depolymerizes microtubules Neurobiology of Aging 1994 15 S37-S 7700457
19 Wagner U Utton M Gallo JM Miller CCJ Cellular phosphorylation of tau by GSK-3 beta influences tau binding to microtubules and microtubule organisation Journal of Cell Science 1996 109 1537 1543 8799840
20 Merrick SE Trojanowski JQ Lee VMY Selective destruction of stable microtubules and axons by inhibitors of protein serine/threonine phosphatases in cultured human neurons (NT2N cells) Journal of Neuroscience 1997 17 5726 5737 9221771
21 Ballatore C Lee VMY Trojanowski JQ Tau-mediated neurodegeneration in Alzheimer's disease and related disorders Nature Reviews Neuroscience 2007 8 663 672 17684513
22 Wilcock GK Esiri MM Plaques, tangles and dementia - a quantitative study Journal of the Neurological Sciences 1982 56 343 356 7175555
23 Arriagada PV Growdon JH Hedleywhyte ET Hyman BT Neurofibrillary tangles but not senile plaques parallel duration and severity of Alzheimers disease Neurology 1992 42 631 639 1549228
24 Gomez-Isla T Hollister R West H Mui S Growdon JH Petersen RC Neuronal loss correlates with but exceeds neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer's disease Annals of Neurology 1997 41 17 24 9005861
25 Hong M Zhukareva V Vogelsberg-Ragaglia V Wszolek Z Reed L Miller BI Mutation-specific functional impairments in distinct Tau isoforms of hereditary FTDP-17 Science 1998 282 1914 1917 9836646
26 Hutton M Lendon CL Rizzu P Baker M Froelich S Houlden H Association of missense and 5 '-splice-site mutations in tau with the inherited dementia FTDP-17 Nature 1998 393 702 705 9641683
27 Brunden KR Trojanowski JQ Lee VMY Advances in tau-focused drug discovery for Alzheimer's disease and related tauopathies Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 2009 8 783 793 19794442
28 Kovacs GG Ferrer I Grinberg LT Alafuzoff I Attems J Budka H Aging-related tau astrogliopathy (ARTAG): harmonized evaluation strategy Acta Neuropathol 2016 131 87 102 26659578
29 Min SW Cho SH Zhou YG Schroeder S Haroutunian V Seeley WW Acetylation of Tau Inhibits Its Degradation and Contributes to Tauopathy Neuron 2010 67 953 966 20869593
30 Cohen TJ Guo JL Hurtado DE Kwong LK Mills IP Trojanowski JQ The acetylation of tau inhibits its function and promotes pathological tau aggregation Nature Communications 2011 2 252
31 Lefebvre T Ferreira S Dupont-Wallois L Bussiere T Dupire MJ Delacourte A Evidence of a balance between phosphorylation and O-GlcNAc glycosylation of Tau proteins - a role in nuclear localization Biochimica et Biophysica Acta-General Subjects 2003 1619 167 176
32 Liu F Iqbal K Grundke-Iqbal I Hart GW Gong CX O-GlcNAcylation regulates phosphorylation of tau: A mechanism involved in Alzheimer's disease Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2004 101 10804 10809 15249677
33 Gong CX Liu F Grundke-Iqbal I Iqbal K Post-translational modifications of tau protein in Alzheimer's disease Journal of Neural Transmission 2005 112 813 838 15517432
34 Morris M Knudsen GM Maeda S Trinidad JC Ioanoviciu A Burlingame AL Tau post-translational modifications in wild-type and human amyloid precursor protein transgenic mice Nature neuroscience 2015 18 1183-+ 26192747
35 Marcus JN Schachter J Targeting post-translational modifications on tau as a therapeutic strategy for Alzheimer's disease J Neurogenet 2011 25 127 133 22091726
36 Ksiezak-Reding H Liu WK Yen SH Phosphate Analysis and Dephosphorylation of Modified Tau Associated with Paired Helical Filaments Brain Research 1992 597 209 219 1472994
37 Kopke E Tung YC Shaikh S Alonso AD Iqbal K GrundkeIqbal I Microtubule-Associated Protein-Tau - Abnormal Phosphorylation of A Non-Paired Helical Filament Pool in Alzheimer-Disease Journal of Biological Chemistry 1993 268 24374 24384 8226987
38 Matsuo ES Shin RW Billingsley ML Vandevoorde A Oconnor M Trojanowski JQ Biopsy-Derived Adult Human Brain Tau Is Phosphorylated at Many of the Same Sites As Alzheimers-Disease Paired Helical Filament-Tau Neuron 1994 13 989 1002 7946342
39 Morishima-Kawashima M Hasegawa M Takio K Suzuki M Yoshida H Titani K Proline-Directed and Non-Proline-Directed Phosphorylation of Phf-Tau Journal of Biological Chemistry 1995 270 823 829 7822317
40 Hasegawa M Morishimakawashima M Takio K Suzuki M Titani K Ihara Y Protein-Sequence and Mass-Spectrometric Analyses of Tau in the Alzheimers-Disease Brain Journal of Biological Chemistry 1992 267 17047 17054 1512244
41 Hanger DP Betts JC Loviny TLF Blackstock WP Anderton BH New phosphorylation sites identified in hyperphosphorylated tau (paired helical filament-tau) from Alzheimer's disease brain using nanoelectrospray mass spectrometry Journal of Neurochemistry 1998 71 2465 2476 9832145
42 Lee VMY Daughenbaugh R Trojanowski JQ Microtubule Stabilizing Drugs for the Treatment of Alzheimers-Disease Neurobiology of Aging 1994 15 S87 S89 7700471
43 Brunden KR Yao Y Potuzak JS Ferrar NI Ballatore C James MJ The characterization of microtubule-stabilizing drugs as possible therapeutic agents for Alzheimer's disease and related tauopathies Pharmacological Research 2011 63 341 351 21163349
44 Brunden KR Trojanowski JQ Smith AB 3rd Lee VM Ballatore C Microtubule-stabilizing agents as potential therapeutics for neurodegenerative disease Bioorg Med Chem 2014 22 5040 5049 24433963
45 Alonso AD GrundkeIqbal I Iqbal K Alzheimer's disease hyperphosphorylated tau sequesters normal tau into tangles of filaments and disassembles microtubules Nature Medicine 1996 2 783 787
46 Necula M Kuret J Pseudophosphorylation and glycation of tau protein enhance but do not trigger fibrillization in vitro Journal of Biological Chemistry 2004 279 49694 49703 15364924
47 Mazanetz MP Fischer PM Untangling tau hyperphosphorylation in drug design for neurodegenerative diseases Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 2007 6 464 479 17541419
48 Gong CX Iqbal K Hyperphosphorylation of Microtubule-Associated Protein Tau: A Promising Therapeutic Target for Alzheimer Disease Current Medicinal Chemistry 2008 15 2321 2328 18855662
49 Hanger DP Anderton BH Noble W Tau phosphorylation: the therapeutic challenge for neurodegenerative disease Trends Molecular Medicine 2009 15 112 119
50 Tell V Hilgeroth A Recent developments of protein kinase inhibitors as potential AD therapeutics Frontiers in cellular neuroscience 2013 7
51 Martin L Latypova X Wilson CM Magnaudeix A Perrin ML Yardin C Tau protein kinases: involvement in Alzheimer's disease Ageing Res Rev 2013 12 289 309 22742992
52 Yamaguchi H Ishiguro K Uchida T Takashima A Lemere CA Imahori K Preferential labeling of Alzheimer neurofibrillary tangles with antisera for tau protein kinase (TPK)I glycogen synthase kinase-3 beta and cyclin-dependent kinase 5, a component of TPK II Acta Neuropathologica 1996 92 232 241 8870824
53 Imahori K Uchida T Physiology and pathology of tau protein kinases in relation to Alzheimer's disease Journal of Biochemistry 1997 121 179 188 9089387
54 Pei JJ Grundke-Iqbal I Iqbal K Bogdanovic N Winblad B Cowburn RF Accumulation of cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (cdk5) in neurons with early stages of Alzheimer's disease neurofibrillary degeneration Brain Research 1998 797 267 277 9666145
55 Augustinack JC Sanders JL Tsai LH Hyman BT Colocalization and fluorescence resonance energy transfer between cdk5 and AT8 suggests a close association in pre-neurofibrillary tangles and neurofibrillary tangles Journal of Neuropathology and Experimental Neurology 2002 61 557 564 12071639
56 Spittaels K Van Den Haute C Van Dorpe J Geerts H Mercken M Bruynseels K Glycogen synthase kinase-3 beta phosphorylates protein tau and rescues the axonopathy in the central nervous system of human four-repeat tau transgenic mice Journal of Biological Chemistry 2000 275 41340 41349 11007782
57 Lucas JJ Hernandez F Gomez-Ramos P Moran MA Hen R Avila J Decreased nuclear beta-catenin, tau hyperphosphorylation and neurodegeneration in GSK-3 beta conditional transgenic mice Embo Journal 2001 20 27 39 11226152
58 Hernandez F Borrell J Guaza C Avila J Lucas JJ Spatial learning deficit in transgenic mice that conditionally over-express GSK-3 beta in the brain but do not form tau filaments Journal of Neurochemistry 2002 83 1529 1533 12472906
59 Ahlijanian MK Barrezueta NX Williams RD Jakowski A Kowsz KP McCarthy S Hyperphosphorylated tau and neurofilament and cytoskeletal disruptions in mice overexpressing human p25, an activator of cdk5 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2000 97 2910 2915 10706614
60 Noble W Olm V Takata K Casey E Mary O Meyerson J Cdk5 is a key factor in tau aggregation and tangle formation in vivo Neuron 2003 38 555 565 12765608
61 Noble W Planel E Zehr C Olm V Meyerson J Suleman F Inhibition of glycogen synthase kinase-3 by lithium correlates with reduced tauopathy and degeneration in vivo Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2005 102 6990 6995 15867159
62 Perez M Hernandez F Lim F Diaz-Nido J Avila J Chronic lithium treatment decreases mutant tau protein aggregation in a transgenic mouse model J Alzheimer's Disease 2003 5 301 308 14624025
63 Nakashima H Ishihara T Suguimoto P Yokota O Oshima E Kugo A Chronic lithium treatment decreases tau lesions by promoting ubiquitination in a mouse model of tauopathies Acta Neuropathologica 2005 110 547 556 16228182
64 Le Corre S Klafki HW Plesnila N Hubinger G Obermeier A Sahagun H An inhibitor of tau hyperphosphorylation prevents severe motor impairments in tau transgenic mice Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2006 103 9673 9678 16769887
65 Hampel H Ewers M Burger K Annas P Mortberg A Bogstedt A Lithium trial in Alzheimer's disease: a randomized, single-blind, placebo-controlled multicenter 10-week study Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 2009 In press
66 Tolosa E Litvan I Hoglinger GU Burn D Lees A Andres MV A phase 2 trial of the GSK-3 inhibitor tideglusib in progressive supranuclear palsy Mov Disord 2014 29 470 478 24532007
67 Lovestone S Boada M Dubois B Hull M Rinne JO Huppertz HJ A phase II trial of tideglusib in Alzheimer's disease J Alzheimers Dis 2015 45 75 88 25537011
68 Rayasam GV Tulasi VK Sodhi R Davis JA Ray A Glycogen synthase kinase 3: more than a namesake British Journal of Pharmacology 2009 156 885 898 19366350
69 Robertson LA Moya KL Breen KC The potential role of tau protein O-glycosylation in Alzheimer's disease J Alzheimers Dis 2004 6 489 495 15505370
70 Yuzwa SA Cheung AH Okon M McIntosh LP Vocadlo DJ O-GlcNAc modification of tau directly inhibits its aggregation without perturbing the conformational properties of tau monomers J Mol Biol 2014 426 1736 1752 24444746
71 Yuzwa SA Shan X Macauley MS Clark T Skorobogatko Y Vosseller K Increasing O-GlcNAc slows neurodegeneration and stabilizes tau against aggregation Nat Chem Biol 2012 8 393 399 22366723
72 Yuzwa SA Macauley MS Heinonen JE Shan XY Dennis RJ He YA A potent mechanism-inspired O-GlcNAcase inhibitor that blocks phosphorylation of tau in vivo Nature Chemical Biology 2008 4 483 490 18587388
73 Graham DL Gray AJ Joyce JA Yu D O'Moore J Carlson GA Increased O-GlcNAcylation reduces pathological tau without affecting its normal phosphorylation in a mouse model of tauopathy Neuropharmacology 2014 79 307 313 24326295
74 Borghgraef P Menuet C Theunis C Louis JV Devijver H Maurin H Increasing Brain Protein O-GlcNAc-ylation Mitigates Breathing Defects and Mortality of Tau. P301L Mice PloS one 2013 8
75 Min SW Chen X Tracy TE Li YQ Zhou YG Wang C Critical role of acetylation in tau-mediated neurodegeneration and cognitive deficits Nature Medicine 2015 21 1154-+
76 Rissman RA Poon WW Blurton-Jones M Oddo S Torp R Vitek MP Caspase-cleavage of tau is an early event in Alzheimer disease tangle pathology J Clin Invest 2004 114 121 130 15232619
77 Gamblin TC Chen F Zambrano A Abraha A Lagalwar S Guilloz AL Caspase cleavage of tau: linking amyloid and neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer's disease Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2003 100 10032 10037 12888622
78 Guillozet-Bongaarts AL Garcia-Sierra F Reynolds MR Horowitz PM Fu Y Wang T Tau truncation during neurofibrillary tangle evolution in Alzheimer's disease Neurobiol Aging 2005 26 1015 1022 15748781
79 Newman J Rissman RA Sarsoza F Kim RC Dick M Bennett DA Caspase-cleaved tau accumulation in neurodegenerative diseases associated with tau and alpha-synuclein pathology Acta Neuropathol 2005 110 135 144 15986225
80 Zhao Y Tseng IC Heyser CJ Rockenstein E Mante M Adame A Zheng Q Huang T Wang X Arslan PE Chakrabarty P Wu C Bu G Mobely WC Zhang Y George-Hyslop P Masliah E Fraser P Xu H Appoptosin-mediated caspase cleavage of tau contributes to progressive supranuclear palsy pathogenesis Neuron 2015 87 963 975 26335643
81 Zhang Q Zhang X Sun A Truncated tau at D421 is associated with neurodegeneration and tangle formation in the brain of Alzheimer transgenic models Acta Neuropathol 2009 117 687 697 19190923
82 de Calignon A Fox LM Pitstick R Carlson GA Bacskai BJ Spires-Jones TL Caspase activation precedes and leads to tangles Nature 2010 464 1201 1204 20357768
83 Guo H Albrecht S Bourdeau M Petzke T Bergeron C LeBlanc AC Active caspase-6 and caspase-6-cleaved tau in neuropil threads, neuritic plaques, and neurofibrillary tangles of Alzheimer's disease Am J Pathol 2004 165 523 531 15277226
84 Horowitz PM Patterson KR Guillozet-Bongaarts AL Reynolds MR Carroll CA Weintraub ST Early N-terminal changes and caspase-6 cleavage of tau in Alzheimer's disease J Neurosci 2004 24 7895 7902 15356202
85 Wang Y Garg S Mandelkow EM Mandelkow E Proteolytic processing of tau Biochem Soc Trans 2010 38 955 961 20658984
86 Albrecht S Bourdeau M Bennett D Mufson EJ Bhattacharjee M LeBlanc AC Activation of caspase-6 in aging and mild cognitive impairment Am J Pathol 2007 170 1200 1209 17392160
87 Ramcharitar J Albrecht S Afonso VM Kaushal V Bennett DA Leblanc AC Cerebrospinal fluid tau cleaved by caspase-6 reflects brain levels and cognition in aging and Alzheimer disease J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2013 72 824 832 23965742
88 Basurto-Islas G Luna-Munoz J Guillozet-Bongaarts AL Binder LI Mena R Garcia-Sierra F Accumulation of aspartic acid421- and glutamic acid391-cleaved tau in neurofibrillary tangles correlates with progression in Alzheimer disease J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2008 67 470 483 18431250
89 Park SY Ferreira A The generation of a 17 kDa neurotoxic fragment: an alternative mechanism by which tau mediates beta-amyloid-induced neurodegeneration J Neurosci 2005 25 5365 5375 15930385
90 Ferreira A Bigio EH Calpain-mediated tau cleavage: a mechanism leading to neurodegeneration shared by multiple tauopathies Mol Med 2011 17 676 685 21442128
91 Garg S Timm T Mandelkow EM Mandelkow E Wang Y Cleavage of Tau by calpain in Alzheimer's disease: the quest for the toxic 17 kD fragment Neurobiol Aging 2011 32 1 14 20961659
92 Reinecke JB DeVos SL McGrath JP Shepard AM Goncharoff DK Tait DN Implicating calpain in tau-mediated toxicity in vivo PLoS One 2011 6 e23865 21858230
93 Zhang Z Song M Liu X Kang SS Kwon IS Duong DM Cleavage of tau by asparagine endopeptidase mediates the neurofibrillary pathology in Alzheimer's disease Nat Med 2014 20 1254 1262 25326800
94 Rao MV McBrayer MK Campbell J Kumar A Hashim A Sershen H Specific calpain inhibition by calpastatin prevents tauopathy and neurodegeneration and restores normal lifespan in tau P301L mice J Neurosci 2014 34 9222 9234 25009256
95 Olesen OF Proteolytic degradation of microtubule associated protein tau by thrombin Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1994 201 716 721 8003007
96 Wang X An S Wu JM Specific processing of native and phosphorylated tau protein by proteases Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1996 219 591 597 8605032
97 Arai T Guo JP McGeer PL Proteolysis of non-phosphorylated and phosphorylated tau by thrombin J Biol Chem 2005 280 5145 5153 15542598
98 Bednarski E Lynch G Cytosolic proteolysis of tau by cathepsin D in hippocampus following suppression of cathepsins B and L J Neurochem 1996 67 1846 1855 8863489
99 Kenessey A Nacharaju P Ko LW Yen SH Degradation of tau by lysosomal enzyme cathepsin D: implication for Alzheimer neurofibrillary degeneration J Neurochem 1997 69 2026 2038 9349548
100 Malik M Fenko MD Sheikh AM Wen G Li X A novel approach for characterization of cathepsin D protease and its effect on tau and beta-amyloid proteins Neurochem Res 2011 36 754 760 21267651
101 Arai T Miklossy J Klegeris A Guo JP McGeer PL Thrombin and prothrombin are expressed by neurons and glial cells and accumulate in neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer disease brain J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2006 65 19 25 16410745
102 Khlistunova I Biernat J Wang Y Pickhardt M von Bergen M Gazova Z Inducible expression of Tau repeat domain in cell models of tauopathy: aggregation is toxic to cells but can be reversed by inhibitor drugs J Biol Chem 2006 281 1205 1214 16246844
103 Wang Y Martinez-Vicente M Kruger U Kaushik S Wong E Mandelkow EM Tau fragmentation, aggregation and clearance: the dual role of lysosomal processing Hum Mol Genet 2009 18 4153 4170 19654187
104 Banay-Schwartz M DeGuzman T Kenessey A Palkovits M Lajtha A The distribution of cathepsin D activity in adult and aging human brain regions J Neurochem 1992 58 2207 2211 1573400
105 Kenessey A Banay-Schwartz M DeGuzman T Lajtha A Increase in cathepsin D activity in rat brain in aging J Neurosci Res 1989 23 454 456 2769800
106 Fernandez-Montoya J Perez M Cathepsin D in a murine model of frontotemporal dementia with Parkinsonism-linked to chromosome 17 J Alzheimers Dis 2015 45 1 14 25428250
107 Bi X Haque TS Zhou J Skillman AG Lin B Lee CE Novel cathepsin D inhibitors block the formation of hyperphosphorylated tau fragments in hippocampus J Neurochem 2000 74 1469 1477 10737603
108 Kuret J Congdon EE Li G Yin H Yu X Zhong Q Evaluating triggers and enhancers of tau fibrillization Microsc Res Tech 2005 67 141 155 16103995
109 Morris AM Watzky MA Agar JN Finke RG Fitting neurological protein aggregation kinetic data via a 2-step, minimal/"Ockham's razor" model: the Finke-Watzky mechanism of nucleation followed by autocatalytic surface growth Biochemistry 2008 47 2413 2427 18247636
110 Naiki H Higuchi K Hosokawa M Takeda T Fluorometric determination of amyloid fibrils in vitro using the fluorescent dye, thioflavin T1 Anal Biochem 1989 177 244 249 2729542
111 Biancalana M Koide S Molecular mechanism of Thioflavin-T binding to amyloid fibrils Biochim Biophys Acta 2010 1804 1405 1412 20399286
112 Goedert M Jakes R Spillantini MG Hasegawa M Smith MJ Crowther RA Assembly of microtubule-associated protein tau into Alzheimer-like filaments induced by sulphated glycosaminoglycans Nature 1996 383 550 553 8849730
113 Hasegawa M Crowther RA Jakes R Goedert M Alzheimer-like changes in microtubule-associated protein Tau induced by sulfated glycosaminoglycans. Inhibition of microtubule binding, stimulation of phosphorylation, and filament assembly depend on the degree of sulfation J Biol Chem 1997 272 33118 33124 9407097
114 Wischik CM Edwards PC Lai RY Roth M Harrington CR Selective inhibition of Alzheimer disease-like tau aggregation by phenothiazines Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996 93 11213 11218 8855335
115 Necula M Chirita CN Kuret J Cyanine dye N744 inhibits tau fibrillization by blocking filament extension: Implications for the treatment of tauopathic neurodegenerative diseases Biochemistry 2005 44 10227 10237 16042400
116 Taniguchi S Suzuki N Masuda M Hisanaga S Iwatsubo T Goedert M Inhibition of heparin-induced tau filament formation by phenothiazines, polyphenols, and porphyrins J Biol Chem 2005 280 7614 7623 15611092
117 Crowe A Huang W Ballatore C Johnson RL Hogan AM Huang R Identification of aminothienopyridazine inhibitors of tau assembly by quantitative high-throughput screening Biochemistry 2009 48 7732 7745 19580328
118 Crowe A James MJ Lee VM Smith AB Trojanowski JQ Ballatore C Aminothienopyridazines and methylene blue affect Tau fibrillization via cysteine oxidation J Biol Chem 2013 288 11024 11037 23443659
119 Bulic B Pickhardt M Khlistunova I Biernat J Mandelkow EM Mandelkow E Rhodanine-based tau aggregation inhibitors in cell models of tauopathy Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 2007 46 9215 9219 17985339
120 Pickhardt M Gazova Z von Bergen M Khlistunova I Wang Y Hascher A Anthraquinones inhibit tau aggregation and dissolve Alzheimer's paired helical filaments in vitro and in cells J Biol Chem 2005 280 3628 3635 15525637
121 Brunden KR Ballatore C Crowe A Smith AB Lee VM Trojanowski JQ Tau-directed drug discovery for Alzheimer's disease and related tauopathies: a focus on tau assembly inhibitors Exp Neurol 2010 223 304 310 19744482
122 Akoury E Pickhardt M Gajda M Biernat J Mandelkow E Zweckstetter M Mechanistic basis of phenothiazine-driven inhibition of Tau aggregation Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 2013 52 3511 3515 23401175
123 Congdon EE Wu JW Myeku N Figueroa YH Herman M Marinec PS Methylthioninium chloride (methylene blue) induces autophagy and attenuates tauopathy in vitro and in vivo Autophagy 2012 8 609 622 22361619
124 Hochgrafe K Sydow A Matenia D Cadinu D Konen S Petrova O Preventive methylene blue treatment preserves cognition in mice expressing full-length pro-aggregant human Tau Acta Neuropathol Commun 2015 3 25 25958115
125 Wischik CM Staff RT Wischik DJ Bentham P Murray AD Storey JM Tau aggregation inhibitor therapy: an exploratory phase 2 study in mild or moderate Alzheimer's disease J Alzheimers Dis 2015 44 705 720 25550228
126 Wischik CM Harrington CR Storey JM Tau-aggregation inhibitor therapy for Alzheimer's disease Biochem Pharmacol 2014 88 529 539 24361915
127 Chirita C Necula M Kuret J Ligand-dependent inhibition and reversal of tau filament formation Biochemistry 2004 43 2879 2887 15005623
128 Congdon EE Necula M Blackstone RD Kuret J Potency of a tau fibrillization inhibitor is influenced by its aggregation state Arch Biochem Biophys 2007 465 127 135 17559794
129 Crowe A Ballatore C Hyde E Trojanowski JQ Lee VM High throughput screening for small molecule inhibitors of heparin-induced tau fibril formation Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2007 358 1 6 17482143
130 Arkin MR Wells JA Small-molecule inhibitors of protein-protein interactions: progressing towards the dream Nat Rev Drug Discov 2004 3 301 317 15060526
131 Dou F Netzer WJ Tanemura K Li F Hartl FU Takashima A Chaperones increase association of tau protein with microtubules Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2003 100 721 726 12522269
132 Luo W Dou F Rodina A Chip S Kim J Zhao Q Roles of heat-shock protein 90 in maintaining and facilitating the neurodegenerative phenotype in tauopathies Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2007 104 9511 9516 17517623
133 Tortosa E Santa-Maria I Moreno F Lim F Perez M Avila J Binding of Hsp90 to tau promotes a conformational change and aggregation of tau protein J Alzheimers Dis 2009 17 319 325 19363271
134 Karagoz GE Duarte AM Akoury E Ippel H Biernat J Moran Luengo T Hsp90-Tau complex reveals molecular basis for specificity in chaperone action Cell 2014 156 963 974 24581495
135 Dickey CA Dunmore J Lu B Wang JW Lee WC Kamal A HSP induction mediates selective clearance of tau phosphorylated at proline-directed Ser/Thr sites but not KXGS (MARK) sites FASEB J 2006 20 753 755 16464956
136 Petrucelli L Dickson D Kehoe K Taylor J Snyder H Grover A CHIP and Hsp70 regulate tau ubiquitination, degradation and aggregation Hum Mol Genet 2004 13 703 714 14962978
137 Jinwal UK Akoury E Abisambra JF O'Leary JC 3rd Thompson AD Blair LJ Imbalance of Hsp70 family variants fosters tau accumulation FASEB J 2013 27 1450 1459 23271055
138 Saidi LJ Polydoro M Kay KR Sanchez L Mandelkow EM Hyman BT Carboxy terminus heat shock protein 70 interacting protein reduces tau-associated degenerative changes J Alzheimers Dis 2015 44 937 947 25374103
139 Dickey CA Kamal A Lundgren K Klosak N Bailey RM Dunmore J The high-affinity HSP90-CHIP complex recognizes and selectively degrades phosphorylated tau client proteins Journal of Clinical Investigation 2007 117 648 658 17304350
140 Shimura H Schwartz D Gygi SP Kosik KS CHIP-Hsc70 complex ubiquitinates phosphorylated tau and enhances cell survival J Biol Chem 2004 279 4869 4876 14612456
141 Hatakeyama S Matsumoto M Kamura T Murayama M Chui DH Planel E U-box protein carboxyl terminus of Hsc70-interacting protein (CHIP) mediates poly-ubiquitylation preferentially on four-repeat Tau and is involved in neurodegeneration of tauopathy J Neurochem 2004 91 299 307 15447663
142 Dickey CA Yue M Lin WL Dickson DW Dunmore JH Lee WC Deletion of the ubiquitin ligase CHIP leads to the accumulation, but not the aggregation, of both endogenous phospho- and caspase-3-cleaved tau species J Neurosci 2006 26 6985 6996 16807328
143 Sahara N Murayama M Mizoroki T Urushitani M Imai Y Takahashi R In vivo evidence of CHIP up-regulation attenuating tau aggregation J Neurochem 2005 94 1254 1263 16111477
144 Fontaine SN Martin MD Akoury E Assimon VA Borysov S Nordhues BA The active Hsc70/tau complex can be exploited to enhance tau turnover without damaging microtubule dynamics Hum Mol Genet 2015 24 3971 3981 25882706
145 Fontaine SN Rauch JN Nordhues BA Assimon VA Stothert AR Jinwal UK Isoform-selective Genetic Inhibition of Constitutive Cytosolic Hsp70 Activity Promotes Client Tau Degradation Using an Altered Co-chaperone Complement J Biol Chem 2015 290 13115 13127 25864199
146 Keller JN Gee J Ding Q The proteasome in brain aging Ageing Res Rev 2002 1 279 293 12039443
147 Keller JN Hanni KB Markesbery WR Impaired proteasome function in Alzheimer's disease J Neurochem 2000 75 436 439 10854289
148 Keck S Nitsch R Grune T Ullrich O Proteasome inhibition by paired helical filament-tau in brains of patients with Alzheimer's disease J Neurochem 2003 85 115 122 12641733
149 Han DH Na HK Choi WH Lee JH Kim YK Won C Direct cellular delivery of human proteasomes to delay tau aggregation Nat Commun 2014 5 5633 25476420
150 Bence NF Sampat RM Kopito RR Impairment of the ubiquitin-proteasome system by protein aggregation Science 2001 292 1552 1555 11375494
151 Berger Z Ravikumar B Menzies FM Oroz LG Underwood BR Pangalos MN Rapamycin alleviates toxicity of different aggregate-prone proteins Hum Mol Genet 2006 15 433 442 16368705
152 Majumder S Richardson A Strong R Oddo S Inducing autophagy by rapamycin before, but not after, the formation of plaques and tangles ameliorates cognitive deficits PLoS One 2011 6 e25416 21980451
153 Schaeffer V Lavenir I Ozcelik S Tolnay M Winkler DT Goedert M Stimulation of autophagy reduces neurodegeneration in a mouse model of human tauopathy Brain 2012 135 2169 2177 22689910
154 Rodriguez-Navarro JA Rodriguez L Casarejos MJ Solano RM Gomez A Perucho J Trehalose ameliorates dopaminergic and tau pathology in parkin deleted/tau overexpressing mice through autophagy activation Neurobiol Dis 2010 39 423 438 20546895
155 Kruger U Wang Y Kumar S Mandelkow EM Autophagic degradation of tau in primary neurons and its enhancement by trehalose Neurobiol Aging 2012 33 2291 2305 22169203
156 Ozcelik S Fraser G Castets P Schaeffer V Skachokova Z Breu K Rapamycin attenuates the progression of tau pathology in P301S tau transgenic mice PLoS One 2013 8 e62459 23667480
157 Shimada K Motoi Y Ishiguro K Kambe T Matsumoto SE Itaya M Long-term oral lithium treatment attenuates motor disturbance in tauopathy model mice: implications of autophagy promotion Neurobiol Dis 2012 46 101 108 22249108
158 Soga S Akinaga S Shiotsu Y Hsp90 inhibitors as anti-cancer agents, from basic discoveries to clinical development Curr Pharm Des 2013 19 366 376 22920907
159 Kamal A Boehm MF Burrows FJ Therapeutic and diagnostic implications of Hsp90 activation Trends Mol Med 2004 10 283 290 15177193
160 Polak P Hall MN mTOR and the control of whole body metabolism Curr Opin Cell Biol 2009 21 209 218 19261457
161 Wolfe DM Lee JH Kumar A Lee S Orenstein SJ Nixon RA Autophagy failure in Alzheimer's disease and the role of defective lysosomal acidification Eur J Neurosci 2013 37 1949 1961 23773064
162 Boland B Kumar A Lee S Platt FM Wegiel J Yu WH Autophagy induction and autophagosome clearance in neurons: Relationship to autophagic pathology in Alzheimer's disease Journal of Neuroscience 2008 28 6926 6937 18596167
163 Dawson HN Cantillana V Jansen M Wang H Vitek MP Wilcock DM Loss of Tau Elicits Axonal Degeneration in A Mouse Model of Alzheimer's Disease Neuroscience 2010 169 516 531 20434528
164 Harada A Oguchi K Okabe S Kuno J Terada S Ohshima T Altered Microtubule Organization in Small-Caliber Axons of Mice Lacking Tau-Protein Nature 1994 369 488 491 8202139
165 Ikegami S Harada A Hirokawa N Muscle weakness, hyperactivity, and impairment in fear conditioning in tau-deficient mice Neuroscience Letters 2000 279 129 132 10688046
166 Ma QL Zuo X Yang F Ubeda OJ Gant DJ Alaverdyan M Loss of MAP function leads to hippocampal synapse loss and deficits in the Morris Water Maze with aging J Neurosci 2014 34 7124 7136 24849348
167 Roberson ED Scearce-Levie K Palop JJ Yan FR Cheng IH Wu T Reducing endogenous tau ameliorates amyloid beta-induced deficits in an Alzheimer's disease mouse model Science 2007 316 750 754 17478722
168 Ittner LM Ke YD Delerue F Bi MA Gladbach A van Eersel J Dendritic Function of Tau Mediates Amyloid-beta Toxicity in Alzheimer's Disease Mouse Models Cell 2010 142 387 397 20655099
169 Roberson ED Halabisky B Yoo JW Yao J Chin J Yan F Amyloid-beta/Fyn-induced synaptic, network, and cognitive impairments depend on tau levels in multiple mouse models of Alzheimer's disease J Neurosci 2011 31 700 711 21228179
170 Hall AM Throesch BT Buckingham SC Markwardt SJ Peng Y Wang Q Tau-dependent Kv4.2 depletion and dendritic hyperexcitability in a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease J Neurosci 2015 35 6221 6230 25878292
171 DeVos SL Goncharoff DK Chen G Kebodeaux CS Yamada K Stewart FR Antisense reduction of tau in adult mice protects against seizures J Neurosci 2013 33 12887 12897 23904623
172 DeVos SL Miller TM Antisense oligonucleotides: treating neurodegeneration at the level of RNA Neurotherapeutics 2013 10 486 497 23686823
173 Kordasiewicz HB Stanek LM Wancewicz EV Mazur C McAlonis MM Pytel KA Sustained therapeutic reversal of Huntington's disease by transient repression of huntingtin synthesis Neuron 2012 74 1031 1044 22726834
174 Alonso AC Zaidi T Grundke-Iqbal I Iqbal K Role of abnormally phosphorylated tau in the breakdown of microtubules in Alzheimer disease Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1994 91 5562 5566 8202528
175 Binder LI Frankfurter A Rebhun LI The distribution of tau in the mammalian central nervous system J Cell Biol 1985 101 1371 1378 3930508
176 Wood JG Mirra SS Pollock NJ Binder LI Neurofibrillary tangles of Alzheimer disease share antigenic determinants with the axonal microtubule-associated protein tau (tau) Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1986 83 4040 4043 2424015
177 Zhang B Maiti A Shively S Lakhani F McDonald-Jones G Bruce J Microtubule-binding drugs offset tau sequestration by stabilizing microtubules and reversing fast axonal transport deficits in a tauopathy model Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2005 102 227 231 15615853
178 Zhang B Carroll J Trojanowski JQ Yao Y Iba M Potuzak JS The microtubule-stabilizing agent, epothilone D, reduces axonal dysfunction, neurotoxicity, cognitive deficits, and Alzheimer-like pathology in an interventional study with aged tau transgenic mice J Neurosci 2012 32 3601 3611 22423084
179 Barten DM Fanara P Andorfer C Hoque N Wong PY Husted KH Hyperdynamic microtubules, cognitive deficits, and pathology are improved in tau transgenic mice with low doses of the microtubule-stabilizing agent BMS-241027 J Neurosci 2012 32 7137 7145 22623658
180 Hempen B Brion JP Reduction of acetylated alpha-tubulin immunoreactivity in neurofibrillary tangle-bearing neurons in Alzheimer's disease J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 1996 55 964 972 8800092
181 Cash AD Aliev G Siedlak SL Nunomura A Fujioka H Zhu X Microtubule reduction in Alzheimer's disease and aging is independent of tau filament formation Am J Pathol 2003 162 1623 1627 12707046
182 Brunden KR Zhang B Carroll J Yao Y Potuzak JS Hogan AM Epothilone D improves microtubule density, axonal integrity, and cognition in a transgenic mouse model of tauopathy J Neurosci 2010 30 13861 13866 20943926
183 Fitzgerald DP Emerson DL Qian Y Anwar T Liewehr DJ Steinberg SM TPI-287, a new taxane family member, reduces the brain metastatic colonization of breast cancer cells Mol Cancer Ther 2012 11 1959 1967 22622283
184 Matsuoka Y Jouroukhin Y Gray AJ Ma L Hirata-Fukae C Li HF A neuronal microtubule-interacting agent, NAPVSIPQ, reduces tau pathology and enhances cognitive function in a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2008 325 146 153 18199809
185 Matsuoka Y Gray AJ Hirata-Fukae C Minami SS Waterhouse EG Mattson MP Intranasal NAP administration reduces accumulation of amyloid peptide and tau hyperphosphorylation in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer's disease at early pathological stage J Mol Neurosci 2007 31 165 170 17478890
186 Quraishe S Cowan CM Mudher A NAP (davunetide) rescues neuronal dysfunction in a Drosophila model of tauopathy Mol Psychiatry 2013 18 834 842 23587881
187 Bassan M Zamostiano R Davidson A Pinhasov A Giladi E Perl O Complete sequence of a novel protein containing a femtomolar-activity-dependent neuroprotective peptide J Neurochem 1999 72 1283 1293 10037502
188 Divinski I Mittelman L Gozes I A femtomolar acting octapeptide interacts with tubulin and protects astrocytes against zinc intoxication J Biol Chem 2004 279 28531 28538 15123709
189 Gozes I Divinski I NAP, a neuroprotective drug candidate in clinical trials, stimulates microtubule assembly in the living cell Curr Alzheimer Res 2007 4 507 509 18220512
190 Gozes I Steingart RA Spier AD NAP mechanisms of neuroprotection J Mol Neurosci 2004 24 67 72 15314252
191 Pedersen JT Sigurdsson EM Tau immunotherapy for Alzheimer's disease Trends Mol Med 2015 21 394 402 25846560
192 Congdon EE Gu J Sait HB Sigurdsson EM Antibody uptake into neurons occurs primarily via clathrin-dependent Fcgamma receptor endocytosis and is a prerequisite for acute tau protein clearance J Biol Chem 2013 288 35452 35465 24163366
193 Gu J Congdon EE Sigurdsson EM Two novel Tau antibodies targeting the 396/404 region are primarily taken up by neurons and reduce Tau protein pathology J Biol Chem 2013 288 33081 33095 24089520
194 Guo JL Lee VM Cell-to-cell transmission of pathogenic proteins in neurodegenerative diseases Nature Medicine 2014 20 130 138
195 Iba M Guo JL McBride JD Zhang B Trojanowski JQ Lee VM Synthetic tau fibrils mediate transmission of neurofibrillary tangles in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer's-like tauopathy Journal of Neuroscience 2013 33 1024 1037 23325240
196 Clavaguera F Akatsu H Fraser G Crowther RA Frank S Hench J Brain homogenates from human tauopathies induce tau inclusions in mouse brain Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2013 110 9535 9540 23690619
197 Clavaguera F Bolmont T Crowther RA Abramowski D Frank S Probst A Transmission and spreading of tauopathy in transgenic mouse brain Nature Cell Biology 2009 11 909 913 19503072
198 Boluda S Iba M Zhang B Raible KM Lee VM Trojanowski JQ Differential induction and spread of tau pathology in young PS19 tau transgenic mice following intracerebral injections of pathological tau from Alzheimer's disease or corticobasal degeneration brains Acta Neuropathologica 2015 129 221 237 25534024
199 Iba M McBride JD Guo JL Zhang B Trojanowski JQ Lee VM Tau pathology spread in PS19 tau transgenic mice following locus coeruleus (LC) injections of synthetic tau fibrils is determined by the LC's afferent and efferent connections Acta Neuropathol 2015 130 349 362 26150341
200 Sanders DW Kaufman SK DeVos SL Sharma AM Mirbaha H Li A Distinct tau prion strains propagate in cells and mice and define different tauopathies Neuron 2014 82 1271 1288 24857020
201 Rosenmann H Grigoriadis N Karussis D Boimel M Touloumi O Ovadia H Tauopathy-like abnormalities and neurologic deficits in mice immunized with neuronal tau protein Archives of Neurology 2006 63 1459 1467 17030663
202 Asuni AA Boutajangout A Quartermain D Sigurdsson EM Immunotherapy targeting pathological tau conformers in a tangle mouse model reduces brain pathology with associated functional improvements Journal of Neuroscience 2007 27 9115 9129 17715348
203 Boimel M Grigoriadis N Lourbopoulos A Haber E Abramsky O Rosenmann H Efficacy and safety of immunization with phosphorylated tau against neurofibrillary tangles in mice Exp Neurol 2010 224 472 485 20546729
204 Rozenstein-Tsalkovich L Grigoriadis N Lourbopoulos A Nousiopoulou E Kassis I Abramsky O Repeated immunization of mice with phosphorylated-tau peptides causes neuroinflammation Exp Neurol 2013 248 451 456 23876516
205 Schroeder SK Joly-Amado A Gordon MN Morgan D Tau-Directed Immunotherapy: A Promising Strategy for Treating Alzheimer's Disease and Other Tauopathies J Neuroimmune Pharmacol 2015
206 Asai H Ikezu S Tsunoda S Medalla M Luebke J Haydar T Depletion of microglia and inhibition of exosome synthesis halt tau propagation Nature neuroscience 2015 18 1584 1593 26436904
207 Saman S Kim W Raya M Visnick Y Miro S Saman S Exosome-associated tau is secreted in tauopathy models and is selectively phosphorylated in cerebrospinal fluid in early Alzheimer disease J Biol Chem 2012 287 3842 3849 22057275
208 Worley S After disappointments, Alzheimer's researchers seek out new paths: biomarkers and combination therapies may lead to disease-modifying treatments, experts say P T 2014 39 365 374 24883009
209 Maruyama M Shimada H Suhara T Shinotoh H Ji B Maeda J Imaging of tau pathology in a tauopathy mouse model and in Alzheimer patients compared to normal controls Neuron 2013 79 1094 1108 24050400
210 Johnson KA Schultz A Betensky RA Becker JA Sepulcre J Rentz D Tau PET imaging in aging and early Alzheimer's disease Ann Neurol 2015
211 Perry D Sperling R Katz R Berry D Dilts D Hanna D Building a roadmap for developing combination therapies for Alzheimer's disease Expert Rev Neurother 2015 15 327 333 25708309
