LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101128963
29630
Ageing Res Rev
Ageing Res. Rev.
Ageing research reviews
1568-1637
1872-9649

27421577
5127718
10.1016/j.arr.2016.07.002
NIHMS804653
Article
The Endocytic Pathway in Microglia During Health, Aging and Alzheimer’s Disease
Solé-Domènech Santiago AB
Cruz Dana L. B
Capetillo-Zarate Estibaliz BC
Maxfield Frederick R. B*
A Experimental Dementia Unit, Department of Medicine, Lund University, Sölvegatan 19, BMC B11, 221 84 Lund, Sweden
B Department of Biochemistry, Weill Cornell Medical College, 1300 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065, United States
C IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science, 48011, Bilbao, Spain; Achucarro Basque Center for Neurosciences, 48170, Zamudio, Spain; Department of Neuroscience, Faculty of Medicine and Odontology, University of the Basque Country EHU/UPV, Leioa, Spain
* Corresponding author. Contact: Frederick R. Maxfield, Tel: 212 746 6405, frmaxfie@med.cornell.edu
21 7 2016
12 7 2016
12 2016
01 12 2017
32 89103
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Microglia, the main phagocytes of the central nervous system (CNS), are involved in the surveillance and maintenance of nervous tissue. During normal tissue homeostasis, microglia migrate within the CNS, phagocytose dead cells and tissue debris, and modulate synapse pruning and spine formation via controlled phagocytosis. In the event of an invasion by a foreign body, microglia are able to phagocytose the invading pathogen and process it proteolytically for antigen presentation. Internalized substrates are incorporated and sorted within the endocytic pathway and thereafter transported via complex vesicular routes. When targeted for degradation, substrates are delivered to acidic late endosomes and lysosomes. In these, the enzymatic degradation relies on pH and enzyme content. Endocytosis, sorting, transport, compartment acidification and degradation are regulated by complex signaling mechanisms, and these may be altered during aging and pathology. In this review, we discuss the endocytic pathway in microglia, with insight into the mechanisms controlling lysosomal biogenesis and pH regulation. We also discuss microglial lysosome function associated with Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and the mechanisms of amyloid-beta (Aβ) internalization and degradation. Finally, we explore some therapies currently being investigated to treat AD and their effects on microglial response to Aβ, with insight in those involving enhancement of lysosomal function.

lysosome
endocytosis
microglia
TFEB
MITF
amyloid-beta
Alzheimer’s disease

1. Introduction

The mononuclear phagocytic cell population in vertebrates includes monocytes, macrophages, dendritic cells, Langerhans cells, microglia and osteoclasts (Arandjelovic and Ravichandran, 2015; Nakamichi et al., 2013). Phagocytes are responsible for the clearance of infectious agents, dead cells and tissue debris and are involved in immune response. Monocytes circulate in the blood and can enter organs and become macrophages in normal conditions as well as in response to stimuli including infectious agents and inflammatory signals. However, an important fraction of the macrophages is tissue-specific. These tissue-resident macrophages derive from primitive macrophages generated from early erythro-myeloid progenitors in the yolk sac, and maintain their presence in tissues by slow self-renewal (Davies et al., 2013; Hoeffel and Ginhoux, 2015). Microglia, the resident macrophages of the CNS, derive exclusively from primitive macrophages in the yolk sac, populate the CNS before and shortly after birth and self-renew locally with a slow turnover rate throughout life (Ginhoux and Prinz, 2015; Gomez Perdiguero et al., 2015; Nakamichi et al., 2013).

Microglia constitute 10–15% of brain cells and play a critical role in tissue surveillance and maintenance of CNS homeostasis. Microglia are very motile within the CNS and engage in the phagocytosis of apoptotic cells and debris, participate in tissue repair, and modulate synapse pruning and spine formation, among other important functions. Microglia also help to initiate the immune response against infectious agents by acting as antigen-presenting cells (Ransohoff and Cardona, 2010).

Generally, phagocytic cells internalize a wide variety of extracellular material via several mechanisms collectively named endocytosis. Internalized material follows branching vesicular transport pathways, and some internalized material is delivered to acidic late endosomes and lysosomes, where degradation occurs. Sorting of internalized substrates and targeting to degradative acidic organelles is regulated by complex sorting mechanisms.

Moreover, as resident CNS phagocytes, microglia play a role in many neurodegenerative diseases. AD, the most common form of dementia, accounts for 60 to 80% of all cases worldwide. One of the main histopathological hallmarks of AD is the presence of amyloid plaques in specific areas of the brain. However, in the majority of AD cases, it is unclear whether faster production or slower clearance of Aβ species is responsible for plaque accumulation.

In this review, we discuss the endocytic pathway in the context of phagocytic cells, and specifically microglia, with insight into the mechanisms regulating microglial lysosome biogenesis. We also discuss microglial lysosome function in the context of aging and AD, with focus on the various mechanisms of Aβ internalization and degradation. Finally, we explore some therapies currently being investigated to treat AD and their effects on microglial activity and response to Aβ.

2. The endocytic pathway in phagocytic cells

Endocytic processes are involved in the internalization of nutrients, antigen presentation, regulation of cell-surface receptor expression, cellular cholesterol homeostasis, maintenance of cell polarity and removal of pathogens, among other functions (Mukherjee et al., 1997). In the following section we discuss the main endocytic routes in phagocytic cells. Figure 1 summarizes the various mechanisms of endocytosis in the context of microglia.

2.1. Pinocytosis

Pinocytosis, originally described by Lewis (Lewis, 1931), is a process by which the plasma membrane (PM) forms vesicles that engulf extracellular fluid in a non-selective way. In macropinocytosis, large vesicles (up to 5 µm in diameter) are formed by actin-dependent membrane ruffles whose tips fall back to the PM (Hewlett et al., 1994; Lim and Gleeson, 2011). Fusion of the tips with the PM forms a new vesicle that contains extracellular fluid. Bone-marrow derived macrophages (BMMs) (Norbury et al., 1995), dendritic cells (Sallusto et al., 1995) and microglia (Booth and Thomas, 1991; Fitzner et al., 2011; Mandrekar et al., 2009) are capable of constitutive macropinocytosis. Pinocytotic behavior was described in microglia more than 20 years ago (Booth and Thomas, 1991).

Macropinocytosis allows cells to survey and internalize large amounts of the extracellular milieu in search of cell debris, damaged proteins, apoptotic cells and pathogens, most of which are degraded. For instance, macrophages can internalize up to 200% of their surface area per hour by macropinocytosis (Steinman et al., 1976). Antigens contained in macropinosomes in antigen presenting cells can become associated with major histocompatibility complex (MHC) complexes for antigen presentation (Sallusto et al., 1995). Macropinocytosis has also been associated with pathogen entry (reviewed in (Lim and Gleeson, 2011)).

2.2. Phagocytosis

Phagocytosis is the process by which cells internalize, by vesicular engulfment, large particles (typically ≥5 µm) such as apoptotic cells, foreign bodies and pathogens (Flannagan et al., 2012). Professional phagocytes such as microglia and macrophages are able to migrate to specific areas by chemotaxis and clear foreign bodies by phagocytosis (described in detail in section 2.6). The phagocytosed particle is recognized by specific receptors on the PM of the phagocytic cell. Moreover, for an immune response, phagocytic cells can act as antigen presenting cells (Flannagan et al., 2012).

There are a variety of receptors involved in phagocytosis. Pattern-recognition receptors (PRRs) recognize specific pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) found in bacteria or fungi. In microglia, PAMPs are recognized by Toll-like receptors (TLRs) as well as by scavenger receptor A (SRA) and scavenger receptor class B - CD36 (Flannagan et al., 2012; Koenigsknecht-Talboo and Landreth, 2005; Paresce et al., 1996) among others.

In contrast to PRRs, opsonic receptors (ORs) recognize foreign bodies (or antigens) coated with immunoglobulins (IGs) (Janeway, 2001). The most studied opsonic receptors are the Fc receptor, which binds to the Fc region of immunoglobulin G (IgG), and receptors of the complement system such as CR1, CR3 and CR4 (Flannagan et al., 2012). Surface receptors CD45, CD11b, and CD11c are also expressed in microglia and macrophages (extensively reviewed in (Ransohoff and Cardona, 2010; Saijo and Glass, 2011)).

Upon recognition by the appropriate receptor, additional receptors are recruited to the phagocytic cup (Flannagan et al., 2012). This requires lateral mobility of receptors (Holowka et al., 2007) and continuous binding of new receptors to the foreign body for complete sealing of the phagocytic cup. Receptor binding elicits complex signaling cascades leading to actin polymerization, extension of actin filaments, and actin association with myosins, allowing for the progression of the phagocytic cup (Freeman and Grinstein, 2014). PM lipids also play an important role in the formation of the phagocytic vesicle (Botelho et al., 2000; Corrotte et al., 2006). For a thorough review of phagocytosis see (Flannagan et al., 2012; Gordon, 2016).

2.3. Receptor-mediated endocytosis

In all nucleated vertebrate cells, a significant fraction of internalized PM and extracellular fluid enters the cell by receptor-mediated endocytosis (RME) via clathrin-coated pits (Mukherjee et al., 1997). Clathrin-independent mechanisms involving caveolae and other membrane invaginations have been discussed elsewhere (Le Roy and Wrana, 2005).

When macromolecules destined for RME are recognized by their transmembrane receptors, they become concentrated in patch-like indented regions of the PM called clathrin coated pits. These invaginate to form vesicles of ∼150 nm diameter coated with clathrin and other proteins (Kirchhausen et al., 2014; Mukherjee et al., 1997). Adaptor proteins facilitate the recruitment of clathrin to the PM for coated-pit formation (Maxfield and McGraw, 2004; McMahon and Boucrot, 2011). These coated vesicles engulf the ligands, bound to their respective membrane receptors, along with extracellular fluid. Coated vesicle formation involves several accessory proteins including epsins, endophilin, dynamin and amphiphysin, which are responsible for membrane bending and fission (Merrifield and Kaksonen, 2014).

Within seconds following vesicle internalization, the clathrin coat and the proteins involved in vesicle formation are removed in an energy-dependent step to be reused in new cycles of RME (Lemmon, 2001). The resulting uncoated vesicles (primary endosomes) fuse with each other and with transient early endosomes denominated sorting endosome (SEs). The process involves small GTPase regulatory proteins (Rab proteins) as well as SNARE complexes, which mediate vesicle fusion (reviewed in (Maxfield and McGraw, 2004; McMahon and Boucrot, 2011)).

By concentrating receptors and ligands, clathrin-mediated endocytosis carries out the internalization of nutrients, pathogens, antigens, growth factors and receptors (Le Roy and Wrana, 2005) without the need to internalize a large volume of extracellular fluid. Clathrin-coated pits have been found in microglia processes and synaptic elements (Tremblay et al., 2010). After incorporation into the endocytic pathway, the various receptors and cargoes follow specific trafficking routes that determine their cellular fate.

2.4. Sorting endosomes and the endocytic recycling compartment

The SE is localized at the periphery of the cell and has tubulovesicular morphology. At the mildly acidic pH (5.9–6.0) of the SE (Maxfield and McGraw, 2004), many ligands such as low density lipoproteins (LDL) dissociate from their receptors. The sorting of ligands and receptors is based in part on a geometry-based sorting process (Maxfield and McGraw, 2004; Mukherjee et al., 1997). Membrane constituents, including many recycling receptors, are removed from the SEs in narrow diameter tubules and transported to the recycling compartment or to the PM directly (Maxfield and McGraw, 2004). Soluble contents, including ligands released from their receptors, are generally retained in the more spherical parts of the SEs as they mature into a late endosome (LE).

The endocytic recycling compartment (ERC) is an organelle with a tubular morphology and associated varicosities that is often concentrated near the microtubule organizing center and typically has a lumenal pH of 6.4–6.5 (reviewed in (Maxfield and McGraw, 2004)). The ERC contains transferrin associated with its receptor and other unbound receptors that are recycled to the PM, but it does not contain ligands targeted to LEs and lysosomes (LYs) (Yamashiro et al., 1984). Vesicles are continuously budding from the ERC and reaching the PM where recycled receptors participate in new rounds of endocytosis. Some ERC contents are delivered to the trans Golgi network (TGN) (Lin et al., 2004; Mallet and Maxfield, 1999; Wilcke et al., 2000).

2.5. Late endosomes / lysosomes

SEs acquire newly endocytosed vesicles for a finite period of time (approx 5–10 min) and subsequently are translocated toward the center of the cell by microtubule-associated transport (Dunn and Maxfield, 1992; Lakadamyali et al., 2006). As they mature, vesicles often acquire a multivesicular morphology. The endosomal sorting complex required for transport (ESCRT), composed of ESCRT-0/I/II/III and the AAA ATPase Vps4 complexes, is responsible for the inward budding and detachment of endosomal membrane containing ubiquitylated receptors, which become tagged at the PM, and their sorting into multivesicular bodies (MVBs) (Henne et al., 2011; Hurley, 2015). ESCRT complexes are recruited from the cytosol to the endosomes in a sequential manner; ESCRT-0 initiates the pathway by binding to ubiquitylated substrates in endosomal membranes, followed by binding of ESCRT-I and II to the cargo and subsequent sequestration and sorting by ESCRT-III, which drives vesicle budding. ESCRT-III is finally disassembled by Vps-Vta1 complex (reviewed in (Henne et al., 2011)). Cargo sorted into MVBs by the ESCRT machinery is selectively targeted for degradation in LEs and LYs.

In some instances, MVBs secrete their intraluminal vesicles (ILVs) to the extracellular milieu by fusion of the limiting membrane with the cell’s PM, in a process also mediated by the ESCRT complex (Hurley, 2015). The secreted vesicles, called exosomes (30–100nm in diameter), contain a variety of membrane-associated and cytosolic proteins, mRNAs and miRNAS among components that play important roles in cell-to-cell signaling (Budnik et al., 2016). Neuronal and glial cells secrete exosomes loaded with various cargoes. Importantly, microglial exosomes contain MHC class II complexes (Potolicchio et al., 2005) probably as means to rapidly propagate and present antigens under pathological conditions (Prada et al., 2013).

As MVBs reach the perinuclear region, they adopt a complex structure with internal membranes typical of LEs, become acidified to pH 5–5.5 and acquire Rab9 as well as LY-associated membrane proteins (LAMPs). Many of the lysosomal hydrolases are tagged with mannose-6-phosphate in the Golgi, and they are delivered to LEs by mannose-6-phosphate receptors (M6PRs) via vesicular transport from the TGN (Luzio et al., 2014). The lower pH of the LEs facilitates dissociation of the enzymes from the M6PRs and allows full activation of their enzymatic activity (Majumdar et al., 2011; Mukherjee et al., 1997; Nixon, 2013).

LEs and LYs contain more than 100 membrane proteins (Schwake et al., 2013) and 70 hydrolytic enzymes (Lubke et al., 2009) that facilitate the degradation of macromolecules delivered via endocytic, phagocytic and autophagic pathways (Luzio et al., 2014). A large fraction of degradation probably occurs in LEs (Mukherjee et al., 1997). Nevertheless, molecules that are difficult to degrade remain in LEs that mature to become LYs.

Relating to phagocytosis and macropinocytosis, both phagosomes and macropinosomes mature in a process very similar to endosome maturation (Flannagan et al., 2012; Garin et al., 2001). Following internalization, early macropinosomes and phagosomes fuse with early endosomal compartments. The vesicles contain transferrin receptors, which are removed during maturation. As they remodel into maturing phagosomes or macropinosomes, intermediate phagosomes (IP) or macropinosomes (IM) adopt a multivesicular morphology (MVBs) and thereafter acquire LAMPs and enzymatic cargo by fusion with existing LEs and LYs. Eventually, the vesicles adopt a morphology that resembles that of LEs, followed by a decrease in Rab7 and a further increase in LAMPs as endosomes mature further (Racoosin and Swanson, 1993).

2.6. Mechanisms of microglia phagocytosis in the healthy brain

In healthy conditions, microglia undertake several functions related to maintaining tissue homeostasis (Sierra et al., 2013; Siskova and Tremblay, 2013). Among these, microglia are involved in ‘controlled phagocytosis’, a process by which the cells engage in the noninflammatory clearance of apoptotic cells and cell debris as part of their scavenging/clearing role within the CNS. Controlled phagocytosis is a focus of current research due to its potential implications in AD and epilepsy, among other CNS diseases (Brown and Neher, 2014; Sierra et al., 2013).

Apoptotic cells release ‘find me’ signals, ligands that act as powerful chemoattractants to recruit microglia that initiate phagocytosis of the cell corpses. Well-characterized ‘find-me’ signals are ATP and UDP, recognized by purinergic receptors P2X4 and P2X7 or P2Y6 and P2Y12, which are expressed by microglia (Haynes et al., 2006; Koizumi et al., 2007; Ohsawa et al., 2007). Following recruitment, ‘eat me’ signals or ligands such as phosphatidylserine (PS), which becomes exposed in the outer leaflet of the plasma membrane during apoptosis, calreticulin and complement components C1q and C3, are recognized by specific microglia surface receptors, which initiate actin-associated cytoskeleton remodeling, engulfment and phagocytosis. Internalized material is digested in acidic compartments by mechanisms described in sections 2.3 through 2.5, followed by the subsequent post-digestion responses such as release of anti-inflammatory mediators. These processes have been extensively reviewed (Brown and Neher, 2014; Sierra et al., 2013). A number of receptors involved in the recognition of ‘eat me’ signals have recently been described, including triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2 (TREM2) (Takahashi et al., 2005), MerTK and Axl (Grommes et al., 2008), among others.

TREM2 promotes intracellular protein tyrosine phosphorylation (Takahashi et al., 2005; Wunderlich et al., 2013). Although ligands for TREM2 have not yet been unambiguously identified, there is evidence of direct binding of the receptor to a number of phospholipids, including PS, and anionic and zwitterionic non-phosphate lipids, released by damaged neurons and myelin, respectively (Cantoni et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2015) as well as to apoE (Atagi et al., 2015). Upon binding to ligands, TREM2 initiates phagocytosis via its signaling adaptor protein TYROBP/DNAX protein of 12 KDa (DAP12) (Wunderlich et al., 2013). TREM2 activation has been shown to increase phagocytosis in microglia and decrease their inflammatory profile (Hsieh et al., 2009), whereas the R47H TREM2 variant has been associated with increased risk for late onset AD (Guerreiro et al., 2013). Recently, it has been shown that TREM2 lipid sensing sustains the microglial response in a mouse model of AD, and that the R47H variant impairs the detection of lipid ligands by the receptor, suggesting a link to defective phagocytosis in AD (Wang et al., 2015).

Mer and Axl are members of the TAM (Tyro, Axl and Mer) receptor tyrosine kinase family and regulate the innate immune response in dendritic cells and macrophages (Lemke, 2013). Mer is abundantly expressed by microglia whereas Axl levels in the CNS are low (Fourgeaud et al., 2016; Gautier et al., 2012). Both receptors engage PS indirectly, via binding to soluble opsonins protein-S (protS) and growth-arrest-specific 6 (Gas6), the latter being the only ligand to which Axl has been shown to bind, and both are expressed by apoptotic cells and microglia (Ishimoto et al., 2000; Lew et al., 2014). Recently, Fourgeaud and collaborators demonstrated that removal of Axl and Mer by genetic ablation in CX3CR1 mice caused a striking increase in uncleared apoptotic cell bodies in brain areas undergoing adult neurogenesis (Fourgeaud et al., 2016). In their study, both protS and Gas6 promoted microglial phagocytosis, suggesting that the process, although with some contribution from Axl, is mainly driven by Mer.

2.7. Regulators of microglial survival and homeostasis in the CNS

The macrophage colony-stimulating factor cytokine (M-CSF or CSF1) is a key mediator in the differentiation of myeloid progenitor cells into various phagocytic cell types through binding to its receptor, the colony-stimulating factor-1 receptor (CSF-1R, but also known as CD115) (Pollard, 2009). Other cytokines such as interleukin-3 (IL3 or multi-CSF), interleukin-4 (IL4), granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF or CSF-2) or interleukin-5 (IL5) also play a role in macrophage development and have been described elsewhere (Nakamichi et al., 2013; Pollard, 2009).

CSF-1R is expressed by all tissue macrophages (Hume, 2015) and by some neurons (Chitu et al., 2015) and is necessary for microglial viability (Elmore et al., 2014). CSF-1R depletion either with antibodies against the receptor (MacDonald et al., 2010), receptor inhibitors (Elmore et al., 2014) or by genetic ablation (Dai et al., 2002) in mice leads to a removal of tissue macrophages and microglia. Differentiation of microglia and their presence in the CNS is highly dependent on CSF-1R expression (Ginhoux and Prinz, 2015) and its ligand, M-CSF, is mainly expressed by neurons within the CNS (Nandi et al., 2012; Wang et al., 2012). However, depletion of M-CSF expression does not lead to the same depletion of macrophages as removal of CSF-1R (Dai et al., 2002), suggesting the existence of additional ligands that might compensate for the lack of this cytokine.

A second cytokine ligand for the CSF-1R receptor, interleukin-34 (IL34), has been identified (Lin et al., 2008). IL34 is also mainly produced by neurons. Its genetic ablation led to removal of an important fraction of microglia in the cortex, hippocampus and olfactory bulbs but not in the cerebellum or brain stem, where M-CSF is primarily expressed during development. Importantly, other phagocyte populations such as monocytes, dendritic cells and most tissue macrophages remained almost intact, thus suggesting a role for IL34 in the specific development of microglia (Greter et al., 2012; Wang et al., 2012). While IL34 regulates the development and maintenance of microglia in forebrain structures, M-CSF seems to control microglia populations in white matter areas, and, to a lesser extent, in the cortex and cerebellum (Kondo and Duncan, 2009; Nandi et al., 2012). Lastly, M-CSF and CSF-1R-deficient mice present brain abnormalities and die before adulthood (Ginhoux et al., 2010), whereas brains in mice deficient in IL34 are largely normal (Wang et al., 2012), suggesting that only M-CSF, through CSF-1R signaling, is responsible for overall brain development (Chitu et al., 2016). M-CSF is highly expressed in the yolk sac, and it may contribute to the expansion of microglial precursors, whereas IL34 does not control embryonic development of microglia (Ginhoux et al., 2010; Greter et al., 2012).

2.8. Mechanisms regulating lysosomal biogenesis in microglia

Transcription of lysosomal enzymes, membrane proteins and proton pumps is critical for the final steps of vesicle maturation. In phagocytic cells, lysosomal biogenesis is regulated by a number of transcription factors. In the present section we discuss the MiTF/TFE family of transcription factors and their associated signaling cascades, which are summarized in Figure 2.

Transcription factor EB (TFEB), a protein belonging to the MiTF/TFE family of transcription factors also composed of TFE3, TFEC and the microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (MITF), is a master regulator of lysosomal protein transcription in many cell types (Sardiello et al., 2009; Settembre et al., 2011) and participates in the regulation of lysosomal biogenesis in microglia (Tanaka et al., 2013). TFEB associates with the LY nutrient sensing machinery (LYNUS), composed of the kinase complex mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1), RAG GTPase proteins, the vacuolar ATPase complex (V-ATPase), the ragulator complex, which anchors RAGs to the lysosomal membrane, and the small GTPase RAS homologue enriched in brain (RHEB) which is involved in mTORC-1 activation, along with other proteins (Settembre et al., 2013b). Under high nutrient conditions, TFEB associated with RAG GTPases at the surface of lysosomes and undergoes phosphorylation at several residues such as Ser211 and Ser142 by mTORC-1 (Settembre et al., 2013b). Phosphorylated TFEB is then released to the cytosol, where it associates with YWHA (14-3-3) family of proteins (Martina et al., 2012), which act as chaperones, thus stabilizing TFEB in the cytosol and probably masking the RAG-binding domain in TFEB (Martina and Puertollano, 2013). Extracellular signal-regulated kinase 2 (ERK2), a mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), has also been shown to phosphorylate TFEB at Ser142 and promote its cytosolic stabilization (Settembre et al., 2012). However, during cellular starvation (absence of amino acids) or lysosomal stress, mTORC-1 and RAG GTPases are inactivated and TFEB no longer undergoes mTORC-1-associated phosphorylation. As a consequence, the binding site established in TFEB by mTORC-1 phosphorylation, which facilitated TFEB and 14-3-3 complex formation, is no longer available, and TFEB diffuses from the surface of lysosomes to undergo nuclear translocation (Settembre et al., 2013a; Settembre et al., 2011). Once in the nucleus, TFEB binds to CLEAR motifs, 10bp domains present in a number of LY-associated genes, promoting their transcription (Sardiello et al., 2009; Settembre et al., 2013a). Additionally, in osteoclasts, receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-B ligand (RANKL) alone has been shown to increase TFEB nuclear levels by preventing its degradation, via phosphorylation at Ser461 and/or Ser462, Ser466 and Ser468 by protein kinase C-β (PKC-β), which stabilized the factor in the cytosol (Ferron et al., 2013).

MITF, also belonging to the MiTF/TFE family, is closely related to TFEB (Martina et al., 2014). MITF is involved in the terminal differentiation of developmentally unrelated cell types such as osteoclasts and melanocytes. Animals bearing dominant-negative mutations in the MITF gene present a severe osteopetrotic phenotype (Weilbaecher et al., 2001). In bone marrow–derived macrophages (BMMs), MITF is complexed with 14-3-3 proteins in the cytosol, and experiments conducted in RAW 264.7 macrophages suggested that phosphorylation at Ser173 by Cdc25C-associated kinase 1 (C-TAK1) was necessary in order to maintain MITF-14-3-3 association (Bronisz et al., 2006). However, like TFEB, MITF is also capable of nuclear translocation. Upon treatment with RANKL and M-CSF, C-TAK-induced phosphorylation of MITF is inactivated, leading to destabilization of the 14-3-3-MITF complexes and promotion of nuclear translocation of the factor (Bronisz et al., 2006). In primary osteoclasts, M-CSF has also been shown to promote nuclear translocation of MITF via phosphorylation at Ser73 by ERK 1/2 followed by recruitment of the transcriptional coactivator p300 (Weilbaecher et al., 2001). Interestingly, a consensus MAPK phospho-acceptor serine is conserved within MITF, TFE, TFEC and TFEB (Weilbaecher et al., 2001). Hence, M-CSF may be able to induce transcriptional activity via both MITF and TFEB. p38 MAPK and phosphoinositide-3 kinase (PI3K) have also been associated with MITF-mediated maturation and gene expression in cells of myeloid lineage (Carey et al., 2016; Ma et al., 2011). It is important to note that, so far, 9 MITF isoforms have been identified (Martina et al., 2014). Therefore, some of the mechanisms described in the literature may be isoform-specific.

Work carried out in HeLa and ARPE cells indicated that, like TFEB, MITF also associates with RAG GTPases in the LYNUS, and it has been suggested that the factor may undergo regulation in a manner similar to TFEB (Martina and Puertollano, 2013; Roczniak-Ferguson et al., 2012). Moreover, homodimerization and heterodimerization between MITF, TFEB, TFEC and TFE3 is required for binding to DNA and transcriptional activation of target genes (Martina et al., 2014).

M-CSF has been shown to promote lysosomal biogenesis in osteoclasts and BMMs (Jaworowski et al., 1999; Meadows et al., 2007; Motyckova et al., 2001). As discussed in sections 2.7, neurons and microglia express CSF-1R (Hume, 2015; Nandi et al., 2012). However, the signaling mechanisms discussed above have not been validated in microglia, and little is known regarding the mechanisms by which MiTF/TFE family of transcription factors regulates lysosomal biogenesis in these cells. Nevertheless, as discussed in sections 2.10.3 and 2.12.3, microglia do respond to M-CSF with increased lysosomal function. Interestingly, it has been shown that glial cells internalize exosomes of neuronal origin (Budnik et al., 2016). Therefore, although merely speculative, a mechanism by which microglia may tune their degradative capacity might involve the internalization of neuronal exosomes containing M-CSF.

2.9. Regulation of pH in late endosomes and lysosomes of microglia

In most cells, within 30 minutes following internalization, and as they progress through the endocytic pathway, ligands encounter an increasingly acidic environment ranging from pH 6 in SEs to a pH of 4.5–5 in LYs (Yamashiro and Maxfield, 1987).

Endosomal pH is regulated by a variety of ion transport processes. The main regulator of vesicular pH is the V-ATPase complex. The different subunits of this complex play a role in the regulation of membrane potential and vesicular pH as well as membrane function (Maxson and Grinstein, 2014). This complex has two domains, the V1 that carries out ATP hydrolysis and the V0 that pumps protons across the membrane. Transport of the protons into the lysosomal lumen generates an inside-positive membrane potential, which limits further proton transport and prevents full lysosomal acidification (Pillay et al., 2002). A number of pathways dissipate the electrical gradient and allow for full acidification of the compartments. The nature of these pathways is complex, but anion transport and specifically the influx of chloride ions (Cl−) constitute one important ion transport mechanism (Graves et al., 2008; Pillay et al., 2002; Stauber and Jentsch, 2013; Steinberg et al., 2010), although cation efflux has also been described as an important pathway (Steinberg et al., 2010). In the lysosomes of many cell types, the Cl− channel transporter ClC-7 is able to dissipate the voltage across the lysosomal membrane (Graves et al., 2008; Mindell, 2012). ClC-7 has been identified as the main regulator involved in LY pH regulation in microglia (Majumdar et al., 2011). ClC-7 forms a heterodimeric complex with another lysosomal membrane protein, Ostm1, and the formation of this complex is important for trafficking ClC-7 to LY (Lange et al., 2006). The neutralization of the lysosomal inside-positive membrane potential allows for further proton import into the lysosomal lumen, leading to full lysosomal acidification.

2.10. Internalization and degradation of Aβ by microglia

The amyloidogenic processing of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) occurs primarily in neurons (Haass et al., 2012). APP is transported both in neuronal axons and dendrites, and its lumenal fragments are degraded, at least in part, in LYs (Haass et al., 2012; Haass et al., 1992). Undegraded Aβ released by the neurons is taken up by microglia and other cells.

In non-polarized mammalian cells, approximately 10% of the total nascent APP reaches the PM, whereas the majority of APP at steady-state is localized in the Golgi apparatus and TGN (Haass et al., 2012). In the PM, a fraction of APP is cleaved in a non-amyloidogenic manner by α-secretase, producing a soluble fragment (αAPPs), which is released extracellularly (Haass et al., 2012). However, the majority of APP that reaches the PM is rapidly internalized by endocytosis. Following internalization, APP is processed in the amyloidogenic pathway and generation of Aβ occurs mainly in SEs and the ERC (Haass et al., 2012). BACE1 cleavage generates a soluble APP N-terminal fragment (βAPPs) and a C-terminal fragment (β-CTF) at the membrane of early endosomal compartments. Subsequently, the multimeric γ-secretase complex including presenilin (PS-1 or PS-2), nicastrin, anterior pharynx defective protein (APH-1) and presenilin enhancer protein (PEN-2) cleaves β-CTF within the transmembrane domain generating Aβ and the APP intracellular domain (AICD) (Haass et al., 2012). γ-secretase cleavage has been reported in different organelles, although Aβ accumulates primarily in LEs and MVBs (Takahashi et al., 2002).

Aβ is present in the brain in monomeric, oligomeric, protofibrillar and fibrillar forms (Haass and Selkoe, 2007). Aβ oligomers and fibrils accumulate both inside neurons (Gouras et al., 2010) and in the parenchymal extracellular space (Hardy and Selkoe, 2002; Meyer-Luehmann et al., 2003). However, the origin of the extracellular Aβ species is unclear. Presumably, Aβ can be released from cells by membrane trafficking (e.g., recycling from endosomes) (Cirrito et al., 2008) or perhaps by release from dying cells containing intracellular peptide.

In this section we discuss the mechanisms of internalization and degradation of the various Aβ species by microglia and the enzymatic processing taking place in acidic compartments. Figure 1 summarizes the proposed mechanisms for Aβ internalization in microglia.

2.10.1. Microglia uptake and degradation of sAβ species

Microglia internalize soluble Aβ (sAβ) by pinocytosis (Chung et al., 1999; Mandrekar et al., 2009), and it enters the endocytic pathway. Much of it is recycled undegraded, and some is delivered to LE/LY (Chung et al., 1999; Mandrekar et al., 2009). Acidic conditions facilitate formation of Aβ fibrils (Jiang et al., 2012; Stine et al., 2003). Therefore, some of the internalized pool of sAβ may rapidly polymerize and reach the LY as fibrillar Aβ (fAβ).

Endothelin-converting enzymes (ECEs) are type II membrane-bound zinc metalloproteases mainly involved in regulation of vasoconstriction (Turner and Murphy, 1996). ECE-1 is located extracellularly or in the lumen of organelles (Pacheco-Quinto et al., 2013). ECE-2, which is highly homologous to ECE-1, has a pH optimum of 5.0–5.5, suggesting that it is active in LE/LY (Pacheco-Quinto et al., 2013). ECEs have been observed in the endolysosomal system of neuronal cultures (Pacheco-Quinto and Eckman, 2013) and to lesser extent in astrocytes, microglia and macrophages of AD brains (Palmer et al., 2009). ECE-1 degrades both sAβ1–40 and sAβ1–42 in vitro (Eckman et al., 2001). ECE-1 cleaves at K16|L17, L17|V18 and F19|F20 within the hydrophobic domain of Aβ1–40/42 sequences (Eckman et al., 2001; Rogeberg et al., 2014) as well as at G33|L34 and L34|M35 of the C-terminal side of Aβ1–42 (Rogeberg et al., 2014). Due to the high degree of homology between ECE-1 and ECE-2, it is plausible that both enzymes process Aβ in a similar manner. Mice deficient in ECE-1 and −2 showed elevated fAβ1–40 and fAβ1–42 in their brains (Eckman et al., 2003) perhaps due to decreased sAβ degradation in neurons.

The major LY proteases are the cathepsins (Nakanishi and Wu, 2009; Turk et al., 1999). Cathepsins B, L, and D are present in microglial LY (Banati et al., 1993; Majumdar et al., 2007; Nakanishi, 2003), with pH optima ranging from 3.5 for cathepsin D to 5.5 for cathepsin B (Mackay et al., 1997). Cathepsin B has been shown to cleave sAβ at the C-terminal sites G33|L34, G38|V39 and V40|I41 of the Aβ sequence in vitro (Mueller-Steiner et al., 2006), and cathepsin D cleaves at L17|V18, F19|F20, F20|A21 and L34|M35 (Hamazaki, 1996; Rogeberg et al., 2014; Sadik et al., 1999). Cathepsin D is also present in LEs (Cataldo et al., 1995) and might participate in the partial degradation of sAβ before the cargo ultimately reaches the LY. Moreover, cathepsin E, an endosomal aspartyl protease, is expressed in early endosomal compartments of microglia (Nishioku et al., 2002) and cleaves sAβ1–40 at the hydrophobic site F19|F20 (Mackay et al., 1997). It is therefore likely that cathepsin E partially processes sAβ1–42 following endocytosis.

2.10.2. Microglia degradation of fibrillar Aβ species

Small fibrils of Aβ1–42 are internalized in vitro by neonatal murine microglia, via RME mediated by scavenger receptors A class I and II (SRAs) and B-I (SRB-I) (Paresce et al., 1996). A complex composed of CD36 (SRB family), the integrin-associated protein CD47 and the integrin receptor α6β1 has also been associated with internalization of fAβ peptide sequences 25–35, 1–40 and 1–42 (Bamberger et al., 2003). Other receptors implicated in the uptake of fAβ1–42 include CD14 and TLRs 2 and 4 (Reed-Geaghan et al., 2009) as well as a heterotrimeric receptor complex composed of CD36, TLR4 and TLR6 (Stewart et al., 2010). However, in vivo studies have not always confirmed in vitro findings. In the CRND8 mouse model of AD harboring the human amyloid precursor protein gene with the Indiana and Swedish mutations (Chishti et al., 2001), microglia were efficient at internalizing protofibrillar Aβ but were unable to phagocytose congophillic fAβ, and microglial phagocytic activity was modulated by the chemokine receptor CX3CR1 (Liu et al., 2010). Furthermore, one study suggested that microglia have no involvement in the clearance of fAβ plaques (Grathwohl et al., 2009). After elimination of microglia in the APP/PS1 and APP23 models of AD, no changes were observed in Aβ plaque load, neuronal counts or neuronal morphology. In fact, a small reduction in total Aβ load was observed in the APP23 model upon microglia ablation. Similarly, ablation of microglia by inhibition of CSF-1R signaling in 5xFAD (Spangenberg et al., 2016) and 3xTg-AD (Dagher et al., 2015) mice models of AD prevented neuronal loss and improved cognition, respectively, without significantly altering Aβ pathology. A significant population of microglia is chronically activated in the AD brain, thus causing damage to neurons, while probably inefficiently degrading Aβ. Removal of these cells might partially rescue neuronal dysfunction while leaving Aβ pathology largely unaltered. In contrast, another study in the APP/PS1 mouse model of AD demonstrated that plaques surrounded by an increased number of microglia were smaller, suggesting that microglia were able to actively regulate plaque size (Bolmont et al., 2008). The role that microglia play in the regulation of Aβ deposition, clearance, and neuronal damage is largely dependent on their activation state.

Following internalization, fAβ is trafficked to LYs (Majumdar et al., 2007; Paresce et al., 1996) where it encounters degradative enzymes. Within non-stimulated microglia, however, fAβ shows considerable resistance to lysosomal proteolytic degradation (Chung et al., 1999; Majumdar et al., 2011; Majumdar et al., 2007; Paresce et al., 1997). In the LYs, cathepsin B cleaves at the C-terminal side of the fAβ peptides just as for sAβ (Mueller-Steiner et al., 2006), and deletion of the enzyme led to increased fAβ plaque load in the J20 mouse model of AD (Mueller-Steiner et al., 2006).

2.10.3. Insufficient lysosomal acidification leads to undegraded fAβ

The regulation of LY pH is crucial to the enzymatic activity. Surveillant microglia maintain their LY pH at about pH 6 but are able to alter it in response to physiological stimuli. In contrast, most other cells maintain their LY pH close to 5 or lower (Majumdar et al., 2011). The benefits of incomplete LY acidification are not well understood, but control of LY pH might be associated with the role of microglia in antigen processing and presentation (Majumdar et al., 2011).

The transcription of Ostm1 in surveillant microglia is greatly reduced when compared with other cell types. In the absence of sufficient Ostm1, most of the Cl− transporter ClC-7 (discussed in section 2.9) undergoes endoplasmic reticulum (ER) associated degradation (ERAD) and does not get to the LY (Majumdar et al., 2011). The higher LY pH of microglia results in decreased fAβ degradation compared to macrophages, which fully acidify their LYs (Majumdar et al., 2007).

Treatment of neonatal murine microglia with M-CSF increases the transcription of both ClC-7 and Ostm1, which is indicative of lysosomal biogenesis. Following this treatment, abundant ClC-7 is found in microglial LY, and the cells acidify their LY to pH 5 (Majumdar et al., 2011). Knockdown of either Ostm1 or ClC-7 reduces the ability of M-CSF to acidify microglial lysosomes, demonstrating the requirement for delivery of this complex to LY in order to achieve full acidification. Lysosomal acidification induced by M-CSF treatment led to increased degradation of fAβ by microglia at levels similar to macrophages (Majumdar et al., 2011; Majumdar et al., 2007).

2.10.4. Decreased Aβ degradation with aging

Aging has been associated with impaired LY function in a wide variety of cell types and organisms (Cuervo and Dice, 2000; Martinez-Vicente et al., 2005; Terman and Brunk, 2004). During the course of aging, LY volume often increases, whereas LY stability and hydrolytic activity decrease (Terman and Brunk, 2004).

The progressive accumulation of undigested material (e.g., lipofuscin) by microglia, due to the accumulation of proteolysis-resistant material as well as, to some extent, phagocytosis of neurons (Nakanishi and Wu, 2009) might hinder LY function (Martinez-Vicente et al., 2005; Nixon, 2013; Terman and Brunk, 2004). Lipofuscin forms due to the progressive oxidation and polymerization of proteins and lipid residues and is considered a hallmark of aging (Terman and Brunk, 2004). With aging, postmitotic cells such as neurons and microglia accumulate large amounts of lipofuscin.

The increased amounts of Fe2+ contained in lipofuscin vesicles further promote reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation, perhaps causing LY membrane damage and permeabilization, leading to dysregulation of LY pH and altered enzymatic activity (Kurz et al., 2008; Nixon, 2013; Terman and Brunk, 2004).

Besides lipofuscin, other factors may contribute to the aging-related decline in LY proteolysis. A decrease in chaperones during aging might impair transport of enzymes to the LYs (Kaushik and Cuervo, 2015; Vilchez et al., 2014), and aging-related post-translational modifications and protein misfolding might alter the proteolytic susceptibility of proteins in part by altering normal chaperone function (Kaushik and Cuervo, 2015).

2.11. Microglia, apolipoprotein E, lipid metabolism and AD

Many studies have pointed to a disruption in lipid metabolism as an increased risk factor for AD (reviewed in (Di Paolo and Kim, 2011)), and lysosomal storage disorders have demonstrated the importance of proper cholesterol trafficking in the CNS (Vanier, 2010).

A major genetic risk factor for AD, associated with lipid metabolism, is the inherited polymorphism of the apolipoprotein E gene (APOE) (Corder et al., 1993). ApoE is the primary cholesterol carrier in the brain (Liu et al., 2013; Pitas et al., 1987). Its role is to maintain cholesterol homeostasis, an essential aspect of membrane and synapse integrity (Mahley and Rall, 2000). The three most common apoE isoforms are a result of changes in the coding sequence that alter the structure and function of the protein (Mahley et al., 2006). The lipidated ε2 and ε3 isoforms bind and clear Aβ from the brain better than the ε4 isoform and are associated with lower AD risk (Castellano et al., 2011; Liu et al., 2013). Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) Aβ levels are lower in patients with Aβ plaque deposition in their brains (Fagan et al., 2005), and this is apoE ε4 dose-dependent (Sunderland et al., 2004), suggesting that apoE plays a role in the clearance of Aβ from the parenchyma to the CSF.

In the CNS, apoE is expressed primarily by astrocytes and microglia (Liu et al., 2013). In AD patient brains, apoE colocalizes with amyloid plaques (Namba et al., 1991) that are typically surrounded by a large number of reactive microglia (Solito and Sastre, 2012). The ATP-binding cassette transporter A1 (ABCA1), a related protein, ABCA7, and other related transporters transfer cholesterol to apoE-containing lipoproteins, reducing cholesterol levels and maintaining neuronal health (Sakae et al., 2016; Wahrle et al., 2004). Lipidated apoE acts as an Aβ chaperone within the cell and, in microglia, apoE ε3 promotes enzyme mediated (NEP and IDE) Aβ degradation more efficiently than ε4 (Jiang et al., 2008; Liu et al., 2013). The chaperone role of apoE in promoting Aβ degradation in microglia, however, is not definitive; altered cholesterol levels regulate Aβ delivery to lysosomes and degradation in microglia but do not seem to change the expression or activity of Aβ degrading enzymes (Lee et al., 2012).

Retinoid X receptor (RXR) and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPAR) are implicated in the apoE-related response to Aβ in AD as well as transcription and activation of TFEB. The transcription of APOE is activated by the dimerization of RXR with PPARγ (Chawla et al.; Corder et al., 1993; Schmechel et al., 1993). The activation of PPARγ and RXRs controls brain inflammation and alters the inflammatory state of microglia (Bernardo and Minghetti, 2006). In the APP/PS1 mouse model of AD, genistein (PPARγ agonist) and bexarotene (RXR agonist which crosses the blood-brain barrier) treatments lowered plaque load and Aβ levels due to increased apoE release from astrocytes, together with a reduction of microgliosis (Bonet-Costa et al., 2016). The decrease in Aβ by bexarotene treatment is dependent on ABCA1’s lipidation of apoE (Corona et al., 2016). Bexarotene also increases the expression of genes involved in microglial Aβ phagocytosis, including Trem2, Tyrobp, Apoe, and Mertk (Lefterov et al., 2015). Furthermore, RXRα also dimerizes with PPARα to form a transcriptional complex, and in primary astrocytes or BV-2 glial cells, treatment with gemfibrozil (a PPARα agonist), or retinoic acid upregulates TFEB transcription (Ghosh et al., 2015). Interestingly, in cultured human dermal fibroblasts, genistein also induces an upregulation in TFEB expression (Moskot et al., 2014). Thus, the reduction in mouse brain Aβ levels seen upon treatment with PPAR agonists may also be mediated in part by enhanced lysosomal biogenesis.

ApoE and ABCA1 transcription is also responsive to the ligand-activated liver X receptors (LXRα and LXRβ). The enhancement in Aβ clearance seen following treatment of APP23 AD mice with LXR ligands , together with the role played by ABCA1 in modulating the inflammatory response in the brain (Karasinska et al., 2013), suggests that both cholesterol transport and glial cell-mediated neuroinflammation and degeneration might be potential AD therapeutic targets. The receptors and their agonists discussed in this section are an active area of research in AD treatment.

2.12. Potential mechanisms to increase degradation of Aβ by microglia

A number of genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have revealed an association between genes relating to immune response and late-onset AD (Karch et al., 2014). Genetic epidemiology studies pointed out a genetic overlap between immune-mediated disease and AD (Yokoyama et al., 2016). These data indicate a central role played by the immune system and specifically by microglia in the pathogenesis of AD. Therefore, targeting of microglia and specifically their degradative capacity constitutes a promising therapeutic approach in the treatment of AD. In this section we discuss the role of microglia in mediating the effects of certain AD treatments, and we also discuss ways to increase Aβ degradation by enhancing microglial degradative capacity.

2.12.1. Anti-inflammatory therapies

The role of inflammation during the pathogenesis of AD is controversial. Based on an inflammation theory of AD, the main focus of research has been on finding suitable antiinflammatory agents that cross the blood-brain barrier (Trepanier and Milgram, 2010). Prostaglandin H synthase (COX) inhibitors constitute the major anti-inflammatory agents tested on AD patients, and most non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) possess potent antiinflammatory activity based on their COX inhibition. In addition, some NSAIDs act as PPARγ agonists, inhibiting interleukin-6 (IL6) and RNF-alpha in microglia and monocytes (Combs et al., 1999) and preventing microglial activation (Combs et al., 2000). 3xTg-AD mice treated with a COX-1 selective inhibitor showed reduced glial activation and increased brain expression of anti-inflammatory markers along with learning and memory improvements and reduced Aβ deposits (Choi et al., 2013). Unfortunately, clinical trials have failed to show beneficial effects of NSAIDs in AD patients (Heneka et al., 2015). Recent data showed that prostaglandin signaling mediates a beneficial immune modulatory response via prostaglandin EP4 receptors. However, prostaglandin signaling also induces a toxic response via EP2 and EP3 receptors. This dichotomous response argues against NSAIDs as appropriate therapeutic agents. Targeting downstream of COX might avoid this detrimental response (Johansson et al., 2015). This topic has been reviewed in detail (Woodling and Andreasson, 2016).

Aspirin-triggered lipoxin A4 (ATL) treatment has been suggested to promote the production of anti-inflammatory molecules while decreasing pro-inflammatory factors. Compared to NSAID treatment, ATL induces high responses with lower drug doses, thus constituting a therapeutic candidate for the treatment of AD. ATL treatment in the Tg2576 mouse model of AD led to upregulation of arginase-1 and YM1 alternative activation markers (anti-inflammatory) and downregulation of iNOS expression (Medeiros et al., 2013). Interestingly, YM1 showed colocalization with CD45-positive microglia and 6E10-positive Aβ deposits. This alternative microglia activation was associated with enhanced phagocytic phenotype, fAβ plaque clearance, synapse recovery and improvement in cognitive performance tests (Dunn et al., 2015; Medeiros et al., 2013). However the mechanism at the cellular level needs further investigation.

Despite the promising results of anti-inflammatory treatments on animal models, drugs to block the inflammatory signaling mechanisms on which microglia rely to modulate their phagocytic and proteolytic functions might magnify the progression of AD (Lucin and Wyss-Coray, 2009; Wyss-Coray and Mucke, 2002). This apparently paradoxical effect in microglia might be related to the plasticity of the cells responding to different environmental signals. Aging might cause an imbalance of the inflammatory response, and this might contribute to or aggravate AD pathology. Controlling the subtle shift from classical, pro-inflammatory, to alternatively activated microglia may be a key factor to consider when designing efficient anti-inflammatory therapies.

2.12.2. Immunization therapies

In human AD brains and in transgenic mouse models of AD, microglia associate with fAβ deposits (reviewed in (Wyss-Coray and Rogers, 2012)). However, as discussed in previous sections, non-activated microglia do not degrade fAβ efficiently due to insufficient lysosomal acidification (Majumdar et al., 2011; Majumdar et al., 2007). Immunotherapy studies in mouse models of AD showed that both active and passive immunization against the Aβ peptide were successful at resolving Aβ pathology, but clinical trials involving AD patients have not been successful so far (extensively reviewed in (Wisniewski and Goni, 2015)).

In a seminal study, Schenk and collaborators showed that active immunization against Aβ in PDAPP mice led to a striking reduction in brain Aβ pathology. Areas typically occupied by plaques appeared decorated with Aβ-immunoreactive, MHC-II positive microglia and/or monocyte-derived cells. The study suggested that these cells phagocytose Aβ via Fc receptors (Schenk et al., 1999) and set the ground for clinical trials involving AD patients (reviewed in (Boche et al., 2010; Wisniewski and Goni, 2015)).

Similarly, peripherally administered antibodies (passive immunotherapy) against Aβ penetrate the parenchyma and trigger microglia to clear plaques through Fc receptor-mediated phagocytosis, leading to degradation (Bard et al., 2000; Koenigsknecht-Talboo et al., 2008; Wilcock et al., 2004). Interestingly, PDAPP mice showed increased expression of Fc receptors and CD45 inflammation marker in microglia 1 and 2 months after injection of anti-Aβ antibodies, respectively (Wilcock et al., 2004).

In line with animal studies, several post-mortem studies in patients of the AN1792 vaccine trial of active immunization against Aβ revealed neocortical areas with reduced plaque load. These areas contained small punctate immunostained Aβ with a distribution matching that of CD68 positive microglia (Ferrer et al., 2004; Masliah et al., 2005; Nicoll et al., 2006; Nicoll et al., 2003), suggesting both microglial activation and phagocytosis of Aβ. Patient data indicated that Aβ mobilization started within 4 months of immunization, but extensive plaque removal required several years (Holmes et al., 2008; Nicoll et al., 2006). This suggests continuous but extremely slow plaque uptake and degradation by microglia in vivo.

2.12.3. Enhanced microglial lysosomal function as a therapeutic target

Factors that promote microglial lysosome biogenesis might enhance lysosomal function, thus allowing for enhanced degradative capacity. As discussed in section 2.8, M-CSF has been reported to induce lysosomal biogenesis in several cell types.

M-CSF treatment of an AD mouse model presenting AD-like pathology and associated cognitive impairment reversed the Aβ load and improved performance in cognitive tests (Boissonneault et al., 2009). In addition, M-CSF treatment in young animals without neurological alterations or evident Aβ plaque load prevented AD-like pathology (Boissonneault et al., 2009). Treatment with M-CSF increased the number of microglia associated with amyloid deposits and enhanced fAβ phagocytosis by the cells. Moreover, internalized Aβ highly co-localized with LE/LY markers in the microglia (Boissonneault et al., 2009). These studies in mouse models are consistent with in vitro studies showing that M-CSF activation of primary neonatal murine microglia leads to normal lysosomal acidification and enhanced fAβ degradation (Majumdar et al., 2011). In these studies, and similar to microglial activation seen with immunization therapies, M-CSF treatment increased microglial expression of inflammatory surface markers CD45 and CD11b as well as MHC-II (Majumdar et al., 2011). Therefore, microglial activation by immunization or other mechanisms might prove beneficial in enhancing Aβ degradation. Interestingly, healthy individuals and individuals with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) present lower M-CSF levels when compared to AD patients (Laske et al., 2010; Ray et al., 2007). Additionally, in mouse brains, not only microglia but also an important fraction of neuronal populations express the CSF-1R receptor (Chitu et al., 2015). Therefore, M-CSF treatment may also enhance lysosomal function in neurons.

Treatments that induce neuroinflammation would not be appropriate, but it is possible that the cellular mechanisms by which M-CSF leads to enhanced degradation of fAβ could be activated in other ways. For example, activation of TFEB or other transcription factors might lead to overall enhanced synthesis of lysosomal proteins, including Ostm1 and ClC-7. In general, direct activation of transcription factors is considered to be a challenging pharmacological target. However, TFEB is regulated by mTORC pathways, and pharmacological manipulation of these signaling pathways has been considered (Richardson et al., 2015; Xiao et al., 2015).

3. Conclusions and future directions

Endocytosis by microglia and subsequent incorporation of substrates into the endocytic pathway play critical roles in immune cell response, synapse pruning, scavenging of cell debris and in the degradation of protein aggregates. The effect of aging and AD on the microglial endocytic pathway is likely to have a dramatic impact on brain homeostasis.

The accumulation of undigested material in lysosomes increases with age as the cells and their respective organelles slow their metabolic turnover. A classic hallmark of AD, the accumulation of Aβ plaques surrounded by activated, proinflammatory microglia, may be related to impaired microglial phagocytosis and lysosomal degradation. With aging, the rate of degradation of Aβ may be reduced (Hickman et al., 2008; Norden and Godbout, 2013). Probably due to their role as antigen-presenting cells (discussed in section 2.10.3), the lysosomes of non-inflammatory surveillant microglia are not fully acidified. This may be one of the main reasons why deposits of fAβ are not efficiently degraded.

Harnessing the brain’s immune system for Aβ clearance and prevention of plaque accumulation through microglia appears promising. A specific immune response by microglia to Aβ that leads to increased phagocytosis followed by efficient degradation in acidic compartments would be ideal. Increased numbers of microglia with more acidic lysosomes may be required not only for plaque internalization but also for enhanced degradation of pre-fAβ, which may be a crucial target for disease prevention. In addition, enhancing lysosomal function may be a way to increase Aβ clearance without a concurrent inflammatory response that is damaging to the neurons.

Taken together, microglial endocytic pathways and their alterations caused by aging and AD are of vital importance in the understanding and prevention of disease. In that context, further research into the role of microglia and their ability to degrade Aβ is crucial.

This project was supported by National Center for Research Resources [award number S10RR031855] and National Institutes of Health grants [R37-DK27083 and R01-HL093324]. S.S.D. is supported by the Swedish Research Council (VR) International Postdoctoral Grant DNR. 637-2013-503.

Figure 1 Proposed endocytic pathways in phagocytic cells

Endocytic mechanisms, namely macropinocytosis, phagocytosis and clathrin-mediated endocytosis, are depicted on the PM. Following receptor-mediated endocytosis, substrates bound to receptors undergo sorting in SEs and receptors are recycled back to the PM either directly from nascent endosomes or via the ERC, whereas nascent phagosomes and macropinosomes fuse with SEs and undergo a similar sorting process (indicated by an asterisk). SEs as well as intermediate phagosomes / macropinosomes containing sorted cargo (IPs and IMs, respectively) mature and adopt a multivesicular morphology (MVBs) where an additional sorting process takes place. Substrates in MVBs eventually reach LEs, which receive enzymes and membrane proteins from the TGN via vesicular trafficking, and the LY. Most degradation occurs in these acidic compartments. In contrast, IPs and IMs acquire enzymatic cargo by fusion with LEs and LYs, giving rise to phagolysosomes and macropinolysosomes. APP cellular trafficking: Surface APP is cleaved by α-secretase followed by extracellular release of the αAPP fragment. However, an important fraction of APP is incorporated into the endocytic pathway by clathrin-mediated endocytosis and processed mainly in SEs and the ERC by BACE1 and γ-secretase, leading to secretion of AICD to the cytosol and Aβ to the lumen of the compartments. Trafficking routes are indicated by black arrows. Fusion events are indicated by pink arrows. Abbreviations: PM, plasma membrane. SE, sorting endosome. ERC, endocytic recycling compartment. IP, intermediate phagosome. IM, intermediate macropinosome. MVB, multivesicular body. TGN, trans-Golgi network. LE, late endosome. LY, lysosome. PLY, phagolysosome. MLY, macropinolysosome. SRA, scavenger receptor class A. APP, amyloid precursor protein. αAPPs, soluble APP N-terminal fragment from α-secretase cleavage. βAPPs, soluble APP N-terminal fragment from β-secretase cleavage. AICD, APP intracellular domain. sAβ, soluble Aβ. fAβ, fibrillar Aβ. LDL, low density lipoprotein. M6PR, mannose-6-phosphate receptors.

Figure 2 Proposed mechanisms of lysosomal biogenesis in microglia

(A) TFEB and MITF localization is dependent on their phosphorylation sites and states. In fully fed cells, TFEB (and probably MITF too) associates with active RAG GTPases in the LYNUS machinery at the surface of lysosomes and becomes phosphorylated by mTORC-1 at multiple sites including Ser211 and Ser142 (phosphorylation indicated by blue circles) followed by release to the cytosol and complex formation with 14-3-3 chaperones (indicated by black lines and arrowheads) (Martina and Puertollano, 2013; Settembre et al., 2013b). C-TAK1 and ERK1/2 have also been suggested to phosphorylate MITF and TFEB at Ser173 and Ser142, respectively, and promote their cytosolic stabilization by complex formation with 14-3-3 proteins (indicated by blue lines and arrowheads). Under certain conditions such as starvation or cellular stress, mTORC-1 detaches from LYNUS and no longer phosphorylates TFEB likely leading to destabilization of TFEB-14-3-3 complexes and promoting the nuclear translocation of the factor (indicated by grey lines and arrowheads). MITF may be regulated in a similar manner (Martina and Puertollano, 2013; Roczniak-Ferguson et al., 2012; Settembre et al., 2013b). In addition, following uptake by specific PM receptors, M-CSF and RANKL are also able to promote nuclear translocation of MITF by inhibiting C-TAK1 (which in turn destabilizes MITF-14-3-3 complexes) and/or promoting ERK 1/2-associated phosphorylation of the factor at Ser73 (Bronisz et al., 2006; Weilbaecher et al., 2001). RANKL alone has been shown to increase TFEB nuclear levels by preventing its degradation via PKC-β-associated phosphorylation at multiple serine residues (phosphorylation indicated by yellow circles), which seems to stabilize TFEB in the cytosol (Ferron et al., 2013). (B). Following nuclear mobilization, MITF and TFEB (depicted by green and red circles/arrows, respectively) promote the transcription of lysosomal genes (Meadows et al., 2007; Sardiello et al., 2009; Settembre et al., 2012). Newly synthesized lysosomal proteins pass through the ER and the Golgi and reach acidic late endosomes by vesicular trafficking (depicted by triangles, circles, rectangles and squares in the various organelles, and described in the legend). Abbreviations: M-CSF, macrophage-colony stimulating factor. RANKL, receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-B ligand. LY, lysosome. MITF, microphthalmia-associated transcription factor. TFEB, transcription factor EB. C-TAK1, Cdc25C-associated kinase 1. MAPK, Mitogen-activated protein kinases. mTORC1, mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1. LYNUS, LY nutrient sensing machinery.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Conflict of Interests

The authors declared no potential conflict of interests regarding the publication of this manuscript.


References

Arandjelovic S Ravichandran KS Phagocytosis of apoptotic cells in homeostasis Nat Immunol 2015 16 907 917 26287597
Atagi Y Liu CC Painter MM Chen XF Verbeeck C Zheng H Li X Rademakers R Kang SS Xu H Younkin S Das P Fryer JD Bu G Apolipoprotein E Is a Ligand for Triggering Receptor Expressed on Myeloid Cells 2 (TREM2) J Biol Chem 2015 290 26043 26050 26374899
Bamberger ME Harris ME McDonald DR Husemann J Landreth GE A cell surface receptor complex for fibrillar beta-amyloid mediates microglial activation J Neurosci 2003 23 2665 2674 12684452
Banati RB Rothe G Valet G Kreutzberg GW Detection of lysosomal cysteine proteinases in microglia: flow cytometric measurement and histochemical localization of cathepsin B and L Glia 1993 7 183 191 8432559
Bard F Cannon C Barbour R Burke RL Games D Grajeda H Guido T Hu K Huang J Johnson-Wood K Khan K Kholodenko D Lee M Lieberburg I Motter R Nguyen M Soriano F Vasquez N Weiss K Welch B Seubert P Schenk D Yednock T Peripherally administered antibodies against amyloid beta-peptide enter the central nervous system and reduce pathology in a mouse model of Alzheimer disease Nat Med 2000 6 916 919 10932230
Bernardo A Minghetti L PPAR-gamma agonists as regulators of microglial activation and brain inflammation Curr Pharm Des 2006 12 93 109 16454728
Boche D Denham N Holmes C Nicoll JA Neuropathology after active Abeta42 immunotherapy: implications for Alzheimer’s disease pathogenesis Acta Neuropathol 2010 120 369 384 20632020
Boissonneault V Filali M Lessard M Relton J Wong G Rivest S Powerful beneficial effects of macrophage colony-stimulating factor on beta-amyloid deposition and cognitive impairment in Alzheimer’s disease Brain 2009 132 1078 1092 19151372
Bolmont T Haiss F Eicke D Radde R Mathis CA Klunk WE Kohsaka S Jucker M Calhoun ME Dynamics of the microglial/amyloid interaction indicate a role in plaque maintenance J Neurosci 2008 28 4283 4292 18417708
Bonet-Costa V Herranz-Perez V Blanco-Gandia M Mas-Bargues C Ingles M Garcia-Tarraga P Rodriguez-Arias M Minarro J Borras C Garcia-Verdugo JM Vina J Clearing Amyloid-beta through PPARgamma/ApoE Activation by Genistein is a Treatment of Experimental Alzheimer’s Disease J Alzheimers Dis 2016 51 701 711 26890773
Booth PL Thomas WE Evidence for motility and pinocytosis in ramified microglia in tissue culture Brain Res 1991 548 163 171 1868330
Botelho RJ Teruel M Dierckman R Anderson R Wells A York JD Meyer T Grinstein S Localized biphasic changes in phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate at sites of phagocytosis J Cell Biol 2000 151 1353 1368 11134066
Bronisz A Sharma SM Hu R Godlewski J Tzivion G Mansky KC Ostrowski MC Microphthalmia-associated transcription factor interactions with 14-3-3 modulate differentiation of committed myeloid precursors Mol Biol Cell 2006 17 3897 3906 16822840
Brown GC Neher JJ Microglial phagocytosis of live neurons Nat Rev Neurosci 2014 15 209 216 24646669
Budnik V Ruiz-Canada C Wendler F Extracellular vesicles round off communication in the nervous system Nat Rev Neurosci 2016 17 160 172 26891626
Cantoni C Bollman B Licastro D Xie M Mikesell R Schmidt R Yuede CM Galimberti D Olivecrona G Klein RS Cross AH Otero K Piccio L TREM2 regulates microglial cell activation in response to demyelination in vivo Acta Neuropathol 2015 129 429 447 25631124
Carey HA Bronisz A Cabrera J Hildreth BE 3rd Cuitino M Fu Q Ahmad A Toribio RE Ostrowski MC Sharma SM Failure to Target RANKL Signaling Through p38-MAPK Results in Defective Osteoclastogenesis in the Microphthalmia Cloudy-Eyed Mutant J Cell Physiol 2016 231 630 640 26218069
Castellano JM Kim J Stewart FR Jiang H DeMattos RB Patterson BW Fagan AM Morris JC Mawuenyega KG Cruchaga C Goate AM Bales KR Paul SM Bateman RJ Holtzman DM Human apoE isoforms differentially regulate brain amyloid-beta peptide clearance Sci Transl Med 2011 3 89ra57
Cataldo AM Barnett JL Berman SA Li J Quarless S Bursztajn S Lippa C Nixon RA Gene expression and cellular content of cathepsin D in Alzheimer’s disease brain: evidence for early up-regulation of the endosomal-lysosomal system Neuron 1995 14 671 680 7695914
Chawla A Boisvert WA Lee CH Laffitte BA Barak Y Joseph SB Liao D Nagy L Edwards PA Curtiss LK Evans RM Tontonoz P A PPAR gamma-LXR-ABCA1 pathway in macrophages is involved in cholesterol efflux and atherogenesis Mol Cell 2001 7 161 171 11172721
Chishti MA Yang DS Janus C Phinney AL Horne P Pearson J Strome R Zuker N Loukides J French J Turner S Lozza G Grilli M Kunicki S Morissette C Paquette J Gervais F Bergeron C Fraser PE Carlson GA George-Hyslop PS Westaway D Early-onset amyloid deposition and cognitive deficits in transgenic mice expressing a double mutant form of amyloid precursor protein 695 J Biol Chem 2001 276 21562 21570 11279122
Chitu V Gokhan S Gulinello M Branch CA Patil M Basu R Stoddart C Mehler MF Stanley ER Phenotypic characterization of a Csf1r haploinsufficient mouse model of adult-onset leukodystrophy with axonal spheroids and pigmented glia (ALSP) Neurobiol Dis 2015 74 219 228 25497733
Chitu V Gokhan S Nandi S Mehler MF Stanley ER Emerging Roles for CSF-1 Receptor and its Ligands in the Nervous System Trends Neurosci 2016 39 378 393 27083478
Choi SH Aid S Caracciolo L Minami SS Niikura T Matsuoka Y Turner RS Mattson MP Bosetti F Cyclooxygenase-1 inhibition reduces amyloid pathology and improves memory deficits in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease J Neurochem 2013 124 59 68 23083210
Chung H Brazil MI Soe TT Maxfield FR Uptake, degradation, and release of fibrillar and soluble forms of Alzheimer’s amyloid beta-peptide by microglial cells J Biol Chem 1999 274 32301 32308 10542270
Cirrito JR Kang JE Lee J Stewart FR Verges DK Silverio LM Bu G Mennerick S Holtzman DM Endocytosis is required for synaptic activity-dependent release of amyloid-beta in vivo Neuron 2008 58 42 51 18400162
Combs CK Johnson DE Cannady SB Lehman TM Landreth GE Identification of microglial signal transduction pathways mediating a neurotoxic response to amyloidogenic fragments of beta-amyloid and prion proteins J Neurosci 1999 19 928 939 9920656
Combs CK Johnson DE Karlo JC Cannady SB Landreth GE Inflammatory mechanisms in Alzheimer’s disease: Inhibition of beta-amyloid-stimulated proinflammatory responses and neurotoxicity by PPAR gamma agonists J Neurosci 2000 20 558 567 10632585
Corder EH Saunders AM Strittmatter WJ Schmechel DE Gaskell PC Small GW Roses AD Haines JL Pericak-Vance MA Gene dose of apolipoprotein E type 4 allele and the risk of Alzheimer’s disease in late onset families Science 1993 261 921 923 8346443
Corona AW Kodoma N Casali BT Landreth GE ABCA1 is Necessary for Bexarotene-Mediated Clearance of Soluble Amyloid Beta from the Hippocampus of APP/PS1 Mice J Neuroimmune Pharmacol 2016 11 61 72 26175148
Corrotte M Chasserot-Golaz S Huang P Du G Ktistakis NT Frohman MA Vitale N Bader MF Grant NJ Dynamics and function of phospholipase D and phosphatidic acid during phagocytosis Traffic 2006 7 365 377 16497229
Cuervo AM Dice JF When lysosomes get old Exp Gerontol 2000 35 119 131 10767573
Dagher NN Najafi AR Kayala KM Elmore MR White TE Medeiros R West BL Green KN Colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor inhibition prevents microglial plaque association and improves cognition in 3xTg-AD mice J Neuroinflammation 2015 12 139 26232154
Dai XM Ryan GR Hapel AJ Dominguez MG Russell RG Kapp S Sylvestre V Stanley ER Targeted disruption of the mouse colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor gene results in osteopetrosis, mononuclear phagocyte deficiency, increased primitive progenitor cell frequencies, and reproductive defects Blood 2002 99 111 120 11756160
Davies LC Jenkins SJ Allen JE Taylor PR Tissue-resident macrophages Nat Immunol 2013 14 986 995 24048120
Di Paolo G Kim TW Linking lipids to Alzheimer’s disease: cholesterol and beyond Nat Rev Neurosci 2011 12 284 296 21448224
Dunn HC Ager RR Baglietto-Vargas D Cheng D Kitazawa M Cribbs DH Medeiros R Restoration of lipoxin A4 signaling reduces Alzheimer’s disease-like pathology in the 3xTg-AD mouse model J Alzheimers Dis 2015 43 893 903 25125468
Dunn KW Maxfield FR Delivery of ligands from sorting endosomes to late endosomes occurs by maturation of sorting endosomes J Cell Biol 1992 117 301 310 1560027
Eckman EA Reed DK Eckman CB Degradation of the Alzheimer’s amyloid beta peptide by endothelin-converting enzyme J Biol Chem 2001 276 24540 24548 11337485
Eckman EA Watson M Marlow L Sambamurti K Eckman CB Alzheimer’s disease beta-amyloid peptide is increased in mice deficient in endothelin-converting enzyme J Biol Chem 2003 278 2081 2084 12464614
Elmore MR Najafi AR Koike MA Dagher NN Spangenberg EE Rice RA Kitazawa M Matusow B Nguyen H West BL Green KN Colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor signaling is necessary for microglia viability, unmasking a microglia progenitor cell in the adult brain Neuron 2014 82 380 397 24742461
Fagan AM Csernansky CA Morris JC Holtzman DM The search for antecedent biomarkers of Alzheimer’s disease J Alzheimers Dis 2005 8 347 358 16556966
Ferrer I Boada Rovira M Sanchez Guerra ML Rey MJ Costa-Jussa F Neuropathology and pathogenesis of encephalitis following amyloid-beta immunization in Alzheimer’s disease Brain Pathol 2004 14 11 20 14997933
Ferron M Settembre C Shimazu J Lacombe J Kato S Rawlings DJ Ballabio A Karsenty G A RANKL-PKCbeta-TFEB signaling cascade is necessary for lysosomal biogenesis in osteoclasts Genes Dev 2013 27 955 969 23599343
Fitzner D Schnaars M van Rossum D Krishnamoorthy G Dibaj P Bakhti M Regen T Hanisch UK Simons M Selective transfer of exosomes from oligodendrocytes to microglia by macropinocytosis J Cell Sci 2011 124 447 458 21242314
Flannagan RS Jaumouille V Grinstein S The cell biology of phagocytosis Annu Rev Pathol 2012 7 61 98 21910624
Fourgeaud L Traves PG Tufail Y Leal-Bailey H Lew ED Burrola PG Callaway P Zagorska A Rothlin CV Nimmerjahn A Lemke G TAM receptors regulate multiple features of microglial physiology Nature 2016 532 240 244 27049947
Freeman SA Grinstein S Phagocytosis: receptors, signal integration, and the cytoskeleton Immunol Rev 2014 262 193 215 25319336
Garin J Diez R Kieffer S Dermine JF Duclos S Gagnon E Sadoul R Rondeau C Desjardins M The phagosome proteome: Insight into phagosome functions J Cell Biol 2001 152 165 180 11149929
Gautier EL Shay T Miller J Greter M Jakubzick C Ivanov S Helft J Chow A Elpek KG Gordonov S Mazloom AR Ma’ayan A Chua WJ Hansen TH Turley SJ Merad M Randolph GJ Immunological Genome C Gene-expression profiles and transcriptional regulatory pathways that underlie the identity and diversity of mouse tissue macrophages Nat Immunol 2012 13 1118 1128 23023392
Ghosh A Jana M Modi K Gonzalez FJ Sims KB Berry-Kravis E Pahan K Activation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha induces lysosomal biogenesis in brain cells: implications for lysosomal storage disorders J Biol Chem 2015 290 10309 10324 25750174
Ginhoux F Greter M Leboeuf M Nandi S See P Gokhan S Mehler MF Conway SJ Ng LG Stanley ER Samokhvalov IM Merad M Fate mapping analysis reveals that adult microglia derive from primitive macrophages Science 2010 330 841 845 20966214
Ginhoux F Prinz M Origin of microglia: current concepts and past controversies Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2015 7 a020537 26134003
Gomez Perdiguero E Klapproth K Schulz C Busch K Azzoni E Crozet L Garner H Trouillet C de Bruijn MF Geissmann F Rodewald HR Tissue-resident macrophages originate from yolk-sac-derived erythro-myeloid progenitors Nature 2015 518 547 551 25470051
Gordon S Phagocytosis: An Immunobiologic Process Immunity 2016 44 463 475 26982354
Gouras GK Tampellini D Takahashi RH Capetillo-Zarate E Intraneuronal beta-amyloid accumulation and synapse pathology in Alzheimer’s disease Acta Neuropathol 2010 119 523 541 20354705
Grathwohl SA Kalin RE Bolmont T Prokop S Winkelmann G Kaeser SA Odenthal J Radde R Eldh T Gandy S Aguzzi A Staufenbiel M Mathews PM Wolburg H Heppner FL Jucker M Formation and maintenance of Alzheimer’s disease beta-amyloid plaques in the absence of microglia Nat Neurosci 2009 12 1361 1363 19838177
Graves AR Curran PK Smith CL Mindell JA The Cl-/H+ antiporter ClC-7 is the primary chloride permeation pathway in lysosomes Nature 2008 453 788 792 18449189
Greter M Lelios I Pelczar P Hoeffel G Price J Leboeuf M Kundig TM Frei K Ginhoux F Merad M Becher B Stroma-derived interleukin-34 controls the development and maintenance of langerhans cells and the maintenance of microglia Immunity 2012 37 1050 1060 23177320
Grommes C Lee CY Wilkinson BL Jiang Q Koenigsknecht-Talboo JL Varnum B Landreth GE Regulation of microglial phagocytosis and inflammatory gene expression by Gas6 acting on the Axl/Mer family of tyrosine kinases J Neuroimmune Pharmacol 2008 3 130 140 18247125
Guerreiro R Wojtas A Bras J Carrasquillo M Rogaeva E Majounie E Cruchaga C Sassi C Kauwe JS Younkin S Hazrati L Collinge J Pocock J Lashley T Williams J Lambert JC Amouyel P Goate A Rademakers R Morgan K Powell J St George-Hyslop P Singleton A Hardy J Alzheimer Genetic Analysis G TREM2 variants in Alzheimer’s disease N Engl J Med 2013 368 117 127 23150934
Haass C Kaether C Thinakaran G Sisodia S Trafficking and proteolytic processing of APP Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2012 2 a006270 22553493
Haass C Schlossmacher MG Hung AY Vigo-Pelfrey C Mellon A Ostaszewski BL Lieberburg I Koo EH Schenk D Teplow DB Amyloid beta-peptide is produced by cultured cells during normal metabolism Nature 1992 359 322 325 1383826
Haass C Selkoe DJ Soluble protein oligomers in neurodegeneration: lessons from the Alzheimer’s amyloid beta-peptide Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2007 8 101 112 17245412
Hamazaki H Cathepsin D is involved in the clearance of Alzheimer’s beta-amyloid protein FEBS Lett 1996 396 139 142 8914975
Hardy J Selkoe DJ The amyloid hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease: progress and problems on the road to therapeutics Science 2002 297 353 356 12130773
Haynes SE Hollopeter G Yang G Kurpius D Dailey ME Gan WB Julius D The P2Y12 receptor regulates microglial activation by extracellular nucleotides Nat Neurosci 2006 9 1512 1519 17115040
Heneka MT Carson MJ El Khoury J Landreth GE Brosseron F Feinstein DL Jacobs AH Wyss-Coray T Vitorica J Ransohoff RM Herrup K Frautschy SA Finsen B Brown GC Verkhratsky A Yamanaka K Koistinaho J Latz E Halle A Petzold GC Town T Morgan D Shinohara ML Perry VH Holmes C Bazan NG Brooks DJ Hunot S Joseph B Deigendesch N Garaschuk O Boddeke E Dinarello CA Breitner JC Cole GM Golenbock DT Kummer MP Neuroinflammation in Alzheimer’s disease Lancet Neurol 2015 14 388 405 25792098
Henne WM Buchkovich NJ Emr SD The ESCRT pathway Dev Cell 2011 21 77 91 21763610
Hewlett LJ Prescott AR Watts C The coated pit and macropinocytic pathways serve distinct endosome populations J Cell Biol 1994 124 689 703 8120092
Hickman SE Allison EK El Khoury J Microglial dysfunction and defective beta-amyloid clearance pathways in aging Alzheimer’s disease mice J Neurosci 2008 28 8354 8360 18701698
Hoeffel G Ginhoux F Ontogeny of Tissue-Resident Macrophages Front Immunol 2015 6 486 26441990
Holmes C Boche D Wilkinson D Yadegarfar G Hopkins V Bayer A Jones RW Bullock R Love S Neal JW Zotova E Nicoll JA Long-term effects of Abeta42 immunisation in Alzheimer’s disease: follow-up of a randomised, placebo-controlled phase I trial Lancet 2008 372 216 223 18640458
Holowka D Sil D Torigoe C Baird B Insights into immunoglobulin E receptor signaling from structurally defined ligands Immunol Rev 2007 217 269 279 17498065
Hsieh CL Koike M Spusta SC Niemi EC Yenari M Nakamura MC Seaman WE A role for TREM2 ligands in the phagocytosis of apoptotic neuronal cells by microglia J Neurochem 2009 109 1144 1156 19302484
Hume DA The Many Alternative Faces of Macrophage Activation Front Immunol 2015 6 370 26257737
Hurley JH ESCRTs are everywhere EMBO J 2015 34 2398 2407 26311197
Ishimoto Y Ohashi K Mizuno K Nakano T Promotion of the uptake of PS liposomes and apoptotic cells by a product of growth arrest-specific gene, gas6 J Biochem 2000 127 411 417 10731712
Janeway CJ Travers P Walport M Shlomchik MJ Immunobiology: The Immune System in Health and Disease 2001 5th New York Garland Science
Jaworowski A Wilson NJ Christy E Byrne R Hamilton JA Roles of the mitogen-activated protein kinase family in macrophage responses to colony stimulating factor-1 addition and withdrawal J Biol Chem 1999 274 15127 15133 10329719
Jiang D Rauda I Han S Chen S Zhou F Aggregation pathways of the amyloid beta(1–42) peptide depend on its colloidal stability and ordered beta-sheet stacking Langmuir 2012 28 12711 12721 22870885
Jiang Q Lee CY Mandrekar S Wilkinson B Cramer P Zelcer N Mann K Lamb B Willson TM Collins JL Richardson JC Smith JD Comery TA Riddell D Holtzman DM Tontonoz P Landreth GE ApoE promotes the proteolytic degradation of Abeta Neuron 2008 58 681 693 18549781
Johansson JU Woodling NS Wang Q Panchal M Liang X Trueba-Saiz A Brown HD Mhatre SD Loui T Andreasson KI Prostaglandin signaling suppresses beneficial microglial function in Alzheimer’s disease models J Clin Invest 2015 125 350 364 25485684
Karasinska JM de Haan W Franciosi S Ruddle P Fan J Kruit JK Stukas S Lutjohann D Gutmann DH Wellington CL Hayden MR ABCA1 influences neuroinflammation and neuronal death Neurobiol Dis 2013 54 445 455 23376685
Karch CM Cruchaga C Goate AM Alzheimer’s disease genetics: from the bench to the clinic Neuron 2014 83 11 26 24991952
Kaushik S Cuervo AM Proteostasis and aging Nat Med 2015 21 1406 1415 26646497
Kirchhausen T Owen D Harrison SC Molecular structure, function, and dynamics of clathrin-mediated membrane traffic Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 6 a016725 24789820
Koenigsknecht-Talboo J Landreth GE Microglial phagocytosis induced by fibrillar beta-amyloid and IgGs are differentially regulated by proinflammatory cytokines J Neurosci 2005 25 8240 8249 16148231
Koenigsknecht-Talboo J Meyer-Luehmann M Parsadanian M Garcia-Alloza M Finn MB Hyman BT Bacskai BJ Holtzman DM Rapid microglial response around amyloid pathology after systemic anti-Abeta antibody administration in PDAPP mice J Neurosci 2008 28 14156 14164 19109498
Koizumi S Shigemoto-Mogami Y Nasu-Tada K Shinozaki Y Ohsawa K Tsuda M Joshi BV Jacobson KA Kohsaka S Inoue K UDP acting at P2Y6 receptors is a mediator of microglial phagocytosis Nature 2007 446 1091 1095 17410128
Kondo Y Duncan ID Selective reduction in microglia density and function in the white matter of colony-stimulating factor-1-deficient mice J Neurosci Res 2009 87 2686 2695 19396881
Kurz T Terman A Gustafsson B Brunk UT Lysosomes in iron metabolism, ageing and apoptosis Histochem Cell Biol 2008 129 389 406 18259769
Lakadamyali M Rust MJ Zhuang X Ligands for clathrin-mediated endocytosis are differentially sorted into distinct populations of early endosomes Cell 2006 124 997 1009 16530046
Lange PF Wartosch L Jentsch TJ Fuhrmann JC ClC-7 requires Ostm1 as a beta-subunit to support bone resorption and lysosomal function Nature 2006 440 220 223 16525474
Laske C Stransky E Hoffmann N Maetzler W Straten G Eschweiler GW Leyhe T Macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF) in plasma and CSF of patients with mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease Curr Alzheimer Res 2010 7 409 414 20455868
Le Roy C Wrana JL Clathrin- and non-clathrin-mediated endocytic regulation of cell signalling Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2005 6 112 126 15687999
Lee CY Tse W Smith JD Landreth GE Apolipoprotein E promotes beta-amyloid trafficking and degradation by modulating microglial cholesterol levels J Biol Chem 2012 287 2032 2044 22130662
Lefterov I Schug J Mounier A Nam KN Fitz NF Koldamova R RNA-sequencing reveals transcriptional up-regulation of Trem2 in response to bexarotene treatment Neurobiol Dis 2015 82 132 140 26071899
Lemke G Biology of the TAM receptors Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2013 5 a009076 24186067
Lemmon SK Clathrin uncoating: Auxilin comes to life Curr Biol 2001 11 R49 R52 11231140
Lew ED Oh J Burrola PG Lax I Zagorska A Traves PG Schlessinger J Lemke G Differential TAM receptor-ligand-phospholipid interactions delimit differential TAM bioactivities Elife 2014 3 23
Lewis WH Pinocytosis Bulletin of the Johns Hopkins Hospital 1931 49 17 27
Lim JP Gleeson PA Macropinocytosis: an endocytic pathway for internalising large gulps Immunol Cell Biol 2011 89 836 843 21423264
Lin H Lee E Hestir K Leo C Huang M Bosch E Halenbeck R Wu G Zhou A Behrens D Hollenbaugh D Linnemann T Qin M Wong J Chu K Doberstein SK Williams LT Discovery of a cytokine and its receptor by functional screening of the extracellular proteome Science 2008 320 807 811 18467591
Lin SX Mallet WG Huang AY Maxfield FR Endocytosed cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate receptor traffics via the endocytic recycling compartment en route to the trans-Golgi network and a subpopulation of late endosomes Mol Biol Cell 2004 15 721 733 14595110
Liu CC Kanekiyo T Xu H Bu G Apolipoprotein E and Alzheimer disease: risk, mechanisms and therapy Nat Rev Neurol 2013 9 106 118 23296339
Liu Z Condello C Schain A Harb R Grutzendler J CX3CR1 in microglia regulates brain amyloid deposition through selective protofibrillar amyloid-beta phagocytosis J Neurosci 2010 30 17091 17101 21159979
Lubke T Lobel P Sleat DE Proteomics of the lysosome Biochim Biophys Acta 2009 1793 625 635 18977398
Lucin KM Wyss-Coray T Immune activation in brain aging and neurodegeneration: too much or too little? Neuron 2009 64 110 122 19840553
Luzio JP Hackmann Y Dieckmann NM Griffiths GM The biogenesis of lysosomes and lysosome-related organelles Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 6 a016840 25183830
Ma P Mali RS Munugalavadla V Krishnan S Ramdas B Sims E Martin H Ghosh J Li S Chan RJ Krystal G Craig AW Takemoto C Kapur R The PI3K pathway drives the maturation of mast cells via microphthalmia transcription factor Blood 2011 118 3459 3469 21791431
MacDonald KP Palmer JS Cronau S Seppanen E Olver S Raffelt NC Kuns R Pettit AR Clouston A Wainwright B Branstetter D Smith J Paxton RJ Cerretti DP Bonham L Hill GR Hume DA An antibody against the colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor depletes the resident subset of monocytes and tissue- and tumor-associated macrophages but does not inhibit inflammation Blood 2010 116 3955 3963 20682855
Mackay EA Ehrhard A Moniatte M Guenet C Tardif C Tarnus C Sorokine O Heintzelmann B Nay C Remy JM Higaki J Van Dorsselaer A Wagner J Danzin C Mamont P A possible role for cathepsins D, E, and B in the processing of beta-amyloid precursor protein in Alzheimer’s disease Eur J Biochem 1997 244 414 425 9119007
Mahley RW Huang Y Weisgraber KH Putting cholesterol in its place: apoE and reverse cholesterol transport J Clin Invest 2006 116 1226 1229 16670767
Mahley RW Rall SC Jr Apolipoprotein E: far more than a lipid transport protein Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet 2000 1 507 537 11701639
Majumdar A Capetillo-Zarate E Cruz D Gouras GK Maxfield FR Degradation of Alzheimer’s amyloid fibrils by microglia requires delivery of ClC-7 to lysosomes Mol Biol Cell 2011 22 1664 1676 21441306
Majumdar A Cruz D Asamoah N Buxbaum A Sohar I Lobel P Maxfield FR Activation of microglia acidifies lysosomes and leads to degradation of Alzheimer amyloid fibrils Mol Biol Cell 2007 18 1490 1496 17314396
Mallet WG Maxfield FR Chimeric forms of furin and TGN38 are transported with the plasma membrane in the trans-Golgi network via distinct endosomal pathways J Cell Biol 1999 146 345 359 10465644
Mandrekar S Jiang Q Lee CY Koenigsknecht-Talboo J Holtzman DM Landreth GE Microglia mediate the clearance of soluble Abeta through fluid phase macropinocytosis J Neurosci 2009 29 4252 4262 19339619
Martina JA Chen Y Gucek M Puertollano R MTORC1 functions as a transcriptional regulator of autophagy by preventing nuclear transport of TFEB Autophagy 2012 8 903 914 22576015
Martina JA Diab HI Li H Puertollano R Novel roles for the MiTF/TFE family of transcription factors in organelle biogenesis, nutrient sensing, and energy homeostasis Cell Mol Life Sci 2014 71 2483 2497 24477476
Martina JA Puertollano R Rag GTPases mediate amino acid-dependent recruitment of TFEB and MITF to lysosomes J Cell Biol 2013 200 475 491 23401004
Martinez-Vicente M Sovak G Cuervo AM Protein degradation and aging Exp Gerontol 2005 40 622 633 16125351
Masliah E Hansen L Adame A Crews L Bard F Lee C Seubert P Games D Kirby L Schenk D Abeta vaccination effects on plaque pathology in the absence of encephalitis in Alzheimer disease Neurology 2005 64 129 131 15642916
Maxfield FR McGraw TE Endocytic recycling Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2004 5 121 132 15040445
Maxson ME Grinstein S The vacuolar-type H(+)-ATPase at a glance - more than a proton pump J Cell Sci 2014 127 4987 4993 25453113
McMahon HT Boucrot E Molecular mechanism and physiological functions of clathrin-mediated endocytosis Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2011 12 517 533 21779028
Meadows NA Sharma SM Faulkner GJ Ostrowski MC Hume DA Cassady AI The expression of Clcn7 and Ostm1 in osteoclasts is coregulated by microphthalmia transcription factor J Biol Chem 2007 282 1891 1904 17105730
Medeiros R Kitazawa M Passos GF Baglietto-Vargas D Cheng D Cribbs DH LaFerla FM Aspirin-triggered lipoxin A4 stimulates alternative activation of microglia and reduces Alzheimer disease-like pathology in mice Am J Pathol 2013 182 1780 1789 23506847
Merrifield CJ Kaksonen M Endocytic accessory factors and regulation of clathrin-mediated endocytosis Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 6 a016733 25280766
Meyer-Luehmann M Stalder M Herzig MC Kaeser SA Kohler E Pfeifer M Boncristiano S Mathews PM Mercken M Abramowski D Staufenbiel M Jucker M Extracellular amyloid formation and associated pathology in neural grafts Nat Neurosci 2003 6 370 377 12598899
Mindell JA Lysosomal acidification mechanisms Annu Rev Physiol 2012 74 69 86 22335796
Moskot M Montefusco S Jakobkiewicz-Banecka J Mozolewski P Wegrzyn A Di Bernardo D Wegrzyn G Medina DL Ballabio A Gabig-Ciminska M The phytoestrogen genistein modulates lysosomal metabolism and transcription factor EB (TFEB) activation J Biol Chem 2014 289 17054 17069 24770416
Motyckova G Weilbaecher KN Horstmann M Rieman DJ Fisher DZ Fisher DE Linking osteopetrosis and pycnodysostosis: regulation of cathepsin K expression by the microphthalmia transcription factor family Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2001 98 5798 5803 11331755
Mueller-Steiner S Zhou Y Arai H Roberson ED Sun B Chen J Wang X Yu G Esposito L Mucke L Gan L Antiamyloidogenic and neuroprotective functions of cathepsin B: implications for Alzheimer’s disease Neuron 2006 51 703 714 16982417
Mukherjee S Ghosh RN Maxfield FR Endocytosis Physiol Rev 1997 77 759 803 9234965
Nakamichi Y Udagawa N Takahashi N IL-34 and CSF-1: similarities and differences J Bone Miner Metab 2013 31 486 495 23740288
Nakanishi H Microglial functions and proteases Mol Neurobiol 2003 27 163 176 12777686
Nakanishi H Wu Z Microglia-aging: roles of microglial lysosome- and mitochondria-derived reactive oxygen species in brain aging Behav Brain Res 2009 201 1 7 19428609
Namba Y Tomonaga M Kawasaki H Otomo E Ikeda K Apolipoprotein E immunoreactivity in cerebral amyloid deposits and neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer’s disease and kuru plaque amyloid in Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease Brain Res 1991 541 163 166 2029618
Nandi S Gokhan S Dai XM Wei S Enikolopov G Lin H Mehler MF Stanley ER The CSF-1 receptor ligands IL-34 and CSF-1 exhibit distinct developmental brain expression patterns and regulate neural progenitor cell maintenance and maturation Dev Biol 2012 367 100 113 22542597
Nicoll JA Barton E Boche D Neal JW Ferrer I Thompson P Vlachouli C Wilkinson D Bayer A Games D Seubert P Schenk D Holmes C Abeta species removal after abeta42 immunization J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2006 65 1040 1048 17086100
Nicoll JA Wilkinson D Holmes C Steart P Markham H Weller RO Neuropathology of human Alzheimer disease after immunization with amyloid-beta peptide: a case report Nat Med 2003 9 448 452 12640446
Nishioku T Hashimoto K Yamashita K Liou SY Kagamiishi Y Maegawa H Katsube N Peters C von Figura K Saftig P Katunuma N Yamamoto K Nakanishi H Involvement of cathepsin E in exogenous antigen processing in primary cultured murine microglia J Biol Chem 2002 277 4816 4822 11719510
Nixon RA The role of autophagy in neurodegenerative disease Nat Med 2013 19 983 997 23921753
Norbury CC Hewlett LJ Prescott AR Shastri N Watts C Class I MHC presentation of exogenous soluble antigen via macropinocytosis in bone marrow macrophages Immunity 1995 3 783 791 8777723
Norden DM Godbout JP Review: microglia of the aged brain: primed to be activated and resistant to regulation Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 2013 39 19 34 23039106
Ohsawa K Irino Y Nakamura Y Akazawa C Inoue K Kohsaka S Involvement of P2×4 and P2Y12 receptors in ATP-induced microglial chemotaxis Glia 2007 55 604 616 17299767
Pacheco-Quinto J Eckman EA Endothelin-converting enzymes degrade intracellular beta-amyloid produced within the endosomal/lysosomal pathway and autophagosomes J Biol Chem 2013 288 5606 5615 23283972
Pacheco-Quinto J Herdt A Eckman CB Eckman EA Endothelin-converting enzymes and related metalloproteases in Alzheimer’s disease J Alzheimers Dis 33 Suppl 2013 1 S101 S110
Palmer JC Baig S Kehoe PG Love S Endothelin-converting enzyme-2 is increased in Alzheimer’s disease and up-regulated by Abeta Am J Pathol 2009 175 262 270 19541930
Paresce DM Chung H Maxfield FR Slow degradation of aggregates of the Alzheimer’s disease amyloid beta-protein by microglial cells J Biol Chem 1997 272 29390 29397 9361021
Paresce DM Ghosh RN Maxfield FR Microglial cells internalize aggregates of the Alzheimer’s disease amyloid beta-protein via a scavenger receptor Neuron 1996 17 553 565 8816718
Pillay CS Elliott E Dennison C Endolysosomal proteolysis and its regulation Biochem J 2002 363 417 429 11964142
Pitas RE Boyles JK Lee SH Foss D Mahley RW Astrocytes synthesize apolipoprotein E and metabolize apolipoprotein E-containing lipoproteins Biochim Biophys Acta 1987 917 148 161 3539206
Pollard JW Trophic macrophages in development and disease Nat Rev Immunol 2009 9 259 270 19282852
Potolicchio I Carven GJ Xu X Stipp C Riese RJ Stern LJ Santambrogio L Proteomic analysis of microglia-derived exosomes: metabolic role of the aminopeptidase CD13 in neuropeptide catabolism J Immunol 2005 175 2237 2243 16081791
Prada I Furlan R Matteoli M Verderio C Classical and unconventional pathways of vesicular release in microglia Glia 2013 61 1003 1017 23625857
Racoosin EL Swanson JA Macropinosome maturation and fusion with tubular lysosomes in macrophages J Cell Biol 1993 121 1011 1020 8099075
Ransohoff RM Cardona AE The myeloid cells of the central nervous system parenchyma Nature 2010 468 253 262 21068834
Ray S Britschgi M Herbert C Takeda-Uchimura Y Boxer A Blennow K Friedman LF Galasko DR Jutel M Karydas A Kaye JA Leszek J Miller BL Minthon L Quinn JF Rabinovici GD Robinson WH Sabbagh MN So YT Sparks DL Tabaton M Tinklenberg J Yesavage JA Tibshirani R Wyss-Coray T Classification and prediction of clinical Alzheimer’s diagnosis based on plasma signaling proteins Nat Med 2007 13 1359 1362 17934472
Reed-Geaghan EG Savage JC Hise AG Landreth GE CD14 and toll-like receptors 2 and 4 are required for fibrillar A{beta}-stimulated microglial activation J Neurosci 2009 29 11982 11992 19776284
Richardson A Galvan V Lin AL Oddo S How longevity research can lead to therapies for Alzheimer’s disease: The rapamycin story Exp Gerontol 2015 68 51 58 25481271
Roczniak-Ferguson A Petit CS Froehlich F Qian S Ky J Angarola B Walther TC Ferguson SM The transcription factor TFEB links mTORC1 signaling to transcriptional control of lysosome homeostasis Sci Signal 2012 5 ra42 22692423
Rogeberg M Furlund CB Moe MK Fladby T Identification of peptide products from enzymatic degradation of amyloid beta Biochimie 2014 105 216 220 25010651
Sadik G Kaji H Takeda K Yamagata F Kameoka Y Hashimoto K Miyanaga K Shinoda T In vitro processing of amyloid precursor protein by cathepsin D Int J Biochem Cell Biol 1999 31 1327 1337 10605825
Saijo K Glass CK Microglial cell origin and phenotypes in health and disease Nat Rev Immunol 2011 11 775 787 22025055
Sakae N Liu CC Shinohara M Frisch-Daiello J Ma L Yamazaki Y Tachibana M Younkin L Kurti A Carrasquillo MM Zou F Sevlever D Bisceglio G Gan M Fol R Knight P Wang M Han X Fryer JD Fitzgerald ML Ohyagi Y Younkin SG Bu G Kanekiyo T ABCA7 Deficiency Accelerates Amyloid-β Generation and Alzheimer’s Neuronal Pathology J Neurosci 2016 36 3848 3859 27030769
Sallusto F Cella M Danieli C Lanzavecchia A Dendritic cells use macropinocytosis and the mannose receptor to concentrate macromolecules in the major histocompatibility complex class II compartment: downregulation by cytokines and bacterial products J Exp Med 1995 182 389 400 7629501
Sardiello M Palmieri M di Ronza A Medina DL Valenza M Gennarino VA Di Malta C Donaudy F Embrione V Polishchuk RS Banfi S Parenti G Cattaneo E Ballabio A A gene network regulating lysosomal biogenesis and function Science 2009 325 473 477 19556463
Schenk D Barbour R Dunn W Gordon G Grajeda H Guido T Hu K Huang J Johnson-Wood K Khan K Kholodenko D Lee M Liao Z Lieberburg I Motter R Mutter L Soriano F Shopp G Vasquez N Vandevert C Walker S Wogulis M Yednock T Games D Seubert P Immunization with amyloid-beta attenuates Alzheimer-disease-like pathology in the PDAPP mouse Nature 1999 400 173 177 10408445
Schmechel DE Saunders AM Strittmatter WJ Crain BJ Hulette CM Joo SH Pericak-Vance MA Goldgaber D Roses AD Increased amyloid beta-peptide deposition in cerebral cortex as a consequence of apolipoprotein E genotype in late-onset Alzheimer disease Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993 90 9649 9653 8415756
Schwake M Schroder B Saftig P Lysosomal membrane proteins and their central role in physiology Traffic 2013 14 739 748 23387372
Settembre C De Cegli R Mansueto G Saha PK Vetrini F Visvikis O Huynh T Carissimo A Palmer D Klisch TJ Wollenberg AC Di Bernardo D Chan L Irazoqui JE Ballabio A TFEB controls cellular lipid metabolism through a starvation-induced autoregulatory loop Nat Cell Biol 2013a 15 647 658 23604321
Settembre C Di Malta C Polito VA Garcia Arencibia M Vetrini F Erdin S Erdin SU Huynh T Medina D Colella P Sardiello M Rubinsztein DC Ballabio A TFEB links autophagy to lysosomal biogenesis Science 2011 332 1429 1433 21617040
Settembre C Fraldi A Medina DL Ballabio A Signals from the lysosome: a control centre for cellular clearance and energy metabolism Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2013b 14 283 296 23609508
Settembre C Zoncu R Medina DL Vetrini F Erdin S Erdin S Huynh T Ferron M Karsenty G Vellard MC Facchinetti V Sabatini DM Ballabio A A lysosome-to-nucleus signalling mechanism senses and regulates the lysosome via mTOR and TFEB EMBO J 2012 31 1095 1108 22343943
Sierra A Abiega O Shahraz A Neumann H Janus-faced microglia: beneficial and detrimental consequences of microglial phagocytosis Front Cell Neurosci 2013 7 6 23386811
Siskova Z Tremblay ME Microglia and synapse: interactions in health and neurodegeneration Neural Plast 2013 2013 425845 24392228
Solito E Sastre M Microglia function in Alzheimer’s disease Front Pharmacol 2012 3 14 22363284
Spangenberg EE Lee RJ Najafi AR Rice RA Elmore MR Blurton-Jones M West BL Green KN Eliminating microglia in Alzheimer’s mice prevents neuronal loss without modulating amyloid-beta pathology Brain 2016 139 1265 1281 26921617
Stauber T Jentsch TJ Chloride in vesicular trafficking and function Annu Rev Physiol 2013 75 453 477 23092411
Steinberg BE Huynh KK Brodovitch A Jabs S Stauber T Jentsch TJ Grinstein S A cation counterflux supports lysosomal acidification J Cell Biol 2010 189 1171 1186 20566682
Steinman RM Brodie SE Cohn ZA Membrane flow during pinocytosis. A stereologic analysis J Cell Biol 1976 68 665 687 1030706
Stewart CR Stuart LM Wilkinson K van Gils JM Deng J Halle A Rayner KJ Boyer L Zhong R Frazier WA Lacy-Hulbert A El Khoury J Golenbock DT Moore KJ CD36 ligands promote sterile inflammation through assembly of a Toll-like receptor 4 and 6 heterodimer Nat Immunol 2010 11 155 161 20037584
Stine WB Jr Dahlgren KN Krafft GA LaDu MJ In vitro characterization of conditions for amyloid-beta peptide oligomerization and fibrillogenesis J Biol Chem 2003 278 11612 11622 12499373
Sunderland T Mirza N Putnam KT Linker G Bhupali D Durham R Soares H Kimmel L Friedman D Bergeson J Csako G Levy JA Bartko JJ Cohen RM Cerebrospinal fluid beta-amyloid1-42 and tau in control subjects at risk for Alzheimer’s disease: the effect of APOE epsilon4 allele Biol Psychiatry 2004 56 670 676 15522251
Takahashi K Rochford CD Neumann H Clearance of apoptotic neurons without inflammation by microglial triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells-2 J Exp Med 2005 201 647 657 15728241
Takahashi RH Milner TA Li F Nam EE Edgar MA Yamaguchi H Beal MF Xu HX Greengard P Gouras GK Intraneuronal Alzheimer A beta 42 accumulates in multivesicular bodies and is associated with synaptic pathology Am J Pathol 2002 161 1869 1879 12414533
Tanaka Y Matsuwaki T Yamanouchi K Nishihara M Increased lysosomal biogenesis in activated microglia and exacerbated neuronal damage after traumatic brain injury in progranulin-deficient mice Neuroscience 2013 250 8 19 23830905
Terman A Brunk UT Lipofuscin Int J Biochem Cell Biol 2004 36 1400 1404 15147719
Tremblay ME Lowery RL Majewska AK Microglial interactions with synapses are modulated by visual experience PLoS Biol 2010 8 e1000527 21072242
Trepanier CH Milgram NW Neuroinflammation in Alzheimer’s disease: are NSAIDs and selective COX-2 inhibitors the next line of therapy? J Alzheimers Dis 2010 21 1089 1099 21504126
Turk B Dolenc I Lenarcic B Krizaj I Turk V Bieth JG Bjork I Acidic pH as a physiological regulator of human cathepsin L activity Eur J Biochem 1999 259 926 932 10092883
Turner AJ Murphy LJ Molecular pharmacology of endothelin converting enzymes Biochem Pharmacol 1996 51 91 102 8615890
Vanier MT Niemann-Pick disease type C Orphanet J Rare Dis 2010 5 16 20525256
Vilchez D Saez I Dillin A The role of protein clearance mechanisms in organismal ageing and age-related diseases Nat Commun 2014 5 5659 25482515
Wahrle SE Jiang H Parsadanian M Legleiter J Han X Fryer JD Kowalewski T Holtzman DM ABCA1 is required for normal central nervous system ApoE levels and for lipidation of astrocyte-secreted apoE J Biol Chem 2004 279 40987 40993 15269217
Wang Y Cella M Mallinson K Ulrich JD Young KL Robinette ML Gilfillan S Krishnan GM Sudhakar S Zinselmeyer BH Holtzman DM Cirrito JR Colonna M TREM2 lipid sensing sustains the microglial response in an Alzheimer’s disease model Cell 2015 160 1061 1071 25728668
Wang Y Szretter KJ Vermi W Gilfillan S Rossini C Cella M Barrow AD Diamond MS Colonna M IL-34 is a tissue-restricted ligand of CSF1R required for the development of Langerhans cells and microglia Nat Immunol 2012 13 753 760 22729249
Weilbaecher KN Motyckova G Huber WE Takemoto CM Hemesath TJ Xu Y Hershey CL Dowland NR Wells AG Fisher DE Linkage of M-CSF signaling to Mitf, TFE3, and the osteoclast defect in Mitf(mi/mi) mice Mol Cell 2001 8 749 758 11684011
Wilcke M Johannes L Galli T Mayau V Goud B Salamero J Rab11 regulates the compartmentalization of early endosomes required for efficient transport from early endosomes to the trans-golgi network J Cell Biol 2000 151 1207 1220 11121436
Wilcock DM Rojiani A Rosenthal A Levkowitz G Subbarao S Alamed J Wilson D Wilson N Freeman MJ Gordon MN Morgan D Passive amyloid immunotherapy clears amyloid and transiently activates microglia in a transgenic mouse model of amyloid deposition J Neurosci 2004 24 6144 6151 15240806
Wisniewski T Goni F Immunotherapeutic approaches for Alzheimer’s disease Neuron 2015 85 1162 1176 25789753
Woodling NS Andreasson KI Untangling the Web: Toxic and Protective Effects of Neuroinflammation and PGE2 Signaling in Alzheimer’s Disease ACS Chem Neurosci 2016 7 454 463 26979823
Wunderlich P Glebov K Kemmerling N Tien NT Neumann H Walter J Sequential proteolytic processing of the triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells-2 (TREM2) protein by ectodomain shedding and gamma-secretase-dependent intramembranous cleavage J Biol Chem 2013 288 33027 33036 24078628
Wyss-Coray T Mucke L Inflammation in neurodegenerative disease--a double-edged sword Neuron 2002 35 419 432 12165466
Wyss-Coray T Rogers J Inflammation in Alzheimer disease-a brief review of the basic science and clinical literature Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2012 2 a006346 22315714
Xiao Q Yan P Ma X Liu H Perez R Zhu A Gonzales E Tripoli DL Czerniewski L Ballabio A Cirrito JR Diwan A Lee JM Neuronal-Targeted TFEB Accelerates Lysosomal Degradation of APP, Reducing Abeta Generation and Amyloid Plaque Pathogenesis J Neurosci 2015 35 12137 12151 26338325
Yamashiro DJ Maxfield FR Kinetics of endosome acidification in mutant and wild-type Chinese hamster ovary cells J Cell Biol 1987 105 2713 2721 2447097
Yamashiro DJ Tycko B Fluss SR Maxfield FR Segregation of transferrin to a mildly acidic (pH 6.5) para-Golgi compartment in the recycling pathway Cell 1984 37 789 800 6204769
Yokoyama JS Wang Y Schork AJ Thompson WK Karch CM Cruchaga C McEvoy LK Witoelar A Chen CH Holland D Brewer JB Franke A Dillon WP Wilson DM Mukherjee P Hess CP Miller Z Bonham LW Shen J Rabinovici GD Rosen HJ Miller BL Hyman BT Schellenberg GD Karlsen TH Andreassen OA Dale AM Desikan RS Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging, I Association Between Genetic Traits for Immune-Mediated Diseases and Alzheimer Disease JAMA Neurol 2016 73 691 697 27088644
