LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9419065
21028
Hum Brain Mapp
Hum Brain Mapp
Human brain mapping
1065-9471
1097-0193

28083895
5859584
10.1002/hbm.23491
NIHMS949465
Article
Surface-based vertexwise analysis of morphometry and microstructural integrity for white matter tracts in diffusion tensor imaging: with application to the corpus callosum in Alzheimer's disease
Tang Xiaoying abc*
Qin Yuanyuan d
Zhu Wenzhen d
Miller Michael I. efg
a Sun Yat-sen University-Carnegie Mellon University (SYSU-CMU) Joint Institute of Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China
b Sun Yat-sen University-Carnegie Mellon University (SYSU-CMU) Shunde International Joint Research Institute, Shunde, Guangdong, China
c School of Electronics and Information Technology, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China
d Department of Radiology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, China
e Center for Imaging Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA
f Institute for Computational Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA
g Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA
* Corresponding author: Xiaoying Tang, tangxiaoy@mail.sysu.edu.cn, txiaoyin@andrew.cmu.edu, Phone: (+86) 13922156126, Fax: (+1) 412-268-2860, Address: 213A, SYSU-CMU Joint Institute of Engineering, No. 132, East Waihuan Road, Guangzhou, 510006, Guangdong, P.R. China
9 3 2018
13 1 2017
4 2017
01 4 2018
38 4 18751893
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
In this paper, we present a unified statistical pipeline for analyzing the white matter (WM) tracts morphometry and microstructural integrity, both globally and locally within the same WM tract, from diffusion tensor imaging (DTI). Morphometry is quantified globally by the volumetric measurement and locally by the vertexwise surface areas. Meanwhile, microstructural integrity is quantified globally by the mean fractional anisotropy (FA) and trace values within the specific WM tract and locally by the FA and trace values defined at each vertex of its bounding surface. The proposed pipeline consists of four steps: 1) fully automated segmentation of WM tracts in a multi-contrast multi-atlas framework; 2) generation of the smooth surface representations for the WM tracts of interest; 3) common template surface generation on which the localized morphometric and microstructural statistics are defined and a variety of statistical analyses can be conducted; 4) multiple comparison correction to determine the significance of the statistical analysis results. Detailed herein, this pipeline has been applied to the corpus callosum in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) with significantly decreased FA values and increased trace values, both globally and locally, being detected in patients with AD when compared to normal aging populations. A subdivision of the corpus callosum in both hemispheres revealed that the AD pathology primarily affects the body and splenium of the corpus callosum. Validation analyses and two multiple comparison correction strategies are provided.

Diffusion tensor imaging
white matter tract
morphometry
microstructural integrity
surface map
statistical mapping
multiple comparison correction

1 Introduction

Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) is a modern magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) technique that is used to estimate the axonal organization of the brain based on the diffusion of water molecules in brain tissue. Water should diffuse at a greater rate along the major axes of white matter (WM) fiber bundles than it does along directions perpendicular to them, since there are fewer obstacles to doing so (Stejskal and Tanner, 1965). Such an anisotropy in the diffusion of water through brain tissue can thus be used to quantify WM microstructural integrity, for which fractional anisotropy (FA) and mean diffusivity (MD) are the two most commonly used quantitative indices to be derived from DTI.

In measuring anisotropic water diffusion, the value of FA ranges from 0 (isotropic) to 1 (anisotropic) and reflects the degree to which directional diffusion occurs in the cellular structures of WM fiber tracts. FA is a useful metric for an examination of the fiber density, axonal diameter, and myelination in WM. A decrease in the FA value suggests a loss of fiber tract integrity and thus WM damage (Pierpaoli et al., 1996). The second metric, MD, being a third of the total diffusivity (trace), measures the average diffusivity in the non-colinear directions of free diffusion (Pierpaoli et al., 1996). Both FA and MD are computable at each voxel of the DTI image and are independent of the fiber orientation, making it convenient to compare them across subjects and groups. These two DTI-derived quantitative indices have been applied to a wide variety of studies investigating WM integrity (Bennett et al., 2010; Charlton et al., 2006; Keller et al., 2007; Kraus et al., 2007; Kubicki et al., 2005).

Historically, to compare the two DTI indices across subjects or even populations, histogram based analyses of the whole brain measurements were the first approaches to be adopted (Cercignani et al., 2001; Valsasina et al., 2005), though they were limited by a loss of detailed anatomical/spatial information. To resolve this issue, region of interest (ROI) based analysis was proposed, wherein common WM tracts (for example, the corticospinal tract and the corpus callosum) are segmented from the DTI data of each subject either manually or automatically (Bazin et al., 2011; Clayden et al., 2007; Hao et al., 2014; Jonasson et al., 2005; Lawes et al., 2008; Tang et al., 2014b). From these segmentations, a summarizing statistic (typically the mean value) of FA and MD is computed across voxels belonging to the specific ROI being evaluated for abnormality. The main limitation of this ROI-based WM integrity analysis is that it cannot reveal the more detailed spatial profile of WM abnormality within that ROI. To address such concerns, certain methods have been developed that borrow insight from voxel-based morphometry (Ashburner and Karl J. Friston, 2000), but are distinguished by the image modality used for spatial normalization. The validity of using VBM to analyze local properties has been a topic of debate, primarily because of the potential for mis-registrations especially in the cortical regions where the anatomical topology has an extremely large variability from subject to subject. The necessity to employ smoothing in VBM raises further potential issues, especially for DTI data (Jones et al., 2005).

To overcome the problems induced by the spatial normalization in VBM while preserving the ability to characterize localized WM abnormalities, manifold (for example, curve, skeleton, and surface based) methods have been developed (Qiu et al., 2010; Smith et al., 2006; Yushkevich et al., 2008), wherein some methods (Qiu et al., 2010; Yushkevich et al., 2008) were developed to analyze specific WM tracts whereas some others (Smith et al., 2006) were designed for the entire WM. In the work of Qiu and colleagues, not only were surface based FA abnormalities analyzed, so were the localized morphometric abnormalities indexed at the WM tract surfaces (Qiu et al., 2010). Compared to whole brain methods, structure specific approaches may be more sensitive to microstructural damage, providing more detailed abnormality patterns for the specific structures of interest.

In this study, we follow the principles of surface based analysis to examine the localized WM abnormalities in terms of both morphometry (surface areas) and microstructural integrities (FA and trace DTI indices) in a unified framework. We develop a complete surface based WM analysis pipeline, consisting of the following steps: 1) a fully automated and precise segmentation of the WM tract of interest from DTI data using a multi-contrast multi-atlas approach in the framework of the large deformation diffeomorphic metric mapping (LDDMM) (Miller et al., 2006); 2) the extraction of a smooth surface representation of the WM tract of interest; 3) the spatial mapping of the localized surface areas, the FA values, as well as the trace values as indexed at each vertex of the surface; 4) a statistical analysis of the surface-indexed abnormalities via multiple comparison corrections performed with two distinct approaches. In step 1), the diffeomorphic multi-contrast multi-atlas segmentation algorithm (Tang et al., 2014b) is employed, the accuracy of which has been previously validated in segmenting whole brain structures, including the major WM tracts. Creation of the smooth surface representations of WM tracts in step 2) is conducted in a fashion similar to that of our approach to deep gray matter structures in structural MRI (Tang et al., 2014a). Creation of the surface maps in step 3) is also based on the advanced brain warping technique of LDDMM, the validity of which has been established in a variety of surface based analyses (Miller et al., 2015a; Miller et al., 2015b; Tang et al., 2015a). Finally, for our statistical analyses, we utilize a linear statistical model with multiple comparison corrections performed in two manners; controlling the familywise error rate (FWER) (Nichols and Satoru Hayasaka, 2003) and controlling the false discovery rate (FDR) (Benjamini and Yosef Hochberg, 1995).

In this paper, we will first detail each of the above steps before applying our fully developed pipeline to the surface based analysis of the corpus callosum (CC), in terms of both morphometry and microstructural integrity, in mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and Alzheimer’s disease (AD). While the CC has been implicated to be affected by the pathology of AD in numerous studies (Biegon et al., 1994; Hampel et al., 1998; Janowsky et al., 1996; Weis et al., 1991), the combined analysis of morphometry and microstructural integrity featured in our proposed pipeline is the first of its kind. In summary, we will present results from the following components of our investigation: (1) validation of the surface creation procedure; (2) abnormality characterization in the ROI-based global metrics, including the volumetric measurement, the mean FA value and the mean trace value within the left and the right CC; (3) spatial maps for the mean values of the vertexwise FA and trace as averaged across the healthy control (HC) population, the MCI population, as well as the AD population alongside each DTI index’s group difference maps between HC and both MCI and AD, after FWER-correction and FDR-correction; (4) mappings of those same group comparisons, now taken in terms of the bilateral CC’s localized surface areas. It has been suggested that the CC consists of multiple distinct subregions based on its microstructural and functional specialization (Aboitiz et al., 1992) and to account for that, in this paper, we sub-segment the CC surface of each hemisphere into three compatible subregions – the genu, body, and splenium of the CC (or GCC, BCC, and SCC respectively) so as to identify the specific subregion that is most affected by the neuropathology of AD. We also present the scan-rescan reproducibility of the proposed pipeline on another dataset of 21 healthy subjects which were scanned twice. Furthermore, we characterize the cross-subject variability, in terms of the localized surface areas and the two localized DTI indices (FA and trace), in that 21-subject normal population.

2 Materials and Methods

2.1 Participants and DTI dataset

In this study, we successfully recruited 23 HC subjects, 8 MCI subjects, and 29 AD subjects at Tongji Hospital, Wuhan, China. Among those 60 subjects, 15 of the HC subjects, all of the MCI subjects, and 23 of the AD subjects had undergone DTI imaging. There were another 12 subjects with cognitive impairment which had been originally recruited. However, after a careful examination, they were excluded from this study on the basis of image quality or their lack of a complete neurological examination. These details can also be found in our previous work (Tang et al., 2016a). Each diagnosis of MCI or AD was reached by assessment under the Alzheimer's criteria of the National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke and the Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Association criteria (McKhann et al., 1984). Subjects with structural abnormalities that could produce dementia, such as cortical infarction, tumor, or subdural hematoma, along with those who had undergone treatment or had a concurrent illness (other than dementia) that interfered with cognitive function at the time of the DTI scan were not included in this study.

The DTI data of each subject was acquired from a 3 Tesla (3T) MR system (SignaHDxt, GE Healthcare, USA) with the following imaging parameters; repetition time = 10000 ms, echo time = 83 ms, flip angle = 90°, acquisition matrix = 256 × 256), field of view (FOV) = 240 mm × 240 mm, phase FOV = 1, slice thickness = 3.0 mm with no space, number of excitations = 1, total slice = 42, and b value = 1000 s/mm2 along 30 directions. We acquired a single volume when b=0. Array Spatial Sensitivity Encoding Technique (ASSET) was employed with the acquisition performed on a HDxt system as a dual spin echo DTI acquisition.

For the scan-rescan reproducibility test, 21 healthy volunteers with no history of neurological conditions (11 M / 10 F, 22–61 years old) participated in this study. The DTI dataset was acquired with a multi-slice, single-shot, echo-planar imaging (EPI), spin echo–sequence (TR/TE = 6281/67 ms, SENSE factor = 2.5). Sixty-five transverse slices were acquired parallel to the line connecting the anterior commissure to the posterior commissure with no slice gap and 2.2 mm nominal isotropic resolution (FOV = 212 × 212, data matrix = 96 × 96, reconstructed to 256 × 256). Diffusion weighting was applied along 32 directions (Philips parameters: gradient overplus = no, directional resolution = high, gradient mode = enhanced) with a b-value of 700 s/mm2. This is the same data as used in another reproducibility neuroimaging study, where more details of the protocol can be found (Landman et al., 2011). This dataset is publicly available at http://www.nitrc.org/projects/multimodal/.

This study was approved by the internal Institutional Review Board of Tongji Hospital and written informed consent was obtained from all participants; in the case of patients with dementia, such consent was obtained from family members.

2.2 White matter tract segmentation

Our entire DTI dataset was processed using a fully-automated and web-based DTI data processing pipeline (a module implemented at www.mricloud.org) that includes: 1) DTI image quality control through the correction of mis-registration between diffusion weighted images caused by patient motion and eddy-current-induced distortion (Penny et al., 2011); 2) DTI image corruption detection and rejection (Li et al., 2013); 3) tensor calculation, which included providing the 3D FA and trace maps.

The WM tracts of interest were automatically extracted using a fully-automated multi-contrast multi-atlas DTI segmentation pipeline (Tang et al., 2014b), which is a multimodality extension of our diffeomorphic multi-atlas likelihood fusion algorithm (Tang et al., 2013). In this DTI segmentation pipeline, each atlas consisted of five whole brain images in different contrasts, the FA image, the trace image, and the three elements of the primary eigenvector, alongside a paired segmentation label comprising a total of 168 manually-delineated anatomical structures including the WM tracts of interest. In this study, we used 12 atlases, all of which are freely distributed at www.mricloud.org.

The registration in our multi-contrast multi-atlas likelihood fusion algorithm was performed using a three-channel LDDMM image matching algorithm (Ceritoglu et al., 2009), with the three channels being the FA image, the trace image, and the ventricle as found in each atlas and the to-be-segmented DTI data. A three-step cascading strategy was employed within the multi-channel LDDMM image matching to gradually improve the matching quality. Details on the selection of parameters in the LDDMM image matching can be found elsewhere (Ceritoglu et al., 2013). The likelihood of each atlas was jointly calculated from the five contrasts (FA, trace, and the three elements of the primary eigenvector) using Gaussian mixture modelling. The optimal estimator of the segmentation labels was iteratively obtained using the expectation maximization algorithm. More details about this multi-atlas DTI segmentation algorithm and its performance, as well as the creation of the multiple DTI atlases, can be found in our previous work (Tang et al., 2014b).

2.3 Surface generation

To generate the surface representations for each WM tract of interest in all subjects, we developed an approach similar to the one which we adopted and validated for subcortical structures (Qiu and Miller, 2008; Tang et al., 2014a), wherein the surface of each WM tract for each subject was obtained by applying an optimized diffeomorphism to a template surface of that specific WM tract. The template surfaces were created manually to ensure sufficient smoothness and correct anatomical topology (Mori et al., 2008). The volumetric segmentations and triangulated surface representations of the bilateral CCs delineated in Mori’s atlas are illustrated in Figure 1. Each subject-specific and structure-specific optimized diffeomorphism was obtained using the LDDMM surface matching algorithm (Vaillant and Glaunès, 2005), aligning the smooth surface from Mori’s atlas with a coarse surface representation of the subject’s WM tract obtained by applying the marching cubes algorithm (Lorensen and Cline, 1987) to the volume segmentation obtained in section 2.2. The main purpose of this transformation-based surface generation technology is to de-noise the automatically segmented WM tracts and to allow inheritance of the manually-created template surfaces' smoothness and topology. Other transformation-based surface de-noising approaches have also been investigated (Tward et al., 2013). In Figure 2, we demonstrate comparisons between the original WM tracts and the de-noised ones in volume and surface representations of the CC in both hemispheres, from which it is clear that smoothness was ensured without damaging the segmentation accuracy. In addition to qualitative evaluations, we also quantitatively compared the original and the de-noised bilateral CCs in terms of Dice overlaps and mean volumetric measurements (see Figure 3), from which great consistency and similarity was observed.

2.4 Surface based morphometry maps

The localized surface-based morphometrics (the vertexwise surface areas) of each subject surface were quantified by a diffeomorphism that connected a common template surface to that subject surface. The common template surface of each WM tract of interest was itself generated from all subject surfaces using a Bayesian template estimation algorithm (Ma et al., 2010) to ensure “population-averaging” by iteratively minimizing the overall metric distance from the common template surface to each subject surface, in the setting of LDDMM, until convergence. After that, the LDDMM surface matching algorithm (Vaillant and Glaunès, 2005) was used to map the common template surface to each individual subject surface. A scalar field, indexed at each vertex of the common template surface, was subsequently calculated as the log-determinant of the Jacobian of the diffeomorphism, which quantifies the factor by which the diffeomorphism expands or shrinks the localized surface area in the target relative to the template in a logarithmic scale; i.e. a positive value corresponds to a localized surface area expansion of the subject relative to the template while a negative value suggests a localized surface area contraction at each vertex of the common template surface. This structure-specific and subject-specific scalar field is our surface based morphometry map for each WM tract of interest and on which our statistical morphometric analyses will be performed.

2.5 Surface based FA and trace maps

For each WM tract of interest, to create the surface based FA and trace maps in the common “population-averaged” template surface coordinate, we took two steps: in the first step, we identified both the FA and trace values at each vertex of the subject surface using trilinear interpolation after identifying the spatial correspondence between the volumetric segmentation voxel coordinates and the surface vertex coordinates for each subject; in the second step, we transferred the FA and the trace maps indexed at each vertex of the subject surface to the common template surface based on the aforementioned LDDMM surface registration technique. Each template-to-subject surface mapping established a vertex-by-vertex correspondence between the template surface and the deformed template surface which one would expect to be a good approximation to the subject surface. For each vertex of the template surface, a value from the subject surface’s FA map (also the trace map) was assigned by taking that of the vertex on the original subject surface which is spatially closest to the corresponding deformed template surface vertex. This process resulted in subject-specific structure-specific FA and trace maps in the common template coordinate, enabling group based statistical analyses at common surface vertices. It is worthy of note that the surface based morphometry maps and the FA/trace maps of all subjects now reside in the common template space, and therefore the statistical analysis results will be quantified on that template surface as well.

2.6 Statistical analysis

For inter-group comparisons of the surface based morphometry maps, the FA maps, and the trace maps of the bilateral CCs, we employed a linear regression model yk(s)=βk,0+βk,1g(s)+∑covαcovXcov(s)+εk(s), where y (s) is the scalar value of the surface map (surface areas, FA values, and trace values) for subject s evaluated at vertex k of the structure-specific common template surface, g (s) is a binary group variable, Xcov (s) denotes the covariate information of subject s included in the analysis (in this study, we co-varied for age, gender, as well as the total intracranial volume (TIV) as computed from the size of the brain’s image after skull-stripping (Tang et al., 2015b; Tang et al., 2015c)), and εk(s) denotes a Gaussian white noise with its variance automatically estimated. We tested the null hypothesis Hk0:βk,1=0 against the general hypothesis Hk1:βk,1≠0 with the complete null hypothesis being Hk0:βk,1≠0 simultaneously for all k. The statistical significance of a group difference is measured by a p-value obtained from Fisher’s method of randomization; a non-parametric permutation test (a total of 40,000 permutations employed) was conducted by randomizing the model’s residuals, more details on which can be found elsewhere (Younes et al., 2014). To correct for multiple comparisons being performed simultaneously at all vertices of the template surface, we adjusted the p-values to control for familywise error rate (FWER) at a level of 0.05 based on the maximum statistic method (Nichols and Satoru Hayasaka, 2003). For a direct comparison, we also present the statistical shape analysis results with the multiple comparison correction having been performed by controlling the false discovery rate (FDR) (Benjamini and Yosef Hochberg, 1995) at a level of 0.05. The reader should note that in the inter-group comparisons of surface based FA and trace maps, we co-varied for age and gender but not TIV, because TIV is not relevant to the DTI-derived metrics.

To compare two groups in terms of a single metric, such as the volume measurement, the mean FA, or the mean trace, we employed the same model with y (s) now being a scalar rather than a vertex-based scalar field. This corresponds to the general linear model. In such case, no correction is needed.

For the scan-rescan reproducibility test, we investigated the vertexwise difference for each of the three measurements (surface area, FA value, and trace value) at corresponding vertices of the two scans for the same subject. The difference is computed as |Mk1-MK2|0.5(Mk1-MK2), where Mk1 denotes a specific measurement (e.g. FA value) of vertex k for the first scan and Mk2 denotes the corresponding measurement of vertex k for the second scan of the same subject.

2.7 Template surface subdivision of the bilateral CCs

With the help of accurate divisions of each of the bilateral CCs into three compatible subregions (the genu, body, and splenium of the CC (GCC, BCC, and SCC)) in Mori’s atlas, we divided our common template surface for each of the two WM tracts into those three subregions using the approach detailed in our previous work (Tang et al., 2014a). This subdivision was accomplished by transferring the boundary definitions in Mori’s atlas to our template surfaces using the geodesic positioning function afforded by diffeomorphisms (Miller et al., 2014). The geodesic positioning algorithm provides a diffeomorphic correspondence between the two atlas coordinate systems, with the corresponding diffeomorphism transporting the label maps defined on Mori’s atlas to the population template surfaces.

3 Results

3.1 Demographic characteristics

In the HC group, there are a total of 7 males and 8 females, with the median age being 63 years and the age range being [55, 77] years. Among the 8 MCI subjects, 3 are male and the other 5 are female. The median age of the MCI group is 64 years and the age range is [56, 82] years. In the AD group, there are 11 males and 12 females, the median age being 65 years with an age range of [52, 82] years. There is no significant group differences in terms of age either between HC and MCI (p-value = 0.689) or between HC and AD (p-value = 0.363) based on the Student’s t-tests.

Among the 60 subjects, we had access to the mini-mental state examination (MMSE) scores for 11 HC subjects (median = 29, range = [28, 29]), 4 MCI subjects (median = 28, range = [27, 29]), and 21 AD subjects (median = 21, range = [8, 27]). We did not detect significant group difference between HC and MCI in terms of the MMSE score (p-value = 0.1452). This result may have been largely affected by the fact that we had MMSE scores for only 4 MCI subjects. The MMSE score in the AD group was statistically significantly lower than that in the HC group, with a p-value smaller than 10−6 obtained from a Student’s t-test.

3.2 Morphometric analysis

In comparing the volumetric measurements and the localized surface area maps of the left and right CC between HC and MCI, as well as HC and AD, we did not observe any statistically significant group differences, at a level of 0.05, between neither HC and MCI nor HC and AD.

3.3 Microstructural analysis

In our microstructural analysis, we first performed ROI-based single-statistic analyses; namely, we computed the mean FA and mean trace value as averaged across all voxels belonging to a specific WM tract of interest for each subject and then compared them within each group pair. The average and standard deviations of the mean FA and mean trace values of the bilateral CCs for each of the three groups (HC, MCI, and AD) are listed in Table 1, and the p-values obtained in comparing HC with each of the two diseased groups are tabulated in Table 2. The scatterplots of the mean FA and mean trace values for the bilateral CCs for each subject of the three groups are presented in Figure 4. For the CC’s mean FA value in each hemisphere, we observed HC&gt;MCI&gt;AD and for the mean trace value one can see that HC&lt;MCI&lt;AD on average. However, only the group differences between HC and AD in the mean FA and mean trace reached statistical significance while those between HC and MCI did not.

Results on the surface based FA maps of the left CC and the right CC are demonstrated in Figure 5 and Figure 6 respectively. In both of those figures, panel A represents the three-subregion division of the CC, while panels B1, B2, and B3 show the mean FA values, indexed at each vertex of the common template surface, averaged across the HC group, the MCI group, and the AD group respectively, and finally panels C1 and C2 denote those vertices whose group differences between HC and AD remained statistically significant after the FDR-correction and the FWER-correction respectively. We did not detect any significant group differences between HC and MCI in terms of the surface based FA maps when utilizing either FWER or FDR as the correction strategy. According to Figures 5–6, the FA values plotted on the common template surfaces generally follow the pattern of HC&gt;MCI&gt;AD, which is consistent with findings from the ROI-based single-statistic analysis. Significant regionally specific decreased FA values were detected in AD when compared to HC, on both the left and the right CC, independently of whether FDR-correction or FWER-correction was used, though a larger portion of vertices survived in the FDR-correction than the FWER-correction. The main subregion exhibiting significant FA decrease was found to be composed of the SCC and parts of the BCC.

The surface based trace analysis results of the left CC and the right CC are illustrated in Figure 7 and Figure 8 respectively, with the panel formatting in those two figures being the same as that used in Figures 5–6. Overall, we detected HC&lt;MCI&lt;AD patterns at all vertices of the template surfaces (see panels B1, B2, and B3 of Figures 7–8). After multiple-comparison correction using either FDR-controlling or FWER-controlling, we detected significant group differences only between HC and AD, but not between HC and MCI, which is in line with our FA surface map results. Again, the subregion of the bilateral CCs exhibiting the majority of regionally specific trace abnormalities in AD belonged to the SCC and BCC. When FDR-controlling was employed as the correction procedure, increased trace values were also detected in part of the GCC on both the left and the right hemisphere.

3.4 Reproducibility analysis

According to our test-retest experiments, the differences in our measurements of the surface area, FA, and trace of the left CC between the first and second scans, using our aforementioned metric, when averaged over all vertices were 0.068, 0.152, and 0.111 respectively. For the right CC, the corresponding results were 0.065, 0.145, and 0.099 when averaging over all vertices.

Figures 9–11 show the maps of cross-subject variability and the test-retest reproducibility results in the surface area, FA, and trace measurements respectively. To be specific, in each figure, the top panel represents the results on the left CC while the bottom panel contains those on the right CC. Within each panel, the top row represents the cross-subject variability results and the bottom row represents the test-retest reproducibility results. The cross-subject variability was again computed for each vertex of the surface and was quantified as the ratio of the standard deviation to the mean value across the 21 subjects. The cross-subject variability results should provide information for power analysis to design population studies.

In Figure 12 and Figure 13, we provide the histogram analysis results: in each figure, the left column represents the cross-subject variability results whereas the right column represents the test-retest reproducibility results; for each row, from top, to middle, to bottom, we show the distribution results of the surface area, the FA value, and the trace value respectively.

According to those results, we observe that the reproducibility, in terms of the localized surface area, were below 5% for most vertices. For both types of DTI indices (FA and trace), the reproducibility results were smaller than 10% for a majority of surface vertices. Such results indicate high reproducibility, especially when compared with the cross-subject variability in that 21-subject normal population.

4 Discussion

In this study, we have developed a pipeline for the unified investigation of surface based morphometry and microstructural integrity on WM tracts and its application to the corpus callosum of both hemispheres in Alzheimer’s disease. This work is essentially an extension and refinement of a previous study (Qiu et al., 2010). That said, several important advancements have emerged from the proposed pipeline: 1) segmentations of the WM tracts of interest were obtained in a fully automated fashion through a validated multi-contrast multi-atlas algorithm, which ensures a superior segmentation accuracy when compared to fiber-tracking based WM tract segmentation approaches and a boundary smoothness that is inherited from multiple manually delineated DTI atlases (Tang et al., 2014b); 2) the generation of the surface representations of the WM tracts of interest was performed in a transformation-based manner in the LDDMM framework, ensuring the smoothness and correct anatomical topology transferred faithfully from the manually created template surfaces defined in Mori’s atlas (Mori et al., 2008) and this surface generation pipeline was validated both qualitatively and quantitatively; 3) the morphometric maps, the FA maps, as well as the trace maps of all subjects are defined at each vertex of the bounding surface rather than on skeleton based geometric models (Smith et al., 2006; Yushkevich et al., 2008), which may be more biologically meaningful by quantifying the localized surface areas; 4) a topical issue is also examined in our multiple-comparison correction strategy where two state-of-the-art approaches (FDR-controlling and FWER-controlling) were evaluated. The FWER-correction strategy was found to be more conservative than the FDR-correction in terms of rejecting the null hypothesis. To be specific, the statistically significant HC-versus-AD group differences, in terms of the FA and trace surface maps, were detected on a much greater number of vertices after FDR-correction than after FWER-correction. This observation is in keeping with the general understanding that FWER-correction is stricter than FDR-correction and is more likely to make pessimistic estimates. Therefore, FWER-correction is more appropriate when there is an overriding reason to avoid any incorrect rejections of the null hypothesis whereas FDR-correction is more appropriate when there is a good reason to tolerate an expected proportion (usually 5%) of the FDR-corrected significance values being incorrectly rejected. In our previous work on surface based morphometric analyses of deep gray matter structures (Tang et al., 2016a), we have also investigated the resultant differences induced by the correction strategy difference.

This work was strongly motivated by the lack of existing advanced pipelines capable of analyzing the localized morphometry and microstructural integrity of WM tracts in a unified fashion. Localized morphometric analysis, mainly based on shape analysis, has primarily been conducted on anatomical structures extracted from structural MRIs (e.g. the T1-weighted image) (Miller et al., 2015a; Miller et al., 2015b; Qiu and Miller, 2008; Tang et al., 2015a; Tang et al., 2014a) with applications to WM tracts extracted directly from DTI images (O'Donnell et al., 2009; Qiu et al., 2010) being relatively rare. Alternative approaches for analyzing the shape of WM tracts of interests, mainly in terms of morphometry, have been proposed. In the work of Corouge and colleagues, it is proposed to generate a geometric description of a set of curves forming a bundle, to calculate an average, prototype curve, and to analyze the variability of shape deviations from this prototype (Corouge et al., 2004). This approach is fundamentally different from ours in multiple fashions: 1) our shape modeling is based on triangulated meshing whereas in their approach the focus is mainly upon curves; 2) in our work the localized shape characteristics were extracted from surface deformations whereas in this alternative approach the local shape descriptors are derived from the Frénet frame. In another work (Gerig et al., 2004), the same shape modeling methodology as in Corouge’s work (Corouge et al., 2004) is employed and extended to local diffusional property analysis, in addition to morphometric analysis, by attributing bundles with diffusion properties. This is similar to the essence of our own work, aiming to systematically analyze the diffusion properties as well as the geometric properties of WM tracts of interests utilizing shape modeling. An integrative analysis of morphometry and microstructural integrity in a unified framework may bring unique and novel information for understanding neuroanatomy and neurocognitive function in various settings.

During the past decade, there have been numerous investigations into how a specific disease (such as AD) affects the WM tract shapes. In two existing works (Ardekani et al., 2014; Bachman et al., 2014), the shape of the CC was analyzed with basic shape measurements – the total cross-sectional area and circularity of a 2D CC segmentation obtained at the mid-sagittal plane. In the study by Qiu and colleagues they analyzed the surface metrics of multiple WM tracts with application to AD (Qiu et al., 2010). We suggest that to have a more thorough understanding of the relevance of WM tract surface measurements to pathology, there must be fully-automated, carefully-designed, sophisticated, and effective tools for obtaining them. This is indeed the essential motivation of this work, to create such a tool. In fact, there have already been efforts to this effect, such as the approaches developed by other research groups (Smith et al., 2006; Yushkevich et al., 2008) which were based on the skeleton geometric model. Those two methods are now seeing use in a variety of applications. We believe that making the proposed pipeline available to the research community will unleash further potential for surface-based WM tract analyses.

Further to the above, the proposed pipeline is also a promising tool for automated disease detection and prediction. This pipeline is able to provide a variety of refined boundary-based characteristics/features that may be discriminating of various brain disorders (such as AD). More specifically, our pipeline is capable of providing the following multi-granularity multi-modality neuro-informatics: the volume of the WM tract of interest, the surface area of each subregion of the WM tract of interest (for example, the GCC, SCC, and BCC within the corpus callosum), the vertex-based surface areas, the mean FA and mean trace within the WM tract of interest, the mean FA and mean trace within each subregion of the WM tract of interest, as well as the vertex-based FA and trace maps. The more detailed description of the region-specific alterations of WM may provide us with more indicative information when differentiating disorders, such as demyelinating diseases of the central nervous system, neurodegeneration diseases, hypoglycemia, and Hypoxic Ischemic Encephalopathy. Also, a combination of these rich neuro-informatics may be much more discriminating and powerful in disease detection and prediction than any subset of them.

The proposed pipeline can be conveniently extended in multi-fold fashions: firstly, this pipeline can be easily applied to different WM tracts of interest in the pathology of a variety of disorders with little to no limitation, although validation analyses may still be needed, especially in the smooth surface generation procedure; secondly, in addition to the two types of statistic provided in this work, the ROI-averaged single DTI index and the vertexwise DTI index of the surface, other summarizing statistics such as the mean taken across all surface vertices or the mean computed within a specific subregion of the template surface are also feasible statistics for investigation; thirdly, in addition to the two multiple-comparison correction methods (FDR-controlling and FWER-controlling), other types of correction methods are also possible depending on the clinical applications; lastly, this method can also be applied to DTI-derived quantities other than FA and trace, such as the apparent diffusion coefficient, the axial diffusivity, and the radial diffusivity, thus enabling a multi-modality analysis in a common surface space.

In the current paper, we also applied the proposed analysis pipeline to the morphological investigation of the corpus callosum in AD. However, we did not detect any significant morphometric group differences between HC and MCI or between HC and AD in terms of either global volume or local surface area. In existing findings, the volume and shape of the CC have been reported to be affected by the pathology of AD (Ardekani et al., 2014; Bachman et al., 2014; Biegon et al., 1994). An obvious distinction between our work and those published previously (Ardekani et al., 2014; Bachman et al., 2014) is that their CC segmentation was based on T1-weighted image whereas our CC segmentation was obtained from DTI directly. A potential concern when measuring the WM volume from DTI-based segmentation is the spatial distortion which EPI-based DTI is susceptible to. One of our future directions will be morphometric analysis of the CC, in terms of both volume and shape, based on segmentations from T1-weighted images to verify this speculation. Another potential limitation of our study is the sample size; having only included a total of 15 HC subjects, 8 MCI subjects, and 23 AD subjects. This relatively small sample size may have limited the potential of our approach to detect morphometric abnormalities in the two disease groups. With that being said, we have detected significant decreases in the FA surface maps and increases in the trace surface maps for the CC of both hemispheres in AD relative to those in HC, indicating a sensitivity of the proposed method in detecting subtle microstructural abnormalities in WM tracts. This finding of CC microstructural damage, which is suspected to be tightly linked to the demyelination of the CC (Song et al., 2005), consolidates existing findings reported in the AD literature (Chua et al., 2008; Di Paola et al., 2010; Xie et al., 2006). We did not observe any significant group differences between HC and MCI in the DTI indices either globally or locally, with the low number of available MCI subjects (8 for this study) being the most likely explanation. However, we observed a pattern of HC&gt;MCI&gt;AD in the FA index and HC&lt;MCI&lt;AD in the trace index in terms of both the ROI-based single summarizing statistic and the surface based maps. As such, there are grounds to suspect that the inclusion of more subjects would likely to address any potential limitations of this study.

With a division of the CC surfaces into three subregions, the genu, body, and splenium of the CC, we found that the pathology of AD seemed to exhibit its greatest effects in the SCC and parts of the BCC. This agrees with previously published results that the degeneration of the SCC is significantly correlated with progression of dementia severity in AD patients (Teipei et al., 2002) and that relative to normal controls, patients with probable AD showed a highly significant reduction in the integrity of SCC (Rosa et al., 2000). A conjectured explanation of such region-specific abnormality patterns is that the fibers from the SCC and part of the BCC originate from temporoparietal regions of the brain (de Lacoste et al., 1985; Conturo et al., 1999), grey matter regions that are characteristically affected in AD (Brun et al., 1986). Please note that our sub-division methodology can be easily applied to other WM tracts which are assumed to consist of multiple functionally contrasting subregions.

A potential concern for this pipeline arises from the partial volume effects (PVEs) being induced during the DTI data acquisition procedure, especially in regions where the brain structure borders the cerebrospinal fluid. This is essentially a limitation of DTI data. To resolve this issue, multiple approaches for PVE correction have been proposed (Ardekani et al., 2005; Baron and Beaulieu, 2015; Jeon et al., 2012). In addition to the limitation induced by DTI acquisition, another limitation comes from the fact that the proposed pipeline targets the WM tract surfaces analyzing the DTI metrics at the boundary of the WM tracts of interest. This may pose a potential problem that the vertex-wise changes/abnormalities in the DTI metrics might actually reflect changes in the neighboring tissue rather than the tissue of interest. In other words, the changes in the DTI metrics on the WM tract surfaces may have been induced by either systematic changes in the WM itself or the systematic changes in the neighboring tissue. Furthermore, the boundary of a WM structure is more easily to be contaminated by the PVEs compared to the tract’s skeleton. In this respect, the skeleton-based methods (Smith et al., 2006; Yushkevich et al., 2008) are more favorable to the surface-based ones.

With that being said, according to our test-retest reproducibility results, our pipeline is robust, exhibiting a high reproducibility for all three measurements of interest, the localized surface area, the localized FA value, as well as the localized trace value. With a combination of effective PVE correction methods, the proposed pipeline has the potential for further robustness and greater impact upon real clinical applications.

5 Conclusion

To sum up, we have developed an integrative pipeline for analyzing the morphometry and microstructural integrity of WM tracts globally and locally and applied it to the investigation of the corpus callosum in Alzheimer’s disease. Future work will involve application and validation of the proposed pipeline to other WM tracts, other types of brain disorders, as well as other types of DTI-derived contrasts.

This study was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC 81501546, NSFC 81401389) and the SYSU-CMU Shunde International Joint Research Institute Start-up Grant (20150306). Michael I. Miller owns an equal share in Anatomyworks LLC. The terms of this arrangement have been reviewed and approved by the Johns Hopkins University, in accordance with it conflict of interest policy.

Figure 1 The top panel and the bottom panel demonstrate the volume and surface representations, respectively, of the corpus callosum in three views (yellow: left, blue: right).

Figure 2 Qualitative comparisons of the original corpus callosum surfaces (yellow) and their counterparts computed by the surface generation procedure (blue) for two subjects (top and bottom panel). For each surface, both the medial view (the upper one) and the lateral view (the lower one) are shown. In each panel, both the left and right corpus callosum results are presented.

Figure 3 The mean and standard deviations of the dice overlaps between the original surfaces and the filtered ones as well as the volumetric measurements of the two sets of surfaces, for the corpus callosum, averaged across all of the 46 subjects included in this study.

Figure 4 Scatterplots of the mean FA (top panel) and mean trace (bottom panel) values within the left and right corpus callosum in HC (blue diamonds), MCI (red asterisks), and AD (black open circles) subjects. Bars denote the averaged values of the mean FA and mean trace taken across each group.

Figure 5 Panel A denotes the three-subregion division (GCC, BCC, and SCC) of the left corpus callosum surface. Panels B1, B2, and B3 denote the FA value at each vertex of the template surface averaged, respectively, across the HC group, the MCI group, and the AD group. Panels C1 and C2 show the statistically significant vertexwise FA differences of the left corpus callosum between HC and AD after FDR-correction and FWER-correction respectively. The color bar denotes the decrease of FA value in AD relative to HC. For each surface, both the medial view (the left one) and the lateral view (the right one) are shown.

Figure 6 Panel A denotes the three-subregion division (GCC, BCC, and SCC) of the right corpus callosum surface. Panels B1, B2, and B3 denote the FA value at each vertex of the template surface averaged, respectively, across the HC group, the MCI group, and the AD group. Panels C1 and C2 show the statistically significant vertexwise FA differences of the right corpus callosum between HC and AD after FDR-correction and FWER-correction respectively. The color bar denotes the decrease of FA value in AD relative to HC. For each surface, both the medial view (the left one) and the lateral view (the right one) are shown.

Figure 7 Panel A denotes the three-subregion division (GCC, BCC, and SCC) of the left corpus callosum surface. Panels B1, B2, and B3 denote the trace value at each vertex of the template surface averaged, respectively, across the HC group, the MCI group, and the AD group. Panels C1 and C2 show the statistically significant vertexwise trace differences of the left corpus callosum between HC and AD after FDR-correction and FWER-correction respectively. The color bar denotes the increase of trace value in AD relative to HC. For each surface, both the medial view (the left one) and the lateral view (the right one) are shown.

Figure 8 Panel A denotes the three-subregion division (GCC, BCC, and SCC) of the right corpus callosum surface. Panels B1, B2, and B3 denote the trace value at each vertex of the template surface averaged, respectively, across the HC group, the MCI group, and the AD group. Panels C1 and C2 show the statistically significant vertexwise trace differences of the right corpus callosum between HC and AD after FDR-correction and FWER-correction respectively. The color bar denotes the increase of trace value in AD relative to HC. For each surface, both the medial view (the left one) and the lateral view (the right one) are shown.

Figure 9 The top panel and bottom panel respectively denote the results of left CC and right CC on vertexwise surface areas. In each panel, the first row denotes the cross-subject variability results whereas the second row denotes the test-retest reproducibility results in terms of the localized surface areas. For each surface, both the medial view (the left one) and the lateral view (the right one) are shown.

Figure 10 The top panel and bottom panel respectively denote the results of left CC and right CC on vertexwise FA maps. In each panel, the first row denotes the cross-subject variability results whereas the second row denotes the test-retest reproducibility results in terms of the localized FA value. For each surface, both the medial view (the left one) and the lateral view (the right one) are shown.

Figure 11 The top panel and bottom panel respectively denote the results of left CC and right CC on vertexwise trace maps. In each panel, the first row denotes the cross-subject variability results whereas the second row denotes the test-retest reproducibility results in terms of the localized trace value. For each surface, both the medial view (the left one) and the lateral view (the right one) are shown.

Figure 12 The histogram of the cross-subject variability (left column) and the test-retest reproducibility (right column) in terms of the localized surface areas (top panel), the localized FA values (middle panel), and the localized trace value (bottom panel) for the left CC.

Figure 13 The histogram of the cross-subject variability (left column) and the test-retest reproducibility (right column) in terms of the localized surface areas (top panel), the localized FA values (middle panel), and the localized trace value (bottom panel) for the right CC.

Table 1 The mean and standard deviations of the mean FA and mean trace values for the left and right corpus callosum of the three groups (HC, MCI, and AD).

	Left Corpus Callosum	Right Corpus Callosum	
FA	HC	0.5241 ± 0.0343	0.5376 ± 0.0356	
MCI	0.5037 ± 0.0339	0.5145 ± 0.0334	
AD	0.4591 ± 0.0523	0.4717 ± 0.0579	
trace	HC	0.0031 ± 0.0002	0.0029 ± 0.0002	
MCI	0.0032 ± 0.0002	0.0030 ± 0.0002	
AD	0.0036 ± 0.0003	0.0034 ± 0.0003	

Table 2 The p-values obtained from the general linear regression in comparing the mean FA and mean trace between HC and each of the two disease groups (MCI and AD).

	Left Corpus Callosum	Right Corpus Callosum	
HC vs. MCI p-values	FA	0.176	0.186	
trace	0.132	0.227	
	
HC vs. AD p-values	FA	0.0001	&lt;0.000025	
trace	0.001	&lt;0.000026	


Aboitiz F Scheibel AB Fisher RS Zaidel E 1992 Fiber composition of the human corpus callosum Brain Res 598 143 153 1486477
Ardekani BA Bachman AH Figarsky K Sidtis JJ 2014 Corpus callosum shape changes in early Alzheimer's disease: an MRI study using the OASIS brain database Brain Struct Funct 219 343 352 23322167
Ardekani S Sinha U 2005 Geometric distortion correction of high-resolution 3 T diffusion tensor brain images Magnetic resonance in medicine 54 5 1163 1171 16187289
Ashburner J Friston KJ 2000 Voxel-based morphometry—the methods Neuroimage 11 805 821 10860804
Bachman AH Lee SH Sidtis JJ Ardekani BA 2014 Corpus callosum shape and size changes in early Alzheimer's disease: a longitudinal MRI study using the OASIS brain database J Alzheimers Dis 39 71 78 24121963
Baron CA Beaulieu C 2015 Acquisition strategy to reduce cerebrospinal fluid partial volume effects for improved DTI tractography Magnetic resonance in medicine 73 3 1075 1084 24723303
Bazin PL Ye C Bogovic JA Shiee N Reich DS Prince JL Pham DL 2011 Direct segmentation of the major white matter tracts in diffusion tensor images Neuroimage 58 458 468 21718790
Benjamini Y Hochberg Y 1995 Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and powerful approach to multiple testing Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B (Methodological) 57 289 300
Bennett IJ Madden DJ Vaidya CJ Howard DV Howard JH 2010 Age-related differences in multiple measures of white matter integrity: A diffusion tensor imaging study of healthy aging Hum Brain Mapp 31 378 390 19662658
Biegon A Eberling J Richardson B Roos M Wong S Reed B Jagust W 1994 Human corpus callosum in aging and Alzheimer's disease: a magnetic resonance imaging study Neurobiol Aging 15 393 397 7969715
Brun A Englund E 1986 A white matter disorder in dementia of the Alzheimer type. A pathoanatomical study Ann Neurol 19 253 262 3963770
Cercignani M Inglese M Pagani E Comi G Filippi M 2001 Mean diffusivity and fractional anisotropy histograms of patients with multiple sclerosis AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 22 952 958 11337342
Ceritoglu C Tang X Chow M Hadjiabadi D Shah D Brown T Burhanullah MH Trinh H Hsu JT Ament KA Crocetti D Mori S Mostofsky SH Yantis S Miller MI Ratnanather JT 2013 Computational analysis of LDDMM for brain mapping Front Neurosci 7 151 23986653
Ceritoglu C Oishi K Li X Chou M Younes L Albert M Lyketsos C van Zijl PCM Miller MI Mori S 2009 Multi-contrast large deformation diffeomorphic metric mapping for diffusion tensor imaging Neuroimage 47 618 627 19398016
Charlton RA Barrick TR McIntyre DJ Shen Y O'Sullivan M Howe FA Clark CA Morris RG Markus HS 2006 White matter damage on diffusion tensor imaging correlates with age-related cognitive decline Neurology 66 217 222 16434657
Chua TC Wen W Slavin MJ Sachdev PS 2008 Diffusion tensor imaging in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: a review Curr Opin Neurol 21 83 92 18180656
Clayden JD Storkey AJ Bastin ME 2007 A Probabilistic Model-Based Approach to Consistent White Matter Tract Segmentation Medical Imaging, IEEE Transactions on 26 1555 1561
Conturo TE Lori NF Cull TS 1999 Tracking neuronal fiber pathways in the living human brain Proc Natl Accad Sci USA 96 10422 10427
Corouge I Gouttard S Gerig G 2004 Towards a shape model of white matter fiber bundles using Diffusion Tensor MRI Proceedings IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging Washington, DC, USA 344 347
de Lacoste MC Kirkpatrick JB Ross ED 1985 Topography of the human corpus callosum J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 44 578 591 4056827
Di Paola M Di Iulio F Cherubini A Blundo C Casini AR Sancesario G Passafiume D Caltagirone C Spalletta G 2010 When, where, and how the corpus callosum changes in MCI and AD: A multimodal MRI study Neurology 74 1136 1142 20368633
Gerig G Gouttard S Corouge I 2004 Analysis of brain white matter via fiber tract modeling Proceedings of the IEEE EMBS 4421 4424
Hampel H Teipel SJ Alexander GE Horwitz B Teichberg D Schapiro MB Rapoport SI 1998 Corpus callosum atrophy is a possible indicator of region–and cell type–specific neuronal degeneration in Alzheimer disease: A magnetic resonance imaging analysis Arch Neurol 55 193 198 9482361
Hao X Zygmunt K Whitaker RT Fletcher PT 2014 Improved segmentation of white matter tracts with adaptive Riemannian metrics Med Image Anal 18 161 175 24211814
Janowsky JS Kaye JA Carper RA 1996 Atrophy of the corpus callosum in Alzheimer's disease versus healthy aging J Am Geriatr Soc 44 798 803 8675927
Jeon T Mishra V Uh J Weiner M Hatanpaa KJ 2012 Regional changes of cortical mean diffusivities with aging after correction of partial volume effects Neuroimage 62 1705 1716 22683383
Jonasson L Bresson X Hagmann P Cuisenaire O Meuli R Thiran J 2005 White matter fiber tract segmentation in DT-MRI using geometric flows Med Image Anal 9 223 236 15854843
Jones DK Symms MR Cercignani M Howard RJ 2005 The effect of filter size on VBM analyses of DT-MRI data Neuroimage 26 546 554 15907311
Keller TA Kana RK Just MA 2007 A developmental study of the structural integrity of white matter in autism Neuroreport 18 23 27 17259855
Kraus MF Susmaras T Caughlin BP Walker CJ Sweeney JA Little DM 2007 White matter integrity and cognition in chronic traumatic brain injury: a diffusion tensor imaging study Brain 130 2508 2519 17872928
Kubicki M Park H Westin C Nestor P Mulkern R Maier S Niznikiewicz M Connor E Levitt J Frumin M 2005 DTI and MTR abnormalities in schizophrenia: analysis of white matter integrity Neuroimage 26 1109 1118 15878290
Landman BA Huang AJ Gifford A Vikram DS Lim IAL 2011 Multi-parametric neuroimaging reproducibility: A 3-T resource study Neuroimage 54 2854 2866 21094686
Lawes INC Barrick TR Murugam V Spierings N Evans DR Song M Clark CA 2008 Atlas-based segmentation of white matter tracts of the human brain using diffusion tensor tractography and comparison with classical dissection Neuroimage 39 62 79 17919935
Li Y Shea SM Lorenz CH Jiang H Chou MC Mori S 2013 Image corruption detection in diffusion tensor imaging for post-processing and real-time monitoring PLoS One 8 e49764 24204551
Lorensen WE Cline HE 1987 Marching cubes: A high resolution 3D surface construction algorithm SIGGRAPH '87 Proceedings of the 14th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques 163 169
Ma J Miller MI Younes L 2010 A bayesian generative model for surface template estimation Int J Biomed Imaging 2010 974957 Epub 2010 Sep 20 20885934
Miller MI Younes L Ratnanather JT Brown T Trinh H Lee DS Tward D Mahon PB Mori S Albert M 2015a Amygdalar atrophy in symptomatic Alzheimer's disease based on diffeomorphometry: the BIOCARD cohort Neurobiol Aging 36 S3 S10 25444602
Miller MI Ratnanather JT Tward DJ Brown T Lee DS Ketcha M Mori K Wang MC Mori S Albert MS Younes L BIOCARD Research Team 2015b Network Neurodegeneration in Alzheimer's Disease via MRI Based Shape Diffeomorphometry and High-Field Atlasing Front Bioeng Biotechnol 3 54 26284236
Miller MI Trouve A Younes L 2006 Geodesic Shooting for Computational Anatomy J Math Imaging Vis 24 209 228 20613972
Miller MI Younes L Trouvé A 2014 Diffeomorphometry and geodesic positioning systems for human anatomy Technology 02 36 43
Mori S Oishi K Jiang H Jiang L Li X Akhter K Hua K Faria AV Mahmood A Woods R 2008 Stereotaxic white matter atlas based on diffusion tensor imaging in an ICBM template Neuroimage 40 570 582 18255316
Nichols T Hayasaka S 2003 Controlling the familywise error rate in functional neuroimaging: a comparative review Statistical Methods in Medical Research 12 419 446 14599004
O'Donnell LJ Westin C Golby AJ 2009 Tract-based morphometry for white matter group analysis Neuroimage 45 832 844 19154790
Penny WD Friston KJ Ashburner JT Kiebel SJ Nichols TE 2011 Statistical parametric mapping: the analysis of functional brain images Academic press
Pierpaoli C Jezzard P Basser PJ Barnett A Di Chiro G 1996 Diffusion tensor MR imaging of the human brain Radiology 201 637 648 8939209
Qiu A Miller MI 2008 Multi-structure network shape analysis via normal surface momentum maps Neuroimage 42 1430 1438 18675553
Qiu A Oishi K Miller MI Lyketsos CG Mori S Albert M 2010 Surface-based analysis on shape and fractional anisotropy of white matter tracts in Alzheimer's disease PLoS One 5 e9811 20339558
Rosa SE Chen F Chalk JB Zelaya FO Strugnell WE Benson M Semple J Doddrell DM 2000 Loss of connectivity in Alzheimer's disease: an evaluation of white matter tract integrity with colour coded MR diffusion tensor imaging J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 69 528 530 10990518
Smith SM Jenkinson M Johansen-Berg H Rueckert D Nichols TE Mackay CE Watkins KE Ciccarelli O Cader MZ Matthews PM Behrens TEJ 2006 Tract-based spatial statistics: Voxelwise analysis of multi-subject diffusion data Neuroimage 31 1487 1505 16624579
Song S Yoshino J Le TQ Lin S Sun S Cross AH Armstrong RC 2005 Demyelination increases radial diffusivity in corpus callosum of mouse brain Neuroimage 26 132 140 15862213
Stejskal EO Tanner JE 1965 Spin diffusion measurements: spin echoes in the presence of a time-dependent field gradient J Chem Phys 42 288 292
Tang X Qin Y Wu J Zhang M Zhu W Miller MI 2016a Shape and diffusion tensor imaging based integrative analysis of the hippocampus and the amygdala in Alzheimer's disease Magnetic Resonance Imaging 34 1087 1099 27211255
Tang X Holland D Dale AM Younes L Miller MI 2015a The diffeomorphometry of regional shape change rates and its relevance to cognitive deterioration in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease Hum Brain Mapp 36 2093 2117 25644981
Tang X Kutten K Ceritoglu C Mori S Miller MI 2015b Simultaneous skull-stripping and lateral ventricle segmentation via fast multi-atlas likelihood fusion Proc SPIE 9413, Medical Imaging 2015: Image Processing 94130W 94130W-7
Tang X Crocetti D Kutten K Ceritoglu C Albert MS Mori S Mostofsky SH Miller MI 2015c Segmentation of brain magnetic resonance images based on multi-atlas likelihood fusion: testing using data with a broad range of anatomical and photometric profiles Front Neurosci 9 61 25784852
Tang X Holland D Dale AM Miller MI 2015d APOE Affects the Volume and Shape of the Amygdala and the Hippocampus in Mild Cognitive Impairment and Alzheimer’s Disease: Age Matters J Alzheimers Dis 47 645 660 26401700
Tang X Holland D Dale AM Younes L Miller MI Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 2014a Shape abnormalities of subcortical and ventricular structures in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: detecting, quantifying, and predicting Hum Brain Mapp 35 3701 3725 24443091
Tang X Yoshida S Hsu J Huisman TA Faria AV Oishi K Kutten K Poretti A Li Y Miller MI Mori S 2014b Multi-contrast multi-atlas parcellation of diffusion tensor imaging of the human brain PLoS One 9 e96985 24809486
Tang X Oishi K Faria AV Hillis AE Albert MS Mori S Miller MI 2013 Bayesian Parameter Estimation and Segmentation in the Multi-Atlas Random Orbit Model PLoS One 8 e65591 23824159
Teipel SJ Bayer W Alexander GE Zebuhr Y Teichberg D Kulic L Schapiro MB Möller H Rapoport SI Hampel H 2002 Progression of Corpus Callosum Atrophy in Alzheimer Disease Arch Neurol 59 243 248 11843695
Tward DJ Ma J Miller MI Younes L 2013 Robust Diffeomorphic Mapping via Geodesically Controlled Active Shapes Int J Biomed Imaging 2013 205494 23690757
Vaillant M Glaunès J 2005 Surface matching via currents Information Processing in Medical Imaging 381 392 17354711
Valsasina P Rocca MA Agosta F Benedetti B Horsfield MA Gallo A Rovaris M Comi G Filippi M 2005 Mean diffusivity and fractional anisotropy histogram analysis of the cervical cord in MS patients Neuroimage 26 822 828 15955492
Weis S Jellinger K Wenger E 1991 Morphometry of the corpus callosum in normal aging and Alzheimer’s disease Age-associated Neurological Diseases Springer 35 38
Xie S Xiao JX Gong GL Zang YF Wang YH Wu HK Jiang XX 2006 Voxel-based detection of white matter abnormalities in mild Alzheimer disease Neurology 66 1845 1849 16801648
Younes L Albert M Miller MI BIOCARD Research Team 2014 Inferring changepoint times of medial temporal lobe morphometric change in preclinical Alzheimer's disease Neuroimage Clin 5 178 187 25101236
Yushkevich PA Zhang H Simon TJ Gee JC 2008 Structure-specific statistical mapping of white matter tracts Neuroimage 41 448 461 18407524
