LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


7503062
4443
J Am Geriatr Soc
J Am Geriatr Soc
Journal of the American Geriatrics Society
0002-8614
1532-5415

28766695
5937943
10.1111/jgs.14997
NIHMS880284
Article
THE PREVENTION OF ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE: LESSONS LEARNED AND APPLIED
Galvin James E. MD, MPH Comprehensive Center for Brain Health, Department of Integrated Medical Sciences, Charles E. Schmidt College of Medicine, Florida Atlantic University

Corresponding Author: James E. Galvin, MD, MPH, Charles E. Schmidt College of Medicine, Florida Atlantic University, 777 Glades Road, ME-104, Rm 102, Boca Raton, FL 33431, galvinj@health.fau.edu, Phone: 561-297-4793
2 6 2017
02 8 2017
10 2017
01 10 2018
65 10 21282133
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) affects over 5 million Americans with substantial consequences to patients, families and society that will only continue to be a significant cause of morbidity, mortality, and healthcare costs. With disease-modifying treatment trials unsuccessful at the present time and only symptomatic medications available, an emerging approach is the creation of prevention trials. Advances in diagnostic criteria, biomarker development and improved understanding of the biophysiological basis of AD make these initiatives feasible. Ongoing pharmacological trials using anti-amyloid therapies are underway in sporadic and genetic forms of AD. However, a large number of modifiable risk factors for AD have been identified in observational studies, many of which do not appear to exert effects via amyloid or tau. This suggests that prevention studies focusing on risk reduction and lifestyle modification may offer additional benefits. Rather than relying solely on large sample, long duration randomized clinical trial designs; a precision medicine approach using N-of-1 trials may provide more rapid results on whether personalized prevention plans can improve patient-centered outcomes. As there appear to be multiple pathways to develop AD, there may also be multiple ways to prevent or delay the onset of AD. Even if these precision approaches alone are not successful in preventing AD, they may greatly improve the likelihood of amyloid- or tau-specific therapies to reach their endpoints by reducing co-morbidities. Keeping this in mind, dementia may be as a disorder that develops over a lifetime, with individualized ways to build a better brain as we age.

Alzheimer’s disease
dementia
prevention
lifestyle
risk reduction
precision medicine
N-of-1 trials

INTRODUCTION

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) affects over 5 million Americans with substantial costs to patients, families and society.1 Projections by the Alzheimer Association anticipate if nothing is done, by the year 2050 there will be over 16 million cases of AD in the United States, and over 60 million cases worldwide. Over the past 25 years, only five symptomatic medications have met their endpoints in Phase III clinical trials and successfully come to market; of these, four are still available. Since 2003, every both symptomatic and disease-modifying agent has failed in Phase II/III due to challenges with safety and/or efficacy. This led to a bold initiative put forth by the National Alzheimer Plan Act to develop a disease-modifying treatment (DMT) by the year 2025.2 Two important concepts are associated with this target date. First, if a DMT is to make it to market by 2025, then only medications that have already entered Phase II testing can reach this target date.2 Second, if a DMT were available by 2025, then the 2050 projection of 16 million Americans with AD would be reduced by 5.7 million cases with societal savings of $367 Billion.1 To complement efforts to develop a DMT for individuals with symptomatic AD, a concerted effort is underway to initiate preventive measures in asymptomatic individuals. Such efforts are also consistent the 2025 target goal.

An important question however, is whether AD can be prevented. To date, a large number of risk factors (Table 1), both modifiable (e.g., exposures, lifestyle and social habits) and non-modifiable (e.g., age, sex, genetics) have been identified. Recent revisions to the clinical criteria for AD3 and mild cognitive impairment (MCI)4 helped clarify the role of biomarkers in defining the pathologic cascade, and the addition of research criteria for presymptomatic disease5 sets the stage for better modeling of the preclinical and prodromal stages of disease.6 Efforts developing and validating fluid and imaging biomarkers now make it possible to explore underlying pathologic changes in amyloid, tau, dopamine transport, inflammation, signaling pathways, and someday alpha-synuclein and TDP-43 in symptomatic, prodromal, and presymptomatic individuals. Advances in genetic, epigenetic, and “omic” (e.g., proteomics, lipidomics, metabolomics) approaches will permit the modeling of transcriptional, translational, and post-translational changes. Furthermore, precision medicine approaches with demonstrable benefits in oncology are being applied to neurodegenerative disorders. Thus, the platform is in place to begin prevention initiatives.

These efforts have a great potential for both pharmaceutical and non-pharmacological approaches with earlier identification of at-risk individuals, expanding opportunities for faster and earlier diagnoses, better stratification of at-risk patients, higher enrollment into randomized clinical trials (RCTs) by reducing screen failure rates, and eventually more effective treatments. While the focus of this article will be on AD, the principles discussed here are relevant to related neurodegenerative disorders (e.g., Parkinson’s disease, Lewy body dementia, vascular dementia). Assuming curing AD remains a substantial unsolved challenge, preventing or simply delaying the dementia onset could significantly change the face of disease.

PHARMACOLOGIC APPROACHES TO PREVENTION

A number of prevention studies are ongoing in both sporadic and autosomal dominant forms of AD. Results are still pending but a review of ClinicalTrials.gov7 provides important details about these studies. One such study is the Anti-Amyloid Treatment in Asymptomatic Alzheimer’s (A4) recruiting individuals aged 65–86 with normal cognitive function but positive AD biomarkers (amyloid deposition by PET scan). These individuals are followed for three years of treatment with an anti-amyloid monoclonal antibody. The Alzheimer Prevention Initiative (API) will study individuals age 60–75 with normal cognition who have two copies of the ApoE e4 allele, putting them at a high risk of AD. These individuals are for two years of treatment with a different anti-amyloid monoclonal antibody. The TOMMORROW Study will enroll individuals age 65–83 with normal cognition who have a polymorphism of TOMM40 gene associated with increased risk of AD. Individuals are followed for five years of treatment with pioglitazone, an anti-diabetes drug. In parallel to these trials in sporadic cases with enhanced risk, trials are ongoing in individuals with autosomal dominant forms of AD including the API and Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer Network – Treatment Unit (DIAN-TU) using monoclonal antibodies. A particular advantage of the trials in familial AD is that age of onset is predictable so that if a DMT effect exists, it is more likely to be detected. A potential disadvantage of these trials is whether the results are generalizable to the much more common sporadic forms where risk factors other than genetics may predominate.

Similar to prevention trials, there are number of prodromal studies with a major focus on individuals with MCI. Results are still pending for many of these trials but at least one Phase II study had promising results. Aducanumab immunotherapy8 against the amyloid protein not only demonstrated changes in CSF amyloid over 54 weeks in a dose-dependent manner but also demonstrated significant changes in cognitive and functional measures. These findings support the concept that there may be a critical window for these agents to be administered in order to increase the likelihood of success.

LIFESTYLE MODIFICATION INTERVENTIONS

Modifiable Lifestyle Factors

A number of modifiable risk and preventive factors for AD have been described in observational studies (Table 1). Across several studies, prominent risk factors include diabetes, hypertension, renal dysfunction, alcohol and smoking patterns, high cholesterol, coronary heart disease, depression, sedentary life style, low cognitive activity, and diet. These factors combined account for &gt;50% of the attributable risk for AD.9 The most difficult of these factors to address is diet as it is highly dependent on income and access to fresh foods.10 In a 16-year observational study of 949 individuals using the Lifestyle for Brain Health (LIBRA) measure of modifiable risk factors, a 1-point increase in LIBRA scores was associated with a 19% increased risk of dementia.11 In a meta-analyses of 19 studies on cognitive leisure activities12 including crossword puzzles, card games, computer use, arts and crafts, life-long learning, group discussions, and music had a protective effect (odds ratio=0.58). In addition, physical activities may lead to a 20–65% risk reduction depending on the type and intensity of activity through mechanisms involving reduced vascular disease risk, improved respiratory function, stimulation of trophic factors, and reduced oxidative stress and inflammation.13 Objective measurement of midlife vascular risk factors demonstrated increase risk of dementia in late life.14 In a study of 2000 individuals aged 71–78y, work-related stress increased the risk of MCI (odds ratio=1.38), dementia (odds ratio=1.53), and AD (odds ratio=1.55).15

In spite of the differences between countries of origin, culture, language, educational attainment, and ages studied, the aforementioned studies and many others are convergent for a short list of risk factors that seem to play a critical role in the development or prevention of AD and related disorders. This consistency has led to the implementation of a number of dementia prevention initiatives to modify these risk factors, most of which cannot be directly linked to either amyloid or tau deposition.

Ongoing Prevention Initiatives

The European Prevention of AD (EPAD)16 initiative is currently recruiting to examine whether alteration of risk factors for AD that occur in early- and mid-life potentiate pathophysiological changes decades before dementia onset. The Innovative Midlife Intervention for Dementia Deterrence (In-MINDD) trial9 considers 11 identified risk factors (e.g., diabetes, hypertension, renal) that account for 50% of the attributable risk and enrolled 600 individuals to participate in an internet education intervention. To date, the largest initiative is the FINGER study17 enrolling 1260 individuals in an educational intervention that includes modules in diet, exercise, cognitive training, and vascular risk reduction. Overall between-group differences reached statistical significance for global cognition, executive function, and processing speed but not episodic memory.17 These results suggest that lifestyle modification may offer some benefit in cognitive function, albeit with a small effect size.

PRECISION MEDICINE APPROACHES TO PREVENTION

While age is the single greatest risk factor for AD, it is not inevitable. The best estimates suggest that at age 85, there is 42% risk of developing AD.1 Of course, this means that 58% of older adults do not develop dementia, even if amyloid can be detected in the brain. The reasons are unknown, but may be explained in part by a host of modifiable and non-modifiable risk factors (Table 1). Up to 30% of AD cases may be preventable through modification of risk factors, and behavioral changes to mitigate the impact of those risk factors that are not modifiable.18 There remains an ongoing debate as to whether the current evidence base is sufficient to initiate prevention programs because: (a) it is difficult to prove causation from observational studies, and (b) it is difficult to pool multiple RCTs due to differences in study design, measurements used, and anticipated outcomes.18 While a well-balanced, healthy lifestyle may be the cornerstone of disease prevention and brain health, each individual risk factor (vascular, lifestyle choices, psychosocial) may act both independently and potentiate the effects of each other.19,20 Therefore, a prevention initiative needs to be both multimodal, and tailored to address individual risks.

These requirements lead to a number of design and analytic challenges. Many prevention RCTs use time-to-event analytic strategies to demonstrate a DMT effect. Such designs are optimal when anticipated treatment effects remain constant over time, however in the case of dementia prevention this is unknown. Thus, time-to-event strategies such a hazard ratios may not be the best way to model effects, particularly if the detectable signal is a late effect of the intervention.21 Since AD is quite heterogeneous in risk factors, age of onset, presentation, progression, and pathology burden, designing a study to treat individuals as a homogenous population requires large sample sizes (thousands to tens of thousands) to be followed for long periods of time (years to decades).22 This markedly increases study costs, staff burden, and participant burden. In the absence of robust biomarkers that mark disease onset and progression, rather than just the presence of pathology, RCT design will remain a challenge.23 Barriers to prevention studies include: limited understanding of the real relationship between dementia risk factors and the impact of risk reduction; complexity of life course on dementia risk factors; lack of standardization of study design, definitions and outcomes; difficulty of translating RCT findings into real-world practice; cultural and social barriers to implementation; lack of research capacity to enroll large research cohorts for long periods of time; and pervasive social stigma associated with AD.18

Since effective prevention strategies remain elusive despite significant advances in our understanding of the biology and pathophysiology of AD, an alternative approach would be to take advantage of precision medicine designs used in oncology trials to tailor interventions to an individual’s phenotypic and genotypic expression. With improved classification and phenotyping of patients, trial ready cohorts can be targeted more appropriately with interventions (both pharmacological and non-pharmacological) designed to ameliorate specific pathologic mechanisms, based on specific biomarkers and patient characteristics.23 Future trials could then be created to more quickly determine efficacy and safety (“fast to fail”) by moving away from one-size-fits-all approaches to patient-specific precision treatments.

This would also require re-thinking trial design for prevention measures, moving to more “N-of-1” designs. N-of-1 trials consider the individual patient as the sole unit of observation to study the efficacy and/or adverse impact of an intervention,22 and are guided by objective data-driven criteria, while leveraging the study designs and statistical techniques common to RCTs.22 Since risk and molecular profiles of AD vary widely by patient, grouping individuals into single entities (placebo vs. treatment-arm) may mix “super-responders” with “non-responders” washing out treatment effects that only become apparent in post-hoc analyses.24 Instead, comparing time-to-disease progression of an individual patient using a novel therapeutic approach to the time-to-disease progression for that same patient for the immediately preceding treatment paradigm may be preferable.25 N-of-1 trials may be less bound by threats to generalizability of large RCTs due to recruitment delays and challenges to translate significant p-values in large treatment groups to the care of an individual patient, which is the ultimate goal of clinical practice. In a meta-analyses of 70 N-of-1 trials, of 57 completed trials, 50 provided definitive clinical or statistical answers with 39% prompting physicians to change the plan of care.26 Another meta-analysis examined 108 trials involving 2154 participants and found 54% of participants had subsequent treatment decisions changed based on the results.27 To create the platform for such trials, several conditions must be met (Table 2). Patients must be deeply phenotyped with characterization of sociodemographic, psychological, clinical, cognitive, functional, biomarker, and genetic traits. Ideally, these patients would agree to be followed longitudinally, have samples banked for future analyses, and consent to autopsy to provide confirmation of both diagnosis and treatment effects on brain pathology. Statistical considerations may take advantage of both alternative time-series analyses and within- and between-subject comparisons. Lastly, an important caveat is the cost of care when a high-cost intervention is planned, for example off-label treatment with an expensive medication.22

EXAMPLE OF A PERSONALIZED MEDICINE APPROACH TO DEMENTIA PREVENTION

As an example of how this may applied in a pragmatic sense, we are developing N-of-1 trials to personalized dementia prevention using an evidence-base derived from an extensive literature review, and results of an NIH-funded project to conduct dementia screening in multicultural communities (R01 AG0402-11-A1, study design reviewed28,29). In addition to screening for cognitive impairment, broader medical screening for diabetes, hypertension, vascular risk factors, obesity, mobility, physical performance, frailty, and depression was incorporated into a “Healthy Body, Healthy Mind” approach to make the concept of dementia screening more acceptable, and to understand the impact of co-morbid disease on cognitive performance. This cross-sectional study confirmed many findings of observational studies regarding the association between cognitive performance and diabetes, hypertension, obesity, vascular risk factors, and depression while providing novel findings linking cognitive performance to sarcopenia28 and mobility.29 These collective findings were prospectively applied to develop N-of-1 trials. For example, a 68-year old college-educated woman (Note: although an actual case, some features were altered to preserve anonymity) presented with a 1-year history of subjective memory complaints (misplacing car keys, forgetting conversations, defensiveness about memory issues), but with independent functioning in her everyday activities. Her relevant past history is significant for hypertension and hypercholesterolemia. Her physical exam findings include mild hypertension (132/92) but normal cardiac and peripheral vascular exams. Pertinent neurologic findings include mild, symmetric weakness; decreased vibration sensation in the lower extremities; and mild postural instability. Cognitive testing revealed global deficits (Montreal Cognitive Assessment score 19/30), working memory and executive dysfunction, and episodic memory deficits on list learning that disappeared with cued recognition. Physical and functional testing revealed low lean muscle mass, at-risk nutritional status, modest daily physical activity, mild deficits on physical functionality (Short Physical Performance Battery score 7/12), and mild frailty (Fried Frailty Phenotype Score 3/5). Gait and balance testing revealed slowed gait speed (1.07 m/s), marked slowing (22.9%) with a dual-task challenge (walking while talking), and postural sway with eyes closed. Blood-based biomarkers revealed an abnormal lipid profile (elevated total, LDL- and non-HDL cholesterol; elevated LDL and small LDL particles; and reduced HDL particles), elevated inflammatory markers (hs-CRP and myeloperoxidase), ApoE 3/4 genotype, and evidence of insulin resistance (elevated fasting glucose, hemoglobin A1c, and estimated average glucose). Quantitative MRI revealed normal hippocampal size and lateral ventricle volume, however there were confluent white matter hyperintensities with frontal lobe predominance. Auditory event-related potentials demonstrated delayed median reaction times and reduced amplitude at the N200 peak (linked to impaired attention and executive function), and left-right asymmetry with frontal predominance (linked to vascular injury), but normal amplitudes and latencies at all other peaks, including the P50 peak associated with amyloid deposition.30 This deep phenotypic evaluation provided actionable findings in cognitive testing (executive and working memory deficits with cued episodic memory improvements supporting intact hippocampal circuitry), physical testing (sarcopenia, at-risk nutritional status, poor physical functionality, and early frailty), gait testing (slowed gait speed, impaired dual tasks, postural instability with eyes closed), biomarker testing (lipid profile, inflammation, insulin resistance, ApoE4 genotype suggesting poor response to statins), MRI (preservation of hippocampal and cortical volume, extensive white matter disease), and EEG (executive dysfunction and evidence of vascular injury) and supported a diagnosis of vascular cognitive impairment. A personalized treatment plan was then developed focusing on (a) dietary counseling (MIND diet, high protein snacks, glycemic control); (b) physical therapy for gait, balance, strengthening, and conditioning; (c) referral to a personal trainer for aerobic, resistance, and flexibility training; (d) mindfulness (yoga, meditation) for stress reduction; (e) cognitive exercise focusing on problem-solving skills, (f) omega-3 supplementation and possible resin therapy for cholesterol lowering; (g) improved blood pressure monitoring; and (h) initiation of a baby aspirin to improve blood flow. Longitudinal follow-up is needed to monitor adherence to recommendations and for evidence of improvement in outcomes. However, such a trial could provide a direct estimate of individual treatment effects, fine-tune personalized care plans, enhance precision of future treatment decisions, improve patient-centered outcomes, and if successful, reduce long-term healthcare costs.25

DISCUSSION

There is increasing evidence that multiple medical conditions increase the risk of neurodegeneration and subsequent development of dementia (Figure 1). Further, it is becoming clear that the majority of these risk factors act in amyloid- and tau-independent ways. Trials testing the amyloid hypothesis (β- and γ-secretase inhibitors, anti-aggregation medications, mono- and polyclonal antibody approaches), anti-inflammatory agents, and early-phase anti-tau therapies have failed to meet outcomes or have been discontinued due to safety concerns. While we wait for successful pharmacotherapy, we can take advantage of these multiple pathways leading to AD to test hypotheses around risk reduction and mitigation. In all likelihood, efforts to prevent cognitive decline and development of dementia may be more successful when multimodal and directed to at-risk individuals based on their personal health profile, rather than “one-size-fits-all” approaches. The detection of, and interventions addressing root causes may offer novel approaches to diagnosing, treating, curing, or preventing AD. AD offers a large array of potentially modifiable risk factors (lifestyle, exposure, environment, co-morbid disease) that are excellent targets to personalize the approach to medical care. Precision medicine approaches specifically target the heterogeneity of AD by identifying person-specific risk factors and applying a tailored intervention directed against this risk profile. Even if these precision approaches do not, in and of themselves, cure or prevent AD – removing other pathways to neurodegeneration may greatly improve the likelihood of amyloid- or tau-specific therapies to reach their endpoints. Perhaps it is time to abandon generalized approaches to AD, but rather consider neurodegenerative disorders as diseases of a lifetime, and that there may be individualized ways to build a better brain as we age.

Dr Galvin was responsible for the study design, statistical analyses and interpretation, drafting, revising and submitting the manuscript. Dr Galvin serves as a scientific advisor for Axovant, Biogen, Eisai, and Eli Lilly; receives licensing fees from Pfizer, Lilly, Axovant, and Quintiles; and conducts on-going clinical trials funded by Biogen, Axovant, and Janssen. Dr Galvin is funded by grants from NIH (R01 AG0402-11-A1, U01 NS100610, and R01 NS088040-01), the Florida Department of Health, the Harry T. Mangurian Foundation, and the Association for Frontotemporal Degeneration. He is on the editorial boards of Neurodegenerative Disease Management, Alzheimer’s Disease and Associated Disorders, and Acta Neuropathologica. None of these entities played any role in the preparation or content of this manuscript. Dr Galvin is the Principal Investigator of this study and takes full responsibility for the data, the analyses and interpretation, and the conduct of the research; he has full access to all of the data; and has the right to publish all data.

Figure 1 Model of a Dementia Prevention Initiative

Panel A: Hypothetical model of the development of clinical dementia. Prior to diagnosis, there would be evidence of cognitive decline, which reflects neurodegenerative changes including cellular dysfunction and loss, synaptic dysfunction, and loss of connectivity. Presumably, these downstream changes are caused by accumulation of one or more pathologies. If more than one pathology is present, then each pathology should have its own risk factor or factors (i.e., Risk Factor A causes Pathology A, while Risk Factor B causes Pathology B).

Panel B: Application of model in N-of-1 trial (described in detail in text). Six different risk factors were identified during the clinical evaluation presumably working through different pathways with the end result being neurodegeneration, cognitive decline, and if unchecked, eventually clinical dementia. A personalized prevention plan directed at root causes of impairment, if successful would prevent the conversion of cognitive decline to dementia (marked by X in Panel B). As root causes may interact or potentiate each other’s effect on neurodegeneration (connecting arrows on the left side of Panel B), multimodal approaches are more likely to have an effect than singular approaches.

Table 1 Alzheimer’s disease risk and protective factors

Risk Factors (Non-Modifiable)	Protective Factors (Modifiable)	
Age	Cognitive reserve and mental activity	
Sex	Educational attainment and lifelong learning	
Family history	Cognitive leisure activities	
Apolipoprotein E ε4 allele*	Physical activity and exercise	
Risk Factors (Modifiable)	Social engagement	
Diabetes and insulin resistance	Mindfulness and wellness activities	
Obesity	Optimism and Purpose in life	
Metabolic syndrome	Diet	
Hypertension	Omega-3 intake	
Hypercholesterolemia		
Cerebrovascular disease		
Depression		
Psychological and physiological stress		
Traumatic brain injury		
Sleep disordered breathing		
Smoking		
Alcohol abuse		
Note: ApoE is the major risk gene, a number of other minor risk genes have been identified

Table 2 Basic Principles of a Dementia Prevention Program

Establish a longitudinal cohort of individuals without memory impairment and with prodromal disease	
Develop a protocol that can measure patient-centered and health-economic outcomes	
Annual evaluation of clinical, cognitive, functional, and behavioral features	
Collection and banking of biomarkers: blood, spinal fluid, DNA, cell lines, MRI, PET scans	
Encourage autopsy participation	
Deep phenotyping of individuals with near participation in all biomarker collection protocols	
Application of precision medicine-type interventions to match treatment to individual characteristics	
Test tailored N-of-1 interventions over a designated time period to determine whether protocols alter biophysiological profiles, disease-relevant biomarkers, and outcome measures	
Statistical plan to incorporate immediate, intermediate, and long term time-to-event analyses	
Create of trial ready cohort for larger scale pharmacologic and non-pharmacologic interventions	


1 Alzheimer Disease: Facts and Figures 2017 Alzheimer’s Association (online) Available at www.alz.org Accessed April 2, 2017
2 Cummings J Aisen PS DuBois B Drug development in Alzheimer's disease: the path to 2025 Alzheimers Res Ther 2016 8 39 27646601
3 McKhann GM Knopman DS Chertkow H The diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer's disease: recommendations from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer's Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer's disease Alzheimers Dement 2011 7 263 269 21514250
4 Albert MS DeKosky ST Dickson D The diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment due to Alzheimer's disease: recommendations from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer's Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer's disease Alzheimers Dement 2011 7 270 279 21514249
5 Sperling RA Aisen PS Beckett LA Toward defining the preclinical stages of Alzheimer's disease: recommendations from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer's Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer's disease Alzheimers Dement 2011 7 280 292 21514248
6 Galvin JE Dementia screening, biomarkers and protein misfolding: Implications for public health and diagnosis Prion 2011 5 16 21 21164279
7 Alzheimer Clinical Trials Available at www.clinicaltrials.gov Accessed April 2, 2017
8 Sevigny J Chiao P Bussière T The antibody aducanumab reduces Aβ plaques in Alzheimer's disease Nature 2016 537 50 56 27582220
9 O'Donnell CA Browne S Pierce M In-MINDD Team Reducing dementia risk by targeting modifiable risk factors in mid-life: study protocol for the Innovative Midlife Intervention for Dementia Deterrence (In-MINDD) randomised controlled feasibility trial Pilot Feasibility Stud 2015 1 40 27965818
10 Canevelli M Lucchini F Quarata F Nutrition and Dementia: Evidence for Preventive Approaches? Nutrients 2016 8 144 26959055
11 Schiepers OJ Köhler S Deckers K Lifestyle for Brain Health (LIBRA): a new model for dementia prevention Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 2017 2 28 [Epub ahead of print]
12 Yates LA Ziser S Spector A Cognitive leisure activities and future risk of cognitive impairment and dementia: systematic review and meta-analysis Int Psychogeriatr 2016 28 1791 1806 27502691
13 Cheng ST Cognitive Reserve and the Prevention of Dementia: the Role of Physical and Cognitive Activities Curr Psychiatry Rep 2016 18 85 27481112
14 Sindi S Calov E Fokkens J The CAIDE Dementia Risk Score App: The development of an evidence-based mobile application to predict the risk of dementia Alzheimers Dement (Amst) 2015 1 328 333 27239514
15 Sindi S Hagman G Håkansson K Midlife Work-Related Stress Increases Dementia Risk in Later Life: The CAIDE 30-Year Study J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci 2016 4 8 [Epub ahead of print]
16 Ritchie CW Molinuevo JL Truyen L European Prevention of Alzheimer's Dementia (EPAD) Consortium. Development of interventions for the secondary prevention of Alzheimer's dementia: the European Prevention of Alzheimer's Dementia (EPAD) project Lancet Psychiatry 2016 3 179 186 26683239
17 Ngandu T Lehtisalo J Solomon A A 2 year multidomain intervention of diet, exercise, cognitive training, and vascular risk monitoring versus control to prevent cognitive decline in at-risk elderly people (FINGER): a randomised controlled trial Lancet 2015 385 2255 2263 25771249
18 Mitchell S Ridley SH Sancho RM The future of dementia risk reduction research: barriers and solutions J Public Health (Oxf) 2016 10 3 [Epub ahead of print]
19 Volpe R Sotis G Cianciabella M Is it always Alzheimer's? Let's talk to our patients about "cardiocerebrovascular" prevention Aging Clin Exp Res 2016 28 159 160 26559414
20 Lista S Dubois B Hampel H Paths to Alzheimer's disease prevention: from modifiable risk factors to biomarker enrichment strategies J Nutr Health Aging 2015 19 154 163 25651440
21 Scherrer B Andrieu S Ousset PJ Analysing Time to Event Data in Dementia Prevention Trials: The Example of the GuidAge Study of EGb761 J Nutr Health Aging 2015 19 1009 1011 26624212
22 Lillie EO Patay B Diamant J The n-of-1 clinical trial: the ultimate strategy for individualizing medicine? Per Med 2011 8 161 173 21695041
23 Graham WV Bonito-Oliva A Sakmar TP Update on Alzheimer's Disease Therapy and Prevention Strategies Annu Rev Med 2017 68 413 430 28099083
24 Reitz C Toward precision medicine in Alzheimer's disease Ann Transl Med 2016 4 107 27127760
25 Markman M Kramer K Alvarez RH Evaluating the Utility of a 'N-of-1' Precision Cancer Medicine Strategy: The Case for 'Time-to-Subsequent-Disease Progression' Oncology 2016 91 299 301 27705967
26 Guyatt GH Keller JL Jaeschke R The n-of-1 randomized controlled trial: clinical usefulness. Our three-year experience Ann Intern Med 1990 112 293 299 2297206
27 Duan N Kravitz RL Schmid CH Single-patient (n-of-1) trials: a pragmatic clinical decision methodology for patient-centered comparative effectiveness research J Clin Epidemiol 2013 66 Suppl S21 28 23849149
28 Tolea MI Galvin JE Sarcopenia and impairment in cognitive and physical performance Clin Interv Aging 2015 10 663 671 25878493
29 Tolea MI Galvin JE The Relationship Between Mobility Dysfunction Staging and Global Cognitive Performance Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 2016 30 230 236 26840544
30 Green DL Payne L Polikar R P50: A candidate ERP biomarker of prodromal Alzheimer's disease Brain Res 2015 1624 390 397 26256251
