LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9215515
20498
Neuroimage
Neuroimage
NeuroImage
1053-8119
1095-9572

27012503
5031516
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.02.079
NIHMS771304
Article
Single Subject Prediction of Brain Disorders in Neuroimaging: Promises and Pitfalls
Arbabshirani Mohammad R. a
Plis Sergey a
Sui Jing ab
Calhoun Vince D. ac
a The Mind Research Network, Albuquerque, NM, USA, 87106
b Brainnetome Center and National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, 100190
c Department of ECE, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, USA
16 4 2016
21 3 2016
15 1 2017
15 1 2018
145 Pt B 137165
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Neuroimaging-based single subject prediction of brain disorders has gained increasing attention in recent years. Using a variety of neuroimaging modalities such as structural, functional and diffusion MRI, along with machine learning techniques, hundreds of studies have been carried out for accurate classification of patients with heterogeneous mental and neurodegenerative disorders such as schizophrenia and Alzheimer's disease. More than 500 studies have been published during the past quarter century on single subject prediction focused on a multiple brain disorders. In the first part of this study, we provide a survey of more than 200 reports in this field with a focus on schizophrenia, mild cognitive impairment (MCI), Alzheimer's disease (AD), depressive disorders, autism spectrum disease (ASD) and attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Detailed information about those studies such as sample size, type and number of extracted features and reported accuracy are summarized and discussed. To our knowledge, this is by far the most comprehensive review of neuroimaging-based single subject prediction of brain disorders. In the second part, we present our opinion on major pitfalls of those studies from a machine learning point of view. Common biases are discussed and suggestions are provided. Moreover, emerging trends such as decentralized data sharing, multimodal brain imaging, differential diagnosis, disease subtype classification and deep learning are also discussed. Based on this survey, there are extensive evidences showing the great potential of neuroimaging data for single subject prediction of various disorders. However, the main bottleneck of this exciting field is still the limited sample size, which could be potentially addressed by modern data sharing models such as the ones discussed in this paper. Emerging big data technologies and advanced data-intensive machine learning methodologies such as deep learning have coincided with an increasing need for accurate, robust and generalizable single subject prediction of brain disorders during an exciting time. In this report, we survey the past and offer some opinions regarding the road ahead.

Neuroimaging
Machine Learning
Classification
Brain Disorders
Prediction

1. Introduction

Neuroimaging has opened up an exciting non-invasive window into the human brain over the past few decades. This interdisciplinary field has attracted scientists from areas such as medicine, engineering, mathematics, physics, statistics, computer science, and psychology (Epstein et al., 2001). Imaging modalities such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and magnetoencephalography (MEG) along with more traditional methods such as electroencephalography (EEG) have made it possible to noninvasively study various aspects of the human brain with unprecedented accuracy. MRI-related techniques such as structural MRI (sMRI), functional MRI (fMRI) and diffusion MRI (dMRI) have the benefit of providing localized spatial information about the brain structure and function as well as functional and structural connectivity. These techniques have provided new insight into the human brain and have brought hope to researchers trying to unravel the secrets of one of the most complex systems in the universe, the human brain.

Structural MRI has made it possible to visualize the brain at high spatial resolution (one cubic millimeter or less) (Liang and Lauterbur, 2000). SMRI high resolution images of the brain are ideal for studying various brain structures and also for detecting physical abnormalities, lesions and damages. DMRI is an imaging technique for visualization of anatomical connections between different brain regions (Le Bihan et al., 2001; Merboldt et al., 1985). Functional MRI measures brain activity by detecting changes in the blood oxygenation (DeYoe et al., 1994; Ogawa et al., 1990). FMRI makes it possible to study functional regions and networks of the brain as well as temporal associations among them.

Unfortunately, brain disorders are major health problems in US and the rest of the world that not only impair lives of millions of people but also impose huge financial burdens on societies (DiLuca and Olesen, 2014; Ernst and Hay, 1994; Rice, 1999). Moreover, there are no clinical tests to identify many brain disorders such as schizophrenia. One of the major hopes underlying the advanced neuroimaging tools mentioned above is to provide new understanding of brain disorders such as schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, autism spectrum disorder (ASD), Alzheimer's disease (AD), major depressive disorders, attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and mild cognitive impairment (MCI). Brain disorder research aims at understanding the impact of each disease on the brain's function and structure from the cellular to system level, as well as the pathogenesis of these complex disorders. As a result, thousands of studies have been published on different aspects of brain disorders to show aberrations of some features (structural or functional) in a patient group usually in comparison with a healthy cohort (Jack et al., 1997; Jafri et al., 2008; Lorenzetti et al., 2009; McAlonan et al., 2005). While these studies are valuable in terms of finding relevant disease biomarkers, they are not sufficient for direct clinical diagnostic/prognostic adoption. The main reason is that many of these findings are statistically significant at the group level, but the individual discrimination ability of the proposed biomarkers is not typically evaluated. Since classification provides information for each individual subject, it is considered a much harder task than reporting group differences.

In recent years, there has been a growing trend in designing neuroimaging-based prognostic/diagnostic tools. As a result, there have been a lot of efforts using neuroimaging tools to automatically discriminate patients with brain disorders from healthy control or from each other (Klöppel et al., 2012). Many of these studies have reported promising prediction performances with the claim that complex diseases can be diagnosed robustly, accurately and rapidly in a automatic fashion. However, until now, these tools have not been integrated into the clinical realm. We believe the main reason for this is that many of the studies of this nature, despite the promising results on a specific research dataset, are not designed to generalize to other datasets, specifically the clinical ones.

The purpose of this study is two-fold. First, we reviewed a large number of MRI-based brain disorder diagnostic/prognostic studies in schizophrenia, ASD, ADHD, depressive disorder, MCI and Alzheimer's disease. These studies are compared in a number of key aspects such as type of features, classifier and reported accuracies. Next, we formed our opinion on the issues associated with how machine learning is applied in neuroimaging and have suggested solutions that might address these pitfalls. Considering the immense potential of neuroimaging tools for clinical adoption, careful implementation and interpretation of machine learning in neuroimaging is crucial. Machine learning is a relatively new domain for many neuroimaging researchers coming from other fields and therefore pitfalls are unfortunately not rare. We attempt to identify and emphasize some common mistakes that result in these shortcomings and biases. At the end, we discuss emerging trends in neuroimaging such as data sharing, multimodal brain imaging and differential diagnosis.

1.1 Group Difference vs. Classification

As pointed out in the introduction, many brain disorder studies have shown abnormality in the average sense in one or more brain features in a patient cohort in comparison with a healthy group using statistical tests. The success of such methodology is usually measured by the means of p-values. On the other hand, the goal of single subject prediction is to automatically classify each subject into one of the groups in the study (e.g., healthy vs. patient). The success of classification studies is usually measured by accuracy.

These two problems are very different in essence as they try to address varying research questions. In general, showing group differences is much easier compared to single subject prediction. To better illustrate the difference between these types of analysis, we show an example in Figure 1. Suppose there are two groups each with 100 samples (subjects) and we have measurements of one brain feature for each subject. Figure 1A shows a case where the mean of two groups is different as measured by a two-sample t-test. The difference is statistically significant (p-value=0.001). However, if one tries to classify subjects based on a threshold on this brain feature (the dotted red line placed between the mean of two groups), a weak classification rate of 60.0% will be achieved. The reason for this is the range of values for that specific feature is highly overlapping for the two groups. So, a highly significant group difference does not necessarily translate into a strong classification result. But the opposite is also true, as high classification based on a feature doesn't necessarily mean that group-level mean differences exist. Figure 1B shows a case where the two-sample t-test on the two groups is not significant (p-value= 0.86) but the classification based on two thresholds (red dotted lines placed between each mode of group 2 and mean of group 1) is very strong (94.5%). In this case, the abnormality is bidirectional, which does not cause significant mean differences but makes it possible to separate the groups with two thresholds (dotted lines). Interestingly, bidirectional abnormalities are observed in neuroimaging studies (Mohammad R. Arbabshirani and Calhoun, 2011; Calhoun et al., 2006b). Figure 1C shows a case where strong group differences and successful classification go hand in hand. The abnormality is one-directional and the mean difference is very significant (p-value&lt;2e-16). The mean of two groups is so far apart that the values of most of the samples of the two groups do not overlap. Therefore, a strong classification rate of 93.5% is achieved (based on one threshold).

The main purpose of example in Figure 1 is to show that group level analysis and classification are two different methods for different problems. We will return to this example later for criticism of selecting features based on p-value.

2. Survey of MRI-based Single-Subject Prediction of Brain Disorders

Based on a search on Pubmed from 1990 to 20151, more than 500 papers on MRI-based single subject prediction of brain disorders were found. Figure 2 summarizes the paper selection procedure for this study. More than 200 papers were eventually selected for this survey (112 AD/MCI, 63 schizophrenia, 19 depressive disorders, 20 ASD and 22 ADHD papers).

We limited our search to journal papers in English published up to December 2015. In a few instances, the full paper was not found and therefore those studies were excluded from this survey. Also, in cases of very similar papers from the same authors, only one was selected. Key aspects of each study such as modality, machine learning method, sample size and type features were investigated. A list of all abbreviations used in the tables and the manuscript itself is provided in Table 1.

2.1 Mild Cognitive Impairment/Alzheimer's Disease

MCI entails cognitive decline more than what is expected for an individual's age and education level, but not to the extent that it interferes notably with activities of daily life (Albert et al., 2011). Unfortunately, more than 50% of the MCI patients progress to dementia within 5 years (Gauthier et al., 2006). So, it is considered a prodromal phase to dementia especially the AD type (Gauthier et al., 2006). The heterogeneous etiology of MCI includes degenerative diseases (AD, fronto-temporal lobe degeneration, dementia with Lewy bodies) as well as vascular and psychiatric disorders (Petersen and Negash, 2008). AD is the most common neurodegenerative disorder, which is increasingly prevalent among adults aged 65 years and older. AD is characterized by the progressive impairment of neurons and their connections, which result in decline and loss of cognitive functions. In 2007, it was estimated that more than 26 million people suffer from AD worldwide (Brookmeyer et al., 2007). In 2001 it was predicted that AD will triple in prevalence by 2050 (Hebert et al., 2001). The detection of AD is based on clinical examinations and an evaluation of the patient's perception and behavior. Considering the prevalence and severity of MCI/AD, the largest number of neuroimaging-based, automatic prediction/classification publications has been devoted to these conditions. Table 2 summarizes the 112 studies that we reviewed in this survey.

2.2 Schizophrenia

Schizophrenia is among the most prevalent mental disorders and affects about one percent of the population worldwide (Bhugra, 2005). This devastating, chronic heterogeneous disease is usually characterized by disintegration in perception of reality, cognitive problems, and a chronic course with lasting impairment (Heinrichs and Zakzanis, 1998). Considering the absence of standard clinical test for schizophrenia, there is a growing interest in automatic diagnosis of schizophrenia based on neuroimaging features. We surveyed 65 papers, which are tabulated in Table 3.

2.3 Depressive Disorders

Major depressive disorder (MDD) or unipolar depression characterized by a pervasive low mood, self-esteem and lack of interest in enjoyable activities is a common mental illness affecting adolescents. The lifetime prevalence of MDD is approximately 15–20% (Kessler et al., 2003; Lewinsohn et al., 1986). It is estimated that by the year 2020, depression will account for 15% of the disease burden in the world ranking second after heart disease (Kessler et al., 1994). We reviewed 19 studies that used neuroimaging for automatic diagnose MDD. Those studies are listed in Table 4.

2.4 Autism Spectrum Disorder

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a serious neurodevelopmental condition characterized by impaired social communication, deficits in social–emotional reciprocity, deficits in nonverbal communicative behaviors used for social interaction and stereotypic behavior (Association and others, 2003). Although the causation of autism is still largely unknown, it has been suggested that genetic, developmental, and environmental factors could be involved alone or in combination as possible causal or predisposing effects toward developing autism (Minshew and Payton, 1988; Wing, 1997). ASD has an estimated prevalence of 1:68 in the U.S. (Baio, 2012). We surveyed 20 papers in automatic diagnosis of ASD using MRI-based features. Those studies are listed in Table 5.

2.5 Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder

Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) is one of the most commonly found functional disorders affecting children. Approximately 3–10% of school aged children are diagnosed with ADHD (Biederman, 2005; Dey et al., 2012). Currently, no biological-based measure exists to detect ADHD and instead behavioral symptoms are investigated to identify it. Despite all the research efforts, the root cause of ADHD is still unknown. In 2011, a global competition called ADHD-200 was held in order to use neuroimaging as well as phonotypic measures to automatically detect ADHD (Consortium and others, 2012). Most of the studies reviewed in this survey were responses to that challenge. The main characteristics of those studies are tabulated in Table 6.

2.6 Analysis of the Survey

In Figure 3 we illustrate a couple of key aspects of this survey. Figure 3A shows the number of papers published in each year for each disease type. The number of studies has been growing significantly since 2007. There is a peak for ADHD studies in 2012-2013 mainly due to ADHD-200 competition (Consortium and others, 2012) which attracted many scientists. The total number of studies for each modality and each disorder is illustrated in Figure 3B. It is clear that structural MRI is the most popular modality especially for MCI/AD studies thanks to Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) dataset. Combined rest and task fMRI studies are most popular for ADHD and schizophrenia studies. Surprisingly, multimodal studies are more common compared to either task fMRI or diffusion MRI studies. Figure 3C shows the overall accuracy against the total sample size used in the studies. Interestingly, almost all studies that reported very high accuracies, had sample sizes smaller than 100. The reported overall accuracy decreases with sample size in most of disorders such as schizophrenia and ADHD. This pattern raises a serious concern regarding generalizability of many of those studies with small sample sizes. Figure 3D shows the sample size distribution. The dashed lines represent mean (red) and median (blue) sizes, which are 186 and 88 respectively. Finally Figure 3E illustrate the distribution of reported accuracy for each disorder. On average (red dashed lines) MCI/AD and ADHD studies reported the highest and lowest accuracies respectively.

Based on Tables 2-6, the most common extracted features in the surveyed studies are volume and cortical thickness from structural MRI, the activation maps and functional connectivity among ROIs or ICA components from fMRI data and fractional anisotropy from dMRI data. Most common feature reduction methods (not reported in the tables) were based on PCA or univariate statistical tests.

In terms of classification methods, support vector machine (SVM) was by far the most popular method. Different flavors of SVM such as linear, non-linear with different kernel, SVM with recursive feature elimination, SVM with L1 regularization and SVM with L1 and L2 regularization (elastic net) have been used for classification of various disorders. Linear discriminant analysis (under different names) and logistic regression were also popular classification methods among the surveyed studies.

2.7. Predicting Continuous Measures

Most of the studies surveyed above, conducted the diagnosis of a disorder (i.e., assigning a categorical label to each subject) using classification techniques. Pattern regression considers the problem of estimating continuous rather than categorical variables, which can be more challenging as compared to classification. Clinically, pattern regression can be used to estimate the disease stage and progression. Therefore, there is a growing interest in estimating continuous variables such as cognitive scores for brain disorders using neuroimaging measurements. We didn't survey those papers, but we will point out to some of those studies in this section.

Wang et al. proposed a general methodology for estimating continuous clinical variables from high-dimensional imaging data (Wang et al., 2010). Sato et al. used interregional cortical thickness measurements to estimate Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS) score in ASD patients (Sato et al., 2013). Stonnington et al. used relevance vector regression (RVR) to predict number of cognitive scores such as Dementia Rating Scale (DRS) and Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale (ADAS) based on structural MRI measures (Stonnington et al., 2010). Tognin et al used RVR to predict Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS) scores of subjects at high risk of psychosis based on gray matter volume and cortical thickness measurements (Tognin et al., 2013). Yue et al. showed relationship between functional connectivity and neuropsychological assessment scores such as Rey–Osterrieth Complex Figure Test (CFT) in amnestic MCI patients (Yue et al., 2015). Zahng et al. used MRI, PET and CSF data to predict Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) and ADAS scores in MCI and AD patients (Zhang and Shen, 2012a).

2.8 Detecting/characterizing at Risk Healthy Subjects

The majority of studies surveyed above tried to automatically diagnose one or more disorders in patients. However, detecting or characterizing healthy individuals who are at high risk of brain disorders could potentially delay or prevent future symptoms. There has been a lot of such studies using genetics information but detecting or characterizing at risk subjects based on neuroimaging data is rare. Mourão-Miranda et al. used functional MRI to detect subjects at high risk of mood disorders (Mourão-Miranda et al., 2012). Guo et al. characterized activity of default-mode network in unaffected siblings of schizophrenia patients using resting-state functional data (W. Guo et al., 2014). In another study, Fan et al. studied structural endophenotypes in unaffected family members of schizophrenia patients using machine learning methods (Fan et al., 2008a).

3. Common Machine-learning Pitfalls in Neuroimaging

In this section, common pitfalls among the surveyed papers are discussed.

3.1 Feature Selection Bias

Most of the papers we surveyed consisted of two consecutive parts: group difference analysis and classification. Usually, statistical tests such as t-tests are used to show group differences on a set of extracted features in the first part of the study, which is followed by a classification approach to assess the discrimination ability of those features on a single subject basis. Unfortunately, it is not rare to see that the results of first part (group differences) are used to select features for the classification part. In general, any use of test samples in any part of the training (such as feature extraction, feature selection and classifier training) poses a bias. Selecting features for classification based on the results of group tests that were conducted on the whole dataset is a form of double dipping and therefore leads to a biased (inflated) result (Bishop, 2006; Demirci et al., 2008b).

This form of feature selection also has another major problem. The significance of group statistical tests, which are the basis of feature selection in some of the studies, is mostly based on p-values. However, the relationship between p-value and discrimination power is not straightforward. Figure 1 shows the p-value of a two-sample t-test as well as overall accuracy based on one or two thresholds in three different scenarios. It is seen that low p-value doesn't necessary mean a strong feature (Figure 1A) and high p-value doesn't mean a weak feature (Figure 1B). However, if the abnormality is one-directional, then a very low p-value might translate to high classification accuracy (Figure 1C). So, by discarding features just based on the result of statistical tests sensitive to group mean, valuable discriminatory information could be lost.

Instead of feature selection based on univariate group-level statistical tests, more common filtering and wrapper methods should be used (Blum and Langley, 1997; Hall and Smith, 1998; Kohavi and John, 1997). Filtering methods assign scores to each feature from which a number of top ones can be selected. A good filtering method should be sensitive to the discriminative power of the features. Most of these methods are univariate and therefore each feature is treated independently from other features. Filtering methods have the advantage of low computational cost, but their main drawback is ignoring the relationship among features.

Wrapper methods, on the other hand, consider selection of a set of feature as a search problem. Different combinations are evaluated and finally the best set of features is selected. A popular wrapper method is the recursive feature elimination (RFE) algorithm (Guyon et al., 2002). Wrapper methods are computationally much more expensive than filtering methods, but can result in superior performance by considering interaction among features.

There are methods that aim at combining both filtering and wrapper methods. Minimum-redundancy maximum relevancy (mRMR) is one the methods popular for genetic feature selection. MRMR tries to select features with maximum mutual information with class labels while minimizing the mutual information among those features (G. Brown et al., 2012)

Finally, there are embedded feature selection methods (Guyon and Elisseeff, 2003). These methods combine classification and feature selection into one unified step. Embedded methods learn the features that contribute the most to the accuracy of the model during the training phase. One of the common categories of the embedded methods is using regularization to enforce the learning algorithm to find more parsimonious models with lower complexity and therefore with fewer parameters. A post training analysis of the model coefficients, determines the selected features. Examples of regularization algorithms used in embedded feature selection methods are LASSO, elastic net and ridge regression (Hastie et al., 2004; Ng, 2004; Park and Hastie, 2007; Zou and Hastie, 2005).

3.2 Overfitting

Overfitting happens when a model describes noise in the data rather than the underlying pattern of interest. Overfitting results in very good performance on the observed data and very poor performance on unseen data. Using models that are very complex or have many parameters on datasets with small number of samples and large number of features are more susceptible to overfitting. Neuroimaging datasets have limited number of samples and millions voxels per sample. Based on Figure 3D, the majority of surveyed studies built predictive models based on a very small number of subjects. It is evident from Figure 3C that overall reported accuracy decreases with sample size in our survey. Therefore, it is plausible that many surveyed studies suffer from overfitting problem. It should be noted that by definition, overfitted models work well on the training data and poor on the test data. However, if the process of training and testing is repeated (by varying the model parameters) until a desirable performance on the test data is achieved, the model will likely overfit both the train and test datasets. Cross validation and regularization are common methods to control overfitting. As mentioned earlier, more complex models have a greater chance of overfitting the data. For example, non-linear SVM is more powerful compared to linear SVM but has many more parameters and therefore is also potentially more capable of explaining noise in the data. As discussed in the previous section, proper feature selection can also help to avoiding overfitting.

3.3 Reporting Classification Results

The result of classification is basically a confusion table/matrix also known as a contingency table. The confusion matrix summarizes the results in a table layout where each column represents the predicted class and each row represents the actual class. Confusion matrix is m × m where m represents the number of classes. In the case of binary classification, many statistical measures can be computed from the 2 × 2 confusion matrix, such as sensitivity (or recall), specificity, positive predictive value (or precision), negative predictive value, F1 score, odds ratio, kappa and false negative rate. Confusion matrix and some of the performance measures are shown in Figure 4. In order to understand the performance of a classifier, it is important to report at least sensitivity/specificity or precision/recall along with the overall accuracy. We highly encourage reporting the confusion matrix itself as well. Some of the studies in this review just reported the overall accuracy, which can be very uninformative especially when classes have unequal sample sizes (Alberg et al., 2004). Suppose there are 20 patients and 80 controls in a test dataset. Reporting 80% accuracy is completely uninformative since the classification of all subjects as healthy could result in 80% (one of the scenarios). This problem is easily detectable by looking at the confusion matrix or sensitivity and specificity measures. In unbalanced sample size cases, balanced specificity and sensitivity is more desirable than higher overall accuracy; therefore, measures such as F1 score (harmonic mean of precision and recall) are preferred for evaluating the classifier. The other very common way of reporting results for a binary classifier is by showing “receiver operating characteristic” (ROC) curve. The ROC curve is the plot of sensitivity against “1-specificity” by changing the discrimination threshold and therefore provides a complete picture of classifier's performance. The ROC curve is usually summarized by an area under the curve (AUC), which is a number between 0 and 1 (ideal classifier).

The other common reporting issue is unjustified comparison of the achieved overall accuracy with the random chance. This issue is critical in this field due to small sample sizes. For example, an 80% achieved overall accuracy might not be significantly different from a 50% random chance in a statistical sense in a two-class problem if the sample size is too small. Any achieved accuracy in a test sample is just one estimate of the population accuracy. Like any other statistics, a confidence interval can be computed for that measure. In the case of a two-class problem, a binomial confidence interval can be computed for overall accuracy that serves as the basis for comparison with random chance, or any other accuracy. In our example (80% accuracy), if the test sample size is 10, then the 95% exact binomial confidence interval would be [0.444 0.975], which includes the random chance probability (0.50) and therefore is not statistically above chance. Calculating this interval is straightforward using most of statistical and technical computing software such as R and Matlab. This approach should be employed when repeating the classification experiment for number of times is not feasible. However, in most cases, the null distribution of chance is empirically computable by randomly assigning labels to test samples and repeating classification for a number of times. This method, known as a permutation or randomization test, makes it possible to calculate the desired confidence interval of the chance, which consequently can be compared against the achieved classification accuracy using the correct labels (Collingridge, 2013; Fisher et al., 1960; Good, 2006; Mehta et al., 1988) . Recently, for special cases such as SVM, fast analytical estimation of permutation testing has been proposed (Gaonkar and Davatzikos, 2013). Also, it has been shown that p-value for permutation testing can be written in the form of an infinite series whose terms are efficiently computable (Gill, 2007).

3.4 Comparison of Accuracies Across Studies

It was frequently observed that authors claim that their proposed classification framework outperformed some other studies (and sometimes all other studies) just on the basis of overall accuracy. Considering the number of variables in each study—such as sample size, scanner parameters, sample age distribution, patients’ status (e.g., severity, medication), modality, length, type and design of study (for fMRI studies), preprocessing parameters, number and type of extracted features and type of classifier—such a comparison is essentially meaningless. Even in the case of standard neuroimaging datasets, the statistical comparison discussed in the previous section, should be employed to compare the results.

3.5 Hyperparameter Optimization

Hyperparameter optimization or model selection is choosing a set of parameters for the learning algorithm in order to maximize the performance of the algorithm. Hyperparameters should be chosen during training, usually via an inner loop cross validation inside the training data. SVM, which is one of the most popular classifiers in this review and in neuroimaging in general (Orrù et al., 2012), has at least one hyperparameter (linear SVM) called soft margin. In addition to soft margin, non linear SVM has one or more hyperparameters depending on the kernel (e.g. sigma/gamma for RBF kernel and degree for polynomial kernel). Some of the studies that we reviewed just used the default values for these parameters. A lack of parameter optimization can degrade the classification performance significantly. To show this, a toy example is illustrated in Figure 5. SVM with three different kernels is used to classify this simulated two-class problem. In the top row, 1.0 is chosen for soft margin hyperparameter (which is the default of most machine learning software packages) for all kernels, degree of 3 was chosen for the polynomial kernel and gamma of 0.01 was selected for RBF kernel. In the second row, the hyperparameters are optimized. First, it is evident that the linear kernel failed to learn the non linear pattern under both settings. Increasing the polynomial kernel degree by one, dramatically improved the classifier. Also, increased soft margin value, significantly improved SVM with RBF kernel. So, both the choice of kernel and hyperparameters are crucial for building a successful SVM-based classifier. SVM hyperparameters are usually selected based on a grid search over plausible values.

4. Machine Learning in Neuroimaging: Shortcomings and Emerging Trends

Machine learning has more than two decades of history in neuroimaging and despite all of the promising results of numerous studies, it is still immature and not ready for integration into clinical healthcare. In this section, we review some of the challenges and emerging solutions.

4.1 Sample Size in Neuroimaging Studies

The most limiting factor in this field is by far the limited sample size issue. As summarized in Figure 3B, the majority of studies in this review and in general have sample size of less than 150. This sample size is miniscule in comparison with other fields in which machine learning is used. As an example, ImageNet2, which is commonly used as standard computer vision dataset, has over one million samples and 1000 classes. As a result of such big datasets, dramatic improvement has been achieved in the field of computer vision in the past few years. However, sample size limitations in neuroimaging pose several problems. First, the classifier performance is directly affected by the sample size. It is shown that large training data sets increase classification accuracy (Franke et al., 2010; Klöppel et al., 2009). Small sample size does not represent the patient population and therefore promising results may not generalize to other patient groups. In a study conducted by Nieuwenhuis et al., it was shown that for small training sample sizes (N&lt;130) the predictive model for classification of schizophrenia patients based on sMRI was not stable (Nieuwenhuis et al., 2012). More than 63% of the studies we reviewed didn't meet this criterion. Large datasets may reduce problems with disease heterogeneity as they can represent the whole spectrum of the disorder. Although there are some machine learning methods that are less sensitive to data, a limited number of data samples can cause model overfitting, resulting in poor generalization of the method to independent data sets (Pereira et al., 2009).

To understand the etiology of complex conditions such as mental health, we must develop a better understanding of the structure of the signals and measurements we make of the brain. Thanks to advances in imaging and assaying technology, we can gather increasingly detailed information about individuals, but the cost and complexity of these techniques means that individual researchers may not have sufficient data to build a compact and informative representation of the data. For example, a single sMRI may have tens of thousands of voxels, but a single site may have only a hundred subjects in their study. With increasingly complex data, the classical “curse of dimensionality” would seem to indicate that there is no way to determine signal from noise in this setting. To address the “small N” problem in other settings, many researchers have proposed open sharing of data to leverage data from multiple sites as well as commercial cloud computing infrastructures to handle the additional computational burden. In the past few years, several multi-site data sharing initiatives such as FBIRN, MCIC and COBRE for schizophrenia, ADNI for Alzheimer's disease, ABIDE for ASD, ADHD-200 for children with ADHD and Functional Connectomes project for healthy have been started.

In neuroscience, measurements often come from human subjects; in some cases legal, ethical, and sociological concerns may preclude or prohibit such open sharing. In particular, local administrative rules, concerns about re-identification of study participants, and a desire to maintain control over data in ongoing research projects may prevent individual research sites from sharing the data (Sarwate et al., 2014). The status quo is a patchwork of institution-to-institution data use agreements whose complexity stymies automated analyses across more than a handful of data sets.

4.2 Operating on Decentralized Data

We believe a more convenient and scalable solution will come from design and implementation of algorithms which learn from data distributed across research groups. These algorithms shall include feature learning as well as classification, prediction and inference. Dropping the requirement of moving the data, these algorithms will better match the current decentralized and efficient organization of research society and substantially lower barriers to entry for collaborative work. The resulting network effect will enable new innovative opportunities for research that we cannot envision today. The need for such approaches to general data computation is realized by some researchers (Bai et al., 2005) but not yet fully appreciated by the neuroimaging field. The field is currently in the state of establishing central repositories of anonymized raw data (Bockholt et al., 2009; Buccigrossi et al., 2007; Di Martino et al., 2014; Jack et al., 2008; Keator et al., 2008; Landis et al., 2015; Marcus et al., 2007; Poldrack et al., 2013; Scott et al., 2011; Turner, 2014; Van Essen et al., 2013). In the past 10 years, release of multi-site neuroimaging datasets such as: FBIRN, MCIC for schizophrenia (Ford et al., 2009; Gollub et al., 2013), ADNI for Alzheimer's disease (Jack et al., 2008), ABIDE for ASD (Di Martino et al., 2014), ADHD-200 for children with ADHD (Consortium and others, 2012) and Functional Connectomes project for healthy subjects (Biswal et al., 2010) have been started.

Certainly, access to raw data is the best way to drill down to the finest details and resolve any inconsistencies due to data handling. However, even in the centralized repositories, it is often more convenient to start analysis from a point in the processing pipeline where less detailed but possibly more informative features are generated. Furthermore, there are three categories of data that pose challenges for public availability for easy access: (1) data that are non-shareable due to obvious re-identification concerns, such as extreme age of the subject or a zip code/disease combination that makes re-identification simple; (2) data that are non-shareable due to more complicated or less obvious concerns, such as genetic data or other data which may be re-identifiable in conjunction with other data not under the investigator's control; and (3) data that are non-shareable due to the local institutional review boards (IRBs) rules or other administrative decisions (e.g., stakeholders in the data collection not allowing sharing). For example, even with broad consent to share the data acquired at the time of data collection, some of the eMERGE sites were required to re-contact the subjects and re-consent prior to sharing within the eMERGE consortium, which can be a permanent show-stopper for some datasets (Ludman et al., 2010). An extensive account of the problems that go along with these concerns is given by Sarwate et al. (Sarwate et al., 2014). An example of how a decentralized data feature learning algorithm could use decentralized data joint ICA in given by Baker et al. (Baker et al., 2015). In short, the algorithm performs a joint ICA on datasets distributed across research sites which enables one to perform temporal ICA on fMRI data as an increasingly large data sample becomes available when many research groups join the collaboration. Importantly, Baker et al. have demonstrated (on synthetic data) that with their approach the estimated components are virtually identical for the pooled data (i.e. a central repository), two sites with data split in half, multiple sites with data evenly split across, and even a very large number of sites with very few subjects at each of them. Once globally consistent features are available they may be used in building classification algorithms.

Nevertheless, decentralized data computation under serious privacy concerns will need additional protection besides simple protection from only sharing summaries and not the raw data samples. A solution for this setting has been offered in the ε-differential privacy model and explained extensively in the neuroimaging context with published examples (Dwork, 2006; Sarwate et al., 2014). This approach defines privacy by quantifying the change in the risk of re-identification as a result of publishing a function of the data. Notably, privacy is a property of an algorithm operating on the data, rather than a property of the sanitized data, which reflects the difference between semantic and syntactic privacy. Importantly for our applications, it can be applied to systems which do not share data itself but instead share data derivatives (functions of the data). Algorithms that guarantee differential privacy are randomized in how they manipulate the data values (e.g., by adding noise) to bound the risk. Enabling individual subject prediction in the classification framework is one of the applications where the above-described approaches can provide the most benefit—especially for rare conditions that are easy to identify by cross referencing when raw data is openly shared and hard to collect enough data at a single site to provide high generalization. The former is perfectly addressed by applying ε-differential privacy approach to classification (Chaudhuri et al., 2011), while the latter can be addressed by running decentralized algorithms over multiple sites. As mentioned already, differentially private algorithms provide guarantees by necessarily lowering the quality of the solution due to the required noise addition. The same happens to differentially private classifiers (Chaudhuri et al., 2011) and the effect is an undesirable increase in prediction error (Sarwate et al., 2014). Fortunately, combining the approaches (differential privacy and decentralized algorithms) can improve the situation considerably by dropping classification error from 25% to 5% while preserving all privacy guarantees (Sarwate et al., 2014).

In these “big data” times, the need for computation on large-scale datasets creates the best climate for software for distributed computation. Many useful and powerful projects came to the scene such as Apache Spark (Zaharia et al., 2010) and H2O (“H2O,” 2015). On closer inspection, these implementations are essentially striving for the efficiency of computation given a big data overload (typically easy to get data stored centrally). They suggest optimization toward an environment that is quite orthogonal to what we have to deal with—hard to get to and expensive to collect data spread across research labs around the nation and the world. The goal of decentralized approaches that we are describing here stands principally as preserving correctness of the computation while minimizing the data passed around and reducing the number of iterations. The tools and methods are not conflicting and decentralized data algorithms can and shall take advantage of what is being developed for large-scale computation in the distributed computing community.

4.3 Differential Diagnosis and Disease Subtype Classification

Using machine learning methods, promising results have been reported for automatic diagnosis of various cognitive and neurodegenerative disorders, usually from healthy controls based on neuroimaging features. However, one of the main challenges in psychiatric and neurology diagnoses is to differentially diagnose a disorder that shares symptoms with multiple other disorders. Examples of such overlapping disorders are schizophrenia, bipolar, schizoaffective, unipolar and mood disorders. Except for differentiating MCI for AD, only a few considered much needed automatic differential diagnosis in the studies we surveyed. Costafreda et al. used fMRI with a verbal fluency task to classify schizophrenia, bipolar and healthy controls (Costafreda et al., 2011b). Calhoun et al., and Arribas et al. both used fMRI with an auditory oddball task and an ICA approach to extract features from the default model network and the temporal lobe of the brain (Arribas et al., 2010; Calhoun et al., 2008). Both of these studies reported high differential accuracy between schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. Pardo et al. used a combination of volumes of 23 ROIs derived from structural MRI along with 22 neurophysiological test scores to automatically classify schizophrenia, bipolar and healthy controls (Pardo et al., 2006). Recently, Schnack et al. proposed using gray matter densities for classification schizophrenia, bipolar and healthy controls (Schnack et al., 2014). Koutsouleris et al., used gray matter maps from structural MRI to classify schizophrenia from mood disorder (Koutsouleris et al., 2015). Ota et al. combined volumetric measures derived from structural MRI with fractional anisotropy from dMRI in selected ROIs to classify schizophrenia from MDD (Ota et al., 2013). Sacchet et al. proposed using gray matter volumes of caudate and ventral diencephalon to differentiate MDD, bipolar and remitted MDD patients (Sacchet et al., 2015).

Pathologies like autism and schizophrenia are spectrum disorders with multiple etiologies under the umbrella of the same diagnostic category. While classification of these disorders using the generic category is commonly used to find diagnostic biomarkers, one of the key issues in mental healthcare is the differential diagnosis of patients across several disease subtypes. Common binary patient-control classification ignores the underlying heterogeneity of the disorder. Usually, the treatment path used for these subtypes differs from each other and therefore the correct subtype diagnosis is very important. For example, several cognitive deficits are observed in schizophrenia patients, but the magnitudes of such symptoms are highly variable among the patients. To reduce this phenotypic heterogeneity two major subtypes named “cognitive deficit” and “cognitively spared” have been defined (Green et al., 2013; Jablensky, 2006). These two subtypes exhibit different genetic and cognitive profiles (Green et al., 2013; Morar et al., 2011). An automatic classification of schizophrenia subtypes has been rarely studied. Ingalhalikar et al. proposed unsupervised spectral clustering of multi-edge graphs built from a structural connectivity network among 78 ROIs be usedto identify subtypes of autism and schizophrenia (Ingalhalikar et al., 2012). Gould et al. proposed using whole brain, voxel-based morphometry to classify schizophrenia patients with cognitive deficit from those that are cognitively spared (Gould et al., 2014).

There are several studies on automatic differentiation of stable MCI from progressive MCI (those that convert to AD within a certain amount of time). Most of these studies reported modest accuracies around 65-80% (Plant et al., 2010; Salvatore et al., 2015a; Tangaro et al., 2015; Tong et al., 2014; Wolz et al., 2011; Zu et al., 2015). ADHD subtype studies are scarce and limited to few studies such as the one by Sato et al. with the intent to automatically differentiate ADHD-IA, ADHD-HI and ADHD-C using resting-state fMRI (Sato et al., 2012).

Again, one major limitation in differential diagnosis and disease subtype classification is the limited sample size. In most of the current datasets, the number of subjects in each diseases subtype is small and therefore provides limited ability to develop robust single-subject predictor to accurately differentiate them.

4.4.1 Multimodal Neuroimaging Studies

Each imaging modality provides a different view of brain function or structure, and data fusion capitalizes on the strengths of each imaging modality/task and their inter-relationships in a joint analysis. This is an important tool to help unravel the pathophysiology of brain disease (Calhoun et al., 2006a; Sui et al., 2012). Recent advances in data fusion include integrating multiple (task) fMRI data sets (Kim et al., 2010; Sui et al., 2015, 2009) from the same participant to specify common versus specific sources of activity to a greater degree than traditional general linear model-based approaches. This can increase confidence in conclusions about the functional significance of brain regions and of activation changes in brain disease. In addition, the combination of function and structure may provide more informative insights into both altered brain patterns and connectivity in brain disorders (McCarley et al., 2008; Michael et al., 2009; Sui et al., 2011). These findings suggest that most studies favor only one data type or do not combine modalities in an integrated manner, and thus miss important changes which are only partially detected by each modality (Calhoun and Adali, 2009). On the other hand, multimodal fusion provides a more comprehensive description of altered brain patterns and connectivity than a single modality, which has shown increasing utility in answering both scientifically interesting and clinically relevant questions.

4.4.2 Single-Subject Prediction using Multimodal Neuroimaging Data

There is increasing evidence from multimodal studies that patients with brain disorders exhibit unique morphological characteristics, connectivity patterns, and functional alterations, which could not have been revealed through separate unimodal analyses as typically performed in the majority of neuroimaging experiments. Hence, applying classification techniques to these characteristics could identify biomarkers for psychiatric diseases. This could expedite differential diagnosis, thus leading to more appropriate treatment and improved outcomes for patients with brain disorders. There has been number of studies showing the benefits of combining both rest and task fMRI data for group differences in functional connectivity between schizophrenia patients and controls (Arbabshirani and Calhoun, 2011; Cetin et al., 2014). The change of functional connectivity from rest to task contains novel information present in neither of the states, which could be beneficial for single subject prediction (Mohammad R Arbabshirani and Calhoun, 2011). Based on these evidences, future studies might benefit from combining resting-state and task-based data for classification of brain disorders.

As another example, MCI is difficult to diagnose due to its rather mild and nearly insignificant symptoms of cognitive impairment. Wee et al. integrated information from DTI and resting fMRI by employing multiple-kemel SVM, yielding statistically significant improvement (&gt;7.4%) in classification accuracy of predicting MCI from HC by using multimodal data (96.3%) compared to using each modality independently (Wee et al., 2012). There are additional studies that demonstrate the potential of the fusion of structural and functional data combined with multi-modal classification techniques to provide more accurate and early detection of brain abnormalities (Fan et al., 2008b). By taking advantage of these two complementary approaches, Sui et al. proposed a framework based on mCCA+jICA, that allows both high and weak connections to be detected and shows excellent source separation performance (Sui et al., 2011). It enables robust identification of correspondence among N diverse data types and enables one to investigate the important question of whether certain disease risk factors are shared or are distinct across multiple modalities, which can also serve as multimodal feature selection method for schizophrenia (Sui et al., 2013a, 2013b). Similarly, Jie et al. adopted SVM-FoBa to classify between bipolar versus unipolar disorders by combining GM and ALFF features, achieving an accuracy of 92% This suggests that using complimentary multimodal biomarkers may be more informative and effective to discriminate brain disorders (Jie et al., 2015).

There are number of recent studies looking at combined biomarkers of sMRI, FDG-PET, and CSF (mostly for ADNI dataset) to discriminate between AD, MCI and HC (Gray et al., 2013; Xu et al., 2015; Yu et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2011, 2014). Similarly, a few studies combined functional and structural data to build such predictive models (Z. Dai et al., 2012; Dyrba et al., 2015). Most of those studies reported superior performance of models built based on multimodal features compared to those based on a single modality (Calhoun and Sui, 2016).

4.5 Deep Learning in Neuroimaging

In recent years, deep learning methodology has made significant improvement in representation learning and classification in various areas such as speech recognition, natural image classification and text mining. Two main features have made deep learning very attractive to machine learning researchers. First deep learning in contrast with traditional machine learning methods is capable of data-driven automatic feature learning. This important capability removes the subjectivity in selecting the relevant features especially in cases where too many features exist or prior knowledge in selecting features is not conclusive. The second important feature of deep learning is the depth of models. By applying a hierarchy of non-linear layers, deep learning is capable of modeling very complicated data patterns in contrast with traditional shallow models.

Typical approaches in single subject prediction in neuroimaging consist of selecting features sometimes from thousands of voxels. As reviewed in this report, the basis for such a feature selection is usually inefficient univariate statistical tests. Recently, deep belief networks, a class of deep learning, has been applied to both structural and functional MRI data (Plis et al., 2014). Plis et al. showed that deep learning methods could produce physiologically meaningful features and reveal relations from high dimensional neuroimaging data (Plis et al., 2014). Hjelm et al., applied restricted Boltzmann machines (RBM) to identify intrinsic networks in fMRI data (Hjelm et al., 2014). They showed that RBMs could extract spatial networks and their activation with the accuracy of traditional matrix factorization methods such as ICA. Provably, deep models need exponentially smaller number of parameters in order to model the same thing shallow models can model (Bengio, 2013, 2012). Moreover, deep learning structures such as RBM are generative models and therefore it can be sampled from. This way it is easy to access uncertainty in the estimates compared to the point estimates of matrix factorization models. Furthermore, for deep learning RBM could be stacked to obtain deeper models as needed. This cannot be readily done with ICA, NMF, or sparse PCA.

Recently, deep learning is employed in classification of patients using neuroimaging data. Suk et al. used stacked autoencoder (another class of deep learning) to discriminate patients with AD from those with MCI (Suk et al., 2013). Kim et al. used deep learning for classification of schizophrenia patients from healthy controls based on functional connectivity patterns. They showed that their approach outperforms SVM by a significant margin (Kim et al., 2015).

Deep learning is a very promising tool for understanding the neural basis of brain disorders by extracting hidden patterns from high-dimensional neuroimaging data (Kriegeskorte, 2015). In our opinion, this method has the potential to improve brain disorder diagnosis—especially if larger neuroimaging datasets become available and/or improved methods of training based on existing data are developed (Castro et al., 2015).

4.6 Standard Machine Learning Competitions in Neuroimaging

The machine learning field has benefited hugely from standard competitions in many applications. In such competitions, usually the participants are provided with a labeled training dataset and an unlabeled testing dataset. The participants try to develop the best predictive model based on the training dataset, predict the labels of the provided testing dataset and submit the results. Such a setting ensures that the results are not biased. These competitions usually attract many groups, even those with less domain knowledge and expertise. By providing a standard dataset and some initial preprocessing, the participants can primarily concentrate on the machine learning aspect of the analysis.

Due to all of the data sharing problems previously discussed, such competitions are rare in neuroimaging. The ADHD-200 competition was held in 2011 with the goal of predicting ADHD from healthy controls in children and adults, using resting-state fMRI along with anatomical and phonotypical data of 776 subjects (491 TDC and 285 ADHD) for training along with additional 197 subjects for testing (Consortium and others, 2012). The competition was a successful example of large-scale ADHD data sharing among several sites. However, the ‘winning’ team of ADHD-200 competition didn't use the imaging data in their predictive model (just the phenotypical data), which caused discussion in the community about usefulness of brain data in diagnosing a brain disorder (M. R. G. Brown et al., 2012; Consortium and others, 2012).

More recently, The IEEE MLSP workshop held a schizophrenia classification challenge with the goal of automatic classification of schizophrenia patients from healthy controls using just brain imaging features (Silva et al., 2014). Functional network connectivity values of resting-state fMRI along with ICA loadings of source-based morphometry of sMRI were calculated from 144 subjects (75 healthy controls, 69 schizophrenia patients) and shared with participants. Interestingly, 245 teams participated in the competition and the winning team achieved an AUC of around 0.90. Moreover, by combining the top three models, an AUC of around 0.94 was achieved (Silva et al., 2014). In our opinion, sharing ready to use, well-defined features as opposed to imaging data itself, was one of the success factors of the MLSP competition in both attracting numerous groups and also achieving high accuracy results. That experience shows that imaging data has a lot of predictive potential at least in the case of separating schizophrenia patients from healthy controls.

We believe that the field of neuroimaging can benefit a lot from standard machine learning competitions such as the ones discussed above. Such competitions can assess the realistic, unbiased, discriminative power of brain data for detecting brain disorders. Also, by attracting a large number of participants, a variety of machine learning methods will be examined for the specific problem. By providing brain features, machine learning experts with less neuroimaging domain knowledge can participate and develop predictive models.

5. Summary and Conclusions

5.1 Previous Single-subject Prediction Surveys

In this study, we comprehensively reviewed past efforts in neuroimaging-based single subject prediction in several brain disorders such as MCI, AD, ASD, ADHD, schizophrenia and depressive disorders. Previous reviews include disease-specific surveys such as schizophrenia (Calhoun and Arbabshirani, 2012; Dazzan, 2014; Demirci et al., 2008b; Kambeitz et al., 2015; Veronese et al., 2013; Zarogianni et al., 2013), autism spectrum disorder (Retico et al., 2014, 2013), Alzheimer's disease (Falahati et al., 2014; Klöppel et al., 2008) and in general (Klöppel et al., 2012; Orrù et al., 2012) as well as modality-specific reviews such as machine learning based on fMRI (Sundermann et al., 2014). Also, there are few children specific reviews such as a recent one by Levman et al. on multivariate analyses studies in neonatal and pediatric patients (Levman and Takahashi, 2015). Probably the most comprehensive review so far is the recent one by Wolfers et al., where they reviewed about 120 single subject prediction studies in schizophrenia, mood disorders, anxiety disorders, ADHD and ASD (Wolfers et al., 2015). While there is some overlap among the mentioned studies and this survey, to our knowledge, this is by far the largest survey in the field based on the number of papers reviewed (about 240 papers). Moreover, as discussed previously, the majority of single subject prediction studies have been published in recent years; consequently, an updated survey is much needed. In this work, several pitfalls such as feature selection bias, incomplete reporting of results, unfair comparison across studies and improper hyperparameter selection were discussed and suggestions to address those issues were provided. Moreover, emerging trends in this exciting field such as decentralized data sharing, differential diagnosis and disease subtype classification, multimodal neuroimaging, applications of deep learning in neuroimaging and merits of standard machine learning competitions were discussed in detail.

5.2 Limitations

There are several limitations in this work. We limited our search to MRI-based English journal papers in specific disorders. There are other single subject prediction studies that are based on other modalities such as EEG and MEG. Also, other brain disorders such Parkinson disease and anxiety disorders were not reviewed in this work. From the studies we reviewed, we tried to extract the key features as it relates to the machine learning. Many of those studies contained multiple experiments under different scenarios but we just reported one of them (usually the most successful one) here. Also, there are many important details in each study and for that reason interested readers should always refer to each reference for full information on experiment setup and other details.

In terms of common pitfalls, we mostly focused on the potential problems from the machine learning point of view. There are many other important potential issues in topics such as experimental design, effect of head motion and other factors such as the impact of draining veins on fMRI studies (Boubela et al., 2015; Power et al., 2015, 2014, 2012), wakefulness of subjects during rsfMRI (Tagliazucchi and Laufs, 2014) and the selecting of preprocessing steps (Vergara et al., 2015). Effect of those potential issues on single subject prediction deserves a full paper by itself.

In conclusion, we are optimistic about the use of brain imaging for single subject prediction, and many of the issues we recommend are within reach. Larger studies are available and repositories with pooled data across studies are growing rapidly (Eickhoff et al., 2016).

Acknowledgement

This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grants P20GM103472, R01EB005846 and 1 ROl DA040487 (to V .D. Calhoun); “100 Talents Plan” of Chinese Academy of Sciences (to J. Sui); Chinese National Science Foundation No. 81471367 and the State High-Tech Development Plan (863) No. 2015AA020513; Also, we would like to thank Monica Jaramillo for the initial survey of neuroimaging studies.

Figure 1 Comparison of group difference analysis and classification in three different scenarios using toy data. Group difference is analyzed by two-sample t-tests and classification is performed by simple thresholding (red dotted lines). Each group/class has 100 samples. A: Significant group difference (p-value&lt;0.001) but poor classification (60.0%). B: Insignificant group difference (p-value=0.865) but high classification accuracy (94.5%). C: Significant group difference (p-value&lt;2e-16) and high classification accuracy (93.0%). Significant group difference doesn't necessarily cause high classification and vice versa.

Figure 2 The literature review procedure, the inclusion criteria and the number of surveyed studies for each modality.

Figure 3 Visual summary of Table 2-6. A: Total number of papers for two-year intervals for each modality. The inset legend shows the color code for each disorder. This legend also applies to figures in part B and C. B: Number of publications per modality for each disorder C: Scatter plot of overall reported accuracy versus the total sample size. D: Histogram of number of samples used in the surveyed studies. Vertical dashed lines show mean (red) and median (blue) sample size among all studies, which are 186 and 88 respectively. E: Disorder specific histograms of reported accuracies of all surveyed papers. Red dashed line indicates the mean accuracy. Black curves represent the estimated distribution of overall accuracy based on kernel density estimation.

Figure 4 Confusion matrix and common performance measures for binary classification. Measures such as sensitivity, specificity, precision, accuracy and F1 score are easily computable based on the four elements of the confusion matrix.

Figure 5 An example to show the effect of SVM hyperparameter optimization on classification accuracy for linear, polynomial and RBF kernels. Top row: un-optimized, Bottom row: optimized. Since the underlying pattern is non-linear, SVM with linear kernel fails to perform well in both scenarios. Performance of SVM with both polynomial and RBF kernels significantly improve when the parameters are optimized.

Table 1 Glossary

Abbreviation	Full Term	
AAL	Automated anatomical Labeling	
ABIDE	Autism brain imaging data exchange	
AD	Alzheimer's disease	
ADAS	Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale	
ADHD	Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder	
ADHD-C	ADHD Combined	
ADHD-HI	Hyperactive/impulsive ADHD	
ADHD-IA	Inattentive ADHD	
ADNI	Alzheimer's disease neuroimaging initiative	
ADOS	Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule	
AG	Angular Gyrus	
ALFF	Amplitude of low frequency fluctuations	
aMCI	amnestic MCI	
ANN	Artificial Neural Network	
ANOVA	Analysis of variance	
AOD	Auditory Oddball	
ASD	Autism Spectrum Disease	
AUC	Area under curve	
AX-CPT	AX version of continuous performance task	
BOLD	Blood-Oxygen Level Dependent	
BP	Bipolar Disorder	
CFT	Complex Figure Test	
cMCI	MCI converter	
CN	Cognitively normal	
CSF	Cerebrospinal fluid	
DA	Axial Diffusion	
DAT	Dementia of the Alzheimer's Type	
DLPFC	Dorsolateral prefrontal cortex	
DMN	Default-Mode network	
dMRI	Diffusion Magnetic Resonance Imaging	
DR	Radial Diffusion	
DRS	Dementia Rating Scale	
EC	Elderly Controls	
EEG	Electroencephalography	
ELM	Extreme Learning Machines	
EMCI	Early MCI	
ERC	Entorhinal Cortex	
FA	Fractional anisotropy	
FALLF	Fractional Amplitude of low frequency fluctuations	
FBIRN	Functional Biomedical Informatics Research Network	
FC	Functional Connectivity	
FDG	Fluorodeoxyglucose	
FDG-PET	Fluorodeoxyglucose Positron Emission Tomography	
FFT	Fast Fourier Transform	
fMRI	Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging	
FNC	Functional Network Connectivity	
FTD	Frontotemporal Dementia	
GLM	General Linear Modeling	
GM	Gray matter	
GMD	Gray Matter Density	
HC	Healthy controls	
ICA	Independent Component Analyses	
ITG	Inferior Temporal Gyrus	
jICA	Joint Independent Component Analysis	
LBD	Lewy body dementia	
LDA	Linear Discriminant Analysis	
LDDMM	Large Deformation Diffeomorphic Metric Mapping	
LLD	Late-life Depression	
LLE	Locally linear embedding	
LMCI	Late MCI	
MA	Mean anisotropy	
mCCA	Multi-set Canonical Correlation Analysis	
MCI	Mild Cognitive Impairement	
MCIC	Multi-site Clinical Imaging Consortium	
MD	Mean Diffusitivity	
md-aMCI	Multiple Domains MCI	
MDD	Major Depressive Disorder	
MEG	Magnetoencephalography	
MLSP	Machine Learning for Signal Processing	
mMLDA	Modified Maximum Uncertainty Linear Discriminant Analysis	
MMSE	Mini Mental State Examination	
MPFC	Medial Prefrontal Cortex	
MRI	Magnetic Resonance Imaging	
MRMR	Minimum Redundancy Maximum Relevancy	
MRS	Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy	
MTL	Medial Temporal Lobe	
MTR	Magnetization Transfer Ratio	
MVPA	Multi voxel pattern analysis	
N/A	No Answer	
ncMCI	MCI non-converter	
NDD	Non-refractory Depressive Disorder	
NMF	Non-negative Matrix Factorization	
OCD	Obsessive Compulsive Disorder	
ODVBA	Optimally-Discriminative Voxel-Based Analysis	
orPLS	Ordinary Partial Least Square	
PANSS	Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale	
PCA	Principal component analysis	
PCC	Posterior Cingulate Cortex	
pdf	Probability Distribution Functuion	
PET	Positron Emission Tomography	
pMCI	Progressive MCI	
PPI	Psychophysiological Interaction	
QDA	Quadratic Discriminant Analysis	
RAVENS	Regional analysis of brain volumes in normalized space	
RBF	Radial basis function	
RDD	Refractory Depressive Disorder	
ReHo	Regional Homogeneity	
RMD	Remitted MDD	
ROC	Receiver Operating Characteristic	
ROI	Region of interest	
rsfMRI	Resting-state fMRI	
RSN	Resting-state Networks	
RVM	Relevance Vector Machine	
RVoxM	Relevance Voxel Machine	
RVR	Relevance Vector Regression	
sACC	Subgenual Anterior Cingulate Cortex	
SBM	Surface based morphometry	
sd-aMCI	Single Domain amnestic MCI	
sd-fMCI	Single Domain frontal MCI	
SIFT	Scale-invariant Feature Transform	
sMCI	Stable MCI	
sMRI	Structural Magnetic Resonance Imaging	
SN	Salience Network	
SNP	Single Nucleotide Polymorphism	
SSD	Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders	
StD	Late-Life Subthreshold Depression	
SUVr	Standard Uptake Value Ratio	
SVM	Support Vector Machine	
SVM-FoBa	Support Vector Machine with a Forward-Backward search strategy	
SVM-RFE	Support vector machine with recursive feature elimination	
SZ	Schizophrenia	
SZA	Schizoaffective	
TD	Typically Developing	
TDC	Typically Developing Children	
uMCI	Unknown MCI	
VaD	Vascular Dementia	
VBM	Voxel-based Morphometry	
VMHC	Voxel-mirrored Homotopic Correlations	
VOI	Volume of Interest	
WM	White matter	
WMD	White Matter Density	
WMT	Working Memory Task	

Table 2 Summary of 112 MRI-based AD/MCI classification studies. Overall classification accuracy of sMCI (cMCI) from pMCI (ncMCI) is indicated by MCI-CONV if applicable.

Modality	Disorder	Features	# Features	Classifier	Number of Subjects	Overall Accuracy	Reference	
dMRI	AD	FA	1210	SVM	HC=25, AD=20,
Total=45	100%	(Graña et al., 2011)	
dMRI and sMRI	AD	FA and MD from dMRI and GMD and
WMD from sMRI	26,000
FA,
128,000
MD,
41,000
WMD and
181,000
GMD	SVM	HC=143, AD=137,
Total=280	63.6-91.1%	(Dyrba et al., 2013)	
rsfMRI	AD	Averaged voxel intensities of selected
resting-state networks	4	Multivariate ROC	HC=16, AD=15,
Total=31	100%	(Wu et al., 2013)	
rsfMRI	AD	Graph measures based on FC analysis
among ROIs	454	SVM	HC=20, AD=20,
Total=40	100%	(Khazaee et al., 2015)	
sMRI	AD	Eigen brains of key slices	10	SVM	NC=98, AD=28,
Total=126	92.3%	(Zhang et al., 2015)	
sMRI	AD	ODVBA of RAVENs maps	N/A	SVM	HC=50, AD=50,
Total=100	90%	(Zhang and Davatzikos, 2011)	
sMRI	AD	Hippocampus shape measures using
LDDMM and PCA	20
Principal
componen
ts (3-4
selected
by the
classifier)	Logistic Regression	HC=26, DAT=18,
Total=44	81.1-84.6%	(Wang et al., 2007)	
sMRI	AD	GM, WM, and CSF tissue densities along
with age, gender and genotype	237-240	SVM	HC=190, AD=190,
Total=380	85.6-89.3%	(Vemuri et al., 2008)	
sMRI	AD	Cortical thickness measures along mesh
vertices	82000
mesh
vertices	RVoxM	HC= 150, Ad=150,
Total=300	93.0%
(AUC)	(Sabuncu and Van Leemput, 2012)	
sMRI	AD	Whole brain and hippocampus VBM
measures	N/A	SVM	EC=31, AD=31,
Total=62	74-79%	(Polat et al., 2012)	
sMRI	AD	Volumetric measures	45	SVM	HC=20, AD=14,
Total=34	88.2%	(Oliveira et al., 2010)	
sMRI	AD	Hippocampus morphometric measures	9	LDA	HC=57, AD=38,
Semantic dementia=6,
Total=101	77%	(Miller et al., 2009)	
sMRI	AD	GM Maps	10-45	SVM, ELM, Self-
adaptive Resource
Allocation Network	HC=30, AD=30,
Total=60	97.1-99.7%	(Mahanand et al., 2012)	
sMRI	AD	GM distribution of ROIs	90	SVM	EC=22, AD=16,
Total=38	94.5%	(Magnin et al., 2009)	
sMRI	AD	Surface-based measures of hippocampus	N/A	SVM	HC=20, AD=19,
Total=39	84.6-94.9%	(Li et al., 2007)	
sMRI	AD	Cortical thickness	N/A	LDA, QDA and
Logistic regression	HC=17, AD=19,
Total=36	90-100%	(Lerch et al., 2008)	
sMRI	AD	Cortical thickness data and hippocampus
shape	N/A	LDA	NC=84, AD=33,
Total=117	87.5%	(Lee et al., 2014)	
sMRI	AD	GM Probability Maps	Variable	Linear program
boosting of voxel-
wise weak
classifiers with
spatial constraints	Total=183	82.0%
(AUC)	(Hinrichs et al., 2009)	
sMRI	AD	WM and GM voxels selected by SVM-RFE	Variable	SVM	HC=185, AD=185,
Total=370	94.3-95.1%	(Hidalgo-Muñoz et al., 2014)	
sMRI	AD	Volumes of hippocampus–amygdala
formation	1	Thresholding	HC=28, AD=27,
Total=55	89-96%
(Sensitivity)	(Hampel et al., 2002)	
sMRI	AD	Linear measurements of several structures	12	Linear
Discriminant
Analysis	HC=31, AD=46,
Total=77	81-87%
(Sensitivity)	(Frisoni et al., 1996)	
sMRI	AD	Texture Features	260	Linear
Discriminant
Function	HC=40, AD=24,
Total=66	91%	(Freeborough and Fox, 1998)	
sMRI	AD	Percentage of brain volume changes	3	SVM	NC=30, AD=30,
Total=60	91.7%	(Farzan et al., 2015)	
sMRI	AD	GM, WM and CSF volumes and size of
hippocampus	5	SVM, MLP, and
J48 decision tree	NC=48, AD=37,
Total=85	93.7%	(Farhan et al., 2014)	
sMRI	AD	Brain volume, temporal lobe matter and
CSF volume	4	Discriminant
Analysis	HC=29, DAT=31,
Total=60	100%	(DeCarli et al., 1995)	
sMRI	AD	Several voxel-based and cortical thickness-
based schemes	Variable	Regularized SVM	CN=162, AD=137,
Total= 299	83-91%	(Cuingnet et al., 2013)	
sMRI	AD	Atrophic patterns of hippocampus and
entorhinal cortex	N/A	QDA	HC=50, AD=50,
Total=100	93%	(Coupé et al., 2012)	
sMRI	AD	SIFT Features	133	Ensemble of SVMs	HC1=66, AD1=20,
HC2=98, AD2=28,
Total=212	70-87%	(Chen et al., 2014)	
sMRI	AD	PDF of VOI based on VBM	100	SVM	HC=130, AD-130, Total-
260	86%	(Beheshti and Demirel, 2015)	
sMRI	AD	Generative-Discriminative Basis vectors
based on RAVEN maps	30-50	Logistic Model
Trees	HC=63, AD=54,
Total=117	87-89%	(Batmanghelich et al., 2012)	
sMRI	AD	Cortical thickness and volumetric measures	N/A	SVM	HC=25, AD=29,
Total=54	90.9% (AUC)	(Arimura et al., 2008)	
sMRI	AD	GM maps based on VBM	384,065	SVM	HC=137, AD=108,
MCI=203,
Total=448	63.7-80.3%	(Adaszewski et al., 2013)	
sMRI	AD	Gray Matter Probability Maps	2E6	SVM	HC=226, AD=91,
Total=417	87%	(Abdulkadir et al., 2011)	
sMRI and dMRI	AD	FA and GM volumes	142	SVM	NC=15, AD=21,
Total=36	94.3%	(Li et al., 2014b)	
sMRI and PET	AD	Volumes of interest	12	SVM	HC1=28, AD1=28,
HC2=13, AD2=21,
Total=90	86-100%	(Dukart et al., 2013)	
sMRI and
rsfMRI	AD	GM Volume from sMRI and ALFF, RcHo
and FC from rsfMRI	Variable	Maximum
uncertainty LDA
and second level	HC=22, AD=16,
Total=38	89.5%	(Z. Dai et al., 2012)	
sMRI, rsfMRI
and dMRI	AD	GM volume from sMRI, fiber tract integrity
from dMRI and graph-theoretical measures
form fMRI	N/A	SVM	HC=25, AD=28,
Total=53	74-85%
(AUC)	(Dyrba et al., 2015)	
fMRI
(confrontation
naming task)	AD (Low and
high risk)	Fractional signal changes ROI	50	LDA+orPLS	Low AD Risk HC=11,
High AD Risk HC= 13,
Total=24	83.3%	(Andersen et al., 2012)	
dMRI	AD/BP	FA Maps	1500-
14000	SVM	HC=25, BP=12, AD=20	100%	(Bergouignan et al., 2011)	
rsfMRI	AD/FTD	ROI-based difference between DMN and
SN map	22	LDA	HC=12, AD=12,
FTD=12, Total=36	92%	(Zhou et al., 2010)	
sMRI	AD/FTD	GM Maps	N/A	SVM	HC=91, AD=85,
FTD=19, Total=195	87-96%	(Klöppel et al., 2008)	
sMRI	AD/FTD	GM volume an thickness and complexity
estimates	N/A	LDA	CN=23 AD=24, FTD=19,
Total=66	81-96%	(Young et al., 2009)	
sMRI	AD/FTD	Morphometric measures of selected ROIs	2	Discriminant
Analysis	EC=12, AD=17,
FTD=16, Total=45	91%	(Kaufer et al., 1997)	
dMRI	AD/MCI	FA and MD Values	12-1080	SVM	EC=50, AD=37,
MCI=113, Total=200	68.3-84.9%	(Nir et al., 2015)	
rsfMRI	AD/MCI	FC among selected AAL regions	3403	Bayesian Gaussian
process logistic
regression	HC=39,aMCI=50,
AD=27, Total=116	75-90%	(Challis et al., 2015)	
sMRI	AD/MCI	3D hippocampal shape morphology	N/A	SVM	HC=88, MCI=103,
AD=71, Total=262	MCI-CONV:
80%	(Costafreda et al., 2011a)	
sMRI	AD/MCI	GM, WM and CSF volumetric measures
and ventricle shape	18	Particle swarm
optimization SVM	HC=17, AD=17,
MCI=18, Total=52	88.9-94.1%	(Yang et al., 2013)	
sMRI	AD/MCI	Coefficient of ICA on normalized brain
images	N/A	SVM	HC1=316, AD1=98,
Total1=416, HC2=200,
AD2=200, MCI=400,
Total2=800,	67.5-99%	(Yang et al., 2011)	
sMRI	AD/MCI	Hippocampal volume, tensor-based
morphometry, cortical thickness and
Manifold-based learning features	112-114	LDA and SVM	HC=231, AD=198,
sMCI=238, pMCI=167,
Total=834	84.0-89.0%
MCI-
CONV:68.0
%	(Wolz et al., 2011)	
sMRI	AD/MCI	ROI-based and correlative features based on
cortical and cerebral thickness and WM
volumes	N/A	Multi-kernel SVM	NC=200, AD=198,
ncMCI=111, cMCI=89,
Total=598	79.2-97.4%
MCI-
CONV:75.1
%	(Wee et al., 2013)	
sMRI	AD/MCI	Intensity patches of selected ROIs around
hippocampus	130-150
Patches	SVM (in multiple
instance-Graph
Framework)	CN=231, AD=198,
ncMCI=238, cMCI=167,
Total=834	82.9-89%
-MCI-
CONV:70%	(Tong et al., 2014)	
sMRI	AD/MCI	Diffeomorphometry patterns of subcortical
and ventricular structures	14	LDA	HC=210, AD=175,
cMCI=135, ncMCI=87,
Total=607	MCI-
CONV:77.0
%	(Tang et al., 2015)	
sMRI	AD/MCI	Hippocampus, amygdala, and ventricle
shape measures	N/A	LDA	HC=210, AD=175,
MCI=369, Total=754	86%	(Tang et al., 2014)	
sMRI	AD/MCI	Whole brain GM and WM maps	34-127	SVM	HC=162, AD=137,
ncMCI=134, cMCI=76,
Total=509	72-76%,
MCI-
CONV:66.0
%	(Salvatore et al., 2015b)	
sMRI	AD/MCI	GM Maps	6000	SVM	HC=189, AD=144,
ncMCI=166, cMCI=136,
Total=635	80.0% -
MCI-
CONV:70.7
%	(Retico et al., 2015)	
sMRI	AD/MCI	Hippocampal surface deformation measures	19	LDA	HC=26, DAT=18, DAT-
Converters=9,
Total=53	77.0-87.0%	(Qiu et al., 2008)	
sMRI	AD/MCI	GM and WM maps	Variable	SVM, Bayes
statistic and voting
feature intervals	HC=18, AD=32,
MCI=24, Total=74	92%-MCI-
CONV:75.0
%	(Plant et al., 2010)	
sMRI	AD/MCI	Volumes of the hippocampus and ERC	2-4	Discriminant
Function Analysis	HC=59, AD=48,
MCI=65, Total=172	65.9-90.7%	(Pennanen et al., 2004)	
sMRI	AD/MCI	GM Density of ROIs	37	SVM	ncMCI=38, cMCI=39,
Total=77	77.7% (MCI
Conversion)	(Ota et al., 2014)	
sMRI	AD/MCI	Hippocampal volumetric measures	5	LDA	HC=53, AD=18,
MCI=20, Total=91	73.7-77.5%	(Mueller et al., 2010)	
sMRI	AD/MCI	GM density values and cognitive measures	309	Low density
separation semi-
supervised
classifier	NC=231, AD=200,
sMCI=100, pMCI=164,
uMCI=130, Total=825	MCI-CONV:
76.6-90.0%
(AUC)	(Moradi et al., 2015)	
sMRI	AD/MCI	Data-driven ROI GM from different
templates	1500 from
each
template	SVM	NC=128, AD=97,
sMCI=117, pMCI=117,
Total=459	91.6%, MCI-
CONV:
72.4%	(Min et al., 2014)	
sMRI	AD/MCI	Longitudinal volumetric MR imaging
measures	N/A	QDA	HC=203 AD=164,
MCI=317, Total=684	85%	(McEvoy et al., 2011)	
sMRI	AD/MCI	Volumetric and cortical thickness measures	N/A	LDA	HC=139, AD=84,
MCI=175, Total=398	89-92%	(McEvoy et al., 2009)	
sMRI	AD/MCI	GM maps	N/A	Ensemble of SVMs	NC=229, AD=198,
MCI=225, Total=652	85.3-92.0%	(M. Liu et al., 2014)	
sMRI	AD/MCI	GM maps registered to multiple templates	1500 for
each
template	Ensemble of SVMs	NC=128, AD=97,
sMCI=117, pMCI=117,
Total=459	93.8% MCI-
CONV:80.9
%	(Liu et al., 2015)	
sMRI	AD/MCI	Volume and cortical thickness values of
ROIs	162
Original
features
reduced
by LLE	Logistic regression,
SVM and LDA	CN=137, sMCI=93,
cMCI=97, AD=86,
Total=413	51-89%
MCI-CONV:
68%	(Liu et al., 2013)	
sMRI	AD/MCI	Surface connectivity
and center of mass markers	N/A	LDA	NC=170, AD=114,
MCI=240, Total=524	76.6-87.7%
(AUC)	(Lillemark et al., 2014)	
sMRI	AD/MCI	Proposed local binary pattern features	N/A	SVM	NC=142, AD=80,
MCI=141, Total=363	61.5-82.8%	(Li et al., 2014a)	
sMRI	AD/MCI	Cortical thickness measures, cortex thinning
dynamics and network features based on
longitudinal thickness changes of different
ROIs	262	SVM	NC=40, sMCI=36,
pMCI=39, AD=37,
Total=152	81.7-96.1%
MCI-
CONV:80.3
%	(Li et al., 2012)	
sMRI	AD/MCI	Hurst's exponents at different scales	N/A	SVM	HC=11, AD=11,
MCI=11, Total=33	97.1-97.5%	(Lahmiri and Boukadoum, 2014)	
sMRI	AD/MCI	Volumetric Measures	120 (115
brain
features)	LDA	CN=125, AD=55,
HMCI=114, LMCI=91,
Total=385	90.8-94.5%	(Goryawala et al., 2015)	
sMRI	AD/MCI	Spherical harmonics of hippocampi	2646	SVM	HC=25, AD=23,
aMCI=23, Total=71	83-94%	(Gerardin et al., 2009)	
sMRI	AD/MCI	Three schemes: voxel-based features,
cortical thickness features and
hippocampus-based features	Variable	SVM	CN=162,
AD=137,cMCI=76,
ncMCI=134, Total=509	81-95% (for
AD vs CN)	(Cuingnet et al., 2011)	
sMRI	AD/MCI	Volume, thickness and surface area of
selected ROIs	7 MRI, 2
CSF and
14
neuropsyc
hological
features	SVM	HC=111, cMCI=56,
ncMCI=111, AD=96,
Total=350	MCI-CONV:
67.1%	(Cui et al., 2011)	
sMRI	AD/MCI	Hippocampus and parahippocampal gyrus
GM maps	11,031	SVM	HC=188, MCI=260,
AD=131	70-85%
MCI-CONV:
65%	(Chu et al., 2012)	
sMRI	AD/MCI	Intensity and texture of selected VOIs in
MTL	&gt;100,000	Ensemble of SVMs	HC=189, ncMCI=166,
cMCI=136, AD=144	65-94%
MCI-
CONV:74.0
% (AUC)	(Chincarini et al., 2011)	
sMRI	AD/MCI	GM Map	50,000-
750,000	SVM, Regularized
logistic Regression,
Linear Regression
Classifier	HC=205, MCI=351,
AD= 171, Total= 727	80-90%	(Casanova et al., 2012)	
sMRI	AD/MCI	Volumetric measures of amygdala,
hippocampus, and parahippocampal gyrus	N/A	Discriminant
function analysis	NEC=20, MCI=21,
AD=39, Total=60	80.5-88.1%	(Bottino et al., 2002)	
sMRI	AD/MCI	Hippocampal volume and CSF Aβ, t-tau
and p-tau levels,
and ApoE4 stratification	N/A	SVM	NC=111, AD=95,
MCI=182	64-78%	(Apostolova et al., 2014)	
sMRI	AD/MCI	Cortical thickness and volumetric measures	57	SVM	HC=110, AD=116
MCI=119, Total=345	88.1%	(Aguilar et al., 2013)	
sMRI and dMRI	AD/MCI	Network topology, tractography
connectivity and flow-based measures	N/A	SVM	NC=50, AD=38,
EMCI=74, LMCI=38,
Total=200	59.2-78.2%	(Prasad et al., 2015)	
sMRI and dMRI	AD/MCI	Disease-specific spatial filters	N/A	LDA	NC=22, AD=19,
MCI=22, Total=63	9.3.0%
(AUC) MCI
Conversion	(Oishi et al., 2011)	
sMRI and dMRI	AD/MCI	Cortical thickness, subcortical volume and
white matter integrity	2-5	SVM	SMI=27, AD=27,
MCI=138 Total=72	70.5-96.3%	(Jung et al., 2015)	
sMRI and PET	AD/MCI	Volumes of GM tissue of seleeted ROIs	93	Domain Transfer
SVM	NC=52, AD=51,
cMCI=43, ncMCI=56,
Total=202	MCI-CONV:
79.4%	(B. Cheng et al., 2015)	
sMRI and PET	AD/MCI	Functional and structural connectivity
measures using sparse inverse covariance
estimation	84	SVM	HC=68, AD=70,
MCI=111, Total=249	84-92%	(Ortiz et al., 2015)	
sMRI and PET	AD/MCI	GM volume of ROIs from sMRI and
average intensity of ROIs from PET	186
(original
number of
features)	Multi-kernel SVM	NC=52, AD=51,
MCI=99, Total=202	78.8-94.8%	(F. Liu et al., 2014)	
sMRI, FDG-PET	AD/MCI	ROI-based GM, volumes from sMRI and
average intensity from PET	186	Multi-kernel SVM	NC=52, AD=51,
ncMCI=56, cMCI=43,
Total=202	80.3-95.9%,
MCI-
CONV:69.8
%	(Zu et al., 2015)	
sMRI, FDG-
PET	AD/MCI	Cortical and volumetric measures and
surface based FDG uptakes	24	Partial least square
LDA	NC=85, AD=71,
MCI=163, Total=319	76.5-90.1%	(Yun et al., 2015)	
sMRI, FDG-
PET	AD/MCI	GM and WM maps from sMRI and FDG-
PET images	Variable	Multi Kernel
Learning	HC=66, AD=48,
MCI=119, Total=233	87.6%	(Hinrichs et al., 2011)	
sMRI, FDG-
PET and
Florbetapir PET	AD/MCI	Mean volume of GM, SUVr value of FDG-
PFT and SUVr value of florbetapir PET for
selected ROIs	90 per
modalitiy	Weighted multi-
modality
sparse
representation-
based classification	NC=117, AD=113,
sMCI=83, pMCT=27,
Total=340	74.5-94.8%,
MCI-
CONV:77.8
%	(Xu et al., 2015)	
sMRI, FDG-
PET, and CSF	AD/MCI	ROI-based GM, WM and CSF volumes
from sMRI and average intensity from PET	189	SVM	HC=52, AD=51,
ncMCI=56, cMCI=43,
Total=202	76.4-93.2%,
MCI-
CONV=81.2
%	(Zhang et al., 2011)	
sMRI, FDG-
PET, and CSF
data	AD/MCI	Volume of GM from sMRI and average
intensity from PET of selected ROIs along
with CSF measures	189	Graph-guided
multi-task learning	NC=52, AD=50,
MCI=97, Total=199	80.0-92.6%	(Yu et al., 2015)	
sMRI, FDG-
PET, CSF, and
APOE genotype	AD/MCI	ROI-based GMD maps, mean activity from
PET	20 ROIs	Gaussian Process
Classifier	HC=73, AD=63,
ncMCI=96, cMCI=47,
Total=279	MCI-
CONV:74.1
%	(Young et al., 2013)	
sMRI, PET	AD/MCI	Volume of GM from sMRI and average
intensity from PET of selected ROIs	186	Multi-task Linear
Programming
Discriminant	sMCI=226, pMCI=167,
Total=393	MCI-CONV:
67.2%	(Yu et al., 2014)	
sMRI, PET	AD/MCI	GM density relative cerebral metabolic rate
for glucose of ROIs	168-172	SVM	ncMCI=40, cMCI=40,
Total=80	MCI-CONV:
74.8-75.0
% (AUC)	(Ota et al., 2015)	
sMRI, PET,
CSF and SNP	AD/MCI	GM volume and average intensity of ROIs
along with CSF and SNP features	93(sMRI,
93(PET),
3 (CSF)
and 5677
(SNP)	SVM	HC=47, AD=49,
MCI=93, Total=189	71.0-94.8%	(Zhang et al., 2014)	
sMRI	AD/MCI/Diment
ia	GM and WM maps	N/A	SVM	HC=604, AD=483,
FTD=51, LBD=27,
ncMCI=290, cMCI=128,
Total=1583	73-97%
(AUC) MCI-
CONV:73.0
% (AUC)	(Klöppel et al., 2015)	
dMRI, sMRI	AD/VaD	Transcallosal prefrontal FA and Fazckas
score	4	LDA	HC=22, AD=16,
VaD=13, Total=51	87.5%	(Zarci et al., 2009)	
sMRI	Dementia	Hippocampal head and body volumetric
measures	4	LDA	HC=17, Questionable
Deminetia=12, Mild
Dimential=10, Total=39	76.9%	(Wolf et al., 2001)	
dMRI	MCI	Clustering coefficient of WM connectivity
maps based on fiber count, FA, MD and
principal diffusivities	3 (Most
selected
ROIs)	SVM	HC=17, MCI=10,
Total=27	88.9%	(Wee et al., 2011)	
dMRI	MCI	FA, DA, DR and MD	500	SVM	EC=40, MCI=33,
Total=73	93.0%	(O'Dwyer et al., 2012)	
dMRI	MCI	FA and the volume of fiber pathways from
selected region	100-4500	SVM	NC=45, MCI=39,
Total=84	100%	(Lee et al., 2013)	
dMRI	MCI	FA maps	1000	SVM	sd-aMCI=18, sd-
fMCI=13, ad-aMCI=35,
Total=66	97%	(Haller et al., 2013)	
dMRI	MCI	FA, longitudinal, radial, and mean
diffusivity
features	N/A	SVM	HC=35, MCI=67,
Total=102	91.4-97.5%	(Haller et al., 2010)	
rsfMRI	MCI	local connectivity and global topological
properties	450	Multiple Kernel
Learning	HC=25, MCI=12,
Total=37	91.9%	(Jie et al., 2014)	
rsfMRI	MCI	N/A	465	N/A	HC=21, MCI=29,
Total=60	95.6%	(Beltrachini et al., 2015)	
sMRI	MCI	Graph properties based on inter-regional co
variation of cortical thickness	Variable	Multiple Kernel
Learning	NC=42,sd-aMCI=38, md-
aMCI=32, Total=112	56.0-62.0%	(Raamana et al., 2014)	
sMRI	MCI	Volume, mean T1, MTR and T2* for
selected ROIs	7 ROIs	SVM	HC=77, MCI=42,
Total=119	75%	(Granziera et al., 2015)	
sMRI and dMRI	MCI	Subcortical volumetric measures and FA
values	68	SVM	HC=204, aMCI=79,
Total=283	71.1%	(Cui et al., 2012)	
sMRI, FDG-
PET, CSF and
Genetics	MCI	ROI-based volumetric measures from
sMRI, voxel-wise intensity measures from
PET along with CSF and genetic features	&gt;1E5	Random Forest	NC=35, AD=37,
sMCI=41, pMCI=34,
Total=147	74.6-89.0%,
MCI-
CONV:58.0
%	(Gray et al., 2013)	
sMRI, PET	MCI	ROI-based GM, WM and CSF volumes
from sMRI and average intensity from PET	93 ROIs	Multiple Kernel
Learning	ncMCI=50, cMCI=38,
Total=88	78.4%	(Zhang and Shen, 2012b)	

Table 3 Summary of 65 MRI-based schizophrenia classification studies.

Modality	Disorder	Features	# Features	Classifier	Number of Subjects	Overall Accuracy	Reference	
dMRI	Schizophrenia	Discriminant PCA of FA Maps	60	Fisher's Linear
Discriminant	HC=45, SZ=45
Total=90	80%	(Caprihan et al., 2008)	
dMRI	Schizophrenia	FA Maps	13	LDA	HC=24, SZ=34
Total=58	75%	(Caan et al., 2006)	
dMRI	Schizophrenia	Voxels of FA and MA maps reduced by
PCA	11-13	LDA	HC=50, SZ=50
Total=100	96%	(Ardekani et al., 2011)	
fMRI (Sensorimotor,
AOD, Working
Memory tasks)	Schizophrenia	Mean activation of the largest activation
cluster	1	Majority vote of 3
decision stumps	HC=15, SZ=13
Total=28	96%	(Honorio et al., 2012)	
fMRI (AOD/Sternberg
/Sensorimotor tasks)	Schizophrenia	ICA Spatial Maps	10:14	Projection Pursuit	HC=91, SZ=57
Total=138	80-90%	(Demirci et al., 2008a)	
fMRI (AX-CPT
task)	Schizophrenia
(first-episode)	Voxels of left DLPFC in the contrast map	N/A	LDA	HC=51, SZ=51
Total=102	62%	(Yoon et al., 2012)	
fMRI-
(Monetary
Incentive Delay
task)	Schizophrenia	MVPA of task activation pattern (best
result for right palladium)	N/A	Searchlight SVM	HC=44, SZ=44
Total=88	93%	(Koch et al., 2015)	
fMRI
(Sensorimotor task) + SNP	Schizophrenia	Sparse representation based variable
selection	200	Sparse
representation
based classifier	HC=116, SZ=92
Total=208	77%	(Cao et al., 2013)	
fMRI (Verbal
Fluency task)	Schizophrenia/bipolar	Thresholded voxels in activation map by
ANOVA tests	N/A	SVM	HC=40, SZ=32, BP=40
Total=104	92%	(Costafreda et al., 2011b)	
fMRI (Visual
task)	Schizophrenia	Selected active voxels from the contrast
map	346	Multi voxel pattern
analysis (MVPA)	HC=15, SZ=19
Total=34	59-72%	(Yoon et al., 2008)	
fMRI (WMT
task)	Schizophrenia
with and
without OCD	MVPA on GLM contrast values	33	SVM	HC=20, SZ (with
OCD)=16, SZ (without
OCD)=17, Total=53	75-91%	(Bleich-Cohen et al., 2014)	
fMRI (AOD
task)	Schizophrenia	ICA Spatial Maps of magnitude and phase
data	135-243	Multiple kernel
learning	HC=21, SZ=31
Total=52	85%	(Castro et al., 2014)	
fMRI (AOD
task)	Schizophrenia	ICA (temporal and DMN network) and
GLM spatial maps parcellated into AAL
atlas	116	Recursive
composite kernels	HC=54, SZ=52
Total=106	95%	(Castro et al., 2011)	
fMRI (AOD
task)	Schizophrenia/bipolar	Distance to mean image for each group
build using ICA Spatial Maps (DMN and
temporal Lobe)	3	Minimum Distance	HC=26, SZ=21, BP=14
Total=61	83-95%	(Calhoun et al., 2008)	
fMRI (AOD
task)	Schizophrenia/bipolar	ICA Spatial Maps (DMN and temporal
Lobe)	10	Bayesian
Generalized
Softmax Perceptron	HC=25, SZ=21, BP=14
Total=60	82-90%
(AUC)	(Arribas et al., 2010)	
fMRI (AOD
task) and
rsfMRI	Schizophrenia	Kernel PCA on ICA spatial maps	53	Fisher's Linear
Discriminant	HC=28, SZ=28
Total=56	93-98%	(Du et al., 2012)	
fMRI (AOD
task) and rsfMRI	Schizophrenia	FNC scores derived from ICA- based multi-
network fusion template for functional
normalization	3 and 100	LDA and shaplet
based classifier	HC=28, SZ=27
Total=55	72%	(Çetin et al., 2015)	
fMRI (AOD
task) and SNP	Schizophrenia	Three types of features: selected voxels in
fMRI activation map, selected SNPs and
ICA components	261
voxels +
150 SNPs	Majority voting
among 3 SVMs	HC=20, SZ=20
Total=40	87%	(Yang et al., 2010)	
rsfMRI	Schizophrenia	Functional connectivity among 116 regions
in AAL atlas reduced by PCA	333	SVM	HC=25, SZ=24, Sibling
HC=22
Total=71	62%	(Yu et al., 2013b)	
rsfMRI	Schizophrenia/
MDD	FC among ROIs	6670	SVM	HC=38, SZ=32,
MDD=19, Total=89	80.9%	(Yu et al., 2013a)	
rsfMRI	Schizophrenia	Functional connectivity among 347 nodes
placed as a grid in the entire brain	3000	Fused Lasso,
GraphNet	HC=74, SZ=71
Total=145	91%	(Watanabe et al., 2014)	
rsfMRI	Schizophrenia	fALFF values of the left ITG	N/A	SVM	HC=46, Unaffected
Sibling of SCZ
patients=46, Total=92	75%	(W. Guo et al., 2014)	
rsfMRI	Schizophrenia	FCamong 90 ROIs	1096	Random Forest	HC=18, SZ=18
Total=36	75%	(Venkataraman et al., 2012)	
rsfMRI	Schizophrenia	FC among 90 regions in WFU atlas reduced
by PCA	550	SVM	HC=22, SZ=22
Total=44	93%	(Tang et al., 2012)	
rsfMRI	Schizophrenia	Functional connectivity (based on extended
maximized mutual information) among 116
AAL regions	6670	SVM	HC=32, SZ=32
Total=64	83%	(Su et al., 2013)	
rsfMRI	Schizophrenia	Dimension-reduced FC (local linear
embedding) among AAL ROIs	12	C-Means
Clustering	HC=20, SZ=32
Total=52	86%	(Shen et al., 2010)	
rsfMRI	Schizophrenia	Functional connectivity among 116 regions in
AAL atlas	6670	Deep Neural
Network	HC=50, SZ=50
Total=100	86%	(Kim et al., 2015)	
rsfMRI	Schizophrenia	Functional connectivity based on ICA
decomposition	46	Regularized Linear
Discriminant
classifier	HC=196, SZ=71
Total=267	75-84%	(Kaufmann et al., 2015)	
rsfMRI	SZ	Graph Measures of Functional connectivity	N/A	SVM	HC=29, SZ=19, Total=48	80.0%	(H. Cheng et al., 2015)	
rsfMRI	Schizophrenia	Local and global Complex network
measures	216	SVM	HC=10, SZ=8
Total=18	100%	(Fekete et al., 2013)	
rsfMRI	Schizophrenia	Functional connectivity patterns	6-7
variable	Ensemble of SVM
classifiers	HC=31, SZ=31
Total=62	85-87%	(Fan et al., 2011)	
rsfMRI	Schizophrenia	Pearson correlation features derived from
Regional Homogeneity, ALFF, FALF and
Voxel-Mirrored Homotopic Connectivity	100	Ensemble of
extreme learning
machines	HC=74, SZ=72
Total=146	80-91%	(Chyzhyk et al., 2015)	
rsfMRI	Schizophrenia	Size of connected components in graphs
build from correlation among time-courses
for 90 AAL regions	N/A	SVM	HC=29, SZ=29
Total=58	75%	(Bassett et al., 2012)	
rsfMRI	Schizophrenia	Functional network connectivity among 9
ICA time-courses	45	SVM (best results)	HC=28, SZ=28
Total=56	96%	(Arbabshirani et al., 2013)	
rsfMRI	Schizophrenia	MVPA based on whole brain thalamic
connectivity map	N/A	SVM	HC=90, SZ=90,
Total=180	73.9%	(Anticevic et al., 2014)	
rsfMRI	Schizophrenia	Graph metrics based on FNC computed
from ICA	13	SVM	HC=74, SZ=72
Total=146	65%	(Anderson and Cohen, 2013)	
sMRI	Schizophrenia	Voxels from five regions based on
optimally discriminative voxel-based
morphometry	N/A	SVM	HC=79, SZ=69
Total=148	71%	(Zhang and Davatzikos, 2013)	
sMRI	Schizophrenia
(First episode)	Whole brain volumetric measurements
based on RAVENS	69	SVM	HC=62, SZ=62
Total=124	73%	(Zanetti et al., 2013)	
sMRI	Schizophrenia
(first-episode)	Volume and mean cortical thickness of
selected ROIs	2.5	Discriminant
Function Analysis	HC=40, SZ=52
Total=92	80%	(Takayanagi et al., 2011)	
sMRI	Schizophrenia
and psychosis	Cortical GMD	129	Sparse multinomial
logistic regression
classifier	HC=36, SZ=36
Total=72	86%	(Sun et al., 2009)	
sMRI	Schizophrenia/bipolar	Voxel-wise GM Maps	N/A	SVM	HC1=66, HC2 = 43,
SZ1=66, SZ2=46,
BP1=66, BP2=47,
Total1=198, Total2=136	67-90%	(Schnack et al., 2014)	
sMRI	Schizophrenia	Texture and volumetric measures	N/A	LDA	HC=24, SZ=27, Total=51	65.0-72.7%	(Radulescu et al., 2014)	
sMRI	Schizophrenia	Clinical, neuropsychological, biochemical
and volumetric measures	1050	SVM	HC=42, SSD=36, Non-
SSD=45, Total=123	81.0-99.0%	(Pina-Camacho et al., 2015)	
sMRI	Schizophrenia/bipolar	Volume of 23 ROIs along with 22
neuropsychological test scores	45	LDA	HC=8, SZ=10, BP=10
Total=28	96%	(Pardo et al., 2006)	
sMRI	Schizophrenia	GM and CSF volumetric measures of ROIs	4	LDA	HC=105, HC2=23,
SZ1=38, SZ2=23,
Total=189	70-76%	(Ota et al., 2012)	
sMRI	Schizophrenia	Gray matter densities based on voxel-based
morphometry of top 10% voxels	15,700	SVM	HC1=111, HC2=122,
SZ1=128, SZ2=155
Total1=239,
Total2=277	71%	(Nieuwenhuis et al., 2012)	
sMRI	Schizophrenia	Volume of several ROIs in the brain	7	LDA	HC=47, SZ=57
Total=104	78-86%	(Nakamura et al., 2004)	
sMRI	Schizophrenia/
Mood Disorder	GM maps of Regional Analysis of brain
Volumes in Normalized Space (RAVENS)	170	SVM-RFE	Mood Disorder=104,
SZ=158
Total=262	76%	(Koutsouleris et al., 2015)	
sMRI	Schizophrenia	The mean expression of Eigen image
derived from voxel-based morphometry	1	Simple
Thresholding	HC=46, SZ=46
Total=92	80-90%	(Kawasaki et al., 2007)	
sMRI	Schizophrenia
(first-episode)	Whole brain voxel intensity values	N/A(probably
thousands)	maximum-
uncertainty LDA	HC=39, SZ=39
Total=78	72%	(Kasparek et al., 2011)	
sMRI	Recent onset
Schizophrenia	Volumetric measurements of 95 ROIs	5	LDA	HC=47, SZ=28
Total=75	72%	(Karageorgiou et al., 2011)	
sMRI	Schizophrenia	MR intensities, gray matter densities and
deformation based morphometry	96 per
feature
category	Combination of
mMLDA, centroid
method, and the
average linkage	HC=49, SZ=49	81.6%	(Janousova et al., 2015)	
sMRI	Schizophrenia	GM and WM maps	N/A	SVM	HC=20, SZ=19, Total=39	66.6-77%	(Iwabuchi et al., 2013)	
sMRI	Schizophrenia
(identifying
subtypes)	Multi-edge graphs build from Structural
connectivity networks with 78 ROIs	N/A	Spectral Clustering	HC=29, SZ=23
Total=52	78%	(Ingalhalikar et al., 2012)	
sMRI	Schizophrenia
(Childhood
onset)	Cortical Thickness	74	Random Forrest	HC=99, SZ=98
Total=197	74%	(Greenstein et al., 2012)	
sMRI	Schizophrenia
(cognitive
deficit and
cognitive
spared)	Whole brain voxel-based morphometry	N/A	SVM	HC=163, SZ=208,
SZA=41,
Total=412	56-72%	(Gould et al., 2014)	
sMRI	Schizophrenia	Volumetric measurements based on
deformation-based morphometry	39/44	SVM	HC1=38, HC2=41,
SZ1=23, SZ2=46
Total1=61,
Total2=87	91%	(Fan et al., 2007)	
sMRI	Schizophrenia	Volumetric measures of all WM, GM and
CSF	69	SVM-RFE	HC=38, SZ=23
Total=61	92%	(Fan et al., 2005)	
sMRI	Schizophrenia	Whole brain volumetric measurements	N/A	Nonlinear
Classifier (not
specified)	HC=79, SZ=69
Total=148	81%	(Davatzikos et al., 2005)	
sMRI	Schizophrenia	Hippocampal and thalamic shape
eigenvectors	25	Discriminant
Function Analysis	HC=65, SZ=52
Total=117	79%	(Csernansky et al., 2004)	
sMRI	Schizophrenia	Visual words extracted from DLPFC by
SIFT and clustered by k-means	30	SVM with local
kernel	HC=54, SZ=54
Total=108	66-75%	(Castellani et al., 2012)	
sMRI	Schizophrenia	Surface morpholical Measures	N/A	Semi-supervised
(Hierarchical
Clustering)	HC=40, SZ=65,
Total=105	94.0%	(Bansal et al., 2012)	
sMRI and dMRI	Schizophrenia/
MDD	Volume and FA of Insula, thalamus, ACC,
Ventricles and corpus callosum	31	LDA	MDD=25, SZ=25
Total=50	72-88%	(Ota et al., 2013)	
sMRI, rsfMRI and dMRI	Schizophrenia	Gray matter densities from structural, FA
from DTI and ALFF from fMRI	1863	SVM	HC=28, SZ=35
Total=63	79%	(Sui et al., 2013b)	

Table 4 Summary of 19 MRI-based depressive disorder classification studies.

Modality	Disorder	Features	# Features	Classifier	Number of Subjects	Overall Accuracy	Reference	
dMRI	MDD	Whole-brain anatomical connectivity
patterns	50	SVM	HC=26, MDD=22,
Total=48	91.7%	(Fang et al., 2012)	
fMRI (facial
affect
recognition task)	MDD	Brain activation maps and ROI-averaged
activation features	N/A	One-class SVM	HC=19, Depressed=19,
Total=38	63-65.5%
(estimated)	(Mourão-Miranda et al., 2011)	
fMRI (gender
discrimination
and emotional
tasks)	MDD	Sparse network-based features of FC	9316	SVM	HC=19, MDD=19,
Total=38	78.9-85.0%	(Rosa et al., 2015)	
fMRI (social
concept task)	MDD	GM maps of PPI analysis	N/A	Maximum Entropy
LDA	HC=21, MDD=25,
Total=46	78.1%
(AUC)	(Sato et al., 2015)	
fMRI (verbal
fluency task)	MDD	Voxel-wise contrast map	14055	Regularized
Logistic Regression,
SVM (best
performance)	HC=31, MDD=31,
Total=62	90.0-95.0%	(Shimizu et al., 2015)	
rsfMRI	MDD	FC maps of sACC	N/A	Label Generation
Maximum Marging
Clustering	HC=29, MDD=24,
Total=53	92.5%	(Zeng et al., 2014)	
rsfMRI	MDI)	Hurst components of resting-state networks	12	SVM	HC=20, MDD=20,
Total=40	90%	(Wei et al., 2013)	
rsfMRI	MDD	Netowrk-based measures based on FC
among ROIs	2-25	SVM	HC=22, MDD=21,
Total=43	99%	(Lord et al., 2012)	
rsfMRI	MDD	FC among AA1 regions	31	SVM	HC=37 MDD=39,
Total=76	76.6%	(Cao et al., 2014)	
rsfMRI	First-onset
Depressive
Disorder	Graph-theory Measures	30	ANN	HC=27, first-onset
depression=36, Total=63	90.5%	(H. Guo et al., 2014)	
rsfMRI	Subthreshold
Depression	ReHo features of ROIs	8 ROIs	Fisher stepwise
discriminant
analysis	NC=19, StD=19,
Total=37	91.9%	(Ma et al., 2013)	
sMRI	MDD/BP	GM, WM and ventricles volumetric maps
(RAVENS)	53-99	SVM	HC1=33, HC2=38,
MDD=19, BP=23,
Total=113	54.6-66.1%	(Serpa et al., 2014)	
sMRI	MDD/BP	Gray matter volumes of Caudate and
Ventral Diencephalon	4	SVM	HC=61, BP=40,
MDD=57, RMD=35,
Total=193	59.5-62.7%	(Sacchet et al., 2015)	
sMRI	MDD/BP	Volumetric measurements	5	Discriminant
function analysis	HC=22, MDD=32,
BP=14, Total=68	81.0%	(MacMaster et al., 2014)	
sMRI	MDD/BP	Cortical thickness and surface area	18	SVM	HC=29, MDD=19,
BP=16	74.3%	(Fung et al., 2015)	
sMRI	MDD	Feature-based morphometric measures of
GM maps	N/A	SVM and RVM	HC=32, MDD=30,
Total=62	90.3%	(Mwangi et al., 2012)	
sMRI	MDD	GM and WM densities	N/A	SVM	HC=42, RDD=23,
NDD=23, Total=88	58.7-84.6%	(Gong et al., 2011)	
sMRI	MDD	Cortical thickness of several ROIs	68	SVM	HC=15, MDD=18,
Total=33	70%	(Foland-Ross et al., 2015)	
sMRI, rsfMRI and dMRI	LLD	Variety of features from each modality	13 Feature
Sets	Alternating
Decision Trees	EC=35, LLD=33,
Total=68	87.3%	(Patel et al., 2015)	

Table 5 Summary of 20 MRI-based ASD classification studies.

Modality	Disorder	Features	# Features	Classifier	Number of Subjects	Overall Accuracy	Reference	
dMRI	ASD	FA and MD of selected ROIs	18	SVM	TDC=30, ASD=45,
Total=75	80%	(Ingalhalikar et al., 2011)	
fMRI (social
interaction task)	ASD	Activation of selected voxels processed by
factor analysis	4 factors	Gaussian Naïve
Bayes	HC=17, TDC=17,
Total=34	97%	(Just et al., 2014)	
fMRI (two
language tasks
and a Theory-
of-Mind task)	ASD	AG, MPFC and PCC based FC maps	N/A	Logistic Regression	TD=14, ASD=13,
Total=27	96.0%	(Murdaugh et al., 2012)	
fMRI-Task and
DMRI	ASD	Causal connectivity weights, FC values and
FA values	19	SVM	TDC=15, ASD=15,
Total=30	95.9%	(Deshpande et al., 2013)	
rsfMRI	ASD	ICA components of rsfMRI	10
components	Logistic Regression	TDC=20, ASD=20,
Total=40	78.0%	(Uddin et al., 2013)	
rsfMRI	ASD	FC among ROIs	Variable	Logistic Regression
and SVM (best
results)	TD1=59, TD2=89
ASD1=59, ASD2=89,
Total=296	76.7%	(Plitt et al., 2015)	
rsfMRI	ASD	FC among 90 ROIs	4005	Probabilistic
Neural Network	TDC=328, ASD=312,
Total=640	90%	(Iidaka, 2015)	
rsfMRI	ASD	Functional Connectivity among 220 ROIs	24090	Random Forest	TDC=126, ASD=126,
Total=252	91%	(Chen et al., 2015)	
rsfMRI	ASD	FC among ROIs	26,393,745	Threshodling	TD=40, ASD=40,
Total=80	79.0%	(Anderson et al., 2011)	
sMRI	ASD	Thickness and volumetric of ROIs along
with interregional features	N/A	Multi-kernel SVM	HC=59, ASD=58,
Total=117	96.3%	(Wee et al., 2014)	
sMRI	ASD	Voxel-wise GM and WM maps	N/A	SVM	TD=24, ASD=24,
Total=48	92.0%	(Uddin et al., 2011)	
sMRI	ASD	GM volume map	N/A	SVM	HC=40, ASD=52, ASD-
Sib=40	80.0-85.0%	(Segovia et al., 2014)	
sMRI	ASD	Regional thickness measurements extracted
from SBM	7	Logistic model
trees	HC=16, ASD=22,
Total=38	87%	(Jiao et al., 2010)	
sMRI	ASD	Morphometric features of selected ROIs	314	SVM	HC=20, ASD=21,
Total=41	74% (AUC)	(Gori et al., 2015)	
sMRI	ASD	GM and WM maps	&gt;10,000	SVM	HC=22, ASD=22,
Total=44	77%	(Ecker et al., 2010b)	
sMRI	ASD	Volumetric and geometric features of
selected cortical locations	5 features
from each
ROI	SVM	HC=20, ASD=20, Total-
40	85%	(Ecker et al., 2010a)	
sMRI	ASD	Gray maps from VBM-DARTEL	200	SVM	TDC=38, ASD=30, Total
= 76	80.0%
(AUC)	(Calderoni et al., 2012)	
sMRI	ASD	Volumetric measures and cerebellar vermis
area	9	Discriminant
Function Analysis	TDC=15, ASD=52,
Total=67	92.3-95.8%	(Akshoomoff et al., 2004)	
sMRI, dMRI
and MRS	ASD	Cortical thickness, FA and neurochemical
concentration	3	Decision Tree	TD=18, ASD=19,
Total=37	91.9%	(Libero et al., 2015)	
sMRI, rsfMRI	ASD	Volume of selected subcortical regions,
fALFF, number of voxels and Z-values of
selected regions and global VMHC voxel
number	22	Random Tree
Classifier	TDC=153, ASD=127,
Total=280	70.0%	(Zhou et al., 2014)	

Table 6 Summary of 22 MRI-based ADHD classification studies.

Modality	Disorder	Features	# Features	Classifier	Number of Subjects	Overall Accuracy	Reference	
fMRI (Stop
Task)	ADHD	Whole brain GLM coefficient map	21,658	Gaussian Process
Classifier	HC=30, ADHD=30,
Total=60	77%	(Hart et al., 2014a)	
fMRI (Six
Tasks)	ADHD	Network measures based on FC values	N/A	SVM	ADHD-IA=13, ADHD-
C=21, Total=34	91.2%	(Park et al., 2015)	
fMRI (temporal
discrimination
task)	ADHD	Brain Activation Map	N/A	Gaussian Process	HC=20. ADHD=20,
Total=40	75.0%	(Hart et al., 2014b)	
rsfMRI	ADHD	ReHo Maps	N/A	PCA-based Fisher
discriminative analysis	HC=12, ADHD=12,
Total=24	85.0%	(Zhu et al., 2008)	
rsfMRI	ADHD	ReHo Maps	6500	SVM	HC=23, ADHD=23,
Total=46	80.0%	(Wang et al., 2013)	
rsfMRI	ADHD	FFT and different varation of PCA on the
BOLD signals along with phenotypic
measures	About
7,000	SVM	HC=429, ADHD-I=98,
ADHD-C=141,
Total=668	68.86-76%	(Sidhu et al., 2012)	
rsfMRI	ADHD	ReHO, ALLFand RSN	400 for
each
feature type	Logistic Regression
(best performance)	HC=546, ADHD-
IA=122, ADHD-HI=12,
ADHD-C=249,
Total=929	54% ADHD
Subtype:
67%	(Sato et al., 2012)	
rsfMRI	ADHD	Graph based features based on FC	150	SVM-based MVPA	TDC=455, ADHD-I=80,
ADHD-C=112 Total=647	63.4-82.7%	(Fair et al., 2012)	
rsfMRI	ADHD	Graph-based measures compressed by
Multi-Dimensional Scaling	2	SVM	HC=307, ADHD=180,
Total=487	73.5%	(Dey et al., 2014)	
rsfMRI	ADHD	Directional connectivity measures	200	Artificial Neural
Network	TDC=744, ADHD=433,
Total=1177	90%	(Deshpande et al., 2015)	
sMRI	ADHD/Dyslexia	Morphometric measures of ROIs	6	Discriminant
Function Analysis	HC=10, ADHD=10,
Dyslexia=10, Total=30	60.0-87%%	(Semrud-Clikeman et al., 1996)	
sMRI	ADHD	Cortical thickness measures	340	ELM	HC=55, ADHD=55,
Total=110	90.2%	(Peng et al., 2013)	
sMRI	ADHD	Voxel-wise GM Volumetric Measures	N/A	Gaussian Process
Classifier	HC=19, ASD=19,
ADHD=20	68.2-85.2%	(Lim et al., 2013)	
sMRI	ADHD	WM maps	N/A	SVM	HC=34, ADHD=34,
Total=68	93%	(Johnston et al., 2014)	
sMRI	ADHD	Caudate nucleus volumetric measures	N/A	Adaboost and SVM	HC=39 AHDH=39,
Total=78	72.5%	(Igual et al., 2012)	
sMRI	ADHD	Texture features based on isotropic local
binary patterns on three orthogonal planes	117-
33630	SVM	HC=226, ADHD=210,
Total=436	69.9%	(Chang et al., 2012)	
sMRI	ADHD	Surface morphometric measures	N/A	Semi-supervised
(Hierarchical
Clustering)	HC=42, ADHD=41,
Total=83	91.0%	(Bansal et al., 2012)	
sMRI + rsfMRI
+Phenotypic
data	ADHD	Curvature index, folding index, Gaussian
curvature, gray matter volume, mean
curvature, surface area, thickness average,
and thickness standard deviation along with
functional connectivity measures and
phenotypic data	20	NMF + Decision
Tree	TD=472, ADHD=276,
Total=748	66.8%	(Anderson et al., 2014)	
sMRI + rsfMRI	ADHD	Various anatomical, network and non-
imaging measures	5-6000	SVM	TDC=491, ADHD=285,
Total=776	80.0%
(AUC)	(Bohland et al., 2012)	
sMRI and
fMRI-
Task(Flanker/NoGo)	ADHD	Whole brain GLM coefficients and GM
maps from VBM	N/A	SVM	HC=18, ADHD=18,
Total=36	61.1-77.8%	(Iannaccone et al., 2015)	
sMRI and rsfMRI	ADHD	Cortical thickness and GM maps from
sMRI and ReHo and FC from rsfMRI	N/A	SVM and Multi-
Kernel Learning	TCD=402, ADHD=222,
Total=624	61.5%	(D. Dai et al., 2012)	
sMRI and
rsfMRI	ADHD	Morphological measures, FC, power spectra
and graph measures	Variable
(&gt;100)	Multiple SVM	TD=491, ADHD=285,
Total=776	55%	(Colby et al., 2012)	

Highlights

Past efforts on classification of brain disorders are comprehensively reviewed.

The common pitfalls from machine learning point of view are discussed.

Emerging trends related to single-subject prediction are reviewed and discussed.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

1 Search Term: (“Machine Learning” OR SVM OR “automatic Classification” OR “discriminant analysis” OR “neural Network” OR “Logistic Regressions” OR “decision tree”) AND (MRI OR “Magnetic Resonance” OR fMRI OR “functional MRI” OR “structural MRI” OR “Diffusion MRI” OR DTI OR DSI) AND (schizophrenia OR bipolar OR Alzheimer's OR “Mild Cognitive Impairment” OR MCI OR autism OR “autism spectrum disorder” OR ASD OR depression OR “depressive disorder” OR ADHD OR “Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder”) concluded on 12/08/2015.

2 http://image-net.org/

The authors report no financial relationships with commercial interests.


References

Abdulkadir A Mortamet B Vemuri P Jack CR Krueger G Klöppel S Effects of hardware heterogeneity on the performance of SVM Alzheimer's disease classifier. Neuroimage 2011 58 785 792 doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.06.029 21708272
Adaszewski S Dukart J Kherif F Frackowiak R Draganski B How early can we predict Alzheimer's disease using computational anatomy? Neurobiol. Aging 2013 34 2815 2826 doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2013.06.015 23890839
Aguilar C Westman E Muehlboeck J-S Mecocci P Vellas B Tsolaki M Kloszewska I Soininen FL Lovestone S Spenger C Simmons A Wahlund L-O Different multivariate techniques for automated classification of MRI data in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment. Psychiatry Res 2013 212 89 98 doi: 10.1016/j.pscychresns.2012.11.005 23541334
Akshoomoff N Lord C Lincoln AJ Courchesne RY Carper RA Townsend J Courchesne E Outcome classification of preschool children with autism spectrum disorders using MRI brain measures. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2004 43 349 357 doi:10.1097/00004583-200403000-00018 15076269
Alberg AJ Park JW Hager BW Brock MV Diener-West M The use of “overall accuracy” to evaluate the validity of screening or diagnostic tests. J. Gen. Intern. Med 2004 19 460 465 15109345
Albert MS DeKosky ST Dickson D Dubois B Feldman HH Fox NC Gamst A Holtzman DM Jagust WJ Petersen RC The diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment due to Alzheimer's disease: Recommendations from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer's Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimer's Dement 2011 7 270 279 others 21514249
Andersen AH Rayens WS Liu Y Smith CD Partial least squares for discrimination in fMRI data. Magn Reson Imaging 2012 30 446 452 doi:10.1016/j.mri.2011.11.001 22227352
Anderson A Cohen MS Decreased small-world functional network connectivity and clustering across resting state networks in schizophrenia: an fMRI classification tutorial. Front. Hum. Neurosci 2013 7 520 doi:10.3389/fnhum.2013.00520 24032010
Anderson A Douglas PK Kerr WT Haynes VS Yuille AL Xie J Wu YN Brown JA Cohen MS Non-negative matrix factorization of multimodal MRI, fMRI and phenotypic data reveals differential changes in default mode subnetworks in ADHD. Neuroimage 2014 102 Pt 1 207 219 doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.12.015 24361664
Anderson JS Nielsen JA Froehlich AL DuBray MB Druzgal TJ Cariello AN Cooperrider JR Zielinski BA Ravichandran C Fletcher PT Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism. Brain 2011 134 3742 3754 others 22006979
Anticevic A Cole MW Repovs G Murray JD Brumbaugh MS Winkler AM Savic A Krystal JH Pearlson GD Glahn DC Characterizing thalamo-cortical disturbances in schizophrenia and bipolar illness. Cereb. Cortex 2014 24 3116 3130 doi:10.1093/cercor/bhtl65 23825317
Apostolova LG Hwang KS Kohannim O Avila D Elashoff D Jack CR Shaw L Trojanowski JQ Weiner MW Thompson PM ApoE4 effects on automated diagnostic classifiers for mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease. Neuroimage Clin 2014 4 461 472 doi:10.1016/j.nicl.2013.12.012 24634832
Arbabshirani MR Calhoun VD Functional network connectivity during rest and task: Comparison of healthy controls and schizophrenic patients 2011 Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society 2011 4418 4421 IEEE Boston, MA
Arbabshirani MR Calhoun VD Functional network connectivity during rest and task: Comparison of healthy controls and schizophrenic patients. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc 2011 2011 4418 4421 doi:10.1109/IEMBS.2011.6091096 22255319
Arbabshirani MR Kiehl KA Pearlson GD Calhoun VD Classification of schizophrenia patients based on resting-state functional network connectivity. Front. Neurosci 2013
Ardekani B. a. Tabesh A Sevy S Robinson DG Bilder RM Szeszko PR Diffusion tensor imaging reliably differentiates patients with schizophrenia from healthy volunteers. Hum. Brain Mapp 2011 32 1 9 doi:10.1002/hbm.20995 20205252
Arimura H Yoshiura T Kumazawa S Tanaka K Koga H Mihara F Honda H Sakai S Toyofuku F Higashida Y Automated method for identification of patients with Alzheimer's disease based on three-dimensional MR images. Acad Radiol 2008 15 274 284 doi:10.1016/j.acra.2007.10.020 18280925
Arribas JI Calhoun VD Adali T Automatic bayesian classification of healthy controls, bipolar disorder, and schizophrenia using intrinsic connectivity maps from fMRI data. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng 2010 57 2850 2860 doi:10.1109/TBME.2010.2080679 20876002
Association AP Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders:: DSM-5. ManMag 2003 others
Bai Z-J Chan RH Luk FT Principal Component Analysis for Distributed Data Sets with Updating Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Advanced Parallel Processing Technologies, APPT'05 2005 471 483 Springer-Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg
Baio J Prevalence of Autism Spectrum Disorders: Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network, 14 Sites, United States, 2008. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report. Surveillance Summaries 2012 61 3 Centers Dis. Control Prev
Baker B Silva R Calhoun VD Sarwate AD Plis S Large scale collabortion with automony: decentralized data ICA IEEE Machine Learning for Signal Processing Workshop 2015 Boston, MA.
Bansal R Staib LH Laine AF Hao X Xu D Liu J Weissman M Peterson BS Anatomical brain images alone can accurately diagnose chronic neuropsychiatric illnesses 2012
Bassett DS Nelson BG Mueller B. a. Camchong J Lim KO Altered resting state complexity in schizophrenia. Neuroimage 2012 59 2196 2207 doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.10.002 22008374
Batmanghelich NK Taskar B Davatzikos C Generative-discriminative basis learning for medical imaging. IEEE Trans Med Imaging 2012 31 51 69 doi:10.1109/TMI.2011.2162961 21791408
Beheshti I Demirel H Probability distribution function-based classification of structural MRI for the detection of Alzheimer's disease. Comput. Biol. Med 2015 64 208 216 doi:10.1016/j.compbiomed.2015.07.006 26226415
Beltrachini L De Marco M Taylor ZA Lotjonen J Frangi AF Venneri A Integration of Cognitive Tests and Resting State fMRI for the Individual Identification of Mild Cognitive Impairment. Curr Alzheimer Res 2015 12 592 603 26238814
Bengio Y Deep learning of representations: Looking forward Statistical Language and Speech Processing 2013 1 37 Springer
Bengio Y Deep learning of representations for unsupervised and transfer learning. Unsupervised Transf. Learn. Challenges Mach. Learn 2012 7 19
Bergouignan L Lefranc JP Chupin M Morel N Spano JP Fossati P Breast cancer affects both the hippocampus volume and the episodic autobiographical memory retrieval. PLoS One 2011 6 e25349 doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0025349 22016764
Bhugra D The global prevalence of schizophrenia. PLoS Med 2005 2 372
Biederman J Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: a selective overview. Biol. Psychiatry 2005 57 1215 1220 15949990
Bishop C~M Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning (Information Science and Statistics) 2006 Springer
Biswal BB Mennes M Zuo X-N Gohel S Kelly C Smith SM Beckmann CF Adelstein JS Buckner RL Colcombe S Toward discovery science of human brain function. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci 2010 107 4734 4739 others 20176931
Bleich-Cohen M Jamshy S Sharon H Weizman R Intrator N Poyurovsky M Hendler T Machine learning fMRI classifier delineates subgroups of schizophrenia patients. Schizophr. Res 2014 160 196 200 doi:10.1016/j.schres.2014.10.033 25464921
Blum AL Langley P Selection of relevant features and examples in machine learning. Artif. Intell 1997 97 245 271
Bockholt HJ Scully M Courtney W Rachakonda S Scott A Caprihan A Fries J Kalyanam R Segall JM de la Garza R Mining the Mind Research Network: {A} Novel framework for exploring large scale, heterogeneous translational neuroscience research data sources. Front. Neuroinform 2009 3 others
Bohland JW Saperstein S Pereira F Rapin J Grady L Network, anatomical, and non-imaging measures for the prediction of ADHD diagnosis in individual subjects. Front Syst Neurosci 2012 6 78 doi:10.3389/fnsys.2012.00078 23267318
Bottino CMC Castro CC Gomes RLE Buchpiguel CA Marchetti RL Neto MRL Volumetric MRI measurements can differentiate Alzheimer's disease, mild cognitive impairment, and normal aging. Int Psychogeriatr 2002 14 59 72 12094908
Boubela RN Kalcher K Huf W Seidel E-M Derntl B Pezawas L Nasel C Moser E fMRI measurements of amygdala activation are confounded by stimulus correlated signal fluctuation in nearby veins draining distant brain regions. Sci. Rep 2015 5
Brookmeyer R Johnson E Ziegler-Graham K Arrighi HM Forecasting the global burden of Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimer's Dement 2007 3 186 191 19595937
Brown G Pocock A Zhao M-J Lujan M Conditional Likelihood Maximisation: A Unifying Framework for Mutual Information Feature Selection. J. Mach. Learn. Res 2012 13 27 66
Brown MRG Sidhu GS Greiner R Asgarian N Bastani M Silverstone PH Greenshaw AJ Dursun SM ADHD-200 Global Competition: diagnosing ADHD using personal characteristic data can outperform resting state fMRI measurements. Front. Syst. Neurosci 2012 6
Buccigrossi R Ellisman M Grethe J Haselgrove C Kennedy DN Martone M Preuss N Reynolds K Sullivan M Turner J The Neuroimaging Informatics Tools and Resources Clearinghouse (NITRC). AMIA... Annual Symposium Proceedings/AMIA Symposium. AMIA Symposium 2007 1000 others 18694099
Caan M.W. a Vermeer K. a. van Vliet LJ Majoie CBLM Peters BD den Heeten GJ Vos FM Shaving diffusion tensor images in discriminant analysis: A study into schizophrenia. Med. Image Anal 2006 10 841 849 doi: 10.1016/j.media.2006.07.006 16965928
Calderoni S Retico A Biagi L Tancredi R Muratori F Tosetti M Female children with autism spectrum disorder: an insight from mass-univariate and pattern classification analyses. Neuroimage 2012 59 1013 1022 doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.08.070 21896334
Calhoun V Arbabshirani MR Singh I Sinnott-Armstrong WP Savulescu J Neuroimaging-Based Automatic Classification of Schizophrenia Bioprediction, Biomarkers and Bad Behavior 2012 206 230 Oxford Univ Press
Calhoun VD Adali T Kiehl KA Astur R Pekar JJ Pearlson GD A method for multitask f{MRI} data fusion applied to schizophrenia. Hum. Brain Mapp 2006a 27 598 610 16342150
Calhoun VD Adali T Feature-Based Fusion of Medical Imaging Data. Inf. Technol. Biomed. IEEE Trans 2009 13 711 720 doi:10.1109/TITB.2008.923773
Calhoun VD Adali T Giuliani NR Pekar JJ Kiehl KA Pearlson GD Method for multimodal analysis of independent source differences in schizophrenia: Combining gray matter structural and auditory oddball functional data. Hum. Brain Mapp 2006b 27 47 62 doi:10.1002/hbm.20166 16108017
Calhoun VD Maciejewski PK Pearlson GD Kiehl K. a. Temporal lobe and “default” hemodynamic brain modes discriminate between schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. Hum. Brain Mapp 2008 29 1265 1275 doi:10.1002/hbm.20463 17894392
Calhoun VD Sui J Multimodal fusion of brain imaging data: A key to finding the missing link (s) in complex mental illness. Biol. Psychiatry Cogn. Neurosci. Neuroimaging 2016
Cao H Duan J Lin D Calhoun V Wang Y-P Integrating fMRI and SNP data for biomarker identification for schizophrenia with a sparse representation based variable selection method. BMC Med. Genomics 6 Suppl 2013 3 S2 doi:10.1186/1755-8794-6-S3-S2
Cao L Guo S Xue Z Hu Y Liu H Mwansisya TE Pu W Yang B Liu C Feng J Chen EYH Liu Z Aberrant functional connectivity for diagnosis of major depressive disorder: a discriminant analysis. Psychiatry Clin. Neurosci 2014 68 110 119 doi:10.1111/pcn.l2106 24552631
Caprihan a. Pearlson GD Calhoun VD Application of principal component analysis to distinguish patients with schizophrenia from healthy controls based on fractional anisotropy measurements. Neuroimage 2008 42 675 682 doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.04.255 18571937
Casanova R Hsu F-C Espeland MA Classification of structural MRI images in Alzheimer's disease from the perspective of ill-posed problems. PLoS One 2012 7 e44877 doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0044877 23071501
Castellani U Rossato E Murino V Bellani M Rambaldelli G Perlini C Tomelleri L Tansella M Brambilla P Classification of schizophrenia using feature-based morphometry. J. Neural Transm 2012 119 395 404 doi: 10.1007/s00702-011-0693-7 21904897
Castro E Gómez-Verdejo V Martínez-Ramon M Kiehl K. a. Calhoun VD A multiple kernel learning approach to perform classification of groups from complex-valued fMRI data analysis: Application to schizophrenia. Neuroimage 2014 87 1 17 doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.10.065 24225489
Castro E Martinez-Ramón M Pearlson G Sui J Calhoun VD Characterization of groups using composite kernels and multi-source fMRI analysis data: Application to schizophrenia. Neuroimage 2011 58 526 536 doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.06.044 21723948
Castro E Ulloa A Plis SM Turner JA Calhoun VD Simulation of Structural Magnetic Resonance Images for Deep Learning Pre-Training IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging 2015 New York, NY, USA.
Cetin MS Christensen F Abbott CC Stephen JM Mayer AR Cafiive JM Bustillo JR Pearlson GD Calhoun VD Thalamus and posterior temporal lobe show greater inter-network connectivity at rest and across sensory paradigms in schizophrenia. Neuroimage 2014 97 117 126 24736181
Çetin MS Khullar S Damaraju E Michael AM Baum S. a. Calhoun VD Enhanced disease characterization through multi network functional normalization in fMRI. Front. Neurosci 2015 9 1 15 doi:10.3389/fnins.2015.00095 25653585
Challis E Hurley P Serra L Bozzali M Oliver S Cercignani M Gaussian process classification of Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment from resting-state fMRI. Neuroimage 2015 112 232 243 doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.02.037 25731993
Chang C-W Ho C-C Chen J-H ADHD classification by a texture analysis of anatomical brain MRI data. Front Syst Neurosci 2012 6 66 doi:10.3389/fnsys.2012.00066 23024630
Chaudhuri K Monteleoni C Sarwate AD Differentially private empirical risk minimization. J. Mach. Learn. Res 2011 12 1069 1109 21892342
Chen CP Keown CL Jahedi A Nair A Pflieger ME Bailey BA Miiller R-A Diagnostic classification of intrinsic functional connectivity highlights somatosensory, default mode, and visual regions in autism. Neuroimage Clin 2015 8 238 245 doi:10.1016/j.nicl.2015.04.002 26106547
Chen Y Storrs J Tan L Mazlack LJ Lee J-H Lu LJ Detecting brain structural changes as biomarker from magnetic resonance images using a local feature based SVM approach. J. Neurosci. Methods 2014 221 22 31 doi:10.1016/j.jneumeth.2013.09.001 24041480
Cheng B Liu M Zhang D Munsell BC Shen D Domain Transfer Learning for MCI Conversion Prediction. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng 2015 62 1805 1817 doi:10.1109/TBME.2015.2404809 25751861
Cheng H Newman S Goni J Kent JS Howell J Bolbecker A Puce A O'Donnell BF Hetrick WP Nodal centrality of functional network in the differentiation of schizophrenia. Schizophr. Res 2015 168 345 352 doi:10.1016/j.schres.2015.08.011 26299706
Chincarini A Bosco P Calvini P Gemme G Esposito M Olivieri C Rei L Squarcia S Rodriguez G Bellotti R Cerello P De Mitri I Retico A Nobili F Local MRI analysis approach in the diagnosis of early and prodromal Alzheimer's disease. Neuroimage 2011 58 469 80 doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.05.083 21718788
Chu C Hsu A-L Chou K-H Bandettini P Lin C Does feature selection improve classification accuracy? Impact of sample size and feature selection on classification using anatomical magnetic resonance images. Neuroimage 2012 60 59 70 doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.11.066 22166797
Chyzhyk D Savio A Grana M Computer aided diagnosis of schizophrenia on resting state fMRI data by ensembles of ELM. Neural Networks 2015 68 23 33 doi:10.1016/j.neunet.2015.04.002 25965771
Colby JB Rudie JD Brown JA Douglas PK Cohen MS Shehzad Z Insights into multimodal imaging classification of ADHD. Front Syst Neurosci 2012 6 59 doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2012.00059 22912605
Collingridge DS A primer on quantitized data analysis and permutation testing. J. Mix. Methods Res 2013 7 81 97
Consortium, A.-200 The ADHD-200 consortium: a model to advance the translational potential of neuroimaging in clinical neuroscience. Front. Syst. Neurosci 2012 6 others
Costafreda SG Dinov ID Tu Z Shi Y Liu C-Y Kloszewska I Mecocci P Soininen H Tsolaki M Vellas B Wahlund L-O Spenger C Toga AW Lovestone S Simmons A Automated hippocampal shape analysis predicts the onset of dementia in mild cognitive impairment. Neuroimage 2011a 56 212 219 doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.01.050 21272654
Costafreda SG Fu CHY Picchioni M Toulopoulou T McDonald C Kravariti E Walshe M Prata D Murray RM McGuire PK Pattern of neural responses to verbal fluency shows diagnostic specificity for schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. BMC Psychiatry 2011b 11 18 doi:10.1186/1471-244X-ll-18 21276242
Coupé P Eskildsen SF Manjon JV Fonov VS Collins DL Simultaneous segmentation and grading of anatomical structures for patient's classification: application to Alzheimer's disease. Neuroimage 2012 59 3736 3747 doi: 10.1016/j .neuroimage.2011.10.080 22094645
Csernansky JG Schindler MK Splinter NR Wang L Gado M Selemon LD Rastogi-Cruz D Posener J. a. Thompson P. a. Miller MI Abnormalities of Thalamic Volume and Shape in Schizophrenia. Am. J. Psychiatry 2004 161 896 902 doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.161.5.896 15121656
Cui Y Liu B Luo S Zhen X Fan M Liu T Zhu W Park M Jiang T Jin JS Identification of conversion from mild cognitive impairment to Alzheimer's disease using multivariate predictors. PLoS One 2011 6 e21896 doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0021896 21814561
Cui Y Wen W Lipnicki DM Beg MF Jin JS Luo S Zhu W Kochan NA Reppermund S Zhuang L Raamana PR Liu T Trollor JN Wang L Brodaty H Sachdev PS Automated detection of amnestic mild cognitive impairment in community-dwelling elderly adults: a combined spatial atrophy and white matter alteration approach. Neuroimage 2012 59 1209 1217 doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.08.013 21864688
Cuingnet R Gerardin E Tessieras J Auzias G Lehericy S Habert M-O Chupin M Benali H Colliot O Automatic classification of patients with Alzheimer's disease from structural MRI: a comparison of ten methods using the ADNI database. Neuroimage 2011 56 766 781 doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.06.013 20542124
Cuingnet R Glaunés JA Chupin M Benali H Colliot O Spatial and Anatomical Regularization of SVM: A General Framework for Neuroimaging Data. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 2013 35 682 696 doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2012.142 22732664
Dai D Wang J Hua J He H Classification of ADHD children through multimodal magnetic resonance imaging. Front Syst Neurosci 2012 6 63 doi:10.3389/fnsys.2012.00063 22969710
Dai Z Yan C Wang Z Wang J Xia M Li K He Y Discriminative analysis of early Alzheimer's disease using multi-modal imaging and multi-level characterization with multi-classifier (M3). Neuroimage 2012 59 2187 2195 doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.10.003 22008370
Davatzikos C Shen D Gur RC Wu X Liu D Fan Y Hughett P Turetsky BI Gur RE Whole-brain morphometric study of schizophrenia revealing a spatially complex set of focal abnormalities. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 2005 62 1218 1227 doi:10.1001/archpsyc.62.11.1218 16275809
Dazzan P Neuroimaging biomarkers to predict treatment response in schizophrenia: the end of 30 years of solitude? Dialogues Clin Neurosci 2014 16 491 503 25733954
DeCarli C Murphy DG Mcintosh AR Teichberg D Schapiro MB Horwitz B Discriminant analysis of MRI measures as a method to determine the presence of dementia of the Alzheimer type. Psychiatry Res 1995 57 119 130 7480379
Demirci O Clark VP Calhoun VD A projection pursuit algorithm to classify individuals using fMRI data: Application to schizophrenia. Neuroimage 2008a 39 1774 82 doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2007.10.012 18396487
Demirci O Clark VP Magnotta V. a. Andreasen NC Lauriello J Kiehl K. a. Pearlson GD Calhoun VD A review of challenges in the use of fMRI for disease classification / characterization and A projection pursuit application from A multi-site fMRI schizophrenia study. Brain Imaging Behav 2008b 2 207 226 doi:10.1007/sl 1682-008-9028-1
Deshpande G Libera LE Sreenivasan KR Deshpande HD Kana RK Identification of neural connectivity signatures of autism using machine learning. Front Hum Neurosci 2013 7 670 doi:10.3389/fnhum.2013.00670 24151458
Deshpande G Wang P Rangaprakash D Wilamowski B Fully Connected Cascade Artificial Neural Network Architecture for Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder Classification From Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging Data. IEEE Trans Cybern 2015 45 2668 2679 doi:10.1109/TCYB.2014.2379621 25576588
Dey S Rao AR Shah M Attributed graph distance measure for automatic detection of attention deficit hyperactive disordered subjects. Front Neural Circuits 2014 8 64 doi:10.3389/fncir.2014.00064 24982615
Dey S Rao AR Shah M Exploiting the brain's network structure in identifying ADHD subjects. Front Syst Neurosci 2012 6 75 doi:10.3389/fnsys.2012.00075 23162440
DeYoe EA Bandettini P Neitz J Miller D Winans P Functional magnetic resonance imaging (FMRI) of the human brain. J. Neurosci. Methods 1994 54 171 187 7869750
Di Martino A Yan C-G Li Q Denio E Castellanos FX Alaerts K Anderson JS Assaf M Bookheimer SY Dapretto M The autism brain imaging data exchange: towards a large-scale evaluation of the intrinsic brain architecture in autism. Mol. Psychiatry 2014 19 659 667 others 23774715
DiLuca M Olesen J The cost of brain diseases: A burden or a challenge? Neuron 2014 82 1205 1208 doi: 10.1016/j .neuron.2014.05.044 24945765
Du W Calhoun VD Li H Ma S Eichele T Kiehl K. a. Pearlson GD Adali T High Classification Accuracy for Schizophrenia with Rest and Task fMRI Data. Front. Hum. Neurosci 2012 6 1 12 doi:10.3389/fnhum.2012.00145 22279433
Dukart J Mueller K Barthel H Villringer A Sabri O Schroeter ML Meta-analysis based SVM classification enables accurate detection of Alzheimer's disease across different clinical centers using FDG-PET and MRI. Psychiatry Res 2013 212 230 236 doi:10.1016/j.pscychresns.2012.04.007 23149027
Dwork C Differential privacy. Autom. Lang. Program 2006 1 12
Dyrba M Ewers M Wegrzyn M Kilimann I Plant C Oswald A Meindl T Pievani M Bokde ALW Fellgiebel A Filippi M Hampel H Kloppel S Hauenstein K Kirste T Teipel SJ Robust automated detection of microstructural white matter degeneration in Alzheimer's disease using machine learning classification of multicenter DTI data. PLoS One 2013 8 e64925 doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0064925 23741425
Dyrba M Grothe M Kirste T Teipel SJ Multimodal analysis of functional and structural disconnection in Alzheimer's disease using multiple kernel SVM. Hum Brain Mapp 2015 36 2118 2131 doi:10.1002/hbm.22759 25664619
Ecker C Marquand A Mourão-Miranda J Johnston P Daly EM Brammer MJ Maltezos S Murphy CM Robertson D Williams SC Murphy DGM Describing the brain in autism in five dimensions--magnetic resonance imaging–assisted diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder using a multiparameter classification approach. J. Neurosci 2010a 30 10612 10623 doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5413-09.2010 20702694
Ecker C Rocha-Rego V Johnston P Mourao-Miranda J Marquand A Daly EM Brammer MJ Murphy C Murphy DG Investigating the predictive value of whole-brain structural MR scans in autism: a pattern classification approach. Neuroimage 2010b 49 44 56 doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.08.024 19683584
Eickhoff S Turner JA Nichols TE Van Horn JD Sharing the wealth: Neuroimaging data repositories. Neuroimage 2016 124 1065 1068 26574120
Epstein J Stern E Silbersweig D Neuropsychiatry at the millenium: the potential for mind/brain integration through emerging interdisciplinary research strategies. Clin. Neurosci. Res 2001 1 10 18
Ernst RL Hay JW The US economic and social costs of Alzheimer's disease revisited. Am. J. Public Health 1994 84 1261 1264 8059882
Fair DA Nigg JT Iyer S Bathula D Mills KL Dosenbach NUF Schlaggar BL Mennes M Gutman D Bangaru S Buitelaar JK Dickstein DP Di Martino A Kennedy DN Kelly C Luna B Schweitzer JB Velanova K Wang Y-F Mostofsky S Castellanos FX Milham MP Distinct neural signatures detected for ADHD subtypes after controlling for micro-movements in resting state functional connectivity MRI data. Front Syst Neurosci 2012 6 80 doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2012.00080 23382713
Falahati F Westman E Simmons A Multivariate data analysis and machine learning in Alzheimer's disease with a focus on structural magnetic resonance imaging. J. Alzheimers Dis 2014 41 685 708 doi:10.3233/JAD-131928 24718104
Fan Y Gur RE Gur RC Wu X Shen D Calkins ME Davatzikos C Unaffected family members and schizophrenia patients share brain structure patterns: a high-dimensional pattern classification study. Biol. Psychiatry 2008a 63 118 124 17555720
Fan Y Liu Y Wu FL Hao Y Liu FL Liu Z Jiang T Discriminant analysis of functional connectivity patterns on Grassmann manifold. Neuroimage 2011 56 2058 2067 doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.03.051 21440643
Fan Y Resnick SM Wu X Davatzikos C Structural and functional biomarkers of prodromal Alzheimer's disease: a high-dimensional pattern classification study. Neuroimage 2008b 41 277 285 18400519
Fan Y Shen D Davatzikos C Classification of structural images via high-dimensional image warping, robust feature extraction, and SVM. Med. Image Comput. Comput. Assist. Interv 2005 8 1 8 doi: 10.1007/11566465_1 16685822
Fan Y Shen D Gur RC Gur RE Davatzikos C COMPARE: Classi cation of Morphological Patterns Using Adaptive Regional Elements. Comp. A J. Comp. Educ 2007 26 93 105
Fang P Zeng L-L Shen H Wang L Li B Liu L Hu D Increased cortical-limbic anatomical network connectivity in major depression revealed by diffusion tensor imaging. PLoS One 2012 7 e45972 doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0045972 23049910
Farhan S Fahiem MA Tauseef H An ensemble-of-classifiers based approach for early diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease: classification using structural features of brain images. Comput Math Methods Med 2014 2014 862307 doi:10.1155/2014/862307 25276224
Farzan A Mashohor S Ramli AR Mahmud R Boosting diagnosis accuracy of Alzheimer's disease using high dimensional recognition of longitudinal brain atrophy patterns. Behav. Brain Res 2015 290 124 130 doi:10.1016/j.bbr.2015.04.010 25889456
Fekete T Wilf M Rubin D Edelman S Malach R Mujica-Parodi LR Combining Classification with fMRI-Derived Complex Network Measures for Potential Neurodiagnostics. PLoS One 2013 8 doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0062867
Fisher SRA Genetiker S Fisher RA Genetician S Fisher RA Geneticien S The design of experiments. Oliver and Boyd Edinburgh 1960
Foland-Ross LC Sacchet MD Prasad G Gilbert B Thompson PM Gotlib IH Cortical thickness predicts the first onset of major depression in adolescence. Int. J. Dev. Neurosci 2015 46 125 131 doi: 10.1016/j .ijdevneu.2015.07.007 26315399
Ford JM Roach BJ Jorgensen KW Turner JA Brown GG Notestine R Bischoff-Grethe A Greve D Wible C Lauriello J Tuning in to the voices: a multisite FMRI study of auditory hallucinations. Schizophr. Bull 2009 35 58 66 others 18987102
Franke K Ziegler G Klöppel S Gaser C Estimating the age of healthy subjects from T 1-weighted MRI scans using kernel methods: Exploring the influence of various parameters. Neuroimage 2010 50 883 892 Initiative, A.D.N., others 20070949
Freeborough PA Fox NC MR image texture analysis applied to the diagnosis and tracking of Alzheimer's disease. IEEE Trans Med Imaging 1998 17 475 479 doi: 10.1109/42.712137 9735911
Frisoni GB Beltramello A Weiss C Geroldi C Bianchetti A Trabucchi M Linear measures of atrophy in mild Alzheimer disease. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 1996 17 913 923 8733967
Fung G Deng Y Zhao Q Li Z Qu M Li K Zeng Y-W Jin Z Ma Y-T Yu X Wang Z-R Shum DHK Chan RCK Distinguishing bipolar and major depressive disorders by brain structural morphometry: a pilot study. BMC Psychiatry 2015 15 298 doi:10.1186/sl2888-015-0685-5 26590556
Gaonkar B Davatzikos C Analytic estimation of statistical significance maps for support vector machine based multi-variate image analysis and classification. Neuroimage 2013 78 270 283 23583748
Gauthier S Reisberg B Zaudig M Petersen RC Ritchie K Broich K Belleville S Brodaty FL Bennett D Chertkow H Mild cognitive impairment. Lancet 2006 367 1262 1270 others 16631882
Gerardin E Chételat G Chupin M Cuingnet R Desgranges B Kim H-S Niethammer M Dubois B Lehericy S Garnero L Eustache F Colliot O Multidimensional classification of hippocampal shape features discriminates Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment from normal aging. Neuroimage 2009 47 1476 1486 doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.05.036 19463957
Gill PMW Efficient calculation of p-values in linear-statistic permutation significance tests. J. Stat. Comput. Simul 2007 77 55 61
Gollub RL Shoemaker JM King MD White T Ehrlich S Sponheim SR Clark VP Turner JA Mueller BA Magnotta V The MCIC collection: a shared repository of multi-modal, multi-site brain image data from a clinical investigation of schizophrenia. Neuroinformatics 2013 11 367 388 others 23760817
Gong Q Wu Q Scarpazza C Lui S Jia Z Marquand A Huang X McGuire P Mechelli A Prognostic prediction of therapeutic response in depression using high-field MR imaging. Neuroimage 2011 55 1497 1503 doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.11.079 21134472
Good PI Permutation, parametric, and bootstrap tests of hypotheses 2006 Springer Science &amp; Business Media
Gori I Giuliano A Muratori F Saviozzi I Oliva P Tancredi R Cosenza A Tosetti M Calderoni S Retico A Gray Matter Alterations in Young Children with Autism Spectrum Disorders: Comparing Morphometry at the Voxel and Regional Level. J Neuroimaging 2015 25 866 874 doi: 10.Ill 1/jon.12280 26214066
Goryawala M Zhou Q Barker W Loewenstein DA Duara R Adjouadi M Inclusion of Neuropsychological Scores in Atrophy Models Improves Diagnostic Classification of Alzheimer's Disease and Mild Cognitive Impairment. Comput Intell Neurosci 2015 2015 865265 doi:10.1155/2015/865265 26101520
Gould IC Shepherd AM Laurens KR Cairns MJ Carr VJ Green MJ Multivariate neuroanatomical classification of cognitive subtypes in schizophrenia: A support vector machine learning approach. Neuroimage Clin 2014 6 229 236 doi:10.1016/j.nicl.2014.09.009 25379435
Graña M Termenon M Savio A Gonzalez-Pinto A Echeveste J Perez JM Besga A Computer aided diagnosis system for Alzheimer disease using brain diffusion tensor imaging features selected by Pearson's correlation. Neurosci. Lett 2011 502 225 229 doi:10.1016/j.neulet.2011.07.049 21839143
Granziera C Daducci A Donati A Bonnier G Romascano D Roche A Bach Cuadra M Schmitter D Kloppel S Meuli R von Gunten A Krueger G A multi-contrast MRI study of microstructural brain damage in patients with mild cognitive impairment. Neuroimage Clin 2015 8 631 639 doi:10.1016/j.nicl.2015.06.003 26236628
Gray KR Aljabar P Heckemann RA Hammers A Rueckert D Initiative ADN Random forest-based similarity measures for multi-modal classification of Alzheimer's disease. Neuroimage 2013 65 167 175 others 23041336
Green MJ Cairns MJ Wu J Dragovic M Jablensky A Tooney PA Scott RJ Carr VJ Genome-wide supported variant MIR 137 and severe negative symptoms predict membership of an impaired cognitive subtype of schizophrenia. Mol. Psychiatry 2013 18 774 780 22733126
Greenstein D Malley JD Weisinger B Clasen L Gogtay N Using Multivariate Machine Learning Methods and Structural MRI to Classify Childhood Onset Schizophrenia and Healthy Controls. Front. Psychiatry 2012 3 1 12 doi:10.3389/fpsyt.2012.00053 22347194
Guo H Cheng C Cao X Xiang J Chen J Zhang K Resting-state functional connectivity abnormalities in first-onset unmedicated depression. Neural Regen Res 2014 9 153 163 doi:10.4103/1673-5374.125344 25206796
Guo W Su Q Yao D Jiang J Zhang J Zhang Z Yu L Zhai J Xiao C Decreased regional activity of default-mode network in unaffected siblings of schizophrenia patients at rest. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 2014 24 545 552 doi:10.1016/j.euroneuro.2014.01.004 24491950
Guyon I Elisseeff A An introduction to variable and feature selection. J. Mach. Learn. Res 2003 3 1157 1182
Guyon I Weston J Barnhill S Vapnik V Gene selection for cancer classification using support vector machines. Mach. Learn 2002 46 389 422
H20 [WWW Document] 2015 URL http://h2o.ai/
Hall MA Smith LA Practical feature subset selection for machine learning 1998
Haller S Missonnier P Herrmann FR Rodriguez C Deiber M-P Nguyen D Gold G Lovblad K-O Giannakopoulos P Individual classification of mild cognitive impairment subtypes by support vector machine analysis of white matter DTI. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2013 34 283 291 doi:10.3174/ajnr.A3223 22976235
Haller S Nguyen D Rodriguez C Emch J Gold G Bartsch A Lovblad KO Giannakopoulos P Individual prediction of cognitive decline in mild cognitive impairment using support vector machine-based analysis of diffusion tensor imaging data. J. Alzheimers Dis 2010 22 315 327 doi:10.3233/JAD-2010-100840 20847435
Hampel H Teipel SJ Bayer W Alexander GE Schwarz R Schapiro MB Rapoport SI Moller H-J Age transformation of combined hippocampus and amygdala volume improves diagnostic accuracy in Alzheimer's disease. J. Neurol. Sci 2002 194 15 19 11809161
Hart H Chantiluke K Cubillo AI Smith AB Simmons A Brammer MJ Marquand AF Rubia K Pattern classification of response inhibition in ADHD: toward the development of neurobiological markers for ADHD. Hum Brain Mapp 2014a 35 3083 3094 doi:10.1002/hbm.22386 24123508
Hart H Marquand AF Smith A Cubillo A Simmons A Brammer M Rubia K Predictive neurofunctional markers of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder based on pattern classification of temporal processing. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 2014b 53 569 578 24745956
Hastie T Rosset S Tibshirani R Zhu J The entire regularization path for the support vector machine. J. Mach. Learn. Res 2004 5 1391 1415
Hebert LE Beckett LA Scherr PA Evans DA Annual incidence of Alzheimer disease in the United States projected to the years 2000 through 2050. Alzheimer Dis. Assoc. Disord 2001 15 169 173 11723367
Heinrichs RW Zakzanis KK Neurocognitive deficit in schizophrenia: a quantitative review of the evidence. Neuropsychology 1998 12 426 9673998
Hidalgo-Mufioz AR Ramírez J Gorriz JM Padilla P Regions of interest computed by SVM wrapped method for Alzheimer's disease examination from segmented MRI. Front Aging Neurosci 2014 6 20 doi:10.3389/fnagi.2014.00020 24634656
Hinrichs C Singh V Mukherjee L Xu G Chung MK Johnson SC Spatially augmented LPboosting for AD classification with evaluations on the ADNI dataset. Neuroimage 2009 48 138 149 doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.05.056 19481161
Hinrichs C Singh V Xu G Johnson SC Predictive markers for AD in a multi-modality framework: an analysis of MCI progression in the ADNI population. Neuroimage 2011 55 574 589 doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.10.081 21146621
Hjelm RD Calhoun VD Salakhutdinov R Allen EA Adali T Plis SM Restricted Boltzmann machines for neuroimaging: An application in identifying intrinsic networks. Neuroimage 2014 96 245 260 24680869
Honorio J Tomasi D Goldstein RZ Leung HC Samaras D Can a single brain region predict a disorder? IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 2012 31 2062 2072 doi:10.1109/TMI.2012.2206047 22752119
Iannaccone R Hauser TU Ball J Brandeis D Walitza S Brem S Classifying adolescent attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) based on functional and structural imaging. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2015 24 1279 1289 doi:10.1007/s00787-015-0678-4 25613588
Igual L Soliva JC Escalera S Gimeno R Vilarroya O Radeva P Automatic brain caudate nuclei segmentation and classification in diagnostic of Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder. Comput Med Imaging Graph 2012 36 591 600 doi:10.1016/j.compmedimag.2012.08.002 22959658
Iidaka T Resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging and neural network classified autism and control. Cortex 2015 63 55 67 doi:10.1016/j.cortex.2014.08.011 25243989
Ingalhalikar M Parker D Bloy L Roberts TPL Verma R Diffusion based abnormality markers of pathology: toward learned diagnostic prediction of ASD. Neuroimage 2011 57 918 927 doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.05.023 21609768
Ingalhalikar M Smith AR Bloy L Gur R Roberts TPL Verma R Identifying sub-populations via unsupervised cluster analysis on multi-edge similarity graphs. Med. Image Comput. Comput. Assist. Interv 2012 15 254 61 23286056
Iwabuchi SJ Liddle PF Palaniyappan L Clinical utility of machine-learning approaches in schizophrenia: improving diagnostic confidence for translational neuroimaging. Front Psychiatry 2013 4 95 doi:10.3389/fpsyt.2013.00095 24009589
Jablensky A Subtyping schizophrenia: implications for genetic research. Mol. Psychiatry 2006 11 815 836 16801952
Jack CR Bernstein MA Fox NC Thompson P Alexander G Harvey D Borowski B Britson PJ L Whitwell J Ward C The Alzheimer's disease neuroimaging initiative (ADNI): MRI methods. J. Magn. Reson. Imaging 2008 27 685 691 others 18302232
Jack CR Petersen RC Xu YC Waring SC O'Brien PC Tangalos EG Smith GE Ivnik RJ Kokmen E Medial temporal atrophy on MRI in normal aging and very mild Alzheimer's disease. Neurology 1997 49 786 794 9305341
Jafri MJ Pearlson GD Stevens M Calhoun VD A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia. Neuroimage 2008 39 1666 1681 18082428
Janousova E Schwarz D Kasparek T Combining various types of classifiers and features extracted from magnetic resonance imaging data in schizophrenia recognition. Psychiatry Res. Neuroimaging 2015 232 237 249 doi:10.1016/j.pscychresns.2015.03.004 25912090
Jiao Y Chen R Ke X Chu K Lu Z Herskovits EH Predictive models of autism spectrum disorder based on brain regional cortical thickness. Neuroimage 2010 50 589 599 doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.12.047 20026220
Jie B Zhang D Gao W Wang Q Wee C-Y Shen D Integration of network topological and connectivity properties for neuroimaging classification. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng 2014 61 576 589 doi:10.1109/TBME.2013.2284195 24108708
Jie N Zhu M Xiaoying M Osuch EA Wammes M Theberge J Li H Zhang Y Jiang T Sui J Calhoun VD Discriminating Bipolar Disorder From Major Depression Based on SVM-FoBa: Efficient Feature Selection With Multimodal Brain Imaging Data. IEEE Trans. Auton. Ment. Dev 2015 In Press
Johnston BA Mwangi B Matthews K Coghill D Konrad K Steele JD Brainstem abnormalities in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder support high accuracy individual diagnostic classification. Hum Brain Mapp 2014 35 5179 5189 doi:10.1002/hbm.22542 24819333
Jung WB Lee YM Kim YH Mun C-W Automated Classification to Predict the Progression of Alzheimer's Disease Using Whole-Brain Volumetry and DTI. Psychiatry Investig 2015 12 92 102 doi:10.4306/pi.2015.12.1.92
Just MA Cherkassky VL Buchweitz A Keller TA Mitchell TM Identifying autism from neural representations of social interactions: neurocognitive markers of autism. PLoS One 2014 9 e113879 doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0113879 25461818
Kambeitz J Kambeitz-Ilankovic L Leucht S Wood S Davatzikos C Malchow B Falkai P Koutsouleris N Detecting Neuroimaging Biomarkers for Schizophrenia: A Meta-Analysis of Multivariate Pattern Recognition Studies. Neuropsychopharmacology 2015
Karageorgiou E Schulz SC Gollub RL Andreasen NC Ho BC Lauriello J Calhoun VD Bockholt HJ Sponheim SR Georgopoulos AP Neuropsychological testing and structural magnetic resonance imaging as diagnostic biomarkers early in the course of schizophrenia and related psychoses. Neuroinformatics 2011 9 321 333 doi:10.1007/sl2021-010-9094-6 21246418
Kasparek T Thomaz CE Sato JR Schwarz D Janousova E Marecek R Prikryl R Vanicek J Fujita A Ceskova E Maximum-uncertainty linear discrimination analysis of first-episode schizophrenia subjects. Psychiatry Res. - Neuroimaging 2011 191 174 181 doi:10.1016/j.pscychresns.2010.09.016 21295452
Kaufer DI Miller BL Itti L Fairbanks LA Li J Fishman J Kushi J Cummings JL Midline cerebral morphometry distinguishes frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease. Neurology 1997 48 978 985 9109887
Kaufmann T Skatun KC Alnaes D Doan NT Duff EP Tonnesen S Roussos E Ueland T Aminoff SR Lagerberg TV Agartz I Melle IS Smith SM Andreassen O. a. Westlye LT Disintegration of Sensorimotor Brain Networks in Schizophrenia. Schizophr. Bull 2015 1 10 doi:10.1093/schbul/sbv060
Kawasaki Y Suzuki M Kherif F Takahashi T Zhou SY Nakamura K Matsui M Sumiyoshi T Seto FL Kurachi M Multivariate voxel-based morphometry successfully differentiates schizophrenia patients from healthy controls. Neuroimage 2007 34 235 242 doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2006.08.018 17045492
Keator DB Grethe JS Marcus D Ozyurt B Gadde S Murphy S Pieper S Greve D Notestine R Bockholt HJ A national human neuroimaging collaboratory enabled by the Biomedical Informatics Research Network (BIRN). Inf. Technol. Biomed. IEEE Trans 2008 12 162 172 others
Kessler RC Berglund P Demler O Jin R Koretz D Merikangas KR Rush AJ Walters EE Wang PS The epidemiology of major depressive disorder: results from the National Comorbidity Survey Replication (NCS-R). Jama 2003 289 3095 3105 12813115
Kessler RC McGonagle KA Zhao S Nelson CB Hughes M Eshleman S Wittchen H-U Kendler KS Lifetime and 12-month prevalence of DSM-III-R psychiatric disorders in the United States: results from the National Comorbidity Survey. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 1994 51 8 19 8279933
Khazaee A Ebrahimzadeh A Babajani-Feremi A Identifying patients with Alzheimer's disease using resting-state fMRI and graph theory. Clin Neurophysiol 2015 126 2132 2141 doi:10.1016/j.clinph.2015.02.060 25907414
Kim DI Sui J Rachakonda S White T Manoach DS Clark VP Ho BC Schulz SC Calhoun VD Identification of Imaging Biomarkers in Schizophrenia: {A} Coefficient-constrained Independent Component Analysis of the Mind Multi-site Schizophrenia Study. Neuroinformatics 2010 1 17 20127205
Kim J Calhoun VD Shim E Lee J-H Deep neural network with weight sparsity control and pre-training extracts hierarchical features and enhances classification performance: Evidence from whole-brain resting-state functional connectivity patterns of schizophrenia. Neuroimage 2015 doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.05.018
Klöppel S Abdulkadir A Jack CR Koutsouleris N Mourao-Miranda J Vemuri P Diagnostic neuroimaging across diseases. Neuroimage 2012 61 457 463 doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.11.002 22094642
Klöppel S Chu C Tan GC Draganski B Johnson H Paulsen JS Kienzle W Tabrizi SJ Ashburner J Frackowiak RSJ Automatic detection of preclinical neurodegeneration Presymptomatic Huntington disease. Neurology 2009 72 426 431 others 19188573
Klöppel S Peter J Ludl A Pilatus A Maier S Mader I Heimbach B Frings L Egger K Dukart J Schroeter ML Perneczky R Haussermann P Vach W Urbach H Teipel S Hull M Abdulkadir A Applying Automated MR-Based Diagnostic Methods to the Memory Clinic: A Prospective Study. J. Alzheimers Dis 2015 47 939 954 doi: 10.3233/JAD-150334 26401773
Klöppel S Stonnington CM Chu C Draganski B Scahill RI Rohrer JD Fox NC Jack CR Ashburner J Frackowiak RSJ Automatic classification of MR scans in Alzheimer's disease. Brain 2008 131 681 689 18202106
Koch SP Hägele C Haynes J-D Heinz A Schlagenhauf F Sterzer P Diagnostic Classification of Schizophrenia Patients on the Basis of Regional Reward-Related fMRI Signal Patterns. PLoS One 2015 10 eOl19089 doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.Ol 19089
Kohavi R John GH Wrappers for feature subset selection. Artif. Intell 1997 97 273 324
Koutsouleris N Meisenzahl EM Borgwardt S Riecher-Rossler a. Frodl T Kambeitz J Kohler Y Falkai P Moller H-J Reiser M Davatzikos C Individualized differential diagnosis of schizophrenia and mood disorders using neuroanatomical biomarkers. Brain 2015 doi:10.1093/brain/awvlll
Kriegeskorte N Deep neural networks: a new framework for modelling biological vision and brain information processing. bioRxiv 2015 29876
Lahmiri S Boukadoum M New approach for automatic classification of Alzheimer's disease, mild cognitive impairment and healthy brain magnetic resonance images. Heal. Technol Lett 2014 1 32 36 doi:10.1049/htl.2013.0022
Landis D Courtney W Dieringer C Kelly R King M Miller B Wang R Wood D Turner JA Calhoun VD An Open Platform for Compiling, Curating, and Disseminating Neuroimaging Data. Neuroimage 2015 In Press
Le Bihan D Mangin JF Poupon C Clark CA Pappata S Molko N Chabriat H Diffusion tensor imaging: concepts and applications. J. Magn. Reson. imaging 2001 13 534 546 11276097
Lee G-Y Kim J Kim JH Kim K Seong J-K Online Learning for Classification of Alzheimer Disease based on Cortical Thickness and Hippocampal Shape Analysis. Heal. Inf. Res 2014 20 61 68 doi:10.4258/hir.2014.20.1.61
Lee W Park B Han K Classification of diffusion tensor images for the early detection of Alzheimer's disease. Comput. Biol. Med 2013 43 1313 1320 doi:10.1016/j.compbiomed.2013.07.004 24034721
Lerch JP Pruessner J Zijdenbos AP Collins DL Teipel SJ Hampel H Evans AC Automated cortical thickness measurements from MRI can accurately separate Alzheimer's patients from normal elderly controls. Neurobiol. Aging 2008 29 23 30 doi:10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2006.09.013 17097767
Levman J Takahashi E Multivariate analyses applied to fetal, neonatal and pediatric MRI of neurodevelopmental disorders. Neuroimage Clin 2015 9 532 544 doi:10.1016/j.nicl.2015.09.017 26640765
Lewinsohn PM Duncan EM Stanton AK Hautzinger M Age at first onset for nonbipolar depression. J. Abnorm. Psychol 1986 95 378 3805502
Li M Oishi K He X Qin Y Gao F Mori S An efficient approach for differentiating Alzheimer's disease from normal elderly based on multicenter MRI using gray-level invariant features. PLoS One 2014a 9 el05563 doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0105563
Li M Qin Y Gao F Zhu W He X Discriminative analysis of multivariate features from structural MRI and diffusion tensor images. Magn Reson Imaging 2014b 32 1043 1051 doi:10.1016/j.mri.2014.05.008 24970026
Li S Shi F Pu F Li X Jiang T Xie S Wang Y Hippocampal shape analysis of Alzheimer disease based on machine learning methods. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2007 28 1339 1345 doi:10.3174/ajnr.A0620 17698538
Li Y Wang Y Wu G Shi F Zhou L Lin W Shen D Discriminant analysis of longitudinal cortical thickness changes in Alzheimer's disease using dynamic and network features. Neurobiol. Aging 2012 33 427 el5 30 doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2010.11.008 21272960
Liang Z-P Lauterbur PC Principles of magnetic resonance imaging 2000 SPIE Optical Engineering Press
Libera LE DeRamus TP Lahti AC Deshpande G Kana RK Multimodal neuroimaging based classification of autism spectrum disorder using anatomical, neurochemical, and white matter correlates. Cortex 2015 66 46 59 doi:10.1016/j.cortex.2015.02.008 25797658
Lillemark L Sørensen L Pai A Dam EB Nielsen M Brain region's relative proximity as marker for Alzheimer's disease based on structural MRI. BMC Med Imaging 2014 14 21 doi: 10.1186/1471-2342-14-21 24889999
Lim L Marquand A Cubillo AA Smith AB Chantiluke K Simmons A Mehta M Rubia K Disorder-specific predictive classification of adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) relative to autism using structural magnetic resonance imaging 2013
Liu F Wee C-Y Chen H Shen D Inter-modality relationship constrained multi-modality multi-task feature selection for Alzheimer's Disease and mild cognitive impairment identification. Neuroimage 2014 84 466 475 doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.09.015 24045077
Liu M Zhang D Adeli-Mosabbeb E Shen D Inherent Structure Based Multi-view Learning with Multi-template Feature Representation for Alzheimer's Disease Diagnosis. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng 2015 doi: 10.1109/TBME.2015.2496233
Liu M Zhang D Shen D Hierarchical fusion of features and classifier decisions for Alzheimer's disease diagnosis. Hum Brain Mapp 2014 35 1305 1319 doi:10.1002/hbm.22254 23417832
Liu X Tosun D Weiner MW Schuff N Locally linear embedding (LLE) for MRI based Alzheimer's disease classification. Neuroimage 2013 83 148 157 doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.06.033 23792982
Lord A Horn D Breakspear M Walter M Changes in community structure of resting state functional connectivity in unipolar depression. PLoS One 2012 7 e41282 doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0041282 22916105
Lorenzetti V Allen NB Fornito A Yiicel M Structural brain abnormalities in major depressive disorder: a selective review of recent MRI studies. J. Affect. Disord 2009 117 1 17 19237202
Ludman EJ Fullerton SM Spangler L Trinidad SB Fujii MM Jarvik GP Larson EB Burke W Glad you asked: participants' opinions of re-consent for dbGap data submission. J. Empir. Res. Hum. Res. Ethics 2010 5 9 16 20831417
Ma Z Li R Yu J He Y Li J Alterations in regional homogeneity of spontaneous brain activity in late-life subthreshold depression. PLoS One 2013 8 e53148 doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0053148 23301035
MacMaster FP Carrey N Langevin LM Jaworska N Crawford S Disorder-specific volumetric brain difference in adolescent major depressive disorder and bipolar depression. Brain Imaging Behav 2014 8 119 127 doi: 10.1007/s 11682-013-9264-x 24158718
Magnin B Mesrob L Kinkingnehun S Pelegrini-Issac M Colliot O Sarazin M Dubois B Lehericy S Benali H Support vector machine-based classification of Alzheimer's disease from whole-brain anatomical MRI. Neuroradiology 2009 51 73 83 doi:10.1007/s00234-008-0463-x 18846369
Mahanand BS Suresh S Sundararajan N Aswatha Kumar M Identification of brain regions responsible for Alzheimer's disease using a Self-adaptive Resource Allocation Network. Neural Netw 2012 32 313 322 doi:10.1016/j.neunet.2012.02.035 22391013
Marcus DS Olsen TR Ramaratnam M Buckner RL The extensible neuroimaging archive toolkit. Neuroinformatics 2007 5 11 33 17426351
McAlonan GM Cheung V Cheung C Suckling J Lam GY Tai KS Yip L Murphy DGM Chua SE Mapping the brain in autism. A voxel-based MRI study of volumetric differences and intercorrelations in autism. Brain 2005 128 268 276 15548557
McCarley RW Nakamura M Shenton ME Salisbury DF Combining ERP and structural MRI information in first episode schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. Clin. EEG Neurosci 2008 39 57 60 18450168
McEvoy LK Fennema-Notestine C Roddey JC Hagler DJ Holland D Karow DS Pung CJ Brewer JB Dale AM Alzheimer disease: quantitative structural neuroimaging for detection and prediction of clinical and structural changes in mild cognitive impairment. Radiology 2009 251 195 205 doi: 10.1148/radiol.2511080924 19201945
McEvoy LK Holland D Hagler DJ Fennema-Notestine C Brewer JB Dale AM Mild cognitive impairment: baseline and longitudinal structural MR imaging measures improve predictive prognosis. Radiology 2011 259 834 843 doi: 10.1148/radiol.11101975 21471273
Mehta CR Patel NR Senchaudhuri P Importance sampling for estimating exact probabilities in permutational inference. J. Am. Stat. Assoc 1988 83 999 1005
Merboldt K-D Hanicke W Frahm J Self-diffusion NMR imaging using stimulated echoes. J. Magn. Reson 1985 64 479 486
Michael AM Baum SA Fries JF Ho BC Pierson RK Andreasen NC Calhoun VD A method to fuse f{MRI} tasks through spatial correlations: Applied to schizophrenia. Hum. Brain Mapp 2009 30 25122529
Miller MI Priebe CE Qiu A Fischl B Kolasny A Brown T Park Y Ratnanather JT Busa E Jovicich J Yu P Dickerson BC Buckner RL Collaborative computational anatomy: an MRI morphometry study of the human brain via diffeomorphic metric mapping. Hum Brain Mapp 2009 30 2132 2141 doi:10.1002/hbm.20655 18781592
Min R Wu G Cheng J Wang Q Shen D Multi-atlas based representations for Alzheimer's disease diagnosis. Hum Brain Mapp 2014 35 5052 5070 doi:10.1002/hbm.22531 24753060
Minshew NJ Payton JB New perspectives in autism. Part 2: The differential diagnosis and neurobiology of autism. Curr. Probl. Pediatr 1988 18 618 694
Moradi E Pepe A Gaser C Huttunen H Tohka J Machine learning framework for early MRI-based Alzheimer's conversion prediction in MCI subjects. Neuroimage 2015 104 398 412 doi: 10.1016/j .neuroimage.2014.10.002 25312773
Morar B Dragović M Waters FAV Chandler D Kalaydjieva L Jablensky A Neuregulin 3 (NRG3) as a susceptibility gene in a schizophrenia subtype with florid delusions and relatively spared cognition. Mol. Psychiatry 2011 16 860 866 20548296
Mourão-Miranda J Hardoon DR Hahn T Marquand AF Williams SCR Shawe-Taylor J Brammer M Patient classification as an outlier detection problem: an application of the One-Class Support Vector Machine. Neuroimage 2011 58 793 804 doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.06.042 21723950
Mourão-Miranda J Oliveira L Ladouceur CD Marquand A Brammer M Birmaher B Axelson D Phillips ML Pattern recognition and functional neuroimaging help to discriminate healthy adolescents at risk for mood disorders from low risk adolescents. PLoS One 2012 7 e29482 doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0029482 22355302
Mueller SG Schuff N Yaffe K Madison C Miller B Weiner MW Hippocampal atrophy patterns in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease. Hum Brain Mapp 2010 31 1339 1347 doi:10.1002/hbm.20934 20839293
Murdaugh DL Shinkareva SV Deshpande HR Wang J Pennick MR Kana RK Differential deactivation during mentalizing and classification of autism based on default mode network connectivity 2012
Mwangi B Ebmeier KP Matthews K Steele JD Multi-centre diagnostic classification of individual structural neuroimaging scans from patients with major depressive disorder. Brain 2012 135 1508 1521 doi: 10.1093/brain/aws084 22544901
Nakamura K Kawasaki Y Suzuki M Hagino H Kurokawa K Takahashi T Niu L Matsui M Seto H Kurachi M Multiple structural brain measures obtained by three-dimensional magnetic resonance imaging to distinguish between schizophrenia patients and normal subjects. Schizophr. Bull 2004 30 393 404 15279055
Ng AY Feature selection, L 1 vs. L 2 regularization, and rotational invariance Proceedings of the Twenty-First International Conference on Machine Learning 2004 78
Nieuwenhuis M van Haren NEM Hulshoff Pol HE Cahn W Kahn RS Schnack HG Classification of schizophrenia patients and healthy controls from structural MRI scans in two large independent samples. Neuroimage 2012 61 606 612 doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.03.079 22507227
Nir TM Villalon-Reina JE Prasad G Jahanshad N Joshi SH Toga AW Bernstein MA Jack CR Weiner MW Thompson PM Diffusion weighted imaging-based maximum density path analysis and classification of Alzheimer's disease. Neurobiol. Aging 2015 36 Suppl 1 SI32 40 doi:10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.05.037
O'Dwyer L Lamberton F Bokde AL Ewers M Faluyi YO Tanner C Mazoyer B O'Neill D Bartley M Collins DR Using support vector machines with multiple indices of diffusion for automated classification of mild cognitive impairment. PLoS One 2012 7 e32441 others 22384251
Ogawa S Lee T-M Kay AR Tank DW Brain magnetic resonance imaging with contrast dependent on blood oxygenation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci 1990 87 9868 9872 2124706
Oishi K Akhter K Mielke M Ceritoglu C Zhang J Jiang H Li X Younes L Miller MI van Zijl PCM Albert M Lyketsos CG Mori S Multi-modal MRI analysis with disease-specific spatial filtering: initial testing to predict mild cognitive impairment patients who convert to Alzheimer's disease. Front Neurol 2011 2 54 doi: 10.3389/fneur.2011.00054 21904533
Oliveira P.P. de M. Nitrini R Busatto G Buchpiguel C Sato JR Amaro E Use of SVM methods with surface-based cortical and volumetric subcortical measurements to detect Alzheimer's disease. J. Alzheimers Dis 2010 19 1263 1272 doi: 10.3233/JAD-2010-1322 20061613
Orrú G Pettersson-Yeo W Marquand AF Sartori G Mechelli A Using Support Vector Machine to identify imaging biomarkers of neurological and psychiatric disease: A critical review. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev 2012 36 1140 1152 doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2012.01.004 22305994
Ortiz A Munilla J Alvarez-Ulan I Górriz JM Ramírez J Exploratory graphical models of functional and structural connectivity patterns for Alzheimer's Disease diagnosis. Front Comput Neurosci 2015 9 132 doi:10.3389/fncom.2015.00132 26578945
Ota K Oishi N Ito K Fukuyama H Effects of imaging modalities, brain atlases and feature selection on prediction of Alzheimer's disease. J. Neurosci. Methods 2015 256 168 183 doi:10.1016/j.jneumeth.2015.08.020 26318777
Ota K Oishi N Ito K Fukuyama H A comparison of three brain atlases for MCI prediction. J. Neurosci. Methods 2014 221 139 150 doi:10.1016/j.jneumeth.2013.10.003 24140118
Ota M Ishikawa M Sato N Hori H Sasayama D Hattori K Teraishi T Noda T Obu S Nakata Y Higuchi T Kunugi H Discrimination between schizophrenia and major depressive disorder by magnetic resonance imaging of the female brain. J. Psychiatr. Res 2013 47 1383 1388 doi:10.1016/j.jpsychires.2013.06.010 23830450
Ota M Sato N Ishikawa M Hori H Sasayama D Hattori K Teraishi T Obu S Nakata Y Nemoto K Moriguchi Y Hashimoto R Kunugi FL Discrimination of female schizophrenia patients from healthy women using multiple structural brain measures obtained with voxel-based morphometry. Psychiatry Clin. Neurosci 2012 66 611 617 doi:10.1111/j.l440-1819.2012.02397.x 23252928
Pardo PJ Georgopoulos AP Kenny JT Stuve T. a. Findling RL Schulz SC Classification of adolescent psychotic disorders using linear discriminant analysis. Schizophr. Res 2006 87 297 306 doi:10.1016/j.schres.2006.05.007 16797923
Park B-Y Kim M Seo J Lee J-M Park H Connectivity Analysis and Feature Classification in Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder Sub-Types: A Task Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging Study. Brain Topogr 2015 doi:10.1007/sl0548-015-0463-l
Park MY Hastie T Ll-regularization path algorithm for generalized linear models. J. R. Stat. Soc. Ser. B (Statistical Methodol 2007 69 659 677
Patel MJ Andreescu C Price JC Edelman KL Reynolds CF Aizenstein HJ Machine learning approaches for integrating clinical and imaging features in late-life depression classification and response prediction. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 2015 30 1056 1067 doi:10.1002/gps.4262 25689482
Peng X Lin P Zhang T Wang J Extreme learning machine-based classification of ADHD using brain structural MRI data. PLoS One 2013 8 e79476 doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0079476 24260229
Pennanen C Kivipelto M Tuomainen S Hartikainen P Hanninen T Laakso MP Hallikainen M Vanhanen M Nissinen A Helkala E-L Vainio P Vanninen R Partanen K Soininen H Hippocampus and entorhinal cortex in mild cognitive impairment and early AD. Neurobiol. Aging 2004 25 303 310 doi: 10.1016/S0197-4580(03)00084-8 15123335
Pereira F Mitchell T Botvinick M Machine learning classifiers and fMRI: a tutorial overview. Neuroimage 2009 45 S199 S209 19070668
Petersen RC Negash S Mild cognitive impairment: an overview. CNS Spectr 2008 13 45 53 18204414
Pina-Camacho L Garcia-Prieto J Parellada M Castro-Fornieles J Gonzalez-Pinto AM Bombin I Graell M Paya B Rapado-Castro M Janssen J Baeza I Del Pozo F Desco M Arango C Predictors of schizophrenia spectrum disorders in early-onset first episodes of psychosis: a support vector machine model. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2015 24 427 440 doi:10.1007/s00787-014-0593-0 25109600
Plant C Teipel SJ Oswald A Bohm C Meindl T Mourao-Miranda J Bokde AW Hampel H Ewers M Automated detection of brain atrophy patterns based on MRI for the prediction of Alzheimer's disease. Neuroimage 2010 50 162 174 doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.11.046 19961938
Plis SM Hjelm D Salakhutdinov R Allen EA Bockholt HJ Long JD Johnson HJ Paulsen J Turner JA Calhoun VD Deep learning for neuroimaging: a validation study. Front. Neurosci. 8 2014
Plitt M Barnes KA Martin A Functional connectivity classification of autism identifies highly predictive brain features but falls short of biomarker standards. Neuroimage Clin 2015 7 359 366 doi:10.1016/j.nicl.2014.12.013 25685703
Polat F Demirel SO Kitis O Simsek F Haznedaroglu DI Coburn K Kumral E Gonul AS Computer based classification of MR scans in first time applicant Alzheimer patients. Curr Alzheimer Res 2012 9 789 794 22299620
Poldrack RA Barch DM Mitchell JP Wager TD Wagner AD Devlin JT Cumba C Koyejo O Milham MP Toward open sharing of task-based {fMRI} data: the {OpenfMRI} project. Front. Neuroinform 2013 7 doi:10.3389/fninf.2013.00012
Power JD Barnes KA Snyder AZ Schlaggar BL Petersen SE Spurious but systematic correlations in functional connectivity MRI networks arise from subject motion. Neuroimage 2012 59 2142 2154 22019881
Power JD Mitra A Laumann TO Snyder AZ Schlaggar BL Petersen SE Methods to detect, characterize, and remove motion artifact in resting state fMRI. Neuroimage 2014 84 320 341 23994314
Power JD Schlaggar BL Petersen SE Recent progress and outstanding issues in motion correction in resting state fMRI. Neuroimage 2015 105 536 551 25462692
Prasad G Joshi SH Nir TM Toga AW Thompson PM Brain connectivity and novel network measures for Alzheimer's disease classification. Neurobiol. Aging 36 Suppl 2015 1 S121 31 doi:10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.04.037
Qiu A Younes L Miller MI Csernansky JG Parallel transport in diffeomorphisms distinguishes the time-dependent pattern of hippocampal surface deformation due to healthy aging and the dementia of the Alzheimer's type. Neuroimage 2008 40 68 76 doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2007.11.041 18249009
Raamana PR Wen W Kochan NA Brodaty FL Sachdev PS Wang L Beg MF Novel ThickNet features for the discrimination of amnestic MCI subtypes. Neuroimage Clin 2014 6 284 295 doi:10.1016/j.nicl.2014.09.005 25379441
Radulescu E Ganeshan B Shergill SS Medford N Chatwin C Young RCD Critchley HD Grey-matter texture abnormalities and reduced hippocampal volume are distinguishing features of schizophrenia. Psychiatry Res 2014 223 179 186 doi:10.1016/j.pscychresns.2014.05.014 25028155
Retico A Bosco P Cerello P Fiorina E Chincarini A Fantacci ME Predictive Models Based on Support Vector Machines: Whole-Brain versus Regional Analysis of Structural MRI in the Alzheimer's Disease. J Neuroimaging 2015 25 552 563 doi: 10.1111/jon.12163 25291354
Retico A Tosetti M Muratori F Calderoni S Neuroimaging-based methods for autism identification: a possible translational application? Funct. Neurol 2014 29 231 239 25764253
Retico A Tosetti M Muratori F Calderoni S Neuroimaging-based methods for autism identification: a possible translational application? Funct. Neurol 2013 29 231 239 25764253
Rice DP The economic impact of schizophrenia. J. Clin. Psychiatry 1999
Rosa MJ Portugal L Hahn T Fallgatter AJ Garrido MI Shawe-Taylor J Mourao-Miranda J Sparse network-based models for patient classification using fMRI. Neuroimage 2015 105 493 506 doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.11.021 25463459
Sabuncu MR Van Leemput K The relevance voxel machine (RVoxM): a self-tuning Bayesian model for informative image-based prediction. IEEE Trans Med Imaging 2012 31 2290 2306 doi: 10.1109/TMI.2012.2216543 23008245
Sacchet MD Livermore EE Iglesias JE Glover GH Gotlib IH Subcortical volumes differentiate Major Depressive Disorder, Bipolar Disorder, and remitted Major Depressive Disorder. J Psychiatr Res 2015 68 91 98 doi:10.1016/j.jpsychires.2015.06.002 26228406
Salvatore C Battista P Castiglioni I Frontiers for the early diagnosis of AD by means of MRI brain imaging and Support Vector Machines. Curr Alzheimer Res 2015a
Salvatore C Cerasa A Battista P Gilardi MC Quattrone A Castiglioni I Magnetic resonance imaging biomarkers for the early diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease: a machine learning approach. Front Neurosci 2015b 9 307 doi:10.3389/fnins.2015.00307 26388719
Sarwate AD Plis SM Turner JA Arbabshirani MR Calhoun VD Sharing privacy-sensitive access to neuroimaging and genetics data: a review and preliminary validation. Front. Neuroinform 2014 8 35 24778614
Sato JR Hoexter MQ Fujita A Rohde LA Evaluation of pattern recognition and feature extraction methods in ADHD prediction. Front Syst Neurosci 2012 6 68 doi:10.3389/fnsys.2012.00068 23015782
Sato JR Hoexter MQ Oliveira P.P. de M. Brammer MJ Murphy D Ecker C Inter-regional cortical thickness correlations are associated with autistic symptoms: a machine-learning approach. J Psychiatr Res 2013 47 453 459 doi:10.1016/j.jpsychires.2012.11.017 23260170
Sato JR Moll J Green S Deakin JFW Thomaz CE Zahn R Machine learning algorithm accurately detects fMRI signature of vulnerability to major depression. Psychiatry Res 2015 233 289 291 doi:10.1016/j.pscychresns.2015.07.001 26187550
Schnack HG Nieuwenhuis M van Haren NEM Abramovic L Scheewe TW Brouwer RM Hulshoff Pol HE Kahn RS Can structural MRI aid in clinical classification? A machine learning study in two independent samples of patients with schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and healthy subjects. Neuroimage 2014 84 299 306 doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.08.053 24004694
Scott A Courtney W Wood D la Garza R Lane S King M Wang R Roberts J Turner JA Calhoun VD COINS: an innovative informatics and neuroimaging tool suite built for large heterogeneous datasets. Front. Neuroinform 2011 5
Segovia F Holt R Spencer M Górriz JM Ramirez J Puntonet CG Phillips C Chura L Baron-Cohen S Suckling J Identifying endophenotypes of autism: a multivariate approach. Front. Comput. Neurosci 2014 8
Semrud-Clikeman M Hooper SR Hynd GW Hern K Presley R Watson T Prediction of group membership in developmental dyslexia, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, and normal controls using brain morphometric analysis of magnetic resonance imaging. Arch Clin Neuropsychol 1996 11 521 528 14588457
Serpa MH Ou Y Schaufelberger MS Doshi J Ferreira LK Machado-Vieira R Menezes PR Scazufca M Davatzikos C Busatto GF Zanetti MV Neuroanatomical classification in a population-based sample of psychotic major depression and bipolar I disorder with 1 year of diagnostic stability. Biomed Res Int2014 2014 706157 doi: 10.1155/2014/706157
Shen H Wang L Liu Y Hu D Discriminative analysis of resting-state functional connectivity patterns of schizophrenia using low dimensional embedding of fMRI. Neuroimage 2010 49 3110 3121 doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.11.011 19931396
Shimizu Y Yoshimoto J Toki S Takamura M Yoshimura S Okamoto Y Yamawaki S Doya K Toward Probabilistic Diagnosis and Understanding of Depression Based on Functional MRI Data Analysis with Logistic Group LASSO. PLoS One 2015 10 e0123524 doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0123524 25932629
Sidhu GS Asgarian N Greiner R Brown MRG Kernel Principal Component Analysis for dimensionality reduction in fMRI-based diagnosis of ADHD. Front Syst Neurosci 2012 6 74 doi:10.3389/fnsys.2012.00074 23162439
Silva RF Castro E Gupta CN Cetin M Arbabshirani M Potluru VK Plis SM Calhoun VD THE TENTH ANNUAL MLSP COMPETITION: SCHIZOPHRENIA CLASSIFICATION CHALLENGE The Mind Research Network , 1101 Yale Blvd ., Albuquerque , New Mexico 87106 2014 IEEE INTERNATIONAL WORKSHOP ON MACHINE LEARNING FOR SIGNAL PROCESSING Remis, France
Stonnington CM Chu C Kloppel S Jack CR Ashburner J Frackowiak RSJ Predicting clinical scores from magnetic resonance scans in Alzheimer's disease. Neuroimage 2010 51 1405 1413 doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.03.051 20347044
Su L Wang L Shen H Feng G Hu D Discriminative analysis of non-linear brain connectivity in schizophrenia: an fMRI Study. Front. Hum. Neurosci 2013 7 702 doi:10.3389/fnhum.2013.00702 24155713
Sui J Adali T Pearlson GD Calhoun VD An {ICA}-based method for the identification of optimal {fMRI} features and components using combined group-discriminative techniques. Neuroimage 2009 46 73 86 19457398
Sui J He H Liu J Yu Q Adali T Pearlson G Calhoun V Three-Way {fMRI}-{DTI}-Methylation Data Fusion Based on {MCCA}+j{ICA} and Its Application to Schizophrenia. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. 2012. EMBS 2012. 34th Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE 2012
Sui J He H Pearlson GD Adali T Kiehl KA Yu Q Clark VP Castro E White T Mueller BA Three-way (N-way) fusion of brain imaging data based on mCCA+ jICA and its application to discriminating schizophrenia. Neuroimage 2013a 66 119 132 others 23108278
Sui J He H Yu Q Chen J Rogers J Pearlson GD Mayer AR Bustillo JR Canive J Calhoun VD Combination of Resting State fMRI, DTI, and sMRI Data to Discriminate Schizophrenia by N-way MCCA + jICA. Front. Hum. Neurosci 2013b 7 235 doi:10.3389/fnhum.2013.00235 23755002
Sui J Pearlson G Caprihan A Adali T Kiehl KA Liu J Yamamoto J Calhoun VD Discriminating schizophrenia and bipolar disorder by fusing fMRI and DTI in a multimodal CCA+ joint ICA model. Neuroimage 2011 57 839 855 21640835
Sui J Pearlson GD Du Y Yu Q Jones TR Chen J Jiang T Bustillo J Calhoun VD In Search of Multimodal Neuroimaging Biomarkers of Cognitive Deficits in Schizophrenia. Biol. Psychiatry 2015
Suk H-L Lee S-W Shen D Initiative ADN Latent feature representation with stacked auto-encoder for AD/MCI diagnosis. Brain Struct. Funct 2013 220 841 859 others 24363140
Sun D van Erp TGM Thompson PM Bearden CE Daley M Kushan L Hardt ME Nuechterlein KH Toga AW Cannon TD Elucidating a Magnetic Resonance Imaging-Based Neuroanatomic Biomarker for Psychosis: Classification Analysis Using Probabilistic Brain Atlas and Machine Learning Algorithms. Biol. Psychiatry 2009 66 1055 1060 doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2009.07.019 19729150
Sundermann B Herr D Schwindt W Pfleiderer B Multivariate classification of blood oxygen level-dependent fMRI data with diagnostic intention: A clinical perspective. Am. J. Neuroradiol 2014 39 848 855 doi:10.3174/ajnr.A3713 24029388
Tagliazucchi E Laufs H Decoding wakefulness levels from typical fMRI resting-state data reveals reliable drifts between wakefulness and sleep. Neuron 2014 82 695 708 24811386
Takayanagi Y Takahashi T Orikabe L Mozue Y Kawasaki Y Nakamura K Sato Y Itokawa M Yamasue PL Kasai K Kurachi M Okazaki Y Suzuki M Classification of first-episode schizophrenia patients and healthy subjects by automated MRI measures of regional brain volume and cortical thickness. PLoS One 2011 6 1 10 doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0021047
Tang X Holland D Dale AM Younes L Miller MI Baseline shape diffeomorphometry patterns of subcortical and ventricular structures in predicting conversion of mild cognitive impairment to Alzheimer's disease. J. Alzheimers Dis 2015 44 599 611 doi:10.3233/JAD-141605 25318546
Tang X Holland D Dale AM Younes L Miller MI Shape abnormalities of subcortical and ventricular structures in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: detecting, quantifying, and predicting. Hum Brain Mapp 2014 35 3701 3725 doi:10.1002/hbm.22431 24443091
Tang Y Wang L Cao F Tan L Identify schizophrenia using resting-state functional connectivity: an exploratory research and analysis. Biomed. Eng. Online 2012 11 50 doi:10.1186/1475-925X-ll-50 22898249
Tangaro S Amoroso N Brescia M Cavuoti S Chincarini A Errico R Inglese P Longo G Maglietta R Tateo A Riccio G Bellotti R Feature Selection Based on Machine Learning in MRIs for Hippocampal Segmentation. Comput Math Methods Med 2015 2015 814104 doi: 10.1155/2015/814104 26089977
Tognin S Pettersson-Yeo W Valli I Hutton C Woolley J Allen P McGuire P Mechelli A Using structural neuroimaging to make quantitative predictions of symptom progression in individuals at ultra-high risk for psychosis. Front Psychiatry 2013 4 187 doi:10.3389/fpsyt.2013.00187 24523700
Tong T Wolz R Gao Q Guerrero R Hajnal JV Rueckert D Multiple instance learning for classification of dementia in brain MRI. Med Image Anal 2014 18 808 818 doi:10.1016/j.media.2014.04.006 24858570
Turner JA The rise of large-scale imaging studies in psychiatry. Gigascience 2014 3 29 25793106
Uddin LQ Menon V Young CB Ryali S Chen T Khouzam A Minshew NJ Hardan AY Multivariate searchlight classification of structural magnetic resonance imaging in children and adolescents with autism. Biol. Psychiatry 2011 70 833 841 21890111
Uddin LQ Supekar K Lynch CJ Khouzam A Phillips J Feinstein C Ryali S Menon V Salience network–based classification and prediction of symptom severity in children with autism. JAMA psychiatry 2013 70 869 879 23803651
Van Essen DC Smith SM Barch DM Behrens TEJ Yacoub E Ugurbil K Consortium W-MHCP The WU-Minn human connectome project: an overview. Neuroimage 2013 80 62 79 others 23684880
Vemuri P Gunter JL Senjem ML Whitwell JL Kantarci K Knopman DS Boeve BF Petersen RC Jack CR Alzheimer's disease diagnosis in individual subjects using structural MR images: validation studies. Neuroimage 2008 39 1186 1197 doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2007.09.073 18054253
Venkataraman A Whitford TJ Westin C-F Golland P Kubicki M Whole brain resting state functional connectivity abnormalities in schizophrenia. Schizophr. Res 2012 139 7 12 doi:10.1016/j.schres.2012.04.021 22633528
Vergara VM Damaraju E Mayer AB Miller R Cetin MS Calhoun V The impact of data preprocessing in traumatic brain injury detection using functional magnetic resonance imaging Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), 2015 37th Annual International Conference of the IEEE 2015 5432 5435
Veronese E Castellani U Peruzzo D Bellani M Brambilla P Machine learning approaches: from theory to application in schizophrenia. Comput Math Methods Med 2013 2013 867924 doi:10.1155/2013/867924 24489603
Wang L Beg F Ratnanather T Ceritoglu C Younes L Morris JC Csernansky JG Miller MI Large deformation diffeomorphism and momentum based hippocampal shape discrimination in dementia of the Alzheimer type. IEEE Trans Med Imaging 2007 26 462 470 doi: 10.1109/TMI.2005.853923 17427733
Wang X Jiao Y Tang T Wang H Lu Z Altered regional homogeneity patterns in adults with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. Eur J Radiol 2013 82 1552 1557 doi:10.1016/j.ejrad.2013.04.009 23684384
Wang Y Fan Y Bhatt P Davatzikos C High-dimensional pattern regression using machine learning: from medical images to continuous clinical variables. Neuroimage 2010 50 1519 1535 doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.12.092 20056158
Watanabe T Kessler D Scott C Angstadt M Sripada C Disease prediction based on functional connectomes using a scalable and spatially-informed support vector machine. Neuroimage 2014 96 183 202 doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.03.067 24704268
Wee C-Y Wang L Shi F Yap P-T Shen D Diagnosis of autism spectrum disorders using regional and interregional morphological features. Hum. Brain Mapp 2014 35 3414 3430 25050428
Wee C-Y Yap P-T Li W Denny K Browndyke JN Potter GG Welsh-Bohmer KA Wang L Shen D Enriched white matter connectivity networks for accurate identification of MCI patients. Neuroimage 2011 54 1812 1822 doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.10.026 20970508
Wee C-Y Yap P-T Shen D Prediction of Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment using cortical morphological patterns. Hum Brain Mapp 2013 34 3411 3425 doi:10.1002/hbm.22156 22927119
Wee C-Y Yap P-T Zhang D Denny K Browndyke JN Potter GG Welsh-Bohmer KA Wang L Shen D Identification of MCI individuals using structural and functional connectivity networks. Neuroimage 2012 59 2045 2056 22019883
Wei M Qin J Yan R Li H Yao Z Lu Q Identifying major depressive disorder using Hurst exponent of resting-state brain networks. Psychiatry Res 2013 214 306 312 doi:10.1016/j.pscychresns.2013.09.008 24113289
Wing L The autistic spectrum. Lancet 1997 350 1761 1766 9413479
Wolf H Grunwald M Kruggel F Riedel-Heller SG Angerhofer S Hojjatoleslami A Hensel A Arendt T Gertz H Hippocampal volume discriminates between normal cognition; questionable and mild dementia in the elderly. Neurobiol. Aging 2001 22 177 186 11182467
Wolfers T Buitelaar JK Beckmann CF Franke B Marquand AF From estimating activation locality to predicting disorder: A review of pattern recognition for neuroimaging-based psychiatric diagnostics. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev 2015 57 328 349 26254595
Wolz R Julkunen V Koikkalainen J Niskanen E Zhang DP Rueckert D Soininen H Lotjonen J Multi-method analysis of MRI images in early diagnostics of Alzheimer's disease. PLoS One 2011 6 e25446 doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0025446 22022397
Wu X Li J Ayutyanont N Protas H Jagust W Fleisher A Reiman E Yao L Chen K The receiver operational characteristic for binary classification with multiple indices and its application to the neuroimaging study of Alzheimer's disease. IEEE/ACM Trans Comput Biol Bioinform 2013 10 173 180 doi:10.1109/TCBB.2012.141 23702553
Xu L Wu X Chen K Yao L Multi-modality sparse representation-based classification for Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment. Comput Methods Programs Biomed 2015 122 182 190 doi:10.1016/j.cmpb.2015.08.004 26298855
Yang H Liu J Sui J Pearlson G Calhoun VD A Hybrid Machine Learning Method for Fusing fMRI and Genetic Data: Combining both Improves Classification of Schizophrenia. Front. Hum. Neurosci 2010 4 192 doi:10.3389/fnhum.2010.00192 21119772
Yang S-T Lee J-D Chang T-C Huang C-H Wang J-J Hsu W-C Chan H-L Wai Y-Y Li K-Y Discrimination between Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment using SOM and PSO-SVM. Comput Math Methods Med 2013 2013 253670 doi:10.1155/2013/253670 23737859
Yang W Lui RLM Gao J-H Chan TF Yau S-T Sperling RA Huang X Independent component analysis-based classification of Alzheimer's disease MRI data. J. Alzheimers Dis 2011 24 775 783 doi:10.3233/JAD-2011-101371 21321398
Yoon JH Nguyen DV McVay LM Deramo P Minzenberg MJ Ragland JD Niendham T Solomon M Carter CS Automated classification of fMRI during cognitive control identifies more severely disorganized subjects with schizophrenia. Schizophr. Res 2012 135 28 33 doi:10.1016/j.schres.2012.01.001 22277668
Yoon JH Tamir D Minzenberg MJ Ragland JD Ursu S Carter CS Multivariate Pattern Analysis of Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging Data Reveals Deficits in Distributed Representations in Schizophrenia. Biol. Psychiatry 2008 64 1035 1041 doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2008.07.025 18822407
Young J Modat M Cardoso MJ Mendelson A Cash D Ourselin S Accurate multimodal probabilistic prediction of conversion to Alzheimer's disease in patients with mild cognitive impairment. Neuroimage Clin 2013 2 735 745 doi:10.1016/j.nicl.2013.05.004 24179825
Young K Du A-T Kramer J Rosen FL Miller B Weiner M Schuff N Patterns of structural complexity in Alzheimer's disease and frontotemporal dementia. Hum Brain Mapp 2009 30 1667 1677 doi:10.1002/hbm.20632 18677745
Yu G Liu Y Shen D Graph-guided joint prediction of class label and clinical scores for the Alzheimer's disease. Brain Struct Funct 2015 doi:10.1007/s00429-015-l 132-6
Yu G Liu Y Thung K-H Shen D Multi-task linear programming discriminant analysis for the identification of progressive MCI individuals. PLoS One 2014 9 e96458 doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0096458 24820966
Yu Y Shen H Zeng L-L Ma Q Hu D Convergent and divergent functional connectivity patterns in schizophrenia and depression. PLoS One 2013a 8 e68250 doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0068250 23844175
Yu Y Shen H Zhang H Zeng L-L Xue Z Hu D Functional connectivity-based signatures of schizophrenia revealed by multiclass pattern analysis of resting-state fMRI from schizophrenic patients and their healthy siblings. Biomed. Eng. Online 2013b 12 10 doi:10.1186/1475-925X-12-10 23390976
Yue C Wu D Bai F Shi Y Yu H Xie C Zhang Z State-based functional connectivity changes associate with cognitive decline in amnestic mild cognitive impairment subjects. Behav. Brain Res 2015 288 94 102 doi:10.1016/j.bbr.2015.04.013 25907751
Yun HJ Kwak K Lee J-M Multimodal Discrimination of Alzheimer's Disease Based on Regional Cortical Atrophy and Hypometabolism. PLoS One 2015 10 e0129250 doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0129250 26061669
Zaharia M Chowdhury M Franklin MJ Shenker S Stoica I Spark: cluster computing with working sets Proceedings of the 2nd USENIX Conference on Hot Topics in Cloud Computing 2010 10
Zanetti MV Schaufelberger MS Doshi J Ou Y Ferreira LK Menezes PR Scazufca M Davatzikos C Busatto GF Neuroanatomical pattern classification in a population-based sample of first-episode schizophrenia. Prog. Neuro-Psychopharmacology Biol. Psychiatry 2013 43 116 125 doi:10.1016/j.pnpbp.2012.12.005
Zarei M Damoiseaux JS Morgese C Beckmann CF Smith SM Matthews PM Scheltens P Rombouts SARB Barkhof F Regional white matter integrity differentiates between vascular dementia and Alzheimer disease. Stroke 2009 40 773 779 doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.108.530832 19164789
Zarogianni E Moorhead TWJ Lawrie SM Towards the identification of imaging biomarkers in schizophrenia, using multivariate pattern classification at a single-subject level. Neuroimage Clin 2013 3 279 289 doi:10.1016/j.nicl.2013.09.003 24273713
Zeng L-L Shen H Liu L Hu D Unsupervised classification of major depression using functional connectivity MRI. Hum Brain Mapp 2014 35 1630 1641 doi:10.1002/hbm.22278 23616377
Zhang D Shen D Multi-modal multi-task learning for joint prediction of multiple regression and classification variables in Alzheimer's disease. Neuroimage 2012a 59 895 907 doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.09.069 21992749
Zhang D Shen D Predicting future clinical changes of MCI patients using longitudinal and multimodal biomarkers. PLoS One 2012b 7 e33182 doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0033182 22457741
Zhang D Wang Y Zhou L Yuan H Shen D Initiative ADN Multimodal classification of Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment. Neuroimage 2011 55 856 867 others 21236349
Zhang T Davatzikos C Optimally-Discriminative Voxel-Based Morphometry significantly increases the ability to detect group differences in schizophrenia, mild cognitive impairment, and Alzheimer's disease. Neuroimage 2013 79 94 110 doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.04.063 23631985
Zhang T Davatzikos C ODVBA: optimally-discriminative voxel-based analysis. IEEE Trans Med Imaging 2011 30 1441 1454 doi: 10.1109/TMI.2011.2114362 21324774
Zhang Y Dong Z Phillips P Wang S Ji G Yang J Yuan T-F Detection of subjects and brain regions related to Alzheimer's disease using 3D MRI scans based on eigenbrain and machine learning. Front Comput Neurosci 2015 9 66 doi:10.3389/fncom.2015.00066 26082713
Zhang Z Huang H Shen D Integrative analysis of multi-dimensional imaging genomics data for Alzheimer's disease prediction. Front Aging Neurosci 2014 6 260 doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2014.00260 25368574
Zhou J Greicius MD Gennatas ED Growdon ME Jang JY Rabinovici GD Kramer JH Weiner M Miller BL Seeley WW Divergent network connectivity changes in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease. Brain 2010 133 1352 1367 doi:10.1093/brain/awq075 20410145
Zhou Y Yu F Duong T Multiparametric MRI characterization and prediction in autism spectrum disorder using graph theory and machine learning. PLoS One 2014 9 e90405 doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0090405 24922325
Zhu C-Z Zang Y-F Cao Q-J Yan C-G He Y Jiang T-Z Sui M-Q Wang Y-F Fisher discriminative analysis of resting-state brain function for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Neuroimage 2008 40 110 120 18191584
Zou H Hastie T Regularization and variable selection via the elastic net. J. R. Stat. Soc. Ser. B (Statistical Methodol 2005 67 301 320
Zu C Jie B Liu M Chen S Shen D Zhang D Label-aligned multi-task feature learning for multimodal classification of Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment. Brain Imaging Behav 2015 doi:10.1007/sl 1682-015-9480-7
