LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


8900963
1466
Mol Neurobiol
Mol. Neurobiol.
Molecular neurobiology
0893-7648
1559-1182

28401475
5636654
10.1007/s12035-017-0503-9
NIHMS873830
Article
Mitochondrial Quality Control and Disease: Insights into Ischemia-Reperfusion Injury
Anzell Anthony R. 123
Maizy Rita 1
Przyklenk Karin 123
Sanderson Thomas H. 123
1 Department of Emergency Medicine, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI 48201, USA
2 Cardiovascular Research Institute, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI 48201, USA
3 Department of Physiology, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI 48201, USA
30 6 2017
11 4 2017
3 2018
07 3 2018
55 3 25472564
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Mitochondria are key regulators of cell fate during disease. They control cell survival via the production of ATP that fuels cellular processes and, conversely, cell death via the induction of apoptosis through release of pro-apoptotic factors such as cytochrome C. Therefore, it is essential to have stringent quality control mechanisms to ensure a healthy mitochondrial network. Quality control mechanisms are largely regulated by mitochondrial dynamics and mitophagy. The processes of mitochondrial fission (division) and fusion allow for damaged mitochondria to be segregated and facilitate the equilibration of mitochondrial components such as DNA, proteins, and metabolites. The process of mitophagy are responsible for the degradation and recycling of damaged mitochondria. These mitochondrial quality control mechanisms have been well studied in chronic and acute pathologies such as Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease, stroke, and acute myocardial infarction, but less is known about how these two processes interact and contribute to specific pathophysiologic states. To date, evidence for the role of mitochondrial quality control in acute and chronic disease is divergent and suggests that mitochondrial quality control processes can serve both survival and death functions depending on the disease state. This review aims to provide a synopsis of the molecular mechanisms involved in mitochondrial quality control, to summarize our current understanding of the complex role that mitochondrial quality control plays in the progression of acute vs chronic diseases and, finally, to speculate on the possibility that targeted manipulation of mitochondrial quality control mechanisms may be exploited for the rationale design of novel therapeutic interventions.

Brain
Mitophagy
Ischemia
Reperfusion
Mitochondria
Mitochondrial dynamics

Introduction: Mitophagic Balance in Acute and Chronic Disease

Cardiovascular and neurologic diseases are leading causes of morbidity and mortality in the USA [1]. Cardiovascular disease can result in acute injuries sustained by both the heart and the brain in the form of acute myocardial infarction (AMI) and stroke. AMI and stroke are induced by a cessation of blood flow (ischemia), caused by blockage of one or more of the coronary or cerebral arteries that supply the heart or brain. This cessation of blood flow will subsequently lead to tissue hypoxia or anoxia and, ultimately, necrotic cell death (characterized by cellular swelling and membrane rupture due to energy failure). It is well known that although restoration of blood flow (reperfusion) is essential to salvage ischemic tissue, this can also, paradoxically, exacerbate damage from several cellular alterations including excessive reactive oxygen species (ROS) production from mitochondria [2–4]. ROS production will lead to mitochondrial damage and, ultimately, mitochondrial failure and predominantly apoptosis (typically occurring via the intrinsic or mitochondrial pathway) [5, 6]. Ultimately, cell death observed during ischemia and reperfusion in both heart and brain occurs over a broad spectrum of cell death phenotypes depending on the duration and severity of the ischemic insult. This process occurring at the level of the tissue has been termed lethal ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury.

In addition to acute injuries such as stroke or AMI, the incidence of chronic neuropathologies (including, for example, Parkinson's disease (PD) and Alzheimer's disease (AD)) are on the rise as the average lifespan continues to increase [7, 8]. PD and AD are neurodegenerative diseases that affect different parts of the brain and are typically seen in the elderly, although inherited mutations may also lead to disease in younger patients. PD is a movement disorder, and while many forms of hereditary and acquired PD have unique mechanistic causes, all result in a pathologic dysfunction and death of dopaminergic neurons. AD is a neurodegenerative disorder that affects the elderly and causes memory loss and declined cognitive function. The pathological factors of the disease consist of the presence of amyloid-β plaques and neurofibrillary tangles in the brain [9]. Although I/R injury, Parkinson's disease, and Alzheimer's disease differ in terms of their etiology, the literature suggests that loss of mitochondrial integrity plays a central role in each of these disease processes.

It is well established that mitochondria are key regulators of cell fate, controlling survival (via the production of ATP that fuels cellular processes) and, conversely, death (via the induction of apoptosis). Indeed, mitochondrial dysfunction has been well characterized as a precursor to cell death [10–13]. Therefore, it is essential to have stringent control mechanisms regulating the quality of mitochondria to avoid the pathologic effects of dysfunctional mitochondria on the cell.

While the negative roles of mitochondrial failure and apoptosis are well documented, much less is known of the causal role of mitochondrial quality control in disease and the potentially nuanced role for these mechanisms in different disease settings. Importantly, evidence suggests a divergent role of mitochondrial quality control in acute vs. chronic disease. Defects in the mechanisms that regulate quality of mitochondria are recognized to play a large role in chronic diseases such as PD and AD, but, to date, their role in the acute setting of I/R injury is poorly understood. In contrast, evidence supports a salutary role for mitochondrial quality control in acute cardiac and neurologic injury, suggesting that quality control mechanisms can serve both survival and death functions depending on the nature of the disease. This review aims to (i) discuss the molecular mechanisms involved in mitochondrial quality control including mitochondrial dynamics and mitophagy (Fig. 1), (ii) detail the role that mitochondrial quality control plays in chronic and acute neurodegenerative and cardiovascular diseases, and (iii) provide a better understanding of the intricacies and balance of this process in the progression of acute vs chronic diseases.

The Axes of Mitochondrial Quality Control

Mitochondrial Dynamics: to Divide or Not to Divide?

Within the cell, mitochondria exist in an ever-changing dynamic state, where mitochondrial networks are constantly elongating and dividing (i.e., mitochondrial fusion and fission, respectively). The balance of these two events provides an equilibrium of small fragmented mitochondria and long interconnected mitochondrial networks and is thought to be essential for mitochondrial homeostasis, cell stability, and cell survival (Fig. 1) [14, 15]. Fission plays a role in segregating dysfunctional mitochondria that contain damaged proteins, destabilized membranes, and mutated or damaged mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) [16–20]. Fusion, in contrast, has been shown to aid in equilibration of matrix metabolites, intact mtDNA, and even membrane components such as complex I of the electron transport chain [16, 21–24]. Fission and fusion are both regulated by a family of dynamin-related proteins (DRPs). These proteins are unique in that they are large self-assembling GTPases that also possess the capability of assembly-stimulated GTP hydrolysis [25]. Through the work of DRPs, the mitochondrial network can be in constant communication to ensure a healthy connected network, while at the same time allowing the distribution of mitochondria to specific sites of the cell via transport on actin or microtubule networks [26, 27].

Mitochondrial Fission

The master mediator of fission is dynamin-related protein 1 (Drp1), which has been shown to be essential for noncytokinetic mitochondrial division [16, 28]. Drp1 is distributed diffusely throughout the cytosol and, when activated through post-translational modifications (predominantly phosphorylation/de-phosphorylation), translocates to the outer mitochondrial membrane via actin and microtubule mechanisms [29–33]. These post-translational modifications, described in detail below, include phosphorylation/dephosphorylation, ubiquitination, and sumoylation, in a cell-specific manner [34, 35]. Once positioned on the outer mitochondrial membrane, Drp1 interacts with four mitochondrial-bound proteins that serve as Drp1 receptors (mitochondrial dynamic proteins of 49 and 51 kDa (Mid49 and Mid51), mitochondrial fission protein 1 (Fis1), and mitochondrial fission factor (Mff), where it constricts and cleaves the mitochondria (Fig. 2a) [36–38]. Fis1 is an 18-kDa adaptor protein anchored to the outer mitochondrial membrane and has been implicated in recruiting Drp1, as well as modulating the assembly of the fission complex [39, 40]. Fis1 is thought to be required for mitochondrial fission, although this remains controversial as other groups have found it to be dispensable in the fission process [38, 41, 42].

Fission is regulated by numerous post-translational modifications of Drp1 as well as endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-mitochondrial contact sites. Phosphorylation/dephosphorylation is one of the main regulators of Drp1 and is carried out at two different serine sites located 20 amino acids apart (Ser616 and Ser637) [43]. Phosphorylation of Ser616 is associated with Drp1 activation and is phosphorylated by cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1), extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK1/2), and protein kinase C delta (PKCδ) [44–46]. CDK1 induces mitochondrial fragmentation during mitosis [44]. ERK1/2 and PKCδ induces Drp1-mediated mitochondrial fission via increases in ROS production during hyperglycemic conditions and hypertensive neuroencephalopathy, respectively [45, 46]. Ser637 is phosphorylated by protein kinase A (PKA), calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase 1 alpha (CAMKIα), and the Rho-associated coil-containing protein kinase 1 (ROCK1) [34, 35, 47]. PKA-phosphorylated Drp1 has been shown to have decreased GTPase activity and result in decreased fission during starvation, stress, or exercise. Studies in neurons and cardiac tissue exposed to oxygen-glucose deprivation (OGD) and ischemia-reperfusion, respectively, demonstrate calcineurin-mediated dephosphorylation of Ser637, subsequently leading to Drp1 activation, mitochondrial fission, and apoptosis [33, 48, 49]. Conversely, CAMKIα phosphorylation of Ser637 results in enhanced fission during conditions of high extracellular K+ (inducing Ca2+ influx) in primary rat hippocampal neurons [33, 35, 47]. Additionally, ROCK1 phosphorylation of Ser637 has been demonstrated to induce mitochondrial fission in podocytes and endothelial cells of mice with metabolic syndrome and diabetes [34]. Phosphorylation of the same residue leading to opposite effects points to the complexity of Drp1 regulation that is likely dependent on cell type, extracellular conditions, as well as intracellular status.

Recent literature also suggests a role for the ER in mitochondrial fission. Studies conducted in both yeast and mammalian cells have shown that ER tubules will wrap around the mitochondria and mediate constriction before Drp1 recruitment via the ER-localized inverted formin 2 (INF2) mechanisms [50, 51]. INF2 is thought to drive initial mitochondrial constriction that provides sites for subsequent Drp1 recruitment and secondary constriction [51]. The multiple mechanisms involved in the regulation of fission underscore the complexity of this process and may provide insight into potential mechanisms by which dysregulated mitochondrial dynamics may interact with disease processes.

Mitochondrial Fusion

Fusion is mediated by three different GTPases: optic atrophy 1 (Opa1), mitofusin 1 (Mfn1), and mitofusin 2 (Mfn2) [24]. Both Mfn1 and Mfn2 mediate fusion of the outer mitochondrial membranes, while Opa1 mediates the fusion of the inner mitochondrial membrane, along with its role in maintaining normal inner membrane cristae structure [52–54]. Mitofusins, which are required for fusion, are anchored to the outer mitochondrial membrane where they interact and form a hemifusion stalk to initiate the joining of two mitochondrial membranes [16, 55]. The stalk then grows and creates a lipidic hole as well as a hemifusion diaphragm to reestablish membrane continuity. Finally, a fusion pore is made for inner membrane fusion via the lipid binding domain in Opa1 that is specific for cardiolipin [55, 56] (Fig. 2b).

Fusion of the inner and outer mitochondrial membrane is mediated mainly through proteolytic cleavage and ubiquitination, respectively. Opa1, in mammals, consists of eight different isoforms generated by alternative splicing of three of the 30 Opa1 exons [57, 58]. Membrane-bound long (L)-Opa1 can be further processed via two proteolytic cleavage sites (S1 and S2), generating short (S)-Opa1 forms [54]. Proteolytic processing is carried out predominantly through two intermembrane space AAA proteases (ATPases associated with diverse cellular activities): (i) overlapping with m-AAA (OMA1) cleaving at the S1 site and (ii) yeast mitochondrial DNA escape 1-like (YME1L) cleaving at the S2 site [59, 60]. Every (L)-Opa1isoform contains a S1 cleavage site, while about half of the (L)-Opa1 isoforms contain both S1 and S2 cleavage sites [61, 62]. Under normal physiological conditions, S1 and S2 are constitutively cleaved to produce a 50/50 ratio of (L)-Opa1 and (S)-Opa1. The balance in Opa1 isoforms is thought to mediate the balance between mitochondrial fission and fusion [63]. Under pathophysiologic conditions, such as membrane depolarization, low levels of ATP, or dysfunctional quality control mechanisms, the balance is tipped and the remaining (L)-Opa1 are cleaved by Oma1 resulting in mitochondrial fragmentation [64–68]. Mitofusins are regulated mainly by ubiquitin-mediated degradation, specifically through the PTEN-induced kinase (PINK1) and Parkin-mediated ubiquitination pathway during mitophagy [69]. This pathway will be discussed later in further detail. Abnormalities in proteolytic cleavage of Opa1 or ubiquitination of the mitofusins result in impaired fusion, changes in cristae architecture, and favor a fragmented mitochondrial phenotype.

Mitophagy: Out with the Old, In with the New

Autophagy is the catabolic process of cellular components including cytosolic protein aggregates and organelles such as mitochondria that are sequestered in a double-membrane structure called an autophagosome [70, 71]. There are three distinct subtypes of autophagy [72]. Macroautophagy (typically referred to as autophagy) is the process of taking damaged proteins and organelles from the cytoplasm to the lysosome for degradation via an intermediate vesicle termed the autophagosome (summarized in Fig. 3). Macroautophagy typically involves the degradation of large cellular components such as organelles through both selective and nonselective mechanisms. In contrast, in so-called microautophagy, particles are directly taken up by the lysosome (no intermediate vesicle) by direct engulfment where they are degraded. Lastly, chaperone-mediated autophagy involves targeting dysfunctional proteins to be taken across the lysosomal membrane with the aid of the cytosolic chaperone heat shock cognate 70 kDa protein (HSC-70). The protein-chaperone protein complex then interacts with a specific lysosomal membrane receptor, lysosomal-associated membrane protein 2A (LAMP-2A), resulting in their degradation [73, 74].

The process of mitochondrial degradation through macroautophagy has been termed mitophagy. Mitophagy occurs through several different pathways (summarized in Fig. 4) that all involve (i) detection of dysfunctional mitochondria, (ii) segregation from the healthy mitochondrial network, (iii) recruitment of the phagophore, and (iv) degradation through autophagic processes. Mitophagy, in concert with mitochondrial biogenesis, ensures a healthy mitochondrial network through mitochondrial turnover. Clearance of dysfunctional mitochondria is critical to limit cellular damage via ROS production and subsequent apoptosis. Mitophagic proteins, specifically Parkin, are critical for eliminating mitochondria with deleterious mtDNA mutations via mitophagy [20]. This suggests that mitophagy is selective and plays pivotal role in the maintaining a functional population of mitochondria.

Autophagy: the Four Phases

There are four phases in the development of an autophagosome: (i) nucleation, (ii) elongation, (iii) sequestration and maturation, followed by (iv) fusion and degradation (Fig. 3) [75, 76].

Nucleation of the isolation membrane is initiated first through the phosphorylation of the Unc-51 like autophagy activating kinase 1 (ULK1) complex, typically by 5′ AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) [77]. Once phosphorylated, the ULK1 complex will recruit several different autophagosome-related proteins (Atg) to the autophagosome formation site. In addition, ULK1 also phosphorylates beclin 1 (Atg6) which, in turn, initiates the activity of the class III phosphotidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) complex (beclin 1 and vacuolar proteins sorting 34 and 15 (VPS34 and VPS15)) for nucleation of the phagophore [77–79].

Elongation of the phagophore is mediated by two ubiquitin-like systems (ULS) [77]. In the Atg5-Atg12 conjugation system (first of the two ULS), Atg12 is activated by Atg7 (an E1-like enzyme) and is then transferred to Atg10 (an E2-like enzyme) that is on the target protein Atg5. This Atg5-Atg12 will form a dimeric complex with Atg16, which will target the phagophore membrane. The second ULS involves the cleavage of Atg8 by Atg4 (cysteine protease) and, subsequently, the processing by the ubiquitin-like enzymes Atg7 and Atg3 [77]. Together, these ULS, along with light chain 3 (LC3), extend the autophagosome membrane.

Sequestration is the process by which the isolation membrane encircles the damaged organelle. This is mediated through the binding of LC3 to a variety of different proteins/receptors that detect damaged organelles [78, 80, 81]. LC3 is processed by a cysteine protease to its cytosolic form, LC3I. Cytosolic LC3I then conjugates with phosphotidylethanolamine (PE) associated with the inner and outer membrane of the phagophore to form LC3II [82]. The phagophore will then continue to elongate until it completely engulfs its cargo and matures into an autophagosome.

In the degradation phase, the autophagosome then fuses with the lysosome, resulting in the degradation of its cargo via acid hydrolase enzymes [75, 76]. In the fusion process, soluble NSF attachment protein receptor (SNARE) proteins, endosomal coating proteins (COPs), the endosomal sorting complex require for transport (ESCRT III) complex, the homotypic fusion and protein sorting (HOPS) complex, LAMP proteins, GTPase Rab proteins, the beclin 1 binding protein Rubicon, and chaperon HSP70 family proteins have all been implicated to play contributing roles [83–90]. More specifically, Chen et al. reported that tectonin beta-propeller repeat-containing protein 1 (TECPR1) of the lysosome binds phosphotidylinositol 3-phosphate upon conjugation of Atg12-Atg5 to promote autophagosome-lysosome fusion [91]. After degradation, the cargo's amino acids and lipids can then be reused for synthesis of new organelles.

Identification of Dysfunctional Mitochondria: the Pathways of Mitophagy

Four pathways have been identified that detect dysfunctional mitochondria and recruit autophagosomes for degradation (summarized in Fig. 4). The most well-known pathway is PINK1/Parkin-mediated mitophagy [92, 93], named for its role in the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease. PINK1 contains a mitochondrial targeting domain such that, in healthy mitochondria, it is (i) transported into the intermembrane space (IMS) through the translocase of the outer mitochondrial membrane (TOM), then (ii) integrated into the inner mitochondrial membrane via insertion into the translocase of the inner mitochondrial membrane (TIM) [94], and (iii) rapidly processed and degraded by the mitochondrial membrane peptidase and presinilin-associated rhomboid-like protease (PARL). Under healthy conditions, this rapid degradation serves to keep the mitochondrial concentration of PINK1 low [95]. However, TIM-mediated import of protein relies on a steady mitochondrial membrane potential. When mitochondria are depolarized, PINK1 can no longer be inserted into the mitochondria, inhibiting its proteolytic cleavage and subsequent degradation [96]. PINK1 then accumulates on depolarized mitochondria, where it phosphorylates and activates a myriad of proteins including Parkin, ubiquitin, and TANK binding kinase 1 (TBK1) [92, 97–101] (Fig. 4a).

Parkin is an E3 ubiquitin ligase that is activated by phosphorylation by PINK at Ser65 within its ubiquitin like domain [102, 103]. In addition, Parkin has also been reported to be activated by PINK1-dependent phosphorylation of ubiquitin at Ser65 [99, 101, 104]. When activated, Parkin will ubiquitinate numerous outer mitochondrial membrane proteins including mitofusins and voltage-dependent anion channel (VDAC) [69, 105, 106]. Interestingly, the ubiquitin chains generated by Parkin are major targets of PINK1 phosphorylation, allowing Parkin retention on mitochondria, providing a feed forward mechanism to promote mitophagy [98, 104]. Concurrently, PINK1 also phosphorylates TBK1 at Ser172, promoting the phosphorylation of three different autophagy adaptor proteins: p62 (also known as sequestrome 1 (SQSTM1)), optineurin (OPTN), and nuclear dot protein (NDP52) [107–109]. The aggregation of dysfunctional mitochondria is mediated via p62, while OPTN and NDP52 serve as receptors for the phagophore via ubiquitin and LC3 binding domains [108–113] (Fig. 4a). Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) will also translocate upon ubiquitination of outer mitochondrial membrane proteins and has been shown to enhance fusion of the autophagosome and lysosome [114, 115].

Mitophagy can also be regulated in a receptor-mediated fashion. One of these pathways is through BNIP3/NIX, which are B cell CLL/lymphoma 2 (BCL-2)-related proteins. These proteins play a dual role by both (i) inducing mitochondrial apoptosis and (ii) localizing to the mitochondrial membrane and acting as autophagy receptors where they can directly bind to LC3 [116–120] (Fig. 4b). This pathway is distinct from the PINK1/Parkin-mediated mitophagy in that PINK1/Parkin requires depolarized mitochondria to initiate mitophagy, whereas BNIP3 can activate mitophagy in mitochondria that have a stable membrane potential [92, 93, 121]. BNIP3 does recruit Parkin to mitochondria, and it has been shown that Parkin-deficient myocytes display a reduction in mitophagy despite overexpression of BNIP3 [122]. Although these proteins have dual function in activating mitophagy or inducing apoptosis, it is unclear how they are recruited for each divergent role.

FUN14 domain containing 1 (FUNDC1) is an outer mitochondrial membrane protein that mediates mitophagy through receptor binding with LC3 and has been implicated to play a role in hypoxia-mediated mitophagy [123] (Fig. 4c). FUNDC1 is regulated by casein kinase 2 (CK2) and the mitochondrial serine/threonine protein phosphatase PGAM5 [124]: Specifically, CK2 phosphorylates FUNDC1 to inhibit its function, while during hypoxia, PGAM5 phosphatase de-phosphorylates FUNDC1 to activate its binding to LC3 and thus promote mitophagy. This pathway has been shown to be related to both PINK1/Parkin and BNIP3 primarily through PGAM5. PGAM5 phosphatase activity is required for PINK1 stabilization as well as PINK1/Parkin-mediated mitophagy, and PGAM5-deficient mice develop Parkinson's disease [125]. BNIP3 has also been shown to be activated in hypoxia and induce mitophagy [126]. Whether or not these three pathways communicate with one another is still a question that needs further investigation.

Cardiolipin is a lipid predominantly localized to the inner mitochondrial membrane, is involved in mitochondrial metabolism, and interestingly, has also recently been implicated in receptor-mediated mitophagy [127, 128]. When oxidized, cardiolipin undergoes redistribution and externalization to the surface of damaged mitochondria where it is recognized by LC3 [128] (Fig. 4d). Nucleoside diphosphate kinase-D (NDPK-D (NM23-H4)), a hexameric intermembrane space protein, mediates the externalization of cardiolipin in artificially depolarized mitochondria [129]. How this process may interact with PINK1/Parkin pathway is still unknown but may provide novel insight to a potential role for cardiolipin signaling in pathologies involving mitochondrial membrane depolarization, i.e., I/R injury.

Mitochondrial Biogenesis

Mitochondrial biogenesis refers to the growth and division of pre-existing mitochondria. After mitochondria are degraded, the existing mitochondrial pool needs to continue growing to keep pace with energy demands of the cell. The increase in mitochondrial content involves an array of processes that include protein and lipid synthesis driven by both nuclear and mtDNA transcription. The double-stranded circular mtDNA is about 16.5 kb in length and contains 37 genes that encode for 13 proteins (subunits of electron transport chain complexes), 22 transfer RNAs, and 2 ribosomal RNAs necessary for translation [130]. Similarly, lipids such as phosphotidylethanolamine, phosphotidylglycerine, and cardiolipin are synthesized within the mitochondria from ER-derived phospholipids [131]. The rest of the ∼1000 proteins and lipids come from the nucleus and ER, respectively. This coordinated import and synthesis of proteins and lipids are essential for healthy mitochondrial biogenesis.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor coactivator (PGC-1α) is considered to be the master regulator of mitochondrial biogenesis [132]. PGC-1α is induced under conditions of increased energy demand such as fasting, cold, and exercise where it increases the expression of, and coactivates, a variety of transcription factors [132–135]. These transcription factors include the nuclear respiratory factors (NRF1/2), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR), as well as estrogen-related receptors (ERRs) [132]. NRF1 and NRF2 promote the expression of the nuclear encoded mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam), which is responsible for the transcription of mtDNA [136]. As described previously, mtDNA gives rise to 13 subunits of the electron transport chain as well as the 22 tRNAs and 2 rRNAs. The nuclear proteins come from the transcriptional activity of PPARs and ERRs, which are involved in regulating the expression of proteins and enzymes that control multiple aspects of mitochondrial oxidative metabolism ranging from fatty acid transport and oxidation, glucose utilization, the TCA cycle, to oxidative phosphorylation [137]. Once transcribed in the nucleus, the mRNA is then translated in the cytosol complete with a mitochondrial localization signal. The proteins are subsequently transported in an unfolded fashion with the aid of molecular chaperones such as Hsp70 and inserted into the mitochondria through different protein translocases, including TOM and TIM (both involved in the translocation of PINK1), as well as presequence translocase-associated motor (PAM) and sorting and assembly machinery (SAM) [138].

Lipids, on the other hand, are primarily synthesized in the ER and transported to the mitochondria during biogenesis [139]. The transfer of primarily phospholipids [140] from the ER to mitochondria has been thought to be mediated via ER-mitochondrial contacts, effectively termed the mitochondria-associated membranes (MAMs) [141]. The MAMs are purportedly comprised of a variety of proteins including (i) the IP3 receptor and VDAC1, through Grp75, that play a role in calcium signaling; (ii) the mitofusins, expressed both on mitochondria and ER membranes, that play a role in tethering and modulating mitochondrial dynamics; (iii) the ER stress sensor PERK that initiates signaling in response to ER stress; and (iv) many more [142–144]. Although it remains unclear how lipids are transported in MAMs, in yeast, it is thought that ER-mitochondrial encounter structure (ERMES) are responsible [145]. ERMES are composed of the structural component maintenance of mitochondrial morphology 1 (MMM1), mitochondrial distribution and morphology 34 (Mdm34), Mdm12, and Mdm10 as well as the regulatory subunit GTPase EF-hand protein of mitochondria (Gem1) [146]. The ERMES complex possesses a synaptotagmin-like mitochondrial lipid-binding (SMP) domain that harbors an elongated hydrophobic groove in which different lipids can bind and possibly be transported [147]. Once the lipids are transported from the ER, mitochondrial enzymes can then synthesize the lipids critical for mitochondrial function.

The Interplay Between Mitochondrial Dynamics and Mitophagy

Mitochondrial dynamics and mitophagy have been well studied separately, but investigations aimed at elucidating the interplay between these two components of mitochondrial quality control have been limited. It has been shown that fission can trigger mitophagy and govern mitochondrial clearance [18, 148]. In this regard, multiple studies have demonstrated that alterations to pro-fusion or pro-fission proteins can affect mitophagy, i.e., inhibition of Fis1 in insulin secreting (INS1) cells resulted in a 70% reduction of mitophagy, while overexpression of Drp1 in HeLa cells was accompanied by a 70% decrease in mitochondrial mass [148, 149]. Further evidence that fission and mitophagy are intimately associated is that the Drp1-dependent mediator of fission, endophilin B1, colocalizes with autophagic markers LC3, Atg5, and Atg9 specifically in response to nutrient starvation [150, 151]. Conversely, proteins associated with mitophagy (in particular, excessive PINK1 in depolarized mitochondria) may also play a role in fission by mechanisms that are, at present, unclear. It has been proposed that when PINK1 accumulates and recruits Parkin, Parkin ubiquitinates mitofusins to inhibit fusion [17]. Accordingly, in a state where all mitochondria are depolarized with PINK1 accumulation and mitofusin ubiquitination, the only path for mitochondria would be fission. However, although fission is apparently necessary for mitophagy, mitophagy is not necessary for fission [69, 92, 122, 148, 152, 153].

Mitochondrial Quality Control in Disease

As discussed in the previous sections, mitochondrial dynamics and mitophagy are essential regulators of mitochondrial quality control and play a role in maintaining mitochondrial homeostasis in healthy cells. Defects in mitochondrial quality control have also been implicated to contribute to both chronic and acute neurological and cardiovascular diseases; however, little is known about how mitochondrial dynamics and mitophagy interact/communicate with each other under pathophysiological conditions.

Chronic Diseases: Parkinson's and Alzheimer's Disease

Parkinson's Disease

The pathologic signature of PD is the accumulation-damaged protein aggregates such as α-synuclein (SNCA) and ubiquitin into intracytoplasmic inclusions termed Lewy bodies. PD has been associated with mutations, sporadic or hereditary, in at least six genes that are responsible for generating mutations in the following proteins: SNCA, Parkin, β-glucocerebrosidase (GBA), PINK1, the protein deglycase DJ1, and leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) [154]. Interestingly, these genes give rise to proteins that are associated with mitochondria or located within mitochondria, thereby implicating mitochondria as key players in PD [155–158]. Evidence of mitochondrial abnormalities in PC (including reduced complex I activity, reduced mitochondrial membrane potential, increased ROS production, altered mitochondrial dynamics, impaired mitochondrial trafficking, and increases in mtDNA mutations) underscore this association [159–163].

To maintain a healthy mitochondrial network, cells must undergo mitophagy to dispose of damaged and dysfunctional mitochondria and produce new healthy mitochondria via mitochondrial biogenesis. In PD, patients with PINK1 and Parkin mutations display impaired mitophagy. Mutations and defects in PINK1 (i) have the potential to diminish both the mitochondrial translocation and activation of Parkin, (ii) can result in the failure to segregate dysfunctional mitochondria for mitophagy via fission [164], and (iii) have been associated with a decrease in phospho-Drp1 levels and an increase in Drp1 GTPase activity, suggesting a direct role of PINK1 to induce fission [165]. PINK1 deficiency has also been shown to be associated with dysfunctional Na+/Ca2+ exchangers in the inner mitochondrial membrane that cause unbalanced mitochondrial calcium homeostasis [160]. This impairment of calcium efflux from the mitochondria results in reduced respiration from ROS-stimulated inhibition of glucose uptake. Finally, and not surprisingly based on the aforementioned associations, mutations in PINK1 reportedly increase the sensitivity of cells to stress-induced cell death. Studies have shown that PINK1 is necessary for long-term survival of cells [155, 166].

Mutations in Parkin, on the other hand, can lead to impaired ubiquitination of outer mitochondrial membrane proteins, which has been shown to play a role in recognition by the autophagosome [167]. Interestingly, Parkin was first linked to the mitochondria by evidence that the protein prevented mitochondrial swelling and cytochrome C release in cells treated with ceramide [168]. In addition to this purported neuroprotective role, Parkin was found to protect mtDNA from oxidative stress and stimulate mtDNA repair systems [169], while, in strains of Parkin knockout mice, neurons in the ventral midbrain displayed severe mitochondrial damage and decreases in complexes I and IV, despite being devoid of the phenotypical motor impairment characteristic of PD [170, 171]. It remains unclear how deficiencies in Parkin lead to severe mitochondrial damage and PD. Mitochondria do undergo a basal level of “wear and tear” via mtDNA mutations as well as oxidation of lipids and proteins. As discussed previously, under normal conditions, these damaged mitochondria would be sequestered and undergo proteolytic degradation. If, in PD, defects in PINK1 and Parkin compromise the ability of the cell to degrade and dispose of proteins or damaged mitochondria, the accrual of damaged organelles would, in all likelihood, ultimately lead to cell death.

Alzheimer's Disease

AD currently affects 1.5 million Americans, with the associated memory loss and decline in cognitive function attributed to the accumulation of amyloid-β plaques and phosphorylated tau [172]. Sporadic and hereditary AD are attributed to mutations in several genes, as well as accumulation of mtDNA mutations that generally lead to an increase in β-amyloid levels in the brain [173, 174]. Although the underlying mechanisms are unclear, accumulation of amyloid-β in neurons and formation of plaques have been attributed to excessive cleavage of amyloid precursor protein (APP, a transmembrane glycoprotein) or mutations in the apolipoprotein APOE4, which, under normal conditions, contributes to the breakdown of amyloid-β [175].[176].

Early in the pathogenesis of AD, mitochondrial abnormalities are also common, including defective glucose metabolism, a reduction in enzyme activity, mitochondrial DNA mutations, defected gene expression, and aberrant mitochondrial dynamics [177]. Mitochondria in AD patients have been observed to reveal significant structural damage together with decreases in mitochondrial fusion proteins, increases in Fis1, and increases in Ser616 phosphorylated Drp1 (despite decreases in total Drp1)—all of which favor excessive fragmentation [178, 179]. In vitro studies corroborated this concept, i.e., overexpression of APP in M17 cells was associated with mitochondrial fragmentation, reduced neurite growth, abnormal mitochondrial distribution, and modulation of mitochondrial fission/fusion proteins [180]. Similar findings were obtained in primary neurons of transgenic mice expressing the human APP Swedish mutation [181]. The interactions between amyloid-β and Drp1 are still unknown, but limited data have proposed that GSK3β may be the mediator in Drp1 phosphorylation via the association of amyloid-β with NMDA receptors and the Wnt signaling pathway [182]. With excessive fission, healthy mitochondria are cleaved unnecessarily, thereby disrupting the equilibration of mitochondrial matrix metabolites (required for efficient production of ATP) and making the mitochondria more vulnerable to injury. In addition, this excessive fragmentation could potentially lead to an upregulation in mitophagic pathways.

Insights into I/R Injury

Fission, Fusion, and Cell Fate

There has been growing interest in mitochondrial dynamics, and its potential association with apoptosis, in the setting of I/R injury [183–185]. Several studies have uncovered excessive mitochondrial fission or fragmentation during both ischemia and I/R injury [186–189]. Using a 6-h OGD model to simulate ischemia, Kim et al. observed a massive mitochondrial fragmentation profile during OGD in H9C2 cells [186]. This mitochondrial fission profile was confirmed in vivo using a 24-h left anterior descending permanent ligation model in mice [186]. Disatnik et al. and Ong et al. observed mitochondrial fragmentation during reoxygenation in OGD/reoxygenation models using neonatal primary cardiomyocytes and HL1 cells, respectively [188, 189]. In the brain, Tang et al. also demonstrated a highly fragmented mitochondrial profile in mouse N2a neuroblastoma cells following OGD/reoxygenation [187]. Previous studies from our lab, conducted using both primary rat neurons and HT22 cells, revealed evidence of mitochondrial fission during OGD and reoxygenation [190]. Moreover, mitochondrial fragmentation was accompanied by Opa1 processing and concomitant release of cytochrome C [190]. Using an in vitro real-time imaging model of OGD/reoxygenation, we further observed complex temporal alterations in mitochondrial morphology [191]. Using HT22 cells transfected with a plasmid containing a GFP marker, two distinct phases of fragmentation were detected: The first phase of fission occurred during OGD, while reintroduction of oxygen triggered initial fusion followed by complete and massive fragmentation after late reoxygenation. The massive fragmentation observed during late reoxygenation was confirmed in vivo in CA1 hippocampal neurons of rats exposed to global brain ischemia/reperfusion [191].

The aforementioned studies suggest that mitochondrial fragmentation is a pathophysiological consequence of I/R injury and that inhibition mitochondrial fragmentation may reverse this. Indeed, in support of this concept, there is evidence that, after exposure to apoptotic stimuli, Drp1 inhibition or overexpression of a dominant negative Drp1 blocked the induction of apoptosis [192]. Moreover, inhibition of Drp1 was found to be neuroprotective in response to OGD in vitro and transient focal ischemia in vivo [193], and cardioprotective in cultured HL-1 cardiomyocytes subjected to OGD and reoxygenation [194]. However, in the latter study, cardioprotection was only seen when inhibition of Drp1 was initiated as a pretreatment; cell death was paradoxically exacerbated when treatment was administered during reoxygenation [194]. This points to the complexity of mitochondrial dynamics and its effects on cell death or survival—an issue that is highlighted by observations that fusion (presumably favoring survival) involves the formation of lipidic pores that may contribute to mitochondrial permeabilization and compromise cell viability [195], while fission (as discussed above, associated with cell death) is necessary for mitophagy and governs clearance of dysfunctional mitochondria [18, 148]. Thus, despite strong evidence to suggest that mitochondrial fragmentation can be detrimental to the cell during stress conditions, collectively these results reveal a complex dynamic nature of mitochondria that requires further study to understand (i) why fission occurs during these stress states, (ii) why inhibition mitochondrial fission is only cardioprotective when initiated before the OGD/ischemic event, and (iii) why fusion is not possible after reoxygenation/reperfusion.

Mitophagy and I/R Injury

I/R injury has been shown to activate mitophagy pathways through multiple signals. During the ischemic phase when ATP production halts, AMPK pathways are upregulated to initiate autophagy [196]. AMPK activates ULK1 via phosphorylation, which will activate the class III PI3K complex (beclin 1, VPS34, and VPS15) that initiate nucleation of the phagophore [197]. Interestingly, ULK1 may have a redundant role in activating mitophagy, i.e., has also been shown to translocate to mitochondria and activate the FUNDC1 receptor [198]. During the reperfusion phase, ROS serves as a signaling molecule to inhibit the mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathways, thereby contributing to the initiation and nucleation of the autophagosome [199]. ROS has also been shown to activate mitophagy via BNIP3 although, as stated previously, high levels of BNIP3 can induce apoptosis [200, 201]. Overexpression of BNIP3 in HL-1 myocytes was reported to increase cell death in response to simulated I/R injury by facilitating mPTP opening through the activation of Bcl-2-asscoaited X protein (Bax) [116, 201]. Moreover, BNIP3−/− mice subjected to 1-h coronary artery occlusion and 3-week reperfusion exhibited preserved left ventricular (LV) systolic function and diminished LV dilation, while conditional over-expression of BNIP3 reversed these effects resulting in increased apoptosis and infarct size [202]. Collectively, these results demonstrate a threshold for BNIP3, as increases or overexpression will inevitably lead to increased apoptosis. Given the dual “life-or-death” role of mitochondria, together with reports of the strong association between mitophagic proteins (i.e., BNIP3 and Drp1) and apoptosis, this raises the question of whether mitophagy is beneficial or detrimental to cell fate in response to I/R injury.

Heart

During ischemia, upregulation of mitophagy is agreed to confer protection [203, 204]. The most compelling evidence is provided by Kubli et al. Using an in vivo mouse model, the investigators demonstrated that Parkin-deficient mice are more sensitive to myocardial infarction [204]. Following permanent left anterior descending coronary artery occlusion, Parkin-deficient mice displayed accumulation of swollen and dysfunctional mitochondria due to impaired mitophagy, which resulted in larger infarcts and reduced survival rates [204]. Moreover, the investigators observed upregulation of mitophagy with increased expression of Parkin at the border zone of the infarct in wild-type mice [204]. In vitro studies corroborated this concept, i.e., overexpression of Parkin in isolated cardiomyocytes subjected to hypoxia-mediated cell death was associated with increased Parkin translocation to the mitochondria and increased cell viability, while cardiomyocytes expressing Parkinson disease-associated mutants of Parkin failed to reduce hypoxia-mediated cell death [204]. In accordance with this concept, evidence in the in vivo mouse model of permanent coronary ligation revealed that the upregulation of mitophagy via the genetic deletion of two molecular inhibitors, p53 and TP53-induced glycolysis and apoptosis regulator (TIGAR), attenuated apoptotic cell death and provided resistance to subsequent remodeling [203]. Moreover, cardioprotection was reversed in p53−/− and TIGAR−/− mice following permanent myocardial infarction with administration of chloroquine, an autophagy inhibitor, an effect characterized by the accumulation of abnormal mitochondria in the ischemic myocardium [203]. Interestingly, the upregulation of mitophagy via inhibition of p53 and TIGAR was induced through an increase in ROS production followed by BNIP3 activation [203]. In this case, BNIP3 activation was necessary and beneficial in attenuating cardiac I/R injury.

In contrast to ischemic injury, the role of mitophagy in I/R injury remains controversial. A considerable body of evidence suggests that an upregulation of mitophagy during myocardial I/R injury is protective [118, 205–207]. It was first described that upregulation of autophagy in HL-1 cells protected against simulated ischemia-reperfusion by Hamacher-Brady et al. [207]. The investigator's observations revealed that autophagosomal engulfment of mitochondria was a prominent response in their model. Subsequent studies using HL-1 cells demonstrated an upregulation of BNIP3-regulated mitophagy following simulated I/R [118]. Purportedly, overexpression of BNIP3 during simulated I/R induces mitochondrial damage via ROS production, leading to an upregulation of mitophagy [118]. Expression of ATG5K130R, a dominant negative of ATG5 shown to suppress vacuole formation, significantly reduced mitophagy and increased BNIP3-induced cell death [118]. Together, these data suggests that upregulation of mitophagy occurs following BNIP3-induced mitochondrial damage as a cellular response to remove damaged mitochondria during I/R [118]. More recently, using Langendorff heart I/R model, Lu et al. observed that PGAM5-deficient mice had exacerbated necroptosis in response to 25 min of ischemia followed by 90 min of reperfusion [205]. Data in their mouse embryonic fibroblast (MEF) model of ROS-dependent necroptosis revealed impaired autophagic removal of LC-3II as well as impaired mitochondrial clearance following 24 h of TNF-α cyclohexamide and z-VAD-fmk (TCZ) stimulation. Finally, upregulation of mitophagy has been reported to play a role in the gold standard of cardioprotection, ischemic precondition (IPC) [206]. In both Langendorff perfused rat hearts and in vivo mice subjected to regional IPC, Parkin and P62 translocate to the mitochondria and mediate mitophagy [206]. Moreover, IPC is abolished in Parkin-deficient mice, suggesting a critical role for Parkin in IPC [206]. The investigators propose that selective mitophagy of mitochondria that have the lowest threshold for mPTP opening during IPC would leave behind mitochondria that are more equipped to handle sustained ischemic insults [206].

In contrast to the aforementioned studies, there is some evidence to suggest that the suppression of mitophagy may protect the heart from I/R [208]. In a rat model of left anterior descending coronary artery occlusion, pretreatment with mitochondrial aldehyde dehydrogenase 2 (ALDH2), an allosteric tetrameric enzyme responsible for the metabolism or detoxification of toxic aldehydes, conferred cardioprotection via attenuation of apoptotic cell death [208]. In vitro studies corroborated this concept using H9C2 cells subjected to 2 h of hypoxia (1% oxygen) and 1 h of reoxygenation [208]. Pretreatment of ALDH2 increased cell viability through the suppression of mitophagy [208]. Mitophagy was measured through colocalization of PINK1, Parkin, and the mitochondrial electron transport chain protein cytochrome C oxidase subunit IV (COXIV) [208]. However, given that mitophagy is in constant flux and mitochondria are degraded in autophagolysosomes, mitophagy proteins such as PINK1 and Parkin that are associated with dysfunctional mitochondria would also be degraded. Therefore, evaluation of the mitophagic flux would aid in confirming that ALDH2 is suppressing mitophagy as opposed to enhancing mitophagy and subsequently breakdown of mitophagy proteins.

Brain

There are notable differences between brain and heart in that controversy lies with respect to the role of mitophagy in ischemia as well as I/R (beneficial or detrimental). Cerebral ischemic pre-conditioning has been associated with increased autophagosome formation and confers neuroprotection in rats subjected to permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion (pMCAO) [209]. More recent evidence in the same model of pMCAO confirmed that the upregulation of autophagy during ischemia includes mitophagy, revealed by increased autophagic vacuoles containing mitochondria and LC3 colocalization with COXIV [210]. Interestingly, the upregulation of mitophagy was mediated through Drp1 as treatment with Mdivi, a pharmacological inhibitor of Drp1, prevented mitophagy and resulted in decreased LC3 and COXIV colocalization, increased levels of mitochondrial proteins, and the accumulation of damaged mitochondria following 1 h of pMCAO [210]. Moreover, Drp1 inhibition exacerbated mitochondrial-mediated brain injury to an even greater extent compared to the inhibition of autophagy using 3-methyladenine (3-MA) following 24 h of pMCAO [210]. Conversely, in mice subjected to pMCAO, administration of 3-MA conferred neuro-protection via a reduction in infarct size along with a dose-dependent increase in cell viability following exposure of 4-h OGD in rat primary cortical neurons [211]. Knockdown of Atg7 with siRNA reinforced this concept, resulting in increased cell viability in response to ischemia-induced neuronal injury [210]. Interestingly, the investigators observed no change in infarct volume with administration of mdivi in both in vitro and in vivo models of ischemia [211]. The lack of observable change could be a result of when the inhibitor was administered, i.e., at the point of artery occlusion or the beginning of OGD. Results from our lab demonstrate that mitochondria undergo massive fragmentation within 20 min of ischemia [191]. In this case, mitochondrial fragmentation could have occurred before the onset of inhibition with mdivi, resulting in segregated mitochondria ready to be recruited for mitophagy.

In cerebral I/R, there is a consequential amount of literature that suggests that an upregulation of mitophagy confers neuroprotection [205, 211, 212]. The strongest evidence to support this concept is provided by Zhang et al. [211]. Using pharmacological and genetic suppression of autophagy (i.e., 3-MA treatment, bafilomycin A1 (BafA) treatment, Atg5 knockout, and Atg7 knockdown), primary cortical neurons subjected to 2 h of OGD followed by a 24-h reperfusion had significantly decreased cell viability as compared to controls [211]. These results were affirmed in an in vivo transient MCAO model, where inhibition of autophagy via 3-MA treatment and Atg7 knockdown exacerbated I/R injury [211]. Moreover, addition of rapamycin, a known enhancer of mitophagy that attenuates mitochondrial dysfunction following cerebral ischemia [212], partly reversed the deleterious effects of 3-MA-treated primary neurons subjected to OGD reperfusion [211]. Similar to the heart, PGAM−/− mice subject to transient MCAO displayed significantly higher infarct sizes as compared to wild-type mice after 72 h of reperfusion [205].

At variance with the preceding studies, evidence provided by Shi et al. suggests that excessive mitophagy following cerebral I/R results in cell death [213]. Using an adapted Rice-Vanucci model of neonatal stroke or hypoxia-ischemia encephalopathy (HIE), the investigators observed that pups deficient of BNIP3 had a decrease in mitophagy that resulted in significantly smaller infarct sizes in response to neonatal stroke and 7 days of reperfusion [213]. Interestingly, the infarct volume in BNIP3−/− pups was significantly larger after 1 day of reperfusion but then recovered while the infarct volume in wild-type pups was exacerbated after 3 to 7 days of reperfusion [213]. The investigators also demonstrated in wild-type pups a dramatic increase in BNIP3 mitochondrial-localized homodimer expression in a time-dependent manner following neonatal stroke accompanied by a significant decrease in mitochondrial proteins from isolated cortical neurons following 6 h of OGD [213]. Although these data were collected in a neonatal model, it suggests that (i) BNIP3 induces excessive mitophagy following I/R, which ultimately exacerbates cerebral I/R injury, and (ii) underscores the balance of mitophagy required to prevent pro-apoptotic proteins such as BNIP3 to surpass the “death signal” threshold.

Beyond “Good” Versus “Evil”: a Question of Balance?

As reviewed in the preceding sections, there is continued controversy regarding whether upregulation of mitophagy in the setting of I/R is good or bad. It may, however, be more appropriate to consider mitophagy (and mitochondrial quality control as a whole) as a balancing act (Fig. 5). For example, it has been proposed that, following reperfusion, mitophagy is essential to clear dysfunctional mitochondria [211]. However, excessive mitophagy coupled with inhibited mitochondrial biogenesis and a global decrease in protein synthesis [214, 215] will result in a decrease in mitochondrial mass and, subsequently, a deficit in ATP production that may fail to meet the demands of the cell. This energy imbalance could eventually cause energy deprivation and cell death. With the other extreme—that is, with minimal mitophagy—damaged mitochondria will not be eliminated and the overall ROS burden would increase. This excessive ROS formation could further induce mitochondrial dysfunction, leading to a feed forward cycle of ROS production and ultimately cell death (Fig. 5).

Accordingly, there is a fundamental need for balance in mitochondrial quality control, and further investigation is needed to define this threshold. If this threshold can be identified, modulation of mitophagy may represent a valuable therapeutic option, with the goal of eliminating dysfunctional mitochondria while still providing sufficient energy to repair cellular damage, restore protein translation, and ultimately return to homeostasis. PINK1 and Parkin (rather than BNIP3 and NIX) may yield the greatest promise as effective targets for manipulation of mitophagy, given their reported favorable association with cell survival together with a lack of involvement in apoptotic pathways [204, 206, 211].

Conclusions and Challenges

Mitochondrial quality control is critical for the homeostasis of the mitochondrial network, and a constant balance is needed between mitochondrial fission/fusion as well as mitophagy and biogenesis. Disruption of mitochondrial quality control has been proposed to contribute to the pathogenesis of acute and chronic diseases, including Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease, and ischemia-reperfusion-induced cell death in the brain and heart. Accordingly, targeted modulation of one or more of the molecular components involved in mitochondrial quality control provides opportunities for the design of novel therapies. However, to capitalize on this potential opportunity, a greater mechanistic understanding of mitochondrial fission/fusion, mitophagy, and mitochondrial quality control—together with the development improved molecular tools to investigate these complex phenomena [216]—will be required.

Fig. 1 The mitochondrial quality control cycle. The mitochondrial quality control cycle involves a dynamic process of fission, fusion, mitophagy, and biogenesis. When mitochondria become depolarized or dysfunctional, they are marked for degradation. Once marked, the unhealthy component of the mitochondria will undergo fission from the healthy mitochondrial network. Certain damaged mitochondria can fuse with other healthy mitochondria in an attempt to salvage that mitochondrion, but typically, dysfunctional mitochondria will undergo mitophagy. When the dysfunctional mitochondria are segregated from the healthy mitochondrial network, mitochondria will accumulate mitophagy markers that will recruit the phagophore. The phagophore will attach to the dysfunctional mitochondria, mature into an autophagosome, fuse with the lysosome to form the autolysosome, and degrade the mitochondria. Once degraded, the cell will recycle the amino acids and fatty acids to enable the remaining healthy mitochondrial network to grow and divide through biogenesis

Fig. 2 Mitochondrial dynamics. a Fission is mediated by a family of dynamin-related proteins (Drp). Activated Drp1 translocates from the cytosol to the mitochondrial membrane where it interacts with Drp1 receptors (Mid 49, Mid51, Mff) and Fis1 to create the fission complex. Drp1 oligomers constrict and divide the mitochondria. b Fusion is mediated through the mitofusins (Mfn1/2) and optic atrophy 1 (Opa1). The mitofusins mediate the fusion of the outer mitochondrial membrane, while Opa1 is thought to mediate fusion of the inner mitochondrial membrane. Mitofusins are anchored to the outer mitochondrial membrane and interact with each other and form a hemifusion stalk. The stalk then grows into a lipidic hole and finally reestablishes membrane continuity. Opa1 forms a fusion pore for the inner mitochondrial membrane via its cardiolipin binding domain

Fig. 3 Phases of Autophagy

Autophagy is carried out in four different phases: nucleation, elongation, sequestration, and degradation. Nucleation of the isolation membrane is initiated by the phosphorylation of the ULk1 complex by AMPK. ULK1 will then recruit several autophagosome-related proteins for nucleation of the phagophore via phosphorylation of beclin 1 in the PI3K complex. Elongation or the extension of the autophagosome membrane is mediated by two ubiquitin-like systems involving the transferring of Atg12 from Atg7 to Atg10 and finally Atg5 where it forms a dimeric complex with Atg16 on the phagophore membrane. LC3 is also thought to help mediate the extension of the phagophore. Sequestration occurs when damaged organelles are detected via LC3/autophagy receptor interactions. Autophagy receptors localized on damaged organelles will bind LC3 inducing elongation of the phagophore until the cargo is completely engulfed and matures into an autophagosome. In the degradation phase, the lysosome will fuse with the autophagosome (autolysosome), releasing acid hydrolase enzymes that degrade the contents

Fig. 4 Mitophagic pathways. a In dysfunctional mitochondria, PINK1 accumulates in the outer mitochondrial membrane. Accumulations of PINK1 induce a concerted signaling cascade involving the simultaneous recruitment and phosphorylation of the E3 ubiquitin ligase Parkin, ubiquitin, and TBK1. Phosphorylation by PINK1 as well as phospho-Ser65-ubiquitin activates Parkin and leads to ubiquitination of outer mitochondrial membrane proteins in a feed forward process. Phagophore recruitment and binding are then mediated by OPTN and NDP52 with its ubiquitin and LC3 binding domains. b BNIP3/Nix are localized on the outer mitochondrial membrane and serve as mitophagy receptors and bind directly to the phagosome via LC3. c FUNDC1 localizes on the outer mitochondrial membrane and acts as a receptor for mitophagy under hypoxic condition. During hypoxia, PGAM5 dephosphorylates FUNDC1 and activates mitophagy via LC3 binding on the phagophore. d Cardiolipin localizes mainly in the inner leaflet of the inner mitochondrial membrane, specifically around the folds of the cristae. When cardiolipin is oxidized, it is externalized to the outer mitochondrial membrane where it is recognized by LC3 of the phagophore

Fig. 5 Finding a balance of mitochondrial quality control. During I/R injury, there is excessive mitochondrial fragmentation, favoring an increase in mitophagy. Degradation of dysfunctional ROS-producing mitochondria is critical for survival; however, mitochondrial content decrease would compromise ATP production. Insufficient ATP production paired with inhibited biogenesis will ultimately lead to cell death. In contrast, if fission was completely inhibited, mitochondrial content would be maintained, but damaged mitochondria would not be segregated and could lead to accumulated mitochondrial dysfunction and exacerbate damage to the entire mitochondrial network. The increase in mitochondrial damage would augment pro-apoptotic stimuli and, ultimately, cause cell death. Therefore, a balance in mitochondrial quality control (i.e., an equilibrium between retaining adequate mitochondrial content for sufficient ATP production versus disposal of dysfunctional mitochondria) is optimal for cell survival after I/R injury


1 Mozaffarian D 2015 Heart disease and stroke statistics— 2015 update: a report from the American Heart Association Circulation 131 4 e29 322 25520374
2 Pulsinelli WA Duffy TE 1983 Regional energy balance in rat brain after transient forebrain ischemia J Neurochem 40 5 1500 1503 6834075
3 Crack PJ Taylor JM 2005 Reactive oxygen species and the modulation of stroke Free Radic Biol Med 38 11 1433 1444 15890617
4 Aronowski J Strong R Grotta JC 1997 Reperfusion injury: demonstration of brain damage produced by reperfusion after transient focal ischemia in rats J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 17 10 1048 1056 9346429
5 Sanderson TH 2013 Molecular mechanisms of ischemia-reperfusion injury in brain: pivotal role of the mitochondrial membrane potential in reactive oxygen species generation Mol Neurobiol 47 1 9 23 23011809
6 Lucas DT Szweda LI 1998 Cardiac reperfusion injury: aging, lipid peroxidation, and mitochondrial dysfunction Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95 2 510 514 9435222
7 Alzheimer's A 2016 Alzheimer's disease facts and figures Alzheimers Dement 2016 12
8 Koller W 1987 Relationship of aging to Parkinson's disease Adv Neurol 45 317 321 3493630
9 Turner RS 2006 Alzheimer's disease Semin Neurol 26 5 499 506 17048151
10 Yue R 2015 Mitochondrial DNA oxidative damage contributes to cardiomyocyte ischemia/reperfusion-injury in rats: cardioprotective role of lycopene J Cell Physiol 230 9 2128 2141 25656550
11 Newmeyer DD Ferguson-Miller S 2003 Mitochondria: releasing power for life and unleashing the machineries of death Cell 112 4 481 490 12600312
12 Anne Stetler R 2013 The dynamics of the mitochondrial organelle as a potential therapeutic target J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 33 1 22 32 23093069
13 Ott M 2002 Cytochrome c release from mitochondria proceeds by a two-step process Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99 3 1259 1263 11818574
14 Twig G Shirihai OS 2011 The interplay between mitochondrial dynamics and mitophagy Antioxid Redox Signal 14 10 1939 1951 21128700
15 Calo L 2013 Mitochondrial dynamics: an emerging paradigm in ischemia-reperfusion injury Curr Pharm Des 19 39 6848 6857 23590157
16 Hoppins S Lackner L Nunnari J 2007 The machines that divide and fuse mitochondria Annu Rev Biochem 76 751 780 17362197
17 Twig G Hyde B Shirihai OS 2008 Mitochondrial fusion, fission and autophagy as a quality control axis: the bioenergetic view Biochim Biophys Acta 1777 9 1092 1097 18519024
18 Gomes LC Scorrano L 2008 High levels of Fis1, a pro-fission mitochondrial protein, trigger autophagy Biochim Biophys Acta 1777 7–8 860 866 18515060
19 Malena A 2009 Inhibition of mitochondrial fission favours mutant over wild-type mitochondrial DNA Hum Mol Genet 18 18 3407 3416 19561330
20 Suen DF 2010 Parkin overexpression selects against a deleterious mtDNA mutation in heteroplasmic cybrid cells Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107 26 11835 11840 20547844
21 Partikian A 1998 Rapid diffusion of green fluorescent protein in the mitochondrial matrix J Cell Biol 140 4 821 829 9472034
22 Ono T 2001 Human cells are protected from mitochondrial dysfunction by complementation of DNA products in fused mitochondria Nat Genet 28 3 272 275 11431699
23 Busch KB 2006 Mitochondrial dynamics generate equal distribution but patchwork localization of respiratory complex I Mol Membr Biol 23 6 509 520 17127623
24 Dimmer KS Scorrano L 2006 (De) constructing mitochondria: what for? Physiology (Bethesda) 233 241 16868312
25 Song BD Schmid SL 2003 A molecular motor or a regulator? Dynamin's in a class of its own Biochemistry 42 6 1369 1376 12578348
26 Boldogh IR Pon LA 2006 Interactions of mitochondria with the actin cytoskeleton Biochim Biophys Acta 1763 5–6 450 462 16624426
27 Hollenbeck PJ Saxton WM 2005 The axonal transport of mitochondria J Cell Sci 118 Pt 23 5411 5419 16306220
28 Smirnova E 2001 Dynamin-related protein Drp1 is required for mitochondrial division in mammalian cells Mol Biol Cell 12 8 2245 2256 11514614
29 Labrousse AM 1999 C. elegans dynamin-related protein DRP-1 controls severing of the mitochondrial outer membrane Mol Cell 4 5 815 826 10619028
30 De Vos KJ 2005 Mitochondrial function and actin regulate dynamin-related. Protein 1-dependent mitochondrial fission Curr Biol 15 7 678 683 15823542
31 Varadi A 2004 Cytoplasmic dynein regulates the subcellular distribution of mitochondria by controlling the recruitment of the fission factor dynamin-related protein-1 J Cell Sci 117 Pt 19 4389 4400 15304525
32 Jahani-Asl A Slack RS 2007 The phosphorylation state of Drp1 determines cell fate EMBO Rep 8 10 912 913 17906671
33 Cribbs JT Strack S 2007 Reversible phosphorylation of Drp1 by cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase and calcineurin regulates mitochondrial fission and cell death EMBO Rep 8 10 939 944 17721437
34 Wang W 2012 Mitochondrial fission triggered by hyperglycemia is mediated by ROCK1 activation in podocytes and endothelial cells Cell Metab 15 2 186 200 22326220
35 Han XJ 2008 CaM kinase I alpha-induced phosphorylation of Drp1 regulates mitochondrial morphology J Cell Biol 182 3 573 585 18695047
36 Palmer CS 2011 MiD49 and MiD51, new components of the mitochondrial fission machinery EMBO Rep 12 6 565 573 21508961
37 Osellame LD 2016 Cooperative and independent roles of the Drp1 adaptors Mff, MiD49 and MiD51 in mitochondrial fission J Cell Sci 129 11 2170 2181 27076521
38 Stojanovski D 2004 Levels of human Fis1 at the mitochondrial outer membrane regulate mitochondrial morphology J Cell Sci 117 Pt 7 1201 1210 14996942
39 Yoon Y 2003 The mitochondrial protein hFis1 regulates mitochondrial fission in mammalian cells through an interaction with the dynamin-like protein DLP1 Mol Cell Biol 23 15 5409 5420 12861026
40 Zhang Y 2012 Crystal structure of mitochondrial fission complex reveals scaffolding function for mitochondrial division 1 (Mdv1) coiled coil J Biol Chem 287 13 9855 9861 22303011
41 Otera H 2010 Mff is an essential factor for mitochondrial recruitment of Drp1 during mitochondrial fission in mammalian cells J Cell Biol 191 6 1141 1158 21149567
42 Loson OC 2013 Fis1, Mff, MiD49, and MiD51 mediate Drp1 recruitment in mitochondrial fission Mol Biol Cell 24 5 659 667 23283981
43 Lee H Yoon Y 2014 Mitochondrial fission: regulation and ER connection Mol Cells 37 2 89 94 24598992
44 Taguchi N 2007 Mitotic phosphorylation of dynamin-related GTPase Drp1 participates in mitochondrial fission J Biol Chem 282 15 11521 11529 17301055
45 Yu T Jhun BS Yoon Y 2011 High-glucose stimulation increases reactive oxygen species production through the calcium and mitogen-activated protein kinase-mediated activation of mitochondrial fission Antioxid Redox Signal 14 3 425 437 20518702
46 Qi X 2011 Aberrant mitochondrial fission in neurons induced by protein kinase C {delta} under oxidative stress conditions in vivo Mol Biol Cell 22 2 256 265 21119009
47 Chang CR Blackstone C 2007 Cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase phosphorylation of Drp1 regulates its GTPase activity and mitochondrial morphology J Biol Chem 282 30 21583 21587 17553808
48 Slupe AM 2013 A calcineurin docking motif (LXVP) in dynamin-related. Protein 1 contributes to mitochondrial fragmentation and ischemic neuronal injury J Biol Chem 288 17 12353 12365 23486469
49 Wang JX 2011 miR-499 regulates mitochondrial dynamics by targeting calcineurin and dynamin-related protein-1 Nat Med 17 1 71 78 21186368
50 Friedman JR 2011 ER tubules mark sites of mitochondrial division Science 334 6054 358 362 21885730
51 Korobova F Ramabhadran V Higgs HN 2013 An actin-dependent step in mitochondrial fission mediated by the ER-associated formin INF2 Science 339 6118 464 467 23349293
52 Santel A Fuller MT 2001 Control of mitochondrial morphology by a human mitofusin J Cell Sci 114 Pt 5 867 874 11181170
53 Escobar-Henriques M Anton F 2013 Mechanistic perspective of mitochondrial fusion: tubulation vs. fragmentation Biochim Biophys Acta 1833 1 162 175 22884630
54 Ishihara N 2006 Regulation of mitochondrial morphology through proteolytic cleavage of OPA1 EMBO J 25 13 2966 2977 16778770
55 Chernomordik LV Kozlov MM 2005 Membrane hemifusion: crossing a chasm in two leaps Cell 123 3 375 382 16269330
56 Meglei G McQuibban GA 2009 The dynamin-related protein Mgm1p assembles into oligomers and hydrolyzes GTP to function in mitochondrial membrane fusion Biochemistry 48 8 1774 1784 19236101
57 Olichon A 2007 OPA1 alternate splicing uncouples an evolutionary conserved function in mitochondrial fusion from a vertebrate restricted function in apoptosis Cell Death Differ 14 4 682 692 17024226
58 Delettre C 2001 Mutation spectrum and splicing variants in the OPA1 gene Hum Genet 109 6 584 591 11810270
59 Kaser M 2003 Oma1, a novel membrane-bound metallopeptidase in mitochondria with activities overlapping with the m-AAA protease J Biol Chem 278 47 46414 46423 12963738
60 MacVicar T Langer T 2016 OPA1 processing in cell death and disease—the long and short of it J Cell Sci 129 12 2297 2306 27189080
61 Griparic L Kanazawa T van der Bliek AM 2007 Regulation of the mitochondrial dynamin-like protein Opa1 by proteolytic cleavage J Cell Biol 178 5 757 764 17709430
62 Song Z 2007 OPA1 processing controls mitochondrial fusion and is regulated by mRNA splicing, membrane potential, and Yme1L J Cell Biol 178 5 749 755 17709429
63 Anand R 2014 The i-AAA protease YME1L and OMA1 cleave OPA1 to balance mitochondrial fusion and fission J Cell Biol 204 6 919 929 24616225
64 Ehses S 2009 Regulation of OPA1 processing and mitochondrial fusion by m-AAA protease isoenzymes and OMA1 J Cell Biol 187 7 1023 1036 20038678
65 Head B 2009 Inducible proteolytic inactivation of OPA1 mediated by the OMA1 protease in mammalian cells J Cell Biol 187 7 959 966 20038677
66 Wai T Langer T 2016 Mitochondrial dynamics and metabolic regulation Trends Endocrinol Metab 27 2 105 117 26754340
67 Baricault L 2007 OPA1 cleavage depends on decreased mitochondrial ATP level and bivalent metals Exp Cell Res 313 17 3800 3808 17826766
68 Merkwirth C 2008 Prohibitins control cell proliferation and apoptosis by regulating OPA1-dependent cristae morphogenesis in mitochondria Genes Dev 22 4 476 488 18281461
69 Tanaka A 2010 Proteasome and p97 mediate mitophagy and degradation of mitofusins induced by Parkin J Cell Biol 191 7 1367 1380 21173115
70 Nakatogawa H 2009 Dynamics and diversity in autophagy mechanisms: lessons from yeast Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 10 7 458 467 19491929
71 Yang Z Klionsky DJ 2010 Eaten alive: a history of macroautophagy Nat Cell Biol 12 9 814 822 20811353
72 Sharifi MN 2015 Measuring autophagy in stressed cells Methods Mol Biol 1292 129 150 25804753
73 Glick D Barth S Macleod KF 2010 Autophagy: cellular and molecular mechanisms J Pathol 221 1 3 12 20225336
74 Saftig P Beertsen W Eskelinen EL 2008 LAMP-2: a control step for phagosome and autophagosome maturation Autophagy 4 4 510 512 18376150
75 Klionsky DJ Schulman BA 2014 Dynamic regulation of macroautophagy by distinctive ubiquitin-like proteins Nat Struct Mol Biol 21 4 336 345 24699082
76 Feng Y 2014 The machinery of macroautophagy Cell Res 24 1 24 41 24366339
77 Nah J Yuan J Jung YK 2015 Autophagy in neurodegenerative diseases: from mechanism to therapeutic approach Mol Cells 38 5 381 389 25896254
78 Moyzis AG Sadoshima J Gustafsson AB 2015 Mending a broken heart: the role of mitophagy in cardioprotection Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 308 3 H183 H192 25437922
79 Russell RC 2013 ULK1 induces autophagy by phosphorylating Beclin-1 and activating VPS34 lipid kinase Nat Cell Biol 15 7 741 750 23685627
80 Lamark T 2009 NBR1 and p62 as cargo receptors for selective autophagy of ubiquitinated targets Cell Cycle 8 13 1986 1990 19502794
81 Zhang J Ney PA 2009 Role of BNIP3 and NIX in cell death, autophagy, and mitophagy Cell Death Differ 16 7 939 946 19229244
82 Tanida I Ueno T Kominami E 2008 LC3 and autophagy Methods Mol Biol 445 77 88 18425443
83 Nair U 2011 SNARE proteins are required for macroautophagy Cell 146 2 290 302 21784249
84 Razi M Chan EY Tooze SA 2009 Early endosomes and endosomal coatomer are required for autophagy J Cell Biol 185 2 305 321 19364919
85 Rusten TE 2007 ESCRTs and Fab1 regulate distinct steps of autophagy Curr Biol 17 20 1817 1825 17935992
86 Nickerson DP Brett CL Merz AJ 2009 Vps-C complexes: gatekeepers of endolysosomal traffic Curr Opin Cell Biol 21 4 543 551 19577915
87 Eskelinen EL 2002 Role of LAMP-2 in lysosome biogenesis and autophagy Mol Biol Cell 13 9 3355 3368 12221139
88 Jager S 2004 Role for Rab7 in maturation of late autophagic vacuoles J Cell Sci 117 Pt 20 4837 4848 15340014
89 Matsunaga K 2009 Two Beclin 1-binding proteins, Atg14L and Rubicon, reciprocally regulate autophagy at different stages Nat Cell Biol 11 4 385 396 19270696
90 Leu JI 2009 A small molecule inhibitor of inducible heat shock protein 70 Mol Cell 36 1 15 27 19818706
91 Chen D 2012 A mammalian autophagosome maturation mechanism mediated by TECPR1 and the Atg12-Atg5 conjugate Mol Cell 45 5 629 641 22342342
92 Narendra DP 2010 PINK1 is selectively stabilized on impaired mitochondria to activate Parkin PLoS Biol 8 1 e1000298 20126261
93 Matsuda N 2010 PINK1 stabilized by mitochondrial depolarization recruits Parkin to damaged mitochondria and activates latent Parkin for mitophagy J Cell Biol 189 2 211 221 20404107
94 Mokranjac D Neupert W 2007 Protein import into isolated mitochondria Methods Mol Biol 372 277 286 18314733
95 Meissner C 2011 The mitochondrial intramembrane protease PARL cleaves human Pink1 to regulate Pink1 trafficking J Neurochem 117 5 856 867 21426348
96 Jin SM 2010 Mitochondrial membrane potential regulates PINK1 import and proteolytic destabilization by PARL J Cell Biol 191 5 933 942 21115803
97 Kane LA 2014 PINK1 phosphorylates ubiquitin to activate Parkin E3 ubiquitin ligase activity J Cell Biol 205 2 143 153 24751536
98 Ordureau A 2015 Defining roles of PARKIN and ubiquitin phosphorylation by PINK1 in mitochondrial quality control using a ubiquitin replacement strategy Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 112 21 6637 6642 25969509
99 Kazlauskaite A 2014 Parkin is activated by PINK1-dependent phosphorylation of ubiquitin at Ser65 Biochem J 460 1 127 139 24660806
100 Koyano F 2014 Ubiquitin is phosphorylated by PINK1 to activate parkin Nature 510 7503 162 166 24784582
101 Okatsu K 2015 Phosphorylated ubiquitin chain is the genuine Parkin receptor J Cell Biol 209 1 111 128 25847540
102 Sha D Chin LS Li L 2010 Phosphorylation of parkin by Parkinson disease-linked kinase PINK1 activates parkin E3 ligase function and NF-kappaB signaling Hum Mol Genet 19 2 352 363 19880420
103 Kondapalli C 2012 PINK1 is activated by mitochondrial membrane potential depolarization and stimulates Parkin E3 ligase activity by phosphorylating serine 65 Open Biol 2 5 120080 22724072
104 Ordureau A 2014 Quantitative proteomics reveal a feedforward mechanism for mitochondrial PARKIN translocation and ubiquitin chain synthesis Mol Cell 56 3 360 375 25284222
105 Chan NC 2011 Broad activation of the ubiquitin-proteasome system by Parkin is critical for mitophagy Hum Mol Genet 20 9 1726 1737 21296869
106 Geisler S 2010 PINK1/Parkin-mediated mitophagy is dependent on VDAC1 and p62/SQSTM1 Nat Cell Biol 12 2 119 131 20098416
107 Kishore N 2002 IKK-i and TBK-1 are enzymatically distinct from the homologous enzyme IKK-2: comparative analysis of recombinant human IKK-i, TBK-1, and IKK-2 J Biol Chem 277 16 13840 13847 11839743
108 Heo JM 2015 The PINK1-PARKIN mitochondrial ubiquitylation pathway drives a program of OPTN/NDP52 recruitment and TBK1 activation to promote mitophagy Mol Cell 60 1 7 20 26365381
109 Lazarou M 2015 The ubiquitin kinase PINK1 recruits autophagy receptors to induce mitophagy Nature 524 7565 309 314 26266977
110 Shen WC 2015 Mutations in the ubiquitin-binding domain of OPTN/optineurin interfere with autophagy-mediated degradation of misfolded proteins by a dominant-negative mechanism Autophagy 11 4 685 700 25484089
111 Wild P 2011 Phosphorylation of the autophagy receptor optineurin restricts Salmonella growth Science 333 6039 228 233 21617041
112 von Muhlinen N 2012 LC3C, bound selectively by a non-canonical LIR motif in NDP52, is required for antibacterial autophagy Mol Cell 48 3 329 342 23022382
113 Thurston TL 2009 The TBK1 adaptor and autophagy receptor NDP52 restricts the proliferation of ubiquitin-coated bacteria Nat Immunol 10 11 1215 1221 19820708
114 Lee JY 2010 Disease-causing mutations in parkin impair mitochondrial ubiquitination, aggregation, and HDAC6-dependent mitophagy J Cell Biol 189 4 671 679 20457763
115 Lee JY 2010 HDAC6 controls autophagosome maturation essential for ubiquitin-selective quality-control autophagy EMBO J 29 5 969 980 20075865
116 Kubli DA Ycaza JE Gustafsson AB 2007 Bnip3 mediates mitochondrial dysfunction and cell death through Bax and Bak Biochem J 405 3 407 415 17447897
117 Yussman MG 2002 Mitochondrial death protein Nix is induced in cardiac hypertrophy and triggers apoptotic cardiomyopathy Nat Med 8 7 725 730 12053174
118 Hamacher-Brady A 2007 Response to myocardial ischemia/reperfusion injury involves Bnip3 and autophagy Cell Death Differ 14 1 146 157 16645637
119 Sandoval H 2008 Essential role for Nix in autophagic maturation of erythroid cells Nature 454 7201 232 235 18454133
120 Novak I 2010 Nix is a selective autophagy receptor for mitochondrial clearance EMBO Rep 11 1 45 51 20010802
121 Rikka S 2011 Bnip3 impairs mitochondrial bioenergetics and stimulates mitochondrial turnover Cell Death Differ 18 4 721 731 21278801
122 Lee Y 2011 Mitochondrial autophagy by Bnip3 involves Drp1-mediated mitochondrial fission and recruitment of Parkin in cardiac myocytes Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 301 5 H1924 H1931 21890690
123 Liu L 2012 Mitochondrial outer-membrane protein FUNDC1 mediates hypoxia-induced mitophagy in mammalian cells Nat Cell Biol 14 2 177 185 22267086
124 Chen G 2014 A regulatory signaling loop comprising the PGAM5 phosphatase and CK2 controls receptor-mediated mitophagy Mol Cell 54 3 362 377 24746696
125 Lu W 2014 Genetic deficiency of the mitochondrial protein PGAM5 causes a Parkinson's-like movement disorder Nat Commun 5 4930 25222142
126 Tracy K 2007 BNIP3 is an RB/E2F target gene required for hypoxia-induced autophagy Mol Cell Biol 27 17 6229 6242 17576813
127 Houtkooper RH Vaz FM 2008 Cardiolipin, the heart of mitochondrial metabolism Cell Mol Life Sci 65 16 2493 2506 18425414
128 Chu CT 2013 Cardiolipin externalization to the outer mitochondrial membrane acts as an elimination signal for mitophagy in neuronal cells Nat Cell Biol 15 10 1197 1205 24036476
129 Kagan VE 2016 NDPK-D (NM23-H4)-mediated externalization of cardiolipin enables elimination of depolarized mitochondria by mitophagy Cell Death Differ 23 7 1140 1151 26742431
130 Taanman JW 1999 The mitochondrial genome: structure, transcription, translation and replication Biochim Biophys Acta 1410 2 103 123 10076021
131 Tatsuta T Scharwey M Langer T 2014 Mitochondrial lipid trafficking Trends Cell Biol 24 1 44 52 24001776
132 Wu Z 1999 Mechanisms controlling mitochondrial biogenesis and respiration through the thermogenic coactivator PGC-1 Cell 98 1 115 124 10412986
133 Nisoli E 2005 Calorie restriction promotes mitochondrial biogenesis by inducing the expression of eNOS Science 310 5746 314 317 16224023
134 Puigserver P 1998 A cold-inducible coactivator of nuclear receptors linked to adaptive thermogenesis Cell 92 6 829 839 9529258
135 Zong H 2002 AMP kinase is required for mitochondrial biogenesis in skeletal muscle in response to chronic energy deprivation Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99 25 15983 15987 12444247
136 Virbasius JV Scarpulla RC 1994 Activation of the human mitochondrial transcription factor A gene by nuclear respiratory factors: a potential regulatory link between nuclear and mitochondrial gene expression in organelle biogenesis Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 91 4 1309 1313 8108407
137 Fan W Evans R 2015 PPARs and ERRs: molecular mediators of mitochondrial metabolism Curr Opin Cell Biol 33 49 54 25486445
138 Wiedemann N Frazier AE Pfanner N 2004 The protein import machinery of mitochondria J Biol Chem 279 15 14473 14476 14973134
139 Lev S 2012 Nonvesicular lipid transfer from the endoplasmic reticulum Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 4
140 Fleischer S 1967 Lipid composition of mitochondria from bovine heart, liver, and kidney J Lipid Res 8 3 170 180 4292227
141 Gaigg B 1995 Characterization of a microsomal subfraction associated with mitochondria of the yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Involvement in synthesis and import of phospholipids into mitochondria Biochim Biophys Acta 1234 2 214 220 7696296
142 de Brito OM Scorrano L 2008 Mitofusin 2 tethers endoplasmic reticulum to mitochondria Nature 456 7222 605 610 19052620
143 Szabadkai G 2006 Chaperone-mediated coupling of endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondrial Ca2+ channels J Cell Biol 175 6 901 911 17178908
144 Verfaillie T 2012 PERK is required at the ER-mitochondrial contact sites to convey apoptosis after ROS-based ER stress Cell Death Differ 19 11 1880 1891 22705852
145 Kornmann B 2013 The molecular hug between the ER and the mitochondria Curr Opin Cell Biol 25 4 443 448 23478213
146 Boldogh IR 2003 A protein complex containing Mdm10p, Mdm12p, and Mmm1p links mitochondrial membranes and DNA to the cytoskeleton-based segregation machinery Mol Biol Cell 14 11 4618 4627 13679517
147 Kopec KO Alva V Lupas AN 2010 Homology of SMP domains to the TULIP superfamily of lipid-binding proteins provides a structural basis for lipid exchange between ER and mitochondria Bioinformatics 26 16 1927 1931 20554689
148 Twig G 2008 Fission and selective fusion govern mitochondrial segregation and elimination by autophagy EMBO J 27 2 433 446 18200046
149 Arnoult D 2005 Bax/Bak-dependent release of DDP/TIMM8a promotes Drp1-mediated mitochondrial fission and mitoptosis during programmed cell death Curr Biol 15 23 2112 2118 16332536
150 Takahashi Y 2007 Bif-1 interacts with Beclin 1 through UVRAG and regulates autophagy and tumorigenesis Nat Cell Biol 9 10 1142 1151 17891140
151 Karbowski M Jeong SY Youle RJ 2004 Endophilin B1 is required for the maintenance of mitochondrial morphology J Cell Biol 166 7 1027 1039 15452144
152 Frank M 2012 Mitophagy is triggered by mild oxidative stress in a mitochondrial fission dependent manner Biochim Biophys Acta 1823 12 2297 2310 22917578
153 Prieto J 2016 Early ERK1/2 activation promotes DRP1-dependent mitochondrial fission necessary for cell reprogramming Nat Commun 7 11124 27030341
154 Alcalay RN 2010 Frequency of known mutations in early-onset Parkinson disease: implication for genetic counseling: the consortium on risk for early onset Parkinson disease study Arch Neurol 67 9 1116 1122 20837857
155 Valente EM 2004 Hereditary early-onset Parkinson's disease caused by mutations in PINK1 Science 304 5674 1158 1160 15087508
156 Biskup S 2006 Localization of LRRK2 to membranous and vesicular structures in mammalian brain Ann Neurol 60 5 557 569 17120249
157 Junn E 2009 Mitochondrial localization of DJ-1 leads to enhanced neuroprotection J Neurosci Res 87 1 123 129 18711745
158 Shavali S 2008 Mitochondrial localization of alpha-synuclein protein in alpha-synuclein overexpressing cells Neurosci Lett 439 2 125 128 18514418
159 Schapira AH 1993 Mitochondrial complex I deficiency in Parkinson's disease Adv Neurol 60 288 291 8420145
160 Gandhi S 2009 PINK1-associated Parkinson's disease is caused by neuronal vulnerability to calcium-induced cell death Mol Cell 33 5 627 638 19285945
161 Poole AC 2008 The PINK1/Parkin pathway regulates mitochondrial morphology Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105 5 1638 1643 18230723
162 Weihofen A 2009 Pink1 forms a multiprotein complex with Miro and Milton, linking Pink1 function to mitochondrial trafficking Biochemistry 48 9 2045 2052 19152501
163 Luoma P 2004 Parkinsonism, premature menopause, and mitochondrial DNA polymerase gamma mutations: clinical and molecular genetic study Lancet 364 9437 875 882 15351195
164 Deng H 2008 The Parkinson's disease genes pink1 and parkin promote mitochondrial fission and/or inhibit fusion in Drosophila Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105 38 14503 14508 18799731
165 Sandebring A 2009 Mitochondrial alterations in PINK1 deficient cells are influenced by calcineurin-dependent dephosphorylation of dynamin-related protein 1 PLoS One 4 5 e5701 19492085
166 Wood-Kaczmar A 2008 PINK1 is necessary for long term survival and mitochondrial function in human dopaminergic neurons PLoS One 3 6 e2455 18560593
167 Kirkin V 2009 A role for ubiquitin in selective autophagy Mol Cell 34 3 259 269 19450525
168 Darios F 2003 Parkin prevents mitochondrial swelling and cytochrome c release in mitochondria-dependent cell death Hum Mol Genet 12 5 517 526 12588799
169 Rothfuss O 2009 Parkin protects mitochondrial genome integrity and supports mitochondrial DNA repair Hum Mol Genet 18 20 3832 3850 19617636
170 Stichel CC 2007 Mono- and double-mutant mouse models of Parkinson's disease display severe mitochondrial damage Hum Mol Genet 16 20 2377 2393 17412759
171 Palacino JJ 2004 Mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative damage in parkin-deficient mice J Biol Chem 279 18 18614 18622 14985362
172 Nalls MA 2015 Diagnosis of Parkinson's disease on the basis of clinical and genetic classification: a population-based modelling study Lancet Neurol 14 10 1002 1009 26271532
173 Waring SC Rosenberg RN 2008 Genome-wide association studies in Alzheimer disease Arch Neurol 65 3 329 334 18332245
174 Yan MH Wang X Zhu X 2013 Mitochondrial defects and oxidative stress in Alzheimer disease and Parkinson disease Free Radic Biol Med 62 90 101 23200807
175 Wilquet V De Strooper B 2004 Amyloid-beta precursor protein processing in neurodegeneration Curr Opin Neurobiol 14 5 582 588 15464891
176 Liu CC 2013 Apolipoprotein E and Alzheimer disease: risk, mechanisms and therapy Nat Rev Neurol 9 2 106 118 23296339
177 Reddy PH 2012 Abnormal mitochondrial dynamics and synaptic degeneration as early events in Alzheimer's disease: implications to mitochondria-targeted antioxidant therapeutics Biochim Biophys Acta 1822 5 639 649 22037588
178 Hirai K 2001 Mitochondrial abnormalities in Alzheimer's disease J Neurosci 21 9 3017 3023 11312286
179 Wang X 2009 Impaired balance of mitochondrial fission and fusion in Alzheimer's disease J Neurosci 29 28 9090 9103 19605646
180 Wang X 2008 Amyloid-beta overproduction causes abnormal mitochondrial dynamics via differential modulation of mitochondrial fission/fusion proteins Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105 49 19318 19323 19050078
181 Calkins MJ 2011 Impaired mitochondrial biogenesis, defective axonal transport of mitochondria, abnormal mitochondrial dynamics and synaptic degeneration in a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease Hum Mol Genet 20 23 4515 4529 21873260
182 Kandimalla R Reddy PH 2016 Multiple faces of dynamin-related. Protein 1 and its role in Alzheimer's disease pathogenesis Biochim Biophys Acta 1862 4 814 828 26708942
183 Tanaka A Youle RJ 2008 A chemical inhibitor of DRP1 uncouples mitochondrial fission and apoptosis Mol Cell 29 4 409 410 18313377
184 Martinou JC Youle RJ 2006 Which came first, the cytochrome c release or the mitochondrial fission? Cell Death Differ 13 8 1291 1295 16763618
185 Estaquier J Arnoult D 2007 Inhibiting Drp1-mediated mitochondrial fission selectively prevents the release of cytochrome c during apoptosis Cell Death Differ 14 6 1086 1094 17332775
186 Kim H 2011 Fine-tuning of Drp1/Fis1 availability by AKAP121/Siah 2 regulates mitochondrial adaptation to hypoxia Mol Cell 44 4 532 544 22099302
187 Tang J 2016 Parkin protects against oxygen-glucose deprivation/reperfusion insult by promoting Drp1 degradation Oxidative Med Cell Longev 2016 8474303
188 Ong SB 2010 Inhibiting mitochondrial fission protects the heart against ischemia/reperfusion injury Circulation 121 18 2012 2022 20421521
189 Disatnik MH 2013 Acute inhibition of excessive mitochondrial fission after myocardial infarction prevents long-term cardiac dysfunction J Am Heart Assoc 2 5 e000461 24103571
190 Sanderson TH Raghunayakula S Kumar R 2015 Neuronal hypoxia disrupts mitochondrial fusion Neuroscience 301 71 78 26049142
191 Kumar R 2016 Mitochondrial dynamics following global cerebral ischemia Mol Cell Neurosci 76 68 75 27567688
192 Frank S 2001 The role of dynamin-related protein 1, a mediator of mitochondrial fission, in apoptosis Dev Cell 1 4 515 525 11703942
193 Grohm J 2012 Inhibition of Drp1 provides neuroprotection in vitro and in vivo Cell Death Differ 19 9 1446 1458 22388349
194 Dong Y Undyala VV Przyklenk K 2016 Inhibition of mitochondrial fission as a molecular target for cardioprotection: critical importance of the timing of treatment Basic Res Cardiol 111 5 59 27573530
195 Papanicolaou KN Phillippo MM Walsh K 2012 Mitofusins and the mitochondrial permeability transition: the potential downside of mitochondrial fusion Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 303 3 H243 H255 22636681
196 Zaha VG Young LH 2012 AMP-activated protein kinase regulation and biological actions in the heart Circ Res 111 6 800 814 22935535
197 Kim J 2011 AMPK and mTOR regulate autophagy through direct phosphorylation of Ulk1 Nat Cell Biol 13 2 132 141 21258367
198 Kundu M 2008 Ulk1 plays a critical role in the autophagic clearance of mitochondria and ribosomes during reticulocyte maturation Blood 112 4 1493 1502 18539900
199 Alexander A 2010 ATM signals to TSC2 in the cytoplasm to regulate mTORC1 in response to ROS Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107 9 4153 4158 20160076
200 Scherz-Shouval R 2007 Reactive oxygen species are essential for autophagy and specifically regulate the activity of Atg4 EMBO J 26 7 1749 1760 17347651
201 Kubli DA 2008 Bnip3 functions as a mitochondrial sensor of oxidative stress during myocardial ischemia and reperfusion Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 295 5 H2025 H2031 18790835
202 Diwan A 2007 Inhibition of ischemic cardiomyocyte apoptosis through targeted ablation of Bnip3 restrains postinfarction remodeling in mice J Clin Invest 117 10 2825 2833 17909626
203 Hoshino A 2012 p53-TIGAR axis attenuates mitophagy to exacerbate cardiac damage after ischemia J Mol Cell Cardiol 52 1 175 184 22044588
204 Kubli DA 2013 Parkin protein deficiency exacerbates cardiac injury and reduces survival following myocardial infarction J Biol Chem 288 2 915 926 23152496
205 Lu W 2016 Mitochondrial protein PGAM5 regulates mitophagic protection against cell necroptosis PLoS One 11 1 e0147792 26807733
206 Huang C 2011 Preconditioning involves selective mitophagy mediated by Parkin and p62/SQSTM1 PLoS One 6 6 e20975 21687634
207 Hamacher-Brady A Brady NR Gottlieb RA 2006 Enhancing macroautophagy protects against ischemia/reperfusion injury in cardiac myocytes J Biol Chem 281 40 29776 29787 16882669
208 Ji W 2016 Aldehyde dehydrogenase 2 has cardioprotective effects on myocardial ischaemia/reperfusion injury via suppressing mitophagy Front Pharmacol 7 101 27148058
209 Sheng R 2010 Autophagy activation is associated with neuroprotection in a rat model of focal cerebral ischemic preconditioning Autophagy 6 4 482 494 20400854
210 Zuo W 2014 Mitochondria autophagy is induced after hypoxic/ischemic stress in a Drp1 dependent manner: the role of inhibition of Drp1 in ischemic brain damage Neuropharmacology 86 103 115 25018043
211 Zhang X 2013 Cerebral ischemia-reperfusion-induced autophagy protects against neuronal injury by mitochondrial clearance Autophagy 9 9 1321 1333 23800795
212 Li Q 2014 Rapamycin attenuates mitochondrial dysfunction via activation of mitophagy in experimental ischemic stroke Biochem Biophys Res Commun 444 2 182 188 24440703
213 Shi RY 2014 BNIP3 interacting with LC3 triggers excessive mitophagy in delayed neuronal death in stroke CNS Neurosci Ther 20 12 1045 1055 25230377
214 Racay P 2009 Ischemia-reperfusion induces inhibition of mitochondrial protein synthesis and cytochrome c oxidase activity in rat hippocampus Physiol Res 58 1 127 138 18198996
215 DeGracia DJ 2002 Molecular pathways of protein synthesis inhibition during brain reperfusion: implications for neuronal survival or death J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 22 2 127 141 11823711
216 Sun N 2015 Measuring in vivo mitophagy Mol Cell 60 4 685 696 26549682
