LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


8802730
6431
Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids
Prostaglandins Leukot. Essent. Fatty Acids
Prostaglandins, leukotrienes, and essential fatty acids
0952-3278
1532-2823

28529008
5680156
10.1016/j.plefa.2017.05.001
NIHMS880059
Article
Role of Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids in Human Brain Structure and Function Across the Lifespan: An Update on Neuroimaging Findings
McNamara Robert K. 1
Asch Ruth H. 1
Lindquist Diana M. 2
Krikorian Robert 1
1 Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neuroscience, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45219
2 Imaging Research Center, Department of Radiology, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati OH 45267
* Corresponding author: Robert K. McNamara, Ph.D., Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neuroscience, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 260 Stetson Street, Cincinnati, OH 45219-0516, PH: 513-558-5601, FAX: 513-558-4805, robert.mcnamara@uc.edu
31 5 2017
09 5 2017
9 2018
01 9 2019
136 2334
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
There is a substantial body of evidence from animal studies implicating polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) in neuroinflammatory, neurotrophic, and neuroprotective processes in brain. However, direct evidence for a role of PUFA in human brain structure and function has been lacking. Over the last decade there has been a notable increase in neuroimaging studies that have investigated the impact of PUFA intake and/or blood levels (i.e., biostatus) on brain structure, function, and pathology in human subjects. The majority of these studies specifically evaluated associations between omega-3 PUFA intake and/or biostatus and neuroimaging outcomes using a variety of experimental designs and imaging techniques. This review provides an updated overview of these studies in an effort to identify patterns to guide and inform future research. While the weight of evidence provides general support for a beneficial effect of a habitual diet consisting of higher omega-3 PUFA intake on cortical structure and function in healthy human subjects, additional research is needed to replicate and extend these findings as well as identify response mediators and clarify mechanistic pathways. Controlled intervention trials are also needed to determine whether increasing n-3 PUFA biostatus can prevent or attenuate neuropathological brain changes observed in patients with or at risk for psychiatric disorders and dementia.

Graphical abstract

Omega-3 fatty acids
Docosahexaenoic acid
Arachidonic acid
Brain development
Aging
Neurodegeneration
White matter

1. Introduction

Over the past 30 years a considerable body of translational evidence has emerged implicating polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) in normal brain development and function [1]. Omega-3 (n-3) and omega-6 (n-6) fatty acids are members of the PUFA family. α-linolenic acid (ALA, 18:3n-3) and linoleic acid (18:2n-6), the precursors of n-3 and n-6 PUFA respectively, are considered ‘essential’ because mammals cannot biosynthesize them de novo and are therefore reliant on dietary sources for procurement. The most abundant PUFAs in mammalian brain gray matter are the n-3 PUFA docosahexaenoic acid (DHA, 22:6n-3) and the n-6 PUFA arachidonic acid (AA, 20:4n-6)[2,3]. Although the n-3 PUFA precursors of DHA, including ALA, eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA, 20:5n-3), and docosapentaenoic acid (DPA, 22:5n-3), cross the blood-brain barrier, they comprise &lt;1% of total brain fatty acid composition due in part to rapid oxidation [4]. Unesterified DHA readily diffuses from plasma to brain [5,6], and preferentially accumulates in gray matter synaptasomal and mitochondrial membranes [7]. In rodents, dietary n-3 PUFA insufficiency, particularly during early development, is associated with robust cortical DHA deficits and associated elevations in the AA/DHA ratio [8], whereas dietary n-6 PUFA insufficiency leads to cortical AA deficits and associated decreases in the AA/DHA ratio [9]. In general, DHA and AA have opposing effects on synaptic signal transduction [10] and inflammatory [11,12] signaling pathways.

Rodent developmental studies have provided important insight into the role of dietary PUFA on brain development and function. In brief, dietary n-3 PUFA insufficiency, and associated increases in the brain AA/DHA ratio, during peri- or postnatal development is associated with reductions in neurogenesis [13,14], delays in neuronal migration, embryonic cortical plate expansion, synaptic pruning [15–17], impaired glutamate and monoamine synaptic function [18,19], and reductions in brain glucose uptake and metabolism [20,21]. Dietary n-3 PUFA insufficiency during development is also associated with behavioral abnormalities including impaired learning [22,23] and elevated behavioral indices of depression and aggression [24,25]. Elevations in the AA/DHA ratio in the rodent brain are also associated with increases in pro-inflammatory signaling [11,26], decreased neuronal resilience to a range of insults including ischemia [27,28], and age-related neurodegenerative processes [29].

As observed in rodents, DHA concentrations increase sharply in the non-human primate brain during perinatal development [3,30,31], and preterm birth is associated with cortical DHA deficits compared with term births [32,33]. Dietary-induced deficits in cortical DHA accrual, and associated increases in the brain AA/DHA ratio, during perinatal development are associated with deficits in retinal signal transduction, deficits in visual attention, and behavioral abnormalities [3,31,34,35]. Of direct relevance to the current review, emerging evidence from non-human primate neuroimaging studies indicates a positive association between n-3 PUFA intake/biostatus and resting state cerebral glucose uptake and metabolism [36], regional functional connectivity [37], and neurovascular coupling [38].

In human brain, postmortem studies suggest that DHA levels increase and the AA/DHA ratio decreases at a rapid rate during early perinatal development and throughout childhood and adolescence [2,39,40] in parallel with active periods of synaptogenesis and the establishment of structural connectivity [41,42]. However, limitations associated with the postmortem approach have hindered progress in our understanding of the role of PUFA in human brain structure, function, and pathology. Conventional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) techniques are well-suited to elucidate the role of PUFA in human brain structure, function, and pathology, and permit longitudinal investigation of dynamic changes in cortical structure, chemistry, and functional activity. Over the last decade there has been a substantial increase in the number of neuroimaging studies that have investigated associations between PUFA intake/biostatus and human brain structure and function. The majority of these studies specifically evaluated associations between n-3 PUFA intake and/or biostatus and neuroimaging outcomes using a variety of different experimental designs and imaging techniques. In these studies PUFA intake is extrapolated from questionnaires and PUFA biostatus is calculated from blood (plasma, erythrocyte, or whole blood) levels. Blood n-3 PUFA levels are highly correlated with the frequency of dietary intake of preformed n-3 PUFA (e.g., fish/seafood)[43] and to a lesser extent ALA intake [44]. This review will provide an updated overview of neuroimaging findings in an effort to identify patterns to guide and inform future studies.

2. Methods

A computerized search was performed to identify eligible peer-reviewed studies published up to March 2017 using PubMed at the National Library of Medicine. Search terms included: “omega-3”, “DHA”, “PUFA”, “MRI,” “fMRI,” “DTI,” “PET,” “MRS,” “NIRS”, “structural,” “elderly”, “infant”, and/or “psychiatry.” Additional articles were identified from the reference lists of identified manuscripts. Articles were included if they were written in English, specifically investigated relationships between PUFA measures (i.e., intake or biostatus) and neuroimaging outcomes, and were peer-reviewed. The literature search identified 54 original research articles published between 2002 and 2017, and no studies were excluded based on inclusion criteria. Articles were sub-classified according to neuroimaging modality (i.e., fMRI, DTI, etc), and within each modality further sub-classified by study design (i.e., cross-sectional, prospective longitudinal, retrospective, supplementation) and reviewed in separate sections.

3. Structural MRI

Structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) uses T1-weighted images and voxel-based morphometry methods to measure regional gray and white matter volumes. T2-weighted images are used to identify white matter hyperintensities (WMH) which are common in elderly subjects and psychiatric patients, and are caused by a variety of factors including ischemia, micro-hemorrhages, or loss and deformation of the myelin sheath [45]. The majority of studies adjusted for variables known to contribute to imaging outcome measures including age and gender, and MRI field strength ranged from 1.5 to 4.0 Tesla.

3.1. Cross-sectional studies

A seminal cross-sectional structural MRI study of healthy middle-aged adults (mean age: 44.7 years, n=55) found that greater dietary n-3 PUFA intake was associated with larger gray matter volumes in the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), the right hippocampus, and the right amygdala [46]. A study of dementia-free elderly subjects (mean age: 87 years; n=104) found that a nutrient pattern associated with higher fasting plasma EPA+DHA levels was associated with smaller WMH volumes and better executive function [47]. Covarying for depression attenuated the relationship between this nutrient pattern and WMH volume. A larger study of dementia-free elderly subjects (mean age: 67 years, n=1,575) found that the lowest quartile of erythrocyte DHA levels was associated with lower total brain volume, but not temporal horn volume, greater WMH volumes, and lower memory and executive function scores compared with the combined higher erythrocyte DHA quartiles [49]. Two additional cross-sectional studies similarly observed an inverse association between fasting serum EPA, EPA+DHA, or the EPA/AA ratio and WMH burden in of elderly subjects [50,51]. A study of cognitively healthy elderly subjects (mean age: 69 years, n=40) with the apolipoprotein E (APOE) ε4 polymorphism, which may be associated with impaired DHA transport [52], investigated the relationships among fasting plasma EPA and DHA levels, regional gray matter volumes, and executive function [53]. In the adjusted model, plasma EPA+DHA levels were positively correlated with left rostral ACC gray matter volume which partially mediated the positive relationship between plasma EPA+DHA levels and executive function. A recent study of elderly subjects with no or mild cognitive impairment (mean age: 77 years, n=61) investigated the relationship between fasting serum DHA levels and regional gray and white matter volumes [54]. In the adjusted model, serum DHA levels were positively associated with hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, bilateral percuneus, and total gray matter volumes, but not white matter volumes or WMH burden.

3.2. Prospective longitudinal studies

A 5-year prospective study of healthy elderly subjects (mean age: 75 years; n=3,660) investigated the relationship between baseline fish intake frequency and white and gray matter volumes and subclinical infarcts [55]. In the adjusted model, a higher baseline intake frequency (&gt;3 times/week) of tuna or baked or broiled fish, but not fried fish, was associated with fewer white matter abnormalities, but not markers of gray matter atrophy, and reduced risk for developing subclinical infarcts compared with lower fish intake frequency (&lt;1 times/month). A follow-up study conducted in the same cohort evaluated the relationship between baseline fasting plasma phospholipid EPA+DPA+DHA levels and white and gray matter abnormalities 5 years later [56]. Consistent with their previous observations, the risk for having a subclinical infarct and white matter abnormalities, but not markers of gray matter atrophy, were significantly lower in subjects in the highest versus lowest plasma EPA+DPA+DHA quartile.

A 4-year prospective study of cognitively healthy elderly subjects (age &gt;65 years; n=281) found that higher baseline plasma EPA, but not DHA, levels were associated with slower right hippocampus and amygdala gray matter atrophy over 4 years [57]. A 5-year prospective study of cognitively healthy elderly subjects (mean age: 70 years; n=252) found that greater self-reported EPA and DHA intake at baseline was positively associated with global gray matter volume, but not global white matter or total or regional brain volume, and increased global cognitive performance 5 years later [58]. A 9-year prospective study of cognitively healthy elderly subjects (mean age: 78 years; n=260) found that greater weekly consumption of baked or broiled fish was associated with larger hippocampus, precuneus, posterior cingulate, and orbital frontal cortex gray matter volumes 9 years later [59]. In the latter study baseline baked or broiled fish consumption was positively correlated with plasma EPA+DHA levels but EPA+DHA levels were not significantly associated with regional gray matter volumes. A 3.6-year prospective study of cognitively healthy elderly subjects (mean age: 63 years; n=92) found that higher whole blood DHA levels, but not EPA levels, at study endpoint were associated with less baseline-endpoint cortical thinning in the left middle and superior temporal gyrus and similar trends were also observed in the right hemisphere [60]. An 8-year prospective study of postmenopausal dementia-free women (mean age: 78 years, n=1,111) found that higher erythrocyte EPA and DHA levels at baseline were associated with larger total brain and hippocampal volumes 8 years later [61].

3.3. Retrospective studies

A 2-year retrospective cohort study of elderly subjects (mean age: 77 years) with mild cognitive impairment randomized to placebo (n=83) or high-dose B vitamin supplementation (folic acid, 0.8 mg; vitamin B-6, 20 mg; vitamin B-12, 0.5 mg)(n=85), found that subjects with high non-fasting baseline plasma EPA+DHA levels exhibited a slower rate of whole brain atrophy rate in the B vitamin group but not in the placebo group [62]. A second retrospective cohort study investigated the relationship between fish oil supplement use and cerebral cortex gray matter, hippocampus, and ventricular volumes in a cohort of older adults consisting of cognitively healthy individuals (mean age: 76 years, n=229), patients with mild cognitive impairment (mean age: 75 years, n=397), and 193 patients with Alzheimer’s disease (mean age: 75 years, n=193), during follow-up at 6–48 months [63]. Across the entire cohort, fish oil use during study participation was associated with reduced atrophy in cerebral cortex gray matter and hippocampus, less ventricular enlargement, and less cognitive decline during follow-up compared with subjects not using fish oil.

3.4. Supplementation trials

A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial investigated the effects of 72-week supplementation with algal DHA (2 g/d) or placebo (corn/soy oil) on the rate of total brain atrophy in a subsample of participants with mild to moderate Alzheimer disease (mean age: 76 years; n=102)[64]. DHA supplementation significantly increased plasma and cerebrospinal fluid DHA levels, but did not alter cognitive measures or rate of atrophy in total brain volume or hippocampal volume, or ventricular enlargement compared with placebo. A second controlled trial investigated the effects of 26-week supplementation with fish oil (1.5:1 EPA/DHA – 2,200 mg/d) or placebo (sunflower oil) on regional gray matter volumes in a cohort of healthy older adults (mean age: 64 years; n=65)[65]. Compared with placebo, supplementation with fish oil significantly increased erythrocyte EPA and DHA levels and attenuated decreases in gray matter volume in the left hippocampus, precuneus, superior temporal, inferior parietal and postcentral gyri, and right middle temporal gyrus. Fish oil supplementation was also associated with better performance on tests of executive function but not memory. A third trial investigated the effects of 24-week combined treatment with fish oil supplementation (1.5:1 EPA/DHA – 2,200 mg/d), aerobic exercise, and cognitive stimulation on regional gray matter volume in patients with mild cognitive impairment (mean age: 70 years; n=20)[66]. Although the combined intervention did not alter cognitive performance, it attenuated frontal, parietal, and cingulate cortex gray matter volume reductions observed in patients receiving the control intervention consisting of fish oil supplementation plus stretching and toning.

4. Diffusion tensor imaging

Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) is a technique that permits a detailed analysis of white matter microstructural integrity by measuring water diffusion in different directions along white matter fibers [67,68]. Commonly used parameters are fractional anisotropy (the degree of directionality of water diffusivity), axial diffusivity (parallel diffusion along white matter fibers), radial diffusivity (perpendicular diffusion to white matter fibers), and mean diffusivity (a global measure of water diffusion). Animal studies suggest that an increase in radial diffusivity is a specific measurement of demyelination or dysmyelination, whereas a decrease in axial diffusivity is more closely associated with axonal damage [69–71]. Although fractional anisotropy will decrease following either a decrease in axial diffusivity or an increase in radial diffusivity, anisotropy is not always correlated with histological markers of axonal damage or demyelination [69]. A pattern of decreasing fractional anisotropy, and increasing radial diffusivity, is observed in older adults [72–74] and in disorders associated with white matter pathology including multiple sclerosis [75]. Recent evidence further suggests that the decrease in fractional anisotropy in older subjects is mediated in part by variants in the enzymes that regulate PUFA biosynthesis [76]. Studies combining MRI and DTI suggest that age-related reductions in fractional anisotropy and increases in radial diffusivity may precede and contribute to the formation of WMH in elderly subjects [77,78].

The second and third trimesters of human gestation are a critical neurodevelopmental period associated with the establishment of major axonal white matter tracts that mediate frontal lobe connectivity, including the uncinate fasciculus [41,79]. The early organization and maturation of these cortical circuits is highly vulnerable, and children and adolescents born prior to the completion of the third trimester (i.e., preterm birth) exhibit long-standing decreases in frontal white matter integrity [80]. A cross-sectional study investigated the relationship between early preterm or near-term erythrocyte PUFA levels and white matter microstructural integrity in a cohort of 60 infants born preterm (&lt;32 weeks gestation) at 33 months of age [81]. In adjusted models, early preterm erythrocyte DHA levels were inversely associated with mean diffusivity in the internal capsule and the optic radiations, and axial diffusivity in the internal capsule. After excluding infants with more severe intraventricular hemorrhage, DHA levels were inversely associated with radial diffusivity in the optic radiations. Linoleic acid (18:2n-6) levels were associated with higher mean diffusivity in the optic radiations, and no statistically significant associations were found with EPA or AA. An early prospective randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled study investigated the effects of standard preterm formula without DHA or AA, or formula supplemented with algal DHA (15 mg/100 ml) and fungi AA (31 mg/100 ml), in infants (n=42) born premature (&lt;34 weeks gestation) on white matter maturation over 3 and 12 months [82]. Preterm infants fed formula supplemented with DHA and AA did not exhibit differences in white matter maturation at 3 or 12 months compared with infants fed formula without DHA or AA. An 8-year prospective randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled study investigated the effects of postnatal supplementation with DHA (32 mg/100 ml human milk) and AA (31 mg/100 ml human milk) on white matter microstructural integrity at 8 years of age in infants with very low birth weight (n=98)[83]. Although no significant differences between the intervention and control groups were found, a non-significant increase in fractional anisotropy was observed in the left corpus callosum of the intervention group.

A cross-sectional study of dementia-free elderly subjects (mean age: 84 years, n=239) investigated the relationship between a nutritional pattern characterized by high intakes of n-3 and n-6 PUFA and vitamin E, global fractional anisotropy, and executive function [84]. In the adjusted model, subjects in the highest tertile of this nutritional pattern had significantly higher global white matter fractional anisotropy compared with those in the lowest tertile, and higher global fractional anisotropy mediated the positive relationship between the nutrient pattern and several cognitive measures including executive function. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial investigated the effects of 26-week supplementation with fish oil (1.5:1 EPA/DHA – 2,200 mg/d) or placebo (sunflower oil) on white matter integrity in a cohort of healthy older adults (mean age: 64 years, n=65)[65]. Compared with placebo, fish oil supplementation significantly increased fractional anisotropy, and decreased mean diffusivity and radial diffusivity, in left hemisphere anterior corpus callosum, uncinate fasciculus, and inferior-occipital fasciculus, and in right hemisphere superior longitudinal fasciculus and superior and inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus.

A preliminary cross-sectional study of young adult male patients with recent onset schizophrenia (mean age: 23 years, n=12) found that total erythrocyte PUFA (omega-3 and omega-6) concentrations were positively correlated with fractional anisotropy in the uncinate fasciculus but not other white matter tracts [85]. A second independent cross-sectional study of young adult male patients with recent onset schizophrenia (mean age: 23 years, n=30) similarly found that total erythrocyte PUFA concentration (omega-3 and omega-6) was positively correlated with fractional anisotropy, and inversely correlated with radial diffusivity but not axial diffusivity, in the corpus callosum and bilateral parietal, occipital, temporal and frontal white matter tracts [86]. Nervonic acid, AA, and DPA concentrations were positively correlated with regional fractional anisotropy, and a trend was observed for DHA. Greater severity of negative symptoms was associated with lower nervonic acid concentrations and lower fractional anisotropy values.

An open-label trial investigated the effects of 6-week supplementation with fish oil (2:1 EPA/DHA – 2,400 mg/d) on regional white matter microstructural integrity in acutely depressed patients with major depressive disorder (MDD)(mean age: 34 years, n=16) and healthy participants (mean age: 31 years, n=12)[87]. At baseline, fractional anisotropy in the genu and splenium of corpus callosum, anterior corona radiata bilaterally, and right superior longitudinal fasciculus was significantly lower in MDD patients compared with healthy controls. Baseline fasting plasma phospholipid DHA was positively correlated with fractional anisotropy in the corpus callosum of MDD patients. Following fish oil supplementation, increases in plasma phospholipid DHA, but not increases in EPA or decreases in AA, were associated with increased fractional anisotropy in the genu and body of corpus callosum, bilateral anterior corona radiate, and cingulum of patients with MDD, but not in healthy controls. The reduction in depression symptom severity observed in MDD patients following fish oil supplementation was associated with increases in fractional anisotropy in left corticospinal tract and superior longitudinal fasciculus.

5. fMRI

Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) measures signal intensity changes attributed to blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) effects. Elevations in BOLD signal are related to increases in synaptic activity and associated increases in local blood volume [88], and reductions in BOLD signal are thought to reflect a suppression of neural activity and shunting of blood from less active to more active regions [89]. fMRI studies can be performed in a resting state, during performance of cognitive tasks, or during exposure to emotional images to activate specific regional brain networks of interest. For example, working memory and sustained attention tasks have been widely used to interrogate functional activity in the prefrontal cortex, whereas functional activity in limbic emotional structures including the amygdala can be interrogated using emotional images. Using a voxelwise approach, fMRI can additionally investigate functional connectivity among different brain regions, either in a resting state or during performance of cognitive tasks.

A cross-sectional study investigated event-related functional connectivity by fMRI during performance of a sustained attention task (CPT-IP) in male children (mean age: 9 years) divided into ‘low-DHA’ (n=18) and ‘high-DHA’ (n=18) biostatus groups by a median split of erythrocyte DHA levels [90]. Groups were demographically similar and mean erythrocyte DHA levels in the low-DHA group were significantly lower than the high-DHA group. The anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) served as the seed region. The low-DHA group exhibited reduced functional connectivity between the ACC and the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex, insula, precuneus, superior parietal lobule, middle occipital gyrus, inferior temporal gyrus, and lingual gyrus compared with the high-DHA group. These findings are similar to results obtained in non-human primates [37], and suggest that low DHA biostatus is associated with reduced event-related functional connectivity in cortical networks of typically developing children.

A randomized double-blind placebo-controlled dose-ranging trial investigated the effects of 8-week supplementation with one of two doses of algal DHA (400 or 1,200 mg/d) or placebo (corn oil) in healthy male children (mean age: 9 years, n=33)[91]. fMRI scans were acquired during performance of a sustained attention task (identical pairs continuous performance task, CPT-IP). At 8 weeks erythrocyte membrane DHA composition increased significantly from baseline in subjects receiving low-dose and high-dose DHA (high &gt; low), but not placebo, and there were no group differences in CPT-IP performance at baseline or study endpoint. Compared with placebo, both DHA dose groups exhibited significantly greater increases from baseline in the activation of dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), and low-dose and high-dose DHA groups exhibited greater decreases in the occipital cortex and cerebellar cortex, respectively. Relative to low-dose DHA, high-dose DHA resulted in greater decreases in activation of bilateral cerebellum. In an exploratory analysis using progressively less stringent statistical thresholds, more extensive baseline-endpoint increases in prefrontal cortex activation, and baseline-endpoint decreases in parietal cortex, temporal cortex, and cerebellar cortex activation, are observed in boys receiving DHA (1,200 mg/d) versus placebo during sustained attention (Figure 1). Among all subjects, erythrocyte DHA composition was positively correlated with DLPFC activation, and inversely correlated with reaction time, at baseline and endpoint.

A randomized double-blind study investigated the effects of 4-week supplementation with either an EPA-rich formulation (3:1 EPA/DHA - 727 mg/d) or a DHA-rich formulation (4:1 DHA/EPA – 576 mg/d) using a crossover design and a 30-day washout period in healthy young adults (aged 20–34 years, n=13)[92]. fMRI scans were acquired during performance of color-word Stroop task and a Spatial Working Memory task. Although both supplements decreased the AA/EPA ratio in plasma, neither significantly increased plasma EPA or DHA. Subjects receiving the EPA-rich supplement exhibited decreased activation in the left ACC and increased activation in the right precentral gyrus during performance of the Stroop task. EPA-rich supplementation was also associated with a decrease in reaction times. Subjects receiving the DHA-rich supplement exhibited decreased activation in the right precentral gyrus during the Stroop and Spatial Working Memory tasks without significant changes in task performance measures. It was concluded that the observed reductions in the left ACC and increased activation in the right precentral gyrus, and associated reductions in reaction time, following EPA-rich supplementation may be attributable to improvements in cortical processing efficiency and that DHA-rich supplementation is less effective.

A third randomized double-blind placebo-controlled trial investigated the effects of 16-week supplementation (via margarine) with an EPA+DHA formulation (1:1 EPA/DHA – 1,300 mg/d) or placebo in male ADHD children and demographically similar healthy male children (mean age: 10.5 years, n=72)[93]. The majority (95%) of ADHD subjects were taking psychostimulant medication (methylphenidate) during the trial and were instructed not to take their medication for 24 h prior to scanning. fMRI scans were acquired during performance of a Go/NoGo task. Supplementation with EPA+DHA, but not placebo, increased cheek cell phospholipid DHA levels and improved parent-rated attention in both ADHD and healthy children. During performance of the Go/NoGo task, ADHD children had longer reaction times compared with healthy children during the Go trials, and exhibited decreased activation in bilateral inferior parietal lobule and the right middle frontal gyrus compared with healthy controls. However, no significant effects of treatment were observed in either ADHD subjects or healthy children.

A fourth randomized double-blind placebo-controlled trial investigated the effects of 24-week supplementation with fish oil (2:1 EPA/DHA – 2,400 mg/d) or placebo (corn oil) in older adults (mean age: 68 years, n=21) with subjective memory impairment but not meeting criteria for mild cognitive impairment or dementia [94]. fMRI scans were acquired during performance of a sequential letter n-back working memory task. Subjects receiving fish oil, but not placebo, exhibited increases in erythrocyte membrane EPA+DHA composition and greater accuracy on the more difficult 2-back memory loading condition of the n-back working memory task. Subjects receiving fish oil, but not placebo, exhibited a significant baseline-endpoint increase posterior cingulate cortex activation during the 1- and 2-back conditions. Among all subjects, the baseline-endpoint change in erythrocyte EPA+DHA was associated with better performance in the 2-back working memory task and posterior cingulate activation during performance of the 2-back condition.

6. Near infrared spectroscopy

Similar to fMRI, near infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) is a non-invasive technique that measures hemodynamic responses to neuronal activation indexed by changes in concentrations of oxygenated hemoglobin (oxy-Hb), deoxy-Hb, and total hemoglobin which are correlated with cerebral blood flow and fMRI BOLD signal [95]. Unlike fMRI, NIRS is based on the intrinsic optical absorption of blood involving the transmission of wavelengths of light introduced through the skull via a laser emitter and measured from the upper surface of the cortex by a detector. To date two cross-sectional studies and four prospective intervention studies have investigated the relationship between fish/fish oil intake and/or blood EPA and DHA biostatus and NIRS measures during performance of cognitive tasks.

The first cross-sectional study of healthy adults residing in Japan (aged 20–49 years, n=64) investigated the relationship between blood EPA and DHA levels and NIRS measures in the prefrontal cortex during performance of an arithmetic task and investigated associations with mood state and arousal level [96]. In the adjusted model, blood EPA levels were positively correlated with the ratio of oxy-Hb to oxy-Hb + deoxy-Hb in the prefrontal cortex while completing the arousal level questionnaire, and inversely correlated while completing the mood state questionnaire. Both EPA and DHA were inversely correlated with depression-dejection and positively associated with arousal level. A second cross-sectional study of healthy adult males residing in Japan (mean age: 35 years, n=208) investigated the relationship between fish intake frequency during the prior 3 months, and NIRS measures in the DLPFC during performance of a 2-back working memory task [97]. When the cohort was divided into high (n=92) and low (n=116) fish consumption groups, greater increases in oxy-Hb were observed in the high consumption group in the left DLPFC during performance of the working memory task despite exhibiting similar performance. Among all subjects, a positive correlation was observed between fish consumption and oxy-Hb in the left DLPFC during performance of the working memory task, and this remained significant after controlling for confounding variables (age, education levels, BDI total scores). No significant correlations were observed between plasma EPA and DHA levels and oxy-Hb in the left DLPFC.

A randomized double-blind placebo-controlled study investigated the effects of 12-week supplementation with an EPA-rich formulation (1.5:1 EPA/DHA - 500 mg/d), a DHA-rich formulation (5:1 DHA/EPA – 540 mg/d), or placebo (olive oil) in healthy young adult males (mean age: 22 years, n=22)[98]. NIRS was acquired from the prefrontal cortex during the performance of the Stroop task, peg-and-ball task, 3-back task, and Wisconsin card sort task. Supplementation with the DHA-rich formulation increased serum DHA levels, and the EPA-rich formulation also increased serum DHA levels but not EPA levels. Compared with placebo, at study endpoint subjects receiving the DHA-rich formulation, but not the EPA-rich formulation, exhibited elevated concentrations of oxy-Hb and total Hb (the sum of oxy- and deoxy-Hb) during performance of the Stroop task, and there were similar trends observed for the other tasks. A second randomized double-blind placebo-controlled dose-ranging trial investigated the effects of 12-week supplementation with one of two doses of DHA-rich fish oil (1:5 EPA/DHA – 540 mg/d or 1,080 mg/d) or placebo (olive oil) in healthy adults (aged 18–29 years, n=65)[99]. At study endpoint, NIRS was acquired from the prefrontal cortex during performance of several different computerized cognitive tasks. Blood EPA+DHA levels were not determined/reported. There were no group differences while in a resting state. Subjects receiving both doses of fish oil, but not placebo, exhibited greater increases in oxy-Hb and total Hb levels during performance of cognitive tasks. Compared with placebo, faster reaction times were observed in the fish oil groups on a subset of tasks. It was concluded that 12-week supplementation with both doses of DHA-rich fish oil increased cerebral blood flow in the prefrontal cortex during performance of cognitive tasks.

A randomized double-blind placebo-controlled trial investigated the effects of 6-month supplementation with DHA-rich fish oil (1:7 EPA/DHA – 1,024 mg/d) or placebo (sunflower oil) in older adults (mean age: 60 years, n=248) with subjective memory impairment [100]. At study endpoint, NIRS was acquired from the prefrontal cortex during performance of several different computerized cognitive tasks. Supplementation with DHA-rich fish oil increased whole blood EPA and DHA levels, and decreased the AA/EPA ratio. However, no effect of treatment was observed for NIRS measures (total Hb) or cognitive task performance. A second randomized double-blind placebo-controlled investigated the effects of 12-week supplementation with either krill oil (2:1 EPA/DHA – 285 mg/d), sardine oil (2:1 EPA/DHA – 742 mg/d), or placebo (medium chain triglycerides) in cognitively healthy older adults (mean age: 67 years, n=45) residing in Japan [101]. Plasma EPA, but not DHA, increased in subjects receiving krill oil or sardine oil. At study endpoint, NIRS measures were acquired in the DLPFC during performance of a 2-back working memory task or a calculation task. Subjects receiving krill oil or sardine oil exhibited greater increases in oxy-Hb in the DLPFC during performance of the working memory task compared with placebo. Subjects receiving krill oil also exhibited greater increases in oxy-Hb during performance of the calculation task compared with placebo.

7. 1H MRS

Proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (1H MRS) is a voxel-based technique that determines regional concentrations of glutamate, glutamine, glutathione, γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), myo-inositol, N-acetyl aspartate, choline, and creatine. N-acetyl aspartate is primarily localized to neurons [102,103] and is positively correlated with mitochondrial metabolism [104], and 1H MRS studies have observed reductions in regional N-acetyl aspartate concentrations in association with neuronal and axonal atrophy [105–109]. Similarly, choline and creatine are reduced in human cerebral infarcts during the acute or subacute phase of ischemic stroke [106,110,111]. Myo-inositol is metabolized from glucose via 1L-myo-inositol 1-phosphate synthase and is predominantly concentrated in astroctyes [102,103]. The myo-inositol peak detectable by 1H MRS likely reflects the astrocyte pool. Glutathione is primarily present in astrocytes and is thought to have anti-oxidant properties [112]. In general, lower concentrations of N-acetyl aspartate, choline, creatine, and glutathione are associated with reductions in cortical structural and functional integrity.

A cross-sectional study segregated healthy typically developing male children (mean age: 9 years) into low-DHA (n=19) and high-DHA (n=19) biostatus groups by a median split of erythrocyte DHA levels [113]. 1H MRS voxels were placed in the right and left DLPFC and bilateral ACC. Mean erythrocyte DHA levels in the low-DHA group were significantly lower than the high-DHA group. Subjects in the low-DHA group exhibited lower myo-inositol, N-acetyl aspartate, choline, and creatine concentrations in the ACC compared with the high-DHA group. There were no group differences for any metabolite in the left or right DLPFC. Among all subjects, erythrocyte DHA was positively correlated with myo-inositol concentrations in the ACC.

A dose-ranging trial investigated the effects of 10-week open-label supplementation with low (2.4 g/d, n=7) or high (16.2 g/d, n=7) dose fish oil (EPA/DHA: 2:1) on prefrontal metabolite concentrations in adolescents with MDD (mean age: 15 years)[114]. 1H MRS voxels were placed in the right and left DLPFC and bilateral ACC. Baseline erythrocyte EPA composition was positively correlated, and the AA/EPA ratio inversely correlated, with choline concentrations in the right DLPFC, and erythrocyte DHA composition was inversely correlated with myo-inositol in the left DLPFC. Erythrocyte EPA and DHA composition increased significantly in both dose groups. While there were no significant baseline-endpoint changes in metabolite levels in each voxel, the low-dose group exhibited trends with large effect sizes including a decrease in myo-inositol in the left DLPFC and increases in glutamate/glutamine and choline in the right DLPFC. The high-dose group exhibited trends with large effect sizes including increases in choline in the right DLPFC.

Three randomized double-blind placebo-controlled trials have investigated the effects n-3 PUFA supplementation on cortical and subcortical metabolite concentrations using 1H MRS. The first trial investigated the effects of 12-week supplementation with ethyl-EPA (2,000 mg/d) or placebo (liquid paraffin) in lithium-treated female patients with bipolar disorder (mean age: 41 years, n=14)[115]. A single voxel was placed in the cingulate gyrus region. Blood EPA levels were not determined/reported. EPA supplementation selectively increased N-acetyl aspartate concentrations, and there were no corresponding changes in depression symptom severity. The second trial investigated the effects of 12-week supplementation with ethyl-EPA (2,000 mg/d) or placebo (not specified) in first-episode psychotic patients (mean age: 20 years, n=24)[116]. The voxels were placed in bilateral anterior hippocampus. The majority of patients were drug-naive at baseline and started treatment with a second generation antipsychotic during the 12-week trial. Blood EPA levels were was not determined/reported. Supplementation with ethyl-EPA increased glutathione concentrations bilaterally, and increased glutamate/glutamine in the left hemisphere. Change in negative symptom severity was inversely correlated with changes in glutathione concentrations, and changes in glutamate/glutamine and glutathione were positively correlated. A third trial investigated the effects of 12-week supplementation with fish oil (EPA/DHA: 1.5:1 – 2,000 mg/d) or placebo (paraffin oil) in healthy older adults (mean age: 71 years, n=51), a subset of which had a history of depression [117]. The single voxel was placed in the in the thalamus, and the glutathione/creatine ratio was the primary measure of interest. Blood EPA and DHA levels were not determined. Over the 12 week trial subjects in the placebo group exhibited a significant increase in the glutathione/creatine ratio, which was moderately associated with a worsening of depression, whereas subjects in the fish oil did not exhibit a significant change in the glutathione/creatine ratio.

8. 31P MRS

Phosphorous magnetic resonance spectroscopy (31P MRS) permits measurement of concentrations of phosphorus-containing compounds, including phospholipid anabolites (i.e., phosphomonoesters, PME) and catabolites (i.e., phosphodiesters, PDE), high-energy phosphate compounds, as well as indices of cortical energy utilization (i.e., ATP). Reductions in the PME:PDE ratio, secondary to either elevations in PDE or reductions in PME, are thought to reflect a decrease in the synthesis and/or an increase in the breakdown of membrane phospholipids. An early case study reported that 6 month treatment with ethyl-EPA resulted in the normalization of brain membrane phospholipid metabolism in a drug-naive patient with schizophrenia [118]. A preliminary 31P MRS study found that cortical PDE levels in the basal ganglia were inversely correlated with erythrocyte DHA and EPA levels in a small cohort of healthy young adults (mean age: 29 years, n=9)[119]. A cross-sectional study of neuroleptic-naive first-episode psychosis patients (mean age: 26 years, n=11) found that erythrocyte total PUFA levels and AA were positively correlated with bilateral prefrontal cortex PME levels, and linoleic acid (18:2n-6) was positively correlated with PDE levels [120]. No associations with fatty acid levels were observed in other brain regions, including the basal ganglia, occipital, inferior parietal, and superior temporal cortex, and no significant associations were observed for erythrocyte DHA and EPA levels.

9. Positron emission tomography

Positron emission tomography (PET) is an imaging technique that uses radiotracers to investigate several different metabolic processes. For example, radiotracers have been developed to interrogate regional neurotransmitter receptor or transporter binding levels (e.g., [11C]-DTBZ), glucose metabolic rates (e.g., [18F]-FDG), cerebral blood flow (e.g., [15O]H2O), neuroinflammation (e.g., [11C]PBR28), as well as fatty acid incorporation and turnover rates (e.g., [1-11C]DHA). A pioneering cross-sectional PET study using radiolabeled DHA ([1-11C]DHA) investigated DHA incorporation and turnover rates in small group of healthy adult subjects (mean age: 36 years, n=14)[121]. The brain DHA incorporation rate from plasma was equivalent to net rate of DHA consumption and suggested that the half-life of DHA in the human brain is approximately 2.5 years. Using [15O]H2O this study also demonstrated that DHA incorporation was positively correlated with regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF). A follow-up case-control study of chronic alcoholics and healthy controls found that the DHA incorporation rate and rCBF were significantly elevated in chronic alcoholics consistent with a hypermetabolic state and increased consumption of DHA [122].

A cross-sectional study of adult medication-free MDD patients (mean age: 41 years, n=29) found that plasma DHA levels, but not plasma EPA levels, were positively correlated with resting glucose metabolism ([18F]-FDG) in the temporoparietal cortex, and inversely correlated with resting glucose metabolism in prefrontal cortex and anterior cingulate cortex [123]. Plasma AA levels were positively correlated with resting glucose metabolism in the temporoparietal cortex. A second cross-sectional study of healthy middle-aged adults (mean age: 54 years, n=52) found that a nutrient pattern associated with higher n-3 PUFA intake from fish, as well as monounsaturated and n-6 PUFA intake, was associated with greater glucose metabolism ([F]-FDG) in the bilateral prefrontal cortex [124]. A recent crosssectional study of elderly subjects with no or mild cognitive impairment (mean age: 77 years, n=61) investigated the relationship between fasting serum DHA levels and cerebral amyloid deposition using PET imaging and the radiotracer C-labeled Pittsburgh Compound B ([11C]PiB)[125]. In adjusted models, serum DHA levels were inversely correlated with cerebral amyloid load and were significantly lower in participants with cerebral amyloidosis than those without.

A prospective intervention study used PET to investigate the effects of 24-week fish oil (1:1.2 EPA/DHA – 1,680 mg/d) supplementation on vesicular monoamine transporter binding ([11C]-DTBZ) in healthy young adults (mean age: 22 years, n=11)[126]. Although fish oil supplementation significantly increased erythrocyte EPA and DHA levels, no significant change in [11C]-DTBZ binding was observed in striatal subdivisions. A preliminary prospective study found that 3-week fish oil (1:2 EPA/DHA – 1,000 mg/d) supplementation did not significantly alter glucose metabolism ([18F]-FDG) in several different regions, including the hippocampus, ACC, or prefrontal cortex, in healthy young (mean age: 23, n=5) or elderly (mean age: 76, n=6) adults [127].

10. Summary and Discussion

Over the last decade there has been a substantial increase in the number of studies using different neuroimaging techniques to specifically investigate associations between PUFA and human brain structural and functional integrity. Although there have been inconsistencies within different neuroimaging modalities, to date no study has reported a detrimental effect of increasing n-3 PUFA intake/biostatus on any measure of human brain structure or function. Indeed, the weight of evidence from cross-sectional and prospective longitudinal MRI studies conducted in healthy subjects suggests that greater dietary fish intake frequency and/or higher blood DHA and/or EPA levels are associated with increased global gray matter volumes as well as increased regional volumes, including the ACC and temporal lobe structures including the hippocampus and amygdala. A subset of studies additionally found that the positive association between blood DHA and/or EPA levels and performance on cognitive measures, particularly executive function, may be mediated in part by gray matter volumes. The majority of studies did not observe an association between n-3 PUFA intake/biostatus and white matter volumes in either infants or older adults. However, several studies observed an inverse association between n-3 PUFA intake/biostatus and WMH burden in older adults, and emerging DTI evidence suggests a positive association between PUFA and white matter microstructural integrity. Evidence from fMRI and NIRS studies further suggest a positive association between n-3 PUFA intake/biostatus and activity dependent cerebral blood flow in children and young adults, and MRS studies suggest a positive association between n-3 PUFA intake/biostatus and chemical indices of cortical integrity in children and adults.

A subset of studies investigated associations between n-3 PUFA intake/biostatus and neuroimaging measures in elderly patients with dementia or Alzheimer’s disease. The one controlled trial in patients with moderate Alzheimer’s disease did not observe a protective effect of algal DHA supplementation on global or hippocampal gray matter atrophy [64]. However, additional research is needed to determine whether this negative finding is attributable to the intervention (algal DHA) or the advanced stage of cognitive decline of the study population. For example, a controlled supplementation trial conducted in a younger cohort of cognitively healthy older adults did observe a beneficial effect of fish oil on gray matter volume in the left hippocampus [65], and other studies have observed apparent protective effects of n-3 PUFA intake/biostatus against brain pathology, including subclinical infarcts, WMH burden, and cerebral amyloid load in older adults. Therefore, increasing n-3 PUFA intake/biostatus early in the aging process may be required to prevent or attenuate neurodegenerative processes leading to dementia or Alzheimer’s disease which may be less amenable to modification once established. Furthermore, additional research is warranted to evaluate whether supplementation with DHA or EPA alone or in combination is more effective for altering different neuroimaging outcomes.

A small number of neuroimaging studies have investigated associations between PUFA intake/biostatus in infants and children. To date, there have been no studies in typically developing term-born infants and the results from studies assessing associations between n-3 PUFA intake/biostatus on white matter of infants born preterm have been equivocal. It is notable, however, that neuroimaging studies in infants are complicated by the PUFA intake/biostatus of the mother and associated PUFA levels in breastmilk. Nevertheless, in view of evidence that preterm birth is associated with early deficits in cortical DHA accrual [32,33] and enduring decreases in frontal white matter integrity [80], additional research is warranted to replicate and extend preliminary evidence for a positive association between DHA biostatus and white matter microstructural integrity [81]. While the effects of increasing n-3 PUFA intake/biostatus on functional cortical activity in typically developing children have also been inconsistent, preliminary cross-sectional evidence supports a positive association between n-3 PUFA intake/biostatus and frontal cortical integrity and regional connectivity. Because pediatric and adolescent developmental is associated with increases in cortical DHA accrual and rapid changes in cortical structure and function, additional neuroimaging research is warranted to further define whether n-3 PUFA intake/biostatus is associated with cortical structural and functional maturation in typically developing youth.

Several studies also investigated associations between n-3 PUFA intake/biostatus and neuroimaging measures in patients with neuropsychiatric disorders. Schizophrenia is associated with blood DHA and AA deficits [128] and progressive neuropathological brain changes characterized in part by reduced cortical white matter microstructural integrity [129]. It is of interest, therefore, that emerging evidence suggests that PUFA biostatus is positively associated with white matter microstructural integrity in schizophrenic patients [86]. Moreover, mood disorders including MDD and bipolar disorder are associated with blood EPA+DHA deficits, and associated increases in the AA/EPA+DHA ratio [130,131], reduced gray matter volumes in corticolimbic structures [132], increased WMH burden [133], and reduced cortical white matter microstructural integrity [134,135]. It is notable, therefore that fish oil supplementation was found to increase white matter microstructural integrity in patients with MDD in association with reductions in depression symptom severity [87]. In a preliminary cross-sectional study of adolescent MDD patients we have additionally found that erythrocyte DHA levels are positively correlated with prefrontal cortex activation during performance of a sustained attention task (Figure 2). These and other neuroimaging findings suggest that blood measures of n-3 PUFA biostatus may represent a peripheral biomarker that is relevant to cortical pathology observed in patients with psychiatric disorders. However, additional research is needed to directly investigate whether increasing n-3 PUFA biostatus early in the course of illness can prevent or attenuate neuropathological brain changes in youth with or at risk for psychiatric disorders.

While the mechanisms mediating the observed protective effects of n-3 PUFA against gray matter atrophy, WMH, and cerebral infarct burden remain to be elucidated, observations from fMRI, NIRS, and PET studies suggest that higher n-3 PUFA levels are associated with increased cerebral blood flow. It is relevant, therefore, that increasing n-3 PUFA biostatus decreases blood triglyceride levels [137] and reduces blood platelet aggregation [136], potentially by attenuating platelet thromboxane A2 production which has vasoconstriction effects [138–140]. Moreover, neuroimaging studies have observed inverse associations between triglyceride levels and cerebral blood flow [141,142]. Therefore, greater n-3 PUFA biostatus may promote cerebral blood flow in part by reducing blood viscosity and arterial occlusion (Figure 3). Additionally, n-3 PUFA biostatus is inversely correlated with circulating blood pro-inflammatory cytokine and C-reactive protein (CRP) levels [143] which adversely impact vascular endothelial cells [144]. Neuroimaging studies have observed inverse associations between circulating blood pro-inflammatory cytokine and CRP levels and corticolimbic gray matter volumes and white matter pathology [145–149]. While the causal relationships between these factors remains to be determined, it is relevant that patients with MDD exhibit elevated blood n-6/n-3 PUFA levels [130], increased blood viscosity [150], elevated blood cytokine levels [151], neuroinflammation [152], regional cerebral hypoperfusion [150,153], increased WMH burden [133], reduced cortical white matter microstructural integrity [135], and regional gray matter volume reductions [132]. Nevertheless, additional research using neuroimaging techniques that are more sensitive to cerebral perfusion dynamics, including Computed Tomography, will be required to directly evaluate whether any or all of these factors mediate the observed beneficial effects of n-3 PUFA on human cortical structure and function.

In summary, the recent increase in neuroimaging studies investigating the impact of PUFA intake and/or biostatus on human brain structure and function provide important new insight into the role of dietary PUFA on human brain maturation and resilience. To date, findings from human and non-human primate imaging studies provide general support for a beneficial role of higher n-3 PUFA intake on cortical structure and function during both development and aging. Nevertheless, additional research is needed to replicate and extend these early findings as well as identify response mediators and clarify mechanisms of action.

This work was supported in part by National Institute of Health grants DK097599, MH097818, and MH107378 to R.K.M.

R.K.M. has received research support from NARSAD, Martek Biosciences/DSM Inc, Ortho-McNeil Janssen, AstraZeneca, Eli Lilly, Kyowa Hakko Bio Co., LTD, and the Inflammation Research Foundation (IRF), was a member of the IRF scientific advisory board, and served as a paid consultant for VAYA Pharma Inc., and Vifor Pharma Inc. The NIH did not have any role in the design, implementation, analysis or interpretation of the research.

Figure 1 Functional magnetic resonance images illustrating greater baseline-endpoint increases in blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) activity in the prefrontal cortex (top row, DHA&gt;Placebo), and greater baseline-endpoint decreases in BOLD activity in parietal, temporal, and cerebellar cortices (bottom row, DHA&lt;Placebo), in healthy boys receiving DHA (1,200 mg/d) or placebo for 8 weeks. Scans were acquired during performance of a sustained attention task (CPT-IP). Results are presented over progressively less stringent statistical thresholds, and the voxel-extent threshold was held constant at T25.

Figure 2 Erythrocyte DHA levels are positively correlated with blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) activity in prefrontal and anterior cingulate subregions of adolescent MDD patients (mean age: 16 years, n=20) during performance of a sustained attention task (CPT-IP). The color gradient reflects increasing (red → yellow) statistical significances from p≤0.05 (corrected).

Figure 3 Diagram illustrating candidate mechanisms mediating the relationship between n-3 PUFA deficiency, and associated elevations in the n-6/n-3 PUFA ratio, and gray matter atrophy, white matter pathology (e.g., WMH), and cerebral infarct burden. An elevated n-6/n-3 PUFA ratio reduces cerebral blood flow (i.e., cerebrovascular hypoperfusion) in part by increasing blood viscosity by increasing triglyceride levels and platelet aggregation, and increasing vasoconstriction via elevated platelet thromboxane A2 production. Elevated n-6/n-3 PUFA ratio also increases circulating pro-inflammatory cytokine levels which adversely impact vascular endothelial cells and have been found to be associated with white matter pathology and reduced corticolimbic gray matter volumes.

Highlights

There has been a substantial increase in neuroimaging studies investigating associations between PUFA and human brain structure and function.

The weight of evidence suggests that greater n-3 PUFA intake/biostatus is associated with increased gray matter volumes.

Studies have observed an inverse association between n-3 PUFA intake/biostatus and white matter microstructural integrity.

Functional imaging studies suggest a positive association between n-3 PUFA intake/biostatus and activity dependent cerebral blood flow.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

DISCLOSURES

The other authors do not have any financial disclosures.


1 McNamara RK Vannest JJ Valentine CJ Role of perinatal long-chain omega-3 fatty acids in cortical circuit maturation: Mechanisms and implications for psychopathology World J Psychiatr 2015 5 15 34 25815252
2 Carver JD Benford VJ Han B Cantor AB The relationship between age and the fatty acid composition of cerebral cortex and erythrocytes in human subjects Brain Res Bull 2001 56 79 85 11704343
3 Anderson GJ Neuringer M Lin DS Connor WE Can prenatal N-3 fatty acid deficiency be completely reversed after birth? Effects on retinal and brain biochemistry and visual function in rhesus monkeys Pediatr Res 2005 58 865 872 16257925
4 Chen CT Liu Z Ouellet M Calon F Bazinet RP Rapid beta-oxidation of eicosapentaenoic acid in mouse brain: an in situ study Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 2009 80 157 163 19237271
5 Ouellet M Emond V Chen CT Julien C Bourasset F Oddo S LaFerla F Bazinet RP Calon F Diffusion of docosahexaenoic and eicosapentaenoic acids through the blood-brain barrier: An in situ cerebral perfusion study Neurochem Int 55 2009 476 482 19442696
6 Rapoport SI Ramadan E Basselin M Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) incorporation into the brain from plasma, as an in vivo biomarker of brain DHA metabolism and neurotransmission Prostaglandins Other Lipid Mediat 96 2011 109 113 21704722
7 Suzuki H Manabe S Wada O Crawford MA Rapid incorporation of docosahexaenoic acid from dietary sources into brain microsomal, synaptosomal and mitochondrial membranes in adult mice Int J Vitam Nutr Res 67 1997 272 278 9285258
8 Kim HW Rao JS Rapoport SI Igarashi M Regulation of rat brain polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA) metabolism during graded dietary n-3 PUFA deprivation Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 2011 85 361 368 21880477
9 Igarashi M Gao F Kim HW Ma K Bell JM Rapoport SI Dietary n-6 PUFA deprivation for 15 weeks reduces arachidonic acid concentrations while increasing n-3 PUFA concentrations in organs of post-weaning male rats Biochim Biophys Acta 2009 1791 132 139 19073280
10 McNamara RK Ostrander MM Abplanalp W Richtand NM Benoit SC Clegg DJ Modulation of phosphoinositide-protein kinase C signal transduction by omega-3 fatty acids: Implications for the pathophysiology and treatment of recurrent neuropsychiatric illness Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 2006 75 237 257 16935483
11 Rao JS Ertley RN DeMar JC Jr Rapoport SI Bazinet RP Lee HJ Dietary n-3 PUFA deprivation alters expression of enzymes of the arachidonic and docosahexaenoic acid cascades in rat frontal cortex Mol Psychiatry 2007 12 151 157 16983392
12 Bagga D Wang L Farias-Eisner R Glaspy JA Reddy ST Differential effects of prostaglandin derived from omega-6 and omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids on COX-2 expression and IL-6 secretion Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2003 100 1751 1756 12578976
13 Beltz BS Tlusty MF Benton JL Sandeman DC Omega-3 fatty acids upregulate adult neurogenesis Neurosci Lett 2007 415 154 158 17240063
14 Kawakita E Hashimoto M Shido O Docosahexaenoic acid promotes neurogenesis in vitro and in vivo Neuroscience 2006 139 991 997 16527422
15 Coti Bertrand P O’Kusky JR Innis SM Maternal dietary (n-3) fatty acid deficiency alters neurogenesis in the embryonic rat brain J Nutr 2006 136 1570 1575 16702323
16 Yavin E Himovichi E Eilam R Delayed cell migration in the developing rat brain following maternal omega 3 alpha linolenic acid dietary deficiency Neuroscience 2009 162 1011 1122 19447164
17 de Velasco PC Mendonça HR Borba JM Andrade da Costa BL Guedes RC Navarro DM Santos GK Faria-Melibeu Ada C Campello Costa P Serfaty CA Nutritional restriction of omega-3 fatty acids alters topographical fine tuning and leads to a delay in the critical period in the rodent visual system Exp Neurol 2012 234 220 229 22227060
18 Cao D Kevala K Kim J Moon HS Jun SB Lovinger D Kim HY Docosahexaenoic acid promotes hippocampal neuronal development and synaptic function J Neurochem 2009 111 510 521 19682204
19 Chalon S Omega-3 fatty acids and monoamine neurotransmission Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 2006 75 259 269 16963244
20 Ximenes da Silva A Lavialle F Gendrot G Guesnet P Alessandri JM Lavialle M Glucose transport and utilization are altered in the brain of rats deficient in n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids J Neurochem 2002 81 1328 1337 12068080
21 Pifferi F Roux F Langelier B Alessandri JM Vancassel S Jouin M Lavialle M Guesnet P (n-3) polyunsaturated fatty acid deficiency reduces the expression of both isoforms of the brain glucose transporter GLUT1 in rats J Nutr 2005 135 2241 2246 16140905
22 Moriguchi T Salem N Jr Recovery of brain docosahexaenoate leads to recovery of spatial task performance J Neurochem 2003 87 297 309 14511107
23 Greiner RS Moriguchi T Hutton A Slotnick BM Salem N Jr Rats with low levels of brain docosahexaenoic acid show impaired performance in olfactory-based and spatial learning tasks Lipids 1999 34 Suppl S239 43 10419165
24 DeMar JC Jr Ma K Bell JM Igarashi M Greenstein D Rapoport SI One generation of n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid deprivation increases depression and aggression test scores in rats J Lipid Res 2006 47 172 180 16210728
25 Weiser MJ Wynalda K Salem N Jr Butt CM Dietary DHA during development affects depression-like behaviors and biomarkers that emerge after puberty in adolescent rats J Lipid Res 2015 56 151 166 25411442
26 Madore C Nadjar A Delpech JC Sere A Aubert A Portal C Joffre C Layé S Nutritional n-3 PUFAs deficiency during perinatal periods alters brain innate immune system and neuronal plasticity-associated genes Brain Behav Immun 2014 41 22 31 24735929
27 Belayev L Khoutorova L Atkins KD Bazan NG Robust docosahexaenoic acid-mediated neuroprotection in a rat model of transient, focal cerebral ischemia Stroke 2009 40 3121 3126 19542051
28 Blondeau N Widmann C Lazdunski M Heurteaux C Polyunsaturated fatty acids induce ischemic and epileptic tolerance Neuroscience 2002 109 231 241 11801360
29 Calon F Cole G Neuroprotective action of omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids against neurodegenerative diseases: evidence from animal studies Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 2007 77 287 293 18037281
30 Connor WE Neuringer M Lin DS Dietary effects on brain fatty acid composition: the reversibility of n-3 fatty acid deficiency and turnover of docosahexaenoic acid in the brain, erythrocytes, and plasma of rhesus monkeys J Lipid Res 1990 31 237 247 2139096
31 Neuringer M Connor WE Lin DS Barstad L Luck S Biochemical and functional effects of prenatal and postnatal omega 3 fatty acid deficiency on retina and brain in rhesus monkeys Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1986 83 4021 4025 3459166
32 Sarkadi-Nagy E Wijendran V Diau GY Chao AC Hsieh AT Turpeinen A Lawrence P Nathanielsz PW Brenna JT Formula feeding potentiates docosahexaenoic and arachidonic acid biosynthesis in term and preterm baboon neonates J Lipid Res 2004 45 71 80 14523049
33 Sarkadi-Nagy E Wijendran V Diau GY Chao AC Hsieh AT Turpeinen A Nathanielsz PW Brenna JT The influence of prematurity and long chain polyunsaturate supplementation in 4-week adjusted age baboon neonate brain and related tissues Pediatr Res 2003 54 244 252 12736388
34 Reisbick S Neuringer M Gohl E Wald R Anderson GJ Visual attention in infant monkeys: effects of dietary fatty acids and age Dev Psychol 1997 33 387 395 9149918
35 Reisbick S Neuringer M Hasnain R Connor WE Home cage behavior of rhesus monkeys with long-term deficiency of omega-3 fatty acids Physiol Behav 1994 55 231 239 8153160
36 Pifferi F Dorieux O Castellano CA Croteau E Masson M Guillermier M Van Camp N Guesnet P Alessandri JM Cunnane S Dhenain M Aujard F Long-chain n-3 PUFAs from fish oil enhance resting state brain glucose utilization and reduce anxiety in an adult nonhuman primate, the grey mouse lemur J Lipid Res 2015 56 1511 1518 26063461
37 Grayson DS Kroenke CD Neuringer M Fair DA Dietary omega-3 fatty acids modulate large-scale systems organization in the rhesus macaque brain J Neurosci 2014 34 2065 2074 24501348
38 Tsukada H Kakiuchi T Fukumoto D Nishiyama S Koga K Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) improves the age-related impairment of the coupling mechanism between neuronal activation and functional cerebral blood flow response: a PET study in conscious monkeys Brain Res 2000 862 180 186 10799683
39 Clandinin MT Chappell JE Leong S Heim T Swyer PR Chance GW Extrauterine fatty acid accretion in infant brain: implications for fatty acid requirements Early Hum Dev 1980 4 131 138 7408743
40 Martínez M Mougan I Fatty acid composition of human brain phospholipids during normal development J Neurochem 1998 71 2528 2533 9832152
41 Dubois J Dehaene-Lambertz G Kulikova S Poupon C Hüppi PS Hertz-Pannier L The early development of brain white matter: a review of imaging studies in fetuses, newborns and infants Neuroscience 2014 276 48 71 24378955
42 Giedd JN Lalonde FM Celano MJ White SL Wallace GL Lee NR Lenroot RK Anatomical brain magnetic resonance imaging of typically developing children and adolescents J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2009 48 465 470 19395901
43 Sands SA Reid KJ Windsor SL Harris WS The impact of age, body mass index, and fish intake on the EPA and DHA content of human erythrocytes Lipids 2005 40 343 347 16028715
44 Brenna JT Salem N Jr Sinclair AJ Cunnane SC International Society for the Study of Fatty Acids and Lipids, ISSFAL alpha-Linolenic acid supplementation and conversion to n-3 long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids in humans Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 2009 80 85 91 19269799
45 Raz N Yang Y Dahle CL Land S Volume of white matter hyperintensities in healthy adults: contribution of age, vascular risk factors, and inflammation-related genetic variants Biochim Biophys Acta 2012 1822 361 369 21889590
46 Conklin SM Gianaros PJ Brown SM Yao JK Hariri AR Manuck SB Muldoon MF Long-chain omega-3 fatty acid intake is associated positively with corticolimbic gray matter volume in healthy adults Neurosci Lett 2007 421 209 212 17574755
47 Bowman GL Silbert LC Howieson D Dodge HH Traber MG Frei B Kaye JA Shannon J Quinn JF Nutrient biomarker patterns, cognitive function, and MRI measures of brain aging Neurology 2012 78 241 249 22205763
48 Tan ZS Harris WS Beiser AS Au R Himali JJ Debette S Pikula A Decarli C Wolf PA Vasan RS Robins SJ Seshadri S Red blood cell ω−3 fatty acid levels and markers of accelerated brain aging Neurology 2012 78 658 664 22371413
49 Bowman GL Dodge HH Mattek N Barbey AK Silbert LC Shinto L Howieson DB Kaye JA Quinn JF Plasma omega-3 PUFA and white matter mediated executive decline in older adults Front Aging Neurosci 2013 5 92 24379780
50 Nagai K Koshiba H Shibata S Matsui T Kozaki K Correlation between the serum eicosapentanoic acid-to-arachidonic acid ratio and the severity of cerebral white matter hyperintensities in older adults with memory disorder Geriatr Gerontol Int 2015 15 Suppl 1 48 52 26671157
51 Suwa M Yamaguchi S Komori T Kajimoto S Kino M The association between cerebral white matter lesions and plasma omega-3 to omega-6 polyunsaturated fatty acids ratio to cognitive impairment development Biomed Res Int 2015 2015 153437 26583090
52 Samieri C Lorrain S Buaud B Vaysse C Berr C Peuchant E Cunnane SC Barberger-Gateau P Relationship between diet and plasma long-chain n-3 PUFAs in older people: impact of apolipoprotein E genotype J Lipid Res 2013 54 2559 2567 23801662
53 Zamroziewicz MK Paul EJ Rubin RD Barbey AK Anterior cingulate cortex mediates the relationship between O3PUFAs and executive functions in APOE e4 carriers Front Aging Neurosci 2015 7 87 26052283
54 Yassine HN Feng Q Azizkhanian I Rawat V Castor K Fonteh AN Harrington MG Zheng L Reed BR DeCarli C Jagust WJ Chui HC Association of serum docosahexaenoic acid with cerebral amyloidosis JAMA Neurol 2016 73 1208 1216 27532692
55 Virtanen JK Siscovick DS Longstreth WT Jr Kuller LH Mozaffarian D Fish consumption and risk of subclinical brain abnormalities on MRI in older adults Neurology 2008 71 439 446 18678827
56 Virtanen JK Siscovick DS Lemaitre RN Longstreth WT Spiegelman D Rimm EB King IB Mozaffarian D Circulating omega-3 Polyunsaturated fatty acids and subclinical brain abnormalities on MRI in older adults: the Cardiovascular Health Study J Am Heart Assoc 2013 2 5 e000305 24113325
57 Samieri C Maillard P Crivello F Proust-Lima C Peuchant E Helmer C Amieva H Allard M Dartigues JF Cunnane SC Mazoyer BM Barberger-Gateau P Plasma long-chain omega-3 fatty acids and atrophy of the medial temporal lobe Neurology 2012 79 642 650 22855869
58 Titova OE Sjögren P Brooks SJ Kullberg J Ax E Kilander L Riserus U Cederholm T Larsson EM Johansson L Ahlström H Lind L Schiöth HB Benedict C Dietary intake of eicosapentaenoic and docosahexaenoic acids is linked to gray matter volume and cognitive function in elderly Age (Dordr) 2013 35 1495 1505 22791395
59 Raji CA Erickson KI Lopez OL Kuller LH Gach HM Thompson PM Riverol M Becker JT Regular fish consumption and age-related brain gray matter loss Am J Prev Med 2014 47 444 451 25084680
60 Walhovd KB Storsve AB Westlye LT Drevon CA Fjell AM Blood markers of fatty acids and vitamin D, cardiovascular measures, body mass index, and physical activity relate to longitudinal cortical thinning in normal aging Neurobiol Aging 2014 35 1055 1064 24332985
61 Pottala JV Yaffe K Robinson JG Espeland MA Wallace R Harris WS Higher RBC EPA + DHA corresponds with larger total brain and hippocampal volumes: WHIMS-MRI study Neurology 2014 82 435 442 24453077
62 Jernerén F Elshorbagy AK Oulhaj A Smith SM Refsum H Smith AD Brain atrophy in cognitively impaired elderly: the importance of long-chain ω−3 fatty acids and B vitamin status in a randomized controlled trial Am J Clin Nutr 2015 102 215 221 25877495
63 Daiello LA Gongvatana A Dunsiger S Cohen RA Ott BR Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative. Association of fish oil supplement use with preservation of brain volume and cognitive function Alzheimers Dement 2015 11 226 235 24954371
64 Quinn JF Raman R Thomas RG Yurko-Mauro K Nelson EB Van Dyck C Galvin JE Emond J Jack CR Jr Weiner M Shinto L Aisen PS Docosahexaenoic acid supplementation and cognitive decline in Alzheimer disease: a randomized trial JAMA 2010 304 1903 1911 21045096
65 Witte AV Kerti L Hermannstädter HM Fiebach JB Schreiber SJ Schuchardt JP Hahn A Flöel A Long-chain omega-3 fatty acids improve brain function and structure in older adults Cereb Cortex 2014 24 3059 3068 23796946
66 Köbe T Witte AV Schnelle A Lesemann A Fabian S Tesky VA Pantel J Flöel A Combined omega-3 fatty acids, aerobic exercise and cognitive stimulation prevents decline in gray matter volume of the frontal, parietal and cingulate cortex in patients with mild cognitive impairment Neuroimage 2016 131 226 338 26433119
67 Basser PJ Inferring microstructural features and the physiological state of tissues from diffusion-weighted images NMR Biomed 1995 8 333 344 8739270
68 Le Bihan D Mangin JF Poupon C Clark CA Pappata S Molko N Chabriat H Diffusion tensor imaging: concepts and applications J Magn Reson Imaging 2001 13 534 546 11276097
69 Budde MD Xie M Cross AH Song SK Axial diffusivity is the primary correlate of axonal injury in the experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis spinal cord: a quantitative pixelwise analysis J Neurosci 2009 29 2805 2813 19261876
70 Song SK Sun SW Ramsbottom MJ Chang C Russell J Cross AH Dysmyelination revealed through MRI as increased radial (but unchanged axial) diffusion of water Neuroimage 2002 17 1429 1436 12414282
71 Song SK Yoshino J Le TQ Lin SJ Sun SW Cross AH Armstrong RC Demyelination increases radial diffusivity in corpus callosum of mouse brain Neuroimage 2005 26 132 140 15862213
72 Head D Buckner RL Shimony JS Williams LE Akbudak E Conturo TE McAvoy M Morris JC Snyder AZ Differential vulnerability of anterior white matter in nondemented aging with minimal acceleration in dementia of the Alzheimer type: evidence from diffusion tensor imaging Cereb Cortex 2004 14 410 423 15028645
73 Pfefferbaum A Adalsteinsson E Sullivan EV Frontal circuitry degradation marks healthy adult aging: Evidence from diffusion tensor imaging Neuroimage 2005 26 891 899 15955499
74 Salat DH Tuch DS Greve DN van der Kouwe AJ Hevelone ND Zaleta AK Rosen BR Fischl B Corkin S Rosas HD Dale AM Age-related alterations in white matter microstructure measured by diffusion tensor imaging Neurobiol Aging 2005 26 1215 1227 15917106
75 Roosendaal SD Geurts JJ Vrenken H Hulst HE Cover KS Castelijns JA Pouwels PJ Barkhof F Regional DTI differences in multiple sclerosis patients Neuroimage 2009 44 1397 1403 19027076
76 Peters BD Voineskos AN Szeszko PR Lett TA DeRosse P Guha S Karlsgodt KH Ikuta T Felsky D John M Rotenberg DJ Kennedy JL Lencz T Malhotra AK Brain white matter development is associated with a human-specific haplotype increasing the synthesis of long chain fatty acids J Neurosci 2014 34 6367 6376 24790207
77 Pelletier A Periot O Dilharreguy B Hiba B Bordessoules M Chanraud S Pérès K Amieva H Dartigues JF Allard M Catheline G Age-related modifications of diffusion tensor imaging parameters and white matter hyperintensities as inter-dependent processes Front Aging Neurosci 2016 7 255 26834625
78 Maillard P Carmichael O Harvey D Fletcher E Reed B Mungas D DeCarli C FLAIR and diffusion MRI signals are independent predictors of white matter hyperintensities AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2013 34 54 61 22700749
79 Huang H Xue R Zhang J Ren T Richards LJ Yarowsky P Miller MI Mori S Anatomical characterization of human fetal brain development with diffusion tensor magnetic resonance imaging J Neurosci 2009 29 4263 4273 19339620
80 Constable RT Ment LR Vohr BR Kesler SR Fulbright RK Lacadie C Delancy S Katz KH Schneider KC Schafer RJ Makuch RW Reiss AR Prematurely born children demonstrate white matter microstructural differences at 12 years of age, relative to term control subjects: an investigation of group and gender effects Pediatrics 2008 121 306 316 18245422
81 Tam EW Chau V Barkovich AJ Ferriero DM Miller SP Rogers EE Grunau RE Synnes AR Xu D Foong J Brant R Innis SM Early postnatal docosahexaenoic acid levels and improved preterm brain development Pediatr Res 2016 79 723 730 26761122
82 van Wezel-Meijler G van der Knaap MS Huisman J Jonkman EJ Valk J Lafeber HN Dietary supplementation of long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids in preterm infants: effects on cerebral maturation Acta Paediatr 2002 91 942 950 12412870
83 Almaas AN Tamnes CK Nakstad B Henriksen C Grydeland H Walhovd KB Fjell AM Iversen PO Drevon CA Diffusion tensor imaging and behavior in premature infants at 8 years of age, a randomized controlled trial with long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids Early Hum Dev 2016 95 41 46 26939082
84 Gu Y Vorburger RS Gazes Y Habeck CG Stern Y Luchsinger JA Manly JJ Schupf N Mayeux R Brickman AM White matter integrity as a mediator in the relationship between dietary nutrients and cognition in the elderly Ann Neurol 2016 79 1014 1025 27129740
85 Peters BD Duran M Vlieger EJ Majoie CB den Heeten GJ Linszen DH de Haan L Polyunsaturated fatty acids and brain white matter anisotropy in recent-onset schizophrenia: a preliminary study Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 2009 81 61 63 19477108
86 Peters BD Machielsen MW Hoen WP Caan MW Malhotra AK Szeszko PR Duran M Olabarriaga SD de Haan L Polyunsaturated fatty acid concentration predicts myelin integrity in early-phase psychosis Schizophr Bull 2013 39 830 838 22927668
87 Chhetry BT Hezghia A Miller JM Lee S Rubin-Falcone H Cooper TB Oquendo MA Mann Jj Sublette ME Omega-3 Polyunsaturated fatty acid supplementation and white matter changes in major depression J Psychiatr Res 2016 75 65 74 26802812
88 Hess A Stiller D Kaulisch T Heil P Scheich H New insights into the hemodynamic blood oxygenation level-dependent response through combination of functional magnetic resonance imaging and optical recording in gerbil barrel cortex J Neurosci 2000 20 3328 3338 10777796
89 Harel N Lee SP Nagaoka T Kim DS Kim SG Origin of negative blood oxygenation level-dependent fMRI signals J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2002 22 908 917 12172376
90 Almeida DM Jandacek RJ Weber WA McNamara RK Docosahexaenoic acid biostatus is associated with event-related functional connectivity in cortical attention networks of typically developing children Nutr Neurosci 2017 20 261 270
91 McNamara RK Able J Jandacek R Rider T Tso P Eliassen JC Alfieri D Weber W Jarvis K DelBello MP Strakowski SM Adler CM Docosahexaenoic acid supplementation increases prefrontal cortex activation during sustained attention in healthy boys: a placebo-controlled, dose-ranging, functional magnetic resonance imaging study Am J Clin Nutr 2010 91 1060 1067 20130094
92 Bauer I Hughes M Rowsell R Cockerell R Pipingas A Crewther S Crewther D Omega-3 supplementation improves cognition and modifies brain activation in young adults Hum Psychopharmacol 2014 29 133 144 24470182
93 Bos DJ Oranje B Veerhoek ES Van Diepen RM Weusten JM Demmelmair H Koletzko B de Sain-van der Velden MG Eilander A Hoeksma M Durston S Reduced Symptoms of Inattention after Dietary Omega-3 Fatty Acid Supplementation in Boys with and without Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder Neuropsychopharmacology 2015 40 2298 2306 25790022
94 Boespflug EL McNamara RK Eliassen JC Schidler MD Krikorian R Fish Oil Supplementation Increases Event-Related Posterior Cingulate Activation in Older Adults with Subjective Memory Impairment J Nutr Health Aging 2016 20 161 169 26812512
95 Huppert TJ Hoge RD Diamond SG Franceschini MA Boas DA A temporal comparison of BOLD, ASL, and NIRS hemodynamic responses to motor stimuli in adult humans Neuroimage 2006 29 368 382 16303317
96 Hamazaki-Fujita N Hamazaki K Tohno H Itomura M Terashima Y Hamazaki T Nakamura N Yomoda S Polyunsaturated fatty acids and blood circulation in the forebrain during a mental arithmetic task Brain Res 2011 1397 38 45 21616479
97 Pu S Nakagome K Yamada T Matsumura H Yokoyama K Kaneko K Kurosawa Y Association between fish consumption and prefrontal function during a cognitive task in male Japanese workers: A multi-channel near-infrared spectroscopy study PLoS One 2015 10 e0123972 25919586
98 Jackson PA Reay JL Scholey AB Kennedy DO DHA-rich oil modulates the cerebral haemodynamic response to cognitive tasks in healthy young adults: a near IR spectroscopy pilot study Br J Nutr 2012 107 1093 1098 22018509
99 Jackson PA Reay JL Scholey AB Kennedy DO Docosahexaenoic acid-rich fish oil modulates the cerebral hemodynamic response to cognitive tasks in healthy young adults Biol Psychol 2012 89 183 190 22020134
100 Jackson PA Forster JS Bell JG Dick JR Younger I Kennedy DO DHA supplementation alone or in combination with other nutrients does not modulate cerebral hemodynamics or cognitive function in healthy older adults Nutrients 2016 8 86 26867200
101 Konagai C Yanagimoto K Hayamizu K Han L Tsuji T Koga Y Effects of krill oil containing n-3 Polyunsaturated fatty acids in phospholipid form on human brain function: a randomized controlled trial in healthy elderly volunteers Clin Interv Aging 2013 8 1247 1257 24098072
102 Brand A Richter-Landsberg C Leibfritz D Multinuclear NMR studies on the energy metabolism of glial and neuronal cells Dev Neurosci 1993 15 289 298 7805581
103 Griffin JL Bollard M Nicholson JK Bhakoo K Spectral profiles of cultured neuronal and glial cells derived from HRMAS (1)H NMR spectroscopy NMR Biomed 2002 15 375 384 12357551
104 Ciccarelli O Toosy AT De Stefano N Wheeler-Kingshott CA Miller DH Thompson AJ Assessing neuronal metabolism in vivo by modeling imaging measures J Neurosci 2010 30 15030 15033 21068308
105 Bjartmar C Kidd G Mörk S Rudick R Trapp BD Neurological disability correlates with spinal cord axonal loss and reduced N-acetyl aspartate in chronic multiple sclerosis patients Ann Neurol 2000 48 893 901 11117546
106 Federico F Simone IL Lucivero V Giannini P Laddomada G Mezzapesa DM Tortorella C Prognostic value of proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy in ischemic stroke Arch Neurol 1998 55 489 494 9561976
107 Demougeot C Marie C Giroud M Beley A N-acetylaspartate: a literature review of animal research on brain ischaemia J Neurochem 2004 90 776 783 15287882
108 Malisza KL Kozlowski P Peeling J A review of in vivo 1H magnetic resonance spectroscopy of cerebral ischemia in rats Biochem Cell Biol 1998 76 487 496 9923718
109 Woo CW Lee BS Kim ST Kim KS Correlation between lactate and neuronal cell damage in the rat brain after focal ischemia: An in vivo 1H magnetic resonance spectroscopic (1H-MRS) study Acta Radiol 2010 51 344 350 20144147
110 Duijn JH Matson GB Maudsley AA Hugg JW Weiner MW Human brain infarction: proton MR spectroscopy Radiology 1992 183 711 718 1584925
111 Lanfermann H Kugel H Heindel W Herholz K Heiss WD Lackner K Metabolic changes in acute and subacute cerebral infarctions: findings at proton MR spectroscopic imaging Radiology 1995 196 203 210 7784568
112 Dringen R Metabolism and functions of glutathione in brain Prog Neurobiol 2000 62 649 671 10880854
113 McNamara RK Jandacek R Tso P Weber W Chu WJ Strakowski SM Adler CM Delbello MP Low docosahexaenoic acid status is associated with reduced indices in cortical integrity in the anterior cingulate of healthy male children: a 1H MRS Study Nutr Neurosci 2013 16 183 190 23582513
114 McNamara RK Jandacek R Rider T Tso P Chu WJ Weber WA Welge JA Strawn JR Adler CM DelBello MP Effects of fish oil supplementation on prefrontal metabolite concentrations in adolescents with major depressive disorder: a preliminary 1H MRS study Nutr Neurosci 2016 19 145 155 24915543
115 Frangou S Lewis M Wollard J Simmons A Preliminary in vivo evidence of increased N-acetyl-aspartate following eicosapentanoic acid treatment in patients with bipolar disorder J Psychopharmacol 2007 21 435 439 16891338
116 Berger GE Wood SJ Wellard RM Proffitt TM McConchie M Amminger GP Jackson GD Velakoulis D Pantelis C McGorry PD Ethyl-eicosapentaenoic acid in first-episode psychosis. A 1H-MRS study Neuropsychopharmacology 2008 33 2467 2473 18199999
117 Duffy SL Lagopoulos J Cockayne N Hermens DF Hickie IB Naismith SL Oxidative stress and depressive symptoms in older adults: A magnetic resonance spectroscopy study J Affect Disord 2015 180 29 35 25881278
118 Puri BK Richardson AJ Horrobin DF Easton T Saeed N Oatridge A Hajnal JV Bydder GM Eicosapentaenoic acid treatment in schizophrenia associated with symptom remission, normalisation of blood fatty acids, reduced neuronal membrane phospholipid turnover and structural brain changes Int J Clin Pract 2000 54 57 63 10750263
119 Richardson AJ Allen SJ Hajnal JV Cox IJ Easton T Puri BK Associations between central and peripheral measures of phospholipid breakdown revealed by cerebral 31-phosphorus magnetic resonance spectroscopy and fatty acid composition of erythrocyte membranes Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 2001 25 1513 1521 11642651
120 Yao Jk Stanley JA Reddy RD Keshavan MS Pettegrew JW Correlations between peripheral polyunsaturated fatty acid content and in vivo membrane phospholipid metabolites Biol Psychiatry 2002 52 823 830 12372654
121 Umhau JC Zhou W Carson RE Rapoport SI Polozova A Demar J Hussein N Bhattacharjee AK Ma K Esposito G Majchrzak S Herscovitch P Eckelman WC Kurdziel KA Salem N Jr Imaging incorporation of circulating docosahexaenoic acid into the human brain using positron emission tomography J Lipid Res 2009 50 1259 1268 19112173
122 Umhau JC Zhou W Thada S Demar J Hussein N Bhattacharjee AK Ma K Majchrzak-Hong S Herscovitch P Salem N Jr Urish A Hibbeln JR Cunnane SC Rapoport SI Hirvonen J Brain docosahexaenoic acid [DHA] incorporation and blood flow are increased in chronic alcoholics: a positron emission tomography study corrected for cerebral atrophy PLoS One 2013 8 e75333 24098376
123 Sublette ME Milak MS Hibbeln JR Freed PJ Oquendo MA Malone KM Parsey RV Mann JJ Plasma polyunsaturated fatty acids and regional cerebral glucose metabolism in major depression Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 2009 80 57 64 19128951
124 Berti V Murray J Davies M Spector N Tsui WH Li Y Williams S Pirraglia E Vallabhajosula S McHugh P Pupi A de Leon MJ Mosconi L Nutrient patterns and brain biomarkers of Alzheimer’s disease in cognitively normal individuals J Nutr Health Aging 2015 19 413 423 25809805
125 Yassine HN Feng Q Azizkhanian I Rawat V Castor K Fonteh AN Harrington MG Zheng L Reed BR DeCarli C Jagust WJ Chui HC Association of serum docosahexaenoic acid with cerebral amyloidosis JAMA Neurol 2016 73 1208 1216 27532692
126 Narendran R Frankle WG Mason NS Muldoon MF Moghaddam B Improved working memory but no effect on striatal vesicular monoamine transporter type 2 after omega-3 Polyunsaturated fatty acid supplementation PLoS One 2012 7 e46832 23056476
127 Nugent S Croteau E Pifferi F Fortier M Tremblay S Turcotte E Cunnane SC Brain and systemic glucose metabolism in the healthy elderly following fish oil supplementation Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 2011 85 287 291 21795034
128 van der Kemp WJ Klomp DW Kahn RS Luijten PR Hulshoff Pol HE A meta-analysis of the polyunsaturated fatty acid composition of erythrocyte membranes in schizophrenia Schizophr Res 2012 141 153 161 22981812
129 Yao L Lui S Liao Y Du MY Hu N Thomas JA Gong QY White matter deficits in first episode schizophrenia: an activation likelihood estimation meta-analysis Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 2013 45 100 106 23648972
130 Lin PY Huang SY Su KP A meta-analytic review of polyunsaturated fatty acid compositions in patients with depression Biol Psychiatry 2010 68 140 147 20452573
131 McNamara RK Welge JA Meta-analysis of erythrocyte polyunsaturated fatty acid biostatus in bipolar disorder Bipolar Disord 2016 18 300 306 27087497
132 Kempton MJ Salvador Z Munafò MR Geddes JR Simmons A Frangou S Williams SC Structural neuroimaging studies in major depressive disorder. Meta-analysis and comparison with bipolar disorder Arch Gen Psychiatry 2011 68 675 690 21727252
133 Beyer JL Young R Kuchibhatla M Krishnan KR Hyperintense MRI lesions in bipolar disorder: A meta-analysis and review Int Rev Psychiatry 2009 21 394 409 20374153
134 Vederine FE Wessa M Leboyer M Houenou J A meta-analysis of whole-brain diffusion tensor imaging studies in bipolar disorder Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 2011 35 1820 1826 21624424
135 Jiang J Zhao YJ Hu XY Du MY Chen ZQ Wu M Li KM Zhu HY Kumar P Gong QY Microstructural brain abnormalities in medication-free patients with major depressive disorder: a systematic review and meta-analysis of diffusion tensor imaging J Psychiatry Neurosci 2016 42 150341
136 Gao LG Cao J Mao QX Lu XC Zhou XL Fan L Influence of omega-3 Polyunsaturated fatty acid-supplementation on platelet aggregation in humans: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials Atherosclerosis 2013 226 328 334 23153623
137 Leslie MA Cohen DJ Liddle DM Robinson LE Ma DW A review of the effect of omega-3 Polyunsaturated fatty acids on blood triacylglycerol levels in normolipidemic and borderline hyperlipidemic individuals Lipids Health Dis 2015 14 53 26048287
138 Kristensen SD Schmidt EB Dyerberg J Dietary supplementation with n-3 Polyunsaturated fatty acids and human platelet function: a review with particular emphasis on implications for cardiovascular disease J Intern Med Suppl 1989 731 141 50 2650690
139 Murray MJ Zhang T The incorporation of dietary n-3 Polyunsaturated fatty acids into porcine platelet phospholipids and their effects on platelet thromboxane A2 release Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 1997 56 223 228 9089803
140 Wander RC Patton BD Comparison of three species of fish consumed as part of a Western diet: effects on platelet fatty acids and function, hemostasis, and production of thromboxane Am J Clin Nutr 1991 54 326 333 1858697
141 Birdsill AC Carlsson CM Willette AA Okonkwo OC Johnson SC Xu G Oh JM Gallagher CL Koscik RL Jonaitis EM Hermann BP LaRue A Rowley HA Asthana S Sager MA Bendlin BB Low cerebral blood flow is associated with lower memory function in metabolic syndrome Obesity (Silver Spring) 2013 21 1313 1320 23687103
142 Jennings JR Heim AF Kuan DC Gianaros PJ Muldoon MF Manuck SB Use of total cerebral blood flow as an imaging biomarker of known cardiovascular risks Stroke 2013 44 2480 2485 23881956
143 Li K Huang T Zheng J Wu K Li D Effect of marine-derived n-3 Polyunsaturated fatty acids on C-reactive protein, interleukin 6 and tumor necrosis factor α: a meta-analysis PLoS One 2014 9 e88103 24505395
144 Young JL Libby P Schönbeck U Cytokines in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis Thromb Haemost 2002 88 554 567 12362224
145 Marsland AL Gianaros PJ Abramowitch SM Manuck SB Hariri AR Interleukin-6 covaries inversely with hippocampal grey matter volume in middle-aged adults Biol Psychiatry 2008 64 484 490 18514163
146 Marsland AL Gianaros PJ Kuan DC Sheu LK Krajina K Manuck SB Brain morphology links systemic inflammation to cognitive function in midlife adults Brain Behav Immun 2015 48 195 204 25882911
147 Satizabal CL Zhu YC Mazoyer B Dufouil C Tzourio C Circulating IL-6 and CRP are associated with MRI findings in the elderly: the 3C-Dijon Study Neurology 2012 78 720 727 22357713
148 Sudheimer KD O’Hara R Spiegel D Powers B Kraemer HC Neri E Weiner M Hardan A Hallmayer J Dhabhar FS Cortisol, cytokines, and hippocampal volume interactions in the elderly Front Aging Neurosci 2014 6 153 25071562
149 Wersching H Duning T Lohmann H Mohammadi S Stehling C Fobker M Conty M Minnerup J Ringelstein EB Berger K Deppe M Knecht S Serum C-reactive protein is linked to cerebral microstructural integrity and cognitive function Neurology 2010 74 1022 1029 20350977
150 Wang Y Zhang H Tang S Liu X O’Neil A Turner A Chai F Chen F Berk M Assessing regional cerebral blood flow in depression using 320-slice computed tomography PLoS One 2014 9 e107735 25251476
151 Liu Y Ho RC Mak A Interleukin (IL)-6, tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) and soluble interleukin-2 receptors (sIL-2R) are elevated in patients with major depressive disorder: a meta-analysis and meta-regression J Affect Disord 2012 139 230 239 21872339
152 Setiawan E Wilson AA Mizrahi R Rusjan PM Miler L Rajkowska G Suridjan I Kennedy JL Rekkas PV Houle S Meyer JH Role of translocator protein density, a marker of neuroinflammation, in the brain during major depressive episodes JAMA Psychiatry 2015 72 268 275 25629589
153 Ho TC Wu J Shin DD Liu TT Tapert SF Yang G Connolly CG Frank GK Max JE Wolkowitz O Eisendrath S Hoeft F Banerjee D Hood K Hendren RL Paulus MP Simmons AN Yang TT Altered cerebral perfusion in executive, affective, and motor networks during adolescent depression J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2013 52 1076 1091 24074474
