LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


0347227
5571
Mech Ageing Dev
Mech. Ageing Dev.
Mechanisms of ageing and development
0047-6374
1872-6216

27663141
5316312
10.1016/j.mad.2016.09.005
NIHMS821445
Article
Chronic Oxidative Damage together with Genome Repair Deficiency in the Neurons is a Double Whammy for Neurodegeneration: Is Damage Response Signaling a Potential Therapeutic Target?
Wang Haibo 16†
Dharmalingam Prakash 16†
Vasquez Velmarini 1236
Mitra Joy 16
Boldogh Istvan 4
Rao K. S. 2
Kent Thomas A. 5
Mitra Sankar 17
Hegde Muralidhar L. 167*
1 Department of Radiation Oncology, Houston Methodist Research Institute, Houston, Texas 77030, USA
2 Centre for Neuroscience, Instituto de Investigaciones Científicas y Servicios de Alta Tecnología (INDICASAT AIP), City of Knowledge, Panama City, Republic Panama
3 Department of Biotechnology, Acharya Nagarjuna University, Guntur, India
4 Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas-77555
5 Department of Neurology, Baylor College of Medicine and Center for Translational Research on Inflammatory Diseases Michael E. DeBakey Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA
6 Houston Methodist Neurological Institute, Houston, Texas 77030 USA
7 Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New York
* Correspondence: *Muralidhar L. Hegde, Houston Methodist Research Institute, 6550 Fannin St, Smith 8-05, Houston TX 77030. mlhegde@houstonmethodist.org; Tel.:+1-713-441-7456: Fax: +1-713-790-3755
† These authors contributed equally to the article.

7 10 2016
20 9 2016
1 2017
01 1 2018
161 Pt A 163176
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
A foremost challenge for the neurons, which are among the most oxygenated cells, is the genome damage caused by chronic exposure to endogenous reactive oxygen species (ROS), formed as cellular respiratory byproducts. Strong metabolic activity associated with high transcriptional levels in these long lived post-mitotic cells render them vulnerable to oxidative genome damage, including DNA strand breaks and mutagenic base lesions. There is growing evidence for the accumulation of unrepaired DNA lesions in the central nervous system (CNS) during accelerated ageing and progressive neurodegeneration. Several germ line mutations in DNA repair or DNA damage response (DDR) signaling genes are uniquely manifested in the phenotype of neuronal dysfunction and are etiologically linked to many neurodegenerative disorders. Studies in our lab and elsewhere revealed that pro-oxidant metals, ROS and misfolded amyloidogenic proteins not only contribute to genome damage in CNS, but also impede their repair/DDR signaling leading to persistent damage accumulation, a common feature in sporadic neurodegeneration. Here, we have reviewed recent advances in our understanding of the etiological implications of DNA damage vs. repair imbalance, abnormal DDR signaling in triggering neurodegeneration and potential of DDR as a target for the amelioration of neurodegenerative diseases.

DNA damage
DNA damage response
DNA repair defects
Neurodegeneration

1. Introduction

The term neurodegeneration is broadly used to describe a diverse array of &gt;600 neurodegenerative diseases (NDDs), characterized by the loss of specific groups of neurons in brain/spinal cord. Although, the majority of NDDs are sporadic, about 10–20% are driven by specific inherited mutations that accelerate the phenotype in the presence of various environmental factors. Common NDDs including Alzheimer’s disease (AD), Parkinson’s disease (PD), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), Huntington’s disease (HD), multiple sclerosis (MS), and prion diseases are not only ageing-associated but also involve diverse etiology like de novo as well as somatic mutations, epigenetic changes, environmental factors (stress, infection and nutrition) and genomic instability [1]. A common feature of majority of the NDDs emerging in the recent studies, is the accumulation of various types of genome damage together with specific repair inhibition/defects in the affected central nervous system (CNS) region. Genome damage has also been linked to hemin or iron mediated neuronal dysfunction after brain injury and stroke [2, 3]. Mutations in the genes of specific DNA repair pathways are uniquely manifested in early onset NDDs, e.g. nucleotide excision repair (NER) defects in xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) and Cockayne syndrome (CS), defective base excision/single-strand break repair (BER/SSBR) in ataxia-oculomotor apraxia-1 (AOA1) and spinocerebellar ataxia with axonal neuropathy (SCAN1), and defective DNA double-strand break repair (DSBR) and DNA damage response (DDR) signaling in ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) [4] and Nijmegen breakage syndrome [5]. Recent studies have highlighted the importance of DDR in post-mitotic neurons and the role of its chronic/abnormal activation triggering neuro-inflammation and transcriptional arrest [6–8]. Here, we have reviewed the critical roles of endogenous and exogenous factors underlying genome damage accumulation and repair deficiency as a common feature of NDDs, and discussed the possibility of targeting DDR signaling to counter genome damage mediated neuronal death.

2. Genome damage and repair responses in central nervous system

The sequence fidelity of the genome, particularly in aerobic cells, is continuously challenged because of DNA’s inherent instability due to spontaneous chemical reactions, exposure to endogenous ROS and other reactive pro-oxidant molecules [9]. The CNS consists of post-mitotic neurons as well as several fold more neuro-glial cells (astrocytes, oligodendrocytes and microglia). A distinct feature of terminally differentiated neurons, unlike the glial cells, is the lack of replication-associated DNA repair [10]. Recent studies have illuminated some unique features of neuronal versus glial cell responses to various types of genome damage, however, a comprehensive understanding of DNA repair mechanisms and CNS region-specific damage responses in various neurodegenerative conditions remain elusive. A number of studies in patients and rodent models with AD, PD, ALS, HD, ataxia and stroke show significantly elevated DNA damage together with defects in the repair of both nuclear DNA (nuDNA) and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) in the affected CNS regions [11–15].

2.1. Endogenous causes of genome damage in the CNS

Due to the protection by blood brain barrier from external genotoxins, endogenous reactive oxygen species (ROS) -induced damage is the most critical threat to the CNS genome. In the brain, constitutively expressed enzymes such as the neuronal isoform of nitric oxide synthase (nNOS) contribute to the production of nitric oxide (NO°) radicals, which react with superoxide (O2·−) to produce peroxynitrite (ONOO−), a reactive nitrogen species (RNS) [16]. Trace levels of ROS/RNS are required for the normal functioning of the CNS, and serve as signaling molecules for regulating synaptic plasticity and adult neurogenesis [17]. Excessive ROS and other pro-oxidant species induce a variety of damage in DNA that include, oxidized and alkylated base lesions, abasic (AP) sites, inter-strand cross links, and single strand breaks (SSBs) [18]. The most common oxidized DNA lesion is 8-oxoguanine (8-oxoG), derived from guanine. Highly mutagenic/toxic but less common oxidized bases are formamidopyrimidines (FapyG and FapyA), 7,8-dihydro-8-oxoadenine (8-oxoA), 5-Hydroxyuridine (5-OHU), thymine glycol, 5-hydroxycytosine (5-OHC) etc [18]. SSBs may be induced directly by ROS or as intermediates during oxidized lesion repair. It is likely that persistent unrepaired bi-stranded oxidative damage in close proximity could result in secondary double strand breaks (DSBs) [18]. This phenomenon could be more prevalent in promoter sequences of actively transcribing genes, where a localized generation of ROS due to CpG demethylation-mediated promoter activation has been recently shown to generate transient strand breaks [19]. DSBs may also be generated in neuronal genome from accidental or diagnostic/therapeutic exposure to ionizing radiation (IR) and chemotherapeutic drugs [20]. A recent study reveals that DSBs occur in mouse brain cells during normal physiological/metabolic processes involving gene expression and chromosome remodelling associated with learning and memory [21]. Endogenous metabolic by-products such as homocysteine (Hcy), a non-essential sulfur-containing amino acid derived from methionine metabolism, has been implicated in CNS disorders with cystathionine beta synthase deficiency in AD. Elevated Hcy level disturbs the DNA methylation/demethylation cycle [22] and contributes to DNA damage by inducing thymidine depletion and promoting uracil mis-incorporation [23].

2.2. Excision repair pathways in the CNS genome

Excision repair pathways, which resolve the majority of endogenous genome damage including modified base or large bulky lesions are the most versatile among DNA repair processes. Small base lesions including oxidized or alkylated bases and AP sites are repaired via BER while larger bulky lesions like inter-strand cross-links are repaired via NER, both of which are conserved from bacteria to humans and are ubiquitous in most tissues including the CNS [24].

2.2.1. Base excision repair

BER mainly resolves alkylation and oxidative DNA damage (including SSB). Depending on the nucleotide length of the gap filling synthesis, BER is subdivided as short-patch BER (or single-nucleotide BER) (SP- or SN-BER) and long-patch BER (LP-BER), involving synthesis of one or 2–10 nucleotides, respectively [25]. BER involves four basic reactions: (a) repair initiation by base lesion excising DNA glycosylases (e.g., 8-oxoguanine glycosylase (OGG1), and endonuclease III homologue (NTH1), (Nei-Like DNA glycosylases) NEIL1, NEIL2 and NEIL3 for oxidized bases); (b) processing of blocked 3′ P (generated by NEILs) or 3′ dRP (also named 3′ PUA; generated by OGG1 and NTH1) termini at the SSB intermediate by polynucleotide kinase 3′ phosphatase (PNKP) or AP endonuclease 1 (APE1), respectively. The 5′dRP group generated during AP site cleavage by APE1 is processed by DNA polymerase β (Pol β); (c) SN-BER or LP-BER gap filling by a DNA polymerase and (d) final nick sealing by a DNA ligase [26].

Given that BER is the major pathway for repairing oxidative DNA damage, the most common damage in CNS genome, the deficiency of BER is frequently linked to aging and neurodegeneration. For example, among the DNA glycosylases, OGG1 expression is decreased during ageing in rat brain [27], whereas NEIL1 and NEIL2 levels are highly increased, consistent with the role of NEILs’ in transcription-associated repair and high transcriptional activity in the brain [26, 28–30]. The activity of APE1 is reduced in the frontal/parietal cortex, cerebellum, brainstem, midbrain and hypothalamus in aged rats [31]. Among DNA polymerases, Polβ is highly and ubiquitously expressed in brain regions [32] while its activity decreases in the brain upon aging [33]. The linkage of BER deficiency with neurodegeneration will be discussed in the later section.

2.2.2. Nucleotide excision repair

NER, requiring higher energy consumption than BER, was shown to be active in post-mitotic neurons in repairing lesions that cause substantial DNA helical distortions. These include ultraviolet (UV) induced cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers, 6–4 photoproducts, intra-strand crosslinks, DNA-protein crosslinks and DNA adducts caused by oxidative damage [34]. Two NER sub-pathways, global genome NER (GG-NER) and transcription-coupled NER (TC-NER), first described by Bohr et al. [35], can be distinguished based on the difference in the initial DNA damage recognition, but utilizing the same excision and repair synthesis steps subsequently. GG-NER recognizes and repairs DNA lesions throughout the genome while TC-NER resolves lesions present in the actively transcribing DNA regions. The sequential steps in NER include, (i) lesion sensing by the heterotrimeric complex of XPC/hHR23B/centrin 2 (for GG-NER) or RNA polymerase II/CS factors, CSA and CSB (for TC-NER); (ii) unwinding of the DNA; (iii) dual-incision of the DNA strand on the 3′ and 5′ sides of the lesion, leading to the excision of the lesion-containing single-stranded segment; (iv) repair synthesis of DNA to fill the nucleotide gap, and (v) final ligation to seal the nick. It is important to note that both neurons and astrocytes show lower activities of NER compared with the other cell types [36]. However, no data are available on NER in microglia, in either healthy or NDD patients.

2.3. DNA strand break repair

Repair of DNA strand breaks in a timely and error-free manner is vital for the preservation of genomic integrity. The importance of neuronal SSBR is evident in several NDDs, namely, AOA1, SCAN1 and microcephaly with early-onset, intractable seizures and developmental delay, which are caused by inherited mutations in SSB end processing factors [26, 37]. SSBR, which includes many overlapping sub-pathways, share the later steps of repair with BER such as end processing of damaged termini, gap-filling, and nick ligation [26, 38]. However, in addition to the 3′ P and 3′ dRP groups generated at SSB termini during BER, SSBR could involve diverse end processing enzymes to remove a variety of blocked termini generated by ROS [26]. Specifically, APE1 removes the most common block at ROS-induced SSB like 3′ phosphoglycolate or 3′ phosphoglycolaldehyde, another 3′ end-processing enzyme tyrosyl DNA phosphodiesterase 1 (TDP1) cleaves Top1(Tyr)-crosslinked to 3′ P generated by an aborted DNA topoisomerase 1 (TOP1) reaction. The resulting 3′ P is then removed by PNKP [39, 40], which also phosphorylates the 5′OH generated at SSB. Furthermore, abortive DNA ligation could form a unique type of 5′ blocking group, namely, adenylate linked via 5′-5′ bond at the 5′P terminus, which is processed by aprataxin (APTX) to restore the 5′ P terminus at the SSB [41, 42]. Two other key SSBR components include poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP-1) and X-ray repair cross-complementing protein 1 (XRCC1), which not only serve as scaffolding factors for recruiting and stabilizing other SSBR proteins, but also play a structural and regulatory role as damage sensors [43–45].

The repair of DNA DSBs in mammalian genomes could occur via three sub pathways: error-free pathway homology directed recombination (HDR) that occurs in only S/G2 cells requiring homologous DNA sequence (sister chromatid) as templates; and error-prone pathway non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ) or short microhomology-dependent alternative end-joining (Alt-EJ) throughout cell cycle. Although HDR may be critical during neurodevelopment, NHEJ has been suggested as the predominant DSBR pathway in mature neurons [46, 47]. Besides, it is likely that Alt-EJ may step into repair these secondary DSBs (generated from unrepaired bi-stranded SSBs) since elevated Alt-EJ activity has been observed in neuroblastoma cell lines [48], whereas its role in primary neurons has not been established.

NHEJ primarily requires DNA-PK holoenzyme (DNA-PKcs/Ku70/Ku80) and XRCC4/DNA LigIV complex, while Alt-EJ requires a distinct set of components including PARP-1, XRCC1/DNA LigIII (co-opted from SSBR) to initiate the repair [49, 50]. In any case, mutations in key DSBR proteins (e.g., ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) in A-T, NBS1 in Nijmegen breakage syndrome, and meiotic recombination 11 (MRE11) in ataxia-telangiectasia-like disorder (A-TLD) have been shown to predispose humans to various neurodegenerative phenotypes, suggesting that DSBR is critical for post-mitotic neurons [47, 51–54].

2.4. DNA Damage Response (DDR) signaling in the CNS

DDR consists of a kinase cascade based network of coordinated signaling pathways, activated primarily in response to DSBs. In dividing cells (including neural progenitor cells during development, trace number of neural stem cells and dividing glial cells in adult CNS, the cell cycle is arrested at critical stages, particularly in response to DSBs, which is termed as cell cycle or DNA damage checkpoint activation, to provide sufficient time for optimal DNA damage repair and to prevent replication or segregation of DNA with unrepaired damages [55]. DNA strand breaks in mammalian genome typically activate phosphoinositide-3-kinase related (PIKK) family of serine/threonine kinases, ATM and ATM/RAD3-related (ATR), that play a central role in signal amplification by phosphorylating multiple downstream proteins to regulate checkpoint activation, DNA repair or cell death. ATM is predominantly activated in response to DSB-induced by radiation and other genotoxins, while ATR is activated by DNA replication stress, SSBs and UV-mediated damage, besides playing a back-up role to ATM [56].

As a central component of DDR cascade, ATM also plays an essential role in maintaining genomic stability in neuronal cells, and the loss of ATM associated DNA repair deficiency has been linked to neuronal dysfunction or neurodevelopmental defects as in A-T patients. A number of unique regulators of ATM and p53 in neurons have been identified. Tian et al. have demonstrated that cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (Cdk5) directly phosphorylates ATM at Ser794, which is required for the activation of its kinase activity and the phosphorylation of its substrates- p53 and histone H2A.X [57]. Another factor involved in DDR regulation, NAD+-dependent lysine deacetylase sirtuin 1 (SIRT1), is recruited at DNA break sites in an ATM dependent manner to stimulate ATM auto-phosphorylation and its activity. Phosphorylation of H2A.X (γH2AX) is significantly reduced in SIRT1 knockout neurons, which indicates the importance of SIRT1-initiated DNA damage signaling in neurons [58]. Furthermore, an RNA/DNA binding protein, fused in sarcoma/translocated in liposarcoma (FUS/TLS), whose toxicity has been implicated in motor neuron diseases, was identified as a substrate of ATM in response to DNA damage and has been shown to participate in both HDR- and NHEJ- mediated DSB repair pathways [13, 59]. The coordination between ATM and p53 appears to be critical for DNA damage signaling in neurons as in cycling cells. ATM and p53 are also involved in triggering persistent damage-induced neuro-inflammation via nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-κB) activation, which is discussed in section 5.2. Herzog et al. showed that the p53 level is upregulated in wild type mouse neurons but significantly reduced in some brain regions of ATM−/− mouse in response to irradiation and post-mitotic neurons in ATM−/− mouse showed resistance to p53-mediated irradiation induced apoptosis [60], which provided some insight in to the possibility of preventing DNA damage related neuronal cell death by targeting the ATM-p53 pathway.

2.5. Mitochondrial DNA repair in the CNS

It has long been demonstrated that the increase of oxidative mtDNA damage is associated with neurodegenerative diseases and normal aging process [61]. Compared with nuDNA, human mtDNA is more susceptible to oxidative damage in a variety of tissues including brain [62], since mitochondria generates the majority of energy for cells through oxidative phosphorylation, producing abundant ROS [63, 64] and lacks protection from histones, [65]. SN-BER is recognized as a major pathway for mtDNA damage repair [66], although growing evidence shows that LP-BER, mismatch repair, HDR and NHEJ are also involved in mtDNA damage processing [67–69]. As in nuclear genome, the BER in mitochondria is initiated by DNA glycosylase including OGG1, Uracil DNA glycosylase (UNG), Muty Homologue (MYH), NTH1 and NEILs, followed by the processing of AP site by the only endonuclease in mitochondria, APE1. The knockout of APE1 is embryonic lethal in mouse [70, 71], while another study demonstrated that the loss of APE1 in mitochondria but not in nucleus is believed to trigger cellular apoptosis [72]. The final step of the mitochondrial BER is the ligation of the DNA nick by Ligase III but independent of XRCC1 [73, 74], unlike in nucleus. Interestingly, Gao et al. developed a mouse model in which the Ligase III or XRCC1 was conditionally inactivated in the developing neurons, and revealed that the Ligase III is important for mtDNA integrity but not for XRCC1 dependent, H2O2 or irradiation induced nuDNA damage repair in astrocytes [75, 76], which underscores the critical role of Ligase III mediated mtDNA repair in neuroprotection. Finally, human mtDNA encodes only 13 proteins, and mitochondria BER is highly dependent on nuclear encoded proteins [77].

The mtDNA repair capacity varies among different CNS cell types. For example, the oxidative mtDNA damage repair capacity was observed to be significantly decreased in cultured oligodendrocytes and microglia compared with astrocytes, and the difference is correlated with the apoptosis induction [78, 79].

3. Link between CNS genome damage and the neurodegenerative disease severity

Progressive accumulation of various unrepaired genome damage appears to be a unifying feature of many NDDs with diverse pathology, and correlates with symptomatic severity in most cases, including AD, PD and ALS [80, 81]. Recent studies have also linked unrepaired genome damage to several neuropsychiatric diseases including schizophrenia and bipolar disorders, where extensively higher levels of DNA/RNA oxidation have been observed [82, 83]. We have summarized below the salient features of the common CNS diseases and their association with various genome damage.

3.1. DNA damage accumulation in AD, PD and ALS

AD, the most common progressive NDD and the major cause of dementia in adults, is strongly age-associated and characterized by progressive loss of memory and cognitive capacity. AD is histopathologically associated with extracellular deposition of amyloid β (Aβ) peptide, intracellular aggregates of hyper-phosphorylated tau and neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) [84]. It was hypothesized around 30 years ago that increased DNA damage may be associated with AD due to the observation of specific chromatin structure alteration in AD patients [85, 86] and Mullart et al. subsequently quantified at least 2-fold increase in DNA breaks in cortex of AD patients [87], underscoring the contribution of accumulated genome damage. Other studies suggested strong association between the extent of oxidative damage in the neuronal genomes in affected brain regions with severity and progression of dementia in AD patients [11, 88–94]. Among the oxidized bases, increased levels of 8-OHA and Hcy were observed in DNA from AD parietal lobe, whereas increased thymine glycol, FapyA and FapyG, and 5-OHU were found in other affected brain regions [95]. Hippocampal DNA from late stage AD was shown to have a 2-fold acrolein/guanosine DNA adducts compared to that from unaffected brain, the repair implications of which are unknown [96]. Aβ seems to elicit DNA damage directly. In addition to the stimulation of ROS production [97–99], Aβ42 was shown to have DNA nicking activities similar to nucleases [100]. A recent study indicated that pathologically elevated level of Aβ increases neuronal DSB at baseline in mouse brain sections and cultured primary neurons, and enhanced the DSB that physiologic brain activity caused by eliciting aberrant synaptic activity [21].

As the most frequent neurodegenerative movement disorder, PD is characterized by the loss of dopaminergic (DAergic) neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc) [101–104] as well as the presence of proteinaceous cytoplasmic inclusions known as Lewy bodies in the brain of patient with either sporadic or familial form [105]. Although the pathological mechanisms underlining PD are complex and remains largely unknown, oxidative DNA damage (specifically, the production of 8-oxo-dG) has been demonstrated to be extensively generated in PD patients compared with age-matched control [106, 107]. PD-linked α-Synuclein (α-Syn) expressed transgenic mice show accumulation DNA damage within neurons [108]. Our later study also showed that both SSB and DSB accumulate in postmortem midbrain region of PD patients and the isolated DNA exhibited increased susceptibility to DNAse I treatment compared to control DNA [103]. Additionally, DNA damage-dependent activation of p53 and PARP-1 was shown to play a role in the death of DAergic neurons [109]. The MPTP (1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine)-induced PD mouse model shows DNA damage together with the activation of PARP1, which correlated with SNpc neuronal degeneration [110].

ALS or Lou Gehrig’s disease is an adult onset motor neuron disease, about 10% of which are inherited while ~90% occurs sporadically. Mutations in genes like superoxide dismutase (SOD-1) [111, 112], TAR-DNA binding protein-43 (TDP-43) [113, 114], FUS/TLS [115, 116], ubiquilin 2 (UBQLN2) [117], optineurin [118], valosin-containing protein (VCP) [119], C9orf72 [120], profilin1 (PFN1) [121] and matrin 3 (MATR 3) [122] have been identified in ALS patients. Similar to AD and PD pathologies, ALS affected motor neurons (frontal cortex, motor cortex, spinal cord, striatum) accumulate oxidized DNA bases in both nuclear and mitochondrial genomes [123]. For instance, ALS linked SOD1 G93A mutant expressed transgenic mice, consistently showed higher DNA damage compared to mice with wild type SOD1 [124]. In ALS patients harboring FUS/TLS mutations, increased DSBs were observed, and FUS/TLS knockdown in cultured human and rodent neurons leads to significant accumulation of DSBs [13]. TDP-43 is functionally similar with FUS, while its involvement in genome damage accumulation has not been investigated yet, although substantial increase in DNA damage has been observed in ALS patients with TDP-43 pathology [125].

3.2. DNA damage accumulation in Stroke

Stroke results from sudden interruption of blood supply to the brain, which could be due to abrupt blockage of arteries leading to the brain (ischemic stroke) or due to bleeding into brain tissue when a blood vessel bursts (hemorrhagic stroke). There is substantial evidence for the formation of oxidative genome damage after hypoxia followed by ischemic reperfusion and the release of iron and toxic hemoglobin by-products in brain parenchyma following hemorrhagic stroke [126–128]. Lesions including oxidative bases and strand breaks have been reported to remain unrepaired in post-stroke brain tissue, which could chronically predispose neurons to damage-mediated dysfunction or defective damage repair. It appears that BER is particularly important in protecting neuronal oxidative DNA damage after stroke. A mouse study indicated that activation of the BER pathway protects ischemic induced injury in brain by enhancing the endogenous oxidative DNA damage repair [129]. OGG1−/− mouse exhibited elevated oxidative DNA base lesions under ischemic conditions [130]. NEIL1 deficiency results in increased brain damage in a focal ischemia/reperfusion model of stroke [126]. While APE1 was shown to be greatly reduced specifically in rat hippocampus after ischemic insult, which suggests that the specific APE1 deficiency may involve in the extent of cellular apoptosis in response to ischemia [131]. During ischemia, damage to nucleic acids may also be caused by nucleases causing DNA fragmentation [132]. Extensive oxidative damage was detected in the mtDNA and nuDNA of astrocytes, neurons and vascular endothelial cells within 15–30 min of ischemia/reperfusion [133]. In intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH), hemin and iron promotes accumulation of DNA strand breaks and base oxidation in the affected cell genomes [134]. This is supported by the observation that intra-hippocampal injection of iron or hemoglobin in rats induces significant genome damage and neuronal death [135].

4. DNA repair defects and neuronal phenotypes

DNA repair defects have been observed extensively in patients with NDDs. BER deficiencies were shown in brains from AD patients [136] and in fibroblasts from CS patients [137, 138]. Deficient NER was shown in XP [139] and CS [140]. DNA mismatch repair (MMR) is deficient in HD [141]. SSBR is inefficient in AOA1 and SCAN1 [39, 142]. DSBR deficiencies were observed in AD [143], A-T and ataxia telangiectasia-like disorder (ATLD) [52, 144, 145]. Evidence linking the DNA repair deficiency with initiation and progression of NDDs is supported by studies in mouse models as well as in patient derived CNS tissue. For example, mouse with global or neuron-specific mutations in the excision repair cross-complementing groop1 (Ercc1), a factor functions in multiple DNA repair pathways involved in DNA crosslink or strand breaks repair, exhibits an age-dependent cognitive decline and neurodegeneration [146]. Another study revealed that the reduction of Pol β is sufficient to enhance the AD features in AD mouse model by inducing neuronal dysfunction, cell death, memory impairment and synaptic plasticity [147]. XRCC1 deficiency leads to persistent DNA strand breaks associated with the loss of cerebellar interneurons as well as abnormal hippocampal function [148]. Inherited and induced DNA repair defects and their specific predisposition to neurodegenerative phenotypes is discussed in the following sections.

4.1. Inherited DDR defects

A substantial subset of familial NDDs have been found to be inherited or acquired from defects in one or more key genes involved in DDR signaling. Mutation of DSBR proteins involved in the predisposition to familial NNDs include ATM, NBS1 and MRE11. For example, neurodegeneration is a syndrome of A-T patient carrying ATM mutation [149]. Mutations in another DSBR factor MRE11 is associated with ATLD phenotype [150]. In Nijmegen breakage syndrome, a 657Δ5 frameshift mutation of NBS1 results in the formation of truncated product, affecting its ability to act as a scaffold between γH2AX, and MRE11, which is required for DNA damage signaling in HDR, NHEJ and telomere maintenance [144]. While some syndromes characterized by ataxia are deficient in SSBR, for example, SCAN1 and AOA1 are caused by mutations in TDP1 and APTX, respectively [37, 151, 152]. TDP1 is required for efficient SSBR in mouse neurons and in lymphoblastoid cells from SCAN1 patient [153], [39]. Homozygous mutation in TDP1 (H493R), causes 25-fold reduction in its activity, leading to the accumulation of covalent Tdp1-DNA intermediates, thereby, inhibiting SSBR [39, 154]. While APTX was shown to protect DNA damage by interacting PARP-1, APE1, XRCC1 and XRCC4 [155, 156]. Caglayan et al. demonstrated that APEX coordinates with Polβ and flap endonuclease 1 (FEN1) in processing of the 5′-adenylated dRP-containing BER intermediate [157]. Interestingly, mouse models lacking both of TDP1 and APTX shows synergistic decrease in SSBR [158]. Homozygous mutation in PNKP with reduced SSBR capacity was demonstrated in progressive polyneuropathy characterized by underdevelopment and neurodegeneration [159]. Mutation in ATR in Seckel syndrome leads to reduced DNA repair capacity [160]. Other rare syndromes like LigIV, and NHEJ syndromes are directly linked to repair defects; mutations in LigIV affects its ability to interact with XRCC4 [161] whereas mutations in the NHEJ-associated gene encoding XRCC4-like factor (XLF) affects its ability to form a scaffold essential for XRCC4 and LigIV [162]. Taken together, familial NDDs are predominantly associated with DNA repair defects, or with compromised DDR signaling. We have listed various CNS diseases associated with inherited DDR defects and associated DNA repair proteins in Table 1.

4.2. Neurodegeneration-linked etiological factors contribute to DNA damage/repair imbalance: A common basis for sporadic NDDs?

Reduced DNA repair is increasingly linked to a number of sporadic NDDs. General reduction in DNA repair capacity during ageing and in sporadic NDDs could involve multiple mechanisms including, (i) altered transcriptional regulation causing reduced expression of a repair protein (e.g., reduced levels of MRN, DNA-PKcs [143, 163] in CS; reduced OGG1 (in mitochondria) [164] and Polβ in AD [165], reduced breast cancer associated gene 1 (BRCA1) in AD brain [166]); (ii) inhibition of catalytic activity of repair proteins, whose levels are otherwise comparable to healthy neurons in the CNS, primarily by NDD-linked etiological factors like exposure to excessive pro-oxidant metals and ROS (e.g., metal and ROS-mediated inhibition of NEIL1, NEIL2, LigIII, APE1 etc., in AD and PD [167, 168]; reduced catalytic activity of OGG1 in AD [136, 169] and reduced Polβ activity in AD [136, 165] and (iii) abnormal degradation and/or mis-localization of repair proteins (e.g., degradation of ATM and PARP1 by caspases/Matrix-Metallo-Proteinases (MMPs) [170], nuclear to cytoplasmic mis-localization of FUS in ALS [13]. Most of the NDDs have complex etiologies including oxidative stress, pro-oxidant metal and other toxic free radicals, and the misfolded/aggregating protein response, together with extensive accumulation of various types of DNA damages [18]. However, the relative contribution of these factors towards progressive neurodegeneration and their precise mechanistic role in causing persistent genome damage in specific CNS regions remains unclear. Here, we present the cumulative evidence regarding the interplay among these etiologies in inducing genome damage, in inhibiting genome damage repair, affecting the dynamics of DDR signaling, and thereby causing damage-repair imbalance in neuronal genomes (Figure 1, 2).

4.2.1. ROS and pro-oxidant metal ions

A key connection among most NDDs is the impairment of redox homeostasis in brain primarily involving excessive ROS and pro-oxidant metal ions, many of which are essential in trace levels [32, 171–173]. Altered homeostasis of essential transition metals like Cu, Fe, Zn and Mn, and excessive accumulation of Al, Cr, Pb, and Ni in the CNS have been implicated in the onset/progression of AD, PD, ALS, Wilson’s disease and stroke [174]. Although, a common mechanism of metal toxicity in CNS is the generation of ROS via Fenton reaction, excess free metals also cause neuronal genotoxicity in multiple ways including, (i) direct DNA binding leading to oxidative damage as well as strand breaks, altered DNA methylation and localized chromatin condensation, interference with transcription factors’ binding at promotor sequences [134, 175], which together impact gene expression; (ii) functional inhibition of proteins associated with various DNA transactions and anti-oxidant machinery, which could involve the displacement of essential metal cofactors by toxic metal ions (e.g., Zn from Zn finger proteins) and metal ion binding to redox sensitive amino acid residues (e.g., thiol groups) in proteins to alter protein conformation [176]. For example, Cu binding could cause localized chromatin condensation in neurons both directly and via altered DNA methylation [177], which could lead to altered gene expression. Al ions, together with amyloid peptide alters DNA conformation and super helicity [178]. Further, elevated levels of Fe, Cu, Zn inhibit the proteins of BER pathway via changes in protein conformation and cysteine oxidation [134, 179], whereas excess Pb, Fe, Cd cause inhibition of APE1’s nuclease activity, and exposure to Cd also inhibits OGG1 activity, and down-regulates DNA polymerase δ (Polδ) expression, thereby, impairing BER pathway [180]. Furthermore, during pathological conditions like ischemic stroke, oxidative stress activates nuclear metal-dependent proteases leading to nuclear proteolysis of ATM, XRCC1, and PARP1, and thereby affecting repair. This cleavage of DDR proteins could also be a direct cause of oxidative stress-mediated activation of caspase-3 to promote neuronal apoptosis [181]. Together, these studies reveal that pro-oxidant metal and other redox species serve as major contributors of genomic instability during the etiology of neurodegenerative pathologies [182].

4.2.2. Misfolded amyloidogenic proteins contribute to DNA damage

The major hallmark of ~ 95% of NDDs is the aberrant folding and aggregation of amyloidogenic proteins, which typically sequester as intra- (cytoplasmic) or extracellular inclusion bodies [183]. The presence of Aβ peptide fragments-positive extracellular plaques and intracellular tau protein-positive NFTs in the AD brain, α-Syn rich Lewy bodies in PD, prion proteins in prion diseases, misfolded TDP-43, FUS/TLS, or SOD1 in different subsets of the ALS group of diseases, expanded polyglutamine (polyQ) proteins’ containing inclusions in ataxia or HD, etc., are considered as the hallmark pathological characteristics of these respective diseases, although the measure of aggregates/plaques may not always be correlated with the disease severity [184]. Neuronal cells treated with Aβ or α-Syn develops characteristics of apoptosis, including membrane blebbing, compaction of nuclear chromatin, and DNA fragmentation. It was shown that the production of Aβ is increased approximately two to four fold in human primary neuronal cells induced to undergo apoptosis by serum deprivation [185]. Treatment with synthetic Aβ peptides has been shown to trigger the degeneration of cultured neurons through the activation of apoptotic pathway preceding accumulation of unrepaired DNA strand breaks (133). In addition, Aβ (25–35) fragment also induces the expression of DNA damage-inducible gene (Gadd45) implicated in the DNA excision-repair process [186]. Aurintricarboxylic acid, a nuclease inhibitor, was shown to prevent apoptotic DNA fragmentation and delays cell death caused by Aβ [187]. Sub-lethal doses of Aβ contribute to loss of DNA-PK activity, thereby, leading to delayed DNA repair [188]. Furthermore, J20 mice expressing high level of hAPP showed the presence of DSB marker γH2AX in brain, suggesting a possible link between Aβ accumulation and increased DSBs formation [21]. Similarly, the presence of toxic α-Syn aggregates inhibits the mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway, alters axonal trafficking and induces oxidative stress [189], leading to the accumulation of 8-oxoG in both the mtDNA and nuDNA of DAergic neurons in PD. While Aβ and α-Syn toxicity could cause genome damage via multiple mechanisms, some studies have indicated that misfolded amyloid proteins could interfere with the repair process due to their DNA binding activity. Furthermore, the Aβ peptides were shown to acquire DNA nicking activity, particularly in the presence of pro-oxidant metal ions in vitro [190]. Aβ (1-42) and Aβ (1–16) fragments, misfolded α-Syn and tau bind to GC-rich DNA and also alter the conformation of DNA, which could impact gene expression patterns [191, 192]. Studies have shown that prion proteins also have DNA-binding properties [193], which in turn induces structural changes in prion peptides by forming stable complexes causing further polymerization [194]. From the above lines of evidences, it appears that most amyloid proteins (α-Syn, Aβ, prions) possess intrinsic DNA-binding property. In SCA3, the PNKP is inactivated due to its interaction with mutant ATXN3 (encodes expanded polyQ sequences), resulting in defective DNA repair, persistent accumulation of DNA damage/strand breaks, and subsequent chronic activation of the DDR signaling pathway [195, 196].

4.3. CNS mitochondrial DNA damage and repair defects

Mitochondrial dysfunction, one of key events contributing to NDDs and aging, can result from mtDNA point mutations or deletions [197]. For example, mutations in the subunits of mitochondrial respiratory chain Complex I occurs in approximately 95% of Leber Hereditary Optic Neuropathy [198]. Some mtDNA mutations have also been associated with AD [199, 200] and PD [201–203], although no clear causative mtDNA mutations are linked with these diseases.

Consistently, studies have revealed elevated mtDNA damage accumulation or mtDNA repair defects in patients with NDDs. In AD, a three-fold increase in 8-oxoG lesion in mtDNA from frontal, temporal, and parietal lobes and cerebellar brain tissues have been observed compared to age matched controls [204]. Increased DNA fragmentation and reduced DNA content/mass in brain mitochondria have been linked to the extent of hippocampal degeneration in AD [205]. In HD, mutant huntingtin is associated with elevated mtDNA oxidation [206], as well as higher levels of 8-oxoG in the striatum of HD patients and in a transgenic mouse model (R6/2) [207, 208]. mtDNA damage was suggested as an early biomarker for HD-associated neurodegeneration [209]. Patients with XP group C (XPC), accumulate pyrimidine dimers, 8-oxoG, and thymine glycol in the mtDNA of CNS [210]. In children with autism, elevated mtDNA damage was observed [211]. Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) with somatic mitochondrial mutations [212], Spinal and Bulbar muscular atrophy or Kennedy disease, (a motor neuron disorders) also exhibit mtDNA damage [213]. Somatic mutations in neuronal mtDNA causes ATP depletion, increased oxidative stress, and in turn leading to nuclear genome damage [214]. Patients with XP accumulate pyrimidine dimers, 8-oxoG, and thymine glycol in the mtDNA of CNS tissue. These observations provide important insights into the impact of mtDNA somatic mutations in neuronal mitochondria.

Elevated mtDNA AP sites were observed in nigral dopamine neurons in PD patients, suggesting persistent BER defects [215]. A transgenic mouse model expressing Mito-PstI, an endonuclease targeted exclusively into DAergic neuronal mitochondria to generate mtDNA DSBs, demonstrates strong patterns of SN degeneration similar to that observed in PD patients [12]. In support of the above, mtDNA in DAergic neurons possesses higher oxidized base lesions [106, 216] together with unrepaired strand breaks, AP sites, and deletions in SN of PD brain [217]. Presence of unrepaired SSBs and DSBs in the mitochondrial genome of familial α-Syn mutant (A53T) transgenic mice correlated with mitochondrial degeneration and PD like pathology [108].

As previously mentioned, mtDNA repair is highly dependent on nuclear encoded proteins, indicating that a continuous interplay between nuDNA and mtDNA is essential. Nuclear encoded proteins are imported into mitochondria through mitochondria membrane translocases: translocase of the mitochondrial outer (TOM) and inner (TIM) membrane protein complex. Brain regions such as hippocampus, SN, and cortex which are significantly affected in AD, PD, and HD show altered levels of TOM and TIM [218]. Mid brain tissue studies from PD patients and wild type and mutant (A53T) α-Syn transgenic mice model revealed that the protein level of TOM40, an important transmembranous domain of the TOM complex involve in the import of nuclear encoded proteins, is significantly reduced along with high level of oxidative damage and deletions in mtDNA, which could be rescued by overexpressing of TOM40 [218]. Although accumulated mtDNA damage may be induced by elevated ROS observed in α-Syn accumulating cells, reduction of TOM40 levels may also contribute to the mtDNA damage by inefficient import of nuclear encoded mtDNA repair proteins. These studies opened up new avenues towards understanding the mitochondrial protein import defects in NDDs as well as search for novel biomarkers of degraded TOM/TIM peptide fragments.

The regulation of brain mitochondrial BER varies through the lifespan. DNA glycosylases (UNG1, OGG1, and NTH1), are upregulated in the cortical mitochondria of brain tissues from young mice, but downregulated in the brain tissues from ageing mice [219, 220].

5. Pathological response to persistent genome damage in neurons

In contrast to the early school of thought that non-cycling cells such as mature neurons may be more resistant to genome damage induced mortality, cumulative evidences indicate that the persistent presence of unrepaired damage particularly DNA strand breaks, could have highly deleterious effect on neurons, including transcriptional arrest at the damage sites, formation of RNA-DNA hybrids or R-loops at the stalled transcriptional sites, DDR-mediated activation of neuro-inflammatory signaling, possible damage-induced deregulation of cell cycle machinery and abortive cell cycle-mediated cell death initiation and brain atrophy [221]. Persistent DNA damage in neurons during neurodevelopment as well as in adults may also cause defective neurogenesis, which is associated with many NDDs [6]. Unlike proliferating cells in which DNA damage induces cell cycle arrest, unrepaired DNA damage in post-mitotic neurons could trigger cell-cycle re-entry but usually leads to neuronal cell death [222].

5.1. DNA damage induced transcriptional inhibition

With about three to five times more actively transcribing genes than elsewhere in the body [6], damage and repair at transcriptional sites are critical for neuronal survival. Neuronal transcription machinery has been shown to closely collaborate with DNA damage sensing and repair as well as chromatin organization [223]. Many DNA lesions (e.g., 5′, 8-purine cyclo-deoxynucleosides, purine dimers, 8-oxoG, thymine glycol and DNA strand breaks) stall RNA polymerase II in transcribing genes. Furthermore, it has been proposed that the inhibition of RNA polymerase II can be via ATM dependent or DNA-PK dependent pathways [224]. The accumulation of 8-oxoG in redox-sensitive transcribing genes containing GC-rich promoter sequences renders them particularly vulnerable to oxidative modification-mediated transcriptional inhibition [225]. Consistently, recent studies have reported the accumulation of R-loop structures (presumably formed by damage-induced inhibition of transcription) in AD and ALS affected brain tissues [226–228]. Transcriptional stalling together with DNA repair inhibition is a recipe for exacerbating genomic instability and enhancing the hyper-methylation of gene promoters leading to gene silencing [229]. Taken together, these recent developments underscore the implications of defective DNA repair and DDR in neuronal cell death.

5.2. DDR and neuro-inflammation

The activation of the neuro-inflammatory response has been linked to ageing and NDDs, and its connection to unrepaired genome damage has been recently postulated [230]. Several studies have shown that factors like NF-κB are activated in response to stroke [231], kainite-induced seizures [232] and Aβ-treated fetal rat cortical neurons [233]; however, the functional role of RelA/NF-κB in neuronal death/survival remains unclear [234]. As mentioned before, DDR-induced signaling activates the ATM-p53 and ATM-IKKα/β-interferon (IFN)-β signaling pathways. The latter involves the expression of IFN-inducible IFI16 gene, which stimulates STING-dependent activation of IFN-β, activation of IFI16 inflammasome, and the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines (e.g., IL-1β and IL-18). Because DDR activates the expression of the IFI16 gene, thereby, increased levels of the IFI16 protein enhances p53-mediated transcriptional activation of many genes including the ones involved in DNA repair. At the same time, persistent DDR-mediated neuro-inflammation contributes to ageing-associated progressive neuronal dysfunctions. However, a complete understanding of how the accumulation of DNA damage, and DDR in various NDDs contribute to inflammation requires further investigations.

5.3. Cell cycle re-entry of neurons – role of unrepaired DNA strand breaks?

Neuronal cycle re-activation was first linked to DNA damage in 2004, when Kruman et al. [235] found that DNA damage causing agents including irradiation, etoposide, Hcy, methotrexate and Aβ1-42 were able to induce cell cycle re-entry followed by neuronal apoptosis, in which p53 played a critical regulatory role [235]. Post-mitotic neurons remain in a quiescent G0 state and are normally incapable of re-entering cell cycle. However, aberrant cell cycle re-entry has been extensively observed in several NDDs, supported by the expression of cyclins (e.g., Cyclin B1 and D), cyclin-dependent kinases (e.g., CDK3 and 4) and other cell cycle mediators (e.g., Cdc2) in AD, PD, ALS and HD [58, 236–238]. Growing evidence indicate that the re-entry into the cell cycle leads to cell death instead of neuronal proliferation. The cell cycle-regulated protein kinase Cdc2 expressed in rat post-mitotic granular neurons mediates apoptosis, suggesting that cell cycle re-entry may function as a common pathological basis for neuronal cell death [239]. Despite the mystery of how cell cycle re-entry induces neuronal apoptosis, DNA damage has been recognized as a trigger of unscheduled cell cycle re-entry. Consistently, an aberrant cell cycle with accumulated DNA damage is frequently observed in cultured cells or mouse models of neurodegeneration [240]. However, the mechanism of DNA damage-activated cell cycle in post-mitotic neuronal cells remains unclear. It has been proposed that neurons re-enter the cell cycle in order to repair DSBs via HDR [235].

6. Concluding remarks

It is clear that there exists strong evidence for correlation between unrepaired DNA damage, persistent DDR signaling and neuronal dysfunction or cell death in various NDDs as well as in ageing. However, the direct role of genome damage in initiation and progression of neurodegeneration needs to be further established. Furthermore, how the specific CNS cell types respond to DNA damage and communicate to ensure homeostasis needs to be investigated. In addition, the consequences of neuronal DNA damage could significantly impact the homeostasis of mitochondrial–nuclear cross-talk and the post-mitotic status of neurons. It is important to investigate whether DDR signaling mediated cell cycle deregulation, transcriptional defects and neuro-inflammation substantially contribute to neuronal loss in NDDs, it is also critical to understand the relative toxicity of NDD-linked etiological factors in causing nuclear vs. mitochondrial genome damage/repair defects.

Tight regulation of DDR is important for the genomic integrity and survival of cells in the CNS. Persistent and aberrant activation of DDR could lead to increased genome instability and susceptibility to neurodegeneration. Consistently, preliminary evidences suggest that modulating DDR signaling could be beneficial in attenuating the neurodegeneration. Suberbielle et al. showed that Aβ oligomer-induced increases of neuronal DSB could be prevented by blocking the activation of extra-synaptic NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) -type glutamate receptors in cultured primary neurons, which indicates that the inhibition of these receptors may contribute to protecting and stabilizing neuronal genome in pathological conditions [21]. Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) was demonstrated to be neuroprotective by attenuating Aβ induced 8-oxo-dG, AP sites, SSB as well as DSB in rat primary cortical neurons [241]. Studies reported that Ku-mediated DNA repair is impaired in mutant huntingtin expressed neurons while supplementation of exogenous Ku70 rescues pathological phenotypes in mouse [242], and Drosophila models of HD [243]. In a recent study, a neuroprotective role of BER machinery was demonstrated in mouse model. Martin et al. enforced expression of human APE1 and OGG1 in vulnerable neurons and found that the expression significantly suppressed the axotomy and target deprivation induced apoptosis of thalamic neurons and motor neurons, which indicates that the modulation of DNA repair could be a potential therapeutic target for DNA damage related neuronal apoptosis [244]. Another study revealed that, overexpression of sirtuin 6 (SIRT6), which is down-regulated in brains of AD patients as well as 5XFAD mice, likely regulated by Aβ42, prevents Aβ42-induced DNA damage in a p53-depedent manner [244, 245].

Furthermore, ATM has been proposed as a promising therapeutic target for NDDs. Partial genetic reduction or pharmacological inhibition of ATM using small molecule inhibitor KU-60019 was shown to be protective in HD cells and animal models [246]. Although the precise mechanism of ATM’s neuroprotection role has not been fully understood and multiple signaling pathways may overlap, targeting the DNA damage induced, ATM mediated p53/E2F1 dependent apoptosis could be one of the major aspects. ATM was shown to be required for IR induced, p53 mediated cell death in mouse developing CNS [60]. E2F transcription factor 1 (E2F-1), a transcription factor that regulates cell cycle in cycling progenitor [247] and post-mitotic cells [248], and the dysregulation of which is linked with neuronal cell death [249–254]. E2F-1 is stabilized by ATM in response to DNA damage [255]. A study focused on targeting ATM-p53-E2F1 pathway demonstrated that the ATM inhibitor, caffeine, shows protection against complex I inhibition-induced apoptosis by inhibiting p53 activation and E2F1 related cell-cycle reentry in cerebellar granule neurons [256].

Targeting mtDNA repair also could be a viable approach for neuronal protection against oxidative lesions. Oligodendrocytes are one of the primary types of glial cells and are extremely sensitive to oxidative stress associated with decreased mtDNA repair capacity, and the dysfunction of which leads to severe neurological deficits. Druzhyna et al. transfected mitochondrial targeting sequence fused human OGG1 gene into rat oligodendrocyte and found that the increased oxidative mtDNA repair by OGG1 expression significantly resists oligodendrocyte to the lethal effects of menadione mediated oxidative stress [257].

Future studies should explore other DDR targets such as NF-κB, components of BER, damage-induced cell cycle regulation, and transcriptional signaling as avenues to prevent neuronal death, a first priority in NDD patients, while simultaneously exploring ways to improve back-up genome repair capacity.

The research in the Hegde laboratory is supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health USPHS R01 NS 088645, Muscular Dystrophy Association (MDA 294842), ALS Association (15-IIP-204), Alzheimer’s Association (NIRG-12-242135) to M.L.H. and Melo Brain Funds (M.L.H. and K.S.R.). S.M. is supported by USPHS grants R01 CA CA158910 and I.B. is supported by NIEHS R01 ES018948. V.V. is supported by a Doctoral Scholarship granted by the Institute for Training and Development of Human resources of Panama (IFARHU) and the National Secretariat for Science, Technology, and Innovation of Panama (SENACYT). K.S.R. is supported by the National System on Investigation (SNI) grant of SENACYT. T.K is supported by National Institutes of Health R01NS094535. The authors thank other members of the Hegde laboratory for their assistance.

Figure 1 A double whammy of genome damage induction and repair defects in neurodegeneration. Common etiological factors linked to neurodegeneration not only inducing genome damage but also inhibits DNA repair or cause defective DNA repair. Both endogenous and exogenous factors cause various types of DNA damage directly or via mitochondrial dysfunction, deficient antioxidant defence and inflammatory response. While cells have evolved proficient DNA repair machinery to cope such damage, defective repair influenced by the neurodegenerative etiologies leads to imbalance in damage vs. repair and persistent accumulation of unrepaired genome damage.

Figure 2 Schematic illustration of implications of persistent genome damage/deficient DNA repair in neurodegeneration. Persistent presence of genome damage, together with deficient/defective DNA repair in long lived neurons leads to aberrant DNA damage response (DDR) signaling that triggers neuro-inflammation, transcriptional inhibition, and/or abnormal cell cycle regulation, resulting in neuronal cell death. Implications of chronic DDR signaling in neuronal dysfunction and its potential as a target for ameliorating neuronal death is discussed in this review.

Table 1 Linkage of inherited DDR defects to CNS Diseases.

Affected DNA Repair Pathway/Gene	Defect(s)	Associated Disease	
BER Pathway	
OGG1	Ser 326 polymorphism (activity reduced) and genetic variants of OGG1.	Weakly associated with HD, ALS, Schizoprenia [258–260]	
XRCC1	Associated with defective TDP1 and aprataxin.
Polymorphisms may lead to altered DNA repair.
Genetic variants of XRCC1.	Inherited spinocerebellar ataxias [261]
Schizophrenia [262]
PD [263]	
Pol β	Deficiency in Pol β (Haploinsufficiency)	Exacerbates AD Pathology [147]	
PCNA	Homozygous missense (p.Ser228Ile)	Hearing loss, Premature ageing, Telangiectasia, Neurodegeneration [264]	
APE1	Genetic variants of APE1	PD [263]	
FEN1	Reduced FEN1 favors hairpin loop formation	HD [265]	
NER Pathway	
XPA	XPA gene mutations (c.288delT and c.349_353del).	XP [266]	
XPB	Mutations in XPB (T119P)	XP [267]	
XPD	Polymorphisms may lead to altered DNA repair.
Mutations of XPD gene in XP61OS, Mutation in XPD (R112 loop or at the C-terminal end of the protein).	Schizophrenia [260]
skin symptoms of XP without CS, TTD, or other neurological complications [268–270]	
SSBR	
PNKP	c.1250_1266dup, Frameshift p.Thr424GlyfsX48.	Cerebellar atrophy, Polyneuropathy [159]	
APTX	Mutations in APTX gene (K153E and S242N).	AOA1 [271–273]	
TDP1	Mutations in TDP1 (H493R).	SCAN1 [154, 274, 275]	
DSBR-HR	
NBS1	675Δ5 frameshift mutation or Hypomorphic mutations in NBS1.	Nijmegen break syndrome, A-T [276–278]	
ATM/MRE1	Mutations in MRE11, ATM.	A-T [52, 279, 280]	
Rad50	Mutations (c.3277C→T; p.R1093X), (c.3939A→T).	Nijmegen breakage syndrome [5]	
XRCC3	Polymorphisms may lead to altered DNA repair.	Schizophrenia [260]	
DSBR-NHEJ	
LIG4	Hypomorphic Ligase IV mutations, defective NHEJ.	Ligase IV syndrome [161]	
BRCA1	Reduced BRCA1 levels.	AD [166]	
AD-Alzheimer’s Disease, ALS-Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, APTX- Aprataxin, APE1-apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease 1, ATM-Ataxia telangiectasia mutated, AOA1-Ataxia-oculomotor apraxia 1, BER-Base excision repair, BRCA1-Breast cancer associated gene 1, CSB-Cockayne syndrome B genes, DDR-DNA damage response, FEN1 - Flap Structure-Specific Endonuclease 1, HR-Homologous recombination, LIG4-Ligase IV, MRE11-Meiotic recombination 11, NHEJ-Non-homologous end joining, OGG1-8-Oxoguanine glycosylase, PD-Parkinson’s disease, PCNA-Proliferating Cell Nuclear Antigen, PNPK-Polynucleotide kinase 3′-phosphatase, Polβ-Polymerase β, Rad50-radiation sensitive 50, SSBR-Single strand break repair, TDP-1-Tyrosyl-DNA phosphodiesterase 1, TFIIH-Transcription factor IIH, XRCC1-X-ray repair cross-complementing protein 1, XP-Xeroderma pigmentosum.

Highlights

Persistent genome damage is linked to accelerated ageing and age-associated neurodegeneration.

Inherited DNA repair defect is uniquely manifested in neurodegenerative phenotype.

DNA repair capacity is compromised in most sporadic neurodegenerative conditions.

Varied etiological factors contribute to genome damage and their repair defect.

Imbalance in genome damage and repair may be the common basis for diverse diseases involving neurodegeneration.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


1 Kerner B Psychiatric genetics, neurogenetics, and neurodegeneration Front Genet 2014 5 467 25642241
2 Gu Y Iron accumulation and DNA damage in a pig model of intracerebral hemorrhage Acta Neurochir Suppl 2011 111 123 8 21725742
3 Lee JY Hemoglobin and iron handling in brain after subarachnoid hemorrhage and the effect of deferoxamine on early brain injury J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2010 30 11 1793 803 20736956
4 McKinnon PJ DNA repair deficiency and neurological disease Nat Rev Neurosci 2009 10 2 100 12 19145234
5 Waltes R Human RAD50 deficiency in a Nijmegen breakage syndrome-like disorder Am J Hum Genet 2009 84 5 605 16 19409520
6 Hetman M Vashishta A Rempala G Neurotoxic mechanisms of DNA damage: focus on transcriptional inhibition J Neurochem 2010 114 6 1537 49 20557419
7 Nakanishi H Hayashi Y Wu Z The role of microglial mtDNA damage in age-dependent prolonged LPS-induced sickness behavior Neuron Glia Biol 2011 7 1 17 23 22032249
8 Barzilai A Biton S Shiloh Y The role of the DNA damage response in neuronal development, organization and maintenance DNA Repair (Amst) 2008 7 7 1010 27 18458000
9 Hegde ML Izumi T Mitra S Oxidized base damage and single-strand break repair in mammalian genomes: role of disordered regions and posttranslational modifications in early enzymes Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci 2012 110 123 53 22749145
10 Iyama T Wilson DM 3rd DNA repair mechanisms in dividing and non-dividing cells DNA Repair (Amst) 2013 12 8 620 36 23684800
11 Wang J Increased oxidative damage in nuclear and mitochondrial DNA in Alzheimer’s disease J Neurochem 2005 93 4 953 62 15857398
12 Pickrell AM Striatal dysfunctions associated with mitochondrial DNA damage in dopaminergic neurons in a mouse model of Parkinson’s disease J Neurosci 2011 31 48 17649 58 22131425
13 Wang WY Interaction of FUS and HDAC1 regulates DNA damage response and repair in neurons Nat Neurosci 2013 16 10 1383 91 24036913
14 Moore N Homogeneous repair of nuclear genes after experimental stroke J Neurochem 2002 80 1 111 8 11796749
15 Jonson I Oxidative stress causes DNA triplet expansion in Huntington’s disease mouse embryonic stem cells Stem Cell Res 2013 11 3 1264 71 24041806
16 Thanan R Oxidative stress and its significant roles in neurodegenerative diseases and cancer Int J Mol Sci 2015 16 1 193 217
17 Massaad CA Klann E Reactive oxygen species in the regulation of synaptic plasticity and memory Antioxid Redox Signal 2011 14 10 2013 54 20649473
18 Hegde ML Oxidative genome damage and its repair in neurodegenerative diseases: function of transition metals as a double-edged sword J Alzheimers Dis 2011 24 Suppl 2 183 98 21441656
19 Clark DW Promoter G-quadruplex sequences are targets for base oxidation and strand cleavage during hypoxia-induced transcription Free Radic Biol Med 2012 53 1 51 9 22583700
20 Shiwaku H Okazawa H Impaired DNA damage repair as a common feature of neurodegenerative diseases and psychiatric disorders Curr Mol Med 2015 15 2 119 28 25732151
21 Suberbielle E Physiologic brain activity causes DNA double-strand breaks in neurons, with exacerbation by amyloid-beta Nat Neurosci 2013 16 5 613 21 23525040
22 Kruman II Homocysteine elicits a DNA damage response in neurons that promotes apoptosis and hypersensitivity to excitotoxicity J Neurosci 2000 20 18 6920 6 10995836
23 Vanzin CS Homocysteine contribution to DNA damage in cystathionine beta-synthase-deficient patients Gene 2014 539 2 270 4 24534463
24 Subba Rao K Mechanisms of disease: DNA repair defects and neurological disease Nat Clin Pract Neurol 2007 3 3 162 72 17342192
25 Krokan HE Bjoras M Base excision repair Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2013 5 4 a012583 23545420
26 Hegde ML Hazra TK Mitra S Early steps in the DNA base excision/single-strand interruption repair pathway in mammalian cells Cell Res 2008 18 1 27 47 18166975
27 Chen D Age-dependent decline of DNA repair activity for oxidative lesions in rat brain mitochondria J Neurochem 2002 81 6 1273 84 12068075
28 Dou H Mitra S Hazra TK Repair of oxidized bases in DNA bubble structures by human DNA glycosylases NEIL1 and NEIL2 J Biol Chem 2003 278 50 49679 84 14522990
29 Dou H Interaction of the human DNA glycosylase NEIL1 with proliferating cell nuclear antigen. The potential for replication-associated repair of oxidized bases in mammalian genomes J Biol Chem 2008 283 6 3130 40 18032376
30 Wilson DM 3rd McNeill DR Base excision repair and the central nervous system Neuroscience 2007 145 4 1187 200 16934943
31 Kisby GE Effect of caloric restriction on base-excision repair (BER) in the aging rat brain Exp Gerontol 2010 45 3 208 16 20005284
32 Rao KS Loss of base excision repair in aging rat neurons and its restoration by DNA polymerase beta Brain Res Mol Brain Res 2000 85 1–2 251 9 11146128
33 Vyjayanti VN Swain U Rao KS Age-related decline in DNA polymerase beta activity in rat brain and tissues Neurochem Res 2012 37 5 991 5 22219134
34 Kulkarni A Wilson DM 3rd The involvement of DNA-damage and -repair defects in neurological dysfunction Am J Hum Genet 2008 82 3 539 66 18319069
35 Bohr VA DNA repair in an active gene: removal of pyrimidine dimers from the DHFR gene of CHO cells is much more efficient than in the genome overall Cell 1985 40 2 359 69 3838150
36 Yamamoto A Neurons and astrocytes exhibit lower activities of global genome nucleotide excision repair than do fibroblasts DNA Repair (Amst) 2007 6 5 649 57 17236820
37 Takashima H Mutation of TDP1, encoding a topoisomerase I-dependent DNA damage repair enzyme, in spinocerebellar ataxia with axonal neuropathy Nat Genet 2002 32 2 267 72 12244316
38 Caldecott KW Single-strand break repair and genetic disease Nat Rev Genet 2008 9 8 619 31 18626472
39 El-Khamisy SF Defective DNA single-strand break repair in spinocerebellar ataxia with axonal neuropathy-1 Nature 2005 434 7029 108 13 15744309
40 Pouliot JJ Yeast gene for a Tyr-DNA phosphodiesterase that repairs topoisomerase I complexes Science 1999 286 5439 552 5 10521354
41 Rass U Ahel I West SC Actions of aprataxin in multiple DNA repair pathways J Biol Chem 2007 282 13 9469 74 17276982
42 el-Khamisy SF Caldecott KW DNA single-strand break repair and spinocerebellar ataxia with axonal neuropathy-1 Neuroscience 2007 145 4 1260 6 17045754
43 Caldecott KW XRCC1 polypeptide interacts with DNA polymerase beta and possibly poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase, and DNA ligase III is a novel molecular ’nick-sensor’ in vitro Nucleic Acids Res 1996 24 22 4387 94 8948628
44 Masson M XRCC1 is specifically associated with poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase and negatively regulates its activity following DNA damage Mol Cell Biol 1998 18 6 3563 71 9584196
45 El-Khamisy SF A requirement for PARP-1 for the assembly or stability of XRCC1 nuclear foci at sites of oxidative DNA damage Nucleic Acids Res 2003 31 19 5526 33 14500814
46 Vyjayanti VN Rao KS DNA double strand break repair in brain: reduced NHEJ activity in aging rat neurons Neurosci Lett 2006 393 1 18 22 16226837
47 Orii KE Selective utilization of nonhomologous end-joining and homologous recombination DNA repair pathways during nervous system development Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2006 103 26 10017 22 16777961
48 Newman EA Alternative NHEJ Pathway Components Are Therapeutic Targets in High-Risk Neuroblastoma Mol Cancer Res 2015 13 3 470 82 25563294
49 Mahaney BL Meek K Lees-Miller SP Repair of ionizing radiation-induced DNA double-strand breaks by non-homologous end-joining Biochem J 2009 417 3 639 50 19133841
50 Dobbs TA Tainer JA Lees-Miller SP A structural model for regulation of NHEJ by DNA-PKcs autophosphorylation DNA Repair (Amst) 2010 9 12 1307 14 21030321
51 Shen J Mutations in PNKP cause microcephaly, seizures and defects in DNA repair Nat Genet 2010 42 3 245 9 20118933
52 McKinnon PJ ATM and ataxia telangiectasia EMBO reports 2004 5 8 772 6 15289825
53 Wyman C Kanaar R DNA double-strand break repair: all’s well that ends well Annu Rev Genet 2006 40 363 83 16895466
54 Carney JP The hMre11/hRad50 protein complex and Nijmegen breakage syndrome: linkage of double-strand break repair to the cellular DNA damage response Cell 1998 93 3 477 86 9590181
55 Polo SE Jackson SP Dynamics of DNA damage response proteins at DNA breaks: a focus on protein modifications Genes Dev 2011 25 5 409 33 21363960
56 Abraham RT Cell cycle checkpoint signaling through the ATM and ATR kinases Genes Dev 2001 15 17 2177 96 11544175
57 Tian B Yang Q Mao Z Phosphorylation of ATM by Cdk5 mediates DNA damage signalling and regulates neuronal death Nat Cell Biol 2009 11 2 211 8 19151707
58 Dobbin MM SIRT1 collaborates with ATM and HDAC1 to maintain genomic stability in neurons Nat Neurosci 2013 16 8 1008 15 23852118
59 Gardiner M Identification and characterization of FUS/TLS as a new target of ATM Biochem J 2008 415 2 297 307 18620545
60 Herzog KH Requirement for Atm in ionizing radiation-induced cell death in the developing central nervous system Science 1998 280 5366 1089 91 9582124
61 LeDoux SP Mitochondrial DNA repair: a critical player in the response of cells of the CNS to genotoxic insults Neuroscience 2007 145 4 1249 59 17097236
62 Mecocci P Oxidative damage to mitochondrial DNA shows marked age-dependent increases in human brain Ann Neurol 1993 34 4 609 16 8215249
63 Wallace DC A mitochondrial paradigm of metabolic and degenerative diseases, aging, and cancer: a dawn for evolutionary medicine Annu Rev Genet 2005 39 359 407 16285865
64 Richter C Park JW Ames BN Normal oxidative damage to mitochondrial and nuclear DNA is extensive Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1988 85 17 6465 7 3413108
65 Cha MY Kim DK Mook-Jung I The role of mitochondrial DNA mutation on neurodegenerative diseases Exp Mol Med 2015 47 e150 25766619
66 Stierum RH Dianov GL Bohr VA Single-nucleotide patch base excision repair of uracil in DNA by mitochondrial protein extracts Nucleic Acids Res 1999 27 18 3712 9 10471741
67 Liu P Demple B DNA repair in mammalian mitochondria: Much more than we thought? Environ Mol Mutagen 2010 51 5 417 26 20544882
68 Yang JL Mitochondrial DNA damage and repair in neurodegenerative disorders DNA Repair (Amst) 2008 7 7 1110 20 18463003
69 Boesch P DNA repair in organelles: Pathways, organization, regulation, relevance in disease and aging Biochim Biophys Acta 2011 1813 1 186 200 20950654
70 Ludwig DL A murine AP-endonuclease gene-targeted deficiency with post-implantation embryonic progression and ionizing radiation sensitivity Mutat Res 1998 409 1 17 29 9806499
71 Xanthoudakis S The redox/DNA repair protein, Ref-1, is essential for early embryonic development in mice Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996 93 17 8919 23 8799128
72 Li MX Targeting truncated APE1 in mitochondria enhances cell survival after oxidative stress Free Radic Biol Med 2008 45 5 592 601 18515104
73 Lakshmipathy U Campbell C Mitochondrial DNA ligase III function is independent of Xrcc1 Nucleic Acids Res 2000 28 20 3880 6 11024166
74 Simsek D Crucial role for DNA ligase III in mitochondria but not in Xrcc1-dependent repair Nature 2011 471 7337 245 8 21390132
75 Gao Y DNA ligase III is critical for mtDNA integrity but not Xrcc1-mediated nuclear DNA repair Nature 2011 471 7337 240 4 21390131
76 Katyal S McKinnon PJ Disconnecting XRCC1 and DNA ligase III Cell Cycle 2011 10 14 2269 75 21636980
77 Kaniak-Golik A Skoneczna A Mitochondria-nucleus network for genome stability Free Radic Biol Med 2015 82 73 104 25640729
78 Ledoux SP Glial cell-specific differences in response to alkylation damage Glia 1998 24 3 304 12 9775981
79 Hollensworth SB Glial cell type-specific responses to menadione-induced oxidative stress Free Radic Biol Med 2000 28 8 1161 74 10889445
80 Ellwanger JH Selenium reduces bradykinesia and DNA damage in a rat model of Parkinson’s disease Nutrition 2015 31 2 359 65 25592015
81 Deng Q FUS is phosphorylated by DNA-PK and accumulates in the cytoplasm after DNA damage J Neurosci 2014 34 23 7802 13 24899704
82 Markkanen E Meyer U Dianov GL DNA Damage and Repair in Schizophrenia and Autism: Implications for Cancer Comorbidity and Beyond Int J Mol Sci 2016 17 6
83 Raza MU DNA Damage in Major Psychiatric Diseases Neurotox Res 2016 30 2 251 67 27126805
84 Mao P Reddy PH Aging and amyloid beta-induced oxidative DNA damage and mitochondrial dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease: implications for early intervention and therapeutics Biochim Biophys Acta 2011 1812 11 1359 70 21871956
85 McLachlan DR Chromatin structure in dementia Ann Neurol 1984 15 4 329 34 6742779
86 Cotman CW Su JH Mechanisms of neuronal death in Alzheimer’s disease Brain Pathol 1996 6 4 493 506 8944319
87 Mullaart E Increased levels of DNA breaks in cerebral cortex of Alzheimer’s disease patients Neurobiol Aging 1990 11 3 169 73 2362649
88 Bradley MA Elevated 4-hydroxyhexenal in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) progression Neurobiol Aging 2012 33 6 1034 44 20965613
89 Bradley MA Markesbery WR Lovell MA Increased levels of 4-hydroxynonenal and acrolein in the brain in preclinical Alzheimer disease Free Radic Biol Med 2010 48 12 1570 6 20171275
90 Gabbita SP Lovell MA Markesbery WR Increased nuclear DNA oxidation in the brain in Alzheimer’s disease J Neurochem 1998 71 5 2034 40 9798928
91 Lovell MA Gabbita SP Markesbery WR Increased DNA oxidation and decreased levels of repair products in Alzheimer’s disease ventricular CSF J Neurochem 1999 72 2 771 6 9930752
92 Lovell MA Soman S Bradley MA Oxidatively modified nucleic acids in preclinical Alzheimer’s disease (PCAD) brain Mech Ageing Dev 2011 132 8–9 443 8 21878349
93 Shao C Altered 8-oxoguanine glycosylase in mild cognitive impairment and late-stage Alzheimer’s disease brain Free Radic Biol Med 2008 45 6 813 9 18598755
94 Markesbery WR Lovell MA DNA oxidation in Alzheimer’s disease Antioxid Redox Signal 2006 8 11–12 2039 45 17034348
95 Lyras L An assessment of oxidative damage to proteins, lipids, and DNA in brain from patients with Alzheimer’s disease J Neurochem 1997 68 5 2061 9 9109533
96 Tang MS Acrolein induced DNA damage, mutagenicity and effect on DNA repair Mol Nutr Food Res 2011 55 9 1291 300 21714128
97 Hensley K A model for beta-amyloid aggregation and neurotoxicity based on free radical generation by the peptide: relevance to Alzheimer disease Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1994 91 8 3270 4 8159737
98 Varadarajan S Review: Alzheimer’s amyloid beta-peptide-associated free radical oxidative stress and neurotoxicity J Struct Biol 2000 130 2–3 184 208 10940225
99 Butterfield DA Amyloid beta-peptide (1-42)-induced oxidative stress and neurotoxicity: implications for neurodegeneration in Alzheimer’s disease brain. A review Free Radic Res 2002 36 12 1307 13 12607822
100 Suram A Hegde ML Rao KS A new evidence for DNA nicking property of amyloid beta-peptide (1-42): relevance to Alzheimer’s disease Arch Biochem Biophys 2007 463 2 245 52 17502108
101 Cookson MR Evolution of neurodegeneration Curr Biol 2012 22 17 R753 61 22975006
102 Simon DK Somatic mitochondrial DNA mutations in cortex and substantia nigra in aging and Parkinson’s disease Neurobiol Aging 2004 25 1 71 81 14675733
103 Hegde ML Studies on genomic DNA topology and stability in brain regions of Parkinson’s disease Arch Biochem Biophys 2006 449 1–2 143 56 16600170
104 Hegde ML Rao KS DNA induces folding in alpha-synuclein: understanding the mechanism using chaperone property of osmolytes Arch Biochem Biophys 2007 464 1 57 69 17537399
105 Luk KC Lee VM Modeling Lewy pathology propagation in Parkinson’s disease Parkinsonism Relat Disord 2014 20 Suppl 1 S85 7 24262196
106 Zhang J Parkinson’s disease is associated with oxidative damage to cytoplasmic DNA and RNA in substantia nigra neurons Am J Pathol 1999 154 5 1423 9 10329595
107 Sanchez-Ramos OE JR Ames BN A marker of oxyradical-mediated DNA damage (8-hydroxy-2 ‘-deoxyguanosine) is increased in nigro-striatum of Parkinson’s disease brain 3 1994 Neurodegeneration 7
108 Martin LJ Parkinson’s disease alpha-synuclein transgenic mice develop neuronal mitochondrial degeneration and cell death J Neurosci 2006 26 1 41 50 16399671
109 Hoang T Neuronal NOS and cyclooxygenase-2 contribute to DNA damage in a mouse model of Parkinson disease Free Radic Biol Med 2009 47 7 1049 56 19616617
110 Iwashita A Neuroprotective effects of a novel poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 inhibitor, 2-[3-[4-(4-chlorophenyl)-1-piperazinyl] propyl]-4(3H)-quinazolinone (FR255595), in an in vitro model of cell death and in mouse 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine model of Parkinson’s disease J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2004 309 3 1067 78 14985416
111 Rosen DR Mutations in Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase gene are associated with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Nature 1993 362 6415 59 62 8446170
112 Deng HX Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and structural defects in Cu,Zn superoxide dismutase Science 1993 261 5124 1047 51 8351519
113 Neumann M Ubiquitinated TDP-43 in frontotemporal lobar degeneration and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Science 2006 314 5796 130 3 17023659
114 Arai T TDP-43 is a component of ubiquitin-positive tau-negative inclusions in frontotemporal lobar degeneration and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2006 351 3 602 11 17084815
115 Kwiatkowski TJ Jr Mutations in the FUS/TLS gene on chromosome 16 cause familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Science 2009 323 5918 1205 8 19251627
116 Vance C Mutations in FUS, an RNA processing protein, cause familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis type 6 Science 2009 323 5918 1208 11 19251628
117 Deng HX Mutations in UBQLN2 cause dominant X-linked juvenile and adult-onset ALS and ALS/dementia Nature 2011 477 7363 211 5 21857683
118 Maruyama H Mutations of optineurin in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Nature 2010 465 7295 223 6 20428114
119 Johnson JO Exome sequencing reveals VCP mutations as a cause of familial ALS Neuron 2010 68 5 857 64 21145000
120 Scotter EL C9ORF72 and UBQLN2 mutations are causes of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in New Zealand: a genetic and pathologic study using banked human brain tissue Neurobiol Aging 2016
121 Wu CH Mutations in the profilin 1 gene cause familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Nature 2012 488 7412 499 503 22801503
122 Johnson JO Mutations in the Matrin 3 gene cause familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Nat Neurosci 2014 17 5 664 6 24686783
123 Coppede F An overview of DNA repair in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Scientific World Journal 2011 11 1679 91 22125427
124 Sau D Mutation of SOD1 in ALS: a gain of a loss of function Hum Mol Genet 2007 16 13 1604 18 17504823
125 Iguchi Y TDP-43 depletion induces neuronal cell damage through dysregulation of Rho family GTPases J Biol Chem 2009 284 33 22059 66 19535326
126 Canugovi C Endonuclease VIII-like 1 (NEIL1) promotes short-term spatial memory retention and protects from ischemic stroke-induced brain dysfunction and death in mice Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2012 109 37 14948 53 22927410
127 Broughton BR Reutens DC Sobey CG Apoptotic mechanisms after cerebral ischemia Stroke 2009 40 5 e331 9 19182083
128 Wagner KR Heme and iron metabolism: role in cerebral hemorrhage J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2003 23 6 629 52 12796711
129 Li W Ischemic preconditioning in the rat brain enhances the repair of endogenous oxidative DNA damage by activating the base-excision repair pathway J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2006 26 2 181 98 16001017
130 Liu D Evidence that OGG1 glycosylase protects neurons against oxidative DNA damage and cell death under ischemic conditions J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2011 31 2 680 92 20736962
131 Edwards M APE/Ref-1 responses to ischemia in rat brain Neuroreport 1998 9 18 4015 8 9926839
132 Li P Mechanistic insight into DNA damage and repair in ischemic stroke: exploiting the base excision repair pathway as a model of neuroprotection Antioxid Redox Signal 2011 14 10 1905 18 20677909
133 Cui J Holmes EH Liu PK Oxidative damage to the c-fos gene and reduction of its transcription after focal cerebral ischemia J Neurochem 1999 73 3 1164 74 10461908
134 Li H Swiercz R Englander EW Elevated metals compromise repair of oxidative DNA damage via the base excision repair pathway: implications of pathologic iron overload in the brain on integrity of neuronal DNA J Neurochem 2009 110 6 1774 83 19619136
135 Song S A new hippocampal model for examining intracerebral hemorrhage-related neuronal death: effects of deferoxamine on hemoglobin-induced neuronal death Stroke 2007 38 10 2861 3 17761912
136 Weissman L Defective DNA base excision repair in brain from individuals with Alzheimer’s disease and amnestic mild cognitive impairment Nucleic Acids Res 2007 35 16 5545 55 17704129
137 Abolhassani N Molecular pathophysiology of impaired glucose metabolism, mitochondrial dysfunction, and oxidative DNA damage in Alzheimer’s disease brain Mech Ageing Dev 2016
138 Tuo J Primary fibroblasts of Cockayne syndrome patients are defective in cellular repair of 8-hydroxyguanine and 8-hydroxyadenine resulting from oxidative stress FASEB J 2003 17 6 668 74 12665480
139 Cleaver JE Defective repair replication of DNA in xeroderma pigmentosum Nature 1968 218 5142 652 6 5655953
140 Venema J The genetic defect in Cockayne syndrome is associated with a defect in repair of UV-induced DNA damage in transcriptionally active DNA Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1990 87 12 4707 11 2352945
141 Manley K Msh2 deficiency prevents in vivo somatic instability of the CAG repeat in Huntington disease transgenic mice Nat Genet 1999 23 4 471 3 10581038
142 Ahel I The neurodegenerative disease protein aprataxin resolves abortive DNA ligation intermediates Nature 2006 443 7112 713 6 16964241
143 Shackelford DA DNA end joining activity is reduced in Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 2006 27 4 596 605 15908050
144 Maser RS Zinkel R Petrini JH An alternative mode of translation permits production of a variant NBS1 protein from the common Nijmegen breakage syndrome allele Nat Genet 2001 27 4 417 21 11279524
145 Taylor AM Ataxia telangiectasia: a human mutation with abnormal radiation sensitivity Nature 1975 258 5534 427 9 1196376
146 Borgesius NZ Accelerated age-related cognitive decline and neurodegeneration, caused by deficient DNA repair J Neurosci 2011 31 35 12543 53 21880916
147 Sykora P DNA polymerase beta deficiency leads to neurodegeneration and exacerbates Alzheimer disease phenotypes Nucleic Acids Res 2015 43 2 943 59 25552414
148 Lee Y The genesis of cerebellar interneurons and the prevention of neural DNA damage require XRCC1 Nat Neurosci 2009 12 8 973 80 19633665
149 Frappart PO McKinnon PJ Ataxia-telangiectasia and related diseases Neuromolecular Med 2006 8 4 495 511 17028372
150 Stewart GS The DNA double-strand break repair gene hMRE11 is mutated in individuals with an ataxia-telangiectasia-like disorder Cell 1999 99 6 577 87 10612394
151 Date H Early-onset ataxia with ocular motor apraxia and hypoalbuminemia is caused by mutations in a new HIT superfamily gene Nat Genet 2001 29 2 184 8 11586299
152 Moreira MC The gene mutated in ataxia-ocular apraxia 1 encodes the new HIT/Zn-finger protein aprataxin Nat Genet 2001 29 2 189 93 11586300
153 Katyal S TDP1 facilitates chromosomal single-strand break repair in neurons and is neuroprotective in vivo Embo j 2007 26 22 4720 31 17914460
154 Interthal H SCAN1 mutant Tdp1 accumulates the enzyme--DNA intermediate and causes camptothecin hypersensitivity EMBO J 2005 24 12 2224 33 15920477
155 Harris JL Aprataxin, poly-ADP ribose polymerase 1 (PARP-1) and apurinic endonuclease 1 (APE1) function together to protect the genome against oxidative damage Hum Mol Genet 2009 18 21 4102 17 19643912
156 Clements PM The ataxia-oculomotor apraxia 1 gene product has a role distinct from ATM and interacts with the DNA strand break repair proteins XRCC1 and XRCC4 DNA Repair (Amst) 2004 3 11 1493 502 15380105
157 Caglayan M Complementation of aprataxin deficiency by base excision repair enzymes Nucleic Acids Res 2015 43 4 2271 81 25662216
158 El-Khamisy SF Synergistic decrease of DNA single-strand break repair rates in mouse neural cells lacking both Tdp1 and aprataxin DNA Repair (Amst) 2009 8 6 760 6 19303373
159 Poulton C Progressive cerebellar atrophy and polyneuropathy: expanding the spectrum of PNKP mutations Neurogenetics 2013 14 1 43 51 23224214
160 O’Driscoll M An overview of three new disorders associated with genetic instability: LIG4 syndrome, RS-SCID and ATR-Seckel syndrome DNA Repair (Amst) 2004 3 8–9 1227 35 15279811
161 Girard PM Analysis of DNA ligase IV mutations found in LIG4 syndrome patients: the impact of two linked polymorphisms Hum Mol Genet 2004 13 20 2369 76 15333585
162 Ahnesorg P Smith P Jackson SP XLF interacts with the XRCC4-DNA ligase IV complex to promote DNA nonhomologous end-joining Cell 2006 124 2 301 13 16439205
163 Jacobsen E Deficiency of the Mre11 DNA repair complex in Alzheimer’s disease brains Brain Res Mol Brain Res 2004 128 1 1 7 15337312
164 Leon J 8-Oxoguanine accumulation in mitochondrial DNA causes mitochondrial dysfunction and impairs neuritogenesis in cultured adult mouse cortical neurons under oxidative conditions Sci Rep 2016 6 22086 26912170
165 Copani A DNA polymerase-beta is expressed early in neurons of Alzheimer’s disease brain and is loaded into DNA replication forks in neurons challenged with beta-amyloid J Neurosci 2006 26 43 10949 57 17065437
166 Suberbielle E DNA repair factor BRCA1 depletion occurs in Alzheimer brains and impairs cognitive function in mice Nat Commun 2015 6 8897 26615780
167 Hegde ML Specific Inhibition of NEIL-initiated repair of oxidized base damage in human genome by copper and iron: potential etiological linkage to neurodegenerative diseases J Biol Chem 2010 285 37 28812 25 20622253
168 Grin IR Heavy metal ions affect the activity of DNA glycosylases of the fpg family Biochemistry (Mosc) 2009 74 11 1253 9 19916941
169 Jacob KD Alzheimer’s disease-associated polymorphisms in human OGG1 alter catalytic activity and sensitize cells to DNA damage Free Radic Biol Med 2013 63 115 25 23684897
170 Chaitanya GV Steven AJ Babu PP PARP-1 cleavage fragments: signatures of cell-death proteases in neurodegeneration Cell Commun Signal 2010 8 31 21176168
171 Bolognin S Chelation therapy for neurodegenerative diseases Med Res Rev 2009 29 4 547 70 19177468
172 Hegde ML Serum trace element levels and the complexity of inter-element relations in patients with Parkinson’s disease J Trace Elem Med Biol 2004 18 2 163 71 15646263
173 Hegde ML Challenges associated with metal chelation therapy in Alzheimer’s disease J Alzheimers Dis 2009 17 3 457 68 19363258
174 Giacoppo S Heavy metals and neurodegenerative diseases: an observational study Biol Trace Elem Res 2014 161 2 151 60 25107328
175 Hegde ML Vasudevaraju P Rao KJ DNA induced folding/fibrillation of alpha-synuclein: new insights in Parkinson’s disease Front Biosci (Landmark Ed) 2010 15 418 36 20036828
176 Ross GM Zinc alters conformation and inhibits biological activities of nerve growth factor and related neurotrophins Nat Med 1997 3 8 872 8 9256278
177 Sagripanti JL Goering PL Lamanna A Interaction of copper with DNA and antagonism by other metals Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 1991 110 3 477 85 1949015
178 Hegde ML First evidence for helical transitions in supercoiled DNA by amyloid Beta Peptide (1-42) and aluminum: a new insight in understanding Alzheimer’s disease J Mol Neurosci 2004 22 1–2 19 31 14742907
179 Hegde ML Hazra TK Mitra S Functions of disordered regions in mammalian early base excision repair proteins Cell Mol Life Sci 2010 67 21 3573 87 20714778
180 Antoniali G Cadmium treatment suppresses DNA polymerase delta catalytic subunit gene expression by acting on the p53 and Sp1 regulatory axis DNA Repair (Amst) 2015 35 90 105 26519823
181 Sairanen T Neuronal caspase-3 and PARP-1 correlate differentially with apoptosis and necrosis in ischemic human stroke Acta Neuropathol 2009 118 4 541 52 19529948
182 Uttara B Oxidative stress and neurodegenerative diseases: a review of upstream and downstream antioxidant therapeutic options Curr Neuropharmacol 2009 7 1 65 74 19721819
183 Winklhofer KF Tatzelt J Haass C The two faces of protein misfolding: gain- and loss-of-function in neurodegenerative diseases Embo j 2008 27 2 336 49 18216876
184 Brettschneider J Spreading of pathology in neurodegenerative diseases: a focus on human studies Nat Rev Neurosci 2015 16 2 109 20 25588378
185 LeBlanc A Increased production of 4 kDa amyloid beta peptide in serum deprived human primary neuron cultures: possible involvement of apoptosis J Neurosci 1995 15 12 7837 46 8613723
186 Santiard-Baron D Identification of beta-amyloid-responsive genes by RNA differential display: early induction of a DNA damage-inducible gene, gadd45 Exp Neurol 1999 158 1 206 13 10448433
187 Loo DT Apoptosis is induced by beta-amyloid in cultured central nervous system neurons Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993 90 17 7951 5 8367446
188 Cardinale A Sublethal doses of beta-amyloid peptide abrogate DNA-dependent protein kinase activity J Biol Chem 2012 287 4 2618 31 22139836
189 Majd S Power JH Grantham HJ Neuronal response in Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease: the effect of toxic proteins on intracellular pathways BMC Neurosci 2015 16 69 26499115
190 Gupta VB Studies on the mechanism of the DNA nicking property of amyloid-beta40: implications in Alzheimer’s disease J Alzheimers Dis 2013 33 4 1059 71 23160010
191 Vasudevaraju P Role of DNA dynamics in Alzheimer’s disease Brain Res Rev 2008 58 1 136 48 18342372
192 Vasudevaraju P New evidence on alpha-synuclein and Tau binding to conformation and sequence specific GC* rich DNA: Relevance to neurological disorders J Pharm Bioallied Sci 2012 4 2 112 7 22557921
193 Nandi PK Leclerc E Polymerization of murine recombinant prion protein in nucleic acid solution Arch Virol 1999 144 9 1751 63 10542024
194 Ma KL alpha-Synuclein is prone to interaction with the GC-box-like sequence in vitro Cell Mol Neurobiol 2014 34 4 603 9 24659023
195 Chatterjee A The role of the mammalian DNA end-processing enzyme polynucleotide kinase 3′-phosphatase in spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 pathogenesis PLoS Genet 2015 11 1 e1004749 25633985
196 Gao R Inactivation of PNKP by mutant ATXN3 triggers apoptosis by activating the DNA damage-response pathway in SCA3 PLoS Genet 2015 11 1 e1004834 25590633
197 Zhu X Pathogenic mutations of nuclear genes associated with mitochondrial disorders Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai) 2009 41 3 179 87 19280056
198 Pinto M Moraes CT Mitochondrial genome changes and neurodegenerative diseases Biochim Biophys Acta 2014 1842 8 1198 207 24252612
199 Hutchin TP Mitochondrial DNA mutations in Alzheimer’s disease Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1997 241 2 221 5 9425253
200 Coskun PE Beal MF Wallace DC Alzheimer’s brains harbor somatic mtDNA control-region mutations that suppress mitochondrial transcription and replication Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2004 101 29 10726 31 15247418
201 Simon DK Familial multisystem degeneration with parkinsonism associated with the 11778 mitochondrial DNA mutation Neurology 1999 53 8 1787 93 10563629
202 Simon DK Mitochondrial DNA mutations in complex I and tRNA genes in Parkinson’s disease Neurology 2000 54 3 703 9 10680807
203 Vives-Bauza C Sequence analysis of the entire mitochondrial genome in Parkinson’s disease Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2002 290 5 1593 601 11820805
204 Mecocci P MacGarvey U Beal MF Oxidative damage to mitochondrial DNA is increased in Alzheimer’s disease Ann Neurol 1994 36 5 747 51 7979220
205 de la Monte SM Mitochondrial DNA damage as a mechanism of cell loss in Alzheimer’s disease Lab Invest 2000 80 8 1323 35 10950123
206 Siddiqui A Mitochondrial DNA damage is associated with reduced mitochondrial bioenergetics in Huntington’s disease Free Radic Biol Med 2012 53 7 1478 88 22709585
207 De Luca G A role for oxidized DNA precursors in Huntington’s disease-like striatal neurodegeneration PLoS Genet 2008 4 11 e1000266 19023407
208 Bogdanov MB Increased oxidative damage to DNA in a transgenic mouse model of Huntington’s disease J Neurochem 2001 79 6 1246 9 11752065
209 Acevedo-Torres K Mitochondrial DNA damage is a hallmark of chemically induced and the R6/2 transgenic model of Huntington’s disease DNA Repair (Amst) 2009 8 1 126 36 18935984
210 Reardon JT In vitro repair of oxidative DNA damage by human nucleotide excision repair system: possible explanation for neurodegeneration in xeroderma pigmentosum patients Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997 94 17 9463 8 9256505
211 Singh K Sulforaphane treatment of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2014 111 43 15550 5 25313065
212 Kurtz A Somatic mitochondrial DNA mutations in neurofibromatosis type 1-associated tumors Mol Cancer Res 2004 2 8 433 41 15328370
213 Beitel LK Mechanisms mediating spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy: investigations into polyglutamine-expanded androgen receptor function and dysfunction Front Neurol 2013 4 53 23720649
214 Schon EA DiMauro S Hirano M Human mitochondrial DNA: roles of inherited and somatic mutations Nat Rev Genet 2012 13 12 878 90 23154810
215 Sanders LH Mitochondrial DNA damage: molecular marker of vulnerable nigral neurons in Parkinson’s disease Neurobiol Dis 2014 70 214 23 24981012
216 Nakabeppu Y Oxidative damage in nucleic acids and Parkinson’s disease J Neurosci Res 2007 85 5 919 34 17279544
217 Bender A High levels of mitochondrial DNA deletions in substantia nigra neurons in aging and Parkinson disease Nat Genet 2006 38 5 515 7 16604074
218 Bender A TOM40 mediates mitochondrial dysfunction induced by alpha-synuclein accumulation in Parkinson’s disease PLoS One 2013 8 4 e62277 23626796
219 Gredilla R Bohr VA Stevnsner T Mitochondrial DNA repair and association with aging--an update Exp Gerontol 2010 45 7–8 478 88 20096766
220 Bohr VA Repair of oxidative DNA damage in nuclear and mitochondrial DNA, and some changes with aging in mammalian cells Free Radic Biol Med 2002 32 9 804 12 11978482
221 Jaarsma D Age-related neuronal degeneration: complementary roles of nucleotide excision repair and transcription-coupled repair in preventing neuropathology PLoS Genet 2011 7 12 e1002405 22174697
222 Herrup K Divide and die: cell cycle events as triggers of nerve cell death J Neurosci 2004 24 42 9232 9 15496657
223 Memo M Intracellular Pathways Involved in DNA Damage and Repair to Neuronal Apoptosis Apoptosis, Cell Signaling, and Human Diseases 2007 Humana Press 11
224 Pankotai T DNAPKcs-dependent arrest of RNA polymerase II transcription in the presence of DNA breaks Nat Struct Mol Biol 2012 19 3 276 82 22343725
225 Hailer-Morrison MK Oxidized guanine lesions as modulators of gene transcription. Altered p50 binding affinity and repair shielding by 7,8-dihydro-8-oxo-2′-deoxyguanosine lesions in the NF-kappaB promoter element Biochemistry 2003 42 32 9761 70 12911319
226 Swarup V Deregulation of TDP-43 in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis triggers nuclear factor kappaB-mediated pathogenic pathways J Exp Med 2011 208 12 2429 47 22084410
227 Elden AC Ataxin-2 intermediate-length polyglutamine expansions are associated with increased risk for ALS Nature 2010 466 7310 1069 75 20740007
228 Salvi JS Mekhail K R-loops highlight the nucleus in ALS Nucleus 2015 6 1 23 9 25587791
229 Schmitz KM TAF12 recruits Gadd45a and the nucleotide excision repair complex to the promoter of rRNA genes leading to active DNA demethylation Mol Cell 2009 33 3 344 53 19217408
230 Shen Y Frataxin Deficiency Promotes Excess Microglial DNA Damage and Inflammation that Is Rescued by PJ34 PLoS One 2016 11 3 e0151026 26954031
231 Fabian RH Perez-Polo JR Kent TA A decoy oligonucleotide inhibiting nuclear factor-kappaB binding to the IgGkappaB consensus site reduces cerebral injury and apoptosis in neonatal hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy J Neurosci Res 2007 85 7 1420 6 17348043
232 Nakai M Kainic acid-induced apoptosis in rat striatum is associated with nuclear factor-kappaB activation J Neurochem 2000 74 2 647 58 10646516
233 Bales KR The NF-kappaB/Rel family of proteins mediates Abeta-induced neurotoxicity and glial activation Brain Res Mol Brain Res 1998 57 1 63 72 9630519
234 Pizzi M Post-ischemic brain damage: NF-kappaB dimer heterogeneity as a molecular determinant of neuron vulnerability Febs j 2009 276 1 27 35 19087197
235 Kruman II Cell cycle activation linked to neuronal cell death initiated by DNA damage Neuron 2004 41 4 549 61 14980204
236 Hoglinger GU The pRb/E2F cell-cycle pathway mediates cell death in Parkinson’s disease Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2007 104 9 3585 90 17360686
237 Ranganathan S Bowser R Alterations in G(1) to S phase cell-cycle regulators during amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Am J Pathol 2003 162 3 823 35 12598317
238 Pelegri C Cell cycle activation in striatal neurons from Huntington’s disease patients and rats treated with 3-nitropropionic acid Int J Dev Neurosci 2008 26 7 665 71 18768156
239 Konishi Y Cdc2 phosphorylation of BAD links the cell cycle to the cell death machinery Mol Cell 2002 9 5 1005 16 12049737
240 Migliore L Coppede F Genetic and environmental factors in cancer and neurodegenerative diseases Mutat Res 2002 512 2–3 135 53 12464348
241 Wu MF NAD attenuates oxidative DNA damages induced by amyloid beta-peptide in primary rat cortical neurons Free Radic Res 2014 48 7 794 805 24678962
242 Enokido Y Mutant huntingtin impairs Ku70-mediated DNA repair J Cell Biol 2010 189 3 425 43 20439996
243 Tamura T Ku70 alleviates neurodegeneration in Drosophila models of Huntington’s disease PLoS One 2011 6 11 e27408 22096569
244 Martin LJ Wong M Enforced DNA repair enzymes rescue neurons from apoptosis induced by target deprivation and axotomy in mouse models of neurodegeneration Mech Ageing Dev 2016
245 Jung ES p53-dependent SIRT6 expression protects Abeta42-induced DNA damage Sci Rep 2016 6 25628 27156849
246 Lu XH Targeting ATM ameliorates mutant Huntingtin toxicity in cell and animal models of Huntington’s disease Sci Transl Med 2014 6 268 268ra178
247 DeGregori J Johnson DG Distinct and Overlapping Roles for E2F Family Members in Transcription, Proliferation and Apoptosis Curr Mol Med 2006 6 7 739 48 17100600
248 Wang L Wang R Herrup K E2F1 works as a cell cycle suppressor in mature neurons J Neurosci 2007 27 46 12555 64 18003834
249 Giovanni A E2F1 mediates death of B-amyloid-treated cortical neurons in a manner independent of p53 and dependent on Bax and caspase 3 J Biol Chem 2000 275 16 11553 60 10766769
250 Liu DX Greene LA Neuronal apoptosis at the G1/S cell cycle checkpoint Cell Tissue Res 2001 305 2 217 28 11545259
251 Motonaga K Up-regulation of E2F-1 in Down’s syndrome brain exhibiting neuropathological features of Alzheimer-type dementia Brain Res 2001 905 1–2 250 3 11423103
252 O’Hare MJ Induction and modulation of cerebellar granule neuron death by E2F-1 J Biol Chem 2000 275 33 25358 64 10851232
253 Ranganathan S Scudiere S Bowser R Hyperphosphorylation of the retinoblastoma gene product and altered subcellular distribution of E2F-1 during Alzheimer’s disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis J Alzheimers Dis 2001 3 4 377 385 12214040
254 Jordan J p53 expression induces apoptosis in hippocampal pyramidal neuron cultures J Neurosci 1997 17 4 1397 405 9006981
255 Lin WC Lin FT Nevins JR Selective induction of E2F1 in response to DNA damage, mediated by ATM-dependent phosphorylation Genes Dev 2001 15 14 1833 44 11459832
256 Alvira D Neuroprotective effects of caffeine against complex I inhibition-induced apoptosis are mediated by inhibition of the Atm/p53/E2F-1 path in cerebellar granule neurons J Neurosci Res 2007 85 14 3079 88 17638302
257 Druzhyna NM Targeting human 8-oxoguanine glycosylase to mitochondria of oligodendrocytes protects against menadione-induced oxidative stress Glia 2003 42 4 370 8 12730957
258 Coppede F Association of the hOGG1 Ser326Cys polymorphism with sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Neurosci Lett 2007 420 2 163 8 17531381
259 Coppede F The hOGG1 Ser326Cys polymorphism and Huntington’s disease Toxicology 2010 278 2 199 203 19857538
260 Odemis S Association Between Polymorphisms of DNA Repair Genes and Risk of Schizophrenia Genet Test Mol Biomarkers 2016 20 1 11 7 26554302
261 Berquist BR Functional capacity of XRCC1 protein variants identified in DNA repair-deficient Chinese hamster ovary cell lines and the human population Nucleic Acids Res 2010 38 15 5023 35 20385586
262 Sujitha SP DNA Repair Gene (XRCC1) Polymorphism (Arg399Gln) Associated with Schizophrenia in South Indian Population: A Genotypic and Molecular Dynamics Study PLoS One 2016 11 1 e0147348 26824244
263 Gencer M DNA repair genes in Parkinson’s disease Genet Test Mol Biomarkers 2012 16 6 504 7 22224629
264 Baple EL Hypomorphic PCNA mutation underlies a human DNA repair disorder J Clin Invest 2014 124 7 3137 46 24911150
265 Goula AV Stoichiometry of base excision repair proteins correlates with increased somatic CAG instability in striatum over cerebellum in Huntington’s disease transgenic mice PLoS Genet 2009 5 12 e1000749 19997493
266 Christen-Zaech S Unexpected occurrence of xeroderma pigmentosum in an uncle and nephew Arch Dermatol 2009 145 11 1285 91 19917958
267 Weeda G A mutation in the XPB/ERCC3 DNA repair transcription gene, associated with trichothiodystrophy Am J Hum Genet 1997 60 2 320 9 9012405
268 Kobayashi T Mutations in the XPD gene leading to xeroderma pigmentosum symptoms Hum Mutat 1997 9 4 322 31 9101292
269 Cleaver JE A summary of mutations in the UV-sensitive disorders: xeroderma pigmentosum, Cockayne syndrome, and trichothiodystrophy Hum Mutat 1999 14 1 9 22 10447254
270 Botta E Genotype-phenotype relationships in trichothiodystrophy patients with novel splicing mutations in the XPD gene Hum Mutat 2009 30 3 438 45 19085937
271 Castellotti B Ataxia with oculomotor apraxia type1 (AOA1): novel and recurrent aprataxin mutations, coenzyme Q10 analyses, and clinical findings in Italian patients Neurogenetics 2011 12 3 193 201 21465257
272 Nouri N A novel mutation in the aprataxin (APTX) gene in an Iranian individual suffering early-onset ataxia with oculomotor apraxia type 1(AOA1) disease Iran Biomed J 2012 16 4 223 5 23183622
273 Ferrarini M A novel mutation of aprataxin associated with ataxia ocular apraxia type 1: phenotypical and genotypical characterization J Neurol Sci 2007 260 1–2 219 24 17572444
274 Hirano M DNA single-strand break repair is impaired in aprataxin-related ataxia Ann Neurol 2007 61 2 162 74 17315206
275 Miao ZH Hereditary ataxia SCAN1 cells are defective for the repair of transcription-dependent topoisomerase I cleavage complexes DNA Repair (Amst) 2006 5 12 1489 94 16935573
276 Digweed M Sperling K Nijmegen breakage syndrome: clinical manifestation of defective response to DNA double-strand breaks DNA Repair (Amst) 2004 3 8–9 1207 17 15279809
277 Watanabe T Mutational inactivation of the nijmegen breakage syndrome gene (NBS1) in glioblastomas is associated with multiple TP53 mutations J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2009 68 2 210 5 19151620
278 Huang J Mutations in the Nijmegen breakage syndrome gene in medulloblastomas Clin Cancer Res 2008 14 13 4053 8 18593981
279 Regal JA Disease-associated MRE11 mutants impact ATM/ATR DNA damage signaling by distinct mechanisms Hum Mol Genet 2013 22 25 5146 59 23912341
280 Liu XL Novel ATM mutations with ataxia-telangiectasia Neurosci Lett 2016 611 112 5 26628246
