LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9419065
21028
Hum Brain Mapp
Hum Brain Mapp
Human brain mapping
1065-9471
1097-0193

28295799
5447460
10.1002/hbm.23559
NIHMS857362
Article
Your algorithm might think the hippocampus grows in Alzheimer’s disease: caveats of longitudinal automated hippocampal volumetry
Sankar Tejas 1*
Park Min Tae M. 23*
Jawa Tasha 4
Patel Raihaan 28
Bhagwat Nikhil 2589
Voineskos Aristotle N. 56
Lozano Andres M. 6
Chakravarty M. Mallar 278
the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative**
1 Division of Neurosurgery, Department of Surgery, University of Alberta, Canada
2 Douglas Mental Health University Institute, Montreal, Canada
3 Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, Western University, London, Canada
4 Division of Neurosurgery, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
5 Kimel Family Translational Imaging Genetics Research Laboratory, Research Imaging Centre, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, Canada
6 Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
7 Department of Psychiatry, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada
8 Department of Biomedical Engineering, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada
9 Institute of Biological and Biomedical Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
Correspondence to: Tejas Sankar, Division of Neurosurgery, Department of Surgery, University of Alberta, 2D Surgery, WMC Health Sciences Centre, 8440-112 Street, Edmonton, AB T6G 2B7, 780-407-6869, tsankar@ualberta.ca; M. Mallar Chakravarty, Douglas Mental Health University Institute, Montreal, QC, Canada., 6875 LaSalle Boulevard, Montreal, QC H4H 1R3, 514-761-6131, mallar@cobralab.ca
* These authors contributed equally to the manuscript

** Data used in preparation of this article were obtained from the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database (adni.loni.usc.edu). As such, the investigators within the ADNI contributed to the design and implementation of ADNI and/or provided data but did not participate in analysis or writing of this report. A complete listing of ADNI investigators can be found at: http://adni.loni.usc.edu/wp-content/uploads/how_to_apply/ADNI_Acknowledgement_List.pdf

22 3 2017
15 3 2017
6 2017
01 6 2018
38 6 28752896
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Hippocampal atrophy rate—measured using automated techniques applied to structural MRI scans—is considered a sensitive marker of disease progression in Alzheimer’s disease, frequently used as an outcome measure in clinical trials. Using publicly accessible data from the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI), we examined one-year hippocampal atrophy rates generated by each of five automated or semi-automated hippocampal segmentation algorithms in patients with Alzheimer’s disease, subjects with mild cognitive impairment, or elderly controls. We examined MRI data from 398 and 62 subjects available at baseline and at one year at MRI field strengths of 1.5T and 3T, respectively. We observed a high rate of hippocampal segmentation failures across all algorithms and diagnostic categories, with only 50.8% of subjects at 1.5T and 58.1% of subjects at 3T passing stringent segmentation quality control. We also found that all algorithms identified several subjects (between 2.94% and 48.68%) across all diagnostic categories showing increases in hippocampal volume over one year. For any given algorithm, hippocampal “growth” could not entirely be explained by excluding patients with flawed hippocampal segmentations, scan-rescan variability, or MRI field strength. Furthermore, different algorithms did not uniformly identify the same subjects as hippocampal “growers”, and showed very poor concordance in estimates of magnitude of hippocampal volume change over time (intraclass correlation coefficient 0.319 at 1.5T and 0.149 at 3T). This precluded a meaningful analysis of whether hippocampal “growth” represents a true biological phenomenon. Taken together, our findings suggest that longitudinal hippocampal volume change should be interpreted with considerable caution as a biomarker.

Alzheimer’s Disease
MRI
atrophy
hippocampus
volumetry

Introduction

Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by the accumulation of amyloid-beta and tau proteins in the brain, ultimately leading to progressive synaptic, neuronal, and axonal loss which profoundly affect memory and cognitive function (Small &amp; Duff, 2008). The neurodegeneration that ultimately leads to dementia in AD begins in the medial temporal lobe, before going on to involve neocortical regions (Braak &amp; Braak, 1991; Braak, de Vos, Jansen, Bratzke, &amp; Braak, 1998), and manifests as atrophy on structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (Lerch et al., 2008; Sabuncu et al., 2012; Sabuncu et al., 2011) Consequently, quantitative MRI volumetry of the hippocampus has long been proposed as a sensitive and objective biomarker in AD. Smaller hippocampal volume has consistently been associated with a diagnosis of AD (Sabuncu et al., 2011; Coupe, Eskildsen, Manjon, Fonov, &amp; Collins, 2011b; Mouiha &amp; Duchesne, 2011; Sabuncu et al., 2011), while many studies report that the rate of hippocampal atrophy over time is accelerated in patients with AD compared to subjects with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) or healthy controls (Sabuncu et al., 2011; Apostolova et al., 2012; Mouiha &amp; Duchesne, 2011). Furthermore, it has been suggested that hippocampal atrophy may more sensitively and precisely track disease progression in AD than clinical measures of cognitive function (Cavedo et al., 2014; Apostolova et al., 2010; Sanchez-Benavides et al., 2014; Mielke et al., 2012; McLaren et al., 2012). As a result, a decrease in the expected rate of hippocampal atrophy in AD patients—or a hippocampal atrophy rate more closely approximating that observed in normal aging—may be considered surrogate evidence of a disease-modifying effect in trials of novel AD therapies. On this basis, hippocampal atrophy has been included as an outcome measure in several clinical trials of candidate disease-modifying drugs in AD (Frisoni et al., 2010).

Hippocampal volume and atrophy rate are typically computed from T1-weighted volumetric MRI data. Several manual segmentation protocols—in which the outline of the hippocampus is traced by an experienced observer—have been developed for this purpose (Pruessner et al., 2000; Boccardi et al., 2011b; Watson et al., 1997). To date, it has been difficult to determine the superiority of any one protocol over another (Boccardi et al., 2011a). Unfortunately, while a harmonized consensus protocol has recently been developed it is yet to be widely adopted (Boccardi et al., 2013a; Boccardi et al., 2013b). Despite being considered the neuroanatomical “gold standard” for structural image analysis, manual segmentation has several pitfalls. Primarily, manual segmentation is extraordinarily labour-intensive and time consuming, and is, as such, impractical for computing hippocampal volume in large patient samples. Furthermore, the adoption of any protocol requires careful assessment of inter-rater and intra-rater reliability to ensure the concordance of hippocampal volumes between different observers, and the stability of volume estimates from any single observer over time (Pruessner et al., 2000). In response to these drawbacks, several semi-automated and fully-automated hippocampal segmentation algorithms using libraries of manually segmented hippocampi as training data have been developed and are now freely accessible through popular neuroimaging software packages (Fischl et al., 2002; Patenaude et al., 2011; Pipitone et al., 2014). These algorithms permit hippocampal volumes and atrophy rates to be computed in large imaging datasets at the click of a mouse button or through the use of a few simple commands, while minimizing any potential impact of human bias (Mouiha &amp; Duchesne, 2011; Sabuncu et al., 2011; Pipitone et al., 2014).

Since different segmentation algorithms use slightly different a priori anatomical information to identify the boundaries of the hippocampus, there are, predictably, slight differences in absolute hippocampal volume and absolute rate of hippocampal atrophy generated by each individual algorithm for a given set of subjects (Mulder et al., 2014; Barnes, Ourselin, &amp; Fox, 2009). Such absolute differences can be tolerated provided that hippocampal volumes and atrophy rates are at least concordant across algorithms, that is, those subjects whose hippocampi are larger at baseline, or in whom hippocampal atrophy is occurring more rapidly over time, ought to be consistently be identified by each individual algorithm. In the absence of a single gold-standard algorithm, this type of inter-algorithm concordance would greatly strengthen our confidence in the use of hippocampal volume as a biomarker to assess the impact of therapies directed at AD, or perhaps even to track disease progression at the individual subject level in clinical practice. To date, there has been a relative paucity of studies addressing the concordance between hippocampal atrophy rates generated across various automated segmentation algorithms (Mulder et al., 2014). The need for these types of studies is ever more pressing because of easier access to hippocampal segmentation algorithms and high-performance computing hardware by clinicians and scientists who may lack expertise with quantitative neuroimaging. The need is heightened by the ongoing development of new segmentation algorithms, and the development of turnkey commercial services which take unprocessed MRI data from patients and generate hippocampal volumes and atrophy rates in a “black box” manner.

The work in this paper is inspired by an observation made by our group during our study of hippocampal volumes derived from the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI, http://www.adni-info.org), a large-scale, multi-site, longitudinal study of the natural history of AD, in part designed to determine the utility of various imaging biomarkers in detecting and tracking AD (Mueller et al., 2005; Holland et al., 2009; Weiner et al., 2012). While brain imaging data from ADNI is made freely available to researchers, the ADNI database also contains a list of longitudinal hippocampal volume estimates, generated by different semi-automated and automated methods, for most subjects. We observed, unexpectedly, that ADNI-reported hippocampal volumes increased over time in a number of subjects across the AD, MCI, and healthy control groups. This observation runs counter to the expected progressive atrophy of the hippocampus in AD and MCI, and to a lesser extent, in normal aging (Sabuncu et al., 2011; Mouiha &amp; Duchesne, 2011). We therefore undertook a study to determine the incidence of hippocampal volume increases over time in the ADNI cohort, by each of five different semi-automated or automated hippocampal segmentation algorithms. Finding a surprisingly large proportion of patients with hippocampal enlargement, we then examined whether patients demonstrating volume increases are identified independently and consistently across these algorithms. Based on these observations, we examined whether these volume increases could be explained by well-known sources of variability in hippocampal segmentation, such as scan-rescan reliability, or factors influencing MRI acquisition, such as field strength. Given the use of hippocampal volume and atrophy rates as biomarkers for disease progression and transition from NC to MCI to AD (Amaral et al., 2016; Wolz et al., 2009), the use of atrophy rates may also provide diagnostic classification accuracy. We further tested if this was true across the algorithms examined in this study. Our findings raise some concerns about the reliability of current segmentation algorithms in assessing hippocampal atrophy rate, and as such serve as a cautionary note to end users of these algorithms, especially those investigators designing clinical trials in AD, or clinicians who may be tempted to apply their output as a biomarker at the individual patient level to aid in clinical decision-making.

Materials and Methods

Data acquisition

Data used in this study were obtained from the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database (http://adni.loni.usc.edu/). The ADNI was launched in 2003 by the National Institute on Aging (NIA), the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering (NIBIB), the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), private pharmaceutical companies and non-profit organizations, as a $60 million, 5-year public-private partnership. The primary goal of ADNI has been to test whether longitudinal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), positron emission tomography (PET), other biological markers, and clinical and neuropsychological assessment can be combined to measure the progression of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and early Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Determination of sensitive and specific markers of very early AD progression is intended to aid researchers and clinicians to develop new treatments and monitor their effectiveness, as well as lessen the time and cost of clinical trials.

The Principal Investigator of this initiative is Michael W. Weiner, MD, VA Medical Center and University of California San Francisco. ADNI is the result of efforts of many co- investigators from a broad range of academic institutions and private corporations, and subjects have been recruited from over 50 sites across the U.S. and Canada. The initial goal of ADNI was to recruit 800 subjects but ADNI-1 has been followed by ADNI-GO and ADNI-2. To date these three protocols have recruited over 1500 adults, ages 55 to 90, to participate in the research, consisting of cognitively normal older individuals, people with early or late MCI, and people with early AD. The follow up duration of each group is specified in the protocols for ADNI-1, ADNI-2 and ADNI-GO. Subjects originally recruited for ADNI-1 and ADNI-GO had the option to be followed in ADNI-2. For up-to-date information, see www.adni-info.org.

From the ADNI1:Complete 1Yr 1.5T standardized dataset and ADNI1:Complete 1Yr 3T standardized dataset, we identified 650 and 142 subjects respectively for whom a baseline and a one-year follow-up MRI scan had been completed. ADNI investigators acquired MRI data using using 1.5T or 3.0T scanners (General Electric Healthcare, Philips Medical Systems or Siemens Medical Solutions) at multiple sites as described in (Jack et al., 2008). Uniformly pre-processed images available through the ADNI database were considered suitable for analyses after quality control. Pre-processing steps include gradient nonlinearity and intensity inhomogeneity correction, and phantom-based distortion correction (Wyman et al., 2013). Representative 1.5T imaging parameters were TR = 2400ms, TI = 1000ms, TE = 3.5ms, flip angle = 8, field of view = 240 × 240mm, a 192 × 192 × 166 matrix (x, y, and z directions) yielding voxel dimensions of 1.25mm × 1.25mm × 1.2mm. Representative 3.0T imaging parameters were TR = 2300ms, TI = 850–900ms, TE = 3.5ms, flip angle = 8–9, field of view = 256–260 × 240mm, a 256 × 256 × 160–170 matrix (x, y, and z directions) yielding voxel dimensions of 1.20mm × 1.00mm × 1.00mm.

Hippocampal segmentation algorithms evaluated

Five different algorithms for segmentation of the hippocampus were chosen for evaluation. Amongst these, three were algorithms from which hippocampal volume data were already available within the ADNI database, namely: FreeSurfer (Fischl et al., 2002; Fischl et al., 2004), the Quantitative Anatomical Regional Change (QUARC) algorithm from the University of San Diego California (from this point forward referred to as UCSD) (Holland et al., 2009; Holland &amp; Dale, 2011; Holland et al., 2012), and Surgical Navigation Technologies (SNT) (Hsu et al., 2002). Quality control of segmentations generated by these algorithms was already available through the ADNI database and subsequently used in our evaluations. We also chose two other segmentation algorithms not already available in the ADNI database, namely FSL FIRST (http://fsl.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/fslwiki/FIRST) (Patenaude et al., 2011), and a newly derived multi-atlas segmentation algorithm from our group, MAGeT-Brain (Chakravarty et al., 2013; Pipitone et al., 2014). FSL FIRST was chosen due to its popularity in the field and in other neuroimaging studies of the hippocampus, for example the recent ENIGMA genome-wide association meta-analysis study (Stein et al., 2012). MAGeT-Brain was chosen due to our familiarity with the methodology and our assessment of its overall quality in comparison to FreeSurfer, FSL FIRST, and SNT methods (Pipitone et al., 2014, Treadway et al., 2014). Note that the primary goal of our work was not to simply compare algorithmic performance, as has been undertaken in other studies (Pipitone et al., 2014; Mulder et al., 2014), but moreover to evaluate their performance and concordance in a longitudinal context. These algorithms are described in more detail below.

FreeSurfer

FreeSurfer is a publicly available image analysis tool box (https://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/) that uses a fully automated Markov random fields approach in order to identify cortical and subcortical structures based on probabilistic information available from a library of manually segmented images (Fischl et al., 2002; Fischl et al., 2004). Data accessed for this study was generated using the recently derived minimally-biased processing stream (Reuter, Schmansky, Rosas, &amp; Fischl, 2012) that relies on within-subject template creation and initializing the processing for each time point with common information from the subject template in order to minimize potential confounds due to over-regularization. Data from ADNI1 (1.5T) and ADNI2 (3T) were processed using FreeSurfer 4.4 and 5.1 respectively, using the longitudinal processing stream.

UCSD

The UCSD method was developed for accurate quantification of both global and local structural changes based on longitudinal MRI scans (Holland et al., 2009; Holland &amp; Dale, 2011; Holland et al., 2012). The methodology relies on the fully affine matching of longitudinal data, followed by an intensity alignment stage that corrects for relative B1-induced intensity distortions. This is followed by a nonlinear registration phase to match longitudinal images using a linear elasticity model which estimates a well-regularized displacement field to align two images (Holland &amp; Dale, 2011). The displaced transformed image will deform cubic voxels into irregular hexahedra in order to estimate volume changes. This is done in a hierarchical iterative procedure in order to capture subtle volumetric differences between longitudinal data from the same individual. FreeSurfer based segmentations (as above) were used to create the baseline definitions of the hippocampal segmentations. Final hippocampal volumes were estimated using the UCSD procedure as the output of the nonlinear registration phase.

Surgical Navigation Technologies (SNT)

Semi-automated hippocampal volumetry was carried out using a commercially available high-dimensional brain mapping tool (Medtronic Surgical Navigation Technologies, Louisville, CO) that has previously been validated and compared to manual tracing of the hippocampus (Hsu et al., 2002). Measurements of hippocampal volume was achieved by manually placing 22 control points as local landmarks for the hippocampus on the individual brain MRI data: one landmark at the hippocampal head, one at the tail, and four per image (i.e.: at the superior, inferior, medial, and lateral boundaries) on five equally spaced sections perpendicular to the long axis of the hippocampus. Second, fluid image transformation is used to match the individual brains to a template brain (Miller et al., 1997). The voxels corresponding to the hippocampus are then labeled and counted to obtain volume.

FSL-FIRST

Segmentations were derived using FSL-FIRST, part of the FSL toolkit (Jenkinson, Beckmann, Behrens, Woolrich, &amp; Smith, 2012), (http://fsl.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/fslwiki/)). FIRST is a model-based segmentation tool that uses shape and appearance based models constructed from manually segmented images (Patenaude et al., 2011). The manual labels are parameterized as surface meshes and modeled as a point distribution model. Deformable surfaces are used to automatically parameterize the volumetric labels using constraints to preserve vertex correspondence across the training data. Based on learned models, FIRST searches through linear combinations of shape modes of variation for the most probable shape instance given the observed intensities in a T1-weighted image. FIRST was implemented using FSL 4.1.9 version. FIRST segmentations were performed using the run_first_all script according to the FIRST user guide (http://fsl.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/fslwiki/FIRST/UserGuide).

MAGeT Brain

The MAGeT Brain framework (Pipitone et al., 2014; Chakravarty et al., 2013) is a modified multi-atlas framework that uses a minimal number of well-defined atlases as inputs. In our implementation we used five high-resolution atlases of the hippocampus (Winterburn et al., 2013) as input. MAGeT Brain uses a subset of the data to be segmented to automatically generate a template library so that the segmentation process can be bootstrapped using a subset of the data. Template library images were chosen based on a representative sampling of subject diagnosis, age, and sex to model neuroanatomical variability within the ADNI cohort. Seven subjects from each diagnostic group (AD, MCI, healthy control) spanning the age range within each group were chosen. The template library is generated through automated nonlinear registration between each of the atlases and each of the subjects in the template library, yielding five candidate segmentations for each hippocampus. The template library now acts like regular input segmentations in a regular multi-atlas procedure. Each of the subjects is then matched to each of the subjects in the template library to yield 105 candidate segmentations. The final segmentation is created by selecting the most frequently occurring label at each voxel location (Collins &amp; Pruessner, 2010). All images were converted into the MINC file format (http://www.bic.mni.mcgill.ca/ServicesSoftware/MINC) and all nonlinear registrations were performed using symmetric normalization and a cross-correlation objective function as implemented in the ANTs toolbox (Avants et al., 2008).

Volumetric data generated from the FreeSurfer, UCSD, and SNT methods were obtained from the ADNI database (adni.loni.usc.edu) between March 2012 and December 2012. FSL-FIRST and MAGeT Brain were locally processed for 1.5T and 3T data. FreeSurfer (longitudinal, version 5.1.0) was used to process 3T images as the data were not available from the ADNI database.

Identification of subjects showing hippocampal “growth”

We compared baseline to 12-month hippocampal volumes generated by each algorithm to identify those subjects showing hippocampal “growth” over time. Simply, we defined hippocampal growth as occurring in a given subject if that subject demonstrated a larger hippocampal volume at the 12-month time point compared to baseline. Hippocampal “growers” were classified as unilateral (i.e., increase over 12 months in volume of either the right or left hippocampus), bilateral (i.e., increase over 12 months in volume of both right and left hippocampi), or average (i.e., increase over 12 months in mean volume of both hippocampi).

Quality control

Quality control (QC) assessments were performed in order to identify and eliminate subjects with hippocampal segmentation failures which could impact our hippocampal growth analysis. Briefly, QC information for segmentations from the FreeSurfer and UCSD algorithms was obtained directly from the ADNI database, while QC was assessed for FSL and MAGeT using an in-house method. QC could not be assessed for the SNT algorithm. A detailed description of QC methods follows below.

FreeSurfer

QC information for individual hippocampal segmentations was obtained from the ADNI database. According to ADNI, QC assessment was carried out as outlined in the ADNI protocols (http://adni.bitbucket.org/docs/UCSFFRESFR/UCSFFreeSurferMethodsSummary.pdf). QC was assessed in both regional and global registration and segmentation accuracy. For the purposes of this study, we focused on the ADNI-reported “Overall QC” metric, which is the most rigorous QC measure, meant to reflect the quality of cortical and subcortical segmentation across the entire brain volume. Specifically, we considered a given hippocampal segmentation in a given subject as acceptable only if that subject achieved an Overall QC metric of “PASS”.

UCSD

QC information in the form of a simple two-point scale was obtained from the ADNI database, an ADNI-reported rating of “0” denoted segmentation failure, while a rating of “1” indicated a passing segmentation.

SNT

Formal QC was not reported in ADNI, and was not performed considering that the SNT algorithm is semi-automated, depending in part on the selection of anatomical landmarks on the hippocampus by an expert observer. As such, it is thought to be resistant to gross segmentation error, and is frequently considered a “gold-standard” reference (Leung et al., 2010; Wolz et al., 2010).

FSL-FIRST, MAGeT Brain

QC was performed by one of the authors (MTMP). Fifteen representative slices encompassing left and right hippocampal segmentations were used to evaluate QC. Specifically, if either hippocampus was under- or overestimated by at least 10 voxels in three or more slices then the segmentation did not pass. The MAGeT Brain segmentations used here have previously been analyzed in a validation study of this algorithm, and have been found to show good concordance with manual segmentations derived using the Pruessner protocol (Pruessner et al., 2000) as well as SNT-generated volumes (Pipitone et al., 2014).

QC assessment as described above was used to generate three subject groups based on increasingly stringent QC levels: First pass QC: subjects passing first-pass QC were simply those with complete volumetric information for all algorithms at both time points. First-pass QC did not involve any specific assessment of segmentation quality.

Method-wise QC: subjects passing method-wise QC were those who, for any given algorithm, passed QC by that particular algorithm at both time points. Obviously, this resulted in different numbers of subjects surviving QC for each algorithm.

Across-method QC: among subjects in #1, only those passing QC by all algorithms at both time points.

Evaluation of scan-rescan reliability

Scan-rescan reliability can be an important source of error influencing measurement accuracy of longitudinal volumetric changes in brain structure, and has been assessed in studies which report the output of automatic segmentation algorithms applied to multiple MRI scans of the same subject at short intervals (Morey et al., 2010). Resulting segmentations and volumetric differences between repeat scans are then typically used to quantify error limits within the segmentation algorithm.

We addressed scan-rescan reliability in two ways. First, we determined literature-reported mean scan-rescan reliability data for each algorithm:

FreeSurfer, FSL-FIRST, UCSD: scan-rescan data were estimated from a previous study that compared FreeSurfer and FSL segmentations (Morey et al., 2010). Data were not available specifically for the UCSD method, though we expected higher sensitivity in detecting subtle longitudinal changes for the UCSD method compared to FreeSurfer (Holland &amp; Dale, 2011). We therefore used the same threshold for FreeSurfer and UCSD as a conservative measure of reliability.

SNT: absolute volumetric differences between raters were quantified from a previous study comparing SNT with manual segmentation (Hsu et al., 2002).

MAGeT Brain: images from five subjects scanned within a week locally were processed with the MAGeT Brain pipeline, and absolute volumetric differences between time points were quantified.

Mean scan-rescan reliability data (expressed as a percentage in supplementary table 1) for each algorithm were then used to define a conservative threshold for hippocampal growth: “candidate” growers were those subjects in ADNI who, for a given segmentation algorithm, demonstrated an increase in hippocampal volume between baseline and 1-year greater than mean scan-rescan reliability error for that algorithm.

Second, we used data obtained from the Open Access Series of Imaging Studies (OASIS; http://www.oasis-brains.org/) from the Consortium for Reliability and Reproducibility (CoRR; website: http://fcon_1000.projects.nitrc.org/indi/CoRR/html/) (Zuo et al., 2014). OASIS (1.5T) and CoRR (3T) datasets were used to independently assess the scan-rescan reliability of the FSL, FreeSurfer and MAGeT Brain segmentation algorithms, since we had ready access to these algorithms in our lab. A set of 20 (12 Female/8 Male, Ages 19–34, all right handed) subjects from the OASIS dataset who underwent a repeat scan within 90 days were selected, yielding a set of 40 total images. A set of 84 (46 Female/38 Male, Ages 18–62, handedness not available) subjects from the CoRR dataset who underwent a repeat scan within 24 days were selected, yielding a set of 168 images. Specifically, images from the HNU_1, IPCAS_1 and XHCUMS sites were selected from the CoRR dataset.

OASIS and CoRR data were processed independently with FSL, Freesurfer and MAGeT Brain segmentation algorithms as described above for the ADNI dataset. FSL First (version 5.0.6) was run using the run_first_all command in accordance with http://fsl.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/fslwiki/FIRST/UserGuide. The FreeSurfer longitudinal pipeline (version 4.4 for 1.5T, version 5.1 for 3T) was run for each scan-rescan pair according to http://freesurfer.net/fswiki/LongitudinalProcessing. MAGeT Brain segmentation was run in accordance with https://github.com/CobraLab/MAGeTbrain. For 1.5T data, 19 of the 20 baseline images were selected as templates. For 3T data, 21 of the 84 baseline images were selected in a demographically representative fashion.

The resulting scan-rescan CoRR-OASIS reliability distributions for each algorithm were used as null distributions against which ADNI 1-year atrophy rate distributions were compared. Subjects from ADNI with atrophy rate outside the right-tail 90th percentile of the scan-rescan distribution were considered as an alternate definition for identifying candidate “growers”. We chose a more liberal 90th percentile threshold based on the assumption that the scan-rescan distributions we computed likely undersample the true population variance in scan-rescan values. By generating a null distribution of test-retest reliability error we considered that single individuals that fell to the edges of this distribution would be the most likely candidates to demonstrate plausible biological growth over the course of one year. Moreover, if these individuals were most likely to exhibit hippocampal growth over one year, we hypothesized that this phenomenon should be captured through the different algorithms tested in this manuscript.

In this particular case, it may be more beneficial to identify high rates of atrophy using a whole brain or temporal lobe measures (such as a medial temporal atrophy score). However, at the present time, there are limited measures for lateral ventricle and whole brain volumes available via ADNI. Consequently, deriving such scores would limit us and potentially bias downstream analysis to a specific method.

Statistical analysis

General linear models were used to compare baseline hippocampal volume and hippocampal atrophy rate between segmentation algorithms and diagnostic groups, with age and sex used as co-variates. We verified the normality of the atrophy rate distributions using a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test for normality as these rates are derived using the ratio of two normally distributed variables. The χ2 test (or Fisher’s exact test for small n) was used to assess differences in the proportion of QC failures between algorithms, diagnostic categories, and timepoints, as well as differences in the proportion of candidate hippocampal “growers” by each method. Correction for multiple comparisons was performed with the Marascuilo procedure for multiple proportions. To determine if any subset of individuals (i.e.: AD with smallest hippocampi) were driving QC failures, we also split each diagnostic group into quartiles based on total hippocampal volume. For each method we determined if the group representation in the QC failures was different to the QC passes. To assess concordance between various algorithms in baseline hippocampal volume and hippocampal atrophy rate, the intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) was used in a two-way, mixed-model for a single measure using a consistency agreement definition.

Diagnostic classification based on atrophy rates

We performed pairwise classification between three diagnostic categories (AD, MCI, and NC) using hippocampal atrophy rates derived from the five different segmentation pipelines described above. To have a consistent set of subjects we used hippocampal volumes that survived the most stringent level of quality control. We trained three different machine-learning models: logistic regression with Lasso, support vector machine, and random forest (RF). We only used total bilateral hippocampal atrophy estimated at one year as input.

The model performance was evaluated using 10-fold nested cross-validation procedure for each input choice. Folds were stratified according to the proportion of each diagnostic category. Data were preprocessed to center at mean and feature-wise scaled to have unit-variance. (http://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.preprocessing.scale.html) Briefly, cross-validation was performed as follows. First, we divided the input data into 10 subsets. Then each model was trained using 9 of these 10 subsets and performance was measured on the held-out test subset. The process was repeated 10 times. Hyperparameters of the model (number of trees, Lasso penalty etc.) were determined through a grid search using an inner cross validation loop created by further dividing the training subset in each round. All models were implemented using scikit-learn toolbox (http://scikit-learn.org/stable/index.html). The binary classification performance was measured using receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves and area under the curve (AUC) values.”

Results

Demographic and clinical data

Demographic and clinical features of subjects in all three diagnostic categories are listed in table 1.

Baseline hippocampal volume and hippocampal atrophy rates are consistent with literature-reported data

Figure 1 shows mean baseline hippocampal volume and mean hippocampal atrophy rates categorized by segmentation algorithm at 1.5T (3T data are shown in supplementary figure 1) at a first pass level of QC. We observed that atrophy rates across methods and field strengths were normally distributed with the exception of UCSD at 1.5T (D=0.11, p=0.01). As a result we chose to continue to use the analyses detailed in the Statistical Methods section of the Methods (See supplementary table 2). Mean 12-month hippocampal atrophy rates for subjects with AD ranged from 1.6% to 6.0%, well within the expected range of literature-reported values (Barnes et al., 2009). There was no significant difference in hippocampal atrophy rate across algorithms.

Automated hippocampal segmentation algorithms result in a sizeable number of hippocampal segmentation failures

We found evidence of hippocampal segmentation failures by every fully automated algorithm (FreeSurfer, UCSD, FSL, and MAGeT) in every diagnostic category (i.e., AD, MCI, or NC). Segmentation failures were observed regardless of scan field strength: the proportion of segmentation failures for each algorithm and diagnostic category at 1.5T is summarized by figure 2, while the proportion of failures at 3T is shown in supplementary figure 2 (raw data on segmentation failures is found in supplementary tables 3 and 4). The substantial number of segmentation failures, naturally, caused several subjects to fail more stringent QC assessment. At 1.5T, across all diagnostic categories, only approximately half (202 out of 398, 50.8%) of those subjects with scans available at baseline and 12 months passed across-method QC (i.e., had acceptable hippocampal segmentations at both time points by all algorithms). Overall, the proportion of AD patients passing across-method QC was significantly lower than that of NC subjects (37.8% vs. 58.9%, χ2=9.95, p=0.007), but not significantly lower than that of MCI subjects (51.4%). At 3T, 58.1% (36 out of 62) of all subjects passed across-method QC overall; as at 1.5T, the proportion of AD patients passing across-method QC was significantly lower than that of NC subjects (40.0% vs. 78.2%, χ2=6.26, p=0.04) but not that of MCI patients (50.0%).

We considered the possibility that segmentation algorithms might be less accurate when applied to MRI scans of increasingly atrophic brains. If this were true, scans at 12 months would be more likely to be classified as QC failures than those at baseline, since atrophy would be expected to progress over time. To test this hypothesis, we compared the proportion of QC failures by each algorithm at baseline and at 12-months separately. At 1.5T, the proportion of subjects with a failed hippocampal segmentation was no different at 12-months compared to baseline for all algorithms (p &gt; 0.05 by χ2 test) except UCSD (χ2=123.31, p &lt; 0.001). Similarly, at 3T, only the UCSD algorithm had a lower proportion of QC failures at baseline (p &lt; 0.001, Fisher’s exact test). No specific diagnostic category was seen to have an increased proportion of failures in any method at 1.5T or 3T (supplementary table 5). Interestingly—and uniquely—there were no segmentation failures at baseline by the UCSD algorithm, in any clinical group or at either field strength.

Automated hippocampal segmentation algorithms demonstrate that hippocampal “growth” occurs in a substantial proportion of subjects

At 1.5T, at the first-pass QC level, a substantial proportion of subjects in each of the AD, MCI, and NC groups demonstrated increases in hippocampal volume over 12 months (i.e., were candidate “growers”) across all algorithms (table 2, figure 3). The percentage of candidate “growers” for each method, diagnosis, and QC level at 3T is listed in supplementary table 6 and 7. Even among those subjects who passed stringent, across-method QC, hippocampal “growth” was still observed in some subjects in every diagnostic group. In AD patients, the proportion of candidate “growers” in average hippocampal volume ranged from 2.94% (UCSD algorithm) to 23.53% (MAGeT algorithm). In MCI patients, the proportion of mean hippocampal candidate “growers” varied from 7.61% (UCSD) to 27.17% (SNT algorithm). In NC, between 18.42% (UCSD) and nearly half (48.68%, SNT) of subjects were mean hippocampal candidate “growers”, and the SNT, FSL, Freesurfer, and MAGeT algorithms all found that &gt;35% of NC subjects demonstrated growth in average hippocampal volume. Overall, the proportion of average hippocampal candidate “growers” was different between algorithms (omnibus χ2=26.78, p &lt; 0.0001). Post-hoc testing showed that the proportion of average hippocampal candidate “growers” was lower for the UCSD method compared to any other algorithm (p &lt; 0.035 for all pairwise comparisons). Owing to smaller sample sizes, the results at 3T were more variable (supplementary figure 3, supplementary tables 6 and 7). Growth rates as a percentage at 1.5T are given in supplementary table 8.

Hippocampal growth in some subjects cannot entirely be explained by scan-rescan reliability

We used literature-reported mean scan-rescan variability values for each segmentation algorithm as a threshold to identify individuals who are plausible candidates for hippocampal growth, that is, only subjects showing increases in hippocampal volume above these thresholds were considered candidate “growers”. Results of this analysis at 1.5T are summarized in table 3, divided according to QC level. Notably, we found that adjusting for scan-rescan variability still did not completely exclude “candidate” hippocampal growers by each method, even among those subjects who passed stringent across-method QC. As an example, by the SNT algorithm at 1.5T, fully 13% of MCI patients and 22% of NC subjects demonstrated average hippocampal growth greater than scan-rescan variability threshold at the highest QC level.

Comparisons between the scan-rescan distributions obtained from FSL, Freesurfer, and MAGeT Brain (using the CoRR-OASIS dataset), and the 1-year ADNI atrophy rate distributions, are shown in figures 4 and 5. By all three algorithms, there were still subjects who exhibited hippocampal growth at 1 year that exceeded the 90th percentile of the right tail of the scan-rescan distribution. This observation held true even at the most stringent QC level.

Subjects showing hippocampal growth are not concordant across segmentation algorithms

Despite unexpectedly large numbers of hippocampal growers across diagnostic groups and segmentation algorithms, very few individual candidate “growers” were identified consistently across multiple algorithms (figure 3, supplementary figure 3). At 1.5T, among subjects passing 1st-pass QC, a total of only 7 subjects (0 AD, 3 MCI, and 4 NC) demonstrated mean hippocampal growth across all methods. By contrast, on its own, each individual algorithm in isolation found from as low as 76 (UCSD) to as high as 180 (MAGeT) candidate hippocampal “growers”. Similarly, considering only those subjects who passed stringent across-method QC, a total of only 3 (0 AD, 1 MCI, and 2 NC) subjects demonstrated mean hippocampal growth by all algorithms. Yet, between 22 and 63 subjects demonstrated hippocampal growth when any given algorithm was considered on its own at the across-method QC level.

Segmentation algorithms are poorly concordant in their estimates of hippocampal volume change over time

To further characterize the degree of concordance—or lack thereof—in hippocampal atrophy rates across algorithms, we used the intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) as a summary statistic. We computed ICC with a two-way, mixed-model for a single measure using a consistency agreement definition. As shown in table 4, ICC values suggested good inter-algorithm reliability (i.e., ICC &gt; 0.7) for baseline hippocampal volume measurements, irrespective of field strength and QC level. However, ICC values for % hippocampal volume change over one year were much lower (ICC range 0.05–0.319), and well below the threshold for acceptable inter-algorithm reliability. Neither increased field strength nor more stringent QC appreciably improved ICC for % hippocampal volume change. In summary, the five segmentation algorithms we assessed were very poorly concordant in their estimates of one-year hippocampal atrophy rate across all diagnostic categories, all field strengths, and all levels of scan QC.

Variable diagnostic classification based on atrophy rates and method chosen

Subject-wise classification across algorithms and classification methods is not concordant (see Fig 6). All methods perform well for the NC vs AD case (mean ROC AUC range: 0.61–0.91). UCSD performs the best for this classification (mean ROC AUC range: 0.84–0.91). FSL, FS, and SNT show similar performance across classifiers (mean ROC AUC range &gt; 0.7) except for random forests with FSL and SNT (mean ROC AUC = 0.58 and 0.67, respectively). MAGeT performs the worst in this comparison with (mean ROC AUC &lt; 0.66 across classifiers). All segmentation methods drop in accuracy substantially when classifying NC vs MCI (mean ROC AUC range: 0.47–0.73) with the majority of ROC values being &lt;0.70. There is no clearly superior algorithm in this comparison, however SNT performs least accurately (mean ROC AUC range: 0.47–54). When classifying NC vs AD, a similar pattern is observed. Classification accuracies range from 0.36–0.77 with the majority of values &lt;0.70. MAGeT achieves the lowest accuracy (mean ROC AUC=0.36) with logistic regression, but performs within the bounds of the other classification techniques when used with support vector machines or random forests. FreeSurfer achieves the best accuracy with random forest (mean ROC =0.77).

Discussion

Motivated by our preliminary observation that within-subject hippocampal volume increased over one year in some patients—including those diagnosed with AD—in the ADNI database, we aimed to determine the full extent of this phenomenon, and the degree to which it could be explained by sources of variability in automated hippocampal segmentation. Our assessment of five different semi-automated or automated hippocampal segmentation algorithms—including three (SNT, Freesurfer, and UCSD) which were used to generate publicly-reported hippocampal volume data in ADNI—showed that a considerable proportion of ADNI patients demonstrated volumetric hippocampal growth over one year by all algorithms spanning AD, MCI, and NC groups. We also closely analyzed hippocampal segmentation quality for each algorithm and examined concordance between algorithms. We found a considerable incidence of hippocampal segmentation failures for each method across all diagnostic groups. Interestingly, even when stringent QC measures were used to exclude erroneous segmentations, each algorithm still identified a number of candidate hippocampal “growers”. Adjustment for scan-rescan reliability error further reduced the number of candidate hippocampal growers, but did not eliminate them entirely. Ultimately, we found that hippocampal growth was inconsistently identified in the same subjects by all algorithms, and that one-year hippocampal atrophy rate estimates—as opposed to cross-sectional, single timepoint estimates of baseline hippocampal volume—were poorly concordant across algorithms. In addition, we demonstrate that there is also no concordance between algorithms at the level of the single subject.

While there have been several previous studies in the literature addressing issues of error, variability, and reliability in automated hippocampal segmentation (Morey et al., 2010; Pipitone et al., 2014; Mulder et al., 2014; Mouiha &amp; Duchesne, 2011), our study is unique for three reasons: 1) we frame the issue in the context of hippocampal “growth” over time, 2) we are primarily concerned with inter-algorithm concordance in hippocampal atrophy rate, which is a popular longitudinal biomarker for studies of putative disease-modifying therapies in AD, and 3) we assessed five separate segmentation algorithms, including, but not limited to, those algorithms used to generate hippocampal volume data in ADNI.

To our knowledge, there have to date been no studies specifically examining the phenomenon of hippocampal growth over time, either in the setting of AD or in data obtained from ADNI. A closer look at the literature, however, does hint at its occurrence without explicit mention. In one example, Mouiha and Duchesne (2011) examined hippocampal atrophy rates in the ADNI dataset using SNT and Freesurfer, and found that for the SNT algorithm, the mean monthly hippocampal atrophy rate between 6–12 months after baseline was greater than zero for both the left and right hippocampi in HC subjects. Put differently, the hippocampi of healthy subjects, segmented by SNT, at a group-wide level, demonstrated a mean increase in volume over a 6 month interval. Notably—and in keeping with the pattern of non-concordance we identified—Freesurfer did not find evidence of group-wide hippocampal growth when applied to the same group of HC subjects. However, unlike in our study, these authors did not report the results of QC on any segmented images, and only considered scans acquired at 1.5T.

Scan-rescan reliability error is perhaps the most straightforward explanation to account for hippocampal growth we encountered in the present study. Repeated MRI scanning of the same subject, even under identical scanner and acquisition parameters (as in ADNI), does not necessarily generate identical images, because of small changes in the position of the subject’s head within the MRI coil, as well as instabilities in the magnetic field even on stringently monitored scanners (Morey et al., 2010). As a result, hippocampal segmentations may be different between successive scans of the same patient even when no actual volume changes have occurred. Note that, by contrast, the output of automated hippocampal segmentation algorithms is thought to be almost perfectly reproducible when applied to the same scan at different times, whether one uses different computing platforms, or runs algorithms in parallel on the same platform (Gronenschild et al., 2012). Thresholding by scan-rescan error, however, still did not completely eliminate hippocampal growers. There are several potential reasons for this finding. First, it is possible that we underestimated the degree of scan-rescan variability. For subjects in ADNI, actual scan-rescan variability for any given algorithm may well be greater than literature-reported values or our own internally generated variability distributions, since these values were obtained using different scanners than in ADNI, and from different populations free of older subjects or AD patients (exception is (Hsu et al., 2002)). Second, while the effect of the duration between repeated scans on scan-rescan variability in hippocampal volume is poorly understood (Holland et al., 2009; Holland &amp; Dale, 2011) it would seem intuitive that a longer interval between scans—such as the 12-month interval in this study—might increase the likelihood of larger inter-scan variability, thus, the thresholds we identified from the literature may be underestimates. Finally, it is possible that scan-rescan variability is simply larger than average for those specific individual subjects whom we identified as “candidate” hippocampal growers.

One intriguing alternative to the scan-rescan reliability explanation is the possibility that hippocampal growth as we have observed it represents a true biological phenomenon. The hippocampus has a notable capacity for plasticity and regeneration, and several quantitative human MRI studies have suggested that it may enlarge in response to physical and mental training paradigms, or during recovery from neurological disease states (see (Fotuhi, Do, &amp; Jack, 2012) for a review). To our knowledge, there is only one published instance of therapy-related hippocampal enlargement in AD, reported in a subset of patients with mild AD treated using deep brain stimulation of the fornix (Sankar et al., 2015). Though these preliminary findings have yet to be replicated, it is conceivable that in a certain subset of AD or MCI subjects that hippocampal volume may increase over time as a compensatory response to Alzheimer’s pathology or aging. Also, the accumulation of amyloid pathology within the hippocampi could theoretically produce a spurious increase in hippocampal volume in selected patients (analogous to data in some rodent models of AD (Lau et al., 2008)). Obviously, these possibilities are purely speculative, and we certainly do not have any convincing evidence from our data to support their existence. In a set of post-hoc analyses not shown, we could not identify any characteristic clinical traits or cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) features unique to hippocampal growers for any given method, including those who showed growth over and above scan-rescan variability thresholds. Perhaps more importantly, in the absence of any real ground truth in hippocampal volume change for each patient, and because agreement between segmentation algorithms in identifying hippocampal growers was so poor, it is a challenge to know in which patients one ought to even begin looking for evidence of biological hippocampal growth.

A particularly significant finding of our study is that the automated hippocampal segmentation algorithms we assessed are in good agreement regarding baseline hippocampal volume, but in rather poor agreement regarding the magnitude and direction of hippocampal volume changes over time, for subjects in the ADNI dataset. Interestingly, poor concordance in hippocampal atrophy rate did not appear to be remedied by increasing field strength (which should increase signal-to-noise and tissue contrast in the hippocampal region) nor by applying more stringent QC measures. Taken together, these data suggest more generally that a given automated segmentation algorithm may have a particular bias toward exaggerating or underestimating volume change relative to other algorithms for a given subject with a unique hippocampal morphology. This may most convincingly be explained by a combination of two key factors. First, different segmentation algorithms use different a priori anatomical definitions of the hippocampus; as an example, some algorithms exclude surrounding white matter such as the alveus or fimbria (Pipitone et al., 2014), while others incorporate these into the hippocampal volume (Collins &amp; Pruessner, 2010; Pruessner et al., 2002). This fact alone would not necessarily worsen inter-algorithm concordance if hippocampal atrophy in AD, MCI, and aging were evenly distributed across the hippocampus. The second key factor, however, is that hippocampal atrophy may proceed at different rates within different regions of the hippocampus, as evidenced by recent work using hippocampal subfields as outcome measures (La Joie et al., 2010; Mueller et al., 2010; Apostolova et al., 2012). Accordingly, various algorithms may be differentially sensitive to—and their atrophy rate estimates differentially influenced by—the subject-specific spatial distribution of atrophy within the hippocampus, leading to significant discrepancies in the calculated magnitude of longitudinal hippocampal volume change.

Apart from possibly being driven by differences in neuroanatomical definitions, the lack of concordance between atrophy rates may have significant implications in studies of aging, pathological aging, and in clinical trials using hippocampal volume as a primary outcome measure. Given the confounds over not only the specificity of hippocampal volumes at the individual subject level in a longitudinal setting, but the concordance between atrophy rates as well, the choice of algorithm will have a clear effect on outcome measures and the acceptable range of values in research and clinical trial settings. We previously reported the effects of proportional biases on hippocampal volume estimation in Pipitone et al., (2014), where we observed that FSL and FreeSurfer, in particular, tended to over-estimate the size of larger hippocampi while underestimating the size of smaller hippocampi. We noted the opposite, and more conservative bias, in MAGeT and SNT algorithms. Thus the next step, which is outside the scope of this manuscript, would be to elucidate if there is a homologous proportional bias related to atrophy rate. Importantly, researchers may want to consider the use of different algorithms for different purposes based on the data we have presented here and depending on the overall endpoints for their studies or clinical trials.

Overall, our rigorous and comprehensive approach to QC resulted in the rejection of a large number of hippocampal segmentations across algorithms, and merits some comment. For the Freesurfer and UCSD algorithms, we made the decision to use QC data reported in ADNI, since these data are publicly accessible. Since many studies consider SNT segmentations to be a “gold standard”—given that they require observer input and correction during their computation—we did not consider QC for SNT (Leung et al., 2010; Wolz et al., 2010). For those algorithms lacking QC information in ADNI (i.e., FSL and MAGeT), we performed a detailed visual inspection of segmentation quality in each subject. Given the absence of a standard consensus method to assess the quality of hippocampal segmentations, we erred on the side of a strict approach, limiting as much as possible the potential influence of spurious segmentations on the measured incidence of hippocampal growers. As an example, for the FreeSurfer algorithm, we classified a particular subject as a hippocampal segmentation failure if that subject showed evidence of segmentation inaccuracies anywhere in the brain across a multitude of cortical or subcortical regions (i.e., if that subject failed “overall” QC). Our rationale was that evidence of poor tissue classification or poor delineation of anatomy anywhere in the brain might introduce doubt about the accuracy of hippocampal segmentations as well. No doubt this contributed to the high failure rate we found for the FreeSurfer algorithm. Note that we are neither advocating any particular approach to assessing hippocampal segmentation quality, nor are we suggesting that the ideal approach needs to be as stringent as the one we employed. That being said, our QC data are consistent with recent reports in the literature suggesting that the influence of failed segmentations may have the effect of significantly reducing the reproducibility of hippocampal volume change estimates in longitudinal studies (Mulder et al., 2014). Indeed, our findings underscore the need to re-evaluate the validity of the oft-used argument that it is too costly to perform rigorous QC of hippocampal segmentations in large datasets. At the very least, our results would argue that in studies using ADNI-reported hippocampal values, the (easily accessed) accompanying QC data ought to be considered as well.

One open question based on the findings presented in this manuscript is the ability of these algorithms to classify individuals by their diagnosis. While this could be an important undertaking in the context of the hippocampal volume segmentation, such analyses are a topic of hot debate in the literature (Coupe et al., 2011a; Coupe et al., 2015; Eskildsen et al., 2013; Davatzikos et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2010). Such a problem would require several design choices, which themselves will be controversial, each of which could easily account for a source of detailed investigation. For example, should the input data that is used consist of baseline volumes only, atrophy rates, or volumes from both time points? Should data that passes QC on a per-method basis be used or should the dataset consist of only those subjects that have passed QC across several methods? The impact of image processing techniques on multi-variate/machine learning applications is an open question in the literature that requires further investigation, but is, ultimately, outside the scope of this paper.

Based on our segmentation results, we also performed classification of the different diagnostic categories using three different commonly used classifiers (logistic regression with lasso, random forests, and support vector machines) to determine if we could identify patterns that would properly identify patients in the different diagnostic categories. Other groups have used classification techniques to better identify diagnostic groups. For example, Wolz et al (2010) achieve a correct classification rate of 82% between AD vs. NC and they also demonstrate they can identify MCI patients who progress to AD (with an accuracy of 64%) based only on 1-year atrophy rates. Although we did not perform this latter comparison, it could be further explored using the framework in this manuscript. However, given the large number of comparisons, segmentation algorithms, and classifiers already explored in this manuscript, it would have been difficult to treat this latter question (MCI-to-AD conversion) appropriately while maintaining equivalent datasets across methods (given the significant issues with quality control that we observed).

It is important to note that there are other studies that examine the utility of hippocampal volume as a biomarker based on the relationship between hippocampal atrophy and established biomarkers related to AD pathophysiology. These include the observations that longitudinal atrophy rates measured using surface-based (Morra et al., 2008) and volumetric techniques (Schuff et al., 2009) have a strong relationship with known AD-specific risk factors (such as being positive for apolipoprotein e4 isoform and low education status) and cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers.

Another open question that remains is how to deal with the lack of concordance between methodologies. While many groups have started to move to standardized datasets and practices in evaluating hippocampal and hippocampal subfield volumes, further investigation may be necessary (Boccardi et al., 2013a; Yushkevich et al., 2015; Schoemaker et al., 2016). Heterogeneity in scientific methodology is important, so long as methodologies have been stringently validated (as is the case with algorithms that have been evaluated here). Furthermore, our understanding of group effects certainly benefits from many groups asking similar questions but answering them with different tools. While these methods likely show accurate results at the group level (significant cross-sectional and longitudinal differences), it is clear that their precision (i.e., treatment of single subjects, atrophy rates) varies substantially. This is important and requires further replication and research with the use of open-source software and shared datasets.

It may also be worth considering the differences between the design of the different methods. In this study two of the methods that were used were explicitly designed for the analyses of longitudinal datasets. Previous work by Jovicich and colleagues (2014) examined the reliability of the FreeSurfer cross-sectional and longitudinal processing streams in a multi-site setting and demonstrated that far more variability in the cross-sectional scheme across sites for hippocampal volumes. These results are somewhat reflected in our results as well, as after stringent QC of all methods in performed, as we observe a slightly larger number of candidate “growers” in methods not optimized for longitudinal data. The UCSD method appears to perform more strongly in this regard and shows a small number of growers across QC methods and only 1.1% of MCI subjects as candidate growers after across-methods QC. Nontheless, it is somewhat puzzling why in some instances that FreeSurfer demonstrates a substantial number of candidate growers (&gt;7% in some cases; see Table 3). It is possible that this can be attributed to a confluence of factors included older imaging (1.5T) and image processing (older FreeSurfer versions) that were used in the processing of the data that was examined. It remains to be seen if newer versions of the FreeSurfer pipeline may behave differently with these data.

One limitation of our study is that we did not compare the incidence of hippocampal growth in ADNI by manual tracing to that observed with automated segmentation algorithms. Manual tracing by trained observers is considered by some to be more accurate than automated methods in determining either hippocampal volume or atrophy rate (Pruessner et al., 2000; Barnes et al., 2008; Boccardi et al., 2013a; Boccardi et al., 2011a; Nestor et al., 2012; Pipitone et al., 2014), and segmentations generated manually are usually considered the gold standard against which automated methods are validated (Mulder et al., 2014). In addition, manual tracing is less susceptible to gross segmentation errors (Morey et al., 2010). At first glance, therefore, manual tracing would appear better suited to predicting the true incidence of hippocampal growers—if they actually exist—provided manual segmentations could actually be completed on all subjects in ADNI. Unfortunately, doing so would most likely be prohibitively time-consuming. Even if it could be done, it is not necessarily true that the results obtained would be more valid than for automated segmentation. First, unlike automated segmentation algorithms, the reproducibility of any hippocampal manual tracing protocol is influenced by intra-rater reliability, since observer interpretation of identical imaging data may drift over time and due to human factors such as fatigue (Morey et al., 2010). Second, inter-rater reliability for the same protocol may vary even between expert observers (Chupin et al., 2009; Pipitone et al., 2014). Third, in the absence of widespread adoption of a harmonized protocol, there are at least as many manual protocols as there are automated segmentation algorithms (Boccardi et al., 2013a; 2013b). Accordingly, depending on the specific hippocampal boundaries used in each protocol, the subject-specific spatial distribution of atrophy within the hippocampus may influence inter-protocol concordance in hippocampal atrophy rates in a manner similar to that observed with automated algorithms.

A second limitation concerns the results reported by thresholding for true growth using literature-based values. These values represent a mean error on the reliability of the measurement of hippocampal volume; consequently, any threshold defined by this method is liberal since it is possible that scan-rescan reliability for any given subject may exceed the group mean. Indeed, we would caution against over-interpreting results that exceed mean scan-rescan reliability thresholds in cases where information about a single subject is desired. Nonetheless, our results based on this type of thresholding still demonstrate a lack of concordance between many commonly used algorithms in the literature. A final limitation pertains to our analysis of atrophy rates. While it is possible that atrophy rates may not theoretically conform to a normal distribution (since atrophy rate is the ratio of normally distributed variables), this is not what we observe in our data. Since most methods conformed to a normal distribution (except for UCSD data at 1.5T) and we chose to use Gaussian statistics for analysis of atrophy rates.

Taken together, our findings raise some concerns in the use of hippocampal volume as a biomarker in studies of AD and other neurodegenerative disorders. Firstly, QC may have a major impact regardless of segmentation algorithm, field strength, diagnosis, and hippocampal boundary definitions. The high rate of QC failures in this study brings into question whether current and prior “black-box” approaches to hippocampal volumetry applied in certain studies and clinical trials, where patient MRIs are analyzed using either commercial or publically available software without any standardized QC measures reported, can be entirely trusted to yield meaningful results. Secondly, our data indicate that relative longitudinal hippocampal volume change, calculated in an automated fashion, may be a suboptimal biomarker to track disease progression or response to therapy. This appears to hold true even for algorithms that have been optimized for longitudinal volumetric processing, such as FreeSurfer and the UCSD method; we found these algorithms to be poorly concordant with one another and with alternate algorithms. Our data further suggest that it may be ill-advised to trust normative or pathological rates of hippocampal volume change derived only a single algorithm; conversely, it is possible that the use of several different algorithms could, at worst, produce altogether divergent results.

Conclusion

In an assessment of five different automated or semi-automated segmentation algorithms designed to measure hippocampal volume from structural MRI data, we found an unexpectedly high incidence of subjects in the ADNI database who demonstrated hippocampal growth over time. For no individual algorithm could this counterintuitive finding be entirely explained by gross segmentation errors, scan-rescan variability, or field strength of MRI acquisition. Furthermore, algorithms did not consistently identify the same subjects as hippocampal growers, and more generally our analysis revealed poor concordance between algorithms in their estimates of the magnitude and direction of hippocampal volume change over time, which precluded a meaningful analysis of whether hippocampal growth could be a true biological phenomenon. These findings suggest that, in patients with either AD or MCI, or age-matched elderly controls, longitudinal hippocampal volume change should be interpreted with considerable caution as a biomarker at the individual subject level, and may have important limitations at a group-wide level as well.

Supplementary Material

Supp info

Funding

T.S. is supported by a Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) fellowship award. A.N.V. is funded by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), National Alliance for Research on Schizophrenia and Depression (NARSAD), Ontario Mental Health Foundation (OMHF), and CAMH Foundation (Koerner New Scientist Program and Paul Garfinkel New Investigator Catalyst Fund). A.M.L. is a Canada Research Chair in Neuroscience and is supported by the R.R. Tasker Chair in Functional Neurosurgery. A.M.L. is a consultant to Medtronic, St Jude, and Boston Scientific. A.M.L. serves on the scientific advisory board of Ceregene, Codman, Neurophage, Aleva and Alcyone Life Sciences. A.M.L. is co-founder of Functional Neuromodulation Inc. and holds intellectual property in the field of Deep Brain Stimulation. M.M.C. is supported by funding from the W. Garfield Weston Foundation, Michael J. Fox Foundation, Alzheimer’s Society, National Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, and Canadian Institutes of Health Research. MR image processing computations were performed on the GPC supercomputer at the SciNet HPC Consortium. SciNet is funded by: the Canada Foundation for Innovation under the auspices of Compute Canada; the Government of Ontario; Ontario Research Fund - Research Excellence; and the University of Toronto.

Data collection and sharing for this project was funded by the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) (National Institutes of Health Grant U01 AG024904) and DOD ADNI (Department of Defense award number W81XWH-12-2-0012). ADNI is funded by the National Institute on Aging, the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering, and through generous contributions from the following: AbbVie, Alzheimer’s Association; Alzheimer’s Drug Discovery Foundation; Araclon Biotech; BioClinica, Inc.; Biogen; Bristol-Myers Squibb Company; CereSpir, Inc.; Cogstate; Eisai Inc.; Elan Pharmaceuticals, Inc.; Eli Lilly and Company; EuroImmun; F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd and its affiliated company Genentech, Inc.; Fujirebio; GE Healthcare; IXICO Ltd.; Janssen Alzheimer Immunotherapy Research &amp; Development, LLC.; Johnson &amp; Johnson Pharmaceutical Research &amp; Development LLC.; Lumosity; Lundbeck; Merck &amp; Co., Inc.; Meso Scale Diagnostics, LLC.; NeuroRx Research; Neurotrack Technologies; Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation; Pfizer Inc.; Piramal Imaging; Servier; Takeda Pharmaceutical Company; and Transition Therapeutics. The Canadian Institutes of Health Research is providing funds to support ADNI clinical sites in Canada. Private sector contributions are facilitated by the Foundation for the National Institutes of Health (www.fnih.org). The grantee organization is the Northern California Institute for Research and Education, and the study is coordinated by the Alzheimer’s Therapeutic Research Institute at the University of Southern California. ADNI data are disseminated by the Laboratory for Neuro Imaging at the University of Southern California.

Data collected for the OASIS dataset were performed using support obtained from the following NIH grants: P50 AG05681, P01 AG03991, R01 AG021910, P50 MH071616, U24 RR021382, R01 MH56584.

Figure 1 Hippocampal volumetric data at 1.5T. (A) Mean left, right, and average baseline hippocampal volume by segmentation algorithm. (B) Mean left, right, and average 12-month hippocampal atrophy rate by segmentation algorithm.

Figure 2 Graphical summary of the proportion of hippocampal segmentation failures at 1.5T by algorithm, diagnostic category, and time point: A) Baseline, B) 1-year followup.

Figure 3 Venn diagrams demonstrating overlap of subjects identified as hippocampal “growers” at 1.5T across all 5 segmentation algorithms, divided by a) 1st pass QC, b) Across-method QC. Within a) and b), clockwise from upper left, individual Venn diagrams represent overlap for left, right, bilateral, and average hippocampal growth respectively.

Figure 4 Comparison of CoRR-OASIS test-retest distributions to ADNI 1-year hippocampal atrophy rates, at a) 1st pass, and b) Across-method QC. Accompanying right-sided insets show mean absolute scan-rescan values as determined from the CoRR-OASIS dataset.

Figure 5 ADNI 1-year hippocampal atrophy distributions thresholded at the 90th percentile of the CoRR-OASIS absolute test-retest distributions, for both positive and negative atrophy rates. Within each graph, top right percentage indicates the 90th percentile threshold used, while percentages on either side of the distributions indicate the percentage of subjects exhibiting potential growth atrophy after thresholding. a) 1st pass, and b) Across-method QC.

Figure 6 Receiver operating curves and area under the curve measures for ADNI-1 data passing stringent, across method QC for classification of A) AD vs. NC; B) MCI vs. NC; and C) MCI vs. AD. LR_L1 = Logistic regression with lasso; SVC= support vector machine classification; RFC = random forest classification.

Table 1 Selected demographic and clinical features of subjects by diagnostic category and field strength. p-values are reported for one-way ANOVA for age and MMSE, and for chi-square test (1.5T) or Fisher’s exact test (3T) for proportion of females. MMSE was significantly different between groups.

1.5T					
	AD	MCI	Normal	p value	
N	90	179	129	–	
Mean age (range)	74.7 (56–89)	74.9 (55–89)	76.2 (62–90)	0.16	
#females	41	60	60	0.050	
MMSE (sd)	23.4 (1.90)	27.1 (1.75)	29.1 (1.03)	&lt; 0.001	
3T					
	AD	MCI	Normal	p value	
N	15	24	23	–	
Mean age (range)	72.1 (57–88)	74.2 (56–88)	75.6 (70–85)	0.35	
#females	9	9	15	0.39	
MMSE (sd)	23.1 (2.12)	26.92 (2.00)	29.43 (0.73)	&lt; 0.001	

Table 2 Percentage of subjects at 1.5T showing hippocampal “growth” for all algorithms at all QC levels. Note that method-wise QC could not be performed for SNT; see text for details.

	Diagnosis		FS	UCSD	SNT	FSL	MAGeT	
1st pass QC	AD	Left	13.3	6.7	14.4	25.6	22.2	
		Right	12.2	6.7	11.1	24.4	25.6	
		Bilateral	5.6	3.3	4.4	11.1	8.9	
		Average	13.3	5.6	6.7	21.1	21.1	
	MCI	Left	22.4	17.9	31.3	22.9	30.2	
		Right	22.4	20.1	22.9	24.6	26.3	
		Bilateral	10.1	8.9	12.3	11.2	12.9	
		Average	16.8	14.5	25.1	18.4	24.0	
	Normal	Left	37.2	17.8	42.6	38.0	29.5	
		Right	33.3	20.2	41.9	40.3	37.2	
		Bilateral	15.5	11.6	29.5	19.4	15.5	
		Average	36.4	19.4	43.4	38.0	31.8	
Method-wise QC	AD	Left	11.5	4	–	21.0	23.6	
		Right	9.6	5.3	–	15.8	23.6	
		Bilateral	5.8	1.3	–	5.3	9.7	
		Average	11.5	4	–	14.5	22.2	
	MCI	Left	21.6	14.3	–	22.0	29.8	
		Right	21.6	16.3	–	23.9	26.2	
		Bilateral	9.6	5.4	–	10.7	12.5	
		Average	15.2	9.5	–	17.0	23.8	
	Normal	Left	38.0	16.4	–	37.5	28.9	
		Right	35.0	18.2	–	40.0	38.8	
		Bilateral	15.0	10.0	–	17.5	16.5	
		Average	37.0	17.3	–	37.5	33.1	
Across-method QC	AD	Left	8.8	2.9	14.7	23.5	20.6	
		Right	8.8	5.9	11.8	23.5	29.4	
		Bilateral	2.9	0	2.9	5.9	5.9	
		Average	8.8	3.0	2.9	17.7	23.5	
	MCI	Left	17.4	15.2	38.0	20.7	29.4	
		Right	19.6	18.5	19.6	19.6	26.1	
		Bilateral	8.7	5.4	14.1	7.6	14.1	
		Average	15.2	7.6	27.2	15.2	20.7	
	Normal	Left	39.5	18.4	43.4	35.5	38.2	
		Right	30.3	18.4	46.0	35.5	39.5	
		Bilateral	15.8	10.5	34.2	11.8	19.5	
		Average	38.2	18.4	48.7	35.5	38.2	

Table 3 Percentage of subjects (number of “growers”/total # of subjects within DX group) at 1.5T showing average hippocampal growth after thresholding for scan-rescan reliability, divided by segmentation algorithm. (A) 1st pass QC, (B) Method-wise QC, (C) Across-method QC, (D) Across-method QC and using 90th percentile thresholds generated based on CoRR-OASIS scan-rescan distributions. N/A=CoRR-OASIS scan-rescan distributions could not be generated for UCSD and SNT methods; see text for details.

		FS	UCSD	SNT	FSL	MAGeT	
a)	AD	4.4	0	2.2	10.0	6.7	
	MCI	5.0	2.2	11.2	6.2	11.2	
	Normal	7.8	1.6	21.7	7.8	7.8	
b)	AD	1.9	0	2.2	1.3	4.2	
	MCI	4.0	1.4	11.2	5.0	10.1	
	Normal	7.0	0.9	21.7	5.0	8.3	
c)	AD	2.9	0	0	0	2.9	
	MCI	2.2	1.1	13.0	4.4	7.6	
	Normal	6.6	0	22.4	2.6	9.2	
d)	AD	2.9	N/A	N/A	0	0	
	MCI	0	N/A	N/A	3.3	1.1	
	Normal	5.3	N/A	N/A	2.6	1.3	

Table 4 Inter-rater reliability between hippocampal segmentation algorithms for hippocampal volume and atrophy rate as measured using the intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC)

1.5T					
Measure	QC	Number of measurements	ICC	p-value	
Baseline hippocampal volume	1st pass	398	0.764	&lt;0.0001	
	Across-method	202	0.842	&lt;0.0001	
% change in hippocampal volume 1 year	1st pass	398	0.050	0.373	
	Across-method	202	0.319	&lt;0.0001	
3T					
Measure	QC	Number of measurements	ICC	p-value	
Baseline hippocampal volume	1st pass	62	0.800	&lt;0.0001	
	Across-method	36	0.828	&lt;0.0001	
% change in hippocampal volume 1 year	1st pass	62	0.281	&lt;0.0001	
	Across-method	36	0.149	&lt;0.005	
QC=quality control level; ICC=two-way mixed model, single measures, intraclass correlation coefficient using a consistency agreement definition.


Amaral RS Park MT Devenyi GA Lynn V Pipitone J Winterburn J Chavez S Schira M Lobaugh NJ Voineskos AN Pruessner JC Chakravarty MM Alzheimer’s Disease NeuroImaging Initiative. Manual segmentation of the fornix, fimbria, and alveus on high-resolution 3T MRI: Application via fully-automated mapping of the human memory circuit white and grey matter in healthy and pathological aging Neuroimage epub 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.10.027
Apostolova LG Morra JH Green AE Hwang KS Avedissian C Woo E Thompson PM 2010 Automated 3D mapping of baseline and 12-month associations between three verbal memory measures and hippocampal atrophy in 490 ADNI subjects Neuroimage 51 1 488 499 doi:S1053-8119(10)00062-5 [pii]10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.12.125 20083211
Apostolova LG Green AE Babakchanian S Hwang KS Chou YY Toga AW Thompson PM 2012 Hippocampal atrophy and ventricular enlargement in normal aging, mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and Alzheimer Disease Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 26 1 17 27 10.1097/WAD.0b013e3182163b62 22343374
Avants BB Epstein CL Grossman M Gee JC 2008 Symmetric diffeomorphic image registration with cross-correlation: evaluating automated labeling of elderly and neurodegenerative brain Med Image Anal 12 1 26 41 10.1016/j.media.2007.06.004 17659998
Barnes J Foster J Boyes RG Pepple T Moore EK Schott JM Fox NC 2008 A comparison of methods for the automated calculation of volumes and atrophy rates in the hippocampus Neuroimage 40 4 1655 1671 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.01.012 18353687
Barnes J Ourselin S Fox NC 2009 Clinical application of measurement of hippocampal atrophy in degenerative dementias Hippocampus 19 6 510 516 10.1002/hipo.20617 19405145
Boccardi M Bocchetta M Apostolova LG Preboske G Robitaille N Pasqualetti P Frisoni GB 2013a Establishing Magnetic Resonance Images Orientation for the EADC-ADNI Manual Hippocampal Segmentation Protocol J Neuroimaging 10.1111/jon.12065
Boccardi M Bocchetta M Ganzola R Robitaille N Redolfi A Duchesne S Frisoni GB 2013b Operationalizing protocol differences for EADC-ADNI manual hippocampal segmentation Alzheimers Dement 10.1016/j.jalz.2013.03.001
Boccardi M Bocchetta M Ganzola R Robitaille N Redolfi A Bartzokis G DeToledo-Morrell L 2011a Estimating the impact of differences among protocols for manual hippocampal segmentation on Alzheimer’s disease-related atrophy: Preparatory phase for a harmonized protocol Alzheimer’s and Dementia 7 4 S205 S206 Retrieved from http://discover-decouvrir.cisti-icist.nrc-cnrc.gc.ca/dcvr/ctrl?url_ver=Z39.88-2004&amp;url_ctx_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:ctx&amp;rft_dat=info:tdr/18673529&amp;rft_id=info:Swets/1610039980&amp;rft_val_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:journal&amp;rft.jtitle=Alzheimer’s+and+Dementia+&amp;rft.issn=1552-5260&amp;rft.atitle=Estimating+the+impact+of+differences+among+protocols+for+manual+hippocampal+segmentation+on+Alzheimer’s+disease-related+atrophy:+Preparatory+phase+for+a+harmonized+protocol&amp;rft.aulast=Boccardi&amp;rft.aufirst=&amp;rft.date=2011-07-01&amp;rft.volume=7&amp;rft.issue=4&amp;rft.spage=7&amp;rfr_id=info:sid/scholar.google.ca&amp;ctx_enc=info:ofi/enc:UTF-8
Boccardi M Ganzola R Bocchetta M Pievani M Redolfi A Bartzokis G deToledo-Morrell L 2011b Survey of Protocols for the Manual Segmentation of the Hippocampus: Preparatory Steps Towards a Joint EADC-ADNI Harmonized Protocol Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 26 61 75 Retrieved from http://iospress.metapress.com/index/V17620T411703LQ8.pdf
Braak H Braak E 1991 Neuropathological stageing of Alzheimer-related changes Acta Neuropathol 82 4 239 259 Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Citation&amp;list_uids=1759558 1759558
Braak H de Vos RA Jansen EN Bratzke H Braak E 1998 Neuropathological hallmarks of Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases Prog Brain Res 117 267 285 Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Citation&amp;list_uids=9932414 9932414
Cavedo E Pievani M Boccardi M Galluzzi S Bocchetta M Bonetti M Frisoni GB 2014 Medial temporal atrophy in early and late-onset Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.03.009
Chakravarty MM Steadman P van Eede MC Calcott RD Gu V Shaw P Lerch JP 2013 Performing label-fusion-based segmentation using multiple automatically generated templates Hum Brain Mapp 34 10 2635 2654 10.1002/hbm.22092 22611030
Chupin M Gerardin E Cuingnet R Boutet C Lemieux L Lehericy S Colliot O 2009 Fully automatic hippocampus segmentation and classification in Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment applied on data from ADNI Hippocampus 19 6 579 587 10.1002/hipo.20626 19437497
Collins DL Pruessner JC 2010 Towards accurate, automatic segmentation of the hippocampus and amygdala from MRI by augmenting ANIMAL with a template library and label fusion Neuroimage 52 4 1355 1366 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.04.193 20441794
Coupe P Eskildsen SF Manjon JV Fonov V Collins DL 2011a Simultaneous segmentation and grading of hippocampus for patient classification with Alzheimer’s disease Med Image Comput Comput Assist Interv 14 Pt 3 149 157 Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Citation&amp;list_uids=22013614
Coupe P Eskildsen SF Manjon JV Fonov V Collins DL 2011b Simultaneous segmentation and grading of anatomical structures for patient’s classification: Application to Alzheimer’s disease Neuroimage 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.10.080
Coupe P Fonov VS Bernard C Zandifar A Eskildsen SF Helmer C Collins DL 2015 Detection of Alzheimer’s disease signature in MR images seven years before conversion to dementia: Toward an early individual prognosis Hum Brain Mapp 10.1002/hbm.22926
Davatzikos C Bhatt P Shaw LM Batmanghelich KN Trojanowski JQ 2011 Prediction of MCI to AD conversion, via MRI, CSF biomarkers, and pattern classification Neurobiol Aging 32 12 2322.e19 27 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2010.05.023
Eskildsen SF Coupe P Garcia-Lorenzo D Fonov V Pruessner JC Collins DL 2013 Prediction of Alzheimer’s disease in subjects with mild cognitive impairment from the ADNI cohort using patterns of cortical thinning Neuroimage 65 511 521 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.09.058 23036450
Fischl B van der Kouwe A Destrieux C Halgren E Segonne F Salat DH Dale AM 2004 Automatically parcellating the human cerebral cortex Cereb Cortex 14 1 11 22 Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Citation&amp;list_uids=14654453 14654453
Fischl B Salat DH Busa E Albert M Dieterich M Haselgrove C Dale AM 2002 Whole brain segmentation: automated labeling of neuroanatomical structures in the human brain Neuron 33 3 341 355 doi:S089662730200569X [pii] 11832223
Fotuhi M Do D Jack C 2012 Modifiable factors that alter the size of the hippocampus with ageing Nat Rev Neurol 8 4 189 202 10.1038/nrneurol.2012.27 22410582
Frisoni GB Fox NC Jack CRJ Scheltens P Thompson PM 2010 The clinical use of structural MRI in Alzheimer disease Nat Rev Neurol 6 2 67 77 10.1038/nrneurol.2009.215 20139996
Gronenschild EH Habets P Jacobs HI Mengelers R Rozendaal N van Os J Marcelis M 2012 The effects of FreeSurfer version, workstation type, and Macintosh operating system version on anatomical volume and cortical thickness measurements PLoS One 7 6 e38234 10.1371/journal.pone.0038234 22675527
Holland D Brewer JB Hagler DJ Fennema-Notestine C Dale AM 2009 Subregional neuroanatomical change as a biomarker for Alzheimer’s disease Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106 49 20954 20959 Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Citation&amp;list_uids=19996185 19996185
Holland D Dale AM 2011 Nonlinear registration of longitudinal images and measurement of change in regions of interest Med Image Anal 15 4 489 497 10.1016/j.media.2011.02.005 21388857
Holland D McEvoy LK Dale AM 2012 Unbiased comparison of sample size estimates from longitudinal structural measures in ADNI Hum Brain Mapp 33 11 2586 2602 10.1002/hbm.21386 21830259
Hsu YY Schuff N Du AT Mark K Zhu X Hardin D Weiner MW 2002 Comparison of automated and manual MRI volumetry of hippocampus in normal aging and dementia J Magn Reson Imaging 16 3 305 310 10.1002/jmri.10163 12205587
Jack CRJ Bernstein MA Fox NC Thompson P Alexander G Harvey D Weiner MW 2008 The Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI): MRI methods J Magn Reson Imaging 27 4 685 691 10.1002/jmri.21049 18302232
Jenkinson M Beckmann CF Behrens TE Woolrich MW Smith SM 2012 FSL Neuroimage 62 2 782 790 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.09.015 21979382
Jovicich J Marizzoni M Bosch B Bartrés-Faz D Arnold J Benninghoff J PharmaCog C 2014 Multisite longitudinal reliability of tract-based spatial statistics in diffusion tensor imaging of healthy elderly subjects Neuroimage 101 390 403 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.06.075 25026156
La Joie R Fouquet M Mezenge F Landeau B Villain N Mevel K Chetelat G 2010 Differential effect of age on hippocampal subfields assessed using a new high-resolution 3T MR sequence Neuroimage 53 2 506 514 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.06.024 20600996
Lau JC Lerch JP Sled JG Henkelman RM Evans AC Bedell BJ 2008 Longitudinal neuroanatomical changes determined by deformation-based morphometry in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Neuroimage 42 1 19 27 doi:S1053-8119(08)00581-8 [pii] 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.04.252 18547819
Lerch JP Pruessner J Zijdenbos AP Collins DL Teipel SJ Hampel H Evans AC 2008 Automated cortical thickness measurements from MRI can accurately separate Alzheimer’s patients from normal elderly controls Neurobiol Aging 29 1 23 30 doi:S0197-4580(06)00343-5 [pii] 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2006.09.013 17097767
Leung KK Barnes J Ridgway GR Bartlett JW Clarkson MJ Macdonald K Ourselin S 2010 Automated cross-sectional and longitudinal hippocampal volume measurement in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease Neuroimage 51 4 1345 1359 Retrieved from http://ukpmc.ac.uk/articles/PMC2873209 20230901
McLaren DG Sreenivasan A Diamond EL Mitchell MB Van Dijk KR Deluca AN Atri A 2012 Tracking cognitive change over 24 weeks with longitudinal functional magnetic resonance imaging in Alzheimer’s disease Neurodegener Dis 9 4 176 186 10.1159/000335876 22456451
Mielke MM Okonkwo OC Oishi K Mori S Tighe S Miller MI Lyketsos CG 2012 Fornix integrity and hippocampal volume predict memory decline and progression to Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimers Dement 8 2 105 113 10.1016/j.jalz.2011.05.2416 22404852
Miller M Banerjee A Christensen G Joshi S Khaneja N Grenander U Matejic L 1997 Statistical methods in computational anatomy Stat Methods Med Res 6 3 267 299 Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Citation&amp;list_uids=9339500 9339500
Morey RA Selgrade ES Wagner HR Huettel SA Wang L McCarthy G 2010 Scan-rescan reliability of subcortical brain volumes derived from automated segmentation Hum Brain Mapp 31 11 1751 1762 10.1002/hbm.20973 20162602
Morra JH Tu Z Apostolova LG Avedissian C Madsen SK Parikshak N Hua X Toga AW Jack CR Jr Weiner MW Thompson PM Alzheimer’s Disease NeuroImaging Initiative NeuroImage 43 1 59 68 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.07.003
Mouiha A Duchesne S 2011 Hippocampal atrophy rates in Alzheimer’s disease: Automated segmentation variability analysis Neuroscience letters Retrieved from http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0304394011002564
Mueller SG Weiner MW Thal LJ Petersen RC Jack CR Jagust W Beckett L 2005 Ways toward an early diagnosis in Alzheimer’s disease: the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) Alzheimers Dement 1 1 55 66 10.1016/j.jalz.2005.06.003 17476317
Mueller SG Schuff N Yaffe K Madison C Miller B Weiner MW 2010 Hippocampal atrophy patterns in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease Hum Brain Mapp 31 9 1339 1347 10.1002/hbm.20934 20839293
Mulder ER de Jong RA Knol DL van Schijndel RA Cover KS Visser PJ Vrenken H 2014 Hippocampal volume change measurement: Quantitative assessment of the reproducibility of expert manual outlining and the automated methods FreeSurfer and FIRST Neuroimage 92 169 181 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.01.058 24521851
Nestor SM Gibson E Gao FQ Kiss A Black SE 2012 A direct morphometric comparison of five labeling protocols for multi-atlas driven automatic segmentation of the hippocampus in Alzheimer’s disease Neuroimage 66C 50 70 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.10.081
Patenaude B Smith SM Kennedy DN Jenkinson M 2011 A Bayesian model of shape and appearance for subcortical brain segmentation Neuroimage 56 3 907 922 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.02.046 21352927
Pipitone J Park MT Winterburn J Lett TA Lerch JP Pruessner JC Chakravarty MM 2014 Multi-atlas segmentation of the whole hippocampus and subfields using multiple automatically generated templates Neuroimage 101 494 512 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.04.054 24784800
Pruessner JC Kohler S Crane J Pruessner M Lord C Byrne A Evans AC 2002 Volumetry of temporopolar, perirhinal, entorhinal and parahippocampal cortex from high-resolution MR images: considering the variability of the collateral sulcus Cereb Cortex 12 12 1342 1353 Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Citation&amp;list_uids=12427684 12427684
Pruessner JC Li LM Serles W Pruessner M Collins DL Kabani N Evans AC 2000 Volumetry of hippocampus and amygdala with high-resolution MRI and three-dimensional analysis software: minimizing the discrepancies between laboratories Cerebral cortex 10 4 433 442 Retrieved from http://cercor.oxfordjournals.org/content/10/4/433.full 10769253
Reuter M Schmansky NJ Rosas HD Fischl B 2012 Within-subject template estimation for unbiased longitudinal image analysis Neuroimage 61 4 1402 1418 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.02.084 22430496
Sabuncu MR Buckner RL Smoller JW Lee PH Fischl B Sperling RA 2012 The association between a polygenic Alzheimer score and cortical thickness in clinically normal subjects Cereb Cortex 22 11 2653 2661 10.1093/cercor/bhr348 22169231
Sabuncu MR Desikan RS Sepulcre J Yeo BT Liu H Schmansky NJ Fischl B 2011 The dynamics of cortical and hippocampal atrophy in Alzheimer disease Arch Neurol 68 8 1040 1048 10.1001/archneurol.2011.167 21825241
Sanchez-Benavides G Pena-Casanova J Casals-Coll M Gramunt N Molinuevo JL Gomez-Anson B Blesa R 2014 Cognitive and Neuroimaging Profiles in Mild Cognitive Impairment and Alzheimer’s Disease: Data from the Spanish Multicenter Normative Studies (NEURONORMA Project) J Alzheimers Dis 10.3233/JAD-132186
Schoemaker D Buss C Head K Sandman CA Davis EP Chakravarty MM Pruessner JC 2016 Hippocampus and amygdala volumes from magnetic resonance images in children: Assessing accuracy of FreeSurfer and FSL against manual segmentation Neuroimage 129 1 14 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.01.038 26824403
Small SA Duff K 2008 Linking Abeta and tau in late-onset Alzheimer’s disease: a dual pathway hypothesis Neuron 60 4 534 542 10.1016/j.neuron.2008.11.007 19038212
Stein JL Medland SE Vasquez AA Hibar DP Senstad RE Winkler AM Thompson PM 2012 Identification of common variants associated with human hippocampal and intracranial volumes Nat Genet 44 5 552 561 10.1038/ng.2250 22504417
Wang Y Fan Y Bhatt P Davatzikos C 2010 High-dimensional pattern regression using machine learning: from medical images to continuous clinical variables Neuroimage 50 4 1519 1535 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.12.092 20056158
Watson C Cendes F Fuerst D Dubeau F Williamson B Evans A Andermann F 1997 Specificity of volumetric magnetic resonance imaging in detecting hippocampal sclerosis Arch Neurol 54 1 67 73 Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Citation&amp;list_uids=9006416 9006416
Weiner MW Veitch DP Aisen PS Beckett LA Cairns NJ Green RC Trojanowski JQ 2012 The Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative: a review of papers published since its inception Alzheimers Dement 8 1 Suppl S1 68 10.1016/j.jalz.2011.09.172 22047634
Winterburn JL Pruessner JC Chavez S Schira MM Lobaugh NJ Voineskos AN Chakravarty MM 2013 A novel in vivo atlas of human hippocampal subfields using high-resolution 3 T magnetic resonance imaging Neuroimage 74 254 265 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.02.003 23415948
Wolz R Aljabar P Hajnal JV Hammers A Rueckert D 2010 LEAP: learning embeddings for atlas propagation Neuroimage 49 2 1316 1325 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.09.069 19815080
Wolz R Heckemann RA Aljabar P Hajnal JV Hammers A Lotjonen J Ruechert D Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 2010 Neuroimage 49 3 2352 65 10.106/j.neuroimage.2009.10.026 19857578
Wyman BT Harvey DJ Crawford K Bernstein MA Carmichael O Cole PE Jack CRJ 2013 Standardization of analysis sets for reporting results from ADNI MRI data Alzheimers Dement 9 3 332 337 10.1016/j.jalz.2012.06.004 23110865
Yushkevich PA Amaral RS Augustinack JC Bender AR Bernstein JD Boccardi M Zeineh MM 2015 Quantitative comparison of 21 protocols for labeling hippocampal subfields and parahippocampal subregions in in vivo MRI: towards a harmonized segmentation protocol Neuroimage 111 526 541 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.01.004 25596463
Zuo XN Anderson JS Bellec P Birn RM Biswal BB Blautzik J Milham MP 2014 An open science resource for establishing reliability and reproducibility in functional connectomics Sci Data 1 140049 10.1038/sdata.2014.49 25977800
