LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


0217513
1037
Biochim Biophys Acta
Biochim. Biophys. Acta
Biochimica et biophysica acta
0006-3002
1878-2434

28711595
5875988
10.1016/j.bbadis.2017.07.005
NIHMS917585
Article
Aβ truncated species: Implications for brain clearance mechanisms and amyloid plaque deposition
Cabrera Erwin 1#
Mathews Paul 25
Mezhericher Emiliya 1#
Beach Thomas G. 6
Deng Jingjing 34
Neubert Thomas A. 34
Rostagno Agueda 1*
Ghiso Jorge 12*§
1 Department of Pathology New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA
2 Department of Psychiatry New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA
3 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016 USA
4 Kimmel Center for Biology and Medicine at the Skirball Institute, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016 USA
5 Nathan Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research, Orangeburg, NY 10962, USA
6 Civin Laboratory for Neuropathology, Banner Sun Health Research Institute, Sun City, AZ 85351, USA
§ To whom correspondence should be addressed: New York University School of Medicine, 550 First Avenue, MSB-556, New York, NY 10016. Tel: (212) 263-7997. Fax (212) 263-0858. jorge.ghiso@nyumc.org
* Both authors contributed equally

# Current affiliation: Erwin Cabrera: Farmingdale State College SUNY, 2350 Broadhollow Road, Farmingdale, NY 11735 USA; Emiliya Mezhericher, Department of Biochemistry, SUNY Downstate Medical Center, Brooklyn, NY 11203, USA

16 11 2017
13 7 2017
1 2018
01 1 2019
1864 1 208225
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Extensive parenchymal and vascular Aβ deposits are pathological hallmarks of Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Besides classic full-length peptides, biochemical analyses of brain deposits have revealed high degree of Aβ heterogeneity likely resulting from the action of multiple proteolytic enzymes. In spite of the numerous studies focusing in Aβ, the relevance of N- and C-terminal truncated species for AD pathogenesis remains largely understudied. In the present work, using novel antibodies specifically recognizing Aβ species N-terminally truncated at position 4 or C-terminally truncated at position 34, we provide a clear assessment of the differential topographic localization of these species in AD brains and transgenic models. Based on their distinct solubility, brain N- and C-terminal truncated species were extracted by differential fractionation and identified via immunoprecipitation coupled to mass spectrometry analysis. Biochemical/biophysical studies with synthetic homologues further confirmed the different solubility properties and contrasting fibrillogenic characteristics of the truncated species composing the brain Aβ peptidome. Aβ C-terminal degradation leads to the production of more soluble fragments likely to be more easily eliminated from the brain. On the contrary, N-terminal truncation at position 4 favors the formation of poorly soluble, aggregation prone peptides with high amyloidogenic propensity and the potential to exacerbate the fibrillar deposits, self-perpetuating the amyloidogenic loop. Detailed assessment of the molecular diversity of Aβ species composing interstitial fluid and amyloid deposits at different disease stages, as well as the evaluation of the truncation profile during various pharmacologic approaches will provide a comprehensive understanding of the still undefined contribution of Aβ truncations to the disease pathogenesis and their potential as novel therapeutic targets.

Aβ catabolism
Aβ enzymatic degradation
targeted proteomic
post-translational modifications

1. Introduction

Alzheimer’s disease, the most common form of amyloidosis and dementia in humans, is neuropathologically characterized by the presence of parenchymal and vascular amyloid β (Aβ) deposits, by the co-existence of intraneuronal neurofibrillary tangles composed of abnormally phosphorylated tau assembled into paired-helical filaments, and by the gradual loss of synapsis which is the best pathological correlate with cognitive impairment [1, 2]. Over the years, different lines of investigation have provided support for a central role of Aβ in the disease pathogenesis [1, 3, 4]. In this line, individuals with Down’s syndrome, who feature an overexpression of the Aβ precursor protein (APP) gene as a result of the extra chromosome 21 that codifies for this protein, harbor the same lesions and develop early AD-like pathology, typically by middle age [5, 6]. In addition, familial APP mutations translate into an earlier onset of the disease [7–9] and transgenic animal models expressing those familial mutations develop parenchymal and cerebrovascular amyloid lesions as well as cognitive deficits in the absence of neurofibrillary tangles [10].

Aβ deposits, irrespective of their topographical location within the brain, are poorly soluble and highly heterogeneous, containing a variety of post-translational modifications that include, among others, isomerization and racemization of aspartates, cyclation of N-terminal glutamates, oxidation of methionine and abundant N- and C-terminal truncations [11, 12]. It is well known that post-translational modifications play a key role in functional proteomics by dramatically increasing the proteome diversity and modulating many aspects of cell function [13]. The importance of Aβ modifications for the process of amyloidogenesis as well as the mechanisms that drive these enzymatic and non-enzymatic modifications are currently under increased scrutiny. One of the most studied protein modifications is the formation of N-terminal pyroglutamate (pE) which has been reported in N-terminally truncated forms of Aβ, specifically pE3Aβ and pE11Aβ. The additional loss of a negative charge occurring as a result of the cyclation of glutamate increases the β-sheet content, aggregation propensity, hydrophobicity, and resistance to enzymatic degradation of the Aβ fragments [14, 15] suggesting a contribution of these species to the disease process. In this sense, pE-modified forms of Aβ have been shown to be more neurotoxic than full-length, unmodified Aβ [16–19] and to be more abundant in the AD brain compared to cognitively intact age-matched controls, further highlighting their biological relevance [20–24]. Spontaneous, non-enzymatic isomerization at asparagine and aspartate residues was described early on in parenchymal plaque core preparations [25]. More recently, partial aspartate isomerization at positions 1, 7 and 23 has been biochemically identified in parenchymal and cerebrovascular deposits of the Iowa Aβ variant (AβD23N) [12]. This post-translational modification in conjunction with the D23N mutation largely contribute to the enhanced aggregation/fibrillization and cell toxicity properties of the Iowa mutant, triggering apoptotic pathways with mitochondrial engagement and cytochrome c release in both neuronal and microvascular endothelial cells [26]. Oxidative damage due to accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in AD is known to be an important contributor of the disease pathogenesis. However, oxidation of Aβ at Methionine 35 seems to play a more complex role in the process of oligomerization than initially thought; while the formation of the reversible sulfoxide derivative has been shown to prevent oligomerization and neurotoxicity, the poorly reversible formation of the sulfone derivative produces the opposite effect, suggesting a protective role of mild oxidative conditions [27, 28].

In addition to the abundance of pE-, iso-Asp and oxidated Aβ species, numerous N- and C-terminal truncations significantly contribute to the molecular heterogeneity of the Aβ deposits. Besides the intact Aβ peptides generated by the combined action of BACE1 and γ-secretase – starting at the aspartate residue at position 1 and ending at amino acids 38/ 40 / 42 – different truncated Aβ species have been identified in cellular and animal models as well as in AD patients [15, 29–36], likely generated by the action of a number of Aβ-degrading enzymes, among them neprylisin, insulin degrading- and endothelin converting-enzymes, plasmin and matrix metalloproteases [37–42]. Reduced levels and/or decreased catalytic activity of these Aβ-degrading enzymes as a result of age, genetic factors, and specific disease conditions have been proposed to affect Aβ accumulation, an issue well documented in murine models in which gene deletion of different proteases translate into increased levels of Aβ deposition [39, 40, 43]. N-terminal truncated Aβ peptides, particularly species beginning with phenylalanine residue at position 4 of Aβ (Aβ4-42), were reported three decades ago [6] and the limited studies available seem to indicate their relative abundance in patients with AD, Down’s syndrome, and vascular dementia [44–46]. Numerous C-terminal truncations have also been described as components of brain deposits although the limited studies reported for these species have been primarily dedicated to their occurrence in the heterogeneous CSF Aβ profile [30, 47, 48]. We have recently described that the action of the matrix metalloproteases MMP-2 and MMP-9 generates one of the most relevant C-terminally truncated fragments, Aβ1-34 [41]. Recent work has also demonstrated that this truncated peptide is capable of being originated through BACE1 cleavage and illustrated the presence of Aβ1-34 in transfected HEK293 cells simultaneously overexpressing APP and BACE1, as well as in brain tissues of 3xTg mice, a model artificially engineered with mutations associated with FAD and FTDP-17 diseases concurrently (APP Swedish, PSEN1 M146V and Tau P301L transgenes)[49]. More studies using additional APP Tg models as well as human AD cases are required to determine the in vivo relevance of these truncation.

In spite of the high number of studies focusing on Aβ, the relevance of the N- and C-terminal truncated species for the pathogenesis of AD remains largely understudied. In the present work, using novel antibodies specifically recognizing Aβ species N-terminally truncated at position 4 or C-terminally truncated at position 34 in immunohistochemical studies, we provide a clear assessment of the differential topographical localization of these species in brain specimens from AD cases as well as from different APP transgenic models. Through the use of immunoprecipitation (IP) coupled to mass spectrometry (MS) analysis together with a sequential extraction protocol allowing the differential fractionation of brain Aβ deposits based on their distinctive solubility properties, the current work highlights the heterogeneity and biochemical differences of the Aβ peptidome in AD and Tg mouse brains. Further studies with synthetic homologues confirmed the differential solubility properties and contrasting fibrillogenic characteristics of the different truncated fragments and suggest that Aβ C-terminal degradation leads to the production of more soluble, less aggregation-prone fragments which are therefore likely to be more easily cleared from the brain. Contrastingly, the N-terminal truncation at position 4 favors the generation poorly soluble peptides with high amyloidogenic propensity and the potential to exacerbate/perpetuate the fibrillar deposits.

2. Material and methods

2.1. Peptide synthesis

Synthetic homologues of Aβ1-40 and Aβ1-42 either full-length or truncated at amino acid residues 4 (Aβ4-40, Aβ4-42), 34 (Aβ1-34), or simultaneously at both positions (Aβ4-34), as well as those starting at residue 3, either glutamate (Aβ3-40) or post-translationally modified to pyroglutamate (Aβ3pE-40) (Fig 1a) were synthesized using N-tert-butyloxycarbonyl chemistry by James I. Elliott at ERI Amyloid Laboratory (Oxford, CT). Peptides were purified by reverse phase-high performance liquid chromatography on a Vydac C4 column (Western Analytical, Murrieta, CA), molecular masses were corroborated by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometry, and concentrations were assessed by amino acid analysis, as previously reported [50].

2.2. Antibody production and characterization

Anti-Aβ x-34

A polyclonal antibody specific for Aβ peptides ending in position 34 was custom-generated at Bethyl Laboratories (Montgomery, Texas) immunizing New Zealand white rabbits using standard protocols. The immunogen consisted of a synthetic peptide containing N-terminal cysteine followed by residues 29–34 of Aβ, GAIIGL, which was coupled to keyhole limpet haemocyanin (KLH) through the cysteine residue (Fig 1). Hyperimmune serum was affinity purified and specificity confirmed by dot-blot analysis, as described below.

Monoclonal antibodies recognizing C-terminally truncated Aβ species at position 34 were generated at Abnova Corp. (Taipei, Taiwan) based on mice immunization with a peptide consisting of an N-terminal Cys-Gly followed by residues 28–34 of Aβ (CGKGAIIGL), also conjugated to KLH. Of the different hybridoma cell lines generated and subcloned, clone 1B5.4 was selected for the present studies. Cells were grown in Protein Free Hybridoma Medium II (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA) and monoclonal antibodies purified from culture supernatants by chromatography on Protein G-Sepharose 4 Fast Flow (GE Life Sciences, Marlborough, MA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, as we previously described [51].

Anti-Aβ 4-x

A polyclonal antibody recognizing Aβ peptides starting at position 4 was also generated at Bethyl Laboratories immunizing rabbits with a peptide homologous to amino acids 4–9 of Aβ, FRHDSG, followed by a cysteine residue for KLH conjugation. Hyperimmune serum was affinity purified and specificity confirmed by dot-blot analysis.

Monoclonal antibodies recognizing N-terminal truncated Aβ species beginning at position 4 were generated at GenScript (Piscataway, NJ) based on mice immunization with the same peptide used for the corresponding polyclonal antibody (residues 4–9 of Aβ added of a C-terminal Cys, FRHDSGC) also conjugated to KLH. Of the different hybridoma cell lines generated and subcloned, clone 18H6C4 was selected for the present studies and its specificity confirmed by dot-blot analysis. Purification of monoclonal anti-Aβ4-x was performed on Protein G-Sepharose, as above.

Dot Blot Analysis

Five hundred ng of each of the different Aβ peptides were loaded on a nitrocellulose membrane assembled into a Bio-Dot Microfiltration Apparatus (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) and allowed to diffuse passively for about 30 min before vacuum application as previously described [50]. The membrane was subsequently blocked in situ for 1h with 1% nonfat milk in Tris-buffered saline, pH 7.4, containing 0.1% Tween 20 (TBST), followed by vacuum application and two subsequent washes with TBST. After removal from the dot blot apparatus and further blocking with 5% milk in TBST (1h, RT), membranes were probed (1h, RT) with either polyclonal anti Aβx-34 (1:500), polyclonal anti Aβ4-x (1:500), monoclonal 18H6C4 anti Aβ4-x (1:5000), monoclonal 1B5.4 anti Aβx-34 (1: 5000) or a 50:50 combination of 4G8 and 6E10 monoclonal anti-Aβ antibodies recognizing residues 17–24 and 1–16, respectively (Covance, Princeton, NJ; 1:3000 each) as a loading control for all the Aβ peptides. Following incubation with the pertinent HRP-conjugated anti-rabbit or anti-mouse IgG (Invitrogen/Life Technologies; 1:3000, 1 h, RT) immunoreactivity was assessed by chemiluminescence using Supersignal West Pico Luminol/Enhancer and Stable Peroxide solutions (ThermoFisher/Pierce, Waltham, MA).

2.3. Tissue source

Human brain tissues

Paraffin-embedded blocks and frozen brain tissue from frontal cortex of six neuropathologically confirmed AD cases and three non-AD controls, collected with very short postmortem interval, were obtained properly de-identified from the Banner Sun Health Research Institute Brain and Body Donation Program (Sun City, AZ). Table I summarizes the cases employed in the current studies and provides specific information regarding the different patients including age, sex, apo E genotype, Braak and Braak stage, and the post mortem intervals at which samples were collected.

APP transgenic mice

Brain specimens from three different mouse models –APP/PS1, Tg2576 (APPSw), and APPLd2–were employed in the current studies. The APP/PS1 mouse model expresses human APP carrying the Swedish double mutation K670N/M671L and L166P mutated human PSEN1 both under the control of the mouse Thy-1 promoter and develop amyloid plaques at early age starting at 2–3 months [52]. The widely studied Tg2576 model expresses the Swedish APP double mutation (K670N/M671L) driven by the hamster prion protein gene promoter [53] and develop abundant amyloid plaques in the parenchyma by 11–13 months. The APPLd2 mouse model expresses human APP with the London V717I mutation, under the control of the mouse Thy-1 promoter and develop amyloid plaques by 10 months of age [54]. For the studies described herein, the animals were selected at ages with well-established neuropathological lesions: 17 months, 20 months, and 22–28 months for APP/PS1, Tg2576, and APPLd2, respectively.

Mice were transcardially perfused with PBS followed by 4% paraformaldehyde; brains were harvested following institutionally approved IACUC protocols and processed accordingly to the subsequent analysis. For immunohistochemistry tissue was further fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (4°C, overnight) and paraffin-embedded in a Leica Peloris II tissue processor at the NYU Experimental Pathology Core Facility. For biochemical/mass spectrometry studies, brain tissues were snap frozen and maintained at −80°C until processing.

2.4. Biophysical properties of N- and C-terminal truncated Aβ species

All synthetic homologues listed in Figure 1a were incubated at a concentration of 1 mg/ml in 1,1,1,3,3,3, hexafluoro-isopropanol (HFIP; Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, MO) for 4 days, a pretreatment that breaks down β-sheet structures and disrupts hydrophobic forces leading to monodisperse amyloid subunit preparations [55]. HFIP-pretreated peptides were lyophilized and subsequently reconstituted to 1 mM in deionized water followed by further dilution in 10 × phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) to a final concentration of 50 μM in 1 × PBS. To evaluate changes in the structure of the different peptides at physiologic salt concentration, peptides were subsequently incubated at 37°C for up to 6 days and structural properties evaluated at different time points by circular dichroism spectroscopy, Thioflavin T- and ANS- (8-anilinonapthalene-1-sulfonic acid) binding, as well as native gel electrophoresis/Western blot analysis, as described below.

Circular dichroism spectroscopy

Changes in the secondary structure of the different Aβ peptides was estimated by CD spectroscopy as previously described [50]. HFIP-pretreated peptides were solubilized in deionized water as above, followed by further dilution to a final concentration of 50 μM in a 10 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.4, containing 150 mM sodium fluoride. Spectra in the far-ultraviolet (wavelength range: 190–260 nm; band-width 1 nm; intervals 1 nm; scan rate 60 nm/min) yielded by the different peptides at various time points of aggregation (up to 6 days) were recorded at 24°C with a Jasco J-720 spectropolarimeter (Jasco Inc., Easton, MD) using a 1 mm path quartz cell. For each sample, 15 consecutive spectra were obtained and averaged, the baseline reading was subtracted, and results were expressed in terms of molar ellipticity (deg·cm2·dmol −1).

Thioflavin T binding assay

Aggregation of PBS-reconstituted Aβ homologues, incubated at 37°C for up to 6 days as above, was monitored by fluorescence evaluation of Thioflavin T binding, following previously described protocols [50, 56]. Briefly, 6 μl aliquots from each peptide aggregation time points were added to 184 μl of 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer, pH 8.5, and 10 μl of 0.1 mM thioflavin T (Sigma, St. Louis, MI). Fluorescence was recorded for 300 s in an LS-50B spectrometer (Perkin Elmer, Waltham, MA) with a slit width of 10 nm and excitation and emission wavelengths of 435 and 490 nm, respectively [57].

ANS binding assay

Changes in the exposure of hydrophobic residues by peptides pre-treated and aggregated as in thioflavin T assays were evaluated by their ability to bind the fluorescent dye ANS (Sigma). Fifty μl from each of the 50 μM peptide aggregation time point samples were added to 200 μl PBS, pH 7.4, containing 2 μl of 7.5 mg/ml ANS in dimethyl formamide (Sigma) as previously described [58]. Spectra were recorded from 450 to 570 nm in a Perkin Elmer LS-50B spectrometer with excitation at 370 nm, 10 nm slit width, and a scan speed of 500 nm per min. For each sample, 7 consecutive scans were obtained and the maximum fluorescence values from each scan were averaged and plotted as ANS binding in arbitrary fluorescence units[59].

Native gel electrophoresis and Western Blot analysis

Electrophoretic analysis for the assessment of peptide aggregation was performed under native conditions in 5–20% gradient polyacrylamide gels, in the absence of SDS, using 25 mM Tris/glycine buffer, pH 8.8, as running buffer as previously described [50]. Molecular masses were determined using High Molecular Weight Calibration kit for native electrophoresis (GE Healthcare Life Sciences, Piscataway NJ) in combination with the low molecular weight proteins insulin and soybean trypsin inhibitor. After the electrophoretic separation, proteins were electrotransferred to nitrocellulose membranes (0.45 μm pore size; Bio Rad) at 400 mA for 45 min, using 10 mM 3-cyclohexylamino-1-propanesulfonic acid (CAPS, Sigma) buffer, pH 11.0, containing 10% (v/v) methanol. Membranes were subsequently blocked for 1 h with 5% nonfat milk in PBS containing 0.1% Tween 20 (PBS-T), and probed overnight at 4 °C with a 50:50 combination of monoclonal antibodies 4G8 and 6E10 (each at a 1:3000 dilution in PBS-T). After thorough washes with PBS-T, membranes were immunoreacted with HRP-conjugated anti-mouse IgG and further developed by chemiluminescence as the dot-blot analysis.

2.5. Biochemical identification of N- and C-terminal truncated Aβ species in brain homogenates

Tissue Fractionation

Sequential extraction of non-fibrillar soluble Aβ and fibrillar Aβ deposits from human AD brain tissue was performed taking advantage of the differential solubility of the different Aβ species, as previously described [12, 60]. Tissues were homogenized in ice-cold PBS containing Complete Protease Inhibitor (Roche, Indianapolis, IN; 5 ml buffer per gram of wet tissue) using an Omni Tissue Homogenizer with disposable soft tips (Omni International, Kennesaw, GA). Homogenates were centrifuged in a Beckman XL ultracentrifuge (50.4 Ti rotor, 100,000 × g, 1 hour, 4°C), PBS extractions of the remaining pellets were repeated 4 times, and PBS soluble extracts pooled together. The remaining pellets were subsequently treated with PBS containing 2% SDS to extract less soluble material, followed by 70 and 98% formic acid (1ml/g of original mass of wet tissue) to retrieve the most insoluble fibrillar deposits [61]; all extracts were stored at −80°C until mass spectrometry (MS) analysis.

Immunoprecipitation / MALDI-TOF Mass Spectrometry

Immunoprecipitation (IP) of extracted materials was performed as previously described by our laboratory [12]. For the IP of total Aβ species, each extraction pool was incubated with anti-mouse IgG paramagnetic beads (Dynabeads M-280; Invitrogen) pre-coated with anti-Aβ monoclonals 4G8 and 6E10 and blocked in PBS containing 0.1% BSA [12]. Prior to IP, the SDS-extracts were depleted of the detergent with SDS-OUT (Pierce) and the FA-extracts neutralized with saturated Trizma base, as previously described [60]. In all cases, following incubation with the respective fractions, the beads were subsequently washed with PBS and 50mM NH4HCO3, bound material was eluted with 0.5M acetic acid, and IP fractions were dried out on a Savant SpeedVac concentrator (Thermo Fisher). Prior to MALDI-TOF analysis, all IP materials were separately solubilized in 5 μl of 0.1% FA / 50% acetonitrile in water and one fifth of the reconstituted samples was combined with an equal volume of α-4-hydroxycinnamic acid matrix (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) previously solubilized at a concentration of 15 g/l in acetonitrile containing 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA); 1 μL of the resulting mixture was spotted in duplicate onto a Bruker Daltonics MTP 384 massive target T aluminum plate and analyzed in a Bruker Daltonics Autoflex MALDI-TOF mass spectrometer (Bremen, Germany) in linear mode using standard instrument settings at the New York University Mass Spectrometry Core for Neuroscience. External calibration was performed using human adrenocorticotropic hormone peptide 18–39 (average mass = 2465.68 Da) and insulin (average mass = 5733.49 Da). In all cases MS spectra were processed and analyzed by FlexAnalysis (Bruker Daltonics).

Dot-blot analysis

Brain tissue from APPPS1Tg was homogenized in PBS containing protease inhibitors, centrifuged, and the remaining pellets were further extracted with 98% formic acid to retrieve the most insoluble material, as above. Both PBS and FA extracts were immunoprecipitated using 4G8/6E10 coated paramagnetic beads, bound material eluted with 0.5M acetic acid and loaded onto nitrocellulose membranes assembled in the dot-blot apparatus. Synthetic Aβ4-42 and Aβ1-34 homologues were loaded on separate wells as controls. After blocking, the membrane was incubated with monoclonal anti-Aβx-34, anti-Aβ4-x antibodies under the same conditions indicated above using 4G8/6E10 as a loading control. In all cases, membranes were further incubated with HRP-conjugated anti-mouse IgG and developed by ECL, as above.

2.6. Immunohistochemical analyses

Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded 8-μm human and mouse brain tissue sections were evaluated for immunoreactivity for total Aβ as well as for the presence of N- and C-terminal truncated species starting at amino acid residue 4 or ending at position 34 by light microscopy and immunofluorescence as indicated below. In all cases, sections were deparaffinized in xylene, rehydrated, and pretreated with 98% FA for 10 min as previously described [12]. Following quenching of endogenous peroxidase with Dako Blocking reagent (Dako North America, Carpinteria, CA), and blocking non-specific binding by 30 min incubation with 10% non-fat milk in PBS, sections were subjected to the different protocols indicated below.

2.6.1. Light microscopy

Aβ and Aβ4-x staining

Following the pre-treatment and blocking steps described above, sections were incubated overnight at 4°C with either a combination of 4G8/6E10 monoclonal antibodies (1:1,000 each), polyclonal anti-Aβ4-x (1:1,000), or monoclonal Aβ4-x (clone18H6C4; 1:3,000). After PBS-T washes, sections were further incubated with the respective biotinylated anti-mouse or anti-rabbit secondary antibodies followed by Vectastain ABC kit (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA). Color was developed by diaminobenzidine (DAB) / H2O2 and sections counterstained with hematoxylin (Dako).

Aβ x-34 staining

After pretreatment and blocking sections as above, staining for x-34 species employing the rabbit polyclonal antibody was performed using Tyramide Signal Amplification (TSA) system (Perkin Elmer, Waltham, MA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Sections were blocked with TNB blocking reagent followed by sequential incubation with anti-Aβx-34 antibody (1:500; overnight, 4°C), biotin conjugated anti-rabbit IgG (Biosource/Invitrogen; 1:1,000, 30 min), and HRP- conjugated streptavidin (Biosource/Invitrogen; 1:1,000, 30 min). Following incubation with TSA working solution, signal was further amplified by incubation with streptavidin-HRP, developed with DAB and counterstained with hematoxylin as above. For staining with the monoclonal anti-Aβ4-x, which displayed higher signal intensity and required no amplification, the immunohistochemical procedure followed was essentially the same employed for the anti-Aβ4-x staining detailed above. The incubation with the primary monoclonal antibody was carried out overnight (1:1,500, 4°C), and followed by anti-mouse IgG immunoreaction and ABC detection.

Congo Red staining

Congo red (Sigma) was solubilized in 80% ethanol (100 mg/10 ml), added of 100 μl of 1N NaOH, and filtered through #1 Whatman filter paper. After deparaffinization, brain tissue sections were incubated with the Congo red solution for 30 min, rinsed with water, differentiated with 80% ethanol to remove fluorochrome excess, and counterstained with hematoxylin (30 sec). Staining was visualized under polarized light, as described [12].

2.6.2. Immunofluorescence microscopy

Brain tissue sections were pretreated, and incubated with the primary antibodies as for light microscopy evaluation. These steps were followed by incubation with the corresponding secondary antibodies labeled with Alexafluor-488 and -568 conjugates (Life Technologies, 1:200, 30 min, RT). In the case of immunodetection of Aβx-34 species in which TSA methodology was employed, following the amplification steps and after reaction with biotin-labeled secondary antibody, sections were incubated with Alexafluor-488 or -568 conjugated streptavidin (Life Technologies, 1:200, 30 min, RT). Localization of specific immunoreactivity profiles with fibrillar structures was assessed by counterstaining the pertinent sections for 7 min with 1% thioflavin-S solution followed by differentiation in 70% alcohol as described [62]. In all cases sections were mounted with aqueous mounting medium (Vectashield, Vector) and images were acquired using a Nikon Eclipse Ti microscope (Nikon, Melville, NY).

3. Results

3.1 Generation of antibodies recognizing N-terminally cleaved Aβ4-x species and C-terminally truncated Aβ x-34 fragments

Polyclonal antibodies specific for Aβ peptides either ending in position 34 or starting at position 4 were generated by immunization with synthetic peptides containing an additional cysteine residue that allowed their oriented coupling to KLH (Fig 1), as described in the Methods section. In addition, monoclonal antibodies recognizing Aβ4-x and Aβx-34 species were also produced, and of the different hybridoma cell lines generated and subcloned, 18H6C4 and 1B5.4 were selected for the present studies. The dot blot analysis illustrated in Figure 1b, indicates that both the polyclonal as well as the monoclonal anti-Aβ4-x recognize the Aβ peptides starting at position 4 namely, Aβ4-34, Aβ4-40, and Aβ4-42, while both antibodies lack immunoreactivity for the N-terminally intact peptides Aβ 1-34, Aβ1-40, and Aβ1-42 highlighting their ability to recognize the truncated species even in the presence of the intact full-length peptides. Both poly- and mono-clonal anti-Aβ4-x antibodies lacked immunoreactivity for synthetic homologues truncated at position 3 and post-translationally modified to pyroglutamate, further highlighting its specificity to Aβ peptides beginning at phenylalanine 4 and in sharp contrast with a previously reported antibody with dual specificity [63]. Polyclonal anti-Aβx-34 as well as monoclonal 1B5.4 showed specific reactivity for the peptides truncated at position 34, both Aβ1-34 and Aβ4-34 failing to recognize either full-length Aβ1-40 /Aβ1-42, or the respective synthetic homologues cleaved at position 4. As a loading control, a parallel dot bot illustrates the immunoreactivity of all the peptides with a combination of 4G8 and 6E10.

3.2. Immunohistochemical identification of Aβ truncated species in APP-transgenic models and Alzheimer’s disease cases

The custom generated antibodies recognizing Aβ species starting at position 4 (Aβ4-x) as well as those ending at residue 34 (Aβx-34) were employed to evaluate the topographical distribution of these truncated molecules in brain tissue sections of APP-transgenic mice and AD cases through a combination of light and confocal fluorescence microscopy methodologies. Figure 2 illustrates the immunostaining in 20 month-old Tg2576 mice, highlighting the robust Aβ deposition taking place in the hippocampus of aged mice, as indicated by the immunoreactivity rendered with a combination of 4G8/6E10 monoclonal anti-Aβ antibodies (Fig 2a, 2e, and 2i). Immunoreaction with polyclonal anti-Aβ4-x indicated a strong signal mostly restricted to a subset of the amyloid plaques (Fig 2b, 2f, and 2j) coinciding with the Congo red positive staining (Fig 2c and 2g), indicative of a localization of Aβ4-x species to the more fibrillar lesions. Of note, fragments truncated at position 4 were also present in vascular amyloid deposits co-localizing with Congo red positive vessels (Insets in Fig 2b and 2c). In contrast to the tissue distribution displayed with anti-Aβ4-x, immunoreaction with polyclonal anti-Aβx-34 demonstrated a different staining profile, as the antibody revealed a more diffuse punctuated pattern primarily in-between and in the periphery of the plaques and not fully associated with Congo red positive deposits (Fig 2d, 2h, and 2k). The staining profile within the plaques themselves was also different, while the combination of 4G8/6E10 highlighted the full lesion and anti-Aβ4-x decorated predominantly the center of the plaque (Fig 2l and 2m, respectively), anti-Aβx-34 stained plaques more diffusely and predominantly in the periphery (Fig 2n).

Comparable immunohistochemical profiles to the one exhibited by the Tg2576 were displayed by the APP/PS1 model. Figure 3 depicts the localization of Aβ4-x species to a subset of amyloid plaques displaying Congo red positivity in the hippocampus of a 17 month-old APP/PS1 (compare panels 3a, 3b and 3c) whereas Aβx-34 immunoreactivity illustrates the same diffuse punctuated parenchymal pattern (Fig 3d) previously shown in the Tg2576 model. High power images further illustrate that the reactivity of Aβ4-x species is primarily restricted to the center of the plaques (Fig 3e for the polyclonal antibody staining and Fig 3f for the monoclonal antibody reactivity) whereas a more diffuse pattern is observed in the case of Aβx-34 (Fig 3g and Fig 3h, for the poly- and mono-clonal antibody immunoreaction, respectively). The absence of immunoreactivity after absorption of both the poly- and mono-clonal anti-Aβx-34 antibodies with purified Aβ1-34 synthetic peptide (panels k and l, respectively) together with the lack of staining of anti-Aβ4-x in non-Tg littermates (Fig 3i and Fig 3j for the poly- and monoclonal antibody, respectively) validate the specificity of our custom generated antibodies while providing additional support to the differential staining pattern of the truncated N- and C-terminal species studied herein.

Immunofluorescence microscopy studies depicted in Figure 4 further revealed that the Aβ4-x staining (green signal) is limited to a subset of total plaques labeled with 4G8/6E10 anti-Aβ antibodies (red fluorescence) and largely confined to the core of the amyloid plaques in all three mouse models studied herein, as highlighted in the respective merged immunofluorescence images (Fig 4, panels a–i). As it was the case for the light microscopy studies, immunofluorescence confocal microscopy analysis also indicate that Aβx-34 signals (green) did not co-localize to the center of the plaques, and contrastingly display a punctiform diffuse pattern involving the areas surrounding plaque deposits (Fig 4, panels j–r). Interestingly, some of the diffuse punctiform staining decorated by Aβx-34 was independent of the 4G8/6E10 reactivity in all three Tg models. Whether this relates to the presence of specific conformational structures not recognized by the pan-Aβ antibodies -4G8 in combination with 6E10- remain to be elucidated.

Consistent with the results of the immunohistochemical analysis in the various APP transgenic models, a similar staining profile was obtained in the human AD cases. Figure 5 depicts the topographic similarities of the Aβ4-x signal –confined to a subset of the amyloid plaques immunoreactive with the combination of 4G8/6E10 antibodies (compare panels 5a and 5d highlighting total Aβ deposits with panels b and e depicting Aβ4-x reactivity)– and the diffuse staining pattern exhibited by the Aβx-34 reactivity (panels c, g, and j–l), illustrated in the figure for two different AD cases. No immunoreactivity was observed with either anti-Aβ4-x or anti-Aβx-34 antibodies in human non-demented controls (Fig 5, panels f and h, respectively). Higher magnification images illustrate the similarities among the staining profiles in the Tg models, with anti-Aβ4-x immunoreactivity concentrated primarily to the core of the plaques (Fig 5i) and Aβx-34 signals more diffuse, punctuated and preferentially associated with the periphery of the plaques (Fig 5, panels j, k, l). Confirming the specificity of the immunostainings no immunohistochemical signal was retrieved when the primary custom generated antibodies antibodies were pre-absorbed with the respective immunogens using previously described protocols from our laboratory [64] (m, n, o, p).

Immunofluorescence analysis of the same human specimens (Figure 6) further illustrates the topographical localization of Aβ4-x concentrating in the core of the plaques (panels a–c) and the diffuse broadly distributed Aβx-34 signal either in the periphery or away from the plaques (panels d–f). Co-staining of Aβ4-x or Aβx-34 with thioflavin S confirms the preferential localization of the N-terminal truncated 4-x species to the fibrillar, thioflavin (+) lesions (Fig 6, panels g-i) and the primary association of Aβx-34 species to thioflavin (−) areas or surrounding the plaque deposits (panels j–l). Additional comparative studies of the topographical localization of N- and C-terminal truncated species in different brain areas as well as assessment of the temporal accrual of the different species with disease pathogenesis, both in AD and Tg tissues, will not only help in the better understanding of the process of amyloidogenesis but will also further validate the different mouse models.

3.3. Biochemical identification of N- and C-terminally truncated species in AD and Tg-mice specimens

Biochemical analysis of brain tissue from AD cases and Tg mouse lines illustrate the heterogeneity of the Aβ deposits highlighting the abundance of N- and C-terminal truncated species and their differential solubilization in water-based or stringent extraction solutions. Brain tissue specimens were subjected to sequential extraction protocols previously developed in our laboratory [12, 61] in which soluble Aβ peptides are typically recovered in the water-based extracts whereas the more insoluble Aβ counterparts require either the addition of detergents like SDS or further treatment with the more stringent agent FA. Consistent with this notion, Figure 7a illustrates the heterogeneity of the brain Aβ peptidome exemplified in the Aβ profile obtained from case I (Tables I and II). The composition of the PBS fraction depicted in Fig 7a shows the presence of numerous Aβ species, predominantly truncated at the C-terminus, together with Aβ1-40, the more soluble of the full-length peptides. Also present in the PBS fraction are the N-terminally truncated Aβ4-40 species as well as fragments truncated at both ends as Aβ4-34 and Aβ2-34. Extraction with SDS, retrieved not only Aβ1-40 and Aβ4-40, but also part of the more insoluble Aβ1-42 whereas more stringent conditions, 70 % FA or 98% FA, retrieved additional Aβ1-40 and Aβ1-42. Using the harshest treament, the two fragments truncated at Phe4 –Aβ4-40 and Aβ4-42–were also retrieved in addition to the full-length peptides, in aggreement with our previous findings demonstrating remarkably similar populations of post-translationally cleaved Aβ forms in AD and aged squirrel monkeys [65] and suggesting that N-terminal degradation at position 4 negatively affects peptide solubility. Partial retrieval of Aβ4-40 in water-based buffers, in difference to Aβ4-42 which was exclusively present in FA extracts, was suggestive of a higher solubility of the shorter fragment in comparisson to the Aβ4-42 counterpart. In the other AD cases analyzed (Table II) and illustrated in Fig 7b–c for cases IV and V SDS tratment was sufficient to retrieve in addition to the full length peptides, Aβ species truncated at position 4. Overall, the targeted proteomic analysis in AD brain revealed that, although there was some variability in the Aβ peptidome among the patients studied, the general profile predominantly consisting of C-terminally truncated Aβ species in water-based extraction conditions and the more insoluble Aβ1-42 and N-terminally truncated derivatives retrieved in SDS or FA extracts was a constant finding, as we partially reported [34, 66]. A comparable MS analysis performed in non-demented control cases (Tables I and II) albeit retrieving Aβ1-40 and C-terminal truncated derivatives in PBS homogenates, failed to demonstrate the more insoluble Aβ4-40 or Aβ4-42 truncated species even under the more stringent FA extracting conditions (Table II). In agreement with the heterogeneous presence of C-terminally cleaved species in water-based PBS suggestive of the high solubility of these Aβ forms, the Aβ profile in CSF is typically enriched in C-terminal truncated forms, as illustrated in Fig 7g and also consistent with our recently published data [67]. Whether the differencial extractability of Aβ4-40 or Aβ4-42 in SDS or FA found in the different patients studied herein relates to the magnitude, complexity, or composition of the deposits, to the duration of the disease, or to other clinical phenotypes is currently being studied and remains to be elucidated.

Notably, the same Aβ heterogeneity present in AD cases was also observed in brain tissue obtained from the different transgenic mouse models studied herein and illustrated in Fig 7d–7f for the APPLd2 Tg mouse and summarized in Table II for Ld2 and Tg2576. Analysis of PBS homogenates consistently retrieved Aβ1-40 together with multiple C-terminally truncated forms as Aβ1-38, Aβ1-34, Aβ1-29, and Aβ1-27, among others (Fig. 7d, top panel), in agreement with the findings in human brain. As expected, parallel IP/MS experiments performed with PBS homogenates of a non-transgenic littermate failed to retrieve any Aβ peptide (Fig 7d, bottom panel). Tandem IP/MS of FA-extracts utilizing first anti-Aβ4-x – to enrich the immunoprecipitate in species N-terminally truncated at residue 4 – followed by IP with 4G8/6E10 to retrieve the remaining Aβ peptides in the extracts is illustrated in Fig 7e–f, respectively. Anti-Aβ4-x was able to fully retrieve the truncated fragments Aβ4-40 and Aβ4-42 from the mouse FA-extracts (Fig 7e) whereas subsequent IP with 4G8/6E10-coated beads recovered additional derivatives lacking the N-terminal cleavage at position 4, including Aβ1-38 (also reported as a component of fibrillar deposits in familial AD [12]), together with the classic full-length Aβ1-40 and Aβ1-42 (Fig. 7f). The minor Aβ1-42 peak in the Aβ4-x-immunoprecipitated fraction likely reflects a fraction of the peptide bound to Aβ4-x derivatives – a previously described feature of some amyloid molecules [60, 68] – since as demonstrated in Fig 1, the antibody recognizing Aβ4-x truncated forms does not immunoreact with full-length species. The presence of N- and C-terminally truncated species in APPPS1 extracts was demonstrated by dot-blot analysis, as illustrated in Fig 7h–j. PBS homogenates and FA extracts from APPPS1 were immunoprecipitated with 4G8/6E10 coated beads, eluted, and loaded onto nitrocellulose membranes as described in Material and Methods. Incubation with monoclonal anti-Aβx-34 or Aβ4-x revealed the presence of peptides bearing the C-terminal truncations at position 34, and N-terminal truncations at Phe4 in both brain extracts (Fig 7h and 7i, respectively), while immunoreactivity with 4G8/6E10 was used as loading controls (Fig 7j). Table II summarizes the exact conditions under which both the full-length peptides Aβ1-40 and Aβ1-42 as well as the N- and C-terminally truncated derivatives were extracted from brain tissue in AD cases and various APP Tg models. Overall, the IP/MS data highlight the similarities in the brain Aβ peptidome between AD and APP Tg mouse models, consistent with our recent findings demonstrating a comparable Aβ profile between human AD and aged squirrel monkeys [65]. More importantly, the abundance of truncated forms of Aβ in both these animal paradigms, rule out the likelihood that these species may in any way be related to the post mortem interval of the human specimens analyzed in this work.

3.4. Structural properties of full-length and truncated Aβ species

The different distribution of the N- and C-terminal truncated homologues within different tissue extracts and the distinct staining patterns displayed in the immunohistochemical analyses suggested a dissimilar aggregation/fibrillization profile for both species and prompted the biophysical characterization of the peptides. The aggregation pattern and structural changes of the different synthetic homologues, pretreated, solubilized, and aggregated as described in Methods, was analyzed by CD spectroscopy, non-denaturing WB analysis, thioflavin T- and ANS-binding.

Figure 8 illustrates changes in the secondary structure as well as in the aggregation propensity over a time-lapse of six days for the full-length Aβ 1-42, and β 1-40, as well as their truncated derivatives at position 4 and/or 34. Consistent with previous findings [50, 69], the highly fibrillogenic Aβ1-42 (Fig 8a), showed a CD spectra with a typical minimum at 218 nm – indicative of the presence of β-sheet rich secondary structures – at every time point tested, including upon solubilization under physiologic salt concentration, with a strong formation of high molecular mass oligomeric assemblies, evident in the WB analysis throughout the experimental window. As aggregation increased with time, the monomer component –which was most notable immediately after solubilization in PBS– decreased and practically disappeared after 2h incubation. These structural properties dramatically changed when Aβ1-42 was systematically truncated at its C-terminus. As indicated in Fig 8b, the shorter derivative Aβ1-40 adopted a typical unordered conformation upon solubilization in PBS exhibiting a classic CD minimum at 198 nm, a secondary structure that remained unchanged for up to 1 day. After 2-day incubation, a β-sheet minimum at 218 nm became evident while still exhibiting some random structural components, as illustrated by the still predominantly negative values observed below 200 nm. This type of mixed secondary structure remained basically unchanged for the remaining 6-day duration of the aggregation experiments. Consistent with these changes, high molecular mass oligomeric species became evident after 1 day and remained basically unchanged for the 6-day time frame of the experiments, as indicated by the native WB analysis. Further C-terminal truncation at position 34 completely suppressed aggregation, as indicated by the native WB; consistent with this finding, the primarily random secondary structure exhibited by Aβ1-34 upon solubilization also remained unaffected within the 6-day time frame of the experiments (Fig 8c).

N-terminal truncation of the same peptides at position 4 affected primarily their aggregation propensity, displaying, in all cases, a higher tendency to form higher molecular mass oligomers than their respective counterparts containing an intact N-terminus. In this sense, Aβ4-42, compared with the parent peptide Aβ1-42 formed β-sheet structures shortly after solubilization while oligomerizing to a larger extent, initially forming tetramers and high molecular mass oligomers, as indicated in the WB. After 2–3 days incubation, the mass of the oligomeric species was so prominent that the peptides largely failed to enter into the gel (Fig 8d). Aβ4-40 and Aβ4-34, albeit not transitioning to a β-sheet rich configuration, both initially assembled into tetramers and slowly formed higher molecular mass oligomers (Fig 8e and 8f). In this note, it is important to remark that, although the classical concept of peptide aggregation indicates that β-sheet conformations directly correlate with fibrillogenesis propensity, more recent evidence suggests that –at least in the case of Aβ and other amyloidogenic peptides– the issue may be far more complex. Not only have a wide spectrum of soluble intermediate oligomers been shown to coexist at a certain time-point, but more than one oligomerization/aggregation paths have been proposed with even aggregates of the same size being capable of exhibiting unique structures and driving different aggregation pathways, including those not leading to fibrillization but to the formation of “off-pathway” aggregates [70, 71]. In this sense, certain Aβ subunits possessing random coil secondary structures in CD have been shown to form oligomeric assemblies as visualized in WB, and to generate specific types of aggregates with distinctive biochemical properties and toxicity [70, 72]. A deeper structural analysis further characterizing the precise aggregation pathways is in progress to determine whether this is the case of Aβ4-34 and Aβ4-40. It is certainly noteworthy that in difference to the more insoluble Aβ4-42 species, Aβ4-40 and Aβ4-34 are very often released from the AD and APP Tg tissue deposits with PBS, and partially with more stringent solutions (Table II). Whether this represents the coexistence in the deposits of more than one type of aggregates with different extractability properties remains to be determined.

Thioflavin T binding –a property largely associated with the presence of β-sheet structures and typically correlating with the existence of fibrillar and/or protofibrillar components [56, 58]– also varied among the different peptides. In accordance with its known fibrillogenic propensity, large content of β-structure and elevated concentration of high-order aggregates, Aβ1-42 exhibited much higher fluorescence values than the full-length Aβ1-40 (Fig 9a) whereas further C-terminal truncation at position 34 (Aβ1-34) resulted in signal suppression, consistent with poor fibrillogenic propensity. On the contrary, truncation at residue 4 translated in enhanced values of thioflavin T binding compared to their respective intact counterparts with Aβ4-42 exhibiting the highest fluorescence signal yielding values that even exceeded those obtained for Aβ1-42 at the same time points. In all cases the fluorescence signals of thioflavin T correlated with the magnitude of the high-order molecular mass aggregates visualized by native WB. The effect of the N-terminal truncation was also noticeable in the shortest fragment Aβ4-34, resulting in an increase of the Thioflavin T signal at the latest points that reached comparable values to those obtained with the intact Aβ1-40. In agreement with the WB and the thioflavin T binding data, Aβ1-42 as well as the peptides Aβ4-42 and Aβ 4-40 showed increased signal levels, as well as a blue shift in ANS fluorescence (Figure 9b) indicative of the exposure of hydrophobic residues of the molecule, a feature typically associated with a higher tendency to aggregate/oligomerize. In the case of the two peptides truncated at position 4 (Aβ4-42 and Aβ4-40), the fluorescence changes were higher than those observed with their respective full-length counterparts while in agreement with its lack of aggregation /fibrillization tendency, Aβ1-34 showed ANS values indistinguishable from the blanks.

The above data clearly indicates that the N-terminal truncation at position 4, particularly in the case of Aβ4-42, induces higher β-sheet content, enhanced aggregation/fibrillization propensity, and/or greater hydrophobicity than the intact Aβ1-40 and Aβ1-42 counterparts, all characteristics associated with pro-amyloidogenic properties. The structural studies also confirmed that a C-terminal truncation at position 34 leads to the generation of peptides less prone to aggregation and far less hydrophobic than the respective parent molecules, suggestive of molecules with more accelerated clearance potential, in agreement with their tissue retrieval in water-based buffers and consistent with the diffuse staining pattern illustrated in our immunohistochemical data.

4. Discussion

The accumulation of Aβ in the brain is considered a central element in the pathogenesis of AD. Notably, and in spite of innumerable studies related to Aβ pathogenicity, the heterogeneity of Aβ species in brain tissue and CSF biological samples –extending far beyond the classic Aβ1-40/Aβ1-42 dichotomy– has only marginally been taken into consideration. The presence of N- and C-terminal truncated species was reported in the 1980s initially reflecting the presence of alternative cleavage sites for both BACE1 –with capacity to generate species starting at Asp1 or at Glu11–as well as for γ-secretase, which can generate Aβ species ending at residues 38, 40, and 42 [47]. Thereafter, many other truncated fragments have been identified in brain homogenates and biological fluids likely reflecting the collective action of Aβ-degrading resident enzymes forming part of the brain proteolytic machinery [73]. The diversity of the proteases that have been implicated in Aβ proteolysis is rather perplexing, but in many cases the role of these enzymes in Aβ degradation in vivo has been validated mostly through the use of genetically engineered animal models. Evidence of a genetic association of these proteases with AD has only been published for a few enzymes albeit no consensus exists with regard to the importance or reproducibility of these associations in the general AD population [74]. Irrespective of the mechanism originating the different cleaved peptides, the existence of a broad heterogeneity of N- and C-terminally truncated peptides is undeniable albeit the importance of these numerous species for the disease pathogenesis remains largely understudied. The current work has taken advantage of custom-generated novel poly- and mono-clonal antibodies specific for Aβ fragments starting at position 4 or ending at residue 34 and the use of immunohistochemical, targeted proteomic, and biochemical approaches in different transgenic models and AD brain specimens providing a clear assessment of the differential localization within the Aβ deposits as well as the biophysical properties of Aβ4-x versus Aβx-34 species. Our studies clearly demonstrate the preferential distribution of Aβ4-x truncated species – both in AD and Tg models – to the central core of the amyloid plaques overlapping with the more fibrillar areas of the lesions that are Congo red and thioflavin-S positive. In contrast, Aβx-34 demonstrated a different profile, exhibiting a more diffuse punctuated pattern primarily in the periphery and between plaques that is not fully associated with Congo red/thioflavin staining suggestive of the association of these species with more soluble amyloid derivatives. Whether this fragment colocalizes with dystrophic neurites in the plaque periphery is unclear and currently under investigation. Confirming the differential immunohistochemical distribution, targeted proteomic studies employing a multi-step biochemical retrieval approach –which sequentially extracts water-soluble, detergent soluble, and formic acid soluble species– followed by peptide identification through immunoprecipitation and MS analysis revealed that in the brain deposits of both Tg models and AD specimens fragments with intact N-terminus but exhibiting C-terminal truncations, like Aβ1-34, are consistently retrieved in physiologic water-based buffers. Conversely, N-terminal truncated peptides stating at Phe4 but exhibiting intact C-terminus, particularly Aβ4-42 are more insoluble requiring the use of SDS or formic acid treatment for tissue extraction, further validating the tissue distribution highlighted by the light microscopy and immunofluorescence analyses.

Biochemical/biophysical studies using synthetic homologues confirmed the differential solubility properties and apparent dissimilar fibrillogenic characteristics of the species truncated at either N- or C-terminal ends. Truncation at position 34 resulted in the highly soluble Aβ1-34, a peptide of low hydrophobicity that lacked aggregation/fibrillogenic properties in the timeframe of our experimental design, as demonstrated by WB, thioflavin T- and ANS-binding. Consistent with the absence of amyloidogenic properties of Aβ1-34, we recently reported that the MMP2 and MMP9-mediated cleavage of full-length Aβ1-40 and Aβ1-42 resulted in the sequential production of Aβ1-34 followed by its subsequent enzymatic degradation to Aβ1-30, and further into Aβ1-16 all truncated peptides lacking toxicity for cerebral microvascular and neuronal cells [41], a feature supporting the notion that the C-terminally truncated Aβ species, likely to be more easily eliminated from the brain, are associated with non-pathogenic mechanisms. Notably, the heterogeneity of the Aβ peptidome in CSF – consistently enriched in multiple C-terminally truncated fragments [30, 47, 48] including those ending at position 34–further stress the role of C-terminal degradation for interstitial Aβ clearance. In this sense, our recently published data demonstrated that full-length Aβ1-40 injected intracerebrally in wild-type C57Bl/6 mice is rapidly degraded in numerous C-terminal truncated fragments that can be detected in the CSF in as short as 5 minutes after injection [67], further highlighting the role of brain resident enzymes in the mechanism of brain Aβ clearance. In contrast to the behavior of C-terminally truncated species, peptides exhibiting a cleavage at position 4, Aβ4-40 and particularly Aβ4-42, showed increased exposure of hydrophobic residues, higher β-sheet content, and/or elevated tendency to oligomerize/fibrillize consistent with early reports that indicated that N-terminal deletions enhanced peptide aggregation and toxicity in relation to full-length species [75]. Interestingly, truncation at Phe4 of the highly abundant Aβ1-40 generates the Aβ4-40 fragment with enhanced aggregation and fibrillogenic propensity compared to the parent Aβ1-40 in spite of the lack of β-sheet structure in the time-frame of our experimental paradigm, perhaps explaining the presence of Aβ4-40 –in difference to Aβ4-42–not only in FA and SDS extracts, but also in PBS homogenates containing the more soluble species (Table II). Our current findings highlighting the predominant association of Aβ4-x with Congo red/thioflavin positive lesions as well as the requirement of stringent conditions for their release from the tissue deposits –as demonstrated by the targeted proteomic analyses– correlate well with the early demonstration of Aβ4-42 as an important component of plaque cores isolated from AD and Down’s syndrome brains [6]. In fact, the reported N-terminal sequence data in this study indicated a ragged N-terminus for the plaque core proteins, with a surprising prevalence of Aβ peptides starting at position 4 in both, AD cases and Down’s syndrome preparations. In these cases truncations at position 4 represented 64 % and 45% of the analyzed plaque core material, respectively, findings that were not further studied over the years.

Based on the generally poor solubility of N-terminally truncated species at position 4, it is conceivable that these derivatives might contribute to the exacerbation of amyloidogenic conformations by acting as seeding elements as has been proposed for the poorly soluble N-terminally modified pE species [76]. Along this line, it was shown that intracerebral infusion of Aβ-rich brain extracts from AD patients stimulates the premature formation of parenchymal and vascular deposits in APP Tg models, a mechanism resembling the infectivity of prion diseases and currently considered as a significant contributor to AD pathogenesis [77, 78]. Whether Aβ4-x species play a role in the propagation and/or formation of pathological amyloid aggregates remains to be determined although the in vitro biophysical studies presented herein, are certainly suggestive of such a likely contribution. Further studies in Tg mice of different ages, currently ongoing, will certainly indicate whether the presence of Aβ4-x precedes or is concomitant with the deposition of the full-length Aβ1-40/42 peptides. Additional experimentation in in vitro cellular culture models is also needed to further demonstrate the increased toxicity of the highly aggregation-prone Aβ4-x species. Nevertheless, it should be noted that validating the amyloidogenic potential of these truncated species, it was recently reported that Aβ4-42 was highly neurotoxic in cell culture models and its toxicity correlated with the age-dependent hippocampal neuronal loss and concomitant memory deficits displayed by Tg4-42 mouse model [63]. Supporting the mechanistic relevance of N-terminal truncated fragments, passive immunotherapy with a monoclonal antibody recognizing both Aβ4-x and pyroglutamate-modified Aβ3-x species rescued memory deficits in the Tg4-42 model and decreased thioflavin positive plaque load in 5XFAD mice [79]. In this sense, our novel anti-Aβ4-x and anti-Aβx-34 monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies, highly specific for the respective truncations and blind for the more abundant intact Aβ1-40 and Aβ1-42 species will provide much needed flexibility for the development of quantitative assays and attractive therapeutic approaches to further dwell into translational aspects of the disease pathogenesis.

The intrinsic biophysical properties and easy extractability from the tissue deposits displayed by the C-terminal truncated peptide Aβ1-34 together with the primarily diffuse immunostaining pattern exhibited by the fragment in both AD and APP Tg models as well as the consistent presence of multiple C-terminally cleaved species in the CSF Aβ peptidome in normal and AD individuals [30, 47, 48] are all suggestive of the relationship of these truncated species to brain clearance mechanisms. The findings may also indicate that Aβx-34, and perhaps additional C-terminally truncated fragments with similar solubility, may contribute to the diffuse deposits seen in AD with conventional Aβ antibodies, providing a note of caution regarding the interpretation of these lesions for the disease pathogenesis. While diffuse deposits have been consistently regarded as structures preceding the formation of amyloid plaques, based on the data presented herein, it is also plausible that they may partially reflect an opposing view, revealing the physiologic degradation mechanisms exacerbated in a futile effort to prevent excessive Aβ accumulation and preclude the formation of amyloid deposits. Further studies along these lines of investigation are certainly warranted. Increasing evidence generated over the last decade indicates that one of the main mechanisms leading to brain Aβ accumulation and likely contributing to AD is a defective clearance of the protein from the brain, which affects the delicate balance between degree of Aβ production, dynamics of aggregation and rate of brain efflux. Indeed, our recent report clearly demonstrated the detrimental role exerted by peptide oligomerization/aggregation for the brain clearance mechanisms suggestive of the potential for Aβ4-x species to be preferentially retained within the brain [67]. Using newly developed techniques for quantifying the rates of Aβ production and clearance within the CSF in humans [80], it was clearly shown that sporadic AD patients do indeed exhibit significant defects in the clearance of Aβ [81] although the precise pathways impaired in these patients remain largely undefined. Glial phagocytosis, perivascular drainage, transport to the CSF, clearance across the BBB, and local enzymatic degradation are among the mechanisms under current investigation [82–84]. Widespread interest in the role of Aβ enzymatic degradation and its consequences in Aβ homeostasis has increased since the early identification of neprilysin as one of the main Aβ-degrading enzymes with pathophysiological significance in Tg animal models, studies that boosted interest in a previously underappreciated aspect of Aβ catabolism. The list of enzymes capable of degrading Aβ and contribute to the overall Aβ brain homeostasis has continued to grow and some of them are being currently targeted in novel therapeutic avenues involving genetic or pharmacological approaches aimed to increase the catabolic processing of the peptide [42]. Overall, our data highlighting the opposing properties of enzymatically generated Aβ fragments depending on the targeted peptide bond provide a note of caution to strategies aimed at indiscriminately increasing Aβ catabolism. While C-terminal truncation may lead to generation of smaller, more soluble fragments and favor Aβ brain elimination, N-terminal truncation at position 4 is likely to generate highly insoluble and aggregation prone peptides creating a potentially undesirable self-perpetuating amyloidogenic loop. Only the detailed assessment of the molecular diversity of all species composing the deposits at different stages of the disease and their relative ratios, as well as the evaluation of changes in the truncation profile with different treatment strategies will provide a comprehensive understanding of the still undefined contribution of N- and C-terminal truncations to the pathogenesis of the disease.

This work was supported in part by National Institute of Health [grant numbers AG030539, AG044817, AG051266, NS050276, and RR027990], the Alzheimer’s Association, the BrightFocus Foundation, and grants supporting the Brain and Body Donation Program of the Banner Sun Health Research Institute [NIH AG19610 and NS072026, the Arizona Department of Health Services (contract 211002, Arizona Alzheimer’s Research Center), the Arizona Biomedical Research Commission (contracts 4001, 0011,05-901 and 1001 to the Arizona Parkinson’s Disease Consortium), and The Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson’s Research]

Fig. 1 Synthetic homologues and custom-generated antibodies

(a) Amino acid sequence of the full-length Aβ1-40/Aβ1-42 peptides and the N- and C-terminal truncated species employed in the current studies. (b) Antigenic details and specificity of the custom-generated polyclonal and monoclonal anti-Aβ4-x and anti-Aβx-34 antibodies assessed by dot blot analysis. For immunization of the corresponding hosts, the pertinent Aβ sequences, highlighted in bold, were coupled to KLH via an additional cysteine residue in the case of Aβ4-x antibodies and the polyclonal anti-Aβx-34 and to a CG linker for the production of Aβx-34 monoclonal antibodies. Anti-Aβ4-x antibodies recognized only Aβ peptides truncated at position 4 whereas anti-Aβx-34 antibodies recognized Aβ species truncated at position 34 (central panels). Right panels depict the lack of immunoreactivity of both the polyclonal and monoclonal Aβ4-x antibodies with Aβ species truncated at position 3 –either bearing Glu or pyro-Glu at the N-terminus (E3-40 and pE3-40, respectively), in striking difference over previously reported antibodies [85]. As a loading control, the figure illustrates the signal yielded by all peptides upon incubation with a combination of 4G8/6E10 anti-Aβ antibodies.

Fig. 2 Immunohistochemical evaluation of Aβ deposits in the Tg2576 mouse model

Brain tissues of 20-month old Tg mice were subjected to light microscopy analysis for evaluation of total Aβ as well as of the Aβ species truncated at positions 4 and 34 in conjunction with Congo red staining. Panels (a and e) illustrate tissue immunoreactivity with a combination of 4G8/6E10 monoclonal antibodies; (b and f) indicate reactivity for anti-Aβ4-x, broken line-delineated inset in (b) illustrates a zoomed-in image of a vessel positive for Aβ4-x; (c and g) display the signal for Congo red staining as visualized under polarized light, broken line-delineated inset in (c) illustrates a zoomed-in image of the Congo red birefringence of the same Aβ4-x positive vessel shown in (b); (d and h) depict the reactivity with anti-Aβx-34. Images in (e–h) represent a higher power display of the areas delineated by the boxes in the respective top panels (a–d). Panels (i–n) indicate comparable staining patterns with all antibodies in a different Tg 2576 animal of the same age; (i and l) reactivity with 4G8/6E10; (j and m) immunoreaction with anti-Aβ4-x; (k and n) staining profile with anti-Aβx-34. In all pertinent cases, immunohistochemical studies with anti-Aβ4-x and anti-Aβx-34 were performed employing the respective polyclonal antibodies. Bars indicate 200 μm in panels (a–d), 50 μm in (e–h), 100 μm in (i–k), and 25 μm in panels (l–n).

Fig. 3 Immunohistochemical evaluation of Aβ deposits in the APP/PS1 mouse model

Brain tissues of 17-month old APP/PS1 Tg mice were subjected to immunohistochemical analysis for topographic evaluation of total Aβ as well as of the Aβ species truncated at positions 4 and 34. Panel (a) illustrates total Aβ highlighted with 4G8/6E10 reactivity; (b) Congo red visualized under polarized light; (c, e, f, i, and j) staining with anti-Aβ4-x; (d, g, h, k and l) Aβx-34 immunoreactivity. Panels (c and e) show reactivity with rabbit polyclonal anti-Aβ4-x and panel (f) the staining pattern resulting from the use of the monoclonal anti-Aβ4-x antibody in a parallel section. Images in (d and g) depict signal obtained using polyclonal anti-Aβx-34 antibodies whereas panel (h) displays the staining resulting from the use of the custom-generated monoclonal antibody with the same specificity. The lack of staining observed after absorption of both the poly- and mono-clonal anti-Aβx-34 antibodies with purified Aβ1-34 synthetic peptide (panels k and l, respectively) together with the lack of signals yielded by both poly- and mono-clonal anti Aβ4-x in non-Tg littermates (panels i and j, respectively) reinforce the specificity of the custom generated antibodies. Arrows in panels g, h, k, l indicate the location of amyloid plaques which are stained by both anti-Aβ1-34 antibodies (g, h) and remained negative when incubated with the pre-absorbed counterparts (k, l). Bars indicate 200 μm in panels (a–d) and 25 μm in (e–l)

Fig. 4 Immunofluorescence microscopy assessment of Aβ deposits in Tg 2576, APP/PS1, and APPLd2 mice

Brain tissue sections of the different transgenic lines were immunostained with 4G8/6E10 (red signal, panels a, d, g, j, m, p) in combination with either anti-Aβ4-x (green signal, panels b, e, h) or anti-Aβx-34 (green signal, panels k, n, q). All the right panels (c, f, i, l, o, r) illustrate the merged fluorescence images. Bar represents 100 μm in all cases.

Fig. 5 Immunohistochemical analysis of Aβ deposits in Alzheimer’s disease specimens

Cortical tissue sections were subjected to immunohistochemical analysis for evaluation of total Aβ as well as of the Aβ species truncated at positions 4 and 34. Images in a, b, and c, are representative fields from case I; images in d, e, and g are representative staining patterns from case II; images in f and h are representative stainings of case VIII. Panels (a and d) depict total Aβ staining with 4G8/6E10; (b, e, and f) illustrate immunoreactivity with polyclonal anti-Aβ4-x in the two AD cases, and a non-demented control case, respectively; (c, g, and h) display the staining pattern obtained with polyclonal anti-Aβx-34 in the two AD cases, and a non-demented control, respectively. Higher power images in (i–p) show the comparative immunoreactivity profile of the poly- and mono-clonal custom generated antibodies highlighting the specificity of the respective stainings by the lack of signal obtained after pre-absorption of the primary antibodies. Panels (i and m) illustrate the immunoreactivity of monoclonal anti-Aβ4-x antibody before and after pre-absorption, respectively. Panels (j, k n, o) depict the immunostainings with monoclonal anti-Aβx-34 before and after pre-absorption in cases II (j, n) and III (k, o), respectively. Panels (l and p) illustrate the diffuse reactivity pattern of polyclonal anti-Aβx-34 as well as the lack of signal yielded by the absorbed antibody, respectively. Bar represents 200μm in (a–h), 25 μm in (i, k, l, m, o, p) and 40 μm in (j, n)

Fig. 6 Immunofluorescence analysis of Aβ deposits in Alzheimer’s disease specimens

Cortical tissue sections were immunostained with 4G8/6E10 in combination with either anti-Aβ4-x or anti-Aβx-34 antibodies (a–f). Co- localization of the N- and C-terminal truncated species with fibrillar structures was assessed by counterstaining the sections with thioflavin-S (g–l). (a and d) illustrate reactivity with 4G8/6E10 monoclonal anti-Aβ antibodies followed by Alexafluor-568 conjugated secondary antibody (red signal); (b, g) immunoreaction with rabbit polyclonal anti-Aβ4-x followed by detection with Alexafluor-488 and -568 conjugates (green and red fluorescence, respectively); (e, j) immunoreaction with rabbit polyclonal anti-Aβx-34 and subsequent detection with either Alexafluor-488 or -568 conjugates, respectively; (h, k) thioflavin-S counterstaining. In all cases, right panels (c, f, i, and l) illustrate merged images of the respective stainings. Bar represents 100μm in panels (a-f) and 50 μm in panels (g-l)

Fig. 7 Biochemical analysis of Aβ deposits in AD specimens and APPLd2 mice

Brain tissues were sequentially extracted in PBS, SDS-containing buffer, and formic acid; the different fractions were subsequently immunoprecipitated with paramagnetic beads coated with different anti-Aβ antibodies and analyzed by MALDI-TOF MS. (a) MS profiles obtained after sequential extraction and 4G8/6E10 immunoprecipitation from a human AD case (Case I, Table I and Table II). Panels illustrate the patterns retrieved from the PBS homogenate, as well as the SDS- and FA-extracts; (b and c) MS patterns yielded by the immunoprecipitation of SDS extracts from two additional AD cases (Case IV, and V, respectively); (d) MS profile of the PBS extract of APPLd2 brain (top) and a wild-type control mouse (bottom); (e and f) MS profile of APPLd2 FA extract after sequential immunoprecipitation with anti-Aβ4-X coated beads (e) followed by 4G8/6E10-IP (f) to retrieve remaining Aβ species non-truncated at position 4; (g) Example of a IP/MS analysis of an AD CSF specimen highlighting the heterogeneity of Aβ species composed of full-length Aβ peptides in conjunction with a broad spectrum of C-terminally truncated Aβ species; (h–j) dot blot analysis of APPPS1 brain extracts and respective peptide controls; PBS and FA extracts after IP with 4G8/6E10 coated beads were loaded on the nitrocellulose membrane and reacted with monoclonal anti- Aβx-34 (h), monoclonal anti-Aβ4-x (i), or 4G8/6E10 (j). In all cases, bottom rows in the dot-blot illustrate the immunoreactivity of the antibodies with Aβ1-34 and Aβx-34 synthetic homologues. Overall, Figure 7 illustrates the abundance of C-terminal truncations in brain PBS homogenates, resembling the CSF Aβ peptidome profile, as well as the presence of N-terminal truncated spieces starting at position 4 in the more insoluble tissue fractions, suggestive of their enhanced amyloidogenic properties. * denotes an unidentified peak

Fig. 8 Structural analysis of N- and C-terminal truncated Aβ peptides

The different Aβ homologues pretreated in HFIP and reconstituted in physiologic salt concentration containing buffer were incubated at 37°C for up to 6 days. Structural properties were monitored at different time points by CD and WB analysis under non-denaturing conditions. (a) Aβ1-42; (b) Aβ1-40; (c) Aβ1-34; (d) Aβ4-42; (e) Aβ4-40; (f) Aβ4-34. For all CD graphs, black lines represent structure immediately after reconstitution in PBS or time zero, purple lines 1 day incubation, blue lines 2 days, green lines 3 days, and red lines 6 days. In all cases WB were probed with a combination of 4G8 and 6E10 monoclonal anti-Aβ antibodies.

Fig. 9 Probing differential aggregation and hydrophobicity of full-length homologues and N- and C-terminal truncated Aβ peptides

(a) Oligomerization/fibrillization was assessed by fluorescence evaluation of ThT binding to the respective synthetic homologues (50 μM) over 6-day incubation. Data represent the mean ± SEM of three independent experiments after subtraction of blank levels. (b) Exposure of hydrophobic regions of the molecules was evaluated by assessing the binding of the different peptides to ANS. Graph is representative of three independent experiments. In (a) and (b), results are expressed in arbitrary units (A.U.)

Table I AD and control cases employed in immunohistochemical and biochemical analyses

Case	Diagnosis	Sex	Age	ApoE	Braak Stage	PMI*	
I	AD	F	84	ε3/ε3	VI	1.8h	
II	AD	M	85	ε3/ε3	VI	3h	
III	AD	M	87	ε2/ε3	VI	2.5h	
IV	AD	F	85	ε3/ε3	VI	1.5h	
V	AD	F	86	ε3/ε3	VI	2.5h	
VI	AD	F	84	ε3/ε4	VI	3.5h	
VII	Control	M	97	ε2/ε3	III	1.5h	
VIII	Control	F	75	ε3/ε4	III	2.75h	
IX	Control	F	84	ε3/ε3	II	3h	
* postmortem interval

Table II Identification of full-length and truncated Aβ species in AD cases and APP transgenic lines *

Tissue	Fraction	Intact	C-terminal truncations	N-terminal truncations	
1–
42	1–
40	1–
39	1–
38	1–
34	1–
33	1–
31	1–
29	1–
28	1–
27	1–
25	1–
22	1–
20	1–
19	1–
18	1–
17	1–
16	1–
15	4–
42	4–
40	4–
34	4–
24	2–
39	2–
34	
HumanAD	Case I	PBS		X			X			X	X	X			X		X		X			X	X			X	
SDS	X	X																		X					
FA	X	X																	X	X					
Case II	PBS		X			X								X	X	X		X			X					
SDS	X	X	X	X	X	X		X					X			X									
FA	X	X																	X						
Case III	PBS	X	X			X	X		X			X		X	X	X		X			X					
SDS	X	X			X	X							X	X		X	X	X	X						
FA	X	X		X																					
Case IV	PBS		X			X									X	X										
SDS	X	X																	X						
FA	X	X																							
Case V	PBS		X			X			X					X	X	X										
SDS		X			X								X							X					
FA	X	X		X																X					
Case VI	PBS	X	X			X			X					X	X		X	X			X					
SDS	X	X		X	X	X		X					X	X		X			X	X					
FA	X	X																							
Human Control	Case VII	PBS		X			X																X		X		
SDS	X	X											X												
FA																									
Case VIII	PBS		X			X																				
SDS																									
FA																									
APPTg	Tg2576	PBS	X	X	X	X	X	X		X	X	X				X			X			X					
SDS		X	X	X				X																	
FA	X	X		X															X						
PBS	X	X	X	X	X	X								X			X			X					
SDS	X	X		X	X			X											X						
FA	X	X		X																					
Ld2	PBS		X	X	X		X		X		X															
FA	X	X	X	X															X	X					
• Data indicates presence or absence of the respective Aβ species

Highlights

Brain homogenates in AD and transgenic mouse models exhibit high Aβ heterogeneity

N- and C-terminal truncated species show differential topographical localization

Truncated species are differentially extracted from brain amyloid tissue deposits

C-terminal truncations lead to generation of soluble, clearance-driven fragments

N-terminal truncation at position 4 generates aggregation-prone fragments

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Compliance with Ethical Standards

Disclosure of potential conflicts of interest

The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest

Research involving humans

All procedures involving human participants were in accordance with the ethical standards of the institutional and/or national research committee and with the 1964 Helsinki declaration and its later amendments or comparable ethical standards. Informed consent was obtained from all individuals participants included in the study

Research involving animals

All international and NIH guidelines for the care and use of laboratory animals were followed, in accordance with institutional guidelines.


1 Selkoe DJ Alzheimer’s disease: genes, proteins, and therapy Physiological Reviews 81 2001 741 766 11274343
2 Rostagno A Holton JL Lashley T Revesz T Ghiso J Cerebral amyloidosis: amyloid subunits, mutants and phenotypes Cell Mol Life Sci 67 2010 581 600 19898742
3 Selkoe D Alzheimer’s disease: a central role for amyloid J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 53 1994 438 447 8083687
4 Hardy J Selkoe DJ The amyloid hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease: progress and problems on the road to therapeutics Science 297 2002 353 356 12130773
5 Busciglio J Pelsman A Wong C Pigino G Yuan M Mori H Yankner BA Altered metabolism of the amyloid beta precursor protein is associated with mitochondrial dysfunction in Down’s syndrome Neuron 33 2002 677 688 11879646
6 Masters CL Simms G Weinman NA Multhaup G McDonald BL Beyreuther K Amyloid plaque core protein in Alzheimer disease and Down syndrome Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 82 1985 4245 4249 3159021
7 Morawe T Hiebel C Kern A Behl C Protein homeostasis, aging and Alzheimer’s disease Molecular neurobiology 46 2012 41 54 22361852
8 Haass C DJ S Soluble protein oligomers in neurodegeneration: lessons from the Alzheimer’s amyloid β-peptide Nature Rev Molec Cell Biol 8 2007 101 112 17245412
9 Benilova I Karran E De Strooper B The toxic Aβ oligomer and Alzheimer’s disease: an emperor in need of clothes Nat Neurosci 15 2012 349 357 22286176
10 Laurijssens B Aujard F Rahman A Animal models of Alzheimer’s disease and drug development Drug discovery today Technologies 10 2013 e319 327 24050129
11 Ghiso J Frangione B Amyloidosis and Alzheimer’s disease Adv Drug Delivery Rev 54 2002 1539 1551
12 Tomidokoro Y Rostagno A Neubert TA Lu Y Rebeck GW Frangione B Greenberg SM Ghiso J Iowa Variant of Familial Alzheimer’s Disease: Accumulation of Posttranslationally Modified AβD23N in Parenchymal and Cerebrovascular Amyloid Deposits Am J Pathol 176 2010 1841 1854 20228223
13 Walsh CT Garneau-Tsodikova S Gatto GJJ Protein posttranslational modifications: the chemistry of proteome diversifications Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 44 2005 7342 7372 16267872
14 He W Barrow CJ The A beta 3-pyroglutamyl and 11-pyroglutamyl peptides found in senile plaque have greater beta-sheet forming and aggregation propensities in vitro than full-length A beta Biochemistry 38 1999 10871 10877 10451383
15 Saido T Yamao-Harigaya W Iwatsubo T Kawashima S Amino-and carboxyl-terminal heterogeneity of beta-amyloid peptides deposited in human brain Neuroscience Letters 13 1996 173 176
16 Schlenzig D Ronicke R Cynis H Ludwig HH Scheel E Reymann K Saido T Hause G Schilling S Demuth HU N-Terminal pyroglutamate formation of Abeta38 and Abeta40 enforces oligomer formation and potency to disrupt hippocampal long-term potentiation J Neurochem 121 2012 774 784 22375951
17 Wirths O Breyhan H Cynis H Schilling S Demuth HU Bayer TA Intraneuronal pyroglutamate-Abeta 3-42 triggers neurodegeneration and lethal neurological deficits in a transgenic mouse model Acta Neuropathologica 118 2009 487 496 19547991
18 De Kimpe L van Haastert ES Kaminari A Zwart R Rutjes H Hoozemans JJ Scheper W Intracellular accumulation of aggregated pyroglutamate amyloid beta: convergence of aging and Abeta pathology at the lysosome Age (Dordr) 35 2013 673 687 22477259
19 Nussbaum JM Schilling S Cynis H Silva A Swanson E Wangsanut T Tayler K Wiltgen B Hatami A Ronicke R Reymann K Hutter-Paier B Alexandru A Jagla W Graubner S Glabe CG Demuth HU Bloom GS Prion-like behaviour and tau-dependent cytotoxicity of pyroglutamylated amyloid-beta Nature 485 2012 651 655 22660329
20 Wu G Miller RA Connolly B Marcus J Renger J Savage MJ Pyroglutamate-Modified Amyloid-beta Protein Demonstrates Similar Properties in an Alzheimer’s Disease Familial Mutant Knock-In Mouse and Alzheimer’s Disease Brain Neurodegener Dis 2013
21 Wirths O Hillmann A Pradier L Hartig W Bayer TA Oligomeric pyroglutamate amyloid-beta is present in microglia and a subfraction of vessels in patients with Alzheimer’s disease: implications for immunotherapy J Alzheimers Dis 35 2013 741 749 23481684
22 Wirths O Bethge T Marcello A Harmeier A Jawhar S Lucassen PJ Multhaup G Brody DL Esparza T Ingelsson M Kalimo H Lannfelt L Bayer TA Pyroglutamate Abeta pathology in APP/PS1KI mice, sporadic and familial Alzheimer’s disease cases Journal of neural transmission (Vienna, Austria : 1996) 117 2010 85 96
23 Piccini A Russo C Gliozzi A Relini A Vitali A Borghi R Giliberto L Armirotti A D’Arrigo C Bachi A Cattaneo A Canale C Torrassa S Saido TC Markesbery W Gambetti P Tabaton M beta-amyloid is different in normal aging and in Alzheimer disease The Journal of biological chemistry 280 2005 34186 34192 16103127
24 Frost JL Le KX Cynis H Ekpo E Kleinschmidt M Palmour RM Ervin FR Snigdha S Cotman CW Saido TC Vassar RJ St George-Hyslop P Ikezu T Schilling S Demuth HU Lemere CA Pyroglutamate-3 amyloid-beta deposition in the brains of humans, non-human primates, canines, and Alzheimer disease-like transgenic mouse models Am J Pathol 183 2013 369 381 23747948
25 Roher AE Lowenson JD Clarke S Wolkow C Wang R Cotter RJ Reardon IM Zurcher NH Heinrikson RL Ball MJ Greenberg RD Structural alterations in the peptide backbone of beta-amyloid core protein may account for its deposition and stability in Alzheimer’s disease J Biol Chem 268 1993 3072 3083 8428986
26 Fossati S Todd K Sotolongo K Ghiso J Rostagno A Differential contribution of isoaspartate post-translational modifications to the fibrillization and toxic properties of amyloid β and the Asn23 Iowa mutation Biochem J 456 2013 347 360 24028142
27 Swomley AM Förster S Keeney JT Triplett J Zhang Z Sultana R Butterfield DA Abeta, oxidative stress in Alzheimer disease: evidence based on proteomics studies Biochim Biophys Acta 1842 2014 1248 1257 24120836
28 Moskovitz J Maiti P Lopes DH Oien DB Attar A Liu T Mittal S Hayes J Bitan G Induction of methionine-sulfoxide reductases protects neurons from amyloid β-protein insults in vitro and in vivo Biochemistry 50 2011 10687 10697 22059533
29 Naslund J Karlstrom AR Tjernberg LO Schierhorn A Terenius L Nordstedt C High-resolution separation of amyloid beta-peptides: structural variants present in Alzheimer’s disease amyloid J Neurochem 67 1996 294 301 8667005
30 Portelius E Westman-Brinkmalm A Zetterberg H Blennow K Determination of beta-amyloid peptide signatures in cerebrospinal fluid using immunoprecipitation-mass spectrometry J Proteome Res 5 2006 1010 1016 16602710
31 Sergeant N Bombois S Ghestem A Drobecq H Kostanjevecki V Missiaen C Wattez A David JP Vanmechelen E Sergheraert C Delacourte A Truncated β-amyloid peptide species in pre-clinical Alzheimer’s disease as new targets for the vaccination approach J Neurochem 85 2003 1581 1591 12787077
32 Wang R Sweeney D Gandy SE Sisodia SS The profile of soluble amyloid beta protein in cultured cell media. Detection and quantification of amyloid beta protein and variants by immunoprecipitation-mass spectrometry J Biol Chem 271 1996 31894 31902 8943233
33 McIntee F Giannoni P Blais S Neubert TA Mathews P Rostagno A Ghiso J Catabolism of Alzheimer’s amyloid-b: Implications for brain clearance and plaque deposition Neurodegenerative diseases 8 2011 11
34 Ghiso J Cabrera E Rostagno A Amyloid beta catabolism generates N-terminal truncations that are largely associated with the process of amyloidogenesis and perpetuation of fibrillar deposits Neurodegenerative Dis 15 2015 49
35 Roher A Kasunic TC Woods AS Cotter RJ Ball MJ Fridman R Proteolysis of A beta peptide from Alzheimer disease brain by gelatinase A Biochem Biophys Res Comm 205 1994 1755 1761 7811262
36 Lowenson JD Clarke S Roher AE Chemical modifications of deposited amyloid-beta peptides Methods Enzymol 309 1999 89 105 10507019
37 Miners JS Baig S Palmer J Palmer LE Kehoe PG Love S Aβ-degrading enzymes in Alzheimer’s disease Brain Pathol 18 2008 240 252 18363935
38 Morelli L Llovera R Ibemdahl S Castaño EM The degradation of amyloid beta as a therapeutic strategy in Alzheimer’s disease and cerebrovascular amyloidosis Neurochem Res 27 2002 1387 1399 12512943
39 Selkoe DJ Clearing the brain’s amyloid cobwebs Neuron 32 2001 177 180 11683988
40 Wang Y-J Zhou H-D Xin-Fu Zhou X-F Clearance of amyloid-beta in Alzheimer’s disease: progress, problems and perspectives Drug Disc Today 11 2006 931 938
41 Hernandez-Guillamon M Mawhirt S Blais S Montaner J Neubert TA Rostagno A Ghiso J Sequential Amyloid-β Degradation by the Matrix Metalloproteases MMP-2 and MMP-9 J Biol Chem 290 2015 15078 15091 25897080
42 Saido T Leissring MA Proteolytic degradation of amyloid β-protein Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2 2012 a006379
43 Vardy ER Catto AJ Hooper NM Proteolytic mechanisms in amyloid-beta metabolism: therapeutic implications for Alzheimer’s disease Trends Mol Med 11 2005 464 472 16153892
44 Portelius E Lashley T Westerlund A Persson R Fox NC Blennow K Revesz T Zetterberg H Brain amyloid-beta fragment signatures in pathological ageing and Alzheimer’s disease by hybrid immunoprecipitation mass spectrometry Neurodegener Dis 15 2015 50 57 25591542
45 Lewis H Beher D Cookson N Oakley A Piggott M Morris CM Jaros E Perry R Ince P Kenny RA Ballard CG Shearman MS Kalaria RN Quantification of Alzheimer pathology in ageing and dementia: age-related accumulation of amyloid-beta(42) peptide in vascular dementia Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 32 2006 103 118 16599940
46 Masters CL Multhaup G Sims G Pottigiesser J Martins RN Beyreuther K Neuronal origin of cerebral amyloid: neurofibrillary tangles of Alzheimer’s disease contain the same protein as the amyloid of plaque cores and blood vessels EMBO J 4 1985 2757 2763 4065091
47 Hampel H Shen Y Walsh DM Aisen P Shaw LM Zetterberg H Trojanowski JQ Blennow K Biological markers of amyloid β-related mechanisms in Alzheimer’s disease Exp Neurol 223 2010 334 346 19815015
48 Portelius E Zetterberg H Gobom J Andreasson U Blennow K Targeted proteomics in Alzheimer’s disease: focus on amyloid-β Expert Rev Proteomics 5 2008
49 Caillava C Ranaldi S Lauritzen I Bauer C Fareh J Abraham JD Checler F Study on Aβ34 biology and detection in transgenic mice brains Neurobiol Aging 35 2014 1570 1581 24495834
50 Fossati S Cam J Meyerson J Mezhericher E Romero IA Couraud PO Weksler B Ghiso J Rostagno A Differential activation of mitochondrial apoptotic pathways by vasculotropic amyloid-β variants in cells composing the cerebral vessel walls Faseb J 24 2010 229 241 19770225
51 Todd K Ghiso J Rostagno A Oxidative stress and mitochondria-mediated cell death mechanisms triggered by the familial Danish dementia ADan amyloid Neurobiol Dis 85 2015 130 143 26459115
52 Radde R Bolmont T Kaeser PS Coomaraswamy J Lindau D Stoltze L Calhoun ME Jaggi F Wolburg H Gengler S Haass C Ghetti B Czech C Holscher C Mathews PM Jucker M Abeta42-driven cerebral amyloidosis in transgenic mice reveals early and robust pathology EMBO J 7 2006 940 946
53 Hsiao K Chapman P Nilsen S Eckman CB Harigaya Y Younkin SG Yang F Cole GM Correlative memory deficits, Abeta elevation, and amyloid plaques in transgenic mice Science 274 1996 99 102 8810256
54 Moechars D Dewachter I Lorent K Reversé D Baekelandt V Naidu A Tesseur I Spittaels K Haute CV Checler F Godaux E Cordell B Van Leuven F Early phenotypic changes in transgenic mice that overexpress different mutants of amyloid precursor protein in brain J Biol Chem 274 1999 6483 6492 10037741
55 Stine WBJ Dahlgren KN Krafft GA LaDu MJ In vitro characterization of conditions for amyloid-β peptide oligomerization and fibrillogenesis J Biol Chem 278 2003 11612 11622 12499373
56 Walsh DM Hartley DM Kusumoto Y Fezoui Y Condron MM Lomakin A Benedek GB Selkoe D Teplow D Amyloid β-protein fibrillogenesis. Structure and biological activity of protofribrillar intermediates J Biol Chem 274 1999 25945 25952 10464339
57 Viana RJ Nunes AF Castro RE Ramalho RM Meyerson J Fossati S Ghiso J Rostagno A Rodrigues CM Tauroursodeoxycholic acid prevents E22Q Alzheimer’s Abeta toxicity in human cerebral endothelial cells Cell Mol Life Sci 66 2009 1094 1104 19189048
58 Todd K Fossati S Ghiso J Rostagno A Mitochondrial dysfunction induced by a post-translationally modified amyloid linked to a familial mutation in an alternative model of neurodegeneration Biochim Biophys Acta 1842 2014 2457 2467 25261792
59 Bolognesi B Kumita JR Barros TP Esbjorner EK Luheshi LM Crowther DC Wilson MR Dobson CM Favrin G Yerbury JJ ANS binding reveals common features of cytotoxic amyloid species ACS chemical biology 5 2010 735 740 20550130
60 Tomidokoro Y Lashley T Rostagno A Neubert TA Bojsen-Moller M Braendgaard H Plant G Holton J Frangione B Revesz T Ghiso J Familial Danish dementia: Co-existence of ADan and Aβ amyloid subunits in the absence of compact plaques J Biol Chem 280 2005 36883 36894 16091362
61 Rostagno A Ghiso J Isolation and biochemical characterization of amyloid plaques and paired helical filaments Curr Protoc Cell Biol Chapter 3 2009 3.33.31 33.33.33 19499505
62 Lashley T Revesz T Plant G Bandopadhyay R Lees AJ Frangione B Wood NW de Silva R Ghiso J Rostagno A Holton JL Expression of BRI2 mRNA and protein in normal human brain and familial British dementia: its relevance to the pathogenesis of disease Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 34 2008 492 505 18282158
63 Bouter Y Dietrich K Wittnam JL Rezaei-Ghaleh N Pillot T Papot-Couturier S Lefebvre T Sprenger F Wirths O Zweckstetter M Bayer TA N-truncated amyloid β (Aβ) 4-42 forms stable aggregates and induces acute and long-lasting behavioral deficits Acta Neuropathol 126 2013 189 205 23685882
64 Vidal R Frangione B Rostagno A Mead S Revesz T Plant G Ghiso J A stop-codon mutation in the BRI gene associated with familial British dementia Nature 399 1999 776 781 10391242
65 Rosen RF Tomidokoro Y Farberg AS Dooyema J Ciliax B Preuss TM Neubert TA Ghiso JA LeVine Hr Walker LC Comparative pathobiology of β-amyloid and the unique susceptibility of humans to Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 44 2016 185 196 27318146
66 Ghiso J Cabrera E Mathews P Rostagno A Amyloid beta catabolism: a balancing act between effective brain clearance and the process of amyloidogenesis Neurodegener Dis 17 2017 37
67 McIntee FL Giannoni P Blais S Sommer G Neubert TA Rostagno A Ghiso J In vivo Differential Brain Clearance and Catabolism of Monomeric and Oligomeric Alzheimer’s Aβ protein, Front Aging Neurosci 8 2016 223
68 Calero M Rostagno A Ghiso J Search for amyloid-binding proteins by affinity chromatography Methods Mol Biol 849 2012 213 223 22528093
69 Solito R Corti F Fossati S Mezhericher E Donnini S Ghiso J Giachetti A Rostagno A Ziche M Dutch and Arctic mutant peptides of beta amyloid(1-40) differentially affect the FGF-2 pathway in brain endothelium Exp Cell Res 315 2009 385 395 19061884
70 Ladiwala AR Lin JC Bale SS Marcelino-Cruz AM Bhattacharya M Dordick JS Tessier PM Resveratrol selectively remodels soluble oligomers and fibrils of amyloid Abeta into off-pathway conformers J Biol Chem 285 2010 24228 24237 20511235
71 Glabe CG Structural classification of toxic amyloid oligomers J Biol Chem 283 2008 29639 29643 18723507
72 Arai T Sasaki D Araya T Sato T Sohma Y Kanai M A cyclic KLVFF-derived peptide aggregation inhibitor induces the formation of less-toxic off-pathway amyloid-β oligomers Chembiochem 15 2014 2577 2583 25262917
73 Revesz T Holton JL Lashley T Plant G Frangione B Rostagno A Ghiso J Genetics and molecular pathogenesis of sporadic and hereditary cerebral amyloid angiopathies Acta neuropathol 118 2009 115 130 19225789
74 De Strooper B Proteases and proteolysis in Alzheimer disease: a multifactorial view on the disease process Physiol Rev 90 2010 465 494 20393191
75 Pike CJ Overman MJ Cotman CW Amino-terminal deletions enhance aggregation of β-amyloid peptides in vitro J Biol Chem 270 1995 23895 23898 7592576
76 Perez-Garmendia R Gevorkian G Pyroglutamate-Modified Amyloid Beta Peptides: Emerging Targets for Alzheimer´s Disease Immunotherapy Curr Neuropharmacol 11 2013 491 498 24403873
77 Meyer-Luehmann M Coomaraswamy J Bolmont T Kaeser S Schaefer C Kilger E Neuenschwander A Abramowski D Frey P Jaton AL Vigouret JM Paganetti P Walsh DM Mathews PM Ghiso J Staufenbiel M Walker LC Jucker M Exogenous induction of cerebral beta-amyloidogenesis is governed by agent and host Science 313 2006 1781 1784 16990547
78 Jucker M Walker LC Self-propagation of pathogenic protein aggregates in neurodegenerative diseases Nature 501 2013 45 51 24005412
79 Antonios G Borgers H Richard BC Brauß A Meißner J Weggen S Pena V Pillot T Davies SL Bakrania P Matthews D Brownlees J Bouter Y Bayer TA Alzheimer therapy with an antibody against N-terminal Abeta 4-X and pyroglutamate Abeta 3-X Sci Rep 5 2015 17338 26626428
80 Bateman RJ Munsell LY Morris JC Swarm R Yarasheski KE Holtzman DM Human amyloid-b synthesis and clearance rates as measured in cerebrospinal fluid in vivo Nat Med 12 2006 856 861 16799555
81 Mawuenyega KG Sigurdson W Ovod V Munsell L Kasten T Morris JC Yarasheski KE Bateman RJ Decreased clearance of CNS beta-amyloid in Alzheimer’s disease Science 330 2010 1774 21148344
82 Deane R Bell RD Sagare A Zlokovic B Clearance of amyloid-beta peptide across the blood-brain barrier: implication for therapies in Alzheimer’s disease, CNS Neurol Dis Drug Targets 8 2009 16 30
83 Deane R Sagare A Zlokovic BV The role of the cell surface LRP and soluble LRP in blood-brain barrier Ab clearance in Alzheimer’s disease Curr Pharmac Design 14 2008 1601 1605
84 Deane R Wu Z Zlokovic B RAGE (Yin) versus LRP (yang) balance regulates Alzheimer Amyloid b-peptide clearance through transport across the blood-brain-barrier Stroke 35 2004 2628 2631 15459432
85 Antonios G Saiepour N Bouter Y Richard BC Paetau A Verkkoniemi-Ahola A Lannfelt L Ingelsson M Kovacs GG Pillot T Wirths O Bayer TA N-truncated Abeta starting with position four: early intraneuronal accumulation and rescue of toxicity using NT4X-167, a novel monoclonal antibody Acta Neuropathol Commun 1 2013 56 24252153
