LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101650118
43477
Alzheimers Dement (N Y)
Alzheimers Dement (N Y)
Alzheimer's &amp; dementia (New York, N. Y.)
2352-8737

28439532
5399544
10.1016/j.trci.2017.02.004
NIHMS858122
Article
Recruiting to preclinical Alzheimer’s disease clinical trials through registries
Grill Joshua D. Ph.D. Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center, Institute for Memory Impairments and Neurological Disorders, University of California, Irvine, Irvine CA, USA

Address: 3204 Biological Sciences III, University of California, Irvine, Irvine CA 92697., jgrill@uci.edu, Telephone: 949-824-5905
18 3 2017
6 2017
01 6 2018
3 2 205212
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.

Participant registries are repositories of individuals who have expressed willingness to learn about studies for which they may be eligible. Registries are increasingly being utilized to improve recruitment to preclinical Alzheimer’s disease (AD) clinical trials, which require large screening efforts to identify adequate numbers of participants who meet enrollment criteria. Recruiting to preclinical AD trials from registries is made more efficient through registry collection of data that permits exclusion of those who will not be eligible and identifies individuals most likely to qualify for trials. Such data could include self-reported disease family history or other risk factors, but could also include cognitive, genetic, or biomarker testing outcomes. Few data are available to guide investigators overseeing registries and important ethical questions are likely to arise related to their conduct, especially in registries collecting AD risk information. This article outlines three areas of consideration for registry investigators: informed consent, disclosure, and sponsorship.


1. Introduction

Slow recruitment to clinical trials is a consistent barrier to developing improved treatments for Alzheimer’s disease (AD)[1–3]. Few interventions have demonstrated effectiveness for improving AD trial recruitment [4]. Potential participant registries are increasingly common interventions that aim to address this challenge by creating repositories of individuals who can be recruited at the start of a new trial [4–9]. Registries represent a potentially important strategy to address the large participant needs of preclinical AD trials [7], which recruit otherwise healthy individuals who are at increased risk to develop cognitive impairment and dementia based on genetic or biomarker criteria [10].

Some registries consist of databases of contact information, allowing investigators to inform large numbers of potential participants of new trials, rather than (or in addition to) serially engaging in community outreach, social and popular media campaigns, and other forms of recruitment [9]. Other registries include self-reported health information or prospective assessments of cognitive performance. With these data, investigators can prioritize recruitment based on age, family history, previous medical history, or even subjective changes in cognitive performance, all of which may be associated with meeting preclinical AD trial eligibility criteria [11, 12]. Within a given health system, registries may link to electronic medical records to access diagnostic and medication information, allowing investigators to more efficiently exclude ineligible participants [13]. Registries may even perform cognitive, genetic, or biomarker testing to identify participants meeting preclinical AD criteria [14, 15]. For example, an AD prevention trial is underway that is enrolling apolipoprotein E (APOE) ε4 homozygotes specifically [16, 17], and eligible participants could be directly identified in registries that perform genetic testing.

Regardless of the registry model, bigger is better. Greater numbers of registrants increase the number of potentially eligible trial participants who can be recruited and should expedite the rate of enrollment in preclinical AD trials. Given the increasing number of preclinical AD trials [16, 17], national and international efforts are underway to use registries to enrich cohort studies that perform deep phenotyping of participants, including biomarker testing, and can serve as feeders to preclinical AD trials [7]. The “registry-to-cohort” model is being implemented by multinational efforts to enhance the conduct of preclinical AD drug development, such as the European Prevention Alzheimer’s Dementia (EPAD) and the Global Alzheimer’s Platform (GAP)[7, 18] (http://www.alzforum.org/news/conference-coverage/coming-center-near-you-gap-and-epad-revamp-alzheimers-trials).

As more registries are initiated, a variety of important questions may arise. Few data are available to guide registry design. Participant preferences related to registry operations are largely unknown and experiences with registry conduct remain nascent. There is need for normative evaluation of the concept, methods, and utilization of registries as an intervention to improve preclinical AD trial recruitment. A recent article [19] outlines some ethical concerns for the concept of “pre-recruitment,” including the means by which individuals may be recruited to registries. The present article considers issues related to registries used to recruit preclinical AD trial participants. Specifically, registry informed consent, disclosure of AD risk information, and registry sponsorship are discussed (Table 1). Because a wide variety of registry types and methods exist, not all issues raised in this perspective will be applicable to all registries. Nonetheless, the aim of this manuscript is to enhance the discussion around the optimal means to utilize registries to improve recruitment to preclinical AD trials.

2. Informed consent

Adequate informed consent is generally considered an essential element of ethical research [20]. But which registries should be considered research, and which should not? Registries that collect only email or mailing addresses for the purpose of broadly disseminating study announcements may not require ethical review or informed consent. Registries that collect data to instruct trial recruitment, however, may need a consent process, even if the purpose of that data is not to gain knowledge, per se, but rather to facilitate studies that will. The collection and storage of data may carry risks, even if data are related to only disease family history or self-reported health information. Disclosing those risks and positioning the potential enrollee to decide if they are willing to absorb them via an informed consent process may be necessary for these registries.

Informed consent is a process, not a document. Consent may be indicated in a variety of ways, including signing a written form, orally expressing consent, or through voluntary actions [21]. Ethical [21] and regulatory [22] guidelines agree that a review board may grant a waiver of signed consent if the associated risks are no more than minimal. Minimal risk is generally defined as not greater than that associated with routine medical or psychological examination and not requiring written consent outside of the research context. But when is the risk associated with enrolling in a registry minimal and when should written, in-person informed consent be required?

The Declaration of Helsinki states that, though only documentation of informed consent is a requirement, signed written informed consent is preferable [23]. Thus, registries that utilize fluid or neuroimaging biomarker information such as amyloid positron emission tomography (PET) and cerebrospinal fluid analysis (CSF) [10], which require in-person visits for data collection, should implement written informed consent. The need for written consent is underscored, given that the collection and storage of biomarker information carries ethical and legal risks that must be addressed in these consent documents to ensure autonomous decision-making—including the decision not to enroll for some. These risks have been described more fully elsewhere, as they relate to preclinical AD trials [24–28]. The potential loss of confidentiality and the lack of legal protections against discrimination by insurers and other outside entities could result in harm to registry participants [24]. Unwanted disclosure of AD risk information could result in stigma in the workplace, the clinic, and the home for registrants [25, 28].

Securing written, in-person informed consent from the very large samples that will need to be enrolled in registries to facilitate preclinical AD trials may not be feasible [18]. Altered methods may ensure practicability while still adhering to the requirements of ethical research [29]. Internet-based registries, for example, may represent a realistic means to establish adequately large populations of willing participants, though there may be risks associated with electronic consent such as participants rapidly scrolling or clicking through consent documents and blithely clicking “enroll,” as they might with a new smart phone application [30]. Comprehension and retention of consent information may differ for screen-based, compared to paper-based, learning [31]. The opportunity to have questions answered may be reduced or delayed. Alternatively, electronic consent is likely to enhance opportunities to utilize videos, graphics, and other multimedia approaches for more concise and creative means to enhance participant understanding while simultaneously reducing participant burden [30]. Automated quizzes may enable assessment of participant understanding. Giving options for more extensive and detailed information may permit some participants to achieve personal requirements for adequate information in less time, while still affording others the opportunity for in-depth understanding of registry operations.

Regardless of the manner in which informed consent is achieved, a clear explanation of the registry methods should be provided. It may also be important to set participant expectations, including that many of those enrolling may never be invited to participate in a preclinical AD trial. The EPAD registry-to-cohort initiative will implement a staged consent model (Tromp, AAIC 2016). Participants will first consent to a registry, indicating their willingness to participate in research. Subsequently, registrants will be prepared for risk disclosure and consented into a cohort study, should they choose. After education on disclosure and risk, participants will be invited to decide whether they are willing to learn their biomarker status (though disclosure may not be certain to occur) and to enroll into an intervention trial. Novel mechanisms such as staged consent may be necessary to ensure the ethical conduct of these large efforts toward successful preclinical AD trials. Consenting at once to enroll in a registry, a cohort study, and then a trial may produce too great a burden for participants, especially since only a portion of those enrolled will advance to subsequent steps of the recruitment pipeline. Additionally, the progressive experience of participation, first in low-burden low risk modalities such as remote operation registries and then in more involved studies, may help overcome barriers to recruitment and “nudge” participants to enroll in each new phase [32].

3. Disclosure

The most effective registries will efficiently identify participants who are likely to be eligible for preclinical AD trials so that they can be recruited. Regardless of the type of AD risk information collected, registrants may desire, or even expect, that registry information related to their health will be returned to them ([33, 34], Grill et al., in press). Preliminary studies indicate that the opportunity to receive personal testing results will incentivize some participants to enroll [35] and if these results communicate elevated AD risk, this may alter the trial decision-making process toward enrollment [36]. Yet, disclosure of research results requires time, expertise, and resources that may not be feasible in very large registries, especially those operating through the Internet. Addressing these complications should begin at enrollment with thorough informed consent. Cautious development of a recruitment process, and in some cases a disclosure process, may be necessary but particularly challenging if in-person visits with experts will not be performed. Information that might be returned to registrants includes the results of biomarker, genetic, and cognitive tests.

3.1. Biomarker testing results disclosure

Though increasingly common in the research and clinical settings, large registries may be unlikely to incorporate wide scale biomarker testing due to prohibitive costs of neuroimaging [37] and barriers to procedures necessary for CSF analyses [38]. Some registries, however, may operate more like cohort studies, including the collection of serial biomarkers. Using these registries to identify potential enrollees in preclinical AD trials would require caution, since participants may have enrolled in a study in which there was no expectation of sharing biomarker results and since limited data related to the safety of disclosing biomarker results are currently available [39]. Disclosure of biomarker results will require a careful and deliberate process that ideally should begin prior to performing the biomarker procedure. A process to disclose amyloid PET results was developed for the Anti-Amyloid treatment in Asymptomatic AD study (A4), a preclinical AD trial enrolling only those with elevated brain amyloid [40]. This process outlines the need for assessing depression and anxiety prior to biomarker testing and excluding those at risk for adverse reaction to biomarker information; separation in time between informed consent and biomarker testing and between biomarker testing and disclosure; and careful monitoring for adverse psychological outcomes following disclosure [41]. Recruiting trial eligible participants from established biomarker cohorts would necessitate amendment of this process, including pre-disclosure counseling and education sessions in which participants consent to learning their biomarker results. Some cognitively healthy older people who initially choose to learn AD biomarker results will change their mind after a thorough education and disclosure process [42]. Knowledge that a test has been performed, however, may increase the desire to learn test results [34]. It is unknown whether those participants who would change their mind about disclosure after thorough education still would do so if the biomarker test had already been performed. Investigators disclosing previously collected biomarker data also need to consider who would be invited to learn their biomarker results, since inclusion of only biomarker positive individuals could result in de facto disclosure.

3.2. Genetic testing results disclosure

Tissue collection, genetic testing, and disclosure of results can be performed without an in-person visit. The disclosure of genetic testing results has been the focus of important research over the last two decades, including in AD. The Risk Evaluation and Education for AD (REVEAL) study demonstrated the safety of informing individuals with a family history of AD of their APOE ε4 genotypes, using a traditional genetic counseling and disclosure process involving multiple in-person pre-disclosure sessions, including separate education and counseling visits, and in-person post-disclosure counseling with a genetics or medical expert [43]. The associated time and resource burden may limit the ability to incorporate this approach to sharing genetic testing results in large registries. REVEAL II showed that replacing the in-person education session with a mailed brochure is not inferior to the full disclosure process for APOE genetic testing [44, 45], though this approach still requires two in-person visits (pre- and post-disclosure). Technology may be safely used to reduce the counseling burden associated with the traditional approach, including telephone education and counseling [46] and telephonic disclosure of results [47, 48]. Results are expected in the near future from REVEAL III, which examined the safety of telephone disclosure of APOE status (https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00462917). The safety of disclosure of genetic results without pre- and post-disclosure counseling of some form is unknown, though direct-to-consumer genetic testing companies implemented such a practice, albeit briefly [49].

Genetic disclosure without adequate counseling could have risks. Participants may lack sufficient information to make fully informed decisions to learn their results. For example, federal protections related to genetic information have particular omissions, including that long-term care insurers are not prohibited from using this information when determining eligibility for policies. A system of education and confirmation of participant preferences and understanding would be needed if a registry implemented remote testing and disclosure. In the absence of counseling, participants may lack the support needed to deal psychologically with learning their genetic status, risking harm to registrants and violating the principle of nonmaleficence. Ten-to-twelve percent of older healthy people report that they would utilize AD risk information to instruct suicide planning [50–52]. Beyond the risks to individuals, catastrophic reactions, even if rare, would put the scientific value of a registry at risk, since the occurrence could also have regulatory implications to continued registry conduct. To address these risks and facilitate recruitment to the “Generations study,” a preclinical AD trial enrolling APOE ε4 homozygotes, the Alzheimer’s Prevention Registry investigators recently launched GeneMatch, a program to perform APOE genotyping in willing registry volunteers. The program uses on-line interactive educational programming to ensure informed consent prior to sending cheek swab testing kits to enrollees’ homes. GeneMatch will disclose APOE testing results to a subset of those enrolled, including ε4 homozygotes, heterozygotes, and non-carriers, so that the invitation to learn results is not indicative of genetic status. A substudy will also assess the effectiveness of video teleconference vs. telephone counseling and disclosure sessions (http://www.alzforum.org/news/conference-coverage/know-or-not-know-trial-participants-confront-question).

3.3. Cognitive testing results disclosure

Open and honest discussion of patients’ cognitive performance is a mainstay in dementia care [53]. The use of remote cognitive testing in registries, however, may create unique challenges in sharing cognitive testing results. On-line neuropsychological tests are not equivalent to controlled clinical testing, which is free from distraction, slow Internet speed, and potentially variable testing platforms (e.g., desktop computers, tablets, and mobile telephones). Therefore, normative scores for these new methods may be difficult to achieve and there may be a risk for spurious findings. Measuring within-subject change in cognitive performance may circumvent some but not all of these challenges, but informing an individual registrant that their cognitive performance has declined has risks. The amount of information that can be provided with testing results is limited, given that clinical (e.g., changes in medications, clinical depression) and technological factors that could affect testing scores may be unknown to registry operators. Participants who demonstrate sufficient cognitive decline to meet the criteria for Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI)[7] may need clinical referral prior to considering recruitment to research to treat reversible causes of cognitive impairment, address decisions around etiological testing, and assist patients and families with planning (Grill et al, submitted). Communicating the need for memory assessment to these registrants in an automated manner may risk psychological reaction, refusal of recommendations, and withdrawal from the registry.

4. Sponsorship

Most registries aim to facilitate science, rather than test explicit hypotheses. As a result, few registries are sponsored by federal grants. This may introduce a possibility that registries will not be considered human subjects research and create a loophole through which some registries accrue potential participants without ethical review [19]. If an academic institution sponsors a registry, it is likely to require independent review from an Institutional Review Board. These registries may also be positioned to serve as sources for recruitment to multiple studies and investigators within the institution. Supporting larger numbers of studies increases the scientific value of a registry, further justifying the associated risks absorbed by those who enroll [20].

Some industry-sponsored registries have begun to cover the cost of clinical amyloid PET imaging for patients who are interested in participating in future clinical trials for that sponsor. Since amyloid PET adds to clinicians’ diagnostic confidence [54] but is not currently reimbursable, physicians may view the opportunity to help patients undergo etiological testing that they might not otherwise be able to afford as an incentive to enroll families in these registries. This practice raises several important issues. First, the use of clinical testing for the purpose of trial recruitment could conflate research and clinical care and risk confusion or therapeutic misconception among patients and families. Second, clinicians may be put in a potential conflict of interest. The presence of the registry could alter physician behaviors in referring participants to ongoing or future trials, due to feeling debt toward the sponsor. To do so would put patients’ autonomy at risk. Third, covering the cost of scans could be interpreted as an attempt by the sponsor to unduly influence these potential participants and may violate the ethical principle of justice and erode trust among several stakeholders, including physicians, investigators, patients and families. Finally, covering the cost of clinical scans for cognitively normal participants (e.g., those with a family history or who know they are carriers of the APOE ε4 allele) would violate preliminary recommendations made by expert investigators [26, 27, 55] and sponsored panels [56], which state that until disease-delaying treatments are available and more is understood about the implications of testing results, clinical amyloid imaging should not be performed in people without objective cognitive impairment. If the sponsored registry intends to support preclinical AD trial recruitment, this would necessitate a careful biomarker disclosure process, as discussed above.

5. Conclusions

Potential participant registries may enable clinical trials to enroll samples with adequate statistical power and therefore may help ensure the ethical conduct of these studies [57]. Challenging issues may arise in the conduct of registries, however, and in recruiting participants to trials from them. Investigators will need to carefully construct and use registries, especially ones that collect AD risk information, to ensure the safety and wellbeing of potential trial participants. Balance must be struck between collecting data that permit efficient identification and recruitment of potentially eligible participants, and management of the risks that will inevitably be associated with increased data collection. Registries represent an innovative tool in the pursuit of improved preclinical AD trial recruitment. Yet, many questions remain unanswered related to their use. Whether registries effectively expedite preclinical AD trial recruitment or do so in a cost-effective manner is, as yet, unknown. Rigorous examination of registry effectiveness is needed to inform the field whether larger, more coordinated efforts in establishing and using registries are justified. Furthermore, few data are available to instruct the optimal methods of inviting participants to enroll in registries, inviting registrants to enroll in trials, and managing potential risks around registry conduct. Studies to instruct these issues are needed (Table 2) so that investigators know how best to design and use registries, so that sponsors can consider funding registry efforts, and so that preclinical AD trials can be maximally expedited through these potentially valuable tools.

The author thanks Chelsea G. Cox, J. Scott Roberts, and Jason Karlawish for comments on drafts of this manuscript. This work was supported by AG016573, UL1 TR001414, and by HCP, Inc.

Table 1 Potential ethical issues related to recruiting to preclinical AD trials from participant registries

Issue	Potential challenge(s)	
	
Informed consent	
	
Is informed consent necessary?	Lists or databases of individuals willing to be contacted about studies may not carry risk for those included, and therefore may not require an informed consent process. If a registry collects data beyond contact information, an assessment of risk must be performed to determine whether informed consent is necessary.	
When is written, in-person consent necessary?	Written, in-person consent is always preferred [23], but not always feasible. Investigators and ethical review boards must assess the risk/benefit balance to determine whether risk is adequately minimized to allow remote (e.g., electronic) consent for large registries that may still have the capacity to collect, store, and utilize sensitive information such as genetic testing results.	
Alternate methods of consent may be needed to achieve necessary sample sizes.	Alternate methods of consent, such as electronic consent, may have risks related to reduced participant understanding or opportunity to ask questions prior to enrollment. Alternatively, novel methods such as video consent and online quizzes may enhance the consent process.	
	
Disclosure	
	
Previously collected biomarker and genetic information can be used to identify participants eligible for preclinical AD trials.	Biomarker study consents may not discuss disclosure of results or may indicate that cognitively normal participants will not be told biomarker results. Individuals who may have explicit desire “not to know” may have enrolled and not wish to be told their results or even offered the opportunity.	
Disclosure of biomarker results to individuals who underwent testing would require a modification of available disclosure processes [41, 43], since pre-testing education and counseling would not be possible.	
The manner in which individuals are selected to learn their biomarker results could risk inadvertent disclosure, prior to proper informed consent, education, and counseling.	
Safety of disclosure.	Few studies, as yet, demonstrate the safety of biomarker result disclosure [39].	
Technology may enable reduced burden on expert investigators for full disclosure processes, but the extent to which education, counseling, or disclosure can be safely performed remotely remains an area of active study [45].	
No studies have examined the safety of automated methods of disclosure, as might be utilized in Internet-based registries implementing cognitive or genetic testing.	
Integrity of disclosed information.	For remotely collected cognitive testing data, a large number of variables, such as the testing modality, the setting in which the participant completes the testing, and other health and lifestyle factors, could result in biased testing results.	
	
Sponsorship	
	
Ethical review.	Some sponsors may not consider registries to be research studies and may therefore not pursue review and approval by an ethical review board [19].	
Therapeutic misconception.	Sponsored registries that cover clinical biomarker test costs for the purpose of research recruitment risk patient misunderstanding and conflation of research and clinical care.	
Conflicts of interest.	Sponsored registries that cover clinical biomarker test costs potentially place referring physician investigators in conflicts of interest.	

Table 2 Unanswered research questions related to participant registries.

Topic	Research Question(s)	
Registry design and methods.	What registry designs increase willingness to enroll and to remain enrolled until invited to participate in a preclinical AD trial?

What methods will increase willingness of registry participants to participate in preclinical AD trials, if invited?

	
Participant perspective.	Do registry enrollees have expectations related to information they will receive as a function of their enrollment or the probability of being invited to participate in a trial?

How might these expectations need to be addressed to ensure optimal retention within the registry and optimal enrollment to preclinical AD trials?

	
Informed consent.	Is electronic consent equivalent to in-person written consent in achieving participant comprehension, understanding and satisfaction with the enrollment process?

	
Disclosure.	If participants are enrolled in a cohort study that involves biomarker or genetic testing for which disclosure was not planned, can participants be safely invited to learn their results as a function of recruitment to a preclinical AD trial?

Does the fact that the test was previously performed affect the decision whether to learn results?

Can biomarker, genetic, or cognitive testing results be safely disclosed to registry enrollees?

Can disclosure be safely performed without expert in-person counseling, education, and/or disclosure?

	

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


1 Grill JD Karlawish J Addressing the challenges to successful recruitment and retention in Alzheimer's disease clinical trials Alzheimer's research &amp; therapy 2010 2 34
2 Watson JL Ryan L Silverberg N Cahan V Bernard MA Obstacles and opportunities in Alzheimer's clinical trial recruitment Health Aff (Millwood) 2014 33 574 9 24711317
3 Fargo KN Carrillo MC Weiner MW Potter WZ Khachaturian Z The crisis in recruitment for clinical trials in Alzheimer's and dementia: An action plan for solutions Alzheimer's &amp; dementia : the journal of the Alzheimer's Association 2016 12 1113 5
4 Grill JD Galvin JE Facilitating Alzheimer disease research recruitment Alzheimer disease and associated disorders 2014 28 1 8 24322484
5 Harris PA Lane L Biaggioni I Clinical research subject recruitment: the Volunteer for Vanderbilt Research Program http://www.volunteer.mc.vanderbilt.edu Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association : JAMIA 2005 12 608 13 16049231
6 Harris PA Scott KW Lebo L Hassan N Lightner C Pulley J ResearchMatch: a national registry to recruit volunteers for clinical research Academic medicine : journal of the Association of American Medical Colleges 2012 87 66 73 22104055
7 Aisen P Touchon J Andrieu S Boada M Doody RS Nosheny RL Registries and Cohorts to Accelerate Early Phase Alzheimer’s Trials. A Report from the E.U./U.S. Clinical Trials in Alzheimer’s Disease Task Force The journal of prevention of Alzheimer's disease 2016 3 7
8 Romero HR Welsh-Bohmer KA Gwyther LP Edmonds HL Plassman BL Germain CM Community engagement in diverse populations for Alzheimer disease prevention trials Alzheimer disease and associated disorders 2014 28 269 74 24614272
9 Schneider LS Recruitment methods for United States Alzheimer disease prevention trials The journal of nutrition, health &amp; aging 2012 16 331 5
10 Sperling RA Aisen PS Beckett LA Bennett DA Craft S Fagan AM Toward defining the preclinical stages of Alzheimer's disease: recommendations from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer's Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer's disease Alzheimer's &amp; dementia : the journal of the Alzheimer's Association 2011 7 280 92
11 Mielke MM Wiste HJ Weigand SD Knopman DS Lowe VJ Roberts RO Indicators of amyloid burden in a population-based study of cognitively normal elderly Neurology 2012 79 1570 7 22972644
12 Amariglio RE Becker JA Carmasin J Wadsworth LP Lorius N Sullivan C Subjective cognitive complaints and amyloid burden in cognitively normal older individuals Neuropsychologia 2012 50 2880 6 22940426
13 Kluding PM Denton J Jamison TR Brooks W Blackwell K Lantos JD Frontiers: Integration of a Research Participant Registry with Medical Clinic Registration and Electronic Health Records Clin Transl Sci 2015 8 405 11 26243261
14 Rodrigue KM Kennedy KM Devous MD Sr Rieck JR Hebrank AC Diaz-Arrastia R beta-Amyloid burden in healthy aging: regional distribution and cognitive consequences Neurology 2012 78 387 95 22302550
15 Resnick SM Sojkova J Zhou Y An Y Ye W Holt DP Longitudinal cognitive decline is associated with fibrillar amyloid-beta measured by [11C]PiB Neurology 2010 74 807 15 20147655
16 Rafii MS Preclinical Alzheimer's disease therapeutics Journal of Alzheimer's disease : JAD 2014 42 Suppl 4 S545 9 25079804
17 Reiman EM Langbaum JB Tariot PN Lopera F Bateman RJ Morris JC CAP-- advancing the evaluation of preclinical Alzheimer disease treatments Nature reviews Neurology 2016 12 56 61 26416539
18 Ritchie CW Molinuevo JL Truyen L Satlin A Van der Geyten S Lovestone S Development of interventions for the secondary prevention of Alzheimer's dementia: the European Prevention of Alzheimer's Dementia (EPAD) project Lancet Psychiatry 2016 3 179 86 26683239
19 Hunter D We could be heroes: ethical issues with the pre-recruitment of research participants Journal of medical ethics 2015 41 557 8 25700106
20 Emanuel EJ Wendler D Grady C What makes clinical research ethical? JAMA : the journal of the American Medical Association 2000 283 2701 11 10819955
21 (WHO) TCfIOoMSCicwtWHO The International Ethical Guidelines for Biomedical Research Involving Human Subjects Geneva 2002
22 Services USDoHaH. Code of Federal Regulations. 45 CFR 46.117(b)(2) – Documentation of informed consent.

23 Association WM Declaration of Helsinki 59th World Medical Assembly Geneva, Switzherland 2008
24 Arias JJ Karlawish J Confidentiality in preclinical Alzheimer disease studies: when research and medical records meet Neurology 2014 82 725 9 24477112
25 Karlawish J Addressing the ethical, policy, and social challenges of preclinical Alzheimer disease Neurology 2011 77 1487 93 21917767
26 Grill JD Johnson DK Burns JM Should we disclose amyloid imaging results to cognitively normal individuals? Neurodegenerative Disease Management 2013 3 9
27 Roberts JS Dunn LB Rabinovici GD Amyloid imaging, risk disclosure and Alzheimer's disease: ethical and practical issues Neurodegener Dis Manag 2013 3 219 29 26167204
28 Gauthier S Leuzy A Racine E Rosa-Neto P Diagnosis and management of Alzheimer's disease: past, present and future ethical issues Progress in neurobiology 2013 110 102 13 23578568
29 McKinney RE Jr Beskow LM Ford DE Lantos JD McCall J Patrick-Lake B Use of altered informed consent in pragmatic clinical research Clin Trials 2015 12 494 502 26374677
30 Pisani AR Wyman PA Mohr DC Perrino T Gallo C Villamar J Human Subjects Protection and Technology in Prevention Science: Selected Opportunities and Challenges Prev Sci 2016 17 765 78 27220838
31 Ackerman R Goldsmith M Metacognitive regulation of text learning: on screen versus on paper J Exp Psychol Appl 2011 17 18 32 21443378
32 VanEpps EM Volpp KG Halpern SD A nudge toward participation: Improving clinical trial enrollment with behavioral economics Science translational medicine 2016 8 348fs13
33 Wendler D Krohmal B Emanuel EJ Grady C Group E Why patients continue to participate in clinical research Archives of internal medicine 2008 168 1294 9 18574086
34 Wendler D Pentz R How does the collection of genetic test results affect research participants? American journal of medical genetics Part A 2007 143A 1733 8 17618487
35 Grill JD Zhou Y Elashoff D Karlawish J Disclosure of amyloid status is not a barrier to recruitment in preclinical Alzheimer's disease clinical trials Neurobiology of aging 2016 39 147 53 26923411
36 Grill JD Karlawish J Elashoff D Vickrey BG Risk disclosure and preclinical Alzheimer's disease clinical trial enrollment Alzheimer's &amp; dementia : the journal of the Alzheimer's Association 2013 9 356 9 e1
37 Burns JM Klunk WE Predicting positivity for a new era of Alzheimer disease prevention trials Neurology 2012 79 1530 1 22972636
38 Marcantonio ER Aneja J Jones RN Alsop DC Fong TG Crosby GJ Maximizing clinical research participation in vulnerable older persons: identification of barriers and motivators Journal of the American Geriatrics Society 2008 56 1522 7 18662204
39 Bemelmans SA Tromp K Bunnik EM Milne RJ Badger S Brayne C Psychological, behavioral and social effects of disclosing Alzheimer's disease biomarkers to research participants: a systematic review Alzheimers Res Ther 2016 8 46 27832826
40 Sperling RA Rentz DM Johnson KA Karlawish J Donohue M Salmon DP The A4 study: stopping AD before symptoms begin? Science translational medicine 2014 6 228fs13
41 Harkins K Sankar P Sperling R Grill JD Green RC Johnson KA Development of a process to disclose amyloid imaging results to cognitively normal older adult research participants Alzheimer's research &amp; therapy 2015 7 26
42 Gooblar J Roe CM Selsor NJ Gabel MJ Morris JC Attitudes of Research Participants and the General Public Regarding Disclosure of Alzheimer Disease Research Results JAMA neurology 2015 1 7 26659895
43 Green RC Roberts JS Cupples LA Relkin NR Whitehouse PJ Brown T Disclosure of APOE genotype for risk of Alzheimer's disease The New England journal of medicine 2009 361 245 54 19605829
44 Green RC Christensen KD Cupples LA Relkin NR Whitehouse PJ Royal CD A randomized noninferiority trial of condensed protocols for genetic risk disclosure of Alzheimer's disease Alzheimer's &amp; dementia : the journal of the Alzheimer's Association 2015 11 1222 30
45 Roberts JS Chen CA Uhlmann WR Green RC Effectiveness of a condensed protocol for disclosing APOE genotype and providing risk education for Alzheimer disease Genetics in medicine : official journal of the American College of Medical Genetics 2012 14 742 8 22498844
46 Green MJ Peterson SK Baker MW Harper GR Friedman LC Rubinstein WS Effect of a computer-based decision aid on knowledge, perceptions, and intentions about genetic testing for breast cancer susceptibility: a randomized controlled trial JAMA : the journal of the American Medical Association 2004 292 442 52 15280342
47 Jenkins J Calzone KA Dimond E Liewehr DJ Steinberg SM Jourkiv O Randomized comparison of phone versus in-person BRCA1/2 predisposition genetic test result disclosure counseling Genetics in medicine : official journal of the American College of Medical Genetics 2007 9 487 95 17700386
48 Bradbury AR Patrick-Miller L Fetzer D Egleston B Cummings SA Forman A Genetic counselor opinions of, and experiences with telephone communication of BRCA1/2 test results Clinical genetics 2011 79 125 31 21039431
49 Annas GJ Elias S 23 and Me and the FDA The New England journal of medicine 2014 370 985 8 24520936
50 Caselli RJ Langbaum J Marchant GE Lindor RA Hunt KS Henslin BR Public perceptions of presymptomatic testing for Alzheimer disease Mayo Clinic proceedings 2014 89 1389 96 25171823
51 Caselli RJ Marchant GE Hunt KS Henslin BR Kosiorek HE Langbaum J Predictive Testing for Alzheimer's Disease: Suicidal Ideation in Healthy Participants Alzheimer disease and associated disorders 2015
52 Ott BR Pelosi MA Tremont G Snyder PJ A Survey of Knowledge and Views Concerning Genetic and Amyloid PET Status Disclosure Alzheimers Dement (N Y) 2016 2 23 9 27019867
53 Carpenter BD Xiong C Porensky EK Lee MM Brown PJ Coats M Reaction to a dementia diagnosis in individuals with Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment Journal of the American Geriatrics Society 2008 56 405 12 18194228
54 Grundman M Pontecorvo MJ Salloway SP Doraiswamy PM Fleisher AS Sadowsky CH Potential impact of amyloid imaging on diagnosis and intended management in patients with progressive cognitive decline Alzheimer disease and associated disorders 2013 27 4 15 23203162
55 Lingler JH Klunk WE Disclosure of amyloid imaging results to research participants: has the time come? Alzheimer's &amp; dementia : the journal of the Alzheimer's Association 2013 9 741 4 e2
56 Johnson KA Minoshima S Bohnen NI Donohoe KJ Foster NL Herscovitch P Appropriate use criteria for amyloid PET: A report of the Amyloid Imaging Task Force, the Society of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging, and the Alzheimer's Association Alzheimer's &amp; dementia : the journal of the Alzheimer's Association 2013
57 Halpern SD Karlawish JH Berlin JA The continuing unethical conduct of underpowered clinical trials JAMA : the journal of the American Medical Association 2002 288 358 62 12117401
