LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


7600076
3453
Drugs
Drugs
Drugs
0012-6667
1179-1950

27988872
5575843
10.1007/s40265-016-0674-0
NIHMS896511
Article
Insulin Resistance and Neurodegeneration: Progress Towards the Development of New Therapeutics for Alzheimer’s Disease
de la Monte Suzanne M. MD, MPH Departments of Neurology, Neurosurgery, Neuropathology, and Pathology, Rhode Island Hospital, and the Alpert Medical School of Brown University, Providence, RI 02903

Correspondence to Dr. Suzanne M. de la Monte, MD, MPH, Pierre Galletti Research Building, Rhode Island Hospital, 55 Claverick Street, Room 419, Providence, RI 02903. Tel: 401-444-7364; Fax: 401-444-2939; Suzanne_DeLaMonte_MD@Brown.edu
2 8 2017
1 2017
01 1 2018
77 1 4765
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) should be regarded as a degenerative metabolic disease caused by brain insulin resistance and deficiency, and overlapping with the molecular, biochemical, pathophysiological, and metabolic dysfunctions occurring in diabetes mellitus, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, and metabolic syndrome. Although most of the diagnostic and therapeutic approaches over the past several decades have focused on amyloid-beta (Aβ42) and aberrantly phosphorylated tau, which could be caused by consequences of brain insulin resistance, the broader array of pathologies including white matter atrophy with loss of myelinated fibrils and leukoaraiosis, non-Aβ42 microvascular disease, dysregulated lipid metabolism, mitochondrial dysfunction, astrocytic gliosis, neuro-inflammation, and loss of synapses vis-à-vis growth of dystrophic neurites, is not readily accounted for by Aβ42 accumulations, but could be explained by dysregulated insulin/IGF-1 signaling with attendant impairments in signal transduction and gene expression. This review covers the diverse range of brain abnormalities in AD and discusses how insulins, incretins, and insulin sensitizers could be utilized to treat at different stages of neurodegeneration.


1. Introduction

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is clinically manifested by progressive behavioral changes, loss of recent, i.e. short-term memory, declines in executive functions, and deficits in cognition [1]. Through structured longitudinal neuropsychological assessments of memory, intellectual function, and language skills, a diagnosis of possible or probable AD can be rendered. However, higher levels of diagnostic accuracy can be achieved using laboratory tests such as paired cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and serum assays of amyloid precursor protein-amyloid beta 1–42 peptide (Aβ42) and phospho-Tau (pTau231) [2, 3], and neuroimaging [1], particularly magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain [4, 5], functional MRI (fMRI), diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) [6], single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT), positron emission tomography (PET), and magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) [7, 8].

1.1 Characteristic Neuropathology

Typically, neurodegeneration begins before it becomes clinically manifested as the typical neuropathological changes are detectable by postmortem examination of asymptomatic individuals. The brain structures hit earliest by AD including medial temporal and orbitofrontal regions, which are linked to neuronal plasticity needed for learning and memory. Over time, neurodegeneration grows in severity and distribution, with initial involvement of corticolimbic structures, followed by progressive destruction of other regions within the cerebral hemispheres.

Neurodegeneration is manifested by atrophy of cortical, white matter, and medial temporal structures with loss of neurons and synaptic terminals, neuro-inflammation, reactive astrocytosis, micro-vascular disease, accumulations of hyper-phosphorylated tau (pTau)-containing cytoskeletal lesion, increased amyloid-beta (Aβ42) deposits in plaques, vessels, and neurons, and increased ubiquitin immunoreactivity in degenerating neurons [9–11]. Aberrant phosphorylation of tau via inappropriate activation of kinases causes Tau fibrillarization, aggregation, and ubiquitination, followed by the stress-activated unfolded protein response (UPR), and ultimately cell death. Insoluble, fibrillar aggregates of hyper-phosphorylated and ubiquitinated Tau produce characteristic paired-helical filaments (PHFs) that are detectable by transmission electron microscopy and immunohistochemical staining. PHFs are major components of neurofibrillary tangles, dystrophic neurites, and neuropil threads which are signature AD lesions [12].

Aβ42 is a ~4 kD peptide generated by secretase cleavage of amyloid beta precursor protein (AβPP). Under normal circumstances, Aβ42 is continuously cleared from the brain by transport into the general circulation [13]. In aging and AD, Aβ42 accumulates in cortical and leptomeningeal vessel walls, cortical and sub-cortical perivascular spaces, and plaques, and as neurotoxic, oligomeric soluble diffusible ligands (ADDLs) [14, 15].

1.2 AD Pathologies Unrelated to Aβ42 and pTau

Although a neuropathologic diagnosis of AD is rendered by assessing the distribution and abundance of neurofibrillary tangles and senile plaques [10], the features of neurodegeneration are far broader and include: neuronal loss; neuro-inflammation; gliosis; white matter degeneration; and vascular degeneration, particularly in white matter [16, 17]. In addition, impairments in brain metabolism (glucose and oxygen utilization), although recognized for decades and frequently assessed, has not been incorporated into the cluster AD biomarkers. Failure to consider these additional aspects of AD limits opportunity to fully understand the nature of disease and therapeutically target its underlying basis. For example, significant degenerative changes emerge in cerebral white matter and micro-vessels early in AD; these abnormalities can be more conspicuous than neurofibrillary tangles and plaques. Restricting therapeutic interventions to Aβ42 and pTau accumulations would not attend to other major pathologies that impair function and worsen with AD severity.

2. Neuro-inflammation

Inflammatory responses in brains with neurodegeneration have been recognized for years but only recently have gained renewed attention as potential mediators of AD. Neuro-inflammation refers to the presence of activated microglia and astrocytes which cause injury through expression and release of pro-inflammatory cytokines, chemokines, and complement, increased generation of membrane fatty acids, eicosanoids, lipid peroxidation products, and reactive oxygen and reactive nitrogen species [18–20].

2.1 Neuro-inflammation as a mediator of neurodegeneration

Neuro-inflammation is an early and consistent feature of many neurodegenerative diseases, including AD. Increased expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin-1β (IL-1β), IL-6, interferon-gamma, and macrophage migration inhibitory factor in the vicinities of Aβ42 plaques supports the concept that neuro-inflammation is an important mediator or propagator of AD neurodegeneration [21, 22]. In addition, neuro-inflammation promotes neuronal injury and cholinergic dysfunction [23]. Downstream effects include oxidative stress with increased production of reactive oxygen and reactive nitrogen species which can damage nerve terminals, causing synaptic dysfunction and attendant cognitive impairment [19]. Furthermore, since chronic inflammation is known to exacerbate insulin resistance associated with systemic disease-states [24–28], neuro-inflammation could also have an important etiopathic role in the brain insulin and IGF-1 resistances that occur in AD [29–34] and Parkinson’s disease [35]. Furthermore, inflammation has inhibitory effects on incretin (orexin) expression and function, while reduced insulin resistance afforded by activation of incretin signaling inhibits pro-inflammatory cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α) [36].

2.2 Role of insulin resistance in neuro-inflammation

Despite compelling evidence for a possible causal role of neuro-inflammation in neurodegeneration, its common presence in many other central nervous system (CNS) diseases including multiple sclerosis, malignant brain tumors, infections, traumatic injury, ischemic injury and stroke, perinatal leukoencephalopathy, and toxic-metabolic disorders suggests that such responses may be reactive rather than causal. In that regard, neuro-inflammation may produce secondary bystander injury rather than operate as the primary driver of neurodegeneration. In humans with peripheral insulin resistance diseases, including diabetes mellitus and metabolic syndrome, cognitive impairment and AD are partly driven by brain insulin resistance, together with neuro-inflammation and vasculopathy [37–39].

One of the brain abnormalities in AD that can be linked to both insulin resistance and neuroinflammation is down-regulation of peroxisome proliferator activator receptor (PPAR) delta [40]. In brain, PPAR-delta is the most abundantly expressed of the 3 isoforms of PPAR nuclear hormone receptors (alpha, beta/delta, and gamma) [41]. PPARs play critical roles in modulating insulin-stimulated gene expression in response to signals transmitted from surface membranes [42]. However, in addition to their insulin sensitizing actions, ligand activation of PPARs has potent anti-inflammatory effects [42–44]. The findings that in AD models, 1) PPAR-delta expression is reduced in AD brains [40]; 2) experimental depletion of PPAR-delta increases neuro-inflammation, astrogliosis, oxidative stress, Aβ42 deposition, and PHF tau [45]; 3) PPAR-delta agonists are neuroprotective [46]; and 4) PPAR-delta agonists reduce neuro-inflammation and Aβ42 deposition [44, 47, 48], convincingly support the notion that impairments in insulin signaling could account for many major abnormalities in AD, including neuro-inflammation. However, the fact that neuro-inflammation exacerbates insulin resistance, neurotoxic and oxidation-mediated cell death, gliosis, Aβ42 toxicity, and PHF pathology means that the association between insulin resistance and neuro-inflammation is tight. Another possible interpretation of this scenario is that insulin resistance and neuro-inflammatory pathologies co-conspire in a positive feedback loop to mediate neurodegeneration.

2.3 Oxidative Stress contributes to neurodegeneration

Neurodegeneration is consistently associated with oxidative stress resulting from increased generation of reactive oxygen and reactive nitrogen species [49]. These products exert their neurotoxic effects by reacting with macromolecules including lipids, nucleic acids (RNA and DNA), and proteins, causing their dysfunction [49, 50]. Oxidative damage occurs at very early stages of neurodegeneration [51] and has been linked to mitochondrial dysfunction in AD and other neurodegenerative diseases [52, 53]. Like neuro-inflammation, oxidative stress and free radical injury are not specific to neurodegeneration. Although oxidative stress can be caused by a broad range of exposures including hypoxia, ischemia, and insulin resistance, the resulting molecular, biochemical and cellular abnormalities overlap extensively with related pathologies in AD [54].

A long-standing hypothesis is that free radical stress and injury in AD are mediated by Fenton-type reactions [55] linked to excess iron accumulation in the brain [56]. This concept is supported by experimental evidence that impairments in iron metabolism increase levels of neuronal iron and lipid-peroxidation and protein carbonyl adducts in the brain [57]. In AD and many other neurodegenerative diseases, Heme accumulation is regarded as a common and important mediator of oxidative stress [58]. In the brain, the deleterious effects of heme-induced free radical damage are broad and include inhibition of the muscarinic acetylcholine receptor [59], which likely contributes to cognitive decline in AD. Correspondingly, heme-associated impairments in muscarinic acetylcholine receptor function can be prevented by anti-oxidant treatment [59]. Heme oxygenases function by either dynamically or constitutively degrading heme to ferrous iron, carbon monoxide and biliverdin-IX-alpha. Heme oxygenases’ anti-oxidant responses protect cells from injury [49] and activate the alpha7 nicotinic receptor [60]. Correspondingly, exert their neuroprotective actions in part by inducing of heme-oxygenase 1 (HO-1) and reducing the levels of redox active iron in the brain.

Further evidence that iron accumulation and oxidative stress have etiopathic roles in AD stems from studies showing that deferoxamine treatment of P301L transgenic mice normalized performance in the radial arm water maze [61]. The P301L AD model is associated with phospho-Tau accumulates in the brain. Mechanistically, deferoxamine treatments reduced neuroinflammation, protein oxidation, and GSk-3β activation without altering brain levels of phospho-Tau [61]. Similarly, in the APP/PS1 mouse model, intranasal deferoxamine significantly improved performance in spatial learning and memory [62] while reducing GSK-3β activation, oxidative stress, and levels of soluble Aβ40 and Aβ42 in the brain [63]. Despite these compelling insights, the ability to extend this logic to human diseases is limited by the uncommon and uncharacteristic nature of the experimental mouse genetic profiles relative to most human cases, and the fact that the causes of brain iron accumulation in these models are not obvious.

2.4 The insulin resistance, oxidative stress, iron overload, neurodegeneration network

Insulin resistance promotes to oxidative stress by dysregulating carbohydrate and lipid metabolism, increasing GSK-3β activation, and impairing cell survival/anti-apoptotic signaling, energy balance, mitochondrial function [54], and choline acetyltransferase and neurotrophin gene expression [64]. Brain insulin resistance is also associated with increased levels of phospho-Tau and Aβ42 [54]. Iron accumulation occurs in both AD and Type 2 diabetes mellitus [65]. Reducing iron load in the body enhances glycemic control in Type 2 diabetes [65], just as deferoxamine treatment reverses or prevents AD-type abnormalities in experimental models [62, 63]. Paradoxically HO-1 expression is substantially elevated in AD brains [66] and peripheral blood [67, 68]. Since HO-1 degrades heme, its up-regulated expression in AD suggests that endogenous neuroprotective mechanisms may become activated as a compensatory response to neurodegeneration. However, this explanation has been called into question by studies showing that in postmortem brains of patients with AD or MCI, HO-1 protein is post-translationally modified by serine phosphorylation, which increases its activity, and lipid peroxidation adducts, which would impair its function [69]. Thus, it is uncertain whether the aberrantly elevated levels of HO-1 in AD brains represent responses to neurodegeneration or oxidative damage and attendant inhibition of enzyme activity.

The findings in several studies that various aspects of neurodegeneration were abrogated by reducing heme make it difficult to refute the argument that neurodegeneration in insulin resistance diseases is mediated by dysregulation of iron metabolism, oxidative stress, and free radical damage [65, 68]. Further exploration of this concept was enabled by review of neuro-cognitive abnormalities associated with genetic disorders of iron metabolism that lead to iron overload. Of particular interest is that hemochromatosis has been linked to glucose intolerance, insulin resistance, cognitive-motor impairments, and neurodegeneration[70] [71–73], and studies have shown that the glucose intolerance and insulin resistance improve with iron chelation therapy [74]. Unfortunately, these observations are also not entirely conclusive since people with hemochromatosis also have liver disease, and hepatic dysfunction can also cause cognitive-motor deficits and neurodegeneration.

Further studies addressed the same question using transgenic mouse models of hemochromatosis (HFE). One study found no evidence to support a direct and causal role for dysregulated iron metabolism in the pathogenesis of AD since the associated alterations in brain mRNA levels did not confer increased risk for AD-type neurodegeneration [75]. Additionally relevant findings in HFE models were that, 1) brain iron accumulations were most abundant in regions that regulate motor rather than cognitive functions; and 2) HFE hemochromatosis gene expression was mainly localized in choroid plexus epithelial cells, vascular endothelial cells, and ependymal lining cells rather than neurons and glia [70]. Despite early studies demonstrating probable links between the mutant hemochromatosis gene (HFE H63D) and increased risk for AD [76], other groups observed equivocal associations [77], and a later meta-analysis revealed that mutant HFE (H63D) most likely plays a protective role in reducing AD risk [78]. Additional research is needed to better understand how dysregulated iron metabolism contributes to neurodegeneration and cognitive impairment. One consideration is that iron accumulation may impair mitochondrial function and thereby cause oxidative stress and mitochondrial DNA damage, and metabolic dysfunction [79–82]. Mitochondrial DNA damage and dysfunction are well-recognized features of AD [53, 83] and other neurodegenerative diseases [84].

3 Brain Metabolic Dysfunction in AD

3.1 Deficits in Brain Glucose Utilization

The constellation of progressive neuropathological abnormalities in AD illustrates the need to conceptualize pathogenic mechanisms in ways that accommodate all aspects of disease rather than focus on just neurofibrillary tangles and senile plaques. The fact that most aspects of AD are fairly consistent from case to case suggests that the underlying basis of the seemingly unrelated pathologies may be shared. Deficits in brain energy metabolism, particularly with respect to glucose utilization in AD have been recognized for years. PET imaging with (18)F-fluoro-deoxyglucose (FDG) is the standard approach for detecting early impairments in brain glucose metabolism [85, 86]. The most significant finding across multiple studies is that AD is associated with global reductions in brain glucose metabolism relative to normal healthy control brains [87–90].

3.2 Insulin’s Functions in the Brain

Insulin and insulin-like growth factor, type 1 (IGF-1) polypeptides (growth factors) and receptors are expressed in the brain, most abundantly in regions that are most vulnerable to AD neurodegeneration [91]. Insulin regulates neuronal and oligodendroglial cell survival and neuronal plasticity [91, 92]. Experimental models have shown that brain insulin resistance or deficiency impair learning and memory [64]. In early or intermediate stages of AD, brain and CSF levels of insulin are decreased [34], while Aβ42 and advanced glycation end-products are increased [34, 54, 93]. High levels of Aβ42 in brain and CSF are associated with low levels in serum due to decreased clearance [94]. Insulin administration improves working memory and cognition [95–98] and enhances Aβ42 clearance from the brain [98].

3.3 Primary Brain Insulin and IGF Deficiency and Resistance in AD—Type 3 Diabetes

To validate the roles of insulin and IGF deficiencies and resistances in AD, human postmortem brains with different Braak stage severities of AD were used to measure expression levels of the corresponding trophic factors and receptors, ligand-receptor binding, and constitutive activation of downstream signaling [31, 99, 100]. Those investigations revealed significant AD stage-dependent declines in the expression of molecules needed to relay insulin and IGF-1 signaling including ligands, receptors and insulin receptor substrate, type 1 (IRS-1), reduced insulin and IGF-1 binding to their cognate receptors, impairments in signaling through PI3K-Akt pathways needed for neuronal survival, plasticity, and metabolism, together with increased GSK-3β activation [31, 99, 100]. Of further significance was the finding that impairments in brain insulin, IGF-1, and IGF-2 signaling mechanisms were correlated with reduced expression of choline acetyltransferase which is needed to generate acetylcholine [31, 99, 100]. Subsequent studies confirmed that insulin and IGF-1 resistance [101] and impaired signaling through IRS proteins with attendant increased activation of GSK-3β and suppression of PI3K-Akt [32] were fundamental feature of AD in human brains.

The concept that brain insulin/IGF resistance and deficiency have significant roles in the pathogenesis of AD is supported by data showing that in the early stages of disease, CSF levels of insulin, IGF-1, nerve growth factor, and glial derived neurotrophic factor levels were significantly decreased while neuroinflammatory indices were increased relative to aged controls [34]. That study was highly significant because a postmortem diagnosis of AD was confirmed in all patients [34]. Together, these observations suggest that besides pTau and Aβ42, biomarkers of brain metabolic and neurotrophin dysfunction should be included in CSF panels designed to aid in early detection of AD.

Because the human AD associated abnormalities in insulin and IGF-1 signaling are highly reminiscent of what occurs in both Type 1 and Type 2 diabetes mellitus, yet they selectively involve the brain, we coined the term ‘Type 3 diabetes’ [99]. The objective was to convey the concept that AD is a brain form of diabetes in which both ligand (insulin and IGF-1) deficiencies and receptor resistances account for functional impairments in activating downstream signaling pathways. In addition to the deficits in insulin and IGF-1 signaling, cognitive impairment and AD are associated with reduced sensitivity (resistance) or ligand deficiencies pertaining to leptin and neurotrophins [34, 102, 103], and therapeutic responsiveness to incretins [104–106]; these abnormalities also occur in obesity, Type 2 diabetes and other insulin-resistance diseases [107–113]. Therefore, in both Type 3 diabetes and peripheral insulin resistance diseases, the mediators and correlates of metabolic dysfunction extend beyond impairments in insulin and IGF-1 signaling and more broadly include deficits in neurotrophin functions. For ‘Type 3 diabetes’, although we hypothesized that the brain is the main target of metabolic dysfunction since none of the subjects in our initial studies had clinical evidence of peripheral insulin resistance, emerging evidence suggests that the CNS regulates glucose metabolism in the body [114, 115] and that CNS impairments in metabolic signaling may drive obesity and peripheral insulin resistance [116–119]. Altogether, these concepts point toward the use of insulin and/or insulin sensitizer drugs for remediating brain diabetes early in the course of disease to prevent its progression and potential precipitation or exacerbation of systemic insulin resistance diseases.

3.4 Secondary Systemic Insulin Resistance Diseases and Cognitive Impairment

Analysis of epidemiological trends over several decades show that the rates of AD increased sharply within all age groups, 50 years and above [120]. Parallel trends occurred for diabetes mellitus [120], suggesting that the underlying factors might be related. Equally important, the rapid shifts in disease prevalence correspond with effects of exposures rather than genetic factors. Correspondingly, data generated from multiple laboratories and institutions have shown that overweight or obese people and diabetics are at increased risk for developing cognitive impairment and dementia [121–125]. Furthermore, individuals with inadequately controlled Type 1 and Type 2 diabetes also have higher rates of cognitive impairment [126–131] and a two-fold or greater risk of developing AD relative to people without diabetes [132]. Other studies have linked various forms of peripheral insulin resistance [133, 134] including pre-diabetes [127], metabolic syndrome [135], high fat diet-induced obesity [136, 137], and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease [138–140] to AD-type pathology and cognitive decline. Finally, multivariate analysis of a late onset AD international, multicenter cohort identified gene clusters associated with inflammation, diabetes, and obesity as pathologic processes linked to neurodegeneration [141].

In light of the evidence that various peripheral insulin resistance diseases can negatively impact brain structure and function and cause brain insulin resistance, it must be acknowledged that cognitive impairment and AD-type neurodegeneration can emerge either as primary or secondary CNS disease processes. In other words, ‘Type 3 Diabetes’ can arise in isolation (primary) with selective involvement of the brain, or as a consequence of systemic insulin resistance (secondary) due to obesity, diabetes mellitus, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease or metabolic syndrome. Yet a third way to conceptualize the problem is to regard insulin resistance diseases as one process that can afflict one or multiple organs and tissues in the same way that atherosclerosis can target one or more vessels and produce distinct manifestations of disease. Importantly, the explanation for the rapid increase in rates of cognitive impairment and AD, even adjusting for age, probably is rooted in the parallel epidemics of obesity and other insulin resistance diseases rather than genetics per se. The good news is that the exposure-induced excesses in rates of neurodegeneration are probably preventable and treatable. The strategies are likely to be similar to those used and continuously under development to manage diabetes mellitus.

4 Therapeutic Strategies for Abrogating Brain Insulin Deficiency and Insulin Resistance in AD

4.1 Rational therapeutic options

AD neurodegeneration is associated with energy imbalance, dysregulated lipid and carbohydrate metabolism, cytokine mediated inflammation, increased oxidative and other types of cellular stresses, on-going cell death, and vascular degeneration. The finding that these abnormalities are also present in Type 2 diabetes mellitus, metabolic syndrome, and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease supports the concept that insulin-resistance diseases are all inter-related, could have the same root causes, and may be managed by similar if not identical therapeutic strategies. Therefore, in designing treatment approaches, it would be prudent to remain mindful of the full range of molecular and cellular pathologies that must be addressed, and determine if the treatment responses are short-term or long-term, cell or tissue type specific, broadly evident across different aspects of disease. Furthermore, non-invasive approaches are needed to assess and monitor the impact of various treatments on each component of neurodegeneration.

Regarding AD, any drug that can enhance brain glucose utilization and insulin signaling through the PI3K-Akt pathway, and thereby support neuronal survival, plasticity, and metabolism, should be regarded as a first-line therapeutic agent. Insulins should be given high-level consideration because besides stimulating insulin pathways, inflammation, cellular stress and neurotransmitter deficits are responsive to insulin. In contrast, anti-inflammatory agents, anti-oxidants and cholinesterase inhibitor drugs have narrower targeted effects, although they should be included with multi-pronged therapeutic regimens. Most of the chronic and progressive abnormalities, including white matter and vascular degeneration can be attributed at least in part to brain insulin resistance; therefore those aspects of AD should also respond to insulin and/or insulin sensitizers. Therapeutic options for treating AD as a metabolic disorder can be grouped under 3 headings: lifestyle changes, anti-inflammatory/anti-oxidant measures, and insulin signaling support.

4.2 Lifestyle Interventions

Lifestyle measures including aerobic physical exercise, weight training and adopting a healthful diet are established strategies for lowering disease risk and severity, including cognitive impairment and AD, in states of insulin resistance, particularly in the preclinical and early stages [142, 143]. A meta-analysis study showed that reduced rates of physical exercise increase risk for developing AD [144]. This suggests that, in addition to protecting against cardiovascular disease, diabetes, obesity, and hypertension, healthful diets and regular physical exercise are neuroprotective and guard against mild cognitive impairment and AD [97, 145], and also positively impact neuronal plasticity [146]. Epidemiological data further suggest that the “Mediterranean diet” which is rich in fruits, vegetables and extra virgin olive oil, provides neuroprotection with aging [147], and that tight regulation of glycemia in diabetics helps preserve cognitive function [148]. In contrast, diets rich in simple sugars, particularly fructose, increase rates of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus, which in turn, enhances risk for AD [149]. Smoking is yet another avoidable risk factor for AD neurodegeneration as it increases neuro-inflammation, tau phosphorylation and Aβ42 deposition [150]. Other potential exposure-mediated causes of neurodegeneration linked to insulin resistance include neurotoxins [151], particulate matter present in polluted air [152, 153], and nitrosamines incorporated into processed and preserved foods and tobacco [154–158].

Nearly all protective lifestyle measures drive the body toward reducing insulin resistance, whereas accelerators of aging and cognitive impairment worsen insulin responsiveness. Aging is the dominant risk factor for cognitive impairment and neurodegeneration, including AD. Insulin resistance increases with aging. Lifestyle measures can reduce aging associated insulin resistance. The protective effects of caloric restriction on aging demonstrated in earlier studies were likely due to concomitant reductions in insulin resistance. Therefore, lifestyle measures that preserve insulin responsiveness would likely protect against cognitive impairment and neurodegeneration [159]. From a public health perspective, although adopting healthy active lifestyles is the most logical and economically feasible approach to resolving the insulin resistance diseases epidemic, compliance has proven stubbornly difficult to sustain over prolonged periods. An additional consideration is whether lifestyle measures would even have significant neuroprotective effects in the intermediate or late stages of AD. If not, more definitive therapeutic strategies must be considered.

4.3 Anti-inflammatory/anti-oxidant agents

Epidemiological studies suggested that individuals who were chronically maintained on anti-inflammatory or anti-oxidant drugs for unrelated conditions had lower risks for developing cognitive impairment and AD [160]. Moreover, pre-clinical studies provided encouraging results showing that anti-inflammatory agents decreased neurofibrillary tangle burden [161, 162], tau phosphorylation [163], neurobehavioral (memory) deficits [164], Aβ42 burden [165, 166], synaptic degeneration [48, 167, 168], and mitochondrial dysfunction [169]. Therefore, anti-oxidants with neuroprotective actions may be beneficial in the treatment of neurodegeneration, including AD [170, 171].

Curcumin has received considerable attention as a natural anti-oxidant and anti-inflammatory agent for treating AD due to its inhibitory effects on Aβ42 deposition, Aβ42 aggregation, and Tau phosphorylation, and positive effects on neurobehavioral function in preclinical AD models [166]. Other anti-oxidants and anti-inflammatory agents that may provide neuroprotection for AD include alpha-lipoic acid [172–174], Vitamin E [175, 176], resveratrol [170], phytonutrients [177], cyclooxygenase 2 inhibitors [178], Ginkgo [179], and melatonin [180]. However, thus far, formal clinical trials designed to treat or prevent AD by targeting neuro-inflammation and oxidative stress [181, 182] have yielded disappointing results with respect to neuroprotection and preservation of cognitive function [166, 168, 183–185]. On the other hand, since neuro-inflammation emerges early and in pre-symptomatic stages of AD [186], relatively delayed treatment may not be effective because the peak period of related injury would have passed. The same phenomenon may hold with respect to Aβ42 accumulations. Although clinical trials designed to remove plaques and increase Aβ42 clearance failed to restore cognitive function, prevent cognitive decline, and reduce critical AD dementia-associated neuropathological abnormalities such as neuropil threads, dystrophic neurites, and neurofibrillary tangles [187–190], in order for this mode of therapy to be effective, it may have to be administered early, i.e. within the pre-symptomatic stages of disease. The same concept may hold with respect to therapeutic targeting of neuro-inflammation and oxidative stress [186] to prevent, reduce severity, or slow the rate of AD neurodegeneration. In support of this concept, in a recent publication of a randomized clinical pilot study, combined early intervention with omega-3 fatty acids, aerobic exercise, and cognitive stimulation significantly reduced progression of frontal, parietal and cingulate cortex atrophy in subjects with mild cognitive impairment [191].

4.4 Insulins

Insulin polypeptide has 51 amino acids and a molecular weight of 5808 Daltons. Insulin is first synthesized as a pre-prohormone in which its signal peptide directs the protein to the ER for cleavage and subsequent formation of proinsulin. Folding, with the addition of 3 disulfide bonds, and subsequent enzymatic processing by prohormone convertases and carboxypeptidase E in the trans-golgi network releases disulfide bond-linked A- and B- chains of insulin. Mature insulin is stored in mature granules as an inactive hexamer. Active monomeric insulin is released on demand in response to elevated blood glucose and food intake. In Type 1 diabetes mellitus, insulin production is reduced or absent due to auto-immune destruction of the pancreatic islet beta cells. In Type 2 diabetes mellitus, insulin production is elevated due to insulin receptor resistance in target organs, including skeletal muscle and adipose tissue. Higher levels of insulin are needed to achieve cellular responses to dietary glucose and energy metabolism. In addition, as T2DM progresses, states of insulin deficiency can emerge, further increasing the need for insulin therapy.

4.4.1 Physiological and therapeutic effects of brain insulin and IGF-1: rationale for insulin/IGF-1 therapy in neurodegenerative diseases

In addition to stimulating glucose metabolism, insulin and IGF-1 support neuronal and oligodendroglial cell survival [91, 92, 192], abundance and integrity of synapses [193], synaptic plasticity [91, 92, 193], and working memory and cognition [64, 95–98]. Other mechanistic actions of insulin that pertain to its potential use in targeting neurodegeneration include its anti-inflammatory effects [194], enhancement of Aβ42 clearance from the brain [98, 195], and stimulation of brain energy metabolism [197, 198], cerebral blood flow, including to regions damaged in AD [199], and acetylcholine production [197]. It is noteworthy that insulin enhancement of Aβ42 clearance was found not to be associated with altered expression of insulin degrading enzyme [195], which degrades both Aβ42 and insulin [196], and therefore other mechanisms must be involved.

4.4.2 Pharmacokinetics of insulins used for therapy

Insulins vary with respect to their onsets of action which correlate with the time interval required for their detection in peripheral blood after injection, peak periods of action, i.e. maximum effectiveness in lowering blood glucose, and duration of action (time period of detection in peripheral blood). In addition, insulin’s strength, conveyed in international units (U), ranges from 20 to 500, although the most common human dosing is U-100. The fastest acting insulins are termed ‘rapid-acting’. They are detectable in peripheral blood within 15 minutes of injection; their levels peak within 1 hour; and blood levels are sustained for 2 to 4 hours. Regular insulins are similar to natural pancreatic islet-derived insulin as they are short-acting, detectable in peripheral blood 30 minutes after injection, with peak blood levels achieved within 2 or 3 hours, and a therapeutic window that lasts 3 to 6 hours.

Newer synthetic or recombinant insulins tend to have longer half-lives, later peak periods of maximum strength for lowering blood glucose, and longer durations of action relative to rapid- and short-acting insulins, and thus their therapeutic windows are considerably broader than with rapid- and short-acting insulins. Intermediate-acting insulins are detectable in peripheral blood 2 to 4 hours after injection, produce peak levels 4 and 12 hours later, and their therapeutic effects are sustained for 12 to 18 hours. Long-acting insulins produce relatively stable peripheral blood insulin levels over a 24-hour period, enabling once-per-day treatments. Finally, inhaled insulins were developed to administer rapid-acting insulin after meals and avoid additional injections in Type 1 or Type 2 diabetics who were already being managed with long-acting insulin. Inhaled insulin’s effects are evident within 12–15 minutes and peak by 30 minutes. An advantage of this approach is that the “piggy backed” inhaled insulin has very short-term effects as it is not detectable 3 hours after administration.

4.5 Insulin Therapy, Including Intranasal Delivery for Cognitive Impairment and AD

The brain needs insulin to support metabolism, neuronal survival, synaptic plasticity, myelin maintenance, growth and repair, and neuroprotection. Insulin deficiency and resistance emerge early in AD, and the resulting molecular, pathological, and biochemical abnormalities are essentially indistinguishable from the effects of other Insulin resistance diseases such as diabetes mellitus and metabolic syndrome. This concept led to the term, ‘Type 3 Diabetes’ which conveys that the underlying problems in AD can be explained as a brain form of diabetes, and therefore, the therapeutic interventions could be the same of closely related. Insulin can be administered subcutaneous, transdermal, oral, sublingual, buccal, rectal, vaginal, intramuscular, intraperitoneal, or intranasal. Since insulin normally crosses the blood-brain barrier, systemic administration by various routes can modulate brain metabolism. Furthermore, in AD, compromise of the blood-barrier is compromised renders the brain even more accessible to insulin delivery from the periphery circulation.

Although clinical and experimental evidence suggest that insulin could be used to remediate brain metabolic dysfunction in AD, concerns about using peripherally injected insulin to treat the brain include off-target systemic effects such as hypoglycemia, and uncertainty about the efficiency of drug delivery across the blood-brain barrier. Intranasal delivery provides a realistic solution to these problems because with this non-invasive approach, insulin and other neurotrophins can enter the CNS and bypass the blood-brain barrier [96, 200, 201] while avoiding systemic effects. In contrast to inhalation, intranasal administration efficiently delivers drugs to ventromedial corticolimbic structures in the brain via olfactory and trigeminal nerves innervating the nasal cavity (olfactory) mucosa [202]. Due to connections with corticolimbic structures, intranasal insulin can to be used to treat the most vulnerable targets of AD. Intranasal delivery approaches provide virtually unrestricted transfer of therapeutic compounds across the blood-brain barrier to the brain or CSF for disease-specific targeting at high levels of safety [200, 201].

4.6 Clinical Trials of Insulin Therapy for Cognitive Impairment and Early AD

A number of studies have demonstrated that insulin administration improves cognition and brain energy metabolism in people with mild cognitive impairment or early AD. In addition, insulin enhances clearance of Aβ42, decreases activity of kinases that promote tau hyper-phosphorylation, and enhances signaling through pathways needed for synaptic plasticity [92, 203–205]. Furthermore, results from several clinical trials demonstrated that intranasal insulin improves working memory and cognition in individuals with mild cognitive impairment or early AD [98]. However, such responses are not fully generalizable as they appear to have been modulated by genetic background, particularly APOE-ε4 genotype. APOE-ε4 is the most prevalent genetic risk factor for AD and is present in 18–20% of the population. APOE-ε4-negative subjects were reported to exhibit greater insulin-mediated improvements in cognition [203, 206, 207] while APOE-ε4+ individuals either had no significant responses or their manifestations of AD worsed [207].

After a series of small trials, the multi-center 12-month SNIFF trial was conducted to examine responses to intranasal long-acting insulin (detemir) in subjects with amnestic mild cognitive impairment or probable mild AD [208]. Intranasal detemir improved cognition, verbal and visuospatial memory, and activities of daily living. Responses were most robust in subjects with the worst baseline performances, and they were modulated with respect to APOE-ε4 carrier status [208]. However, in contrast to the earlier study from the same group [207], the SNIFF trial results revealed that significant improvements in verbal memory occurred in APOE-ε4 positive carriers whereas significant declines were associated with APOE-ε4 negative status [208]. Conceivably, the discrepant findings were related to insufficient statistical power of the earlier clinical trials. Nonetheless, the findings in multiple studies provide ample evidence that insulin therapy, particularly via intranasal delivery, slows progression of cognitive impairment and AD, although the role of genetic factor regulation of treatment responsiveness requires further investigation. An additional caveat is that the data could reflect the need to go beyond monotherapy and extend the therapeutic targets to mediators of insulin resistance, as well as other abnormalities including neuroinflammation and deficits in neurotrophin and incretin signaling in AD.

4.6.1 Challenges Facing Intranasal Insulin Therapy for Cognitive Impairment and AD

Although cognitive impairment and AD can be treated with either systemic or intranasal insulin, proper administration of the latter has the potential to selectively target the brain with generally high levels of safety due to the low rates of off-target side-effects such as hypoglycemia [96]. Furthermore, intranasal therapy avoids the need for multiple daily injections. Finally, as the priority dates of patents for intranasal agent delivery, including insulin to treat AD have expired (US5624898 A and US6313093 B1), opportunities exist for expanding this mode of therapy, including to the use of long-acting insulins to address a pressing need due to the large number of patients with AD throughout the world.

Despite its compelling strengths, intranasal therapy faces several challenges. First, delivery protocols must be standardized and simple enough to be managed routinely by elderly individuals; otherwise dose variability will lead to suboptimum and inconsistent responses. A second concern is the need to avoid off-target effects due to inadvertent systemic delivery and attendant hypoglycemia. This concern is serious and potentially devastating, particularly in elderly patients because the brain regions damaged by hypoglycemia are the very ones that require treatment for AD. The third point is that therapeutic agents, including insulin, delivered via the intranasal route should be structurally stable, relatively resistant to degradation, and able to penetrate the nasal mucosa. Finally, the potential for developing nasal transport resistance and reduced absorbance could limit the effectiveness of intranasal therapy [96]. Therefore, to further the use of intranasal insulin and other neurotrophins to treat CNS diseases, improvements in delivery systems, means of monitoring CNS delivery and brain responses, and assessments of nasal transport resistance are needed. On the other hand, the emergence of newer, ultra-long-acting insulins with predictably sustained release and bioactivity profiles, together with substantial margins of safety and efficacy [209–211], could represent the next generation of insulin compounds for treating cognitive impairment and AD.

4.7 Incretins

Incretins, including glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP), glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1), are metabolic hormones that signal reductions in blood glucose levels by stimulating insulin secretion, insulin gene expression, and pancreatic beta cell proliferation [212]. In addition, long-acting liraglutide was demonstrated to ameliorate impairments in insulin signaling in an AD mouse model (APPSWE/PS1dE9) by normalizing cell membrane distributions and localizations of the insulin receptor, reducing expression of pS(616) IRS-1, which inhibits downstream insulin signaling, neuroinflammation, and astrogliosis [213]. Incretin enhancement of nutrient-induced insulin release has potentially broad therapeutic applications, including for the treatment of cognitive impairment, osteoporosis, Type 2 diabetes, and obesity [214, 215]. However, since GLP-1 and GIP are rapidly degraded by dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4) following secretion by K and L cells of the gastrointestinal track [119, 212], they have minimal exogenous therapeutic utility. Instead, synthetic long-acting analogs with insulinotropic activity, including liraglutide and Exendin-4, are more suitable for in vivo experimentation and human clinical trials. Alternatively, inhibitors of DPP-4 could potentially be used to prolong the half-life of GLP-1 and GIP and regulate blood glucose in Type 2 diabetes mellitus [107].

Although the effects of liraglutide could have been mediated by systemically increased insulin secretion, GLP-1 is expressed in CNS neurons (brainstem) [216] that project widely throughout the CNS [217], and its receptors are expressed in ventral tegmental area, paraventricular nucleus and nucleus accumbens neurons [218] which receive projections from GLP-1 expressing brainstem neurons [218, 219]. The peripherally administered GLP-1 analog effects on food intake and body weight are likely mediated through CNS actions [220, 221], as these compounds can cross the blood-brain barrier [222, 223]. However, there is also evidence that CNS-mediated GLP-1 receptor activation has peripheral effects in regulating blood glucose [224], lipid metabolism [225], cardiovascular function [226].

In the CNS, incretins and incretin analogues are neuroprotective [227] because they enhance synaptic plasticity, cell proliferation, and memory, and they reduce Aβ42 plaques, oxidative stress, neuro-inflammation, and gliosis without causing adverse cardiovascular effects [228–232]. In light of the significant and progressive diabetes-like impairments in insulin signaling that occur with increasing AD stage [31, 32, 54], translational and clinical research to determine if incretin therapy can be extended to AD and other neurodegenerative diseases has been conducted.

The long-lasting GIP incretin hormone analogue, D-Ala(2)GIP, was found to protect memory formation and synaptic plasticity, normalize proliferation of stem cells, and reduce Aβ42 plaques and activation of microglia and astrocytes (neuroinflammation and oxidative stress) in the APPswe/PS1ΔE9 mouse model of AD [228]. In addition, Aβ42-inhibition of insulin signaling in neuronal cells was reversed by treatment with a DPP-4 inhibitor [233]. Exendin-4 (Ex-4), an incretin mimetic long-acting GLP-1 receptor agonist approved for T2DM, has neurotrophic and neuroprotective activity in cellular and animal models of stroke, Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases [229–231]. Correspondingly, encouraging results were obtained from a small pilot study in which liraglutide was found to have modest neuroprotective effects manifested by improvements in brain glucose metabolism in subjects with AD [234].

One potential disadvantage of incretins is that they must be administered by injection and they must be long-acting to be effective for human therapy. Moreover, since brain insulin resistance worsens as AD progresses to intermediate and late stages, the therapeutic window for targeting AD with insulins may narrow and possibly vanish over time. Additional research is needed to determine if incretin receptor resistance also develops with advancement of AD stage of neurodegeneration.

4.8 Metformin

The potential use of anti-diabetes drugs apart from insulins to manage cognitive impairment and AD is very exciting due to the large body of data from clinical trials and clinical experience. Evidence is emerging that cognitive function can be preserved by managing diabetes, including with metformin [132, 204, 235–237]. Thus far, just two major metformin clinical trial results have been published, one from Australia and the other from Singapore [132, 204]. However, the findings were somewhat contradictory. The Australian study reported an increased risk for cognitive impairment among Type 2 diabetics following long-term treatment with metformin [236], whereas the Singapore study showed that metformin provided neuroprotection in older adults with Type 2 diabetes [238]. The confounding factor in the Australian study was that the adverse effects of metformin were largely due to concomitant Vitamin B12 deficiencies, which when corrected, abrogated the apparently detrimental effects of metformin. In a later independent study, metformin treatment of overweight or obese, previously untreated diabetics with amnestic mild cognitive impairment had a statistical trend for positive performance effects on the selective reminding test [239]. Given the widespread use of metformin and its potential effects on cognition, additional research including execution of a large multinational longitudinal study and meta-analysis of smaller studies are warranted.

4.9 Thiazolidinediones: Nuclear Hormone Receptor (Peroxisome-proliferator activated receptor) agonists

Peroxisome-proliferator activated receptors (PPARs) are nuclear hormone receptors of which there are three main types: alpha, beta/delta, and gamma. In addition, subtypes of PPAR-gamma have been identified [240]. Differential expression of one or more PPAR type and subtype enables relatively selective modulation of gene expression in tissues. Once activated, PPAR protein heterodimerizes with retinoid X receptor (RXR) and the complex then binds to target sequences that contain peroxisome proliferator hormone response elements within DNA promoters and function as transcription factors to regulate target gene expression, including in the brain [240]. Since PPARs have pivotal roles in regulating carbohydrate, protein, and lipid metabolism, as well as inflammatory responses [241–245], their agonists offer excellent opportunities for treating various aspects of brain diabetes while circumventing problems stemming from insulin resistance [46, 47]. In addition, recent evidence suggests that PPAR agonists can also activate IGF-1 regulated pathways in the brain [47].

In one early but small clinical trial, PPAR-gamma agonist treatment of subjects with mild cognitive impairment or early AD was demonstrated to enhance cognitive function [246]. In a later study, responses to metformin, rosiglitazone and dual treatments were examined. The results indicated that rosiglitazone treatment of diabetics was more effective than metformin in stabilizing long-term cognitive function [247].

Pioglitazone is the second PPAR-gamma agonist to gain attention for potential treatment of AD. In preclinical models, pioglitazone was shown to restore deficits in synaptic transmission and enhance long-term potentiation [248], reduce cerebellar dysfunction [249], and restore dendritic spine densities and adaptive plasticity responses damaged by Aβ42 [250]. Currently, in an on-going Phase III Clinical trial, low dose pioglitazone is being tested to determine if it can delay the onset of MCI and its progression to AD in normal subjects [251]. Importantly, the experimental treatment dose is considerably lower and therefore less toxic than the one used to treat Type 2 diabetes because dose optimization was achieved by determining the pioglitazone dose that was needed to increase oxygen consumption in the brain based on blood-oxygen-level dependent contrast imaging with fMRI [251]. Correspondingly, in preclinical experiments, low-doses of PPAR agonists proved to be more effective and less toxic that high doses for reversing or preventing AD pathologies in experimental models of sporadic AD [46, 47, 252].

Effective brain targeting to enhance brain insulin/IGF signaling and thereby slow or prevent neurodegeneration and cognitive impairment with PPAR agonists will most likely require the use of mainly PPAR-delta, followed by PPAR-gamma agonists since most of the PPARs expressed in brain are delta [41]. Furthermore, PPAR-delta agonists are neuroprotective [253, 254], they inhibit neuro-inflammation [44, 255], reduce Aβ42 accumulation [44], support function in vascular endothelial [256] and smooth muscle [257] cells, promote oligodendrocyte maturation [258] which is needed for myelin maintenance, may negatively regulate CNS neuronal circuitry that drives obesity [259, 260], support cognitive function [261], and prevent neurodegeneration, including AD-type [262] in experimental models [46, 48]. However, since PPAR-gamma agonists also have neuroprotective effects, in may be beneficial to therapeutically target both PPAR-delta and PPAR-gamma for disease remediation in AD. In this regard, preclinical studies have shown that T3D-959, a novel hybrid PPAR-delta/PPAR-gamma agonist [263–265] can effectively restore cognitive function, integrity of temporal lobe/hippocampal structure, and insulin/IGF-1 sensitivity and inhibit neuro-inflammation in a sporadic model of AD [47, 48, 266]. PPAR delta/gamma agonists could be most effective in early to intermediate stages of AD, coinciding with emergence and progression of brain insulin/IGF-1 resistance, and either in concert or tandem with early insulin and/or incretin therapy for mild cognitive impairment and AD neurodegeneration.

5 Conclusions

AD should be regarded as a brain form of diabetes in which insulin resistance and deficiency develop either primarily in the brain, or due to systemic insulin resistance disease with secondary involvement of the brain. Nearly all pathologies in AD, including the typical Aβ42 and phospho-tau containing, PHF-associated structural lesions, metabolic dysfunction, neuro-inflammation, cellular stress, synaptic disconnection with proliferation of dystrophic neurites (reflecting loss of neuronal plasticity), cell death, white matter atrophy and degeneration, and microvascular disease, could be attributed to impairments in insulin and IGF signaling. Therefore, apart from reducing burdens of Aβ42 and pTau, therapeutic interventions must be designed to ameliorate the broader and multifaceted components of AD neurodegeneration. To that end, therapeutic interventions should include measures that increase insulin supply, enhance insulin/IGF receptor responsiveness, and modulate downstream signaling through IRS and insulin/IGF target gene expression.

Supported by AA-11431 and R44 AG049510 from the National Institutes of Health

7.1 Funding: No funding was received for the publication of this review.

Key Points

Alzheimer’s Disease should be regarded as an insulin-resistance-mediated neurodegenerative disorder that has the same fundamental abnormalities as occur in diabetes mellitus, metabolic syndrome, and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease

Contrary to popular perception, Alzheimer’s disease is associated with a number of major abnormalities in the brain that are not attended to by diagnostic and therapeutic approaches that specifically target Amyloid-beta and phospho-tau accumulation.

Disease remediation for Alzheimer’s and probably many other neurodegenerative diseases should be approached by attacking underlying impairments in the actions of insulin and insulin-like growth factors. Orchestrating the repertoire of drugs that support their multifaceted functions in the brain by efficiently and safely delivering insulins (short-, long- and ultralong-acting forms), incretins, and insulin sensitizers for disease-stage intervention could slow or halt progression of neurodegeneration.

7 Compliance with Ethical Standards

7.2 Conflicts of Interest: The author has consulted and delivered a paid lecture for Novo Nordisk in 2016, and is on the Scientific Advisory Board for T3D Pharmaceuticals, Inc.


1 McKhann GM Knopman DS Chertkow H Hyman BT Jack CR Jr Kawas CH The diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer’s disease: recommendations from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimers Dement 2011 5 7 3 263 9 21514250
2 Blennow K Dubois B Fagan AM Lewczuk P de Leon MJ Hampel H Clinical utility of cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers in the diagnosis of early Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimers Dement 2015 1 11 1 58 69 24795085
3 Olsson B Lautner R Andreasson U Ohrfelt A Portelius E Bjerke M CSF and blood biomarkers for the diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis Lancet Neurol 2016 6 15 7 673 84 27068280
4 Duncan GW Firbank MJ O’Brien JT Burn DJ Magnetic resonance imaging: a biomarker for cognitive impairment in Parkinson’s disease? Mov Disord 2013 4 28 4 425 38 23450518
5 Pantano P Caramia F Pierallini A The role of MRI in dementia Ital J Neurol Sci 1999 20 5 Suppl S250 3 10662960
6 Amlien IK Fjell AM Diffusion tensor imaging of white matter degeneration in Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment Neuroscience 2014 9 12 276 206 15 24583036
7 Jones RS Waldman AD 1H-MRS evaluation of metabolism in Alzheimer’s disease and vascular dementia Neurol Res 2004 7 26 5 488 95 15265265
8 Ewers M Cheng X Zhong Z Nural HF Walsh C Meindl T Increased CSF-BACE1 activity associated with decreased hippocampus volume in Alzheimer’s disease J Alzheimers Dis 2011 25 2 373 81 21460439
9 Nelson PT Alafuzoff I Bigio EH Bouras C Braak H Cairns NJ Correlation of Alzheimer disease neuropathologic changes with cognitive status: a review of the literature J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2012 5 71 5 362 81 22487856
10 Hyman BT Phelps CH Beach TG Bigio EH Cairns NJ Carrillo MC National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association guidelines for the neuropathologic assessment of Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimers Dement 2012 1 8 1 1 13 22265587
11 Montine TJ Phelps CH Beach TG Bigio EH Cairns NJ Dickson DW National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association guidelines for the neuropathologic assessment of Alzheimer’s disease: a practical approach Acta Neuropathol 2012 1 123 1 1 11 22101365
12 Serrano-Pozo A Frosch MP Masliah E Hyman BT Neuropathological alterations in Alzheimer disease Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2011 9 1 1 a006189 22229116
13 Ueno M Chiba Y Matsumoto K Nakagawa T Miyanaka H Clearance of beta-amyloid in the brain Curr Med Chem 2014 21 35 4085 90 25312211
14 Kalaria RN Ballard C Overlap between pathology of Alzheimer disease and vascular dementia Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 1999 Oct-Dec 13 Suppl 3 S115 23 10609690
15 Viola KL Klein WL Amyloid beta oligomers in Alzheimer’s disease pathogenesis, treatment, and diagnosis Acta Neuropathol 2015 2 129 2 183 206 25604547
16 Brun A Liu X Erikson C Synapse loss and gliosis in the molecular layer of the cerebral cortex in Alzheimer’s disease and in frontal lobe degeneration Neurodegeneration 1995 6 4 2 171 7 7583681
17 Vinters HV Emerging concepts in Alzheimer’s disease Annu Rev Pathol 2015 10 291 319 25387055
18 Piro JR Benjamin DI Duerr JM Pi Y Gonzales C Wood KM A dysregulated endocannabinoid-eicosanoid network supports pathogenesis in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Cell Rep 2012 6 28 1 6 617 23 22813736
19 Agostinho P Cunha RA Oliveira C Neuroinflammation, oxidative stress and the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease Curr Pharm Des 2010 16 25 2766 78 20698820
20 Singhal G Jaehne EJ Corrigan F Toben C Baune BT Inflammasomes in neuroinflammation and changes in brain function: a focused review Front Neurosci 2014 8 315 25339862
21 Mehlhorn G Hollborn M Schliebs R Induction of cytokines in glial cells surrounding cortical beta-amyloid plaques in transgenic Tg2576 mice with Alzheimer pathology Int J Dev Neurosci 2000 Jul-Aug 18 4–5 423 31 10817926
22 Dandrea MR Reiser PA Gumula NA Hertzog BM Andrade-Gordon P Application of triple immunohistochemistry to characterize amyloid plaque-associated inflammation in brains with Alzheimer’s disease Biotech Histochem 2001 3 76 2 97 106 11440311
23 Giovannini MG Scali C Prosperi C Bellucci A Vannucchi MG Rosi S Beta-amyloid-induced inflammation and cholinergic hypofunction in the rat brain in vivo: involvement of the p38MAPK pathway Neurobiol Dis 2002 11 11 2 257 74 12505419
24 Rose DP Gracheck PJ Vona-Davis L The Interactions of Obesity, Inflammation and Insulin Resistance in Breast Cancer Cancers (Basel) 2015 10 26 7 4 2147 68 26516917
25 Juhan-Vague I Morange PE Alessi MC The insulin resistance syndrome: implications for thrombosis and cardiovascular disease Pathophysiol Haemost Thromb 2002 Sep-Dec 32 5–6 269 73 13679655
26 You T Nicklas BJ Chronic inflammation: role of adipose tissue and modulation by weight loss Curr Diabetes Rev 2006 2 2 1 29 37 18220615
27 Holvoet P Relations between metabolic syndrome, oxidative stress and inflammation and cardiovascular disease Verh K Acad Geneeskd Belg 2008 70 3 193 219 18669160
28 Vykoukal D Davies MG Vascular biology of metabolic syndrome J Vasc Surg 2011 9 54 3 819 31 21439758
29 de la Monte SM Insulin resistance and Alzheimer’s disease BMB Rep 2009 8 31 42 8 475 81 19712582
30 Messier C Teutenberg K The role of insulin, insulin growth factor, and insulin-degrading enzyme in brain aging and Alzheimer’s disease Neural Plast 2005 12 4 311 28 16444902
31 Rivera EJ Goldin A Fulmer N Tavares R Wands JR de la Monte SM Insulin and insulin-like growth factor expression and function deteriorate with progression of Alzheimer’s disease: link to brain reductions in acetylcholine J Alzheimers Dis 2005 12 8 3 247 68 16340083
32 Talbot K Wang HY Kazi H Han LY Bakshi KP Stucky A Demonstrated brain insulin resistance in Alzheimer’s disease patients is associated with IGF-1 resistance, IRS-1 dysregulation, and cognitive decline J Clin Invest 2012 4 122 4 1316 38 22476197
33 Talbot K Brain insulin resistance in Alzheimer’s disease and its potential treatment with GLP-1 analogs Neurodegener Dis Manag 2014 4 1 31 40 24640977
34 Lee S Tong M Hang S Deochand C de la Monte S CSF and Brain Indices of Insulin Resistance, Oxidative Stress and Neuro-Inflammation in Early versus Late Alzheimer’s Disease J Alzheimers Dis Parkinsonism 2013 10 31 3 128 25035815
35 Tong M Dong M de la Monte SM Brain insulin-like growth factor and neurotrophin resistance in Parkinson’s disease and dementia with Lewy bodies: potential role of manganese neurotoxicity J Alzheimers Dis 2009 16 3 585 99 19276553
36 Clark IA Vissel B Inflammation-sleep interface in brain disease: TNF, insulin, orexin J Neuroinflammation 2014 3 21 11 51 24655719
37 Misiak B Leszek J Kiejna A Metabolic syndrome, mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease--the emerging role of systemic low-grade inflammation and adiposity Brain Res Bull 2012 11 1 89 3–4 144 9 22921944
38 Samaras K Sachdev PS Diabetes and the elderly brain: sweet memories? Ther Adv Endocrinol Metab 2012 12 3 6 189 96 23323191
39 Gaspar JM Baptista FI Macedo MP Ambrosio AF Inside the Diabetic Brain: Role of Different Players Involved in Cognitive Decline ACS Chem Neurosci 2016 2 17 7 2 131 42 26667832
40 de la Monte SM Wands JR Molecular indices of oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction occur early and often progress with severity of Alzheimer’s disease J Alzheimers Dis 2006 7 9 2 167 81 16873964
41 Cimini A Benedetti E Cristiano L Sebastiani P D’Amico MA D’Angelo B Expression of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs) and retinoic acid receptors (RXRs) in rat cortical neurons Neuroscience 2005 130 2 325 37 15664689
42 Collino M Patel NS Thiemermann C PPARs as new therapeutic targets for the treatment of cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injury Ther Adv Cardiovasc Dis 2008 6 2 3 179 97 19124421
43 Dunn SE Bhat R Straus DS Sobel RA Axtell R Johnson A Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor delta limits the expansion of pathogenic Th cells during central nervous system autoimmunity J Exp Med 2010 8 2 207 8 1599 608 20624891
44 Kalinin S Richardson JC Feinstein DL A PPARdelta agonist reduces amyloid burden and brain inflammation in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Curr Alzheimer Res 2009 10 6 5 431 7 19874267
45 Barroso E del Valle J Porquet D Vieira Santos AM Salvado L Rodriguez-Rodriguez R Tau hyperphosphorylation and increased BACE1 and RAGE levels in the cortex of PPARbeta/delta-null mice Biochim Biophys Acta 2013 8 1832 8 1241 8 23507144
46 de la Monte SM Tong M Lester-Coll N Plater M Jr Wands JR Therapeutic rescue of neurodegeneration in experimental type 3 diabetes: relevance to Alzheimer’s disease J Alzheimers Dis 2006 9 10 1 89 109 16988486
47 de la Monte SM Tong M Schiano I Didsbury J Improved Brain Insulin/IGF Signaling and Reduced Neuro-inflammation with T3D-959 in an Experimental Model of Sporadic Alzheimer’s Disease J Alzheimers Dis 2016 (In Press)
48 Malm T Mariani M Donovan LJ Neilson L Landreth GE Activation of the nuclear receptor PPARdelta is neuroprotective in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease through inhibition of inflammation J Neuroinflammation 2015 12 7 25592770
49 Barone E Di Domenico F Mancuso C Butterfield DA The Janus face of the heme oxygenase/biliverdin reductase system in Alzheimer disease: it’s time for reconciliation Neurobiol Dis 2014 2 62 144 59 24095978
50 Nunomura A Moreira PI Castellani RJ Lee HG Zhu X Smith MA Oxidative damage to RNA in aging and neurodegenerative disorders Neurotox Res 2012 10 22 3 231 48 22669748
51 Nunomura A Perry G Aliev G Hirai K Takeda A Balraj EK Oxidative damage is the earliest event in Alzheimer disease J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2001 8 60 8 759 67 11487050
52 Bonda DJ Wang X Lee HG Smith MA Perry G Zhu X Neuronal failure in Alzheimer’s disease: a view through the oxidative stress looking-glass Neurosci Bull 2014 4 30 2 243 52 24733654
53 de la Monte SM Luong T Neely TR Robinson D Wands JR Mitochondrial DNA damage as a mechanism of cell loss in Alzheimer’s disease Lab Invest 2000 8 80 8 1323 35 10950123
54 de la Monte SM Tong M Brain metabolic dysfunction at the core of Alzheimer’s disease Biochem Pharmacol 2014 4 15 88 4 548 59 24380887
55 Smith MA Perry G Free radical damage, iron, and Alzheimer’s disease J Neurol Sci 1995 12 134 Suppl 92 4 8847550
56 Bishop GM Robinson SR Liu Q Perry G Atwood CS Smith MA Iron: a pathological mediator of Alzheimer disease? Dev Neurosci 2002 24 2–3 184 7 12401957
57 Barbeito AG Garringer HJ Baraibar MA Gao X Arredondo M Nunez MT Abnormal iron metabolism and oxidative stress in mice expressing a mutant form of the ferritin light polypeptide gene J Neurochem 2009 5 109 4 1067 78 19519778
58 Castellani R Smith MA Richey PL Kalaria R Gambetti P Perry G Evidence for oxidative stress in Pick disease and corticobasal degeneration Brain Res 1995 10 23 696 1–2 268 71 8574681
59 Fawcett JR Bordayo EZ Jackson K Liu H Peterson J Svitak A Inactivation of the human brain muscarinic acetylcholine receptor by oxidative damage catalyzed by a low molecular weight endogenous inhibitor from Alzheimer’s brain is prevented by pyrophosphate analogs, bioflavonoids and other antioxidants Brain Res 2002 9 20 950 1–2 10 20 12231224
60 Navarro E Buendia I Parada E Leon R Jansen-Duerr P Pircher H Alpha7 nicotinic receptor activation protects against oxidative stress via heme-oxygenase I induction Biochem Pharmacol 2015 10 15 97 4 473 81 26212551
61 Fine JM Baillargeon AM Renner DB Hoerster NS Tokarev J Colton S Intranasal deferoxamine improves performance in radial arm water maze, stabilizes HIF-1alpha, and phosphorylates GSK3beta in P301L tau transgenic mice Exp Brain Res 2012 6 219 3 381 90 22547371
62 Hanson LR Fine JM Renner DB Svitak AL Burns RB Nguyen TM Intranasal delivery of deferoxamine reduces spatial memory loss in APP/PS1 mice Drug Deliv Transl Res 2012 6 2 3 160 8 25786865
63 Fine JM Renner DB Forsberg AC Cameron RA Galick BT Le C Intranasal deferoxamine engages multiple pathways to decrease memory loss in the APP/PS1 model of amyloid accumulation Neurosci Lett 2015 1 1 584 362 7 25445365
64 de la Monte SM Tong M Bowling N Moskal P si-RNA inhibition of brain insulin or insulin-like growth factor receptors causes developmental cerebellar abnormalities: relevance to fetal alcohol spectrum disorder Mol Brain 2011 4 13 21443795
65 Grunblatt E Bartl J Riederer P The link between iron, metabolic syndrome, and Alzheimer’s disease J Neural Transm (Vienna) 2011 3 118 3 371 9 20556444
66 Schipper HM Cisse S Stopa EG Expression of heme oxygenase-1 in the senescent and Alzheimer-diseased brain Ann Neurol 1995 6 37 6 758 68 7778849
67 Di Domenico F Barone E Mancuso C Perluigi M Cocciolo A Mecocci P HO-1/BVR-a system analysis in plasma from probable Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment subjects: a potential biochemical marker for the prediction of the disease J Alzheimers Dis 2012 32 2 277 89 22776971
68 Barone E Butterfield DA Insulin resistance in Alzheimer disease: Is heme oxygenase-1 an Achille’s heel? Neurobiol Dis 2015 12 84 69 77 25731746
69 Barone E Di Domenico F Sultana R Coccia R Mancuso C Perluigi M Heme oxygenase-1 posttranslational modifications in the brain of subjects with Alzheimer disease and mild cognitive impairment Free Radic Biol Med 2012 6 1–15 52 11–12 2292 301 22549002
70 Nandar W Connor JR HFE gene variants affect iron in the brain J Nutr 2011 4 1 141 4 729S 39S 21346098
71 Nielsen JE Jensen LN Krabbe K Hereditary haemochromatosis: a case of iron accumulation in the basal ganglia associated with a parkinsonian syndrome J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1995 9 59 3 318 21 7673967
72 Giambattistelli F Bucossi S Salustri C Panetta V Mariani S Siotto M Effects of hemochromatosis and transferrin gene mutations on iron dyshomeostasis, liver dysfunction and on the risk of Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 2012 8 33 8 1633 41 21514009
73 Percy M Somerville MJ Hicks M Garcia A Colelli T Wright E Risk factors for development of dementia in a unique six-year cohort study. I. An exploratory, pilot study of involvement of the E4 allele of apolipoprotein E, mutations of the hemochromatosis-HFE gene, type 2 diabetes, and stroke J Alzheimers Dis 2014 38 4 907 22 24081379
74 Stremmel W Niederau C Berger M Kley HK Kruskemper HL Strohmeyer G Abnormalities in estrogen, androgen, and insulin metabolism in idiopathic hemochromatosis Ann N Y Acad Sci 1988 526 209 23 3291683
75 Johnstone DM Graham RM Trinder D Riveros C Olynyk JK Scott RJ Changes in brain transcripts related to Alzheimer’s disease in a model of HFE hemochromatosis are not consistent with increased Alzheimer’s disease risk J Alzheimers Dis 2012 30 4 791 803 22466002
76 Connor JR Lee SY HFE mutations and Alzheimer’s disease J Alzheimers Dis 2006 11 10 2–3 267 76 17119292
77 Lehmann DJ Worwood M Ellis R Wimhurst VL Merryweather-Clarke AT Warden DR Iron genes, iron load and risk of Alzheimer’s disease J Med Genet 2006 10 43 10 e52 17047092
78 Lin M Zhao L Fan J Lian XG Ye JX Wu L Association between HFE polymorphisms and susceptibility to Alzheimer’s disease: a meta-analysis of 22 studies including 4,365 cases and 8,652 controls Mol Biol Rep 2012 3 39 3 3089 95 21701828
79 Horowitz MP Greenamyre JT Mitochondrial iron metabolism and its role in neurodegeneration J Alzheimers Dis 2010 20 Suppl 2 S551 68 20463401
80 Santambrogio P Dusi S Guaraldo M Rotundo LI Broccoli V Garavaglia B Mitochondrial iron and energetic dysfunction distinguish fibroblasts and induced neurons from pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration patients Neurobiol Dis 2015 9 81 144 53 25836419
81 Dusi S Valletta L Haack TB Tsuchiya Y Venco P Pasqualato S Exome sequence reveals mutations in CoA synthase as a cause of neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation Am J Hum Genet 2014 1 2 94 1 11 22 24360804
82 Matthes T Rustin P Trachsel H Darbellay R Costaridou S Xaidara A Different pathophysiological mechanisms of intramitochondrial iron accumulation in acquired and congenital sideroblastic anemia caused by mitochondrial DNA deletion Eur J Haematol 2006 8 77 2 169 74 16856911
83 Bonda DJ Wang X Perry G Smith MA Zhu X Mitochondrial dynamics in Alzheimer’s disease: opportunities for future treatment strategies Drugs Aging 2010 3 1 27 3 181 92 20210366
84 Sangchot P Sharma S Chetsawang B Porter J Govitrapong P Ebadi M Deferoxamine attenuates iron-induced oxidative stress and prevents mitochondrial aggregation and alpha-synuclein translocation in SK-N-SH cells in culture Dev Neurosci 2002 24 2–3 143 53 12401952
85 Daulatzai MA Quintessential risk factors: their role in promoting cognitive dysfunction and Alzheimer’s disease Neurochem Res 2012 12 37 12 2627 58 22886562
86 Schaffer C Sarad N DeCrumpe A Goswami D Herrmann S Morales J Biomarkers in the Diagnosis and Prognosis of Alzheimer’s Disease J Lab Autom 2015 10 20 5 589 600 25424384
87 de Leon MJ George AE Ferris SH Rosenbloom S Christman DR Gentes CI Regional correlation of PET and CT in senile dementia of the Alzheimer type AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 1983 May-Jun 4 3 553 6 6410795
88 Faulstich ME Brain imaging in dementia of the Alzheimer type Int J Neurosci 1991 3 57 1–2 39 49 1938155
89 Waldron AM Wintmolders C Bottelbergs A Kelley JB Schmidt ME Stroobants S In vivo molecular neuroimaging of glucose utilization and its association with fibrillar amyloid-beta load in aged APPPS1-21 mice Alzheimers Res Ther 2015 7 1 76 26666747
90 Wurtman R Biomarkers in the diagnosis and management of Alzheimer’s disease Metabolism 2015 3 64 3 Suppl 1 S47 50 25468144
91 de la Monte SM Wands JR Review of insulin and insulin-like growth factor expression, signaling, and malfunction in the central nervous system: relevance to Alzheimer’s disease J Alzheimers Dis 2005 2 7 1 45 61 15750214
92 de la Monte SM Contributions of brain insulin resistance and deficiency in amyloid-related neurodegeneration in Alzheimer’s disease Drugs 2012 1 1 72 1 49 66 22191795
93 Shuvaev VV Laffont I Serot JM Fujii J Taniguchi N Siest G Increased protein glycation in cerebrospinal fluid of Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 2001 May-Jun 22 3 397 402 11378244
94 Zafari S Backes C Meese E Keller A Circulating Biomarker Panels in Alzheimer’s Disease Gerontology 2015 61 6 497 503 25720553
95 Benedict C Frey WH 2nd Schioth HB Schultes B Born J Hallschmid M Intranasal insulin as a therapeutic option in the treatment of cognitive impairments Exp Gerontol 2011 Feb-Mar 46 2–3 112 5 20849944
96 de la Monte SM Intranasal insulin therapy for cognitive impairment and neurodegeneration: current state of the art Expert opinion on drug delivery 2013 12 10 12 1699 709 24215447
97 Kidd PM Alzheimer’s disease, amnestic mild cognitive impairment, and age-associated memory impairment: current understanding and progress toward integrative prevention Altern Med Rev 2008 6 13 2 85 115 18590347
98 Reger MA Watson GS Green PS Wilkinson CW Baker LD Cholerton B Intranasal insulin improves cognition and modulates beta-amyloid in early AD Neurology 2008 2 5 70 6 440 8 17942819
99 de la Monte SM Wands JR Alzheimer’s disease is type 3 diabetes: Evidence reviewed J Diabetes Sci Technol 2008 2 6 1101 13 19885299
100 Steen E Terry BM Rivera EJ Cannon JL Neely TR Tavares R Impaired insulin and insulin-like growth factor expression and signaling mechanisms in Alzheimer’s disease--is this type 3 diabetes? J Alzheimers Dis 2005 2 7 1 63 80 15750215
101 Moloney AM Griffin RJ Timmons S O’Connor R Ravid R O’Neill C Defects in IGF-1 receptor, insulin receptor and IRS-1/2 in Alzheimer’s disease indicate possible resistance to IGF-1 and insulin signalling Neurobiol Aging 2010 2 31 2 224 43 18479783
102 Zeki Al Hazzouri A Stone KL Haan MN Yaffe K Leptin, mild cognitive impairment, and dementia among elderly women J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2013 2 68 2 175 80 22859388
103 Cole GM Frautschy SA The role of insulin and neurotrophic factor signaling in brain aging and Alzheimer’s Disease Exp Gerontol 2007 Jan-Feb 42 1–2 10 21 17049785
104 Calsolaro V Edison P Novel GLP-1 (Glucagon-Like Peptide-1) Analogues and Insulin in the Treatment for Alzheimer’s Disease and Other Neurodegenerative Diseases CNS Drugs 2015 12 29 12 1023 39 26666230
105 Holscher C The incretin hormones glucagonlike peptide 1 and glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide are neuroprotective in mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimers Dement 2014 2 10 1 Suppl S47 54 24529525
106 Ji C Xue GF Li G Li D Holscher C Neuroprotective effects of glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide in Alzheimer’s disease Rev Neurosci 2016 1 27 1 61 70 26351802
107 Freeman JS Role of the incretin pathway in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes mellitus Cleve Clin J Med 2009 12 76 Suppl 5 S12 9 19952298
108 Farr OM Gavrieli A Mantzoros CS Leptin applications in 2015: what have we learned about leptin and obesity? Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes 2015 10 22 5 353 9 26313897
109 Yang XN Zhang CY Wang B-W Zhu SG Zheng RM Leptin Signalings and Leptin Resistance Sheng Li Ke Xue Jin Zhan 2015 10 46 5 327 33 26904854
110 Civelek S Konukoglu D Erdenen F Uzun H Serum neurotrophic factor levels in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: relationship to metabolic syndrome components Clin Lab 2013 59 3–4 369 74 23724627
111 Hristova M Aloe L Metabolic syndrome--neurotrophic hypothesis Med Hypotheses 2006 66 3 545 9 16298496
112 Aguirre GA De Ita JR de la Garza RG Castilla-Cortazar I Insulin-like growth factor-1 deficiency and metabolic syndrome J Transl Med 2016 1 06 14 3 26733412
113 Cubbon RM Kearney MT Wheatcroft SB Endothelial IGF-1 Receptor Signalling in Diabetes and Insulin Resistance Trends Endocrinol Metab 2016 2 27 2 96 104 26712712
114 Ono M Ichihara J Nonomura T Itakura Y Taiji M Nakayama C Brain-derived neurotrophic factor reduces blood glucose level in obese diabetic mice but not in normal mice Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1997 9 18 238 2 633 7 9299565
115 Baeza-Raja B Li P Le Moan N Sachs BD Schachtrup C Davalos D p75 neurotrophin receptor regulates glucose homeostasis and insulin sensitivity Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2012 4 10 109 15 5838 43 22460790
116 Ramirez S Claret M Hypothalamic ER stress: A bridge between leptin resistance and obesity FEBS Lett 2015 6 22 589 14 1678 87 25913783
117 Thon M Hosoi T Ozawa K Possible Integrative Actions of Leptin and Insulin Signaling in the Hypothalamus Targeting Energy Homeostasis Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) 2016 7 138 27812350
118 Meier JJ Nauck MA Is the diminished incretin effect in type 2 diabetes just an epi-phenomenon of impaired beta-cell function? Diabetes 2010 5 59 5 1117 25 20427697
119 Joao AL Reis F Fernandes R The incretin system ABCs in obesity and diabetes - novel therapeutic strategies for weight loss and beyond Obes Rev 2016 7 17 7 553 72 27125902
120 de la Monte SM Neusner A Chu J Lawton M Epidemiological Trends Strongly Suggest Exposures as Etiologic Agents in the Pathogenesis of Sporadic Alzheimer’s Disease, Diabetes Mellitus, and Non-Alcoholic Steatohepatitis J Alzheimers Dis 2009 4 10 17 3 519 29 19363256
121 Pedditizi E Peters R Beckett N The risk of overweight/obesity in mid-life and late life for the development of dementia: a systematic review and meta-analysis of longitudinal studies Age Ageing 2016 1 45 1 14 21 26764391
122 Alosco ML Gunstad J The negative effects of obesity and poor glycemic control on cognitive function: a proposed model for possible mechanisms Curr Diab Rep 2014 6 14 6 495 24752836
123 Luchsinger JA Reitz C Patel B Tang MX Manly JJ Mayeux R Relation of diabetes to mild cognitive impairment Arch Neurol 2007 4 64 4 570 5 17420320
124 Noble JM Manly JJ Schupf N Tang MX Luchsinger JA Type 2 diabetes and ethnic disparities in cognitive impairment Ethn Dis 2012 Winter 22 1 38 44 22774307
125 Naderali EK Ratcliffe SH Dale MC Obesity and Alzheimer’s disease: a link between body weight and cognitive function in old age Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen 2009 Dec-2010 Jan 24 6 445 9
126 Drab SR Recognizing the rising impact of diabetes in seniors and implications for its management Consult Pharm 2009 6 24 Suppl B 5 10
127 Roriz-Filho JS Sa-Roriz TM Rosset I Camozzato AL Santos AC Chaves ML (Pre)diabetes, brain aging, and cognition Biochim Biophys Acta 2009 5 1792 5 432 43 19135149
128 de la Monte SM Metabolic derangements mediate cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease: role of peripheral insulin-resistance diseases Panminerva medica 2012 9 54 3 171 8 22801434
129 Fotuhi M Do D Jack C Modifiable factors that alter the size of the hippocampus with ageing Nat Rev Neurol 2012 4 8 4 189 202 22410582
130 Sridhar GR Lakshmi G Nagamani G Emerging links between type 2 diabetes and Alzheimer’s disease World J Diabetes 2015 6 10 6 5 744 51 26069723
131 de la Monte SM Relationships between diabetes and cognitive impairment Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 2014 3 43 1 245 67 24582101
132 Li X Song D Leng SX Link between type 2 diabetes and Alzheimer’s disease: from epidemiology to mechanism and treatment Clin Interv Aging 2015 10 549 60 25792818
133 Kim B Feldman EL Insulin resistance as a key link for the increased risk of cognitive impairment in the metabolic syndrome Exp Mol Med 2015 47 e149 25766618
134 Cholerton B Baker LD Craft S Insulin resistance and pathological brain ageing Diabet Med 2011 12 28 12 1463 75 21974744
135 Frisardi V Solfrizzi V Seripa D Capurso C Santamato A Sancarlo D Metabolic-cognitive syndrome: a cross-talk between metabolic syndrome and Alzheimer’s disease Ageing Res Rev 2010 10 9 4 399 417 20444434
136 Ho L Qin W Pompl PN Xiang Z Wang J Zhao Z Diet-induced insulin resistance promotes amyloidosis in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease FASEB J 2004 5 18 7 902 4 15033922
137 Moroz N Tong M Longato L Xu H de la Monte SM Limited Alzheimer-type neurodegeneration in experimental obesity and type 2 diabetes mellitus J Alzheimers Dis 2008 9 15 1 29 44 18780965
138 de la Monte SM Longato L Tong M Wands JR Insulin resistance and neurodegeneration: roles of obesity, type 2 diabetes mellitus and non-alcoholic steatohepatitis Curr Opin Investig Drugs 2009 10 10 10 1049 60
139 Nagoshi S Liver diseases Nihon Rinsho 2014 4 72 4 726 9 24796105
140 Lyn-Cook LE Jr Lawton M Tong M Silbermann E Longato L Jiao P Hepatic ceramide may mediate brain insulin resistance and neurodegeneration in type 2 diabetes and non-alcoholic steatohepatitis J Alzheimers Dis 2009 16 4 715 29 19387108
141 Meda SA Narayanan B Liu J Perrone-Bizzozero NI Stevens MC Calhoun VD A large scale multivariate parallel ICA method reveals novel imaging-genetic relationships for Alzheimer’s disease in the ADNI cohort Neuroimage 2012 4 15 60 3 1608 21 22245343
142 Demarin V Lisak M Morovic S Mediterranean diet in healthy lifestyle and prevention of stroke Acta Clin Croat 2011 3 50 1 67 77 22034786
143 Polidori MC Preventive benefits of natural nutrition and lifestyle counseling against Alzheimer’s disease onset J Alzheimers Dis 2014 42 Suppl 4 S475 82 25238764
144 Beydoun MA Beydoun HA Gamaldo AA Teel A Zonderman AB Wang Y Epidemiologic studies of modifiable factors associated with cognition and dementia: systematic review and meta-analysis BMC Public Health 2014 14 643 24962204
145 Kalaria RN Vascular basis for brain degeneration: faltering controls and risk factors for dementia Nutr Rev 2010 12 68 Suppl 2 S74 87 21091952
146 Stranahan AM Mattson MP Bidirectional metabolic regulation of neurocognitive function Neurobiol Learn Mem 2011 11 96 4 507 16 21236352
147 Rigacci S Olive Oil Phenols as Promising Multi-targeting Agents Against Alzheimer’s Disease Adv Exp Med Biol 2015 863 1 20 26092624
148 Lehtisalo J Lindstrom J Ngandu T Kivipelto M Ahtiluoto S Ilanne-Parikka P Diabetes, glycaemia, and cognition-a secondary analysis of the Finnish Diabetes Prevention Study Diabetes Metab Res Rev 2016 1 32 1 102 10 26172529
149 Moreira PI High-sugar diets, type 2 diabetes and Alzheimer’s disease Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care 2013 7 16 4 440 5 23657152
150 Moreno-Gonzalez I Estrada LD Sanchez-Mejias E Soto C Smoking exacerbates amyloid pathology in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Nat Commun 2013 4 1495 23422663
151 Daulatzai MA Neurotoxic saboteurs: straws that break the hippo’s (hippocampus) back drive cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s Disease Neurotox Res 2013 10 24 3 407 59 23820984
152 Calderon-Garciduenas L Maronpot RR Torres-Jardon R Henriquez-Roldan C Schoonhoven R Acuna-Ayala H DNA damage in nasal and brain tissues of canines exposed to air pollutants is associated with evidence of chronic brain inflammation and neurodegeneration Toxicol Pathol 2003 Sep-Oct 31 5 524 38 14692621
153 Calderon-Garciduenas L Reed W Maronpot RR Henriquez-Roldan C Delgado-Chavez R Calderon-Garciduenas A Brain inflammation and Alzheimer’s-like pathology in individuals exposed to severe air pollution Toxicol Pathol 2004 Nov-Dec 32 6 650 8 15513908
154 de la Monte SM Type 3 diabetes is sporadic Alzheimers disease: mini-review Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 2014 12 24 12 1954 60 25088942
155 de la Monte SM Tong M Mechanisms of nitrosamine-mediated neurodegeneration: potential relevance to sporadic Alzheimer’s disease J Alzheimers Dis 2009 17 4 817 25 19542621
156 de la Monte SM Tong M Lawton M Longato L Nitrosamine exposure exacerbates high fat diet-mediated type 2 diabetes mellitus, non-alcoholic steatohepatitis, and neurodegeneration with cognitive impairment Mol Neurodegener 2009 4 54 20034403
157 Tong M Neusner A Longato L Lawton M Wands JR de la Monte SM Nitrosamine exposure causes insulin resistance diseases: relevance to type 2 diabetes mellitus, non-alcoholic steatohepatitis, and Alzheimer’s disease J Alzheimers Dis 2009 17 4 827 44 20387270
158 Yalcin E de la Monte S Tobacco nitrosamines as culprits in disease: mechanisms reviewed J Physiol Biochem 2016 3 72 1 107 20 26767836
159 Middleton LE Yaffe K Promising strategies for the prevention of dementia Arch Neurol 2009 10 66 10 1210 5 19822776
160 Standridge JB Pharmacotherapeutic approaches to the prevention of Alzheimer’s disease Am J Geriatr Pharmacother 2004 6 2 2 119 32 15555488
161 Boimel M Grigoriadis N Lourbopoulos A Touloumi O Rosenmann D Abramsky O Statins reduce the neurofibrillary tangle burden in a mouse model of tauopathy J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2009 3 68 3 314 25 19225406
162 Piedrahita D Hernandez I Lopez-Tobon A Fedorov D Obara B Manjunath BS Silencing of CDK5 reduces neurofibrillary tangles in transgenic alzheimer’s mice J Neurosci 2010 10 20 30 42 13966 76 20962218
163 Leroy K Ando K Heraud C Yilmaz Z Authelet M Boeynaems JM Lithium treatment arrests the development of neurofibrillary tangles in mutant tau transgenic mice with advanced neurofibrillary pathology J Alzheimers Dis 2010 19 2 705 19 20110614
164 Villaflores OB Chen YJ Chen CP Yeh JM Wu TY Curcuminoids and resveratrol as anti-Alzheimer agents Taiwan J Obstet Gynecol 2012 12 51 4 515 25 23276553
165 Lazar AN Mourtas S Youssef I Parizot C Dauphin A Delatour B Curcumin-conjugated nanoliposomes with high affinity for Abeta deposits: possible applications to Alzheimer disease Nanomedicine 2013 7 9 5 712 21 23220328
166 Hamaguchi T Ono K Yamada M REVIEW: Curcumin and Alzheimer’s disease CNS Neurosci Ther 2010 10 16 5 285 97 20406252
167 Olmos-Alonso A Schetters ST Sri S Askew K Mancuso R Vargas-Caballero M Pharmacological targeting of CSF1R inhibits microglial proliferation and prevents the progression of Alzheimer’s-like pathology Brain 2016 3 139 Pt 3 891 907 26747862
168 Goozee KG Shah TM Sohrabi HR Rainey-Smith SR Brown B Verdile G Examining the potential clinical value of curcumin in the prevention and diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease Br J Nutr 2016 2 14 115 3 449 65 26652155
169 Prakash A Kumar A Implicating the role of lycopene in restoration of mitochondrial enzymes and BDNF levels in beta-amyloid induced Alzheimers disease Eur J Pharmacol 2014 10 15 741 104 11 25066110
170 Mancuso C Bates TE Butterfield DA Calafato S Cornelius C De Lorenzo A Natural antioxidants in Alzheimer’s disease Expert Opin Investig Drugs 2007 12 16 12 1921 31
171 Grundman M Grundman M Delaney P Antioxidant strategies for Alzheimer’s disease Proc Nutr Soc 2002 5 61 2 191 202 12133201
172 Kishi Y Schmelzer JD Yao JK Zollman PJ Nickander KK Tritschler HJ Alpha-lipoic acid: effect on glucose uptake, sorbitol pathway, and energy metabolism in experimental diabetic neuropathy Diabetes 1999 10 48 10 2045 51 10512372
173 Mitsui Y Schmelzer JD Zollman PJ Mitsui M Tritschler HJ Low PA Alpha-lipoic acid provides neuroprotection from ischemia-reperfusion injury of peripheral nerve J Neurol Sci 1999 2 1 163 1 11 6 10223404
174 Hardas SS Sultana R Clark AM Beckett TL Szweda LI Murphy MP Oxidative modification of lipoic acid by HNE in Alzheimer disease brain Redox Biol 2013 1 80 5 24024140
175 Grundman M Vitamin E and Alzheimer disease: the basis for additional clinical trials Am J Clin Nutr 2000 2 71 2 630S 6S 10681271
176 Isaac MG Quinn R Tabet N Vitamin E for Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2008 3 CD002854 18646084
177 Wattanapenpaiboon N Wahlqvist MW Phytonutrient deficiency: the place of palm fruit Asia Pac J Clin Nutr 2003 12 3 363 8 14506002
178 Scali C Giovannini MG Prosperi C Bellucci A Pepeu G Casamenti F The selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor rofecoxib suppresses brain inflammation and protects cholinergic neurons from excitotoxic degeneration in vivo Neuroscience 2003 117 4 909 19 12654342
179 Christen Y Ginkgo biloba and neurodegenerative disorders Front Biosci 2004 9 1 9 3091 104 15353340
180 Wang JZ Wang ZF Role of melatonin in Alzheimer-like neurodegeneration Acta Pharmacol Sin 2006 1 27 1 41 9 16364209
181 Ancelin ML Christen Y Ritchie K Is antioxidant therapy a viable alternative for mild cognitive impairment? Examination of the evidence Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 2007 24 1 1 19 17495472
182 Farina N Isaac MG Clark AR Rusted J Tabet N Vitamin E for Alzheimer’s dementia and mild cognitive impairment Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012 11 CD002854 23152215
183 Polidori MC Nelles G Antioxidant clinical trials in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease - challenges and perspectives Curr Pharm Des 2014 20 18 3083 92 24079767
184 Mecocci P Polidori MC Antioxidant clinical trials in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease Biochim Biophys Acta 2012 5 1822 5 631 8 22019723
185 Levey A Lah J Goldstein F Steenland K Bliwise D Mild cognitive impairment: an opportunity to identify patients at high risk for progression to Alzheimer’s disease Clin Ther 2006 7 28 7 991 1001 16990077
186 McGeer PL McGeer EG The amyloid cascade-inflammatory hypothesis of Alzheimer disease: implications for therapy Acta Neuropathol 2013 10 126 4 479 97 24052108
187 Nicoll JA Wilkinson D Holmes C Steart P Markham H Weller RO Neuropathology of human Alzheimer disease after immunization with amyloid-beta peptide: a case report Nat Med 2003 4 9 4 448 52 12640446
188 Bombois S Maurage CA Gompel M Deramecourt V Mackowiak-Cordoliani MA Black RS Absence of beta-amyloid deposits after immunization in Alzheimer disease with Lewy body dementia Arch Neurol 2007 4 64 4 583 7 17420322
189 Lemere CA Developing novel immunogens for a safe and effective Alzheimer’s disease vaccine Prog Brain Res 2009 175 83 93 19660650
190 Kuzuhara S Treatment strategy of Alzheimer’s disease: pause in clinical trials of Abeta vaccine and next steps Brain Nerve 2010 7 62 7 659 66 20675870
191 Kobe T Witte AV Schnelle A Lesemann A Fabian S Tesky VA Combined omega-3 fatty acids, aerobic exercise and cognitive stimulation prevents decline in gray matter volume of the frontal, parietal and cingulate cortex in patients with mild cognitive impairment Neuroimage 2016 5 1 131 226 38 26433119
192 Xu J Yeon JE Chang H Tison G Chen GJ Wands J Ethanol impairs insulin-stimulated neuronal survival in the developing brain: role of PTEN phosphatase J Biol Chem 2003 7 18 278 29 26929 37 12700235
193 Chiu SL Chen CM Cline HT Insulin receptor signaling regulates synapse number, dendritic plasticity, and circuit function in vivo Neuron 2008 6 12 58 5 708 19 18549783
194 Sun Q Li J Gao F New insights into insulin: The anti-inflammatory effect and its clinical relevance World J Diabetes 2014 4 15 5 2 89 96 24765237
195 Vandal M White PJ Tremblay C St-Amour I Chevrier G Emond V Insulin reverses the high-fat diet-induced increase in brain Abeta and improves memory in an animal model of Alzheimer disease Diabetes 2014 12 63 12 4291 301 25008180
196 Zhao L Teter B Morihara T Lim GP Ambegaokar SS Ubeda OJ Insulin-degrading enzyme as a downstream target of insulin receptor signaling cascade: implications for Alzheimer’s disease intervention J Neurosci 2004 12 8 24 49 11120 6 15590928
197 Soscia SJ Tong M Xu XJ Cohen AC Chu J Wands JR Chronic gestational exposure to ethanol causes insulin and IGF resistance and impairs acetylcholine homeostasis in the brain Cell Mol Life Sci 2006 9 63 17 2039 56 16909201
198 Jauch-Chara K Friedrich A Rezmer M Melchert UH HGS-E Hallschmid M Intranasal insulin suppresses food intake via enhancement of brain energy levels in humans Diabetes 2012 9 61 9 2261 8 22586589
199 Schilling TM Ferreira de Sa DS Westerhausen R Strelzyk F Larra MF Hallschmid M Intranasal insulin increases regional cerebral blood flow in the insular cortex in men independently of cortisol manipulation Hum Brain Mapp 2014 5 35 5 1944 56 23907764
200 Hanson LR Frey WH 2nd Intranasal delivery bypasses the blood-brain barrier to target therapeutic agents to the central nervous system and treat neurodegenerative disease BMC Neurosci 2008 9 Suppl 3 S5
201 Williams GS Intranasal Drug Delivery Bypasses the Blood-Brain Barrier Neurology Reviews 2016 24 4 40 1
202 Born J Lange T Kern W McGregor GP Bickel U Fehm HL Sniffing neuropeptides: a transnasal approach to the human brain Nat Neurosci 2002 6 5 6 514 6 11992114
203 Freiherr J Hallschmid M Frey WH 2nd Brunner YF Chapman CD Holscher C Intranasal insulin as a treatment for Alzheimer’s disease: a review of basic research and clinical evidence CNS Drugs 2013 7 27 7 505 14 23719722
204 Alagiakrishnan K Sankaralingam S Ghosh M Mereu L Senior P Antidiabetic drugs and their potential role in treating mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease Discov Med 2013 12 16 90 277 86 24333407
205 Chen Y Zhang J Zhang B Gong CX Targeting Insulin Signaling for the Treatment of Alzheimer’s Disease Curr Top Med Chem 2016 16 5 485 92 26268336
206 Reger MA Watson GS Frey WH 2nd Baker LD Cholerton B Keeling ML Effects of intranasal insulin on cognition in memory-impaired older adults: modulation by APOE genotype Neurobiol Aging 2006 3 27 3 451 8 15964100
207 Reger MA Watson GS Green PS Baker LD Cholerton B Fishel MA Intranasal insulin administration dose-dependently modulates verbal memory and plasma amyloid-beta in memory-impaired older adults J Alzheimers Dis 2008 4 13 3 323 31 18430999
208 Claxton A Baker LD Hanson A Trittschuh EH Cholerton B Morgan A Long-acting intranasal insulin detemir improves cognition for adults with mild cognitive impairment or early-stage Alzheimer’s disease dementia J Alzheimers Dis 2015 44 3 897 906 25374101
209 Hirsch IB Franek E Mersebach H Bardtrum L Hermansen K Safety and efficacy of insulin degludec/insulin aspart with bolus mealtime insulin aspart compared with standard basal-bolus treatment in people with Type 1 diabetes: 1-year results from a randomized clinical trial (BOOST(R) T1) Diabet Med 2016 1 16
210 Christiansen JS Niskanen L Rasmussen S Johansen T Fulcher G Lower rates of hypoglycemia during maintenance treatment with insulin degludec/insulin aspart versus biphasic insulin aspart 30: a combined analysis of two Phase 3a studies in type 2 diabetes J Diabetes 2016 9 8 5 720 8 26612062
211 Kalra S Gupta Y Clinical use of Insulin Degludec: Practical Experience and Pragmatic Suggestions N Am J Med Sci 2015 3 7 3 81 5 25838998
212 Doyle ME Egan JM Mechanisms of action of glucagon-like peptide 1 in the pancreas Pharmacol Ther 2007 3 113 3 546 93 17306374
213 Long-Smith CM Manning S McClean PL Coakley MF O’Halloran DJ Holscher C The diabetes drug liraglutide ameliorates aberrant insulin receptor localisation and signalling in parallel with decreasing both amyloid-beta plaque and glial pathology in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Neuromolecular Med 2013 3 15 1 102 14 23011726
214 Irwin N Gault V Flatt PR Therapeutic potential of the original incretin hormone glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide: diabetes, obesity, osteoporosis and Alzheimer’s disease? Expert Opin Investig Drugs 2010 9 19 9 1039 48
215 Yabe D Seino Y Incretin actions beyond the pancreas: lessons from knockout mice Curr Opin Pharmacol 2013 12 13 6 946 53 24095602
216 Goke R Larsen PJ Mikkelsen JD Sheikh SP Distribution of GLP-1 binding sites in the rat brain: evidence that exendin-4 is a ligand of brain GLP-1 binding sites Eur J Neurosci 1995 11 1 7 11 2294 300 8563978
217 Merchenthaler I Lane M Shughrue P Distribution of pre-pro-glucagon and glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor messenger RNAs in the rat central nervous system J Comp Neurol 1999 1 11 403 2 261 80 9886047
218 Richards P Parker HE Adriaenssens AE Hodgson JM Cork SC Trapp S Identification and characterization of GLP-1 receptor-expressing cells using a new transgenic mouse model Diabetes 2014 4 63 4 1224 33 24296712
219 Alhadeff AL Rupprecht LE Hayes MR GLP-1 neurons in the nucleus of the solitary tract project directly to the ventral tegmental area and nucleus accumbens to control for food intake Endocrinology 2012 2 153 2 647 58 22128031
220 Tang-Christensen M Larsen PJ Goke R Fink-Jensen A Jessop DS Moller M Central administration of GLP-1-(7-36) amide inhibits food and water intake in rats Am J Physiol 1996 10 271 4 Pt 2 R848 56 8897973
221 Turton MD O’Shea D Gunn I Beak SA Edwards CM Meeran K A role for glucagon-like peptide-1 in the central regulation of feeding Nature 1996 1 4 379 6560 69 72 8538742
222 Kastin AJ Akerstrom V Entry of exendin-4 into brain is rapid but may be limited at high doses Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord 2003 3 27 3 313 8 12629557
223 Kanoski SE Fortin SM Arnold M Grill HJ Hayes MR Peripheral and central GLP-1 receptor populations mediate the anorectic effects of peripherally administered GLP-1 receptor agonists, liraglutide and exendin-4 Endocrinology 2011 8 152 8 3103 12 21693680
224 Chan SW Lin G Yew DT Rudd JA A physiological role of glucagon-like peptide-1 receptors in the central nervous system of Suncus murinus (house musk shrew) Eur J Pharmacol 2011 10 1 668 1–2 340 6 21756894
225 Farr S Baker C Naples M Taher J Iqbal J Hussain M Central Nervous System Regulation of Intestinal Lipoprotein Metabolism by Glucagon-Like Peptide-1 via a Brain-Gut Axis Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2015 5 35 5 1092 100 25675997
226 Griffioen KJ Wan R Okun E Wang X Lovett-Barr MR Li Y GLP-1 receptor stimulation depresses heart rate variability and inhibits neurotransmission to cardiac vagal neurons Cardiovasc Res 2011 1 1 89 1 72 8 20736238
227 Rachmany L Tweedie D Li Y Rubovitch V Holloway HW Miller J Exendin-4 induced glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor activation reverses behavioral impairments of mild traumatic brain injury in mice Age (Dordr) 2013 10 35 5 1621 36 22892942
228 Duffy AM Holscher C The incretin analogue D-Ala2GIP reduces plaque load, astrogliosis and oxidative stress in an APP/PS1 mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Neuroscience 2013 1 3 228 294 300 23103794
229 Garcia-Casares N Garcia-Arnes JA Gomez-Huelgas R Valdivielso-Felices P Garcia-Arias C Gonzalez-Santos P Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) mimetics: a new treatment for Alzheimer’s disease? Rev Neurol 2014 12 1 59 11 517 24 25418147
230 Holscher C Drugs developed for treatment of diabetes show protective effects in Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases Sheng Li Xue Bao 2014 10 25 66 5 497 510 25331995
231 Holscher C Insulin, incretins and other growth factors as potential novel treatments for Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases Biochem Soc Trans 2014 4 42 2 593 9 24646283
232 Irwin N Flatt PR New perspectives on exploitation of incretin peptides for the treatment of diabetes and related disorders World J Diabetes 2015 11 10 6 15 1285 95 26557956
233 Kornelius E Lin CL Chang HH Li HH Huang WN Yang YS DPP-4 Inhibitor Linagliptin Attenuates Abeta-induced Cytotoxicity through Activation of AMPK in Neuronal Cells CNS Neurosci Ther 2015 7 21 7 549 57 26010513
234 Gejl M Gjedde A Egefjord L Moller A Hansen SB Vang K In Alzheimer’s Disease, 6-Month Treatment with GLP-1 Analog Prevents Decline of Brain Glucose Metabolism: Randomized, Placebo-Controlled, Double-Blind Clinical Trial Front Aging Neurosci 2016 8 108 27252647
235 Liu X Foo G Lim WP Ravikumar S Sim SH Win MS Sulphonylurea usage in melioidosis is associated with severe disease and suppressed immune response PLoS Negl Trop Dis 2014 4 8 4 e2795 24762472
236 Moore EM Mander AG Ames D Kotowicz MA Carne RP Brodaty H Increased risk of cognitive impairment in patients with diabetes is associated with metformin Diabetes Care 2013 10 36 10 2981 7 24009301
237 Wheeler S Moore K Forsberg CW Riley K Floyd JS Smith NL Mortality among veterans with type 2 diabetes initiating metformin, sulfonylurea or rosiglitazone monotherapy Diabetologia 2013 9 56 9 1934 43 23797633
238 Ng TP Feng L Yap KB Lee TS Tan CH Winblad B Long-term metformin usage and cognitive function among older adults with diabetes J Alzheimers Dis 2014 41 1 61 8 24577463
239 Luchsinger JA Perez T Chang H Mehta P Steffener J Pradabhan G Metformin in Amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment: Results of a Pilot Randomized Placebo Controlled Clinical Trial J Alzheimers Dis 2016 51 2 501 14 26890736
240 Kliewer SA Lehmann JM Milburn MV Willson TM The PPARs and PXRs: nuclear xenobiotic receptors that define novel hormone signaling pathways Recent Prog Horm Res 1999 54 345 67 discussion 67–8 10548883
241 Bright JJ Kanakasabai S Chearwae W Chakraborty S PPAR Regulation of Inflammatory Signaling in CNS Diseases PPAR Res 2008 2008 658520 18670616
242 Fuentes L Roszer T Ricote M Inflammatory mediators and insulin resistance in obesity: role of nuclear receptor signaling in macrophages Mediators Inflamm 2010 2010 219583 20508742
243 Gilde AJ Van Bilsen M Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARS): regulators of gene expression in heart and skeletal muscle Acta Physiol Scand 2003 8 178 4 425 34 12864748
244 Lee CH Olson P Evans RM Minireview: lipid metabolism, metabolic diseases, and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors Endocrinology 2003 6 144 6 2201 7 12746275
245 Schoonjans K Staels B Auwerx J The peroxisome proliferator activated receptors (PPARS) and their effects on lipid metabolism and adipocyte differentiation Biochim Biophys Acta 1996 7 26 1302 2 93 109 8695669
246 Watson GS Cholerton BA Reger MA Baker LD Plymate SR Asthana S Preserved cognition in patients with early Alzheimer disease and amnestic mild cognitive impairment during treatment with rosiglitazone: a preliminary study Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 2005 11 13 11 950 8 16286438
247 Abbatecola AM Lattanzio F Molinari AM Cioffi M Mansi L Rambaldi P Rosiglitazone and cognitive stability in older individuals with type 2 diabetes and mild cognitive impairment Diabetes Care 2010 8 33 8 1706 11 20435794
248 Chen J Li S Sun W Li J Anti-diabetes drug pioglitazone ameliorates synaptic defects in AD transgenic mice by inhibiting cyclin-dependent kinase5 activity PLoS One 2015 10 4 e0123864 25875370
249 Toba J Nikkuni M Ishizeki M Yoshii A Watamura N Inoue T PPARgamma agonist pioglitazone improves cerebellar dysfunction at pre-Abeta deposition stage in APPswe/PS1dE9 Alzheimer’s disease model mice Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2016 5 13 473 4 1039 44 27059136
250 Zou C Shi Y Ohli J Schuller U Dorostkar MM Herms J Neuroinflammation impairs adaptive structural plasticity of dendritic spines in a preclinical model of Alzheimer’s disease Acta Neuropathol 2016 2 131 2 235 46 26724934
251 Roses AD Saunders AM Lutz MW Zhang N Hariri AR Asin KE New applications of disease genetics and pharmacogenetics to drug development Curr Opin Pharmacol 2014 2 14 81 9 24565016
252 Crenshaw DG Asin K Gottschalk WK Liang Z Zhang N Roses AD Effects of low doses of pioglitazone on resting-state functional connectivity in conscious rat brain PLoS One 2015 10 2 e0117973 25671601
253 Iwashita A Muramatsu Y Yamazaki T Muramoto M Kita Y Yamazaki S Neuroprotective efficacy of the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor delta-selective agonists in vitro and in vivo J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2007 3 320 3 1087 96 17167170
254 Aleshin S Reiser G Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor beta/delta (PPARbeta/delta) protects against ceramide-induced cellular toxicity in rat brain astrocytes and neurons by activation of ceramide kinase Mol Cell Neurosci 2014 3 59 127 34 24513118
255 Aleshin S Grabeklis S Hanck T Sergeeva M Reiser G Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)-gamma positively controls and PPARalpha negatively controls cyclooxygenase-2 expression in rat brain astrocytes through a convergence on PPARbeta/delta via mutual control of PPAR expression levels Mol Pharmacol 2009 8 76 2 414 24 19483106
256 Santhanam AV d’Uscio LV He T Katusic ZS PPARdelta agonist GW501516 prevents uncoupling of endothelial nitric oxide synthase in cerebral microvessels of hph-1 mice Brain Res 2012 11 5 1483 89 95 22982594
257 Yin KJ Deng Z Hamblin M Zhang J Chen YE Vascular PPARdelta protects against stroke-induced brain injury Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2011 3 31 3 574 81 21205987
258 Saluja I Granneman JG Skoff RP PPAR delta agonists stimulate oligodendrocyte differentiation in tissue culture Glia 2001 3 1 33 3 191 204 11241737
259 Kocalis HE Turney MK Printz RL Laryea GN Muglia LJ Davies SS Neuron-specific deletion of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor delta (PPARdelta) in mice leads to increased susceptibility to diet-induced obesity PLoS One 2012 7 8 e42981 22916190
260 Poon K Alam M Karatayev O Barson JR Leibowitz SF Regulation of the orexigenic neuropeptide, enkephalin, by PPARdelta and fatty acids in neurons of the hypothalamus and forebrain J Neurochem 2015 12 135 5 918 31 26332891
261 Yu S Levi L Casadesus G Kunos G Noy N Fatty acid-binding protein 5 (FABP5) regulates cognitive function both by decreasing anandamide levels and by activating the nuclear receptor peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor beta/delta (PPARbeta/delta) in the brain J Biol Chem 2014 5 2 289 18 12748 58 24644281
262 Mounsey RB Martin HL Nelson MC Evans RM Teismann P The effect of neuronal conditional knock-out of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors in the MPTP mouse model of Parkinson’s disease Neuroscience 2015 8 6 300 576 84 26028469
263 Delmedico MK Severynse-Stevens D Oliver WR DB959 is a novel, dual PPAR δ/γ agonist which controls glucose and regulates triglycerides and HDLc in animal models of T2D and dyslipidemia 69th Annual Scientific Sessions of the American Diabetes Association 2009 365-OR
264 Didsbury J T3D Therapeutics, Inc Receives FDA IND Approval to Begin Phase 2 Clinical Study of T3D-959 in Alzheimer’s Patients Research Triangle Park, NC PRWEB 2015
265 Didsbury J de la Monte SM T3D-959: A multi-faceted disease remedial drug candidate for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimer and Dement 2015 11 7 906
266 Tong M Deochand C Didsbury J de la Monte SM T3D-959: A Multi-Faceted Disease Remedial Drug Candidate for the Treatment of Alzheimer’s Disease J Alzheimers Dis 2016 1 22 51 1 123 38 26836193
