LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


8904467
21230
Neuropsychology
Neuropsychology
Neuropsychology
0894-4105
1931-1559

28206782
5559353
10.1037/neu0000352
NIHMS841051
Article
Process Dissociation Analyses of Memory Changes in Healthy Aging, Preclinical, and Very Mild Alzheimer Disease: Evidence for Isolated Recollection Deficits
Millar Peter R. *Department of Psychological &amp; Brain Sciences, Washington University in St. Louis

Balota David A. Department of Psychological &amp; Brain Sciences and Department of Neurology, Washington University in St. Louis

Maddox Geoffrey B. Department of Psychology, Rhodes College

Duchek Janet M. Department of Psychological &amp; Brain Sciences, Washington University in St. Louis

Aschenbrenner Andrew J. Department of Neurology, Washington University in St. Louis

Fagan Anne M. Department of Neurology and The Charles F. and Joanne Knight Alzheimer Disease Research Center, Washington University in St. Louis

Benzinger Tammie L.S. The Charles F. and Joanne Knight Alzheimer Disease Research Center, Department of Radiology, and Department of Neurological Surgery, Washington University in St. Louis

Morris John C. Department of Neurology and The Charles F. and Joanne Knight Alzheimer Disease Research Center, Washington University in St. Louis

* Peter R Millar, pmillar@wustl.edu, 314-935-6524, One Brookings Drive, Campus Box 1125, St. Louis, MO 63130
11 1 2017
16 2 2017
10 2017
01 10 2018
31 7 708723
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Objective

Recollection and familiarity are independent processes that contribute to memory performance. Recollection is dependent on attentional control, which has been shown to be disrupted in early-stage Alzheimer disease (AD), whereas familiarity is independent of attention. The present longitudinal study examines the sensitivity of recollection estimates based on Jacoby’s (1991) process dissociation procedure to AD-related biomarkers in a large sample of well-characterized cognitively normal middle-aged and older adults (N = 519) and the extent to which recollection discriminates these individuals from individuals with very mild symptomatic AD (N = 64).

Method

Participants studied word pairs (e.g., knee bone), then completed a primed, explicit, cued fragment-completion memory task (e.g., knee b_n_). Primes were either congruent with the correct response (e.g., bone), incongruent (e.g., bend), or neutral (e.g., &amp;&amp;&amp;). This design allowed for the estimation of independent contributions of recollection and familiarity processes, using the process dissociation procedure.

Results

Recollection, but not familiarity, was impaired in healthy aging and in very mild AD. Recollection discriminated cognitively normal individuals from the earliest detectable stage of symptomatic AD above and beyond standard psychometric tests. In cognitively normal individuals, baseline CSF measures indicative of AD pathology were related to lower initial recollection and less practice-related improvement in recollection over time. Finally, presence of amyloid plaques, as imaged by PIB-PET, was also related to less improvement in recollection over time.

Conclusions

These findings suggest that attention-demanding memory processes, such as recollection, may be particularly sensitive to both symptomatic and preclinical AD pathology.

Recollection
Episodic memory
Alzheimer disease
Amyloid
Tau

Alzheimer disease (AD) is traditionally characterized by a deficit in episodic memory processes and there is clear evidence that these deficits are the prominent clinical feature of the disease throughout its progression (for review, see Carlesimo &amp; Oscar-Berman, 1992; R. G. Morris &amp; Kopelamn, 1986). In addition to episodic memory, there is accumulating evidence that early-stage symptomatic AD is also marked by changes in executive function and/or attentional control processes that might contribute to changes in memory performance (for review, see Balota &amp; Duchek, 2015; Faust &amp; Balota, 2007; Perry &amp; Hodges, 1999). This proposal runs parallel to research in the domain of healthy aging, where it has been repeatedly demonstrated that certain age-related memory deficits may be mimicked in younger adults under conditions of divided attention (e.g., Balota, Burgess, Cortese, &amp; Adams, 2002; Benjamin, 2001; Castel &amp; Craik, 2003; Jacoby, 1999b). Moreover, structural equation models reveal that individual age differences in memory performance are mediated by an executive/attention factor, composed of executive functioning and working memory measures (McCabe, Roediger, McDaniel, Balota, &amp; Hambrick, 2010). The critical role of attention/executive processes in the study of memory changes in both healthy aging and AD is in accord with longstanding theoretical frameworks that emphasize the relationship between attention and memory systems (e.g., Craik &amp; Lockhart, 1972; Hasher &amp; Zacks, 1979; Jacoby, 1991). In this light, if changes in attention processes are hypothesized to contribute to AD-related memory changes, then one might predict that memory tasks and processes that are highly dependent on such processes should be particularly sensitive to biomarkers of presymptomatic AD in healthy control individuals and in discriminating healthy aging from the earliest stages of symptomatic AD.

One theoretical framework that has been critical in identifying contributions of attention to memory performance is Jacoby’s (1991) dual process theory. This model proposes that at least two cognitive processes contribute independently to performance on a given memory task: recollection, which is intentionally guided and highly dependent upon attentional control, and familiarity, which is automatic and independent of attentional control. Importantly, Jacoby (1991) developed experimental paradigms to isolate the contributions of each process to overall performance via the process dissociation procedure (PDP). A PDP task includes congruent conditions, in which reliance upon either process would lead to the same response, and incongruent conditions, in which the two processes lead to conflicting responses. With such a design, one can estimate the independent contributions of recollection and familiarity for a single memory task. As predicted by the dual process model, under conditions of divided attention at encoding or retrieval, estimates of recollection are decreased, while estimates of familiarity remain consistent (Jacoby, 1991, 1998; Jacoby, Toth, &amp; Yonelinas, 1993; for review, see Yonelinas &amp; Jacoby, 2012), confirming that recollection is highly dependent upon attentional control.

If recollection is indeed dependent upon attentional control systems, one would predict a relatively large recollection deficit among individuals who exhibit deficits in such systems, such as aging or dementing populations. Koen and Yonelinas (2014) recently presented a meta-analysis of recollection and familiarity estimates as a function of healthy aging, amnestic mild cognitive impairment (aMCI), and AD. Interestingly, healthy aging was associated with significant reductions of both recollection and familiarity. However, the mean effect size of age on recollection was approximately three times larger than the effect on familiarity. Furthermore, the effect of age on familiarity was only significant for a subset of studies in which processes were inferred using a self-report remember/know procedure (e.g., McCabe, Roediger, McDaniel, &amp; Balota, 2009). In the studies that employed a PDP (e.g., Jacoby, 1999b) or receiver operating characteristic (ROC) approach (e.g., Healy, Light, &amp; Chung, 2005), there was no deficit in the more automatic familiarity process. In contrast to the inconsistent effect of age on familiarity estimates, the effect of age on recollection was significant across all three estimation procedures (Koen &amp; Yonelinas, 2014). AD, like healthy aging, was associated with significant reductions of both recollection and familiarity. Unlike healthy aging, however, the effect sizes were similar in magnitude across the two processes. This finding is somewhat surprising given the above evidence of deficits in both attention and memory in early stage symptomatic AD. If indeed attention contributes to the memory deficit, one would a priori expect AD status to produce a larger deficit in recollection than in familiarity.

Since the present study is partially focused on early-stage symptomatic AD, one aspect of the Koen and Yonelinas meta-analysis of particular interest is that aMCI was associated with a deficit in recollection, but not in familiarity. Indeed, the mean effect of aMCI on familiarity only approached significance for a subset of studies that tested individuals with both single-domain and multiple-domain diagnoses of aMCI (e.g., Wolk, Mancuso, Kliot, Arnold, &amp; Dickerson, 2013), while the mean effect size was near zero and slightly positive for studies that examined only single-domain aMCI (e.g., Anderson et al., 2008).

It is clear that estimates of recollection are sensitive to healthy aging and dementia, however, there appears to be some inconsistency regarding the relative contributions of familiarity in these populations, which merits further investigation. As noted above, this inconsistency may be due in part to different approaches for estimating recollection and familiarity, e.g., using remember/know judgments based on self-report, as opposed to PDP procedures based on memory task performance, or different diagnoses of dementia, e.g., single-domain aMCI, multiple-domain aMCI, or AD. In addition, task complexity may play a part in this variability. It is possible that some of the more severe AD participants may not fully understand complex task instructions and hence produce deficits in both recollection and familiarity. Other procedural details of the memory task may play a role as well. Studies reported in the Koen and Yonelinas meta-analysis estimated recollection from performance on a variety of recognition tasks, e.g., memory inclusion and/or exclusion, or discrimination of intact, rearranged, and novel paired associates. Such recognition tasks might not engage controlled processes to the same extent as a free or cued-recall task (Craik, 1983). If attentional control plays a role in the memory changes that occur in aging and symptomatic AD, it might be more informative to examine memory processes using a free or cued recall task. Finally, because of relatively small sample sizes in previous studies, i.e., from 7 to 32 individuals with aMCI or AD in each previous study, it is important to examine these process estimates in a larger, well-characterized sample.

In addition to the behavioral evidence regarding the influence of age, MCI, and AD on retrieval process estimates, there has also been evidence that distinct neural substrates that are influenced by AD pathology influence both recollection and familiarity. Specifically, recollection has been associated with the hippocampus, while familiarity has been associated with the anterior parahippocampal gyrus, including entorhinal and perirhinal cortices (Bowles et al., 2010; Davachi, Mitchell, &amp; Wagner, 2003; Wolk, L., Dickerson, Aizenstein, &amp; Dekosky, 2011; for review, see Diana, Yonelinas, &amp; Ranganath, 2007; but also see Wais, Squire, &amp; Wixted, 2010). Because early stage AD tau pathology begins in medial perirhinal cortex, continuing into entorhinal, and then hippocampal areas (Braak &amp; Braak, 1991; Taylor &amp; Probst, 2008), one may expect disruptions in both recollection and familiarity processes. However, as noted above, this effect may depend on the tasks used to measure recollection and familiarity, along with the severity of disease progression.

In addition to discriminating healthy aging from early-stage symptomatic AD, memory process estimates might change as a function of biomarkers of asymptomatic AD pathology in non-demented individuals. In current disease staging, the presence of AD biomarkers in the absence of AD diagnosis is defined as “preclinical AD” (Albert et al., 2011; J. C. Morris et al., 2014; Sperling et al., 2011). Physiologically, this stage is marked by amyloid plaque deposits, which can be detected by measuring amyloid β42 (Aβ42) in the cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) or via positron emission tomography with the Pittsburgh Compound B radiotracer (PIB-PET), and progressive neuronal degeneration, which can be detected by measuring tau in the CSF or regional brain atrophy via magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (Sperling et al., 2011). Correlations between these preclinical biomarkers and standardized neuropsychological measures are relatively small and are somewhat inconsistent (for meta-analysis, see Hedden, Oh, Younger, &amp; Patel, 2013). Here we examined whether memory process estimates, particularly recollection, might be sensitive to these biomarkers.

The present study includes a large, longitudinal cohort of cognitively normal adults and individuals with early-stage symptomatic AD. The participants are well-characterized with AD-related biomarkers, e.g., apolipoprotein E (APOE) genotype, CSF estimates of Aβ42 and tau, and PIB-PET imaging, available for most participants. By defining the current AD sample using the Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) scale, we can focus on the earliest detectable stage of symptomatic AD in participants who have a CDR of 0.5 (indicating very mild dementia). Importantly, we apply strict diagnostic criteria to include only individuals with early-stage symptomatic AD, as opposed to mixed etiologies or uncertain causes for early cognitive decline. Individuals with a CDR of 0.5 typically have an average MMSE score of 26 to 27 and are very likely to progress to a higher CDR level. The CDR has been shown to be very accurate (93%) in identifying very mild AD (CDR 0.5), as confirmed by subsequent autopsy (Berg et al., 1998; Storandt, Grant, Miller, &amp; Morris, 2006).

There are four goals in the present study. First, we developed a relatively simple paradigm that affords the use of the PDP to obtain estimates of recollection and familiarity in their relative contributions to the memory deficits observed in both healthy aging and symptomatic AD. Second, we examined the extent to which recollection estimates account for AD effects above and beyond standard psychometric measures. Third, because of the large and well-characterized sample, we were able to examine whether recollection (or familiarity) is sensitive to preclinical biomarkers of AD pathology in cognitively normal adults. Fourth, because we have multiple measures of recollection and familiarity across time for individuals, we were able to examine the change in the recollection and familiarity estimates across time as a function of biomarker burden via longitudinal analyses. Since these longitudinal estimates were derived from identical tasks, they may exhibit a practice effect benefit from repeated exposures. Importantly, reduced episodic memory practice effects in similar samples have previously been shown to relate to preclinical AD and to predict AD conversion (Hassenstab et al., 2015).

In order to address these goals, we utilized a primed memory task that allows for PDP estimates of recollection and familiarity, based on a modification of a procedure previously used by Jacoby (1999a). The current version of the task was unique in that it was much shorter than prior PDP tasks of a similar type, i.e., 30 critical test trials vs. 60–90 trials. In fact, this task may be administered in approximately 10 minutes, which might facilitate use in clinical applications.

As shown in Figure 1, the current PDP memory task included two phases. First, participants incidentally encoded (via relatedness decisions) related and unrelated word pairs (e.g., knee bone, arrow cage). Next, participants completed a primed, cued fragment-completion task for the related pairs with explicit recall instructions. Participants were instructed to complete a cued word fragment based on their memory for the prior related word pairs (e.g., bone for knee b_n_). Immediately before the onset of each cued fragment, participants were presented a prime word that was congruent with the correct response (e.g., bone), incongruent with the correct response (e.g., bend), or neutral (i.e., &amp;&amp;&amp;). Thus, the congruent condition was designed to prime familiarity for a correct response, while the incongruent condition was designed to prime familiarity for an incorrect response, which might bias participants to commit intrusion errors.

In a longer version of this task with slightly different instructions at retrieval, Jacoby (1999a) found that healthy older adults were more likely than younger controls to falsely recall the incongruent prime words, as evidenced by a higher intrusion rate. He did not report estimates of recollection and familiarity for individual participants, but application of the PDP to mean performance revealed a greater estimate of recollection in younger adults than in older adults and similar estimates of familiarity in each age group. This task is also conceptually similar to an earlier paradigm that manipulated the familiarity signal by establishing “habitual” associations in a pre-study training phase, e.g., training on 15 presentations of “knee bone” and 5 presentations of “knee bend” (Hay &amp; Jacoby, 1996). Process estimates from similar variants of that paradigm have demonstrated process-specific age-related deficits in recollection, but not in familiarity (Anderson &amp; Craik, 2006; Guerdoux, Dressaire, Martin, Adam, &amp; Brouillet, 2012; Hay &amp; Jacoby, 1999). Of particular interest to the present study, Guerdoux and colleagues (2012) used this later paradigm to obtain process estimates in healthy control, aMCI, and AD individuals, and found only a deficit in recollection and not in familiarity.

The current paradigm is ideally suited to obtain estimates of the relative contributions of recollection and familiarity in healthy aging and very mild AD because the task is mostly automated, relatively brief, and is well-understood by the participants. Furthermore, since the paradigm demands explicit retrieval of the target, it should be particularly sensitive to changes in attentional control processes.

Method

Participants

All participants were recruited by the Charles F. and Joanne Knight Alzheimer Disease Research Center at Washington University in St. Louis, as part of one of two longitudinal studies: the Healthy Aging and Senile Dementia Program Project or the Adult Children Study Program Project. In total, 583 individuals participated in this study over the course of up to 8 years, including 519 individuals with a CDR of 0 at baseline, indicating no dementia, and 64 individuals with a CDR of 0.5 at baseline, indicating the earliest detectable stage of dementia. All participants with a CDR of 0.5 only included individuals with a diagnosis of symptomatic AD, and so we excluded all individuals diagnosed with non-AD, uncertain, or mixed etiologies, such as frontotemporal contributions to the dementia. Aging effects were tested by dividing the sample of CDR 0 participants into three age groups: 45–59 years, 60–74, and 75–95. These age groups were selected to obtain relative equivalence of both the number of individuals and the range of ages represented in each group. Basic demographic measures of the sample are reported in Table 1. Research methods were approved by the Washington University Human Research Protection office. Written informed consent was obtained from all participants.

Annual Clinical and Psychometric Batteries

Each participant was assessed by a trained clinician using the Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) scale (John C Morris, 1993). At each assessment, participants were assigned a CDR rating: 0 for cognitively normal, 0.5 for very mild dementia, 1 for mild dementia, 2 for moderate dementia, or 3 for severe dementia. A clinical diagnosis of AD in individuals who are CDR 0.5 or greater was based on NINCDS-ADRDA criteria (McKhann et al., 1984). In this report, we are most interested in describing very mild symptomatic and asymptomatic AD, so we focus on individuals with CDR ratings of 0 or 0.5.

Participants also annually completed a 2-hour battery of psychometric tests to assess cognitive performance. This battery included: several measures of memory, including the Logical Memory, Digit Span, and Associate Memory subtests of the Wechsler Memory Scale (WMS-R; Wechsler, 1987), and the Free and Cued Selective Reminding test (FCSR; Grober, Buschke, Crystal, Bang, &amp; Dresner, 1988); measures of attention and processing speed, including WMS Mental Control (Wechsler &amp; Stone, 1973), Letter-Number Sequencing (Wechsler, 1997), and Digit Symbol of the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scales (WAIS-R Wechsler, 1981); measures of semantic/lexical retrieval, including the Animal Naming Test (Goodglass &amp; Kaplan, 1983), the Boston Naming Test (Kaplan, Goodglass, &amp; Weintraub, 1976), and the Word Fluency Test S-P (Thurstone &amp; Thurstone, 1947); as well as measures of visuomotor ability (Trail Making A &amp; B; Armitage, 1946); and working memory capacity (Reading Span; Engle, Tuholski, Laughlin, &amp; Conway, 1999). The tasks included in the psychometric battery differed between the two longitudinal cohorts and, thus, some tasks were administered to only a subset of the current sample. All participants also completed the Mini-Mental State Exam (MMSE; Folstein, Folstein, &amp; McHugh, 1975). Average baseline psychometric test scores are presented in Table 1 as a function of age and CDR status.

APOE Genotyping, CSF Measurement, and PIB-PET Imaging

APOE genotyping was performed using standard procedures with TaqMan assays (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) for both rs429358 (ABI#C_3084793_20) and rs7412 (ABI#C_904973_10). We defined ε4+ individuals as those with at least one ε4 allele present, i.e., ε24, ε34, and ε44, while ε4- individuals were those without a single ε4 allele present, i.e., ε22, ε23, and ε33. The proportion of individuals identified as ε4+ is presented in Table 1.

Approximately once every 3 years, CSF was collected via lumbar puncture and analyzed using methods described previously (Fagan et al., 2007). After participants fasted overnight, 20–30 mL samples of CSF were collected, then aliquoted (500 μL) in polypropylene tubes, and stored at −84°C. Samples were analyzed after a single thaw using ELISA (INNOTEST, Fujirebio [formerly Innogenetics], Ghent, Belgium). Baseline levels of CSF biomarkers, Aβ42 and tau, are presented in Table 1.

Approximately once every 3 years, amyloid burden was imaged with PIB-PET using methods previously described (Mintun et al., 2006). Regions of interest were segmented automatically using Freesurfer (Fischl, 2012). Mean cortical binding potential (MCBP) was averaged across the following regions: left and right lateral orbitofrontal, inferior parietal, precuneus, rostral middle frontal, superior frontal, superior temporal, and middle temporal. Cerebellum was used as the reference region. This Freesurfer-derived measure of MCBP is highly consistent with a manually-derived MCBP and demonstrates excellent test-retest reliability (Su et al., 2013). Baseline MCBP is presented in Table 1.

PDP Memory Task

Approximately once every 3 years, participants completed the PDP memory task. Word stimuli for this task were developed according to previously described norms (Jacoby, 1996, 1999b). Related word pairs were constructed such that the cue word had a strong semantic association with two target words (e.g., knee bone, knee bend). Furthermore, the two possible targets were constrained to include words with the same number of letters and with at least two identical letters in the same position, such that either target would be a valid completion of the same word fragment (e.g., b_n_). In total, 34 related and 14 unrelated word pairs were produced. All stimuli were presented in 18-point Courier font on a computer monitor using E-Prime (Psychology Software Tools, Pittsburgh, PA).

As noted, the PDP memory task consisted of two phases (see Figure 1). During incidental encoding (Phase 1), participants viewed a series of 40 word pairs, consisting of 30 related pairs (e.g., knee bone) and 10 unrelated pairs (e.g., arrow cage). Word pairs were presented in a random order. On each trial, the following sequence of events occurred: (a) a fixation cross appeared at the center of the screen for 1000 ms; (b) a word pair appeared for 3000 ms; (c) the participant read each word pair aloud and vocally identified if the words were related or unrelated; (d) the experimenter coded vocal responses with a button press. Four unscored buffer trials (including 2 related and 2 unrelated word pairs) were presented before and after the 40 test trials to minimize the influence of primacy and recency effects and to serve as memory targets for practice trials in the second phase.

Immediately after completing the incidental encoding phase, participants completed a primed, cued fragment-completion task with explicit recall instructions (Phase 2). The 30 related word pairs from Phase 1 were used as cued retrieval targets. Each trial consisted of the following: (a) a fixation cross presented at the center of the screen for 1000 ms; (b) a prime presented for 1000 ms; (c) a cue word paired with a word fragment, based on one of the related word pairs from Phase 1 (e.g., knee b_n_). The type of prime was manipulated within subjects in three conditions: congruent with the correct response (e.g., bone), incongruent with the correct response (e.g., bend), or neutral symbols (i.e., &amp;&amp;&amp;). Crucially, all incongruent primes were also valid completions of the fragment and semantically related to the cue, but had not been presented during the incidental encoding phase. Participants were instructed to silently read each prime word, then use the cue and fragment to recall the word that was earlier paired with the cue. Participants were given up to 20 seconds for their responses. The experimenter coded all vocal responses. Participants were informed that all correct answers were related to the cue word and correctly completed the fragment, and that the prime words might be congruent or incongruent with the correct answer that was presented during the first phase of the experiment. Participants completed 10 congruent, 10 incongruent, and 10 neutral trials in a random order. These 30 trials were preceded by 4 unscored practice trials, based on the 4 related buffer trials presented in the incidental encoding phase.

In each longitudinal session, participants completed an identical version of the PDP task. The recollection estimate derived from the task demonstrated adequate test-retest reliability for a behavioral measure, ICC = .63, 95% C.I. = [.57, .69].

Data Aggregation

For each administration of the PDP task, dependent measures were matched to the temporally closest clinical (CDR rating within 1 year), psychometric (within 2 years), and physiological measures (CSF estimates and PIB-PET scans within 3 years) for that individual. The mean time intervals between the PDP task and each of these measures are reported in Table 1.

Results

Overview of Analyses

We first tested the effects of healthy aging and disease status (i.e., healthy controls vs. very mild symptomatic AD, CDR .5) on task performance, then on PDP estimates of recollection and familiarity. Although we tested the effects of age as a function of three groups, other groupings of age, e.g., two-group median split or four groups, resulted in consistent interpretations of the age effects. Effects of very mild symptomatic AD were tested by comparing all CDR 0s to CDR 0.5s with age as a continuous covariate. We then compared the recollection estimates to a battery of standard psychometric tests in their accuracy in classifying individuals as CDR 0 vs. CDR 0.5. Finally, we tested whether recollection estimates were sensitive to individual differences in preclinical biomarkers of AD pathology and risk in cognitively normal individuals (CDR 0s) both at baseline and in longitudinal analyses. These biomarkers included APOE genotype, CSF measurements of Aβ42 and tau, as well as the presence of amyloid burden, as imaged by PIB-PET. One participant was excluded from all analyses as an outlier for age (31 years). Another participant was excluded from all analyses because a concurrent CDR was unable to be matched.

Memory Performance as a Function of Healthy Aging

Figure 2 displays the mean proportion of each response type (correct, intrusion error, or other error) at the initial PDP test as a function of age (top panel) and CDR status (bottom panel). We tested the effects of healthy aging on memory task performance in a 3 × 3 mixed-model Analysis of Variance (ANOVA), with proportion of correct responses as the dependent variable, age as a between-subjects factor (&lt;60 years, 60–74 years, or 75+ years), and condition as a within-subjects factor (congruent, incongruent, or neutral). Only CDR 0s were included in this analysis. As expected, this analysis revealed a main effect of age, F(2,516) = 23.37, p &lt; .001, ηp2 = .08, a main effect of condition, F(2,1032) = 407.17, p &lt; .001, ηp2 = .44, and an interaction between age and condition, F(4,1032) = 8.65, p &lt; .001, ηp2 = .03. As shown in the top panel of Figure 2, older age was associated with a greater decrease in correct responses for incongruent trials compared with neutral or congruent trials.

The age effects on correct memory responses might be driven by differences in the proportion of intrusions of the critical/incongruent prime word or other errors. Analysis of the intrusion errors revealed a main effect of age, F(2,516) = 21.83, p &lt; .001, ηp2 = .08, a main effect of condition, F(2,1032) = 443.23, p &lt; .001, ηp2 = .46, and a reliable interaction between age and condition, F(4,1032) = 9.29, p &lt; .001, ηp2 = .04. As shown in the top panel of Figure 2, older age was associated with a greater increase in intrusion responses for incongruent trials compared with neutral or congruent trials.

Other errors included trials in which the participant responded with a word that was neither the correct response nor the critical lure, as well as trials in which the participant did not respond within 20 seconds. For these errors, there was a significant main effect of age, F(2,516) = 3.98, p = .019, ηp2 = .02, and a main effect of condition, F(2,1032) = 49.46, p &lt; .001, ηp2 = .09, but the interaction between age and condition was not significant, F(4,1032) = 0.51, p = .726, ηp2&lt; .01.

Memory Performance as a Function of CDR Status

A 2 (CDR: 0 or 0.5) × 3 (condition: congruent, incongruent, or neutral) mixed-model analysis of covariance (ANCOVA), controlling for the effect of age as a continuous covariate, was conducted on mean correct performance. This analysis revealed a main effect of CDR status, F(1,580) = 158.68, p &lt; .001, ηp2 = .22, and an interaction between CDR status and condition, F(2,1160) = 34.82, p &lt; .001, ηp2 = .06. As shown in the bottom panel of Figure 2, the group difference in performance between CDR 0s and 0.5s was greater for incongruent trials compared with neutral trials or congruent trials.

The effects of CDR status on intrusion and other errors were tested in separate ANCOVA models, using the factor structure described above for correct responses. For intrusion errors, there was a significant main effect of CDR status, F(1,580) = 126.98, p &lt; .001, ηp2 = .18, and an interaction between CDR status and condition, F(2,1160) = 36.76, p &lt; .001, ηp2 = .06. As shown in the bottom panel of Figure 2, the group difference in intrusion responses between CDR 0s and 0.5s was greater for incongruent trials compared with neutral trials or congruent trials.

For other errors, there was a significant main effect of CDR status, F(1,580) = 46.95, p &lt; .001, ηp2 = .08, and an interaction between CDR status and condition, F(2,1160) = 9.64, p &lt; .001, ηp2 = .02. As shown in the bottom panel of Figure 2, the group difference in other errors between CDR 0s and 0.5s was greater for neutral trials compared with congruent trials or incongruent trials. Therefore, the present results indicate that, controlling for age, AD-related differences in task performance are strongly driven by intrusions of the primes in the incongruent condition, and to a much smaller extent, by other errors, including random word responses and failures to respond.

Estimates of Recollection and Familiarity using the PDP

In the current paradigm, the following equations (see Jacoby, 1991) were used to obtain estimates of recollection and familiarity. Recollection was estimated by subtracting the probability of an intrusion on an incongruent trial (reflecting the failure of recollection and reliance on familiarity) from the probability of a correct response to a congruent trial (reflecting either successful recollection or reliance on familiarity): Recollection=P(correct|congruent)−P(intrusion|incongruent)

Familiarity was then estimated by dividing the probability of an intrusion to an incongruent trial by the estimated probability of a failure of recollection: Familiarity=P(intrusion|incongruent)1−Recollection

Since a recollection estimate of 1.00 would produce a familiarity estimate that is not defined, familiarity estimates were not calculated in cases where recollection was equal to 1.00 (approximately 6% of CDR 0s and 2% of CDR 0.5s). Figure 3 depicts the mean estimates of recollection and familiarity as a function of age (left panel) and CDR status (right panel).

The effects of healthy aging on memory process estimates were tested in the CDR 0 sample using a 3 × 2 mixed-model ANOVA, with process estimate as the dependent variable, age group as a between-subjects factor, and process type as a within-subjects factor (recollection or familiarity). The interaction between age and process type was significant, F(2,487) = 7.45, p = .001, ηp2 = .03. As shown in the left panel of Figure 3, older age was associated with a greater change in recollection estimates than in familiarity estimates. Planned contrasts revealed that the age effect on recollection was significant, F(2,487) = 17.28, p &lt; .001, ηp2 = .07, but the effect on familiarity was not, F(2,487) = 0.12, p = .892, ηp2 &lt; .01.

The effects of very mild symptomatic AD on memory process estimates were tested in a 2 × 2 mixed-model ANCOVA, with process estimate as the dependent variable, CDR status as a between-subjects factor, process type as a within-subjects factor, and age as a continuous covariate. The interaction between CDR status and process type was highly significant, F(1,550) = 46.18, p &lt; .001, ηp2 = .08. As shown in the right panel of Figure 3, the group difference between CDR 0s and 0.5s was greater for recollection estimates than it was for familiarity estimates. Planned contrasts revealed that, controlling for age, the AD group difference for recollection was significant, F(1,550) = 112.71, p &lt; .001, ηp2 = .17, but the difference in familiarity was not, F(1,550) = 0.14, p = .707, ηp2 &lt; .001.

The results from the PDP estimates are very clear. In a large, well-characterized sample, there are highly reliable effects of age and CDR status on the more attention-demanding recollection component, but there is no evidence of an effect of age or AD status on the more automatic familiarity component1.

Sensitivity of Recollection to CDR Status

Next we evaluated the utility of the recollection estimates2 in discriminating between cognitively normal individuals and those with very mild symptomatic AD above and beyond standard psychometric tests, which have been useful in such discrimination in the extant literature (see Storandt, Botwinick, Danziger, Berg, &amp; Hughes, 1984). To address this question, we ran a series of stepwise binary logistic regression models on participants at time 1 with CDR status (0 or 0.5) as the dependent variable. In Step 1, we entered age, education, and one of the 17 psychometric measures described above and tested whether the measures were able to reliably classify CDR status. Each psychometric measure, with the exception of Digit Span forward, reliably classified CDR status, χ2s(3) &gt; 9, ps ≤ .03, Nagelkerke’s R2s ≥ .04. In Step 2, we added recollection as a predictor and tested whether it reliably increased the classification accuracy of the previous model. Crucially, for each psychometric measure, adding recollection reliably increased classification accuracy in step 2, Δ χ2s(1) &gt; 18, ps &lt; .001, Δ Nagelkerke’s R2s ≥ .05 (see the grey bars in Figure 4).

We then tested whether any of the psychometric measures offered discriminative utility for CDR status above and beyond recollection. To do so, we ran another series of stepwise binary logistic regression models with CDR status as the dependent variable. In the first step, we entered age, education, and recollection. In each sample, this model reliably classified CDR status, χ2s(3) &gt; 55, ps &lt; .001, Nagelkerke’s R2s ≥ .33. In the second step, we added one of the 17 psychometric measures. Adding the psychometric measures had mixed effects on classification accuracy in Step 2: 13 measures produced a significant improvement to the model, χ2s(1) &gt; 4.7, ps ≤ .03, Nagelkerke’s R2s ≥ .02, and 4 measures produced a non-significant improvement, χ2s(1) &lt; 2.2, ps ≥ .15, Nagelkerke’s R2s ≤ .01 (see the white bars in Figure 4).

We then compared the unique classification utility of recollection estimates to that of the psychometric measures by comparing model improvement measures, i.e., Δ χ2s in Step 2, across the two models, i.e., the recollection-second model vs. the psychometric-second model. As shown in Figure 4, the improvements in classification accuracy for recollection after partialling each psychometric measure were greater than the corresponding improvements for each psychometric measure after partialling recollection for all but two cases: Logical Memory delayed recall and FCSR free recall. A non-parametric sign test revealed that the classification improvement for recollection over the psychometric measures (N = 15) was reliably greater than the classification improvement for psychometric measures over recollection (N = 2), p = .002. Thus, a recollection estimate from this 10-minute, computerized task was a relatively useful discriminator of healthy aging from very mild symptomatic AD, and at the very least comparable to well-established psychometric memory measures.

Sensitivity of Recollection to Preclinical AD Biomarkers

If recollection estimates are sensitive to the earliest detectable stage of symptomatic AD, then these estimates might also be sensitive to individual differences in preclinical AD biomarkers within a cognitively normal population, as reflected by CSF measures or PIB-PET imaging. Moreover, since we estimated recollection multiple times longitudinally, this sensitivity might emerge in baseline recollection estimates and/or in change in recollection over time. We tested these hypotheses in hierarchical linear models of recollection as predicted by biomarker measures, controlling for demographic variables. We completed these analyses on a sample of only CDR 0s, so that any effects could be attributable to preclinical variability in AD biomarkers and not a clinical diagnosis of symptomatic AD. In these models, we aimed to minimize the influence of extreme outliers in the recollection estimate, so we estimated each participant’s slope of recollection over time. We removed two potential outlier individuals with recollection slopes greater than 5 standard deviations from the sample mean.

In the following analyses, we present two sections. First, we examine the relationship between the CSF biomarkers and recollection estimates both at baseline and longitudinally. Second, we examine the relationship between PIB and recollection both at baseline and longitudinally. We present the analyses on CSF biomarkers and on the PIB biomarker as separate analyses for two reasons: First, although there is overlap in individuals who have both PIB and CSF measures, when we impose our constraints regarding the timing of the biomarker measurements, the inclusion of only participants with both biomarkers reduces our sample size by 34% in the following CSF analyses and by 24% in the following PIB analyses. Hence, in order to maximize the sample, and reduce intercorrelated variables in the analyses (CSF Aβ42 and PIB MCBP are correlated at r = −.50), we report these as separate analyses.

Sensitivity of Recollection to CSF Biomarkers

We first examined the sensitivity of recollection to CSF biomarkers, including measures of Aβ42 and tau. These analyses were performed on a subset of individuals who had completed a lumbar puncture within 3 years of the baseline PDP estimate. We corrected for non-normality in the tau measurement by applying a natural log transform as performed by Aschenbrenner, Balota, Tse, and colleagues (2015). No observations were identified as potential outliers for Aβ42 or log-transformed tau (all cases were less than 3.5 standard deviations from the respective sample means). The final CSF model dataset included a total of 562 observations from 320 unique individuals (141 with one test, 122 with two tests, 51 with three tests, and 6 with four tests).

Hierarchical linear models were analyzed using the “nlme” package in R (Pinheiro, Bates, DebRoy, &amp; Sarkar, 2014). We first calculated the intra-class correlation (ICC) in an unconditional random-intercept model to describe the variability of the recollection estimates in this sample. The ICC for this sample was .55, indicating that 55% of variability in recollection estimates was driven by inter-individual differences, leaving 45% driven by intra-individual change over time. We then added time as a level 1 predictor to begin accounting for this variability. The fixed effect of time was marginally significant, β = .03, SE = .02, p = .055. Recollection marginally increased over time, likely due to a practice effect from repeated exposure to the task and materials. The random effect 95% confidence interval was −.14 to .20, indicating the range of 95% of the slopes predicted in the sample. We then added demographic and CSF biomarker predictors of recollection. These predictors included baseline age, education, APOE genotype, sex, baseline values of CSF Aβ42 and tau, as well as all two- and three-way interactions amongst time, Aβ42, and/or tau. These predictors were always retained as they were necessary to test our a priori hypotheses. We then added the two-way interactions between each level 2 demographic predictor and time to test for cross-level effects. Only the interaction between time and sex was significant, and thus all other cross-level demographic interactions were removed from the model. This approach was taken to test our hypotheses and avoid forming overly complex models or over-fitting the data.

The final parameter estimates are displayed in Table 2. In this model, time had a significant positive relationship with recollection, β = .06, p = .021. Confirming our previous analysis, baseline age was negatively related to the recollection estimate in the initial test, β = −.21, p &lt; .001. Additionally, years of education were positively related to initial recollection estimate, β = .06, p = .001. APOE status was not related to recollection, β = .02, p = .873. Sex was positively related to initial recollection, β = .49, p &lt; .001, indicating that females had higher initial recollection estimates than males. Additionally, the time * sex interaction was marginally significant, β = −.06, p = .048, indicating that females had marginally lower increases in recollection over time than males did.

The CSF biomarker predictors were most critical to our hypotheses. The model revealed that baseline level of Aβ42 was positively related to initial recollection estimate, β = .14, p = .016 (see Figure 5). This effect is in the predicted direction, because low levels of Aβ42 in the CSF are associated with accumulation of amyloid plaques in the brain (Fagan et al., 2006), and hence more AD pathology. In contrast, baseline level of tau was not related to initial recollection estimate, β = −.06, p = .356, nor was the interaction between baseline tau and Aβ42, β = −.09, p = .111.

Turning to longitudinal change in recollection, the model revealed a significant interaction amongst time, Aβ42, and tau, β = .06, p &lt; .001. This interaction is depicted in Figure 6, in which predictions are plotted in separate panels for individuals with abnormal (lower) baseline CSF Aβ42, as defined by Vos et al. (2014), using the Youden index, as values less than 459 pg/mL, and for individuals within the normal (higher) range. In these longitudinal plots, the positive slope of recollection over time likely reflects a practice effect, resulting from repeated exposures to the task. When Aβ42 was abnormal, as CSF tau increased (indicating more progressed AD pathology), recollection was less likely to increase over time, perhaps reflecting an attenuated practice effect in those individuals. However, when Aβ42 was normal, the relationship between CSF tau and recollection slope was weaker. Practice effects have been noted in similar samples for other repeated episodic memory tasks (see Aschenbrenner, Balota, Fagan, et al., 2015; Galvin et al., 2005; Hassenstab et al., 2015). The episodic memory practice benefit has previously been associated with a decreased risk of progression to symptomatic AD (Hassenstab et al., 2015). To summarize, in the current cognitively normal preclinical sample, CSF Aβ42 and tau, both biomarkers of AD pathology, produced an interactive influence on recollection across time.

Sensitivity of Recollection to PIB-PET

We then tested whether recollection was related to presence of amyloid plaques as observed by PIB-PET imaging. These analyses were performed on a subset of observations in which the baseline PDP estimate had been completed within 3 years of a PIB-PET scan. MCBP within this sample was highly skewed with several potential outliers. One conservative, but informative, approach to testing the effects of amyloid plaque is to categorically identify the presence (PIB+) or absence of amyloid plaques (PIB−) using a threshold value of MCBP. We defined PIB+ individuals as those with MCBP greater than .23 and PIB− individuals with MCBP less than or equal to .23. This threshold value was taken from Gordon et al. (2015), who dichotomized PIB positivity in a similar cohort using the Youden index (as performed by Vos et al., 2014). The final PIB-PET model dataset included a total of 501 observations from 278 unique individuals (116 with one test, 106 with two tests, 51 with three tests, and 5 with four tests). We repeated the same modeling procedures described in the CSF model above, substituting PIB positivity for CSF measures as a biomarker predictor. The ICC of recollection in this sample was .53. Again, there was a marginally significant fixed effect of time, β = .03, SE = .02, p = .101, as well as a significant random effect of time, 95% C.I. = [−.09, .14]. The final model parameters are presented in Table 3. Importantly, PIB positivity was not related to baseline recollection, β = .00, p = .991, but it significantly interacted with time to predict change in recollection, β = −.10, p = .021. As shown in Figure 7, in individuals who were PIB- at baseline, recollection tended to slightly increase over time, while in individuals who were PIB+, recollection decreased over time.

General Discussion

The results from the present study yielded a number of noteworthy results. Specifically, using a short 10-minute procedure that affords retrieval process estimates in a large cohort of participants, an estimate of recollection, but not familiarity, is (a) sensitive to healthy aging, (b) particularly sensitive to early stage symptomatic AD, compared to standard psychometric measures, and (c) sensitive to biomarkers of preclinical AD pathology and risk in cognitively normal individuals both at baseline and as a function of longitudinal change. Below, we discuss how these results are informative to individual and group differences in memory processes, the relationships between AD biomarkers and cognition, the role of attention in memory, and the potential applied utility of recollection estimates.

Memory Processes in Healthy Aging and Early Stage Symptomatic AD

The current finding of a large age-related deficit in recollection, but not in familiarity is consistent with the meta-analysis of age effects on process estimates (Koen &amp; Yonelinas, 2014). Across 20 studies in which processes were estimated with PDP (13 studies) or ROC procedures (7 studies), recollection reliably decreased in healthy aging, while familiarity exhibited no deficit. The present study is unique, however, in that it replicated the effects of healthy aging on process estimates in a much less extreme age comparison. Most prior studies of these effects, as summarized by Koen and Yonelinas (2014), have compared younger adult samples (typically undergraduate students; mean sample age = 21.47, range = 18.90 – 30.00) to older adult samples (typically recruited from the community; mean sample age = 71.14, range = 60.61 – 77.00). By contrast, the present study compares three age groups (45–59 years, 60–74, and 75–95), recruited from the community, ranging from middle-aged to older adults. Furthermore, in both of the present hierarchical linear models for CSF and PIB biomarkers, we demonstrate continuous negative effects of age on recollection, controlling for AD biomarkers. To our knowledge, no other study has examined age effects on process estimates within such a narrow age range. Nor have previous studies controlled for the possible contribution of preclinical AD pathology to the effect of age on memory processes. The current findings suggest that an age-related, process-specific deficit in recollection continues even in advanced healthy aging above and beyond the effects of preclinical AD pathology.

The current analyses also indicate that very mild symptomatic AD is associated with a large deficit in recollection, but no change in familiarity. This finding is also consistent with aspects of the meta-analysis of the effect of aMCI on process estimates (Koen &amp; Yonelinas, 2014). In terms of dementia severity, the current CDR 0.5 sample (mean MMSE = 26.15, S.D. = 3.32) is a better match to the aMCI population reported in the meta-analysis (mean sample MMSE = 27.61, range = 25.50 – 28.50) than to the more advanced AD population (mean sample MMSE = 22.23, range = 17.00 – 24.90). Across 9 studies of single- and/or multiple-domain aMCI reported in the meta-analysis, recollection reliably decreased in aMCI, compared to healthy controls, while familiarity had only a marginal deficit. Only those studies that included multiple-domain diagnosis aMCI have reported familiarity deficits (see Ally, Gold, &amp; Budson, 2009; Wolk et al., 2013; Wolk, Signoff, &amp; DeKosky, 2008). Multiple-domain diagnosis of aMCI differs from a single-domain diagnosis in that the impairment is in at least one other cognitive domain, in addition to memory (Winblad et al., 2004). Interestingly, when studied exclusively, individuals with single-domain aMCI do not exhibit a reliable familiarity deficit (see Anderson et al., 2008; Serra et al., 2010). Finally, it is worth noting that the current CDR 0.5 sample (63 individuals afforded estimates of familiarity) is much larger than any previous sample in which a familiarity deficit was found (11 individuals with aMCI in Ally et al., 2009; 32 in Wolk et al., 2013, 16 in Wolk et al., 2008). Therefore, the present study affords increased sample size to detect a familiarity deficit, and yet no evidence of such a deficit was found.

It is also important to consider the unique characteristics of the current task in understanding any potential inconsistencies in dementia-related effects on familiarity. To our knowledge, no other study has tested the effect of symptomatic AD on memory process estimates using a cued fragment completion recall task. The current findings regarding recollection estimates are largely consistent with previous studies in which processes were estimated from recognition, but it is likely that interpretations of familiarity estimates may vary depending on the task used for estimation. Specifically, recognition performance is more likely to be influenced by familiarity processes (e.g., Mandler, 1980). Furthermore, in most other PDP paradigms, the familiarity signal originates from a previous encoding phase, temporally and contextually separated from the retrieval attempt. Past findings of an aMCI-related familiarity deficit have employed such paradigms (Wolk et al., 2013, 2008; but see Serra et al., 2010; Troyer et al., 2012). By contrast, in the current paradigm, familiarity originates from a prime, presented immediately before the retrieval attempt. In this regard, the present paradigm is more similar to one used by Anderson and colleagues (2008), in which the familiarity signal originated from repeated stimuli within a continuous recognition task, separated by a lag of up to 12 trials. Consistent with the present findings, familiarity did not differ between individuals with aMCI and controls in that study. In the current paradigm, the highly salient primes might “capture” a retrieval attempt in a way that items made familiar at encoding might not (Jacoby, Bishara, Hessels, &amp; Toth, 2005). Thus, it is possible that encoding-driven familiarity processes might in fact decline in AD (as suggested by Wolk et al., 2013, 2008), while retrieval-driven familiarity remains intact.

Cognitive Correlates of Preclinical AD Biomarkers

The present analysis of preclinical AD biomarkers showed that the initial estimate of recollection is sensitive to individual differences in CSF Aβ42. Additionally, change in recollection over time is sensitive to the interaction between CSF Aβ42 and tau, and to the presence of amyloid plaques detected by PIB-PET imaging. Because recollection is highly dependent upon executive/attentional control systems, it is likely sensitive to preclinical biomarkers in ways that other memory measures are not. Indeed, composite measures of both episodic memory and attentional control demonstrate sensitivity to preclinical AD biomarkers in a similar sample (Aschenbrenner, Balota, Fagan, et al., 2015). Furthermore, a recent meta-analysis reported small, but reliable correlations between preclinical measures of amyloid (including PIB, CSF, etc.) and both episodic memory and executive function (Hedden et al., 2013). Thus, recollection is likely tapping memorial, as well as attentional domains, both of which might be particularly disrupted in preclinical AD.

Relationship between Attention and Memory Systems

One model of memory impairment in preclinical AD posits that the preferential accumulation of amyloid in areas of the default mode network directly influences the integrity of memory network areas through neuronal atrophy and metabolic disruption (Buckner et al., 2005). However, several longstanding cognitive models of memory recognize that memory is not an entirely isolated system and is, in fact, highly dependent upon executive and attentional control systems (Craik &amp; Lockhart, 1972; Hasher &amp; Zacks, 1979; Jacoby, 1991). Thus, attentional/executive control systems likely contribute to the memory deficits that arise in preclinical AD (Balota &amp; Duchek, 2015). In the present study, we conclude that attention-dependent recollection, but not automatic familiarity, is particularly sensitive to biomarkers of AD pathology and risk in asymptomatic individuals. Thus, the role of attentional systems should not be ignored in the study of preclinical AD and its effects on memory systems. Indeed, just as in the Stroop color-naming task (Stroop, 1935), one needs to exert control over the readily available Word dimension in the incongruent condition, in the present paradigm, one needs to exert control over the readily available incongruent prime information. Attentional control is important in both contexts, while the relative strength of the competing pathways likely varies across tasks. In this light, it is noteworthy that Spieler, Balota, and Faust (1996) applied the process dissociation procedure to Stroop performance and found that the Color (attention driven) estimate was impaired in very mild AD, compared to healthy controls, whereas, there was no difference in the Word (automatic) component between those two groups, consistent with the current application of the PDP to a controlled memory task.

Clinical Utility of Recollection

The results from the binary logistic regression analyses indicate that a recollection estimate improves the identification of the earliest detectable stage of symptomatic AD above and beyond standard psychometric tests. Such a measure might aid in the diagnosis of AD. The current behavioral task was relatively quick, lasting about 10 minutes, is entirely computer-based, and can be automatically scored. Thus, it would be very easy to administer in a clinical setting.

It is worth noting that the recollection estimate provided less unique discrimination of CDR status than the Free and Cued Selective Reminding test (FCSR) free recall portion (Grober et al., 1988) and comparable discrimination to the WMS Logical Memory (WMS-LM) delayed recall units (WMS-LM; Wechsler, 1997). We further compared these measures in their sensitivity and specificity for CDR classification by calculating optimal cutoff points for each measure based on the Youden index. For recollection estimates, sensitivity was .77 and specificity was .86 for a Youden index of .63. In comparison, the Youden index of FCSR free recall was comparable (.64), but sensitivity was higher (.91) and specificity was lower (.73) than recollection. Finally, WMS-LM delayed recall had a lower Youden index (.54) than recollection with comparable, but lower, sensitivity (.71) and specificity (.83).

Unlike the recollection estimate, FCSR and WMS-LM currently lack computer implementation and instead must be manually administered and scored. Furthermore, the current PDP task is comparable in duration to FCSRT (12–15 minutes; National Institute on Aging) and is much shorter than the retention interval of 30 to 40 minutes required for the delayed WMS-LM (Wechsler, 1997). Finally, the test-retest reliability of recollection estimates within the full sample (ICC = .63, 95% C.I. = [.57, .69]) is comparable to that of FCSRT recall (ICC = .69, 95% C.I. = [.63, .74]), but, as expected, is lower than that of the much longer WMS-LM delayed recall (ICC = .74, 95% C.I. = [.68, .79]).

Interestingly, the FCSR free recall and WMS-LM delayed recall, like recollection, both involve strong components of controlled recall. It is possible that recollection estimates, FCSR, and WMS-LM are tapping similar processes, particularly memory retrieval processes that are highly dependent on executive and/or attentional control processes. If these processes are influenced by very mild symptomatic AD, then it is not surprising that such measures would be particularly useful in identifying CDR 0.5s. However, we would argue that no task is process pure and that FCSR and WMS-LM are likely not tapping identical processes to recollection. Indeed, recollection is only modestly correlated with FCSR free recall (r = .52) and with WMS-LM delayed recall (r = .45) in the current sample. It is noteworthy that the recollection estimate was measured in a different battery than the FCSR and WMS-LM tasks, with an average interval of 94.2 days between the two batteries, and so the correlations to those measures will be reduced. Hence, as expected, the correlation between FCSR free recall and WMS-LM delayed recall is higher (r = .62). Furthermore, in the logistic regression models, adding recollection significantly improves CDR classification accuracy controlling for FCSR or WMS-LM and vice versa (see Figure 4), suggesting that each measure is capturing a significant portion of unique variance within the sample. Therefore, recollection estimates, FCSR, and WMS-LM might each be indicative of similar, but different, processes or combinations of processes underlying memory performance.

As noted, FCSR and WMS-LM both employ a self-initiated free recall task, which might be more sensitive to very mild symptomatic AD than the cued fragment-completion phase in the current PDP task. Perhaps a recollection estimate obtained from a task requiring more self-initiated retrieval processes might be even more sensitive to CDR status. Future studies might test this possibility by employing a cued recall task instead of cued fragment completion task. Discrimination of CDR status and/or test-retest reliability might also be improved in the current task by increasing the number of trials or by adding a delay between the encoding and retrieval phases. Although one advantage of the current task is its brevity, potential gains in diagnostic utility might be worth increasing the length of an already-short task.

An important potential clinical advantage of the current recollection estimate is its unique biomarker sensitivity. Of the two psychometric measures that performed as well or better than recollection in classifying CDR status, the only reliable CSF or imaging effect was CSF tau predicting baseline performance on WMS-LM delayed recall, β = −.17, S.E. = .07, p = .020. Across the full battery of 17 psychometric measures, neither the time * Aβ42 * tau nor the time * PIB interaction was significant in any model. Thus, the current recollection estimate appears to possess unique longitudinal sensitivities to preclinical AD biomarkers, and should be considered as a target for future research relating biomarkers to cognition in preclinical AD.

Conclusion

In summary, the present results suggest that recollection is a sensitive cognitive marker of age, very mild symptomatic AD, and preclinical AD pathology. Recollection may exhibit this role because it places a high demand on executive or attentional control systems. Moving forward, recollection, or other attention-demanding memory processes, might prove particularly useful in describing and detecting both symptomatic and asymptomatic AD pathology.

We thank the participants for their dedication to this project, Larry Jacoby and Ian Dobbins for helpful comments on the interpretation of the results, and Michael Strube for advice on the hierarchical linear modeling procedures.

This research was supported by grants from the National Institute on Aging (P01-AG026276, P01-AG03991, T32-AG000030-32); and a traineeship from the National Science Foundation (IGERT-0548890).

Figure 1 Illustration of PDP task design and example trials.

Figure 2 Mean proportion (+/− standard error of the mean) of correct responses, intrusion errors, and other errors as a function of trial type, age group (top panel) and AD group (bottom panel) on the baseline PDP task. Values in the bottom panel are residual means, controlling for age.

Figure 3 Mean estimates (+/− standard error of the mean) of recollection and familiarity as a function of age group (left panel) and AD group (right panel) on the baseline PDP task. Values in the right panel are residual means, controlling for age.

Figure 4 Comparison of the recollection-second (grey) and psychometric-second (white) models in improvements to classification accuracy (reported as Δ χ2) in step 2 of the binary logistic regression analyses. Dotted line is the critical Δ χ2 value for the addition of a single parameter (df = 1) with α set to .05.

Figure 5 Relationship between recollection and CSF Aβ42. Points are model residuals. Line is the model prediction. Shaded area is the 95% confidence region.

Figure 6 Interaction between Aβ42, tau, and time on recollection. Regression lines of recollection, predicted by time, are plotted separately for mean levels of tau, as well as 1 standard deviation above and below the mean, for individuals with abnormal levels of Aβ42 (&lt;459 pg/mL, upper panel) and those with normal levels (≥459 pg/mL, lower panel).

Figure 7 Interaction between PIB positivity and time on recollection. Regression lines of recollection, predicted by time, are plotted separately for individuals who were PIB+ (MCBP &gt;.23) and those who were PIB- (MCBP ≤ .23).

Table 1 Demographic, psychometric, and biomarker measures, mean (SD), at initial test grouped by age and CDR status. F(df) reports the univariate F statistic for the effect of CDR status, controlling for age as a continuous covariate.

Variable (units)	CDR 0 Age &lt;60	CDR 0 Age 60–74	CDR 0 Age 75+	CDR 0.5	F(df)	p	
N	94	277	148	64			
% Female	68%	61%	61%	42%			
Age (years)	54.04 (3.38)	68.10 (3.98)	79.92 (4.13)	75.03 (7.14)	24.64 (1,581)	&lt;.001	
Education (years)	16.25 (2.53)	15.57 (2.57)	15.39 (2.71)	15.11 (2.69)	0.78 (1,572)	.378	
MMSE	29.45 (0.84)	29.08 (1.30)	28.50 (1.49)	26.15 (3.32)	134.55 (1,552)	&lt;.001	
WMS Logical Memory immediate	12.57 (4.12)	13.89 (3.76)	13.28 (4.44)	8.54 (4.64)	76.78 (1,426)	&lt;.001	
WMS Logical Memory delayed	13.00 (4.55)	12.99 (4.18)	12.19 (4.95)	5.62 (5.27)	119.04 (1,426)	&lt;.001	
WMS Digit forward	6.43 (0.98)	6.83 (1.04)	6.64 (1.10)	6.57 (1.06)	1.25 (1,424)	.264	
WMS Digit backward	4.86 (1.46)	4.85 (1.20)	4.74 (1.15)	4.28 (1.14)	9.79 (1,424)	.002	
WMS Associate Memory	14.50 (4.50)	14.45 (3.38)	13.33 (3.99)	9.86 (3.58)	64.48 (1,423)	&lt;.001	
FCSR free recall	33.15 (5.38)	31.41 (5.76)	28.97 (6.31)	18.52 (8.25)	174.51 (1,545)	&lt;.001	
FCSR total	47.87 (0.37)	47.82 (1.32)	47.63 (0.85)	42.79 (7.91)	161.02 (1,545)	&lt;.001	
WMS Mental Control	6.71 (1.80)	7.32 (1.77)	7.48 (1.71)	6.72 (1.97)	6.89 (1,426)	.009	
WAIS-III Letter Number Sequencing	11.83 (2.61)	10.35 (2.54)	8.63 (2.42)	7.71 (3.27)	15.33 (1,372)	&lt;.001	
WAIS-R Digit Symbol	58.86 (12.19)	49.59 (10.12)	44.99 (10.78)	37.74 (12.95)	41.52 (1,418)	&lt;.001	
Animal Naming	24.50 (5.94)	21.51 (5.45)	18.38 (5.53)	15.95 (4.41)	27.49 (1,552)	&lt;.001	
Boston Naming	57.43 (3.60)	55.64 (4.92)	53.56 (6.82)	50.52 (7.75)	24.13 (1,426)	&lt;.001	
Word Fluency S-P	33.57 (11.83)	30.58 (9.75)	29.77 (10.63)	25.82 (10.02)	9.38 (1,426)	.002	
Trail Making A	27.26 (9.13)	32.86 (13.46)	39.23 (14.10)	49.03 (28.47)	35.56 (1,552)	&lt;.001	
Trail Making B	58.79 (22.80)	78.67 (31.28)	101.26 (39.40)	116.85 (47.28)	30.59 (1,551)	&lt;.001	
Reading span	2.82 (0.67)	2.45 (0.72)	2.09 (0.56)	1.68 (0.61)	23.33 (1,287)	&lt;.001	
Psychometric interval (days)	196.4 (194.45)	86.70 (114.32)	62.80 (57.21)	59.36 (59.88)	1.16 (1,552)	.282	
% APOE ε4 positive	40%	36%	25%	54%			
CSF Aβ42 (pg/mL)	700.29 (230.65)	692.84 (259.62)	608.56 (304.98)	485.99 (228.86)	10.96 (1,346)	.001	
CSF Tau (pg/mL)	204.64 (77.34)	285.98 (159.11)	392.64 (248.17)	589.29 (292.72)	54.63 (1,346)	&lt;.001	
Lumbar puncture interval (days)	280.99 (281.83)	194.64 (230.94)	265.94 (292.87)	142.46 (164.02)	2.80 (1,346)	.095	
PIB-PET MCBP	0.05 (0.07)	0.15 (0.21)	0.24 (0.32)	0.43 (0.32)	9.94 (1,289)	.002	
PIB-PET interval (days)	239.13 (227.32)	263.91 (263.49)	277.77 (226.39)	316.89 (369.05)	0.14 (1,289)	.712	
Number of PDP assessments	1.69 (0.73)	1.75 (0.80)	1.45 (0.59)	1.30 (0.46)	8.52 (1,580)	.004	
Time in Study (years)	2.51 (2.55)	2.34 (2.38)	1.41 (1.88)	0.91 (1.49)	9.05 (1,580)	.003	

Table 2 Hierarchical linear model parameters of CSF biomarkers predicting recollection. Note: Time was defined as years after initial test and was allowed to vary randomly within individuals. Age was defined as age at initial test. Education was centered at 16 years, the sample mean. APOE status was coded as 0 for absence and 1 for presence of an ε4 allele. Sex was coded as 0 for male and 1 for female. CSF biomarkers were baseline values at the time of the first PDP estimate, within 3 years. CSF tau was corrected for non-normality using a natural log transform. Recollection, baseline age, and CSF biomarkers were standardized within the sample.

Variable	Estimate (SE)	df	t	p	
Intercept	−0.33 (0.09)	321	−3.72	&lt;.001	
Time	0.06 (0.02)	228	2.33	.021	
Age	−0.21 (0.05)	321	−4.21	&lt;.001	
Education	0.06 (0.02)	321	3.33	.001	
APOE	0.02 (0.10)	321	0.16	.873	
Sex	0.49 (0.11)	228	4.64	&lt;.001	
Aβ42	0.14 (0.06)	321	2.41	.016	
Tau	−0.06 (0.06)	321	−0.93	.356	
Time * Sex	−0.06 (0.03)	228	−1.99	.048	
Aβ42 * Tau	−0.09 (0.06)	321	−1.60	.111	
Time * Aβ42	−0.01 (0.02)	228	−0.47	.639	
Time * Tau	0.00 (0.02)	228	0.01	.990	
Time * Aβ42 * Tau	0.06 (0.02)	228	3.23	.001	

Table 3 Hierarchical linear model parameters of PIB positivity predicting recollection. Note: Time was defined as years after initial test and was allowed to vary randomly within individuals. Age was defined as age at initial test. Education was centered at 16 years, the sample mean. APOE status was coded as 0 for absence and 1 for presence of an ε4 allele. Sex was coded as 0 for male and 1 for female. PIB was coded as 0 for baseline MCBP ≤ .23 and 1 for &gt; .23. Recollection and baseline age were standardized within the sample.

Variable	Estimate (SE)	df	t	p	
Intercept	−0.16 (0.10)	280	−1.62	.107	
Time	0.02 (0.02)	212	0.94	.350	
Age	−0.24 (0.05)	280	−4.56	&lt;.001	
Education	0.06 (0.02)	280	3.29	.001	
APOE	−0.24 (0.12)	280	−1.96	.051	
Sex	0.29 (0.11)	280	2.78	.006	
PIB	0.00 (0.15)	280	−0.01	.991	
Time * APOE	0.06 (0.03)	212	1.65	.100	
Time * PIB	−0.10 (0.04)	212	−2.33	.021	

Public Significance

Recollection is a controlled process of memory retrieval, as opposed to familiarity, which is automatic. An estimate of recollection, derived from a 10-minute, computer-based memory task, outperformed a majority of other behavioral measures in correctly discriminating between cognitively normal individuals from those with the earliest detectable stage of dementia. Recollection was also uniquely related to the accumulation of Alzheimer disease pathology, i.e., amyloid plaques and neurodegeneration, in presymptomatic, cognitively normal individuals.

We have no conflict of interests to report. Aspects of this report were presented to the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences at Washington University in St. Louis as a Master’s thesis by PM. Aspects of this report were also presented in a poster at the 2016 Cognitive Aging Conference, in Atlanta, GA.

1 It should be noted that the familiarity estimates were negatively skewed, with most estimates being 1.00. The skewness might limit statistical power for a test of differences in familiarity compared to a test of the more normal and more variable recollection estimate. Therefore, we also performed the same ANOVA for age effects on a subset of 244 CDR 0s in whom familiarity was less than one. Again, the interaction between age and process type was significant, F(2,241) = 7.05, p = .001, ηp2 = .06. Older age was associated with a greater change in recollection estimates (Ms = .57, .58, .43) than in familiarity estimates (Ms = .62, .56, .65). Planned contrasts revealed that the age effect on recollection was significant, F(2,241) = 10.02, p &lt; .001, ηp2 = .08, as was the effect on familiarity, F(2,241) = 3.30, p = .039, ηp2 = .03. However, it is worth noting that this familiarity effect is marginally significant and importantly, is low for the middle aged group compared to the older age group.

We also performed the same ANCOVA for symptomatic AD effects on a subset of 244 CDR 0s and 48 CDR 0.5s in whom familiarity was less than one. Again, the interaction between CDR status and process type was highly significant, F(1,289) = 51.73, p &lt; .001, ηp2 = .15. The group difference between CDR 0s and 0.5s was greater for recollection estimates (Ms = .53, .16) than it was for familiarity estimates (Ms = .60, .76). Planned contrasts revealed that, controlling for age, the AD group difference for recollection was significant, F(1,289) = 79.97, p &lt; .001, ηp2 = .22, as was the effect on familiarity, F(1,289) = 16.39, p &lt; .001, ηp2 = .05. However, it is worth noting that this familiarity effect is in the opposite direction than that reported in some of the previous literature (see Koen &amp; Yonelinas, 2014), and might reflect a dependence between the recollection and familiarity processes within this subset of the data. Indeed, when recollection is included as an additional covariate in the familiarity contrast, the AD group difference is no longer significant, F(1,288) = 3.25, p = .073, ηp2 = .01.

2 Although we excluded recollection estimates of 1.00 from Figure 3 and from the ANOVA and ANCOVA analyses of process estimates since the corresponding familiarity estimates were undefined, for regression analyses, in which we focused specifically on recollection, we included those recollection estimates of 1.00. This inclusion served to avoid unnecessarily discarding data for tests that did not require complete pairs of recollection and familiarity estimates and to avoid biasing correlations by removing the highest performers.


Albert MS DeKosky ST Dickson D Dubois B Feldman HH Fox NC Phelps CH 2011 The diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment due to Alzheimer’s disease: Recommendations from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 7 270 279 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jalz.2011.03.008
Ally BA Gold CA Budson AE 2009 An evaluation of recollection and familiarity in Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment using receiver operating characteristics Brain and Cognition 69 3 504 513 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandc.2008.11.003 19101064
Anderson ND Craik FIM 2006 The mnemonic mechanisms of errorless learning Neuropsychologia 44 14 2806 2813 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2006.05.026 16901519
Anderson ND Ebert PL Jennings JM Grady CL Cabeza R Graham SJ 2008 Recollection- and familiarity-based memory in healthy aging and amnestic mild cognitive impairment Neuropsychology 22 2 177 87 http://doi.org/10.1037/0894-4105.22.2.177 18331160
Armitage SG 1946 An Analysis of Certain Psychological Tests Use for the Evaluation of Brain Injury Psychological Monographs 60 1
Aschenbrenner AJ Balota DA Fagan AM Duchek JM Benzinger TLS Morris JC 2015 Alzheimer Disease Cerebrospinal Fluid Biomarkers Moderate Baseline Differences and Predict Longitudinal Change in Attentional Control and Episodic Memory Composites in the Adult Children Study Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society 21 8 573 583 http://doi.org/10.1017/S1355617715000776 26416094
Aschenbrenner AJ Balota DA Tse CS Fagan AM Holtzman DM Benzinger TLS Morris JC 2015 Alzheimer Disease Biomarkers, Attentional Control, and Semantic Memory Retrieval: Synergistic and Mediational Effects of Biomarkers on a Sensitive Cognitive Measure in Non-Demented Older Adults Neuropsychology 29 368 381 http://doi.org/10.1037/neu0000133 25222200
Balota DA Burgess GC Cortese MJ Adams DR 2002 The Word-Frequency Mirror Effect in Young, Old, and Early-Stage Alzheimer’s Disease: Evidence for Two Processes in Episodic Recognition Performance Journal of Memory and Language 46 1 199 226 http://doi.org/10.1006/jmla.2001.2803
Balota DA Duchek JM 2015 Attention, Variability, and Biomarkers in Alzheimer’s Disease Remembering: Attributions, Processes, and Control in Human Memory 285 303 New York Psychology Press
Benjamin AS 2001 On the Dual Effects of Repetition on False Recognition Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 27 4 941 947
Berg L McKeel DW Miller JP Storandt M Rubin EH Morris JC Saunders AM 1998 Clinicopathologic Studies in Cognitively Healthy Aging and Alzheimer Disease Archives of Neurology 55 3 326 http://doi.org/10.1001/archneur.55.3.326 9520006
Bowles B Crupi C Pigott S Parrent A Wiebe S Janzen L Köhler S 2010 Double dissociation of selective recollection and familiarity impairments following two different surgical treatments for temporal-lobe epilepsy Neuropsychologia 48 9 2640 2647 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2010.05.010 20466009
Braak H Braak E 1991 Acta H â€™ pathologica Neuropathological stageing of Alzheimer-related changes Acta Neuropathologica 82 239 259 http://doi.org/10.1007/BF00308809 1759558
Buckner RL Snyder AZ Shannon BJ LaRossa G Sachs R Fotenos AF Mintun Ma 2005 Molecular, structural, and functional characterization of Alzheimer’s disease: evidence for a relationship between default activity, amyloid, and memory The Journal of Neuroscience : The Official Journal of the Society for Neuroscience 25 34 7709 17 http://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2177-05.2005 16120771
Carlesimo Ga Oscar-Berman M 1992 Memory deficits in Alzheimer’s patients: A comprehensive review Neuropsychology Review 3 2 119 170 http://doi.org/10.1007/BF01108841 1300219
Castel AD Craik FIM 2003 The effects of aging and divided attention on memory for item and associative information Psychology and Aging 18 4 873 885 http://doi.org/10.1037/0882-7974.18.4.873 14692872
Craik FIM 1983 On the transfer of information from temporary to permanent memory Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London: Series B 302 341 359
Craik FIM Lockhart RS 1972 Levels of processing: A framework for memory research Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 11 6 671 684 http://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-5371(72)80001-X
Davachi L Mitchell JP Wagner AD 2003 Multiple routes to memory: distinct medial temporal lobe processes build item and source memories Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 100 4 2157 2162 http://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0337195100 12578977
Diana RA Yonelinas AP Ranganath C 2007 Imaging recollection and familiarity in the medial temporal lobe: a three-component model Trends in Cognitive Sciences 11 9 379 386 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2007.08.001 17707683
Engle RW Tuholski SW Laughlin JE Conway AR 1999 Working memory, short-term memory, and general fluid intelligence: a latent-variable approach Journal of Experimental Psychology: General1 128 3 309
Fagan AM Mintun MA Mach RH Lee SY Dence CS Shah AR Holtzman DM 2006 Inverse relation between in vivo amyloid imaging load and cerebrospinal fluid Abeta;42 in humans Annals of Neurology 59 3 512 519 http://doi.org/10.1002/ana.20730 16372280
Fagan AM Roe CM Xiong C Mintun Ma Morris JC Holtzman DM 2007 Cerebrospinal fluid tau/beta-amyloid(42) ratio as a prediction of cognitive decline in nondemented older adults Archives of Neurology 64 3 343 349 http://doi.org/10.1001/archneur.64.3.noc60123 17210801
Faust ME Balota DA 2007 Inhibition, Facilitation, and Attention Control in Dementia of the Alzheimer Type: The role of unifying principles in cognitive theory development Gorfein DS McLeod C The place of inhibition in Cognition 213 238
Fischl B 2012 FreeSurfer Neuroimage2 62 2 774 781 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.01.021.FreeSurfer
Folstein MF Folstein SE McHugh PR 1975 “Mini-mental state”. A practical method for grading the cognitive state of patients for the clinician Journal of Psychiatric Research 12 3 189 198 http://doi.org/10.1016/0022-3956(75)90026-6 1202204
Galvin JE Powlishta KK Wilkins K McKeel DW Xiong C Grant E Morris JC 2005 Predictors of preclinical Alzheimer disease and dementia: a clinicopathologic study Archives of Neurology 62 5 758 765 http://doi.org/10.1001/archneur.62.5.758 15883263
Goodglass H Kaplan E 1983 Boston Diagnostic Aphasia Examination Booklet Lea &amp; Febiger
Gordon Ba Zacks JM Blazey T Benzinger TLS Morris JC Fagan AM Balota DA 2015 Task-evoked fMRI changes in attention networks are associated with preclinical Alzheimer’s disease biomarkers Neurobiology of Aging http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2015.01.019
Grober E Buschke H Crystal H Bang S Dresner R 1988 Screening for dementia by memory testing Neurology 38 June 900 903 http://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.38.6.900 3368071
Guerdoux E Dressaire D Martin S Adam S Brouillet D 2012 Habit and recollection in healthy aging, mild cognitive impairment, and Alzheimer’s disease Neuropsychology 26 4 517 533 http://doi.org/10.1037/a0028718 22642394
Hasher L Zacks RT 1979 Automatic and Effortful Processes in Memory Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 108 3 356 388
Hassenstab J Ruvolo D Jasielec M Xiong C Grant E Morris JC 2015 Absence of practice effects in preclinical Alzheimer’s disease Neuropsychology 29 6 940 948 http://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/neu0000208 26011114
Hay JF Jacoby LL 1996 Separating habit and recollection: Memory slips, process dissociations, and probability matching Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 22 6 1323 1335 http://doi.org/10.1037/0278-7393.22.6.1323
Hay JF Jacoby LL 1999 Separating habit and recollection in young and older adults: Effects of elaborative processing and distinctiveness Psychology and Aging 14 1 122 134 http://doi.org/10.1037/0882-7974.14.1.122 10224637
Healy MR Light LL Chung C 2005 Dual-process models of associative recognition in young and older adults: evidence from receiver operating characteristics Journal of Experimental Psychology. Learning, Memory, and Cognition 31 4 768 788 http://doi.org/10.1037/0278-7393.31.4.768
Hedden T Oh H Younger AP Patel TA 2013 Meta-analysis of amyloid-cognition relations in cognitively normal older adults Neurology 80 1341 1348 23547267
Jacoby LL 1991 A process dissociation framework: Separating automatic from intentional uses of memory Journal of Memory and Language 30 5 513 541 http://doi.org/10.1016/0749-596X(91)90025-F
Jacoby LL 1996 Dissociating Automatic and Consciously Controlled Effects of Study/Test Compatibility Journal of Memory and Language 35 32 52 http://doi.org/10.1006/jmla.1996.0002
Jacoby LL 1998 Invariance in Automatic Influences of Memory : Toward a User ’s Guide for the Process-Dissociation Procedure Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition
Jacoby LL 1999a Deceiving the Elderly: Effects of Accessibility Bias in Cued-Recall Performance Cognitive Neuropsychology 16 3–5 417 436 http://doi.org/10.1080/026432999380861
Jacoby LL 1999b Ironic effects of repetition: measuring age-related differences in memory Journal of Experimental Psychology. Learning, Memory, and Cognition 25 1 3 22 http://doi.org/10.1037/0278-7393.25.1.3
Jacoby LL Bishara AJ Hessels S Toth JP 2005 Aging, subjective experience, and cognitive control: dramatic false remembering by older adults Journal of Experimental Psychology. General 134 2 131 148 http://doi.org/10.1037/0096-3445.134.2.131 15869342
Jacoby LL Toth JP Yonelinas AP 1993 Separating Conscious and Unconscious Influences of Memory: Measuring Recollection Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 112 2 139 154
Kaplan E Goodglass H Weintraub S 1976 Boston Naming Test Scoring Booklet, Experimental Edition Boston Veterans Administration Hospital
Koen JD Yonelinas AP 2014 The Effects of Healthy Aging, Amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment, and Alzheimer’s Disease on Recollection and Familiarity: A Meta-Analytic Review Neuropsychology Review 332 354 http://doi.org/10.1007/s11065-014-9266-5 25119304
Mandler G 1980 Recognizing: The judgment of previous occurrence Psychological Review 87 3 252 271 http://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.87.3.252
McCabe DP Roediger HL McDaniel MA Balota DA 2009 Aging reduces veridical remembering but increases false remembering: Neuropsychological test correlates of remember-know judgments Neuropsychologia 47 11 2164 2173 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2008.11.025 19100756
McCabe DP Roediger HL McDaniel MA Balota DA Hambrick DZ 2010 The relationship between working memory capacity and executive functioning: evidence for a common executive attention construct Neuropsychology 24 2 222 43 http://doi.org/10.1037/a0017619 20230116
McKhann G Drachman D Folstein M Katzman R Price D Stadlan EM 1984 Clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease: Report of the NINCDS-ADRDA Work Group under the auspices of Department of Health and Human Services Task Force on Alzheimer’s Disease Neurology 34 939 944 http://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.34.7.939 6610841
Mintun MA Larossa GN Sheline YI Dence CS Lee SY MacH RH Morris JC 2006 [11C]PIB in a nondemented population: Potential antecedent marker of Alzheimer disease Neurology 67 3 446 452 http://doi.org/10.1212/01.wnl.0000228230.26044.a4 16894106
Morris JC 1993 The Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR): current version and scoring rules Neurology 43 11 2412 4
Morris JC Blennow K Froelich L Nordberg A Soininen H Waldemar G Dubois B 2014 Harmonized diagnostic criteria for Alzheimer’s disease: Recommendations Journal of Internal Medicine 275 3 204 213 http://doi.org/10.1111/joim.12199 24605805
Morris RG Kopelamn MD 1986 The memory deficits in Alzheimer-type dementia: A review Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 38A 10 575 602 http://doi.org/10.1080/14640748608401615
Perry RJ Hodges JR 1999 Attention and executive deficits in Alzheimer’ s disease A critical review 383 404
Pinheiro J Bates D DebRoy S Sarkar D 2014 R Core Team. nlme: Linear and Nonlinear Mexed Effects Models R package version 3 1 117
Serra L Bozzali M Cercignani M Perri R Fadda L Caltagirone C Carlesimo GA 2010 Recollection and familiarity in amnesic mild cognitive impairment Neuropsychology 24 3 316 26 http://doi.org/10.1037/a0017654 20438209
Sperling RA Aisen PS Beckett LA Bennett DA Craft S Fagan AM Phelps CH 2011 Toward defining the preclinical stages of Alzheimer’s disease: Recommendations from the National Institute on Aging and the Alzheimer’s Association workgroup Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 7 3 1 13 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jalz.2011.03.005
Spieler DH Balota DA Faust ME 1996 Stroop Performance in Healthy Younger and Older Adults and in Individuals With Dementia of the Alzheimer’s Type 22 2 461 479
Storandt M Botwinick J Danziger WL Berg L Hughes CP 1984 Pyschometric differentiation of mild senile dementia of the Alzheimer type Archives of Neurology 41 497 499 6721715
Storandt M Grant EA Miller JP Morris JC 2006 Longitudinal course and neuropathologic outcomes in original vs revised MCI and in pre-MCI Neurology 67 3 467 473 16894109
Stroop JR 1935 Studies of interference in serial verbal reactions Journal of Experimental Psychology 18 6 643 662 http://doi.org/10.1037/h0054651
Su Y D’Angelo GM Vlassenko AG Zhou G Snyder AZ Marcus DS Benzinger TLS 2013 Quantitative analysis of PiB-PET with FreeSurfer ROIs PLoS ONE 8 11 http://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0073377
Taylor KI Probst A 2008 Anatomic localization of the transentorhinal region of the perirhinal cortex Neurobiology of Aging 29 10 1591 1596 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2007.03.024 17478012
Thurstone LL Thurstone TG 1947 SRA Primary Mental Abilities
Troyer AK Murphy KJ Anderson ND Craik FIM Moscovitch M Maione A Gao F 2012 Associative recognition in mild cognitive impairment: Relationship to hippocampal volume and apolipoprotein E Neuropsychologia 50 14 3721 3728 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2012.10.018 23103838
Vos SJB Xiong C Visser PJ Mateusz S Hassenstab J Grant EA Fagan AM 2014 Preclinical Alzheimer’s disease and it’s outcome: a longitudinal cohort study Lancet Neurol 12 10 957 965 http://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(13)70194-7.Preclinical
Wais PE Squire LR Wixted JT 2010 In search of recollection and familiarity signals in the hippocampus Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 22 1 109 123 http://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2009.21190 19199424
Wechsler D 1981 WAIS-R manual: Wechsler adult intelligence scale-revised Psychological Corporation
Wechsler D 1987 WMS-R: Wechler Memory Scale-Revised: Manual Psychological Corporation
Wechsler D 1997 WAIS-III: Administration and Scoring Manual: Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale Psychological Corporation
Wechsler D Stone CP 1973 Manual: Wechsler memory scale New York Psychological Corporation
Winblad B Palmer K Kivipelto M Jelic V Fratiglioni L Wahlund LO Petersen RC 2004 Mild cognitive impairment–beyond controversies, towards a consensus: report of the International Working Group on Mild Cognitive Impairment Journal of Internal Medicine 256 3 240 246 http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2796.2004.01380.x 15324367
Wolk DA L DK Dickerson BC Aizenstein HJ Dekosky ST 2011 A Medial Temporal Lobe Division of Labor: Insights from Memory in Aging and Early Alzheimer Disease Hipp 21 5 461 466 http://doi.org/10.1002/hipo.20779.A
Wolk DA Mancuso L Kliot D Arnold SE Dickerson BC 2013 Familiarity-based memory as an early cognitive marker of preclinical and prodromal AD Neuropsychologia 51 6 1094 1102 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2013.02.014 23474075
Wolk DA Signoff ED DeKosky ST 2008 Recollection and familiarity in amnestic mild cognitive impairment: A global decline in recognition memory Neuropsychologia 46 7 1965 1978 http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2008.01.017 18328509
Yonelinas AP Jacoby LL 2012 The process-dissociation approach two decades later: Convergence, boundary conditions, and new directions Memory &amp; Cognition 40 5 663 680 http://doi.org/10.3758/s13421-012-0205-5 22528824
