LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


100962782
22271
Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol
Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.
Nature reviews. Molecular cell biology
1471-0072
1471-0080

26956196
5161407
10.1038/nrm.2016.14
NIHMS835273
Article
Nuclear DNA damage signalling to mitochondria in ageing
Fang Evandro Fei 1*
Scheibye-Knudsen Morten 1*
Chua Katrin F. 23
Mattson Mark P. 45
Croteau Deborah L. 1
Bohr Vilhelm A. 1*
1 Laboratory of Molecular Gerontology, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, Baltimore, Maryland 21224, USA
2 Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Gerontology, and Metabolism, School of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA
3 Geriatric Research, Education, and Clinical Center, VA Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto, California 94304, USA
4 Laboratory of Neurosciences, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, Baltimore, Maryland 21224, USA
5 Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA
Correspondence to V.A.B. vbohr@nih.gov
* These authors contributed equally to this work.

13 12 2016
09 3 2016
5 2016
16 12 2016
17 5 308321
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Mitochondrial dysfunction is a hallmark of ageing, and mitochondrial maintenance may lead to increased healthspan. Emerging evidence suggests a crucial role for signalling from the nucleus to mitochondria (NM signalling) in regulating mitochondrial function and ageing. An important initiator of NM signalling is nuclear DNA damage, which accumulates with age and may contribute to the development of age-associated diseases. DNA damage-dependent NM signalling constitutes a network that includes nuclear sirtuins and controls genomic stability and mitochondrial integrity. Pharmacological modulation of NM signalling is a promising novel approach for the prevention and treatment of age-associated diseases.


Mitochondria are present in the cytoplasm of almost all mammalian cells. They provide energy by generating ATP and are crucial for many signalling pathways. Mitochondria constantly adjust their morphology and function in response to changes in the microenvironment, such as exposure to endogenous or exogenous stress1,2. Healthy mitochondria are maintained by multiple processes, including fusion and fission, DNA repair and mitophagy (clearance of damaged mitochondria)2–6. Impairment of any of these processes can lead to mitochondrial dysfunction and contribute to mitochondrial diseases, neurodegenerative disorders, cancer, diabetes, heart disease, immunodeficiency and ageing1,7–10. For example, impairment of mitophagy is implicated in Parkinson disease, Alzheimer disease and pathological ageing11–13. Although the aetiology of mitochondrial diseases has largely been attributed to defects in mitochondrial proteins, mutations in non-mitochondrial proteins or impairment of nucleus-to-mitochondria signalling (NM signalling) can also promote mitochondrial dysfunction. Thus, a better understanding of the molecular signalling mechanisms that influence mitochondrial functions is important in relation to human health.

Owing to its central function in energy metabolism, a healthy mitochondrial pool is crucial for organismal health. Indeed, some data suggest that damaged mitochondria accumulate with age in organisms spanning the evolutionary spectrum, from unicellular organisms to humans10,12,14–16. However, age-associated changes in gross mitochondrial function, such as oxidative phosphorylation, have not been consistently detected17,18. Thus, age- associated mitochondrial changes may not be the primary drivers, but rather a downstream consequence, of nuclear signalling pathways that drive the ageing process17,19,20.

Recent evidence suggests that compromised NM signalling is a key component of mammalian ageing. DNA damage is well known to affect DNA replication, transcription and many signalling pathways, but how this damage invokes signalling to mitochondria is a new area of investigation. Several DNA repair-deficient, premature ageing diseases, such as Cockayne syndrome, xeroderma pigmentosum group A (XPA) and ataxia telangiectasia, involve mitochondrial alterations consisting of increased mitochondrial membrane potential and increased oxygen consumption rates — traits that are indicative of adaptive responses3,12,21–23. In this Review, we focus on NM signalling pathways that are activated in response to genotoxic stimuli, especially DNA damage, and their roles in the maintenance of mitochondrial integrity and ageing (FIG. 1). We also discuss emerging findings suggesting that intervention in NM signalling can alleviate age-associated physiological changes. Importantly, NM signalling is closely coupled with signalling from mitochondria to the nucleus, including the mitochondrial unfolded protein response (UPRmt). Recent findings suggest that the nuclear DNA damage response regulates protein homeostasis in mitochondria through activation of the UPRmt (for more details about the molecular pathways involved, see REFS 16, 24–27).

Nuclear DNA repair and mitochondrial health

Progressive damage to nuclear DNA and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is considered to be a prominent contributing factor to the ageing process and may underlie several age-associated diseases4,20,28,29. Cells have multiple DNA repair pathways to rectify the myriad types of DNA lesions that occur and to maintain DNA integrity in the nucleus and in mitochondria (BOX 1). Key nuclear DNA repair pathways include DNA double- strand break repair (DSBR), base excision repair (BER) and nucleotide excision repair (NER). Multiple mitochondria-associated adaptive processes are regulated by nuclear transcription regulators, such as peroxi-some proliferator-activated receptor-γ co-activator 1α (PGC1α), hypoxia inducible factor 1α (HIF1α), the fork-head box O (FOXO) proteins and some sirtuin family members. Sirtuins are a group of NAD+-dependent deacetylases that can alter the activities of diverse proteins (BOX 2). Coordination between nuclear DNA repair proteins and nuclear sirtuins (SIRT1, SIRT6 and SIRT7) reveals a facet of how nuclear DNA repair proteins may regulate mitochondrial homeostasis (FIG. 2).

Box 1 Nuclear and mitochondrial DNA damage repair

Nuclear DNA damage is regarded as a major culprit in cancer, neurodegeneration, mitochondrial dysfunction and many age-related diseases, and unrepaired DNA damage can result in pathological levels of nucleus-to-mitochondria signalling (NM signalling), which may exacerbate disease progression. As DNA is constantly assaulted by both endogenous (for example, reactive oxygen species and hydrolysis) and exogenous (such as ultraviolet and ionizing radiation) stresses, cells have evolved several DNA repair pathways to maintain the integrity of DNA3,4,141–144. Major DNA repair pathways in the nucleus include direct reversal (DR) of the lesion (usually methylation), base excision repair (BER), mismatch repair (MMR), nucleotide excision repair (NER; comprising global genome NER and transcription-coupled NER), double-strand break repair (DSBR, which includes non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ) and homologous recombination (HR)) and inter-strand crosslink repair (ICLR), among others (see the figure). DNA repair pathways in mitochondria are less well understood; the available data suggest that BER is the major DNA repair pathway, whereas NER does not exist in mitochondria.

DR, MMR and DSBR may exist in mitochondria, although their enzymatic constituents remain to be elucidated3,145,146. Intriguingly, a number of predominantly nuclear DNA repair proteins are also present in mitochondria. Many of the proteins involved in BER are present in both compartments, and for many other DNA metabolic proteins, it is unclear whether they are normally present in the mitochondria or imported under conditions of stress. Some DNA repair proteins, such as RECQL4, petite integration frequency 1 (PIF1), DNA replication helicase/nuclease 2 (DNA2) and Suppressor of Var1 3-like protein 1 (SUPV3L1) are localized at both the nucleus and mitochondria and may maintain mitochondrial DNA stability and/or mitochondrial function, in addition to promoting nuclear DNA integrity147,148. For example, RECQL4 is one of the five human RecQ helicases, and it is mutated in Rothmund–Thomson syndrome. RECQL4 primarily localizes to the nucleus and participates in nuclear DNA repair. A portion of RECQL4 also localizes to the mitochondria and regulates the translocation of p53 to mitochondria, as well as maintaining mitochondrial DNA integrity147,148.

Box 2 Functions of sirtuins in ageing and age-associated diseases

Sirtuins are NAD+-dependent deacetylase and deacylase enzymes that control metabolism and ageing. Sirtuins modify proteins, and, in the process, they consume NAD+ and generate nicotinamide (NAM) and ADP-ribose (ADPR; see the figure). The Saccharomyces cerevisiae SIR2 gene (silent information regulator 2; encoding the protein Sir2p) was the first sirtuin to be discovered; it affects replicative lifespan in yeast through histone deacetylation and chromatin silencing at ribosomal DNA repeats and sub-telomeric sequences33,149,150. The SIR2 orthologue in Caenorhabditis elegans is sir-2.1. Overexpression of sir-2.1 extended lifespan in some studies but not others16,151–153. There are seven mammalian sirtuins, SIRT1 to SIRT7. SIRT1, which is a nuclear protein, is defective in many age-associated diseases and regulates diverse ageing-related processes, including mitochondrial homeostasis and genomic stability12,33. More than 50 proteins are deacetylated by SIRT1, including some that are involved in energy metabolism (such as peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-α (PPARα) and PPARγ), mitochondrial homeostasis (peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ co-activator 1α (PGC1α), hypoxia inducible factor 1α (HIF1α), autophagy-related protein 7 (ATG7) and ATG8), and some that are involved in DNA repair (such as ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM), xeroderma pigmentosum group A-complementing protein (XPA), Werner syndrome ATP-dependent helicase (WRN), KU70 and others)12,33,47,48,154. SIRT2 is primarily cytoplasmic but is observed in the nucleus during mitosis, where it regulates the mitotic checkpoint. SIRT3, SIRT4 and SIRT5 are mitochondrial enzymes, with SIRT3 being responsible for the majority of deacetylation of mitochondrial metabolic enzymes155. The nuclear SIRT6 is linked to telomere maintenance and genome stabilization. In mice, SIRT6 loss leads to genomic instability and premature ageing phenotypes, whereas overexpression of SIRT6 extends mouse lifespan54,55,60,62. SIRT7, which is also a nuclear protein, promotes epigenetic stabilization of cancer-associated gene expression programmes and regulates mitochondrial homeostasis through the regulation of nuclear-encoded mitochondrial genes and the mitochondrial unfolded protein response (UPRmt)25,68. Mammalian sirtuins affect cancer biology through tumour suppressive and oncogenic effects33. Thus, the sirtuins participate in multiple cellular pathways, and future work should further interrogate the crosstalk between sirtuins and ageing.

The PARP1 and NAD+–SIRT1–PGC1α axis

A prominent pathway linking nuclear DNA damage to mitochondrial homeostasis is the NAD+–SIRT1–PGC1α axis, in which NAD+ has a pivotal role. NAD+ is a rate-limiting metabolite for poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP1) and SIRT1 activities, making the cellular content of NAD+ an important index for cell fate and organismal health (see below). Intracellular NAD+ levels are usually approximately 0.2–0.5 mM, depending on cell type and condition27. There is a subcellular difference in NAD+ content between the nucleus and mitochondria, as the nuclear NAD+ content is ~0.07 mM — much lower than in mitochondria, where it is 0.25 mM or greater27,30. The cellular NAD+ level is tightly regulated by three biosynthetic pathways, the Preiss–Handler pathway, de novo biosynthesis and the salvage pathway27,31. There is an age-dependent decrease in NAD+, and NAD+ is also reduced in several pathologies, suggesting a contributory role for NAD+ depletion in ageing and age-related diseases. The regulation of NAD+ metabolism and its importance in health and ageing are discussed in two excellent recent reviews27,31.

Mammalian SIRT1 is thought to be involved in epigenetic regulation, mitochondrial maintenance and the ageing process. SIRT1, which is a prominent nuclear sirtuin, regulates various cellular pathways and may delay the progression of ageing through deacetylation of several substrates, including PGC1α, which is a master regulator of mitochondrial biogenesis32. The deacetylation activity of SIRT1 and other sirtuins requires consumption of NAD+, which is a cofactor also involved in DNA damage repair12,33–35. When DNA breaks occur, the DNA break sensor PARP1 detects break sites and initiates DNA repair signalling through generation of PAR, a process called PARylation, which consumes NAD+ (REF. 36) (FIG. 2). Interestingly, PARP1 and SIRT1 have comparable Km values for NAD+ (50–97 μM and 94–96 μM, respectively)27. PARylation promotes the rapid recruitment of PAR-binding DNA repair proteins to locate and efficiently repair the DNA damage, as well as promoting the decondensation of chromatin around the damage site. Aged and DNA repair-deficient laboratory animal models exhibited persistent hyperactivation of PARP1, lower SIRT1 activity and NAD+ depletion. PARP1 inhibition or NAD+ supplementation restored NAD+ levels and SIRT1 activity12,16,27. Thus, PARP1 and SIRT1 can compete for NAD+, and increased consumption of NAD+ by one of these proteins may limit the activity of the other (FIGS 2,3a). When cells with a very high energy requirement, such as neurons or cardiac myocytes, are subjected to severe reductions in energy availability — such as during an ischaemic event (stroke or myocardial infarction) — increased consumption of NAD+ by PARP1 (REFS 37,38) and SIRT1 (REF. 39) may contribute to a cellular energy crisis that triggers cell death. The molecular details of the nature of the competition between PARP1 and SIRT1 for NAD+ as a substrate merit further investigation.

Imbalances of the activities of PARP1 and SIRT1 have been associated with ageing and pathological processes. An age-dependent increase in PARylation was observed in various experimental animals (including nematodes and mice)12,16, and PARP activation has been detected in a wide range of human diseases, including chronic heart failure, stroke, Alzheimer disease and Parkinson disease40. Deletion of the Parp1 gene increased NAD+ levels, SIRT1 activity and mitochondrial biogenesis in mice41, and pharmacological inhibition of PARP1 increased mitochondrial biogenesis and extended lifespan in wild-type nematodes16. Compromised balance between the activities of PARP1 and SIRT1 signalling may also contribute to premature ageing syndromes, such as in XPA and Cockayne syndrome. Individuals with XPA are UV-sensitive, with a high risk of skin cancers, and they suffer from neurodegeneration, including progressive cerebral and cerebellar atrophy, neuropathy and sensorineural hearing loss12,42. XPA is caused by mutation of the gene encoding the protein XPA, which participates in NER43. Patients with Cockayne syndrome show photosensitivity (but no cancer susceptibility), with major clinical manifestations including severe early-onset neurodegeneration, hearing loss, muscle weakness and cachectic dwarfism44. This is caused by mutations in genes encoding Cockayne syndrome group A or B (CSA or CSB) proteins, which are also involved in the NER pathway of DNA repair. Recent studies in patient cells and various experiments in animal models suggest that both XPA and Cockayne syndrome have a noticeable phenotype of mitochondrial disease, as evidenced by severe mitochondrial clinical features and dysfunction including altered mitochondrial metabolism and accumulation of damaged mitochondria12,21,35. In patient cells and animal models of XPA and CSB, there is a reduction of SIRT1 activity, owing to persistent activation of PARP, induced by unrepaired DNA damage. Inhibition of PARP1 or supplementation of NAD+ precursors restored SIRT1 activity and improved mitochondrial homeostasis12,21,35. Thus, short-term activation of PARP1 is beneficial for genomic stability, because it promotes DNA repair; however, persistent activation of PARP1 in age-related diseases probably contributes to pathology.

In addition to the NAD+–SIRT1–PGC1α axis, other processes are affected by PARP1/SIRT1 competition. SIRT1 modulates the activities of mitochondria-related transcription factors other than PGC1α, including HIF1α, FOXO1 and FOXO3A, through deacetylation or degradation (for HIF1α)45,46. DAF-16, a homologue of mammalian FOXO3A, is the only FOXO family member in Caenorhabditis elegans. The C. elegans SIR-2.1 (a homologue of mammalian SIRT1) can activate the DAF-16–superoxide dismutase (SOD-3) pathway to protect against reactive oxygen species (ROS)16, which can trigger PARP1 (FIG. 2). Many other pathway steps in NM signalling following DNA damage are being investigated.

SIRT1 participates in nuclear DNA repair

SIRT1 affects multiple DNA repair pathways. It deacetylates and activates some major DSBR proteins, including KU70, nibrin, histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and the RecQ helicase protein Werner (WRN)47–49. In neurons, SIRT1 has a role in DSBR through non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ). Specifically, it participates in the initial sensing and signalling of DSBs through stabilization of ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) at DSB sites and deacetylates HDAC1, which is implicated in another step of NHEJ47. In proliferating cells, SIRT1 participates in homologous recombination and BER through deacetylation of WRN49. Even though ATM is a crucial sensor of DSBs, SIRT1 can promote DSBR in an ATM-independent manner, which may involve WRN and other proteins50. SIRT1 also increases BER activity through deacetylation of key pathway proteins, including apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease 1 and thymine DNA glycosylase51,52. SIRT1 also promotes NER through deacetylation of XPA, resulting in enhanced interaction of XPA with other NER proteins53. Thus, in addition to direct regulation of mitochondrial homeostasis through the aforementioned pathways, SIRT1 promotes genomic stability (FIG. 2).

Other sirtuins

Two other nuclear sirtuins, SIRT6 and SIRT7, have important roles in chromatin regulation and genome maintenance and, like SIRT1, have intriguing links to mitochondrial homeostasis. SIRT6 is a chromatin-remodelling factor that maintains genomic stability through various mechanisms and represses gene expression programmes associated with ageing, metabolism and cancer. SIRT6 is implicated in longevity regulation: overexpression of SIRT6 increases lifespan in male transgenic mice, and SIRT6 deficiency leads to shortened mouse lifespan, genomic instability and, in mouse cancer models, to increased tumour growth and aggressiveness54–56. Additionally, ageing-associated phenotypes observed in SIRT6-deficient mice have some features similar to those of Hutchinson–Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS), which is a rare and fatal human premature ageing disease caused by mutations in the lamin A gene55,57,58. Lamin A may be an endogenous activator of SIRT6 by promoting its DNA repair-mediating activity58. Despite its nuclear localization and functions, SIRT6 influences mitochondrial homeostasis and has important effects on cancer cell metabolism. SIRT6 increases mitochondrial respiration by repressing transcription of key glycolytic enzymes through inhibition of HIF1α; in cancer cells, this prevents tumorigenic glycolytic metabolism (known as the ‘Warburg effect’)56,59.

SIRT6 also regulates genomic stability and promotes DSBR through several mechanisms. It prevents telomere dysfunction and interacts physically or functionally with many DSBR proteins, including PARP1, DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK), C-terminal-binding protein-interacting protein (CTIP), WRN and the ATP-dependent chromatin remodeller SWI/SNF-related matrix-associated actin-dependent regulator of chromatin A5 (SNF2H)60–64. Thus, SIRT6 is involved in DNA damage recognition64 and affects mitochondrial homeostasis and tumour suppression. In addition to DNA repair, anti-ageing effects of SIRT6 may be associated with its role in repressing long interspersed element 1 (LINE1) retrotransposons, a group of transposable elements that induce genomic instability65. LINE1 transposition increases upon DNA damage or cellular and tissue ageing and is associated with depletion of SIRT6 at LINE1 promoters. Interestingly, retrotransposons can trigger innate immune responses, which may involve mitochondrial stress signalling1, thus suggesting linkage between SIRT6 and mitochondria. This area of research is a ripe topic for future investigations to better understand the role of SIRT6 in DNA damage-induced NM signalling.

SIRT7 is less well characterized than SIRT6, but studies indicate that it is a dynamic nuclear regulator of both chromatin and mitochondrial functions. SIRT7 promotes chromatin-dependent repression of genes involved in the epigenetic maintenance of oncogenic transformation, including cytoplasmic and mito-chondrial ribosomal proteins66. In SIRT7-deficient mouse liver, increased ribosomal protein expression is associated with endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and hepatosteatosis67, and, in haematopoietic stem cells, SIRT7 loss leads to increased levels of mitochondrial ribosomal proteins and mitochondrial protein folding stress25. SIRT7 may regulate mitochondrial homeostasis by deacetylating GA-binding protein β1 (GABPβ1), which is a master regulator of nuclear-encoded mitochondrial genes; accordingly, SIRT7-deficient mice exhibit multi-systemic mitochondrial dysfunction68.

In addition to nuclear sirtuins, the mitochondrial SIRT3 and SIRT4 may participate in DNA damage- induced NM signalling. SIRT3, a major mitochondrial deacetylase, prevents both age-related and noise-induced hearing loss through reduction of oxidative mtDNA damage (such as apurinic and apyrimidinic sites and 8-oxo-dGuo) in the cochlea and brain, or through reduction of neurite degeneration caused by noise69,70. The roles of SIRT3 in neuroprotection may be mediated by augmentation of the mitochondrial antioxidant defence system and deacetylation of several proteins, including mitochondrial isocitrate dehydrogenase 2, SOD2 and cyclophilin D69,71. SIRT4 is induced by many genotoxic agents, and it regulates the cellular metabolic response to nuclear DNA damage response pathways through repression of mitochondrial glutamine metabolism. Although the roles of mitochondrial sirtuins in ageing, metabolism and mitochondrial function have been established33,72,73, further work on how these mitochondrial sirtuins link mitochondrial maintenance and genomic stability will improve our understanding of their roles in NM signalling.

Although we discuss a few of the nuclear sirtuins separately, there is evidence for functional interactions among them. The expression of SIRT6 may be dependent on SIRT1 through the formation of a SIRT1–FOXO3A–nuclear respiratory factor 1 (NRF1) transcription complex on the SIRT6 promoter74. SIRT7 and SIRT1 interact physically, and this interaction is important for regulation of the epithelial–mesenchymal transition (EMT)-like process of metastatic progression in cancer cells75. Proteomic studies of SIRT6- or SIRT7-interacting factors uncovered more than 110 common proteins, although it is not known whether these interactions occur in the same or in distinct protein complexes76. Several of these proteins, including nucleophosmin and nucleolin, are associated with ageing-related processes such as DNA repair and cellular senescence, but they can also have an impact on mitochondrial biology76, indicating a possible involvement in DNA damage-induced NM signalling.

Metabolic NM signalling pathways

DNA damage leads to metabolic alterations at the cellular and organismal levels. This is evident in premature ageing disorders such as Werner syndrome, ataxia telangiectasia, Cockayne syndrome and Hutchinson–Gilford progeria, in which weight loss is highly prevalent35,77,78. Notably, weight loss is common in normal human ageing, as well as in neurodegenerative diseases such as Parkinson disease, Huntington disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)79. Indeed, in cell and animal models of accelerated ageing, weight loss is prominent and may be caused by increased metabolic rates12,35,80. Pharmacological inhibition of the DNA damage sensor PARP1 decreases the metabolic rate of old Csbm/m mice (with a truncation mutation in CSB), supporting the idea that DNA damage-induced hyperactivation of this enzyme contributes to metabolic alterations in accelerated ageing disorders35. In the process of PARylation, PARP1 consumes NAD+, which leads to alterations in the NAD+/NADH ratio, resulting in increased lactate production35,81. This phenomenon is observed in the brain during normal and accelerated ageing82 (FIG. 3a). Lactate is produced by lactate dehydrogenase from pyruvate. Pyruvate dehydrogenase decarboxylates pyruvate, thereby creating the central bioenergetic molecule acetyl-CoA. This process occurs in mitochondria; however, recent findings suggest that the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex is also present in the nucleus, where acetyl-CoA is utilized by histone acetyltransferases to control the epigenome83. Intriguingly, DNA damage- induced PARP1 activation can lead to decreases in the NAD+/NADH ratio, decreased formation of acetyl-CoA, and thus loss of histone acetylation, perhaps contributing to the global transcriptional silencing that is known to occur after DNA damage84,85. Accordingly, age-associated accumulation of DNA damage and persistent activation of PARP1 could contribute to age- associated alterations in the epigenome. Importantly, cellular acetyl-CoA levels can be increased through simple dietary interventions such as fasting or ingestion of a ketogenic diet. Indeed, these two diets increase lifespan and/or healthy life expectancy (healthspan) across species86.

Alterations in food intake regulate ageing across numerous species. As is the case with DNA damage signalling, fasting also leads to the activation of downstream factors. One conserved and key cellular energy sensor is AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), which facilitates cell survival through the orchestrated activation of multiple pathways that maintain cellular energy homeostasis. AMPK is activated by increases in ADP and AMP levels during periods of either low energy availability or increased energy demand45. In addition, AMPK is activated by ROS and elevated cytoplasmic calcium levels through Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase kinase-β (CaMKKβ). AMPK is also activated by ATM, which is a master regulator of the DNA damage response (as described below), and by p53. ATM can either directly phosphorylate and activate AMPK or activate the upstream AMPK activator liver kinase B1 (LKB1)87 (FIG. 3b).

Additionally, p53 stabilization has been reported to induce transcriptional activation of sestrin 1 and sestrin 2, resulting in AMPK activation88. AMPK activation leads to increased glucose and fatty acid oxidation through activation of glucose transporters (GLUTs), HIF1α and sterol regulatory element- binding proteins (SREBPs), as well as activation of mitochondrial maintenance signalling through phosphorylation and activation of the promitophagic factor UNC51-like kinase 1 (ULK1)89. In addition, AMPK phosphorylates and activates the mTORC1 inhibitor tuberous sclerosis complex 2 (TSC2), thereby further activating autophagy and inhibiting cell growth. AMPK also positively regulates PGC1α activity, which stimulates mitochondrial biogenesis, and FOXO3A activity, which leads to activation of stress response and pro- survival pathways45. Thus, it is clear that AMPK has a central role in regulating mitochondrial function both directly and indirectly (FIG. 3b). Importantly, AMPK represents a pharmacological target, with specific activators having potential beneficial effects in various age-related diseases.

Mitophagy–apoptosis crosstalk

DNA damage activates certain pivotal proteins that lead to amplification and propagation of a signal, ultimately resulting in cellular outcomes such as mitophagy and apoptosis. Several mediators seem to be important for the choice between autophagy and mitophagy or apoptosis. Importantly, low levels of DNA damage stress may stimulate mitophagy and antagonize apoptosis, whereas high levels of stress inhibit mitophagy and stimulate apoptosis.

Mitochondria not only have a central role in metabolic pathways, they also regulate cell fate through crosstalk between mitophagy and apoptosis. Macroautophagy (autophagy) and apoptosis are intimately interconnected to determine whether cells survive or die (FIG. 4). DNA damage constitutes a strong intrinsic apoptotic signal. Apoptosis can occur by several different mechanisms, including caspase 8-dependent apoptosis, mitochondria- mediated caspase 9- and caspase 3-dependent apoptosis, and caspase-independent necrosis or autophagic cell death90 (FIG. 4a). The B cell lymphoma 2 (BCL-2) family of proteins are closely involved in the regulation of apoptosis and consist of both pro-survival members, including BCL-2, BCL-XL, BCL-W, A1A and MCL2; and pro-apoptotic members such as BAX, BAK, BIM, BID (BCL-2 homologous 3-interacting domain death agonist) and PUMA91. Apoptosis is initiated when the DNA lesion burden exceeds a specific threshold, leading to the initiation of intrinsic and/or extrinsic apoptotic pathways.

Autophagy (auto, self; phagy, eating of) generally functions as a pro-survival mechanism, and defective autophagy is linked with neurodegenerative diseases and ageing. Autophagy is a process whereby cells sequester damaged or unused cytoplasmic substrates within a double-membrane vesicle — the autophagosome — that is then fused with lysosomes, leading to the degradation of the engulfed substrates92. Mitophagy is the selective degradation of mitochondria by autophagy. In mammalian cells, there are several mitophagy pathways, such as NIX (also known as BNIP3L)-regulated programmed mitophagy, which is found in blood cells; and selective mitophagy, which can be regulated in a PTEN-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1)-dependent or PINK1-independent manner3,93–95. Genes encoding PINK1 and the ubiquitin ligase parkin are often mutated in autosomal recessive parkinsonism5. In mitophagy, full-length PINK1 located at the outer mitochondrial membrane phosphorylates ubiquitin to activate parkin, which generates ubiquitin chains to recruit downstream autophagy receptors and signals robust mitophagy95 (FIG. 4b). In normal, steady-state conditions, the mitochondrial membrane potential drives full-length PINK1 through the translocase of the inner membrane (TIM) complex, where mitochondrial processing peptidase (MPP) and presenilin-associated rhomboid-like protein (PARL) cleave the mitochondrial targeting sequence and transmembrane domain of PINK1. The cytoplasmic part of PINK1 is further degraded by the ubiquitin proteasome5,12,96. Thus, mitophagy targets damaged and depolarized mitochondria, as mitochondria with higher mitochondrial membrane potentials are spared from PINK1-dependent mitophagy.

It is increasingly clear that mitophagy plays an important part in the maintenance of neuronal health, as well as in the ageing process itself11. Current knowledge of the relationship between autophagy and apoptosis suggests that autophagy precedes apoptosis in many instances, and that autophagy and apoptosis are often antagonistic22,90,92 (FIG. 4). In this section, the interplay between classic apoptotic mediators and mitophagy, and the role of NM signalling in the regulation of this crosstalk, will be illustrated in three major pathways.

ATM-mediated mitophagy–apoptosis crosstalk

The protein kinase ATM is a major activator of the DNA damage response. It has a key role in the repair of DSBs, and it is closely linked to health through its roles in the maintenance of genomic stability and mitochondrial homeostasis (FIG. 4c). ATM triggers multiple cellular events to promote cell survival at low levels of DSBs; conversely, it drives cellular apoptosis after extensive DSB damage23,97. ATM promotes survival by activating repair of DSBs, upregulating pro-survival genes and inducing autophagy and mitophagy. In response to DNA damage, cells recruit DNA repair proteins, including ATM, to DSBs to initiate DNA repair. This process also involves ubiquitylation of the nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) essential modifier (NEMO) protein, which translocates from the nucleus to the cytoplasm, where it activates the Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK)97,98. JNK modulates the balance between apoptosis and autophagy and mitophagy through the phosphorylation of specific BCL-2 protein family members, such as BCL-2 and BIM. This releases the pro-autophagy protein Beclin 1 from BCL-2 or BIM complexes, and autophagy is initiated99. When DSBs are extensive, JNK instead promotes apoptosis through at least two independent pathways: the inactivation of the anti-apoptotic BCL-2 and the activation of the FAS-associated death domain protein (FADD)–caspase 8 pro-apoptotic pathway90,97. Thus, in response to DSBs, ATM uses NEMO and JNK to regulate autophagy/ mitophagy–apoptosis crosstalk (FIG. 4c). The ATM–BID axis is an additional regulator of mitochondrial function following DNA damage. ATM may inhibit ROS production by phosphorylating BID and preventing its translocation to mitochondria and apoptosis100 (FIG. 4c).

A role for ATM in mitochondrial homeostasis and longevity is supported by the phenotypes of ataxia telangiectasia patients and Atm−/− laboratory animal models. Patients with ataxia telangiectasia show neurodegeneration, cancer predisposition and sterility23. Cells from these patients have mitochondrial dysfunction and alterations in mtDNA copy number, higher mitochondrial levels of ROS, elevated cellular respiratory capacity and an accumulation of damaged mitochondria12,80,101. The importance of mitochondrial dysfunction in the aetiology or progression of ataxia telangiectasia is further supported by the notion that ataxia telangiectasia patient cells and Atm−/− mouse models are highly sensitive to oxidants. Conversely, mitochondrial antioxidants protect Atm−/− cells against oxidative stress and mitigate some ataxia telangiectasia phenotypes in Atm−/− mice23. It is likely that defective mitophagy significantly contributes to the mitochondrial dysfunction in ataxia telangiectasia12,80. Using a bio-informatics tool, Mito DB, it was reported that patients with ATM mutations clinically resemble patients with mitochondrial diseases12,102. Further studies into pathways involved in mitochondrial dysfunction in ataxia telangiectasia are warranted.

p53-mediated mitophagy–apoptosis crosstalk

The tumour suppressor p53 is at the hub of numerous signalling pathways, but although the role of p53 in apoptosis is well established, it has only recently been associated with mitophagy (FIG. 4d). Under lethal genotoxic stress, p53 transcriptionally upregulates pro-apoptotic proteins such as p21, RB, BAX, FAS, death receptor 5 (DR5; also known as TNFRSF10B), NOXA, PIG3, p53AIP1 and PUMA, which leads to cellular apoptosis, senescence or growth arrest103,104. Of note, p53 in the cytoplasm may enhance apoptosis through inhibition and destabilization of the autophagy-initiation ULK1–FIP200–autophagy-related protein 13 (ATG13)–ATG101 complex, as well as through inhibition of PINK1–Parkin-mediated mitophagy105. However, in cells under low levels of stress, nuclear p53 can bind the promoter regions of genes that encode pro-autophagy proteins, including DNA damage-regulated autophagy modulator 1 (DRAM1), thereby inducing mitophagy89,106. DRAM1 is a lysosomal membrane protein involved in autophagy induction; when mitochondrial protein synthesis is impaired, mitochondria generate more ROS to activate autophagy and mitophagy through the ROS–p53–DRAM1 pathway107. These examples illustrate how p53-mediated nuclear signalling regulates apoptosis and mitophagy (FIG. 4d).

In recent years, evidence has accumulated to suggest that p53 has crucial roles in ageing through interconnected regulation of apoptosis, senescence and autophagy. Studies from animal models support the view that p53 signalling prolongs lifespan, as evidenced by decreased levels of tumour incidence, senescence and ageing-associated damage in model organisms108–110. In C. elegans, it was reported that daf-2 (encoding an insulin-like receptor) mutants had extended lifespan through inhibition of tumour growth in a DAF-16–p53-dependent manner110. Compared with wild type, mice with moderately high levels of p53 showed high cancer resistance, increased antioxidant activity and delayed ageing109. In view of the role of p53 in the induction of autophagy, it would be of interest to investigate the role of autophagy in p53-mediated longevity. Collectively, the available data suggest that p53 can determine cell fate by influencing mitophagy–apoptosis crosstalk, and that an imbalance of this crosstalk in favour of apoptosis may contribute to degenerative diseases and ageing.

SIRT1-mediated mitophagy–apoptosis crosstalk

In addition to the well-described role of SIRT1 in mitochondrial biogenesis through PGC1α, SIRT1 also regulates the crosstalk between mitophagy and cell death. SIRT1 deacetylates and inactivates p53, allowing cells to escape apoptosis after excessive toxic stress, including DNA damage111,112 (FIG. 4e). It also inhibits apoptosis by activating autophagy and mitophagy. In yeast, Sir2 (silent information regulator 2; the homologue of mammalian SIRT1) protects against ageing, partially through induction of mitophagy by transcriptional upregulation of the mitophagy executor Atg32 (REF. 113). In mammals, SIRT1 can activate autophagy through several pathways, including deacetylation of light chain 3 (LC3; also known as MAP1LC3B), which facilitates its nuclear export and its conjugation on the autophagic membrane through interaction with another cytoplasmic autophagy regulator, ATG7 (REF. 114). SIRT1 can also regulate mitophagy by maintaining PINK1 integrity through regulation of the mitochondrial membrane potential12. In XPA, a high mitochondrial membrane potential destabilizes full-length PINK1, causing defective mitophagy. Activation of the NAD+–SIRT1–PGC1α axis in XPA cells restored mitophagy through upregulation of mitochondrial uncoupling protein 2 (UCP2)12.

SIRT1 also interacts cooperatively with AMPK, which is a central regulator of metabolism and energy homeostasis, to stimulate mitophagy (FIG. 4e). Either physiological (through fasting or exercise) or pharmacological activation of AMPK can activate SIRT1 through increasing the NAD+/NADH ratio12,45,89. Interestingly, AMPK can also be activated by SIRT1 through deacetylation of LKB1, leading to the phosphorylation and activation of AMPK. This may suggest the existence of a positive-feedback loop in the regulation of SIRT1–AMPK signalling115. Thus, SIRT1 may counteract ageing by maintaining mitochondrial integrity and inhibiting apoptosis through tight regulation of several major cell fate-determining proteins. Importantly, hyperactivation of the DNA damage response may inhibit SIRT1 activity through the consumption of NAD+, even though SIRT1 promotes genomic stability through participation in DNA repair, as discussed above.

Collectively, autophagy and mitophagy are key regulators of mitochondrial homeostasis, and defective mitophagy may accelerate the ageing process and the development of age-related neurodegenerative diseases. Enhancement of autophagy and mitophagy may therefore represent a therapeutic strategy for these diseases.

Strategies for improving healthspan

Recent findings demonstrate the possibility of interventions in ageing that will reduce or delay morbidity and increase healthspan116. The NM signalling network is emerging as a promising target for improving healthspan.

Enhancing the NAD+–SIRT1 pathway

The NAD+–SIRT1 pathway is an important target for intervention. SIRT1 activity can be enhanced by increasing NAD+ levels or by the use of SIRT1 activators. One way to increase NAD+ levels is to reduce NAD+ consumption by, for example, using inhibitors of PARPs (such as olaparib and veliparib (FIG. 5a)) or of other NAD+-consuming enzymes such as CD38 (REFS 12,16). As PARP1 is a key protein in DNA repair, and because its inhibition may lead to genomic instability, it is necessary to proceed cautiously with such long-term intervention in humans. As CD38 participates in several cellular functions (such as immunity, signal transduction and calcium signalling), and even though inhibition of CD38 may increase SIRT1 activity, the side-effects of CD38 inhibition are unclear and thus warrant caution when applying this strategy in humans27.

NAD+ precursors such as nicotinamide riboside and nicotinamide mononucleotide (NMN) also increase SIRT1 activity and have potential as anti-ageing drugs (FIG. 5b). In C. elegans, NAD+ levels are decreased during ageing, in part, by age-associated induction of NAD+-consuming PARP1. Consistently, supplementation with nicotinamide riboside increased worm lifespan in a SIR2.1-dependent manner12,16. In 22-month-old mice, 7-day supplementation with NMN significantly rescued mitochondrial dysfunction and normalized the mitochondrial parameters to those of young mice46. Nicotinamide riboside was also reported to be beneficial in both C. elegans and mouse models of XPA and Cockayne syndrome, which exhibit impaired NM signalling12,35. Encouraged by these data, several nicotinamide riboside clinical trials are underway117–120. Intriguingly, the P7C3 class of aminopropyl carbazole chemicals, which increase cellular NAD+ levels by enhancing the activity of the NAD+- generating enzyme nicotinamide phosphoribosyl-transferase (NAMPT), show strong neuroprotective activity121. Furthermore, NAMPT levels and SIRT1 activity are increased by treatment with AMPK activators such as 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide-1-β-D-riboside (AICAR)45 (FIG. 5c).

A group of small molecules called SIRT1-activating compounds (STACs) may also have some health benefits. STACs are either natural or synthetic small bio-active compounds, which allosterically activate SIRT1 by binding to the SIRT1-activation domain (amino acids 190–240)122,123. Some STACs, such as the natural polyphenol resveratrol and its synthetic analogues SRT2104 and SRT1720 (FIG. 5c), can extend healthspan and lifespan in mice, and some human studies have shown protective effects of resveratrol and SRT2104 (REFS 123–125). Ongoing laboratory and clinical studies to determine the long-term safety and clinical applicability of STACs are necessary before their potential as anti-ageing agents can be explored. Collectively, the development of NAD+–SIRT1 pathway pharmaceuticals is highly desirable.

Ketones

Ketones (or ketone bodies) are a group of molecules produced through fatty acid oxidation in the liver by the conjugation of two acetyl-CoA molecules. Importantly, ketogenesis is induced by fasting, which is a well-characterized pro-longevity intervention. Ketones enter the blood circulation and are transported into the brain and other organs, where they are used as substrates for energy production. Notably, ketones can rescue features of accelerated ageing in Cockayne syndrome and can attenuate neurodegeneration in models of ALS, Parkinson disease, Huntington disease and Alzheimer disease86,126. Indeed, a recent synthetic ketone ester was developed that ameliorated behavioural deficits and amyloid pathology in a mouse model of Alzheimer disease, thereby providing a new pharmacological approach for tackling age-associated neurodegenerative diseases126. Furthermore, the ketone body D-β-hydroxybutyrate (β-OHB) (FIG. 5b) is a histone deacetylase inhibitor that was shown to extend lifespan in C. elegans, possibly through activating the SIR-2.1, AMPK, DAF-16–FOXO and SKN-1–NRF pathways127. The potential health benefits of β-OHB may be at least partially attributed to its ability to suppress oxidative stress by mediating increased histone acetylation at the FOXO3A and metallothionein 2 (MT2) promoters128. Although still speculative, bio-energetic interventions could thus be a way to decrease age-associated genome instability.

Inducing mitophagy

Inducing autophagy and mitophagy to diminish the load of damaged proteins and mitochondria, and to increase cell survival, may ameliorate age-related diseases accompanied by mitochondrial dysfunction. Common features of Alzheimer disease, Parkinson disease and Huntington disease include mitochondrial dysfunction, impaired autophagy and neuronal death13,92,129. Accumulation of damaged mitochondria may induce neuronal death in Parkinson disease, and stimulation of autophagy can ameliorate disease pathology in laboratory Parkinson disease models13,92. In addition, defective mitophagy has been suggested as a trigger of disease progression, especially neurodegeneration, in some premature ageing diseases including XPA, Cockayne syndrome and ataxia telangi-ectasia12,35,80. In C. elegans and mouse models of XPA and Cockayne syndrome, increased mitophagy through restoration of the NAD+–SIRT1 (SIR2.1) pathway improves healthspan12,35.

Another major strategy to enhance autophagy and mitophagy is to inhibit mTORC1, which is a negative regulator of autophagy (FIG. 5d), using compounds such as rapamycin and associated rapamycin esters. Indeed, rapamycin can increase mouse lifespan and rejuvenate the ageing heart, and it is beneficial when administrated in mouse models of Alzheimer disease, Parkinson disease, Huntington disease and Hutchinson–Gilford progeria; thus, it is being considered as an anti-ageing drug92,130,131. However, potential toxicity of rapamycin and its analogues have been noticed132, raising the need for discovery of new mTORC1-inhibiting compounds with fewer side-effects. New autophagy-inducing compounds that may function independently of mTORC1 have been identified, including spermidine (FIG. 5d) and some US Food and Drug Administration-approved drugs such as L-type Ca2+-channel antagonists and imidazoline receptor agonists133,134. Clearly, the next generation of autophagy stimulators could be promising drugs for various age-associated diseases.

Open questions and future challenges

Impairment of DNA damage-mediated NM signalling can cause mitochondrial dysfunction, which is linked to ageing and various age-associated pathologies. Our understanding of the mechanisms of mitochondrial maintenance has greatly expanded over the decades, implicating both mitochondrial processes and signalling between mitochondria and other cellular compartments, especially the nucleus. Because of their central physiological role, mitochondria continue to be a focus of investigations in a great number of diseases and ageing.

In light of the importance of DNA damage-induced NM signalling in mitochondrial maintenance, genomic stability and longevity, associated pathways are of interest. For instance, modulation of DNA damage-induced NM signalling can activate UPRmt, which is a signalling pathway that contributes to longevity16,24–27. Inhibition of the DNA repair signalling protein PARP1 seems to extend lifespan in C. elegans through activation of UPRmt (REF. 16). There may be inducers of UPRmt other than DNA damage, and other ways to coordinate NM signalling with signalling from mitochondria to the nucleus. A related issue is the linkage between telomere maintenance and NM signalling. Telomere attrition may induce mitochondrial dysfunction through the p53–PGC1α axis135. Some telomeric proteins, including telomerase reverse transcriptase and TRF1-interacting nuclear protein 2 (TIN2) may localize to both the nucleus and mitochondria and thereby link nuclear and mitochondrial events through DNA damage-induced NM signalling136,137.

Additional mechanistic investigations are needed to propose a unified role for PARP1–sirtuin crosstalk in ageing. It seems contradictory that inhibition of PARP1 extends lifespan in both wild-type and disease animal models12,16, but that high PARP1 activity may be associated with longevity138,139. We hope that future studies will uncouple the conceptual link between PARP1-induced PARylation and high levels of DNA repair activity. High levels of PARP1-induced PARylation will facilitate DNA repair when the latter is proficient, but it will over-consume NAD+ without enhancing lesion repair when DNA repair pathways are compromised. PARylation is regulated in a dynamic manner and can also be reversed by poly(ADP-ribose) glycohydrolase138. Thus, PARylation levels do not necessarily correlate with PARP activity. However, the sirtuin family of NAD+-dependent deacetylase and deacylase enzymes affect both intra-mitochondrial and NM signalling mechanisms. Although SIRT1 and SIRT6 both influence longevity, genomic stability and normal mitochondrial function, they may differ in their relationship with PARP1. SIRT6 is an upstream activator of PARP1, whereas SIRT1 and PARP1 can mutually affect the activity of one another in response to a range of stimuli, including genotoxic, metabolic and circadian changes140. In addition, further mechanistic studies of DNA repair proteins that have nuclear and mitochondrial localization (BOX 1) are needed to extend our understanding of DNA damage-induced NM signalling.

Novel strategies to target different NM pathways and mitochondrial maintenance, such as sustaining energy metabolism, upregulating mitophagy and regulating DNA repair, should be explored in depth in experimental models with a view towards intervention in humans. For compounds targeting the NM pathways mentioned here (FIG. 5), some major questions remain. Do these compounds cross the blood–brain barrier? What are their optimal pharmacokinetic conditions? So far, indications are that certain compounds, such as nicotinamide riboside and ketones, may have little or no toxicity in humans, but this requires further exploration. This research area is ripe for development, and new mechanistic insights and intervention strategies will probably soon emerge from ongoing research.

The authors acknowledge the valuable work of the many investigators whose published articles they were unable to cite owing to space limitations. They thank Prabhat Khadka and Anne Tseng for critical reading of the manuscript. This research was supported entirely by the Intramural Research Program of the US National Institutes of Health (NIH) National Institute on Ageing (NIA). K.F.C. was supported by the Department of Veterans Affairs (Merit Award), research awards from the Glenn Foundation for Medical Research and the NIH/NIA (R56AG050997).

Cockayne syndrome A rare accelerated-ageing disease with progressive neurodegeneration, caused by mutations in genes encoding two DNA repair proteins, CSA and CSB

Xeroderma pigmentosum A rare autosomal-recessive disorder characterized by severe sun sensitivity and skin cancer, associated with mutation of genes encoding a group of DNA repair proteins, XPA to XPG

Ataxia telangiectasia A genomic instability disease with progressive cerebellar neurodegeneration caused by mutation of the ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene, encoding the kinase ATM, which is a master regulator of DNA damage processing

Preiss–Handler pathway A NAD+ biosynthetic process that consumes dietary nicotinic acid

Salvage pathway A NAD+ biosynthetic pathway that uses nicotinamide to generate nicotinamide mononucleotide (NMN), which is then transformed into NAD+

Reactive oxygen species (ROS) By-products of cellular metabolism, which at low levels provide health benefits, whereas at high levels they become increasingly noxious, with broad pathological consequences

Ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) A 350 kDa Ser/Thr protein kinase that is required for activation of the DNA damage response to double-strand breaks through phosphorylation of &gt;700 downstream DNA repair proteins

Hepatosteatosis Also known as hepatic steatosis (fatty liver). A common liver abnormality, in which patients have excessive accumulation of triglycerides (lipid droplets) in the liver

Apurinic and apyrimidinic sites (AP sites; also known as abasic sites). Sites of DNA sugar without a base, which is a common DNA lesion and is typically repaired by DNA base excision repair through sugar cleavage by AP endonuclease 1 (APE1)

8-oxo-dGuo (8-oxo-7,8-dihydro-2′-deoxyguanosine). An oxidative DNA lesion, which can be repaired by DNA base excision repair

NAD+/NADH ratio NAD exists in cells in both oxidized (NAD+) and reduced (NADH) forms. The ratio of NAD+ and NADH regulates many cellular processes, including energy metabolism and mitochondrial functions

Ketogenic diet A diet that is high-fat, high-protein and low-carbohydrate

Stress response A cellular response to certain types of stress, such as caloric restriction or increase in reactive oxygen species, in which different stress- counteracting pathways are upregulated

Autophagosome A key structure of autophagy, an autophagosome is a spherical, double-membrane vesicle that sequesters cytoplasmic contents for degradation

Rapamycin A natural metabolite from the bacterium Streptomyces hygroscopicus, which inhibits mTOR and extends lifespan in species from yeast to fruit flies and mice

Figure 1 An overview of DNA damage-induced nucleus-to-mitochondria signalling and ageing

Nuclear DNA damage can cause mitochondrial dysfunction. DNA damage leads to the activation of a number of proteins, resulting in widespread downstream changes in various cellular pathways. Among these pathways, signalling from the nucleus to mitochondria (NM signalling) is less studied than many others, but it may be very important in the ageing process and in age-associated diseases, and interventions in this process may slow ageing. A number of factors contribute to NM signalling, such as upstream DNA damage sensors including poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP1), ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) and the transcription factor p53. The NAD-dependent protein deacetylase sirtuin 1 (SIRT1) and the transcription regulator AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) then propagate the NM signal through post-translational modifications (deacetylation or phosphorylation, respectively) of DNA histones, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ co-activator 1α (PGC1α) and other proteins. The combined effect of the activation of the DNA damage response is downstream changes in the transcriptome, epigenome and metabolome, and in cellular bioenergetics. These contribute to ageing and the development of age-associated diseases such as neurodegeneration and cancer.

Figure 2 PARP1–NAD+–SIRT1-mediated nuclear DNA damage to mitochondria signalling

Activation of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP1) upon DNA damage facilitates DNA repair but leads to loss of NAD+ and acetyl-CoA, the latter being an important molecule in cellular metabolism. This results in inhibition of sirtuins such as SIRT1, owing to competition for NAD+. Loss of sirtuin activity leads to an increase in mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (O2−), owing to decreased activation of downstream stress response factors such as AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), forkhead box O proteins (FOXOs) and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ co-activator 1α (PGC1α). Collectively, these enzymes regulate a large number of genes that are involved in coping with oxidative stress, such as those encoding uncoupling proteins (UCPs) like UCP2 and superoxide dismutases (SODs). In addition, SIRT1, as well as SIRT6, has been shown to positively regulate several DNA repair pathways, such as homologous recombination (HR), non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ), base excision repair (BER) and nucleotide excision repair (NER). Specifically, SIRT1 has been shown to deacetylate repair factors such as xeroderma pigmentosum group A-complementing protein (XPA, which is involved in NER), KU70 (involved in NHEJ), ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM; involved in HR and NHEJ) and thymine DNA glycosylase (TDG; involved in BER). Activation of PARP1 and subsequently less-robust DNA repair, as well as increased oxidative stress, may represent a vicious cycle that could contribute to the ageing process. Thus, PARP1 is pivotal to the initiation of different DNA repair pathways, and it interacts with SIRT1 to execute cellular signalling from the nucleus to mitochondria.

Figure 3 DNA damage-induced nucleus-to-mitochondria signalling is linked to metabolic dysfunction and age-associated diseases

a | Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP1) activation leads to alterations in central bioenergetic pathways. A consequence of loss of NAD+ is change in the NAD+/NADH ratio. Notably, PARP1 activation also leads to increased nicotinamide (NAM), a competitive inhibitor of sirtuins such as SIRT1, as well as loss of NAD+, which is a substrate for sirtuins. The decrease in the NAD+/NADH ratio also leads to the conversion of pyruvate to lactate by lactate dehydrogenase, while decreasing the formation of acetyl-CoA by pyruvate dehydrogenase. An isoform of pyruvate dehydrogenase has recently been found in the cell nucleus, and the DNA damage response could thereby regulate the formation of acetyl-CoA locally. Loss of acetyl-CoA decreases histone acetylation (Ac) and changes the epigenome, resulting in chromatin condensation and gene silencing, while also leading to decreased availability of acetyl-CoA for the mitochondria for the generation of ATP. Histone acetylation is also reduced by the activity of sirtuins such as SIRT1 and of other classes of histone Lys deacetylases (HDACs). Ketones, which are a group of metabolites made in the liver, increase acetyl-CoA levels and histone acetylation and could counteract the effects of age-associated DNA damage. b | Ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) regulates multiple metabolic pathways following DNA damage through phosphorylation of p53, liver kinase B1 (LKB1) and AMP-activated kinase (AMPK). AMPK is a central kinase in the adaptive cellular response and phosphorylates a number of key factors. These include SIRT1, which is a known regulator of mitochondrial biogenesis; forkhead box O transcription factors (FOXOs), which are involved in cellular stress responses; glucose transporters (GLUTs), which are involved in glucose transport and glycolysis; UNC51-like kinase 1 (ULK1), which is a regulator of autophagy; peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ co-activator 1α (PGC1α), which is a master-regulator of mitochondrial biogenesis; sterol regulatory element-binding protein 1 (SREBP1), which is a regulator of fatty acid oxidation; and hypoxia inducible factor 1α (HIF1α), which is a central positive regulator of glycolysis. Collectively the activity of these factors leads to changes in cellular bioenergetics.

Figure 4 DNA damage signalling in the regulation of mitophagy and apoptosis

a | Apoptosis can be initiated through intrinsic or extrinsic pathways. The intrinsic pathways can be initiated by genotoxic stress, leading to the activation of p53 and transcriptional upregulation of pro-apoptotic factors such as BAD, BAX and BID. If the stress is sustained or high enough, BAD and BAX accumulation results in the permeabilization of the outer mitochondrial membrane and release of cytochrome C (CytC) that can associate with apoptosis-activating factor 1 (APAF1) and activate caspase 9 (CASP9). CASP9 activation leads to CASP3 activation and initiation of apoptosis. The extrinsic pathway can be initiated through activation of the FAS receptor. This leads to FAS-associated death domain protein (FADD)-mediated activation of CASP8, resulting in CASP3 activation. Notably, there is considerable crosstalk between intrinsic and extrinsic pathways. b | Selective mitophagy is regulated through factors such as PTEN-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1) and the E3-ubiquitin ligase parkin. Initially, mitochondrial damage causes loss of the mitochondrial membrane potential (Δψ). This leads to the retention of PINK1 at the outer mitochondrial membrane and phosphorylation of outer membrane proteins. Concomitantly, parkin is activated, leading to ubiquitylation of outer membrane proteins. PINK1 phosphorylates ubiquitin that recruits adaptor proteins such as optineurin (OPT), nuclear dot protein 52 (NDP52) and p62, leading to recruitment of the UNC51-like kinase 1 (ULK1) complex (consisting of proteins such as autophagy-related protein 101 (ATG101), ATG13 and FIP200) and to the formation of a double lipid membrane-bound vesicle, the autophagosome. The adaptor proteins (OPT, p62 and NDP52) interact with the autophagosome through light chain 3 (LC3), a small protein that coats the autophagosome. The entire mitochondrion will eventually become engulfed in the autophagosome, which will fuse with a lysosome leading to degradation of the mitochondrion. c | Ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) is activated by breaks in DNA and possibly also by oxidative stress (O2−). At low levels of DNA damage stress, ATM activation leads to phosphorylation, ubiquitylation and activation of the NEMO JNK (NF-κB essential modulator Jun N-terminal kinase) pathway that stimulates mitophagy. ATM also phosphorylates the pro-apoptotic factor BID to inhibit apoptotic signalling. At high levels of stress, ATM phosphorylates and activates p53, which propagates pro-apoptotic signals. d | p53 has been well characterized in the response to genotoxic stimuli, in which it transcriptionally activates pro-apoptotic proteins such as BAX and p21 while simultaneously inhibiting the ULK1-containing autophagy-initiating complex. In addition, p53 activation may lead to decreased expression of parkin and decreased activation of parkin PINK1-mediated mitophagy. At lower levels of stress, p53 can stimulate mitophagy through the activation of DNA damage-regulated autophagy modulator protein 1 (DRAM1), which stimulates p62-mediated mitophagy. e | Sirtuin 1 (SIRT1) regulates both mitophagy and apoptosis. At low levels of DNA damage, nuclear SIRT1 can be activated to facilitate DNA repair. After lethal levels of nuclear DNA damage, SIRT1 is inhibited by the DNA damage response, leading to p53 acetylation and cell death. Loss of SIRT1 activity decreases the stimulation of mitophagy through peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γco-activator 1α (PGC1α)- and AMP-activated kinase (AMPK)-dependent pathways. SIRT1 regulates mitochondrial biogenesis and mitophagy through deacetylation of PGC1α, and it also interacts with AMPK to regulate mitophagy through mutual activation: AMPK activates SIRT1 by increasing the ratio of NAD+/NADH, and it is activated by SIRT1 through deacetylation of liver kinase B1 (LKB1), an AMPK activator. Furthermore, AMPK phosphorylates and activates the mTORC1 inhibitor protein tuberous sclerosis complex 2 (TSC2), thereby further activating autophagy. AMPK also positively regulates PGC1α activity, which stimulates mitochondrial biogenesis and activates forkhead box protein O 3A, leading to activation of stress response and pro-survival pathways. NAM, nicotinamide.

Figure 5 Pharmacological interventions in the DNA damage response that may lead to increases in lifespan and healthspan

a | Inhibition of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP1) by olaparib and other PARP inhibitors has been shown to increase lifespan in model organisms. b | Impaired cellular metabolism can be counteracted by treatment with NAD+ precursors such as nicotinamide riboside (NR), by activation of NAD+-generating enzymes such as nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase by P7C3, or by replenishment of acetyl-CoA levels with ketones such as β-hydroxybutyrate (βOHB). c | Signalling factors and targets in the DNA damage response (DDR) may constitute additional targets for interventions. These include activation of sirtuin 1 by compounds such as SRT1720, or AMP-activated kinase (AMPK) activation using the AMP analogue AICAR. d | Mitochondrial function may be augmented by stimulation of autophagy by rapamycin or its newer analogues, or by stimulation of autophagy through alternative pathways using compounds such as spermidine.

Competing interests statement

The authors declare competing interests: see Web version for details.

DATABASES

Mito DB (The mitochondrial disease database): http://www.mitodb.com/

ALL LINKS ARE ACTIVE IN THE ONLINE PDF


1 West AP Mitochondrial DNA stress primes the antiviral innate immune response Nature 520 553 557 2015 25642965
2 Wallace DC Mitochondrial DNA variation in human radiation and disease Cell 163 33 38 2015 26406369
3 Scheibye-Knudsen M Protecting the mitochondrial powerhouse Trends Cell Biol 25 158 170 2014 25499735
4 Maynard S Fang EF Scheibye-Knudsen M Croteau DL Bohr VA DNA damage, DNA repair, aging, and neurodegeneration Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 5 a025130 2015 26385091
5 Youle RJ van der Bliek AM Mitochondrial fission, fusion, and stress Science 337 1062 1065 2012 22936770
6 Randow F Youle RJ Self and nonself: how autophagy targets mitochondria and bacteria Cell Host Microbe 15 403 411 2014 24721569
7 Wallace DC Mitochondria and cancer Nat Rev Cancer 12 685 698 2012 23001348
8 Coskun P A mitochondrial etiology of Alzheimer and Parkinson disease Biochim Biophys Acta 1820 553 564 2012 21871538
9 Mattson MP Pathways towards and away from Alzheimer’s disease Nature 430 631 639 2004 15295589
10 Wallace DC Mitochondrial diseases in man and mouse Science 283 1482 1488 1999 10066162
11 Palikaras K Lionaki E Tavernarakis N Coordination of mitophagy and mitochondrial biogenesis during ageing in C. elegans Nature 521 525 528 2015 Provides evidence for a pivotal role of mitophagy in healthspan and lifespan in C. elegans 25896323
12 Fang EF Defective mitophagy in XPA via PARP-1 hyperactivation and NAD+/SIRT1 reduction Cell 157 882 896 2014 24813611
13 Menzies FM Fleming A Rubinsztein DC Compromised autophagy and neurodegenerative diseases Nat Rev Neurosci 16 345 357 2015 25991442
14 Petersen KF Mitochondrial dysfunction in the elderly: possible role in insulin resistance Science 300 1140 1142 2003 12750520
15 Conley KE Jubrias SA Esselman PC Oxidative capacity and ageing in human muscle J Physiol 526 203 210 2000 10878112
16 Mouchiroud L The NAD+/sirtuin pathway modulates longevity through activation of mitochondrial UPR and FOXO signaling Cell 154 430 441 2013 Shows that the UPRmt contributes to SIR2.1-related longevity in C. elegans 23870130
17 Hey-Mogensen M A novel method for determining human ex vivo submaximal skeletal muscle mitochondrial function J Physiol 593 3991 4010 2015 26096709
18 Capel F Due to reverse electron transfer, mitochondrial H2O2 release increases with age in human vastus lateralis muscle although oxidative capacity is preserved Mech Ageing Dev 126 505 511 2005 15722109
19 Maynard S Relationships between human vitality and mitochondrial respiratory parameters, reactive oxygen species production and dNTP levels in peripheral blood mononuclear cells Aging 5 850 864 2013 24304678
20 Lopez-Otin C Blasco MA Partridge L Serrano M Kroemer G The hallmarks of aging Cell 153 1194 1217 2013 23746838
21 Scheibye-Knudsen M Cockayne syndrome group B protein prevents the accumulation of damaged mitochondria by promoting mitochondrial autophagy J Exp Med 209 855 869 2012 22473955
22 Scheibye-Knudsen M Fang EF Croteau DL Bohr VA Contribution of defective mitophagy to the neurodegeneration in DNA repair-deficient disorders Autophagy 10 1468 1469 2014 24991831
23 Shiloh Y Ziv Y The ATM protein kinase: regulating the cellular response to genotoxic stress, and more Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 14 197 210 2013
24 Houtkooper RH Mitonuclear protein imbalance as a conserved longevity mechanism Nature 497 451 457 2013 23698443
25 Mohrin M A mitochondrial UPR-mediated metabolic checkpoint regulates hematopoietic stem cell aging Science 347 1374 1377 2015 25792330
26 Pellegrino MW Nargund AM Haynes CM Signaling the mitochondrial unfolded protein response Biochim Biophys Acta 1833 410 416 2013 22445420
27 Canto C Menzies KJ Auwerx J NAD+ metabolism and the control of energy homeostasis: a balancing act between mitochondria and the nucleus Cell Metab 22 31 53 2015 26118927
28 Michikawa Y Mazzucchelli F Bresolin N Scarlato G Attardi G Aging-dependent large accumulation of point mutations in the human mtDNA control region for replication Science 286 774 779 1999 10531063
29 Croteau DL Popuri V Opresko PL Bohr VA Human RecQ helicases in DNA repair, recombination, and replication Annu Rev Biochem 83 519 552 2014 24606147
30 Yang H Nutrient-sensitive mitochondrial NAD+ levels dictate cell survival Cell 130 1095 1107 2007 17889652
31 Verdin E NAD+ in aging, metabolism, and neurodegeneration Science 350 1208 1213 2015 26785480
32 Rodgers JT Nutrient control of glucose homeostasis through a complex of PGC-1α and SIRT1 Nature 434 113 118 2005 15744310
33 Chalkiadaki A Guarente L The multifaceted functions of sirtuins in cancer Nat Rev Cancer 15 608 624 2015 26383140
34 Imai S Armstrong CM Kaeberlein M Guarente L Transcriptional silencing and longevity protein Sir2 is an NAD-dependent histone deacetylase Nature 403 795 800 2000 The first evidence linking NAD+ to a sirtuin 10693811
35 Scheibye-Knudsen M A high fat diet and NAD+ rescue premature aging in Cockayne syndrome Cell Metab 20 840 855 2014 25440059
. Together with reference 12, establishes a causative link from DNA damage to mitochondrial dysfunction and premature ageing.

36 Gibson BA Kraus WL New insights into the molecular and cellular functions of poly(ADP-ribose) and PARPs Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 13 411 424 2012 22713970
37 Eliasson MJ Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase gene disruption renders mice resistant to cerebral ischemia Nat Med 3 1089 1095 1997 9334719
38 Virag L Szabo C The therapeutic potential of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitors Pharmacol Rev 54 375 429 2002 12223530
39 Liu D Gharavi R Pitta M Gleichmann M Mattson MP Nicotinamide prevents NAD+ depletion and protects neurons against excitotoxicity and cerebral ischemia: NAD+ consumption by SIRT1 may endanger energetically compromised neurons Neuromolecular Med 11 28 42 2009 19288225
40 Pacher P Szabo C Role of the peroxynitrite-poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase pathway in human disease Am J Pathol 173 2 13 2008 18535182
41 Bai P PARP-1 inhibition increases mitochondrial metabolism through SIRT1 activation Cell Metab 13 461 468 2011 21459330
42 DiGiovanna JJ Kraemer KH Shining a light on xeroderma pigmentosum J Invest Dermatol 132 785 796 2012 22217736
43 Cleaver JE Defective repair replication of DNA in xeroderma pigmentosum Nature 218 652 656 1968 5655953
44 Lindenbaum Y Xeroderma pigmentosum/ Cockayne syndrome complex: first neuropathological study and review of eight other cases Eur J Paediatr Neurol 5 225 242 2001 11764181
45 Canto C AMPK regulates energy expenditure by modulating NAD+ metabolism and SIRT1 activity Nature 458 1056 1060 2009 19262508
46 Gomes AP Declining NAD+ induces a pseudohypoxic state disrupting nuclear-mitochondrial communication during aging Cell 155 1624 1638 2013 Demonstrates a role for NAD+ in the regulation of nuclear–mitochondrial communication 24360282
47 Dobbin MM SIRT1 collaborates with ATM and HDAC1 to maintain genomic stability in neurons Nat Neurosci 16 1008 1015 2013 23852118
48 Cohen HY Calorie restriction promotes mammalian cell survival by inducing the SIRT1 deacetylase Science 305 390 392 2004 15205477
49 Li K Regulation of WRN protein cellular localization and enzymatic activities by SIRT1-mediated deacetylation J Biol Chem 283 7590 7598 2008 18203716
50 Uhl M Role of SIRT1 in homologous recombination DNA Repair 9 383 393 2010 20097625
51 Yamamori T SIRT1 deacetylates APE1 and regulates cellular base excision repair Nucleic Acids Res 38 832 845 2010 19934257
52 Madabushi A Hwang BJ Jin J Lu AL Histone deacetylase SIRT1 modulates and deacetylates DNA base excision repair enzyme thymine DNA glycosylase Biochem J 456 89 98 2013 23952905
53 Fan W Luo J SIRT1 regulates UV-induced DNA repair through deacetylating XPA Mol Cell 39 247 258 2010 20670893
54 Kanfi Y The sirtuin SIRT6 regulates lifespan in male mice Nature 483 218 221 2012 22367546
55 Mostoslavsky R Genomic instability and aging-like phenotype in the absence of mammalian SIRT6 Cell 124 315 329 2006 16439206
56 Sebastian C The histone deacetylase SIRT6 is a tumor suppressor that controls cancer metabolism Cell 151 1185 1199 2012 23217706
57 Liu GH Recapitulation of premature ageing with iPSCs from Hutchinson–Gilford progeria syndrome Nature 472 221 225 2011 21346760
58 Ghosh S Liu B Wang Y Hao Q Zhou Z Lamin A is an endogenous SIRT6 activator and promotes SIRT6-mediated DNA repair Cell Rep 13 1396 1406 2015 26549451
59 Zhong L The histone deacetylase Sirt6 regulates glucose homeostasis via Hif1α Cell 140 280 293 2010 20141841
60 Kaidi A Weinert BT Choudhary C Jackson SP Human SIRT6 promotes DNA end resection through CtIP deacetylation Science 329 1348 1353 2010 20829486
61 Mao Z SIRT6 promotes DNA repair under stress by activating PARP1 Science 332 1443 1446 2011 21680843
62 Michishita E SIRT6 is a histone H3 lysine 9 deacetylase that modulates telomeric chromatin Nature 452 492 496 2008 18337721
63 McCord RA SIRT6 stabilizes DNA-dependent protein kinase at chromatin for DNA double-strand break repair Aging 1 109 121 2009 20157594
64 Toiber D SIRT6 recruits SNF2H to DNA break sites, preventing genomic instability through chromatin remodeling Mol Cell 51 454 468 2013 23911928
65 Van Meter M SIRT6 represses LINE1 retrotransposons by ribosylating KAP1 but this repression fails with stress and age Nat Commun 5 5011 2014 25247314
66 Barber MF SIRT7 links H3K18 deacetylation to maintenance of oncogenic transformation Nature 487 114 118 2012 22722849
67 Shin J SIRT7 represses Myc activity to suppress ER stress and prevent fatty liver disease Cell Rep 5 654 665 2013 24210820
68 Ryu D A SIRT7-dependent acetylation switch of GABPβ1 controls mitochondrial function Cell Metab 20 856 869 2014 Provides evidence that SIRT7 regulates mitochondrial function 25200183
69 Someya S Sirt3 mediates reduction of oxidative damage and prevention of age-related hearing loss under caloric restriction Cell 143 802 812 2010 21094524
70 Brown KD Activation of SIRT3 by the NAD+ precursor nicotinamide riboside protects from noise-induced hearing loss Cell Metab 20 1059 1068 2014 25470550
71 Cheng A Mitochondrial SIRT3 mediates adaptive responses of neurons to exercise and metabolic and excitatory challenges Cell Metab 23 128 142 2016 26698917
72 Hirschey MD SIRT3 regulates mitochondrial fatty-acid oxidation by reversible enzyme deacetylation Nature 464 121 125 2010 20203611
73 Jeong SM SIRT4 has tumor-suppressive activity and regulates the cellular metabolic response to DNA damage by inhibiting mitochondrial glutamine metabolism Cancer Cell 23 450 463 2013 23562301
74 Kim HS Hepatic-specific disruption of SIRT6 in mice results in fatty liver formation due to enhanced glycolysis and triglyceride synthesis Cell Metab 12 224 236 2010 20816089
75 Malik S SIRT7 inactivation reverses metastatic phenotypes in epithelial and mesenchymal tumors Sci Rep 5 9841 2015 25923013
76 Lee N Comparative interactomes of SIRT6 and SIRT7: implication of functional links to aging Proteomics 14 1610 1622 2014 24782448
77 Woods CG Taylor AM Ataxia telangiectasia in the British Isles: the clinical and laboratory features of 70 affected individuals Q J Med 82 169 179 1992 1377828
78 Merideth MA Phenotype and course of Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome N Engl J Med 358 592 604 2008 18256394
79 Dahl AK Body mass index, change in body mass index, and survival in old and very old persons J Am Geriatr Soc 61 512 518 2013 23452127
80 Valentin-Vega YA Mitochondrial dysfunction in ataxia-telangiectasia Blood 119 1490 1500 2012 22144182
81 Williamson DH Lund P Krebs HA The redox state of free nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide in the cytoplasm and mitochondria of rat liver Biochem J 103 514 527 1967 4291787
82 Ross JM High brain lactate is a hallmark of aging and caused by a shift in the lactate dehydrogenase A/B ratio Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107 20087 20092 2010 21041631
83 Sutendra G A nuclear pyruvate dehydrogenase complex is important for the generation of acetyl-CoA and histone acetylation Cell 158 84 97 2014 24995980
84 Mone MJ Local UV-induced DNA damage in cell nuclei results in local transcription inhibition EMBO Rep 2 1013 1017 2001 11713193
85 Shanbhag NM Rafalska-Metcalf IU Balane-Bolivar C Janicki SM Greenberg RA ATM-dependent chromatin changes silence transcription in cis to DNA double-strand breaks Cell 141 970 981 2010 20550933
86 Longo VD Mattson MP Fasting: molecular mechanisms and clinical applications Cell Metab 19 181 192 2014 24440038
87 Tripathi DN Reactive nitrogen species regulate autophagy through ATM-AMPK-TSC2-mediated suppression of mTORC1 Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110 E2950 E2957 2013 23878245
88 Budanov AV Karin M p53 target genes sestrin1 and sestrin2 connect genotoxic stress and mTOR signaling Cell 134 451 460 2008 18692468
89 Egan DF Phosphorylation of ULK1 (hATG1) by AMP-activated protein kinase connects energy sensing to mitophagy Science 331 456 461 2011 21205641
90 Marino G Niso-Santano M Baehrecke EH Kroemer G Self-consumption: the interplay of autophagy and apoptosis Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 15 81 94 2014 24401948
91 Youle RJ Strasser A The BCL-2 protein family: opposing activities that mediate cell death Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 9 47 59 2008 18097445
92 Rubinsztein DC Marino G Kroemer G Autophagy and aging Cell 146 682 695 2011 21884931
93 Allen GF Toth R James J Ganley IG Loss of iron triggers PINK1/Parkin-independent mitophagy EMBO Rep 14 1127 1135 2013 24176932
94 Chu CT Cardiolipin externalization to the outer mitochondrial membrane acts as an elimination signal for mitophagy in neuronal cells Nat Cell Biol 15 1197 1205 2013 24036476
95 Lazarou M The ubiquitin kinase PINK1 recruits autophagy receptors to induce mitophagy Nature 524 309 314 2015 26266977
96 Pickrell AM Youle RJ The roles of PINK1, parkin, and mitochondrial fidelity in Parkinson’s disease Neuron 85 257 273 2015 25611507
97 Biton S Ashkenazi A NEMO and RIP1 control cell fate in response to extensive DNA damage via TNF-α feedforward signaling Cell 145 92 103 2011 21458669
98 Picco V Pages G Linking JNK activity to the DNA damage response Genes Cancer 4 360 368 2013 24349633
99 Luo S Bim inhibits autophagy by recruiting Beclin 1 to microtubules Mol Cell 47 359 370 2012 22742832
100 Maryanovich M The ATM-BID pathway regulates quiescence and survival of haematopoietic stem cells Nat Cell Biol 14 535 541 2012 22446738
101 Mercer JR DNA damage links mitochondrial dysfunction to atherosclerosis and the metabolic syndrome Circ Res 107 1021 1031 2010 20705925
102 Scheibye-Knudsen M Scheibye-Alsing K Canugovi C Croteau DL Bohr VA A novel diagnostic tool reveals mitochondrial pathology in human diseases and aging Aging 5 192 208 2013 23524341
103 Oda K p53AIP1, a potential mediator of p53-dependent apoptosis, and its regulation by Ser-46-phosphorylated p53 Cell 102 849 862 2000 11030628
104 Murray-Zmijewski F Slee EA Lu X A complex barcode underlies the heterogeneous response of p53 to stress Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 9 702 712 2008 18719709
105 Hoshino A Cytosolic p53 inhibits Parkin-mediated mitophagy and promotes mitochondrial dysfunction in the mouse heart Nat Commun 4 2308 2013 23917356
106 Crighton D DRAM, a p53-induced modulator of autophagy, is critical for apoptosis Cell 126 121 134 2006 16839881
107 Xie X Le L Fan Y Lv L Zhang J Autophagy is induced through the ROS-TP53-DRAM1 pathway in response to mitochondrial protein synthesis inhibition Autophagy 8 1071 1084 2012 22576012
108 Poyurovsky MV Prives C P53 and aging: a fresh look at an old paradigm Aging 2 380 382 2010 20657036
109 Matheu A Delayed ageing through damage protection by the Arf/p53 pathway Nature 448 375 379 2007 17637672
110 Pinkston JM Garigan D Hansen M Kenyon C Mutations that increase the life span of C elegans inhibit tumor growth Science 313 971 975 2006 16917064
111 Vaziri H hSIR2SIRT1 functions as an NAD-dependent p53 deacetylase Cell 107 149 159 2001 11672523
112 Luo J Negative control of p53 by Sir2α promotes cell survival under stress Cell 107 137 148 2001 11672522
113 Sampaio-Marques B SNCA (α-synuclein)-induced toxicity in yeast cells is dependent on sirtuin 2 (Sir2)-mediated mitophagy Autophagy 8 1494 1509 2012 22914317
114 Huang R Deacetylation of nuclear LC3 drives autophagy initiation under starvation Mol Cell 57 456 466 2015 25601754
115 Price NL SIRT1 is required for AMPK activation and the beneficial effects of resveratrol on mitochondrial function Cell Metab 15 675 690 2012 22560220
116 Longo VD Interventions to slow aging in humans: are we ready? Aging Cell 14 497 510 2015 25902704
117 US National Library of Medicine ClinicalTrials.gov https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02300740 2014
118 US National Library of Medicine ClinicalTrials.gov https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02303483 2014
119 US National Library of Medicine ClinicalTrials.gov https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02191462 2014
120 US National Library of Medicine ClinicalTrials.gov https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02678611 2016
121 Wang G P7C3 neuroprotective chemicals function by activating the rate-limiting enzyme in NAD salvage Cell 158 1324 1334 2014 25215490
122 Hubbard BP Evidence for a common mechanism of SIRT1 regulation by allosteric activators Science 339 1216 1219 2013 23471411
123 Sinclair DA Guarente L Small-molecule allosteric activators of sirtuins Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 54 363 380 2014 24160699
124 van der Meer AJ The selective sirtuin 1 activator SRT2104 reduces endotoxin-induced cytokine release and coagulation activation in humans Crit Care Med 43 e199 202 2015 25978169
125 Timmers S Calorie restriction-like effects of 30 days of resveratrol supplementation on energy metabolism and metabolic profile in obese humans Cell Metab 14 612 622 2011 22055504
126 Kashiwaya Y A ketone ester diet exhibits anxiolytic and cognition-sparing properties, and lessens amyloid and tau pathologies in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 34 1530 1539 2013 23276384
127 Edwards C D-β-hydroxybutyrate extends lifespan in C. elegans Aging 6 621 644 2014 25127866
128 Shimazu T Suppression of oxidative stress by β-hydroxybutyrate, an endogenous histone deacetylase inhibitor Science 339 211 214 2013 23223453
129 Ravikumar B Inhibition of mTOR induces autophagy and reduces toxicity of polyglutamine expansions in fly and mouse models of Huntington disease Nat Genet 36 585 595 2004 Provides the first evidence that compromised autophagy contributes to the pathology of the neurodegenerative disorder Huntington disease 15146184
130 Leslie M A putative antiaging drug takes a step from mice to men Science 342 789 2013 24233701
131 Dai DF Altered proteome turnover and remodeling by short-term caloric restriction or rapamycin rejuvenate the aging heart Aging Cell 13 529 539 2014 24612461
132 Soefje SA Karnad A Brenner AJ Common toxicities of mammalian target of rapamycin inhibitors Target Oncol 6 125 129 2011 21499766
133 Eisenberg T Induction of autophagy by spermidine promotes longevity Nat Cell Biol 11 1305 1314 2009 19801973
134 Pavel M Rubinsztein DC Antitumor Potential and Other Emerging Medicinal Properties of Natural Compounds Fang EF Ng TB 227 238 Springer 2013
135 Sahin E Telomere dysfunction induces metabolic and mitochondrial compromise Nature 470 359 365 2011 21307849
136 Saretzki G Extratelomeric functions of human telomerase: cancer, mitochondria and oxidative stress Curr Pharm Des 20 6386 6403 2014 24975608
137 Chen LY Mitochondrial localization of telomeric protein TIN2 links telomere regulation to metabolic control Mol Cell 47 839 850 2012 22885005
138 Mangerich A Burkle A Pleiotropic cellular functions of PARP1 in longevity and aging: genome maintenance meets inflammation Oxid Med Cell Longev 2012 321653 2012 23050038
139 Grube K Burkle A Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase activity in mononuclear leukocytes of 13 mammalian species correlates with species-specific life span Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 89 11759 11763 1992 1465394
140 Luna A Aladjem MI Kohn KW SIRT1/PARP1 crosstalk: connecting DNA damage and metabolism Genome Integr 4 6 2013 24360018
141 Hoeijmakers JH DNA damage, aging, and cancer N Engl J Med 361 1475 1485 2009 19812404
142 Cleaver JE Lam ET Revet I Disorders of nucleotide excision repair: the genetic and molecular basis of heterogeneity Nat Rev Genet 10 756 768 2009 19809470
143 Hanawalt PC Spivak G Transcription-coupled DNA repair: two decades of progress and surprises Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 9 958 970 2008 19023283
144 Jackson SP Bartek J The DNA-damage response in human biology and disease Nature 461 1071 1078 2009 19847258
145 Lakshmipathy U Campbell C Double strand break rejoining by mammalian mitochondrial extracts Nucleic Acids Res 27 1198 1204 1999 9927756
146 Alexeyev M Shokolenko I Wilson G LeDoux S The maintenance of mitochondrial DNA integrity — critical analysis and update Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 5 a012641 2013 23637283
147 Ding L Liu Y Borrowing nuclear DNA helicases to protect mitochondrial DNA Int J Mol Sci 16 10870 10887 2015 25984607
148 Croteau DL RECQL4 localizes to mitochondria and preserves mitochondrial DNA integrity Aging Cell 11 456 466 2012 22296597
149 Lin SJ Defossez PA Guarente L Requirement of NAD and SIR2 for life-span extension by calorie restriction in Saccharomyces cerevisiae Science 289 2126 2128 2000 11000115
150 Dang W Histone H4 lysine 16 acetylation regulates cellular lifespan Nature 459 802 807 2009 19516333
151 Viswanathan M Guarente L Regulation of Caenorhabditis elegans lifespan by sir-2.1 transgenes Nature 477 E1 E2 2011 21938026
152 Tissenbaum HA Guarente L Increased dosage of a sir-2 gene extends lifespan in Caenorhabditis elegans Nature 410 227 230 2001 11242085
153 Burnett C Absence of effects of Sir2 overexpression on lifespan in C elegans and Drosophila Nature 477 482 485 2011 21938067
154 Oberdoerffer P SIRT1 redistribution on chromatin promotes genomic stability but alters gene expression during aging Cell 135 907 918 2008 19041753
155 Finley LW Haigis MC Metabolic regulation by SIRT3: implications for tumorigenesis Trends Mol Med 18 516 523 2012 22749020
