LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


7806090
6166
Neurosci Biobehav Rev
Neurosci Biobehav Rev
Neuroscience and biobehavioral reviews
0149-7634
1873-7528

27039345
5045786
10.1016/j.neubiorev.2016.03.024
NIHMS783611
Article
Why estrogens matter for behavior and brain health
Galea Liisa A.M. 1
Frick Karyn M. 2
Hampson Elizabeth 3
Sohrabji Farida 4
Choleris Elena 5
1 Department of Psychology, Centre for Brain Health, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, CANADA V6T1Z4
2 Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee WI 53211
3 Department of Psychology, University of Western Ontario, London, ON N6A 5C2
4 Department of Neuroscience and Experimental Therapeutics, Texas A&amp;M HSC College of Medicine, Bryan TX 77807
5 Department of Psychology and Neuroscience Program, University of Guelph, Guelph, ON N1G 2W1
Corresponding author: Liisa A. M. Galea, Department of Psychology, Centre for Brain Health, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, CANADA V6T1Z4, lgalea@psych.ubc.ca
14 5 2016
31 3 2016
5 2017
01 5 2018
76 Pt B 363379
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
The National Institutes of Health (NIH) has required the inclusion of women in clinical studies since 1993, which has enhanced our understanding of how biological sex affects certain medical conditions and allowed the development of sex-specific treatment protocols. However, NIH’s policy did not previously apply to basic research and the NIH recently introduced a new policy requiring all new grant applications to explicitly address sex as a biological variable. The policy itself is grounded in the results of numerous investigations in animals and humans illustrating the existence of sex differences in the brain and behavior, and the importance of sex hormones, particularly estrogens, in regulating physiology and behavior. Here, we review findings from our laboratories and others, demonstrating how estrogens influence brain and behavior in adult females. Research from subjects throughout the adult lifespan on topics ranging from social behavior, learning and memory, to disease risk will be discussed to frame an understanding of why estrogens matter to behavioral neuroscience.


1. Introduction

Although sex differences exist in the risk, etiology, symptomatology, and progression of a wide variety of neuropsychiatric and neuropathological diseases, the vast majority of biomedical researchers rarely study sex differences in disease. As a result, North American and European granting agencies have made a concerted effort to compel basic and medical researchers to consider sex as a biological variable in studying brain disorders (Clayton &amp; Collins, 2014; http://ec.europa.eu/research/swafs/index.cfm?pg=policy&amp;lib=gender). Brain disorders such as stroke, Alzheimer Disease (AD), and depression display large sex differences in incidence as well as manifestation of symptoms (Angst et al., 2002; Barnes et al., 2005; Irvine et al., 2012). For example, women are more likely than men to be diagnosed with depression (Angst et al., 2002; Gutierrez-Lobos et al., 2002), show greater pathology and cognitive deficits related to AD (Barnes et al 2005; Irvine et al., 2012; Gao et al., 1998), and have poor functional outcomes and quality of life after stroke (Reeves et al., 2009).

When sex differences are observed, it is likely that sex chromosomes and/or sex hormones are involved (McCarthy et al., 2012; McCullough et al., 2014). In addition societal expectations undoubtedly influence gender differences in a number of outcomes that can affect diagnoses or management such as number of doctor visits, prescriptions, prescription use, and compliance (Bertakis, 2009; Leresche, 2011; Zeber et al., 2013). However, while gender is a psychosocial construct that determines what a given society may deem appropriate for men versus women this review is restricted to the biological differences between men and women, and in particular the effects of estrogens in females. The reader is directed to other reviews on sex and gender differences in contribution to disease (Mielke et al., 2014). Indeed, disease progression and manifestation in a number of brain disorders may be influenced by levels of sex steroids (Amiaz and Seidman, 2008; Baum, 2005; Bloch et al., 2003; Lv et al., 2015; McIntyre et al., 2006; Moffat et al., 2004; Rosario et al., 2011; Sankar &amp; Hampson, 2012). For example, lower levels of 17β-estradiol in women are associated with an increased incidence of neurological and neuropsychiatric diseases (Baum, 2005; Rosario et al., 2011; Wieck, 2011). Similarly, exogenous 17β-estradiol given to aging women may reduce the risk of AD (Maki, 2013), improve cognition in older age (Hogervorst et al., 2000; Hogervorst et al., 2005), and provide relief from depression (Rubinow et al., 2015). Although one large clinical trial, the Women’s Health Initiative, did not find evidence of a beneficial effect of hormone therapy on cognition or AD risk in postmenopausal women (Shumaker et al., 2003), this study was widely criticized due to the older age of participants (most women were well past menopause), health of participants, and the particular choice of hormone therapy (Brinton, 2005; Maki, 2004; Resnick &amp; Henderson, 2002). The concerns raised by this study, together with evidence for greater disease incidence in women that may be associated with estrogens, underscores the necessity for further research into the impact of estrogens on cognition, health and neuroprotection.

In younger adults, research attention is needed in human studies to assess the potential role of estrogens in mental health conditions that affect men and women unequally. New inroads into the sources of the sex disparity, as well as new insights into the basic mechanisms that underlie these poorly understood psychiatric disorders, could result from greater attention to the role of biological sex and the moderating effects of sex steroids. It could be argued that progress has been hampered in past research by the failure to take biological sex into consideration, and factors that covary with it such as differences in liver enzyme expression and lean-to-fat ratios (Waxman &amp; Holloway, 2009), variations in circulating levels of estrogens, and sex differences in brain pathways. Thus, given the prominent sex and sex hormone interactions with a number of disorders, more research should be directed towards understanding the disease process in both males and females under different sex hormone conditions.

Here, we review literature surrounding the complex effects of estrogens in females from a variety of perspectives, beginning with basic science neurobehavioral and molecular biology investigations in young adult females, and building up to disease models in older adult females and human studies. These data were presented as a symposium at the annual meeting of the International Behavioral Neuroscience Society (IBNS) in June, 2015. In this review, we discuss how estrogens influence learning and memory in female rodents (sections 3 and 4) and women (section 7), the brain systems and cellular pathways through which estrogens may exert their effects (sections 3 and 4), the different effects of various types of estrogens on cognition and neuroplasticity (section 5), and findings indicating that the ability of estrogens to influence neuroprotection depends on age (section 6), preexisting pathology (section 6), and experience (section 5). We close by discussing why sex and hormonal status are important considerations in examining factors related to women’s brain health.

2. Estrogen receptor localization and function

Like all steroid hormones, estrogens were once thought to act solely via straightforward actions at the genome. This classical “genomic” mechanism involves the binding of estrogens to the intracellular estrogen receptors ERα and ERβ, which form homo- or heterodimers that translocate to the nucleus and regulate expression of ER target genes by directly binding an estrogen response element (ERE) or forming protein-protein interactions to indirectly regulate other transcription factors (Figure 1A). However, intracellular ERs have been identified in numerous locations, including dendrites and axon terminals (Blaustein and Lehman, 1992). Intracellular ERs have been identified throughout the male and female rodent hippocampus in both pyramidal neurons and glia (Milner et al., 2001; Milner et al., 2005; Mitra et al., 2003; Mitterling et al., 2010; Shughrue et al., 1997a; Shughrue et al., 1997b; Shughrue and Merchenthaler, 2000). Within pyramidal neurons, ultrastructural analyses have localized ERα and ERβ to extranuclear sites including dendritic spines, axons, and axon terminals (Milner et al., 2005; Milner et al., 2001; Mitterling et al., 2010; Waters et al., 2011), suggesting functions for the ERs beyond classical ERE-dependent transcription. Such non-nuclear effects are supported by findings demonstrating that 17β-estradiol increases the localization of ERβ to dendritic spines and shafts in the adult female rat hippocampus, and promotes translocation of ERβ to the plasma membrane in hippocampal-derived cell lines (Sheldahl et al., 2008; Waters et al., 2011). These data indicate that 17β-estradiol mobilizes intracellular ERs to interact with membrane proteins in extranuclear cellular compartments. Such “non-classical” effects (Figure 1B) have been demonstrated in vitro and in vivo in the female rodent hippocampus, where ERα and ERβ interact at the plasma membrane with metabotropic glutamate receptors mGluR1 and mGluR2/3 to activate extracellular signal-regulated kinase/mitogen activated protein kinase (ERK/MAPK) signaling, which triggers increased cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) phosphorylation and CREB-dependent gene transcription (Boulware et al., 2013; Boulware et al., 2005). In cultured neurons from female rat hippocampus, S-palmitoylation of the ERs regulates their interactions with mGluRs (Meitzen et al., 2013), thus providing a possible mechanism through which intracellular ERs can activate cell-signaling cascades like ERK.

In addition to the membrane-associated activity of intracellular ERs, several membrane-bound ERs have been hypothesized, including G-protein-coupled ER (GPER, formerly GPR30), Gq-ER, and ER-X. Of these, GPER is the most widely accepted as a membrane ER (Srivastava and Evans, 2013), and can be found throughout the hippocampus exclusively at extranuclear sites within glia, interneurons, and pyramidal neurons (Brailoiu et al., 2007; Waters et al., 2015). Notably, in pyramidal neurons, GPER can be found at or near the plasma membrane of dendrites, dendritic spines, soma, axons, and axon terminals in association with post-synaptic scaffolding proteins (Akama et al., 2013; Waters et al., 2015). As such, GPER is well positioned to mediate the rapid effects of estrogens on cell signaling and other cellular functions.

3. Rapid action of estrogens and their receptors: implications for learning and memory

As noted above, in addition to their delayed and long-lasting genomic actions, estrogens can also act very rapidly via non-genomic mechanisms that depend upon intracellular signaling (reviewed in Ervin et al., 2013 and Frick et al., 2015). The rapid effects have received research attention in recent years and have been shown to be involved in learning and memory. Investigations with treatments administered shortly after the acquisition phase of a learning task have demonstrated a crucial role for the rapid mechanisms of estrogens in the consolidation of a new memory (see Frick et al., 2015 and section 4 below in this review). Investigations showing an effect of estrogen administration prior to memory acquisition and with testing done shortly thereafter suggest the rapid effects of estrogen can enhance performance in learning tasks even at a time when memory consolidation is incomplete. This section focuses on rapid estrogenic effects during this early phase of the formation of a new memory.

Studies with systemic treatment with 17β-estradiol either 30 min before or immediately after exposure to objects (acquisition phase) improved object recognition in ovariectomized female rats when tested 4 h later (Luine et al., 2003). Studies in which systemic treatments of 17β-estradiol were given to ovariectomized mice have shown very rapid facilitation of various learning tasks including social recognition, object recognition, object placement and the social transmission of food preferences (Ervin et al., 2015; Phan et al., 2012). In these studies by the Choleris laboratory, mice were administered 17β-estradiol 15 min before a learning task, which was completed by 40 min post-treatment. Hence, both task acquisition and testing were completed within a timeframe that makes genomic effects of estrogens unlikely, and rather points towards rapid non-genomic mechanisms. Using systemic treatments with ER selective agonists, various investigations showed that ERα and GPER predominantly mediate these rapid effects of estrogens (Phan et al., 2011; Gabor, Lymer et al., 2015; Ervin et al., 2015). However, differences in specific ER-involvement in these tasks were also found. In particular, systemic treatment with the ERα agonist propyl pyrazole triol (PPT) (Phan et al., 2011) and GPER agonist G1 (Gabor, Lymer et al., 2015) rapidly enhanced social and object recognition in adult ovariectomized mice. Conversely, systemic treatment with the ERβ agonist diarylpropionitrile (DPN) may have rapidly impaired social recognition and had no effects on object recognition (Phan et al., 2011). Mice tested in the object placement task showed rapid enhanced performance with all 3 ER-selective agonists (Phan et al., 2011; Gabor et al., 2015). Together, these results suggest a generalized role for ERα and GPER in mediating the rapid enhancement of recognition and location memories by estrogens and a specific role for ERβ in location memory. The involvement of the 3 ERs in the rapid facilitation of social learning by estrogens, instead, appears different. The GPER agonist G1 rapidly enhanced social learning, while ERα agonist PPT and ERβ agonist DPN did not. Rather, the ERα agonist shortened a socially learned food preference (Ervin et al., 2015). The different and somewhat opposing effects of GPER and ERα agonists may explain why treatment with the GPER agonist resulted in a socially acquired food preference of longer duration than treatment with 17β-estradiol itself, which activates all ERs (Ervin et al., 2015). The results of the social learning test also point at a learning-specific role of the ERs in mediating the rapid effects of estradiol on memory encoding. In particular, the findings with the ERα agonist PPT are striking, as it strongly facilitated performance in social recognition, object recognition and object placement tasks, while it inhibited social learning (Ervin et al., 2015; Phan et al., 2011). These different results suggest that ERα may have specific effects on different types of memories mediated by different brain regions.

3.1 The hippocampus is implicated in the rapid learning enhancement of estrogens and their receptors

The brain responds to rapid effects of estrogens at different levels, from structural to functional (reviewed in Sellers et al., 2015; Woolley et al., 2007). In particular, dendritic spines, the site of most excitatory synapses, respond very rapidly to estrogen treatment. In the hippocampus, 17β-estradiol administration results in a transient increase in density and length (Jacome et al., 2016; MacLusky et al., 2005; Mukai et al., 2007; Murakami et al., 2006; Mendez et al., 2011; Srivastava, et al., 2008; Tuscher et al., 2016). In behaviorally naïve ovariectomized female mice, it was also found that systemic treatment with 17β-estradiol (Phan et al., 2012), ERα agonist PPT (Phan et al., 2011) and GPER agonist G1 (Gabor, Lymer et al., 2015) rapidly increased dendritic spine density in CA1 field of the hippocampus, while ERβ agonist DPN decreased it (Phan et al., 2011). Subsequently, it was shown that bath application of 17β-estradiol and ERα agonist PPT for 20–30 minutes to hippocampal sections from behaviorally naïve postnatal female (PND 20–32) mice enhanced dendritic spine density (Phan et al., 2015). Intriguingly, within the same timeframe as the dendritic spines and learning enhancements, 17β-estradiol also decreased CA1 hippocampal excitatory input, rapidly and transiently reducing AMPA responses, likely through AMPA receptor internalization (see Figure 2A; Phan et al., 2015). Hence, it appears new spines induced by estrogens are associated with silent or immature synapses. These synapses may become active when used in learning events as they are with induction of learning-associated long-term potentiation (LTP; Smejkalova &amp; Woolley, 2010; Smith &amp; McMahon, 2006). These effects confirmed the results of previous ex-vivo work (Srivastava et al., 2008) and prompted further investigations into the involvement of the hippocampus in the rapid effects of estrogens on learning.

Infusion of 17β-estradiol or the ERα agonist PPT (Phan et al., 2015) into the dorsal hippocampus rapidly improved performance in social recognition, object recognition, and object placement tasks, while the ERβ agonist DPN was ineffective. Similarly, infusion of the GPER agonist G1 enhanced social and object recognition but did not affect object location recognition in the object placement task (Lymer et al., submitted). Conversely, infusion of the same doses of 17β-estradiol in the dorsal hippocampus did not enhance the social transmission of food preferences (Ervin et al., unpublished results). These results suggest that ERα and the GPER are involved in most of the rapid enhancing effects of hippocampal estradiol on learning and also support the notion that estrogens in the dorsal hippocampus can promote social, object and location recognition. The lack of effects on social learning in initial investigations, suggest the improvement seen with systemic treatment (Ervin et al., 2015) was mediated by estrogenic action in brain regions other than the dorsal hippocampus. Further research is needed in order to identify those other regions.

Because the hippocampus is known to process spatial information and enhance spatial learning, it was further hypothesized that improvement in social and object recognition by estrogens in the dorsal hippocampus may be due to enhanced processing of spatial cues associated with the social and object stimuli used in the learning tasks. Using a Y-maze with high walls that minimize access to spatial information, it was found that dorsal hippocampal infusion of 17β-estradiol rapidly enhanced object recognition but not social recognition (Phan et al., unpublished results). Hence, dorsal hippocampal estrogens rapidly and directly improve performance in the object recognition and placement tasks, while they enhance social recognition via associated spatial information processing, likely in interplay with an extra hippocampal brain region. Recent results suggest the latter may be the medial amygdala, as infusion of 17β-estradiol here enhanced social recognition (Sheppard et al., unpublished results). Overall, these findings illustrate that an interconnected network of brain regions is being identified that are specifically implicated in the very rapid effects of estrogens and ERs on various learning tasks in females.

4. Cell-signaling pathways involved in 17β-estradiol-induced memory enhancement

The rapid activation of cell-signaling pathways by membrane receptors such as neurotransmitter and growth factor receptors allows for intracellular communication that need not depend on gene transcription. As such, cell-signaling mechanisms may allow estrogens to swiftly modulate cellular functions in response to a learning event (e.g., local protein synthesis to build new dendritic spines). Numerous cell-signaling cascades linked to glutamatergic receptor activation are involved in hippocampal memory formation, including ERK/MAPK, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K), protein kinase A (PKA), calcium-calmodulin kinase II (CaMKII), and the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) (e.g., (Adams and Sweatt, 2002; Atkins et al., 1998; Guzowski and McGaugh, 1997; Hoeffer and Klann, 2010; Horwood et al., 2006; Impey et al., 1998a; Impey et al., 1998b; Lee and Silva, 2009; Selcher et al., 1999; Silva et al., 1992)). 17β-estradiol can activate many of these cell-signaling cascades in vivo and in vitro within minutes as discussed below.

Among the earliest examples of such activation came from in vitro studies of various cell types, including hippocampal neurons. This work shows that ERK phosphorylation was increased within 15 minutes of exposure to 17β-estradiol or a membrane-impermeable form of 17β-estradiol for which 17β-estradiol was conjugated to bovine serum albumin (BSA-17β-estradiol) (Wade and Dorsa, 2003; Wade et al., 2001; Watters et al., 1997; Yokomaku et al., 2003). In adult male rats and female mice, 17β-estradiol or BSA-17β-estradiol infused into the dorsal hippocampus or cerebral ventricles (ICV) significantly increases dorsal hippocampal ERK phosphorylation within 5 minutes, demonstrating very rapid effects of 17β-estradiol on ERK signaling in vivo (Boulware et al., 2013; Fernandez et al., 2008; Fortress et al., 2013; Kuroki et al., 2000; Pereira et al., 2014; Zhao et al., 2012; Zhao et al., 2010),. Accordingly, inhibitors of MAPK kinase (MEK), which exclusively phosphorylates ERK, block 17β-estradiol-induced ERK phosphorylation both in vitro and in vivo (Fernandez et al., 2008; Fortress et al., 2013; Nilsen and Brinton, 2003; Yokomaku et al., 2003; Zhao et al., 2010). Importantly, inhibition of MEK in the dorsal hippocampus prevents 17β-estradiol or BSA-17β-estradiol infused into the dorsal 3rd ventricle from enhancing the consolidation of hippocampal-dependent object recognition and spatial memories in ovariectomized mice (see Figure 2B; Boulware et al., 2013; Fernandez et al., 2008; Fortress et al., 2013; Pereira et al., 2014; Zhao et al., 2012; Zhao et al., 2010). These findings demonstrate two important points. The first is that the memory-enhancing effects of 17β-estradiol are dependent on cell signaling. Second, the effects of 17β-estradiol on ERK and memory consolidation can be mimicked by a membrane-impermeable form of 17β-estradiol, thus illustrating a key role for membrane proteins in the memory-enhancing effects of 17β-estradiol. These two points will be discussed in more detail below.

In support of the first point, ERK is one of many cell-signaling molecules whose activity is regulated by 17β-estradiol, and this estrogenic modulation of cell signaling has important consequences for neural functioning. For example, inhibitors of ERK, PI3K, PKA, protein kinase C (PKC), and CaMKII phosphorylation block spinogenesis and LTP in hippocampal slices from adult male rats (Hasegawa et al., 2015; Mukai et al., 2007; Murakami et al., 2014). Similarly, inhibition of ERK prevents 17β-estradiol from increasing dendritic spine density in cultured embryonic rat (sex not specified) cortical neurons (Srivastava et al., 2008). Although increased spine density does not necessarily translate into increased synaptic plasticity, the 17β-estradiol-induced facilitation of signaling in the RhoA/RhoA protein kinase (ROCK) pathway has been associated with enhanced LTP in male rat hippocampal slices (Kramár et al., 2009). ROCK activates LIM kinase, which then phosphorylates cofilin, thereby leading to actin polymerization and stabilization of the spine cytoskeleton (Gungabissoon and Bamburg, 2003; Thirone et al., 2009). 17β-estradiol increases filamentous actin levels and actin polymerization in dendritic spines via Rho/ROCK activation, whereas ovariectomy disrupts LTP stabilization and actin filament assembly in spines (Kramár et al., 2009). Moreover, the beneficial effects of 17β-estradiol on LTP in slices from the male rat hippocampus are completely blocked by the toxin latrunculin, which disrupts actin filament assembly (Kramár et al., 2009). Thus, 17β-estradiol appears to regulate spinogenesis and LTP in the male rat hippocampus by altering actin polymerization. Although a direct link between 17β-estradiol-induced alterations in ERK and cofilin signaling has yet to be reported in the hippocampus, inhibitors of ERK or the downstream mTOR protein synthesis pathway prevent dorsal hippocampus-infused 17β-estradiol from increasing dendritic spine density in the dorsal hippocampus of ovariectomized mice (Tuscher et al., 2016). This novel finding suggests the intriguing possibility that multiple cell-signaling pathways regulate the effects of 17β-estradiol on hippocampal morphology and synaptic plasticity.

Accordingly, numerous cell-signaling pathways are also involved in the memory- enhancing effects of 17β-estradiol. In addition to ERK, activation of PKA, PI3K, and mTOR are necessary for 17β-estradiol to enhance memory consolidation in hippocampal-dependent object recognition and object location tasks in ovariectomized mice (Fan et al., 2010; Fortress et al., 2013; Lewis et al., 2008). As with ERK, inhibitors of PKA, PI3K, or mTOR prevent 17β-estradiol from enhancing memory consolidation (Fan et al., 2010; Fortress et al., 2013; Lewis et al., 2008). Several of these signaling pathways work together to mediate the effects of 17β-estradiol in young and middle-aged ovariectomized mice. In particular, 17β-estradiol first activates PI3K, followed by ERK, and then mTOR (Fan et al., 2010; Fortress et al., 2013). Given the important role of the mTOR pathway in local protein synthesis and memory formation (Bekinschtein et al., 2007; Dash et al., 2006; Hoeffer and Klann, 2010; Myskiw et al., 2008; Parsons et al., 2006), the order of kinase activation induced by 17β-estradiol is consistent with the hypothesis that rapid effects of 17β-estradiol on cell signaling increase dendritic spine density, which then leads to increased synaptic plasticity and enhanced memory.

4.2. 17β-estradiol-induced cell-signaling and receptor interactions

If activation of cell-signaling pathways is critical for 17β-estradiol to facilitate memory formation, then how does 17β-estradiol trigger cell signaling? 17β-estradiol likely initiates cell signaling via interactions with membrane receptors. This notion is supported by evidence that the membrane impermeable BSA-17β-estradiol mimics the effects of 17β-estradiol on ERK activation and object recognition memory (Fernandez et al., 2008; Kuroki et al., 2000; Wade and Dorsa, 2003; Watters et al., 1997). Furthermore, these effects are not blocked by administration of the intracellular ER antagonist ICI 182,780 to the hippocampus (Fernandez et al., 2008; Kuroki et al., 2000). This finding suggests that activation of membrane ERs is sufficient for 17β-estradiol to increase ERK signaling and facilitate memory formation. However, the identity of these receptors remains unclear, as there is scant evidence that ERα and ERβ are integral membrane proteins (Bondar et al., 2009).

One possible mechanism links intracellular ERs with mGluR1 receptors. As mentioned above, 17β-estradiol activates ERK and phosphorylates CREB in hippocampal slices from neonatal female rats (Boulware et al., 2005). In slices, this effect is mediated by interactions between mGluR1 and ERα, but not ERβ (Boulware et al., 2005). In ovariectomized adult C57BL/6 mice however, both ERα and ERβ play key roles. When infused directly into the dorsal hippocampus of ovariectomized C57BL/6 mice, both the ERα agonist PPT and ERβ agonist DPN increase dorsal hippocampal ERK phosphorylation and enhance object recognition and object location memory consolidation (Boulware et al., 2013). The effects of 17β-estradiol and these agonists are blocked by either the ERK inhibitor U0126 or the mGluR1 antagonist LY367385 (Boulware et al., 2013; Zhao et al., 2010), suggesting direct interactions between the ERs and mGluR1. Supporting the existence of these interactions, fractionation and co-immunoprecipitation experiments indicate physical interactions between both ERs and mGluR1 at the membrane (Boulware et al., 2013). Although it is unknown how BSA-17β-estradiol might gain access to intracellular ERα and ERβ to facilitate the interactions with mGluR1, these data illustrate one way in which intracellular ERs may initiate cell signaling. Given the plethora of cell-signaling pathways activated by 17β-estradiol, numerous other membrane receptors are likely to be involved in mediating the effects of 17β-estradiol on memory. NMDA receptors have already been implicated in 17β-estradiol’s effects on ERK and object recognition in ovariectomized female mice (Lewis et al., 2008), and many more receptors are apt to play key roles. As such, this area is particularly ripe for future investigation.

Another way in which 17β-estradiol may trigger cell signaling is via binding to membrane ERs. As mentioned above, GPER is generally considered to be a membrane ER, although not all researchers agree (Langer et al., 2010; Levin, 1999). The GPER agonist G-1 increases hippocampal CA1 dendritic spine density in ovariectomized mice (Gabor et al., 2015), and enhances several forms of hippocampal memory in ovariectomized rats or mice including spatial working memory, social transmission of food preferences, social recognition, object recognition, and spatial recognition (Ervin et al., 2015; Gabor et al., 2015; Hammond et al., 2009; Hawley et al., 2014). In contrast, the GPER antagonist G-15 impairs spatial working memory in ovariectomized rats (Hammond et al., 2012). Consistent with these findings, post-training dorsal hippocampus or ICV infusion of G-1 enhances, whereas G-15 impairs, object recognition and object location memory consolidation (Kim et al., 2016). Unlike 17β-estradiol, however, G-1 does not increase ERK, PI3K, or Akt phosphorylation in the dorsal hippocampus, but rather increases activation of the c-Jun N-terminal Kinase (JNK) signaling pathway (Kim et al., 2016). Moreover, the memory-enhancing effects of G-1 are dependent on activation of JNK and not ERK, whereas the reverse is true for 17β-estradiol (Kim et al., 2016). These data suggest that GPER in the dorsal hippocampus is not involved in the memory-enhancing effects of 17β-estradiol. In accordance with this hypothesis, the GPER agonist G-15 does not prevent 17β-estradiol from enhancing object recognition or object location memory consolidation (Kim et al., 2016), suggesting that GPER may not function as an ER in the dorsal hippocampus. Additional evidence for disparate effects of 17β-estradiol and G-1 comes from a recent neurogenesis study, in which 17β-estradiol increased, but G-1 decreased, cell proliferation in the dorsal hippocampus of ovariectomized rats (Duarte-Guterman et al., 2015). However, other findings support similar roles for 17β-estradiol and G-1, as dorsal hippocampus infusion of G-1 reportedly increases dorsal hippocampus ERK activation in ovariectomized mice (Hart et al., 2014) and G-15 prevents 17β-estradiol from activating ERK in hippocampal slices from ovariectomized mice (Kumar et al., 2015). Therefore, the role of GPER in mediating the effects of 17β-estradiol on memory remains unresolved and will need to be clarified in future studies.

4.3. 17β-estradiol-induced cell-signaling and epigenetic interactions

Cell-signaling pathways have myriad effects within the cell, including altering gene transcription through post-translational modifications of one or more transcription factors such as CREB. As mentioned earlier, 17β-estradiol phosphorylates CREB via phosphorylation of ERK. Another way in which 17β-estradiol-induced cell-signaling alterations may affect gene transcription is by regulating the epigenetic mechanisms histone acetylation and DNA methylation. Although 17β-estradiol-induced enhancements of object recognition memory consolidation are dependent on DNA methylation (Zhao et al., 2010), this section will focus on histone acetylation because estrogenic regulation of histone acetylation is dependent on cell signaling (see (Fortress and Frick, 2014) for a more detailed review of estrogenic regulation of DNA methylation and histone acetylation).

Acetylation of the four core histones (H2A, H2B, H3, H4) around which DNA is coiled is a primary mechanism of increasing gene expression. Acetylation relaxes the bond between the histones and DNA, thereby allowing transcription factors access to DNA. Of the four core histones, acetylation of H3 has been particularly associated with hippocampal ERK activation and facilitation of memory formation in rodents (Chwang et al., 2006; Gräff and Tsai, 2013; Levenson et al., 2004). Consistent with its ability to phosphorylate ERK and enhance memory, dorsal hippocampus infusion of 17β-estradiol increases H3 acetylation in the dorsal hippocampus of ovariectomized mice within 30 minutes (Fortress and Frick, 2014; Zhao et al., 2010). This effect is blocked by dorsal hippocampus infusion of U0126 (Zhao et al., 2010), demonstrating that dorsal hippocampal ERK activation is necessary for 17β-estradiol to increase H3 acetylation. The 17β-estradiol-induced acetylation of H3 regulates the expression of memory-promoting genes such as brain derived neurotrophic factor (Bdnf), as illustrated by data showing that 17β-estradiol increases H3 acetylation of Bdnf promoters II and IV in the dorsal hippocampus of ovariectomized mice 30 minutes after infusion, and increases levels of pro-BDNF and BDNF protein in the dorsal hippocampus 4 and 6 hours after infusion (Fortress and Frick, 2014). Thus, estrogenic regulation of histone acetylation appears to promote the expression of genes that facilitate memory formation.

How might 17β-estradiol regulate histone acetylation? One possibility is by altering levels of histone deacetylases (HDACs), which are enzymes that remove acetyl groups from histones. In particular, expression of HDAC2 and HDAC3 is associated with impaired hippocampal plasticity and memory in rodents (Guan et al., 2009; McQuown et al., 2011). Dorsal hippocampus infusion of 17β-estradiol decreases levels of HDAC2 and HDAC3 protein in the dorsal hippocampus of ovariectomized mice (Fortress and Frick, 2014; Zhao et al., 2010). However, the rapid effects of 17β-estradiol on H3 acetylation are not likely due to regulation of HDAC2 or HDAC3 because changes in these proteins are not observed until 4 hours after infusion (Fortress and Frick, 2014; Zhao et al., 2010). Rather, the immediate effects of 17β-estradiol on histone acetylation may result from regulating the activity of histone acetyltransferases (HATs), the enzymes that acetylate histones. In ovariectomized mice, dorsal hippocampus infusion of 17β-estradiol increases HAT activity in the dorsal hippocampus within 30 minutes, and blocking histone acetylation with a dorsal hippocampus infusion of the HAT inhibitor garcinol prevents 17β-estradiol from enhancing object recognition memory consolidation (Zhao et al., 2012). These findings demonstrate that histone acetylation is necessary for 17β-estradiol to enhance memory formation in female mice. Together with the aforementioned findings that 17β-estradiol-induced histone acetylation depends on ERK activation, these data suggest a central importance of cell signaling in the estrogenic regulation of epigenetic processes that regulate gene expression and memory formation. Given the complexity of cell-signaling mechanisms involved in memory processes, much more work will be needed to fully understand the contributions of various cell-signaling pathways to epigenetic regulation of estrogen-dependent memory.

Research from the past decade has greatly expanded our understanding of how 17β-estradiol regulates hippocampal function beyond classical genomic mechanisms. Classical mechanisms certainly play an important role in the effects of estrogens on long-term memory, as well as the cytoarchitecture and plasticity that supports long-term memory formation and retention. However, recent studies suggest that rapid activation of cell-signaling processes may underlie short-term memory and/or the initial stages of long-term memory acquisition and consolidation in the hippocampus. Cellular events that may contribute to acute estrogenic regulation of acquisition and consolidation are summarized in Fig. 1B (see (Frick, 2015) for a more detailed description of this model). Although these findings have provided exciting new insights, they surely represent just the tip of the non-classical iceberg. Research in the coming years should melt away the ice until the full complexity of non-classical mechanisms underlying estrogenic regulation of memory is revealed.

5. How do different estrogens influence cognition and neurogenesis in the hippocampus?

Up until now, evidence has been presented outlining the epigenetic and cell signaling mechanisms by which 17β-estradiol influences novel object recognition, novel object placement, social learning and social recognition via ERs primarily in the dorsal hippocampus. In this section, the effects of other estrogens will be described in relation to 17β-estradiol. In addition, it is important to recognize that experience and environment matter to the effects of estrogens on brain and behavior and evidence demonstrating these effects will also be described.

There are three main forms of estrogens: estrone, estradiol and estriol. The most potent of the estrogens is 17β-estradiol. Estriol is at highest concentrations during pregnancy, but is not widely studied. Although limited, research suggests that estriol reduces relapses in women with multiple sclerosis (Voskuhl et al., 2015) perhaps via its effects to reduce inflammation and rescue synaptic dysfunction during an automimmune response in the hippocampus (Zeihn et al., 2010). Although estrone and 17β-estradiol both decline with aging in women, there is a shift in the ratio of estradiol to estrone such that there is more estrone relative to estradiol after menopause (Rannevik, et al., 1986). Estrone is a weaker estrogen than estradiol, binding with less affinity to the intracellular ERs. Nonetheless, a widely prescribed hormone therapy (HT) called Premarin, used for the relief of menopausal symptoms, is composed of approximately 50% sulphated estrone and 1% estradiol.

Premarin was used in the Women’s Health Initiative Memory Study (WHIMS) that found that Premarin (plus a synthetic progesterone) was associated with increased risk for dementia and reduced cognitive functioning (Shumaker et al., 2003). This study was criticized based on a number of issues relating to the healthy cell bias (Brinton, 2005), critical window hypothesis (Resnick &amp; Henderson, 2002; Sherwin, 2005), and type of HT (Maki, 2004; Hogervorst et al., 2000; Ryan et al., 2008). Briefly, the healthy cell bias put forward by Roberta Brinton’s group suggested that estrogens will be neuroprotective in a healthy environment but not in a diseased environment. In the WHIMS study, patients were included even if they had a variety of health disorders and this may at least partially explain the negative findings on cognition. The critical window hypothesis refers to the idea that HT will only be effective when initiated early in menopause or just prior to menopause (Resnick &amp; Henderson, 2002) whereas the women in the WHIMS study were on average 15 years past menopause (Resnick &amp; Henderson, 2002; Sherwin, 2005). Meta-analyses indicate that HT therapies were more likely to have cognitive enhancing effects if given right after menopause and not 15 years later (Hogervorst et al., 2000; Ryan et al., 2008). The type of HT is another criticism of the WHIMS findings (Maki, 2004). Premarin, as mentioned above, contains 50% estrone but only 1% estradiol, and these estrogens have different influences on brain and behavior. 17β-estradiol has more positive effects on cognition, whereas estrone has more negative effects on cognition (Barha and Galea, 2009; Hogervorst et al., 2000). Indeed, in a meta-analysis, Hogervorst and colleagues (Hogervorst et al., 2000) found that the majority of studies using estradiol-based therapies were much more likely to find cognitive enhancing effects than studies using estrone-based therapies such as Premarin.

Studies from the Galea laboratory examined the ability of different estrogens to affect hippocampus learning and memory and neurogenesis in adult female rats. Neurogenesis is a form of neuroplasticity that is seen at robust levels in the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus of all mammalian species examined, including humans (see Kempermann et al., 2015 for review). Neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus has a number of stages: cell proliferation (the production of new cells); cell differentiation (into neurons or glia); cell migration (the migration of new neurons into the granule cell layer); and the survival of new neurons. Estrogens are associated with alterations in both cell proliferation and survival of new neurons in the dentate gyrus of adult female rodents (for review see Galea et al., 2013).

Galea and her colleagues found that acute 17β-estradiol and estrone upregulated cell proliferation in a dose-dependent manner in the dentate gyrus of adult female rats (Barha et al., 2009). However, although 17β-estradiol was associated with enhanced contextual fear conditioning at a lower dose, estrone was only associated with impaired contextual fear conditioning at a medium dose (Barha et al., 2011). The authors of those studies do not believe the differential effects of estrone versus 17β-estradiol are solely based due to differences in potency as three different doses of each were used in these experiments (Barha et al., 2009; 2011). Only the low dose of 17β-estradiol improved fear memory but none of the doses of estrone improved fear memory, while both the low and high doses of 17-β estradiol and estrone increased cell proliferation (Barha et al., 2009). It is important to note that although 17-β estradiol and estrone can be bi-directionally converted, the preferential pathway is from estradiol to estrone (Milewich et al., 1985). Furthermore chronic 17β-estradiol increased neurogenesis and activation of new neurons in response to spatial memory retrieval in the dentate gyrus, whereas chronic estrone decreased neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus in adult female rats (see Figure 3A; McClure et al., 2013). Indeed, in this study only 17β-estradiol had a positive correlation between activation of new neurons and spatial memory retrieval (McClure et al., 2013). These findings indicated that only 17β-estradiol was associated with positive effects on spatial memory in the Morris Water Maze, whereas estrone was not. These studies collectively provide evidence for differential effects between 17β-estradiol and estrone with 17β-estradiol facilitating cognition and neuroplasticity but estrone impairing cognition and neurogenesis at certain doses.

Low doses of Premarin were associated with impaired reference and working memory in a spatial working/reference memory version of the radial arm maze (Barha and Galea, 2013). Paradoxically, Premarin also increased neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus (Barha and Galea, 2013). This paradoxical finding may be explained if the new neurons surviving under Premarin either did not make appropriate connections or are not involved in learning or memory per se. The former explanation seemed the most likely explanation, as activation of new neurons was not associated with learning under Premarin treatment but was associated with improved learning under vehicle treatment. Other studies from the Bimonte-Nelson laboratory have found that whereas low doses of Premarin impaired spatial reference acquisition, medium and high doses of Premarin improved spatial working memory (Engler-Chiurrazzi et al., 2011). These studies collectively show that estradiol and estrone have very different influences on cognition and plasticity within the hippocampus, with estradiol having greater dose-dependent facilitatory effects but estrone having more detrimental effects on hippocampus structure and function.

5.1 The effects of estrogens on neurogenesis are dependent on experience

The effects of estrogens on neurogenesis within the hippocampus are altered by various forms of experience such as reproductive experience, spatial training, and/or food restriction. Galea and colleagues found that estrogens do not influence cell proliferation in nulliparous (never mothered) middle-aged rats, but all three estrogens tested (17α-estradiol, 17β-estradiol and estrone) increased cell proliferation in multiparous (pregnant and mothered at least four times) middle-aged rats (Barha and Galea, 2011). Indeed, the effects of the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor, fluoxetine, on neurogenesis were altered by parity as fluoxetine increased the number of immature neurons in nulliparous animals but not in primiparous animals (Workman et al., in press). These studies among others suggest that reproductive experience influences the ability of certain factors to promote neurogenesis in the hippocampus of adult female rodents. In addition, Barha and Galea (2013) showed that chronic Premarin (1 and 2μg doses) for 33 days increased neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus in females but only in those undergoing a spatial task and food restriction (to 85%). However, the same doses of Premarin did not influence neurogenesis in cage controls that neither underwent spatial training or food restriction. This finding indicates that either food restriction and/or spatial training influences the effects of estrogens on neurogenesis and more studies examining the factors that influence estrogens ability to alter hippocampal parameters need to be considered in the future.

6. Is estradiol neuroprotective? It depends on age and pathology

Estradiol has been shown to be neuroprotective in several experimental models of disease, such as stroke, Parkinson’s disease, and multiple sclerosis (reviewed in Sohrabji et al. 2015). The mechanisms underlying estradiol’s actions are likely pleitropic, involving a combination of anti-apoptotic and anti-inflammatory actions (Simpkins et al., 2010; Suzuki et al., 2009. In the case of ischemic stroke, which is usually modeled by middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAo), 17β-estradiol was first implicated as a neuroprotectant because of the dramatic sex differences in stroke outcomes. Specifically, females were found to have smaller infarct volumes and better cerebral blood flow than age-matched males both in normoglycemic (Alkayed et al., 1998) and diabetic (Toung et al., 2000) animals, and this sex difference was eliminated when females were bilaterally ovariectomized.

Several other pieces of evidence also support the role of estradiol as neuroprotectant. Stroke injury to females in proestrus (high estradiol levels) result in smaller infarcts than those in metestrus (low estradiol state) and the extent of ischemic damage was inversely related to circulating levels of estradiol (Liao et al., 2011). Bilateral ovariectomy worsens infarct volume and longer periods of estradiol deprivation (1 week versus 4 week of ovariectomy) further increase the size of the infarct (Fukuda et al., 2000). Direct evidence of 17β-estradiol’s role was shown in studies where estradiol treatment to ovariectomized females reduced infarct volume and mortality (Simpkins et al., 1997). Exogenous 17β-estradiol replacement is neuroprotective when given prior (Dubal et al, 1998) or subsequent to the injury (Liu et al., 2007; Yang et al., 2003), and is also effective in males (Toung et al., 1998). Remarkably, activating GPER30 via the G1 ligand is neuroprotective in ovariectomized females, but paradoxically increases infarct volume in males (Broughton et al., 2014), indicating sex specific effects of activating estrogen receptors.

However, 17β-estradiol’s actions are not uniformly neuroprotective in females and, in specific conditions, may have deleterious actions. 17β-estradiol replacement to the Wistar-Kyoto rat strain (Carswell et al., 2004), Lister Hooded and Sprague–Dawley rats (Bingham et al., 2005; Gordon et al., 2005), reportedly increases infarct volume and has no protective effect on infarct size in the ovariectomized stroke-prone spontaneously hypertensive rat (SHRSP) (Carswell et al., 2004). In a model of severe ischemic injury, where cerebral vessels (single middle cerebral artery [MCA] and both common carotids) were occluded for 3h, there were no sex differences in infarct size and no reduction of the infarct due to intravenous or subcutaneous 17β-estradiol (Vergouwen et al., 2000). Based on these studies, Macrae and Carswell (2006) have suggested that the neuroprotective effect of 17β-estradiol may be less effective in permanent ischemic models.

Age also affects the neuroprotective capacity of 17β-estradiol. Relatively few studies have assessed older females in experimental stroke models, and while most studies agree that stroke damage is worse in older females as compared to younger females (see Figure 3B; Takaba et al., 2004; Liu et al., 2009, Selvamani and Sohrabji, 2010a), they differ in their conclusions regarding the efficacy of 17β-estradiol treatment to older females. Chronic 17β-estradiol replacement is neuroprotective to middle-aged females in the MCAo suture stroke model (Alkayed et al., 2000; Dubal and Wise 2001) as well as a single injection of estradiol administered ICV or systemically following a four vessel occlusion model (Lebesgue et al., 2010), although 17β-estradiol failed to attenuate hippocampal cell death in a bilateral carotid artery occlusion model in middle-aged gerbils (De Butte-Smith et al., 2007). In middle-aged female rats, characterized as reproductively senescent by daily vaginal smears and with virtually undetectable levels of estradiol (constant diestrus), 17β-estradiol treatment increased infarct volume and worsened sensory motor performance in an endothelin-1 vasoconstriction model, although 17β-estradiol treatment to multiparous young females was neuroprotective in this model (Selvamani and Sohrabji, 2010a; 2010b). The lack of protective response to 17β-estradiol treatment to older females may be due to an extended period of estrogen deficiency, making their response to subsequent 17β-estradiol treatment less favorable. Some support for this hypothesis comes from a study by Wise and colleagues where ovariectomized females replaced with chronic 17β-estradiol immediately had reduced infarct volume, while those replaced with 17β-estradiol 10 weeks later had no improvement in stroke outcomes (Suzuki et al., 2007).

Another explanation for the ineffectiveness of 17β-estradiol treatment to older animals with stroke comes from observations that estradiol typically collaborates with peptide growth factors to promote neuronal growth and proliferation. Thus in aging females, the loss of estrogens is also accompanied by decreasing levels of other hormones, including IGF-1. In fact, post-stroke IGF-1 replacement to middle-aged females pretreated with 17β-estradiol abrogates the neurotoxic effects of 17β-estradiol in this group (Selvamani and Sohrabji, 2010b). Reciprocally, treatment of young females with the IGF receptor antagonist JB-1 attenuates the protective effect of estradiol typically seen in this group. Together, these data suggest that the collaborative actions of 17β-estradiol and IGF-1 are critical for neuroprotection at any age, but are likely to be unmasked in aging when both estradiol and IGF-1 levels fall.

Both 17β-estradiol and IGF-1 regulate common second messenger systems that are critical for disease process such as cell survival and angiogenesis (Sohrabji, 2014). 17β-estradiol and IGF-1 are critical mitogens, and the PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway appears to be the principal transducer of their actions. 17β-estradiol proliferative actions on MCF-7 cells, for example, are mediated via IGF-1, and 17β-estradiol increases IRS-1 (IGF-1 substrate) as well as p85 (the active subunit of the PI3K). Conversely, IGF-1 is proliferative only in steroid-treated cells (Bernard et al., 2006). Similarly, a second common pathway for 17β-estradiol and IGF-1 is the MAP kinase signaling family. In 17β-estradiol treatment in vivo results in a dose-dependent activation of ERK and Akt and has a synergistic effect on IGF-1 mediated activation of the pAkt/PKB pathway (Cardona-Gomez et al., 2002). In a medial forebrain bundle injury that models Parkinson’s disease, IGF-1 attenuates lesion effects and also mediates the neuroprotective effects of estrogen (Quesada et al., 2004). IGF-1 and 17β-estradiol both signal through MAPK and Akt pathways and Akt inhibitors blocked the survival effects of both 17β-estradiol and IGF-1 (Quesada et al., 2008), implicating the Akt survival pathway in 17β-estradiol and IGF-1 mediated neuroprotection.

7. Estrogens in the human brain

It should be abundantly clear from the foregoing discussion that estrogens are a significant influence on brain and behavior in various rodent species. Are estrogens similarly important in the human central nervous system (CNS)? The question has received much less study in humans than in laboratory animals, for 2 reasons. One is conceptual: sex differences in humans, to the extent that they are biologically-based, are usually assumed to be driven by exposure of the CNS to androgens during fetal development, not to adult estrogens (Berenbaum &amp; Beltz, 2011; McCarthy &amp; Konkle, 2005). This view derives from animal models, where the organizational effects of androgens (with or without aromatization) during pre- or perinatal development have been a dominant focus of study for decades among those interested in how sex differences arise (Breedlove &amp; Hampson, 2002). At present, it is not widely recognized among human researchers that circulating estrogens can be important for engendering sex differences. The second reason is practical: human researchers can less easily conduct the sort of blinded controlled administration of estradiol vs placebo that is typically done when studying other species. Such manipulations are permissible in some forms of clinical research (or in postmenopausal women whose gonads are inactive), but ethical and logistical complexities are introduced when studying young women of reproductive age where the endogenous ovarian cycle and fertility issues must be taken into consideration.

Animal studies have revealed the surprising breadth of estradiol’s modulatory effects on the cholinergic, serotonergic, dopaminergic, noradrenergic, and other brain pathways (for a review see McEwen &amp; Alves, 1999). To be clear, these effects are dependent on changes in estradiol levels in adult animals, not estrogens that act during early brain development. If such effects do occur in humans, they potentially could have far-reaching implications for a number of mental health conditions. Indeed, symptom expression in some clinical conditions does vary as a function of the ovarian cycle. Women with schizophrenia, for example, show increased symptom severity and more hospital admissions during times when circulating estrogens are low (e.g., Riecher-Rössler et al., 1994; Bergemann et al., 2002). Several randomized trials have now suggested that estradiol treatment administered in conjunction with antipsychotics can improve drug control and perhaps improve positive symptoms in particular (Kulkarni et al., 2015), although conflicting evidence does exist (Bergemann et al., 2005). It is very plausible that variations in circulating estrogen levels bring about these changes, but the role of estrogen is ill defined and because of the lack of dedicated research inquiry is still largely a matter of conjecture.

The role played by estrogens in major depression also is uncertain, including forms of depression closely tied to reproduction, such as antepartum or postpartum depression, but an influence of estradiol levels is suggested by a small body of findings. Major depressive disorder is twice as prevalent in women as men, and the sex difference arises at puberty (Tanner stage III) and declines after menopause (Steiner &amp; Young, 2008). It is possible that a modulatory influence of ovarian hormones on the neurochemistry of major depression might explain the sex difference in prevalence rates. Collaborative work by Hampson and colleagues has found a candidate genetic polymorphism in ESR1 (the gene coding for ERα) that was linked statistically to the occurrence of postpartum depression (Pinsonneault et al., 2013; see also Costas et al., 2010) and a possible interaction with the serotonin transporter was identified (Pinsonneault et al., 2013). Hampson and colleagues also found lower serum estradiol (but increased cortisol) in women suffering from antepartum depression during pregnancy compared with healthy controls assessed at the same gestational timepoint (Hampson et al., 2015). Emerging animal data supports the idea that steroids may play a role in postpartum depression (for a review see Brummelte &amp; Galea, 2015).

So how do we study estrogen-related effects in humans, and do they really matter? Although we can’t always manipulate hormones exogenously, it is still possible to design intelligent studies that probe the potential role of biological sex and the role of estrogens. A review of ‘best practices’ when doing sex differences research was published by Endocrinology in 2005 (Becker et al., 2005) and contains a wealth of useful tips for novices (see also Becker et al., 2008). Certain issues peculiar to humans need to be taken into account. For instance, estrogen levels differ greatly pre- and post-menopause, or as a function of the use of exogenous estrogens in menopausal women who opt to use hormone replacement therapy (HT). In young women, it is necessary for researchers to attend to whether or not hormonal contraception is used. Oral contraceptives contain ethinyl estradiol combined with one of at least 13 different progestins. Oral contraceptives suppress the endogenous changes in sex steroids associated with the menstrual cycle and the synthetic steroids contained in the pills themselves exert a combination of estrogenic, progestogenic, and androgenic effects (Hampson &amp; Young, 2008).

Although active in the CNS, ethinyl estradiol is not detected by most routine immunoassays available commercially (data available from the manufacturers), so simply measuring women’s estradiol levels is not an effective method to deal with oral contraceptive use when designing a study. Although it is beyond the scope of this review, it is often necessary when studying sex differences in brain and behavior to limit participation to women who have naturally-occurring cycles, or to consider oral contraceptive users separately in statistical analyses, or to take advantage of the steroidal milieu offered by the pills to harness their effects in a meaningful way that is useful to the research question (for a discussion of issues related to oral contraceptives and their effects see Hampson &amp; Young, 2008; Beltz et al., 2015). One common method for studying the effects of estrogens (and progestins) in neuroscience studies involving human participants is to carefully time the behavioral testing on an individualized basis to coincide with specific phases of the menstrual cycle when estradiol levels are expected to be either high or low (Hampson &amp; Young, 2008; Becker et al., 2005), a method used in many studies in the Hampson laboratory (Hampson et al., 2005; cf. Hampson &amp; Morley, 2013) and also adopted by others (e.g. Maki et al., 2002). In effect, targeted timing affords researchers a naturalistic method to compare the differences in behavioral outcomes that result under low versus high estradiol conditions.

An illustration of these approaches is useful here, not simply to illustrate how estrogens can be considered in human research studies, but also to illustrate why it matters conceptually. Working memory is a form of short-term memory that is well known to decline during normal aging and also in certain medical conditions. The executive components of working memory depend upon activity in the prefrontal cortex in humans and other primates (Owen, 1997). Duff and Hampson (2000) showed, in healthy postmenopausal women, that the use of estrogen replacement therapy (taken in the form of conjugated equine estrogens), whether or not it was combined with a progestin, was associated with significantly better accuracy on a test of spatial working memory (the SPWM task; Duff &amp; Hampson, 2000) compared with women not using HT. Two other working memory tasks showed the same effect. Of note, all women in the Duff and Hampson study were in good general health and began treatment at the onset of menopause. This finding has since been replicated and extended by others using either observational designs (e.g., Keenan et al., 2001) or randomized trials of estradiol or placebo (e.g., Krug et al., 2006), and is supported by work in rhesus monkeys using a delayed response task (Rapp et al., 2003) where superior performance under estradiol treatment was found. In the study by Duff and Hampson (2000), the difference in the numbers of working memory errors between non-users and women treated with estrogen-progestin therapy was relatively large (approximately 20–40% greater errors among non-users on the SPWM task, see Figure 4), and women using replacement estrogens in fact performed within the range of scores typically observed in much younger control women (Hampson &amp; Moffat, 2004; Hampson &amp; Morley, 2013). Taking estrogen status into account thus advanced our understanding of memory changes during aging, suggesting that at least some of the change is not, in fact, age-related as commonly assumed, but may be attributable instead to endocrine changes that accompany aging.

These studies collectively implicate the prefrontal cortex as a novel site of estrogen action in the human female brain, a fact not previously appreciated. The possibility that the frontal cortex might be modulated by estrogens in women is a new idea that is beginning to receive support from investigations using functional MRI. Regional changes in frontal activation are observed during working memory tasks when women are receiving estradiol compared with placebo (e.g., Smith et al., 2006; Joffe et al., 2006). Recent work suggests that estradiol levels are positively correlated with working memory performance in younger women of reproductive age (Hampson &amp; Morley, 2013), corroborating earlier observations showing a modest sex difference on the same memory task (SPWM) in young adults (Duff &amp; Hampson, 2001; Lejbak et al., 2009). These are exciting findings that have a potential to transform our present understanding of the prefrontal cortex, and perhaps shed new light on the clinical syndromes described earlier (schizophrenia, major depression), in which the frontal cortex plays a significant but inadequately understood role (Koenigs &amp; Grafman, 2009).

8. The importance of including females in studies of behavioral neuroscience

The studies reviewed above, from basic science and animal models of neuropathology, to investigations in women, demonstrate the prominent role played by estrogens in female brain function and behavior. Such estrogenic effects highlight the need for the inclusion of females in neurobiological investigations and are one important facet to our understanding of biological sex differences. Despite a scientific climate in which understanding sex differences is increasingly emphasized, a survey of the literature from 2009 found a strong bias towards studying only males in biomedical research (Beery and Zucker, 2011). In this regard, the recent policy to include sex as a variable in NIH-funded research is welcome. However, the careful study of sex differences requires more than the simple inclusion of males and females. Currently the general practice has been to use sex as a covariate in analyses to “control for sex differences” or to combine males and females together in the analysis. For example Beery and Zucker (2011) found in their review that studies that included both sexes analyzed sex as an independent factor only 20% of the time. Thus, unfortunately the vast majority of studies that included both sexes did not analyze the effect of biological sex.

Here we give three general recommendations for studies examining sex differences: 1) use sex as an independent factor in the analysis (and not as a covariate, see explanation below); 2) design studies with sufficient statistical power; and 3) include a thoughtful evaluation of factors such as reproductive and hormonal status, which can affect brain and behavior. First, we think it is important to consider sex as an independent factor in the analysis and not simply as a covariate, because the latter in part precludes the detection of interactions with sex and other independent variables and/or non-linear variations with sex (Mefford and Witte, 2012). For example, when the authors used sex as a factor in their a priori analysis in a study of men and women, it found that only depressed women prescribed antidepressants showed an increase in immature neuron ratio in the hippocampus (Epp et al., 2013). However, analyzing these data using sex as a covariate yielded no significant effect of antidepressants to increase immature neuron ratio (see Figure 5). Had the authors only used sex as a covariate, they would have lost important information about female specific response to prescribed antidepressants. Similar sex-dependent effects have been found in other studies (Brody et al., 2011; Wright et al., 2007) and support the importance of assessing sex as a variable. Second, it is critical that sufficient numbers of males and females are included in each study, as statistical underpowering has been identified as a major problem in neuroscience. Lack of statistical power leads to a lack of reproducibility due to either a low probability of finding a true effect or an overestimate of the size of a true effect (Button et al., 2013). Third, when hormonal effects have been identified for a certain biological system, it is critical that they are taken into account when both sexes are investigated. For example, studies on oxytocin have seen an upsurge in publications recently, and many have featured only men or males (e.g. Auyeung et al., 2015; Ma et al., 2015). However, sex differences and estrogenic regulation of oxytocin are established (e.g. in rodents and humans, Feng et al., 2015; Rilling et al., 2014). Thus, the exclusion of females may lead to conclusions that cannot be extrapolated to girls or women (Dhakar et al 2013).

The lack of inclusion of sex as a statistical factor could become problematic in clinical trials. For example there is no planned assessment of sex differences as either a primary or secondary outcome in an ongoing clinical trial examining the use of intranasal oxytocin as a therapy in autism (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01944046). Thus, potential sex differences in response to oxytocin will not be examined and although autism has a greater incidence in boys compared to girls, the lack of attention to sex differences may lead to erroneous conclusions regarding the effectiveness of oxytocin for the treatment of girls with autism. Lastly, when examining females, care must be taken to record and analyze variables such as estrous or menstrual cycle phase that cause within-sex or within-subject variability as seen in the review of the literature above. This may be particularly important when examining measures that involve the hippocampus, as discussed below.

9. Studying females: when to track the menstrual/estrous cycle

A meta-analysis indicated that there is no significant difference in variance between male and female mice across a wide variety of behavioral, molecular, morphological and physiological traits (Pendergast et al., 2011). It has been suggested that these findings indicate that the estrous cycle phase does not need to be monitored (McCarthy, 2015). However, it should be noted that the lack of significant difference in variability between males and females does not exclude the possibility that estrous phase produces variability in females. To be fair, it has been argued that studying females is more complicated than studying males because of the estrous cycle and the authors of the meta-analysis (Pendergast et al., 2013) undoubtedly wanted to assuage researcher’s fears that estrous cycle collection is needed (McCarthy, 2015). Others have argued against the importance of tracking estrous cycle and suggest that environmental factors such as single versus pair housing are more important to behavioral variability (Richardson et al., 2015). Arguing that the variability is larger within one context (housing variability &gt; variability within females) does not preclude the possibility that estrous cycle contributes to the variability seen in females. Indeed, many factors such as chronic high corticosterone (Brummelte and Galea, 2010), housing parameters (Baker and Bielajew, 2007), and aging (Rubin, 2000) can alter cyclicity in the female. In general, we think it is important to acknowledge that estrous cycle phase does indeed influence some factors quite dramatically (see below).

Although there are equivocal findings as to the effects of estrous cycle phase on some measures such as cell proliferation in the hippocampus (Tanapat et al., 21999; Rummel et al., 2010 compared to Lagace et al., 2007), it is important to know that estradiol and progesterone levels can vary dramatically within a few hours of the day (Tada et al., 2015). Thus, timing of testing is very important to observing an effect of estrous cycle phase (Tada et al., 2015) and may lead to variable findings in the literature. This is not to say that the estrous cycle will be important to monitor for every variable that a researcher may be interested in testing, but that estrous cycle has been demonstrated repeatedly to influence a wide variety of measures. For example, there are estrous cycle effects on hippocampal CA1 spine density (Woolley et al., 1990), LTP parameters (Warren et al., 1997), spatial cognition (Warren and Juraska, 1995), depressive-like behaviors (Kokras et al., 2015), antinociceptive potency of opioids (Terner et al., 2005), dopamine signaling (Perez et al., 2014) and cell proliferation (Tanapat et al., 1999). Indeed, the menstrual cycle has been reported to influence cognitive and electrophysiological measures in women as well, such as seizure frequency (Herzog et al., 2014), mental rotation (Hampson et al., 2014; Maki et al., 2002), and fMRI activity patterns (Dietrich et al., 2001; Schöning et al., 2007). However, care needs to be taken in measuring menstrual cycle phase as age (Klein et al., 1996) and parity (Barrett et al., 2014) can affect both the length of menstrual cycle and ovarian hormone levels across each stage.

Conclusions

In conclusion, estrogens impact specific cognitive and social behaviors (e.g., working memory, spatial memory, novel object recognition and social behavior) and influence neuroprotection in models of stroke. However, a number of experiential and genetic factors (e.g., age, reproductive factors, estrogen type, genotype, disease background) can moderate cognitive outcome and neuroprotection with estrogens, and these factors are not currently fully appreciated. There is a growing realization of the importance of studying sex differences in neuroscience, and our review has presented accumulating evidence that estrogens matter for hippocampus and prefrontal cortex-related cognition, neuroplasticity, and neuroprotection. Only by studying the role of sex hormones on brain and behavior in both males and females will we begin to develop better more effective therapeutic advances to promote brain health.

Empirical work described from LAMG’s laboratory was supported by Canadian Institutes for Health Research (MOP102568), Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (203596-13), Pacific Alzheimer Research Foundation and Alzheimer Society of Canada (13–27). KMF would like to thank The University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee and R01DA038042 for supporting the writing of this manuscript and travel to the IBNS meeting. Empirical work described from KMF’s laboratory was supported by R01AG022525, R03MH065460, the American Federation for Aging Research, a University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee Research Growth Initiative Award, the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, and Yale University. Empirical work from EC laboratory was supported by Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (400212). Empirical work described from EH’s laboratory was supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (138017), the Ontario Mental Health Foundation (T37789), and the Society for Women’s Health Research through the Isis Fund Network on Sex, Gender, Drugs and the Brain. Empirical work from the FS laboratory was supported by AG042189 and NS074895.

Figure 1 Schematic models illustrating mechanisms through which 17β-estradiol may modulate hippocampal memory. (A) In the classical mechanism, 17β-estradiol diffuses through the membrane to bind intracellular ERα and ERβ in the cytoplasm or nucleus. The 17β-estradiol-ER complex then binds to an estrogen response element (ERE) on the DNA with co-regulator proteins (Co) and histone acetyltransferases (HAT) to stimulate gene transcription. (B) Non-classical mechanisms reported thus far support a model in which 17β-estradiol activates neurotransmitter (NT) and/or growth factor (GF) receptors at the cell membrane or activates membrane ERs to trigger cell signaling cascades. Cell-signaling activation may lead to local protein synthesis, post-translational protein modifications in the cytoplasm or nucleus, and activation of transcription factors and epigenetic processes that increase gene transcription. Any of these 17β-estradiol-induced alterations could enhance hippocampal memory consolidation, although gene transcription is likely necessary for long-term memory storage.

Figure 2 (A) Treatment (20–30 min) of hippocampal sections with 50 nM 17b-Estradiol (E2) increased dendritic spine density in the stratum radiatum (shown) and stratum oriens (not shown) of the CA1 subregion of the dorsal hippocampus and shown in the biocytin filled pyramidal neurons (scale bar, 100mm). In parallel, infusion of 50 nM 17-b estradiol (E2) in the dorsal hippocampus of ovariectomized female mice 15 min prior to learning (habituation) and testing rapidly enhanced performance in the Object Placement (OP), Object Recognition (OR), and Social Recognition (SR) task within 40 min of treatments. In this specific paradigm vehicle control mice (only control for OP task is shown here) do not show learning while E2 treated mice did, as indicated by a significant increase from habituation (black bars) to test (white bars) in the percent of time spent investigating a novel or displaced stimulus vs a familiar stimulus. Within the same timeframe, patch clamping recordings from CA1 pyramidal neurons of learning-naïve mice showed a significant inhibitory effect of the same 50nM dose of E2 on the frequency of miniature Excitatory Postsynaptic Current (mEPSC) and on the amplitude of AMPA-induced membrane depolarization. This effects is consistent with the notion that E2 rapidly induces the formation of silent/immature synapses. * P&lt;0.05, *** P&lt;0.001 in comparison to vehicle control; # P&lt;0.05, ## P&lt;0.01, ### P&lt;0.001 in comparison to habituation phase. Modified from Phan et al., PNAS 112: 16018–16023.

(B) Dorsal hippocampal mTOR activation is necessary for E2 to enhance object recognition memory consolidation. Levels of phospho-p42 ERK, but not phsopho-p44 ERK, are increased in ovariectomized mice 5 min after bilateral dorsal hippocampal infusion of 5 μg/hemisphere E2 (*p &lt; 0.05 relative to vehicle). This effect was blocked by the ERK inhibitor U0126 (0.5 μg/hemisphere), the PI3K inhibitor LY298002 (0.005 μg/hemisphere), or the mTOR inhibitor rapamycin (0.25 μg/hemisphere). Each inhibitor also prevented E2 from enhancing object recognition memory; only mice infused with E2 alone spent more time than chance (15 s) with the novel object (*p &lt; 0.05). Error bars=mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM). Phosphorylated ERK normalized to total ERK. Insets are representative Western blots of phosphorylated and total ERK. Adapted with permission from Fortress et al., 2013.

Figure 3 (A) Chronic estrone decreased the number of BrdU-immunoreactive (ir) cells whereas chronic 17β-estradiol increased the total number of BrdU-ir cells. Asterisks (*) indicate significant difference between groups (controls vs 17β-estradiol p=0.046; controls vs estrone p=0.005; 17β-estradiol vs estrone p=0.0002). Photomicrographs indicate a BrdU(red)-ir cell colablled with NeuN(green), indicating that the newly synthesized cell expressed a mature neuronal marker. NeuN-neuronal nuclei; BrdU- bromodeoxyuridine. Modified and reprinted with permission from McClure et al., 2013, Hormones and Behavior, 63: 144–157.

(B) Effect of estrogen treatment on infarct volume is dependent on “reproductive” age: Estrogen treatment to ovariectomized adult females decreased MCAo-induced infarct volume in the cortex and striatum, while the same dose of estrogen treatment increased stroke-induced infarction in middle aged females. CTX: cortex, STR: striatum, *:p&lt;0.05 (modified from Selvamani and Sohrabji, 2010, Neurobiology of Aging, 31, 1618–1628.

Figure 4 Total number of working memory (WM) errors committed by 3 groups of postmenopausal women (mean age 55.6 yrs) on the SPWM test of working memory. WM errors were significantly more frequent among women not receiving hormone therapy (Non-HT, n = 35), compared with women who were receiving estrogens only (E-Only, n = 38) or women receiving estrogens plus a progestin (E + P, n = 23) at the time of testing. Difference between the 2 treated groups (E-Only, E + P) was not significant. Bars represent standard errors. (Data redrawn from Duff &amp; Hampson, 2000, Horm Behav, 38, 262–276). Horizontal line shows mean level of performance on the same task in a group of young women not using oral contraceptives (n = 39, mean age 21.6 yrs) (first 2 trials only; for details see Hampson &amp; Morley, 2013, Psychoneuroendocrinology, 38, 2897–2904).

Figure 5 The density of doublecortin (DCX)/NeuN expression in the dentate gyrus is increased in depressed patients. A) The density of DCX/NeuN expression was increased in depressed patients compared to depressed patients with psychosis (p=.02) and with a strong trend in controls (p=0.08). B) The density of DCX/NeuN expression was significantly greater in depressed women compared to all other groups. C) Representative DCX-expression is shown from depressed patients, depressed patients with psychosis and controls. Data shown is mean + SEM (standard error of the mean). Reprinted with permission from Epp JR, Beasley CL, Galea LAM. (2013). Neuropsychopharmacology, 38:2297–2306.

Highlights

17β-estradiol impacts specific cognitive and social behaviors in adult females

17β-estradiol influences neuroprotection in models of stroke dependent on age

Estrone and 17β-estradiol differentially influence cognition and neuroplasticity

Experiential factors moderate cognitive outcome and neuroprotection with estrogens

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


Adams JP Sweatt JD 2002 Molecular psychology: Roles for the ERK MAP kinase cascade in memory Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 42 135 163 11807168
Akama KT Thompson LI Milner TA McEwen BS 2013 Post-synaptic density-95 (PSD-95) binding capacity of G-protein-coupled Receptor 30 (GPR30), an estrogen receptor that can be identified in hippocampal dendritic spines J Biol Chem 288 6438 6450 23300088
Amiaz R Seidman SN 2008 Testosterone and depression in men Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes 15 278 83 18438177
Alkayed NJ Harukuni I Kimes AS London ED Traystman RJ Hurn PD 1998 Gender-linked brain injury in experimental stroke Stroke 29 159 165 discussion 166 9445346
Alkayed NJ Murphy SJ Traystman RJ Hurn PD Miller VM 2000 Neuroprotective effects of female gonadal steroids in reproductively senescent female rats Stroke 31 161 168 10625733
Angst J Gamma A Gastpar M Lépine JP Mendlewicz J Tylee A 2002 Gender differences in depression. Epidemiological findings from the European DEPRES I and II studies Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci 252 201 209 12451460
Atkins CM Selcher JC Petraitis JJ Trzaskos JM Sweatt JD 1998 The MAPK cascade is required for mammalian associative learning Nat Neurosci 1 602 609 10196568
Auyeung B Lombardo MV Heinrichs M Chakrabarti B Sule A Deakin JB Bethlehem RA Dickens L Mooney N Sipple JA Thiemann P Baron-Cohen S 2015 Oxytocin increases eye contact during a real-time, naturalistic social interaction in males with and without autism Transl Psychiatry 5 e507 25668435
Baker S Bielajew C Influence of housing on the consequences of chronic mild stress in female rats Stress 2007 8 10 3 283 93 17613942
Barha CK Dalton GL Galea LAM 2010 Low doses of 17α-estradiol and 17β-estradiol facilitate, while higher doses of estrone and 17α- and 17β-estradiol impair, contextual fear conditioning in adult female rats Neuropsychopharmacology 35 547 559 19847162
Barha CK Galea LAM 2013 The hormone therapy, Premarin, impairs hippocampus-dependent spatial learning and memory and reduces activation of new granule neurons in response to memory in female rats Neurobiology of Aging 34 986 1004 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2012.07.009 22938820
Barha CK Galea LAM 2011 Motherhood alters the cellular response to estrogens in the hippocampus later in life Neurobiology of Aging 32 2091 2095 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2009.12.004 20034703
Barha CK Lieblich SE Galea LAM 2009 Different forms of oestrogens rapidly upregulate hippocampal cell proliferation in the dentate gyrus of young female rats Journal of Neuroendocrinology 21 155 166 19076272
Barnes LL Wilson RS Bienias JL Schneider JA Evans DA Bennett DA Sex differences in the clinical manifestations of Alzheimer disease pathology Arch Gen Psychiatry 2005 6 62 6 685 91 15939846
Barrett ES Parlett LE Windham GC Swan SH Differences in ovarian hormones in relation to parity and time since last birth Fertil Steril 2014 6 101 6 1773 80.e1 24684956
Bartz J Simeon D Hamilton H Kim S Crystal S Braun A Vicens V Hollander E Oxytocin can hinder trust and cooperation in borderline personality disorder Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 2011 10 6 5 556 63 21115541
Baum LW Sex, hormones, and Alzheimer’s disease J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2005 60 6 736 43 15983176
Becker JB Arnold AP Berkley KJ Blaustein JD Eckel LA Hampson E Herman JP Marts S Sadee W Steiner M Taylor J Young EA 2005 Strategies and methods for research on sex differences in brain and behavior Endocrinology 146 1650 1673 15618360
Becker JB Berkley KJ Geary N Hampson E Herman JP Young EA 2008 Sex Differences in the Brain: From Genes to Behavior New York Oxford University Press
Bellott DW Hughes JF Skaletsky H Brown LG Pyntikova T Cho TJ Koutseva N Zaghlul S Graves T Rock S Kremitzki C Fulton RS Dugan S Ding Y Morton D Khan Z Lewis L Buhay C Wang Q Watt J Holder M Lee S Nazareth L Alföldi J Rozen S Muzny DM Warren WC Gibbs RA Wilson RK Page DC Mammalian Y chromosomes retain widely expressed dosage-sensitive regulators Nature 2014 4 24 508 7497 494 9 24759411
Beltz AM Hampson E Berenbaum SA 2015 Oral contraceptives and cognition: A role for ethinyl estradiol Hormones and Behavior 74 209 217 26122296
Beery AK Zucker I Sex bias in neuroscience and biomedical research Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2011 1 35 3 565 72 20620164
Bekinschtein P Katche C Slipczuk LN Igaz LM Cammarota M Izquierdo I Medina JH 2007 mTOR signaling in the hippocampus is necessary for memory formation Neurobiol Learn Mem 87 303 307 17005423
Berenbaum SA Beltz A 2011 Sexual differentiation of human behavior: Effects of prenatal and pubertal organizational hormones Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology 32 183 200 21397624
Bergemann N Mundt C Parzer P Pakrasi M Eckstein-Mannsperger U Haisch S Salbach B Klinga K Runnebaum B Resch F 2005 Estrogen as an adjuvant therapy to antipsychotics does not prevent relapse in women suffering from schizophrenia: Results of a placebo-controlled double-blind study Schizophrenia Research 74 125 134 15721993
Bergemann N Parzer P Nagl I Salbach B Runnebaum B Mundt C Resch F 2002 Acute psychiatric admission and menstrual cycle phase in women with schizophrenia Archives of Women’s Mental Health 5 119 126
Bernard L Legay C Adriaenssens E Mougel A Ricort JM 2006 Estradiol regulates the insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) signalling pathway: A crucial role of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI 3-kinase) in estrogens requirement for growth of MCF-7 human breast carcinoma cells Biochem and Biophys Res Commun 350 916 921 17045571
Bertakis KD 2009 The influence of gender on the doctor-patient interaction Patient Educ Couns 76 356 360 19647968
Bingham D Macrae IM Carswell HV 2005 Detrimental effects of 17beta-oestradiol after permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 25 414 420 15647739
Blaustein JD Lehman MN Turcotte JC Greene G 1991 Estrogen receptors in dendrites and axon terminals in the guinea pig hypothalamus Endocrinology 131 281 90 1612006
Bloch M Daly RC Rubinow DR Endocrine factors in the etiology of postpartum depression Compr Psychiatry 2003 44 3 234 46 12764712
Bondar G Kuo J Hamid N Micevych P 2009 Estradiol-induced estrogen receptor-α trafficking J Neurosci 29 15323 15330 19955385
Boulware MI Heisler JD Frick KM 2013 The memory-enhancing effects of hippocampal estrogen receptor activation involve metabotropic glutamate receptor signaling J Neurosci 33 15184 15194 24048848
Boulware MI Weick JP Becklund BR Kuo SP Groth RD Mermelstein PG 2005 Estradiol activates group I and II metabotropic glutamate receptor signaling, leading to opposing influences on cAMP response element-binding protein J Neurosci 25 5066 5078 15901789
Brailoiu E Dun SL Brailoiu GC Mizuo K Sklar LA Oprea TI Prossnitz ER Dun NJ 2007 Distribution and characterization of estrogen receptor G protein-coupled receptor 30 in the rat central nervous system J Endocrinol 193 311 321 17470522
Breedlove SM Hampson E 2002 Sexual differentiation of the brain and behavior Becker JB Breedlove SM Crews D McCarthy MM Behavioral endocrinology 75 114 MIT Press Cambridge MA
Brinton RD 2005 Investigative models for determining hormone therapy-induced outcomes in brain: evidence in support of a healthy cell bias of estrogen action Ann N Y Acad Sci 1052 57 74 16024751
Brody GH Beach SR Chen YF Obasi E Philibert RA Kogan SM Simons RL 2011 Perceived discrimination, serotonin transporter linked polymorphic region status, and the development of conduct problems Dev Psychopathol 23 617 627 23786700
Broughton BR Brait VH Kim HA Lee S Chu HX Gardiner-Mann CV Guida E Evans MA Miller AA Arumugam TV Drummond GR Sobey CG 2014 Sex-dependent effects of G protein-coupled estrogen receptor activity on outcome after ischemic stroke Stroke 45 835 841 24457292
Brummelte S Galea LAM 2015 Postpartum depression: Etiology, treatment and consequences for maternal care Hormones and Behavior ***
Button KS Ioannidis JP Mokrysz C Nosek BA Flint J Robinson ES Munafò MR 2013 Power failure: why small sample size undermines the reliability of neuroscience Nat Rev Neurosci 14 365 376 23571845
Cardona-Gomez GP Mendez P DonCarlos LL Azcoitia I Garcia-Segura LM 2002 Interactions of estrogen and insulin-like growth factor-I in the brain: molecular mechanisms and functional implications J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 83 211 217 12650718
Carswell HV Bingham D Wallace K Nilsen M Graham DI Dominiczak AF Macrae IM 2004 Differential effects of 17beta-estradiol upon stroke damage in stroke prone and normotensive rats J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 24 298 304 15091110
Chwang WB O’Riordan KJ Levenson JM Sweatt JD 2006 ERK/MAPK regulates hippocampal histone phosphorylation following contextual fear conditioning Learn Mem 13 322 328 16741283
Choleris E Clipperton-Allen AE Gray DG Diaz-Gonzalez S Welsman RG 2011 Differential effects of dopamine receptor D1-type and D2-type antagonists and phase of the estrous cycle on social learning of food preferences, feeding and social interactions in mice Neuropsychopharmacology 36 1689 1702 21525863
Clayton JA Collins FS Policy: NIH to balance sex in cell and animal studies Nature 2014 5 15 509 7500 282 3 24834516
Costas J Gratacos M Escaramis G Martin-Santos R de Diego Y Baca-Garcia E Canellas F Estivill X Guillamat R Guitart M Gutierrez-Zotes A Garcia-Esteve L Mayoral F Molto MD Phillips C Roca M Carracedo A Vilella E Sanjuan J 2013 Association study of 44 canadidate genes with depressive and anxiety symptoms in post-partum women Journal of Psychiatry Research 44 717 724
Dash PK Orsi SA Moore AN 2006 Spatial memory formation and memory-enhancing effect of glucose involves activation of the tuberous sclerosis complex-Mammalian target of rapamycin pathway J Neurosci 26 8048 8056 16885218
Dhakar MB Stevenson EL Caldwell HK 2013 Oxytocin, vasopressin, and their interplay with gonadal steroids 3 26 Choleris E Pfaff D Kavaliers M Oxytocin, Vasopressin and Related Peptides in the Regulation of Behavior Cambridge University Press
Dietrich T Krings T Neulen J Willmes K Erberich S Thron A Sturm W Effects of blood estrogen level on cortical activation patterns during cognitive activation as measured by functional MRI Neuroimage 2001 13 425 432 11170808
Diver MJ Imtiaz KE Ahmad AM Vora JP Fraser WD Diurnal rhythms of serum total, free and bioavailable testosterone and of SHBG in middle-aged men compared with those in young men Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 2003 6 58 6 710 7 12780747
Duarte-Guterman P Leiblich SE Chow C Galea LA 2015 Estradiol and GPER activation differentially affect cell proliferation but not GPER expression in the hippocampus of adult female rats PLoS ONE 10 e0129880 26075609
Dubal D Kashon M Pettigrew L Ren J Finklestein S Rau S Wise P 1998 Estradiol protects against ischemic injury J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 18 1253 1258 9809515
Dubal DB Wise PM 2001 Neuroprotective effects of estradiol in middle-aged female rats Endocrinology 142 43 48 11145565
Duff SJ Hampson E 2000 A beneficial effect of estrogen on working memory in postmenopausal women taking hormone replacement therapy Hormones and Behavior 38 262 276 11104644
Duff SJ Hampson E 2001 A sex difference on a novel spatial working memory task in humans Brain and Cognition 47 470 493 11748902
Ellegren H Parsch J The evolution of sex-biased genes and sex-biased gene expression Nat Rev Genet 2007 9 8 9 689 98 17680007
Epp JR Beasley CL Galea LAM 2013 Increased Hippocampal Neurogenesis and p21 Expression in Depression: Dependent on Antidepressants, Sex, Age, and Antipsychotic Exposure Neuropsychopharmacology 38 2297 2306 23778854
Ervin SJK Lymer J Matta R Clipperton-Allen AE Kavaliers M Choleris E 2015 Estrogen involvement in social behavior in rodents: rapid and long-term actions Horm Behav 74 53 76 26122289
Ervin SJK Mulvale E Gallagher N Roussel V Choleris E 2015 Activation of the G protein-coupled estrogen receptor, but not estrogen receptor α or β, rapidly enhances social learning Psychoneuroendocrinology 58 51 66 25957002
Ervin SJK Phan A Gabor CS Choleris E 2013 Rapid oestrogenic regulation of social and non-social learning J Neuroendocrinol 25 1116 1132 23876061
Fan L Zhao Z Orr PT Chambers CH Lewis MC Frick KM 2010 Estradiol-induced object memory consolidation in middle-aged female mice requires dorsal hippocampal extracellular signal-regulated kinase and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase activation J Neurosci 30 4390 4400 20335475
Feng C Hackett PD DeMarco AC Chen X Stair S Haroon E Ditzen B Pagnoni G Rilling JK Oxytocin and vasopressin effects on the neural response to social cooperation are modulated by sex in humans Brain Imaging Behav 2015 12 9 4 754 64 25416642
Fernandez SM Lewis MC Pechenino AS Harburger LL Orr PT Gresack JE Schafe GE Frick KM 2008 Estradiol-induced enhancement of object memory consolidation involves hippocampal ERK activation and membrane-bound estrogen receptors J Neurosci 28 8660 8667 18753366
Fortress AM Fan L Orr PT Zhao Z Frick KM 2013 Estradiol-induced object recognition memory consolidation is dependent on activation on mTOR signaling in the dorsal hippocampus Learn Mem 20 147 155 23422279
Fortress AM Frick KM 2014 Epigenetic regulation of estrogen-dependent memory Front Neuroendocrinol 35 530 549 24878494
Frick KM 2015 Molecular mechanisms underlying the memory-enhancing effects of estradiol Horm Behav 74 4 18 25960081
Frick KM Kim J Tuscher JJ Fortress AM 2015 Sex steroid hormones matter for learning and memory: estrogenic regulation of hippocampal function in male and female rodents Learn Mem 22 472 493 26286657
Fukuda K Yao H Ibayashi S Nakahara T Uchimura H Fujishima M Hall ED 2000 Ovariectomy exacerbates and estrogen replacement attenuates photothrombotic focal ischemic brain injury in rats Stroke 31 155 160 10625732
Gabor CS Lymer J Phan A Choleris E 2015 Rapid effects of the G-Protein Coupled Estrogen Receptor (GPER) on learning and dorsal hippocampus dendritic spines in female mice Physiol Behav 149 53 60 26003497
Gabor CS Phan A Clipperton-Allen AE Kavaliers M Choleris E 2012 Interplay of oxytocin, vasopressin and sex hormones in the regulation of social recognition Behav Neurosci 126 97 109 22141469
Galea LAM Wainwright SR Roes MM Duarte-Guterman P Chow C Hamson DK 2014 Sex, hormones, and neurogenesis in the hippocampus: Hormonal modulation of neurogenesis and potential functional implications Journal of Neuroendocrinology 25 1039 1061 23822747
Gao S Hendrie HC Hall KS Hui S The relationships between age, sex, and the incidence of dementia and Alzheimer disease: a meta-analysis Arch Gen Psychiatry 1998 9 55 9 809 15 9736007
Gordon KB Macrae IM Carswell HV 2005 Effects of 17beta-oestradiol on cerebral ischaemic damage and lipid peroxidation Brain Res 1036 155 162 15725413
Gräff J Tsai LH 2013 Histone acetylation: Molecular mnemonics on the chromatin Nat Rev Neurosci 14 97 111 23324667
Guan JS Haggarty SJ Giacometti E Dannenberg JH Joseph N Gao J Nieland TJ Zhou Y Wang X Mazitschek R Bradner JE DePinho RA Jaenisch R Tsai LH 2009 HDAC2 negatively regulates memory formation and synaptic plasticity Nature 459 55 60 19424149
Gutierrez-Lobos K Scherer M Anderer P Katschnig H 2002 Theinfluence of age on the female/male ratio of treated incidence rates in depression BMC Psychiatry 2 3 10.1186/1471-244X-2-3 11860609
Gungabissoon RA Bamburg JR 2003 Regulation of growth cone actin dynamics by ADF/cofilin J Histochem Cytochem 51 411 420 12642619
Guzowski JF McGaugh JL 1997 Antisense oligodeoxynucleotide-mediated disruption of hippocampal cAMP response element binding protein levels impairs consolidation of memory for water maze training Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94 2693 2698 9122258
Hammond R Mauk R Ninaci D Nelson D Gibbs RB 2009 Chronic treatment with estrogen receptor agonists restores acquisition of a spatial learning task in young ovariectomized rats Horm Behav 56 309 314 19560466
Hammond R Nelson D Kline E Gibbs RB 2012 Chronic treatment with a GPR30 antagonist impairs acquisition of a spatial learning task in young female rats Horm Behav 62 367 374 22828404
Hampson E Levy-Cooperman N Korman JM 2014 Estradiol and mental rotation: Relation to dimensionality, difficulty, or angular disparity? Horm Behav 65 238 248 24394702
Hampson E Moffat SD 2004 The psychobiology of gender: Cognitive effects of reproductive hormones in the adult nervous system Eagly AH Beall AE Sternberg RJ The Psychology of Gender 2 38 64 New York Guilford Press
Hampson E Morley EE 2013 Estradiol concentrations and working memory performance in women of reproductive age Psychoneuroendocrinology 38 2897 2904 24011502
Hampson E Phillips SD Duff-Canning SJ Evans KL Merrill M Pinsonneault JK Sadee W Soares CN Steiner M 2015 Working memory in pregnant women: Relation to estrogen and antepartum depression Hormones and Behavior 74 218 227 26187710
Hampson E Young EA 2008 Methodological issues in the study of hormone-behavior relations in humans: Understanding and monitoring the menstrual cycle Becker JB Berkley KJ Geary N Hampson E Herman JP Young EA Sex Differences in the Brain: From Genes to Behavior 63 78 New York Oxford University Press
Hart D Nilges M Pollard K Lynn T Patsos O Shiel C Clark SM Vasudevan N 2014 Activation of the G-protein coupled receptor 30 (GPR30) has different effects on anxiety in male and female mice Steroids 81 49 56 24240011
Hasegawa Y Hojo Y Kojima H Ikeda M Hotta K Sato R Ooishi Y Yoshiya M Chung BC Yamazaki T Kawato S 2015 Estradiol rapidly modulates synaptic plasticity of hippocampal neurons: Involvement of kinase networks Brain Res 1621 147 161 25595055
Hawley WR Grissom EM Moody NM Dohanich GP Vasudevan N 2014 Activation of G-protein-coupled receptor 30 is sufficient to enhance spatial recognition memory in ovariectomized rats Behav Brain Res 262 68 73 24445074
Herzog AG Fowler KM Sperling MR Massaro JM Progesterone Trial Study Group Distribution of seizures across the menstrual cycle in women with epilepsy Epilepsia 2015 5 56 5 e58 62 25823700
Hoeffer CA Klann E 2010 mTOR signaling: At the crossroads of plasticity, memory and disease Trends Neurosci 33 67 75 19963289
Hogervorst E1 Bandelow S Moffat SD Increasing testosterone levels and effects on cognitive functions in elderly men and women: a review Curr Drug Targets CNS Neurol Disord 2005 10 4 5 531 40 16266286
Hogervorst E Williams J Budge M Riedel W Jolles J The nature of the effect of female gonadal hormone replacement therapy on cognitive function in post-menopausal women: a meta-analysis Neuroscience 2000 101 3 485 512 11113299
Holland J Bandelow S Hogervorst E Testosterone levels and cognition in elderly men: a review Maturitas 2011 8 69 4 322 37 21696899
Horwood JM Dufour F Laroche S Davis S 2006 Signaling mechanisms mediated by the phosphoinositide 3-kinase/Akt cascade in synaptic plasticity and memory in the rat Eur J Neurosci 23 3375 3384 16820027
Impey S Obrietan K Wong ST Poser S Yano S Wayman G Deloulme JC Chan G Storm DR 1998a Cross talk between ERK and PKA is required for Ca2+ stimulation of CREB-dependent transcription and ERK nuclear translocation Neuron 21 869 883 9808472
Impey S Smith DM Obrietan K Donahue R Wade C Storm DR 1998b Stimulation of cAMP response element (CRE)-mediated transcription during contextual learning Nat Neurosci 1 595 601 10196567
Inagaki T Gautreaux C Luine V 2010 Acute estrogen treatment facilitates recognition memory consolidation and alters monoamine levels in memory-related brain areas Horm Behav 58 415 426 20553724
Irvine K Laws KR Gale TM Kondel TK 2012 Greater cognitive deterioration in women than men with Alzheimer’s disease: a meta analysis J Clin Exp Neuropsychol 34 989 98 22913619
Jacome LF Barateli K Buitrago D Lema F Frankfurt M Luine VN 2016 Gonadal hormones rapidly enhance spatial memory and increase hippocampal spine density in male rats Endocrinology 2016 2 4 en20151959
Joffe H Hall JE Gruber S Sarmiento IA Cohen LS Yurgelun-Todd D Martin KA 2006 Estrogen therapy selectively enhances prefrontal cognitive processes: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study with functional magnetic resonance imaging in perimenopausal and recently postmenopausal women Menopause 13 411 422 16735938
Keenan PA Ezzat WH Ginsburg K Moore GJ 2001 Prefrontal cortex as the site of estrogen’s effect on cognition Psychoneuroendocrinology 26 577 590 11403979
Kempermann G Song H Gage FH 2015 Neurogenesis in the Adult Hippocampus Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 7 9 a018812 26330519
Kim J Szinte JS Boulware MI Frick KM 2016 17β-estradiol and agonism of G-protein Coupled Estrogen Receptor (GPER) enhance hippocampal memory consolidation via different cell-signaling mechanisms Journal of Neuroscience 36 11
Klein NA Battaglia DE Fujimoto VY Davis GS Bremner WJ Soules MR 1996 Reproductive aging: accelerated ovarian follicular development associated with a monotropic follicle-stimulating hormone rise in normal older women The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology &amp; Metabolism 81 1038 1045 10.1210/jcem.81.3.8772573 8772573
Koenigs M Grafman J 2009 The functional neuroanatomy of depression: Distinct roles for ventromedial and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex Behavioral Brain Research 201 239 243
Krug R Born J Rasch B 2006 A 3-day estrogen treatment improves prefrontal cortex-dependent cognitive function in postmenopausal women Psychoneuroendocrinology 31 965 975 16831520
Kokras N Antoniou K Mikail HG Kafetzopoulos V Papadopoulou-Daifoti Z Dalla C Forced swim test: What about females? Neuropharmacology 2015 12 99 408 21 25839894
Kramár EA Chen LY Brandon NJ Rex CS Liu F Gall CM Lynch G 2009 Cytoskeletal changes underlie estrogen’s acute effects on synaptic transmission and plasticity J Neurosci 29 12982 12993 19828812
Kulkarni J Gavrilidis E Wang W Worsley R Fitzgerald PB Gurvich C Van Rheenen T Berk M Burger H 2015 Estradiol for treatment-resistant schizophrenia: A large-scale randomized controlled trial in women of child-bearing age Molecular Psychiatry 20 695 702 24732671
Kumar A Bean LA Rani A Jackson T Foster TC 2015 Contribution of estrogen receptor subtypes, ERα, ERβ, and GPER1 in rapid estradiol-mediated enhancement of hippocampal synaptic transmission in mice Hippocampus 10.1002/hipo.22475
Kuroki Y Fukushima K Kanda Y Mizuno K Watanabe Y 2000 Putative membrane-bound estrogen receptors possibly stimulate mitogen-activated protein kinase in the rat hippocampus Eur J Pharmacol 400 205 209 10988335
Lagace DC Fischer SJ Eisch AJ Gender and endogenous levels of estradiol do not influence adult hippocampal neurogenesis in mice Hippocampus 2007 17 3 175 80 17286277
Langer G Bader B Meoli L Isensee J Delbeck M Noppinger PR Otto C 2010 A critical review of fundamental controversies in the field of GPR30 research Steroids 75 603 610 20034504
Lebesgue D Traub M De Butte-Smith M Chen C Zukin RS Kelly MJ Etgen AM 2010 Acute Administration of Non-Classical Estrogen Receptor Agonists Attenuates Ischemia-Induced Hippocampal Neuron Loss in Middle-Aged Female Rats PLoS One 5 e8642 20062809
Lee YS Silva AJ 2009 The molecular and cellular biology of enhanced cognition Nat Rev Neurosci 10 126 140 19153576
Lejbak L Vrbancic M Crossley M 2009 The female advantage in object location memory is robust to verbalizability and mode of presentation of test stimuli Brain and Cognition 69 148 153 18722700
Leresche L 2011 Defining gender disparities in pain management Clin Orthop Relat Res 469 1871 1877 21210309
Levenson JM O’Riordan KJ Brown KD Trinh MA Molfese DL Sweatt JD 2004 Regulation of histone acetylation during memory formation in the hippocampus J Biol Chem 279 40545 40559 15273246
Levin ER 1999 Cellular functions of the plasma membrane estrogen receptor Trends Endocrinol Metab 10 374 377 10511697
Lewis MC Kerr KM Orr PT Frick KM 2008 Estradiol-induced enhancement of object memory consolidation involves NMDA receptors and protein kinase A in the dorsal hippocampus of female C57BL/6 mice Behav Neurosci 122 716 721 18513142
Liao S Chen W Kuo J Chen C 2001 Association of serum estrogen level and ischemic neuroprotection in female rats Neurosci Lett 297 159 162 11137752
Liu F Yuan R Benashski SE McCullough LD 2009 Changes in experimental stroke outcome across the life span J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 29 792 802 19223913
Liu R Wang X Liu Q Yang SH Simpkins JW 2007 Dose dependence and therapeutic window for the neuroprotective effects of 17beta-estradiol when administered after cerebral ischemia Neurosci Lett 415 237 241 17331646
Luine VN Jacome LF Maclusky NJ 2003 Rapid enhancement of visual and place memory by estrogens in rats Endocrinology 144 2836 2844 12810538
Lv W Du N Liu Y Fan X Wang Y Jia X Hou X Wang B Low Testosterone Level and Risk of Alzheimer’s Disease in the Elderly Men: a Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis Mol Neurobiol 2015 7 8 Epub ahead of print
Ma Y Liu Y Rand DG Heatherton TF Han S 2015 Opposing Oxytocin Effects on Intergroup Cooperative Behavior in Intuitive and Reflective Minds Neuropsychopharmacology 40 10 2379 87 25807529
MacLusky NJ Luine VN Hajszan T Leranth C 2005 The 17alpha and 17beta isomers of estradiol both induce rapid spine synapse formation in the CA1 hippocampal subfield of ovariectomized female rats Endocrinology 146 287 293 15486220
MacRae IM Carswell HV 2006 Oestrogen and stroke: the potential for harm as well as benefit Biochem Soc Trans 34 1362 1365 Erratum in: Biochem Soc Trans. 2007 Feb;35(Pt 1):166 17073819
Maki PM 2004 Hormone therapy and risk for dementia: where do we go from here? Gynecol Endocrinol 19 6 354 359 15724810
Maki PM 2013 The critical window hypothesis of hormone therapy and cognition: A scientific update on clinical studies Menopause 20 695 709 23715379
Maki PM Rich JB Rosenbaum RS 2002 Implicit memory varies across the menstrual cycle: Estrogen effects in young women Neuropsychologia 40 518 529 11749982
McCarthy MM Incorporating Sex as a Variable in Preclinical Neuropsychiatric Research Schizophr Bull 2015 9 41 5 1016 20 26067001
McCarthy MM Arnold AP Ball GF Blaustein JD De Vries GJ 2012Sex differences in the brain: the not so inconvenient truth J Neurosci 32 2241 2247 22396398
McCarthy MM Konkle ATM 2005 When is a sex difference not a sex difference? Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology 26 85 102 16083951
McClure RE Barha CK Galea LAM 2013 17β-Estradiol, but not estrone, increases the survival and activation of new neurons in the hippocampus in response to spatial memory in adult female rats Hormones and Behavior 63 144 157 23063473
McCullough LD de Vries GJ Miller VM Becker JB Sandberg K McCarthy MM NIH initiative to balance sex of animals in preclinical studies: generative questions to guide policy, implementation, and metrics Biol Sex Differ 2014 10 3 5 15 25780556
McEwen BS Alves SE 1999 Estrogen actions in the central nervous system Endocrine Reviews 20 279 307 10368772
McIntyre RS Mancini D Eisfeld BS Soczynska JK Grupp L Konarski JZ Kennedy SH Calculated bioavailable testosterone levels and depression in middle-aged men Psychoneuroendocrinology 2006 10 31 9 1029 35 16908107
McQuown SC Barrett RM Matheos DP Post RJ Rogge GA Alenghat T Mullican SE Jones S Rusche JR Lazar MA Wood MA 2011 HDAC3 is a critical negative regulator of long-term memory formation J Neurosci 31 764 747 21228185
Mefford J Witte JS 2012 The Covariate’s Dilemma PLoS Genet 8 11 e1003096 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003096 23162385
Meitzen J Luoma JI Boulware MI Hedges VL Peterson BM Tuomela K Britson KA Mermelstein PG 2013 Palmitoylation of estrogen receptors is essential for neuronal membrane signaling Neuroendocrinology 154 4293 4304
Mendez P Garcia-Segura LM Muller D 2011 Estradiol promotes spine growth and synapse formation without affecting pre-established networks Hippocampus 21 1263 1267 20928832
Mielke MM Vemuri P Rocca WA 2014 Clinical epidemiology of Alzheimer’s disease: assessing sex and gender differences Clin Epidemiol 6 37 48 24470773
Milewich L Garcia RL Gerrity LW 1985 17β-Hydroxysteroid oxidoreductase: A ubiquitous enzyme. Interconversion of estrone and estradiol-17β in BALBc mouse tissues Metabolism 34 938 944 3862927
Milner TA Ayoola K Drake CT Herrick SP Tabori NE McEwen BS Warrier S Alves SE 2005 Ultrastructural localization of estrogen receptor beta immunoreactivity in the rat hippocampal formation J Comp Neurol 491 81 95 16127691
Milner TA McEwen BS Hayashi S Li CJ Reagan LP Alves SE 2001 Ultrastructural evidence that hippocampal alpha estrogen receptors are located at extranuclear sites J Comp Neurol 429 355 371 11116225
Mirowska-Guzel D Gromadzka G Mendel T Janus-Laszuk B Dzierka J Sarzynska-Dlugosz I Czlonkowski A Czlonkowska A Impact of BDNF -196 G&gt;A and BDNF -270 C&gt;T polymorphisms on stroke rehabilitation outcome: sex and age differences Top Stroke Rehabil 2014 21 Suppl 1 S33 41 24722042
Mitra SW Hoskin E Yudkovitz J Pear L Wilkinson HA Hayashi S Pfaff DW Ogawa S Rohrer SP Schaeffer JM McEwen BS Alves SE 2003 Immunolocalization of estrogen receptor β in the mouse brain: Comparison with estrogen receptor α Endocrinology 144 2055 2067 12697714
Mitterling KL Spencer JL Dziedzic N Shenoy S McCarthy K Waters EM McEwen BS Milner TA 2010 Cellular and subcellular localization of estrogen and progestin receptor immunoreactivities in the mouse hippocampus J Comp Neurol 518 2729 2743 20506473
Moffat SD Hampson E 2000 Salivary testosterone concentrations in left-handers: An association with cerebral language lateralization Neuropsychology 14 71 81 10674799
Moffat SD Zonderman AB Metter EJ Kawas C Blackman MR Harman SM Resnick SM Free testosterone and risk for Alzheimer disease in older men Neurology 2004 1 27 62 2 188 93 14745052
Mukai H Tsurugizawa T Murakami G Kominami S Ishii H Ogiue-Ikeda M Takata N Tanabe N Furukawa A Hojo Y Ooishi Y Morrison JH Janssen WG Rose JA Chambon P Kato S Izumi S Yamazaki T Kimoto T Kawato S 2007 Rapid modulation of long-term depression and spinogenesis via synaptic estrogen receptors in hippocampal principal neurons J Neurochem 100 950 967 17266735
Murakami G Hojo Y Ogiue-Ikeda M Mukai H Chambon P Nakajima K Ooishi Y Kimoto T Kawato S 2014 Estrogen receptor KO mice study on rapid modulation of spines and long-term depression in the hippocampus Brain Res 1621 133 146 25498865
Murakami G Tsurugizawa T Hatanaka Y Komatsuzaki Y Tanabe N Mukai H Hojo Y Kominami S Yamazaki T Kimoto T Kawato S 2006 Comparison between basal and apical dendritic spines in estrogeninduced rapid spinogenesis of CA1 principal neurons in the adult hippocampus Biochem Biophys Res Commun 351 553 558 17070772
Myskiw JC Rossato JI Bevilaqua LR Medina JH Izquierdo I Cammarota M 2008 On the participation of mTOR in recognition memory Neurobiol Learn Mem 89 338 351 18039584
Nilsen J Brinton RD 2003 Divergent impact of progesterone and medroxyprogesterone acetate (Provera) on nuclear mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100 10506 10511 12925744
Owen AM 1997 The functional organization of working memory processes with human lateral frontal cortex: The contribution of functional neuroimaging European Journal of Neuroscience 9 1329 1339 9240390
Parsons RG Gafford GM Helmstetter FJ 2006 Translational control via the mammalian target of rapamycin pathway is critical for the formation and stability of long-term fear memory in amygdala neurons J Neurosci 26 12977 12983 17167087
Pereira LM Bastos CP de Souza JM Ribeiro FM Pereira GS 2014 Estradiol enhances object recognition memory in Swiss female mice by activating hippocampal estrogen receptor α Neurobiol Learn Mem 114 1 9 24726465
Perez SM Chen L Lodge DJ Alterations in dopamine system function across the estrous cycle of the MAM rodent model of schizophrenia Psychoneuroendocrinology 2014 47 88 97 25001958
Phan A Gabor CS Favaro KJ Kaschak SL Armstrong JN MacLusky NJ Choleris E 2012 Low doses of 17β-estradiol rapidly improve learning and increase hippocampal dendritic spines Neuropsychopharmacology 37 10 2299 2309 22669167
Phan A Lancaster KE Armstrong JN MacLusky N Choleris E 2011 Rapid effects of estrogen receptor α and β selective agonists on learning and dendritic spines in female mice Endocrinology 152 4 1492 1502 21285321
Phan A Suchkov S Molinaro L Reynolds K Lymer JM Bailey CDC Kow L-M MacLusky NJ Pfaff DW Choleris E 2015 Rapid increases in immature synapses parallel estrogen-induced hippocampal learning enhancements Proc Natl Acad Sci USA pii: 201522150
Pinsonneault JK Sullivan D Sadee W Soares CN Hampson E Steiner M 2013 Association study of the estrogen receptor gene ESR1 with postpartum depression--A pilot study Archives of Women’s Mental Health 16 499 509
Prendergast BJ Onishi KG Zucker I Female mice liberated for inclusion in neuroscience and biomedical research Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2014 3 40 1 5 24456941
Quesada A Micevych PE 2004 Estrogen interacts with the IGF-1 system to protect nigrostriatal dopamine and maintain motoric behavior after 6-hydroxydopamine lesions J Neurosci Res 75 107 116 14689453
Quesada A Lee BY Micevych PE 2008 PI3 kinase/Akt activation mediates estrogen and IGF-1 nigral DA neuronal neuroprotection against a unilateral rat model of Parkinson’s disease Dev Neurobiol 68 632 644 18278798
Rapp PR Morrison JH Roberts JA 2003 Cyclic estrogen replacement improves cognitive function in aged ovariectomized rhesus monkeys Journal of Neuroscience 23 5708 5714 12843274
Rannevik G Carlström K Jeppsson S Bjerre B Svanberg L 1986 A prospective long-term study in women from pre-menopause to post-menopause: changing profiles of gonadotrophins, oestrogens and androgens Maturitas 8 297 307 2952867
Reeves M Bushnell CD Howard G Gargano JW Duncan PW Lynch G Khatiwoda A Lisabeth L 2008 Sex differences in stroke: epidemiology, clinical presentation, medical care, and outcomes Lancet Neurol 7 915 926 18722812
Resnick SM Henderson VW 2002 Hormone therapy and risk of Alzheimer disease: A critical time JAMA 288 2170 2172 12413378
Riecher-Rössler A Häfner H Stumbaum M Maurer K Schmidt R 1994 Can estradiol modulate schizophrenic symptomatology? Schizophrenia Bulletin 20 203 214 8197416
Rilling JK Demarco AC Hackett PD Chen X Gautam P Stair S Haroon E Thompson R Ditzen B Patel R Pagnoni G Sex differences in the neural and behavioral response to intranasal oxytocin and vasopressin during human social interaction Psychoneuroendocrinology 2014 1 39 237 48 24157401
Richardson SS Reiches M Shattuck-Heidorn H LaBonte ML Consoli T Opinion: Focus on preclinical sex differences will not address women’s and men’s health disparities Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2015 11 3 112 44 13419 20 26534989
Rosario ER Chang L Head EH Stanczyk FZ Pike CJ Brain levels of sex steroid hormones in men and women during normal aging and in Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 2011 4 32 4 604 13 19428144
Rubin BS Hypothalamic alterations and reproductive aging in female rats: evidence of altered luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone neuronal function Biol Reprod 2000 10 63 4 968 76 10993815
Rubinow DR Johnson SL Schmidt PJ Girdler S Gaynes B Efficacy of estradiol in perimenopausal depression: so much promise and so few answers Depress Anxiety 2015 8 32 8 539 49 10.1002/da.22391 Epub 2015 Jun 30 26130315
Rummel J+ Epp JR+ Galea LAM 2010 Estradiol does not influence strategy choice but place strategy choice is associated with increased cell proliferation in the hippocampus of female rats Hormones and Behavior 58 4 582 90 [NSERC] IF: 4.142+ both authors contributed equally 20688068
Ryan J Scali J Carriere I Ritchie K Ancelin ML 2008 Hormonal treatment, mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease Int Psychogeriatr 20 1 47 56 18072983
Sankar JS Hampson E 2012 Testosterone levels and androgen receptor gene polymorphism predict specific symptoms of depression in young men Gender Medicine 9 232 243 22728214
Schöning S Engelien A Kugel H Schäfer S Schiffbauer H Zwitserlood P Pletziger E Beizai P Kersting A Ohrmann P Greb RR Lehmann W Heindel W Arolt V Konrad C Functional anatomy of visuo-spatial working memory during mental rotation is influenced by sex, menstrual cycle, and sex steroid hormones Neuropsychologia 2007 11 5 45 14 3203 14 17689571
Selcher JC Atkins CM Trzaskos JM Paylor R Sweatt JD 1999 A necessity for MAP kinase activation in mammalian spatial learning Learn Mem 6 478 490 10541468
Sellers K Raval P Srivastava DP 2015 Molecular signature of rapid estrogen regulation of synaptic connectivity and cognition Front Neuroendocrinol 36 72 89 25159586
Selvamani A Sohrabji F 2010a Reproductive age modulates the impact of focal ischemia on the forebrain as well as the effects of estrogen treatment in female rats Neurobiol Aging 31 1618 28 18829137
Selvamani A Sohrabji F 2010b The neurotoxic effects of estrogen on ischemic stroke in older female rats is associated with age-dependent loss of insulin-like growth factor-1 J Neurosci 30 6852 61 20484627
Shaw ND Srouji SS Welt CK Cox KH Fox JH Adams JM Sluss PM Hall JE Evidence that increased ovarian aromatase activity and expression account for higher estradiol levels in African American compared with Caucasian women J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2014 4 99 4 1384 92 24285681
Sheldahl LC Shapiro RA Bryant DN Koerner IP Dorsa DM 2008 Estrogen induced rapid translocation of estrogen receptor β, but not estrogen receptor α, to the neuronal plasma membrane Neuroscience 153 751 761 18406537
Sherwin BB Estrogen and memory in women: how can we reconcile the findings? Horm Behav 47 3 371 375 15708768
Shughrue P Scrimo P Lane M Askew R Merchenthaler I 1997a The distribution of estrogen receptor-β mRNA in forebrain regions of the estrogen receptor-α knockout mouse Endocrinology 138 5649 5652 9389555
Shughrue PJ Lane MV Merchenthaler I 1997b Comparative distribution of estrogen receptor-α and -β mRNA in the rat central nervous system J Comp Neurol 388 507 525 9388012
Shughrue PJ Merchenthaler I 2000 Evidence for novel estrogen binding sites in the rat hippocampus Neuroscience 99 605 612 10974424
Shumaker SA Legault C Rapp SR Thal L Wallace RB Ockene JK Hendrix SL Jones BN 3rd Assaf AR Jackson RD Kotchen JM Wassertheil-Smoller S Wactawski-Wende J WHIMS Investigators 2003 Estrogen plus progestin and the incidence of dementia and mild cognitive impairment in postmenopausal women: the Women’s Health Initiative Memory Study: a randomized controlled trial JAMA 2003 5 28 289 20 2651 62
Silva AJ Paylor R Wehner JM Tonegawa S 1992 Impaired spatial learning in α-calcium- calmodulin kinase II mutant mice Science 257 206 211 1321493
Simpkins JW Rajakumar G Zhang YQ Simpkins CE Greenwald D Yu CJ Bodor N Day AL 1997 Estrogens may reduce mortality and ischemic damage caused by middle cerebral artery occlusion in the female rat J Neurosurg 87 724 730 9347981
Simpkins JW Yi KD Yang S-H 2009 Role of protein phosphatases and mitochondria in the neuroprotective effects of estrogens Front Neuroendocrinol 30 93 105 19410596
Smejkalova T Woolley CS 2010 Estradiol acutely potentiates hippocampal excitatory synaptic transmission through a presynaptic mechanism J Neurosci 30 16137 16148 21123560
Smith YR Love T Persad CC Tkaczyk A Nichols TE Zubieta JK 2006 Impact of combined estradiol and norethindrone therapy on visuospatial working memory assessed by functional magnetic resonance imaging Journal of Clinical Endocrinology &amp; Metabolism 91 4476 4481 16912129
Smith CC McMahon LL 2006 Estradiol-induced increase in the magnitude of long-term potentiation is prevented by blocking NR2B-containing receptors J Neurosci 26 8517 8522 16914677
Sohrabji F 2014 Estrogen-IGF-1 interactions in neuroprotection: Ischemic stroke as a case study Front Neuroendocrinol 36 1 14 24882635
Sohrabji F Welsh CJ Reddy DS 2015 Sex differences in neurological diseases Chapter 12 in Sex differences in the central nervous system Shansky Rebecca M Academic Press London UK 297 323
Spiteri T Musatov S Ogawa S Ribeiro A Pfaff DW Ågmo A 2012 The role of the estrogen receptor alpha in the medial amygdala and ventromedial nucleus of the hypothalamus in social recognition, anxiety and aggression Behav Brain Res 210 211 220 20184922
Srivastava DP Evans PD 2013 G-protein oestrogen receptor 1: Trials and tribulations of a membrane oestrogen receptor J Neuroendocrinol 25 1219 1230 23822769
Srivastava DP Woolfrey KM Jones KA Shum CY Lash LL Swanson GT Penzesm P 2008 Rapid enhancement of two-step wiring plasticity by estrogen and NMDA receptor activity Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105 14650 14655 18801922
Steiner M Young EA 2008 Hormones and mood Becker JB Berkley KJ Geary N Hampson E Herman JP Young EA Sex Differences in the Brain: From Genes to Behavior 405 426 New York Oxford University Press
Suzuki S Brown CM Dela Cruz CD Yang E Bridwell DA Wise PM 2007 Timing of estrogen therapy after ovariectomy dictates the efficacy of its neuroprotective and antiinflammatory actions Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104 6013 6018 17389368
Suzuki S Brown CM Wise PM 2009 Neuroprotective effects of estrogens following ischemic stroke Front Neuroendocrinol 30 201 211 19401209
Tada H Koide M Ara W Shibata Y Funabashi T Suyama K Goto T Takahashi T Estrous Cycle-Dependent Phasic Changes in the Stoichiometry of Hippocampal Synaptic AMPA Receptors in Rats PLoS One 2015 6 29 10 6 e0131359 26121335
Terner JM Lomas LM Picker MJ 2005 Influence of estrous cycle and gonadal hormone depletion on nociception and opioid antinociception in female rats of four strains J Pain 6 372 383 15943959
Thirone AC Speight P Zulys M Rotstein OD KSs Pedersen SF Kapus A 2009 Hyperosmotic stress induces Rho/Rho kinase/LIM kinase- mediated cofilin phosphorylation in tubular cells: key role in the osmotically triggered F-actin response Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 296 C463 475 19109524
Toung TK Hurn PD Traystman RJ Sieber FE 2000 Estrogen decreases infarct size after temporary focal ischemia in a genetic model of type 1 diabetes mellitus Stroke 31 2701 2706 11062297
Toung TJ Traystman RJ Hurn PD 1998 Estrogen-mediated neuroprotection after experimental stroke in male rats Stroke 29 1666 1670 9707210
Tuscher JJ Luine V Frankfurt M Frick KM 2016 Estradiol-mediated spine changes in the dorsal hippocampus and medial prefrontal cortex of ovariectomized female mice depend on ERK and mTOR activation in the dorsal hippocampus J Neurosci 36 5 1483 1489 26843632
Voskuhl RR Wang H Wu TC Sicotte NL Nakamura K Kurth F Itoh N Bardens J Bernard JT Corboy JR Cross AH Dhib-Jalbut S Ford CC Frohman EM Giesser B Jacobs D Kasper LH Lynch S Parry G Racke MK Reder AT Rose J Wingerchuk DM MacKenzie-Graham AJ Arnold DL Tseng CH Elashoff R Estriol combined with glatiramer acetate for women with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis: a randomised, placebo-controlled, phase 2 trial Lancet Neurol 2015 11 24 pii: S1474-4422(15)00322-1. [Epub ahead of print] 10.1016/S1474-4422(15)00322-1
Wade CB Dorsa DM 2003 Estrogen activation of cyclic adenosine 5′-monophosphate response element-mediated transcription requires the extracellularly regulated kinase/mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway Endocrinology 144 832 838 12586759
Wade CB Robinson S Shapiro RA Dorsa DM 2001 Estrogen receptor (ER)α and ERβ exhibit unique pharmacologic properties when coupled to activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway Endocrinology 142 2336 2342 11356680
Walf AA Rhodes ME Frye CA 2008 Ovarian steroids enhance object recognition in naturally cycling and ovariectomized, hormone-primed rats Neurobiol Learn Mem 86 35 46 16529958
Warren SG Humphreys AG Juraska JM Greenough WT LTP varies across the estrous cycle: enhanced synaptic plasticity in proestrus rats Brain research 703 26 30 1995 8719612
Warren SG Juraska JM Spatial and nonspatial learning across the rat estrous cycle Behav Neurosci 111 259 266 1997 9106666
Waters EM Thompson LI Patel P Gonzales AD Ye HZ Filardo EJ Clegg DJ Gorecka J Akama KT McEwen BS Milner TA 2015 G-protein-coupled estrogen receptor 1 is anatomically positioned to modulate synaptic plasticity in the mouse hippocampus J Neurosci 35 2384 2397 25673833
Waters EM Yildirim M Janssen WG Lou WY McEwen BS Morrison JH Milner TA 2011 Estrogen and aging affect the synaptic distribution of estrogen receptor beta-immunoreactivity in the CA1 region of female rat hippocampus Brain Res 1379 86 97 20875808
Watters JJ Campbell JS Cunningham MJ Krebs EG Dorsa DM 1997 Rapid membrane effects of steroids in neuroblastoma cells: Effects of estrogen on mitogen activated protein kinase signalling cascade and c-fos immediate early gene transcription Endocrinology 138 4030 4033 9275096
Waxman DJ Holloway MG 2009 Sex differences in the expression of hepatic drug metabolizing enzymes Molecular Pharmacology 76 215 228 19483103
Wei SM Eisenberg DP Kohn PD Kippenhan JS Kolachana BS Weinberger DR Berman KF Brain-derived neurotrophic factor Val66Met polymorphism affects resting regional cerebral blood flow and functional connectivity differentially in women versus men J Neurosci 2012 5 16 32 20 7074 81 22593075
Wieck A 2011 Oestradiol and psychosis: clinical findings and biological mechanisms Curr Top Behav Neurosci 8 173 187 21557053
Woolley CS 2007 Acute effects of estrogen on neuronal physiology Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 47 657 80 16918306
Woolley CS Gould E Frankfurt M McEwen BS Naturally occurring fluctuation in dendritic spine density on adult hippocampal pyramidal neurons J Neurosci 1990 12 10 12 4035 9 2269895
Workman JL Gobinath AR Brummelte S Galea LAM in press 11 25 2015 Parity modifies the effects of fluoxetine and corticosterone on HPA axis responses and hippocampal neurogenesis Neuropharmacology
Wright DW Kellermann AL Hertzberg VS Clark PL Frankel M Goldstein FC Salomone JP Dent LL Harris OA Ander DS Lowery DW Patel MM Denson DD Gordon AB Wald MM Gupta S Hoffman SW Stein DG ProTECT: a randomized clinical trial of progesterone for acute traumatic brain injury Ann Emerg Med 2007 4 49 4 391 402 402.e1 2 17011666
Wright DW Yeatts SD Silbergleit R Palesch YY Hertzberg VS Frankel M Goldstein FC Caveney AF Howlett-Smith H Bengelink EM Manley GT Merck LH Janis LS Barsan WG NETT Investigators Very early administration of progesterone for acute traumatic brain injury N Engl J Med 2014 12 25 371 26 2457 66 25493974
Yang SH Liu R Wu SS Simpkins JW 2003 The use of estrogens and related compounds in the treatment of damage from cerebral ischemia Ann N Y Acad Sci 1007 101 107 14993044
Yokomaku D Numakawa T Numakawa Y Suzuki S Matsumoto T Adachi N Nishio C Taguchi T Hatanaka H 2003 Estrogen enhances depolarization-induced glutamate release through activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and mitogen-activated protein kinase in cultured hippocampal neurons Mol Endocrinol 17 831 844 12554763
Zarrouf FA Artz S Griffith J Sirbu C Kommor M 2009 Testosterone and depression: systematic review and meta-analysis J Psychiatr Pract 15 289 305 19625884
Zeber JE Manias E Williams AF Hutchins D Udezi WA Roberts CS Peterson AM 2013 A systematic literature review of psychosocial and behavioral factors associated with initial medication adherence: a report of the ISPOR medication adherence &amp; persistence special interest group Value Health 16 891 900 23947984
Zhao Z Fan L Fortress AM Boulware MI Frick KM 2012 Hippocampal histone acetylation regulates object recognition and the estradiol-induced enhancement of object recognition J Neurosci 32 2344 2351 22396409
Zhao Z Fan L Frick KM 2010 Epigenetic alterations regulate the estradiol-induced enhancement of memory consolidation Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107 5605 5610 20212170
Ziehn MO Avedisian AA Dervin SM O’Dell TJ Voskuhl RR 2012 Estriol preserves synaptic transmission in the hippocampus during autoimmune demyelinating disease Lab Invest 92 1234 1245 22525427
Zirkin BR Tenover JL 2012 Aging and Declining Testosterone: Past, Present, and Hopes for the Future J Androl 33 1111 1118 22879528
