LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101256586
33820
J Neuroimmune Pharmacol
J Neuroimmune Pharmacol
Journal of neuroimmune pharmacology : the official journal of the Society on NeuroImmune Pharmacology
1557-1890
1557-1904

28160121
5393046
10.1007/s11481-016-9724-3
NIHMS849546
Article
Destination Brain: The Past, Present, and Future of Therapeutic Gene Delivery
Joshi Chaitanya R. 1
Labhasetwar Vinod 2
Ghorpade Anuja 13*
1 Institute for Molecular Medicine, University of North Texas Health Science Center, 3500 Camp Bowie Boulevard, Fort Worth, TX 76107 USA
2 Department of Biomedical Engineering, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, 9500 Euclid Avenue Cleveland, OH 44195 USA
3 Research, University of North Texas Health Science Center, 3500 Camp Bowie Boulevard, Fort Worth, TX 76107 USA
* Corresponding Author: Dr. Anuja Ghorpade, Anuja.Ghorpade@unthsc.edu, Phone: 817-735-2055, Fax: 817-735-2610
23 2 2017
03 2 2017
3 2017
01 3 2018
12 1 5183
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Neurological diseases and disorders (NDDs) present a significant societal burden and currently available drug- and biological-based therapeutic strategies have proven inadequate to alleviate it. Gene therapy is a suitable alternative to treat NDDs compared to conventional systems since it can be tailored to specifically alter select gene expression, reverse disease phenotype and restore normal function. The scope of gene therapy has broadened over the years with the advent of RNA interference and genome editing technologies. Consequently, encouraging results from central nervous system (CNS)-targeted gene delivery studies have led to their transition from preclinical to clinical trials. As we shift to an exciting gene therapy era, a retrospective of available literature on CNS-associated gene delivery is in order. This review is timely in this regard, since it analyzes key challenges and major findings from the last two decades and evaluates future prospects of brain gene delivery. We emphasize major areas consisting of physiological and pharmacological challenges in gene therapy, function-based selection of an ideal cellular target, available therapy modalities, and diversity of viral vectors and nanoparticles as vehicle systems. Further, we present plausible answers to key questions such as strategies to circumvent low blood-brain barrier permeability, most suitable CNS cell types for targeting. We compare and contrast pros and cons of the tested viral vectors in context of delivery systems used in past and current clinical trials. Gene vector design challenges are also evaluated in the context of cell-specific promoters. Key challenges and findings reported for recent gene therapy clinical trials, assessing viral vectors and nanoparticles, are discussed in the context of bench to bedside gene therapy translation. We conclude this review by tying together gene delivery challenges, available vehicle systems and comprehensive analysis of neuropathogenesis to outline future prospects of CNS-targeted gene therapies.

adenoviral vectors
adeno-associated viral vectors
lentiviral vectors
polymeric nanoparticles
CNS-gene delivery
CNS-specific promoters

1. Introduction

A comprehensive global burden of disease study indicated that years lived with disability increased by 59% for neurological disorders and by 83% for cerebrovascular disease from 1990 to 2013 (Vos et al., 2015). These neurological disorders include Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and other dementias, Parkinson’s disease (PD), and multiple sclerosis (MS), while ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke constitute cerebrovascular disease. Neurological and cerebrovascular conditions are discussed in this review as neurological diseases and disorders (NDDs) in the context of therapeutic gene delivery. Huntington’s disease (HD), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-associated neurocognitive disorders (HAND) are also included in the NDDs spectrum. Available drug- and biological-based therapeutic strategies are inadequate to treat or cure NDDs. Several studies are testing safe, effective, non-invasive, therapeutic strategies for NDDs by attempting delivery of drugs (Geldenhuys et al., 2011), proteins (Chaturvedi et al., 2014), and genes (Su et al., 2009) to cure disease or to slow its development. NDD progression could potentially be halted or reversed by targeting a single cell type, for instance neurons or astrocytes. Gene therapy is highly promising in this regard as it could be tailored for transient or long-term gene expression in specific cell types.

Researchers have actively investigated gene-based NDD therapies in the last two decades, and genes have been delivered successfully to central nervous system (CNS) cells (Bevan et al., 2011; Morris and Labhasetwar, 2015). Conventionally, challenges towards brain-targeted therapeutic delivery include low blood-brain barrier (BBB) permeability, brain heterogeneity, route of administration and dosing. Though these challenges are common for drugs and genes, unique modifications to gene delivery vehicles could potentially circumvent the challenges (Section 2). In addition to tackling the physiological and pharmacological problems, the principal questions related to gene delivery have revolved around obtaining an ideal cellular target, suitable therapeutic gene(s), and an efficient gene delivery vehicle. Oligodendrocytes and microglia play key role(s) in the neuropathogenesis of NDDs, yet treatments have centered on neurons and astrocytes. We have analyzed the functional features and disease roles of these cell types to ascertain their suitability as cellular target(s) (Section 3). Gene therapy modalities increased after the advent of silencing by RNA interference (RNAi) technology and genome editing endonuclease systems in addition to augmentation. The pros and cons of each approach are discussed here from the perspective of NDDs (Section 4). Vectors derived from adenoviruses, adeno-associated viruses (AAV), and lentiviruses as well as non-viral transport systems, such as polymeric nanoparticles (NPs) and lipid complexes, are under investigation as vehicles for CNS gene delivery. Evaluating expression efficiency, duration, and targeting specificity is critical to validate a suitable delivery system (Section 5). Therapeutic genes driven by cell-specific promoters have been utilized to restrict expression. The selection of promoter during vector design process has evolved over time and unique trends for neural cell types have been examined (Section 6). Recent gene therapy clinical trials are evaluating safety and efficacy of novel viral vectors and nanoparticles. The findings reported thus far for these trials must be analyzed in the context of ‘bench to bedside translational’ challenges to postulate directions for future gene therapy research (Section 7). To conclude, we present a synopsis of the overall trends observed for each aspect of CNS-targeted gene delivery systems and propose future directions (Section 8).

2. Challenges towards CNS-targeted gene delivery

Effective gene delivery could restore normal cell function during NDDs by providing transient or long-term expression of the gene of interest, eliminating the need for frequent drug administration and continual penetration of the BBB. An ideal gene delivery system development would involve in vitro testing of delivery vehicle under consideration of biocompatibility, efficacy, dose-time kinetics, and sustained expression. Subsequently, in vivo studies would evaluate dosing, route of administration, and immune responses in addition to the same in vitro assessments followed by transition into clinical trials. However, each step of this process contains its own challenges. For example, our ongoing studies have revealed surprising difficulty in polymeric NP-mediated gene delivery to primary human neurons and astrocytes, let alone targeting them in vivo. Currently, we are looking into the NP-uptake mechanisms in these cells to determine feasible alternatives and to overcome gene expression challenges (unpublished data). Further, transgenic animal models [Reviewed by (Jucker, 2010; Gorantla et al., 2012)] fail to mimic the complexities of the NDD-associated mechanisms making therapeutic assessments difficult. Diverse hosts (mouse, rat, rabbit, human), coupled with age differences have resulted in varying gene expression levels in preclinical studies (Gray et al., 2011; Gholizadeh et al., 2013). Finally, the immunologically privileged status of the brain makes reaching brain cells difficult, given the low permeability of the intact BBB and complexity of brain structure. These barriers along with obstacles to routes of administration for gene therapies, and the difficulties in bench to bedside translation will be discussed in this section.

2.1 Low blood-brain barrier permeability

In the absence of trauma or disease, tight junctions between brain microvascular endothelial cells (BMVECs) covered by astrocyte foot processes seal the majority of the brain to peripheral immune surveillance and passive diffusion of water-soluble drugs (Abbott et al., 2006). The intricate vasculature of the brain promotes global perfusion since all brain cells are within 20 μm of a blood capillary (Pardridge, 2002). Therefore, intravascular gene delivery systems could permeate the entire brain if the BBB can be traversed. Low permeability of the BBB remains the primary physical challenge and rate-limiting step for targeting brain cells. An ideal vascular gene delivery system would have very small size, high lipophilicity, and low plasma protein binding (Pardridge, 2002).

Severe neuroinflammation compromises the BBB by activating BMVECs and astrocytes, increasing cellular adhesion molecule expression and decreasing tight junction and extracellular matrix protein levels. Thus, BBB permeability varies in health and disease (Xia et al., 2004). Based on this, delivering gene(s) during NDDs, such as AD and PD, may be easier since chronic neuroinflammation enhances BBB permeability. However, compromised BBB during ischemia may not be helpful for gene therapies since the therapeutic window is small and a rapidly acting therapy is required (Jaffer et al., 2011). According to a report, gene delivery was efficient in fetal mice compared to older mice, attributed underdeveloped BBB (Gholizadeh et al., 2013). As classic NDDs (e.g. AD) are diagnosed and treated in older patients, improved gene delivery older mice will be more relevant. Disruption of BBB to enhance delivery has been explored via microbubbles, ultrasound (Tan et al., 2016) and chemicals (e.g. mannitol) (Kwon et al., 2010; Gray et al., 2011); but the clinical implications of such approaches are not known. Arginine-modified polyplexes (Morris and Labhasetwar, 2015), transactivator of transcription-conjugated NPs (Rao et al., 2008) and AAV vector serotype 9 (Foust et al., 2009) crossed the BBB when injected intravenously in rodent models, indicating that tailor-made NPs with surface modifications and genetically modified viral vectors with particular capsid sequences can overcome the BBB. Further, off-target gene expression in peripheral organs could be prevented by inclusion of cell-specific promoters (discussed in Section 6).

Gene vectors have been injected directly into the brain to circumvent the BBB (Do Thi et al., 2004; Yang et al., 2013). The innate difficulty and risk during brain administration makes this method less applicable over long-term clinical trials. Convection-enhanced delivery, in which one or more catheters are carefully placed in the brain parenchyma for therapeutic delivery, could be a potential solution. While elaborate, this technology is currently in Phase III clinical trials for glioblastoma treatments (Debinski and Tatter, 2009) and could be a feasible delivery mechanism for future gene-based NDD therapies.

2.2 Brain structure complexity

The heterogeneity of the brain rules out a ‘universal’ delivery system for genes. In addition, unique pathogenesis of each NDD requires a tailored vehicle system designed to deliver a gene of interest to a certain cell type for a given disease. Though genes have been injected or infused directly in the brain (Do Thi et al., 2004; Yang et al., 2013; Mastorakos et al., 2015), obtaining global gene expression has been difficult -(Lisovoski et al., 1997; Arregui et al., 2011). This is attributed to low gene or vehicle diffusion within brain parenchyma (Mastorakos et al., 2015), less viral vector transduction efficiency (Lisovoski et al., 1997), and reduced gene expression driven by weak promoters (Sandhu et al., 2009). Additional difficulties ensue in diseases where a precise region is to be targeted within the heterogeneous brain structure, e.g. the substantia nigra (SN) in PD. Age contributes to brain complexity in the context of the extent of BBB development (Gholizadeh et al., 2013) and the ratios of glia to neurons throughout the brain parenchyma.

Some viral vectors demonstrate select cell type and brain region tropism (Nomoto et al., 2003; Aschauer et al., 2013). For instance, AAV2 preferentially transduced neurons while AAV5 transduced astrocytes in vitro. In vivo, AAV2-mediated expression was restricted to pyramidal and granular cells and AAV5 transduced only granular cells (Nomoto et al., 2003; Aschauer et al., 2013). Further, neurons and astrocytes could respond dissimilarly to the same biomolecules, such as heme oxygenase (Benvenisti-Zarom and Regan, 2007), requiring evaluation of off-target effects. Tagging specific cell surface receptor ligands on DNA-vehicle complex can target neurons or astrocytes (Discussed further in Section 6). Thus, thorough knowledge of neuropathology, cellular responses to particular stimuli, intrinsic cell tropisms of delivery systems, and gene vector or vehicle system modifications are critical to tackle the brain heterogeneity challenge in the treatment of each NDD.

2.3 Route of administration

Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic profiles of drugs are studied to obtain optimal dose(s) and route of administration. Gene delivery is complicated because dose and frequency of administration depends on both the gene and the delivery system. Intranasal (Kim et al., 2012), intracarotid (Gray et al., 2011), intravitreal (Aartsen et al., 2010), intrathecal (Milligan et al., 2006) and intramuscular (Towne et al., 2010) routes of administration have been explored for brain delivery. Currently, intravenous (Yurek et al., 2009) and intracerebral (Drinkut et al., 2012) administrations are frequently used; yet, neither is an effective ‘gold standard’ for CNS gene delivery. Intracerebral delivery was shown to be efficient (Yurek et al., 2009), but had brain diffusion issues (Drinkut et al., 2012). Low diffusion is a noted disadvantage of intracerebroventricular (ICV) delivery as well (Pardridge, 2002). Depending on the therapeutic strategy though, limited diffusion could be beneficial when a local effect is desired (Drinkut et al., 2012). Intrathecal delivery revealed promising results in rodents with spinal cord injury (SCI) (Milligan et al., 2006); however, it led to severe neurotoxic effects in monkeys (Samaranch et al., 2014). Overall, the route of administration must be tailored to the therapeutic usage, while reducing associated risks and optimizing ease of use and efficacy. Intravenous and intranasal routes offer ease of administration compared to intracerebral or intrathecal routes. Therefore, research should be directed towards developing systems that could be delivered via intravenous or intranasal routes.

Age, weight, gender, and genetics of the examined species and the route of administration determine the NPs or viral vector dosing strategy. The transition from in vitro to in vivo studies and from mice to non-human primates (NHPs) is difficult as the delivery system design and dosing paradigms vary significantly between models (Gray et al., 2011). Additionally, there are logistical concerns over bulk production and handling. Thorough dose-time kinetics experiments will be required to establish the therapeutic window of gene delivery for individual NDD. For instance, gene therapies for stroke would need a rapid onset of expression, or be prophylactically administered to those with a significant risk. Potential palliative measures for would require dose concentrations and frequencies tailored to particular patients based on relative risk and symptoms. Taken together, it can be discerned that the route of administration issue can be partly attributed to low BBB permeability (Section 2.1) and complex brain structure (Section 2.2); while, an optimal administration method may overcome the BBB and the brain heterogeneity challenges.

3. Selecting an ideal CNS cellular target for NDD therapy

Neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration are hallmarks of NDDs (Dhar et al., 2006; Begum et al., 2008; Hirsch and Hunot, 2009; Silvestroni et al., 2009; Beers et al., 2011). These hallmarks and intracellular processes that precede or succeed them involve a crosstalk between neurons, astrocytes, microglia and peripheral blood monocytes (Carson et al., 2006). Thus, all of these cell types could potentially serve as cellular targets for NDDs treatment.

Gene delivery challenges discussed in Section 2 could be attributed to physical properties of the vehicle, i.e. viral vectors or NPs. Structural or physical modifications of vehicles could overcome the challenges to offer a feasible and efficient gene delivery. On the other hand, an equally important question would be which cell type would make an ideal target? In this section, we discuss some principal types of CNS cells in the context of their functions and their role in NDD pathogenesis to ascertain suitable cellular targets. A schematic of key underlying processes during NDDs and all discussed cell types along with their functional relevance is depicted in Fig. 1.

3.1 Neurons

Structurally and functionally neurons remain the most investigated CNS cell type and therefore neuronal changes and biomarkers associated with NDDs have been well characterized. Neuronal numbers reduce in healthy aging and there is a rapid loss of certain brain region neurons during NDDs. For instance, loss of neurons in the frontal cortex, SN, and striatum occurs during AD (Uylings and De Brabander, 2002), PD (Anglade et al., 1997), and HD (DiFiglia et al., 1997), respectively.

Clinically, neuronal death is associated with dendritic loss, synaptic reduction and cognitive and/or motor impairment (Uylings and De Brabander, 2002). Synaptic transmission, the principal function of neurons, is altered during AD and PD (Van Spronsen and Hoogenraad, 2010). Neuritic plaques, containing the 43-amino acid peptide amyloid-β (Aβ), and neurofibrillary tangles, containing tau protein, are pathological hallmarks of AD (Andrade-Moraes et al., 2013). Accumulation of interneuronal cytoplasmic ‘Lewy’ bodies, composed of α-synuclein, parkin, ubiquitin, and neurofilaments, remain a diagnostic criterion for PD, in addition to dopaminergic neuron loss (Emerit et al., 2004). In HD, huntingtin (htt) protein aggregates build up inside neurons (DiFiglia et al., 1997). Despite precise neuropathogenesis of every NDD, intracellular processes preceding or succeeding neuronal loss may overlap including mitochondrial and oxidative stress (Emerit et al., 2004), synaptic transmission dysfunction (Van Spronsen and Hoogenraad, 2010), altered neurotransmitter levels (Tekin and Cummings, 2002) and changes in stimuli preventing or promoting neuronal cell death (Emerit et al., 2004). Disrupted synaptic transmission of the excitatory neurotransmitter glutamate leading to excitotoxicity has been implicated in ischemic stroke, epilepsy, MS, and HAND (Arundine and Tymianski, 2003; Cisneros and Ghorpade, 2014). Axonal damage and subsequent impairment of axonal transport is linked to ALS (Boillée et al., 2006) and MS (De Stefano et al., 2003) pathologies. Importantly, astrocyte or microglia or oligodendrocyte dysfunctions can cause neuronal damage by inducing the same processes listed above. Additionally, reduced expression of neurotrophic factors, such as brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), nerve growth factor (NGF) and glial cell-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF), is also implicated in NDDs and replenishing their levels is considered a potential therapeutic strategy, discussed in detail in section 4.1.

Neuroprotection remains the ultimate aim of all therapeutic strategies either by preventing or reversing damage. Currently available palliative NDD treatments involve drugs for AD (e.g. acetylcholinesterase inhibitors (von Bernhardi et al., 2003) and PD (e.g. dopamine agonists (Schapira, 1999), immunosuppressive therapy for MS (Stangel et al., 2006), blood thinners for stroke (e.g. tissue plasminogen activator (Jaffer et al., 2011), rehabilitative care and physical therapy. Additionally, neural stem cell-based transplantations and other surgical procedures are also included in the NDD treatment repertoire. Unfortunately, these treatments are inadequate making gene therapy a promising alternative.

Neuronal gene delivery investigations have shown varying degrees of success to reverse pathogenesis (Nakajima et al., 2007; Chen et al., 2012). However, targeting neurons still presents certain limitations. The neuronal population is always reducing since they die during healthy aging, in addition to rapid loss during disease. Synaptic transmission is fastidious and must be tightly regulated. As pointed out by Drinkut and colleagues, if neurons secrete exogenous biomolecules from various cell parts, including the soma and synaptic sites, it could produce off-target, undesirable effects since axonal endings terminate on other neurons or peripheral organs (Drinkut et al., 2012). Since NDDs are not diffuse or random but involve damage to a precise subset of neurons, neuronal gene delivery has always been challenging (Callaway, 2005). However, if gene expression could be restricted to a brain region and a strong, neuron-specific promoter is used, a low dose of exogenous DNA for neuronal expression may prove beneficial.

3.2 Microglia

Comprising ~10 to 15% of the total brain cells, microglia are the resident immune cells of CNS (Carson et al., 2006). Resting microglia perform normal brain surveillance (Polazzi and Monti, 2010; Aguzzi et al., 2013). In acute conditions, activated microglia provide neuroprotection by releasing neurotrophic and anti-inflammatory factors including NGF, BDNF, neurotrophin-3 and GDNF, providing innate immunity, facilitating repair through guided migration of stem cells (Garden and Möller, 2006; Block et al., 2007) and phagocytizing dead neurons and debris (Polazzi and Monti, 2010).

During normal aging, microglia produce a chronic, mild inflammatory environment by secreting inflammatory cytokines interleukin (IL)-1β, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, CCL2, CXCL8 and reactive nitrogen species such as nitric oxide, a potential risk factor for NDDs (Von Bernhardi et al., 2015). Triggers include extracellular adenosine triphosphate, serum factors (e.g. plasma thrombins), microbial agents (e.g. lipopolysaccharides) and pathological proteins (e.g. Aβ) induce microglial activation (Garden and Möller, 2006). Microgliosis is another key process in chronic inflammation, which is attributed to extravasation of circulating monocytes post-BBB disruption (Wake et al., 2013). Neurons could inhibit the microglial activation via receptor-ligand interaction; an example is neuronal CD200 and its receptor on microglia (Aguzzi et al., 2013); however, disrupting such interactions could lead to chronic neuroinflammation.

Microglia cause neurotoxicity either as a response to external pro-inflammatory stimuli or through activation post-neuronal injury, eventually eliciting neurodegeneration by secretion of neurotoxic substances (Block et al., 2007). Since their responses differ drastically during mild, acute injury versus chronic inflammation, microglia can act as friend or foe depending on the stage and extent of injury (Aguzzi et al., 2013). Therefore, an ideal therapeutic approach would consist of weakening microglial responses instead of silencing them entirely.

Microglia cleared Aβ plaques in AD immunotherapy preclinical trials (Lobello et al., 2012). Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs such as cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors are being investigated to alleviate microglial activation (Rock and Peterson, 2006). Few studies reported that genes were successfully delivered to neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes as well as microglia (Zhao et al., 2003; Hendriks et al., 2007).

The window of opportunity to target microglia is very unpredictable, especially in chronic NDDs (Polazzi and Monti, 2010), and would require timely diagnosis of particular disease and degree of microglial involvement. The extent of peripheral extravasation of monocytes during injury would be necessary to examine before targeting microglia (Wake et al., 2013). Early detection of microglial activation will be essential to inhibit their neurotoxic effects and subsequent neuronal loss. To achieve this, sophisticated techniques such as positron emission tomography will be essential (Block et al., 2007).

3.3 Oligodendrocytes

Oligodendrocytes, a type of glial cells, are responsible for myelination of axons in the brain and spinal cord (McTigue and Tripathi, 2008). They originate as pre-progenitors in the subventricular zone (SVZ) and then migrate, proliferate, mature and start producing myelin sheaths. These processes are regulated by platelet-derived growth factors (PDGF), fibroblast growth factor 1 and 2, insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1), transforming growth factor-β, neurotrophin-3, and ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF) (McMorris and McKinnon, 1996). Oligodendrocytes electrically insulate sodium channel-clustering axons, which ensures saltatory nerve conduction (Bradl and Lassmann, 2010).

Metabolic changes in oligodendrocytes attributed to genetic defects, infections, or toxins lead to flawed myelination or demyelination (Chen et al., 1998). Remyelination, i.e. formation of new myelin sheaths by oligodendrocytes, remains the intrinsic response. Remyelination does not occur in MS due to unknown causes (Franklin and Kotter, 2008). Further, a variable loss of oligodendrocytes occurs in all MS subtypes, which includes apoptotic death in type III and non-apoptotic death in type IV. The underlying pathways linked to oligodendrocyte loss include oxidative and mitochondrial stress (Bradl and Lassmann, 2010), proinflammatory cytokine signaling, free radicals, and complement-facilitated injury (Merrill and Scolding, 1999). Clinically, lack of myelin associated protein and 2,3-cyclic nucleotide 3-phosphodiesterase indicate oligodendropathy (Popescu and Lucchinetti, 2012). Oligodendrocytes are implicated in other demyelinating diseases including Marburg disease and Devic’s disease (Popescu and Lucchinetti, 2012).

Preventing oligodendrocyte loss and increasing myelination are the two possible approaches to treat dysfunctional oligodendrocytes. Currently investigated MS treatments including immune-, cell-based-, and gene- therapies have direct implications/effects in oligodendrocytes (Rodgers et al., 2013). Proposed strategies to prevent oligodendropathy include upregulating growth factor gene expression, which regulate their maturation. However, a single growth factor is not involved in that process, posing a potential multiple gene delivery challenge. Oligodendrocyte-targeted gene delivery has been tested in studies investigating SCIs (Zhao et al., 2003; Tuinstra et al., 2012). Overall, demyelination diseases constitute a small fraction of NDDs spectrum and oligodendrocytes are one of the least abundant cell types in the brain. Hence, they may not be the best choice to attain global CNS gene delivery.

3.4 Astrocytes

Astrocytes, principal glial cells of the CNS (Wang and Bordey, 2008), are structural components of tight junctions of the BBB and form ‘tripartite’ synapses with pre- and post-synaptic neurons (Halassa et al., 2007). Astrocytes produce neurotrophic factors, including BDNF, NGF, GDNF (Cabezas et al., 2016) and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-1 (Gardner and Ghorpade, 2003; Ashutosh et al., 2012). They regulate neurotransmission and synaptic activity by sequestering synaptic potassium and neurotransmitters, including glutamate. Astrocytes communicate with neighboring astrocytes via calcium waves and gap junctions (Barres, 2008), and also by secreting a number of cytokines and chemokines including CCL2 (Kiyota et al., 2009), CXCL8 (Zheng et al., 2008), IL-1β and TNF-α (Niranjan, 2014) that play critical roles in NDD pathogenesis. The astrocyte neurotrophic repertoire also includes antioxidant defense and metabolic support.

Neuroinflammation induces reactive gliosis whereby reactive astrocytes proliferate and migrate towards injury, leading to glial scar formation (Carson et al., 2006; Buffo et al., 2010; Colangelo et al., 2014; Anderson et al., 2016). While this response is an attempt to repair the initial damage, both astrocyte and neuronal functions are compromised by chronic inflammation. Similar to microglia, astrocytes secrete neuromodulatory molecules, which can be either protective or damaging depending on the stage of injury, making astrogliosis a ‘double-edged’ sword (Buffo et al., 2010). Other astrocyte intracellular processes that contribute to NDD pathologies include oxidative and mitochondrial stress (Manfredi and Xu, 2005), reduced excitatory amino acid transporter (EAAT)2 levels that lead to excitotoxicity (Ambrosi et al., 2014), calcium dysregulation (Alberdi et al., 2013) and attenuated neurotrophin secretion (Giralt et al., 2010).

Astrocytes could be central targets for NDD gene therapies as they interact with other cell types including neurons, microglia, BMVECs, and ependymal cells throughout the brain contributing to the disease and recovery processes (Wang and Bordey, 2008). Their foot processes are present at the interface between the periphery and the brain, giving them preferential access to therapeutics delivered via vascular route. A phosphodiesterase inhibitor, Ibudilast, prevents glial activation; and clinical trials testing its potential for chronic migraine, and substance abuse disorders are underway (Institut and Health, 2016). Simultaneously, preclinical studies have been performed to develop astrocyte-directed gene delivery systems (Gray et al., 2011; Gholizadeh et al., 2013). Clinical trials have been conducted in which astrocytes are cellular targets (Section 7). The majority of these preclinical and clinical trials intended to overexpress neurotrophin genes with or without astrocyte-specific promoter thereby mimicking inherent astrocyte neuroprotective function.

Before, focusing on astrocytes as a suitable cellular target for global CNS gene delivery, some potential issues must be discussed. Genes delivered via viral vectors, for example AAV, and NPs remain episomal. During chronic inflammation, these delivered genes could get diluted or lost due to astrocyte proliferation presenting astrogliosis as a “self-limiting” factor (Drinkut et al., 2012). Additionally, abundant interconnected astrocytes may not be ideal for PD and stroke therapy where site-restricted gene expression is required. Nevertheless, the fundamentally neuroprotective functions of astrocytes make them relevant. Considering the limitations stated in Section 3.1 for neurons, targeting astrocytes might prove a beneficial strategy.

4. Gene delivery modalities

Gene delivery strategies for NDD therapies are categorized into three approaches: 1. Augmentation 2. Silencing and 3. Editing. The goal of such therapies would be to alter specific gene expression and correct disrupted CNS homeostasis. Increasing neuroprotective measures, for instance, secreted neurotrophins, or reversing neurotoxic mechanisms, such as excitotoxicity, could restore CNS homeostasis. Thus, an ideal CNS-targeted gene delivery method would increase neurotrophin levels or reduce proinflammatory biomarkers. Hereditary NDDs, such as HD, depict distinct gene mutations and require therapies to permanently correct the mutated gene, which can be achieved by gene editing. Though the names of gene therapy modalities are self-explanatory, it is essential to compare and contrast between these methods to determine their applicability in the context of NDDs.

4.1 Gene augmentation

Gene augmentation would be applicable when an insertion or missense mutation produces nonfunctional protein or when certain genes are downregulated owing to disease pathology. For CNS diseases, it has been employed for replenishing neurotrophin levels, for example BDNF, GDNF, and NGF. All neurotrophins, except BDNF, are constitutively expressed in the brain. Neurotrophin levels are reduced in NDDs and exogenous administration is not possible since they cannot cross the BBB (Allen et al., 2013). Therefore, a gene augmentation modality could be used to increase or maintain neurotrophin levels. Neuroprotective and neurorestorative effects of this approach have been reported in AD (Furman et al., 2012), PD (Choi-Lundberg et al., 1997), and HD (Giralt et al., 2010). Many gene therapy trials for neurodegeneration are testing neurotrophin augmentation (Section 7).

A notable exception to the above theme includes the delivery of 7ND, a dominant negative analogue of CCL2. Overexpression of 7ND competitively inhibited CCL2-facilitated proinflammatory effects in an amyloid precursor protein/presenilin-1 rodent model of AD (Kiyota et al., 2009). Additionally, genes of neurotoxic or neuroinflammatory proteins have been augmented to mimic disease pathology in preclinical studies. Examples of such studies include mutated htt gene delivery to study downstream effects on astrocyte function in HD. Mutated htt overexpression led to downregulation of astrocyte-BDNF indicating neurotrophin levels are critical to HD pathogenesis (Wang et al., 2012). Similarly, inflammatory cytokines IL-1β (Ferrari et al., 2004) and TNF-α (Ezcurra et al., 2010) were overexpressed in rat brains to determine subsequent effects in demyelination and PD, respectively. Gene augmentation is the oldest and principally tested gene delivery modality.

4.2 Gene silencing

Gene silencing can be useful for nonsense or repeat mutations that produce abnormally functioning proteins or to reduce levels of neurotoxic proteins that increase neuroinflammation. Gene silencing alters gene expression by post-transcriptional regulation of a gene by the RNAi technique. It has been employed for NDD-associated studies where small interfering RNA (siRNA) (Kim et al., 2010), microRNA (miRNA) (Tuinstra et al., 2012), and short hairpin RNA (shRNA) (Desclaux et al., 2009) specific to the gene of interest were delivered successfully to CNS cells.

Gene silencing inquiries involve studying disease mechanisms, evaluating cellular or protein function, and testing therapeutic potential. An early work testing RNAi in brain cells investigated the function of astrocyte-aquaporin (AQP) 4 water channels using siRNA. Reduced AQP4 resulted in reduced membrane water permeability, subsequently altering astrocyte morphology to maintain surface-volume ratio and water influx. Knocking down AQP4 also reduced ischemia-related protein expression indicating a possible therapeutic option (Nicchia et al., 2003). Therapeutic potential of shRNA for glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and vimentin was determined in primary astrocyte cultures. Both GFAP and vimentin are markers astrocyte markers activated during glial inflammation and their knockdown expression resulted in reduced glial activation and migration (Desclaux et al., 2009).

Lack of cell-specific restriction is a potential pitfall of using RNAi for therapy. Detrimental off-target effects could result from miRNA binding to multiple messenger RNAs. Exogenously produced siRNA and shRNA bind with single mRNAs; however, careful assessments must be performed during preclinical studies to avoid any off-target effects.

4.3 Gene editing

Gene editing is the least explored delivery modality due to its relatively novel nature compared to previously discussed modalities. Gene or genome editing is done with engineered nucleases composed of sequence-specific DNA-binding domains fused to a non-specific DNA cleavage module. These nucleases are capable of modifying DNA precisely and efficiently by inducing precise DNA double-strand breaks, which stimulates cellular DNA repair mechanisms. Such endonucleases include zinc-finger nucleases, transcription activator-like effector nucleases, and clustered regulatory interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)/CRISPR-associated system 9 (Cas9) (CRISPR-Cas9) RNA guided system (Gaj et al., 2013). Genome editing components are delivered to the target cell with overexpression vectors and have the same delivery and specificity limitations. In HD, a mutated htt gene contains increased CAG repeats at the 5′ end of the gene, making it an ideal NDD for gene editing. Since normal htt functions are not well established, knocking it down may not be a suitable approach. The number of CAG repeats is linked to disease severity, thus, gene editing methods that precisely remove excessive CAG repeats may attenuate disease pathology (Aronin and DiFiglia, 2014). Recently, CRISPR-Cas9 successfully eradicated HIV-1 proviral DNA from latently infected human CD4+ T cells and cells derived from microglia, monocytes, and T cells (Hu et al., 2014; Kaminski et al., 2016). During HAND, neurons and oligodendrocytes are not infected, 2 to 20% of astrocytes are nonproductively infected, and microglia are productively infected with HIV-1 (Ghafouri et al., 2006). Though anti-retroviral therapy reduces productive infection, HIV-1 proviral DNA is incorporated into microglia and astrocyte genome. These latently infected cells, astrocytes and microglia, become viral reservoirs in the brain, continually releasing viral proteins that cause neurotoxicity and neurocognitive decline. CRISPR-Cas9 technology could prove useful in eliminating latent infection in brain cells (Hu et al., 2014). Since the complete inactivation or removal of proviral DNA from infected cells has been a critical hurdle for HIV therapies, this approach is a giant leap toward a cure and for therapeutic gene editing in general.

5. Delivery Systems

Development of sophisticated systems has enabled successful gene delivery to CNS cells. Widely used gene delivery systems include, but are not limited to, viral vectors (Tables 1, 2, and 3), and NPs (Table 4). Based on the nature of the gene, delivery system investigations can be categorized into ‘proof of concept’ and ‘therapy-based’ inquiries. Reporter genes are used for ‘proof-of concept’ experiments that establish and validate delivery system’s efficiency, for example, evaluating AAV9 vector’s brain gene delivery potential using green fluorescent protein (GFP) reporter (Foust et al., 2009). Therapy-based studies deliver genes to alleviate disease progression based on NDD pathogenesis. For example, low BDNF levels during disease led to testing BDNF gene therapy for HD (Arregui et al., 2011). The same gene and/or delivery system could result in varied outcomes in two studies based on differences in gene delivery route, targeted cell type, and in vitro or in vivo models.

5.1 Viral vectors

Viral vectors are preferred for gene delivery to brain cells as well as other cell types including muscles (Wang et al., 2014), cardiac cells (Katz et al., 2013), and cancer cells (Cerullo et al., 2010). Viral vectors exploit the ability of a virus to infect mammalian cells and use of host machinery to produce viral proteins. Viral vector construction involves replacing immunogenic viral genome segments with the gene of interest. Structural viral proteins required for viral capsid and host genome integration are included as trans-acting factors. Literature on viral vectors derived from adenoviruses (AVs) (Table 1), AAVs (Table 2), and lentiviruses (LVs) (Table 3), major research breakthroughs and failures for each vector type are discussed here.

5.1.1 Adenovirus

In 2012, About 23% of gene clinical trials utilize AVs (Ginn et al., 2013); despite a setback in 1999 due to the death of a patient in an AV clinical trial (Andrews et al., 2001). Since then, replication-restricted or deficient AVs have been developed by deleting non-essential viral DNA (Andrews et al., 2001; Do Thi et al., 2004; Dormond et al., 2009). Consistent AV-mediated brain gene expression has been found at three through thirty days, and was detectable at six months in Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats (Thomas et al., 2000). Adenoviruses do not integrate in the host genome and have been shown to preferentially transduce neurons in vivo (Lisovoski et al., 1997) and astrocytes in vitro (Kuhn et al., 2011). When AV-LacZ was injected into the dorsal side spinal cord of SD rats, predominantly astrocytes were transduced on the dorsal side while neurons were transduced on ventral side (Romero and Smith, 1998).

In ischemia therapy, AV-GDNF and AV-CNTF were delivered via intrastriatal injections a week prior to middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO)-induced ischemia in rats. These neurotrophins were primarily expressed in astrocytes and prevented neuronal damage compared to controls. At sites distant to the injection site, GDNF effects were stronger than CNTF (Hermann et al., 2001b). Apart from neurotrophins, an astrocyte-specific molecule, secretory leukocyte protease inhibitor, expression led to neuroprotection indicated by reduced ischemic lesion size and lowered neurological deficits (Wang et al., 2003b). Similarly, adrenomedullin expression reduced apoptosis and astrocyte migration to the ischemic core in vivo. Compromised BBB could enhance the vector penetration (Xia et al., 2004). AV-delivered heme oxygenase-1 expression increased astrocyte, but not neuronal survival, during hemin-induced apoptosis, post-hemorrhagic injury (Teng et al., 2004; Benvenisti-Zarom and Regan, 2007) indicating that cell-type-associated protective mechanisms must be studied while designing of cell-specific therapies.

Neurotrophin genes delivered via AV have been effective in certain NDD rodent models. Adenoviral vector-mediated GDNF gene delivery was tested in 6-hydoxydopamine- (6-OHDA) and cold-lesioned rats, modeling PD and brain trauma, respectively (Hermann et al., 2001a; Do Thi et al., 2004). Lesions and apoptotic cells reduced in the brain trauma model (Hermann et al., 2001a), and dopaminergic neuronal loss decreased and motor function improved in the PD study (Do Thi et al., 2004). When AV delivered BDNF to excitotoxic rats (Bemelmans et al., 1999), Quinolinic acid-induced lesion size was reduced and striatal neuron survival increased (Bemelmans et al., 1999). In transgenic HD mice (Arregui et al., 2011), AV-BDNF delivery improved behavior tests and motor phenotype appearance (Arregui et al., 2011). Thus, neurotrophin expression alleviated disease outcomes despite the differences in targeted cell-type, associated disease, and species models reaffirming their applicability as NDD therapeutics.

In addition to high transduction efficiency, first generation AVs elicited an inflammatory response and caused striatal shrinkage at injection sites (Liu et al., 1997; Bemelmans et al., 1999). Subsequent peripheral AV immunizations led to reduced CNS gene expression, increased macrophage and T cell infiltration into the brain, microglial activation, and demyelination (Byrnes et al., 1996; Hermens and Verhaagen, 1998; Thomas et al., 2000). Second and third generation AV with deleted early regions (E1, E3, and E4) depicted low immunogenicity (Do Thi et al., 2004). When Bellini and coworkers delivered IGF-1 to rat spinal cords, the resulting mild inflammatory response was attributed to IGF-1 reducing AV immunogenicity (Bellini et al., 2011). Taken together, certain segments of the AV genome, peripheral AV immunizations and gene of interest alter AV immunogenicity. Though AVs remain an efficient viral gene delivery system, they are not being tested in NDD clinical trials due to immunogenic potential and subsequent inflammatory outcomes.

5.1.2 Adeno-associated virus (AAV)

Low immunogenicity of AAV vectors and ability to transduce terminally differentiated neurons as well as dividing astrocytes, make them suitable for brain gene delivery (Peel and Klein, 2000). Larger size gene constructs could significantly reduce uptake and the kinetics of gene delivery (Dong et al., 1996). The smaller AAV genome compared to adenoviruses (4.7 kilobase (kb) versus 36 kb) facilitates gene uptake and delivery. CNS-targeted AAV vector studies can be divided into three main groups based on the serotype they investigate 1. AAV2 (Bartlett et al., 1998; Kügler et al., 2003), 2. AAV9 (Foust et al., 2009; Gray et al., 2011), and 3. Other AAVs, which include AAV4, 6, 8, rh10, rh39, rh43 (AAV43), etc. (Lawlor et al., 2009; Zhang et al., 2011). While AAV2 remains the prototype vector, some AAV serotypes are generated by pseudotyping, i.e. an AAV2 genome is packaged with a different capsid sequence such as AAV9. The majority of serotypes, other than AAV2, tested in the cited literature are designed this way. Contradicting results are documented on transduction efficiencies of self-complimentary AAVs (scAAV) and classical single-stranded AAVs (ssAAV). Smaller size scAAV (2.3 kb versus 4.7 kb) transduced effectively compared to ssAAV (Gray et al., 2011; Aschauer et al., 2013); yet, the inverse may also be true (Rahim et al., 2011).

5.1.2.1 AAV2

Early studies demonstrated an AAV2-mediated immediate neuronal transduction. However, astrocytes were not transduced and microglial transduction was short-lived (24 hours) (Bartlett et al., 1998). However, in a later study, cytomegalovirus (CMV) or human (h) synapsin (Syn) promoter-driven AAV2 specifically transduced astrocytes and neurons, respectively (Kügler et al., 2003). Higher AAV2 infectivity and binding was reported in human astrocytes in vitro and was attributed to stronger interactions between AAV2 and secondary protein receptors on astrocytes facilitating endocytosis (Koerber et al., 2009). When AAV2 and AAV5 were compared, AAV2 preferentially transduced neurons and AAV5 transduced astrocytes (Nomoto et al., 2003). While, kainate-induced limbic seizure activity reduced transduction efficiency, preferential cell type-specific expression persisted for both serotypes. Further, AAV5 transduced more efficiently than AAV2, potentially due to astrocyte activation, dying neurons or AAV2 neutralizing antibodies (NAbs) (Weinberg et al., 2011). One study also reported an exclusive neuronal transduction (Shevtsova et al., 2005). Recently preferential neuronal transduction by AAV2 and astrocyte activation was documented (An et al., 2016). When tested in oligodendrocytes, AAV2 encoding myelin basic protein (MBP) promoter led to exclusive oligodendrocyte transduction in vitro and in vivo with rat brain cells and mouse model, respectively, indicating therapeutic potential (Chen et al., 1998). Similarly for microglia, in vitro and in vivo targeting was achieved by including murine F4/80 promoter in AAV2 and AAV5 in a rat model (Cucchiarini et al., 2003).

Therapy-based enquiries for ischemia (Sun et al., 2003), PD (Kaplitt et al., 2007), and AD (Furman et al., 2012) have employed AAV2. In a cerebral focal ischemia rodent model, AAV2-mediated B-cell lymphoma-w (Bcl-w) expression in neurons, astrocytes and endothelial cells reduced infarct size, and improved neurological function (Sun et al., 2003). Literature indicates neurons are the preferred target of AAV2, but potential expression in other cell types and effects on the disease prognosis remain to be seen. Additionally, the presence of anti-AAV2 NAbs in a significant percentage (~72%) of the human population (Boutin et al., 2010) could become a key factor affecting therapeutic efficacy.

5.1.2.2 AAV9

Attention shifted from AAV2 to AAV9 for CNS gene delivery after its BBB crossing ability was reported (Foust et al., 2009). Faust and colleagues first documented AAV9 neuronal transduction in neonatal mice and astrocyte transduction in adult mice (Foust et al., 2009). Later reports found that AAV9 tropism shifted from neurons in fetal mice to astrocytes in neonatal mice (Rahim et al., 2011), from astrocytes in neonatal mice to neurons in young mice (Gholizadeh et al., 2013), and exhibited astrocyte tropism in NHPs of all ages (Bevan et al., 2011). Thus, literature presented conflicting data regarding AAV9-mediated preferential transduction of astrocytes or neurons. It can be discerned that, age of tested animals could be critical contributor of AAV9 cell-tropism (Foust et al., 2009; Rahim et al., 2011; Gholizadeh et al., 2013).

Similarly, variations in route of administration (Gray et al., 2011; Aschauer et al., 2013), and tested species (Bevan et al., 2011; Gray et al., 2011) have shown changes in AAV9 cell-tropism. In adult mice, intramuscular injection led to reporter expression in spinal cord neurons and astrocytes (Benkhelifa-Ziyyat et al., 2013), and intravenous administration showed higher neuronal transduction in brain (Gray et al., 2011). A study in NHPs showed brain parenchymal injection led to exclusive neuronal expression and intravenous injection resulted in preferential astrocyte transduction. Better access to astrocytes, potential AAV9-blood protein interactions, and presence of NAbs were attributed as contributing factors affecting gene expression post-intravenous administration (Gray et al., 2011). With ICV injection, AAV9 was effective for neurons (Aschauer et al., 2013). Thus, Gray and Aschauer study findings consistently showed AAV9-mediated neuronal expression when injected in the brain. In contrast, intracerebral scAAV9 injection showed a dose-dependent increase in neuron and astrocyte transduction efficiency without astrogliosis in mice (Donsante et al., 2016). Literature also showed the highest transduction efficiency and astrocyte tropism of AAV9. Despite widespread neuronal transduction, astrocytes were the predominantly transduced cell type (Zhang et al., 2011) and reporter gene expression remained for over 18 months (Miyake et al., 2011).

Therapeutically, AAV9 has been used to deliver human erythropoietin (hEPO) (Yang et al., 2013), EAAT2, glutamine synthase (GS), miRNA against adenosine kinase (Young et al., 2014), and β-galactoside (Weismann et al., 2015). In an experimental PD model, a single intrastriatal dose of AAV9-hEPO was preceded by an additional intrastriatal or intramuscular injection to evaluate effects on immunogenicity and transduction efficiency. Prior intramuscular injection reduced transduction, increased major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I and II expression, CD4 and CD8 T cells infiltration in the brain, and circulating NAbs for both AAV9 and hEPO in the blood. Alternatively, prior intrastriatal injection did not cause severe inflammation or reduced transduction efficiency, but increased peripheral blood cells (Yang et al., 2013). Though intrastriatal or intramuscular might not be preferred routes of administration, these findings highlight the importance of assessing dosing route and frequency. AAV9-EAAT2 and -GS delivery to rat hippocampal astrocytes did not alter kainate-induced seizures, while AAV9-miRNA against adenosine kinase reduced seizure duration suggesting a possible therapeutic usage (Young et al., 2014). Intravascular injection of AAV9-β-galactoside led to CNS and peripheral organ transduction. It partially reduced GM1-gangliosidosis by improving reactive astrogliosis in a rodent disease model (Weismann et al., 2015).

Since high peripheral organ transduction has been reported for AAV9 when injected intravenously, consequent studies investigating AAV9 immunogenicity in the CNS may have used intrastriatal or intrathecal routes. Immunogenic potential of AAV9 has been analyzed in comparison with AAV2. Human aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase (AADC) was injected intrastriatally using AAV2 and AAV9 vectors and their effects on immune response and antigen-presenting cell activation were tested. In addition to higher brain expression compared to AAV2, AAV9 led to immune activation over time. Glia transduced by AAV9 revealed increased MHC class II expression within few days of infusion, which was absent with exclusively neuron-transducing AAV2 (Ciesielska et al., 2013). A follow-up paper found AAV9 encoding GFP (foreign-protein) elicited a stronger immune response compared to AAV9 encoding aromatic L-AADC (self-protein) in NHPs suggesting need for syngeneic and non-functional reporter protein testing. Intriguingly, AAV2-GFP did not induce a significant immune response (Samaranch et al., 2014). When AAV9 was delivered via intrathecal and intravenous routes, there was no global immune response, but higher reporter-expressing cell nuclei lacked Nissl bodies, an indication of neurotoxicity (Schuster et al., 2015). It is possible to avoid off-target effects by including brain-cell specific promoters to restrict expression, which is discussed in detail in Section 6. Since ongoing AAV9-based Phase I clinical trials involve intravenous or intrathecal injections (Table 5), findings about AAV9 immunogenicity and peripheral expression are clinically relevant and must be taken into considerations for future trials.

5.1.2.3 Other AAV

Intrastriatal AAV1 injections resulted in preferential and higher neuronal expression than AAV2 control (Wang et al., 2003a). When AAV1 delivered galactocerebrosidase (GALC) to a twitcher mouse model of globoid cell leukodystrophy, the GALC gene was predominantly expressed in neurons and some astrocyte processes. Though oligodendrocyte precursors were effectively transduced in vitro, this was not reproduced in vivo. Leukodystrophy symptoms reduced, while increasing myelination and lifespan on GALC expression (Rafi et al., 2005).

Astrocytes in the SVZ and rostral migratory stream were transduced when AAV4 was delivered directly to the SVZ (Liu et al., 2005). In another study, AAV4 showed a higher astrocyte binding but low transduction efficiency highlighting the importance of post-binding barriers that play a key role in effective transduction. The same study also generated AAV2 and AAV6 variants by engineered peptide loop replacement that presented increased specificity and transduction efficiency in astrocytes and Muller glial of the retina (Koerber et al., 2009). Neurons and astrocytes were successfully transduced by AAV5 encoding a reporter gene driven by hSyn or CMV promoter, respectively. However, in vitro results were reproduced only for neurons in vivo (Shevtsova et al., 2005).

Adeno-associated virus serotype 6 was shown to transduce only neurons in rats and also astrocytes in NHPs with higher MHC I and II expression (San Sebastian et al., 2013). Astrocyte restricted gene expression was tested using AAV8 and AAV43 containing GFAP promoters (Lawlor et al., 2009). After being injected in sciatic nerve, AAV8 was found to be Schwann cells-tropic in mice and AAV8-CNTF delivery led to increased levels of myelin protein P0 and PMP22 indicating its therapeutic potential (Homs et al., 2011). Recently, AAV8 encoding GFAP promoter-driven achaete-scute complex homolog-like 1 converted dorsal midbrain astrocytes into functional neurons in vitro and in vivo in mice (Liu et al., 2015). Neuron and oligodendrocyte transduction has been shown with AAVrh8 (Yang et al., 2014) and AAVrh10 (Petrosyan et al., 2014; Yang et al., 2014) with an efficiency comparable to AAV9 (Miyake et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2011). Both AAVrh8 and AAVrh10 crossed the BBB when injected intravenously in mice with minimal peripheral tropism as compared to AAV9 (Yang et al., 2014). Currently, AAVrh10 is under investigation in a Phase I clinical trial (Table 5).

Few AAV serotypes have successfully transitioned into clinical trials for NDD therapy. While inclusion of cell-specific promoters restricted AAV gene expression, mechanisms responsible for intrinsic cell tropisms of AAV serotypes have not been investigated well. Some AAV receptors are known, for example, PDGF receptor has a role in AAV5 transduction (Aschauer et al., 2013). We infer that abundance of such AAV receptors on cell surface must have a key role in uptake, endocytosis and expression efficiency of AAV-mediated transduction. Yet, due to availability of alternatives and ease of manipulation, the overall focus has been on testing serotypes that present higher efficiency and intrinsic tropism for intended cellular target instead of elucidating AAV serotype transduction mechanism.

5.1.3 Lentivirus

Lentiviruses, from the retroviridae family, integrate in the host genome, unlike adenovirus and AAV. Therefore, LVs are capable of producing longer, more stable gene expression in diverse cell types (Blömer et al., 1996; Naldini et al., 1996). Lai and Brody depicted LV-mediated gene expression in neurons and astrocytes (Lai and Brady, 2002). When injected in rat dorsal funiculus, LVs transduced astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, and their progenitors in spinal cord white matter (Zhao et al., 2003). During SCI in rats, LV injected at a lesion site led to high peripheral expression in astrocytes with lower transduction of neurons, oligodendrocytes precursors, and microglia (Hendriks et al., 2007). When compared with AV and AAV, early investigations involving intrastriatal and intrahippocampal injections of LV showed comparable CNS transduction efficiency at two weeks and higher efficiency from six to twenty four weeks in mice. About 90% of the transduced cells were terminally differentiated neurons (Blömer et al., 1997) indicating intrinsic neuronal tropism. Two decades later, a conflicting report demonstrated preferential astrocyte tropism of LV compared to AAV in NHPs (An et al., 2016).

Most investigated LVs are HIV-1-derived and are pseudotyped, a process by which viral genome is packaged with glycoproteins derived from a nonpathogenic virus such as vesicular stomatitis virus-G (VSV-G). Pseudotyping is performed to increase transduction efficiency and specificity i.e. cell-specific tropism. Vectors packaged with envelope proteins of murine leukemia virus (muLV), lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV), rabies-related Mokola virus, and VSV-G transduced striatum, thalamus, and white matter in mice brains. Additionally, both VSV-G- and Mokola-LV were effective in oligodendrocytes and their precursors in vitro. In mixed neuroglial cultures, VSV-G-LV-facilitated gene expression was higher in astrocytes (Watson et al., 2002). In contrast, VSV-G-LV has been shown to preferentially transduce neurons in adult rats and embryonic mice, while glycoprotein 64-enveloped-LV mediated expression was seen in astrocytes of adult rats (Rahim et al., 2009). Also, astrocyte preference of LCMV- and muLV-pseudotyped LV was depicted post- infusion into SN (Cannon et al., 2011). On the other hand, an earlier study demonstrated VSV-G-LV-mediated exclusive neuronal or astrocyte-transduction including cell-specific promoters depicting promoter dictated restriction and not pseudotyping (Jakobsson et al., 2003).

To deliver therapeutic genes via LV, neurons were targeted by LV-CNTF in embryonic neuroglial cultures and astrocytes became activated with altered membrane distribution of highly glycosylated forms of glutamate transporter (GLAST) and glutamate transporter-1. Improved astrocyte glutamate clearance ability in these studies suggested translation potential in excitotoxicity-associated disease (Escartin et al., 2006). Lentiviral vector encoding GDNF cDNA downstream of the GFAP or CMV promoters showed similar neuroprotection indicating the GFAP promoter, which produced only 1/10 the GDNF of the CMV promoter, was enough to impart neuroprotection (Sandhu et al., 2009).

For RNAi investigations, LV has been the vector of choice. Compared to AV and AAV, more studies combined LV and RNAi. Colin and colleagues adapted a unique gene silencing approach to target astrocytes. They designed a LV construct pseudotyped with Mokola-G-LV and encoding miR124T to exclusively silence the ‘off-target’ neuronal gene expression. GLAST gene or miRNA regulating GLAST encoded downstream of miR124T in the above construct was delivered exclusively to astrocytes in vitro. Specificity of this system was shown in vivo using a LacZ reporter (Colin et al., 2009). In a follow-up paper, the LV construct described above was modified further to include an astrocyte-specific GS1 promoter, an additional sequence of miR124T and a regulatory tetracycline response element to increase specificity and add a regulatory component (Merienne et al., 2015). High complexity of this construct could limit its therapeutic applications, although certain vector modification approaches tested in this study can be utilized to improve targeted gene delivery.

Other RNAi-associated studies employed LVs to silence astrocyte marker molecules GFAP and vimentin (Desclaux et al., 2009), chondroitin polymerizing factor (CPF) and chondroitin synthase-1 (CS-1) (Tuinstra et al., 2013), as well as miR145 (Wang et al., 2015). Astrocyte intermediate filaments, GFAP and vimentin, are upregulated during inflammation adversely affecting axonal and neurite regeneration post-injury. Thus, LV-shGFAP and shVimentin delivery decreased astrogliosis, astrocyte migration in scratch assay and improved neuronal survival in co-cultures (Desclaux et al., 2009). Astrocyte-secreted chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans were activated by LV-miCPF and -miCS-1 delivery during CNS injury, which increased the neurite outgrowth in neuroglial cultures (Tuinstra et al., 2013). A negative regulator of reactive astrogliosis, miR145, delivered with LV reduced astrocyte activation, proliferation, and migration in an in vitro SCI model (Wang et al., 2015).

In contrast to adenoviruses, LV-administration did not elicit significant immune response (Blömer et al., 1996; Naldini et al., 1996). Microglial and macrophage accumulation at the injection site was attributed to injection toxicity and not LV (Zhao et al., 2003). Research later reported that prior peripheral LV immunization elicited an immune response to a subsequent CNS-injected LV only when both LVs encoded the same transgene (Abordo-Adesida et al., 2005). Since LVs are integration proficient, there’s a risk of insertional mutagenesis, and therefore integration-deficient vectors have been used as well (Lu-Nguyen et al., 2014). Recently, a first-ever LV-based Phase I PD clinical trial was completed (Table 5). The trial results are not only encouraging for its transition into Phase II and III clinical trials, but also for the promise of increased LV therapies in the future (discussed in Section 7).

5.2 Polymeric nanoparticles

Research and clinical applications of nanotechnology have increased in recent years. Formulations &lt;100 nm in at least one dimension, which may enable crossing BBB, qualify as NPs. Effects of metallic NPs containing iron (Geppert et al., 2011; Pilakka-Kanthikeel et al., 2013), silver (Luther et al., 2011) or silica (Klejbor et al., 2007) have been evaluated in brain cells, but non-metallic polymeric NPs have been predominantly studied for gene delivery (Wong et al., 2012). Types of NPs including polymeric, solid-lipid, nanoemulsion, and liposomes have been well documented in the literature along with strategies to optimize delivery and expression efficiency (Wong et al., 2012; Shah et al., 2013; Tosi et al., 2013; Kreuter, 2014). Investigations associated with CNS gene delivery have used neuronal or neural stem cell lines such as PC12 (Park et al., 2007), C17.2 (Liu et al., 2013), and Neuro2a (Malhotra et al., 2013). There are fewer studies, which utilize primary brain cells or animal models. Also, microglia and oligodendrocytes were less frequently targeted with NP-mediated gene delivery compared to neurons and astrocytes.

Cationic polyethylenimine (PEI)-DNA ‘polyplexes’ are avidly used for gene delivery (Goula et al., 1998; Rao et al., 2015). Polyamidoamines (PAMAM) and poly(lactic-co-glycolic) acid (PLGA) have also been frequently examined. The positive charge on NPs allows electrostatic interaction with a negatively charged cell membrane and exogenous DNA to improve delivery and prevent systemic degradation of plasmid DNA (pDNA) (Midoux et al., 2008). After cellular uptake, titratable amine groups on PEI and PAMAM increase chloride concentration leading to endosomal swelling and higher endosomal escape. Therefore, PEI and PAMAM have better transfection efficiencies compared to other positively charged polymers (Sonawane et al., 2003).

Gene delivery inquiries involving NPs revolve around increasing transfection efficiency and reducing NP toxicity. Complexing NP with polyethylene glycol (PEG), or PEGylation, increased transfection efficiencies, reduced toxicity, and imparted “stealth” properties (Xin et al., 2012; Rungta et al., 2013; Morris and Labhasetwar, 2015; Yurek et al., 2015). Convection-enhanced delivery also increased efficiency of NP administration (Mastorakos et al., 2015). Arginine addition enhanced the cellular uptake and delivery across the BBB (Kim et al., 2006; Morris and Labhasetwar, 2015), and tagging liposome NPs with transferrin receptor ligand facilitated transcytosis across the BBB and endocytosis into CNS cells (Shi et al., 2001).

Lipid containing substances are frequently used for CNS delivery (Rao et al., 2015). Early investigations showed liposome-mediated gene delivery, i.e. lipofection, was more efficient than calcium phosphate transfection in fetal human and rat astrocytes, and was comparable to that of modified vaccinia Ankara viral transduction in fetal spinal cord astrocytes (Ambrosini et al., 1999), and PEI in primary rat astrocytes (Rao et al., 2015). Neutrally charged, 120–150 nm liposomal NPs containing palmitic acid, vitamin A, or vitamin E preferentially transfected astrocytes close to the injection site after ICV delivery. In vitro, apolipoprotein E (ApoE) co-treatment increased uptake and transfection efficiency lipid NP derived from vitamin A and E in astrocyte-derived cells (Akita et al., 2015).

For mammalian cell transfections, PEI is considered the gold standard. But it has exhibited some toxicity (Lu et al., 2015). Therefore, polymers with lower toxicity and comparable efficiency including C2-(dimethylamino)ethyl methacrylate-based cyclized knot polymer (Newland et al., 2013), arginine-modified PEI derivative (Lu et al., 2015; Morris and Labhasetwar, 2015), heavily PEGylated PEI (Mastorakos et al., 2015), arginine-modified PAMAM (Kim et al., 2010), and PLGA (Gwak et al., 2016) are preferred. In our collaborative work, arginine-PEI-PEG polyplexes formulated with luciferase-expressing plasmid DNA transfected rat primary astrocytes and neurons in vitro and in vivo following intravenous injection (Morris and Labhasetwar, 2015).

As a PD therapy, 8–11 nm diameter PEGylated poly-l-lysine nanorods delivered the GDNF gene to rats via intracerebral injections. Neurons and glia were transfected and sustained expression for over 11 weeks (Yurek et al., 2009). Transfection efficiency was higher in denervated striatum of 6-OHDA-induced mice and old mice, highlighting their disease sensitivity and age as a factor in gene delivery (Yurek et al., 2015). A cyclized-knot polymer delivered GDNF to primary rat astrocytes and the astrocyte cell line Neu7 that led to functional effects in co-cultured dorsal root ganglion cells (Newland et al., 2013). As a PD therapy option, GFAP-promoter driven-tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) gene-loaded liposomes were delivered intrastriatally (Segovia et al., 1998) or intravenously (Zhang et al., 2004) to a 6-OHDA-induced rat model. Rotational behavior was improved in both studies, but TH expression was restricted to either astrocytes (Segovia et al., 1998) or nigrastriatal neurons (Zhang et al., 2004).

For SCI, IL-10 (Milligan et al., 2006) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) (Gwak et al., 2016) gene therapies were evaluated using PLGA NPs. Anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 could reduce gliosis during neuroinflammation due to astrocyte-specific receptor expression. Dose of IL-10 pDNA reduced significantly when delivered via NPs compared to naked pDNA to achieve similar expression (Milligan et al., 2006). Cholesterol-modified PLGA NPs efficiently transfected the VEGF gene in both neurons and astrocytes post spinal cord injection (Gwak et al., 2016).

Gene silencing strategies have been reported using polymeric NPs (Jiménez et al., 2010; Kim et al., 2010; Rungta et al., 2013). Carbosilane dendrimers successfully delivered siRNA specific to HIV-1 negative regulatory factor (Nef) to primary astrocytes and related cell lines (Jiménez et al., 2010; Serramía et al., 2015). An arginine-modified PAMAM derivative delivered high mobility group protein 1 siRNA to cultured primary mouse cortical cells and led to a reduction in infarct volume in rat brains post-ischemia (Kim et al., 2006). Rungta and coworkers synthesized distearoylphosphatidylcholine/cholesterol/PEG-DMG containing lipid NPs to deliver siRNA targeting the neuronal GluN1 subunit of the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor, reducing NMDA-based currents, but not α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid-induced currents (Rungta et al., 2013). These NPs could be used to treat neurons, while co-delivering an astrocyte-specific gene.

Polymeric NPs are non-metallic and non-pathogenic. Their synthesis process can be better controlled than producing viral vectors in bulk. They can be optimized to increase transfection efficiency and BBB penetrability. Currently, PLGA is approved by the food and drug administration for therapeutic use indicating polymeric NPs are better accepted as delivery vehicles than viral vectors.

6. CNS-targeted gene delivery using cell-specific promoters

Low BBB permeability and brain structure complexity have already been discussed as major challenges in designing a delivery system for any neural cell type. In theory, cell-specific promoters could be used to target gene delivery to particular cells. Well-known cell-specific markers are neuron-specific enolase (NSE) for neurons, GFAP for astrocytes, F4/80 for microglia, and MBP for oligodendrocytes; which in turn represent the widely used methodology of restricting exogenous gene expression to specific cell types.

As discussed earlier in the review, neurons and astrocytes are targeted more frequently than microglia and oligodendrocytes. Targeting a precise neuronal subtype is essential during NDD treatment since that subtype often expresses genes linked to a disease; for instance, dopaminergic neurons express TH gene in PD. Yet few neuron-focused papers discuss gene vector design to improve expression specificity. Our observations suggest that neuronal targeting has been a tacit approach for numerous CNS gene delivery studies and implications of off-target gene expression in astrocytes or oligodendrocytes were not discussed. Nevertheless, NSE, hSyn, and PDGF are the frequently reported neuron-specific promoters.

When NSE and PDGF promoter-driven GFP encoding AAV2 were injected into the mid-cervical region of rat spinal cords, exclusive neuronal expression was obtained with at 15 and 45 weeks post-injection (Peel et al., 1997). Later studies reported that inclusion of NSE promoter achieved relatively precise but not exclusive neuronal expression (Navarro et al., 1999; Kügler et al., 2003). Among uncommon promoters, LV encoding a 1.6 kb segment of ‘homeobox 9’ promoter was used for motor neuron targeting in mice spinal cord (Peviani et al., 2012). Also, Thy1.2 and α-CAMKII promoter were shown to be specific for pyramidal neurons (Dittgen et al., 2004). An AV, encoding multiple copies of a cis-regulatory element of human dopaminergic β-hydroxylase promoter, selectively transduced noradrenergic neurons (Hwang et al., 2001).

Macrophage-specific promoter sequences, such as human CD11b, CD68, and murine F4/80, were evaluated for in vitro and in vivo microglial targeting employing AAV constructs. Murine F4/80 offered the highest expression efficiency and restriction in SD rats (Cucchiarini et al., 2003). Oligodendrocytes and Schwann cells in the CNS abundantly express MBP. An AAV2 vector encoding a MBP promoter precisely targeted oligodendrocytes in vitro and in vivo, in rat cells and mice, respectively (Chen et al., 1998). Inclusion of the MBP promoter in LV-GFP also led to exclusive oligodendrocytes expression (McIver et al., 2005).

Contrary to neurons, astrocyte-targeted studies have focused on one promoter, i.e. GFAP, and modified it to reduce size and increase efficiency (Brenner et al., 1994; Lee et al., 2008; Meng et al., 2015). Aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 L1 and GLAST/EAAT1 are other astrocyte-specific markers, but the GFAP promoter remains the ‘promoter of choice’ in gene delivery approaches (Regan et al., 2007; Lee et al., 2008; Adam et al., 2012). Brenner and colleagues identified an essential 2.1 kb promoter segment (gfa2), in the 5′ region of GFAP promoter capable of driving gene expression (Brenner et al., 1994). It has been utilized to restrict gene expression (Shi et al., 2001; Furman et al., 2012), in transgenic models (Kim et al., 2003), and to study astrocyte function (Nolte et al., 2001; Kim et al., 2003; Giralt et al., 2010). This promoter has also been used with viral vectors (von Jonquieres et al., 2013) and NPs (Shi et al., 2001). In spite of the widespread acceptance for gfa2, some reports have debated over the promoter specificity. An early report documented that using only 5′ flanking promoter sequence produced tissue restricted expression while both 5′ and 3′ flanking sequences were essential for cell-specific expression (Galou et al., 1994). In agreement with the findings, GFAP-driven TH was expressed exclusively in nigrastriatal neurons and not in astrocytes (Zhang et al., 2004).

Immunogenicity is a major problem with viral vectors, especially AVs. Gerdes and colleagues showed that using a strong promoter like major immediate early murine CMV reduced vector dose and immunogenicity (Gerdes et al., 2000). However, this approach is not suitable for cell-specific targeting. On the other hand, gfa2 promoter has been considered a weak promoter that resulted in lower expression (Benvenisti-Zarom and Regan, 2007) and its efficiency changed with age in vivo (von Jonquieres et al., 2013). Thus, gfa2 has been modified over a decade to improve transgene expression. Recently, a shorter, 1740 kb gfa2 promoter driven AAV-GFP was delivered to cortical astrocytes (Meng et al., 2015). Stronger promoter sequences, such as CMV and/or inverted terminal repeat sequences were appended upstream of the gfa2 promoter to increase expression. These modifications led to higher expression as compared to CMV promoter in vitro and in vivo, when injected intrastriatally (Wang and Wang, 2006). Brenner laboratory followed up their original work on gfa2 promoter by concluding that a 681 kb segment of the GFAP promoter, gfaBC1D, is optimal to obtain promoter-driven gene expression. They suggested that gfaBC1D enhanced the expression efficiency due to its smaller size (Lee et al., 2008). Since then, GfaBC1D was used to drive expression of the pleckstrin homology domain of phospholipase C-like protein p130 using AAV2/5 (Xie et al., 2010). Other astrocyte-specific promoters; aldehyde dehydrogenase 1L1, which is active in all mature astrocytes with broader expression pattern and GLAST/EAAT1; have been utilized to a lesser extent (Regan et al., 2007; Barres, 2008)

In addition to promoters, certain cellular receptors could be used for targeting. For instance, the rabies virus enters neurons via nicotinic acetylcholine receptor and a bacterial protein, namely tetanus toxin, binds with neurons through the triasialoganglioside receptor, GT1b (Kwon et al., 2010). Hence rabies virus glycoprotein or tetanus toxin could thus be tagged to exogenous DNA-vector complex to improve endocytosis. Additionally, a 12 amino acid peptide, Tet-1, has been identified and has been successfully used to target neurons (Kwon et al., 2010). Similarly, DNA-vehicle complex was tagged with neurotensin and NGF fragments for neuron-specific delivery (Rogers and Rush, 2012).

Another way to increase cell-targeting specificity is by including elements that respond to a biomarker characteristic of the neuropathology. This concept was utilized by flanking hypoxia response element with the VEGF gene sequence as a therapy for focal ischemia. Since hypoxia-inducible factor-1 binds to hypoxia response element, VEGF expression was enhanced during stroke (Shen et al., 2008). Uptake and transfection efficiency of lipid NP uptake and transfection efficiency increased in the presence of ApoE suggesting that it could be utilized for astrocyte targeting (Akita et al., 2015).

The perpetual process of designing and optimizing CNS-directed gene delivery system has remained a translational research priority. Though literature agrees on inclusion of a cell-specific promoter, standard constructs for each cell type have not been established. Going forward, comprehensive efforts must be directed toward delivery system design to enable BBB permeability, cell-specific targeting, and increasing expression of weak promoters.

7. Bench to bedside translation

One of the major highlights in gene delivery research has been its transition into clinical trials. Several viral vectors are currently being investigated in Phase I/II clinical trials (Table 5) for treatment of NDDs including AD, PD, and lysosomal storage disorders. Phase I clinical trial for AD treatment involved stereotactic injections of AAV2-NGF to the basal forebrain region of containing the nucleus basalis of Meynert. The study was conducted in ten patients with three different doses of AAV2-NGF to determine the highest safe dose for a Phase II study. Patients were monitored for over two years to ascertain treatment safety. All patients survived the procedure with few adverse events reported. AAV2-NGF therapy was evaluated to be safe and well tolerated (Rafii et al., 2014). Currently, a multicenter Phase II study evaluating the treatment efficacy is underway.

Several clinical trials have been completed or being carried out for PD treatment administering genes associated with either enzymes involved in dopamine synthesis, such as AADC, or neurotrophic factors, such as neurturin (NTRN) and GDNF. Most of these studies have successfully completed Phase I trials and have proven safety (Kaplitt et al., 2007; Bartus et al., 2014). Phase II clinical trials evaluating efficacy are currently ongoing and have shown mixed results thus far. AAV-glutamate decarboxylase trial has been terminated due to financial constraints despite improvements observed during Phase II (LeWitt et al., 2011). On the other hand, AAV-NTRN Phase II study results promised long-term safety but conclusive results on efficacy were not obtained (Kordover and Bjorklund, 2013). Additionally, results from first-ever clinical trial employing a LV have been reported. It involved stereotactic injections of a tri-cistronic vector expressing genes for TH, AADC, and cyclohydrolase-1 with the intention of stimulating non-dopaminergic, striatal neurons to secrete dopamine, replenishing levels. Motor improvements and long-term tolerability four years post-injection was established (Palfi et al., 2014). Currently, methods to increase effectiveness of this therapy are being investigated.

In vitro and preclinical investigations conducted so far have reported that presence of preexisting NAbs could be responsible for varied gene delivery efficiencies and immune responses between rodent models, NHPs, and humans. A study conducted with over 200 human serum samples indicated presence of AAV-NAbs in 40% to 70% samples for various AAV subtypes. In a preclinical study, presence of pre-existing NAbs reduced AAV9 transduction efficiency in NHPs (Gray et al., 2011). Consistent with these findings, completed clinical trials discussed above have also reported presence of AAV antibodies or VSV-G antibodies for AAV- and LV- associated trials, respectively. While none of the published data report adverse events or immune responses; it must be noted that the primary endpoint of Phase I trials is safety and are conducted with small (&lt;100) patient cohorts. It will be important to evaluate if presence of NAbs will reduce efficacy in larger patient cohorts. According to Palfi et al. the presence of NAbs should not interfere with LV transduction efficacy since NAbs were detected in some patients three months post-gene delivery; and thus, LVs would be integrated by the time NAbs appear (Palfi et al., 2014).

An ongoing clinical trial involves intravenous injections of an AAV9 encoding survival motor neuron gene to six to nine month old infants diagnosed with spinal muscular atrophy. The study involves monthly monitoring until death or continuous respiratory support for over 16 hours. The final results of the study are not available; however, preliminary data presented at scientific conferences and provided on the trial sponsor’s website indicates safety and some motor function improvements (AveXis, 2016).

NPs are another major system being evaluated as gene delivery vehicles. Special characteristics of NPs must be considered before transitioning to preclinical or clinical trials. NPs have higher surface area resulting in higher toxicity in vitro compared to in vivo studies, leading to inconsistent results, a concept known as ‘nanomaterial paradox’ (Joris et al., 2013). NPs that are toxic at low doses in vitro could be delivered at relatively higher dose in vivo without toxicity. Therefore, it is essential to perform in vivo experiments with NPs, even if in vitro findings indicate toxicity. Currently, no ongoing or completed clinical trials have used polymeric NPs for NDDs. It must be noted that polymeric NPs are being used in cancer drug delivery studies and can soon be expected to transition into clinical trials for gene delivery based on the translational data available in literature (Jensen et al., 2013; Guerrero-Cázares et al., 2014; Mangraviti et al., 2015). All gene delivery systems require careful and comprehensive analyses for route, dose, and frequency of administration, in addition to immunological profiling of the animal models to improve the transition from in vitro to in vivo and further into clinical trials.

8. Conclusions and future prospects

In this review, we appraised key elements of the ever-growing field of CNS-targeted gene delivery focusing on the past two decades. Challenges encountered in therapeutic strategies targeting the brain, such as low BBB permeability and brain structure complexity were carefully analyzed, specifically in the context of gene delivery. Furthermore, we critically evaluated functional aspects of principal CNS cell types implicated in NDD pathogenesis. Taken together, we infer that targeting neurons and astrocytes will have significantly broader implications in the context of CNS gene delivery, than microglia and oligodendrocytes. Ultimately, astrocytes will emerge as the most appealing therapeutic targets as compared to terminally differentiated neurons, with their complex structure and fastidious synaptic transmission. We thus anticipate robust development of astrocyte-focused delivery systems in the near future.

Of all the delivery systems investigated thus far, there are pros and cons to each, and clearly, the quest for an ideal gene delivery system continues. Among the viral gene delivery approaches, higher immunogenicity limits the application of AVs despite their better transduction efficiency compared to other viral vectors; AAVs have an edge over other approaches with their successful progression into clinical trials and consistent results over the years; whereas LVs require further comprehensive investigations for clinical translation. A parallel line of investigation comprises of concurrent development of polymeric NPs to successfully tackle the BBB and target specific CNS cell types. The non-viral nature of NPs renders these formulations far more amenable for acceptance by the general population. All together, the sheer diversity of viral vectors and NPs ensures that suitable vehicles for CNS cellular targets will soon be available despite issues such as varying gene expression efficiency, distinct cell tropisms and immunogenicity. Considering these significant challenges and caveats encountered, NDD gene therapy has made impressive strides. Fig. 2 summarizes the milestones of this exciting journey over the past two decades.

The litmus test for any therapeutic strategy is its success in the bench to bedside translation. In this regard, we have included viral vector- and NP-associated clinical trials for NDDs in our review (Table 5) (Health, 2016). However, the enigma of the brain as the ultimate challenge is reflected in the clinical trial numbers as well. In 2012, only 2% of the clinical trials were associated with NDDs as compared to 64.4% for cancer, 10% for monogenic disease and 7.5% for cardiovascular diseases (Ginn et al., 2013). Without a doubt, safety of gene therapy for NDDs is well established given the results of multiple successful Phase I clinical trials. However, based on the literature available thus far, no studies have provided conclusive data substantiating improved efficacy of gene therapy over current treatments. Thus, although gene therapy has shown long-term safety, transitions into Phase II to evaluate efficacy and fine-tuning the route, dose and frequency of administration will be critical.

The majority of the gene therapy investigations thus far have focused on validating the concept of gene delivery in attempts to overcome diverse multifactorial challenges. Consistent with this notion, most clinical trials that spearheaded these investigations employed classically known disease biomarker genes for first line investigations. One notable example would be clinical trial testing of L-AADC, which converts L-DOPA to dopamine, as a therapy for PD (Eberling et al., 2008). Going forward, emerging trends both in discovery of novel biomarkers and early diagnostic techniques, will pave the way for the next generation gene therapy approaches.

While significant research and resources have been invested in the last few decades establishing the basics of gene augmentation and silencing, these specific modalities may soon become obsolete with development of genome editing technology. Regardless, key challenges facing successful delivery of these technologies to the brain will remain the same, and past lessons learnt will thus help guide strategies for successful translation of novel gene editing techniques, such as CRISPR-Cas9, to the clinic.

The overall progress in gene delivery approaches promotes a brighter future for NDD management and a strong potential for the development of effective, personalized gene therapy. In conclusion, gene therapy has come of age with bits of both successes and failures thus far, yet, the lessons from past and current research promise that cell- and disease-specific, safe and effective CNS gene delivery will be a reality in the not too distant future.

The authors would like to acknowledge Ms. Kathleen Borgmann for her help with critical reading and scientific writing of the manuscript, tables, and figures. Ms. Lenore Price and Mr. Timothy Van Treuren proofread the manuscript. Dr. Irma Cisneros and Dr. Richa Pandey helped in making figures. The authors also thank all other members of Ghorpade laboratory at UNT Health Science Center and Labhasetwar laboratory at Cleveland Clinic for their help during the writing of the manuscript. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) awards R01 NS048837 to AG and R01 NS070896 to VL supported the presented work.

Abbreviations

6-OHDA 6-hydroxydopamine

Aβ Amyloid-β

AADC Amino acid decarboxylase

AAV Adeno-associated virus

AD Alzheimer’s disease

ALS Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis

ApoE Apolipoprotein E

AQP Aquaporin

AV Adenoviral vector

BBB Blood-brain barrier

Bcl-w B-cell lymphoma-w

BDNF Brain-derived neurotrophic factor

BMVEC Brain microvascular endothelial cell

Cas9 CRISPR-associated system 9

CMV Cytomegalovirus

CNS Central nervous system

CNTF Ciliary neurotrophic factor

CPF Chondroitin polymerizing factor

CRISPR Clustered regulatory interspaced short palindromic repeats

CS-1 Chondroitin synthase-1

EAAT Excitatory amino acid transporter

EPO Erythropoietin

GALC Galactocerebrosidase

GDNF Glial cell-derived neurotrophic factor

GFAP Glial fibrillary acidic protein

gfa2 GFAP essential promoter segment

GFP Green fluorescent protein

GLAST Glutamate transporter

GS Glutamine synthase

h Human

HAND HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders

HD Huntington’s disease

HIV Human immunodeficiency virus

htt Huntingtin

ICV Intracerebroventricular

IGF Insulin-like growth factor

IL Interleukin

kb Kilobase

LCMV Lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus

LV Lentiviral vector

MBP Myelin basic protein

MS Multiple sclerosis

MCAO Middle cerebral artery occlusion

MHC Major histocompatibility complex

miRNA/miR/mi microRNA

muLV Murine leukemia virus

NAb Neutralizing antibody

NDDs Neurological disease and disorders

Nef Negative regulatory factor

NGF Nerve growth factor

NHP Non-human primate

NMDA N-methyl-D-aspartate

NP Nanoparticle

NSE Neuron-specific enolase

NTRN neurturin

PAMAM Polyamidoamine

PD Parkinson’s disease

pDNA Plasmid DNA

PDGF Platelet-derived growth factor

PEG Polyethylene glycol

PEI Polyethylenimine

PLGA Poly(lactic-co-glycolic) acid

RNAi RNA interference

scAAV Self-complementary AAV

ssAAV Single-stranded AAV

SCI Spinal cord injury

SD Sprague-Dawley

shRNA Short hairpin RNA

siRNA Small interfering RNA

SN Substantia nigra

SVZ Subventricular zone

Syn Synapsin

TH Tyrosine hydroxylase

TNF Tumor necrosis factor

VEGF Vascular endothelial growth factor

VSV-G Vesicular stomatitis virus-G

Fig. 1 Common cellular mechanisms implicated in neurological diseases and disorders (NDDs)

NDDs are associated with cellular dysfunctions of principal CNS cells including neurons, microglia, oligodendrocytes, and astrocytes. Neuronal damage includes dendritic and axonal loss, and reduced neurotrophin secretion. Microglial activation occurs during brain injury and resultant proinflammatory cytokines induce neuroinflammation along with microgliosis due to extravasation of peripheral monocytes. Oligodendrocyte dysfunctions include demyelination and oligodendropathy, i.e. death of oligodendrocytes. During injury, astrocytes contribute to excitotoxicity, and neuroinflammation by reduced glutamate uptake and increased release of proinflammatory cytokines, respectively. They likely undergo oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, calcium dysregulation, attenuated neurotrophin production and astrogliosis. Additionally, altered BBB permeability can increase neuroinflammation and contribute to disease. These mechanisms precede or succeed neurodegeneration and overlap in diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease (AD) [A1(Uylings and De Brabander, 2002), A2 (Wake et al., 2013), A3 (Wyss-Coray and Rogers, 2012), A4 (Alberdi et al., 2013), A5 (Fuller et al., 2009), A6 (Allen and Barres, 2009)], Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) [B1 (Evans et al., 2013), B2 (Manfredi and Xu, 2005), B3 (Grosskreutz et al., 2010)], HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders (HAND) [C1 (Lu et al., 2011), C2 (Cisneros and Ghorpade, 2012), C3 (Persidsky et al., 2000), C4 (Steiner et al., 2006), C5 (Vartak-Sharma et al., 2014)], Huntington’s disease (HD) [D1 (Wang et al., 2013), D2 (Giralt et al., 2010), D3 (Fan and Raymond, 2007)], Multiple Sclerosis (MS) [E1 (Franklin and Kotter, 2008), E2 (Popescu and Lucchinetti, 2012)], Parkinson’s disease (PD) [F1 (Van Spronsen and Hoogenraad, 2010), F2 (Hu et al., 2008), F3 (Zinger et al., 2011), F4 (Niranjan, 2014), F5 (Drinkut et al., 2012), F6 (Ambrosi et al., 2014)], and stroke [G1 (Ceulemans et al., 2010), G2 (Xia et al., 2004), G3 (Lai et al., 2014)].

Fig. 2 Milestones and breakthroughs in gene delivery over two decades

Significant progress was made in the last twenty years of gene therapy research. Considering the time taken by any therapy to transition from bench to bedside, we can expect additional clinical gene therapy applications in the coming years with the help of cutting-edge technology.

Table 1 Adenoviral vectors for brain-targeted gene delivery

Gene	Disease/Mechanism	Transduced Cell Types	In Vitro Cell Source	In Vivo	Result	Reference	
Adrenomedullin	Stroke/ischemia	Neurons, Astrocytes	Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats	Middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) in SD rats	In vitro: reduced apoptosis, increased migration, nitric oxide (NO), B-cell lymphoma (Bcl)-2 levels, and Akt, GSK-3β phosphorylation; In vivo: decreased infarct size and astrocyte migration to ischemic core	(Xia et al., 2004)	
	
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF)	Huntington’s disease (HD)	Astrocytes		R6/2 mice	Sustained expression, improved behavior, induced astrocyte motor phenotype	(Arregui et al., 2011)	
BDNF	HD	Not specified (N/S)	SD rats	Quinolinic acid (QA)-induced SD rats	Improved protection of striatal neurons	(Bemelmans et al., 1999)	
	
Ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF)	Astrogliosis	Neurons, Astrocytes	Chicken embryo neural cells	SD rats	Hypertrophied astrocytes expressing gene for over 5 weeks	(Lisovoski et al., 1997)	
CNTF, Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF)	Stroke/Ischemia	Astrocytes		B6 mice	Prior intrastriatal delivery increased viable neurons post-ischemia, Reduced injured cells and DNA fragmentation, GDNF-induced effects better than CNTF	(Hermann et al., 2001a)	
	
Genetically encoded, fluorescent calcium indicator protein (G-CaMP2)		Astrocytes		Mice type N/S	Calcium signaling recorded in Bergmann glia and protoplasmic astrocyte	(Kuhn et al., 2011)	
GDNF	Focal cortical trauma	Astrocytes		Cold injured SD rats	Reduced lesions attributed to reduced inducible nitric oxide synthase, caspase 3, and DNA fragmentation	(Hermann et al., 2001b)	
GDNF	Parkinson’s disease (PD)	Astrocytes	SD rats	6-hydroxydopamine (OHDA)-treated SD rats	Improved nigral dopamine (DA) neuron survival and behavior	(Do Thi et al., 2004)	
Heme oxygenase-1	Oxidative injury	Astrocytes	BALB/c x 129/Sv mice		Reduced cell death post Hemin exposure	(Benvenisti-Zarom and Regan, 2007)	
Insulin-like growth factor-1	Glial inflammation	Astrocytes	Caesarean derived (CD)-1 mice		Reduced toll-like receptor 4 expression, reduced NF-κB translocation	(Bellini et al., 2011)	
LacZ		Neurons, Astrocytes, Microglia		SD rats	Astrocytes and other cells expressed reporter	(Liu et al., 1997)	
LacZ	Spinal cord injury (SCI)	Neurons, Astrocytes		Rats type N/S	Dorsal side astrocytes and ventral side neurons transduced, temperature-sensitive vector-mediated expression remained longer than controls	(Romero and Smith, 1998)	
LacZ		Neurons, Astrocytes		SD rats	High-capacity vector maintained gene expression over 6 months, prevented immune cells infiltration in the brain post-peripheral injection	(Thomas et al., 2000)	
Secretory leukocyte protease inhibitor	Focal stroke	Neurons, Astrocytes		MCAO-in Hypertensive rats, SD rats	Reduced ischemic lesion size with neuroglial gene expression peak after 2 days	(Wang et al., 2003b)	

Table 2 Adeno-associated viral vectors for brain-targeted gene delivery

Type	Gene	Disease/Mechanism	Transduced Cell Types	In Vitro Cell Source	In Vivo	Result	Reference	
AAV1	Galactocerebrosidase (GALC)		Neurons, Astrocytes, Oligodendrocytes	Humans, mice	Twitcher (Twi) mice	Stable expression in vivo, improved myelination, symptom reduction, and increased life span	(Rafi et al., 2005)	
AAV1
AAV2	Green fluorescent protein (GFP)	Neurodegenerative diseases and disorders (NDDs)	Neurons, Astrocytes, Oligodendrocytes, Microglia		C3H/HeJ mice	AAV1 transduced multiple cell types, higher efficiency and better distribution than AAV2	(Wang et al., 2003a)	
AAV1
AAV2
AAV8	CNTF	Myelin disorders	Sensory neurons, Schwann cells		CD-1 mice	AAV8: preferential Schwann cells transduction, lower immunogenicity, increased myelin and neuronal proteins associated with axonal regeneration	(Homs et al., 2011)	
AAV1
AAV5
AAV9
AAVrh10	GFP	SCI	Neurons, Astrocytes
Oligodendrocytes		SD rats	AAVrh10: Neuronal transduction efficiency was similar to other vectors but also transduced other cell types	(Petrosyan et al., 2014)	
AAV1
AAV8
AAV9	GFP		Neurons, Astrocytes, Purkinje Cells		B6 mice	AAV9 most effective and sustained global expression for 18 months	(Miyake et al., 2011)	
AAV2	B-cell lymphoma 2-like 2 (a.k.a. Bcl-w)	Cerebral ischemia	Neurons, Astrocytes, Ependymal Cells		MCAO in SD rats	Global expression, infarct size reduction, improved neurological function	(Sun et al., 2003)	
GFP		Neurons, Microglia		SD rats	Neuronal expression 3 days post-infusion	(Bartlett et al., 1998)	
GFP		Neurons, Astrocytes	N/S	Wistar rats	Human synapsin promoter: neuronal expression in vitro, in vivo Cytomegalovirus promoter: glial expression in vitro, thalamic neurons in vivo	(Kügler et al., 2003)	
GFP		Neurons, Astrocytes		Cynomolgus monkeys	Neuronal expression and astrocyte activation	(An et al., 2016)	
GFP		Oligodendrocytes	Rats type N/S	B6 mice	Expression in white matter in vivo, oligodendrocytes in vitro due to inclusion of myelin basic protein promoter	(Chen et al., 1998)	
AAV2
AAV5	GFP, Luc	NDDs	Neurons, Astrocytes		Kainate-treated SD rats	Kainate-induction reduced transduction efficiency; AAV5 better than AAV2; AAV5 glial transduction in seizured brains	(Weinberg et al., 2011)	
LacZ		Neurons, Astrocytes	Wistar rats	Gerbils	In vitro: AAV2 neuronal tropism, AAV5 astrocyte tropism; In vivo: higher AAV5-mediated hippocampal expression	(Nomoto et al., 2003)	
LacZ, Red fluorescent protein (RFP)	NDDs	Microglia	Wistar rats	SD rats	F4/80 promoter provided the best specificity compared to CD11b, CD68 promoters	(Cucchiarini et al., 2003)	
AAV2, AAV6	GFP		Astrocytes, Muller cells	Humans, rats	Fischer 344 rats	Higher efficiency in vitro, astrocyte, muller glia transduction ability in vivo of AAV variants generated by loop replacement	(Koerber et al., 2009)	
GFP		Astrocytes		Human retinas, Crb1−/− mice	Astrocyte-expression with glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) promoter	(Aartsen et al., 2010)	
AAV2
AAV9	GFP, L-amino acid decarboxylase		Astrocytes		SD rats, Cynomolgus monkeys	AAV2, but not AAV9, mediated protein expression without immune response	(Ciesielska et al., 2013; Samaranch et al., 2014)	
AAV4	GFP, LacZ		Astrocytes, Neuronal progenitor cells		C57/BL6 mice	Expression in ependymal cells, astrocytes of subventricular zone, rostral migratory stream	(Liu et al., 2005)	
AAV5	GDNF	PD	Astrocytes		MPTP-induced B6 mice, 6-OHDA-treated Wistar rats	Expression specific to the injected hemisphere, no off-target effects; same efficacy as neuron-derived GDNF; increased DA synthesis, behavioral improvement	(Drinkut et al., 2012)	
VIVIT, a peptide that interferes with the calcineurin/nuclear factor of activated T-cells (NFAT) signaling pathway	Alzheimer’s disease (AD)	Astrocytes		Amyloid precursor protein/presenilin-1 mice	Reduced glial activation, amyloid levels, improved cognitive and synaptic function	(Furman et al., 2012)	
AAV8
AAVcy5
AAVrh20
AAVrh39
AAVrh43	GFP		Neurons, Astrocytes, Oligodendrocytes		SD rats	Preferential astrocyte and oligodendrocyte transduction with AAV8 and AAVrh43 using cell-specific promoters	(Lawlor et al., 2009)	
AAV8, AAV9	GFP, mCherry		Neurons, Astrocytes		B6 mice	AAV8 astrocyte tropism and AAV9 neuronal tropism; single complementary (sc) AAV better than single strand (ss) AAV	(Aschauer et al., 2013)	
AAV9	Erythropoietin (EPO)	PD	Neurons, Astrocytes		6-OHDA treated SD rats	Prior intramuscular injection reduced intrastriatal transduction efficiency due to circulating antibodies to AAV and EPO	(Yang et al., 2013)	
GFP	Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis	Neurons, Astrocytes		B6 mice	Crosses blood-brain barrier, neonatal mice: neuronal tropism, adult mice: astrocyte tropism	(Foust et al., 2009)	
GFP	Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA)	Motor neurons, Astrocytes		Survival motor neurons Δ7 and B6 mice	Intramuscular injection transduced spinal cord motor neurons, astrocytes; increased median lifespan	(Benkhelifa-Ziyyat et al., 2013)	
GFP	SMA	Neurons, Astrocytes, Oligodendrocytes		Cynomolgus monkeys	Global CNS expression at different ages; selective CNS expression by cerebrospinal fluid delivery	(Bevan et al., 2011)	
GFP		Neurons, Astrocytes		BALB/C mice, Rhesus macaques	Higher neuronal expression in rodent, higher glial expression in NHPs, scAAV efficient than ssAAV	(Gray et al., 2011)	
GFP		Neurons, Astrocytes		MF1 mice	Neuronal tropism in fetal mice, astrocyte tropism in neonatal mice; ssAAV efficient than scAAV	(Rahim et al., 2011)	
GFP		Neurons, Astrocytes		B6 mice	Neonatal mice: astrocyte tropism; young mice: neuronal tropism	(Gholizadeh et al., 2013)	
GFP		Neurons, Astrocytes		B6 mice	Intrathecal delivery efficient than intravenous delivery	(Schuster et al., 2015)	
GFP		Neurons, Astrocytes		SD rats, farm mice	Dose-dependent increase in global transduction, no astrogliosis	(Donsante et al., 2016)	
Glutamine synthetase, excitatory amino acid transporter, micro RNA targeting adenosine kinase (miADK)	Temporal lobe epilepsy	Astrocytes		Kainate-treated SD rats	miADK reduced seizure duration	(Young et al., 2014)	
β-galactosidase	GM1-gangliosidosis	N/S		GM1 mice	Reduced astrogliosis, improved behavior and median survival, moderate CNS expression	(Weismann et al., 2015)	
AAV9
AAVrh10	GFP		Neurons, Astrocytes		B6 mice	Efficient transduction without inflammatory response	(Zhang et al., 2011)	
AAVrh8
AAVhu32
AAVhu37
AAVpi2A
AVhu48R3	GFP		Neurons, Astrocytes, Oligodendrocytes		C3H/HeOuJ mice	Neuronal transduction by all serotypes, astrocyte and oligodendrocyte transduction by certain serotypes	(Cearley et al., 2008)	

Table 3 Lentiviral vectors for brain-targeted gene delivery

Gene	Disease/Mechanism	Transduced Cell Types	In Vitro Cell Source	In Vivo	Result	Reference	
CNTF	Excitotoxicity	Neurons	SD rats	Quinolinic acid (QA)-induced Lewis rats	Hypertrophied astrocytes with increased glutamate aspartate transporter (GLAST) and glutamate transporter-1 (GLT-1) expression, improved glutamate handling	(Escartin et al., 2006)	
GDNF	NDDs	Neurons, Astrocytes	Mouse N2a neural cells, ventral mesencep halon cells		Gene expression for 3+ weeks, neuroprotection from 6-OHDA insult mediated by GDNF and glutathione together	(Sandhu et al., 2009)	
GDNF	PD	Astrocytes		6-OHDA treated SD rats	Efficient, sustained expression, improved DA neuronal survival, improved behavior	(Lu-Nguyen et al., 2014)	
GFP	PD	Neurons, Astrocytes		Lewis rats	Astrocyte tropism by lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV)- and Moloney murine leukemia virus (muLV)-enveloped	(Cannon et al., 2011)	
GFP	Neural scar formation	Neurons, Astrocytes, Oligodendrocytes precursors, Microglia	Wistar rats	Wistar rats	In vitro astrocyte and meningeal cells transduction, lack of transduction at injury/injection site in vivo with peripheral transduction of several cell types except meningeal cells	(Hendriks et al., 2007)	
GFP		Neurons, Astrocytes		B6 mice	Astrocytes transduced with neuron promoter	(Lai and Brady, 2002)	
GFP		Neurons, Astrocytes		SD rats	Vesicular stomatitis virus glycoprotein (VSV-G)-pseudotyped vector transduces glia and neurons, promoter-dependent selectivity	(Jakobsson et al., 2003)	
GFP		Neurons, Astrocytes		SD rats, MF1 mice	Astrocyte tropism by gp64-enveloped	(Rahim et al., 2009)	
GFP		Neurons, Astrocytes		Cynomolgus monkeys	Higher astrocyte transduction without activation over AAV2	(An et al., 2016)	
LacZ	Demyelination	Astrocytes, Oligodendrocytes, Oligodendrocyte progenitors		SD rats	Expressed in glial cells of spinal cord white matter, microglia and macrophages at injection site	(Zhao et al., 2003)	
LacZ		Neurons, Astrocytes, Microglia	SD rats	C3H mice	Different brain regions transduced by muLV, LCMV, Mokola virus, VSV-G enveloped, lack of transduction with Ebola virus enveloped	(Watson et al., 2002)	
LacZ		Neurons		Fisher rats	Neurons ~90% of transduced cells at the injection site	(Blömer et al., 1997)	
miR124, shRNA GLAST, dsRednuc, mCherry		Astrocytes		BAC-GLT1-eGFP, BAC-GLAST-DsRed, B6 mice	Neuron-specific silencing, used other miRNAs; astrocyte-specific promoters and tetracycline-inducible systems for astrocyte-targeting and regulation	(Merienne et al., 2015)	
miR124T, GLAST, LacZ		Neurons, Astrocytes	SD rats	B6 mice	miR124T blocked neuronal expression and reporter expressed in astrocytes	(Colin et al., 2009)	
miRNA chondroitin polymerizing factor or chondroitin synthase-1		Astrocytes	Neu7 rats, chicken embryo dorsal root ganglia		Reduced chondroitin sulphate proteoglycans and neurite outgrowth inhibition	(Tuinstra et al., 2013)	
Neurotro phin-3, BDNF	SCI	Astrocytes, Schwann cells		Long-Evans rats	Transduced multiple cell types, increased axonal growth and myelination	(Tuinstra et al., 2012)	
Small hairpin RNA (shRNA) GFAP, vimentin	SCI	Astrocytes	B6 mice neuroglia		Reduced glial scarring, improved neuronal survival; axonal growth increased or not affected by shGFAP	(Desclaux et al., 2009)	

Table 4 Polymeric nanoparticles targeting different cell types in central nervous system

Polymeric Nanoparticle	Gene	Disease/Mechanism	Transfected Cell Types	In Vitro Cell Source	In Vivo	Result	Reference	
Arg-polyamidoamine (PAMAM) dendrimer	Green fluorescent protein (GFP), luciferase (Luc), small interfering RNA (siRNA) (High mobility group box 1 protein, HMGB1)		Neurons, Astrocytes, Oligodendrocytes, Microglia	Mice		Lower toxicity compared to polylactic acid or lipofectamine, transfected multiple cell types	(Kim et al., 2006)	
		
	siRNA (HMGB1)	Stroke/ischemia	Neurons, Astrocytes	Mouse neuroglial cells	Sprague -Dawley (SD) rats	In vitro: siHMGB1 reduced H2O2-and N-methyl-D-aspartate-induced apoptosis; In vivo: decreased infarct volume	(Kim et al., 2010)	
	
Carbosilane dendrimers	siRNA (HIV-1 p24 and Nef)	HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders	Astrocytes	Humans, U87 glioma		Sustained siRNA release, transcytosis across blood brain barrier in vitro, lower viral replication	(Jiménez et al., 2010)	
	
DMAP-BLP:DSPC: cholesterol: PEG-DMG [3-(dimethylam ino)propyl (12Z,15Z)-3-[(9Z,12Z)-octadeca-9,12-dien-1-yl] henicosa-12,15-dienoate distearoylph osphatidylcholine: cholesterol: polyethylene glycol-(1,2-dimyristoyl-sn-glycerol)]	siRNA (glutamate receptor, ionotropic, N-Methyl D-aspartate 1, GRIN1; phosphatase and tensin homolog, PTEN)		Neurons	SD rats	SD rats	In vitro and in vivo testing, apolipoprotein E (ApoE) regulated NP uptake, knocked down both targets (GRIN1, PTEN)	(Rungta et al., 2013)	
	
Lipid nanoparticle-ss-pH-activated, lipid-like materials (LNPssPalm) vitamin A (A), vitamin E (E), myristic acid (M)	Luc, LacZ, mCherry		Astrocytes	KT-5 cells	ICR/HaJ Mice	In vitro: ApoE3-dependent uptake; In vivo: higher efficiency with LNPssPalmA, LNPssPalmE	(Akita et al., 2015)	
	
Lipofect-amine®	LacZ, HIV Nef		Astrocytes	Humans,Rats, U87 glioma		Lipofection effective than modified vaccinia Ankara-vector and calcium phosphate precipitation	(Ambrosini et al., 1999)	
		
	Tyrosine hydroxylase	Parkinson’s disease (PD)	Astrocytes		6-hydroxy dopamine (OHDA)-treated SD rats	Expression in astrocytes, behavioral recovery	(Segovia et al., 1998)	
	
Organically-modified silica (ORMOSIL)	(CAG)20 or (CAG)127 fused to human influenza hemagglutinin-tag	Huntington’s disease (HD)	Neurons		R6 mice, Wistar rats	(CAG)127 delivery activated astrocytes in mice and rats	(Klejbor et al., 2007)	
	
PEG-polyethynein amine (PEI)	GFP, Luc	Neuro-degenerative disorders	N/S	Rats, Rabbits type N/S	Fischer rats	Higher efficiency and viability than PEI	(Mastorakos et al., 2015)	
		
Arg-PEI-PEG	Luc		Neurons	Rats type N/S	Nude mice	Low cytotoxicity and hemotoxicity compared to PEI. Crosses BBB	(Morris and Labhasetwar, 2015)	
	
PEG L-cysteinyl-poly-l-lysine (PLL)	Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF)	Aging, PD	Astrocytes	SD rats	6-OHDA treated SD rats	Higher expression in the denervated striatum, in older animals due to increased gliosis	(Yurek et al., 2015)	
	
PEG-Liposomes	Luc, LacZ		Astrocytes		BALB/c mice	Astrocyte-specific expression with GFAP promoter	(Shi et al., 2001)	
		
PEI, Lipofectamine®	GFP, Luc		Astrocytes, Schwann cells	Lewis rats, Fisher rats		Comparable efficacy in vitro, decreased viability with PEI	(Rao et al., 2015)	
		
	LacZ		Astrocytes	Rat glioma, Astrocytes, Hippocampal progenitors		Lipofectamine-higher number of cells transfected, PEI-more gene expression per cell	(Tinsley et al., 2004)	
	
PEI-methacrylate knot polymer	GDNF	PD	Astrocytes	Rats type N/S		Lower cytotoxicity and higher expression than PEI; increased neurite outgrowth in neuronal co-cultures	(Newland et al., 2013)	
	
pFastBac1, (with PEI for in vitro)	Luc		Astrocytes	Wistar rats	Wistar rats	With modified promoter sequences: higher expression in vitro, improved astrocyte-specific expression in vivo	(Wang and Wang, 2006)	
	
PEI, poly-lactic-glycolic-acid (PLGA)	Interleukin (IL)-10	Spinal cord injury (SCI)	Astrocytes		SD rats	Low intrathecal dose required compared to naked pDNA	(Milligan et al., 2006)	
		
PEI, cholesterol-PLGA	Luc, vascular endothelial growth factor	SCI	Neurons, Astrocytes	Mouse neural stem cells	SD rats	Lower in vitro, in vivo cytotoxicity than PEI, higher efficiency in vivo with angiogenesis, motor function recovery	(Gwak et al., 2016)	

Table 5 Gene delivery- and NP-based clinical trials for neurological diseases and disorders (NDDs)

Disease	Phase	Therapeutic Intervention	Institution/Company	ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier	
Alzheimer’s Disease	I	Autologous intracerebral transplantation of skin fibroblasts genetically modified to produce nerve growth factor (NGF)	The Shiley Family Trust, California, USA	NCT00017940	
I, II	Bilateral stereotactic injections CERE-110 (Adeno-associated virus (AAV) 2-β-NGF) to basal forebrain region containing the nucleus basalis of Meynert (NBM)	Ceregene, San Diego, CA, USA	NCT00087789, NCT00876863	
Batten Disease	I, II	Intrathecal single dose self-complementary AAV9 encoding ceroid-lipofuscinosis neuronal (CLN) 6 gene (scAVV9.CB.CLN6)	Nationwide Children’s Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA	NCT02725580	
Giant Axonal Neuropathy	I	Intrathecal administration of self-complementary AAV9 encoding gene for gigaxonin (scAAV9/JeT-GAN)	National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS), Bethesda, MD, USA	NCT02362438	
Leber Hereditary Optic Neuropathy	Not available	Single intravitreal injection of recombinant AAV2-nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate dehydrogenase, subunit 4 (complex I) (rAAV2-ND4)	Bin Li, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, China	NCT01267422	
Late Infantile Neuronal Ceroid Lipofuscinosis	I	Brain delivery of an AAV2 encoding human CLN2 cDNA (AAV2CUhCLN2)	Weill Medical College of Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA	NCT00151216
NCT01414985
NCT01161576	
I, II	Brain delivery of an AAV2 encoding human CLN2 cDNA (AAV2CUCLN2)	
I	Brain delivery of an AAVrh.10 encoding human CLN2 cDNA (AAVRh.10CUhCLN2) in two separate doses	
Metachromatic Leukodystrophy	I, II	Multiple intracerebral doses of AAVrh.10 encoding arylsulfatase A (ARSA) enzyme (AAVrh.10cuARSA)	Institut National de la Santé Et de la Recherche Médicale, Paris, France	NCT01801709	
Parkinson’s Disease	I	Convection enhanced delivery of AAV2-Glial Cell-Line Derived Neurotropic Factor (AAV2-GDNF)	NINDS Bethesda, MD, USA	NCT01621581	
I, II	Stereotactic intrastriatal injection of ProSavin delivering genes of three key enzymes involved in the synthesis of dopamine	Oxford BioMedica, Oxford, United Kingdom	NCT00627588	
I	Continuously infused intracerebral recombinant-methionyl GDNF (r-metHuGDNF)	National Center for Research Resources (NCRR) Bethesda, MD, USA	NCT00115427, NCT00111982, NCT00006488, NCT00148369	
I, II	Bilateral surgical infusion of AAV-mediated glutamic acid decarboxylase (AAV-GAD) gene transfer to subthalamic nuclei	Neurologix, Inc., Fort Lee, NJ, USA	NCT00643890, NCT00195143, NCT01301573	
I, II	Intraputaminal/striatal infusion of AAV-human aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase	Voyager Therapeutics &amp; Genzyme, Cambridge, MA, USA; Jichi Medical University, Shimotsuke, Tochigi, Japan	NCT01973543, NCT00229736, NCT02418598	
I, II	Intraputaminal and intranigral administration of CERE-120 (AAV2-Neurturin)	Ceregene, San Diego, CA, USA	NCT00985517, NCT00400634, NCT00252850	
Progressive Supranuclear Palsy	I	Continuously infused intracerebral r-metHuGDNF	NINDS, Bethesda, MD, USA	NCT00005903	
Schizophrenia, Cognition	I, II	Curcumin nanoparticles to improve cognitive dysfunction	VA Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System, Los Angeles, CA, USA	NCT02104752	
Spinal Muscular Atrophy Type 1	I	Intravenous delivery of AVXS-101 i.e. self-complementary AAV9 encoding the spinal motor neuron gene under the control of a hybrid CMV enhancer/chicken-β-actin promoter	AveXis, Inc, Bannockburn, IL, USA	NCT02122952	

Conflicts of Interest

The authors declare no conflict of interest associated to the presented work.


Bibliography

Aartsen WM Van Cleef KW Pellissier LP Hoek RM Vos RM Blits B Ehlert EM Balaggan KS Ali RR Verhaagen J 2010 GFAP-driven GFP expression in activated mouse Müller glial cells aligning retinal blood vessels following intravitreal injection of AAV2/6 vectors PLoS One 5 e12387 20808778
Abbott NJ Rönnbäck L Hansson E 2006 Astrocyte endothelial interactions at the blood brain barrier Nature Reviews Neuroscience 7 41 53 16371949
Abordo-Adesida E Follenzi A Barcia C Sciascia S Castro MG Naldini L Lowenstein PR 2005 Stability of lentiviral vector-mediated transgene expression in the brain in the presence of systemic antivector immune responses Hum Gene Ther 16 741 751 15960605
Adam SA Schnell O Pöschl J Eigenbrod S Kretzschmar HA Tonn JC Schüller U 2012 ALDH1A1 is a marker of astrocytic differentiation during brain development and correlates with better survival in glioblastoma patients Brain Pathol 22 788 797 22417385
Aguzzi A Barres BA Bennett ML 2013 Microglia: scapegoat, saboteur, or something else? Science 339 156 161 23307732
Akita H Nakatani T Kuroki K Maenaka K Tange K Nakai Y Harashima H 2015 Effect of hydrophobic scaffold on the cellular uptake and gene transfection activities of DNA-encapsulating liposomal nanoparticles via intracerebroventricular administration International journal of pharmaceutics 490 142 145 26003418
Alberdi E Wyssenbach A Alberdi M Sanchez-Gomez MV Cavaliere F Rodriguez JJ Verkhratsky A Matute C 2013 Ca(2+) -dependent endoplasmic reticulum stress correlates with astrogliosis in oligomeric amyloid beta-treated astrocytes and in a model of Alzheimer’s disease Aging Cell 12 292 302 23409977
Allen NJ Barres BA 2009 Neuroscience: glia more than just brain glue Nature 457 675 677 19194443
Allen SJ Watson JJ Shoemark DK Barua NU Patel NK 2013 GDNF, NGF and BDNF as therapeutic options for neurodegeneration Pharmacology &amp; therapeutics 138 155 175 23348013
Ambrosi G Cerri S Blandini F 2014 A further update on the role of excitotoxicity in the pathogenesis of Parkinson’s disease Journal of Neural Transmission 121 849 859 24380931
Ambrosini E Ceccherini-Silberstein F Erfle V Aloisi F Levi G 1999 Gene transfer in astrocytes: comparison between different delivering methods and expression of the HIV-1 protein Nef Journal of neuroscience research 55 569 577 10082079
An H Cho D-W Lee SE Yang Y-S Han S-C Lee CJ 2016 Differential Cellular Tropism of Lentivirus and Adeno-Associated Virus in the Brain of Cynomolgus Monkey Experimental neurobiology 25 48 54 26924933
Anderson MA Burda JE Ren Y Ao Y O’Shea TM Kawaguchi R Coppola G Khakh BS Deming TJ Sofroniew MV 2016 Astrocyte scar formation aids central nervous system axon regeneration Nature 532 195 200 27027288
Andrade-Moraes CH Oliveira-Pinto AV Castro-Fonseca E da Silva CG Guimarães DM Szczupak D Parente-Bruno DR Carvalho LR Polichiso L Gomes BV 2013 Cell number changes in Alzheimer’s disease relate to dementia, not to plaques and tangles Brain 136 3738 3752 24136825
Andrews JL Kadan MJ Gorziglia MI Kaleko M Connelly S 2001 Generation and characterization of E1/E2a/E3/E4-deficient adenoviral vectors encoding human factor VIII Molecular Therapy 3 329 11273775
Anglade P Vyas S Javoy-Agid F Herrero M Michel P Marquez J Mouatt-Prigent A Ruberg M Hirsch E Agid Y 1997 Apoptosis and autophagy in nigral neurons of patients with Parkinson’s disease Histology and histopathology 12 25 32 9046040
Aronin N DiFiglia M 2014 Huntingtin-lowering strategies in Huntington’s disease: Antisense oligonucleotides, small RNAs, and gene editing Movement Disorders 29 1455 1461 25164989
Arregui L Benítez JA Razgado LF Vergara P Segovia J 2011 Adenoviral astrocyte-specific expression of BDNF in the striata of mice transgenic for Huntington’s disease delays the onset of the motor phenotype Cell Mol Neurobiol 31 1229 1243 21681558
Arundine M Tymianski M 2003 Molecular mechanisms of calcium-dependent neurodegeneration in excitotoxicity Cell Calcium 34 325 337 12909079
Aschauer DF Kreuz S Rumpel S 2013 Analysis of transduction efficiency, tropism and axonal transport of AAV serotypes 1, 2, 5, 6, 8 and 9 in the mouse brain PloS one 8 e76310 24086725
Ashutosh Chao C Borgmann K Brew K Ghorpade A 2012 Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-1 protects human neurons from staurosporine and HIV-1-induced apoptosis: mechanisms and relevance to HIV-1-associated dementia Cell Death Dis 3 e332 22739984
AveXis I 2016 AveXis Reports Data from Ongoing Phase 1 Trial of AVXS-101 in Spinal Muscular Atrophy Type 1 AxeVis Inc
Barres BA 2008 The mystery and magic of glia: a perspective on their roles in health and disease Neuron 60 430 440 18995817
Bartlett JS Samulski RJ McCown TJ 1998 Selective and rapid uptake of adeno-associated virus type 2 in brain Human gene therapy 9 1181 1186 9625257
Bartus RT Weinberg MS Samulski RJ 2014 Parkinson’s disease gene therapy: success by design meets failure by efficacy Molecular Therapy 22 487 497 24356252
Beers DR Zhao W Liao B Kano O Wang J Huang A Appel SH Henkel JS 2011 Neuroinflammation modulates distinct regional and temporal clinical responses in ALS mice Brain, behavior, and immunity 25 1025 1035
Begum AN Jones MR Lim GP Morihara T Kim P Heath DD Rock CL Pruitt MA Yang F Hudspeth B 2008 Curcumin structure-function, bioavailability, and efficacy in models of neuroinflammation and Alzheimer’s disease Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics 326 196 208 18417733
Bellini MJ Hereñú CB Goya RG Garcia-Segura LM 2011 Insulin-like growth factor-I gene delivery to astrocytes reduces their inflammatory response to lipopolysaccharide Journal of neuroinflammation 8 1 21208419
Bemelmans A-P Horellou P Pradier L Brunet I Colin P Mallet J 1999 Brain-derived neurotrophic factor-mediated protection of striatal neurons in an excitotoxic rat model of Huntington’s disease, as demonstrated by adenoviral gene transfer Human gene therapy 10 2987 2997 10609659
Benkhelifa-Ziyyat S Besse A Roda M Duque S Astord S Carcenac R Marais T Barkats M 2013 Intramuscular scAAV9-SMN injection mediates widespread gene delivery to the spinal cord and decreases disease severity in SMA mice Molecular Therapy 21 282 290 23295949
Benvenisti-Zarom L Regan RF 2007 Astrocyte-specific heme oxygenase-1 hyperexpression attenuates heme-mediated oxidative injury Neurobiology of disease 26 688 695 17467999
Bevan AK Duque S Foust KD Morales PR Braun L Schmelzer L Chan CM McCrate M Chicoine LG Coley BD 2011 Systemic gene delivery in large species for targeting spinal cord, brain, and peripheral tissues for pediatric disorders Molecular Therapy 19 1971 1980 21811247
Block ML Zecca L Hong J-S 2007 Microglia-mediated neurotoxicity: uncovering the molecular mechanisms Nature Reviews Neuroscience 8 57 69 17180163
Blömer U Naldini L Verma IM Trono D Gage FH 1996 Applications of gene therapy to the CNS Human molecular genetics 5 1397 1404 8875243
Blömer U Naldini L Kafri T Trono D Verma IM Gage FH 1997 Highly efficient and sustained gene transfer in adult neurons with a lentivirus vector Journal of virology 71 6641 6649 9261386
Boillée S Velde CV Cleveland DW 2006 ALS: a disease of motor neurons and their nonneuronal neighbors Neuron 52 39 59 17015226
Boutin S Monteilhet V Veron P Leborgne C Benveniste O Montus MF Masurier C 2010 Prevalence of serum IgG and neutralizing factors against adeno-associated virus (AAV) types 1, 2, 5, 6, 8, and 9 in the healthy population: implications for gene therapy using AAV vectors Human gene therapy 21 704 712 20095819
Bradl M Lassmann H 2010 Oligodendrocytes: biology and pathology Acta neuropathologica 119 37 53 19847447
Brenner M Kisseberth WC Su Y Besnard F Messing A 1994 GFAP promoter directs astrocyte-specific expression in transgenic mice The Journal of Neuroscience 14 1030 1037 8120611
Buffo A Rolando C Ceruti S 2010 Astrocytes in the damaged brain: molecular and cellular insights into their reactive response and healing potential Biochemical pharmacology 79 77 89 19765548
Byrnes AP MacLaren RE Charlton HM 1996 Immunological instability of persistent adenovirus vectors in the brain: peripheral exposure to vector leads to renewed inflammation, reduced gene expression, and demyelination The Journal of neuroscience 16 3045 3055 8622134
Cabezas R Avila-Rodriguez M Vega-Vela EN Echeverria V González J Hidalgo AO Santos BA Aliev G Barreto EG 2016 Growth factors and astrocytes metabolism: Possible roles for platelet derived growth factor Medicinal Chemistry 12 204 210 26477707
Callaway EM 2005 A molecular and genetic arsenal for systems neuroscience Trends Neurosci 28 196 201 15808354
Cannon JR Sew T Montero L Burton EA Greenamyre JT 2011 Pseudotype-dependent lentiviral transduction of astrocytes or neurons in the rat substantia nigra Exp Neurol 228 41 52 21056560
Carson MJ Thrash JC Walter B 2006 The cellular response in neuroinflammation: The role of leukocytes, microglia and astrocytes in neuronal death and survival Clin Neurosci Res 6 237 245 19169437
Cearley CN Vandenberghe LH Parente MK Carnish ER Wilson JM Wolfe JH 2008 Expanded repertoire of AAV vector serotypes mediate unique patterns of transduction in mouse brain Molecular Therapy
Cerullo V Pesonen S Diaconu I Escutenaire S Arstila PT Ugolini M Nokisalmi P Raki M Laasonen L Särkioja M 2010 Oncolytic adenovirus coding for granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor induces antitumoral immunity in cancer patients Cancer research 70 4297 4309 20484030
Ceulemans A-G Zgavc T Kooijman R Hachimi-Idrissi S Sarre S Michotte Y 2010 The dual role of the neuroinflammatory response after ischemic stroke: modulatory effects of hypothermia Journal of neuroinflammation 7 1 20047691
Chaturvedi M Molino Y Sreedhar B Khrestchatisky M Kaczmarek L 2014 Tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinases-1 loaded poly (lactic-co-glycolic acid) nanoparticles for delivery across the blood brain barrier International journal of nanomedicine 9 575 24531257
Chen H McCarty D Bruce A Suzuki K 1998 Gene transfer and expression in oligodendrocytes under the control of myelin basic protein transcriptional control region mediated by adeno-associated virus Gene therapy 5
Chen X Lin W Lin J Wu C Zhang L Huang Z Lai J 2012 The protective effects of the lentivirus-mediated neuroglobin gene transfer on spinal cord injury in rabbits Spinal cord 50 467 471 22105458
Choi-Lundberg DL Lin Q Chang Y-N Chiang YL Hay CM Mohajeri H Davidson BL Bohn MC 1997 Dopaminergic neurons protected from degeneration by GDNF gene therapy Science 275 838 841 9012352
Ciesielska A Hadaczek P Mittermeyer G Zhou S Wright JF Bankiewicz KS Forsayeth J 2013 Cerebral infusion of AAV9 vector-encoding non-self proteins can elicit cell-mediated immune responses Molecular Therapy 21 158 166 22929660
Cisneros IE Ghorpade A 2012 HIV-1, methamphetamine and astrocyte glutamate regulation: combined excitotoxic implications for neuro-AIDS Curr HIV Res 10 392 406 22591363
Cisneros IE Ghorpade A 2014 Methamphetamine and HIV-1-induced neurotoxicity: role of trace amine associated receptor 1 cAMP signaling in astrocytes Neuropharmacology 85 499 507 24950453
Colangelo AM Alberghina L Papa M 2014 Astrogliosis as a therapeutic target for neurodegenerative diseases Neuroscience letters 565 59 64 24457173
Colin A Faideau M Dufour N Auregan G Hassig R Andrieu T Brouillet E Hantraye P Bonvento G Déglon N 2009 Engineered lentiviral vector targeting astrocytes in vivo Glia 57 667 679 18942755
Cucchiarini M Ren X Perides G Terwilliger E 2003 Selective gene expression in brain microglia mediated via adeno-associated virus type 2 and type 5 vectors Gene therapy 10 657 667 12692594
De Stefano N Guidi L Stromillo M Bartolozzi M Federico A 2003 Imaging neuronal and axonal degeneration in multiple sclerosis Neurological Sciences 24 s283 s286 14652790
Debinski W Tatter SB 2009 Convection-enhanced delivery for the treatment of brain tumors Expert review of neurotherapeutics 9 1519 1527 19831841
Desclaux M Teigell M Amar L Vogel R y Ribotta MG Privat A Mallet J 2009 A novel and efficient gene transfer strategy reduces glial reactivity and improves neuronal survival and axonal growth in vitro PLoS One 4 e6227 19597552
Dhar A Gardner J Borgmann K Wu L Ghorpade A 2006 Novel role of TGF-beta in differential astrocyte-TIMP-1 regulation: implications for HIV-1-dementia and neuroinflammation J Neurosci Res 83 1271 1280 16496359
DiFiglia M Sapp E Chase KO Davies SW Bates GP Vonsattel J Aronin N 1997 Aggregation of huntingtin in neuronal intranuclear inclusions and dystrophic neurites in brain Science 277 1990 1993 9302293
Dittgen T Nimmerjahn A Komai S Licznerski P Waters J Margrie TW Helmchen F Denk W Brecht M Osten P 2004 Lentivirus-based genetic manipulations of cortical neurons and their optical and electrophysiological monitoring in vivo Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 101 18206 18211
Do Thi N Saillour P Ferrero L Dedieu J Mallet J Paunio T 2004 Delivery of GDNF by an E1, E3/E4 deleted adenoviral vector and driven by a GFAP promoter prevents dopaminergic neuron degeneration in a rat model of Parkinson’s disease Gene therapy 11 746 756 14724667
Dong J-Y Fan P-D Frizzell RA 1996 Quantitative analysis of the packaging capacity of recombinant adeno-associated virus Human gene therapy 7 2101 2112 8934224
Donsante A McEachin Z Riley J Leung C Kanz L O’Connor D Boulis N 2016 Intracerebroventricular delivery of self-complementary adeno-associated virus serotype 9 to the adult rat brain Gene therapy 23 401 407 26824881
Dormond E Perrier M Kamen A 2009 From the first to the third generation adenoviral vector: what parameters are governing the production yield? Biotechnology advances 27 133 144 19013226
Drinkut A Tereshchenko Y Schulz JB Bähr M Kügler S 2012 Efficient gene therapy for Parkinson’s disease using astrocytes as hosts for localized neurotrophic factor delivery Molecular Therapy 20 534 543 22086235
Eberling J Jagust W Christine C Starr P Larson P Bankiewicz K Aminoff M 2008 Results from a phase I safety trial of hAADC gene therapy for Parkinson disease Neurology 70 1980 1983 18401019
Emerit J Edeas M Bricaire F 2004 Neurodegenerative diseases and oxidative stress Biomed Pharmacother 58 39 46 14739060
Escartin C Brouillet E Gubellini P Trioulier Y Jacquard C Smadja C Knott GW Kerkerian-Le Goff L Déglon N Hantraye P 2006 Ciliary neurotrophic factor activates astrocytes, redistributes their glutamate transporters GLAST and GLT-1 to raft microdomains, and improves glutamate handling in vivo The Journal of neuroscience 26 5978 5989 16738240
Evans MC Couch Y Sibson N Turner MR 2013 Inflammation and neurovascular changes in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Molecular and cellular neurosciences 53 34 41 23110760
Ezcurra ALDL Chertoff M Ferrari C Graciarena M Pitossi F 2010 Chronic expression of low levels of tumor necrosis factor-α in the substantia nigra elicits progressive neurodegeneration, delayed motor symptoms and microglia/macrophage activation Neurobiology of disease 37 630 640 19969084
Fan MM Raymond LA 2007 N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor function and excitotoxicity in Huntington’s disease Progress in neurobiology 81 272 293 17188796
Ferrari CC Depino AM Prada F Muraro N Campbell S Podhajcer O Perry VH Anthony DC Pitossi FJ 2004 Reversible demyelination, blood-brain barrier breakdown, and pronounced neutrophil recruitment induced by chronic IL-1 expression in the brain The American journal of pathology 165 1827 1837 15509551
Foust KD Nurre E Montgomery CL Hernandez A Chan CM Kaspar BK 2009 Intravascular AAV9 preferentially targets neonatal neurons and adult astrocytes Nature biotechnology 27 59 65
Franklin RJ Kotter MR 2008 The biology of CNS remyelination Journal of neurology 255 19 25
Fuller S Munch G Steele M 2009 Activated astrocytes: a therapeutic target in Alzheimer’s disease? Expert review of neurotherapeutics 9 1585 1594 19903019
Furman JL Sama DM Gant JC Beckett TL Murphy MP Bachstetter AD Van Eldik LJ Norris CM 2012 Targeting astrocytes ameliorates neurologic changes in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease The Journal of Neuroscience 32 16129 16140 23152597
Gaj T Gersbach CA Barbas CF 2013 ZFN, TALEN, and CRISPR/Cas-based methods for genome engineering Trends in biotechnology 31 397 405 23664777
Galou M Pournin S Ensergueix D Ridet JL Tchélingérian JL Lossouran L Privat A Babinet C Dupouey P 1994 Normal and pathological expression of GFAP promoter elements in transgenic mice Glia 12 281 293 7890332
Garden GA Möller T 2006 Microglia biology in health and disease Journal of Neuroimmune Pharmacology 1 127 137 18040779
Gardner J Ghorpade A 2003 Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase (TIMP)-1: the TIMPed balance of matrix metalloproteinases in the central nervous system J Neurosci Res 74 801 806 14648584
Geldenhuys W Mbimba T Bui T Harrison K Sutariya V 2011 Brain-targeted delivery of paclitaxel using glutathione-coated nanoparticles for brain cancers Journal of drug targeting 19 837 845 21692650
Geppert M Hohnholt MC Thiel K Nürnberger S Grunwald I Rezwan K Dringen R 2011 Uptake of dimercaptosuccinate-coated magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles by cultured brain astrocytes Nanotechnology 22 145101 21346306
Gerdes CA Castro MG Löwenstein PR 2000 Strong promoters are the key to highly efficient, noninflammatory and noncytotoxic adenoviral-mediated transgene delivery into the brain in vivo Molecular Therapy 2 330 11020348
Ghafouri M Amini S Khalili K Sawaya BE 2006 HIV-1 associated dementia: symptoms and causes Retrovirology 3 28 16712719
Gholizadeh S Tharmalingam S MacAldaz ME Hampson DR 2013 Transduction of the central nervous system after intracerebroventricular injection of adeno-associated viral vectors in neonatal and juvenile mice Human gene therapy methods 24 205 213 23808551
Ginn SL Alexander IE Edelstein ML Abedi MR Wixon J 2013 Gene therapy clinical trials worldwide to 2012 an update The journal of gene medicine 15 65 77 23355455
Giralt A Friedman HC Caneda-Ferron B Urban N Moreno E Rubio N Blanco J Peterson A Canals JM Alberch J 2010 BDNF regulation under GFAP promoter provides engineered astrocytes as a new approach for long-term protection in Huntington’s disease Gene Ther 17 1294 1308 20463759
Gorantla S Poluektova L Gendelman HE 2012 Rodent models for HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders Trends Neurosci 35 197 208 22305769
Goula D Remy J Erbacher P Wasowicz M Levi G Abdallah B Demeneix B 1998 Size, diffusibility and transfection performance of linear PEI/DNA complexes in the mouse central nervous system Gene therapy 5 712 717 9797878
Gray SJ Matagne V Bachaboina L Yadav S Ojeda SR Samulski RJ 2011 Preclinical differences of intravascular AAV9 delivery to neurons and glia: a comparative study of adult mice and nonhuman primates Molecular Therapy 19 1058 1069 21487395
Grosskreutz J Van Den Bosch L Keller BU 2010 Calcium dysregulation in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Cell calcium 47 165 174 20116097
Guerrero-Cázares H Tzeng SY Young NP Abutaleb AO Quiñones-Hinojosa A Green JJ 2014 Biodegradable polymeric nanoparticles show high efficacy and specificity at DNA delivery to human glioblastoma in vitro and in vivo ACS nano 8 5141 5153 24766032
Gwak S-J Yun Y Kim KN Ha Y 2016 Therapeutic Use of 3β-[N-(N′, N′-Dimethylaminoethane) Carbamoyl] Cholesterol-Modified PLGA Nanospheres as Gene Delivery Vehicles for Spinal Cord Injury PloS one 11 e0147389 26824765
Halassa MM Fellin T Haydon PG 2007 The tripartite synapse: roles for gliotransmission in health and disease Trends in molecular medicine 13 54 63 17207662
Health USNIo 2016 Neurodegeneration clinical trials NIH
Hendriks W Eggers R Verhaagen J Boer G 2007 Gene transfer to the spinal cord neural scar with lentiviral vectors: predominant transgene expression in astrocytes but not in meningeal cells Journal of neuroscience research 85 3041 3052 17671987
Hermann DM Kilic E Kügler S Isenmann S Bähr M 2001a Adenovirus-mediated glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) expression protects against subsequent cortical cold injury in rats Neurobiology of disease 8 964 973 11741392
Hermann DM Kilic E Kügler S Isenmann S Bähr M 2001b Adenovirus-mediated GDNF and CNTF pretreatment protects against striatal injury following transient middle cerebral artery occlusion in mice Neurobiology of disease 8 655 666 11493030
Hermens WT Verhaagen J 1998 Viral vectors, tools for gene transfer in the nervous system Progress in neurobiology 55 399 432 9654386
Hirsch EC Hunot S 2009 Neuroinflammation in Parkinson’s disease: a target for neuroprotection? The Lancet Neurology 8 382 397 19296921
Homs J Ariza L Pages G Udina E Navarro X Chillón M Bosch A 2011 Schwann cell targeting via intrasciatic injection of AAV8 as gene therapy strategy for peripheral nerve regeneration Gene therapy 18 622 630 21326330
Hu W Kaminski R Yang F Zhang Y Cosentino L Li F Luo B Alvarez-Carbonell D Garcia-Mesa Y Karn J 2014 RNA-directed gene editing specifically eradicates latent and prevents new HIV-1 infection Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111 11461 11466
Hu X Zhang D Pang H Caudle WM Li Y Gao H Liu Y Qian L Wilson B Di Monte DA 2008 Macrophage antigen complex-1 mediates reactive microgliosis and progressive dopaminergic neurodegeneration in the MPTP model of Parkinson’s disease The Journal of Immunology 181 7194 7204 18981141
Hwang D-Y Carlezon WA Jr Isacson O Kim K-S 2001 A high-efficiency synthetic promoter that drives transgene expression selectively in noradrenergic neurons Human gene therapy 12 1731 1740 11560767
Institut USN, Health et al 2016 Ibudilast clinical trials Search results on for Ibudilast clinical trials
Jaffer H Morris VB Stewart D Labhasetwar V 2011 Advances in Stroke Therapy Drug Deliv Transl Res 1 409 419 22201014
Jakobsson J Ericson C Jansson M Björk E Lundberg C 2003 Targeted transgene expression in rat brain using lentiviral vectors Journal of neuroscience research 73 876 885 12949915
Jensen SA Day ES Ko CH Hurley LA Luciano JP Kouri FM Merkel TJ Luthi AJ Patel PC Cutler JI 2013 Spherical nucleic acid nanoparticle conjugates as an RNAi-based therapy for glioblastoma Science translational medicine 5 209ra152 209ra152
Jiménez JL Clemente MI Weber ND Sanchez J Ortega P de la Mata FJ Gómez R García D López-Fernández LA Muñoz-Fernández MÁ 2010 Carbosilane dendrimers to transfect human astrocytes with small interfering RNA targeting human immunodeficiency virus BioDrugs 24 331 343 20795754
Joris F Manshian BB Peynshaert K De Smedt SC Braeckmans K Soenen SJ 2013 Assessing nanoparticle toxicity in cell-based assays: influence of cell culture parameters and optimized models for bridging the in vitro in vivo gap Chemical Society Reviews 42 8339 8359 23877583
Jucker M 2010 The benefits and limitations of animal models for translational research in neurodegenerative diseases Nature medicine 16 1210 1214
Kaminski R Chen Y Fischer T Tedaldi E Napoli A Zhang Y Karn J Hu W Khalili K 2016 Elimination of HIV-1 genomes from human T-lymphoid cells by CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing Scientific reports 6 27920433
Kaplitt MG Feigin A Tang C Fitzsimons HL Mattis P Lawlor PA Bland RJ Young D Strybing K Eidelberg D 2007 Safety and tolerability of gene therapy with an adeno-associated virus (AAV) borne GAD gene for Parkinson’s disease: an open label, phase I trial The Lancet 369 2097 2105
Katz MG Fargnoli AS Williams RD Bridges CR 2013 Gene therapy delivery systems for enhancing viral and nonviral vectors for cardiac diseases: current concepts and future applications Human gene therapy 24 914 927 24164239
Kim BO Liu Y Ruan Y Xu ZC Schantz L He JJ 2003 Neuropathologies in transgenic mice expressing human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Tat protein under the regulation of the astrocyte-specific glial fibrillary acidic protein promoter and doxycycline Am J Pathol 162 1693 1707 12707054
Kim I-D Lim C-M Kim J-B Nam HY Nam K Kim S-W Park J-S Lee J-K 2010 Neuroprotection by biodegradable PAMAM ester (e-PAM-R)-mediated HMGB1 siRNA delivery in primary cortical cultures and in the postischemic brain Journal of Controlled Release 142 422 430 19944723
Kim I-D Shin J-H Kim S-W Choi S Ahn J Han P-L Park J-S Lee J-K 2012 Intranasal delivery of HMGB1 siRNA confers target gene knockdown and robust neuroprotection in the postischemic brain Molecular Therapy 20 829 839 22252450
Kim J-B Choi JS Nam K Lee M Park J-S Lee J-K 2006 Enhanced transfection of primary cortical cultures using arginine-grafted PAMAM dendrimer, PAMAM-Arg Journal of controlled release 114 110 117 16842881
Kiyota T Yamamoto M Schroder B Jacobsen MT Swan RJ Lambert MP Klein WL Gendelman HE Ransohoff RM Ikezu T 2009 AAV1/2-mediated CNS gene delivery of dominant-negative CCL2 mutant suppresses gliosis, β-amyloidosis, and learning impairment of APP/PS1 mice Molecular Therapy 17 803 809
Klejbor I Stachowiak E Bharali D Roy I Spodnik I Morys J Bergey E Prasad P Stachowiak M 2007 ORMOSIL nanoparticles as a non-viral gene delivery vector for modeling polyglutamine induced brain pathology Journal of neuroscience methods 165 230 243 17655935
Koerber JT Klimczak R Jang J-H Dalkara D Flannery JG Schaffer DV 2009 Molecular evolution of adeno-associated virus for enhanced glial gene delivery Molecular Therapy 17 2088 2095 19672246
Kreuter J 2014 Drug delivery to the central nervous system by polymeric nanoparticles: what do we know? Adv Drug Deliv Rev 71 2 14 23981489
Kügler S Lingor P Schöll U Zolotukhin S Bähr M 2003 Differential transgene expression in brain cells in vivo and in vitro from AAV-2 vectors with small transcriptional control units Virology 311 89 95 12832206
Kuhn B Hoogland TM Wang SS-H 2011 Injection of recombinant adenovirus for delivery of genetically encoded calcium indicators into astrocytes of the cerebellar cortex Cold Spring Harb Protoc 2011 1217 1223 21969619
Kwon EJ Lasiene J Jacobson BE Park I-K Horner PJ Pun SH 2010 Targeted nonviral delivery vehicles to neural progenitor cells in the mouse subventricular zone Biomaterials 31 2417 2424 20004466
Lai TW Zhang S Wang YT 2014 Excitotoxicity and stroke: identifying novel targets for neuroprotection Progress in neurobiology 115 157 188 24361499
Lai Z Brady RO 2002 Gene transfer into the central nervous system in vivo using a recombinanat lentivirus vector Journal of neuroscience research 67 363 371 11813241
Lawlor PA Bland RJ Mouravlev A Young D During MJ 2009 Efficient gene delivery and selective transduction of glial cells in the mammalian brain by AAV serotypes isolated from nonhuman primates Molecular Therapy 17 1692 1702 19638961
Lee Y Messing A Su M Brenner M 2008 GFAP promoter elements required for region-specific and astrocyte-specific expression Glia 56 481 493 18240313
LeWitt PA Rezai AR Leehey MA Ojemann SG Flaherty AW Eskandar EN Kostyk SK Thomas K Sarkar A Siddiqui MS 2011 AAV2-GAD gene therapy for advanced Parkinson’s disease: a double-blind, sham-surgery controlled, randomised trial The Lancet Neurology 10 309 319 21419704
Lisovoski F Akli S Peltekian E Vigne E Haase G Perricaudet M Dreyfus PA Kahn A Peschanski M 1997 Phenotypic alteration of astrocytes induced by ciliary neurotrophic factor in the intact adult brain, as revealed by adenovirus-mediated gene transfer The Journal of neuroscience 17 7228 7236 9295369
Liu G Martins I Chiorini J Davidson B 2005 Adeno-associated virus type 4 (AAV4) targets ependyma and astrocytes in the subventricular zone and RMS Gene therapy 12 1503 1508 15944733
Liu Y Himes BT Moul J Huang W Chow SY Tessler A Fischer I 1997 Application of recombinant adenovirus for in vivo gene delivery to spinal cord Brain research 768 19 29 9369296
Liu Y Liu Z Wang Y Liang Y-R Wen X Hu J Yang X Liu J Xiao S Cheng D 2013 Investigation of the performance of PEG PEI/ROCK-II-siRNA complexes for Alzheimer’s disease in vitro Brain research 1490 43 51 23103413
Liu Y Miao Q Yuan J Han Se Zhang P Li S Rao Z Zhao W Ye Q Geng J 2015 Ascl1 converts dorsal midbrain astrocytes into functional neurons in vivo The Journal of Neuroscience 35 9336 9355 26109658
Lobello K Ryan JM Liu E Rippon G Black R 2012 Targeting Beta amyloid: a clinical review of immunotherapeutic approaches in Alzheimer’s disease International Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 2012
Lu S Morris VB Labhasetwar V 2015 Codelivery of DNA and siRNA via arginine-rich PEI-based polyplexes Molecular pharmaceutics 12 621 629 25591125
Lu S-M Tremblay M-È King IL Qi J Reynolds HM Marker DF Varrone JJ Majewska AK Dewhurst S Gelbard HA 2011 HIV-1 Tat-induced microgliosis and synaptic damage via interactions between peripheral and central myeloid cells PloS one 6 e23915 21912650
Lu-Nguyen NB Broadstock M Schliesser MG Bartholomae CC von Kalle C Schmidt M Yáñez-Muñoz RJ 2014 Transgenic expression of human glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor from integration-deficient lentiviral vectors is neuroprotective in a rodent model of Parkinson’s disease Human gene therapy 25 631 641 24635742
Luther EM Koehler Y Diendorf J Epple M Dringen R 2011 Accumulation of silver nanoparticles by cultured primary brain astrocytes Nanotechnology 22 375101 21852719
Malhotra M Tomaro-Duchesneau C Saha S Kahouli I Prakash S 2013 Development and characterization of chitosan-PEG-TAT nanoparticles for the intracellular delivery of siRNA International journal of nanomedicine 8 2041 2052 23723699
Manfredi G Xu Z 2005 Mitochondrial dysfunction and its role in motor neuron degeneration in ALS Mitochondrion 5 77 87 16050975
Mangraviti A Tzeng SY Kozielski KL Wang Y Jin Y Gullotti D Pedone M Buaron N Liu A Wilson DR 2015 Polymeric nanoparticles for nonviral gene therapy extend brain tumor survival in vivo ACS nano 9 1236 1249 25643235
Mastorakos P Zhang C Berry S Oh Y Lee S Eberhart CG Woodworth GF Suk JS Hanes J 2015 Highly PEGylated DNA nanoparticles provide uniform and widespread gene transfer in the brain Advanced healthcare materials 4 1023 1033 25761435
McIver SR Lee CS Lee JM Green SH Sands MS Snider BJ Goldberg MP 2005 Lentiviral transduction of murine oligodendrocytes in vivo Journal of neuroscience research 82 397 403 16158420
McMorris FA McKinnon RD 1996 Regulation of oligodendrocyte development and CNS myelination by growth factors: prospects for therapy of demyelinating disease Brain Pathol 6 313 329 8864287
McTigue DM Tripathi RB 2008 The life, death, and replacement of oligodendrocytes in the adult CNS Journal of neurochemistry 107 1 19 18643793
Meng X Yang F Ouyang T Liu B Wu C Jiang W 2015 Specific gene expression in mouse cortical astrocytes is mediated by a 1740bp-GFAP promoter-driven combined adeno-associated virus 2/5/7/8/9 Neuroscience letters 593 45 50 25778419
Merienne N Delzor A Viret A Dufour N Rey M Hantraye P Déglon N 2015 Gene transfer engineering for astrocyte-specific silencing in the CNS Gene therapy 22 830 839 26109254
Merrill J Scolding N 1999 Mechanisms of damage to myelin and oligodendrocytes and their relevance to disease Neuropathology and applied neurobiology 25 435 458 10632895
Midoux P Breuzard G Gomez JP Pichon C 2008 Polymer-based gene delivery: a current review on the uptake and intracellular trafficking of polyplexes Current gene therapy 8 335 352 18855631
Milligan ED Soderquist RG Malone SM Mahoney JH Hughes TS Langer SJ Sloane EM Maier SF Leinwand LA Watkins LR 2006 Intrathecal polymer-based interleukin-10 gene delivery for neuropathic pain Neuron glia biology 2 293 308 18079973
Miyake N Miyake K Yamamoto M Hirai Y Shimada T 2011 Global gene transfer into the CNS across the BBB after neonatal systemic delivery of single-stranded AAV vectors Brain research 1389 19 26 21397590
Morris VB Labhasetwar V 2015 Arginine-rich polyplexes for gene delivery to neuronal cells Biomaterials 60 151 160 26000961
Nakajima H Uchida K Kobayashi S Inukai T Horiuchi Y Yayama T Sato R Baba H 2007 Rescue of rat anterior horn neurons after spinal cord injury by retrograde transfection of adenovirus vector carrying brain-derived neurotrophic factor gene Journal of neurotrauma 24 703 712 17439352
Naldini L Blomer U Gallay P Ory D 1996 In vivo gene delivery and stable transduction of nondividing cells by a lentiviral vector Science 272 263 8602510
Navarro V Millecamps S Geoffroy M Robert J Valin A Mallet J Le Gal La Salle G 1999 Efficient gene transfer and long-term expression in neurons using a recombinant adenovirus with a neuron-specific promoter Gene therapy 6 1884 1892 10602384
Newland B Abu-Rub M Naughton M Zheng Y Pinoncely A Collin E Dowd E Wang W Pandit A 2013 GDNF gene delivery via a 2-(dimethylamino) ethyl methacrylate based cyclized knot polymer for neuronal cell applications ACS chemical neuroscience 4 540 546 23391146
Nicchia GP Frigeri A Liuzzi GM Svelto M 2003 Inhibition of aquaporin-4 expression in astrocytes by RNAi determines alteration in cell morphology, growth, and water transport and induces changes in ischemia-related genes The FASEB journal 17 1508 1510 12824287
Niranjan R 2014 The role of inflammatory and oxidative stress mechanisms in the pathogenesis of Parkinson’s disease: focus on astrocytes Molecular neurobiology 49 28 38 23783559
Nolte C Matyash M Pivneva T Schipke CG Ohlemeyer C Hanisch UK Kirchhoff F Kettenmann H 2001 GFAP promoter-controlled EGFP-expressing transgenic mice: A tool to visualize astrocytes and astrogliosis in living brain tissue Glia 33 72 86 11169793
Nomoto T Okada T Shimazaki K Mizukami H Matsushita T Hanazono Y Kume A Katsura K-i Katayama Y Ozawa K 2003 Distinct patterns of gene transfer to gerbil hippocampus with recombinant adeno-associated virus type 2 and 5 Neuroscience letters 340 153 157 12668259
Palfi S Gurruchaga JM Ralph GS Lepetit H Lavisse S Buttery PC Watts C Miskin J Kelleher M Deeley S 2014 Long-term safety and tolerability of ProSavin, a lentiviral vector-based gene therapy for Parkinson’s disease: a dose escalation, open-label, phase 1/2 trial The Lancet 383 1138 1146
Pardridge WM 2002 Drug and gene delivery to the brain: the vascular route Neuron 36 555 558 12441045
Park IK Lasiene J Chou SH Horner PJ Pun SH 2007 Neuron-specific delivery of nucleic acids mediated by Tet1-modified poly (ethylenimine) The journal of gene medicine 9 691 702 17582226
Peel A Zolotukhin S Schrimsher G Muzyczka N Reier P 1997 Efficient transduction of green fluorescent protein in spinal cord neurons using adeno-associated virus vectors containing cell-type specific promoters Gene therapy 4 16 24 9068791
Peel AL Klein RL 2000 Adeno-associated virus vectors: activity and applications in the CNS Journal of neuroscience methods 98 95 104 10880823
Persidsky Y Zheng J Miller D Gendelman HE 2000 Mononuclear phagocytes mediate blood-brain barrier compromise and neuronal injury during HIV-1-associated dementia J Leukoc Biol 68 413 422 10985259
Petrosyan H Alessi V Singh V Hunanyan A Levine J Arvanian V 2014 Transduction efficiency of neurons and glial cells by AAV-1,-5,-9,-rh10 and-hu11 serotypes in rat spinal cord following contusion injury Gene therapy 21 991 1000 25119378
Peviani M Kurosaki M Terao M Lidonnici D Gensano F Battaglia E Tortarolo M Piva R Bendotti C 2012 Lentiviral vectors carrying enhancer elements of Hb9 promoter drive selective transgene expression in mouse spinal cord motor neurons Journal of neuroscience methods 205 139 147 22245491
Pilakka-Kanthikeel S Atluri VSR Sagar V Saxena SK Nair M 2013 Targeted brain derived neurotropic factors (BDNF) delivery across the blood-brain barrier for neuro-protection using magnetic nano carriers: an in-vitro study PLoS One 8 e62241 23653680
Polazzi E Monti B 2010 Microglia and neuroprotection: from in vitro studies to therapeutic applications Progress in neurobiology 92 293 315 20609379
Popescu BFG Lucchinetti CF 2012 Pathology of demyelinating diseases Annual Review of Pathology: Mechanisms of Disease 7 185 217
Rafi MA Rao HZ Passini MA Curtis M Vanier MT Zaka M Luzi P Wolfe JH Wenger DA 2005 AAV-mediated expression of galactocerebrosidase in brain results in attenuated symptoms and extended life span in murine models of globoid cell leukodystrophy Molecular Therapy 11 734 744 15851012
Rafii MS Baumann TL Bakay RA Ostrove JM Siffert J Fleisher AS Herzog CD Barba D Pay M Salmon DP 2014 A phase1 study of stereotactic gene delivery of AAV2-NGF for Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 10 571 581
Rahim A Wong A Howe S Buckley S Acosta-Saltos A Elston K Ward N Philpott N Cooper J Anderson P 2009 Efficient gene delivery to the adult and fetal CNS using pseudotyped non-integrating lentiviral vectors Gene therapy 16 509 520 19158847
Rahim AA Wong AM Hoefer K Buckley SM Mattar CN Cheng SH Chan JK Cooper JD Waddington SN 2011 Intravenous administration of AAV2/9 to the fetal and neonatal mouse leads to differential targeting of CNS cell types and extensive transduction of the nervous system The FASEB Journal 25 3505 3518 21746868
Rao KS Reddy MK Horning JL Labhasetwar V 2008 TAT-conjugated nanoparticles for the CNS delivery of anti-HIV drugs Biomaterials 29 4429 4438 18760470
Rao S Morales AA Pearse DD 2015 The Comparative Utility of Viromer RED and Lipofectamine for Transient Gene Introduction into Glial Cells BioMed research international 2015
Regan MR Huang YH Kim YS Dykes-Hoberg MI Jin L Watkins AM Bergles DE Rothstein JD 2007 Variations in promoter activity reveal a differential expression and physiology of glutamate transporters by glia in the developing and mature CNS The Journal of neuroscience 27 6607 6619 17581948
Rock RB Peterson PK 2006 Microglia as a pharmacological target in infectious and inflammatory diseases of the brain Journal of Neuroimmune Pharmacology 1 117 126 18040778
Rodgers JM Robinson AP Miller SD 2013 Strategies for protecting oligodendrocytes and enhancing remyelination in multiple sclerosis Discovery medicine 16 53 23911232
Rogers M-L Rush RA 2012 Non-viral gene therapy for neurological diseases, with an emphasis on targeted gene delivery Journal of controlled release 157 183 189 21893121
Romero M Smith G 1998 Adenoviral gene transfer into the normal and injured spinal cord: enhanced transgene stability by combined administration of temperature-sensitive virus and transient immune blockade Gene therapy 5 1612 1621 10023440
Rungta RL Choi HB Lin PJ Ko RW Ashby D Nair J Manoharan M Cullis PR MacVicar BA 2013 Lipid nanoparticle delivery of siRNA to silence neuronal gene expression in the brain Molecular Therapy Nucleic Acids 2 e136 24301867
Samaranch L San Sebastian W Kells AP Salegio EA Heller G Bringas JR Pivirotto P DeArmond S Forsayeth J Bankiewicz KS 2014 AAV9-mediated expression of a non-self protein in nonhuman primate central nervous system triggers widespread neuroinflammation driven by antigen-presenting cell transduction Molecular Therapy 22 329 337
San Sebastian W Samaranch L Heller G Kells AP Bringas J Pivirotto P Forsayeth J Bankiewicz KS 2013 Adeno-associated virus type 6 is retrogradely transported in the non-human primate brain Gene therapy 20 1178 1183 24067867
Sandhu JK Gardaneh M Iwasiow R Lanthier P Gangaraju S Ribecco-Lutkiewicz M Tremblay R Kiuchi K Sikorska M 2009 Astrocyte-secreted GDNF and glutathione antioxidant system protect neurons against 6OHDA cytotoxicity Neurobiology of disease 33 405 414 19118631
Schapira AH 1999 Science, medicine, and the future: Parkinson’s disease BMJ 318 311 314 9924061
Schuster DJ Dykstra JA Riedl MS Kitto KF Belur LR McIvor RS Elde RP Fairbanks CA Vulchanova L 2015 Biodistribution of adeno-associated virus serotype 9 (AAV9) vector after intrathecal and intravenous delivery in mouse Neuroanatomy and transgenic technologies
Segovia J Vergara P Brenner M 1998 Astrocyte-specific expression of tyrosine hydroxylase after intracerebral gene transfer induces behavioral recovery in experimental Parkinsonism Gene therapy 5
Serramía MJ Álvarez S Fuentes-Paniagua E Clemente MI Sánchez-Nieves J Gómez R de la Mata J Muñoz-Fernández MÁ 2015 In vivo delivery of siRNA to the brain by carbosilane dendrimer Journal of Controlled Release 200 60 70 25559178
Shah L Yadav S Amiji M 2013 Nanotechnology for CNS delivery of bio-therapeutic agents Drug delivery and translational research 3 336 351 23894728
Shen F Fan Y Su H Zhu Y Chen Y Liu W Young WL Yang G-Y 2008 Adeno-associated viral vector-mediated hypoxia-regulated VEGF gene transfer promotes angiogenesis following focal cerebral ischemia in mice Gene therapy 15 30 39 17960159
Shevtsova Z Malik JM Michel U Bahr M Kugler S 2005 Promoters and serotypes: targeting of adeno-associated virus vectors for gene transfer in the rat central nervous system in vitro and in vivo Exp Physiol 90 53 59 15542619
Shi N Zhang Y Zhu C Boado RJ Pardridge WM 2001 Brain-specific expression of an exogenous gene after iv administration Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 98 12754 12759
Silvestroni A Faull RL Strand AD Möller T 2009 Distinct neuroinflammatory profile in post-mortem human Huntington’s disease Neuroreport 20 1098 1103 19590393
Sonawane ND Szoka FC Verkman A 2003 Chloride accumulation and swelling in endosomes enhances DNA transfer by polyamine-DNA polyplexes Journal of Biological Chemistry 278 44826 44831 12944394
Stangel M Gold R Gass A Haas J Jung S Elias W Zettl UK 2006 Current issues in immunomodulatory treatment of multiple sclerosis--a practical approach J Neurol 253 Suppl 1 I32 36 16477485
Steiner J Haughey N Li W Venkatesan A Anderson C Reid R Malpica T Pocernich C Butterfield DA Nath A 2006 Oxidative stress and therapeutic approaches in HIV dementia Antioxidants &amp; redox signaling 8 2089 2100 17034352
Su X Kells AP Huang EJ Lee HS Hadaczek P Beyer J Bringas J Pivirotto P Penticuff J Eberling J 2009 Safety evaluation of AAV2-GDNF gene transfer into the dopaminergic nigrostriatal pathway in aged and parkinsonian rhesus monkeys Human gene therapy 20 1627 1640 19671001
Sun Y Jin K Clark K Peel A Mao X Chang Q Simon R Greenberg D 2003 Adeno-associated virus-mediated delivery of BCL-w gene improves outcome after transient focal cerebral ischemia Gene therapy 10 115 122 12571640
Tan J-KY Pham B Zong Y Perez C Maris DO Hemphill A Miao CH Matula TJ Mourad PD Wei H 2016 Microbubbles and ultrasound increase intraventricular polyplex gene transfer to the brain Journal of Controlled Release 231 86 93 26860281
Tekin S Cummings JL 2002 Frontal-subcortical neuronal circuits and clinical neuropsychiatry: an update Journal of psychosomatic research 53 647 654 12169339
Teng Z-P Chen J Chau L-Y Galunic N Regan RF 2004 Adenoviral transfer of the heme oxygenase-1 gene protects striatal astrocytes from heme-mediated oxidative injury Neurobiology of disease 17 179 187 15474356
Thomas CE Schiedner G Kochanek S Castro MG Löwenstein PR 2000 Peripheral infection with adenovirus causes unexpected long-term brain inflammation in animals injected intracranially with first-generation, but not with high-capacity, adenovirus vectors: toward realistic long-term neurological gene therapy for chronic diseases Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 97 7482 7487
Tinsley RB Vesey MJ Barati S Rush RA Ferguson IA 2004 Improved non-viral transfection of glial and adult neural stem cell lines and of primary astrocytes by combining agents with complementary modes of action The journal of gene medicine 6 1023 1032 15352075
Tosi G Bortot B Ruozi B Dolcetta D Vandelli M Forni F Severini G 2013 Potential use of polymeric nanoparticles for drug delivery across the blood-brain barrier Current medicinal chemistry 20 2212 2225 23458620
Towne C Schneider B Kieran D Redmond D Aebischer P 2010 Efficient transduction of non-human primate motor neurons after intramuscular delivery of recombinant AAV serotype 6 Gene therapy 17 141 146 19727139
Tuinstra HM Ducommun MM Briley WE Shea LD 2013 Gene delivery to overcome astrocyte inhibition of axonal growth: An in vitro Model of the glial scar Biotechnology and bioengineering 110 947 957 23055330
Tuinstra HM Aviles MO Shin S Holland SJ Zelivyanskaya ML Fast AG Ko SY Margul DJ Bartels AK Boehler RM 2012 Multifunctional, multichannel bridges that deliver neurotrophin encoding lentivirus for regeneration following spinal cord injury Biomaterials 33 1618 1626 22130565
Uylings HB De Brabander J 2002 Neuronal changes in normal human aging and Alzheimer’s disease Brain and cognition 49 268 276 12139954
Van Spronsen M Hoogenraad CC 2010 Synapse pathology in psychiatric and neurologic disease Current neurology and neuroscience reports 10 207 214 20425036
Vartak-Sharma N Gelman BB Joshi C Borgamann K Ghorpade A 2014 Astrocyte elevated gene-1 is a novel modulator of HIV-1-associated neuroinflammation via regulation of nuclear factor-kappaB signaling and excitatory amino acid transporter-2 repression J Biol Chem 289 19599 19612 24855648
Von Bernhardi R Eugenín-von Bernhardi L Eugenín J 2015 Microglial cell dysregulation in brain aging and neurodegeneration Frontiers in aging neuroscience 7 25762930
von Bernhardi R Ramirez G De Ferrari GV Inestrosa NC 2003 Acetylcholinesterase induces the expression of the beta-amyloid precursor protein in glia and activates glial cells in culture Neurobiol Dis 14 447 457 14678761
von Jonquieres G Mersmann N Klugmann CB Harasta AE Lutz B Teahan O Housley GD Fröhlich D Krämer-Albers E-M Klugmann M 2013 Glial promoter selectivity following AAV-delivery to the immature brain PLoS One 8 e65646 23799030
Vos T Barber RM Bell B Bertozzi-Villa A Biryukov S Bolliger I Charlson F Davis A Degenhardt L Dicker D 2015 Global, regional, and national incidence, prevalence, and years lived with disability for 301 acute and chronic diseases and injuries in 188 countries, 1990–2013: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2013 The Lancet 386 743 800
Wake H Moorhouse AJ Miyamoto A Nabekura J 2013 Microglia: actively surveying and shaping neuronal circuit structure and function Trends Neurosci 36 209 217 23260014
Wang C Wang S 2006 Astrocytic expression of transgene in the rat brain mediated by baculovirus vectors containing an astrocyte-specific promoter Gene therapy 13 1447 1456 16724097
Wang C Wang C Clark K Sferra T 2003a Recombinant AAV serotype 1 transduction efficiency and tropism in the murine brain Gene therapy 10 1528 1534 12900769
Wang CY Yang SH Tzeng SF 2015 MicroRNA-145 as one negative regulator of astrogliosis Glia 63 194 205 25139829
Wang D Zhong L Nahid MA Gao G 2014 The potential of adeno-associated viral vectors for gene delivery to muscle tissue Expert opinion on drug delivery 11 345 364 24386892
Wang DD Bordey A 2008 The astrocyte odyssey Progress in neurobiology 86 342 367 18948166
Wang J-Q Chen Q Wang X Wang Q-C Wang Y Cheng H-P Guo C Sun Q Chen Q Tang T-S 2013 Dysregulation of mitochondrial calcium signaling and superoxide flashes cause mitochondrial genomic DNA damage in Huntington disease Journal of Biological Chemistry 288 3070 3084 23250749
Wang L Lin F Wang J Wu J Han R Zhu L Zhang G DiFiglia M Qin Z 2012 Truncated N-terminal huntingtin fragment with expanded-polyglutamine (htt552-100Q) suppresses brain-derived neurotrophic factor transcription in astrocytes Acta biochimica et biophysica Sinica gmr125
Wang X Li X Xu L Zhan Y Yaish-Ohad S Erhardt JA Barone FC Feuerstein GZ 2003b Up-regulation of secretory leukocyte protease inhibitor (SLPI) in the brain after ischemic stroke: adenoviral expression of SLPI protects brain from ischemic injury Molecular pharmacology 64 833 840 14500739
Watson DJ Kobinger GP Passini MA Wilson JM Wolfe JH 2002 Targeted transduction patterns in the mouse brain by lentivirus vectors pseudotyped with VSV, Ebola, Mokola, LCMV, or MuLV envelope proteins Molecular Therapy 5 528 11991743
Weinberg M Blake B Samulski RJ Mccown TJ 2011 The influence of epileptic neuropathology and prior peripheral immunity on CNS transduction by rAAV2 and rAAV5 Gene therapy 18 961 968 21490684
Weismann CM Ferreira J Keeler AM Su Q Qui L Shaffer SA Xu Z Gao G Sena-Esteves M 2015 Systemic AAV9 gene transfer in adult GM1 gangliosidosis mice reduces lysosomal storage in CNS and extends lifespan Human molecular genetics 24 4353 4364 25964428
Wong HL Wu XY Bendayan R 2012 Nanotechnological advances for the delivery of CNS therapeutics Advanced drug delivery reviews 64 686 700 22100125
Wyss-Coray T Rogers J 2012 Inflammation in Alzheimer disease-a brief review of the basic science and clinical literature Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2 a006346 22315714
Xia C-F Yin H Borlongan CV Chao J Chao L 2004 Adrenomedullin gene delivery protects against cerebral ischemic injury by promoting astrocyte migration and survival Human gene therapy 15 1243 1254 15684700
Xie Y Wang T Sun GY Ding S 2010 Specific disruption of astrocytic Ca 2+ signaling pathway in vivo by adeno-associated viral transduction Neuroscience 170 992 1003 20736051
Xin H Sha X Jiang X Zhang W Chen L Fang X 2012 Anti-glioblastoma efficacy and safety of paclitaxel-loading Angiopep-conjugated dual targeting PEG-PCL nanoparticles Biomaterials 33 8167 8176 22889488
Yang B Li S Wang H Guo Y Gessler DJ Cao C Su Q Kramer J Zhong L Ahmed SS 2014 Global CNS transduction of adult mice by intravenously delivered rAAVrh. 8 and rAAVrh. 10 and nonhuman primates by rAAVrh. 10 Molecular Therapy 22 1299 1309 24781136
Yang C Yang W-H Chen S-S Ma B-F Li B Lu T Qu T-Y Klein RL Zhao L-R Duan W-M 2013 Pre-immunization with an intramuscular injection of AAV9-human erythropoietin vectors reduces the vector-mediated transduction following re-administration in rat brain PloS one 8 e63876 23667683
Young D Fong DM Lawlor PA Wu A Mouravlev A McRae M Glass M Dragunow M During MJ 2014 Adenosine kinase, glutamine synthetase and EAAT2 as gene therapy targets for temporal lobe epilepsy Gene therapy 21 1029 1040 25231174
Yurek D Hasselrot U Cass W Sesenoglu-Laird O Padegimas L Cooper M 2015 Age and lesion-induced increases of GDNF transgene expression in brain following intracerebral injections of DNA nanoparticles Neuroscience 284 500 512 25453772
Yurek DM Fletcher AM Smith GM Seroogy KB Ziady AG Molter J Kowalczyk TH Padegimas L Cooper MJ 2009 Long-term transgene expression in the central nervous system using DNA nanoparticles Molecular Therapy 17 641 650 19223866
Zhang H Yang B Mu X Ahmed SS Su Q He R Wang H Mueller C Sena-Esteves M Brown R 2011 Several rAAV vectors efficiently cross the blood brain barrier and transduce neurons and astrocytes in the neonatal mouse central nervous system Molecular Therapy 19 1440 1448 21610699
Zhang Y Schlachetzki F Zhang Y-F Boado RJ Pardridge WM 2004 Normalization of striatal tyrosine hydroxylase and reversal of motor impairment in experimental parkinsonism with intravenous nonviral gene therapy and a brain-specific promoter Human gene therapy 15 339 350 15053859
Zhao C Strappe PM Lever AM Franklin RJ 2003 Lentiviral vectors for gene delivery to normal and demyelinated white matter Glia 42 59 67 12594737
Zheng JC Huang Y Tang K Cui M Niemann D Lopez A Morgello S Chen S 2008 HIV-1-infected and/or immune-activated macrophages regulate astrocyte CXCL8 production through IL-1β and TNF-α: Involvement of mitogen-activated protein kinases and protein kinase R Journal of neuroimmunology 200 100 110 18653246
Zinger A Barcia C Herrero MT Guillemin GJ 2011 The involvement of neuroinflammation and kynurenine pathway in Parkinson’s disease Parkinson’s disease 2011
