LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


8709159
3902
Free Radic Biol Med
Free Radic. Biol. Med.
Free radical biology &amp; medicine
0891-5849
1873-4596

28988799
5748263
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2017.10.001
NIHMS914706
Article
Dysfunction of Autophagy and Endosomal-Lysosomal Pathways: Roles in Pathogenesis of Down Syndrome and Alzheimer’s Disease
Colacurcio Daniel J. 12
Pensalfini Anna 12
Jiang Ying 12
Nixon Ralph A. 123
1 Center for Dementia Research, Nathan S. Kline Institute, Orangeburg, NY 10962, USA
2 Department of Psychiatry, New York University Langone Medical Center, New York, NY 10016, USA
3 Department of Cell Biology, New York University Langone Medical Center, New York, NY 10016, USA
Corresponding Author: Ralph A. Nixon1,2,3, Nixon@NKI.RFMH.org
30 10 2017
06 10 2017
1 2018
01 1 2019
114 4051
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Individuals with Down syndrome (DS) have an increased risk of early-onset Alzheimer’s Disease (AD), largely owing to a triplication of the APP gene, located on chromosome 21. In DS and AD, defects in endocytosis and lysosomal function appear at the earliest stages of disease development and progress to widespread failure of intraneuronal waste clearance, neuritic dystrophy and neuronal cell death. The same genetic factors that cause or increase AD risk are also direct causes of endosomal-lysosomal dysfunction, underscoring the essential partnership between this dysfunction and APP metabolites in AD pathogenesis. The appearance of APP-dependent endosome anomalies in DS beginning in infancy and evolving into the full range of AD-related endosomal-lysosomal deficits provides a unique opportunity to characterize the earliest pathobiology of AD preceding the classical neuropathological hallmarks. Facilitating this characterization is the authentic recapitulation of this endosomal pathobiology in peripheral cells from people with DS and in trisomy mouse models. Here, we review current research on endocytic-lysosomal dysfunction in DS and AD, the emerging importance of APP/βCTF in initiating this dysfunction, and the potential roles of additional trisomy 21 genes in accelerating endosomal-lysosomal impairment in DS. Collectively, these studies underscore the growing value of investigating DS to probe the biological origins of AD as well as to understand and ameliorate the developmental disability of DS.

Graphical abstract

Down Syndrome
Alzheimer’s Disease
Endosomes
Lysosomes
Autophagy

INTRODUCTION

Arising from an extra copy of chromosome 21 (HSA21), Down syndrome (DS) is characterized by varying degrees of intellectual disability (learning, memory and language), heart defects, craniofacial abnormality and childhood leukemia (Lott and Dierssen, 2010; Wiseman et al., 2009). The average life expectancy of people with DS has increased to 60 years, as medical treatment has advanced and social acceptance has led to decreased institutionalization. Despite these positive developments, however, almost all individuals with DS reaching the age of 40 will develop progressive Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) with characteristic neuropathological features including β-amyloid plaques, neurofibrillary tangles, and neuronal cell loss (Leverenz and Raskind, 1998; Wisniewski et al., 1985). Among DS individuals, 2–5% exhibit symptoms of AD dementia by the age of 40, while the occurrence of AD dementia approaches 100% in DS individuals by the age of 70 years (Lott and Dierssen, 2010). The extra copy of chromosome 21 is the fundamental source of this increased AD risk and can be mainly attributed to the gene encoding for amyloid precursor protein (APP), which is itself linked to familial AD (Tanzi, 2012). The observation that, in rare cases, a trisomy 21 state in which APP gene dosage is 2N rather than 3N, is associated with a DS phenotype but without an AD phenotype, implies that 3N APP is necessary, though not necessarily sufficient, for AD to develop in individuals with DS (Doran et al., 2017; Korbel et al., 2009; Prasher et al., 1998). Beyond APP, many of the triplicate genes on the HSA21 of DS individuals, such as superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1), DYRK1A, BACE2, Down-Syndrome critical region (DSCR) and S100β have been implicated in AD development (Lott and Dierssen, 2010). Common genetic and pathological factors operating in both AD and DS suggest commonalities in the underlying disease mechanisms. These shared pathological mechanisms are compounded by ageing in both conditions, but accelerated in DS relative to the disease progression observed in AD.

In AD, defects in endocytosis and autophagy have emerged as key drivers of accumulation of cellular waste products, progressive neuronal dysfunction, and neurodegeneration; which we have described previously (Nixon, 2017). Notably, many elements of endocytic and autophagic dysfunction observed in AD are also found in DS brain (as summarized in Figure 1), suggesting common disease-associated pathogenic processes, and a prospect of gaining key insights into these processes by investigating the early onset of AD-related pathophysiological features in DS brain, peripheral tissues, and experimental models of DS. A distinct advantage of the analysis of early AD pathobiology is the authentic recapitulation of the endosomal-lysosomal phenotype and its APP gene dependence in primary skin fibroblasts, other peripheral cell elements, and in induced pluripotent stem (iPSC) neuronal cell lines derived from these cell sources. This has enabled increasingly detailed analyses of the molecular pathways underlying endosomal signaling defects linked to neurodegeneration (Jiang et al., 2010; Park et al., 2008; Weick et al., 2013). In this review, we will address the current state of research on endocytosis and autophagy defects in DS and the relevance of defects in these processes to the development of AD.

ENDOCYTIC DYSFUNCTION IN DS AND RELATIONSHIPS TO AD

Endosomal pathology in AD and DS and the role of specific APP metabolites

Early endosomes sort internalized and plasma membrane-associated cargoes that will be either recycled to the plasma membrane, transported to and from the Golgi via the retromer complex, or directed to lysosomes for degradation (Di Fiore and von Zastrow, 2014; Huotari and Helenius, 2011). Importantly, in addition, endosomes contain on their surface a signaling platform that transduces external or membrane receptor signals, via activation of intracellular signaling molecules, into multiple vesicular trafficking events controlling cargo fates, receptor occupancy on membranes, and endosome-nuclear translocation of transcriptional regulators like tropomyosin receptor kinases (Trks), receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs), and cell cycle and inflammatory factors (Cendrowski et al., 2016; Cosker and Segal, 2014; Howe and Mobley, 2004; Kim et al., 2015; Miaczynska, 2013; Pyrzynska et al., 2009). The master regulator of endocytosis is the small Rab GTPase rab5, whose functions, similarly to other rabGTPases, depend on a) its membrane localization, regulated by GDP dissociation inhibitors (GDIs) (Felberbaum-Corti et al., 2005) and GDI displacement factors (GDFs) (Dirac-Svejstrup et al., 1997); and b) cycling between a GTP-bound/active and a GDP-bound/inactive state, via guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs) and GTPase-activating proteins (RabGAPs) activities, respectively (Wandinger-Ness and Zerial, 2014).

Upon activation, Rab5 recruits effector proteins important for endosome maturation, trafficking and signaling. These effectors include: Rabaptin-5 (Stenmark et al., 1995), forming a complex with, and regulating the GEF activity of Rabex-5, a specific GEF for rab5 (Horiuchi et al., 1997; Zhang et al., 2014); phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Vps34 and its product PI(3)P, required for docking and fusion of incoming rab5 positive early endosomes via recruitment of EEA1 and SNAREs (Christoforidis et al., 1999; Simonsen et al., 1998). Rabenosyn-5, similarly to EEA1, specifically binds to PI(3)P via its FYVE finger motif and is also necessary for endosomal membrane targeting (Sonnichsen et al., 2000; Zerial and McBride, 2001). APPL1 (adaptor protein containing pleckstrin homology domain, phosphotyrosine binding (PTB) domain, and leucine zipper motif) (Miaczynska et al., 2004), enriched on a subpopulation of very early endosomes with distinct spatial distributions and cargo sorting activity (Kalaidzidis et al., 2015) has emerged as another important rab5 regulatory factor highly relevant to emergence of early endosome dysfunction in AD. Owing to its BAR-PH and PTB domains (Li et al., 2007; Zhu et al., 2007), APPL1 binding to GTP-rab5 is key to mediate the signaling of growth factors (EGF, NGF, BDNF) (Fu et al., 2011; Lin et al., 2006; Miaczynska et al., 2004), NF-kB (Hupalowska et al., 2012), adiponectin (Mao et al., 2006), insulin (Ryu et al., 2014) and phosphoinositides (Bohdanowicz et al., 2012).

In AD, acceleration of neuronal endocytosis (as measured directly in DS fibroblasts), is reflected in increased fusion and the swelling of rab5-positive early endosomes (Cataldo et al., 1997; Cataldo et al., 2008) and upregulated expression of rab5 and related rab effectors (Ginsberg et al., 2010a; Ginsberg et al., 2011; Ginsberg et al., 2010b) are the earliest AD neuronal pathology thus far identified. Our previous studies had linked the endosomal abnormality in DS to its extra copy of APP in neurons of the Ts65Dn and Ts2 mouse (Cataldo et al., 2000; Jiang et al., 2016), and also in fibroblasts derived from individuals with DS (Cataldo et al., 2008; Jiang et al., 2010). Notably for AD and DS, endosomes are sites of active APP processing due to the enrichment of β-site APP cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1) and γ-site APP secretase (Israel et al., 2012; Nixon, 2013). Growing evidence shows that β-site cleavage of APP on endosomes (Kaether et al., 2006) to form APP-βCTF is actively modulated by the varied regulatory influences on BACE1 activity and localization, which include many AD risk factors.

APP-βCTF is elevated in both AD and DS human brains (Kim et al., 2015; Pera et al., 2013) and gene mutations in presenilin 1 (PSEN1) and APP that cause early-onset forms of AD accelerate APP-βCTF formation and/or accumulation (Cacquevel et al., 2012; Chang and Suh, 2005; De Jonghe et al., 2001; Deyts et al., 2016; van der Kant and Goldstein, 2015). APP-βCTF has been shown recently to pathologically activate rab5 by recruiting to early endosomes the adaptor protein APPL1, which binds both APP-βCTF and GTP-rab5, causing stabilization and further activation of rab5 (Figure 2A). This results in the upregulation of endocytosis, endosomal trafficking defects and abnormal endosome-mediated signaling (Kim et al., 2015). By crossing Ts2 mice with the BACE1+/− line, we generated Ts2.BACE1+/− mice that have reduced APP-βCTF but undetectable change in regional Aβ levels compared to Ts2.BACE1+/+ mice; this modulation rescued rab5-positive endosome size and normalized basal forebrain cholinergic neuron (BFCN) number (Jiang et al., 2016). Combined with findings from others (Choi et al., 2013; Lauritzen et al., 2012; Lauritzen et al., 2016; Salehi et al., 2006; Tamayev et al., 2012) our studies (Jiang et al., 2010; Jiang et al., 2016; Kim et al., 2015) implicate APP-βCTF in the pathogenesis of AD and DS, while also providing support for ongoing clinical study of BACE1 inhibitors as a therapy for AD. Genetic reduction of BACE1 has been shown to reduce amyloid burden, delay the onset BFCN degeneration, and improve cognitive function in several APP transgenic mouse models (McConlogue et al., 2007; Ohno et al., 2007; Singer et al., 2005).

In addition to APP, another gene from HSA21 that has been implicated in the observed endosomal dysfunction in DS is the synaptojanin1 (SYN1) gene (Cossec et al., 2012). SYNJ1 encodes for a phosphatase, the activity of which is directed to phosphatidylinositol-4,5-biphosphate PI(4,5)P2, a signaling molecule involved in the regulation of clathrin-mediated endocytosis (Mani et al., 2007). SYNJ1 levels are elevated in the brain of human DS patients (Arai et al., 2002) and even greater in DS with AD, compared to sporadic AD and control brains (Martin et al., 2014). Moreover, elevated expression of SYNJ1 was shown to alter PI(4,5)P2 metabolism and cause cognitive deficits in the T65Dn mouse model of DS (Voronov et al., 2008).

Finally, inheritance of the APOE ε4 allele, which is the strongest genetic risk factor for sporadic AD (Liu et al., 2013), promoted earlier appearance of endosomal enlargement at preclinical stages of AD (Cataldo et al., 2000). Notably, APOE ε4 is a significant factor in the severity of AD pathology in DS. Several studies have shown that DS patients who carry APOE ε4 exhibit increased risk of AD-DS, earlier dementia onset, and greater amyloid load; whereas APOE ε2 has been shown to confer protective effects in DS (Lai et al., 1999; Prasher et al., 2008; Wiseman et al., 2015). Considering the shared genetics between AD and DS, it may be speculated that APOE ε4 accelerates endosomal pathology in DS as well as in AD in the early development of disease.

Endosomal dysfunction in AD and DS: Consequences on downstream endocytic events relevant to AD pathogenesis

Endosome maturation defects

The conversion from rab5- to rab7-positive endosomes underlies the transition of cargos from early to late endosomes (Huotari and Helenius, 2011). Such transition is mediated by GTP-rab5, which recruits the SAND-1/Mon1 and Ccz1 complex (Poteryaev et al., 2007; Wang et al., 2003) and the class C vacuolar protein sorting/homotypic fusion and protein sorting (Class C VPS/HOPS) complex (Rink et al., 2005) for recruitment and activation of rab7 and suppression of rab5. The molecular link between the rab5 and rab7 machineries comes from the observation that expression of GTP hydrolysis-defective rab5 mutant or deletion of Vps39, one of the class C VPS/HOPS complex subunit known to be a GEF for rab7, caused enlargement and colocalization of rab5/EEA1 and rab7/LAMP1-positive vacuoles (Rink et al., 2005). As the endosome moves towards the nucleus, sorting complexes required for transport (ESCRT-0, ESCRT-I, ESCRT-II, ESCRT-III) regulate the sequestration of ubiquitinated cargoes (Raiborg and Stenmark, 2009) and initiate the lipid-driven formation of intra-lumenal vesicles (ILVs), which are enriched in cholesterol, sphingolipids and PI(3)P in early phases and lyso-bisphosphatidic acid (LBPA) and phosphoinositol-3,5-bis phosphate (PI(3,5)P2) in later phases (Babst, 2011; Solinger and Spang, 2013).

As a result of the upregulation of endocytosis, DS fibroblasts (Cataldo et al., 2008), like neurons in DS/AD brain, exhibit late endosomal abnormalities, manifesting in increased numbers and size of rab7- and LBPA-positive perinuclear vacuoles. Microarray analysis of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and AD hippocampal CA1 neurons revealed upregulation of both rab5 and rab7 GTPases (Ginsberg et al., 2010a). Subsequent analysis on rab5 and rab7 protein expression revealed a region-specific increase in their levels in basal forebrain, frontal cortex, hippocampus in MCI and AD (Ginsberg et al., 2011; Ginsberg et al., 2010b). Also, lipidomic analysis showed specific enrichment of LBPA, sphingomyelin, ganglioside GM3, and cholesterol esters in human AD brain entorhinal cortex (Chan et al., 2012). A similar increase in cholesterol esters and GM3 was also observed in PS1-APP mice, altogether suggesting a common collection of pathogenic mechanisms associated with endo-lysosomal pathology in DS and AD (Chan et al., 2012). Disruption of the ESCRT machinery has also been shown to promote neuronal accumulation of ubiquitin-positive aggregates and autophagosomes (APs), as well as neurodegeneration (Kurashige et al., 2013; Lee et al., 2007; Tanikawa et al., 2012; Yamazaki et al., 2010), and causes an early accumulation of large lipid-related autofluorescent intraneuronal aggregates derived from the endolysosomal system (Clayton et al., 2015).

Aberrant endosomal signaling of neurotrophins leading to cholinergic neurodegeneration

The coordinated action of Rab5 and rab7 is key to the regulation of axonal uptake and long-range retrograde transport of NGF-activated TrkA receptor within long-lived signaling endosomes (Howe and Mobley, 2004) (Deinhardt et al., 2006; Philippidou et al., 2011; Saxena et al., 2005) which play roles in the modulation of gene expression promoting neuronal growth, survival and synapse assembly and maintenance (Cosker and Segal, 2014; Lehigh et al., 2017; Sharma et al., 2010).

There are multiple lines of evidence supporting impaired endosomal signaling in AD and DS (Figure 2B). Activity-dependent release of NGF from cortical and hippocampal neurons and NGF signaling are crucial for the survival of BFCNs that are lost in DS and AD, contributing to cognitive decline (Grothe et al., 2012; Iulita and Cuello, 2016). Retrograde transport of NGF is disrupted and the cholinergic phenotype is lost in mouse models of AD and DS (Granholm et al., 2000; Jiang et al., 2016; Salehi et al., 2006) and reversed by administration of NGF (Cooper et al., 2001; Granholm et al., 2000) or by partial reduction of BACE-1 (Jiang et al., 2016). Additionally, microarray analysis of human AD hippocampal neurons and BFCN revealed an early down-regulation of Trk receptors accompanying the upregulation of early endocytic genes (Ginsberg et al., 2010a; Ginsberg et al., 2011).

APP-βCTF-mediated rab5 hyper-activation and endosomal enlargement (Kim et al., 2015; Xu et al., 2016) lead to BFCN atrophy (Xu et al., 2016) and disrupt retrograde transport and signaling causing a net slowing down of vesicle movements, which are prevented by reducing GTP-rab5 levels either by siAPPL1 (Kim et al., 2015) or by expression of dominant negative rab5 mutant (Xu et al., 2016). βCTF-mediated rab5 hyperactivation may also affect the biogenesis of signaling endosomes, which requires inactivation of Rab5 by rabGAP5, and constitutively active rab5 mutant blocks NGF-mediated neurite outgrowth (Haas et al., 2005; Liu et al., 2007). Finally, APPL1 recruitment to βCTF-GTP-rab5 endosomes may prevent APPL1-PTB binding to activated TrkA receptor mediating NGF signaling (Lin et al., 2006; Varsano et al., 2006) and contribute to slow down endosome transport by increasing rab5 activation and reducing TrkA signaling (Nixon, 2017). Aside from its effects on NGF, rab5 hyperactivation promotes activation of signaling pathways leading to cell death. APPL1-mediated nuclear delivery of transcription factors activates nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) in human DS fibroblasts (Kim et al., 2015). Rab5 interaction with APP-BP1 induces cell cycle re-entry followed by apoptosis in London mutant APP (V642I)-FAD expressing primary rat cortical neurons (Laifenfeld et al., 2007).

Similarly to TrkA receptors (Ascano et al., 2009), also APP (Woodruff et al., 2016) and BACE1 (Buggia-Prevot et al., 2014) have been shown to require rab11-mediated transcytosis for their axonal localization. Following APP endocytosis into in rab5 positive early endosomes, BACE1-mediated cleavage of APP redistributes a portion of full-length APP and βCTF into rab11 recycling endosomes where the γ-secretase-mediated cleavage of βCTF is the “signal” promoting transcytosis (Woodruff et al., 2016). fAD mutations that increase βCTF levels, either by enhancing BACE1 activity or impairing γ-secretase cleavage of APP, disrupt APP transcytosis, causing an accumulation of APP/βCTF and rab11-positive endosomes in the soma and reduced levels in the axon (Woodruff et al., 2016). APP has also been proposed to influence TrkA anterograde transport via direct (Kamal et al., 2001; Stokin et al., 2005) or indirect (Inomata et al., 2003) binding to kinesins that may affect NGF signaling (Zhang et al., 2013). Therefore, decreased anterograde transport of TrkA due to defects in axonal transport of APP caused by overexpression or mutations of APP may also contribute to NGF retrograde transport defects.

Retromer defects

The sequential action of rab5 and rab7 has also been shown to regulate the retrograde transport from the sorting compartment to the trans-Golgi network (TGN), via recruitment of the retromer complex (Rojas et al., 2008), which also regulates the recycling of cargoes from endosomes back to the plasma membrane; a process which is necessary for synaptic remodeling and plasticity (Loo et al., 2014; Temkin et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2012). Rab5 indirectly promotes the recruitment of the sorting nexin (SNX) subcomplex (different dimeric combinations of SNX1, SNX2, SNX5, and SNX6), likely via PI3K activation (Rojas et al., 2008). On the other hand, rab7, along with SNX3 and TBC1 domain family member 5 (TBC1DF5), also known as the “membrane-recruiting module” (Small and Petsko, 2015), directly interacts with the vacuolar protein sorting (Vps) subcomplex (a heterotrimer composed of Vps26, Vps29, and Vps35). Recently, another SNX, SNX27, was linked to retromer and its function (Steinberg et al., 2013; Temkin et al., 2011). SNX27 functions as an adaptor for binding to PDZ ligand-containing cargos that are directed to the cell surface via the recycling pathway.

Defects in the retromer complex have been linked to neurodegenerative diseases, including AD and DS. While autosomal-dominant mutations in VPS35 link late-onset PD with retromer dysfunction, AD brains are deficient in Vps35 and Vps26 components (Small and Petsko, 2015). Moreover, a recent study provides evidence for SNX27 deficiency in DS brains possibly due to an extra copy of a microRNA encoded by human chromosome 21, which causes decreased SNX27 expression (Wang et al., 2013). This resulted in disrupted glutamate receptor recycling in the hippocampus and led to dendritic dysfunction. Notably, upregulation of SNX27 in the hippocampus of Ts65Dn mice rescued both synaptic and cognitive deficits (Wang et al., 2013). It might be speculated that correcting the retromer-dependent trafficking from endosomes would also have a salutary effect on endosome enlargement and its consequences.

Altered endosome trafficking contributing to autophagic defects and neuritic pathology in AD and DS

Before fusing with lysosomes, late endosomes can fuse with autophagosomes (AP) to form prelysosomal compartments known as amphisomes (Nixon, 2013). Amphisome formation requires some of the components that regulate late endosome/multivesicular body (MVB) formation, such as HOPS and ESCRT protein complexes. Additionally, Rab7 is found on nascent autophagosomes and is required for AP maturation (Gutierrez et al., 2004; Jager et al., 2004). In distal axons, late endosomes commonly fuse with APs and acquire retrograde motility by recruiting dynein-snapin complexes (Cheng et al., 2015). Snapin, originally implicated in vesicle fusion and synaptic transmission (Ilardi et al., 1999), has been shown to play a crucial role in regulating late endosome retrograde transport and maturation in neurons (Cai et al., 2010). Indeed, Snapin deletion causes accumulation of late endosomes and impairs lysosomal function.

Recent evidence indicates that amphisome retrograde transport is impaired in the mossy fiber tracts of the dentate gyrus in young 3×Tg-AD mice, compared to WT, as detected by increased colocalization of LC3-II with the late endosomal marker mannose-6-phosphate receptor (CI-MPR) in distal axons. Additionally, these axons were positive for ubiquitin, p62 and appeared swollen and dystrophic (Tammineni et al., 2017). APs have been shown to be key organelle for the degradation of βCTF via the MVB/lysosomal pathway, and inhibition of AP formation or fusion with the endolysosomal compartment, caused accumulation of βCTF in ILV/MVB (Gonzalez et al., 2017). Disrupted anterograde transport of βCTF-containing endosomes results in their accumulation in axons terminals along with autophagic vacuoles, presumably formed in an effort to facilitate clearance of endosomes, contributing to axonal swelling and neuritic dystrophy similar to that observed at early stages of AD (Stokin et al., 2005).

The majority of dystrophic neurites in human and mouse AD brains are characterized by the presence of autophagic vacuoles (Nixon, 2005). A sustained induction of autophagy and endocytosis paralleled by a progressive decline in lysosomal proteolysis and a slowing of retrogradely transported cargoes within vulnerable neuronal populations likely contributes to the extensive autophagic and neuritic pathologies implicated in AD (as illustrated in Figure 2C) (Bordi et al., 2016). Notably, even in the absence of APP-βCTF/amyloid, defective proteolysis or inhibition of endolysosomal acidification can induce the accumulation of vacuoles filled with incompletely degraded, ubiquitinated material that accumulates, causing neurite swelling and dystrophy (Boland et al., 2008; Lee et al., 2011). In DS fibroblasts, an increase in the number of large compartments with the structural features of early/late endosomal hybrids, MVB, autophagic vacuoles, late endosomes, or lysosomes, has also been reported (Cataldo et al., 2008), further highlighting the relationship between early endosomal dysfunction and downstream endocytic and proteolytic compartments. Extensive accumulation of misfolded and ubiquitinated proteins in the brain (Tramutola et al., 2016) and dystrophic neurites (as illustrated in Figure 2C) (Mattiace et al., 1991) of DS individuals suggests that global defects in protein quality control ultimately disrupt autophagic and lysosomal clearance (see following section), despite the lowered autophagy induction rate due to hyperactivation of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR axis (Perluigi et al., 2014). mTOR activation has also been reported to be elevated in inferior parietal lobule (Tramutola et al., 2015) and medial temporal cortex neurons bearing hyperphosphorylated tau in human AD brains (Li et al., 2005), as well as in non-neural cultured cells transfected with mutant APP (Caccamo et al., 2010) or exposed to Aβ oligomers (Bhaskar et al., 2009). On the other hand, a reduction in mTOR activity has been documented in AD hippocampus (Bordi et al., 2016), as well as murine neuroblastoma cells exposed to Aβ42, PSEN1/APP mouse brain and lymphocytes from AD patients (Lafay-Chebassier et al., 2005). There is also evidence for an early transcriptional upregulation of genes promoting autophagy and downregulation of negative regulators of autophagy flux in human AD entorhinal cortex (Lipinski et al., 2010) and in CA1 pyramidal neurons (Bordi et al., 2016). Taken together, these observations highlight the complexity in defining the net direction of autophagic signaling changes during the course of AD, due to the different experimental models used, the specific brain regions and cell populations examined at a given stage of AD pathology development and the different methods of analyzing mTOR activity itself and downstream effects on its substrates and autophagy.

LYSOSOMAL DYSFUNCTION IN DS AND RELATIONSHIPS TO AD

APP and APP β-C-terminal fragments (βCTF) and lysosomal dysfunction

The triplication of the APP gene in DS is of particular interest in the study of the AD-DS relationship, due to the role of APP mutations in fAD and the broader role of its metabolites in sAD (Selkoe and Hardy, 2016). In the context of lysosomal dysfunction, this attention towards APP is well-supported; APP holoprotein and its cleavage products are implicated in lysosomal defects in DS and AD (Nixon, 2007) (as described in Figure 3). Numerous lines of evidence connect APP and its products with lysosomal dysfunction in AD (Umeda et al., 2011; Xu et al., 2016; Xue et al., 2014; Yang et al., 2008; Yang et al., 2014), and the triplication of the APP gene in DS suggests that APP-mediated lysosomal defects occur in DS in a similar fashion. A recent study on an elderly DS individual lacking APP triplication due to partial trisomy 21 revealed a lack of AD pathology or dementia (Doran et al., 2017), providing human evidence for the role of APP in the development of AD pathology observed in older individuals with DS. This finding is supported by evidence from primary DS fibroblasts which shows that their AD-like endosomal phenotype is APP-dependent (Jiang et al., 2016). The relationship between lysosomal dysfunction and APP is thought to be bi-directional, as lysosomal failure permits formation of misfolded aggregates of APP products and other pathogenic proteins (Ivy et al., 1984; Mangieri et al., 2014), while both APP holoprotein and APP cleavage products (particularly βCTF) negatively impact lysosomal function (Ditaranto et al., 2001; Lauritzen et al., 2012; Lauritzen et al., 2016; Yang et al., 1998; Yang et al., 2011b; Yang et al., 2014). This relationship is observed in studies of the CRND8 APP mutant mouse line, which exhibits age-related amyloid pathology and learning/memory deficits. These mice exhibit markers of lysosomal dysfunction, specifically swollen Cathepsin D (CTSD)-positive compartments, accumulation of amyloid products in the lysosome, and impaired lysosomal lipid processing (Yang et al., 2011b; Yang et al., 2014). Further, the amelioration of learning and memory defects in conjunction with reduced amyloid via rescue of lysosomal function in the CRDN8 model is compelling evidence for the centrality of lysosomal dysfunction in the progression of APP-associated disease phenotypes. Additional strong pathological evidence for autophagic-lysosomal dysfunction in APP mutant animal models has been reported in the 3xTG-AD mouse as well, specifically in regard to the role of βCTF (Lauritzen et al., 2012; Lauritzen et al., 2016).

While a great deal of research in AD has focused on Aβ1–40/42 and the products of their aggregation, current studies indicate that the APP cleavage product βCTF exert significant pathological effects on lysosomal function, in addition to the demonstrated roles of βCTF in endosomal dysfunction (described above). βCTF was found to promote neurodegeneration and formation of lesions in vivo following viral induction of βCTF expression (Lauritzen et al., 2012), and these pathological signs appear to be driven by impairments of lysosomal function. βCTF contributes to morphological changes in lysosomes, reduced lysosomal proteolysis, and accumulation of intracellular waste products (Lauritzen et al., 2016). Further studies of this phenomenon demonstrate that gamma-secretase inhibition, which blocks Aβ formation while increasing βCTF levels, significantly exacerbates the lysosomal dysfunction. These detrimental effects on endolysosomal function also occur independently of Aβ in models of DS (Jiang et al., 2010; Jiang et al., 2016). It is also shown that βCTF fragments can be found in the membranes of lysosomes and autophagic compartments, where they may impair the integrity of the membrane. This could impair acidification of lysosomes via loss of membrane stability and/or through the potential interactions of βCTF with any of the various membrane proteins of the lysosome which are essential to proper acidification. βCTF-induced membrane permeability could also promote cell death via release of lysosomal calcium and pro-apoptotic functions of leaked lysosomal enzymes (Guicciardi et al., 2004)(as described in Figure 3).

Amyloid-β

Additionally, there is also evidence that forms of Aβ can negatively impact lysosomes en route to promoting neuronal death. In vitro studies suggest that various forms of Aβ can permeabilize lysosomal membranes (Ditaranto et al., 2001; Kosenko et al., 2011; Song et al., 2011; Umeda et al., 2011; Yang et al., 1998), which is detrimental to the stability of the lysosome, permitting release of lysosomal enzymes and calcium into the cytoplasm, promoting apoptosis (Guicciardi et al., 2004; Nixon and Cataldo, 1993). Many of these studies tested the effects of intraneuronal amyloid peptides, which accumulate early in DS pathogenesis (Mori et al., 2002). Notably, in animal models of DS and AD, the identity of APP cleavage products is heterogeneous; βCTF and various forms of Aβ are generated, and Aβ peptides can be present as monomers or various stages of oligomerization. In the case of DS, increased expression of full-length APP is likely to increase the autophagic burden of clearing all types of APP cleavage products, but positive effects of BACE1 inhibition (Jiang et al., 2016) suggest potential benefit in targeting APP cleavage by BACE1 to reduce both βCTF and Aβ.

Cathepsin D (CTSD) defects and lysosomal pathology in DS and AD

Lysosomal CTSD-mediated proteolysis plays a very important role in maintaining neuronal cell homeostasis by degrading unwanted material delivered to lysosomes via autophagy or endocytosis. Many disease-associated aggregated proteins: Aβ/βCTF, α-synuclein, tau and huntingtin, abnormally accumulate in autophagic compartments when they are not efficiently degraded by CTSD and other lysosomal enzymes (Nixon, 2013). Numerous studies have shown that mice lacking CTSD have neurodevelopmental deficits and exhibit progressive neurodegeneration (Koike et al., 2003; Shacka et al., 2007; Tyynela et al., 2000; Yamasaki et al., 2007), demonstrating the essential functions of CTSD in efficient lysosomal function and subsequently, neuronal health. In human disease, a subtype of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (NCL) is a lysosomal storage disease directly caused by mutations in CTSD (Ketterer et al., 2017; Stoka et al., 2016). Also, a rare form of Gaucher disease (another lysosomal storage disease) is the result of lowered activity of lysosomal CTSD, caused by a pro-saposin gene mutation (Tatti et al., 2013). Abnormal CTSD protein levels and lowered specific enzyme activity, reflecting a accumulation of inactive or less active CTSD, are seen in the brains of individuals with either sporadic AD or PSEN-fAD (Cataldo et al., 2004). Moreover, also seen in AD is a) an elevated level of CTSD transcript in CA1 neurons of AD brains (Ginsberg et al., 2010a); b) increases in both mRNA expression and cellular content of CTSD in neocortical pyramidal neurons of AD brain (Cataldo et al., 1995); c) presence of CTSD immunoreactivity and active forms of other cathepsins and lysosomal enzymes within amyloid plaques of both DS and AD postmortem brains (Cataldo et al., 1996), reflecting the robust autophagy-lysosomal pathway pathology in neuritic plaques; and d) elevated level of CTSD of abnormally lowered specific enzyme activity in the cerebrospinal fluid of AD patients (Schwagerl et al., 1995). In addition, altered expression and subcellular localization of CTSD were found in both neurons and glia in aged brains (Nakanishi, 2003). CTSD has been associated with the clearance of Aβ, tau, and APOE, all of which are involved in the pathogenesis of AD (Kenessey et al., 1997; Zhou et al., 2006). Our recent studies in DS human fibroblasts show decreased lysosomal CTSD specific and in situ activities, despite an elevation of total CTSD activity (Nixon et al., 2017). Further research on CTSD dysfunction and related pathologic effects on DS and AD are needed to fully understand the mechanism underlying these changes, although impaired lysosomal acidification is a significant contributing factor (Nixon et al., 2017).

Lysosomal acidification defects in autophagic dysfunction during AD and DS

Lysosomal acidification is crucial to many functions of the lysosome, most notably proteolysis; as activities and maturation of multiple lysosomal hydrolases, including CTSD, are pH-dependent. But acidification is also critical for axonal transport of acidified vesicular compartments (Lee et al., 2011), fusion with AVs, lysosomal signaling functions via mTOR (Perera and Zoncu, 2016), lysosomal calcium release, and exocytosis (Wolfe et al., 2013). Acidification of lysosomes is fundamental to lysosomal function and autophagy in general throughout cell types, but is particularly important in neurons which are post-mitotic and need to exert quality control over large expanses of cytoplasm. The rapid constitutive rate of autophagy necessitates also having a highly efficient lysosomal processing of substrates (Boland et al., 2008). Lysosomal acidification defects have been implicated in a number of late-onset neurodegenerative diseases, including AD (Lee et al., 2010; Lee et al., 2015), and PD (Dehay et al., 2013), but also in a group of childhood genetic diseases affecting the CNS (Colacurcio and Nixon, 2016). These acidification-related diseases are often linked to mutation of a component of the vacuolar ATPase (v-ATPase) complex, the proton pump that is the primary driver of lysosomal acidification (McGuire et al., 2017). In these genetic disease contexts, a mutation of the v-ATPase or a v-ATPase associated protein leads to impaired lysosomal acidification, which can drive aggressive (i.e. childhood-onset) CNS pathology via progressive failure of lysosomal function in neurons.

While we have previously addressed the genetic and pathological overlap between AD and DS, it is noteworthy that lysosomal de-acidification causes another form of mental retardation in the case of Mental Retardation Hedera Type, during which a chaperone (ATP6AP2) of the lysosomal v-ATPase is mutated (Hedera et al., 2002; Kinouchi et al., 2013; Korvatska et al., 2013). Combined with the observations of lysosomal de-acidification in AD and AD models (Avrahami et al., 2013; Lee et al., 2015), florid lysosomal pathology of APP mutant mice (Lauritzen et al., 2016; Yang et al., 2011a; Yang et al., 2014), and the overlapping role of APP in AD and DS, lysosomal de-acidification may contribute substantially to the lysosomal dysfunction in DS. Lysosomal de-acidification may also explain how the activities of CTSD and other lysosomal hydrolases become altered and why inactive enzyme forms accumulate. In this regard, our recent data demonstrate de-acidification of lysosomes, driven by loss of v-ATPase function in primary human DS fibroblasts relative to control cells (Nixon et al., 2017).

Also, recent proteomic studies have identified accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins in DS (Tramutola et al., 2016), indicative of aforementioned failures of both proteasomal function and autophagic clearance of proteins (Dephoure et al., 2014). In addition to a global increase in ubiquitinated proteins and loss of proteasomal function, this study (Tramutola et al., 2016) demonstrated progressive ubiquitination of certain proteins between brains of young DS individuals and older DS individuals with AD pathology compared to non-DS controls. For example, V1B2 subunits of the v-ATPase were increasingly ubiquitinated in the brains of DS individuals and further increased in DS individuals with AD pathology. Moreover, this ubiquitination increased with age in non-DS individuals. These changes in the v-ATPase could possibly impair the acidification of lysosomes. The correlation of v-ATPase ubiquitination with DS, DS-associated AD pathology, and ageing therefore further adds to previous evidence (Colacurcio and Nixon, 2016) that v-ATPase dysfunction and lysosomal de-acidification are significant contributors to a common theme of lysosomal dysfunction throughout neurodegenerative disease.

Downstream of lysosomal acidification defects, a number of pathological events can occur progressively throughout the lysosomal network, and ultimately impact the overall health of the cell as this progressive lysosomal corruption worsens (Guicciardi et al., 2004). De-acidification of lysosomes impairs maturation of cathepsins and their activity, leading to oxidative stress in conjunction with impaired clearance of oxidatively damaged proteins (Wolfe et al., 2013). Beyond this hydrolytic dysfunction, abnormal rise in lysosomal pH interferes with axonal trafficking of autophagic compartments (Lee et al., 2011), stalls clearance of defective mitochondria (mitophagy), causes release of lysosomal calcium (McBrayer and Nixon, 2013) leading to harmful downstream effects of calpain activation (Rao et al., 2014) and kinase activation. Many of these impairments overlap and synergize, such as mitophagy failure as an additional source of oxidative stress. The accumulated effects destabilize lysosomal membrane integrity, sending neurons into a “death spiral” (Malkus et al., 2009).

APP-independent lysosomal defects in DS and AD

While the aforementioned evidence from individuals with DS (Doran et al., 2017) and DS cells (Jiang et al., 2010; Jiang et al., 2016) implicates APP gene dosage with AD-like phenotypes in DS, a number of cellular abnormalities associated with DS may also contribute to lysosomal dysfunction. Without regard for specific Ts21 genes, aneuploidy alone has been shown to exert stress on the proteostatic network (Dephoure et al., 2014; Oromendia et al., 2012; Torres et al., 2007). The abnormally high mRNA expression in trisomy 21 leads to proteotoxic stress, ER stress, activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR), oxidative stress, elevated ubiquitinated proteins, and decreased proteasomal degradation. This general disruption of the entire proteostatic network represents an increased burden on lysosomal clearance, especially considering the decrease in proteasomal function. Extensive accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins has also been observed in DS brain tissue (Di Domenico et al., 2013; Tramutola et al., 2016); further suggesting systemic defects in protein quality control and failed waste clearance by both proteasomal and lysosomal systems.

Beyond global defects in protein quality control, a number of individual genes triplicated in DS are linked to lysosomal dysfunction. Notably, the triplication of SOD1 contributes to an oxidative stress burden in DS, which has been shown in DS primary cells and in amniotic fluid samples from DS individuals (Butterfield et al., 2014; Lott and Dierssen, 2010; Pagano and Castello, 2012; Perluigi et al., 2011; Zana et al., 2007; Zana et al., 2006). The increased oxidative stress in DS drives accelerated senescence in DS cells (Rodriguez-Sureda et al., 2015). Oxidative stress is also shown pathologically in brain tissue from DS patients and correlates with amyloid pathology (Cenini et al., 2012). A proteomic study of oxidatively modified proteins in DS brain tissue showed that a number of lysosomal proteins (including v-ATPase, CTSD, GRP78, UCH-L1, and GFAP) become modified, in a manner that couples with decreased activity of the proteasome and AP formation (Di Domenico et al., 2013). The v-ATPase, which is carbonylated on the V1B2 subunit, may be impaired functionally by such changes, contributing to de-acidification (Porter et al., 2013; Wang and Floor, 1998). Oxidative modifications to other lysosomal proteins can also hamper the functions of the lysosome, as evidenced in models of acute oxidative stress (Pal et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2017). The role of oxidative stress in DS is an intriguing area of research, and is addressed further in other reviews in this monograph.

Cystatin B functions as an endogenous lysosomal protease inhibitor, specifically found to inhibit the functions of cathepsins. Previous research from our group (Yang et al., 2011a; Yang et al., 2014) demonstrates in vivo that deletion of cystatin B stimulates lysosomal enzyme function, leading to improvement of lysosomal proteolysis. CRND8 APP mutant mice, when crossed with cystatin B-deficient mice, exhibit improved learning/memory function and amelioration of amyloid pathology compared to the CRND8 mice. These findings are highly relevant to the discussion of lysosomal dysfunction in AD and DS because cystatin B is located on chromosome 21 (Pennacchio and Myers, 1996), and the increased gene dosage (due to trisomy of chromosome 21) of Cystatin B in DS could impair cathepsin function, contributing to lysosomal dysfunction in DS.

As in AD and numerous other neurodegenerative diseases (Guo et al., 2017), neurofibrillary pathology is observed in DS (Head et al., 2016). Neurofibrillary pathology in DS does not appear until age 30–40, manifesting in a similar neuroanatomical pattern as in AD (Hof et al., 1995). Despite the timing of neurofibrillary pathology in relation to amyloid deposition, tau pathogenesis in DS may occur due to both APP-dependent and APP-independent causes. Conversely to this time frame, there is evidence for changes in tau phosphoryation in DS even at a prenatal stage, so initial intracellular changes in tau phosphorylation and proteolysis could occur long before tangle pathology is observed (Milenkovic et al., 2017). Rather than changes in the MAPT gene, the triplication of the Dyrk1A gene in DS (Kay et al., 2016; Yin et al., 2017) is shown to increase the 3R forms of tau, which is associated with tau pathology (Cardenas et al., 2012; Wegiel et al., 2011). Concurrently, the neurofibrillary tangles in DS brain show increased amounts of 3R tau isoforms and Dyrk1A-mediated phosphorylation relative to AD, suggesting a specific role for Drk1A in DS tau pathology. Tau itself, particularly in aggregated form, is also a substrate of lysosomal degradation (Vinicia et al., 2014), and so impairments in lysosomal function could favor the accumulation of Drk1A-phosphorylated and/or misfolded/aggregated tau. RCAN1 (Cardenas et al., 2012) is also implicated in tau pathology in DS, via the stimulation of the tau kinase GSK3β and inhibition of calcineurin. The progression of tau pathology in DS has been reported to occur subsequently to early-life accumulation of intracellular APP metabolites (Mori et al., 2002) but on a more rapid time frame than in AD possibly due to excessive Drk1A tau phosphorylation and RCAN1 gain of function as contributing genetic factors. Additionally, progression of tauopathy in both DS and AD is potentially accelerated by lysosomal dysfunction via release of lysosomal calcium, which promotes tau pathology through activation of calpains and tau kinases (Rao et al., 2014) (as described in Figure 3).

DS CELL LINES AND TRISOMIC MICE: WINDOWS INTO THE EARLIEST STAGES OF AD AND THE MULTIFACTORIAL ROLES OF APP IN PATHOGENESIS

Beside human postmortem fixed or frozen brain tissue from control or DS individuals, both primary cell lines obtained from human and various trisomy 21 mice are widely used in studies of DS (Choong et al., 2015; Prandini et al., 2007). Human DS and age-matched control fibroblast cell lines and Epstein Barr virus (EBV)-transformed human lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) are widely available. In addition, iPSC cells derived from fibroblast of multiple DS patients (Park et al., 2008; Weick et al., 2013), including fetal fibroblasts of monozygotic twins (Hibaoui et al., 2014), have been differentiated into neurons and astroglia (Chen et al., 2014) for further functional studies.

The most widely used DS mouse models is Ts65Dn [B6EiC3Sn a/A-Ts(1716)65Dn/J], which has triplicate App and other HSA21 analogous genes on mouse chromosome 16 (MMU16) (Davisson et al., 1993). Ts65Dn and other mouse models with various lengths of triplicate genes comparable to human HSA21, with or without App have been reviewed in detail (Choong et al., 2015). Therefore, we would like to focus on the Ts2 mouse (Ts[Rb(12.1716)]2Cje), a model of DS generated by a spontaneous Robertsonian fusion, was characterized by Villar and colleagues (Villar et al., 2005). Ts2 mice possess higher transmission rate of MMU16, and male fertility, resulting in a ~3-fold higher viable offspring compared to Ts65Dn mice (Davisson et al., 1993). Our study (Jiang 2016) showed that Ts2 mice develop a similar regional pattern of APP-dependent neuronal endosomal abnormality (Cataldo et al., 2003), and a similar loss of basal forebrain cholinergic neurons (BFCN) as seen in Ts65Dn mice at the similar age (Davisson and Costa, 1999; Davisson et al., 1990; Granholm et al., 2000; Holtzman et al., 1996). The evidence of endosomal pathology prior to the onset of substantial BFCN loss in Ts2 mice indicates that early endosomal alterations are an early manifestation of pathology and precede BFCN neuron loss. Ts2 and Ts65Dn mice also show similar hippocampal glutamatergic neuronal deficits (Kaur et al., 2014) and similar MRI anomalies (Chen et al., 2009). The breeding advantages of Ts2 mouse over the more extensively used Ts65Dn model recommend it strongly for future studies on the role of APP and additional relevant genes in recapitulating the earliest pathobiology in AD.

Compared to AD mouse models, the triplication of APP in trisomy models of DS is a relatively precise genetic model of DS, as the key features of early pathology mirror the human disease authentically, and have been cross validated in primary cells from DS individuals (Jiang et al., 2016). The utility of DS model mouse systems makes them a valuable resource in addition to existing AD mouse models, which are typically based on the induced expression of mutant forms of APP, PSEN1 or MAPT, but are unfortunately narrow in their recapitulation of a full human AD phenotype. Models based on familial AD-associated genetic mutations are limited in their applicability to sporadic AD, and current APP overexpression models of AD may cause a range of artifactual responses in neurons that obscure the disease effects exerted at endogenous levels of a pathogenic protein (Nilsson et al., 2014). A frequent criticism of common AD mouse models is that high expression of mutant APP induces an accelerated amyloid phenotype which doesn’t fully model the gradual onset of human AD in relationship with ageing, and can mask the detection of earlier changes within the endocytic and lysosomal systems in human AD (Cataldo et al., 2000) due to excessive amyloid deposition and widespread neuronal death early in life. Considering the relevance of endocytic and lysosomal dysfunction in the early stages of AD, and the commonality of these defects in the genetics and pathology of DS and AD, we suggest DS models as useful tools in the study of endocytic-lysosomal defects fundamental to AD pathogenesis.

CONCLUSIONS

Combined with the genetic and neuropathological similarities between AD and Down syndrome, emerging findings indicate that disruption of endocytosis and autophagy are fundamental factors in the pathogenesis of both AD and DS (as summarized in Figure 1). The same endosomal-lysosomal disruptions that occur at a rapid pace during DS (and familial early onset forms of AD) develop at a slower pace during sporadic AD when neuronal ageing becomes a key additional factor in the progressive corruption of endocytosis and autophagy. The ability to characterize these earliest endosomal anomalies in tractable models of the authentic disease (DS fibroblasts and trisomic mice) has greatly facilitated the elucidation of pathogenic APP-dependent mechanisms in the absence of massive amyloid deposition and secondary reactions to it. The continued use of DS cellular and animal models represents an appealing complement to the limitations of models often used in AD research.

Given that effective therapies for AD and DS remain elusive, expansion of drug development pursuits to include potential targets in the endosomal-lysosomal and autophagy pathways may lead to improved therapies for both DS and AD. For example, preclinical research has shown that stimulation of lysosomal CTSD function (via genetic deletion of cystatin B) in mouse models of AD reverses autophagic-lysosomal pathology and improves learning and memory (Yang et al., 2011a). Our group and others also demonstrated improvement of lysosomal function in in vitro AD models using acidic nanoparticles to restore lysosomal acidification (Bourdenx et al., 2016; Lee et al., 2015; Xue et al., 2014). These studies, in conjunction with others (Menzies et al., 2017), demonstrate the potential of targeting endocytic-lysosomal function as a therapeutic avenue in neurodegenerative disease.

Additionally, modulation of βCTF generation has previously been ignored as a therapeutic target in AD and DS, even when clinical trials have been carried out with BACE1 inhibitors developed with the goal of lowering Aβ levels. The complex regulation of BACE1 compared with gamma-secretase, the worsening of cognition seen in clinical trials of gamma-secretase inhibitors that elevate βCTF levels as they lower Aβ levels, and the existence of a “protective mutation” of APP (Hashimoto and Matsuoka, 2014) that acts to reduce βCTF (not only Aβ), and the effects of mutation of PSEN1 and APP which alter βCTF as well as Aβ, are all consistent with the mounting data showing that βCTF is a regulator of endosomal signaling that becomes aberrant at the earliest stages of AD and in DS and is linked to early cholinergic neurodegeneration.

The laboratory of R.A.N. is funded by the U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH); National Institute on Aging (NIA) (P01AG017617-16).

Abbreviations

AD Alzheimer Disease

DS Down Syndrome

Aβ amyloid-β

HSA21 Chromosome 21

APP Amyloid precursor protein

BACE1/2 β-site APP cleaving enzyme ½

βCTF β carboxyl-terminal fragment

PSEN1 presenilin 1

APPL1 adaptor protein containing pleckstrin homology domain, phosphotyrosine binding domain, and leucine zipper motif

GEF guanine nucleotide exchange factor

GAP GTPase-activating protein

GDI GDP dissociation inhibitor

GDF GDI displacement factor

PI3K/vps34 phosphoinositide 3-kinase

SYN1 synaptojanin1

Class C VPS/HOPS class C vacuolar protein sorting/homotypic fusion and protein sorting

ESCRT sorting complexes required for transport

LBPA lyso-bisphosphatidic acid

BFCN basal forebrain cholinergic neurons

NGF nerve growth factor

Trk tropomyosin receptor kinase

ILV intra-lumenal vesicles

MVB multivesicular body

SNX sorting nexin

Vps vacuolar protein sorting

AP autophagosome

LC3 Microtubule-associated protein 1A/1B-light chain 3

mTOR mammalian target of rapamycin

CTSD Cathepsin D

v-ATPase vacuolar ATPase

UPR unfolded protein response

DYRK1A Dual specificity tyrosine phosphorylation regulated kinase 1A

RCAN1 Regulator of calcineurin 1

SOD1 Superoxide dismutase 1

CSTB Cystatin B

MAPT Microtubule-associated protein tau

GSK-3β Glycogen synthase kinase 3β

cdk5 cyclin-dependent kinase 5

LCLs lymphoblastoid cell lines

iPSCs induced pluripotent stem cells

MMU16 mouse chromosome 16

Figure 1 Overview of the shared pathways and pathological mechanisms driven by the APP gene and its cleavage products (βCTF/Aβ) in DS and AD: known and predicted endocytic and lysosomal factors contributing to neurodegeneration. Genetic contributors to neurodegeneration in DS other than APP are shown in parentheses. ApoE ε4, a known genetic risk factor for AD, contributes to endolysosomal dysfunction in AD and potentially in DS. EE, early endosome; LE, late endosome; AP, autophagosome; Ly, Lysosome; AMP/AL, amphisome/autolysosome.

Figure 2 Endosomal pathology and altered endosome trafficking in DS and AD contribute to aberrant neurotrophin transport and signaling and neuritic dystrophy. A) Under normal conditions, the conversion of rab5 from an active to an inactive state occurs rapidly and it is highly regulated by the coordinated action of rab5 effectors rabex-5/rabaptin-5 and rabGAP5, respectively. In DS and AD, APP-βCTF mediates pathological activation of rab5 by recruiting APPL1 to endosomes. APPL1 binds to the “YENPT” motif of βCTF through its phosphotyrosine binding (PTB) domain. Upon dimerization via its BAR domains to facilitate vesicle curvature, APPL1 binds to GTP-rab5 via its PH domain, which stabilizes rab5 in its activated state on endosomes. Over-activation of rab5 causes acceleration of endocytosis and endosome fusion leading to characteristic swelling of endosomes. B) Under normal conditions, biogenesis of long-lived signaling endosomes involves endocytosis of activated TrkA receptors (NGF-bound TrkA) into rab5-positive endosomes (a), followed by deactivation of rab5 and acquisition of rab7 (b), which binds to dynein/dynactin motor complexes regulating long-range retrograde axonal transport (c, green arrow). In DS and AD, prolonged rab5 hyperactivation by APP/APP-βCTF and APPL1 causes enlargement of NGF/TrkA endosomes (a’) and slows retrograde endosome transport (red dotted arrow), thus diminishing TrkA signaling which ultimately leads to the loss of trophic support for basal forebrain cholinergic neurons (BFCNs). C) DS and AD are characterized by the pathological accumulation of ubiquitinated misfolded/aggregated proteins and of enlarged early and late endosomal structures (EE and LE, respectively) containing βCTF/Aβ fragments. Autophagosomes (AP), amphisomes (AMP), and endolysosomal compartments containing incompletely degraded material accumulate within neuritic swellings (“dystrophic neurites”) as a result of the βCTF/Aβ-mediated impairment of retrograde transport and lysosomal function.

Figure 3 Common mechanisms of lysosomal dysfunction in neurons during AD and DS: (A) APP and its cleavage products, βCTF and Aβ, contribute to lysosomal de-acidification and lysosomal membrane permeabilization, leading to a decline in lysosomal function. (B) Reactive oxygen species (ROS), which are increased in DS and in AD, also contribute to impaired lysosomal function. Congruent elements of lysosomal dysfunction; including lysosomal de-acidification, reduced proteolysis, lysosomal membrane permeabilization leading to loss of membrane integrity, and the release of Ca2+ and cathepsins represent common pathological outcomes in AD and DS, leading to accumulation of intralysosomal waste, toxic APP and tau metabolite accumulation, neurofibrillary tangle (NFT) formation, and cell death.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


Arai Y Ijuin T Takenawa T Becker LE Takashima S 2002 Excessive expression of synaptojanin in brains with Down syndrome Brain Dev 24 67 72 11891094
Ascano M Richmond A Borden P Kuruvilla R 2009 Axonal targeting of Trk receptors via transcytosis regulates sensitivity to neurotrophin responses J Neurosci 29 11674 11685 19759314
Avrahami L Farfara D Shaham-Kol M Vassar R Frenkel D Eldar-Finkelman H 2013 Inhibition of glycogen synthase kinase-3 ameliorates beta-amyloid pathology and restores lysosomal acidification and mammalian target of rapamycin activity in the Alzheimer disease mouse model: in vivo and in vitro studies J Biol Chem 288 1295 1306 23155049
Babst M 2011 MVB vesicle formation: ESCRT-dependent, ESCRT-independent and everything in between Curr Opin Cell Biol 23 452 457 21570275
Bhaskar K Miller M Chludzinski A Herrup K Zagorski M Lamb BT 2009 The PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway regulates Abeta oligomer induced neuronal cell cycle events Mol Neurodegener 4 14 19291319
Bohdanowicz M Balkin DM De Camilli P Grinstein S 2012 Recruitment of OCRL and Inpp5B to phagosomes by Rab5 and APPL1 depletes phosphoinositides and attenuates Akt signaling Mol Biol Cell 23 176 187 22072788
Boland B Kumar A Lee S Platt FM Wegiel J Yu WH Nixon RA 2008 Autophagy induction and autophagosome clearance in neurons: relationship to autophagic pathology in Alzheimer’s disease J Neurosci 28 6926 6937 18596167
Bordi M Berg MJ Mohan PS Peterhoff CM Alldred MJ Che S Ginsberg SD Nixon RA 2016 Autophagy flux in CA1 neurons of Alzheimer hippocampus: Increased induction overburdens failing lysosomes to propel neuritic dystrophy Autophagy 12 2467 2483 27813694
Bourdenx M Daniel J Genin E Soria FN Blanchard-Desce M Bezard E Dehay B 2016 Nanoparticles restore lysosomal acidification defects: Implications for Parkinson and other lysosomal-related diseases Autophagy 12 472 483 26761717
Buggia-Prevot V Fernandez CG Riordan S Vetrivel KS Roseman J Waters J Bindokas VP Vassar R Thinakaran G 2014 Axonal BACE1 dynamics and targeting in hippocampal neurons: a role for Rab11 GTPase Mol Neurodegener 9 1 24386896
Butterfield DA Di Domenico F Swomley AM Head E Perluigi M 2014 Redox proteomics analysis to decipher the neurobiology of Alzheimer-like neurodegeneration: overlaps in Down’s syndrome and Alzheimer’s disease brain Biochem J 463 177 189 25242166
Caccamo A Majumder S Richardson A Strong R Oddo S 2010 Molecular interplay between mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), amyloid-beta, and Tau: effects on cognitive impairments J Biol Chem 285 13107 13120 20178983
Cacquevel M Aeschbach L Houacine J Fraering PC 2012 Alzheimer’s disease-linked mutations in presenilin-1 result in a drastic loss of activity in purified gamma-secretase complexes PLoS One 7 e35133 22529981
Cai Q Lu L Tian JH Zhu YB Qiao H Sheng ZH 2010 Snapin-regulated late endosomal transport is critical for efficient autophagy-lysosomal function in neurons Neuron 68 73 86 20920792
Cardenas AM Ardiles AO Barraza N Baez-Matus X Caviedes P 2012 Role of tau protein in neuronal damage in Alzheimer’s disease and Down syndrome Arch Med Res 43 645 654 23142525
Cataldo AM Barnett JL Berman SA Li J Quarless S Bursztajn S Lippa C Nixon RA 1995 Gene expression and cellular content of cathepsin D in Alzheimer’s disease brain: evidence for early up-regulation of the endosomal-lysosomal system Neuron 14 671 680 7695914
Cataldo AM Barnett JL Mann DM Nixon RA 1996 Colocalization of lysosomal hydrolase and beta-amyloid in diffuse plaques of the cerebellum and striatum in Alzheimer’s disease and Down’s syndrome Journal of neuropathology and experimental neurology 55 704 715 8642396
Cataldo AM Barnett JL Pieroni C Nixon RA 1997 Increased neuronal endocytosis and protease delivery to early endosomes in sporadic Alzheimer’s disease: neuropathologic evidence for a mechanism of increased beta-amyloidogenesis The Journal of neuroscience: the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 17 6142 6151 9236226
Cataldo AM Mathews PM Boiteau AB Hassinger LC Peterhoff CM Jiang Y Mullaney K Neve RL Gruenberg J Nixon RA 2008 Down syndrome fibroblast model of Alzheimer-related endosome pathology: accelerated endocytosis promotes late endocytic defects Am J Pathol 173 370 384 18535180
Cataldo AM Petanceska S Peterhoff CM Terio NB Epstein CJ Villar A Carlson EJ Staufenbiel M Nixon RA 2003 App gene dosage modulates endosomal abnormalities of Alzheimer’s disease in a segmental trisomy 16 mouse model of down syndrome JNeurosci 23 6788 6792 12890772
Cataldo AM Peterhoff CM Schmidt SD Terio NB Duff K Beard M Mathews PM Nixon RA 2004 Presenilin mutations in familial Alzheimer disease and transgenic mouse models accelerate neuronal lysosomal pathology Journal of neuropathology and experimental neurology 63 821 830 15330337
Cataldo AM Peterhoff CM Troncoso JC Gomez-Isla T Hyman BT Nixon RA 2000 Endocytic pathway abnormalities precede amyloid beta deposition in sporadic Alzheimer’s disease and Down syndrome: differential effects of APOE genotype and presenilin mutations Am J Pathol 157 277 286 10880397
Cendrowski J Maminska A Miaczynska M 2016 Endocytic regulation of cytokine receptor signaling Cytokine Growth Factor Rev 32 63 73 27461871
Cenini G Dowling AL Beckett TL Barone E Mancuso C Murphy MP Levine H 3rd Lott IT Schmitt FA Butterfield DA 2012 Association between frontal cortex oxidative damage and beta-amyloid as a function of age in Down syndrome Biochim Biophys Acta 1822 130 138 22009041
Chan RB Oliveira TG Cortes EP Honig LS Duff KE Small SA Wenk MR Shui G Di Paolo G 2012 Comparative lipidomic analysis of mouse and human brain with Alzheimer disease J Biol Chem 287 2678 2688 22134919
Chang KA Suh YH 2005 Pathophysiological roles of amyloidogenic carboxy-terminal fragments of the beta-amyloid precursor protein in Alzheimer’s disease J Pharmacol Sci 97 461 471 15821343
Chen C Jiang P Xue H Peterson SE Tran HT McCann AE Parast MM Li S Pleasure DE Laurent LC 2014 Role of astroglia in Down’s syndrome revealed by patient-derived human-induced pluripotent stem cells Nat Commun 5 4430 25034944
Chen Y Dyakin VV Branch CA Ardekani B Yang D Guilfoyle DN Peterson J Peterhoff C Ginsberg SD Cataldo AM 2009 In vivo MRI identifies cholinergic circuitry deficits in a Down syndrome model Neurobiol Aging 30 1453 1465 18180075
Cheng XT Zhou B Lin MY Cai Q Sheng ZH 2015 Axonal autophagosomes recruit dynein for retrograde transport through fusion with late endosomes J Cell Biol 209 377 386 25940348
Choi JH Kaur G Mazzella MJ Morales-Corraliza J Levy E Mathews PM 2013 Early endosomal abnormalities and cholinergic neuron degeneration in amyloid-beta protein precursor transgenic mice J Alzheimers Dis 34 691 700 23254640
Choong XY Tosh JL Pulford LJ Fisher EM 2015 Dissecting Alzheimer disease in Down syndrome using mouse models Front Behav Neurosci 9 268 26528151
Christoforidis S McBride HM Burgoyne RD Zerial M 1999 The Rab5 effector EEA1 is a core component of endosome docking Nature 397 621 625 10050856
Clayton EL Mizielinska S Edgar JR Nielsen TT Marshall S Norona FE Robbins M Damirji H Holm IE Johannsen P 2015 Frontotemporal dementia caused by CHMP2B mutation is characterised by neuronal lysosomal storage pathology Acta Neuropathol 130 511 523 26358247
Colacurcio DJ Nixon RA 2016 Disorders of lysosomal acidification-the emerging role of v-ATPase in aging and neurodegenerative disease Ageing Res Rev
Cooper JD Salehi A Delcroix JD Howe CL Belichenko PV Chua-Couzens J Kilbridge JF Carlson EJ Epstein CJ Mobley WC 2001 Failed retrograde transport of NGF in a mouse model of Down’s syndrome: reversal of cholinergic neurodegenerative phenotypes following NGF infusion Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 98 10439 10444 11504920
Cosker KE Segal RA 2014 Neuronal signaling through endocytosis Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 6
Cossec JC Lavaur J Berman DE Rivals I Hoischen A Stora S Ripoll C Mircher C Grattau Y Olivomarin JC 2012 Trisomy for synaptojanin1 in Down syndrome is functionally linked to the enlargement of early endosomes Hum Mol Genet 21 3156 3172 22511594
Davisson MT Costa AC 1999 Mouse models of Down Syndrome Mouse models of human genetic neurological diseases Popko B New York Plenum 297 327
Davisson MT Schmidt C Akeson EC 1990 Segmental trisomy of murine chromosome 16: a new model system for studying Down syndrome Prog Clin Biol Res 360 263 280 2147289
Davisson MT Schmidt C Reeves RH Irving NG Akeson EC Harris BS Bronson RT 1993 Segmental trisomy as a mouse model for Down syndrome Prog Clin Biol Res 384 117 133 8115398
De Jonghe C Esselens C Kumar-Singh S Craessaerts K Serneels S Checler F Annaert W Van Broeckhoven C De Strooper B 2001 Pathogenic APP mutations near the gamma-secretase cleavage site differentially affect Abeta secretion and APP C-terminal fragment stability Hum Mol Genet 10 1665 1671 11487570
Dehay B Martinez-Vicente M Caldwell GA Caldwell KA Yue Z Cookson MR Klein C Vila M Bezard E 2013 Lysosomal impairment in Parkinson’s disease Mov Disord 28 725 732 23580333
Deinhardt K Salinas S Verastegui C Watson R Worth D Hanrahan S Bucci C Schiavo G 2006 Rab5 and Rab7 control endocytic sorting along the axonal retrograde transport pathway Neuron 52 293 305 17046692
Dephoure N Hwang S O’Sullivan C Dodgson SE Gygi SP Amon A Torres EM 2014 Quantitative proteomic analysis reveals posttranslational responses to aneuploidy in yeast Elife 3 e03023 25073701
Deyts C Clutter M Herrera S Jovanovic N Goddi A Parent AT 2016 Loss of presenilin function is associated with a selective gain of APP function Elife 5
Di Domenico F Coccia R Cocciolo A Murphy MP Cenini G Head E Butterfield DA Giorgi A Schinina ME Mancuso C 2013 Impairment of proteostasis network in Down syndrome prior to the development of Alzheimer’s disease neuropathology: redox proteomics analysis of human brain Biochim Biophys Acta 1832 1249 1259 23603808
Di Fiore PP von Zastrow M 2014 Endocytosis, signaling, and beyond Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 6
Dirac-Svejstrup AB Sumizawa T Pfeffer SR 1997 Identification of a GDI displacement factor that releases endosomal Rab GTPases from Rab-GDI EMBO J 16 465 472 9034329
Ditaranto K Tekirian TL Yang AJ 2001 Lysosomal membrane damage in soluble Abeta-mediated cell death in Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiology of disease 8 19 31 11162237
Doran E Keator D Head E Phelan MJ Kim R Totoiu M Barrio JR Small GW Potkin SG Lott IT 2017 Down Syndrome, Partial Trisomy 21, and Absence of Alzheimer’s Disease: The Role of APP J Alzheimers Dis 56 459 470 27983553
Felberbaum-Corti M Cavalli V Gruenberg J 2005 Capture of the small GTPase Rab5 by GDI: regulation by p38 MAP kinase Methods Enzymol 403 367 381 16473603
Fu X Yang Y Xu C Niu Y Chen T Zhou Q Liu JJ 2011 Retrolinkin cooperates with endophilin A1 to mediate BDNF-TrkB early endocytic trafficking and signaling from early endosomes Mol Biol Cell 22 3684 3698 21849472
Ginsberg SD Alldred MJ Counts SE Cataldo AM Neve RL Jiang Y Wuu J Chao MV Mufson EJ Nixon RA 2010a Microarray analysis of hippocampal CA1 neurons implicates early endosomal dysfunction during Alzheimer’s disease progression Biol Psychiatry 68 885 893 20655510
Ginsberg SD Mufson EJ Alldred MJ Counts SE Wuu J Nixon RA Che S 2011 Upregulation of select rab GTPases in cholinergic basal forebrain neurons in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease J Chem Neuroanat 42 102 110 21669283
Ginsberg SD Mufson EJ Counts SE Wuu J Alldred MJ Nixon RA Che S 2010b Regional selectivity of rab5 and rab7 protein upregulation in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease Journal of Alzheimer’s disease : JAD 22 631 639 20847427
Gonzalez AE Munoz VC Cavieres VA Bustamante HA Cornejo VH Januario YC Gonzalez I Hetz C daSilva LL Rojas-Fernandez A 2017 Autophagosomes cooperate in the degradation of intracellular C-terminal fragments of the amyloid precursor protein via the MVB/lysosomal pathway FASEB J 31 2446 2459 28254759
Granholm AC Sanders LA Crnic LS 2000 Loss of cholinergic phenotype in basal forebrain coincides with cognitive decline in a mouse model of Down’s syndrome ExpNeurol 161 647 663
Grothe M Heinsen H Teipel SJ 2012 Atrophy of the cholinergic Basal forebrain over the adult age range and in early stages of Alzheimer’s disease Biol Psychiatry 71 805 813 21816388
Guicciardi ME Leist M Gores GJ 2004 Lysosomes in cell death Oncogene 23 2881 2890 15077151
Guo T Noble W Hanger DP 2017 Roles of tau protein in health and disease Acta Neuropathol 133 665 704 28386764
Gutierrez MG Munafo DB Beron W Colombo MI 2004 Rab7 is required for the normal progression of the autophagic pathway in mammalian cells J Cell Sci 117 2687 2697 15138286
Haas AK Fuchs E Kopajtich R Barr FA 2005 A GTPase-activating protein controls Rab5 function in endocytic trafficking Nat Cell Biol 7 887 893 16086013
Hashimoto Y Matsuoka M 2014 A mutation protective against Alzheimer’s disease renders amyloid beta precursor protein incapable of mediating neurotoxicity J Neurochem 130 291 300 24646423
Head E Lott IT Wilcock DM Lemere CA 2016 Aging in Down Syndrome and the Development of Alzheimer’s Disease Neuropathology Curr Alzheimer Res 13 18 29 26651341
Hedera P Alvarado D Beydoun A Fink JK 2002 Novel mental retardation-epilepsy syndrome linked to Xp21.1-p11.4 Ann Neurol 51 45 50 11782983
Hibaoui Y Grad I Letourneau A Sailani MR Dahoun S Santoni FA Gimelli S Guipponi M Pelte MF Bena F 2014 Modelling and rescuing neurodevelopmental defect of Down syndrome using induced pluripotent stem cells from monozygotic twins discordant for trisomy 21 EMBO Mol Med 6 259 277 24375627
Hof PR Bouras C Perl DP Sparks DL Mehta N Morrison JH 1995 Age-related distribution of neuropathologic changes in the cerebral cortex of patients with Down’s syndrome. Quantitative regional analysis and comparison with Alzheimer’s disease Arch Neurol 52 379 391 7710374
Holtzman DM Santucci D Kilbridge J Chua-Couzens J Fontana DJ Daniels SE Johnson RM Chen K Sun Y Carlson E 1996 Developmental abnormalities and age-related neurodegeneration in a mouse model of Down syndrome Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 93 13333 13338 8917591
Horiuchi H Lippe R McBride HM Rubino M Woodman P Stenmark H Rybin V Wilm M Ashman K Mann M 1997 A novel Rab5 GDP/GTP exchange factor complexed to Rabaptin-5 links nucleotide exchange to effector recruitment and function Cell 90 1149 1159 9323142
Howe CL Mobley WC 2004 Signaling endosome hypothesis: A cellular mechanism for long distance communication J Neurobiol 58 207 216 14704953
Huotari J Helenius A 2011 Endosome maturation EMBO J 30 3481 3500 21878991
Hupalowska A Pyrzynska B Miaczynska M 2012 APPL1 regulates basal NF-kappaB activity by stabilizing NIK J Cell Sci 125 4090 4102 22685329
Ilardi JM Mochida S Sheng ZH 1999 Snapin: a SNARE-associated protein implicated in synaptic transmission Nat Neurosci 2 119 124 10195194
Inomata H Nakamura Y Hayakawa A Takata H Suzuki T Miyazawa K Kitamura N 2003 A scaffold protein JIP-1b enhances amyloid precursor protein phosphorylation by JNK and its association with kinesin light chain 1 J Biol Chem 278 22946 22955 12665528
Israel MA Yuan SH Bardy C Reyna SM Mu Y Herrera C Hefferan MP Van Gorp S Nazor KL Boscolo FS 2012 Probing sporadic and familial Alzheimer’s disease using induced pluripotent stem cells Nature 482 216 220 22278060
Iulita MF Cuello AC 2016 The NGF Metabolic Pathway in the CNS and its Dysregulation in Down Syndrome and Alzheimer’s Disease Curr Alzheimer Res 13 53 67 26391047
Ivy GO Schottler F Wenzel J Baudry M Lynch G 1984 Inhibitors of lysosomal enzymes: accumulation of lipofuscin-like dense bodies in the brain Science 226 985 987 6505679
Jager S Bucci C Tanida I Ueno T Kominami E Saftig P Eskelinen EL 2004 Role for Rab7 in maturation of late autophagic vacuoles J Cell Sci 117 4837 4848 15340014
Jiang Y Mullaney KA Peterhoff CM Che S Schmidt SD Boyer-Boiteau A Ginsberg SD Cataldo AM Mathews PM Nixon RA 2010 Alzheimer’s-related endosome dysfunction in Down syndrome is Abeta-independent but requires APP and is reversed by BACE-1 inhibition Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 107 1630 1635 20080541
Jiang Y Rigoglioso A Peterhoff CM Pawlik M Sato Y Bleiwas C Stavrides P Smiley JF Ginsberg SD Mathews PM 2016 Partial BACE1 reduction in a Down syndrome mouse model blocks Alzheimer-related endosomal anomalies and cholinergic neurodegeneration: role of APP-CTF Neurobiol Aging 39 90 98 26923405
Kaether C Haass C Steiner H 2006 Assembly, trafficking and function of gamma-secretase Neurodegener Dis 3 275 283 17047368
Kalaidzidis I Miaczynska M Brewinska-Olchowik M Hupalowska A Ferguson C Parton RG Kalaidzidis Y Zerial M 2015 APPL endosomes are not obligatory endocytic intermediates but act as stable cargo-sorting compartments J Cell Biol 211 123 144 26459602
Kamal A Almenar-Queralt A LeBlanc JF Roberts EA Goldstein LS 2001 Kinesin-mediated axonal transport of a membrane compartment containing beta-secretase and presenilin-1 requires APP Nature 414 643 648 11740561
Kaur G Sharma A Xu W Gerum S Alldred MJ Subbanna S Basavarajappa BS Pawlik M Ohno M Ginsberg SD 2014 Glutamatergic transmission aberration: a major cause of behavioral deficits in a murine model of Down’s syndrome JNeurosci 34 5099 5106 24719089
Kay LJ Smulders-Srinivasan TK Soundararajan M 2016 Understanding the Multifaceted Role of Human Down Syndrome Kinase DYRK1A Adv Protein Chem Struct Biol 105 127 171 27567487
Kenessey A Nacharaju P Ko LW Yen SH 1997 Degradation of tau by lysosomal enzyme cathepsin D: implication for Alzheimer neurofibrillary degeneration J Neurochem 69 2026 2038 9349548
Ketterer S Gomez-Auli A Hillebrand LE Petrera A Ketscher A Reinheckel T 2017 Inherited diseases caused by mutations in cathepsin protease genes FEBS J 284 1437 1454 27926992
Kim S Sato Y Mohan PS Peterhoff C Pensalfini A Rigoglioso A Jiang Y Nixon RA 2015 Evidence that the rab5 effector APPL1 mediates APP-betaCTF-induced dysfunction of endosomes in Down syndrome and Alzheimer’s disease Mol Psychiatry
Kinouchi K Ichihara A Sano M Sun-Wada GH Wada Y Ochi H Fukuda T Bokuda K Kurosawa H Yoshida N 2013 The role of individual domains and the significance of shedding of ATP6AP2/(pro)renin receptor in vacuolar H(+)-ATPase biogenesis PLoS One 8 e78603 24223829
Koike M Shibata M Ohsawa Y Nakanishi H Koga T Kametaka S Waguri S Momoi T Kominami E Peters C 2003 Involvement of two different cell death pathways in retinal atrophy of cathepsin D-deficient mice Mol Cell Neurosci 22 146 161 12676526
Korbel JO Tirosh-Wagner T Urban AE Chen XN Kasowski M Dai L Grubert F Erdman C Gao MC Lange K 2009 The genetic architecture of Down syndrome phenotypes revealed by high-resolution analysis of human segmental trisomies Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106 12031 12036 19597142
Korvatska O Strand NS Berndt JD Strovas T Chen DH Leverenz JB Kiianitsa K Mata IF Karakoc E Greenup JL 2013 Altered splicing of ATP6AP2 causes X-linked parkinsonism with spasticity (XPDS) Hum Mol Genet 22 3259 3268 23595882
Kosenko E Poghosyan A Kaminsky Y 2011 Subcellular compartmentalization of proteolytic enzymes in brain regions and the effects of chronic beta-amyloid treatment Brain Res 1369 184 193 21029727
Kurashige T Takahashi T Yamazaki Y Hiji M Izumi Y Yamawaki T Matsumoto M 2013 Localization of CHMP2B-immunoreactivity in the brainstem of Lewy body disease Neuropathology 33 237 245 22989140
Lafay-Chebassier C Paccalin M Page G Barc-Pain S Perault-Pochat MC Gil R Pradier L Hugon J 2005 mTOR/p70S6k signalling alteration by Abeta exposure as well as in APP-PS1 transgenic models and in patients with Alzheimer’s disease J Neurochem 94 215 225 15953364
Lai F Kammann E Rebeck GW Anderson A Chen Y Nixon RA 1999 APOE genotype and gender effects on Alzheimer disease in 100 adults with Down syndrome Neurology 53 331 336 10430422
Laifenfeld D Patzek LJ McPhie DL Chen Y Levites Y Cataldo AM Neve RL 2007 Rab5 mediates an amyloid precursor protein signaling pathway that leads to apoptosis J Neurosci 27 7141 7153 17611268
Lauritzen I Pardossi-Piquard R Bauer C Brigham E Abraham JD Ranaldi S Fraser P St-George-Hyslop P Le Thuc O Espin V 2012 The beta-secretase-derived C-terminal fragment of betaAPP, C99, but not Abeta, is a key contributor to early intraneuronal lesions in triple-transgenic mouse hippocampus J Neurosci 32 16243 16255a 23152608
Lauritzen I Pardossi-Piquard R Bourgeois A Pagnotta S Biferi MG Barkats M Lacor P Klein W Bauer C Checler F 2016 Intraneuronal aggregation of the beta-CTF fragment of APP (C99) induces Abeta-independent lysosomal-autophagic pathology Acta Neuropathol 132 257 276 27138984
Lee JHH Yu WH Kumar A Lee S Mohan PS Peterhoff CM Wolfe DM Martinez-Vicente M Massey AC Sovak G 2010 Lysosomal proteolysis and autophagy require presenilin 1 and are disrupted by Alzheimer-related PS1 mutations Cell 141 1146 1158 20541250
Lee JA Beigneux A Ahmad ST Young SG Gao FB 2007 ESCRT-III dysfunction causes autophagosome accumulation and neurodegeneration Curr Biol 17 1561 1567 17683935
Lee JH McBrayer MK Wolfe DM Haslett LJ Kumar A Sato Y Lie PP Mohan P Coffey EE Kompella U 2015 Presenilin 1 Maintains Lysosomal Ca(2+) Homeostasis via TRPML1 by Regulating vATPase-Mediated Lysosome Acidification Cell Rep 12 1430 1444 26299959
Lee S Sato Y Nixon RA 2011 Lysosomal proteolysis inhibition selectively disrupts axonal transport of degradative organelles and causes an Alzheimer’s-like axonal dystrophy The Journal of neuroscience: the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 31 7817 7830 21613495
Lehigh KM West KM Ginty DD 2017 Retrogradely Transported TrkA Endosomes Signal Locally within Dendrites to Maintain Sympathetic Neuron Synapses Cell Rep 19 86 100 28380365
Leverenz JB Raskind MA 1998 Early amyloid deposition in the medial temporal lobe of young Down syndrome patients: a regional quantitative analysis Exp Neurol 150 296 304 9527899
Li J Mao X Dong LQ Liu F Tong L 2007 Crystal structures of the BAR-PH and PTB domains of human APPL1 Structure 15 525 533 17502098
Li X Alafuzoff I Soininen H Winblad B Pei JJ 2005 Levels of mTOR and its downstream targets 4E-BP1, eEF2, and eEF2 kinase in relationships with tau in Alzheimer’s disease brain FEBS J 272 4211 4220 16098202
Lin DC Quevedo C Brewer NE Bell A Testa JR Grimes ML Miller FD Kaplan DR 2006 APPL1 associates with TrkA and GIPC1 and is required for nerve growth factor-mediated signal transduction Mol Cell Biol 26 8928 8941 17000777
Lipinski MM Zheng B Lu T Yan Z Py BF Ng A Xavier RJ Li C Yankner BA Scherzer CR 2010 Genome-wide analysis reveals mechanisms modulating autophagy in normal brain aging and in Alzheimer’s disease Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107 14164 14169 20660724
Liu CC Liu CC Kanekiyo T Xu H Bu G 2013 Apolipoprotein E and Alzheimer disease: risk, mechanisms and therapy Nat Rev Neurol 9 106 118 23296339
Liu J Lamb D Chou MM Liu YJ Li G 2007 Nerve growth factor-mediated neurite outgrowth via regulation of Rab5 Mol Biol Cell 18 1375 1384 17267689
Loo LS Tang N Al-Haddawi M Dawe GS Hong W 2014 A role for sorting nexin 27 in AMPA receptor trafficking Nat Commun 5 3176 24458027
Lott IT Dierssen M 2010 Cognitive deficits and associated neurological complications in individuals with Down’s syndrome Lancet Neurol 9 623 633 20494326
Malkus KA Tsika E Ischiropoulos H 2009 Oxidative modifications, mitochondrial dysfunction, and impaired protein degradation in Parkinson’s disease: how neurons are lost in the Bermuda triangle Mol Neurodegener 4 24 19500376
Mangieri LR Mader BJ Thomas CE Taylor CA Luker AM Tse TE Huisingh C Shacka JJ 2014 ATP6V0C knockdown in neuroblastoma cells alters autophagy-lysosome pathway function and metabolism of proteins that accumulate in neurodegenerative disease PLoS One 9 e93257 24695574
Mani M Lee SY Lucast L Cremona O Di Paolo G De Camilli P Ryan TA 2007 The dual phosphatase activity of synaptojanin1 is required for both efficient synaptic vesicle endocytosis and reavailability at nerve terminals Neuron 56 1004 1018 18093523
Mao X Kikani CK Riojas RA Langlais P Wang L Ramos FJ Fang Q Christ-Roberts CY Hong JY Kim RY 2006 APPL1 binds to adiponectin receptors and mediates adiponectin signalling and function Nat Cell Biol 8 516 523 16622416
Martin SB Dowling AL Lianekhammy J Lott IT Doran E Murphy MP Beckett TL Schmitt FA Head E 2014 Synaptophysin and synaptojanin-1 in Down syndrome are differentially affected by Alzheimer’s disease J Alzheimers Dis 42 767 775 24927707
Mattiace LA Kress Y Davies P Ksiezak-Reding H Yen SH Dickson DW 1991 Ubiquitin-immunoreactive dystrophic neurites in Down’s syndrome brains J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 50 547 559 1654399
McBrayer M Nixon RA 2013 Lysosome and calcium dysregulation in Alzheimer’s disease: partners in crime Biochem Soc Trans 41 1495 1502 24256243
McConlogue L Buttini M Anderson JP Brigham EF Chen KS Freedman SB Games D Johnson-Wood K Lee M Zeller M 2007 Partial reduction of BACE1 has dramatic effects on Alzheimer plaque and synaptic pathology in APP Transgenic Mice J Biol Chem 282 26326 26334 17616527
McGuire C Stransky L Cotter K Forgac M 2017 Regulation of V-ATPase activity Front Biosci (Landmark Ed) 22 609 622 27814636
Menzies FM Fleming A Caricasole A Bento CF Andrews SP Ashkenazi A Fullgrabe J Jackson A Jimenez Sanchez M Karabiyik C 2017 Autophagy and Neurodegeneration: Pathogenic Mechanisms and Therapeutic Opportunities Neuron 93 1015 1034 28279350
Miaczynska M 2013 Effects of membrane trafficking on signaling by receptor tyrosine kinases Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 5 a009035 24186066
Miaczynska M Christoforidis S Giner A Shevchenko A Uttenweiler-Joseph S Habermann B Wilm M Parton RG Zerial M 2004 APPL proteins link Rab5 to nuclear signal transduction via an endosomal compartment Cell 116 445 456 15016378
Milenkovic I Jarc J Dassler E Aronica E Iyer A Adle-Biassette H Scharrer A Reischer T Hainfellner JA Kovacs GG 2017 The physiological phosphorylation of tau is critically changed in fetal brains of individuals with Down syndrome Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol
Mori C Spooner ET Wisniewsk KE Wisniewski TM Yamaguch H Saido TC Tolan DR Selkoe DJ Lemere CA 2002 Intraneuronal Abeta42 accumulation in Down syndrome brain Amyloid 9 88 102 12440481
Nakanishi H 2003 Neuronal and microglial cathepsins in aging and age-related diseases Ageing Res Rev 2 367 381 14522241
Nilsson P Saito T Saido TC 2014 New mouse model of Alzheimer’s ACS Chem Neurosci 5 499 502 24852598
Nixon RA 2005 Endosome function and dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease and other neurodegenerative diseases Neurobiology of aging 26 373 382 15639316
Nixon RA 2007 Autophagy, amyloidogenesis and Alzheimer disease Journal of cell science 120 4081 4091 18032783
Nixon RA 2013 The role of autophagy in neurodegenerative disease Nat Med 19 983 997 23921753
Nixon RA 2017 Amyloid precursor protein and endosomal-lysosomal dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease: inseparable partners in a multifactorial disease FASEB J 31 2729 2743 28663518
Nixon RA Cataldo AM 1993 The lysosomal system in neuronal cell death: a review Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 679 87 109 8512210
Nixon RA Jiang Y Sato Y Im E Bordi M Colacurcio DJ Pensalfini A Rigoglioso A Mohan P 2017 APP-beta CTF-mediated pathological endosome signaling also disrupts lysosomal function in Down syndrome (DS) Paper presented at: 13th International Congress on Alzheimers and Parkinsons Disease
Ohno M Cole SL Yasvoina M Zhao J Citron M Berry R Disterhoft JF Vassar R 2007 BACE1 gene deletion prevents neuron loss and memory deficits in 5XFAD APP/PS1 transgenic mice Neurobiology of Disease 26 134 145 17258906
Oromendia AB Dodgson SE Amon A 2012 Aneuploidy causes proteotoxic stress in yeast Genes Dev 26 2696 2708 23222101
Pagano G Castello G 2012 Oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction in Down syndrome Adv Exp Med Biol 724 291 299 22411251
Pal R Bajaj L Sharma J Palmieri M Di Ronza A Lotfi P Chaudhury A Neilson J Sardiello M Rodney GG 2016 NADPH oxidase promotes Parkinsonian phenotypes by impairing autophagic flux in an mTORC1-independent fashion in a cellular model of Parkinson’s disease Sci Rep 6 22866 26960433
Park IH Arora N Huo H Maherali N Ahfeldt T Shimamura A Lensch MW Cowan C Hochedlinger K Daley GQ 2008 Disease-specific induced pluripotent stem cells Cell 134 877 886 18691744
Pennacchio LA Myers RM 1996 Isolation and characterization of the mouse cystatin B gene Genome Res 6 1103 1109 8938434
Pera M Alcolea D Sanchez-Valle R Guardia-Laguarta C Colom-Cadena M Badiola N Suarez-Calvet M Llado A Barrera-Ocampo AA Sepulveda-Falla D 2013 Distinct patterns of APP processing in the CNS in autosomal-dominant and sporadic Alzheimer disease Acta Neuropathol 125 201 213 23224319
Perera RM Zoncu R 2016 The Lysosome as a Regulatory Hub Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 32 223 253 27501449
Perluigi M di Domenico F Fiorini A Cocciolo A Giorgi A Foppoli C Butterfield DA Giorlandino M Giorlandino C Schinina ME 2011 Oxidative stress occurs early in Down syndrome pregnancy: A redox proteomics analysis of amniotic fluid Proteomics Clin Appl 5 167 178 21360684
Perluigi M Pupo G Tramutola A Cini C Coccia R Barone E Head E Butterfield DA Di Domenico F 2014 Neuropathological role of PI3K/Akt/mTOR axis in Down syndrome brain Biochim Biophys Acta 1842 1144 1153 24735980
Philippidou P Valdez G Akmentin W Bowers WJ Federoff HJ Halegoua S 2011 Trk retrograde signaling requires persistent, Pincher-directed endosomes Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 108 852 857 21187387
Porter K Nallathambi J Lin Y Liton PB 2013 Lysosomal basification and decreased autophagic flux in oxidatively stressed trabecular meshwork cells: implications for glaucoma pathogenesis Autophagy 9 581 594 23360789
Poteryaev D Fares H Bowerman B Spang A 2007 Caenorhabditis elegans SAND-1 is essential for RAB-7 function in endosomal traffic EMBO J 26 301 312 17203072
Prandini P Deutsch S Lyle R Gagnebin M Delucinge Vivier C Delorenzi M Gehrig C Descombes P Sherman S Dagna Bricarelli F 2007 Natural gene-expression variation in Down syndrome modulates the outcome of gene-dosage imbalance Am J Hum Genet 81 252 263 17668376
Prasher VP Farrer MJ Kessling AM Fisher EM West RJ Barber PC Butler AC 1998 Molecular mapping of Alzheimer-type dementia in Down’s syndrome Ann Neurol 43 380 383 9506555
Prasher VP Sajith SG Rees SD Patel A Tewari S Schupf N Zigman WB 2008 Significant effect of APOE epsilon 4 genotype on the risk of dementia in Alzheimer’s disease and mortality in persons with Down syndrome Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 23 1134 1140 18464295
Pyrzynska B Pilecka I Miaczynska M 2009 Endocytic proteins in the regulation of nuclear signaling, transcription and tumorigenesis Mol Oncol 3 321 338 19577966
Raiborg C Stenmark H 2009 The ESCRT machinery in endosomal sorting of ubiquitylated membrane proteins Nature 458 445 452 19325624
Rao MV McBrayer MK Campbell J Kumar A Hashim A Sershen H Stavrides PH Ohno M Hutton M Nixon RA 2014 Specific calpain inhibition by calpastatin prevents tauopathy and neurodegeneration and restores normal lifespan in tau P301L mice The Journal of neuroscience: the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 34 9222 9234 25009256
Rink J Ghigo E Kalaidzidis Y Zerial M 2005 Rab conversion as a mechanism of progression from early to late endosomes Cell 122 735 749 16143105
Rodriguez-Sureda V Vilches A Sanchez O Audi L Dominguez C 2015 Intracellular oxidant activity, antioxidant enzyme defense system, and cell senescence in fibroblasts with trisomy 21 Oxid Med Cell Longev 2015 509241 25852816
Rojas R van Vlijmen T Mardones GA Prabhu Y Rojas AL Mohammed S Heck AJ Raposo G van der Sluijs P Bonifacino JS 2008 Regulation of retromer recruitment to endosomes by sequential action of Rab5 and Rab7 J Cell Biol 183 513 526 18981234
Ryu J Galan AK Xin X Dong F Abdul-Ghani MA Zhou L Wang C Li C Holmes BM Sloane LB 2014 APPL1 potentiates insulin sensitivity by facilitating the binding of IRS1/2 to the insulin receptor Cell Rep 7 1227 1238 24813896
Salehi A Delcroix JD Belichenko PV Zhan K Wu C Valletta JS Takimoto-Kimura R Kleschevnikov AM Sambamurti K Chung PP 2006 Increased App expression in a mouse model of Down’s syndrome disrupts NGF transport and causes cholinergic neuron degeneration Neuron 51 29 42 16815330
Saxena S Bucci C Weis J Kruttgen A 2005 The small GTPase Rab7 controls the endosomal trafficking and neuritogenic signaling of the nerve growth factor receptor TrkA J Neurosci 25 10930 10940 16306406
Schwagerl AL Mohan PS Cataldo AM Vonsattel JP Kowall NW Nixon RA 1995 Elevated levels of the endosomal-lysosomal proteinase cathepsin D in cerebrospinal fluid in Alzheimer disease Journal of neurochemistry 64 443 446 7798944
Selkoe DJ Hardy J 2016 The amyloid hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease at 25 years EMBO Mol Med 8 595 608 27025652
Shacka JJ Klocke BJ Young C Shibata M Olney JW Uchiyama Y Saftig P Roth KA 2007 Cathepsin D deficiency induces persistent neurodegeneration in the absence of Bax-dependent apoptosis J Neurosci 27 2081 2090 17314303
Sharma N Deppmann CD Harrington AW St Hillaire C Chen ZY Lee FS Ginty DD 2010 Long-distance control of synapse assembly by target-derived NGF Neuron 67 422 434 20696380
Simonsen A Lippe R Christoforidis S Gaullier JM Brech A Callaghan J Toh BH Murphy C Zerial M Stenmark H 1998 EEA1 links PI(3)K function to Rab5 regulation of endosome fusion Nature 394 494 498 9697774
Singer O Marr RA Rockenstein E Crews L Coufal NG Gage FH Verma IM Masliah E 2005 Targeting BACE1 with siRNAs ameliorates Alzheimer disease neuropathology in a transgenic model 8 1343 1349
Small SA Petsko GA 2015 Retromer in Alzheimer disease, Parkinson disease and other neurological disorders Nat Rev Neurosci 16 126 132 25669742
Solinger JA Spang A 2013 Tethering complexes in the endocytic pathway: CORVET and HOPS FEBS J 280 2743 2757 23351085
Song MS Baker GB Todd KG Kar S 2011 Inhibition of beta-amyloid1-42 internalization attenuates neuronal death by stabilizing the endosomal-lysosomal system in rat cortical cultured neurons Neuroscience 178 181 188 21262324
Sonnichsen B De Renzis S Nielsen E Rietdorf J Zerial M 2000 Distinct membrane domains on endosomes in the recycling pathway visualized by multicolor imaging of Rab4, Rab5, and Rab11 J Cell Biol 149 901 914 10811830
Steinberg F Gallon M Winfield M Thomas EC Bell AJ Heesom KJ Tavare JM Cullen PJ 2013 A global analysis of SNX27-retromer assembly and cargo specificity reveals a function in glucose and metal ion transport Nat Cell Biol 15 461 471 23563491
Stenmark H Vitale G Ullrich O Zerial M 1995 Rabaptin-5 is a direct effector of the small GTPase Rab5 in endocytic membrane fusion Cell 83 423 432 8521472
Stoka V Turk V Turk B 2016 Lysosomal cathepsins and their regulation in aging and neurodegeneration Ageing Res Rev 32 22 37 27125852
Stokin GB Lillo C Falzone TL Brusch RG Rockenstein E Mount SL Raman R Davies P Masliah E Williams DS 2005 Axonopathy and transport deficits early in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease Science 307 1282 1288 15731448
Tamayev R Matsuda S Arancio O D’Adamio L 2012 beta- but not gamma-secretase proteolysis of APP causes synaptic and memory deficits in a mouse model of dementia EMBO Mol Med 4 171 179 22170863
Tammineni P Ye X Feng T Aikal D Cai Q 2017 Impaired retrograde transport of axonal autophagosomes contributes to autophagic stress in Alzheimer’s disease neurons Elife 6
Tanikawa S Mori F Tanji K Kakita A Takahashi H Wakabayashi K 2012 Endosomal sorting related protein CHMP2B is localized in Lewy bodies and glial cytoplasmic inclusions in alpha-synucleinopathy Neurosci Lett 527 16 21 22947304
Tanzi RE 2012 The genetics of Alzheimer disease Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2
Tatti M Motta M Di Bartolomeo S Cianfanelli V Salvioli R 2013 Cathepsin-mediated regulation of autophagy in saposin C deficiency Autophagy 9 241 243 23108186
Temkin P Lauffer B Jager S Cimermancic P Krogan NJ von Zastrow M 2011 SNX27 mediates retromer tubule entry and endosome-to-plasma membrane trafficking of signalling receptors Nat Cell Biol 13 715 721 21602791
Torres EM Sokolsky T Tucker CM Chan LY Boselli M Dunham MJ Amon A 2007 Effects of aneuploidy on cellular physiology and cell division in haploid yeast Science 317 916 924 17702937
Tramutola A Di Domenico F Barone E Giorgi A Di Francesco L Schinina E Coccia R Arena A Head E Butterfield DA 2016 Poly-Ubiquitinylation Profile in Down Syndrome Brain before and after the Development of Alzheimer Neuropathology Antioxid Redox Signal
Tramutola A Triplett JC Di Domenico F Niedowicz DM Murphy MP Coccia R Perluigi M Butterfield DA 2015 Alteration of mTOR signaling occurs early in the progression of Alzheimer disease (AD): analysis of brain from subjects with pre-clinical AD, amnestic mild cognitive impairment and late-stage AD J Neurochem 133 739 749 25645581
Tyynela J Sohar I Sleat DE Gin RM Donnelly RJ Baumann M Haltia M Lobel P 2000 A mutation in the ovine cathepsin D gene causes a congenital lysosomal storage disease with profound neurodegeneration EMBO J 19 2786 2792 10856224
Umeda T Tomiyama T Sakama N Tanaka S Lambert MP Klein WL Mori H 2011 Intraneuronal amyloid beta oligomers cause cell death via endoplasmic reticulum stress, endosomal/lysosomal leakage, and mitochondrial dysfunction in vivo J Neurosci Res 89 1031 1042 21488093
van der Kant R Goldstein LS 2015 Cellular functions of the amyloid precursor protein from development to dementia Dev Cell 32 502 515 25710536
Varsano T Dong MQ Niesman I Gacula H Lou X Ma T Testa JR Yates JR 3rd Farquhar MG 2006 GIPC is recruited by APPL to peripheral TrkA endosomes and regulates TrkA trafficking and signaling Mol Cell Biol 26 8942 8952 17015470
Villar AJ Belichenko PV Gillespie AM Kozy HM Mobley WC Epstein CJ 2005 Identification and characterization of a new Down syndrome model, Ts[Rb(12.1716)]2Cje, resulting from a spontaneous Robertsonian fusion between T(171)65Dn and mouse chromosome 12 Mamm Genome 16 79 90 15859352
Vinicia AP Hongmei L Heidi MS Baiping W Li Y Yin X Daniel BS Michela P Alberto R Virginia MYL 2014 Selective clearance of aberrant tau proteins and rescue of neurotoxicity by transcription factor EB EMBO Molecular Medicine 6 1142 1160 25069841
Voronov SV Frere SG Giovedi S Pollina EA Borel C Zhang H Schmidt C Akeson EC Wenk MR Cimasoni L 2008 Synaptojanin 1-linked phosphoinositide dyshomeostasis and cognitive deficits in mouse models of Down’s syndrome Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105 9415 9420 18591654
Wandinger-Ness A Zerial M 2014 Rab proteins and the compartmentalization of the endosomal system Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 6 a022616 25341920
Wang CW Stromhaug PE Kauffman EJ Weisman LS Klionsky DJ 2003 Yeast homotypic vacuole fusion requires the Ccz1-Mon1 complex during the tethering/docking stage J Cell Biol 163 973 985 14662743
Wang X Zhao Y Zhang X Badie H Zhou Y Mu Y Loo LS Cai L Thompson RC Yang B 2013 Loss of sorting nexin 27 contributes to excitatory synaptic dysfunction by modulating glutamate receptor recycling in Down’s syndrome Nat Med 19 473 480 23524343
Wang Y Floor E 1998 Hydrogen peroxide inhibits the vacuolar H+-ATPase in brain synaptic vesicles at micromolar concentrations J Neurochem 70 646 652 9453558
Wegiel J Kaczmarski W Barua M Kuchna I Nowicki K Wang KC Wegiel J Yang SM Frackowiak J Mazur-Kolecka B 2011 Link between DYRK1A overexpression and several-fold enhancement of neurofibrillary degeneration with 3-repeat tau protein in Down syndrome J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 70 36 50 21157379
Weick JP Held DL Bonadurer GF 3rd Doers ME Liu Y Maguire C Clark A Knackert JA Molinarolo K Musser M 2013 Deficits in human trisomy 21 iPSCs and neurons Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110 9962 9967 23716668
Wiseman FK Al-Janabi T Hardy J Karmiloff-Smith A Nizetic D Tybulewicz VL Fisher EM Strydom A 2015 A genetic cause of Alzheimer disease: mechanistic insights from Down syndrome Nat Rev Neurosci 16 564 574 26243569
Wiseman FK Alford KA Tybulewicz VL Fisher EM 2009 Down syndrome–recent progress and future prospects Hum Mol Genet 18 R75 83 19297404
Wisniewski KE Dalton AJ McLachlan C Wen GY Wisniewski HM 1985 Alzheimer’s disease in Down’s syndrome: clinicopathologic studies Neurology 35 957 961 3159974
Wolfe DM Lee JHH Kumar A Lee S Orenstein SJ Nixon RA 2013 Autophagy failure in Alzheimer’s disease and the role of defective lysosomal acidification The European journal of neuroscience 37 1949 1961 23773064
Woodruff G Reyna SM Dunlap M Van Der Kant R Callender JA Young JE Roberts EA Goldstein LS 2016 Defective Transcytosis of APP and Lipoproteins in Human iPSC-Derived Neurons with Familial Alzheimer’s Disease Mutations Cell Rep 17 759 773 27732852
Xu W Weissmiller AM White JA 2nd Fang F Wang X Wu Y Pearn ML Zhao X Sawa M Chen S 2016 Amyloid precursor protein-mediated endocytic pathway disruption induces axonal dysfunction and neurodegeneration J Clin Invest 126 1815 1833 27064279
Xue X Wang LRR Sato Y Jiang Y Berg M Yang DSS Nixon RA Liang XJJ 2014 Single-walled carbon nanotubes alleviate autophagic/lysosomal defects in primary glia from a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Nano letters 14 5110 5117 25115676
Yamasaki R Zhang J Koshiishi I Sastradipura Suniarti DF Wu Z Peters C Schwake M Uchiyama Y Kira J Saftig P 2007 Involvement of lysosomal storage-induced p38 MAP kinase activation in the overproduction of nitric oxide by microglia in cathepsin D-deficient mice Mol Cell Neurosci 35 573 584 17570679
Yamazaki Y Takahashi T Hiji M Kurashige T Izumi Y Yamawaki T Matsumoto M 2010 Immunopositivity for ESCRT-III subunit CHMP2B in granulovacuolar degeneration of neurons in the Alzheimer’s disease hippocampus Neurosci Lett 477 86 90 20420883
Yang AJ Chandswangbhuvana D Margol L Glabe CG 1998 Loss of endosomal/lysosomal membrane impermeability is an early event in amyloid Aβ1-42 pathogenesis Journal of Neuroscience Research
Yang DSS Kumar A Stavrides P Peterson J Peterhoff CM Pawlik M Levy E Cataldo AM Nixon RA 2008 Neuronal apoptosis and autophagy cross talk in aging PS/APP mice, a model of Alzheimer’s disease The American journal of pathology 173 665 681 18688038
Yang DSS Stavrides P Mohan PS Kaushik S Kumar A Ohno M Schmidt SD Wesson D Bandyopadhyay U Jiang Y 2011a Reversal of autophagy dysfunction in the TgCRND8 mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease ameliorates amyloid pathologies and memory deficits Brain: a journal of neurology 134 258 277 21186265
Yang DSS Stavrides P Mohan PS Kaushik S Kumar A Ohno M Schmidt SD Wesson DW Bandyopadhyay U Jiang Y 2011b Therapeutic effects of remediating autophagy failure in a mouse model of Alzheimer disease by enhancing lysosomal proteolysis Autophagy 7 788 789 21464620
Yang DSS Stavrides P Saito M Kumar A Rodriguez-Navarro JA Pawlik M Huo C Walkley SU Saito M Cuervo AM 2014 Defective macroautophagic turnover of brain lipids in the TgCRND8 Alzheimer mouse model: prevention by correcting lysosomal proteolytic deficits Brain: a journal of neurology 137 3300 3318 25270989
Yin X Jin N Shi J Zhang Y Wu Y Gong CX Iqbal K Liu F 2017 Dyrk1A overexpression leads to increase of 3R-tau expression and cognitive deficits in Ts65Dn Down syndrome mice Sci Rep 7 619 28377597
Zana M Janka Z Kalman J 2007 Oxidative stress: a bridge between Down’s syndrome and Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 28 648 676 16624449
Zana M Szecsenyi A Czibula A Bjelik A Juhasz A Rimanoczy A Szabo K Vetro A Szucs P Varkonyi A 2006 Age-dependent oxidative stress-induced DNA damage in Down’s lymphocytes Biochem Biophys Res Commun 345 726 733 16696946
Zerial M McBride H 2001 Rab proteins as membrane organizers Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2 107 117 11252952
Zhang D Isack NR Glodowski DR Liu J Chen CC Xu XZ Grant BD Rongo C 2012 RAB-6.2 and the retromer regulate glutamate receptor recycling through a retrograde pathway J Cell Biol 196 85 101 22213799
Zhang S Eitan E Mattson MP 2017 Early Involvement of Lysosome Dysfunction in the Degeneration of Cerebral Cortical Neurons Caused by the Lipid Peroxidation Product 4-Hydroxynonenal J Neurochem
Zhang YW Chen Y Liu Y Zhao Y Liao FF Xu H 2013 APP regulates NGF receptor trafficking and NGF-mediated neuronal differentiation and survival PLoS One 8 e80571 24224055
Zhang Z Zhang T Wang S Gong Z Tang C Chen J Ding J 2014 Molecular mechanism for Rabex-5 GEF activation by Rabaptin-5 Elife 3
Zhou W Scott SA Shelton SB Crutcher KA 2006 Cathepsin D-mediated proteolysis of apolipoprotein E: possible role in Alzheimer’s disease Neuroscience 143 689 701 16997486
Zhu G Chen J Liu J Brunzelle JS Huang B Wakeham N Terzyan S Li X Rao Z Li G 2007 Structure of the APPL1 BAR-PH domain and characterization of its interaction with Rab5 EMBO J 26 3484 3493 17581628
