LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


8709159
3902
Free Radic Biol Med
Free Radic. Biol. Med.
Free radical biology &amp; medicine
0891-5849
1873-4596

28274817
5482368
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2017.02.049
NIHMS866699
Article
Microvascular NADPH oxidase in health and disease
Li Yao
Pagano Patrick J. *
Department of Pharmacology &amp; Chemical Biology, Vascular Medicine Institute, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
* Corresponding author. pagano@pitt.edu (P.J. Pagano)
15 4 2017
06 3 2017
8 2017
01 8 2017
109 3347
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
The systemic and cerebral microcirculation contribute critically to regulation of local and global blood flow and perfusion pressure. Microvascular dysfunction, commonly seen in numerous cardiovascular pathologies, is associated with alterations in the oxidative environment including potentiated production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and subsequent activation of redox signaling pathways. NADPH oxidases (Noxs) are a primary source of ROS in the vascular system and play a central role in cardiovascular health and disease. In this review, we focus on the roles of Noxs in ROS generation in resistance arterioles and capillaries, and summarize their contributions to microvascular physiology and pathophysiology in both systemic and cerebral microcirculation. In light of the accumulating evidence that Noxs are pivotal players in vascular dysfunction of resistance arterioles, selectively targeting Nox isozymes could emerge as a novel and effective therapeutic strategy for preventing and treating microvascular diseases.

Microcirculation
NADPH oxidase
Reactive oxygen species
Endothelial dysfunction
Arterioles
Remodeling
Myogenic tone
Aging

1. Introduction

1.1. Microcirculation

The microcirculation, comprised of the most distal segments of the vascular system, proceeds from an active network of arterioles to capillaries and venules in the periphery. Together, these vascular beds function to regulate blood flow and perfusion pressure. The microcirculation is responsible for optimizing the supply of nutrients and oxygen to various organs, while simultaneously removing metabolic waste products. Consequently, the rate of blood flow through these beds is tightly controlled by the metabolic demands of the tissue they pervade and is finely tuned by the more proximal small arteries and resistance arterioles. It is widely acknowledged that the small arteries and arterioles account for the majority (80%) of vascular resistance to blood flow [1–3]. They also serve to protect downstream capillaries from the potential damaging effects of high perfusion pressure and, in turn, prevent end-organ damage [4]. Arteriolar lumen size can vary dramatically depending on various species, distinct vascular beds and intrinsic contractile status. However, the common feature shared by arterioles across all vascular beds and species is the fact that they only possess one or two layers of smooth muscle cells in their arterial wall, which play a remarkably effective and fundamental role in regulating vascular contractility and local perfusion. Regulation of arteriolar diameter and blood flow in the microcirculation is a dynamic and well-controlled process that integrates signals from mechanical, chemical, hormonal and neuronal stimuli. This is also achieved by an ensemble of responses elicited by endothelial cells and smooth muscle cells [1,2]. Impaired arteriolar function, as observed in various cardiovascular pathologies such as hypertension, diabetes, stroke and aging, leads to vascular remodeling, tissue ischemia and organ damage [3,5–8]. Emerging evidence has shown that changes in the oxidative environment are often accompanied by the aforementioned vascular dysfunction and cardiovascular diseases in the microcirculation [6,9–12]. As a primary source for oxidative stress and reactive oxygen species (ROS) in vascular cells, the contribution of NADPH oxidases (Noxs) to the cardiovascular system in health and disease has been investigated in a plethora of studies [9–11,13–15]. In the microcirculation, Noxs are implicated in a variety of vascular pathologies including arteriolar remodeling [16,17] and endothelial dysfunction [18,19] in systemic microvessels, as well as impaired neurovascular coupling [20] and disrupted blood-brain barrier (BBB) integrity [21] in the cerebral circulation. The current review aims not to be an exhaustive review on the roles of all sources of oxidases in the microcirculation. Rather, the goal here is to survey what is known of the roles of Noxs in ROS generation in resistance arterioles and to summarize their contributions to microvascular physiology and pathophysiology in both cerebral and systemic microcirculation.

1.2. NADPH oxidases (Noxs) in the microvasculature

The nicotinamide-adenine-dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidases (Noxs) are an increasingly complex family of proteins whose core components are membrane bound. All Noxs transfer electrons from NADPH to molecular oxygen, thus generating superoxide anion and attendant other downstream ROS with NADP+ as a byproduct [22]. There are seven members of the Nox family characteristically distinguished and referred to by their catalytic core component, namely prototypic Nox2 (previously gp91phox), Nox1, Nox3, Nox4, Nox5, Duox1 and Duox2. These isozymes are heterogeneously distributed across tissue. Their structure and function are complex and have been extensively reviewed elsewhere [9,10,12–14,23]. The focus here will be on their profound implications in vascular function and disease in the microcirculatory system.

Of the seven members of the Nox family, Nox1, Nox2, Nox4 and Nox5 are known to be expressed in human vascular tissue. They are considered the “professional” enzymatic source of ROS in vascular cells, and are found to exert varied and often distinct physiological functions depending on the cell, tissue and/or species (Table 1). For instance, Noxs identified by their core catalytic subunits, i.e. Nox2 and Nox4, are involved in proliferation of endothelial cells [24], whereas Nox1 facilitates smooth muscle cell mitogenesis and proliferation and thus likely aids in cell replenishment under normal conditions [25]. Smooth muscle Nox4 has been implicated widely in the maintenance of a differentiated phenotype [26,27]. Further, Noxs are also involved in regulation of vascular contractility [28–30]. On the other hand, Nox isozymes are also known to be major players in mediating vascular dysfunction and disease [9,11–13,23,31–33].

Membrane-integrated Nox subunit p22phox is required by Nox1, Nox2 and Nox4 but not the Nox5 isoform for membrane stabilization and activity [23]. The prototypical phagocytic NADPH oxidase is composed of five subunits: p47phox (organizer), p67phox (activator), p40phox, p22phox and catalytic subunit Nox2 (previously gp91phox) [34–37]. p47phox is phosphorylated upon stimulation, and hence the cytosolic units form a complex that includes the small Rho-family GTP-binding protein Rac1/2 [38]. This complex is then well characterized as being translocated to the plasma membrane where it interacts with the heterodimeric flavoprotein (cytochrome b558 complex) formed by p22phox and Nox2. Once assembled, the enzyme is rendered active and generates superoxide anion from molecular oxygen [23]. The Nox2 oxidase complex is not only widely distributed in phagocytes but is ubiquitous in lung, heart and vasculature [23]. In the vasculature, it was first discovered and characterized in fibroblasts [28,36,39,40], vascular smooth muscle cells [41–43], and endothelial cells [44,45]. These findings sparked exploration and discovery of Nox in virtually all cell types and led to the knowledge that similar orthologues are highly conserved in nature dating to some of their earliest evolutionary predecessors in fungi; and resembling the subunit-modulated Noxs that are highly regulated in mammals [46]. Being the first to be discovered, Nox2 remains to be the most extensively studied member of the Nox family in numerous physiological and pathological processes. In the microvasculature, Nox2 appears to be mostly present in the endothelium and adventitia [20,24], responsible for endothelial dysfunction under disease conditions [19,47] but has been shown by Touyz et al. to also be functionally active in human resistance smooth muscle cells [43]. Similar to Nox2, the canonical Nox1 requires binding of p22phox, p47phox homologue NoxO1, p67phox homologue NoxA1 and Rac1/2 for activation [48]. Nox1 oxidase complex is most abundant in colon, prostate, uterus and vascular cells [23]. In contrast to Nox1 and Nox2 complexes, activity of Nox4 was shown to be modulated by the enzyme polymerase delta-interacting protein or Poldip2 [49]. Also distinguishing itself from other Nox complexes, Nox4 appears to be constitutively active and to most favorably produce hydrogen peroxide over superoxide anion [23]. Interestingly, Nox4 is substantially higher in the cerebral circulation and purportedly generates hydrogen peroxide that modulates arteriolar activity as a potent vasodilator under physiological conditions [50,51]. However, the findings in that study using a selective Nox2 inhibitor along with apocynin might challenge the notion of a singular role for Nox4 and perhaps suggest a cross-talk between Nox2 and Nox4 in this vasodilator effect [52]. Nox5 activity does not depend on p22phox, nor cytosolic organizer or activator. Rather, it is regulated by calcium binding through EF-hand motifs [53]. As the most recently discovered Nox member, the expression and functional significance of Nox5 are poorly appreciated since Nox5 is absent in mouse and rat genomes [54]. In the microcirculation, Nox5 isozyme is found in porcine and human coronary resistance arterioles [55–57]. Additionally, its expression is significantly enhanced in these microvessels under disease conditions such as atherosclerosis and myocardial infarction, suggesting that it may be an important mediator of the pathological degeneration of human resistance arteries [56,57].

In this review, we discuss the involvement of Noxs in two distinct microvascular systems: systemic microcirculation and cerebral microcirculation. In each section, we will briefly summarize the expression of Noxs in various vascular beds and cell types. Further, implication of Noxs in both physiological processes such as myogenic tone regulation and vasodilator mechanisms, and cardiovascular pathologies including endothelial dysfunction and vascular remodeling will be discussed in detail. In light of the burgeoning evidence that Noxs are central players in vascular dysfunction of resistance arterioles, targeting Nox could emerge as a novel and effective therapeutic strategy for preventing and treating microvascular diseases.

2. Systemic microcirculation

2.1. Nox expression

In systemic microvessels, expression of Nox isozymes has been described in a number of resistance vascular beds, participating in physiological and pathological processes. For example, mRNA transcript and protein of Nox1, Nox2, Nox4, p22phox, p47phox, p67phox and Rac1/2 subunits were detected in mouse and rat mesenteric resistance arteries [19,58,60,66,67,71], where Noxs are implicated in structural and functional alterations in response to distinct stimuli [17,72,73]. In mouse coronary arteries, protein expression of Nox2 and its regulatory subunits p67phox, p47phox and p22phox were reported [64]. Moreover, immunohistochemical assays illustrate that Nox1, Nox2, Nox4, p22phox, p47phox and p67phox are expressed in human coronary arteriolar endothelium [62]. In addition, Nox5, both at the level of mRNA transcript and protein, was detected in human coronary arterioles. Immunofluorescence staining of Nox5 corroborated its localization in both endothelium and smooth muscle with low expression levels in healthy subjects and high levels in patients with coronary artery disease and myocardial infarction [56,57]. Recently, Nox5 mRNA was also detected in porcine coronary artery smooth muscle cells, mediating growth factor-induced expression and activation of intermediate conductance Ca2+-activated K+ channels (KCNN4) and subsequent smooth muscle cell migration [55]. Noxs are also involved in the microvascular function in the kidney, where Nox2 was found in mouse afferent arteriole, contributing to angiotensin II (AngII)-induced arteriolar contraction [65]. Furthermore, Nox2 and Nox4 transcripts are found in human renal arterioles, and they modulate endothelium-dependent dilation in elderly patients [68]. Other resistance arteries that express functional Nox isozymes or its regulatory subunits include human subcutaneous arterioles from gluteal and abdominal regions [43,74]. Although the molecular evidence for Noxs in cremaster arterioles is lacking, they appear to be present and functionally active in this vascular bed since ROS scavenger Tempol and Nox inhibitor apocynin inhibited ROS production and downstream inward remodeling of rat cremaster arterioles [75]. Overall, accumulating evidence suggest that Nox activity is crucial for modulations in vascular structure and function in the systemic microcirculation.

2.2. Systemic microvascular Nox in health

The myogenic response is one of the key means by which resistance arteries autoregulate. This crucial hallmark characteristic of arterioles protects downstream capillaries from potential detrimental effects of high intraluminal pressure, thus preventing end-organ damage due to pressure and perfusion fluctuations. Autoregulation is defined as a process by which resistance arteries constrict and reduce their diameter in response to increased intravascular pressure [76]. Mechanisms of the development and maintenance of pressure-induced vasoconstriction have been rigorously studied for decades. Elevation in intraluminal pressure leads to stimulation of depolarizing influence such as transient receptor potential (TRP) channel opening [77,78], and simultaneous inhibition of hyperpolarizing factors including different types of potassium channels in the smooth muscle cells [79,80]. This results in smooth muscle cell membrane depolarization, Ca2+ influx and smooth muscle contraction [76]. Though several aspects of the mechanism underlying pressure-induced vasoconstriction remain to be elucidated, emerging evidence has pointed to the possible contribution of Nox and ROS in the microvasculature under both physiological and pathological conditions. For example, a study showed that elevated transmural pressure initiated a rapid and transient ROS production in isolated resistance arteries from hamster gracilis muscle [29]. Further, pressure-elicited ROS, enhanced Ca2+ sensitivity and vascular contraction were all attenuated in the presence of diphenylene iodonium (DPI) or Nox2-selective peptide inhibitor Nox2ds-tat (aka gp91ds-tat) demonstrating that Nox2-derived ROS is physiologically critical for enhancing Ca2+ sensitivity and smooth muscle contractility in response to increased intraluminal pressure [29]. Using renal afferent arterioles, another study demonstrated that pathologically enhanced myogenic vasoconstriction is attributed to a 4-fold increase in ROS production in vessels from the spontaneous hypertensive rats compared to control animals [81]. The source of ROS is believed to be Nox2 isozyme, as the superoxide scavenger Tempol and the Nox2 inhibitor gp91ds-tat attenuated pressure-induced vasoconstriction in resistance arterioles [81]. Further, the mechanosensitivity of Nox is strongly suggested as several groups reported that superoxide production is largely stimulated by mechanical stretch in cultured vascular smooth muscle cells [82–84]. Importantly, Nox appears to be the predominant source of ROS in these settings, since Nox inhibitors rather than xanthine oxidase or cyclooxygenase inhibitors effectively attenuated stretch-induced ROS generation [29,82,84]. In agreement with these findings, deleting p47phox as well as reducing Nox1 levels abrogated the response in vascular smooth muscle cells, indicative of a clear role of Nox in stretch-mediated ROS production as well as downstream signaling events [83].

Mechanistically, mechano-activation of Nox is mediated by protein kinase C (PKC), which phosphorylates p47phox and promotes its translocation and interaction with Nox2 [85]. In addition, ROS is found to activate downstream RhoA/Rho kinase signaling in vascular smooth muscle [86,87]. Interestingly, both PKC and Rho kinase pathways are well-established cellular mechanisms that mediate myogenic tone development both at the level of promoting smooth muscle depolarization/Ca2+ entry and enhancing Ca2+ sensitivity [88–91], suggesting possible crosstalk involving Nox2 and the protein kinases to facilitate myogenic responses in vascular smooth muscle cells. Moreover, emerging evidence has pointed to the mechano-sensitivity of Gq protein-coupled receptors such as Ang II receptors and P2Y purinergic receptors in resistance arteries [92,93]. It was suggested that osmotically induced cell membrane stretch initiates a conformational modification in Ang II receptors where transmembrane segment 7 enters the ligand-binding pocket to cause receptor activation [94]. Mechano-activation of Ang II receptors as well as other Gq protein-coupled receptors further stimulate downstream PKC or Rho kinase pathways [91–93,95,96]. Because AngII receptor activation is also strongly associated with Nox activation and ROS production in smooth muscle cells, it is conceivable that complex cellular interactions among AngII receptors, Nox and protein kinases may be essential for developing and maintaining microvascular myogenic tone physiologically, and adversely regulating the contractile responsiveness under disease conditions. Furthermore, since Nox5 possesses EF-hands and is exquisitely sensitive to rises in Ca2+ [53], PKC and Rho kinase-mediated increase in Ca2+ influx and Ca2+ sensitivity may be particularly relevant. In fact, it was demonstrated that PKC phosphorylates Nox5 at key residues, and facilitates enzyme activation as well as ROS production by increasing its sensitivity to Ca2+ [97,98]. However, the physiological significance of this pathway, particularly its participation in vascular function requires further investigation.

2.3. Systemic microvascular Nox in disease

2.3.1. Microvascular remodeling

In addition to rapid contractile and dilatory responses to mechanical or chemical stimuli, resistance vessels also display adaptive structural modifications that alter their diameter and responses to vasoactive molecules [99]. Vascular remodeling is controlled by a number of processes including cytoskeletal remodeling, cell growth, cell proliferation, cell migration, apoptosis, and extracellular matrix modification, all of which are influenced by redox state [2]. The involvement of ROS in different mechanisms of the vascular remodeling process is more thoroughly discussed elsewhere [2]. This section of the review will focus on Nox-mediated inward and outward remodeling at the level of microcirculation. Vascular remodeling can be induced by various factors, such as mechanical and hemodynamic forces, and neurohumoral or paracrine agents. Inward hypertrophic remodeling is believed to commonly occur in resistance arteries that undergo prolonged contraction as reported in cardiovascular diseases such as hypertension and diabetes [100,101]. It involves cell proliferation and alterations in the amount and composition of extracellular matrix components which eventually reduce lumen diameter and increase vascular wall thickness, media/lumen ratio and cross-sectional area [100]. In contrast to inward remodeling that is caused by prolonged contraction as a primary stimulus, outward remodeling happens when vessels are subjected to chronically increased blood flow or shear stress, and they adaptively outward remodel to meet the need for higher metabolic demand [102]. These arterioles exhibit increased wall thickness and vascular diameter as well as an increased luminal size. Both inward and outward hypertrophy are important compensatory mechanisms as they occur when vascular myogenic reactivity is not sufficient to normalize circumferential stress [2]. Also similar to myogenic autoregulation, inward hypertrophy serves to protect downstream capillaries from perfusion pressure fluctuations and prevent end-organ damage, whereas outward remodeling functions to meet higher metabolic demand that is more commonly seen during pregnancy and exercise training [103,104]. Multiple studies have implicated Nox in both types of remodeling in the microvasculature. For example, it was shown that inward hypertrophy of cremaster and mesenteric arterioles induced by prolonged exposure to vasoactive compounds, primarily AngII, is accompanied by increased superoxide anion production [16,17,72,75,105]. Both ROS generation and vascular remodeling could be prevented by the non-specific Nox inhibitor apocynin, suggestive of an important role of Nox in the microvascular remodeling mechanisms [16,17]. In accordance with this notion, Briones et al. inferred that treatment with atorvastatin attenuates AngII-elicited mesenteric resistance artery hypertrophy partially by inhibiting AngII-induced increase in Nox1 expression [17]. Additionally, involvement of Nox in high flow-induced outward remodeling has been evaluated. That is, high flow-mediated ROS production and diameter enlargement of mesenteric resistance arteries were inhibited by Tempol and apocynin [106]. Potentiated p67phox and Nox2 expression levels in these arterioles further suggested that Nox-derived ROS are responsible for flow-initiated outward remodeling in the microcirculation [106]. Similarly, Castier et al. found that prolonged stimulation by high blood flow facilitated artery enlargement and concomitant shear stress reduction from the initial surge [107]. Surprisingly, deleting Nox2 had little effect to reverse these alterations, whereas p47phox deletion conferred significant improvement in artery caliber and shear stress, and elicited pronounced decreases in oxidative stress. Those findings suggested that outward remodeling is mediated by a p47phox-dependent signaling pathway which is independent of Nox2 activation [107]. This could suggest that the hybrid Nox1 system that utilizes p47phox is operant here. In both the inward and outward remodeling processes, it is generally accepted that ROS participates in part via activating matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), including MMP2 and MMP9 [75,107,108]. Castier et al. proposed that increased superoxide anion and NO and, in turn, peroxynitrite subsequently activate these MMPs and cause vascular remodeling in the microvasculature [107]. However, the specific Nox isozymes or the downstream signaling cascades that facilitate these types of hypertrophy have not yet been identified.

2.3.2. Endothelial dysfunction

Endothelial dysfunction is characterized by a shift in vascular function towards reduced vasodilation, a pro-inflammatory state, and pro-thrombotic properties. This shift is implicated in many types of cardiovascular diseases, such as hypertension, coronary artery disease, chronic heart failure, peripheral vascular disease, diabetes and chronic kidney failure [109]. At the level of microcirculation, endothelial dysfunction is believed to play a key role in the development of atherosclerosis, abnormal angiogenesis, vascular leakage and stroke, all of which are associated with enhanced oxidative stress [110]. Noxs, a primary cause of oxidative stress in the vasculature, have major implications for endothelial dysfunction in the microcirculation by way of producing ROS and subsequently disrupting NO signaling. The diffusion-limited reaction between superoxide anion and NO reduces NO bioavailability and diminishes its anti-proliferative, anti-coagulant, anti-inflammatory and vasodilatory properties. The product of this reaction, peroxynitrite, is in and of itself a powerful oxidant and can exacerbate vascular dysfunction by causing further damage to lipids, proteins and DNA, uncoupling endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) and diminishing smooth muscle responses to NO [111,112]. In the systemic microvasculature, impaired endothelium-dependent vasodilation and concomitant enhanced Nox-mediated oxidative stress have been observed in microvascular coronary arterioles and mesenteric resistance arteries in a number of cardiovascular diseases, such as obesity [113,114], diabetes [18,19,47,115,116], hypertension [117–119] and ischemia-reperfusion [73]. In these studies, elevated expression of Nox subunits is a common characteristic across different cardiovascular pathologies. For example, ischemia-reperfusion injury induced upregulation of Nox1 and p47phox mRNA transcript levels, which purportedly accounts for superoxide production and potentiation of endothelin 1-induced vasoconstriction [73]. In a mouse model of type 1 diabetes, isolated mesenteric resistance arteries showed a 4-fold increase in Nox activity, and a 4–6 fold enhancement of Nox2 and Nox4 expression compared to vessels from control mice. Moreover, those findings are consistent with Nox being functionally involved in a largely attenuated endothelium-dependent vasodilation [120]. Similarly, mesenteric arterioles obtained from young type 2 diabetic rats showed higher ROS and greater protein expression of Nox2 isozyme compared to young lean rats. ROS production is even more pronounced in aged diabetic rats, in which elevation in p67phox subunit expression was also noted [47]. In other type 2 diabetic mouse models, upregulation of other Nox2 subunits, namely p22phox, p40phox and p47phox, is observed in mesenteric and coronary resistance arteries [18,19,115]. Further corroborating a role of Nox2 in endothelial dysfunction, gp91ds-tat (aka Nox2ds-tat)-treated arterioles exhibited improved vasodilation to acetylcholine compared to untreated vessels. Moreover, evidence that knocking out p47phox prevented disruption of endothelium-dependent vasodilation is consistent with the essential contribution of p47phox to microvascular dysfunction [19]. Several mechanisms underpinning Nox activation and subsequent endothelial dysfunction have been proposed. In diabetic and hypertensive disease models and obese patient samples, TNFα and endothelin-1 were upregulated [114,115,121,122], leading to amplified Nox-mediated oxidative stress and microvascular dysfunction. In a type 2 diabetic mouse model, superoxide anion levels are augmented by the interaction between advanced glycation end products (AGE) and receptor for AGE (RAGE), both of which are heavily involved in pathophysiology of hyperglycemia and diabetes. AGE-RAGE binding further potentiated expression of TNFα, oxidative stress and endothelial dysfunction in coronary microvessels [115]. In another type 2 diabetes study, augmented epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase was shown to enhance Nox expression and activity, which facilitated an increased vasoconstrictor response and attenuated acetylcholine-induced dilatation [19]. Although the mechanistic implications of ROS signaling pathway in microvascular endothelial dysfunction is not fully understood, it is clear that Nox, particularly Nox2, plays a central role in this pathological process. Therefore, selectively targeting Nox or its stabilizing membrane counterpart p22phox can be a useful strategy in terms of restoring the balance between pro- and anti-oxidants and improving vascular functionality. In fact, one study showed that p22phox small interfering RNA (siRNA) significantly improved endothelium-dependent vasodilator responses in microvessels isolated from diabetic mice [18]. This appears to be mediated by reversal of the augmented phosphorylation of downstream mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) p38 and extracellular signal-receptor kinase (ERK) following p22phox knockdown [18]. Since it is well established that activation of MAPKs is a fundamental mechanism responsible for cardiovascular dysfunction in diabetes, p22phox siRNA-mediated decrease in phosphorylation of these kinases is expected to effectively ameliorate vascular abnormalities [123,124]. Taken together, the findings support the notion that Nox is a central player and a potential drug target for treating microvascular diseases.

2.3.3. Microvascular angiogenesis

Angiogenesis is a natural process in the microcirculatory system. It is induced by ischemia and is characterized by the sprouting of new blood vessels from existing vessels, as well as the proliferation and migration of microvascular endothelial cells [125]. Several studies have reported that Noxs participate importantly in the regulation of angiogenesis of the microvascular endothelial cells. In particular, Nox4 was found to be a key mediator of pro-angiogenic signaling through distinct cellular pathways [126–128]. For example, blood flow recovery after hind limb ischemia was significantly enhanced in mice overexpressing human Nox4 and was impaired in mice overexpressing a dominant negative form in the endothelium, suggesting that Nox4 is involved in angiogenic response in vivo [129]. In isolated cardiac microvascular endothelial cells, Nox4 expression and activity were substantially increased after cells were subjected to hypoxia/reoxygenation [127]. Transcriptionally downregulating Nox4 exacerbated hypoxia/reoxygenation-induced cell apoptosis and inhibited the expression of hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF-1α) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). This suggests that Nox4 promotes microvascular endothelial cell survival, migration and angiogenesis after ischemia/reperfusion injury by activating the HIF-1α/VEGF signaling [127]. Other mechanisms underlying Nox4-promoted angiogenic response include activation of receptor tyrosine kinases and the ERK pathway [128], and stimulation of transforming growth factor β1 (TGFβ1) to initiate activation of VEGF receptor 2, p38 MAPK and adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase alpha (AMPKα) in microvascular endothelial cells [129]. In addition, there is evidence that Nox2 is an important regulator of angiogenesis in vivo [130]. In particular, Nox2 knockout mice exhibited significantly impaired neovascularization in the ischemic hind limb compared to wild type mice. New blood vessel formation in response to ischemia is an important adaptive response for preserving tissue integrity [131]. Therefore, both Nox4 and Nox2 appear to be protective by orchestrating complex angiogenic signaling pathways in endothelial cells of the microcirculation. However, an exaggerated angiogenic response can be pathological, and be associated with tumor growth and metastasis. A large body of evidence appears to suggest that Nox-derived ROS may function as signaling molecules that mediate growth-related responses and facilitate tumor angiogenesis [132] although much more work appears necessary to test this directly.

2.3.4. Aging

The cumulative process of diverse deleterious changes in the cells and tissues with advancing age progressively impairs function and eventually causes death [133]. Aging is a major risk factor for cardiovascular diseases [133]. Among multiple other instigators of the aging process, ROS and oxidative stress are often described as a common denominator in aging and age-related cardiovascular diseases [9,11,134–136]. As the “professional” enzymatic source for ROS generation in vascular cells, Nox isozymes appear to play a crucial role in age-associated cardiovascular dysfunction including coronary artery disease, atherosclerosis, hypertension and diabetes via activation of redox signaling pathways [70,137–143]. Multiple studies have identified age-mediated alterations in the activity and/or expression levels of Nox subunits and the pivotal contribution of Noxs to impairment of endothelium-dependent vasodilation, i.e. endothelial dysfunction. For example, aortas from aged hypertensive rats exhibited increased ROS formation compared to age-matched control rats, which was sensitive to broad spectrum Nox inhibitors VAS2870, apocynin and DPI. This was accompanied by enhanced protein levels of Nox1 and Nox2, but not Nox4, in aged aortas. Further, acetylcholine-induced vasodilation was largely attenuated in these aortas compared to control, which was improved by VAS2870 and apocynin [144]. Another study comparing aortas from young and middle aged spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR) and control Wistar rats showed significantly higher mRNA expression of p22phox and Nox activity in the aortas from older SHR rats, concomitant with lower acetylcholine dilatory responses [145]. Those findings seem to suggest a link between enhanced expression and activity of Noxs and conduit artery endothelial dysfunction associated with aging and hypertension. In the microcirculation, attenuated effects from endothelium-dependent dilatory stimuli were also reported. In aged coronary arterioles, flow and acetylcholine-initiated dilation were significantly diminished [146]. Even though endothelial dysfunction paralleled higher Nox-derived superoxide anion generation in aged coronary microvessels, it appears to be independent of a change in expression of Nox subunits such p47phox, p67phox, Nox1 and p22phox [146]; statistical power could have been an issue for an apparent but nonsignificant rise in p67phox. Nevertheless, the role of Nox-derived ROS in many other manifestations of microvascular dysfunction associated with the aging process is largely unknown. In fact, the microcirculation undergoes significant functional and anatomical changes with age. Apart from declines in endothelium-dependent vasodilation, for instance, age is also associated with Rho kinase signaling-mediated cutaneous vasoconstriction [147]. Since Rho kinase activation has been shown to be regulated by ROS in vascular smooth muscle cells [86], it seems reasonable to propose that age-induced microvascular constriction is also regulated by Nox-mediated ROS signaling. Furthermore, aging is associated with arteriolar stiffness, decreased vascular density and impaired microvascular organization [5]. Nevertheless, signaling mechanisms that underlie the co-existence of Nox-mediated oxidative stress, aging and microvascular pathologies warrant further investigation.

3. Cerebral microcirculation

3.1. Nox expression

In the cerebral vasculature, expression of NADPH oxidases (Nox1, Nox2 and Nox4) at the level of both mRNA and protein has been confirmed by various studies. Specifically, Nox1, Nox2 and Nox4 were detected in human brain vascular smooth muscle cells [63]. In basilar arterial endothelial cells, Nox1 and Nox4 mRNA are highly expressed, whereas Nox2 transcript is expressed to a far lesser extent [61]. The cytosolic components of Nox including p47phox, p67phox, NOXO1 and NOXA1 were also found in these endothelial cells [61]. Furthermore, mRNA of NADPH oxidase subunits Nox1, Nox2, Nox4, p22phox, p47phox and p67phox were also identified in the cerebral neocortical microvessels including cerebral arterioles and capillaries [59]. Using electron microscopy, Nox2 immunoreactivity was detected in the intima and adventitia of cerebral arterioles [20], which may reflect important involvement of ROS-mediated signaling in regulation of cerebral microcirculation.

3.2. Cerebral microvascular Nox in health

Interestingly, cerebral arteries isolated from various healthy animal models presented markedly higher NADPH oxidase activity and ROS generation compared to systemic vessels [50,148], which may be explained at least in part by elevated expression of Nox2 and Nox4 in the cerebral vasculature [50]. It is tempting to speculate that perhaps more significant roles of Nox and ROS are operant in modulating cerebrovascular function and local blood flow under physiological conditions. Indeed, compelling evidence exists for ROS, particularly hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), participating in control of arteriolar reactivity as a potent endogenous vasodilator in the cerebral circulation [50,51,149]. This is supported by the observation that NADPH-induced vasodilation can be abolished by the H2O2 scavenger catalase and Nox inhibitor apocynin, indicating that H2O2, generated secondarily from Nox2 and superoxide anion dismutation, is a potent vasorelaxant. As several endogenous vasoactive stimulants such as AngII and TNFα elicit increases in Nox activity, it was proposed that H2O2-mediated vasodilation in the cerebral microcirculation may play a protective role against endogenous vasoactive hormones, thereby preventing cerebral vasospasm and subsequent neuronal damage. In agreement with this postulate, Miller et al. showed that AngII initiated significantly smaller contractions in cerebral arteries than in systemic vessels, which were potentiated by both catalase and apocynin [50]. In addition, Nox2 was identified to be an important regulator of cerebral blood flow in vivo, as NADPH-induced cerebral vasodilation and increase in blood flow were significantly attenuated by Nox2 inhibitor gp91ds-tat as well as in gp91phox-null mice [150]. Another physiological contribution of Nox-derived ROS was reportedly flow-induced vasodilation in cerebral arteries [151,152]. It was reported in cultured primary cells [153], in isolated arteries [152] as well as in vivo [151] that Nox activity in the endothelium is enhanced by shear stress. Moreover, the evidence that flow-mediated ROS production and vasodilation could be inhibited by catalase and DPI points to the contribution of Nox-generated H2O2 to flow-dependent responses in cerebral circulation [151]. Further mechanistic studies of Nox and ROS-mediated cerebral vascular relaxation revealed mediators both in smooth muscle and endothelium. Sobey et al. reported that dilation of rat cerebral arterioles in response to H2O2 is mediated by activation of large conductance calcium-activated potassium (BKCa) channels in vascular smooth muscle cells. This was proved by selective blockers of these potassium channels (TEA and iberiotoxin) largely inhibiting a putative H2O2-induced vasorelaxation [51]. In agreement with this finding, Cheranov et al. utilized patch clamping to demonstrate that TNFα activates Nox in cerebral smooth muscle cells, leading to production of H2O2 activating BKCa channel currents and resulting in a reduction in global intracellular Ca2+ concentration and vasodilation [154]. In cerebral arterial endothelial cells, Nox-derived ROS were found to propagate the lipid peroxidation metabolite 4-HNE, which further initiated Ca2+ influx through TRPA1 channels, activation of intermediate-conductance Ca2+ channel sparklets and vasodilatation [155].

In addition to facilitating vasodilation under physiological conditions, Nox can mediate cerebral vasoconstriction in response to increases in intraluminal pressure, i.e. myogenic tone. Gebremedhin et al. made key discoveries that increased intraluminal pressure markedly promotes superoxide and H2O2 production in isolated cerebral arteries, which are inhibited by Nox2 inhibitor gp91ds-tat. Elevated ROS levels in smooth muscle cells further evoke redox-sensitive signaling mechanisms involving crosstalk between inactivation of the dual phosphatase PTEN and activation of the PI3K/Akt pathway. This, in turn, inhibits BKCa channels, leading to depolarization and pressure-induced vasoconstriction of cerebral arteries [156]. The seemingly paradoxical involvement of Nox in both dilation and constriction of cerebral arteries in fact appears to highlight the significance of Nox in the fine tuning of cerebral vascular tone and local blood flow. Further, this dichotomy might be attributed to different isoforms of Nox, Nox localization combined with the degree of ROS generated and distinct downstream signaling pathways. Elucidation of these mechanisms will likely require rigorous and directed application of (a) isoform-specific Nox inhibitors; and/or (b) ROS scavengers.

3.3. Cerebral microvascular Nox in disease

3.3.1. Endothelial dysfunction

It is well characterized that ROS impairs cerebral vascular function primarily via inhibition of the endothelium-dependent NO signaling pathway, resulting in dysregulated cerebral microcirculation [157,158]. For example, acetylcholine-induced CBF increase is attenuated by AngII treatment. This process is reversed by apocynin and Nox2 inhibitor, and absent in Nox2 deficient mice, all supportive of the key involvement of Nox2 in AngII-elicited inhibition of NO signaling of the cerebral microvasculature [59]. Indeed, the interaction between superoxide anion and NO not only reduces NO bioavailability, hence diminishing its vasodilatory capability, but also gives rise to peroxynitrite (ONOO−) that leads to damage of DNA, lipids and protein, and more profound vascular pathologies. Several groups have shown that peroxynitrite is implicated in cerebrovascular dysfunction, including impaired NO-dependent vasodilation [159] and augmented vasoconstrictor response during post-ischemic reperfusion [160]. Consistent with the effects on endothelial cells, high concentration of ROS in cerebral arterial smooth muscle also promotes cell contraction and vasoconstriction. Amberg et al. reported that exogenous ROS increases L-type calcium channel activity in isolated myocytes via activation of PKC [161]. As signaling pathways in endothelium and smooth muscle act in concert to facilitate Nox-mediated cerebral vascular dysfunction, Noxs can serve as important targets for therapeutic development against cerebral microvascular diseases.

3.3.2. BBB disruption

Several studies have shown that ROS and Noxs are involved in blood brain barrier (BBB) disruption from various causes. It was reported that Nox inhibition and genetic deletion of Nox2 attenuates stroke-induced BBB disruption and lesions in vivo as well as increases in permeability of brain capillary endothelial cells in vitro [162]. It was also found that apocynin pre-treatment prevents traumatic brain injury-induced ROS production and BBB disruption, thus decreasing neuronal death [21]. Amyloid β (Aβ), whose accumulation in brain capillaries is observed in 40% of the Alzheimer’s disease cases, was found to significantly increase ROS generation and capillary tight junction alterations, both reversed by administration of DPI and an ROS scavenger lipoic acid [163]. Furthermore, increase in BBB permeability in vitro, as determined by FITC-dextran leakage through a monolayer of cultured human brain microvascular endothelial cells (HBMECs), is observed following lipopolysaccharide (LPS) treatment [164]. Concomitantly, LPS potentiated p67phox and p47phox expression, elevated Nox activity and reduced tight junction protein expression. These adverse effects on BBB integrity were all attenuated by the Nox inhibitor apocynin, indicating that Nox, as the primary source of ROS activated by LPS, is a significant regulator of BBB function [164]. Moreover, ROS production and BBB damage were also reported in oxidized low-density lipoprotein-stimulated cerebral arteries [165] and in AngII-treated stroke-prone SHR rats [166]. In both models, Nox inhibition effectively diminished ROS generation and BBB disruption, demonstrating that Nox-dependent oxidative stress represents a common instigator for cerebral microcirculatory BBB dysfunction. Thus, targeting NADPH oxidases may be an effective therapeutic strategy for preventing BBB disruption or restoring its integrity. Although mechanisms underlying Nox-mediated BBB disruption have not been fully elucidated, implications of phosphatidyl inositol 3-kinase, c-Jun N-terminal kinase, Rho kinase in ROS-impaired permeability have been reported [162]. Interestingly, involvement of Rho kinase appears to be both upstream and downstream of Nox and ROS signaling in the cerebral microvasculature, as Rho kinase inhibitor not only prevents ROS-induced BBB damage, but also attenuates oxygen-glucose deprivation-related increases in Nox2 expression and ROS production, restores intercellular tight junctions and preserves BBB integrity [162,167].

3.3.3. Inward remodeling

Another key cerebral vascular abnormality resulting from oxidative stress is alteration in arteriolar structure. It is well acknowledged that hypertension is associated with inward eutrophic remodeling, which is characterized by decreased outer and lumenal diameter and increased media/lumen ratio [168]. This is often observed in resistance-size arteries in the brain [169] as well as peripheral vascular beds [170]. As blood flow is proportional to the fourth power of the vessel’s internal radius, slight changes in lumen diameter can profoundly affect tissue perfusion. Therefore, inward remodeling can exert profound effects on cerebral blood flow. Oxidative stress caused by hypertension is a key mediator of microvascular remodeling in various vascular beds such as mesenteric and subcutaneous arterioles [2]. However, ROS-initiated structural changes in the cerebral vasculature and its potential contribution to vascular function or cerebral blood flow are poorly understood. Chan et al. utilized Nox2 knockout mice to show that superoxide anion generated from the Nox2 isoform oxidase plays a key role in AngII-induced cerebral arteriolar inward remodeling [171]. Nevertheless, the intracellular mechanisms underlying this process require further scrutiny.

3.3.4. Neurovascular uncoupling

Cerebral parenchymal arterioles branch off from upstream arteries on the surface of the brain (pial arteries) and penetrate into the cerebral cortex, where they are encased by astrocytes and neurons. Increased neuronal activity signals through astrocytes, and subsequently leads to arteriolar dilation and an increase in local cerebral blood flow satisfying enhanced glucose and oxygen demand; a process termed neurovascular coupling or functional hyperemia [172]. Neurovascular coupling is disrupted in a variety of pathological conditions, including hypertension, Alzheimer’s disease and ischemic stroke [173], all of which are also associated with elevated levels of arteriolar ROS [20,174,175]. Compelling evidence has shown that Nox2-derived superoxide in the arterioles contributes heavily to impairment of functional hyperemia induced by AngII [20]. AngII evokes significant ROS production in cerebral microvessels and attenuates cerebral blood flow increase from whisker stimulation. These effects were largely inhibited by pegylated-superoxide dismutase (SOD), Tiron, apocynin, and were prevented in mice treated with Nox2 inhibitor gp91ds-tat or in Nox2 deficient mice [20,176]. Aging also represents an important factor for compromised neurovascular coupling, which is believed to cause further age-decline in cortical function and vascular cognitive impairment [177,178]. Further, Toth et al. showed that the cerebral cortex in aged mice had significantly higher mRNA expression of Nox1, Nox2 and Nox4 subunits compared to young mice, also associated with increased level of oxidative stress [179]. Moreover, a whisker stimulation-evoked CBF increase was remarkably lower in aged mice. Both of these effects were inhibited by apocynin, supporting the notion that Nox plays a central role in impairment of neurovascular function and dysregulation of cerebral microcirculation [179]. However, the signaling pathways controlling ROS-mediated damage in neurovascular coupling remain to be unveiled.

3.3.5. Aging

In fact, in addition to compromised functional hyperemia that is briefly described above, it is well documented that aging is associated with diverse cerebrovascular alterations that include reduction in resting CBF, disrupted microvascular integrity, atrophic structural changes and attenuated responses to endothelium-dependent vasodilators [158,180–182]. All these alterations increase the susceptibility of the cerebral vasculature to functional abnormalities, ischemic injury and vascular cognitive impairment [180]. Numerous studies have established a major contribution of Noxs and oxidative stress in age-related vascular dysfunction of the cerebral circulation. For example, aging is associated with increased ROS production in the cerebral cortex and cerebral arteries [158,183], where mRNA transcript levels of Nox subunits such as Nox2, p47phox, and p67phox are elevated in aged groups [158,184]. Further, mice lacking Nox2 do not exhibit cerebrovascular oxidative stress, and are protected from disruption of endothelium-dependent relaxation and impairment of functional hyperemia [158,183]. ROS scavenger Tempol, non-selective Nox inhibitor apocynin and selective Nox2 inhibitor gp91ds-tat all ameliorate aging-induced ROS production and improve vascular function in aged animals [158,183–185]. Recently, the correlation between aging and Alzheimer’s disease was rigorously interrogated, as they, together with hypertension, are purportedly major determinants of cognitive impairment. Aging serves as a powerful risk factor for the cognitive decline caused by hypertension and Alzheimer’s Disease. Therefore, it is not surprising that the contribution of hypertension, Alzheimer’s Disease and aging to cerebrovascular dysfunction and cognitive decline are intertwined and highly interactive. Burgeoning evidence reveals that elevated vascular oxidative stress from Nox appears to be a common thread associated with these conditions [186,187]. In support of this notion, Park et al. utilized aged Tg2576 mice, a mouse line that overexpresses a mutant form of amyloid precursor protein (APP), and is linked to the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease and progressive cognitive deficits. They reported that aging and amyloid deposition, both alone and together, cause cerebrovascular dysfunction including attenuated functional hyperemia and reduced endothelium-dependent dilator responses. Deleting Nox2 not only rescued these abnormal vascular functions in full, but also diminished oxidative stress in aged Tg2576 mice. Similarly, application of Nox2 inhibitor gp91ds-tat largely improved neurovascular coupling and vasodilatory responses in these mice [174]. These reports suggest that Nox2 is a central player in cerebral microcirculatory dysfunction from age-related pathological conditions. In support of these findings, a recent study from Han et al. showed that both apocynin and Tempol reduced ROS levels and improved responses to vasoactive stimuli in aged Tg2576 mice [188]. They also ameliorated vascular smooth muscle-dependent hypercontractile responses observed in aged Tg2576 mice. The authors further noted that the anti-ROS therapy decreased cerebral amyloid angiopathy and micro-hemorrhage that commonly occur in Alzheimer’s Disease [188]. As all these studies point to the key contribution of the Nox, particularly Nox2, to aging-elicited cerebrovascular dysfunction, Nox2 inhibition holds great promise as a therapeutic strategy [52,189–191] for restoring vascular health in cerebral microcirculation, and hopefully delaying the onset of cognitive impairment.

4. Nox inhibitors as therapeutics for microvascular diseases

4.1. Peptidic inhibitors

4.1.1. Nox2ds-tat

Since its initial design and characterization [192], Nox2ds-tat (previously gp91ds-tat) has been one of the most widely used isoform-specific inhibitors of the Nox2 isozyme. It selectively blocks the interaction between Nox2 and p47phox by binding to the latter and preventing p47phox translocation to the plasma membrane. We have previously shown that Nox2ds-tat is a potent inhibitor of the canonical Nox2 oxidase with an IC50 of 0.74 μM, and a selective inhibitor with no effects on Nox1, Nox4 or xanthine oxidase activity [52]. Moreover, the evidence that Nox2ds-tat inhibits neither the canonical Nox1-NoxO1 binding nor the hybrid Nox1-p47phox interaction further demonstrates its specificity on the Nox2 isozyme [52]. Since its development, Nox2ds-tat has proven its value not only in delineating the involvement of Nox2-derived ROS in cardiovascular biology as well as in myriad other organ systems physiology, but also in attenuating Nox2/ROS-mediated cell and tissue damage in vitro and in vivo [193–206]. In resistance arteries from hamster gracilis muscle, the physiological contribution of Nox2 to elevated intraluminal pressure-induced ROS generation, Ca2+ sensitivity and myogenic vasoconstriction was revealed by application of Nox2ds-tat [29]. Moreover, Nox2 was identified as an important source of superoxide anion in the cerebral arteries, as Nox2ds-tat, but not control scrambled peptide, significantly attenuated superoxide anion production in response to increased intraluminal pressure [156]. In addition, Nox2ds-tat was shown to attenuate myogenic tone in afferent arterioles from spontaneous hypertensive rats, indicating that Nox2-derived ROS play a critical role in potentiating the myogenic response in hypertension [81]. Furthermore, since Nox2ds-tat inhibits bradykinin-induced dilation in coronary arteries as well as superoxide anion and H2O2 generation in coronary artery endothelial cells, Nox2 is proposed as an essential enzymatic source of H2O2 that mediates agonist-induced vasodilation in the microcirculation [62]. On the other hand, the therapeutic potential of Nox2ds-tat in the microcirculatory system has also been well described. For example, in a type2 diabetes model, Nox2ds-tat not only was able to attenuate EGF receptor activation-enhanced Nox activity in vascular cells, but also improved EGF-initiated endothelial dysfunction in mesenteric resistance arteries including the rescue of eNOS and Akt signaling [19]. Studies on the functional benefits of Nox2ds-tat are particularly revealing in the cerebral microcirculation. Several reports have shown that Nox2ds-tat mitigates the impairment of neurovascular coupling/functional hyperemia in mice evoked by various pathological stimuli [20,176,183]. These include cerebral flow changes in response to beta amyloid protein [176] and are consistent with the role of Nox2 in behavioral changes resulting from overexpression of beta amyloid [174]. Nevertheless, a commonly raised disadvantage of the inhibitor is its expected poor oral bioavailability. Testing of emergent technologies for better stabilization (i.e. peptide stapling [207,208] and nanoparticle formulations [209–218]) will likely be required to improve the druggability of Nox2ds-tat.

4.1.2. NoxA1ds

NoxA1ds was developed to mimic a putative “activation domain” of Nox1 activator subunit NoxA1 which is homologous to a reported p67phox “activation domain”, thus blocking the Nox1-NoxA1 binding and isozyme activation [219]. Previous work charactering NoxA1ds in our laboratory has corroborated the selectivity of this peptidic inhibitor, which potently inhibited Nox1-derived superoxide anion production in a reconstituted Nox1 cell-free system with an IC50 of 19 nM, and exhibited no inhibitory effects on Nox2-, Nox4-, Nox5-, or xanthine oxidase-derived ROS production [219]. NoxA1ds was shown to inhibit hypoxia-induced ROS generation and endothelial cell migration in human pulmonary arterial endothelial cells [219]. It also reduced uniaxial cyclic stretch-induced Nox1-dependent superoxide anion generation and synthetic phenotypic switch in rat aortic smooth muscle cells [84]. Although no evidence for beneficial effects of NoxA1ds in the microcirculation is yet available, administration of the inhibitor is expected to attenuate microvascular changes potentially mediated by Nox1, such as AngII-elicited vascular hypertrophy [17] and ischemia-reperfusion injury-induced potentiation of vasocontractile response in mesenteric resistance arteries [73].

4.2. Small molecule inhibitors

4.2.1. Diphenylene iodonium (DPI) and apocynin

Both compounds are traditionally and widely utilized as broad spectrum Nox inhibitors to investigate the roles of Noxs in various cardiovascular pathologies. Nevertheless, as both agents generate sizable off-target effects, studies using these inhibitors alone should be subjected to more scrutinized review. Specifically, apart from its inhibitory effects on Noxs, DPI is also demonstrated to be an irreversible and nonselective inhibitor of a wide array of flavin-dependent enzymes, such as nitric oxide synthase and xanthine oxidase [220]. Apocynin was initially believed to inhibit Noxs by specifically preventing p47phox translocation to the plasma membrane [220]. This has been called into question by a reported direct scavenging activity of apocynin of non-radical oxidant species such as HOCl and H2O2 [221,222] as well as its ability to suppress expression of various Nox catalytic subunits and/or inhibit Nox isozymes that do not require p47phox [222,223]. These nonspecific actions of DPI and apocynin largely diminish their value in dissecting the roles of Noxs in redox signaling pathways. Rather, one or more isoform selective inhibitors or siRNAs ought to be employed in addition to DPI and apocynin to clearly validate the participation of Nox. On a positive note, these broad spectrum inhibitors notwithstanding have exhibited protective effects against microvascular diseases. For example, apocynin and DPI suppressed ROS formation and restored endothelial function in aortas as well as cerebral arterioles from aged rats [144,158]. Moreover, apocynin conferred protection against neurovascular uncoupling arising with age [179]. It was also reported that traumatic brain injury-initiated ROS elevation, BBB disruption and neuronal death can all be prevented by apocynin [21]. However, whether these beneficial effects are entirely attributable to Nox blockade warrants further investigation.

4.2.2. VAS2870 and VAS3947

VAS2870 and VAS3947 are triazolopyrimidine derivatives. They have been characterized as promising Nox inhibitors based on the observation that they reduce Nox-derived ROS generation in several cell lines, including primary vascular endothelial and smooth muscle cells, with no antioxidant properties or inhibition of xanthine oxidase or eNOS activity [224–227]. VAS2870 is considered a pan-Nox inhibitor as it suppresses the activity of Nox1, Nox2, Nox4 and Nox5 [224,228]. Its preclinical effectiveness was evaluated by several groups who reported that VAS2870 improved microvascular function in a variety of vascular beds. For instance, experimental ischemia/reperfusion in middle cerebral arteries significantly upregulated Nox2 and Nox4, potentiated ROS production, and caused BBB leakage and brain edema in hyperglycemic rats, which were all markedly blunted by VAS2870 treatment [229]. Moreover, the expression of several key modulators in BBB integrity was decreased following ischemia/reperfusion, and was partially restored by VAS2870 [229]. VAS2870 was shown to reverse attenuated endothelium-dependent vasodilation of mesenteric arteries from type 2 diabetic mice and insulin-resistant rats, as well as arteries treated with amylin, a peptide strongly associated with insulin resistance [230,231]. However, off-target effects of VAS2870 on the cellular thiol redox status, i.e. thiol alkylation, were also reported [232]. In other words, when assessing the roles of Nox in physiological and pathological settings, findings obtained with VAS2870 should be interpreted with further caution. As with all inhibitors, the combination of various pharmacological as well as genetic tools will likely provide more definitive conclusions.

4.2.3. GKT13690 and GKT137831

Both compounds are pyrazolopyridine derivatives. They are Nox inhibitors effective for dual Nox1/Nox4, but not for Nox2, suppression [233]. Moreover, they do not show detectable inhibitory actions against other ROS-generating and redox-sensitive enzymes [233]. Due to high oral bioavailability, ease of synthesis and a reportedly good safety profile, GKT137831 has been proposed as a new therapy for diabetic kidney disease and has undergone phase 2 clinical trials [234]. In the microvasculature, GKT136901 was reported to ameliorate impaired vasodilatation of mesenteric arterioles from obese (db/db) mice displaying enhanced Nox1 expression [235], suggesting that this dual Nox1 and Nox4 inhibitor could be useful therapeutically for treating microvascular dysfunction in a range of cardiovascular diseases.

4.2.4. ML171

ML171 was the first small molecule reported to be an isoform-selective Nox1 inhibitor [236]. ML171 does exhibit inhibitory effects on Nox2, Nox3, Nox4 and xanthine oxidase but with an approximate 20-fold lower potency than that for Nox1. Incidentally, it exerts no apparent inhibitory effects on mitochondrial ROS generation [236]. The relative isoform selectivity renders this compound a useful tool (when a relatively low concentration of ML171 is employed) to elucidate the contribution of Nox1 to redox-signaling. For example, a recent study on the effects of chronic restraint stress on vascular function showed that ML171 (0.5 μM) reduced AngII-initiated vasoconstriction in rat carotid arteries in the presence and absence of endothelium, implying that Nox1-derived ROS positively influence AngII-mediated contraction in carotid arterial smooth muscle cells [237]. Another study comparing endothelial function of coronary arteries from male and female pigs reported that 100 μM ML171 enhanced bradykinin-induced endothelium-dependent relaxation in male rather than female porcine coronary arteries [238]. Nevertheless, it is not clear whether Nox1 alone played a role in suppressing vasodilation, since 100 μM of ML171 is high enough to abolish the activity of other Nox isozymes as well as xanthine oxidase [236].

4.2.5. Ebselen

Ebselen was initially characterized as a glutathione peroxidase mimetic [239] and a scavenger of peroxynitrite [240]. Later, inhibitory actions of ebselen congener JM-77b on Noxs were reported with relatively higher selectivity for Nox2 (IC50=0.4 μM) compared to Nox1 (IC50=6.3 μM), Nox4 (no detectable inhibition) and Nox5 (IC50=17 μM) [241]. Its ability to inhibit Nox2 notwithstanding, the antioxidant properties of ebselen, per se, were favorably utilized in different disease models to improve vascular reactivity. In a study on hypoxia/reoxygenation-initiated brain damage, ebselen ameliorated endothelial dysfunction in rat posterior cerebral arteries following hypoxia/reoxygenation insults [242]. Additionally, administering ebselen for 7 days significantly reduced vasospasm in right internal carotid arteries and middle cerebral arteries after subarachnoid hemorrhage in primates [243]. It was also reported to restore voltage-gated potassium (Kv) channel expression and activity in coronary arteriolar smooth muscle cells where channels were suppressed in diabetic rats. Consequently, ebselen potentiated Kv channel-dependent vasodilation in small coronary arteries [244]. However, whether or not any of these protective functions is associated with Nox inhibition is not entirely clear.

4.2.6. Tetrahydroquinolines\

In light of the profound implication of Nox2 in myriad macro- and microvascular pathologies, and perception of poor clinical applicability of peptidic Nox2ds-tat, development of small molecule Nox2-specific inhibitors has long been a quest for use as both an investigative tool and a therapeutic strategy. Using high throughput screening and rational design, our laboratory identified bridged tetrahydroquinolines as specific Nox2 inhibitors [191]. Among a group of structurally related molecules, compounds 11 g [(±)-(1S,4R,9S)-5-bromo-3,3-dimethyl-9-(2-methylallyl)−10-pentyl-1,2,3,4-tetrahydro-1,3-(epiminomehono) naphthalene] and 11 h [(±)-(1S,4R,9S)-5-bromo-3,3-dimethyl-9-(2-methyallyl)-10-(thiophen-2-ylmethyl)-1,2,3,4-tetrahydro-1,4-(epino-methano)naphthalene] displayed isoform-selective inhibition on Nox2 in intact COS-Nox2 cells with IC50 of 20 μM and 32 μM, respectively. Importantly, 11 g and 11 h had no inhibitory actions on ROS production by Nox1-, Nox4-, Nox5-expressing systems or xanthine oxidase, and showed no free radical scavenging activity [191]. Unpublished work from our group suggests that these inhibitors likely interfere with Nox2-p47phox binding via blockade of the p22phox-p47phox interface. Functionally, 11 g and 11 h significantly inhibit TNFα-induced inflammatory activation in aortic endothelial cells and endothelial dysfunction in mouse aorta (unpublished). Although they have not been evaluated on the microcirculation, these inhibitors hold great promise in improving Nox2-mediated microvascular complications.

Other Nox inhibitors include S17834 [245] and AEBSF [246], both of which decrease superoxide formation by Nox oxidases but also display multiple off-target effects [220]. Fulvene-5 [247] was also shown to reduce Nox2 and Nox4 activity, however, further interrogation on its specificity for Nox isozymes, mechanism of action, and effectiveness on the cardiovascular system is not reported. In summary, even though important strides in discovering Nox inhibitors have been made during the past decade, selective and clinically applicable Nox inhibitors are scarce and require further assessment of their mechanisms of action, pharmacokinetic properties and in vivo efficacy. Inhibitors specifically for Nox3, Nox4, Nox5, DUOX1/2 are not yet available, which may be a consequence of a poor understanding of interactions of this subset of Noxs with intracellular subunits. Indeed, further research developing more Nox modulators is warranted as they will not only advance the field of Nox research but also provide novel hit compounds that might be manipulated in clinical settings.

5. Conclusions and future perspectives

The dynamic network of the microcirculatory system is of vital importance to the modulation of blood flow and perfusion pressure locally and systemically. Impaired microvascular function often leads to vascular remodeling, tissue ischemia and organ damage. Structural and functional abnormalities of the microcirculation, as observed in various cardiovascular diseases, are strongly associated with an imbalance of the redox environment. As the likely major source of ROS in the vascular system, Noxs are important signaling molecules that participate physiologically in the regulation of microvascular tone. All the more crucial, excessive production of ROS (resulting from increased Nox expression or activity) plays a central role in triggering microvascular remodeling, endothelial dysfunction, increased BBB permeability and impaired neurovascular coupling in both the systemic and cerebral microcirculations. These manifestations are all hallmarks of cardiovascular disease including those evident in hypertension, diabetes, stroke and aging. The central involvement of Nox-derived ROS signaling in microvascular function and pathology is depicted in Fig. 1. Despite their importance, understanding of Nox and ROS as cellular signaling agents at the level of the microcirculation is far from sufficient. One important limiting factor lies in the paucity of a broad array of specific tools to delineate the individual roles of Nox isoforms. With the development of selective Nox1 and 2 inhibitors, the roles of the Nox1 and Nox2 isozymes are poised to be the best characterized in the vasculature in coming years. More work is needed, however, to develop novel, isoform-selective inhibitors (peptidic or small molecule) with optimal pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic profiles for each of the Nox isozymes. This is particularly critical for Nox5, both owing to its absence of expression in rats and mice, rendering it impossible to utilize conventional gene deletion models, and because Nox5 is abundantly expressed in human vascular cells and implicated in a growing number of human cardiovascular pathologies. Moreover, considerably more work is required to gain mechanistic insights into the regulation of Nox-mediated redox signaling pathways in the microcirculatory system. In particular, questions related to what specific Nox isoforms are involved, how signaling cascades are differentially regulated, how Noxs integrate the complex network of signaling and govern cellular and vascular function and whether these experimental findings can be translated into human diseases, require immediate attention. It is also noteworthy that Nox/ROS-implicated redox pathways remain far less interrogated in cerebral vs. other microvascular cells, which may be a consequence of limited tissue mass and low yield of signaling proteins. While most research focuses on the functional aspects of Noxs in arteriolar activity, more mechanistic studies of the Nox in cultured primary microvascular cells is critical. Finally, a better appreciation of the complexity of these signaling pathways will lead to the development of novel and effective therapeutic strategies aimed at preventing and treating microvascular pathologies in humans.

This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grants R01-HL112914, R01HL079207 and P01-HL103455 and by the Institute for Transfusion Medicine and the Hemophilia Center of Western Pennsylvania. The authors would like to thank Ms. Cynthia Hatfield and Dr. Eugenia Cifuentes-Pagano for their assistance with the editing of this manuscript.

Fig. 1 Major Nox-mediated redox-sensitive signaling pathways involved in microvascular physiology and pathophysiology. Schematic diagram illustrating known Nox and ROS-mediated signaling pathways in cerebral and systemic microvascular endothelium and smooth muscle. Arrows denote positive activation of downstream targets. Blunt-ended arrows indicate inhibitory effects on targets. Dashed arrows denote pathways that are active in other vascular systems but have not been reported in the microcirculation. In endothelial cells, Noxs can be activated by hormones, cytokines, growth factors and oscillatory shear stress [248,249], which stimulate ROS-dependent pathways that eventually lead to increased angiogenesis, inflammation, BBB permeability and impaired neurovascular coupling. Interaction between superoxide anion and NO yields peroxynitrite, which reduces NO bioavailability and causes endothelial dysfunction. In smooth muscle cells of cerebral and systemic arterioles, Noxs can be stimulated by mechanical stretch as well as vasoactive agents, e.g. AngII. Nox-derived ROS are centrally involved in inhibiting potassium channels, activating protein kinases and increasing Ca2+ sensitivity of the contractile apparatus. These effects are physiologically important for myogenic tone regulation, but may also lead to augmented vasoconstriction and diminished vasorelaxation. Microvascular remodeling is also dependent on Nox-mediated ROS production through putative stimulation of MMPs. Abbreviations: O2−•: superoxide anion; H2O2: hydrogen peroxide; SOD: superoxide dismutase; eNOS: endothelial nitric oxide synthase; NO: nitric oxide; ONOO−: peroxynitrite; p38: p38 mitogen-activated protein kinases; JNK: c-Jun N-terminal kinases; ERK: extracellular signal-regulated kinases; HIF1α: hypoxia-inducible factor 1-alpha; AMPK: 5′AMP-activated protein kinases; NFκB: nuclear factor-κB; GPCRs: G protein-coupled receptors; TRP channels: transient receptor potential channels; PKC: protein kinase C; ROCK: rho-associated protein kinase; ROS: reactive oxygen species; BK: big-conductance Ca2+-activated K+ channels; Kv: voltage-gated K+ channels; PKG: cGMP-dependent protein kinase; GTP: guanosine triphosphate; cGMP: cyclic guanosine monophosphate; sGC: soluble guanylyl cyclase; MMP: matrix metalloproteinases.

Table 1 Nox family of proteins in the microcirculation.

Nox isozyme *	Canonical subunits/regulators	ROS Generation	Tissue expression in the microvasculature a	
Nox1	p22phox, NOXO1, NOXA1, Rac1/2	Superoxide anion.	Mouse: mesenteric arteries [58], cerebral microvessels [59]
Rat: mesenteric arteries [17,60], basilar arterial endothelium [61];
Human: coronary arteriolar endothelium [62], cerebral arteriolar smooth muscle [63]	
Nox2	p22phox, p47phox, p67phox, p40phox, Rac1/2	Inducible; Superoxide anion.	Mouse: mesenteric arteries [19,58], coronary arteries [64], afferent arterioles [65]; cerebral microvessels [59]
Rat: mesenteric arteries [66,67], basilar arterial endothelium [61];
Human: coronary arteriolar endothelium [62], renal arterioles [68], subcutaneous arteriolar smooth muscle [43], cerebral arteriolar smooth muscle [63].	
Nox4	p22phox, Poldip2 [49]	Constitutively active; Capacity for primary production of H2O2 [69].	Mouse: mesenteric arteries [19,58], cerebral microvessels [59];
Rat: mesenteric arteries [60], basilar arterial endothelium [61];
Human: renal arterioles [68], coronary arteriolar endothelium [62], subcutaneous arteriolar smooth muscle [43], cerebral arteriolar smooth muscle [63]	
Nox5	No subunits identified to date	Superoxide anion; Independent of p22phox; regulated by Ca2+.	Human: coronary arteriolar endothelium and smooth muscle [57,70]	
a As primarily identified by its core catalytic subunit comprising cytochrome b558.

Conflict of interest

The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest.


1 Martinez-Lemus LA The dynamic structure of arterioles Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol 110 1 2012 5 11 21989114
2 Staiculescu MC Foote C Meininger GA Martinez-Lemus LA The role of reactive oxygen species in microvascular remodeling Int J Mol Sci 15 12 2014 23792 23835 25535075
3 Levy BI Ambrosio G Pries AR Struijker-Boudier HA Microcirculation in hypertension: a new target for treatment? Circulation 104 6 2001 735 740 11489784
4 Faraci FM Heistad DD Regulation of large cerebral arteries and cerebral microvascular pressure Circ Res 66 1 1990 8 17 2403863
5 Bentov I Reed MJ The effect of aging on the cutaneous microvasculature Microvasc Res 100 2015 25 31 25917013
6 De Silva TM Miller AA Cerebral small vessel disease: targeting oxidative stress as a novel therapeutic strategy? Front Pharmacol 7 2016
7 Arrick DM Sharpe GM Sun H Mayhan WG Diabetes-induced cerebrovascular dysfunction: role of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase Microvasc Res 73 1 2007 1 6 16982071
8 Didion SP Lynch CM Baumbach GL Faraci FM Impaired endothelium-dependent responses and enhanced influence of Rho-kinase in cerebral arterioles in type II diabetes Stroke; J Cereb Circ 36 2 2005 342 347
9 Csanyi G Taylor WR Pagano PJ NOX and inflammation in the vascular adventitia Free Radic Biol Med 47 9 2009 1254 1266 19628034
10 Al Ghouleh I Khoo NK Knaus UG Griendling KK Touyz RM Thannickal VJ Barchowsky A Nauseef WM Kelley EE Bauer PM Darley-Usmar V Shiva S Cifuentes-Pagano E Freeman BA Gladwin MT Pagano PJ Oxidases and peroxidases in cardiovascular and lung disease: new concepts in reactive oxygen species signaling Free Radic Biol Med 51 7 2011 1271 1288 21722728
11 Sahoo S Meijles DN Pagano PJ NADPH oxidases: key modulators in aging and age-related cardiovascular diseases? Clin Sci 130 5 2016 317 335 26814203
12 Cai H Harrison DG Endothelial dysfunction in cardiovascular diseases: the role of oxidant stress Circ Res 87 10 2000 840 844 11073878
13 Frazziano G Champion HC Pagano PJ NADPH oxidase-derived ROS and the regulation of pulmonary vessel tone Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 302 11 2012 H2166 H2177 22427511
14 Kleikers PW Wingler K Hermans JJ Diebold I Altenhofer S Radermacher KA Janssen B Gorlach A Schmidt HH NADPH oxidases as a source of oxidative stress and molecular target in ischemia/reperfusion injury J Mol Med 90 12 2012 1391 1406 23090009
15 McCarty MF NADPH oxidase activity in cerebral arterioles is a key mediator of cerebral small vessel disease-implications for prevention Healthcare 3 2 2015 233 251 27417759
16 Virdis A Neves MF Amiri F Touyz RM Schiffrin EL Role of NAD(P)H oxidase on vascular alterations in angiotensin II-infused mice J Hypertens 22 3 2004 535 542 15076159
17 Briones AM Rodríguez-Criado N Hernanz R García-Redondo AB Rodrigues-Díez RR Alonso MJ Egido J Ruiz-Ortega M Salaices M Atorvastatin prevents angiotensin II–induced vascular remodeling and oxidative stress Hypertension 54 1 2009 142 149 19451411
18 Kassan M Choi S-K Galán M Lee Y-H Trebak M Matrougui K Enhanced p22phox expression impairs vascular function through p38 and ERK1/2 MAP kinase-dependent mechanisms in type 2 diabetic mice Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 306 7 2014 H972 H980 24486509
19 Kassan M Ait-Aissa K Ali M Trebak M Matrougui K Augmented EGF receptor tyrosine kinase activity impairs vascular function by NADPH oxidase-dependent mechanism in type 2 diabetic mouse BBA - Mol Cell Res 1853 10 2015 2404 2410
20 Kazama K Anrather J Zhou P Girouard H Frys K Milner TA Iadecola C Angiotensin II impairs neurovascular coupling in neocortex through NADPH oxidase-derived radicals Circ Res 95 10 2004 1019 1026 15499027
21 Choi BY Jang BG Kim JH Lee BE Sohn M Song HK Suh SW Prevention of traumatic brain injury-induced neuronal death by inhibition of NADPH oxidase activation Brain Res 1481 2012 49 58 22975130
22 Nauseef WM Biological roles for the NOX family NADPH oxidases J Biol Chem 283 25 2008 16961 16965 18420576
23 Bedard K Krause KH The NOX family of ROS-generating NADPH oxidases: physiology and pathophysiology Physiol Rev 87 1 2007 245 313 17237347
24 Petry A Djordjevic T Weitnauer M Kietzmann T Hess J Gorlach A NOX2 and NOX4 mediate proliferative response in endothelial cells Antioxid Redox Signal 8 9–10 2006 1473 1484 16987004
25 Suh YA Arnold RS Lassegue B Shi J Xu X Sorescu D Chung AB Griendling KK Lambeth JD Cell transformation by the superoxide-generating oxidase Mox1 Nature 401 6748 1999 79 82 10485709
26 Clempus RE Sorescu D Dikalova AE Pounkova L Jo P Sorescu GP Schmidt HH Lassegue B Griendling KK Nox4 is required for maintenance of the differentiated vascular smooth muscle cell phenotype Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 27 1 2007 42 48 17082491
27 Deliri H McNamara CA Nox 4 regulation of vascular smooth muscle cell differentiation marker gene expression Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 27 1 2007 12 14 17185622
28 Di Wang H Hope S Du Y Quinn MT Cayatte A Pagano PJ Cohen RA Paracrine role of adventitial superoxide anion in mediating spontaneous tone of the isolated rat aorta in angiotensin II-induced hypertension Hypertension 33 5 1999 1225 1232 10334816
29 Keller M Lidington D Vogel L Peter BF Sohn HY Pagano PJ Pitson S Spiegel S Pohl U Bolz SS Sphingosine kinase functionally links elevated transmural pressure and increased reactive oxygen species formation in resistance arteries FASEB J: Off Publ Fed Am Soc Exp Biol 20 6 2006 702
30 Ray R Murdoch CE Wang M Santos CX Zhang M Alom-Ruiz S Anilkumar N Ouattara A Cave AC Walker SJ Grieve DJ Charles RL Eaton P Brewer AC Shah AM Endothelial Nox4 NADPH oxidase enhances vasodilatation and reduces blood pressure in vivo Arterioscler Thromb, Vasc Biol 31 6 2011 1368 1376 21415386
31 Griendling KK Sorescu D Ushio-Fukai M NAD(P)H oxidase: role in cardiovascular biology and disease Circ Res 86 5 2000 494 501 10720409
32 Guzik TJ West NE Black E McDonald D Ratnatunga C Pillai R Channon KM Vascular superoxide production by NAD(P)H oxidase: association with endothelial dysfunction and clinical risk factors Circ Res 86 9 2000 E85 E90 10807876
33 Touyz RM Reactive oxygen species, vascular oxidative stress, and redox signaling in hypertension: what is the clinical significance? Hypertension 44 3 2004 248 252 15262903
34 DeLeo FR Quinn MT Assembly of the phagocyte NADPH oxidase: molecular interaction of oxidase proteins, J Leukoc Biol 60 6 1996 677 691
35 Zhan S Vazquez N Zhan S Wientjes FB Budarf ML Schrock E Ried T Green ED Chanock SJ Genomic structure, chromosomal localization, start of transcription, and tissue expression of the human p40-phox, a new component of the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate-oxidase complex Blood 88 7 1996 2714 2721 8839867
36 Pagano PJ Clark JK Cifuentes-Pagano ME Clark SM Callis GM Quinn MT Localization of a constitutively active, phagocyte-like NADPH oxidase in rabbit aortic adventitia: enhancement by angiotensin II Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94 26 1997 14483 14488 9405639
37 Babior BM NADPH oxidase: an update Blood 93 5 1999 1464 1476 10029572
38 Miyano K Sumimoto H Role of the small GTPase Rac in p22phox-dependent NADPH oxidases Biochimie 89 9 2007 1133 1144 17583407
39 Meier B Jesaitis AJ Emmendorffer A Roesler J Quinn MT The cytochrome b-558 molecules involved in the fibroblast and polymorphonuclear leucocyte superoxide-generating NADPH oxidase systems are structurally and genetically distinct Biochem J 289 Pt 2 1993 481 486 7678734
40 Pagano PJ Ito Y Tornheim K Gallop PM Tauber AI Cohen RA An NADPH oxidase superoxide-generating system in the rabbit aorta Am J Physiol 268 6 Pt 2 1995 H2274 H2280 7611477
41 Mohazzab KM Wolin MS Sites of superoxide anion production detected by lucigenin in calf pulmonary artery smooth muscle Am J Physiol 267 6 Pt 1 1994 L815 L822 7810685
42 Griendling KK Minieri CA Ollerenshaw JD Alexander RW Angiotensin II stimulates NADH and NADPH oxidase activity in cultured vascular smooth muscle cells Circ Res 74 6 1994 1141 1148 8187280
43 Touyz RM Chen X Tabet F Yao G He G Quinn MT Pagano PJ Schiffrin EL Expression of a functionally active gp91phox-containing neutrophil-type NAD(P)H oxidase in smooth muscle cells from human resistance arteries: regulation by angiotensin II Circ Res: J Am Heart Assoc 90 11 2002 1205 1213
44 Mohazzab KM Kaminski PM Wolin MS NADH oxidoreductase is a major source of superoxide anion in bovine coronary artery endothelium Am J Physiol 266 6 Pt 2 1994 H2568 H2572 8024019
45 Jones SA O’Donnell VB Wood JD Broughton JP Hughes EJ Jones OT Expression of phagocyte NADPH oxidase components in human endothelial cells Am J Physiol 271 4 Pt 2 1996 H1626 H1634 8897960
46 Kawahara T Quinn MT Lambeth JD Molecular evolution of the reactive oxygen-generating NADPH oxidase (Nox/Duox) family of enzymes BMC Evol Biol 7 2007 109 17612411
47 Vessières E Guihot A-L Toutain B Maquigneau M Fassot C Loufrani L Henrion D COX-2-derived prostanoids and oxidative stress additionally reduce endothelium-mediated relaxation in old type 2 diabetic rats PLoS One 8 7 2013 e68217 23874545
48 Helmcke I Heumuller S Tikkanen R Schroder K Brandes RP Identification of structural elements in Nox1 and Nox4 controlling localization and activity Antioxid Redox Signal 11 6 2009 1279 1287 19061439
49 Lyle AN Deshpande NN Taniyama Y Seidel-Rogol B Pounkova L Du P Papaharalambus C Lassegue B Griendling KK Poldip2, a novel regulator of Nox4 and cytoskeletal integrity in vascular smooth muscle cells Circ Res 105 3 2009 249 259 19574552
50 Miller AA Drummond GR Schmidt HH Sobey CG NADPH oxidase activity and function are profoundly greater in cerebral versus systemic arteries Circ Res 97 10 2005 1055 1062 16210546
51 Sobey CG Heistad DD Faraci FM Mechanisms of bradykinin-induced cerebral vasodilatation in rats. Evidence that reactive oxygen species activate K+ channels Stroke; J Cereb Circ 28 11 1997 2290 2294 discussion 2295
52 Csanyi G Cifuentes-Pagano E Ghouleh I Al Ranayhossaini DJ Egana L Lopes LR Jackson HM Kelley EE Pagano PJ Nox2 B-loop peptide, Nox2ds, specifically inhibits the NADPH oxidase Nox2 Free Radic Biol Med 51 6 2011 1116 1125 21586323
53 Banfi B Tirone F Durussel I Knisz J Moskwa P Molnar GZ Krause KH Cox JA Mechanism of Ca2+ activation of the NADPH oxidase 5 (NOX5) J Biol Chem 279 18 2004 18583 18591 14982937
54 Fulton DJ Nox5 and the regulation of cellular function Antioxid Redox Signal 11 10 2009 2443 2452 19331545
55 Gole HK Tharp DL Bowles DK Upregulation of intermediate-conductance Ca2+-activated K+ channels (KCNN4) in porcine coronary smooth muscle requires NADPH oxidase 5 (NOX5) PLoS One 9 8 2014 e105337 25144362
56 Guzik B Guzik TJ Chen W Gongora MC Lob HE Mangalat D Hoch N Dikalov S Rudzinski P Kapelak B Sadowski J Harrison DG Calcium-dependent NOX5 nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase contributes to vascular oxidative stress in human coronary artery disease J Am Coll Cardiol 52 22 2008 1803 1809 19022160
57 Hahn NE Meischl C Kawahara T Musters RJ Verhoef VM van der Velden J Vonk AB Paulus WJ van Rossum AC Niessen HW Krijnen PA NOX5 expression is increased in intramyocardial blood vessels and cardiomyocytes after acute myocardial infarction in humans Am J Pathol 180 6 2012 2222 2229 22503554
58 Bruder-Nascimento T Callera GE Montezano AC He Y Antunes TT Nguyen Dinh Cat A Tostes RC Touyz RM Vascular injury in diabetic db/db mice is ameliorated by atorvastatin: role of Rac1/2-sensitive Nox-dependent pathways Clin Sci 128 7 2015 411 423 25358739
59 Girouard H Park L Anrather J Zhou P Iadecola C Angiotensin II attenuates endothelium-dependent responses in the cerebral microcirculation through nox-2-derived radicals Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 26 4 2006 826 832 16439707
60 Androwiki AC Camargo Lde L Sartoretto S Couto GK Ribeiro IM Verissimo-Filho S Rossoni LV Lopes LR Protein disulfide isomerase expression increases in resistance arteries during hypertension development. Effects on Nox1 NADPH oxidase signaling Front Chem 3 2015 24 25870854
61 Ago T Kitazono T Kuroda J Kumai Y Kamouchi M Ooboshi H Wakisaka M Kawahara T Rokutan K Ibayashi S Iida M NAD(P)H oxidases in rat basilar arterial endothelial cells Stroke; J Cereb Circ 36 5 2005 1040 1046
62 Larsen BT Bubolz AH Mendoza SA Pritchard JKA Gutterman DD Bradykinin-induced dilation of human coronary arterioles requires NADPH oxidase-derived reactive oxygen species Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 29 5 2009 739 19213944
63 Coucha M Abdelsaid M Li W Johnson MH Orfi L El-Remessy AB Fagan SC Ergul A Nox4 contributes to the hypoxia-mediated regulation of actin cytoskeleton in cerebrovascular smooth muscle Life Sci 163 2016 46 54 27558234
64 Park Y Yang J Zhang H Chen X Zhang C Effect of PAR2 in regulating TNF-α and NAD(P)H oxidase in coronary arterioles in type 2 diabetic mice Basic Res Cardiol 106 1 2011 111 123 20972877
65 Carlström M Lai EY Ma Z Patzak A Brown RD Persson AEG Role of NOX2 in the regulation of afferent arteriole responsiveness Am J Physiol - Regul Integr Comp Physiol 296 1 2009 R72 R79 18987286
66 Franco Mdo C Akamine EH Marco GS Di Casarini DE Fortes ZB Tostes RC Carvalho MH Nigro D NADPH oxidase and enhanced superoxide generation in intrauterine undernourished rats: involvement of the renin-angiotensin system Cardiovasc Res 59 3 2003 767 775 14499878
67 Tarhouni K Freidja ML Guihot AL Vessieres E Grimaud L Toutain B Lenfant F Arnal JF Loufrani L Henrion D Role of estrogens and age in flow-mediated outward remodeling of rat mesenteric resistance arteries Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 307 4 2014 H504 H514 24929854
68 Schlüter T Zimmermann U Protzel C Miehe B Klebingat K-J Rettig R Grisk O Intrarenal artery superoxide is mainly NADPH oxidase-derived and modulates endothelium-dependent dilation in elderly patients Cardiovasc Res 85 4 2010 814 824 19843513
69 Takac I Schroder K Zhang L Lardy B Anilkumar N Lambeth JD Shah AM Morel F Brandes RP The E-loop is involved in hydrogen peroxide formation by the NADPH oxidase Nox4 J Biol Chem 286 15 2011 13304 13313 21343298
70 Guzik TJ Chen W Gongora MC Guzik B Lob HE Mangalat D Hoch N Dikalov S Rudzinski P Kapelak B Sadowski J Harrison DG Calcium-dependent NOX5 nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase contributes to vascular oxidative stress in human coronary artery disease J Am Coll Cardiol 52 22 2008 1803 1809 19022160
71 DeLano FA Parks DA Ruedi JM Babior BM Schmid-Schonbein GW Microvascular display of xanthine oxidase and NADPH oxidase in the spontaneously hypertensive rat Microcirculation 13 7 2006 551 566 16990214
72 Amiri F Virdis A Neves MF Iglarz M Seidah NG Touyz RM Reudelhuber TL Schiffrin EL Endothelium-restricted overexpression of human endothelin-1 causes vascular remodeling and endothelial dysfunction Circulation 110 15 2004 2233 2240 15466627
73 Martinez-Revelles S Caracuel L Marquez-Martin A Dantas A Oliver E D’Ocon P Vila E Increased endothelin-1 vasoconstriction in mesenteric resistance arteries after superior mesenteric ischaemia-reperfusion Br J Pharmacol 165 4 2012 937 950 21806604
74 Virdis A Duranti E Colucci R Ippolito C Tirotta E Lorenzini G Bernardini N Blandizzi C Taddei S Ghrelin restores nitric oxide availability in resistance circulation of essential hypertensive patients: role of NAD(P)H oxidase Eur Heart J 36 43 2015 3023 3030 26224075
75 Martinez-Lemus LA Zhao G Galiñanes EL Boone M Inward remodeling of resistance arteries requires reactive oxygen species-dependent activation of matrix metalloproteinases Am J Physiol - Heart Circ Physiol 300 6 2011 2005 2015
76 Knot HJ Nelson MT Regulation of arterial diameter and wall [Ca2+] in cerebral arteries of rat by membrane potential and intravascular pressure J Physiol 508 Pt 1 1998 199 209 9490839
77 Li Y Baylie RL Tavares MJ Brayden JE TRPM4 channels couple purinergic receptor mechanoactivation and myogenic tone development in cerebral parenchymal arterioles J Cereb Blood Flow Metab: Off J Int Soc Cereb Blood Flow Metab 34 10 2014 1706 1714
78 Earley S Waldron BJ Brayden JE Critical role for transient receptor potential channel TRPM4 in myogenic constriction of cerebral arteries Circ Res 95 9 2004 922 929 15472118
79 Amberg GC Santana LF Kv2 channels oppose myogenic constriction of rat cerebral arteries Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 291 2 2006 C348 C356 16571867
80 Brayden JE Nelson MT Regulation of arterial tone by activation of calcium-dependent potassium channels Science 256 5056 1992 532 535 1373909
81 Ren Y D’Ambrosio MA Liu R Pagano PJ Garvin JL Carretero OA Enhanced myogenic response in the afferent arteriole of spontaneously hypertensive rats Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 298 6 2010 H1769 H1775 20363886
82 Hishikawa K Oemar BS Yang Z Lüscher TF Pulsatile stretch stimulates superoxide production and activates nuclear factor-kappa B in human coronary smooth muscle Circ Res 81 5 1997 797 803 9351451
83 Grote K Flach I Luchtefeld M Akin E Holland SM Drexler H Schieffer B Mechanical stretch enhances mRNA expression and proenzyme release of matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) via NAD(P)H oxidase-derived reactive oxygen species Circ Res 92 11 2003 1 7
84 Rodriguez AI Csanyi G Ranayhossaini DJ Feck DM Blose KJ Assatourian L Vorp DA Pagano PJ MEF2B-Nox1 signaling is critical for stretch-induced phenotypic modulation of vascular smooth muscle cells Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 35 2 2015 430 438 25550204
85 Ungvari Z Csiszar A Huang A Kaminski PM Wolin MS Koller A High pressure induces superoxide production in isolated arteries via protein kinase C-dependent activation of NAD(P)H oxidase Circulation 108 10 2003 1253 1258 12874194
86 Jernigan NL Walker BR Resta TC Reactive oxygen species mediate RhoA/Rho kinase-induced Ca2+ sensitization in pulmonary vascular smooth muscle following chronic hypoxia Am J Physiol - Lung Cell Mol Physiol 295 3 2008 515 529
87 Aghajanian A Wittchen ES Campbell SL Burridge K Direct activation of RhoA by reactive oxygen species requires a redox-sensitive motif PLoS One 4 11 2009 e8045 19956681
88 Osol G Laher I Cipolla M Protein kinase C modulates basal myogenic tone in resistance arteries from the cerebral circulation Circ Res 68 2 1991 359 367 1991343
89 Jarajapu YP Knot HJ Relative contribution of Rho kinase and protein kinase C to myogenic tone in rat cerebral arteries in hypertension Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 289 5 2005 H1917 H1922 15980039
90 Earley S Straub SV Brayden JE Protein kinase C regulates vascular myogenic tone through activation of TRPM4 Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 292 6 2007 H2613 H2622 17293488
91 Li Y Brayden JE Rho kinase activity governs arteriolar myogenic depolarization J Cereb Blood Flow Metab: Off J Int Soc Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2015
92 Schleifenbaum J Kassmann M Szijártó IA Hercule HC Tano J-Y Weinert S Heidenreich M Pathan AR Anistan Y-M Alenina N Rusch NJ Bader M Jentsch TJ Gollasch M Stretch–activation of angiotensin II Type 1a receptors contributes to the myogenic response of mouse mesenteric and renal arteries Circ Res 115 2 2014 263 272 24838176
93 Brayden JE Li Y Tavares MJ Purinergic receptors regulate myogenic tone in cerebral parenchymal arterioles J Cereb Blood Flow Metab: Off J Int Soc Cereb Blood Flow Metab 33 2 2013 293 299
94 Yasuda N Miura S Akazawa H Tanaka T Qin Y Kiya Y Imaizumi S Fujino M Ito K Zou Y Fukuhara S Kunimoto S Fukuzaki K Sato T Ge J Mochizuki N Nakaya H Saku K Komuro I Conformational switch of angiotensin II type 1 receptor underlying mechanical stress-induced activation EMBO Rep 9 2 2008 179 186 18202720
95 Mederos y Schnitzler M Storch U Meibers S Nurwakagari P Breit A Essin K Gollasch M Gudermann T Gq-coupled receptors as mechanosensors mediating myogenic vasoconstriction EMBO J 27 23 2008 3092 3103 18987636
96 Hong K Zhao G Hong Z Sun Z Yang Y Clifford PS Davis MJ Meininger GA Hill MA Mechanical activation of angiotensin II type 1 receptors causes actin remodelling and myogenic responsiveness in skeletal muscle arterioles J Physiol 2016
97 Jagnandan D Church JE Banfi B Stuehr DJ Marrero MB Fulton DJ Novel mechanism of activation of NADPH oxidase 5. calcium sensitization via phosphorylation J Biol Chem 282 9 2007 6494 6507 17164239
98 Chen F Yu Y Haigh S Johnson J Lucas R Stepp DW Fulton DJ Regulation of NADPH oxidase 5 by protein kinase C isoforms PLoS One 9 2 2014 e88405 24505490
99 Martinez-Lemus LA Hill MA Meininger GA The plastic nature of the vascular wall: a continuum of remodeling events contributing to control of arteriolar diameter and structure Physiology 24 1 2009 45 19196651
100 Rizzoni D Porteri E Guefi D Piccoli A Castellano M Pasini G Muiesan ML Mulvany MJ Rosei EA Cellular hypertrophy in subcutaneous small arteries of patients with renovascular hypertension Hypertens: J Am Heart Assoc 35 4 2000 931 935
101 Rizzoni D Porteri E Castellano M Bettoni G Muiesan ML Muiesan P Giulini SM Agabiti-Rosei E Vascular hypertrophy and remodeling in secondary hypertension Hypertension 28 5 1996 785 790 8901824
102 De Mey JGR Schiffers PM Hilgers RHP Sanders MMW Toward functional genomics of flow-induced outward remodeling of resistance arteries Am J Physiol - Heart Circ Physiol 288 3 2005 1022 1027
103 Cipolla MJ Sweet JG Chan SL Cerebral vascular adaptation to pregnancy and its role in the neurological complications of eclampsia J Appl Physiol 110 2 2011 329 339 21071591
104 Amaral SL Michelini LC Effect of gender on training-induced vascular remodeling in SHR Braz J Med Biol Res 44 9 2011 814 826 21537612
105 Virdis A Neves MF Amiri F Viel E Touyz RM Schiffrin EL Spironolactone improves angiotensin-induced vascular changes and oxidative stress Hypertens: J Am Heart Assoc 40 4 2002 504 510
106 Chantemèle EJ Belin De Vessières E Dumont O Guihot A-L Toutain B Loufrani L Henrion D Reactive oxygen species are necessary for high flow (shear stress)-induced diameter enlargement of rat resistance arteries Microcirculation 16 5 2009 391 402 19353375
107 Castier Y Brandes RP Leseche G Tedgui A Lehoux S p47phox-dependent NADPH oxidase regulates flow-induced vascular remodeling Circ Res 97 6 2005 533 540 16109921
108 Haas TL Doyle JL Distasi MR Norton LE Sheridan KM Unthank JL Involvement of MMPs in the outward remodeling of collateral mesenteric arteries Am J Physiol - Heart Circ Physiol 293 4 2007 2429 2437
109 Rajendran P Rengarajan T Thangavel J Nishigaki Y Sakthisekaran D Sethi G Nishigaki I The vascular endothelium and human diseases Int J Biol Sci 9 10 2013 1057 1069 24250251
110 Griendling KK Sobey CG Selemidis S Drummond GR Combating oxidative stress in vascular disease: NADPH oxidases as therapeutic targets Nat Rev Drug Discov 10 6 2011 453 471 21629295
111 Laursen JB Somers M Kurz S McCann L Warnholtz A Freeman BA Tarpey M Fukai T Harrison DG Endothelial regulation of vasomotion in apoE-deficient mice: implications for interactions between peroxynitrite and tetrahydrobiopterin Circulation 103 9 2001 1282 1288 11238274
112 Weber M Lauer N Mülsch A Kojda G The effect of peroxynitrite on the catalytic activity of soluble guanylyl cyclase Free Radic Biol Med 31 11 2001 1360 1367 11728807
113 Galili O Versari D Sattler KJ Olson ML Mannheim D McConnell JP Chade AR Lerman LO Lerman A Early experimental obesity is associated with coronary endothelial dysfunction and oxidative stress Am J Physiol - Heart Circ Physiol 292 2 2007 904 911
114 Virdis A Santini F Colucci R Duranti E Salvetti G Salvetti A Rugani I Segnani C Anselmino M Bernardini N Blandizzi C Pinchera A Taddei S Vascular generation of tumor necrosis factor-α reduces nitric oxide availability in small arteries from visceral fat of obese patients J Am Coll Cardiol 58 3 2011 238 247 21737013
115 Gao X Zhang H Schmidt AM Zhang C AGE/RAGE produces endothelial dysfunction in coronary arterioles in Type 2 diabetic mice Am J Physiol - Heart Circ Physiol 295 2 2008 491 498
116 Galán M Kassan M Choi S-K Partyka M Trebak M Henrion D Matrougui K A novel role for epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase and its downstream endoplasmic reticulum stress in cardiac damage and microvascular dysfunction in type 1 diabetes mellitus Hypertension 60 1 2012 71 80 22665120
117 Virdis A Colucci R Versari D Ghisu N Fornai M Antonioli L Duranti E Daghini E Giannarelli C Blandizzi C Taddei S Del Tacca M Atorvastatin prevents endothelial dysfunction in mesenteric arteries from spontaneously hypertensive rats: role of cyclooxygenase 2–derived contracting prostanoids Hypertension 53 6 2009 1008 1016 19380610
118 Kassan M Galan M Partyka M Trebak M Matrougui K Interleukin-10 released by CD4+CD25+ natural regulatory T cells improves microvascular endothelial function through inhibition of NADPH oxidase activity in hypertensive mice Arterioscler, Thromb, Vasc Biol 31 11 2011 2534 2542 21817097
119 Wenceslau CF Rossoni LV Rostafuroxin ameliorates endothelial dysfunction and oxidative stress in resistance arteries from deoxycorticosterone acetate-salt hypertensive rats: the role of Na+K+-ATPase/cSRC pathway J Hypertens 32 3 2014 542 554 24309491
120 Galan M Kassan M Choi SK Partyka M Trebak M Henrion D Matrougui K A novel role for epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase and its downstream endoplasmic reticulum stress in cardiac damage and microvascular dysfunction in type 1 diabetes mellitus Hypertension 60 1 2012 71 80 22665120
121 Amiri F Ko EA Javeshghani D Reudelhuber TL Schiffrin EL Deleterious combined effects of salt-loading and endothelial cell restricted endothelin-1 overexpression on blood pressure and vascular function in mice J Hypertens 28 6 2010 1243 20308920
122 Thengchaisri N Hein TW Ren Y Kuo L Endothelin-1 impairs coronary arteriolar dilation: role of p38 kinase-mediated superoxide production from NADPH oxidase J Mol Cell Cardiol 86 2015 75 84 26211713
123 Liu Z Cao W p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase: a critical node linking insulin resistance and cardiovascular diseases in type 2 diabetes mellitus Endocr Metab Immune Disord Drug Targets 9 1 2009 38 46 19275680
124 Huang A Yang YM Yan C Kaley G Hintze TH Sun D Altered MAPK signaling in progressive deterioration of endothelial function in diabetic mice Diabetes 61 12 2012 3181 3188 22933112
125 Conway EM Collen D Carmeliet P Molecular mechanisms of blood vessel growth Cardiovasc Res 49 3 2001 507 521 11166264
126 Di Bartolo BA Cartland SP Prado-Lourenco L Griffith TS Gentile C Ravindran J Azahri NS Thai T Yeung AW Thomas SR Kavurma MM Tumor Necrosis Factor-Related Apoptosis-Inducing Ligand (TRAIL) promotes angiogenesis and ischemia-induced neovascularization via NADPH oxidase 4 (NOX4) and nitric oxide-dependent mechanisms J Am Heart Assoc 4 11 2015
127 Wang J Hong Z Zeng C Yu Q Wang H NADPH oxidase 4 promotes cardiac microvascular angiogenesis after hypoxia/reoxygenation in vitro Free Radic Biol Med 69 2014 278 288 24480752
128 Datla SR Peshavariya H Dusting GJ Mahadev K Goldstein BJ Jiang F Important role of Nox4 type NADPH oxidase in angiogenic responses in human microvascular endothelial cells in vitro Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 27 11 2007 2319 2324 17717289
129 Chen L Xiao J Kuroda J Ago T Sadoshima J Cohen RA Tong X Both hydrogen peroxide and transforming growth factor beta 1 contribute to endothelial Nox4 mediated angiogenesis in endothelial Nox4 transgenic mouse lines Biochim Et Biophys Acta 1842 12 Pt A 2014 2489 2499
130 Tojo T Ushio-Fukai M Yamaoka-Tojo M Ikeda S Patrushev N Alexander RW Role of gp91phox (Nox2)-containing NAD(P)H oxidase in angiogenesis in response to hindlimb ischemia Circulation 111 18 2005 2347 2355 15867174
131 Carmeliet P Mechanisms of angiogenesis and arteriogenesis Nat Med 6 4 2000 389 395 10742145
132 Ushio-Fukai M Nakamura Y Reactive oxygen species and angiogenesis: NADPH oxidase as target for cancer therapy Cancer Lett 266 1 2008 37 52 18406051
133 Lakatta EG Age-associated cardiovascular changes in health: impact on cardiovascular disease in older persons Heart Fail Rev 7 1 2002 29 49 11790921
134 Griendling KK FitzGerald GA Oxidative stress and cardiovascular injury: Part I: basic mechanisms and in vivo monitoring of ROS Circulation 108 16 2003 1912 1916 14568884
135 Zalba G Beaumont J San Jose G Fortuno A Fortuno MA Diez J Vascular oxidant stress: molecular mechanisms and pathophysiological implications J Physiol Biochem 56 1 2000 57 64 10879682
136 Bonomini F Rodella LF Rezzani R Metabolic syndrome, aging and involvement of oxidative stress Aging Dis 6 2 2015 109 120 25821639
137 Cifuentes ME Rey FE Carretero OA Pagano PJ Upregulation of p67(phox) and gp91(phox) in aortas from angiotensin II-infused mice Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 279 5 2000 H2234 H2240 11045958
138 Frazziano G Ghouleh I Al Baust J Shiva S Champion HC Pagano PJ Nox-derived, ROS are acutely activated in pressure overload pulmonary hypertension: indications for a seminal role for mitochondrial Nox4 Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 306 2 2014 H197 H205 24213612
139 Al Ghouleh I Frazziano G Rodriguez AI Csanyi G Maniar S St Croix CM Kelley EE Egana LA Song GJ Bisello A Lee YJ Pagano PJ Aquaporin 1, Nox1, and Ask1 mediate oxidant-induced smooth muscle cell hypertrophy Cardiovasc Res 97 1 2013 134 142 22997161
140 Sorescu D Weiss D Lassegue B Clempus RE Szocs K Sorescu GP Valppu L Quinn MT Lambeth JD Vega JD Taylor WR Griendling KK Superoxide production and expression of nox family proteins in human atherosclerosis Circulation 105 12 2002 1429 1435 11914250
141 Barry-Lane PA Patterson C van der Merwe M Hu Z Holland SM Yeh ET Runge MS p47phox is required for atherosclerotic lesion progression in ApoE (−/−) mice J Clin Investig 108 10 2001 1513 1522 11714743
142 Sheehan AL Carrell S Johnson B Stanic B Banfi B Miller FJ Jr Role for Nox1 NADPH oxidase in atherosclerosis Atherosclerosis 216 2 2011 321 326 21411092
143 Matsuno K Yamada H Iwata K Jin D Katsuyama M Matsuki M Takai S Yamanishi K Miyazaki M Matsubara H Yabe-Nishimura C Nox1 is involved in angiotensin II-mediated hypertension: a study in Nox1-deficient mice Circulation 112 17 2005 2677 2685 16246966
144 Wind S Beuerlein K Armitage ME Taye A Kumar AH Janowitz D Neff C Shah AM Wingler K Schmidt HH Oxidative stress and endothelial dysfunction in aortas of aged spontaneously hypertensive rats by NOX1/2 is reversed by NADPH oxidase inhibition Hypertension 56 3 2010 490 497 20606112
145 Zalba G Beaumont FJ San Jose G Fortuno A Fortuno MA Etayo JC Diez J Vascular NADH/NADPH oxidase is involved in enhanced superoxide production in spontaneously hypertensive rats Hypertension 35 5 2000 1055 1061 10818064
146 Csiszar A Ungvari Z Edwards JG Kaminski P Wolin MS Koller A Kaley G Aging-induced phenotypic changes and oxidative stress impair coronary arteriolar function Circ Res 90 11 2002 1159 1166 12065318
147 Thompson-Torgerson CS Holowatz LA Flavahan NA Kenney WL Rho kinase-mediated local cold-induced cutaneous vasoconstriction is augmented in aged human skin Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 293 1 2007 H30 H36 17416609
148 Miller AA Drummond GR De Silva TM Mast AE Hickey H Williams JP Broughton BR Sobey CG NADPH oxidase activity is higher in cerebral versus systemic arteries of four animal species: role of Nox2 Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 296 1 2009 H220 H225 19028794
149 Sobey CG Heistad DD Faraci FM Potassium channels mediate dilatation of cerebral arterioles in response to arachidonate Am J Physiol 275 5 Pt 2 1998 H1606 H1612 9815067
150 Park L Anrather J Zhou P Frys K Wang G Iadecola C Exogenous NADPH increases cerebral blood flow through NADPH oxidase-dependent and -indepen dent mechanisms Arterioscler Thromb, Vasc Biol 24 10 2004 1860 1865 15308559
151 Paravicini TM Miller AA Drummond GR Sobey CG Flow-induced cerebral vasodilatation in vivo involves activation of phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase, NADPH-oxidase, and nitric oxide synthase J Cereb Blood Flow Metab: Off J Int Soc Cereb Blood Flow Metab 26 6 2006 836 845
152 Drouin A Thorin E Flow-induced dilation is mediated by Akt-dependent activation of endothelial nitric oxide synthase-derived hydrogen peroxide in mouse cerebral arteries Stroke; J Cereb Circ 40 5 2009 1827 1833
153 De Keulenaer GW Chappell DC Ishizaka N Nerem RM Alexander RW Griendling KK Oscillatory and steady laminar shear stress differentially affect human endothelial redox state: role of a superoxide-producing NADH oxidase Circ Res 82 10 1998 1094 1101 9622162
154 Cheranov SY Jaggar JH TNF-α dilates cerebral arteries via NAD(P)H oxidase-dependent Ca2+ spark activation Am J Physiol - Cell Physiol 290 4 2006 964 971
155 Sullivan MN Gonzales AL Pires PW Bruhl A Leo MD Li W Oulidi A Boop FA Feng Y Jaggar JH Welsh DG Earley S Localized TRPA1 channel Ca2+ signals stimulated by reactive oxygen species promote cerebral artery dilation Sci Signal 8 358 2015 ra2 25564678
156 Gebremedhin D Terashvili M Wickramasekera N Zhang DX Rau N Miura H Harder DR Redox signaling via oxidative inactivation of PTEN modulates pressure-dependent myogenic tone in rat middle cerebral arteries PLoS One 8 7 2013 e68498 23861911
157 Miller AA De Silva TM Judkins CP Diep H Drummond GR Sobey CG Augmented superoxide production by Nox2-containing NADPH oxidase causes cerebral artery dysfunction during hypercholesterolemia Stroke; J Cereb Circ 41 4 2010 784 789
158 Mayhan WG Arrick DM Sharpe GM Sun H Age-related alterations in reactivity of cerebral arterioles: role of oxidative stress Microcirculation 15 3 2008 225 236 18386218
159 Adachi T Weisbrod RM Pimentel DR Ying J Sharov VS Schöneich C Cohen RA S-Glutathiolation by peroxynitrite activates SERCA during arterial relaxation by nitric oxide Nat Med 10 11 2004 1200 1207 15489859
160 Cipolla MJ Sweet JG Gokina NI White SL Nelson MT Mechanisms of enhanced basal tone of brain parenchymal arterioles during early postischemic reperfusion: role of ET-1-induced peroxynitrite generation J Cereb Blood Flow Metab: Off J Int Soc Cereb Blood Flow Metab 33 10 2013 1486 1492
161 Amberg GC Earley S Glapa SA Local regulation of arterial L-type calcium channels by reactive oxygen species Circ Res 107 8 2010 1002 1010 20798361
162 Kahles T Luedike P Endres M Galla HJ Steinmetz H Busse R Neumann-Haefelin T Brandes RP NADPH oxidase plays a central role in blood-brain barrier damage in experimental stroke Stroke; a J Cereb Circ 38 11 2007 3000 3006
163 Carrano A Hoozemans JJM van der Vies SM Rozemuller AJM van Horssen J de Vries HE Amyloid beta induces oxidative stress-mediated blood–brain barrier changes in capillary amyloid angiopathy Antioxid Redox Signal 15 5 2011 1167 1178 21294650
164 Zhao Z Hu J Gao X Liang H Liu Z Activation of AMPK attenuates lipopolysaccharide-impaired integrity and function of blood-brain barrier in human brain microvascular endothelial cells Exp Mol Pathol 97 3 2014 386 392 25220346
165 Schreurs MPH Cipolla MJ Cerebrovascular dysfunction and blood–brain barrier permeability induced by oxidized LDL are prevented by apocynin and magnesium sulfate in female rats J Cardiovasc Pharmacol 63 1 2014 33 39 24084218
166 Kim-Mitsuyama S Yamamoto E Tanaka T Zhan Y Izumi Y Izumiya Y Ioroi T Wanibuchi H Iwao H Critical role of angiotensin II in excess salt-induced brain oxidative stress of stroke-prone spontaneously hypertensive rats Stroke; a J Cereb Circ 36 5 2005 1082 1083
167 Gibson CL Srivastava K Sprigg N Bath PMW Bayraktutan U Inhibition of Rho-kinase protects cerebral barrier from ischaemia-evoked injury through modulations of endothelial cell oxidative stress and tight junctions J Neurochem 129 5 2014 816 826 24528233
168 Intengan HD Schiffrin EL Vascular remodeling in hypertension: roles of apoptosis, inflammation, and fibrosis Hypertens: J Am Heart Assoc 38 3, Part 2 Suppl 2001 581 587
169 Baumbach GL Heistad DD Remodeling of cerebral arterioles in chronic hypertension Hypertension 13 6, Part2 1989 968 972 2737731
170 Heagerty AM Aalkjaer C Bund SJ Korsgaard N Mulvany MJ Small artery structure in hypertension: dual processes of remodeling and growth Hypertension 21 4 1993 391 397 8458640
171 Chan SL Baumbach GL Deficiency of Nox2 prevents angiotensin II-induced inward remodeling in cerebral arterioles Front Physiol 4 2013 133 23805104
172 Filosa JA Bonev AD Straub SV Meredith AL Wilkerson MK Aldrich RW Nelson MT Local potassium signaling couples neuronal activity to vasodilation in the brain Nat Neurosci 9 11 2006 1397 1403 17013381
173 Girouard H Iadecola C Neurovascular coupling in the normal brain and in hypertension, stroke, and Alzheimer disease J Appl Physiol 100 1 2006 328 335 16357086
174 Park L Zhou P Pitstick R Capone C Anrather J Norris EH Younkin L Younkin S Carlson G McEwen BS Iadecola C Nox2-derived radicals contribute to neurovascular and behavioral dysfunction in mice overexpressing the amyloid precursor protein Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105 4 2008 1347 1352 18202172
175 Allen CL Bayraktutan U Oxidative stress and its role in the pathogenesis of ischaemic stroke Int J Stroke 4 6 2009 461 470 19930058
176 Park L Anrather J Zhou P Frys K Pitstick R Younkin S Carlson GA Iadecola C NADPH-oxidase-derived reactive oxygen species mediate the cere- brovascular dysfunction induced by the amyloid beta peptide J Neurosci 25 7 2005 1769 1777 15716413
177 Sorond FA Hurwitz S Salat DH Greve DN Fisher NDL Neurovascular coupling, cerebral white matter integrity, and response to cocoa in older people Neurology 81 10 2013 904 909 23925758
178 Fabiani M Gordon BA Maclin EL Pearson MA Brumback-Peltz CR Low KA McAuley E Sutton BP Kramer AF Gratton G Neurovascular coupling in normal aging: a combined optical, ERP and fMRI study Neuroimage 85 Pt 1 2014 592 607 23664952
179 Toth P Tarantini S Tucsek Z Ashpole NM Sosnowska D Gautam T Ballabh P Koller A Sonntag WE Csiszar A Ungvari Z Resveratrol treatment rescues neurovascular coupling in aged mice: role of improved cerebromicrovascular endothelial function and downregulation of NADPH oxidase Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 306 3 2014 H299 H308 24322615
180 Farkas E Luiten PGM Cerebral microvascular pathology in aging and Alzheimer’s disease Prog Neurobiol 64 6 2001 575 611 11311463
181 Hajdu MA Heistad DD Siems JE Baumbach GL Effects of aging on mechanics and composition of cerebral arterioles in rats Circ Res 66 6 1990 1747 1754 2344672
182 Mayhan WG Faraci FM Baumbach GL Heistad DD Effects of aging on responses of cerebral arterioles AJP - Heart Circ Physiol 258 4 1990 H1138
183 Park L Anrather J Girouard H Zhou P Iadecola C Nox2-derived reactive oxygen species mediate neurovascular dysregulation in the aging mouse brain J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 27 12 2007 1908 1918 17429347
184 Peña Silva RA Chu Y Miller JD Mitchell IJ Penninger JM Faraci FM Heistad DD Impact of ACE2 deficiency and oxidative stress on cerebrovascular function with aging Stroke; J Cereb Circ 43 12 2012 3358 3363
185 Modrick ML Didion SP Sigmund CD Faraci FM Role of oxidative stress and AT1 receptors in cerebral vascular dysfunction with aging Am J Physiol - Heart Circ Physiol 296 6 2009 1914 1919
186 Iadecola C Davisson RL Hypertension and cerebrovascular dysfunction Cell Metab 7 6 2008 476 484 18522829
187 Iadecola C Park L Capone C Threats to the mind: aging, amyloid, and hypertension Stroke; J Cereb Circ 40 3 Suppl 2009 S40 S44
188 Han BH Zhou M-l Johnson AW Singh I Liao F Vellimana AK Nelson JW Milner E Cirrito JR Basak J Yoo M Dietrich HH Holtzman DM Zipfel GJ Contribution of reactive oxygen species to cerebral amyloid angiopathy, vasomotor dysfunction, and microhemorrhage in aged Tg2576 mice Proc Natl Acad Sci 112 8 2015 E881 E890 25675483
189 Rey FE Li XC Carretero OA Garvin JL Pagano PJ Perivascular superoxide anion contributes to impairment of endothelium-dependent relaxation: role of gp91(phox) Circulation 106 19 2002 2497 2502 12417549
190 Cifuentes-Pagano E Csanyi G Pagano PJ NADPH oxidase inhibitors: a decade of discovery from Nox2ds to HTS Cell Mol Life Sci: CMLS 69 14 2012 2315 2325 22585059
191 Cifuentes-Pagano E Saha J Csanyi G Ghouleh IA Sahoo S Rodriguez A Wipf P Pagano PJ Skoda EM Bridged tetrahydroisoquinolines as selective NADPH oxidase 2 (Nox2) inhibitors MedChemComm 4 7 2013 1085 1092 24466406
192 Rey FE Cifuentes ME Kiarash A Quinn MT Pagano PJ Novel competitive inhibitor of NAD(P)H oxidase assembly attenuates vascular O(2)(−) and systolic blood pressure in mice Circ Res 89 5 2001 408 414 11532901
193 Al-Shabrawey M Bartoli M El-Remessy AB Platt DH Matragoon S Behzadian MA Caldwell RW Caldwell RB Inhibition of NAD(P)H oxidase activity blocks vascular endothelial growth factor overexpression and neovascu-larization during ischemic retinopathy Am J Pathol 167 2 2005 599 607 16049343
194 Duerrschmidt N Stielow C Muller G Pagano PJ Morawietz H NO-mediated regulation of NAD(P)H oxidase by laminar shear stress in human endothelial cells J Physiol 576 Pt 2 2006 557 567 16873416
195 Dourron HM Jacobson GM Park JL Liu J Reddy DJ Scheel ML Pagano PJ Perivascular gene transfer of NADPH oxidase inhibitor suppresses angioplasty-induced neointimal proliferation of rat carotid artery Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 288 2 2005 H946 H953 15388496
196 Jung O Schreiber JG Geiger H Pedrazzini T Busse R Brandes RP gp91phox-containing NADPH oxidase mediates endothelial dysfunction in renovascular hypertension Circulation 109 14 2004 1795 1801 15037533
197 Liu J Yang F Yang XP Jankowski M Pagano PJ NAD(P)H oxidase mediates angiotensin II-induced vascular macrophage infiltration and medial hypertrophy Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 23 5 2003 776 782 12637340
198 Jacobson GM Dourron HM Liu J Carretero OA Reddy DJ Andrzejewski T Pagano PJ Novel, NAD(P)H oxidase inhibitor suppresses angioplasty-induced superoxide and neointimal hyperplasia of rat carotid artery Circ Res 92 6 2003 637 643 12609967
199 Liu J Ormsby A Oja-Tebbe N Pagano PJ Gene transfer of NAD(P)H oxidase inhibitor to the vascular adventitia attenuates medial smooth muscle hypertrophy Circ Res 95 6 2004 587 594 15308582
200 Weaver M Liu J Pimentel D Reddy DJ Harding P Peterson EL Pagano PJ Adventitial delivery of dominant-negative p67phox attenuates neointimal hyperplasia of the rat carotid artery Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 290 5 2006 H1933 H1941 16603705
201 Sukumar P Viswambharan H Imrie H Cubbon RM Yuldasheva N Gage M Galloway S Skromna A Kandavelu P Santos CX Gatenby VK Smith J Beech DJ Wheatcroft SB Channon KM Shah AM Kearney MT Nox2 NADPH oxidase has a critical role in insulin resistance-related endothelial cell dysfunction Diabetes 62 6 2013 2130 2134 23349484
202 Abais JM Zhang C Xia M Liu Q Gehr TW Boini KM Li PL NADPH oxidase-mediated triggering of inflammasome activation in mouse podocytes and glomeruli during hyperhomocysteinemia Antioxid Redox Signal 18 13 2013 1537 1548 23088210
203 Cangemi R Celestini A Del Ben M Pignatelli P Carnevale R Proietti M Calabrese CM Basili S Violi F Role of platelets in NOX2 activation mediated by TNFalpha in heart failure Intern Emerg Med 9 2 2014 179 185 22843319
204 Yamamoto Y Saito T Feng GG Li J Yasuda Y Kazaoka Y Fujiwara Y Kinoshita H Intermittent local periodontal inflammation causes endothelial dysfunction of the systemic artery via increased levels of hydrogen peroxide concomitantly with overexpression of superoxide dismutase Int J Cardiol 222 2016 901 907 27526356
205 Kumar A Barrett JP Alvarez-Croda DM Stoica BA Faden AI Loane DJ NOX2 drives M1-like microglial/macrophage activation and neurodegeneration following experimental traumatic brain injury Brain Behav Immun 58 2016 291 309 27477920
206 Magwenzi S Woodward C Wraith KS Aburima A Raslan Z Jones H McNeil C Wheatcroft S Yuldasheva N Febbriao M Kearney M Naseem KM Oxidized LDL activates blood platelets through CD36/NOX2-mediated inhibition of the cGMP/protein kinase G signaling cascade Blood 125 17 2015 2693 2703 25710879
207 Tugyi R Uray K Ivan D Fellinger E Perkins A Hudecz F Partial D-amino acid substitution: improved enzymatic stability and preserved Ab recognition of a MUC2 epitope peptide Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102 2 2005 413 418 15630090
208 Walensky LD Kung AL Escher I Malia TJ Barbuto S Wright RD Wagner G Verdine GL Korsmeyer SJ Activation of apoptosis in vivo by a hydrocarbon-stapled BH3 helix Science 305 5689 2004 1466 1470 15353804
209 Lakkireddy HR Urmann M Besenius M Werner U Haack T Brun P Alie J Illel B Hortala L Vogel R Bazile D Oral delivery of diabetes peptides -comparing standard formulations incorporating functional excipients and nanotechnologies in the translational context Adv Drug Deliv Rev 106 Pt B 2016 196 222 26964477
210 Li X Wang C Liang R Sun F Shi Y Wang A Liu W Sun K Li Y The glucose-lowering potential of exenatide delivered orally via goblet cell-targeting nano-particles Pharm Res 32 3 2015 1017 1027 25270570
211 Patil NH Devarajan PV Insulin-loaded alginic acid nanoparticles for sublingual delivery Drug Deliv 23 2 2016 429 436 24901208
212 Singh G Pai RS Atazanavir-loaded Eudragit, RL 100 nanoparticles to improve oral bioavailability: optimization and in vitro/in vivo appraisal Drug Deliv 23 2 2016 532 539 24963752
213 Yun Y Cho YW Park K Nanoparticles for oral delivery: targeted nanoparticles with peptidic ligands for oral protein delivery Adv Drug Deliv Rev 65 6 2013 822 832 23123292
214 Agrawal AK Harde H Thanki K Jain S Improved stability and antidiabetic potential of insulin containing folic acid functionalized polymer stabilized multilayered liposomes following oral administration Biomacromolecules 15 1 2014 350 360 24283460
215 Araujo F Shrestha N Shahbazi MA Fonte P Makila EM Salonen JJ Hirvonen JT Granja PL Santos HA Sarmento B The impact of nanoparticles on the mucosal translocation and transport of GLP-1 across the intestinal epithelium Biomaterials 35 33 2014 9199 9207 25109441
216 Bouttefeux O Beloqui A Preat V Delivery of peptides via the oral route: diabetes treatment by peptide-loaded nanoparticles Curr Pharm Des 22 9 2016 1161 1176 26675223
217 Aguirre TA Teijeiro-Osorio D Rosa M Coulter IS Alonso MJ Brayden DJ Current status of selected oral peptide technologies in advanced preclinical development and in clinical trials Adv Drug Deliv Rev 106 Pt B 2016 223 241 26921819
218 Krol S Ellis-Behnke R Marchetti P Nanomedicine for treatment of diabetes in an aging population: state-of-the-art and future developments Nanomedicine 8 Suppl 1 2012 S69 S76 22640905
219 Ranayhossaini DJ Rodriguez AI Sahoo S Chen BB Mallampalli RK Kelley EE Csanyi G Gladwin MT Romero G Pagano PJ Selective recapitulation of conserved and nonconserved regions of putative NOXA1 protein activation domain confers isoform-specific inhibition of Nox1 oxidase and attenuation of endothelial cell migration J Biol Chem 288 51 2013 36437 36450 24187133
220 Cifuentes-Pagano E Meijles DN Pagano PJ The quest for selective nox inhibitors and therapeutics: challenges, triumphs and pitfalls Antioxid Redox Signal 20 17 2014 2741 2754 24070014
221 Petronio MS Zeraik ML Fonseca LM Ximenes VF Apocynin: chemical and biophysical properties of a NADPH oxidase inhibitor Molecules 18 3 2013 2821 2839 23455672
222 Heumuller S Wind S Barbosa-Sicard E Schmidt HH Busse R Schroder K Brandes RP Apocynin is not an inhibitor of vascular NADPH oxidases but an antioxidant Hypertension 51 2 2008 211 217 18086956
223 El-Naga RN Apocynin protects against ethanol-induced gastric ulcer in rats by attenuating the upregulation of NADPH oxidases 1 and 4 Chem Biol Interact 242 2015 317 326 26522475
224 ten Freyhaus H Huntgeburth M Wingler K Schnitker J Baumer AT Vantler M Bekhite MM Wartenberg M Sauer H Rosenkranz S Novel Nox inhibitor VAS2870 attenuates PDGF-dependent smooth muscle cell chemotaxis, but not proliferation Cardiovasc Res 71 2 2006 331 341 16545786
225 Stielow C Catar RA Muller G Wingler K Scheurer P Schmidt HH Morawietz H Novel Nox inhibitor of oxLDL-induced reactive oxygen species formation in human endothelial cells Biochem Biophys Res Commun 344 1 2006 200 205 16603125
226 Wind S Beuerlein K Eucker T Muller H Scheurer P Armitage ME Ho H Schmidt HH Wingler K Comparative pharmacology of chemically distinct NADPH oxidase inhibitors Br J Pharmacol 161 4 2010 885 898 20860666
227 Lange S Heger J Euler G Wartenberg M Piper HM Sauer H Platelet-derived growth factor BB stimulates vasculogenesis of embryonic stem cell-derived endothelial cells by calcium-mediated generation of reactive oxygen species Cardiovasc Res 81 1 2009 159 168 18806276
228 Altenhofer S Kleikers PW Radermacher KA Scheurer P Rob Hermans JJ Schiffers P Ho H Wingler K Schmidt HH The NOX toolbox: validating the role of NADPH oxidases in physiology and disease Cell Mol Life Sci: CMLS 69 14 2012 2327 2343 22648375
229 Tuo YH Liu Z Chen JW Wang QY Li SL Li MC Dai G Wang JS Zhang YL Feng L Shi ZS NADPH oxidase inhibitor improves outcome of mechanical reperfusion by suppressing hemorrhagic transformation J Neurointerventional Surg 2016
230 El Assar M Angulo J Santos-Ruiz M Moreno P Novials A Villanueva-Penacarrillo ML Rodriguez-Manas L Differential effect of amylin on endothelial-dependent vasodilation in mesenteric arteries from control and insulin resistant rats PLoS One 10 3 2015 e0120479 25807378
231 Huang A Yang YM Yan C Kaley G Hintze TH Sun D Altered MAPK signaling in progressive deterioration of endothelial function in diabetic mice Diabetes 61 12 2012 3181 3188 22933112
232 Sun QA Hess DT Wang B Miyagi M Stamler JS Off-target thiol alkylation by the NADPH oxidase inhibitor 3-benzyl-7-(2-benzoxazolyl)thio-1,2,3-triazolo [4,5-d]pyrimidine (VAS2870) Free Radic Biol Med 52 9 2012 1897 1902 22406319
233 Laleu B Gaggini F Orchard M Fioraso-Cartier L Cagnon L Houngninou-Molango S Gradia A Duboux G Merlot C Heitz F Szyndralewiez C Page P First in class, potent, and orally bioavailable NADPH oxidase isoform 4 (Nox4) inhibitors for the treatment of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis J Med Chem 53 21 2010 7715 7730 20942471
234 Genkyotex Innovation SAS Safety and efficacy of oral GKT137831 in patients with type 2 diabetes and albuminura ClinicalTrials.gov [Internet] Bethesda (MD) National Library of Medicine (US) Available from: 〈https://www.clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/record/NCT02010242〉, 2000 (cited 2017Feb13), NLM Identifier: NCT02010242.
235 Qiu S Mintz JD Salet CD Han W Giannis A Chen F Yu Y Su Y Fulton DJ Stepp DW Increasing muscle mass improves vascular function in obese (db/db) mice J Am Heart Assoc 3 3 2014 e000854 24965025
236 Gianni D Taulet N Zhang H DerMardirossian C Kister J Martinez L Roush WR Brown SJ Bokoch GM Rosen H A novel and specific NADPH oxidase-1 (Nox1) small-molecule inhibitor blocks the formation of functional invadopodia in human colon cancer cells ACS Chem Biol 5 10 2010 981 993 20715845
237 Coco H Pernomian L Pereira PC Gomes MS Marchi KC Lopes AH Cunha TM Tirapelli CR de Oliveira AM Chronic restraint stress increases angiotensin II potency in the rat carotid: role of cyclooxygenases and reactive oxygen species J Pharm Pharmacol 69 1 2017 52 65 27774650
238 Wong PS Randall MD Roberts RE Sex differences in the role of NADPH oxidases in endothelium-dependent vasorelaxation in porcine isolated coronary arteries Vasc Pharmacol 72 2015 83 92
239 Sies H Ebselen, a selenoorganic compound as glutathione peroxidase mimic Free Radic Biol Med 14 3 1993 313 323 8458589
240 Sies H Masumoto H Ebselen as a glutathione peroxidase mimic and as a scavenger of peroxynitrite Adv Pharmacol 38 1997 229 246 8895811
241 Smith SM Min J Ganesh T Diebold B Kawahara T Zhu Y McCoy J Sun A Snyder JP Fu H Du Y Lewis I Lambeth JD Ebselen and congeners inhibit NADPH oxidase 2-dependent superoxide generation by interrupting the binding of regulatory subunits Chem Biol 19 6 2012 752 763 22726689
242 Xie H Ray PE Short BL NF-kappaB activation plays a role in superoxide-mediated cerebral endothelial dysfunction after hypoxia/reoxygenation Stroke; J Cereb Circ 36 5 2005 1047 1052
243 Handa Y Kaneko M Takeuchi H Tsuchida A Kobayashi H Kubota T Effect of an antioxidant, ebselen, on development of chronic cerebral vasospasm after subarachnoid hemorrhage in primates Surg Neurol 53 4 2000 323 329 10825515
244 Bubolz AH Wu Q Larsen BT Gutterman DD Liu Y Ebselen reduces nitration and restores voltage-gated potassium channel function in small coronary arteries of diabetic rats Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 293 4 2007 H2231 H2237 17675568
245 Cayatte AJ Rupin A Oliver-Krasinski J Maitland K Sansilvestri-Morel P Boussard MF Wierzbicki M Verbeuren TJ Cohen RA S17834, a new inhibitor of cell adhesion and atherosclerosis that targets nadph oxidase Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 21 10 2001 1577 1584 11597929
246 Diatchuk V Lotan O Koshkin V Wikstroem P Pick E Inhibition of NADPH oxidase activation by 4-(2-aminoethyl)-benzenesulfonyl fluoride and related compounds J Biol Chem 272 20 1997 13292 13301 9148950
247 Bhandarkar SS Jaconi M Fried LE Bonner MY Lefkove B Govindarajan B Perry BN Parhar R Mackelfresh J Sohn A Stouffs M Knaus U Yancopoulos G Reiss Y Benest AV Augustin HG Arbiser JL Fulvene-5 potently inhibits NADPH oxidase 4 and blocks the growth of endothelial tumors in mice J Clin Investig 119 8 2009 2359 2365 19620773
248 Hwang J Ing MH Salazar A Lassegue B Griendling K Navab M Sevanian A Hsiai TK Pulsatile versus oscillatory shear stress regulates NADPH oxidase subunit expression: implication for native LDL oxidation Circ Res 93 12 2003 1225 1232 14593003
249 Siu KL Gao L Cai H Differential roles of protein complexes NOX1-NOXO1 and NOX2-p47phox in mediating endothelial redox responses to oscillatory and unidirectional laminar shear stress J Biol Chem 291 16 2016 8653 8662 26826128
