LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9306181
20201
Solid State Nucl Magn Reson
Solid State Nucl Magn Reson
Solid state nuclear magnetic resonance
0926-2040
1527-3326

29035839
5705391
10.1016/j.ssnmr.2017.10.001
NIHMS913146
Article
Insights into Protein Misfolding and Aggregation enabled by Solid-State NMR Spectroscopy
van der Wel Patrick C.A. *Department of Structural Biology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA

* vanderwel@pitt.edu; phone: 1-412-383-9896; fax: 1-412-648-9008
15 10 2017
04 10 2017
11 2017
01 11 2018
88 114
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
The aggregation of proteins and peptides into a variety of insoluble, and often non-native, aggregated states plays a central role in many devastating diseases. Analogous processes undermine the efficacy of polypeptide-based biological pharmaceuticals, but are also being leveraged in the design of biologically inspired self-assembling materials. This Trends article surveys the essential contributions made by recent solid-state NMR (ssNMR) studies to our understanding of the structural features of polypeptide aggregates, and how such findings are informing our thinking about the molecular mechanisms of misfolding and aggregation. A central focus is on disease-related amyloid fibrils and oligomers involved in neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s and Huntington’s disease. SSNMR-enabled structural and dynamics-based findings are surveyed, along with a number of resulting emerging themes that appear common to different amyloidogenic proteins, such as their compact alternating short-β-strand/β-arc amyloid core architecture. Concepts, methods, future prospects and challenges are discussed.

Graphical Abstract

Amyloid
Neurodegenerative disease
Magic-angle spinning
Protein Structure
Protein Dynamics
Protein misfolding
Structural Biology
Prions

Introduction

Biochemical, biological and structural studies traditionally focus on the characterization of proteins in their soluble state. Such a solution-centric focus risks undervaluing the high relevance and importance of a variety of insoluble protein aggregates. Aggregated proteins play a central role in protein deposition diseases, they compromise the stability and effectiveness of protein-based therapeutics, and are increasingly used as self-assembling (hybrid) bio-materials [1–6]. Solid-state NMR (ssNMR) offers unique and essential capabilities to study the aggregated state of polypeptides, through its ability to elucidate both structure and dynamics independent of macroscopic order. This Trends article reviews the progress made in the application of ssNMR to this important field of research in the last five years. Due to constraints of space rather than reflecting relative importance, the primary focus will be on contributions of ssNMR to studies of structural and mechanistic aspects of disease-associated protein aggregation. A growing list of diseases are associated with the aggregation of proteins, either within cells or extracellularly [1]. The most famous examples of protein deposition diseases are those in which the affected proteins form amyloid or amyloid-like fibrils. Note that a traditional definition of “amyloid” is that these are patient-derived extracellular fibrils, but increasingly the term amyloid is employed more generously to polypeptide assemblies with a characteristic cross-β β-sheet-based architecture (see below) [7]. Examples of amyloid diseases include Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s and Huntington’s diseases. Characteristically these diseases are age-dependent, even in those cases where the disease-causing amyloidogenic protein is a mutant variant that is present from birth. Another common feature of these devastating and lethal diseases is that they lack effective treatments that target the molecular causes of disease (i.e. the misfolding and aggregation), rendering them as-yet incurable, unpreventable and ultimately fatal. In absence of a cure, affected patients require extensive and costly day-to-day care during the unstoppable progression of the disease. Efforts to design treatments that target the causative protein misfolding and aggregation events are hindered by a lack of atomic-level understanding of mechanism by which the aggregates form or how they may help cause the disease-related cellular toxicity.

Structural biology of protein aggregates

One longstanding hurdle in our understanding of protein aggregation mechanisms is the lack of atomic structures for non-crystalline protein assemblies that populate these pathways. Mature aggregates lack the three-dimensional crystalline order required for high-resolution X-ray crystallography. Amyloid fibrils can still be studied using X-rays, in the form of aligned (or unaligned) fibril diffraction experiments. Indeed, X-ray diffraction arguably provides the gold-standard test of the “amyloid” nature of aggregates, as amyloids share a highly characteristic cross-β diffraction pattern (Fig. 1a). This cross-β pattern reflects the fact that the common “core” of these assemblies is made up of extensively intermolecular β-sheets running along the length of the fibers (vide infra). Unfortunately, these diffraction patterns lack the resolution to extract atomic-level amyloid structures. This is exemplified by polyglutamine amyloids for which qualitatively different fiber structures were proposed based on the same experimental X-ray data [8–10]. While a subset of amyloidogenic proteins can be made to form sufficiently large crystals that are suitable for high-resolution X-ray crystallography, the resulting structures reflect a non-amyloid state that is devoid of the structural hallmarks of the fibrillar amyloid. Most obviously this is true for proteins that are crystallized in their native fold but also form aggregates when they misfold into a distinct non-native structure. Certain short fragments of amyloidogenic proteins are capable of forming amyloid-like fibrils and elongated β-sheet-based nano- or microcrystals. In the 2000s, X-ray crystallographic studies of the latter crystalline amyloid mimics revealed a number of structural motifs that were subsequently shown to be common in true amyloid fibril structures [11, 12]. The interfaces between β-sheets featured “steric zippers”: a tight intermeshing of side chains, without (space for) water molecules (Fig. 1b,c). These amyloid-like crystal structures provide a growing library of high-resolution “reference” amyloid architectures in the protein databank. An intriguing, and as-yet not fully understood, question is what differentiates the formation of those 3D crystal lattices from the formation of “true” amyloid fibril structures, given that they are in fact different structures even though they form under very similar conditions [13]. Single molecule based methods such as atomic force microscopy (AFM) and electron microscopy (EM) have also been essential for the study of protein aggregates and their formation. Although these tools traditionally have been unable to gain sub-nm resolution data, it has been especially the EM field that has made significant progress toward ever-higher resolution amyloid fibril studies (Fig. 1d) [14–17]. In the few years, it has however been especially the use of advanced solid-state NMR spectroscopy (ssNMR) that has made a lot of exciting progress in detailing atomic-level structures and structural data. Mature aggregates and even the “soluble” oligomers may tumble too slowly for direct high-resolution solution NMR characterization, but they have proved quite amenable to the ever more capable tools of magic-angle-spinning (MAS) ssNMR. After an introductory review of applicable concepts in the next section, we will discuss how recent MAS ssNMR studies have revealed the structure and dynamics of amyloid fibrils, non-fibrillar protein deposits and pre-fibrillar assemblies, in unprecedented Å-resolution detail.

Concepts and mechanisms

Amyloid: definition of a generic architecture

Amyloids are characterized by an elongated, fairly narrow (5–15 nm wide) fibrillar structure that is largely or entirely made up of β-sheet structures. The most robust hallmark of amyloid is the presence of a cross-β pattern in X-ray diffraction studies (Fig. 1a). The cross-β pattern reveals the fundamental architecture, in which a 4.7–4.8 Å repeat distance reflects the hydrogen-bonding distance between β-strands. The β-strands from individual monomers stack atop each other to form long intermolecular β-sheets. Close contacts between opposing sheets manifest themselves in the cross-β pattern as (perpendicular) repeat distances of ~ 8–10 Å. These inter-sheet repeat distances are more variable, as they depend on the size of side chains forming the sheet-to-sheet interface [22, 23]. Fig. 1d shows an example of such an amyloid fiber structure derived from a combination of ssNMR and EM constraints [18]. This architecture is stabilized by intermolecular hydrogen bonding between the backbones of this relatively short amyloidogenic peptide. Since this structural motif is mediated by backbones, it can naturally be adopted by a wide array of unrelated proteins and peptides that all form amyloids. That said, especially for longer amyloidogenic peptides or proteins, different types of β-sheet-based architectures can underlie an amyloid fibril assembly. Fig. 1e–h shows three basic amyloid folds predicted in a previously proposed classification [21]. Many amyloids feature in-register parallel (IP) β-sheets, whilst the extended polypeptide chain contains multiple shorter β-strand segments that end up in their own distinct β-sheet stacks (Fig. 1e). Connecting these β-strands are characteristic loops or kinks (sometimes named β-arcs; see figure). Thus, each polypeptide forms a layer of connected strands and arcs, which together are referred to as “β-arches” that stack to form an IP amyloid architecture. IP β-sheet amyloids are characterized by a particular sequence position in one monomer being layered atop the same residue in its neighboring protein monomer (Fig. 1e; black dots). In this case, the hydrogen bonds stabilizing the β-sheets are all intermolecular. This is also the case for amyloid folds in the polypeptide also forms β-arches, but these arches are assembled supramolecularly in antiparallel (AP) rather than IP β-sheets (Fig. 1g). Notably, in the AP fold most residues in a β-strand will not face their sequence counterpart in the neighboring β-strand, which imparts particular sequence constraints that do not apply to IP amyloids. Some amyloids feature β-sheet architectures that are in part stabilized by intramolecular backbone-mediated hydrogen-bonding interactions. For instance, β-solenoid-based amyloids contain parallel (but not in-register) β-sheets (Fig. 1f; Fig. 2) in which two or more neighboring strands come from the same protein. Or, AP β-sheets can be formed from β-hairpins stabilized by intramolecular hydrogen bonds (Fig. 1h). The structural motif connecting the two β-strands of a β-hairpin is known as a β-turn (see figure), which is distinct from the β-arc found in β-arch architectures (see above). It is important to distinguish true β-hairpins (with their internal hydrogen-bonding) from the types of “hairpin” structures seen in e.g. certain IP Aβ fibrils, where the hydrogen bonding occurs between inter-molecularly rather than intra-molecularly. Note that all of these distinct amyloid folds conform to the abovementioned cross-β architecture (Fig. 1a).

Protein aggregation mechanisms and nomenclature

As Anfinsen already noted [26], a polypeptide chain’s fold “is determined by the totality of inter-atomic interactions and hence by the amino acid sequence, in a given environment” (emphasis added). The same applies in protein misfolding and aggregation, where the structure of the resulting aggregate depends specifically on the exact aggregation conditions. Changes in experimental conditions, such as concentration, pH, temperature or agitation, change the nature of both intra- and inter-protein interactions, and thus enable different aggregation pathways. In this section, we will examine different types of aggregation mechanism, while also covering some of the nomenclature in use in the protein aggregation and amyloid formation literature [27, 28]. Figure 3 summarizes several different types of protein aggregation processes, with the active one dependent on the polypeptide sequence and environmental conditions.

Many disease-associated aggregation-prone proteins are intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) under physiological conditions, when they are not aggregated (Fig. 3a,b; left). These proteins (or protein domains) are present in an ensemble of rapidly interchanging conformations. As a precursor to full-blown aggregation, aggregation-prone IDPs often first form oligomeric, but still soluble, assemblies, usually driven by hydrophobic interactions. These initial interactions may require a structural change (compared to the soluble monomer) that is slow or unlikely to occur, manifesting in a lag phase of oligomer formation. Commonly, oligomers are semi-stable at a certain defined size, but for amyloidogenic proteins oligomer formation is followed by a structural change that facilitates the formation of extendable filamentous assemblies. This amyloidogenic structural change reflects the initial creation of the amyloid architecture, based on inter-molecular β-sheets, and is commonly known as the (primary) nucleation event. A hallmark feature of amyloid structure is that it is capable of self-propagation through elongation: new monomers are recruited to fibril ends, where they hydrogen-bond to the exposed β-strands of the amyloid core. This elongation step causes the new monomer to take on the existing amyloid structure. This mechanism gives amyloids the ability to self-propagate with high structural fidelity. In-depth analyses of protein aggregation kinetics [29] reveal that fibrils do more than just elongate: fibril fragmentation and fibril-mediated secondary nucleation are essential to fully explain observed aggregation kinetics.

Not all aggregation-prone proteins implicated in disease are normally IDPs. The proteins that aggregate in transthyretin and light chain amyloidosis are globular proteins with a defined native fold [30]. The eye lens proteins that aggregate during cataract formation also normally adopt an ordered fold [31]. These kinds of non-IDP proteins form protein deposits via different types of aggregation mechanisms, with three prominent categories illustrated in Fig. 3c [32]. First, destabilization of the native fold can lead to significant unfolding that effectively opens up an amyloidogenic assembly process reminiscent of those illustrated in Fig. 3a–b. However, extensive unfolding or misfolding is not a prerequisite for aggregation. Some aggregation-prone proteins self-assemble under non-denaturing conditions into non-filamentous protein deposits that lack the hallmarks of amyloids [32]. The molecular principles of these types of aggregation pathways are less well understood. Condensation-style aggregation involves predominantly surface-surface interactions (Fig. 3c; top). Others have advocated domain swapping as a potential contributor to this type of aggregation process, noting a correlation between domain swapping propensity and aggregation propensity. To the best of our knowledge, truly domain-swapped conformations have not yet been demonstrated within amyloid fibrils, but may be part of non-amyloid aggregates or pre-amyloid oligomers [32–35].

Many aggregation processes are multistage mechanisms in which multiple structural states co-exist and inter-convert. This includes the mature fibrils and oligomers discussed above, but there are two other concepts that should be noted. Protofibrils are thinner isolated β-sheet-based fibrils, sometimes wormlike in appearance, that can be observed prior to the formation of the thicker mature fibrils, but after formation of non-fibrillar oligomers. They are conceptually different from so-called protofilaments, which are the intertwining sub-filaments that constitute amyloid fibrils (but may not be immediately visible in low to moderate resolution EM or AFM images).

Aggregate polymorphism

A predictable consequence of the diversity of accessible aggregation pathways (Fig. 3) is that they should yield differently structured aggregates. Structural information on the aggregates is therefore useful to narrow down the set of potential aggregation mechanisms. The active mechanism depends on experimental conditions, causing a single polypeptide to form a variety of differently structured types of aggregates [36, 37]. Polymorphism is well known for the amyloid aggregates formed by Aβ, tau, and α-synuclein, and it underlies the strain phenomenon of prion proteins. A particular amyloid fibril polymorph often (but not always! [38]) propagates itself with structural fidelity. Polymorphic aggregation goes beyond the formation of different types of amyloid fibrils. This is illustrated in Fig. 3(c), in context of the condition-dependent aggregation of a cataract-related mutant eye lens protein, P23T γD crystallin[32]. Under physiological conditions this protein forms non-amyloid “amorphous” aggregates, while denaturing conditions induce formation of amyloid fibrils with a very different internal and macroscopic structure. In other cases, relatively subtle changes in experimental conditions (e.g. concentration) differentiate the nucleation of 3D crystals from amyloid fibrils [19].

Functional properties of polymorphic assemblies

Naturally, different (polymorphic) structures translate into different functional properties. This correlation is a prominent concern for the disease-related protein aggregation diseases. The misfolding and aggregation of proteins leads to a loss of (normal) function, but also can cause a disease-causing gain of a toxic function. The exact toxic roles of different types of oligomers and fibrils remain hotly debated[39–41]. Most evidence suggests that cytotoxic effects show an inverse correlation to parameters such as aggregate size and stability, with soluble oligomers, protofibrils or small fibrillar states generally being most toxic. Sequestration of smaller species into larger assemblies may reduce the effective toxicity. This is an ongoing discussion, as there are also data supporting a contribution of mature aggregates to disease and toxicity [41].

Protein aggregation in human disease

Aggregates in Alzheimer’s disease – Aβ

Two types of polypeptide aggregates are associated with Alzheimer’s disease (AD). This includes on the one hand 40- and 42-residue Aβ peptides that form extracellular amyloid plaques. Aβ fibrils have been a long-standing target of MAS ssNMR studies, with several groups recently reporting 3D structures of different types of Aβ fibrils (Fig. 4). Most Aβ fibrils feature an IP β-sheet architecture, with each “layer” containing two or three peptide monomers, depending on the polymorph. One exception is the Aβ1-40 Iowa mutant (D23N mutation), which forms fibrils with an AP core fold[42]. Aβ40 fibrils featuring the Osaka mutation (E22Δ) adopt the more canonical IP fold, with the conformation of the dimeric peptide building block in Fig. 4b [43]. An intriguing feature of this fibril architecture is that it achieves a dense packing of the hydrophobic core by combining steric-zipper-like interactions between short β-strand segments with intervening β-arc (ref. Fig. 1e) twists or turns. This is a recurring feature in a number of newly determined amyloid fibril structures. Indeed, an inspection of three independently determined Aβ42 fibril structures shows a similar structural motif [44–46], as illustrated in Fig. 4c–e. Various ssNMR studies of Aβ and other amyloids have started to probe the conformation of brain-seeded fibrils [47–49]. In these studies, amyloid fibrils recovered from patient material are amplified by cyclical seeded elongation processes performed in vitro. By using stable-isotope labeled monomers during the final round of amplification, labeled fibrils are obtained that are amenable to multidimensional ssNMR. For Aβ1-40, this approach has yielded the three-fold-symmetric fibril structure in Fig. 4a, which is distinct from prior Aβ1-40 in vitro fibril structures [48]. The key differences were ascribed to bends and kinks in the backbone, which were absent in prior in vitro fibrils that had a less complex architecture with longer straighter β-strands [48].

Recent ssNMR studies related to Aβ aggregation have not been constrained to the determination of high-resolution fibril structures, but have tried to provide more insights into the pathway of misfolding that leads to amyloid formation. One recurring question has been how membrane interactions can modulate the Aβ misfolding and aggregation process [50–52]. Others have used ssNMR to examine the conformation of pre-fibrillar Aβ oligomers and protofibrils, and compare them to those of the mature fibrils [53–60]. Although a high-resolution structure of these disordered assemblies has not been reported, these studies do agree that the pre-fibrillar species have β-strands that occur in regions that are also part of the amyloid core. It appears however that these β-strands must be arranged in a tertiary or quaternary fold that is different and in particular not amenable to amyloidogenic elongation into a fibril. It has been suggested that the β-rich oligomers or protofibrils formed by Aβ contain intramolecularly hydrogen bonded β-hairpins that need to undergo a substantial strand rearrangement to convert into the more stable fibril state [53, 55, 60–65]. At least one recent ssNMR study of Aβ42 oligomers argues against β-hairpins, but favors other types of antiparallel β-sheets (lacking the intramolecular hydrogen bonds) [59].

Aggregates in Alzheimer’s disease - Tau

AD patients also have another type of protein aggregates in the form of tau tangles. The tau protein is much larger than Aβ, which has made it harder to study by most structural biology methods including ssNMR. A combination of improvements in protein production protocols and in the ability of ssNMR to study smaller sample sizes have started to make effective tau ssNMR studies possible [67]. Beyond ssNMR, it is worth noting a recent breakthrough study involving the use of cryoEM to probe the conformation of patient-extracted tau fibrils [16].

Aggregates in Parkinson’s disease

In Parkinson’s disease it is the α-synuclein protein that undergoes aggregation into amyloid fibrils. Building on earlier ssNMR work, recent years have seen important progress reported by several ssNMR groups [66, 68–71]. This includes one study that probed the effect of phospholipid membrane binding on α-synuclein aggregation. Membrane binding modulates the α-synuclein aggregation pathway, but ssNMR shows that, perhaps somewhat surprisingly, the resulting fibril structure is relatively similar to the structure that forms in absence of membranes [68]. Moreover, a 2016 study showed that α-synuclein fibrils made in vitro are toxic to cells, and used extensive ssNMR experiments to delineate the atomic-resolution structure of these fibrils [66]. The obtained structure is shown in Fig. 4f, and reveals the presence of a similarly kinked backbone architecture as was discussed for some Aβ polymorphs above. The compact structure of alternating β-arcs and short β-strand segments enables a dense packing of the rigid amyloid core, stabilized by a combination of backbone and side chain interactions both within and between the IP β-sheets.

Prions

Amyloid-like aggregates play a special role in prion diseases, given their role as the infectious species. The origin of this phenomenon is encoded in their capability to propagate themselves by recruiting otherwise innocuous protein monomers and subverting them into an amyloidogenic state. Differently structured aggregates made by a particular prion protein have distinct levels of infectivity and toxicity, while prions from different organisms vary in cross-species propagation. MAS ssNMR has been applied to aggregated prion proteins from multiple organisms, to probe this fascinating topic from a structural perspective[72]. Several groups are pursuing ssNMR studies of the prion strain phenomenon and its relation to toxicity and propagation, with a prominent role for correlating the ssNMR to in-vivo toxicity studies or seeding with ex-vivo aggregates [72–74]. Structurally speaking, a striking feature of the examined prion protein fibrils is that ssNMR revealed that only a small portion of the protein ends up in an ordered β-sheet amyloid core, visible in cross-polarization (CP) experiments (Fig. 5a) [73–76]. Upon freezing the hydrated sample, the disordered non-core segments become visible in the CP spectra, but are highly broadened due to static disorder and structural heterogeneity. In the unfrozen state, the dynamically disordered residues outside this core are so dynamic and flexible that they are visible in J-based ssNMR experiments (see below).

Prions are also found in lower organisms such as fungi, where they are proteins with prion behavior but without sequence similarity to the abovementioned mammalian prion protein. Although not associated with human disease, this class of amyloidogenic proteins has proven instrumental for our understanding of protein misfolding and amyloid formation. This includes a number of now-classic ssNMR studies on various fungal protein amyloids. In recent years, several groups have used ssNMR to contribute further insights on the structure, dynamics, and chaperone interactions of the Sup35p yeast prion protein (Fig. 5b) [77–80]. Structurally, most ssNMR data point to the formation of canonical IP β-sheet architectures by the mammalian as well as yeast prions [61]. In contrast, ssNMR studies of the functionally important fungal prion protein HET-s previously has provided a exciting perspective into a solenoid amyloid fibril architecture (Fig. 2a) [24]. Building on this ssNMR structure, recent studies continue to probe (by ssNMR) the dynamics, structures, NMR characteristics, and functional properties of the amyloid state [81–83]. Notably this includes a demonstration of the potential of segmental isotopic labeling in current and future ssNMR studies of larger protein assemblies [84, 85].

Aggregates in Huntington’s disease

Huntington’s disease (HD) is the most common example of a family of inherited polyglutamine expansion disorders[88], in which mutations in disease-specific genes result in the expansion of a normally occurring polyglutamine repeat within affected proteins. In the case of HD it is the huntingtin protein that is mutated, with its polyglutamine domain present within the first exon of the protein. The last five years have seen a number of ssNMR studies of aggregated polyglutamine, both in isolation and in context of the huntingtin exon 1 (HttEx1) [20, 87, 89–93]. HttEx1 is seen as an essential disease-relevant huntingtin N-terminal fragment, as it is observed in patients and can cause HD-like disease in model animals. A recent ssNMR study revealed that the expanded polyglutamine domain forms a long β-hairpin structure in mutant HttEx1 fibrils[20], which were subsequently shown to be toxic to neuronal cells (Fig. 5e)[87]. Like other ssNMR-studied amyloids discussed above, the HttEx1 fibrils also have a highly ordered amyloid core that is decorated with exposed non-amyloid flanking regions (with α- and PPII-helical as well as random coil regions; Fig. 5c–e) [87, 91–93]. Delineation of the fibrils’ domain architecture was enabled in large part by ssNMR measurements of the domains’ relative dynamics probed by ssNMR measurements of relaxation rates and dipolar order parameters (Fig. 5f–g), and the use of J-based pulse sequences (Fig. 5d) [87, 91, 92, 94].

Systemic amyloidosis

The term of amyloidosis is sometimes used to generically indicate amyloid-related diseases, but is mostly reserved for systemic amyloidosis diseases [30]. The two most well known examples are light chain amyloidosis and transthyretin amyloidosis, both of which have seen recent contributions from ssNMR studies. Both these proteins have an ordered conformation in their native state, as in Fig. 3(c), unlike IDPs such as Aβ or amyloidogenic proteins with low-complexity sequences. Recent progress is particularly notable in the previously poorly served (by ssNMR) area of light chain amyloidosis research with very recent work on two light chain variants [95–97]. The study of the variable domain of AL-09 included a comparison to patient-derived material, based not on the seeding of labeled protein, but rather the direct acquisition of patient material’s natural abundance 13C spectrum. The fibrillar and oligomeric states of the variable domain of MAK33 were very similar to each other in terms of their ssNMR spectra, whilst the fibrils were also reported not to reflect a domain swapped state [35]. Interestingly, the regions that form the amyloid core seem to differ between the two light chain variants, arguing that further ssNMR studies will be valuable to probe what (if any) commonalities are present between different amyloidogenic light chains.

Beyond studies of amyloidogenic peptides derived from TTR (Fig. 1), multiple groups are studying aggregates formed by the disease-relevant full-length protein upon long-term incubation under acidic conditions [98, 99]. No ssNMR-based structure of TTR fibrils is as yet available, but various types of structural data start to constrain our understanding of TTR’s aggregate architecture, with implications for the misfolding mechanism. These data show that the aggregated protein lacks the common IP β-sheet architecture, but the reports disagree on the extent to which secondary and tertiary structures from the β-rich native fold are preserved in the fibrils.

Other amyloid-related diseases

A variety of other amyloid-related diseases have seen recent contributions from ssNMR studies of the associated protein deposits. ALS or Lou Gehrig’s disease reflects a class of related diseases that are now recognized to also involve the aggregation of proteins. Affected proteins include the TDP43 and FUS proteins. Thus far, ssNMR studies on the former have been limited to fragments of the protein, which suggested the formation of a β-hairpin in the fibril [100]. Recently, a novel ssNMR-based structure of the FUS amyloid core was reported, with similar structural features as noted above for other amyloid structures[101]. The peptide IAPP (also known as amylin) forms amyloid-like fibrils in type II diabetes, which have also been studied recently by ssNMR [102]. Human β-2-microglobulin (β2m) is involved in dialysis-related amyloidosis. In contrast to the large flexible flanking domains in HttEx1 and prion protein fibrils, ssNMR shows the β2m amyloid core to contain ~80% of the primary sequence (with N-terminal truncation actually extending this core structure) [103].

Functional amyloids

Amyloid-like architectures occur in nature not just in context of disease, but are also observed to have a more beneficial relevance. This category of amyloids is generally known as “functional amyloid” [104]. A number of bacterial proteins form functional amyloids, with relevance to biofilm formation. Most notably this includes the curli proteins, which have been studied by ssNMR [105–107]. Although no purely ssNMR-based structure exists yet, computational modeling informed by the available experimental data (including ssNMR) has been reported [25]. As illustrated in Fig. 2, the curli structure appears to be a β-helix or β-solenoid, reminiscent of the discussed fungal HET-s fibrils. This kind of architecture may be a more general feature of functional amyloids, as HET-s is itself also considered a functional amyloid. Various functional amyloids have been identified or proposed in higher organisms, some of which have been probed by ssNMR: the Pmel17 protein involved in the melanin deposition [108], memory-related CPEB and Orb2 proteins [109–111], RIP1/RIP3 kinases involved in necrosis [112], and reversible fibrils formed by β-endorphin [113].

Designer amyloids

Amyloid-like assemblies are also finding applications beyond biology, as frameworks for self-assembling hydrogels and other nanomaterials. As with their naturally occurring counterparts, structural studies of these designer amyloids benefit from valuable insights enabled by ssNMR [23, 114–118]. In most cases, these amyloid- or cross-β-based materials are based on short amyloidogenic peptides that may be modified with acyl chains or by cross-linking [23, 115, 116]. Detailed structural (and dynamic) data on these synthetic assemblies enabled by ssNMR are likely to be critical for disentangling how these designer molecules self-assemble and to find ways to rationally modify their structures and properties.

Non-amyloid protein aggregates

It is important to note that not all protein aggregation necessarily reflects misfolding into an amyloid-like state. Indeed, many studies differentiate protein aggregates (related to disease) between elongated amyloid-like fibrils and amorphous-looking assemblies [32, 119–122]. This includes for instance pre-fibrillar oligomers formed by amyloidogenic polypeptides, which are in EM and AFM studies lacking the more ordered elongated appearance of the mature fibrils. These oligomers are studied by ssNMR, but such experiments are often complicated by the need to somehow stabilize these inherently transient assemblies (vide supra). Other proteins form amorphous-looking aggregates not as an intermediate form, but rather as their final mature aggregated state. It is tempting to assume these types of assemblies to be dynamically or statically disordered on the atomic level (and therefore challenging or unsuitable for in-depth ssNMR study). However, a recent ssNMR study on such amorphous looking aggregates formed by a mutant of a γD-crystallin protein reported very high quality spectra, indicative of high rigidity and order on the atomic level [32]. Note that this protein forms canonical amyloid-like fibrils under denaturing conditions, but follows a qualitatively different assembly process at physiological pH. The remarkably high ssNMR spectral quality of the latter non-amyloid assemblies illustrates the point that EM-based morphology may not predict or reflect the atomic-level structure or the suitability for ssNMR. Clearly, MAS ssNMR is a powerful complement to EM-based structural studies, and may be invaluable for samples that feature local order, but lack the repetitive or “macroscopic” order necessary for EM image reconstruction methods.

Recurring themes

Structural features of amyloid architectures

One of the key lessons learned from ssNMR studies of amyloid fibrils is that there are a number of recurring features and canonical architectures[21]. Thus far, the most common architecture reported for amyloid fibrils is based on an IP β-sheet assembly, as illustrated in Fig. 1 and Fig. 4. These types of assemblies lead to the stacking of identical segments from individual protein monomers, stabilized by a combination of intermolecular backbone-backbone and side-chain interactions. Several ssNMR approaches have been developed for detecting the characteristic “self-to-self” interactions of IP β-sheets. This is most commonly achieved by intermolecular 13C-13C recoupling experiments using either derivatives of the RFDR-based PITHIRDS experiment or double quantum 13C-13C recoupling pulse sequences such as DQ-DRAWS [123–125]. An IP structure has been reported for Aβ, α-synuclein, several yeast prion proteins, and various other amyloids (Fig. 4) [13, 44, 45, 66, 75, 101, 126]. However, we also have a growing set of alternative amyloid core structures that were first predicted [21] and have now been demonstrated experimentally by ssNMR. This includes the parallel β-sheet solenoids as illustrated in Fig. 2, as well as antiparallel architectures with and without β-hairpins[20, 42, 100, 118].

Beyond the overall architecture classification, there is an emerging characteristic shared by many of the recent fibril structures. They tend to feature a very tightly packed core that is made possible by a collapsed supramolecular fold in which short complementary β-strands are linked by β-arc turns to form a compact alternating short-strand/arc (CASSA) architecture (e.g. Fig. 4). Typically, the short β-strands tend to be only a few residues long, yielding a striking highly kinked misfolded state that may well prove to be a typical architecture of amyloids. The short strand segments of these amyloid cores are engaged in tight zipper-like interactions, reminiscent of the structures of crystallized amyloidogenic hexapeptides[11, 12]. These peptide X-ray structures have yielded a systematic classification of amyloid-like β-sheet spine assemblies. Although it is dangerous to extrapolate the structures of the short-peptide crystals to the actual amyloid architecture of their parent proteins [78, 79], these X-ray data are valuable for ssNMR studies as high-resolution reference structures. The peptide crystals are also ideal to experimentally validate (novel) ssNMR measurements of amyloid structure. In the case of the hexapeptide GNNQQNY (Fig. 1b), ssNMR on the (highly stable) crystalline and fibrillar states [127] indicated that the crystals do recapitulate key structural features of the amyloid state. This includes the dehydrated “steric zipper” interface between β-sheets that seems to be characteristic of various amyloids studied by ssNMR[20]. However, the hexapeptide fibrils reproducibly had a complex architecture in which both straight β-strands and bent peptides co-assembled into a “composite” core structure [13], which might in retrospect reflect a CASSA-type architecture typical of larger amyloids.

Recent ssNMR studies increasingly focus on larger proteins and protein constructs, rather than truncated fragments. These studies reveal another common feature of amyloidogenic proteins: that only relatively small portions of the protein end up in the β-sheet-based amyloid core [75, 91, 92, 111]. The non-amyloid portions can contain folded domains, isolated secondary structure elements, or be dynamically disordered (Fig. 5). The different domains within and outside the amyloid core have very different dynamics and solvent accessibility, which can be very nicely probed by ssNMR (as long as samples are sufficiently hydrated and unfrozen). The amyloid core itself tends to be highly rigid, resulting in high signal intensities in traditional dipolar-based experiments. Highly flexible disordered segments are invisible in CP-based spectra, but are effectively studied using a variety of multidimensional J-based MAS ssNMR pulse sequences. Indeed, fully scalar methods often allow for a detailed analysis of the assignments and dynamic properties of these exposed segments. Partly immobilized domains outside the amyloid core are often visible in the dipolar MAS NMR spectra, but show diminished intensity and increased relaxation. This still permits the measurements of chemical shifts and dynamic parameters, but the reduced dipolar order parameters complicate the measurements of (long range) distances or dihedral angles with precision and accuracy. Many types of protein aggregates how now been found to contain segments with dynamics that range from fully rigid to completely flexibly disordered in the same protein. As such, these samples not only benefit greatly from the wide assortment of ssNMR-based dynamics measurements, but also present a great opportunity to further develop this toolkit.

Outlook

A combination of improvements in ssNMR instrumentation, ssNMR pulse sequence development and sample preparation protocols have allowed ssNMR studies to greatly advance our understanding of amyloid formation, protein misfolding, and protein aggregation. Recent years have seen a progression from measurements of structural constraints, to the development of preliminary structural models, to increasingly well-defined atomic-resolution structures deposited in the protein databank. Thus, we have obtained the first detailed insights into the misfolded structures of true amyloid fibrils, and begun to identify their recurring characteristic architectures.

Technological and methodological advances

Going forward, there are a number of developments that are likely to further revolutionize this field of investigation. A characteristic challenge of ssNMR spectroscopy relates to the inherently low sensitivity of the method. Dynamic nuclear polarization (DNP) methods are under continuing development as a means to achieve dramatic increases in sensitivity. A number of published studies have demonstrated the applicability to protein aggregate studies in particular [128–132]. One interesting application is to study smaller amounts of labeled protein aggregates under dilute conditions, for instance in cellular extracts [132]. Current DNP methods are typically reliant on cryogenic temperatures, which enhance the performance of dipolar-recoupling experiments, but also limit the ability to measure highly valuable dynamics data and often result in reductions in spectral resolution [82, 133]. A complementary new development is the advent of faster MAS using ever-smaller rotor sizes, with state-of-the-art probes enabling MAS rates in excess of 100 kHz [134]. This enables 1H detection and can greatly improve the per-mg sensitivity, which is a crucial consideration for studies of hard-to-produce protein samples [135]. Ultrafast MAS traditionally suffers the opposite challenge of cryogenic DNP conditions, in that the frictional heating is prone to overheat the sample. Fortunately, this challenge is being met by improvements in sample cooling hardware.

The field is also expected to benefit from methodological developments in terms of pulse sequence design and application. A key goal in this should be a standardization of methods for structural and dynamic analysis. At conventional MAS rates (8–20 kHz), the field is gradually settling on standard methods of measuring ssNMR chemical shifts and distance constraints, with the latter mostly based on 13C-13C and 1H-1H (from XHHC; with X=N/C) distance constraints. These are complemented with 13C-15N distances that can be obtained via TEDOR or PAIN-CP experiments. One recurring challenge is that one needs to distinguish intra-molecular from intermolecular distance constraints, which are indistinguishable in fully labeled protein aggregates. For this purpose, ssNMR studies of amyloid structures typically include distance measurements on isotopically diluted and isotopically mixed samples. The former would reveal those inter-residue interactions that are intramolecular while the latter unambiguously identify inter-molecular contacts. Standard protocols are complemented with more tailored or specialized experiments, some of which are of particular interest in amyloid studies. For instance, as noted above, several dedicated tools are available for probing 13C-13C contacts characteristic of intermolecular IP β-sheets, including DQ-DRAWS and PITHIRDS [130, 136, 137]. Other complementary structural data can be obtained via dihedral torsion angle measurements, which have been proved useful and effective in several amyloid fibril studies [20, 127]. Torsion angle experiments are effectively insensitive to intermolecular interactions and can therefore be performed without need for isotopic dilution.

When performed on hydrated and unfrozen samples[138], ssNMR studies can provide many tools to probe dynamics across a wide range of motional time scales. In the context of aggregate studies, these experiments are invaluable in efforts to identify the rigid core of the aggregated state, which commonly features the residues that drive the aggregation process. However, it is also increasingly realized that regions outside the amyloid core proper can have important consequences for the aggregation process[87, 94]. Scalar-based or J-based methods probe highly dynamic protein segments that are distant from the rigid amyloid core. Selectivity for highly flexible residues can be accomplished by generating initial polarization using refocused INEPT featuring τ1/τ2 delays without any 1H decoupling [110, 139]. Such dynamically disordered segments are observed in many types of amyloids, whether formed from IDPs [45, 77, 87, 110, 126] or by destabilization of a folded protein [32, 103]. It is important to note that not all protein segments outside the amyloid core are seen in such dynamically filtered J-based spectra, as they require a very high degree of flexibility. Proximity to the amyloid core and the presence of secondary structure can imbue non-amyloid flanking domains with intermediate dynamics resulting in short relaxation times [87, 91]. Such residues may be visible in CP spectra, permitting measurements of their dynamics via relaxation and order parameter measurements. However, intermediate motion may also render certain residues effectively invisible in both CP- and INEPT-based spectra obtained at ambient temperatures[140].

Relationship to other techniques in structural biology

The ability of ssNMR methods to provide Å-resolution structural data on protein aggregates remains a unique strength compared to other methods. However, the development of 3D structural models (or structures) requires the incorporation of long-range information. As such, ssNMR measurements are increasingly part of a multi-technique integrated structural biology approach, in which especially EM-based methods play an important role. This includes negative-stain TEM, alongside unstained STEM and dark-field methods. As the evolution of cryo-EM methods continues [16–18], we can foresee exciting opportunities for the further integration of ssNMR and cryo-EM structural data, with an early example in a recent EM/ssNMR study of Aβ fibrils [17]. Another notable complementary method is EPR spectroscopy, which provides both dynamic insights and long-range structural constraints. Synergy arises not only from the complementarity of obtained information, but also from the fact that EPR spin-labeled samples allow for ssNMR measurements of long-range paramagnetic effects on the nuclear shifts and relaxation properties [141].

Future challenges and (biological) questions

One of the recurring questions in ssNMR studies of disease-related aggregates is whether the aggregates made in vitro are truly relevant to the disease. Going forward, one can envision several approaches that address this question, some of which are already in use. The first approach relies on the characteristic feature that many amyloids show a high degree of fidelity in the propagation of strains or polymorphs. This principle has been leveraged to “amplify” small amounts of propagation-capable seeds extracted from patient materials, for instance in studies of Aβ and prion protein [73, 74]. Whilst limited work on unlabeled patient material has already been reported [96], new ssNMR methods based on 1H detection and DNP-enhancement may further boost sensitivity to the point that more in-depth ssNMR measurements become feasible. Whilst obtaining large amounts of material of sufficient purity from human patients may remain a challenge, aggregates extracted from disease model animals would also be of great interest and could be more accessible. Alternatively, there are a number of reports of the successful isotopic labeling of certain types of animals, for studies of tissue by ssNMR [142].

A similarly important biological question concerns the need to connect ssNMR-enabled structural findings to the molecular origins of disease toxicity. This can be addressed in part by measuring the cytotoxicity of in vitro fibrils or oligomers used for ssNMR, using neuronal cell lines or animals [54, 66, 87, 90]. Integrating structural ssNMR measurements of polymorphic fibrils and oligomers with parallel toxicity measurements will provide exciting opportunities to detail the toxic mechanism behind protein misfolding diseases. An associated challenge comes from the transient nature of the pre-fibrillar species (e.g. soluble oligomers) that may be the most toxic type of misfolded protein aggregates. This feature makes their study by ssNMR challenging, due to the time requirements of (multidimensional) NMR and the destabilizing impact of densely packing the oligomers during sample preparation. Existing studies [53–55, 58] describe a variety of means to stabilize or trap oligomers, including cross-linking, freeze-drying and stabilizing antibodies. Further SSNMR studies may also directly study one of the proposed mechanisms of toxicity: the idea that oligomers disrupt the barrier function of cellular membranes [143]. This is exemplified in several existing studies that shed light on the molecular mechanism of membrane damage, by leveraging the capabilities of ssNMR to probe protein-lipid interactions and the disruption of lipid bilayer structures [52, 144, 145].

A crucial goal in current and future ssNMR-enabled studies of protein misfolding and aggregation related to disease is to facilitate the development of new treatments. On the one hand, SSNMR-enabled studies can be expected to further illuminate the mechanisms of misfolding and aggregation, which are increasingly seen as targets for developing new (and hopefully more effective) drugs [146–149]. Moreover, ssNMR will likely play a key role in studies of the ways in which inhibitors can modulate the aggregation behavior and aggregate structure [57, 150]. A related topic of substantial interest involves the use of ssNMR to learn more about players in the protein homeostasis network that is another key drug target [151]. Many chaperones are oligomeric or disordered (or both), making them challenging for traditional structural studies, but potential targets for ssNMR studies of structure and dynamics [152–154]. A natural extension of the above will be to integrate these types of projects together, with ssNMR used to probe e.g. both the chaperones and their aggregating substrates.

Extrapolating from the work covered in this review, it is clear that we can expect a further progression and expansion of investigations of the molecular mechanisms that drive the misfolding and self-assembly of polypeptides, both in disease and beyond. Seeing the crucial findings already made achieved by ssNMR, and the ongoing developments in advancing ssNMR hardware and methodology, it is clear that ssNMR will be a critical component in future interdisciplinary studies of this important research. As noted, the interest in these topics (and thus the need for ssNMR applications) is growing and spans beyond biochemistry, into other areas such as materials science and pharmaceutical research.

The author acknowledges helpful discussions with Ronald Wetzel and members of the Van der Wel lab, as well as support by the National Institutes of Health grants R01 GM112678 and AG019322 for our polyglutamine amyloid research.

Fig. 1 Amyloid architecture

(a) Cross-β X-ray diffraction pattern of TTR(105–115) fibrils [18]. (Adapted from Fitzpatrick et al. 2013). (b) Steric zipper sheet-to-sheet interface of GNNQQNY amyloid-like nanocrystals (PDB 1YJP; ref. [11]; adapted with permission from Van der Wel et al., 2007 [19], Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society). (c) Steric zipper interface in polyglutamine amyloid [20]. (Adapted from Hoop et al. 2016). (d) Integrated structural model of TTR(105–115) amyloid fibrils, based on TEM, cryoEM, and ssNMR experiments [18]. (Adapted from Fitzpatrick et al. 2013) (e–h) Basic β-sheet classifications for amyloid assemblies[21]. The black dot marks the position of a particular residue number, while color-coding differentiates the peptide monomers. Note that these dots are at characteristically different distances from each other, a feature used in ssNMR experiments such as the PITHIRDS pulse sequence (see below).

Figure 2 Amyloids with parallel β-solenoid core structures

(a) HET-s fibril structure determined by ssNMR [24], with colorcoding highlighting the fact that two rungs of the solenoid come from a single protein monomer. Reproduced from Wasmer et al. 2008 [24] with permission from AAAS. (b,c) Computational predictions of left- and right-handed β-helical models of curli fibril structure. Adapted with permission from ref. [25], copyright American Chemical Society. Both proteins show extensive intra-molecular interactions that determine the structure and stability of the fibrils. This provides an element of (evolutionary) control that may be essential for these functional amyloids.

Figure 3 Molecular mechanisms of aggregation

(a) Characteristic molecular mechanism of amyloid formation, showing monomers, non-amyloid oligomers and β-rich amyloid aggregates. (b) In some cases, initial self-assembly may not be based on β-rich oligomers, but involve amphipathic α-helices. (c) Potential aggregation mechanisms accessible by non-IDP proteins, adapted from Boatz et al. 2017 [32]. (d) Schematic aggregation curve, where amyloid formation is monitored using the amyloid dye ThT. The nucleation and elongation phases of the process are indicated. The lag phase is associated with the nucleation process, while the elongation rate dictates the slope of the elongation phase.

Figure 4 Recent ssNMR-based IP amyloid structures

(a) Brain-seeded Aβ1-40 fibrils, from ref. [48], which adopt the common IP architecture, like most known Aβ fibrils. It also shows the increasingly common feature of having a compact amyloid core featuring alternating short β-strands and β-arc kinks or bends. (b) Osaka mutant Aβ1-40 fibrils also adopt the IP architecture, with twisted sets of short β-strands. Adapted from ref. [43] with permission from Wiley. (c-d) Three independent Aβ1-42 structures [44–46] feature similarly alternating β-arcs and short β-strand segments. Adapted with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol., ref. [44], copyright 2015; from ref. [45] (Copyright American Chemical Society), and ref. [46]. (e) The amyloid architecture of α-synuclein fibrils has analogous features, featuring a structural motif that resembles an orthogonal Greek key arrangement [66]. Adapted with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol., ref. [66], copyright 2016. All structures represent the conformation of the immobilized amyloid core (studied by CP-based ssNMR), with dynamic exposed residues included in the samples but not shown in these representations (see Fig. 5).

Figure 5 SSNMR of amyloid cores and non-amyloid flanking domains

(a) Variable temperature CP-based NCA spectra for human Y145Stop prion protein fibrils. Whilst at 0 °C only narrow signals from the ordered amyloid core show up (red), freezing of the solvent results in the appearance of additional broad signals from the now-immobilized non-amyloid segments of the protein (blue). Adapted from ref. [86]; (b) As illustrated for weak and strong Sup35p NM domain fibrils, J-based 2D INEPT/TOBSY spectra can be used to detect the flexible domains in the unfrozen state. Adapted from ref. [77]. (c) CP/DARR and (d) INEPT/TOBSY spectra of HttEx1 fibrils (44Q variant) detect signals of core and flanking domains, respectively. (e) Combining structural and dynamic ssNMR studies helped reveal the architecture of these HttEx1 fibrils, which feature a β-hairpin polyQ amyloid core and solvent-exposed non-amyloid flanking regions. (f–g) CP-visible signals include regions of different dynamics, as illustrated here with 13Cα-1Hα DIPSHIFT dephasing curves for the amyloid core and its neighboring flanking regions. Panels (c–g) were adapted from ref. [87].

Highlights

The aggregation of peptides and proteins is a hallmark of many incurable diseases.

Solid-state NMR site-specifically probes the conformation of protein aggregates.

Solid-state NMR studies of dynamics and disordered regions yield unique insights.

Recent solid-state NMR structures point to common molecular themes and mechanisms.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


1* Chiti F Dobson CM Protein Misfolding, Amyloid Formation, and Human Disease: A Summary of Progress Over the Last Decade Annu Rev Biochem 86 1 2017 27 68 This paper reviews recent progress in our understanding of protein misfolding diseases 28498720
2 Otzen D Nielsen PH We find them here, we find them there: Functional bacterial amyloid Cell Mol Life Sci 65 6 2008 910 927 18034321
3 Wei G Su Z Reynolds NP Arosio P Hamley IW Gazit E Mezzenga R Self-assembling peptide and protein amyloids: from structure to tailored function in nanotechnology Chem Soc Rev 9 2017 237
4 Jones OG Mezzenga R Inhibiting, promoting, and preserving stability of functional proteinfibrils Soft Matter 8 4 2012 876 895
5 Hamrang Z Rattray NJW Pluen A Proteins behaving badly: emerging technologies in profiling biopharmaceutical aggregation Trends Biotechnol 31 8 2013 448 458 23769716
6 Roberts CJ Therapeutic protein aggregation: mechanisms, design, and control Trends Biotechnol 32 7 2014 372 380 24908382
7 Greenwald J Riek R Biology of amyloid: structure, function, and regulation Structure 18 10 2010 1244 1260 20947013
8 Perutz MF Johnson T Suzuki M Finch JT Glutamine repeats as polar zippers: their possible role in inherited neurodegenerative diseases Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 91 12 1994 5355 5358 8202492
9 Perutz MF Finch JT Berriman J Lesk A Amyloid fibers are water-filled nanotubes Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99 8 2002 5591 5595 11960014
10 Sikorski P Atkins E New model for crystalline polyglutamine assemblies and their connection with amyloid fibrils Biomacromolecules 6 1 2005 425 432 15638548
11 Nelson R Sawaya MR Balbirnie M Madsen AØ Riekel C Grothe R Eisenberg D Structure of the cross-β spine of amyloid-like fibrils Nature 435 7043 2005 773 778 15944695
12 Sawaya MR Sambashivan S Nelson R Ivanova MI Sievers SA Apostol MI Thompson MJ Balbirnie M Wiltzius JJ McFarlane HT Madsen AO Riekel C Eisenberg D Atomic structures of amyloid cross-β spines reveal varied steric zippers Nature 447 7143 2007 453 7 17468747
13 Lewandowski JR van der Wel PCA Rigney M Grigorieff N Griffin RG Structural complexity of a composite amyloid fibril J Am Chem Soc 133 37 2011 14686 14698 21766841
14 Jiménez JL Nettleton EJ Bouchard M Robinson CV Dobson CM Saibil HR The protofilament structure of insulin amyloid fibrils Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99 14 2002 9196 9201 12093917
15 Schmidt M Rohou A Lasker K Yadav JK Schiene-Fischer C Fändrich M Grigorieff N Peptide dimer structure in an Aβ(1-42) fibril visualized with cryo-EM Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 112 38 2015 11858 11863 26351699
16* Fitzpatrick AWP Falcon B He S Murzin AG Murshudov G Garringer HJ Crowther RA Ghetti B Goedert M Scheres SHW Cryo-EM structures of tau filaments from Alzheimer’s disease Nature 56 2017 343 Reports an impressive cryo-EM study of ex-vivo tau fibrils from an amyloid patient. Although not quite reaching atomic resolution, this study provides an unprecedented view of the fibril architecture and is expected to pave the way for studies of other disease-associated protein aggregates
17* Gremer L Schölzel D Schenk C Reinartz E Labahn J Ravelli RBG Tusche M Lopez-Iglesias C Hoyer W Heise H Willbold D Schröder GF Fibril structure of amyloid-β(1-42) by cryoelectron microscopy Science 2017 358 6359 116 119 Reports the structure (PDB 5OQV) of an in-vitro amyloid fibril formed by Aβ1-42 at pH 2, from a cryoEM electron density map along with constraints from MAS ssNMR. This kind of integrated approach is likely increasingly important for both amyloids and non-amyloid biological assemblies 28882996
18* Fitzpatrick AWP Debelouchina GT Bayro MJ Clare DK Caporini MA Bajaj VS Jaroniec CP Wang L Ladizhansky V Müller SA MacPhee CE Waudby CA Mott HR De Simone A Knowles TPJ Saibil HR Vendruscolo M Orlova EV Griffin RG Dobson CM Atomic structure and hierarchical assembly of a cross-β amyloid fibril Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110 14 2013 5468 5473 Atomic resolution structure of a peptide amyloid protofilament, based on a combination of ssNMR, EM, X-ray and other methods. Deposited in the PDB as entry 2M5N 23513222
19 van der Wel PCA Lewandowski JR Griffin RG Solid-state NMR study of amyloid nanocrystals and fibrils formed by the peptide GNNQQNY from yeast prion protein Sup35p J Am Chem Soc 129 16 2007 5117 5130 17397156
20 Hoop CL Lin H-K Kar K Magyarfalvi G Lamley JM Boatz JC Mandal A Lewandowski JR Wetzel R van der Wel PCA Huntingtin exon 1 fibrils feature an interdigitated β-hairpin-based polyglutamine core Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 113 6 2016 1546 1551 26831073
21 Kajava AV Baxa U Steven AC Beta arcades: recurring motifs in naturally occurring and disease-related amyloid fibrils FASEB J 24 5 2010 1311 1319 20032312
22 Fändrich M Dobson CM The behaviour of polyamino acids reveals an inverse side chain effect in amyloid structure formation EMBO J 21 21 2002 5682 5690 12411486
23 Merg AD Boatz JC Mandal A Zhao G Mokashi-Punekar S Liu C Wang X Zhang P van der Wel PCA Rosi NL Peptide-directed assembly of single-helical gold nanoparticle superstructures exhibiting intense chiroptical activity J Am Chem Soc 138 41 2016 13655 13663
24 Wasmer C Lange A Van Melckebeke H Siemer AB Riek R Meier BH Amyloid Fibrils of the HET-s(218–289) Prion Form a β Solenoid with a Triangular Hydrophobic Core Science 319 5869 2008 1523 1526 18339938
25 Tian P Boomsma W Wang Y Otzen DE Jensen MH Lindorff Larsen K Structure of a functional amyloid protein subunit computed using sequence variation J Am Chem Soc 137 1 2015 22 25 25415595
26 Anfinsen CB Principles that govern the folding of protein chains Science 181 4096 1973 223 230 4124164
27 Kodali RB Wetzel R Polymorphism in the intermediates and products of amyloid assembly Curr Opin Struc Biol 17 1 2007 48 57
28 Sipe JD Benson MD Buxbaum JN Ikeda S-I Merlini G Saraiva MJM Westermark P Amyloid fibril proteins and amyloidosis: chemical identification and clinical classification International Society of Amyloidosis 2016 Nomenclature Guidelines Amyloid 23 4 2016 209 213 27884064
29* Meisl G Kirkegaard JB Arosio P Michaels TCT Vendruscolo M Dobson CM Linse S Knowles TPJ Molecular mechanisms of protein aggregation from global fitting of kinetic models Nat Protoc 11 2 2016 252 272 This paper describes the AmyloFit platform that allows for the systematic mechanstic analysis of amyloid formation kinetics measured (for instance) by ThT assays 26741409
30 Blancas-Mejía LM Ramirez-Alvarado M Systemic amyloidoses Annu Rev Biochem 82 2013 745 774 23451869
31 Moreau KL King JA Protein misfolding and aggregation in cataract disease and prospects for prevention Trends Mol Med 18 5 2012 273 282 22520268
32* Boatz JC Whitley MJ Li M Gronenborn AM Van der Wel PCA Cataract-associated P23T γD-crystallin retains a native-like fold in amorphous-looking aggregates formed at physiological pH Nat Commun 8 2017 15137 This study describes ssNMR studies of non-amyloid protein aggregates associated with disease, which commonly have an amorphous appearance when examined by EM. Surprisingly, these aggregates yield high-quality spectra, suggesting that it may be worth probing aggregates by ssNMR that are commonly assumed to be disordered and amorphous 28474685
33 van der Wel PCA Domain swapping and amyloid fibril conformation Prion 6 3 2012 211 216 22437737
34 Perlenfein TJ Mehlhoff JD Murphy RM Insights into the mechanism of cystatin C oligomer and amyloid formation and its interaction with β-amyloid J Biol Chem 292 27 2017 11485 11498 28487367
35 Hora M Sarkar R Morris V Xue K Prade E Harding E Buchner J Reif B MAK33 antibody light chain amyloid fibrils are similar to oligomeric precursors PLoS ONE 12 7 2017 e0181799 28746363
36 Kodali RB Williams AD Chemuru S Wetzel R Aβ(1-40) forms five distinct amyloid structures whose β-sheet contents and fibril stabilities are correlated J Mol Biol 401 3 2010 503 517 20600131
37 Tycko R Amyloid polymorphism: structural basis and neurobiological relevance Neuron 86 3 2015 632 645 25950632
38 Yamaguchi K-I Takahashi S Kawai T Naiki H Goto Y Seeding-dependent propagation and maturation of amyloid fibril conformation J Mol Biol 352 4 2005 952 960 16126222
39 Cremades N Dobson CM The contribution of biophysical and structural studies of protein self-assembly to the design of therapeutic strategies for amyloid diseases Neurobiol Dis 2017 In press
40 Marshall KE Marchante R Xue W-F Serpell LC The relationship between amyloid structure and cytotoxicity Prion 8 2 2014
41 Tipping KW van Oosten-Hawle P Hewitt EW Radford SE Amyloid Fibres: Inert End-Stage Aggregates or Key Players in Disease? Trends Biochem Sci 40 12 2015 719 727 26541462
42* Qiang W Yau W-M Luo Y Mattson MP Tycko R Antiparallel β-sheet architecture in Iowa-mutant β-amyloid fibrils Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109 12 2012 4443 4448 Reports the conformation Iowa mutant Aβ1-40 fibrils (D23N), which are found to be antiparallel - unlike most Aβ fibril polymorphs. A structure is deposited in the PDB as entry 2LNQ 22403062
43* Schütz AK Vagt T Huber M Ovchinnikova OY Cadalbert R Wall J Güntert P Böckmann A Glockshuber R Meier BH Atomic-resolution three-dimensional structure of amyloid β fibrils bearing the Osaka mutation Angew Chem Int Ed 54 1 2015 331 335 Reports the structure of Aβ1-40 fibrils featuring the Osaka mutation. The structure is reported in the PDB as entry 2MVX
44* Xiao Y Ma B McElheny D Parthasarathy S Long F Hoshi M Nussinov R Ishii Y Aβ(1-42) fibril structure illuminates self-recognition and replication of amyloid in Alzheimer’s disease Nat Struct Mol Biol 22 6 2015 499 505 Reports an atomic model of the Aβ1-42 fibril structure, which has been deposited in the PDB as entry 2MXU 25938662
45* Colvin MT Silvers R Ni QZ Can TV Sergeyev I Rosay M Donovan KJ Michael B Wall J Linse S Griffin RG Atomic Resolution Structure of Monomorphic Aβ 42 Amyloid Fibrils J Am Chem Soc 2016 138 30 9663 9674 (Atomic resolution structure of Aβ(1-42) fibrils obtained via MAS ssNMR. Structure is in the PDB as entry 5KK3 27355699
46* Wälti MA Ravotti F Arai H Glabe CG Wall JS Böckmann A Güntert P Meier BH Riek R Atomic-resolution structure of a disease-relevant Aβ(1-42) amyloid fibril Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 113 34 2016 E4976 84 This work combines ssNMR and EM data to present an atomic structure of amyloid beta 1-42 fibrils, which is deposited in the protein databank as PDB entry 2NAO 27469165
47 Paravastu AK Qahwash I Leapman RD Meredith SC Tycko R Seeded growth of β-amyloid fibrils from Alzheimer’s brain-derived fibrils produces a distinct fibril structure Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106 18 2009 7443 7448 19376973
48* Lu J-X Qiang W Yau W-M Schwieters CD Meredith SC Tycko R Molecular Structure of β-Amyloid Fibrils in Alzheimer’s Disease Brain Tissue Cell 154 6 2013 1257 1268 Reports the conformation of Aβ1-40 fibrils seeded by patient material. The resulting structure represents one of the first examplles of a more twisted sheet amyloid core that recurs in later fibril structures. Listed in the PDB as entry 2M4J 24034249
49* Qiang W Yau W-M Lu J-X Collinge J Tycko R Structural variation in amyloid-β fibrils from Alzheimer’s disease clinical subtypes Nature 2017 541 7636 217 221 Systematic ssNMR studies of brain-seeded Aβ fibrils point to structural differences in the amyloid seeds present in patients suffering from different sub-types of Alzheimer’s disease 28052060
50 Korshavn KJ Satriano C Lin Y Zhang R Dulchavsky M Bhunia A Ivanova MI Lee Y-H La Rosa C Lim MH Ramamoorthy A Reduced Lipid Bilayer Thickness Regulates the Aggregation and Cytotoxicity of Amyloid-β J Biol Chem 292 11 2017 4638 4650 28154182
51* Delgado DA Doherty K Cheng Q Kim H Xu D Dong H Grewer C Qiang W Distinct Membrane Disruption Pathways Are Induced by 40-Residue β-Amyloid Peptides J Biol Chem 291 23 2016 12233 12244 One of several recent papers by the Qiang ssNMR research group investigating the effect of lipid membranes on amyloid beta misfolding and aggregation, and (here) the effect of the polypeptide aggregates on the membrane. Note that membrane disruption is one among various candidates for potential mechanisms behind the observed Gain of Toxic Function associated with disease-causing amyloidogenesis 27056326
52 Qiang W Yau W-M Schulte J Fibrillation of β amyloid peptides in the presence of phospholipid bilayers and the consequent membrane disruption Biochim Biophys Acta 1848 1 Pt B 2015 266 276 24769158
53* Lendel C Bjerring M Dubnovitsky A Kelly RT Filippov A Antzutkin ON Nielsen NC Härd T A hexameric peptide barrel as building block of amyloid-β protofibrils Angew Chem Int Ed 53 47 2014 12756 12760 Intramolecular cross-linking is used to overcome the challenge of stablizing Aβ oligomers for ssNMR structural studies, resulting in a barrel-shaped hexameric oligomer model featuring β-hairpins
54 Chimon S Shaibat MA Jones CR Calero DC Aizezi B Ishii Y Evidence of fibril-like β-sheet structures in a neurotoxic amyloid intermediate of Alzheimer’s β-amyloid Nat Struct Mol Biol 14 12 2007 1157 1164 18059284
55* Scheidt HA Morgado I Huster D Solid-state NMR Reveals a Close Structural Relationship between Amyloid-β Protofibrils and Oligomers J Biol Chem 287 27 2012 22822 22826 In this paper a specific antibody is used to stabilize amyloid beta protofibrils to facilitate their characterization by solid-state NMR, as an alternative approach to overcoming the challenge of preparing a sufficiently stable and homogeneous preparation 22589542
56 Kotler SA Brender JR Vivekanandan S Suzuki Y Yamamoto K Monette M Krishnamoorthy J Walsh P Cauble M Holl MMB Marsh ENG Ramamoorthy A High-resolution NMR characterization of low abundance oligomers of amyloid-β without purification Sci Rep 5 1 2015 11811 26138908
57 Lopez del Amo JM Fink U Dasari M Grelle G Wanker EE Bieschke J Reif B Structural properties of EGCG-induced, nontoxic Alzheimer’s disease Aβ oligomers J Mol Biol 421 4–5 2012 517 524 22300765
58 Sarkar B Mithu VS Chandra B Mandal A Chandrakesan M Bhowmik D Madhu PK Maiti S Significant structural differences between transient amyloid-β oligomers and less-toxic fibrils in regions known to harbor familial Alzheimer’s mutations Angew Chem Int Ed 53 27 2014 6888 6892
59 Tay WM Huang D Rosenberry TL Paravastu AK The Alzheimer’s Amyloid-β(1–42) Peptide Forms Off-Pathway Oligomers and Fibrils That Are Distinguished Structurally by Intermolecular Organization J Mol Biol 425 14 2013 2494 2508 23583777
60* Chandra B Bhowmik D Maity BK Mote KR Dhara D Venkatramani R Maiti S Madhu PK Major Reaction Coordinates Linking Transient Amyloid- β Oligomers to Fibrils Measured at Atomic Level Biophys J 113 4 2017 805 816 One of several ssNMR studies that indicate that pre-fibrillar amyloid beta oligomers feature similar beta strand segments to what is found in mature fibrils, with their key difference being reflected in their tertiary or supramolecular organization 28834717
61 Tycko R Wickner RB Molecular Structures of Amyloid and Prion Fibrils: Consensus versus Controversy Acc Chem Res 46 7 2013 1487 1496 23294335
62 Serra-Batiste M Ninot-Pedrosa M Bayoumi M Gairí M Maglia G Carulla N Aβ42 assembles into specific β-barrel pore-forming oligomers in membrane-mimicking environments Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2016 201605104
63 Sandberg A Luheshi LM Söllvander S Pereira de Barros T Macao B Knowles TPJ Biverstål H Lendel C Ekholm-Petterson F Dubnovitsky A Lannfelt L Dobson CM Härd T Stabilization of neurotoxic Alzheimer amyloid-β oligomers by protein engineering Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107 35 2010 15595 15600 20713699
64 Huang D Zimmerman MI Martin PK Nix AJ Rosenberry TL Paravastu AK Antiparallel β-Sheet Structure within the C-Terminal Region of 42-Residue Alzheimer’s Amyloid-β Peptides When They Form 150-kDa Oligomers J Mol Biol 427 13 2015 2319 2328 25889972
65 Doi T Masuda Y Irie K Akagi K-I Monobe Y Imazawa T Takegoshi K Solid-state NMR analysis of the β-strand orientation of the protofibrils of amyloid β-protein Biochem Biophys Res Commun 428 4 2012 458 462 23131555
66* Tuttle MD Comellas G Nieuwkoop AJ Covell DJ Berthold DA Kloepper KD Courtney JM Kim JK Barclay AM Kendall A Wan W Stubbs G Schwieters CD Lee VM-Y George JM Rienstra CM Solid-state NMR structure of a pathogenic fibril of full-length human α-synuclein Nat Struct Mol Biol 2016 23 5 409 415 Atomic resolution structure of a-synuclein amyloid fibrils, with the atomic coordinates in the PDB as entry 2N0A 27018801
67 Xiang S Biernat J Mandelkow E Becker S Linser R Backbone assignment for minimal protein amounts of low structural homogeneity in the absence of deuteration Chem Commun 52 21 2016 4002 4005
68 Comellas G Lemkau LR Zhou DH George JM Rienstra CM Structural intermediates during α-synuclein fibrillogenesis on phospholipid vesicles J Am Chem Soc 134 11 2012 5090 5099 22352310
69 Lv G Kumar A Giller K Orcellet ML Riedel D Fernández CO Becker S Lange A Structural comparison of mouse and human α-synuclein amyloid fibrils by solid-state NMR J Mol Biol 420 1–2 2012 99 111 22516611
70 Verasdonck J Bousset L Gath J Melki R Böckmann A Meier BH Further exploration of the conformational space of α-synuclein fibrils: solid-state NMR assignment of a high-pH polymorph Biomol NMR Assign 10 1 2016 5 12 26318307
71 Gath J Bousset L Habenstein B Melki R Böckmann A Meier BH Unlike Twins: An NMR Comparison of Two α-Synuclein Polymorphs Featuring Different Toxicity PLoS ONE 9 3 2014 e90659 24599158
72 Theint T Nadaud PS Aucoin D Helmus JJ Pondaven SP Surewicz K Surewicz WK Jaroniec CP Species-dependent structural polymorphism of Y145Stop prion protein amyloid revealed by solid-state NMR spectroscopy Nat Commun 8 1 2017 753 28963458
73 Müller H Brener O Andreoletti O Piechatzek T Willbold D Legname G Heise H Progress towards structural understanding of infectious sheep PrP-amyloid Prion 8 5 2014 344 358 25482596
74 Groveman BR Dolan MA Taubner LM Kraus A Wickner RB Caughey B Parallel In-register Intermolecular β-Sheet Architectures for Prion-seeded Prion Protein (PrP) Amyloids J Biol Chem 289 35 2014 24129 24142 25028516
75 Helmus JJ Surewicz K Surewicz WK Jaroniec CP Conformational flexibility of Y145Stop human prion protein amyloid fibrils probed by solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy J Am Chem Soc 132 7 2010 2393 2403 20121096
76 Theint T Nadaud PS Surewicz K Surewicz WK Jaroniec CP 13C and 15N chemical shift assignments of mammalian Y145Stop prion protein amyloid fibrils Biomol NMR Assign 11 1 2016 75 80 28004358
77 Frederick KK Debelouchina GT Kayatekin C Dorminy T Jacavone AC Griffin RG Lindquist SL Distinct Prion Strains Are Defined by Amyloid Core Structure and Chaperone Binding Site Dynamics Chem Biol 21 2 2014 295 305 24485763
78 Luckgei N Schütz AK Bousset L Habenstein B Sourigues Y Gardiennet C Meier BH Melki R Böckmann A The Conformation of the Prion Domain of Sup353p in Isolation and in the Full-Length Protein Angew Chem Int Ed 52 48 2013 12741 12744
79 Frederick KK Michaelis VK Caporini MA Andreas LB Debelouchina GT Griffin RG Lindquist SL Combining DNP NMR with segmental and specific labeling to study a yeast prion protein strain that is not parallel in-register Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 114 14 2017 3642 3647 28330994
80 Gorkovskiy A Thurber KR Tycko R Wickner RB Locating folds of the in-register parallel β-sheet of the Sup35p prion domain infectious amyloid Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111 43 2014 E4615 E4622 25313080
81 Wan W Bian W McDonald M Kijac A Wemmer DE Stubbs G Heterogeneous Seeding of a Prion Structure by a Generic Amyloid Form of the Fungal Prion-forming Domain HET-s(218–289) J Biol Chem 288 41 2013 29604 29612 23986444
82 Bauer T Dotta C Balacescu L Gath J Hunkeler A Böckmann A Meier BH Line-Broadening in Low-Temperature Solid-State NMR Spectra of Fibrils J Biomol NMR 67 1 2017 51 61 28161758
83 Smith AA Testori E Cadalbert R Meier BH Ernst M Characterization of fibril dynamics on three timescales by solid-state NMR J Biomol NMR 65 3–4 2016 171 191 27423891
84* Schubeis T Lührs T Ritter C Unambiguous Assignment of Short- and Long- Range Structural Restraints by Solid-State NMR Spectroscopy with Segmental Isotope Labeling ChemBioChem 2014 16 1 51 54 (This work describes the use of segmental labeling in the Het-s amyloid fibril studies by solid-state NMR. See also the Methods review article by some of these authors elsewhere in this bibliography 25394265
85* Schubeis T Nagaraj M Ritter C Segmental Isotope Labeling of Insoluble Proteins for Solid-State NMR by Protein Trans-Splicing Methods Mol Biol 1495 Chapter 10 2017 147 160 Review of methods used for the segmental labeling of proteins for amyloid structural studies by solid-state NMR. This is likely to become an ever more powerful approach for future ssNMR studies, with a gradually growing list of successful applications in the literature (and in this review) 27714615
86 Helmus JJ Surewicz K Nadaud PS Surewicz WK Jaroniec CP Molecular conformation and dynamics of the Y145Stop variant of human prion protein in amyloid fibrils Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105 17 2008 6284 6289 18436646
87 Lin H-K Boatz JC Krabbendam IE Kodali R Hou Z Wetzel R Dolga AM Poirier MA van der Wel PCA Fibril polymorphism affects immobilized non-amyloid flanking domains of huntingtin exon1 rather than its polyglutamine core Nat Commun 8 2017 15462 28537272
88 Bates GP Dorsey R Gusella JF Hayden MR Kay C Leavitt BR Nance M Ross CA Scahill RI Wetzel R Wild EJ Tabrizi SJ Huntington Disease Nat Rev Dis Primers 1 1 2015 15005 27188817
89 Mishra R Hoop CL Kodali R Sahoo B van der Wel PCA Wetzel R Serine phosphorylation suppresses huntingtin amyloid accumulation by altering protein aggregation properties J Mol Biol 424 1–2 2012 1 14 22999956
90 Kar K Hoop CL Drombosky KW Baker MA Kodali R Arduini I van der Wel PCA Horne WS Wetzel R β-hairpin-mediated nucleation of polyglutamine amyloid formation J Mol Biol 425 7 2013 1183 1197 23353826
91 Hoop CL Lin H-K Kar K Hou Z Poirier MA Wetzel R van der Wel PCA Polyglutamine amyloid core boundaries and flanking domain dynamics in huntingtin fragment fibrils determined by solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance Biochemistry 53 42 2014 6653 6666 25280367
92 Isas JM Langen R Siemer AB Solid-State Nuclear Magnetic Resonance on the Static and Dynamic Domains of Huntingtin Exon-1 Fibrils Biochemistry 54 25 2015 3942 3949 26020223
93 Isas JM Langen A Isas MC Pandey NK Siemer AB Formation and Structure of Wild Type Huntingtin Exon-1 Fibrils Biochemistry 56 28 2017 3579 3586 28621522
94* Sivanandam VN Jayaraman M Hoop CL Kodali R Wetzel R van der Wel PCA The aggregation-enhancing huntingtin N-terminus is helical in amyloid fibrils J Am Chem Soc 133 12 2011 4558 4566 First report of the use of ssNMR to probe polyglutamine aggregates implicated in Huntington’s Disease and other polyglutamine expansion diseases. Dynamics measurements enable the selective identification of the amyloid versus (more mobile) flanking regions in amyloid fibrils of a short N-terminal fragment of the huntingtin protein, even in absence of isotopic labeling 21381744
95* Hora M Carballo Pacheco M Weber B Morris VK Wittkopf A Buchner J Strodel B Reif B Epigallocatechin-3-gallate preferentially induces aggregation of amyloidogenic immunoglobulin light chains Sci Rep 7 2017 41515 This new paper on light chain amyloidosis is one of several recent ssNMR studies that probe the impact of epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) on the aggregation of amyloidogenic proteins. This is type of investigation helps our understanding of aggregation inhibitors and modulators, which may become useful for disease treatments 28128355
96* Piehl DW Blancas-Mejía LM Wall JS Kennel SJ Ramirez-Alvarado M Rienstra CM Immunoglobulin Light Chains Form an Extensive and Highly Ordered Fibril Involving the N- and C-Termini ACS Omega 2 2 2017 712 720 One of several recent ssNMR papers on light chain amyloid formation. Includes a rare example of ssNMR data obtained on actual (unlabeled) patient aggregates (although for now limited to a 1D 13C spectrum) 28261692
97 Piehl DW Blancas-Mejía LM Ramirez-Alvarado M Rienstra CM Solid-state NMR chemical shift assignments for AL-09 VL immunoglobulin light chain fibrils Biomol NMR Assign 11 1 2017 45 50 27771830
98 Bateman DA Tycko R Wickner RB Experimentally derived structural constraints for amyloid fibrils of wild-type transthyretin Biophys J 101 10 2011 2485 2492 22098747
99 Lim KH Dasari AKR Hung I Gan Z Kelly JW Wright PE Wemmer DE Solid-State NMR Studies Reveal Native-like β-Sheet Structures in Transthyretin Amyloid Biochemistry 55 37 2016 5272 5278 27589034
100 Mompeán M Hervás R Xu Y Tran TH Guarnaccia C Buratti E Baralle F Tong L Carrión-Vázquez M McDermott AE Laurents DV Structural Evidence of Amyloid Fibril Formation in the Putative Aggregation Domain of TDP-43 J Phys Chem Lett 6 13 2015 2608 2615 26266742
101* Murray DT Kato M Lin Y Thurber KR Hung I McKnight SL Tycko R Structure of FUS Protein Fibrils and Its Relevance to Self-Assembly and Phase Separation of Low-Complexity Domains Cell 2017 171 615 627 (Like other amyloidogenic proteins, the low sequence complexity domain of FUS assembles into a well-defined amyloid core structure, flanked by unstructured flexible regions. The order core structure is deposited in the PDB as entry 5W3N 28942918
102 Rodriguez Camargo DC Tripsianes K Buday K Franko A Göbl C Hartlmüller C Sarkar R Aichler M Mettenleiter G Schulz M Böddrich A Erck C Martens H Walch AK Madl T Wanker EE Conrad M de Angelis MH Reif B The redox environment triggers conformational changes and aggregation of hIAPP in Type II Diabetes Sci Rep 7 2017 44041 28287098
103 Su Y Sarell CJ Eddy MT Debelouchina GT Andreas LB Pashley CL Radford SE Griffin RG Secondary Structure in the Core of Amyloid Fibrils Formed from Human β 2m and its Truncated Variant ΔN6 J Am Chem Soc 136 17 2014 6313 6325 24679070
104 Fowler DM Koulov AV Balch WE Kelly JW Functional amyloid--from bacteria to humans Trends Biochem Sci 32 5 2007 217 224 17412596
105* Shewmaker F McGlinchey RP Thurber KR McPhie P Dyda F Tycko R Wickner RB The Functional Curli Amyloid Is Not Based on In-register Parallel β-Sheet Structure J Biol Chem 284 37 2009 25065 25076 This ssNMR study of the functional curli amyloid notes the apparent structural analogy to the Het-s fibril structure, with neither adopting the parallel in-register configuration of many disease-related amyloids, but also the observation that curli and Het-s fibrils nonetheless gave quite different ssNMR linewidths 19574225
106 McCrate OA Zhou X Reichhardt C Cegelski L Sum of the parts: composition and architecture of the bacterial extracellular matrix J Mol Biol 425 22 2013 4286 4294 23827139
107* Schubeis T Yuan P Ahmed M Nagaraj M van Rossum B-J Ritter C Untangling a Repetitive Amyloid Sequence: Correlating Biofilm-Derived and Segmentally Labeled Curli Fimbriae by Solid-State NMR Spectroscopy Angew Chem Int Ed 54 49 2015 14669 14672 One of the first practical uses of segmental labeling for studying (challenging) amyloid assemblies by ssNMR
108 Hu K-N McGlinchey RP Wickner RB Tycko R Segmental polymorphism in a functional amyloid Biophys J 101 9 2011 2242 2250 22067164
109 Raveendra BL Siemer AB Puthanveettil SV Hendrickson WA Kandel ER McDermott AE Characterization of prion-like conformational changes of the neuronal isoform of Aplysia CPEB Nat Struct Mol Biol 20 4 2013 495 501 23435382
110* Falk AS Siemer AB Dynamic domains of amyloid fibrils can be site-specifically assigned with proton detected 3D NMR spectroscopy J Biomol NMR 66 3 2016 159 162 This paper discusses in some detail the biological importance, dynamic features and ssNMR characterization of non-amyloid flanking domains, which are seen in a variety of misfolded protein aggregates 27766502
111 Cervantes SA Bajakian TH Soria MA Falk AS Service RJ Langen R Siemer AB Identification and Structural Characterization of the N-terminal Amyloid Core of Orb2 isoform A Sci Rep 6 1 2016 38265 27922050
112 Li J McQuade T Siemer AB Napetschnig J Moriwaki K Hsiao Y-S Damko E Moquin D Walz T McDermott A Chan FK-M Wu H The RIP1/RIP3 Necrosome Forms a Functional Amyloid Signaling Complex Required for Programmed Necrosis Cell 150 2 2012 339 350 22817896
113 Nespovitaya N Gath J Barylyuk K Seuring C Meier BH Riek R Dynamic Assembly and Disassembly of Functional β-Endorphin Amyloid Fibrils J Am Chem Soc 138 3 2016 846 856 26699104
114* Nagy-Smith K Moore E Schneider J Tycko R Molecular structure of monomorphic peptide fibrils within a kinetically trapped hydrogel network Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 112 32 2015 9816 9821 Structure of a peptide fibril, reported in the PDB as entry 2N1E 26216960
115 Li S Mehta AK Sidorov AN Orlando TM Jiang Z Anthony NR Lynn DG Design of Asymmetric Peptide Bilayer Membranes J Am Chem Soc 138 10 2016 3579 3586 26942690
116 Ni R Childers WS Hardcastle KI Mehta AK Lynn DG Remodeling Cross-β Nanotube Surfaces with Peptide/Lipid Chimeras Angew Chem Int Ed 51 27 2012 6635 6638
117 Cormier AR Pang X Zimmerman MI Zhou H-X Paravastu AK Molecular Structure of RADA16-I Designer Self-Assembling Peptide Nanofibers ACS Nano 7 9 2013 7562 7572 23977885
118 Leonard SR Cormier AR Pang X Zimmerman MI Zhou H-X Paravastu AK Solid-state NMR evidence for β-hairpin structure within MAX8 designer peptide nanofibers Biophys J 105 1 2013 222 230 23823242
119 Kardos J Okuno D Kawai T Hagihara Y Yumoto N Kitagawa T Závodszky P Naiki H Goto Y Structural studies reveal that the diverse morphology of β(2)-microglobulin aggregates is a reflection of different molecular architectures Biochim Biophys Acta 1753 1 2005 108 120 16185940
120 Yoshimura Y Lin Y Yagi H Lee Y-H Kitayama H Sakurai K So M Ogi H Naiki H Goto Y Distinguishing crystal-like amyloid fibrils and glass-like amorphous aggregates from their kinetics of formation Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109 36 2012 14446 14451 22908252
121 Winkler J Tyedmers J Bukau B Mogk A Chaperone networks in protein disaggregation and prion propagation J Struct Biol 179 2 2012 152 160 22580344
122 So M Hall D Goto Y Revisiting supersaturation as a factor determining amyloid fibrillation Curr Opin Struc Biol 36 2016 32 39
123 Liang C Ni R Smith JE Childers WS Mehta AK Lynn DG Kinetic Intermediates in Amyloid Assembly J Am Chem Soc 136 43 2014 15146 15149 25313920
124 De Paëpe Gl Dipolar Recoupling in Magic Angle Spinning Solid-State Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Ann Rev Phys Chem 63 1 2012 661 684 22404583
125 Chan JCC Solid-State NMR Techniques for the Structural Determination of Amyloid Fibrils Chan JCC Solid State NMR Springer Berlin Heidelberg Berlin, Heidelberg 2012 47 88
126 Colvin MT Silvers R Frohm B Su Y Linse S Griffin RG High resolution structural characterization of Aβ42 amyloid fibrils by magic angle spinning NMR J Am Chem Soc 137 23 2015 7509 7518 26001057
127 van der Wel PCA Lewandowski JR Griffin RG Structural characterization of GNNQQNY amyloid fibrils by magic angle spinning NMR Biochemistry 49 44 2010 9457 9469 20695483
128 Lopez del Amo JM Schneider D Loquet A Lange A Reif B Cryogenic solid state NMR studies of fibrils of the Alzheimer’s disease amyloid-β peptide: perspectives for DNP J Biomol NMR 56 4 2013 359 363 23793606
129 Nagaraj M Franks TW Saeidpour S Schubeis T Oschkinat H Ritter C van Rossum B-J Surface Binding of TOTAPOL Assists Structural Investigations of Amyloid Fibrils by Dynamic Nuclear Polarization NMR Spectroscopy ChemBioChem 17 14 2016 1308 1311 27147408
130 Debelouchina GT Bayro MJ Fitzpatrick AW Ladizhansky V Colvin MT Caporini MA Jaroniec CP Bajaj VS Rosay M MacPhee CE Vendruscolo M Maas WE Dobson CM Griffin RG Higher Order Amyloid Fibril Structure by MAS NMR and DNP Spectroscopy J Am Chem Soc 135 51 2013 19237 19247 24304221
131 Su Y Andreas L Griffin RG Magic angle spinning NMR of proteins: high-frequency dynamic nuclear polarization and (1)H detection Annu Rev Biochem 84 1 2015 465 497 25839340
132* Frederick KK Michaelis VK Corzilius B Ong T-C Jacavone AC Griffin RG Lindquist SL Sensitivity-Enhanced NMR Reveals Alterations in Protein Structure by Cellular Milieus Cell 163 3 2015 620 628 This study is an example of how DNP enhancement can be used to study labeled protein fibrils in various different contexts, including in conditions where the target protein is relatively dilute 26456111
133 Ni QZ Markhasin E Can TV Corzilius B Tan KO Barnes AB Daviso E Su Y Herzfeld J Griffin RG Peptide and Protein Dynamics and Low-Temperature/DNP Magic Angle Spinning NMR J Phys Chem B 2017 121 19 4997 5006 28437077
134 Parthasarathy S Nishiyama Y Ishii Y Sensitivity and Resolution Enhanced Solid-State NMR for Paramagnetic Systems and Biomolecules under Very Fast Magic Angle Spinning Acc Chem Res 46 9 2013 2127 2135 23889329
135 Andreas LB Jaudzems K Stanek J Lalli D Bertarello A Le Marchand T Cala-De Paepe D Kotelovica S Akopjana I Knott B Wegner S Engelke F Lesage A Emsley L Tars K Herrmann T Pintacuda G Structure of fully protonated proteins by proton-detected magic-angle spinning NMR Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 113 33 2016 9187 9192 27489348
136 Caporini MA Bajaj VS Veshtort M Fitzpatrick A MacPhee CE Vendruscolo M Dobson CM Griffin RG Accurate determination of interstrand distances and alignment in amyloid fibrils by magic angle spinning NMR J Phys Chem B 114 42 2010 13555 13561 20925357
137 Tycko R Symmetry-based constant-time homonuclear dipolar recoupling in solid state NMR J Chem Phys 126 6 2007 064506 064506 17313228
138 Mandal A Boatz JC Wheeler T Van der Wel PCA On the use of ultracentrifugal devices for routine sample preparation in biomolecular magic-angle-spinning NMR J Biomol NMR 67 3 2017 165 178 28229262
139 Andronesi OC Becker S Seidel K Heise H Young HS Baldus M Determination of membrane protein structure and dynamics by magic-angle-spinning solid-state NMR spectroscopy J Am Chem Soc 127 37 2005 12965 12974 16159291
140 Mandal A Hoop CL DeLucia M Kodali R Kagan VE Ahn J van der Wel PCA Structural Changes and Proapoptotic Peroxidase Activity of Cardiolipin-Bound Mitochondrial Cytochrome c Biophys J 109 9 2015 1873 1884 26536264
141* Jaroniec CP Structural studies of proteins by paramagnetic solid-state NMR spectroscopy J Magn Reson 253 2015 50 59 Review of the use of PREs and other paramagnetic interactions to obtain longer range ssNMR constraints 25797004
142 Wong VWC Reid DG Chow WY Rajan R Green M Brooks RA Duer MJ Preparation of highly and generally enriched mammalian tissues for solid state NMR J Biomol NMR 63 2 2015 119 123 26407607
143 Cecchi C Stefani M The amyloid-cell membrane system. The interplay between the biophysical features of oligomers/fibrils and cell membrane defines amyloid toxicity Biophysical Chemistry 182 2013 30 43 23820236
144 Walsh P Vanderlee G Yau J Campeau J Sim VL Yip CM Sharpe S The mechanism of membrane disruption by cytotoxic amyloid oligomers formed by prion protein(106–126) is dependent on bilayer composition J Biol Chem 289 15 2014 10419 10430 24554723
145 Brender JR Heyl DL Samisetti S Kotler SA Osborne JM Pesaru RR Ramamoorthy A Membrane disordering is not sufficient for membrane permeabilization by islet amyloid polypeptide: studies of IAPP(20–29) fragments Phys Chem Chem Phys 15 23 2013 8908 23493863
146 Habchi J Arosio P Perni M Costa AR Yagi-Utsumi M Joshi P Chia S Cohen SIA Müller MBD Linse S Nollen EAA Dobson CM Knowles TPJ Vendruscolo M An anticancer drug suppresses the primary nucleation reaction that initiates the production of the toxic Aβ42 aggregates linked with Alzheimer’s disease Sci Adv 2 2 2016 e1501244 26933687
147 Toth G Gardai SJ Zago W Bertoncini CW Cremades N Roy SL Tambe MA Rochet J-C Galvagnion C Skibinski G Finkbeiner S Bova M Regnstrom K Chiou S-S Johnston J Callaway K Anderson JP Jobling MF Buell AK Yednock TA Knowles TPJ Vendruscolo M Christodoulou J Dobson CM Schenk D McConlogue L Targeting the Intrinsically Disordered Structural Ensemble of α-Synuclein by Small Molecules as a Potential Therapeutic Strategy for Parkinson’s Disease PLoS ONE 9 2 2014 e87133 24551051
148 Kar K Baker MA Lengyel GA Hoop CL Kodali R Byeon I-J Horne WS van der Wel PCA Wetzel R Backbone Engineering within a Latent β-Hairpin Structure to Design Inhibitors of Polyglutamine Amyloid Formation J Mol Biol 429 2 2017 308 323 27986569
149 Cheng B Gong H Xiao H Petersen RB Zheng L Huang K Inhibiting toxic aggregation of amyloidogenic proteins: a therapeutic strategy for protein misfolding diseases Biochim Biophys Acta 1830 10 2013 4860 4871 23820032
150 Mithu VS Sarkar B Bhowmik D Das AK Chandrakesan M Maiti S Madhu PK Curcumin alters the salt bridge-containing turn region in amyloid β(1-42) aggregates J Biol Chem 289 16 2014 11122 11131 24599958
151 Radwan M Wood RJ Sui X Hatters DM When proteostasis goes bad: Protein aggregation in the cell IUBMB Life 69 2 2017 49 54 28066979
152 Kingsley CN Brubaker WD Markovic S Diehl A Brindley AJ Oschkinat H Martin RW Preferential and Specific Binding of Human αB-Crystallin to a Cataract-Related Variant of γS-Crystallin Structure 21 12 2013 2221 2227 24183572
153* Mainz A Peschek J Stavropoulou M Back KC Bardiaux B Asami S Prade E Peters C Weinkauf S Buchner J Reif B The chaperone αB-crystallin uses different interfaces to capture an amorphous and an amyloid client Nat Struct Mol Biol 22 11 2015 898 905 A recent example of the use of solid-state NMR to examine the functional and structural features of an oligomeric chaperone. Pharmacological modulation of chaperone activity is seen as one key approach for treating protein aggregation diseases, which will require a better understanding of their mechanism of action 26458046
154 Baldwin AJ Walsh P Hansen DF Hilton GR Benesch JLP Sharpe S Kay LE Probing Dynamic Conformations of the High-Molecular-Weight αB-Crystallin Heat Shock Protein Ensemble by NMR Spectroscopy J Am Chem Soc 134 37 2012 15343 15350 22916679
