LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


0335405
29764
Chem Soc Rev
Chem Soc Rev
Chemical Society reviews
0306-0012
1460-4744

29498733
5882534
10.1039/c7cs00404d
NIHMS948444
Article
Optogenetically controlled protein kinases for regulation of cellular signaling
Leopold Anna V. 1#
Chernov Konstantin G. 1#
Verkhusha Vladislav V. 12*
1 Department of Biochemistry and Developmental Biology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki 00290, Finland
2 Department of Anatomy and Structural Biology, and Gruss-Lipper Biophotonics Center, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA
* Correspondence: vladislav.verkhusha@einstein.yu.edu; Tel.: +1-718-4308591; Fax: +1-718-4308996
# These authors contributed equally.

8 3 2018
03 4 2018
03 4 2019
47 7 24542484
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Protein kinases are involved in the regulation of many cellular processes including cell differentiation, survival, migration, axon guidance and neuronal plasticity. A growing set of optogenetic tools, termed opto-kinases, allows activation and inhibition of different protein kinases with light. The optogenetic regulation enables fast, reversible and non-invasive manipulation of protein kinase activities, complementing traditional methods, such as treatment with growth factors, protein kinase inhibitors or chemical dimerizers. In this review, we summarize properties of the existing optogenetic tools for controlling of tyrosine kinases and serine-threonine kinases. We discuss how the opto-kinases can be applied for studies of spatial and temporal aspects of protein kinase signaling in cells and organisms. We compare approaches for chemical and optogenetic regulation of protein kinase activity and present guidelines for selection of opto-kinases and equipment to control them with light. We also describe strategies to engineer novel opto-kinases on the basis of various photoreceptors.

Optogenetics
opto-kinase
RTK
photoreceptor
phosphorylation
photoactivation

1. INTRODUCTION

Reversible phosphorylation is a key regulatory event in cell signaling. Eukaryotic proteins are phosphorylated at serine, threonine and tyrosine residues by protein kinases. Phosphorylation downregulates and upregulates protein activity, tags proteins for degradation and enables them to interact with other proteins1, 2. Protein kinases can be classified into typical eukaryotic protein kinases (ePKs) that share a significant structural similarity in their protein kinase domains (Figure 1A–H) and atypical eukaryotic protein kinases that lack this similarity2. Protein kinases phosphorylate other proteins, building complex chains of phosphorylation events. These chains include the most important kinase signaling cascades: the mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (MAPK/ERK) pathway, the Janus kinase (JAK) pathway and the Akt (protein kinase B) pathway3.

The strategy of specific inhibition or activation of a certain tier in protein kinase cascade was useful for dissecting cellular signaling and for establishing links between the activity of tiers and the physiological outcome4. However, this approach does not allow the regulation of such parameters as the duration of the protein kinase signaling or the localization of the activated protein kinases. These parameters can be varied with the help of such methods as the usage of microfluidic devices for temporarily defined growth factor delivery into culture medium5, antagonistic reversal of the original signal with the help of different combinations of chemically induced dimerizers (CIDs)6 and immobilizing patterns of growth factors on fibrin substrates to achieve spatially directed guidance of cell migration7.

However, the aforementioned methods are limited in spatiotemporal precision. For example, employment of immobilizing patterns of growth factors on fibrin substrates allows spatial, but not temporal regulation of protein kinases. Although microfluidic devices were used to control biological processes at single-cell level, they do not allow to target kinase activity in specific subcellular compartments. In contrast, optogenetics provides control over protein activity with unprecedented spatiotemporal precision by exploiting natural genetically encoded photoreceptors. Optogenetics has become the reliable method of choice for researchers wanting to probe both dynamic and spatial aspects of protein kinase signaling at the cellular and the entire organism levels. Initially, optogenetics emerged as a method that allows to precisely activate or inhibit individual neurons with the help of single-component, opsin-based systems. Modern optogenetics employs a wide variety of genetically encoded tools that allow light-control of numerous biological processes including protein phosphorylation8, 9.

Although the number of light-controlled protein kinases is not large, it is rapidly expanding, and we anticipate the rise of the new optogenetic tools and improvement of the old ones. Multiplexing of opto-kinases with spectrally compatible biosensors for kinase activities should allow simultaneous light-control and monitoring of intracellular kinase pathways in cultured cells and in vivo. Spectral multiplexing of several kinase biosensors in a cell has been already applied to monitor activity of calmodulin-dependent kinase IIα (CaMKIIα) and protein kinase C (PKC)10 or ERK and Akt kinase activities11. Furthermore, far-red optogenetic tools for regulation of kinase signaling should allow their simultaneous use with common fluorescent proteins in small animal models12, 13. Perspectives of use of spectral multiplexing in cell signaling and fluorescent proteins in translocation reporters were recently reviewed1014. Moreover, in vivo strategies of so called all-optical electrophysiology utilizing channelrhodopsins can be adapted for spectral multiplexing of opto-kinases with kinase biosensors and reporters15–17.

2. GROUPS, STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF PROTEIN KINASES

2.1. Structure of kinase domain of the mammalian protein kinases

Structurally, mammalian protein kinases are subdivided into two groups. The larger group encompasses ePKs, which share a structurally related catalytic core. The second group consists of atypical protein kinases, which lack this structural similarity. It has been proposed that atypical kinases are derived from a distinct phyletic group, while all ePKs share a common ancestor and a conserved region of approximately 200–250 amino acids that confers kinase activity1819.

The first eukaryotic protein kinase whose structure was resolved was cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA) that possesses the catalytic kinase core similar to majority of mammalian protein kinases (Figure 1A). The catalytic domain of PKA consists of the N-terminal and C-terminal lobes that are separated by the catalytic cleft. The binding pocket for ATP and the substrate is located inside the catalytic cleft. The N-lobe is smaller than the C-lobe and consists of five β-strands and one αC-helix, which is embedded between them20. The N-lobe also contains a highly conserved flexible glycine-rich loop (GXGXXG) located between the two first β-strands. This flexible loop participates in the positioning of the γ-phosphate of ATP for catalysis21.

The C-lobe is mostly helical, but contains one β-sheet. The helical part of the C-lobe participates in substrate recognition, whereas the β-sheet participates in the phosphate transfer from ATP to the protein substrate. The conserved kinase catalytic core is accompanied by various regulatory domains, such as autoinhibitory C-terminal motif of Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase (CAMK) (Figure 1E), extracellular immunoglobulin-like domains of receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) (Figure 1F), N-terminal SH2 homology motif (Figure 1G) and N-terminal inhibitory domains of non-receptor tyrosine kinases (NRTKs) (Figure 1H). This regulatory diversity of protein kinases was developed by natural selection over the course of billions of years22. Swapping kinase regulatory domains with light-sensitive domains of photoreceptors enabled the development of a substantial set of light-regulatable protein kinases. Below, we describe major groups of serine/threonine and tyrosine kinases with an emphasis on the regulatory mechanism of protein kinase activity.

2.2. Major protein kinase groups

According to their substrate specificity, mammalian protein kinases are subdivided into two groups, serine/threonine and tyrosine kinases. The majority of protein kinases are serine/threonine kinases, while tyrosine kinases are the smaller group23. Both groups catalyze the reaction of phosphate transfer from ATP (in the presence of Mg2+) to the substrate hydroxyls of serine or threonine (in the case of serine/threonine kinases) or tyrosine (in the case of tyrosine kinases)23.

2.2.1. Serine/Threonine protein kinases

The subgroup of serine/threonine kinases consists of several major protein kinase families, including cAMP-dependent protein kinases (AGC), cGMP-dependent protein kinases (CMGC), glycogen synthase kinases (GSK) and Ca2+/calmodulin dependent protein kinases (CAMK).

cAMP-dependent protein kinases (AGC kinases)

PKA was the first discovered member of cAMP-dependent protein kinase family. This family includes cytoplasmic serine/threonine protein kinases that share structural similarity with PKA and regulated by secondary messengers, such as cAMP, phosphatidylinositol (3,4,5)-triphosphate (PIP3), Ca2+ and lipids.

Evolutionarily conserved catalytic kinase core of cAMP-dependent protein kinases is followed by the C-terminal hydrophobic motif. This motif interacts with the docking site in the N-lobe of the same kinase molecule named PDK1-interacting-fragment (PIF)-pocket and inhibits kinase (Figure 1B). After phosphorylation, hydrophobic motif undocks and binds to PIF-pocket of another kinase molecule that results in kinase activation (Figure 1B). Interaction of hydrophobic motif with the PIF-pocket is a prominent target for numerous small molecules acting as kinase inhibitors and activators24. Presumably, this interaction would be a subject of optogenetic intervention.

It is remarkable that the first studied protein kinase PKA is regulated in different manner. PKA holoenzyme consists of two constitutively active catalytic subunits inhibited by two regulatory subunits. Upon cAMP binding, an allosteric conformational change results in the release of catalytic subunits from the regulatory subunits and kinase activation.

Some of AGC kinases contain the N-terminal pleckstrin homology (PH) domain that interacts with phosphatidylinositol (3,4,5)-trisphosphate (PIP3) and targets kinase to the plasmatic membrane (PM). For example, phosphoinositide-dependent kinase 1 (PDK1) is recruited to PM upon elevation of PIP3 level where it activates other AGC kinases, including Akt (Figure 2)25. PM recruitment of these AGC kinases can be subject of optogenetic intervention and was employed for the development of opto-Akt26.

cGMP-dependent protein kinases (CMGC)

Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs), mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs), glycogen synthase kinases (GSKs), and CDK-like kinases (CLKs) are collectively termed as the CMGC group. All CMGC kinases share a unique structural feature, the CMGC insert, which is located in the C-lobe and is necessary for interaction with scaffold proteins. The CDK and MAPK families are the two largest and best-studied CMGC groups27.

CDK-family kinases are main regulators of the cell cycle. Isolated CDK catalytic core is inactive due to steric occlusion of catalytic center by αC-helix (Figure 1C). Upon interaction of kinase with cyclin, αC helix undocks from the catalytic pocket that results in CDK activation28. In mammals, CDKs are divided into three subfamilies that participate in the regulation of the cell-cycle (CDK1, CDK4, CDK5) and five subfamilies involved in the regulation of transcription (CDK7, CDK8, CDK9, CDK11, CDK20). According to their functional specialization, each CDK interacts with one or several cyclins (for example, CDK1 binds cyclins B1, B2 and B3, while CDK7 binds Cyclin-H). Intracellular concentration of cyclins oscillates and thus regulates the cell cycle progression. CDK7 in complex with cyclin H phosphorylates CDK1, CDK2, and CDK4 acting as “master kinase”29. Theoretically, the interaction of CDK with cyclins could be exploited for the development of optogenetic tools that regulate cell cycle progression.

MAPKs are the other well-studied members of the GMGC protein kinase family. Their most prominent functional feature is the 50 amino acid C-terminal MAPK fragment that confers signal specificity and participates in the recognition of the substrate docking motifs (Figure 1D)30. The most common docking motif of MAPKs is the docking motif (D-motif). The D-motif is a hydrophobic groove formed between the αD and αE helices, the β7-β8 reverse turn and the acidic patch (Figure 1D). Upon binding its signaling partner, MAPK phosphorylates the conserved threonine and tyrosine residues, separated by one amino acid (Thr-x-Tyr). The amino acid between the Thr and Tyr partially defines the MAPK specificity, along with the D-motif30. MAPKs are organized into three-tiered signaling cascades, which start from the upstream MAP kinase 3 (MAP3K) and proceed to MAP kinase 2 (MAP2K) and MAPK (Figure 2). The organization of MAPKs into their three-tiered signaling cascades will be described below.

Ca2+/calmodulin dependent protein kinases (CAMK)

CAMKs are serine/threonine kinases that are activated by the binding to the Ca2+/Calmodulin (CaM) complex. Calmodulin acts as a Ca2+ sensor responding to changes in the Ca2+ level in cells. The best-studied CAMK-family kinase, CAMKII, is a dodecameric protein. In the multimeric CAMKII, the monomeric subunits are organized into two “rings”. Each ring consists of six kinase monomers. In the inactive state, each monomer from the upper ring interacts with a monomer from the lower ring. This autoinhibiting interaction is disrupted after Ca2+/CaM binding. At this point, kinase domains are trans-phosphorylated at threonine by other kinase domains in the same ring. Therefore, in the inactive state of CAMKII, kinase monomers are inhibited by their counterparts from the other ring, while activation occurs when neighbors from the same ring interact31. The other multimeric enzyme in this family is a tetrameric phosphorylase kinase, while other CAMKs are mostly monomeric. Monomeric CAMKs are also regulated with the help of autoinhibition. Their conserved kinase domains are flanked with autoinhibitory sequences at the C-terminus. In the inactive state, the autoinhibitory sequence binds and blocks the active site of the enzyme, while the binding of Ca2+/CaM unlocks the active site and activates the CAMK molecule (Figure 1E). This autoinhibitory interaction can be targeted for the engineering of light-inducible CAMKs32.

Glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK-3)

GSK-3 is an important serine-threonine kinase that is implicated in development several pathological states, including diabetes, cancer, Alzheimer’s disease and bipolar disorder33. GSK-3 kinase is inactivated upon stimulation of cells with growth factors. For example, the stimulation of cells with insulin results in activation of PIK3 and its downstream target AKT that phosphorylates and inhibits GSK-3. That increases rates of translation and glycogen synthesis in cells. In human, there are two isoforms of kinase, GSK-3α and GSK-3β. Phosphorylation of Ser21 in GSK-3α or Ser9 in GSK-3β causes the N-terminal tail of GSK-3 to act as a pre-phosphorylated substrate, or a pseudosubstrate. This pseudosubstrate competes with substrates for substrate-binding pocket and inhibits GSK-334. Being associated with numerous diseases, GSK-3 is an important therapeutic target. The best-characterized inhibitor of GSK-3 is lithium that has been used for a long time for treatment of bipolar disorder35. Therefore, modulation of GSK-3 activity with optogenetic tools could be useful to unravel molecular mechanisms of this brain disease.

2.2.2. Tyrosine kinases

The family of tyrosine kinases encompasses the sub-families of receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) and non-receptor tyrosine kinases (NRTKs). Both families share the similar conserved bilobal structure of the catalytic domain with other ePKs, but the first group (RTKs) consists of transmembrane receptors, while the second consists of cytoplasmic proteins.

Receptor tyrosine kinases

RTKs are cell-surface receptors consisting of an extracellular domain, a transmembrane helical domain and a cytoplasmic catalytic kinase domain. The human RTK family consists of 19 subfamilies and regulates a number of processes such as the formation of new blood vessels (the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) receptor family), glucose metabolism and aging (the insulin receptor (IR) family), axon guidance and cell migration (the ephrin family and the neurotrophin receptor family). Hyperactivation of RTKs results in the development of a number of cancers, while reduced RTK activity is involved in neurodegenerative processes36–38. Inhibition of RTK activity is a common strategy for cancer therapy, and screening of RTK inhibitors has remained a hot spot in cancer drug discovery over the past two decades39.

The extracellular domains of receptor tyrosine kinases are characterized by significant diversity and may contain immunoglobulin-like (Ig-like) domains, cysteine-rich or leucine-rich repeats, EGF-like domains and some other motifs reviewed elsewhere40. They interact with the corresponding ligands, such as nerve growth factor (NGF, for the Trk family), endothelial growth factor (EGF, for the EGFR family) or insulin growth factor (IGF, for the IGFR family)40.

The transmembrane domains of RTKs connect the extracellular domains with their cytoplasmic domains, contributing to the stability of full-length receptor dimers and maintaining a signaling-competent dimeric receptor conformation41.

The cytoplasmic kinase domains of RTKs are conserved, as compared to their extracellular counterparts, and share the typical bilobed structure first described for protein kinase A42. In the simplest model of the RTK activation, RTKs are inactive as monomers and active as dimers. Ligand binding promotes the dimerization of RTK receptors, and upon dimerization, cytoplasmic catalytic domains phosphorylate each other in trans. The exception to this rule is the insulin receptor family. Receptors of this family (insulin and insulin-like growth factor receptor) exist in the PM as pre-formed covalent dimers. The binding of the ligand causes conformational changes in the receptor, which leads to the reorganization of the inactive kinase domains and thus their activation (Figure 1F)43. Most likely, other RTKs, including neurotrophin receptors, can also exist as preformed inactive dimers. In this case, the binding of the ligand causes not dimerization but conformational changes in the RTK molecule44. Despite this exception, the simplified model of receptor tyrosine kinases activation which describes them as inactive monomers (“OFF”-state) and active dimers (“ON”-state), which is sufficient for the engineering of RTKs regulated by inducible protein dimerization. Thus, chemically induced dimerization (CID) has been successfully implemented for the engineering of a number of chemically induced receptor tyrosine kinases45. As an example, the CID pair consisting of FK506 and FKBP12 has been successfully used for the engineering of a chemically controlled PDGF receptor and even a chemically controlled insulin receptor46.

Non-receptor tyrosine kinases (NRTKs)

Non-receptor tyrosine kinases are cytoplasmic proteins that can be anchored to PM due to their different N-terminus modifications. The largest NTRK subfamily is the SRC family kinases (SFK). The first member of SFK described, SRC, was identified as the gene causing cellular transformation by the Rous sarcoma virus. SFK also include such kinases a lymphocyte-specific protein kinase (LCK) and FYN. Kinases of this family have high structural similarity and consist of the N-terminal myristoylated signal (Myr), SRC homology domains SH3 and SH2, a short linker and bilobal tyrosine kinase domain, followed by a short C-terminal tail (Figure 1G–H). The N-terminal Myr peptide is necessary for the attachment of Src to the PM, where some of its signaling partners are localized. The SH3 and SH2 domains perform regulatory functions and are necessary for the interaction of Src with its binding partners47.

SFK have two tyrosines that are critical for the regulation of their activity. The first tyrosine is the negative regulatory C-terminal tyrosine (Tyr-530 in human Src), whereas the other is the catalytic tyrosine in the active site of SFK (Tyr-419 in the human Src) (Figure 1G). When the C-terminal negative regulatory tyrosine is phosphorylated, it binds to the N-terminal SH2 domain. This interaction keeps the active site of SRC closed. Dephosphorylation of the C-terminal regulatory tyrosine unlatches the active site with Tyr-419 in the activation loop and opens the SRC structure (Figure 1G)48. Then the activation loop is phosphorylated, and the SRC kinase is stabilized in the active state 49. Phosphorylation of the C-terminal inhibitory tyrosine returns the Src molecule to the inactive conformation again (Figure 1G).

The activities of ABL and focal adhesion kinase (FAK) non-receptor tyrosine kinases that are closely related to SFK are regulated through autoinhibition by the N-terminal autoinhibitory domains (Figure 1H). The N-terminal SH3 and SH2 domains of the ABL molecule interact with the kinase catalytic domain. This interaction suppresses the kinase activity of ABL, and the ABL kinase domain itself is more active than the full-size ABL molecule50. Phosphorylation of the autoinhibitory tyrosine in the SH3 domain disrupts the inhibitory interaction between the SH3 and kinase domains and allows phosphorylation of the tyrosine in the activation loop. This phosphorylation can be performed by the ABL kinases in trans or by other kinases of the SFK family (Figure 1H). The ABL tyrosine kinase domain is followed by the C-terminal domains for the binding of DNA or the cytoskeleton50. In FAK, the N-terminal four-point-one, ezrin, radixin (FERM) domain binds to the activation loop in the region of the catalytic cleft and blocks it from phosphorylation by Src51.

In the non-receptor Janus kinases (JAKs), which are members of the JAK-STAT pathway, the inhibition of kinase activity occurs with the help of a pseudokinase domain, which precedes the kinase domain. This pseudokinase domain is structurally similar to the kinase domain, but it lacks catalytic tyrosine residues. It interacts with the kinase domain and inhibits its activity. The pseudokinase domain is preceded by the N-terminal FERM and SH2 domains. These domains participate in the interaction with class I and class II cytokine receptors. Upon cytokine binding, these receptors bring together two autoinhibited JAKs into the active signaling complex (Figure 1I)52.

All these structural features of non-receptor tyrosine kinases may provide clues for the rational engineering of optically regulated non-receptor tyrosine kinases. For example, full-size molecules of FAK and ABL kinases can be split into catalytic and inhibitory parts. It is possible to attach these parts to any light-induced dimer (LID) pair (see below) and to regulate their interaction and NRTK activity using light. The dimerization of cytokine receptors and, thus, the interaction of JAKs can also be made light-inducible with an appropriate LID pair.

2.3. Major protein kinase-regulated pathways

The major protein kinase pathways reviewed here include the mitogen-activated protein kinase cascades, which are activated by growth factors, hormones and stress; the AKT pathway, which is also activated by growth factors; and the JAK/STAT pathway, which is activated by cytokines.

2.3.1. MAPK pathways

Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascades are activated by a number of cell-surface receptors, including RTKs, cytokine receptors and G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs). Each MAPK cascade consists of a three-tiered module of MAPK3K, MAP2K and MAPK, which activate each other. The upstream mitogen-activated protein kinase, MAP3K, is activated by external stimuli. MAP3K phosphorylates the following MAP2K, which, in turn, phosphorylates MAPK, the last kinase in the cascade. MAPK translocates into the nucleus and activates a number of transcription factors, phosphorylating them at the Ser/Thr-Pro motif30. The best-studied MAPK modules are the ERK1/2, JNK and p38 signaling modules53. The ERK1/2 module is activated by prosurvival stimuli, while the JNK and p38 modules are activated by stress stimuli (Figure 2).

The extracellular signal regulated (ERK1/2) signaling module is activated by signals from the cell-surface receptors and is represented by the RAF-MEK-ERK signaling axis. The MAP3Ks of this module, A-RAF, B-RAF, and C-RAF, are activated by small GTPases of the rat sarcoma (RAS) subfamily. The activated RAFs phosphorylate the MAP2Ks, MEK1 and MEK2, which in turn phosphorylate ERK1 and ERK2. Phosphorylated ERK1 and ERK2 translocate into the nucleus, where they activate a number of nuclear transcription factors, including ELK, ETS and c-FOS, leading to cellular proliferation, migration and differentiation. Hyperactivation of this MAPK module is the leading cause of a number of human cancers, and inhibition of the RAF-MEK-ERK module remains an important anticancer strategy54.

The other prominent MAPK signaling modules are the JNK and p38 pathways. Both pathways are activated by cytokines, growth factors and by various stresses, such as heat shock, ionizing radiation, oxidative stress and DNA-damaging agents. The molecular architecture of these pathways is more complicated than that of the RAF/MEK/ERK pathway. The JNK and p38 pathways share MAP3K upstream kinases, such as MEKK1-4, but their MAP2K and MAPK kinases differ (Figure 2)53. The terminal MAPKs of the JNK and p38 pathway phosphorylate both cytoplasmic and nuclear targets. Among their important cytoplasmic targets in neurons are microtubule-associated proteins (MAPs), which are important for the maintenance of the neuronal cytoskeleton. The phosphorylation of MAPs by JNK kinases is important for the maintenance of the stability of microtubules, and deficiency in JNK signaling may be a cause of neurodegeneration. The hyperactivation of JNK and p38 leads to the hyperphosphorylation of tau protein, which is the hallmark of Alzheimer disease55. Upon translocation to the nucleus, JNK and p38 phosphorylate a number of targets, including transcription factor c-Jun that controls numerous target genes. In various cell types, c-Jun has been shown to participate in regulation of cell cycle, cellular differentiation, tumor transformation and apoptosis55.

2.3.2. AKT pathway

The other important prosurvival signaling cascade is the AKT signaling pathway. The protein kinase B (AKT) is activated in response to the elevation of PIP3 levels on the PM and regulates a number of cell responses, such as migration, proliferation and differentiation. Extracellular signals including growth factors often stimulate both ERK1/2/MAPK and AKT pathways. However, in certain conditions AKT can downregulate ERK signaling through inhibition of c-Raf. Growth factor receptors activate phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K) that phosphorylates lipids in the PM. The N-terminal pleckstrin homology domain of AKT acts as a sensor of the PM level of PIP3. Upon translocation to the PM, AKT is phosphorylated by phosphoinositide-dependent kinase 1 (PDK-1) at Thr308 (located within the catalytic domain) and by mTOR2 at Ser47356. Activated AKT further translocates to various cellular locations, where it phosphorylates target proteins containing the RxRxxS/T motif. AKT cascade signaling is negatively regulated by phosphatase and tensin homolog phosphatase (PTEN)57. Activated AKT phosphorylates and inhibits a number of proapoptotic transcription factors, such as Forkhead box O3 (FOXO3) (Figure 2). AKT also phosphorylates and inhibits the activity of such proapoptotic proteins as BAD, caspase-9, and several members of the aforementioned JNK and p38 MAPK modules. In addition to deactivating proapoptotic factors, AKT activates a number of prosurvival transcription factors including the Forkhead family of transcription factors and cyclic AMP (cAMP)– response element binding protein (CREB) transcription factor, which, in turn, activates expression of antiapoptotic genes. The PIP3-Akt-FoxO axis is involved in the regulation of the stability of the long-lived cells in mammals and in the regulation of the lifespan in lower organisms58.

2.3.3. JAK-STAT pathway

A number of ligands, such as interferons, interleukins, growth factors and some hormones activate the JAK-STAT pathway. While MAPK and AKT pathways are activated indirectly by the cell surface receptors, JAK kinases are directly associated with the cytokine receptors (Figure 1I). Homodimerization of the cytokine receptors causes association of the JAK subunits attached to the cytokine receptors, followed by their phosphorylation in trans. Activated JAK kinases, in turn, phosphorylate signal transduction and activator of transcription (STAT) (Figure 2). Phosphorylated STATs translocate to the nucleus, where they induce the transcription of target genes52. Thus, compared to the MAPK and AKT pathways, the JAK/STAT pathway is the fastest pathway by which cells can send signals from the PM to the nucleus59. Activation of the JAK/STAT pathway leads to various cellular outcomes including proliferation, differentiation, cell migration and apoptosis. The JAK/STAT pathway is associated with immune functions, hematopoiesis and cancer. It has also been shown that it is involved in synaptic plasticity. The activation of STAT3 is also essential for the regulation of reproduction, embryonic development, mammary involution and wound healing60. It is notable that the number of JAKs and STATs encoded in the human genome is limited, and activation of a similar combination of a JAK and STAT may lead to a different outcome. Thus, the activation of the same JAK1-STAT3 axis by the interleukin IL-10 or IL-6 leads to the activation of the transcription of different gene sets, with IL-10 activating anti-inflammatory genes and IL-6 activating IL-6 regulated genes52.

2.4. Temporal regulation of kinase signaling and its connection with cellular output

The same sequence of phosphorylation events may lead to different physiological outcomes and to the activation of various gene patterns. Studies of MAPK cascades revealed large number of links between activation patterns and types of cellular response. The same RAF-MEK-ERK module is activated by growth factors including vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), nerve growth factor (NGF) and fibroblast growth factor (FGF), however, all these factors cause different cellular responses. Activation of p53 MAPK by ionization or by ultraviolet radiation leads to apoptosis or cell cycle arrest, respectively. All these differences depend on the spatial and temporal patterns of protein kinase signaling.

The spatial pattern of kinase signaling plays an important role in embryonic development. As an example, the activation of a number of RTKs plays a crucial role in the shaping of the embryo. Growth factors, such as fibroblast growth factor, form stable gradients across fields of cells. The amount of ligand present at each position determines the level of activation of the associated receptor tyrosine kinase and triggers the dose-dependent activation or repression of distinct target genes. In this case, different concentrations of the same morphogen may induce different transcriptional responses, when distinct genes are expressed above distinct concentration thresholds61. This spatial patterning of growth factors, stimulating corresponding RTKs, can be imitated by the use of light gradients and opto-RTKs.

The dynamics of the kinase signaling also influences the signaling output. The RAF-MEK-ERK signaling cascade is often used as an example of the importance of signaling duration for cell fate choice. In rat pheochromocytoma cells (PC12), the activation of the RAF/MEK/ERK cascade by different stimuli, e.g., NGF and EGF (endothelial growth factor), leads to different cellular outcomes. NGF causes differentiation of the PC12 cells into sympathetic-like neurons, while EGF causes proliferation of the PC12 cells. It has been shown that this effect depends on the duration of ERK signaling. Active ERK translocates to the nucleus and phosphorylates transcription factors there. These transcription factors (Elk-1, CREB, STAT3) induce the transcription of immediate early genes (IEGs). When ERK activation is transient, IEG products degrade rapidly. However, the sustained ERK activation leads to the stabilization of the IEGs and differentiation of the cells62. It has been shown that it is possible to change the PC12 cell response to EGF from proliferation to differentiation by maintaining a constant EGF supply into the culture medium5.

The other MAPK module, the p38 MAPK module, uses the same principle of the regulation of transcription activation depending on the duration of the final MAPK signaling. It has been shown that short exposure to inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin-1β (IL-1β) induces only transient activation of p38, while longer exposure to IL-1β is necessary for the induction of the expression of effector genes63. The activation of the p53 MAPK cascade by different stress stimuli also leads to varying cell responses depending on the duration of p53 signaling. The p53 MAPK cascade can be activated by DNA double-strand breaks (ionizing radiation) and by single-strand breaks (UV radiation). These stimuli induce different temporal patterns of p53 activation. Transient p53 activation by single-strand breaks causes cell cycle arrest and DNA repair, while sustained p53 activation leads to apoptosis64.

The dynamics of AKT signaling also correlates with the cellular output. Pulsed and sustained insulin stimulation of the AKT pathway results in transient and sustained AKT phosphorylation, respectively, which are decoded by downstream signaling modules65. The importance of the spatial and temporal patterns of protein kinase signaling establishes a demand for molecular tools that allow the imitation of the spatial gradients of growth factors or the temporal patterns of the activation of the main signaling cascades. Dysregulation of the spatial and temporal patterns of kinase signaling leads to a number of pathological conditions, and therefore establishing the correlation between temporal patterns of kinase signaling and transcriptional outputs is of particular interest.

3. NATURAL PHOTORECEPTORS AS TEMPLATES TO DESIGN OPTO-KINASES

Light is an important developmental cue that generates a signal transmitted through elaborate pathways to modify the growth and behavior of organism. Light is directly absorbed by proteins known as photoreceptors that are currently found in all kingdoms of life, including plants, bacteria and animals (Figure 3, Table 1). Each photoreceptor bears a chromophore that contains a conjugated π-electron system. The chromophore can be either covalently or non-covalently bound to an apoprotein and can be derived either from small-molecule metabolites or from amino acid side chains of the protein.

The choice of a photoreceptor for protein engineering is dictated by the availability of the chromophore and the tissue penetration of light. To achieve true genetic encoding, the photoreceptor must be efficiently folded and must incorporate a chromophore available in sufficient quantities in the target tissue. Flavin chromophores are readily available in different cells and organisms due to their role as cofactors in redox reactions. Cobalamin (vitamin B12) is not synthesized in fungi, plants, or animal tissues, but it is involved in DNA synthesis and in fatty acid and amino acid metabolism and is therefore present in significant concentrations in these organisms. The linear tetrapyrrole biliverdin (BV), which is a product of heme degradation, is also readily available in mammalian tissues. By contrast, availability of the chemically reduced linear tetrapyrrole phycocyanobilin (PCB) is limited to plants.

Light penetration is another critical factor that must be considered for engineering. It is of little concern for tissue culture or single-cell organism studies, but it can be a limiting factor for experiments in deep tissues or animals. Visible light is significantly scattered by lipids and absorbed by hemoglobin and melanin present in mammalian tissues, whereas near-infrared (NIR) light within the spectral region above 700 nm, known as the “near-infrared window”, penetrates significantly deeper.

Bacterial phytochrome photoreceptors sense near-infrared (NIR) light and incorporate BV chromophore that makes them attractive templates for engineering of fluorescent proteins, biosensors and optogenetic tools for in vivo applications66, 67. Recently, several NIR optogenetic tools that exploit the interaction between the RpBphP1 phytochrome from purple bacteria Rhodopseudomonas palustris and its natural binding partner, transcriptional repressor RpPpsR2, were developed68, 69. These tools allowed to regulate a variety of processes in mammalian cells including transcription, enzymatic activities, cell signaling and protein targeting. Moreover, the combination of RpBphP1-based tools with LOV-based tools enabled spectral multiplexing and opened exciting possibilities to optically control cellular several processes simultaneously69.

3.1. LOV domains

Among photoreceptors, relatively small LOV domains (approximately 100 amino acid residues) are the best-studied and most widely used to engineer optogenetic tools (Table 1, Table 2). They belong to the PER-ARNT-SIM (PAS) superfamily, a diverse group of sensor domains that have been reported to mediate protein–protein interactions70, 7172. The core of PAS domains consists of a central five-stranded anti-parallel β-sheet flanked by three helical segments (Figure 3A). The PAS domain binds various cofactors, either covalently or non-covalently, that allow receptors to respond to a diversity of chemical signals or physical stimuli such as light73. LOV domains bind to flavin (either FAD or FMN) as prosthetic groups and sense blue light in bacteria, fungi and plants74, 75. Flavins are readily available in different organisms and therefore do not need to be supplemented. The absorption of blue photons by the cofactor leads to the formation of a covalent bond between FMN and a cysteine in the PAS core, which causes a tilt of the FMN isoalloxazine ring, movement of coordinating residues and changes in the hydrogen-bonding pattern of a nearby conserved glutamine residue76–78. These structural changes propagate to Ncap and Ccap elements that mediate protein-protein interactions and dimerization (Figure 3A). In darkness, the cysteine-FMN adduct is spontaneously hydrolyzed back, and the protein returns to its ground monomeric state79.

The LOV2 domain is also well suited for engineering due to its small size, robust expression and incorporation of the FMN chromophore, which is widely present in mammalian tissues. The LOV2 domain of Arabidopsis sativa (AsLOV2) precedes a serine/threonine kinase domain in phototropin-1 kinase and plays a key role in signal transduction80. The AsLOV2 domain contains the central PAS structural elements, as well as N- and C-terminal extensions designated Aα and Jα, respectively, that are not typical for PAS-domain structure (Figure 3B). In the darkness, the Jα helix is docked on the surface of the LOV2 domain, whereas illumination with blue light leads to its unwinding and exposure to the solvent81, 82.

3.2. Cryptochromes

Cryptochromes are photoreceptors found in both plants and animals. Initially, found to be photoreceptors responsible for growth and development in plants, cryptochromes were later shown to regulate circadian rhythms in insects and mammals83, 84. Cryptochromes consist of two structural domains linked by an extended and largely unstructured segment (Figure 3C). Cryptochromes share the same architecture as DNA photolyases, composed of an N-terminal αβ domain and a C-terminal α-helical domain that binds non-covalently to the FAD chromophore. Another chromophore, 5,10-methenyltetrahydrofolate (MTHF), is bound to the interface of the N- and C-terminal domains. The energy of light absorbed by MTHF is transferred to FAD to ensure efficient photoreduction. The absorption of blue light by the oxidized ground state of FAD induces the formation of a radical intermediate state, FADH, which results in structural changes that are propagated through the C-terminal domain.

The mechanism of cryptochrome signaling is not fully understood. Most likely, upon the absorption of blue light, the C-terminal domain undergoes order-to-disorder transitions that mediate direct interactions with downstream signaling proteins, such as ubiquitin ligase COP85, 86. The photolyase homology region (PHR) of cryptochromes is able to form homodimers that are also essential for signaling87. The absorption of green light causes further reduction of FADH· to FADH−, which inhibits signaling.

3.3. Dronpa

Dronpa is a photoswitchable fluorescent protein artificially engineered from a coral protein. Like other GFP-like proteins, Dronpa possesses a β-barrel fold and a chromophore formed by the posttranslational cyclization and oxidation of the protein side chains (Figure 3D). Dronpa absorbs light at 503 nm and emits green fluorescence, whereas strong irradiation at 488 nm converts the protein into a non-fluorescent state that absorbs at 390 nm. This transition is caused by the cis-trans photoisomerization of the chromophore and is accompanied by the structural flexibility of the β-barrel88. It was demonstrated that the photoswitching of the Dronpa145N mutant can result in changes in the protein oligomeric state89. In the bright state, the β7 strand is tightly packed on the surface of the β-barrel and forms a cross-dimer interface that promotes the formation of the protein tetramer, whereas upon off-switching β7 becomes flexible, which results in the protein monomerization. To create a light-dimerizable protein, several mutations that break the antiparallel dimer interface and strengthen the cross-dimer interface were introduced into Dronpa145N 90. The resultant protein, named photodissociable Dronpa (pdDronpa), forms a homodimer under 400 nm light illumination and dissociates and is switched off by 500 nm cyan light (Table 1).

3.4. Phytochromes

In addition to blue-light sensing LOV domains, there are other photoreceptors that are able to dimerize in response to illumination. Phytochromes, including bacterial phytochromes, are photoreceptors with diverse functions found in plants, fungi and bacteria. The structure of phytochromes includes a photosensory core module (PCM) linked to a C-terminal output domain, commonly represented by histidine kinase (Figure 3E). Other output domains include antirepressors, diguanylate cyclase and phosphodiesterases that regulate second messenger signaling91–93. The photosensory core module (PCM; 55–58 kDa) of phytochromes typically consists of the PAS (Per-ARNT-Sim), GAF (cGMP phosphodiesterase-adenylate cyclase-FhlA), and PHY (phytochrome-specific) domains connected by α-helical linkers94–96. Although the amino acid sequences of the PAS, GAF and PHY domains demonstrate low sequence similarity, their structures share a common topology.

Bacterial phytochromes incorporate BV as a chromophore, whereas plant phytochromes and cyanobacterial phytochromes (CPHs) incorporate phytochromobilin (PΦB) and PCB, respectively. All bilins bind tightly in the pocket between the β-sheet and three α-helices in the GAF domain. Upon binding, the bilins form a single thioether covalent bond with a Cys residue located in either the PAS (bacterial phytochromes) or the GAF domain (plant phytochromes). All bilins have a similar linear tetrapyrrole structure, but only BV is synthesized in mammalian tissues due to its constant production by heme oxygenase.

Upon illumination, phytochromes undergo photoconversion between far-red light-absorbing (Pr) and NIR light-absorbing (Pfr) states. These light-induced Pr↔Pfr transitions are accompanied by Z/E isomerization and rotation of the D-ring of the bilin chromophore, followed by rearrangements of hydrogen bonds in the chromophore-binding pocket. Consequently, conformational changes are propagated throughout the PCM and result in the rotation and activation of the output domains97.

3.5. Cobalamin-binding domains

Many bacteria synthesize carotenoids to protect themselves against free radicals and singlet oxygen species produced by illumination98. The synthesis of cobalamin is regulated by transcription repressors of the Car family, which consists of DNA-binding and cobalamin-binding domains. The autonomously folded N-terminal domain binds to DNA and recognizes other transcription factors, whereas the C-terminal is needed for oligomerization and cooperative binding to DNA (Figure 3F)99, 100. In darkness, C-terminal cobalamin-binding domains (CBDs) mediate the formation of oligomeric complexes on DNA and transcription repression. Illumination with green light causes photolytic cleavage of the cobalamin cofactor, resulting in protein monomerization. The relatively small size of CBDs of approximately 200 amino acid residues and the availability of cobalamin cofactor (vitamin B12) in mammalian tissues make CBDs attractive templates for the engineering of optogenetic tools.

4. ENGINEERING APPROACHES TO DEVELOP OPTO-KINASES

Development of optogenetic tools significantly accelerated development of modern biology by allowing to control intracellular processes with exceptional spatiotemporal precision. The modular structure of photoreceptors, in turn, allowed the rational engineering of light-regulatable optogenetic tools101 (Table 2). Photoreceptors are commonly truncated to the minimal photosensitive moiety to ensure efficient incorporation of the chromophore and fast folding. All output modules should be removed to avoid the non-specific activation of intracellular pathways. Domain configuration, linker length and other construct details appear to have profound and unpredictable effects on photoswitching. Therefore, researchers interested in building novel opto-kinases are advised to test not only different dimerizer systems but also different configurations of fusion constructs (either N- or C-terminal), different truncations and different linker lengths to ensure maximal performance.

Rational mutagenesis is another method that has made it possible to decrease background activation and improve the light-to-dark contrast of opto-kinases. The robust expression of the desired construct is often achieved by codon optimization. Additionally, optimization of the expression can be done by testing different homologous photoreceptors isolated from various species. High levels of expression, however, should be avoided in the case of PM-anchored kinases due to the enhanced risk of self-association leading to undesirable background activity.

To be functional in mammalian tissues, several photoreceptors including plant phytochromes need an exogenous source of the chromophore. Therefore, the co-expression of orthogonal enzymes producing the desired chromophore is often needed to provide a continuous chromophore supply to the experimental model system.

4.1. Employing light-inducible protein homodimerization to develop opto-kinases

The homodimerization strategy was employed to create light-regulated receptor tyrosine kinases (Figure 4A) (Table 2). In the seminal work, diverse LOV domains from bacteria, fungi and plants were tested for their expression and cytotoxicity in mammalian cells102. The results indicated that all LOV domains (either alone or as fusions with mVenus FP) were not cytotoxic and were produced efficiently in both HEK293 and CHOK1 cells. Next, each of seven LOV domains was linked to the C-terminus of the intracellular catalytic domain of murine receptor of FGF (mFGFR1) and attached to the PM using Myr signal to increase the signaling capability. Constructs were tested for activation of the MAPK/ERK pathway using luciferase reporter under the control of the serum response element (SRE) promoter. Most of them either did not activate reporter expression or activated it independently of illumination. Only one construct, consisting of the LOV domain of aureochrome-1 from Vaucheria frigida (mFGFR1-VfAU1-LOV), demonstrated a low background and high magnitude of pathway activation (~7-fold). This construct (termed opto-mFGFR1) was specifically activated with blue light (470 nm) of 0.25 mW/cm2 intensity, but not with green (530 nm) or red (630 nm) light (Table 1).

Among the tested LOV domains, only VfAU1-LOV was located C-terminally from the kinase domain in the full-length parent protein, whereas all other domains tested were located N-terminally. Therefore, preserving the domain order was necessary for the engineering of a functional opto-kinase.

The functionality of opto-mFGFR1 was confirmed by mutational analysis. A single amino acid substitution in the kinase domain (R195E) and cross-linking experiments suggested that dimerization is indeed the underlying mechanism of opto-mFGFR1 activation. The mutational analysis of opto-FGFR also revealed that its key residues required for activation of the MAPK/ERK pathway are essentially the same as the ones reported for the natural mFGFR. The amino acid substitution I472V in the LOV domain, which is known to decrease the lifetime of the FMN-cysteinyl photo-adduct, also confirmed that long-lived VfAU1-LOV photo-adduct is required for Opto-mFGFR1 photoactivation.

This successful strategy was further employed to engineer two other constructs by fusing VfAU1-LOV with the PM-anchored catalytic domains of hEGFR and hRET. The resultant opto-kinases, termed opto-hEGFR and opto-hRET, demonstrated 9-fold and 6-fold light-to-dark activation contrasts. The next test was whether the VfAU1-LOV domain could be replaced by other LOV domains that are also located C-terminally from the effector. By that approach, chimeras of mFGFR1 with Nannochloropsis gaditana putative aureochrome 1 (Ng-PA1-LOV) or Ochromonas danica putative aureochrome-1 (OdPA1) were created. These opto-kinases, termed mFGFR1-NgPA1-LOV and mFGFR1-OdPA1-LOV, demonstrated 3-fold and 6-fold activation of the reporter in response to blue light.

The ability of opto-mFGFR1 to activate MAPK signaling was demonstrated in two tumor cell lines, M38K and SPC212, as well as in human blood endothelial cells. Opto-mFGFR1 was localized predominantly at PM, and 1 min of illumination was sufficient to observe the phosphorylation of the receptor and its downstream targets, including AKT, PLCγ1, and ERK1/2. In the darkness, phosphorylation of the receptor and downstream targets returned to the ground state within 15–30 min. The spatial precision of the construct was demonstrated by the illumination of small areas of the cell layer (500–2500 cells), followed by the immunodetection of phospho-ERK1/2. Altogether, the experiments on cell lines demonstrated the rapid activation of MAP/ERK cascade within 5 min, its reversibility to the pre-stimulation level within 30 min, and the sub-millimeter spatial resolution of the light stimulation. Activation of the MAP/ERK cascade in M38K cells resulted in an increase in the cell division rate, the upregulation of genes involved in cancer progression, and cancer-like changes in the cellular morphology. The light stimulation of hBE cells expressing opto-mFGFR1 induced sprouting similar to that of the proangiogenic growth factor VEGFA.

Another type of opto-RTK receptors was engineered by fusing full-length tropomyosin receptor kinase B (TrkB) to the photolyase homology domain of cryptochrome-2 (Cry2-PHR)103. The resultant optogenetic tool was named opto-TrkB. Illumination of PC12 and HeLa cells expressing opto-TrkB (470 nm, 1.27 mW/cm2) increased the phosphorylation of ERK and led to its translocation to the nucleus. The illumination also targeted mCherry-PH-AKT to the PM, indicating the PI3K/Akt signaling activation. In cells co-expressing opto-TrkB and R-GECO1, the sensor illumination increased sensor fluorescence, indicating the elevation of the intracellular Ca2+. The activation of opto-TrkB in PC12 cells resulted in neurite outgrowth and cell differentiation. In primary neurons, opto-Trk stimulated the formation of filopodia and lamellipodia (Table 2).

Recently, a homodimerization-based opto-kinase was developed from the Cph1 of Synechocystis104. Cph1 incorporates PCB as a chromophore and consists of the photosensory core module (PCM) and histidine kinase (HisK) domains linked by a coiled-coil region. To create the opto-kinase, Cph1 was truncated to PCM. This PCM fragment was poorly expressed in mammalian cells, but its synthetic codon-optimized variant, named Cph1S-o, showed elevated expression without cytotoxicity. Cph1S-o was fused to the C-terminus of truncated mFGFR1, and the extracellular domain was replaced by Myr signal. The activity of opto-kinase was measured by using fluorescent protein reporters under the control of the MAPK/Erk pathway-sensitive serum response element (SRE). Myr-mFGFR-Cph1S-o caused a 20-fold increase in the activity of the MAPK/Erk pathway in HEK293 cells upon illumination with far-red light (I=0.62 mW/cm2, λ=630 nm) compared to darkness. Mutating a conserved arginine (R195E mutation) in the kinase catalytic domain abolished pathway activation and confirmed that dimerization is required for kinase activation.

To develop light-regulated rat neurotrophin receptor, Cph1S-o was fused C-terminally to its catalytic domain anchored to the PM. Exposure to far-red light resulted in 4-fold activation of the MAPK/ERK cascade. Immunoblotting confirmed that pathway activation was caused by ERK1 phosphorylation. In contrast to LOV-based kinase tools, opto-kinases engineered from phytochromes can be activated through animal tissues due to their transparency to far-red and NIR light. Rat insulinoma cells (INS-1E) expressing Myr-mFGFR1-CPH1S-o can be stimulated with far-red light through 10 mm-thick mouse abdomen tissues. The resulting Erk phosphorylation in these cells was much higher in light than that observed in the darkness.

Recently, the cobalamin-binding domains (CBDs) of CarH bacterial transcription factors were exploited to engineer opto-RTKs105. Two codon-optimized versions of CBDs from Myxococcus xanthus and Thermus thermophilus that demonstrated an absence of cytotoxicity and robust expression in mammalian cells were used as templates for opto-kinase engineering.

To generate opto-RTK, MxCBD and TxCBD were fused to the C-terminus of the catalytic domain of mFGFR1, anchored to the PM by Myr signal. The expression of both proteins in HEK293 cells required the addition of the cofactor 5’-deoxyadenosylcobalamin (AdoCbl). Using a luciferase reporter assay, it was demonstrated that both mFGFR1-MxCBD and mFGFR-TtCBD activated the MAPK/ERK pathway in the dark to an extent comparable with that of the constitutively dimerized receptor. Notably, this activation required the addition of exogenous AdoCBl. Green light illumination (λ=545 nm, I=0.17 mW/cm2) resulted in 5-fold and 10-fold decreases in the pathway activity in mFGFR1-MxCBD- and mFGFR1-TtCBD-expressing HEK293 cells, respectively. Red light irradiation (λ=670 nm, I=0.014 mW/cm2) did not significantly inhibit opto-kinases, whereas blue light (λ=470 nm, I=0.2 mW/cm2) caused inhibition of mFGFR1-TtCBD to the same extent as the green light. This blue-light inhibition did not occur in the case of mFGFR1-MxCBD.

Activation of the MAPK/ERK pathway was additionally confirmed by immunoblotting. It was shown that green light decreases ERK and mFGFR phosphorylation to the base level within 5 min and 30 min, respectively. This effect was not observed in the absence of AdoCbl. The mFGFR-MxCBD phosphorylation was recovered to 86% of the original value, whereas no recovery was observed for mFGFR1-TtCBD within 60 min after light cessation. However, the single amino acid substitution H597A in the cofactor-binding pocket of mFGFR1-TtCBD led to phosphorylation recovery. Most likely, the formation of a stable adduct between H597 and the corrin ring of AdoCbd prevents the release of the bleached cofactor from the binding pocket of mFGFR1-TtCBD. Notably, the ERK phosphorylation demonstrated no recovery for either opto-kinase, probably due to the complex behavior of the signaling pathway.

The potential of the CBD for optogenetic engineering in vertebrates was assessed by experiments on zebrafish embryos. Embryos injected with FGFR1-MxCBD and AdoCbl and grown in the dark demonstrated developmental malformations such as caudalization of the brain, similar to the malformations reported for constitutively active zebrafish FGFR1. In contrast, embryos treated with green light did not show abnormalities, demonstrating that FGFR1-MxCBD signaling can be turned off by illumination in vivo. Altogether, these data indicate the successful use of homodimerization-based opto-kinases for regulating MAPK cascades in vivo.

4.2. Employing light-inducible protein heterodimerization to develop opto-kinases

Protein heterodimerization is a common approach to regulating protein activity. A widely applied heterodimerization system exploits the light-induced interaction of Arabidopsis thaliana cryptochrome-2 (AtCry2) with its partner protein AtCIB1.

The light-dependent heterodimerization approach was employed for the regulation of AKT signaling by PM targeting (Figure 4B, Table 2). The recruitment of AKT to the PM results in subsequent phosphorylation by upstream kinases and thus activation. To generate photoactivatable AKT (PA-Akt), CRYPHR was fused with the AKT kinase domain. The minimal catalytically active kinase domain was used to avoid PM recruitment by the interaction of the PH domain with PIP3. The N-terminal portion of CIB1 (CIBN) bearing the Myr signal was used as a partner protein for the recruitment106. Upon illumination with a blue light pulse (5.8 mW/cm2 for 1 s), CRY-PHR-AKT-Cherry protein was rapidly targeted to the PM with similar kinetics to the originally reported CRY2-CIB system107. This targeting caused the accumulation of phospho-PA-Akt, whose amount was linearly correlated with the number of light pulses. The activation of PA-Akt caused phosphorylation of the downstream glycogene synthase kinase 3 (GSK-3) and re-localization of FoxO1 transcription factor from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. Furthermore, PA-Akt activation resulted in membrane ruffling and actin remodeling. Multiple cycles of illumination followed by light cessation demonstrated the reversibility of PA-Akt. Altogether, these results demonstrate the suitability of the PA-Akt system for the spatiotemporal control of Akt activity.

Two components, PM-targeted Mid2-GFP-Cry2 and CIBN-Ste5ΔN, were used for the activation of MAPK cascades in yeast and assessed by the PFUS1-DsRed reporter108. The original construct based on full-length Cry2 was unable to fully activate the pathway, but the truncated version CRY2PHR, encompassing amino acid residues 1–498, provided lower background and much higher activation of the cascade. This system was then compared with tunable, light-controlled interacting protein tag (TULIP) system. The illumination of both systems resulted in high activation of the MAPK cascade, comparable to α-factor-treated cells acting as a positive control. Notably, both the CRY2PHR/CIB and TULIP systems showed a higher background dark-state level than the control cells.

The interaction of plant phytochrome B (PhyB) with PIF, which is stimulated by red light, was widely applied to develop optogenetic tools that control the activity of signaling proteins in living cells12, 107, 109, 110.

Activation of RAS-ERK signaling can be achieved not only by the treatment of cells with various growth factors but also by recruitment of the catalytic segment of SOS (acting as RasGEF) to the PM. This mechanism of activation was exploited in the opto-SOS system13. In this system, RAS-ERK signaling is activated by the red light-stimulated targeting of the cytoplasmic YFP-PIF-SOScat fusion protein to the PM-anchored PhyB-Cherry-CAAX. The activation of Ras signaling was demonstrated by the accumulation of YFP-PIF-SOScat on the PM and the nuclear translocation of ERK2 tagged with the blue fluorescent protein (BFP-ERK2). These effects corresponded to a rapid increase in ERK phosphorylation but not in AKT phosphorylation. Therefore, the opto-SOS system selectively activated only the RAS-ERK cascade, which is different from the action of growth factors activating both RAS-ERK and PI3K-AKT signaling. The magnitude of RAS-ERK activation by opto-SOS was comparable to that induced by platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) and required the addition of exogenous PCB chromophore. The subsequent illumination of cells with NIR light (750 nm) reversed the nuclear localization of ERK and cascade activation13.

RAF kinase can be artificially targeted to the PM, which activates the MEK/ERK pathway111. The optogenetic pair engineered for this purpose included the CRY2PHR-mCherry-Raf1 and PM-anchored CIBN-GFP-CAAX proteins. Blue light recruited kinase to the PM, whereas the cessation of light caused dissociation of kinase. The light-induced PM targeting of RAF1 resulted in the accumulation of phospho-ERK. Moreover, the sustainable nature of ERK activation led to the differentiation of PC12 cells, detected by the neurite outgrowth assay.

Numerous growth factors activate phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway, which controls cell survival, division and metabolism. PI3K generates PIP3, which recruits the protein kinase AKT to the PM, where it phosphorylates many downstream factors112. Therefore, 5-phosphatases (5-ptases) that rapidly deplete phosphatidylinositol 4,5-biphosphate (PIP2) and PIP3 from the PM are powerful tools to downregulate PIK3 signaling. The Cry2-CIBN dimerization system was used to recruit 5-ptase to the PM113. The illumination of cells expressing mCherry-Cry2-5-ptase and CIBN-GFP-CAAX caused the rapid recruitment (half-time is 3 s) of 5-ptase to the PM and displacement of the PIP2 biosensor iRFP-PHPLCδ1 from the PM. Dissociation of the probe was not observed in the case of the catalytically inactive 5-ptase mutant. Tight spatiotemporal control of 5-ptase recruitment was demonstrated by the pulse illumination (0.1 s) of a single spot (4 μm2) at the edge of the cell with a blue laser. Importantly, the RF-PHPLCδ1 probe was completely relocalized to the PM within 10 min in the dark.

The depletion of PIP2 and PIP3 led to the arrest of clathrin-coated pits detected by the mCherry-tagged μ2-subunit of clathrin adaptor protein AP2. The level of PIP2 also plays an important role in the function of KCNQ2/3 ionic channels. When the PIP2 level is high, the channel remains open, whereas the depletion of PIP2 results in channel closure. Indeed, 5-ptase recruitment to the PM resulted in the acute inhibition of the whole-cell membrane current due to channel closure. The effect of PIP2 depletion in PC12 cells was accompanied by dramatic retraction of the cell protrusions (Table 2).

Another optogenetic pair used to increase the PIP3 level included the CIBN-GFP-CAAX and mCherry-Cry2-iSH2 proteins113. Upon illumination, iSH2 binds to the p100α subunit of endogenous PIK3 and recruits it to the PM. In serum-starved COS7 cells expressing these constructs, illumination caused the rapid (half-time is 14 s) translocation of mCherry-Cry2-iSH2 to the PM, which was associated with pronounced PM ruffling due to PIP3–induced actin cytoskeleton reorganization.

4.3. Applying light-inducible protein clustering to develop opto-kinases

Multimerization is a natural mechanism for the modulation of cellular signaling. It is known to activate numerous transmembrane receptors, transcription and translational factors. Some photoreceptors are also prone to forming oligomeric complexes; for example, the formation of “photobodies” occurs in plant cells in response to blue light. Therefore, light-driven photoreceptor oligomerization could be potentially employed for the modulation of intracellular signaling.

In a paper on light-dependent protein clustering, it was shown that the mCherry-CRY2PHR protein, containing the photolyase homology region of Cry2, can rapidly form oligomeric clusters (τ1/2 =30 s) upon blue light illumination (9 mW/cm2)114. These clusters can be fully disassembled within a few minutes in the dark (half-time is 5.5 min). The application of multiple light-dark cycles demonstrated the full reversibility of this process. Clustering was dependent on light, as it was undetected in the light-insensitive D387A mutant. It was found that the CIB1 partner protein is also targeted to the clusters, and CIB1-CRY2 interaction did not compete with cluster formation. Therefore, CRY2 light-dependent multimerization is a physiologically relevant process rather than an artifact caused by protein overexpression.

Initially, CRY2 clustering was employed to regulate the Wnt/β-catenin signaling cascade. This cascade is triggered by ligand binding to low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 6 (LRP6), which induces the formation of high-order clusters and the activation of β-catenin. Subsequently, β-catenin translocates to the nucleus and activates the transcription of target genes. However, activation of the Wnt cascade can be induced by the ligand-independent clustering of the LRP6 receptor, the strategy that was used to create an optogenetic system that activates β-catenin signaling. In this system, GFP-LRP6c and mCherry-CRY2PHR were fused with the self-associating leucine zipper helices LZa and LZb. These proteins interact constantly in the dark and in the light, but the formation of oligomeric complexes occurs only in the light. This difference was demonstrated by a 200-fold increase in the β-catenin luciferase reporter upon illumination in cells co-expressing Cry2-mCherry-LZa and LRP6-GFP-LZb.

Dimerization and oligomerization are also a mechanism underlying the activation of receptor tyrosine kinases that regulate cellular proliferation, growth, survival, differentiation and motility. To target endogenous RTKs, the SH2 domain from PLCγ was used as an RTK binding moiety115. A single SH2 domain does not bind to unphosphorylated peptide sequences within RTKs, but oligomerization of SH2 increases the affinity for the inactivated receptor. The binding of SH2 oligomers can cause receptor clustering and activation and downstream signaling (Figure 4C). The benefit of targeting endogenous RTKs is the lack of receptor overexpression, which may cause background activation and hypersensitivity of cells to the extracellular ligand.

The chimeric SH2-Cherry-CRY2 protein (termed SH2-N) was used as an optogenetic construct for RTK targeting. SH2-N expressed in HEK293T and adult neural stem cells exhibited cytoplasmic localization in darkness, whereas upon illumination it formed PM-anchored puncta. The treatment of cells with an inhibitor of RTK phosphorylation (PD-089828) significantly reduced the enrichment of SH2-N on the PM. Therefore, receptor phosphorylation occurs upon SH2 PM targeting. In NIH3T cells, illumination resulted in SH2-N migration to focal adhesion structures that are enriched in endogenous PM receptors. Interestingly, this translocation was greatly inhibited by treatment of the cells with a selective inhibitor of PDGFR but not of FGFR. Therefore, in certain cell types, the SH2-N domain demonstrated selectivity towards individual receptors. Light-dependent co-localization of SH2-N with receptors was also demonstrated in cells stably expressing GFP-tagged FGFR1 and PDGFRβ receptors. Importantly, this co-localization can also be abolished by specific inhibitors of phosphorylation. Additionally, the interaction of SH2-N with GFP-tagged receptors was confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation.

Altogether, these data indicated that light-dependent SH2-N PM targeting depends on phosphorylation and causes clustering of RTKs. Downstream signaling was demonstrated by the immunodetection of phosphorylated targets. A significant increase in the levels of phospho-AKT and phospho-ERK1/2 was observed after 15 min of blue-light illumination. This effect was abrogated by a specific RTK inhibitor.

In fibroblasts, SH2-N translocation was accompanied by filopodial and lamellipodial extension, followed by cell polarization and movement. These effects were dependent on PI3K activity because treatment of the cells with the specific inhibitor wortmannin led to the collapse of cellular protrusions. In fibroblasts co-expressing SH2-N and PH-Venus (biosensor of PIP3), the accumulation of PIP3 production was followed by PM ruffling and lamellipodia formation towards the region of illumination. These effects were accompanied by actin polymerization in cells co-expressing SH2-N and the Lifeact-Venus probe for F-actin. Altogether, these data indicate that SH2-N invokes cytoskeleton reorganization, polarization and motility by the activation of PI3K.

Light-dependent oligomerization can be employed to inactivate proteins by reversible sequestration. This strategy was also realized using the CRY2/CIB1 optogenetic pair. In that case, CIB1 was fused with the peptide derived from Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase, called MP. This peptide lacks the catalytic activity of the full-length protein but assembles the CIB-MP fusion protein into oligomers. By fusing anti-GFP nanobody to CRY2, a wide variety of GFP-tagged proteins can be targeted to the aggregates to lower their active concentration in cells. Upon photoexcitation, the CRY2 fusion protein oligomerizes and forms interconnections between CIB1 oligomers that result in the formation of macromolecular aggregates.

The ability of CRY2:CIB pair to downregulate the control of PI3K was demonstrated in cells expressing CFP-p110CAAX, which is a constantly active PM-anchored subunit of PIK3K116. Co-expression of CIB1-SNAP-MP and CLIP-CRY2-VHH(GFP) resulted in a decrease in the cellular PIP3 level upon illumination that was detected by the dissociation of mCherry-PHBtk used as a PIP3 probe from the PM.

4.4. Light regulation of kinase activity using conformational changes

The light-induced unfolding of Jα has been widely exploited in a versatile “peptide uncaging” strategy, where a peptide epitope fused with Jα becomes undocked from the LOV2 core and is thus available to trigger downstream events upon illumination. This “peptide uncaging” strategy was employed to engineer an AsLOV2 light-dependent heterodimerizing system (Figure 4D)117. First, two mutations, G528A and N538E, that stabilize the Jα helix were introduced in order to improve the switching contrast118. For initial screening, a series of AsLOV2 mutants with C-terminal truncation of the Jα helix were fused with the (-SSADTWV-COOH) peptide epitope, which is able to interact with the Erbin PDZ domain (ePDZ). This peptide epitope was engineered from the high-affinity sequence (-GSIDTWV-COOH) to retain the continuity of the Jα helix.

To screen for the best construct, a series of chimeric PM-anchored Mid2-GFP-AsLOV2-pep fusions were tested for binding ePDZ-mCherry in the dark or after photoexcitation with a 473 nm laser117. It was found that the longest fusions interacted with their binding partner independently of illumination and demonstrated low contrast. Shorter fusions (registers 4 and 5) demonstrated approximately 2-fold contrast, but the amplitude of the signal was partially diminished due to higher occlusion of the peptide. The register 4 constructs were further improved by introducing mutations that stabilize the docking of the Jα helix and improve the binding to ePDZ. The resultant construct, named LOV-pep, recruited the ePDZb1-mCherry fusion to the mitochondria or PM in a confined region of the cell by spot excitation. In the dark, ePDZb1-mCherry was dissociated from the PM within 2 min. The repeating cycles of light and dark demonstrated the full reversibility of the recruitment. The engineered optogenetic pair was further used to control a MAPK kinase cascade in yeast.

The activation of the MAPK cascade in yeast can be achieved by the recruitment of Ste5 (or Ste 11) as a scaffold assembling multimeric complexes to the PM, which results in the G1 arrest and mating phenotype. To create an optogenetic system, Ste5ΔN (a truncated version deficient in G-protein binding) or Ste11 was C-terminally fused to ePDZb, an improved version of ePDZ. The PM-targeted ePDZb partner was made by fusing LOVpep to Mid2-GFP, anchored to the PM. The expression of Mid2-GFP-LOVpep was under the control of the galactose promoter in order to allow cell growth on glucose media. It was demonstrated that no growth arrest was observed for ePDZb-Ste5ΔN or ePDZb-Ste11 co-expressed with Mid2-GFP-LOVpep in the dark, whereas continuous illumination resulted in growth arrest on galactose media. The activation of the MAP cascade was also confirmed using the DsRED-Max reporter under the control of the FUS1 promoter108, 117.

The unfolding of the Jα helix by illumination causes the exposure of the dark-state docked peptide to the solvent and triggers downstream reactions. Therefore, optogenetic constructs that downregulate various endogenous activities can be engineered by fusing inhibitory peptides to the LOV2 domain. This strategy was employed for the engineering of a photoactivatable inhibitor for cyclic-AMP dependent kinase (PKA)119. PKA can be specifically inhibited by the inhibitory peptide encoded by the PKI gene. PKI possesses heat stability and binds with nanomolar affinity to PKA, making it a good template for engineering. Initially, a short PKI fragment encompassing amino acids 14–22 (PKI 14–22) was incorporated into a flexible loop joining the PAS fold and Jα helix of LOV2. Both “dark-state” (C450A) and “lit-state” mutants of LOV2-PKI fusions were able to inhibit PKA activity stimulated by the adenylate cyclase agonist forskolin. This effect was explained by the interference of PKI14-22 with the folding of the LOV2 core because it was unlikely that PKI14-22 was undocked in both the lit and dark states.

Another possibility included the caging of PKI to the C-terminus of the Jα helix. Three-dimensional modeling predicted that fusion of the PKI 14–22 peptide to the C-terminus of Jα would preserve the continuity of the helix, which was confirmed by experimental data demonstrating 2-fold inhibition of PKA activity in illuminated cells compared to the dark control. Incorporation of the longer PKI 6–22 peptide disrupted Jα helix continuity and resulted in constant light-independent PKA inhibition.

The activity of LOV2-PKI 14–22, named PA-PKI, was demonstrated in mammalian cell cultures by the immunodetection of the forskolin-induced phosphorylation of downstream targets. The irradiation of HEK293 cells transfected with PA-PKI resulted in a 2-fold reduction in the phosphorylation of CREB. In primary cultured mouse cortical neurons, irradiation caused a 2-fold decrease in the amount of phosphorylated PKA substrates detected by immunofluorescence.

This strategy was additionally applied to create myosin light chain kinase inhibitory peptide 18 (MKI). Similarly to PKI, MKI fused to the C-terminus of the Jα helix adopted the helical conformation. The illumination of HEK293 cells expressing PA-MKI resulted in a 4-fold decrease in myosin light chain phosphorylation that was not detected in control cells expressing the “dark-state” PA-MKI (C450A) mutant. Moreover, analysis of cell morphology revealed that the photoactivation of PA-MKI inhibits the protrusion dynamics in COS7 cells.

4.5. Light regulation of kinase activity with uncaging

The kinase activity could be regulated by the kinase active site attached in close proximity to the dimerizing moieties. Upon formation of the intramolecular dimer, the kinase active site becomes sterically hindered from the substrate, whereas upon monomerization, the active site becomes exposed to the solvent and able to phosphorylate the substrate (Figure 4E). This strategy was employed to create an opto-kinase using pdDronpa1 as the template90.

Like its parental protein Dronpa145N89, pdDronpa1 is photodissociated, and its fluorescence is switched off upon illumination with 500 nm cyan light, whereas illumination by 400 nm violet light provokes dimerization. The kinase MEK, which is permanently localized in the cytosol and does not require dimerization or PM recruitment for its activity, was chosen as a target kinase. MEK plays a central role in the Raf-MEK-ERK pathway and regulates cell proliferation, differentiation and migration. In full-length MEK1, amino acids 1–61 contain the substrate docking site and are not needed for the kinase activity. Therefore, the constitutively active minimal MEK1 kinase domain (active (ΔNT)MEK1), bearing activating phosphomimetic mutations but lacking its N-terminus, was used as the initial template for engineering. Presumably, the fusion of monomeric Dronpa at the N-terminus of the kinase domain as well as its insertion inside the kinase domain does not interfere with protein folding because the N- and C-termini of Dronpa are located near each other. Therefore, two insertion sites, one at the N-terminus and another inside the FG loop that is located strictly opposite to the active kinase site, were exploited.

The fusion of monomeric Dronpa into these sites retained active (ΔNT)MEK1 kinase activity towards ERK, which indicated correct construct folding. Attachment of pdDronpa1 domains to the same sites created proto-photoswitchable (ΔNT)MEK1 (proto-ps(ΔNT)MEK1), whose activity was comparable to that of the catalytically inactive MEK1. This construct did not respond to 500 nm light, suggesting that two pdDronpa1 domains interacted too strongly with each other, providing overly tight caging. This construct was improved by introducing the N145K mutation into the FG loop of pdDronpa1. The resultant photoswitchable MEK1 (ps(ΔNT)MEK1) was activated with 500 nm light (20 mW/cm2 for 2 min), but its activity was still less than that of the active MEK1 positive control. To increase kinase activity, the N-terminal substrate-docking site was fused to ps(ΔNT)MEK1. However, this modification increased both the induced and basal levels of activity.

The background kinase activity was decreased by the mutation of both pdDronpa1 domains to pdDronpa1.2 in order to enhance the hydrophobic contacts between the monomers. The resultant opto-kinase, termed photoswitchable MEK1 (psMEK1), demonstrated robust light response and reduced basal activity. Another construct, named psMEK1tight, contained a truncated linker connecting N-terminal Dronpa1.2 with the kinase domain, which further reduced the basal activity. Both psMEK1 and psMEK1tight demonstrated 10-fold light-to-dark contrast, although the basal activity of psMEK1 was twice that of psMEK1tight. The reversibility of kinase activity was demonstrated by multiple rounds of illumination with 400 nm and 500 nm light.

This engineering approach was further employed to create other opto-kinases. The replacement of MEK1 sequences by sequences of the closely related MEK2 resulted in psMEK2, which demonstrated 10-fold photoswitching contrast without further optimization. Using rational design, the photoswitchable kinases psRAF and psCDK5 were made by the insertion of pdDronpa1 domains at the sites homologous to those in MEK1. In the case of psRAF1, addition of CAAX localization signal targeted the active kinase to PM.

4.6. Light regulation of kinase activity using allosteric control

Allosteric regulation is a common approach to regulating enzymatic activity. The engineering of artificially regulated allosteric enzymes includes insertion of the disordered domains into surface loops of a protein. These insertions induce disorders that can be transferred to the active site of the enzyme in a controlled fashion. Generally, insertion sites that confer allosteric regulation are identified on the basis of the mutational analysis, by random screening or using rational analysis of sequence conservation.

The allosteric regulation approach was used for the modulation activity of focal adhesion kinase (FAK), which is implicated in proliferation, apoptosis and cellular migration120. To generate an insertion domain, the rapamycin-binding domain of FKBP12 was truncated to have its N- and C-termini in close proximity to each other. The resulting domain, called insertable FKBP (iFKBP), was inserted into the kinase domain of FAK. Upon binding to rapamycin, iFKBP forms a heterodimer with the FKBP12-rapamycin-binding (FRB) domain, which substantially increases its conformational rigidity. To generate allosterically regulated FAK, iFKBP was inserted within the loop between two β-strands in the N-terminal kinase lobe proximal to the catalytic domain. For optimal binding to rapamycin, the construct required the addition of short linkers between the iFKBP and kinase moieties. The activity of the resultant construct, termed rapamycin-regulated FAK (RapR-FAK), was negligible in the absence of rapamycin and restored to near wild-type level by the addition of rapamycin120.

Light-dependent regulation of FRB-iFKBP heterodimerization was realized using a photoactivatable analog of rapamycin, called pRap121. In pRap, the hydroxyl group at C40 is blocked by a “caging group” that prevents its interaction with Glu53 of iFKBP. Illumination with UV light of 365 nm removes the caging group and releases rapamycin, which promotes iFKBP-FRB heterodimerization. It was demonstrated that pRap was not able to activate RapR-FAK in the dark, but irradiation caused kinase activation and the phosphorylation of the downstream adapter protein paxillin. In living cells, the activation of RapR-FAK resulted in PM ruffling across the dorsal cell surface121. Altogether, these data suggest that pRap allows light-dependent regulation of kinase activity with superior spatial and temporal precision to alternative methods, including proteolytic degradation and chemical rescue.

The allosteric regulation approach was also employed to create rapamycin-induced Src kinase by the insertion of the rapamycin-binding uniRapR domain in the loop between β-strands, which is mechanically coupled to the ATP-binding site122. Potentially, the same insertion site could be used to build a light-regulatable opto-kinase from photoreceptor domains. LOV domain is well suited for insertion due to its small size and the close proximity of its N- and C-termini. Illumination induces undocking of the Jα helix from the LOV core, which potentially inhibits the kinase.

These considerations were employed to create light-inhibited SRC kinase123. A LOV domain was inserted into the kinase loop that was previously used for the insertion of the uniRapR domain122. The resultant photo-inhibitable SRC kinase (PI-Src) demonstrated the same dark activity as the constitutively active kinase, whereas illumination (λ=445 nm, I=0.01 mW/cm2) resulted in 3.5-fold inhibition123. The light-induced inhibition was additionally demonstrated by the decrease in phosphorylation of multiple SRC downstream targets. Consistently with the effect of SRC on cell mobility, irradiation caused lamellipodia collapse and a significant reduction in cell migration rates, a similar effect to the SRC inhibitor PP2. Interestingly, the modeling of SRC conformational changes by molecular dynamics did not reveal randomly distorted conformations of PI-Src in the lit state but indicated only slight physiologically relevant changes in the kinase structure.

The use of peptide-derived inhibitors that can be inactivated by light is another approach to regulate SRC kinase124. SRC kinase possesses a modular structure consisting of three domains. The SH1 domain provides catalytic functions, whereas domains SH2 and SH3 play roles in kinase regulation and substrate recognition. It was found that a bivalent peptide that binds simultaneously to the SH1 and SH2 domains possesses 50-fold increased affinity to the kinase, compared with a monovalent SH1-targeted monovalent inhibitor 125. Introducing a photolabile site into the peptide between the two kinase binding sites resulted in a light-controlled inhibitor, which is functionally equivalent to the photoactivatable Src kinase 124. The light-dependent release of Src kinase activity was demonstrated by phosphorylation of the fluorescent substrate in vitro.

4.7. Routes to design light-regulatable kinases

The choice of appropriate kinase target requires detailed knowledge of cell signaling pathways in order to identify kinase that act as master regulator of specific biological process. This can be challenging task because all nodes in cell signaling are highly interconnected with each other. Therefore, several members of the same pathway could be considered as targets for engineering. Ideally, these kinases should have determined 3D structures and well-defined regulation mechanisms.

Engineering of opto-kinases consists of several major steps (Figure 5). The first step is the selection of an engineering approach that will allow light-control over kinase activity. It can be either engineered from kinase itself, for example, via fusion of a kinase and a photoreceptor, or from kinase inhibitor. The selected target kinase should be truncated to the catalytic domain or to the cytoplasmic domain (in a case of RTKs) in order to remove all regulatory domains. Because all protein kinases share the same catalytic core, it can be done in a relatively simple way. However, individual families of kinases are regulated differently (Figure 1). For example, the catalytic core can be inhibited or activated by specific motifs, which must be removed to uncouple it from the regulation mechanisms. This results in either constitutively active or inactive core, which should be fused to photosensitive moiety of a photoreceptor. Based on the kinase structure and activation mechanism (Figure 1) and kinase signaling pathways (Figure 2), a rational choice for engineering can be made (Figure 5). The easiest route to design a light-regulatable kinase is to use one of the available optogenetic systems (Figure 4). If one wants to perform light-control over endogenous kinases, such approaches as optogenetic clustering or use of optically regulated kinase inhibitors can be applied (Figure 5).

Choosing of the proper optogenetic system is the second step in the opto-kinase engineering. Photoreceptors in the optogenetic systems are usually truncated to the minimal photosensitive moiety to remove all output domains interfering with intracellular signaling. This can be done in relatively straightforward manner because structure of most photoreceptors is known (Figure 3). In the simplest scenario, the kinase core is fused to the photoreceptor, which forms light-inducible homodimers or multimers. Apparently, this approach can be used to create opto-RTKs (Figure 1F). Structure and length of the linkers between photoreceptor and kinase moieties can have critical effect on opto-kinase properties. Therefore, different linkers should be screened to achieve highest enzymatic activity and photodynamic contrast. Heterodimerization can be easily employed for targeting of kinases to different locations. Space near the cell plasma membrane contains a number of signaling partners of kinases. Many kinases stay inactive in the cytoplasm, whereas their recruitment to the plasma membrane activates them because it is the place where their “master kinases” or downstream signaling partners are localized (part 2.2). This engineering approach is straightforward and has been employed to optically regulate several kinase activities (part 4.1). More complicated task is to create an opto-kinase regulated by heterodimerization in any location. This approach can be used to engineer cGMP–dependent kinases (Figure 1C), CAMKs (Figure 1E) and FAK kinases (Figure 1H). An optogenetic pair that forms heterodimer, for example CRY2/CIB1 or PhyB/PIF, can be used as a photosensitive template. One protein from the optogenetic pair can be fused to the kinase core, whereas another one to the regulatory moiety. Challenging task is to isolate a minimal regulatory moiety that can interact with the core in light-dependent manner. Ideally, such regulatory moiety should target only an opto-kinase but not endogenous enzymes. Moreover, two components of the heterodimeric opto-kinase should be expressed in equimolar concentrations in a cell, which can be achieved by co-expression from a vector containing the 2A self-cleavable peptide. Caging of catalytic center between two photoreceptor moieties is another approach to regulate kinase activity (Figure 4E). This approach is essential for many kinase targets that are not regulated by homo- or heterodimerization (Figure 4E). For caging, relatively small homodimerizing photoreceptors, such as LOV or Dronpa, suit best. All unwanted regulatory sequences should be removed from a kinase core. Detailed insight into the kinase structure is needed to find insertion places, which are frequently located in the loops opposite to the active site. Typically, several insertion sites are screened, and the opto-kinase variants demonstrating the lowest basal activity and the highest activation are chosen. Photocaging can be used for regulation of endogenous kinases too. In this case, an inhibitory peptide can be fused to the Jα helix of the LOV photoreceptor (Figure 4F). This approach is relatively straightforward and has been used to develop several light-regulated kinase inhibitors (part 4.1).

The third step is to determine whether the developed opto-kinase or its inhibitor is light-regulatable or not (Figure 5). Ideally, the detection and selection of the best opto-kinase construct requires a high-throughput screening system, which possesses the high signal-to-background (S/B) ratio. Immunodetection of phosphorylated kinase targets or phosphorylated kinase itself is the first method of choice to determine kinase activation rate and reversibility; but it cannot be adapted for high-throughput screens. For high-throughput screening of opto-kinases, vectors encoding the reporter genes, such as luciferase, secreted alkaline phosphatase or fluorescent protein, cloned after serum response element (SRE) can be used104, 105, 126. The SRE-dependent transcription of the bioluminescent or fluorescent reporter will be a key indicator of the opto-kinase activation. Assays based on the SRE-driven reporter expression are preferable for selection of opto-kinase variants with the highest S/B ratio. However, they are not convenient for assessment of activation kinetics and reversibility of opto-kinases. To determine opto-kinase activation kinetics and reversibility, FRET-based kinase biosensors and fluorescent translocation reporters can be used. Currently available kinase biosensors have relatively low S/B ratio as compared to translocation reporters. Also, because FRET biosensors consist of two fluorescent proteins, it is more difficult to avoid spectral crosstalk with activation light of an opto-kinase. However, the choice of the translocation reporters is limited to kinases of the MAPK and Akt pathways127, 11. The photoreceptor excitation is typically very fast, with half-times of transition being between picoseconds and microseconds128. It assumes that all opto-kinases should be activated faster, than their endogenous counterparts whose activation kinetics is limited by diffusion rates of growth factors. However, it was shown that activation of many opto-kinases leads to rapid ERK phosphorylation with rates typical for endogenous kinases stimulated by growth factors. In contrast to chemically caged compounds, active states of photoreceptors are fully reversible in darkness128. Dark relaxation of photoreceptors proceeds more slowly than excitation, with rates varying between seconds and minutes129. Dephosphorylation rates of native kinases also varies within these limits, whereas dephosphorylation rates of their downstream targets, can be much slower, varying between minutes and hours, depending on cell type130. We, therefore, can conclude that the kinetics of light-activation and dark relaxation for photoreceptors is comparable to the phosphorylation/dephosphorylation rates of endogenous kinases. Altogether, the intrinsic properties of photoreceptors mainly determine the duration and reversibility of cell signaling by engineered opto-kinases.

The fourth step in the opto-kinase development is its application to light-control of kinase signaling in cultured cells and in vivo (Figure 5). To achieve light-regulation of cell signaling in physiological context, an optimal opto-kinase variant should be fast activated, fully reversible and to demonstrate high S/B ratio. The resulting advanced opto-kinase variant can be applied to study various biological problems, such as described below.

5. APPLICATION OF OPTO-KINASES TO BIOLOGICAL PROBLEMS

It is possible to define three types of research problems to which optogenetic regulation of protein kinase activity can be applied. These problems are (i) probing the role of protein kinase signaling in embryonic development (Figure 6A), (ii) probing the dependence of the cell signaling output on the signal duration (Figure 6B), and (iii) dissecting cell signaling by the selective activation of distinct signaling nodes (Figure 6C).

5.1. Optogenetic control of kinase activity in embryonic development and cell migration

Protein kinase signaling is tightly controlled both spatially and temporally during embryonic development, and its dysregulation leads to developmental disorders. The use of optically regulated protein kinases allows the activation of kinase signaling during certain stages of embryonic development. It also allows the activation of protein kinase signaling in defined groups of cells in the developing embryo. This approach may help to identify temporal and spatial windows in which the dysregulation of protein kinase signaling leads to developmental disorders (Figure 6A, Table 3).

Blue-light-activated RAF1 was applied to determine the role of RAF1 in the induction of mesoderm in the Xenopus embryo. It has been shown that expression of constitutively active RAF1 induces the formation of ectopic-like structures (i.e., epithelial-mesenchymal transition) in the anterior dorsal region of the Xenopus embryo after germ layer specification131. In these experiments, constitutively active RAF1 activated the downstream signaling cascades soon after the injection of the RNA into the Xenopus embryo during the early cleavage stage. It was technically challenging to activate RAF1 specifically after germ layer specification, and it was hard to understand if the activation of RAF1 after germ layer specification will lead to epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

CRY-2A-CIBN expression cassette encodes the photolyase homology region of CRY2 (CRY2PHR) and cryptochrome-interacting basic-helix-loop-helix protein (CIB1). In this system, RAF1 is fused to the CRY2 domain, while CIB1 is attached to the PM by the CAAX motif. Upon blue light illumination, CRY2-RAF1 is recruited to the PM, and RAF1 signaling is induced. This led to activation of RAF1 signaling in Xenopus embryos after germ layer specification that led to the development of ectopic tail-like structures in the anterior dorsal region. Therefore, this system allows the precise temporal control of RAF1 activity during development. This result provided the first direct evidence that the activation of Raf1 after mesoderm induction triggers the tumor-like growth of embryonic tissues132.

The other example of successful optogenetic control over protein kinase activity during development was regulation of the activity of fibroblast growth factor receptor-1 (FGFR-1) using green light. In this system, kinase domains of FGFR1 were fused to the cobalamine-binding domain (CBD) of the bacterial CarH transcription factor. CBDs dimerize in darkness but dissociate upon irradiation with green light. The expression of mFGFR1-MxCBD in zebrafish embryos led to such developmental malformations as the formation of the secondary axis and caudalization of the brain in darkness. Illumination with green light led to the development of normal embryos. This experiment shows the possibility of precise inhibition of FGFR signaling in the developing embryo with the help of light105.

Opto-SOS system consists of the phytochrome of Arabidopsis thaliana, anchored at the PM, and the phytochrome interacting factor (PIF), fused to SOScat. Upon illumination with red light, PIF-SOScat is recruited to the PM and activates the RAS/RAF/MEK/ERK cascade. This optogenetic system was implemented to identify the temporal and spatial windows when Drosophila embryos are especially vulnerable to the dysregulation of ERK signaling. First, it has been shown that early Drosophila embryos are insensitive to the activation of Ras/MEK/ERK signaling at the poles of embryos but are highly sensitive to the activation of ERK signaling in the middle of the embryos. Second, it was demonstrated that Drosophila embryos are sensitive to this activation of RAS/MEK/ERK signaling only 1–4 h after fertilization. Thus, activation of the RAS/MEK/ERK module led to defects in embryonic development only during this short period, and the embryos stayed insensitive to later perturbations of RAS/MEK/ERK signaling even at the level of the whole embryo. This example shows how optogenetic stimulation of a certain signaling module makes it possible to identify spatial and temporal points when the embryo is vulnerable to that module’s overactivation133.

Opto-FGFR1 (kinase domains of FGFR1 fused to the CRY2PHR domains) was used to establish a phototaxis model in fibroblasts and in human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). First, this “phototaxis” model was applied to elucidate the role of local increase of Ca2+ signals in the migration of HUVECs. Local Ca2+ signals are well-known modulators of cell migration and combination of opto-RTK with sensor of Ca2+ activity aided in the dissection of the role of local Ca2+ signals in the migration of HUVECs134. Because opto-FGFR-expressing cells showed positive phototaxis to blue light it was possible to discriminate between their front and rear regions. Visualization of the fluorescent Ca2+ sensor revealed sensor revealed enhancement of the local concentrations of Ca2+ in the rear parts of the migrating cells.

Knowledge about the distribution of Ca2+ signals between the front and the rear regions in the directionally migrating cells was previously limited because it was technically challenging to establish a gradient of the chemoattractant (FGF). The use of opto-FGFR and fluorescent Ca2+ sensors helped to establish a clear pathway linking the local Ca2+ signal and front-rear coordination during directed cell migration135.

The same opto-FGFR was also applied to induce phototaxis in fibroblasts and to dissect the roles of the MAPK, PLCγ and PI3K pathways in their migration. It has been shown that inhibition of the MAPK pathway does not affect the FGFR-dependent migration of fibroblasts, while inhibition of PLCγ and PI3K signaling hampers cell migration134.

5.2. Interrogation of protein kinase signaling pathways with opto-kinases

Dissection of protein kinase pathways benefited greatly from the development of small molecular inhibitors. However, these inhibitors fail to regulate protein kinase signaling reversibly and with temporal precision. The use of optically controlled protein kinases allows the reversible activation of separate nodes of protein signaling cascades with the help of light.

AKT fused to CRY2 and PM-anchored CIB1 were used for identification of temporal patterns of AKT activity, which are crucial for the regulation of the AKT-FoxO pathway. Blue-light induced translocation of CRY2-AKT to the PM allowed effective changes in the amplitude and frequency of AKT signaling. This ability helped to establish connections between the timing of AKT activation and induction of the gene transcription. Smaller frequency and larger amplitude caused the strongest activation of Atrogin-1, the downstream target of the AKT-FoxO signaling, while more frequent stimulation with a similar light dose led to the diminished expression of Atrogin-1106.

In another study, CIB1-CRY2-based opto-AKT and opto-RAF tools were applied to identify the optimal time window for the protection of the differentiated PC12 cells against oxidative stress. Both tools were induced with blue light either before (pre-conditioning) or after (post-conditioning) applying stress to PC12 cells. It has been shown that the induction of opto-RAF before stress protects cells longer (for 12 h) than the induction of opto-AKT. Conversely, the induction of opto-AKT after stress cells protected cells more efficiently than the induction of opto-RAF. These results indicated that the RAF/MEK/ERK cascade exerts its prosurvival effect due to the induction of expression of prosurvival transcription factors, such as Elk-1 and CREB, while AKT immediately phosphorylates and suppresses apoptotic transcription factors (Figure 2)136. Therefore, modes of the prosurvival action of the RAF/MEK/ERK and AKT cascades are different.

CIBN-CAAX and CRY2-RAF1 pair was employed to identify the optimal timing of the RAF/MEK/ERK cascade stimulation needed for differentiation of PC12 cells. The strongest neurite outgrowth was observed when the off-time duration per stimulation time was shorter than 45 min111.

The light-activated inhibitor of CAMKII, named paAI2, was used to reveal the temporal window required for the induction of synaptic and behavioral plasticity. Illumination of dendritic spines expressed paAI2 for 1–2 mins inhibited induction of LTP (long-term potentiation) in hippocampal slices of rodents. On the other hand, activation of pAI2 for only one minute after the induction of LTP did not affect LTP formation thereafter. This optogenetic inhibition of CAMKII activity revealed the temporal window when CAMKII activity is crucial for LTP formation. A similar experiment on animals revealed that inactivation of CAMKII during training suppresses memory formation. In this case, paAI2 inhibitor was expressed in the amygdala neurons of mice, and activated with light during an avoidance task137.

Opto-SOS system, which activates the RAS/MEK/ERK cascade, was used to address a set of problems. First, using opto-SOS along with the fluorescent reporter of ERK activity, it has been shown that RAS/MEK/ERK module acts as a low-pass filter, transmitting only signals longer than 4 min. Second, employment of opto-SOS and reverse protein arrays, allowed to establish correlations between temporal patterns between timing of RAF/MEK/ERK activation (whether 120 min or 20 min light stimuli) and distinct protein expression patterns were established. Third, co-culturing opto-SOS-expressing NIH3T3 cells with non-transfected cells allowed to identify a paracrine circuit from ERK to STAT3. In this system, the non-transfected NIH3T3 cells were stimulated by leukemia inhibitory factor, which was secreted by the opto-SOS-expressing light-stimulated cells12613.

Opto-PIP3 and opto-Akt were successfully used to establish difference between downstream signaling nodes PI3K and AKT of the insulin signaling pathway in 3T3-L1 adipocytes. For this, the CRY2-iSH2/CIBN1-CAAX pair was used for the activation of PI3K signaling by blue light. The iSH2 protein constitutively binds one of the PI3K catalytic domains and, when recruited to the PM, activates PI3K. The prominent effect of insulin signaling in adipocytes is the translocation of the glucose transporter 4 (GLUT4) to the PM. Thus far, as both PI3K and AKT are activated following IR stimulation, it is hard to understand whether PI3K or AKT plays the major role in GLUT4 translocation. Light induction of CRY2-iSH2/CIBN1-CAAX interaction fully imitated the action of insulin and led to the efficient translocation of GLUT4 to the PM while the activation of opto-AKT resulted only in the weak translocation of GLUT4. These data revealed the primary role of PI3K signaling in the translocation of GLUT4 to the PM26.

5.3. Optically assisted screening of protein kinase inhibitors

Development of screening methods for protein kinase inhibitors is important problem in pharmacology. Light activation enables the individual activation of distinct protein kinases (Figure 6C) and, thus, may simplify the cell-based screening of protein kinase inhibitors. For example, activation of the RTK by growth factors activates several signaling nodes simultaneously, and it is hard to determine on which node a certain inhibitor exerts its action.

The method of all-optical screening was first applied to the screening of inhibitors of RTKs126. For that purpose, opto-RTKs based on fusions of the blue light-induced homodimerizing domain from Vaucheria frigida and the kinase domains of receptor tyrosine kinases were used in the screening assay. HEK293 cells transfected with opto-RTKs were stimulated with blue light, and activation of the RAF/MEK/ERK module was monitored through the detection of SRE-driven GFP expression. This method was useful not only for the identification of inhibitors of conventional RTKs but also for the inhibitors of orphan RTKs, i.e., RTKs without identified ligands126.

MEK1 and MEK2 kinases were fused to Dronpa monomeric subunits so that in the darkness, when Dronpa is dimeric, their catalytic sites were occluded, and MEK-Dronpa fusions were inactive. Upon 500 nm illumination, these kinases induced the translocation of ERK-GFP to the nucleus. These light-activated kinases were used to establish ERK-GFP translocation-based optically assisted inhibitor screening. In this system, an inhibitor should block light-induced ERK translocation to the nucleus. This system makes it possible to screen only MEK inhibitors and “walk down the pathway,” avoiding the activation of upstream steps and shortening the RTK/RAS/RAF/MEK/ERK signaling modules to MEK/ERK (Figure 6C)90.

Different optoRAFs were successfully used for the characterization of RAF inhibitors as well. For this purpose, a set of blue-light activated RAFs was developed. Different isoforms of RAFs can be activated by heterodimerization. Light-regulated BRAF-Cry2, CRAF-CRY2, BRAF-CRY2/CRAF-CIBN and kinase dead BRAFkd-CRY2/CRAF-CIBN fusions were established to characterize the effects of their inhibitors. Vemurafenib and dabrafenib are clinically approved drugs that inhibit oncogenic BRAF, but paradoxically activate wild-type BRAF. To characterize their action, these inhibitors were applied separately to cells expressing BRAF and CRAF homodimers or CRAF/BRAF heterodimers. Opto-RAFs were stimulated with blue light, and SRE-driven SEAP expression was used to monitor their activity. It was shown that vemurafenib activated RAF signaling in cells expressing BRAF-CRY2, CRAF-CRY2 and BRAFkd/CRAF-CRY2. Dabrafenib failed to activate RAF signaling in BRAF-CRY2-expressing cells, but, like vemurafenib, induced RAF signaling in CRAF-CRY2 and BRAFkd/CRAF-CRY2 expressing cells. Implementing such a screening system may aid in further screening for “paradox breaker” inhibitors, which inhibit all Raf isoforms131.

6. OPTICAL VERSUS CHEMICAL REGULATION OF PROTEIN KINASES

Several chemical strategies were developed to regulate protein kinase activity with exclusive specificity138. An elegant bump-and-hole approach involves mutating the ‘gatekeeper’ residue near the ATP-binding site of the protein kinase molecule to the smaller amino acid, usually glycine. This mutation creates a ‘hole’, which can be targeted with the inhibitors specifically developed for this purpose. These inhibitors downregulate only mutated protein kinase, called ‘analogue sensitive kinase’, but do not target wild-type, non-mutated protein kinases. The generality of this approach was demonstrated by engineering of the number of ‘analogue sensitive kinases’, including SRC, c-Fyn, CDK and CAMK139. The somewhat similar approach, termed Ele-Cys, is able to complement bump-and-hole technique. Ele-Cys approach involves the development of the kinase with the engineered cysteine residue at a position close to the active center. This cysteine can be selectively blocked with electrophilic inhibitors. Ele-Cys approach is compatible with the bump-hole approach so that ‘bump-hole’ and ‘Ele-Cys’ kinases can be independently inhibited when expressed in one cell138. These both techniques are able to inhibit engineered protein kinases with the high specificity. However, the bump-and-hole approach has limitations. First, about 30% of protein kinases do not tolerate the gatekeeper mutation and respond to it with the dramatic reduction of catalytic activity. Second, bump-and-hole technique alone does not allow simultaneous control of the different kinases in the same cell, whereas the described above opto-kinases do that140. Third, the ability of the bump-and-hole approach to regulate protein kinases depends on the rate of the diffusion of the inhibitor of the ‘analogue sensitive kinase’. In contrast, optically controlled kinases can be stimulated with light instantly.

Another chemical strategy to regulate protein kinase activity consists of activation of protein kinases with the small CID molecules. In this approach, protein kinase molecule is split into two inactive parts. Each inactive kinase part is attached to the fusion protein, such as the FKBP and FRB. Upon addition of rapamycin, FKBP and FRB bind each other, parts of the split kinase interact too, resulting in a reconstitution of the functional protein kinase molecule. The other CID systems used to reconstitute split kinases are based on gibberellic acid (GID1-GAI) and abscisic acid (ABI-PYL)141. The CID based approaches allow specific induction of simultaneously several protein kinases in one cell. Two drawbacks of CID based approaches are the requirement to engineer chimeric protein kinases and their heterologous expression in cells.

Many small molecule kinase activators allow controlling the activity of endogenous protein kinases. Small molecule chemical activators represent the diverse group of molecules that is substantially smaller than the group of small molecule inhibitors of protein kinase activity. Most of the known examples of small molecule kinase activators activate protein kinases via the binding of the allosteric site and favoring formation of the active kinase conformation. Some of these substances, such as gambogic amide, may act as highly specific agonists, acting on the only one protein kinase142, but due to the high homology of the protein kinases from the same families, some of these agonists act on several kinases from the one family. Amitriptyline, TrkA and TrkB agonist, activates both of them. This complicates functional research of the protein kinase pathways; for example, administration of amitriptyline to mice activates both TrkA and TrkB. Co-administration of the specific TrkA inhibitor allows deciphering roles of TrkA and TrkB in the protection of neurons from the kainic acid-triggered neuronal cell death. Only inhibition of TrkA abolishes neuroprotective effect of amitriptyline. Therefore, the combination of the activator with broad specificity and the inhibitor with the narrow specificity allowed elucidating the distinct roles of the closely related receptors in the neuroprotection142, 143.

Thus, there are two groups of approaches to chemically control the protein kinase activity. The first one allows for the specific control over individual kinases but requires engineering of the chimeric protein kinases, such as ‘analogue-sensitive kinases’ or split kinases, and selection of CID inducers. The second group consisting of small molecule activators and inhibitors is less specific but allows the control over endogenous endogenous kinases. The former approaches are more specific but may suffer from the adverse effects caused by the overexpression of the heterologous proteins103. Moreover, the addition of the bulky fusions to the kinase domains can potentially disturb interaction of the engineered protein kinases with their signaling partners. On the other hand, although the chemical inhibitors and activators can be less specific, they allow controlling the activity of endogenous protein kinases without perturbing the protein balance in cells.

In this regard, the optically controlled kinases in some way stay closer to the engineered protein kinases regulated by chemical stimuli rather than to small molecule inducers. However, they are specifically regulated by light, and the action of light does not affect endogenous kinase activity. The main difference between the chemically and optically controlled protein kinases is the possibility to regulate the latter ones non-invasively, reversibly and in spatiotemporal manner. The chemical stimulus applied to cell culture medium usually cannot be easily and fast removed. Pulsed application of the inhibitor or activator to culture medium requires the use of sophisticated microfluidic devices144. Contrary, activation light of specific wavelength can be just turned off and on repeatedly in the specific place of the individual cultured cell or the specific regions of tissue or organ in vivo.

Optically controlled kinases may have limitations similar to that of the chemically regulated chimeric kinases. For instance, the high level of expression of the light-regulated RTKs may cause unspecific activation of the downstream pathways103. To avoid this, an addition of the N-terminal light-responsive fusions to such membrane-localized protein kinases as Raf may enhance the distance between them and the PM, where the Raf signaling partners are concentrated, decreasing background activation of signaling132.

Optically controlled kinases can be combined with the described above techniques of chemical regulation, as well as with other opto-kinases that are regulated by the light of the different wavelength. The current examples of the chemical and optical regulation together consist of combining of the chemical inhibitors of the protein kinase activity and opto-kinases (Table 3).

7. INSTRUMENTATION TO PHOTOACTIVATE OPTO-KINASES

Photoactivation of opto-kinases requires the appropriate optical software and hardware. The easiest way to photostimulate cell culture expressing opto-kinases is to apply the wide-field illumination to the cells. Wide-field illumination can be easily performed with the light-emitting diode (LED) arrays. However, this method does not allow precise photostimulation of opto-kinases in single cells. Nevertheless, LED arrays can be combined with fast shutters, which allow to photostimulate opto-kinases with high temporal precision145. The wide-field stimulation of the cell culture with the light of two different wavelengths can be achieved with the help of a light-plate apparatus (LPA). It can be assembled from the commercially available compounds and regulated with the help of open-source software, called Iris146.

Advantages of LED-based systems include their low cost, convenience of use and high-frequency temporal precision. LED arrays provide light intensities in the range of 1–10 mW/cm2 that is sufficient to activate most of photoreceptors (Table 1). However, some photosensitive moieties, such as pdDronpa and pRAP, are activated with the higher light intensities (up to several W/cm2), which is not provided by common LEDs. Halogen lamps and lasers can generate such light intensities. Notably, Arduino microcontrollers can control large LED arrays to generate precise spatio-temporal patterns of lightning for simultaneous processing of multiple samples147. LEDs can be repeatedly switched OFF and ON with the megahertz frequency148. Drawbacks of LEDs, as compared to lasers, are large spectral width and high light-scattering. The wide emission spectrum of LEDs can become an obstacle for multicomponent optogenetic experiments in which several photoreceptors should be exited separately with light of certain wavelengths. Moreover, the low LED light intensity is a disadvantage for in vivo experiments149, 150.

The precise photoregulation of the opto-kinase activity in single cells and subcellular regions (Figure 6D) can be achieved with a set of methods that allow spatial shaping of the laser beam. In the scanning methods, a serial photostimulation of the regions of interest is performed with the help of scanning laser focus. The desired excitation pattern is generated by modulation of the laser beam at the back aperture of the microscope objective so that the aforementioned pattern is reproduced in focus at the sample plane145, 151. In the parallel methods, all regions of interest are excited simultaneously. The desired light intensity pattern is forwarded to the appropriate laser modulating devices, such as digital micromirror devices (DMDs), which modulate laser beam intensity. Micro-LED arrays can be used for the parallel excitation alongside with changing of intensity profile of the laser beam, using spatial light modulators, to achieve excitation of the separate spots in space145, 151. These optical modulators can be adapted to standard microscopes.

However, single-photon excitation suffers from the light scattering, which prevents single cell targeting and deep excitation inside tissue151. Two-photon excitation exploits excitation with the help of two photons, each having half of the energy of the photon in single photon excitation and, thus, allows precise excitation of the light-sensitive molecules on the bigger depths than single-photon excitation 151. Moreover, for light-stimulation of optogenetic tools in living animals, a light delivery can be achieved with the help of optical fibers coupled to LEDs and lasers151. However, coupling of LEDs and lasers to optical fibers in freely moving animals faces some obstacles. Freely moving animals may remove or damage the optical fiber while grooming. Another issue is a possibility of the tissue damage in the place of fiber insertion. An alternative to the fiber-coupled LEDs are portable and implantable devices having wireless or battery-powered regulation of illumination152153. These devices allow avoiding the use of optical fiber that tethers an animal154.

For further information on the hardware and software approaches used for activation of opto-kinases we refer readers to the recent reviews and experimental articles145151, 146, 154,155.

8. PERSPECTIVES

The optogenetic tools allow reversible, fast and non-invasive manipulation of the protein kinase activities and perturbation of the protein kinase pathways. The photoreceptor modules described above (Table 1) will enable engineering of the new opto-kinases whereas the light-regulatable protein kinases already developed (Table 2) allow studies of the protein kinase signaling in mammalian cells with high spatial and temporal precision. Further expansion of optical control of the protein kinase signaling pathways requires an enlargement of the opto-kinase toolbox. Several approaches in this direction can be defined.

First, an enhancement of the spectral diversity of the opto-kinase toolbox is expected. Currently, the largest number of the opto-kinases responds to blue light. Further engineering of protein kinases controlled with green, yellow, red and NIR light will allow simultaneous perturbation of several protein kinase pathways in a cell or an organism using the light of different wavelengths. The spectral diversity of the opto-kinase toolbox will also facilitate simultaneous use of fluorescent biosensors for signaling pathways and optogenetic tools, having different light activation spectral ranges.

Second, although many optogenetic tools allowing regulation of the prosurvival MAPK RAF/MEK/ERK cascade are currently developed, the number of tools to regulate the stress-inducible MAPK, JNK and p38 cascades is limited to one156. Given the role of both JNK and p38 cascades in the development of Alzheimer disease, as a result of the hyperactivation of both pathways, the engineering of such optogenetic tools is highly required. The same can be said about the designing of optical regulators of JAK-STAT signaling. Available LID pairs can be applied to the development of light-regulatable cytokine receptors and attached to the cytokine receptors JAK kinases.

Third, the new strategies such as splitting protein kinase molecules with N-terminal inhibitory domains into two parts and coupling the kinase domain and kinase-inhibiting domain to different components of any LID pair could aid in the expanding of the opto-kinase toolbox in the area of protein kinases with N-terminal autoinhibitory domains.

Fourth, a refining of the performance of the available optogenetic tools is required. The performance of the already developed opto-kinases can be improved by focusing on such properties as photodynamic range (or photoactivation contrast), response rate, reversibility, and sensitivity to ambient light.

Although several signaling pathways including MAPK/ERK and PI3K/AKT can be optically regulated by light-induced recruitment, this approach is not suitable for controlling kinases that are primarily localized in the cytoplasm. Due to that, numerous soluble kinases including cAMP-dependent and cGMP-dependent protein kinases, MAPKs, CAMKs and GSK-3 are still awaiting optogenetic intervention. Among them, soluble kinases with cellular outcomes depending strongly on dynamics of their activation are the prominent targets for engineering. Such targets are MAP kinases that are activated during the M phase of cell cycle and CAMKs that upregulated by increase of calcium concentration.

Mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) is soluble multisubunit complex that coordinates cell metabolism with environmental stimuli, such as stress, growth factors, nutrients and oxygen. mTOR has profound effects on physiology regulating glucose homeostasis, muscle mass, lipid metabolism and immunity, which makes it an important pharmacological target157. Although inhibitors of mTOR are used for immunosuppression and treatment of several cancers, they are toxic for organism. Therefore, mTOR-targeting pharmacology is now focused on the development of tissue-specific approaches. Optical control over mTOR could confer high spatiotemporal resolution that would not be possible with pharmacological methods.

Optical regulation of native intracellular enzymes is a paramount challenge for modern medicine. Optogenetic constructs regulating endogenous kinases could be engineered by caging of inhibiting or activating peptides at a C-terminus of the LOV2 domain. However, intrinsic dynamics of the LOV2 domain prevents effective caging, resulting in low S/B ratio for light-dependent inhibition119. More efficient caging could be achieved by fusing peptides to N-terminus of LOV domain that has more thermodynamically stable dark state158.

Opto-kinases can be combined with kinase translocation reporters in all-optical screens for kinase inhibitors90. In traditional chemical-based screens, kinase target is stimulated by addition of growth factor or serum that leads to activation of multiple signaling cascades. Therefore, these screens cannot distinguish between inhibitors targeting specific kinase and its upstream targets. In contrast, photoactivation is always specific to certain opto-kinase and should allow discovery and validation of specific inhibitors. Furthermore, real-time imaging of all-optical screens can provide information on kinetics of inhibition.

All kinase pathways must have negative feedback loops needed to protect cells from excessive signaling. These loops are difficult to identify due to the absence of methods allowing rapid activation and deactivation of certain signaling cascade node. Opto-kinases provide an opportunity to separate target kinase activity and feedback events in time, which cannot be achieved by biochemical methods. For example, rapid stimulation of photoswitchable psRaf1 was used to discover a novel mechanism of RAF/MEK/ERK cascade regulation. It was demonstrated that phospho-ERK stimulates PP2A/PP1 phosphatases, which de-phosphorylate MEK and downregulate RAF/MAP/ERK signaling90.

How can advanced opto-kinases be engineered? On one hand, the photochemical characteristics of already used LIDs can be improved with rational design and random mutagenesis. For example, computational protein design, phage display and high-throughput binding assays were implemented to improve the light-inducible LOV2-based dimer. While the original LOV2 domain bound its natural binding partner SspB only twice stronger upon illumination, the described engineering approach has improved its light-inducible affinity to SspB by over 50-fold159. On the other hand, a search for the new putative LIDs among natural photoreceptors should be performed. For example, an NIR light-responsive bacterial phytochrome pair, consisting of bacterial phytochrome RpBphP1 and its binding partner RpPpsR2 from Rhodopseudomonas palustris was efficiently used to control protein-protein interactions with NIR light in several applications68. Perhaps the RpBphP1-RpPpsR2 pair could be exploited to achieve activation of Akt and Raf protein kinases via PM targeting (Figure 4B). Moreover, it was shown that the engineered variant of the DrBphP bacterial phytochrome from Deinococcus radiodurance can monomerize upon far-red light irradiation97, 160. This monomerization could be used to develop far-red light-inactivated protein kinases. Because far-red and NIR light penetrates mammalian tissues with the high efficiency, the development of these opto-kinases should allow non-invasive manipulation of protein kinase activity in living mammals67.

Nevertheless, the currently available optogenetically controlled kinases can be already efficiently used to study spatial and temporal aspects of the various protein kinase signaling pathways (Table 2). The described in Table 3 examples of the opto-kinase applications in embryonic development, cell signaling and characterization of inhibitors should provide the guidelines to use these optogenetic tools in a wide variety of protein kinase studies.

Supplementary Material

Author Picture 1

Author Picture 2

Author Picture 3

Biographies

This work was supported by grants GM122567 and NS103573 from the US National Institutes of Health, ERC-2013-ADG-340233 from the EU FP7 program, and 263371 and 266992 from the Academy of Finland.

List of abbreviations

Abl abelson murine leukemia viral oncogene homolog

AGC protein kinase group, which unites protein kinase A, C and G families

AKT protein kinase B. The name Akt does not refer to its function and was a temporary classification name for a mouse bred that developed spontaneous thymic lymphomas. The “t” stands for “thymoma”

AsLOV2 light-oxygen-voltage-sensing domain 2 of Avena sativa.

BV biliverdin IXα

Jα helix C-terminal α-helix of AsLOV2 domain

CAAX C-terminal membrane targeting peptide motif (C, cysteine; A, aliphatic residue; X, any amino acid)

CAMK Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase

CBD cobalamin (vitamin B12) binding domains

CDK cyclin-dependent kinase

CIB cryptochrome-interacting basic helix-loop-helix protein

CIBN truncated version of CIB (first 170 amino acids)

CID chemically induced dimerization or chemically induced dimerizer

CMGC cGMP-dependent protein kinase

Cph cyanobacterial phytochrome

CREB cAMP response element-binding protein

CRY cryptochrome

Dronpa reversibly photoswitchable green fluorescent protein

EGF epidermal growth factor

Elk Ets (E26 transformation-specific family) domain-containing protein

ePDZ acronym derived from the names of the Post-synaptic density protein 95, Drosophila disc large tumor suppressor and zona occludens 1

ePKs eukaryotic protein kinases

ERK extracellular signal-regulated kinase

FAD flavin adenine dinucleotide; FAD refers to the oxidized form while FADH and FADH2 forms are formed upon reduction.

FAK focal adhesion kinase

FERM N-terminal domain for the membrane targeting (Four-point-one, Ezrin, Radixirin, Moesin)

FGFR1 fibroblast growth factor receptor 1

FMN flavin mononucleotide

FRB rapamycin binding domain of mTOR

GAF type of protein domains, which is observed in many proteins; it is widespread in cGMP-specific phosphodiesterases, adenylyl cyclases and FhlA

GSK3 glycogen synthase kinase

HTH helix-turn-helix

IEG immediate early expression gene

IGFR insulin growth factor receptor

IL interleukin

IR insulin receptor

iSH2 the coiled-coil regulatory motif of the PI3K

Lck lymphocyte-specific protein kinase

LID light-induced dimerization

LOV light-oxygen-voltage-sensing domain

MAPK mitogen-activated protein kinase

MEK the other name for MAP2K1 kinase, the second MAPK kinase in the cascade

Myr myristoylation peptide or signal

NGF nerve growth factor

NIR near infrared

NRTK non-receptor tyrosine kinase

opto-kinase optically regulated kinase

opto-RTK optically regulated receptor tyrosine kinase

PAS Per-Arnt-Sim domain; the protein motif, which acts as a molecular Velcro.

PCB phycocyanobilin

PCM photosensory core module

PDK phosphoinositide-dependent kinase-1

PH plekstrin homology domain

PHR photolyase homology domain

PhyB phytochrome B

PΦB phytochromobilin

PI3K phosphoinositide 3-kinase

PIF phytochrome interacting factor

PIF-pocket substrate binding motif in AGC kinases

PIP3 phosphatidylinositol (3,4,5)-triphosphate

PKA protein kinase A

PLCγ phospholipase C gamma-1

PM plasmatic membrane

PTEN phosphatase and tensin homolog, negative regulator of PI3K/Akt pathway

RAF serine/threonine-specific protein kinases participating in MAPK pathway; acronym for rapidly accelerated fibrosarcoma

RAS small GTPases, transferring signals from the RTKs to MAPK cascade

ROS1 proto-oncogene tyrosine-protein kinase

RTK receptor tyrosine kinases

S/B signal-to-background ratio

SFK Src family of kinases

SH Src-homology domain

Sos series of guanidine nucleotide exchange factors, acting on Ras subfamily of small GTPases)

Src non-receptor tyrosine kinase, which is encoded by SRC gene

SRE serum response element

STAT signal transducer and activator of transcription

Trk tropomyosin receptor kinase

FIGURE 1 The structural basis for the activation of protein kinases

Protein kinases in inactive state are in gray and activated protein kinases are in violet. (A) Left: Schematic depiction of the bilobal structure of eukaryotic protein kinases. Right: The bilobal structure of PKA (PDB ID: 2CPK), in rainbow coloring161. (B) In the inactive state, PDK1 interacting fragment (PIF-tide) binds to PIF-pocket of the same kinase molecule. Upon kinase activation, PIF-tide dissociates and binds to PIF pocket of another kinase molecule. (C) Activation of CDK kinases through their interaction with cyclins. Left: N-terminal αC-helix (black) locks the catalytic cleft and inactivates kinase. Right: CMGC insert-mediated interaction of the CDK kinase with the cyclin dissociates αC-helix, disrupts blockage of the catalytic cleft and makes it accessible for the phosphorylation that results in kinase activation. (D) Regulation of MAPK kinases. In the inactive state, CMGC motif (red) is bound to kinase C-lobe, whereas upon activation it interacts with the N-terminal D-motif (docking motif) of the other MAPK-kinase. (E) In the inactive state, of CAMK, inhibitory C-terminal motif (shown in red) locks catalytic center, whereas binding to calmodulin releases this lock and activates catalytic center. (F) Left: Interaction with growth factors lead to dimerization, transphosphorylation of kinase cytoplasmic domains and activation of downstream signaling. Right: Binding of insulin to insulin receptor causes their conformational changes and activation. Ig-like extracellular domains of RTKs are shown in green. (G) Regulation of SFK non-receptor tyrosine kinases through inhibitory phosphate at the C-terminus of the catalytic kinase domain. SH2 domains are shown in blue. (H) Non-receptor tyrosine kinases: regulation through autoinhibition by different N-terminal inhibitory domains. N-terminal inhibitory domains are shown in blue. (I) JAK kinases are attached to cytokine receptors (green). Cytokine receptors dimerize upon interaction with cytokines (blue), and JAK kinases transphosphorylate each other and phosphorylate STAT transcription factors bound to cytokine receptors.

FIGURE 2 The major protein kinase signaling pathways

From left to right: (A) Prosurvival action of AKT signaling: AKT phosphorylates and inhibits pro-apoptotic proteins in the cytosol and phosphorylates and causes dislocation of the FOX3O transcription factor from the nucleus; (B) Signaling by growth factor receptors leads to the activation of the prosurvival MAPK ERK1/2 pathway and to the induction of prosurvival transcription factors; (C) Stress factors lead to the activation of the stress-induced MAPK pathways JNK1/2/3 and p38, which leads to the induction of pro-apoptotic c-Jun activation and phosphorylation of tau protein; and (D) Activation of the JAK-STAT pathway by cytokines leads to the dimerization of cytokine receptors, phosphorylation of the associated with them JAK kinases, subsequent phosphorylation of STAT transcription factors and dissociation of the phosphorylated STAT transcription factors in the cell nucleus.

FIGURE 3 Photoreceptors used for the engineering of opto-kinases

(A) The structure of the Neurospora crassa LOV protein Vivid in its signaling state (PDB ID: 3RH8)162. N-terminal extensions important for dimer formation are shown in magenta. FAD cofactor is shown. (B) Crystal structure of the LOV2 domain of Avena sativa phototropin-1 (AsLOV2). N-terminal (A’α) and C-terminal helices (Jα) are shown in magenta. FAD cofactor is shown. In the dark state, helices are packed on the outer face of a five-stranded antiparallel β-sheet that adopts the PAS fold (PDB ID: 2V0U)163, (C) Crystal structure of cryptochrome-1, which is the closest homolog of cryptochrome-2 from Arabidopsis thaliana (1U3D). Both cryptochromes are involved in signaling and share 60% of amino acid identity164. N-terminal αβ domain is in brown, large mainly unstructured linker region in magenta, and C-terminal α domain in green. (D) The structure of bright dimeric Dronpa (2Z6Y)88. Flexible β7-strand is in magenta. Autocatalytically formed from GYC amino acids chromophore is shown. (E) Crystal structure of phytochrome from Xanthomonas campestris (PDB ID: 5AKP)165. PAS domain is shown in green, GAF in cyan, PHY in magenta and HisK in brown. Extended α-helices that propagate the signal from the GAF to the HisK domain are in black. BV chromophore is shown. (F) Crystal structure of transcriptional regulator CarH from Thermus thermophilus (PDB ID: 5CK8F)100. N-terminal DNA-binding HTH domain is in brown and C-terminal domain that binds B12 cofactor in green. Chromophores and cofactors in all panels are shown as spheres with carbon in gray, oxygen in red, nitrogen in blue, sulfur in yellow and phosphorus in orange.

FIGURE 4 The general strategies to engineer opto-kinases

(A) Homodimerization. Upon blue-light illumination, LOV domains form a homodimer that causes activation of the receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK). (B) Heterodimerization. Illumination results in CRRY2-CIBN interaction, recruitment of constitutively active Akt kinase domain to the PM and downstream signaling. (C) Clustering. CRY2 fused to the receptor targeting domain is monomeric in darkness and possesses low affinity to RTK. Illumination results in CRY2 oligomerization and increased affinity to RTK. Subsequent receptor clustering activates kinase signaling. (D) Oligomerization. Undocking of Jα helix from the LOV2 core results in uncaging of the peptide and recruitment of Ste5 on the PM through ePDZ–peptide interaction. Ste5 act as the scaffold to assemble multiprotein complex that activates signaling. (E) Uncaging. In the darkness, MEK kinase site is sterically caged between two Dronpa molecules forming the intramolecular homodimer. Illumination results in monomeric Dronpa that correspond to uncaging and psMEK1 activation. (F). Allosteric control. The LOV2 domain is inserted in the loop in the catalytic domain. In darkness then Jα helix is docked on the core of LOV2 it does not interfere with the activity whereas illumination abrogates kinase activity due to Jα undocking. In all panels the red star designates the signaling state of protein kinase.

FIGURE 5 Workflow for the development of opto-kinases

Step 1. Choosing of an engineering approach for different groups of mammalian tyrosine and serine-threonine kinases. The kinase groups are indicated on the right side of each arrow. Approaches applicable to engineer light-regulated kinases of each group (clustering, dimerization, etc.) are indicated behind each arrowhead. Step 2. Selection of an optogenetic system. Selection of the optogenetic system depends on the engineering approach. From left to right: the optogenetic systems corresponding to the engineering approaches from tstep 1 are presented. See text for further details and examples. Step 3. Methods allowing to test opto-kinase activity. (i) Immunochemistry: Western blotting using phospho-specific antibodies allows to make a distinction between activated and non-activated states of opto-kinase. Applicable to all kinase groups. (ii) SRE-dependent expression of fluorescent and bioluminescent reporters: a gene of the reporter is cloned after the serum response element (SRE). SRE is activated as a result of activation of MAPK/ERK pathway. Reporter expression corresponds to the level of the pathway activation. Mostly applicable to RTKs and MAPKs. (iii) Use of fluorescent translocation reporters: a fluorescent reporter, such as Erk or PH-Akt, resides in cell cytoplasm. Upon illumination the reporter translocases to the cell membrane or nucleus. Applicable mostly to opto-RTKs, some AGCs and MAPK opto-kinases. (iv) FRET-based sensors: measurements using these ratiometric fluorescent biosensors are applicable to all opto-kinases but provide the lower sensitivity than the other methods. Step 4. Further characterization and optimization of the resulting advanced opto-kinase variant. Opto-kinases can be implemented in studies of cultured cells and in small model animals in vivo. See text for further details and examples.

FIGURE 6 Selected biological applications of opto-kinases

(A) Manipulation of zebrafish development with opto-FGFR105. Overexpression of active opto-FGFR in darkness caused developmental malformations such as caudalization of the brain. Illumination of embyos with green light caused inhibition of opto-FGFR and normal embryo development. (B) Constant illumination of PC12 cells expressing CIBN-GFP-CAAX and Cry2PHR-mCherry-Raf1 optogenetic pair leads to recruitment of Raf1 to PM and sustained activation of Raf/MEK/ERK cascade. That causes significant neurite outgrowth, whereas light pulses cause transient activation of the cascade and cell proliferation111. (C) Interrogation of protein kinase pathways via selective activation of signaling nodes. From left to right: Activation of opto-AKT with blue light; activation of RTKs with blue and red light, and inactivation with green light; Activation and inactivation of opto-SOS with red and NIR light; Separate activation of different RAF isoforms with the help of blue light; Activation of MEK with cyan light; and inactivation of CAMKII with blue light. (D) Selective activation of subpopulation of cells in tissue culture with NIR and light. Left: In darkness and under NIR light opto-SOS kinase is inactive and GFP-ERK reporter is localized in the cytoplasm. Right: Illumination with red light recruits opto-SOS to the PM where it activates MAPK/ERK cascade. This leads to relocalization of EGFP-ERK1 reporter to the nucleus that occurs only in the illuminated cells13.

TABLE 1 Photosensitive modules used as templates to engineer opto-kinases.

Photosensitive protein module	Mechanism	Cofactor	Light intensity, mW/cm2a	On light, nm	Off light, nm	Ref	
VfAU1-LOV, NgPA1-LOV, OdPA1-LOV	homodimerization	FMN	0.25	470	darkness	102, 166	
AsLOV2	allosteric control	0.01	123	
conformational change	5.6	119	
heterodimerization of pep with PDZ	0.5	117	
AtCry2	homodimerization	FAD	1.27	488	darkness	103	
heterodimerization with CIB1	0.2, 5.8b, 50c	111, 113
106, 108	
clustering	0.65d, 9e	114–116	
pdDronpa1, pdDronpa1.2	caging	none	200	500	400	90	
PhyB	heterodimerization with PIF	PCB	N/Af	650	750	12, 13	
CPH1S	homodimerization	PCB	0.62	630	darkness	104	
CBD	homodimerization	cobalamin	0.17	dark	545	105	
iFKBP:pRAP	caging	none	72	365	none	121	
a If not stated otherwise, intensity of continuous light is given

b Pulses, 1 s ON and 3 min OFF

c Laser pulses 0.2 s long

d Laser pulses, 0.5 s long

e Pulses, 0.5 s long every 10 s

f ON light with 650 nm LED, and OFF light using microscope lamp with 750 nm long-pass filter.

TABLE 2 Developed opto-kinases and their properties.

Optogenetic tools	Light-sensitive moiety	Affected signaling pathways	Observed cellular response	Ref	
OptoTrkA
OptoTrkB
OptoTrkC	AtCry2PRH	activates ERK, AKT, Ca2+	Neurite outgrowth	103	
Opto-mFGFR1	LOV	MAPK/ERK	Increase in cell division rate, cancer-like morphology	102	
OptoSOS	PhyB:PIF	activates RAS-ERK cascade	PC12 differentiation	13	
Opto-mFGFR1	Cph1S-o	MAPK/ERK	Increase of ERK phosphorylation	104	
Opto-mFGFR1	CBD	MAPK/ERK	Developmental malformation of the brain	105	
PA-AKT	CRY2PHR:CIBN	AKT	Membrane ruffling and cytoskeleton remodeling	106	
Opto-Ste5	CRY2PHR:CIB	MAPK	Cell cycle arrest	108	
SH2-N	Cry2	ERK, AKT	Fillopodia and lamellipodia extension	115	
Opto-PIK3K	Cry2:CIB	PIK3-AKT	Change of PIP3 level	113, 116	
Opto-Ste5
Opto-Ste11	AsLOV2	MAPK	Growth arrest	117	
PA-PKI	AsLOV2	PKA	Decrease of CREBP phosphorylation	119	
PA-MKI	AsLOV2	PKA	Inhibition of cell protrusion dynamics	119	
psMEK
psRAF,psCDK5	Dronpa	MEK, RAF, CDK5	Increase of ERK phosphorylation, tail swelling in C. elegans	90	
RapR-FAK	pRap	FAK	Membrane ruffling	121	
RapR-Src	pRap	Src	Increase of cell area, loss of cellular contacts in the epidermis	122	
PI-Src	LOV2	Src	Reduction of cell migration rates	123	
Opto-RAF	CRY2PHR:CIBN	MAPK/ERK	PC12 neurites outgrowth	111	
Opto–inositol 5-phosphatase	CRY2PHR:CIBN	PIK3-AKT	Arrest of clathrin-mediated endocytosis	113	
Opto-iSH2	CRY2PHR:CIBN	PIK3-AKT	Reorganization of actin cytoskeleton	113	

TABLE 3 Applications of opto-kinases to study cellular signaling.

Biological problem	Used opto-kinase	Observed effect	Ref	
Analysis of cell migration and embryonic development	
Comparison of the effect of the constitutively active/induced after completion of germ layer specification Raf1 expression on the development of Xenopus embryo	CRY2-2A-2CIBN	Overexpression of RAF1 before and after completion of germ layer specification causes developmental malformations in Xenopus embryo	132	
Effect of expression of constitutively active human mFGFR-1 in zebrafish	mFGFR1-MxCBD	Overexpression of mFGFR1 in zebrafish embryo induces developmental malformations	105	
Identification of the period of sensitivity of Drosophila embryos to the perturbations of ERK signaling	Opto-SOS	Early embryogenesis in Drosophila embryos is insensitive to increased ERK activity at the poles and highly sensitive to ERK signaling in the middle of the embryo; elevated ERK activity is lethal for the early embryos but has no effect 3–4 h post fertilization	133	
Connection of FGFR-induced signaling pathways with the local Ca2+ signals	opto-FGFR
opto-RAC1
optoPI3K	Deciphering of the signaling pathways linking local Ca2+ signals and front-rear coordination during directed cell migration	135	
Impact of MAPK, PLCγ and PI3K pathways onto FGF-induced fibroblast migration	opto-FGFR	PLCγ and PIP3 signaling play major role in the fibroblast migration	134	
Dissection of signaling pathways	
Identification of temporal patterns associated with the expression of Atrogin-1	PA-AKT	Smaller frequency and bigger amplitude of the AKT-stimulation induces the high level of the Atrogin expression	106	
Identification of the temporal window of protection of PC12 cells from the oxidative stress by Akt and ERK signaling	opto-AKT	Induction of opto-RAF protects cells from the oxidative stress for longer time, than Akt induction. opto-AKT induction more efficient in the protection of cells from the oxidative stress after induction of the stress	136	
Identifying the optimal time period of stimulation of the Raf/MEK/ERK cascade for the PC12 cells differentiation	opto-RAF	Maximum neurite outgrowth is observed if the off-time duration per cycle is shorter than 45 min	111	
Establishing connections of the temporal patterns of CAMKII activation and LTP formation	paAIP2	Activation of CAMKII is crucial for the LTP formation, but inhibition of CAMKII after LTP induction does not affects it any more. Activation of CAMKII during training in behaving animals is crucial for memory formation	137	
Interrogating dynamic control of signal transmission by the Ras/ERK module	opto-SOS	Finding of proteins induced by the various temporal patterns of ERK activation.
Identification of the paracrine circuit from the activated ERK to the STAT3	13	
The role of kinase-dead BRAF mutant in the CRAF activation	opto-RAF	Kinase-dead B-RAF acts as activating scaffold of the C-RAF	167	
Interrogation the separate roles of PIP3 and Akt in insulin action	opto-PIP3
opto-AKT	opto-PIP3 alone is able to induce GLUT4 vesicle exocytosis in 3T3 adipocytes	26	
Characterization of protein kinase inhibitors	
Screening of inhibitor library	optoROS1	Identification of small molecules specifically inhibiting opto-RTKs	126	
Dissecting roles of BRAF inhibitors	optoRAFs	BRAF inhibitor, vemuraphenib, is confirmed as the paradoxical activator of BRAF and CRAF homodimers and heterodimers	131	

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

The authors declare no conflict of interest.


1 Cohen P Eur J Biochem 2001 268 5001 5010 11589691
2 Endicott JA Noble ME Johnson LN Annu Rev Biochem 2012 81 587 613 22482904
3 Wu P Nielsen TE Clausen MH Trends Pharmacol Sci 2015 36 422 439 25975227
4 Ebisuya M Kondoh K Nishida E Journal of cell science 2005 118 2997 3002 16014377
5 Ryu H Chung M Dobrzynski M Fey D Blum Y Lee SS Peter M Kholodenko BN Jeon NL Pertz O Mol Syst Biol 2015 11 838 26613961
6 Czapinski J Kielbus M Kalafut J Kos M Stepulak A Rivero-Muller A Front Chem 2017 5 12 28344971
7 Miller ED Li K Kanade T Weiss LE Walker LM Campbell PG Biomaterials 2011 32 2775 2785 21272933
8 Deisseroth K Nat Neurosci 2015 18 1213 1225 26308982
9 Mattis J Tye KM Ferenczi EA Ramakrishnan C O’Shea DJ Prakash R Gunaydin LA Hyun M Fenno LE Gradinaru V Yizhar O Deisseroth K Nat Methods 2011 9 159 172 22179551
10 Welch CM Elliott H Danuser G Hahn KM Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2011 12 749 756 22016058
11 Maryu G Matsuda M Aoki K Cell Struct Funct 2016 41 81 92 27247077
12 Toettcher JE Gong D Lim WA Weiner OD Methods Enzymol 2011 497 409 423 21601096
13 Toettcher JE Weiner OD Lim WA Cell 2013 155 1422 1434 24315106
14 Piatkevich KD Verkhusha VV Methods Cell Biol 2011 102 431 461 21704849
15 Kampasi K Stark E Seymour J Na K Winful HG Buzsaki G Wise KD Yoon E Sci Rep 2016 6 30961 27485264
16 Emiliani V Cohen AE Deisseroth K Hausser M J Neurosci 2015 35 13917 13926 26468193
17 Mohanty SK Lakshminarayananan V J Mod Opt 2015 62 949 970 26412943
18 Scheeff ED Bourne PE PLoS Comput Biol 2005 1 e49 16244704
19 Adams JA Chem Rev 2001 101 2271 2290 11749373
20 Huang K Wang YH Brown A Sun G J Mol Biol 2009 386 1066 1077 19244618
21 Taylor SS Kornev AP Trends Biochem Sci 2011 36 65 77 20971646
22 Oruganty K Kannan N Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2012 367 2529 2539 22889905
23 Manning G Whyte DB Martinez R Hunter T Sudarsanam S Science 2002 298 1912 1934 12471243
24 Pastor-Flores D Schulze JO Bahi A Giacometti R Ferrer-Dalmau J Passeron S Engel M Suss E Casamayor A Biondi RM ACS Chem Biol 2013 8 2283 2292 23911092
25 Leonard TA Hurley JH Curr Opin Struct Biol 2011 21 785 791 22142590
26 Xu Y Nan D Fan J Bogan JS Toomre D Journal of cell science 2016 129 2085 2095 27076519
27 Varjosalo M Keskitalo S Van Drogen A Nurkkala H Vichalkovski A Aebersold R Gstaiger M Cell Rep 2013 3 1306 1320 23602568
28 Malumbres M Genome Biol 2014 15 122 25180339
29 Lolli G Johnson LN Cell Cycle 2005 4 572 577 15876871
30 Turjanski AG Vaque JP Gutkind JS Oncogene 2007 26 3240 3253 17496919
31 Hunter T Schulman H Cell 2005 123 765 767 16325572
32 Hook SS Means AR Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 2001 41 471 505 11264466
33 Doble BW Woodgett JR Journal of cell science 2003 116 1175 1186 12615961
34 Frame S Cohen P Biondi RM Molecular cell 2001 7 1321 1327 11430833
35 Jope RS Trends in pharmacological sciences 2003 24 441 443 12967765
36 Fan QW Weiss WA Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 2010 347 279 296 20535652
37 Storkebaum E Carmeliet P J Clin Invest 2004 113 14 18 14702101
38 Latina V Caioli S Zona C Ciotti MT Amadoro G Calissano P Front Cell Neurosci 2017 11 68 28360840
39 Hoelder S Clarke PA Workman P Mol Oncol 2012 6 155 176 22440008
40 Hubbard SR Till JH Annu Rev Biochem 2000 69 373 398 10966463
41 Li E Hristova K Cell Adh Migr 2010 4 249 254 20168077
42 Taylor SS Zhang P Steichen JM Keshwani MM Kornev AP Biochim Biophys Acta 2013 1834 1271 1278 23535202
43 Ward CW Lawrence MC Bioessays 2009 31 422 434 19274663
44 Maruyama IN Bioessays 2015 37 959 967 26241732
45 DeRose R Miyamoto T Inoue T Pflugers Arch 2013 465 409 417 23299847
46 Yang J Symes K Mercola M Schreiber SL Curr Biol 1998 8 11 18 9427627
47 Roskoski R Jr Pharmacol Res 2015 94 9 25 25662515
48 Yeatman TJ Nat Rev Cancer 2004 4 470 480 15170449
49 Boggon TJ Eck MJ Oncogene 2004 23 7918 7927 15489910
50 Wang JY Mol Cell Biol 2014 34 1188 1197 24421390
51 Lietha D Cai X Ceccarelli DF Li Y Schaller MD Eck MJ Cell 2007 129 1177 1187 17574028
52 Murray PJ J Immunol 2007 178 2623 2629 17312100
53 Cargnello M Roux PP Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2011 75 50 83 21372320
54 Roskoski R Jr Pharmacol Res 2012 66 105 143 22569528
55 Coffey ET Nat Rev Neurosci 2014 15 285 299 24739785
56 Datta SR Brunet A Greenberg ME Genes Dev 1999 13 2905 2927 10579998
57 Toker A Marmiroli S Adv Biol Regul 2014 55 28 38 24794538
58 Song G Ouyang G Bao S J Cell Mol Med 2005 9 59 71 15784165
59 Sacktor TC Neuron 2012 73 211 213 22284176
60 Nicolas CS Peineau S Amici M Csaba Z Fafouri A Javalet C Collett VJ Hildebrandt L Seaton G Choi SL Sim SE Bradley C Lee K Zhuo M Kaang BK Gressens P Dournaud P Fitzjohn SM Bortolotto ZA Cho K Collingridge GL Neuron 2012 73 374 390 22284190
61 Christian JL Wiley Interdiscip Rev Dev Biol 2012 1 3 15 23801664
62 Murphy LO Blenis J Trends Biochem Sci 2006 31 268 275 16603362
63 Tomida T Takekawa M Saito H Nat Commun 2015 6 8350 26399197
64 Luo Q Beaver JM Liu Y Zhang Z Genes (Basel) 2017 8
65 Kubota H Noguchi R Toyoshima Y Ozaki Y Uda S Watanabe K Ogawa W Kuroda S Molecular cell 2012 46 820 832 22633957
66 Piatkevich KD Subach FV Verkhusha VV Chem Soc Rev 2013 42 3441 3452 23361376
67 Chernov KG Redchuk TA Omelina ES Verkhusha VV Chem Rev 2017 117 6423 6446 28401765
68 Kaberniuk AA Shemetov AA Verkhusha VV Nat Methods 2016 13 591 597 27159085
69 Redchuk TA Omelina ES Chernov KG Verkhusha VV Nat Chem Biol 2017 13 633 639 28346403
70 Taylor BL Zhulin IB Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 1999 63 479 506 10357859
71 Conrad KS Manahan CC Crane BR Nat Chem Biol 2014 10 801 809 25229449
72 Huang ZJ Edery I Rosbash M Nature 1993 364 259 262 8391649
73 Möglich A Ayers RA Moffat K Structure 2009 17 1282 1294 19836329
74 Möglich A Yang X Ayers RA Moffat K Annu Rev Plant Biol 2010 61 21 47 20192744
75 Zoltowski BD Gardner KH Biochemistry 2011 50 4 16 21141905
76 Crosson S Moffat K Plant Cell 2002 14 1067 1075 12034897
77 Fedorov R Schlichting I Hartmann E Domratcheva T Fuhrmann M Hegemann P Biophys J 2003 84 2474 2482 12668455
78 Zoltowski BD Schwerdtfeger C Widom J Loros JJ Bilwes AM Dunlap JC Crane BR Science 2007 316 1054 1057 17510367
79 Schleicher E Kowalczyk RM Kay CW Hegemann P Bacher A Fischer M Bittl R Richter G Weber S J Am Chem Soc 2004 126 11067 11076 15339193
80 Christie JM Swartz TE Bogomolni RA Briggs WR Plant J 2002 32 205 219 12383086
81 Harper SM Neil LC Gardner KH Science 2003 301 1541 1544 12970567
82 Crosson S Moffat K Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2001 98 2995 3000 11248020
83 Ahmad M Cashmore AR Plant Mol Biol 1996 30 851 861 8639745
84 Emery P So WV Kaneko M Hall JC Rosbash M Cell 1998 95 669 679 9845369
85 Partch CL Clarkson MW Ozgür S Lee AL Sancar A Biochemistry 2005 44 3795 3805 15751956
86 Wang H Ma LG Li JM Zhao HY Deng XW Science 2001 294 154 158 11509693
87 Sang Y Li QH Rubio V Zhang YC Mao J Deng XW Yang HQ Plant Cell 2005 17 1569 1584 15805487
88 Mizuno H Mal TK Wälchli M Kikuchi A Fukano T Ando R Jeyakanthan J Taka J Shiro Y Ikura M Miyawaki A Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2008 105 9227 9232 18574155
89 Zhou XX Chung HK Lam AJ Lin MZ Science 2012 338 810 814 23139335
90 Zhou XX Fan LZ Li P Shen K Lin MZ Science 2017 355 836 842 28232577
91 Auldridge ME Forest KT Crit Rev Biochem Mol 2011 46 67 88
92 Giraud E Verméglio A Photosynth Res 2008 97 141 153 18612842
93 Tarutina M Ryjenkov DA Gomelsky M J Biol Chem 2006 281 34751 34758 16968704
94 Rockwell NC Lagarias JC Chemphyschem 2010 11 1172 1180 20155775
95 Yang X Kuk J Moffat K Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2008 105 14715 14720 18799746
96 Wagner JR Zhang J Brunzelle JS Vierstra RD Forest KT J Biol Chem 2007 282 12298 12309 17322301
97 Takala H Bjorling A Berntsson O Lehtivuori H Niebling S Hoernke M Kosheleva I Henning R Menzel A Ihalainen JA Westenhoff S Nature 2014 509 245 248 24776794
98 Armstrong GA Annu Rev Microbiol 1997 51 629 659 9343362
99 Pérez-Marín MC Padmanabhan S Polanco MC Murillo FJ Elías-Arnanz M Mol Microbiol 2008 67 804 819 18315685
100 Jost M Fernández-Zapata J Polanco MC Ortiz-Guerrero JM Chen PY Kang G Padmanabhan S Elías-Arnanz M Drennan CL Nature 2015 526 536 541 26416754
101 Shcherbakova DM Shemetov AA Kaberniuk AA Verkhusha VV Annu Rev Biochem 2015 84 519 550 25706899
102 Grusch M Schelch K Riedler R Reichhart E Differ C Berger W Inglés-Prieto Á Janovjak H EMBO J 2014 33 1713 1726 24986882
103 Chang KY Woo D Jung H Lee S Kim S Won J Kyung T Park H Kim N Yang HW Park JY Hwang EM Kim D Heo WD Nat Commun 2014 5 4057 24894073
104 Reichhart E Ingles-Prieto A Tichy AM McKenzie C Janovjak H Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 2016 55 6339 6342 27101018
105 Kainrath S Stadler M Reichhart E Distel M Janovjak H Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 2017 56 4608 4611 28319307
106 Katsura Y Kubota H Kunida K Kanno A Kuroda S Ozawa T Sci Rep 2015 5 14589 26423353
107 Kennedy MJ Hughes RM Peteya LA Schwartz JW Ehlers MD Tucker CL Nat Methods 2010 7 973 975 21037589
108 Pathak GP Strickland D Vrana JD Tucker CL ACS Synth Biol 2014 3 832 838 25350266
109 Levskaya A Weiner OD Lim WA Voigt CA Nature 2009 461 997 1001 19749742
110 Toettcher JE Gong D Lim WA Weiner OD Nat Methods 2011 8 837 839 21909100
111 Zhang K Duan L Ong Q Lin Z Varman PM Sung K Cui B PLoS One 2014 9 e92917 24667437
112 Mendoza MC Er EE Blenis J Trends Biochem Sci 2011 36 320 328 21531565
113 Idevall-Hagren O Dickson EJ Hille B Toomre DK De Camilli P Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2012 109 E2316 2323 22847441
114 Bugaj LJ Choksi AT Mesuda CK Kane RS Schaffer DV Nat Methods 2013 10 249 252 23377377
115 Bugaj LJ Spelke DP Mesuda CK Varedi M Kane RS Schaffer DV Nat Commun 2015 6 6898 25902152
116 Lee S Park H Kyung T Kim NY Kim S Kim J Heo WD Nat Methods 2014 11 633 636 24793453
117 Strickland D Lin Y Wagner E Hope CM Zayner J Antoniou C Sosnick TR Weiss EL Glotzer M Nat Methods 2012 9 379 384 22388287
118 Strickland D Yao X Gawlak G Rosen MK Gardner KH Sosnick TR Nat Methods 2010 7 623 626 20562867
119 Yi JJ Wang H Vilela M Danuser G Hahn KM ACS Synth Biol 2014 3 788 795 24905630
120 Karginov AV Ding F Kota P Dokholyan NV Hahn KM Nat Biotechnol 2010 28 743 747 20581846
121 Karginov AV Zou Y Shirvanyants D Kota P Dokholyan NV Young DD Hahn KM Deiters A J Am Chem Soc 2011 133 420 423 21162531
122 Dagliyan O Shirvanyants D Karginov AV Ding F Fee L Chandrasekaran SN Freisinger CM Smolen GA Huttenlocher A Hahn KM Dokholyan NV Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2013 110 6800 6804 23569285
123 Dagliyan O Tarnawski M Chu PH Shirvanyants D Schlichting I Dokholyan NV Hahn KM Science 2016 354 1441 1444 27980211
124 Li H Hah JM Lawrence DS J Am Chem Soc 2008 130 10474 10475 18642802
125 Hah JM Sharma V Li H Lawrence DS J Am Chem Soc 2006 128 5996 5997 16669643
126 Ingles-Prieto A Reichhart E Muellner MK Nowak M Nijman SM Grusch M Janovjak H Nat Chem Biol 2015 11 952 954 26457372
127 de la Cova C Townley R Regot S Greenwald I Dev Cell 2017 42 542 553 e544 28826819
128 Moglich A Moffat K Photochemical &amp; photobiological sciences : Official journal of the European Photochemistry Association and the European Society for Photobiology 2010 9 1286 1300
129 Ziegler T Moglich A Frontiers in molecular biosciences 2015 2 30 26137467
130 Kiel C Serrano L Science signaling 2009 2 ra38 19638615
131 Chatelle CV Hovermann D Muller A Wagner HJ Weber W Radziwill G Sci Rep 2016 6 23713 27025703
132 Krishnamurthy VV Khamo JS Mei W Turgeon AJ Ashraf HM Mondal P Patel DB Risner N Cho EE Yang J Zhang K Development 2016 143 4085 4094 27697903
133 Johnson HE Goyal Y Pannucci NL Schupbach T Shvartsman SY Toettcher JE Dev Cell 2017 40 185 192 28118601
134 Kim N Kim JM Lee M Kim CY Chang KY Heo WD Chem Biol 2014 21 903 912 24981772
135 Kim JM Lee M Kim N Heo WD Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2016 113 5952 5957 27190091
136 Ong Q Guo S Duan L Zhang K Collier EA Cui B PLoS One 2016 11 e0153487 27082641
137 Murakoshi H Shin ME Parra-Bueno P Szatmari EM Shibata ACE Yasuda R Neuron 2017 94 690 28472663
138 Kung A Schimpl M Ekanayake A Chen YC Overman R Zhang C ACS Chem Biol 2017 12 1499 1503 28459525
139 Bishop A Buzko O Heyeck-Dumas S Jung I Kraybill B Liu Y Shah K Ulrich S Witucki L Yang F Zhang C Shokat KM Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct 2000 29 577 606 10940260
140 Cravatt BF Nat Methods 2005 2 411 412 15908917
141 Camacho-Soto K Castillo-Montoya J Tye B Ogunleye LO Ghosh I J Am Chem Soc 2014 136 17078 17086 25409264
142 Jang SW Okada M Sayeed I Xiao G Stein D Jin P Ye K Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2007 104 16329 16334 17911251
143 Jang SW Liu X Chan CB Weinshenker D Hall RA Xiao G Ye K Chem Biol 2009 16 644 656 19549602
144 Vanapalli SA Duits MH Mugele F Biomicrofluidics 2009 3 12006 19693387
145 Papagiakoumou E Biol Cell 2013 105 443 464 23782010
146 Gerhardt KP Olson EJ Castillo-Hair SM Hartsough LA Landry BP Ekness F Yokoo R Gomez EJ Ramakrishnan P Suh J Savage DF Tabor JJ Sci Rep 2016 6 35363 27805047
147 Olson EJ Hartsough LA Landry BP Shroff R Tabor JJ Nature methods 2014 11 449 455 24608181
148 Valley M Wagner S Gallarda BW Lledo PM J Vis Exp 2011 10.3791/3379
149 Telford WG Methods Mol Biol 2018 1678 447 479 29071690
150 Favre-Bulle IA Preece D Nieminen TA Heap LA Scott EK Rubinsztein-Dunlop H Sci Rep 2015 5 11501 26108566
151 Oron D Papagiakoumou E Anselmi F Emiliani V Prog Brain Res 2012 196 119 143 22341324
152 Steude A Witts EC Miles GB Gather MC Sci Adv 2016 2 e1600061 27386540
153 Kale RP Kouzani AZ Walder K Berk M Tye SJ Neurophotonics 2015 2 031206 26158015
154 Montgomery KL Yeh AJ Ho JS Tsao V Iyer SMohan Grosenick L Ferenczi EA Tanabe Y Deisseroth K Delp SL Poon AS Nat Methods 2015 12 969 974 26280330
155 Zhu P Fajardo O Shum J Zhang Scharer YP Friedrich RW Nat Protoc 2012 7 1410 1425 22743832
156 Melero-Fernandez de Mera RM Li LL Popinigis A Cisek K Tuittila M Yadav L Serva A Courtney MJ Nat Commun 2017 8 15017 28497795
157 Saxton RA Sabatini DM Cell 2017 168 960 976 28283069
158 Heintz U Schlichting I eLife 2016 5 e11860 26754770
159 Guntas G Hallett RA Zimmerman SP Williams T Yumerefendi H Bear JE Kuhlman B Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2015 112 112 117 25535392
160 Takala H Bjorling A Linna M Westenhoff S Ihalainen JA J Biol Chem 2015 290 16383 16392 25971964
161 Knighton DR Zheng JH Ten Eyck LF Ashford VA Xuong NH Taylor SS Sowadski JM Science 1991 253 407 414 1862342
162 Vaidya AT Chen CH Dunlap JC Loros JJ Crane BR Science signaling 2011 4 ra50 21868352
163 Halavaty AS Moffat K Biochemistry 2007 46 14001 14009 18001137
164 Brautigam CA Smith BS Ma Z Palnitkar M Tomchick DR Machius M Deisenhofer J Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2004 101 12142 12147 15299148
165 Otero LH Klinke S Rinaldi J Velázquez-Escobar F Mroginski MA Fernández López M Malamud F Vojnov AA Hildebrandt P Goldbaum FA Bonomi HR J Mol Biol 2016 10.1016/j.jmb.2016.04.012
166 Inglés-Prieto Á Reichhart E Muellner MK Nowak M Nijman SM Grusch M Janovjak H Nat Chem Biol 2015 11 952 954 26457372
167 Wend S Wagner HJ Muller K Zurbriggen MD Weber W Radziwill G ACS Synth Biol 2014 3 280 285 24090449
