LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


8900963
1466
Mol Neurobiol
Mol. Neurobiol.
Molecular neurobiology
0893-7648
1559-1182

26993302
5901910
10.1007/s12035-016-9849-7
NIHMS957383
Article
Insulin-like growth factor-II/cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate receptor in neurodegenerative diseases
Wang Y. ab
MacDonald R.G. c
Thinakaran G. d
Kar S. abe
a Department of Psychiatry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
b Centre for Prions and Protein Folding Diseases, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
c Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA
d Departments of Neurobiology, Neurology, and Pathology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA
e Department of Medicine, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
Address correspondence to: Satyabrata Kar, Ph.D., Centre for Prions and Protein Folding Diseases, Departments of Medicine (Neurology) and Psychiatry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada T6G 2M8, Tel. no: (780) 492 9357; Fax no: (780) 492 9352, skar@ualberta.ca
7 4 2018
19 3 2016
5 2017
16 4 2018
54 4 26362658
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
The insulin-like growth factor II/mannose 6-phosphate (IGF-II/M6P) receptor is a multifunctional single-transmembrane glycoprotein. Recent studies have advanced our understanding of the structure, ligand binding properties and trafficking of the IGF-II/M6P receptor. This receptor has been implicated in a variety of important cellular processes including growth and development, clearance of IGF-II, proteolytic activation of enzymes and growth factor precursors, in addition to its well-known role in the delivery of lysosomal enzymes. The IGF-II/M6P receptor, distributed widely in the central nervous system, has additional roles in mediating neurotransmitter release and memory enhancement/consolidation, possibly through activating IGF-II-related intracellular signaling pathways. Recent studies suggest that overexpression of the IGF-II/M6P receptor may have an important role in regulating the levels of transcripts and proteins involved in the development of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) – the prevalent cause of dementia affecting the elderly population in our society. It is reported that IGF-II/M6P receptor overexpression can increase the levels/processing of amyloid precursor protein leading to the generation of β-amyloid peptide, which is associated with degeneration of neurons and subsequent development of AD pathology. Given the significance of the receptor in mediating the transport and functioning of the lysosomal enzymes, it is being considered for therapeutic delivery of enzymes to the lysosomes to treat lysosomal storage disorders. Notwithstanding these results, additional studies are required to validate and fully characterize the function of the IGF-II/M6P receptor in the normal brain and its involvement in various neurodegenerative disorders including AD. It is also critical to understand the interaction between the IGF-II/M6P receptor and lysosomal enzymes in neurodegenerative processes, which may shed some light on developing approaches to detect and prevent neurodegeneration through the dysfunction of the receptor and the endosomal-lysosomal system.

Insulin-like growth factor II receptor
Mannose 6-phosphate receptor
Endosomal–lysosomal system
Alzheimer’s disease
Neurodegenerative diseases

1. Introduction

Insulin-like growth factors I and II (IGF-I and IGF-II) are pleiotropic polypeptides that are distributed widely in various tissues/organs, including the central nervous system (CNS). They share structural homology with proinsulin and are considered to mediate a wide spectrum of physiological functions during development and in the adult. At the cellular level, both IGFs can act as autocrine and paracrine factors to regulate cellular growth, survival, differentiation and chemotaxis. As components of an endocrine system, IGFs also help to regulate general growth and metabolism [1, 2]. The biological activities of IGF-I and -II are regulated by their synthetic rates, clearance, and their binding to a family of high-affinity IGF binding proteins (IGFBP1-6) and low-affinity IGFBP-related peptides (IGFBP-rP1-4) [3]. These proteins influence the half-life of circulating and tissue IGFs by regulating their transport in the circulation, filtration and excretion by the kidneys, delivery to their target cells, and interaction with receptors [4]. Generally, binding to IGFBPs decreases the activity of IGFs while nevertheless decreasing clearance and extending their biological half-life. The evidence further suggests that IGF stimulation increases the synthetic rates of some binding proteins, thus providing a feedback regulation in controlling the activity of the growth factors at the tissue level. Adding to the complexity of IGF availability, several enzymes capable of proteolyzing IGFBPs have been identified. The cleavage of IGFBPs by IGFBP proteases plays a key role in modulating the levels of free IGFs and IGFBPs and their actions [5, 6].

The biological functions of both IGFs are mediated by specific membrane receptors referred to as the IGF-I, IGF-II and insulin receptors (Fig. 1) [1, 7]. The IGF-I receptor is a member of the tyrosine kinase receptor family with close structural homology to the insulin receptor. This receptor binds IGF-I with higher affinity than either IGF-II or insulin and is usually located at the cell surface as a heterotetramer consisting of two α (135 kDa) and two β (90 kDa) subunits held together by disulfide bonds. The α-subunits contain the extracellular ligand binding site, whereas the β-subunits have transmembrane and tyrosine kinase domains and an intracellular tyrosine autophosphorylation site [7]. Ligand binding to the extracellular α subunit induces a conformational change that triggers receptor tyrosine kinase activity and initiates autophosphorylation of tyrosine residues within the intracellular segment of the β subunit (transphosphorylation) [1, 7]. This event leads to the docking of effector and adaptor molecules and subsequent activation of various intracellular signaling cascades, including the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase and phosphoinositide 3′-kinase pathways, which regulate growth, proliferation, survival, development and metabolic responses [1, 7]. Although the IGF-I receptor is the primary mediator of IGF’s physiological effects, the insulin receptor (IR), which binds both insulin and the IGFs, can also mediate certain biological actions of IGF-I and -II [7]. The IR is expressed as two isoforms, IR-A and IR-B, due to alternative splicing of exon 11 - a small exon encoding 12 amino acid residues at the carboxyl terminus of the IR α-subunit. Some studies have indicated that IGF-II binds IR-A, the isoform that excludes the exon-11 peptide, with higher affinity than IR-B in a variety of tissues and malignant cells [8, 9]. Activation of IR-A by IGF-II has been shown to stimulate mitogenic effects in IGF-I receptor-null mouse embryonic fibroblasts, possibly via the coordinated activation or deactivation of the proto-oncogenic serine kinase, Akt, glycogen synthase kinase 3-β, and extracellular-signal-regulated kinases (ERKs) [10]. The role of IR-B in mediating IGF effects remains unclear. Apart from specific IGF-I and insulin receptors, the detection of a hybrid receptor, comprising an insulin receptor αβ hemimolecule and an IGF-I receptor αβ hemimolecule, has added an additional layer of complexity to the IGF system. Although the hybrid receptors are widely distributed in certain tissues [11, 12], their signaling characteristics and/or physiological relevance in relation to the IGF-I receptor are still under investigation. Nevertheless, receptor cross-talk interactions through shared ligands, subunit combination and phosphorylation of some common substrates, are believed to be the main mechanisms by which both IGFs can mediate their functions [1, 2, 7].

The IGF-II receptor, unlike the IGF-I or insulin receptors, is structurally distinct and has no intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity. It exhibits higher affinity for IGF-II than IGF-I and does not bind insulin (Fig. 1) [13, 14]. The discovery in 1987–88 [15–17] that the IGF-II receptor is identical to the cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate (M6P) receptor indicates that this receptor (i.e., the IGF-II/M6P receptor) could function in multiple biological processes. Indeed, several studies have clearly established a role for this receptor in lysosomal enzyme trafficking from the trans-Golgi network (TGN) to the endosome for their subsequent delivery to lysosomes, clearance and/or activation of a variety of growth factors and endocytosis-mediated degradation of IGF-II. A growing body of evidence further supports a role for this receptor in transmembrane signal transduction in response to IGF-II binding, but its biological relevance remains controversial. At present, unlike the IGF-I receptor, very little is known as to the physiological and/or pathological significance of the IGF-II/M6P receptor in the functioning of the CNS [13, 18]. Thus, there is a need for a better understanding of the potential implications of this unique multifunctional receptor. This review provides an overview of the current knowledge on the structure and function of the IGF-II/M6P receptor, with special emphasis on its role in CNS functions in the normal brain and in degenerative diseases. For information on earlier work on the IGF-II/M6P receptor and/or its role in the periphery, the reader is referred to several reviews [13, 18, 19].

2. Structure, ligands and trafficking of the IGF-II/M6P receptor

2.1. Primary structure of the IGF-II/M6P receptor

Structurally, the IGF-II/M6P receptor is a type 1 integral membrane glycoprotein and P-type lectin receptor with a large N-terminal extracytoplasmic domain (ectodomain), a single transmembrane domain and a short C-terminal cytoplasmic domain. The ectodomain, which protrudes into the extracellular space or the lumen of vesicles and intracellular organelles, is composed of 15 contiguous repeats of approximately 147 amino acid residues each, sharing 14–38% sequence identity. Most repeats contain eight conserved cysteines that form intramolecular disulfide bonds necessary for proper receptor folding [13, 20, 21]. Functionally, the receptor binds IGF-II and M6P-containing ligands at distinct sites: repeat 11 comprises the core IGF-II binding site, whereas repeats 3, 5, 9 and 15 bind substrates with M6P groups [20, 22–24] (Fig. 1). High-resolution crystal structure studies of repeat 11 and of a receptor fragment consisting of repeats 1–3 of the human IGF-II/M6P receptor have provided insights into the structural features of the receptor [20, 21]. These studies suggest that all 15 repeats share a similar topology consisting of a flattened β-barrel formed by nine β-strands. This overall disulfide bond-stabilized structure has been termed a mannose 6-phosphate receptor homology (MRH) domain [13]. Further analysis of the 1–3 triple-repeat crystal indicates a structure in which repeat 3 sits on the top of repeats 1 and 2, suggesting that the IGF-II/M6P receptor forms distinct structural units that stack in a back-to-front manner. In this model, the IGF-II binding site potentially resides on the opposite face of the structure relative to the principal M6P binding sites of domains 3 and 9. The ectodomain contains 19 potential glycosylation sites, of which at least two are utilized in forming the mature receptor. Post-translational modifications including phosphorylation and palmitoylation have also been reported for the receptor. The cytoplasmic domain contains motifs that are important for receptor trafficking and phosphorylation. For example, the single tyrosine-based internalization motif, YSKV, is involved in targeting plasma membrane receptors to clathrin-coated vesicles [25]. Additionally, several regions of the cytoplasmic tail can act as potential substrates for various protein kinases, including protein kinase C (PKC), cAMP-dependent protein kinase, and casein kinases I and II [26]. A truncated form of the receptor representing a proteolytic cleavage product of the receptor’s ectodomain has been identified in serum and other physiological fluids of a variety of mammalian species [27, 28]. The significance of the truncated receptor form in relation to the functioning of the IGF-II/M6P receptor under in vivo conditions remains unclear; however, it appears that proteolytic cleavage at the cell surface to release the receptor’s ectodomain may be one means to degrade and thus down-regulate levels of the IGF-II/M6P receptor [29, 30].

The human IGF-II/M6P receptor gene is located on chromosome 6 and the murine IGF-II/M6P receptor gene is located on chromosome 17, and both contain 48 exons [31]. Interestingly, the exon boundaries of the IGF-II/M6P receptor, unlike other multidomain receptors, do not correspond to its functional or structural domains: exons 1–46 encode the receptor’s ectodomain with each of its 15 domains encoded by portions of 3 to 5 separate exons. In the human, expression of the IGF-II/M6P receptor gene is biallelic, whereas in the mouse it is maternally imprinted in peripheral tissues [32] but is expressed from both parental alleles in the CNS. The IGF-II/M6P receptor is ubiquitously expressed in most cells and tissues, and a number of studies have demonstrated that levels of the receptor are developmentally regulated; expressed at higher levels during fetal development and then declining over the postnatal period [33–35].

2.2. Ligands of the IGF-II/M6P receptor

As stated above, the multifunctional IGF-II/M6P receptor binds M6P-containing ligands and IGF-II at several distinct sites (Table 1) [13, 22, 24]. Two high-affinity M6P binding sites localize to repeats 1–3 and 7–11 of the receptor’s ectodomain, with essential residues localized to domains 3 and 9 (Fig. 1). A third, lower-affinity M6P recognition site that has a preference for binding mannose 6-phosphodiesters has been demonstrated within domain 5 [23]. Recently, a fourth M6P binding site with very low ligand-binding affinity has been localized to domain 15 [24]. It has been demonstrated that one receptor can simultaneously bind two molecules of M6P and one molecule of IGF-II [13, 36]. A variety of M6P-containing ligands such as lysosomal enzymes, transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) [37], granzyme B, glycosylated leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) [38], proliferin [39] and thyroglobulin [40], Other ligands that may bind the receptor by a non-M6P-based interaction are retinoic acid [41], urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR) and plasminogen itself [42, 43]. It is noteworthy that of the receptor’s 15 ectodomain repeats, ligand-binding functions - either primary (1, 3, 5, 9, 11, 15) or secondary (1, 7, 13) - have been ascribed to every odd-numbered repeat, whereas the even-numbered domains are considered to have more passive functions involving connection, spacing, orientation or dimerization.

The distinct binding sites of the IGF-II/M6P receptor allow not only for simultaneous binding of IGF-II and M6P-tagged glycoproteins, but binding of one ligand has been shown to reciprocally modulate receptor affinity for other ligands [44, 45]. For example, IGF-II has been shown to prevent binding of β-galactosidase to purified IGF-II/M6P receptors, whereas several lysosomal enzymes, but not M6P, inhibit the binding of IGF-II to the receptor [46, 47]. Conversely, M6P has been shown to stimulate the binding of 125I-IGF-II to the IGF-II/M6P receptor by two-fold in a number of cell types [45, 48]. Although the physiological significance of this interaction remains to be defined, it has been suggested that reciprocal inhibition of binding of these two classes of ligand is probably caused by a steric hindrance or a conformational change in the receptor. As a consequence of this reciprocal inhibition, extracellular lysosomal enzymes may inhibit the IGF-II/M6P receptor-mediated degradation of IGF-II, whereas the presence of IGF-II would increase the concentration of extracellular lysosomal enzymes. This issue will be discussed in further detail below.

Traditionally thought to function as a monomer, the IGF-II/M6P receptor exists in the membrane as an oligomer, and simultaneous, cooperative binding by monomers is necessary to produce a high affinity for M6P-related ligands [49, 50]. The ectodomain repeat 12 is believed to be functionally important for dimerization of the receptor (Fig. 1), which apparently enhances the binding affinity of ligands that are multivalent for M6P residues and alters the kinetics of receptor internalization from the cell surface [49, 50]. As IGF-II and lysosomal enzymes act as primary ligands for the multifunctional IGF-II/M6P receptor, the following section provides a brief overview of the features that underlie the binding of these ligands to the receptor.

2.2.1. IGF-II

IGF-II, which exhibits close structural similarity with IGF-I and insulin, contains 67 amino acid residues of which 45 (62%) are identical to IGF-I [51]. The gene encoding IGF-II maps to chromosome 11p15 and comprises 9 exons and 4 promoters. Exons 7, 8 and 9 encode the prepro-IGF-II protein, whereas exons 1 to 6 are non-coding and form alternative 5′-untranslated regions [52]. The 180-residue prepro-IGF-II contains an 89-residue carboxyl-terminal (E) peptide and a 24-residue signal peptide, both of which are cleaved post-translationally to generate mature IGF-II. At the cellular level, IGF-II and its mRNA are widely distributed in many different tissues including the CNS. Although IGF-II binds to both the IGF-I and IR-A receptors, it is considered to be the best-characterized non-M6P-containing ligand of the IGF-II/M6P receptor in viviparous mammals [13]. Functionally, IGF-II binds to repeat 11 of the IGF-II/M6P ectodomain [53, 54], which contains two hydrophobic binding sites, the first being a shallow cleft located at the mouth of the β-barrel and the second one extends along an external flattened surface. The former binding site, which contains Ile1572, is crucial for the initial docking of IGF-II, whereas the latter plays a role in stabilizing IGF-II binding [55, 56]. Structural studies of the interactions between IGF-II and the receptor, confirmed by mutagenesis, demonstrate that the residues Phe19 and Leu53 of IGF-II lock into this hydrophobic pocket of the receptor [57]. Repeat 11 of the ectodomain is also sufficient to mediate internalization of IGF-II by the receptor [56]. Examination of IGF-II binding to mini-receptors containing repeats 11–12, 11–13, and 11–15 indicates that repeat 13 does not itself bind to IGF-II but contains a domain that enhances its binding to the receptor [18, 58, 59]. It is also of interest to note that IGF-II binding by the IGF-II/M6P receptor is mostly confined to viviparous mammals, as platypus [60], chicken [61] and frog [61] receptors do not demonstrate such interactions or they bind with such low affinity as to not be physiologically relevant. The sequence alignment studies of both the IGF-II/M6P receptor and IGF-II suggested that although IGF-II remains relatively unaltered during evolution, the receptor gained the ability to bind IGF-II by changing key residues located in the binding pocket. Interestingly, unlike IGF-II binding, the carbohydrate recognition function of the receptor is widely utilized by mammalian and non-mammalian species [62, 63].

2.2.2. Lysosomal enzymes

To date, approximately 60 lysosomal hydrolases have been identified [64], and the majority of them are transported to lysosomes via the IGF-II/M6P receptor [62]. Equilibrium dialysis experiments have shown that the receptor can bind 2 moles of M6P or 1 mole of β-galactosidase or equivalent lysosomal enzyme bearing multiple M6P moieties [13]. Site-directed mutagenesis studies combined with pentamannosyl phosphate-agarose chromatography and binding affinity analyses have identified 5 amino acids in both repeat 3 (Q392, S431, R435, E460 and Y465) and repeat 9 (Q1292, H1329, R1334, E1354 and Y1360) that are essential for carbohydrate recognition by the bovine IGF-II/M6P receptor [13, 65]. Structure-based sequence alignment analysis of repeat 5 has also revealed 4 key residues (Gln, Arg, Glu and Tyr) that are necessary for carbohydrate binding, but the affinity of this site for M6P is approximately 300-fold lower than those of repeats 3 and 9 [23]; this site has now been identified as having a preference for binding mannose 6-phosphodiesters [66]. The C-terminal M6P binding site located on domain 9 exhibits optimal binding at pH 6.4–6.5, whereas the N-terminal M6P binding site of domain 3 shows a higher optimal binding pH of 6.9–7.0. Furthermore, the C-terminal site is highly specific for M6P and M6P phosphomonoester, whereas the N-terminal site binds M6P phosphodiester and M6P-sulfate with lower affinity than M6P [13, 67]. A recent study revealed that domain 15 has 3 of the five canonical ligand-binding residues and does bind M6P ligands, but with very low affinity [24, 66]; the physiological relevance of this property is unclear at this time. Thus, it is apparent that carbohydrate-binding sites of the IGF-II/M6P receptor recognize a great diversity of ligands over a relatively broad pH range [68].

2.3. Trafficking of the IGF-II/M6P receptor

Under normal conditions, the IGF-II/M6P receptors are localized mostly in the TGN and endosomal compartments and to a lesser extent (~10%) on the plasma membrane, but the receptors continuously shuttle between the surface and intracellular pools [18, 59]. Several agents, including growth factors, enzymes and chemical compounds, have been shown to modulate cellular recycling and routing of the IGF-II/M6P receptor. For example, a rapid and transient redistribution of IGF-II/M6P receptors from internal pools to the cell surface is induced in human fibroblasts by IGF-I, IGF-II and epidermal growth factor (EGF) [69]. The most striking effects on the distribution of the IGF-II/M6P receptor have been observed in rat adipocytes and H-35 hepatoma cells, wherein insulin causes a major subcellular relocalization of receptors from internal membranes to the cell surface [70, 71]. Glucose also increases IGF-II binding to the IGF-II/M6P receptor as a result of increased receptor cell-surface localization in two insulin-secreting cell lines (RINm5F and HIT) and human erythroleukemia K562 cell line [72]. Furthermore, the lysosomal enzyme β-glucuronidase has been shown to increase the rate of receptor internalization from the cell surface by stimulating or stabilizing receptor dimerization [73], whereas some major histocompatibility complex class I-derived peptides have been shown to inhibit receptor internalization in insulin-stimulated rat adipose cells [74]. Although the underlying mechanism(s) remains to be established, several kinases and phosphatases have been suggested to regulate the redistribution of cellular IGF-II/M6P receptors [19]. There is evidence that PKC-mediated serine phosphorylation or okadaic acid inhibition of serine phosphatases increases the proportion of receptors on the plasma membrane [72, 75, 76]. The cytoplasmic domain of the bovine IGF-II/M6P receptor contains three serine residues (i.e., Ser19, Ser85 and Ser156) whose phosphorylation correlates with the localization of the receptor in the TGN and clathrin-coated vesicles [77–79]. However, disruption of these three phosphorylation sites by mutagenesis had no detectable effect on the sorting of lysosomal enzymes by the bovine or murine IGF-II/M6P receptor [25].

3. Functions of the IGF-II/M6P receptor

The IGF-II/M6P receptor is actively involved in the regulation of cellular homeostasis either by transporting a diverse group of extracellular ligands into the cell via clathrin-coated vesicles for their subsequent activation/degradation or by targeting molecules such as lysosomal enzymes to endosomes/lysosomes for their subsequent functions. Binding of IGF-II to the receptor located on the plasma membrane may also exert some biological effects under certain circumstances by activating specific signal transduction pathways. Although the precise function of the IGF-II/M6P receptor may vary depending on the ligands and/or cell type under consideration, here we provide a brief overview of the general functions of IGF-II/M6P receptors that have been studied rather extensively over the years [26].

3.1. IGF-II/M6P receptor in sorting of lysosomal enzymes

Although the segregation and transport of lysosomal enzymes are believed to be mediated by a number of selective receptors, several lines of evidence demonstrate a critical role for IGF-II/M6P receptor in intracellular sorting of newly synthesized lysosomal enzymes. The lysosomal enzymes, after being synthesized in the rough endoplasmic reticulum (ER), enter the lumen of the ER by means of an amino-terminal signal peptide. Co-translational glycosylation occurs on selected asparagine residues by transfer of pre-formed oligosaccharides rich in mannose residues. The lysosomal enzymes are then moved by vesicular transport to the Golgi stack, where phosphorylation of selected mannose residues on the 6-position is performed in a two-step process. First, a phosphotransferase transfers N-acetylglucosamine-1-phosphate from UDP-GlcNAc to a mannose residue on the lysosomal enzyme, resulting in a phosphodiester intermediate. Subsequently, N-acetylglucosamine-1-phosphodiester α-N-acetylglucosaminidase removes N-acetylglucosamine, yielding a mannose 6-phosphomonoester that can bind to the receptor. As the lysosomal enzymes acquire their complement of M6P residues in the cis-Golgi, they become capable of binding to the IGF-II/M6P receptors that are also being directed through the Golgi stacks. Sorting of lysosomal enzymes away from other transmembrane and secreted protein cargo usually occurs in the TGN, where clathrin-coated vesicles are found to arise from the tubular structures. The vesicles containing lysosomal enzymes are then trafficked to late endosomes, where the acidic milieu triggers the dissociation of lysosomal enzymes from the IGF-II/M6P receptor. While the lysosomal enzymes are subsequently delivered to lysosomes by vesicular trafficking, the unoccupied IGF-II/M6P receptors are either targeted to the cell surface or recycled to the TGN to engage in another round of transport of ligands (Fig. 2) [13, 26]. A minor population of lysosomal enzymes escapes the intracellular sorting and gets secreted through the constitutive secretory trafficking pathway; these molecules bind to cell-surface IGF-II/M6P receptors and are transported to the lysosomes via clathrin-coated endocytic vesicles. The endocytic pathway that leads to delivery of the enzymes to lysosomes utilizes the same late-endosome/pre-lysosomal intermediates that are utilized in the intracellular biosynthetic pathway [80]. Recent evidence suggests that IGF-II/M6P receptor can also mediate transcytosis of lysosomal enzymes across the blood-brain barrier (BBB) in neonatal mice [81], thus providing an underlying basis for the treatment of lysosomal storage disorders characterized by neurological impairment arising from deficits in specific lysosomal enzymes [82].

Site-directed mutagenesis experiments have shown that binding of clathrin-associated proteins to an acidic-cluster-dileucine amino acid (AC-LL) motif within the cytoplasmic tail of the M6P receptors is required for efficient clathrin-mediated transport of lysosomal enzymes to endosomal compartments [18, 83]. Previously, interactions between the clathrin adaptor protein AP1 and the dileucine-based sorting signals of M6P receptors, in conjunction with ADP-ribosylation factor, were thought to mediate clathrin-coat assembly on vesicles budding from the TGN [13, 84, 85]. Although a role for AP1 in the transport of M6P receptors from TGN-to-endosome has not been ruled out, several studies have provided strong evidence that members of the clathrin-associated Golgi-localized, γ-ear-containing, ADP-ribosylation factor-binding (GGA) protein family mediate M6P receptor sorting into vesicles budding from the TGN [18, 86, 87]. The GGAs, which comprise three members in mammals (GGA1, GGA2 and GGA3) and two members in yeast (Gga1p and Gga2p), are monomeric, multi-domain, cytoplasmic adaptor proteins consisting of four domains: an amino-terminal VHS (for Vps27, Hrs, STAM homology) domain, a GAT (for GGA and TOM homology) domain, a connecting hinge segment, and a carboxyl-terminal GAE (for γ-adaptin ear homology domain) domain [18, 85, 86, 88, 89]. The GAT domain binds ADP-ribosylation factor-GTP complexes and mediates recruitment of GGAs from the cytosol onto the TGN. The VHS domain interacts specifically with the AC-LL motif in the cytoplasmic tails of the M6P receptors. The GAE domain binds a subset of the accessory factors that interacts with the ear domain of AP-1, whereas the recruitment of clathrin triskeletons to budding vesicles is most likely mediated through clathrin-binding motifs of the hinge and GAE domain [18, 86, 87, 90]. Taken together, these findings suggest that GGAs are sorting proteins that recruit IGF-II/M6P receptors into clathrin-coated vesicles at the TGN for their transport to endosomes [18, 91]. On the other hand, receptor recycling back to the TGN from endosomes appears to involve an interaction between the cytoplasmic tail of the receptor and a complex of adaptor proteins termed as retromers. The retromers are composed of two subcomplexes: one consisting of Vps35p, Vps29p and Vps26p protein involve in cargo selection and the other comprising SNX1/SNX2/-SNX5-SNX6 dimers that regulate the formation of membrane tubules [92]. Several other proteins have also been implicated in the retrieval of the IGF-II/M6P receptor, including AP1, tail-interacting protein of 47 kDa (TIP47) and phosphofurin acidic cluster-sorting protein 1 (PACS-1) [18, 85, 93]. There is evidence that PACS-1 acts as a connector between the IGF-II/M6P receptor and AP1 to facilitate recycling of the receptor from early endosomes to the TGN [26], whereas TIP47 recycles receptors from late endosomes by binding Rab9, a late endosome GTPase [13, 18].

3.2. IGF-II/M6P receptor in the clearance/activation of extracellular ligands

Earlier studies using a variety of cultured cells, including rat adipocytes [94], L6 rat myoblasts [95], rat C6 glial cells [46] and mouse L cells [96] have demonstrated that IGF-II/M6P receptor mediates internalization and subsequent degradation of IGF-II. This is further substantiated by genetic experiments [97–99], which showed that deletion of the IGF-II/M6P receptor gene in mice led to prenatal death, but the fetuses were ~30% larger than normal [99] with increased levels of serum IGF-II but no alteration in IGF-II mRNA expression [97]. Interestingly, this phenotype can be rescued by simultaneous disruption of the genes for either IGF-II itself or the IGF-I receptor [98], thus indicating that increased levels of local IGF-II in the absence of IGF-II/M6P receptors produce a proliferative and hypertrophic response mediated via the IGF-I receptor.

In addition to IGF-II, IGF-II/M6P receptors regulate the internalization followed by degradation or activation of a variety of other ligands, including proliferin (a prolactin-related murine protein) [39], glycosylated human LIF [38], pre-prorenin [100] and epidermal growth factor receptor [101]. The cell-surface IGF-II/M6P receptor is believed to facilitate activation of latent TGF-β [102, 103], the precursor of the potent growth effector that regulates differentiation and growth of many cell types, by complex interactions involving IGF-II/M6P receptor, plasminogen and urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR). The ability of plasminogen and uPAR to bind the IGF-II/M6P receptor at distinct sites (localized to domain 1) from the latent TGF-β provides a plausible model in which urokinase binding to uPAR first facilitates the conversion of plasminogen to plasmin, which in turn proteolytically activates IGF-II/M6P receptor-bound TGF-β precursor [18, 42].

3.3. IGF-II/M6P receptor in mediating the biological effects of IGF-II

Unlike its function as a clearance receptor (in the clearance of IGF-II), the role of the IGF-II/M6P receptor in mediating certain biological effects of IGF-II by triggering an intracellular signaling cascade remains controversial. Because the IGF-II/M6P receptor lacks intrinsic catalytic activity, most of the biological effects of IGF-II have been attributed either to the IGF-I receptor [13] or IR-A [8]. Nonetheless, a number of studies over the years have suggested that certain biological effects of IGF-II are being triggered directly via the IGF-II/M6P receptor, including calcium influx in mouse embryo fibroblasts [104] and rat calvarial osteoblasts [105], increased protein phosphorylation [106] and alkalinization in proximal renal tubule cells [107], stimulation of Na+/H+ exchange and inositol trisphosphate production in canine kidney cells [108], increased amino acid uptake in muscle cells [109], increased glycogen synthesis in hepatoma cells [110], proteoglycan synthesis in human chondrosarcoma cells [111], calcium mobilization in rabbit articular chondrocytes [112], cell motility in rhabdomyosarcoma cells [113, 114], aromatase activity in placenta cytotrophoblasts [115], migration of human extravillous trophoblasts [116], insulin exocytosis by pancreatic β cells [117], and regulation of endogenous acetylcholine and GABA release from the adult rat brain [118, 119].

Since the cytoplasmic tail of IGF-II/M6P receptor lacks an intrinsic kinase domain, the intracellular mechanisms by which the receptor can mediate the range of biological effects listed above remain unclear. However, a number of studies using cell-free experimental systems or live cells have provided evidence for an interaction of the IGF-II/M6P receptor with heterotrimeric G proteins [72, 118, 120]. This is supported by the evidence that i) a cytoplasmic 14-residue region (Arg2410-Lys2423) of the human IGF-II/M6P receptor, which exhibits some sequence similarity with mastoparan - a small peptide in wasp venom that can directly activate Gi/Go proteins, is able to activate Giα protein [121, 122], and ii) the existence of sequence homology between the C-terminal Ser2424-Ile2451 region of the IGF-II/M6P receptor and part of the pleckstrin homology domain of several proteins that bind Gβγ and inhibit its stimulatory action on adenylyl cyclase activity [120]. At the functional level, there is evidence to suggest that IGF-II, acting via a G protein, can stimulate Ca2+ influx in 3T3 fibroblasts and CHO cells [123, 124], increase exocytosis of insulin from pancreatic β cells [117], promote migration of extravillous trophoblast cells [116], and enhance PKC-induced phosphorylation of intracellular proteins [72]. Notwithstanding these results, the IGF-II/M6P receptor, under certain conditions, failed to interact with G protein or to couple with a Giα in some studies [125, 126], thus raising doubt about the physiological relevance of the interaction between the IGF-II/M6P receptor and G proteins.

We have earlier shown that activation of the IGF-II/M6P receptor by Leu27IGF-II, an IGF-II analog that preferentially binds to the IGF-II/M6P receptor as opposed to the IGF-I or insulin receptors, can induce depolarization of the basal forebrain cholinergic neurons and potentiate acetylcholine release from the adult rat hippocampus by a G protein-sensitive, PKCα-dependent pathway [118, 127]. More recently we reported that brain IGF-II/M6P receptors, as observed for several G-protein coupled receptors, are associated with β-arrestin 2. Following stimulation with Leu27IGF-II, the receptors are translocated from detergent-resistant to detergent-soluble membrane fractions along with a portion of β-arrestin 2 [128]. Activation of the IGF-II/M6P receptor by IGF-II was also found to cause cardiac cell pathological hypertrophy via Gαq-mediated increased phosphorylation of PKCα and calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII) [129]. Furthermore, IGF-II in cultured HEK293 cells can promote rapid membrane recruitment and activation of sphingosine kinase, leading to the production of extracellular sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P), the ligand for G protein-coupled S1P receptors [130, 131]. This triple-membrane-spanning model of sphingosine kinase-dependent SIP receptor transactivation provides a general mechanism for the activation of G protein-dependent signaling pathways by non-classical G protein-coupled receptors [59, 131] but its physiological significance in relation to IGF-II/M6P receptor remains to be established.

3.4. IGF-II/M6P receptor in regulation of cell proliferation/death

It has long been suggested that overexpression of the IGF-II/M6P receptor acts as a growth inhibitor [132], whereas loss of the receptor function is associated with cell proliferation and progression of tumorigenesis [133–135]. This is supported by the evidence that IGF-II/M6P receptor plays a critical role in regulating the pericellular levels of IGF-II, a mitogen that is overexpressed in a number of human cancers [135, 136]. As stated above, the IGF-II/M6P receptor facilitates activation of the growth inhibitor TGF-β [42, 102, 137], and modulates the uptake/targeting of lysosomal enzymes, and glycosylated LIF [38], all of which require tight control to avoid the development and growth of tumors. Several studies have demonstrated that cytotoxic T cells kill target cells by granzyme B, which is taken up by perforin- and IGF-II/M6P receptor-based internalization mechanisms [138, 139]. Nevertheless, this conclusion has also been called into question [140]. Heterozygosity at the IGF-II/M6P receptor locus due to the loss of one allele and somatic mutations in the remaining allele have also been associated with a variety of cancers [141, 142]. Additionally, microsatellite instability within the IGF-II/M6P receptor gene has been shown to occur in a large number of gastrointestinal cancers [143], and single-nucleotide polymorphisms within the receptor gene have been suggested to increase the risk of developing cancers [144].

4. IGF-II/M6P receptor in neurodegenerative diseases

4.1. Distribution of IGF-II/M6P receptor in CNS

IGF-II/M6P receptor is widely but selectively distributed throughout the CNS (Table 2). Earlier studies using in vitro receptor autoradiography and membrane binding assays have shown the presence of specific 125I-IGF-II binding sites in various neuroanatomic regions of the brain, with particular enrichment in the choroid plexus, as well as in cortical areas, hippocampus, hypothalamus, cerebellum and certain brainstem nuclei of the adult rat brain [145–147]. A high to moderate density of specific 125I-IGF-II labeling, as revealed by in vitro receptor autoradiography, was apparent in various regions of the spinal cord [148]. Subsequent studies using Western blotting and immunohistochemistry have demonstrated that very high levels of the IGF-II/M6P receptor are expressed in the striatum, deeper layers (layers IV and V) of the cortex, pyramidal and granule cell layers of the hippocampus, selected thalamic nuclei, Purkinje cells of the cerebellum, pontine nucleus, and motor neurons of the brainstem as well as spinal cord [149–152]. Moderate neuronal labeling is noted primarily in the olfactory bulb, basal forebrain areas, hypothalamus, superior colliculus, midbrain areas and granule cells of the cerebellum, whereas relatively low intensity of labeling is apparent in the outer layer of the cortex, stratum lacunosum moleculare of Ammon’s horn, the molecular layer of the dentate gyrus and cerebellum [149–151]. Although most of the staining appears to be associated with neurons and their processes, non-neuronal ependymal cells also seem to express moderate levels of the receptor [149, 150]. Occasionally, IGF-II/M6P receptor immunoreactivity is evident in normal astrocytes, but its presence in resident microglia remains to be established [151, 152]. The distributional profile of the IGF-II/M6P receptor in the brain exhibits striking similarity with the distribution of the 46-kDa cation-dependent M6P receptor, but the relative intensity of the IGF-II/M6P receptor immunoreactivity was found to be greater, particularly in the basal forebrain and cerebral cortex, than that of the cation-dependent M6P receptor [153]. In keeping with protein profiles, high levels of IGF-II/M6P receptor mRNA have been demonstrated in various regions of the adult rat brain by Northern blot and RNAse protection assays [35, 154]. It is also of interest that IGF-II/M6P receptor expression in the brain is developmentally regulated, with high prenatal levels preceding a sharp postnatal decline, which is less acute in humans as compared to rat [155, 156]. The widespread distribution of the IGF-II/M6P receptor in the CNS suggests that one of its functions could relate to a “housekeeping” role in transporting intracellular or recapturing secreted lysosomal enzymes. The receptor may also participate in regulating the levels or functions of LIF, TGF-β and retinoic acid, which are known to modulate the activities of the nervous system [26, 102, 157, 158]. Additionally, the receptor may have a role in regulating the release of neurotransmitter/modulators [118, 119]. Several lines of experimental evidence suggest that IGF-II, which exhibits coordinated expression with the IGF-II/M6P receptor during development, has been shown to promote the growth, proliferation, and/or differentiation of a variety of neuronal phenotypes as well as glial cells under in vitro conditions [159–162]. Given the evidence that most, but not all, biological effects of IGF-II are mediated via IGF-I or insulin receptor, it is likely that mitogenic/growth-promoting effects of IGF-II during development are regulated by IGF-I receptor or insulin receptor, whereas the IGF-II/M6P receptor may act to stabilize or regulate local levels of IGF-II [26]. IGF-II/M6P receptor levels are also differentially altered following various surgical or pharmacological manipulations, thus indicating a potential role for the receptor in lesion-induced degenerative or regenerative processes [163–166]. As this review focuses primarily on recent developments on the potential role of the receptor in neurodegenerative diseases, especially in relation to Alzheimer’s disease (AD), the reader is referred to several earlier reviews that describe the role of the receptor in regulating the functions of the brain [26, 127, 167, 168].

Unlike the normal brain, neurodegenerative diseases associated with aging constitute a set of pathological conditions characterized by progressive loss of neurons and synapses in selected areas of the nervous system. Brain cell death in degenerative disorders varies in type, location and rate of loss depending upon the disorders [169]. Even though it is unclear why certain brain regions are vulnerable in different degenerative disorders, it is also a fact that some neurons in targeted regions survive despite the loss of adjacent neurons [170]. The major neurodegenerative diseases that are associated with aging are AD, Parkinson disease (PD) and Huntington disease (HD). Other age-associated neurodegenerative diseases include amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), frontotemporal lobar degeneration, lysosomal storage diseases (LSDs), etc. The etiology of these diseases is either genetic and/or sporadic and the factors that trigger degeneration of neurons are considered to be multifactorial i.e., genetic, environmental, or endogenous factors related to aging. Nevertheless, neuronal loss in some of these diseases occurs via a shared mechanism triggered by an accumulation of misfolded toxic protein(s) - a possible consequence of abnormalities in synthesis, intracellular trafficking and/or clearance mechanisms [64, 171, 172]. This is partly supported by altered activity/functioning of the endosomal/lysosomal (EL) system which plays a critical role in the generation, and metabolism of proteins involved in various neurodegenerative diseases, including AD, PD and HD. Since IGF-II/M6P receptor is involved in the trafficking and sorting of lysosomal enzymes and some of their substrates to the EL system - the potential implication of this receptor in regulating the function of the EL system has been studied to a greater extent in relation to AD pathology, which shares several themes (such as protein misfolding) with other neurodegenerative diseases.

4.2. IGF-II/M6P receptor and AD pathology

AD is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by severe memory loss followed by deterioration of higher cognitive functions such as language, praxis, and judgment. Although in most cases AD develops sporadically after 65 years of age, a small proportion of cases corresponds to the early-onset (&lt;65 years), autosomal-dominant form of the disease. Mutations in three genes, the amyloid precursor protein (APP) gene on chromosome 21, the presenilin 1 (PSEN1) gene on chromosome 14 and the presenilin 2 (PSEN2) gene on chromosome 1, have been identified as the cause of a large proportion of early-onset familial AD cases [173, 174]. Additionally, inheritance of the ε4 allele of the apolipoprotein E (APOE) gene on chromosome 19 increases the risk of late-onset/sporadic AD [175]. The neuropathological features associated with AD include the presence of extracellular β-amyloid (Aβ) peptide-containing neuritic plaques, intracellular tau-positive neurofibrillary tangles, and the loss of synapses and neurons in defined brain regions [176–178]. Structurally, neuritic plaques contain a compact deposit of proteinaceous amyloid filaments surrounded by dystrophic neurites, activated microglia, and fibrillary astrocytes. The principal component of neuritic/amyloid fibrils is the β-amyloid (Aβ) peptide, which is generated from APP [176, 177]. Pathological changes that characterize AD, together with the constitutive production of Aβ in the normal brain [179–181], indicate that an overproduction and/or a lack of degradation may increase Aβ levels which, in turn, contribute to neuronal loss and development of AD. Indeed, enhanced production of Aβ peptide has been associated with familial AD cases, whereas decreased clearance of the peptide has been linked to sporadic AD [182, 183].

The brain regions that are affected in AD include the basal forebrain, hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, neocortex and certain brainstem nuclei. Of all these regions, the basal forebrain, which provides the major cholinergic input to the hippocampus and the neocortex, is known to be most severely affected in AD pathology [184, 185]. Additionally, the loss of these neurons has been suggested to contribute to the progressive memory impairment associated with AD [185–187]. Given the evidence that the IGF-II/M6P receptor can potentiate acetylcholine release [118], enhance short- and long-term memory [188, 189], and also regulate the function of the EL system, which is involved in Aβ metabolism [190, 191], we and others have evaluated levels/distribution of IGF-II/M6P receptor in brains of individuals with AD. In general, IGF-II/M6P receptor levels are not significantly altered in AD brains compared to age-matched controls but are found to be decreased in the hippocampus of patients with two copies of the APOE e4 alleles [192] or increased in the cortex of patients with PSEN1 mutations [193]. Transgenic (Tg) mice expressing familial AD-linked mutant APP, on the other hand, showed increased levels/expression of IGF-II/M6P receptor in the affected regions of the brain at early but not late stages compared to age-matched controls [152] (unpublished data). Notwithstanding these results, IGF-II/M6P receptor is present in a subset of Aβ-containing neuritic plaques and activated astrocytes in both AD brains and mutant APP transgenic mice [152, 192], thus suggesting a potential role for the receptor in Aβ metabolism. In contrast to the receptor, IGF-II mRNA/peptide levels are decreased in AD brains [194, 195] and APP transgenic mice [195]. Additionally, enhancing IGF-II levels in the brain has been shown to ameliorate Aβ-containing neuritic plaques, synaptic deficits and cognitive impairments in two different lines of mutant APP transgenic mice [195, 196]. Since IGF-II can enhance working memory via the IGF-II/M6P receptor [188], it is likely that the receptor may have a role in regulating both cognitive functions and Aβ metabolism associated with AD pathology.

4.2.1. IGF-II/M6P receptor and EL system in AD

The EL system is part of the cell’s central vacuolar system where secretory and membrane proteins/lipids are synthesized, modified, trafficked to appropriate cellular compartments and then eventually degraded. It is comprised of the endocytic pathway and lysosomal system including five major compartments: early endosomes, late endosomes, autophagic vacuoles, lysosomes and residual bodies [197]. Along the endocytic pathway, endosomes sort cargos through tubular protrusions for recycling or through intraluminal vesicles for degradation. Sorting of cargos involves fission of endosomal transport intermediate vesicles and fusion with other endosomes or with lysosomes [198]. Endosomes are able to regulate numerous pathways in the cell by sorting, processing, recycling, activating, silencing and degrading a variety of substances and receptors [199]. Lysosomes are intracellular organelles that contain about 60 enzymes crucial for degradation and recycling of macromolecules delivered by endocytosis, phagocytosis or autophagy [200]. Therefore, the EL system is not only important for protein trafficking and processing, but also the key component of the autophagy system involved in cellular homeostasis and protection [64, 201, 202].

A variety of experimental approaches over the last decade have indicated that the EL system, which acts as one of the hubs for APP metabolism, is drastically altered in “at risk” neurons of AD brains. The changes associated with early-endosomes, which precede the clinical symptoms and substantial deposition of Aβ peptides, include increased volumes and increased expression of proteins involved in endocytosis/ recycling (such as Rab5 and rababtin) as well as certain lysosomal enzymes. These alterations likely reflect increased rates of endocytosis and endosomal recycling of proteins involved in AD [190, 191]. Coincidentally, changes in the lysosomal system, which possibly occur after endosomal abnormalities, are reflected by a robust proliferation of lysosomes as well as expression of all classes of lysosomal hydrolases, including cathepsins B and D [203, 204]. Transgenic mice overproducing Aβ peptides also exhibit an up-regulation of endosomal markers as well as lysosomal enzymes in selected brain regions [152]. Since cathepsins can directly influence APP processing and Aβ metabolism [205, 206], it is possible that enhanced levels of these enzymes may lead to intracellular accumulation of the peptides in vulnerable cells. This is partly supported by the evidence that pharmacological inhibition of cathepsin B or deletion of the cathepsin B gene has been shown to reduce Aβ burden in mutant APP transgenic mice [207, 208]. Additionally, as the leakage of lysosomal enzymes into the cytoplasm often leads to cell death [209, 210], it has also been suggested that chronic activation of lysosomes may have a role in the degeneration of neurons in AD brains. This notion is partly supported by two distinct lines of evidence i) increased levels of Aβ peptide trigger the release of lysosomal enzymes cathepsin D and β-hexosaminidase into the cytosol prior to degeneration of neurons [211, 212] and ii) preventing lysosomal breakdown protects neurons against toxicity [213]. At present, the mechanism underlying the activation of the EL system has not been clearly established, but it is likely to be regulated by receptors involved in the trafficking of molecules/enzymes to the lysosomes.

Previous studies have reported that IGF-II/M6P receptor levels, in general, are not markedly altered in most AD brain regions compared to controls [192, 193]. Conversely, the levels of the receptor are increased at early but not later stages of mutant APP-Tg mice [152] (unpublished data). Considering the multifunctional role of the IGF-II/M6P receptor, it is possible that unaltered receptor levels may reflect a rapid receptor turnover or a compromise in its other functions at the expense lysosomal enzyme delivery. Alternatively, a subset of the lysosomal enzymes could possibly be transported by other sorting receptors such as the cation-dependent M6P receptor or sortilin A receptor. In this regard, the cation-dependent M6P receptor, whose levels are elevated in vulnerable neurons of the AD brain, has been shown to redirect certain lysosomal hydrolases to early endosomes and increase the secretion of Aβ peptides in cultured fibroblasts [214, 215]. Thus further studies are required to define the relative significance of IGF-II/M6P receptor vs. cation-dependent M6P receptor in regulating the transport of lysosomal enzymes in AD pathology.

4.2.2. IGF-II/M6P receptor in APP processing and Aβ metabolism

Aβ peptides, the principal components of neuritic plaques, are a group of hydrophobic peptides containing 39–43 amino acid residues. These peptides are generated from proteolysis of APP, which is processed under normal conditions either by non-amyloidogenic α-secretase or amyloidogenic β-secretase pathways [190, 191]. The α-secretase pathway is mediated by a set of proteases that cleaves APP within the Aβ domain, yielding soluble APPα and a 10-kDa C-terminal fragment (CTF-α), which can be processed further by γ-secretase to generate Aβ17-40/Aβ17-42 [191]. The candidates that act as α-secretase are tumor necrosis factor-α converting enzyme (TACE or ADAM-17), ADAM-9, ADAM-10 or MDC-9. The amyloidogenic β-secretase pathway, on the other hand, cleaves APP to generate soluble APPβ and an Aβ-containing C-terminal fragment (CTF-β), which is further processed via γ-secretase to release full-length Aβ1-40/Aβ1-42 peptides [191]. While the β-secretase is a transmembrane aspartyl protease called BACE1, γ-secretase is a multi-transmembrane aspartyl protease complex made of presenilins (PS1 or PS2), nicastrin, PEN-2 and APH-1 [216–218]. Evidence suggests that non-amyloidogenic α-secretase processing occurs mostly in the secretory pathway and at the cell surface, whereas amyloidogenic BACE1 processing of APP mainly occurs in the endocytic pathway [190, 191]. The relative efficiencies of the two alternative modes of APP processing in the brain can be influenced by a variety of factors including classical neurotransmitters, neuropeptides and growth factors.

Recently, using well-characterized mouse L-cells deficient in expression of the murine IGF-II/M6P receptor (MS cells) and corresponding MS9II cells that overexpress the human IGF-II/M6P receptor, we reported that overexpression of the IGF-II/M6P receptor increases the steady-state levels of App, Bace1, Psen1, Ncstn and Aph1a transcripts [219]. In addition, the levels of APP holo-protein and its cleaved products APP-CTFs (APP-CTFα and APP-CTFβ) were increased in MS9II cells, suggesting a potential role for the receptor in regulating the levels of APP and its processing. As for secretase, while BACE1 proteins were increased, the steady-state levels of PS1 and APH-1 were not altered in MS9II cells when compared to MS cells [219]. The activities of both β- and γ-secretases, as well as secretory Aβ1-40/Aβ1-42 levels, were significantly higher in MS9II cells than MS cells [220]. Conversely, levels of the Aβ degrading enzyme IDE, but not neprilysin, were lower in MS9II cells indicating that overexpression of the IGF-II/M6P receptor may also influence clearance of Aβ-related peptides [220]. At the cellular level, subsets of APP, BACE1 and PS1 in the perinuclear region were found to be co-localized with IGF-II/M6P receptor in MS9II cells [220]. Additionally, receptor overexpression promoted APP localization in certain tubular structures, whose exact nature remains unclear. The significance of the IGF-II/M6P receptor overexpression on APP metabolism is highlighted by two lines of evidence i) siRNA-targeted decrease of the receptor level led to a concomitant reduction of APP, APP-CTFs and Aβ levels in MS9II cells and ii) activation of the receptor by its agonist Leu27IGF-II did not significantly affect the levels or processing of the APP in MS9II cells [220]. Notwithstanding these results, the functional implications of normal levels of the IGF-II/M6P receptor on neuronal Aβ metabolism remain to be evaluated.

At present, the mechanism(s) by which IGF-II/M6P receptor overexpression regulates APP levels or processing remains unclear. A number of earlier studies have indicated that lipid-raft microdomains and non-raft regions of lipid bilayers play critical roles in the efficiency of amyloidogenic and non-amyloidogenic processing of APP, respectively [221–224]. Since the relative amount of full-length APP is found to be markedly higher in raft vs non-raft fractions in MS9II cells compared to MS cells, it is likely that IGF-II/M6P receptor overexpression may partly enhance Aβ production in MS9II cells by promoting raft microdomain association of APP [220]. Alternatively, given the evidence that IGF-II/M6P receptors are involved in the intracellular trafficking of lysosomal enzymes such as cathepsins B and D, which are known to regulate Aβ metabolism [59, 203, 225], it is possible that receptor overexpression can influence amyloidogenic processing of APP by altering the levels and/or redistribution of the enzymes within the EL compartments, as in the case of cation-dependent M6P receptor overexpression [214].

Evidence suggests that trafficking of both APP and BACE1 within the cells is intimately associated with Aβ production. Newly synthesized APP and BACE1 are first transported to the cell surface via the secretory pathway and then internalized into endosomes where BACE cleaves APP in an acidic environment leading to Aβ production. APP can also be retrieved from endosomes back to TGN by binding to sortilin A receptor via PACS1, thus preventing its processing into Aβ peptides [191, 226]. Interestingly, retrograde transport of BACE1 from endosomes to TGN, as observed for IGF-II/M6P receptor, is mediated by binding to GGA proteins and the retromer complex [227, 228]. Dysfunction of the retromer complex not only causes endosomal accumulation of BACE1 but also increases production of APP-CTFβ and soluble APPβ [227, 229]. Since retrieval of the IGF-II/M6P receptor from endosomes to TGN overlaps with that of APP and BACE1, it is possible that overexpression of the receptor alters the trafficking dynamics in a manner that is conducive to amyloidogenic processing of APP within endosomal compartments leading to increased production of Aβ peptides.

4.2.3. IGF-II/M6P receptor and the cholinergic system

The IGF-II/M6P receptor is known to be widely but selectively distributed in various neuronal populations in the brain including the basal forebrain cholinergic neurons that are preferentially vulnerable in AD pathology [150]. Given the significance of the basal forebrain and acetylcholine in learning and memory processing, it has long been suggested that loss of these neurons and their innervations to the hippocampus and cortex contribute to the progressive memory impairment associated with AD patients [185]. Indeed, decreased levels of choline acetyltransferase activity, choline uptake and acetylcholine levels in the hippocampus and cortical regions of AD brains correlate positively with the clinical severity of dementia [185]. At present, however, the underlying cause of neurodegeneration of the basal forebrain cholinergic neurons remains unclear. Some earlier studies have shown that IGF-II/M6P receptor can enhance neuronal survival and increase the activity of acetylcholine transferase, the enzyme responsible for the synthesis of acetylcholine, in mouse primary septal cultured neurons [160]. N-nitrosodiethylamine-induced loss of neurons, on the other hand, has been shown to reduce both acetylcholine transferase and IGF-II/M6P receptor mRNAs [230]. We have reported that expression of the IGF-II/M6P receptor is increased in surviving cholinergic and non-cholinergic neurons in the basal forebrain region following in vivo administration of the immunotoxin 192 IgG-saporin [231]. Apart from influencing the viability of cholinergic neurons, there is evidence that activation of the IGF-II/M6P receptor can potentiate endogenous acetylcholine release from the hippocampus and cortex by a G protein-sensitive, PKCα-dependent pathway [118, 232]. Prenatal choline supplementation has also been shown to increase the expression of IGF-II and IGF-II/M6P receptor and enhance IGF-II-induced acetylcholine release in adult rat hippocampus and frontal cortex [233]. Thus, it would be of interest to determine whether the altered levels and/or signaling of the IGF-II/M6P receptor is the cause or consequence of the loss of basal forebrain cholinergic neuronal loss observed in AD brains.

4.2.4. IGF-II/M6P receptor and memory enhancement in AD

Apart from potentiating acetylcholine release, the IGF axis and the IGF-II/M6P receptor are involved in the retention and consolidation of memory processing [188, 189]. Using multiple approaches, it has recently been demonstrated that inhibitory avoidance learning in rat [188] and extinction learning in mouse [234] require increased synthesis of IGF-II. Administration of IGF-II directly into the hippocampus also enhanced memory retention and prevent forgetting [188]. This effect, which requires new protein synthesis, the function of the activity-regulated cytoskeletal-associated protein, and glycogen-synthase kinase-3, is mediated via the IGF-II/M6P receptor [167, 188]. Intriguingly, systemic administration of IGF-II has also been shown to enhance the retention and persistence of working, short-term as well as long-term memories via activation of the IGF-II/M6P receptors [189]. In a parallel study, it has been shown that IGF-II acts as a downstream regulator of IκB kinase/nuclear factor of κB (IKK/NF-κB)-dependent synapse development and remodeling process. This effect, which appears to be mediated by the IGF-II/M6P receptor via the MEK/ERK signaling pathway, provides a morphological correlate of memory enhancement coupled to IGF-II [235]. The involvement of IGF-II in cognitive function is further reinforced by three lines of evidence: i) IGF-II mRNA/protein levels are decreased in the brains of AD patients as well as transgenic mice overexpressing mutant APP [194, 236], ii) direct administration or adenovirus-mediated delivery of IGF-II into the brain has been shown to ameliorate cognitive deficits as well as other AD-related pathology [195, 196], and iii) an IGF-II polymorphism has been associated with human cognitive function [237]. Collectively, these findings not only suggest a novel role for IGF-II in cognitive functions but also indicate the possibility that activation of the receptor by IGF-II or its mimetic may have therapeutic relevance in the treatment of AD pathology.

4.2.5. IGF-II/M6P receptor and neuroprotection in AD

Although IGF-II has been shown to protect neurons against a variety of toxic agents [238–241], the significance of the IGF-II/M6P receptor in mediating the effects of IGF-II remains unclear. A recent study, however, showed that ameliorating effects of IGF-II against glucocorticoid-induced toxicity can partly be mediated via IGF-II/M6P receptor [241]. A protective role for the receptor has also been suggested by the evidence that cultured PC12 cells that are resistant to Aβ-mediated toxicity [242] or brain neurons that survive 192 IgG-saporin-induced toxicity express high levels of the IGF-II/M6P receptors [231]. Additionally, TGFβ1, which is known to be activated by IGF-II/M6P receptor, has been shown to protect cultured neurons against Aβ-mediated toxicity both under in vitro and in vivo conditions [243–245]. Notwithstanding these results, overexpression of the IGF-II/M6P receptor was found to render MS9II cells more vulnerable to staurosporine-induced toxicity than IGF-II/M6P receptor lacking MS cells [220]. Thus, more work is needed to define the significance of the receptor in relation to degeneration of neurons observed in AD brains.

5. IGF-II/M6P receptor in lysosomal storage disorders (LSDs)

LSDs represent two groups of inherited metabolic neurodegenerative diseases triggered by a deficiency of lysosomal enzymes or components integral to lysosomal function, the mucolipidoses and the mucopolysaccharidoses [246]. Nearly two-thirds of the more than 50 LSDs involve the CNS, where neuronal dysfunction or loss results in mental retardation, progressive motor degeneration, and premature death [247, 248]. The majority of LSDs are caused by loss of function of lysosomal hydrolases [247], and most of these enzymes are transported by the IGF-II/M6P receptor. Dysfunction in any of these components may cause lysosomal deficits, leading to accumulation of degradative products and ultimately lead to LSD. I-cell disease (mucolipidosis type II) is one of the LSDs caused by deficiency of N-acetylglucosamine phosphotransferase, which catalyzes the first step in M6P addition to N-linked oligosaccharides on the lysosomal enzymes, leading to defective lysosomal delivery of enzymes, secretion of those enzymes into the extracellular space, and accumulation of products destined to be degraded in dense inclusion bodies within cells [249]. Deficiencies of M6P-tagged lysosomal enzymes in some of the LSDs have been rectified by enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) where exogenously administered enzymes are delivered to the EL system via the cell-surface IGF-II/M6P receptor [250]. Recently discovered M6P analogs may improve both the affinity of the specific recombinant enzyme for the IGF-II/M6P receptor and the stability of the M6P moiety in the blood circulation and consequently enhance ERT efficacy and reduce enzyme dosage required for an efficient treatment [251, 252]. In addition, a newly-designed chimeric protein of IGF-II fused to β-glucuronidase to deliver enzyme via the IGF-II binding site on the IGF-II/M6P receptor can further increase the efficiency and improve delivery to resistant sites [253].

ERT has become well established as a useful therapeutic approach for several of the mucopolysaccharidoses (MPSs), a group of LSDs characterized by inherited deficiencies in a single lysosomal enzyme [250]. The effectiveness of this therapy depends on the expression of functional IGF-II/M6P receptors on the surface of the affected cells [250, 253]. The first disorder to be treated by this means was Gaucher disease, an inherited deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme glucocerebrosidase. Although there are now ERT approaches available for a number of the MPSs, including Fabry disease, Pompe disease, and MPS I, II and IV, the clinical effectiveness of these therapies has not matched the success attained with Gaucher disease. Even more problematic has been the nearly complete failure of ERT strategies to help correct brain dysfunction caused by CNS storage conditions in these diseases because the M6P-tagged replacement enzyme delivered intravenously does not transit the blood-brain barrier (BBB) [250, 253, 254]. The principal reason for this appears to be that the IGF-II/M6P receptors are not expressed on the BBB beyond the early perinatal period. Some hope for the application of brain-targeted ERT for the LSDs has been provided recently through the use of a chimeric form of sulphamidase coupled to the BBB-binding domain of apolipoprotein B [255]. The chimeric enzyme restored sulphamidase activity in the brains of sulphamidase-deficient mice with MPS IIIA. This highly engineered protein was taken up by binding of the apolipoprotein B portion of the chimera to the low-density lipoprotein receptor on the BBB and moved across into brain cells via transcytosis. Thus, in this case, the solution did not involve the IGF-II/M6P receptors.

Niemann-Pick disease covers a heterogenous group of three distinct lysosomal lipid storage diseases with autosomal recessive inheritance, i.e., Niemann-Pick type A, Niemann-Pick type B and Niemann-Pick type C (NPC). Niemann-Pick disease types A and B, caused by mutations in the gene coding for the lysosomal enzyme acid sphingomyelinase, result in the progressive accumulation of sphingomyelin and other lipids in the lysosomes of various tissues [256, 257]. NPC disease, which accounts for the majority of the cases of Niemann-Pick disease, is caused by mutation of either NPC1 gene located on chromosome 18 or NPC2 gene located on chromosome 14. This disease is characterized by a defect in intracellular cholesterol trafficking, which leads to accumulation of unesterified cholesterol in lysosomes. The buildup of cholesterol triggers hepatomegaly with foamy macrophage infiltration and chronic neurologic deterioration, leading to seizures, supranuclear ophthalmoplegia and progressive loss of motor and intellectual function. Neuropathologically, impaired lipid trafficking results in the degeneration of neurons, activation of glial cells and the presence of intracellular neurofibrillary tangles [256, 258, 259]. Interestingly, the brains of patients with NPC contain increased levels of Aβ-related peptides and often display extracellular deposition of the peptide – thus exhibiting some striking similarity with AD brain pathology [260, 261].

Earlier studies have shown that altered levels of cholesterol can influence distribution/trafficking of IGF-II/M6P receptors within cells [262–264]. In fact, it has been reported that cholesterol accumulation in cultured cells induced by treatment with U18666A (an amphiphilic drug that induces an NPC-like phenotype at the cellular level) or siRNA-mediated NPC1 depletion can lead to redistribution of the IGF-II/M6P receptors to endosomes and impair its retrograde transport from late endosomes to the trans-Golgi network [262, 265, 266]. Studies from Npc1−/− mice, which recapitulate most of the pathological features of NPC disease, revealed that IGF-II/M6P receptor levels are not altered in the brain even though cathepsins B and D levels/activity are dramatically increased in the same regions [258, 267, 268]. At the cellular level, IGF-II/M6P receptor immunoreactivity is found to be somewhat decreased in neurons of the Npc1−/− mouse brains. Additionally, the majority of activated astrocytes, but not microglia, express higher levels of IGF-II/M6P receptor indicating that decreased neuronal levels may partially be compensated by glial expression of the receptor [268]. Since the subcellular distribution of the IGF-II/M6P receptor in Npc1−/− mouse brains has not yet been established, it remains unclear whether the increased levels/activity of the lysosomal enzymes may be associated with the altered levels/distribution of the receptor [258, 268].

6. IGF-II/M6P receptor in other neurodegenerative diseases

Since IGF-II/M6P receptor is widely distributed throughout the brain, it is expected that altered levels and/or functioning of the receptor, may have a role in various neurodegenerative disorders in addition to AD. PD, the second most common neurodegenerative disorder, is characterized by akinesia, rigidity, tremor and postural abnormalities. The sensorimotor symptoms are often accompanied by autonomic dysfunction, dementia, and cognitive deficits. Etiologically, PD is heterogeneous; only a minority (8–10%) segregates with genetic abnormalities, whereas the majority of cases are believed to be sporadic. The neuropathological features associated with PD include: i) loss of dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra pars compacta projecting to the striatum; and ii) the presence of intracellular inclusions known as Lewy bodies, composed of insoluble aggregates of a protein called α-synuclein, which plays a critical role in the degeneration of neurons [269]. It is reported that lysosomes and lysosomal enzyme cathepsin D are fundamental regulators of α-synuclein degradation through the chaperone-mediated autophagy pathway [270, 271]. Some recent studies have shown that several point mutations of Vps35, a subunit of retromer complex that plays an important role in the trafficking of the IGF-II/M6P receptor, can lead to the manifestation of late-onset PD in many ethnic groups [272–274]. Using a transgenic Drosophila model, it has been demonstrated that interference with the retromer function can lead to aberrant maturation of cathepsin D and subsequent accumulation of α-synuclein in the late-endosome/lysosome compartments [275]. Additionally, the missense Vps35 mutation (i.e., D620N) did not alter steady-state levels of IGF-II/M6P receptor in the fibroblasts of PD patients, but triggered a deficit in retromer-dependent trafficking of the receptor and its ligand cathepsin D, which may underlie impaired degradation of α-synuclein resulting in the loss of neurons and development of PD pathology [276]. Interestingly, IGF-II/M6P receptor mRNA levels were not altered either in the frontal cortex or basal ganglia but decreased in the amygdala region of PD brains compared to control brains [277]. Although IGF-II/M6P receptor protein expression has not yet been evaluated in patients with PD, it appears that altered trafficking/function rather than levels of the receptor may have a role in the development of disease pathology. Impaired trafficking of the IGF-II/M6P receptor, as observed in PD-linked Vps35 mutation, may also contribute to the development of juvenile Batten disease - an autosomal recessive disorder with onset at 5–8 years of age. Hallmarks of this disease include lysosomal accumulation of undigested materials, degeneration of neurons in the brain and eye, blindness, seizures and development of cognitive and motor deficits, leading to death. This disease is caused by mutation of the gene encoding CLN3, a multipass transmembrane glycoprotein with unknown function. Using genetic manipulation, it has been shown that loss of CLN3 function triggers accumulation of IGF-II/M6P receptor in the trans-Golgi network, which leads to defective maturation/transport and activity of lysosomal cathepsins. Thus, dysfunction of lysosomal clearance mechanisms may underlie the development of devastating Batten disease [278].

Earlier studies indicated that 125I-IGF-II receptor binding was markedly increased in the spinal cords of patients with ALS - a fatal neurodegenerative disease caused by selective motor neuron death [279]. Using transgenic rat exhibiting loss of motor neurons, it has been demonstrated that IGF-II/M6P receptor expression is upregulated in reactive astrocytes towards the end-stages of disease pathology but not in pre-symptomatic animals suggesting a potential protective response against the loss of IGF-related trophic support [280]. In contrast to ALS, 125I-IGF-II receptor binding sites were not found to be altered either in the hippocampus or cerebellum following voluntary consumption of alcohol [146], but the receptor mRNA and binding sites are decreased in the cerebellar vermis and/or anterior cingulate gyrus of human alcoholics – often associated with loss of neurons as well as cognitive and motor deficits [281]. Multiple sclerosis (MS), an autoimmune inflammatory disease of the CNS, is characterized by demyelination, axonal loss, and neuronal death in selected brain regions. It is widely accepted that infiltration of inflammatory cells plays major roles in MS pathogenesis possibly via serine protease granzyme B secreted from granules of cytotoxic T cells [282, 283]. Interestingly, M6P treatment was found to attenuate granzyme B-mediated cell death by blocking the IGF-II/M6P receptor-dependent endocytosis, which suggests potential new targets for the treatment of MS [284]. However, no alteration was evident in 125I-IGF-II receptor binding sites in the cerebral cortex of MS patients [147], thus the significance of the receptor in the development of disease pathology, if any, remains to be determined. More recently, IGF-II/M6P receptor has been shown to be expressed highly in microglial nodules in human brains with human immunodeficiency virus encephalitis. Under an in vitro paradigm in which IGF-II/M6P receptor expression can be enhanced in microglia by interferon-γ, it has been shown to be a positive modulator of human immunodeficiency virus infection thus suggesting a contribution of the receptor in the persistence and spreading of viral-related pathology in the brain [285].

7. Conclusion

Recent studies have advanced our understanding of the structure, ligand binding properties and trafficking of the IGF-II/M6P receptor. This receptor plays a critical role in many cellular processes including growth and development, clearance of IGF-II, proteolytic activation of enzymes and growth factor precursors, apart from regulating trafficking of the lysosomal enzymes. This receptor, which is widely distributed throughout the brain, is also involved in IGF-II-mediated memory enhancement/ consolidation process as well as regulation of neurotransmitter release via G protein-dependent signaling mechanisms. Overexpression of the receptor has been shown to influence not only the functioning of the EL system but also the levels and metabolism of APP/Aβ-related peptides – thus suggesting its possible implication in AD pathology. Considering the significance of the receptor in regulating the trafficking of the lysosomal enzymes and other molecules, it is likely that the receptor may have a role not only in LSD but also in other neurodegenerative disorders that are associated with abnormal functioning of the EL system. However, further studies are needed to validate and fully characterize the significance of the IGF-II/M6P receptor in the normal brain and various neurodegenerative diseases to understand its full implications in regulating neuronal functioning.

This work was supported by grants from Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (#203518) and Canadian Institutes of Health Research (MOP-84480) to SK and R01AG019070 grant from National Institutes on Aging to GT and National Cancer Institute grant CA91885 to RM. YW is a recipient of Doctoral Awards from Alzheimer Society of Canada and a Graduate Studentship Award from Alberta Innovates - Health Solutions.

Fig. 1 Structures of insulin receptor isoform A and the IGF-I and IGF-II/M6P receptors

The IGF-I receptor and insulin receptor isoform A are members of the tyrosine kinase receptor family, which share high structural homology. Both receptors exist at the cell surface as a heterotetramer composed of two α and two β subunits joined by disulfide bonds. By contrast, the IGF-II/M6P receptor is a type I transmembrane glycoprotein dimer consisting of four structural domains, including an amino-terminal signal sequence, a large extracytoplasmic domain, a single transmembrane region and a carboxy-terminal cytoplasmic tail. Most ligands bind to the extracytoplasmic domain, and the IGF-II/M6P receptor could exist as dimers. The binding affinity of insulin, IGF-I and IGF-II to each of the three receptors differ from each other as indicated. Plg, plasminogen; uPAR, urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor.

Fig. 2 Cellular roles of IGF-II/M6P receptor

Newly synthesized lysosomal enzymes are targeted within the trans-Golgi network for sorting to lysosomes by the posttranslational addition of M6P residues. IGF-II/M6P receptors, possibly interacting with GGA/AP-1, mediate the recruitment of lysosomal hydrolases to clathrin-coated vesicles, following which enzyme-receptor complexes are delivered to endosomal compartments. Lysosomal enzymes dissociate from M6P receptors within the low-pH environment of late endosomes and are subsequently delivered to lysosomes. Recycling of IGF-II/M6P receptors from late endosomes to the Golgi from early endosomes is thought to be mediated by retromer. Cell-surface IGF-II/M6P receptors also function in the capture and activation/degradation of extracellular M6P-bearing ligands, as well as in the clearance and degradation of the non-glycosylated IGF-II polypeptide hormone through clathrin-dependent endocytosis. IGF-II/M6P receptor may mediate intracellular signal transduction following IGF-II binding to regulate neurotransmitter release memory enhancement and cell proliferation.

Table 1 Ligands that bind the IGF-II/M6P receptor and functional consequences of their binding

Non-M6P-containing ligands	Consequences of IGF-II/M6P receptor binding	
Insulin-like growth factor-II	Endocytosis and lysosomal degradation, possible signal transduction	
Retinoic acid	Growth inhibition and/or apoptosis	
Urokinase-type plasminogen	Participation in TGF-h activation at the cell surface; endocytosis and activator receptor lysosomal degradation	
Plasminogen	Conversion to plasmin and participation of TGF-β activation	
	
M6P-containing ligands	Consequences of IGF-II/M6P receptor binding	
	
Lysosomal enzymes	Endocytosis and/or trafficking to lysosomes	
Transforming growth factor- β precursor	Cell-surface proteolytic activation	
Leukemia inhibitory factor	Endocytosis and lysosomal degradation	
Proliferin	Induction of endothelial cell migration and angiogenesis	
Thyroglobulin	Endocytosis and lysosomal activation and/or degradation	
Renin precursor	Endocytosis and proteolytic activation and/or degradation	
Granzyme A	Targeting to lytic granules and possible role in apoptosis	
Granzyme B	Internalization and induction of apoptosis	
DNAse I	Possible targeting to lysosomes	
CD26	Internalization and T cell activation	
Epidermal growth factor	Endocytosis and lysosomal degradation	
Herpes simplex viral glycoprotein D	Facilitation of viral entry into cells and transmission between cells	
Varicella-zoster viral glycoprotein I	Facilitation of viral entry into cells	

Table 2 Summary of the distribution of IGF-II/M6PR immunoreactivity in the adult brain

Brain region	IGF-II/M6P receptor	
Lateral septal nucleus		+		
Medial septal nucleus		+++		
Nucleus of diagonal band of Broca		+++		
Caudate-putamen		− to +		
Globus pallidus		+		
Cerebral cortex, layers	I	II–III	IV–VI	
Neocortex	+	+	+++	
Piriform/entorhinal	− to +	+++	− to +	
Amygdala		+++		
Stratum pyramidale		++		
Strata oriens/radiatum		− to +		
Molecular layer		+		
Granule cell layer		+		
Dorsal nuclei		+		
Posterior nuclei		+		
Ventral nuclei		++		
Relative intensity levels of the immunoreactivity for IGF-II/M6P receptor were estimated by visual inspection of stained sections under a light microscope. High (+++), intermediate (++), low (+), and undetectable (−) levels of immunoreactive intensity were discerned (Adapted from Konishi et al., 2005).


1 Adams TE Structure and function of the type 1 insulin-like growth factor receptor Cell Mol Life Sci 2000 57 7 1050 93 10961344
2 Rother KI Accili D Role of insulin receptors and IGF receptors in growth and development Pediatr Nephrol 2000 14 7 558 61 10912518
3 Hwa V Oh Y Rosenfeld RG The insulin-like growth factor-binding protein (IGFBP) superfamily Endocr Rev 1999 20 6 761 87 10605625
4 Duan C Xu Q Roles of insulin-like growth factor (IGF) binding proteins in regulating IGF actions Gen Comp Endocrinol 2005 142 1–2 44 52 15862547
5 Bunn RC Fowlkes JL Insulin-like growth factor binding protein proteolysis Trends Endocrinol Metab 2003 14 4 176 81 12714278
6 Lelbach A Muzes G Feher J The insulin-like growth factor system: IGFs, IGF-binding proteins and IGFBP-proteases Acta Physiol Hung 2005 92 2 97 107 16268048
7 Dupont J LeRoith D Insulin and insulin-like growth factor I receptors: similarities and differences in signal transduction Horm Res 2001 55 Suppl 2 22 6 11684871
8 Frasca F Insulin receptor isoform A, a newly recognized, high-affinity insulin-like growth factor II receptor in fetal and cancer cells Mol Cell Biol 1999 19 5 3278 88 10207053
9 Sciacca L In IGF-I receptor-deficient leiomyosarcoma cells autocrine IGF-II induces cell invasion and protection from apoptosis via the insulin receptor isoform A Oncogene 2002 21 54 8240 50 12447687
10 Scalia P Regulation of the Akt/Glycogen synthase kinase-3 axis by insulin-like growth factor-II via activation of the human insulin receptor isoform-A J Cell Biochem 2001 82 4 610 8 11500939
11 Bailyes EM Insulin receptor/IGF-I receptor hybrids are widely distributed in mammalian tissues: quantification of individual receptor species by selective immunoprecipitation and immunoblotting Biochem J 1997 327 Pt 1 1 209 15 9355755
12 Federici M Distribution of insulin/insulin-like growth factor-I hybrid receptors in human tissues Mol Cell Endocrinol 1997 129 2 121 6 9202395
13 Dahms NM Hancock MK P-type lectins Biochim Biophys Acta 2002 1572 2–3 317 40 12223278
14 Massague J Czech MP The subunit structures of two distinct receptors for insulin-like growth factors I and II and their relationship to the insulin receptor J Biol Chem 1982 257 9 5038 45 6279656
15 Morgan DO Insulin-like growth factor II receptor as a multifunctional binding protein Nature 1987 329 6137 301 7 2957598
16 Oshima A The human cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate receptor. Cloning and sequence of the full-length cDNA and expression of functional receptor in COS cells J Biol Chem 1988 263 5 2553 62 2963003
17 MacDonald RG A single receptor binds both insulin-like growth factor II and mannose-6-phosphate Science 1988 239 4844 1134 7 2964083
18 Ghosh P Dahms NM Kornfeld S Mannose 6-phosphate receptors: new twists in the tale Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2003 4 3 202 12 12612639
19 Kiess W Insulin-like growth factor II (IGF-II) and the IGF-II/mannose-6-phosphate receptor: the myth continues Horm Res 1994 41 Suppl 2 SUPPL 2 66 73 8088706
20 Brown J Structure of a functional IGF2R fragment determined from the anomalous scattering of sulfur EMBO J 2002 21 5 1054 62 11867533
21 Olson LJ Dahms NM Kim JJ The N-terminal carbohydrate recognition site of the cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate receptor J Biol Chem 2004 279 32 34000 9 15169779
22 Braulke T Type-2 IGF receptor: a multi-ligand binding protein Horm Metab Res 1999 31 2–3 242 6 10226808
23 Reddy ST Identification of a low affinity mannose 6-phosphate-binding site in domain 5 of the cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate receptor J Biol Chem 2004 279 37 38658 67 15252023
24 Olson LJ Identification of a fourth mannose 6-phosphate binding site in the cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate receptor Glycobiology 2015 25 6 591 606 25573276
25 Chen HJ Yuan J Lobel P Systematic mutational analysis of the cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate/insulin-like growth factor II receptor cytoplasmic domain. An acidic cluster containing a key aspartate is important for function in lysosomal enzyme sorting J Biol Chem 1997 272 11 7003 12 9054390
26 Hawkes C Kar S The insulin-like growth factor-II/mannose-6-phosphate receptor: structure, distribution and function in the central nervous system Brain Res Brain Res Rev 2004 44 2–3 117 40 15003389
27 Kiess W Type II insulin-like growth factor receptor is present in rat serum Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1987 84 21 7720 4 2959961
28 MacDonald RG Serum form of the rat insulin-like growth factor II/mannose 6-phosphate receptor is truncated in the carboxyl-terminal domain J Biol Chem 1989 264 6 3256 61 2536739
29 Clairmont KB Czech MP Extracellular release as the major degradative pathway of the insulin-like growth factor II/mannose 6-phosphate receptor J Biol Chem 1991 266 19 12131 4 1648081
30 Leksa V Soluble M6P/IGF2R released by TACE controls angiogenesis via blocking plasminogen activation Circ Res 2011 108 6 676 85 21273553
31 Killian JK Jirtle RL Genomic structure of the human M6P/IGF2 receptor Mamm Genome 1999 10 1 74 7 9892739
32 Kalscheuer VM The insulin-like growth factor type-2 receptor gene is imprinted in the mouse but not in humans Nat Genet 1993 5 1 74 8 8220428
33 Funk B Expression of the insulin-like growth factor-II/mannose-6-phosphate receptor in multiple human tissues during fetal life and early infancy J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1992 75 2 424 31 1379254
34 Matzner U von Figura K Pohlmann R Expression of the two mannose 6-phosphate receptors is spatially and temporally different during mouse embryogenesis Development 1992 114 4 965 72 1319896
35 Sklar MM Developmental expression of rat insulin-like growth factor-II/mannose 6-phosphate receptor messenger ribonucleic acid Endocrinology 1992 130 6 3484 91 1317785
36 Westlund B Dahms NM Kornfeld S The bovine mannose 6-phosphate/insulin-like growth factor II receptor. Localization of mannose 6-phosphate binding sites to domains 1–3 and 7–11 of the extracytoplasmic region J Biol Chem 1991 266 34 23233 9 1660469
37 Dennis PA Rifkin DB Cellular activation of latent transforming growth factor beta requires binding to the cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate/insulin-like growth factor type II receptor Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1991 88 2 580 4 1846448
38 Blanchard F Mannose 6-Phosphate/Insulin-like growth factor II receptor mediates internalization and degradation of leukemia inhibitory factor but not signal transduction J Biol Chem 1999 274 35 24685 93 10455136
39 Lee SJ Nathans D Proliferin secreted by cultured cells binds to mannose 6-phosphate receptors J Biol Chem 1988 263 7 3521 7 2963825
40 Scheel G Herzog V Mannose 6-phosphate receptor in porcine thyroid follicle cells. Localization and possible implications for the intracellular transport of thyroglobulin Eur J Cell Biol 1989 49 1 140 8 2547614
41 Kang S The retinoid X receptor agonist 9-cis-retinoic acid and the 24-hydroxylase inhibitor ketoconazole increase activity of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 in human skin in vivo J Invest Dermatol 1997 108 4 513 8 9077483
42 Godar S M6P/IGFII-receptor complexes urokinase receptor and plasminogen for activation of transforming growth factor-beta1 Eur J Immunol 1999 29 3 1004 13 10092105
43 Olson LJ Structure of uPAR, plasminogen, and sugar-binding sites of the 300 kDa mannose 6-phosphate receptor EMBO J 2004 23 10 2019 28 15085180
44 Waheed A Mannose 6-phosphate/insulin like growth factor II receptor: the two types of ligands bind simultaneously to one receptor at different sites Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1988 152 3 1248 54 2454100
45 Nissley P Kiess W Reciprocal modulation of binding of lysosomal enzymes and insulin-like growth factor-II (IGF-II) to the mannose 6-phosphate/IGF-II receptor Adv Exp Med Biol 1991 293 311 24 1662863
46 Kiess W Insulin-like growth factor-II (IGF-II) inhibits both the cellular uptake of beta-galactosidase and the binding of beta-galactosidase to purified IGF-II/mannose 6-phosphate receptor J Biol Chem 1989 264 8 4710 4 2538455
47 Hille-Rehfeld A Mannose 6-phosphate receptors in sorting and transport of lysosomal enzymes Biochim Biophys Acta 1995 1241 2 177 94 7640295
48 Macdonald RG Mannose-6-Phosphate Enhances Cross-Linking Efficiency between Insulin-Like Growth Factor-Ii (Igf-Ii) and Igf-Ii/Mannose-6-Phosphate Receptors in Membranes Endocrinology 1991 128 1 413 421 1846107
49 Byrd JC MacDonald RG Mechanisms for high affinity mannose 6-phosphate ligand binding to the insulin-like growth factor II/mannose 6-phosphate receptor J Biol Chem 2000 275 25 18638 46 10764735
50 Byrd JC Dimerization of the insulin-like growth factor II/mannose 6-phosphate receptor J Biol Chem 2000 275 25 18647 56 10764761
51 Brissenden JE Ullrich A Francke U Human chromosomal mapping of genes for insulin-like growth factors I and II and epidermal growth factor Nature 1984 310 5980 781 4 6382023
52 Jones JI Clemmons DR Insulin-like growth factors and their binding proteins: biological actions Endocr Rev 1995 16 1 3 34 7758431
53 Dahms NM Wick DA Brzycki-Wessell MA The bovine mannose 6-phosphate/insulin-like growth factor II receptor. Localization of the insulin-like growth factor II binding site to domains 5–11 J Biol Chem 1994 269 5 3802 9 8106425
54 Garmroudi F MacDonald RG Localization of the insulin-like growth factor II (IGF-II) binding/cross-linking site of the IGF-II/mannose 6-phosphate receptor to extracellular repeats 10–11 J Biol Chem 1994 269 43 26944 52 7929433
55 Zaccheo OJ Kinetics of insulin-like growth factor II (IGF-II) interaction with domain 11 of the human IGF-II/mannose 6-phosphate receptor: function of CD and AB loop solvent-exposed residues J Mol Biol 2006 359 2 403 21 16631789
56 Garmroudi F Truncated forms of the insulin-like growth factor II (IGF-II)/mannose 6-phosphate receptor encompassing the IGF-II binding site: characterization of a point mutation that abolishes IGF-II binding Mol Endocrinol 1996 10 6 642 51 8776724
57 Brown J Structure and functional analysis of the IGF-II/IGF2R interaction EMBO J 2008 27 1 265 76 18046459
58 Hassan AB Keys to the hidden treasures of the mannose 6-phosphate/insulin-like growth factor 2 receptor Am J Pathol 2003 162 1 3 6 12507883
59 El-Shewy HM Luttrell LM Insulin-like growth factor-2/mannose-6 phosphate receptors Vitam Horm 2009 80 667 97 19251055
60 Killian JK M6P/IGF2R imprinting evolution in mammals Mol Cell 2000 5 4 707 16 10882106
61 Clairmont KB Czech MP Chicken and Xenopus mannose 6-phosphate receptors fail to bind insulin-like growth factor II J Biol Chem 1989 264 28 16390 2 2550441
62 Nadimpalli SK Amancha PK Evolution of mannose 6-phosphate receptors (MPR300 and 46): lysosomal enzyme sorting proteins Curr Protein Pept Sci 2010 11 1 68 90 20201808
63 Nolan CM Mannose 6-phosphate receptors in an ancient vertebrate, zebrafish Dev Genes Evol 2006 216 3 144 51 16411117
64 Nixon RA The role of autophagy in neurodegenerative disease Nat Med 2013 19 8 983 97 23921753
65 Hancock MK Identification of residues essential for carbohydrate recognition by the insulin-like growth factor II/mannose 6-phosphate receptor J Biol Chem 2002 277 13 11255 64 11799115
66 Chavez CA Domain 5 of the cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate receptor preferentially binds phosphodiesters (mannose 6-phosphate N-acetylglucosamine ester) Biochemistry 2007 46 44 12604 17 17927214
67 Marron-Terada PG Recognition of Dictyostelium discoideum lysosomal enzymes is conferred by the amino-terminal carbohydrate binding site of the insulin-like growth factor II/mannose 6-phosphate receptor Biochemistry 2000 39 9 2243 53 10694390
68 Bohnsack RN Cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate receptor: a composite of distinct phosphomannosyl binding sites J Biol Chem 2009 284 50 35215 26 19840944
69 Braulke T Regulation of the mannose 6-phosphate/IGF II receptor expression at the cell surface by mannose 6-phosphate, insulin like growth factors and epidermal growth factor EMBO J 1989 8 3 681 6 2542023
70 Oka Y Insulin activates the appearance of insulin-like growth factor II receptors on the adipocyte cell surface Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1984 81 13 4028 32 6330732
71 Appell KC I Simpson A Cushman SW Characterization of the stimulatory action of insulin on insulin-like growth factor II binding to rat adipose cells. Differences in the mechanism of insulin action on insulin-like growth factor II receptors and glucose transporters J Biol Chem 1988 263 22 10824 9 2968984
72 Zhang Q Berggren PO Tally M Glucose increases both the plasma membrane number and phosphorylation of insulin-like growth factor II/mannose 6-phosphate receptors J Biol Chem 1997 272 38 23703 6 9295313
73 York SJ The rate of internalization of the mannose 6-phosphate/insulin-like growth factor II receptor is enhanced by multivalent ligand binding J Biol Chem 1999 274 2 1164 71 9873065
74 Stagsted J Inhibition of internalization of glucose transporters and IGF-II receptors. Mechanism of action of MHC class I-derived peptides which augment the insulin response in rat adipose cells J Biol Chem 1993 268 30 22809 13 8226791
75 Braulke T Mieskes G Role of protein phosphatases in insulin-like growth factor II (IGF II)-stimulated mannose 6-phosphate/IGF II receptor redistribution J Biol Chem 1992 267 24 17347 53 1324932
76 Hu KQ Modulation of the insulin growth factor II/mannose 6-phosphate receptor in microvascular endothelial cells by phorbol ester via protein kinase C J Biol Chem 1990 265 23 13864 70 2166043
77 Corvera S Insulin action inhibits insulin-like growth factor-II (IGF-II) receptor phosphorylation in H-35 hepatoma cells. IGF-II receptors isolated from insulin-treated cells exhibit enhanced in vitro phosphorylation by casein kinase II J Biol Chem 1988 263 7 3116 22 2963823
78 Meresse S Phosphorylation of the cytoplasmic domain of the bovine cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate receptor. Serines 2421 and 2492 are the targets of a casein kinase II associated to the Golgi-derived HAI adaptor complex J Biol Chem 1990 265 31 18833 42 2172236
79 Meresse S Hoflack B Phosphorylation of the cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate receptor is closely associated with its exit from the trans-Golgi network J Cell Biol 1993 120 1 67 75 8416996
80 Neufeld EF From serendipity to therapy Annu Rev Biochem 2011 80 1 15 21675915
81 Urayama A Developmentally regulated mannose 6-phosphate receptor-mediated transport of a lysosomal enzyme across the blood-brain barrier Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2004 101 34 12658 63 15314220
82 Urayama A Mannose 6-phosphate receptor-mediated transport of sulfamidase across the blood-brain barrier in the newborn mouse Mol Ther 2008 16 7 1261 6 18443601
83 Boker C von Figura K Hille-Rehfeld A The carboxy-terminal peptides of 46 kDa and 300 kDa mannose 6-phosphate receptors share partial sequence homology and contain information for sorting in the early endosomal pathway J Cell Sci 1997 110 Pt 8 1023 32 9152028
84 Dell’Angelica EC Payne GS Intracellular cycling of lysosomal enzyme receptors: cytoplasmic tails’ tales Cell 2001 106 4 395 8 11525725
85 Mullins C Bonifacino JS The molecular machinery for lysosome biogenesis BioEssays 2001 23 4 333 43 11268039
86 Hirst J Lindsay MR Robinson MS GGAs: roles of the different domains and comparison with AP-1 and clathrin Mol Biol Cell 2001 12 11 3573 88 11694590
87 Puertollano R Sorting of mannose 6-phosphate receptors mediated by the GGAs Science 2001 292 5522 1712 6 11387475
88 Zhu Y Binding of GGA2 to the lysosomal enzyme sorting motif of the mannose 6-phosphate receptor Science 2001 292 5522 1716 8 11387476
89 Hirsch DS Arf regulates interaction of GGA with mannose-6-phosphate receptor Traffic 2003 4 1 26 35 12535273
90 Misra S Structural basis for acidic-cluster-dileucine sorting-signal recognition by VHS domains Nature 2002 415 6874 933 7 11859375
91 Collins BM Watson PJ Owen DJ The structure of the GGA1-GAT domain reveals the molecular basis for ARF binding and membrane association of GGAs Dev Cell 2003 4 3 321 32 12636914
92 Seaman MN The retromer complex - endosomal protein recycling and beyond J Cell Sci 2012 125 Pt 20 4693 702 23148298
93 Orsel JG Recognition of the 300-kDa mannose 6-phosphate receptor cytoplasmic domain by 47-kDa tail-interacting protein Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2000 97 16 9047 51 10908666
94 Oka Y Rozek LM Czech MP Direct demonstration of rapid insulin-like growth factor II Receptor internalization and recycling in rat adipocytes. Insulin stimulates 125I-insulin-like growth factor II degradation by modulating the IGF-II receptor recycling process J Biol Chem 1985 260 16 9435 42 2991246
95 Kiess W An antibody that blocks insulin-like growth factor (IGF) binding to the type II IGF receptor is neither an agonist nor an inhibitor of IGF-stimulated biologic responses in L6 myoblasts J Biol Chem 1987 262 26 12745 51 2957378
96 Nolan CM Binding of insulin-like growth factor II (IGF-II) by human cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate receptor/IGF-II receptor expressed in receptor-deficient mouse L cells Cell Regul 1990 1 2 197 213 1966041
97 Lau MM Loss of the imprinted IGF2/cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate receptor results in fetal overgrowth and perinatal lethality Genes Dev 1994 8 24 2953 63 8001817
98 Ludwig T Mouse mutants lacking the type 2 IGF receptor (IGF2R) are rescued from perinatal lethality in Igf2 and Igf1r null backgrounds Dev Biol 1996 177 2 517 35 8806828
99 Wang ZQ Regulation of embryonic growth and lysosomal targeting by the imprinted Igf2/Mpr gene Nature 1994 372 6505 464 7 7984240
100 Saris JJ High-affinity prorenin binding to cardiac man-6-P/IGF-II receptors precedes proteolytic activation to renin Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2001 280 4 H1706 15 11247783
101 Todderud G Carpenter G Presence of mannose phosphate on the epidermal growth factor receptor in A-431 cells J Biol Chem 1988 263 34 17893 6 3192517
102 Ghahary A Cellular response to latent TGF-beta1 is facilitated by insulin-like growth factor-II/mannose-6-phosphate receptors on MS-9 cells Exp Cell Res 1999 251 1 111 20 10438576
103 Villevalois-Cam L The hepatocyte is a direct target for transforming-growth factor beta activation via the insulin-like growth factor II/mannose 6-phosphate receptor J Hepatol 2003 38 2 156 63 12547403
104 Nishimoto I Insulin-like growth factor II stimulates calcium influx in competent BALB/c 3T3 cells primed with epidermal growth factor. Characteristics of calcium influx and involvement of GTP-binding protein J Biol Chem 1987 262 25 12120 6 2442157
105 Martinez DA Identification of functional insulin-like growth factor-II/mannose-6-phosphate receptors in isolated bone cells J Cell Biochem 1995 59 2 246 57 8904318
106 Hammerman MR Gavin JR 3rd Binding of insulin-like growth Factor ii and multiplication-stimulating activity-stimulated phosphorylation in basolateral membranes from dog kidney J Biol Chem 1984 259 21 13511 7 6092378
107 Mellas J Gavin JR 3rd Hammerman MR Multiplication-stimulating activity-induced alkalinization of canine renal proximal tubular cells J Biol Chem 1986 261 31 14437 42 3533920
108 Rogers SA Hammerman MR Insulin-like growth factor II stimulates production of inositol trisphosphate in proximal tubular basolateral membranes from canine kidney Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1988 85 11 4037 41 3259697
109 Shimizu M Insulin and insulinlike growth factor receptors and responses in cultured human muscle cells Am J Physiol 1986 251 5 Pt 1 E611 5 2946238
110 Hari J The receptor for insulin-like growth factor II mediates an insulin-like response EMBO J 1987 6 11 3367 71 2828025
111 Takigawa M Insulin-like growth factors I and II are autocrine factors in stimulating proteoglycan synthesis, a marker of differentiated chondrocytes, acting through their respective receptors on a clonal human chondrosarcoma-derived chondrocyte cell line, HCS-2/8 Endocrinology 1997 138 10 4390 400 9322955
112 Poiraudeau S Different mechanisms are involved in intracellular calcium increase by insulin-like growth factors 1 and 2 in articular chondrocytes: voltage-gated calcium channels, and/or phospholipase C coupled to a pertussis-sensitive G-protein J Cell Biochem 1997 64 3 414 22 9057099
113 El-Badry OM Insulin-like growth factor II acts as an autocrine growth and motility factor in human rhabdomyosarcoma tumors Cell Growth Differ 1990 1 7 325 31 2177632
114 Minniti CP The insulin-like growth factor II (IGF-II)/mannose 6-phosphate receptor mediates IGF-II-induced motility in human rhabdomyosarcoma cells J Biol Chem 1992 267 13 9000 4 1315746
115 Nestler JE Insulin-like growth factor II is a potent inhibitor of the aromatase activity of human placental cytotrophoblasts Endocrinology 1990 127 5 2064 70 2226300
116 McKinnon T Stimulation of human extravillous trophoblast migration by IGF-II is mediated by IGF type 2 receptor involving inhibitory G protein(s) and phosphorylation of MAPK J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2001 86 8 3665 74 11502794
117 Zhang Q Insulin-like growth factor II signaling through the insulin-like growth factor II/mannose-6-phosphate receptor promotes exocytosis in insulin-secreting cells Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997 94 12 6232 7 9177200
118 Hawkes C Single transmembrane domain insulin-like growth factor-II/mannose-6-phosphate receptor regulates central cholinergic function by activating a G-protein-sensitive, protein kinase C-dependent pathway J Neurosci 2006 26 2 585 96 16407557
119 Amritraj A Leu27 insulin-like growth factor-II, an insulin-like growth factor-II analog, attenuates depolarization-evoked GABA release from adult rat hippocampal and cortical slices Neuroscience 2010 170 3 722 30 20659530
120 Ikezu T In vivo coupling of insulin-like growth factor II/mannose 6-phosphate receptor to heteromeric G proteins. Distinct roles of cytoplasmic domains and signal sequestration by the receptor J Biol Chem 1995 270 49 29224 8 7493951
121 Higashijima T Burnier J Ross EM Regulation of Gi and Go by mastoparan, related amphiphilic peptides, and hydrophobic amines. Mechanism and structural determinants of activity J Biol Chem 1990 265 24 14176 86 2117607
122 Okamoto T Nishimoto I Analysis of stimulation-G protein subunit coupling by using active insulin-like growth factor II receptor peptide Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1991 88 18 8020 3 1654554
123 Matsunaga H Activation of a calcium-permeable cation channel by insulin-like growth factor II in BALB/c 3T3 cells American Journal of Physiology 1988 255 4 Pt 1 C442 6 2845795
124 Pfeifer A Cyclic GMP-dependent protein kinase blocks pertussis toxin-sensitive hormone receptor signaling pathways in Chinese hamster ovary cells J Biol Chem 1995 270 16 9052 9 7721818
125 Sakano KI The Design, Expression, and Characterization of Human Insulin-Like Growth Factor-Ii (Igf-Ii) Mutants Specific for Either the Igf-Ii Cation-Independent Mannose 6-Phosphate Receptor or Igf-I Receptor Journal of Biological Chemistry 1991 266 31 20626 20635 1657932
126 Korner C Mannose 6-phosphate/insulin-like growth factor II receptor fails to interact with G-proteins. Analysis of mutant cytoplasmic receptor domains J Biol Chem 1995 270 1 287 95 7814388
127 Hawkes C Heterotrimeric G proteins and the single-transmembrane domain IGF-II/M6P receptor: functional interaction and relevance to cell signaling Mol Neurobiol 2007 35 3 329 45 17917122
128 Amritraj A Single-Transmembrane Domain IGF-II/M6P Receptor: Potential Interaction with G Protein and Its Association with Cholesterol-Rich Membrane Domains Endocrinology 2012 153 10 4784 98 22903618
129 Chu CH Activation of insulin-like growth factor II receptor induces mitochondrial-dependent apoptosis through G(alpha)q and downstream calcineurin signaling in myocardial cells Endocrinology 2009 150 6 2723 31 19095737
130 El-Shewy HM Insulin-like growth factors mediate heterotrimeric G protein-dependent ERK1/2 activation by transactivating sphingosine 1-phosphate receptors J Biol Chem 2006 281 42 31399 407 16926156
131 El-Shewy HM The insulin-like growth factor type 1 and insulin-like growth factor type 2/mannose-6-phosphate receptors independently regulate ERK1/2 activity in HEK293 cells J Biol Chem 2007 282 36 26150 7 17620336
132 O’Gorman DB Insulin-like growth factor-II/mannose 6-phosphate receptor overexpression reduces growth of choriocarcinoma cells in vitro and in vivo Endocrinology 2002 143 11 4287 94 12399424
133 DaCosta SA Schumaker LM Ellis MJ Mannose 6-phosphate/insulin-like growth factor 2 receptor, a bona fide tumor suppressor gene or just a promising candidate? J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia 2000 5 1 85 94 10791771
134 Oates AJ The mannose 6-phosphate/insulin-like growth factor 2 receptor (M6P/IGF2R), a putative breast tumor suppressor gene Breast Cancer Res Treat 1998 47 3 269 81 9516081
135 Osipo C Dorman S Frankfater A Loss of insulin-like growth factor II receptor expression promotes growth in cancer by increasing intracellular signaling from both IGF-I and insulin receptors Exp Cell Res 2001 264 2 388 96 11262195
136 Toretsky JA Helman LJ Involvement of IGF-II in human cancer J Endocrinol 1996 149 3 367 72 8691094
137 Yang L Tredget EE Ghahary A Activation of latent transforming growth factor-beta1 is induced by mannose 6-phosphate/insulin-like growth factor-II receptor Wound Repair Regen 2000 8 6 538 46 11208181
138 Motyka B Mannose 6-phosphate/insulin-like growth factor II receptor is a death receptor for granzyme B during cytotoxic T cell-induced apoptosis Cell 2000 103 3 491 500 11081635
139 Veugelers K Granule-mediated killing by granzyme B and perforin requires a mannose 6-phosphate receptor and is augmented by cell surface heparan sulfate Mol Biol Cell 2006 17 2 623 33 16280358
140 Dressel R Granzyme-mediated cytotoxicity does not involve the mannose 6-phosphate receptors on target cells J Biol Chem 2004 279 19 20200 10 14985351
141 Hu CK Loss of heterozygosity of M6P/IGF2R gene is an early event in the development of prostate cancer Prostate Cancer Prostatic Dis 2006 9 1 62 7 16304558
142 Jang HS Clinical significance of loss of heterozygosity for M6P/IGF2R in patients with primary hepatocellular carcinoma World J Gastroenterol 2008 14 9 1394 8 18322954
143 Souza RF Microsatellite instability in the insulin-like growth factor II receptor gene in gastrointestinal tumours Nat Genet 1996 14 3 255 7 8896552
144 Savage SA Analysis of genes critical for growth regulation identifies Insulin-like Growth Factor 2 Receptor variations with possible functional significance as risk factors for osteosarcoma Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2007 16 8 1667 74 17684144
145 Kar S Chabot JG Quirion R Quantitative autoradiographic localization of [125I]insulin-like growth factor I, [125I]insulin-like growth factor II, and [125I]insulin receptor binding sites in developing and adult rat brain J Comp Neurol 1993 333 3 375 97 8349849
146 Marinelli PW Gianoulakis C Kar S Effects of voluntary ethanol drinking on [125I]insulin-like growth factor-I, [125I]insulin-like growth factor-II and [125I]insulin receptor binding in the mouse hippocampus and cerebellum Neuroscience 2000 98 4 687 95 10891612
147 Wilczak N Insulin-like growth factor II receptors in human brain and their absence in astrogliotic plaques in multiple sclerosis Brain Res 2000 863 1–2 282 8 10773220
148 Hawkes C Kar S Insulin-like growth factor-II/Mannose-6-phosphate receptor in the spinal cord and dorsal root ganglia of the adult rat Eur J Neurosci 2002 15 1 33 9 11860504
149 Couce ME Weatherington AJ McGinty JF Expression of insulin-like growth factor-II (IGF-II) and IGF-II/mannose-6-phosphate receptor in the rat hippocampus: an in situ hybridization and immunocytochemical study Endocrinology 1992 131 4 1636 42 1396308
150 Hawkes C Kar S Insulin-like growth factor-II/mannose-6-phosphate receptor: widespread distribution in neurons of the central nervous system including those expressing cholinergic phenotype J Comp Neurol 2003 458 2 113 27 12596253
151 Fushimi S Shirabe T Expression of insulin-like growth factors in remyelination following ethidium bromide-induced demyelination in the mouse spinal cord Neuropathology 2004 24 3 208 18 15484699
152 Amritraj A Altered levels and distribution of IGF-II/M6P receptor and lysosomal enzymes in mutant APP and APP + PS1 transgenic mouse brains Neurobiol Aging 2009 30 1 54 70 17561313
153 Konishi Y Fushimi S Shirabe T Immunohistochemical distribution of cation-dependent mannose 6-phosphate receptors in the mouse central nervous system: comparison with that of cation-independent mannose 6-phophate receptors Neurosci Lett 2005 378 1 7 12 15763163
154 Nissley P Kiess W Sklar M Developmental expression of the IGF-II/mannose 6-phosphate receptor Mol Reprod Dev 1993 35 4 408 13 8398120
155 Sara VR Carlsson-Skwirut C The role of the insulin-like growth factors in the regulation of brain development Prog Brain Res 1988 73 87 99 3047812
156 Valentino KL Ocrant I Rosenfeld RG Developmental expression of insulin-like growth factor-II receptor immunoreactivity in the rat central nervous system Endocrinology 1990 126 2 914 20 2153533
157 Murphy M Cytokines which signal through the LIF receptor and their actions in the nervous system Prog Neurobiol 1997 52 5 355 78 9304697
158 Thompson Haskell G Retinoic acid signaling at sites of plasticity in the mature central nervous system J Comp Neurol 2002 452 3 228 41 12353219
159 Knusel B Selective and nonselective stimulation of central cholinergic and dopaminergic development in vitro by nerve growth factor, basic fibroblast growth factor, epidermal growth factor, insulin and the insulin-like growth factors I and II J Neurosci 1990 10 2 558 70 2406380
160 Konishi Y Insulin-like growth factor II promotes in vitro cholinergic development of mouse septal neurons: comparison with the effects of insulin-like growth factor I Brain Res 1994 649 1–2 53 61 7953654
161 Liu JP Lauder JM S-100 beta and insulin-like growth factor-II differentially regulate growth of developing serotonin and dopamine neurons in vitro J Neurosci Res 1992 33 2 248 56 1360544
162 Neff NT Insulin-like growth factors: putative muscle-derived trophic agents that promote motoneuron survival J Neurobiol 1993 24 12 1578 88 8301266
163 Walter HJ Distinct sites of insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-II expression and localization in lesioned rat brain: possible roles of IGF binding proteins (IGFBPs) in the mediation of IGF-II activity Endocrinology 1999 140 1 520 32 9886865
164 Dore S Impact of neonatal kainate treatment on hippocampal insulin-like growth factor receptors Neuroscience 1999 91 3 1035 43 10391481
165 Beilharz EJ Insulin-like growth factor II is induced during wound repair following hypoxic-ischemic injury in the developing rat brain Brain Res Mol Brain Res 1995 29 1 81 91 7770004
166 Stephenson DT Rash K Clemens JA Increase in insulin-like growth factor II receptor within ischemic neurons following focal cerebral infarction J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 1995 15 6 1022 31 7593334
167 Alberini CM Chen DY Memory enhancement: consolidation, reconsolidation and insulin-like growth factor 2 Trends Neurosci 2012 35 5 274 83 22341662
168 O’Kusky J Ye P Neurodevelopmental effects of insulin-like growth factor signaling Front Neuroendocrinol 2012 33 3 230 51 22710100
169 Jellinger KA Basic mechanisms of neurodegeneration: a critical update J Cell Mol Med 2010 14 3 457 87 20070435
170 Double KL Selective cell death in neurodegeneration: why are some neurons spared in vulnerable regions? Prog Neurobiol 2010 92 3 316 29 20541584
171 Wang X Dysregulation of protein trafficking in neurodegeneration Mol Neurodegener 2014 9 31 25152012
172 Lim J Yue Z Neuronal aggregates: formation, clearance, and spreading Dev Cell 2015 32 4 491 501 25710535
173 Bertram L Tanzi RE The genetics of Alzheimer’s disease Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci 2012 107 79 100 22482448
174 Karch CM Cruchaga C Goate AM Alzheimer’s Disease Genetics: From the Bench to the Clinic Neuron 2014 83 1 11 26 24991952
175 Poirier J Apolipoprotein E polymorphism and Alzheimer’s disease Lancet 1993 342 8873 697 9 8103819
176 Selkoe DJ Biochemistry and molecular biology of amyloid beta-protein and the mechanism of Alzheimer’s disease Handb Clin Neurol 2008 89 245 60 18631749
177 Hardy J The amyloid hypothesis for Alzheimer’s disease: a critical reappraisal J Neurochem 2009 110 4 1129 34 19457065
178 Nelson PT Braak H Markesbery WR Neuropathology and cognitive impairment in Alzheimer disease: a complex but coherent relationship J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2009 68 1 1 14 19104448
179 Selkoe DJ Alzheimer’s disease Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2011 3 7
180 Haass C Amyloid beta-peptide is produced by cultured cells during normal metabolism Nature 1992 359 6393 322 5 1383826
181 Seubert P Isolation and quantification of soluble Alzheimer’s beta-peptide from biological fluids Nature 1992 359 6393 325 7 1406936
182 Saido TC Iwata N Metabolism of amyloid beta peptide and pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease. Towards presymptomatic diagnosis, prevention and therapy Neurosci Res 2006 54 4 235 53 16457902
183 Mawuenyega KG Decreased clearance of CNS beta-amyloid in Alzheimer’s disease Science 2010 330 6012 1774 21148344
184 Auld DS Alzheimer’s disease and the basal forebrain cholinergic system: relations to beta-amyloid peptides, cognition, and treatment strategies Prog Neurobiol 2002 68 3 209 45 12450488
185 Francis PT The cholinergic hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease: a review of progress J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1999 66 2 137 47 10071091
186 Kar S Interactions between beta-amyloid and central cholinergic neurons: implications for Alzheimer’s disease J Psychiatry Neurosci 2004 29 6 427 41 15644984
187 Ladner CJ Lee JM Pharmacological drug treatment of Alzheimer disease: the cholinergic hypothesis revisited J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 1998 57 8 719 31 9720487
188 Chen DY A critical role for IGF-II in memory consolidation and enhancement Nature 2011 469 7331 491 7 21270887
189 Stern SA Enhancement of memories by systemic administration of insulin-like growth factor II Neuropsychopharmacology 2014 39 9 2179 90 24642597
190 Thinakaran G Koo EH Amyloid precursor protein trafficking, processing, and function J Biol Chem 2008 283 44 29615 9 18650430
191 Haass C Trafficking and proteolytic processing of APP Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2012 2 5 a006270 22553493
192 Kar S Cellular distribution of insulin-like growth factor-II/mannose-6-phosphate receptor in normal human brain and its alteration in Alzheimer’s disease pathology Neurobiol Aging 2006 27 2 199 210 16399207
193 Cataldo AM Presenilin mutations in familial Alzheimer disease and transgenic mouse models accelerate neuronal lysosomal pathology J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2004 63 8 821 30 15330337
194 Rivera EJ Insulin and insulin-like growth factor expression and function deteriorate with progression of Alzheimer’s disease: link to brain reductions in acetylcholine J Alzheimers Dis 2005 8 3 247 68 16340083
195 Pascual-Lucas M Insulin-like growth factor 2 reverses memory and synaptic deficits in APP transgenic mice EMBO Mol Med 2014 6 10 1246 62 25100745
196 Mellott TJ IGF2 ameliorates amyloidosis, increases cholinergic marker expression and raises BMP9 and neurotrophin levels in the hippocampus of the APPswePS1dE9 Alzheimer’s disease model mice PLoS One 2014 9 4 e94287 24732467
197 Nixon RA Mathews PM Cataldo AM The neuronal endosomal-lysosomal system in Alzheimer’s disease J Alzheimers Dis 2001 3 1 97 107 12214078
198 Gautreau A Oguievetskaia K Ungermann C Function and regulation of the endosomal fusion and fission machineries Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 6 3
199 Huotari J Helenius A Endosome maturation EMBO J 2011 30 17 3481 500 21878991
200 Appelqvist H The lysosome: from waste bag to potential therapeutic target J Mol Cell Biol 2013 5 4 214 26 23918283
201 Nixon RA Endosome function and dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease and other neurodegenerative diseases Neurobiol Aging 2005 26 3 373 82 15639316
202 Nixon RA Yang DS Autophagy and neuronal cell death in neurological disorders Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2012 4 10
203 Nixon RA Cataldo AM Lysosomal system pathways: genes to neurodegeneration in Alzheimer’s disease J Alzheimers Dis 2006 9 3 Suppl 277 89 16914867
204 Cataldo AM Endocytic pathway abnormalities precede amyloid beta deposition in sporadic Alzheimer’s disease and Down syndrome: differential effects of APOE genotype and presenilin mutations Am J Pathol 2000 157 1 277 86 10880397
205 Chevallier N Cathepsin D displays in vitro beta-secretase-like specificity Brain Res 1997 750 1–2 11 9 9098524
206 Schechter I Ziv E Cathepsins S, B and L with aminopeptidases display beta-secretase activity associated with the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease Biol Chem 2011 392 6 555 69 21585286
207 Hook VY Kindy M Hook G Inhibitors of cathepsin B improve memory and reduce beta-amyloid in transgenic Alzheimer disease mice expressing the wild-type, but not the Swedish mutant, beta-secretase site of the amyloid precursor protein J Biol Chem 2008 283 12 7745 53 18184658
208 Kindy MS Deletion of the cathepsin B gene improves memory deficits in a transgenic ALZHeimer’s disease mouse model expressing AbetaPP containing the wild-type beta-secretase site sequence J Alzheimers Dis 2012 29 4 827 40 22337825
209 Boya P Kroemer G Lysosomal membrane permeabilization in cell death Oncogene 2008 27 50 6434 51 18955971
210 Johansson AC Regulation of apoptosis-associated lysosomal membrane permeabilization Apoptosis 2010 15 5 527 40 20077016
211 Yang AJ Loss of endosomal/lysosomal membrane impermeability is an early event in amyloid Abeta1–42 pathogenesis J Neurosci Res 1998 52 6 691 8 9669318
212 Ditaranto K Tekirian TL Yang AJ Lysosomal membrane damage in soluble Abeta-mediated cell death in Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Dis 2001 8 1 19 31 11162237
213 Yamashima T Reconsider Alzheimer’s disease by the ‘calpain-cathepsin hypothesis’--a perspective review Prog Neurobiol 2013 105 1 23 23499711
214 Mathews PM Alzheimer’s disease-related overexpression of the cation-dependent mannose 6-phosphate receptor increases Abeta secretion: role for altered lysosomal hydrolase distribution in beta-amyloidogenesis J Biol Chem 2002 277 7 5299 307 11551970
215 Cataldo AM Increased neuronal endocytosis and protease delivery to early endosomes in sporadic Alzheimer’s disease: neuropathologic evidence for a mechanism of increased beta-amyloidogenesis J Neurosci 1997 17 16 6142 51 9236226
216 Wolfe MS Gamma-secretase: structure, function, and modulation for Alzheimer’s disease Curr Top Med Chem 2008 8 1 2 8 18220927
217 Nathalie P Jean-Noel O Processing of amyloid precursor protein and amyloid peptide neurotoxicity Curr Alzheimer Res 2008 5 2 92 9 18393795
218 Vassar R Beta-secretase cleavage of Alzheimer’s amyloid precursor protein by the transmembrane aspartic protease BACE Science 1999 286 5440 735 41 10531052
219 Wang Y Thinakaran G Kar S Overexpression of the IGF-II/M6P receptor in mouse fibroblast cell lines differentially alters expression profiles of genes involved in Alzheimer’s disease-related pathology PLoS One 2014 9 5 e98057 24846272
220 Wang Y Overexpression of the Insulin-Like Growth Factor II Receptor Increases beta-Amyloid Production and Affects Cell Viability Mol Cell Biol 2015 35 14 2368 84 25939386
221 Ehehalt R Amyloidogenic processing of the Alzheimer beta-amyloid precursor protein depends on lipid rafts J Cell Biol 2003 160 1 113 23 12515826
222 Kojro E Low cholesterol stimulates the nonamyloidogenic pathway by its effect on the alpha -secretase ADAM 10 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2001 98 10 5815 20 11309494
223 Vetrivel KS Association of gamma-secretase with lipid rafts in post-Golgi and endosome membranes J Biol Chem 2004 279 43 44945 54 15322084
224 Vetrivel KS Spatial segregation of gamma-secretase and substrates in distinct membrane domains J Biol Chem 2005 280 27 25892 900 15886206
225 Haque A Banik NL Ray SK New insights into the roles of endolysosomal cathepsins in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease: cathepsin inhibitors as potential therapeutics CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets 2008 7 3 270 7 18673211
226 Buggia-Prevot V Thinakaran G Sorting the role of SORLA in Alzheimer’s disease Sci Transl Med 2014 6 223 223fs8
227 He X GGA proteins mediate the recycling pathway of memapsin 2 (BACE) J Biol Chem 2005 280 12 11696 703 15615712
228 Cuartero Y Retromer regulates postendocytic sorting of beta-secretase in polarized Madin-Darby canine kidney cells Traffic 2012 13 10 1393 410 22758778
229 Okada H Proteomic identification of sorting nexin 6 as a negative regulator of BACE1-mediated APP processing FASEB J 2010 24 8 2783 94 20354142
230 de la Monte SM Tong M Mechanisms of nitrosamine-mediated neurodegeneration: potential relevance to sporadic Alzheimer’s disease J Alzheimers Dis 2009 17 4 817 25 19542621
231 Hawkes C Up-regulation of cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate receptor and endosomal-lysosomal markers in surviving neurons after 192-IgG-saporin administrations into the adult rat brain Am J Pathol 2006 169 4 1140 54 17003474
232 Kar S Insulin-like growth factors-I and -II differentially regulate endogenous acetylcholine release from the rat hippocampal formation Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997 94 25 14054 9 9391151
233 Napoli I Blusztajn JK Mellott TJ Prenatal choline supplementation in rats increases the expression of IGF2 and its receptor IGF2R and enhances IGF2-induced acetylcholine release in hippocampus and frontal cortex Brain Res 2008 1237 124 35 18786520
234 Agis-Balboa RC A hippocampal insulin-growth factor 2 pathway regulates the extinction of fear memories EMBO J 2011 30 19 4071 83 21873981
235 Schmeisser MJ IkappaB kinase/nuclear factor kappaB-dependent insulin-like growth factor 2 (Igf2) expression regulates synapse formation and spine maturation via Igf2 receptor signaling J Neurosci 2012 32 16 5688 703 22514330
236 Amtul Z Oleic acid ameliorates amyloidosis in cellular and mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease Brain Pathol 2011 21 3 321 9 21040071
237 Alfimova MV Association of the insulin-like growth factor II (IGF2) gene with human cognitive functions Genetika 2012 48 8 993 8 23035551
238 Pu SF Insulin-like growth factor-II increases and IGF is required for postnatal rat spinal motoneuron survival following sciatic nerve axotomy J Neurosci Res 1999 55 1 9 16 9890429
239 Silva A Growth factor effects on survival and development of calbindin immunopositive cultured septal neurons Brain Res Bull 2000 51 1 35 42 10654578
240 Jarvis K Beta-amyloid toxicity and reversal in embryonic rat septal neurons Neurosci Lett 2007 423 3 184 8 17709203
241 Martin-Montanez E Involvement of IGF-II receptors in the antioxidant and neuroprotective effects of IGF-II on adult cortical neuronal cultures Biochim Biophys Acta 2014 1842 7 1041 51 24667322
242 Li Y Xu C Schubert D The up-regulation of endosomal-lysosomal components in amyloid beta-resistant cells J Neurochem 1999 73 4 1477 82 10501192
243 Prehn JH Protective effect of transforming growth factor-beta 1 on beta-amyloid neurotoxicity in rat hippocampal neurons Mol Pharmacol 1996 49 2 319 28 8632765
244 Ren RF Flanders KC Transforming growth factors-beta protect primary rat hippocampal neuronal cultures from degeneration induced by beta-amyloid peptide Brain Res 1996 732 1–2 16 24 8891264
245 Chen JH Protection of TGF-beta1 against neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration in Abeta1-42-induced Alzheimer’s disease model rats PLoS One 2015 10 2 e0116549 25658940
246 Bellettato CM Scarpa M Pathophysiology of neuropathic lysosomal storage disorders J Inherit Metab Dis 2010 33 4 347 62 20429032
247 Prada CE Grabowski GA Neuronopathic lysosomal storage diseases: clinical and pathologic findings Dev Disabil Res Rev 2013 17 3 226 46 23798011
248 Meikle PJ Prevalence of lysosomal storage disorders JAMA 1999 281 3 249 54 9918480
249 Dittmer F I-cell disease-like phenotype in mice deficient in mannose 6-phosphate receptors Transgenic Res 1998 7 6 473 83 10341453
250 Lachmann RH Enzyme replacement therapy for lysosomal storage diseases Curr Opin Pediatr 2011 23 6 588 93 21946346
251 Zhu Y Conjugation of mannose 6-phosphate-containing oligosaccharides to acid alpha-glucosidase improves the clearance of glycogen in pompe mice J Biol Chem 2004 279 48 50336 41 15383547
252 Gary-Bobo M Mannose 6-phosphate receptor targeting and its applications in human diseases Curr Med Chem 2007 14 28 2945 53 18220730
253 Grubb JH Vogler C Sly WS New strategies for enzyme replacement therapy for lysosomal storage diseases Rejuvenation Res 2010 13 2–3 229 36 20345279
254 Sly WS Vogler C The final frontier -- crossing the blood-brain barrier EMBO Mol Med 2013 5 5 655 7 23653302
255 Sorrentino NC A highly secreted sulphamidase engineered to cross the blood-brain barrier corrects brain lesions of mice with mucopolysaccharidoses type IIIA EMBO Mol Med 2013 5 5 675 90 23568409
256 Tang Y Li H Liu JP Niemann-Pick Disease Type C: from molecule to clinic Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol 2010 37 1 132 40 19566836
257 Schuchman EH Wasserstein MP Types A and B Niemann-Pick disease Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab 2015 29 2 237 47 25987176
258 Rosenbaum AI Maxfield FR Niemann-Pick type C disease: molecular mechanisms and potential therapeutic approaches J Neurochem 2011 116 5 789 95 20807315
259 Maulik M Role of Cholesterol in APP Metabolism and Its Significance in Alzheimer’s Disease Pathogenesis Mol Neurobiol 2012
260 Malnar M Bidirectional links between Alzheimer’s disease and Niemann-Pick type C disease Neurobiol Dis 2014 72 Pt A 37 47 24907492
261 Mattsson N Amyloid-beta metabolism in Niemann-Pick C disease models and patients Metab Brain Dis 2012 27 4 573 85 22935999
262 Kobayashi T Late endosomal membranes rich in lysobisphosphatidic acid regulate cholesterol transport Nat Cell Biol 1999 1 2 113 8 10559883
263 Ohashi M Arrested maturing multivesicular endosomes observed in a Chinese hamster ovary cell mutant, LEX2, isolated by repeated flow-cytometric cell sorting J Cell Sci 2000 113 Pt 12 2187 205 10825292
264 Miwako I Cholesterol requirement for cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate receptor exit from multivesicular late endosomes to the Golgi J Cell Sci 2001 114 Pt 9 1765 76 11309206
265 Ganley IG Pfeffer SR Cholesterol accumulation sequesters Rab9 and disrupts late endosome function in NPC1-deficient cells J Biol Chem 2006 281 26 17890 9 16644737
266 Ikeda K Drug-induced phospholipidosis is caused by blockade of mannose 6-phosphate receptor-mediated targeting of lysosomal enzymes Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2008 377 1 268 74 18840403
267 Liao G Cholesterol accumulation is associated with lysosomal dysfunction and autophagic stress in Npc1 −/− mouse brain Am J Pathol 2007 171 3 962 75 17631520
268 Amritraj A Increased Activity and Altered Subcellular Distribution of Lysosomal Enzymes Determine Neuronal Vulnerability in Niemann-Pick Type C1-Deficient Mice Am J Pathol 2009
269 Kalia LV Lang AE Parkinson’s disease Lancet 2015
270 Sevlever D Jiang P Yen SH Cathepsin D is the main lysosomal enzyme involved in the degradation of alpha-synuclein and generation of its carboxy-terminally truncated species Biochemistry 2008 47 36 9678 87 18702517
271 Qiao L Lysosomal enzyme cathepsin D protects against alpha-synuclein aggregation and toxicity Mol Brain 2008 1 17 19021916
272 Zimprich A A mutation in VPS35, encoding a subunit of the retromer complex, causes late-onset Parkinson disease Am J Hum Genet 2011 89 1 168 75 21763483
273 Sharma M A multi-centre clinico-genetic analysis of the VPS35 gene in Parkinson disease indicates reduced penetrance for disease-associated variants J Med Genet 2012 49 11 721 6 23125461
274 Tsika E Parkinson’s disease-linked mutations in VPS35 induce dopaminergic neurodegeneration Hum Mol Genet 2014 23 17 4621 38 24740878
275 Miura E VPS35 dysfunction impairs lysosomal degradation of alpha-synuclein and exacerbates neurotoxicity in a Drosophila model of Parkinson’s disease Neurobiol Dis 2014 71 1 13 25107340
276 Follett J The Vps35 D620N mutation linked to Parkinson’s disease disrupts the cargo sorting function of retromer Traffic 2014 15 2 230 44 24152121
277 Tong M Dong M de la Monte SM Brain insulin-like growth factor and neurotrophin resistance in Parkinson’s disease and dementia with Lewy bodies: potential role of manganese neurotoxicity J Alzheimers Dis 2009 16 3 585 99 19276553
278 Metcalf DJ Loss of the Batten disease gene CLN3 prevents exit from the TGN of the mannose 6-phosphate receptor Traffic 2008 9 11 1905 14 18817525
279 Dore S Distribution and levels of insulin-like growth factor (IGF-I and IGF-II) and insulin receptor binding sites in the spinal cords of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) patients Brain Res Mol Brain Res 1996 41 1–2 128 33 8883943
280 Dagvajantsan B Up-regulation of insulin-like growth factor-II receptor in reactive astrocytes in the spinal cord of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis transgenic rats Tohoku J Exp Med 2008 214 4 303 10 18441505
281 de la Monte SM Insulin and insulin-like growth factor resistance in alcoholic neurodegeneration Alcohol Clin Exp Res 2008 32 9 1630 44 18616667
282 Barry M Bleackley RC Cytotoxic T lymphocytes: all roads lead to death Nat Rev Immunol 2002 2 6 401 9 12093006
283 Neumann H Cytotoxic T lymphocytes in autoimmune and degenerative CNS diseases Trends Neurosci 2002 25 6 313 9 12086750
284 Haile Y Granule-derived granzyme B mediates the vulnerability of human neurons to T cell-induced neurotoxicity J Immunol 2011 187 9 4861 72 21964027
285 Suh HS Insulin-like growth factor 2 receptor is an IFNgamma-inducible microglial protein that facilitates intracellular HIV replication: implications for HIV-induced neurocognitive disorders Am J Pathol 2010 177 5 2446 58 20889566
