LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101500072
35770
Nat Rev Neurol
Nat Rev Neurol
Nature reviews. Neurology
1759-4758
1759-4766

28708131
5771416
10.1038/nrneurol.2017.96
NIHMS931103
Article
A clinicopathological approach to the diagnosis of dementia
Elahi Fanny M.
Miller Bruce L.
Memory and Aging Center, Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, 675 Nelson Rising Lane, Suite 190, San Francisco, California 94158, USA
Correspondence to F.M.E. fanny.elahi@ucsf.edu
9 1 2018
14 7 2017
8 2017
17 1 2018
13 8 457476
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
The most definitive classification systems for dementia are based on the underlying pathology which, in turn, is categorized largely according to the observed accumulation of abnormal protein aggregates in neurons and glia. These aggregates perturb molecular processes, cellular functions and, ultimately, cell survival, with ensuing disruption of large-scale neural networks subserving cognitive, behavioural and sensorimotor functions. The functional domains affected and the evolution of deficits in these domains over time serve as footprints that the clinician can trace back with various levels of certainty to the underlying neuropathology. The process of phenotyping and syndromic classification has substantially improved over decades of careful clinicopathological correlation, and through the discovery of in vivo biomarkers of disease. Here, we present an overview of the salient features of the most common dementia subtypes — Alzheimer disease, vascular dementia, frontotemporal dementia and related syndromes, Lewy body dementias, and prion diseases — with an emphasis on neuropathology, relevant epidemiology, risk factors, and signature signs and symptoms.


Dementia is a complex process involving an interplay between specific molecular pathways affecting cellular functions, leading to loss of synaptic connections, cell death, gliosis1, inflammation, and disruption of functional networks underlying cognition, personality, behaviour and sensorimotor functions, eventually attacking an individual’s autonomy2. Ageing is the most robust risk factor for dementia, with more than 90% of dementias presenting after the age of 65 years. With an increase in the mean age of the population, the incidence and prevalence of dementia continue to steadily increase worldwide. In 2015, the World Alzheimer Report3, a comprehensive meta-analysis of population-based studies, estimated that 46.8 million people worldwide are living with dementia, and that number is expected to reach 131.5 million by 2050. In the USA alone, an intervention delaying onset of dementia by 5 years would reduce Medicare costs by US$283 billion in 2050 (REF. 4).

Historically, definitions of dementia have been weighted toward prominent deficits in memory, as observed in typical amnestic Alzheimer disease (AD)5. The definition was revised in 2011 to reflect the plethora of cognitive and behavioural changes that can cause decline from baseline levels of functioning6. The revised definition requires impairments in at least two neuropsychiatric or cognitive domains that are not better explained by nondegenerative or primary psychiatric disorders, or systemic conditions such as delirium. The diagnostic process requires a history taken from the patient and a reliable informant, as well as objective measures of impairment through a neuropsychiatric and neuropsychological assessment6.

Definitive classification of dementia is based on the underlying neuropathology, as noted on autopsy or — in rare cases — biopsy. However, with various degrees of certainty, dementias can be sorted into syndromic categories on the basis of distinct clinical features, evolution over time (symptomatic progression), and other ancillary diagnostic information. Different pathologies can cause similar clinical syndromes, although rigorous syndromic classification can often predict the underlying pathology. The accuracy of clinicopathological diagnoses is improved by the use of imaging, biofluid and genetic biomarkers. In addition, simple treatable causes of cognitive impairment, such as hypothyroidism, vitamin B12 deficiency, infection or medication-induced problems, must be sought and ruled out.

In this Review, we highlight key elements that distinguish the most common dementia subtypes. We offer an overview of dementia classification and diagnosis, with an emphasis on salient clinical features, neuropathology, relevant epidemiology, risk factors, and in vivo biomarkers. We conclude with a summary of where the field stands with regards to the diagnostic process, and where it is heading.

Dementia classification

Dementias are classified on the basis of their underlying pathologies, which are largely defined by accumulation of abnormal protein aggregates in neurons and glia, as well as in the extracellular compartment, in vulnerable regions of the brain7. The vast majority of non-vascular dementias fall into six main categories of neurodegenerative proteinopathy: amyloid-β (Aβ), microtubule-associated protein tau, TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43), fused in sarcoma (FUS), α-synuclein, and prion protein (FIG. 1). Often, the presence of proteinopathies precedes clinical deficits by years. Whether these proteins are simply biomarkers reflecting the toxic molecular milieu, active agents of toxicity, or a combination of the two is open to debate.

The prion protein propagates along neuronal networks and can seed healthy cells8,9. Evidence emerging in recent years suggests that other neurodegenerative proteinopathies — in particular, tau and α-synuclein — share similar mechanisms of propagation10–13. Indeed, pathological and in vivo functional studies indicate that the majority of neurodegenerative diseases begin focally in a subset of vulnerable neurons or glia, with subsequent spread throughout the brain along specific paths7,14. Moreover, rather than being a homogeneous disease process, dementias seem to constitute a continuum of pathophysiological change, in turn giving rise to a spectrum of symptoms of varying severity. Therefore, definitions of the underlying pathologies, incorporating information from in vivo biomarkers of disease, are changing to reflect asymptomatic (or presymptomatic) and symptomatic phases of disease, also referred to as preclinical and clinical, respectively.

Three dichotomous clinical categories — early versus late, gradual versus rapid, and sporadic versus familial — apply distinctly or in combination to the spectrum of dementing processes. The age cut-off for early versus late onset of dementia is arbitrarily set at 65 years, which is historically the typical age for retirement. However, the incidence of many pathologies increases with age, frequently resulting in coexistence of more than one pathology (mixed pathology), which blurs syndromic delineations in the latter decades of life15.

Dementia epidemiology remains challenging: the accuracy of incidence and prevalence estimates is hampered by diagnostic challenges, and the absence of pathological confirmation in most of the published literature16. Globally, AD accounts for approximately 60% of all dementias17,18. However, when dementias are subdivided into early versus late, frontotemporal dementia (FTD) seems to be at least equally prevalent to AD before the age of 65 years19–23. Many patients diagnosed with AD also show multiple non-AD pathologies involving tau, TDP-43 and α-synuclein24,25. Sex differences between syndromes are observed, with over-representation of AD in females after age 75 years26. Survival after diagnosis ranges from months to decades. Regardless of the disease specificity, as dementia progresses, vegetative functions eventually become affected, with death frequently ensuing from swallowing difficulties, falls and infections.

It should be noted that established diagnostic criteria are primarily aimed at homogenizing clinical research cohorts, although they also have value for the clinician in establishing certainty around a specific diagnosis. In clinical practice, every patient presents with a unique story of decline. The work of the clinician lies in translating the patient’s story into a dynamic neuroanatomical map of the underlying pathology and its associated proteinopathy, supported by in vivo biomarkers of disease.

Alzheimer disease

Pathology: a dual proteinopathy

AD pathology is a dual proteinopathy defined by the coexistence of extracellular aggregates of Aβ42 fibrils — and, to a lesser extent, Aβ40 fibrils — that form neuritic Aβ plaques (hereafter referred to as amyloid), and intracellular aggregates of hyperphosphorylated tau (P-tau), termed neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs)27,28. The gradual spread of NFTs (Braak stages I–VI)29 correlates better with progression of cognitive deficits30,31 than does amyloid deposition32, which is often diffuse at the time of symptom presentation33,34.

The order in which these proteinopathies develop, and their potentially synergistic relationship with neurodegeneration, continue to be investigated. In sporadic AD, both proteinopathies precede symptom onset by years31. In an autopsy series of 2,332 brains35, Braak and colleagues found NFTs in the absence of amyloid in the early stages of AD. By contrast, with the exception of one individual with an autosomal dominant genetic cause of amyloidopathy (amyloid precursor protein (APP) gene triplication in Down syndrome), the researchers did not detect amyloid plaques in the absence of NFTs. The observation of tau pathology early in the disease course and its close association with the severity of neurodegeneration has prompted reconsideration of AD as a tauopathy. Nevertheless, by definition, AD-related dementia remains a dual proteinopathy with postulated synergy between tau and amyloid in the progression toward dementia.

From an anatomical standpoint, the abnormal intracellular aggregation of tau may begin subcortically in noradrenergic projection neurons of the locus coeruleus36–39, extending along functional networks subserving the limbic system. Noradrenergic deficiency, and ensuing symptoms such as attentional deficits, are intimately connected to the neuroanatomical substrates of AD. In addition, involvement of cholinergic neurons in the nucleus basalis of Meynert results in an important cholinergic deficit, and loss of serotonergic neurons in the dorsal raphe nucleus is thought to contribute to psychiatric changes. The first cortical regions displaying accumulation of abnormal tau include the transentorhinal cortex of the medial temporal lobes, the hippocampal formation and the basal forebrain, followed by the allocortex and the rest of the neocortex.

From a molecular standpoint, abnormally phosphorylated tau no longer binds to microtubules, leading to misfolding and aggregation, forming ‘pretangles’ that gradually fill affected neurons. Pretangles transform into insoluble fibrillary and argyrophilic neuropil threads, and eventually NFTs. In addition, tau is extensively involved in neuronal signalling pathways, which become affected with disease progression. Affected cells survive for years, eventually undergoing premature apoptosis, which results in loss of grey matter and symptomatic progression. With increasing age, other co-pathologies, such as vascular disease and Lewy body disease (LBD), are found post mortem24.

Additional dimensions to AD proteinopathies continue to be uncovered. For instance, several structurally diverse molecular subtypes of Aβ fibrils that have differential associations with AD subtypes (phenotypes) have been reported40–43.

The current model of AD is based on distinct but related pathological and clinical continua. AD pathology progresses through disease states, with spread of NFTs, neurodegeneration, and phases of amyloid. These states are reflected in progression of clinical symptoms44, from prodromal AD or mild cognitive impairment (MCI)45,46 to mild, moderate or severe dementia6.

Risk factors

In autosomal dominant AD (ADAD), mutations in known disease-related genes, including APP, presenilin-1 (PSEN1) and presenilin-2 (PSEN2), contribute directly to increased Aβ42 production, amyloid formation and inflammation47–49. Sporadic AD is a genetically complex disease, for which the strongest monogenic risk factor remains the apolipoprotein E ε4 allele (APOE*ε4): homozygosity for this allele increases the odds of AD 15-fold, compared with threefold in heterozygotes50. Genome-wide association studies have identified over 20 risk and protective genetic variants, with modest individual effect sizes51. Recent work using genotype data from over 70,000 patients with AD and age-matched controls has shown that a polygenic hazard score composed of AD-associated risk genotypes and APOE status can predict the age-specific risk of developing AD52.

Additional risk factors for AD include age, family history of AD, cerebrovascular disease (CVD) and its associated risk factors (including hypertension and diabetes), chronic inflammation, obstructive sleep apnoea, traumatic brain injury (TBI), and low education53,54. In fact, emerging data-driven models suggest that vascular disease and dysregulated inflammation are early risk factors in the pathophysiological cascade leading to AD55. The mechanisms of vascular disease — especially small vessel disease (SVD) — and AD-related neurodegeneration might be intricately interrelated56.

Biomarkers

The most commonly used in vivo biomarkers of AD neuropathology are cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) levels of Aβ42, tau and P-tau (BOX 1; TABLE 1). Decreases in CSF Aβ42 can be observed in the early stages of disease, before overt neurodegeneration occurs, and can precede increases in CSF tau and P-tau by years30, or even decades in the case of ADAD49. Of the various biomarker combinations under investigation, the Aβ42:Aβ40 ratio shows the best correlation with amyloid deposition at the MCI stage, and the highest diagnostic accuracy for AD versus other dementias57.

AD states can only be determined with certainty post mortem, although advances in structural and molecular neuroimaging are making ante-mortem determination a possibility58–60. Several tau PET ligands show promise, with tracer uptake matching the predicted topographic Braak staging of NFTs in AD61–64. However, only amyloid PET, using the 18F-labelled tracers florbetapir, flutemetamol and florbetaben, is available clinically65. Other amyloid ligands, such as 11C-labelled Pittsburgh compound B, are available for research. Studies in ADAD suggest that CSF Aβ42 levels are more sensitive than amyloid PET, which can lag behind by a decade in ADAD49.

Structural MRI and 18F-FDG–PET are topographical methods of assessing neurodegeneration and neuronal dysfunction (for example, synaptic loss), respectively. Antecedent to atrophy, hypometabolism characteristically involves the medial temporal and medial parietal (precuneus) lobes, posterior cingulate cortex, and temporo parietal association cortices66. In typical, amnestic AD, atrophy is first noted in the medial temporal lobes, gradually involving the broader temporoparietal cortices with disease progression67 (FIG. 2).

From a clinical perspective, biomarkers should be used to confer confidence on the clinical diagnosis or to determine disease state, with their interpretation being contingent on clinical phenotype. Biomarkers diminish in utility with age, as the incidence of asymptomatic AD neuropathology increases dramatically from 70 years of age. Consequently, they are most useful in diagnosing early-onset AD (EOAD), or in the presence of atypical features, such as rapid rate of progression, prominent behavioural symptoms, or motor dysfunction. In late-onset AD (LOAD), structural neuroimaging (MRI or CT) remains useful in determining contributing factors, such as vascular disease, and assessing the presence of alternative pathologies such as strokes or malignancies.

From a research perspective, the combination of tau with amyloid PET60 offers the possibility of ante-mortem disease state determination, and clarification of the temporospatial relationship between the proteinopathies as individuals transition into the symptomatic stage of disease. However, in-depth clinical phenotyping and assessment of functional status continue to serve as gauges of disease progression.

Biomarker findings can conflict with the clinical picture: even a ‘typical’ progressive amnestic AD phenotype can be associated with negative amyloid biomarkers. Combined with an atypical pattern of atrophy or hypometabolism, and possibly increased CSF tau levels, negative amyloid biomarkers can be suggestive of other neurodegenerative diseases, such as FTD with TDP-43 neuropathology (see below), argyrophilic grain disease, LBD, or tangle-only dementia68.

Clinical syndromes

A diagnosis of AD dementia requires insidious onset and gradual progression of deficits in two cognitive domains, one being memory. These original diagnostic criteria have been revised to incorporate in vivo biomarkers of the disease process as well as genetics. The new criteria6 distinguish between levels of certitude, with probable and possible AD categories, as well as probable or possible AD with in vivo evidence of the AD pathophysiological process or genetic risk factors.

AD clinical diagnoses can be sporadic (the majority of cases) or familial. Sporadic AD is predominantly a late-onset dementia, presenting after the sixth to seventh decade of life, whereas familial AD usually presents earlier. Among individuals affected by AD, an estimated 1–5% present with EOAD69. EOAD is genetically complex, and only an estimated 10–20% of individuals with this condition have a clear family history showing a Mendelian inheritance pattern. The genes most commonly implicated in EOAD are PSEN1, PSEN2 and APP.

A few syndromes that classically present early are discussed below. However, presentation of early EOAD as a whole and the spectrum of ADAD syndromes is a vast topic, outside the scope of this Review, and the interested reader is directed to previously published work70,71.

Typical Alzheimer disease

Sporadic LOAD is the prototypical AD syndrome. Amnestic MCI, defined as isolated difficulties with formation of new episodic memories, with preserved functional independence46, is frequently the first clinical presentation of typical — or amnestic — AD6. Decreased semantic fluency can also be noted on neuropsychological testing. Overall, typical AD is defined by prominent early episodic memory deficits, reflecting neurodegeneration of the limbic system and the medial temporal lobe. Additional deficits such as acalculia and visuospatial dysfunction localize to parietal lobes (FIG. 2). Noradrenergic and cholinergic deficits can be prominent, affecting mood and frontal lobe functions, with diminished attention and concentration. Early and prominent involvement of cognitive domains other than memory is suggestive of atypical or variant AD, detailed below.

Atypical or variant Alzheimer disease

In variant AD, deficits in language, visual processing and executive and/or behavioural functions constitute the first presenting symptoms, and frequently overshadow milder disturbances in episodic memory in the initial stages of the disease. These focal cortical presentations occur with higher frequency in patients with EOAD72.

The three well-described syndromes — logopenic variant primary progressive aphasia (lvPPA), posterior cortical atrophy (PCA), and behavioural dysexecutive AD — begin in the inferior parietal lobule or superior temporal gyrus, the occipitoparietal lobes, and the frontoparietal neuronal networks, where peak atrophy can be seen.

As lvPPA is an aphasia syndrome, the earliest and most debilitating symptom must be impairment in language, even in the presence of other deficits, including episodic memory73–75. Frequently, patients present with anomia due to single-word retrieval difficulties, with frequent pauses and hesitations in spontaneous speech, and loss of fluency (Supplementary information S1 (box)). As patients attempt to circumvent word-retrieval blocks through simplifications, substitutions and circumlocutions, use of indefinite or demonstrative pronouns and unspecified nouns such as ‘stuff’ increase with greater imprecision in language. Limitation in auditory working memory can lead to difficulties in repetition and comprehension of long sentences. Phonemic paraphasias also occur.

At onset of lvPPA, routine ‘small talk’ may sound normal, with deficits becoming apparent when access to infrequently used words is sought. With disease progression, patients develop features common to other aphasias, as well as verbal episodic memory deficits, typical of limbic AD. Concordant presence of atrophy (FIG. 2) and hypoperfusion or hypometabolism in the posterior perisylvian region and/or parietal lobe on MRI, single-photon emission CT (SPECT) and PET supports this diagnosis66,67. In addition, AD biomarkers (CSF or PET) have high utility for increasing confidence in the diagnosis, as well as for distinguishing lvPPA from FTD language syndromes that are much less frequently caused by AD pathology76 (see FTD section below).

PCA, historically referred to as visual AD77,78, involves a plethora of signs and symptoms that reflect degeneration of the occipitoparietal and sometimes the posterior temporal lobes (FIG. 2). Deficits include higher-order visual processing impairments, such as visual agnosia, dressing apraxia, alexia, elements of Balint and Gerstmann syndromes, ideomotor apraxia, and prosopagnosia. Some patients experience visual field cuts early in the disease course, and many eventually become cortically blind. By contrast, memory and verbal fluency impairments are typically more modest. The preservation of insight in the setting of severe impairments can contribute to depression. Topographic changes in the posterior cortex, noted on ancillary testing, are supportive of the diagnosis72,79.

PCA and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) both target posterior cortical regions and, therefore, share noted changes in higher-order visual processing. However, these conditions differ with regard to typical age of onset and other specific core and supportive diagnostic criteria. On average, symptom onset for PCA is in the fifth or sixth decade of life — earlier than for DLB, which is typically a late-onset dementia. AD is the most common pathology associated with PCA, although cases with Lewy bodies, prions or primary tau pathology have been reported.

The behavioural dysexecutive variant of AD80, also referred to as frontal variant AD, can present with predominance of behavioural and/or executive dysfunction81–85. In the behavioural subtype, voxel-based morphometric studies reveal temporoparietal atrophy with relative preservation of frontal grey matter (FIG. 2). Consequently, Rabinovici and colleagues have favoured the use of the term behavioural dysexecutive variant, rather than frontal variant80. The behavioural variant can easily be mistaken for possible behavioural variant FTD (bvFTD, see below); however, it is characterized by a more dampened and restricted behavioural disturbance. Although memory deficits can lag behind behavioural dysfunction, they still tend to occur earlier than in sporadic bvFTD80. In the University of California, San Francisco (UCSF) series, amyloid PET and post-mortem evaluations indicated a rate of 10–40% for the misdiagnosis of behavioural variant AD as bvFTD86–88.

Autosomal dominant Alzheimer disease

Overproduction of amyloid, caused by mutations in APP, PSEN1 or PSEN2, is thought to be an important aspect of ADAD pathophysiology. This phenomenon is intricately linked to certain complications that are prevalent in ADAD, including cerebral amyloid angiopathy, and the related microbleeds, progressive white matter disease and microinfarcts. Although non-cognitive manifestations of disease affect only a fraction of individuals with ADAD70, they occur with higher frequency than in sporadic EOAD71. Besides early age of onset64, profound amnesia and a family history, certain features, such as psychiatric symptoms (including hallucinations and delusions), parkinsonism, gait abnormality, pseudobulbar affect and early prominent myoclonus, have been reported in mutation carriers71,89. Overall, the reported ADAD phenotypes are highly variable, possibly owing to other genetic modifiers that influence the molecular effects of mutated gene products.

Vascular dementia

Pathology, risk factors and epidemiology

CVD affecting vessels of various calibres can cause infarcts and haemorrhages, as well as chronic progressive white matter disease, including demyelination, axonal injury, astrocytosis and oedema, with infiltration of macrophages and activation of microglia90. In contrast with other neurodegenerative diseases, vascular cognitive impairment (VCI) and vascular dementia (VaD)91,92 are not characterized neuropathologically by accumulation of abnormal proteins. Nonetheless, vascular disease tends to be progressive and degenerative, with cognitive impairment following clinical stroke or resulting from subclinical vascular brain injury93.

The Newcastle pathological categorization distinguishes six vascular injury subtypes that can cause a dementia syndrome94. Chronic cerebral SVD, the most insidious subtype, shows the strongest association with cognitive impairment. From a microstructural perspective, SVD is associated with blood–brain barrier (BBB) compromise, resulting in leakage of fluid and macromolecules, and chronic white matter disease95,96. SVD can cause cortical and subcortical microinfarcts, lacunar strokes, a chronic state of cerebral hypoperfusion, hippocampal atrophy, and sclerosis. Interestingly, SVD is also an important risk factor for large vessel disease97. The histopathological substrate of SVD includes lipo-hyalinization of vessels, formation of microatheromas within vessels, fibroid necrosis, enlarged Virchow–Robin spaces (eVRS), pallor of perivascular myelin, and astrocytic gliosis98. In addition to age-related and possibly synergistic interactions between SVD and AD pathology, cerebral amyloid angiopathy can cause a vigorous inflammatory and non-inflammatory SVD, with microbleeds and infarcts.

Risk factors for poststroke dementia99, which include age, low education, female sex, vascular risk factors, and global and medial temporal lobar atrophy on structural imaging, overlap extensively with those identified for AD, suggesting possible mechanistic interactions and cumulative risk of these two pathologies. Hereditary vascular disease syndromes such as CADASIL are associated with specific patterns of change, as well as a more aggressive disease process. In general, the spatial variability in manifestation of vascular disease echoes the principle of selective vulnerability seen in neurodegenerative diseases with underlying proteinopathy. The extent of overlap between molecular mechanisms of sporadic and genetic disease remains to be determined.

Population-based clinicopathological studies have yielded prevalence estimates of 2.4–23.7% for pure VaD and 4.1–21.6% for mixed AD and VaD100,101. A large number of dementia patients with prominent CVD show multiple pathologies, most frequently including AD and LBD102. The variability in types and location of vascular disease, existence of mixed pathology, and lack of internationally accepted consensus criteria for VaD neuropathology might explain the limited sensitivity and specificity of ante-mortem clinical diagnostic criteria, and the variability in prevalence estimates reported in autopsy series92. Nevertheless, the consistent decrease in pure VaD and the related increase in mixed pathologies with age are well established, and imply intricate relationships between vascular disease, cerebral ageing and accumulation of abnormal proteins in neurodegeneration99,103.

Clinical syndromes and biomarkers

The VCI–VaD spectrum encompasses a heterogeneous group of clinical presentations. Numerous diagnostic criteria have been drafted for sporadic VaD to date. The modified Hachinski Ischemic Scale (HIS), which includes 13 features aimed at obtaining a global ischaemic score, can be easily applied in clinical practice104. The HIS was specifically designed to enhance the distinction between VaD and AD105. The scoring system includes risk factors such as history of hypertension, as well as symptoms of small and large vessel disease that localize to white and grey matter, such as stepwise cognitive decline, abrupt onset, a history of stroke, focal neurological signs and symptoms, emotional lability, and somatic complaints. The criteria are limited by lack of integration of neuroimaging information, but the sensitivity (70%) and specificity (80%) for separating VaD from AD remain acceptable.

The most widely used criteria in VaD clinical trials research were formulated by the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke and Association Internationale pour la Recherche et l’Enseignement en Neurosciences (NINDS–AIREN)106. Emphasis was placed on neuroimaging evidence of disease in key areas involved in VaD (frontal, temporal or parietal cortices, thalamus, and basal ganglia), and visual quantification of abnormal white matter signal. In 2014, the International Society of Vascular Behavioural and Cognitive Disorders (VASCOG) drafted a new set of criteria addressing the breadth of symptoms, high variability in severity of deficits and rate of progression, and frequent occurrence of mixed CVD and AD pathologies107.

Early changes at the prodromal VCI stage include deficits in cognitive flexibility and verbal memory retrieval108. As the frontal white matter is particularly vulnerable to SVD56, typical cognitive deficits with disease progression include executive dysfunction, with diminished attention and concentration and impaired spontaneous retrieval of stored memory. Behavioural changes such as irritability are common, and parkinsonism (frequently symmetrical) can also be noted.

Vascular disease is necessary but not sufficient for the development of VaD. Biomarker predictors of clinical deficits include the volume and pattern of white matter disease, as well as the patient’s cognitive reserve109. White matter disease, microbleeds and eVRS all constitute imaging biomarkers of SVD110.

In research, new imaging techniques, including diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy and dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI, are being used to quantify white matter disease and BBB disruption. In addition, CSF and peripheral biomarkers of inflammation and BBB dysfunction show promise for improving the diagnosis of SVD and VaD109,111.

Frontotemporal dementia

Pathology: tau, TDP-43 and FUS

FTD syndromes arise from frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD), a gross pathological term denoting the degeneration of cortical and subcortical structures within frontal and temporal regions of the brain. Affected structures include the frontoinsular cortices, anterior temporal poles, basal ganglia, brainstem and thalamus, as well as the cerebellum in certain genetic forms of the disease. Gradually, neuronal networks that subserve personality, behaviour, executive functions, language and motor abilities are disrupted, with relative sparing of memory and visuospatial functions112,113. FTLD and the clinical syndromes of FTD have diverse molecular pathologies, risk factors and genetic foundations.

Most FTLD cases (90–95%) are FTLD-tau or FTLD-TDP, caused by intracellular aggregates of tau or TDP-43, respectively114–117 (BOX 2). Most of the remaining 5–10% of cases are FTLD-FUS, caused by intracellular FUS inclusions118,119 (BOX 2). Alternative splicing of microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT) pre-mRNA gives rise to tau isoforms containing three or four microtubule-binding domain repeats (3R and 4R). Therefore, FTLD-tau is further subdivided into 3R, 4R and 3R/4R tauopathies. Pick disease is a 3R tauopathy, progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) and corticobasal degeneration (CBD) are 4R tauopathies, and AD is a mixed 3R/4R tauopathy. Mixed FTLD pathologies and unclassifiable tauopathies are also encountered.

Each FTLD pathological subtype can cause several FTD syndromes (FIG. 3). There are three core FTD syndromes, including the most common — behavioural variant FTD (bvFTD) — and two language syndromes, namely, nonfluent/agrammatic variant PPA (nfvPPA) and semantic variant PPA (svPPA)120. In addition, three FTD motor syndromes are recognized: FTD with motor neuron disease (FTD–MND), and two variants with parkinsonism, namely, corticobasal syndrome (CBS), and PSP syndrome (PSP-S) (FIG. 1).

The heterogeneity in clinical presentations of FTLD molecular pathologies renders ante-mortem pathological predictions difficult. In familial FTLD, however, the affected genes are associated with homogenous pathological signatures. Mutations in the C9orf72, progranulin (GRN), valosin-containing protein (VCP) and TDP-43 (TARDBP) genes are associated with TDP-43 pathology, whereas MAPT mutations are consistently associated with tau pathology (BOX 2). In addition, a few non-familial clinical syndromes have homogenous pathological substrates. Approximately 90% of individuals with svPPA have FTLD-TDP type C pathology, and Steele– Richardson–Olszewski syndrome (PSP-RS) is linked to 4R tau pathology (FIG. 3). FTD–MND is almost always associated with TDP-43 pathology (usually type B), and around 85% of all nfvPPA cases show either 4R (CBD or PSP) or 3R tau pathology. By contrast, all molecular subtypes are seen with bvFTD: at UCSF, 60% of cases show TDP-43 aggregates, 30% show some form of tau pathology, and 10% show FUS neuropathology (D. C. Perry et al., unpublished observations).

Approximately one-third of patients with FTD have a family history of dementia, although the proportion varies between FTD subtypes. Investigation of familial FTD has revealed notable variability in penetrance of mutations and associated phenotypes, including age of onset and rate of progression121. FTD–MND is the most heritable subtype, and svPPA — notwithstanding a few cases associated with GRN mutations — is the least heritable122–126.

Expansion of an intronic hexanucleotide repeat in C9orf72 is the most common hereditary cause of FTLD-TDP127, as well as the most frequent genetic aetiology of familial and sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) (BOX 3). TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) mutations have also been reported to cause FTD–MND spectrum disorders128. GRN mutations cause about 25% of familial cases of FTLD-TDP129, and typically give rise to a bvFTD syndrome or, less commonly, CBS, language or mixed behavioural–language FTD130,131. TARDBP mutations are responsible for 4% of familial ALS cases reported, and only rarely cause FTD. VCP mutations can cause FTLD pathology with a syndrome including hereditary inclusion body myopathy and Paget disease of bone132,133. The MAPT H1 haplotype is a genetic risk factor for PSP and CBD134.

Clinical syndromes and biomarkers

FTLD molecular pathologies give rise to degeneration in vulnerable neuronal networks subserving cognitive, behavioural and sensorimotor functions. Psychiatric symptoms such as depression occur with varying frequency across different FTD subtypes135. Early in the clinical course, self-awareness and insight commonly diminish, so despite disabling deficits affecting social and interpersonal relationships, patients report depression less frequently than in other dementia syndromes. However, important behavioural and personality changes contribute to a high caregiver burden136.

Each FTD syndrome is characterized by a chronology of deficits partially dictated by the underlying proteinopathy7. In bvFTD and right-sided svPPA (svPPA-R), global hemispheric differences, with right-predominant patterns of atrophy, lead to striking behavioural symptoms, whereas patients with left-predominant atrophy, such as nfvPPA and svPPA-L, tend to present with language-related deficits (FIG. 4). Consequently, prototypical findings on formal neuropsychological evaluation vary depending on the syndrome, stage of disease, and individual factors, such as baseline cognitive function, or disease resilience137. However, deficits in executive function — possibly including face and emotion recognition — and changes in language, with relative preservation of episodic memory and visuospatial functions, can generally be noted. With disease progression, the mesiotemporal and parietal lobes also become involved, with corresponding impairment in episodic memory and visuospatial functions.

The reported age of FTD onset ranges from the 20s to the 90s, with most patients presenting between 45 and 65 years of age. Motor FTD syndromes can present later, with mean age of onset in the seventh decade of life120,138,139.

Behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia

The earliest symptoms of bvFTD include progressive changes in emotion, personality and behaviour, especially relating to interpersonal interactions and social conduct, localizing to disrupted paralimbic networks including the anterior cingulate, insular, medial frontal and orbitofrontal cortices140. Dysfunction of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortices contributes to impairment in executive functions. Most patients present with early changes in empathy; apathy or inertia; disinhibition; stereotypic behaviour; alteration in food preference and eating behaviour; and dysexecutive symptoms113,141 (Supplementary information S1 (box)). Among these early symptoms, loss of empathy seems to have special diagnostic value, but is challenging to ascertain in practice. In relation to disinhibition and loss of insight, transgression of social and moral rules is common, giving rise to criminal and sociopathic behaviour142. Memory and visuospatial deficits are unusual early in the illness, although a subset of patients exhibit early problems with episodic memory. An amnestic phenotype is more frequently observed in individuals harbouring expansions in C9orf72 (REF. 143). The underlying neuropathology in amnestic FTD is thought to be TDP-43-related hippocampal disease and sclerosis144. The differential diagnosis in such cases includes typical LOAD or mixed pathology. Amyloid biomarkers can be helpful in cases of pure FTLD-related hippocampal disease.

Patients with bvFTD frequently present with psychiatric symptoms, at onset or during the course of their illness. Distinguishing behavioural features from primary psychiatric disorders, such as depression, borderline personality disorder, bipolar disorder and schizophrenia, can be challenging145,146 In a large case series including 751 individuals with bvFTD, 6% of patients presented with psychosis early in their disease course146. Approximately 20% of patients have delusions and 10% have hallucinations. These symptoms are more common in genetic cases caused by mutations in C9orf72 (REF. 147) (BOX 3) and GRN. Mania has also been reported148. Using voxel-based morphometry, Rosen and colleagues demonstrated that core neuropsychiatric symptoms of bvFTD, such as apathy, disinhibition, eating disorders and aberrant motor behaviour, localized to right frontal structures (FIG. 4). Severity of symptoms correlated with extent of atrophy in the right-hemispheric anterior cingulate cortex, ventromedial superior frontal gyrus, posterior ventromedial prefrontal cortex, lateral middle frontal gyrus, caudate head, orbitofrontal cortex, and anterior insula149. In addition to psychiatric symptoms, parkinsonism with axial rigidity often emerges in bvFTD.

Progression of symptoms, and neurodegeneration demonstrated by atrophy on MRI, provide important clues for the differential diagnosis of bvFTD. The diagnostic criteria were revised in 2011 to incorporate the extended spectrum of psychiatric and motor symptomatology, as well as topographical biomarkers of disease113 (TABLE 1). Currently, the pattern of neurodegeneration seen on structural MRI constitutes the most helpful biomarker of disease (FIG. 4). However, hypoperfusion on SPECT and hypometabolism on 18F-FDG–PET precede atrophy, and have potential utility early in the disease before overt neurodegeneration. When the differential diagnosis includes the behavioural variant of AD, AD biomarkers can be helpful, as dual pathology is uncommon in early-onset dementias.

The clinical phenotype of bvFTD is influenced by the underlying molecular pathology. For instance, in comparison with bvFTD patients who have Pick disease, those with CBD pathology tend to have more dorsal than ventral frontal atrophy, and relative preservation of the frontoinsular rim. Consequently, executive dysfunction and anxiety are more prominent than disinhibition, emotional dysregulation, social misconduct and changes in eating behaviour150. bvFTD associated with C9orf72 expansion also has distinct clinical features and patterns of neurodegeneration151 (BOX 3).

A subgroup of patients meet the core diagnostic criteria for bvFTD at presentation, but show little or no symptom progression, and have — at most — modest atrophy on brain MRI. The neurodegenerative basis of this ‘phenocopy’ syndrome has been debated. Some individuals with bvFTD phenocopies carry C9orf72 expansions152. Moreover, a slowly progressing subgroup with predominant subcortical atrophy and FTLD-TDP pathology was recently identified, almost one-quarter of whom had mutations in FTD-related genes153.

Language-centred frontotemporal dementias

The language-centred FTDs generally show focal onset but, with disease progression, deficits eventually arise in all language functions. Therefore, the different subtypes are distinguished by the chronology and severity of deficits in specific linguistic functions. Neurodegenerative diseases targeting the language circuitry often present asymmetrically, with dominant (frequently left) hemispheric disease manifesting as language syndromes154–156 (FIG. 4).

Patients with nfvPPA present with fluency impairment and/or agrammatism, and most eventually develop both features. These deficits localize to the disrupted frontoinsular language network, with atrophy noted most frequently in the left inferior frontal and insular cortices157 (FIG. 4). Speech becomes nonfluent, gradually more telegraphic and less melodic (aprosodic). Apraxia emerges, with inconsistent sound errors and distortions, especially with pronunciation of consonant clusters, as well as effortful, halting speech with groping of the tongue and lips (Supplementary information S1 (box)). Deficits in grammar, which can be first noted in writing, eventually limit comprehension, especially of the passive voice or complex syntax. Anomia is not a central deficit, but delayed naming, with hesitations, and word-finding pauses are frequently noted. Repetition is less impaired than spontaneous speech, and semantic language typically remains preserved well into the disease process. Progressive deficits resemble the lesion-based model of Broca aphasia. Motor deficits, including asymmetric parkinsonism and/or pyramidal signs, occur in most patients, even early in the illness.

Differentiating nfvPPA from lvPPA can be challenging, with commonalities including preserved object meaning in the presence of progressive anomia and loss of fluency. In such instances, AD biomarkers such as CSF analyses or amyloid PET can be helpful; in comparison with lvPPA, only a small fraction of nfvPPA cases are caused by AD pathology. The diagnostic criteria for nfvPPA are supported by markers of neurodegeneration and neuronal dysfunction, as measured by MRI, PET or SPECT, in the left posterior frontoinsular region (TABLE 1).

In svPPA, degeneration of the anterior temporal lobes (FIG. 4) disrupts access to semantic memory75. Anomia and single-word comprehension deficits, starting with low-frequency items, are essential for diagnosis158. Difficulties in confrontation naming are present in other language-dominant neurodegenerative diseases, but are most severe in semantic variants (Supplementary information S1 (box)). Critically, the loss of semantic knowledge in svPPA encompasses all sensory modalities, including visual, tactile, olfactory and gustatory, in addition to auditory. Moreover, the deficits extend to reading and writing, with the emergence of surface dyslexia and dysgraphia75. Although motor speech production and grammar are initially unaffected, communication becomes gradually more difficult, with impoverishment of content and increasingly vague speech. Among all the FTD syndomes, svPPA is associated with the longest survival times.

In addition to prosopagnosia and associative agnosia, right anterior temporal variants of svPPA (svPPA-R) present with prominent behavioural and personality changes that frequently overshadow more-subtle linguistic deficits159,160. Compulsions, loss of empathy with ensuing ‘coldness’, and child-like behaviour can be observed. A decline in semantic knowledge regarding people familiar to the patient, graded by frequency of interactions with those people, has been reported161. Affected individuals can also display features of Geschwind syndrome162, including rigidity in philosophical beliefs or religious dogmatism, hypergraphia, hyposexuality, and a tendency to inappropriately prolong conversations, termed ‘viscosity’ (REF. 159). Selective tissue loss in the anterior temporal lobes can help distinguish svPPA-R from bvFTD. The svPPA-R variant presents an exception to the coherence of the current PPA nosology, as the development of language deficits is delayed until the pathology extends into the dominant hemisphere159,163.

The neuropathological substrate of svPPA is almost always TDP-43 type C164, but other possible pathologies include TDP-43 type B and Pick disease. For atypical presentations in which other pathological processes are suspected, AD biomarkers can diminish uncertainty regarding the underlying pathology.

A mixed PPA bridging the two main FTD language phenotypes, characterized by concomitant onset and progression in agrammatism and semantic deficits, has also been described165. However, this condition is more frequently associated with AD166, although cases of tauopathy have also been reported76.

Progressive deficits in language can arise as a secondary feature of other syndromes167, but such presentations do not meet the core PPA diagnostic criteria and cannot, therefore, be classified as PPA subtypes.

Motor frontotemporal dementias

The spectrum of FTD extends to syndromes with pyramidal and/or extrapyramidal impairments. These ‘motor FTD syndromes’ can present later than nonmotor syndromes, with mean age of onset in the seventh decade of life120,138,139.

FTD and MND are increasingly perceived along a clinicopathological continuum with shared fundamental biology. ALS and FTD–MND are mostly associated with TDP-43 pathology, and FTD–MND is frequently caused by C9orf72 mutations (BOX 3). Approximately 60% of patients with FTD have evidence of MND on electromyography, with 10–15% of patients developing clinical signs of MND168,169. Conversely, around 50% of patients with MND develop cognitive decline without meeting the research diagnostic criteria for FTD170. The MND clinical phenotype is typically ALS, although upper motor neuron (primary lateral sclerosis) and lower motor neuron (progressive muscular atrophy) disorders have also been described171. Early bulbar dysfunction is observed more frequently in FTD–MND than in isolated ALS, and patients with FTD–MND show the shortest survival among individuals with FTD syndromes. The clinical course of FTD–MND can be very aggressive, with acceleration at the onset of MND.

PSP-S refers to a range of clinical syndromes that are mainly — but not exclusively — caused by 4R FTLD-tau pathology (FIG. 3). Other than PSP pathology, PSP-S is associated with CBD and Pick disease. PSP-S can manifest with a combination of features, including atypical parkinsonism with axial, symmetrical rigidity; a stare with furrowing of the brow (procerus sign); supranuclear gaze palsy; and prominent frontal lobe dysfunction172 (Supplementary information S1 (box)). Limited to no response to dopaminergic therapy is typical. PSP-S invariably involves atrophy of the midbrain tegmentum and the pons173, although the timing and, therefore, the symptomatic chronology varies across subtypes. The classic PSP-S presentation, PSP-RS, is characterized by early involvement of the midbrain with ensuing supranuclear gaze palsy, gait instability and falls. PSP-parkinsonism and PSP-pure akinesia and gait freezing closely resemble PD174. Of these two conditions, PSP-parkinsonism is the more responsive to dopaminergic medications. Psychiatric symptoms (depression and anxiety), and profound sleep disruption associated with hyperarousal often precede PSP-S and can remain prominent once the parkinsonian features emerge.

PSP-RS has the highest predictive value for underlying PSP pathology. Although saccade abnormalities, including increased latency, decreased velocity and decreased gains, are associated with numerous neurodegenerative pathologies, including CBD, Pick disease, and AD, patients with PSP-RS display the most severe visually guided saccade abnormalities175. Therefore, careful examination of eye movement abnormalities can be diagnostically valuable. Decreased vertical saccade velocity correlates with dorsal midbrain atrophy (TABLE 1). Moreover, quantification of anteroposterior midbrain to pons ratio has high specificity for PSP pathology, and has potential diagnostic utility176. PSP-S due to PSP (4R FTLD-tau) pathology is associated with shorter survival.

CBD is another 4R FTLD-tau pathology, and is implicated in approximately 35% of cases of CBS. A UCSF study found that patients with pathologically proven CBD presented with bvFTD, nfvPPA or executive–motor syndrome with early extrapyramidal motor symptoms such as ridigity and akinesia177. CBS is a pathologically diverse syndrome that involves progressive neurodegeneration of dorsal posteromedial frontal, perirolandic and insular cortices. The syndrome typically includes motor, behavioural and cognitive changes177. Alien limb phenomena occur in a minority of cases, usually in the later stages178 (Supplementary information S1 (box)). CBS, as defined by the diagnostic criteria, has low pathological predictive value177,178.

CBS can be associated with FTLD-tau (CBD, PSP or, less frequently, Pick disease), FTLD-TDP or AD pathology (FIG. 3). Extension of atrophy into frontal cortices is suggestive of FTLD-tau pathology, whereas posterior extension into the precuneus and temporoparietal regions is predictive of CBS due to AD (CBS-AD). In addition, individuals with CBS-CBD display pronounced dorsal frontal atrophy, whereas patients with CBS-AD tend to have more posterior involvement (TABLE 1). From a neuropsychological perspective, group comparisons demonstrate greater visuospatial and memory deficits, concordant with greater temporoparietal degeneration, in patients with CBS-AD in comparison with CBS associated with underlying FTLD179.

The pathological heterogeneity of CBS limits its clinical and research utility. Diagnostic criteria for CBD syndromes, or clinical phenotypes predictive of possible or probable underlying CBD pathology, may be more useful178.

Lewy body dementia

Pathology: α-synucleinopathy

Lewy body dementias include DLB and Parkinson disease (PD) dementia (PDD), which lie along a clinicopathological continuum defined by characteristic intracellular α-synuclein aggregates (Lewy bodies) that cause dysfunction of cerebral neuronal networks.

Traditionally, PD pathology is thought to originate in the caudal brainstem, typically involving the dorsal IX/X motor nucleus and the intermediate or magnocellular reticular zone of the caudal medulla, before extending, possibly transynaptically180, to the rostral brainstem — resulting in prodromal REM sleep behaviour disorder (RBD), mood disorders and anxiety — the substantia-nigra and, eventually, the basal ganglia, and cortex36,181. However, recent evidence suggests that the pathology actually originates in the enteric nervous system182, progressing to involve the CNS via the vagus nerve183. The pathological progression of DLB remains unclear.

DLB and PDD typically manifest symptomatically between the ages of 60 and 90 years. Most patients with DLB show mixed pathology, with concomitant presence of vascular disease and/or AD pathology184–186. Similarly, the cortical pathology observed in patients with PDD is often mixed187,188, with coexisting AD pathology leading to more-advanced dementia189. Not surprisingly, the genetics of AD pathology and LBD overlap to some extent190: the APOE*ε4 genotype is overrepresented in sporadic LBD191, whereas the APOE*ε2 allele seems to be protective against DLB as well as sporadic AD192. Other genetic risks for LBD include mutations in SNCA and LRRK2 (REF. 193). Mutations in SCARB2 (REF. 194) and GBA specifically increase the risk of DLB, and result in younger age of onset195. Risk factors for DLB, other than genetic modifiers, remain to be discovered. Pesticide exposure, TBI and a history of melanoma are overrepresented in patients with PD, and are possible risk factors for PDD and DLB.

Clinical syndromes

The main difference between DLB and PDD hinges on the temporal relationship of cognitive decline and neuropsychiatric symptoms to parkinsonism, with the two conditions showing early and late onset of cognitive symptoms, respectively196. Original descriptions of PD emphasized an absence of cognitive deficits197–199; however, recent observations support insidious spread of pathology along cognitive networks, with approximately one-fifth of patients diagnosed with at least MCI at the time of presentation200.

Dementia with Lewy bodies

The defining clinical features of DLB localize to cortical and subcortical structures, with the ensuing characteristic combination of cognitive and motor dysfunction196. The disease typically progresses slowly; however, a rapidly progressive dementia syndrome is also possible201. The core diagnostic features of DLB include fluctuating cognition, recurrent visual hallucinations, and parkinsonism. The fluctuations in mental status, conceived as a low-grade chronic delirium, may be due to profound cholinergic deficits in addition to neocortical Lewy body pathology202. Visuospatial and constructional deficits are frequently seen in early AD, but are also suggestive of Lewy body pathology203,204, where they foreshadow more-rapid decline and visual hallucinations205. In comparison with AD, however, memory functions are often preserved in the early stages of DLB, although episodic memory deficits are frequently reported with older age, possibly due to mixed Lewy body and AD pathology24. Other features include anxiety and depression206, autonomic symptoms207 (including constipation and hypersialorrhea), olfactory dysfunction208,209, and severe neuroleptic sensitivity, causing exacerbation of parkinsonism. RBD has great diagnostic utility due to its high positive predictive value (&gt;80%) for α-synuclein-related neurodegeneration210,211.

Parkinson disease dementia

Most patients with PD develop MCI212,213 (labelled as MCI-PD) and can progress to dementia214–217. Cognitive deficits are routinely missed in clinical practice, as motor symptoms are frequently the focus of diagnosis and treatment218,219. Although patients with PDD primarily present with executive dysfunction, localizing to disrupted dorsolateral prefrontal–striatal networks220, the cognitive profile can be diverse200. The best predictors of further cognitive decline seem to be deficits in verbal and visual memory, semantic fluency, and visuospatial abilities221.

Biomarkers

18F-FDG–PET typically reveals reduced metabolism and perfusion in occipital cortices in patients with DLB222, with additional involvement of frontal and parietal lobes noted in patients with PDD223 (TABLE 1). One distinguishing feature between DLB and AD is the relative sparing of the posterior cingulate cortex — the so-called posterior cingulate ‘island sign’ — in DLB224. Studies suggest that CSF markers can also help to distinguish these dementia syndromes from AD, with lower CSF α-synuclein levels being observed in patients with DLB225. By contrast, in vivo detection of amyloid pathology through CSF analysis or molecular imaging has not proven useful for distinguishing these diseases, owing to the frequent coexistence of AD and Lewy body pathology226,227.

Low dopamine transporter (DAT) uptake in the basal ganglia, as shown by SPECT or PET, is suggestive of DLB. An autopsy-based study that compared neuroimaging with clinical diagnosis alone showed that 123I-N-ω-fluoropropyl-2β-carbomethoxy-3β-(4-iodophenyl)nortropane (123I-FP-CIT) SPECT dopaminergic imaging increased specificity and overall diagnostic accuracy228. Though clinically available, DAT scans are seldom necessary in the presence of supportive clinical features. Should ancillary studies be necessary, a characteristic marked reduction in tracer uptake is seen on myocardial 123I-metaiodobenzylguanidine (123I-MIBG) SPECT in patients with diffuse LBD.

MRI has limited ability to discriminate between DLB and PDD, as atrophy can be modest and/or lack focality in the early stages of LBD.

Prion disease

Pathology and risk factors

Prion diseases, also known as transmissible spongiform encephalopathies, are rapidly progressive neurodegenerative diseases caused by propagation of misfolded prion proteins in the nervous system229. A histopathological hallmark is the protease-resistant amyloid- containing prion protein, also known as scrapie prion protein (PrPSc). PrPSc shows a high degree of β-pleated sheet structure, in contrast to PrPC, the nonpathogenic, mostly α-helical and protease-sensitive cellular isoform230. In the majority of cases, misfolding of this protein occurs spontaneously, possibly via de novo structural changes in the PrP gene PRNP. This subtype is referred to as sporadic CJD (sCJD)231. Less frequently, CJD cases are familial, exhibiting an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. Over 20 known causative mutations have been identified worldwide232. Familial cases of CJD are subdivided into three clinicopathologically distinct categories: familial CJD (fCJD), fatal familial insomnia (FFI) and Gerstmann–Straussler–Scheinker syndrome (GSS). In rare cases, prion disease is acquired, giving rise to variant CJD (vCJD). The majority of these cases (about 200) occurred in the UK and France in the past two decades, and were associated with consumption of cattle affected by bovine spongiform encephalopathy233. Finally, prion disease can be acquired iatrogenically via cadaveric transplants, human-derived hormones (growth hormone) or medical instrumentations234, or via cannibalism — a condition known as kuru, the historic disease of the Fore tribe in Papua New Guinea235. Importantly, the incubation period for acquired CJD can be several decades232.

Astrocyte proliferation, gliosis, and neuronal loss are found in all prion diseases, but other histopathological features allow distinction between four major pathological subtypes: diffuse spongiosis (or vacuolation, due to focal swelling of axonal and dendritic processes) of grey more than white matter neuropil, with minimal PrP-amyloid plaques, characteristic of sCJD and fCJD; ‘florid’ PrP-amyloid plaques surrounded by a vacuole or halo, characteristic of vCJD232; multicentric PrP plaques extensively affecting the molecular layer of the cerebellum, pathognomonic of GSS; and focal and relatively isolated anterior and dorsomedial thalamic nuclear gliosis, as seen in FFI. In addition, some mutations leading to GSS were shown to be associated with cortical NFTs236,237.

The peak incidence of sCJD occurs between 55 and 75 years of age, whereas fCJD typically presents before age 55, and vCJD commonly occurs even younger, in the late teens or young adulthood232.

Clinical syndromes and biomarkers

sCJD has a protean presentation, reflecting the variety of neuropathological subtypes238 and the extent of the CNS territory affected. The condition most often presents with rapidly progressive dementia (mean disease duration 4.0–6.5 months), featuring behavioural abnormalities, cerebellar ataxia, pyramidal and/or extra pyramidal signs, and myoclonus as the disease progresses. The two main modes of onset are cognitive deficits (usually memory impairment, but sometimes also deficits in language, executive function or visual processing) and cerebellar ataxia, predominantly limiting gait231. These presentations are sometimes preceded by neuropsychiatric symptoms, such as agitation, aggressiveness, depression, apathy or anxiety, or vague constitutional symptoms, such as dizziness, fatigue or sleep disturbances239–242. If not already present in the early stages of the disease, about half of patients with sCJD will develop behavioural changes, including psychiatric symptoms and higher cortical deficits, such as aphasia, neglect, acalculia, apraxia or astereognosis, followed in frequency by visual or oculomotor dysfunctions. Other deficits commonly affect motor (extrapyramidal, pyramidal) and sensory (pain, paraesthesia) functions. Depending on the initial presentation of the disease, sCJD can resemble other non-rapidly progressive neurodegenerative syndromes, such as the language forms of FTD, AD or CBS; however, the rapid emergence of new deficits often in a matter of days to weeks, as well as the pace of general decline, should raise concern for prion disease. The symptoms can occasionally progress more slowly: in one subtype of sCJD, mean disease duration is 17 months243.

sCJD phenotypes are in part determined by a polymorphism at codon 129 (methionine or valine) in the PRNP gene and the pattern of PrPSc cleavage by protease K, giving rise to six molecular subtypes — MM1, MV1, VV1, MM2, MV2 and VV2 (REFS 244,245). The MM2 molecular subtype is further divided into a thalamic and a cortical subtype on the basis of the distribution of pathology in the CNS. The most common subtypes, MM1 and MV1 (about 40% of cases), are pathologically and clinically identical and are, therefore, known as MM1/MV1. These subtypes are associated with more-rapid clinical progression than MV2. VV2, which presents with rapidly progressive ataxia, is another common subtype. The MM2-thalamic subtype has features of FFI, and is also referred to as sporadic fatal insomnia232.

Compared with most cases of sCJD, vCJD shows slightly slower progression (mean disease duration 14.5 months)233, with a prolonged prodromal phase typically dominated by psychiatric symptoms. At more-advanced stages, however, vCJD is clinically indistinguishable from sCJD. All but one of the reported cases of vCJD were homozygous for methionine (MM) at codon 129 (REF. 233).

fCJD may progress more slowly than its sporadic counterpart, but otherwise presents with similar clinical phenomenology. FFI and GSS have distinctive clinical features. The initial symptoms of FFI are severe insomnia followed by dysautonomia, with cognitive and motor dysfunctions typically lagging. GSS manifests as a slowly progressive dementia associated with cerebellar ataxia or a parkinsonian syndrome that commonly starts in the fifth decade of life; however, the age of onset, symptomatic progression, and disease duration vary greatly, even within a given family.

Routinely available ancillary diagnostic tests for CJD include EEG, MRI, and CSF biomarkers (BOX 1; TABLE 1). In addition, because the lymphoreticular system is invaded in vCJD, tonsillar biopsy is considered to be a sensitive test for PrPSc (REF. 246). EEG findings of frequent periodic sharp-wave complexes (1–2 Hz) with occasional triphasic morphology are supportive of a CJD diagnosis, but can manifest at a late stage247 — if at all — so are of limited diagnostic utility.

Classic MRI findings in CJD include hyperintense signal along various segments of the cortical ribbon, as well as in the thalamus, on diffusion-weighted imaging, often corroborated by evidence of fluid restriction on apparent diffusion coefficient sequences. These findings have an estimated diagnostic accuracy of 97%248. Symmetrical involvement of both pulvinar and medial thalami — the so-called ‘double hockey stick sign’ — is not specific for any particular form of CJD249; however, involvement of the pulvinar nuclei alone is pathognomonic for vCJD.

Despite good sensitivity, CSF biomarkers show limited specificity in CJD250. A combination of elevated concentrations of 14-3-3, total tau, neuron-specific enolase and S100β increase the diagnostic accuracy, but remain inferior to MRI251. These tests are best used as a complement to neuroimaging, and in the work-up of the differential diagnosis248,252. An emerging CSF real-time quaking-induced conversion (RT-QuIC) test shows high specificity (98.5%) and sensitivity (92%)253 for the diagnosis of CJD, with close concordance between laboratories254. Though more accurate than any combination of the usual CSF biomarkers, RT-QuIC has yet to be directly compared with MRI, which has the disadvantage of being dependent on the reader’s skills and expertise.

Network-based biomarkers

In the past few years, network-based neuroimaging techniques, including resting state functional MRI and DTI, have provided research-based biomarkers for neurodegenerative diseases, with promise for the classification of syndromes on the basis of unique structural and functional network alterations (TABLE 1). For instance, the salience network, which integrates limbic, autonomic and higher-order perceptual functions, and has intimate links to emotional processing, sense of self and rapport with others — critical for social behaviour — shows decreased connectivity and activation in patients with bvFTD compared with healthy controls or patients with AD7. In AD, the default mode network (DMN) seems to be especially affected, with AD variants showing decreased connectivity in this network, as well as specific differences in connectivity outside the DMN, such as the visuospatial network in PCA, the language network in lvPPA, and the frontoparietal network in behavioural dysexecutive AD255.

Conclusions

Amid the tangled web of neurodegenerative disease, common schemas are emerging. Misfolding of proteins — forming aggregates, disrupting cellular functions, and propagating across functionally and structurally connected vulnerable neuronal networks — seems to lie at the heart of neurodegenerative diseases causing dementia. The pathological cascade can begin years or decades before symptomatic presentation, and clinical deficits eventually arise from irreversible damage within functional networks. Causative genetic factors promote specific proteinopathies, and modifier genes can influence variability in phenotypic presentation.

With disease progression, syndromes converge, and syndromic frontiers efface. In advanced stages of dementia, the footprints of disease extend beyond the initial regions of vulnerability, affecting symptom specificity and diagnostic yield. Therefore, detection of incipient signs and symptoms, or a history that allows early symptoms to be deciphered, is critical for the clinical classification of disease and prediction of the underlying proteinopathy. Nonetheless, despite detailed pre-mortem phenotyping, clinicopathological correlations remain imperfect.

The use of biomarkers has become crucial for in vivo dissection of neurodegenerative syndromes into distinct molecular and structural subtypes, with the ultimate goal of uncovering the factors that are necessary and sufficient to cause neurodegenerative disease. Currently, among the clinically available biomarkers, those for prion disease and AD have the highest predictive values. Patterns of atrophy on structural MRI (FIGS 2,4) can assist in the diagnosis of other neurodegenerative diseases, with high specificity for certain syndromes and pathologies. Tau PET, functional MRI and DTI, which are currently limited to research, show promise for the detection of mild or prodromal stages of disease.

The incidence of dementia increases with age, but some neurodegenerative diseases — in particular, those with a strong heritable component, such as FTLD — can present early. Taken together with the fact that subclinical structural changes can precede symptomatic disease by decades, vulnerability to dementia might be partially dictated by developmental differences in the brain.

Decades of careful phenotyping and clinical observations, as well as intensive molecular investigations, have culminated in discoveries that have launched a new era in dementia research and patient care. The discovery of causative mutations and related proteinopathies, as well as vulnerable large-scale structurally and functionally related neural networks, is offering molecular windows into the study of disease processes, with opportunities for the development of pathway-specific therapies that could be administered at prodromal or preclinical stages to patients selected on the basis of biomarker positivity.

Supplementary Material

S1

Acalculia Inability to perform calculations

Phonemic paraphasias Errors in speech resulting in substitution of parts of the intended word by other phonemes, leading to generation of a — sometimes non-existent — word sounding similar to the target word (for example, pipe for pile, loan for moan, or papple for apple)

Visual agnosia Inability to recognize or interpret visual stimuli despite intact vision

Alexia Inability to read, which comprises inability to read out loud and/or comprehend

Ideomotor apraxia Deficit in the ability to voluntarily plan or complete a motor task, with preservation of involuntary (automatic) motor planning when the subject is cued. This preserved ability to perform automated motoric responses to cuing contrasts with ‘ideational apraxia’, in which the ability to select the appropriate motor programme or sequencial steps, even in the presence of cuing, is lost

Prosopagnosia Inability to recognize faces, also known as ‘face blindness’

Pseudobulbar affect Also referred to as marked emotional lability or emotional incontinence. This symptom is characterized by uncontrollable episodes of crying or laughter, proportionately in excess of the valence of an emotional stimulus

Virchow–Robin spaces Perivascular spaces surrounding the penetrating vessels that arise from the subarachnoid space and perforate the brain parenchyma. Prominence — in terms of visibility and numbers — of enlarged Virchow–Robin spaces has been associated with cognitive ageing, small vessel disease, and neurodegeneration

CADASIL Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL) is an autosomal dominantly inherited small vessel disease, with notable dysregulation of inflammatory markers and pathognomonic T2/FLAIR white matter hyperintensities in anterior temporal lobes

Anticipation Genetic phenomenon relating to the gradual expansion of a mutation with each generation, usually resulting in earlier age of onset and more-severe symptoms when passed on to the next generation

Surface dyslexia and dysgraphia Impairment in the ability to read and write words that are considered ‘irregular’ with regard to their spelling-to-sound correspondence (for example, friend, island or yacht), as opposed to ‘regular’ words (for example, fire, lemon or computer). This impairment can result in regularization errors, that is, words are erroneously spelled according to the regular phonetic rules

Associative agnosia Impaired recognition of visually presented objects despite intact visual perception of these objects. Also known as ‘visual object agnosia’

Hypergraphia Compulsive and overwhelming urge to write, with potential intraindividual variability in style and content during the disease course

Astereognosis Inability to recognize an object by active touch alone, in the absence of primary sensory deficit

Figure 1 Clinicopathological spectrum of neurodegenerative proteinopathies

Schematic representation of the molecular underpinnings of neurodegenerative diseases and their main clinical manifestations. The figure lists genes with full penetrance that are considered causative and risk genes (in parentheses) that influence molecular processes culminating in the misfolding and/or aggregation of six fundamental proteins: cellular prion protein (PrPC), Aβ42 (and, to a lesser extent, Aβ40), tau, TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43), fused in sarcoma (FUS), and α-synuclein. These normal proteins misfold and/or accumulate in intracellular or extracellular compartments in specific areas of the CNS. Four major pathological disease categories are recognized: prion disease, Alzheimer disease (AD), frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) and Lewy body diseases (LBD). The pathologies can involve multiple molecules; for example, AD is a dual proteinopathy with Aβ and tau aggregates. Also, in some cases of prion disease, Aβ in seen in addition to the principal aggregates of misfolded scrapie prion protein (PrPSc). The majority of FTLD cases are associated with three different proteinopathies: tau, TDP-43 and FUS. Each pathological entity can in turn manifest as a variety of clinical syndromes, sometimes featuring symptoms that bridge syndromes. Asterisks indicate frontotemporal dementia (FTD) syndromes that, in addition to FTLD, can be associated with AD neuropathology. Genetic pleiotropy is also at play: mutations in certain genes — for example, GRN — have full penetrance for one pathology (FTLD-TDP) and associated FTD syndromes, while representing a risk factor for another pathology (AD). In addition, certain fully penetrant genetic mutations (for example, VCP mutations), are associated with additional systemic disease manifestations. The rich and diverse clinical expression of neurodegenerative processes is best illustrated in FTLD, a pathological category with six distinct clinical syndromes. Of note, FUS pathology causing FTLD is typically not associated with FUS mutations, which more often cause amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Aβ, amyloid-β; CJD, Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease; FTD–MND, FTD with motor neuron disease; PPA, primary progressive aphasia.

Figure 2 Patterns of brain atrophy in Alzheimer disease

The images show patterns of atrophy on structural neuroimaging observed in various clinical syndromes associated with Alzheimer disease (AD) pathology. In typical amnestic late-onset Alzheimer disease (LOAD), atrophy is first noted in the medial temporal lobes, and gradually spreads to involve the broader temporoparietal and posterior cingulate cortices. Logopenic variant primary progressive aphasia (lvPPA) is characterized by atrophy in the posterior perisylvian region or parietal lobe. For lvPPA, the left (dominant) hemisphere is represented here to indicate that the left-hemispheric cortical areas are predominantly affected. In posterior cortical atrophy (PCA), degeneration of the occipitoparietal and sometimes the posterior temporal lobes is observed. In the behavioural dysexecutive variant of AD, voxel-based morphometric studies reveal temporoparietal atrophy with relative preservation of frontal grey matter.

Figure 3 Possible clinicopathological correlations for frontotemporal dementia syndromes

The figure shows the pathologies associated with each frontotemporal dementia (FTD) syndrome. The three main frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) molecular pathologies — FTLD-tau, FTLD-TDP and FTLD-FUS — are represented in different shades of blue, and Alzheimer disease (AD) pathology is in yellow. The areas of crossover between syndromes and pathologies are qualitative rather than quantitative. The centre of the rhombus indicates the most frequent pathology for each syndrome. bvFTD, behavioural variant FTD; CBS, corticobasal syndrome; FTD–MND, FTD with motor neuron disease; FUS, fused in sarcoma; nfvPPA, nonfluent/agrammatic variant PPA; PPA, primary progressive aphasia; PSP-S, progressive supranuclear palsy syndrome; svPPA, semantic variant PPA; TDP-43, TAR DNA-binding protein 43.

Figure 4 Patterns of brain atrophy in frontotemporal dementia syndromes

The images show the patterns of atrophy observed on structural imaging in various frontotemporal dementia (FTD) syndromes, which arise from frontotemporal lobar degeneration. The core neuropsychiatric symptoms of behavioural variant FTD (bvFTD), such as apathy, disinhibition, eating disorders and aberrant motor behaviour, localize to right frontal structures. Patients with nonfluent/agrammatic variant primary progressive aphasia (nfvPPA) present with fluency impairment and/or agrammatism. These deficits localize to the frontoinsular language network, with atrophy noted most frequently in the left inferior frontal and insular cortices (the entire network is not depicted on this figure). In semantic variant PPA (svPPA), degeneration of the anterior temporal lobes disrupts access to semantic memory.

Table 1 Biomarkers of dementia syndromes

Clinical syndrome	Molecules	Imaging	
Pathology	Cerebrospinal fluid	MRI (typical areas of peak atrophy)	Metabolic (18F-FDG-PET) and perfusion (SPECT) imaging	Functional networks (resting state functional MRI)	Molecular imaging and emerging techniques	
Alzheimer disease (AD)	
Typical/amnestic AD	NFTs (3R/4R tau) and amyloid plaques	Reduced Aβ (Aβ42Aβ40 ratio); increased tau and P-tau	MTL (hippocampus and entorhinal cortex), PCC, temporoparietal cortex, precuneus	Reduced perfusion and metabolism in MTL, precuneus, PCC, temporoparietal	Reduced DMN and anterior temporal network activation	18F-based amyloid tracer (for example, florbetapir, flutemetamol, and florbetaben) uptake is typically diffuse in the neocortex

Tau ligand uptake is closely associated with post-mortem NFT distribution and peak areas of atrophy

	
Behavioural dysexecutive AD	NFTs (3R/4R tau) and amyloid plaques	Reduced Aβ42 (Aβ42:Aβ40 ratio); increased tau and P-tau	Temporoparietal cortex &gt; dorsolateral prefrontal cortex	Reduced metabolism in medial and orbital frontal regions	Reduced DMN and frontoparietal network activation	
Posterior cortical atrophy (PCA)	NFTs (3R/4R tau) and amyloid plaques	Reduced Aβ42 (Aβ42A40 ratio); increased tau and P-tau	MTL, PCC, occipital and parietal lobes	Reduced signal in parieto-occipital lobes	Reduced DMN and visual network activation	
Logopenic variant PPA (lvPPA)	NFTs (3R/4R tau) and amyloid plaques	Reduced Aβ42 (Aβ42Aβ40 ratio); increased tau and P-tau	Temporal lobe (superior temporal gyrus), parietal lobe (inferior parietal lobule)	Reduced signal in inferior parietal lobule	Reduced DMN and language network activation	
Frontotemporal dementia (FTD)	
Behavioural variant FTD (bvFTD)	TDP-43 type B &gt; Pick disease (3R tau)	Nonspecific increase in tau due to neurodegeneration	Frontoinsular and anterior temporal lobes right &gt; left	Reduced perfusion and metabolism in frontal and temporal lobes	Reduced salience network and increased DMN activation	Ongoing efforts to develop PET tracers that bind the conformations of abnormal tau characteristic of frontotemporal lobar degeneration tauopathies, while minimizing off-target binding	
Nonfluent/agrammatic variant PPA (nfvPPA)	4R tau &gt; TDP-43 type A	Nonspecific increase in tau due to neurodegeneration	Grey matter atrophy: left &gt; right posterior frontoinsular cortex, including inferior frontal gyrus; white matter atrophy: aslant tract and arcuate fasciculus	Reduced metabolism in inferior frontal gyrus	Reduced language network activation	
Semantic variant PPA (svPPA)	TDP-43 type C	Nonspecific increase in tau due to neurodegeneration	Atrophy of anterior temporal lobe(s) and inferior temporal gyrus	Reduced metabolism in anterior temporal lobe	Reduced language network activation	
Progressive supranuclear palsy syndrome (PSP-S)	PSP (4R tau)	Nonspecific) increase in tau due to neurodegeneration	Classic Richardson: midbrain tegmentum (hummingbird or penguin sign), pons, thalamus and striatum, with minimal involvement of the frontal lobe	Variable, with reduced metabolism reported in frontal, caudate, midbrain and thalamic regions in 4R tauopathies	Reduced cerebello-thalamocortical network activation	
Corticobasal syndrome (CBS)	Corticobasal degeneration (CBD) and AD most common	Nonspecific increase in tau due to neurodegeneration	Perirolandic cortex and posterior extension (AD); perirolandic cortex and prefrontal extension (CBD)	Early changes can be seen typically in the same pattern as the atrophy that follows	NA	
Lewy body dementia	
Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB)/Parkinson disease dementia (PDD)	Lewy body disease (LBD)	Reduced α-synuclein	Inferior frontal lobe, visual cortex, insula, hypothalamus, midbrain, caudate, putamen and anterior hippocampus	Reduced perfusion in striatum, reduced perfusion and metabolism in visual cortex. Sparing of PCC (‘island sign’) helps when mixed disease or AD are in the differential diagnosis	Reduced cerebello-thalamocortical network activation	Reduced dopamine transporter uptake in basal ganglia, reduced tracer uptake on cardiac-123I-MIBG SPECT	
Prion disease	
Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease (CJD)	Scrapie prion protein (PrPSc)	RT-QuIC test (most accurate); increased 14-3-3, neuron-specific enolase and tau (specificity increases when more than one cerebrospinal fluid marker is elevated)	Diffusion-weighted imaging and T2 hyperintensity in the striatum, hypothalamus and cortices (‘cortical ribboning’), posterior (pulvinar) and medial thalamus (‘double hockey stick sign’, nonspecific) or pulvinar alone (‘pulvinar sign’, in variant CJD only)	NA	NA	NA	
Vascular dementia (VaD)	
VaD (small and large vessel disease)	White matter and grey matter lesions, mixed pathology (most commonly AD or LBD)	NA	Frontal subcortical and periventricular white matter hyperintensities, microhaemorrhages, lacunar strokes, prominent Virchow-Robin spaces, cortical infarcts and haemorrhage	Reduced perfusion and metabolism in frontal subcortical and periventricular regions	NA	NA	
3R/4R, three/four microtubule-binding domain repeats; Aβ, amyloid-β; DMN, default mode network; MTL, medial temporal lobe; NA, not applicable; NFTs, neurofibrillary tangles; PCC, posterior cingulate cortex; PPA, primary progressive aphasia; P-tau, hyperphosphorylated tau; RT-QuIC, real-time quaking-induced conversion; SPECT, single-photon emission CT; TDP-34, TAR DNA-binding protein 43.

Box 1 Biomarker-based diagnostic algorithms for dementia syndromes

Alzheimer disease

MRI to evaluate pattern of atrophy, concomitant vascular disease, and nondegenerative lesions (mimics)

Alzheimer disease (AD) molecular biomarkers (cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) or PET) for early-onset AD, atypical clinical features or possibility of frontotemporal lobar degeneration; 18F-FDG–PET if patient is amyloid-negative according to CSF or PET studies and MRI is inconclusive

Genetic testing: PSEN1, PSEN2 and APP if familial or genetic causes of AD are suspected; C9orf72 in the case of an amyloid-negative amnestic phenotype

Frontotemporal dementia

MRI to evaluate pattern of atrophy and nondegenerative lesions (mimics)

Amyloid biomarkers (CSF or PET) if AD is included in the differential diagnosis

Can consider genetics in the case of a family history or certain clinical features - C9orf72: family history of frontotemporal dementia with or without motor neuron disease (MND), MND, or atypical clinical features (for example, hallucinations or delusions)

- GRN: extensive white matter damage, striking asymmetry in atrophy, or prominent parietal lobe involvement

- VCP: if inclusion body myopathy, with or without Paget disease, is present

- MAPT: family history and extrapyramidal motor dysfunction

Lewy body dementia

MRI to evaluate pattern of atrophy and nondegenerative lesions (mimics)

AD molecular biomarkers (CSF or PET) to test for mixed disease if atrophy patterns or clinical features are suggestive

In-laboratory sleep study to evaluate for REM sleep without atonia; may also find evidence of dream-enactment behaviour on video recording

Prion disease

MRI: abnormalities on diffusion-weighted imaging, and apparent diffusion coefficient sequences abnormality; T1-weighted and T2-weighted sequences to test for mimics

CSF: real-time quaking-induced conversion (RT-QuIC) preferred; 14-3-3, tau and neuron-specific enolase (alternative)

Paraneoplastic panel (serum and/or CSF) if diagnosis not reached in the first two steps (mimics)

Vascular dementia

MRI for subtype and severity of disease, and atrophy pattern suggestive of mixed disease

AD molecular biomarkers (CSF or PET) if clinical features or atrophy patterns suggest mixed disease

Genetic testing (for example, NOTCH3 for CADASIL) if familial disease suspected, or atypical features are seen, such as white matter disease in anterior temporal lobes

Box 2 FTLD proteinopathies

Frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) is caused predominantly by intracellular aggregates of tau, TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) or fused in sarcoma (FUS).

Tau

Tau is encoded by the microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT) gene. Alternative splicing of MAPT mRNA leads to production of six tau isoforms with differential expression across the brain. Tau binds to and stabilizes microtubules, which are important for cellular morphology and function. In neurodegenerative disorders, the normally phosphorylated tau becomes aberrantly hyperphosphorylated, dissociates from microtubules, and forms aggregates within neurons and glia. MAPT mutations mainly cause FTLD-tau pathology, giving rise to syndromes such as nonfluent/agrammatic variant primary progressive aphasia. Patients with frontotemporal dementia (FTD) syndromes who harbour MAPT mutations tend to be relatively young (&lt;50 years), present with disinhibition rather than apathy, display ritualistic behaviour, and develop features of semantic impairment.

TDP-43

TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) is encoded by the TARDBP gene. TARDBP mutations typically cause amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), but are also, in rare cases, implicated in FTLD-TDP types A–D and U. TDP-43 pathology is subclassified according to patterns of TDP-43-containing neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions and dystrophic neurites in diseased neurons. All FTD syndromes except for progressive supranuclear palsy syndrome can be caused by FTLD-TDP. The TDP-43 C-terminus has been shown to contain a prion-like domain that permits formation of TDP-43 oligomers, and is a hotspot of disease-causing mutations in ALS.

FUS

Fused in sarcoma (FUS) is an RNA-binding protein involved in splicing and nuclear export of mRNA. FTLD-FUS has three subtypes: atypical FTLD with ubiquinated inclusions, basophilic inclusion body disease, and neuronal intermediate filament inclusion disease. FUS mutations are mainly associated with ALS, but can give rise to behavioural variant FTD, FTD with motor neuron disease, or language FTD phenotypes. A specific phenotype related to sporadic FTLD-FUS pathology has emerged, with young onset (22–46 years), prominent caudate atrophy, and unique phenotypic features of marked obsessiveness, social withdrawal, hyperorality (often with pica), and stimulus-bound and repetitive, ritualistic behaviours. The cognitive profile consists of subcortical executive dysfunction in the absence of cortical language, perceptual and praxis impairments.

Box 3 C9orf72

Intronic hexanucleotide (GGGGCC) repeat expansions in C9orf72 are the most common genetic cause of familial and sporadic frontotemporal dementia (FTD) plus or minus motor neuron disease (MND)127, with a suspected single-founder effect in Northern Europe256. Molecular pathologies, in descending frequency, include TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) type B, TDP-43 type A and corticobasal degeneration (rare). Common syndromes (with or without MND) in descending frequency include behavioural variant FTD, mixed behavioural and semantic language deficits, nonfluent/agrammatic variant primary progressive aphasia, and behavioural and nonfluent language symptoms257. Symptoms more frequently observed in mutation carriers in comparison to individuals with sporadic FTD147,257 include greater disinhibition and less apathy; psychosis (~30%); paranoia and delusional and/or irrational thoughts (~25%), such as somatoform delusions of infestation (&lt;4% of nongenetic FTD cases); complex repetitive delusion-related behaviours (as opposed to simple motor stereotypies); and amnesia, with or without TDP-43-related hippocampal sclerosis144,145. In fact, progressive amnesia can cause misdiagnosis as ‘atypical’ early-onset Alzheimer disease. Concomitance of FTD and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in C9orf72 carriers can be associated with prominent bulbar dysfunction. Atrophy on MRI is variable and can be modest in comparison to the severity of clinical deficits. In addition to the frontotemporal lobes, cerebellar, parietal and thalamic atrophy can be noted158. White matter atrophy has been reported at preclinical stages. Variability in penetrance, clinical features and age of onset is suggestive of potential anticipation mechanisms and modifying factors (including epigenetic factors and other genes). For a more detailed review on C9orf72, see Yokoyama et al.121.

Key points

Definite classification of dementia is based on the underlying neuropathology

Accumulation of abnormally folded proteins lies at the heart of dementia neuropathology

Alzheimer disease pathology can give rise to subtypes with focal onset in functional networks outside the memory system, such as language, visuospatial and behavioural executive domains

Frontotemporal lobar degeneration, associated with aggregates of tau, TDP-43 or FUS, can give rise to three core frontotemporal dementia syndromes and three associated syndromes

Clinical classification of dementia syndromes is based on diagnostic criteria that rely heavily on the specificity of affected domains and the evolution of deficits in these domains

In vivo biomarkers of disease include imaging findings of morphological, molecular and functional changes, both upstream and downstream of the disease processes

Author contributions

F.M.E. researched data for the article and wrote the manuscript. Both authors made substantial contributions to discussions of the content, and reviewed and edited the manuscript before submission.

Competing interests statement

The authors declare no competing interests.

Publisher’s note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION

See online article: S1 (box)


1 Brun A Liu X Erikson C Synapse loss and gliosis in the molecular layer of the cerebral cortex in Alzheimer’s disease and in frontal lobe degeneration Neurodegeneration 4 171 177 1995 7583681
2 Miller BL Neuroanatomy of the self: evidence from patients with frontotemporal dementia Neurology 57 817 821 2001 11552010
3 Alzheimer’s Disease International World Alzheimer Report 2015: the Global Impact of Dementia Alzheimer’s Disease International https://www.alz.co.uk/research/world-report-2015 2015
4 Sloane PD The public health impact of Alzheimer’s disease, 2000–2050: potential implication of treatment advances Annu Rev Public Health 23 213 231 2002 11910061
5 Katzman R Alzheimer’s disease N Engl J Med 314 964 973 1986 2870433
6 McKhann GM The diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer’s disease: recommendations from the National Institute on Aging–Alzheimer’s Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimers Dement 7 263 269 2011 21514250
7 Seeley WW Crawford RK Zhou J Miller BL Greicius MD Neurodegenerative diseases target large-scale human brain networks Neuron 62 42 52 2009 19376066
8 McKinley MP Masiarz FR Prusiner SB Reversible chemical modification of the scrapie agent Science 214 1259 1261 1981 6795721
9 Prusiner SB Novel proteinaceous infectious particles cause scrapie Science 216 136 144 1982 6801762
10 Jaunmuktane Z Evidence for human transmission of amyloid-β pathology and cerebral amyloid angiopathy Nature 525 247 250 2015 26354483
11 Jucker M Walker LC Self-propagation of pathogenic protein aggregates in neurodegenerative diseases Nature 501 45 51 2013 24005412
12 Sanders DW Distinct tau prion strains propagate in cells and mice and define different tauopathies Neuron 82 1271 1288 2014 24857020
13 Li JY Lewy bodies in grafted neurons in subjects with Parkinson’s disease suggest host-to-graft disease propagation Nat Med 14 501 503 2008 18391963
14 Seeley WW Selective functional, regional, and neuronal vulnerability in frontotemporal dementia Curr Opin Neurol 21 701 707 2008 18989116
15 Jellinger KA Attems J Prevalence and impact of vascular and Alzheimer pathologies in Lewy body disease Acta Neuropathol 115 427 436 2008 18273624
16 Matthews FE Epidemiological pathology of dementia: attributable-risks at death in the Medical Research Council Cognitive Function and Ageing Study PLoS Med 6 e1000180 2009 19901977
17 Lobo A Prevalence of dementia and major subtypes in Europe: a collaborative study of population-based cohorts. Neurologic Diseases in the Elderly Research Group Neurology 54 S4 S9 2000 10854354
18 Qiu C Kivipelto M von Strauss E Epidemiology of Alzheimer’s disease: occurrence, determinants, and strategies toward intervention Dialogues Clin Neurosci 11 111 128 2009 19585947
19 Panegyres PK Frencham K Course and causes of suspected dementia in young adults: a longitudinal study Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen 22 48 56 2007 17534002
20 Ratnavalli E Brayne C Dawson K Hodges JR The prevalence of frontotemporal dementia Neurology 58 1615 1621 2002 12058088
21 Harvey RJ Skelton-Robinson M Rossor MN The prevalence and causes of dementia in people under the age of 65 years J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 74 1206 1209 2003 12933919
22 Kelley BJ Boeve BF Josephs KA Young-onset dementia: demographic and etiologic characteristics of 235 patients Arch Neurol 65 1502 1508 2008 19001170
23 Mercy L Hodges JR Dawson K Barker RA Brayne C Incidence of early-onset dementias in Cambridgeshire, United Kingdom Neurology 71 1496 1499 2008 18981371
24 Schneider JA Arvanitakis Z Bang W Bennett DA Mixed brain pathologies account for most dementia cases in community-dwelling older persons Neurology 69 2197 2204 2007 17568013
25 Nelson PT Modeling the association between 43 different clinical and pathological variables and the severity of cognitive impairment in a large autopsy cohort of elderly persons Brain Pathol 20 66 79 2010 19021630
26 Ruitenberg A Ott A van Swieten JC Hofman A Breteler MM Incidence of dementia: does gender make a difference? Neurobiol Aging 22 575 580 2001 11445258
27 Braak H Braak E Neuropathological stageing of Alzheimer-related changes Acta Neuropathol 82 239 259 1991 1759558
28 Taylor JP Hardy J Fischbeck KH Toxic proteins in neurodegenerative disease Science 296 1991 1995 2002 12065827
29 Braak H Alafuzoff I Arzberger T Kretzschmar H Del Tredici K Staging of Alzheimer disease-associated neurofibrillary pathology using paraffin sections and immunocytochemistry Acta Neuropathol 112 389 404 2006 16906426
30 Jack CR Jr Tracking pathophysiological processes in Alzheimer’s disease: an updated hypothetical model of dynamic biomarkers Lancet Neurol 12 207 216 2013 23332364
31 Jansen WJ Prevalence of cerebral amyloid pathology in persons without dementia: a meta-analysis JAMA 313 1924 1938 2015 25988462
32 Thal DR Rub U Orantes M Braak H Phases of Aβ-deposition in the human brain and its relevance for the development of AD Neurology 58 1791 1800 2002 12084879
33 Braak H Braak E Staging of Alzheimer’s disease-related neurofibrillary changes Neurobiol Aging 16 271 278 1995 7566337
34 Thal DR Sequence of Abeta-protein deposition in the human medial temporal lobe J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 59 733 748 2000 10952063
35 Braak H Thal DR Ghebremedhin E Del Tredici K Stages of the pathologic process in Alzheimer disease: age categories from 1 to 100 years J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 70 960 969 2011 22002422
36 Braak H Ghebremedhin E Rub U Bratzke H Del Tredici K Stages in the development of Parkinson’s disease-related pathology Cell Tissue Res 318 121 134 2004 15338272
37 Grudzien A Locus coeruleus neurofibrillary degeneration in aging, mild cognitive impairment and early Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 28 327 335 2007 16574280
38 Theofilas P Dunlop S Heinsen H Grinberg LT Turning on the light within: subcortical nuclei of the isodentritic core and their role in Alzheimer’s disease pathogenesis J Alzheimers Dis 46 17 34 2015 25720408
39 Simic G Monoaminergic neuropathology in Alzheimer’s disease Prog Neurobiol 151 101 138 2017 27084356
40 Petkova AT Self-propagating, molecular-level polymorphism in Alzheimer’s β-amyloid fibrils Science 307 262 265 2005 15653506
41 Watts JC Serial propagation of distinct strains of Aβ prions from Alzheimer’s disease patients Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111 10323 10328 2014 24982139
42 Cohen ML Rapidly progressive Alzheimer’s disease features distinct structures of amyloid-β Brain 138 1009 1022 2015 25688081
43 Qiang W Yau WM Lu JX Collinge J Tycko R Structural variation in amyloid-β fibrils from Alzheimer’s disease clinical subtypes Nature 541 217 221 2017 28052060
44 Dubois B Advancing research diagnostic criteria for Alzheimer’s disease: the IWG-2 criteria Lancet Neurol 13 614 629 2014 24849862
45 Petersen RC Mild cognitive impairment: clinical characterization and outcome Arch Neurol 56 303 308 1999 10190820
46 Albert MS The diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment due to Alzheimer’s disease: recommendations from the National Institute on Aging–Alzheimer’s Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimers Dement 7 270 279 2011 21514249
47 Bertram L Tanzi RE The genetics of Alzheimer’s disease Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci 107 79 100 2012 22482448
48 Bertram L Lill CM Tanzi RE The genetics of Alzheimer disease: back to the future Neuron 68 270 281 2010 20955934
49 Bateman RJ Clinical and biomarker changes in dominantly inherited Alzheimer’s disease N Engl J Med 367 795 804 2012 22784036
50 Farrer LA Effects of age, sex, and ethnicity on the association between apolipoprotein E genotype and Alzheimer disease. A meta-analysis. APOE and Alzheimer Disease Meta Analysis Consortium JAMA 278 1349 1356 1997 9343467
51 Chouraki V Seshadri S Genetics of Alzheimer’s disease Adv Genet 87 245 294 2014 25311924
52 Desikan RS Genetic assessment of age-associated Alzheimer disease risk: development and validation of a polygenic hazard score PLoS Med 14 e1002258 2017 28323831
53 Baumgart M Summary of the evidence on modifiable risk factors for cognitive decline and dementia: a population-based perspective Alzheimers Dement 11 718 726 2015 26045020
54 Osorio RS Sleep-disordered breathing advances cognitive decline in the elderly Neurology 84 1964 1971 2015 25878183
55 Iturria-Medina Y Early role of vascular dysregulation on late-onset Alzheimer’s disease based on multifactorial data-driven analysis Nat Commun 7 11934 2016 27327500
56 Haight TJ Dissociable effects of Alzheimer disease and white matter hyperintensities on brain metabolism JAMA Neurol 70 1039 1045 2013 23779022
57 Janelidze S CSF Aβ42/Aβ40 and Aβ42/Aβ38 ratios: better diagnostic markers of Alzheimer disease Ann Clin Transl Neurol 3 154 165 2016 27042676
58 Ewers M CSF biomarkers for the differential diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease: a large-scale international multicenter study Alzheimers Dement 11 1306 1315 2015 25804998
59 Jack CR Jr Holtzman DM Biomarker modeling of Alzheimer’s disease Neuron 80 1347 1358 2013 24360540
60 Tosun D Association between tau deposition and antecedent amyloid-beta accumulation rates in normal and early symptomatic individuals Brain 140 1499 1512 2017 28334939
61 Johnson KA Tau positron emission tomographic imaging in aging and early Alzheimer disease Ann Neurol 79 110 119 2016 26505746
62 Scholl M PET imaging of tau deposition in the aging human brain Neuron 89 971 982 2016 26938442
63 Schwarz AJ Regional profiles of the candidate tau PET ligand 18F-AV-1451 recapitulate key features of Braak histopathological stages Brain 139 1539 1550 2016 26936940
64 Cho H In vivo cortical spreading pattern of tau and amyloid in the Alzheimer disease spectrum Ann Neurol 80 247 258 2016 27323247
65 Wang Y Development of a PET/SPECT agent for amyloid imaging in Alzheimer’s disease J Mol Neurosci 24 55 62 2004 15314250
66 Garibotto V Clinical validity of brain fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography as a biomarker for Alzheimer’s disease in the context of a structured 5-phase development framework Neurobiol Aging 52 183 195 2017 28317648
67 Ten Kate M Clinical validity of medial temporal atrophy as a biomarker for Alzheimer’s disease in the context of a structured 5-phase development framework Neurobiol Aging 52 167 182.e1 2017 28317647
68 Chetelat G Atrophy, hypometabolism and clinical trajectories in patients with amyloid-negative Alzheimer’s disease Brain 139 2528 2539 2016 27357349
69 Reitz C Brayne C Mayeux R Epidemiology of Alzheimer disease Nat Rev Neurol 7 137 152 2011 21304480
70 Tang M Neurological manifestations of autosomal dominant familial Alzheimer’s disease: a comparison of the published literature with the Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer Network observational study (DIAN-OBS) Lancet Neurol 15 1317 1325 2016 27777020
71 Joshi A Ringman JM Lee AS Juarez KO Mendez MF Comparison of clinical characteristics between familial and non-familial early onset Alzheimer’s disease J Neurol 259 2182 2188 2012 22460587
72 Mendez MF Lee AS Joshi A Shapira JS Nonamnestic presentations of early-onset Alzheimer’s disease Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen 27 413 420 2012 22871906
73 Mesulam M Primary progressive aphasia pathology Ann Neurol 63 124 125 2008
74 Mesulam M Alzheimer and frontotemporal pathology in subsets of primary progressive aphasia Ann Neurol 63 709 719 2008 18412267
75 Gorno-Tempini ML Classification of primary progressive aphasia and its variants Neurology 76 1006 1014 2011 21325651
76 Spinelli EG Typical and atypical pathology in primary progressive aphasia variants Ann Neurol 81 430 443 2017 28133816
77 Benson DF Davis RJ Snyder BD Posterior cortical atrophy Arch Neurol 45 789 793 1988 3390033
78 Crutch SJ Shining a light on posterior cortical atrophy Alzheimers Dement 9 463 465 2013 23274153
79 Whitwell JL Imaging correlates of posterior cortical atrophy Neurobiol Aging 28 1051 1061 2007 16797786
80 Ossenkoppele R The behavioural/dysexecutive variant of Alzheimer’s disease: clinical, neuroimaging and pathological features Brain 138 2732 2749 2015 26141491
81 Binetti G Disorders of visual and spatial perception in the early stage of Alzheimer’s disease Ann NY Acad Sci 777 221 225 1996 8624088
82 Back-Madruga C Functional ability in executive variant Alzheimer’s disease and typical Alzheimer’s disease Clin Neuropsychol 16 331 340 2002 12607146
83 Snowden JS Cognitive phenotypes in Alzheimer’s disease and genetic risk Cortex 43 835 845 2007 17941342
84 Dickerson BC Wolk DA Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative Dysexecutive versus amnesic phenotypes of very mild Alzheimer’s disease are associated with distinct clinical, genetic and cortical thinning characteristics J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 82 45 51 2011 20562467
85 Mez J Faster cognitive and functional decline in dysexecutive versus amnestic Alzheimer’s subgroups: a longitudinal analysis of the National Alzheimer’s Coordinating Center (NACC) database PLoS ONE 8 e65246 2013 23755200
86 Varma AR Evaluation of the NINCDS–ADRDA criteria in the differentiation of Alzheimer’s disease and frontotemporal dementia J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 66 184 188 1999 10071097
87 Rabinovici GD Amyloid versus FDG–PET in the differential diagnosis of AD and FTLD Neurology 77 2034 2042 2011 22131541
88 Ossenkoppele R Impact of molecular imaging on the diagnostic process in a memory clinic Alzheimers Dement 9 414 421 2013 23164552
89 Ryman DC Symptom onset in autosomal dominant Alzheimer disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis Neurology 83 253 260 2014 24928124
90 Grinberg LT Thal DR Vascular pathology in the aged human brain Acta Neuropathol 119 277 290 2010 20155424
91 Jellinger KA The pathology of “vascular dementia”: a critical update J Alzheimers Dis 14 107 123 2008 18525132
92 Jellinger KA Pathology and pathogenesis of vascular cognitive impairment — a critical update Front Aging Neurosci 5 17 2013 23596414
93 Gorelick PB Vascular contributions to cognitive impairment and dementia: a statement for healthcare professionals from the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association Stroke 42 2672 2713 2011 21778438
94 Kalaria RN Towards defining the neuropathological substrates of vascular dementia J Neurol Sci 226 75 80 2004 15537525
95 Wardlaw JM Blood–brain barrier and cerebral small vessel disease J Neurol Sci 299 66 71 2010 20850797
96 Wardlaw JM Blood–brain barrier permeability and long-term clinical and imaging outcomes in cerebral small vessel disease Stroke 44 525 527 2013 23233386
97 Kalaria RN Neuropathological diagnosis of vascular cognitive impairment and vascular dementia with implications for Alzheimer’s disease Acta Neuropathol 131 659 685 2016 27062261
98 McAleese KE Post-mortem assessment in vascular dementia: advances and aspirations BMC Med 14 129 2016 27600683
99 Pendlebury ST Rothwell PM Prevalence, incidence, and factors associated with pre-stroke and post-stroke dementia: a systematic review and meta-analysis Lancet Neurol 8 1006 1018 2009 19782001
100 Zaccai J Ince P Brayne C Population-based neuropathological studies of dementia: design, methods and areas of investigation — a systematic review BMC Neurol 6 2 2006 16401346
101 Grinberg LT Prevalence of dementia subtypes in a developing country: a clinicopathological study Clinics (Sao Paulo) 68 1140 1145 2013 24037011
102 Korczyn AD The complex nosological concept of vascular dementia J Neurol Sci 203–204 3 6 2002
103 James BD Bennett DA Boyle PA Leurgans S Schneider JA Dementia from Alzheimer disease and mixed pathologies in the oldest old JAMA 307 1798 1800 2012 22550192
104 Hachinski V Preventable senility: a call for action against the vascular dementias Lancet 340 645 648 1992 1355217
105 Small GW Revised Ischemic Score for diagnosing multi-infarct dementia J Clin Psychiatry 46 514 517 1985 4066617
106 Roman GC Vascular dementia: diagnostic criteria for research studies. Report of the NINDS– AIREN International Workshop Neurology 43 250 260 1993 8094895
107 Sachdev P Diagnostic criteria for vascular cognitive disorders: a VASCOG statement Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 28 206 218 2014 24632990
108 Garrett KD The neuropsychological profile of vascular cognitive impairment — no dementia: comparisons to patients at risk for cerebrovascular disease and vascular dementia Arch Clin Neuropsychol 19 745 757 2004 15288328
109 Rosenberg GA Consensus statement for diagnosis of subcortical small vessel disease J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 36 6 25 2016 26198175
110 Wardlaw JM Neuroimaging standards for research into small vessel disease and its contribution to ageing and neurodegeneration Lancet Neurol 12 822 838 2013 23867200
111 Rosenberg GA Bjerke M Wallin A Multimodal markers of inflammation in the subcortical ischemic vascular disease type of vascular cognitive impairment Stroke 45 1531 1538 2014 24692476
112 Brun A Frontal lobe degeneration of non-Alzheimer type. I. Neuropathology Arch Gerontol Geriatr 6 193 208 1987 3689053
113 Rascovsky K Sensitivity of revised diagnostic criteria for the behavioural variant of frontotemporal dementia Brain 134 2456 2477 2011 21810890
114 Neumann M Ubiquitinated TDP-43 in frontotemporal lobar degeneration and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Science 314 130 133 2006 17023659
115 Baborie A Pathological correlates of frontotemporal lobar degeneration in the elderly Acta Neuropathol 121 365 371 2011 20978901
116 Mackenzie IR Nomenclature and nosology for neuropathologic subtypes of frontotemporal lobar degeneration: an update Acta Neuropathol 119 1 4 2010 19924424
117 Mackenzie IR Nomenclature for neuropathologic subtypes of frontotemporal lobar degeneration: consensus recommendations Acta Neuropathol 117 15 18 2009 19015862
118 Neumann M A new subtype of frontotemporal lobar degeneration with FUS pathology Brain 132 2922 2931 2009 19674978
119 Lee SE Clinical characterization of bvFTD due to FUS neuropathology Neurocase 18 305 317 2012 22060063
120 Johnson JK Frontotemporal lobar degeneration: demographic characteristics of 353 patients Arch Neurol 62 925 930 2005 15956163
121 Yokoyama JS Sirkis DW Miller BL C9ORF72 hexanucleotide repeats in behavioral and motor neuron disease: clinical heterogeneity and pathological diversity Am J Neurodegener Dis 3 1 18 2014 24753999
122 Goldman JS Comparison of family histories in FTLD subtypes and related tauopathies Neurology 65 1817 1819 2005 16344531
123 Hodges JR Semantic dementia: demography, familial factors and survival in a consecutive series of 100 cases Brain 133 300 306 2010 19805492
124 Snowden JS Progranulin gene mutations associated with frontotemporal dementia and progressive non-fluent aphasia Brain 129 3091 3102 2006 17003069
125 Mesulam M Progranulin mutations in primary progressive aphasia: the PPA1 and PPA3 families Arch Neurol 64 43 47 2007 17210807
126 Beck J A distinct clinical, neuropsychological and radiological phenotype is associated with progranulin gene mutations in a large UK series Brain 131 706 720 2008 18234697
127 DeJesus-Hernandez M Expanded GGGGCC hexanucleotide repeat in noncoding region of C9ORF72 causes chromosome 9p-linked FTD and ALS Neuron 72 245 256 2011 21944778
128 Freischmidt A Haploinsufficiency of TBK1 causes familial ALS and fronto-temporal dementia Nat Neurosci 18 631 636 2015 25803835
129 Baker M Mutations in progranulin cause tau-negative frontotemporal dementia linked to chromosome 17 Nature 442 916 919 2006 16862116
130 Chen-Plotkin AS Genetic and clinical features of progranulin-associated frontotemporal lobar degeneration Arch Neurol 68 488 497 2011 21482928
131 Snowden JS Distinct clinical and pathological phenotypes in frontotemporal dementia associated with MAPT, PGRN and C9orf72 mutations Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener 16 497 505 2015 26473392
132 Watts GD Inclusion body myopathy associated with Paget disease of bone and frontotemporal dementia is caused by mutant valosin-containing protein Nat Genet 36 377 381 2004 15034582
133 Watts GD Novel VCP mutations in inclusion body myopathy associated with Paget disease of bone and frontotemporal dementia Clin Genet 72 420 426 2007 17935506
134 Rademakers R High-density SNP haplotyping suggests altered regulation of tau gene expression in progressive supranuclear palsy Hum Mol Genet 14 3281 3292 2005 16195395
135 Lanata SC Miller BL The behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD) syndrome in psychiatry J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 87 501 511 2016 26216940
136 Mioshi E Bristow M Cook R Hodges JR Factors underlying caregiver stress in frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer’s disease Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 27 76 81 2009 19155621
137 Wilson RS Life-span cognitive activity, neuropathologic burden, and cognitive aging Neurology 81 314 321 2013 23825173
138 Onyike CU Diehl-Schmid J The epidemiology of frontotemporal dementia Int Rev Psychiatry 25 130 137 2013 23611343
139 Coyle-Gilchrist IT Prevalence, characteristics, and survival of frontotemporal lobar degeneration syndromes Neurology 86 1736 1743 2016 27037234
140 Seeley WW Frontal paralimbic network atrophy in very mild behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia Arch Neurol 65 249 255 2008 18268196
141 Garcin B Determinants of survival in behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia Neurology 73 1656 1661 2009 19917988
142 Diehl-Schmid J Perneczky R Koch J Nedopil N Kurz A Guilty by suspicion? Criminal behavior in frontotemporal lobar degeneration Cogn Behav Neurol 26 73 77 2013 23812170
143 Patel AN Sampson JB Cognitive profile of C9orf72 in frontotemporal dementia and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep 15 59 2015 26198888
144 Pletnikova O Hippocampal sclerosis dementia with the C9ORF72 hexanucleotide repeat expansion Neurobiol Aging 35 2419.e17 2419.e21 2014
145 Rankin KP Spontaneous social behaviors discriminate behavioral dementias from psychiatric disorders and other dementias J Clin Psychiatry 69 60 73 2008 18312039
146 Velakoulis D Walterfang M Mocellin R Pantelis C McLean C Frontotemporal dementia presenting as schizophrenia-like psychosis in young people: clinicopathological series and review of cases Br J Psychiatry 194 298 305 2009 19336778
147 Kertesz A Psychosis and hallucinations in frontotemporal dementia with the C9ORF72 mutation: a detailed clinical cohort Cogn Behav Neurol 26 146 154 2013 24077574
148 Woolley JD Frontotemporal dementia and mania Am J Psychiatry 164 1811 1816 2007 18056235
149 Rosen HJ Neuroanatomical correlates of behavioural disorders in dementia Brain 128 2612 2625 2005 16195246
150 Rankin KP Behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia with corticobasal degeneration pathology: phenotypic comparison to bvFTD with Pick’s disease J Mol Neurosci 45 594 608 2011 21881831
151 Lee SE Altered network connectivity in frontotemporal dementia with C9orf72 hexanucleotide repeat expansion Brain 137 3047 3060 2014 25273996
152 Khan BK Atypical, slowly progressive behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia associated with C9ORF72 hexanucleotide expansion J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 83 358 364 2012 22399793
153 Ranasinghe KG Distinct subtypes of behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia based on patterns of network degeneration JAMA Neurol 73 1078 1088 2016 27429218
154 Galantucci S White matter damage in primary progressive aphasias: a diffusion tensor tractography study Brain 134 3011 3029 2011 21666264
155 Rogalski E Asymmetry of cortical decline in subtypes of primary progressive aphasia Neurology 83 1184 1191 2014 25165386
156 Mesulam MM Primary progressive aphasia and the evolving neurology of the language network Nat Rev Neurol 10 554 569 2014 25179257
157 Gorno-Tempini ML Cognition and anatomy in three variants of primary progressive aphasia Ann Neurol 55 335 346 2004 14991811
158 Kramer JH Distinctive neuropsychological patterns in frontotemporal dementia, semantic dementia, and Alzheimer disease Cogn Behav Neurol 16 211 218 2003 14665820
159 Edwards-Lee T The temporal variant of frontotemporal dementia Brain 120 1027 1040 1997 9217686
160 Seeley WW The natural history of temporal variant frontotemporal dementia Neurology 64 1384 1390 2005 15851728
161 Chan D The clinical profile of right temporal lobe atrophy Brain 132 1287 1298 2009 19297506
162 Geschwind N Galaburda AM Cerebral lateralization. Biological mechanisms, associations, and pathology: III. A hypothesis and a program for research Arch Neurol 42 634 654 1985 3874617
163 Gorno-Tempini ML Cognitive and behavioral profile in a case of right anterior temporal lobe neurodegeneration Cortex 40 631 644 2004 15505973
164 Snowden JS The clinical diagnosis of early-onset dementias: diagnostic accuracy and clinicopathological relationships Brain 134 2478 2492 2011 21840888
165 Mesulam MM Wieneke C Thompson C Rogalski E Weintraub S Quantitative classification of primary progressive aphasia at early and mild impairment stages Brain 135 1537 1553 2012 22525158
166 Mesulam MM Asymmetry and heterogeneity of Alzheimer’s and frontotemporal pathology in primary progressive aphasia Brain 137 1176 1192 2014 24574501
167 Gorno-Tempini ML Murray RC Rankin KP Weiner MW Miller BL Clinical, cognitive and anatomical evolution from nonfluent progressive aphasia to corticobasal syndrome: a case report Neurocase 10 426 436 2004 15788282
168 Lomen-Hoerth C Anderson T Miller B The overlap of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia Neurology 59 1077 1079 2002 12370467
169 Burrell JR Kiernan MC Vucic S Hodges JR Motor neuron dysfunction in frontotemporal dementia Brain 134 2582 2594 2011 21840887
170 Strong MJ Consensus criteria for the diagnosis of frontotemporal cognitive and behavioural syndromes in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Amyotroph Lateral Scler 10 131 146 2009 19462523
171 Devenney E Vucic S Hodges JR Kiernan MC Motor neuron disease–frontotemporal dementia: aclinical continuum Expert Rev Neurother 15 509 522 2015 25865485
172 Höglinger GU Clinical diagnosis of progressive supranuclear palsy: the Movement Disorder Society criteria Mov Disord 32 853 864 2017 28467028
173 Williams DR Pathological tau burden and distribution distinguishes progressive supranuclear palsy-parkinsonism from Richardson’s syndrome Brain 130 1566 1576 2007 17525140
174 Williams DR Characteristics of two distinct clinical phenotypes in pathologically proven progressive supranuclear palsy: Richardson’s syndrome and PSP-parkinsonism Brain 128 1247 1258 2005 15788542
175 Boxer AL Saccade abnormalities in autopsy-confirmed frontotemporal lobar degeneration and Alzheimer disease Arch Neurol 69 509 517 2012 22491196
176 Massey LA The midbrain to pons ratio: a simple and specific MRI sign of progressive supranuclear palsy Neurology 80 1856 1861 2013 23616165
177 Lee SE Clinicopathological correlations in corticobasal degeneration Ann Neurol 70 327 340 2011 21823158
178 Armstrong MJ Criteria for the diagnosis of corticobasal degeneration Neurology 80 496 503 2013 23359374
179 Sha SJ Predicting amyloid status in corticobasal syndrome using modified clinical criteria, magnetic resonance imaging and fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography Alzheimers Res Ther 7 8 2015 25733984
180 George S Rey NL Reichenbach N Steiner JA Brundin P α-synuclein: the long distance runner Brain Pathol 23 350 357 2013 23587141
181 Braak H Staging of brain pathology related to sporadic Parkinson’s disease Neurobiol Aging 24 197 211 2003 12498954
182 Mulak A Bonaz B Brain–gut–microbiota axis in Parkinson’s disease World J Gastroenterol 21 10609 10620 2015 26457021
183 Svensson E Vagotomy and subsequent risk of Parkinson’s disease Ann Neurol 78 522 529 2015 26031848
184 Jellinger KA Attems J Prevalence and pathology of dementia with Lewy bodies in the oldest old: a comparison with other dementing disorders Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 31 309 316 2011 21502762
185 Walker L Neuropathologically mixed Alzheimer’s and Lewy body disease: burden of pathological protein aggregates differs between clinical phenotypes Acta Neuropathol 129 729 748 2015 25758940
186 Barnes LL Mixed pathology is more likely in black than white decedents with Alzheimer dementia Neurology 85 528 534 2015 26180136
187 Hall H Hippocampal Lewy pathology and cholinergic dysfunction are associated with dementia in Parkinson’s disease Brain 137 2493 2508 2014 25062696
188 Horvath J Herrmann FR Burkhard PR Bouras C Kovari E Neuropathology of dementia in a large cohort of patients with Parkinson’s disease Parkinsonism Relat Disord 19 864 868 2013 23746454
189 Irwin DJ Lee VM Trojanowski JQ Parkinson’s disease dementia: convergence of α-synuclein, tau and amyloid-β pathologies Nat Rev Neurosci 14 626 636 2013 23900411
190 Meeus B DLB and PDD: a role for mutations in dementia and Parkinson disease genes? Neurobiol Aging 33 629.e5 629.e18 2012
191 Tsuang D APOE ε4 increases risk for dementia in pure synucleinopathies JAMA Neurol 70 223 228 2013 23407718
192 Berge G Sando SB Rongve A Aarsland D White LR Apolipoprotein E ε2 genotype delays onset of dementia with Lewy bodies in a Norwegian cohort J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 85 1227 1231 2014 24639435
193 Hyun CH Yoon CY Lee HJ Lee SJ LRRK2 as a potential genetic modifier of synucleinopathies: interlacing the two major genetic factors of Parkinson’s disease Exp Neurobiol 22 249 257 2013 24465140
194 Bras J Genetic analysis implicates APOE. SNCA and suggests lysosomal dysfunction in the etiology of dementia with Lewy bodies Hum Mol Genet 23 6139 6146 2014 24973356
195 Nalls MA A multicenter study of glucocerebrosidase mutations in dementia with Lewy bodies JAMA Neurol 70 727 735 2013 23588557
196 McKeith I Dementia with Lewy bodies and Parkinson’s disease with dementia: where two worlds collide Pract Neurol 7 374 382 2007 18024777
197 Parkinson J An essay on the shaking palsy. 1817 J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci 14 223 236 2002 11983801
198 Albanese A Diagnostic criteria for Parkinson’s disease Neurol Sci 24 Suppl. 1 S23 S26 2003 12774207
199 Sauerbier A Jenner P Todorova A Chaudhuri KR Non motor subtypes and Parkinson’s disease Parkinsonism Relat Disord 22 Suppl. 1 S41 S46 2016 26459660
200 Aarsland D Cognitive impairment in incident, untreated Parkinson disease: the Norwegian ParkWest study Neurology 72 1121 1126 2009 19020293
201 Gaig C Rapidly progressive diffuse Lewy body disease Mov Disord 26 1316 1323 2011 21484863
202 Schneider JA Cognitive impairment, decline and fluctuations in older community-dwelling subjects with Lewy bodies Brain 135 3005 3014 2012 23065790
203 Tiraboschi P What best differentiates Lewy body from Alzheimer’s disease in early-stage dementia? Brain 129 729 735 2006 16401618
204 Cagnin A High specificity of MMSE pentagon scoring for diagnosis of prodromal dementia with Lewy bodies Parkinsonism Relat Disord 21 303 305 2015 25547859
205 Hamilton JM Early visuospatial deficits predict the occurrence of visual hallucinations in autopsy-confirmed dementia with Lewy bodies Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 20 773 781 2012 21997600
206 Boot BP Risk factors for dementia with Lewy bodies: a case–control study Neurology 81 833 840 2013 23892702
207 Postuma RB Gagnon JF Pelletier A Montplaisir J Prodromal autonomic symptoms and signs in Parkinson’s disease and dementia with Lewy bodies Mov Disord 28 597 604 2013 23554107
208 Auning E Early and presenting symptoms of dementia with lewy bodies Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 32 202 208 2011 22095040
209 Chiba Y Retrospective survey of prodromal symptoms in dementia with Lewy bodies: comparison with Alzheimer’s disease Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 33 273 281 2012 22722638
210 Ferman TJ Inclusion of RBD improves the diagnostic classification of dementia with Lewy bodies Neurology 77 875 882 2011 21849645
211 Schenck CH Boeve BF Mahowald MW Delayed emergence of a parkinsonian disorder or dementia in 81% of older men initially diagnosed with idiopathic rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder: a 16-year update on a previously reported series Sleep Med 14 744 748 2013 23347909
212 Litvan I Diagnostic criteria for mild cognitive impairment in Parkinson’s disease: Movement Disorder Society Task Force guidelines Mov Disord 27 349 356 2012 22275317
213 Svenningsson P Westman E Ballard C Aarsland D Cognitive impairment in patients with Parkinson’s disease: diagnosis, biomarkers, and treatment Lancet Neurol 11 697 707 2012 22814541
214 Aarsland D Zaccai J Brayne C A systematic review of prevalence studies of dementia in Parkinson’s disease Mov Disord 20 1255 1263 2005 16041803
215 Janvin CC Larsen JP Aarsland D Hugdahl K Subtypes of mild cognitive impairment in Parkinson’s disease: progression to dementia Mov Disord 21 1343 1349 2006 16721732
216 Emre M Clinical diagnostic criteria for dementia associated with Parkinson’s disease Mov Disord 22 1689 1707 2007 17542011
217 Olde Dubbelink KT Predicting dementia in Parkinson disease by combining neurophysiologic and cognitive markers Neurology 82 263 270 2014 24353335
218 Mok W Chow TW Zheng L Mack WJ Miller C Clinicopathological concordance of dementia diagnoses by community versus tertiary care clinicians Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen 19 161 165 2004 15214202
219 Toledo JB Clinical and multimodal biomarker correlates of ADNI neuropathological findings Acta Neuropathol Commun 1 65 2013 24252435
220 Kehagia AA Barker RA Robbins TW Neuropsychological and clinical heterogeneity of cognitive impairment and dementia in patients with Parkinson’s disease Lancet Neurol 9 1200 1213 2010 20880750
221 Williams-Gray CH The CamPaIGN study of Parkinson’s disease: 10-year outlook in an incident population-based cohort J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 84 1258 1264 2013 23781007
222 Teune LK Typical cerebral metabolic patterns in neurodegenerative brain diseases Mov Disord 25 2395 2404 2010 20669302
223 Jokinen P [11C]PIB-, [18F]FDG–PET and MRI imaging in patients with Parkinson’s disease with and without dementia Parkinsonism Relat Disord 16 666 670 2010 20870446
224 Lim SM The 18F-FDG PET cingulate island sign and comparison to 123I-β-CIT SPECT for diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies J Nucl Med 50 1638 1645 2009 19759102
225 Lim X Yeo JM Green A Pal S The diagnostic utility of cerebrospinal fluid alpha-synuclein analysis in dementia with Lewy bodies — a systematic review and meta-analysis Parkinsonism Relat Disord 19 851 858 2013 23886935
226 Kantarci K Antemortem amyloid imaging and β-amyloid pathology in a case with dementia with Lewy bodies Neurobiol Aging 33 878 885 2012 20961664
227 Brunnstrom H Hansson O Zetterberg H Londos E Englund E Correlations of CSF tau and amyloid levels with Alzheimer pathology in neuropathologically verified dementia with Lewy bodies Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 28 738 744 2013 22911491
228 Thomas AJ Autopsy validation of 123I-FP-CIT dopaminergic neuroimaging for the diagnosis of DLB Neurology 88 276 283 2017 27940650
229 Prusiner SB Prions Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95 13363 13383 1998 9811807
230 Safar J Roller PP Gajdusek DC Gibbs CJ Jr Conformational transitions, dissociation, and unfolding of scrapie amyloid (prion) protein J Biol Chem 268 20276 20284 1993 8104185
231 Puoti G Sporadic human prion diseases: molecular insights and diagnosis Lancet Neurol 11 618 628 2012 22710755
232 Brown K Mastrianni JA The prion diseases J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol 23 277 298 2010 20938044
233 Heath CA Diagnosing variant Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease: a retrospective analysis of the first 150 cases in the UK J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 82 646 651 2011 21172857
234 Brown P Brandel JP Preece M Sato T Iatrogenic Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease: the waning of an era Neurology 67 389 393 2006 16855204
235 Will RG Acquired prion disease: iatrogenic CJD, variant CJD, kuru Br Med Bull 66 255 265 2003 14522863
236 Yamada M An inherited prion disease with a PrP P105L mutation: clinicopathologic and PrP heterogeneity Neurology 53 181 188 1999 10408557
237 Giaccone G Neurofibrillary tangles of the Indiana kindred of Gerstmann–Straussler–Scheinker disease share antigenic determinants with those of Alzheimer disease Brain Res 530 325 329 1990 2176119
238 Gambetti P Kong Q Zou W Parchi P Chen SG Sporadic and familial CJD: classification and characterisation Br Med Bull 66 213 239 2003 14522861
239 Tsuji S Kuroiwa Y Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease in Japan Neurology 33 1503 1506 1983 6355897
240 Will RG Matthews WB A retrospective study of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in England and Wales 1970–1979. I: clinical features J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 47 134 140 1984 6368752
241 Brown P Cathala F Castaigne P Gajdusek DC Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease: clinical analysis of a consecutive series of 230 neuropathologically verified cases Ann Neurol 20 597 602 1986 3539001
242 Rabinovici GD First symptom in sporadic Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease Neurology 66 286 287 2006 16434680
243 Krasnianski A Clinical findings and diagnostic tests in the MV2 subtype of sporadic CJD Brain 129 2288 2296 2006 16720682
244 Goldfarb LG Fatal familial insomnia and familial Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease: disease phenotype determined by a DNA polymorphism Science 258 806 808 1992 1439789
245 Parchi P Classification of sporadic Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease based on molecular and phenotypic analysis of 300 subjects Ann Neurol 46 224 233 1999 10443888
246 Hill AF Investigation of variant Creutzfeldt– Jakob disease and other human prion diseases with tonsil biopsy samples Lancet 353 183 189 1999 9923873
247 Steinhoff BJ Diagnostic value of periodic complexes in Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease Ann Neurol 56 702 708 2004 15449324
248 Forner SA Comparing CSF biomarkers and brain MRI in the diagnosis of sporadic Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease Neurol Clin Pract 5 116 125 2015 26137420
249 Martindale J Sporadic Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease mimicking variant Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease Arch Neurol 60 767 770 2003 12756143
250 Hamlin C A comparison of tau and 14-3-3 protein in the diagnosis of Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease Neurology 79 547 552 2012 22843257
251 Kim MO Geschwind MD Clinical update of Jakob–Creutzfeldt disease Curr Opin Neurol 28 302 310 2015 25923128
252 Stoeck K Cerebrospinal fluid biomarker supported diagnosis of Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease and rapid dementias: a longitudinal multicentre study over 10 years Brain 135 3051 3061 2012 23012332
253 Foutz A Diagnostic and prognostic value of human prion detection in cerebrospinal fluid Ann Neurol 81 79 92 2017 27893164
254 McGuire LI Cerebrospinal fluid real-time quaking-induced conversion is a robust and reliable test for sporadic Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease: an international study Ann Neurol 80 160 165 2016 27130376
255 Lehmann M Intrinsic connectivity networks in healthy subjects explain clinical variability in Alzheimer’s disease Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110 11606 11611 2013 23798398
256 Smith BN The C9ORF72 expansion mutation is a common cause of ALS+/−FTD in Europe and has a single founder Eur J Hum Genet 21 102 108 2013 22692064
257 Snowden JS Distinct clinical and pathological characteristics of frontotemporal dementia associated with C9ORF72 mutations Brain 135 693 708 2012 22300873
