LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101563152
39420
J Clin Cell Immunol
J Clin Cell Immunol
Journal of clinical &amp; cellular immunology
2155-9899

27895978
5123596
10.4172/2155-9899.1000441
NIHMS820073
Article
Cytokines and Cytokine Receptors Involved in the Pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s Disease
Nagae Tomone 1
Araki Kiho 1
Shimoda Yuki 1
Sue Lucia I. 2
Beach Thomas G. 2
Konishi Yoshihiro 1*
1 Department of Clinical Research, National Tottori Medical Center, Tottori 689-0203, Japan
2 Civin Laboratory for Neuropathology, Banner Sun Health Research Institute, Sun City, AZ, 85351, USA
* Corresponding author: Yoshihiro Konishi, Department of Clinical Research, National Tottori Medical Center, 876 Mitsu, Tottori 689-0203, Japan, Tel: 81-857-59-1111; Fax: 81-857-59-1589; ykonishi@tottori-iryo.hosp.go.jp
25 10 2016
4 8 2016
8 2016
01 8 2017
7 4 441This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.

Inflammatory mechanisms are implicated in the pathology of Alzheimer’s disease (AD). However, it is unclear whether inflammatory alterations are a cause or consequence of neurodegeneration leading to dementia. Clarifying this issue would provide valuable insight into the early diagnosis and therapeutic management of AD. To address this, we compared the mRNA expression profiles of cytokines in the brains of AD patients with “non-demented individuals with AD pathology” and non-demented healthy control (ND) individuals. “Non-demented individuals with AD pathology” are referred to as high pathology control (HPC) individuals that are considered an intermediate subset between AD and ND. HPC represents a transition between normal aging and early stage of AD, and therefore, is useful for determining whether neuroinflammation is a cause or consequence of AD pathology. We observed that immunological conditions that produce cytokines in the HPC brain were more representative of ND than AD. To validate these result, we investigated the expression of inflammatory mediators at the protein level in postmortem brain tissues. We examined the protein expression of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)α and its receptors (TNFRs) in the brains of AD, HPC, and ND individuals. We found differences in soluble TNFα and TNFRs expression between AD and ND groups and between AD and HPC groups. Expression in the temporal cortex was lower in the AD brains than HPC and ND. Our findings indicate that alterations in immunological conditions involving TNFR-mediated signaling are not the primary events initiating AD pathology, such as amyloid plaques and tangle formation. These may be early events occurring along with synaptic and neuronal changes or later events caused by these changes. In this review, we emphasize that elucidating the temporal expression of TNFα signaling molecules during AD is important to understand the selective tuning of these pathways required to develop effective therapeutic strategies for AD.

Cytokines
Neuroinflammation
Alzheimer’s disease
Postmortem brain tissues
Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)α
TNF receptors

Introduction

Are inflammatory alterations a cause or consequence of AD neurodegeneration?

The molecular mechanisms underlying Alzheimer’s disease (AD) pathogenesis have not yet been elucidated. Numerous inflammatory mediators have been identified in AD brains but were not detected in non-demented elderly control individuals. This suggests that various inflammatory mechanisms are involved in the process of AD [1–3]. An important role for neuroinflammation in AD pathogenesis is supported by findings that immune receptor genes, including the triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2 (TREM2) and CD33, are associated with AD [4]. Changes in cytokine expression in AD are not restricted to a single cytokine; there are widespread changes in intracellular cytokine signaling networks [5]. Amyloid β (Aβ) deposits, neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs), and neuronal degeneration are characteristic of AD and are the most likely sources of inflammation in AD brains [3,4,6]. In contrast, Aβ and Aβ precursor protein (APP) are regulated by cytokines [3,7]. In addition, systemic and peripheral inflammation in the preclinical stage of AD may upregulate neuroinflammation, causing neuronal damage in AD [6,8–10]. The role of cytokines in the pathogenesis of AD beyond their relationship with Aβ has begun to attract attention [7]. Neuroinflammation is now thought to contribute to AD pathogenesis rather than being a consequence of emerging senile plaques, NFTs, and neurodegeneration [4,6]; however, this has not been confirmed [2,4,11,12]. Recent clinical trials for AD treatment based on the amyloid hypothesis have been disappointing, and drug development needs to address the multifactoriality of the disease [13–15]. AD pathogenesis involves neuroinflammation, which includes the production of neurotoxic and neurotrophic cytokines [4–6,8]. Our major focus has been to clarify whether neuroinflammation is involved in AD pathogenesis, particularly prior to the onset of overt AD dementia. If peripheral and neural alterations in inflammatory mediators are primary AD pathologic processes that occur before neuronal damage and dementia, then these alterations will provide valuable insights into early diagnosis and therapeutic management of AD [1,16]. Alternatively, the alterations may be secondary responses to AD, occurring in the later symptomatic stages of the disease.

Anti-inflammatory therapies, which are described in detail below, using non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) should prevent cognitive impairment in AD if inflammatory and immunological alterations precede AD dementia. Increasing reports have demonstrated alterations in the expression of inflammatory mediators in peripheral blood mononuclear cells, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), plasma, and serum of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) individuals [17–23]. MCI is a preclinical stage of AD and represents a transitional period between normal aging and early AD [24]. Recently, Rodriguez-Vieitez et al. [16] detected astrocytic activation by positron emission tomography imaging with 11C-deuterium-L-deprenyl (11C-DED) in asymptomatic carriers of autosomal dominant AD with increasing Aβ-plaque load during disease progression. Such alterations in MCI and asymptomatic carriers of AD suggest that inflammatory events may precede the clinical development of AD [21,23] and that NSAIDs may interrupt or slow the pathological progression of latent AD and thereby prevent the onset of dementia [25]. However, the finding that indomethacin reduces cognitive decline in AD [26], has not been replicated by large-scale, randomized controlled trials. NSAIDs showed no clinical effects on cognitive outcomes in patients with prodromal symptoms or dementia of AD [4,27,28]. Furthermore, NSAID treatment for 1–3 years did not prevent or delay the onset of AD in elderly healthy individuals with a family history of AD, which was investigated by follow-up for 5–7 years after termination of the treatment, according to the Alzheimer’s Disease Anti-Inflammatory Prevention Trial (ADAPT) and follow-up study (ADAPT-FS) [4,29–31]. In contrast, Vlad et al. [32] prospectively assessed the effects on AD risk of NSAID use in subjects aged 50 years and older, free of AD at baseline, and found that long-term (&gt;5 years) NSAID users had a lower risk of AD than non-NSAID users. In addition, retrospective studies have shown that treatment of rheumatoid arthritis with anti-inflammatory medication may reduce the risk of AD [26].

Comparison of Cytokine Expression Levels between AD Patients and Non-demented Individuals with and without AD Pathology

High pathology control (HPC)

It remains to be determined whether inflammatory alterations are the cause or consequence of neurodegeneration that leads to overt AD dementia, and whether anti-inflammatory therapy reduces cognitive impairment in AD patients in very early or preclinical stages. To address this issue, we compared the expression profiles of several cytokines in the temporal cortex of postmortem AD and control individuals [33]. There were two control groups: non-demented patients with increasing AD pathology, referred to as the HPC group, and normal individuals without dementia (ND) group. The ND group was also referred to as the low pathology control (LPC) group. LPC was defined clinically as being non-demented and pathologically as having the Consortium to Establish a Registry for AD (CERAD) neuritic plaque density scores [34] of none or sparse and Thal’s Aβ-phase [35] of 1 or 2, with Braak NFT stage [36] of I, II or III. LPC individuals may meet “low” probability of AD based on the National Institute on Aging (NIA)–Reagan Institute (RI) neuropathological criteria for AD [37], but exhibited no antemortem dementia symptoms. AD was defined clinically as being demented and pathologically as having CERAD neuritic plaque density scores of frequent and Thal’s Aβ-phase of 3, 4 or 5, with Braak NFT stage of V or VI. The AD patients are at the NIA–RI “high” probability of AD.

Our previous study [33] compared data from AD, HPC, and ND (LPC) individuals. The HPC group was defined clinically as being non-demented and pathologically as having CERAD neuritic plaque density scores of moderate or frequent and Thal’s Aβ-phase of 2 or 3, with Braak NFT stage of III or IV. Lue et al. [38,39] isolated HPC individuals that met “intermediate” probability of AD based on the NIA-RI pathological criteria for AD but exhibited no antemortem symptoms to otherwise qualify for the diagnosis of AD [40]. They found that HPC individuals had little or no neocortical or limbic synaptic loss and represented an intermediate subset between AD and LPC individuals [38,39]. To elucidate the role of inflammation in AD and promote the development of new treatments for early AD, data collected from HPC individuals are particularly important. HPC individuals are defined clinically and pathologically, while MCI is defined according to clinical criteria. The pathology of MCI is variable and not restricted to AD [40–42]. Some reports have described MCI as a clinical diagnosis, but the underlying neuropathological findings of amnestic MCI, in particular, are just being defined [43,44]. The temporal expression profiles of cytokines and other inflammatory molecules have been poorly investigated in AD postmortem brain tissues [45–47]. HPC cases have not been used much to study temporal expression profiles of inflammatory molecules involved in pathogenesis of AD, although many elderly people have AD pathological lesions but remain cognitively normal [48,49]. The temporal expression profiles of different kinds of Aβ and phosphorylated tau (p-tau) species have been demonstrated in postmortem brain samples of individuals with AD neuropathologic changes in the absence of cognitive impairment [38,50–53]. We believe that HPC cases represent a more accurate transition between normal aging and early stage AD to investigate whether neuroinflammation is a causes or consequence of neurodegeneration in AD.

The objection to HPC

Some object to the use of HPC individuals as an intermediate subset between AD and ND (LPC) because HPC subset may imply a different pathogenesis from that of AD group. This is because HPC individuals meet the pathological criteria for AD but show no antemortem symptoms of dementia. However, HPC cases are not only intermediate between AD and LPC in terms of Aβ plaques or NFTs, but it is also intermediate in terms of the cortical cholinergic deficits [54–56]. In addition, HPC individuals have a significantly higher prevalence of the apolipoprotein (Apo) E ε4 allele [57] and toxic Aβ oligomers, although they do not bind to the postsynaptic site with the preservation of synaptic integrity [52]. These suggest that HPC would have progressed to AD with dementia if the patients had lived long enough.

Cytokines attracting our attention in AD research

We have previously investigated the expression of the following cytokines [33]: (i) Interleukin (IL)-1β, IL-6 and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)α, which are frequently evaluated cytokines in AD [3,58,59]. (ii) Other members of the IL-1 superfamily, including IL-1 receptor antagonist, IL-18, and IL-33, which are involved in AD pathogenesis [17,60–65]. In addition, IL-1 is a master regulator of neuroinflammation [59,66]. (iii) Anti-inflammatory cytokines, IL-10 and IL-13, which had long been thought to participate in a counter-regulatory or reciprocal mechanism that protects the brain from detrimental proinflammatory mediators, but were recently shown to worsen AD-relevant phenotypes either dependently or independently of involvement of other inflammatory mediators [27,67–70]. (iv) IL-16, which is a lymphocyte chemoattractant factor and is correlated with AD [71,72]. (v) IL-32, a relatively novel cytokine that promotes the production of TNFα and is involved in AD pathogenesis [73]. (vi) IL-8 and monocyte chemotactic protein (MCP)-1, which are CXC and CC chemokines, respectively, and contribute to AD pathogenesis, shedding light on the development of a new strategy for treating AD with anti-inflammatory agents [4,74,75]. (vii) Macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF), a noncognate ligand of CXC chemokine receptors, which has attracted attention in AD research for the role in AD [76]. (viii) Converting enzymes for IL-1β, IL-18 and IL-33, and TNFα; that is, IL-1β-converting enzyme (ICE) and TNFα-converting enzyme (TACE), respectively. (ix) Transforming growth factor (TGF)β1, which is an important factor with beneficial and detrimental effects on AD pathogenesis [27,77,78].

Evaluation of cytokine mRNA expression profiles in AD, HPC, and ND (LPC)

We have investigated the cytokine expression profiles in the brain using real-time PCR techniques [33]. Brain tissue samples were obtained from the Banner Sun Health Research Institute (BSHRI) Brain Donation Program [79]. In each sample, mRNA expression levels of each target cytokine were normalized to a reference housekeeping molecule, peptidyl-prolyl isomerase A (PPIA) (target cytokine to reference ratio; c/r ratio). In each patient, the normalized value (c/r ration) of cytokine expression in the temporal cortex that is vulnerable to AD pathology was divided by the c/r ratio in the cerebellum, where AD pathological changes are lowest [80,81]. The expression ratio of temporal cortex to cerebellum (T/Ce ratio) was compared among AD, HPC and ND individual groups. The demographics of these individuals are shown in Table S1. We found that the mRNA levels for IL-1β, IL-10, IL-13, IL-18, IL-33, TACE, and TGFβ1 were significantly higher in the temporal cortex of AD patients compared to HPC individuals. No cytokines had significantly lower mRNA levels in the temporal cortex of AD patients compared to HPC individuals. There were no significant differences in cytokine mRNA expression in the temporal cortex of HPC and ND individuals, or in the cerebellum of AD, HPC, and ND individual groups. TNFα mRNA expression was not significantly different in the temporal cortices of AD, HPC, and ND individuals, and was significantly higher in the cerebellum of AD compared to ND individuals [33].

The protection of the cerebellum against AD pathology

The cerebellum generally lacks Aβ deposits in the AD brain, despite Aβ production in all brain regions [81]. Synaptic Aβ and p-tau, which finally form senile plaques and NFTs, are lowest in the cerebellum of AD cases [80]. In the cerebellum of AD patients used in our study, only sparse diffuse and cored plaques were observed (Table S1); that is, no typical plaques associated neuritic alterations, NFTs, or glial reactions were found, in agreement with previous findings [82–85]. Plaques were not observed in the cerebellum of HPC or ND individuals (Table S1). Therefore, inflammatory changes linked to AD pathology are very low in the cerebellum of AD patients [84]. However, the mechanisms that protect the cerebellum from AD pathology have not been clearly defined. Regional differences in immune-mediated reactions and pathological changes in the central nervous system (CNS) were proposed to play a role [83,84,86,87].

The expression profiles of cytokine proteins

Our previous study [33] has demonstrated the following: (i) cytokine mRNA expression in the temporal cortex, which is vulnerable to AD pathology, is different between AD and HPC individuals but not between HPC and ND individuals; (ii) cytokine mRNA expression is not altered in the cerebellum of AD, HPC, and ND individuals, except TNFα. Cytokine expression in the HPC brain is more similar to ND than AD brains. Our finding that TNFα expression is different in the cerebellum of AD patients may provide the first immunological insights into the protection of the cerebellum from AD pathology. In our study, mRNA transcription levels were measured only in the brain. To confirm our findings, it is important to investigate changes in inflammatory mediators in postmortem brain tissues from AD, HPC, and ND individuals on the protein level. Wood et al. [5] reported differences in mRNA and protein expression of neurotoxic cytokines in the postmortem brain samples of AD patients and controls. We examined the expression of some inflammatory mediators at the protein level, including several proteins in the complement system, TNFα, and its receptors in the brain of AD patients compared to HPC and ND individuals as shown below.

To date, cytokine expression profiles have not been investigated at the protein level in HPC individuals [53]. A limited number of cytokine studies using postmortem brain tissues has focused on protein levels in AD patients compared to those in controls [46,47,88–90], although the findings were inconsistent [18,27]. Wood et al. [5] compared cytokine expression in different brain regions including the entorhinal cortex, amygdala, and superior frontal gyrus in postmortem AD and non-AD control brains. Instead of using HPC brains, they analyzed the expression in these three different brain regions, where AD lesions first appear at Braak NFT stage I–II, III–IV, and V–VI, respectively; therefore, these regions generally show relatively advanced, moderate, and mild AD pathology, respectively, at the time point when the postmortem brains are examined. Carriba et al. [88] demonstrated changes in TNFα signaling components in postmortem bran samples from individuals with no AD histopathological alterations (Braak 0), asymptomatic subjects with some AD histopatholical modification (Braak II), and demented AD patients (Braak V and VI). However, they did not include intermediate cases like HPC (Braak III and IV).

Other Neuroinflammatory Mechanisms Involved in AD Pathogenesis

Complement proteins

Many types of inflammatory mediators are involved in AD pathogenesis [3,4,8,18,58]. The production of complement proteins increases in AD [3]. Using immunohistochemistry, we demonstrated that C1q and the membrane attack complex (MAC) were present in Aβ plaques and tangled neurons in AD brains, whereas limited C1q and MAC immunoreactivity was observed in ND brains [91] (Table S2). In the HPC brain, minor MAC immunoreactivity was observed; however, C1q immunoreactivity was clearly observed in a fraction of Aβ plaques and tangled neurons [91] (Table S2). These findings were confirmed using Western blotting by Lue et al. [39]. Thus, these data suggest that the complement system is noticeably involved in later stages of AD but may be initially activated at earlier stages of the disease.

CD59

CD59 is expressed in the brain [92,93]. Decreases in CD59 expression promote MAC formation [94,95]. MAC expression is upregulated in the AD brain [91]. We observed CD59 expression in many neurons in ND brains, while expression almost disappeared in AD brains. In the HPC brain, neurons were partly positive for CD59 (manuscript, in preparation). This indicates an earlier involvement of CD59 in the CNS damage and pathology caused by AD. In contrast, Yasojima et al. [96] previously demonstrated positive bands for CD59 on Western blots found in both AD and normal hippocampal tissues.

Stress hormones

The elevation of glucocorticoids (GCs) secreted by the adrenal glands upon chronically stressful stimuli that occurs during aging may accelerate the progression of brain aging, particularly the hippocampus. Although under physiological stress GCs generally exert anti-inflammatory effects in the CNS, the chronically elevated GC levels under stressful stimuli can potentiate neuroinflammation and increase the expression of proinflammatory cytokines, such as IL-1β and TNFα, which in turn activate many signaling pathways, including nuclear factor kappa-B (NF-κB), and microglia function [97,98]. As a result, GCs increase the vulnerability of neurons to numerous chronic stressful events, including metabolic, ischemic, excitotoxic, oxidative, and infectious insults. Thus, the aging process is facilitated in stress-vulnerable neurons in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus, which leads to neuronal death [98–101]. Neuroinflammation is triggered by chronic stress in a GC receptor (GR)-dependent manner, and the reduced expression of hippocampal GRs is associated with an exaggerated response to chronic stress. These data confirm the negative feedback inhibition of hippocampal projections on the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical axis and the consequent elevation and damaging effects of circulating GCs [97,102].

Hippocampal changes arising from chronic stress via the long-term elevation of GC signaling are also evident in AD-associated processes, including aging [8,97]. Indeed, aging human subjects exhibit higher mean diurnal values of GCs, and some subjects with higher GCs later develop AD. Chronic GC administration to aged monkeys and transgenic mouse models of AD increased Aβ pathology and led to memory impairment. These data suggest that excess GCs drive important components of the declining brain function observed in AD and during the aging process [98]. GCs are hormones that are released during the stress response and are well known for their immunosuppressive and anti-inflammatory properties [102]; however, recent studies have uncovered examples of contrasting effects, as observed in adrenalectomized/GC-supplemented rats [103] and a randomized controlled trial of low-dose predonisone in AD patients [104].

Anti-inflammatory Therapy for AD (1)

Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)

Aisen et al. [104] suggested that with more limited effects of NSAIDs on inflammation than those of GCs, and without the issue of possible hippocampal toxicity, NSAIDs would be appropriate candidates for clinical trials in AD. Substantial evidence from laboratory and epidemiologic studies has suggested that anti-inflammatory medication, especially NSAIDs, can defer or prevent AD occurrence. However, recent meta-analyses concluded that ADAPT and ADAPT-FS [29,105] did not support the use of NSAIDs for AD prevention among dementia-free individuals. The ADAPT study was designed to evaluate the efficacy of naproxen, a non-selective cyclooxygenase (COX) inhibitor, and celecoxib, a selective COX-2 inhibitor, in treating AD [105]. Many reasons have been proposed for the discrepancies between the findings of observational studies and ADAPT. These include the choice of specific NSAIDs, duration of treatment, ApoE ε4 allele, age, disease stage, and speed of disease progression [27,29,105,106].

NSAIDs reduce neuroinflammation, Aβ levels, AD-like brain pathology, and behavioral impairments in mouse models of AD via several pathways [107–110]. Because upregulated COX-2 is implicated in AD pathogenesis, NSAIDs exert anti-inflammatory effects possibly by blocking COX-2 in the brain [105,111]. NSAIDs may affect Aβ production by suppressing microglial activation or modifying γ-secretase activity, thereby reducing Aβ42 levels. Furthermore, NSAIDs may reduce β-secretase levels by activating the nuclear receptor peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ (PPARγ), thereby decreasing Aβ levels [112].

According to Weggen et al. [113], the non-selective COX inhibitors ibuprofen and indomethacin reduced Aβ42 secretion from cultured cells. However, naproxen, which belongs to the same class of drugs as ibuprofen, did not lower Aβ42 levels in culture medium [113] and was associated with increased Aβ pathology [114]. They also reported that SC-560 (a selective COX-1 inhibitor) and celecoxib did not lower Aβ42 secretion, concluding that the capacity of a subset of NSAIDs, including ibuprofen and indomethacin, to reduce Aβ42 levels was independent of COX activity [110,113,115]. COX-2 expressed in neurons may have a neuroprotective function; therefore, COX-2 inhibition may have deleterious consequences in AD treatment trials [58,106,116]. Several COX-2 inhibitors, including celecoxib, were reported to increase Aβ42 levels [115,116]. The selective COX-2 inhibitor rofecoxib possibly accelerated underlying AD neuropathology in individuals with MCI [117]. There was a contrasting outcome where celecoxib use possibly improved cognitive performance in people with relatively mild age-related cognitive complaints, before subclinical neuropathological changes emerged [118]. Conversely, COX-1 highly expressed in microglia has been suggested to be a more appropriate target for anti-inflammatory therapies for AD [58,106,119], as it is associated with a significant reduction in the probability of progression from MCI to AD [120].

Kotilinek et al. [121] proposed a third possible mechanism by which NSAIDs may protect against AD, involving the blockade of a COX-2-mediated prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) response at synapses. This block occurred independently of reductions in Aβ42 or decreases in inflammation.

Inflammation and defective insulin signaling in AD

AD is a multifactorial neurodegenerative disease, and inflammation is an integral part of its pathogenesis [3,8]. A host of comorbid conditions are associated with aging, including metabolic endotoxemia, type 2 diabetes (T2DM), prediabetic hyperglycemia, obesity, dyslipidemia, metabolic syndrome, and chronic disorders of the respiratory and cardiovascular systems. All of these conditions upregulate systemic inflammation [8,122–125]. Inflammation is a basic part of the body’s defense mechanisms against multiple threats [125]; however, the prolonged dysregulation of this system, which can occur during aging, induces the production of neurotoxic proinflammatory cytokines and GCs that promote neuroinflammation and exacerbate neurodegeneration, which ultimately leads to cognitive decline and AD [8]. Compared with younger individuals, older healthy individuals are more likely to suffer profound memory impairments following the neuroinflammatory response to challenging life events [124,126]. These age-related conditions are linked to insulin resistance, which is a condition with chronic low-grade inflammation as an essential pathogenic factor [8,127]. Proinflammatory cytokines can cause insulin resistance [7]. Numerous epidemiological, clinical, and experimental studies have strengthened the link between T2DM and AD. Several pathological features, including insulin resistance, disrupted insulin signaling, and inflammation, appear to be shared by patients with T2DM and AD [123,125]. Bomfim et al. [128] demonstrated that mechanisms analogous to those that account for peripheral insulin resistance in patients with T2DM underlay the impaired insulin signaling and neuronal dysfunction in the brains of AD patients. Aβ oligomers (AβOs), synaptotoxins that accumulate in AD brains, impaired neuronal insulin signaling via activation of TNFα and stress-related kinases, including the IκB kinase (IKK), c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), and double-stranded RNA-dependent protein kinase (PKR), which induced the phosphorylation of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2α (eIF2α) and caused serine phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate (IRS)-1 (IRS-1pSer), while inhibiting the physiological tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS-1 (IRS-1pTyr). IRS-1pSer, but not IRS-1pTyr, interfered with the ability of IRS-1 to engage in insulin receptor (IR) signaling, thus blocking the intracellular action of insulin [128]. The phosphorylation of IRS-1 at tyrosine residues is required for insulin-stimulated responses, whereas the phosphorylation of IRS-1 at multiple serine residues causes a reduced insulin response that is consistent with insulin resistance [129]. Insulin signaling is generally involved in brain glucose uptake and utilization, energy production, neuronal survival, synaptic plasticity, gene expression, and learning and memory [130–132]. Interestingly, the induction of IRS-1pSer by AβOs in neurons was blocked by infliximab, a TNFα neutralizing antibody, and exendin-4 (exenatide), a novel anti-diabetic drug that activates insulin signaling through stimulation of glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) receptors. The reduction of IRS-1pSer reduced amyloid pathology, decreased synapse loss, and improved cognition in transgenic mouse models of AD [128,133]. These results were confirmed by PKR and TNF receptor (TNFR) knockout mice [134]. The enzyme dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4) degrades endogenous GLP-1, and DPP-4 inhibitors attenuated Aβ-induced cytotoxicity in vitro [7,135]. These results support research into the repurposing of diabetes drugs for brain insulin resistance in AD [7,124,129]. Notably, insulin prevented the increase in IRS-1pSer induced by AβOs [128], and intranasally administered insulin improved cognition in individuals with MCI and early-stage AD [7,136].

Talbot et al. [137] demonstrated that the AD brain exhibited reduced response to insulin signaling in the IR/IRS-1/ phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt pathway. This reduced insulin response may lead to increased glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3) activity, which is involved in the hyperphosphorylation of tau, Aβ production, neuroinflammation, glial activation, apoptotic neuronal death, and memory impairment in AD [7,129,138,139].

Involvement of TNFα in AD Pathogenesis

The mechanisms of its dual function

TNFα is centrally involved in the pathogenesis of AD [140–142] and is one of the most investigated cytokines in the CNS [18]. Astrocytes and microglia are classically believed to serve as the predominant sources of TNFα in the CNS. Furthermore, neurons express this cytokine in pathological states in the CNS [143].

TNFα signals exert bidirectional effects of being supportive and harmful to neuronal function [3]. TNFα is associated with Aβ plaque formation [142]. Aβ in plaques stimulates microglial and astrocytic secretion of TNFα [144,145]. It remains unclear whether microglial and astrocytic responses are protective or deleterious [5,58]. Moreover, TNFα is implicated in neuronal death in AD [88,146]. TNFα signaling enhances Aβ production and Aβ- and glutamate-induced neurotoxicity [134,147–149]. Wood et al. [5] revealed that TNFα was a potent inducer of neuronal death and reduced neuronal viability in vitro, when applied either alone or together with Aβ. Janelsins et al. [143] demonstrated that TNFα expression for 4 months specifically in hippocampal neurons of triple-transgenic AD (3xTg-AD) mice by a recombinant adeno-associated virus (rAAV) expressing human TNFα enhanced intracellular levels of Aβ as well as microglial activation. More prolonged expression for 10 months induced extensive microglial activation, pro-apoptotic signaling cascades, and neuronal death, accompanied with reduction in extracellular Aβ plaque load. This indicates that chronic, neuron-specific TNFα expression induced neuronal death where the coincident expression of the pathogenic transgene products of 3xTg-AD mouse neurons was required. Several anti-TNFα biologic medications have attenuated Aβ deposition, behavioral impairments, and inflammation in AD animal models [27]. Inhibiting TNFα signaling reduced Aβ generation and plaque formation, and it prevented learning and memory deficits in APP23 transgenic mice [150]. Inhibition of soluble TNF signaling prevented pre-plaque AD pathology in 3xTg-AD mice exposed to chronic systemic inflammation [151].

On the other hand, Chakrabarty et al. [152] reported that hippocampal expression of TNFα by transduction of rAAV expressing mouse TNFα in APP transgenic TgCRND8 mice induced glial activation, attenuating Aβ plaque formation without causing bystander neurotoxicity. More lines of studies have demonstrated that TNFα protected neurons from Aβ toxicity [153–155] and metabolic-excitotoxic insults [156,157]. The long form of Fas apoptotic inhibitory molecule (FAIM-L) is a Fas antagonist and is expressed exclusively in neurons. FAIM-L expression promoted TNFα-mediated protection against Aβ-induced neuronal death [88].

These findings show that excess TNFα signaling has detrimental and beneficial effects on neurons. This depends on many factors, including the presence or absence of Aβ [143]; aging [158]; the type of TNFR predominantly expressed and activated to trigger downstream signaling pathways [3,159]; downstream intracellular signaling molecules such as NF-κB, CREB-binding protein (CBP), FAIM, and cellular inhibitor of apoptotic protein (cIAP), which are predominantly recruited when TNFα binds to its receptors [88,153,155,160,161]; the balance of soluble and transmembrane forms of TNFα [162]; the presence of soluble TNFRs (sTNFRs) to neutralize or decrease TNFα signal [159–161]; cell type and activation state; intra- and extra-cellular environments; inflammatory milieu [163,164]; and crosstalk between glutamate receptors and their signaling pathways [148,165,166].

TNFα levels in AD

Several cytokines including TNFα are expressed in a disease progression-dependent manner; that is, they increased steadily or peaked when MCI progressed to AD, and therefore, may represent suitable molecules for disease prediction [27]. In a literature review, Brosseron et al. [18] analyzed the expression of 66 cytokines in the serum, plasma and CSF of AD and MCI individuals compared to normal control subjects. They reported inconsistent TNFα levels in serum, plasma, and CSF of AD and MCI individuals. TNFα expression was upregulated, downregulated, or not regulated in the reviewed studies. In the recent meta-analysis, no significant differences in TNFα levels were found between MCI and healthy control subjects [167]. TNFα expression in the AD brain generally seems to be upregulated [5,142,147], although some reports have demonstrated its decline in AD [46,168].

TNFα-converting enzyme (TACE)

TNFα is produced as a membrane-bound precursor molecule (mTNFα) of 26 kDa, which is cleaved by TACE to produce a soluble 17 kDa mature cytokine (sTNFα) [142]. Both forms of TNFα are active and have distinct biological activities [169]. It was reported that TACE is the α-secretase responsible for the majority of regulated α-cleavage of APP, suggesting that alterations in TACE activity during aging may contribute to Aβ formation [170]. The two types of TNFRs are also thought to be substrates of TACE, which cleaves TNFRs, releasing sTNFRs that regulate TNFα signaling by shedding of cell surface TNFRs [171]. Jiang et al. [172] reported elevated TACE and sTNFRs levels in the CSF of MCI and AD patients. Kim et al. [173] showed that TACE inhibition mitigated the effects of TNFα in the AD brain.

Our data on TNFα protein levels in AD, HPC and ND (LPC)

In this section, we present our data on TNFα expression normalized to glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) and β-actin, in the AD brain. These were compared to levels in the brain of HPC and ND individuals. Expression was measured in the temporal cortices and cerebella of autopsied brain samples from five AD patients, and five age and gender-matched HPC and ND individuals each. The demographic characteristics were similar to those shown in Table S1. Brain samples were provided by the BSHRI brain bank. The postmortem intervals (PMIs) averaged less than 4 hrs.

Mature sTNFα and precursor mTNFα were recognized with the anti-TNFα antibody (R&amp;D Systems, AF210NA) as positive bands at approximately 17 kDa and 26 kDa [174], respectively, on Western blots (Figure 1). The expression of sTNFα differed significantly in the cerebellum as well as in the temporal cortex of AD, HPC, and ND individuals. Differences were observed between the AD and ND groups (AD&lt;ND) and the AD and HPC groups (AD&lt;HPC) in the temporal cortex, and between the AD and ND groups (AD&gt;ND) in the cerebellum (p&lt;0.05; Kruskal–Wallis non-parametric analysis with Steel–Dwass post-testing). No significant differences in sTNFα levels were observed between the HPC and ND groups. There were no significant differences in mTNFα levels across the three individual groups (Figure 1).

Our data indicate that TNFα protein expression was lower, not higher, in the vulnerable temporal cortex of AD patients compared to HPC or ND individuals. Previous findings regarding TNFα expression in the AD brain have been inconsistent. Lanzrein et al. [46] reported its decrease in AD. Differences have also been reported between gene and protein expression [5]. The discrepancy between TNFα mRNA [33] and protein expression, particularly in the vulnerable temporal cortex, needs further investigation in more postmortem brain samples. The different levels of sTNFα and mTNFα proteins may be explained by different levels of TACE. TACE levels were reported to increase in AD and MCI individuals and were significantly higher in MCI than in AD [172]. We observed that TACE mRNA expression increased in AD [33].

TNF Receptors (TNFRs) in AD Pathogenesis

Each TNFR has a dual function

The biological effects of TNFα are exerted by its binding to TNFR type 1 (TNFR1) and TNFR type 2 (TNFR2) [159]. TNFR1 is responsible for the majority of biologic actions of sTNFα [174]. TNFR2 can only be fully activated by mTNFα, but not sTNFα [161].

The main receptor for TNFα, TNFR1 can trigger two signaling pathways, leading to survival and death. Survival signaling begins with complex I formation, consisting of TNFR1, TNFR-associated death domain protein (TRADD), receptor-interacting protein 1 (RIP1) and TNFR-associated factor 2 (TRAF2), followed by the activation of NF-κB, which leads to the transcriptional activation of pro-survival genes, such as those encoding cIAP1/2, Bcl-2, Bcl-xL, and FLICE-like inhibitory protein (FLIP). Death signaling is initiated by recruitment of TRADD and RIP1 to TNFR1, which bind to the Fas-associated death domain protein (FADD) after the dissociation from TNFR1. This recruits and activates caspase-8 to finally form complex II in instances where the complex I or NF-κB fails to be activated [88,175,176]. Del Villaer and Miller [177] demonstrated that differentially expressed in normal versus neoplastic (DENN)/MAPK activating death domain (MADD) protein, a TNFR1 binding protein, was down-regulated by Aβ in hippocampal neurons in AD patients and APP transgenic mice, allowing the TRADD-mediated TNFR1 apoptosis signaling. Carriba et al. [88] reported that Aβ reduced the expression of FAIM-L exclusively localized in neurons, thereby shifting the TNFα-mediated inflammatory response from neuronal protection to death.

In general, TNFR2 is believed to mediate its effects by intensive crosstalk with TNFR1 signaling pathways and ligand passing to neighboring TNFR1 [159,160,162]. However, these are not the only function of TNFR2. TNFα can signal through TNFR2 that lacks a death domain, recruiting TRAF2, TRAF1, and cIAP1/2, and activating the JNK/cJun pathway, which stimulates pro-apoptosis gene expression, although JNK can also inhibit induction of apoptosis by TNFα [178]. Signaling through the TNFR2 pathway is thought to play protective roles in several disorders, including neurodegenerative disorders. In contrast, several mechanisms can account for TNFR2-mediated apoptosis [160].

Signaling pathways initiated by TNFRs may either cooperate or counterbalance each other [159]. TNFα binds to TNFR 1 and TNFR2, generally relying on TNFR2 for survival and on TNFR1 for apoptosis. However, research has shown some degree of overlap in the function of the two receptors. It is not always true that TNFR1 functions for apoptosis while TNFR2 for survival. As described above, many factors can affect TNFR1 versus TNFR2 signaling [160].

Of interest, TNFRs can have counteracting functions, at least in neural tissues [161]. Fontaine et al. [179] demonstrated that, in a mouse model of retinal ischemia, TNFR1 contributed to cell death, whereas TNFR2 promoted cell protection dependent on Akt/protein kinase B (PKB) pathway. Marchetti et al. [166] demonstrated that TNFR2-mediated neuroprotection against glutamate-induced excitotoxicity was exerted by persistent activation of NF-κB in a PI3K-dependent manner. This was counterbalanced by the action of TNFR1, which only induced rapid but transient NF-κB activation, leading to cell death. These results strongly suggest that anti-TNF therapies could be made successful if they selectively target TNFR1 signaling by efficient neutralization of sTNFα without eliciting collateral damage to TNFR2/mTNFα-dependent processes [162].

The role of TNFRs in mouse models of AD

Mice that globally lack both TNFRs showed exacerbation of excitotoxic and ischemic neuronal injuries accompanied by a reduced response of microglia to excitotoxins and ischemia, indicating a neuroprotective role of TNFα signaling [180]. Long-term, global ablation of both TNFRs in all cell types in 3xTg-AD mice exhibited enhanced amyloid and tau-related AD pathology and reduced Aβ phagocytic activity of microglia, arguing against the long-term use of pan-anti-TNFα inhibitors for treating AD [181].

Detrimental and neuroprotective roles have been reported for TNFα signaling, illustrating the complexity of these signaling pathways [163]. TNFR1 deletion in APP23 transgenic mice reduced Aβ generation, lessened neuronal loss, and alleviated Aβ-related learning and memory deficits [150]. Deletion of TNFR2 in APP23 transgenic mice increased Aβ production, plaque formation, and microglial activation [182]. These two reports suggest that the two TNFRs have opposite contributions to AD pathology.

Montgomery et al. [163] demonstrated that rAAV2 vector-mediated neuron-selective knockdown of TNFR2, but not TNFR1 or TNFR1 + 2, in 3xTg-AD mice led to a significantly dramatic enhancement of Aβ42 plaque deposition in a stage-dependent manner. This suggests the following: (i) the signaling dichotomy between TNFR1 and TNFR2 also exists in disease; (ii) unopposed neuron-specific TNFR1 signaling at later stages of disease, when TNFR2 has been selectively down-regulated, increases the severity of AD pathogenesis; and (iii) TNFR2 exerts protective action that may be required to counteract TNFR1 signaling, emphasizing the need for strategies that more selectively modulate TNFα signaling in specific cell types and at different stages of disease.

Our data on TNF receptor levels in AD, HPC and ND (LPC)

We demonstrated that expression of cytokines including sTNFα in the HPC brain was closer to ND than AD brains. We next compared TNFR1 and TNFR2 expression in the brains of AD patients and compared this to HPC and ND brains. This study used postmortem tissue samples from the vulnerable temporal cortex and resistant cerebellum of ten AD patients and ten age and gender-matched HPC and ND individuals each. Demographic characteristics were similar to those shown in Table S1. The brain samples were provided by the BSHRI brain bank. PMIs averaged less than 4 hrs. The anti-TNFR1 (Gene Tex, GTX27630) and anti-TNFR2 (Cell Signaling, 3727) antibodies were used for Western blot analyses. TNFR protein levels in vulnerable brain areas, including the frontal and temporal cortices and the hippocampus of AD and ND individuals have already been reported using autopsied human tissues [183,184]. However, they did not use brain samples of HPC subjects. It is important to examine TNFR expression in the HPC brain to determine whether TNFR-mediated signaling primarily contributes to AD pathology prior to the manifestation of overt dementia, or is only a secondary response to AD pathology at later stages. To normalize the expression levels of target proteins, we used GAPDH and β-actin. In addition, the data normalized with GAPDH and β-actin were compared to data normalized with two neuronal cell body markers, neuron specific enolase and class III β-tubulin, as TNFR1 and TNFR2 are mainly expressed in neurons in the CNS [183,184]. All normalized data showed the same trend, unless otherwise stated.

TNFR1 and TNFR2 were detected as single bands at approximately 55 kDa and 75 kDa, respectively (Figure 2). In the temporal cortex, densitometric analyses revealed that the expression levels of TNFR1 and TNFR2 were significantly different between the AD and HPC groups (AD&lt;HPC) and the AD and ND groups (AD&lt;ND) (p&lt;0.05; Kruskal–Wallis non-parametric analysis with Steel–Dwass post-testing). No significant differences in the expression levels of both TNFRs were observed between the HPC and ND groups. In the cerebellum, there were no significant differences across the three groups. Our data indicate the following: (i) the expression levels of both TNFRs in the HPC group were closer to those in ND group than AD group in the temporal cortex; (ii) the expression levels of both TNFRs were lowest in the AD group in the temporal cortex; and (iii) both TNFR’s expression did not differ across the three groups in the cerebellum.

Our study is the first to investigate TNFR protein expression in HPC cases. We demonstrated lower levels of both TNFRs in AD, but not HPC individuals, compared to ND individuals. This means that alterations in immunological conditions involving TNFR signaling are not the primary events initiating AD pathological changes such as Aβ plaque and NFT formation but may be either early events occurring along with synaptic and neuronal changes or later events occurring as a secondary response to synaptic loss and neuronal death. As shown in Figure 2, TNFR protein levels may have tended to be elevated in HPC individuals compared to individuals with AD and ND, suggesting that TNFR signaling may play a role in the HPC stage, although this was not statistically significant. To validate our data, temporal expression patterns in ND, HPC, early stage of AD (Braak III–IV), and late stage of AD (Braak V–VI) need to be investigated. This was partly conducted by Carriba et al. [88] and González et al. [185], but these studies did not investigate HPC brains. Culpan et al. [184] demonstrated in their Figure 2 that levels of TNFR1 were lower in AD brains than control brains, and the differences were greater in the frontal cortex than the temporal cortex and hippocampus. In the study by Cheng et al. [183], TNFR1 protein levels were higher in the frontal tissues of AD brains compared to ND brains, and TNFR2 protein levels were lower in the frontal tissues of AD brains compared to ND brains. The discrepancy between our data and the data of Cheng et al. [183] may partly be explained by the fact that their AD cases were chosen randomly from the BSHRI brain bank and therefore were likely to be a mixture of intermediate (Thal’s Aβ-phase 4 or less, Braak NFT stage III–IV) and high (Thal’s Aβ-phase 5, Braak NFT stage V–VI) AD pathology, while our AD cases were all high and our HPC cases were all intermediate based on the NIA–RI criteria for AD [37]. TNFR2 protein expression was not different in cerebellum of AD brains compared to ND brains in our study. Therefore, the cerebellum may not be protected from AD pathology solely by TNF-α binding to TNFR2 as a survival signal.

Anti-inflammatory Therapy for AD (2)

TNFα as a potential target for AD therapy

There are many therapeutic targets in the neuroinflammation-related pathological processes leading to AD. These include cytokines, the complement system, GCs, IR signaling, glial activation, and other inflammatory mediators. Therefore, a multicomponent treatment approach (polypharmacy) may be required [8]. In each component of polypharmacy, strategies need to be developed to more selectively modulate immune signaling in specific cell types and at different disease stages [27].

TNFα is associated with pathological mechanisms that participate in neurotoxicity and neuronal damage in AD, implicating anti-TNF-α agents in AD therapy [4,5,8,27,141,147,160,162]. However, it is unclear whether TNFα signaling is toxic or trophic in AD pathological processes. Nonetheless, we expect anti-TNFα agents to be effective against AD [141,147]. Furthermore, given the restricted cellular distribution of TNFR2 in contrast with the widespread expression of TNFR1, the possibility of specifically targeting TNFR2 has emerged as a safer and more efficient therapeutic approach [160], although anti-TNFα therapies selectively targeting TNFR1 signaling have also been considered [162].

Anti-TNFα agents, including infliximab and etanercept, have been developed to specifically inhibit TNFα [141,147,162]. Intracerebroventricular infusion of infliximab, a murine-human chimeric bivalent anti-TNFα monoclonal antibody, in AD transgenic mice reduced the number of amyloid plaques [125]. Cognitive improvement was also reported in a woman with AD after intrathecal administration of infliximab [186].

Etanercept is a recombinant dimeric fusion protein comprising the extracellular ligand-binding portions of soluble human TNFR2 linked to the Fc fragment of human IgG1. It binds to mTNFα and trimeric sTNFα, and inhibits signaling through both TNFRs [27,162,187]. In 2006, a six-month, prospective, open-label, single-center, phase II pilot study investigated the effectiveness of perispinal etanercept injections in 15 patients with mild-to-severe AD. The author reported a significantly rapid and sustained cognitive improvement [147], which has been confirmed by other studies [188,189]. Furthermore, some AD patients treated perispinally with etanercept for more than five years exhibited sustained clinical improvement [187]. However, the effects of perispinal etanercept have not been supported by randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled studies on AD patients who were given peripherally (subcutaneously)-delivered etanercept [147,190]. Neither etanercept nor infliximab crosses the blood–brain barrier, thus requiring invasive forms of central administration [125].

Non-specific inhibitors of TNFα, such as thalidomide and minocycline, have been tested in AD treatment [7,191–193].

Blocking all effects of TNFα by anti-TNFα treatment can be counter-productive. A more effective therapeutic approach is the selective blocking of TNFα signaling; therefore, specifically targeting TNFR1 or TNFR2 as a new therapeutic approach is now being considered [160,194,195].

Conclusions

Increasing evidence suggests that inflammatory mediators, including TNFα and its receptors, are involved in the pathogenesis of AD. However, findings regarding their function and expression in AD have been inconsistent. NSAIDs may provoke the contrasting effects of neuroinflammatory molecules at different stages of AD pathogenesis. Different AD stages may have different detrimental and protective factors. These illustrate the complexity of signaling pathways in the CNS, where neuroinflammatory signaling leads to either protective or detrimental outcomes, depending on a variety of conditions. To better define signaling mechanisms and therapeutic strategies for AD, temporal expression profiles of signaling molecules need to be elucidated in ND (LPC), HPC, early stage AD, and late stage AD brains. Expression also needs to be compared between vulnerable and resistant brain areas.

Very recently selective amplification of regulatory T cells by low-dose IL-2 treatment was shown to increase the number of plaque-associated microglia and restore cognitive function in APP/PS transgenic mice [196]. To date, the role of IL-2 in AD has poorly been discussed [1–5].

We are grateful to the Banner Sun Health Research Institute Brain and Body Donation Program of Sun City, Arizona, USA for the provision of postmortem human brain tissues. The Brain and Body Donation Program is supported by the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (U24 NS072026 National Brain and Tissue Resource for Parkinson’s Disease and Related Disorders), the National Institute on Aging (P30 AG19610 Arizona Alzheimer’s Disease Core Center), the Arizona Department of Health Services (contract 211002, Arizona Alzheimer’s Research Center), the Arizona Biomedical Research Commission (contracts 4001, 0011, 05-901 and 1001 to the Arizona Parkinson’s Disease Consortium) and the Mitchel J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson’s Research.

Figure 1 TNFα protein levels in the temporal cortex and cerebellum of the AD, HPC and ND Brain. (A) Representative images of soluble TNFα (sTNFα) and transmembrane TNFα (mTNFα) protein bands at approximately 26 kDa and 17 kDa, respectively, from Western blots. T: Temporal cortex; C: Cerebellum; GAPDH: Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase. (B) Densitometry analysis of sTNFα and mTNFα protein expression in the AD, HPC and ND brain. Data on the protein levels of sTNFα and mTNFα were normalized to GAPDH. Subsequently, the normalized data of AD and HPC groups were compared with ND group, and expressed as relative expression levels, where the data on ND were set as 100%. Values are expressed as the mean ± S.D. of the relative expression levels. n=5, *p&lt;0.05 by Kruskal-Wallis non-parametric analysis with Steel-Dwass post-testing.

Figure 2 Protein levels of TNFR1 and TNFR2 in the temporal cortex and cerebellum of the AD, HPC and ND brain. (A) Representative images of TNFR1 and TNFR2 protein bands at approximately 55 kDa and 75 kDa, respectively, from Western blots. GAPDH: glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase. (B) Densitometry analysis of the two TNFR proteins in the temporal cortex and cerebellum of the AD, HPC and ND brain. Data on the protein levels of TNFR1 and TNFR2 were normalized to GAPDH. Subsequently, the normalized data of AD and HPC groups were compared with ND group, and expressed as relative expression levels, where the data on ND were set as 100%. Values are expressed as the mean ± S.D. of the relative expression levels. n=10, *p&lt;0.05 by Kruskal-Wallis non-parametric analysis with Steel-Dwass post-testing.


References

1 Weeraratna AT Kalehua A Deleon I Bertak D Maher G Alterations in immunological and neurological gene expression patterns in Alzheimer’s disease tissues Exp Cell Res 2007 313 450 461 17188679
2 Eikelenboom P Bate C Van Gool WA Hoozemans JJ Rozemuller JM Neuroinflammation in Alzheimer’s disease and prion disease Glia 2002 40 232 239 12379910
3 Akiyama H Barger S Barnum S Bradt B Bauer J Inflammation and Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 2000 21 383 421 10858586
4 Heneka MT Carson MJ El Khoury J Landreth GE Brosseron F Neuroinflammation in Alzheimer’s disease Lancet Neurol 2015 14 388 405 25792098
5 Wood LB Winslow AR Proctor EA McGuone D Mordes DA Identification of neurotoxic cytokines by profiling Alzheimer’s disease tissues and neuron culture viability screening Sci Rep 2015 5 16622 26564777
6 Czirr E Wyss-Coray T The immunology of neurodegeneration J Clin Invest 2012 122 1156 1163 22466657
7 Clark I Atwood C Bowen R Paz-Filho G Vissel B Tumor necrosis factor-induced cerebral insulin resistance in Alzheimer’s disease links numerous treatment rationales Pharmacol Rev 2012 64 1004 1026 22966039
8 Daulatzai MA Fundamental role of pan-inflammation and oxidative-nitrosative pathways in neuropathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease Am J Neurodegener Dis 2016 5 1 28 27073740
9 Abbayya K Puthanakar NY Naduwinmani S Chidambar YS Association between Periodontitis and Alzheimer’s Disease N Am J Med Sci 2015 7 241 246 26199919
10 Sparks Stein P Steffen MJ Smith C Jicha G Ebersole JL Serum antibodies to periodontal pathogens are a risk factor for Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimer’s Dement 2012 8 196 203 22546352
11 McNaull BB Todd S McGuinness B Passmore AP Inflammation and anti-inflammatory strategies for Alzheimer’s disease--a mini-review Gerontology 2010 56 3 14 19752507
12 Maccioni RB Rojo LE Fernández TA Kuljis RO The role of neuroimmunomodulation in Alzheimer’s disease Ann N Y Acad Sci 2009 1153 240 246 19236346
13 Huang Y Mucke L Alzheimer mechanisms and therapeutic strategies Cell 2012 148 1204 1222 22424230
14 Weissmiller AM Wu C Current advances in using neurotrophic factors to treat neurodegenerative disorders Transl Neurodegener 2012 1 14 23210531
15 Hardy J The amyloid hypothesis for Alzheimer’s disease: a critical reappraisal J Neurochem 2009 110 1129 1134 19457065
16 Rodriguez-Vieitez E Saint-Aubert L Carter SF Almkvist O Farid K Diverging longitudinal changes in astrocytosis and amyloid PET in autosomal dominant Alzheimer’s disease Brain 2016 139 922 936 26813969
17 Saresella M La Rosa F Piancone F Zoppis M Marventano I The NLRP3 and NLRP1 inflammasomes are activated in Alzheimer’s disease Mol Neurodegener 2016 11 23 26939933
18 Brosseron F Krauthausen M Kummer M Heneka MT Body fluid cytokine levels in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease: a comparative overview Mol Neurobiol 2014 50 534 544 24567119
19 Hu WT Holtzman DM Fagan AM Shaw LM Perrin R Plasma multianalyte profiling in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer disease Neurology 2012 79 897 905 22855860
20 Johnstone D Milward EA Berretta R Moscato P Multivariate protein signatures of pre-clinical Alzheimer’s disease in the Alzheimer’s disease neuroimaging initiative (ADNI) plasma proteome dataset PLoS One 2012 7 e34341 22485168
21 Magaki S Mueller C Dickson C Kirsch W Increased production of inflammatory cytokines in mild cognitive impairment Exp Gerontol 2007 42 233 240 17085001
22 Ray S Britschgi M Herbert C Takeda-Uchimura Y Boxer A Classification and prediction of clinical Alzheimer’s diagnosis based on plasma signaling proteins Nat Med 2007 13 1359 1362 17934472
23 Galimberti D Schoonenboom N Scheltens P Fenoglio C Bouwman F Intrathecal chemokine synthesis in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer disease Arch Neurol 2006 63 538 543 16606766
24 Petersen RC Mild cognitive impairment as a diagnostic entity J Intern Med 2004 256 183 194 15324362
25 Zandi PP Breitner JC Do NSAIDs prevent Alzheimer’s disease? And, if so, why? The epidemiological evidence Neurobiol Aging 2001 22 811 817 11754987
26 Rogers J Kirby LC Hempelman SR Berry DL McGeer PL Clinical trial of indomethacin in Alzheimer’s disease Neurology 1993 43 1609 1611 8351023
27 Zheng C Zhou XW Wang JZ The dual roles of cytokines in Alzheimer’s disease: update on interleukins, TNF-α, TGF-β and IFN-γ Transl Neurodegener 2016 5 7 27054030
28 Wang J Tan L Wang HF Tan CC Meng XF Anti-inflammatory drugs and risk of Alzheimer’s disease: an updated systematic review and meta-analysis J Alzheimer’s Dis 2015 44 385 396 25227314
29 ADAPT-FS Research Group Follow-up evaluation of cognitive function in the randomized Alzheimer’s Disease Anti-inflammatory Prevention Trial (ADAPT) and its Follow-up Study (ADAPT-FS) Alzheimer’s Dement 2015 11 216 225 25022541
30 ADAPT Research Group Martin BK Szekely C Brandt J Piantadosi S Cognitive function over time in the Alzheimer’s Disease Anti-inflammatory Prevention Trial (ADAPT): results of a randomized, controlled trial of naproxen and celecoxib Arch Neurol 2008 65 896 905 18474729
31 ADAPT Research Group Lyketsos CG Breitner JC Green RC Martin BK Naproxen and celecoxib do not prevent AD in early results from a randomized controlled trial Neurology 2007 68 1800 1808 17460158
32 Vlad SC Miller DR Kowall NW Felson DT Protective effects of NSAIDs on the development of Alzheimer disease Neurology 2008 70 1672 1677 18458226
33 Morimoto K Horio J Satoh H Sue L Beach T Expression profiles of cytokines in the brains of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) patients compared to the brains of non-demented patients with and without increasing AD pathology J Alzheimer’s Dis 2011 25 59 76 21368376
34 Mirra SS Heyman A McKeel D Sumi SM Crain BJ The Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer’s Disease (CERAD). Part II. Standardization of the neuropathologic assessment of Alzheimer’s disease Neurology 1991 41 479 486 2011243
35 Thal DR Rüb U Orantes M Braak H Phases of A beta-deposition in the human brain and its relevance for the development of AD Neurology 2002 58 1791 1800 12084879
36 Braak H Alafuzoff I Arzberger T Kretzschmar H Del Tredici K Staging of Alzheimer disease-associated neurofibrillary pathology using paraffin sections and immunocytochemistry Acta Neuropathol 2006 112 389 404 16906426
37 Hyman BT Trojanowski JQ Editorial on Consensus Recommendations for the Postmortem Diagnosis of Alzheimer’s Disease from the National Institute on Aging, and the Reagan Institute Working Group on Diagnostic Criteria for the Neuropathological Assessment of Alzheimer’s disease J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 1997 56 1095 1097 9329452
38 Lue LF Kuo YM Roher AE Brachova L Shen Y Soluble amyloid beta peptide concentration as a predictor of synaptic change in Alzheimer’s disease Am J Pathol 1999 155 853 862 10487842
39 Lue LF Brachova L Civin WH Rogers J Inflammation, A beta deposition, and neurofibrillary tangle formation as correlates of Alzheimer’s disease neurodegeneration J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 1996 55 1083 1088 8858005
40 Serrano-Pozo A Frosch MP Masliah E Hyman BT Neuropathological alterations in Alzheimer disease Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2011 1 a006189 22229116
41 Lowe J Mirra SS Hyman BT Dickson DW Lowe S Louis D Ellison DW Pathology of mild cognitive impairment and early Alzheimer’s disease, Alzheimer’s disease, Chapter 14. Ageing and dementia Greenfield’ Neuropathology 2008 8th Boca Raten CRC Press 1065
42 Schneider JA Arvanitakis Z Leurgans SE Bennett DA The neuropathology of probable Alzheimer disease and mild cognitive impairment Ann Neurol 2009 66 200 208 19743450
43 Dugger BN Davis K Malek-Ahmadi M Hentz JG Sandhu S Neuropathological comparisons of amnestic and nonamnestic mild cognitive impairment BMC Neurol 2015 15 146 26289075
44 Markesbery WR Neuropathologic alterations in mild cognitive impairment: a review J Alzheimer’s Dis 2010 19 221 228 20061641
45 Luterman JD Haroutunian V Yemul S Ho L Purohit D Cytokine gene expression as a function of the clinical progression of Alzheimer disease dementia Arch Neurol 2000 57 1153 1160 10927795
46 Lanzrein AS Johnston CM Petty VH Jobst KA King EM Longitudinal study of inflammatory factors in serum, cerebrospinal fluid, and brain tissue in Alzheimer disease: interleukin-1β, interleukin-6, interleukin-1 receptor antagonist, tumor necrosis factor-a, the soluble tumor necrosis factor receptors I and II, and a1-antichymotrypsin Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 1998 12 215 227 9772027
47 Araujo DM Lapchak PA Induction of immune system mediators in the hippocampal formation in Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases: selective effects on specific interleukins and interleukin receptors Neuroscience 1994 61 745 754 7838374
48 Erten-Lyons D Woltjer RL Dodge H Nixon R Vorobik R Factors associated with resistance to dementia despite high Alzheimer disease pathology Neurology 2009 72 354 360 19171833
49 Knopman DS Parisi JE Salviati A Floriach-Robert M Boeve BF Neuropathology of cognitively normal elderly J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2003 62 1087 1095 14656067
50 Esparza TJ Zhao H Cirrito JR Cairns NJ Bateman RJ Amyloid-beta oligomerization in Alzheimer dementia versus high-pathology controls Ann Neurol 2013 73 104 119 23225543
51 Perez-Nievas BG Stein TD Tai HC Dols-Icardo O Scotton TC Dissecting phenotypic traits linked to human resilience to Alzheimer’s pathology Brain 2013 136 2510 2526 23824488
52 Bjorklund NL Reese LC Sadagoparamanujam VM Ghirardi V Woltjer RL Absence of amyloid beta oligomers at the postsynapse and regulated synaptic Zn2+ in cognitively intact aged individuals with Alzheimer’s disease neuropathology Mol Neurodegener 2012 7 23 22640423
53 Maarouf CL Daugs ID Kokjohn TA Walker DG Hunter JM Alzheimer’s disease and non-demented high pathology control nonagenarians: comparing and contrasting the biochemistry of cognitively successful aging PLoS ONE 2011 6 e27291 22087282
54 Beach TG Kuo YM Spiegel K Emmerling MR Sue LI The cholinergic deficit coincides with Abeta deposition at the earliest histopathologic stages of Alzheimer disease J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2000 59 308 313 10759186
55 Katzman R Terry R DeTeresa R Brown T Davies P Clinical, pathological, and neurochemical changes in dementia: a subgroup with preserved mental status and numerous neocortical plaques Ann Neurol 1988 23 138 144 2897823
56 Beach TG Honer WG Hughes LH Cholinergic fibre loss associated with diffuse plaques in the non-demented elderly: the preclinical stage of Alzheimer’s disease? Acta Neuropathol 1997 93 146 153 9039461
57 Caselli RJ Walker D Sue L Sabbagh M Beach T Amyloid load in nondemented brains correlates with APOE e4 Neurosci Lett 2010 473 168 171 20153809
58 Wyss-Coray T Rogers J Inflammation in Alzheimer disease-a brief review of the basic science and clinical literature Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2012 2 a006346 22315714
59 Basu A Krady JK Levison SW Interleukin-1: a master regulator of neuroinflammation J Neurosci Res 2004 78 151 156 15378607
60 Fu AK Hung KW Yuen MY Zhou X Mak DS IL-33 ameliorates Alzheimer’s disease-like pathology and cognitive decline Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2016 113 E2705 E2713 27091974
61 Liu L Chan C The role of inflammasome in Alzheimer’s disease Ageing Res Rev 2014 15 6 15 24561250
62 Sutinen EM Pirttilä T Anderson G Salminen A Ojala JO Pro-inflammatory interleukin-18 increases Alzheimer’s disease-associated amyloid-β production in human neuron-like cells J Neuroinflammation 2012 9 199 22898493
63 Bossù P Ciaramella A Salani F Vanni D Palladino I Interleukin-18, from neuroinflammation to Alzheimer’s disease Curr Pharm Des 2010 16 4213 4224 21184660
64 Chapuis J Hot D Hansmannel F Kerdraon O Ferreira S Transcriptomic and genetic studies identify IL-33 as a candidate gene for Alzheimer’s disease Mol Psychiatry 2009 14 1004 1016 19204726
65 Craft JM Watterson DM Hirsch E Van Eldik LJ Interleukin I receptor antagonist knockout mice show enhanced microglial activation and neuronal damage induced by intracerebroventricular infusion of human β-amyloid J Neuroinflammation 2005 2 15 15967035
66 Shaftel SS Griffin WS O’Banion MK The role of interleukin-1 in neuroinflammation and Alzheimer disease: an evolving perspective J Neuroinflammation 2008 5 7 18302763
67 Chakrabarty P Li A Ceballos-Diaz C Eddy JA Funk CC IL-10 alters immunoproteostasis in APP mice, increasing plaque burden and worsening cognitive behavior Neuron 2015 85 519 533 25619653
68 Guillot-Sestier MV Doty KR Gate D Rodriguez J Jr Leung BP Il10 deficiency rebalances innate immunity to mitigate Alzheimerlike pathology Neuron 2015 85 534 548 25619654
69 Kawahara K Suenobu M Yoshida A Koga K Hyodo A Intracerebral microinjection of interleukin-4/interleukin-13 reduces β-amyloid accumulation in the ipsilateral side and improves cognitive deficits in young amyloid precursor protein 23 mice Neuroscience 2012 207 243 260 22342341
70 Szczepanik AM Funes S Petko W Ringheim GE IL-4, IL-10 and IL-13 modulate Aβ (1–42)-induced cytokine and chemokine production in primary murine microglia and a human monocyte cell line J Neuroimmunol 2001 113 49 62 11137576
71 Khoshbakht T Soosanabadi M Neishaboury M Kamali K Karimlou M An Association Study on IL16 Gene Polymorphisms with the Risk of Sporadic Alzheimer’s Disease Avicenna J Med Biotechnol 2015 7 128 132 26306153
72 Di Rosa M Dell’Ombra N Zambito AM Malaguarnera M Nicoletti F Chitotriosidase and inflammatory mediator levels in Alzheimer’s disease and cerebrovascular dementia Eur J Neurosci 2006 23 2648 2656 16817867
73 Yun HM Kim JA Hwang CJ Jin P Baek MK Neuroinflammatory and Amyloidogenic Activities of IL-32β in Alzheimer’s Disease Mol Neurobiol 2015 52 341 352 25159479
74 Azizi G Khannazer N Mirshafiey A The Potential Role of Chemokines in Alzheimer’s Disease Pathogenesis Am J Alzheimer’s Dis Other Demen 2014 29 415 425 24408754
75 Streit WJ Conde JR Harrison JK Chemokines and Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 2001 22 909 913 11754998
76 Bacher M Deuster O Aljabari B Egensperger R Neff F The role of macrophage migration inhibitory factor in Alzheimer’s disease MolMed 2010 16 116 121
77 Town T Laouar Y Pittenger C Mori T Szekely CA Blocking TGF-beta-Smad2/3 innate immune signaling mitigates Alzheimer-like pathology Nat Med 2008 14 681 687 18516051
78 Tesseur I Zou K Esposito L Bard F Berber E Deficiency in neuronal TGF-beta signaling promotes neurodegeneration and Alzheimer’s pathology J Clin Invest 2006 116 3060 3069 17080199
79 Beach TG Sue LI Walker DG Roher AE Lue LF The Sun Health Research Institute brain donation program: description and experience, 1987–2007 Cell Tissue Bank 2008 9 229 245 18347928
80 Fein JA Sokolow S Miller CA Vinters HV Yang F Co-localization of amyloid beta and tau pathology in Alzheimer’s disease synaptosomes Am J Pathol 2008 172 1683 1692 18467692
81 Fukumoto H Rosene DL Moss MB Raju S Hyman BT Beta-secretase activity increases with aging in human, monkey, and mouse brain Am J Pathol 2004 164 719 725 14742275
82 Ikonomovic MD Klunk WE Abrahamson EE Mathis CA Price JC Post-mortem correlates of in vivo PiB-PET amyloid imaging in a typical case of Alzheimer’s disease Brain 2008 131 1630 1645 18339640
83 Mann DM Iwatsubo T Snowden JS Atypical amyloid (A beta) deposition in the cerebellum in Alzheimer’s disease: an immunohistochemical study using end-specific A beta monoclonal antibodies Acta Neuropathologica 1996 91 647 653 8781665
84 Mann DM Jones D Prinja D Purkiss MS The prevalence of amyloid (A4) protein deposits within the cerebral and cerebellar cortex in Down’s syndrome and Alzheimer’s disease Acta Neuropathol 1990 80 318 327 1698007
85 Joachim CL Morris JH Selkoe DJ Diffuse senile plaques occur commonly in the cerebellum in Alzheimer’s disease Am J Pathol 1989 135 309 319 2675616
86 Du J Sun B Chen K Fan L Wang Z Antagonist of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma induces cerebellar amyloid-β levels and motor dysfunction in APP/PS1 transgenic mice Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2009 384 357 361 19422805
87 Phares TW Kean RB Mikheeva T Hooper DC Regional differences in blood-brain barrier permeability changes and inflammation in the apathogenic clearance of virus from the central nervous system J Immunol 2006 176 7666 7675 16751414
88 Carriba P Jimenez S Navarro V Moreno-Gonzalez I Barneda-Zahonero B Amyloid-β reduces the expression of neuronal FAIM-L, thereby shifting the inflammatory response mediated by TNFa from neuronal protection to death Cell Death Dis 2015 6 el639
89 Ojala J Alafuzoff I Herukka SK van Groen T Tanila H Expression of interleukin-18 is increased in the brains of Alzheimer’s disease patients Neurobiol Aging 2009 30 198 209 17658666
90 Wood JA Wood PL Ryan R Graff-Radford NR Pilapil C Cytokine indices in Alzheimer’s temporal cortex: no changes in mature IL-1β or IL-1RA but increases in the associated acute phase proteins IL-6, a2-macroglobulin and C-reactive protein Brain Res 1993 629 245 252 7509248
91 Konishi Y Beach T Sue LI Hampel H Lindholm K The temporal localization of frame-shift ubiquitin-B and amyloid precursor protein, and complement proteins in the brain of non-demented control patients with increasing Alzheimer’s disease pathology Neurosci Lett 2003 348 46 50 12893422
92 Singhrao SK Neal JW Rushmere NK Morgan BP Gasque P Differential expression of individual complement regulators in the brain and choroid plexus Lab Invest 1999 79 1247 1259 10532588
93 Vedeler C Ulvestad E Bjørge L Conti G Williams K The expression of CD59 in normal human nervous tissue Immunology 1994 82 542 547 7530684
94 Yang LB Li R Meri S Rogers J Shen Y Deficiency of complement defense protein CD59 may contribute to neurodegeneration in Alzheimer’s disease J Neurosci 2000 20 7505 7509 11027207
95 Shen Y Halperin JA Lee CM Complement-mediated neurotoxicity is regulated by homologous restriction Brain Res 1995 671 282 292 7743216
96 Yasojima K McGeer EG McGeer PL Complement regulators C1 inhibitor and CD59 do not significantly inhibit complement activation in Alzheimer disease Brain Res 1999 833 297 301 10375708
97 Vasconcelos AR Cabral-Costa JV Mazucanti CH Scavone C Kawamoto EM The Role of Steroid Hormones in the Modulation of Neuroinflammation by Dietary Interventions Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) 2016 7 9 26869995
98 Landfield PW Blalock EM Chen KC Porter NM A new glucocorticoid hypothesis of brain aging: implications for Alzheimer’s disease Curr Alzheimer Res 2007 4 205 212 17430248
99 Sorrells SF Munhoz CD Manley NC Yen S Sapolsky RM Glucocorticoids increase excitotoxic injury and inflammation in the hippocampus of adult male rats Neuroendocrinology 2014 100 129 140 25228100
100 Munhoz CD Sorrells SF Caso JR Scavone C Sapolsky RM Glucocorticoids exacerbate lipopolysaccharide-induced signaling in the frontal cortex and hippocampus in a dose-dependent manner J Neurosci 2010 30 13690 13698 20943909
101 de Pablos RM Villarán RF Argüelles S Herrera AJ Venero JL Stress increases vulnerability to inflammation in the rat prefrontal cortex J Neurosci 2006 26 5709 5719 16723527
102 Sorrells SF Caso JR Munhoz CD Sapolsky RM The stressed CNS: when glucocorticoids aggravate inflammation Neuron 2009 64 33 39 19840546
103 Dinkel K MacPherson A Sapolsky RM Novel glucocorticoid effects on acute inflammation in the CNS J Neurochem 2003 84 705 716 12562515
104 Aisen PS Davis KL Berg JD Schafer K Campbell K A randomized controlled trial of prednisone in Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimer’s Disease Cooperative Study Neurology 2000 54 588 593 10680787
105 The ADAPT Research Group Results of a follow-up study to the randomized Alzheimer’s Disease Anti-inflammatory Prevention Trial (ADAPT) Alzheimer’s Dement 2013 9 714 723 23562431
106 Breitner JC Baker LD Montine TJ Meinert CL Lyketsos CG Extended results of the Alzheimer’s disease anti-inflammatory prevention trial Alzheimer’s Dement 2011 7 402 411 21784351
107 Kukar T Prescott S Eriksen JL Holloway V Murphy MP Chronic administration of R-flurbiprofen attenuates learning impairments in transgenic amyloid precursor protein mice BMC Neurosci 2007 8 54 17650315
108 Sung S Yang H Uryu K Lee EB Zhao L Modulation of nuclear factor-kappa B activity by indomethacin influences A beta levels but not A beta precursor protein metabolism in a model of Alzheimer’s disease Am J Pathol 2004 165 2197 2206 15579461
109 Lim GP Yang F Chu T Gahtan E Ubeda O Ibuprofen effects on Alzheimer pathology and open field activity in APPsw transgenic mice Neurobiol Aging 2001 22 983 991 11755007
110 Lim GP Yang F Chu T Chen P Beech W Ibuprofen suppresses plaque pathology and inflammation in a mouse model for Alzheimer’s disease J Neurosci 2000 20 5709 5714 10908610
111 Wang J Tan L Wang HF Tan CC Meng XF Anti-inflammatory drugs and risk of Alzheimer’s disease: an updated systematic review and meta-analysis J Alzheimer’s Dis 2015 44 385 396 25227314
112 Sastre M Dewachter I Rossner S Bogdanovic N Rosen E Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs repress beta-secretase gene promoter activity by the activation of PPARgamma Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2006 103 443 448 16407166
113 Weggen S Eriksen JL Das P Sagi SA Wang R A subset of NSAIDs lower amyloidogenic Abeta42 independently of cyclooxygenase activity Nature 2001 414 212 216 11700559
114 Sonnen JA Larson EB Walker RL Haneuse S Crane PK Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are associated with increased neuritic plaques Neurology 2010 75 1203 1210 20811000
115 Kukal T Murphy MP Eriksen JL Sagi SA Weggen S Diverse compounds mimic Alzheimer disease-causing mutations by augmenting αβ42 production Nat Med 2005 11 545 550 15834426
116 Cole GM Frautschy SA Mechanisms of action of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs for the prevention of Alzheimer’s disease CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets 2010 9 140 148 20205646
117 Aisen PS Thal LJ Ferris SH Assaid C Nessly ML Rofecoxib in patients with mild cognitive impairment: further analyses of data from a randomized, double-blind, trial Curr Alzheimer Res 2008 5 73 82 18288935
118 Small GW Siddarth P Silverman DHS Ercoli LM Miller KJ Cognitive and cerebral metabolic effects of celecoxib versus placebo in people with age-related memory loss: randomized controlled study Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 2008 16 999 1009 19038899
119 Frautschy SA Thinking outside the box about COX-1 in Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Dis 2010 38 492 494 20206264
120 Gómez-Isla T Blesa R Boada M Clarimón J Del Ser T A randomized, double-blind, placebo controlled-trial of triflusal in mild cognitive impairment: the TRIMCI study Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 2008 22 21 29 18317243
121 Kotilinek LA Westerman MA Wang Q Panizzon K Lim GP Cyclooxygenase-2 inhibition improves amyloid-beta-mediated suppression of memory and synaptic plasticity Brain 2008 131 651 664 18292081
122 Moon JH Endocrine Risk Factors for Cognitive Impairment Endocrinol Metab (Seoul) 2016 31 185 192 27118278
123 De Felice FG Lourenco MV Brain metabolic stress and neuroinflammation at the basis of cognitive impairment in Alzheimer’s disease Front Aging Neurosci 2015 7 94 26042036
124 De Felice FG Ferreira ST Inflammation, defective insulin signaling, and mitochondrial dysfunction as common molecular denominators connecting type 2 diabetes to Alzheimer’s disease Diabetes 2014 63 2262 2272 24931033
125 Ferreira ST Clarke JR Bomfim TR De Felice FG Inflammation, defective insulin signaling, and neuronal dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimer’s Dement 2014 10 S76 S83 24529528
126 Barrientos RM Frank MG Watkins LR Maier SF Memory impairments in healthy aging: Role of aging-induced microglial sensitization Aging Dis 2010 1 212 231 21132050
127 Romeo GR Lee J Shoelson SE Metabolic syndrome, insulin resistance, and roles of inflammation - Mechanisms and therapeutic targets Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2012 32 1771 1776 22815343
128 Bomfim TR Forny-Germano L Sathler LB Brito-Moreira J Houzel J-C An anti-diabetes agent protects the mouse brain from defective insulin signaling caused by Alzheimer’s disease-associated αβ oligomers J Clin Invest 2012 122 1339 1353 22476196
129 Yarchoan M Arnold SE Repurposing diabetes drugs for brain insulin resistance in Alzheimer disease Diabetes 2014 63 2253 2261 24931035
130 de la Monte SM Contributions of brain insulin resistance and deficiency in amyloid-related neurodegeneration in Alzheimer’s disease Drugs 2012 72 49 66 22191795
131 Chiu S-L Chen CM Cline HT Insulin receptor signaling regulates synapse number, dendritic plasticity, and circuit function in vivo Neuron 2008 58 708 719 18549783
132 Dou J-T Chen M Dufour F Alkon DL Zhao W-Q Insulin receptor signaling in long-term memory consolidation following spatial learning Learn Mem 2005 12 646 655 16287721
133 McClean PL Parthsarathy V Faivre E Hölscher C The diabetes drug liraglutide prevents degenerative processes in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease J Neurosci 2011 31 6587 6594 21525299
134 Lourenco MV Clarke JR Frozza RL Bomfim TR Forny-Germano L TNF-α mediates PKR-dependent memory impairment and brain IRS-1 inhibition induced by Alzheimer’s β-amyloid oligomers in mice and monkeys Cell Metab 2013 18 831 843 24315369
135 Kornelius E Lin C-L Chang H-H Li H-H Huang W-N DPP-4 inhibitor linagliptin attenuates αβ-induced cytotoxicity through activation of AMPK in neuronal cells CNS Neurosci Ther 2015 21 549 557 26010513
136 Claxton A Baker LD Hanson A Trittschuh EH Cholerton B Long-acting intranasal insulin detemir improves cognition for adults with mild cognitive impairment or early-stage Alzheimer’s disease dementia J Alzheimer’s Dis 2015 44 897 906 25374101
137 Talbot K Wang H-Y Kazi H Han L-Y Bakshi KP Demonstrated brain insulin resistance in Alzheimer’s disease patients is associated with IGF-1 resistance, IRS-1 dysfunction, and cognitive decline J Clin Invest 2012 122 1316 1338 22476197
138 Pandey MK DeGrado TR Glycogen Synthase Kinase-3 (GSK-3)-Targeted Therapy and Imaging Theranostics 2016 6 571 593 26941849
139 Engel T Hernández F Avila J Lucas JJ Full reversal of Alzheimer’s disease-like phenotype in a mouse model with conditional overexpression of glycogen synthase kinase-3 J Neurosci 2006 26 5083 5090 16687499
140 McGeer EG McGeer PL Neuroinflammation in Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment: a field in its infancy J Alzheimer’s Dis 2010 19 355 361 20061650
141 Tobinick E Perispinal etanercept for treatment of Alzheimer’s disease Curr Alzheimer Res 2007 4 550 552 18220520
142 Perry RT Collins JS Wiener H Acton R Go RC The role of TNF and its receptors in Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 2001 22 873 883 11754994
143 Janelsins MC Mastrangelo MA Park KM Sudol KL Narrow WC Chronic neuron-specific tumor necrosis factor-a expression enhances the local inflammatory environment ultimately leading to neuronal death in 3xTG-AD mice Am J Pathol 2008 173 1768 1782 18974297
144 White JA Manelli AM Holmberg KH Van Eldik LJ Ladu MJ Differential effects of oligomeric and fibrillar amyloid-beta 1–42 on astrocyte-mediated inflammation Neurobiol Dis 2005 18 459 465 15755672
145 Combs CK Karlo JC Kao SC Landreth GE β-Amyloid stimulation of microglia and monocytes results in TNFa-dependent expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase and neuronal apoptosis J Neurosci 2001 21 1179 1188 11160388
146 Park KM Bowers WJ Tumor necrosis factor-alpha mediated signaling in neuronal homeostasis and dysfunction Cell Signal 2010 22 977 983 20096353
147 Tobinick E Tumour necrosis factor modulation for treatment of Alzheimer’s disease: rationale and current evidence CNS Drugs 2009 23 713 725 19689163
148 Leonoudakis D Zhao P Beattie EC Rapid tumor necrosis factor a-induced exocytosis of glutamate receptor 2-lacking AMPA receptors to extrasynaptic plasma membrane potentiates excitotoxicity J Neurosci 2008 28 2119 2130 18305246
149 Medeiros R Prediger RD Passos GF Pandolfo P Duarte FS Connecting TNF-alpha signaling pathways to iNOS expression in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease: relevance for the behavioral and synaptic deficits induced by amyloid beta protein J Neurosci 2007 27 5394 5404 17507561
150 He P Zhong Z Lindholm K Berning L Lee W Deletion of tumor necrosis factor death receptor inhibits amyloid β generation and prevents learning and memory deficits in Alzheimer’s mice J Cell Biol 2007 178 829 841 17724122
151 McAlpine FE Lee JK Harms AS Ruhn KA Blurton-Jones M Inhibition of soluble TNF signaling in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease prevents pre-plaque amyloid-associated neuropathology Neurobiol Dis 2009 34 163 177 19320056
152 Chakrabarty P Herring A Ceballos-Diaz C Das P Golde TE Hippocampal expression of murine TNFa results in attenuation of amyloid deposition in vivo Mol Neurodegener 2011 6 16 21324189
153 Saha RN Ghosh A Palencia CA Fung YK Dudek SM TNF-alpha preconditioning protects neurons via neuron-specific up-regulation of CREB-binding protein J Immunol 2009 183 2068 2078 19596989
154 Orellana DI Quintanilla RA Maccioni RB Neuroprotective effect of TNFalpha against the beta-amyloid neurotoxicity mediated by CDK5 kinase Biochim Biophys Acta 2007 1773 254 263 17150266
155 Barger SW Hörster D Furukawa K Goodman Y Krieglstein J Tumor necrosis factors a and β protect neurons against amyloid β-peptide toxicity: evidence for involvement of a κB-binding factor and attenuation of peroxide and Ca2+ accumulation Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1995 92 9328 9332 7568127
156 Dolga AM Granic I Blank T Knaus HG Spiess J TNF-α-mediates neuroprotection against glutamate-induced excitotoxicity via NF-κB-dependent up-regulation of KCa2.2 channels J Neurochem 2008 107 1158 1167 18823372
157 Cheng B Christakos S Mattson MP Tumor necrosis factors protect neurons against metabolic-excitotoxic insults and promote maintenance of calcium homeostasis Neuron 1994 12 139 153 7507336
158 Patel JR Brewer GJ Age-related changes to tumor necrosis factor receptors affect neuron survival in the presence of beta-amyloid J Neurosci Res 2008 86 2303 2313 18418902
159 Vandenabeele P Declercq W Beyaert R Fiers W Two tumour necrosis factor receptors: structure and function Trends Cell Biol 1995 5 392 399 14732063
160 Faustman D Davis M TNF receptor 2 pathway: drug target for autoimmune diseases Nat Rev Drug Discov 2010 9 482 493 20489699
161 Wajant H Pfizenmaier K Scheurich P Tumor necrosis factor signaling Cell Death Differ 2003 10 45 65 12655295
162 McCoy MK Tansey MG TNF signaling inhibition in the CNS: implications for normal brain function and neurodegenerative disease J Neuroinflammation 2008 5 45 18925972
163 Montgomery SL Narrow WC Mastrangelo MA Olschowka JA O’Banion MK Chronic neuron-and age-selective down-regulation of TNF receptor expression in triple-transgenic Alzheimer disease mice leads to significant modulation of amyloid- and tau-related pathologies Am J Pathol 2013 182 2285 2297 23567638
164 Pimentel-Muiños FX Seed B Regulated commitment of TNF receptor signaling: a molecular switch for death or activation Immunity 1999 11 783 793 10626900
165 Pickering M Cumiskey D O’Connor JJ Actions of TNF-alpha on glutamatergic synaptic transmission in the central nervous system Exp Physiol 2005 90 663 670 15944202
166 Marchetti L Klein M Schlett K Pfizenmaier K Eisel ULM Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-mediated neuroprotection against glutamate-induced excitotoxicity is enhanced by N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor activation. Essential role of a TNF receptor 2-mediated phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-dependent NF-kappa B pathway J Biol Chem 2004 279 32869 32881 15155767
167 Saleem M Herrmann N Swardfager W Eisen R Lanctot KL Inflammatory Markers in Mild Cognitive Impairment: A Meta-Analysis J Alzheimer’s Dis 2015 47 669 679 26401702
168 Huberman M Shalit F Roth-Deri I Gutman B Brodie C Correlation of cytokine secretion by mononuclear cells of Alzheimer patients and their disease stage J Neuroimmunol 1994 52 147 152 8034754
169 Sharma V Thakur V Singh SN Guleria R Tumor necrosis factor and Alzheimer’s disease: a cause and consequence relationship Klinik Psikofarmakoloji Bülteni (Bull Clin Psychopharmacol) 2012 22 86 97
170 Buxbaum JD Liu KN Luo Y Slack JL Stocking KL Evidence that tumor necrosis factor a converting enzyme is involved in regulated a-secretase cleavage of the Alzheimer amyloid protein precursor J Biol Chem 1998 273 27765 27767 9774383
171 Reddy P Slack JL Davis R Cerretti DP Kozlosky CJ Functional analysis of the domain structure of tumor necrosis factor-alpha converting enzyme J Biol Chem 2000 275 14608 14614 10799547
172 Jiang H Hampel H Prvulovic D Wallin A Blennow K Elevated CSF levels of TACE activity and soluble TNF receptors in subjects with mild cognitive impairment and patients with Alzheimer’s disease Mol Neurodegener 2011 6 69 21978728
173 Kim ML Zhang B Mills IP Milla ME Brunden KR Effects of TNFalpha-converting enzyme inhibition on amyloid beta production and APP processing in vitro and in vivo J Neurosci 2008 28 12052 12061 19005070
174 Wang H Czura CJ Tracey KJ Thomson AW Lotze MT Tumor necrosis factor The Cytokine Handbook 2003 4th London Academic Press 837 860
175 Marques-Fernandez F Planells-Ferrer L Gozzelino R Galenkamp KM Reix S TNFα induces survival through the FLIP-L-dependent activation of the MAPK/ERK pathway Cell Death Dis 2013 4 e493 23412386
176 Micheau O Tschopp J Induction of TNF receptor I-mediated apoptosis via two sequential signaling complexes Cell 2003 114 181 190 12887920
177 Del Villar K Miller CA Down-regulation of DENN/MADD, a TNF receptor binding protein, correlates with neuronal cell death in Alzheimer’s disease brain and hippocampal neurons Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004 101 4210 4215 15007167
178 Varfolomeev EE Ashkenazi A Tumor necrosis factor: an apoptosis JuNKie? Cell 2004 116 491 497 14980217
179 Fontaine V Mohand-Said S Hanoteau N Fuchs C Pfizenmaier K Neurodegenerative and neuroprotective effects of tumor Necrosis factor (TNF) in retinal ischemia: opposite roles of TNF receptor 1 and TNF receptor 2 J Neurosci 2002 22 RC216 11917000
180 Bruce AJ Boling W Kindy MS Peschon J Kraemer PJ Altered neuronal and microglial responses to excitotoxic and ischemic brain injury in mice lacking TNF receptors Nat Med 1996 2 788 794 8673925
181 Montgomery SL Mastrangelo MA Habib D Narrow WC Knowlden SA Ablation of TNF-RI/RII expression in Alzheimer’s disease mice leads to an unexpected enhancement of pathology: implications for chronic pan-TNF-α suppressive therapeutic strategies in the brain Am J Pathol 2011 179 2053 2070 21835156
182 Jiang H He P Xie J Staufenbiel M Li R Genetic deletion of TNFRII gene enhances the Alzheimer-like pathology in an APP transgenic mouse model via reduction of phosphorylated IκBα Hum Mol Genet 2014 23 4906 4918 24824215
183 Cheng X Yang L He P Li R Shen Y Differential activation of tumor necrosis factor receptors distinguishes between brains from Alzheimer’s disease and non-demented patients J Alzheimer’s Dis 2010 19 621 630 20110607
184 Culpan D Cornish A Love S Kehoe PG Wilcock GK Protein and gene expression of tumour necrosis factor receptors I and II and their promoter gene polymorphisms in Alzheimer’s disease Exp Gerontol 2007 42 538 544 17267158
185 González IL Garcia-Esparcia P Llorens F Ferrer I Genetic and transcriptomic profiles of inflammation in neurodegenerative diseases: Alzheimer, Parkinson, Creutzfeldt-Jacob and tauopathies Int J Mol Sci 2016 17 206 26861289
186 Shi JQ Wang BR Jiang WW Chen J Zhu YW Cognitive improvement with intrathecal administration of infliximab in a woman with Alzheimer’s disease J Am Geriatr Soc 2011 59 1142 1144 21668921
187 Tobinick EL Perispinal etanercept: a new therapeutic paradigm in neurology Expert Rev Neurother 2010 10 985 1002 20518613
188 Tobinick EL Gross H Rapid improvement in verbal fluency and aphasia following perispinal etanercept in Alzheimer’s disease BMC Neurol 2008 8 27 18644112
189 Tobinick EL Gross H Rapid cognitive improvement in Alzheimer’s disease following perispinal etanercept administration J Neuroinflammation 2008 5 2 18184433
190 Butchart J Brook L Hopkins V Teeling J Püntener U Etanercept in Alzheimer disease: A randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind, phase 2 trial Neurology 2015 84 2161 2168 25934853
191 He P Cheng X Staufenbiel M Li R Shen Y Long-term treatment of thalidomide ameliorates amyloid-like pathology through inhibition of β-secretase in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease PLoS ONE 2013 8 e55091 23405115
192 Greig NH Giordano T Zhu X Yu QS Perry TA Thalidomide-based TNF-alpha inhibitors for neurodegenerative diseases Acta Neurobiol Exp (Wars) 2004 64 1 9 15190675
193 Ferretti MT Allard S Partridge V Ducatenzeiler A Cuello AC Minocycline corrects early, pre-plaque neuroinflammation and inhibits BACE-1 in a transgenic model of Alzheimer’s disease-like amyloid pathology J Neuroinflammation 2012 9 62 22472085
194 Fischer R Kontermann RE Maier O Targeting sTNF/TNFR1 signaling as a new therapeutic strategy Antibodies 2015 4 48 70
195 Williams SK Maier O Fischer R Fairless R Hochmeister S Antibody-mediated inhibition of TNFR1 attenuates disease in a mouse model of multiple sclerosis PLoS One 2014 9 e90117 24587232
196 Dansokho C Ait Ahmed D Aid S Toly-Ndour C Chaigneau T Regulatory T cells delay disease progression in Alzheimer-like pathology Brain 2016 139 1237 1251 26912648
