LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9500169
20475
Neurobiol Dis
Neurobiol. Dis.
Neurobiology of disease
0969-9961
1095-953X

28502803
5530876
10.1016/j.nbd.2017.05.006
NIHMS879334
Article
Gene co-expression networks identify Trem2 and Tyrobp as major hubs in human APOE expressing mice following traumatic brain injury
Castranio Emilie L. 1
Mounier Anais 1
Wolfe Cody M. 1
Nam Kyong Nyon 1
Fitz Nicholas F. 1
Letronne Florent 1
Schug Jonathan 2
Koldamova Radosveta 1
Lefterov Iliya 1
1 Department of Environmental and Occupational Health, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15219, USA
2 Functional Genomics Core, Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
* Correspondence should be addressed to Iliya Lefterov - iliyal@pitt.edu (Tel:412 383 6906) or Radosveta Koldamova - radak@pitt.edu (Tel:412 383 7197); Department of Environmental &amp; Occupational Health, University of Pittsburgh, 100 Technology Dr., BRIDG Building, Pittsburgh, PA 15219
27 5 2017
11 5 2017
9 2017
01 9 2018
105 114
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is strongly linked to an increased risk of developing dementia, including chronic traumatic encephalopathy and possibly Alzheimer’s disease (AD). APOEε4 allele of human Apolipoprotein E (APOE) gene is the major genetic risk factor for late onset AD and has been associated with chronic traumatic encephalopathy and unfavorable outcome following TBI. To determine if there is an APOE isoform-specific response to TBI we performed controlled cortical impact on 3-month-old mice expressing human APOE3 or APOE4 isoforms. Following injury, we used several behavior paradigms to test for anxiety and learning and found that APOE3 and APOE4 targeted replacement mice demonstrate cognitive impairments following moderate TBI. Transcriptional profiling 14 days following injury revealed a significant effect of TBI, which was similar in both genotypes. Significantly upregulated by injury in both genotypes were mRNA expression and protein level of ABCA1 transporter and APOJ, but not APOE.

To identify gene-networks correlated to injury and APOE isoform, we performed Weighted Gene Co-expression Network Analysis. We determined that the network mostly correlated to TBI in animals expressing both isoforms is immune response with major hub genes including Trem2, Tyrobp, Clec7a and Cd68. We also found a significant increase of TREM2, IBA-1 and GFAP protein levels in the brains of injured mice. We identified a network representing myelination that correlated significantly with APOE isoform in both injury groups. This network was significantly enriched in oligodendrocyte signature genes, such as Mbp and Plp1. Our results demonstrate unique and distinct gene networks at this acute time point for injury and APOE isoform, as well as a network driven by APOE isoform across TBI groups.

Apolipoprotein E
Traumatic brain injury
Trem2
Tyrobp
myelination
immune response
Fyn
innate immune response

Introduction

Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is one of the leading causes of death and disability in the United States. Approximately 2 million people sustain a TBI and 50,000 TBI-related deaths occur in the United States every year. Currently, there is no treatment for TBI, patients are only given supportive care for which the cost is approximately $60 billion annually. TBI can either be caused when the head violently impacts with another object or when an object pierces the skull and enters the brain tissue. Studies show that following the acute phase, over the long-term, patients may develop changes in cognition, and increases in both anxiety and depression [55,27]. The high level of variability in injury outcomes suggests, to a significant extent, a strong role for genetic influence on brain susceptibility and recovery [20,71].

TBI is strongly linked to increased risk of developing dementia, including chronic traumatic encephalopathy and possibly Alzheimer’s disease (AD) [37,38,47]. The APOEε4 allele of human apolipoprotein E (APOE) gene is the major genetic risk factor for late onset AD and has been associated with chronic traumatic encephalopathy and unfavorable outcome following TBI. Multiple studies have identified worse outcomes following TBI based on the inheritance of APOEε4 allele [4,19]. The role of APOE in neuronal survival and repair and in overall response to TBI, however, is not well understood. It has been suggested that APOE4 is less stable and catabolically degraded more quickly than the other APOE isoforms, possibly due to its lower lipidation level [42]. In mice, studies have identified APOE-genotype and brain-region specific genomic changes using mRNA microarrays after controlled cortical impact (CCI) [15]. Patients, carriers of APOEε4, experiencing TBI demonstrated worse memory performance in a verbal learning test and verbal fluency measured 6 months post-injury [16]. In contrast, other in vivo data did not find or confirm a role for APOE4 in TBI [45,46,49,72]. For example, in adult patients with moderate to severe TBI assessed 3, 6 and 12 months post-injury, APOE4 patients did not have poorer cognitive performance, functional outcome or slower improvement [56]. There is a uniform agreement that more studies are needed to clarify the role of APOEε4 allele in TBI. Mechanical stress placed on the brain due to the impact is considered the primary injury. Following the impact, a secondary injury occurs leading to additional damage and cell death, worsening the outcome. Mechanisms of secondary injury include neuronal excitotoxicity, edema, oxidative stress, and neuroinflammation. The inflammatory state in the brain can persist for many years following the injury; chronic neuroinflammation following TBI was closely associated with neuronal death and impaired cell proliferation both immediately adjacent to, and locations more distant from, site of injury [2]. Multiple inflammatory molecules are upregulated after TBI and are believed to contribute to these processes, as well as blood brain barrier dysfunction. Interleukin-1β (IL-1β), tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), chemokine C motif ligand 2 (Ccl2), and chemokine CX3C motif receptor 1 (Cx3cr1) are among those that have been intensely studied for their impact on brain pathology following TBI [18,21,29,35]. Studies have shown that the expression levels of the majority of those inflammatory factors are associated with severity of injury and outcome in TBI patients, the reduction of neurobehavioral impairments and injury volume as well as the survival rates in rodent models [50,73].

To our knowledge, transcription profiling of APOE expressing mice following TBI using Next Generation Sequencing has not yet been performed. The aim of this study was to determine if there is an interaction between APOE isoform and the response to TBI affecting phenotype and the transcriptome. We performed controlled cortical impact on 3-month-old mice expressing human APOE3 or APOE4 isoform and following the injury, tested for anxiety and learning. Transcriptional profiling of hippocampal and cortical tissue from the injury site was performed using mRNA-sequencing (mRNA-seq). We hypothesized that there is APOE isoform-specific response to injury and APOE4 mice would have worse cognitive outcomes and higher inflammatory gene expression following TBI. We found that APOE genotype, while a significant variable in both behavioral tests, did not modulate the changes in transcriptome seen two weeks post injury. To correlate the transcriptome to the phenotype we used network-based approach and applied Weighted Gene Co-expression Network Analysis (WGCNA). This analysis not only connects the genes within networks and identifies the most connected members of a given pathway, but elucidates the relevance of the networks to the experimental findings. Thus, we identified that TBI significantly affected immune response, with Trem2 and Tyrobp being highly ranked within the interconnected gene network.

Methods

Animals

All animal experiments were approved through the University of Pittsburgh Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee and carried out in accordance with PHS policies on the use of animals in research. We used human APOE4+/+ and APOE3+/+ targeted replacement mice on a C57BL/6 background [24]. Experimental male and female APOE3 or APOE4 mice were kept on a 12 h light-dark cycle with ad libitum access to food and water. Mice at 3 mo of age were randomly assigned to either sham or controlled cortical impact (CCI) experimental group and initially were handled for 2 days (5 min per day). Following surgical procedures, mice were allowed to recover for 3 days before starting behavioral testing. All materials were purchased through Thermo Fisher Scientific, unless otherwise noted.

Controlled Cortical Impact

CCI model of brain injury was performed according to previous published methods [9]. Following induction of anesthesia with 5% isoflurane, the mouse was moved to the stereotaxic frame, where the head was secured, core body temperature maintained at 37°C using a heating pad and anesthesia continued with 1.5% isoflurane. The head was shaven, surgical site sterilized with two separate iodine - alcohol washes, a 50% mixture of bupivacaine and lidocaine applied to the surgical site and ophthalmic ointment applied to the eyes. The scalp was opened with a midline incision exposing the dorsal aspect of the skull and the skull leveled. A 4.5 mm diameter craniotomy was performed over the left parietal cortex using a dental drill. Once the bone flap was removed, mice in the CCI group received a single impact at 1.0 mm depth with a 3.0 mm diameter metal tip onto the cortex (3 m/s, 100 ms dwell time; Impact One, Leica). Sham mice received identical anesthesia and craniotomy, but did not receive impact and are considered negative controls. Following the impact, the surgical site was sutured, triple antibiotic cream applied, Buprenex (0.1 mg/kg; IP) provided for analgesia, and sterile saline administered for rehydration. Mice were allowed to recover on heating pad, until freely mobile, before returning to their home cage.

Elevated-Plus Maze

The elevated plus maze (EPM, San Diego Instruments) test was performed 4 days post-injury as described previously [70]. The maze consists of 4 arms in the shape of a “+”. All arms are the same length (30.5 cm) with a central square (10×10 cm); 2 arms are open on the sides, and 2 have 16 cm high walls. The entire maze is raised 40 cm off the ground. The elevated plus maze tests anxiety-related behavior by utilizing rodent’s fear of open and elevated spaces. Mice are placed into the maze within the center square facing a closed arm and are allowed to explore for 5 min. Percent time spent in each arm was tracked using the ANY-maze software (Stoelting Co.) from a camera positioned over the maze. 50% of body area within an arm was established in ANY-maze for definition of entry.

Morris Water Maze

Spatial navigational learning and memory retention were assessed using Morris water maze (MWM) as described previously [22,44]; with testing performed on days 6–12 post-injury. Briefly, in a circular pool of water (diameter 122 cm, height 51 cm, temperature 21 ± 1°C), we measured the ability of mice to form a spatial relationship between a safe but invisible platform (submerged 1 cm below the water level; 10 cm in diameter) and several visual extra maze cues surrounding the pool of water. On day 6 post-injury, mice received a habituation trial, during which the animals were allowed to explore the pool of water without the platform present. Beginning the next day, they received four daily hidden platform training (acquisition) trials with 5-min inter-trial intervals for five consecutive days (days 7–11 post-injury). The platform remained in the center of one of the four quadrants of the pool (target quadrant). Animals were allowed 60 s to locate the platform and 20 s to remain there. Mice that failed to find the platform were lead to the platform by the experimenter and allowed to rest there for 20 s. Performance was recorded using Any-maze software (Stoelting Co.) during all trials. During the acquisition trials, escape latency (time to reach the platform) was subsequently used to analyze and compare the performance between all groups.

Animal Tissue Processing

Fourteen days post-injury, mice were anesthetized using Avertin (250 mg/kg of body weight, i.p.) and perfused transcardially with 20mL of cold 0.1M PBS pH 7.4, following a blood draw from the right atrium [51]. Brains were rapidly removed and a 1.5 mm coronal section of the brain, including the injury site, was taken by slicing the brain at −2.5 mm and −4.0 from bregma. Within the coronal slice, the hemispheres were separated, and the subcortical tissue was dissected out; hippocampal and cortical tissue were snap-frozen together for mRNA-seq and RT-qPCR analysis. The remaining anterior of the brain was fixed in formalin for immunohistochemistry.

Immunohistochemistry

All procedures were as reported previously [25,36,63]. Briefly, OCT-embedded hemibrains were cut in the coronal plane at 20 µm sections and stored in a glycol-based cryoprotectant at −20°C. Five sections starting at −0.20 from Bregma, separated by 500 µm were used for staining. Sections were washed in PBS and antigen retrieval performed with Reveal Decloaker at 100°C for 30 min in a water bath. Quenching of endogenous peroxidases, blocking with 5% normal donkey serum and avidin-biotin blocking followed antigen retrieval. Sections were incubated in TREM2 primary antibody (1:100, AF179, R&amp;D Systems) overnight at 4 °C, followed by washing in PBS and labeling with biotinylated secondary antibody (1:1000, donkey α sheep; A16045) and developed with Vectastain ABC Elite kit (Vector Laboratories) and DAB substrate. Sections for GFAP and Iba1 staining were blocked in 5% serum of the requisite host and incubated in primary antibody overnight (anti-GFAP: 1:1000, Z0334, Dako; Iba1: 1:200, 19–19741, WAKO). Secondary antibodies with conjugated fluorophores were applied as appropriate. Sections were mounted on charged slides and coverslipped with Permount. All slides were examined using the Nikon Eclipse 90i at 10× magnification and percent positive staining was defined as the percent area covered by staining using NIS Elements software (Nikon Instruments Inc.). The percent positive straining was determined by setting a threshold within the software. The threshold was determined using negative and positive controls to identify only stained tissue. Once set, the threshold was applied to all sections and then the ipsilateral and contralateral hemispheres were traced separately to identify the area. The software then calculates the amount of staining per area. Unless otherwise stated, analysis was conducted for ipsilateral hemispheres only. Contralateral hemispheres were identified using a pinhole made before sectioning.

RNA isolation and mRNA sequencing

All procedures were performed as before [51]. Four APOE3 and APOE4 male and female mice per sham and CCI injured group were used for mRNA-seq. RNA was isolated from frozen cortices and hippocampi at the injury site and purified using RNeasy kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer recommendations. Quality control of all RNA samples was performed on a 2100 Bioanalyzer instrument and samples with RIN &gt; 8 were further used for library construction using mRNA Library Prep Reagent Set (Illumina). Libraries were generated by PCR enrichment including incorporation of barcodes to enable multiplexing. The libraries, were sequenced on Illumina HiSeq2000. For RT-qPCR, first strand cDNA was synthesized from 1 µg of total RNA using EcoDry™ Premix, Random Hexamers (Clontech). Next Generation Sequencing of libraries was performed by the Next Generation Sequencing Center (University of Pennsylvania, http://fgc.genomics.upenn.edu/) on HiSeq 2500 machine. Following initial processing and quality control, the sequencing datasets were further analyzed for differential gene expression, which in all cases was calculated using Subread/featureCounts (v1.5.0; https://sourceforge.net/projects/subread/files/subread-1.5.0/) for read alignment and summarization and statistical package edgeR (v3.14.0; https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/edgeR.html). Lists of differentially expressed genes are further analyzed as described in the following section.

Principle Component analysis

Principle component analysis (PCA) was performed to determine the principle components, which account for the highest sources of variance in the dataset, using R (v. 3.3.2) packages and visualized using “ggbiplot2” (v2.1.0, https://github.com/vqv/ggbiplot) [67].

Functional Pathway analysis

We performed functional annotation clustering using the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID, http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov/version6.7) and Gene set enrichment Analysis (GSEA, v2.2.2, https://www.broadinstitute.org/GSEA) [48,65].

Weighted Gene Co-expression Network Analysis

Network analysis was performed using WGCNA (v.1.49) [76]. Libraries are clustered by gene expression enabling the detection of outliers and the power is determined by scale free topology model. Modules were generated automatically using a soft thresholding power, β=10, a minimum module size of 33 genes and a minimum module merge cut height of 0.25. Modules were named by conventional color scheme and then correlated with trait data (APOE isoform, Injury). Each trait was converted individually into a binary factor, (e.g. Sham=0, TBI=1; APOE3=0, APOE4=1). The modules were then correlated to the group phenotype (e.g. all APOE3 Sham mice =0, 0; all APOE3 TBI = 0, 1) using Pearson’s correlation. Statistical significance was determined by student’s t-test, p&lt;0.05. All modules were summarized by module eigengenes (ME), the first principle component of each module that was calculated as a synthetic gene representing the expression profile of all genes within a given module.

Western blot

Frozen cortices and hippocampi were homogenized in TBS homogenization buffer (250 mM sucrose, 20 mM Tris base, 1 mM EDTA, and 1 mM EGTA, 1 ml per 100 mg of tissue) and protease inhibitors cocktail (Roche) as described previously. For WB, RIPA extracted proteins were used detection of apoE, ABCA1, CLU, FYN and β-ACTIN. Thirty microgram of proteins were resolved on 4–12 % SDS-PAGE gels and transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes. Used were the following primary antibodies: Anti-ABCA1 (Ab7360, Abcam), anti-ApoE (178479, Calbiochem), anti-FYN (sc-16, Santa Cruz), and anti-CLU (sc-6419, SantaCruz).

Statistical Analyses

All results are reported as means ± S.E.M. To determine statistical significance between groups in EPM, we used two-way ANOVA with a Sidak’s multiple comparison post hoc test. To analyze MWM data, a three-way ANOVA was used. Unless otherwise indicated, all statistical analyses were performed in GraphPad Prism, version 7.0, or R, version 3.3.2 and differences were considered significant where p&lt;0.05.

Results

TBI causes anxiety-related changes and spatial learning deficits

To examine the effect of APOE isoforms on cognitive performance following TBI, we used mice expressing human APOE3 or APOE4 isoform. As a model of brain injury, we used CCI, performed on 3 months old mice. First, the mice were tested for anxiety-related behavior in the elevated plus maze (EPM), 4 days post injury. As shown on Fig. 1A, the injured mice of both genotypes showed an increased time spent in the open-arms of the EPM when compared to their sham counterparts. We found significant main effects of genotype and TBI, but no interaction. Due to the acute time-point at which this test was performed, increased time spent in the open arms can be interpreted as an increased risk-taking or impulsive behavior by the injured animals.

We employed Morris Water Maze (MWM) to examine the effect of TBI on spatial learning. The result shown on Fig. 1B demonstrates that for both APOE genotypes, TBI significantly increased escape latency time in APOE3 mice (compare blue open and closed circles) and in APOE4 mice (compare red open and closed squares). As seen from Fig. 1B, APOE4 mice in both groups performed significantly worse than APOE3 mice confirming previous data from our and other groups showing a significant memory impairment at baseline in APOE4 mice [24,58,23]. The conclusion from these experiments is that TBI significantly worsens spatial learning and increases impulsive behavior in both APOE isoforms.

Changes in transcriptome induced by TBI reflect stimulated immune response and decreased neuronal functionality

To examine how TBI affects brain transcriptome, we performed mRNA-seq using total RNA isolated from the brains of the mice tested for cognitive performance and perfused 14 days post injury. For this analysis, we used hippocampal and cortical tissue from around the injury site. The PCA was used to calculate the principal components, which account for the sources of highest possible variance in the transcriptome. The result from the PCA shown on Fig. 2A demonstrates that the mRNA-seq data for TBI animals from both genotypes clustered together and the same was observed for sham treated mice. Thus, the result of the PCA suggests that the variance between gene expression levels in TBI vs Sham was higher than between gene expression level in APOE3 vs APOE4 transcripts.

An expression-by-expression plot [69] using the lists of differentially expressed genes (Fig. 2B) demonstrates the high number of significantly expressed transcripts in all sham versus all TBI animals. We then compared the effect of TBI on transcriptome separately for each genotype. As shown on Fig. 2C and D, a significant number of differentially expressed genes was identified in both APOE groups (genes lists shown on Suppl. Table 1A and B). We were interested whether there was a similarity between the biological processes affected by TBI in APOE3 and E4 mice. Top up-regulated categories in both genotypes were highly consistent and were associated with “Immune System Process”, “Innate Immune Response” and “Inflammatory Response” (Suppl. Table 2A and B). Top down-regulated categories in both genotypes were also similar, including “Regulation of Ion Transmembrane Transport”, and “Potassium Ion Transport” (Suppl. Table 3A and B). To further identify enriched pathways commonly affected by TBI in both isoforms, we applied Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) [65] and compared all mice in the TBI group (E3-TBI+E4-TBI) to all sham mice (E3-sham+E4-sham). The analysis confirms the top up-regulated categories by TBI (Suppl. Fig. 1A).

We were particularly interested in two genes significantly up-regulated in brains of both APOE genotypes - Abca1 transporter (fold change=3.46) and Clusterin (Clu/APOJ, fold change=1.66). As shown on Fig. 2E and F, the protein level of ABCA1 and CLU was significantly increased. In contrast, Apoe mRNA and APOE protein level were unaffected by TBI. Thus, these experiments confirm and validate our mRNA-seq results.

Transcriptome analysis demonstrates a higher expression of markers for resident microglia versus peripheral macrophages

Due to the nature of the CCI model, the blood brain barrier is damaged, which allows entry to peripheral cells not normally present in the brain, such as monocytes and peripheral macrophages. We were interested in identifying which cell type was responsible for the inflammatory response in the brain at 14 days post injury. To do this, we referred to Hickman et al. (2013)[31], who demonstrated that microglia have a unique transcriptomic signature with several genes separate from that of peripheral macrophages. Thus, our RNA sequencing data point to a significant portion of genes that are considered microglia “sensome” genes (86 of 100; Fig. 3A–B), or cellular receptors involved in the microglial function of sensing the brain environment. Several of those genes had a significantly higher expression in resident macrophages (microglia) when compared to peripheral macrophages, including Gpr34, Trem2, Siglech, and P2ry12. Additionally, a number of those genes are unique to microglia, including Cx3cr1, Tmem119 and Slco2b1. We also looked at other receptor families involved in immune response, including the purinergic receptors (Fig. 3C–D) and sialic acid binding immunoglobulin lectins (Siglecs; Fig. 3E–F). Several of those were identified as being expressed at significantly higher levels in microglia compared to peripheral macrophages, including P2rx7, P2ry6, P2ry12, P2ry13 and Siglech. As seen from Fig. 3A–F, all these groups of genes was significantly upregulated by TBI in both APOE3 and APOE4 mice. In contrast, several genes characteristic of peripheral macrophages, such as Alox15, Fabp4, Fcna, Slp1 and Serpinb2 were not found (data not shown) or expressed at a very low level (P2rx4). We conclude that whereas the peripheral macrophages invade in the initial days following TBI and are likely to remain present in CNS at low levels, the resident microglia are the predominant source of inflammatory response in the brain 14 days post injury [29,32,41].

Integrated system approach identifies correlated gene networks associated with TBI

To identify gene networks affected by TBI, we employed Weighted Gene Co-expression Network Analysis (WGCNA) [75,57]. We used datasets of the same APOE3 and APOE4 expressing mice, shown on Fig. 2 and 3. WGCNA clusters genes based on expression profiles into functional groups (referred to as modules) and the average expression profile is represented as a ‘module eigengene’ (ME), which is given an arbitrary color name. MEs were then correlated to the phenotype of each experimental group, namely APOE3-TBI, APOE4-TBI, APOE3-Sham and APOE4-Sham, allowing identification of the networks associated with them. We found no significant gender difference, therefore male and female mice were analyzed together. The relationship table (Fig. 4A) shows the Pearson correlation of each module to the phenotype. Additionally, the table visualizes the overall direction of expression for the genes within each module for each phenotype. We were most interested in modules that correlated significantly with either injury in both APOE isoforms or with APOE isoform. Thus, we chose to further characterize two networks that correlate to TBI (ME Brown and ME Green), and two to APOE genotype (ME Darkred and ME Salmon). Correlations between the modules are shown in Suppl. Fig. 2.

ME Brown positively correlated to APOE3-TBI (r=0.54, p=0.002) and APOE4-TBI groups (r=0.47, p=0.007) and negatively correlated to sham treated mice. The interpretation of the positive correlation is that TBI increases the expression of genes, members of this module in mice expressing either isoform. This network is enriched with transcripts functionally associated with “Immune Response” and “Innate Immunity” (Table 1). As seen in Suppl. Fig. 3C and D, the correlation between Module membership and Gene significance for genes within this network demonstrates that they strongly relate to the biological processes associated with this module. The expression levels for all genes in the network and for each sample are shown on Fig. 5A (heatmap and bar plot). The network (Fig. 5B) was built using hub genes associated with immune response and phagocytosis, such as Trem2 (Triggering Receptor Expressed on Myeloid Cells 2), Tyrobp, Clec7a, Cd68, Cx3cr1 and the transcripts connected to them. Hub genes of this network are highly enriched in microglia signature genes (fold enrichment 8.95), including Grp34, Fcrls, Tmem119 and Cx3cr1. In the hub gene list, there were also astrocyte-specific genes such as Gfap, Aqp4, Clu (fold enrichment 8.69).

To validate the mRNA-seq results shown on Fig. 5C and D, we performed RT-QPCR for several genes - Trem2, Tyrobp, Cx3cr1, Tgfb1, Tgfbr1 (Fig. 5E and F). To confirm that mRNA expression levels correspond to an increase in the levels of the respective proteins, we chose three genes highly affected by TBI – Trem2 and Aif1/Iba-1 expressed in microglia and Gfap expressed in astrocytes. Trem2 encodes a transmembrane protein that is expressed on myeloid lineage cells, including microglia and recent studies have shown that Trem2 variants affect microglial functionality [14]. To analyze the impact of TBI on the protein level of TREM2, AIF1/IBA-1 and GFAP, we performed immunohistochemistry on brain sections from the same mice. As seen in Fig. 6A, sham animals showed relatively low-to-no TREM2 immunostaining. In contrast, TBI significantly increased presence of TREM2 around the injury site in both APOE3 (Fig. 6B) and APOE4 (Fig. 6C) mice (p&lt;0.05). IBA1 staining shown on Suppl. Fig. 4 is consistent with the increased intensity of TREM2 around the injury site and confirms microglia activation after TBI. For both TREM2 and IBA-1 staining, there was no significant difference between APOE3 and APOE4 injured animals. To validate the increased mRNA expression of GFAP, we performed immunohistochemistry against GFAP. As visible from Fig. 6E, sham animals show evenly distributed low levels of GFAP staining. In contrast, TBI animals show significantly higher levels of GFAP staining in both APOE3 and APOE4 when compared to their sham counterparts (Fig. 6F–G). As with TREM2 and IBA-1, there was no significant APOE isoform dependent difference in GFAP staining of either sham or TBI groups. The high levels of astrocytosis and microgliosis present at the injury site demonstrate a recruitment of these cells types to the injury.

The conclusion from these data is that, in both APOE isoforms, TBI affects resident microglia genes functionally related to immune response and phagocytosis, as well as astrocyte specific genes.

ME Green is negatively associated with injury suggesting that genes, members of this module are downregulated by TBI (Suppl. Fig. 5). The related biological process that represents this network (module size = 854) was associated with GO category “Transport” and is represented by Camk2b, Pik3r2 and Pld3 for which genetic variants are associated with an increased risk of Alzheimer’s disease [33,68] and functionally have a role in hippocampal plasticity, phospholipid metabolism, brain development, and APP processing [17].

Networks associated with expressed APOE isoform

As shown on Fig. 4, ME Darkred (Fig. 7, Suppl. Fig. 6) and Salmon (Fig. 8, Suppl. Fig. 6) are significantly associated with APOE isoform regardless of injury. On Fig. 7A, the heat-map and bar plot representing ME Darkred demonstrate an increased expression of genes associated with this network in APOE4 mice (TBI+Sham) and a decreased expression in APOE3 mice (TBI+Sham). The biological process associated with ME Darkred network (module size = 31) was the GO term “Innate immunity” (Fig. 7B). The heatmap (Fig. 7C) shows the highest 50 upregulated genes when comparing APOE3 and APOE4 mice. We were interested and further validated one of the hub genes associated with BP “Innate Immunity” - Fyn (Fyn proto-oncogene, Src family tyrosine kinase). Fyn is a major regulator of pro-inflammatory processes, specifically microglia mediated neuroinflammation [54]. mRNA-seq (Fig. 7D) and protein expression level for Fyn are shown on Fig. 7E and F. Three of Serpina3 genes (Serpina3m, Serpina3f and Serpina3h) have been also identified as hub genes in this network.

ME Salmon positively correlated to APOE4-TBI mice and negatively to APOE3-TBI (r=0.41, p=0.01). Functionally, this module (module size = 65) is enriched in genes connected to the BP “Myelination” (Fig. 8 and Table 1). The network is significantly enriched with oligodendrocyte signature genes (18 genes out of 64 were oligodendrocyte specific). The representative network (Fig. 8B) was built using the hub genes Car2, F2ah, Mbp and Plp1 that are all coding for major components of myelin [3,10] and together with cholesterol, are particularly important for myelin formation and remodeling in the context of axonal loss and repair after TBI [61,62]. Mutations in the majority of the genes within the network lead to demyelination and hypomyelinating inherited disorders [13,62,64,66], or have been implicated in neurodegeneration, including Alzheimer’s Disease. Alternatively, the high presence of myelin related proteins, including Mag, myelin associated glycoprotein, could be indicative of the formation of a glial scar [74,59]. Chronically, a glial scar could prevent axonal regeneration and potentially explain a worse outcome in APOE4 TBI mice. mRNA-seq results between APOE4 TBI and APOE3 TBI for selected hub genes are shown on Fig. 8C.

Discussion

We examined the role of human APOE isoforms in the response to TBI in mice. Our study was designed with the goal to identify differences in cognitive performance, brain transcriptome and genome-wide correlated gene networks in adult (3-month-old) APOE targeted replacement mice, following CCI model of brain injury. We found that TBI significantly worsened performance in the anxiety-related EPM and the spatial learning task MWM, but the results showed no interaction of injury with APOE isoform. At baseline, animals expressing APOE4 had pre-existing deficits compared to APOE3 animals, but both groups displayed similar responses to injury although in general APOE3 mice performed better. In mice expressing either isoform, TBI significantly changed the transcriptome, particularly increasing the expression of genes related to immune response and phagocytosis, such as Trem2, Tyrobp, Clec7a, Cd68, Cx3cr1, with low to no expression of peripheral macrophage genes, such as Alox15 and P2rx4. We analyzed the effect of TBI on the transcriptome within each genotype and found similar biological processes affected, regardless of the genotype. The GO terms downregulated by TBI were also similar, with the top processes being regulation of transmembrane ion transport and potassium transport. We did identify an APOE isoform effect on the brain transcriptome in TBI mice, but this effect was entirely separate from the effect of injury.

Using WGCNA we identified correlated gene networks associated with TBI. We determined differential effects of two traits – genotype and type of injury, and identified gene networks throughout the entire genome, that correlated with injury and with the expressed APOE isoform. To a very significant extent, WGCNA results confirmed the GO terms identified through pathway analysis using the lists of differentially expressed genes in response to TBI. Most highly affected by TBI network was represented by “Immune Response”. Importantly, neither APOE3 or APOE4 isoform had a specific modulatory effect on this network: validations of several genes by RT-qPCR, including Trem2 by IHC, found no differences between mice expressing APOE3 or APOE4 (Fig. 5 &amp; 6). This network was highly enriched in microglia signature genes; among those, Trem2, Clex7a and Hexb were identified as hub genes suggesting that at our chosen time-point – 14 days post injury, the elevated immune response in the brain was predominantly a result of activated microglia and astrocytes, which was confirmed by immunohistochemistry and is consistent with TREM2 localization. Recently, human TREM2 has come under scrutiny for its role in inflammation and neurodegeneration. TREM2 is expressed solely in cells of myeloid lineage, including microglia, and TREM2 mutations or mutations in the gene TYROBP, coding for its adaptor protein (aka DAP12) are linked to Nasu-Hakola disease [6]. Although its natural ligands are unknown, binding of TREM2 to negatively charged lipids, results in TYROBP phosphorylation, activation of intracellular spleen tyrosine kinase SYK, and thus SYK-RAS-ERK signaling pathway, actin remodeling and calcium mobilization needed for phagocytosis [14]. Using fluid percussion model of injury in Trem2 deficient mice Lamb’s group has recently shown that in injured mice there was a reduction of infiltrating macrophages, reduced inflammatory cytokines, less hippocampal volume loss and a rescue of spatial memory deficits [60]. Yet, a different study found that Trem2−/− mice had decreased phagocytosis after stroke and worsened neurological outcomes [40]. Obviously, the contradictory results of these studies point to the need of standardized study designs and data collection to understand the role of TREM2 in the response to TBI and subsequent repair.

The “Transport” network, ME Green, was significantly affected and down-regulated by injury in both genotypes. The hub genes of this network include Camk2b, which is important for both hippocampal-dependent learning and long-term potentiation [8]. The kinase transcribed by Camk2b is necessary for the proper targeting of CAMK2a at the synapse for promotion of dendritic spines and synapse formation. Pld3 is another gene in the “Transport” network, which is highly expressed in the brain and may be involved in synaptic transmission and signal transduction [17]. A rare missense variant of PLD3 was linked to an increased risk of late onset AD and since a decreased expression of PLD3 is associated with higher levels of extracellular Aβ, PLD3 may have some role in APP processing [53].

In injured mice “Innate immunity” was the network of genes differentially affected by APOE isoform. The network was built of transcripts connected to Fyn and Serpina3. Since tau and Fyn have been shown to co-localize in dendrites, not surprisingly, recent studies have suggested a pathogenic role for Fyn in AD, [43]. FYN interacts with Aβ, which possibly serves as a critical step in triggering downstream neuronal pathology. Moreover, it has been suggested that binding of Aβ oligomer species to the neuronal membrane receptors at the post-synaptic terminal may activate FYN by phosphorylation, resulting in N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor phosphorylation, dendritic spine loss and tau phosphorylation [52]. Serpina3m, Serpina3f and Serpina3h - Serpina3 genes identified as hub genes in ME Darkred, reside on mouse chromosome 12 (12F1 locus) and code for isoforms of the plasma protease inhibitor α1-antichymotrypsin [26]. Initially, SERPINA3 binding to Aβ peptide and subsequent deposition of this complex in amyloid plaque has been linked to the progression of Alzheimer’s disease (see [1] for review). Genetic variants of α1-antichymotrypsin have been considered as increasing the risk of LOAD, or a modifier of the risk imposed by APOE4 [28,39]. Results of more recent studies, however, have demonstrated a neuroprotective effect of the protein SERPINA3 in in vitro and in vivo models of multiple sclerosis, as well as accelerated tissue repair in a diabetic mouse model [34,30].

The “myelination” network represented by ME salmon was differentially affected by APOE isoform within only the injury groups. ME Salmon was upregulated in APOE4 TBI mice and downregulated in APOE3 TBI mice, and not significant in sham groups. The network was built on several myelin related proteins, such as Car2, F2ah, Mbp and Plp1, and was also highly enriched in oligodendrocyte specific markers. The presence of oligodendrocytes after injury is not surprising, as myelin and cholesterol would both be necessary components for axonal repair and regeneration [61,62]. However, myelin related proteins, particularly Mag, which was identified as a hub gene within the network, have been associated with inhibited axonal outgrowth and the formation of a glial scar [74]. The role of this network in repair and scar formation could provide a mechanism for worse outcome in APOE4 isoform after TBI that is temporally dependent.

The underlying molecular mechanisms by which human APOE isoforms, globally expressed in a mouse, affect the outcome of TBI are not clear, and in general are poorly understood. While controversial in their findings and final interpretation, many studies have suggested, so far, that the inheritance of APOE4 allele in humans or the expression of APOE4 in animal models would result in a worse outcome following brain injury. Several human studies, however, have shown that APOE4 had no effect on outcome of TBI [12,49]. In contrast, the majority of animal studies, mostly in AD mouse models expressing human APP, have demonstrated APOE4 plays a significant role in determining the pathology and recovery following TBI, possibly in an age dependent manner [5,45,7]. The animal models of TBI obviously do not, and cannot, represent all aspects of brain pathology as a response to brain trauma at molecular, cellular and organ levels. Moreover the lack of standardized study design and data collection makes it extraordinarily difficult to compare the results of the studies performed so far and to draw definitive conclusions. The results of our study did not suggest a major role for APOE3 or APOE4 isoforms in modulating the response to TBI. We identified, however, networks of genes in brains of APOE3 and APOE4 injured mice that have clearly pointed out to genes, and thus their proteins, with a potential to become useful and rational targets for future research and drug discovery relevant to TBI.

The major physiological role of APOE, as a principal apolipoprotein of HDL-like particles in brain, is to transport cholesterol and phospholipids in brain interstitial space/fluid. Thus, it is reasonable to assume that other genes/proteins, involved in brain cholesterol metabolism with a regulatory role in APOE expression or in the brain cell type specific transport of cholesterol may play an equally significant, if not a larger role in the response to injury. In our sequencing datasets and validation assays we found that following injury Abca1 mRNA and ABCA1 protein levels were increased. An increased ABCA1 protein level in a rat model of TBI has already been reported [11]. Thus, the elevated expression of ABCA1 following TBI could be a response to the increased demand for cholesterol and phospholipids, necessary for axonal repair. The hub genes in ME Salmon provide additional support that a correlated response to TBI includes upregulation of network of genes relevant to cholesterol transport and myelin formation. While in normal conditions in adult, developed brain oligodendrocytes synthesize cholesterol and do not depend on cholesterol transported by APOE particles, they express LDL-R and receptor mediated endocytosis of lipoproteins, APOE included, is a very important transport mechanism for cholesterol supply in traumatized brain areas with axonal damage and undergoing myelination/myelin remodeling. APOE mediated stimulation of Neural Stem Cells and enhanced oligodendrogenesis, which require sufficient amounts of cholesterol and phospholipids, and to some extent APOE/LDL-R interaction for activation of downstream signaling cascades, most probably have an important role for improved myelination and axonal restoration as part of the recovery process.

In conclusion, we found that APOE3 and APOE4 targeted replacement mice demonstrate similar cognitive impairment following moderate TBI with differences reflecting the preexisting deficits in APOE4 mice at baseline. Transcriptional profiling 14 days following TBI revealed a clear separation between sham and injured animals without a difference based on APOE isoform. Top up-regulated categories in both genotypes were highly consistent and were associated with Immune System, Innate Immune and Inflammatory Responses. Ion and Potassium Transport categories were downregulated, similarly in both genotypes. Using WGCNA, we determined that TBI and APOE affected separate networks independently. Immune Response was the most affected network driven by TBI in both genotypes, while both sham and injured animals were differentially affected by APOE isoform, with increased expression of genes associated with functional groups/modules representing Innate Immunity. The network representing Myelination was affected by APOE isoform across the injury groups, demonstrating a difference in response to injury between APOE3 and APOE4 mice. The results of this study indicate that distinct cellular pathways/networks drive the APOE isoform specific phenotype and the response to TBI at this acute time point.

Supplementary Material

supplement

Supported by National Institutes of Health (R01AG037481, R01AG037919, K01AG044490, R01ES024233) and U.S. Department of Defense (W81XWH-13-1-0384). We would like to thank Dr. H. I. Kamboh for technical assistance.

Fig. 1 TBI significantly affected behavior performance in mice expressing human APOE3 and APOE4 isoforms. Three months old APOE3 and APOE4 targeted replacement mice underwent CCI and their behavior performance was tested using Elevated Plus Maze (A) and Morris Water Maze (B) paradigms. (A) EPM was performed 4 days post injury. For both APOE isoforms, TBI significantly increased the time spent in the open arms of the maze compared to sham (p&lt;0.0001). Statistics is by two-way ANOVA. There is no interaction between genotype and injury but there are significant main effects of genotype (F(1,53) = 4.967, p=0.03) and injury (F(1,53) = 26.36, p&lt;0.0001). Sidak’s multiple comparison test showed a significant difference between APOE3-Sham vs APOE3-TBI (p&lt;0.05) and APOE4-Sham vs APOE4-TBI (p&lt;0.001). (B) Acquisition of spatial memory was examined in APOE3 (blue) and APOE4 mice (red) on 7–11 days post injury by MWM. Time to find the hidden platform is shown for all days of training. Statistics is by three-way ANOVA. There was no interaction between any of the factors, but significant main effects of all three, training, injury and genotype. (For training: F(4,4) = 21.35, p&lt;0.0001; for injury: F(1,4) = 59.94, p&lt;0.0001; for genotype: F(1,4) =17.8, p&lt;0.0001)

Fig. 2 TBI significantly affected the transcriptome demonstrating increases in immune response and decreases in neuronal functionality. mRNA-seq was performed on RNA isolated from the hippocampi and cortex of APOE3 and APOE4 mice shown on Fig. 1, N=8 mice per group. (A) Principle component analysis used to calculate the principal components that account for the highest possible variance in the transcriptome. N= 8 mice/group and all transcripts from each mouse. PCA plot of the transcriptome shows distinct separation based on TBI but not on APOE isoform. (B) Scatterplot for genes comparing sham and TBI reads per million. (C–D) Volcano plots representing the mRNA-seq results. Differential gene expression analysis between sham and injured mice using EdgeR identified: in APOE3 (C): 2853 up- (red) and 2307 down-regulated genes by TBI (blue), and in APOE4 (D): 2065 up- and 1045 down-regulated genes at p&lt;0.05 cutoff. For C and D, statistics is by edgeR, p&lt;0.05. (E) Western blot results for APOE3 sham versus TBI animals for ABCA1, CLU, APOE, and β-ACTIN validate mRNA-seq results. (F) Western blot results for APOE4 sham versus TBI animals for ABCA1, CLU, APOE, and β-ACTIN validate mRNA-seq results. Proteins are normalized to levels of β-ACTIN.

Fig. 3 mRNA-seq data reveal that microglia are predominant source of inflammation. Average expression according to mRNA-seq results for several inflammatory markers modulated by TBI were calculated as the fold of Sham reads per million for each gene. (A–B) Several microglial specific transcripts are significantly upregulated by TBI in both (A) APOE3 and (B) APOE4 mice. (C–D) Purinergic receptors in (C) APOE3 and (D) APOE4 mice, as well as (E–F) Siglecs in (E) APOE3 and (F) APOE4 mice were also upregulated following TBI. Statistics is by edgeR; *p&lt;0.05, **p&lt;0.01, ***p&lt;0.001.

Fig. 4 WGCNA identified modules that correlated to TBI and or APOE isoform. WGCNA was used to determine the correlation of module eigengenes to Injury and APOE genotype. Each cell shows the correlation between the module eigengene (rows) and group (columns) with p-value. Red denotes a positive and blue is a negative correlation. Modules of interest are differentially expressed between trait conditions. Brown, and Green are modules associated with TBI, Darkred and Salmon – with APOE genotype.

Fig. 5 ME Brown correlates to TBI and is associated with Immune Response. (A) Expression barplot shows the gene expression and eigengene expression within each sample. Within the heatmap, the rows denote genes and the columns correspond to samples, with the corresponding module eigengene value for each sample shown in the bar plot below. Red denotes over-expression and green under-expression of the gene within the sample. (B) Network of genes connected to hub genes Trem2, Tyrobp, Clec7a, Cd68, Cx3cr1 representing immune response. Size of each gene was determined by modular membership value, and the weight determined edge width. (C–D) Average expression according to mRNA-seq results of genes modulated by TBI in “Immune response” category for (C) APOE3 and (D) APOE4 mice. The average expression was calculated as fold of Sham reads per million for each gene. Statistics is by edgeR, p&lt;0.05. (E–F) Validation of mRNA-seq results for Trem2, Tyrobp, Cx3cr1, Tgfb1, Tgfbr1 for (E) APOE3 and (F) APOE4 mice by qPCR. Statistics was determined by t-test.

Fig. 6 TREM2 protein level and Astrocytosis are increased by TBI. Immunohistochemistry with anti-TREM2 antibody or anti-GFAP was performed in both sham and TBI mice (n=3/group). Percent intensity of Trem2 staining or GFAP staining was determined in the ipsilateral hemispheres. (A) Sham animals had low to no levels in Trem2. (B) APOE3 TBI and (C) APOE4 TBI animals had significantly higher levels of Trem2 when compared to their sham counterparts (p&lt;0.01 for both APOE3 and APOE4). (D) Analysis of object area fraction demonstrates a significant main effect of injury (p&lt;0.001), but not APOE isoform in Trem2 levels. Statistics is by Two-way ANOVA with post-hoc Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. (E) Sham animals demonstrated low GFAP staining levels. (F) APOE3 and (G) APOE4 TBI animals show increased GFAP staining compared to their sham counterparts, particularly near the injury site (APOE3: p&lt;0.01; APOE4: p&lt;0.001). Insets taken from the injury visualize the increased staining at higher magnification (20X). (H) Analysis of object area fraction demonstrates a significant main effect of injury (p&lt;0.001), but not APOE isoform in GFAP levels. There was no significant difference between APOE3 and APOE4 animals, regardless of injury. Statistics is by Two-way ANOVA with post-hoc Tukey’s multiple comparisons test.

Fig. 7 ME darkred correlates to APOE isoform and is associated with innate immunity. (A) The expression bar plot shows the gene expression and eigengene expression within each sample. (B) Network of genes connected to the chosen hub gene Fyn representing innate immunity. (C) Heatmap of top 50 upregulated genes in comparing APOE3 to APOE4 mice. (D) mRNA-seq results for important genes within the network. The average expression was calculated as fold of APOE3 reads per million for each gene. Statistics is by edgeR, p&lt;0.05. (E) Validation of mRNA-seq results by qPCR. Statistics was determined by t-test. (F) Western blot results for APOE3 TBI versus APOE4 TBI animals for FYN and β-ACTIN validate mRNA-seq results. Proteins are normalized to levels of β-ACTIN and presented as fold of APOE3.

Fig. 8 Gene-network module salmon correlates to APOE isoform in injury groups and is associated with myelination. (A) The expression barplot shows the gene expression and eigengene expression within each sample. (B) Network of genes connected to hub genes Car2, F2ah, Mbp and Plp1 representing myelination. (C) mRNA-seq results for important genes within the network. The average expression was calculated as fold of APOE3 TBI reads per million for each gene. Statistics is by edgeR, p&lt;0.05. (D) Validation of mRNA-seq results by qPCR for Mbp and Plp1. The average expression was calculated as fold of all APOE3 TBI mice. Statistics was determined by t-test.

Table 1 Gene-network modules represent various biological functions associated with injury and APOE isoform. Networks of interest include ME Brown and ME Green, which are associated with injury, and ME Darkred and ME Salmon, which are associated with APOE isoform.

Module
Name	Effect	PValue	Gene
Count	GO Terms	Enrichment
Pvalue	
Brown	Injury	1.0E-10	2639	Immune response	9.97E-41	
				Innate immune response	1.16E-28	
				Phagocytosis	2.61E-05	
Green	Injury	5.0E-06	854	Transport	1.98E-04	
				Phospholipid transport	0.0016	
Darkred	Genotype	1.0E-23	31	Innate immune response	0.0428	
				Complement Activation	0.0471	
Salmon	Genotype	0.001	65	Myelination	3.73E-05	
				Oligodendrocyte differentiation	1.06E-04	

Highlights

TBI increased anxiety and cognitive impairments in both APOE3 and APOE4 mice.

The network correlated to TBI in both APOE isoforms is immune response.

The myelination network correlated with APOE isoform in both injury groups.

Distinct gene networks are driven by APOE isoform and TBI.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Conflict of Interest: The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.


1 Abraham CR 2001 Reactive astrocytes and alpha1-antichymotrypsin in Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 22 931 936 11755001
2 Acosta SA Tajiri N Shinozuka K Ishikawa H Grimmig B Diamond DM Diamond D Sanberg PR Bickford PC Kaneko Y Borlongan CV 2013 Long-term upregulation of inflammation and suppression of cell proliferation in the brain of adult rats exposed to traumatic brain injury using the controlled cortical impact model PloS one 8 e53376 e53376 23301065
3 Alderson NL Maldonado EN Kern MJ Bhat NR Hama H 2006 FA2H-dependent fatty acid 2-hydroxylation in postnatal mouse brain J Lipid Res 47 2772 2780 16998236
4 Alexander S Kerr ME Kim Y Kamboh MI 2007 Apolipoprotein E4 allele presence and functional outcome after severe traumatic brain injury Journal of Neurotrauma 24 790 797 17518534
5 Bennett RE Esparza TJ Lewis HA Kim E Mac Donald CL Sullivan PM Brody DL 2013 Human apolipoprotein E4 worsens acute axonal pathology but not amyloid-beta immunoreactivity after traumatic brain injury in 3xTG-AD mice J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 72 396 403 23584199
6 Bianchin MM Capella HM Chaves DL Steindel M Grisard EC Ganev GG da Silva Junior JP Neto Evaldo S Poffo MA Walz R Carlotti Junior CG Sakamoto AC 2004 Nasu-Hakola disease (polycystic lipomembranous osteodysplasia with sclerosing leukoencephalopathy--PLOSL): a dementia associated with bone cystic lesions. From clinical to genetic and molecular aspects Cell Mol Neurobiol 24 1 24 15049507
7 Bird SM Sohrabi HR Sutton TA Weinborn M Rainey-Smith SR Brown B Patterson L Taddei K Gupta V Carruthers M Lenzo N Knuckey N Bucks RS Verdile G Martins RN 2016 Cerebral amyloid-beta accumulation and deposition following traumatic brain injury--A narrative review and meta-analysis of animal studies Neurosci Biobehav Rev 64 215 228 26899257
8 Borgesius NZ van Woerden GM Buitendijk GH Keijzer N Jaarsma D Hoogenraad CC Elgersma Y 2011 betaCaMKII plays a nonenzymatic role in hippocampal synaptic plasticity and learning by targeting alphaCaMKII to synapses J Neurosci 31 10141 10148 21752990
9 Brody DL Mac Donald C Kessens CC Yuede C Parsadanian M Spinner M Kim E Schwetye KE Holtzman DM Bayly PV 2007 Electromagnetic controlled cortical impact device for precise, graded experimental traumatic brain injury J Neurotrauma 24 657 673 17439349
10 Bujalka H Koenning M Jackson S Perreau VM Pope B Hay CM Mitew S Hill AF Lu QR Wegner M Srinivasan R Svaren J Willingham M Barres BA Emery B 2013 MYRF is a membrane-associated transcription factor that autoproteolytically cleaves to directly activate myelin genes PLoS Biol 11 e1001625 23966833
11 Cartagena CM Ahmed F Burns MP Pajoohesh-Ganji A Pak DT Faden AI Rebeck GW 2008 Cortical injury increases cholesterol 24S hydroxylase (Cyp46) levels in the rat brain J Neurotrauma 25 1087 1098 18729719
12 Chamelian L Reis M Feinstein A 2004 Six-month recovery from mild to moderate Traumatic Brain Injury: the role of APOE-epsilon4 allele Brain 127 2621 2628 15496436
13 Chrast R Saher G Nave KA Verheijen MH 2011 Lipid metabolism in myelinating glial cells: lessons from human inherited disorders and mouse models J Lipid Res 52 419 434 21062955
14 Colonna M Wang Y 2016 TREM2 variants: new keys to decipher Alzheimer disease pathogenesis Nat Rev Neurosci 17 201 207 26911435
15 Crawford F Wood M Ferguson S Mathura V Gupta P Humphrey J Mouzon B Laporte V Margenthaler E O’Steen B Hayes R Roses A Mullan M 2009 Apolipoprotein E-genotype dependent hippocampal and cortical responses to traumatic brain injury Neuroscience 159 1349 1362 19409232
16 Crawford FC Vanderploeg RD Freeman MJ Singh S Waisman M Michaels L Abdullah L Warden D Lipsky R Salazar A Mullan MJ 2002 APOE genotype influences acquisition and recall following traumatic brain injury Neurology 58 1115 1118 11940706
17 Cruchaga C Karch CM Jin SC Benitez BA Cai Y Guerreiro R Harari O Norton J Budde J Bertelsen S Jeng AT Cooper B Skorupa T Carrell D Levitch D Hsu S Choi J Ryten M Consortium UKBE Hardy J Ryten M Trabzuni D Weale ME Ramasamy A Smith C Sassi C Bras J Gibbs JR Hernandez DG Lupton MK Powell J Forabosco P Ridge PG Corcoran CD Tschanz JT Norton MC Munger RG Schmutz C Leary M Demirci FY Bamne MN Wang X Lopez OL Ganguli M Medway C Turton J Lord J Braae A Barber I Brown K Alzheimer’s Research UKC Passmore P Craig D Johnston J McGuinness B Todd S Heun R Kolsch H Kehoe PG Hooper NM Vardy ER Mann DM Pickering-Brown S Brown K Kalsheker N Lowe J Morgan K David Smith A Wilcock G Warden D Holmes C Pastor P Lorenzo-Betancor O Brkanac Z Scott E Topol E Morgan K Rogaeva E Singleton AB Hardy J Kamboh MI St George-Hyslop P Cairns N Morris JC Kauwe JS Goate AM 2002 Rare coding variants in the phospholipase D3 gene confer risk for Alzheimer’s disease Nature 505 550 554
18 Dalgard CL Cole JT Kean WS Lucky JJ Sukumar G McMullen DC Pollard HB Watson WD 2002 The cytokine temporal profile in rat cortex after controlled cortical impact Frontiers in molecular neuroscience 5 6 6
19 Diaz-Arrastia R Gong Y Fair S Scott KD Garcia MC Carlile MC Agostini MA Van Ness PC 2003 Increased risk of late posttraumatic seizures associated with inheritance of APOE epsilon4 allele Arch Neurol 60 818 822 12810485
20 Draper K Ponsford J 2008 Cognitive functioning ten years following traumatic brain injury and rehabilitation Neuropsychology 22 618 625 18763881
21 Ferreira LCB Regner A Miotto KDL Moura Sd Ikuta N Vargas AE Chies JAB Simon D 2014 Increased levels of interleukin-6, −8 and −10 are associated with fatal outcome following severe traumatic brain injury Brain injury 28 1311 1316 24830571
22 Fitz NF Cronican A Pham T Fogg A Fauq AH Chapman R Lefterov I Koldamova R 2010 Liver X receptor agonist treatment ameliorates amyloid pathology and memory deficits caused by high-fat diet in APP23 mice J Neurosci 30 6862 6872 20484628
23 Fitz NF Cronican AA Lefterov I Koldamova R 2013 Comment on “ApoE-directed therapeutics rapidly clear beta-amyloid and reverse deficits in AD mouse models” Science 340 924-c
24 Fitz NF Cronican AA Saleem M Fauq AH Chapman R Lefterov I Koldamova R 2012 Abca1 deficiency affects Alzheimer’s disease-like phenotype in human ApoE4 but not in ApoE3-targeted replacement mice J Neurosci 32 13125 13136 22993429
25 Fitz NF Tapias V Cronican AA Castranio EL Saleem M Carter AY Lefterova M Lefterov I Koldamova R 2015 Opposing effects of Apoe/Apoa1 double deletion on amyloid-beta pathology and cognitive performance in APP mice Brain 138 3699 3715 26510953
26 Forsyth S Horvath A Coughlin P 2003 A review and comparison of the murine alpha1-antitrypsin and alpha1-antichymotrypsin multigene clusters with the human clade A serpins Genomics 81 336 345 12659817
27 Ghroubi S Feki I Chelly H Elleuch MH 2016 Neuropsychological and behavioral disorders and their correlations with the severity of the traumatic brain injury Ann Phys Rehabil Med 59S e134 e135
28 Guan F Gu J Hu F Zhu Y Wang W 2012 Association between alpha1-antichymotrypsin signal peptide −15A/T polymorphism and the risk of Alzheimer’s disease: a meta-analysis Mol Biol Rep 39 6661 6669 22294107
29 Gyoneva S Ransohoff RM 2015 Inflammatory reaction after traumatic brain injury: therapeutic potential of targeting cell-cell communication by chemokines Trends in pharmacological sciences 36 471 480 25979813
30 Haile Y Carmine-Simmen K Olechowski C Kerr B Bleackley RC Giuliani F 2015 Granzyme B-inhibitor serpina3n induces neuroprotection in vitro and in vivo J Neuroinflammation 12 157 26337722
31 Hickman SE Kingery ND Ohsumi TK Borowsky ML Wang LC Means TK El Khoury J 2013 The microglial sensome revealed by direct RNA sequencing Nat Neurosci 16 1896 1905 24162652
32 Holmin S Mathiesen T Shetye J Biberfeld P 1995 Intracerebral inflammatory response to experimental brain contusion Acta neurochirurgica 132 110 119 7754844
33 Hooli BV Lill CM Mullin K Qiao D Lange C Bertram L Tanzi RE 2015 PLD3 gene variants and Alzheimer’s disease Nature 520 E7 8 25832413
34 Hsu I Parkinson LG Shen Y Toro A Brown T Zhao H Bleackley RC Granville DJ 2014 Serpina3n accelerates tissue repair in a diabetic mouse model of delayed wound healing Cell Death Dis 5 e1458 25299783
35 Hua F Wang J Ishrat T Wei W Atif F Sayeed I Stein DG 2011 Genomic profile of Toll-like receptor pathways in traumatically brain-injured mice: effect of exogenous progesterone Journal of neuroinflammation 8 42 42 21549006
36 Jay TR Miller CM Cheng PJ Graham LC Bemiller S Broihier ML Xu G Margevicius D Karlo JC Sousa GL Cotleur AC Butovsky O Bekris L Staugaitis SM Leverenz JB Pimplikar SW Landreth GE Howell GR Ransohoff RM Lamb BT 2015 TREM2 deficiency eliminates TREM2+ inflammatory macrophages and ameliorates pathology in Alzheimer’s disease mouse models The Journal of experimental medicine 212 287 295 25732305
37 Jordan BD 2007 Genetic influences on outcome following traumatic brain injury Neurochem Res 32 905 915 17342413
38 Jordan BD 2014 Chronic traumatic encephalopathy and other long-term sequelae Continuum (Minneap Minn) 20 1588 1604 25470162
39 Kamboh MI Sanghera DK Ferrell RE DeKosky ST 1995 APOE*4-associated Alzheimer’s disease risk is modified by alpha 1-antichymotrypsin polymorphism Nat Genet 10 486 488 7670501
40 Kawabori M Kacimi R Kauppinen T Calosing C Kim JY Hsieh CL Nakamura MC Yenari MA 2015 Triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2 (TREM2) deficiency attenuates phagocytic activities of microglia and exacerbates ischemic damage in experimental stroke J Neurosci 35 3384 3396 25716838
41 Kelley BJ Lifshitz J Povlishock JT 2007 Neuroinflammatory responses after experimental diffuse traumatic brain injury Journal of neuropathology and experimental neurology 66 989 1001 17984681
42 Kim J Basak JM Holtzman DM 2009 The role of apolipoprotein E in Alzheimer’s disease Neuron 63 287 303 19679070
43 Lau DH Hogseth M Phillips EC O’Neill MJ Pooler AM Noble W Hanger DP 2016 Critical residues involved in tau binding to fyn: implications for tau phosphorylation in Alzheimer’s disease Acta Neuropathol Commun 4 49 27193083
44 Lefterov I Fitz NF Cronican AA Fogg A Lefterov P Kodali R Wetzel R Koldamova R 2010 Apolipoprotein A-I deficiency increases cerebral amyloid angiopathy and cognitive deficits in APP/PS1DeltaE9 mice Journal of Biological Chemistry 285 36945 36957 20739292
45 Mannix RC Zhang J Park J Zhang X Bilal K Walker K Tanzi RE Tesco G Whalen MJ 2011 Age-dependent effect of apolipoprotein E4 on functional outcome after controlled cortical impact in mice J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 31 351 361 20588316
46 Mannix RC Zhang J Park J Zhang X Bilal K Walker K Tanzi RE Tesco G Whalen MJ 2016 Age-dependent effect of apolipoprotein E4 on functional outcome after controlled cortical impact in mice Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow &amp; Metabolism 31 351 361
47 McKee AC Cairns NJ Dickson DW Folkerth RD Keene CD Litvan I Perl DP Stein TD Vonsattel JP Stewart W Tripodis Y Crary JF Bieniek KF Dams-O’Connor K Alvarez VE Gordon WA group TC 2016 The first NINDS/NIBIB consensus meeting to define neuropathological criteria for the diagnosis of chronic traumatic encephalopathy Acta neuropathologica 131 75 86 26667418
48 Mootha VK Lepage P Miller K Bunkenborg J Reich M Hjerrild M Delmonte T Villeneuve A Sladek R Xu F Mitchell GA Morin C Mann M Hudson TJ Robinson B Rioux JD Lander ES 2003 Identification of a gene causing human cytochrome c oxidase deficiency by integrative genomics Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 100 605 610 12529507
49 Moran L Taylor H Ganesalingam K Gastier-Foster J Frick J Bangert B Dietrich A Nuss K Rusin J Wright M Yeates K 2009 Apolipoprotein E4 as a predictor of outcomes in pediatric mild traumatic brain injury J Neurotraum 26 1489 1495
50 Morganti JM Jopson TD Liu S Riparip L-K Guandique CK Gupta N Ferguson AR Rosi S 2015 CCR2 antagonism alters brain macrophage polarization and ameliorates cognitive dysfunction induced by traumatic brain injury The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 35 748 760 25589768
51 Nam KN Mounier A Fitz NF Wolfe C Schug J Lefterov I Koldamova R 2016 RXR controlled regulatory networks identified in mouse brain counteract deleterious effects of Abeta oligomers Sci Rep 6 24048 27051978
52 Nygaard HB van Dyck CH Strittmatter SM 2014 Fyn kinase inhibition as a novel therapy for Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimers Res Ther 6 8 24495408
53 Osisami M Ali W Frohman MA 2012 A role for phospholipase D3 in myotube formation PLoS One 7 e33341 22428023
54 Panicker N Saminathan H Jin H Neal M Harischandra DS Gordon R Kanthasamy K Lawana V Sarkar S Luo J Anantharam V Kanthasamy AG Kanthasamy A 2015 Fyn Kinase Regulates Microglial Neuroinflammatory Responses in Cell Culture and Animal Models of Parkinson’s Disease J Neurosci 35 10058 10077 26157004
55 Perez-Garcia G Gama Sosa MA De Gasperi R Lashof-Sullivan M Maudlin-Jeronimo E Stone JR Haghighi F Ahlers ST Elder GA 2016 Chronic post-traumatic stress disorder-related traits in a rat model of low-level blast exposure Behav Brain Res
56 Ponsford J Draper K Schonberger M 2008 Functional outcome 10 years after traumatic brain injury: its relationship with demographic, injury severity, and cognitive and emotional status J Int Neuropsychol Soc 14 233 242 18282321
57 Richter F Gao F Medvedeva V Lee P Bove N Fleming SM Michaud M Lemesre V Patassini S De La Rosa K Mulligan CK Sioshansi PC Zhu C Coppola G Bordet T Pruss RM Chesselet MF 2014 Chronic administration of cholesterol oximes in mice increases transcription of cytoprotective genes and improves transcriptome alterations induced by alpha-synuclein overexpression in nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurons Neurobiol Dis 69 263 275 24844147
58 Rodriguez GA Burns MP Weeber EJ Rebeck GW 2013 Young APOE4 targeted replacement mice exhibit poor spatial learning and memory, with reduced dendritic spine density in the medial entorhinal cortex Learn Mem 20 256 266 23592036
59 Rolls A Shechter R Schwartz M 2009 The bright side of the glial scar in CNS repair Nat Rev Neurosci 10 235 241 19229242
60 Saber M Kokiko-Cochran O Puntambekar SS Lathia JD Lamb BT 2016 Triggering Receptor Expressed on Myeloid Cells 2 Deficiency Alters Acute Macrophage Distribution and Improves Recovery after Traumatic Brain Injury J Neurotrauma
61 Saher G Brugger B Lappe-Siefke C Mobius W Tozawa R Wehr MC Wieland F Ishibashi S Nave KA 2005 High cholesterol level is essential for myelin membrane growth Nat Neurosci 8 468 475 15793579
62 Saher G Stumpf SK 2015 Cholesterol in myelin biogenesis and hypomyelinating disorders Biochim Biophys Acta 1851 1083 1094 25724171
63 Savage JC Jay T Goduni E Quigley C Mariani MM Malm T Ransohoff RM Lamb BT Landreth GE 2015 Nuclear receptors license phagocytosis by trem2+ myeloid cells in mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease J Neurosci 35 6532 6543 25904803
64 Schiza N Sargiannidou I Kagiava A Karaiskos C Nearchou M Kleopa KA 2015 Transgenic replacement of Cx32 in gap junction-deficient oligodendrocytes rescues the phenotype of a hypomyelinating leukodystrophy model Hum Mol Genet 24 2049 2064 25524707
65 Subramanian A Tamayo P Mootha VK Mukherjee S Ebert BL Gillette MA Paulovich A Pomeroy SL Golub TR Lander ES Mesirov JP 2005 Gene set enrichment analysis: a knowledge-based approach for interpreting genome-wide expression profiles Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102 15545 15550 16199517
66 Tsai PC Yang DM Liao YC Chiu TY Kuo HC Su YP Guo YC Soong BW Lin KP Liu YT Lee YC 2016 Clinical and biophysical characterization of 19 GJB1 mutations Ann Clin Transl Neurol 3 854 865 27844031
67 Venables WN Ripley BD 2002 Modern Applied Statistics with S. Statistics and Computing 4 Springer-Verlag New York
68 Wang C Tan L Wang HF Yu WJ Liu Y Jiang T Tan MS Hao XK Zhang DQ Yu JT Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging I 2015 Common Variants in PLD3 and Correlation to Amyloid-Related Phenotypes in Alzheimer’s Disease J Alzheimers Dis 46 491 495 26402410
69 Wang Y Cella M Mallinson K Ulrich JD Young KL Robinette ML Gilfillan S Krishnan GM Sudhakar S Zinselmeyer BH Holtzman DM Cirrito JR Colonna M 2015 TREM2 lipid sensing sustains the microglial response in an Alzheimer’s disease model Cell 160 1061 1071 25728668
70 Washington PM Forcelli PA Wilkins T Zapple DN Parsadanian M Burns MP 2012 The effect of injury severity on behavior: a phenotypic study of cognitive and emotional deficits after mild, moderate, and severe controlled cortical impact injury in mice J Neurotrauma 29 2283 2296 22642287
71 Whitnall L McMillan TM Murray GD Teasdale GM 2006 Disability in young people and adults after head injury: 5–7 year follow up of a prospective cohort study J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 77 640 645 16614025
72 Willemse-van Son AHP Ribbers GM Hop WCJ van Duijn CM Stam HJ 2008 Association between apolipoprotein-epsilon4 and long-term outcome after traumatic brain injury Journal of neurology, neurosurgery, and psychiatry 79 426 430
73 Yang SH Gangidine M Pritts TA Goodman MD Lentsch AB 2008 Interleukin 6 mediates neuroinflammation and motor coordination deficits after mild traumatic brain injury and brief hypoxia in mice Shock (Augusta, Ga) 40 471 475
74 Yiu G He Z 2006 Glial inhibition of CNS axon regeneration Nat Rev Neurosci 7 617 627 16858390
75 Zhang B Horvath S 2005 A general framework for weighted gene co-expression network analysis Statistical applications in genetics and molecular biology 4 Article17-Article17
76 Zhao W Langfelder P Fuller T Dong J Li A Hovarth S 2010 Weighted gene coexpression network analysis: state of the art J Biopharm Stat 20 281 300 20309759
