LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9216781
2602
Brain Pathol
Brain Pathol.
Brain pathology (Zurich, Switzerland)
1015-6305
1750-3639

25904047
5699448
10.1111/bpa.12249
NIHMS669756
Article
A Review of Neuroimaging Findings in Repetitive Brain Trauma
Koerte Inga K. MD 12
Lin Alexander P. PhD 13
Willems Anna 12
Muehlmann Marc MD 12
Hufschmidt Jakob 1
Coleman Michael J. 1
Green Isobel 1
Liao Huijun 3
Tate David F. PhD 4
Wilde Elisabeth A. PhD 5
Pasternak Ofer PhD 1
Bouix Sylvain PhD 1
Rathi Yogesh PhD 1
Bigler Erin D. PhD 6
Stern Robert A. PhD 7
Shenton Martha E. PhD 18
1 Psychiatry Neuroimaging Laboratory, Departments of Psychiatry and Radiology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA USA
2 Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Psychosomatic and Psychotherapy, Ludwig-Maximilian-University, Munich, Germany
3 Center for Clinical Spectroscopy, Department of Radiology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA USA
4 General Dynamic Information Technologies Contractor, Defense and Veterans Brain Injury Centers, San Antonio Military Medical Center, San Antonio, TX USA
5 Departments of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Neurology and Radiology, Baylor College of Medicine, and the Michael E. DeBakey VA Medical Center, San Antonio, TX, USA
6 Neuroscience Center and Department of Psychology, Brigham Young University, Provo Utah
7 Departments of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Anatomy &amp; Neurobiology, Boston University Alzheimer’s Disease Center, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, USA
8 VA Boston Healthcare System, Boston, MA, USA
Correspondence: Inga Katharina Koerte, M.D., Psychiatry Neuroimaging Laboratory, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, 1249 Boylston Street, Boston, MA 02215, USA, Phone: 617-949-9336, Fax : 617 525-6150, ikoerte@bwh.harvard.edu
15 11 2017
5 2015
22 11 2017
25 3 318349
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE) is a neurodegenerative disease confirmed at post-mortem. Those at highest risk are professional athletes who participate in contact sports and military personnel who are exposed to repetitive blast events. All neuropathologically-confirmed CTE cases, to date, have had a history of repetitive head impacts. This suggests that repetitive head impacts may be necessary for the initiation of the pathogenetic cascade that, in some cases, leads to CTE. Importantly, while all CTE appears to result from repetitive brain trauma, not all repetitive brain trauma results in CTE. Magnetic resonance imaging has great potential for understanding better the underlying mechanisms of repetitive brain trauma. In this review we provide an overview of advanced imaging techniques currently used to investigate brain anomalies. We also provide an overview of neuroimaging findings in those exposed to repetitive head impacts in the acute/subacute and chronic phase of injury and in more neurodegenerative phases of injury, as well as in military personnel exposed to repetitive head impacts. Finally, we discuss future directions for research that will likely lead to a better understanding of the underlying mechanisms separating those who recover from repetitive brain trauma versus those who go on to develop CTE.


Introduction

Concussion, or mild traumatic brain injury (mTBI), is a common injury that affects between 1.6 and 3.8 million people each year (37, 82). The symptoms following a concussion usually resolve within days to weeks, but for some postconcussive symptoms persist (see review in (141)). Most notably, there is evidence that those exposed to repetitive brain trauma may be at higher risk for persistent postconcussive symptoms, for structural alterations in the brain (see review in (119), as well as for developing a neurodegenerative disease such as chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE) (e.g., 151); see also review by (156)). CTE is marked by a widespread accumulation of hyperphosphorylated tau (p-tau) (107, 108). It is most frequently observed in professional athletes involved in contact sports (e.g., boxing, American football) and in warfighters (55, 108). Particularly noteworthy, there is no evidence that a single mTBI or even a more severe single TBI leads to CTE (116, 150). In contrast, there are many cases of neuropathologically-confirmed CTE without any reported or known symptomatic concussions but with significant exposure to repetitive subconcussive head impacts. In fact, to date, all cases of neuropathologically-confirmed CTE have had a history of repetitive head impacts, including concussion or mTBI as well as subconcussive impacts, suggesting that repetitive head impacts may be necessary for the initiation of the pathogenetic cascade that eventually leads to neurodegeneration (e.g., 13, 53, 107, 115, 116, 151).

Advanced neuroimaging techniques may lead to the early detection of brain alterations associated with repetitive head impacts, as well as to an improvement in our understanding of the underlying pathomechanisms that link exposure to repetitive head impacts to neurodegenerative disease.

The purpose of this review is to provide an overview of advanced neuroimaging findings in athletes and in military service members with repetitive head impacts (one civilian study was included that met repetitive head impact criteria, see below), and to elucidate possible trajectories such as chronic postconcussive syndrome and neurodegeneration.

In what follows, we first provide an introduction to the different categories or classifications of brain trauma, including concussion (mTBI), subconcussive head impacts, as well as the different trajectories observed, including chronic postconcussive syndrome, and progressive neurodegeneration, such CTE. Second, we provide a brief overview of advanced imaging techniques that are currently used to investigate repetitive brain trauma. Third, we review neuroimaging findings and we include comprehensive tables that list the major findings, along with specific information about the subjects evaluated and the methods used. Finally, we provide information regarding important future directions for research that will lead to a better understanding of the underlying mechanisms involved in those who recover versus those who go on to experience postconcussive symptoms or a neurodegenerative disease such as CTE.

Definition of Categories/Classifications and Stages of Brain Trauma

In what follows we introduce the concept of mTBI before describing repetitive concussive brain trauma and repetitive subconcussive head impacts/brain trauma. We also provide a figure that depicts how these categories and trajectories can be viewed in the context of repetitive brain trauma and its sequelae.

Mild Traumatic Brain Injury or Concussion

Mild traumatic brain injury (mTBI, concussion) usually results from a bump or blow to the head that leads to temporary functional and structural alterations in the brain (26, 104, 110", 157). Common causes include sports-related injuries, motor vehicle accidents, and falls (134). In addition to a direct impact to the head, mTBI can also result from explosions (90). It is estimated that at least 6 per 1,000 people experience mTBI each year (e.g., 28). Sports-related concussion is particularly common with about a 20 percent risk per year for the individual contact-sport athlete (35). However, the incidence of mTBI is likely to be much greater due to differences in the definition of mTBI and, more importantly, due to underreporting (82, 133).

Symptoms following mTBI include nausea, vomiting, headache, irritability, insomnia, anxiety, depression, and sometimes personality change (19, 58, 74). These symptoms are typically most prominent immediately post-injury and typically resolve over days and weeks, although cognitive and behavioral sequelae may persist for months or even years (80, 81, 95, 127). These cognitive and behavioral deficits are generally mild and generally resolve on their own (18, 137). However, a significant number of those afflicted (15 to 30 percent), the so-called “miserable minority” (135), suffer from persistent postconcussive symptoms (see review in (141)).

Although the precise pathomechanisms that link mTBI to neuropathological changes are not completely understood, they likely involve a series of multifocal axonal injuries set in motion by the initial trauma. During mTBI, the brain undergoes shear deformation that produces a stretch of axons resulting in alterations in axonal membrane permeability and ionic shifts, including a massive influx of calcium into the cell, which, in turn, leads to an accumulation in the mitochondria, which impairs oxidative metabolism, leading to energy failure and to the breakdown of microtubules (21, 54). Additive effects may include a decrease in total cerebral blood flow, activation of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors, and a decrease in gamma-aminobutyric acid and other inhibitory neurotransmitters (22, 54, 139). Trauma-induced metabolic changes, however, may return to baseline within a relatively short period of time. Nonetheless, advanced neuroimaging techniques reveal structural and functional brain abnormalities following mTBI (see review in (120, 141)).

Repetitive Traumatic Brain Injury

There is evidence that the brain is particularly vulnerable when recovering from mTBI. The most severe form of repetitive mild traumatic brain injury is referred to as second impact syndrome. It is a rare, often fatal, traumatic brain injury that may occur when the first brain trauma is followed shortly by a second brain trauma, before the symptoms of the first trauma have resolved (27). Although there have been several cases described in the literature (27, 105, 109), second impact syndrome remains a controversial diagnosis and the underlying mechanisms are still unclear (103).

The focus of this review is not on single mTBI or on second impact syndrome. It is instead on repetitive brain trauma, which may result from multiple head impacts over the course of months and years, as experienced most frequently by athletes who participate in contact sports as well as by soldiers who are exposed to multiple blast events. The incidence of repetitive subconcussive head impacts (i.e., hits to the head with enough force to have an impact on neuronal integrity, but without associated symptoms) is much greater than that of impacts that may lead to concussion. For example, a recent study by Broglio et al. (26) found that the average high school football player receives 652 hits to the head per season that exceed 15 g’s of force. Similarly, repeat deployments, mission demands, and the use of improvised explosive devices increase the exposure of military service members to repetitive mTBI. More specifically, one study reported 4,623 combat blast exposures in military personnel deployed to Iraq between March 2004 and December 2007, where 273 (5.9%) were characterized by repetitive blast events, i.e., up to four blast events per person (49). Those who experience repetitive brain trauma are particularly vulnerable to developing persistent postconcussive symptoms (117). Moreover, repetitive brain trauma may be a necessary condition for developing CTE. Further, and as noted previously, to date, all neuropathologically-confirmed cases of CTE have had a history of repetitive brain trauma (151). Importantly, however, a history of repetitive brain trauma may also lead to other neurodegenerative disorders such as Parkinson’s disease (PD), frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD), as well as other neurodegenerative diseases characterized by tauopathies (see below; see also (65, 156)).

Repetitive Subconcussive Brain Trauma

Subconcussive head impacts are even more common than head impacts that lead to concussions. The term “subconcussive” was introduced to describe impact to the head that produces neuronal changes similar to those in concussion, but without the acute symptoms (9). Most concerning, however, is the fact that because there is often no evidence of clinical symptoms, subconcussive head impacts are generally considered to be harmless. While little is known about the pathophysiology of subconcussive blows, recent neuroimaging literature has shown that this may not be the case. For example, in a study by our group we used advanced, sensitive neuroimaging techniques and demonstrated, for the first time, alterations in the brain’s microstructure in soccer players who are at high risk for repetitive subconcussive head impacts when heading the ball (78) (Figure 1). The soccer players included in this study were selected specifically for having no history of concussive brain trauma (78). This finding is not only alarming, given the large number of soccer players worldwide, but, and most importantly, it challenges current concepts of the effects of repetitive head impacts by demonstrating that even repetitive subconcussive head impacts may lead to subtle alterations in the brain. Findings from this study are consistent with a very recent study using task-based functional MRI that reports impaired brain function in college level contact-sports athletes without a history of concussion (100). They are also consistent with a series of studies demonstrating cognitive (170), functional (1, 25, 154), and biochemical changes (128) in the brains of contact sport athletes, despite a lack of diagnosed concussion. It is unknown, however, whether or not these findings represent the direct cumulative effects of repetitive brain trauma (e.g., axonopathy) or if these findings reflect a vulnerability to developing a neurodegenerative disease, including CTE (151).

Chronic Traumatic Encephalopathy

Chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE), historically referred to as “Punch Drunk,” “Dementia Pugilistica”, or “Boxer’s Dementia” (39, 94, 112), is a neurodegenerative disease believed to be caused, in part, from exposure to repetitive head impacts. Bowman and Blau (24) were the first to use the term “chronic traumatic encephalopathy” in their description of a 28-year old professional boxer who suffered from progressive changes in behavior, mood, and cognition. Since that time, several others have used this term ((41, 42, 111)). For example, Critchley, in 1957, reviewed 69 cases of progressive neurodegenerative disease in professional boxers and suggested that the term “chronic progressive traumatic encephalopathy of boxers” be used to describe the neurodegenerative changes he observed (42). Some of the symptoms observed were similar to postconcussive symptoms and acute concussion such as headaches and dizziness but other symptoms were more disabling including mood swings, euphoria, emotional lability, unsteady gait (see also below), as well as changes in behavior. Additionally, Miller (111) also used the term CTE to describe the kind of symptoms that he thought resembled neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) (111). The diagnosis, however, as noted previously, is made post-mortem. Symptoms may begin years or even decades following brain trauma exposure and include memory and other cognitive impairments, depression and suicidality, as well as problems with impulse control (150, 151). As the disease progresses, it may lead to dementia such as CTE or even to other neurological diseases (see (65, 156)).

CTE has been reported most often in professional athletes involved in contact sports (e.g., boxing, American football) who have been subjected to repetitive head impacts. CTE has also been reported in individuals with epilepsy, developmentally disabled individuals with head banging behavior, and in victims of physical abuse (108, 151). Additionally, CTE has been reported in military personnel with a history of repetitive head impacts or blast events (55, 108). Thus, the number of those affected is potentially quite large. Besides exposure to repetitive brain trauma, it is not known to date what additional risk factors lead to CTE. There are, for example, cases of young athletes who show evidence of CTE, suggesting that there may be some who are more vulnerable to the cascade of neurodegenerative changes it involves. Genetic factors such as apolipoprotein 4 (AP0E4), which has been studied in Alzheimer’s disease, may also be a risk factor for CTE (e.g., (44).

CTE is defined by a specific pattern of neuropathological changes, i.e., the presence of p-tau protein in the form of neurofibrillary tangles, glial tangles, and neuropil threads, with widespread distribution throughout the brain, beginning primarily with focal perivascular deposits at the depths of the cortical sulci (107) (for review please see article by McKee in this special issue). While other neurodegenerative diseases also involve p-tau (e.g., Alzheimer’s disease, frontotemporal lobe dementia), the specific regional and cortical distribution of this protein in CTE is thought to be unique (108, 116, 151), although Tartaglia et al., in an extensive review of CTE, notes that not all those who experience multiple head impacts and develop a neurodegenerative disease will have neuropathologically confirmed CTE (156). Thus a better understanding of the differences and similarities of CTE with other neurodegenerative diseases, including possible co-existing neurodegenerative disorders, would help guide possible future interventions. Hazrati and colleagues (2013), for example, examined, prior to death, 6 retired Canadian Football League players who had a history of concussions and symptoms (65). At post-mortem 3 showed a pattern consistent with CTE. Of the 3, there was comorbid evidence of AD, PD, or vasculopathy, and the other 3 showed evidence of PD, AD, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), respectively.

Understanding Concepts

Concussive head impacts may lead to acute symptoms that generally resolve within days or weeks (see Figure 2, as indicated with blue lines). Subconcussive head impacts may not lead to acute symptoms, as indicated by the horizontal dotted blue line in the acute/subacute stage of Figure 2. Following brain trauma, between 15 and 30 percent of patients develop chronic postconcussive symptoms that either resolve within months or years (blue line in Figure 2) or remain the same (yellow band in Figure 2). Those who are exposed to repetitive head impacts are particularly at high risk to for developing chronic symptoms. Moreover, a small number of those exposed to repetitive head impacts will develop a progressive neurodegenerative disease such as CTE (red band in Figure 2).

Short Primer on Relevant Imaging Modalities

In acute hospital settings, both computed tomography (CT) and conventional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are used to rule out severe complications resulting from a traumatic brain injury (TBI), including skull fracture, intracranial hemorrhage, and/or brain edema. However, conventional CT and MRI have proven to be insensitive to the more subtle changes in the brain such as diffuse axonal injury following repetitive brain trauma. Moreover, conventional imaging modalities do not provide accurate information relevant to long-term prognosis (70, 84, 114). Thus, highly sensitive, as well as objective measures of early diagnosis and accurate prognosis are needed to detect structural and functional brain alterations following repetitive brain trauma.

In what follows we provide a brief overview of advanced neuroimaging techniques that are currently being used in research studies to evaluate brain structure (high resolution structural MR imaging), micro-hemorrhages (susceptibility-weighted imaging), tissue microarchitecture (diffusion tensor imaging), brain metabolism (magnetic resonance spectroscopy; positron emission tomography), brain function (functional and functional connectivity MR Imaging), and, finally, regional blood flow (single photon emission computer tomography).

High Resolution Structural Imaging

Based on T1-weighted MR imaging, the entire human brain volume, as well as specific white or gray matter structures, can be quantified and characterized. Methods of quantification include region-of-interest (ROI) (Figure 3), voxel-based morphometry (VBM), as well as almost fully automated software tools such as Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM, http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/) and FreeSurfer (76)(75)(74) (Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Charlestown, MA, USA), all of which enable comparisons between groups. Quantitative analyses of brain volume, and characteristics of specific structures such as cortical thickness, provide useful information for the early diagnosis and prognosis of neurodegenerative diseases (31, 45, 69, 72, 123, 138", 146). For example, brain volume and cortical thickness have been shown to correlate with cognitive performance (31, 138, 146). Recent literature also suggests that the quantitative analysis of the brain’s structure, such as cortical thickness, may be helpful in both diagnostic assessment and in determining the prognosis of mTBI (159) and repetitive brain trauma (145). Figure 4 depicts an image of the cortical surface of the brain where measures of cortical thickness may now be quantified.

Susceptibility-Weighted Imaging (SWI)

SWI is based on a gradient-recalled echo MRI that takes advantage of the different responses of molecules to an applied magnetic field (susceptibility), which can be measured as phase-shifts. These phase-shifts are then superimposed on the conventional MRI, which primarily uses the signal magnitude. This overlaying accentuates local susceptibility changes in the final image. The resulting contrast is sensitive to venous blood, hemorrhage and iron in the brain (59). SWI has proven to be a sensitive technique to detect microhemorrhages and to predict severity of brain injury following TBI (6, 11, 17). The number and volume of microhemorrhages identified using SWI have been shown to be correlated with neuropsychological and clinical outcome (36). SWI is just beginning to be used to investigate repetitive brain trauma (see review of the literature below; see also (66)). Figure 5 shows evidence of microhemorrhages following repetitive head impacts detected using SWI.

Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI)

Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) is an advanced MRI technique that quantifies the diffusion properties of water molecules in tissue (12). Diffusion indices provide indirect information about the tissue's microstructure. Isotropic diffusion is characterized by water molecules that diffuse with the same probability and speed in all directions. This is found, for example, in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). In contrast, anisotropic diffusion results when the diffusion of water molecules is restricted, as, for example in restrictions resulting from axonal membranes, filaments, and/or myelin sheaths, which lead to directionality, or anisotropy, in the motion of water molecules. Moreover, based on the diffusion of water molecules, the diffusion tensor can be quantified and characterized in each voxel. Common parameters are mean diffusivity (MD), which is the average of the diffusion, and fractional anisotropy (FA), which takes into account the directionality of the diffusion. In addition, radial (RD) and axial Diffusivity (AD) can be calculated relative to the main vector of the diffusion (12). Accordingly, DTI has proven to be a particularly sensitive technique to evaluate the brain’s white matter microstructure following mTBI. For reviews, see Niogi et al. (120) and Shenton et al. (141). This makes sense given that the most common injury observed in mTBI is diffuse axonal injury, thus making DTI an important imaging technique for investigating brain alterations in mTBI. These findings will be reviewed below in the context of repetitive brain trauma.

Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy (MRS)

Magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) differs from other imaging methods in traumatic brain injury in that it measures the concentration of chemicals in the brain. These chemicals are often involved in metabolic processes in the brain and as such provide a window into the underlying pathological changes that can occur as a result of brain injury from acute to more chronic stages. This quantitative, non-invasive, and objective technique has demonstrated its value in diagnosis and prognosis, particularly in severe brain injury. Specific chemical changes identified by MRS are also amenable to targeted treatment and treatment monitoring. This research technique is available across all MR scanners as a software option, and it shows great promise for translation into clinical practice (e.g. (86)). The major metabolites measured by MRS include the following: 1) N-acetyl aspartate (NAA), a putative marker of viable neurons and axons; 2) glutamate (Glx), the primary excitatory neurotransmitter in the brain, tightly coupled to glutamine, and found in astrocytes; 3) glutathione (GSH), an anti-oxidant that is reduced with oxidative stress; 4) creatine (Cr), an energy marker that is often used as an internal reference for the measurement of other peaks; 5) choline (Cho), a membrane marker used to measure changes in brain tissue, and 6) myo-inositol (mI), an astrocyte marker and osmolyte (Figure 6). Specific patterns of change in these metabolites can provide insight into biological processes such as neuroinflammation, which has been shown to reduce GSH levels, but to increase Glx and mI levels. Of particular note, and as described below, MRS has been applied to mTBI, and has shown significant changes in brain metabolism following repetitive brain trauma (119).

Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) and Resting State Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (rsfMRI)

Functional MRI measures the cerebral blood flow via the Blood-Oxygen-Level-Dependent contrast (BOLD-contrast) due to the presence of deoxyhemoglobin in the blood. Functional MRI is based on the assumption that cerebral blood flow is directly linked to neuronal activity. For example, when a subject performs a visual activation or attention task, increased blood flows to the region of the brain responsible for the task. One method of fMRI is to subtract images acquired during the task from those acquired when not performing the task in order to determine which brain regions show signal changes that may indicate neuronal activity. Another method is to compare images acquired during tasks of increasing cognitive demand for a particular cognitive task, and yet another is to identify multiple tasks that rely on the same cognitive process and measure commonalities in activation across tasks. Tasks may include tests of memory, executive function, or other brain functions. One unique method of fMRI examines activity during “resting state”, which presumably reveals connectivity between different brain regions. While there have been a number of studies in mTBI (e.g., 106), there have been very few studies in repetitive brain trauma that have used fMRI to understand brain function and dysfunction in repetitive brain injury (e.g. (136, 154)).

Positron Emission Tomography (PET)

Positron emission tomography (PET) uses positron-emitting radionucleotides bound to ligands, which are molecules that have specific biological roles in the brain. When injected, these radiopharmaceuticals are taken up into the brain and imaged in three dimensions to provide a functional assessment of brain activity. A commonly used marker is 18-Fluorodeoxyglucose ([18F]-FDG), an analog of glucose. Here, increased signal indicates an area of increased binding or uptake of the marker. The acquisition time of the data is relatively short due to high sensitivity, although this time may be limited by the half-life of the radionucleotide that is used. Like fMRI, PET can be performed either in a resting state or with performance stimuli (52, 56, 68, 73).

Of quite recent origin is the development of PET ligands that specifically target tau (165). Shah and Catafau (140) reviewed 6 new tau PET radiotracers that have been tested in humans ([11C]-PBB3, [18F]-THK523, [18F]-THK515, [18F]-THK5119, [18F]-T807, and [18F]-T808). The first is not practical for clinical use given its short half-life of 20 minutes. The family of arylquionolines that comprise the next three tau ligands are also not as amendable for clinical use because the first does not label tau lesions in non-AD tauopathies and has high retention in white matter, whereas the latter two have more data in vitro and less data in vivo. Finally, [18F]-T807, and [18F]-T808, both show strong selectivity for tau versus amyloid beta (Aβ) in vitro (165, 171), although in vivo studies in humans are more promising for [18F]-T807 (33) than [18F]-T808 (34) because human studies with [18F]-T808 show bone uptake in skull due to defluorination, which may interfere with interpreting images. This is not seen in [18F]-T807, which shows good clearance from normal gray and white matter, although it has only been tested in AD, with the exception of one case study of a retired NFL player by Mitsis et al. (113), and one ex vivo study of a former NFL player with neuropathologically-confirmed CTE, where the fluorescent probe T557 and the radiolabeled [18F]-T807 were used and showed increased binding to paired helical filament (PHF-tau) in brain sections in Alzheimer’s and in one case of confirmed CTE (7) (Note: abstract does not include the CTE case but it was presented at the meeting). Thus a focus on PET tau ligands that can image tauopathy in living brains may be an important first step towards the diagnosis of CTE during lifetime, which may, in turn, lead to possible interventions that might decrease or eliminate hyperphosphorylated tau in the brain and prevent further neurodegenerative changes. (See also below under Neurodegenerative section, under American Football, and under Future Directions for Research, for a further discussion of tau and Aβ PET studies and their role in furthering our understanding of the specificity of tauopathy versus amyloid neuritic plaques in CTE.)

Single Photon Emission Computer Tomography (SPECT)

Single photon emission computer tomography (SPECT) is a functional imaging technique used to determine blood flow in the brain based on the distribution of radioactive pharmaceuticals in the brain. The most common radiopharmaceutical used for SPECT imaging in the brain is technetium-99m-hexamethylpropyleneamine oxime (99mTc-HMPAO). 99mTc-HMPAO is injected into the bloodstream of patients and as the radioisotope decays and accumulates in areas of blood flow, the photons emitted are detected and recorded by gamma-cameras. Cameras rotate 360 degrees around the subject and produce 3D tomographic images of activity in the brain. Therefore SPECT is utilized as a resting-state functional neuroimaging technique, similar to functional magnetic resonance imaging methods. The radionuclides can be generated much more cheaply than PET isotopes, they have a longer half-life, and they are more readily available for clinical use. Despite these factors, SPECT has only seen very limited use in the study of repetitive brain trauma.

Imaging Findings Associated with Different Trajectories of Repetitive Brain Trauma

Introduction

In this section we present neuroimaging findings in the following categories: 1) Acute/Subacute Injuries (Table 1), 2) Chronic Injuries (Table 2), 3) Neurodegenerative Changes (Table 3), and 4) Military (Table 4). Acute/Subacute Injuries includes studies on athletes who are currently playing sports and who experienced repetitive subconcussive and/or concussive head impacts. Chronic Injuries include imaging findings from studies of retired athletes who were examined months to years after their last concussion. In Neurodegenerative Changes we include imaging findings from studies of athletes who are primarily retired and who experience symptoms of and are likely to be at risk for CTE (and one civilian study that met criteria). Finally, in Military Injuries, we include imaging findings from studies of military personnel who have experienced repetitive head impacts.

We used PUBMED to locate these articles. The following keywords were used: (Neuroimaging or imaging) AND (repetitive traumatic brain injury or repetitive brain trauma or chronic traumatic encephalopathy). The dates for the articles selected were inclusive to December 1st, 2014. Studies were selected if: a) repetitive brain trauma was explicitly stated and it was clear that subjects had sustained more than one concussion; or b) subjects of the study were contact sport athletes and/or military service members who experienced repetitive brain trauma via blasts or direct impact to the head; or c) repetitive brain trauma was explicitly stated and it was clear there was more than one subconcussive impact to the head. We did not include case studies (with the exception of a PET tau ligand case study), review articles, articles that focused on animal models (see article in this special issue by Margulies, which covers this topic), or articles that focused on repetitive head trauma resulting from head banging, epilepsy, or physical abuse. One civilian study met these criteria and the remaining studies were either sports-related or military (see descriptions below and see Tables 1 to 4).

Acute /Subacute (Table 1)

Boxing

As noted previously, CTE has been referred to historically as “Punch Drunk”, “Dementia Pugilistica”, and “Boxer’s Dementia” (see early descriptions by 39, 94, 112). It is still not known, however, what additional risk factors lead to the long-term complications of repetitive concussive and subconcussive brain trauma long-recognized in boxing.

Martland introduced the term “punch drunk” in his early 1928 paper where the term was used to highlight a peculiar behavioral profile, including Parkinsonian motor features, as well as a tilt of the head and even a dragging of one side of the body, that was observed in some prizefighters. These physical signs resembled someone who was drunk, hence the term “punch–drunk”. Based on his observations, Martland concluded that these symptoms were most likely the result of blows to the head and injuries to the brain.

It is only recently that neuroimaging techniques have been used to investigate brain abnormalities in boxers. Levin et al. (85) did not detect any abnormal MRI findings in young boxers nor any relationship between behavior and brain structure on MRI. This early imaging study, however, used a 0.35T magnet and MRI findings were based on the qualitative clinical read of the MR scan by two neuroradiologists. This study did not use quantitative measures that are better able to discern subtle changes in the brain.

Another study by Jordan et al. (71) was interested in determining the efficacy of MRI compared to CT in delineating brain abnormalities in a group of male professional boxers. Similar to the Levin et al. (85) study, qualitative rather than quantitative measures were used, with clinical radiology reads and neurological exams performed. These investigators concluded that MRI was superior to CT in discerning visible abnormalities such as cavum septi pellucidi (CSP), periventricular white matter disease, and small subdural hematomas, which were either not observed or were far less visible using CT. Orrison et al. (121) investigated 85 boxers and used semi-quantitative assessments by one neuroradiologist who reported that 76% of these boxers evinced some sign of traumatic brain injury with 59% showing hippocampal atrophy, 43% showing CSP, and 24% showing cerebral atrophy as well as other changes (see Table 1). These findings are consistent with those reported in neuropathologically confirmed CTE (see (107, 108)).

In a study using more advanced techniques, Zhang et al. (169) used DTI to investigate brain injuries in professional boxers and concluded that abnormalities in diffusion, which were correlated with frequency of hospitalization for boxing injuries, might be a preclinical sign of traumatic brain injury in boxers who did not have any major symptoms.

In another DTI study by Chappell et al. (32), boxers were selected who had non-severe head trauma and these investigators also reported diffusion abnormalities, particularly in deep white matter and in cortical gray matter, compared with controls. Based on these findings, Chappell et al. suggested that there was a pathological effect of cumulative repetitive head impacts on the brain, even when the impacts are non-severe. Zhang et al. (168) also reported diffusion abnormalities in professional boxers compared to controls in a group where 42 of 49 boxers had normal clinical MRI reads, and yet DTI revealed abnormalities in the corpus callosum and in the posterior limb of the internal capsule, again underscoring the presence of what might be preclinical signs of the brain alterations that precipitate further progression to CTE. In a separate study, Kemp et al. (75) looked at cerebral perfusion in 34 male amateur boxers and 20 male controls and reported more cerebral perfusion abnormalities in the boxer group as well as more cognitive decline on psychometric tests. In addition, these changes were associated with more bouts and longer years playing.

More recently, Shin et al. (142) examined both boxers and mixed martial arts (MMA) fighters to determine whether or not fight exposure would predict DTI abnormalities. Findings demonstrated that in boxers, the number of knockouts predicted increased axial diffusivity (AD) and radial diffusivity (RD) in white matter and in subcortical gray matter regions, as well as increased mean diffusivity (MD) and decreased fractional anisotropy (FA). Interestingly, these investigators did not find that the number of fights predicted DTI changes, suggesting that the number of knockouts best predicts damage to the brain. In MMA fighters, the results were different. The number of knockouts did predict increased RD in the posterior cingulate. These results suggest that the mechanism of injury is different in MMA, which might be expected given the different striking and grappling techniques that are used. Finally, we note that we included this study in the acute/subacute category as it is part of an ongoing study and the DTI scans were reported as baseline scans, however the investigators do specify that they “did not consider time after the onset of head injury” and therefore there may be some subjects in this cohort who may be better characterized as evincing chronic injury.

Other studies listed in Table 1 include a study by Tanriverdi et al. (155) that examined the association between pituitary volume and growth hormone deficiency in retired boxers compared to younger and more active boxers. Growth hormone deficiency and pituitary volume changes were characteristic of some older retired boxers, although there was no control group and the comparisons for pituitary volume included only a subset of the subjects. Nonetheless findings here warrant further investigation. A study by Banks et al. (10) using FreeSurfer to automatically segment brain regions also noted changes in pituitary volume in 60 boxers and 71 mixed martial artists, compared with 393 controls. Other regions were also observed to be abnormal, including the caudate, thalamus and hippocampus, all of which showed reductions associated with attention problems and reduced self-control.

A study by Hähnel et al. (61) investigated cerebral microhemorrhages in 42 amateur boxers and 37 controls. Two radiologists reviewed the images clinically for presence or absence of microhemorrhages and reported 3 out of 42 boxers with microhemorrhages compared to 0 out of 37 controls. These findings suggest that microbleeds are present in a very small number of amateur boxers. Another study by Hasiloglu et al. (64) also examined microbleeds in 21 amateur boxers and 21 controls using visual inspection of SWI by two neuroradiologists. While there were no significant differences regarding microbleeds between groups, there were more CSPs observed in the boxers than in the controls.

Provenzano et al. (129) used [18F] FDG PET imaging in active male boxers who were all performing poorly in the ring and all had received knockout blows to the head. These boxers, both professional and amateur, showed reduced brain glucose metabolism in the brain, where there was an 8 to 15% decrease in uptake bilaterally in the posterior cingulate cortex, in the parieto-occipital lobes, in frontal lobes (Broca’s area), and in the cerebellum compared to controls. Such findings suggest hypometabolism and likely reflect mechanisms relevant to repetitive brain trauma in boxers. It would be of interest to know whether or not such findings are extant in boxers with no or fewer symptoms.

In summary, the number of studies with appropriate control groups and the use of more advanced imaging techniques are quite small in this population. This is somewhat surprising, particularly given that boxing has received a great deal of attention with respect to brain trauma. Further studies are needed to delineate the course of changes in the brain over time in boxers. Longitudinal studies over time would also be instructive to determine why some are more prone to neurodegenerative changes in the brain while others are not. Such knowledge might lead to possible interventions that would prevent further progressive changes over time.

American Football

American football is a high-speed collision contact sport. Players are at high risk for experiencing repetitive head impacts during training sessions and games. A study by Broglio et al. (26), described previously, found that high school football players receive an average of 652 hits to the head per season that exceed 15 g’s of force. Given that there are more than one million high school students playing football each year, the public health impact of repetitive head impacts may be quite significant. In a study of college level football players, Singh et al. (145) studied brain structural characteristics in 25 football players with a history of concussion and compared them to both a group of 25 players without a history of concussion and a group of controls. Findings showed decreased bilateral hippocampal volumes in football players compared to controls. Within the football group, those players with a history of concussion had smaller hippocampal volumes than those without a history of concussion. Further, the number of years playing football was inversely correlated with left hippocampal volume, suggesting a dose-response relationship.

Recently, fMRI studies have investigated brain activation patterns in football players using task-related approaches, as well as resting state fMRI over the course of a play season. For example, a study by Talavage et al. (154) investigated high school level football players before and after a play season using task-related fMRI. All three athletes who sustained a concussion during the play season showed behavioral and functional abnormalities in follow-up scans. However, a subgroup of 4 of the 8 players without a clinically diagnosed concussion also showed changes in activation pattern as well as subtle impairment detected using Immediate Post-Concussion Assessment and Cognitive Testing (ImPACT).

Another study by Breedlove et al. (25), which included the aforementioned cohort, plus an additional football team from the following season, confirmed that these results suggest that some of those who experience repetitive subconcussive head impact will show alterations in brain function even in the absence of a concussive event. Moreover, there was an association between the number of head impacts experienced during the play season and change in activation pattern between pre- and postseason evaluation. The authors concluded that the changes in brain activation might be related to exposure to repetitive head impacts. When investigating brain connectivity in this same cohort using resting state fMRI, Abbas et al. (1) found a hyperconnectivity of the default mode network (DMN), a network of brain areas which are active when the brain is at wakeful rest. The subjects were 22 asymptomatic high school level footballers compared to athlete controls at pre- and postseason evaluation. There were, however, an increased number of DMN connections in footballer players during the season at Month-2 and Month-3, and a lower or comparable number of DMN connections at Month-1 and Month-4 evaluations. Changes in connectivity persisted 5 months postseason suggesting neurophysiological alterations that persisted beyond the time of exposure to repetitive head impacts.

In the same cohort, Poole et al. (128) used MRS to investigate pre- and postseason brain metabolism in 34 high school level football players compared to non-contact sport athletes. Results showed increased Glx in all football players at postseason evaluation, despite the fact that none experienced a concussion during the play season. There was also a significant decrease in Cr and mI in a subset of the subjects, based on team and season, but not found across all football players. These findings indicate that repetitive subconcussive head impacts may result in the activation of glutamate pathways although changes in other metabolites are less clear. Activation of glutamate pathways may suggest potential cellular injury, even in the absence of clinical symptoms.

Microstructural changes in the brains of football players have been investigated using DTI. Davenport et al. (43), for example, evaluated 24 male high school level football players before and after a play season using DTI, head impact measures, and ImPACT. Diffusion measures did not correlate with number of recorded subconcussive head impacts. However, the risk-weighted cumulative exposure (RWE), which includes both linear and rotational accelerations, correlated with the number of voxel changes in the diffusion measures. These findings suggest an association between exposure to repetitive head impacts and white matter alteration. Further, pre- versus postseason difference in ImPACT verbal memory composite score also correlated with diffusion measures. These results suggest an association between deficits in verbal memory and changes in white matter microstructure over the course of a play season.

Marchi et al. (93) studied the blood serum of 67 college level football players to identify the pathomechanisms of brain structural changes in repetitive brain trauma and found increased postgame levels of S100B, indicative of blood-brain barrier disruption, in those players who experienced subconcussive head impacts. The increase in S100B levels positively correlated with number and severity of head impacts experienced during the game. A subset of 10 players also underwent DTI scans pre- and postseason. The percentage of voxels with change (positive or negative) in MD correlated with change in S100B autoantibodies. These results suggest that football players may experience repeated blood-brain barrier disruption associated with changes in white matter microstructure due to repetitive subconcussive brain trauma. This was further supported by a subsequent study by Bazarian et al. (15), which included 10 college level football players and 5 non-athlete control subjects who were scanned before and after a play season as well as 6 months later. Athletes showed greater changes in FA and MD between pre- and postseason as well as between pre- and 6 months postseason evaluation compared to controls. Within the football group, the percentage of voxels with decreased FA at postseason was positively correlated with head impact exposure. The persistence of white matter changes between preseason and 6 months postseason was associated with changes in serum ApoA1 and S100B autoantibodies. White matter changes were not associated with cognition or balance.

In summary, there is evidence of alterations in brain structure, function, and metabolism in football players who are exposed to repetitive concussive and subconcussive head impacts. Further, studies indicate an association between the frequency and strength of head impacts and extent of brain alterations as well as cognitive and behavioral sequelae.

Ice Hockey

Ice hockey is a high-speed contact sport (3) with a high rate of concussions (46–48, 101", 132). The number of concussions per 1000 athlete exposures is reported to be as high as 11.7 (47). However, to date, there are only a small number of neuroimaging studies that have included ice hockey players with repetitive head impacts (14, 30, 79, 102).

A study by Bazarian et al. (14) investigated 4 high school level ice hockey players and 5 high school level football players using pre- and postseason DTI. One of the contact sport athletes sustained a concussion during the time of the study. A group of 6 non-athletes served as controls. The percentage of voxels with significant changes in FA and MD between pre- and postseason evaluation was highest for the concussed subject (n=1), intermediate for the remaining athletes who were exposed to repetitive subconcussive head impacts, and lowest for controls. Another study by Koerte et al. (79) investigated a cohort of 17 male college level ice hockey players before and after one play season using DTI. Three athletes sustained a concussion during the time of the study. An increase in trace (or MD), AD, and RD in the right precentral region, the right corona radiata, and the internal capsule were reported from pre- to postseason. Although two of the three concussed subjects showed the most pronounced increase in diffusion measures, most of the non-concussed athletes also showed changes from pre- to postseason. Results from these two studies suggest a cumulative effect of repetitive head impacts on white matter microstructure.

Another pre- and post-season study by Helmer et al. (66) used SWI to investigate a cohort of 45 college level hockey players (25 males/20 females) and reported significant increases in the hypointensity burden index suggesting potential cerebral microbleeds at 2 weeks post-concussion in male but not female concussed subjects. A smaller but non-significant increase in the hypointensity burden was observed for concussed females at the same time point. There were no significant changes pre- to post-season in non-concussed players of either sex. However, there was a significant difference in the burden index between males and females at both the beginning and end of the play season, with males having a higher hypointensity burden, suggesting that gender influences must be considered in evaluating head impacts and their sequalae.

A recent study by McAllister et al. (100) investigated a cohort of 80 college level football and ice hockey players and compared them to 79 non-contact sport athletes. Athletes underwent pre- and postseason DTI. Significant group differences were found for MD in the corpus callosum and FA in the amygdala at postseason scan. No differences, however, were reported between pre- versus postseason evaluation in either group. However, head impact exposure during the season correlated with diffusion measures in corpus callosum, amygdala, cerebellum, hippocampus, and thalamus at postseason evaluation. Poorer learning and memory task performance also correlated with MD in the corpus callosum at postseason scan in both groups. These results indicate a relationship between head impact exposure and white matter microstructure even in players who appear cognitively and clinically unaffected, suggesting that repetitive brain injury may be extant even in the absence of cognitive and clinical symptoms.

Charmard et al. (30) investigated brain metabolic changes in the corpus callosum over the course of one play season in a sample of 45 college level ice hockey players. Female athletes without a diagnosed concussion showed a decrease in their NAA/Cr ratio over the course of the season, possibly indicative of neuronal loss, whereas all ratios remained stable for male athletes. This study provides the first indications that there may be gender differences in metabolic changes in the brain for those who are exposed to repetitive head impacts. No differences were observed in metabolic changes over the season between athletes with concussive and those with subconcussive head impacts. It is possible that the corpus callosum is not biochemically sensitive to these kinds of injury in the acute phase.

Soccer

For a long time soccer has not been the focus of research in repetitive brain trauma and much more attention has been given to other contact-sports such as boxing, martial arts, football, and ice hockey. Soccer players, however, are not only at a relatively high risk for sustaining a concussion while playing soccer, but they are also at high risk for repetitive subconcussive head impacts to their unprotected heads when heading the ball. On average, soccer players perform 6–12 headings per game, resulting in thousands of headings over a player’s career (97, 160). A study initiated by the Fédération Internationale de Football (FIFA) showed head accelerations of up to 20 g when heading a soccer ball (118). These head accelerations are within the range of those which occur in a car crash at 30 km/h. Additionally, more severe head accelerations are expected to occur when a child with insufficient neck strength and posture control attempts to head a high velocity ball (130). This is very concerning given the fact that the young brain is still developing and may be even more vulnerable to brain injury. This concern is supported by a recent study that reports an increased risk for long-term brain alterations depending on the age at start of exposure to repetitive brain trauma (149). Soccer players have also been shown to be at increased risk for impaired neurocognitive function later in life (96, 161). Earlier clinical studies from the 1970s have already suggested a link between frequent heading of a soccer ball and cognitive impairment in professional soccer players (98). Moreover, a recent study reports an association between heading the ball and reduced cognitive performance immediately after training (170). However, until recently there were no techniques available that were sufficiently sensitive to detect changes in the brain in vivo.

A study by Koerte et al. (78), described earlier, used DTI to investigate a small cohort of young professional soccer players who were selected specifically for having no history of a clinically symptomatic concussion, compared to professional swimmers. An increase in RD was found in widespread white matter areas in soccer players consistent with findings observed in mTBI studies, and suggesting possible demyelination due to repetitive subconcussive head impacts. This study is particularly important because it is the first study to show microstructural changes in the brains of athletes who experienced only repetitive subconcussive head impact in the absence of a symptomatic concussion. A study by Lipton et al. (88) also used DTI to study white matter alterations in amateur players and found a nonlinear association between the number of headings performed during the previous 12 months and lower FA in temporo-occipital white matter, suggesting a threshold dose-response relationship. In this study, lower FA was also associated with poorer performance in a memory task. Lifetime history of concussion did not correlate with either FA or memory function.

In summary, soccer players who are at high risk for repetitive subconcussive head impacts show brain microstructural alterations associated with subtle cognitive deficits. Given the great number of soccer players worldwide, future studies are needed to evaluate the association of cognitive impairments with strength and frequency of exposure to head impact as well as to characterize the time course of brain alterations and clinical sequelae.

Mixed Sports

An important longitudinal spectroscopic study (162) utilized a mixed population of 14 athletes including kickboxers (n=6), boxers (n=4, of which 1 was a professional boxer), soccer players (n=2), a rugby player (n=1), and an alpine skier (n=1), compared with five age-matched healthy controls without a history of head injury. Single voxel spectroscopy was acquired in the frontal white matter bilaterally using a long echo time sequence. As a result, only NAA, Cho, and Cr were available for analysis (metabolites such as Glx and mI are not visible at this longer echo time). Their results showed significantly lower NAA 3 days after injury, which was increased at 15 days post-injury, and recovered back to control levels at 30 days post-injury in those subjects who experienced a single concussion. Three subjects (boxers and kickboxer) received a second concussion 10–13 days after their initial concussion. These subjects manifested prolonging reduction in levels of NAA, but NAA did not recover back to normal levels even at 45 days post injury. As NAA is a marker of neuronal health, this study demonstrates the cumulative effects of repetitive brain injury.

Chronic (Table 2)

The long-term effects of repetitive brain trauma are among the greatest concerns in sports-related head injury. In this next section we highlight studies that examine individuals with a history of repetitive head injury 3 months to more than 3 decades after the last concussion. However, we note that some studies that would fall under the definition of “chronic,” and that specifically focus on individuals with symptoms of CTE or neurodegeneration, or military subjects, are highlighted subsequently under Neurodegenerative and Military sections.

Boxers

The earliest study of chronic repetitive brain trauma was conducted in 1990 by a group in Sweden examining amateur boxers (60). A retrospective study examined CT and 0.5T MRI scans for evidence of CSP, which is considered a potential marker for brain injury. In comparing 50 boxers (25 with high exposure with a large number of bouts, 25 with low exposure and few bouts) with matched soccer and track and field athletes, there were no significant differences in CSP observed. A more quantitative analysis that measured the anterior horn index and width of sulci also did not show significant differences. While the authors concluded that there was a lack of evidence of chronic brain injury, advances in imaging technology that provide higher resolution images suggest that this conclusion requires reconsideration, as increased rates of CSP have been reported amongst boxers and participants of other contact-sports exposed to repetitive head impacts (121, 148). Additionally, recent studies suggest a possible causal relationship between repetitive head impacts and CSP. Aviv and colleagues, for example, studied 164 active boxers who underwent annual MRI for a boxing board license renewal (8). CSP was present in 49% of boxers, and was found in the subsequent scans of 8 boxers who did not exhibit CSP on their first scan. Moreover, three boxers showed an increasing extent of CSP in follow-up scans. These findings demonstrate clear evidence of brain injury in boxers.

American Football

It is interesting that similar controversies occur today in studies of American football players. In a study that was prematurely ended from the former NFL’s MTBI Committee, 45 former NFL players were examined and the authors concluded a lack of evidence of chronic brain injury (29). Using 1.5T MRI, SWI, and DTI, Casson and colleagues found microhemorrhages in 9% of the players and 7% with CSP. Although they found correlations with global white matter FA and number of self-reported concussions, the study on the whole was negative. Several limitations to this study such as the lack of a control group, relatively low resolution MRI (1.5T vs. 3.0T), and early termination of the study raise questions about the strength of their conclusions, especially in light of the many previous studies to the contrary.

For example, two recent fMRI studies (50, 62) used fMRI to show patterns of hyperactivity that reflect deficits in episodic memory and executive function, respectively, in former NFL players. In both studies, the number of concussions correlated with the degree of hyperactivation. Ford et al. compared NFL players with 0–2 concussions to those with greater than three concussions and found greater activation during memory tasks in the group with more concussions. Their data suggests that multiple concussions may be associated with less efficient memory performance. Similarly, Hampshire et al. showed hyperactivation and hypoconnectivity of the dorsolateral frontal and frontopolar cortices both of which correlated with the number of documented concussions. Their results suggest that there may be a cortical compensatory mechanism to counteract disrupted dorsal executive network connectivity. In another fMRI paradigm that included the Stroop test and operation span testing, 28 male college athletes from several different sports who experienced two or more concussions were compared to 20 young college male controls. Results showed no differences between groups, which led to these investigators concluding younger brains have more plasticity in the face of multiple head impacts (158). This particular fMRI task, however, may be less sensitive to detecting differences between groups. Moreover, combining different athletic sports injuries may increase the variation in the sports injured group, making detection of differences between the concussed group and the controls more difficult to discern.

The question therefore is: are any of these changes reversible with treatment? An intriguing study conducted by Amen et al. (5) used SPECT imaging to try to answer this question. One hundred retired NFL players had baseline SPECT and were then given a cocktail of fish oil (omega-3 for memory and mood), ginkgo (enhance blood flow), vinpocetine (decrease cortisol), phosphatidylserine (enhance acetylcholine), n-acetyl cysteine (anti-oxidant), and various other homeopathic remedies for two to twelve months and were then re-imaged. The authors report significant increases in brain perfusion in the prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate gyrus, parietal lobes, occipital lobes, and cerebellum. These results suggest that this treatment regimen was effective in improving brain perfusion. However, there are several limitations to the study including the lack of a control group, informal monitoring of the regimen, and the method of statistical analysis performed was group as opposed to individual comparisons, making it unclear if individuals improved. Nonetheless, the study does provide inspiration for future clinical trials that can utilize neuroimaging as endpoints for treatment of repetitive brain injury.

Ice Hockey

These changes in brain structure and function are not limited only to retired professional athletes, as there appear to also be near-term and long-term effects in other contact sports such as ice hockey. Albaugh et al. (4), for example, examined preparatory and collegiate level ice hockey players approximately 3 months after their last concussion and found decreased cortical thickness in frontal, parietal and temporal regions that was inversely correlated with self-reported postconcussive symptoms. Self-reported attention problems were inversely correlated with cortical thickness in the left anterior cingulate, left ventromedial prefrontal, and left dorsomedial prefrontal areas, as well as in the left temporal cortex. These results suggest that morphological changes occur at a young age in athletes with multiple concussions. Perhaps of greater concern is that these changes appear to persist. Tremblay et al. (159) studied athletes that played in college but imaged them at least 30 years after their last concussion. Their aim was to understand better the effect of head injury upon aging. In addition to also finding cortical thinning in the frontal, temporal, and parietal lobes, these former athletes also exhibited lateral ventricular enlargement. Using MRS, Tremblay found increased myo-inositol (mI) and decreased choline in the mesial temporal lobe. Increased mI is associated with glial proliferation and decreased choline with membrane turnover. Of particular interest, both are also changes found in mild cognitive impairment. These underlying biochemical changes and persistent changes in brain morphology are concerning.

Neurodegenerative (Table 3)

Repetitive head impacts are, as noted previously, a necessary risk factor for CTE. Studies listed in Table 3 are differentiated from Table 1 and 2 in that these players have both a history of repetitive head impacts but also clinical symptoms that may be indicative of CTE. Given the post-mortem diagnosis of CTE, these studies provide the current state-of-the-art prospective studies of presumed CTE (and/or perhaps other neurodegenerative disease; see also (156)), absent pathological confirmation.

American Football

The study by Hart et al. (63) recruited both symptomatic (cognitive impairment and/or depression) and asymptomatic retired NFL players, all with a history of at least one concussion during their professional career, and compared them with healthy age-matched controls. Results showed that the symptomatic athletes showed increased total and deep white matter lesion volumes using fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) MRI as well as reduced FA in the left and right frontal and parietal regions, corpus callosum, and left temporal lobe using DTI. Of particular interest, these same findings were found when comparing the symptomatic and asymptomatic athletes, indicating that differences between professional sports lifestyle and non-professional sports lifestyles did not impact these results. The study also incorporated the use of arterial spin labeling (ASL), a method of measuring cerebral blood flow, which showed significantly increased flow in the left inferior parietal lobe, posterior superior temporal gyrus, bilateral mid-cingulate gyri, and right middle frontal gyrus, and reduced flow in the left temporal pole and right occipital region in symptomatic retired NFL players when compared with controls. Comparison to asymptomatic players was not possible due to image co-registration issues. These findings also correlated with cognitive measures although other neuroimaging measures did not. These results demonstrate that there are neuroimaging abnormalities that may be specific to the symptoms of CTE. In a second study by the same group (153), which focused primarily on depression, a cohort of non-cognitively impaired retired NFL players with and without depression was compared with healthy controls. Voxel-wise analysis found widely distributed FA changes in the frontal region that appeared to correlate negatively with depressive symptoms. Tract-based analysis showed depressive symptoms that negatively correlated with forceps minor, right frontal aslant tract, right uncinate fasciculus, and left superior longitudinal fasciculus tract ROIs. These results imply that the changes observed in these DTI changes are specific to depression and not necessarily to CTE.

One of the major questions is what is the underlying mechanism for the neurodegenerative decline? Neuroinflammation could be a potential suspect. Coughlin et al. utilized [11C] DPA-713, a PET ligand that binds to translocation proteins, which have been found to co-localize with regions of neuroinflammation to study retired NFL players with a history of multiple concussions (40). In addition, they acquired T1-weighted MRI to measure brain volumes and cortical thickness. Their results showed increased binding in the hippocampus, amygdala, entorhinal cortex, parahippocampal cortex, and supramarginal gyrus, all bilaterally. Of further note, MRI brain volumes showed atrophy in the right hippocampus as well as reduced total gray matter volume. These results appear to show widespread neuroinflammation as well as brain atrophy, reflective of neurodegeneration. However, one of the major weaknesses of this study is that the control subjects were not age-matched and they were significantly younger than the NFL cohort. As neuroinflammation increases with age (16), the differences observed may be related to age rather than the injury itself.

The most recent study by Lin et al. (87) also studied a cohort of symptomatic retired NFL players using an advanced MRS method called correlated spectroscopy (COSY), which can measure additional metabolites by utilizing a second chemical shift domain that provides greater spectral specificity. The authors identified increased choline (indicative of diffuse axonal injury) and increased glutamate/glutamine (indicative of excitotoxicity), which have been found in previous mTBI MRS studies. However, using the COSY method, they also identified additional cerebral metabolites that have not been previously shown, and which also link to neuroinflammation, providing further support of the mechanism described above. These metabolic changes may provide insight into the potential mechanisms of injury that underlie the structural changes observed in the previous study.

Because symptoms of presumed CTE overlap with many other disorders, the development of a method to detect and to measure tau in the brains of living individuals is critical for the early diagnosis of CTE, even prior to the onset of symptoms, as well as for quantifying the degree and progression of tau accumulation. Until there is an accurate in vivo biomarker for CTE, it will not be possible to examine incidence and prevalence of CTE, to characterize underlying structural and physiological changes, to determine genetic and other risk factors, or to conduct clinical trials for treatment and prevention. It has also been only quite recently that PET ligands that specifically target tau have been developed. One older ligand, [18F]-FDDNP, has shown increased uptake in retired NFL players (147). However, this tracer is non-specific as it binds to both Aβ and tau proteins. Agdeppa et al. have also highlighted the binding characteristics of FDDNP and note that it binds to both Aβ and tau (2). There are now, however, as noted previously, several promising probes with good tau specificity that have been developed (33, 143, 171) and recently used, in vivo, in several studies of neurodegenerative diseases, including CTE. One of these probes, [18F]-T807 was used in a recent case study report (113), where a retired NFL player showed not only subcortical binding of tau but also negative binding for [18F]-florbetapir, demonstrating that CTE is likely separate from AD, which tends to show more Aβ and less tau accumulation (163, 164). It is important to note however that the subject also suffered from progressive nuclear palsy which also results in tauopathy, therefore it is unclear if the patterns observed in this subject is wholly representative of CTE (51). Of further note, an ex vivo study by Attardo et al. (7) has shown that the fluorescent probe T557 and the radiolabeled [18F]-T807 bind to paired helical filament (PHF-tau) in brain sections in AD and non-AD samples, including, notably, samples with neuropathologically confirmed CTE, suggesting the selectivity of this tau ligand (note: published abstract did not include CTE case but this was included in the presentation). There is thus much promise in investigating, in vivo, tau protein accumulation in the brains of those suspected of having CTE.

Non-sports Related Concussion

Finally, rather than focusing on retired NFL players, Little et al. (89) recruited civilians with a history of single and repetitive brain trauma for neuropsychological evaluation and volumetric imaging. Their results show that those subjects with a history of multiple mTBI have more neuroimaging changes compared to those with a single concussion including decreased tissue density in the temporal lobes, parahippocampal gyri, ventrolateral prefrontal regions, external capsule, and cerebellum. They also showed significantly worse neuropsychological performance. These findings suggest that the greater the number of brain injuries, the greater the neurodegenerative changes that are seen.

Military-related Repetitive Brain Trauma (Table 4)

One of the difficulties with studying brain injury in military personnel are the co-morbidities of post-traumatic stress, other mood and anxiety disorders, and substance misuse which may contribute to changes in brain morphometry and functionality (83). Also, given the difficulty in conducting imaging studies in acute or subacute time periods of brain injury in combat theater settings, most studies have focused on brain injury in the chronic phase or in Veteran populations with repetitive exposures to blast and/or concussion. Further, because it is difficult to obtain an accurate estimate of the number of blast-related exposures, many studies include individuals with a range of exposure in terms of both number of incidents and severity of incidents. Further, such injuries are less likely to utilize the label “repetitive” and so our search may have excluded these studies. There is also the issue of other complications for many military personnel including pre- and post-deployment concussion via other non-blast incidents that complicate the picture. Finally, the difficulties involved in retrospective and self-report-based determination of “TBI” or “concussion” contribute to the complexity in this area. Nonetheless, this is an important area of investigation, and there is an active line of research investigating whether or not repeated exposure to explosive events (both controlled, as with military breachers in training, and uncontrolled, as with unintentional exposure to improvised explosive devices) may lead to brain findings similar to those observed in former NFL players in both in vivo imaging studies and post-mortem analyses (see (55).

Nevertheless, recent military conflicts have increased interest in the long-term effects of exposure to repeated blast and non-blast concussive events sustained in combat. For example, an FDG-PET study that examined Iraq war combat Veterans exposed to up to 51 blast events during deployment, and 102 over their entire career, showed reduced uptake in the cerebellum vermis, pons, and medial temporal lobes (125). Furthermore, the same patterns of hypometabolism were observed in Veterans with and without a diagnosis of PTSD. These findings indicate that these changes are likely specific to repetitive brain trauma and may provide the biological basis of impairments in information processing, verbal fluency, attention and working memory. One of the weaknesses of the study, however, was the use of an older, non-military control group.

In a follow-up study by the same group (126), Veterans without exposure to blast injury were included as controls and different results were reported from the previous study. In this study, reduced FDG uptake was noted in the bilateral parietal cortices, left somatosensory cortex, and right visual cortex. This demonstrates the importance of using an appropriate comparison group. This study also examined DTI FA as well as a novel measure of macromolecular proton fraction (MPF), which quantifies white matter myelin compositional integrity using the magnetization transfer effect. DTI FA values were reduced ~20% in the corpus callosum between groups. For MPF measures, significant differences between the blast and non-blast exposed Veterans became more apparent after 20 blasts, suggesting a possible threshold for the number of exposures before changes can be detected. PTSD comorbidity did not change the results, suggesting that these changes are, as noted in the previous study, likely specific to repetitive brain trauma. However, the functional relevance of the PET, DTI, and MPF measures is yet to be determined as there were no significant correlations observed with any of the neuropsychological measures.

Similar to sports-related injury, there is also an element of subconcussive injury in military-related repetitive brain injury. For example, there are several occupations in the military that result in being repeatedly exposed to blast events, such as bomb detonators, mortormen, field artillery personnel, infantrymen that fire hand-held missiles, etc. Another such group are breachers, those who use explosives to breach buildings. Stone et al. found significant differences in DTI and MRI measures in breachers with 7–15 years of experience compared to those with little to no experience and those with only 1–3 years of experience, demonstrating a potential cumulative effect of injury (152) (not included in Table 3 because it is an Abstract).

Another study of functional imaging in military subjects with repetitive brain trauma has shown greater activation in the anterior cingulate gyrus, medical frontal cortex, and posterior cerebral areas involving visual and visual-spatial functions (136). In this study, 15 subjects underwent a task-related functional MRI examination that included a stimulus-response compatibility task that tests executive function including cognitive control. Increased activation was found with stimulus-response incompatibility after controlling for differences in reaction time and symptoms of PTSD and depression. It is difficult to compare the results of this study with other studies in single mTBI due to differences in the study design. However, these brain regions have been shown to be involved in fMRI studies of mTBI, and may be relevant to repetitive brain injury.

Finally, a recent study utilized MRS, albeit at 7 Tesla (67). Findings showed that hippocampal NAA/Cho and NAA/Cr ratios were decreased in Veterans at least one year after 1–10+ blast exposures. Reduced hippocampus volume and deficits in neurocognitive testing were also found. Changes in NAA also appeared to be correlated with effort testing although without a formal comparison. These findings point towards injury to the hippocampus in soldiers exposed to repetitive blast events. Interestingly, there were no significant differences between mTBI subjects with and without a diagnosis of PTSD, anxiety or alcohol abuse, demonstrating that these changes are, as noted above in other studies, likely specific to repetitive brain trauma.

Summary and Future Directions for Research

Introduction

Today, advanced neuroimaging techniques can provide insights into brain injury following repetitive head impacts that go beyond self-report and clinical measures. Diagnosing repetitive brain trauma or resulting neurodegeneration on the basis of objective radiological evidence sets the stage for a more complete understanding of the underlying pathophysiological mechanisms. This is thus an exciting new era of discovery with the hope that this greater understanding will lead to early diagnosis, efficacious treatment, and monitoring of repetitive brain trauma. More studies are, nonetheless, needed to further elucidate the pathomechanisms underlying repetitive brain trauma. There are several directions for future research that we believe will improve our understanding of repetitive brain trauma and the different trajectories, as well as lead to possible interventions to prevent the cascade of progressive changes that characterize some of the outcomes observed to date.

Neuroimaging as a biomarker of neurodegeneration

A major issue with neuroimaging of any brain injury is the dynamic course of neuropathological changes that occur during the acute to sub-acute and chronic stages, including neurodegenerative changes that result in progressive volume loss (20). Little is known about how and under what circumstance repetitive head trauma results in neurodegeneration. Although most studies that have examined longitudinal neuroimaging findings in TBI are based on just a single traumatic event (167), two consistent findings from that literature have direct implications for the study of repetitive brain trauma: (1) injury induced atrophic changes over time may be region specific (i.e., hippocampus) and/or involve the whole brain, and (2) vulnerability of damage to white over gray matter. For example, focusing just within the mild end of the TBI spectrum (Glasgow Coma Scale, GCS ≥ 13), both MacKenzie et al. (91) and Zhou et al. (172) established an early post-injury baseline with various volumetric analyses, and then followed patients a year or more post-injury. Findings demonstrated that even at this mild end of brain injury, volumetric loss was particularly notable within white matter, which was also predictive of neuropsychological outcome. The implications of such findings are that even mild injury may set into motion degenerative changes (38), including neuroinflammation and neuroprotective factors, where advanced neuroimaging techniques may function as biomarkers of recovery and pathological outcomes. This may be particularly important if repetitive brain trauma has the potential to induce a subtle neuroinflammatory response that may set the stage for progressive neurodegenerative changes at some point during the life span (see previous discussions; see also (40, 166)). Of further note, a number of the imaging modalities discussed in this review provide quantitative metrics that would be sensitive to parenchymal loss associated with neurodegeneration. Additionally, as explained in this review, once a baseline is established in cases of repetitive head impacts either pre-injury or as close to the time of injury as possible, such a neuroimaging reference point will provide the basis for determining if neurodegeneration occurs and whether brain changes are static or progressive. Finally, a further important area of future research is to understand the similarities and differences between CTE and other neurodegenerative diseases that may co-occur so as to refine further our understanding of the underlying mechanisms that characterize CTE as well as other tauopathies (see also review (156)).

Multi-modal imaging, longitudinal study designs, and standardized protocols

Each modality provides different information and by using several different modalities we enrich the information we have regarding an individual injury. Future research needs to include multi-modal imaging to acquire different information from different modalities in the same subject in order to have a more complete picture of each subject’s brain alterations. Findings from a multimodal imaging approach can be combined with information from clinical evaluations, neuropsychological evaluations, as well as biomarkers from blood and CSF to identify sensitive biomarkers for diagnosis, therapeutic decisions, and prognosis. To date, studies in this field have not used a multimodal approach.

Moreover, there is a need for longitudinal studies of repetitive brain trauma to understand the dynamic nature of repetitive brain trauma and the influence of possible modulating factors such as the biomechanics of the injury, lesion location, genetics, and others factors that are currently not known. This may lead to the early identification of those individuals who are likely to develop neurodegeneration versus those who will not. Studies of pre- and postseason injury are important but more instructive would be studying, for example, football players at the beginning of their careers and following them through several years of play.

In addition, given the heterogeneous nature of brain trauma, studies will likely need a large number of subjects to truly connect symptoms to brain pathology. Thus multi-center studies will be needed and the development of standardized protocols that can produce similar measurements across MR platforms will be a key component of future research.

More specific measures of repetitive brain injury

Multi-shell sampling

Advanced diffusion MRI (dMRI) protocols use a multi-shell sampling scheme. Here, diffusion measurements are acquired at several different b-values for a specific set of gradient directions. This enables the calculation of microstructural properties which are not available using standard dMRI protocols (single shell) (131). For example, one can compute additional diffusion parameters such as kurtosis, fast and slow diffusion fractions, mean-squared displacement etc. (57, 122, 173).

Multi-tensor tracing of fiber bundles

Tracing of multiple fiber components is now also possible using a two-tensor tractography algorithm (92). This novel tractography algorithm improves the estimation of fiber directions in areas of fiber crossings and increased noise (Figure 7).

Free-Water

Another newly developed diffusion measure, free-water (FW), distinguishes the contribution of extracellular water, which is a potential measure of atrophy, edema and neuroinflammation (124), and neurodegenerative processes.

MRS

While the biochemical changes observed by MRS can help elucidate underlying pathophysiology, they may not necessarily provide specific diagnostic information. The use of MRS with greater spectral resolution such as correlated spectroscopy might provide the needed additional biochemical specificity. Other advances in spatial resolution such as 3D chemical shift imaging may also provide specificity by allowing for the interrogation of brain biochemistry in all regions of the brain, which, importantly may then be correlated with other imaging modalities.

PET tau ligands

By successfully imaging tau deposition, in vivo, along with ostensibly ruling out Alzheimer’s disease through negative Aβ imaging, we will be able to develop a potential biological marker of CTE in living individuals (to be neuropathologically-confirmed). This method has the potential to quickly become a tool for aiding in differential diagnosis in cases of suspected CTE, much like [18F]-DOPA is currently used in Parkinson’s disease. Correlates of PET findings including cognitive/clinical and other imaging measures (MRI, DTI, MRS, and resting state fMRI) will also likely provide non-invasive biomarkers for a putative measure of CTE, in vivo. Careful attention to other tauopathies and differentiating amongst them will, nonetheless, be an important challenge for future research studies.

Personalized medicine approach

The heterogeneity of repetitive brain trauma also calls for new post-processing approaches to identify individual injury patterns. An example is the work by Bouix et al. (23) who observed alterations in diffusion in gray matter in individuals with chronic postconcussive symptoms following a single mTBI (see also (77, 99, 144). Bouix et al. used individual profiles of injury, based on developing a normative atlas, and then compared individual patients to the normative atlas to reveal individual profiles of injury. Using this approach provides a signature of injury for each patient that can be used to guide treatment, to correlate findings with cognitive deficits, and to provide a more informed treatment plan. Such an approach could also be used to prospectively monitor changes over time in a single individual, which may be very important with respect to early detection of brain alterations, and to following those who are exposed to repetitive head impacts.

Summary

All of the above advances, such as in DTI, PET, and MRS, have great promise for becoming highly sensitive markers of tissue structure that, in combination, will likely lead to greater specificity in diagnosing CTE (and differentiating it from other tauopathies), perhaps in the early stages, which may facilitate preventative strategies. These new advances and their application to longitudinal studies of repetitive head impacts will also provide invaluable information about the neurobiology of brain injuries and hopefully lead to an understanding of the underlying mechanisms that determine recovery versus progression. Such information may, in the future, identify early indicators of those at risk for poor outcome so that early interventions can be introduced. Further, a personalized medicine approach to identify individual profiles of injury will provide the treating physician with helpful information about individual patients, as well as serve as a way to monitor treatment efficacy in that the profile of injury may be followed over time to determine change. All of these new advances are not beyond the horizon but are available today to begin a whole new era of investigating repetitive head trauma so as to change the trajectory of outcome in those most at risk for CTE.

This study was supported by the Else Kröner-Fresenius-Stiftung, Germany (IK, MM). This work was also partially funded by grants from The Department of Defense (W81XWH-10-1-0835: APL; X81XWH-07-CC-CSDoD; MES, RAS), the National Institutes of Health (R01-NS078337: APL, MES, RAS; U01-NS086659: RAS) and a VA Merit Award (MES).

Figure 1 Soccer players experience repetitive subconcussive head impacts while heading the ball. A recent study investigated the white matter microstructure using diffusion-tensor imaging in a group of professional soccer players compared to swimmers. Tract-based statistics revealed lower radial diffusivity in widespread white matter regions in soccer players. (c) Journal of the American Medical Association (Koerte et al. 2012).

Figure 2 We present a multi-stage disease model of short- and long-term consequence following repetitive brain trauma. Quality of life is indicated by symptom load, which is expressed as a function of time, thereby allowing for the differentiation between at least three main trajectories of the disease including an acute/subacute phase, a chronic/static phase, and a phase of possible neurodegeneration.

Figure 3 Three-dimensional reconstruction of the hippocampus. The hippocampus has been associated with memory impairment in TBI and repetitive brain trauma.

Figure 4 Surface lines of pial (yellow) and white matter (red) superimposed on a T1-weighted image. Surface segmentation was performed using FreeSurfer 5.1 in a retired NFL player, the surfaces can then be used to calculate cortical thickness and perform group comparisons as well as associations with e.g., neuropsychological test evaluations.

Figure 5 Susceptibility-Weighted Image with superimposed lesion mask. SWI is sensitive to detect micro-hemorrhages following brain trauma. Typically the hemorrhages appear dark in SWI making them difficult to separate from blood vessels. A threshold mask is used such that lesions are hyperintense and can be used to calculate the hypointensity burden (HIB)(see (66)).

Figure 6 Spectrum as obtained using magnetic resonance spectroscopy. mI = Myoinositol, Cho = Choline, Cr = Creatine, NAA = N-acetyl aspartate, Glx = Glutamate.

Figure 7 Comparison between single tensor streamline tractography (A) and two-tensor tractography (B) of the corpus callosum. The same ROI was used to seed fibers (A) and to select fibers from a two-tensor whole brain tractography (B). Note that two-tensor fiber-reconstruction includes numerous fibers in the periphery while the single-tensor approach only detects more central fibers.

Table 1 Acute/Subacute Injuries.

First author	Year	Title	Journal	Predominant
Injury
Mechanism	Sports/
Military	Subjects (N,
Gender, Age)	Modality
Sequence	Analysis
Technique	Main Findings	
Levin HS	1987	Neurobehavioral functioning and magnetic resonance imaging findings in young boxers	J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatr	repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts	Boxing	12 professional + 3 amateur Boxers (male, mean age 20.5 +/− 2.1 yrs), Controls with frequent amateur sport participation (male, mean age 20.0 +/− 2.2 yrs)	0.35T MRI T1w	Reading by 2 neuroradiologists.	No evidence of evidence of increased sulcal prominence, or ventricular enlargement. Also no group difference in neurocognitive testing, suggestive of cerebral atrophy, or cavum septum pellucidum. Qualitative study using clinical reads of scans. Advanced technology only beginning to be used but not in this area of research.	
Jordan BD	1990	Computed Tomography and Magnetic Resonance Imaging Comparisons in Boxers	JAMA	repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts	Boxing	21 boxers (male, 1 retired, 16 active professionals, 4 active amateur, age range 21–66 yrs, mean age 28.3 yrs)	0.5 T MRI T1w, T2w, CT	Clinical radiological read and neurologic examination.	Goal: to compare effectiveness of MRI versus CT imaging in evaluating brain trauma in boxers. 11 boxers had normal findings on CT and MRI, 7 had abnormal findings on both. Concluded that MRI was superior to CT in delineating more clearly brain abnormalities, e.g., small subdural hematoma that was visible on MRI was not visible on CT. Also MRI detected more abnormalities than did CT. There were no cases where CT was superior to MRI. Findings include, but were not limited to, periventricular white matter hyperintensities, CSP, hydrocephalus.	
Kemp PM	1995	Cerebral Perfusion and Psychometric Testing in Military Amateur Boxers and Controls	J Neurosurg	repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts	Boxing	34 amateur boxers (male, mean age 22.0 +/− 2.9 yrs), Controls with frequent amateur sport participation (male, mean age 22.2 +/− 3.1 yrs)	Tc-99m HMPAO SPECT	Comparison with "atlas of normality", image was defined "abnormal" if it contained at least one deficit with 10 connected voxel above threshold of 2.9 SDs.	Significantly more abnormalities in boxers (14 of 34 "abnormal") on cerebral perfusion imaging compared to controls (5 of 34) "abnormal"), Boxers performed worse in psychometric testing compared to controls, and boxers who fought more bouts/years performed worse than those with fewer bouts/years.	
Zhang L	2003	Increased Diffusion in the Brain of Professional Boxers: A Preclinical Sign of Traumatic Brain Injury?	AJNR	repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts	Boxing	24 professional boxers (male, age range 21–53 yrs, mean 32.2, +/− 7.2yrs), 14 controls (male, age-matched to boxers)	1.5T MRI T1w, DTI	DTI: whole brain diffusion histogram, fitted to triple Gaussian curve to represent tissues and mixing; calculation of a mean brain diffusion constant and the width of distribution in a histogram. T1: scoring of CSP, SWM, PWMD and volume loss (scoring done by qualitative rating system).	Diffusion values were significantly higher in boxers. Increased diffusion coefficient was correlated with frequency of hospitalization for boxing injuries. The most common MR findings were volume loss, inappropriate to age, in cavum septi pellucidi, SWM, and PWMD. Findings suggest that microstructural damage to the brain is associated with chronic, repetitive, brain injury even when clinical MRI is normal.	
Chappell MH	2006	Distribution of Microstructural Damage in the Brains of Professional Boxers: A Diffusion MRI Study	JMRI	repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts	Boxing	81 professional boxers (male, 20–42 years, median age 28yrs); 12 controls (male, 22–31 years, median age 25.5yrs)	1.5T MRI DTI	Voxelwise based statistical analysis VBA and SPM.	Increased ADC and decreased FA was observed in deep WM, whereas decreases in ADC were observed in cortical gray matter in boxers compared to controls. Clusters of positive correlation of ADC with age were found in both groups, although regions and strength of correlation differed. No subject had a history of moderate or severe head trauma. These findings suggest that cumulative brain injury results from non-severe repetitive head trauma.	
Zhang L	2006	Diffusion Anisotropy Changes in the Brains of Professional Boxers	AJNR	repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts	Boxing	49 professional boxers (male, mean age 30+/−4.5 yrs), 19 controls (male, mean age 32+/−9.5 yrs)	1.5T MRI T1w, T2w, DTI	Voxelwise analysis ("pixel by pixel"…).	42 of 49 boxers had normal clinical MRI, and none had a neurological disorder. Nonetheless, group differences were evident in diffusion and anisotropy measurements in boxers compared with healthy controls, especially in the CC and in the posterior limb of internal capsule. These findings were interpreted as possible pre-clinical signs of subtle brain injury.	
Tanriverdi F	2008	Brief Communication: Pituitary Volume and Function in Competing and Retired Male Boxers	Ann Intern Med	repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts	Boxing	21 young professional boxers (male, mean age 18 yrs, age range 17–19 yrs), 23 adult male professional boxers (mean age 22 yrs, age range 19–28 yrs), 17 retired male professional boxers (mean age 42 yrs, range 32–53 yrs), from Turkish National Boxing Team; no comparison group	1.5T MRI T1w	Volumetry of pituitary gland in 38 (of 61) randomly selected boxers. No description of exact method or software. Serum hormones measured using radioimmunoassay, immunoradiometric assay or chemiluminescent methods.	9 out of 61 (15%) boxers had growth hormone (GH) deficiency. All except 1 of the 9 was retired. Of the 17 retired boxers, 8 (47%) had GH deficiency. Retired boxers without GH deficiency (n=8) also had lower pituitary volume than retired boxers with normal GH (n=9). Comparing 7 GH deficient boxers to 31 GH normals, pituitary volume was significantly lower in those with GH deficiency. Mean pituitary volume was significantly lower in adult and retired boxers than in young boxers. Limitations are lack of control group and small number of subject with volume measures.	
Chappell MH	2008	Multivariate Analysis of Diffusion Tensor Imaging Data Improves the Detection of Microstructural Damage in young Professional Boxers	MRI	repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts	Boxing	59 professional boxer (male, age range 22–31yrs), 12 controls (male, age range 22–31 yrs)	1.5T MRI DTI	2 multivariate voxelwise analyses were employed, 1: Hotelling’s T2 multivariate analysis using MD and FA, and 2: T Test on Linear Discriminant analysis (LDA) that calculates a 'seperability metric' from MD, FA and mode.	Previous univariate analyses were not able to differentiate between groups. Here, 2 multivariate methods were used where the LDA method demonstrated a better separation between groups than the Hotelling's method. This study uses interesting multivariate techniques, but the sample size for the controls is small (n=12), which limits the power.	
Hähnel S	2008	Prevalence of Cerebral Microhemorrhages in Amateur Boxers as Detected by 3T MR Imaging	AJNR	repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts	Boxing	42 amateur boxers (male, age range 18–65 yrs; mean age 32.95 yrs), 37 healthy controls (male, group age-matched to the boxers)	3T MRI T2*, TOF	Two radiologists reviewed images clinically to evaluate the presence or absence of micro-hemorrhage, blind to group membership.	In the amateur boxers 3 out of 42 had microhemorrhages compared with 0 out of 37 healthy control, although this finding was not statistically significant.	
Vagnozzi R	2008	Temporal Window of Metabolic Brain Vulnerability to Concussion: A Pilot 1H-Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopic Study in Concussed Athletes - Part III	Neurosurg	sports-related concussion, in 3 cases 2 concussions	mixed	13 athletes of different sports (5 female, 8 male, age range 21–32 yrs), (10 athletes at 3 time points, 3 athletes with second concussion at 4 time points), 5 controls + case report of 1 professional boxer (35 yrs) studied at 5 time points (gender information not provided)	3T MRI MRS (SVS, TE=135ms)	MRS ROI on both sides in frontal WM, scan at 3-days, 15-days, 30-days post injury. Those with second concussion also scanned at 45-days post-initial injury. Professional boxer was scanned before, and at 4, 7, 15,and 30 days after knockout.	Longitudinal study of NAA/Cr in individuals with single and double concussions. Single concussions shows that NAA/Cr is significantly lower than controls in the acute stages of injury however NAA/Cr begins to recover to normal levels 30 days post-injury. However in those subjects with two concussions, NAA/Cr rates were lower and took longer to recover to normal. This suggests that cumulative effects of head injury may play a significant role.	
Orrison Jr WW	2009	Traumatic Brain Injury: A Review And High-Field MRI Findings In 100 Unarmed Combatants Using A Literature-Based Checklist Approach	J Neurotrauma	repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts (no information about concussion count)	Boxing, MMA	85 male fighters (mean age 27.3 +/− 5.0 yrs)	3T MRI T1w, T2w	Semi-quantitative reading by one neuroradiologist.	76 % of fighters showed at least one sign associated with TBI, 59 % hippocampal atrophy, 43% CSP, 32% DPVS, 29% DAI, 24% cerebral atrophy, 19% increased lateral ventricles, 14% pituitary gland atrophy, 5% arachnoid cysts, 2% contusions; no sign of vascular damage in MRA.	
Provenzano FA	2010	F-18 FDG PET Imaging of Chronic Traumatic Brain Injury in Boxers: A Statistical Parametric Analysis	Nuclear Med Comm	repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts	Boxing	19 active boxers who were all poor performers in boxing matches and all had been knocked out (male, mean age 30 +/− 4.9 yrs), 8 controls (5 female; mean age 37 +/−8.5yrs)	[18F] FDG-PET	Voxelwise t-tests using SPM and ROI analysis (manually drawn).	Goal was to determine whether there is reduced brain glucose metabolism in professional and amateur boxers using F-18 FDG PET. Results showed an 8–15% decreased uptake in bilaterally in posterior cingulate cortex, parieto-occipital lobes, frontal lobes (Broca's area), and cerebellum compared with controls. Findings suggest that hypometabolism as shown in reduced brain glucose metabolism, may reflect mechanisms relevant to repeated brain trauma in boxers.	
Amen DG	2011	Impact of Playing American Professional Football on Long-Term Brain Function	J Neuropsychiatr	repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts	Football	100 active and retired NFL players (male, mean age 57.27 years), 20 right-handed controls (male, mean age 50.0 years), 32 without loss of consciousness versus 32 with multiple loss of consciousness	SPECT, qEEG	SPECT: general linear (Chang) methods qEEG compared to a nationally published normative database.	SPECT: decreased perfusivity was found in the whole brain, especially in the prefrontal, temporal, parietal and occipital lobes, anterior and posterior cingulate gyrus and cerebellum. qEEG confirmed those results with significantly slower waves in the bilateral temporal regions and bilateral frontal lobes and reduced power at the higher frequencies.	
Hasiloglu ZI	2011	Cerebral Microhemorrhages Detected by Susceptibility-Weighted Imaging in Amateur Boxers	AJNR	repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts	Boxing	21 amateur classic boxers (8 active, 13 retired, (male, mean age 42.5 yrs), 21 healthy non-boxing volunteers (male, age range 19–59 yrs)	1.5T MRI T1w, SWI	Visual inspection by two experienced neuroradiologists.	No significant difference in microbleeds between boxers and controls, but significantly more CSPs in boxers.	
Bazarian JJ	2012	Subject-Specific Changes in Brain White Matter on Diffusion Tensor Imaging After Sports-Related Concussion	Magn Reson Imaging	repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts	Ice Hockey, Football	4 male high school level ice hockey players, 5 male high school level football players (mean age 17 yrs) and 6 controls (1 female, mean age 23 yrs), 1 athlete sustained a concussion	3T MRI DTI	Voxelwise analysis using bootstrapping Preseason versus postseason. In case of concussion additional post-injury scan at 72-hours.	Percentage of voxels with significant pre-post FA and MD changes was highest for concussed subject (n=1), intermediate for remaining athletes with subconcussive head impacts, and lowest for controls. Affected regions included the right corona radiata, and the right ILF.	
Breedlove EL	2012	Biomechanical Correlates of Symptomatic and Asymptomatic Neurophysiological Impairment in High School Football	J Biomech	repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts	Football	Season 1: 24 high school level football players (male, age range 15–18 years, mean age 17 years), season 2: 28 high school level football players (male, age range 14–18 years, mean 16.8 years), season 2 included 14 athletes from season 1 7 of 38 athletes sustained a concussion	3T MRI fMRI	AFNI after testing visual working memory in fMRI. Pre- versus post-season comparison in 23 athletes, and correlation with head impact exposure.	All athletes with concussion showed behavioral and functional abnormalities in follow-up scans. A subgroup of those without a clinically diagnosed concussion showed changes in fMRI and ImPACT. There was an association between the number of head impacts and change in fMRI.	
Koerte IK	2012	White Matter Integrity in the Brains of Professional Soccer Players Without a Symptomatic Concussion	JAMA	repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts No previous history of reported concussion	Soccer	12 professional soccer players (male, mean age 19.7 yrs) and 11 swimmers (male, mean age 21.4 yrs)	3T MRI DTI	TBSS, group comparison.	Widespread white matter area with increased RD in soccer players without history of concussion consistent with findings observed in patients with mild TBI, and suggesting possible demyelination due to repetitive subconcussive head impacts.	
Koerte IK	2012	A Prospective study of Physician-Observed Concussion During a Varsity University Hockey Season: Metabolic Changes in Ice Hockey Players: Part 3 of 4	Neurosurg Focus	repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts	Ice Hockey	17 college level ice hockey players (male, mean age 22.2 yrs), 3 sustained a concussion during the study	3T MRI DTI	TBSS, preseason versus post-season.	Increase in trace, AD, and RD over the course of one play season in the right precentral region, the right corona radiata, and the anterior and posterior limb of the internal capsule. Results suggest microstructural alterations due to concussive and subconcussive head impacts.	
Chamard, E	2012	A Prospective Study of Physician-Observed Concussion During a Varsity University Hockey Season: Metabolic Changes in Ice Hockey Players: Part 4 of 4	Neurosurg Focus	repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts. 11 sustained a concussion during the study	Ice Hockey	45 college level ice hockey players (25 male, mean age 22.2 yrs), (20 female, mean age 20.2 yrs)	3T MRI MRS (SVS TE=35msROI:CC	LCModel; Ratios to Cr; pre-season versus post-season. In case of concussion additional post-injury scans at 72-hours, 2 weeks, and at 2 months.	Female athletes without a diagnosed concussion showed a decrease in their NAA/Cr ratio over the course of the season, whereas all ratios stayed stable for male athletes over the season. No difference were found in changes over the season between athletes with concussive and those with subconcussive head impacts. These results show that the corpus callosum may not be sensitive to metabolic changes after TBI.	
Lipton ML	2013	Soccer Heading is Associated with White Matter Microstructural and Cognitive Abnormalities	Radiology	repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts	Soccer	37 amateur soccer players (29 male, mean age 30.9 yrs, 8 female, mean age 30.8 yrs)	3T MRI DTI	Whole-brain linear regression analysis -formed ROIs on which subsequent nonlinear analysis was performed.	Nonlinear association between number of headings performed during the past 12 months and lower FA in temporo-occipital white matter indicating a threshold dose-response relationship. Lower FA was also associated with poorer memory scores. Lifetime history of concussion did not correlate with neither FA nor memory function.	
Marchi N	2013	Consequences of Repeated Blood-Brain Barrier Disruption in Football Players	PLOS ONE	repetitive subconcussive head impacts	Football	67 college level football players (age range 18 –23 yrs) a subgroup of 10 underwent MRI	3T MRI DTI	Bootstrapping permutation test, pre- versus post-season comparison pre- and post-game blood test (S100B, S100B autoantibodies).	Post-game S100B correlated with number and severity of head impacts. Percentage of voxels with change in MD correlated with change in S100B autoantibodies. Results suggest that football players may experience repeated BBBD.	
Abbas K	2014	Alteration of Default Mode Network in High School Football Athletes Due to Repetitive Subconcussive Mild Traumatic Brain Injury: A Resting-State Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging Study	Brain Connect	repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts	Football	22 high school level football players (male, age range 14–18 yrs, mean age 16.7 yrs) 10 male non-contact sport athletes (male, age range 14–18 yrs, mean age 16.7 yrs)	3T MRI rs fMRI	DMN, Group comparison, pre-, in-, and 5 months post-season comparison.	Hyperconnectivity of the DMN in asymptomatic footballers compared to athlete controls at pre-season, Month-2, Month-3, and post-season sessions, but lower or comparable number of DMN connections for Month-1 and Month-4 sessions. Changes in connectivity persisted 5-months post-season.	
Helmer, K	2014	Hockey Concussion Education Project, Part 1. Susceptibility-weighted imaging study in male and female ice hockey players over a single season	J Neurosurg	repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts	Ice Hockey	45 college level ice hockey players (25 males and 20 females; male mean age 23 yrs and female mean age 21 yrs) tested at beginning and end of season; 11 subjects (5 men, 6 women) imaged 72 hours, 2 weeks, and 2 months post-concussion	3T MRI SWI	Matlab code for identifying hypointensity clusters with algorithm for ruling out vessels.	Significant change at 2 weeks in post-concussed males suggesting potential cerebral microbleeds as evidenced by increased SWI hypointensity burden. No significant pre- versus post-season changes in non-concussed subjects of either sex. However, there was a significant difference in the burden index between males and females at both the beginning and end of season, with males having a higher hypointensity burden. The latter suggests gender differences in exposure to head impacts and their sequalae.	
Davenport EM	2014	Abnormal White Matter Integrity Related to Head Impact Exposure in a Season of High School Varsity Football	J Neurotrauma	repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts	Football	24 high school level football players (male, mean age 16.9 year [0.6])	3T MRI DTI	Pre- versus post-season comparison of diffusion measures. Voxelwise correlation with head impact exposure.	RWE (risk-weighted cumulative exposure including linear and rotational acceleration) as well as pre- versus post-season difference in ImPACT verbal memory composite were correlated with number of voxels with change in diffusion measures (defined by +/− 2SD differing from group mean). Diffusion measures did not correlate with number of impacts. Results suggest an association between strength of head impact and extend of microstructural alteration.	
McAllister TW	2014	Effect of Head Impacts on Diffusivity Measures in a Cohort of Collegiate Contact Sport Athletes	Neurology	repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts	Football, Ice Hockey	80 college level football and ice hockey player (64 male, 16 female, 18–22 yrs, mean age 19 yrs +/− 1.1 yrs), 79 non-contact-sport athletes (56 male, 23 female, 18–22 yrs, mean age 19.5 yrs +/−1.3 yrs)	3T MRI T1w, DTI	Group comparison and pre- versus post-season comparison of diffusion measures in ROIs based on FreeSurfer segmentation.	Significant group difference for MD in the CC and FA in the amygdala at post-season scan. No difference between pre- versus post-season in either group. Head impact exposure correlated with diffusion measures in CC, amygdala, cerebellum, hippocampus, and thalamus. Poorer learning and memory task performance correlated with MD in CC at post-season scan in both groups.	
Poole VN	2014	MR Spectroscopic Evidence of Brain Injury in the Non-Diagnosed Collision Sport Athlete	Dev Neuropsychol	repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts	Football	34 high school level football players (male, age range 15–18 years), 10 non-contact sport athletes (male, age range 15–18 years)	3T MRI MRS (SVS TE=30ms); ROI: DLPFC, M1	LCModel concentrations with PV correction, and group comparison, pre-season versus post-season.	Increased Glx in M1 post-season in all football players despite lack of concussion. Team-specific decreases in Cr and mI. These results show that biochemical changes are occurring as a result of just subconcussive blows although it remains unclear how specific or sensitivity.	
Singh R	2014	Relationship of Collegiate Football Experience and Concussion with Hippocampal Volume and Cognitive Outcomes	JAMA	repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts	Football	25 college level football players with concussion (age range 20.6–21.7 yrs, mean 21.2 yrs +/−1.31 yrs, time since concussion: 1–1672 days, mean 270 days), 25 football players without concussion (male, age range 19.7–20.9 yrs, mean age 20.28 yrs +/−1.43 yrs), 25 matched controls (age range 20–21.6 yrs, mean age 20.8 yrs +/−1.87 yrs	3T MRI T1w	FreeSurfer segmentation of hippocampus, and group comparison.	Decreased bilateral hippocampal volumes in footballers compared to controls. Players with history of concussion had smaller volumes than those without a history of concussion. Number of years played was inversely correlated with left hippocampal volume.	
Talavage TM	2014	Functionally-Detected Cognitive Impairment in High School Football Players Without Clinically-Diagnosed Concussion	J Neurotrauma	repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts	Football	24 high school football players (male, age range 15–18 yrs, mean age 17 yrs), 3 experienced a concussion during the study	3T MRI fMRI	AFNI after testing visual working memory in fMRI. Pre- versus post-season comparison in 11 athletes, and in case of a concussion or high HIT measure, additional scan was performed within 72 hrs after diagnosis.	All 3 players who experienced a concussion showed abnormalities in post-impact scan. Four of 8 players without symptoms but with high HIT measures showed no change in post-impact scan. The remaining 4 showed changes in fMRI and ImPACT in the absence of a clinically diagnosed concussion.	
Banks SJ	2014	Impulsiveness in Professional Fighters	J Neuropsychiatr Clin Neurosci	repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts	Boxing, Mixed Martial Arts	60 boxers and 71 MMA fighters (6 female, age range 19–71 yrs, mean age 28.5 yrs) 393 controls (male, age range 17–45 yrs, mean age not provided)	3T MRI T1w	FreeSurfer segmentation of subcortical gray matter, correlation with BIS, group comparison to a previously published control group.	Fighters demonstrated higher impulsiveness than previously published controls. MMA fighters reported more impulsiveness than boxers. Reductions in caudate and thalamic volume were associated with higher attention and self-control scores. Smaller caudate volumes were related to higher impulsiveness. Smaller hippocampal volumes were associated with reduced self-control.	
Bazarian JJ	2014	Persistent, Long-Term Cerebral White Matter Changes After Sports-Related Repetitive Head Impacts	PLOS ONE	repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts	Football	10 college level football players (male, mean age 20.4 yrs +/− 1.08 yrs, 5 non-athlete controls (male, mean age 20.6 yrs +/− 1.14 yrs)	3T MRI DTI	Wild bootstrapping permutation test, comparison of pre-, post-, and 6 months post-season scans, with correlation with head impact exposure, and also serum ApoA1 and S100B autoantibodies, and cognitive function assessments.	Athletes showed greater changes in FA and MD between pre- and post-season as well as between pre- and 6 months post-season. Within athletes, the percentage of voxels with decreased FA at post-season was positively correlated with head impact exposure. The persistence of WM changes between pre-season and 6 months post-season was associated with changes in serum ApoA1 and S100B autoantibodies. WM changes were not associated with cognition or balance.	
Shin W	2014	Diffusion Measures Indicate Fight Exposure–Related Damage to Cerebral White Matter in Boxers and Mixed Martial Arts Fighters	Brain	repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts	Boxers, Mixed Martial Arts	74 boxers(male, mean age 28 +/− 6) and 80 MMA fighters (male, mean age 28 +/− 5). No controls.	3T DTI	ROI analysis of WM, CC, and GM regions of FA, LD, TD, MD. Multiple hierarchal linear regression model used to test if fight exposure predicted DTU values.	In boxers, the number of knockouts predicted increased LD and TD in WM and GM leading to increased MD and decreased FA. In MMA fighters, decreased FA in the posterior CC and increased TD in the posterior cingulate were predicted by number of knockouts. The results suggest that the number of knockouts may predict microstructural brain damage.	
Key:

Predominant Injury Mechanism: - repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts: more than one head impact, including subconcussive and concussive head impacts

- repetitive subconcussive head impacts: more than one head impact, all of them subconcussive

Abbreviations: ADC=Apparent Diffusion Coefficient, AFNI=Analysis of functional NeuroImages Software, Apo A=Apolipoprotein A-I, BBBD=Blood-Brain Barrier Disruption, BIS=Barratt Impulsiveness Scale II, CC=Corpus Callosum, Cr=creatine, CSP=Cavum Septi Pellucidi, CT=Computed tomography, DAI=Diffuse Axonal Injury, DLPFC=dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, DMN =Default Mode Network, DPVS=dilated perivascular spaces, DTI=Diffusion Tensor Imaging, FA=Fractional Anisotropy, FDG=fluorodeoxyglucose, fMRI=functional Magnet Resonance Imaging, GH=Growth Hormone, Glx=glutamate, HIT=head impact telemetry system, ILF=Inferior Longitudinal Fasciculus, ImPACT=Immediate Post-Concussion Assessment and Cognitive Testing, LCModel=Linear Combination Model, LD=longitudinal diffusivity (also known as Axial Diffusivity, LDA=Linear Discriminant analysis, M1=Motor cortex, MD=Mean Diffusivity, mI=Myo-inositol, MMA=mixed martial arts, MRA =Magnetic Resonance Angiography, MRI=Magnetic Resonance Imaging, MRS=Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy, NAA=N-acetylaspartate, NFL=National Football League, PET=Positron Emission Tomography, PV=Partial Volume, PWMD=periventricular white matter disease, qEEG=quantitative electroencephalography, RD=Radial Diffusivity, rs fMRI=resting-state fMRI, RWE=risk-weighted cumulative exposure, S100B S100 calcium binding protein B, SD=standard deviation, SPECT=single photon emission tomography, SPM=statistic parametric mapping, SVS=single voxel spectra, SWI=susceptibility weighted imaging, SWM=subcortical white matter disease, T1w=T1-weighted Image, T2*=T2-star, T2w=T2-weighted Image, TBI=traumatic brain injury, TBSS=Tract-based spatial statistics, Tc-99m HMPAO Spect Technetium (99mTc)=exametazime hexamethylpropylene amine oxime spectroscopy, TD=transveral diffusivity (also known as Radial Diffusivity), TE=echo time, TOF=time-of-flight, VBA=Voxel-based-analysis, WM=White Matter, yrs=year.

TABLE 2 Chronic Injuries.

First author	Year	Title	Journal	Predominant
Injury
Mechanism	Sports/
Military	Subjects (N, Gender,
Age)	Modality
Sequence	Analysis
Technique	Main Findings	
Haglund Y	1990	Does Swedish Amateur Boxing Lead to Chronic Brain Damage? 2. A Retrospective Study with CT and MRI	Acta Neurol Scand	repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts	Boxers	25 former amateur boxers whit high exposure (mean Age 32.6 years, range 26–41, 25 former amateur boxers with lower exposure (mean Age 33.6 years, range 26–43), control group 1: 25 soccer athletes with heading skills (mean Age 33.0 years, range 25–44), and control group 2: 25 track and field athletes who never had had head injury mean Age 33.4 years, range 25–44; GENDER information NOT provided	0.5T MRI T1w, T2w CT	MRI Reading by two neuroradiologists, Quantitative measures: anterior horn index.	No significant difference was found between boxers and controls and there were no group differences in the anterior horn index, width of sulci, nor were there signs of vermian atrophy. These negative results may be due to the study using older technology.	
Amen DG	2011	Reversing Brain Damage in Former NFL Players: Implications for Traumatic Brain Injury and Substance Abuse Rehabilitation	J Psychoactive Drugs	repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts	Football	30 retired NFL players (male, age not reported) who demonstrated brain damage and cognitive impairment, no control group.	SPECT	Neuropsychological testing, 99mTc-HMPAO.	Significant increases in brain perfusion were observed in the prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate gyrus, parietal lobes, occipital lobes, and in the cerebellum as well as improvements in cognitive tests after treatment (fish oil, vitamins, gingko, etc.). Results may be reflective of treatment success tempered by several study weaknesses.	
Terry DP	2012	Lack of Long-Term fMRI Differences After Multiple Sports-Related Concussions	Brain Injury	repetitive concussions	Multiple Sports	20 male athletes with multiple sports-related concussions (2 or more mTBIs, at least 6 month post-TBI), and 20 male control athletes matched on age, IQ, and handedness	3T MRI fMRI	Neuropsychological testing, stroop test and operation span testing in fMRI.	Although neuropsychological testing revealed some deficits in athletes with multiple concussions, the fMRI paradigm did not result in significant differences between the two groups. The authors concluded that young brains are more plastic but these fMRI tasks may not be sensitive to brain injury. Moreover, combining multiple sports injured athletes together in the concussed group adds to the variation in trying to detect differences between groups.	
Ford JH	2013	Episodic memory in Former Professional Football Players with a History of Concussion: An Event-Related Functional Neuroimaging Study	J Neurotrauma	post-concussive, retired football player	Football	2 groups of former professional NFL players. 1. low concussion (n=0–2 mean concussions=1.07, male, mean age 64.1 +/− 6.8 years) 2. high concussion (n &gt;3, mean concussions = 6.5, male, mean age 62.6 +− 5.0 years), and 14 healthy controls (male, 62.2 +/− 6.3 years)	3T MRI T1w, fMRI	Item and relational memory task-related fMRI, SPM 8.	Former NFL players with 3+ concussion showed greater activation during memory tasks; no significant effect of concussion history on long-term behavioral changes was observed. Data suggests that multiple concussions may be associated with less efficient memory performance.	
Hampshire A	2013	Hypoconnectivity and Hyperfrontality in Retired American Football players	Sc Reports	repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts	Football	13 retired NFL players (male, mean age 54 years), and 20 healthy controls (male, mean age 53 yrs)	3T MRI fMRI	Spatial planning task (tower of London) task, ROI-Analysis (DLPFC,PC,FPC), psychophysiological interaction model, SPM 8.	Retired players showed some executive deficits on neuropsychological measures. However fMRI showed hyperactivation and hypoconnectivity in the frontal lobe cortices compared to controls that also correlated with number of concussions. The results suggest that there may be a cortical compensatory mechanism to counteract disrupted dorsal executive network connectivity.	
Tremblay S	2013	Sports Concussions and aging: A Neuroimaging Investigation	Cerebral Cortex	repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts	Ice Hockey, Football	15 male former university level athletes (mean age 60.87 years), with last concussion in early adulthood, and 15 male controls who were former university level athletes with no history of concussions (mean age 58.13 years, group matched on education and frequency of APOE4)	3T MRI T1w, T2w, MRS (PRESS TE=30ms; ROI: MTL, PFC)	MRI: FSL-VBM, hippocampal volume, CIVET for cortical thickness, MRS: Quantitative metabolite concentrations (LCModel).	Former athletes with a history of multiple concussions examined 30 years after playing showed lateral ventricular enlargement, cortical thinning in the frontal, temporal, and parietal lobes, increased mI and decreased Cho in the MTL. These findings also correlated strongly with episodic memory and verbal fluency tests. These results reflect an abnormal aging pattern when compared to former athletes with no history of concussions.	
Albaugh, MD	2014	Postconcussive Symptoms are Associated with Cerebral Cortical Thickness in Healthy Collegiate and Preparatory School Ice Hockey Players	J Pediatrics	repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts	Ice Hockey	29 Ice Hockey players (male, mean age 17.8 yrs);16 with concussive and 13 with subconcussive head impacts)	3 T MRI T1w	FreeSurfer 5.3 for Cortical Thickness (ICV + age as covariate).	Cortical thickness in frontal, parietal and temporal regions was inversely associated with self-reported postconcussive symptoms. Self-reported attention problems were inversely associated with cortical thickness in the left anterior cingulate, left ventromedial prefrontal and left dorsomedial prefrontal areas as well as left temporal cortex. These results show that morphological changes occur at young age in athletes with multiple concussions.	
Casson IR	2014	Is There Chronic Brain Damage in Retired NFL players? Neuroradiology, Neuropsychology and Neurology Examinations of 45 Retired Players	Sports Health	repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts Concussions were self reported by participants	Football	45 retired NFL player (male, mean age 45.6 +− 8.9 years), mean number of concussions 6.9 +− 6.2 ; n=34 reported more than three concussions; No control group	1.5T MRI T1w, T2w, SWI, DTI,	Semi-quantitative reading for SWI lesions, quantification using in house software, global WM and FA mean analysis. Histogram approach, semi-quantitative scores for anatomical reading.	SWI lesions in were found in 4/45 players, which correlated with number of concussions and family history of neurological disease. CSP found in 9/45 players but did not correlate with other findings. Using DTI, global WM FA was found to correlate with number of self-reported concussions. The authors conclude there is no clear evidence of chronic brain injury however the lack of control group and other methodological issues weaken the conclusion.	
Key:

Predominant Injury Mechanism: - repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts: more than one head impact, including subconcussive and concussive head impacts

- repetitive subconcussive head impacts: more than one head impact, all of them subconcussive

Abbreviations: APOE4=Apolipoprotein E-4, CSP=Cavum Septi Pellucidi, CT=Computed tomography, DLPFC=dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, DTI=Diffusion Tensor Imaging, FA=Fractional Anisotropy, fMRI= functional MRI, FPC=frontopolar cortex, FSL-VBM Functional MRI of the Brain (FMRIB) Software Library - Voxel-based Morphometry, ICV+Intracranial Volume, IQ =intelligence quotient, mI=Myo-inositol, MRI=Magnetic Resonance Imaging, MRS=Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy, mTBI=mild Traumatic Brain Injury, MTL=medial temporal lobe, NFL=National Football League, PC=Parietal cortex, PFC=Prefrontal cortex, PRESS=point-resolved spectroscopy pulse sequence, ROI=region of interest, SPECT=single photon emission tomography, SPM 8=statistic parametric mapping 8, SWI=susceptibility weighted imaging, T1w=T1-weighted, T2w =T2-weighted, Tc-99m HMPAO Spect Technetium (99mTc)=exametazime hexamethylpropylene amine oxime spectroscopy, WM=White Matter, yrs =years.

TABLE 3 Neurodegenerative Injuries.

First author	Year	Title	Journal	Predominant Injury Mechanism	Sports/Military	Subjects (N, Gender, Age)	Modality Sequence	Analysis Technique	Main Findings	
Hart J	2013	Neuroimaging of Cognitive Dysfunction and Depression in Aging Retired NFL players: A Cross-Sectional Study	JAMA Neurology	repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts	Football	26 aging retired NFL players (male, mean age 62 years;), 26 age-, education and IQ-matched controls	3T MRI T1w, FLAIR, Hemosiderin-scan, DTI, ASL	Flair: lesion volumetry and manual dividing into deep and periventricular WM lesions; DTI: TBSS, corrected for age; ASL: maps of cerebral blood flow, no exact method description	Comparison between NFL players that are cognitively impaired vs those that did not show impairment revealed increase WM lesion volume, FA changes in frontal and parietal regions, corpus callosum and in the left temporal lobe, and increased blood flow in select cortical regions of the brain. Hemosiderin did not show differences. It is interesting to note that asymptomatic NFL players showed similar results to healthy controls and that cognitive impairment correlate strongly with DTI and ASL changes.	
Small GW	2013	PET Scanning of Brain Tau in Retired National Football League Players: Preliminary Findings	Am J Ger Psychr	repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts	Football	5 symptomatic retired NFL players (male, mean 59, range 45–73 years), 5 controls (male, mean age 60 yrs, age range 45–66 yrs) matched for BMI, age, gender, education	FDDNP-PET	Logan graphical analysis - ROI was traced on coregistered MRI or CT scans	Players showed significantly higher FDDNP signals in caudate, putamen, thalamus, subthalamus, midbrain, and cerebellar white matter regions. However, as FDDNP labels both amyloid and tau, it is unclear how specific this ligand is for CTE.	
Strain J	2013	Depressive Symptoms and White Matter Dysfunction in Retired NFL players with Concussion History	Neurology	repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts	Football	26 retired NFL players (male, mean age 57.8 yrs, age range 41–79 yrs; 5 symptomatic players sustained 3–11 concussions (mean 5.6); 21 asymptomatic athletes sustained 0–10 concussions (mean 3.43))	3T MRI DTI	FSL, TBSS, ROI approach.	As a follow-up to the Hart study, this study examined a similar cohort but focusing on those with depression. Significant association between WM integrity as measured by FA and the presence as well as severity of depressive symptoms were found. These results show that DTI changes may be sensitive to depression.	
Little DM	2014	Imaging Chronic Traumatic Brain Injury as a Risk Factor for Neurodegeneration	Alzheimer's &amp; Dementia	repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts	Civilian	29 subjects with single TBI (14 female, mean age 35 yrs, range 20–58 yrs), 14 with multiple TBIs (mean age 33 yrs, age range 21–51 yrs, 6 female), 37 controls (21 female, mean age 33 yrs, range 19–60 yrs)	MRI T1w Magnet field strength not reported.	Voxel Based Morphometry (VBM).	Participants with a single TBI had less changes compared to those with multiple events. Those with a history of multiple mTBIs showed decreased tissue density in the temporal lobes, parahippocampal gyri, ventrolateral prefrontal regions, external capsule and cerebellum. These findings suggest that a greater number of concussions results in greater neurodegeneration.	
Mitsis EM	2014	Tauopathy PET and amyloid PET in the diagnosis of chronic traumatic encephalopathies: studies of retired NFL player and of a man with FTD and a severe head injury	Trans Psych	repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts	Football	Retired male NFL player (71 year)	PET, MRI, CT	Visual inspection of the CT/MRI and F-18 Florbetapir/T807 imaging.	Case report of retired NFL players with symptoms of PSP. While results were negative for amyloid and positive for tau, it is unclear if tau deposition may be due to PSP.	
Coughlin J	2015	Neuroinflammation and brain atrophy in former NFL players: An in vivo multimodal imaging pilot study	Neurobio of Disease	repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts	Football	9 retired NFL player (male, mean age 65.7 +− 5.4 years), mean number of concussions 3.8 +− 3.0); 9 healthy controls (male, mean age 58.3+− 3.8)	PET, [11C]DPA-713;3T MRI T1w	PET: regional total distribution volume; MRI: FreeSurfer regional volumes and cortical thickness	Increased binding of [11C]DPA-713 binds to translocator proteins, markers of brain injury and repair, was found in the supramarginal gyrus and right amygdala in the former NFL players when compared to controls. Significant atrophy in the right hippocampus of former NFL players after correction for multiple comparisons. Results appear to support signs of atrophy from MRI and potentially inflammation from PET results, however it is unclear if the findings may be age-related changes given the significantly younger control group.	
Lin AP	2015	Changes in the Neurochemistry of Athletes with Repetitive Brain Trauma: Preliminary Results using Localized Correlated Spectroscopy	Alz Res and Therap	repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts	Football	5 retired NFL players (male, mean age 44 yrs +/− 10 yrs), 5 controls (mean age 45 yrs +/−13 yrs) matched for BMI, age, and gender	3T MRI MRS (Correlated Spectroscopy; PCG)	FELIX-NMR (Crosspeak volumes relative to Cr), Group comparison.	NFL players showed increased Cho, Glx, phenylalanine and fucose reflective of diffuse axonal injury, excitotoxicity, and neuroinflammation. NAA and mI were not significantly different which was unexpected as NAA is a neuronal marker and expected to decrease with neurodegeneration.	
Key:

Predominant Injury Mechanism: - repetitive (sub)concussive head impacts: more than one head impact, including subconcussive and concussive head impacts

- repetitive subconcussive head impacts: more than one head impact, all of them subconcussive

Abbreviations: ASL=Arterial spin labeling, BMI=body mass index, Cho=Choline, CT=computed tomography, CTE=Chronic traumatic encephalopathy, DTI=Diffusion Tensor Imaging, FA=Fractional Anisotropy, FDDNP-PET=2-(1-(6-[(2-[fluorine-18]fluoroethyl)(methyl)amino]-2-naphthyl)--ethylidene)malononitrile positron emission tomography, FLAIR =Fluid-attenuated inversion recovery, FSL Functional MRI of the Brain (FMRIB) Software Library, FTD=frontotemporal dementia, Glx=Glutamate, IQ=Intelligence quotient, MRI=Magnetic Resonance Imaging, MRS=Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy, mTBI=mild traumatic brain injury, NAA N-acetylaspartate, NMR=Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Tomography, PCG=posterior cingulate gyrus, PET=Positron emission tomography, PSP=progressive nuclear palsy, ROI=region of interest, T1w=T1-weighted, TBI=traumatic brain injury, TBSS=Tract-based spatial statistics, VBM=Voxel-based morphometry, yrs =years.

TABLE 4 Military Injuries.

First author	Year	Title	Journal	Predominant
Injury
Mechanism	Subjects (N, Gender,
Age)	Modality
Sequence	Analysis
Technique	Main Findings	
Peskind ER	2011	Cerebrocerebellar Hypometabolism Associated With Repetitive Blast Exposure Mild Traumatic Brain Injury in 12 Iraq War Veterans With Persistent Post-Concussive Symptoms	Neuroimage	repetitive blast-related mTBI (range 3–14)	12 Veterans (male, mean age 32 +/−4.6 years), 10 of 12 were comorbid for PTSD, 12 Controls (7 males and 5 females, mean age 53+/−4.6 years)	[18F] FDG-PET	Stereotactically-defined volume-of-interest (VOI) analyses.	Regional hypometabolism was observed in infratentorial and medial temporal brain regions. Cognitive domain deficits and behavioral symptoms were also observed in the Veterans compared with controls but no correlation with imaging was made. One of the drawbacks to this study was the use of and older control cohort. An important finding is there appeared to be no affect of comorbid PTSD on the imaging results indicating that these regional changes are likely tied to post-concussive symptoms of mTBI.	
Scheibel RS	2012	Altered Brain Activation in Military Personnel with One or More Traumatic Brain Injuries Following Blast	J Int Neuropsych Soc	at least one blast-related TBI (repetitive in 6 out of 15)	15 Veterans (male, mean age 29 +/− 6 years) vs. 15 controls (1 female, mean age 31 +/− 6 years)	3T MRI fMRI	SPM, voxelwise and clusterwise correlation with correct/incorrect response trial events, within-group, between-group comparisons.	Between groups there was a greater activation during stimulus-response incompatibility within the anterior cingulate gyrus, medial frontal cortex, and posterior cerebral areas, a negative relationship between symptoms of PTSD and activation of posterior regions, and increased task-related activation following blast brain injury. These findings suggest impairment of executive function in those with blast injury.	
Petrie EC	2014	Neuroimaging, Behavioral and Psychological Sequelae of Repetitive Combined Blast/Impact Mild Traumatic Brain Injury in Iraq and Afghanistan War Veterans	J Neurotrauma	(repetitive) blast-related mTBI	34 Veterans (male, mean age 31.6 years) with a history of one or more blast mTBI, and 18 nonblast Veterans (1 female, mean age 32.8 years)	3T MRI DTI PET	DTI voxel based analysis, PET whole-brain voxelwise analysis.	Chronic alterations in brain white matter structure and composition and increased cortical glucose metabolism were observed in the veterans with exposure to blasts. The study also showed there may be a retain threshold of number of concussions to elicit changes in DTI and PET. Furthermore, results also showed that comorbid PTSD did not effect results.	
Key:

Predominant Injury Mechanism: - (repetitive) blast-related mTBI: one or more than one mTBI

- repetitive blast-related mTBI: more than one mTBI

Abbreviations: Cho=Choline, Cr=Creatine, CSI=chemical shift imaging, DTI=Diffusion Tensor Imaging, FDG-PET=fluorodeoxyglucose - PET, fMRI=functional MRI, MRI=Magnetic Resonance Imaging, MRS= Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy, mTBI=mild Traumatic Brain Injury, NAA N-acetylaspartate, PET=Positron emission tomography, PTSD=post-traumatic stress disorder, ROI=region of interest, SPM=statistic parametric mapping, T1=T1-weighted, TBI=Traumatic Brain Injury, TE=echo time, VOI=volume of interest.


1 Abbas K Shenk TE Poole VN Breedlove EL Leverenz LJ Nauman EA Talavage TM Robinson ME 2014 Alteration of Default Mode Network in High School Football Athletes Due to Repetitive Subconcussive Mild Traumatic Brain Injury: A Resting-State Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging Study Brain connectivity
2 Agdeppa ED Kepe V Liu J Flores-Torres S Satyamurthy N Petric A Cole GM Small GW Huang SC Barrio JR 2001 Binding characteristics of radiofluorinated 6-dialkylamino-2-naphthylethylidene derivatives as positron emission tomography imaging probes for beta-amyloid plaques in Alzheimer's disease J Neurosci 21 24 RC189 11734604
3 Agel J Harvey EJ 2010 A 7-year review of men's and women's ice hockey injuries in the NCAA Canadian journal of surgery Journal canadien de chirurgie 53 5 319 23 20858376
4 Albaugh MD Orr C Nickerson JP Zweber C Slauterbeck JR Hipko S Gonyea J Andrews T Brackenbury JC Watts R Hudziak JJ 2014 Postconcussive Symptoms Are Associated with Cerebral Cortical Thickness in Healthy Collegiate and Preparatory School Ice Hockey Players The Journal of pediatrics
5 Amen DG Wu JC Taylor D Willeumier K 2011 Reversing brain damage in former NFL players: implications for traumatic brain injury and substance abuse rehabilitation Journal of psychoactive drugs 43 1 1 5 21615001
6 Ashwal S Babikian T Gardner-Nichols J Freier MC Tong KA Holshouser BA 2006 Susceptibility-weighted imaging and proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy in assessment of outcome after pediatric traumatic brain injury Arch Phys Med Rehabil 87 S50 8 17140880
7 Attardo G Gomez F Lin Y Liang Q Conway K Kolb HC Skovronsky DM MA M 2014 Detection of PHF-Tau pathology with [18F]T807 and T557 in brain sections from Alzheimer's and non-Alzheimer's tauopathy patients European journal of nuclear medicine and molecular imaging 41 S427
8 Aviv RI Tomlinson G Kendall B Thakkar C Valentine A 2010 Cavum septi pellucidi in boxers Canadian Association of Radiologists journal = Journal l'Association canadienne des radiologistes 61 1 29 32 quiz 1–2
9 Bailes JE Petraglia AL Omalu BI Nauman E Talavage T 2013 Role of subconcussion in repetitive mild traumatic brain injury Journal of neurosurgery 119 5 1235 45 23971952
10 Banks SJ Mayer B Obuchowski N Shin W Lowe M Phillips M Modic M Bernick C 2014 Impulsiveness in professional fighters The Journal of neuropsychiatry and clinical neurosciences 26 1 44 50 24515676
11 Barnes SR Haacke EM 2009 Susceptibility-weighted imaging: clinical angiographic applications Magnetic resonance imaging clinics of North America 17 1 47 61 19364599
12 Basser PJ Jones DK 2002 Diffusion-tensor MRI: theory, experimental design and data analysis - a technical review NMR in biomedicine 15 7–8 456 67 12489095
13 Baugh CM Stamm JM Riley DO Gavett BE Shenton ME Lin A Nowinski CJ Cantu RC McKee AC Stern RA 2012 Chronic traumatic encephalopathy: neurodegeneration following repetitive concussive and subconcussive brain trauma Brain imaging and behavior 6 2 244 54 22552850
14 Bazarian JJ Zhu T Blyth B Borrino A Zhong J 2012 Subject-specific changes in brain white matter on diffusion tensor imaging after sports-related concussion Magn Reson Imaging 30 2 171 80 22079073
15 Bazarian JJ Zhu T Zhong J Janigro D Rozen E Roberts A Javien H Merchant-Borna K Abar B Blackman EG 2014 Persistent, long-term cerebral white matter changes after sports-related repetitive head impacts PloS one 9 4 e94734 24740265
16 Beal MF 1995 Aging, energy, and oxidative stress in neurodegenerative diseases Annals of neurology 38 3 357 66 7668820
17 Beauchamp MH Beare R Ditchfield M Coleman L Babl FE Kean M Crossley L Catroppa C Yeates KO Anderson V 2013 Susceptibility weighted imaging and its relationship to outcome after pediatric traumatic brain injury Cortex 49 591 8 23062584
18 Belanger HG Curtiss G Demery JA Lebowitz BK Vanderploeg RD 2005 Factors moderating neuropsychological outcomes following mild traumatic brain injury: a meta-analysis Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society : JINS 11 3 215 27 15892898
19 Bigler ED 2004 Neuropsychological results and neuropathological findings at autopsy in a case of mild traumatic brain injury Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society : JINS 10 5 794 806 15327725
20 Bigler ED 2013 Traumatic brain injury, neuroimaging, and neurodegeneration Frontiers in human neuroscience 7 395 23964217
21 Bigler ED Maxwell WL 2012 Neuropathology of mild traumatic brain injury: relationship to neuroimaging findings Brain imaging and behavior 6 2 108 36 22434552
22 Binder LI Guillozet-Bongaarts AL Garcia-Sierra F Berry RW 2005 Tau, tangles, and Alzheimer's disease Biochim Biophys Acta 1739 2–3 216 23 15615640
23 Bouix S Pasternak O Rathi Y Pelavin PE Zafonte R Shenton ME 2013 Increased gray matter diffusion anisotropy in patients with persistent post-concussive symptoms following mild traumatic brain injury PloS one 8 6 e66205 23776631
24 Bowman KM Blau A 1940 Psychotic States Following Head and Brain Injury in Adults and Children Injuries of the skull, brain and spinal cord: Neuropsychiatric, surgical, and medico-legal aspects Brock S 309 60 Williams &amp; Wilkins Co Baltimore, MD
25 Breedlove EL Robinson M Talavage TM Morigaki KE Yoruk U O'Keefe K King J Leverenz LJ Gilger JW Nauman EA 2012 Biomechanical correlates of symptomatic and asymptomatic neurophysiological impairment in high school football Journal of biomechanics 45 7 1265 72 22381736
26 Broglio SP Eckner JT Martini D Sosnoff JJ Kutcher JS Randolph C 2011 Cumulative head impact burden in high school football Journal of neurotrauma 28 10 2069 78 21787201
27 Cantu RC 1998 Second-impact syndrome Clinics in sports medicine 17 1 37 44 9475969
28 Cassidy JD Carroll LJ Peloso PM Borg J von Holst H Holm L Kraus J Coronado VG Injury WHOCCTFoMTB 2004 Incidence, risk factors and prevention of mild traumatic brain injury: results of the WHO Collaborating Centre Task Force on Mild Traumatic Brain Injury Journal of rehabilitation medicine 43 Suppl 28 60
29 Casson IR Viano DC Haacke EM Kou Z LeStrange DG 2014 Is There Chronic Brain Damage in Retired NFL Players? Neuroradiology, Neuropsychology, and Neurology Examinations of 45 Retired Players Sports health 6 5 384 95 25177413
30 Chamard E Theoret H Skopelja EN Forwell LA Johnson AM Echlin PS 2012 A prospective study of physician-observed concussion during a varsity university hockey season: metabolic changes in ice hockey players. Part 4 of 4 Neurosurgical focus 33 6 E4 1 7
31 Chang YL Jacobson MW Fennema-Notestine C Hagler DJ Jr Jennings RG Dale AM McEvoy LK Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging I 2010 Level of executive function influences verbal memory in amnestic mild cognitive impairment and predicts prefrontal and posterior cingulate thickness Cerebral cortex (New York, NY : 1991) 20 6 1305 13
32 Chappell MH Ulug AM Zhang L Heitger MH Jordan BD Zimmerman RD Watts R 2006 Distribution of microstructural damage in the brains of professional boxers: a diffusion MRI study Journal of magnetic resonance imaging : JMRI 24 3 537 42 16878306
33 Chien DT Bahri S Szardenings AK Walsh JC Mu F Su MY Shankle WR Elizarov A Kolb HC 2013 Early clinical PET imaging results with the novel PHF-tau radioligand [F-18]-T807 Journal of Alzheimer's disease : JAD 34 2 457 68 23234879
34 Chien DT Szardenings AK Bahri S Walsh JC Mu F Xia C Shankle WR Lerner AJ Su MY Elizarov A Kolb HC 2014 Early clinical PET imaging results with the novel PHF-tau radioligand [F18]-T808 Journal of Alzheimer's disease : JAD 38 1 171 84 23948934
35 Clay MB Glover KL Lowe DT 2013 Epidemiology of concussion in sport: a literature review Journal of chiropractic medicine 12 4 230 51 24396326
36 Colbert CA Holshouser BA Aaen GS Sheridan C Oyoyo U Kido D Ashwal S 2010 Value of cerebral microhemorrhages detected with susceptibility-weighted MR Imaging for prediction of long-term outcome in children with nonaccidental trauma Radiology 256 898 905 20720073
37 Coronado VG McGuire LC Sarmiento K Bell J Lionbarger MR Jones CD Geller AI Khoury N Xu L 2012 Trends in Traumatic Brain Injury in the U.S. and the public health response: 1995–2009 J Safety Res 43 4 299 307 23127680
38 Corps KN Roth TL McGavern DB 2015 Inflammation and Neuroprotection in Traumatic Brain Injury JAMA neurology
39 Corsellis JA Bruton CJ Freeman-Browne D 1973 The aftermath of boxing Psychological medicine 3 3 270 303 4729191
40 Coughlin JM Wang Y Munro CA Ma S Yue C Chen S Airan R Kim PK Adams AV Garcia C Higgs C Sair HI Sawa A Smith G Lyketsos CG Caffo B Kassiou M Guilarte TR Pomper MG 2014 Neuroinflammation and brain atrophy in former NFL players: An in vivo multimodal imaging pilot study Neurobiology of disease 74C 58 65
41 Critchley M 1949 Punch-Drunk Syndromes: The Chronic Traumatic Encephalopathy of Boxers Hommage à Clovis Vincent 131 Maloine Paris
42 Critchley M 1957 Medical aspects of boxing, particularly from a neurological standpoint British medical journal 1 5015 357 62 13396257
43 Davenport EM Whitlow CT Urban JE Espeland MA Jung Y Rosenbaum DA Gioia GA Powers AK Stitzel JD Maldjian JA 2014 Abnormal white matter integrity related to head impact exposure in a season of high school varsity football Journal of neurotrauma 31 19 1617 24 24786802
44 De Meyer G Shapiro F Vanderstichele H Vanmechelen E Engelborghs S De Deyn PP Coart E Hansson O Minthon L Zetterberg H Blennow K Shaw L Trojanowski JQ Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging I 2010 Diagnosis-independent Alzheimer disease biomarker signature in cognitively normal elderly people Archives of neurology 67 8 949 56 20697045
45 Dickerson BC Wolk DA Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging I 2012 MRI cortical thickness biomarker predicts AD-like CSF and cognitive decline in normal adults Neurology 78 2 84 90 22189451
46 Donaldson L Asbridge M Cusimano MD 2013 Bodychecking rules and concussion in elite hockey PloS one 8 7 e69122 23874888
47 Echlin PS Skopelja EN Worsley R Dadachanji SB Lloyd-Smith DR Taunton JA Forwell LA Johnson AM 2012 A prospective study of physician-observed concussion during a varsity university ice hockey season: incidence and neuropsychological changes. Part 2 of 4 Neurosurgical focus 33 6 E2 1 11
48 Echlin PS Tator CH Cusimano MD Cantu RC Taunton JE Upshur RE Hall CR Johnson AM Forwell LA Skopelja EN 2010 A prospective study of physician-observed concussions during junior ice hockey: implications for incidence rates Neurosurgical focus 29 5 E4
49 Eskridge SL Macera CA Galarneau MR Holbrook TL Woodruff SI MacGregor AJ Morton DJ Shaffer RA 2012 Injuries from combat explosions in Iraq: injury type, location, and severity Injury 43 10 1678 82 22769977
50 Ford JH Giovanello KS Guskiewicz KM 2013 Episodic memory in former professional football players with a history of concussion: an event-related functional neuroimaging study Journal of neurotrauma 30 20 1683 701 23679098
51 Gandy S DeKosky ST 2014 [18F]-T807 tauopathy PET imaging in chronic traumatic encephalopathy F1000Research 3 229 25469232
52 Garcia-Panach J Lull N Lull JJ Ferri J Martinez C Sopena P Robles M Chirivella J Noe E 2011 A voxel-based analysis of FDG-PET in traumatic brain injury: regional metabolism and relationship between the thalamus and cortical areas Journal of neurotrauma 28 9 1707 17 21770759
53 Gavett BE Cantu RC Shenton M Lin AP Nowinski CJ McKee AC Stern RA 2011 Clinical appraisal of chronic traumatic encephalopathy: current perspectives and future directions Current opinion in neurology 24 6 525 31 22045219
54 Giza CC Hovda DA 2001 The Neurometabolic Cascade of Concussion Journal of athletic training 36 3 228 35 12937489
55 Goldstein LE Fisher AM Tagge CA Zhang XL Velisek L Sullivan JA Upreti C Kracht JM Ericsson M Wojnarowicz MW Goletiani CJ Maglakelidze GM Casey N Moncaster JA Minaeva O Moir RD Nowinski CJ Stern RA Cantu RC Geiling J Blusztajn JK Wolozin BL Ikezu T Stein TD Budson AE Kowall NW Chargin D Sharon A Saman S Hall GF Moss WC Cleveland RO Tanzi RE Stanton PK McKee AC 2012 Chronic traumatic encephalopathy in blast-exposed military veterans and a blast neurotrauma mouse model Science translational medicine 4 134 134ra60
56 Gross H Kling A Henry G Herndon C Lavretsky H 1996 Local cerebral glucose metabolism in patients with long-term behavioral and cognitive deficits following mild traumatic brain injury The Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences 8 324 34 8854305
57 Grossman EJ Ge Y Jensen JH Babb JS Miles L Reaume J Silver JM Grossman RI Inglese M 2012 Thalamus and cognitive impairment in mild traumatic brain injury: a diffusional kurtosis imaging study Journal of neurotrauma 29 13 2318 27 21639753
58 Guskiewicz KM Marshall SW Bailes J McCrea M Harding HP Jr Matthews A Mihalik JR Cantu RC 2007 Recurrent concussion and risk of depression in retired professional football players Medicine and science in sports and exercise 39 6 903 9 17545878
59 Haacke EM Xu Y Cheng YC Reichenbach JR 2004 Susceptibility weighted imaging (SWI) Magnetic resonance in medicine : official journal of the Society of Magnetic Resonance in Medicine / Society of Magnetic Resonance in Medicine 52 3 612 8
60 Haglund Y Bergstrand G 1990 Does Swedish amateur boxing lead to chronic brain damage? 2. A retrospective study with CT and MRI Acta neurologica Scandinavica 82 5 297 302 2281746
61 Hahnel S Stippich C Weber I Darm H Schill T Jost J Friedmann B Heiland S Blatow M Meyding-Lamade U 2008 Prevalence of cerebral microhemorrhages in amateur boxers as detected by 3T MR imaging AJNR American journal of neuroradiology 29 2 388 91 17974608
62 Hampshire A MacDonald A Owen AM 2013 Hypoconnectivity and hyperfrontality in retired American football players Scientific reports 3 2972 24135857
63 Hart J Jr Kraut MA Womack KB Strain J Didehbani N Bartz E Conover H Mansinghani S Lu H Cullum CM 2013 Neuroimaging of cognitive dysfunction and depression in aging retired National Football League players: a cross-sectional study JAMA neurology 70 3 326 35 23303193
64 Hasiloglu ZI Albayram S Selcuk H Ceyhan E Delil S Arkan B Baskoy L 2011 Cerebral microhemorrhages detected by susceptibility-weighted imaging in amateur boxers AJNR American journal of neuroradiology 32 1 99 102 20966064
65 Hazrati LN Tartaglia MC Diamandis P Davis KD Green RE Wennberg R Wong JC Ezerins L Tator CH 2013 Absence of chronic traumatic encephalopathy in retired football players with multiple concussions and neurological symptomatology Frontiers in human neuroscience 7 222 23745112
66 Helmer KG Pasternak O Fredman E Preciado RI Koerte IK Sasaki T Mayinger M Johnson AM Holmes JD Forwell LA Skopelja EN Shenton ME Echlin PS 2014 Hockey Concussion Education Project, Part 1. Susceptibility-weighted imaging study in male and female ice hockey players over a single season Journal of neurosurgery 120 4 864 72 24490839
67 Hetherington HP Hamid H Kulas J Ling G Bandak F de Lanerolle NC Pan JW 2014 MRSI of the medial temporal lobe at 7 T in explosive blast mild traumatic brain injury Magnetic resonance in medicine : official journal of the Society of Magnetic Resonance in Medicine / Society of Magnetic Resonance in Medicine 71 4 1358 67
68 Humayun MS Presty SK Lafrance ND Holcomb HH Loats H Long DM Wagner HN Gordon B 1989 Local cerebral glucose abnormalities in mild closed head injured patients with cognitive impairments Nuclear medicine communications 10 5 335 44 2787008
69 Ibarretxe-Bilbao N Junque C Segura B Baggio HC Marti MJ Valldeoriola F Bargallo N Tolosa E 2012 Progression of cortical thinning in early Parkinson's disease Movement disorders : official journal of the Movement Disorder Society 27 14 1746 53 23124622
70 Iverson GL 2005 Outcome from mild traumatic brain injury Current opinion in psychiatry 18 301 17 16639155
71 Jordan BD Zimmerman RD 1990 Computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging comparisons in boxers Jama 263 12 1670 4 2308205
72 Jubault T Gagnon JF Karama S Ptito A Lafontaine AL Evans AC Monchi O 2011 Patterns of cortical thickness and surface area in early Parkinson's disease NeuroImage 55 2 462 7 21184830
73 Kato T Nakayama N Yasokawa Y Okumura A Shinoda J Iwama T 2007 Statistical Image Analysis of Cerebral Glucose Metabolism in Patients with Cognitive Impairment following Diffuse Traumatic Brain Injury Journal of neurotrauma 24 919 26 17600509
74 Kaufman MS Concannon LG Herring SA 2014 Evaluation and treatment of the concussed athlete - update Physical medicine and rehabilitation clinics of North America 25 4 707 22 25442155
75 Kemp PM Houston AS Macleod MA Pethybridge RJ 1995 Cerebral perfusion and psychometric testing in military amateur boxers and controls Journal of neurology, neurosurgery, and psychiatry 59 4 368 74
76 Khan AR Wang L Beg MF 2008 FreeSurfer-initiated fully-automated subcortical brain segmentation in MRI using Large Deformation Diffeomorphic Metric Mapping NeuroImage 41 3 735 46 18455931
77 Kim N Branch CA Kim M Lipton ML 2013 Whole brain approaches for identification of microstructural abnormalities in individual patients: comparison of techniques applied to mild traumatic brain injury PloS one 8 3 e59382 23555665
78 Koerte IK Ertl-Wagner B Reiser M Zafonte R Shenton ME 2012 White matter integrity in the brains of professional soccer players without a symptomatic concussion Jama 308 18 1859 61 23150002
79 Koerte IK Kaufmann D Hartl E Bouix S Pasternak O Kubicki M Rauscher A Li DK Dadachanji SB Taunton JA Forwell LA Johnson AM Echlin PS Shenton ME 2012 A prospective study of physician-observed concussion during a varsity university hockey season: white matter integrity in ice hockey players. Part 3 of 4 Neurosurgical focus 33 6 E3 1 7
80 Konrad C Geburek AJ Rist F Blumenroth H Fischer B Husstedt I Arolt V Schiffbauer H Lohmann H 2011 Long-term cognitive and emotional consequences of mild traumatic brain injury Psychological medicine 41 6 1197 211 20860865
81 Kurca E Sivak S Kucera P 2006 Impaired cognitive functions in mild traumatic brain injury patients with normal and pathologic magnetic resonance imaging Neuroradiology 48 9 661 9 16786351
82 Langlois JA Rutland-Brown W Wald MM 2006 The epidemiology and impact of traumatic brain injury: a brief overview The Journal of head trauma rehabilitation 21 5 375 8 16983222
83 Lanius RA Bluhm R Lanius U Pain C 2006 A review of neuroimaging studies in PTSD: heterogeneity of response to symptom provocation Journal of psychiatric research 40 8 709 29 16214172
84 Le TH Gean AD 2009 Neuroimaging of traumatic brain injury The Mount Sinai journal of medicine, New York 76 2 145 62
85 Levin HS Lippold SC Goldman A Handel S High WM Jr Eisenberg HM Zelitt D 1987 Neurobehavioral functioning and magnetic resonance imaging findings in young boxers Journal of neurosurgery 67 5 657 67 3668634
86 Lin A Tran T Bluml S Merugumala S Liao HJ Ross BD 2012 Guidelines for acquiring and reporting clinical neurospectroscopy Seminars in neurology 32 4 432 53 23361487
87 Lin AP Ramadan S Stern RA Box HC Nowinski CJ Ross BD Mountford CE 2015 Changes in the neurochemistry of athletes with repetitive brain trauma: preliminary results using localized correlated spectroscopy Alzheimer's research &amp; therapy EPub
88 Lipton ML Kim N Zimmerman ME Kim M Stewart WF Branch CA Lipton RB 2013 Soccer Heading Is Associated with White Matter Microstructural and Cognitive Abnormalities Radiology
89 Little DM Geary EK Moynihan M Alexander A Pennington M Glang P Schulze ET Dretsch M Pacifico A Davis ML Stevens AB Huang JH 2014 Imaging chronic traumatic brain injury as a risk factor for neurodegeneration Alzheimer's &amp; dementia : the journal of the Alzheimer's Association 10 3 Suppl S188 95
90 Mac Donald CL Johnson AM Cooper D Nelson EC Werner NJ Shimony JS Snyder AZ Raichle ME Witherow JR Fang R Flaherty SF Brody DL 2011 Detection of Blast-Related Traumatic Brain Injury in U.S. Military Personnel New England Journal of Medicine 364 22 2091 100 21631321
91 MacKenzie JD Siddiqi F Babb JS Bagley LJ Mannon LJ Sinson GP Grossman RI 2002 Brain atrophy in mild or moderate traumatic brain injury: a longitudinal quantitative analysis AJNR American journal of neuroradiology 23 9 1509 15 12372740
92 Malcolm JG Michailovich O Bouix S Westin CF Shenton ME Rathi Y 2010 A filtered approach to neural tractography using the Watson directional function Med Image Anal 14 1 58 69 19914856
93 Marchi N Bazarian JJ Puvenna V Janigro M Ghosh C Zhong J Zhu T Blackman E Stewart D Ellis J Butler R Janigro D 2013 Consequences of repeated blood-brain barrier disruption in football players PloS one 8 3 e56805 23483891
94 Martland HS 1928 Punch drunk J Am Med Assoc 91 1103 7
95 Maruta J Lee SW Jacobs EF Ghajar J 2010 A unified science of concussion Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1208 58 66 20955326
96 Matser EJ Kessels AG Lezak MD Jordan BD Troost J 1999 Neuropsychological impairment in amateur soccer players JAMA 282 10 971 3 10485683
97 Matser JT Kessels AG Jordan BD Lezak MD Troost J 1998 Chronic traumatic brain injury in professional soccer players Neurology 51 3 791 6 9748028
98 Matthews WB 1972 Footballer's migraine Br Med J 2 5809 326 7 5022042
99 Mayer AR Bedrick EJ Ling JM Toulouse T Dodd A 2014 Methods for identifying subject-specific abnormalities in neuroimaging data Human brain mapping 35 11 5457 70 24931496
100 McAllister T 2014 Task-related Cerebral Activation Pre and Post Season In A Cohort Of Collegiate Contact Sport Athletes Brain injury IBIA Abstract
101 McAllister TW Flashman LA Maerlender A Greenwald RM Beckwith JG Tosteson TD Crisco JJ Brolinson PG Duma SM Duhaime AC Grove MR Turco JH 2012 Cognitive effects of one season of head impacts in a cohort of collegiate contact sport athletes Neurology 78 22 1777 84 22592370
102 McAllister TW Ford JC Flashman LA Maerlender A Greenwald RM Beckwith JG Bolander RP Tosteson TD Turco JH Raman R Jain S 2014 Effect of head impacts on diffusivity measures in a cohort of collegiate contact sport athletes Neurology 82 1 63 9 24336143
103 McCrory P 2001 Does second impact syndrome exist? Clinical journal of sport medicine : official journal of the Canadian Academy of Sport Medicine 11 3 144 9 11495318
104 McCrory P Meeuwisse WH Aubry M Cantu B Dvorak J Echemendia RJ Engebretsen L Johnston K Kutcher JS Raftery M Sills A Benson BW Davis GA Ellenbogen RG Guskiewicz K Herring SA Iverson GL Jordan BD Kissick J McCrea M McIntosh AS Maddocks D Makdissi M Purcell L Putukian M Schneider K Tator CH Turner M 2013 Consensus statement on concussion in sport: the 4th International Conference on Concussion in Sport held in Zurich, November 2012 British journal of sports medicine 47 5 250 8 23479479
105 McCrory PR Berkovic SF 1998 Second impact syndrome Neurology 50 3 677 83 9521255
106 McDonald BC Saykin AJ McAllister TW 2012 Functional MRI of mild traumatic brain injury (mTBI): progress and perspectives from the first decade of studies Brain imaging and behavior 6 2 193 207 22618832
107 McKee AC Cantu RC Nowinski CJ Hedley-Whyte ET Gavett BE Budson AE Santini VE Lee HS Kubilus CA Stern RA 2009 Chronic traumatic encephalopathy in athletes: progressive tauopathy after repetitive head injury Journal of neuropathology and experimental neurology 68 7 709 35 19535999
108 McKee AC Stern RA Nowinski CJ Stein TD Alvarez VE Daneshvar DH Lee HS Wojtowicz SM Hall G Baugh CM Riley DO Kubilus CA Cormier KA Jacobs MA Martin BR Abraham CR Ikezu T Reichard RR Wolozin BL Budson AE Goldstein LE Kowall NW Cantu RC 2013 The spectrum of disease in chronic traumatic encephalopathy Brain : a journal of neurology 136 Pt 1 43 64 23208308
109 McQuillen JB McQuillen EN Morrow P 1988 Trauma, sport, and malignant cerebral edema The American journal of forensic medicine and pathology 9 1 12 5 3354517
110 Menon DK Schwab K Wright DW Maas AI 2010 Position statement: definition of traumatic brain injury Archives of physical medicine and rehabilitation 91 11 1637 40 21044706
111 Miller H 1966 Mental after-effects of head injury Proceedings of the Royal Society of Medicine 59 3 257 61 5909768
112 Millspaugh J 1937 Dementia pugilistica US Naval Med Bull 35 297 303
113 Mitsis EM Riggio S Kostakoglu L Dickstein DL Machac J Delman B Goldstein M Jennings D D'Antonio E Martin J Naidich TP Aloysi A Fernandez C Seibyl J DeKosky ST Elder GA Marek K Gordon W Hof PR Sano M Gandy S 2014 Tauopathy PET and amyloid PET in the diagnosis of chronic traumatic encephalopathies: studies of a retired NFL player and of a man with FTD and a severe head injury Translational psychiatry 4 e441 25226550
114 Mittl RL Grossman RI Hiehle JF Hurst RW Kauder DR Gennarelli TA Alburger GW 1994 Prevalence of MR evidence of diffuse axonal injury in patients with mild head injury and normal head CT findings AJNR American journal of neuroradiology 15 1583 9 7985582
115 Montenigro PH Baugh CM Daneshvar DH Mez J Budson AE Au R Katz DI Cantu RC Stern RA 2014 Clinical subtypes of chronic traumatic encephalopathy: literature review and proposed research diagnostic criteria for traumatic encephalopathy syndrome Alzheimer's research &amp; therapy 6 5 68
116 Montenigro PH Corp DT Stein TD Cantu RC Stern RA 2015 Chronic Traumatic Encephalopathy: Historical Origins and Current Perspective Annual review of clinical psychology
117 Mouzon B Chaytow H Crynen G Bachmeier C Stewart J Mullan M Stewart W Crawford F 2012 Repetitive mild traumatic brain injury in a mouse model produces learning and memory deficits accompanied by histological changes J Neurotrauma 29 18 2761 73 22900595
118 Naunheim RS Bayly PV Standeven J Neubauer JS Lewis LM Genin GM 2003 Linear and angular head accelerations during heading of a soccer ball Med Sci Sports Exerc 35 8 1406 12 12900697
119 Ng TS Lin AP Koerte IK Pasternak O Liao H Merugumala S Bouix S Shenton ME 2014 Neuroimaging in repetitive brain trauma Alzheimer's research &amp; therapy 6 1 10
120 Niogi SN Mukherjee P 2010 Diffusion tensor imaging of mild traumatic brain injury The Journal of head trauma rehabilitation 25 4 241 55 20611043
121 Orrison WW Hanson EH Alamo T Watson D Sharma M Perkins TG Tandy RD 2009 Traumatic brain injury: a review and high-field MRI findings in 100 unarmed combatants using a literature-based checklist approach J Neurotrauma 26 5 689 701 19335205
122 Ozarslan E Koay CG Shepherd TM Komlosh ME Irfanoglu MO Pierpaoli C Basser PJ 2013 Mean apparent propagator (MAP) MRI: a novel diffusion imaging method for mapping tissue microstructure Neuroimage 78 16 32 23587694
123 Park H Yang JJ Seo J Lee JM Adni 2013 Dimensionality reduced cortical features and their use in predicting longitudinal changes in Alzheimer's disease Neuroscience letters 550 17 22 23827219
124 Pasternak O Sochen N Gur Y Intrator N Assaf Y 2009 Free water elimination and mapping from diffusion MRI Magn Reson Med 62 3 717 30 19623619
125 Peskind ER Petrie EC Cross DJ Pagulayan K McCraw K Hoff D Hart K Yu CE Raskind MA Cook DG Minoshima S 2011 Cerebrocerebellar hypometabolism associated with repetitive blast exposure mild traumatic brain injury in 12 Iraq war Veterans with persistent post-concussive symptoms NeuroImage 54 Suppl 1 S76 82 20385245
126 Petrie EC Cross DJ Yarnykh VL Richards T Martin NM Pagulayan K Hoff D Hart K Mayer C Tarabochia M Raskind MA Minoshima S Peskind ER 2014 Neuroimaging, behavioral, and psychological sequelae of repetitive combined blast/impact mild traumatic brain injury in Iraq and Afghanistan war veterans Journal of neurotrauma 31 5 425 36 24102309
127 Ponsford J Cameron P Fitzgerald M Grant M Mikocka-Walus A 2011 Long-term outcomes after uncomplicated mild traumatic brain injury: a comparison with trauma controls Journal of neurotrauma 28 6 937 46 21410321
128 Poole VN Abbas K Shenk TE Breedlove EL Breedlove KM Robinson ME Leverenz LJ Nauman EA Talavage TM Dydak U 2014 MR spectroscopic evidence of brain injury in the non-diagnosed collision sport athlete Developmental neuropsychology 39 6 459 73 25144258
129 Provenzano FA Jordan B Tikofsky RS Saxena C Van Heertum RL Ichise M 2010 F-18 FDG PET imaging of chronic traumatic brain injury in boxers: a statistical parametric analysis Nuclear medicine communications 31 11 952 7 20717065
130 Queen RM Weinhold PS Kirkendall DT Yu B 2003 Theoretical study of the effect of ball properties on impact force in soccer heading Med Sci Sports Exerc 35 12 2069 76 14652504
131 Rathi Y Gagoski B Setsompop K Michailovich O Grant PE Westin CF 2013 Diffusion propagator estimation from sparse measurements in a tractography framework Med Image Comput Comput Assist Interv 16 Pt 3 510 7 24505800
132 Rishiraj N Lloyd-Smith R Lorenz T Niven B Michel M 2009 University men's ice hockey: rates and risk of injuries over 6-years The Journal of sports medicine and physical fitness 49 2 159 66 19528893
133 Robbins CA Daneshvar DH Picano JD Gavett BE Baugh CM Riley DO Nowinski CJ McKee AC Cantu RC Stern RA 2014 Self-reported concussion history: impact of providing a definition of concussion Open access journal of sports medicine 5 99 103 24891816
134 Ropper AH Gorson KC 2007 Clinical practice. Concussion The New England journal of medicine 356 2 166 72 17215534
135 Ruff RM Camenzuli L Mueller J 1996 Miserable minority: emotional risk factors that influence the outcome of a mild traumatic brain injury Brain injury 10 8 551 65 8836512
136 Scheibel RS Newsome MR Troyanskaya M Lin X Steinberg JL Radaideh M Levin HS 2012 Altered brain activation in military personnel with one or more traumatic brain injuries following blast Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society : JINS 18 1 89 100 22132942
137 Schretlen DJ Shapiro AM 2003 A quantitative review of the effects of traumatic brain injury on cognitive functioning International review of psychiatry (Abingdon, England) 15 4 341 9
138 Seo SW Ahn J Yoon U Im K Lee JM Tae Kim S Ahn HJ Chin J Jeong Y Na DL 2010 Cortical thinning in vascular mild cognitive impairment and vascular dementia of subcortical type Journal of neuroimaging : official journal of the American Society of Neuroimaging 20 1 37 45 19220710
139 Serbest G Burkhardt MF Siman R Raghupathi R Saatman KE 2007 Temporal profiles of cytoskeletal protein loss following traumatic axonal injury in mice Neurochem Res 32 12 2006 14 17401646
140 Shah M Catafau AM 2014 Molecular Imaging Insights into Neurodegeneration: Focus on Tau PET Radiotracers J Nucl Med 55 6 871 4 24833492
141 Shenton ME Hamoda HM Schneiderman JS Bouix S Pasternak O Rathi Y Vu MA Purohit MP Helmer K Koerte I Lin AP Westin CF Kikinis R Kubicki M Stern RA Zafonte R 2012 A review of magnetic resonance imaging and diffusion tensor imaging findings in mild traumatic brain injury Brain imaging and behavior 6 2 137 92 22438191
142 Shin W Mahmoud SY Sakaie K Banks SJ Lowe MJ Phillips M Modic MT Bernick C 2014 Diffusion measures indicate fight exposure-related damage to cerebral white matter in boxers and mixed martial arts fighters AJNR American journal of neuroradiology 35 2 285 90 23928146
143 Shoup TM Yokell DL Rice PA Jackson RN Livni E Johnson KA Brady TJ Vasdev N 2013 A concise radiosynthesis of the tau radiopharmaceutical, [(18) F]T807 Journal of labelled compounds &amp; radiopharmaceuticals 56 14 736 40 24339014
144 Singh M Jeong J Hwang D Sungkarat W Gruen P 2010 Novel diffusion tensor imaging methodology to detect and quantify injured regions and affected brain pathways in traumatic brain injury Magnetic resonance imaging 28 1 22 40 19608369
145 Singh R Meier TB Kuplicki R Savitz J Mukai I Cavanagh L Allen T Teague TK Nerio C Polanski D Bellgowan PS 2014 Relationship of collegiate football experience and concussion with hippocampal volume and cognitive outcomes Jama 311 18 1883 8 24825643
146 Singh V Chertkow H Lerch JP Evans AC Dorr AE Kabani NJ 2006 Spatial patterns of cortical thinning in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease Brain : a journal of neurology 129 Pt 11 2885 93 17008332
147 Small GW Kepe V Siddarth P Ercoli LM Merrill DA Donoghue N Bookheimer SY Martinez J Omalu B Bailes J Barrio JR 2013 PET scanning of brain tau in retired national football league players: preliminary findings The American journal of geriatric psychiatry : official journal of the American Association for Geriatric Psychiatry 21 2 138 44 23343487
148 Smith DH Johnson VE Stewart W 2013 Chronic neuropathologies of single and repetitive TBI: substrates of dementia? Nat Rev Neurol 9 4 211 21 23458973
149 Stamm JM Bourlas AP Baugh CM Fritts NG Daneshvar DH Martin BM McClean MD Tripodis Y Stern RA 2015 Age of first exposure to football and later-life cognitive impairment in former NFL players Neurology ePub ahead of publication
150 Stern RA Daneshvar DH Baugh CM Seichepine DR Montenigro PH Riley DO Fritts NG Stamm JM Robbins CA McHale L Simkin I Stein TD Alvarez VE Goldstein LE Budson AE Kowall NW Nowinski CJ Cantu RC McKee AC 2013 Clinical presentation of chronic traumatic encephalopathy Neurology 81 13 1122 9 23966253
151 Stern RA Riley DO Daneshvar DH Nowinski CJ Cantu RC McKee AC 2011 Long-term consequences of repetitive brain trauma: chronic traumatic encephalopathy PM &amp; R : the journal of injury, function, and rehabilitation 3 10 Suppl 2 S460 7
152 Stone JR Tustison NJ Wassermann EM Polejaeva L Tierney M McCarron RM LoPresti M Carr WS 2014 Neuroimaging Correlates of Repetitive Blast Exposure in Experienced Military Breachers Journal of neurotrauma 30 15 A120 1
153 Strain J Didehbani N Cullum CM Mansinghani S Conover H Kraut MA Hart J Jr Womack KB 2013 Depressive symptoms and white matter dysfunction in retired NFL players with concussion history Neurology 81 1 25 32 23709590
154 Talavage TM Nauman EA Breedlove EL Yoruk U Dye AE Morigaki KE Feuer H Leverenz LJ 2014 Functionally-detected cognitive impairment in high school football players without clinically-diagnosed concussion Journal of neurotrauma 31 4 327 38 20883154
155 Tanriverdi F Unluhizarci K Kocyigit I Tuna IS Karaca Z Durak AC Selcuklu A Casanueva FF Kelestimur F 2008 Brief communication: pituitary volume and function in competing and retired male boxers Annals of internal medicine 148 11 827 31 18519929
156 Tartaglia MC Hazrati LN Davis KD Green RE Wennberg R Mikulis D Ezerins LJ Keightley M Tator C 2014 Chronic traumatic encephalopathy and other neurodegenerative proteinopathies Frontiers in human neuroscience 8 30 24550810
157 Tator CH 2013 Concussions and their consequences: current diagnosis, management and prevention CMAJ 185 11 975 9 23877672
158 Terry DP Faraco CC Smith D Diddams MJ Puente AN Miller LS 2012 Lack of long-term fMRI differences after multiple sports-related concussions Brain injury 26 13–14 1684 96 23163249
159 Tremblay S De Beaumont L Henry LC Boulanger Y Evans AC Bourgouin P Poirier J Theoret H Lassonde M 2013 Sports concussions and aging: a neuroimaging investigation Cerebral cortex (New York, NY : 1991) 23 5 1159 66
160 Tysvaer A Storli O 1981 Association football injuries to the brain. A preliminary report Br J Sports Med 15 3 163 6 7272660
161 Tysvaer AT Lochen EA 1991 Soccer injuries to the brain. A neuropsychologic study of former soccer players Am J Sports Med 19 1 56 60 2008931
162 Vagnozzi R Signoretti S Tavazzi B Floris R Ludovici A Marziali S Tarascio G Amorini AM Di Pietro V Delfini R Lazzarino G 2008 Temporal window of metabolic brain vulnerability to concussion: a pilot 1H-magnetic resonance spectroscopic study in concussed athletes--part III Neurosurgery 62 6 1286 95 discussion 95-6 18824995
163 Villemagne VL Furumoto S Fodero-Tavolette M Harada R Mulligan RS Kudo Y Masters CL Yanai K Rowe CC Okamura N 2012 The challenges of tau imaging Future Neurologz 7 409ß21
164 Villemagne VL Okamura N 2014 In vivo tau imaging: obstacles and progress Alzheimer's &amp; dementia : the journal of the Alzheimer's Association 10 3 Suppl S254 64
165 Xia CF Arteaga J Chen G Gangadharmath U Gomez LF Kasi D Lam C Liang Q Liu C Mocharla VP Mu F Sinha A Su H Szardenings AK Walsh JC Wang E Yu C Zhang W Zhao T Kolb HC 2013 [(18)F]T807, a novel tau positron emission tomography imaging agent for Alzheimer's disease Alzheimer's &amp; dementia : the journal of the Alzheimer's Association 9 6 666 76
166 Xu L Nguyen JV Lehar M Menon A Rha E Arena J Ryu J Marsh-Armstrong N Marmarou CR Koliatsos VE 2014 Repetitive mild traumatic brain injury with impact acceleration in the mouse: Multifocal axonopathy, neuroinflammation, and neurodegeneration in the visual system Experimental neurology
167 Yuh EL Hawryluk GW Manley GT 2014 Imaging concussion: a review Neurosurgery 75 Suppl 4 S50 63 25232884
168 Zhang L Heier LA Zimmerman RD Jordan B Ulug AM 2006 Diffusion anisotropy changes in the brains of professional boxers AJNR American journal of neuroradiology 27 9 2000 4 17032883
169 Zhang L Ravdin LD Relkin N Zimmerman RD Jordan B Lathan WE Ulug AM 2003 Increased diffusion in the brain of professional boxers: a preclinical sign of traumatic brain injury? AJNR American journal of neuroradiology 24 1 52 7 12533327
170 Zhang MR Red SD Lin AH Patel SS Sereno AB 2013 Evidence of cognitive dysfunction after soccer playing with ball heading using a novel tablet-based approach PLoS One 8 2 e57364 23460843
171 Zhang W Arteaga J Cashion DK Chen G Gangadharmath U Gomez LF Kasi D Lam C Liang Q Liu C Mocharla VP Mu F Sinha A Szardenings AK Wang E Walsh JC Xia C Yu C Zhao T Kolb HC 2012 A highly selective and specific PET tracer for imaging of tau pathologies Journal of Alzheimer's disease : JAD 31 3 601 12 22683529
172 Zhou Y Kierans A Kenul D Ge Y Rath J Reaume J Grossman RI Lui YW 2013 Mild traumatic brain injury: longitudinal regional brain volume changes Radiology 267 3 880 90 23481161
173 Zhuo J Xu S Proctor JL Mullins RJ Simon JZ Fiskum G Gullapalli RP 2012 Diffusion kurtosis as an in vivo imaging marker for reactive astrogliosis in traumatic brain injury NeuroImage 59 1 467 77 21835250
