LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


7906255
4217
Hypertension
Hypertension
Hypertension (Dallas, Tex. : 1979)
0194-911X
1524-4563

28739976
5783787
10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.117.09438
NIHMS902240
Article
Novel Blood Pressure Locus and Gene Discovery Using Genome-Wide Association Study and Expression Data Sets From Blood and the Kidney
Wain Louise V.
Vaez Ahmad
Jansen Rick
Joehanes Roby
van der Most Peter J.
Erzurumluoglu A. Mesut
O’Reilly Paul F.
Cabrera Claudia P.
Warren Helen R.
Rose Lynda M.
Verwoert Germaine C.
Hottenga Jouke-Jan
Strawbridge Rona J.
Esko Tonu
Arking Dan E.
Hwang Shih-Jen
Guo Xiuqing
Kutalik Zoltan
Trompet Stella
Shrine Nick
Teumer Alexander
Ried Janina S.
Bis Joshua C.
Smith Albert V.
Amin Najaf
Nolte Ilja M.
Lyytikäinen Leo-Pekka
Mahajan Anubha
Wareham Nicholas J.
Hofer Edith
Joshi Peter K.
Kristiansson Kati
Traglia Michela
Havulinna Aki S.
Goel Anuj
Nalls Mike A.
Sõber Siim
Vuckovic Dragana
Luan Jian’an
Fabiola Del Greco M.
Ayers Kristin L.
Marrugat Jaume
Ruggiero Daniela
Lopez Lorna M.
Niiranen Teemu
Enroth Stefan
Jackson Anne U.
Nelson Christopher P.
Huffman Jennifer E.
Zhang Weihua
Marten Jonathan
Gandin Ilaria
Harris Sarah E.
Zemunik Tatijana
Lu Yingchang
Evangelou Evangelos
Shah Nabi
de Borst Martin H.
Mangino Massimo
Prins Bram P.
Campbell Archie
Li-Gao Ruifang
Chauhan Ganesh
Oldmeadow Christopher
Abecasis Gonçalo
Abedi Maryam
Barbieri Caterina M.
Barnes Michael R.
Batini Chiara
Beilby John
BIOS Consortium*
Blake Tineka
Boehnke Michael
Bottinger Erwin P.
Braund Peter S.
Brown Morris
Brumat Marco
Campbell Harry
Chambers John C.
Cocca Massimiliano
Collins Francis
Connell John
Cordell Heather J.
Damman Jeffrey J.
Davies Gail
de Geus Eco J.
de Mutsert Renée
Deelen Joris
Demirkale Yusuf
Doney Alex S.F.
Dörr Marcus
Farrall Martin
Ferreira Teresa
Frånberg Mattias
Gao He
Giedraitis Vilmantas
Gieger Christian
Giulianini Franco
Gow Alan J.
Hamsten Anders
Harris Tamara B.
Hofman Albert
Holliday Elizabeth G.
Hui Jennie
Jarvelin Marjo-Riitta
Johansson Åsa
Johnson Andrew D.
Jousilahti Pekka
Jula Antti
Kähönen Mika
Kathiresan Sekar
Khaw Kay-Tee
Kolcic Ivana
Koskinen Seppo
Langenberg Claudia
Larson Marty
Launer Lenore J.
Lehne Benjamin
Liewald David C.M.
Lifelines Cohort Study*
Lin Li
Lind Lars
Mach François
Mamasoula Chrysovalanto
Menni Cristina
Mifsud Borbala
Milaneschi Yuri
Morgan Anna
Morris Andrew D.
Morrison Alanna C.
Munson Peter J.
Nandakumar Priyanka
Nguyen Quang Tri
Nutile Teresa
Oldehinkel Albertine J.
Oostra Ben A.
Org Elin
Padmanabhan Sandosh
Palotie Aarno
Paré Guillaume
Pattie Alison
Penninx Brenda W.J.H.
Poulter Neil
Pramstaller Peter P.
Raitakari Olli T.
Ren Meixia
Rice Kenneth
Ridker Paul M.
Riese Harriëtte
Ripatti Samuli
Robino Antonietta
Rotter Jerome I.
Rudan Igor
Saba Yasaman
Pierre Aude Saint
Sala Cinzia F.
Sarin Antti-Pekka
Schmidt Reinhold
Scott Rodney
Seelen Marc A.
Shields Denis C.
Siscovick David
Sorice Rossella
Stanton Alice
Stott David J.
Sundström Johan
Swertz Morris
Taylor Kent D.
Thom Simon
Tzoulaki Ioanna
Tzourio Christophe
Uitterlinden André G.
Understanding Society Scientific Group*
Völker Uwe
Vollenweider Peter
Wild Sarah
Willemsen Gonneke
Wright Alan F.
Yao Jie
Thériault Sébastien
Conen David
Attia John
Sever Peter
Debette Stéphanie
Mook-Kanamori Dennis O.
Zeggini Eleftheria
Spector Tim D.
van der Harst Pim
Palmer Colin N.A.
Vergnaud Anne-Claire
Loos Ruth J.F.
Polasek Ozren
Starr John M.
Girotto Giorgia
Hayward Caroline
Kooner Jaspal S.
Lindgren Cecila M.
Vitart Veronique
Samani Nilesh J.
Tuomilehto Jaakko
Gyllensten Ulf
Knekt Paul
Deary Ian J.
Ciullo Marina
Elosua Roberto
Keavney Bernard D.
Hicks Andrew A.
Scott Robert A.
Gasparini Paolo
Laan Maris
Liu YongMei
Watkins Hugh
Hartman Catharina A.
Salomaa Veikko
Toniolo Daniela
Perola Markus
Wilson James F.
Schmidt Helena
Zhao Jing Hua
Lehtimäki Terho
van Duijn Cornelia M.
Gudnason Vilmundur
Psaty Bruce M.
Peters Annette
Rettig Rainer
James Alan
Jukema J. Wouter
Strachan David P.
Palmas Walter
Metspalu Andres
Ingelsson Erik
Boomsma Dorret I.
Franco Oscar H.
Bochud Murielle
Newton-Cheh Christopher
Munroe Patricia B.
Elliott Paul
Chasman Daniel I.
Chakravarti Aravinda
Knight Joanne
Morris Andrew P.
Levy Daniel
Tobin Martin D.
Snieder Harold †
Caulfield Mark J. †
Ehret Georg B. †
Department of Health Sciences (L.V.W., A.M.E., N. Shrine, C.B., T.B., M.D.T.), and Department of Cardiovascular Sciences and NIHR Leicester Biomedical Research Centre (C.P.N., P.S.B., N.J.S.), University of Leicester, United Kingdom; Department of Epidemiology (A.V., P.J.v.d.M., I.M.N., H. Snieder), Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine (M.H.d.B., M.A.S.), Interdisciplinary Center Psychopathology and Emotion Regulation (IPCE) (A.J.O., H.R., C.A.H.), Department of Genetics, (M.S.), and Department of Cardiology (P.v.d.H.), University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, The Netherlands; Research Institute for Primordial Prevention of Non-Communicable Disease, Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, Iran (A.V.); Department of Psychiatry, VU University Medical Center, Neuroscience Campus Amsterdam, The Netherlands (R. Jansen); Hebrew SeniorLife, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA (R. Joehanes); National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute’s Framingham Heart Study, MA (R. Joehanes, A.D.J., M. Larson); Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience (P.F.O.), and Department of Twin Research and Genetic Epidemiology (M.M., C. Menni, T.D.S.), King’s College London, United Kingdom; Clinical Pharmacology, William Harvey Research Institute (C.P.C., H.R.W., M.R.B., M. Brown, B.M., M.R., P.B.M., M.J.C.) and NIHR Barts Cardiovascular Biomedical Research Unit (C.P.C., H.R.W., M.R.B., M. Brown, P.B.M., M.J.C.), Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, United Kingdom; Division of Preventive Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA (L.M.R., F.G., P.M.R., D.I.C.); Department of Epidemiology (G.C.V., A. Hofman, A.G.U., O.H.F.), Genetic Epidemiology Unit, Department of Epidemiology (N.A., B.A.O., C.M.v.D.), and Department of Internal Medicine (A.G.U.), Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands; Department of Biological Psychology, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, EMGO+ Institute, VU University Medical Center, The Netherlands (J.-J.H., E.J.d.G., G.W., D.I.B.); Cardiovascular Medicine Unit, Department of Medicine Solna, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden (R.J.S., M. Frånberg, A. Hamsten); Centre for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Universitetsjukhuset, Solna, Sweden (R.J.S., M. Frånberg, A. Hamsten); Estonian Genome Center (T.E., E.O., A. Metspalu), Institute of Biomedicine and Translational Medicine (S.S., M. Laan), and Estonian Genome Center (M.P.), University of Tartu, Estonia; Divisions of Endocrinology/Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA (T.E.); Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA (T.E., C.M.L., C.N.-C.); Center for Complex Disease Genomics, McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD (D.E.A., P.N., A. Chakravarti, G.B.E.); The Population Science Branch, Division of Intramural Research, National Heart Lung and Blood Institute (S.-J.H., D.L.), Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National Institute on Aging (M.A.N.), Medical Genomics and Metabolic Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute (F.C.), and Center for Information Technology (Y.D., P.J.M., Q.T.N.), National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD; The Framingham Heart Study, Framingham, MA (S.-J.H., D.L.); The Institute for Translational Genomics and Population Sciences, Department of Pediatrics (X.G., J.Y.), and The Institute for Translational Genomics and Population Sciences, Departments of Pediatrics and Medicine (J.I.R.), LABioMed at Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance, CA; Institute of Social and Preventive Medicine, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland (Z.K., M. Bochud); Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland (Z.K.); Department of Cardiology (S. Trompet, J.W.J.) Department of Gerontology and Geriatrics (S. Trompet), Department of Clinical Epidemiology (R.L.-G., R.d.M., D.O.M.-K.), Department of Molecular Epidemiology (J.D.), and Department of Public Health and Primary Care (D.O.M.-K.), Leiden University Medical Center, The Netherlands; Institute for Community Medicine (A.T.), Department of Internal Medicine B (M.D.), and Interfaculty Institute for Genetics and Functional Genomics (U.V.), University Medicine Greifswald, Germany; DZHK (German Centre for Cardiovascular Research), partner site Greifswald, Germany (A.T., M.D., U.V.); Institute of Epidemiology II, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany (J.S.R., A. Peters); Cardiovascular Health Research Unit, Department of Medicine (J.C.B., B.M.P.) and Departments of Biostatistics (K.R.), Epidemiology (B.M.P.), and Health Services (B.M.P.), University of Washington, Seattle; Icelandic Heart Association, Kopavogur, Iceland (A.V.S., V. Gudnason); Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland (A.V.S., V. Gudnason); Department of Clinical Chemistry, Fimlab Laboratories, Tampere, Finland (L.-P.L., T.L.); Department of Clinical Chemistry, Faculty of Medicine and Life Sciences, University of Tampere, Finland (L.-P.L., T.L.); Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics (A. Mahajan, A.G., M. Farrall, T.F., C.M.L., H.W., A.P.M.), and Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Radcliffe Department of Medicine (A.G., M. Farrall, H.W.), University of Oxford, United Kingdom; MRC Epidemiology Unit, University of Cambridge School of Clinical Medicine, Institute of Metabolic Science, United Kingdom (N.J.W., J.L., C.L., R.J.F.L., R.A.S., J.H.Z.); Clinical Division of Neurogeriatrics, Department of Neurology (E.H., R. Schmidt), Institute of Medical Informatics, Statistics and Documentation (E.H.), and Department of Neurology (H. Schmidt), Medical University Graz, Austria; Centre for Global Health Research, Usher Institute of Population Health Sciences and Informatics (P.K.J., H.C., I.R., S.W., J.F.W.), Centre for Cognitive Ageing and Cognitive Epidemiology (L.M.L., S.E.H., G.D., A.J.G., D.C.M.L., J.M.S., I.J.D.), Medical Genetics Section, Centre for Genomic and Experimental Medicine, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine (A. Campbell), Generation Scotland, Centre for Genomic and Experimental Medicine (A. Campbell, S.P., C.H.), Department of Psychology (G.D., D.C.M.L., A. Pattie, I.J.D.), Alzheimer Scotland Dementia Research Centre (J.M.S.), and Medical Research Council Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine (C.H.), University of Edinburgh, Scotland, United Kingdom; Department of Health (K.K., A.S.H., T. Niiranen, P.J., A.J., S. Koskinen, P.K., V.S., M.P.), and Chronic Disease Prevention Unit (J.T.), National Institute for Health and Welfare (THL), Helsinki, Finland; Division of Genetics and Cell Biology, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milano, Italy (M.T., C.M.B., C.F.S., D.T.); Data Tecnica International, Glen Echo, MD (M.A.N.); Medical Genetics, IRCCS-Burlo Garofolo Children Hospital, Trieste, Italy (D.V., G.G., P.G.); Department of Medical, Surgical and Health Sciences, University of Trieste, Italy (D.V., I.G., M. Brumat, M. Cocca, A. Morgan, G.G., P.G.); Institute for Biomedicine, Eurac Research, Affiliated Institute of the University of Lübeck, Bolzano, Italy (F.D.G.M., P.P.P., A.S.P., A.A.H.); Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences (K.L.A.), The Charles Bronfman Institute for Personalized Medicine (Y.L., E.P.B., R.J.F.L.), and Mindich Child health Development Institute (R.J.F.L.), Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York; Cardiovascular Epidemiology and Genetics, IMIM, and CIBERCV, Barcelona, Spain (J. Marrugat, R.E.); Institute of Genetics and Biophysics A. Buzzati-Traverso, CNR, Napoli, Italy (D.R., T. Nutile, R. Sorice, M. Ciullo); Department of Psychiatry, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Education and Research Centre, Beaumont Hospital, Dublin (L.M.L.); UCD Conway Institute, Centre for Proteome Research (L.M.L.), and School of Medicine, Conway Institute (D.C.S.), University College Dublin, Belfield, Ireland; Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala Universitet, Science for Life Laboratory, Sweden (S.E., Å. Johansson, U.G.); Department of Biostatistics and Center for Statistical Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor (A.U.J., M. Boehnke); NIHR Leicester Cardiovascular Biomedical Research Unit, Glenfield Hospital, Leicester United Kingdom (C.P.N., P.S.B., N.J.S.); MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine (J.E.H., V.V., J. Marten, A.F.W., J.F.W.), and Medical Genetics Section, Centre for Genomic and Experimental Medicine and MRC Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine (S.E.H.), University of Edinburgh, Western General Hospital, Scotland, United Kingdom; Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health (W.Z., E.E., J.C.C., H.G., B.L., I.T., A.-C.V.), MRC-PHE Centre for Environment and Health, Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health (M.-R.J., P.E.), School of Public Health (N.P.), International Centre for Circulatory Health (S. Thom), and National Heart and Lung Institute (P.S.), Imperial College London, United Kingdom; Department of Cardiology, Ealing Hospital, London North West Healthcare NHS Trust, Southall, United Kingdom (W.Z., J.C.C., J.S.K.); Department of Medical Biology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Split, Croatia (T.Z.); Department of Hygiene and Epidemiology, University of Ioannina Medical School, Greece (E.E.); Medical Research Institute, University of Dundee, Ninewells Hospital and Medical School, Scotland, United Kingdom (N. Shah, A.S.F.D., C.N.A.P.); Department of Pharmacy, COMSATS Institute of Information Technology, Abbottabad, Pakistan (N. Shah); National Institute for Health Research Biomedical Research Centre, London, United Kingdom (M.M.); Department of Human Genetics, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, United Kingdom (B.P.P., E.Z.); INSERM U 1219, Bordeaux Population Health Center, France (G.C., C.T., S.D.); Bordeaux University, France (G.C., C.T., S.D.); Hunter Medical Research Institute, New Lambton, NSW, Australia (C.O., E.G.H., R. Scott, J.A.); Center for Statistical Genetics, Department of Biostatistics, Ann Arbor, MI (G.A.); Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, Iran (M.A.); Busselton Population Medical Research Institute, Western Australia (J.B., J.H.); PathWest Laboratory Medicine of Western Australia, Nedlands (J.B., J.H.); School of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine (J.B., J.H.), School of Population and Global Health (J.H.), and School of Medicine and Pharmacology (A. James), The University of Western Australia, Nedlands; Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom (J.C.C., J.S.K.); University of Dundee, Ninewells Hospital &amp; Medical School, United Kingdom (J.C.); Institute of Genetic Medicine (H.J.C.), and Institute of Health and Society (C. Mamasoula), Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom; Department of Pathology, Amsterdam Medical Center, The Netherlands (J.J.D.); Department of Numerical Analysis and Computer Science, Stockholm University, Sweden (M. Frånberg); Department of Public Health and Caring Sciences, Geriatrics, Uppsala, Sweden (V. Giedraitis); Helmholtz Zentrum Muenchen, Deutsches Forschungszentrum fuer Gesundheit und Umwelt (GmbH), Neuherberg, Germany (C.G.); Department of Psychology, School of Social Sciences, Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh, United Kingdom (A.J.G.); Intramural Research Program, Laboratory of Epidemiology, Demography, and Biometry, National Institute on Aging (T.B.H., L.J.L.); Department of Epidemiology, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA (A. Hofman); Center For Life-Course Health Research (M.-R.J.), and Biocenter Oulu (M.-R.J.), University of Oulu, Finland; Unit of Primary Care, Oulu University Hospital, Finland (M.-R.J.); National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, Cardiovascular Epidemiology and Human Genomics Branch, Bethesda, MD (A.D.J.); Department of Clinical Physiology, Tampere University Hospital, Finland (M.K.); Department of Clinical Physiology, Faculty of Medicine and Life Sciences, University of Tampere, Finland (M.K.); Cardiovascular Research Center (S. Kathiresan, C.N.-C.); Center for Human Genetics (S. Kathiresan), and Center for Human Genetic Research (C.N.-C.), Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston; Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA (S. Kathiresan, C.N.-C.); Department of Public Health and Primary Care, Institute of Public Health, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom (K.-T.K.); Department of Public Health, Faculty of Medicine, University of Split, Croatia (I.K., O.P.); Cardiology, Department of Specialties of Medicine, Geneva University Hospital, Switzerland (L. Lin, F.M., G.B.E.); Department of Medical Sciences, Cardiovascular Epidemiology (L. Lind, J.S.), and Department of Medical Sciences, Molecular Epidemiology and Science for Life Laboratory (E.I.), Uppsala University, Sweden; Department of Psychiatry, EMGO Institute for Health and Care Research, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands (Y.M., B.W.J.H.P.); School of Molecular, Genetic and Population Health Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Medical School, Teviot Place, Scotland, United Kingdom (A.D.M.); Department of Epidemiology, Human Genetics and Environmental Sciences, School of Public Health, University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston (A.C.M.); British Heart Foundation Glasgow Cardiovascular Research Centre, Institute of Cardiovascular and Medical Sciences, College of Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences (S.P.), and Institute of Cardiovascular and Medical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine (D.J.S.), University of Glasgow, United Kingdom; Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), University of Helsinki, Finland (A. Palotie, S.R., A.-P.S., M.P.); Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, Canada (G.P., S. Thériault); Department of Neurology, General Central Hospital, Bolzano, Italy (P.P.P.); Department of Neurology, University of Lübeck, Germany (P.P.P.); Department of Clinical Physiology and Nuclear Medicine, Turku University Hospital, Finland (O.T.R.); Research Centre of Applied and Preventive Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Turku, Finland (O.T.R.); Department of Cardiology, Fujian Provincial Hospital, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, China (M.R.); Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA (P.M.R., D.I.C.); Institute for Maternal and Child Health IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy (A.R.); Institute of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Centre for Molecular Medicine, Medical University of Graz, Austria (Y.S., H. Schmidt); INSERM U1078, Etablissement Français du Sang, Brest Cedex, France (A.S.P.); Faculty of Health, University of Newcastle, Callaghan, NSW, Australia (R. Scott, J.A.); John Hunter Hospital, New Lambton, NSW, Australia (R. Scott, J.A.); The New York Academy of Medicine, New York (D.S.); IRCCS Neuromed, Pozzilli, Isernia, Italy (R. Sorice, M. Ciullo); Molecular and Cellular Therapeutics, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin 2, Ireland (A.S.); Institute for Translational Genomics and Population Sciences, Los Angeles BioMedical Research Institute at Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance, CA (K.D.T.); Division of Genetic Outcomes, Department of Pediatrics, Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance, CA (K.D.T.); Department of Public Health (C.T.), and Department of Neurology (S.D.), Bordeaux University Hospital, France; Department of Internal Medicine, Lausanne University Hospital, CHUV, Switzerland (P.V.); Population Health Research Institute, McMaster University, Hamilton Ontario, Canada (D.C.); National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital Campus, United Kingdom (J.S.K.); Dasman Diabetes Institute, Kuwait (J.T.); Diabetes Research Group, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia (J.T.); Department of Neurosciences and Preventive Medicine, Danube-University Krems, Austria (J.T.); Division of Cardiovascular Sciences, The University of Manchester and Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, United Kingdom (B.D.K.); Division of Public Health Sciences, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem (Y.M.L.); Kaiser Permanent Washington Health Research Institute, Seattle, WA (B.M.P.); Institute of Physiology, University Medicine Greifswald, Karlsburg, Germany (R.R); Department of Pulmonary Physiology and Sleep, Sir Charles Gairdner Hospital, Nedlands, Western Australia (A. James); Population Health Research Institute, St George’s, University of London, United Kingdom (D.P.S.); Department of Medicine, Columbia University Medical Center, New York (W.P.); Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, CA (E.I.); Data Science Institute and Lancaster Medical School, Lancaster University, United Kingdom (J.K.); and Department of Biostatistics, University of Liverpool, United Kingdom (A.P.M.).
Correspondence to Georg B. Ehret, Cardiology, Department of Specialties of Medicine, Geneva University Hospital, 1205 Genève, Switzerland, georg@rhone.ch or Louise V. Wain, Department of Health Sciences, University of Leicester, Leicester LE1 7RH, United Kingdom, louisewain@le.ac.uk
* A list of contributing authors is given in the online-only Data Supplement.

† These authors contributed equally to this work.

10 10 2017
9 2017
24 7 2017
24 1 2019
70 3 e4e19
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Elevated blood pressure is a major risk factor for cardiovascular disease and has a substantial genetic contribution. Genetic variation influencing blood pressure has the potential to identify new pharmacological targets for the treatment of hypertension. To discover additional novel blood pressure loci, we used 1000 Genomes Project–based imputation in 150 134 European ancestry individuals and sought significant evidence for independent replication in a further 228 245 individuals. We report 6 new signals of association in or near HSPB7, TNXB, LRP12, LOC283335, SEPT9, and AKT2, and provide new replication evidence for a further 2 signals in EBF2 and NFKBIA. Combining large whole-blood gene expression resources totaling 12 607 individuals, we investigated all novel and previously reported signals and identified 48 genes with evidence for involvement in blood pressure regulation that are significant in multiple resources. Three novel kidney-specific signals were also detected. These robustly implicated genes may provide new leads for therapeutic innovation.

blood pressure
cardiovascular risk
complex traits
eSNP
GWAS
hypertension

pmcGenetic support for a drug target increases the likelihood of success in drug development,1 and there is clear unmet need for novel therapeutic strategies to treat individuals with hypertension.2 Several large studies have described blood pressure (BP) variant identification by genome-wide and targeted association approaches.3–19 Clinically, the most predictive BP traits for cardiovascular risk are systolic BP (SBP) and diastolic BP (DBP), reflecting roughly the peak and trough of the BP curve, and pulse pressure, the difference between SBP and DBP,20 reflecting arterial stiffness. Using these 3 traits, we undertook a meta-analysis of 150 134 individuals from 54 genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of European ancestry with imputation based on the 1000 Genomes Project Phase 1. To minimize reporting of false-positive associations, we sought stringent evidence for significant independent replication in a further 228 245 individuals. We further followed up novel and previously reported association signals in multiple large gene expression databases and the largest kidney tissue gene expression resource currently available. Finally, we searched for enrichment of associated genes in biological pathways and gene sets and identified whether any of the genes were known drug targets or had tool molecules.

Materials and Methods

Studies Stage 1

Results from 54 independent European-ancestry studies, totaling 150 134 individuals, were included in the stage 1 meta-analysis: AGES (n=3215), ARIC (n=9402), ASPS (n=828), B58C (n=6458), BHS (n=4492), CHS (n=3254), Cilento study (n=999), COLAUS (n=5404), COROGENE-CTRL (n=1878), CROATIA-Vis (n=945), CROATIA-Split (n=494), CROATIA-Korcula (n=867), EGCUT (n=6395), EGCUT2 (n=1844), EPIC (n=2100), ERF (n=2617), Fenland (n=1357), FHS (n=8096), FINRISK-ctrl (n=861), FINRISK CASE (n=839), FUSION (n=1045), GRAPHIC (n=1010), H2000-CTRL (n=1078), HealthABC (n=1661), HTO (n=1000), INGI-CARL (n=456), INGI-FVG (n=746), INGI-VB (n=1775), IPM (n=300), KORAS3 (n=1590), KORAS4 (n=3748), LBC1921 (n=376), LBC1936 (n=800), LOLIPOP-EW610 (n=927), MESA (n=2678), MICROS (n=1148), MIGEN (n=1214), NESDA (n=2336), NSPHS (n=1005), NTR (n=1490), PHASE (n=4535), PIVUS (n=945), PROCARDIS (n=1652), SHIP (n=4068), ULSAM (n=1114), WGHS (n=23 049), YFS (n=1987), ORCADES (n=1908), RS1 (n=5645), RS2 (n=2152), RS3 (n=3018), TRAILS (n=1262), TRAILS-CC (n=282), and TWINGENE (n=9789). Full study names and general study information is given in Table S1 in the online-only Data Supplement.

Study-Level Genotyping and Association Testing

Three quantitative BP traits were analyzed: SBP, DBP, and pulse pressure (difference between SBP and DBP). Within each study, individuals known to be taking antihypertensive medication had 15 mm Hg added to their raw SBP value and 10 mm Hg added to their raw DBP values.21 A summary of BP phenotypes in each study is given in Table S2. Association testing was undertaken according to a central analysis plan that specified the use of sex, age, age2, and body mass index as covariates and optional inclusion of additional covariates to account for population stratification (Table S3). Trait residuals were calculated for each trait using a normal linear regression of the medication-adjusted trait values (mm Hg) onto all covariates. The genotyping array, preimputation quality control filters, imputation software, and association testing software used by each study are listed in Table S4. Each participating study imputed genotypes based on the 1000 Genomes Project Phase 1 integrated release version 3 (March 2012) all ancestry reference panel.22 Imputed genotype dosages were used to take into account uncertainty in the imputation. Association testing was performed using linear regression of the trait residuals onto genotype dosages under an additive genetic model. Methods to account for relatedness within a study were used where appropriate (Table S3). Results for all variants (single nucleotide polymorphisms [SNPs] and insertion/deletion polymorphisms [INDELs]) were then returned to the central analysis group for further quality control checks and meta-analysis.

Stage 1 Meta-Analysis

Central quality control checks were undertaken across all results sets. This included checks to ensure allele frequency consistency (across studies and with reference populations), checks of effect size and standard error distributions (ie, to highlight phenotype issues), and generation of quantile–quantile plots and genomic inflation factor lambdas to check for over- or underinflation of test statistics. Genomic control was applied (if lambda &gt;1) at study level. Variants with imputation quality &lt;0.3 were excluded prior to meta-analysis. Inverse variance–weighted meta-analysis was undertaken. After meta-analysis, variants with a weighted minor allele frequency of &lt;1% or N effective (product of study sample size and imputation quality summed across contributing studies) &lt;60% were then excluded and meta-analysis genomic control lambda calculated and used to adjust the meta-analysis results.

Selection of Regions for Follow-Up

For each trait, regions of association were selected by ranking variants by P value, recording the variant with the lowest P value as a sentinel variant and then excluding all variants ±500 kb from the sentinel and reranking the remaining variants. This was undertaken iteratively until all sentinel variants representing 1 Mb regions containing associations with P&lt;10−6 had been identified. To identify additional signals represented by secondary sentinel variants within 500 kb of each of the sentinel variants, GCTA (the Genome-wide Complex Trait Analysis software)23 was used to run conditional analyses (conditioned on the first sentinel variant) on each of the 1 Mb regions using GWAS summary statistics and linkage disequilibrium (LD) information from ARIC. This was done both for putatively novel regions and for regions that had previously been reported. A χ2 test of heterogeneity of effect sizes across the 54 studies was run for each sentinel variant, and those with P&lt;0.05 for heterogeneity were excluded from further follow-up. Variants with P&lt;10−6 after conditioning on the sentinel SNP (novel or known) in the region and for which any attenuation of the −log10 P value was &lt;1.5 fold were also taken forward for replication.

Studies Stage 2

Data from 14 independent studies, totaling 87 360 individuals, and the first release of UK Biobank, totaling 140 886 individuals, were combined to replicate the findings from stage 1 (ie, totaling 228 245 individuals). Stage 2 study details, including full study names, are given in Table S6 and included 3C-Dijon (n=4061), Airwave (n=14 023), ASCOT-SC (n=2462), ASCOT-UK (n=3803), BRIGHT (n=1791), GAPP (n=1685), GoDARTs (n=7413), GS:SFHS (n=9749), HCS (n=2112), JUPITER (n=8718), LifeLines (n=13 376), NEO (n=5731), TwinsUK (n=4973), UK Biobank-CMC (n=140 886), and UKHLS (n=7462). Analysis was undertaken using the same methods as described for stage 1 studies. UK Biobank-CMC used a newer imputation reference panel than the other studies, and where a requested variant was not available, a proxy was used (next most significant P value with LD r2&gt;0.6 with original top variant). Results from all stage 2 studies were meta-analyzed using inverse variance–weighted meta-analysis. Two of the variants, rs1048238 and chr1:243458005:INDEL, were not available in the largest study in stage 2 (UK Biobank-CMC), and so proxy variants were selected (based on P value and LD).

Stage 1+Stage 2 Meta-Analysis

After meta-analysis of stage 1 and stage 2 results, signals with a P&gt;5×10−8 were excluded. Of the signals with a final P&lt;5×10−8, support for independent replication within the stage 2 studies only was sought. Any signals that had P&lt;5×10−8 and evidence for independent replication in stage 2 alone indicated by P&lt;8.2×10−4 (Bonferroni correction for 61 tests) were reported as novel signals of association with BP. Any signals that were subsequently reported by other BP GWAS that were accepted for publication during the time this analysis was ongoing, or signals for which independence from another known signal could not be established, were removed from our list of novel signals at this stage (Table S5).

Genotype and Gene Expression

We searched for signals of association of genotype with gene expression for the 22 signals (including 8 novel) described in this study (Table S7) and all signals reported prior to our study (Table S10)3–16,18,24 in 3 whole-blood data sets, 1 kidney data set, and the GTEx (Genotype-Tissue Expression) multiple tissue data resource, which included whole blood.25 We selected cis signals of association, which were significant after controlling for 5% false discovery rate. The 3 whole-blood expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) data sets were the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute SABRe (Systems Approach to Biomarker Research in Cardiovascular Disease) initiative whole-blood eQTL resource (microarray, n=5257), NESDA-NTR (microarray, n=4896), BIOS (RNAseq, n=2116). The whole-blood data from GTEx was based on data from 338 samples. The kidney data set comprised 236 donor kidney samples from 134 donors.26 Full details of each data set can be found in the online-only Data Supplement. The source transcriptomic renal data as described26 have been deposited in the GeneExpression Omnibus (NCBI) and are accessible online through GEO Series accession number GSE43974.

LD Lookup

The 1000 Genomes Project phase 3 release of variant calls was used (February 20, 2015) using 503 subjects of European ancestry.22 r2 between the sentinel SNPs and all other biallelic SNPs within the corresponding 2 Mb area were calculated using the Tabix and PLINK software package (v1.07).27,28 Annotation was performed using the ANNOVAR software package.29

Gene-Based Pathway Analysis

All genes identified in 3 or 4 of the whole-blood eQTL resources above (Table 2) and genes containing a nonsynonymous variant with r2&gt;0.5 with the sentinel variant (Table S14) were tested for enrichment of biological pathways and gene ontology (GO) terms using ConsensusPathDB30 using a false discovery rate &lt;5% cutoff. Enriched pathways and GO terms containing genes only implicated by a single BP-associated variant were not reported.

Network Analysis

To construct a functional association network, we combined 2 prioritized candidate gene sets into a single query gene set as (1) genes mapping to the nonsynonymous SNPs in high LD (r2&gt;0.5) with the corresponding sentinel BP-associated SNP and (2) genes with eQTL evidence from 3 or 4 of the blood eQTL resources. Three sentinel SNPs (rs185819, rs926552, and rs805303) mapping to the HLA (human leukocyte antigen) region on chromosome 6 were excluded from downstream analyses. The single query gene set was then used as input for the functional network analysis.31 We used the Cytoscape32 software platform extended by the GeneMANIA33 plugin (Data Version: August 12, 2014).34 All the genes in the composite network, either from the query or the resulting gene sets, were then used for functional enrichment analysis against GO terms35 to identify the most relevant GO terms using the same plugin.34

DNase1 Hypersensitivity Overlap Enrichment Across Tissue and Cell Types

The functional element overlap analysis of the results of GWAS experiments (Forge tool v1.1)36 was used to test for enrichment of overlap of BP SNPs in tissues and cell lines from the Roadmap and ENCODE (Encyclopedia of DNA Elements) projects. All 164 SNPs were entered and 143 were included in the analysis. SNPs from 9 commonly used GWAS arrays were used to select background sets of SNPs for comparison, and 10 000 background repetitions were run. A Z score threshold of ≥3.39 (estimated false-positive rate of 0.5%) was used to declare significance.

Drug–Gene Interactions

Genes used for pathway and GO enrichment analyses were further investigated for potential druggable or drugged targets using DGIdb (drug gene interaction database).37 Known drug–gene interactions were interrogated across 15 source databases in DGIdb and include all types of interactions. The analysis performed for druggability prediction included all 9 databases exclusively inspecting expert curated data only. We also evaluate genes for known tool compounds using Chembl (www.ebi.ac.uk/chembl/; version 22.1).

Results

The stage 1 discovery meta-analysis included 150 134 individuals (Tables S1 through S4 and Figures S1 and S2) and 7 994 604 variants with minor allele frequency &gt;1% and an effective sample size of at least 60% of the total. We used the widely used 2-stage design38 and identified 61 signals in the discovery analysis that were candidates for novel BP signals (P&lt;10−6 for any trait; Table S5). To ensure robustness of signals, we examined BP associations in an additional 228 245 individuals from 15 independent studies for replication, including 140 886 individuals from UK Biobank19 (Table S6). We used the most significant (sentinel) SNP and trait for each locus in replication (61 tests). Twenty-two putatively novel association signals were initially confirmed, showing significant evidence of replication in the independent stage-2 studies (P&lt;8.2×10−4, Bonferroni correction for 61 tests) and genome-wide significance (P&lt;5×10−8) in a meta-analysis across all 378 376 individuals (Table 1 and Table S7). Of these, 14 were subsequently published in 2 other studies17,19 which presented genome-wide significant associations with evidence of replication. A further 2 were highlighted as putative novel signals in one of those studies17 but had not been confirmed by replication. In our study, we report the 6 remaining novel signals, and the 2 previously unconfirmed signals (in EBF2 and in NFKBIA), as novel signals. The 8 novel signals included 7 signals at 7 independent loci (Figure S3) and 1 novel independent signal near a previously reported hit near TNXB (Table S8 and Figure S4). The novel signals show both significant evidence of replication in the independent stage-2 studies (P&lt;8.2×10−4, Bonferroni correction for 61 tests) and genome-wide significance (P&lt;5×10−8) in a meta-analysis across all 378 376 individuals. The sentinel variants at all 8 signals were common (minor allele frequency &gt;5%), and the novel secondary signal at TNXB was in high linkage disequilibrium (r2&gt;0.8) with a nonsynonymous SNP. With the exception of rs9710247, which was only significant for association with DBP, all signals were significantly associated (P&lt;0.006, Bonferroni corrected for 8 tests) with all 3 traits (Table 1 and Table S9).

We next sought to identify which genes might have expression levels that were associated with genotypes of the BP-associated variants reported in this study and others. Strong evidence of an association with expression of a specific gene may provide clues as to which gene(s) might be functionally relevant to that signal. We took the 139 BP association signals reported prior to these studies17,19 and 22 novel signals of association identified and confirmed in this study and 2 contemporaneous studies3–19,24 (Table S10) and searched for evidence of association with gene expression in whole blood (4 studies, total n=12 607; supporting information in the online-only Data Supplement) and in kidney tissue (n=134, the largest kidney eQTL resource currently available). Although of unclear direct relevance to BP, whole blood was studied because of the availability of large data sets enabling a powerful assessment of expression patterns that are likely present across multiple cell and tissue types. Similarly, circulating blood cells have been used for ion transport experiments in the past, and altered ion transport levels in erythrocytes were linked to hypertension.39 Kidney was chosen because of the many renal pathways that regulate BP and outstanding questions about the relevance of kidney pathways to the genetic component of BP regulation in the general population.3,15 eQTL signals were filtered by false discovery rate (&lt;5%), and we examined cis (within 1 Mb) associations only (supporting information in the online-only Data Supplement).

The 4 blood eQTL data sets were NESDA-NTR,40,41 SABRe,15 the BIOS resource,42 and GTEx25 (supporting information in the online-only Data Supplement). The BIOS resource (n=2116) has not previously been used in the analysis of BP associations, and findings from NESDA-NTR and SABRe have been reported for a subset of the previously published signals.16,18 For a total of 369 genes, gene expression was associated with the BP SNP in ≥1 of the 4 blood data sets at experiment-wide significance (Table S11). This included 14 genes for 6 of the 8 novel signals. For 110 genes, we found eQTL evidence in 2 out of 4 data sets (Figure), including 4 genes for 2 of the novel signals: EIF4B and TNS2 for rs73099903 and MAP3K10 and PLD3 for rs9710247. SNP rs73099903 was in strong LD (r2&gt; 0.9), with the SNP most strongly associated with TNS2 expression in the BIOS resource. TNS2 encodes a tensin focal adhesion molecule and may have a role in renal function.43

For 48 genes, we found evidence in 3 out of the 4 resources (Table 2), suggesting robustness of the SNP–gene expression correlation signal and highlighting those genes as potential candidates in genetic BP regulation. Of the 48 genes, 28 have not previously been described in eQTL analyses using BP-associated SNPs, and all were correlated with previously reported BP association signals.

In the kidney data set (TransplantLines),26 there was association of gene expression and genotype for 9 SNPs and 13 genes (Table 2 and Figure; Table S12). Nine of the SNP–gene expression associations were also observed in the whole-blood eQTL data sets, suggesting that those signals may not be unique to the kidney. We report 3 signals that were unique to the kidney and not previously reported (C4orf34, HIP2, and ASIC1) and confirm a previously reported kidney eQTL signal for an antisense RNA for PSMD5.15 The same SNP was also an eQTL for PSMD5 itself in both blood and kidney. ASIC1 encodes the acid sensing ion channel subunit 1, which may interact (and be coexpressed) with ENaC subunits, which mediate transepithelial Na transport in the distal nephron of the kidney.44 The comparatively small number of signals using kidney tissue (Table 2 and Figure) compared with whole blood could be because of the small sample size. Complete GTEx results are given in Table S13.

For genes implicated by eQTL information from whole blood, we tested for enrichment of biological pathways and GOs. We noted enrichment of the 48 genes implicated by 3 or 4 blood eQTL resources (Table 2) and a further 54 genes containing a nonsynonymous variant with r2&gt;0.5 with the top SNP (Table S14) in pathways and ontology terms related to actin and striated muscle (Tables S15 and S16). Network analysis using the same genes highlighted further GO terms relating to muscle function, particularly cardiac muscle (Table S17). We tested the overlap of 161 non-HLA BP-associated variants with DNase hypersensitivity sites identified in the Roadmap and ENCODE cell lines and identified an overall enrichment in multiple cell and tissue types, including heart, kidney, and smooth muscle (Figure S5).

We next investigated these genes for potential suitability as drug targets (druggability), known tool compounds, and clinically approved drugs using DGIdb37 (Table S18). Twelve genes had known drugs, including 4 genes with known antihypertensive drugs. We noted that drugs modulating all but 1 of the 12 drugged targets had a reported influence on BP, either as a primary antihypertensive indication or as a reported side effect of raised BP. Twenty additional genes were predicted druggable, among these 7 genes have known small molecule tool modulators, based on a query of the Chembl database (www.ebi.ac.uk/chembldb/; version 22.1).

Discussion

Enhanced discovery of BP loci increases the potential targets for therapeutic advances. After major advances in the number of BP loci known over the last years and months, we report 8 novel signals that implicate 5 regions of the genome not previously connected to BP regulation.

Six of the 8 novel signals we report had not previously been reported. Two signals (in EBF2 and NFKBIA) have been suggested previously but without evidence for replication.17 For these 2 signals, we present, for the first time, stringent evidence of replication, confirming their relevance to BP genetics.

The path from signal to genes is the essential next step toward realizing the therapeutic potential of a genetic locus and understanding the mechanisms of BP regulation. We have used several large eQTL resources as a first step to realize this objective. As expected, we observed that even across eQTL studies of the same tissue, there is limited overlap in experiment-wide significant signals, suggesting either biological variability (differences in the characteristics of the samples or in the methods for extraction and processing of mRNA in each of the studies), technology-specific differences in coverage of genes (use of RNAseq data for the BIOS blood data set and microarray-based expression levels for the kidney and other blood data sets), or the possibility of false-positive results despite stringent within-experiment significance thresholds. We were unable to distinguish these scenarios using the data available to us, but by selecting genes that were significant in at least 3 resources, and therefore robust to these differences, we identified 48 genes as candidates for further study. These results are limited by the availability of large eQTL resources for whole blood only, which precludes well-powered comparisons across tissue types, particularly, as the origin of BP control is unlikely to be located in the blood. Enrichment and pathway analyses using these genes, and genes containing a correlated functional variant, highlight the potential relevance of muscular tissue and pathways, compatible with a vascular and cardiac origin of BP genetics, extending previous evidence.15 We identify several drugged targets in the pathways identified, including 4 existing hypertension targets. Other drugs identified are not suitable candidates for repositioning to hypertension because most were reported in adverse events to raise BP; however, the targets would be valid for investigation using a reverse mechanism, for example, agonism in place of inhibition. We also identified 7 genes with small molecule tool modulators (mainly inhibitory or binding). These molecules and targets might be suitable candidates for further investigation to build a target validation case to support clinical investigation in hypertension.

Among the genes implicated in our eQTL, analyses were several for which there is already some evidence that they are relevant to BP regulation. The intronic SNP rs10926988 was independently associated with expression of SDCCAG8 in all 4 whole-blood resources. Rare mutations in SDCCAG8 cause Bardet–Biedl syndrome, which features hypertension. Expression levels of MYBPC3 were correlated with rs710364815 in the 3 largest blood eQTL resources (ie, SABRe, NESDA-NTR, and BIOS). MYBPC3 encodes the cardiac isoform of myosin-binding protein C, which is expressed in heart muscle, and mutations in MYBPC3 are known to cause familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.45

This study has several limitations. Given the nature of statistical power for genome-wide association analyses, the sample size is limited, even though this is one of the largest efforts in BP GWAS undertaken to date. The study would clearly have benefited from the availability of larger eQTL resources on multiple tissues in sample sizes even larger than those available today. Our analyses were limited to cis signals, and future analyses, with larger sample sizes, might also consider trans signals.

Perspectives

Our study reports robust novel BP association signals and reports new candidate BP genes, contributing to the transition from variants to genes to explain BP variation. These genes now require further functional validation to establish their potential as drug targets. Our study additionally highlights the challenges of combining and interpreting data from multiple eQTL studies and emphasizes the need for harmonization of data and development of new eQTL resources for multiple tissue types.

In summary, our study reports novel BP association signals and reports new candidate BP genes, contributing to the transition from variants to genes to explain BP variation.

Supplementary Material

We thank all the study participants of this study for their contributions. Detailed acknowledgment of funding sources is provided in the Sources of Funding section.

Sources of Funding

This research used the ALICE and SPECTRE High Performance Computing Facilities at the University of Leicester. G.B. Ehret is supported by Geneva University Hospitals, Geneva University, de Reuter Foundation, the Swiss National Foundation project FN 33CM30-124087, and the Fondation pour Recherches Médicales, Geneva.

Airwave: We thank all participants of the Airwave Health Monitoring Study. The study is funded by the UK Home Office (Grant number 780-TETRA) with additional support from the National Institute for Health Research Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust and Imperial College Biomedical Research Centre.

ARIC: The Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities Study is performed as a collaborative study supported by National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute contracts (HHSN268201100005C, HHSN268201100006C, HHSN268201100007C, HHSN268201100008C, HHSN2682011000 09C, HHSN268201100010C, HHSN268201100011C, and HHSN2682 01100012C), R01HL087641, R01HL59367, and R01HL086694; National Human Genome Research Institute contract U01HG004402; and National Institutes of Health contract HHSN268200625226C. Funding support for the Genetic Epidemiology of Causal Variants Across the Life Course (CALiCo) program was provided through the NHGRI PAGE program (U01 HG007416). We thank the staff and participants of the ARIC study for their important contributions.

ASCOT: This work was supported by Pfizer, New York, NY, for the ASCOT study and the collection of the ASCOT DNA repository; by Servier Research Group, Paris, France; and by Leo Laboratories, Copenhagen, Denmark. We thank all ASCOT trial participants, physicians, nurses, and practices in the participating countries for their important contribution to the study. In particular, we thank Clare Muckian and David Toomey for their help in DNA extraction, storage, and handling. This work forms part of the research programme of the NIHR Cardiovascular Biomedical Research Unit at Barts.

ASPS: The research reported in this article was funded by the Austrian Science Fond (FWF) grant number P20545-P05 and P13180. The Medical University of Graz supports the databank of the ASPS. We thank the staff and the participants of the ASPS for their valuable contributions. We thank Birgit Reinhart for her long-term administrative commitment and Ing Johann Semmler for the technical assistance at creating the DNA bank.

BRIGHT: This work was supported by the Medical Research Council of Great Britain (grant number G9521010D) and by the British Heart Foundation (grant number PG/02/128). The BRIGHT study is extremely grateful to all the patients who participated in the study and the BRIGHT nursing team. This work forms part of the research programme of the NIHR Cardiovascular Biomedical Research Unit at Barts.

B58C: We acknowledge use of phenotype and genotype data from the British 1958 Birth Cohort DNA collection, funded by the Medical Research Council grant G0000934 and the Wellcome Trust grant 068545/Z/02. Genotyping for the B58C-WTCCC subset was funded by the Wellcome Trust grant 076113/B/04/Z. The B58C-T1DGC genotyping used resources provided by the Type 1 Diabetes Genetics Consortium, a collaborative clinical study sponsored by the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK), National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI), National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD), and Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation International (JDRF) and supported by U01 DK062418. B58C-T1DGC GWAS data were deposited by the Diabetes and Inflammation Laboratory, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research (CIMR), University of Cambridge, which is funded by Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation International, the Wellcome Trust, and the National Institute for Health Research Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre; the CIMR is in receipt of a Wellcome Trust Strategic Award (079895). The B58C-GABRIEL genotyping was supported by a contract from the European Commission Framework Programme 6 (018996) and grants from the French Ministry of Research.

CHS: This CHS research was supported by National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) contracts HHSN268201200036C, HHSN268200800007C, N01HC55222, N01HC85079, N01HC85080, N01HC85081, N01HC85082, N01HC 85083, N01HC85086, and HHSN268200960009C and NHLBI grants U01HL080295, R01HL087652, R01HL105756, R01HL103612, R01HL120393, and R01HL130114, with additional contribution from the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS). Additional support was provided through R01AG023629 from the National Institute on Aging (NIA). A full list of principal CHS investigators and institutions can be found at CHS-NHLBI.org. The provision of genotyping data was supported in part by the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, CTSI grant UL1TR000124, and the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Disease Diabetes Research Center (DRC) grant DK063491 to the Southern California Diabetes Endocrinology Research Center. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health.

Cilento study: The Cilento study was supported by the Italian Ministry of Education Universities and Research (Interomics Flagship Project, PON03PE_00060_7), FP6 (Vasoplus-037254), the Assessorato Ricerca Regione Campania, the Fondazione con il SUD (2011-PDR-13), and the Istituto Banco di Napoli-Fondazione to M. Ciullo. We address special thanks to the populations of Cilento for their participation in the study.

COLAUS: The CoLaus study was and is supported by research grants from GlaxoSmithKline (GSK), the Faculty of Biology and Medicine of Lausanne, and the Swiss National Science Foundation (grants 3200B0-105993, 3200B0- 118308, 33CSCO-122661, and 33CS30-139468). We thank all participants, involved physicians, and study nurses to the CoLaus cohort.

COROGENE_CTRL: This study has been funded by the Academy of Finland (grant numbers 139635, 129494, 118065, 129322, and 250207), the Orion-Farmos Research Foundation, the Finnish Foundation for Cardiovascular Research, and the Sigrid Jusélius Foundation. We are grateful for the THL DNA laboratory for its skillful work to produce the DNA samples used in this study. We thank the Sanger Institute genotyping facilities for genotyping the samples.

CROATIA Studies: The CROATIA-Vis, CROATIA-Korcula, and CROATIA-Split studies in the Croatian islands of Vis and Korcula and mainland city of Split were supported by grants from the Medical Research Council (UK); the Ministry of Science, Education, and Sport of the Republic of Croatia (grant number 216-1080315-0302); the European Union framework program 6 European Special Populations Research Network project (contract LSHG-CT-2006–018947); the European Union framework program 7 project BBMRI-LPC (FP7 313010); and the Croatian Science Foundation (grant 8875). The CROATIA studies acknowledge the invaluable contributions of the recruitment teams (including those from the Institute of Anthropological Research in Zagreb) in Vis, Korcula, and Split, the administrative teams in Croatia and Edinburgh, and the people of Vis, Korcula, and Split. SNP genotyping of the CROATIA-Vis samples was performed by the Genetics Core Laboratory at the Wellcome Trust Clinical Research Facility, WGH, Edinburgh, Scotland. SNP genotyping for CROATIA-Korcula was performed by Helmholtz ZentrumMünchen, GmbH, Neuherberg, Germany. The SNP genotyping for the CROATIA-Split cohort was performed by AROS Applied Biotechnology, Aarhus, Denmark.

ERF: The ERF study as a part of EUROSPAN (European Special Populations Research Network) was supported by European Commission FP6 STRP grant number 018947 (LSHG-CT-2006-01947) and also received funding from the European Community’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007–2013)/grant agreement HEALTH-F4-2007–201413 by the European Commission under the programme “Quality of Life and Management of the Living Resources” of 5th Framework Programme (no. QLG2-CT-2002-01254). High-throughput analysis of the ERF data was supported by a joint grant from the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research and the Russian Foundation for Basic Research (NWO-RFBR 047.017.043). Exome sequencing analysis in ERF was supported by the ZonMw grant (project 91111025). Najaf Amin is supported by the Netherlands Brain Foundation (project number F2013(1)-28). We are grateful to all study participants and their relatives, general practitioners, and neurologists for their contributions and to P. Veraart for her help in genealogy, J. Vergeer for the supervision of the laboratory work, and P. Snijders for his help in data collection.

Fenland: J. Luan, C. Langenberg, R.A. Scott, and N.J. Wareham acknowledge support from the Medical Research Council (MC_ U106179471 and MC_UU_12015/1). The Fenland Study is funded by the Wellcome Trust and the Medical Research Council (MC_U106179471). We are grateful to all the volunteers for their time and help and to the General Practitioners and practice staff for assistance with recruitment. We thank the Fenland Study Investigators, Fenland Study Co-ordination team and the Epidemiology Field, Data and Laboratory teams. We further acknowledge support from the Medical Research Council (MC_UU_12015/1).

FHS: The National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute’s Framingham Heart Study is supported by contract N01-HC-25195.

FINRISK_PREDICT_CVD: This study has been funded by the Academy of Finland (grant numbers 139635, 129494, 118065, 129322, 250207, and 269517), the Orion-Farmos Research Foundation, the Finnish Foundation for Cardiovascular Research, and the Sigrid Jusélius Foundation. We are grateful for the THL DNA laboratory for its skillful work to produce the DNA samples used in this study. We thank the Sanger Institute genotyping facilities for genotyping the samples.

FUSION: Support for FUSION was provided by National Instituttes of Health (NIH) grants R01-DK062370 (to M. Boehnke) and intramural project number ZIA-HG000024 (to F. Collins). Genome-wide genotyping was conducted by the Johns Hopkins University Genetic Resources Core Facility SNP Center at the Center for Inherited Disease Research (CIDR), with support from CIDR NIH contract no. N01-HG-65403.

GAPP study: The GAPP study was supported by the Liechtenstein Government, the Swiss National Science Foundation, the Swiss Heart Foundation, the Swiss Society of Hypertension, the University of Basel, the University Hospital Basel, the Hanela Foundation, Schiller AG, and Novartis.

GS:SFHS: Generation Scotland received core support from the Chief Scientist Office of the Scottish Government Health Directorates (CZD/16/6) and the Scottish Funding Council (HR03006). Genotyping of the GS:SFHS samples was performed by the Genetics Core Laboratory at the Wellcome Trust Clinical Research Facility, Edinburgh, Scotland, and was funded by the Medical Research Council UK and the Wellcome Trust (Wellcome Trust Strategic Award “STratifying Resilience and Depression Longitudinally” (STRADL) Reference 104036/Z/14/Z). Ethics approval for the study was given by the NHS Tayside committee on research ethics (reference 05/S1401/89). We are grateful to all the families who took part, the general practitioners, and the Scottish School of Primary Care for their help in recruiting them and the whole Generation Scotland team, which includes interviewers, computer and laboratory technicians, clerical workers, research scientists, volunteers, managers, receptionists, healthcare assistants, and nurses.

GoDARTS: GoDARTS was funded by The Wellcome Trust (072960/Z/03/Z, 084726/Z/08/Z, 084727/Z/08/Z, 085475/Z/08/Z, and 085475/B/08/Z) and as part of the EU IMI-SUMMIT program. We acknowledge the support of the Health Informatics Centre, University of Dundee, for managing and supplying the anonymized data and NHS Tayside, the original data owner. We are grateful to all the participants who took part in the Go-DARTS study, to the general practitioners, to the Scottish School of Primary Care for their help in recruiting the participants, and to the whole team, which includes interviewers, computer and laboratory technicians, clerical workers, research scientists, volunteers, managers, receptionists, and nurses.

GRAPHIC: The GRAPHIC Study was funded by the British Heart Foundation (BHF/RG/2000004). C.P. Nelson and N.J. Samani are supported by the British Heart Foundation, and N.J. Samani is an NIHR Senior Investigator. This work falls under the portfolio of research supported by the NIHR Leicester Cardiovascular Biomedical Research Unit.

H2000: The Health 2000 Study was funded by the National Institute for Health and Welfare (THL), the Finnish Centre for Pensions (ETK), the Social Insurance Institution of Finland (KELA), the Local Government Pensions Institution (KEVA), and other organizations listed on the website of the survey (http://www.terveys2000.fi). We are grateful for the THL DNA laboratory for its skillful work to produce the DNA samples used in this study. We thank the Sanger Institute genotyping facilities for genotyping the GenMets subcohort.

HABC: The Health ABC Study was supported by NIA contracts N01AG62101, N01AG62103, and N01AG62106 and, in part, by the NIA Intramural Research Program. The genome-wide association study was funded by NIA grant 1R01AG032098-01A1 to Wake Forest University Health Sciences, and genotyping services were provided by the Center for Inherited Disease Research (CIDR). CIDR is fully funded through a federal contract from the National Institutes of Health to The Johns Hopkins University, contract number HHSN268200782096C. This study used the high-performance computational capabilities of the Biowulf Linux cluster at the National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD (http://biowulf.nih.gov).

HTO: The study was funded by the Wellcome Trust, Medical Research Council, and British Heart Foundation We thank all the families who participated in the study.

INGI-VB: The INGI-Val Borbera population is a collection of 1664 genotyped samples collected in the Val Borbera Valley, a geographically isolated valley located within the Appennine Mountains in Northwest Italy. The valley is inhabited by ≈3000 descendants from the original population, living in 7 villages along the valley and in the mountains. Participants were healthy people aged 18 to 102 years who had at least one grandfather living in the valley. The study plan and the informed consent form were reviewed and approved by the institutional review boards of San Raffaele Hospital in Milan. The research was supported by funds from Compagnia di San Paolo, Torino, Italy; Fondazione Cariplo, Italy and Ministry of Health, Ricerca Finalizzata 2008 and CCM 2010, PRIN 2009, and Telethon, Italy, to D. Toniolo. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the article. We thank the inhabitants of the VB who made this study possible, the local administrations, the MD of the San Raffaele Hospital, and Prof Clara Camaschella for clinical data collection. We also thank Fiammetta Viganò for technical help, Corrado Masciullo and Massimiliano Cocca for building and maintaining the analysis platform.

INGI-CARL: Italian Ministry of Health RF2010 to P. Gasparini and RC2008 to P. Gasparini.

INGI-FVG: Italian Ministry of Health RF2010 to P. Gasparini and RC2008 to P. Gasparini.

JUPITER: Genetic analysis in the JUPITER trial was funded by a grant from AstraZeneca (D.I. Chasman and P.M. Ridker, Co-Pis).

KORA S3: KORA S3 500K blood pressure project was supported by Estonian Research Council, grant IUT34-12 (for M. Laan). The KORA Augsburg studies have been financed by the Helmholtz Zentrum Munchen, German Research Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany, and supported by grants from the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF). The KORA study group consists of H.-E. Wichmann (speaker), A. Peters, C. Meisinger, T. Illig, R. Holle, J. John, and coworkers who are responsible for the design and conduct of the KORA studies. Part of this work was financed by the German National Genome Research Network (NGFN-2 and NGFNPlus:01GS0823) and supported within the Munich Center of Health Sciences (MC Health) as part of LMUinnovativ.

LBC1921: Phenotype collection in the Lothian Birth Cohort 1921 was supported by the UK’s Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC), The Royal Society, and The Chief Scientist Office of the Scottish Government. Genotyping was funded by the BBSRC. The work was undertaken by The University of Edinburgh Centre for Cognitive Ageing and Cognitive Epidemiology, part of the cross council Lifelong Health and Wellbeing Initiative (MR/K026992/1). Funding from the BBSRC and Medical Research Council (MRC) is gratefully acknowledged. We thank the Lothian Birth Cohort 1921 participants and team members who contributed to these studies.

LBC1936: Phenotype collection in the Lothian Birth Cohort 1936 was supported by Age UK (The Disconnected Mind project). Genotyping was funded by the BBSRC. The work was undertaken by The University of Edinburgh Centre for Cognitive Ageing and Cognitive Epidemiology, part of the cross council Lifelong Health and Wellbeing Initiative (MR/K026992/1). Funding from the BBSRC and Medical Research Council (MRC) is gratefully acknowledged. We thank the Lothian Birth Cohort 1936 participants and team members who contributed to these studies.

Lifelines Cohort Study: The Lifelines Cohort Study and generation and management of GWAS genotype data for the Lifelines Cohort Study is supported by the Netherlands Organization of Scientific Research NWO (grant 175.010.2007.006), the Economic Structure Enhancing Fund (FES) of the Dutch government, the Ministry of Economic Affairs, the Ministry of Education, Culture and Science, the Ministry for Health, Welfare and Sports, the Northern Netherlands Collaboration of Provinces (SNN), the Province of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, the University of Groningen, Dutch Kidney Foundation, and Dutch Diabetes Research Foundation. We acknowledge the services of the Lifelines Cohort Study, the contributing research centers delivering data to Lifelines, and all the study participants.

LOLIPOP: The LOLIPOP study is funded by the British Heart Foundation (SP/04/002), the Medical Research Council (G0601966 and G0700931), the Wellcome Trust (084723/Z/08/Z), the NIHR (RP-PG-0407-10371), European Union FP7 (EpiMigrant, 279143), and Action on Hearing Loss (G51). The LOLIPOP study is supported by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Comprehensive Biomedical Research Centre Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust. The work was performed in part at the NIHR/Wellcome Trust Imperial Clinical Research Facility. We thank the participants and research staff who made the study possible.

MESA: This research was supported by the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis (MESA) contracts N01-HC-95159, N01-HC-95160, N01-HC-95161, N01-HC-95162, N01-HC-95163, N01-HC-95164, N01-HC-95165, N01-HC-95166, N01-HC-95167, N01-HC-95168, and N01-HC-95169 and by grants UL1-TR-000040 and UL1-RR-025005 from NCRR. Funding for MESA SHARe genotyping was provided by NHLBI Contract N02-HL-6-4278. The provision of genotyping data was supported in part by the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, CTSI grant UL1TR000124, and the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Disease Diabetes Research Center (DRC) grant DK063491 to the Southern California Diabetes Endocrinology Research Center.

MICROS: The MICROS study was supported by the Ministry of Health and Department of Innovation, Research and University of the Autonomous Province of Bolzano, the South Tyrolean Sparkasse Foundation, and the European Union framework program 6 EUROSPAN project (contract no. LSHG-CT-2006–018947). For the MICROS study, we thank the primary care practitioners Raffaela Stocker, Stefan Waldner, Toni Pizzecco, Josef Plangger, Ugo Marcadent, and the personnel of the Hospital of Silandro (Department of Laboratory Medicine) for their participation and collaboration in the research project.

MIGEN: The MIGEN Consortium was funded by grant R01 HL087676 (NIH, USA), CIBERCV (Instituto Carlos III, Spain), and AGAUR (Generalitat de Catalunya, Spain).

NEO: The NEO study is supported by the participating Departments, the Division, and the Board of Directors of the Leiden University Medical Center and by the Leiden University, Research Profile Area Vascular and Regenerative Medicine. D.O. Mook-Kanamori is supported by Dutch Science Organization (ZonMW-VENI Grant 916.14.023). The authors of the NEO study thank all individuals who participated in the Netherlands Epidemiology in Obesity study, all participating general practitioners for inviting eligible participants, and all research nurses for collection of the data. We thank the NEO study group, Pat van Beelen, Petra Noordijk, and Ingeborg de Jonge for the coordination, laboratory, and data management of the NEO study. The genotyping in the NEO study was supported by the Centre National de Génotypage (Paris, France), headed by Jean-Francois Deleuze.

NESDA: Funding was obtained from the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (Geestkracht program grant 10-000-1002); the Center for Medical Systems Biology (CSMB, NOW Genomics), Biobanking and Biomolecular Resources Research Infrastructure (BBMRI-NL), VU University’s Institutes for Health and Care Research (EMGO+) and Neuroscience Campus Amsterdam, University Medical Center Groningen, Leiden University Medical Center, and National Institutes of Health (NIH, R01D0042157-01A, MH081802, Grand Opportunity grants 1RC2 MH089951 and 1RC2 MH089995). Part of the genotyping and analyses were funded by the Genetic Association Information Network (GAIN) of the Foundation for the National Institutes of Health. Computing was supported by BiG Grid, the Dutch e-Science Grid, which is financially supported by NWO.

NSPHS: The Northern Swedish Population Health Study (NSPHS) was funded by the Swedish Medical Research Council (Project Number K2007-66X-20270-01-3, 2011–5252, 2012–2884, and 2011–2354), the Foundation for Strategic Research (SSF). NSPHS as part of EUROSPAN (European Special Populations Research Network) was also supported by the European Commission FP6 STRP grant number 01947 (LSHG-CT-2006-01947). This work has also been supported by the Swedish Society for Medical Research (SSMF) and the Swedish Medical Research Council (No. 2015–03327) We are grateful for the contribution of district nurse Svea Hennix for data collection and Inger Jonasson for logistics and coordination of the health survey. We also thank all the participants from the community for their interest and willingness to contribute to this study.

NTR: Funding was obtained from the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO) and The Netherlands Organisation for Health Research and Development (ZonMW) grants 904-61-090, 985-10-002, 904-61-193,480-04-004, 400-05-717, Addiction-31160008, Middelgroot-911-09-032, Spinozapremie 56-464-14192, Biobanking, and Biomolecular Resources Research Infrastructure (BBMRI –NL, 184.021.007); the Netherlands Heart Foundation grants 86.083 and 88.042 and 90.313; the VU Institute for Health and Care Research (EMGO+); the European Community’s Seventh Framework Program (FP7/2007– 2013), ENGAGE (HEALTH-F4-2007–201413); the European Research Council (ERC Advanced, 230374), the Rutgers University Cell and DNA Repository (NIMH U24 MH068457-06), the Avera Institute, Sioux Falls, South Dakota (USA), and the National Institutes of Health (NIH, R01D0042157-01A, MH081802; Grand Opportunity grant 1RC2 MH089951). Part of the genotyping and analyses were funded by the Genetic Association Information Network (GAIN) of the Foundation for the National Institutes of Health. Computing was supported by BiG Grid, the Dutch e-Science Grid, which is financially supported by NWO.

ORCADES: ORCADES was supported by the Chief Scientist Office of the Scottish Government, the Royal Society, the MRC Human Genetics Unit, Arthritis Research UK, and the European Union framework program 6 EUROSPAN project (contract no. LSHG-CT-2006–018947). DNA extractions were performed at the Wellcome Trust Clinical Research Facility in Edinburgh. We acknowledge the invaluable contributions of Lorraine Anderson and the research nurses in Orkney, the administrative team in Edinburgh, and the people of Orkney.

PIVUS: This project was supported by Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation (Wallenberg Academy Fellow), European Research Council (ERC Starting Grant), Swedish Diabetes Foundation (grant no. 2013–024), Swedish Research Council (grant no. 2012-1397), and Swedish Heart-Lung Foundation (20120197). The computations were performed on resources provided by SNIC through Uppsala Multidisciplinary Center for Advanced Computational Science (UPPMAX) under Project b2011036. Genetic data analysis was funded by the Wellcome Trust under awards WT098017 and WT090532. We thank the SNP&amp;SEQ Technology Platform in Uppsala (www.genotyping.se) for excellent genotyping.

PROCARDIS: PROCARDIS was supported by the European Community Sixth Framework Program (LSHM-CT-2007–037273), AstraZeneca, the British Heart Foundation, the Swedish Research Council, the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation, the Swedish Heart-Lung Foundation, the Torsten and Ragnar Söderberg Foundation, the Strategic Cardiovascular Program of Karolinska Institutet and Stockholm County Council, the Foundation for Strategic Research, and the Stockholm County Council (560283). M. Farrall and H. Watkins acknowledge the support of the Wellcome Trust core award (090532/Z/09/Z) and the BHF Centre of Research Excellence (RE/13/1/30181). A. Goel and H. Watkins acknowledge European Union Seventh Framework Programme FP7/2007–2013 under grant agreement no. HEALTH-F2-2013–601456 (CVGenes@Target) and A. Goel acknowledge the Wellcome Trust Institutional strategic support fund.

PROSPER: The PROSPER study was supported by an investigator-initiated grant obtained from Bristol-Myers Squibb. Dr J. W. Jukema is an Established Clinical Investigator of the Netherlands Heart Foundation (grant 2001 D 032). Support for genotyping was provided by the seventh framework program of the European commission (grant 223004) and by the Netherlands Genomics Initiative (Netherlands Consortium for Healthy Aging grant 050-060-810).

RS: The generation and management of GWAS genotype data for the Rotterdam Study (RS I, RS II, RS III) was executed by the Human Genotyping Facility of the Genetic Laboratory of the Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. The GWAS data sets are supported by the Netherlands Organisation of Scientific Research NWO Investments (no. 175.010.2005.011, 911-03-012), the Genetic Laboratory of the Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus MC, the Research Institute for Diseases in the Elderly (014-93-015; RIDE2), the Netherlands Genomics Initiative (NGI)/Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO) Netherlands Consortium for Healthy Aging (NCHA), project no. 050-060-810. The Rotterdam Study is funded by Erasmus Medical Center and Erasmus University, Rotterdam, Netherlands, Organization for the Health Research and Development (ZonMw), the Research Institute for Diseases in the Elderly (RIDE), the Ministry of Education, Culture and Science, the Ministry for Health, Welfare and Sports, the European Commission (DG XII), and the Municipality of Rotterdam. We thank Pascal Arp, Mila Jhamai, Marijn Verkerk, Lizbeth Herrera, and Marjolein Peters, MSc, and Carolina Medina-Gomez, MSc, for their help in creating the GWAS database, and Karol Estrada, PhD, Yurii Aulchenko, PhD, and Carolina Medina-Gomez, MSc, for the creation and analysis of imputed data. We are grateful to the study participants, the staff from the Rotterdam Study, and the participating general practitioners and pharmacists.

SHIP: SHIP is part of the Community Medicine Research net of the University of Greifswald, Germany, which is funded by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research (grants no. 01ZZ9603, 01ZZ0103, and 01ZZ0403), the Ministry of Cultural Affairs, as well as the Social Ministry of the Federal State of Mecklenburg-West Pomerania, and the network ‘Greifswald Approach to Individualized Medicine (GANI_MED)’ funded by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research (grant 03IS2061A). Genome-wide data have been supported by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research (grant no. 03ZIK012) and a joint grant from Siemens Healthcare, Erlangen, Germany, and the Federal State of Mecklenburg-West Pomerania. The University of Greifswald is a member of the Caché Campus program of the InterSystems GmbH.

Three City-Dijon: The 3-City Study is conducted under a partnership agreement among the Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), the University of Bordeaux, and Sanofi-Aventis. The Fondation pour la Recherche Médicale funded the preparation and initiation of the study. The 3C Study is also supported by the Caisse Nationale Maladie des Travailleurs Salariés, Direction Générale de la Santé, Mutuelle Générale de l’Education Nationale (MGEN), Institut de la Longévité, Conseils Régionaux of Aquitaine and Bourgogne, Fondation de France, and Ministry of Research–INSERM Programme “Cohortes et collections de données biologiques.” This work was supported by the National Foundation for Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Disorders, the Institut Pasteur de Lille, the Centre National de Génotypage, and the LABEX (Laboratory of Excellence program investment for the future) DISTALZ—Development of Innovative Strategies for a Transdisciplinary approach to Alzheimer’s disease. G. Chauhan, C. Tzourio, and S. Debette are supported by a grant from the Fondation Leducq. We thank Philippe Amouyel and the UMR1167 Inserm Univ Lille Institut Pasteur de Lille for providing the 3C Dijon cohort SNP replication data funded by a grant from the French National Foundation on Alzheimer’s disease and related disorders.

UKHLS: These data are from Understanding Society: The UK Household Longitudinal Study, which is led by the Institute for Social and Economic Research at the University of Essex and funded by the Economic and Social Research Council. The data were collected by NatCen, and the genome-wide scan data were analyzed by the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute. The Understanding Society DAC have an application system for genetics data, and all use of the data should be approved by them. The application form is available at https://www.understandingsociety.ac.uk/about/health/data.

TRAILS: This research is part of the Tracking Adolescents’ Individual Lives Survey (TRAILS). Participating centers of TRAILS include the University Medical Center and University of Groningen, the Erasmus University Medical Center Rotterdam, the University of Utrecht, the Radboud Medical Center Nijmegen, and the Parnassia Bavo group, all in The Netherlands. TRAILS has been financially supported by various grants from the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research NWO (Medical Research Council program grant GB-MW 940-38-011; ZonMW Brainpower grant 100-001-004; ZonMw Risk Behavior and Dependence grants 60-60600-97-118; ZonMw Culture and Health grant 261-98-710; Social Sciences Council medium-sized investment grants GB-MaGW 480-01-006 and GB-MaGW 480-07-001; Social Sciences Council project grants GB-MaGW 452-04-314 and GB-MaGW 452-06-004; NWO large-sized investment grant 175.010.2003.005; NWO Longitudinal Survey and Panel Funding 481-08-013 and 481-11-001), the Dutch Ministry of Justice (WODC), the European Science Foundation (EuroSTRESS project FP-006), Biobanking and Biomolecular Resources Research Infrastructure BBMRI-NL (CP 32), and the participating universities. Statistical analyses were performed on the Genetic Cluster Computer (http://www.geneticcluster.org) hosted by SURFsara and financially supported by the Netherlands Scientific Organization (NWO 480-05-003 PI: Posthuma) along with a supplement from the Dutch Brain Foundation and the VU University Amsterdam.

TwinGene: This project was supported by grants from the Ministry for Higher Education, the Swedish Research Council (M-2005-1112 and 2009–2298), GenomEUtwin (EU/QLRT-2001-01254; QLG2-CT-2002-01254), NIH grant DK U01-066134, Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation (Wallenberg Academy Fellow), European Research Council (ERC Starting Grant), Swedish Diabetes Foundation (grant no. 2013–024), Swedish Research Council (grant no. 2012-1397), and Swedish Heart-Lung Foundation (20120197). We thank the SNP&amp;SEQ Technology Platform in Uppsala (www.genotyping.se) for excellent genotyping. The computations were performed on resources provided by SNIC through Uppsala Multidisciplinary Center for Advanced Computational Science (UPPMAX) under Project b2011036.

TwinsUK: The study was funded by the Wellcome Trust; European Community’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007–2013). The study also receives support from the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) BioResource Clinical Research Facility and Biomedical Research Centre based at Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust and King’s College London (guysbrc-2012-1). We thank the staff from the Genotyping Facilities at the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute for sample preparation, quality control, and genotyping; Le Centre National de Génotypage, France, for genotyping; Duke University, NC, for genotyping; and the Finnish Institute of Molecular Medicine, Finnish Genome Center, University of Helsinki. Genotyping was also done by CIDR as part of an NEI/NIH project grant.

UK Biobank_Cardiometabolic Consortium: The UKB-CMC received support from the British Heart Foundation (grant SP/SP/13/2/30111). This research has been conducted using the UK Biobank Resource under application number 236. H.R. Warren, C.P. Cabrera, and M.R. Barnes were funded by the National Institutes for Health Research (NIHR) as part of the portfolio of translational research of the NIHR Biomedical Research Unit at Barts. M. Ren was funded by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Biomedical Research Unit in Cardiovascular Disease at Barts. M. Ren is recipient from China Scholarship Council (No. 2011632047). B. Mifsud holds an MRC eMedLab Medical Bioinformatics Career Development Fellowship, funded from award MR/L016311/1. P. Elliott was funded by the National Institutes for Health Research (NIHR) Imperial College Health Care NHS Trust and Imperial College London Biomedical Research Centre, the UK Medical Research Council and Public Health England as Director of the MRC-PHE Centre for Environment and Health, and the NIHR Health Protection Research Unit on the Health Effects of Environmental Hazards. Some of this work used computing resources provided by the Medical Research Council–funded UK MEDical Bioinformatics partnership programme (UK MED-BIO) (MR/L01632X/1)

ULSAM: This project was supported by Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation (Wallenberg Academy Fellow), European Research Council (ERC Starting Grant), Swedish Diabetes Foundation (grant no. 2013–024), Swedish Research Council (grant no. 2012-1397), and Swedish Heart-Lung Foundation (20120197). The computations were performed on resources provided by SNIC through Uppsala Multidisciplinary Center for Advanced Computational Science (UPPMAX) under Project b2011036. Genotyping was funded by the Wellcome Trust under award WT064890. Analysis of genetic data was funded by the Wellcome Trust under awards WT098017 and WT090532. A.P. Morris is a Wellcome Trust Senior Research Fellow in Basic Biomedical Science (WT098017). We thank the SNP&amp;SEQ Technology Platform in Uppsala (www.genotyping.se) for excellent genotyping.

WGHS: The WGHS is supported by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (HL043851, HL080467, HL09935) and the National Cancer Institute (CA047988 and UM1CA182913) with collaborative scientific support and funding for genotyping provided by Amgen.

YFS: The Young Finns Study has been financially supported by the Academy of Finland: grants 286284, 134309 (Eye), 126925, 121584, 124282, 129378 (Salve), 117787 (Gendi), and 41071 (Skidi); the Social Insurance Institution of Finland; Kuopio, Tampere, and Turku University Hospital Medical Funds (grant X51001); Juho Vainio Foundation; Paavo Nurmi Foundation; Finnish Foundation for Cardiovascular Research; Finnish Cultural Foundation; Tampere Tuberculosis Foundation; Emil Aaltonen Foundation; Yrjö Jahnsson Foundation; Signe and Ane Gyllenberg Foundation; and Diabetes Research Foundation of Finnish Diabetes Association. The expert technical assistance in the statistical analyses by Irina Lisinen is gratefully acknowledged.

Figure Overlap of expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) evidence from 4 whole-blood and 1 kidney resource. The figure indicates overlap of evidence for eQTLs from 4 whole-blood studies (SABRe, NESDA-NTR, BIOS, and GTEx) and from 1 kidney resource (TransplantLines). Every colored line indicates that this gene was analysis-wide significant in a given resource. Only genes identified by at least 2 resources are shown. The genes are sorted by genomic position on the y axis.

Table 1 Novel Genome-Wide Significant Signals of Association

Variant ID
(Noncoded/Coded
Allele), Chr:Position,
Nearest Gene(s)
(Type*)	CAF	Results for Most Significant Trait	Stage 1+Stage 2 Meta-Analysis P
Values for All Traits	
Stage 1	Stage 2	Stage 1+Stage 2	
Beta (SE)	P Value	Neff	Beta (SE)	P Value	Neff	Beta (SE)	P Value	Neff	SBP	DBP	PP	
SBP	
rs1048238 (C/T), 1:16341649, HSPB7 (3'UTR)	0.571	0.366 (0.074)	8.09E-07	140299	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	
rs848309 (proxy) (T/C), 1:16308447	0.567	0.347 (0.072)	1.70E-06	146755	0.347 (0.071)	9.10E-07	140462	0.347 (0.051)	7.07E-12‡	287217	7.07E-12‡	1.07E-10‡	5.48E-06	
rs185819 (T/C),† 6:32,050,067, TNXB (ns)	0.513	0.534 (0.073)	1.93E-13‡	142397	0.277 (0.053)	1.49E-07	221748	0.365 (0.043)	1.04E-17‡	364144	1.04E-17‡	2.24E-11‡	8.50E-15‡	
rs6557876 (C/T), 8:25,900,675, EBF2	0.252	−0.411 (0.084)	8.50E-07	143653	−0.350 (0.060)	5.66E-09‡	225803	−0.371 (0.049)	2.85E-14‡	369457	2.85E-14‡	2.50E-10‡	1.51E-08‡	
rs35783704 (G/A), 8:105,966,258, LRP12/ZFPM2	0.109	−0.609 (0.121)	4.96E-07	133924	−0.310 (0.089)	4.78E-04	215528	−0.414 (0.072)	7.08E-09‡	349452	7.08E-09‡	1.60E-06	2.92E-07	
rs73099903 (C/T), 12:53,440,779, LOC283335	0.074	0.768 (0.143)	8.05E-08	136064	0.396 (0.098)	5.32E-05	207253	0.515 (0.081)	1.95E-10‡	343318	1.95E-10‡	4.53E-06	5.46E-08	
rs8904 (G/A), 14:35,871,217, NFKBIA (3'UTR)	0.375	0.377 (0.076)	6.76E-07	140424	0.278 (0.054)	2.31E-07	224771	0.311 (0.044)	1.31E-12‡	365195	1.31E-12‡	1.13E-04	3.44E-12‡	
rs57927100 (C/G), 17:75,317,300, SEPT9	0.258	−0.489 (0.086)	1.10E-08‡	136624	−0.220 (0.061)	3.12E-04	210563	−0.310 (0.050)	4.04E-10‡	347188	4.04E-10‡	1.16E-10‡	1.81E-05	
DBP	
rs9710247 (A/G), 19:40,760,449, AKT2	0.447	0.252 (0.051)	8.11E-07	109695	0.129 (0.032)	5.76E-05	198332	0.164 (0.027)	1.61E-09‡	308028	3.82E-02	1.61E-09‡	5.03E-01	
Results from stage 1 and stage 2, and the meta-analysis of stage 1 and stage 2, for all novel genome-wide significant signals of association. P values of association for all 3 traits from a meta-analysis of stages 1 and 2 are also presented. Results from proxy SNPs are indicated by (proxy); rs848309 was a proxy SNP for rs1048238, and rs10926988 was a proxy SNP for chr1:243458005:INDEL. CAF indicates coded allele frequency; DBP, diastolic blood pressure; Neff, effective sample size; ns, nonsynonymous; PP, pulse pressure; s, synonymous; SBP, systolic blood pressure; and UTR, untranslated region.

* For intragenic variants, the nearest genes are listed; all other variants are intronic unless indicated otherwise.

† Novel signal at previously reported locus.

‡ Genome-wide significant P values (P&lt;5×10−8).

Table 2 BP-Associated SNPs Associated With Expression of the Same Gene Across 4 or 3 Independent Whole-Blood eQTL Resources and the Kidney Resource

Sentinel SNP	Chr	Position	Gene	Blood Data Sets	Top eQTL	Signal in Other
Tissue(s) in GTEx	Signal in
Kidney	eQTL Signal
Previously Reported	
Signal in 4 whole-blood eQTL resources	
rs17367504	1	11862778	CLCN6	YYYY		Y		Y	
rs2169137	1	204497913	MDM4	YYYY	Y	Y		Y	
rs10926988	1	243483279	SDCCAG8	YYYY		Y			
rs319690	3	47927484	MAP4	YYYY	Y	Y		Y	
rs12521868	5	131784393	SLC22A5	YYYY		Y			
rs900145	11	13293905	ARNTL	YYYY		Y		Y	
rs1060105	12	123806219	CDK2AP1	YYYY	Y	Y	Y		
rs1378942	15	75077367	SCAMP2	YYYY					
rs1126464	16	89704365	CHMP1A	YYYY		Y		Y	
rs1126464	16	89704365	FANCA	YYYY				Y	
rs12946454	17	43208121	DCAKD	YYYY		Y	Y	Y	
Signal in 3 (out of 4) whole-blood eQTL resources	
rs17367504	1	11862778	MTHFR	YYYN		Y		Y	
rs871524	1	38411445	FHL3	NYYY		Y			
rs871524	1	38411445	SF3A3	NYYY		Y			
rs4660293	1	40028180	PABPC4	YYYN	Y	Y		Y	
rs6749447	2	169041386	STK39	YYYN	Y				
rs347591	3	11290122	ATG7	YYYN		Y			
rs319690	3	47927484	ZNF589	YYNY		Y			
rs12521868	5	131784393	SLC22A4	YYYN		Y			
rs1563788	6	43308363	CRIP3	YYYN	Y			Y	
rs10943605	6	79655477	PHIP	YYYN	Y	Y		Y	
rs4728142	7	128573967	IRF5	NYYY		Y	Y	Y	
rs4728142	7	128573967	TNPO3	YYYN			Y		
rs2898290	8	11433909	BLK	YYYN		Y			
rs2898290	8	11433909	FAM167A	NYYY		Y			
rs2898290	8	11433909	FDFT1	YYYN		Y			
rs2071518	8	120435812	NOV	YYYN		Y			
rs76452347	9	35906471	TPM2	YYYN					
rs10760117	9	123586737	MEGF9	YYYN		Y		Y	
rs4494250	10	96563757	HELLS	YYYN				Y	
rs11191548	10	104846178	NT5C2	YYYN	Y				
rs661348	11	1905292	TNNT3	NYYY		Y			
rs2649044	11	9763969	SBF2	YYYN					
rs2649044	11	9763969	SWAP70	YYYN	Y	Y		?	
rs7129220	11	10350538	ADM	YYYN				Y	
rs7103648	11	47461783	MYBPC3	YYYN					
rs3741378	11	65408937	CTSW	YYYN					
rs7302981	12	50537815	LIMA1	YYYN				Y	
rs7302981	12	50537815	ATF1	YYNY		Y			
rs1036477	15	48914926	FBN1	YNYY					
rs1378942	15	75077367	CSK	YYYN	Y	Y		Y	
rs1378942	15	75077367	MPI	NYYY		Y			
rs1378942	15	75077367	ULK3	YNYY		Y		Y	
rs12946454	17	43208121	NMT1	YYYN				Y	
rs2304130	19	19789528	GATAD2A	YYYN					
rs867186	20	33764554	EIF6	NYYY		Y			
rs6095241	20	47308798	PREX1	YYYN					
rs9306160	21	45107562	RRP1B	YNYY	Y	Y			
Signals of association of SNP genotype and gene expression in other nonblood tissues in GTEx and in kidney are also indicated. Blood data set order: (1) SABRe, (2) NESDA-NTR, (3) BIOS, and (4) GTEx (whole-blood). Top eQTL: top GWAS SNP is top eQTL SNP (or in high LD, r2&gt;0.9, with top eQTL SNP) in at least 1 data set. eQTL signal previously reported: Genes for which eQTL signals have been previously reported for that sentinel SNP.15,16,18 For full list, see Table S12 in the online-only Data Supplement. eQTL indicates expression quantitative trait loci; GWAS, genome-wide association studies; GTEx, genotype-tissue expression; and LD, linkage disequilibrium; and SABRe, Systems Approach to Biomarker Research in Cardiovascular Disease.

Novelty and Significance

What Is New?

The root origin of hypertension and, hence, blood pressure (BP) variability in the population remains unclear.

This study adds data to explain the genetic basis of BP variability and identifies genes likely active in BP-regulating pathways.

What Is Relevant?

The results are of relevance for scientists, clinicians, and pharmacologists interested in hypertension.

The BP loci and the BP genes identified constitute new leads for the understanding of BP pathogenesis and possibly therapeutic innovation.

Summary

Using 1000 Genomes Project–based imputation in 150 134 European ancestry and independent replication in a further 228 245 individuals, we contribute 8 replicated BP loci to the collection of loci currently known. Using these and previous data, 48 BP genes are identified for priority follow-up.

The online-only Data Supplement is available with this article at http://hyper.ahajournals.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.117.09438/-/DC1.

Author Contributions

Secondary Analyses

Design of secondary analyses: L.V. Wain, G.B. Ehret, M.J. Caulfield, H. Snieder, M.D. Tobin, R. Joehanes, A. Vaez, R. Jansen, A.V. Smith, J. Knight, P.F. O’Reilly, A.P. Morris, and C.P. Cabrera. Computation of secondary analysis: L.V. Wain, G.B. Ehret, A.P. Morris, A.M. Erzurumluoglu, T. Blake, L. Lin, R. Joehanes, A. Vaez, P.J. van der Most, R. Jansen, and C.P. Cabrera.

Discovery

WGHS: Study phenotyping, P.M. Ridker; Genotyping or analysis, D.I. Chasman and L.M. Rose; Study PI, D.I. Chasman and P.M. Ridker.

RS: Study phenotyping, G.C. Verwoert; Genotyping or analysis, G.C. Verwoert and A.G. Uitterlinden; Study PI, O.H. Franco, A. Hofman, and A.G. Uitterlinden.

NTR: Study phenotyping, E.J. de Geus and G. Willemsen; Genotyping or analysis: J.-J. Hottenga, E.J. de Geus, and G. Willemsen; Study PI, D.I. Boomsma and E.J. de Geus.

STR: Study phenotyping, E. Ingelsson; Genotyping or analysis, R.J. Strawbridge and M. Frånberg; Study PI, E. Ingelsson and A. Hamsten.

EGCUT: Genotyping or analysis, T. Esko; Study PI, A. Metspalu.

ARIC: Genotyping or analysis, D.E. Arking, A.C. Morrison, and P. Nandakumar; Study PI, A. Chakravarti.

FHS: Study phenotyping, D. Levy; Genotyping or analysis, S.-J. Hwang; Study PI: D. Levy.

MESA: Study phenotyping, J.I. Rotter; Genotyping or analysis, W. Palmas, X. Guo, J.I. Rotter, J. Yao; Study PI, W. Palmas.

B58C: Study phenotyping, D.P. Strachan; Genotyping or analysis, D.P. Strachan; Study PI, D.P. Strachan.

COLAUS: Study phenotyping, P. Vollenweider; Genotyping or analysis, M. Bochud and Z. Kutalik; Study PI, P. Vollenweider.

PROSPER: Study phenotyping, J.W. Jukema and D.J. Stott; Genotyping or analysis, S. Trompet and J. Deelen; Study PI, J.W. Jukema.

BHS: Study phenotyping, A. James; Genotyping or analysis, N. Shrine, J. Hui, and J. Beilby.

SHIP: Study phenotyping, M. Dörr; Genotyping or analysis, A. Teumer, M. Dörr, and U. Völker; Study PI, R. Rettig.

KORA S4: Genotyping or analysis, J.S. Ried; Study PI, A. Peters.

CHS: Study phenotyping, B.M. Psaty; Genotyping or analysis, J.C. Bis, K. Rice, and K.D. Taylor; Study PI, B.M. Psaty.

AGES-Reykjavik: Genotyping or analysis, A.V. Smith; Study PI, V. Gudnason, T.B. Harris, and L.J. Launer.

ERF: Study phenotyping, C.M. van Duijn and B.A. Oostra; Genotyping or analysis, N. Amin; Study PI, C.M. van Duijn and B.A. Oostra.

NESDA: Study phenotyping, B.W.J.H. Penninx; Genotyping or analysis, I.M. Nolte and Y. Milaneschi; Study PI, H. Snieder and B.W.J.H. Penninx.

YFS: Study phenotyping, T. Lehtimäki, M. Kähönen, and O.T. Raitakari; Genotyping or analysis, T. Lehtimäki, L.-P. Lyytikäinen, M. Kähönen, and O.T. Raitakari; Study PI, T. Lehtimäki, M. Kähönen, and O.T. Raitakari.

EPIC: Genotyping or analysis, N.J. Wareham; Study PI, J.H. Zhao.

ASPS: Study phenotyping, R. Schmidt; Genotyping or analysis, H. Schmidt, E. Hofer, Y. Saba, and R. Schmidt; Study PI, H. Schmidt and R. Schmidt.

ORCADES: Study phenotyping, J.F. Wilson, H. Campbell, and S. Wild; Genotyping or analysis, J.F. Wilson, P.K. Joshi, and S. Wild; Study PI, J.F. Wilson.

FINRISK (COROGENE_CTRL): Study phenotyping, P. Jousilahti; Genotyping or analysis, K. Kristiansson and A.P. Sarin; Study PI, M. Perola and P. Jousilahti.

INGI-VB: Study phenotyping, C.F. Sala; Genotyping or analysis, M. Traglia, C.M. Barbieri, and C.F. Sala; Study PI, D. Toniolo.

FINRISK_PREDICT_CVD: Study phenotyping, V. Salomaa and A.S. Havulinna; Study PI, V. Salomaa, A. Palotie, and S. Ripatti.

TRAILS: Study phenotyping, H. Riese; Genotyping or analysis, P.J. van der Most; Study PI, C.A. Hartman and A.J. Oldehinkel.

PROCARDIS: Study phenotyping, A. Goel; Genotyping or analysis, A. Goel; Study PI, H. Watkins, and M. Farrall.

HABC: Study phenotyping, Y. Liu and T.B. Harris; Genotyping or analysis, M.A. Nalls; Study PI, Y. Liu and T.B. Harris.

KORA S3: Study phenotyping, C. Gieger; Genotyping or analysis, S. Sõber, C. Gieger, and E. Org. Study PI, M. Laan.

INGI-FVG: Genotyping or analysis, D. Vuckovic, M. Brumat, and M. Cocca; Study PI, P. Gasparini.

Fenland: Study phenotyping, R.A. Scott, J. Luan, C. Langenberg, and N.J. Wareham; Genotyping or analysis, R.A. Scott, J. Luan, C. Langenberg, and N.J. Wareham; Study PI, R.A. Scott, C. Langenberg, and N.J. Wareham.

MICROS: Genotyping or analysis, A.A. Hicks, F. Del Greco M., and A. Saint Pierre; Study PI, F. Del Greco M. and P.P. Pramstaller.

HTO: Study phenotyping, B.D. Keavney; Genotyping or analysis, B.D. Keavney, K.L. Ayers, and C. Mamasoula; Study PI, B.D. Keavney and H.J. Cordell.

MIGEN: Study phenotyping, R. Elosua, J. Marrugat, S. Kathiresan, and D. Siscovick; Genotyping or analysis, R. Elosua, S. Kathiresan, and D. Siscovick; Study PI, S. Kathiresan.

ULSAM: Study phenotyping, V. Giedraitis and E. Ingelsson; Genotyping or analysis, A.P. Morris and A. Mahajan; Study PI, A.P. Morris, V. Giedraitis, and E. Ingelsson.

Cilento study: Study phenotyping, R. Sorice; Genotyping or analysis, D. Ruggiero, and T. Nutile; Study PI, M. Ciullo.

LBC1936: Study phenotyping, I.J. Deary and A.J. Gow; Genotyping or analysis, L.M. Lopez, G. Davies, and A.J. Gow; Study PI, I.J. Deary.

H2000_CTRL: Study phenotyping, T. Niiranen; Study PI, P. Knekt, A. Jula, and S. Koskinen.

NSPHS: Genotyping or analysis, S. Enroth and Å. Johansson; Study PI, U. Gyllensten.

FUSION: Genotyping or analysis, A.U. Jackson; Study PI, J. Tuomilehto, M. Boehnke, and F. Collins.

GRAPHIC: Study phenotyping, N.J. Samani, P.S. Braund, and M.D. Tobin. Genotyping or analysis: C.P. Nelson, P.S. Braund, and M.D. Tobin; Study PI, N.J. Samani.

CROATIA_Vis: Study phenotyping, I. Rudan; Genotyping or analysis, V. Vitart and J.E. Huffman; Study PI, V. Vitart and I. Rudan.

PIVUS: Study phenotyping, L. Lind and J. Sundström; Genotyping or analysis, C.M. Lindgren and A. Mahajan; Study PI, C.M. Lindgren, L. Lind, and J. Sundström.

LOLIPOP: Study phenotyping, J.S. Kooner and J.C. Chambers; Genotyping or analysis, J.S. Kooner, W. Zhang, J.C. Chambers, and B. Lehne; Study PI, J.S. Kooner and J.C. Chambers.

CROATIA_Korcula: Genotyping or analysis, C. Hayward and J. Marten; Study PI, C. Hayward and A.F. Wright.

INGI-CARL: Study phenotyping, G. Girotto; Genotyping or analysis, I. Gandin, A. Morgan, and A. Robino.

LBC1921: Study phenotyping, J.M. Starr and A. Pattie; Genotyping or analysis, J.M. Starr, S.E. Harris, D.C.M. Liewald, and A. Pattie; Study PI, J.M. Starr.

CROATIA_SPLIT: Study phenotyping, O. Polasek and I. Kolcic; Genotyping or analysis, O. Polasek and T. Zemunik; Study PI, O. Polasek.

BioMe (formerly IPM): Genotyping or analysis, Y. Lu; Study PI, R.J.F. Loos and E.P. Bottinger.

Replication

UKB-BP: Genotyping or analysis, H.R. Warren, M.R. Barnes, C.P. Cabrera, E. Evangelou, H. Gao, B. Mifsud, M. Ren, and I. Tzoulaki; Study PI, P. Elliott and M.J. Caulfield.

GoDARTS: Study phenotyping, C.N.A. Palmer and A.S.F. Doney; Genotyping or analysis, C.N.A. Palmer and N. Shah; Study PI, C.N.A. Palmer and A.D. Morris.

Lifelines: Study phenotyping: M.H. de Borst; Genotyping or analysis, M. Swertz; Study PI, P. van der Harst.

TwinsUK: Study phenotyping, C. Menni; Genotyping or analysis, M. Mangino and C. Menni; Study PI, T.D. Spector.

Airwave Health Monitoring Study: Genotyping or analysis, A.C. Vergnaud, E. Evangelou, H. Gao, and I. Tzoulaki; Study PI, E. Evangelou.

The UK Household Longitudinal Study (UKHLS): Genotyping or analysis, B.P. Prins; Study PI, E. Zeggini.

Generation Scotland (GS:SFHS): Study phenotyping, S. Padmanabhan; Genotyping or analysis, C. Hayward and A. Campbell.

JUPITER: Study phenotyping, P.M. Ridker; Genotyping or analysis, D.I. Chasman, L.M. Rose, F. Giulianini, and P.M. Ridker; Study PI, D.I. Chasman and P.M. Ridker.

NEO: Study phenotyping, R. de Mutsert; Genotyping or analysis, D.O. Mook-Kanamori and R. Li-Gao; Study PI, R. de Mutsert.

Three City-Dijon: Study phenotyping, S. Debette and C. Tzourio; Genotyping or analysis, G. Chauhan; Study PI, S. Debette and C. Tzourio.

ASCOT-UK: Study phenotyping: P. Sever and N. Poulter; Genotyping or analysis, P.B. Munroe and H.R. Warren; Study PI, P.B. Munroe, P. Sever, N. Poulter, and M.J. Caulfield.

ASCOT-SC: Study phenotyping, S. Thom and M.J. Caulfield; Genotyping or analysis, D.C. Shields, A. Stanton, H.R. Warren, and P.B. Munroe; Study PI, S. Thom, M.J. Caulfield, and P.B. Munroe.

Hunter Community Study: Study phenotyping, R. Scott; Genotyping or analysis, C. Oldmeadow and E.G. Holliday; Study PI, J. Attia.

GAPP: Study phenotyping, D. Conen; Genotyping or analysis, D. Conen, S. Thériault, and G. Paré; Study PI, D. Conen.

BRIGHT: Study phenotyping, M. Brown and J. Connell; Genotyping or analysis, M. Farrall, P.B. Munroe, and H.R. Warren; Study PI, M. Brown, J. Connell, M. Farrall, P.B. Munroe, and M.J. Caulfield.

Resources for Secondary Analyses

eQTL NESDA NTR: Design of secondary analysis, R. Jansen; Computation of secondary analysis, D.I. Boomsma, R. Jansen, and B.W.J.H. Penninx; Study PI, D.I. Boomsma and B.W.J.H. Penninx.

eQTL kidney: Study phenotyping, J.J. Damman and M.A. Seelen; Genotyping or analysis, P.J. van der Most; Study PI, H. Snieder.

eQTL BIOS: Design of secondary analysis, R. Jansen; Computation of secondary analysis, R. Jansen; Study PI, R. Jansen.

SABRe: Study phenotyping, Y. Demirkale, P.J. Munson, and Q.T. Nguyen; Genotyping or analysis, R. Joehanes; Design of secondary analysis, D. Levy; Study PI, D. Levy.

ICBP-Steering Committee

G. Abecasis, M.J. Caulfield, A. Chakravarti, D.I. Chasman, G.B. Ehret, P. Elliott, T. Ferreira, M.-R. Jarvelin, A.D. Johnson, M. Larson, D. Levy, A.P. Morris, P.B. Munroe, C. Newton-Cheh, P.F. O’Reilly, W. Palmas, B.M. Psaty, K. Rice, A.V. Smith, H. Snieder, M.D. Tobin, C.M. van Duijn, L.V. Wain, H.R. Warren.

Disclosures

We declare competing financial interests (see corresponding section in the online-only Data Supplement).


1 Nelson MR Tipney H Painter JL Shen J Nicoletti P Shen Y Floratos A Sham PC Li MJ Wang J Cardon LR Whittaker JC Sanseau P The support of human genetic evidence for approved drug indications Nat Genet 2015 47 856 860 10.1038/ng.3314 26121088
2 Mancia G Fagard R Narkiewicz K 2013 ESH/ESC guidelines for the management of arterial hypertension: the Task Force for the Management of Arterial Hypertension of the European Society of Hypertension (ESH) and of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) Eur Heart J 2013 34 2159 2219 10.1093/eurheartj/eht151 23771844
3 Ehret GB Munroe PB Rice KM Genetic variants in novel pathways influence blood pressure and cardiovascular disease risk Nature 2011 478 103 109 21909115
4 Ganesh SK Chasman DI Larson MG Global Blood Pressure Genetics Consortium. Effects of long-term averaging of quantitative blood pressure traits on the detection of genetic associations Am J Hum Genet 2014 95 49 65 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.06.002 24975945
5 Johnson AD Newton-Cheh C Chasman DI Cohorts for Heart and Aging Research in Genomic Epidemiology Consortium; Global BPgen Consortium; Women’s Genome Health Study. Association of hypertension drug target genes with blood pressure and hypertension in 86,588 individuals Hypertension 2011 57 903 910 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.110.158667 21444836
6 Johnson T Gaunt TR Newhouse SJ Cardiogenics Consortium; Global BPgen Consortium. Blood pressure loci identified with a gene-centric array Am J Hum Genet 2011 89 688 700 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.10.013 22100073
7 Kato N Takeuchi F Tabara Y Meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies identifies common variants associated with blood pressure variation in east Asians Nat Genet 2011 43 531 538 10.1038/ng.834 21572416
8 Levy D Ehret GB Rice K Genome-wide association study of blood pressure and hypertension Nat Genet 2009 41 677 687 10.1038/ng.384 19430479
9 Newton-Cheh C Johnson T Gateva V Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium. Genome-wide association study identifies eight loci associated with blood pressure Nat Genet 2009 41 666 676 10.1038/ng.361 19430483
10 Newton-Cheh C Larson MG Vasan RS Association of common variants in NPPA and NPPB with circulating natriuretic peptides and blood pressure Nat Genet 2009 41 348 353 10.1038/ng.328 19219041
11 Padmanabhan S Melander O Johnson T Global BPgen Consortium. Genome-wide association study of blood pressure extremes identifies variant near UMOD associated with hypertension PLoS Genet 2010 6 e1001177 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001177 21082022
12 Simino J Shi G Bis JC LifeLines Cohort Study. Gene-age interactions in blood pressure regulation: a large-scale investigation with the CHARGE, Global BPgen, and ICBP Consortia Am J Hum Genet 2014 95 24 38 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.05.010 24954895
13 Tragante V Barnes MR Ganesh SK Gene-centric meta-analysis in 87,736 individuals of European ancestry identifies multiple blood-pressure-related loci Am J Hum Genet 2014 94 349 360 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.12.016 24560520
14 Wain LV Verwoert GC O’Reilly PF LifeLines Cohort Study; EchoGen consortium; AortaGen Consortium; CHARGE Consortium Heart Failure Working Group; KidneyGen consortium; CKDGen consortium; Cardiogenics consortium; CardioGram. Genome-wide association study identifies six new loci influencing pulse pressure and mean arterial pressure Nat Genet 2011 43 1005 1011 10.1038/ng.922 21909110
15 Ehret GB Ferreira T Chasman DI CHARGE-EchoGen Consortium; CHARGE-HF Consortium; Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium. The genetics of blood pressure regulation and its target organs from association studies in 342,415 individuals Nat Genet 2016 48 1171 1184 10.1038/ng.3667 27618452
16 Liu C Kraja AT Smith JA CHD Exome+ Consortium; ExomeBP Consortium; GoT2DGenes Consortium; T2D-GENES Consortium; Myocardial Infarction Genetics and CARDIoGRAM Exome Consortia; CKDGen Consortium. Meta-analysis identifies common and rare variants influencing blood pressure and overlapping with metabolic trait loci Nat Genet 2016 48 1162 1170 10.1038/ng.3660 27618448
17 Hoffmann TJ Ehret GB Nandakumar P Ranatunga D Schaefer C Kwok PY Iribarren C Chakravarti A Risch N Genome-wide association analyses using electronic health records identify new loci influencing blood pressure variation Nat Genet 2017 49 54 64 10.1038/ng.3715 27841878
18 Surendran P Drenos F Young R CHARGE-Heart Failure Consortium; EchoGen Consortium; METASTROKE Consortium; GIANT Consortium; EPIC-InterAct Consortium; Lifelines Cohort Study; Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium; Understanding Society Scientific Group; EPIC-CVD Consortium; CHARGE+ Exome Chip Blood Pressure Consortium; T2DGENES Consortium; GoT2DGenes Consortium; ExomeBP Consortium; CHD Exome+ Consortium. Trans-ancestry meta-analyses identify rare and common variants associated with blood pressure and hypertension Nat Genet 2016 48 1151 1161 10.1038/ng.3654 27618447
19 Warren HR Evangelou E Cabrera CP International Consortium of Blood Pressure (ICBP) 1000G Analyses; BIOS Consortium; Lifelines Cohort Study; Understanding Society Scientific group; CHD Exome+ Consortium; ExomeBP Consortium; T2D-GENES Consortium; GoT2DGenes Consortium; Cohorts for Heart and Ageing Research in Genome Epidemiology (CHARGE) BP Exome Consortium; International Genomics of Blood Pressure (iGEN-BP) Consortium; UK Biobank CardioMetabolic Consortium BP working group. Genome-wide association analysis identifies novel blood pressure loci and offers biological insights into cardiovascular risk Nat Genet 2017 49 403 415 10.1038/ng.3768 28135244
20 Safar ME Nilsson PM Blacher J Mimran A Pulse pressure, arterial stiffness, and end-organ damage Curr Hypertens Rep 2012 14 339 344 10.1007/s11906-012-0272-9 22555981
21 Tobin MD Sheehan NA Scurrah KJ Burton PR Adjusting for treatment effects in studies of quantitative traits: antihypertensive therapy and systolic blood pressure Stat Med 2005 24 2911 2935 10.1002/sim.2165 16152135
22 Abecasis GR Auton A Brooks LD DePristo MA Durbin RM Handsaker RE Kang HM Marth GT McVean GA 1000 Genomes Project Consortium. An integrated map of genetic variation from 1,092 human genomes Nature 2012 491 56 65 10.1038/nature11632 23128226
23 Yang J Lee SH Goddard ME Visscher PM GCTA: a tool for genome-wide complex trait analysis Am J Hum Genet 2011 88 76 82 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.11.011 21167468
24 Kato N Loh M Takeuchi F BIOS-consortium; CARDIo GRAMplusCD; LifeLines Cohort Study; InterAct Consortium. Trans-ancestry genome-wide association study identifies 12 genetic loci influencing blood pressure and implicates a role for DNA methylation Nat Genet 2015 47 1282 1293 10.1038/ng.3405 26390057
25 GTEx Consortium Human genomics. The genotype-tissue expression (gtex) pilot analysis: Multitissue gene regulation in humans Science 2015 348 648 660 10.1126/science.1262110 25954001
26 Damman J Bloks VW Daha MR van der Most PJ Sanjabi B van der Vlies P Snieder H Ploeg RJ Krikke C Leuvenink HG Seelen MA Hypoxia and complement-and-coagulation pathways in the deceased organ donor as the major target for intervention to improve renal allograft outcome Transplantation 2015 99 1293 1300 10.1097/TP.0000000000000500 25427168
27 Li H Tabix: fast retrieval of sequence features from generic TAB-delimited files Bioinformatics 2011 27 718 719 10.1093/bioinformatics/btq671 21208982
28 Purcell S Neale B Todd-Brown K Thomas L Ferreira MA Bender D Maller J Sklar P de Bakker PI Daly MJ Sham PC PLINK: a tool set for whole-genome association and population-based linkage analyses Am J Hum Genet 2007 81 559 575 10.1086/519795 17701901
29 Wang K Li M Hakonarson H ANNOVAR: functional annotation of genetic variants from high-throughput sequencing data Nucleic Acids Res 2010 38 e164 10.1093/nar/gkq603 20601685
30 Kamburov A Stelzl U Lehrach H Herwig R The ConsensusPathDB interaction database: 2013 update Nucleic Acids Res 2013 41 database issue D793 D800 10.1093/nar/gks1055 23143270
31 Vaez A Jansen R Prins BP Hottenga JJ de Geus EJ Boomsma DI Penninx BW Nolte IM Snieder H Alizadeh BZ In silico post genome-wide association studies analysis of C-reactive protein loci suggests an important role for interferons Circ Cardiovasc Genet 2015 8 487 497 10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.114.000714 25752597
32 Saito R Smoot ME Ono K Ruscheinski J Wang PL Lotia S Pico AR Bader GD Ideker T A travel guide to Cytoscape plugins Nat Methods 2012 9 1069 1076 10.1038/nmeth.2212 23132118
33 Mostafavi S Ray D Warde-Farley D Grouios C Morris Q GeneMANIA: a real-time multiple association network integration algorithm for predicting gene function Genome Biol 2008 9 suppl 1 S4 10.1186/gb-2008-9-s1-s4
34 Montojo J Zuberi K Rodriguez H Kazi F Wright G Donaldson SL Morris Q Bader GD GeneMANIA Cytoscape plugin: fast gene function predictions on the desktop Bioinformatics 2010 26 2927 2928 10.1093/bioinformatics/btq562 20926419
35 Ashburner M Ball CA Blake JA Gene ontology: tool for the unification of biology. The Gene Ontology Consortium Nat Genet 2000 25 25 29 10.1038/75556 10802651
36 Dunham I Kulesha E Iotchkova V Morganella S Birney E Forge: A tool to discover cell specific enrichments of gwas associated snps in regulatory regions BioRxiv 2014 10.1101/013045
37 Wagner AH Coffman AC Ainscough BJ Spies NC Skidmore ZL Campbell KM Krysiak K Pan D McMichael JF Eldred JM Walker JR Wilson RK Mardis ER Griffith M Griffith OL DGIdb 2.0: mining clinically relevant drug-gene interactions Nucleic Acids Res 2016 44 D1 D1036 D1044 10.1093/nar/gkv1165 26531824
38 Skol AD Scott LJ Abecasis GR Boehnke M Optimal designs for two-stage genome-wide association studies Genet Epidemiol 2007 31 776 788 10.1002/gepi.20240 17549752
39 Trevisan M Ostrow D Cooper R Liu K Sparks S Okonek A Stevens E Marquardt J Stamler J Abnormal red blood cell ion transport and hypertension. The People’s Gas Company study Hypertension 1983 5 363 367 6840823
40 Wright FA Sullivan PF Brooks AI Heritability and genomics of gene expression in peripheral blood Nat Genet 2014 46 430 437 10.1038/ng.2951 24728292
41 Jansen R Batista S Brooks AI Sex differences in the human peripheral blood transcriptome BMC Genomics 2014 15 33 10.1186/1471-2164-15-33 24438232
42 Zhernakova DV Deelen P Vermaat M Identification of context-dependent expression quantitative trait loci in whole blood Nat Genet 2017 49 139 145 10.1038/ng.3737 27918533
43 Marusugi K Nakano K Sasaki H Kimura J Yanobu-Takanashi R Okamura T Sasaki N Functional validation of tensin2 SH2-PTB domain by CRISPR/Cas9-mediated genome editing J Vet Med Sci 2016 78 1413 1420 10.1292/jvms.16-0205 27246398
44 Jeggle P Smith ES Stewart AP Haerteis S Korbmacher C Edwardson JM Atomic force microscopy imaging reveals the formation of ASIC/ENaC cross-clade ion channels Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2015 464 38 44 10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.05.091 26032502
45 Carrier L Mearini G Stathopoulou K Cuello F Cardiac myosin-binding protein C (MYBPC3) in cardiac pathophysiology Gene 2015 573 188 197 10.1016/j.gene.2015.09.008 26358504
