LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


8004872
1436
Behav Brain Res
Behav. Brain Res.
Behavioural brain research
0166-4328
1872-7549

27163751
5099115
10.1016/j.bbr.2016.05.008
NIHMS788896
Article
Molecular and cellular aspects of age-related cognitive decline and Alzheimer’s disease
Hullinger Rikki a
Puglielli Luigi abcd*
a Department of Medicine, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53705, USA
b Department of Neuroscience, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53705, USA
c Wisconsin Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53705, USA
d Geriatric Research Education Clinical Center, VA Medical Center, Madison, WI 53705, USA
* Corresponding author at: Department of Medicine, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53705, USA. lp1@medicine.wisc.edu (L. Puglielli)
1 6 2016
07 5 2016
30 3 2017
30 3 2018
322 Pt B 191205
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
As the population of people aged 60 or older continues to rise, it has become increasingly important to understand the molecular basis underlying age-related cognitive decline. In fact, a better understanding of aging biology will help us identify ways to maintain high levels of cognitive functioning throughout the aging process. Many cellular and molecular aspects of brain aging are shared with other organ systems; however, certain age-related changes are unique to the nervous system due to its structural, cellular and molecular complexity. Importantly, the brain appears to show differential changes throughout the aging process, with certain regions (e.g. frontal and temporal regions) being more vulnerable than others (e.g. brain stem). Within the medial temporal lobe, the hippocampus is especially susceptible to age-related changes. The important role of the hippocampus in age-related cognitive decline and in vulnerability to disease processes such as Alzheimer’s disease has prompted this review, which will focus on the complexity of changes that characterize aging, and on the molecular connections that exist between normal aging and Alzheimer’s disease. Finally, it will discuss behavioral interventions and emerging insights for promoting healthy cognitive aging.

Graphical abstract

Aging
Alzheimer’s disease
Cognition
Hippocampus
Molecular mechanisms

1. Introduction

In almost every country around the globe, the proportion of people aged 60 and older is growing faster than any other age group [1]. In 2013, persons 65 years or older represented 14.1% of the U.S. population, or about one in every seven Americans; by 2040, older persons are expected to represent 21.7% of the population [2] This growth represents a demand to continue our studies on the molecular mechanisms of aging in order to understand the basis of disease vulnerability and improve the quality of life in older individuals. One area of vast importance for our society is that of cognitive aging. Normal aging is most typically accompanied by slower processing speed and changes to memory and executive functions. Aging is also the most important risk factor for mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and Alzheimer’s disease (AD). MCI is defined as problems with memory, language, thinking, and judgment that are serious enough to be recognized by the patient, but not serious enough to interfere with daily life. A diagnosis of dementia instead is made when cognitive and behavioral problems interfere with daily activities. The incidence of MCI and dementia has risen over the course of the past decade, with an estimated 75% of people 60 and older expected to have dementia by 2050 [1,3]. To optimize healthy cognitive aging and deal with the increasing burden of age-associated diseases that affect cognitive functions it is important to understand the molecular mechanisms underlying aging and cognitive decline.

Many cellular and molecular aspects of brain aging are shared with other organ systems (e.g., oxidative stress, mitochondria dysfunction; dysfunctional protein homeostasis, etc.). However, due to its unique molecular and structural complexity, there are age-related changes that are only observed in the brain. The most prominent changes of the aging brain are summarized in Table 1.

The hippocampus has been at the forefront of “memory research” for the last sixty years. It integrates sensory, emotional and cognitive components of many memory inputs coming from the entorhinal cortex while performing fundamental activities related to formation, storage, and retrieval of episodic memories [4–7]. The hippocampus is particularly susceptible to detrimental age-related changes in function [8,9]. In this review we will focus on events that occur within the hippocampus and that are associated with cognitive decline over the aging process. We will also briefly introduce AD neuropathology and discuss signaling pathways that regulate the progression of aging in mammals and show how they impact on the pathogenesis and progression of AD. The fact that common pathways can regulate both aging and AD neuropathology demonstrates that a clear understanding of aging biology is likely to provide answers for development of interventions and treatments to offset and correct cognitive decline and AD.

Due to space limitations, we had to refrain from a more comprehensive analysis of available research. For example, we will not discuss the growing body of research focused on proteostasis and metabolism. These processes play fundamental roles in the brain, and investigation of their contribution to aging and AD is rapidly expanding [10–18]. Indeed, there is compelling evidence that brain aging is accompanied by changes in protein homeostasis that lead to accumulation of toxic protein aggregates [10–13]. Therefore, dissection of the molecular mechanisms that regulate proteostasis will help us prevent age-associated diseases that are characterized by the accumulation of toxic protein aggregates (i.e., AD, Parkinson’s disease, Lewy body dementia, frontotemporal dementia) [10–13]. Similarly, new research has revealed that the brain is metabolically very active. Although many pathways are shared with peripheral tissues, the brain does display unique metabolic features. Topics of high interest that are influenced as a function of age and that impact on different neurological diseases include glucose uptake, acetyl-CoA biosynthesis and flux, metabolism of fatty acids, sphingomyelins and major glycosphingolipids, and mitochondria energy production rates [14–18]. The integration of knowledge that is obtained by dissecting the above highly interconnected metabolic pathways will likely give us information that will impact on several age-associated diseases.

Another important area of research that we will not discuss in this review is the role of aging in regulating neurotrophin signaling. The expression levels of the ligands (neurotrophins) and associated receptors (neurotrophin receptors) change as a function of age, resulting in different signaling pathways being activated. Although much has been learned on the underlying mechanisms, we still need to gather more biochemical information and determine the different layers of cross-talk between neurotrophin signaling pathways if we wish identify possible therapeutic strategies.

2. The hippocampus

The hippocampus is part of the limbic system, a series of highly interconnected structures involved in a variety of functions, which include emotion, behavior, motivation, memory, and olfaction. In humans, it is found within the medial temporal lobe while in rodents it is found just beneath the neocortex. It consists of four Cornu Ammonis (CA) areas, CA1, CA2, CA3, and CA4 [19]. In the literature, the hippocampus is frequently associated with the dentate gyrus and the subiculum; together, these three structures are referred to as the hippocampal formation. Three major neuronal pathways relay information within the hippocampal formation: the perforant pathway projects from the entorhinal cortex to the dentate gyrus, area CA3, and area CA1; the mossy fiber pathway projects from the dentate gyrus to area CA3; the Schaffer collateral pathway projects from CA3 to area CA1 [4,7]. Hippocampal output is also sent back from CA1 to the entorhinal cortex, forming an axonal loop [20]. Recent anatomical tracing studies have also revealed complex connectivity within the hippocampus and hippocampal formation with multiple processing and feedback circuits [4,7].

As mentioned above, the hippocampus has been at the forefront of memory research. The identification of complex circuitry connecting to the entorhinal cortex, the characterization of hippocampal-dependent long-term potentiation, and, more recently, the identification of place cells, head direction cells, and grid cells have further consolidated the role of this structure in memory formation [4–6,21]. Importantly, the entorhinal cortex receives inputs from spatial processing areas, such as the post-subiculum and the retrosplenial cortex, and high-order areas, such as the perirhinal cortex [4–7]. Therefore, in addition to performing fundamental activities related to formation, storage, and retrieval of episodic memories, the hippocampus also integrates sensory, emotional and cognitive components of memory inputs [4–7].

3. Behavioral assays of hippocampal decline

Studies from humans, non-human primates, and rodents reveal age related changes in cognition across many species. In rodents, some aged animals develop severe cognitive impairments whereas others retain normal cognitive abilities [22–24]. In particular, hippocampal-dependent tasks, such as spatial memory, appear to be significantly affected. Performance on spatial navigation tasks as well as the ability to quickly encode changing environments is also affected [8,24].

Several behavioral assays have been developed to assess spatial learning and memory in rodents. Some of them are briefly described below. The Morris water maze is perhaps the most commonly employed measure of hippocampal-dependent spatial memory formation and retention in the rodent. In this procedure, the animals are placed in a large pool of water and trained to use visual cues around the room to locate a platform hidden from view within the pool. It has been established that performance on the Morris water maze declines with age for both rats and mice [8,23–27].

The Barnes circular platform task is another commonly used hippocampal-dependent test of spatial learning and memory. In this task, rodents learn which of 18 holes lead to a dark escape tunnel. Aged rats and mice are impaired in learning the location of the tunnel, and demonstrate difficulties retaining the memory of the location. Furthermore, when the location of the escape tunnel is changed they struggle to learn the new location [8,28–30].

Spatial working memory can be tested with the eight-arm radial maze, and the similar radial arm water maze. In these tasks, rewards are available at the end of arms and animals must learn which arms lead to specific rewards. Numerous studies have demonstrated that aged rodents require significantly more trials to learn the location of rewards, and make more errors of spatial working memory than adult or young counterparts [31,32].

In the object recognition memory task, rodents are exposed to two identical objects in the first training session, and one of the objects is replaced with a novel object in the second training session. The amount of time spent investigating the novel vs familiar object is recorded. The task takes advantage of rodents’ innate preference for novelty, and tests the ability to discriminate between novel and familiar objects. Object recognition memory also appears to be deficient in aged rodents [33,34].

Contextual fear conditioning is another frequently used hippocampal-based test. It was developed by pairing a footshock with a cue such as a light or a tone. When exposed to the same context (location) after the shock, the animal will exhibit a startle response, otherwise known as freezing behavior, which is indicative of fear. Aged animals tend to display significant deficits in this type of conditioning [35,36].

In conclusion, a series of different and independent behavioral tests show significant decline of hippocampal-dependent functions with age. A more severe decline is observed in certain AD mouse models (discussed later).

4. Synaptic plasticity and cognition

Synaptic plasticity, or the ability of the brain to reorganize, develop, and prune neural pathways, is essential for the development and maintenance of memories [37,38]. Two key components of synaptic plasticity, which underlie learning and memory formation are long term potentiation (LTP) and long term depression (LTD). Both LTP and LTD are typically recorded in isolated hippocampal slices. LTP, which involves a rapid influx of calcium into the cell, leads to the enhancement of cell excitability by the activation of intracellular signaling cascades that increase protein transcription, translation, and the insertion of new receptors into the cell membrane [39–42]. LTD has the opposite effect, modulating transcription, translation, and the induction of receptors back into the cell, which leads to decreased cell excitability [43–46]. It is commonly believed that LTP and LTD are the cellular correlates of learning and memory [37,38,47–51]. Detailed information of the different cell surface receptors and down-stream signaling cascades that regulate LTP and LTD can be obtained elsewhere [8,42,52–61].

Interestingly, robust, high intensity stimulation protocols do not reveal differences in LTP between aged and young rats [8,62–64]. In contrast, stimulation paradigms with fewer stimuli or lower amplitude currents reveal that aged rats have deficits in LTP induction in CA1 and in the dentate gyrus [62–64]. Studies in rats and mice have also shown that aged animals display deficits in LTP maintenance and that the durability of LTP correlates with performance in hippocampal dependent tasks [65–67]. Furthermore, LTP is reduced in the hippocampus of aged rats that demonstrate cognitive impairments relative to aged unimpaired rats [68,69]. Studies have also demonstrated that aged impaired rodents are more susceptible to LTD. Interestingly, the stimulus threshold for the induction of LTD appears to be lower in the aged animal, perhaps making it easier to erase memories [70,71]. How this specific feature impacts on the reduced ability to encode new memory of events and facts that is typicaly observed in old individuals remains to be determined.

5. Changes in the aging hippocampus

5.1. Synapse structure

In addition to age-related alterations in hippocampal LTP and LTD, several studies have indicated that changes in synaptic function are accompanied by age-dependent changes in synapse structure. Most studies indicate that aging does not entail a substantial loss of total neurons in the hippocampus or the prefrontal cortex [72]. However, several studies indicate that neurogenesis decreases as a function of age [73,74]. In addition to decreased neurogenesis, evidence suggests that aging is accompanied by the loss of synapses. The extent of synaptic loss correlates with the severity of learning impairment, supporting the notion that the loss of hippocampal synapses directly contributes to age-related cognitive impairment [75–77]. The synaptic loss observed in the hippocampus of aged rats may be due to the loss of both presynaptic [78] and postsynaptic terminals [79]. Presynaptic terminals may be single-synapse boutons, multiple-synapse boutons, or boutons that do not make synaptic contacts (nonsynaptic boutons) [80]. Importantly, hippocampal-dependent associative learning is accompanied by selective synaptogenesis that results in formation of multiple-synapse boutons [81]. This process has been linked to preservation of input specificity during interneuronal spread of LTP and, ultimately, to successful learning under hippocampal-dependent paradigms [82]. Studies using electron microscopy have revealed age-related changes in the type of terminals formed. Specifically, aged female monkeys (Rhesus macaque) with memory impairment have fewer multiple-synapse boutons and twice as many nonsynaptic boutons in the dentate gyrus [80,83]. Finally, aged rodents and monkeys also display significant loss of postsynaptic spines in the hippocampus and cortex [84,85], associated with reduced cognitive performance [75,86].

5.2. Calcium conductance

Despite these changes in synapse structure, the basic properties of the cell membrane such as resting potential, input resistance, amplitude and duration of action potentials, etc. are unchanged in aging rodents [8]. However, several studies have revealed changes in calcium transmission across the membrane as a function of age. The influx of calcium is the final step in synaptic transmission, which triggers LTP or LTD. Therefore, changes in calcium conductance across the cell membrane could have significant effects on synaptic plasticity in aged animals. Aged rats display an increased density of L-type Ca++ channels in CA1 pyramidal cells, leading to increased L-type Ca++ currents [87,88]. Performance on the Morris water maze was inversely related to the density of L-type calcium channels, demonstrating that this change has significant downstream effects on learning and memory [88]. In addition, CA1 pyramidal cells from aged rodents show an increased duration of calcium-mediated action potentials [89,90]. The inward flux of calcium in response to an action potential activates a calcium mediated inward potassium current. The potassium channels are slower to open and close than calcium channels, which leads to a temporary after-hyperpolarization (AHP) of the cell following an action potential. This phenomenon is increased in aged rodents and rabbits, leading to less frequent firing of action potentials in response to a prolonged depolarizing current [91–93]. Subsequent studies demonstrated that these age-related deficits were eliminated when slices were bathed in low Ca++ artificial cerebrospinal fluid (ACSF), or when the membrane permeable calcium chelator 1,2-bis(2-aminophenoxy)ethane-N,N,N′,N′-tetraacetic acid tetrakis(acetoxymethyl ester) (BAPTA-AM) was added to the ACSF prior to stimulation [94,95]. In addition, when the L-type calcium channel agonist Bay K8644 was added to the ACSF, slices from adult (unimpaired) animals demonstrated increased AHP and subsequent impairments in frequency potentiation [96]. Several studies have also examined the relationship between altered calcium transmission and the aberrant LTD seen in aged animals. As discussed previously, aged rats demonstrate increased vulnerability to LTD and have a lower LTD induction threshold than adult rats. This deficit is eliminated when slices are bathed in low Ca++ ACSF, whereas bathing slices from adult rats in high calcium ACSF increases susceptibility to LTD [71,97]. Taken together, these data demonstrate that age-related changes in calcium transmission underly detrimental changes in synaptic plasticity and may partially explain the deficits in plasticity seen over the course of aging.

5.3. mGluRs

In addition to calcium transmission, it has been proposed that changes in activity and expression of metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs) may partially explain age related cognitive decline. mGluRs are a family of group C G-protein-coupled receptors that participate in the modulation of synaptic transmission and neuronal excitability within the central nervous system. They bind glutamate on their extracellular domain and transmit signals to intracellular signaling partners (see Fig. 1). The mGluR family includes eight different members (referred to as mGluR1 to mGluR8) clustered into three groups, group I, II and III. Mice lacking mGluR5 show impaired learning on the Morris water maze and contextual fear conditioning tasks [98], and display exacerbated impairments in a reversal learning paradigm of the maze [99]. Cognitive performance in aged rodents can be rescued by positive allosteric modulators of mGluR5, whereas mGluR5 antagonists have the opposite effect [100–103]. Finally, aged rats that demonstrate superior memories have higher levels of mGluR5 in the post synaptic density than aged rats with learning and memory deficits [102].

Whereas young rats rely on N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor-dependent mechanisms for LTP and LTD, successful cognitive aging appears to be associated with a transition to NMDA receptor-independent forms of LTP. This includes mGluR-dependent and voltage-dependent calcium channel (VDCC)-dependent LTP [51,101,104]. Successful cognitive aging has also been correlated with a transition to mGluR-dependent LTD [103,105]. Taken together, these results provide compeling evidence that mGluRs are essential for synaptic plasticity and memory performance in aged animals. Downstream signaling cascades are discussed in the next chapters (see also Fig. 1).

5.4. Intracellular signaling cascades

The inward flux of calcium following an action potential triggers various intracellular signaling cascades that lead to global changes in cellular activity. Differential calcium conductance in aged impaired animals will mount a cellular response to synaptic input that may inappropriately activate intracellular signaling pathways, thus contributing to synaptic dysfunction and cognitive impairment in the aged animal. Several of these cascades (discussed below) have been proven to be essential for LTP/LTD, learning, and memory to occur and, therefore, are attractive targets to ameliorate age-related cognitive decline (see Fig. 1).

PKC

Protein kinase C (PKC) is a large family of serine/threonine kinases that are highly expressed in the brain. A number of these are already known to play an essential role in synaptic plasticity, learning, and memory [106–108]. One example is the conventional PKC gamma, which is highly expressed in hippocampal neurons and appears to be required for the regulation of synaptic plasticity downstream of ionotropic and metabotropic glutamate receptors [109–113] (see Fig. 1). In addition to this role in synaptic plasticity, PKC is known to be essential for learning and memory. Training in a spatial memory task has been shown to increase expression of PKC gamma [114]. Furthermore, PKC activity is reduced in aged rats compared to middle-aged and young counterparts [115]. PKC activity has also been linked to individual differences in cognitive aging: increased activation of PKC promotes successful cognitive aging whereas animals with diminished PKC activity demonstrate cognitive impairments [102,116,117]. Additionally, PKC activators improve spatial learning [118], whereas PKC inhibitors impair performance on spatial tasks [119]. The activation of PKC in small groups of hippocampal or cortical neurons has been shown to improve the performance of aged rats in the Morris water maze [108]. Finally, PKC gamma activity may protect against neurodegeneration, promote synaptogenesis, and increase neuronal interconnections [120], making PKC an attractive target for therapeutics against age-related cognitive decline.

ERK

The extracellular signal related kinase (ERK), a subclass of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs), is an important regulator of transcription, translation, and receptor trafficking [121–123]. The activation of group I mGluRs leads to the phosphorylation of ERK, activating the kinase pathway and inducing subsequent phosphorylation of several downstream targets [124,125] (see Fig. 1). Activation of ERK by phosphorylation (pERK) induces p90 ribosomal S6 kinase 1 (RSK1) to translocate to the nucleus and phosphorylate transcription factors such as cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) and ETS domain-containing protein 1 (Elk1), which regulate transcription [126,127]. mGluR induced activation of the ERK pathway can also directly regulate protein translation through activation of MAP kinase interacting kinase 1 (Mnk1) and subsequent formation of the eukaryotic initiation factor 4F complex (eIF4F) [128,129], or through the phosphorylation of S6 Kinase (S6K) [130].

It has been demonstrated that activation of ERK is vital for the expression of LTP (see Fig. 1). Inhibitors of ERK activation lead to suppression of hippocampal LTP [131,132] and LTP induction has consistently been shown to lead to phosphorylation of ERK in the dentate gyrus [126,131]. ERK activation is also important for formation of long term memories, specifically in tasks that are known to be hippocampal dependent such as the Morris water maze [84,133,134]. ERK is also known to be important for LTD. Application of dihydroxyphenyglycine (DHPG), an agonist of group I mGluRs, to hippocampal slices causes LTD, hereby referred to as DHPG-LTD; this is accompanied by a robust phosphorylation of ERK and inhibitors that disrupt activation of the ERK pathway significantly reduce DHPG-LTD [135]. Furthermore, selective activation of mGluR5 enhances phosphorylation of ERK1/2 in striatal neurons, and mGluR5 mediated ERK1/2 phosphorylation is almost completely eliminated by disrupting the interactions of mGluR5 and the scaffolding protein Homer1b/c (see later) [136]. The phosphorylation of ERK has been linked to successful cognitive aging. Aged animals demonstrate diminished levels of pERK relative to their young counterparts and pERK levels correlate with performance in the Morris water maze. Additionally, aged rats that demonstrate superior cognitive abilities have elevated pERK levels within the hippocampus compared to aged animals with inferior learning and memory [102].

PI3K-Akt-mTOR

The PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway has emerged as essential for learning and memory and synaptic plasticity (see Fig. 1). In this pathway, activation of mGluRs leads to dissociation of their g-proteins and activation of the protein kinase phosphoinositide 3 kinase (PI3K) [124,125]. PI3K phosphorylates second messengers that activate the protein kinase Akt [137]. Akt activates many targets, including mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), a protein kinase that is thought to be important for LTD, LTP, and memory formation. Phosphorylation (activation) of mTOR leads to two events that are important for translational regulation (see Fig. 1): phosphorylation of S6K causes enhanced translation of mRNAs [138], while phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor 4E binding protein (4EBP) allows for the formation of the translation initiation factor eIF4F, which regulates translation of proteins [139]. Proper translational control via mTOR is required for LTP [129,140] and for formation of hippocampal dependent long term memories [129,141]. It has also been demonstrated that mTOR is activated during DHPG induced mGluR-LTD and that blocking activity of mTOR by the antagonist rapamycin can prevent DHPG-LTD in the hippocampal area CA1 [142].

Aged animals with superior performance in the Morris water maze task were reported to have increased phosphorylation (and activation) of mTOR within the hippocampus compared to aged inferior learners, suggesting a role for mTOR activity in successful cognitive aging [102]. However, mTOR regulates a wide range of biological functions including autophagy, mitochondrial function, lipogenesis, ketogenesis, and glucose homeostasis [143]. mTOR complexes also regulate the cellular response to growth factors such as insulin and insulin like growth factors (IGFs) and, therefore, connect growth to glucose metabolism [143]. Interestingly, reduced signaling through the IGF1 receptor (IGF-1R), which leads to decreased mTOR activity, is linked to increased lifespan and delayed progression of age-associated events ([144]; discussed later). However, IGF-1R also plays an essential role in learning and memory. Various studies have demonstrated a central role for IGFs in memory formation, consolidation, enhancement, and extinction [145] as well as in the generation of LTP [146–148]. In light of this delicate balance between cognition, longevity, and metabolism, the therapeutic potential of IGF-mTOR signaling for age-related cognitive decline may be limited.

CREB

The transcription factor cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) regulates gene transcription and has been shown to be essential for multiple forms of learning and memory [145,149–153] (see Fig. 1). Aged animals with cognitive impairments demonstrate significantly lower levels of CREB [102,154]. However, CREB is ubiquitously expressed and thus it is likely that modulation of CREB activity will have widespread health consequences for the animal. Therefore, it may be more beneficial to target genes downstream of CREB for cognitive enhancement therapeutics.

When taken together, the information reported above clearly shows the complexity of the molecular pathways that control different aspects of synaptic plasticity, learning and memory. Indeed, multiple independent – but also overlapping-signaling pathways relay fundamental information. It is likely that cross-talk between the individual players and pathways provide balance and specificity to ensure proper formation of memory. Dysregulation of this balance may be at the basis of several aspects of cognitive decline observed during aging.

5.5. Immediate early genes

Synaptic plasticity and subsequent memory formation require experience-induced activation of neuronal transmission, which leads to activation of transcription factors such as CREB and Elk1 to induce transcription of several key immediate early genes (IEGs) that rapidly mount a widespread cellular response to a variety of stimuli (see Fig. 1). These IEGs, such as BDNF, Arc, Zif268, cfos, and CREB are essential for LTP, LTD, and for long-term memory formation and consolidation [155,156]. Given their significance for synaptic plasticity and memory, IEGs are potential gene targets that may be differentially activated and expressed in aging animals. Indeed, decreased IEG expression has been reported in normal aging [157,158], and is seen in some models of memory disorders, including AD [159–161]. Several microarray studies have been conducted to investigate whether aged animals with cognitive impairment display differential activation patterns of these IEGs compared to aged unimpaired counterparts [23,157,159,162]. These studies separated aged animals into impaired and unimpaired learners, typically by testing in the Morris water maze, and then conducted microarray analysis to determine which genes were differentially expressed between groups. They revealed that aged impaired animals display reduced expression of IEGs relative to aged unimpaired and young counterparts [23,157,159,162]. This reduction in IEG activation can have widespread cellular consequences given the central role of IEGs in coordinating the neural transmission program. Many IEGs are transcriptional activators and DNA binding proteins, thereby exerting a broad influence over the expression of other downstream proteins. Therefore, dysregulation of one IEG might have broader amplification. Again, cross-talk and partial overlap is likely fundamental for neuronal activity and learning.

5.6. The homer family of proteins

In addition to changes in IEG activity and intracellular signaling cascades discussed above, another important event that may underlie cognitive deficits in some old animals is deficient expression or activity of scaffolding proteins. Scaffolding proteins create anchors between receptors and their intracellular signaling partners and thus facilitate signal transduction. One example of scaffolding proteins that may be differentially activated in aged animals is the Homer family of adaptor proteins, which consists of three members: Homer1, Homer2, and Homer3 [163].

Due to alternative splicing, each member results in several isoforms of various lengths. For example, the HOMER1 gene encodes a short isoform (Homer1a) and two long isoforms (Homer1b and Homer1c). Homer1c was identified as a protein that is upregulated in aged animals that were superior learners, and therefore has been targeted for research focused on the molecular basis of learning and memory [23]. Homer 1c has been shown to bind mGluRs and to enhance trafficking of group I mGluRs to the cell membrane in hippocampal neurons [164,165]. Furthermore, Homer1c links mGluRs to other cell surface receptors, such as N-type calcium and M-type potassium channels [166], thus regulating cell signaling following activation of mGluRs. Homer1c also connects mGluRs to intracellular signaling complexes by interacting with phosphoinositide 3 kinase enhancer (PIKE), and regulates calcium homeostasis by interacting with IP3 and Ryanodine receptors [136,167]. Additionally, Homer1c has been shown to interact with NMDA through Shank, and to participate in the formation of functional connections between mGluRs and ionotropic glutamate receptors at the post synaptic density [168]. Finally, Homer1a is an IEG that is activated following synaptic stimulation and appears to disrupt the connections mediated by the long Homer isoforms, thus having effects opposing those of Homer1c [169].

Homer1c is a scaffolding protein that is localized to the postsynaptic density of neurons in hippocampal area CA1 [165,167]. Given its role as a scaffolding protein, it is not surprising that Homer1c expression is essential for normal synaptic plasticity in the hippocampus. The use of a blocking peptide that disrupts binding of Homer1c to mGluR5 prevents the induction of LTD in hippocampal neurons, thus providing direct evidence that Homer1c-mGluR5 interactions are vital for hippocampal LTD to occur [170,171]. These results have also been replicated in rat striatal neurons [136]. Overexpression of Homer1a has been shown to disrupt LTP maintenance, indicating that a balance between the long and short isoforms of Homer is essential for healthy synaptic plasticity. Homer proteins have also been linked to healthy cognitive aging. Homer1 knockout mice display drastic deficits in spatial memory and synaptic plasticity [172,173]. Furthermore, Homer1c is upregulated in hippocampal area CA1 of aged superior learners compared to aged animals that are impaired in hippocampal dependent memory tasks [23]. Homer1c gene delivery into the hippocampus of aged learning impaired rats can rescue learning deficits [174]. Similarly, aged rats with superior memories have been found to have an increased ratio of Homer1c:Homer1a bound to mGluR5 in hippocampal area CA1 [102]. In contrast, aged rodents with notable cognitive deficits demonstrate elevated levels of Homer1a within the hippocampus [102,103].

6. Aging and epigenetics

Our understanding of changes in synaptic structure, function, and cognition that occur as a function of age is further complicated by the complexity of epigenetic alterations that may occur over the lifespan. Epigenetic modifications of histones include the addition and removal of acetyl, ubiquitin, methyl, and/or phosphate groups. These modifications can alter the structure and conformation of chromatin, thereby blocking or enhancing the transcription of the coded genes, and, ultimately, resulting in changes in gene expression [175,176].

Acetylation is one of the most commonly studied forms of histone modification. It promotes gene expression by disrupting histone-DNA interaction, thereby relaxing the chromatin structure and promoting transcription [177]. Deacetylation has the opposite effect and is associated with decreased gene expression [178,179]. Sustained histone acetylation has been shown to promote learning and memory, whereas lack of acetylation correlates with long-term memory deficits [177–180]. Furthermore, evidence suggests that histone hypoacetylation contributes to age-related cognitive decline. Indeed, aged mice with learning and memory impairments demonstrate hypoacetylation of H4K12; restoration of H4K12 acetylation by using histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors ameliorates the memory deficits [181,182]. Epigenetic changes associated with aging have also been observed on other acetylated sites [183].

Another commonly studied form of epigenetic regulation is DNA methylation. In this process, cytosine residues are reversibly methylated at CpG sites in the DNA sequence. In general, methylation in promoter regions prevents transcription factors from binding and thereby reduces gene expression, whereas demethylation correlates with increased gene expression [184,185]. Studies of DNA methylation indicate that aged rats with learning and memory impairments display abnormal methylation of memory promoting genes [186]. Identified sites include H3K36me3, H4K20me1, H3K9me2/3, and H3K27me3 [183]. A recent study demonstrated that increased expression of DNA methyl transferase 3a2 (DNMT3a2) can rescue age-related memory impairment in aged mice. Additionally, downregulation of DNMT3a2 in young mice can result in memory deficits [187]. These experiments demonstrate a role for methylation in age-related cognitive decline, specifically postulating that differential expression of DNMT3a2 may underlie cognitive changes with the aging process.

The causative effect of described changes is unclear; collectively, they are thought to significantly affect gene expression of both neuronal and non-neuronal brain cells resulting in age-associated maladaptation [183]. However, clear mechanistic validation is impaired by the fact that epigenetic changes may occur at several different sites, and that the acetylation/methylation of different sites may have different effects depending on the area of the brain being examined [183]. For example, aged mice with spatial memory deficits display increased acetylation levels of H3 in the CA1 region, but decreased H4 acetylation in the dentate gyrus [188]. Nevertheless, several epigenetic-modifying compounds are currently being explored for translational purposes [183].

7. Aging and Alzheimer’s disease: common pathways

7.1. AD neuropathology

Thus far, the changes in the aging hippocampus described in this review have focused on nonpathogenic age-related cognitive decline. However, aging is also the most common risk factor for late-onset AD, with prevalence increasing dramatically after the age of 60 and rising to affect roughly 50% of individuals 80 and older [3,144]. While typical age-related cognitive decline incudes changes in cognition that do not dramatically interfere with day to day life, AD is characterized by progressive and severe cognitive and behavioral changes that affect daily living. AD neuropathology is characterized by the accumulation of amyloid plaques (also referred to as senile plaques), neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs), and diffuse loss of neurons and synapses within the hippocampus, cortex, and other regions of the brain responsible for learning and memory formation [144]. Amyloid plaques and NFTs are also observed in the hippocampus and neocortex of aged individuals with normal cognitive functions [144,189].

Amyloid plaques are extracellular protein deposits consisting of a dense core of protein aggregates surrounded by dystrophic dendrites and axons, activated microglia, and reactive astrocytes [190,191]. The protein core consists primarily of amyloid β-peptide (Aβ), a small hydrophobic peptide generated through processing of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) in a two-step process [144]. First, APP is cleaved at the βsite by β-site APP cleaving enzyme (BACE1) generating a large N-terminal fragment that is released to the extracellular milieu and a small, membrane-anchored, fragment called C99 (see Fig. 2A). This initial β-site cleavage by BACE1 is the rate-limiting step in the generation of Aβ. C99 is then cleaved by γ-secretase to form Aβand a small cytosolic fragment called APP intracellular domain (AICD) (see Fig. 2A). Aβ can be generated both at the cell surface and on intracellular membrane compartments; as a result, Aβ aggregates can form both outside and inside the neuronal cell body. Intracellular Aβ aggregates can also be released to the extracellular milieu where they further aggregate to form amyloid plaques. In contrast, AICD is only released in the cytosol where it can bind to cytosolic mRNA:ribosome complexes (polysomes) to regulate initiation of translation [192] and/or translocate to the nucleus to regulate transcription [193–195]. Both Aβ and AICD production are linked to the pathology of AD, and animals that do not express BACE1 (and therefore do not cleave APP) are resistant to the development of AD neuropathology [196].

In contrast to the amyloid plaques, NFTs form in the cytoplasm of neurons. NFTs are made of highly stable polymers of the microtubule-binding protein TAU. Importantly, the phosphorylation status of TAU inversely correlates with binding to microtubules. As a result, hyper-phosphorylated TAU dissociates from microtubules and tends to polymerize into filaments to form NFTs [144,196]. In line with this observation, several TAU kinases including tyrosine-regulated kinase 1A (DYRK1A), cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (CDK5), and glycogen synthase kinase-3β (GSK3β) have been linked to the pathogenesis of AD. Studies from different mouse models have shown that Tau plays an important role in the pathogenesis of the disease. Mutations in MAPT, the gene encoding TAU proteins, are associated with different forms of age-associated dementias (globally referred to as tauopathies). No mutation on MAPT has so far been identified in AD [144].

AD is normally divided into familial (also referred to as early-onset) and sporadic (also referred to as late-onset) AD. Familial AD accounts for ~3–5% of all AD cases and typically becomes manifest between the age of 35 and 55 years [144]. It has been associated with causative mutations on the APP gene (on chromosome 21), the PSEN1 gene (on chromosome 14), and the PSEN2 gene (on chromosome 1). Currently, about 39 mutations have been identified on APP, 211 on PSEN1, and 33 on PSEN2 [197]. All identified mutations are pathogenic and are associated with familial forms of the disease. APP gene duplications associated with familial/early-onset AD have also been reported [198,199]. Interestingly, a single-point genetic variation on APP that impairs β cleavage of APP and protects from AD has also been identified [200]. Globally, currently identified mutations in APP, PSEN1 and PSEN2 account for about 50% of all cases of familial AD, and, therefore, about 1–2% of all AD cases (familial and sporadic). Not all mutations affect the onset and/or progression of the disease equally. For example, the onset of the disease can occur as early as 25 years of age with some PSEN1 mutations, and as late as 80 years of age with some PSEN2 mutations. Disease manifestations also display significant variability, with PSEN1 mutations causing some of the most severe forms of familial AD and PSEN2 mutations causing some of the less severe forms [197].

Sporadic AD is a multifactorial disease with both genetic and environmental risk factors playing important roles. Although more than 20 loci have been associated with sporadic AD, the ε4 allele of the APOE gene (on chromosome 19) remains the most important genetic risk factor [197]. It increases the risk for sporadic AD approximately 3–5 fold in heterozygous carriers and approximately 15–20 fold in homozygous carriers. In contrast, the APOE ε2 allele displays protective effects. The APOE gene encodes three different isoforms, ApoE2, ApoE3, and ApoE4 that differ in only two amino acids. ApoE is a major cholesterol carrier protein and displays important trophic functions in the brain, where it is mostly secreted by astrocytes. The molecular basis of the ApoE-AD association is still a matter of discussion. However, some of the most studied aspects of ApoE biology include rate of Aβ generation, aggregation and clearance, as well as neuronal outgrowth and repair, and synaptic plasticity [201,202].

7.2. Mouse models of AD

Dissection of AD neuropathology in the mouse has proven to be problematic, mostly due to the fact that both mouse App and mouse Tau differ considerably from the human counterparts. Mice overexpressing human APP or a humanized version of mouse App (where the Aβ region of mouse App was replaced with human Aβ, leaving the rest of the protein untouched) have been generated. Both mice also had one or more familial AD-associated mutations incorporated into the APP gene. The resulting animals developed amyloid plaques, LTP/LTD defects, and a certain degree of synaptic loss. Cognitive changes were more elusive, being detected in certain models but not in others. Importantly, the Tau pathology (NFTs) and the neuronal loss appeared almost completely absent, suggesting that additional biochemical/molecular events are required to develop the full spectrum of AD [reviewed in [203,204]. Mice that overexpress PS1/PS2 in addition to APP display a more severe form of AD-like neuropathology. However, NFTs are only observed when animals are engineered to overexpress human TAU harboring mutations associated with human tauopathies [reviewed in Refs. [203,204]]. Again, this differential behavior is explained by significant differences that exist between mouse and human tau proteins (both in the splicing and in the amino acid sequence). Finally, mice overexpressing only the Aβ or the AICD fragments of APP have also been generated. The former develop amyloid plaques or amyloid angiopathy [204,205], while the latter develop synaptic deficits and increased neuronal susceptibility to exogenous stress [206,207]. Mice that were engineered to harbor three or five familial AD-associated mutations (respectively called 3X and 5X mice) on two or more genes appear to offer the closest, albeit still incomplete, models of AD neuropathology [reviewed in Refs. [203,204]].

7.3. Aging and AD

As mentioned above, aging is the single most important risk factor for sporadic AD. The increased lifespan of the population across the globe is solely responsible for the dramatic rise in prevalence and incidence of AD and is transforming this disease into a global pandemic and economic threat. The last decade has seen the explosion of microarray studies in mice, rats, non-human primates, and humans that have fully characterized the transcriptional profile of both the aging and the AD brain. The results show that aging itself is accompanied by changes in expression levels that affect about 3–5% of all the genes expressed in the brain [157,208,209]. A similar profile was also found in late-onset AD; the only major difference was in the fact that AD displayed a slightly higher number of genes being altered and more significant changes [189,210,211]. This overlapping profile seems to support the notion that a continuum exists between aging and AD. Whether this is indeed the case, it remains to be clearly determined. Unfortunately, the complexity of the aging process interferes with our ability to dissect precise cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying the aging-AD connection. It is likely that different events contribute to the association. Possible contributing pathways identified by transcriptional profiling include: vesicular transport and synaptic transmission; Ca++ homeostasis; mitochondrial bioenergetics; glucose and lipid metabolism; stress and unfolded protein response; DNA repair; protein homeostasis; APP/Aβ metabolism; immunity and inflammation; neuronal outgrowth and regenerative mechanisms [189,202]. Overall, almost all the changes that we described in the previous sections on the aging brain are observed in the AD brain, with the latter being more severely affected. Importantly, while most of the changes that are observed in the aging brain are within a spectrum of “natural variability” those that are observed in the AD brain are outside this spectrum and clearly pathological.

A comprehensive description of AD neuropathology and possible associated events can be found in [144,189,202]. Here, we limit our attention to established aging pathways that affect the pathogenesis and/or progression of the disease (see also Fig. 2B).

7.4. The IGF-1R signaling pathway

Given that old individuals with normal cognitive functions can develop amyloid plaques and NFTs similar to those seen in the early phases of AD, it is not surprising that signaling pathways that are altered in normal aging are intimately linked to cognitive decline and AD pathogenesis. The IGF-1R signaling pathway is probably the most studied in the aging field. The IGF-1R is widely expressed throughout the body and the brain [212–214]. It is organized as two α and two β subunits. The two α subunits are largely extracellular, are linked by a disulfide bond, and contain the ligand-binding domain. In contrast, the β subunits are largely intracellular and contain the signal transducing domain. IGF1 binding to the IGF-1R causes the receptor to undergo autophosphorylation. This autophosphorylation enables the receptor to recruit insulin/IGF1 receptor substrates (IRS) and activate phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K). PI3K subsequently catalyzes the conversion of PIP2 into PIP3, which recruits and activates the PKB/Akt pathway (upstream of the mTOR signaling pathway) and the Ras/MEK/ERK signaling cascade (Fig. 3). IGF-1R signaling is downregulated by the phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome ten (PTEN) oncogene, which converts PIP3 back into PIP2 (Fig. 3) [190].

Increased IGF-1R signaling accelerates aging and shortens lifespan, whereas a reduction in signaling has the opposite effect [190,215,216]. This has been observed in worms, fruit flies, mice, and humans, indicating that the role of IGF-1R in aging is evolutionarily conserved [190,215–219]. In humans, genetic variations that result in overall reduced IGF-1R signaling appear to be beneficial for old age survival and preservation of cognitive functions [220–223]. IGF1-R expression levels increase as a function of age in both cortex and hippocampus; this event has been linked to learning deficits in aged rats [23,24,143]. Correlation studies in normally aged volunteers confirm that disturbances in the IGF1/IGF1-R pathway are associated with poor performance on neuropsychological tests evaluating different cognitive functions normally affected by age [145]. IGF-1R is also connected to AD. Indeed, down-regulation of IGF-1R can rescue AD neuropathology in the mouse [224,225]. However, in mammals, insulin and IGF1 are also neurotrophic factors that facilitate neuronal growth and promote learning and memory [146,226]. Therefore, there appears to be a dichotomy between neuroprotective and deleterious effects of IGF1 signaling on animal lifespan. As discussed above, the ERK and mTOR signaling pathways are vital for proper learning and memory to occur and thus may in part explain why IGF1 signaling is also important for proper cognitive function.

7.5. P44/p53 signaling

The p53 protein is best known for its tumor suppressor activity. In fact, a large number of mutations associated with human cancers are found in the p53 gene (TP53). Impaired p53 functions are also observed as a result of mutations in genes that act as immediate activators or inhibitors of p53 activity. The tumor-suppressor activities of p53 are activated in response to stress signals that can potentially lead to abnormal proliferation and transformation of mitotically competent cells. Under these conditions, p53 acts as a “gatekeeper” by inducing permanent withdrawal from the cell cycle (cellular senescence; also referred to as replicative senescence) and/or programmed cell death (most typically apoptosis) [reviewed in Refs. [144,227,228]].

It is now known that the common TP53 gene generates at least twelve different p53 isoforms through a combination of alternative usage of promoters, alternative splicing, and alternative initiation of translation [229]. Of these, full-length p53 (simply known as p53) and Δ40p53 (also referred to as DeltaNp53, p44, or p47) are the most studied. Δ40p53 is an N-truncated form lacking the first 39 amino acids of full-length p53 and is intimately linked to the aging process. Transgenic animals that overexpress this isoform, referred to as p44+/+ animals, display reduced lifespan, accelerated aging, osteoporosis, type 2 diabetes, skin atrophy, synaptic deficits, and severe learning and memory impairments [230,231]. This progeriod phenotype requires the presence of endogenous p53 suggesting that the ratio of p53:Δ40p53 rather than the actual levels of Δ40p53 determines the observed phenotype [230]. Mechanistically, the phenotype of p44+/+ mice is intimately associated with the activation of the IGF-1R signaling pathway. p44+/+ mice display increased activation of IGF-1R signaling and the synaptic deficits of p44+/+ animals are rescued by haploinsufficiency of IGF-1R [230,231].

In addition to an accelerated aging phenotype, increased activation of IGF-1R in p44+/+ mice has also been linked to increased processing of APP, overproduction of Aβ, and deficits in cognition and synaptic plasticity [231,232]. These features are commonly seen in the aging population and in the early phases of AD, suggesting a general role for p44 and IGR-1R. Murine Aβ does not display significant aggregation or neurotoxicity and thus p44+/+ mice under normal circumstances do not develop amyloid plaques or widespread neurodegeneration. However, when engineered to overexpress a humanized version of mouse App (described above), p44+/+ mice develop more classical symptoms of AD, including significant Aβ aggregation, synaptic loss, and severe degeneration of the afferent pathway (hippocampal formation) and corpus callosum [231]. In essence, p44 can accelerate the AD-like phenotype of APP695/swe mice.

Recent work has also revealed a possible “amplification loop” connecting APP, p44 and Tau. In fact, AICD can bind to the second internal ribosome entry site (IRES) element on the p53 mRNA to regulate translation of p44, which -in turn- can bind to the promoter of key Tau kinases to regulate transcription [192,233]. Taken together, these data indicate that cross-talk between p53 and IGF-1R signaling influences key molecular and cellular pathways that drive both the general aging process and the pathogenesis of AD. Again, these findings indicate that a spectrum exists between normal cognitive aging and severe cognitive deficits associated with AD, which highlights the importance of understanding both processes in order to identify means of treating and preventing cognitive decline in aged populations.

7.6. Klotho

Klotho is a cell-surface membrane protein that is also released in the blood and cerebrospinal fluid following proteolytic shedding of the extracellular domain [234,235]. The cleaved and secreted form appears to have endocrine, paracrine and autocrine functions; its levels and enzymatic activity decline during aging [236–238]. Genetic variants of KL, the gene that encodes Klotho, are associated with human aging [239] and klotho-deficient mice display a progeroid phenotype resembling an accelerated form of aging [236]. The phenotype includes atherosclerosis, skin atrophy, osteoporosis, reduced fertility, emphysema, memory defects, and reduced lifespan [236]. In contrast, mice overexpressing Klotho display increased lifespan and increased resistance to several age-associated features [237]. In humans, polymorphisms of KL have been associated with life span and several age-associated diseases, including atherosclerosis, hypertension, osteoporosis, chronic kidney failure, and cancer [239–243]. A possible connection between Klotho and IGF-1R has also been delineated [237,244,245]. Human variations that lead to increased circulating levels of Klotho are associated with greater cortical volumes in the brain [246]. Finally, overexpression of Klotho in the mouse enhances cognition and rescues some of the defects that characterize AD [247]. These include propensity to seizures, deficits in synaptic plasticity, and cognitive decline [247]. Although the above studies support a role of Klotho in aging and, perhaps, AD, the mechanistic components remain to be fully dissected.

8. Non-medical interventions for age-related cognitive decline

A better understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying age related cognitive decline is expected to lead to a better ability to prevent and treat cognitive deficits associated with aging and is therefore of vital importance to the field. In addition to developing therapeutic targets of cognitive decline, several behavioral interventions have proven to be effective in ameliorating or preventing cognitive deficits associated with the aging process.

A wide breadth of evidence in monkeys and humans suggests that, when applied in middle-age, a 20–40% reduction in food intake without malnutrition promotes healthy brain aging [248–250]. Caloric restriction has been shown to reduce motor deficits, improve metabolic functions, and reduce the likelihood of tumor development and cardiovascular disease [251–253]. Furthermore, caloric restriction has been shown to reduce cognitive deficits associated with aging, improve synaptic plasticity, reduce spine loss, and increase neurogenesis within the hippocampus [254–257]. Caloric restriction has also been shown to be protective in various disease states, including AD, Parkinson’s disease, and other neurodegenerative disorders [258,259]. A recent 20-year longitudinal study in Rhesus macaques showed that a 30% reduction in daily calorie intake reduced the rate of age-related deaths as well as the incidence of typical age-associated diseases, including brain atrophy [251,260]. The mechanism whereby caloric restriction increases the resistance of neurons to the adverse effects of aging is not entirely known. However, studies in yeast, worms, flies, and rodents suggest that the reduced calorie intake causes a comprehensive metabolic reprogramming that involves key nutrient-responsive signaling pathways [261–263].

Frequent aerobic physical exercise is another well-established method of maintaining healthy synaptic plasticity and preserved cognition throughout the lifespan [264–266]. Animal research suggests that exercise has the capacity to stimulate neurogenesis in the hippocampus and enhance learning, synaptogenesis, and agiogenesis [27,252]. These beneficial outcomes of exercise appear to be mediated by neurotrophic factors such as BDNF, nerve growth factor, and fibroblast growth factor. BDNF has specifically emerged as one of the most relevant mediators for synaptic plasticity and neuronal connectivity and is considered an essential component for mediating the beneficial neuroprotective effects of physical exercise on the brain [252].

Numerous lines of evidence also indicate that environmental enrichment promotes learning and memory, and successful cognitive aging in human and animal models. Animals living in enriched conditions with enhanced social and cognitive stimuli have improved learning and memory, reduced cellular response to stress, enhanced neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus, increased brain size and weight, increased dendritic branching, and increased synaptogenesis [267–269]. Likewise, among humans, factors such as higher education and other markers of cognitive resilience appear to buffer older individuals against cognitive decline and development of dementia, and provide increased cognitive flexibility, perhaps via similar mechanisms as those observed in animals [270,271].

9. Concluding remarks

Ensuring a high level of cognitive functioning and independence is essential as the population of elderly people continues to expand worldwide. This review highlighted changes in hippocampal structure and function that contribute to cognitive impairment over the course of the aging process as well as in AD, the most common form of age-associated dementia. We propose that investigation of aging brain biology is likely to yield exiting new avenues for the development of intervention and treatments to offset and correct cognitive decline as a function of age.

We wish to thank Dr. Rozalyn M. Anderson and Dr. Barbara B. Bendlin for critically reviewing an early version of this manuscript. This work was supported by VA Merit Award (BX001638) and NIH (NS094154, AG033514). R.H. was supported by a National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship.

Fig. 1 Aging and Hippocampal Signaling Pathways. Group 1 mGluR stimulation leads to subsequent activation of the downstream kinases including PKC, ERK, and mTOR. Subsequent activation of transcription factors such as CREB and ELK-1 within the nucleus induces trasncription of immediate early genes such as Homer1a, Arc, and Zif268. Homer1a is released into the cytosol and disrupts Homer1c/mGluR5 binding, whereas the IEGs Arc and Zif268 promote expression of genes essential for learning and memory to occur. Changes in in the expression ratio of Homer1a:Homer1c, cell surface expression of mGluR5, and activity of PKC, ERK, and mTOR are thought to play a role in successful cognitive aging.

Fig. 2 APP Processing and AD-Aging Pathways. (A) APP is a type 1 membrane protein consisting of a large extracellular domain, a single membrane-spanning domain, and a small cytoplasmic tail. APP cleavage occurs in a 2-step process. First, BACE-1 mediated cleavage at the β site generates a large N-terminal fragment that is secreted into the extracellular milieu and a small C-terminal fragment (C99) that remains membrane-bound. In the second step, C99 is cleaved at the γ site by γ-secretase to produce Aβ and AICD. Both Aβ and AICD have been shown to promote various aspects of Alzheimer’s disease pathology. (B) Possible impact of established aging pathways in the pathogenesis and/or progression of AD. Description is in the text.

Fig. 3 IGF-1R Signaling. Schematic view of the IGF-1R signaling pathway. Description is in the text.

Table 1 Most prominent structural changes of the aging brain.

Amyloid Plaques (progressive accumulation in the parenchyma; main component: Aβ)	
Astrocytes (increased number of activated astrocytes)	
Microglia (increased number of activated microglia)	
Mitochondria (changes in morphology)	
Neurofibrillary Tangles (progressive accumulation within neurons; main component: phospho-tau)	
Neurons (reduced neurogenesis)	
Neuronal Morphology (changes tend to affect dendritic branches and spines)	
Synapses (reduced number and morphological changes)	
Vascular (increased atherosclerosis and arteriosclerosis)	
Volume (reduced white and gray matter volume and increased CSF volume)	

HIGHLIGHTS

Aging is accompanied by structural changes of the brain.

Aging affects synaptic plasticity at multiple levels.

Partial overlap exists between aging and Alzheimer’s disease.

Aging pathways impact on pathogenesis and/or progression of Alzheimer’s disease.


1 Humphreys G The health-care challenges posed by population ageing Bull World Health Organ 90 2012 82 83 22423156
2 Aging Statistics, Administration for Community Living Administration on Aging 2014 http://www.aoa.gov/Aging_Statistics/
3 Ferri CP Prince M Brayne C Brodaty H Fratiglioni L Ganguli M Global prevalence of dementia: a Delphi consensus study Lancet 366 2005 2112 2117 16360788
4 Knierim JJ The hippocampus Curr Biol 25 2015 R1116 R1121 26654366
5 Colgin LL Moser EI Moser MB Understanding memory through hippocampal remapping Trends Neurosci 31 2008 469 477 18687478
6 Jones MW McHugh TJ Updating hippocampal representations: CA2 joins the circuit Trends Neurosci 34 2011 526 535 21880379
7 Munoz-Lopez M Present, and future in hippocampal formation and memory research Hippocampus 25 2015 726 730 25788413
8 Rosenzweig ES Barnes CA Impact of aging on hippocampal function: plasticity, network dynamics, and cognition Prog Neurobiol 69 2003 143 179 12758108
9 Driscoll I Hamilton DA Petropoulos H Yeo RA Brooks WM Baumgartner RN The aging hippocampus: cognitive, biochemical and structural findings Cereb Cortex 13 2003 1344 1351 14615299
10 Hartl FU Cellular homeostasis and aging Annu Rev Biochem 2016 http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev-biochem-011116-110806
11 Frake RA Ricketts T Menzies FM Rubinsztein DC Autophagy and neurodegeneration J Clin Invest 125 2015 65 74 25654552
12 Kroemer G a druggable process that is deregulated in aging and human disease J Clin Invest 125 2015 1 4 25654544
13 Labbadia J Morimoto RI The biology of proteostasis in aging and disease Annu Rev Biochem 84 2015 435 464 25784053
14 Swerdlow RH Bioenergetics and metabolism: a bench to bedside perspective J Neurochem 2016 http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jnc.13509
15 Wilkins HM Koppel S Carl SM Ramanujan S Weidling I Michaelis ML Oxaloacetate enhances neuronal cell bioenergetic fluxes and infrastructure J Neurochem 137 2016 76 87 26811028
16 Lim Y Cho H Kim EK Brain metabolism as a modulator of autophagy in neurodegeneration Brain Res 2016 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2016.02.049
17 Roh E Song do K Kim MS Emerging role of the brain in the homeostatic regulation of energy and glucose metabolism Exp Mol Med 48 2016 e216 26964832
18 Kaur C Rathnasamy G Ling EA The choroid plexus in healthy and diseased brain J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 48 2016 198 213
19 Squire LR Stark CE Clark RE The medial temporal lobe Annu Rev Neurosci 27 2004 279 306 15217334
20 Deng W Aimone JB Gage FH New neurons and new memories: how does adult hippocampal neurogenesis affect learning and memory Nat Rev Neurosci 11 2010 339 350 20354534
21 Morris RG The mantle of the heavens: reflections on the 2014 Nobel Prize for medicine or physiology Hippocampus 25 2015 682 689 25786661
22 Gallagher M Burwell R Burchinal M Severity of spatial learning impairment in aging: development of a learning index for performance in the Morris water maze Behav Neurosci 129 2015 540 548 26214219
23 Burger C Lopez MC Feller JA Baker HV Muzyczka N Mandel RJ Changes in transcription within the CA1 field of the hippocampus are associated with age-related spatial learning impairments Neurobiol Learn Mem 87 2007 21 41 16829144
24 Gallagher M Burwell R Burchinal M Severity of spatial learning impairment in aging: development of a learning index for performance in the Morris water maze Behav Neurosci 107 1993 618 626 8397866
25 Frick KM Baxter MG Markowska AL Olton DS Price DL Age-related spatial reference and working memory deficits assessed in the water maze Neurobiol Aging 16 1995 149 160 7777133
26 de Fiebre NC Sumien N Forster MJ de Fiebre CM Spatial learning and psychomotor performance of C57BL/6 mice: age sensitivity and reliability of individual differences Age (Dordr) 28 2006 235 253 22253492
27 van Praag H Shubert T Zhao C Gage FH Exercise enhances learning and hippocampal neurogenesis in aged mice J Neurosci 25 2005 8680 8685 16177036
28 Barnes CA McNaughton BL An age comparison of the rates of acquisition and forgetting of spatial information in relation to long-term enhancement of hippocampal synapses Behav Neurosci 99 1985 1040 1048 3843538
29 Markowska AL Stone WS Ingram DK Reynolds J Gold PE Conti LH Individual differences in aging: behavioral and neurobiological correlates Neurobiol Aging 10 1989 31 43 2569170
30 Kennard JA Woodruff-Pak DS Age sensitivity of behavioral tests and brain substrates of normal aging in mice Front Aging Neurosci 3 2011 9 21647305
31 Caprioli A Ghirardi O Giuliani A Ramacci MT Angelucci L Spatial learning and memory in the radial maze: a longitudinal study in rats from 4 to 25 months of age Neurobiol Aging 12 1991 605 607 1770992
32 Mizumori SJ Lavoie AM Kalyani A Redistribution of spatial representation in the hippocampus of aged rats performing a spatial memory task Behav Neurosci 110 1996 1006 1016 8919003
33 Bachevalier J Vargha-Khadem F The primate hippocampus: ontogeny, early insult and memory Curr Opin Neurobiol 15 2005 168 174 15831398
34 Brown MW Aggleton JP Recognition memory: what are the roles of the perirhinal cortex and hippocampus Nat Rev Neurosci 2 2001 51 61 11253359
35 Oler JA Markus EJ Age-related deficits on the radial maze and in fear conditioning: hippocampal processing and consolidation Hippocampus 8 1998 402 415 9744425
36 Poole RL Braak D Gould TJ Concentration- and age-dependent effects of chronic caffeine on contextual fear conditioning in C57BL/6J mice Behav Brain Res 298 2016 69 77 25827925
37 Sweatt JD Neural plasticity &amp; behavior – sixty years of conceptual advances J Neurochem 2016 http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jnc.13580
38 Martin SJ Grimwood PD Morris RG Synaptic plasticity and memory: an evaluation of the hypothesis Annu Rev Neurosci 23 2000 649 711 10845078
39 Abraham WC Williams JM Properties and mechanisms of LTP maintenance Neuroscientist 9 2003 463 474 14678579
40 Peng Y Zhao J Gu QH Chen RQ Xu Z Yan JZ Distinct trafficking and expression mechanisms underlie LTP and LTD of NMDA receptor-mediated synaptic responses Hippocampus 20 2010 646 658 19489005
41 Raymond CR LTP forms 1, 2 and 3: different mechanisms for the long in long-term potentiation Trends Neurosci 30 2007 167 175 17292975
42 Raymond CR Thompson VL Tate WP Abraham WC Metabotropic glutamate receptors trigger homosynaptic protein synthesis to prolong long-term potentiation J Neurosci 20 2000 969 976 10648701
43 Kemp N Bashir ZI Induction of LTD in the adult hippocampus by the synaptic activation of AMPA/kainate and metabotropic glutamate receptors Neuropharmacology 38 1999 495 504 10221753
44 Kemp N Bashir ZI Long-term depression: a cascade of induction and expression mechanisms Prog Neurobiol 65 2001 339 365 11527572
45 Lee HK Barbarosie M Kameyama K Bear MF Huganir RL Regulation of distinct AMPA receptor phosphorylation sites during bidirectional synaptic plasticity Nature 405 2000 955 959 10879537
46 Lee HK Kameyama K Huganir RL Bear MF NMDA induces long-term synaptic depression and dephosphorylation of the GluR1 subunit of AMPA receptors in hippocampus Neuron 21 1998 1151 1162 9856470
47 Connor SA Wang YT A place at the table: LTD as a mediator of memory genesis Neuroscientist 2015 pii: 1073858415588498
48 Sweatt JD Memory mechanisms: the yin and yang of protein phosphorylation Curr Biol 11 2001 R391 R394 11378403
49 Bear MF Homosynaptic long-term depression: a mechanism for memory? Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 96 1999 9457 9458 10449713
50 Bliss TV Collingridge GL A synaptic model of memory: long-term potentiation in the hippocampus Nature 361 1993 31 39 8421494
51 Boric K Munoz P Gallagher M Kirkwood A Potential adaptive function for altered long-term potentiation mechanisms in aging hippocampus J Neurosci 28 2008 8034 8039 18685028
52 Lee YS Silva AJ The molecular and cellular biology of enhanced cognition Nat Rev Neurosci 10 2009 126 140 19153576
53 Francesconi W Cammalleri M Sanna PP The metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 is necessary for late-phase long-term potentiation in the hippocampal CA1 region Brain Res 1022 2004 12 18 15353208
54 Neyman S Manahan-Vaughan D Metabotropic glutamate receptor 1 (mGluR1) and 5 (mGluR5) regulate late phases of LTP and LTD in the hippocampal CA1 region in vitro Eur J Neurosci 27 2008 1345 1352 18364018
55 Wu J Harney S Rowan MJ Anwyl R Involvement of group I mGluRs in LTP induced by strong high frequency stimulation in the dentate gyrus in vitro Neurosci Lett 436 2008 235 238 18403113
56 Bortolotto ZA Collett VJ Conquet F Jia Z van der Putten H Collingridge GL The regulation of hippocampal LTP by the molecular switch, a form of metaplasticity, requires mGlu5 receptors Neuropharmacology 49 Suppl 1 2005 13 25 16024054
57 Huber KM Kayser MS Bear MF Role for rapid dendritic protein synthesis in hippocampal mGluR-dependent long-term depression Science 288 2000 1254 1257 10818003
58 Faas GC Adwanikar H Gereau RW Saggau P Modulation of presynaptic calcium transients by metabotropic glutamate receptor activation: a differential role in acute depression of synaptic transmission and long-term depression J Neurosci 22 2002 6885 6890 12177186
59 Fitzjohn SM Kingston AE Lodge D Collingridge GL DHPG-induced LTD in area CA1 of juvenile rat hippocampus; characterisation and sensitivity to novel mGlu receptor antagonists Neuropharmacology 38 1999 1577 1583 10530819
60 Huang CC Lee CC Hsu KS An investigation into signal transduction mechanisms involved in insulin-induced long-term depression in the CA1 region of the hippocampus J Neurochem 89 2004 217 231 15030406
61 Huber KM Roder JC Bear MF Chemical induction of mGluR5- and protein synthesis–dependent long-term depression in hippocampal area CA1 J Neurophysiol 86 2001 321 325 11431513
62 Deupree DL Bradley J Turner DA Age-related alterations in potentiation in the CA1 region in F344 rats Neurobiol Aging 14 1993 249 258 8321393
63 Moore CI Browning MD Rose GM Hippocampal plasticity induced by primed burst, but not long-term potentiation, stimulation is impaired in area CA1 of aged Fischer 344 rats Hippocampus 3 1993 57 66 8364683
64 Rosenzweig ES Rao G McNaughton BL Barnes CA Role of temporal summation in age-related long-term potentiation-induction deficits Hippocampus 7 1997 549 558 9347351
65 Bach ME Barad M Son H Zhuo M Lu YF Shih R Age-related defects in spatial memory are correlated with defects in the late phase of hippocampal long-term potentiation in vitro and are attenuated by drugs that enhance the cAMP signaling pathway Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 96 1999 5280 5285 10220457
66 Bouet V Freret T Dutar P Billard JM Boulouard M Continuous enriched environment improves learning and memory in adult NMRI mice through theta burst-related-LTP independent mechanisms but is not efficient in advanced aged animals Mech Ageing Dev 132 2011 240 248 21530571
67 Freret T Billard JM Schumann-Bard P Dutar P Dauphin F Boulouard M Rescue of cognitive aging by long-lasting environmental enrichment exposure initiated before median lifespan Neurobiol Aging 33 1005 2012 e1 10 22244089
68 Foster TC Kumar A Calcium dysregulation in the aging brain Neuroscientist 8 2002 297 301 12194497
69 Tombaugh GC Rowe WB Chow AR Michael TH Rose GM Theta-frequency synaptic potentiation in CA1 in vitro distinguishes cognitively impaired from unimpaired aged Fischer 344 rats J Neurosci 22 2002 9932 9940 12427850
70 Kumar A Foster TC Intracellular calcium stores contribute to increased susceptibility to LTD induction during aging Brain Res 1031 2005 125 128 15621020
71 Norris CM Korol DL Foster TC Increased susceptibility to induction of long-term depression and long-term potentiation reversal during aging J Neurosci 16 1996 5382 5392 8757251
72 Rapp PR Gallagher M Preserved neuron number in the hippocampus of aged rats with spatial learning deficits Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 93 1996 9926 9930 8790433
73 Hamilton LK Joppé SE Cochard LM Fernandes KJ Aging and neurogenesis in the adult forebrain: what we have learned and where we should go from here Eur J Neurosci 37 2013 1978 1986 23773067
74 Leuner B Kozorovitskiy Y Gross CG Gould E Diminished adult neurogenesis in the marmoset brain precedes old age Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104 2007 17169 17173 17940008
75 Geinisman Y de Toledo-Morrell L Morrell F Loss of perforated synapses in the dentate gyrus: morphological substrate of memory deficit in aged rats Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 83 1986 3027 3031 3458260
76 Geinisman Y deToledo-Morrell L Morrell F Persina IS Rossi M Age-related loss of axospinous synapses formed by two afferent systems in the rat dentate gyrus as revealed by the unbiased stereological dissector technique Hippocampus 2 1992 437 444 1308200
77 McWilliams JR Lynch G Synaptic density and axonal sprouting in rat hippocampus: stability in adulthood and decline in late adulthood Brain Res 294 1984 152 156 6697232
78 Canas PM Duarte JM Rodrigues RJ Kofalvi A Cunha RA Modification upon aging of the density of presynaptic modulation systems in the hippocampus Neurobiol Aging 30 2009 1877 1884 18304697
79 VanGuilder HD Yan H Farley JA Sonntag WE Freeman WM Aging alters the expression of neurotransmission-regulating proteins in the hippocampal synaptoproteome J Neurochem 113 2010 1577 1588 20374424
80 Hara Y Park CS Janssen WG Punsoni M Rapp PR Morrison JH Synaptic characteristics of dentate gyrus axonal boutons and their relationships with aging, menopause, and memory in female rhesus monkeys J Neurosci 31 2011 7737 7744 21613486
81 Geinisman Y Berry RW Disterhoft JF Power JM Van der Zee EA Associative learning elicits the formation of multiple-synapse boutons J Neurosci 21 2001 5568 5573 11466428
82 Harris KM How multiple-synapse boutons could preserve input specificity during an interneuronal spread of LTP Trends Neurosci 18 1995 365 369 7482800
83 Hara Y Park CS Janssen WG Roberts MT Morrison JH Rapp PR Synaptic correlates of memory and menopause in the hippocampal dentate gyrus in rhesus monkeys Neurobiol Aging 33 421 2012 17 28
84 Bloss EB Janssen WG Ohm DT Yuk FJ Wadsworth S Saardi KM Evidence for reduced experience-dependent dendritic spine plasticity in the aging prefrontal cortex J Neurosci 31 2011 7831 7839 21613496
85 Dumitriu D Hao J Hara Y Kaufmann J Janssen WG Lou W Selective changes in thin spine density and morphology in monkey prefrontal cortex correlate with aging-related cognitive impairment J Neurosci 30 2010 7507 7515 20519525
86 Nicholson DA Yoshida R Berry RW Gallagher M Geinisman Y Reduction in size of perforated postsynaptic densities in hippocampal axospinous synapses and age-related spatial learning impairments J Neurosci 24 2004 7648 7653 15342731
87 Campbell LW Hao SY Thibault O Blalock EM Landfield PW Aging changes in voltage-gated calcium currents in hippocampal CA1 neurons J Neurosci 16 1996 6286 6295 8815908
88 Thibault O Landfield PW Increase in single L-type calcium channels in hippocampal neurons during aging Science 272 1996 1017 1020 8638124
89 Disterhoft JF Moyer JR Jr Thompson LT Kowalska M Functional aspects of calcium-channel modulation Clin Neuropharmacol 16 Suppl 1 1993 S12 S24 8390916
90 Pitler TA Landfield PW Aging-related prolongation of calcium spike duration in rat hippocampal slice neurons Brain Res 508 1990 1 6 2337778
91 Kerr DS Campbell LW Hao SY Landfield PW Corticosteroid modulation of hippocampal potentials: increased effect with aging Science 245 1989 1505 1509 2781293
92 Moyer JR Jr Thompson LT Black JP Disterhoft JF Nimodipine increases excitability of rabbit CA1 pyramidal neurons in an age- and concentration-dependent manner J Neurophysiol 68 1992 2100 2109 1491260
93 Power JM Wu WW Sametsky E Oh MM Disterhoft JF Age-related enhancement of the slow outward calcium-activated potassium current in hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons in vitro J Neurosci 22 2002 7234 7243 12177218
94 Landfield PW Pitler TA Applegate MD The effects of high Mg2+-to-Ca2+ ratios on frequency potentiation in hippocampal slices of young and aged rats J Neurophysiol 56 1986 797 811 3783221
95 Ouanounou A Zhang L Charlton MP Carlen PL Differential modulation of synaptic transmission by calcium chelators in young and aged hippocampal CA1 neurons: evidence for altered calcium homeostasis in aging J Neurosci 19 1999 906 915 9920654
96 Thibault O Hadley R Landfield PW Elevated postsynaptic [Ca2+]i and L-type calcium channel activity in aged hippocampal neurons: relationship to impaired synaptic plasticity J Neurosci 21 2001 9744 9756 11739583
97 Norris CM Halpain S Foster TC Reversal of age-related alterations in synaptic plasticity by blockade of L-type Ca2+ channels J Neurosci 18 1998 3171 3179 9547225
98 Lu YM Jia Z Janus C Henderson JT Gerlai R Wojtowicz JM Mice lacking metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 show impaired learning and reduced CA1 long-term potentiation (LTP) but normal CA3 LTP J Neurosci 17 1997 5196 5205 9185557
99 Xu J Zhu Y Contractor A Heinemann SF mGluR5 has a critical role in inhibitory learning J Neurosci 29 2009 3676 3684 19321764
100 Manahan-Vaughan D Braunewell KH The metabotropic glutamate receptor, mGluR5, is a key determinant of good and bad spatial learning performance and hippocampal synaptic plasticity Cereb Cortex 15 2005 1703 1713 15703249
101 Menard C Quirion R Group 1 metabotropic glutamate receptor function and its regulation of learning and memory in the aging brain Front Pharmacol 3 2012 182 23091460
102 Menard C Quirion R Successful cognitive aging in rats: a role for mGluR5 glutamate receptors, homer 1 proteins and downstream signaling pathways PLoS One 7 2012 e28666 22238580
103 Menard C Tse YC Cavanagh C Chabot JG Herzog H Schwarzer C Knockdown of prodynorphin gene prevents cognitive decline, reduces anxiety, and rescues loss of group 1 metabotropic glutamate receptor function in aging J Neurosci 33 2013 12792 12804 23904614
104 Shankar S Teyler TJ Robbins N Aging differentially alters forms of long-term potentiation in rat hippocampal area CA1 J Neurophysiol 79 1998 334 341 9425202
105 Lee HK Min SS Gallagher M Kirkwood A NMDA receptor-independent long-term depression correlates with successful aging in rats Nat Neurosci 8 2005 1657 1659 16286930
106 Bank B DeWeer A Kuzirian AM Rasmussen H Alkon DL Classical conditioning induces long-term translocation of protein kinase C in rabbit hippocampal CA1 cells Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 85 1988 1988 1992 3162320
107 Olds JL Anderson ML McPhie DL Staten LD Alkon DL Imaging of memory-specific changes in the distribution of protein kinase C in the hippocampus Science 245 1989 866 869 2772638
108 Zhang GR Liu M Cao H Kong L Wang X O’Brien JA Improved spatial learning in aged rats by genetic activation of protein kinase C in small groups of hippocampal neurons Hippocampus 19 2009 413 423 18942114
109 Codazzi F Di Cesare A Chiulli N Albanese A Meyer T Zacchetti D Synergistic control of protein kinase Cgamma activity by ionotropic and metabotropic glutamate receptor inputs in hippocampal neurons J Neurosci 26 2006 3404 3411 16571747
110 Malenka RC Kauer JA Perkel DJ Mauk MD Kelly PT Nicoll RA An essential role for postsynaptic calmodulin and protein kinase activity in long-term potentiation Nature 340 1989 554 557 2549423
111 Malinow R Schulman H Tsien RW Inhibition of postsynaptic PKC or CaMKII blocks induction but not expression of LTP Science 245 1989 862 866 2549638
112 Chung HJ Xia J Scannevin RH Zhang X Huganir RL Phosphorylation of the AMPA receptor subunit GluR2 differentially regulates its interaction with PDZ domain-containing proteins J Neurosci 20 2000 7258 7267 11007883
113 Matsuda S Mikawa S Hirai H Phosphorylation of serine-880 in GluR2 by protein kinase C prevents its C terminus from binding with glutamate receptor-interacting protein J Neurochem 73 1999 1765 1768 10501226
114 Nithianantharajah J Murphy M Experience on the Barnes spatial maze influences PKCgamma levels in the hippocampus Int J Neurosci 119 2009 1014 1030 19466636
115 Pascale A Govoni S Battaini F Age-related alteration of PKC, a key enzyme in memory processes: physiological and pathological examples Mol Neurobiol 16 1998 49 62 9554701
116 Colombo PJ Gallagher M Individual differences in spatial memory among aged rats are related to hippocampal PKCgamma immunoreactivity Hippocampus 12 2002 285 289 12000125
117 Colombo PJ Wetsel WC Gallagher M Spatial memory is related to hippocampal subcellular concentrations of calcium-dependent protein kinase C isoforms in young and aged rats Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 94 1997 14195 14199 9391176
118 Paylor R Rudy JW Wehner JM Acute phorbol ester treatment improves spatial learning performance in rats Behav Brain Res 45 1991 189 193 1789927
119 Mathis C Lehmann J Ungerer A The selective protein kinase C inhibitor, NPC 15437, induces specific deficits in memory retention in mice Eur J Pharmacol 220 1992 107 110 1425976
120 Sun MK Alkon DL Pharmacology of protein kinase C activators: cognition-enhancing and antidementic therapeutics Pharmacol Ther 127 2010 66 77 20382181
121 Gaesser JM Fyffe-Maricich SL Intracellular signaling pathway regulation of myelination and remyelination in the CNS Exp Neurol 2016 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.expneurol.2016.03.008
122 Pan YW Storm DR Xia Z Role of adult neurogenesis in hippocampus-dependent memory, contextual fear extinction and remote contextual memory: new insights from ERK5 MAP kinase Neurobiol Learn Mem 105 2013 81 92 23871742
123 Andrusiak MG Jin Y Context specificity of stress-activated MAP Kinase signaling: the story as told by C. elegans J Biol Chem 2016 http://dx.doi.org/10.1074/jbc.R115.711101
124 Mao LM Wang JQ Synaptically localized mitogen-activated protein kinases: local substrates and regulation Mol Neurobiol 2015 http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s12035-015-9535-1
125 Willard SS Koochekpour S Glutamate, glutamate receptors, and downstream signaling pathways Int J Biol Sci 9 2013 948 959 24155668
126 Davis S Vanhoutte P Pages C Caboche J Laroche S The MAPK/ERK cascade targets both Elk-1 and cAMP response element-binding protein to control long-term potentiation-dependent gene expression in the dentate gyrus in vivo J Neurosci 20 2000 4563 4572 10844026
127 Sweatt JD The neuronal MAP kinase cascade: a biochemical signal integration system subserving synaptic plasticity and memory J Neurochem 76 2001 1 10 11145972
128 Banko JL Hou L Poulin F Sonenberg N Klann E Regulation of eukaryotic initiation factor 4E by converging signaling pathways during metabotropic glutamate receptor-dependent long-term depression J Neurosci 26 2006 2167 2173 16495443
129 Banko JL Poulin F Hou L DeMaria CT Sonenberg N Klann E The translation repressor 4E-BP2 is critical for eIF4F complex formation, synaptic plasticity, and memory in the hippocampus J Neurosci 25 2005 9581 9590 16237163
130 Antion MD Hou L Wong H Hoeffer CA Klann E mGluR-dependent long-term depression is associated with increased phosphorylation of S6 and synthesis of elongation factor 1A but remains expressed in S6K-deficient mice Mol Cell Biol 28 2008 2996 3007 18316404
131 English JD Sweatt JD A requirement for the mitogen-activated protein kinase cascade in hippocampal long term potentiation J Biol Chem 272 1997 19103 19106 9235897
132 Impey S Obrietan K Wong ST Poser S Yano S Wayman G Cross talk between ERK and PKA is required for Ca2+ stimulation of CREB-dependent transcription and ERK nuclear translocation Neuron 21 1998 869 883 9808472
133 Peng S Zhang Y Zhang J Wang H Ren B ERK in learning and memory: a review of recent research Int J Mol Sci 11 2010 222 232 20162012
134 Selcher JC Atkins CM Trzaskos JM Paylor R Sweatt JD A necessity for MAP kinase activation in mammalian spatial learning Learn Mem 6 1999 478 490 10541468
135 Gallagher SM Daly CA Bear MF Huber KM Extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase activation is required for metabotropic glutamate receptor-dependent long-term depression in hippocampal area CA1 J Neurosci 24 2004 4859 4864 15152046
136 Mao L Yang L Tang Q Samdani S Zhang G Wang JQ The scaffold protein Homer1b/c links metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 to extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase cascades in neurons J Neurosci 25 2005 2741 2752 15758184
137 Chan TO Rittenhouse SE Tsichlis PN AKT/PKB and other D3 phosphoinositide-regulated kinases: kinase activation by phosphoinositide-dependent phosphorylation Annu Rev Biochem 68 1999 965 1014 10872470
138 Dufner A Thomas G Ribosomal S6 kinase signaling and the control of translation Exp Cell Res 253 1999 100 109 10579915
139 Lawrence JC Jr Abraham RT PHAS/4E-BPs as regulators of mRNA translation and cell proliferation Trends Biochem Sci 22 1997 345 349 9301335
140 Tsokas P Ma T Iyengar R Landau EM Blitzer RD Mitogen-activated protein kinase upregulates the dendritic translation machinery in long-term potentiation by controlling the mammalian target of rapamycin pathway J Neurosci 27 2007 5885 5894 17537959
141 Banko JL Merhav M Stern E Sonenberg N Rosenblum K Klann E Behavioral alterations in mice lacking the translation repressor 4E-BP2 Neurobiol Learn Mem 87 2007 248 256 17029989
142 Hou L Klann E Activation of the phosphoinositide 3-kinase-Akt-mammalian target of rapamycin signaling pathway is required for metabotropic glutamate receptor-dependent long-term depression J Neurosci 24 2004 6352 6361 15254091
143 Laplante M Sabatini DM mTOR signaling at a glance J Cell Sci 122 2009 3589 3594 19812304
144 Pehar M Puglielli L Molecular and cellular mechanisms linking aging to cognitive decline and Alzheimer’s disease Perloft JW Wong AH Cell Aging Nova Science Publishers, Inc New York, NY 2012 153 190
145 Han JH Kushner SA Yiu AP Cole CJ Matynia A Brown RA Neuronal competition and selection during memory formation Science 316 2007 457 460 17446403
146 Svensson J Diez M Engel J Wass C Tivesten A Jansson JO Endocrine liver-derived IGF-I is of importance for spatial learning and memory in old mice J Endocrinol 189 2006 617 627 16731792
147 Chen DY Stern SA Garcia-Osta A Saunier-Rebori B Pollonini G Bambah-Mukku D A critical role for IGF-II in memory consolidation and enhancement Nature 469 2011 491 497 21270887
148 Agis-Balboa RC Arcos-Diaz D Wittnam J Govindarajan N Blom K Burkhardt S A hippocampal insulin-growth factor 2 pathway regulates the extinction of fear memories EMBO J 30 2011 4071 4083 21873981
149 Josselyn SA Shi C Carlezon WA Jr Neve RL Nestler EJ Davis M Long-term memory is facilitated by cAMP response element-binding protein overexpression in the amygdala J Neurosci 21 2001 2404 2412 11264314
150 Kida S Josselyn SA Pena de Ortiz S Kogan JH Chevere I Masushige S CREB required for the stability of new and reactivated fear memories Nat Neurosci 5 2002 348 355 11889468
151 Lonze BE Ginty DD Function and regulation of CREB family transcription factors in the nervous system Neuron 35 2002 605 623 12194863
152 Suzuki A Fukushima H Mukawa T Toyoda H Wu LJ Zhao MG Upregulation of CREB-mediated transcription enhances both short- and long-term memory J Neurosci 31 2011 8786 8802 21677163
153 West AE Griffith EC Greenberg ME Regulation of transcription factors by neuronal activity Nat Rev Neurosci 3 2002 921 931 12461549
154 Brightwell JJ Gallagher M Colombo PJ Hippocampal CREB1 but not CREB2 is decreased in aged rats with spatial memory impairments Neurobiol Learn Mem 81 2004 19 26 14670355
155 Minatohara K Akiyoshi M Okuno H Role of immediate-early genes in synaptic plasticity and neuronal ensembles underlying the memory trace Front Mol Neurosci 8 2015 78 26778955
156 Guzowski JF Insights into immediate-early gene function in hippocampal memory consolidation using antisense oligonucleotide and fluorescent imaging approaches Hippocampus 12 2002 86 104 11918292
157 Blalock EM Chen KC Sharrow K Herman JP Porter NM Foster TC Gene microarrays in hippocampal aging: statistical profiling identifies novel processes correlated with cognitive impairment J Neurosci 23 2003 3807 3819 12736351
158 Small SA Chawla MK Buonocore M Rapp PR Barnes CA Imaging correlates of brain function in monkeys and rats isolates a hippocampal subregion differentially vulnerable to aging Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101 2004 7181 7186 15118105
159 Dickey CA Loring JF Montgomery J Gordon MN Eastman PS Morgan D Selectively reduced expression of synaptic plasticity-related genes in amyloid precursor protein + presenilin-1 transgenic mice J Neurosci 23 2003 5219 5226 12832546
160 Palop JJ Chin J Bien-Ly N Massaro C Yeung BZ Yu GQ Vulnerability of dentate granule cells to disruption of arc expression in human amyloid precursor protein transgenic mice J Neurosci 25 2005 9686 9693 16237173
161 Rosi S Ramirez-Amaya V Vazdarjanova A Worley PF Barnes CA Wenk GL Neuroinflammation alters the hippocampal pattern of behaviorally induced Arc expression J Neurosci 25 2005 723 731 15659610
162 Lee CK Weindruch R Prolla TA Gene-expression profile of the ageing brain in mice Nat Genet 25 2000 294 297 10888876
163 Smani T Dionisio N Lopez JJ Berna-Erro A Rosado JA Cytoskeletal and scaffolding proteins as structural and functional determinants of TRP channels Biochim Biophys Acta 1838 2014 658 664 23333715
164 Serge A Fourgeaud L Hemar A Choquet D Receptor activation and homer differentially control the lateral mobility of metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 in the neuronal membrane J Neurosci 22 2002 3910 3920 12019310
165 Xiao B Tu JC Petralia RS Yuan JP Doan A Breder CD Homer regulates the association of group 1 metabotropic glutamate receptors with multivalent complexes of homer-related, synaptic proteins Neuron 21 1998 707 716 9808458
166 Kammermeier PJ Xiao B Tu JC Worley PF Ikeda SR Homer proteins regulate coupling of group I metabotropic glutamate receptors to N-type calcium and M-type potassium channels J Neurosci 20 2000 7238 7245 11007880
167 Shiraishi-Yamaguchi Y Furuichi T The homer family proteins Genome Biol 8 2007 206 17316461
168 Hayashi MK Tang C Verpelli C Narayanan R Stearns MH Xu RM The postsynaptic density proteins Homer and Shank form a polymeric network structure Cell 137 2009 159 171 19345194
169 Bertaso F Roussignol G Worley P Bockaert J Fagni L Ango F Homer1a-dependent crosstalk between NMDA and metabotropic glutamate receptors in mouse neurons PLoS One 5 2010 e9755 20305784
170 Ronesi JA Huber KM Homer interactions are necessary for metabotropic glutamate receptor-induced long-term depression and translational activation J Neurosci 28 2008 543 547 18184796
171 O’Riordan K Gerstein H Hullinger R Burger C The role of Homer1c in metabotropic glutamate receptor-dependent long-term potentiation Hippocampus 24 2014 1 6 24167026
172 Jaubert PJ Golub MS Lo YY Germann SL Dehoff MH Worley PF Complex, multimodal behavioral profile of the Homer1 knockout mouse Genes Brain Behav 6 2007 141 154 16734773
173 Szumlinski KK Lominac KD Kleschen MJ Oleson EB Dehoff MH Schwarz MK Behavioral and neurochemical phenotyping of Homer1 mutant mice: possible relevance to schizophrenia Genes Brain Behav 4 2005 273 288 16011574
174 Gerstein H O’Riordan K Osting S Schwarz M Burger C Rescue of synaptic plasticity and spatial learning deficits in the hippocampus of Homer1 knockout mice by recombinant adeno-associated viral gene delivery of Homer1c Neurobiol Learn Mem 97 2012 17 29 21945599
175 Consortium EP An integrated encyclopedia of DNA elements in the human genome Nature 489 2012 57 74 22955616
176 Zhou VW Goren A Bernstein BE Charting histone modifications and the functional organization of mammalian genomes Nat Rev Genet 12 2011 7 18 21116306
177 Flavell SW Greenberg ME Signaling mechanisms linking neuronal activity to gene expression and plasticity of the nervous system Annu Rev Neurosci 31 2008 563 590 18558867
178 Kouzarides T Chromatin modifications and their function Cell 128 2007 693 705 17320507
179 Lee KK Workman JL Histone acetyltransferase complexes: one size doesn’t fit all Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 8 2007 284 295 17380162
180 Mather KA Kwok JB Armstrong N Sachdev PS The role of epigenetics in cognitive ageing Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 29 2014 1162 1171 25098266
181 Peleg S Sananbenesi F Zovoilis A Burkhardt S Bahari-Javan S Agis-Balboa RC Altered histone acetylation is associated with age-dependent memory impairment in mice Science 328 2010 753 756 20448184
182 Lovatel GA Elsner VR Bertoldi K Vanzella C dos Moyses FS Vizuete A Treadmill exercise induces age-related changes in aversive memory, neuroinflammatory and epigenetic processes in the rat hippocampus Neurobiol Learn Mem 101 2013 94 102 23357282
183 Akbarian S Beeri MS Haroutunian V Epigenetic determinants of healthy and diseased brain aging and cognition JAMA Neurol 70 2013 711 718 23571692
184 Lubin FD Roth TL Sweatt JD Epigenetic regulation of BDNF gene transcription in the consolidation of fear memory J Neurosci 28 2008 10576 10586 18923034
185 McGowan PO Szyf M The epigenetics of social adversity in early life: implications for mental health outcomes Neurobiol Dis 39 2010 66 72 20053376
186 Penner MR Roth TL Barnes CA Sweatt JD An epigenetic hypothesis of aging-related cognitive dysfunction Front Aging Neurosci 2 2010 9 20552047
187 Oliveira AM Hemstedt TJ Bading H Rescue of aging-associated decline in Dnmt3a2 expression restores cognitive abilities Nat Neurosci 15 2012 1111 1113 22751036
188 Dagnas M Mons N Region- and age-specific patterns of histone acetylation related to spatial and cued learning in the water maze Hippocampus 23 2013 581 591 23436469
189 Yankner BA Lu T Loerch P The aging brain Annu Rev Pathol 3 2008 41 66 18039130
190 Puglielli L Aging of the brain, neurotrophin signaling, and Alzheimer’s disease: is IGF1-R the common culprit Neurobiol Aging 29 2008 795 811 17313996
191 Selkoe DJ Alzheimer’s disease is a synaptic failure Science 298 2002 789 791 12399581
192 Li M Pehar M Liu Y Bhattacharyya A Zhang SC O’Riordan KJ The amyloid precursor protein (APP) intracellular domain regulates translation of p44, a short isoform of p53, through an IRES-dependent mechanism Neurobiol Aging 36 2015 2725 2736 26174856
193 Beckett C Nalivaeva NN Belyaev ND Turner AJ Nuclear signalling by membrane protein intracellular domains: the AICD enigma Cell Signal 24 2012 402 409 22024280
194 Cao X Sudhof TC A transcriptionally [correction of transcriptively] active complex of APP with Fe65 and histone acetyltransferase Tip60 Science 293 2001 115 120 11441186
195 Pardossi-Piquard R Petit A Kawarai T Sunyach C Alves da Costa C Vincent B Presenilin-dependent transcriptional control of the abeta-degrading enzyme neprilysin by intracellular domains of betaAPP and APLP Neuron 46 2005 541 554 15944124
196 Carlsson CM Gleason CE Puglielli L Asthana S Dementia including alzheimer’s disease Halter JB Hazzard’s Geriatric Medicine and Gerontology 6 McGraw-Hill New York 2009 797 811
197 Van Cauwenberghe C Van Broeckhoven C Sleegers K The genetic landscape of Alzheimer disease: clinical implications and perspectives Genet Med 2015 http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/gim.2015.117
198 Rovelet-Lecrux A Hannequin D Raux G Le Meur N Laquerriere A Vital A APP locus duplication causes autosomal dominant early-onset Alzheimer disease with cerebral amyloid angiopathy Nat Genet 38 2006 24 26 16369530
199 Sleegers K Brouwers N Gijselinck I Theuns J Goossens D Wauters J APP duplication is sufficient to cause early onset Alzheimer’s dementia with cerebral amyloid angiopathy Brain 129 2006 2977 2983 16921174
200 Jonsson T Atwal JK Steinberg S Snaedal J Jonsson PV Bjornsson S A mutation in APP protects against Alzheimer’s disease and age-related cognitive decline Nature 488 2012 96 99 22801501
201 Michaelson DM APOE epsilon4: the most prevalent yet understudied risk factor for Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimers Dement 10 2014 861 868 25217293
202 Riedel BC Thompson PM Brinton RD Age, APOE and sex: triad of risk of Alzheimer’s disease J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 2016 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jsbmb.2016.03.012
203 Duyckaerts C Potier MC Delatour B Alzheimer disease models and human neuropathology: similarities and differences Acta Neuropathol 115 2008 5 38 18038275
204 McGowan E Eriksen J Hutton M A decade of modeling Alzheimer’s disease in transgenic mice Trends Genet 22 2006 281 289 16567017
205 McGowan E Pickford F Kim J Onstead L Eriksen J Yu C Abeta42 is essential for parenchymal and vascular amyloid deposition in mice Neuron 47 2005 191 199 16039562
206 Ghosal K Vogt DL Liang M Shen Y Lamb BT Pimplikar SW Alzheimer’s disease-like pathological features in transgenic mice expressing the APP intracellular domain Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106 2009 18367 18372 19837693
207 Giliberto L Zhou D Weldon R Tamagno E De Luca P Tabaton M Evidence that the amyloid beta precursor protein-intracellular domain lowers the stress threshold of neurons and has a regulated transcriptional role Mol Neurodegener 3 2008 12 18764939
208 Erraji-Benchekroun L Underwood MD Arango V Galfalvy H Pavlidis P Smyrniotopoulos P Molecular aging in human prefrontal cortex is selective and continuous throughout adult life Biol Psychiatry 57 2005 549 558 15737671
209 Fraser HB Khaitovich P Plotkin JB Paabo S Eisen MB Aging and gene expression in the primate brain PLoS Biol 3 2005 e274 16048372
210 Blalock EM Geddes JW Chen KC Porter NM Markesbery WR Landfield PW Incipient Alzheimer’s disease: microarray correlation analyses reveal major transcriptional and tumor suppressor responses Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101 2004 2173 2178 14769913
211 Butler RN Sprott R Warner H Bland J Feuers R Forster M Biomarkers of aging: from primitive organisms to humans J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 59 2004 B560 B567 15215265
212 Bondy CA Cheng CM Signaling by insulin-like growth factor 1 in brain Eur J Pharmacol 490 2004 25 31 15094071
213 Werther GA Abate M Hogg A Cheesman H Oldfield B Hards D Localization of insulin-like growth factor-I mRNA in rat brain by in situ hybridization – relationship to IGF-I receptors Mol Endocrinol 4 1990 773 778 2177145
214 Werther GA Hogg A Oldfield BJ McKinley MJ Figdor R Allen AM Localization and characterization of insulin receptors in rat brain and pituitary gland using in vitro autoradiography and computerized densitometry Endocrinology 121 1987 1562 1570 3653038
215 Leduc MS Hageman RS Meng Q Verdugo RA Tsaih SW Churchill GA Identification of genetic determinants of IGF-1 levels and longevity among mouse inbred strains Aging Cell 9 2010 823 836 20735370
216 Selman C Lingard S Choudhury AI Batterham RL Claret M Clements M Evidence for lifespan extension and delayed age-related biomarkers in insulin receptor substrate 1 null mice FASEB J 22 2008 807 818 17928362
217 Barbieri M Bonafe M Franceschi C Paolisso G Insulin/IGF-I-signaling pathway: an evolutionarily conserved mechanism of longevity from yeast to humans Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 285 2003 E1064 E1071 14534077
218 Kenyon C The plasticity of aging: insights from long-lived mutants Cell 120 2005 449 460 15734678
219 Longo VD Finch CE Evolutionary medicine: from dwarf model systems to healthy centenarians Science 299 2003 1342 1346 12610293
220 Bonafe M Barbieri M Marchegiani F Olivieri F Ragno E Giampieri C Polymorphic variants of insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) receptor and phosphoinositide 3-kinase genes affect IGF-I plasma levels and human longevity: cues for an evolutionarily conserved mechanism of life span control J Clin Endocrinol Metab 88 2003 3299 3304 12843179
221 Paolisso G Ammendola S Del Buono A Gambardella A Riondino M Tagliamonte MR Serum levels of insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) and IGF-binding protein-3 in healthy centenarians: relationship with plasma leptin and lipid concentrations, insulin action, and cognitive function J Clin Endocrinol Metab 82 1997 2204 2209 9215295
222 Suh Y Atzmon G Cho MO Hwang D Liu B Leahy DJ Functionally significant insulin-like growth factor I receptor mutations in centenarians Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105 2008 3438 3442 18316725
223 van Heemst D Beekman M Mooijaart SP Heijmans BT Brandt BW Zwaan BJ Reduced insulin/IGF-1 signalling and human longevity Aging Cell 4 2005 79 85 15771611
224 Cohen E Paulsson JF Blinder P Burstyn-Cohen T Du D Estepa G Reduced IGF-1 signaling delays age-associated proteotoxicity in mice Cell 139 2009 1157 1169 20005808
225 Freude S Hettich MM Schumann C Stohr O Koch L Kohler C Neuronal IGF-1 resistance reduces Abeta accumulation and protects against premature death in a model of Alzheimer’s disease FASEB J 23 2009 3315 3324 19487308
226 Russo VC Gluckman PD Feldman EL Werther GA The insulin-like growth factor system and its pleiotropic functions in brain Endocr Rev 26 2005 916 943 16131630
227 Campisi J tumor suppression, and organismal aging: good citizens, bad neighbors Cell 120 2005 513 522 15734683
228 Campisi J Suppressing cancer: the importance of being senescent Science 309 2005 886 887 16081723
229 Marcel V Dichtel-Danjoy ML Sagne C Hafsi H Ma D Ortiz-Cuaran S Biological functions of p53 isoforms through evolution: lessons from animal and cellular models Cell Death Differ 18 2011 1815 1824 21941372
230 Maier B Gluba W Bernier B Turner T Mohammad K Guise T Modulation of mammalian life span by the short isoform of p53 Genes Dev 18 2004 306 319 14871929
231 Pehar M O’Riordan KJ Burns-Cusato M Andrzejewski ME del Alcazar CG Burger C Altered longevity-assurance activity of p53:p44 in the mouse causes memory loss, neurodegeneration and premature death Aging Cell 9 2010 174 190 20409077
232 Costantini C Scrable H Puglielli L An aging pathway controls the TrkA to p75NTR receptor switch and amyloid beta-peptide generation EMBO J 25 2006 1997 2006 16619032
233 Pehar M Ko MH Li M Scrable H Puglielli L P44, the ‘longevity-assurance’ isoform of P53, regulates tau phosphorylation and is activated in an age-dependent fashion Aging Cell 13 2014 449 456 24341977
234 Chen CD Podvin S Gillespie E Leeman SE Abraham CR Insulin stimulates the cleavage and release of the extracellular domain of Klotho by ADAM10 and ADAM17 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104 2007 19796 197801 18056631
235 Bloch L Sineshchekova O Reichenbach D Reiss K Saftig P Kuro-o M Klotho is a substrate for alpha-, beta- and gamma-secretase FEBS Lett 583 2009 3221 3224 19737556
236 Kuro-o M Matsumura Y Aizawa H Kawaguchi H Suga T Utsugi T Mutation of the mouse klotho gene leads to a syndrome resembling ageing Nature 390 1997 45 51 9363890
237 Kurosu H Yamamoto M Clark JD Pastor JV Nandi A Gurnani P Suppression of aging in mice by the hormone Klotho Science 309 2005 1829 1833 16123266
238 Imura A Tsuji Y Murata M Maeda R Kubota K Iwano A alpha-Klotho as a regulator of calcium homeostasis Science 316 2007 1615 1618 17569864
239 Arking DE Krebsova A Macek M Sr Macek M Jr Arking A Mian IS Association of human aging with a functional variant of klotho Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99 2002 856 861 11792841
240 Arking DE Becker DM Yanek LR Fallin D Judge DP Moy TF KLOTHO allele status and the risk of early-onset occult coronary artery disease Am J Hum Genet 72 2003 1154 1161 12669274
241 Ogata N Matsumura Y Shiraki M Kawano K Koshizuka Y Hosoi T Association of klotho gene polymorphism with bone density and spondylosis of the lumbar spine in postmenopausal women Bone 31 2002 37 42 12110410
242 Arking DE Atzmon G Arking A Barzilai N Dietz HC Association between a functional variant of the KLOTHO gene and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, blood pressure, stroke, and longevity Circ Res 96 2005 412 418 15677572
243 Ichikawa S Imel EA Kreiter ML Yu X Mackenzie DS Sorenson AH A homozygous missense mutation in human KLOTHO causes severe tumoral calcinosis J Clin Invest 117 2007 2684 2691 17710231
244 Park SJ Chung YH Lee JH Dang DK Nam Y Jeong JH Growth hormone-releaser diet attenuates cognitive dysfunction in klotho mutant mice via insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor activation in a genetic aging model Endocrinol Metab 29 2014 336 348
245 Shahmoon S Rubinfeld H Wolf I Cohen ZR Hadani M Shimon I The aging suppressor klotho: a potential regulator of growth hormone secretion Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 307 2014 E326 E334 24939736
246 Dubal DB Yokoyama JS Zhu L Broestl L Worden K Wang D Life extension factor klotho enhances cognition Cell Rep 7 2014 1065 1076 24813892
247 Dubal DB Zhu L Sanchez PE Worden K Broestl L Johnson E Life extension factor klotho prevents mortality and enhances cognition in hAPP transgenic mice J Neurosci 35 2015 2358 2371 25673831
248 Colman RJ Anderson RM Johnson SC Kastman EK Kosmatka KJ Beasley TM Caloric restriction delays disease onset and mortality in rhesus monkeys Science 325 2009 201 204 19590001
249 Del Arco A Segovia G de Blas M Garrido P Acuna-Castroviejo D Pamplona R Prefrontal cortex, caloric restriction and stress during aging: studies on dopamine and acetylcholine release, BDNF and working memory Behav Brain Res 216 2011 136 145 20655333
250 Witte AV Fobker M Gellner R Knecht S Floel A Caloric restriction improves memory in elderly humans Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106 2009 1255 1260 19171901
251 Mattison JA Roth GS Beasley TM Tilmont EM Handy AM Herbert RL Impact of caloric restriction on health and survival in rhesus monkeys from the NIA study Nature 489 2012 318 321 22932268
252 Prolla TA Mattson MP Molecular mechanisms of brain aging and neurodegenerative disorders: lessons from dietary restriction Trends Neurosci 24 2001 S21 S31 11881742
253 Stranahan AM Mattson MP Recruiting adaptive cellular stress responses for successful brain ageing Nat Rev Neurosci 13 2012 209 216 22251954
254 Villain N Picq JL Aujard F Pifferi F Body mass loss correlates with cognitive performance in primates under acute caloric restriction conditions Behav Brain Res 305 2016 157 163 26952885
255 Prehn K Jumpertz von Schwartzenberg R Mai K Zeitz U Witte AV Hampel D Caloric restriction in older adults-Differential effects of weight loss and reduced weight on brain structure and function Cereb Cortex 2016 http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhw008
256 Guo J Bakshi V Lin AL Early shifts of brain metabolism by caloric restriction preserve white matter integrity and long-term memory in aging mice Front Aging Neurosci 7 2015 213 26617514
257 Kim Y Kim S Kim C Sato T Kojima M Park S Ghrelin is required for dietary restriction-induced enhancement of hippocampal neurogenesis: lessons from ghrelin knockout mice Endocr J 62 2015 269 275 25735661
258 Lee J Duan W Mattson MP Evidence that brain-derived neurotrophic factor is required for basal neurogenesis and mediates, in part, the enhancement of neurogenesis by dietary restriction in the hippocampus of adult mice J Neurochem 82 2002 1367 1375 12354284
259 Love R Calorie restriction may be neuroprotective in AD and PD Lancet Neurol 4 2005 84 15709227
260 Colman RJ Beasley TM Kemnitz JW Johnson SC Weindruch R Anderson RM Caloric restriction reduces age-related and all-cause mortality in rhesus monkeys Nat Commun 5 2014 3557 24691430
261 Feng Z Hanson RW Berger NA Trubitsyn A Reprogramming of energy metabolism as a driver of aging Oncotarget 2016 http://dx.doi.org/10.18632/oncotarget.7645
262 Anderson RM Weindruch R Metabolic reprogramming, caloric restriction and aging Trends Endocrinol Metab 21 2010 134 141 20004110
263 Anderson RM Weindruch R The caloric restriction paradigm: implications for healthy human aging Am J Hum Biol 24 2012 101 106 22290875
264 Voelcker-Rehage C Godde B Staudinger UM Physical and motor fitness are both related to cognition in old age Eur J Neurosci 31 2010 167 176 20092563
265 Hillman CH Erickson KI Kramer AF Be smart, exercise your heart: exercise effects on brain and cognition Nat Rev Neurosci 9 2008 58 65 18094706
266 Hill RD Storandt M Malley M The impact of long-term exercise training on psychological function in older adults J Gerontol 48 1993 12 17
267 Leggio MG Mandolesi L Federico F Spirito F Ricci B Gelfo F Environmental enrichment promotes improved spatial abilities and enhanced dendritic growth in the rat Behav Brain Res 163 2005 78 90 15913801
268 van Praag H Kempermann G Gage FH Neural consequences of environmental enrichment Nat Rev Neurosci 1 2000 191 198 11257907
269 Rossi C Angelucci A Costantin L Braschi C Mazzantini M Babbini F Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is required for the enhancement of hippocampal neurogenesis following environmental enrichment Eur J Neurosci 24 2006 1850 1856 17040481
270 Stern Y Cognitive reserve in ageing and Alzheimer’s disease Lancet Neurol 11 2012 1006 1012 23079557
271 Steffener J Stern Y Exploring the neural basis of cognitive reserve in aging Biochim Biophys Acta 1822 2012 467 473 21982946
