LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101500072
35770
Nat Rev Neurol
Nat Rev Neurol
Nature reviews. Neurology
1759-4758
1759-4766

27282653
5017598
10.1038/nrneurol.2016.84
NIHMS811607
Article
Genetic variants in Alzheimer disease – molecular and brain network approaches
Gaiteri Chris 1
Mostafavi Sara 2
Honey Christopher 3
De Jager Philip L. 4
Bennett David A. 1
1 Rush Alzheimer's Disease Center, Rush University Medical Center, 600 S Paulina St, Chicago, Illinois 60612, United States
2 Department of Statistics, and Medical Genetics; Centre for Molecular and Medicine and Therapeutics, University of British Columbia, 950 West 28th Avenue, Vancouver, British Columbia V5Z 4H4, Canada
3 Department of Psychology, University of Toronto, 100 St. George Street, 4th Floor Sidney Smith Hall, Toronto, Ontario M5S 3G3, Canada
4 Program in Translational NeuroPsychiatric Genomics, Institute for the Neurosciences, Departments of Neurology and Psychiatry, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 75 Francis Street, Boston MA 02115, United States
23 8 2016
10 6 2016
7 2016
01 1 2017
12 7 413427
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Genetic studies in late-onset Alzheimer disease (LOAD) are aimed at identifying core disease mechanisms and providing potential biomarkers and drug candidates to improve clinical care for AD. However, due to the complexity of LOAD, including pathological heterogeneity and disease polygenicity, extracting actionable guidance from LOAD genetics has been challenging. Past attempts to summarize the effects of LOAD-associated genetic variants have used pathway analysis and collections of small-scale experiments to hypothesize functional convergence across several variants. In this review, we discuss how the study of molecular, cellular and brain networks provides additional information on the effect of LOAD-associated genetic variants. We then discuss emerging combinations of omic data types in multiscale models, which provide a more comprehensive representation of the effect of LOAD-associated genetic variants at multiple biophysical scales. Further, we highlight the clinical potential of mechanistically coupling genetic variants and disease phenotypes with multiscale brain models.


Introduction

Alzheimer disease (AD) is a common1, progressive2, lethal neurodegenerative disorder3. No preventative or curative treatment exists for this disease with high emotional4 and economic5,6 costs. In the USA, the prevalence of AD is expected to triple by 20507, but the global ramifications are even larger, as at that time, the majority of cases will occur in developing countries1. Genetic factors explain most of the variation in the risk of AD8, especially in familial AD (a rare form of the disease with early onset), in which most genetic variants relate to amyloid-β (Aβ) processing9,10. However, no single genetic, lifestyle or environmental factor is sufficient to predict late-onset AD (LOAD) with clinically relevant certainty11. Variants have been detected in more than 20 genes, and are involved in a wide range of functions including metabolism, inflammation, synaptic activity and intracellular trafficking12. Functional effects of these genetic variants have been observed across multiple cell types and on processes such as intracellular signalling, cell morphology and regional brain connectivity, which span several physiological scales. However, the identification of LOAD variants has not yet led to preventative treatments or provided clinical guidance for carriers of specific AD-associated genetic variants.

Previous work on AD genetics has demonstrated the utility of grouping disease-associated variants into canonical pathways13-16. However, manually curated pathways and scientific literature are incomplete, can lack disease specificity, and can reflect historical biases17-19. Network-based approaches (Box 1), comprise complementary methods to identify the function of genetic variants and the basis of AD pathology, by mapping them onto the interactions between the components of various biological systems20,21. This framework facilitates the use of recent omics datasets and primary data from cohorts of individuals with AD to explore the effects of AD genetic variants.

In this review, we focus on how molecular networks provide a functional context for genetic risk variants in AD, and their potential for personalized diagnosis and disease stratification. We first consider ongoing efforts to identify genetic variants and current assessments of their role in AD pathology. Then, we examine network approaches to understand the function of AD variants, both at the molecular and whole-brain neuroimaging levels. Finally, we consider how multiscale models might bridge the gap between the effects of AD-associated variants at the molecular level and their function at the level of the brain, which could enhance the clinical relevance of genetic variants.

Early genetic findings in AD

The Aβ hypothesis and APOE variants

Early genetic findings reported large effect sizes of genetic variants occurring in a group of genes that encode interacting proteins involved in Aβ processing. The resulting amyloid hypothesis profoundly influenced the direction of studies designed to prevent AD or modify the course of the disease14,22. Although these findings have been applied to understanding LOAD, they were obtained in the context of familial Alzheimer disease (which is typically early-onset), with the discovery of mutations in the genes APP23, PSEN1 and PSEN224,25, and of relatively common AD-associated alleles of APOE, which encodes a protein that physically interacts with Aβ and tau, and can substantially increase risk of LOAD26. The amyloid hypothesis has dominated the field for decades, and continues to be the major influence on clinical trials27.

Several trials of Aβ modulators are ongoing. For example, the Alzheimer's Prevention Initiative launched two clinical trials to evaluate the effects of early anti-amyloid treatment in populations at risk of AD — a large familial group in Columbia with early-onset AD driven by PSEN1 mutations28, and in individuals with homozygous APOE ε4 alleles. Similarly, the Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer's Network (DIAN) study selected participants from approximately 500 families carrying dominant mutations in APP, PSEN1 or PSEN2 and is testing the effect of Aβ modulators29. Pioglitazone, a PPAR-γ agonist that is already approved and in widespread use for the treatment of type 2 diabetes, is also being tested for efficacy in preventing AD in people with specific APOE–TOMM40 haplotypes30. These trials, and many others, represent ongoing high levels of investment in the amyloid hypothesis.

Since the US government began tracking AD clinical trials consistently in 2002, more than 400 clinical trials have tested more than 200 compounds27, of which only Memantine showed a mild reduction in symptoms31,32. Half of these trials involved Aβ-related therapies and failed to improve cognition in patients with AD, even when they significantly reduced Aβ levels33-36. These results could have been expected given that after the onset of overt cognitive impairment, increasing Aβ levels are only weakly correlated with further impairment in cognitive function37-39. Thus, therapeutic intervention in the early stages of LOAD might be required for Aβ-targeted therapies to show efficacy, a concept being tested in the ongoing trials in individuals with mild cognitive impairment (MCI)33 or high-risk asymptomatic participants40. It should be noted, however, that long-term administration of expensive agents, with potentially severe adverse effects, warrants careful ethical consideration, as AD-associated brain changes begin a decade or longer before AD-related cognitive decline29,41,42, and many individuals with moderate AD neuropathology do not have cognitive impairement37,43.

Regardless of the actual source, the continued failure of trials that evaluate AD treatments is disconcerting, in light of the large and increasing public health burden of the disease7. While these trials testify to the strength of the early findings on genetic perturbations of the APP processing in AD, this approach is still strongly tied to scientific advances made three decades ago, as opposed to incorporating more-recent genetic findings. It might therefore be helpful to use existing genetics findings and novel ‘omics’ technologies to uncover the disease mechanisms of AD and identify novel therapeutic targets.

Genome-wide association studies

After the early work on variants in early-onset AD, genetic research shifted towards the identification of AD-associated variants that have weak effects or are very rare. To date, GWAS have identified more than 20 genetic variants that influence the risk of AD12,44,45. Although these studies have provided insights into possible pathophysiological mechanisms of AD14,15,22, AD- associated variants that are rare or that have a weak effect are challenging to use in prognosis46,47, as their associated disease risk is much less than that of APOE variants, even when the variants are considered in aggregate48. These findings raise the question of how the identification of a wide range of variants can contribute to a coherent theory of AD pathology. In the past two years, whole exome or targeted sequencing studies49-51 have discovered rare variants that increase the risk of AD more strongly than do common variants (certain TREM2 variants are on par with the odds ratio of APOE ε4 variants).

Ongoing whole-genome sequencing projects, such as the Alzheimer's Disease Sequencing Project will continue to identify susceptibility loci in AD; however, the overall scientific returns of hunting for genetic variants are diminishing relative to the increasing size of the projects52. Gaining insight into the multigenic and multifactorial disease mechanisms in AD requires methods that go well beyond simple genotype–phenotype models. We must now start to scientifically consider and understand many genes, many phenotypes, and the interactions between them. This nascent third stage of AD genetics, the main focus of this review, uses systems biology methods that emphasize how variants interact and how their effects propagate through networks of molecular and brain circuit interactions, which span biophysical scales.

Molecular interactions in AD

Epistatic regulation of AD

The effect of the interaction between genetic variants might help explain the gap between the high heritability of AD and the weak effect of genetic variants48. Epistasis, which can consist of synergistic or dyssynergistic gene–gene interactions, is the simplest form of multigene interaction and is related to phenotypes53,54 or disease status55-57. As described below, the combinatorial nature of epistasis may be useful in accounting for the personalized molecular basis for AD risk in a given patient58. Incorporating epistatic interactions to understand AD heritability provides a direct connection between traditional additive genetics (GWAS) and the large-scale molecular-interaction networks described in the following sections.

Early attempts to find epistasis in AD were largely hypothesis-driven, and only a minority of the proposed epistatic interactions were replicated59. Given the large burden associated to multiple testing and the large sample size necessary to detect genetic interactions, most studies have been focused on detecting interactions between marginally associated variants, and primarily found effects between such variants and APOE haplotypes60. However, certain gene–gene interactions can be associated with AD even if neither locus is independently associated with the disease61,62. Considering all possible combinations of variants produces a high multiple testing burden, which is magnified when examining multiple phenotypes, such as the volume of multiple brain regions. Therefore, some studies have opted for a middle ground: they limited epistasis testing to pairs of genes in the same functional pathways, and found epistasis for hippocampal atrophy63 and temporal lobe volume64.

Edgetic effects

Genetic variation that alters the affinity of specific protein–protein interactions(the edges between proteins in a network diagram), as opposed to all the interactions of a given protein, are referred to as ‘edgetic’ effects65. Edgetic interactions are based on protein binding information, in contrast to the epistatic effects mentioned above, which are primarily statistical interactions, whose physical basis may be unclear. Edgetic alterations resulting from genetic variants can be identified experimentally or predicted by high-resolution, three-dimensional models of protein structure and protein–protein interactions (FIG. 1a)66. This concept is helpful to associate specific alterations in protein interactions with disease states. For example, pleiotropic effects can sometimes be explained by alterations of distinct protein interfaces of a single protein: each interface affects distinct partners and triggers distinct phenotypes67. In the context of Mendelian disorders, disease-associated genetic variants are likely to result in edgetic effects68. Whether this edgetic framework can be applied to study the effects of AD genetic variants is unclear.

Targeted sequencing or exome sequencing efforts carried out in the past few years have identified coding variants in ABCA7, ADAM10, BIN1, CD2AP, CLU, CR1, EPHA1, MS4A4A/MS4A6A, PICALM, PLD3, SORL1 and TREM2 that are associated with late-onset AD49,50,69,70, in addition to the familial AD variants in PSEN1/2 and APP. Thus it is likely that, as whole-genome sequencing becomes more common, person-specific coding variants might also be mapped edgetically to generate detailed individual molecular networks –a process that is already possible for several thousand proteins with known structures (FIG. 1a)66.

Network-based approaches to AD genetics

Aggregating a collection of epistatic or edgetic interactions to identify specific disease mechanisms is still challenging, owing to missing information about how they affect specific cellular systems or neuronal activity. Therefore, alternative network-based approaches (Box 1) leverage large-scale molecular networks to help identify coherent biological functions. The structure of these molecular networks contains information that is useful to determine the function of biological systems. For instance, molecules involved in a particular biological function tend to be densely and mutually connected71-74. Network approaches are different from pathway analysis: they can provide tissue-specific and disease-specific information from the latest omic technologies, and are not limited by the state of knowledge about canonical pathways. In some cases, network-based approaches intersect with the study of AD-associated genetic variants, but we also review select cases outside of AD, which involve principles or practical approaches that could be useful in characterizing the function of AD variants.

Coexpression networks

Coexpression-based networks (FIG. 1a, b, Box 2) are a common type of data-driven network, in which links represent the strength of gene–gene correlations. These links between genes can be generated by many mechanisms such as microRNAs, cell-type specificity, chromosome conformation, epigenetics and cell type proportions, that regulate gene expression21. Correlation links between genes are therefore useful in the context of disease: clusters of coexpressed genes can be a proxy for alterations in gene expression regulatory mechanisms, and the level of coexpressed genes can be matched to disease phenotypes to prioritize certain molecular systems for follow-up experiments. Advantages of the coexpression-analysis approach include coherence with genetic findings, potential tissue-specificity and greater robustness than univariate or single–gene approaches.

Genetic integration

Genetic variants that interact in protein–protein interaction (PPI) networks (Box 2) and tend to be coexpressed have been identified in AD75, autism76 and schizophrenia77. In autism, the coherence between coexpression and PPIs has been used to filter for molecular systems enriched in de novo mutations, in autistic individuals78.

Tissue specificity

Obtaining tissue-specificity and building coexpression networks in tissues relevant to disease can be crucial for the identification of relevant and accurate coexpression networks in neurological disorders79-81. The Genotype-Tissue Expression project (GTEx) consortium was created to make tissue-specific data more accessible by generating transcriptomic profiles of a large number of human tissues, with plans to examine the genetic effects of the tissue context82,83.

Robustness

Patterns of gene coexpression in human CA1 and CA3 were compared to disease progression and pathology to prioritize disease-associated molecular systems84. These coexpression clusters were identified without using genetic information per se; however, they showed coherence with subsequent coexpression, genetic and experimental studies, in terms of the TYROBP–TREM2 signalling cascade85,86.

Network-based stratification

Network-based patient stratification, an approach utilized in oncology, provides a clear example of how molecular interaction networks can aggregate diverse genetic effects to uncover disease mechanisms that are relevant to personalized treatment87. Briefly, genes carrying disease-linked variants were located in publically-available PPI networks (Box 2). Variants carried by patients with similar prognoses were mostly found in genes that were located in certain areas of the PPI network87. Thus, the protein-protein interaction network can be used to stratify patients and to highlight candidate disease mechanisms that involve molecules in the affected area of the network. Drug–target interactions can also be included in these networks to enhance their clinical utility: such networks would enable the identification of drugs that target the specific regions of a network that are affected in a particular person88. Although in AD, the effects of individual genetic variants are relatively small, network-based stratification is an example of how genetic variation can be aggregated in a clinically relevant manner. Applications of this tool to large cancer cohorts89 has provided a roadmap for how molecular networks could be helpful in identifying personalized mechanisms of AD, especially as whole-genome sequencing becomes commonplace. Similar approaches have been utilized in schizophrenia77 and autism76 to find network regions enriched in disease-associated mutations, though such approaches have yet to be applied to AD.

Analysis of directed networks

To estimate the effects of disease-associated variants, the studies cited thus far utilized undirected networks, such as coexpression networks or PPI's, in which elements are connected by links without specific direction that would imply causality. Combining the genetic analysis of pathological variants with gene expression data provides a causal basis for expression changes, which can be used to infer directed networks90. Previously, the use of directed networks required large computing clusters, but the CINDERellA has enabled researchers to infer disease-specific directed networks using standard hardware91.

A previous generation of the directed/causal network approach was applied to microarray and single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) data obtained from tissue samples of the prefrontal cortices of 549 healthy individuals and individuals with AD92. This approach, which included the analysis of expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs), implicated TYROBP (which encodes part of a microglial membrane receptor complex) as an upstream node in an AD-associated network of several hundred genes related to multiple immune subsystems, including previous AD susceptibility genes identified from GWAS CD33, MS4A4A, MS4A6A and TREM2.

Disease state-specific networks

Many network studies were carried out with the assumption that networks generated from datasets in control/healthy systems are sufficiently similar to networks found in the disease state; however, pathological processes or responses to disease can alter network structure. For example, certain gene–gene correlations might only be observed in disease-state data (differential coexpression)93,94. Traditional differential expression analysis might not detect cases of differential coexpression because gene–gene correlations can be altered without changes in the average expression level of the two genes21. Differential coexpression has been observed between several molecular systems when comparing control to AD gene expression patterns92,95 and between PSEN1 and groups of genes highly expressed in oligodendrocyte and microglia, when comparing mouse and human coexpression patterns96. However, it is challenging to collect samples of ’true’ control-state or disease-state networks, as the phenotypic variability in AD is a continuum and AD pathology can be present long before the onset of clinical signs and symptoms97. A hybrid approach, which requires the presence of both clinical and pathological manifestations of the disease to establish an AD diagnosis, might lead to the loss of information on the unique molecular basis of the different –but related– phenotypic aspects of AD98.

Neuropathological studies of AD variants

A fundamental assumption of AD case–control GWAS is that persons can be meaningfully classified according to observable clinical behaviour and accepted definitions of the disease. However, many individuals who are classified as ‘cognitively normal’ harbour AD, infarcts and Lewy bodies99, and many individuals who are clinically diagnosed with AD are affected by other pathologies100 (Box 3). This inaccuracy in disease status and the many comorbid (yet typically unmeasured) conditions present in older populations reduce statistical power and places practical limits on the effectiveness of case–control studies of AD. By conducting GWAS on AD endophenotypes (such as neuropathological and neuroimaging features), it is possible to reduce the effect of confounding factors associated with subclinical disease and comorbid conditions, and to increase statistical power with quantitative outcomes101. The ultimate goal of this approach is to compile these partially overlapping genetic signatures into a more robust description of AD.

Collecting neuropathological data is onerous, but such efforts are leading to the identification of novel loci associated with different types of AD and their related neuropathological features98,102. GWAS on common age-related neurodegenerative disorders, such as hippocampal sclerosis and cerebral amyloid angiopathy, have identified loci involved in each pathology, half of which are also found via case–control AD GWAS 98. Combining genetic data with detailed neuropathological phenotypes has the advantage of placing the genetic variants in the context of a particular pathophysiological process. Moreover, this approach has identified loci that are not found by traditional GWAS, and that contribute to pathologies associated with AD dementia.

Insights from AD networks neuroimaging

Genetics shape brain structure, connectivity and function103. Alterations in various brain regions have been linked to AD104, with canonical sites of early AD-associated effects in the hippocampal region105,106. To understand how AD affects macroscopic brain structures and brain dynamics on a global scale that is relevant to cognitive functions, some neuroimaging efforts have adopted a network–based approach107-109. This work is based on the observation that the networks of the healthy brain must simultaneously achieve two objectives, which can appear opposed. On one hand, brain networks must support functional specialization, which requires some isolated modules or clusters; on the other hand, brain networks must support coordination and information flow between diverse systems, which requires the existence of short-cut paths between modules110,111. Healthy brain networks generally exhibit a balance of high modularity (locality) and short path lengths (integration) to support perceptual and cognitive processing107,109,112,113. In the field of network neuroimaging, AD pathogenesis has been characterized as an imbalance between modular and integrative processes (described below).

Balancing local and global functions

When a network simultaneously supports modular function (local clusters) as well as integration (a short average path length between nodes), it is said to have a ‘small world’ (SW) organization114(FIG. 1c). The extent of SW organization in brain networks is heritable115,116, and predictive of AD status117,118 and progression119. Moreover, changes to the SW balance can be detected prior to neurodegeneration or cognitive decline in people with elevated brain amyloid levels120.

In AD, changes in SW organization can arise from changes in the shortest average path between nodes and/or changes to the clustering coefficient121,122(FIG. 1c). These changes, which may be due to amyloid accumulation in the hub regions of the brain123, can be visualized with several imaging methods, including functional MRI (fMRI)121,124, magnetoencephalography125 , EEG124 and structural imaging122,126. Importantly, although the presence of short paths in networks has been associated with cognitive function in healthy cohorts112,127, specific cognitive deficits in AD have not been conclusively linked to this metric. Cohort studies have shown that the alteration of brain networks in MCI is generally less severe than in AD118; however, some individuals with MCI can show selectively increased connectivity as a potential compensatory mechanism124,128,129 (FIG. 1c).

Critical nodes: hubs and rich clubs

Brain region connectivity has implications for the location and propagation of AD pathology. For instance, ’hubs’ are regions with many connections to other regions, and changes in hubs are implicated in multiple brain disorders130. Hubs are preferentially affected in AD, potentially owing to unique metabolic demands or cellular processes in these regions131,132. A large study comprising patients with MCI and AD showed decreased global integration and decreased interconnections mediated by hubs within the default mode network (DMN)133 (FIG. 1c). Brain hubs that are densely coupled to each other are termed a ‘rich club’134. Damage to rich club nodes could be especially disruptive to brain function, as they are the intersection point for many paths that link distal regions135. Consistent with this hypothesis, the connectivity of rich club nodes is affected in APOE ε4 carriers136, and alterations of hub connectivity are correlated with cognitive performance in patients with AD137. However, connectivity of rich club brain regions could be more strongly altered in early-onset AD and frontotemporal dementia than in LOAD138,139.

Network changes linked to AD genetics

Global and local brain network changes are associated with AD diagnosis, but few studies have examined the effects of AD-associated genomic variants on brain networks, independently of diagnosis. Most of the studies focusing on APOE ε4 carriers versus non-carriers have found alterations of the DMN140-142, and of the SW integration-modularity balance143, with studies of all APOE alleles pointing towards additional subnetworks, the activation of which is influenced by genetics144. These changes take place years before the onset of AD140, are stable through mid-life145, and might be associated with decreased connectivity and metabolism in the DMN in AD146-148. Similar effects on the DMN are seen in the form of familial AD that results from mutations in genes involved in Aβ processing149. Although an AD-associated CLU variant has also been shown to correlate with brain structural path lengths in healthy individuals150, most genetic studies on brain networks in AD have focused on APOE, rather than other recent AD GWAS hits. It is unclear if this is due to historical effects or reflects truly larger effects of APOE alleles on brain network structure.

Challenges and next steps

As mentioned above, an imbalance of modularity and integration is regularly reported in individuals with AD. However, the features that drive the imbalance varies across studies and methods. Many (but not all151-153) imaging studies have found increased path length in AD brain networks121,122,154-157, in particular, the studies that measured structural connectivity networks. By contrast the other component of SW networks – clustering coefficient – is decreased in AD in some studies125,151,152,158,159 and, increased in others126,157,160. Differences in imaging modalities, network connectivity normalization in the context of neurodegeneration, or intrinsic limitations of the resting-state paradigm might be responsible for this range of results.

Although inferred functional brain networks are constrained by underlying structural connections161; the correspondence of structural and functional networks is not straightforward162: and all networks should not be expected to show identical effects in AD. This confounding factor is exacerbated by variations in cohort characteristics, and by the effects of haemodynamics and arousal, which are difficult to control in clinical neuroimaging settings163,164. Guidelines are emerging for optimal data preprocessing165, which should improve the consistency and replicability of network characterizations in AD. Neuroimaging studies sometimes treat brain networks to be static; however, dynamic functional connectivity studies suggest that resting-state networks are a blurred representation of transiently activated regional subnetworks107,166-168. Considering these network fluctuations in disease states169-171 may resolve discrepancies among studies that have assumed a constant network architecture171.

To truly characterize the multiscale processes that are affected in AD, it is crucial to develop network signatures that go beyond the measurement of the SW balance172. This can be done by identifying specific network systems (e.g. configurations of DMN interactions) that are associated with functions (e.g. spatial episodic memory) that can be behaviourally assayed in individuals at risk of AD. This way, the ‘function’ of a particular functional network can be connected more directly to a behavioural phenotype of AD. Finally, as we discuss in the next section, it is crucial that the next generation of network signatures are derived from biologically constrained multiscale models of AD pathology.

Multiscale models of AD

To date, studies have typically examined the effects of AD genetics on molecular networks (FIG. 1a) or on large-scale brain networks (FIG. 1c). Those two perspectives are missing a description of how the molecular effects of AD-associated variants translate into structural brain changes, which in turn can represent cognitive decline in AD. Describing how molecular and brain networks are mechanistically coupled together may help to reduce false positives in drug development, as the molecular assays to test drugs could be linked to brain activity measures that are closer to clinical-level effects. Similarly, brain connectivity and neuroimaging findings are generally described in a manner that is uncoupled from molecular activity. Coupling brain connectivity to molecular properties provides an experimentally tractable basis to address changes in disease.

Multiscale models help to fill the gap between the effects of genetic variants on molecular networks and brain networks173,174. These models go beyond typical imaging-genetics approaches, and can be useful in identifying which molecular and cellular features have an effect on a given tissue or have clinical-level properties, such as patterns of fMRI connectivity that are associated with cognitive function. A concrete example of a neuronal property that could be well-represented by multiscale models is long-term potentiation (LTP) of synapses, which is triggered by the coincident presynaptic input with large postsynaptic depolarization. While initiation of LTP is rapid, the gene expression, translation, and cytoskeletal rearrangement it entails are relatively slow. In the context of AD, a multiscale model could include the experimentally observed effects of AD-associated variants on cellular processes (e.g. the effects of amyloid on LTP), which are then ‘scaled up’ into larger and more realistic brain networks, through computational simulations (Fig. 2)175-178.

Potential to complement AD research

Multiscale models are particularly important for AD because the effects of the disease on executive control and memory can be realistically represented by whole-brain models109,179, whereas therapies are generally developed at the molecular level. These models have the potential to rapidly identify specific molecular properties that exert the strongest effects on the clinical readout180,181,182; thus, they are valuable in silico tools to understand drug mechanisms of action and to evaluate the molecular systems affected by an individual's genetics. The potential use of multiscale models should not be perceived as a replacement for experimental work; it is rather a way of aggregating and extracting the implications of experimental results. Such models are necessary given the diverse systems involved in AD pathology, its decades-long prodrome, and the lack of sufficiently predictive animal models183-185.

Presently, network models of AD typically operate on a single physical scale, and ignore other spatial scales and the temporal component entirely186. Whereas multiscale models are rapidly developing in other areas of neuroscience180,187-190, they are only starting to be utilized in AD191. Therefore, we examine below how multiscale modelling in other diseases and biological systems can enable realistic and rapid examination of the effect of AD genetic variants, in a way that is useful for clinical progress. In particular, two bridges between scales are likely to be essential for multiscale models of AD to become useful in a preclinical setting: gene– electrophysiology coupling, and neuron–tissue coupling.

Gene expression and neuronal activity

Both gene expression and electrophysiology studies have a strong influence on AD research. Integrating these approaches in a multiscale model would have conceptual and practical benefits for the development of AD therapeutics, as cell membranes are very accessible to drugs and can be mathematically modeled in great detail and are essential to brain function. Few studies describe the feedback between gene expression and electrophysiology in a manner than enables predictive multiscale models of AD. Nonetheless, a study of the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN)192 exemplified the potential of combining gene expression and neuronal activity into a unified multiscale model, which can be used to simulate neuronal activity under many different physiological conditions. The cellular aspects included in the simulations span a range of temporal and physical scales (from smallest to largest): intracellular calcium levels, circadian genes expression, ion channels, intracellular neuropeptides and synaptic connectivity. All of these components of the model were mathematically coupled with interacting differential equations to represent the relationships observed experimentally. This simulation was helpful for reconciling long-standing experimental differences observed between results obtained in various laboratories on the effect of γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) on SCN activity. This example illustrates the complete lifecycle of multiscale models: the association of gene expression to systems-level phenomena, such as neurotransmission and circadian activity, resulting in testable hypotheses that are examined experimentally193. Increasing the use of CRISPR, optigenetics and single-cell RNAseq or ATACseq will facilitate experiments to simultaneously measure relationships between gene expression and electrophysiological activity in closely controlled systems. Such experiments are prime sources for the components of multiscale gene–electrophysiology models applicable to AD.

Neuron-tissue coupling

In the process of scaling the effect of genetic variants to the level of whole-brain activity, a second major bridge across physiological scales is between single neuron properties and large-scale networks, that model the activity of millions of neurons194-196. Simulations of large-scale networks can include different excitatory and inhibitory cell types, with their respective ion channel conductances, connected with realistic columnar and inter-regional patterns (FIG. 2b). Far more information is available to generate this aspect of the multiscale model, than is available to model the effects of genetic variants. A key challenge is therefore to determine the useful level of biological detail in simulations196. Simulated neuronal activity can be linked to brain imaging studies by pooling the activity of groups of neurons to represent different brain regions (FIG. 2c)194. Such whole-brain networks show dynamic response patterns that are associated with perceptual and memory processes, and are helpful to understand the interplay between chemical, structural and functional aspects of neurological diseases, as demonstrated in recent multiscale models of schizophrenia197. Although these models cannot yet be used to model the effect of genetic variants, they already contain downstream components of genetic effects, such as intracellular components, detailed neuronal morphology and connectivity, which, together, reproduce fMRI features associated with memory198 and cognition179. As such multiscale models begin to incorporate disease-specific effects, including genetics, they will become useful in silico screening tools for AD cellular interventions.

Roadmap to multiscale models of AD

Here, we specify the components of one of the possible multiscale models of AD and we provide one possible roadmap (FIG. 2) for scaling the effects of AD genetic variants up to the level of whole-brain models195,199-201. First, the effect of AD-associated variants on the electrophysiological and morphological features of neurons (either directly or via other cell types) can be assessed either by changes in ion channel populations or by fitting the observed electrophysiological recordings to mathematical models of neuronal activity202 (FIG. 2a). This strategy is helpful for bypassing some details of the intracellular signaling that transduces the effects of variants to membrane properties. In the second stage of multiscale modelling, the spiking and network activity of models with and without genetic variants (FIG. 2b) can be connected to each other with the desired level of detail, mainly limited by computational power. In sufficiently large numbers or with approximations of the average activity of large numbers of neurons, these computational models can generate a reasonable approximation of the whole-brain dynamics observed in resting-state fMRI studies194 (FIG. 2c).

Practical challenges

Challenges in the implementation of multiscale models that incorporate the effects of AD-associated genetic variants include identifying the exact location of the relevant variant, which can often fall in noncoding regions203, and the fact that some AD-associated genetic variants, particularly those that affect non-neuronal cell types, may not have known synaptic effects. The analysis of epigenetic information can narrow the size of the relevant locus204,205. The epigenetic resources to localize AD-associated variants are limited, but they are rapidly expanding206,207 and becoming more relevant to brain cell types208. The effects of non-coding AD-associated variants can be assessed by creating cell lines each with a mutation in different subregions of the locus, and evaluating the effects of those mutations in electrophysiological and cell imaging experiments. Effects observed in these experiments can be included in neuronal models of disease and compared with output of control-state models, or with the effects of other variants. Regarding variants that affect non-neuronal cell types, the effects of such cell types on neurons can be included in neuronal simulations. For example, certain TREM2 variants are associated with AD and activation of TREM2 signaling in microglia can lead to decreased neurite length. Such effects can be included in neuronal models, which are, in turn, components of whole-brain models.

Conceptual challenges

Ambitious modelling projects, such as multiscale modelling of the effects of disease-associated variants (FIG. 2), are sometimes dismissed because genes, cells and brain networks have some important properties that are not yet measured, and that can lead to variable results209. Indeed, the absence of constraining data is a challenge for modeling efforts in many domains of biology, and has no easy solution. However large-scale and multiscale models have yielded useful insights in several areas of biology, including whole-cell modeling210, cancer177, cardiology176,178, immunology175 and neuroscience190,192,211,212. Moreover, the data required to constrain multiscale models is rapidly accumulating as part of the data-heavy, multicontinental collaboration initiatives led by private and public funders213-215, such as the large-scale coordination of open science for target discovery in the Accelerating Medicines Partnership for Alzheimer Disease (AMP-AD). A particular advantage of multiscale models is that they remain constrained by a large set of results (FIG. 2): for example, fMRI data can be used to constrain the model parameters of cellular membranes by comparing the output of the model in ‘healthy’ and ‘disease’ states to actual healthy fMRI, EEG or magnetoencephalography results. Finally, we emphasize that these models do not attempt to copy the brain in all of its complexity. The goal is to simplify the real system, to distill some of its core functions with sufficient accuracy to predict the behavior of the real system in some limited setting196,216. In this light, multiscale modelling is simply a more quantitative and systematic approach to the general scientific endeavour — one which explicitly couples different experimental programs, rather than leaving their interaction to chance.

Conclusions

The past decade of AD genetic discoveries has been marked by the search for coherence among disease-associated variants with weak effects and functional diversity. Concurrently, omic technologies and neuroimaging have produced detailed descriptions of molecular and brain networks. These trends of diverse genetic findings and biological networks are converging in studies of large AD cohorts, which shed light on the functional roles of AD-associated variants and point towards convergent functions of such variants. At the molecular level, several types of molecular interactions including epistasis, protein–protein interactions and gene coexpression, define the intricate relationships between variants and genome-wide molecular systems. Measurements of differential coexpression and edgetic changes allow the identification of networks that only exist in the disease state, and these novel interaction structures may be crucial for understanding pathogenesis. The effects of individual and combinations of AD-associated genetic variants can also be observed on structural and functional brain connectivity patterns. These show that some variants affect the integration–segregation balance of brain networks, which is critical for perceptual and cognitive function. However, identifying how variants alter brain connectivity patterns entails understanding their effects on cell morphology and electrophysiology, and creating integrated multiscale models to capture their full effects on brain microcircuits and regional connectivity.

While molecular and brain networks are the most complete description of the biological processes altered in patients with AD to date, they are still incomplete, potentially biased, and represent a static picture of the disease. Advancing to the point where network tools can generate a dynamic, multiscale description of Alzheimer's that is sufficiently accurate to provide personalized diagnosis or screen potential therapeutic targets involves challenges in computational infrastructure, omics data acquisition and the social organization of science. Specifically, building multiscale models requires openness and novel collaborations among groups of investigators, breaking out from traditional academic boundaries, to become more aligned with patterns of molecular interactions217,218. While daunting, such coordination between researchers is possible, as demonstrated by the centralized efforts to annotate genome-wide metabolic networks219.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by NIH grants U01AG46152, R01AG36042, P30AG10161, RF1AG15819, R01AG17917, R01AG36836.

Chris Gaiteri is a computational neuroscientist who studies the molecular and neuronal basis of psychiatric and neurodegenerative diseases. To help identify the origins of these diseases, he examines how biological functions can be represented by molecular and cellular interaction networks. He has applied this network perspective to omics research at Sage Bionetworks, in Seattle, Washington, USA, the Allen Institute for Brain Science, in Seattle, Washington, USA, and presently at Rush University, in Chicago, Illinois, USA, where he is an Assistant Professor.

Sara Mostafavi is a computational biologist who develops models and algorithms to understand the genetic and genomic basis of complex neurological and psychiatric disease. She is an Assistant Professor at the Department of Statistics and the Department of Medical Genetics, at University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada, and is a Canada Research Chair in Computational Biology. She obtained her PhD in Computer Science from the University of Toronto, Canada, and performed her postdoctoral fellowship at Stanford University, California, USA.

Christopher Honey is a cognitive neuroscientist who studies large-scale neural dynamics, asking how brain regions communicate and how memory arises in hierarchical brain processes. Born and raised in southern Africa, he studied mathematics and literature at the University of Cape Town, South Africa, obtained his PhD in psychology and cognitive science from Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana, USA, completed postdoctoral training at Princeton University, New Jersey, USA and is an Assistant Professor at the University of Toronto, Canada.

Philip De Jager is an Associate Professor of Neurology at Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA and Director of the Program in Translational NeuroPsychiatric Genomics within the Ann Romney Center for Neurologic Diseases in the Department of Neurology at Brigham and Women's Hospital, in Boston, Massachusetts, USA. He is the first incumbent of the Steven R. and Kathleen P. Haley Distinguished Chair for the Neurosciences. He is a practicing clinical neuroimmunologist. The goal of his work as a clinician-scientist is to apply modern methods of neuroimmunology, statistical genetics and computational biology to first delineate and then intervene in the sequence of events leading from health to neurodegenerative diseases.

David A. Bennett is the Director of the Rush Alzheimer's Disease Center, Chicago, Illinois, USA and the Robert C. Borwell Professor of Neurological Sciences at Rush University Medical Center. He studies the causes of common chronic neurologic conditions of the aging nervous system and novel drug target nomination and validation. He is principal investigator of several studies funded by the National Institutes of Health including the Religious Orders Study and Rush Memory and Aging Project, both community-based clinical-pathologic cohort studies that incorporate deep omics, biomarkers, neuroimaging, biomedical devices, and brain, spinal cord, nerve and muscle pathology. He has more than 600 peer-reviewed publications, 60,000 citations, and an h-index of 118.

Glossary

Amyloid precursor protein (APP) Gene that encodes the amyloid-β precursor protein, which is cleaved to form amyloid-β peptides; presenilin (PSEN1, PSEN2) mutations promote the cleavage of APP into plaque-forming peptide type.

APOE Dosage of the ε4 allele APOE, which encodes the apolipoprotein E, is the strongest genetic risk factor for late-onset Alzheimer disease; APOE interacts with amyloid-β to influence plaque aggregation

Amyloid hypothesis Proposal according to which the root cause of Alzheimer disease is the accumulation of amyloid-β, with nuances around sufficiency and form of amyloid-β responsible for pathogenesis

Clustering coefficient Measure of modularity around a network node. Number of connections among neighbors of a node, divided by the maximum possible number of connections among those neighbors

Cognitive reserve Tolerance and adaptation to neuropathology, in part attributed to genetic and life-style associated factors such as education and social activity, and their neural correlates

Directed networks (directed graphs) Networks where elements are connected by links with a specific direction that represents an asymmetric temporal or transfer function

Genetic variants Insertion, deletion or alternative coding of DNA

Late-onset (sporadic) Alzheimer Disease (LOAD) In contrast to early-onset Alzheimer disease, this is the most common form of the neurodegenerative disease, typically diagnosed clinically after age 65 and definitively diagnosed post-mortem. LOAD is associated with functionally diverse, weak genetic variants

Multiscale modelling Mathematical or conceptual models that couple processes that occur on a varying range of physical or temporal scales, which are typically studied in isolation

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR-γ) Component of a nuclear receptor complex, which includes the retinoid X receptor. This complex is activated endogenously by fatty acids and leads to transcription of APOE, among other genes

Pleiotropy When a single gene or variants of that gene can contribute to two or more ‘non-related’ phenotypes

Small-world network Networks in which most nodes are connected by a small number of hops, yet form relatively isolated (modular) clusters

Figure 1 Effects of Alzheimer disease genetic variants on molecular networks and global brain topology

A. The phenotypic effects of Alzheimer disease (AD)-associated genetic variants are exerted through several types of molecular networks (here extracted from GeneMANIA), or even alter their structure. For example, some AD-associated SORL1 mutations (blue dots) are predicted to affect specific interaction interfaces (edgetic effects). The effects of genetic variants on molecular networks, in turn, influence processes at higher physiological scales (cellular morphology, cell–cell interactions and tissue morphology) that ultimately affect global brain structure. B. Each type of molecular network is prone to different types of biases: in canonical pathways, most links are centred around APP, PSEN1/2 and APOE, potentially reflecting historical interest in those genes; in coexpression analyses and other high-throughput networks, links between genes carrying AD-associated variants are more evenly distributed. C. The functional and structural connectivity of brain networks seen in patients with AD or with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) shows stereotypical changes, in part attributable to the collective effect of AD-associated variants. The circular networks are conceptual representations of small-world brain networks (green zone), which can gain links (pink links in MCI) or lose links (dashed links in AD and MCI), according to disease status. Generally, AD brains are characterized by less efficient and less globally integrated networks, which are seen as a parallel for cognitive dysfunction.

Figure 2 Components of a multiscale model of the effects of genetic variants

A. The direct and indirect effects of Alzheimer disease (AD)-associated genetic variants on neurons can be assessed experimentally in gene editing-based and/or stem cell-based disease models. The resulting patterns of activity can be fitted to mathematical neuronal models —the building blocks of larger microcircuits and brain region models. B. Connectivity between and within brain regions, such as different cortical layers (L1, L2/3, L4) and other structures, including components of the thalamus can be extracted from human and other primate brain tissue (top left). This information can be combined with cellular parameters, such as cell morphology and connectivity, that can be measured by electron microscopy (EM), and inter-regional parameters that can be measured by diffusion spectrum imaging (DSI), to generate detailed realistic connectivity matrices (top right). Such matrices establish a synaptic connection among dynamic neuron models (a), from which spontaneous or evoked activity can be simulated (spike raster plots at the bottom). The effects of AD variants on network activity can be observed by comparing neuronal network models that do or do not incorporate the effects of AD variants. C. The model activity in various brain regions, with or without AD variants, can be temporally smoothed to provide an output analogous to functional MRI (fMRI) data, which can then be compared with published studies. The actions of various drugs or molecular interventions can also quickly be examined at this level — a level much closer to a cognitive phenotype — which may be helpful in screening potential therapies.

Key points

Genetic findings in late-onset Alzheimer disease (AD) have not yet resulted in strategies to prevent or treat AD

Examining the position of genes carrying disease-associated variants in large-scale molecular networks can help identify coherent disease mechanisms

Not all network approaches are equal: recent approaches involve networks that are directed (with causal links), and specific to the tissue and disease-state

AD and AD-associated genetic variants decrease efficiency of information transfer in the brain connectome, which can be quantified by measuring structural and functional patterns in brain networks

Building multiscale models of the effects of AD-associated genetic variants with large neuronal simulations is now feasible and will be useful to understand the effects of such variants and to screen therapeutics in silico

Box 1| Network-analysis approaches

Over the past decade, the term “network analysis’ has been used to refer to a variety of analytical approaches to analyze genomics data. By considering many relationships among biological entities simultaneously, network analyses shift the assumptions from a one–to–one genotype–phenotype mapping to a many–to–many mapping, which better accommodates the complexity of both the genetic basis and the phenotypic expression of chronic diseases. In this approach, networks (known as weighted graphs in Computer Science and Mathematics) provide a generic framework to represent relationships or links between a set of entities which, in the context of genomic analysis can be molecules53,66,220, cells221-224, tissues225-227, or organisms228-230. Network-based approaches utilize one or more large knowledge sources to describe the functional relationships between units. These networks are most commonly utilized in the ‘interpretation’ phase of a genome-wide analysis, to look for functional enrichment among the top hits. Increasingly, molecular networks have also been used during the discovery phase of genomic experiments (as with the NetWas approach81) to identify novel genes or mechanisms associated with diseases. Two main sources of data can be used to construct gene networks: literature-curated interactions from low-throughput experiments, and high-throughput datasets that measure gene expression (and/or activity) across a large set of individuals or conditions. These two sources vary in false positive rates, coverage, prior knowledge, and context-specificity. The meaning of a link in a molecular network can vary depending on the type of network: links can be physical links between molecules, represent signal transduction such as phosphorylation, or consist of statistical inferences derived from primary data, without specifying a particular mechanism of interaction, or involve unmeasured intermediaries. The connectivity in several types of networks has been used to provide context for Alzheimer disease (AD) variants (guilt by association) or to identify molecules and mechanisms associated with AD.

Box 2| Common types of biological networks

Protein–protein interaction networks

Protein interaction networks compile experimentally tested or predicted physical binding affinities between proteins

Tissue-specific protein interactions can be obtained experimentally via yeast two-hybrid or affinity purification–mass spectroscopy approaches, or identified in non-tissue-specific databases, using tissue-specific gene expression signatures231

Disease-associated genetic variants can lead to edgetic changes that alter specific protein–protein physical binding interactions

The use of databases such as HINT232 and H2-II-14233 could help avoiding the historical publication bias that can be linked to protein interactions generated in small-scale experiments

Coexpression networks

Coexpression networks represent the links, or gene–gene correlations, between genes that have similar expression patterns which can reflect common regulatory mechanisms

The biological bases of coexpression links are diverse and include coregulation via chromatin conformation, transcription factors, epigenetics, noncoding RNAs and cell-type variation21

Analysis of samples from multiple tissues can uncover differential gene expression between cell types and brain regions

Coexpression relationships can be utilized even with small samples sizes, with databases such as COEXPRESdb234 and GeneMANIA220, to find genes coexpressed with gene sets of interest

Coexpression relationships can be specific to the tissue or the disease state

Causal networks — directed networks that predict signal propagation

܀ Inference of causal networks that contain directed links typically require hundreds of samples and/or multilevel ‘omics’ data

Inference of directionality is statistically difficult: accuracy decreases as the number of network nodes increases

Ideal data sources for these networks include microarray or RNAseq time-series experiments and systematic perturbation data, which are rarely available for brain tissue

Expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) are useful to generate directed networks, especially in inbred populations in which the single nucleotide polymorphism–to–gene coupling is strong

Toolboxes to extract directed networks from gene expression data, or expression and genetics data, are now publically available91

Box 3| Cognitive ability and reserve

Baseline cognitive function and decline in cognitive function in non-demented individuals are affected by genetics235,236, several neuropathologies97, and lifestyle factors, such as social237 and physical238 activity and life-long cognitive activity239,240. Similarly, in the population with Alzheimer disease (AD), the level of cognitive function is influenced by lifestyle factors (including education and occupation241,242, and disease-related decline243). However, classic AD pathology explains less than a third of the variance of cognitive decline38. Furthermore, many individuals presenting with AD neuropathology still maintain adequate cognitive function37,99. The concept of cognitive reserve has been proposed to help explain this difference between predicted and actual cognitive decline242,244. This disconnection between pathological indices and cognitive function is a strong motivation to study the genetic basis of cognitive function and cognitive decline seen in AD.

High cognitive function in midlife can be considered a component of cognitive reserve, as it can delay AD diagnosis 245,246. Twin studies indicate that cognitive function has a substantial genetic component247. For example, out of 13 single nucleotide polymorphisms associated with general cognitive function , four (TOMM40, APOE, MEF2C and ABCG1) have been consistently implicated in AD 248, and others were associated with the rate of cognitive decline (CR1)249, episodic memory (PICALM)250 and working memory performance tasks (BIN1)251. The most consistent finding, by far, was the association of APOE with various cognitive phenotypes and the rate of cognitive decline with age252,253. However, some of this overlap in the genetic bases of cognitive function and that of AD-associated dementia might be due to the fact that decline in cognitive ability can occur naturally with time or with AD.

Competing interests statement

The authors declare no competing interests


1 Ferri CP Global prevalence of dementia: a Delphi consensus study. The lancet 2006 366 2112 2117
2 Braak H Braak E Neuropathological stageing of Alzheimer-related changes. Acta neuropathologica 1991 82 239 259 1759558
3 Jack CR Introduction to the recommendations from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer's Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimer's &amp; Dementia 2011 7 257 262
4 Dunkin JJ Anderson-Hanley C Dementia caregiver burden A review of the literature and guidelines for assessment and intervention. Neurology 1998 51 S53 S60 9674763
5 Hurd MD Martorell P Delavande A Mullen KJ Langa KM Monetary costs of dementia in the United States. New England Journal of Medicine 2013 368 1326 1334 23550670
6 Langa KM National estimates of the quantity and cost of informal caregiving for the elderly with dementia*. Journal of general internal medicine 2001 16 770 778 11722692
7 Hebert LE Weuve J Scherr PA Evans DA Alzheimer disease in the United States (2010-2050) estimated using the 2010 census. Neurology 2013 80 1778 1783 doi:10.1212/WNL.0b013e31828726f5 23390181
8 Gatz M Heritability for Alzheimer's disease: the study of dementia in Swedish twins. The Journals of Gerontology Series A: Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences 1997 52 M117 M125
9 Janssen J Early onset familial Alzheimer's disease Mutation frequency in 31 families. Neurology 2003 60 235 239 12552037
10 Campion D Mutations of the presenilin I gene in families with early-onset Alzheimer's disease. Human molecular genetics 1995 4 2373 2377 8634712
11 Barnes DE Yaffe K The projected effect of risk factor reduction on Alzheimer's disease prevalence. The Lancet Neurology 2011 10 819 828 21775213
12 Lambert J-C Meta-analysis of 74,046 individuals identifies 11 new susceptibility loci for Alzheimer's disease. Nature genetics 2013 45 1452 1458 24162737
13 Karch CM Cruchaga C Goate AM Alzheimer's disease genetics: from the bench to the clinic. Neuron 2014 83 11 26 24991952
14 Bertram L Tanzi RE Thirty years of Alzheimer's disease genetics: the implications of systematic meta-analyses. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 2008 9 768 778 18802446
15 Schellenberg GD Montine TJ The genetics and neuropathology of Alzheimer's disease. Acta neuropathologica 2012 124 305 323 22618995
16 Sleegers K The pursuit of susceptibility genes for Alzheimer's disease: progress and prospects. Trends in Genetics 2010 26 84 93 20080314
17 Gillis J Pavlidis P The impact of multifunctional genes on “guilt by association” analysis. PloS one 2011 6 e17258 21364756
18 Gillis J Pavlidis P Assessing identity, redundancy and confounds in Gene Ontology annotations over time. Bioinformatics 2013 bts727
19 Khatri P Sirota M Butte AJ Ten years of pathway analysis: current approaches and outstanding challenges. PLoS Comput Biol 2012 8 e1002375 22383865
20 Parikshak NN Gandal MJ Geschwind DH Systems biology and gene networks in neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative disorders. Nature Reviews Genetics 2015 16 441 458
21 Gaiteri C Ding Y French B Tseng GC Sibille E Beyond modules and hubs: the potential of gene coexpression networks for investigating molecular mechanisms of complex brain disorders. Genes, Brain and Behavior 2014 13 13 24
22 Karch CM Goate AM Alzheimer's disease risk genes and mechanisms of disease pathogenesis. Biological psychiatry 2015 77 43 51 24951455
23 Goate A Segregation of a missense mutation in the amyloid precursor protein gene with familial Alzheimer's disease. Nature 1991 349 704 706 1671712
24 Levy-Lahad E Candidate gene for the chromosome 1 familial Alzheimer's disease locus. Science 1995 269 973 977 7638622
25 Rogaev E Familial Alzheimer's disease in kindreds with missense mutations in a gene on chromosome 1 related to the Alzheimer's disease type 3 gene. Nature 1995 376 775 778 7651536
26 Corder E Gene dose of apolipoprotein E type 4 allele and the risk of Alzheimer's disease in late onset families. Science 1993 261 921 923 8346443
27 Cummings JL Morstorf T Zhong K Alzheimer's disease drug-development pipeline: few candidates, frequent failures. Alzheimers Res Ther 2014 6 37 doi:10.1186/alzrt269 25024750
28 Reiman EM Alzheimer's Prevention Initiative: a plan to accelerate the evaluation of presymptomatic treatments. Journal of Alzheimer's Disease 2011 26 321
29 Bateman RJ Clinical and biomarker changes in dominantly inherited Alzheimer's disease. New England Journal of Medicine 2012 367 795 804 22784036
30 Roses AD New applications of disease genetics and pharmacogenetics to drug development. Current opinion in pharmacology 2014 14 81 89 24565016
31 Reisberg B A 24-week open-label extension study of memantine in moderate to severe Alzheimer disease. Archives of neurology 2006 63 49 54 16401736
32 Schneider LS Dagerman KS Higgins JP McShane R Lack of evidence for the efficacy of memantine in mild Alzheimer disease. Archives of neurology 2011 68 991 998 21482915
33 Doody RS Phase 3 trials of solanezumab for mild-to-moderate Alzheimer's disease. New England Journal of Medicine 2014 370 311 321 24450890
34 Salloway S Two phase 3 trials of bapineuzumab in mild-to-moderate Alzheimer's disease. New England Journal of Medicine 2014 370 322 333 24450891
35 Holmes C Long-term effects of Aβ 42 immunisation in Alzheimer's disease: follow-up of a randomised, placebo-controlled phase I trial. The Lancet 2008 372 216 223
36 Rinne JO 11 C-PiB PET assessment of change in fibrillar amyloid-β load in patients with Alzheimer's disease treated with bapineuzumab: a phase 2, double-blind, placebo-controlled, ascending-dose study. The Lancet Neurology 2010 9 363 372 20189881
37 Jack CR Jr. Age-specific population frequencies of cerebral beta-amyloidosis and neurodegeneration among people with normal cognitive function aged 50-89 years: a cross-sectional study. Lancet Neurol 2014 13 997 1005 doi:10.1016/S1474-4422(14)70194-2 25201514
38 Boyle PA Much of late life cognitive decline is not due to common neurodegenerative pathologies. Annals of neurology 2013 74 478 489 23798485
39 Murray ME Clinicopathologic and 11C-Pittsburgh compound B implications of Thal amyloid phase across the Alzheimer's disease spectrum. Brain 2015 awv050
40 Sperling RA The A4 study: stopping AD before symptoms begin? Science translational medicine 2014 6 228fs213
41 Villemagne VL Amyloid β deposition, neurodegeneration, and cognitive decline in sporadic Alzheimer's disease: a prospective cohort study. The Lancet Neurology 2013 12 357 367 23477989
42 Dean DC Brain differences in infants at differential genetic risk for late-onset Alzheimer disease: a cross-sectional imaging study. JAMA neurology 2014 71 11 22 24276092
43 Jansen WJ Prevalence of cerebral amyloid pathology in persons without dementia: a meta-analysis. JAMA 2015 313 1924 1938 25988462
44 Escott-Price V Gene-wide analysis detects two new susceptibility genes for Alzheimer's disease. PLOS ONE 2014
45 Naj AC Common variants at MS4A4/MS4A6E, CD2AP, CD33 and EPHA1 are associated with late-onset Alzheimer's disease. Nature genetics 2011 43 436 441 21460841
46 Sabuncu MR The association between a polygenic Alzheimer score and cortical thickness in clinically normal subjects. Cerebral cortex 2012 22 2653 2661 22169231
47 Harris SE Polygenic risk for Alzheimer's disease is not associated with cognitive ability or cognitive aging in non-demented older people. Journal of Alzheimer's Disease 2014 39 565 574
48 Ridge PG Mukherjee S Crane PK Kauwe JS Alzheimer's Disease Genetics C Alzheimer's disease: analyzing the missing heritability. PLoS One 2013 8 e79771 doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0079771 24244562
49 Cruchaga C Rare coding variants in the phospholipase D3 gene confer risk for Alzheimer/'s disease. Nature 2014 505 550 554 24336208
50 Vardarajan BN Coding mutations in SORL1 and Alzheimer disease. Annals of neurology 2015 77 215 227 25382023
51 Kobolt D Exome-sequencing in a large dataset of late-onset families with Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimer's &amp; Dementia: The Journal of the Alzheimer's Association 2015 11 P359
52 Farfel J Relation of Genomic Variants for Alzheimer's Disease Dementia to Common Neuropathologies. Neurology 2016 In press
53 Costanzo M The genetic landscape of a cell. science 2010 327 425 431 20093466
54 He X Qian W Wang Z Li Y Zhang J Prevalent positive epistasis in Escherichia coli and Saccharomyces cerevisiae metabolic networks. Nature genetics 2010 42 272 276 20101242
55 Hu T Characterizing genetic interactions in human disease association studies using statistical epistasis networks. BMC bioinformatics 2011 12 364 21910885
56 Pandey A Epistasis network centrality analysis yields pathway replication across two GWAS cohorts for bipolar disorder. Translational psychiatry 2012 2 e154 22892719
57 Darabos C Moore JH Epistasis 2015 269 283 Springer
58 Moore JH Williams SM Epistasis and its implications for personal genetics. The American Journal of Human Genetics 2009 85 309 320 19733727
59 Combarros O Cortina-Borja M Smith AD Lehmann DJ Epistasis in sporadic Alzheimer's disease. Neurobiology of aging 2009 30 1333 1349 18206267
60 Carrasquillo MM Replication of BIN1 association with Alzheimer's disease and evaluation of genetic interactions. J Alzheimers Dis 2011 24 751 758 doi:10.3233/JAD-2011-101932 21321396
61 Gusareva ES Genome-wide association interaction analysis for Alzheimer's disease. Neurobiology of aging 2014 35 2436 2443 24958192
62 Bullock JM Discovery by the Epistasis Project of an epistatic interaction between the GSTM3 gene and the HHEX/IDE/KIF11 locus in the risk of Alzheimer's disease. Neurobiology of aging 2013 34 1309 e1301 1309 e1307 23036584
63 Meda SA Genetic interactions associated with 12-month atrophy in hippocampus and entorhinal cortex in Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative. Neurobiol Aging 2013 34 1518 e1519 1518 doi:10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2012.09.020 23107432
64 Hibar DP Genome-wide interaction analysis reveals replicated epistatic effects on brain structure. Neurobiol Aging 2015 36 Suppl 1 S151 158 doi:10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.02.033 25264344
65 Zhong Q Edgetic perturbation models of human inherited disorders. Mol Syst Biol 2009 5 321 doi:10.1038/msb.2009.80 19888216
66 Mosca R dSysMap: exploring the edgetic role of disease mutations. Nat Methods 2015 12 167 168 doi:10.1038/nmeth.3289 25719824
67 Guo Y Dissecting disease inheritance modes in a three-dimensional protein network challenges the “guilt-by-association” principle. Am J Hum Genet 2013 93 78 89 doi:10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.05.022 23791107
68 Sahni N Widespread macromolecular interaction perturbations in human genetic disorders. Cell 2015 161 647 660 doi:10.1016/j.cell.2015.04.013 25910212
69 Vardarajan BN Rare coding mutations identified by sequencing of Alzheimer disease genome-wide association studies loci. Annals of neurology 2015
70 Jin SC Coding variants in TREM2 increase risk for Alzheimer's disease. Hum Mol Genet 2014 23 5838 5846 doi:10.1093/hmg/ddu277 24899047
71 Feldman I Rzhetsky A Vitkup D Network properties of genes harboring inherited disease mutations. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2008 105 4323 4328
72 Mitra K Carvunis A-R Ramesh SK Ideker T Integrative approaches for finding modular structure in biological networks. Nature Reviews Genetics 2013 14 719 732
73 Goh K-I The human disease network. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2007 104 8685 8690
74 Köhler S Bauer S Horn D Robinson PN Walking the interactome for prioritization of candidate disease genes. The American Journal of Human Genetics 2008 82 949 958 18371930
75 Raj T Alzheimer disease susceptibility loci: evidence for a protein network under natural selection. The American Journal of Human Genetics 2012 90 720 726 22482808
76 O'Roak BJ Sporadic autism exomes reveal a highly interconnected protein network of de novo mutations. Nature 2012 485 246 250 22495309
77 Gulsuner S Spatial and temporal mapping of de novo mutations in schizophrenia to a fetal prefrontal cortical network. Cell 2013 154 518 529 23911319
78 Hormozdiari F Penn O Borenstein E Eichler EE The discovery of integrated gene networks for autism and related disorders. Genome research 2015 25 142 154 25378250
79 Raj T Polarization of the effects of autoimmune and neurodegenerative risk alleles in leukocytes. Science 2014 344 519 523 doi:10.1126/science.1249547 24786080
80 Pierson E Sharing and Specificity of Co-expression Networks across 35 Human Tissues. PLoS Comput Biol 2015 11 e1004220 doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004220 25970446
81 Greene CS Understanding multicellular function and disease with human tissue-specific networks. Nat Genet 2015 47 569 576 doi:10.1038/ng.3259 25915600
82 Consortium GT Human genomics. The Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) pilot analysis: multitissue gene regulation in humans. Science 2015 348 648 660 doi:10.1126/science.1262110 25954001
83 Consortium GT The Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) project. Nat Genet 2013 45 580 585 doi:10.1038/ng.2653 23715323
84 Miller JA Woltjer RL Goodenbour JM Horvath S Geschwind DH Genes and pathways underlying regional and cell type changes in Alzheimer's disease. Genome Med 2013 5 48 23705665
85 Zhang B Integrated systems approach identifies genetic nodes and networks in late-onset Alzheimer's disease. Cell 2013 153 707 720 23622250
86 Neumann H Daly MJ Variant TREM2 as risk factor for Alzheimer's disease. N Engl J Med 2013 368 182 184 23151315
87 Hofree M Shen JP Carter H Gross A Ideker T Network-based stratification of tumor mutations. Nature methods 2013 10 1108 1115 24037242
88 Gligorijevic V Malod-Dognin N Przulj N Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing 2016 2016 21 321 332
89 Leiserson MD Pan-cancer network analysis identifies combinations of rare somatic mutations across pathways and protein complexes. Nat Genet 2015 47 106 114 doi:10.1038/ng.3168 25501392
90 Emilsson V Genetics of gene expression and its effect on disease. Nature 2008 452 423 428 18344981
91 Tasaki S Bayesian Network Reconstruction Using Systems Genetics Data: Comparison of MCMC Methods. Genetics 2015 199 973 989 25631319
92 Zhang B Integrated systems approach identifies genetic nodes and networks in late-onset Alzheimer's disease. Cell 2013 153 707 720 doi:10.1016/j.cell.2013.03.030 23622250
93 de la Fuente A From ‘differential expression’to ‘differential networking’–identification of dysfunctional regulatory networks in diseases. Trends in genetics 2010 26 326 333 20570387
94 Rhinn H Alternative α-synuclein transcript usage as a convergent mechanism in Parkinson's disease pathology. Nature communications 2012 3 1084
95 Amar D Safer H Shamir R Dissection of regulatory networks that are altered in disease via differential co-expression. PLoS Comput Biol 2013 9 e1002955 23505361
96 Miller JA Horvath S Geschwind DH Divergence of human and mouse brain transcriptome highlights Alzheimer disease pathways. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010 107 12698 12703 doi:10.1073/pnas.0914257107 20616000
97 Schneider JA Arvanitakis Z Leurgans SE Bennett DA The neuropathology of probable Alzheimer disease and mild cognitive impairment. Annals of neurology 2009 66 200 208 19743450
98 Beecham GW Genome-wide association meta-analysis of neuropathologic features of Alzheimer's disease and related dementias 2014
99 Bennett D Neuropathology of older persons without cognitive impairment from two community-based studies. Neurology 2006 66 1837 1844 16801647
100 Schneider JA Arvanitakis Z Bang W Bennett DA Mixed brain pathologies account for most dementia cases in community-dwelling older persons. Neurology 2007 69 2197 2204 17568013
101 De Jager PL Bennett DA An inflection point in gene discovery efforts for neurodegenerative diseases: from syndromic diagnoses toward endophenotypes and the epigenome. JAMA neurology 2013 70 719 726 23571780
102 Nelson PT ABCC9 gene polymorphism is associated with hippocampal sclerosis of aging pathology. Acta neuropathologica 2014 127 825 843 24770881
103 Hibar DP Common genetic variants influence human subcortical brain structures. Nature 2015 520 224 229 doi:10.1038/nature14101 25607358
104 Weiner MW The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative: A review of papers published since its inception. Alzheimer's &amp; Dementia 2012 8 S1 S68
105 Schroeter ML Stein T Maslowski N Neumann J Neural correlates of Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment: a systematic and quantitative meta-analysis involving 1351 patients. Neuroimage 2009 47 1196 1206 19463961
106 Scahill RI Schott JM Stevens JM Rossor MN Fox NC Mapping the evolution of regional atrophy in Alzheimer's disease: unbiased analysis of fluid-registered serial MRI. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2002 99 4703 4707
107 Betzel RF Fukushima M He Y Zuo X-N Sporns O Dynamic fluctuations coincide with periods of high and low modularity in resting-state functional brain networks. NeuroImage 2016 127 287 297 26687667
108 Fornito A Harrison BJ Zalesky A Simons JS Competitive and cooperative dynamics of large-scale brain functional networks supporting recollection. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2012 109 12788 12793
109 Sadaghiani S Poline J-B Kleinschmidt A D'Esposito M Ongoing dynamics in large-scale functional connectivity predict perception. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2015 112 8463 8468
110 Bassett DS Meyer-Lindenberg A Achard S Duke T Bullmore E Adaptive reconfiguration of fractal small-world human brain functional networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2006 103 19518 19523
111 van den Heuvel MP Kahn RS Goñi J Sporns O High-cost, high-capacity backbone for global brain communication. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2012 109 11372 11377
112 van den Heuvel MP Stam CJ Kahn RS Pol HEH Efficiency of functional brain networks and intellectual performance. The Journal of Neuroscience 2009 29 7619 7624 19515930
113 Gallos LK Makse HA Sigman M A small world of weak ties provides optimal global integration of self-similar modules in functional brain networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2012 109 2825 2830
114 Watts DJ Strogatz SH Collective dynamics of ‘small-world’networks. nature 1998 393 440 442 9623998
115 van den Heuvel MP Genetic control of functional brain network efficiency in children. European Neuropsychopharmacology 2013 23 19 23 22819192
116 Bohlken MM Heritability of structural brain network topology: a DTI study of 156 twins. Human brain mapping 2014 35 5295 5305 24845163
117 Khazaee A Ebrahimzadeh A Babajani-Feremi A Identifying patients with Alzheimer's disease using resting-state fMRI and graph theory. Clinical Neurophysiology 2015
118 Wang J Disrupted functional brain connectome in individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease. Biological psychiatry 2013 73 472 481 22537793
119 Nir TM Connectivity network measures predict volumetric atrophy in mild cognitive impairment. Neurobiology of aging 2015 36 S113 S120 25444606
120 Fischer FU Wolf D Scheurich A Fellgiebel A Initiative A. s. D. N. Altered whole-brain white matter networks in preclinical Alzheimer's disease. NeuroImage: Clinical 2015
121 Stam C Jones B Nolte G Breakspear M Scheltens P Small-world networks and functional connectivity in Alzheimer's disease. Cerebral cortex 2007 17 92 99 16452642
122 Lo C-Y Diffusion tensor tractography reveals abnormal topological organization in structural cortical networks in Alzheimer's disease. The Journal of Neuroscience 2010 30 16876 16885 21159959
123 Myers N Within-patient correspondence of amyloid-β and intrinsic network connectivity in Alzheimer's disease. Brain 2014 137 2052 2064 24771519
124 Frantzidis CA Functional disorganization of small-world brain networks in mild Alzheimer's Disease and amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment: an EEG study using Relative Wavelet Entropy (RWE). Frontiers in aging neuroscience 2014 6
125 Stam C Graph theoretical analysis of magnetoencephalographic functional connectivity in Alzheimer's disease. Brain 2009 132 213 224 18952674
126 He Y Chen Z Evans A Structural insights into aberrant topological patterns of large-scale cortical networks in Alzheimer's disease. The Journal of neuroscience 2008 28 4756 4766 18448652
127 Langer N Functional brain network efficiency predicts intelligence. Human brain mapping 2012 33 1393 1406 21557387
128 Liang P Wang Z Yang Y Jia X Li K Functional disconnection and compensation in mild cognitive impairment: evidence from DLPFC connectivity using resting-state fMRI. PloS one 2011 6 e22153 21811568
129 Gardini S Increased functional connectivity in the default mode network in mild cognitive impairment: a maladaptive compensatory mechanism associated with poor semantic memory performance. Journal of Alzheimer's disease: JAD 2015 45 457 470 25547636
130 Crossley NA The hubs of the human connectome are generally implicated in the anatomy of brain disorders. Brain 2014 137 2382 2395 25057133
131 Buckner RL Cortical hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to Alzheimer's disease. The Journal of Neuroscience 2009 29 1860 1873 19211893
132 de Haan W Mott K van Straaten EC Scheltens P Stam CJ Activity dependent degeneration explains hub vulnerability in Alzheimer's disease. PLoS Comput Biol 2012 8 e1002582 22915996
133 Seo EH Whole-brain functional networks in cognitively normal, mild cognitive impairment, and Alzheimer's disease. PloS one 2013 8 e53922 23335980
134 Zamora-López G Zhou C Kurths J Cortical hubs form a module for multisensory integration on top of the hierarchy of cortical networks. Frontiers in neuroinformatics 2010 4
135 de Reus MA van den Heuvel MP Simulated rich club lesioning in brain networks: a scaffold for communication and integration? Frontiers in human neuroscience 2014 8
136 Wang J Apolipoprotein E ε4 modulates functional brain connectome in Alzheimer's disease. Human brain mapping 2015 36 1828 1846 25619771
137 Dai Z Identifying and Mapping Connectivity Patterns of Brain Network Hubs in Alzheimer's Disease. Cerebral Cortex 2014 bhu246
138 Daianu M Rich club analysis in the Alzheimer's disease connectome reveals a relatively undisturbed structural core network. Human brain mapping 2015 36 3087 3103 26037224
139 Daianu M Disrupted rich club network in behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia and early-onset Alzheimer's disease. Human brain mapping 2015
140 Filippini N Distinct patterns of brain activity in young carriers of the APOE-ε4 allele. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2009 106 7209 7214
141 Sheline YI APOE4 allele disrupts resting state fMRI connectivity in the absence of amyloid plaques or decreased CSF Aβ42. The Journal of Neuroscience 2010 30 17035 17040 21159973
142 Patel KT Default mode network activity and white matter integrity in healthy middle-aged ApoE4 carriers. Brain imaging and Behavior 2013 7 60 67 23011382
143 Goryawala M Apolipoprotein-E4 (ApoE4) carriers show altered small-world properties in the default mode network of the brain. Biomedical Physics &amp; Engineering Express 2015 1 015001
144 Trachtenberg AJ The effects of APOE on the functional architecture of the resting brain. Neuroimage 2012 59 565 572 21851856
145 Shaw P Cortical morphology in children and adolescents with different apolipoprotein E gene polymorphisms: an observational study. The Lancet Neurology 2007 6 494 500 17509484
146 Jones D Age-related changes in the default mode network are more advanced in Alzheimer disease. Neurology 2011 77 1524 1531 21975202
147 Greicius MD Srivastava G Reiss AL Menon V Default-mode network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging: evidence from functional MRI. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2004 101 4637 4642 15070770
148 Langbaum JB Categorical and correlational analyses of baseline fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography images from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). Neuroimage 2009 45 1107 1116 19349228
149 Chhatwal JP Impaired default network functional connectivity in autosomal dominant Alzheimer disease. Neurology 2013 81 736 744 23884042
150 Jahanshad N Multimodal Brain Image Analysis 2012 29 40 Springer
151 Brier MR Functional connectivity and graph theory in preclinical Alzheimer's disease. Neurobiology of aging 2014 35 757 768 24216223
152 Tijms BM Single-subject grey matter graphs in Alzheimer's disease. PloS one 2013 8 e58921 23536835
153 Sanz-Arigita EJ Loss of ‘small-world’networks in Alzheimer's disease: graph analysis of FMRI resting-state functional connectivity. PloS one 2010 5 e13788 21072180
154 Tijms BM Gray matter network disruptions and amyloid beta in cognitively normal adults. Neurobiology of aging 2016 37 154 160 26559882
155 de Haan W Functional neural network analysis in frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease using EEG and graph theory. BMC neuroscience 2009 10 101 19698093
156 Fischer FU Wolf D Scheurich A Fellgiebel A Initiative A. s. D. N. Altered whole-brain white matter networks in preclinical Alzheimer's disease. NeuroImage: Clinical 2015 8 660 666 26288751
157 Zhao X Disrupted small-world brain networks in moderate Alzheimer's disease: a resting-state FMRI study. PloS one 2012 7 e33540 22457774
158 Li Y Qin Y Chen X Li W Exploring the functional brain network of Alzheimer's disease: based on the computational experiment 2013
159 Supekar K Menon V Rubin D Musen M Greicius MD Network analysis of intrinsic functional brain connectivity in Alzheimer's disease. PLoS Comput Biol 2008 4 e1000100 18584043
160 Yao Z Abnormal cortical networks in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease. PLoS Comput Biol 2010 6 e1001006 21124954
161 Honey C Predicting human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2009 106 2035 2040
162 Hosseini SH Kesler SR Comparing connectivity pattern and small-world organization between structural correlation and resting-state networks in healthy adults. Neuroimage 2013 78 402 414 23603348
163 Tagliazucchi E Laufs H Decoding wakefulness levels from typical fMRI resting-state data reveals reliable drifts between wakefulness and sleep. Neuron 2014 82 695 708 24811386
164 Chang C Association between heart rate variability and fluctuations in resting-state functional connectivity. Neuroimage 2013 68 93 104 23246859
165 Airan RD Factors affecting characterization and localization of interindividual differences in functional connectivity using MRI. Human Brain Mapping 2016 37 1986 1997 27012314
166 Zalesky A Fornito A Cocchi L Gollo LL Breakspear M Time-resolved resting-state brain networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2014 111 10341 10346
167 Allen EA Tracking whole-brain connectivity dynamics in the resting state. Cerebral cortex 2012 bhs352
168 Hutchison RM Dynamic functional connectivity: promise, issues, and interpretations. Neuroimage 2013 80 360 378 23707587
169 Rashid B Damaraju E Pearlson GD Calhoun VD Dynamic connectivity states estimated from resting fMRI Identify differences among Schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and healthy control subjects. Frontiers in human neuroscience 2014 8
170 Kaiser RH Dynamic Resting-State Functional Connectivity in Major Depression. Neuropsychopharmacology 2015
171 Jones DT Non-stationarity in the “resting brain's” modular architecture. PloS one 2012 7 e39731 22761880
172 Peraza LR Taylor J-P Kaiser M Divergent brain functional network alterations in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease. Neurobiology of aging 2015
173 Sompolinsky H Computational neuroscience: beyond the local circuit. Current opinion in neurobiology 2014 25 xiii xviii 24602868
174 Bhalla US Molecular computation in neurons: a modeling perspective. Current opinion in neurobiology 2014 25 31 37 24709598
175 Linderman JJ Cilfone NA Pienaar E Gong C Kirschner DE A multi-scale approach to designing therapeutics for tuberculosis. Integrative Biology 2015 7 591 609 25924949
176 Obiol-Pardo C Gomis-Tena J Sanz F Saiz J Pastor M A multiscale simulation system for the prediction of drug-induced cardiotoxicity. Journal of chemical information and modeling 2011 51 483 492 21250697
177 Osborne J A hybrid approach to multi-scale modelling of cancer. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 2010 368 5013 5028
178 Silva JR A multiscale model linking ion-channel molecular dynamics and electrostatics to the cardiac action potential. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2009 106 11102 11106
179 Barttfeld P Signature of consciousness in the dynamics of resting-state brain activity. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2015 112 887 892
180 Spiros A Carr R Geerts H Not all partial dopamine D2 receptor agonists are the same in treating schizophrenia. Exploring the effects of bifeprunox and aripiprazole using a computer model of a primate striatal dopaminergic synapse. Neuropsychiatric disease and treatment 2010 6 589 20856922
181 Anticevic A NMDA receptor function in large-scale anticorrelated neural systems with implications for cognition and schizophrenia. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2012 109 16720 16725
182 Vattikuti S Chow CC A computational model for cerebral cortical dysfunction in autism spectrum disorders. Biological psychiatry 2010 67 672 678 19880095
183 Foley AM Ammar ZM Lee RH Mitchell CS Systematic review of the relationship between amyloid-beta levels and measures of transgenic mouse cognitive deficit in Alzheimer's disease. J Alzheimers Dis 2015 44 787 795 doi:10.3233/JAD-142208 25362040
184 Franco R Cedazo-Minguez A Successful therapies for Alzheimer's disease: why so many in animal models and none in humans. Frontiers in pharmacology 2014
185 Burns TC Li MD Mehta S Awad AJ Morgan AA Mouse models rarely mimic the transcriptome of human neurodegenerative diseases: A systematic bioinformatics-based critique of preclinical models. European journal of pharmacology 2015 759 101 117 25814260
186 Przytycka TM Singh M Slonim DK Toward the dynamic interactome: it's about time. Briefings in bioinformatics 2010 bbp057
187 Ohyama T A multilevel multimodal circuit enhances action selection in Drosophila. Nature 2015
188 Schadt EE Buchanan S Brennand KJ Merchant KM Evolving toward a human-cell based and multiscale approach to drug discovery for CNS disorders. Frontiers in pharmacology 2014 5
189 Southern J Multi-scale computational modelling in biology and physiology. Progress in biophysics and molecular biology 2008 96 60 89 17888502
190 Neymotin S Calcium regulation of HCN channels supports persistent activity in a multiscale model of neocortex. Neuroscience 2016 316 344 366 26746357
191 Rowan MS Neymotin SA Lytton WW Electrostimulation to reduce synaptic scaling driven progression of Alzheimer's disease. Frontiers in computational neuroscience 2014 8
192 DeWoskin D Distinct roles for GABA across multiple timescales in mammalian circadian timekeeping. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2015 112 E3911 E3919
193 Myung J GABA-mediated repulsive coupling between circadian clock neurons in the SCN encodes seasonal time. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2015 112 E3920 E3929
194 Sanz Leon P The Virtual Brain: a simulator of primate brain network dynamics. Frontiers in Neuroinformatics 2013 7 doi:10.3389/fninf.2013.00010
195 Izhikevich EM Edelman GM Large-scale model of mammalian thalamocortical systems. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences 2008 105 3593 3598
196 Eliasmith C Trujillo O The use and abuse of large-scale brain models. Current opinion in neurobiology 2014 25 1 6 24709593
197 Cabral J Structural connectivity in schizophrenia and its impact on the dynamics of spontaneous functional networks. Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science 2013 23 046111
198 Chaudhuri R Knoblauch K Gariel M-A Kennedy H Wang X-J A large-scale circuit mechanism for hierarchical dynamical processing in the primate cortex. Neuron 2015 88 419 431 26439530
199 Nageswaran JM Dutt N Krichmar JL Nicolau A Veidenbaum AV A configurable simulation environment for the efficient simulation of large-scale spiking neural networks on graphics processors. Neural Networks 2009 22 791 800 19615853
200 Markram H Reconstruction and simulation of neocortical microcircuitry. Cell 2015 163 456 492 26451489
201 Potjans TC Diesmann M The cell-type specific cortical microcircuit: relating structure and activity in a full-scale spiking network model. Cerebral cortex 2014 24 785 806 23203991
202 Izhikevich EM Simple model of spiking neurons. IEEE Transactions on neural networks 2003 14 1569 1572 18244602
203 Maurano MT Systematic localization of common disease-associated variation in regulatory DNA. Science 2012 337 1190 1195 22955828
204 Oldoni F Post-GWAS methodologies for localisation of functional non-coding variants: ANGPTL3. Atherosclerosis 2015
205 Rajagopal N High-throughput mapping of regulatory DNA. Nature biotechnology 2016
206 Kundaje A Integrative analysis of 111 reference human epigenomes. Nature 2015 518 317 330 25693563
207 Maurano MT Large-scale identification of sequence variants influencing human transcription factor occupancy in vivo. Nature genetics 2015
208 Akbarian S The PsychENCODE project. Nature neuroscience 2015 18 1707 1712 26605881
209 Gutenkunst RN Universally sloppy parameter sensitivities in systems biology models. PLoS computational biology 2007 3 e189
210 Karr JR A whole-cell computational model predicts phenotype from genotype. Cell 2012 150 389 401 22817898
211 Jolivet R Coggan JS Allaman I Magistretti PJ Multi-timescale Modeling of Activity-Dependent Metabolic Coupling in the Neuron-Glia-Vasculature Ensemble. PLoS computational biology 2015 11 e1004036 e1004036 25719367
212 Li W-K Hausknecht MJ Stone P Mauk MD Using a million cell simulation of the cerebellum: Network scaling and task generality. Neural Networks 2013 47 95 102 23200194
213 Insel TR Landis SC Collins FS The NIH brain initiative. Science 2013 340 687 688 23661744
214 Toga AW Clark KA Thompson PM Shattuck DW Van Horn JD Mapping the human connectome. Neurosurgery 2012 71 1 22705717
215 Lichtman JW Pfister H Shavit N The big data challenges of connectomics. Nature neuroscience 2014 17 1448 1454 25349911
216 O'Leary T Sutton AC Marder E Computational models in the age of large datasets. Current opinion in neurobiology 2015 32 87 94 25637959
217 Rzhetsky A Foster JG Foster IT Evans JA Choosing experiments to accelerate collective discovery. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2015 112 14569 14574
218 Uzzi B Mukherjee S Stringer M Jones B Atypical combinations and scientific impact. Science 2013 342 468 472 24159044
219 Thiele I A community-driven global reconstruction of human metabolism. Nature biotechnology 2013 31 419 425
220 Mostafavi S Ray D Warde-Farley D Grouios C Morris Q GeneMANIA: a real-time multiple association network integration algorithm for predicting gene function. Genome Biol 2008 9 S4 18613948
221 Muldoon SF Soltesz I Cossart R Spatially clustered neuronal assemblies comprise the microstructure of synchrony in chronically epileptic networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2013 110 3567 3572
222 Bonifazi P GABAergic hub neurons orchestrate synchrony in developing hippocampal networks. Science 2009 326 1419 1424 19965761
223 Takahashi N Sasaki T Matsumoto W Matsuki N Ikegaya Y Circuit topology for synchronizing neurons in spontaneously active networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2010 107 10244 10249
224 Kasthuri N Saturated Reconstruction of a Volume of Neocortex. Cell 2015 162 648 661 26232230
225 Dobrin R Multi-tissue coexpression networks reveal unexpected subnetworks associated with disease. Genome Biol 2009 10 R55 19463160
226 Gaiteri C Guilloux J-P Lewis DA Sibille E Altered gene synchrony suggests a combined hormone-mediated dysregulated state in major depression. PloS one 2010 5 e9970 20376317
227 Ardlie KG The Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) pilot analysis: Multitissue gene regulation in humans. Science 2015 348 648 660 25954001
228 Croft DP Krause J James R Social networks in the guppy (Poecilia reticulata). Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences 2004 271 S516 S519
229 Kramer AD Guillory JE Hancock JT Experimental evidence of massive-scale emotional contagion through social networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2014 111 8788 8790
230 Christakis NA Fowler JH Social contagion theory: examining dynamic social networks and human behavior. Statistics in medicine 2013 32 556 577 22711416
231 Magger O Waldman YY Ruppin E Sharan R Enhancing the prioritization of disease-causing genes through tissue specific protein interaction networks. PLoS Comput Biol 2012 8 e1002690 23028288
232 Das J Yu H HINT: High-quality protein interactomes and their applications in understanding human disease. BMC systems biology 2012 6 92 22846459
233 Rolland T A proteome-scale map of the human interactome network. Cell 2014 159 1212 1226 25416956
234 Obayashi T COXPRESdb: a database of coexpressed gene networks in mammals. Nucleic acids research 2008 36 D77 D82 17932064
235 Debette S Genome-wide Studies of Verbal Declarative Memory in Nondemented Older People: The Cohorts for Heart and Aging Research in Genomic Epidemiology Consortium. Biological psychiatry 2015 77 749 763 25648963
236 De Jager PL A genome-wide scan for common variants affecting the rate of age-related cognitive decline. Neurobiology of aging 2012 33 1017 e1011 1017 e1015 22054870
237 Bennett DA Schneider JA Tang Y Arnold SE Wilson RS The effect of social networks on the relation between Alzheimer's disease pathology and level of cognitive function in old people: a longitudinal cohort study. The Lancet Neurology 2006 5 406 412 16632311
238 Buchman A Total daily physical activity and the risk of AD and cognitive decline in older adults. Neurology 2012 78 1323 1329 22517108
239 Wilson RS Life-span cognitive activity, neuropathologic burden, and cognitive aging. Neurology 2013 81 314 321 23825173
240 Wilson RS Participation in cognitively stimulating activities and risk of incident Alzheimer disease. Jama 2002 287 742 748 11851541
241 Alladi S Bilingualism delays age at onset of dementia, independent of education and immigration status. Neurology 2013 81 1938 1944 24198291
242 Stern Y Influence of education and occupation on the incidence of Alzheimer's disease. Jama 1994 271 1004 1010 8139057
243 Hall C Cognitive activities delay onset of memory decline in persons who develop dementia. Neurology 2009 73 356 361 19652139
244 Stern Y What is cognitive reserve? Theory and research application of the reserve concept. Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society 2002 8 448 460 11939702
245 Landau SM Association of lifetime cognitive engagement and low β-amyloid deposition. Archives of neurology 2012 69 623 629 22271235
246 Bennett D Schneider J Wilson R Bienias J Arnold S Education modifies the association of amyloid but not tangles with cognitive function. Neurology 2005 65 953 955 16186546
247 Deary IJ Johnson W Houlihan LM Genetic foundations of human intelligence. Hum Genet 2009 126 215 232 doi:10.1007/s00439-009-0655-4 19294424
248 Davies G Genetic contributions to variation in general cognitive function: a meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies in the CHARGE consortium (N=53949). Mol Psychiatry 2015 20 183 192 doi:10.1038/mp.2014.188 25644384
249 Chibnik LB CR1 is associated with amyloid plaque burden and age-related cognitive decline. Ann Neurol 2011 69 560 569 doi:10.1002/ana.22277 21391232
250 Barral S Genotype patterns at PICALM, CR1, BIN1, CLU, and APOE genes are associated with episodic memory. Neurology 2012 78 1464 1471 22539578
251 Zhang X Bridging Integrator 1 (BIN1) Genotype Effects on Working Memory, Hippocampal Volume, and Functional Connectivity in Young Healthy Individuals. Neuropsychopharmacology 2015 40 1794 1803 doi:10.1038/npp.2015.30 25630570
252 Carrasquillo MM Late-onset Alzheimer's risk variants in memory decline, incident mild cognitive impairment, and Alzheimer's disease. Neurobiol Aging 2015 36 60 67 doi:10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.07.042 25189118
253 Hayden KM Lutz MW Kuchibhatla M Germain C Plassman BL Effect of APOE and CD33 on Cognitive Decline. PLoS One 2015 10 e0130419 doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0130419 26102276
