LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9100095
8509
Mol Cell Neurosci
Mol. Cell. Neurosci.
Molecular and cellular neurosciences
1044-7431
1095-9327

26657644
5930170
10.1016/j.mcn.2015.11.010
NIHMS947889
Article
Modeling Alzheimer’s disease with human induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells
Mungenast Alison E. 12*
Siegert Sandra 1234*
Tsai Li-Huei 12
1 Picower Institute for Learning and Memory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge, MA, USA
2 Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA
4 To whom correspondence should be addressed: ssiegert@ist.ac.at
3 Current address: Institute of Science and Technology, IST, Klosterneuburg, Austria

* Contributed equally

26 3 2018
04 12 2015
6 2016
02 5 2018
73 1331
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
In the last decade, induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells have revolutionized the utility of human in vitro models of neurological disease. The iPS-derived and differentiated cells allow researchers to study the impact of a distinct cell type in health and disease as well as performing therapeutic drug screens on a human genetic background. In particular, clinical trials for Alzheimer’s disease (AD) have been often failing. Two of the potential reasons are first, the species gap involved in proceeding from initial discoveries in rodent models to human studies, and second, an unsatisfying patient stratification, meaning subgrouping patients based on the disease severity due to the lack of phenotypic and genetic markers. iPS cells overcome this obstacles and will improve our understanding of disease subtypes in AD. They allow researchers conducting in depth characterization of neural cells from both familial and sporadic AD patients as well as preclinical screens on human cells.

In this review, we briefly outline the status quo of iPS cell research in neurological diseases along with the general advantages and pitfalls of these models. We summarize how genome-editing techniques such as CRISPR/Cas will allow researchers to reduce the problem of genomic variability inherent to human studies, followed by recent iPS cell studies relevant to AD. We then focus on current techniques for the differentiation of iPS cells into neural cell types that are relevant to AD research. Finally, we discuss how the generation of three-dimensional cell culture systems will be important for understanding AD phenotypes in a complex cellular milieu, and how both two- and three-dimensional iPS cell models can provide platforms for drug discovery and translational studies into the treatment of AD.


1. Introduction

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is an age-related neurodegenerative disorder associated with severe memory impairments and has become the 6th leading cause of death in the United States (www.alz.org). The first case of AD was published in 1907 by Dr. Aloysius “Alois” Alzheimer, who described a 51-year-old woman with serious memory loss. Post-mortem analysis of her brain showed severe brain atrophy and neuronal loss, as well as the presence of dense extracellular deposits and intracellular aggregates within neurons (Alzheimer, 1911; Graeber, et al., 1997). These features were eventually identified as amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles, respectively (Glenner and Wong, 1984; Grundke-Iqbal, et al., 1986; Kosik, et al., 1986), and the condition became known as Alzheimer’s Disease (Kraepelin, 1910).

Amyloid plaques are extracellular accumulations of β-amyloid (Aβ) peptides that are derived from the proteolytic processing of the β-amyloid precursor protein (APP) (Goldgaber, et al., 1987; Kang, et al., 1987; Robakis, et al., 1987; Tanzi, et al., 1987). The γ-secretase complex cleaves APP at different positions, generating different size amyloidogenic peptides Aβ43, Aβ42, Aβ40, Aβ38, and Aβ37 (De Strooper, 2010). Of these, Aβ40 is the most abundant in both healthy and AD brain tissue, whereas the Aβ42 variant has been shown to be likely the most deleterious (Jarrett, et al., 1993; Portelius, et al., 2010). Much of our understanding of the mechanisms underlying AD pathology comes from a small population of individuals with early-onset familial AD (fAD). These cases harbor causal mutations involving primarily the Aβ processing enzymes, presenilin 1 and 2 (PSEN1, PSEN2), which are part of the γ-secretase complex (Levy-Lahad, et al., 1995; Levy-Lahad, et al., 1995; Rogaev, et al., 1995; Schellenberg, et al., 1993), or mutations within or duplications of the APP gene itself (Goate, et al., 1991; Goate, 2006; St George-Hyslop, et al., 1987).

The second defining characteristic of AD is the presence of neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) comprised of intracellular accumulations of the microtubule-associated protein tau in affected neurons (Ballatore, et al., 2007). The extent of tau pathology in human AD has been shown to correlate well to disease severity (Braak and Braak, 1991). Mutations in the gene encoding tau (MAPT) have been found to be causal for fronto-temporal dementia, although MAPT mutations have not been described in AD (Hutton, et al., 1998; Spillantini, et al., 1998). Overexpression of tau protein in mouse models has been shown to disrupt intracellular trafficking (Zhang, et al., 2006), to induce axonal degeneration (Spittaels, et al., 1999), and the humanized tau overexpression leads to neurofibrillary tangles formation in vivo (for review, see (Götz, et al., 2007)). A number of promising drugs have reached late-stage (Phase III) clinical testing, however then failed to prevent cognitive decline (Doody, et al., 2013; Doody, et al., 2014; Salloway, et al., 2014). The reasons are likely twofold: first, the lack of human data for the successful stratification (separating patient population) according to disease phenotypes and/or genetic risk profiles (Blennow, 2010; Wolozin, 2012), and second, the species gap. Risk factors present in humans may not be adequately modeled in rodents. For example, while variants in the APOE gene are the strongest genetic risk factors for sporadic AD identified to date (Bertram, et al., 2008; Corder, et al., 1993; Farrer, et al., 1997), the rodent genome has only one version of this gene.

A number of elegant mouse models have allowed the study of AD phenotypes in vivo in the brain, and have resulted in the basis of our current mechanistic understanding of the disease. However, a common drawback to these models is that they typically only capture specific aspects of AD phenotypes such as Aβ or NFTs, but rarely the entire disease spectrum (Webster, et al., 2014). Moreover, most mouse models focus only on the causative mutations in familial AD (fAD), such as those in the genes encoding presenilin 1 and 2 (PSEN1, PSEN2) and the amyloid-precursor protein (APP). These cases represent an extremely small percentage of the overall human AD burden; though models of fAD are invaluable, the majority of AD cases are sporadic (sAD). The genetic underpinnings of sAD may result from a combinatorial or additive effect of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) identified in genome-wide association studies (GWAS) (Lambert, et al., 2013), while disease penetrance may depend on a host of non-genetic risk factors, such as age, head trauma, diabetes, lifetime stress, and environmental toxins, amongst others. Studying the distinct impact of AD-associated SNPs in mouse models is challenging, as these variants are often found in non-coding regions of the human genome. Using even the latest and most rapid genome editing techniques to insert multiple SNPs in homologous mouse genome regions would be onerous, expensive, and could be considered a highrisk undertaking. It is often not known whether a single SNP is disease causing, or whether it’s a combination of several SNPs particularly as a number of different SNPs are commonly ascribed to a single locus.

2. Human induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells

We will summarize the history, generation, and differentiation of human iPS cells only briefly, as many excellent reviews have covered these topics (Bouwman and de Laat, 2015; Parent and Anderson, 2015; Telias and Ben-Yosef, 2014). One fundamental question in the regeneration field is to find cells that maintain the capability to differentiate into the three germ layers: endoderm, mesoderm, and ectoderm. Embryonic stem (ES) cells have this “pluripotency” capability (Evans and Kaufman, 1981; Martin, 1981; Thomson, et al., 1998). However, ethical issues tempered the initial excitement for human ES cells and therefore alternative strategies were needed (Hotta, 2008; Kamm, 2005). An important step was the discovery that the content of an oocyte’s cytoplasm contained factors crucial for reprogramming somatic cells to an embryonic-like stage (Cowan, et al., 2005; Tada, et al., 2001; Wilmut, et al., 1997). Takahashi et al. screened 24 of these factors and demonstrated that Oct3/4, Sox2, c-Myc, and Klf4 induced pluripotent stem cells from adult mouse fibroblasts (Takahashi and Yamanaka, 2006). A year later, the same group showed that they could reprogram human fibroblasts with these four “Yamanaka factors” into human pluripotent stem cells (Takahashi, et al., 2007). Other groups have generated similarly pluripotent cells from other peripheral cells, such as blood cells (Okita, et al., 2013) or urine-derived epithelial cells (Zhou, et al., 2012).To distinguish these pluripotent stem cells from ES cells, the cells were named “induced pluripotent stem” (iPS) cells. Currently, much debate exists over the best method for reprogramming somatic cells into iPS cells, as well as how to assess the “stemness” of an iPS cell as compared to an ES cell line (Bock, et al., 2011; Hanna, et al., 2010; Lister, et al., 2011). It is important to keep in mind that exogenous factors, genetic background, and epigenetic of tissue origin of cells influences naïve pluripotency (Hanna, et al., 2010). Therefore certain differences on the epigenetic landscape are expected to exist between ES and iPS cells (Bock, et al., 2011; Lister, et al., 2011). Nevertheless, the advent of iPS cells allows to generate any cell type of interest from a patient’s own somatic cells and to develop patient-specific drug treatments. Moreover, these techniques offer a nearly unlimited supply of human cells that can be deposited in repositories and shared between laboratories.

3. Advantages to modeling neurological disease with iPS cells

The study of human brain disease is hampered by obtaining live material. The ability to generate neural cultures from post-mortem human brains depends greatly on the quality of the post-mortem brain tissue (Verwer, et al., 2002). Prolonged agonal states such as hypoxia, coma, or ischemic brain damage could add confounding variables to these studies (Monoranu, et al., 2009). This is not to mention the sheer difficulty of gaining access to reliable sources of human brain tissue. The generation of human iPS cells is one way to surmount these limitations. Protocols have been developed to differentiate iPS cells in vitro into distinct cell types allowing researchers to examine disease onset and progression directly in a human culture model (see Fig. 1) (Liu et al., 2012; Sandoe and Eggan, 2013). A number of studies have shown successful reprogramming of iPS cells from fibroblasts derived from individuals with various neurological diseases such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (Dimos, et al., 2008), familial dysautonomia (Lee, et al., 2009), Parkinson’s disease (Park, et al., 2008; Soldner, et al., 2009), Rett syndrome (Marchetto, et al., 2010), schizophrenia (Brennand, et al., 2011), spinal muscular atrophy (Ebert, et al., 2009; Yoshida, et al., 2015), ADA-SCID, Gaucher disease type III, Duchenne muscular dystrophy, Becker muscular dystrophy, Down syndrome, Juvenile diabetes mellitus, Huntington disease (Consortium, 2012; Zhang, et al., 2010), and Lesch-Nyhan syndrome (Mattis, et al., 2015; Park, et al., 2008) and AD (Choi, et al., 2014; Hossini, et al., 2015; Iovino, et al., 2015; Israel, et al., 2012; Koch, et al., 2012; Kondo, et al., 2013; Muratore, et al., 2014; Wren, et al., 2015; Yagi, et al., 2011; Table 1).

4. Drawbacks of iPS cells in neurological disease modeling

The explosion in human iPS cell use has underscored the need to establish standardized protocols, as cell handling and other factors can influence phenotypes (Boulting, et al., 2011). For example, variable X-inactivation in cells from female donors can have an impact upon both differentiation and phenotype (Boulting, et al., 2011). Also, there is still debate regarding to what extent DNA methylation profiles, and other epigenetic attributes, might be maintained in iPS cells after reprogramming (Kim, et al., 2010; Koche, et al., 2011; Nazor, et al., 2012; Ohi, et al., 2011). To determine the magnitude and nature of variability amongst human iPS cells, (Bock, et al., 2011) performed a human genome-wide reference mapping of the DNA methylation across 20 ES and 12 iPS cell lines. They established two scorecards for evaluating the quality and utility of human pluripotent cell lines; this kind of tool is crucial to the standardization of iPS protocols and is needed to obtain comparable and reproducible results.

Genetic diversity within and between populations, as well as disease onset and progression, can impact the experimental read-out from iPS cells (Rouhani, et al., 2014; Soldner and Jaenisch, 2012). For example, common DNA variants may alter expression levels and pattern of many human genes (Majewski and Pastinen, 2011). Some groups have sought to overcome this diversity by focusing either on few phenotypes in a large collection of lines (Bock, et al., 2011; Rouhani, et al., 2014; Yoshimizu, et al., 2015), or by investigating robust phenotypes in a smaller cohort (Chung, et al., 2013; Israel, et al., 2012). Each iPS cell study is challenged by the question of to what extent the observed phenotypes are related to the disease being modeled. For example, is the phenotype influenced by protective or exacerbating factors in the individual’s genotype? Recent advances in genome editing techniques, particularly the use of Cas9 nuclease-based strategies, have made the generation of isogenic iPS cell practicable (F. Zhang et al., 2014; Y. Zhang et al., 2014; D. Zhang et al., 2014) and this technology can address the variability inherent in the human genome to some extent.

5. Creating isogenic iPS cell lines as a strategy to overcome variability in human genomes

The advent of homology-directed repair techniques for genome editing proved a major advance in our ability to manipulate the human genome. Currently, three systems have been established to perform DNA repairdirected genome editing: Zinc-Finger-Nucleases (ZFN), transcription activator-like effector nucleases (TALENs), and the clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) system that uses the Cas9 nuclease. All these nucleases induce guided DNA breaks. The repair of these breaks then either leads to insertion or deletion (indel) mutations, or the break can be repaired by homologous recombination with a donor vector carrying the desired mutation (Byrne, et al., 2014). For a detailed review of the function of each of the nucleases, please refer to the reviews from (Hsu, et al., 2014; Sander and Joung, 2014) as well as to descriptions of experimental strategies and protocols for human pluripotent cells in particular (Byrne, et al., 2014; Chiba and Hockemeyer, 2015; Zhu, et al., 2014).

The first generation of enzyme-directed genome editing used ZFNs. A number of important papers used the first generation ZFNs to generate isogenic iPS cells (Carroll, 2011; Urnov, et al., 2010)) by knocking down genes such as PITX3 (Hockemeyer, et al., 2009) or PIG-A (Zou, et al., 2009), or correcting disease-related mutations in genes such as α1-anti-trypsin (Yusa, et al., 2011), α-synuclein (SCNA;(Ryan, et al., 2013; Soldner, et al., 2011), and tau (MAPT(Fong, et al., 2013). However, the success of this technique is limited due to the challenging design of a robust engineered zinc finger nuclease (Hsu, et al., 2014; Ma, et al., 2015; Sander and Joung, 2014). The development of the second generation TALEN technique overcame some of the limitations of the ZFNs by being less context-dependent and easier to design (Joung and Sander, 2013; Miller, et al., 2011; Sander and Joung, 2014), while the efficiency is similar between the two paradigms (Hockemeyer, et al., 2011). Human iPS models established with TALEN technology include manipulations in the APOB, SORT1, AKT2, PLIN1 (Ding, et al., 2013), PSEN1 (Woodruff, et al., 2013), and DISC1 (Wen, et al., 2014). The third generation of genome editing tools is comprised of the CRISPR/Cas9 systems, which are based on the use of the RNA-guided Cas9 nuclease (Jinek, et al., 2012; Mali, et al., 2013; Ran, et al., 2013). One major advantage of the CRISPR system is that the Cas9 component is fixed, and the targeting sequence is supplied via a single-guide RNA (sgRNA); thus, targeting sequences can be easily exchanged or multiplexed by testing multiple sgRNAs (Ding, et al., 2013). Several groups generated iPS cells that stably or inducible express the Cas9 protein. This system allows for rapid cell-based screens to test the consequences of multiple gene knockdowns using sgRNA libraries (Shalem, et al., 2014; Wang, et al., 2014; Zhu, et al., 2014). Algorithms have been developed that predict off target effects of CRISPR-mediated genome editing, which, combined with falling costs for deep sequencing, allow researchers to minimize off-target effects (Hsu et al., 2013; Tsai et al., 2015; Slaymaker et al., 2015).

The advantage of isogenic lines is that only the disease-associated difference is studied, as the genetic background of the lines should be identical. While this is ideal for the study of disease causative mutations, other genetic variants, such as a haplotype of SNPs, are more difficult to model because they may only be relevant to disease risk in combination. Therefore, it seems advisable to both correct the mutation of interest in a patient-derived cell line, while in parallel introducing it in a control line. Techniques using mutated Cas9 linked to transcriptional activators or repressors also allow us to examine the consequences of enhanced or suppressed expression of specific genes without alterations to the genome itself (Qi, et al., 2013). Therefore, genome editing will be an important strategy to minimize the effect of background variations in human iPS cell-derived lines.

6. iPS cells as a model for understanding AD onset and disease progression

In the following chapter, we will focus on studies that use iPS cells to model AD-like phenotypes (summarized in Table 1). The two hallmark characteristics of AD in the human brain are first, accumulation of β-amyloid (Aβ) peptides into extracellular aggregates (Aβ plaques), and second, the intracellular accumulation of phosphorylated species of the microtubule-associated protein tau into neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs). Both parameters can be measured in vitro: alterations in the presence of Aβ peptides can be measured from culture medium or cell lysates, and the ratios between different species of Aβ peptides, such as the amount of Aβ40 versus Aβ42, are often reported. To examine tauopathy in AD cellular models, the abundance of different species of phosphorylated tau (pTau) is normalized against total tau levels. Other AD-like phenotypes that can be measured in cultured cells will also be discussed, including endosome cycling and DNA damage.

6.1. Phenotypic characterization of iPS cell AD models

Several groups have succeeded in creating functional neurons from fAD and sAD iPS cells: In 2011, Yagi et al. used fibroblasts of fAD patients with mutations in either presenilin isoform PSEN1 (A246E) or PSEN2 (N141I; Yagi, et al., 2011). Using retrovirus carrying a five-factor reprogramming mix of OCT4, SOX2, KLF4, LIN28 and NANOG, they created iPS cells that were then differentiated mainly into neuronal cells. After two-week culturing, they observed an elevated ratio of Aβ42 to Aβ40 for the fAD lines compared to controls. The authors did not find any level of tauopathy, and speculated that the two-week maturation time may have been too short. Treatment of the cultures with the y-secretase inhibitors Compound E and Compound W reduced both Aβ40 and Aβ42 levels, while only the highest dose of Compound W appeared to impact the Aβ42/40 ratio. This study was the first to establish a model of fAD phenotypes in iPS cell-derived neural cultures. However the drawbacks of this work might be the relatively short time of neuron maturation as well as the potential high variability between clones of the same genotype.

In 2012, Israel et al. provided a thorough evaluation of AD-like phenotypes in multiple iPS cell-derived neurons from both fAD and sAD individuals (Israel, et al., 2012). They used retrovirus carrying the four Yamanaka factors OCT4, SOX2, KLF4, and c-MYC to create iPS cells lines from healthy, non-demented individuals, two sporadic AD patients, and two familial patients, who carried APP duplications. Neural progenitor cells were purified using fluorescence activated cell sorting and differentiated into heterogeneous neuronal cultures. They observed increased secreted Aβ40 in neurons created from one sAD and the two fAD lines. Importantly, the Aβ levels did not differ in fibroblasts from the same individuals, supporting the idea that only distinct iPS-derived cells can model disease-specific phenotypes. No changes were observed in the Aβ42/40 or Aβ38/40 ratios between cell lines, although the authors noted that detection of the less abundant Aβ42 and Aβ38 species were often below the detection range of the assay due to the small number of neurons. In a similar pattern, one sAD and both fAD lines showed increased phospho-tau and activation of the tau kinase GSK3β. Treatment of the neuronal cultures with γ- and β-secretase inhibitors reduced Aβ40 in one sAD and one fAD line, while only β-secretase inhibitors lowered the levels of active GSK-3β, and phospho-tau. Another AD phenotype that can be characterized in iPS cell-derived cultures is the presence of abnormal endosomes. Large, RAB5-positive early endosomes have been observed in AD mouse models and in the brains of sAD and fAD patients (Cataldo, et al., 2001; Cataldo, et al., 2000). These endosomes may contain aberrantly phosphorylated Aβ (Lee, et al., 2003). Impaired endocytic and mitochondrial trafficking has also been observed in iPS cell models of frontotemporal dementia (FTD) using cells from patients carrying mutations in the MAPT gene (Iovino, et al., 2015; Wren, et al., 2015). Israel et al. examined early endosome morphology in iPS-derived neurons seeded onto a layer of commercially-available human astrocytes, and found that the number of medium to large RAB5+ endosomes was increased in neurons derived from one sAD and one fAD compared to the two controls, when they examined early endosome morphology in iPS-derived neurons seeded onto a layer of commercially-available human astrocytes. Finally, they measured synapse formation and function. No differences were apparent in synapse number (synapsin immunoreactivity) or function (voltage clamp recordings) between the AD and control lines.

In 2013, Kondo et al. used episomal vectors to generate iPS cells from dermal fibroblasts from both sAD patients and fAD patients carrying the APP-V717L or the APP-E693Δ fAD mutations (Kondo, et al., 2013). The E693Δ mutation leads to early-onset AD, but without amyloid deposition. Differentiated E693Δ neurons showed decreased Aβ40 and Aβ42 compared to controls, while neurons from the V717L line have increased extracellular Aβ and an increased Aβ42/40 ratio. No significant Aβ secretion was detectable in the medium of the sAD lines. The authors then established astrocyte-rich cultures using protocols modified from Su-Chun Zhang’s work (Krencik and Zhang, 2011). Astrocytes from the E693Δ line and one of the sAD lines accumulated Aβ oligomers intracellular. They performed gene expression profiling of the astrocyte/neuronal co-cultures from E693Δ and control cells and observed that oxidative stress-related categories were upregulated in the AD lines, suggesting ER and Golgi perturbation. The levels of these genes were reduced following treatment with DHA, known to alleviate oxidative stress, as well as the production of ROS, in E693Δ cells, without altering the levels of Aβ.

Fong et al (2013) used zinc-finger nucleases (ZFNs) to correct a A152T mutation in the MAPT gene (tau), as well as to create an isogenic line homozygous for the mutation, in iPS cells (Fong, et al., 2013). Following neuronal differentiation, the heterozygous mutant tau neurons showed short, misshapen neurites with punctate tau and significant phospho-tau immunoreactivity. These phenotypes were absent in the corrected lines, and were significantly exacerbated in the homozygous mutant lines, which showed high degrees of phospho-tau (AT8) and blebbing of the neurites. While they found a low percentage of dopaminergic cells (DA) in the mutant lines, the corrected isogenic lines had 4 to 8-fold increased number of DA neurons.

In addition to lines derived from AD patients, several groups have overexpressed fAD mutant versions of PSEN1 or APP in healthy iPS or ES cell lines (Choi, et al., 2014; Koch, et al., 2012). For example, neurons created from a human ES cell line were transduced, as neuroepithelial-like stem cells, with lentivirus carrying cDNAs for PSEN1wt, PSEN1D385n, or PSEN1L166P under control of the EF1alpha promoter (Koch, et al., 2012). By four weeks of neuronal differentiation, most of the β-III tubulin-positive cells were highly immunoreactive for APP. Interestingly, the inclusion of Exon 15 of APP, a splice variant associated with neurons, was present in neurons after 4 weeks compared to undifferentiated cells. Extracellular Aβ level was reduced in these neuronal cultures following treatment with the γ-secretase inhibitor DAPT. In addition, NSAIDS, such as ibuprofen, slightly lowered Aβ levels only in the PS1wt, but not the PS1D385N, overexpressing neurons. One early screening effort used commercially available iPS cell-derived neurons (iCell Neurons) to screen a library of several hundred compounds for their ability to ameliorate toxicity from exogenously applied Aβ (Xu, et al., 2013).

To date, most studies model AD in patient-derived iPS cells utilize cell lines with defined fAD mutations in PSEN1 and APP. While some studies include cells from sAD patients, the lack of a defined mutation means that isogenic lines cannot be made, and often information is lacking as to the severity or course of disease progression. Two studies in which sAD lines were included observed disease phenotypes similar to fAD cells in only one of two sAD samples (Israel, et al., 2012; Kondo, et al., 2013). Few studies include sAD lines, and this is a concern, as sporadic late-onset AD represents the vast majority of AD cases. And while 60–80% of sAD may in fact have genetic underpinnings (Gatz, et al., 2006), one’s APOE genotype remains the only robust factor affecting sAD risk. These issues add to the call for development of AD biomarkers that can predict disease risk and age of onset. Much work has begun in this direction, and large-scale human genome-wide association studies (GWAS) combined with mouse and human epigenetic and transcriptome profiling, have derived lists of genes in which variants are consistently associated with an increased risk of AD (Bertram, et al., 2007). These genes tend to be implicated in vesicle trafficking/endocytosis, immune function, and cholesterol metabolism (for review see Olgiati, et al., 2011)). One recent study (Young, et al., 2015) focused upon iPS cells derived from individuals with sAD-associated variants in the SORL1 gene, which encodes a protein involved in endocytic trafficking, and whose loss of expression has been observed in sAD brains. The authors found that the induction of SORL1 expression by brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) treatment, as well as the effect of SORL1 expression upon Aβ secretion, was affected by SORL1 genotype in differentiated human neurons. While these studies were hampered by significant variability, which was combated by the inclusion of a relatively large number of cell lines, it was the first to describe a phenotype in human iPS cell-derived neurons resulting from sAD-associated genetic variants. With the increased feasibility of genome editing in iPS cells, particularly to create point mutations, we anticipate that the near future will see many more reports elucidating the roles of sAD risk variants in iPS cell-derived neural cell models.

6.2. AD phenotypes in Down syndrome iPS cells

Down Syndrome (DS) patients show a high incidence of early-onset AD-like dementia (40–60%). The underlying reasons for this are not clear, but are presumably related to the triplication of the APP gene, as well as the tau kinase Dyrk1a gene (Woods, et al., 2001) on chromosome 21 (Beyreuther, et al., 1993; Burger and Vogel, 1973; Lemere, et al., 1996; Rumble, et al., 1989). Therefore, neural cell models from DS individuals may improve both our understanding of AD-like pathology, as well as providing hope for therapies for DS (2013). To date, no genome editing protocols have been reported that allow for the correction or induction of trisomy in iPS cell models. However, the rare occurrence of monozygotic twins discordant for trisomy 21 (Hibaoui, et al., 2014), as well as creation of iPS cell lines from individuals with mosaic DS (Murray, et al., 2015; Weick, et al., 2013), and the spontaneous reversion to disomy 21 in a DS iPS cell line (Maclean, et al., 2012), provide us with isogenic lines with which to study this disorder. An early paper (2008) demonstrated AD-like deficits in endocytic function in fibroblasts from DS individuals (Cataldo, et al., 2008). In 2012, the Livesey group created iPS cells from one DS patient and one control and examined them for AD-like pathology (Shi, et al., 2012). Interestingly, the DS line secreted far higher levels of both Aβ40 and Aβ42 as fibroblasts, than did control cells. Following two months in neuronal culture, aggregates of Aβ42 were detected in the DS cultures using live staining with the thioflavin T analog, BTA1 and immunocytochemistry against Aβ42. A twenty-one day treatment with DAPT nearly abolished both species of Aβ production in the DS neurons. Tau pathology was also evident in neurons differentiated from DS iPS cells, detectable as an abnormal distribution of phospho-tau within the neurons as well as secreted tau in the medium of DS cultures only. Synapse formation did not appear to differ between neurons from DS and control individuals.

Chang et al (2015) created neurons from both hES cell and iPS cell lines (Chang, et al., 2015). Similar to Shi et al, the authors found increased immunoreactivity for Aβ and phosphorylated tau. Treatment with n-butylidenephthalide (Bdph), an activator of Wnt signaling, delivered via coated nanoparticles, ameliorated AD-like phenotypes in these cultures. Recently, accelerated aging phenotypes were reported in neurons derived from DS iPS cells compared to isogenic controls (Murray, et al., 2015). Unlike previous models, these cells exhibited differences in proliferation and differentiation. Consistent with earlier reports, the DS iPS cell-derived neurons had increased Aβ immunoreactivity in fixed cultures, but did not appear to differ electrophysiologically from controls. The DS neurons also exhibit mitochondrial dysfunction and increased DNA damage compared to the controls. This last phenotype is particularly interesting, and the failure of neurons to maintain their genomic integrity appears to be a hallmark both of normal aging and of neurodegenerative disease (Dobbin, et al., 2013; Goto, 1997; Hasty, et al., 2003; Kim, et al., 2008; Lovell and Markesbery, 2007; Lu, et al., 2004; Sahin and DePinho, 2010; Wang, et al., 2013). In conclusion, iPS cell-derived neurons from DS individuals may be useful for modeling phenotypes that are similar between AD and aging in DS, as these cells appear to exhibit both amyloid and tau pathology as well as phenotypes such as endosome dysfunction and DNA damage.

7. Disadvantages in modeling AD with iPS cells

7.1. Aging in iPS cells

Work by several groups has suggested that reprogramming of the iPS cells “re-set” the epigenome, and that other phenotypes associated with cellular aging, such as mitochondrial function and telomere length, are returned to a “juvenile-like” state (Mahmoudi and Brunet, 2012; Miller and Studer, 2014). This raises the question: can we model phenotypes associated with aging in human neural cells (Isobe, et al., 2014)? Transplantation studies of human neuronal progenitor cells (NPCs) into the rodent brain have suggested that the human neural cells mature on a human, rather than a rodent, timeline (Espuny-Camacho, et al., 2013). However, simply allowing iPS cells-derived neural cells to age in vitro is impracticable and expensive. Therefore, several groups have begun to explore the possibility of accelerated aging in these model systems. One approach is to derive iPS cells from individual with Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria syndrome (HGPS), which maintain a truncated product of the mutated LMNA gene, progerin, which triggers fast aging (Blondel, et al., 2014; Liu, et al., 2011). Liu et al found that the deleterious progerin protein was absent in HGPS patient-derived cells in the iPS cell stage (Liu, et al., 2011). However, upon differentiation to smooth muscle cells, the disease phenotype of progerin accumulation, as well as its ageing-associated cellular defects, were recapitulated. In place of using patient cells, progerin can also simply be overexpressed in iPS cells to induce age-related phenotypes such as DNA damage and mitochondrial dysfunction (Miller, et al., 2013). Increases in DNA damage have also been observed in iPS cells derived from individuals with Werner Syndrome, an accelerated aging disorder arising from mutations in the WRN gene, which encodes a DNA helicase (Shimamoto, et al., 2015).

Instead of progerin overexpression, other “stimulating” factors might be used, which activate aging pathways. An interesting example has been shown for cardiomyocytes from differentiated iPS cells of patients with arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia. These cells were exposed to a three-factor cocktail, which activates PPARa and leads to increased fatty acid oxidation instead of glycolysis (Wen, et al., 2015). In this way, the authors recapitulate the adult cardiomyocyte-like metabolism in these cells, which could be pushed to the desired disease pathologies by further treatment with PPARγ activators. Although these techniques appear to induce aging phenotypes in iPS cell derivatives, we first have to understand the underlying association of aging with AD to incorporate systematic approaches to age neurons.

7.2. Neuronal maturation

In all iPS cell approaches, it is necessary to confirm the maturity and the functionality of the derived neurons. While some studies in neurodegenerative disorders use nestin and Pax6-positive NPCs as a kind of proxy to neurons (Hossini, et al., 2015), others have gone to lengths to demonstrate the degree to which iPS cell-derived neurons model in vivo human neurons (Israel, et al., 2012). The most common methods to confirm neuronal differentiation and matureness are a combination of immunocytochemistry and electrophysiology (Israel, et al., 2012; Nieweg, et al., 2015): Mature neurons should show the ability to fire action potentials when depolarized under current clamp, as well as demonstrating spontaneous excitatory and inhibitory postsynaptic currents under single-cell patch-clamp. Immunocytochemistry for synaptic vesicle proteins, such as VGLUT1, VAMP2, synaptobrevin, and synapsin, are indicative for mature functional synapses (Marchetto, et al., 2010; Nieweg, et al., 2015). One early screening effort emphasized the need to create mature neuronal cultures for reliable drug assays (Yahata, et al., 2011). Thus, one major challenge to researchers is to provide neuronal cultures that are both mature enough to be representative of adult brain neurons, while being abundant enough for multiple types of assays. Occasionally the presence of disease mutations may hamper efforts to create human neural cell models of disease. For example, neurons created from patient-derived iPS cells carrying FTD mutations in MAPT have been shown to mature more quickly than control lines, while at the same time displaying disease phenotypes such as hyperphosphorylated Tau (Iovino, et al., 2015). In contrast, another group using iPS cell-derived neurons carrying the same MAPT mutation (N279K) reported that these cells had deficits in neuronal maturation compared to control lines (Wren, et al., 2015). The issue of altered proliferation and/or differentiation of neural progenitor cells and neurons seems particularly troublesome in work with Down syndrome lines (Hibaoui, et al., 2014; Murray, et al., 2015).

7.3. Culture heterogeneity and disease phenotypes

Another important aspect is that in several studies it is not obvious to what extent the reported neuronal cultures contain other cell types, nor whether heterogeneous cultures may encourage neuronal differentiation (Sandoe and Eggan, 2013; Shi, et al., 2012; Shi, et al., 2012). While pure cultures of neurons can form synapses and display connectivity, they may not mature fully in the absence of astrocytes or glial-conditioned medium (Pfrieger, 2009; Pfrieger and Barres, 1997; Ullian, et al., 2004). Along these lines, some groups have found that the addition of astrocytes to iPS cell-derived neuronal cultures enhances the ability to obtain mature neurons (Odawara, et al., 2014; Zhang, et al., 2013); this is an area of active debate and constant methodological improvement. Overall, it is necessary to fully characterize the cell type matureness as well as the heterogeneity of neural cultures derived from iPS cells. In this regard, the advent of three-dimensional neural cultures derived from human iPS cells may be particularly beneficial as discussed later.

Finally, a major challenge is to generate a distinct cell type to study its involvement in a disease phenotype. It is hypothesized that only a certain subset of cells fails in many neurological diseases, for example, a subpopulation of dopaminergic cells in Parkinson’s disease (Sandoe and Eggan, 2013). Moreover, the phenotypes displayed by cells bearing physiological mutations, such as familial AD mutations, may often be less robust than those obtained via the experimental overexpression of mutant proteins. One study compared the effect of compound treatment on neural cells from fAD patients to either heterologous cell lines overexpressing fAD APP, or human control ES-derived neural cells overexpressing mutant APP. They observed that concentrations of indomethacin that reduced Aβ42/40 robustly in the heterologous cells, and more modestly in the APP-overexpressing human cells, had no effect on the human neural cells carrying endogenous fAD mutations (Mertens, et al., 2013). Most researchers who use patient-derived iPS cells carrying familial mutations will be familiar with this issue of comparatively mild disease phenotypes, at least compared to models of gene overexpression or knockdown. Fortunately, the use of isogenic lines with corrected disease alleles may, by reducing variability between lines, allow for the reliable measurement of even modest phenotypes. The increased use of three-dimensional tissue culture systems (see Section 8), may also facilitate disease phenotypes by concentrating protein aggregates and other cellular products in a tissue-like environment that can still be imaged or assayed with ease.

In addition to the issue of variability between iPS cell-derived lines in assays of disease phenotypes, we are faced with the growing awareness that other cell types must be created to model AD in these systems. For example, in the last decade, it has become obvious that glia cells have an important impact in disease onset and progression. Thus, our basic science interests demand that we increase the complexity of our cellular models to adequately represent the disease, while at the same time we are tasked with the production of simplified systems that are amenable to applications such as drug screening.

8. Differentiation of iPS cells to study cell type-specific impact toward neurological diseases

Generation of iPS cells typically serves as a starting point to differentiate them into various brain-specific cell types such as neurons or glial cells. Each cell lineage develops, when a combination of exogenous morphogens are applied at distinct time points during development of the iPS cells (Liu and Zhang, 2011). An alternative strategy is the overexpression of cell type-specific transcription factors (B. Zhang et al., 2013; Y. Zhang et al., 2013). In the following, we focus on examples of the successful generation of neuronal and glial cell types from human iPS cells.

8.1. Differentiation to distinct neuronal cell types

The initial iPS cell study by Takahashi et al. demonstrated the successful generation of neuronal cells from iPS cells (Takahashi, et al., 2007). It is now common to perform neuronal differentiation (Denham and Dottori, 2011), and even to differentiate into specific neuronal subtypes, such as forebrain glutamatergic neurons (Zeng, et al., 2010), cortical neurons (Nieweg, et al., 2015; Shi, et al., 2012), GABAergic interneurons (Liu, et al., 2013; Nieweg, et al., 2015), motor neurons (Ebert, et al., 2009), and hypothalamic-like neurons (Wang, et al., 2015). Indeed, there are too many neuronal differentiation techniques in the literature to adequately review here (some recent reviews include (Broccoli, et al., 2015; Broccoli, et al., 2014; Chinchalongporn, et al., 2015; Lai, et al., 2015)). The generation of inhibitory neurons is of particular interest for AD research, since both inhibitory and excitatory neurons are affected (Hazra, et al., 2013; Krantic, et al., 2012), and inhibitory interneurons, such as parvalbuminergic cells, play crucial roles in orchestrating large networks crucial to memory formation (Bartos, et al., 2007; Mann and Paulsen, 2007). The development of protocols for the differentiation of multiple neural subtypes is a lively area of research.

8.2. Differentiation to glia

In the brain, glial cells can be divided in three major cell classes: astrocytes, microglia, and oligodendrocytes. Each of them has been proposed to have an important impact in AD’s onset and progression; even so it is still debatable, whether they are causative for the disease or just represent a secondary by-standing effect. Overall human AD and mouse gene expression studies show that with AD progression, immune response and inflammatory genes are up- and genes involved in neuronal functions are down-regulated (Blalock, et al., 2011; Blalock, et al., 2004; Gjoneska, et al., 2015). Interestingly, GWAS describe several AD-risk increasing genetic variants, which are linked to genes with identified roles in glial cells, such as APOE, PICALM, TREM2, CR1, CD33 and CLU (Ando, et al., 2013; Antunez, et al., 2011; Bertram, et al., 2008; Bradshaw, et al., 2013; Calero, et al., 2000; Corneveaux, et al., 2010; Crehan, et al., 2013; Deng, et al., 2012; Guerreiro, et al., 2013; Harold, et al., 2009; Hollingworth, et al., 2011; Jonsson, et al., 2013; Lambert, et al., 2009; Lambert, et al., 2010; Wunderlich, et al., 2013; Zhang, et al., 2010). Apolipoprotein APOE was originally identified in the liver that mediates the transport and delivery of cholesterol and other lipids through cell surface ApoE receptors (Mahley, 1988; Mahley and Rall, 2000). The human APOE gene exists as three alleles. While these three variants have a frequency in the population of 8.4% (ε2), 77.9% (ε3), and 13.7% (ε4), the frequency of the APOE ε4 variant (APOE4) is increased to at least 40% in sporadic AD patients (Farrer, et al., 1997) making it as one of the greatest risk factors for sAD (Kanekiyo, et al., 2014; Lambert, et al., 2013). Individuals with one APOE4 allele are three to four times as likely to develop AD than those without APOE4 alleles, an odds ratio that is by far the highest out of any AD risk gene (Bertram and Tanzi, 2008; Corder, et al., 1993). In both humans and in animal models, the APOE4 allele is associated with increased levels of amyloid beta (Aβ), as well as amyloid plaque deposition (Castellano, et al., 2011; Fryer, et al., 2005; Kim, et al., 2009; Youmans, et al., 2012). The least common variant, APOE2, differs from the APOE4 variant at just two amino acid positions but appears to be protective against the development of AD (Bu, 2009; Corder, et al., 1993; Liu, et al., 2013). While the contribution of the APOE4 allele to AD risk is well known, the reasons why this variant may trigger AD are not at all understood. The study of these APOE variants has been particularly difficult in rodent models, which endogenously express only one version of the Apoe gene. Thus, the emergence of iPS cell lines with different APOE isotypes will greatly advance our understanding of this AD risk factor by either collecting individuals of particular genotypes, or by using genome editing to “switch” between the protective and the disease-causing APOE form within the same genotype.

Taken together, two important themes emerge from these observations: 1) neurodegeneration in AD most likely involves an interaction of neuronal and glial pathologies; and 2) understanding the functions of genes implicated in AD, from GWAS or expression studies, will require a thorough characterization of their functions in a cell type-specific manner. Since human and mouse glia are surprisingly divergent (Oberheim, et al., 2006; Oberheim, et al., 2009), which places emphasis on the need for models of human glia for the study of neurodegenerative disease.

8.2.1. Astrocytes

Astrocytes are a diverse cell class, which can differ both functionally and morphologically between brain regions (Bribian, et al., 2015; Ma, et al., 1999; Tabata, 2015) as well as displaying significant species divergence (Oberheim, et al., 2006; Oberheim, et al., 2009). Astrocytes are intimately involved in synaptogenesis and synapse maintenance (Haydon and Nedergaard, 2015; Pascual, et al., 2005; Perea, et al., 2009), maintain brain homeostasis, store and distribute energy substrates, and play a major role in the clearance of metabolites and toxins from the brain parenchyma (Jessen, et al., 2015; Xie, et al., 2013). Inflammatory astrogliosis precede or accompany neurodegeneration in many animal models and human postmortem AD brains, as evidenced by increased immunoreactivity for glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) as well as by the loss of important astrocytic proteins such as glutamine synthase and GLT-1 (Dabir, et al., 2006; Fischer, et al., 2005; Li, et al., 1997; Masliah, et al., 2000; Robinson, 2001; Tilleux and Hermans, 2007). Moreover, astrocytes in the brain are the primary producer of the ApoE protein under physiological conditions, although cell profiling studies have implicated microglia as another prominent ApoE source (F. Zhang et al., 2014; Y. Zhang et al., 2014; D. Zhang et al., 2014).

While differentiation from iPS cells focused initially on creating functional human neurons, several groups have now also developed protocols to differentiate astrocytes from iPS cells. In spontaneously differentiating cultures, astrocytes will appear roughly 100 days from the time that neural progenitor cells are placed in differentiation media (Shi et al., 2012a, 2012b, 2012c). To obtain faster cultures with a higher purity of astrocytes, techniques have been developed to obtain astrocytes from gliospheres (Krencik, et al., 2011) or by directed differentiation via defined factors (Chen, et al., 2014). Astrocyte-like cells can also be obtained via direct reprogramming of fibroblast cells (Caiazzo, et al., 2015). The admirable plasticity of these glial cells, however, which make them such an important and adaptable cell in the brain, has historically led to issues of how representative primary cultured astrocytes are compared to the in vivo situation (Foo, et al., 2011; Hertz, et al., 1998; Sun, et al., 2013). Given the different protocols in development to create iPS cell-derived human astroglia, the issue of variability between different groups and different cell lines is likely to require a concerted effort by the entire neural iPS cell community to address this issue.

8.2.2. Microglia

Microglia are complex and dynamic cells responding to their environment by releasing chemical transmitters as well as phagocytize cell debris, synapses, or whole cells. Both pro-inflammatory and neuroprotective roles for microglia have been demonstrated in AD. Local resident microglia become activated and rapidly react to amyloid plaque formation by extending processes, migrating toward plaques, and aggregate around them (Bolmont, et al., 2008; Lue, et al., 2001). Also, microglia are demonstrated to undergo apoptosis in AD brain (Lassmann, et al., 1995; Sugaya, et al., 1997; Yang, et al., 1998) and show dystrophic morphology and fragmentation, which could be the reason of the senescence of these cells (Streit, et al., 2009; Streit and Xue, 2010).

The differentiation of microglia from iPS cells appears possible, though perhaps more challenging than other neural cell types, given the unique origin of microglia (Ginhoux, et al., 2010). To date, however, while publications exist for creating mouse microglia (Beutner et al., 2010; Beutner et al., 2013; Selvaraj et al., 2012; Tsuchiya et al., 2005), resources describing human iPS cell-derived microglia are rare. We found one patent related to the “Method for obtaining human microglial precursor cells from pluripotent stem cells” (EP 2424976 A1) from the group of Harald Neumann (Neumann, 2012), who also have derived microglial cells from mouse ES cells (Beutner, et al., 2010; Beutner, et al., 2013). Another strategy was introduced by the Filgueira group, who generated microglia from human peripheral blood monocytes using a mixture of recombinant cytokines such as M-CSF, GM-SF, NGFβ, and CCL2 (Etemad, et al., 2012). A report that focuses on the analysis of FTD phenotypes in iPS cell-derive neurons mentions the creation of Iba1-positive cells from embryoid bodies, but does not further characterize these cells (Almeida et al., 2012). Some groups have found that, in the process of making embryoid bodies and three-dimensional cultures, that they are able to isolate Cd11b+/CD45+ monocyte-like cells (Schwartz, et al., 2015). However, whether these microglial precursors are representing the same characteristic as the microglia in vivo is a matter of debate, and our understanding of microglia and their roles in Alzheimer’s disease remains woefully incomplete. To date, we could not find any work in the literature that focused upon creating microglia from human ES or iPS cells. The production of microglia from human iPS cells is highly desirable, given our increasing awareness of the role of inflammation in neurodegenerative disease, and we look forward to seeing new protocols in the literature soon.

8.2.3. Oligodendrocytes

Oligodendrocytes form myelin layers around neuronal axons in order to allow high nerve conductance (Bercury and Macklin, 2015). White matter lesions and myelin abnormalities have been described in human AD brain and mouse models (Bartzokis, 2011; Desai, et al., 2010; Desai, et al., 2009; Englund, et al., 1988; Kobayashi, et al., 2002; Roth, et al., 2005). The potential that iPS cell-derived oligodendrocyte precursor cells and mature oligodendrocytes have for both the study and treatment of demyelinating disorders has made this an active field, with a number of groups developing protocols. These studies have generated oligodendrocytes and oligodendrocytes precursors from human iPS cells either as a component of heterogeneous cultures (Hu, et al., 2009; Kim, et al., 2012; Swistowski, et al., 2010) or as the result of concerted efforts to generate these particular cell types (Douvaras, et al., 2014; Jang, et al., 2011; Ogawa, et al., 2011; Pouya, et al., 2011; Wang, et al., 2013). Oligodendrocytes derived from human iPS cells have been shown to myelinate neuronal processes in vitro (S. Wang et al., 2013; X.Y. Wang et al., 2013) and in vivo (Douvaras et al., 2014; Major et al., 2011; Pouya et al., 2011; S. Wang et al., 2013; X.Y. Wang et al., 2013), and thus hold great promise for studying the impact of myelin abnormalities in AD and other demyelinating disorders.

8.3. Future challenges for cell type differentiation

For each cell type differentiation, it will be crucial to eliminate remaining pluripotent iPS as well as progenitor cells. There are several options such as fluorescent-activated cell sorting (Sergent-Tanguy, et al., 2003) or magnetic separation, however they are very invasive and could potentially change the epigenetic landscape. It would be from advantage to have a marker of successful differentiation. (Kim, et al., 2011) showed that the microRNA-371-3 cluster could serve as a discrimination factor for neuronal differentiation.

One major challenge will be to define what is a cell type and which cell type is impacted in a disease phenotype. To define a cell type is challenging by itself (DeFelipe, et al., 2013; Fishell and Heintz, 2013; Grange, et al., 2014) but solving this question will be crucial for future studies in iPS cells. This requires that we understand the genetic identity of a cell type, so that we can investigate strategies to specifically promote this cell type to differentiate from iPS cells. Once we know the genetic identity of a natural cell, we can correlate this identity to our engineered cell in vitro. Strategies like this are already proposed within the retina (Siegert, et al., 2012).

9. Modeling neurological disease in three-dimensional culture systems

In the previous section, we briefly alluded to the impact of distinct cell types in AD and what are the current efforts in the field to generate these different neural lineages from iPS cells. Although the analysis of a pure cell type population can give valuable insides into the biology of the cell, it is often the interaction between different cell types that are most important to a true model of neural systems: for example neurons exhibit increased synapse formation when they are co-cultured with astrocytes (Pfrieger and Barres, 1997), and astrocytes may look and behave differently in two-dimensional culture than they do in the brain (Cahoy, et al., 2008; Puschmann, et al., 2013). The latter one is a concern for all cell types, since neurons and glia both utilize subcellular specializations, or compartmentalization, to function properly in vivo (Khakh and McCarthy, 2015; Tonnesen, et al., 2014). In a monolayer in a culture dish, however, some of this compartmentalization may be lost. One example is the observation of calcium microdomains in astrocytes in vivo and in slice preparations, in which specific subregions of the astrocytic arbor exhibit restricted calcium oscillations that may reflect activity to immediately adjacent neurons (Bernardinelli, et al., 2014; Di Castro, et al., 2011; Shigetomi, et al., 2013). Another concern is that phenotypes of aberrant extracellular protein aggregation are lost in two-dimensional cultures simply due to the lack of interstitial compartment, and metabolites of interest may diffuse to the media. To overcome this, recent studies have embedded human ES or iPS cell-derived cells in scaffolding such as hydrogel or Matrigel, to create three dimensional culture systems (Pasca, et al., 2015; Schwartz, et al., 2015; Smith, et al., 2015). These kinds of culture systems, when created with human cells overexpressing fAD proteins or treated with Aβ oligomers, can recapitulate AD-like phenotypes such as extracellular Aβ plaque-like deposits (Choi et al., 2014; Kim et al., 2015) and cytoskeletal abnormalities (F. Zhang et al., 2014; Y. Zhang et al., 2014; D. Zhang et al., 2014).

To address issues that might arise from overly simplistic culture model systems, a number of groups have taken advantage of tissue engineering approaches that can generate either scaffolded or self-organizing neural cytosystems, such as “organoids”. In 2008, the Sasai laboratory demonstrated that mouse and human ES cells could form self-organized apico-basally polarized cortical tissue (Eiraku and Sasai, 2012; Eiraku, et al., 2008). However this technique lacks the later stage of cortical development namely discrete cortical layer formation with the typically inside-out organization, as well as the presence of outer radial glia. (Lancaster, et al., 2013) improved the protocol and could model human brain development in 3D organoid structure. They observed cortical-like neuronal generation and organization and found astrocytes and oligodendrocytes after more than 100 days in vitro. To date, AD-like phenotypes have not been reported in self-organizing three-dimensional cultures or organoids from patient-derived cells. However, the three-dimensional cultures reported by Choi et al., which overexpressed mutant APP, also showed an increase in phospho-Tau levels, suggesting that it may be possible to recapitulate many AD phenotypes within one model system, which would be a strong advantage in comparison to AD mouse models (Choi, et al., 2014; Kim, et al., 2015). Three-dimensional neural culture systems have yet to recapitulate complex in vivo brain systems that include elements such as the blood-brain-barrier, vascularization, or immune response, which all have an important impact during disease and treatment. Therefore, multiple research groups are focusing on creating vascularization, shown in liver tissue (Masumoto, et al., 2014; Samuel, et al., 2013; Takebe, et al., 2013) or blood-brain-barrier structures from iPS cells (Lippmann, et al., 2014; Lippmann, et al., 2013; Lippmann, et al., 2012; Minami, et al., 2015).

10. Conclusion

In this review, we have outlined recent strategies to investigate AD pathology using human iPS cells and to find new therapeutic targets preventing disease onset and progression. The approval rate for AD medications is a scant 4% of all treatments that enter onto Phase I trials (McBride, 2012) with projections of 13.8 million people with AD and $1.2 trillion spent on AD-related care in the year 2050 (Association, 2013; Hebert, et al., 2013). These numbers clearly show that new model systems are needed to better translate observations from rodent models into clinical studies. Human iPS cells will be an important step forward in this direction; they have the potential to recapitulate phenotypes from various neurological diseases in a cell type-specific manner. Creating isogenic iPS cells lines overcomes problems of variability in human genomes and genome-editing technology has become much easier to implement. We have outlined how iPS cells can model disease etiology, progression, and phenotypes in human AD. Several groups have, to date, succeeded in recapitulating multiple AD-like phenotypes in human iPS cells. Thus, the stage appears to be set for the widespread use of iPS cells in preclinical drug trials for AD therapies (reviewed in (Khurana, et al., 2015)). To benefit most from these cellular models, it will be absolutely crucial that all experiments are performed in a controlled and standardized manner that will allow reproducibility between different research groups.

Several areas of iPS cell research remain topics of much debate or even controversy. For example, there is debate over exactly how similar iPS and ES cells are, and how well iPS cells can functionally replace ES cells in translational research (Bock et al., 2011; Chin et al., 2009; Doi et al., 2009; Hu et al., 2010; Narsinh et al., 2011a, 2011b). In addition to the ethical and legal issues that have arisen regarding the creation of ES cells, which hinder the production of new lines, a clear advantage of iPS cells is that the donor is often an adult, sometimes elderly, and thus can provide a health history relevant to the disorder of interest. This is not possible with ES cells. This said, the ability to access patient history in the use of iPS cell research is highly variable between research groups and subject to a great deal of regulation to ensure patient privacy (King and Perrin, 2014; Lomax, et al., 2015; Lomax and Peckman, 2012; Lomax, et al., 2013). As more and more iPS cell lines are characterized and this information added to public databases, we expect that even researchers without direct access to patient information will benefit from these models. The development of libraries of disease-associated iPS cell lines, of both genders, will allow high-throughput drug discovery and validation, and should make the rocky path from bench to clinic shorter and straighter.

In this review, we also put a strong focus on the impact of different cell types. It will be crucial to investigate the impact of drugs across different cell types. The use of three-dimensional scaffolding combined with differentiated cells (Choi, et al., 2014), or the creation of self-organizing neural tissue structures in vitro (Eiraku and Sasai, 2012; Eiraku, et al., 2008; Kadoshima, et al., 2013; Lancaster, et al., 2013; Lancaster and Knoblich, 2014), hold great promise for modeling the intricate micro- and macro-environment of the brain. In the future, it may be possible to screen drugs in these cytosystems, which have the benefit of containing multiple neural cell types in a physiological microenvironment and, with the development of vascularization technique, may include blood-brain barrier penetration in the assay at an early stage of drug discovery.

This work was supported by NIH grant R01-AG047661 to LHT. The art in Fig. 1 was created by Julian Wong.

Figure 1 Using human patient derived induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells to model Alzheimer’s disease (AD) pathology

This model figure illustrates the logical path of experiments using iPS cells to study AD phenotypes and screen for novel therapeutics. Somatic cells (blood, skin, etc.) are reprogrammed in vitro into iPS cell colonies. At this point, or later, genome-editing techniques can be used to create isogenic lines containing specific mutations or transgenes. Techniques exist to differentiate the iPS cells into neural cells that include neurons, microglia, astrocytes and oligodendrocytes, as well as neural progenitor cells (not pictured). From the iPS cell stage, self-organizing tissue cytosystems, or organoids, can also be created in three-dimensional culture. Neural cells differentiated from iPS lines with sporadic or familial AD (sAD or fAD) backgrounds can display a number of AD-like phenotypes that can be assayed in vitro. These include amyloid β peptide production and, in the case of three-dimensional culture, amyloid plaques, tau pathology, synaptic dysfunction, immune activation, genomic instability, and aberrant endosome trafficking. High-throughput screens can be designed to examine the impact of small molecule or other treatments upon these and other AD-like phenotypes directly in human neural cells. The development of novel treatments for the AD patient and the success of these treatments in the clinic completes the cycle.

Table 1 Literature reviewed.

Reference	Lab*	Ye
ar	PMID	Cell Source	Dise
ase	Mutation/G
ene	Genome
Editing/Iso
genic lines	Cell
Types
Examined	Phenotypes Reported	Drug
treatment	Profilin
g	
Yagi et al., 2011	Suzuki	2011	21900357	iPSCs from Coriell hFib: AG07768, AG09908; Clone 201B71	fAD, sporadic PD	PSEN1 A246E, PSEN2 N141I		Neurons	Aβ	Compound E, Compound W	Gene expression microaray	
Liu et al., 2011	Izpisua Belmonte	2011	21346760	H9 ESCs; iPSCs from BJ hFib, Coriell hFib: AG01972, AG11498, AG06297, GM00038, AG05247, AG09602.	HGPS progeria	LMNA G608G		Smooth muscle cells	Premature senescence, nuclear defects		DNA methylation microarray	
Israel et al., 2012	Goldstein	2012	22278060	iPSCs from primary patient hFibs	fAD, sAD	APP duplication		NPCs, neurons	Aβ, Tau, GSK3β activity, Endosomes, Vesicle trafficking, Synapse formation/ function	Compound E, DAPT	Gene expression microarray	
Koch et al., 2012	Walter	2012	2251 0327	ESCs: I3 (TE03); iPSCs: PKa2	fAD,	Overexpression of PSEN1 L166P and D385N		lt-NES cells, NPCs, neurons	Aβ, NPC proliferation	DAPT, ibuprofen indomethacin		
Maclean et al., 2012	Orkin	2012	23045682	ESCs: CSES2 and CSES133. iPSCs: DS2, DS1 MRC5-IPS74	DS	Trisomy 21	Spontaneous disomc isogenic lines	Hematopoietic cells	Aβ, hematopoiesis			
Shi et al., 2012	Livesey	2012	22344463	ESCs: DS-ES SC-321, H9; iPSCs: DS1-iPS44	DS	Trisomy 21		NPCs, neurons	Aβ, aggregates, Tau	DAPT		
Kondo et al., 2013	Inoue	2013	23434393	iPSCs from primary patient hFibs	fAD, sAD	APP E693Δ and V717L		Neurons, astrocytes	Aβ, Cellular/oxidative stress,	DHA, DBM14-26, NSC23766, BACE inhibitor IV (BSI)	Gene expression microarray	
Fong et al., 2013	Huang	2013	2431 9659	iPSCs from primary patient hFibs	FTD	MAPT A152T	Zinc finger nucleases	NPCs,	Tau, Neural degeneration, Dopaminergic phenotypes			
Xu et al., 2013	Zhong	2013	23305945	ESCs: H9, iPSCs: hiPS-C4 line. iCell Neurons.	AD	Exogenous Aβ		NPCs, neurons	Neuronal viability, Cell cycle, Neurogenesis, Differentiation	Cdk inhibitors	Compund screen	
Weick et al., 2013	Bhattacharyya	2013	23716668	iPSCs from Coriell hFib: AG05397, GM02504.	DS	Trisomy 21	Disomic isogenic cells via mosaicism	NPCs, neurons	Cellular/oxidative stress, Synapse formation/ function		Gene expression microarray	
Miller et al., 2013	Studer	2013	24315443	iPSCs from Coriell hFib: AG06917, AG06297, AG11498	HGPS Prgeria, PD	LMNA C1824T; PINK1 Q456X; Parkin V324A.		Neurons	Cellular/oxidative stress, Cellular aging, Lewy-body-precursor-like inclusions, DNA damage, Mitochondrial dysfunction		RNA-Seq	
Choi et al., 2014	Kim	2014	25307057	ReN cell VM human neural stem (ReN) cells (Millipore)	fAD	Overexpression of APP K670N/ M671L/V717 I; PSEN1 (ΔE9)		3D neural culture in Matrigel	Aβ, Tau, Neural degeneration	Compound E, BACE inhibitor IV (BSI), DAPT, SGSM41		
Hibaoui et al., 2014	Feki	201 4	24375627	iPSCs from primary patient hFibs	DS	Trisomy 21	Isogenic cells from discordantmonozygotic twins	NPCs, neurons, neurospheres	Synapse number, NPC Viability, DYRK1A activity, Neurogenesis, Differentiation	epigallocat echine gallate (EGCG)	RNA-Seq	
Muratore et al., 2014	Young-Pearse	2014	24524897	iPSCs: hFibs from HSCI	fAD	APP V717I		iPSCs, NPCs, Neurons	Aβ, Tau, APP cleavage, Endosomes	DAPT, Compound E, BACE inhibitor C3, Anti-Aβ antibodies	Nanostring gene expression array	
Sproul et al., 2014	Noggle	2014	24416243	iPSCs: hFibs from Coriell AG07671, AG07768, AG08446	fAD	PSEN1 A246E, M146L		iPSCs, NPCs, neurons	Aβ, differentiation	Recombinant Norrin	Gene expression microarray	
Wren et al., 2015	Bu	2015	26373282	iPSCs from primary patient hFibs	FTD	MAPT N279K		NPCs	Tau, Endosomes, Vesicle trafficking, Cellular/oxidative stress			
Iovino et al., 2015	Spillantini	2015	26220942	iPSCs from primary patient hFibs, Coriell hFib: ND32854, ND40076	FTD	MAPT N279K, P301L		Neurons	Tau, Mitochondrial dysfunction, α synuclein, Neurogenesis, Differentiation		RNA-Seq	
Young et al., 2015	Goldstein	2015	25772071	hFibs from UCSD ADRC, J.C.V.	sAD	SORL1 SNPs		NPCs, neurons	Aβ, SORL1 induction			
Murray et al., 2015	Nizetic	2015	25694335	Young adult hFibs from Galliera Genetic Bank	DS		Disomic isogenic cells via mosaicism	Neurons, hematopoietic cells	Aβ, Mitochondrial dysfunction, DNA damage, proliferation			
Chang et al., 2015	Su	2015	25735452	ESCs: TWI iPSCs: allantoic fluid-derived	DS	Trisomy 21		NPCs, neurons	Aβ, aggregates, Tau, Wnt signaling	F127-Bdph		
Hossini et al., 2015	Adjaye	2015	25765079	ESCs: H1, H9 iPSCs: NFH-46 hFibs	sAD			NPCs/neu rons	Tau, gene expression	Compound E	Gene expression microarray	
* Corresponding Author. PMID: PubMed ID. hFib: Human fibroblast. iPSCs: Induced pluripotent stem cell. ESCs: Embryonic stem cell. sAD/fAD = sporadic/familial Alzheimer’s disease. PD = Parkinsons’ disease. HGPS = Hutchinson–Gilford Progeria syndrome. FTD= Frontotemporal Dementia. DS = Down syndrome. NPCs = neural progenitor cells. HSCI = Harvard Stem Cell Institute.

1 Takahashi, K., Tanabe, K., Ohnuki, M., Narita, M., Ichisaka, T., Tomoda, K. &amp; Yamanaka, S. (2007). Induction of pluripotent stem cells from adult human fibroblasts by defined factors. Cell 131, 861-872 18035408

2 Falk, A., Koch, P., Kesavan, J., Takashima, Y., Ladewig, J., Alexander, M., Wiskow, O., Tailor, J., Trotter, M., Pollard, S., Smith, A. &amp; Brustle, O. (2012). Capture of neuroepithelial-like stem cells from pluripotent stem cells provides a versatile system for in vitro production of human neurons. PLoS One 7, e29597 22272239

3 Biancotti, J. C., Narwani, K., Buehler, N., Mandefro, B., Golan-Lev, T., Yanuka, O., Clark, A., Hill, D., Benvenisty, N. &amp; Lavon, N. (2010). Human embryonic stem cells as models for aneuploid chromosomal syndromes. Stem Cells 28, 1530-1540 20641042

4 Park, I. H., Arora, N., Huo, H., Maherali, N., Ahfeldt, T., Shimamura, A., Lensch, M. W., Cowan, C., Hochedlinger, K. &amp; Daley, G. Q. (2008). Disease-specific induced pluripotent stem cells. Cell 134, 877-886 18691744

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


2013 Strengthening connections between Down syndrome and AD Lancet Neurol 12 931 10.1016/S1474-4422(13)70228-X PMID: 24050729 24050729
Almeida S Zhang Z Coppola G Mao W Futai K Karydas A Geschwind MD Tartaglia MC Gao F Gianni D Sena-Esteves M Geschwind DH Miller BL Farese RV Jr Gao FB 2012 Induced pluripotent stem cell models of progranulin-deficient frontotemporal dementia uncover specific reversible neuronal defects Cell Rep 2 789 798 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2012.09.007 23063362
Alzheimer A 1911 Über eigenartige Krankheitsfalle des späteren Alters Zbl. ges. Neurol. Psych 4 356 385
Ando K Brion JP Stygelbout V Suain V Authelet M Dedecker R Chanut A Lacor P Lavaur J Sazdovitch V Rogaeva E Potier MC Duyckaerts C 2013 Clathrin adaptor CALM/PICALM is associated with neurofibrillary tangles and is cleaved in Alzheimer's brains Acta Neuropathol 125 861 78 10.1007/s00401-013-1111-z PMID: 23589030 23589030
Antunez C Boada M Gonzalez-Perez A Gayan J Ramirez-Lorca R Marin J Hernandez I Moreno-Rey C Moron FJ Lopez-Arrieta J Mauleon A Rosende-Roca M Noguera-Perea F Legaz-Garcia A Vivancos-Moreau L Velasco J Carrasco JM Alegret M Antequera-Torres M Manzanares S Romo A Blanca I Ruiz S Espinosa A Castano S Garcia B Martinez-Herrada B Vinyes G Lafuente A Becker JT Galan JJ Serrano-Rios M Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging I Vazquez E Tarraga L Saez ME Lopez OL Real LM Ruiz A 2011 The membrane-spanning 4-domains, subfamily A (MS4A) gene cluster contains a common variant associated with Alzheimer's disease Genome Med 3 33 10.1186/gm249 PMID: 21627779 21627779
Association A 2013 2013 Alzheimer's disease facts and figures Alzheimer's &amp; dementia : the journal of the Alzheimer's Association 8 131 68 10.1016/j.jalz.2012.02.001 PMID: 22404854
Ballatore C Lee VMY Trojanowski JQ 2007 Tau-mediated neurodegeneration in Alzheimer's disease and related disorders Nature Reviews Neuroscience 8 663 672 17684513
Bartos M Vida I Jonas P 2007 Synaptic mechanisms of synchronized gamma oscillations in inhibitory interneuron networks Nat Rev Neurosci 8 45 56 10.1038/nrn2044 PMID: 17180162 17180162
Bartzokis G 2011 Alzheimer's disease as homeostatic responses to age-related myelin breakdown Neurobiol Aging 32 1341 71 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2009.08.007 PMID: 19775776 19775776
Bercury KK Macklin WB 2015 Dynamics and mechanisms of CNS myelination Dev Cell 32 447 58 10.1016/j.devcel.2015.01.016 PMID: 25710531 25710531
Bernardinelli Y Randall J Janett E Nikonenko I Konig S Jones EV Flores CE Murai KK Bochet CG Holtmaat A Muller D 2014 Activity-dependent structural plasticity of perisynaptic astrocytic domains promotes excitatory synapse stability Curr Biol 24 1679 88 10.1016/j.cub.2014.06.025 PMID: 25042585 25042585
Bertram L Lange C Mullin K Parkinson M Hsiao M Hogan MF Schjeide BM Hooli B Divito J Ionita I Jiang H Laird N Moscarillo T Ohlsen KL Elliott K Wang X Hu-Lince D Ryder M Murphy A Wagner SL Blacker D Becker KD Tanzi RE 2008 Genome-wide association analysis reveals putative Alzheimer's disease susceptibility loci in addition to APOE Am J Hum Genet 83 623 32 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.10.008 PMID: 18976728 18976728
Bertram L McQueen MB Mullin K Blacker D Tanzi RE 2007 Systematic meta-analyses of Alzheimer disease genetic association studies: the AlzGene database Nat Genet 39 17 23 10.1038/ng1934 PMID: 17192785 17192785
Bertram L Tanzi RE 2008 Thirty years of Alzheimer's disease genetics: The implications of systematic meta-analyses Nature Reviews Neuroscience 9 768 778 18802446
Beutner C Roy K Linnartz B Napoli I Neumann H 2010 Generation of microglial cells from mouse embryonic stem cells Nat Protoc 5 1481 94 10.1038/nprot.2010.90 PMID: 20725065 20725065
Beutner C Linnartz-Gerlach B Schmidt SV Beyer M Mallmann MR Staratschek-Jox A Schultze JL Neumann H 2013 Unique transcriptome signature of mouse microglia Glia 61 1429 42 10.1002/glia.22524 PMID: 23832717 23832717
Beyreuther K Pollwein P Multhaup G Monning U Konig G Dyrks T Schubert W Masters CL 1993 Regulation and expression of the Alzheimer's beta/A4 amyloid protein precursor in health, disease, and Down's syndrome Ann N Y Acad Sci 695 91 102 PMID: 8239320 8239320
Biancotti JC Narwani K Buehler N Mandefro B Golan-Lev T Yanuka O Clark A Hill D Benvenisty N Lavon N 2010 Human embryonic stem cells as models for aneuploid chromosomal syndromes Stem Cells 28 1530 1540 (20641042) 20641042
Blalock EM Buechel HM Popovic J Geddes JW Landfield PW 2011 Microarray analyses of lasercaptured hippocampus reveal distinct gray and white matter signatures associated with incipient Alzheimer's disease Journal of chemical neuroanatomy 42 118 26 10.1016/j.jchemneu.2011.06.007 PMID: 21756998 21756998
Blalock EM Geddes JW Chen KC Porter NM Markesbery WR Landfield PW 2004 Incipient Alzheimer's disease: microarray correlation analyses reveal major transcriptional and tumor suppressor responses Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101 2173 8 10.1073/pnas.0308512100 PMID: 14769913 14769913
Blennow K 2010 Biomarkers in Alzheimer's disease drug development Nat Med 16 1218 22 10.1038/nm.2221 PMID: 21052077 21052077
Blondel S Jaskowiak AL Egesipe AL Le Corf A Navarro C Cordette V Martinat C Laabi Y Djabali K de Sandre-Giovannoli A Levy N Peschanski M Nissan X 2014 Induced pluripotent stem cells reveal functional differences between drugs currently investigated in patients with hutchinson-gilford progeria syndrome Stem Cells Transl Med 3 510 9 10.5966/sctm.2013-0168 PMID: 24598781 24598781
Bock C Kiskinis E Verstappen G Gu H Boulting G Smith ZD Ziller M Croft GF Amoroso MW Oakley DH Gnirke A Eggan K Meissner A 2011 Reference Maps of human ES and iPS cell variation enable high-throughput characterization of pluripotent cell lines Cell 144 439 52 10.1016/j.cell.2010.12.032 PMID: 21295703 21295703
Bolmont T Haiss F Eicke D Radde R Mathis CA Klunk WE Kohsaka S Jucker M Calhoun ME 2008 Dynamics of the microglial/amyloid interaction indicate a role in plaque maintenance Journal of Neuroscience 28 4283 4292 10.1523/jneurosci.4814-07.2008 PMID: 18417708 18417708
Boulting GL Kiskinis E Croft GF Amoroso MW Oakley DH Wainger BJ Williams DJ Kahler DJ Yamaki M Davidow L Rodolfa CT Dimos JT Mikkilineni S MacDermott AB Woolf CJ Henderson CE Wichterle H Eggan K 2011 A functionally characterized test set of human induced pluripotent stem cells Nature Biotechnology 29 279 U147 10.1038/nbt.1783 PMID: 21293464
Bouwman BA de Laat W 2015 Architectural hallmarks of the pluripotent genome FEBS Lett 10.1016/j.febslet.2015.04.055 PMID: 25957773
Braak H Braak E 1991 Neuropathological stageing of Alzheimer-related changes Acta Neuropathol 82 239 59 PMID: 1759558 1759558
Bradshaw EM Chibnik LB Keenan BT Ottoboni L Raj T Tang A Rosenkrantz LL Imboywa S Lee M Von Korff A Morris MC Evans DA Johnson K Sperling RA Schneider JA Bennett DA De Jager PL 2013 CD33 Alzheimer's disease locus: altered monocyte function and amyloid biology Nature Neuroscience 16 848 850 doi: papers2://publication/doi/10.1038/nn.3435 23708142
Brennand KJ Simone A Jou J Gelboin-Burkhart C Tran N Sangar S Li Y Mu Y Chen G Yu D McCarthy S Sebat J Gage FH 2011 Modelling schizophrenia using human induced pluripotent stem cells Nature 473 221 10.1038/nature09915 PMID: 21490598 21490598
Bribian A Figueres-Onate M Martin-Lopez E Lopez-Mascaraque L 2015 Decoding astrocyte heterogeneity: New tools for clonal analysis Neuroscience 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2015.04.036 PMID: 25917835
Broccoli V Rubio A Taverna S Yekhlef L 2015 Overcoming the hurdles for a reproducible generation of human functionally mature reprogrammed neurons Exp Biol Med (Maywood) 240 787 94 10.1177/1535370215577585 PMID: 25790823 25790823
Broccoli V Giannelli SG Mazzara PG 2014 Modeling physiological and pathological human neurogenesis in the dish Front Neurosci 8 183 10.3389/fnins.2014.00183 PMID: 25104921 25104921
Bu G 2009 Apolipoprotein E and its receptors in Alzheimer's disease: pathways, pathogenesis and therapy Nat Rev Neurosci 10 333 44 10.1038/nrn2620 PMID: 19339974 19339974
Burger PC Vogel FS 1973 The development of the pathologic changes of Alzheimer's disease and senile dementia in patients with Down's syndrome Am J Pathol 73 457 76 PMID: 4271339 4271339
Byrne SM Mali P Church GM 2014 Genome editing in human stem cells Methods Enzymol 546 119 38 10.1016/B978-0-12-801185-0.00006-4 PMID: 25398338 25398338
Cahoy JD Emery B Kaushal A Foo LC Zamanian JL Christopherson KS Xing Y Lubischer JL Krieg PA Krupenko SA Thompson WJ Barres BA 2008 A transcriptome database for astrocytes, neurons, and oligodendrocytes: a new resource for understanding brain development and function J Neurosci 28 264 78 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4178-07.2008 PMID: 18171944 18171944
Caiazzo M Giannelli S Valente P Lignani G Carissimo A Sessa A Colasante G Bartolomeo R Massimino L Ferroni S Settembre C Benfenati F Broccoli V 2015 Direct conversion of fibroblasts into functional astrocytes by defined transcription factors Stem Cell Reports 4 25 36 10.1016/j.stemcr.2014.12.002 PMID: 25556566 25556566
Calero M Rostagno A Matsubara E Zlokovic B Frangione B Ghiso J 2000 Apolipoprotein J (clusterin) and Alzheimer's disease Microsc Res Tech 50 305 15 10.1002/1097-0029(20000815)50:4&lt;305::AID-JEMT10&gt;3.0.CO;2-L PMID: 10936885 10936885
Carroll D 2011 Genome Engineering With Zinc-Finger Nucleases Genetics 188 773 782 10.1534/genetics.111.131433 PMID: 21828278 21828278
Castellano JM Kim J Stewart FR Jiang H DeMattos RB Patterson BW Fagan AM Morris JC Mawuenyega KG Cruchaga C Goate AM Bales KR Paul SM Bateman RJ Holtzman DM 2011 Human apoE isoforms differentially regulate brain amyloid-β peptide clearance Science Translational Medicine 3
Cataldo A Rebeck GW Ghetri B Hulette C Lippa C Van Broeckhoven C van Duijn C Cras P Bogdanovic N Bird T Peterhoff C Nixon R 2001 Endocytic disturbances distinguish among subtypes of Alzheimer's disease and related disorders Ann Neurol 50 661 5 PMID: 11706973 11706973
Cataldo AM Peterhoff CM Troncoso JC Gomez-Isla T Hyman BT Nixon RA 2000 Endocytic pathway abnormalities precede amyloid β deposition in sporadic alzheimer's disease and down syndrome: Differential effects of APOE genotype and presenilin mutations American Journal Of Pathology 157 277 286 10880397
Cataldo AM Mathews PM Boiteau AB Hassinger LC Peterhoff CM Jiang Y Mullaney K Neve RL Gruenberg J Nixon RA 2008 Down syndrome fibroblast model of Alzheimer-related endosome pathology: accelerated endocytosis promotes late endocytic defects Am J Pathol 173 370 84 10.2353/ajpath.2008.071053 PMID: 18535180 18535180
Chang CY Chen SM Lu HE Lai SM Lai PS Shen PW Chen PY Shen CI Harn HJ Lin SZ Hwang SM Su HL 2015 N-butylidenephthalide Attenuates Alzheimer's Disease-Like Cytopathy in Down Syndrome Induced Pluripotent Stem Cell-Derived Neurons Sci Rep 5 8744 10.1038/srep08744 PMID: 25735452 25735452
Chen C Jiang P Xue H Peterson SE Tran HT McCann AE Parast MM Li S Pleasure DE Laurent LC Loring JF Liu Y Deng W 2014 Role of astroglia in Down's syndrome revealed by patient-derived human-induced pluripotent stem cells Nat Commun 5 4430 10.1038/ncomms5430 PMID: 25034944 25034944
Chiba K Hockemeyer D 2015 Genome Editing in Human Pluripotent Stem Cells Using Site-Specific Nucleases Chromosomal Mutagenesis, Second Edition 1239 267 280 10.1007/978-1-4939-1862-1_15 PMID: 25408412
Chin MH Mason MJ Xie W Volinia S Singer M Peterson C Ambartsumyan G Aimiuwu O Richter L Zhang J Khvorostov I Ott V Grunstein M Lavon N Benvenisty N Croce CM Clark AT Baxter T Pyle AD Teitell MA Pelegrini M Plath K Lowry WE 2009 Induced pluripotent stem cells and embryonic stem cells are distinguished by gene expression signatures Cell Stem Cell 5 111 23 doi: S1934-5909(09)00292-6 [pii] 10.1016/j.stem.2009.06.008. PMID: 19570518 19570518
Chinchalongporn V Koppensteiner P Pre D Thangnipon W Bilo L Arancio O 2015 Connectivity and circuitry in a dish versus in a brain Alzheimers Res Ther 7 44 10.1186/s13195-015-0129-y PMID: 26045718 26045718
Choi SH Kim YH Hebisch M Sliwinski C Lee S D'Avanzo C Chen H Hooli B Asselin C Muffat J Klee JB Zhang C Wainger BJ Peitz M Kovacs DM Woolf CJ Wagner SL Tanzi RE Kim DY 2014 A three-dimensional human neural cell culture model of Alzheimer's disease Nature 515 274 8 10.1038/nature13800 PMID: 25307057 25307057
Chung CY Khurana V Auluck PK Tardiff DF Mazzulli JR Soldner F Baru V Lou Y Freyzon Y Cho S Mungenast AE Muffat J Mitalipova M Pluth MD Jui NT Schule B Lippard SJ Tsai LH Krainc D Buchwald SL Jaenisch R Lindquist S 2013 Identification and rescue of alpha-synuclein toxicity in Parkinson patient-derived neurons Science 342 983 7 10.1126/science.1245296 PMID: 24158904 24158904
Consortium HDi 2012 Induced pluripotent stem cells from patients with Huntington's disease show CAG-repeat-expansion-associated phenotypes Cell Stem Cell 11 264 78 10.1016/j.stem.2012.04.027 PMID: 22748968 22748968
Corder EH Saunders AM Strittmatter WJ Schmechel DE Gaskell PC Small GW Roses AD Haines JL Pericak-Vance MA 1993 Gene dose of apolipoprotein E type 4 allele and the risk of Alzheimer's disease in late onset families Science 261 921 923 8346443
Corneveaux JJ Myers AJ Allen AN Pruzin JJ Ramirez M Engel A Nalls MA Chen K Lee W Chewning K Villa SE Meechoovet HB Gerber JD Frost D Benson HL O'Reilly S Chibnik LB Shulman JM Singleton AB Craig DW Van Keuren-Jensen KR Dunckley T Bennett DA De Jager PL Heward C Hardy J Reiman EM Huentelman MJ 2010 Association of CR1, CLU and PICALM with Alzheimer's disease in a cohort of clinically characterized and neuropathologically verified individuals Hum Mol Genet 19 3295 301 10.1093/hmg/ddq221 PMID: 20534741 20534741
Cowan CA Atienza J Melton DA Eggan K 2005 Nuclear reprogramming of somatic cells after fusion with human embryonic stem cells Science 309 1369 1373 10.1126/science.1116447 PMID: 16123299 16123299
Crehan H Hardy J Pocock J 2013 Blockage of CR1 prevents activation of rodent microglia Neurobiol Dis 54 139 49 10.1016/j.nbd.2013.02.003 PMID: 23454195 23454195
Dabir DV Robinson MB Swanson E Zhang B Trojanowski JQ Lee VM Forman MS 2006 Impaired glutamate transport in a mouse model of tau pathology in astrocytes J Neurosci 26 644 54 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3861-05.2006 PMID: 16407562 16407562
De Strooper B 2010 Proteases and proteolysis in Alzheimer disease: a multifactorial view on the disease process Physiol Rev 90 465 94 10.1152/physrev.00023.2009 PMID: 20393191 20393191
DeFelipe J Lopez-Cruz PL Benavides-Piccione R Bielza C Larranaga P Anderson S Burkhalter A Cauli B Fairen A Feldmeyer D Fishell G Fitzpatrick D Freund TF Gonzalez-Burgos G Hestrin S Hill S Hof PR Huang J Jones EG Kawaguchi Y Kisvarday Z Kubota Y Lewis DA Marin O Markram H McBain CJ Meyer HS Monyer H Nelson SB Rockland K Rossier J Rubenstein JLR Rudy B Scanziani M Shepherd GM Sherwood CC Staiger JF Tamas G Thomson A Wang Y Yuste R Ascoli GA 2013 New insights into the classification and nomenclature of cortical GABAergic interneurons Nature Reviews Neuroscience 14 202 216 10.1038/nrn3444 PMID: 23385869 23385869
Deng YL Liu LH Wang Y Tang HD Ren RJ Xu W Ma JF Wang LL Zhuang JP Wang G Chen SD 2012 The prevalence of CD33 and MS4A6A variant in Chinese Han population with Alzheimer's disease Hum Genet 131 1245 9 10.1007/s00439-012-1154-6 PMID: 22382309 22382309
Denham M Dottori M 2011 Neural Differentiation of Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells Neurodegeneration: Methods and Protocols 793 99 110 10.1007/978-1-61779-328-8_7 PMID: 21913096
Desai MK Mastrangelo MA Ryan DA Sudol KL Narrow WC Bowers WJ 2010 Early oligodendrocyte/myelin pathology in Alzheimer's disease mice constitutes a novel therapeutic target Am J Pathol 177 1422 35 10.2353/ajpath.2010.100087 PMID: 20696774 20696774
Desai MK Sudol KL Janelsins MC Mastrangelo MA Frazer ME Bowers WJ 2009 Triple-transgenic Alzheimer's disease mice exhibit region-specific abnormalities in brain myelination patterns prior to appearance of amyloid and tau pathology Glia 57 54 65 10.1002/glia.20734 PMID: 18661556 18661556
Di Castro MA Chuquet J Liaudet N Bhaukaurally K Santello M Bouvier D Tiret P Volterra A 2011 Local Ca2+ detection and modulation of synaptic release by astrocytes Nat Neurosci 14 1276 84 10.1038/nn.2929 PMID: 21909085 21909085
Dimos JT Rodolfa KT Niakan KK Weisenthal LM Mitsumoto H Chung W Croft GF Saphier G Leibel R Goland R Wichterle H Henderson CE Eggan K 2008 Induced pluripotent stem cells generated from patients with ALS can be differentiated into motor neurons Science 321 1218 21 doi: 1158799 [pii] 10.1126/science.1158799. PMID: 18669821 18669821
Ding Q Regan SN Xia Y Oostrom LA Cowan CA Musunuru K 2013 Enhanced Efficiency of Human Pluripotent Stem Cell Genome Editing through Replacing TALENs with CRISPRs Cell Stem Cell 12 393 394 10.1016/j.stem.2013.03.006 PMID: 23561441 23561441
Ding Q Lee Y-K Schaefer EAK Peters DT Veres A Kim K Kuperwasser N Motola DL Meissner TB Hendriks WT Trevisan M Gupta RM Moisan A Banks E Friesen M Schinzel RT Xia F Tang A Xia Y Figueroa E Wann A Ahfeldt T Daheron L Zhang F Rubin LL Peng LF Chung RT Musunuru K Cowan CA 2013 A TALEN Genome-Editing System for Generating Human Stem Cell-Based Disease Models Cell Stem Cell 12 238 251 10.1016/j.stem.2012.11.011 PMID: 23246482 23246482
Dobbin MM Madabhushi R Pan L Chen Y Kim D Gao J Ahononu B Pao PC Qiu Y Zhao Y Tsai LH 2013 SIRT1 collaborates with ATM and HDAC1 to maintain genomic stability in neurons Nat Neurosci doi: nn.3460 [pii] 10.1038/nn.3460. PMID: 23852118
Doi A Park IH Wen B Murakami P Aryee MJ Irizarry R Herb B Ladd-Acosta C Rho J Loewer S Miller J Schlaeger T Daley GQ Feinberg AP 2009 Differential methylation of tissue- and cancer-specific CpG island shores distinguishes human induced pluripotent stem cells, embryonic stem cells and fibroblasts Nat Genet 41 1350 3 doi: ng.471 [pii] 10.1038/ng.471. PMID: 19881528 19881528
Doody RS Raman R Farlow M Iwatsubo T Vellas B Joffe S Kieburtz K He F Sun X Thomas RG Aisen PS Alzheimer's Disease Cooperative Study Steering C Siemers E Sethuraman G Mohs R Semagacestat Study G 2013 A phase 3 trial of semagacestat for treatment of Alzheimer's disease N Engl J Med 369 341 50 10.1056/NEJMoa1210951 PMID: 23883379 23883379
Doody RS Thomas RG Farlow M Iwatsubo T Vellas B Joffe S Kieburtz K Raman R Sun X Aisen PS Siemers E Liu-Seifert H Mohs R Alzheimer's Disease Cooperative Study Steering, C and Solanezumab Study, G 2014 Phase 3 trials of solanezumab for mild-to-moderate Alzheimer's disease N Engl J Med 370 311 21 10.1056/NEJMoa1312889 PMID: 24450890 24450890
Douvaras P Wang J Zimmer M Hanchuk S O'Bara MA Sadiq S Sim FJ Goldman J Fossati V 2014 Efficient generation of myelinating oligodendrocytes from primary progressive multiple sclerosis patients by induced pluripotent stem cells Stem Cell Reports 3 250 9 10.1016/j.stemcr.2014.06.012 PMID: 25254339 25254339
Ebert AD Yu J Rose FF Jr Mattis VB Lorson CL Thomson JA Svendsen CN 2009 Induced pluripotent stem cells from a spinal muscular atrophy patient Nature 457 277 80 doi: nature07677 [pii] 10.1038/nature07677. PMID: 19098894 19098894
Eiraku M Sasai Y 2012 Self-formation of layered neural structures in three-dimensional culture of ES cells Curr Opin Neurobiol 22 768 77 10.1016/j.conb.2012.02.005 PMID: 22405989 22405989
Eiraku M Watanabe K Matsuo-Takasaki M Kawada M Yonemura S Matsumura M Wataya T Nishiyama A Muguruma K Sasai Y 2008 Self-organized formation of polarized cortical tissues from ESCs and its active manipulation by extrinsic signals Cell Stem Cell 3 519 32 10.1016/j.stem.2008.09.002 PMID: 18983967 18983967
Englund E Brun A Alling C 1988 White matter changes in dementia of Alzheimer's type. Biochemical and neuropathological correlates Brain 111 Pt 6 1425 39 PMID: 3208064 3208064
Espuny-Camacho I Michelsen KA Gall D Linaro D Hasche A Bonnefont J Bali C Orduz D Bilheu A Herpoel A Lambert N Gaspard N Peron S Schiffmann SN Giugliano M Gaillard A Vanderhaeghen P 2013 Pyramidal neurons derived from human pluripotent stem cells integrate efficiently into mouse brain circuits in vivo Neuron 77 440 56 10.1016/j.neuron.2012.12.011 PMID: 23395372 23395372
Etemad S Zamin RM Ruitenberg MJ Filgueira L 2012 A novel in vitro human microglia model: characterization of human monocyte-derived microglia J Neurosci Methods 209 79 89 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2012.05.025 PMID: 22659341 22659341
Evans MJ Kaufman MH 1981 Establishment in Culture of Pluripotential Cells from Mouse Embryos Nature 292 154 156 10.1038/292154a0 PMID: 7242681 7242681
Falk A Koch P Kesavan J Takashima Y Ladewig J Alexander M Wiskow O Tailor J Trotter M Pollard S Smith A Brustle O 2012 Capture of neuroepithelial-like stem cells from pluripotent stem cells provides a versatile system for in vitro production of human neurons PLoS One 7 e29597 (22272239) 22272239
Farrer LA Cupples La Fau - Haines JL Haines Jl Fau - Hyman B Hyman B Fau - Kukull WA Kukull Wa Fau - Mayeux R Mayeux R Fau - Myers RH Myers Rh Fau - Pericak-Vance MA Pericak-Vance Ma Fau - Risch N Risch N Fau - van Duijn CM van Duijn CM 1997 Effects of age, sex, and ethnicity on the association between apolipoprotein E genotype and Alzheimer disease. A meta-analysis. APOE and Alzheimer Disease Meta Analysis Consortium JAMA PMID: 9343467
Fischer A Sananbenesi F Pang PT Lu B Tsai LH 2005 Opposing roles of transient and prolonged expression of p25 in synaptic plasticity and hippocampus-dependent memory Neuron 48 825 838 16337919
Fishell G Heintz N 2013 The Neuron Identity Problem: Form Meets Function Neuron 80 602 612 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.10.035 PMID: 24183013 24183013
Fong H Wang C Knoferle J Walker D Balestra ME Tong LM Leung L Ring KL Seeley WW Karydas A Kshirsagar MA Boxer AL Kosik KS Miller BL Huang Y 2013 Genetic correction of tauopathy phenotypes in neurons derived from human induced pluripotent stem cells Stem Cell Reports 1 226 34 10.1016/j.stemcr.2013.08.001 PMID: 24319659 24319659
Foo LC Allen NJ Bushong EA Ventura PB Chung WS Zhou L Cahoy JD Daneman R Zong H Ellisman MH Barres BA 2011 Development of a method for the purification and culture of rodent astrocytes Neuron 71 799 811 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.07.022 PMID: 21903074 21903074
Fryer JD Simmons K Parsadanian M Bales KR Paul SM Sullivan PM Holtzman DM 2005 Human apolipoprotein E4 alters the amyloid-β 40:42 ratio and promotes the formation of cerebral amyloid angiopathy in an amyloid precursor protein transgenic model Journal of Neuroscience 25 2803 2810 15772340
Gatz M Reynolds CA Fratiglioni L Johansson B Mortimer JA Berg S Fiske A Pedersen NL 2006 Role of genes and environments for explaining Alzheimer disease Arch Gen Psychiatry 63 168 74 10.1001/archpsyc.63.2.168 PMID: 16461860 16461860
Ginhoux F Greter M Leboeuf M Nandi S See P Gokhan S Mehler MF Conway SJ Ng LG Stanley ER Samokhvalov IM Merad M 2010 Fate mapping analysis reveals that adult microglia derive from primitive macrophages Science 330 841 845 PMID: 20966214 20966214
Gjoneska E Pfenning AR Mathys H Quon G Kundaje A Tsai LH Kellis M 2015 Conserved epigenomic signals in mice and humans reveal immune basis of Alzheimer's disease Nature 518 365 9 10.1038/nature14252 PMID: 25693568 25693568
Glenner GG Wong CW 1984 Alzheimer's disease: Initial report of the purification and characterization of a novel cerebrovascular amyloid protein Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 120 885 890 6375662
Goate A Chartier-Harlin M-C Mullan M Brown J Crawford F Fidani L Giuffra L Haynes A Irving N James L Mant R Newton P Rooke K Roques P Talbot C Pericak-Vance M Roses A Williamson R Rossor M Owen M Hardy J 1991 Segregation of a missense mutation in the amyloid precursor protein gene with familial Alzheimer's disease Nature 349 704 706 1671712
Goate A 2006 Segregation of a missense mutation in the amyloid beta-protein precursor gene with familial Alzheimer's disease J Alzheimers Dis 9 341 7 PMID: 16914872 16914872
Goldgaber D Lerman MI McBride WO Saffiotti U Gajdusek DC 1987 Isolation, characterization, and chromosomal localization of human brain cDNA clones coding for the precursor of the amyloid of brain in Alzheimer's disease, Down's syndrome and aging J Neural Transm Suppl 24 23 8 PMID: 2960782 2960782
Goto M 1997 Hierarchical deterioration of body systems in Werner's syndrome: Implications for normal ageing Mechanisms of Ageing and Development 98 239 254 9352493
Götz J Deters N Doldissen A Bokhari L Ke Y Wiesner A Schonrock N Ittner LM 2007 A Decade of Tau Transgenic Animal Models and Beyond Brain Pathology 17 91 103 10.1111/j.1750-3639.2007.00051.x 17493043
Graeber MB Kosel S Egensperger R Banati RB Muller U Bise K Hoff P Moller HJ Fujisawa K Mehraein P 1997 Rediscovery of the case described by Alois Alzheimer in 1911: historical, histological and molecular genetic analysis Neurogenetics 1 73 80 PMID: 10735278 10735278
Grange P Bohland JW Okaty BW Sugino K Bokil H Nelson SB Ng L Hawrylycz M Mitra PP 2014 Cell-type-based model explaining coexpression patterns of genes in the brain Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 111 5397 5402 10.1073/pnas.1312098111 PMID: 24706869 24706869
Grundke-Iqbal I Iqbal K Quinlan M Tung YC Zaidi MS Wisniewski HM 1986 Microtubule-associated protein tau. A component of Alzheimer paired helical filaments J Biol Chem 261 6084 9 PMID: 3084478 3084478
Guerreiro R Wojtas A Bras J Carrasquillo M Rogaeva E Majounie E Cruchaga C Sassi C Kauwe JS Younkin S Hazrati L Collinge J Pocock J Lashley T Williams J Lambert JC Amouyel P Goate A Rademakers R Morgan K Powell J St George-Hyslop P Singleton A Hardy J Alzheimer Genetic Analysis G 2013 TREM2 variants in Alzheimer's disease N Engl J Med 368 117 27 10.1056/NEJMoa1211851 PMID: 23150934 23150934
Hanna JH Saha K Jaenisch R 2010 Pluripotency and Cellular Reprogramming: Facts, Hypotheses, Unresolved Issues Cell 143 508 525 10.1016/j.cell.2010.10.008 PMID: 21074044 21074044
Harold D Abraham R Hollingworth P Sims R Gerrish A Hamshere ML Pahwa JS Moskvina V Dowzell K Williams A Jones N Thomas C Stretton A Morgan AR Lovestone S Powell J Proitsi P Lupton MK Brayne C Rubinsztein DC Gill M Lawlor B Lynch A Morgan K Brown KS Passmore PA Craig D McGuinness B Todd S Holmes C Mann D Smith AD Love S Kehoe PG Hardy J Mead S Fox N Rossor M Collinge J Maier W Jessen F Schurmann B van den Bussche H Heuser I Kornhuber J Wiltfang J Dichgans M Frolich L Hampel H Hull M Rujescu D Goate AM Kauwe JSK Cruchaga C Nowotny P Morris JC Mayo K Sleegers K Bettens K Engelborghs S De Deyn PP Van Broeckhoven C Livingston G Bass NJ Gurling H McQuillin A Gwilliam R Deloukas P Al-Chalabi A Shaw CE Tsolaki M Singleton AB Guerreiro R Muhleisen TW Nothen MM Moebus S Jockel K-H Klopp N Wichmann HE Carrasquillo MM Pankratz VS Younkin SG Holmans PA O'Donovan M Owen MJ Williams J 2009 Genome-wide association study identifies variants at CLU and PICALM associated with Alzheimer's disease Nat Genet 41 1088 1093 doi: http://www.nature.com/ng/journal/v41/n10/suppinfo/ng.440_S1.html 19734902
Hasty P Campisi J Hoeijmakers J van Steeg H Vijg J 2003 Aging and Genome Maintenance: Lessons from the Mouse? Science 299 1355 1359 10.1126/science.1079161 12610296
Haydon PG Nedergaard M 2015 How do astrocytes participate in neural plasticity? Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 7 a020438 10.1101/cshperspect.a020438 PMID: 25502516
Hazra A Gu F Aulakh A Berridge C Eriksen JL Ziburkus J 2013 Inhibitory neuron and hippocampal circuit dysfunction in an aged mouse model of Alzheimer's disease PLoS One 8 e64318 10.1371/journal.pone.0064318 PMID: 23691195 23691195
Hebert LE Weuve J Scherr Pa Evans Da 2013 Alzheimer disease in the United States (2010-2050) estimated using the 2010 census Neurology 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31828726f5 PMID: 23390181
Hertz L Peng L Lai JC 1998 Functional studies in cultured astrocytes Methods 16 293 310 10.1006/meth.1998.0686 PMID: 10071068 10071068
Hibaoui Y Grad I Letourneau A Sailani MR Dahoun S Santoni FA Gimelli S Guipponi M Pelte MF Bena F Antonarakis SE Feki A 2014 Modelling and rescuing neurodevelopmental defect of Down syndrome using induced pluripotent stem cells from monozygotic twins discordant for trisomy 21 EMBO Mol Med 6 259 77 10.1002/emmm.201302848 PMID: 24375627 24375627
Hockemeyer D Soldner F Beard C Gao Q Mitalipova M DeKelver RC Katibah GE Amora R Boydston EA Zeitler B Meng X Miller JC Zhang L Rebar EJ Gregory PD Urnov FD Jaenisch R 2009 Efficient targeting of expressed and silent genes in human ESCs and iPSCs using zinc-finger nucleases Nat Biotechnol 27 851 7 10.1038/nbt.1562 PMID: 19680244 19680244
Hockemeyer D Wang H Kiani S Lai CS Gao Q Cassady JP Cost GJ Zhang L Santiago Y Miller JC Zeitler B Cherone JM Meng X Hinkley SJ Rebar EJ Gregory PD Urnov FD Jaenisch R 2011 Genetic engineering of human pluripotent cells using TALE nucleases Nature Biotechnology 29 731 734 10.1038/nbt.1927 PMID: 21738127
Hollingworth P Harold D Sims R Gerrish A Lambert JC Carrasquillo MM Abraham R Hamshere ML Pahwa JS Moskvina V Dowzell K Jones N Stretton A Thomas C Richards A Ivanov D Widdowson C Chapman J Lovestone S Powell J Proitsi P Lupton MK Brayne C Rubinsztein DC Gill M Lawlor B Lynch A Brown KS Passmore PA Craig D McGuinness B Todd S Holmes C Mann D Smith AD Beaumont H Warden D Wilcock G Love S Kehoe PG Hooper NM Vardy ER Hardy J Mead S Fox NC Rossor M Collinge J Maier W Jessen F Ruther E Schurmann B Heun R Kolsch H van den Bussche H Heuser I Kornhuber J Wiltfang J Dichgans M Frolich L Hampel H Gallacher J Hull M Rujescu D Giegling I Goate AM Kauwe JS Cruchaga C Nowotny P Morris JC Mayo K Sleegers K Bettens K Engelborghs S De Deyn PP Van Broeckhoven C Livingston G Bass NJ Gurling H McQuillin A Gwilliam R Deloukas P Al-Chalabi A Shaw CE Tsolaki M Singleton AB Guerreiro R Muhleisen TW Nothen MM Moebus S Jockel KH Klopp N Wichmann HE Pankratz VS Sando SB Aasly JO Barcikowska M Wszolek ZK Dickson DW Graff-Radford NR Petersen RC Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging I van Duijn CM Breteler MM Ikram MA DeStefano AL Fitzpatrick AL Lopez O Launer LJ Seshadri S consortium, C Berr C Campion D Epelbaum J Dartigues JF Tzourio C Alperovitch A Lathrop M consortium, E Feulner TM Friedrich P Riehle C Krawczak M Schreiber S Mayhaus M Nicolhaus S Wagenpfeil S Steinberg S Stefansson H Stefansson K Snaedal J Bjornsson S Jonsson PV Chouraki V Genier-Boley B Hiltunen M Soininen H Combarros O Zelenika D Delepine M Bullido MJ Pasquier F Mateo I Frank-Garcia A Porcellini E Hanon O Coto E Alvarez V Bosco P Siciliano G Mancuso M Panza F Solfrizzi V Nacmias B Sorbi S Bossu P Piccardi P Arosio B Annoni G Seripa D Pilotto A Scarpini E Galimberti D Brice A Hannequin D Licastro F Jones L Holmans PA Jonsson T Riemenschneider M Morgan K Younkin SG Owen MJ O'Donovan M Amouyel P Williams J 2011 Common variants at ABCA7, MS4A6A/MS4A4E, EPHA1, CD33 and CD2AP are associated with Alzheimer's disease Nat Genet 43 429 35 10.1038/ng.803 PMID: 21460840 21460840
Hossini AM Megges M Prigione A Lichtner B Toliat MR Wruck W Schroter F Nuernberg P Kroll H Makrantonaki E Zoubouliss CC Adjaye J 2015 Induced pluripotent stem cell-derived neuronal cells from a sporadic Alzheimer's disease donor as a model for investigating AD-associated gene regulatory networks BMC Genomics 16 84 10.1186/s12864-015-1262-5 PMID: 25765079 25765079
Hotta Y 2008 Ethical issues of the research on human embryonic stem cells J Int Bioethique 19 77 85 124 5 PMID: 19244943 19244943
Hsu PD Lander ES Zhang F 2014 Development and applications of CRISPR-Cas9 for genome engineering Cell 157 1262 78 10.1016/j.cell.2014.05.010 PMID: 24906146 24906146
Hsu PD Scott DA Weinstein JA Ran FA Konermann S Agarwala V Li Y Fine EJ Wu X Shalem O Cradick TJ Marraffini LA Bao G Zhang F 2013 DNA targeting specificity of RNA-guided Cas9 nucleases Nat Biotechnol 31 827 32 10.1038/nbt.2647 PMID: 23873081 23873081
Hu B-Y Weick JP Yu J Ma L-X Zhang X-Q Thomson JA Zhang S-C 2010 Neural differentiation of human induced pluripotent stem cells follows developmental principles but with variable potency Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107 4335 4340 10.1073/pnas.0910012107
Hu BY Du ZW Zhang SC 2009 Differentiation of human oligodendrocytes from pluripotent stem cells Nat Protoc 4 1614 22 10.1038/nprot.2009.186 PMID: 19834476 19834476
Hutton M Lendon CL Rizzu P Baker M Froelich S Houlden HH Pickering-Brown S Chakraverty S Isaacs A Grover A Hackett J Adamson J Lincoln S Dickson D Davies P Petersen RC Stevena M De Graaff E Wauters E Van Baren J Hillebrand M Joosse M Kwon JM Nowotny P Che LK Norton J Morris JC Reed LA Trojanowski J Basun H Lannfelt L Neystat M Fahn S Dark F Tannenberg T Dodd PR Hayward N Kwok JBJ Schofield PR Andreadis A Snowden J Craufurd D Neary D Owen F Costra BA Hardy J Goate A Van Swieten J Mann D Lynch T Heutink P 1998 Association of missense and 5'-splice-site mutations in tau with the inherited dementia FTDP-17 Nature 393 702 704 PMID: 9641683 9641683
Iovino M Agathou S Gonzalez-Rueda A Del Castillo Velasco-Herrera M Borroni B Alberici A Lynch T O'Dowd S Geti I Gaffney D Vallier L Paulsen O Karadottir RT Spillantini MG 2015 Early maturation and distinct tau pathology in induced pluripotent stem cell-derived neurons from patients with MAPT mutations Brain 10.1093/brain/awv222 PMID: 26220942
Isobe K Cheng Z Nishio N Suganya T Tanaka Y Ito S 2014 iPSCs, aging and age-related diseases N Biotechnol 31 411 21 10.1016/j.nbt.2014.04.004 PMID: 24784583 24784583
Israel MA Yuan SH Bardy C Reyna SM Mu Y Herrera C Hefferan MP Van Gorp S Nazor KL Boscolo FS Carson CT Laurent LC Marsala M Gage FH Remes AM Koo EH Goldstein LS 2012 Probing sporadic and familial Alzheimer's disease using induced pluripotent stem cells Nature 482 216 20 10.1038/nature10821 PMID: 22278060 22278060
Jang J Kang HC Kim HS Kim JY Huh YJ Kim DS Yoo JE Lee JA Lim B Lee J Yoon TM Park IH Hwang DY Daley GQ Kim DW 2011 Induced pluripotent stem cell models from X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy patients Ann Neurol 70 402 9 10.1002/ana.22486 PMID: 21721033 21721033
Jarrett JT Berger EP Lansbury PT Jr 1993 The carboxy terminus of the beta amyloid protein is critical for the seeding of amyloid formation: implications for the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease Biochemistry 32 4693 7 PMID: 8490014 8490014
Jessen NA Munk AS Lundgaard I Nedergaard M 2015 The Glymphatic System: A Beginner's Guide Neurochem Res 10.1007/s11064-015-1581-6 PMID: 25947369
Jinek M Chylinski K Fonfara I Hauer M Doudna JA Charpentier E 2012 A programmable dual-RNA-guided DNA endonuclease in adaptive bacterial immunity Science 337 816 821 22745249
Jonsson T Stefansson H Steinberg S Jonsdottir I Jonsson PV Snaedal J Bjornsson S Huttenlocher J Levey AI Lah JJ Rujescu D Hampel H Giegling I Andreassen OA Engedal K Ulstein I Djurovic S Ibrahim-Verbaas C Hofman A Ikram MA van Duijn CM Thorsteinsdottir U Kong A Stefansson K 2013 Variant of TREM2 associated with the risk of Alzheimer's disease N Engl J Med 368 107 16 10.1056/NEJMoa1211103 PMID: 23150908 23150908
Joung JK Sander JD 2013 TALENs: a widely applicable technology for targeted genome editing Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 14 49 55 10.1038/nrm3486 PMID: 23169466 23169466
Kadoshima T Sakaguchi H Nakano T Soen M Ando S Eiraku M Sasai Y 2013 Self-organization of axial polarity, inside-out layer pattern, and species-specific progenitor dynamics in human ES cell-derived neocortex Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110 20284 9 10.1073/pnas.1315710110 PMID: 24277810 24277810
Kamm FM 2005 Ethical issues in using and not using embryonic stem cells Stem Cell Rev 1 325 30 10.1385/SCR:1:4:325 PMID: 17142875 17142875
Kanekiyo T Xu H Bu G 2014 ApoE and Abeta in Alzheimer's disease: accidental encounters or partners? Neuron 81 740 54 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.01.045 PMID: 24559670 24559670
Kang J Lemaire HG Unterbeck A Salbaum JM Masters CL Grzeschik KH Multhaup G Beyreuther K Muller-Hill B 1987 The precursor of Alzheimer's disease amyloid A4 protein resembles a cell-surface receptor Nature 325 733 6 10.1038/325733a0 PMID: 2881207 2881207
Khakh BS McCarthy KD 2015 Astrocyte calcium signaling: from observations to functions and the challenges therein Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 7 a020404 10.1101/cshperspect.a020404 PMID: 25605709 25605709
Khurana V Tardiff DF Chung CY Lindquist S 2015 Toward stem cell-based phenotypic screens for neurodegenerative diseases Nat Rev Neurol 11 339 350 10.1038/nrneurol.2015.79 PMID: 25986505 25986505
Kim D Frank CL Dobbin MM Tsunemoto RK Tu W Peng PL Guan JS Lee BH Moy LY Giusti P Broodie N Mazitschek R Delalle I Haggarty SJ Neve RL Lu Y Tsai LH 2008 Deregulation of HDAC1 by p25/Cdk5 in Neurotoxicity Neuron 60 803 817 PMID: 19081376 19081376
Kim DS Lee DR Kim HS Yoo JE Jung SJ Lim BY Jang J Kang HC You S Hwang DY Leem JW Nam TS Cho SR Kim DW 2012 Highly pure and expandable PSA-NCAM-positive neural precursors from human ESC and iPSC-derived neural rosettes PLoS One 7 e39715 10.1371/journal.pone.0039715 PMID: 22911689 22911689
Kim H Lee G Ganat Y Papapetrou EP Lipchina I Socci ND Sadelain M Studer L 2011 miR-371-3 Expression Predicts Neural Differentiation Propensity in Human Pluripotent Stem Cells Cell Stem Cell 8 695 706 10.1016/j.stem.2011.04.002 PMID: 21624813 21624813
Kim J Basak JM Holtzman DM 2009 The Role of Apolipoprotein E in Alzheimer's Disease Neuron 63 287 303 PMID: 19679070 19679070
Kim K Doi A Wen B Ng K Zhao R Cahan P Kim J Aryee MJ Ji H Ehrlich LIR Yabuuchi A Takeuchi A Cunniff KC Hongguang H McKinney-Freeman S Naveiras O Yoon TJ Irizarry RA Jung N Seita J Hanna J Murakami P Jaenisch R Weissleder R Orkin SH Weissman IL Feinberg AP Daley GQ 2010 Epigenetic memory in induced pluripotent stem cells Nature 467 285 U60 10.1038/nature09342 PMID: 20644535 20644535
Kim YH Choi SH D'Avanzo C Hebisch M Sliwinski C Bylykbashi E Washicosky KJ Klee JB Brustle O Tanzi RE Kim DY 2015 A 3D human neural cell culture system for modeling Alzheimer's disease Nat Protoc 10 985 1006 10.1038/nprot.2015.065 PMID: 26068894 26068894
King NM Perrin J 2014 Ethical issues in stem cell research and therapy Stem Cell Res Ther 5 85 10.1186/scrt474 PMID: 25157428 25157428
Kobayashi K Hayashi M Nakano H Fukutani Y Sasaki K Shimazaki M Koshino Y 2002 Apoptosis of astrocytes with enhanced lysosomal activity and oligodendrocytes in white matter lesions in Alzheimer's disease Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 28 238 51 PMID: 12060348 12060348
Koch P Tamboli IY Mertens J Wunderlich P Ladewig J Stuber K Esselmann H Wiltfang J Brustle O Walter J 2012 Presenilin-1 L166P mutant human pluripotent stem cell-derived neurons exhibit partial loss of gamma-secretase activity in endogenous amyloid-beta generation Am J Pathol 180 2404 16 10.1016/j.ajpath.2012.02.012 PMID: 22510327 22510327
Koche RP Smith ZD Adli M Gu HC Ku MC Gnirke A Bernstein BE Meissner A 2011 Reprogramming Factor Expression Initiates Widespread Targeted Chromatin Remodeling Cell Stem Cell 8 96 105 10.1016/j.stem.2010.12.001 PMID: 21211784 21211784
Kondo T Asai M Tsukita K Kutoku Y Ohsawa Y Sunada Y Imamura K Egawa N Yahata N Okita K Takahashi K Asaka I Aoi T Watanabe A Watanabe K Kadoya C Nakano R Watanabe D Maruyama K Hori O Hibino S Choshi T Nakahata T Hioki H Kaneko T Naitoh M Yoshikawa K Yamawaki S Suzuki S Hata R Ueno S Seki T Kobayashi K Toda T Murakami K Irie K Klein WL Mori H Asada T Takahashi R Iwata N Yamanaka S Inoue H 2013 Modeling Alzheimer's disease with iPSCs reveals stress phenotypes associated with intracellular Abeta and differential drug responsiveness Cell Stem Cell 12 487 96 10.1016/j.stem.2013.01.009 PMID: 23434393 23434393
Kosik KS Joachim CL Selkoe DJ 1986 Microtubule-associated protein tau (tau) is a major antigenic component of paired helical filaments in Alzheimer disease Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 83 4044 8 PMID: 2424016 2424016
Kraepelin E 1910 Psychiatrie Barth Leipzig
Krantic S Isorce N Mechawar N Davoli MA Vignault E Albuquerque M Chabot JG Moyse E Chauvin JP Aubert I McLaurin J Quirion R 2012 Hippocampal GABAergic neurons are susceptible to amyloid-beta toxicity in vitro and are decreased in number in the Alzheimer's disease TgCRND8 mouse model J Alzheimers Dis 29 293 308 10.3233/JAD-2011-110830 PMID: 22232004 22232004
Krencik R Weick JP Liu Y Zhang ZJ Zhang SC 2011 Specification of transplantable astroglial subtypes from human pluripotent stem cells Nat Biotechnol 29 528 34 10.1038/nbt.1877 PMID: 21602806 21602806
Krencik R Zhang SC 2011 Directed differentiation of functional astroglial subtypes from human pluripotent stem cells Nat Protoc 6 1710 7 10.1038/nprot.2011.405 PMID: 22011653 22011653
Lai S Zhang M Xu D Zhang Y Qiu L Tian C Zheng JC 2015 Direct reprogramming of induced neural progenitors: a new promising strategy for AD treatment Transl Neurodegener 4 7 10.1186/s40035-015-0028-y PMID: 25949812 25949812
Lambert JC Heath S Even G Campion D Sleegers K Hiltunen M Combarros O Zelenika D Bullido MJ Tavernier B Letenneur L Bettens K Berr C Pasquier F Fievet N Barberger-Gateau P Engelborghs S De Deyn P Mateo I Franck A Helisalmi S Porcellini E Hanon O European Alzheimer's Disease Initiative, I de Pancorbo MM Lendon C Dufouil C Jaillard C Leveillard T Alvarez V Bosco P Mancuso M Panza F Nacmias B Bossu P Piccardi P Annoni G Seripa D Galimberti D Hannequin D Licastro F Soininen H Ritchie K Blanche H Dartigues JF Tzourio C Gut I Van Broeckhoven C Alperovitch A Lathrop M Amouyel P 2009 Genome-wide association study identifies variants at CLU and CR1 associated with Alzheimer's disease Nat Genet 41 1094 9 10.1038/ng.439 PMID: 19734903 19734903
Lambert JC Ibrahim-Verbaas CA Harold D Naj AC Sims R Bellenguez C Jun G Destefano AL Bis JC Beecham GW Grenier-Boley B Russo G Thornton-Wells TA Jones N Smith AV Chouraki V Thomas C Ikram MA Zelenika D Vardarajan BN Kamatani Y Lin CF Gerrish A Schmidt H Kunkle B Dunstan ML Ruiz A Bihoreau MT Choi SH Reitz C Pasquier F Hollingworth P Ramirez A Hanon O Fitzpatrick AL Buxbaum JD Campion D Crane PK Baldwin C Becker T Gudnason V Cruchaga C Craig D Amin N Berr C Lopez OL De Jager PL Deramecourt V Johnston JA Evans D Lovestone S Letenneur L Moron FJ Rubinsztein DC Eiriksdottir G Sleegers K Goate AM Fievet N Huentelman MJ Gill M Brown K Kamboh MI Keller L Barberger-Gateau P McGuinness B Larson EB Green R Myers AJ Dufouil C Todd S Wallon D Love S Rogaeva E Gallacher J St George-Hyslop P Clarimon J Lleo A Bayer A Tsuang DW Yu L Tsolaki M Bossu P Spalletta G Proitsi P Collinge J Sorbi S Sanchez-Garcia F Fox NC Hardy J Naranjo MC Bosco P Clarke R Brayne C Galimberti D Mancuso M Matthews F European Alzheimer's Disease, I, Genetic, Environmental Risk in Alzheimer's, D, Alzheimer's Disease Genetic, C, Cohorts for, H, Aging Research in Genomic, E Moebus S Mecocci P Del Zompo M Maier W Hampel H Pilotto A Bullido M Panza F Caffarra P Nacmias B Gilbert JR Mayhaus M Lannfelt L Hakonarson H Pichler S Carrasquillo MM Ingelsson M Beekly D Alvarez V Zou F Valladares O Younkin SG Coto E Hamilton-Nelson KL Gu W Razquin C Pastor P Mateo I Owen MJ Faber KM Jonsson PV Combarros O O'Donovan MC Cantwell LB Soininen H Blacker D Mead S Mosley TH Jr Bennett DA Harris TB Fratiglioni L Holmes C de Bruijn RF Passmore P Montine TJ Bettens K Rotter JI Brice A Morgan K Foroud TM Kukull WA Hannequin D Powell JF Nalls MA Ritchie K Lunetta KL Kauwe JS Boerwinkle E Riemenschneider M Boada M Hiltunen M Martin ER Schmidt R Rujescu D Wang LS Dartigues JF Mayeux R Tzourio C Hofman A Nothen MM Graff C Psaty BM Jones L Haines JL Holmans PA Lathrop M Pericak-Vance MA Launer LJ Farrer LA van Duijn CM Van Broeckhoven C Moskvina V Seshadri S Williams J Schellenberg GD Amouyel P 2013 Meta-analysis of 74,046 individuals identifies 11 new susceptibility loci for Alzheimer's disease Nat Genet 10.1038/ng.2802 PMID: 24162737
Lambert JC Grenier-Boley B Chouraki V Heath S Zelenika D Fievet N Hannequin D Pasquier F Hanon O Brice A Epelbaum J Berr C Dartigues JF Tzourio C Campion D Lathrop M Amouyel P 2010 Implication of the immune system in Alzheimer's disease: evidence from genome-wide pathway analysis J Alzheimers Dis 20 1107 18 10.3233/JAD-2010-100018 PMID: 20413860 20413860
Lancaster MA Renner M Martin C-A Wenzel D Bicknell LS Hurles ME Homfray T Penninger JM Jackson AP Knoblich JA 2013 Cerebral organoids model human brain development and microcephaly Nature 501 373 10.1038/nature12517 PMID: 23995685 23995685
Lancaster MA Knoblich JA 2014 Generation of cerebral organoids from human pluripotent stem cells Nat Protoc 9 2329 40 10.1038/nprot.2014.158 PMID: 25188634 25188634
Lassmann H Bancher C Breitschopf H Wegiel J Bobinski M Jellinger K Wisniewski HM 1995 Cell-Death in Alzheimers-Disease Evaluated by DNA Fragmentation in-Situ Acta Neuropathologica 89 35 41 PMID: 7709729 7709729
Lee G Papapetrou EP Kim H Chambers SM Tomishima MJ Fasano CA Ganat YM Menon J Shimizu F Viale A Tabar V Sadelain M Studer L 2009 Modelling pathogenesis and treatment of familial dysautonomia using patient-specific iPSCs Nature 461 402 406 PMID: 19693009 19693009
Lee MS Kao SC Lemere CA Xia W Tseng HC Zhou Y Neve R Ahlijanian MK Tsai LH 2003 APP processing is regulated by cytoplasmic phosphorylation J Cell Biol 163 83 95 10.1083/jcb.200301115 jcb.200301115 [pii]. PMID: 14557249 14557249
Lemere CA Blusztajn JK Yamaguchi H Wisniewski T Saido TC Selkoe DJ 1996 Sequence of deposition of heterogeneous amyloid beta-peptides and APO E in Down syndrome: implications for initial events in amyloid plaque formation Neurobiol Dis 3 16 32 10.1006/nbdi.1996.0003 PMID: 9173910 9173910
Levy-Lahad E Wijsman EM Nemens E Anderson L Goddard KA Weber JL Bird TD Schellenberg GD 1995 A familial Alzheimer's disease locus on chromosome 1 Science 269 970 3 PMID: 7638621 7638621
Levy-Lahad E Wasco W Poorkaj P Romano DM Oshima J Pettingell WH Yu CE Jondro PD Schmidt SD Wang K 1995 Candidate gene for the chromosome 1 familial Alzheimer's disease locus Science 269 973 7 PMID: 7638622 7638622
Li S Mallory M Alford M Tanaka S Masliah E 1997 Glutamate transporter alterations in Alzheimer disease are possibly associated with abnormal APP expression J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 56 901 11 PMID: 9258260 9258260
Lippmann ES Al-Ahmad A Azarin SM Palecek SP Shusta EV 2014 A retinoic acid-enhanced, multicellular human blood-brain barrier model derived from stem cell sources Sci Rep 4 4160 10.1038/srep04160 PMID: 24561821 24561821
Lippmann ES Al-Ahmad A Palecek SP Shusta EV 2013 Modeling the blood-brain barrier using stem cell sources Fluids Barriers CNS 10 2 10.1186/2045-8118-10-2 PMID: 23305164 23305164
Lippmann ES Azarin SM Kay JE Nessler RA Wilson HK Al-Ahmad A Palecek SP Shusta EV 2012 Derivation of blood-brain barrier endothelial cells from human pluripotent stem cells Nature Biotechnology 30 783 791 10.1038/nbt.2247 PMID: 22729031
Lister R Pelizzola M Kida YS Hawkins RD Nery JR Hon G Antosiewicz-Bourget J O'Malley R Castanon R Klugman S Downes M Yu R Stewart R Ren B Thomson JA Evans RM Ecker JR 2011 Hotspots of aberrant epigenomic reprogramming in human induced pluripotent stem cells Nature 471 68 U84 10.1038/nature09798 PMID: 21289626 21289626
Liu CC Kanekiyo T Xu H Bu G 2013 Apolipoprotein E and Alzheimer disease: risk, mechanisms and therapy Nature Reviews Neurology PMID: 23296339
Liu GH Barkho BZ Ruiz S Diep D Qu J Yang SL Panopoulos AD Suzuki K Kurian L Walsh C Thompson J Boue S Fung HL Sancho-Martinez I Zhang K Yates J 3rd Izpisua Belmonte JC 2011 Recapitulation of premature ageing with iPSCs from Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome Nature 472 221 5 10.1038/nature09879 PMID: 21346760 21346760
Liu GH Qu J Suzuki K Nivet E Li M Montserrat N Yi F Xu X Ruiz S Zhang W Wagner U Kim A Ren B Li Y Goebl A Kim J Soligalla RD Dubova I Thompson J Yates J 3rd Esteban CR Sancho-Martinez I Izpisua Belmonte JC 2012 Progressive degeneration of human neural stem cells caused by pathogenic LRRK2 Nature 491 603 7 10.1038/nature11557 PMID: 23075850 23075850
Liu H Zhang SC 2011 Specification of neuronal and glial subtypes from human pluripotent stem cells Cell Mol Life Sci 68 3995 4008 10.1007/s00018-011-0770-y PMID: 21786144 21786144
Liu Y Liu H Sauvey C Yao L Zarnowska ED Zhang SC 2013 Directed differentiation of forebrain GABA interneurons from human pluripotent stem cells Nat Protoc 8 1670 9 10.1038/nprot.2013.106 PMID: 23928500 23928500
Lomax GP Hull SC Isasi R 2015 The DISCUSS Project: Revised Points to Consider for the Derivation of Induced Pluripotent Stem Cell Lines From Previously Collected Research Specimens Stem Cells Transl Med 4 123 9 10.5966/sctm.2014-0192 PMID: 25561681 25561681
Lomax GP Peckman SR 2012 Stem cell policy exceptionalism: proceed with caution Stem Cell Rev 8 299 304 10.1007/s12015-011-9305-z PMID: 21837381 21837381
Lomax GP Hull SC Lowenthal J Rao M Isasi R 2013 The DISCUSS Project: induced pluripotent stem cell lines from previously collected research biospecimens and informed consent: points to consider Stem Cells Transl Med 2 727 30 10.5966/sctm.2013-0099 PMID: 23990574 23990574
Lovell MA Markesbery WR 2007 Oxidative DNA damage in mild cognitive impairment and late-stage Alzheimer's disease Nucleic Acids Research 35 7497 7504 17947327
Lu T Pan Y Kao SY Li C Kohane I Chan J Yankner BA 2004 Gene regulation and DNA damage in the ageing human brain Nature 429 883 891 15190254
Lue LF Walker DG Rogers J 2001 Modeling microglial activation in Alzheimer's disease with human postmortem microglial cultures Neurobiology of Aging 22 945 956 10.1016/s0197-4580(01)00311-6 PMID: 11755003 11755003
Ma N Shan Y Liao B Kong G Wang C Huang K Zhang H Cai X Chen S Pei D Chen N Pan G 2015 Factor-induced Reprogramming and Zinc Finger Nuclease-aided Gene Targeting Cause Different Genome Instability in beta-Thalassemia Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells (iPSCs) J Biol Chem 290 12079 89 10.1074/jbc.M114.624999 PMID: 25795783 25795783
Ma YJ Hill DF Creswick KE Costa ME Cornea A Lioubin MN Plowman GD Ojeda SR 1999 Neuregulins signaling via a glial erbB-2-erbB-4 receptor complex contribute to the neuroendocrine control of mammalian sexual development J Neurosci 19 9913 27 PMID: 10559400 10559400
Maclean GA Menne TF Guo G Sanchez DJ Park IH Daley GQ Orkin SH 2012 Altered hematopoiesis in trisomy 21 as revealed through in vitro differentiation of isogenic human pluripotent cells Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109 17567 72 10.1073/pnas.1215468109 PMID: 23045682 23045682
Mahley RW 1988 Apolipoprotein E: cholesterol transport protein with expanding role in cell biology Science 240 PMID: 3283935 3140377
Mahley RW Rall SC Jr 2000 Apolipoprotein E: far more than a lipid transport protein Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet PMID: 11701639
Mahmoudi S Brunet A 2012 Aging and reprogramming: a two-way street Curr Opin Cell Biol 24 744 56 10.1016/j.ceb.2012.10.004 PMID: 23146768 23146768
Majewski J Pastinen T 2011 The study of eQTL variations by RNA-seq: from SNPs to phenotypes Trends in Genetics 27 72 79 10.1016/j.tig.2010.10.006 PMID: 21122937 21122937
Major T Menon J Auyeung G Soldner F Hockemeyer D Jaenisch R Tabar V 2011 Transgene excision has no impact on in vivo integration of human iPS derived neural precursors PLoS One 6 e24687 10.1371/journal.pone.0024687 PMID: 21961042 21961042
Mali P Yang L Esvelt KM Aach J Guell M DiCarlo JE Norville JE Church GM 2013 RNA-Guided Human Genome Engineering via Cas9 Science (New York, NY) doi: papers2://publication/doi/10.1126/science.1232033
Mann EO Paulsen O 2007 Role of GABAergic inhibition in hippocampal network oscillations Trends Neurosci 30 343 9 10.1016/j.tins.2007.05.003 PMID: 17532059 17532059
Marchetto MCN Carromeu C Acab A Yu D Yeo GW Mu Y Chen G Gage FH Muotri AR 2010 A Model for Neural Development and Treatment of Rett Syndrome Using Human Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells Cell 143 527 539 10.1016/j.cell.2010.10.016 PMID: 21074045 21074045
Martin GR 1981 Isolation of a pluripotent cell line from early mouse embryos cultured in medium conditioned by teratocarcinoma stem cells Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 78 7634 8 10.1073/pnas.78.12.7634 PMID: 6950406 6950406
Masliah E Alford M Mallory M Rockenstein E Moechars D Van Leuven F 2000 Abnormal Glutamate Transport Function in Mutant Amyloid Precursor Protein Transgenic Mice Experimental Neurology 163 381 387 10833311
Masumoto H Ikuno T Takeda M Fukushima H Marui A Katayama S Shimizu T Ikeda T Okano T Sakata R Yamashita JK 2014 Human iPS cell-engineered cardiac tissue sheets with cardiomyocytes and vascular cells for cardiac regeneration Sci Rep 4 6716 10.1038/srep06716 PMID: 25336194 25336194
Mattis VB Tom C Akimov S Saeedian J Ostergaard ME Southwell AL Doty CN Ornelas L Sahabian A Lenaeus L Mandefro B Sareen D Arjomand J Hayden MR Ross CA Svendsen CN 2015 HD iPSC-derived neural progenitors accumulate in culture and are susceptible to BDNF withdrawal due to glutamate toxicity Hum Mol Genet 24 3257 71 10.1093/hmg/ddv080 PMID: 25740845 25740845
McBride R 2012 Pharma counts just 3 Alzheimer's drug wins in 13 years (101 losses!) FierceBiotech
Mertens J Stuber K Wunderlich P Ladewig J Kesavan JC Vandenberghe R Vandenbulcke M van Damme P Walter J Brustle O Koch P 2013 APP processing in human pluripotent stem cell-derived neurons is resistant to NSAID-based gamma-secretase modulation Stem Cell Reports 1 491 8 10.1016/j.stemcr.2013.10.011 PMID: 24371804 24371804
Miller J Studer L 2014 Aging in iPS cells Aging (Albany NY) 6 246 7 PMID: 24799443 24799443
Miller JC Tan S Qiao G Barlow KA Wang J Xia DF Meng X Paschon DE Leung E Hinkley SJ Dulay GP Hua KL Ankoudinova I Cost GJ Urnov FD Zhang HS Holmes MC Zhang L Gregory PD Rebar EJ 2011 A TALE nuclease architecture for efficient genome editing Nat Biotechnol 29 143 8 10.1038/nbt.1755 PMID: 21179091 21179091
Miller JD Ganat YM Kishinevsky S Bowman RL Liu B Tu EY Mandal PK Vera E Shim JW Kriks S Taldone T Fusaki N Tomishima MJ Krainc D Milner TA Rossi DJ Studer L 2013 Human iPSC-based modeling of late-onset disease via progerin-induced aging Cell Stem Cell 13 691 705 10.1016/j.stem.2013.11.006 PMID: 24315443 24315443
Minami H Tashiro K Okada A Hirata N Yamaguchi T Takayama K Mizuguchi H Kawabata K 2015 Generation of Brain Microvascular Endothelial-Like Cells from Human Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells by Co-Culture with C6 Glioma Cells PLoS One 10 e0128890 10.1371/journal.pone.0128890 PMID: 26061227 26061227
Monoranu CM Apfelbacher M Gruenblatt E Puppe B Alafuzoff I Ferrer I Al-Saraj S Keyvani K Schmitt A Falkai P Schittenhelm J Halliday G Kril J Harper C McLean C Riederer P Roggendorf W 2009 Abstracts of the 110th Meeting of the British Neuropathological Society. January 7–9, 2009. London, United Kingdom Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 35 Suppl 1 1 38 10.1111/j.1365-2990.2008.01003.x PMID: 19146648 19146648
Muratore CR Rice HC Srikanth P Callahan DG Shin T Benjamin LN Walsh DM Selkoe DJ Young-Pearse TL 2014 The familial Alzheimer's disease APPV717I mutation alters APP processing and Tau expression in iPSC-derived neurons Hum Mol Genet 23 3523 36 10.1093/hmg/ddu064 PMID: 24524897 24524897
Murray A Letourneau A Canzonetta C Stathaki E Gimelli S Sloan-Bena F Abrehart R Goh P Lim S Baldo C Dagna-Bricarelli F Hannan S Mortensen M Ballard D Syndercombe Court D Fusaki N Hasegawa M Smart TG Bishop C Antonarakis SE Groet J Nizetic D 2015 Brief report: isogenic induced pluripotent stem cell lines from an adult with mosaic down syndrome model accelerated neuronal ageing and neurodegeneration Stem Cells 33 2077 84 10.1002/stem.1968 PMID: 25694335 25694335
Narsinh KH Sun N Sanchez-Freire V Lee AS Almeida P Hu S Jan T Wilson KD Leong D Rosenberg J Yao M Robbins RC Wu JC 2011 Single cell transcriptional profiling reveals heterogeneity of human induced pluripotent stem cells J Clin Invest 121 1217 21 10.1172/JCI44635 PMID: 21317531 21317531
Narsinh KH Plews J Wu JC 2011 Comparison of human induced pluripotent and embryonic stem cells: fraternal or identical twins? Mol Ther 19 635 8 10.1038/mt.2011.41 PMID: 21455209 21455209
Nazor KL Altun G Lynch C Tran H Harness JV Slavin I Garitaonandia I Muller FJ Wang YC Boscolo FS Fakunle E Dumevska B Lee S Park HS Olee T D'Lima DD Semechkin R Parast MM Galat V Laslett AL Schmidt U Keirstead HS Loring JF Laurent LC 2012 Recurrent variations in DNA methylation in human pluripotent stem cells and their differentiated derivatives Cell Stem Cell 10 620 34 10.1016/j.stem.2012.02.013 PMID: 22560082 22560082
Neumann, HJ-B-S, 53123 Bonn, DE), Roy, Kristin (Karl-Barth-Str. 69, 53129 Bonn, DE), Brüstle, Oliver (c/o Institut für RekonstruktiveNeurobiologieUniversität BonnSigmund-Freud-Str. 25, 53127 Bonn, DE), Peitz, Michael (Aloys-Schulte-Str. 28, 53129 Bonn, DE), (2012) Method for obtaining human microglial precursor cells from pluripotent stem cells. Life &amp; Brain GmbH (Sigmund-Freud-Straβe 25, 53127 Bonn, DE),Rheinische, Friedrich-wilhelms-universität (Regina-Pacis-Weg 3, 53113 Bonn, DE),,

Nieweg K Andreyeva A van Stegen B Tanriover G Gottmann K 2015 Alzheimer's disease-related amyloid-beta induces synaptotoxicity in human iPS cell-derived neurons Cell Death Dis 6 e1709 10.1038/cddis.2015.72 PMID: 25837485 25837485
Oberheim NA Wang X Goldman S Nedergaard M 2006 Astrocytic complexity distinguishes the human brain Trends Neurosci 29 547 53 10.1016/j.tins.2006.08.004 PMID: 16938356 16938356
Oberheim NA Takano T Han X He W Lin JHC Wang F Xu Q Wyatt JD Pilcher W Ojemann JG Ransom BR Goldman SA Nedergaard M 2009 Uniquely Hominid Features of Adult Human Astrocytes J. Neurosci 29 3276 3287 10.1523/jneurosci.4707-08.2009 19279265
Odawara A Saitoh Y Alhebshi AH Gotoh M Suzuki I 2014 Long-term electrophysiological activity and pharmacological response of a human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived neuron and astrocyte co-culture Biochem Biophys Res Commun 443 1176 81 10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.12.142 PMID: 24406164 24406164
Ogawa S Tokumoto Y Miyake J Nagamune T 2011 Induction of oligodendrocyte differentiation from adult human fibroblast-derived induced pluripotent stem cells In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim 47 464 9 10.1007/s11626-011-9435-2 PMID: 21695581 21695581
Ohi Y Qin H Hong C Blouin L Polo JM Guo T Qi Z Downey SL Manos PD Rossi DJ Yu J Hebrok M Hochedlinger K Costello JF Song JS Ramalho-Santos M 2011 Incomplete DNA methylation underlies a transcriptional memory of somatic cells in human iPS cells Nat Cell Biol 13 541 9 10.1038/ncb2239 PMID: 21499256 21499256
Okita K Yamakawa T Matsumura Y Sato Y Amano N Watanabe A Goshima N Yamanaka S 2013 An efficient nonviral method to generate integration-free human-induced pluripotent stem cells from cord blood and peripheral blood cells Stem Cells 31 458 66 10.1002/stem.1293 PMID: 23193063 23193063
Olgiati P Politis AM Papadimitriou GN De Ronchi D Serretti A 2011 Genetics of late-onset Alzheimer's disease: update from the alzgene database and analysis of shared pathways Int J Alzheimers Dis 2011 832379 10.4061/2011/832379 PMID: 22191060 22191060
Parent JM Anderson SA 2015 Reprogramming patient-derived cells to study the epilepsies Nat Neurosci 18 360 6 10.1038/nn.3944 PMID: 25710838 25710838
Park IH Arora N Huo H Maherali N Ahfeldt T Shimamura A Lensch MW Cowan C Hochedlinger K Daley GQ 2008 Disease-specific induced pluripotent stem cells Cell 134 877 86 doi: S0092-8674(08)01001-5 [pii] 10.1016/j.cell.2008.07.041. PMID: 18691744 18691744
Pasca AM Sloan SA Clarke LE Tian Y Makinson CD Huber N Kim CH Park JY O'Rourke NA Nguyen KD Smith SJ Huguenard JR Geschwind DH Barres BA Pasca SP 2015 Functional cortical neurons and astrocytes from human pluripotent stem cells in 3D culture Nat Methods 12 671 8 10.1038/nmeth.3415 PMID: 26005811 26005811
Pascual O Casper KB Kubera C Zhang J Revilla-Sanchez R Sul JY Takano H Moss SJ McCarthy K Haydon PG 2005 Astrocytic purinergic signaling coordinates synaptic networks Science 310 113 6 doi: 310/5745/113 [pii] 10.1126/science.1116916. PMID: 16210541 16210541
Perea G Navarrete M Araque A 2009 Tripartite synapses: astrocytes process and control synaptic information Trends in Neurosciences 32 421 431 19615761
Pfrieger FW 2009 Roles of glial cells in synapse development Cell Mol Life Sci 66 2037 47 10.1007/s00018-009-0005-7 PMID: 19308323 19308323
Pfrieger FW Barres BA 1997 Synaptic efficacy enhanced by glial cells in vitro Science 277 1684 7 PMID: 9287225 9287225
Portelius E Andreasson U Ringman JM Buerger K Daborg J Buchhave P Hansson O Harmsen A Gustavsson MK Hanse E Galasko D Hampel H Blennow K Zetterberg H 2010 Distinct cerebrospinal fluid amyloid beta peptide signatures in sporadic and PSEN1 A431E–associated familial Alzheimer's disease Mol Neurodegener 5 2 10.1186/1750-1326-5-2 PMID: 20145736 20145736
Pouya A Satarian L Kiani S Javan M Baharvand H 2011 Human induced pluripotent stem cells differentiation into oligodendrocyte progenitors and transplantation in a rat model of optic chiasm demyelination PLoS One 6 e27925 10.1371/journal.pone.0027925 PMID: 22125639 22125639
Puschmann TB Zanden C De Pablo Y Kirchhoff F Pekna M Liu J Pekny M 2013 Bioactive 3D cell culture system minimizes cellular stress and maintains the in vivo-like morphological complexity of astroglial cells Glia 61 432 40 10.1002/glia.22446 PMID: 23292921 23292921
Qi LS Larson MH Gilbert LA Doudna JA Weissman JS Arkin AP Lim WA 2013 Repurposing CRISPR as an RNA-γuided platform for sequence-specific control of gene expression Cell 152 1173 1183 23452860
Ran FA Hsu PD Wright J Agarwala V Scott DA Zhang F 2013 Genome engineering using the CRISPR-Cas9 system Nat Protoc 8 2281 308 10.1038/nprot.2013.143 PMID: 24157548 24157548
Robakis NK Wisniewski HM Jenkins EC Devine-Gage EA Houck GE Yao XL Ramakrishna N Wolfe G Silverman WP Brown WT 1987 Chromosome 21q21 sublocalisation of gene encoding beta-amyloid peptide in cerebral vessels and neuritic (senile) plaques of people with Alzheimer disease and Down syndrome Lancet 1 384 5 PMID: 2880184 2880184
Robinson SR 2001 Changes in the cellular distribution of glutamine synthetase in Alzheimer's disease J Neurosci Res 66 972 80 PMID: 11746426 11746426
Rogaev EI Sherrington R Rogaeva EA Levesque G Ikeda M Llang Y Chi H Lin C Holman K Tsuda T Mar L Sorbi S Nacmias B Piacentini S Amaduccl L Chumakov I Cohen D Lannfelt L St George-Hyslop PH 1995 Familial Alzheimer's disease in kindreds with missense mutations in a gene on chromosome 1 related to the Alzheimer's disease type 3 gene Nature 376 775 778 7651536
Roth AD Ramirez G Alarcon R Von Bernhardi R 2005 Oligodendrocytes damage in Alzheimer's disease: beta amyloid toxicity and inflammation Biol Res 38 381 7 PMID: 16579521 16579521
Rouhani F Kumasaka N de Brito MC Bradley A Vallier L Gaffney D 2014 Genetic background drives transcriptional variation in human induced pluripotent stem cells PLoS Genet 10 e1004432 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004432 PMID: 24901476 24901476
Rumble B Retallack R Hilbich C Simms G Multhaup G Martins R Hockey A Montgomery P Beyreuther K Masters CL 1989 Amyloid A4 protein and its precursor in Down's syndrome and Alzheimer's disease The New England journal of medicine 320 1446 52 doi: papers://3039E21D-04C9-4FF4-AF76-9D1A38439DE0/Paper/p1254 2566117
Ryan SD Dolatabadi N Chan SF Zhang X Akhtar MW Parker J Soldner F Sunico CR Nagar S Talantova M Lee B Lopez K Nutter A Shan B Molokanova E Zhang Y Han X Nakamura T Masliah E Yates JR 3rd Nakanishi N Andreyev AY Okamoto S Jaenisch R Ambasudhan R Lipton SA 2013 Isogenic human iPSC Parkinson's model shows nitrosative stress-induced dysfunction in MEF2-PGC1alpha transcription Cell 155 1351 64 10.1016/j.cell.2013.11.009 PMID: 24290359 24290359
Sahin E DePinho RA 2010 Linking functional decline of telomeres, mitochondria and stem cells during ageing Nature 464 520 528 20336134
Salloway S Sperling R Fox NC Blennow K Klunk W Raskind M Sabbagh M Honig LS Porsteinsson AP Ferris S Reichert M Ketter N Nejadnik B Guenzler V Miloslavsky M Wang D Lu Y Lull J Tudor IC Liu E Grundman M Yuen E Black R Brashear HR Bapineuzumab Clinical Trial I 2014 Two phase 3 trials of bapineuzumab in mild-to-moderate Alzheimer's disease N Engl J Med 370 322 33 10.1056/NEJMoa1304839 PMID: 24450891 24450891
Samuel R Daheron L Liao S Vardam T Kamoun WS Batista A Buecker C Schafer R Han X Au P Scadden DT Duda DG Fukumura D Jain RK 2013 Generation of functionally competent and durable engineered blood vessels from human induced pluripotent stem cells Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110 12774 9 10.1073/pnas.1310675110 PMID: 23861493 23861493
Sander JD Joung JK 2014 CRISPR-Cas systems for editing, regulating and targeting genomes Nat Biotechnol 32 347 55 10.1038/nbt.2842 PMID: 24584096 24584096
Sandoe J Eggan K 2013 Opportunities and challenges of pluripotent stem cell neurodegenerative disease models Nat Neurosci 16 780 9 10.1038/nn.3425 PMID: 23799470 23799470
Schellenberg GD Payami H Wijsman EM Orr HT Goddard KA Anderson L Nemens E White JA Alonso ME Ball MJ 1993 Chromosome 14 and late-onset familial Alzheimer disease (FAD) Am J Hum Genet 53 619 28 PMID: 8352272 8352272
Schwartz MP Hou Z Propson NE Zhang J Engstrom CJ Costa VS Jiang P Nguyen BK Bolin JM Daly W Wang Y Stewart R Page CD Murphy WL Thomson JA 2015 Human pluripotent stem cell-derived neural constructs for predicting neural toxicity Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 112 12516 21 10.1073/pnas.1516645112 PMID: 26392547 26392547
Selvaraj V Jiang P Chechneva O Lo UG Deng W 2012 Differentiating human stem cells into neurons and glial cells for neural repair Front Biosci (Landmark Ed) 17 65 89 PMID: 22201733 22201733
Sergent-Tanguy S Chagneau C Neveu I Naveilhan P 2003 Fluorescent activated cell sorting (FACS): a rapid and reliable method to estimate the number of neurons in a mixed population J Neurosci Methods 129 73 9 10.1016/s0165-0270(03)00210-3 PMID: 12951234 12951234
Shalem O Sanjana NE Hartenian E Shi X Scott DA Mikkelsen TS Heckl D Ebert BL Root DE Doench JG Zhang F 2014 Genome-scale CRISPR-Cas9 knockout screening in human cells Science 343 84 7 10.1126/science.1247005 PMID: 24336571 24336571
Shi Y Kirwan P Livesey FJ 2012 Directed differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells to cerebral cortex neurons and neural networks Nat Protoc 7 1836 46 10.1038/nprot.2012.116 PMID: 22976355 22976355
Shi Y Kirwan P Smith J Robinson HP Livesey FJ 2012 Human cerebral cortex development from pluripotent stem cells to functional excitatory synapses Nat Neurosci 15 477 86 s1 10.1038/nn.3041 PMID: 22306606 22306606
Shi Y Kirwan P Smith J MacLean G Orkin SH Livesey FJ 2012 A human stem cell model of early Alzheimer's disease pathology in Down syndrome Sci Transl Med 4 124ra29 10.1126/scitranslmed.3003771 PMID: 22344463
Shigetomi E Bushong EA Haustein MD Tong X Jackson-Weaver O Kracun S Xu J Sofroniew MV Ellisman MH Khakh BS 2013 Imaging calcium microdomains within entire astrocyte territories and endfeet with GCaMPs expressed using adeno-associated viruses J Gen Physiol 141 633 47 10.1085/jgp.201210949 PMID: 23589582 23589582
Shimamoto A Yokote K Tahara H 2015 Werner Syndrome-specific induced pluripotent stem cells: recovery of telomere function by reprogramming Front Genet 6 10 10.3389/fgene.2015.00010 PMID: 25688260 25688260
Siegert S Cabuy E Scherf BG Kohler H Panda S Le YZ Fehling HJ Gaidatzis D Stadler MB Roska B 2012 Transcriptional code and disease map for adult retinal cell types Nat Neurosci 15 487 95 S1 2 10.1038/nn.3032 PMID: 22267162 22267162
Slaymaker IM Gao L Zetsche B Scott DA Yan WX Zhang F 2015 Rationally engineered Cas9 nucleases with improved specificity Science
Smith I Silveirinha V Stein JL de la Torre-Ubieta L Farrimond JA Williamson EM Whalley BJ 2015 Human neural stem cell-derived cultures in three-dimensional substrates form spontaneously functional neuronal networks J Tissue Eng Regen Med 10.1002/term.2001 PMID: 25712225
Soldner F Jaenisch R 2012 iPSC disease modeling Science 338 1155 1156 23197518
Soldner F Hockemeyer D Beard C Gao Q Bell GW Cook EG Hargus G Blak A Cooper O Mitalipova M Isacson O Jaenisch R 2009 Parkinson's disease patient-derived induced pluripotent stem cells free of viral reprogramming factors Cell 136 964 77 doi: S0092-8674(09)00151-2 [pii] 10.1016/j.cell.2009.02.013. PMID: 19269371 19269371
Soldner F Laganière J Cheng AW Hockemeyer D Gao Q Alagappan R Khurana V Golbe LI Myers RH Lindquist S Zhang L Guschin D Fong LK Vu BJ Meng X Urnov FD Rebar EJ Gregory PD Zhang HS Jaenisch R 2011 Generation of Isogenic Pluripotent Stem Cells Differing Exclusively at Two Early Onset Parkinson Point Mutations Cell 146 318 331 doi: papers2://publication/doi/10.1016/j.cell.2011.06.019 21757228
Spillantini MG Murrell JR Goedert M Farlow MR Klug A Ghetti B 1998 Mutation in the tau gene in familial multiple system tauopathy with presenile dementia Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 95 7737 41 PMID: 9636220 9636220
Spittaels K Van Den Haute C Van Dorpe J Bruynseels K Vandezande K Laenen I Geerts H Mercken M Sciot R Van Lommel A Loos R Van Leuven F 1999 Prominent axonopathy in the brain and spinal cord of transgenic mice overexpressing four-repeat human tau protein American Journal Of Pathology 155 2153 2165 10595944
Sproul AA Jacob S Pre D Kim SH Nestor MW Navarro-Sobrino M Santa-Maria I Zimmer M Aubry S Steele JW Kahler DJ Dranovsky A Arancio O Crary JF Gandy S Noggle SA 2014 Characterization andmolecular profiling of PSEN1 familial Alzheimer's disease iPSC-derived neural progenitors PLoS One 9 e84547 http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0084547 24416243
St George-Hyslop PH Tanzi RE Polinsky RJ Haines JL Nee L Watkins PC Myers RH Feldman RG Pollen D Drachman D 1987 The genetic defect causing familial Alzheimer's disease maps on chromosome 21 Science 235 885 90 PMID: 2880399 2880399
Streit WJ Braak H Xue QS Bechmann I 2009 Dystrophic (senescent) rather than activated microglial cells are associated with tau pathology and likely precede neurodegeneration in Alzheimer's disease Acta Neuropathol 118 475 85 10.1007/s00401-009-0556-6 PMID: 19513731 19513731
Streit WJ Xue QS 2010 The Brain's Aging Immune System Aging Dis 1 254 261 PMID: 21833348 21833348
Sugaya K Reeves M McKinney M 1997 Topographic associations between DNA fragmentation and Alzheimer's disease neuropathology in the hippocampus Neurochemistry International 31 275 281 10.1016/S0197-0186(96)00158-1 PMID: 9220460 9220460
Sun W McConnell E Pare JF Xu Q Chen M Peng W Lovatt D Han X Smith Y Nedergaard M 2013 Glutamate-dependent neuroglial calcium signaling differs between young and adult brain Science 339 197 200 10.1126/science.1226740 PMID: 23307741 23307741
Swistowski A Peng J Liu Q Mali P Rao MS Cheng L Zeng X 2010 Efficient generation of functional dopaminergic neurons from human induced pluripotent stem cells under defined conditions Stem Cells 28 1893 904 10.1002/stem.499 PMID: 20715183 20715183
Tabata H 2015 Diverse subtypes of astrocytes and their development during corticogenesis Front Neurosci 9 114 10.3389/fnins.2015.00114 PMID: 25904839 25904839
Tada M Takahama Y Abe K Nakatsuji N Tada T 2001 Nuclear reprogramming of somatic cells by in vitro hybridization with ES cells Curr Biol 11 1553 8 10.1016/s0960-9822(01)00459-6 PMID: 11591326 11591326
Takahashi K Tanabe K Ohnuki M Narita M Ichisaka T Tomoda K Yamanaka S 2007 Induction of pluripotent stem cells from adult human fibroblasts by defined factors Cell 131 861 72 doi: S0092-8674(07)01471-7 [pii] 10.1016/j.cell.2007.11.019. PMID: 18035408 18035408
Takahashi K Yamanaka S 2006 Induction of Pluripotent Stem Cells from Mouse Embryonic and Adult Fibroblast Cultures by Defined Factors Cell 126 663 676 16904174
Takebe T Sekine K Enomura M Koike H Kimura M Ogaeri T Zhang RR Ueno Y Zheng YW Koike N Aoyama S Adachi Y Taniguchi H 2013 Vascularized and functional human liver from an iPSC-derived organ bud transplant Nature 499 481 4 10.1038/nature12271 PMID: 23823721 23823721
Tanzi RE Gusella JF Watkins PC Bruns GA St George-Hyslop P Van Keuren ML Patterson D Pagan S Kurnit DM Neve RL 1987 Amyloid beta protein gene: cDNA, mRNA distribution, and genetic linkage near the Alzheimer locus Science 235 880 4 PMID: 2949367 2949367
Telias M Ben-Yosef D 2014 Modeling neurodevelopmental disorders using human pluripotent stem cells Stem Cell Rev 10 494 511 10.1007/s12015-014-9507-2 PMID: 24728983 24728983
Thomson JA Itskovitz-Eldor J Shapiro SS Waknitz MA Swiergiel JJ Marshall VS Jones JM 1998 Embryonic stem cell lines derived from human blastocysts Science 282 1145 7 PMID: 9804556 9804556
Tilleux S Hermans E 2007 Neuroinflammation and regulation of glial glutamate uptake in neurological disorders J Neurosci Res 85 2059 70 10.1002/jnr.21325 PMID: 17497670 17497670
Tonnesen J Katona G Rozsa B Nagerl UV 2014 Spine neck plasticity regulates compartmentalization of synapses Nat Neurosci 17 678 85 10.1038/nn.3682 PMID: 24657968 24657968
Tsai SQ Zheng Z Nguyen NT Liebers M Topkar VV Thapar V Wyvekens N Khayter C Iafrate AJ Le LP Aryee MJ Joung JK 2015 GUIDE-seq enables genome-wide profiling of off-target cleavage by CRISPR-Cas nucleases Nat Biotechnol 33 187 97 10.1038/nbt.3117 PMID: 25513782 25513782
Tsuchiya T Park KC Toyonaga S Yamada SM Nakabayashi H Nakai E Ikawa N Furuya M Tominaga A Shimizu K 2005 Characterization of microglia induced from mouse embryonic stem cells and their migration into the brain parenchyma J Neuroimmunol 160 210 8 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2004.10.025 PMID: 15710475 15710475
Ullian EM Harris BT Wu A Chan JR Barres BA 2004 Schwann cells and astrocytes induce synapse formation by spinal motor neurons in culture Mol Cell Neurosci 25 241 51 10.1016/j.mcn.2003.10.011 PMID: 15019941 15019941
Urnov FD Rebar EJ Holmes MC Zhang HS Gregory PD 2010 Genome editing with engineered zinc finger nucleases Nat Rev Genet 11 636 46 10.1038/nrg2842 PMID: 20717154 20717154
Verwer RW Dubelaar EJ Hermens WT Swaab DF 2002 Tissue cultures from adult human postmortem subcortical brain areas J Cell Mol Med 6 429 32 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2002.tb00522.x PMID: 12417060 12417060
Wang L Meece K Williams DJ Lo KA Zimmer M Heinrich G Martin Carli J Leduc CA Sun L Zeltser LM Freeby M Goland R Tsang SH Wardlaw SL Egli D Leibel RL 2015 Differentiation of hypothalamic-like neurons from human pluripotent stem cells J Clin Invest 125 796 808 10.1172/JCI79220 PMID: 25555215 25555215
Wang S Bates J Li X Schanz S Chandler-Militello D Levine C Maherali N Studer L Hochedlinger K Windrem M Goldman SA 2013 Human iPSC-derived oligodendrocyte progenitor cells can myelinate and rescue a mouse model of congenital hypomyelination Cell Stem Cell 12 252 64 10.1016/j.stem.2012.12.002 PMID: 23395447 23395447
Wang T Wei JJ Sabatini DM Lander ES 2014 Genetic screens in human cells using the CRISPR-Cas9 system Science 343 80 4 10.1126/science.1246981 PMID: 24336569 24336569
Wang WY Pan L Su SC Quinn EJ Sasaki M Jimenez JC Mackenzie IR Huang EJ Tsai LH 2013 Interaction of FUS and HDAC1 regulates DNA damage response and repair in neurons Nat Neurosci 16 1383 91 10.1038/nn.3514 PMID: 24036913 24036913
Webster SJ Bachstetter AD Nelson PT Schmitt FA Van Eldik LJ 2014 Using mice to model Alzheimer's dementia: an overview of the clinical disease and the preclinical behavioral changes in 10 mouse models Frontiers in genetics 5 88 88 10.3389/fgene.2014.00088 PMID: MEDLINE:24795750 24795750
Weick JP Held DL Bonadurer GF 3rd Doers ME Liu Y Maguire C Clark A Knackert JA Molinarolo K Musser M Yao L Yin Y Lu J Zhang X Zhang SC Bhattacharyya A 2013 Deficits in human trisomy 21 iPSCs and neurons Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110 9962 7 10.1073/pnas.1216575110 PMID: 23716668 23716668
Wen J-Y Wei C-Y Shah K Wong J Wang C Chen H-SV 2015 Maturation-Based Model of Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Dysplasia Using Patient-Specific Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells Circulation Journal advpub 10.1253/circj.CJ-15-0363
Wen Z Nguyen HN Guo Z Lalli MA Wang X Su Y Kim N-S Yoon K-J Shin J Zhang C Makri G Nauen D Yu H Guzman E Chiang C-H Yoritomo N Kaibuchi K Zou J Christian KM Cheng L Ross CA Margolis RL Chen G Kosik KS Song H Ming G-l 2014 Synaptic dysregulation in a human iPS cell model of mental disorders Nature 515 414 8 10.1038/nature13716 PMID: MEDLINE:25132547 25132547
Wilmut I Schnieke AE McWhir J Kind AJ Campbell KH 1997 Viable offspring derived from fetal and adult mammalian cells Nature 385 810 3 10.1038/385810a0 PMID: 9039911 9039911
Wolozin B 2012 Statins and therapy of Alzheimer's disease: questions of efficacy versus trial design Alzheimers Res Ther 4 3 10.1186/alzrt101 PMID: 22264400 22264400
Woodruff G Young JE Martinez FJ Buen F Gore A Kinaga J Li Z Yuan SH Zhang K Goldstein LS 2013 The presenilin-1 DeltaE9 mutation results in reduced gamma-secretase activity, but not total loss of PS1 function, in isogenic human stem cells Cell Rep 5 974 85 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.10.018 PMID: 24239350 24239350
Woods YL Cohen P Becker W Jakes R Goedert M Wang X Proud CG 2001 The kinase DYRK phosphorylates protein-synthesis initiation factor eIF2Bepsilon at Ser539 and the microtubule-associated protein tau at Thr212: potential role for DYRK as a glycogen synthase kinase 3-priming kinase Biochem J 355 609 15 PMID: 11311121 11311121
Wren MC Zhao J Liu CC Murray ME Atagi Y Davis MD Fu Y Okano HJ Ogaki K Strongosky AJ Tacik P Rademakers R Ross OA Dickson DW Wszolek ZK Kanekiyo T Bu G 2015 Frontotemporal dementia-associated N279K tau mutant disrupts subcellular vesicle trafficking and induces cellular stress in iPSC-derived neural stem cells Mol Neurodegener 10 46 10.1186/s13024-015-0042-7 PMID: 26373282 26373282
Wunderlich P Glebov K Kemmerling N Tien NT Neumann H Walter J 2013 Sequential proteolytic processing of the triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells-2 (TREM2) by ectodomain shedding and gamma-secretase dependent intramembranous cleavage J Biol Chem 10.1074/jbc.M113.517540 PMID: 24078628
Xie L Kang H Xu Q Chen MJ Liao Y Thiyagarajan M O'Donnell J Christensen DJ Nicholson C Iliff JJ Takano T Deane R Nedergaard M 2013 Sleep drives metabolite clearance from the adult brain Science 342 373 7 10.1126/science.1241224 PMID: 24136970 24136970
Xu X Lei Y Luo J Wang J Zhang S Yang XJ Sun M Nuwaysir E Fan G Zhao J Lei L Zhong Z 2013 Prevention of beta-amyloid induced toxicity in human iPS cell-derived neurons by inhibition of Cyclin-dependent kinases and associated cell cycle events Stem Cell Res 10 213 27 10.1016/j.scr.2012.11.005 PMID: 23305945 23305945
Yagi T Ito D Okada Y Akamatsu W Nihei Y Yoshizaki T Yamanaka S Okano H Suzuki N 2011 Modeling familial Alzheimer's disease with induced pluripotent stem cells Hum Mol Genet 20 4530 9 10.1093/hmg/ddr394 PMID: 21900357 21900357
Yahata N Asai M Kitaoka S Takahashi K Asaka I Hioki H Kaneko T Maruyama K Saido TC Nakahata T Asada T Yamanaka S Iwata N Inoue H 2011 Anti-Abeta drug screening platform using human iPS cell-derived neurons for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease PLoS One 6 e25788 10.1371/journal.pone.0025788 PMID: 21984949 21984949
Yang F Sun X Beech W Teter B Wu S Sigel J Vinters HV Frautschy SA Cole GM 1998 Antibody to caspase-cleaved actin detects apoptosis in differentiated neuroblastoma and plaque-associated neurons and microglia in Alzheimer's disease Am J Pathol 152 379 89 PMID: 9466564 9466564
Yoshida M Kitaoka S Egawa N Yamane M Ikeda R Tsukita K Amano N Watanabe A Morimoto M Takahashi J Hosoi H Nakahata T Inoue H Saito MK 2015 Modeling the early phenotype at the neuromuscular junction of spinal muscular atrophy using patient-derived iPSCs Stem Cell Reports 4 561 8 10.1016/j.stemcr.2015.02.010 PMID: 25801509 25801509
Yoshimizu T Pan JQ Mungenast AE Madison JM Su S Ketterman J Ongur D McPhie D Cohen B Perlis R Tsai LH 2015 Functional implications of a psychiatric risk variant within CACNA1C in induced human neurons Mol Psychiatry 20 284 10.1038/mp.2014.181 PMID: 25623946 25623946
Youmans KL Tai LM Nwabuisi-Heath E Jungbauer L Kanekiyo T Gan M Kim J Eimer WA Estus S Rebeck GW Weeber EJ Bu G Yu C LaDu MJ 2012 APOE4-specific changes in Aβ accumulation in a new transgenic mouse model of alzheimer disease Journal of Biological Chemistry 287 41774 41786 23060451
Young JE Boulanger-Weill J Williams DA Woodruff G Buen F Revilla AC Herrera C Israel MA Yuan SH Edland SD Goldstein LS 2015 Elucidating molecular phenotypes caused by the SORL1 Alzheimer's disease genetic risk factor using human induced pluripotent stem cells Cell Stem Cell 16 373 85 10.1016/j.stem.2015.02.004 PMID: 25772071 25772071
Yusa K Rashid ST Strick-Marchand H Varela I Liu PQ Paschon DE Miranda E Ordonez A Hannan NR Rouhani FJ Darche S Alexander G Marciniak SJ Fusaki N Hasegawa M Holmes MC Di Santo JP Lomas DA Bradley A Vallier L 2011 Targeted gene correction of alpha1-antitrypsin deficiency in induced pluripotent stem cells Nature 478 391 4 10.1038/nature10424 PMID: 21993621 21993621
Zeng H Guo M Martins-Taylor K Wang X Zhang Z Park JW Zhan S Kronenberg MS Lichtler A Liu HX Chen FP Yue L Li XJ Xu RH 2010 Specification of region-specific neurons including forebrain glutamatergic neurons from human induced pluripotent stem cells PLoS One 5 e11853 10.1371/journal.pone.0011853 PMID: 20686615 20686615
Zhang B Gaiteri C Bodea LG Wang Z McElwee J Podtelezhnikov AA Zhang C Xie T Tran L Dobrin R Fluder E Clurman B Melquist S Narayanan M Suver C Shah H Mahajan M Gillis T Mysore J MacDonald ME Lamb JR Bennett DA Molony C Stone DJ Gudnason V Myers AJ Schadt EE Neumann H Zhu J Emilsson V 2013 Integrated systems approach identifies genetic nodes and networks in late-onset Alzheimer's disease Cell 153 707 20 10.1016/j.cell.2013.03.030 PMID: 23622250 23622250
Zhang D Pekkanen-Mattila M Shahsavani M Falk A Teixeira AI Herland A 2014 A 3D Alzheimer's disease culture model and the induction of P21-activated kinase mediated sensing in iPSC derived neurons Biomaterials 35 1420 8 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2013.11.028 PMID: 24290439 24290439
Zhang F Wen Y Guo X 2014 CRISPR/Cas9 for genome editing: progress, implications and challenges Hum Mol Genet 23 R40 6 10.1093/hmg/ddu125 PMID: 24651067 24651067
Zhang F Wang LP Boyden ES Deisseroth K 2006 Channelrhodopsin-2 and optical control of excitable cells Nat Methods 3 785 92 doi: nmeth936 [pii] 10.1038/nmeth936. PMID: 16990810 16990810
Zhang N An MC Montoro D Ellerby LM 2010 Characterization of Human Huntington's Disease Cell Model from Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells PLoS Curr 2 RRN1193 10.1371/currents.RRN1193 PMID: 21037797 21037797
Zhang Q Yu JT Zhu QX Zhang W Wu ZC Miao D Tan L 2010 Complement receptor 1 polymorphisms and risk of late-onset Alzheimer's disease Brain Res 1348 216 21 10.1016/j.brainres.2010.06.018 PMID: 20558149 20558149
Zhang Y Chen K Sloan SA Bennett ML Scholze AR O'Keeffe S Phatnani HP Guarnieri P Caneda C Ruderisch N Deng S Liddelow SA Zhang C Daneman R Maniatis T Barres BA Wu JQ 2014 An RNA-sequencing transcriptome and splicing database of glia, neurons, and vascular cells of the cerebral cortex J Neurosci 34 11929 47 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1860-14.2014 PMID: 25186741 25186741
Zhang Y Pak C Han Y Ahlenius H Zhang Z Chanda S Marro S Patzke C Acuna C Covy J Xu W Yang N Danko T Chen L Wernig M Südhof TC 2013 Rapid Single-Step Induction of Functional Neurons from Human Pluripotent Stem Cells Neuron 78 785 798 doi: papers2://publication/doi/10.1016/j.neuron.2013.05.029 23764284
Zhou T Benda C Dunzinger S Huang Y Ho JC Yang J Wang Y Zhang Y Zhuang Q Li Y Bao X Tse HF Grillari J Grillari-Voglauer R Pei D Esteban MA 2012 Generation of human induced pluripotent stem cells from urine samples Nat Protoc 7 2080 9 10.1038/nprot.2012.115 PMID: 23138349 23138349
Zhu Z Gonzalez F Huangfu D 2014 The iCRISPR platform for rapid genome editing in human pluripotent stem cells Methods in enzymology 546 215 50 10.1016/b978-0-12-801185-0.00011-8 PMID: MEDLINE:25398343 25398343
Zou J Maeder ML Mali P Pruett-Miller SM Thibodeau-Beganny S Chou BK Chen G Ye Z Park IH Daley GQ Porteus MH Joung JK Cheng L 2009 Gene targeting of a disease-related gene in human induced pluripotent stem and embryonic stem cells Cell Stem Cell 5 97 110 10.1016/j.stem.2009.05.023 PMID: 19540188 19540188
