LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


0217513
1037
Biochim Biophys Acta
Biochim. Biophys. Acta
Biochimica et biophysica acta
0006-3002
1878-2434

26708942
5343673
10.1016/j.bbadis.2015.12.018
NIHMS745677
Article
Multiple Faces of Dynamin-related Protein 1 and Its Role in Alzheimer’s Disease Pathogenesis
Kandimalla Ramesh 1
Reddy P. Hemachandra 12345
1 Garrison Institute on Aging Department, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, 3601 4th Street, MS 9424, Lubbock, Texas 79430
2 Cell Biology &amp; Biochemistry Department, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, 3601 4th Street, MS 9424, Lubbock, Texas 79430
3 Neuroscience &amp; Pharmacology Department, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, 3601 4th Street, MS 9424, Lubbock, Texas 79430
4 Neurology Department, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, 3601 4th Street, MS 9424, Lubbock, Texas 79430
5 Garrison Institute on Aging, South West Campus, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, 6630 S. Quaker Ste. E, MS 7495, Lubbock, Texas 79413
Address for correspondence and reprint requests: P. Hemachandra Reddy, Ph.D., Executive Director and Chief Scientific Officer, Mildred and Shirley L. Garrison Chair in Aging, Professor of Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Neuroscience &amp; Pharmacology and Neurology Departments, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, 3601 Fourth Street/MS/9424/4A 124, Lubbock, Texas 79430, hemachandra.reddy@ttuhsc.edu
18 12 2015
17 12 2015
4 2016
01 4 2017
1862 4 814828
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Mitochondria play a large role in neuronal function by constantly providing energy, particularly at synapses. Recent studies suggest that amyloid beta (Aβ) and phosphorylated tau interact with the mitochondrial fission protein, dynamin-related protein 1 (Drp1), causing excessive fragmentation of mitochondria and leading to abnormal mitochondrial dynamics and synaptic degeneration in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) neurons. Recent research also revealed Aβ-induced and phosphorylated tau-induced changes in mitochondria, particularly affecting mitochondrial shape, size, distribution and axonal transport in AD neurons. These changes affect mitochondrial health and, in turn, could affect synaptic function and neuronal damage and ultimately leading to memory loss and cognitive impairment in patients with AD. This article highlights recent findings in the role of Drp1 in AD pathogenesis. This article also highlights Drp1 and its relationships to glycogen synthase kinase 3, cyclin-dependent kinase 5, p53, and microRNAs in AD pathogenesis.

Alzheimer’s disease
Drp1
GSK3β
mitochondria
p53
CDK5
miRNA

Introduction

Mitochondria are double-membrane organelle that plays an important role in producing cellular energy, living up to their name as the powerhouse of cells. Mitochondria constantly undergo fission and fusion to maintain normal cell biological functions [1–3]. Mitochondrial fission is the division of single mitochondrion into two. Mitochondrial fission is mainly controlled by the dynamin-related protein 1 (Drp1). Recent research revealed that various pathological conditions, such as cancer, obesity, diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, alcohol injury, and neurodegenerative disorders such as Huntington’s disease (HD), Alzheimer’s disease (AD), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and Parkinson’s disease (PD) are associated with impaired balance between mitochondrial fission and fusion, in addition with causal factors [4–17]. Mitochondrial fission plays a phenomenal role in regulating various signaling pathways for cell survival and death mechanisms [18, 19], and it is also required for the bioenergetics function of axonal mitochondria. GTPase Drp1 enzymatic activity is essential for mitochondrial division [4, 6] and increased GTPase Drp1 enzymatic activity causes excessive mitochondrial fragmentation.

Mitochondrial fusion is the union or fusion of two mitochondria into one elongated mitochondrion. Mitochondrial fusion is controlled by mitofusins 1 and 2 (Mfn1, Mfn2) and by optic atrophy 1 (Opa1) [14, 15, 20, 6]. Mitochondrial fusion is important for electrical conductivity, keeping mitochondrial contents intact, and maintaining mitochondrial ATP and neuronal function. It is well established that neuronal mitochondrial half-life is about 2–3 weeks and damaged mitochondria are known to be cleared by mitophagy mechanisms [21]. The purpose of this article is to assess recent advancements of Drp1 research on mitochondria, and also Drp1 relationships to GSK3β, CDK5, p53, and microRNAs in AD pathogenesis.

Drp1 structure

Drp1 is critical for mitochondrial division and is essential for the distribution of mitochondria in axons, dendrites and synapses. Drp1 has been found in the brain, lung, heart, kidney, spleen, liver, hepatocytes testis and fibroblast of humans. Drp1 has also been found in plants, yeast, worms and rodents and other mammals [6]. As shown in Figure 1, the structure of Drp1 contains an N-terminal GTPase domain, a helical domain at the center and a GED domain at the c-terminus. The GTPase domain is highly conserved and reported to involve physiological relevance in [6]. Several researchers have independently sequenced cDNA clones of mammalian Drp1. Based on published studies and NCBI databases, the human Drp1 has been found to have several splice variants: variant 1 consists of 736 amino acids; in variant 2, exon 15 is spliced out; in variant 3, exons 15 and 16 are spliced out and have a total of 699 amino acids; variant 4 has 725 amino acids; variant 5, 710 amino acids; and variant 6, 749 amino acids [23–24]. Drp1 contains a highly conserved GTPase and is involved in various cellular functions. Similar to the human Drp1, the mouse Drp1 has been found in multiple variants: variant 1 consists of 712 amino acids; in variant 2, exon 3 is spliced out; and in variant 3, exons 15 and 16 are spliced out.

In yeast, Dnm1p controls mitochondrial morphology and distribution. However, disruption of the Dnm1p gene was found to cause the collapse of the mitochondrial membrane in one side of the cell [25]. The yeast genetics studies have identified several proteins, including Dnm1 as the central component and its receptor Fis1 and adaptors Mdv1, and Caf4. All these proteins are involved to maintain mitochondria structure and function [26–32]. The other 2 anchor proteins Num1 and Mdm36 are unique with dual functions: they connect Dnm1 to mitochondria and they regulate both mitochondrial division and positioning within the cell [33–36].

In additional studies of Dmn1 in Caenorhabditis elegans, overexpression of wild-type Drp1 caused fragmentation of mitochondria, leading to the overproduction of defective mitochondria in neurons. However, defective Drp1 has been found to increase mitochondrial fusion and it might block mitochondrial transport from the cellular body to the cellular axons, dendrites, and nerve terminals [37]. These various experiments shed light on the role of Drp1 in neurons.

Drp1 function

Drp1 is a multi-functional protein. Recent research findings suggest that Drp1 is involved in mitochondrial division, mitochondrial distribution, peroxisomal fragmentation, phosphorylation, SUMOlyation and ubiquitination. Figure 2 depicts functions of Drp1.

Drp1and mitochondrial division

Several lines of research suggest that Drp1 in yeast, C. elegans, and mammals is involved in mitochondrial division [26, 37–41] and that a reduction in Drp1 increases mitochondrial fusion and mitochondrial connectivity [26, 37, 41]. Studies focusing on the structure of Drp1 have found that purified human Drp1 self-assembles into multimeric, ring-like structures with dimensions, similar to those of dynamin multimers. These similarities between dynamin and Drp1 suggest that Drp1wraps around the constriction points of dividing mitochondria, analogous to dynamin collars at the necks of budding vesicles [41]. Other proteins, including fission 1 (Fis1), mitochondrial fission factor (Mff), and mitochondrial dynamics proteins of 49 and 51 kDa (MiD49 and MiD51) have been proposed to recruit and assemble Drp1 at the outer membrane [42, 43].

Studies of Drp1 in mammalian cells have investigated its expression [44]. Findings suggest that normal expression of Drp1 is critical for mitochondrial dynamics, and its mutant Drp1 overexpression (the dominant negative mutant Drp1) is associated with perinuclear clusters of mitochondria and the breakage of inter-mitochondrial connectivity, suggesting that mutant Drp1 overexpression may cause abnormal mitochondrial dynamics in mammalian cells [41]. Researchers have also found significant role of Drp1 and Mfn2 on mitochondrial morphology and cell survival in neuronal cells compared to non-neuronal cells [44]. In detail, knockdown or dominant-negative interference of endogenous Drp1 significantly increased mitochondrial length in both neurons and non-neuronal cells, but caused cell death only in cortical neurons. Conversely, depletion of the fusion protein, Mfn2, but not Mfn1, caused extensive mitochondrial fission and cell death. Thus, Drp1 and Mfn2 in normal cortical neurons not only regulate mitochondrial morphology, but are also required for cell survival [44].

In the last decade, researchers focused on mitochondria associated membranes’ (MAM) role in mitochondrial fission. It is well established that a close interaction between mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) that regulates calcium between these organelles [22,45–48]. Recently Area-Gomez and colleagues found elevated MAM functions at the ER-mitochondrial interface, which in turn caused increased crosstalk between mitochondria and ER in AD [49]. Hedskog and colleagues also found in the upregulation of MAM-associated proteins AD mouse models before the appearance of amyloid plaques [50]. Mfn2 and OPA1 mutations causes significant disruption of all the homeostatic mechanisms that operate at MAM interfaces and it is says MAM role of mitochondrial dynamics [51–54]. It is interesting to understand the interactions between ER and mitochondria and how these interactions promote mitochondrial fragmentation in relation to Drp1 in AD, other neurodegenerative diseases and also diseases that involve oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction [56–58]. In Friedman and colleagues proposed model, the ER tubules wrap around a mitochondrial segment and forms constrictions which in turn facilitates the recruitment of DRP1 at this area to complete mitochondrial fission process [55].

However established research studies revealed that, the depletion of mouse endogenous Drp1, caused cell death in cortical neurons and also significantly increased mitochondrial length in non-neuronal and neuronal cells [59–60]. Thus, Drp1 may play an important role not only in regulating mitochondrial morphology and mitochondrial division, but also in affecting cell survival in neurons.

Drp1 and mitochondrial distribution

Drp1 has been found to play an important role in mitochondrial distribution in mammalian cells [61–66]. Several investigators have summarized Drp1 role in mitochondrial distribution [6, 67–68]. Recent studies on Drp1’s role in mitochondrial distribution on AD are summarized below.

In AD neurons, Drp1 has been found to play a role in mitochondrial distribution. The intracellular distribution of mitochondria critically important to neuronal survival since the great morphological complexity and dependency on mitochondria for energy at multiple selective sites make neurons particularly sensitive to perturbations in mitochondrial distribution [69]. The loss of mitochondria from axon terminals leads to synaptic dysfunction in flies [70–72].

To understand mitochondrial distribution in AD neurons, Wang et al. (2009) silenced Drp1, OPA1, Mfn1 and Mfn2, and the overexpression of Fis1 in human neuroblastoma (M17) cells and studied mitochondrial distribution. They found in M17 cells that silenced Drp1, OPA1, Mfn1 and Mfn2 and overexpression of Fis1 conditions caused perinuclear accumulation of mitochondria leaving other, more remote areas of the cell devoid of mitochondria in AD neurons [20].

Using APP mice primary neurons and cellular, molecular and electron microscopy methods, Calkins et al. (2011) studied mitochondrial motility, content and distribution and mitochondrial transport. They found excessive fragmentation of mitochondria and accumulated in the soma of hippocampal neurons in APP neurons relative to wild-type neurons. Further, they also found reduced anterograde moving mitochondria, suggesting that abnormal distribution of mitochondria and synaptic degeneration in neurons that overexpress mutant APP and Aβ [73].

These studies suggest a significant reduction of mitochondrial density and uneven mitochondrial coverage in neuronal processes may lead to synaptic degeneration and neuronal dysfunction in AD neurons.

Drp1 and peroxisomal fragmentation

Several recent studies have revealed that Drp1 is involved in fragmenting peroxisomes in mammalian cells through Fis1 and Mff receptors, which have been found to be receptors for both Drp1 and peroxisomes [42, 60, 74]. In addition, MiD49 and MiD51 have been found to be adaptor proteins for peroxisomes and mitochondria [42], which leads to the question whether Fis1, Mff, MiD49, and MiD51 are related to each other and to Drp1.

Palmer et al. (2013) investigated whether MiD49, MiD51, and Mff have a role in mitochondrial dynamics and to what extent they are involved in Drp1 in mitochondrial fragmentation and function. They found that the overexpression of these adaptor proteins caused the elongation of peroxisomes [42]. Unlike Fis1 and Mff, MiD49 and MiD51 were not targeted to the peroxisomal surface, suggesting that they specifically act to facilitate Drp1-directed fission at mitochondria. Moreover, when MiD49 or MiD51 was targeted to the surface of peroxisomes and lysosomes Drp1 was specifically recruited to these organelles. In addition, the Drp1 recruitment activity of MiD49/51, appeared stronger than that of Mff or Fis1. Based on these findings, Palmer et al. concluded that MiD49 and MiD51 can act independently of Mff and Fis1 in Drp1 recruitment and suggest that they provide specificity to the division of mitochondria [42].

In another study, Wakabayashi et al. (2009) found peroxisomes were elongated in Drp1-null embryonic fibroblasts [60]. Although Drp1 controls the division of mitochondria and peroxisomes, it is likely that the embryonic lethality of Drp1−/− mice results from defects in mitochondrial division rather than peroxisomal defects because mice lacking Pex11β, a peroxisomal protein specifically required for peroxisomal division, die after birth [75]. In another study, Koch et al. (2003) proposed a direct role for Drp1 in peroxisomal fission and in the maintenance of peroxisomal morphology in mammalian cells [74]. Koch et al. (2005) also demonstrated the role of human fission 1 in peroxisomal growth and division; In conclusion, they found hFis1 is needed for targeting peroxisomes and mitochondria; hFis1 was found to promote peroxisome division upon ectopic expression, whereas the silencing of Fis1 with RNA inhibited fission and caused the tubulation of peroxisomes [76].

These studies suggest that Drp1 has a significant role in the fragmentation of peroxisomes and tabulation. However, further research still needed to understand functional and physiological importance of Drp1 in peroxisomal fragmentation, particularly in disease state such as AD.

Drp1 phosphorylation and mitochondrial functional changes

Phosphorylation of Drp1 appears to be involved in mitochondrial fragmentation in both normal and disease states. Reddy [77, 78] has summarized Drp1 phosphorylation sites and their involvement in mitochondrial fragmentation and fusion in neurodegenerative diseases, such as AD and HD.

Drp1 phosphorylation at Ser 656 is essential for maintaining the shape of mitochondria and regulating mitochondrial apoptosis [79]. Drp1 phosphorylation at Ser 637 may alter Drp1 function and mitochondrial morphology in turn it regulates mitochondrial division [80]. Upon the induction of apoptosis, Drp1 translocates from the cytosol to the mitochondrial outermembrane, where it induces mitochondrial division. On the other hand, inhibition of Drp1 by overexpression of a dominant-negative mutant counteracts the conversion to a puncti form mitochondrial phenotype, prevents the loss of the mitochondrial membrane potential and the release of cytochrome c, and reveals a reproducible swelling of mitochondria. In addition, the inhibition of Drp1 has been found to block cell death by implicating mitochondrial fission during apoptosis [81]. These findings suggest that Drp1 activation is crucial for mitochondrial fragmentation, which in turn initiates apoptotic cell death. In contrast, Bax-induced mitochondrial fragmentation is required for the release of cytochrome c, but failed to block mitochondrial fission that is associated with Bax/Bak activation. This suggests that Bax/Bak-initiated remodeling of mitochondrial networks and cytochrome c release is separate events and that the proteins in the Bcl-2 family influence mitochondrial fission-fusion dynamics, independent of apoptosis [82–83]. Interestingly, cristae remodeling also plays an important role in cytochrome c release during intrinsic apoptosis. Drp1 normally located in the cytoplasm but during mitochondrial division it translocate to mitochondrial outermembrane and binds with Fis1 (adaptor to mitochondrial outer membrane). Opa1 (a dynamin-related protein that resides in the inner mitochondrial membrane) has some distinct molecular and genetic functions in regulating mitochondrial dynamics and in cristae remodeling during apoptosis as the cristae is the rich source for cytochrome C. So down regulation of Opa1 not only causes mitochondrial fragmentation but also alters the shape of the cristae [84–85].

These findings suggest that Drp1 activation is necessary for mitochondrial fragmentation and that Drp1 activation occurs as an early event in apoptotic cell death. Cytochrome c release is dependent of activities of Bax and Bak. Bax activation is not associated with mitochondrial outer-membrane permeabilization. Further research is needed to confirm these results and further research is still needed to understand Drp1 phosphorylation in AD.

Drp1 and SUMOylation

Many researchers have sought to determine the role of Drp1 in SUMOylation, and found that SUMOylation proteins interact with Drp1, and that Drp1 in conjunction with these proteins may regulate mitochondrial fission [86–95].

Although SUMOylation is dispensable for development of neural cell types, this regulatory mechanism is necessary for neuronal survival. Fu et al., (2009) found a causal link of SUMO modification enzymes to apoptosis of neural cells, suggesting a new pathogenic mechanism for neurodegeneration [96]. Harder et al. (2004) identified 2 Drp1-interacting proteins (Ubc9 and Sumo1) and demonstrated mitochondrial fragmentation [91]. Analysis of endogenous Drp1 levels indicated that the overexpression of Sumo1 specifically protects Drp1 from degradation. This overexpression may partially account for the excess in mitochondrial fragmentation [91–92]. Figueroa-Romero et al. (2009) investigated Drp1 regulation in conjunction with SUMOylation of small ubiquitin like modifier- SUMO proteins and findings suggest that SUMOylation of Drp1 is linked to the activity cycle and is influenced by Drp1 localization [97]. Zunino, et al. and Braschi et al. (2009) studied Drp1 regulators of SUMOylation proteins and has shown pivotal role in mitochondrial fragmentation. These studies shed the light on interorganellar communication during the cell cycle [93,94].

Further research is needed to understand the role of Drp1 in SUMOylation, particularly in diseases such as AD.

Drp1 and ubiquitination

Drp1 has been reported to ubiquitinate with mitochondrial E3 ubiquitin ligase MARCH5 and to regulate mitochondrial fission [98,99].

To understand the role of Drp1 in ubiquitination, used immunostaining and biochemical methods Karbowski et al. (2007) studied Drp1 association with the MARCH5 protein. They found that Drp1 interferes with the mutant proteins MARCH5, and MARCH5 RNA induces an abnormal elongation and interconnection of mitochondria, suggesting that MARCH5 mutations interfere with mitochondrial division [98]. In another study, Park et al. (2010) studied the connection between decreased MARCH5 protein and mitochondrial connectivity. They found highly interconnected and elongated mitochondria in cells with reduced MARCH5 protein. Based on these observations, they concluded that a lack of MARCH5 results in mitochondrial elongation, which blocks Drp1 activity, in turn promoting cellular senescence and/or an accumulation of Mfn1 in mitochondria [99]. In continuation, Park et al. (2014) also studied MARCH5-mediated quality control on acetylated Mfn1, which facilitates cell survival and mitochondrial homeostasis in mitochondrial stress conditions [100]. Drp1 and mitofusins proteins are crucial for mitochondrial division and fusion. Nakamura et al. [101] studied interaction between Drp1 and MARCH-V by immunoprecipitation studies and demonstrated interaction of MARCH-V with ubiquitinated Drp1 and Mfn2. Their results have shown that MARCH-V plays an important role in mitochondrial dynamics through Drp1 and Mfn2 [101]. Interestingly, mitochondrial dynamics also regulated mitochondrial ubiquitin ligase (MITOL) through MAM and Mfn2. Sugiura et al. (2013) identified K192 in the GTPase domain of Mfn2 as a major ubiquitination site for MITOL. Later, K192R mutation blocked oligomerization event in the presence of GTP. Finally these researchers’ results suggested that MITOL regulates ER tethering (at MAM) to mitochondria by activating Mfn2 via K192 ubiquitination [102].

Overall, these studies suggest that Drp1 is involved with ubiquitination. However, it is unclear the mechanistic role of Drp1 in AD and other neurodegenerative diseases.

Drp1 and its relationship with glycogen synthase kinaseβ in Alzheimer’s disease

Glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3) is a serine/threonine protein kinase. GSK3 is omnipresent in all tissues, from yeast to mammals, but it is primarily present in the brain. GSK3 is a multifunctional serine threonine kinase, exists in 2 paralogs: GSK3α and GSK3β. GSK3α has the molecular weight of 51kDa, and GSK3β, 46kDa (Figure 3).

GSK-3 was first isolated from skeletal muscle in 1980, at which time it was identified as one of 5 enzymes capable of phosphorylating glycogen synthase [103]. GSK3β are almost identical in the catalytic kinase domain but are differentiated in the N-terminal and C-terminal regions [104–106]. The activities of these 2 paralogs are positively regulated by the phosphorylation of Tyr 279 and Tyr 216, and are negatively regulated by the phosphorylation of Ser21 and Ser9 [107]. Unlike GSK3β, neither physiological functions nor pathological roles of GSK-3α are well understood. GSK3β has been implicated in multiple biological processes, such as apoptosis, cell differentiation, insulin response, embryonic development, neurogenesis, neuronal polarization, neurite outgrowth, and the regulation of axon-dendrite morphology [108]. Increasing evidence suggests that GSK3β dysregulation is implicated in many diseases, including AD [109–113], cancer [114–116], diabetes [117], inflammatory diseases [118], schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, several mood disorders [119], and mitochondrial diseases [120] (Figure 3).

Of the 2 paralogs, GSK3β is more likely involved in AD pathogenesis. In AD patients and animal models, GSK3β was found to be elevated and increased activity of GSK3β is directly linked to increased levels of Aβ production, which was found to be associated with Aβ deposits, formation of tau phosphorylation and neurofibrillary tangles, and synaptic damage [109,111,121–123]. The possible explanation for the elevation of GSK3β in AD is due to the association of Aβ with NMDA receptors, wnt signaling and insulin [124]. Activated GSK-3β was found to cause tau phosphorylation, NFT formation, and neuronal cell death, whereas the blockade of GSK-3β expression (by antisense oligonucleotides) or its activity by lithium or other GSK3β inhibitors was found to inhibit Aβ-induced toxicity and tau phosphorylation [125–127].

There are limited studies have shown association between GSK3β and Drp1. Initially, Hong et al., (1998) demonstrated association between GSK3β and Drp1 [128]. Chen et al., (2000) reported in their functional characterization studies that this Drp1 variant lacks a proline-rich domain on its C-terminal regions and this region was identified as a critical region for interacting with GSK3β [129]. Chou et al. (2012), studied functional consequences of GSK3β-mediated phosphorylation of Drp1 at the Ser693 site in addition to Ser616 and Ser637 located within the GED domain [130]. Phosphorylation of Drp1 at Ser 637 prevents mitochondrial fragmentation; conversely phosphorylation of Drp1 at Ser616 promotes mitochondrial fragmentation. In this study, they clearly demonstrated that GSK3β-mediated phosphorylation at the Ser693 site induces elongated mitochondrial morphology and exhibits an anti-apoptotic effect against H2O2-induced apoptosis rather than inducing autophagy [130]. Prevention of mitochondrial fragmentation is regulated by cAMPK and promotion is carried out by CAMK1α (Figures 4 and 5). But, recent consensus would be that CDK1/Cyclin B phosphorylates Drp1 at Ser616 to stimulate mitochondrial fission (131).

Chou et al., (2012) studied interaction between GSK3β and Drp1 by performing co-immunoprecipitation, yeast 2-hybrid experiments, co-localization experiments and gel overlay assay. In yeast 2-hybrid experiments, authors created different truncated Drp1 fragments for mapping its binding region with GSK3β [130]. They found wild-type and truncated 2, 3, and 5 fragments of Drp1 interact with GSK3β, but not the truncated 1, 4 and 6 fragments. Their findings suggest that Drp1 fragment (634–690) interacts with GSK3β. Further they confirmed these interactions using co-localized studies. Taken together, these findings suggest that Drp1 (634–390) directly interacts with GSK3β [130]. Chou et al., (2012) further found Drp1 Ser693 is a GSK3β phosphorylated site [130]. Details of Drp1 phosphorylated sites by GSK3β were summarized in Table 1.

Recently, Yan et al. (2015) studied GSK3β dependent Drp1 phosphorylation by using electron microscopy, gene expression analysis, transfection and biochemical methods. These researchers identified Drp1 phosphorylation at Ser40 and Ser44 was found to increase Drp1 GTPase activity and mitochondrial distribution. Moreover, when Yan et al. transfected neurons with Ser40 and Ser44, phosphomimic Drp1 increased mitochondria fragmentation and neurons with increased mitochondrial fragmentation were more vulnerable to Aβ-induced apoptosis [1]. Therefore, the inhibition of GSK3β induced Drp1 phosphorylation, which may be an effective way to protect neurons from Aβ toxicity. Therefore, in this study researchers blocked GSK3β-induced Drp1 phosphorylation with the artificial polypeptide TAT-Drp1-SpS and found significant reduction in Aβ-induced neuronal apoptosis in cultured neurons. The administration of TAT-Drp1-SpS in the Cornu Ammonis 1 region of the hippocampus significantly reduced Aβ burden and rescued the memory deficits in AD transgenic mice [1].

These findings suggest GSK3β plays a pivotal role in mitochondrial fragmentation by Drp1 phosphorylation in AD neurons and it has been suggested that GSK3β inhibitors are potential drug targets to treat patients with AD. However, further research is needed to confirm the interactions between GSKβ and Drp1/Opa1 along with mitochondrial fusion proteins such as mfn1/mfn2 in AD and also other neurodegenerative diseases.

Alzheimer’s disease

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a progressive, age-dependent neurodegenerative disease characterized by the progressive decline of memory, cognitive functions, and changes in behavior and personality. The prevalence of AD is high among aged individuals: 13% of individuals 65 years old have AD and 50% of individuals 85 years of age and older have AD [105]. Histopathological examination of AD postmortem brains revealed that the presence of extracellular neuritic plaques, intracellular neurofibrillary tangles and neuronal loss. AD is also associated with the loss of synapses, oxidative stress &amp; mitochondrial structural and functional abnormalities, inflammatory responses, changes in cholinergic neurotransmission, hormonal changes and cell cycle abnormalities [3, 16, 20, 64, 132–146] (Figure 6). Genetic mutations are responsible for causing early onset, familial AD for a small proportion of total AD patients, but the causal factors for the vast majority of late-onset, sporadic AD cases are still largely unknown. Several factors, including aging, lifestyle, diet, environmental exposure, apolipoprotein allele E4 genotype, and several other genetic variants reported to involve in late-onset AD [141–142].

Mitochondrial oxidative damage and synaptic dysfunction are early events in AD pathogenesis. Increasing evidence suggests that mitochondrial abnormalities are largely involved in AD progression, and pathogenesis, including 1) defective glucose metabolism in AD brains, 2) reduced mitochondrial enzyme activities in AD, 3) mitochondrial DNA defects in AD [147–150], 4) abnormal mitochondrial gene expressions in AD brains [151] and AD transgenic mice [152], abnormal mitochondrial dynamics 3, 20, 64, 73,139,140,153,154].

Oxidative stress and Mitochondrial Dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease

Several lines of evidence suggest that mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress have been extensively reported in AD pathogenesis:

AD postmortem brains - Increased production of free radicals and lipid peroxidation, elevated oxidative DNA protein damages and decreased ATP production in postmortem AD brains relative to brains from non-demented healthy subjects [140, 155–158].

AD mouse models - several studies reported increased production of free radicals and lipid peroxidation and reduced levels ATP, cytochrome oxidative enzymatic activity in affected brain regions [66, 155, 159–160].

AD cells and primary neurons – Increasing studies found that increased levels of lipid peroxidation and free radical production, and reduced levels of mitochondrial ATP, cell viability and cytochrome oxidase activity in primary neurons from AD transgenic mice [73] and neuronal cells treated with Aβ peptide [20, 64, 139, 159, 160].

These studies strongly suggest that mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress are important features of AD pathogenesis.

Aβ and phosphorylated tau association with mitochondria in Alzheimer’s disease neurons

Increasing evidence suggests that mutant APP and Aβ are associated with mitochondria in AD postmortem brains and also brains of several lines transgenic AβAPP mice [158, 159, 161–174]. This abnormal association of mutant APP and Aβ with mitochondria induces free radical production and causes mitochondrial dysfunction.

Recently, several groups found N-terminal tau (20–22 kDa) is associated with mitochondria [175–177]. A 22–22kDa N-terminal tau is enriched in human mitochondria from cryopreserved synaptosomes of AD brains and that the amount of tau is correlated with pathological synaptic changes and mitochondrial dysfunction in AD neurons [175].

Findings from these studies suggest that abnormal association between Aβ and mitochondria, and tau and mitochondria, causes mitochondrial dysfunction in AD pathogenesis.

Abnormal mitochondrial dynamics in relation to elevated Drp1 in AD

Abnormal mitochondrial dynamics and synaptic damage have been reported as early cellular changes in AD pathogenesis [3, 20, 73, 139, 140, 153, 154, 178].

Using human neuroblastoma (M17) cells that express mutant human APP and/or wild-type APP and molecular &amp; cellular and electron microscopy studies, Zhu’s group [178] have studied mitochondrial dynamics in AD. They found 40% M17 cells overexpressing WT APP (APPwt M17 cells) and more than 80% M17 cells overexpressing APPswe mutant (APPswe M17 cells) displayed alterations in mitochondrial morphology and distribution. Specifically, mitochondria exhibited a fragmented structure and an abnormal distribution accumulating around the perinuclear area [178]. These mitochondrial changes were abolished by treatment with beta-site APP-cleaving enzyme inhibitor IV. From a functional perspective, APP overexpression affected mitochondria at multiple levels, including elevating ROS levels, decreasing mitochondrial membrane potential, and reducing ATP production, and also caused neuronal dysfunction such as differentiation deficiency upon retinoic acid treatment. They also found reduced Drp1 and Opa1 and increased levels of Fis1 in APPwt and APPswe M17 cells. They concluded that overexpression of APP, through amyloid beta production, causes an imbalance of mitochondrial fission/fusion that results in mitochondrial fragmentation and abnormal distribution, which contributes to mitochondrial and neuronal dysfunction [178].

In the next study, the same group [20] studied abnormal mitochondrial dynamics by investigating the changes in the expression of mitochondrial fission and fusion proteins in AD brain. They found oligomeric amyloid-beta-derived diffusible ligands (ADDLs) caused mitochondrial fragmentation and reduced mitochondrial density in neuronal processes. More importantly, ADDL-induced synaptic loss particularly reduced dendritic spines and PSD95 in M17 neurons that correlated with abnormal mitochondrial distribution [20].

More recently, the Reddy laboratory has reported abnormal mitochondrial dynamics (increased fission and decreased fusion), Aβ interaction with Drp1, increased mitochondrial fragmentation and impaired axonal transport and synaptic degeneration [38, 39, 73, 139, 140]. These abnormalities increased with disease progression.

Using electron and confocal microscopy, gene expression analysis, and biochemical methods, Manczak et al., (2010) studied mitochondrial structure and function and neurite outgrowth in mouse neuroblastoma (N2a) cells treated with Aβ peptide 25–35 [139]. They found increased expressions of mitochondrial fission genes and decreased expression of fusion genes in cells treated with Aβ peptide relative to untreated cells [139]. Electron microscopy of the N2a cells incubated with Aβ revealed a significantly increased number of mitochondria, indicating that Aβ fragments mitochondria. Biochemical analysis revealed that function is defective in mitochondria. Neurite outgrowth was significantly decreased in Aβ-incubated N2a cells, indicating that Aβ affects neurite outgrowth [139]. These observations suggest that Aβ impairs mitochondrial dynamics, fragments mitochondria and causes synaptic dysfunction and neurite outgrowth, ultimately leading to neuronal damage.

Using primary neurons from a well-characterized AβPP mice (Tg2576 line), Reddy’s group [73] studied mitochondrial activity, including mitochondrial dynamics (fission-fusion gene expressions and protein levels), mitochondrial morphology and mitochondrial function and total number of motile mitochondria and axonal transport of mitochondria [73]. They also studied the nature of Aβ-induced synaptic alterations, and cell death in primary neurons from AβPP mice. They found increased mRNA levels of fission genes – Drp1 and Fis1 and reduced levels of fusion genes Mfn1, Mfn2 and Opa1, and reduced mRNA levels of synaptic genes in AβPP neurons relative to wild-type neurons, indicating the presence of abnormal mitochondrial dynamics in neurons expressing human mutant APP [73]. Further, significantly reduced total motile mitochondria and anterograde moving mitochondria AβPP neurons compared with wild-type neurons. Transmission electron microscopy revealed a large number of small mitochondria and structurally damaged mitochondria, with broken cristae in AβPP primary neurons. They also found an increased accumulation of oligomeric Aβ and increased apoptotic neuronal death in the primary AβPP neurons relative to the wild-type neurons. Their results revealed an accumulation of intraneuronal oligomeric Aβ, leading to mitochondrial and synaptic deficiencies, and ultimately causing neurodegeneration in AβPP cultures [73].

In their next study, Reddy’s group [140] measured mRNA and protein levels of mitochondrial structural genes in the frontal cortex of patients with early, definite and severe AD and in control subjects [140]. They found increased expressions of the mitochondrial fission genes Drp1 and Fis1 and decreased expression of the mitochondrial fusion genes Mfn1, Mfn2, Opa1 and Tomm40. The matrix gene CypD was up-regulated in AD patients relative to control subjects. Results from their real-time RT-PCR and immunoblotting analyses suggest that abnormal mitochondrial dynamics increase as AD progresses [140].

In 2013, Swerdlow’s group [154] studied bioenergetic function using cytoplasmic hybrid (cybrid) cell lines of AD patients. They transferred mitochondria from MCI, AD and control subject platelets to mtDNA-depleted SH-SY5Y cells. They found mitochondrial fission-fusion balance shifted towards increased fission in the AD and MCI cybrids – in other words, increased levels of Drp1 and Fis1 and reduced levels of Mfn1, Mfn2 and Opa1 in AD cybrids. They also found changes in oxygen consumption, respiratory coupling and glucose utilization in AD and MCI cybrids relative to control cybrids. They conclude reduced bioenergetic function is present during very early AD, is not brain-limited and induces protean retrograde responses that likely have both adaptive and mal-adaptive consequences [154].

Findings these studies suggest that the presence of Aβ-induced abnormal mitochondrial dynamics, reduced total and anterograde moving mitochondria, synaptic damage and defective mitochondrial function in AD neurons.

Drp1 interaction with Aβ and phosphorylated Tau in Alzheimer’s disease

The Reddy Laboratory next studied the relationship between Drp1 and Aβ, and Drp1 and phosphorylated tau in AD neurons [38, 140].

Using co-immunoprecipitation and immunofluorescence analysis, they studied interaction between Drp1 and Aβ. Drp1 immunoprecipitation and immunofluorescence analysis of Aβ antibodies revealed that Drp1 interacts with Aβ monomers and oligomers in AD patients, and these abnormal interactions are increased with disease progression [140].

Further, using co-immunoprecipitation and immunofluorescence analyses and AD postmortem brains and cortical tissues from APP, APP/PS1 and 3XTg.AD mice, they also studied physical interaction between Drp1 and phosphorylated tau. They found physical interaction between Drp1 and phosphorylated tau [38].

Findings from these studies suggest that Drp1 interacts with Aβ and phosphorylated tau, likely leading to excessive mitochondrial fragmentation, and mitochondrial and synaptic deficiencies, ultimately possibly leading to neuronal damage and cognitive decline.

Nakanishi et al., [179] also supports a role for hyperphosphorylated tau in mitochondrial impairment. By overexpression of the postsynaptic protein i.e α1-takusan (via interaction with PSD-95, mitigates oligomeric Aβinduced synaptic loss) inhibits Aβ-induced tau hyperphosphorylation and prevents Aβ-induced mitochondrial fragmentation in cortical and hippocampal cultured neurons.

Treatment designed to reduce the expression of Drp1, Aβ and/or phosphorylated tau may decrease the interaction between Drp1 and phosphorylated tau and the interaction between Drp1 and Aβ, may protect AD neurons from toxic insults of excessive Drp1, Aβ and/or phosphorylated tau [179].

Drp1 knockout mice and neuronal survival

The function of Drp1 was studied in Drp1 knock out mice, neural specific (NS) Drp1 (−/−) and homozygote Drp1 knockout mice. Two groups independently studied the function of Drp1 by creating knockout mouse models [59, 60]. These groups studied synapse formation, generation of synapses, neuronal structure in addition with biochemistry and molecular biology of both heterozygote and homozygote knockout mice.

Ishihara et al., (2009) group found the physiological significance of Drp1-dependent mitochondrial fission in tissue development, especially in brains of Drp1-knockout mice [45]. The cell lines that reduced from Drp1−/− mice has shown highly interconnected and perinuclearly aggregated mitochondria. In striking contrast, primary cultured neuronal cells from ND-Drp1−/− mice has shown not only severe defects in synapse formation but also had a high sensitivity to Ca2+-dependent apoptosis [59]. These results suggest that Drp1-dependent mitochondrial fission is dispensable for the function of non-polarized cells, but indispensable for neurons (polarized cells) to maintain the normal spatiotemporal properties of mitochondria that are essential for the responses to Ca2+ or synaptic functions. In addition, use of the established cell lines from Drp1−/− mice has clarified role of Bax/Bak-regulated apoptosis via mitochondrial fission. These results confirmed Drp1-dependent mitochondrial fission is not essential for the release of cytochrome c and the subsequent progression of apoptosis, but Drp1 facilitates these processes [59].

Bax/Bak mediated mitochondrial outer-membrane permeabilization to a class of intermembrane space-localized proteins [180, 181] occurring before the release of cytochrome c is not affected by Drp1 knockout, which is consistent with observations in Drp1-knockdown cells [182, 183]. Intriguingly, contrast studies have been reported that a chemical inhibitor of Drp1, mdivi-1, potently blocks the Bax/Bak dependent release of both Smac/Diablo and cytochrome c [184]. It could be speculated that Drp1 affects Bax/Bak activity to modulate structural or conformational changes in the mitochondrial inner membrane through interaction between the fusion/fission machineries of the mitochondrial outer and inner membranes [184].

In another study, Wakabayashi et al., (2009) developed complete and tissue-specific mouse knockouts of Drp1 [60]. These researchers found homozygous deletion of Drp1 lead to embryonic lethality Homozygote knockout Drp1 mice died by embryonic day 11.5, but this embryonic lethality was not likely caused by ATP deprivation, as Drp1-null cells showed normal intracellular ATP levels [60]. Homozygote knockout Drp1 mice embryos also have shown defective in placental development and decreased cardimyocyte beat rates. The timing of Drp1 (−/−) embryonic lethality is similar to the timing of lethality in mice defective in Mfn1, Mfn2, and Opa1, which are all necessary for mitochondrial fusion [185–187]. These observations suggest that proper mitochondrial dynamics are critical for embryonic development in mice.

Drp1 was knocked out in the cerebellum and surrounding regions using brain-specific Drp1KO with En1- Cre recombinase and floxed alleles of Drp1 [60]. Development of the cerebellum was dramatically decreased, and the mice died within 24 h of birth. In Drp1KO cerebella, proliferation of neurons was greatly decreased, and the number of Purkinje cells was dramatically decreased [60]. Similarly, when Drp1 was deleted in a broad region of the brain using Nes-Cre recombinase, brain development was inhibited and many apoptotic cells were observed in the premature, superficial layer neurons and the deep cortical layers [59]. In neurons isolated from Nes-Cre Drp1KO mice, the size of mitochondria was increased and the number was decreased [59]. In particular, synapses lacked mitochondria, and synapse formation was defective in these neurons in culture [59]. These observations are consistent with findings in Drosophila mutants carrying mutations in Drp1 [188]. Drp1 mutant flies failed to distribute mitochondria at the neuromuscular junctions, leading to defects in mobilization of the vesicle reserve pool, likely due to decreased amounts of ATP in this region [188]. As a result, when Drp1 mutants were exposed to high frequency stimulation to induce continuous neurosecretion, the mutants were unable to maintain normal levels of neurotransmission [188]. In mammals, Drp1 may have a more direct role in endocytosis of synaptic vesicles. Drp1 forms protein complexes with components of clathrin-coated vesicles and controls the size of endocytic vesicles in response to synaptic stimulation [189].

Recently, Reddy laboratory [38,39] studied effects of partial Drp1 reduction on mitochondrial function and synaptic activity. They sought to characterize synaptic, dendritic and mitochondrial proteins, and mitochondrial function and GTPase enzymatic activity, in Drp1 heterozygote knockout mice. Interestingly, they found no significant changes in synaptic, dendritic, and mitochondrial proteins in the Drp1 heterozygote knockout mice compared to the wild-type mice. Further, mitochondrial function and GTPase enzymatic activity appeared to be normal. However, H2O2 and lipid peroxidation levels were significantly reduced in the Drp1 heterozygote knockout mice compared to the wild-type mice. They speculated these findings suggest that partial Drp1 reduction does not affect mitochondrial and synaptic viability [38, 39].

Overall, these knockout studies revealed that Drp1 is essential for mitochondrial division, mitochondrial distribution, mitochondrial morphogenesis, apoptosis and cell survival.

Drp1 reduction in Alzheimer’s disease mouse models

There are very limited numbers of studies about the research on Drp1 using AD mouse models. Yan et al. (2015) did their research to find the role of Drp1 along with GSK3β in mitochondrial fragmentation in double mutant APPSwe/PSEN1dE9 (APP/PS1) transgenic mice. They used co-immunoprecipitation, phosphorylation assays, GTP assays, TUNEL analysis, electron microscopy, Aβ ELISA, Aβ plaque and behavioral analysis (Morris water test) studies on AD transgenic mice. They found GSK3β plays crucial in role mitochondrial fragmentation for causing Aβ neurotoxicity in AD. They concluded that GSK3β plays the pivotal role in the phosphorylation of Drp1 in mitochondrial fragmentation and thus influence mitochondrial dynamics. This mitochondrial fragmentation causes spatial learning and memory deficits, neuronal apoptosis and Aβ mediated neurotoxicity [1].

To understand the beneficial effects of partial reduction of Drp1 in AD pathogenesis, currently, Reddy laboratory is conducting 2 studies.

In the first study, they crossed Drp1+/− mice with AβPP transgenic mice (Tg2576 line) and created double mutant mice – Drp1+/−xAβPP [SFN, 2015 Program # 131.13/D21]. Using real-time RT-PCR and immunoblotting analyses, we measured mRNA expressions and protein levels of genes related to the mitochondrial dynamics – Drp1 and Fis1 (fission), Mfn1, Mfn2 and Opa1 (fusion), CypD (Matrix), mitochondrial biogenesis - Nrf1, Nrf2, PGC1α and TFAM and synaptic - synaptophysin, PSD95, synapsin 1, synaptobrevin 1, neurogranin, GAP43 and synaptopodin in brain tissues from 6-month-old Drp1+/−, AβPP, Drp1+/−xAβPP and wild-type mice. Using biochemical methods, we also studied mitochondrial function and measured soluble Aβ in brain tissues from all lines of mice in our study. They found decreased mRNA expressions and protein levels of fission genes Drp1 and Fis1 and matrix gene CypD, and increased levels of fusion genes Mfn1, Mfn2 and Opa1, Nrf1, Nrf2, PGC1α, TFAM (biogenesis) and synaptophysin, PSD95, synapsin 1, synaptobrevin 1, neurogranin, GAP43 and synaptopodin (synaptic) in 6-month-old Drp1+/−xAβPP mice relative to AβPP mice. Mitochondrial functional assays revealed that mitochondrial dysfunction is reduced in Drp1+/−xAβPP mice relative to AβPP mice, suggesting that reduced Drp1 enhances mitochondrial function in AD neurons. Sandwich ELISA assay revealed that soluble Aβ levels were significantly reduced in Drp1+/−xAβPP mice relative to AβPP mice, indicating that reduced Drp1 decreases soluble Aβ production in AD progression [SFN, 2015 Program # 131.13/D21].

In the second study, Reddy’s group [SFN, 2015 Program # 131.09/D17] crossed Drp1+/− mice with tau transgenic mice (P301L line) and created double mutant mice – Drp1+/−xTau. Using real-time RT-PCR and immunoblotting analyses, they measured mRNA expressions and protein levels of genes related to the mitochondrial dynamics – Drp1 and Fis1, Mfn1, Mfn2 and Opa1, CypD, mitochondrial biogenesis Nrf1, Nrf2, PGC1α and TFAM and synaptic genes synaptophysin, PSD95, synapsin 1, synaptobrevin 1, neurogranin, GAP43 and synaptopodin in brain tissues from 6-month-old Drp1+/−, Tau, Drp1+/−xTau and wild-type mice. Using biochemical methods, we also studied mitochondrial function and measured soluble and phosphorylated tau in brain tissues from all lines of mice in this study. They found reduced mRNA expressions and protein levels of fission genes Drp1 and Fis1, and increased levels of fusion genes Mfn1, Mfn2 and Opa1, biogenesis genes Nrf1, Nrf2, PGC1α, TFAM, and synaptic genes synaptophysin, PSD95, synapsin 1, synaptobrevin 1, neurogranin, GAP43 and synaptopodin genes in 6-month-old Drp1+/−xTau mice relative to AβPP mice. Mitochondrial functional assays revealed that mitochondrial dysfunction is reduced in Drp1+/−xTau mice relative to tau mice, suggesting that reduced Drp1 enhances mitochondrial function in AD neurons. Measurement of phosphorylated tau studies revealed that soluble and phosphorylated tau levels were significantly reduced in Drp1+/−xTau mice relative to Tau mice, indicating that reduced Drp1 decreases soluble and phosphorylated tau production in AD progression [SFN, 2015 Program # 131.09/D17].

Taken together, these findings suggest that reduced Drp1 protects against Aβ toxicity, phosphorylated tau, mitochondrial dysfunction and synaptic damage in AD. These findings also suggest that partial reduction of Drp1 decreases the production of soluble and phosphorylated tau, reduces mitochondrial dysfunction, and maintains mitochondrial dynamics, enhances mitochondrial biogenesis and synaptic activity. Findings of this study may have implications for the development of Drp1 based therapeutics for patients with AD and other tauopathies.

Drp1 and CDK5 in Alzheimer’s disease

Accumulated Aβ causes hyperactivation of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors (NMDARs) which triggers downstream pathways such as phosphorylated tau (or p-tau), caspases, a cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdk5)/(Drp1), calcineurin/PP2B, PP2A, GSK-3β. These events cause endocytosis of AMPA receptors (AMPARs) as well as NMDARs through calcium ions (Figure 7). Ultimately, these pathways lead to consequent synaptic dysfunction, mitochondrial dynamics dysregulation, bioenergetics compromise and impaired long-term potentiation, and cognitive decline [190].

Using cultured primary cortical neurons, Cho et al., (2009) studied found Aβ protein triggered mitochondrial fission, synaptic loss, and neuronal damage, in part via S-nitrosylation of Drp1. Homology modeling of human Drp1 and Quantification of dendritic spine density analysis [191].

Qu et al., (2011 and 2012) studied the role of found that transnitrosylation from Cdk5 to Drp1 would be associated change in Gibbs free energy. According to their biotin-switch data, it has shown that SNO-Drp1 levels are elevated in Cdk5-transfected cells, which cause massive mitochondrial fragmentation compared with control plasmid-transfected cells. These findings suggest that transnitrosylation of NO from Cdk5 to Drp1 might be involved in the pathway to SNO-Cdk5–mediated spine loss, and eventually results in neuronal cell death AD [192, 193].

In cerebrocortical cultures, Molokanova et al. (2014) found extra synaptic NMDAR-mediated increase in NO can produce S-nitrosylation of Drp1 and Cdk5 (by biotin sandwich assay) targets known to contribute to Aβ-induced synaptic damage. In support of a pathological role for S-nitrolyation of Drp1, Drp1 is apparently S-nitrosylated aberrantly because it is found at high levels in postmortem human AD brains but not in control brains [190–191], as well as in peripheral blood lymphocytes of AD but not control patients [194].

All these findings suggest that increased levels of NO associated with aberrant formation of SNO-Cdk5 and SNO-Drp1, leading to the dysregulation of downstream pathways, synaptic dysfunction, and finally neuronal damage and neuronal death in AD. Taken together, these findings also suggest that SNO-Drp1 may represent a potential therapeutic target for protecting neurons and their synapses in AD.

Drp1 and P53 in Alzheimer’s disease

Oxidative stress is the consequence of mitochondrial dysfunction is majorly associated with the pathogenesis of AD, PD, HD, ALS and aging [6, 11, 12, 14, 195, 196]. This oxidative stress is the generation of DNA damages with subsequent induction of the p53 a tumor suppressor protein [197]. Thus, induction of the p53 protein in neurons has been associated for a diverse array of neurological diseases including AD, PD and HD disease, and as well as nervous system injury [197–199]. Numerous lines of evidence suggest that p53 induction is responsible for neuronal damage. Mitochondria change size and shape by undergoing fission and fusion, processes that are orchestrated by a well conserved cellular machinery comprised of dynamin-related GTPases, Drp1 for fission and mitofusins (Mfn1/2), and Opa1 for fusion [38, 39, 63, 77, 78, 200].

Several studies demonstrated that diverse forms of acute neurotoxic stress commonly cause mitochondrial fission and that enhancing the expression of fusion proteins or suppressing Drp1 activity reduces fission as well as neuronal cell death [38, 39, 66, 77, 78, 200, 201]. Despite the likely contribution of p53 to neuronal dysfunction and loss due to oxidative stress associated with neurodegenerative conditions and aging, little progress has been made in characterizing how DNA damage directly alters mitochondrial morphology in compromised neurons. The p53-dependent apoptotic pathway mobilizes the pro-apoptotic protein Bax through the transcriptional activation of BH3 domain-only proteins such as PUMA [202]. In addition to its activity in permeabilizing the outer mitochondrial membrane, Bax promotes mitochondrial fragmentation during apoptosis by forming a complex with Drp1 and Mfn2 at fission sites [203]. As a transcriptional regulator, p53 may also have a direct influence on the expression and function of proteins regulating mitochondrial morphology.

Wang et al. (2013) found that DNA damage which induced by the topoisomerase I inhibitor, camptothecin (CPT), in cultured cortical neurons does not cause fragmented but rather elongated mitochondria, which is, at least in part, due to decreased expression of Drp1 [204]. Overexpression of Drp1/parkin mitigated the mitochondrial elongation and cell death induced by CPT. Staurosporine, a p53-independent apoptotic stress, caused mitochondrial fragmentation as previously reported while CPT treatment of mouse embryonic fibroblasts resulted in mitochondrial fragmentation. Thus, their findings suggest that p53- dependent neuronal cell death is uniquely associated with a net increase in mitochondrial length involving reduced expression of Drp1. The changes in mitochondrial morphology mediated by p53 could affect mitochondrial function, transport and mitophagy in neurons during the course of aging and neurodegenerative disease [204].

In another Study, Guo et al. [205] found that Drp1 binding to p53 induced mitochondria-related necrosis. In contrast, inhibition of Drp1 by Drp1 siRNA reduced necrotic cell death in mouse embryonic fibroblasts exposed to oxidative stress that is due to H2O2. In the same study they confirmed Drp1-p53 interactions by IP analysis. Finally they confirmed neuronal death is due mitochondrial damage, which in turn causes Drp1-p53 interactions through MDM2 [205].

All these findings suggest that under mitochondrial dysfunction Drp1 interacts with p53, which may cause aberrant formation of SNO-Cdk5 and SNO-Drp1, leading to the dysregulation of downstream pathways, synaptic dysfunction, and finally neuronal cell death in AD. However there are no concrete studies, which show the interactions of p53 and CDK5 with Drp1 or other mitochondrial division proteins in neuronal cell death in AD.

Drp1 and microRNAs in Alzheimer’s disease

microRNAs (miRNAs) are a large family of conserved small (18–22 nucleotides) non-coding RNAs. These miRNAs plays an important role in the post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression. In mammals, miRNAs are predicted to control the activity of ~50% of all the protein-coding genes [206]. Aβ formation and Aβ deposits in AD are accompanied by alterations in the levels of many distinct classes of miRNA, certain of which target mRNAs encoding proteins involved in AD pathogenesis [207–211]. Several miRNA species such as miR-101 and miR-106, target APP, and their down-regulation in AD flavors an elevated generation of Aβ [207, 210, 212, 213]. Interestingly, several nucleotide polymorphisms associated with AD located in the miRNA-binding region. Recent studies have shown miR29, 15, 107, 181, 146, 9,101,106 plays crucial role in the pathogenesis of AD [214]. A very few studies have shown that miR-30 and miR499 are involved in the regulation of mitochondrial dynamics by Drp1 through p53 and calcineurin [211, 215].

Li et al. [215] found that miR-30 family members are able to inhibit mitochondrial fission and apoptosis in cardiomyocytes. They identified that p53 is a target of miR-30 family members. p53 induces mitochondrial fission by transcriptionally upregulating Drp1 expression. miR-30 can inhibit mitochondrial fission through suppressing the expression of p53 and its downstream target Drp1 [215]. In another study, Wang et al., [211] reported both the α and β isoforms of the calcineurin catalytic subunit are direct targets of miR-499 and that miR-499 inhibits cardiomyocyte apoptosis through its suppression of calcineurin-mediated dephosphorylation of Drp1, thereby decreasing Drp1 accumulation in mitochondria and Drp1-mediated activation of the mitochondrial fission. In these studies, it has shown that Drp1 is regulated through p53. However, till now there are no studies on the role of miRNAs that clearly demonstrates impaired mitochondrial dynamics (either fission or fusion) in the AD or other neurodegenerative diseases pathogenesis [211] (Figure 8).

Further research is needed to understand precise link between miRNAs and abnormal Drp1 activation, and also physiological relevance of miRNA in mitochondrial dynamics and synaptic damage in AD pathogenesis.

Concluding remarks and future directions

Mitochondrial dysfunction and synaptic damage are early and important cellular changes in AD pathogenesis. Impaired mitochondrial dynamics (increased fission and reduced fusion) is reported in AD neurons. Increasing evidence suggests that balanced mitochondrial dynamics are critically important in the maintenance of mitochondrial shape, distribution, and sizes are very important in normal neuronal function. Recent mitochondrial studies of yeast, worms, rodents and humans have identified several GTPase proteins, including Drp1 (fission), Mfn1, Mfn2, and Opa1 (fusion). Among these, Drp1 is evolutionarily conserved in lower to higher organisms and may have some structural and functional importance in maintaining cell survival and cell death. Recent knockout mice studies of Drp1 suggest that Drp1 is essential for cell survival and mitochondrial division. Recent advancements in molecular, cellular, electron microscopy and confocal and imaging studies revealed that Drp1 is associated with several cellular functions, including mitochondrial fragmentation, phosphorylation and cell death. Mitochondrial fission protein Drp1 interacts with Aβ and phosphorylated tau in AD. Further research is needed to understand the precise mechanisms of Drp1 in fragmenting mitochondria in relation to Aβ and phosphorylated tau. Identification of interacting binding sites between Drp1 soluble Aβ, and Drp1 and soluble Tau, may provide new clues and may help to develop molecular inhibitors to stop and/or reduce abnormal interactions between Drp1 soluble Aβ, and Drp1 and soluble Tau.

Recent research also revealed that Drp1 is associated with GSK3β, CDK5 and p53. However, the physiological relevance of Drp1 association with GSK3β, CDK5 and p53 in AD is not completely understood. Recent research also found that Drp1 is linked to microRNAs in AD pathogenesis. Further research is needed to answer these important questions.

Work presented in this article is supported by NIH grants AG042178, AG047812 and the Garrison Family Foundation.

Abbreviations

Drp1 Dynamin-related protein1

GSK3β Glucose synthase kinase 3 beta

CDK5 Cyclin dependent kinase 5

miRNA micro ribonucleic acid

NMDAR N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor

AMPAR α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid receptor

AD Alzheimer’s Disease

PD Parkinson’s Disease

HD Huntington’s Disease

Aβ β-amyloid

Fis1 Mitochondrial fission 1 protein

Mfn1 Mitochondrial fusin 1

Opa1 Optic Atrophy 1

CypD cyclophilin D

PSD95 Postsynaptic Density 95

MiD49 Mitochondrial Dynamics protein 49

MiD51 Mitochondrial Dynamics protein 51

Mdiv1 Mitochondrial division inhibitor 1

Num1 Nuclear migration 1

Mdm 36 Mitochondrial distribution morphology 36

Mff Mitochondrial fission factor

Nrf1 Nuclear Respiratory Factor 1

Nrf2 Nuclear Respiratory Factor 2

PGC1 Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1

M17 Human Neuroblastoma cells

N2a Mouse neuroblastoma 2a

CA1 Cornu Ammonis area 1

GTPase Guanosine-5′-triphosphate hydrolase

GED Guanosine triphosphate effector domain

Dnm1 Dynamin 1

APP Amyloid Precursor protein

co-IP co-Immunoprecipitation

CaMKIα Ca2+/Calmodulin protein kinaseIα

Bax Bcl2 associated X protein

Bak Bcl2 associated K protein

Bcl2 B-cell leukemia/lymphoma2

PKA Protein kinase A

PP2A Phosphatase 2A

ETC Electron transport chain

MARCH 5 membrane associated RING-CH-5

PEX 11β Peroxisomal Biogenesis factor 11β

Ubc9 Ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme 9

Sumo 1 small ubiquitin like modifier 1

APPwt APP wildtype

APPSwe APP Swedish

AβPP Amyloid beta Precursor Protein

Tomm40 Translocase of outer mitochondrial membrane 40

mtDNA mitochondrial DNA

MCI mild cognitive impairment

PS1 Presenilin 1

IMS Inter membrane space

Smac Second Mitochondria-derived Activator of Caspases

DIABLO Direct IAP-Binding protein with Low PI

ATP Adenosine triphosphate

TUNEL Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling

TFAM Mitochondrial transcription factor A

GAP43 Glial acidic protein 43

ALS Amyotropic lateral sclerosis

PUMA p53 upregulated modulator of apoptosis

CPt Campothecin

siRNA small interfering RNA

MDM2 mouse double minute 2

ADDLs amyloid-beta-derived diffusible ligands

Figure 1 Schematic representations of the important domains of human Drp1

Arrows on the domains are the sites of post-translational modifications. Phosphorylation, SUMOylation, S-Nirosylation were represented with the aid of arrows on Drp1 domains. The GSK3β could be interacted with GED domain of Drp1 at Ser 637 position. All amino acids were numbered with respect to human Drp1 splice variant 1 sequence (longer form).

Figure 2 Drp1 functions

Drp1 plays a crucial role in mitochondrial fission, fragmentation and distribution. Drp1 interacts with GSK3β and involved with the functions of synaptic plasticity across the neurons by regulating of phosphorylation of GSK3β. Drp1 also regulate the peroxisomal fragmentation, SUMOylation and ubiquitination in mammalian cells.

Figure 3 General overview of GSK3

GSK3 dysregulation via mitochondria with neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, Schizophrenia and other bipolar disorders. GSK3 also plays a regulatory role in various types of cancers, diabetes and inflammatory diseases.

Figure 4 Drp1 phosphorylation sites and their involvement in mitochondrial fission and fusion

(A) Phosphorylation of Drp1 at Ser637 prevents mitochondrial fragmentation; (B) conversely phosphorylation of Drp1 at Ser 616 promotes mitochondrial fragmentation. Prevention of mitochondrial fragmentation is regulated by cAMPK and promotion is carried out by CAMK1α. Drp1 is found in cytosol and cycles on/off mitochondria.

Figure 5 GK3β-induced Drp1 phosphorylation and mitochondrial fragmentation in Alzheimer’s disease

GSK3β-mediated phosphorylation of Drp1 at the Ser693 site in addition to Ser616 and Ser637 located within the GED domain induces elongated mitochondrial morphology which in turn inhibits mitochondrial fission/fragmentation. Blockage of GSK3β mediated Drp1 rescues Aβ induced neuronal apoptosis and provides protection from AD.

Figure 6 Summary of cellular and molecular changes in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease

Alzheimer’s disease is associated with the loss of synapses, oxidative stress, mitochondrial structural and functional changes, inflammatory responses, alterations in cholinergic neurotransmission, hormonal dysregulation and cell cycle abnormalities. All these changes are affected on long-term potentiation which in turn causes long term depression across the neurons, ultimately effecting synaptic transmission.

Figure 7 GS3β-Drp1-p53-CDK5 interaction in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease

Amyloid beta peptide causes hyper activation of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors, which triggers downstream pathways such as phosphorylated tau, cyclin-dependent kinase 5, dynamin-related protein 1 and GSK-3β. These events cause endocytosis of AMPA receptors as well as NMDARs through calcium ions. These pathways may lead to abnormalities in mitochondrial dynamics and bioenergetics and impaired long-term potentiation, and synaptic dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease neurons. The p53-dependent apoptotic pathway mobilizes the pro-apoptotic protein Bax, in turn causes mitochondrial fragmentation during apoptosis by forming a complex with Drp1 and Mfn2 at fission sites. As a transcriptional regulator, p53 may also have a direct influence on the expression and function of proteins regulating mitochondrial morphology.

Figure 8 Role of microRNA30 and microRNA499 in neuronal survival

Increased free radicals trigger DNA damage response and/or oxidative stress that may elicit p53-dependent apoptotic pathway. p53 mobilizes the pro-apoptotic protein Bax through the transcriptional activation of BH3 domain in proteins such as PUMA that may elevates Drp1 levels, ultimately leading to mitochondrial fragmentation. MicroRNAs, MiR30 and miR499 reduce mitochondrial fission activity by suppressing the expression of p53 and Drp1 and enhance neuronal survival.

Table 1 Summary of Drp1 phosphorylation sites and effects on mitochondrial dynamics

Drp1 Phosphorylation site	Mitochondrial function	Reference	Remarks	
Ser 600	Promotes Mt. fragmentation	Han et al., 2008 (ref. 216)	Regulated by CAMK1α	
Ser 637	Promotes Mt. fragmentation	Chou et al., 2012 (ref. 130)	Independent with CAMK1α regulation	
Ser 616	Promotes Mt. fragmentation	Chou et al., 2012 (ref. 130)	Independent with CAMK1α regulation	
Ser 616	Promotes Mt. fission	Kashatus et al., 2011 (ref. 131)	Regulated by CDK1/Cyclin B	
Ser 693	Prevents Mt. fission/fragmentation	Chou et al., 2012 (ref. 130)	Independent with CAMK1α regulation	
Ser40/44 (phosphomimic Drp1)	Promotes Mt. fragmentation	Yan et al., 2015 (ref. 1)	GSK3β dependent regulation	

Highlights

Mitochondrial abnormalities play a large role in neuronal in Alzheimer’s disease.

Amyloid beta and phosphorylated tau interacts with the Drp1 in Alzheimer’s disease.

Mitochondrial shape, size, distribution and axonal transport are altered in Alzheimer’s neurons.

Drp1 association with GSK3beta, CDK5 and miRNAs affects neuronal function in Alzheimer’s disease.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


1 Yan J Liu XH Han MZ Wang YM Sun XL Yu N Li T Su B Chen ZY Blockage of GSK3beta-mediated Drp1 phosphorylation provides neuroprotection in neuronal and mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Aging 36 2015 211 227 25192600
2 Wallace DC Bioenergetics in human evolution and disease: implications for the origins of biological complexity and the missing genetic variation of common diseases Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 368 2013 20120267 23754818
3 Reddy PH Tripathi R Troung Q Tirumala K Reddy TP Anekonda V Shirendeb UP Calkins MJ Reddy AP Mao P Manczak M Abnormal mitochondrial dynamics and synaptic degeneration as early events in Alzheimer’s disease: implications to mitochondria-targeted antioxidant therapeutics Biochim Biophys Acta 1822 2012 639 649 22037588
4 Roy M Reddy PH Iijima M Sesaki H Mitochondrial division and fusion in metabolism Curr Opin Cell Biol 33 2015 111 118 25703628
5 Binukumar BK Gupta N Sunkaria A Kandimalla R Wani WY Sharma DR Bal A Gill KD Protective efficacy of coenzyme Q10 against DDVP-induced cognitive impairments and neurodegeneration in rats Neurotox Res 21 2012 345 357 22083459
6 Reddy PH Reddy TP Manczak M Calkins MJ Shirendeb U Mao P Dynamin-related protein 1 and mitochondrial fragmentation in neurodegenerative diseases Brain Res Rev 67 2011 103 118 21145355
7 Binukumar BK Bal A Kandimalla RJ Gill KD Nigrostriatal neuronal death following chronic dichlorvos exposure: crosstalk between mitochondrial impairments, alpha synuclein aggregation, oxidative damage and behavioral changes Mol Brain 3 2010 35 21073741
8 Beal MF Mitochondria take center stage in aging and neurodegeneration Ann Neurol 58 2005 495 505 16178023
9 Reddy PH Beal MF Are mitochondria critical in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease? Brain Res Brain Res Rev 49 2005 618 632 16269322
10 Lin MT Beal MF Mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress in neurodegenerative diseases Nature 443 2006 787 795 17051205
11 Reddy PH Amyloid precursor protein-mediated free radicals and oxidative damage: implications for the development and progression of Alzheimer’s disease J Neurochem 96 2006a 1 13
12 Reddy PH Mitochondrial oxidative damage in aging and Alzheimer’s disease: implications for mitochondrially targeted antioxidant therapeutics J Biomed Biotechnol 2006 2006b 31372 17047303
13 Reddy PH Mitochondrial dysfunction in aging and Alzheimer’s disease: strategies to protect neurons Antioxid Redox Signal 9 2007 1647 1658 17696767
14 Reddy PH Mitochondrial medicine for aging and neurodegenerative diseases Neuromolecular Med 10 2008 291 315 18566920
15 Reddy PH Amyloid beta, mitochondrial structural and functional dynamics in Alzheimer’s disease Exp Neurol 218 2009 286 292 19358844
16 Reddy PH Beal MF Amyloid beta, mitochondrial dysfunction and synaptic damage: implications for cognitive decline in aging and Alzheimer’s disease Trends Mol Med 14 2008 45 53 18218341
17 Swerdlow RH Mitochondria and cell bioenergetics: increasingly recognized components and a possible etiologic cause of Alzheimer’s disease Antioxid Redox Signal 16 2012 1434 1455 21902597
18 Elgass K Pakay J Ryan MT Palmer CS Recent advances into the understanding of mitochondrial fission Biochim Biophys Acta 1833 2013 150 161 22580041
19 Hoppins S The regulation of mitochondrial dynamics Curr Opin Cell Biol 29 2014 46 52 24747170
20 Wang X Su B Lee HG Li X Perry G Smith MA Zhu X Impaired balance of mitochondrial fission and fusion in Alzheimer’s disease J Neurosci 29 2009 9090 9103 19605646
21 Suliman HB Piantadosi CA Mitochondrial Quality Control as a Therapeutic Target Pharmacol Rev 68 2016 20 48 26589414
22 Yoon Y Pitts KR Dahan S McNiven MA A novel dynamin-like protein associates with cytoplasmic vesicles and tubules of the endoplasmic reticulum in mammalian cells J Cell Biol 140 1998 779 793 9472031
23 Shin HW Shinotsuka C Torii S Murakami K Nakayama K Identification and subcellular localization of a novel mammalian dynamin-related protein homologous to yeast Vps1p and Dnm1p J Biochem 122 1997 525 530 9348079
24 Imoto M Tachibana I Urrutia R Identification and functional characterization of a novel human protein highly related to the yeast dynamin-like GTPase Vps1p J Cell Sci 111 1998 1341 1349 9570752
25 Otsuga D Keegan BR Brisch E Thatcher JW Hermann GJ Bleazard W Shaw JM The dynamin-related GTPase, Dnm1p, controls mitochondrial morphology in yeast J Cell Biol 143 1998 333 349 9786946
26 Sesaki H Jensen RE Division versus fusion: Dnm1p and Fzo1p antagonistically regulate mitochondrial shape J Cell Biol 147 1999 699 706 10562274
27 Bleazard W McCaffery JM King EJ Bale S Mozdy A Tieu Q Nunnari J Shaw JM The dynamin-related GTPase Dnm1 regulates mitochondrial fission in yeast Nat Cell Biol 1 1999 298 304 10559943
28 Mozdy AD McCaffery JM Shaw JM Dnm1p GTPase-mediated mitochondrial fission is a multi-step process requiring the novel integral membrane component Fis1p J Cell Biol 151 2000 367 380 11038183
29 Cerveny KL McCaffery JM Jensen RE Division of mitochondria requires a novel DMN1-interacting protein, Net2p Mol Biol Cell 12 2001 309 321 11179417
30 Tieu Q Nunnari J Mdv1p is a WD repeat protein that interacts with the dynamin-related GTPase, Dnm1p, to trigger mitochondrial division J Cell Biol 151 2000 353 366 11038182
31 Fekkes P Shepard KA Yaffe MP Gag3p, an outer membrane protein required for fission of mitochondrial tubules J Cell Biol 151 2000 333 340 11038180
32 Griffin EE Graumann J Chan DC The WD40 protein Caf4p is a component of the mitochondrial fission machinery and recruits Dnm1p to mitochondria J Cell Biol 170 2005 237 248 16009724
33 Cerveny KL Studer SL Jensen RE Sesaki H Yeast mitochondrial division and distribution require the cortical num1 protein Dev Cell 12 2007 363 375 17336903
34 Hammermeister M Schodel K Westermann B Mdm36 is a mitochondrial fission-promoting protein in Saccharomyces cerevisiae Mol Biol Cell 21 2010 2443 2452 20505073
35 Klecker T Scholz D Fortsch J Westermann B The yeast cell cortical protein Num1 integrates mitochondrial dynamics into cellular architecture J Cell Sci 126 2013 2924 2930 23641071
36 Lackner LL Determining the shape and cellular distribution of mitochondria: the integration of multiple activities Curr Opin Cell Biol 25 2013 471 476 23490281
37 Labrousse AM Zappaterra MD Rube DA van der Bliek AM C. elegans dynamin-related protein DRP-1 controls severing of the mitochondrial outer membrane Mol Cell 4 1999 815 826 10619028
38 Manczak M Reddy PH Abnormal interaction between the mitochondrial fission protein Drp1 and hyperphosphorylated tau in Alzheimer’s disease neurons: implications for mitochondrial dysfunction and neuronal damage Hum Mol Genet 21 2012a 2538 2547 22367970
39 Manczak M Sesaki H Kageyama Y Reddy PH Dynamin-related protein 1 heterozygote knockout mice do not have synaptic and mitochondrial deficiencies Biochim Biophys Acta 1822 2012b 862 874 22387883
40 Kageyama Y Zhang Z Sesaki H Mitochondrial division: molecular machinery and physiological functions Curr Opin Cell Biol 2011 427 434 21565481
41 Smirnova E Griparic L Shurland DL van der Bliek AM Dynamin-related protein Drp1 is required for mitochondrial division in mammalian cells Mol Biol Cell 12 2001 2245 2256 11514614
42 Palmer CS Elgass KD Parton RG Osellame LD Stojanovski D Ryan MT Adaptor proteins MiD49 and MiD51 can act independently of Mff and Fis1 in Drp1 recruitment and are specific for mitochondrial fission J Biol Chem 288 2011 27584 27593
43 DuBoff B Feany M Gotz J Why size matters - balancing mitochondrial dynamics in Alzheimer’s disease Trends Neurosci 36 2013 325 335 23582339
44 Uo T Dworzak J Kinoshita C Inman DM Kinoshita Y Horner PJ Morrison RS Drp1 levels constitutively regulate mitochondrial dynamics and cell survival in cortical neurons Exp Neurol 218 2009 274 285 19445933
45 Cha MY Kim DK Mook-Jung I The role of mitochondrial DNA mutation on neurodegenerative diseases Exp Mol Med 2015 47 e150
46 Raturi A Simmen T Where the endoplasmic reticulum and the mitochondrion tie the knot: the mitochondria-associated membrane (MAM) Biochim Biophys Acta 2013 213 224
47 Simmen T Lynes EM Gesson K Thomas G Oxidative protein folding in the endoplasmic reticulum: tight links to the mitochondria-associated membrane (MAM) Biochim Biophys Acta 2010 1465 1473
48 Renvoise B Blackstone C Emerging themes of ER organization in the development and maintenance of axons Curr Opin Neurobiol 2010 531 537 20678923
49 Area-Gomez E Del Carmen Lara Castillo M Tambini MD Guardia-Laguarta C de Groof AJ Madra M Ikenouchi J Umeda M Bird TD Sturley SL Schon EA Upregulated function of mitochondria-associated ER membranes in Alzheimer disease EMBO J 2012 4106 4123 22892566
50 Hedskog L Pinho CM Filadi R Ronnback A Hertwig L Wiehager B Larssen P Gellhaar S Sandebring A Westerlund M Graff C Winblad B Galter D Behbahani H Pizzo P Glaser E Ankarcrona M Modulation of the endoplasmic reticulum-mitochondria interface in Alzheimer’s disease and related models Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2013 7916 7921 23620518
51 Kornmann B Currie E Collins SR Schuldiner M Nunnari J Weissman JS Walter P An ER-mitochondria tethering complex revealed by a synthetic biology screen Science 325 2009 477 481 19556461
52 Dayanithi G Chen-Kuo-Chang M Viero C Hamel C Muller A Lenaers G Characterization of Ca2+ signalling in postnatal mouse retinal ganglion cells: involvement of OPA1 in Ca2+ clearance Ophthalmic Genet 2010 53 65 20450306
53 Kushnareva YE Gerencser AA Bossy B Ju WK White AD Waggoner J Ellisman MH Perkins G Bossy-Wetzel E Loss of OPA1 disturbs cellular calcium homeostasis and sensitizes for excitotoxicity Cell Death Differ 2013 353 365 23138851
54 Singaravelu K Nelson C Bakowski D de Brito OM Ng SW Di Capite J Powell T Scorrano L Parekh AB Mitofusin 2 regulates STIM1 migration from the Ca2+ store to the plasma membrane in cells with depolarized mitochondria J Biol Chem 2011 12189 12201 21220420
55 Friedman JR Lackner LL West M DiBenedetto JR Nunnari J Voeltz GK ER tubules mark sites of mitochondrial division Science 2011 358 362
56 Hayashi T Rizzuto R Hajnoczky G Su TP MAM: more than just a housekeeper Trends Cell Biol 2009 81 88 19144519
57 Schon EA Przedborski S Mitochondria: the next (neurode)generation Neuron 2011 1033 1053 21689593
58 Burte F Carelli V Chinnery PF Yu-Wai-Man P Disturbed mitochondrial dynamics and neurodegenerative disorders Nat Rev Neurol 2015 11 24 25486875
59 Ishihara N Nomura M Jofuku A Kato H Suzuki SO Masuda K Otera H Nakanishi Y Nonaka I Goto Y Taguchi N Morinaga H Maeda M Takayanagi R Yokota S Mihara K Mitochondrial fission factor Drp1 is essential for embryonic development and synapse formation in mice Nat Cell Biol 11 2009 958 966 19578372
60 Wakabayashi J Zhang Z Wakabayashi N Tamura Y Fukaya M Kensler TW Iijima M Sesaki H The dynamin-related GTPase Drp1 is required for embryonic and brain development in mice J Cell Biol 186 2009 805 816 19752021
61 Pitts KR Yoon Y Krueger EW McNiven MA The dynamin-like protein DLP1 is essential for normal distribution and morphology of the endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria in mammalian cells Mol Biol Cell 10 1999 4403 4417 10588666
62 Smirnova E Shurland DL Ryazantsev SN van der Bliek AM A human dynamin-related protein controls the distribution of mitochondria J Cell Biol 143 1998 351 358 9786947
63 Chen H Chan DC Mitochondrial dynamics--fusion, fission, movement, and mitophagy--in neurodegenerative diseases Hum Mol Genet 18 2009 R169 176 19808793
64 Wang X Su B Fujioka H Zhu X Dynamin-like protein 1 reduction underlies mitochondrial morphology and distribution abnormalities in fibroblasts from sporadic Alzheimer’s disease patients Am J Pathol 173 2008 470 482 18599615
65 Wang X Perry G Smith MA Zhu X Amyloid-beta-derived diffusible ligands cause impaired axonal transport of mitochondria in neurons Neurodegener Dis 7 2010 56 59 20160460
66 Li Z Okamoto K Hayashi Y Sheng M The importance of dendritic mitochondria in the morphogenesis and plasticity of spines and synapses Cell 119 2004 873 887 15607982
67 Santel A Frank S Shaping mitochondria: The complex posttranslational regulation of the mitochondrial fission protein DRP1 IUBMB Life 60 2008 448 455 18465792
68 Westermann B Mitochondrial fusion and fission in cell life and death Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 11 2010 872 884 21102612
69 Kann O Kovacs R Mitochondria and neuronal activity Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 292 2007 C641 657 17092996
70 Stowers RS Megeath LJ Gorska-Andrzejak J Meinertzhagen IA Schwarz TL Axonal transport of mitochondria to synapses depends on milton, a novel Drosophila protein Neuron 36 2002 1063 1077 12495622
71 Melov S Modeling mitochondrial function in aging neurons Trends Neurosci 27 2004 601 606 15374671
72 Guo X Macleod GT Wellington A Hu F Panchumarthi S Schoenfield M Marin L Charlton MP Atwood HL Zinsmaier KE The GTPase dMiro is required for axonal transport of mitochondria to Drosophila synapses Neuron 47 2005 379 393 16055062
73 Calkins MJ Manczak M Mao P Shirendeb U Reddy PH Impaired mitochondrial biogenesis, defective axonal transport of mitochondria, abnormal mitochondrial dynamics and synaptic degeneration in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Hum Mol Genet 20 2011 4515 4529 21873260
74 Koch KV Suelmann R Fischer R Deletion of mdmB impairs mitochondrial distribution and morphology in Aspergillus nidulans Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 55 2003 114 124 12740872
75 Li X Baumgart E Morrell JC Jimenez-Sanchez G Valle D Gould SJ PEX11 beta deficiency is lethal and impairs neuronal migration but does not abrogate peroxisome function Mol Cell Biol 22 2002 4358 4365 12024045
76 Koch A Yoon Y Bonekamp NA McNiven MA Schrader M A role for Fis1 in both mitochondrial and peroxisomal fission in mammalian cells Mol Biol Cell 16 2005 5077 5086 16107562
77 Reddy PH Increased mitochondrial fission and neuronal dysfunction in Huntington’s disease: implications for molecular inhibitors of excessive mitochondrial fission Drug Discov Today 19 2014a 951 955 24681059
78 Reddy PH Inhibitors of mitochondrial fission as a therapeutic strategy for diseases with oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction J Alzheimers Dis 40 2014b 245 256 24413616
79 Cribbs JT Strack S Reversible phosphorylation of Drp1 by cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase and calcineurin regulates mitochondrial fission and cell death EMBO Rep 8 2007 939 944 17721437
80 Chang CR Blackstone C Drp1 phosphorylation and mitochondrial regulation EMBO Rep 8 2007 1088 1089 author reply 1089–1090
81 Frank S Gaume B Bergmann-Leitner ES Leitner WW Robert EG Catez F Smith CL Youle RJ The role of dynamin-related protein 1, a mediator of mitochondrial fission, in apoptosis Dev Cell 1 2001 515 525 11703942
82 Sheridan C Delivani P Cullen SP Martin SJ Bax- or Bak-induced mitochondrial fission can be uncoupled from cytochrome C release Mol Cell 31 2008 570 585 18722181
83 Wu S Zhou F Zhang Z Xing D Bax is essential for Drp1-mediated mitochondrial fission but not for mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization caused by photodynamic therapy J Cell Physiol 226 2010 530 541
84 Olichon A Baricault L Gas N Guillou E Valette A Belenguer P Lenaers G Loss of OPA1 perturbates the mitochondrial inner membrane structure and integrity, leading to cytochrome c release and apoptosis J Biol Chem 278 2003 7743 7746 12509422
85 Frezza C Cipolat S Martinsde Brito O Micaroni M Beznoussenko GV Rudka T Bartoli D Polishuck RS Danial NN De Strooper B Scorrano L OPA1 controls apoptotic cristae remodeling independently from mitochondrial fusion Cell 126 2006 177 189 16839885
86 Fu J Yu HM Chiu SY Mirando AJ Maruyama EO Cheng JG Hsu W Disruption of SUMO-specific protease 2 induces mitochondria mediated neurodegeneration PLoS Genet 10 2014 e1004579 25299344
87 Anderson CA Blackstone C SUMO wrestling with Drp1 at mitochondria EMBO J 32 2013 1496 1498 23632859
88 Otera H Ishihara N Mihara K New insights into the function and regulation of mitochondrial fission Biochim Biophys Acta 1833 2013 1256 1268 23434681
89 Strack S Cribbs JT Allosteric modulation of Drp1 mechanoenzyme assembly and mitochondrial fission by the variable domain J Biol Chem 287 2012 10990 11001 22334657
90 Chang CR Blackstone C Dynamic regulation of mitochondrial fission through modification of the dynamin-related protein Drp1 Ann N Y Acad Sci 1201 2010 34 39 20649536
91 Harder Z Zunino R McBride H Sumo1 conjugates mitochondrial substrates and participates in mitochondrial fission Curr Biol 14 2004 340 345 14972687
92 Zunino R Schauss A Rippstein P Andrade-Navarro M McBride HM The SUMO protease SENP5 is required to maintain mitochondrial morphology and function J Cell Sci 120 2007 1178 1188 17341580
93 Zunino R Braschi E Xu L McBride HM Translocation of SenP5 from the nucleoli to the mitochondria modulates DRP1-dependent fission during mitosis J Biol Chem 284 2009 17783 17795 19411255
94 Braschi E Zunino R McBride HM MAPL is a new mitochondrial SUMO E3 ligase that regulates mitochondrial fission EMBO Rep 10 2009 748 754 19407830
95 Wasiak S Zunino R McBride HM Bax/Bak promote sumoylation of DRP1 and its stable association with mitochondria during apoptotic cell death J Cell Biol 177 2007 439 450 17470634
96 Fu J Jiang M Mirando AJ Yu HM Hsu W Reciprocal regulation of Wnt and Gpr177/mouse Wntless is required for embryonic axis formation Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106 2009 18598 18603 19841259
97 Figueroa-Romero C Iniguez-Lluhi JA Stadler J Chang CR Arnoult D Keller PJ Hong Y Blackstone C Feldman EL SUMOylation of the mitochondrial fission protein Drp1 occurs at multiple nonconsensus sites within the B domain and is linked to its activity cycle FASEB J 23 2009 3917 3927 19638400
98 Karbowski M Neutzner A Youle RJ The mitochondrial E3 ubiquitin ligase MARCH5 is required for Drp1 dependent mitochondrial division J Cell Biol 178 2007 71 84 17606867
99 Park YY Lee S Karbowski M Neutzner A Youle RJ Cho H Loss of MARCH5 mitochondrial E3 ubiquitin ligase induces cellular senescence through dynamin-related protein 1 and mitofusin 1 J Cell Sci 123 2010 619 626 20103533
100 Park YY Nguyen OT Kang H Cho H MARCH5-mediated quality control on acetylated Mfn1 facilitates mitochondrial homeostasis and cell survival Cell Death Dis 5 2014 e1172 24722297
101 Nakamura N Kimura Y Tokuda M Honda S Hirose S MARCH-V is a novel mitofusin 2- and Drp1-binding protein able to change mitochondrial morphology EMBO Rep 7 2006 1019 1022 16936636
102 Sugiura A Nagashima S Tokuyama T Amo T Matsuki Y Ishido S Kudo Y McBride HM Fukuda T Matsushita N Inatome R Yanagi S MITOL regulates endoplasmic reticulum-mitochondria contacts via Mitofusin2 Mol Cell 51 2013 20 34 23727017
103 Embi N Rylatt DB Cohen P Glycogen synthase kinase-3 from rabbit skeletal muscle. Separation from cyclic-AMP-dependent protein kinase and phosphorylase kinase Eur J Biochem 107 1980 519 527 6249596
104 Fernandez-Nogales M Hernandez F Miguez A Alberch J Gines S Perez-Navarro E Lucas JJ Decreased glycogen synthase kinase-3 levels and activity contribute to Huntington’s disease Hum Mol Genet 24 2015 5040 5052 26082469
105 Reddy PH Amyloid beta-induced glycogen synthase kinase 3beta phosphorylated VDAC1 in Alzheimer’s disease: implications for synaptic dysfunction and neuronal damage Biochim Biophys Acta 1832 2013 1913 1921 23816568
106 Jope RS Johnson GV The glamour and gloom of glycogen synthase kinase-3 Trends Biochem Sci 29 2004 95 102 15102436
107 Hoeflich KP Luo J Rubie EA Tsao MS Jin O Woodgett JR Requirement for glycogen synthase kinase-3beta in cell survival and NF-kappaB activation Nature 406 2000 86 90 10894547
108 Jiang H Guo W Liang X Rao Y Both the establishment and the maintenance of neuronal polarity require active mechanisms: critical roles of GSK-3beta and its upstream regulators Cell 120 2005 123 135 15652487
109 DaRocha-Souto B Coma M Perez-Nievas BG Scotton TC Siao M Sanchez-Ferrer P Hashimoto T Fan Z Hudry E Barroeta I Sereno L Rodriguez M Sanchez MB Hyman BT Gomez-Isla T Activation of glycogen synthase kinase-3 beta mediates beta-amyloid induced neuritic damage in Alzheimer’s disease Neurobiol Dis 45 2012 425 437 21945540
110 Martinez A Perez DI GSK-3 inhibitors: a ray of hope for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease? J Alzheimers Dis 15 2008 181 191 18953107
111 Kremer A Louis JV Jaworski T Van Leuven F GSK3 and Alzheimer’s Disease: Facts and Fiction Front Mol Neurosci 4 2011 17 21904524
112 Hernandez F Lucas JJ Avila J GSK3 and tau: two convergence points in Alzheimer’s disease J Alzheimers Dis 33 2013 Suppl 1 S141 144 22710914
113 Al Sweidi S Sanchez MG Bourque M Morissette M Dluzen D Di Paolo T Oestrogen receptors and signalling pathways: implications for neuroprotective effects of sex steroids in Parkinson’s disease J Neuroendocrinol 24 2012 48 61 21790809
114 Mishra R Glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta: can it be a target for oral cancer Mol Cancer 9 2010 144 20537194
115 Fung TK Gandillet A So CW Selective treatments of mixed-lineage leukemia leukemic stem cells through targeting glycogen synthase kinase 3 and the canonical Wnt/beta-catenin pathway Curr Opin Hematol 19 2012 280 286 22525581
116 Mills CN Nowsheen S Bonner JA Yang ES Emerging roles of glycogen synthase kinase 3 in the treatment of brain tumors Front Mol Neurosci 4 2011 47 22275880
117 Gao C Holscher C Liu Y Li L GSK3: a key target for the development of novel treatments for type 2 diabetes mellitus and Alzheimer disease Rev Neurosci 23 2011 1 11 22718609
118 Wang H Brown J Martin M Glycogen synthase kinase 3: a point of convergence for the host inflammatory response Cytokine 53 2011 130 140 21095632
119 Bersani FS Iannitelli A Pacitti F Bersani G Sleep and biorythm disturbances in schizophrenia, mood and anxiety disorders: a review Riv Psichiatr 47 2012 365 375 23160047
120 Rasola A Sciacovelli M Pantic B Bernardi P Signal transduction to the permeability transition pore FEBS Lett 584 2010 1989 1996 20153328
121 Sofola O Kerr F Rogers I Killick R Augustin H Gandy C Allen MJ Hardy J Lovestone S Partridge L Inhibition of GSK-3 ameliorates Abeta pathology in an adult-onset Drosophila model of Alzheimer’s disease PLoS Genet 6 2012 e1001087
122 Hurtado DE Molina-Porcel L Carroll JC Macdonald C Aboagye AK Trojanowski JQ Lee VM Selectively silencing GSK-3 isoforms reduces plaques and tangles in mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease J Neurosci 32 2012 7392 7402 22623685
123 Martinez A Perez DI GSK-3 inhibitors: a ray of hope for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease? J Alzheimers Dis 15 2008 181 191 18953107
124 Schenk D Barbour R Dunn W Gordon G Grajeda H Guido T Hu K Huang J Johnson-Wood K Khan K Kholodenko D Lee M Liao Z Lieberburg I Motter R Mutter L Soriano F Shopp G Vasquez N Vandevert C Walker S Wogulis M Yednock T Games D Seubert P Immunization with amyloid-beta attenuates Alzheimer-disease-like pathology in the PDAPP mouse Nature 400 1999 173 177 10408445
125 Alvarez G Munoz-Montano JR Satrustegui J Avila J Bogonez E Diaz-Nido J Lithium protects cultured neurons against beta-amyloid-induced neurodegeneration FEBS Lett 453 1999 260 264 10405156
126 Hoshi M Sato M Matsumoto S Noguchi A Yasutake K Yoshida N Sato K Spherical aggregates of beta-amyloid (amylospheroid) show high neurotoxicity and activate tau protein kinase I/glycogen synthase kinase-3beta Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 100 2003 6370 6375 12750461
127 Wei H Leeds PR Qian Y Wei W Chen R Chuang D beta-amyloid peptide-induced death of PC 12 cells and cerebellar granule cell neurons is inhibited by long-term lithium treatment Eur J Pharmacol 392 2000 117 123 10762662
128 Hong YR Chen CH Cheng DS Howng SL Chow CC Human dynamin-like protein interacts with the glycogen synthase kinase 3beta Biochem Biophys Res Commun 249 1998 697 703 9731200
129 Chen CH Hwang SL Howng SL Chou CK Hong YR Three rat brain alternative splicing dynamin-like protein variants: interaction with the glycogen synthase kinase 3beta and action as a substrate Biochem Biophys Res Commun 268 2000 893 898 10679301
130 Chou CH Lin CC Yang MC Wei CC Liao HD Lin RC Tu WY Kao TC Hsu CM Cheng JT Chou AK Lee CI Loh JK Howng SL Hong YR GSK3beta-mediated Drp1 phosphorylation induced elongated mitochondrial morphology against oxidative stress PLoS One 7 2012 e49112 23185298
131 Kashatus DF Lim KH Brady DC Pershing NL Cox AD Counter CM RALA and RALBP1 regulate mitochondrial fission at mitosis Nat Cell Biol 13 2011 1108 1115 21822277
132 McGeer PL McGeer EG The inflammatory response system of brain: implications for therapy of Alzheimer and other neurodegenerative diseases Brain Res Brain Res Rev 21 1995 195 218 8866675
133 Zimmermann M Borroni B Cattabeni F Padovani A Di Luca M Cholinesterase inhibitors influence APP metabolism in Alzheimer disease patients Neurobiol Dis 19 2005 237 242 15837579
134 Zhu X Lee HG Raina AK Perry G Smith MA The role of mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways in Alzheimer’s disease Neurosignals 11 2002 270 281 12566928
135 Hirai K Aliev G Nunomura A Fujioka H Russell RL Atwood CS Johnson AB Kress Y Vinters HV Tabaton M Shimohama S Cash AD Siedlak SL Harris PL Jones PK Petersen RB Perry G Smith MA Mitochondrial abnormalities in Alzheimer’s disease J Neurosci 21 2001 3017 3023 11312286
136 Herrup K Neve R Ackerman SL Copani A Divide and die: cell cycle events as triggers of nerve cell death J Neurosci 24 2004 9232 9239 15496657
137 Tang MX Jacobs D Stern Y Marder K Schofield P Gurland B Andrews H Mayeux R Effect of oestrogen during menopause on risk and age at onset of Alzheimer’s disease Lancet 348 1996 429 432 8709781
138 Casadesus G Smith MA Zhu X Aliev G Cash AD Honda K Petersen RB Perry G Alzheimer disease: evidence for a central pathogenic role of iron-mediated reactive oxygen species J Alzheimers Dis 6 2004 165 169 15096700
139 Manczak M Mao P Calkins MJ Cornea A Reddy AP Murphy MP Szeto HH Park B Reddy PH Mitochondria-targeted antioxidants protect against amyloid-beta toxicity in Alzheimer’s disease neurons J Alzheimers Dis 20 2010 Suppl 2 S609 631 20463406
140 Manczak M Calkins MJ Reddy PH Impaired mitochondrial dynamics and abnormal interaction of amyloid beta with mitochondrial protein Drp1 in neurons from patients with Alzheimer’s disease: implications for neuronal damage Hum Mol Genet 20 2011 2495 2509 21459773
141 Kandimalla RJ Prabhakar S Binukumar BK Wani WY Gupta N Sharma DR Sunkaria A Grover VK Bhardwaj N Jain K Gill KD Apo-Eepsilon4 allele in conjunction with Abeta42 and tau in CSF: biomarker for Alzheimer’s disease Curr Alzheimer Res 8 2011 187 196 21222606
142 Kandimalla RJ Wani WY Anand R Kaushal A Prabhakar S Grover VK Bharadwaj N Jain K Gill KD Apolipoprotein E levels in the cerebrospinal fluid of north Indian patients with Alzheimer’s disease Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen 28 2013 258 262 23612909
143 Swerdlow RH Bioenergetic medicine Br J Pharmacol 171 2014 1854 1869 24004341
144 Swerdlow RH Khan SM A “mitochondrial cascade hypothesis” for sporadic Alzheimer’s disease Med Hypotheses 63 2004 8 20 15193340
145 Swerdlow RH Khan SM The Alzheimer’s disease mitochondrial cascade hypothesis: an update Exp Neurol 218 2009 308 315 19416677
146 Reddy PH Manczak M Mao P Calkins MJ Reddy AP Shirendeb U Amyloid-beta and mitochondria in aging and Alzheimer’s disease: implications for synaptic damage and cognitive decline J Alzheimers Dis 20 2010 Suppl 2 S499 512 20413847
147 Lin MT Simon DK Ahn CH Kim LM Beal MF High aggregate burden of somatic mtDNA point mutations in aging and Alzheimer’s disease brain Hum Mol Genet 11 2002 133 145 11809722
148 Coskun PE Beal MF Wallace DC Alzheimer’s brains harbor somatic mtDNA control-region mutations that suppress mitochondrial transcription and replication Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101 2004 10726 10731 15247418
149 Coskun PE Wyrembak J Derbereva O Melkonian G Doran E Lott IT Head E Cotman CW Wallace DC Systemic mitochondrial dysfunction and the etiology of Alzheimer’s disease and down syndrome dementia J Alzheimers Dis 20 2010 Suppl 2 S293 310 20463402
150 Lakatos A Derbeneva O Younes D Keator D Bakken T Lvova M Brandon M Guffanti G Reglodi D Saykin A Weiner M Macciardi F Schork N Wallace DC Potkin SG Association between mitochondrial DNA variations and Alzheimer’s disease in the ADNI cohort Neurobiol Aging 31 2010 1355 1363 20538375
151 Manczak M Park BS Jung Y Reddy PH Differential expression of oxidative phosphorylation genes in patients with Alzheimer’s disease: implications for early mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative damage Neuromolecular Med 5 2004 147 162 15075441
152 Reddy PH McWeeney S Park BS Manczak M Gutala RV Partovi D Jung Y Yau V Searles R Mori M Quinn J Gene expression profiles of transcripts in amyloid precursor protein transgenic mice: up-regulation of mitochondrial metabolism and apoptotic genes is an early cellular change in Alzheimer’s disease Hum Mol Genet 13 2004 1225 1240 15115763
153 Zhu X Perry G Smith MA Wang X Abnormal mitochondrial dynamics in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease J Alzheimers Dis 33 2013 Suppl 1 S253 262 22531428
154 Silva DF Selfridge JE Lu J LE Roy N Hutfles L Burns JM Michaelis EK Yan S Cardoso SM Swerdlow RH Bioenergetic flux, mitochondrial mass and mitochondrial morphology dynamics in AD and MCI cybrid cell lines Hum Mol Genet 22 2013 3931 3946 23740939
155 Smith MA Perry G Richey PL Sayre LM Anderson VE Beal MF Kowall N Oxidative damage in Alzheimer’s Nature 382 1996 120 121
156 Maurer I Zierz S Moller HJ A selective defect of cytochrome c oxidase is present in brain of Alzheimer disease patients Neurobiol Aging 21 2000 455 462 10858595
157 Hirai K Aliev G Nunomura A Fujioka H Russell RL Atwood CS Johnson AB Kress Y Vinters HV Tabaton M Shimohama S Cash AD Siedlak SL Harris PL Jones PK Petersen RB Perry G Smith MA Mitochondrial abnormalities in Alzheimer’s disease J Neurosci 21 2001 3017 3023 11312286
158 Devi L Prabhu BM Galati DF Avadhani NG Anandatheerthavarada HK Accumulation of amyloid precursor protein in the mitochondrial import channels of human Alzheimer’s disease brain is associated with mitochondrial dysfunction J Neurosci 26 2006 9057 9068 16943564
159 Manczak M Anekonda TS Henson E Park BS Quinn J Reddy PH Mitochondria are a direct site of A beta accumulation in Alzheimer’s disease neurons: implications for free radical generation and oxidative damage in disease progression Hum Mol Genet 15 2006 1437 1449 16551656
160 Du H Guo L Fang F Chen D Sosunov AA McKhann GM Yan Y Wang C Zhang H Molkentin JD Gunn-Moore FJ Vonsattel JP Arancio O Chen JX Yan SD Cyclophilin D deficiency attenuates mitochondrial and neuronal perturbation and ameliorates learning and memory in Alzheimer’s disease Nat Med 14 2008 1097 1105 18806802
161 Lustbader JW Cirilli M Lin C Xu HW Takuma K Wang N Caspersen C Chen X Pollak S Chaney M Trinchese F Liu S Gunn-Moore F Lue LF Walker DG Kuppusamy P Zewier ZL Arancio O Stern D Yan SS Wu H ABAD directly links Abeta to mitochondrial toxicity in Alzheimer’s disease Science 304 2004 448 452 15087549
162 Caspersen C Wang N Yao J Sosunov A Chen X Lustbader JW Xu HW Stern D McKhann G Yan SD Mitochondrial Abeta: a potential focal point for neuronal metabolic dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease FASEB J 19 2005 2040 2041 16210396
163 Eckert A Hauptmann S Scherping I Rhein V Muller-Spahn F Gotz J Muller WE Soluble beta-amyloid leads to mitochondrial defects in amyloid precursor protein and tau transgenic mice Neurodegener Dis 5 2008 157 159 18322377
164 Rhein V Baysang G Rao S Meier F Bonert A Muller-Spahn F Eckert A Amyloid-beta leads to impaired cellular respiration, energy production and mitochondrial electron chain complex activities in human neuroblastoma cells Cell Mol Neurobiol 29 2009 1063 1071 19350381
165 Drago D Cavaliere A Mascetra N Ciavardelli D di Ilio C Zatta P Sensi SL Aluminum modulates effects of beta amyloid(1–42) on neuronal calcium homeostasis and mitochondria functioning and is altered in a triple transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Rejuvenation Res 11 2008 861 871 18788899
166 Resende R Moreira PI Proenca T Deshpande A Busciglio J Pereira C Oliveira CR Brain oxidative stress in a triple-transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer disease Free Radic Biol Med 44 2008 2051 2057 18423383
167 Sensi SL Rapposelli IG Frazzini V Mascetra N Altered oxidant-mediated intraneuronal zinc mobilization in a triple transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Exp Gerontol 43 2008 488 492 18068923
168 Yao J Irwin RW Zhao L Nilsen J Hamilton RT Brinton RD Mitochondrial bioenergetic deficit precedes Alzheimer’s pathology in female mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106 2009 14670 14675 19667196
169 Dragicevic N Mamcarz M Zhu Y Buzzeo R Tan J Arendash GW Bradshaw PC Mitochondrial amyloid-beta levels are associated with the extent of mitochondrial dysfunction in different brain regions and the degree of cognitive impairment in Alzheimer’s transgenic mice J Alzheimers Dis 20 2010 Suppl 2 S535 550 20463404
170 Pratico D Uryu K Leight S Trojanoswki JQ Lee VM Increased lipid peroxidation precedes amyloid plaque formation in an animal model of Alzheimer amyloidosis J Neurosci 21 2001 4183 4187 11404403
171 Calkins MJ Reddy PH Assessment of newly synthesized mitochondrial DNA using BrdU labeling in primary neurons from Alzheimer’s disease mice: Implications for impaired mitochondrial biogenesis and synaptic damage Biochim Biophys Acta 1812 2011 1182 1189 21549836
172 Crouch PJ Blake R Duce JA Ciccotosto GD Li QX Barnham KJ Curtain CC Cherny RA Cappai R Dyrks T Masters CL Trounce IA Copper-dependent inhibition of human cytochrome c oxidase by a dimeric conformer of amyloid-beta1-42 J Neurosci 25 2005 672 679 15659604
173 Hansson Petersen CA Alikhani N Behbahani H Wiehager B Pavlov PF Alafuzoff I Leinonen V Ito A Winblad B Glaser E Ankarcrona M The amyloid beta-peptide is imported into mitochondria via the TOM import machinery and localized to mitochondrial cristae Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105 2008 13145 13150 18757748
174 Devi L Ohno M Mitochondrial dysfunction and accumulation of the beta-secretase-cleaved C-terminal fragment of APP in Alzheimer’s disease transgenic mice Neurobiol Dis 45 2012 417 424 21933711
175 Amadoro G Corsetti V Ciotti MT Florenzano F Capsoni S Amato G Calissano P Endogenous Abeta causes cell death via early tau hyperphosphorylation Neurobiol Aging 32 2011 969 990 19628305
176 Atlante A Amadoro G Bobba A de Bari L Corsetti V Pappalardo G Marra E Calissano P Passarella S A peptide containing residues 26–44 of tau protein impairs mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation acting at the level of the adenine nucleotide translocator Biochim Biophys Acta 1777 2008 1289 1300 18725189
177 Quintanilla RA Matthews-Roberson TA Dolan PJ Johnson GV Caspase-cleaved tau expression induces mitochondrial dysfunction in immortalized cortical neurons: implications for the pathogenesis of Alzheimer disease J Biol Chem 284 2009 18754 18766 19389700
178 Wang X Su B Siedlak SL Moreira PI Fujioka H Wang Y Casadesus G Zhu X Amyloid-beta overproduction causes abnormal mitochondrial dynamics via differential modulation of mitochondrial fission/fusion proteins Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105 2008 19318 19323 19050078
179 Nakanishi N Ryan SD Zhang X Khan A Holland T Cho EG Huang X Liao FF Xu H Lipton SA Tu S Synaptic protein alpha1-takusan mitigates amyloid-beta-induced synaptic loss via interaction with tau and postsynaptic density-95 at postsynaptic sites J Neurosci 33 2013 14170 14183 23986251
180 Koehler CM New developments in mitochondrial assembly Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 20 2004 309 335 15473843
181 Uren RT Dewson G Bonzon C Lithgow T Newmeyer DD Kluck RM Mitochondrial release of pro-apoptotic proteins: electrostatic interactions can hold cytochrome c but not Smac/DIABLO to mitochondrial membranes J Biol Chem 280 2005 2266 2274 15537572
182 Parone PA Da Cruz S Tondera D Mattenberger Y James DI Maechler P Barja F Martinou JC Preventing mitochondrial fission impairs mitochondrial function and leads to loss of mitochondrial DNA PLoS One 3 2008 e3257 18806874
183 Arnoult D Mitochondrial fragmentation in apoptosis Trends Cell Biol 17 2007 6 12 17116393
184 Cassidy-Stone A Chipuk JE Ingerman E Song C Yoo C Kuwana T Kurth MJ Shaw JT Hinshaw JE Green DR Nunnari J Chemical inhibition of the mitochondrial division dynamin reveals its role in Bax/Bak-dependent mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization Dev Cell 14 2008 193 204 18267088
185 Chen H Detmer SA Ewald AJ Griffin EE Fraser SE Chan DC Mitofusins Mfn1 and Mfn2 coordinately regulate mitochondrial fusion and are essential for embryonic development J Cell Biol 160 2003 189 200 12527753
186 Alavi MV Bette S Schimpf S Schuettauf F Schraermeyer U Wehrl HF Ruttiger L Beck SC Tonagel F Pichler BJ Knipper M Peters T Laufs J Wissinger B A splice site mutation in the murine Opa1 gene features pathology of autosomal dominant optic atrophy Brain 130 2007 1029 1042 17314202
187 Davies VJ Hollins AJ Piechota MJ Yip W Davies JR White KE Nicols PP Boulton ME Votruba M Opa1 deficiency in a mouse model of autosomal dominant optic atrophy impairs mitochondrial morphology, optic nerve structure and visual function Hum Mol Genet 16 2007 1307 1318 17428816
188 Verstreken P Ly CV Venken KJ Koh TW Zhou Y Bellen HJ Synaptic mitochondria are critical for mobilization of reserve pool vesicles at Drosophila neuromuscular junctions Neuron 47 2005 365 378 16055061
189 Li H Alavian KN Lazrove E Mehta N Jones A Zhang P Licznerski P Graham M Uo T Guo J Rahner C Duman RS Morrison RS Jonas EA A Bcl-xL-Drp1 complex regulates synaptic vesicle membrane dynamics during endocytosis Nat Cell Biol 15 2013 773 785 23792689
190 Molokanova E Akhtar MW Sanz-Blasco S Tu S Pina-Crespo JC McKercher SR Lipton SA Differential effects of synaptic and extrasynaptic NMDA receptors on Abeta-induced nitric oxide production in cerebrocortical neurons J Neurosci 34 2014 5023 5028 24695719
191 Cho DH Nakamura T Fang J Cieplak P Godzik A Gu Z Lipton SA S-nitrosylation of Drp1 mediates beta-amyloid-related mitochondrial fission and neuronal injury Science 324 2009 102 105 19342591
192 Qu J Nakamura T Cao G Holland EA McKercher SR Lipton SA S-Nitrosylation activates Cdk5 and contributes to synaptic spine loss induced by beta-amyloid peptide Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 108 2011 14330 14335 21844361
193 Qu J Nakamura T Holland EA McKercher SR Lipton SA S-nitrosylation of Cdk5: potential implications in amyloid-beta-related neurotoxicity in Alzheimer disease Prion 6 2012 364 370 22874667
194 Wang S Song J Tan M Albers KM Jia J Mitochondrial fission proteins in peripheral blood lymphocytes are potential biomarkers for Alzheimer’s disease Eur J Neurol 19 2012 1015 1022 22340708
195 Swerdlow RH Burns JM Khan SM The Alzheimer’s disease mitochondrial cascade hypothesis J Alzheimers Dis 20 2010 Suppl 2 S265 279 20442494
196 Streck EL Czapski GA Goncalves da Silva C Neurodegeneration, mitochondrial dysfunction, and oxidative stress Oxid Med Cell Longev 2013 2013 826046 24191177
197 Morrison RS Kinoshita Y Johnson MD Guo W Garden GA p53-dependent cell death signaling in neurons Neurochem Res 28 2003 15 27 12587660
198 Bae BI Xu H Igarashi S Fujimuro M Agrawal N Taya Y Hayward SD Moran TH Montell C Ross CA Snyder SH Sawa A p53 mediates cellular dysfunction and behavioral abnormalities in Huntington’s disease Neuron 47 2005 29 41 15996546
199 Silva AR Santos AC Farfel JM Grinberg LT Ferretti RE Campos AH Cunha IW Begnami MD Rocha RM Carraro DM de Braganca Pereira CA Jacob-Filho W Brentani H Repair of oxidative DNA damage, cell-cycle regulation and neuronal death may influence the clinical manifestation of Alzheimer’s disease PLoS One 9 2014 e99897 24936870
200 Manczak M Reddy PH RNA silencing of genes involved in Alzheimer’s disease enhances mitochondrial function and synaptic activity Biochim Biophys Acta 1832 2013 2368 2378 24063855
201 Barsoum MJ Yuan H Gerencser AA Liot G Kushnareva Y Graber S Kovacs I Lee WD Waggoner J Cui J White AD Bossy B Martinou JC Youle RJ Lipton SA Ellisman MH Perkins GA Bossy-Wetzel E Nitric oxide-induced mitochondrial fission is regulated by dynamin-related GTPases in neurons EMBO J 25 2006 3900 3911 16874299
202 Uo T Kinoshita Y Morrison RS Apoptotic actions of p53 require transcriptional activation of PUMA and do not involve a direct mitochondrial/cytoplasmic site of action in postnatal cortical neurons J Neurosci 27 2007 12198 12210 17989286
203 Karbowski M Lee YJ Gaume B Jeong SY Frank S Nechushtan A Santel A Fuller M Smith CL Youle RJ Spatial and temporal association of Bax with mitochondrial fission sites, Drp1, and Mfn2 during apoptosis J Cell Biol 159 2002 931 938 12499352
204 Wang DB Garden GA Kinoshita C Wyles C Babazadeh N Sopher B Kinoshita Y Morrison RS Declines in Drp1 and parkin expression underlie DNA damage-induced changes in mitochondrial length and neuronal death J Neurosci 33 2013 1357 1365 23345212
205 Guo X Sesaki H Qi X Drp1 stabilizes p53 on the mitochondria to trigger necrosis under oxidative stress conditions in vitro and in vivo Biochem J 461 2014 137 146 24758576
206 Maffioletti E Tardito D Gennarelli M Bocchio-Chiavetto L Micro spies from the brain to the periphery: new clues from studies on microRNAs in neuropsychiatric disorders Front Cell Neurosci 8 2014 75 24653674
207 Delay C Hebert SS MicroRNAs and Alzheimer’s Disease Mouse Models: Current Insights and Future Research Avenues Int J Alzheimers Dis 2011 2011 894938 21826259
208 Junn E Mouradian MM MicroRNAs in neurodegenerative diseases and their therapeutic potential Pharmacol Ther 133 2012 142 150 22008259
209 Nunez-Iglesias J Liu CC Morgan TE Finch CE Zhou XJ Joint genome-wide profiling of miRNA and mRNA expression in Alzheimer’s disease cortex reveals altered miRNA regulation PLoS One 5 185 e8898 20126538
210 Schonrock N Matamales M Ittner LM Gotz J MicroRNA networks surrounding APP and amyloid-beta metabolism--implications for Alzheimer’s disease Exp Neurol 235 2012 447 454 22119426
211 Wang JX Jiao JQ Li Q Long B Wang K Liu JP Li YR Li PF miR-499 regulates mitochondrial dynamics by targeting calcineurin and dynamin-related protein-1 Nat Med 17 2011 71 78 21186368
212 Hebert SS Horre K Nicolai L Bergmans B Papadopoulou AS Delacourte A De Strooper B MicroRNA regulation of Alzheimer’s Amyloid precursor protein expression Neurobiol Dis 33 2009 422 428 19110058
213 Patel N Hoang D Miller N Ansaloni S Huang Q Rogers JT Lee JC Saunders AJ MicroRNAs can regulate human APP levels Mol Neurodegener 3 2008 10 18684319
214 Delay C Hebert SS MicroRNAs and Alzheimer’s Disease Mouse Models: Current Insights and Future Research Avenues Int J Alzheimers Dis 2011 2011 894938 21826259
215 Li J Donath S Li Y Qin D Prabhakar BS Li P miR-30 regulates mitochondrial fission through targeting p53 and the dynamin-related protein-1 pathway PLoS Genet 6 2010 e1000795 20062521
216 Han XJ Lu YF Li SA Kaitsuka T Sato Y Tomizawa K Nairn AC Takei K Matsui H Matsushita M CaM kinase I alpha-induced phosphorylation of Drp1 regulates mitochondrial morphology J Cell Biol 182 2008 573 585 18695047
