LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


8610688
5937
Mov Disord
Mov. Disord.
Movement disorders : official journal of the Movement Disorder Society
0885-3185
1531-8257

27492190
5168716
10.1002/mds.26721
NIHMS834646
Article
Arguing Against the Proposed Definition Changes of PD
Boeve Bradley F. MD
Dickson Dennis W. MD
Duda John E. MD
Ferman Tanis J. PhD
Galasko Douglas R. MD
Galvin James E. MD, MPH
Goldman Jennifer G. MD, MS
Growdon John H. MD
Hurtig Howard I. MD
Kaufer Daniel I. MD
Kantarci Kejal MD MS
Leverenz James B. MD
Lippa Carol F. MD
Lopez Oscar L. MD
McKeith Ian G. F Med Sci
Singleton Andrew B. PhD
Taylor Angela
Tsuang Debby MD MSc
Weintraub Daniel MD
Zabetian Cyrus P. MD MS
Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, MN, USA
Departments of Pathology and Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, USA
Department of Neurology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA
Department of Psychiatry and Psychology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Jacksonville, FL, USA
Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, CA, USA
Marcus Neuroscience Institute, Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, Florida, USA
Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA
Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School at Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA
Department of Neurology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA
Department of Neurology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA
Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, MN, USA
Lou Ruvo Center for Brain Health, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH USA
Department of Neurology, Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA
Department of Neurology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Institute of Ageing, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK
Department of Neurology, University of Rochester School of Medicine, Rochester, NY, USA
Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA
Lewy Body Dementia Association, Lilburn, GA, USA
Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Washington; GRECC, VA Puget Sound Health System, Seattle, WA, USA
Department of Psychiatry, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA., USA
Department of Neurology, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA, USA
Correspondence: Bradley F. Boeve, MD, Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55895, 507-538-1038, bboeve@mayo.edu
8 12 2016
05 8 2016
11 2016
20 12 2016
31 11 16191622
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
As members of the Lewy Body Dementia Association Scientific Advisory Council, we aim to address some of the issues raised in the article entitled, "Time to redefine PD? Introductory statement of the MDS Task Force on the definition of Parkinson's disease." In particular, we suggest that the one-year rule distinguishing Parkinson’s disease dementia from dementia with Lewy bodies is worth maintaining because it serves an important purpose in clinical practice, in clinical and basic science research, and in helping the lay community understand the complexity of these different clinical phenotypes. Furthermore, we believe that adding an additional diagnostic label, “PD (dementia with Lewy bodies subtype)”, will confuse rather than clarify the distinction between dementia with Lewy bodies and PD or PD dementia, and will not improve management or expedite therapeutic development. We present arguments supporting our contentions.


We read with interest the article by Berg et al. regarding possible changes to the definition of PD as proposed by the International Parkinson and Movement Disorders Society task force commissioned to consider a redefinition of PD.1 Comments were sought by the authors regarding the content of this article. We aim to address some of the issues raised in this article, particularly those relating to dementia and the distinction between dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and Parkinson’s disease dementia (PDD).

We agree that there is clinical overlap between DLB and PDD, and concur that the one-year time period may not be the optimal method for diagnostic distinction, but we also believe that the rule serves a useful purpose for clinical practice and research studies and that its dismissal would be both premature and problematic. We argue that insufficient new evidence has been presented to justify a modification to the diagnostic criteria for PDD and DLB at this time. We also believe that adding an additional diagnostic label, “PD (DLB subtype)”, will confuse rather than clarify the situation, and will not improve management or expedite therapeutic development.

Addressing the “Challenging the Status Quo” Comments

Relevant challenges to redefine PD from the manuscript are restated in italics below, with our responses stated beneath each challenge.

Similar neuropsychological findings, with predominant visuoperceptual impairment, improvement of memory with cueing, and so on

We concur that once the dementia is diagnosed, visual perceptual impairment, attention difficulty and slowed reaction time occur in both DLB and PDD.2, 3 However, the comorbid presence of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) pathology is not uncommon in DLB, and has been shown to contribute to greater verbal memory impairment.4 In addition, it is not known whether PDD and DLB differ cognitively in the pre-dementia (i.e., mild cognitive impairment [MCI]) stage, because the cognitive profile for the MCI of DLB has yet to be firmly established.5 One study found more severe cognitive deficits for patients in the MCI stage of DLB compared with PD-MCI.6 These data raise questions about whether the early cognitive impairments of DLB and PDD are truly indistinguishable.

Similar nonmotor profile, with olfactory loss, depression, autonomic dysfunction, and sleep disorders in both

While these nonmotor features are indeed common to PD, PDD and DLB, their frequency, phenomenology, prominence in the clinical picture, and timing and evolution may differ between PD, PDD and DLB. Lumping nonmotor symptoms as part of the PD umbrella may deter further investigation into why these differences may emerge and what unique role they may play for DLB and other synucleinopathies.

Similar imaging, with overlapping patterns of cortical atrophy, glucose utilization, neurotransmitter changes, and diffusion tensor imaging

As the authors acknowledged, amyloid deposition imaged with positron emission tomography is higher in DLB compared to PD and PDD, and other group-level differences in neuroimaging parameters exist, including more gray matter atrophy on structural MRI in DLB, compared to PDD.7, 8 These findings therefore underscore some key differences between DLB and PDD on imaging.

Similar prodromal stage: For example, patients with idiopathic RBD develop both syndromes, with little difference in clinical evolution patterns

RBD clearly can be an early manifestation of Lewy body disease which eventually evolves into PD or DLB, and many patients with PD and DLB have features of RBD occurring years, or even decades, prior to the onset of parkinsonism, cognitive or psychiatric features.9 The presence of RBD improves the diagnostic validity of the current DLB criteria.10 However, there is insufficient data to substantiate the claim that there is little difference in patterns of clinical evolution between DLB and PDD in those with a prodromal history of RBD.

Similar genetics: For example, family members with alpha-synuclein duplication or triplications as well as glucocerebrosidase (GBA) mutations can present with either condition

Some of the most compelling evidence to maintain a distinction between PDD and DLB comes from recent studies which have uncovered some genetic differences between them. Specifically, single nucleotide polymorphisms in the gene encoding mitochondrial transcription factor A were found to be associated with PDD and not DLB.11 Also, the apolipoprotein e E4 allele frequency was higher in pure DLB (i.e., without concomitant AD pathology) than in PDD.12 Furthermore, while GBA mutations are reported in both DLB and PD, pure DLB has an intermediate mutation frequency, in between AD and PD.13 A recent genome wide study of DLB also demonstrated different genetic risk factors compared to PD.14

Addressing the “Defense of the Status Quo” Comments

Although patients with DLB and PDD look similar at end stage, the course can be extremely different

The most agreed-upon and empirically demonstrated clinical difference between DLB and PDD pertains to clinical course in the context of the temporal onset of dementia and motor signs (i.e., the one-year rule). This has special relevance when considering the prodromal and preclinical stages of these neurodegenerative conditions. In these conditions with both motor and cognitive deficits, when parkinsonian motor signs are the initial clinical feature (PDD), the onset of dementia develops an average of six years later.15, 16 When dementia is a presenting feature (as in DLB), the onset of parkinsonism develops an average of two years later.10 Clinical and pathologic differences are associated with a longer duration of parkinsonism relative to dementia onset, and include older age,17 later onset of visual hallucinations ,18 less severe cortical alpha-synuclein pathology, lower plaque scores and greater cholinergic cortical deficits,19 in PDD compared to DLB. Also, there is a difference in severity, as well as phenomenology, of motor signs and response to dopaminergic therapy between the ‘typical’ patient with PDD who has had many years of motor PD, compared to the archetypal patient who fits DLB criteria, whose duration of motor dysfunction is less, severity is often milder, and response to dopaminergic therapy is often less robust.

Many parkinsonian DLB patients would not meet criteria for clinical PD

We agree with the above statement and would add that in DLB there is also a subset of patients who do not have parkinsonism. These patients meet clinical criteria for probable DLB and have pathologic confirmation of Lewy body disease, but do not exhibit clear-cut extrapyramidal signs during life.10 This is one example of the phenotypic heterogeneity in DLB, and an important reason why the most common misdiagnosis of DLB continues to be AD.20 More work is needed to better understand DLB without parkinsonism, and placing DLB under the umbrella of PD may deter further investigation of the nonmotor and motor features of DLB.

Addressing the “Moving Forward” Comments

In the section titled “Moving Forward”, the authors suggest that we consider omitting the “one-year rule”, and propose using “PD (DLB subtype)” for those patients who meet clinical criteria for DLB and then fulfill criteria for PD, while maintaining the diagnosis of DLB for those who never fulfill criteria for PD. We believe that there is insufficient evidence to support this change currently, and adding an additional diagnostic category will only confuse the distinction further.

We agree that the one-year time period is arbitrary, may not be optimal and will almost certainly be modified in the future when the genetic underpinnings, pathophysiologic mechanisms and prodromal states of these disorders are better understood. It is well known that identifying a precise date of onset for either parkinsonism or dementia is often impossible, so that the difficulties posed by the hypothetical clinical scenario proposed by the authors, with onset of dementia at 10 months, is likely rare in routine clinical practice and does not justify changing diagnostic criteria at this time. Empirical data is needed to determine whether use of the one-year cut-off has benefit, or if a longer cut-off between the onset of parkinsonism and development of dementia would be a better demarcation of PDD from DLB. Although the one-year rule may not be optimal, we argue that modifying the diagnosis of a DLB patient by whether or not they meet clinical criteria for PD would neither help patients and caregivers understand the prognosis, nor serve to inform clinical practice, which was part of the original rationale for this guideline.21, 22 To reliably distinguish “parkinsonism” from PD may be achievable in a specialist movement disorder setting, but would likely introduce significant variation across the wide range of different clinical settings in which dementia patients are assessed and diagnosed.

Implications for Diagnosis, Evaluation, Medical Management, and Social and Supportive Care

The diagnosis, evaluation, medical management, education and community resources for patients with dementia and their families may be difficult to cover comprehensively when viewed from the perspective that PD (and thereby, by the task force’s implication, DLB) is predominantly a movement disorder. Clinical evaluation and management of people with dementia raise complex issues and have to be delivered by a diversity of clinicians with very different levels of expertise.

Patients, families and clinicians therefore require a diagnostic system which is simple, has high face validity, and is widely used. Two decades of concerted effort by the international research community has crafted a mutually agreed upon approach to diagnosis of PD, PDD, PD-MCI and DLB, and modification of this approach should be clearly supported by empirical data. It is precisely this collaborative stability that has enabled both PDD and DLB to have entered DSM-5,23 and to have been assigned as a national research priority by the United States.24

Abbreviations

AD Alzheimer’s disease

DLB dementia with Lewy bodies

GBA glucocerebrosidase

MCI mild cognitive impairment

PDD Parkinson’s disease dementia

RBD REM sleep behavior disorder Arguing

Summary and Recommendations

We argue that the statements from the 2005 Consensus Group on DLB continue to hold true.22 Therefore, we propose that: The one-year rule distinguishing PDD from DLB is worth maintaining because it serves an important purpose in clinical practice, in clinical and basic science research, and in helping the lay community understand the complexity of these apparently different clinical phenotypes. Modification of the one-year time period may be justified when the genetic underpinnings, pathophysiologic mechanisms and prodromal states of these disorders are better understood. Modifying the diagnosis of patients who meet diagnostic criteria for DLB based on whether or not they meet diagnostic criteria for PD is unjustified at this time, and the addition of a further diagnostic category, “PD (DLB subtype)”, is not necessary and is potentially confusing.

Continued attention should be given to identifying the mild or early manifestations of Lewy body disease and characterizing the longitudinal clinical and biomarker changes associated with evolving Lewy body disease.

Symptomatic and disease-modifying interventions should be developed using pharmacologic and non-pharmacologic modalities for the syndromes associated with Lewy body disease.

Both phenotypes be included in clinical trials of new therapies for Lewy body dementia (as opposed to lumping them into one phenotype) until more research improves knowledge about the differences and similarities between PDD and DLB.

Disclosures

None of the authors have disclosures pertinent to the content of this manuscript.

Author Contributions

Bradley F. Boeve MD – conceptualization of the manuscript, writing of first draft, final review and critique

Dennis W. Dickson MD – conceptualization of the manuscript, final review and critique

John E. Duda MD – conceptualization of the manuscript, final review and critique

Tanis J. Ferman PhD – conceptualization of the manuscript, final review and critique

Douglas R. Galasko MD – conceptualization of the manuscript, final review and critique

James E. Galvin MD, MPH – conceptualization of the manuscript, final review and critique

Jennifer G. Goldman MD, MS – conceptualization of the manuscript, final review and critique

John H.Growdon MD – conceptualization of the manuscript, final review and critique

Howard I. Hurtig MD – conceptualization of the manuscript, final review and critique

Daniel I. Kaufer MD – conceptualization of the manuscript, final review and critique

Kejal Kantarci MD MS – conceptualization of the manuscript, final review and critique

James B. Leverenz MD – conceptualization of the manuscript, final review and critique

Carol F. Lippa MD – conceptualization of the manuscript, final review and critique

Oscar L. Lopez MD – conceptualization of the manuscript, final review and critique

Ian G. McKeith F Med Sci – conceptualization of the manuscript, final review and critique

Andrew B. Singleton PhD – conceptualization of the manuscript, final review and critique

Angela Taylor – conceptualization of the manuscript, final review and critique

Debby Tsuang MD MSc – conceptualization of the manuscript, final review and critique

Daniel Weintraub MD – conceptualization of the manuscript, final review and critique

Cyrus P. Zabetian, MD MS – conceptualization of the manuscript, final review and critique


References

1 Berg D Postuma R Bloem B Time to redefine PD? Introductory statement of the MDS Task Force on the definition of Parkinson's disease Mov Disord 2014 29 454 462 24619848
2 Mosimann UP Mather G Wesnes KA O'Brien JT Burn DJ McKeith IG Visual perception in Parkinson disease dementia and dementia with Lewy bodies Neurology 2004 63 2091 2096 15596755
3 Ballard CG Aarsland D McKeith I Fluctuations in attention: PD dementia vs DLB with parkinsonism Neurology 2002 59 1714 1720 12473758
4 Johnson DK Morris JC Galvin JE Verbal and visuospatial deficits in dementia with Lewy bodies Neurology 2005 65 1232 1238 16247050
5 Ferman T Smith G Kantarci K Non-Amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment Progresses to Dementia with Lewy Bodies Neurology 2013 81 2032 2038 24212390
6 Yoon J Lee J Yong S Moon S Lee P The mild cognitive impairment stage of dementia with lewy bodies and Parkinson disease: a comparison of cognitive profiles Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 2014 28 151 155 24126215
7 Edison P Rowe CC Rinne JO Amyloid load in Parkinson's disease dementia and Lewy body dementia measured with [11C]PIB positron emission tomography J Neurol Neurosurg Psych 2008 79 1331 1338
8 Gomperts SN Imaging the role of amyloid in PD dementia and dementia with Lewy bodies Cur Neurol Neurosci Rep 2014 14 472
9 Boeve B Silber M Ferman T Clinicopathologic correlations in 172 cases of rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder with or without a coexisting neurologic disorder Sleep Med 2013 14 754 762 23474058
10 Ferman T Boeve B Smith G Inclusion of RBD improves the diagnostic classification of dementia with Lewy bodies Neurology 2011 77 875 882 21849645
11 Gatt A Jones E Francis P Ballard C Bateman J Association of a polymorphism in mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) with Parkinson's disease dementia but not dementia with Lewy bodies Neurosci Let 2013 557 Pt B 177 180 24184878
12 Tsuang D Leverenz J Lopez O APOE epsilon4 increases risk for dementia in pure synucleinopathies JAMA Neurol 2013 70 223 228 23407718
13 Tsuang D Leverenz JB Lopez OL GBA mutations increase risk for Lewy body disease with and without Alzheimer disease pathology Neurology 2012 79 1944 1950 23035075
14 Bras J Guerreiro R Darwent L Genetic analysis implicates APOE, SNCA and suggests lysosomal dysfunction in the etiology of dementia with Lewy bodies Hum Molec Gen 2014 23 6139 6146 24973356
15 Evans JR Mason SL Williams-Gray CH The natural history of treated Parkinson's disease in an incident, community based cohort J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2011 82 1112 1118 21593513
16 Aarsland D Kvaloy JT Andersen K The effect of age of onset of PD on risk of dementia J Neurol 2007 254 38 45 17508138
17 Savica R Grossardt B Bower J Boeve B Ahlskog J Rocca W Incidence of Dementia with Lewy Bodies and Parkinsonism with Dementia (P03.097) JAMA Neurol 2013 70 1396 1402 24042491
18 Williams DR Lees AJ Visual hallucinations in the diagnosis of idiopathic Parkinson's disease: a retrospective autopsy study Lancet Neurol 2005 4 605 610 16168928
19 Ballard C Ziabreva I Perry R Differences in neuropathologic characteristics across the Lewy body dementia spectrum Neurology 2006 67 1931 1934 17159096
20 Nelson P Jicha G Kryscio R Low sensitivity in clinical diagnoses of dementia with Lewy bodies J Neurol 2010 257 359 366 19795154
21 McKeith I Galasko D Kosaka K Consensus guidelines for the clinical and pathologic diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB): report of the consortium on DLB international workshop Neurology 1996 47 1113 1124 8909416
22 McKeith I Dickson D Lowe J Dementia with Lewy bodies: Diagnosis and management: Third report of the DLB Consortium Neurology 2005 65 1863 1872 16237129
23 American Psychiatric Association: Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed (DSM-5) 2013 Arlington, VA American Psychiatric Publishing
24 Montine T Koroshetz W Babcock D Recommendations of the Alzheimer's disease-related dementias conference Neurology 2014 83 851 860 25080517
