LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9419065
21028
Hum Brain Mapp
Hum Brain Mapp
Human brain mapping
1065-9471
1097-0193

28665045
5593789
10.1002/hbm.23711
NIHMS886397
Article
Extraction of Dynamic Functional Connectivity from Brain Grey Matter and White Matter for MCI Classification
Chen Xiaobo a*
Zhang Han a*
Zhang Lichi a
Shen Celina a
Lee Seong-Whan b
Shen Dinggang ab#
a Department of Radiology and BRIC, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA
b Department of Brain and Cognitive Engineering, Korea University, Seoul 02841, Republic of Korea
# Corresponding Author: Dinggang Shen, dgshen@med.unc.edu, 1-919-843-5420, Radiology and BRIC, UNC-Chapel Hill School of Medicine, Bioinformatics Building 3117, 130 Mason Farm Road
* Co-first Authors

20 6 2017
30 6 2017
10 2017
01 10 2018
38 10 50195034
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Brain functional connectivity (FC) extracted from resting-state fMRI (RS-fMRI) has become a popular approach for diagnosing various neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer's disease (AD) and its prodromal stage, mild cognitive impairment (MCI). Current studies mainly construct the FC networks between grey matter (GM) regions of the brain based on temporal co-variations of the blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) signals, which reflects the synchronized neural activities. However, it was rarely investigated whether the FC detected within the white matter (WM) could provide useful information for diagnosis. Motivated by the recently proposed functional correlation tensors (FCT) computed from RS-fMRI and used to characterize the structured pattern of local FC in the WM, we propose in this paper a novel MCI classification method based on the information conveyed by both the FC between the GM regions and that within the WM regions. Specifically, in the WM, the tensor-based metrics (e.g., fractional anisotropy [FA], similar to the metric calculated based on diffusion tensor imaging [DTI]) are first calculated based on the FCT and then summarized along each of the major WM fiber tracts connecting each pair of the brain GM regions. This could capture the functional information in the WM, in a similar network structure as the FC network constructed for the GM, based only on the same RS-fMRI data. Moreover, a sliding window approach is further used to partition the voxel-wise BOLD signal into multiple short overlapping segments. Then, both the FC and FCT between each pair of the brain regions can be calculated based on the BOLD signal segments in the GM and WM, respectively. In such a way, our method can generate dynamic FC and dynamic FCT to better capture functional information in both GM and WM and further integrate them together by using our developed feature extraction, selection, and ensemble learning algorithms. The experimental results verify that the dynamic FCT can provide valuable functional information in the WM; by combining it with the dynamic FC in the GM, the diagnosis accuracy for MCI subjects can be significantly improved even using RS-fMRI data alone.

Mild cognitive impairment
Alzheimer's disease
functional connectivity
functional correlation tensor
resting-state fMRI

Introduction

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most prevalent form of dementia in elderly, accounting for about 50% to 80% of age-related dementia cases (Association, 2012). It has been estimated that 1 out of 85 will be suffering from this disease by 2050 (Brookmeyer, et al., 2007). AD is an irreversible neurodegenerative disease causing progressive cognitive and memory deficits, which severely interfere with daily life and may eventually cause death. Currently, there are no effective clinical treatments for AD. Therefore, accurate diagnosis of AD at its early stage may have pivotal importance in preventing progression of detrimental symptoms. Mild cognitive impairment (MCI), a prodromal stage of AD, has gained much attention recently since MCI subjects tend to progress to clinical AD at an annual conversion rate of 10% to 15%, compared with normal controls (NC) who develop to AD at much lower annual conversion rate of approximately 1% to 2% (Petersen, et al., 2001). Thus, identifying MCI subjects has played an important role in helping reduce the risk of developing AD by appropriate pharmacological treatments and behavioral interventions. However, it is very challenging to identify MCI subjects from those undergoing normal aging, because of mild cognitive impairment symptoms.

In the past decade, various advanced imaging techniques, such as structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (McEvoy, et al., 2009; Wee, et al., 2013; Suk, et al., 2015), functional MRI (fMRI) (Chen, et al., 2016; Wee, et al., 2015; Wee, et al., 2012a 2012b), diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) (Nir, et al., 2013; Wee, et al., 2011), and positron emission tomography (PET) (Coleman, 2007; Mosconi, et al., 2010), have provided efficient and noninvasive ways to acquire structural and functional imaging data of the human brain. Different imaging techniques can reveal different valuable information and help us better understand the brain (Li, et al., 2011). For example, fMRI (Machulda, et al., 2009; Wee, et al., 2015) is able to detect hemodynamic changes related to neural activities based on the blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) signals in grey matter (GM) regions. DTI (Haller, et al., 2010; Lee, et al., 2013; Wee, et al., 2012) quantifies the anisotropy of water molecule's diffusion process occurring in white matter (WM) tracts, thus providing a feasible way to analyze nerve fibers in WM and also characterizes structural connectivity in the brain. PET (Silveira and Marques, 2010) can be used to observe metabolic processes by indirectly measuring brain function.

For the purpose of MCI classification, constructing brain functional connectivity (FC) networks (Rubinov and Sporns, 2010) based on the resting-state fMRI (RS-fMRI), which is acquired without explicit tasks, has become one of the most promising methods since MCI and AD are generally believed to be associated with a disconnection syndrome within brain networks. The FC is often measured by correlation between RS-fMRI BOLD signals (measuring spontaneous neuronal activities) of different brain regions (Leonardi, et al., 2013), which exhibits how structurally segregated and functionally specialized brain regions interact with each other (Friston, et al., 1993; Greicius, 2008). Nowadays, the FC has been recognized as a crucial imaging biomarker for diagnosing numerous neurodegenerative diseases, including AD/MCI, and for understanding pathophysiological mechanisms, as FC may be altered in both topological structure and strength of connectivity due to pathological disruptions. Numerous methods have been proposed to characterize FC between brain regions based on the BOLD signals of RS-fMRI, such as Pearson's correlation, partial correlation (Jie, et al., 2014b), and sparse representation (Yu, et al., 2017; Suk, et al., 2015; Wee, et al., 2015; Wright, et al., 2009).

Conventionally, the FC is assumed to be temporally stationary, indicating that the interaction patterns between different brain regions are fixed across time. However, this assumption may underestimate the complex and dynamic interaction patterns between different brain regions, which have been confirmed by many recent works (Chen, et al., 2016; Damaraju, et al., 2014; Hutchison, et al., 2013; Leonardi, et al., 2013; Wee, et al., 2015). From this perspective, exploiting the rich temporal information contained in dynamic FC is a promising way to improve the performance of MCI classification. In this paper, we adopt a sliding window strategy (Chen, et al., 2016; Leonardi, et al., 2013; Wee, et al., 2015) to partition the whole BOLD signals into multiple overlapping segments, which is considered a popular approach for exploring dynamic property of underlying FC. Specifically, on each BOLD signal segment, the FC is calculated for measuring the functional relationships between different brain regions during a specific time period. In such a way, it can yield dynamic FC (dFC) for each pair of brain regions that represents variations of FC throughout time, which then can be used as new features for early AD diagnosis.

Besides RS-fMRI data, diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI, often called DTI, when analyzed by the tensor model) is also used for disorder disease diagnosis. DTI is a conventional in vivo imaging modality to investigate structural connectivity information in the WM (Jin, et al., 2015; Jin, et al., 2017). It measures the anisotropic movement of water molecules in the brain by using multiple diffusion-weighted gradient fields. Based on the DTI, the major WM fiber bundles can be delineated using a tractography approach. DTI is often used to characterize structural connectivity (SC), rather than functional connectivity (FC), in the WM according to the voxel-wise diffusion tensors. It should be emphasized that when we refer to “structural connectivity”, it is commonly believed to be static, i.e., not changing in a short period of time. Some works (Wee, et al., 2012; Zhu, et al., 2014) intended to combine the FC information from RS-fMRI data and the SC information from DTI data, since the relationship between functional and structural connectivity of the brain is vital in understanding and interpreting neurophysiological findings.

However, in numerous clinical application studies, it is impractical to acquire both DTI and RS-fMRI data due to the significant increase in total scanning time. Thus, many studies on the brain FC (or the brain functional networks) do not acquire DTI data. While, in some disease-related studies, e.g., early detection of Alzheimer's disease (AD), the brain FC has been shown to be more sensitive to pathological changes than SC (Querbes, et al., 2009; Das, et al., 2013). Moreover, previous studies have also indicated that abnormalities in FC from RS-fMRI can be detected earlier than abnormalities in SC acquired through DTI. Therefore, we have aimed to extract more FC-based features from RS-fMRI data. A possible solution is to extract FC information in the WM regions, in addition to the FC features usually extracted from the GM regions.

It has been argued that there putative and meaningful BOLD fMRI signals exist in the WM (Gawryluk, et al., 2014). Previous studies have indicated a large possibility of having BOLD signals in the WM. For example, task activation was found in the genu of the corpus callosum, which connects the GM activation areas (Tettamanti, et al., 2002). Besides the corpus callosum, fMRI activations have also been observed in other task-related WM structures, such as the internal capsule during a swallow task (Mosier, et al., 1999) and a finger-tapping task (Gawryluk, et al., 2011). These findings together suggest that BOLD fMRI signals do exist in WM regions. The underlying biologically microscopic mechanism may be due to the existence of the vasculature and the detectability of cerebral blood flow (CBF), as well as cerebral blood volume (CBV) in the WM. Nevertheless, the commonly accepted theory is that the BOLD signals in the WM are much weaker (with lower signal-to-noise ratio) than those in the GM, i.e., with only one-third of the GM BOLD signal change percentage in the GM (Gawryluk, et al., 2014). Because the task-evoked response is absent and subject's state is largely unconstrained in the RS-fMRI studies, deriving meaningful functional information from the WM is even more difficult.

Fortunately, in a series of pioneering studies, Ding et al. (2013, 2016) have proposed a novel concept of “functional correlation tensor (FCT),” by using a simple and intuitive way to quantify functional information in the WM based on a tensor model of each voxel's local spatiotemporal BOLD signal correlations. Besides an interesting overall coherence between the FCT from RS-fMRI and the DT from DWI in many main WM structures, it was also found that different functional statuses could modulate such FCTs in the related WM fibers during visual stimulation (Ding, et al., 2016). This is the first study indicating that the FC of the RS-fMRI BOLD signals in the WM also carries meaningful functional information. Several follow-up studies have further validated such findings (Marussich, et al., 2017; Wu, et al., 2016, 2017).

Therefore, the FCT can spatially convey static and anatomical connectivity information, and more importantly, it can measure dynamic and functional information that DTI cannot provide. In this way, we take a step further to make bold assumptions and propose in this study that: 1) the structurally anisotropic FCTs exist in the major WM fiber bundles; 2) these spatially constrained FCTs carry informative functional information; and 3) such functional information can be characterized by dynamic FCT changes captured by dynamics analysis of the time-varying fractional anisotropy (FA) based on FCT. Because of the unneglectable effects of physiological and other sources of noise on the computation of FCT, we propose a noise-robust way for computing the dynamic FCT metric by weighted averaging of the voxel-wise WM fiber tract probability and the voxel-wise FA across all voxels in each main WM fiber bundle. We hypothesize that the dynamic FCT's activity, as quantified by the root-mean-square (RMS), can be used as features from WM, together with the RMS of dynamic FC from the GM, and will help early diagnosis of AD. Our experimental result shows that these two types of (WM and GM) FC-based features can be jointly used to provide complementary information for training a strong classification model for diagnosis. It is worth noting that this is the first time using FCT in the WM (based on RS-fMRI) for disease diagnosis.

2 Materials

2.1 Preprocessing of RS-fMRI data for FC analysis

In this study, the publically available Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database (adni.loni.ucla.edu) is used to provide neuroimaging data. ADNI was launched in 2003 by research organizations and companies, such as the National Institute on Aging, the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering, and the Food and Drug Administration, among others. The goal of ADNI is to define biomarkers for use in clinical trials, find the best way to measure the treatment effects of AD therapeutics, and diagnose AD at a pre-dementia stage.

In this work, 54 MCI patients and 54 NC subjects, which were age- and gender-matched, were selected from ADNI database. The images of each subject were acquired using a 3.0T Philips scanners at centers in different places. The voxel size is 3.13×3.13×3.13 mm3. SPM8 software package (http://www.fil.ion.ucl.uk/spm/software/spm8) was applied to preprocess the RS-fMRI data. The first 3 volumes of each subject were discarded to ensure magnetization equilibrium. Rigid-body transformation was then used to correct subject's head motion, but the subjects with large head motion (i.e., larger than 2 mm or 2 degrees) were discarded. Next, the fMRI images were normalized to the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space and spatially smoothed with a Gaussian kernel with full width at half maximum (FWHM) of 6×6×6 mm3. We did not perform scrubbing to data with a frame-wise displacement larger than 0.5 mm, as it would introduce additional artifacts. Subjects who had more than 2.5 min RS-fMRI data with large (&gt; 0.5) frame-wise displacement were excluded from further analysis. The BOLD signals were further band-pass filtered (0.015≤f≤0.15Hz) to avoid the physiological noises and measurement errors.

2.2 Generating WM major fiber probability template

To measure connectivity within WM, we generated WM major fiber masks, within which we calculated pair-wise connectivity based on specific fiber tracts. Currently, there are several brain WM templates available (Mori, et al., 2005), such as JHU DTI-based atlas created by hand segmentation of a standard-space average of DTI images of 81 subjects. However, only 48 WM tract labels were given in this template, which was not compatible with our ROI-based connectivity analysis. Therefore, in this work, we generated WM atlas using an independent dataset for our specific need. Concretely, DTI data of 60 subjects were selected from the Human Connectome Project (HCP) (http://www.humanconnectomeproject.org/) dataset in order to construct WM major fiber probability template. HCP was started in 2010 and aims to share knowledge about the structural and functional connectivity of the healthy human brain. By using advanced imaging instruments, analysis tools, and informatics techniques to construct a human connectome map, it has served as a foundation for researching changes in brain networks that occur with age and neurodegenerative diseases, like AD. After preprocessing DTI data using FSL (Woolrich, et al., 2009), dtifit function in FSL was used to calculate DT for each voxel. PANDA was then used to generate whole brain tractography within the brain tissue using FACT algorithm using the following parameters: minimal seed voxel fractional anisotropy (FA) = 0.1, angle threshold = 35, and the number of seed at each voxel = 4. Automated Anatomical Labeling (AAL) atlas (Tzourio-Mazoyer, et al., 2002) which contains 116 brain regions (or ROIs, regions of interest) was projected back to each individual's native space using a deformable DTI registration algorithm. If two ROIs were connected with more than 200 streamlines, this pathway was considered as a major fiber pathway. All of these processes were conducted at individual spaces. All the corresponding major fibers across all subjects were transformed to the MNI space and further averaged to generate a probability template for each major fiber. Of all the major fibers, we also counted how many subjects have the same fibers, and those with over 50% subjects were finally chosen as “putative” major fibers. As a result, we identified a total of 359 putative major WM tracts.

3 Method

The flowchart of the proposed method is shown in Fig.1. In summary, it consisted of the following steps: 1) generating dynamic FC (dFC) from grey matter and also dynamic FCT (dFCT) from white matter, 2) extracting statistical features based on root-mean-square of dFC and dFCT, 3) selecting a few crucial features based on a two-stage feature selection method, and 4) classifying subjects based on the ensemble support vector machine (SVM). The detail of each of these four steps is described in the following subsections.

3.1 Generating dynamic FC from GM

The RS-fMRI image of each subject was parcellated into 116 ROIs using AAL atlas (Tzourio-Mazoyer, et al., 2002). In order to capture non-stationary interactions between different ROIs, the RS-fMRI BOLD signal from each voxel was partitioned into multiple overlapping segments with a sliding window approach. Specifically, let M be the total length of image volumes, N be the length of sliding window, and s be the step size between two successive windows. Then, the total number of segments is K = ⌊(M − N) / s⌋ On each segment, within GM areas, the regional mean BOLD signal can be calculated by averaging the BOLD signals over all voxels inside each ROI, reflecting neural activity occurring during a relatively short period. Suppose the Pearson's correlation coefficients (PCC) between ROI i and ROI j on the k–th sliding window is denoted as Cijk. Then, we can get interregional dFC, denoted as dFCij=[Cij1,⋯,Cijk,⋯,CijK], which measures the dynamics of FC between ROI i and ROI j. An illustration of dFCij from GM is shown in Fig.1. Note that, due to the symmetry of Pearson's correlation, the number of dFC is 6670, equaling to the total number of ROI pairs.

3.2 Generating dynamic FCT from WM

To compute functional correlation tensor (FCT), we focused on the voxels in WM. In parallel to the case above, a sliding window approach was first used to partition the BOLD signal from each voxel into K overlapping segments. For voxel Vp in WM, its 3×3×3 neighborhood, comprising a total of 26 first-tier neighboring voxels {Vp1, … , Vpq, …, Vp26}, was defined. Based on the BOLD signal segments within the k-th sliding window, the PCC Cp,pqk between voxel Vp and its neighboring voxel Vpq (q = 1,2, …, 26) was calculated, which together characterized the local profile of 26 temporal correlations along their respective directions during a short period. Define a 3×3 dyadic tensor Dp,pq as

Dp,pq=np,pqnp,pqT

where np,pq is a 3×1 unit vector, such that Dp,pq contains only one non-zero eigenvalue with the corresponding eigenvector pointing to the direction from Vp to Vpq. Then, a 3×3 FCT Tpk is defined for Vp as a weighted combination of all Dp,pq (Ding, et al., 2016):

Tpk=∑q=126Cp,pqkDp,pq

Geometrically, FCT Tpk amounts to a three-dimensional ellipsoid where three mutually-orthogonal axes characterized the directions and magnitudes of FC around Vp. By performing eigen-decomposition on Tpk, we obtained its eigenvalues λ1, λ2, λ3 and eigenvectors, which represented the dominant directions of 26 temporal correlations. To statistically summarize local anisotropy of temporal correlations, similar to the case of fractional anisotropy (FA) calculation based on diffusion tensors in DTI studies, a FA value was calculated for Vp:

FApk=32(λ1−λ¯)2+(λ2−λ¯)2+(λ3−λ¯)2λ12+λ22+λ32

where λ̄ denotes the mean value of all eigenvalues. The above procedure is shown in Fig.1. By repeating the FCT and FA computation for all voxels in WM stated above, we obtained a FA map of FC for each subject on the k-th sliding window. Next, for each pair of ROIs i and j in 359 major fiber probability templates constructed in Section 2.2, we calculated a weighted mean FA value FAijk by combining with the FA map, representing an overall anisotropy of local FC in the WM tracts linking the two GM ROIs. Repeating the above process for each sliding window generated 359 time series, each of which was referred to as dFCT in this work and denoted by dFCTij=[FAij1,⋯,FAijk,⋯,FAijK]. Similar to dFCij in the above section, dFCTij characterized the temporal dynamics of FA values in the WM tracts linking ROI i and ROI j. An illustration of dFCT is also shown in Fig.1.

3.3 Feature extraction

In this study, we treated both dFC and dFCT as two types of discrete signals extracted from different pairs of ROIs. These signals form a basis for further diagnosis. To extract features from these signals, we calculated the root-mean-square (RMS) for each signal, which defined a statistic to measure the magnitude of varying quantity. Specifically, the RMS feature for a discrete signal dFCij=[Cij1,⋯,Cijk,⋯,CijK] was given by

RMS(dFCij)=∑k=1K(Cijk)2K

RMS value, also known as the quadratic mean in mathematics, represented the active level of the signals because its power was directly proportional to the square of RMS value (Altahat, et al., 2012; Dey, 2014). As a result, for dFC of each subject, a total of 6670 RMS features, which form a high-dimensional feature representation, was generated. Similarly, for dFCT of each subject, a total of 359 RMS features was generated.

3.4 Feature selection and classifier learning

The number of RMS features is much larger than that of subjects, especially for dFC, and more importantly, many features may be irrelevant to the classification task. Directly training a machine-learning model on high-dimensional small sample data tended to yield poor generalization performance because of the overfitting phenomenon (Chen, et al., 2012). In addition, it also makes interpretation of the results quite difficult. To overcome the problems above, feature selection (Jie, et al., 2014a; Ye, et al., 2012) is necessary for reducing the number of features before building a classification model.

In this work, a two-stage feature selection procedure was developed to select a subset of original features, which was crucial for classification. Specifically, in the first stage, a two-sample t-test, which had been applied widely in the neuroimaging pattern analysis, was performed between MCI subjects and NC subjects for each original feature. Then, the features were ranked according to their individual discriminative capability indicated by corresponding p-values. Only the features with p-values smaller than a given threshold were retained, while the remaining features were screened out. The resulting features after t-tests, although only highly relevant to the class label, may have still contained redundant information. Therefore, in the second stage, LASSO regression was used to further optimize the feature subset. Different from the paired t-test performed on each feature individually, LASSO regression (Tibshirani, 1996), which accounted all features jointly, kept only the most discriminative features, while discarding the redundant ones. Let X ∈ Rm×n be the sample matrix, where m is the number of samples and n is the number of features selected by paired t-test, and Y ∈ Rm be the label vector of samples, where Yi = 1 if the i-th subject is MCI and Yi = 1 if the i-th subject is NC. Then, the LASSO regression was formulated as the following cost function:

minw12‖Xw+b−Y‖2+λ‖w‖1

where w = [w1, …, wi, … , wn]T ∈ Rn, and wi is the weight for the i-th feature. λ is a balance parameter controlling the modal sparsity based on the l1-norm regularization. The larger the value of λ, the sparser the model. Finally, only those features with non-zero weights wi were eventually retained.

Considering different characteristics of the features extracted from GM and WM regions, two SVM classifiers were constructed based on the respective feature subsets. SVM sought a separation plane between training samples of different classes by maximizing the margin, meanwhile minimizing the classification errors. Balance between empirical risk and model complexity improved the generalization performance on unseen samples. To generate a final classification, the two SVMs were integrated at the decision level, that is, the scores from SVMs were fused by linear combination with a weight reflecting the importance of dFC.

4 Experiments

To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed method, we performed experiments by comparing with some related methods, including static functional connectivity (sFC), static functional correlation tensor (sFCT), dynamic FC (dFC), dynamic FCT (dFCT), and two integrated methods, such as (1) combined sFC and sFCT (sComb) and (2) combined dFC and dFCT (dComb). For static cases, i.e., sFC and sFCT, there were two main differences from their dynamic counterparts. One was that the whole BOLD signal from each voxel in RS-fMRI was employed, without using any sliding window approach. The other was that we directly calculated a single Pearson's correlation coefficient and a single FA value for each of all possible connections between any two ROIs. Note that, for such sFC and sFCT analyses, we could not produce any dynamic time series for these metrics, and could not extract RMS features. Specifically, the pairwise functional connection based on the whole BOLD signals from each pair of the ROIs were used as the sFC features; and we followed the same computation procedures of FCT (in Section 3.3) based on the whole BOLD signals and then calculated weighted mean FA values for each pair of ROIs in the resulting FCT maps as sFCT features. Note that sFC and dFC were constructed from GM regions, while sFCT and dFCT were from WM. For the subsequent feature selection and classification, all methods followed the same flowchart, so that different methods could be compared fairly.

In the experiments, due to limited samples, a leave-one-out (LOO) cross-validation was applied to benchmark the generalization performance of different methods. Specifically, given a total of L subjects, L − 1 subjects were used as training data in order to obtain a model, which was subsequently evaluated by the rest subject in terms of the classification accuracy. The procedure above was repeated L times, where at each time a different subject was used as a test data, and the averaged classification result across L times was finally reported. The parameters in each method were tuned based on the L − 1 training subjects by a nested LOO cross-validation. The parameter λ in LASSO regression was chosen by grid search from the set of {0.1, 0.2,…,0.8}. All methods were implemented in MATLAB environment. For sFCT and dFCT, we only performed the LASSO-based feature selection because many ROI pairs without notable anatomical connections were already screened out during the whole-brain streamline fiber tractography and only 359 ROI pairs were retained. For sFC and dFC, we performed a two-stage feature selection where the two-sample paired t-test with a significance of p = 0.05 was applied in the first stage. This was because for sFC and dFC, all 6670 pairs of ROIs were considered, which generated a much higher dimensionality. SLEP toolbox (Liu, et al., 2009) was used to implement LASSO-based feature selection. LIBSVM library (Chang and Lin, 2001) was used to implement SVM classification by using the default parameter value (i.e., C = 1). For the sliding window approach, we simply allowed the window length be 30 and step size 1. Note that both feature selection and SVM training were carried out within the LOO cross-validation stage for fair comparison.

4.1 Comparison of classification performance

To evaluate the performance of different methods, we employed the five following indices: accuracy (ACC), sensitivity (SEN), specificity (SPE), area under ROC curve (AUC), and F-score (Sokolova, et al., 2006). Let TP, TN, FP, and FN to denote true positive, true negative, false positive, and false negative, respectively, where the controls were considered as the null distribution. On the other hand, the definitions of ACC, SEN, SPE, and F-score are given as follows:

ACC=TP+TNTP+TN+FP+FNSEN=TPTP+FNSPE=TNTN+FPF−score=2×precision×recallprecision+recall

where precision=TPTP+FP, and recall=TPTP+FN. As we can see, ACC measures the proportion of subjects correctly classified among all subjects, SEN and SPE represent the proportions of MCI patients and NC correctly classified, respectively, and F-score considers both precision and recall together. The ROC curve is a plot of SEN versus 1-SPE over all possible values of discrimination threshold. The classification performance of the proposed method and other related methods are summarized in Table 1, where the best scores are highlighted in bold. Fig.2 plots the ROC curves for different methods.

As shown in Table 1, in static cases, FCT achieved higher accuracy than FC. It may be because the available functional correlation information from GM is limited in such a case, while FCT, in contrast, can incorporate valuable anatomical information from WM to assist the diagnosis of MCI. Moreover, the combination of both achieves superior performance than either sFC or sFCT individually. It indicates that the functional connectivity information from GM and WM regions can provide complementary information in MCI diagnosis. More interestingly, we can observe that, in dynamic case, FC gains larger performance improvement and eventually outperforms FCT. This verifies that the time-varying correlation between ROIs can provide rich information compared with the static case. This phenomenon has been observed in many recent studies, e.g., in (Chen, et al., 2016; Wee, et al., 2015). Furthermore, the integration of dFC and dFCT has achieved the best performance in terms of all indices. For instance, it outperformed individual dFC by 4% and individual dFCT by 7% in diagnosis accuracy. In order to implement a nonparametric statistical significance test, we followed DeLong's test (DeLong, et al., 1988), which allowed for the comparison of the two AUCs calculated on the same dataset. The pairwise test results under the 95% confidence interval are shown in Table 2, where the p-values less than 0.05 are highlighted in bold. As we can see from Table 2, our proposed dComb, which combines dFC and dFCT, significantly outperforms all other methods under 95% confidence interval. This demonstrates that the incorporation of the dynamic FC information in the WM is also helpful for improving the classification performance.

In addition to the LOO cross-validation, we also evaluated all methods by using 20-fold cross-validation, which had been widely adopted in previous studies (Salvatore, et al., 2015). To reduce the influence of randomness in data partition, we repeated this 20-fold cross validation 10 times, and reported average accuracy and standard deviation in Fig. 3. Consistent with the results from leave-one-out cross-validation, using 20-fold cross-validation also shows that the combination of dynamic FC and dynamic FCT features achieved the best performance. Thus, this study has certain practical significance in future clinical studies, as it brings significant performance improvement without acquiring diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) data. As a result, total scanning time and imaging costs can also be reduced.

Note that the RS-fMRI based MCI diagnosis has attracted increasing interest from the neuroimaging community, with many research works presented in the literature. For example, Challis et al. (2015) applied Bayesian Gaussian process logistic regression (GP-LR) as classifier to the diagnosis of MCI and AD subjects, which achieved a similar accuracy as our method. However, in addition to FC information, the above paper also used age and mini mental state examination (MMSE) scores as features in classification. In contrast, our method did not use such features, instead only used RS-fMRI data. We also noticed that many other papers dealt with similar problems as our study. However, in contrast to those methods, our study simultaneously considered both the dynamic variations of the conventional functional connectivity from the GM and the anisotropic local functional connectivity patterns, i.e., functional correlation tensors, from the WM.

Fig.4 shows the temporal variations of FC and the weighted mean FA values associated with the left anterior cingulate gyrus (ACG.L) and the left posterior cingulate gyrus (PCG.L), as well as the left posterior cingulate gyrus (PCG.L) and the right posterior cingulate gyrus (PCG.R) for one subject, when using the sliding window approach. As demonstrated, the interregional interaction actually undergoes a large variation over the entire duration of the RS-fMRI scan. For example, not only the magnitude but also the direction of interregional correlation had changed for PCG.L-PCG.R pair. This indicates the rather complex interaction relationship between ROIs, which should be modeled elaborately and leveraged for the diagnosis.

4.2 Most discriminative connections

In this subsection, we present the discriminative connections associated with ROI pairs revealed by our method. The feature selection process evaluates the relevance of each connection with respect to classification, and selects a few connections contributing to the linear classification model. Note that, due to different training sets in LOO cross-validation, different sets of discriminative connections might be selected in each evaluation procedure. Therefore, we compute the total frequencies of each connection across all LOO cross-validations and sort the results according to the resulting total frequencies. Similar to (Wee, et al., 2016), the connections with the highest frequencies during the LOO cross-validation are selected as the most discriminative connections. The reported results are based on the original AAL atlas (with 116 ROIs) for illustration (Fox, et al., 2005). Fig.5 shows some most frequently selected connections, as well as the associated ROI pairs, from dFC and dFCT. The node represents ROI, and the edge represents connection, i.e., a pair of ROIs contributing to classification.

As implicated from these experimental results, many connections of the default mode network (DMN) are selected, such as the precuneus, posterior cingulate cortex, middle temporal gyrus, middle orbitofrontal cortex, superior orbitofrontal cortex, and parahippocampal gyrus. It is generally accepted that the DMN plays an important role in high-level cognitive functions, while abnormality of the DMN can be observed across a range of neurological disorders (Buckner, et al., 2008). Besides the DMN, other selected regions that may be important for early AD diagnosis are mainly the frontal areas, including the inferior orbitofrontal cortex, opercular inferior frontal gyrus, olfactory cortex, precentral gyrus, and paracentral lobule, thus indicating the importance of the frontal lobe for early diagnosis of AD.

Another main brain lobe suggested by our study to have potential diagnostic values is the temporal lobe, including the Heshl's gyrus, the superior and middle temporal pole, the amygdala and the parahippocampus, thus indicating that the temporal lobe could be another important brain lobe that is attacked by AD pathology (Echávarri, et al., 2011; Wee, et al., 2015; Poulin, et al., 2011).

Other regions with potential diagnostic values include: the middle occipital gyrus, fusiform gyrus, the calcarine sulcus in the occipital lobe, and the putamen in subcortical regions, as well as several cerebellar areas, including the cerebellum lobules IX and X, lobule III of vermis, and lobule X of vermis. Most of these selected ROIs are consistently shown to be related to AD pathology in the previous studies (Adriaanse, et al., 2014; De Jong, et al., 2008).

Next, we discuss the potential biomarkers for future studies as indicated by our results from two aspects: dynamic FC and dynamic FCT analysis.

Based on dynamic FC analysis, several connections between the cerebral and the cerebellar regions are suggested as important features. The cerebellum is often involved in motor learning, reflex adaptation, and other cognitive functions. Alzheimer's disease pathology could not only lead to synaptic alterations (Baloyannis, et al., 2000) in some cerebellar regions and cerebral regions (mostly in the frontal areas) (Braak &amp; Braak, 1991) for the MCI subjects, but also alter the indirect (via the relay of the thalamus and/or pons) long-range pathway between the cerebral and cerebellar regions, thus resulting in abnormal cognitive function (see the review in (Egidio, et al., 2012) for more details). However, few previous studies have shown such a long-range cerebrocerebellar functional connectivity abnormality in the early stage of AD, especially for subjects without observable structural difference (Hanyu, et al., 1993; Meoded, et al., 2015). Our result suggests that, by using dynamic FC, we can detect subtle changes in the large-scale cerebrocerebellar functional integration for MCI subjects. However, by using traditional static FC, such changes can be difficult to detect during early stages.

From dynamic FCT analysis, our results show some noticeably clustered connections with aberrant dynamic FCT profiles in the prefrontal cortex (mostly in the orbitomedial prefrontal areas), which coincides with pathological signatures of AD. For example, in the prodromal stage of AD, the neurofibrillary tangles and amyloid plaque deposition are localized mostly in the entorhinal cortex and the orbitomedial prefrontal areas (Braak and Braak, 1991). This AD pathology-based staging model, in its very beginning, is quite consistent in the spatial pattern with our most discriminative dynamic FCT features (see Fig. 5(b) in our paper). It is well known that the prefrontal cortex plays an important role in decision-making, attention control, and other high-level cognitive functions (Grady, et al., 2001). We speculate that this result is mainly because the FCT is computed from the WM and could reflect local-range FC pattern. The local FC changes may be more sensitive to the local pathological changes caused by the progression of AD. Therefore, we propose that the dynamic FCT might be better suitable for serving as an effective early biomarker for diagnosis of AD, specifically in the prodromal stage.

Fig.6 (a) and (b) show the distributions of RMS features in MCI and NC subjects associated with a single connection selected from dFC and dFCT, respectively. For dFC, this connection is between left inferior frontal gyrus (opercular) (IFGoperc.L) and right olfactory (OLF.R), while for dFCT, this connection is between left orbitofrontal cortex (middle) (ORBmid.L) and left orbitofrontal cortex (inferior) (ORBinf.L). As evident from Fig.6, although dFC shows slightly better separability than dFCT, a single connection either from dFC or from dFCT merely provides limited discriminating capability, while multiple connections chosen together through feature selection procedure can achieve better diagnosis accuracy for MCI and NC, as verified by the experimental results shown in Table 1 and Fig. 3.

In summary, these findings show that the disruptions of functional connectivity are widespread across the brain of MCI subjects even at its prodromal stage. The dFC and dFCT both reveal interesting and complementary information for clinical diagnosis.

4.3 Balance between FC and FCT in ensemble classification

In ensemble classification, the weight for FC determines its contribution compared to FCT. A larger weight indicates the larger contribution of FC to the classification and vice versa. Thus, we investigate the variation of classification accuracy with respect to weights in both dynamic and static situations. The classification accuracy and AUC value of the proposed method are shown in Fig.7.

It can be observed that, for static and dynamic cases, FC and FCT shows different importance. In the static case, higher classification accuracy is achieved when using small weights. A similar trend can be observed for the AUC values. This implies that the FCT constructed from WM regions plays a more important role than the FC constructed from GM regions. In contrast, in the dynamic case, a large weight can lead to better performance, indicating the dominance of information carried by FC from GM regions in the classification.

4.4 Computation time

After training the classification model offline, the most discriminative features as well as the weights in SVM model can be determined. As a result, we only need to compute these selected features, instead of checking all ROI pairs or all major white-matter tracts. For a new subject, the total computational time is about 80 min. However, we should notice that the computations on each sliding window and at each white matter voxel are essentially independent and thus are parallelizable. For example, if all computations on 108 sliding windows are performed in parallel, the computational time for a new subject will be about 100 times shorter than the unparalleled situation. After efficient optimization of our method, it can possibly be applied to disease diagnosis in the clinical setting.

5 Discussion

5.1 Evaluation of connection importance

There are many dedicated ways (Haufe, et al., 2014) to reveal the importance of connections in multivariate analysis models, such as the product measure, dominance analysis, proportion marginal variance decomposition, relative weight, as well as bootstrapping. Different methods may generate different results due to different implications of “importance.” In this study, we follow a widely adopted method in the MCI diagnosis related literature (e.g., Wee, et al., 2015; Jie, et al., 2016), by calculating the frequency of each connection chosen by the feature selection process across all the LOO cross-validation iterations. The more frequently selected, the more reliable and robust are those selected connections. Therefore, the reliability and robustness can be regarded as one of the measurements of the feature importance in diagnosis. Furthermore, the connections can be sorted according to their frequencies being selected, with the most frequently selected connections shown in Fig. 5 for illustration. Note that these frequently selected connections are determined in a data-driven way based on feature selection and the label information of all subjects. Before feature extraction, we did not arbitrarily choose any features from any predefined brain regions based on any hypothesis-- that is, the biomarker detection is conducted in an exploratory manner.

On the other hand, the bootstrapping method can be used to define another type of “importance” based on each feature's contribution to the final classification performance. In this method, by randomly changing the subjects' labels, we can conduct another round of “classification” (under the null hypothesis) based on the randomized labels, from which the weight (and also the frequency of being selected) for each feature can be derived. By including randomization and classification of multiple times, we were able to generate a null hypothesis of each feature's weight and also a null hypothesis of each feature's selection frequency. Then, we can obtain a p-value for each feature according to the comparison with the null distribution. Since there are multiple comparisons, the p-values can be further corrected based on multiple comparison correction (e.g., Bonferroni correction) in order to find out those significantly important features.

5.2 Biomarkers and longitudinal study

In order to discover potential biomarkers, many previous studies utilized the conventional mass-univariate analysis methods, such as general linear modeling, two sample t-test (Zhang, et al., 2015), and correlation analysis, to evaluate one feature by another feature independently. Although these types of methods can reveal features that are correlated with the disease, it can potentially ignore the non-trivial interactions among these features, which may lead to a group of weighted features or a pattern with higher sensitivity to disease detection. In contrast, our study is based on the multivariate analysis method, which investigates all features together and utilizes advanced machine learning algorithms to automatically determine the relationships between the combination weights among different features, as well as their relevance to the disease. In addition, our study is for individualized detection, while most of the previous mass-univariate analysis derived only the group-level statistical inference, which could not be applied directly to individualized detection. This is another difference between our study and traditional group-level statistical analysis methods, and also one of the motivations of our work.

Cortical thickness is another important biomarker for detecting AD-related brain morphometric changes. Its calculation is simple, robust, reliable and requires only a T1-weighted image, which usually has the highest priority compared to all other imaging modalities scanned during MRI data acquisitions. In an AD patient's brain, the brain regions that are responsible for memory, language, problem-solving, and other high-level cognitive functions may appear smaller in volume and thinner in cortical thickness because of the neuronal death, when compared to normal aging subjects. Previous studies have already shown various effective cortical morphological features, such as cortical thickness, sulci depth, surface area, grey matter volume and mean curvature, for MCI classification (Li, et al., 2014). However, there are also many studies (Querbes, et al., 2009; Das, et al., 2013) suggesting that the changes in functional connectivity may occur even earlier than those detectable changes in the above-mentioned anatomical, geometric and morphometric features. With this commonly accepted hypothesis in mind during the design of the current study, we decided to use the features of various functional connectivity metrics for early diagnosis of AD at an earlier age, with higher detection sensitivity. Besides the conventional FC metric in the GM, we also explored the discriminative ability of functional correlation tensor, computed from the WM beneath the brain cortex, where AD pathological changes could also occur.

Many studies (Misra, et al., 2009; Lo, et al., 2011) have focused on the trajectory modeling of longitudinal functional and structural imaging data in order to better understand the relationship between imaging-based biomarkers and cognitive or behavioral decline in AD/MCI populations. In contract to longitudinal studies, we attempt to classify MCI from NC subjects based on their cross-sectional RS-fMRI data. In particular, this work emphasizes the roles of dynamic functional connectivity (dFC) as well as dynamic functional correlation tensor (dFCT) as the potential biomarkers for accurate diagnosis of MCI subjects. Note that several of these potential biomarkers detected by our study are shared by the biomarkers suggested by previous longitudinal studies (Yang, et al., 2012), such as frontal lobe, and paracentral lobule. More importantly, the dFC and dFCT biomarkers suggested by our study can be used as the potential biomarker candidates in the future hypothesis-orientated longitudinal studies for more comprehensive characterization of the trajectory of the neurodegeneration. Of note, several features detected by our study are new to the field, since the dFCT features in the WM structures are completely new in early AD detection.

Another useful implication of our study is that we use brain FC dynamics as features, whereas previous studies usually used static FC (calculated based on the whole BOLD signals). We argue that the functional dynamics-based features can be more sensitive to AD pathological changes than the traditional static FC, since in the early stage the FC may not show detectable differences between MCI and NC subjects (Zhang, et al., 2016). Therefore, our proposed features can also be applied to longitudinal studies for detecting abnormal degenerative trajectory. One of our ongoing works is to apply the FC dynamic information into a model of AD progression. Thus, we will be able to investigate brain functional changes at different stages of AD, and then differentiate the stable MCI from the progressive MCI.

5.3 Preprocessing and reliability

Head motion during the RS-fMRI scan is a confounding factor that could have significantly influenced both the functional connectivity measurement and the complex brain functional network measurement, which may lead to drastic changes or spikes in the BOLD signals across the entire brain. There are many works focusing on the influence of head motion on functional connectivity estimation, as well as necessary preprocessing procedure to reduce such effect (Power, et al., 2012; Van Dijk, et al., 2012). In our work, the rigid-body transformation was used to correct subject's head motion, and the subjects with large head motion (i.e., larger than 2 mm or 2 degrees) were discarded in order to reduce potential influences. We did not perform data scrubbing to remove or resample the frames with frame-wise displacement (FD) larger than 0.5 mm, as scrubbing itself will interrupt the temporal structure of the data and probably introduce artifacts into the subsequent dynamic analysis (Hutchison, et al., 2013). However, we only included the subjects who had more than 90 frames with acceptable micro-head motion (FD &lt; 0.5), as suggested by previous studies (Wu, et al., 2015).

On the other hand, band-pass filtering is also an important preprocessing step that may influence FC analysis. In our work, the BOLD signals were band-pass filtered (0.015 ≤ f ≤ 0.15Hz) to reduce the potential effect of the physiological noises. However, there are some studies (Salvador, et al., 2008) showing that neuronal oscillations at distinct frequency bands have different physiological properties, and such inherent frequency-specific property of BOLD spectrums contributes differently to FC estimation. Therefore, a straightforward extension of this work is to consider multiple frequency bands, instead of a single one, as well as to include FC or FCT features from different frequency bands.

Other imaging acquisition and preprocessing factors contain spatial resolution, flip angle, global signal regression, etc. A thorough exploration of all these factors and their combinations, as well as their influences on the classification results, is complicated and beyond the scope of this paper. Additionally, data across studies may have different noise levels and artificial sources, thus making the problem even harder to investigate. Future studies should focus on optimizing strict preprocessing steps in order to provide homogenous parameters between disparate studies.

Test-retest reliability is also an important issue that deserves further dedicated study. There are many test-retest reliability studies on the static FC. For example, it has been suggested that the test-retest reliability of the static FC is fair-to-good when examined in both region- (Wang, et al., 2011) and voxel-wise manners (Shehzad, et al., 2009; Somandepalli, et al., 2015), and the static FC-based brain network properties are still satisfactorily reliable (Andellinia, et al., 2015). However, there are few test-retest reliability studies on dynamic FC or dynamic FCT. Abrol et al (Abrol, et al., 2016) are of the few that have evaluated the reproducibility of properties of functional network connectivity (FNC) dynamics using the sliding window approach across different data sets. As the fMRI data used in our study was acquired during the resting state, there was no explicit task conducted and the subjects' statuses were unconstrained. Therefore, the dynamic FC and FCT profiles cannot be directly compared across subjects due to the absence of phase locking. In addition, considering that the used RS-fMRI data in the current study does not incorporate repeated scans, we cannot conduct test-retest reliability assessment to investigate whether the root-mean-square (RMS) of the dynamic FC and FCT is reliable or not across the scanning sessions. Nevertheless, test-retest reliability will be investigated in our future study.

5.4 Future directions

In this paper, RMS serves as a feature reduction way, although other methods of generating features from each sliding window will produce much more features for each subject. However, in this paper, RMS is mainly selected based on the two considerations. First, RMS is able to characterize the overall activity level of dynamic FC and dynamic FCT. Second, RMS is invariant to the chronological order of sliding windows as temporal information collapses based on the definition of RMS. Using features from each sliding window could initiate the problem of phase mismatching across different subjects due to inclusion of temporal information. In this case, utilization of temporal features becomes another difficult problem. One possible solution is to further extract time-invariant high-level features based on sliding-window features, such as distribution- and frequency-spectrum-based or status-transformation-probability-based features. Besides RMS, other statistics can also be used to extract features from the time series, such as entropy, Hurst index, kurtosis, etc. Since different features characterize the same signal from different viewpoints, combining them in appropriately is likely to further improve the outcomes.

6 Conclusions

In this paper, we have presented a novel framework to integrate temporal correlation information extracted from both GM and WM regions for automatic MCI diagnosis. On one hand, dynamic functional connectivity between brain regions is estimated based on the regional mean BOLD signals in the GM regions. On the other hand, dynamic functional correlation tensor between brain regions is built based on functional anisotropy of the voxels lying on the WM fiber tract linking brain regions. Root-mean-square features are used as feature representation, while a two-stage feature selection, as well as a classifier ensemble approach, may also be developed for classification. The experimental results show better diagnostic power by integrating connectivity information from both GM and WM regions. This work suggests the RS-fMRI BOLD signals observed within WM, although weaker than those observed within GM, can provide complementary information for MCI classification.

This work was supported in part by NIH grants (EB006733, EB008374, MH100217, MH108914, AG041721, AG049371, AG042599, AG053867, EB022880, MH110274). Dr. Lee was partially supported by Institute for Information &amp; Communications Technology Promotion (IITP) grant funded by the Korea government (No. 2017-0-00451).

Fig.1 Framework of the proposed method.

Fig.2 ROC curves of different methods for MCI classification.

Fig.3 Performance comparison using 20-fold cross-validation.

Fig.4 Dynamic variation of (a) FC and (b) weighted mean FA for connections ACG.L-PCG.L and PCG.L-PCG.R.

Fig.5 Illustration of top 10 ROI pairs selected with the highest frequencies. (a) dFC, and (b) dFCT.

Fig.6 Distributions of RMS features selected from (a) dFC(IFGoperc.L, OLF.R) and (b) dFCT(ORBmid.L, ORBinf.L) in MCI and NC subjects, respectively.

Fig.7 Performance of the proposed method with respect to the weight for FC. (a) Accuracy and (b) AUC.

Table 1 Performance of different methods in MCI classification.

Method	ACC	SEN	SPE	AUC	F-score	
sFC	62.04	61.11	62.96	0.6529	61.68	
sFCT	66.67	62.96	70.37	0.6896	65.38	
sComb	69.44	68.52	70.37	0.6954	69.16	
dFC	74.07	70.37	77.78	0.7746	73.08	
dFCT	71.30	70.37	72.22	0.7397	71.03	
dComb	78.70	77.78	79.63	0.8449	78.50	

Table 2 Non-parametric statistical comparisons among different methods.

Method	sFC	sFCT	sComb	dFC	dFCT	dComb	
sFC	-	-	-	-	-	-	
sFCT	0.6364	-	-	-	-	-	
sComb	0.5103	0.9035	-	-	-	-	
dFC	0.0343	0.2288	0.1766	-	-	-	
dFCT	0.2014	0.2818	0.3775	0.6119	-	-	
dComb	0.0003	0.0056	0.0006	0.0088	0.0365	-	


Abrol A Chaze C Damaraju E Calhoun VD 2016 The chronnectome: Evaluating replicability of dynamic connectivity patterns in 7500 resting fMRI datasets 38th IEEE Annual International Conference of the Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society
Adriaanse SM Binnewijzend MA Ossenkoppele R Tijms BM van der Flier WM Koene T Smits LL Wink AM Scheltens P van Berckel BN 2014 Widespread disruption of functional brain organization in early-onset Alzheimer's disease PloS one 9 e102995 25080229
Altahat S Huang X Tran D Sharma D People identification with RMS-Based spatial pattern of EEG signal 2012 Springer 310 318
Andellinia M Cannatàa V Gazzellini S Bernardi B Napolitano A 2015 Test-retest reliability of graph metrics of resting state MRI functional brain networks: A review Journal of Neuroscience Methods 253 183 192 26072249
Association As 2012 2012 Alzheimer's disease facts and figures Alzheimer's &amp; Dementia 8 131 168
Baloyannis SJ Manolidis SL Manolidis LS 2000 Synaptic alterations in the vestibulocerebellar system in Alzheimer's disease-a Golgi and electron microscope study Acta oto-laryngologica 120 247 250 11603783
Braak H Braak E 1991 Neuropathological stageing of Alzheimer-related changes Acta Neuropathologica 82 4 239 259 1759558
Brookmeyer R Johnson E Ziegler-Graham K Arrighi HM 2007 Forecasting the global burden of Alzheimer's disease Alzheimer's &amp; dementia 3 186 191
Buckner RL Andrews-Hanna JR Schacter DL 2008 The brain's default network Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1124 1 38 18400922
Challis E Hurley P Serra L Bozzali M Oliver S Cercignani M 2015 Gaussian process classification of Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment from resting-state fMRI NeuroImage 112 232 243 25731993
Chang C Lin C 2001 LIBSVM: a library for support vector machines Citeseer
Chen X Yang J Zhang D Liang J 2013 Complete large margin linear discriminant analysis using mathematical programming approach Pattern Recognition 46 6 1579 1594
Chen X Zhang H Gao Y Wee CY Li G Shen D 2016 High-order resting-state functional connectivity network for MCI classification Human brain mapping 37 9 3282 96 27144538
Coleman RE 2007 Positron emission tomography diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease PET clinics 2 25 34 27157704
Damaraju E Allen E Belger A Ford J McEwen S Mathalon D Mueller B Pearlson G Potkin S Preda A 2014 Dynamic functional connectivity analysis reveals transient states of dysconnectivity in schizophrenia NeuroImage: Clinical 5 298 308 25161896
Das SR Pluta J Mancuso L Kliot D Orozco S Dickerson BC Yushkevich PA Wolk DA 2013 Increased functional connectivity within medial temporal lobe in mild cognitive impairment Hippocampus 23 1 6 22815064
De Jong L Van der Hiele K Veer I Houwing J Westendorp R Bollen E De Bruin P Middelkoop H Van Buchem M Van Der Grond J 2008 Strongly reduced volumes of putamen and thalamus in Alzheimer's disease: an MRI study Brain 131 3277 3285 19022861
DeLong ER DeLong DM Clarke-Pearson DL 1988 Comparing the areas under two or more correlated receiver operating characteristic curves: a nonparametric approach Biometrics 837 845 3203132
Dey S 2014 Automatic Detection of Brain Functional Disorder Using Imaging Data University of Central Florida Orlando, Florida
Ding Z Newton AT Xu R Anderson AW Morgan VL Gore JC 2013 Spatio-temporal correlation tensors reveal functional structure in human brain PloS one 8 e82107 24339997
Ding Z Xu R Bailey SK Wu TL Morgan VL Cutting LE Anderson AW Gore JC 2016 Visualizing functional pathways in the human brain using correlation tensors and magnetic resonance imaging Magnetic resonance imaging 34 8 17 26477562
Echávarri C Aalten P Uylings H Jacobs H Visser P Gronenschild E Verhey F Burgmans S 2011 Atrophy in the parahippocampal gyrus as an early biomarker of Alzheimer's disease Brain Structure and Function 215 265 271 20957494
Egidio D Stefano C 2012 Seeking a unified framework for cerebellar function and dysfunction: from circuit operations to cognition Frontiers in Neural Circuits 6 116 23335884
Fox MD Snyder AZ Vincent JL Corbetta M Van Essen DC Raichle ME 2005 The human brain is intrinsically organized into dynamic, anticorrelated functional networks Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 102 9673 9678 15976020
Friston K Frith C Liddle P Frackowiak R 1993 Functional connectivity: the principal-component analysis of large (PET) data sets Journal of cerebral blood flow and metabolism 13 5 5 8417010
Gawryluk JR Mazerolle EL D'Arcy RC 2014 Does functional MRI detect activation in white matter? A review of emerging evidence, issues, and future directions Frontiers in Neuroscience 8 239 25152709
Gawryluk JR Mazerolle EL Brewer KD Beyea SD D'Arcy RC 2011 Investigation of fMRI activation in the internal capsule BMC Neuroscience 12 56 21672250
Grady CL Furey ML Pietrini P Horwitz B Rapoport SI 2001 Altered brain functional connectivity and impaired short-term memory in Alzheimer's disease Brain 124 739 756 11287374
Greicius M 2008 Resting-state functional connectivity in neuropsychiatric disorders Current opinion in neurology 21 424 430 18607202
Haller S Nguyen D Rodriguez C Emch J Gold G Bartsch A Lovblad KO Giannakopoulos P 2010 Individual prediction of cognitive decline in mild cognitive impairment using support vector machine-based analysis of diffusion tensor imaging data Journal of Alzheimer's disease 22 315 327
Hanyu H Arai H Iwamoto T Takasaki M Katsunuma H Suzuki T Abe K Amino S 1993 Cerebrocerebellar relationships in normal subjects and patients with dementia of the Alzheimer type: a SPECT study Annals of nuclear medicine 7 45 50 8461238
Haufe S Meinecke F Görgend K Dähne S Haynes J Blankertz B Bieβmann F 2014 On the interpretation of weight vectors of linear models in multivariate NeuroImage 87 96 110 24239590
Hutchison RM Womelsdorf T Allen EA Bandettini PA Calhoun VD Corbetta M Della Penna S Duyn JH Glover GH Gonzalez-Castillo J 2013 Dynamic functional connectivity: promise, issues, and interpretations Neuroimage 80 360 378 23707587
Jie B Shen D Zhang D 2014a Brain Connectivity Hyper-Network for MCI Classification Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention–MICCAI 2014 Springer 724 732
Jie B Zhang D Gao W Wang Q Wee CY Shen D 2014b Integration of network topological and connectivity properties for neuroimaging classification IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering 61 576 589 24108708
Jie B Wee CY Shen D Zhang D 2016 Hyper-connectivity of functional networks for brain disease diagnosis Medical Image Analysis 32 84 100 27060621
Jin Y Huang C Daianu M Zhan L Dennis EL Reid RI Jack CR Jr Zhu H Thompson PM Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 2017 3D tract-specific local and global analysis of white matter integrity in Alzheimer's disease Human Brain Mapping 38 3 1191 1207 27883250
Jin Y Wee CY Shi F Thung KH Ni D Yap PT Shen D 2015 Identification of infants at high-risk for autism spectrum disorder using multiparameter multiscale white matter connectivity networks Human Brain Mapping 36 12 4880 96 26368659
Lee W Park B Han K 2013 Classification of diffusion tensor images for the early detection of Alzheimer's disease Computers in biology and medicine 43 1313 1320 24034721
Leonardi N Richiardi J Gschwind M Simioni S Annoni JM Schluep M Vuilleumier P Van De Ville D 2013 Principal components of functional connectivity: a new approach to study dynamic brain connectivity during rest NeuroImage 83 937 950 23872496
Liu J Ji S Ye J 2009 SLEP: Sparse learning with efficient projections Arizona State University 6 491
Li S Yuan X Pu F Li D Fan Y Wu L Chao W Chen N He Y Han Y 2014 Abnormal changes of multidimensional surface features using multivariate pattern classification in amnestic mild cognitive impairment patients Journal of Neuroscience 34 10541 10553 25100588
Li Y Zhu H Shen D Lin W Gilmore JH Ibrahim JG 2011 Multiscale adaptive regression models for neuroimaging data Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B 73 559 578
Lo RY Hubbard AE Shaw LM Trojanowski JQ Petersen RC Aisen PS Weiner MW Jagust WJ 2011 Longitudinal change of biomarkers in cognitive decline Archives of neurology 68 10 1257 66 21670386
Machulda MM Senjem ML Weigand SD Smith GE Ivnik RJ Boeve BF Knopman DS Petersen RC Jack CR Jr 2009 Functional MRI changes in amnestic and non-amnestic MCI during encoding and recognition tasks Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society: JINS 15 372 19402923
Marussich L Lu K Wen H Liu Z 2017 Mapping white-matter functional organization at rest and during naturalistic visual perception NeuroImage 146 1 1128 1141 27720819
McEvoy LK Fennema-Notestine C Roddey JC Hagler DJ Jr Holland D Karow DS Pung CJ Brewer JB Dale AM 2009 Alzheimer disease: quantitative structural neuroimaging for detection and prediction of clinical and structural changes in mild cognitive impairment 1 Radiology 251 195 205 19201945
Meoded A Morrissette AE Katipally R Schanz O Gotts SJ Floeter MK 2015 Cerebro-cerebellar connectivity is increased in primary lateral sclerosis NeuroImage: Clinical 7 288 296 25610792
Misra C Fan Y Davatzikos C 2009 Baseline and longitudinal patterns of brain atrophy in MCI patients, and their use in prediction of short-term conversion to AD: results from ADNI NeuroImage 44 4 1415 1422 19027862
Mori S Wakana S Van Zijl PC Nagae-Poetscher L 2005 MRI atlas of human white matter Elsevier
Mosconi L Berti V Glodzik L Pupi A De Santi S de Leon MJ 2010 Pre-clinical detection of Alzheimer's disease using FDG-PET, with or without amyloid imaging Journal of Alzheimer's Disease 20 843 854
Mosier KM Liu WC Maldjian JA Shah R Modi B 1999 Lateralization of cortical function in swallowing: a functional MR imaging study American Journal of Neuroradiology 20 8 1520 1526 10512240
Nir TM Jahanshad N Villalon-Reina JE Toga AW Jack CR Weiner MW Thompson PM Initiative AsDN 2013 Effectiveness of regional DTI measures in distinguishing Alzheimer's disease, MCI, and normal aging NeuroImage: Clinical 3 180 195 24179862
Petersen RC Doody R Kurz A Mohs RC Morris JC Rabins PV Ritchie K Rossor M Thal L Winblad B 2001 Current concepts in mild cognitive impairment Archives of neurology 58 1985 1992 11735772
Poulin SP Dautoff R Morris JC Barrett LF Dickerson BC Initiative AsDN 2011 Amygdala atrophy is prominent in early Alzheimer's disease and relates to symptom severity Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging 194 7 13 21920712
Power JD Barnes KA Snyder AZ Schlaggar BL Petersen SE 2012 Spurious but systematic correlations in functional connectivity MRI networks arise from subject motion NeuroImage 59 2142 2154 22019881
Querbes O Aubry F Pariente J Lotterie JA Démonet JF Duret V Puel M Berry I Fort JC Celsis P 2009 Early diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease using cortical thickness: impact of cognitive reserve Brain 132 2036 2047 19439419
Rubinov M Sporns O 2010 Complex network measures of brain connectivity: uses and interpretations Neuroimage 52 1059 1069 19819337
Salvador R Martinez A Pomarol-Clotet E Gomar J Vila F Sarró S Capdevila A Bullmore E 2008 A simple view of the brain through a frequency-specific functional connectivity measure Neuroimage 39 279 289 17919927
Salvatore C Cerasa A Battista P Gilardi MC Quattrone A Castiglioni I the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 2015 Magnetic resonance imaging bi-omarkers for the early diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease: a machine learning approach Frontiers in Neuroscience 9 307 26388719
Shehzad Z Kelly AM Reiss PT Gee DG Gotimer K Uddin LQ Lee SH Margulies DS Roy AK Biswal BB Petkova E Castellanos FX Milham MP 2009 The resting brain: unconstrained yet reliable Cerebral Cortex 19 10 2209 29 19221144
Silveira M Marques J Boosting Alzheimer disease diagnosis using PET images 2010 IEEE 2556 2559
Sokolova M Japkowicz N Szpakowicz S 2006 Beyond accuracy, F-score and ROC: a family of discriminant measures for performance evaluation AI 2006: Advances in Artificial Intelligence Springer 1015 1021
Somandepalli K Kelly C Reiss PT Zuo XN Craddock RC Yan CG Petkova E Castellanos FX Milham MP Di M 2015 A Short-term test-retest reliability of resting state fMRI metrics in children with and without attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 15 83 93 26365788
Suk HI Shen D 2013 Deep learning-based feature representation for AD/MCI classification Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention–MICCAI 2013 Springer 583 90
Suk HI Wee CY Lee SW Shen D 2015 Supervised discriminative group sparse representation for mild cognitive impairment diagnosis Neuroinformatics 13 277 295 25501275
Tettamanti M Paulesu E Scifo P Maravita A Fazio F Perani D Marzi CA 2002 Interhemispheric transmission of visuomotor information in humans: fMRI evidence Journal of Neurophysiology 88 2 1051 1058 12163553
Tibshirani R 1996 Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B (Methodological) 267 288
Tzourio-Mazoyer N Landeau B Papathanassiou D Crivello F Etard O Delcroix N Mazoyer B Joliot M 2002 Automated anatomical labeling of activations in SPM using a macroscopic anatomical parcellation of the MNI MRI single-subject brain Neuroimage 15 273 289 11771995
Van Dijk KR Sabuncu MR Buckner RL 2012 The influence of head motion on intrinsic functional connectivity MRI Neuroimage 59 431 438 21810475
Wang J Zuo X Gohel S Milham M Biswal B He Y 2011 Graph Theoretical Analysis of Functional Brain Networks: Test-Retest Evaluation on Short- and Long-Term Resting-State Functional MRI Data PLoS ONE 6 7 e21976 21818285
Wee CY Yang S Yap PT Shen D Initiative, AsDN 2015 Sparse temporally dynamic resting-state functional connectivity networks for early MCI identification Brain Imaging and Behavior 1 15 25724689
Wee CY Yap PT Li W Denny K Browndyke JN Potter GG Welsh-Bohmer KA Wang L Shen D 2011 Enriched white matter connectivity networks for accurate identification of MCI patients Neuroimage 54 1812 1822 20970508
Wee CY Yap PT Li W Denny K Browndyke JN Potter GG Welsh-Bohmer KA Wang L Shen D 2012a Resting-state multi-spectrum functional connectivity networks for identification of MCI patients PloS one 7 5 e37828 22666397
Wee CY Yap PT Zhang D Denny K Browndyke JN Potter GG Welsh-Bohmer KA Wang L Shen D 2012b Identification of MCI individuals using structural and functional connectivity networks Neuroimage 59 2045 2056 22019883
Wee CY Yap PT Shen D 2016 Diagnosis of Autism Spectrum Disorders Using Temporally Distinct Resting-State Functional Connectivity Networks CNS neuroscience &amp; therapeutics 22 212 219 26821773
Wee CY Yap PT Shen D 2013 Prediction of Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment using cortical morphological patterns Human Brain Mapping 34 12 3411 3425 22927119
Woolrich MW Jbabdi S Patenaude B Chappell M Makni S Behrens T Beckmann C Jenkinson M Smith SM 2009 Bayesian analysis of neuroimaging data in FSL Neuroimage 45 S173 S186 19059349
Wright J Yang AY Ganesh A Sastry SS Ma Y 2009 Robust face recognition via sparse representation IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 31 210 227 19110489
Wu X Yang Z Bailey SK Zhou J Cutting LE Gore JC Ding Z 2017 Functional connectivity and activity of white matter in somatosensory pathways under tactile stimulations Neuroimage 152 371 380 28284801
Wu T Wang F Andersona AW Chen L Ding Z Gore JC 2016 Effects of anesthesia on resting state BOLD signals in white matter of non-human primates Magnetic Resonance Imaging 34 9 1235 1241 27451405
Yang H Liu W Xia H Zhou Z Tong L 2012 Longitudinal change of the grey matter of mild cognitive impairment patients over 3 years by using voxel-based morphometry 5th International Conference on Biomedical Engineering and Informatics (BMEI)
Ye Q Zhao C Ye N Zheng H Chen X 2012 A feature selection method for nonparallel plane support vector machine classification Optimization methods and software 27 431 443
Yu R Zhang H An L Chen X Wei Z Shen D 2017 Connectivity strength-weighted sparse group representation-based brain network construction for MCI classification Human Brain Mapping 38 2370 2383 28150897
Zhang J Cheng W Liu Z Zhang K Lei X Yao Y Becker B Liu Y Kendrick K Lu G Feng J 2016 Neural, electrophysiological and anatomical basis of brain-network variability and its characteristic changes in mental disorders Brain 139 8 2307 2321 27421791
Zhang X Hu B Ma X Xu L 2015 Resting-State Whole-Brain Functional Connectivity Networks for MCI Classification Using L2-Regularized Logistic Regression IEEE Transactions on NanoBioscience 14 2 237 247 25700453
Zhu D Zhang T Jiang X Hu X Chen H Yang N Lv J Han J Guo L Liu T 2014 Fusing DTI and fMRI data: a survey of methods and applications NeuroImage 102 184 191 24103849
