LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


0100725
3187
Cortex
Cortex
Cortex; a journal devoted to the study of the nervous system and behavior
0010-9452
1973-8102

27771044
5760181
10.1016/j.cortex.2016.09.013
NIHMS931463
Article
The self-reference effect in dementia: Differential involvement of cortical midline structures in Alzheimer’s disease and behavioural-variant frontotemporal dementia
Wong Stephanie abc
Irish Muireann acd
Leshikar Eric D. e
Duarte Audrey f
Bertoux Maxime g
Savage Greg ab
Hodges John R. ach
Piguet Olivier ach
Hornberger Michael ag*
a ARC Centre of Excellence in Cognition and its Disorders, Sydney, Australia
b Department of Psychology, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia
c Neuroscience Research Australia, Sydney, Australia
d School of Psychology, The University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia
e Department of Psychology, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
f School of Psychology, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA
g Norwich Medical School, University of East Anglia, Norwich, UK
h School of Medical Sciences, The University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia
* Corresponding author. Norwich Medical School, University of East Anglia, NR4 7TJ, Norwich, UK. m.hornberger@uea.ac.uk (M. Hornberger)
3 1 2018
03 10 2016
6 2017
09 1 2018
91 169185
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Encoding information in reference to the self enhances subsequent memory for the source of this information. In healthy adults, self-referential processing has been proposed to be mediated by the cortical midline structures (CMS), with functional differentiation between anterior-ventral, anterior-dorsal and posterior regions. While both Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and behavioural-variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD) patients show source memory impairment, it remains unclear whether they show a typical memory advantage for self-referenced materials. We also sought to identify the neural correlates of this so-called ‘self-reference effect’ (SRE) in these patient groups. The SRE paradigm was tested in AD (n = 16) and bvFTD (n = 22) patients and age-matched healthy controls (n = 17). In this task, participants studied pictures of common objects paired with one of two background scenes (sources) under self-reference or other-reference encoding instructions, followed by an item and source recognition memory test. Voxel-based morphometry was used to investigate correlations between SRE measures and regions of grey matter atrophy in the CMS. The behavioural results indicated that self-referential encoding did not ameliorate the significant source memory impairments in AD and bvFTD patients. Furthermore, the reduced benefit of self-referential relative to other-referential encoding was not related to general episodic memory deficits. Our imaging findings revealed that reductions in the SRE were associated with atrophy in the anterior-dorsal CMS across both patient groups, with additional involvement of the posterior CMS in AD and anterior-ventral CMS in bvFTD. These findings suggest that although the SRE is comparably reduced in AD and bvFTD, this arises due to impairments in different subcomponents of self-referential processing.

Self-reference effect
Source memory
Alzheimer’s disease
Behavioural-variant frontotemporal dementia
Voxel-based morphometry

1. Introduction

For many years, the concept of self has intrigued philosophers, psychologists and, more recently, neuroscientists. While a number of different theoretical notions and definitions of the self exist, it is accepted that the self plays an important role in memory consolidation (Northoff et al., 2006; Rogers, 1977; Symons &amp; Johnson, 1997). According to Rogers, Kuiper, and Kirker (1977), evaluating new information in relation to the self promotes deeper and more elaborate memory encoding. This so-called self-reference effect (SRE) on memory has since been demonstrated in numerous studies, where self-referentially encoded information is retrieved more accurately on a subsequent memory task, relative to information that has been encoded in relation to another person (other-reference) or based on its physical or semantic features (Rogers et al., 1977; Symons &amp; Johnson, 1997). While the SRE paradigm typically involves encoding and retrieval of trait adjectives (Bower &amp; Gilligan, 1979; Gutchess, Kensinger, &amp; Schacter, 2010), the effect has also been replicated with memory for objects (Hamami, Serbun, &amp; Gutchess, 2011; Leshikar &amp; Duarte, 2013), actions (Rosa &amp; Gutchess, 2011) and specific contextual details (Hamami et al., 2011; Leshikar &amp; Duarte, 2012; Serbun, Shih, &amp; Gutchess, 2011). As such, self-referential encoding promotes episodic memory retrieval by enhancing not only item memory, but also source memory.

The robustness of the SRE has been demonstrated across the lifespan in healthy individuals (Glisky &amp; Marquine, 2009; Gutchess, Kensinger, Yoon, &amp; Schacter, 2007; Gutchess et al., 2015; Leshikar, Dulas, &amp; Duarte, 2015). Importantly, while older individuals typically show age-related decline in source memory accuracy (Johnson, Hashtroudi, &amp; Lindsay, 1993; Yonelinas, 2002), recent work has found that these deficits are ameliorated for source information that has been encoded with reference to the self (Leshikar &amp; Duarte, 2013; Leshikar et al., 2015). Nevertheless, it remains to be established whether self-referencing may benefit source memory retrieval in dementia patients presenting with episodic memory impairment.

Patients with Alzheimer’s disease (AD) show marked impairments in episodic memory (McKhann et al., 2011) and perform poorly on source memory tests (Haj &amp; Kessels, 2013; Multhaup &amp; Balota, 1997). While retrieval of self-referential episodic memories from the past are adversely affected in AD (Irish, Lawlor, O’Mara, &amp; Coen, 2011), notably, concept of self appears to be relatively preserved, as indexed on measures of trait self-knowledge (Klein, Cosmides, &amp; Costabile, 2003; Rankin, 2005) and self-descriptive statements (Eustache et al., 2013). To date, evidence for the benefit of self-referential encoding on source memory retrieval in AD is mixed. Most existing studies have evaluated the self-reference recollection effect (SRRE) in AD using the Remember/Know/Guess paradigm, where ‘remember’ responses are presumed to involve episodic memory, with conscious recollection of contextual details, as opposed to ‘know’ responses, which reflect a ‘feeling of knowing’ without recollection (Tulving, 1985; 2002). While three studies in AD patients have demonstrated higher rates of ‘remember’ responses for self-referenced trait adjectives (Kalenzaga &amp; Clarys, 2013; Kalenzaga, Bugaïska, &amp; Clarys, 2013; Lalanne, Rozenberg, Grolleau, &amp; Piolino, 2013), others have found no SRE for item recognition (Leblond et al., 2016) or both reduced SRE and SRRE (Genon et al., 2014a). Nonetheless, the Remember/Know/Guess paradigm does not control for the variability of remembered contextual details for each item within and between participants. As such, a source memory experimental design would help objectively determine which, if any, specific contextual details are disproportionately enhanced by self-referencing in AD. While no prior research in AD has investigated the SRE on source memory, one study in patients with amnestic mild cognitive impairment (aMCI) showed a benefit of self-referencing in terms of reducing item and source memory errors (Rosa, Deason, Budson, &amp; Gutchess, 2014).

Individuals diagnosed with behavioural-variant fronto-temporal dementia (bvFTD) can also present with episodic memory dysfunction (Bertoux et al., 2014; Graham et al., 2005; Hornberger &amp; Piguet, 2012; Hornberger, Piguet, Graham, Nestor, &amp; Hodges, 2010) and show impaired performance on tests of source memory (Irish, Graham, Graham, Hodges, &amp; Hornberger, 2012; Simons et al., 2002). In contrast to AD however, the core clinical features of bvFTD include marked changes to personality and interpersonal conduct (Piguet, Hornberger, Mioshi, &amp; Hodges, 2011), with declines in social cognition and empathy (Eslinger, Moore, Anderson, &amp; Grossman, 2011; Rascovsky et al., 2011) and lack of insight (Mendez &amp; Shapira, 2011; O’Keeffe et al., 2007). Not surprisingly, bvFTD patients show alterations in their self concept, as reflected in the striking discrepancies between patient and carer ratings of personality traits (Rankin, 2005; Ruby et al., 2007), as well as reports of dramatic changes in social, political or religious values (Miller et al., 2001). To the best of our knowledge, no study to date has explored the impact of self-referential processing on source memory in bvFTD, nor has this been directly contrasted in AD and bvFTD.

Evidence from neuroimaging studies points overwhelmingly to the involvement of cortical midline structures (CMS) in self-referential processing (Craik et al., 1999; Gutchess, Kensinger, &amp; Schacter, 2007; Northoff &amp; Bermpohl, 2004; Northoff et al., 2006; Qin &amp; Northoff, 2011). Drawing from this vast body of literature, Northoff et al. (2006) proposed a model in which three distinct CMS subregions (anterior-ventral, anterior-dorsal and posterior CMS) are associated with subfunctions of self-referential processing, including representation, reappraisal and evaluation, and integration (see also Northoff &amp; Bermpohl, 2004). Specifically, the anterior-ventral CMS encompasses the medial orbitofrontal cortex (MOFC), the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC) and the sub- and pregenual parts of the anterior cingulate cortex (PACC). This region is proposed to be involved in coding the self-relatedness of stimuli, thereby forming a self-related representation. Evaluation and appraisal of self-referenced stimuli is associated with the anterior-dorsal CMS, which includes the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (DMPFC) and the supragenual anterior cingulate cortex (SACC). Finally, the posterior CMS comprises the posterior cingulate cortex (PCC), the retrosplenial cortex (RSC), and the medial parietal cortex (MPC). These posterior regions are proposed to be involved in the integration of new self-referential information within the temporal context of one’s emotional and autobiographical self. While each of these CMS subregions purportedly mediate specific aspects of self-referential processing, no study to date has directly contrasted the differential contributions of these subregions. One way to address this is by comparing the SRE in AD versus bvFTD patients, as these neurodegenerative disorders are characterised by predominantly posterior and anterior burdens of CMS pathology, respectively (Rabinovici et al., 2007).

To our knowledge, only one study has investigated the neural correlates of self-referential processing in dementia patients (Genon et al., 2014a). In this study, AD patients did not show a significant SRE, despite showing similar activation of the VMPFC compared to controls when encoding stimuli with reference to the self. A follow-up investigation revealed a wider functional network of brain regions associated with the accurate recognition of self-referenced information, including the PCC and hippocampus in AD patients (Genon et al., 2014b). In the context of Northoff et al. (2006) model, these findings (Genon et al., 2014a, 2014b) suggest that the absence of SRE in AD may not be related to impairments in the representation of stimuli as self-related by the anterior-ventral CMS, but rather, to a broader deficit in the retrieval of self-related memories, mediated by posterior CMS subregions known to be affected early in the course of the disease (Chételat et al., 2007; Irish, Addis, Hodges, &amp; Piguet, 2012; Nestor, Fryer, Ikeda, &amp; Hodges, 2003; Scahill, Schott, Stevens, Rossor, &amp; Fox, 2002). This dovetails with previous reports of intact concept of self in AD (Eustache et al., 2013; Klein et al., 2003; Rankin, 2005).

Of particular relevance to this study is the pattern of neurodegenerative changes typically seen in bvFTD. Given that the MPFC is one of the earliest affected regions (Kipps, Hodges, Fryer, &amp; Nestor, 2009; Rabinovici et al., 2007; Seeley et al., 2008), this neurodegenerative condition offers an excellent opportunity to examine the impact of MPFC damage on self-referenced memories. While no previous research has explored the SRE in bvFTD, evidence from studies of autobiographical memory in these patients suggests a link between MPFC atrophy and impairments in their retrieval of personally relevant memories from the past (Irish, Hodges, &amp; Piguet, 2013; Irish, Hornberger, et al., 2014). Furthermore, the MPFC represents a site of particular interest, as atrophy in this region has been associated with episodic memory dysfunction in bvFTD, which contrasts with the predominantly posterior pattern of atrophy implicated in AD (Frisch et al., 2013; Irish, Piguet, Hodges, &amp; Hornberger, 2014; Wong, Flanagan, Savage, Hodges, &amp; Hornberger, 2014). Nevertheless, it remains unclear how this anterior-posterior dissociation between bvFTD and AD potentially disrupts the SRE for source memory in these patient groups.

The objectives of this study were twofold: i) to explore whether self-referential encoding would enhance source memory retrieval differentially in bvFTD and AD, and ii) to identify the CMS correlates of the SRE in these patient groups using region-of-interest voxel-based morphometry (VBM). We hypothesised that the SRE for source memory would be comparably attenuated in bvFTD and AD, but that these deficits would be associated with an anterior-posterior dissociation of CMS atrophy. Specifically, we proposed that atrophy of anterior-ventral CMS subregions would relate to the limited benefit of self-referential encoding on source memory retrieval in bvFTD. On the other hand, we predicted that the reduced SRE in AD would be associated with atrophy in the posterior CMS subregions.

2. Material and methods

2.1. Participants

Thirty-eight dementia patients (bvFTD = 22; AD = 16) and 17 age-matched healthy controls were recruited through FRONTIER at Neuroscience Research Australia, Sydney. All bvFTD patients fulfilled clinical diagnostic criteria for probable bvFTD (Rascovsky et al., 2011), with insidious onset, progressive decline in social behaviour and personal conduct, apathy, emotional blunting and loss of insight. To exclude potential phenocopy cases in the bvFTD cohort (Kipps, Hodges, &amp; Hornberger, 2010), only those who showed evidence of progressive decline and atrophy on structural MRI brain scans were included. All AD patients met clinical diagnostic criteria for probable AD (McKhann et al., 2011), with worsening episodic memory impairment in the context of preserved personality and behaviour. Disease duration was estimated as the number of years elapsed since the reported onset of symptoms. The Frontotemporal Dementia Rating Scale (FRS) (Mioshi, Hsieh, Savage, Hornberger, &amp; Hodges, 2010) and Clinical Dementia Rating Scale (CDR) (Morris, 1997) were used to determine the disease severity in bvFTD and AD patients. In addition, the Cambridge Behavioural Inventory Revised (CBI-R) (Wear et al., 2008) was completed by the family or carer, to quantify symptoms of behavioural disturbance, with higher scores indicative of more severe behavioural disturbance. To determine their overall level of cognitive functioning, all participants underwent general cognitive screening using the Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination-III (ACE-III) (Hsieh, Schubert, Hoon, Mioshi, &amp; Hodges, 2013). Age-matched healthy controls were recruited from the FRONTIER research volunteer panel and scored &gt;88 on the ACE-III (Hsieh et al., 2013).

Exclusion criteria for all participants included current or prior history of mental illness, significant head injury, movement disorders, cerebrovascular disease (stroke, transient ischaemic attacks), alcohol and other drug abuse and limited English proficiency. Exclusion criteria for MRI scanning procedures included presence of metal fragments in the eyes, cardiac pacemaker, brain aneurysm clips, cochlear implants, other ferromagnetic implants or severe claustrophobia.

2.2. Ethics statement

All participants provided written informed consent and this study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. Ethical approval was obtained from the Human Research Ethics Committee of the South Eastern Sydney Local Health District and the University of New South Wales.

2.3. Neuropsychological assessment of episodic memory

Following previously reported procedures (Irish, Piguet, et al., 2014; Pennington, Hodges, &amp; Hornberger, 2011), standardised neuropsychological measures of verbal (Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test; RAVLT) (Schmidt, 1996) and visuospatial (Rey-Osterrieth Complex Figure Test; RCFT) (Rey, 1941) episodic memory were administered to all participants. The following scores were included in our correlational analyses between episodic memory and SRE task performance: RAVLT immediate recall following interference trial (maximum score = 15); RAVLT delayed recall following 30 min (maximum score = 15); and RCFT 3-minute delayed recall (maximum score = 36).

2.4. Experimental self-reference source memory task

The self-reference source memory task was adapted from previous studies (Leshikar &amp; Duarte, 2013; Leshikar et al., 2015). The current version assessed source memory recognition following self-reference and other-reference encoding conditions. A perceptual condition was included as a control condition.

2.4.1. Stimuli

The stimuli consisted of 40 objects and 2 background scenes. During encoding, 30 objects were presented superimposed on 1 of the 2 background scenes. A further 10 objects were presented as novel items at the subsequent recognition memory test. The objects were colour images of common objects (e.g., saxophone, spoon, notebook, etc.) taken from the Hemera Technologies Photo-Objects DVDs (Hemera Technologies, Inc.). The 2 background scenes were colour images of landscapes (a mountain or a beach). The word frequency and familiarity of each object was determined using the MRC Psycholinguistic Database (http://www.psych.rl.ac.uk). Ten objects were allocated to each of the 4 stimulus sets (self-reference, other-reference, perceptual and novel), which were matched for total word frequency and familiarity. Sets assigned per condition were counterbalanced across participants.

2.4.2. Procedure

Participants were first trained on a short version of the encoding and recognition tasks. Training included 12 practice encoding trials (4 trials per encoding task) and 16 practice recognition test trials, containing stimuli from the 12 practice items plus 4 novel items. Participant’s understanding of the task instructions was checked before progressing from training to the experimental task. The procedures for the encoding and test phases are illustrated in Fig. 1.

During the training and experimental encoding phases of the study, participants performed encoding tasks under three conditions (self-reference, other-reference and perceptual). Encoding task instructions emphasized that there were no correct answers, as judgements made during the encoding tasks were intended to be subjective.

Self-reference condition

Participants judged whether they liked the object-background pairing (yes/no).

Other-reference condition

Participants judged whether the Queen of England, Elizabeth II, would like the object-background pairing (yes/no). Importantly, a well-known but not close-other person was selected for this condition, as brain regions activated during close-other processing (e.g., one’s best friend) have been shown to overlap with those activated during self-referential processing (Grigg &amp; Grady, 2010). As previously described (Leshikar &amp; Duarte, 2013), Queen Elizabeth II was selected as the other referent, under the assumption that she was well-known but not personally acquainted with any of the participants. A photograph of Queen Elizabeth II was displayed with the encoding instructions that preceded the other-reference condition. All participants demonstrated intact recognition of Queen Elizabeth II.

Perceptual condition

Participants judged whether the object and background contained similar colours (yes/no).

The encoding phase of the study included a total of 30 trials (10 in each encoding condition). Each encoding trial lasted 4000 msec, including presentation of the object-scene pair for 3500 msec, followed by a 500 msec central fixation. To minimize task-switching costs, trials were presented in blocks of 10 trials per encoding condition. At the beginning of each block, an instruction prompt (“Get ready for the [self/queen/colour] task.”) was displayed. The order of the blocks was counterbalanced across participants.

The test phase of the experiment was conducted immediately following encoding. The test phase consisted of 40 test trials, where all 30 of the objects from the encoding phase were individually displayed, intermixed with 10 novel objects. Trials were self-paced and presented in a random order. For each trial, participants first made an item recognition decision by judging whether the object was “old” or “new”, or whether they didn’t know (“don’t know”). The prompt “Old|New|Don’t know” was written below the object. This was followed by a source recognition decision for those objects judged to be “old”. During the source decision, the two background scenes were displayed above the object, with the prompt “Mountain|Beach|Don’t know” written below the object. Following previously reported procedures (Leshikar &amp; Duarte, 2013), the “don’t know” response option was offered in order to reduce potential contamination of guessing. No feedback regarding response accuracy was provided throughout the task.

The self-reference source memory task was programmed using E-Prime 2.0 software (Psychology Software Tools, Pittsburgh, PA), and testing was conducted on a laptop with a 14-inch LED-backlit display. During testing, participants provided verbal responses, which were recorded by the experimenter using the programmed response keys.

2.5. Statistical analyses

Data were analysed using SPSS 20.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, Ill., USA). Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests were used to check for normality of distribution. Where the data were normally distributed, scores were compared across groups using ANOVAs followed by Tukey post-hoc tests. Data that were not normally distributed were analysed using Kruskal-Wallis tests followed by post-hoc pairwise comparisons, using Dunn’s (1964) procedure with a Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons. A chi-squared test was used to compare sex distribution across groups. Demographic variables that differed significantly across groups were included as covariates in between-group analyses of SRE task variables. Item and source recognition accuracy measures from the SRE task were analysed using ANCOVAs. Pairwise comparisons of the main effects were adjusted for multiple comparisons using the Sidak method. To examine differences between encoding conditions within each participant group, post hoc paired-samples t-tests were conducted for each group separately.

Responses from the test phase of the SRE task were converted into percentages of total items in each condition (self-reference, other-reference, perceptual, novel). Item recognition responses were classified as studied ‘item hit’ (correct recognition), studied ‘item miss’ (incorrect rejection) and studied “don’t know” for objects previously seen during the encoding phase; and unstudied ‘item hit’ (correct rejection), unstudied ‘item miss’ (false alarm) and unstudied “don’t know” for novel objects presented in the test phase only. Corrected item recognition was calculated by subtracting the percentage of unstudied ‘item misses’ (false alarms) from the percentage of studied ‘item hits’ (correct recognition) in each condition. Source recognition responses were classified as ‘source correct’, ‘source incorrect’ and ‘source “don’t know”‘. Given that the source recognition question was not asked following incorrect item responses (i.e., studied ‘item miss’ and studied “don’t know” responses), source recognition for incorrect item responses was classified as ‘source incorrect’. As such, source recognition responses were assumed to be incorrect for incorrect item responses.

To investigate the source memory advantage of self-reference over other-reference encoding, a SRE magnitude score was computed for source recognition accuracy by subtracting the other-reference percentage ‘source correct’ scores from the self-reference percentage ‘source correct’ scores. Thus, larger SRE magnitude scores indicated better memory for self-reference compared to other-reference encoded source information. Within each participant group, independent samples t-tests were conducted to determine whether SRE magnitude for source recognition was significantly greater than 0. SRE magnitude scores comparing source recognition accuracy for “self-reference” and “perceptual” encoding conditions were also computed (see Supplementary Material).

2.6. Image acquisition and VBM analysis

Structural MRI brain scans were available for a subset of participants (19/22 bvFTD and 15/16 AD patients and 15/17 controls). Patients and controls underwent the same imaging protocol with whole-brain T1-weighted images using a 3T Phillips MRI scanner with a standard quadrature head coil (8 channels). The 3D T1-weighted sequences were acquired as follows: coronal orientation, matrix 256 × 256, 200 slices, 1 × 1 mm in-plane resolution, slice thickness 1 mm, TE/TR = 2.6/5.8 msec. 3D T1-weighted sequences were analysed using FSL-VBM, a VBM analysis (Ashburner &amp; Friston, 2000; Good et al., 2001), which is part of the FSL software package http://www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/fslvbm/index.html (Smith et al., 2004). Following brain extraction, tissue segmentation was carried out using FMRIB’s Automatic Segmentation Tool (FAST) (Zhang, Brady, &amp; Smith, 2001). The resulting grey matter partial volume maps were aligned to the Montreal Neurological Institute standard space (MNI52) using the nonlinear registration approach with FNIRT (Anderson, Jenkinson, &amp; Smith, 2007a, 2007b) which uses a b-spline representation of the registration warp field (Rueckert et al., 1999). To correct for local expansion or contraction, the registered partial volume maps were modulated by dividing them by the Jacobian of the warp field. Importantly, the Jacobian modulation step did not include the affine part of the registration, which means that the data was normalized for head size as a scaling effect. The modulated images were then smoothed with an isotropic Gaussian kernel with a standard deviation of 3 mm (FWHM: 8 mm).

Given our strong a priori predictions, a single region of interest mask of CMS regions was created by combining individual masks of the relevant Harvard-Oxford cortical structural atlas regions included in the FSL software package. As the regional masks for the frontal pole, orbitofrontal cortex and superior frontal gyri include both medial and lateral portions, masks containing only the medial portions were manually traced. In accordance with Northoff et al. (2006), medial regions were defined as those falling within MNI coordinates x &lt; 25 or x &gt; −25 (see Fig. 2). The following regions were included in the CMS mask: medial frontal pole, MOFC, medial superior frontal gyrus, medial prefrontal cortex, sub-callosal cortex, paracingulate cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, PCC and precuneus. These regions broadly correspond to the CMS subdivisions proposed by Northoff et al. (2006), such that the anterior-ventral CMS includes the medial frontal pole, MOFC, medial prefrontal cortex and subcallosal cortex; the anterior-dorsal CMS includes the medial superior frontal gyrus, paracingulate and anterior cingulate cortices; and the posterior CMS includes the PCC and precuneus.

A voxel-wise general linear model (GLM) was applied to investigate differences in grey matter intensity via permutation-based non-parametric testing (Nichols &amp; Holmes, 2002) with 5000 permutations per contrast. Age and total years of education were included as nuisance variables in all imaging analyses. As a first step, differences in grey matter intensity between patients (bvFTD and AD) and controls were assessed. Group comparisons between patients and controls were tested for significance at p &lt; .05, corrected for multiple comparisons via Family-wise Error (FWE) correction across space. A cluster extent threshold of 100 contiguous voxels was applied for group comparisons. Next, correlations between SRE magnitude and regions of grey matter atrophy were investigated separately in each patient group (bvFTD, AD) combined with controls. This procedure has previously been used in similar studies including AD and bvFTD patients (Irish, Piguet, et al., 2014) and serves to achieve greater variance in behavioural scores, thereby increasing the statistical power to detect brain-behaviour relationships. To check for potential co-atrophy effects, diagnostic group membership was entered as an additional nuisance variable in the design matrix of the SRE magnitude covariate analyses, as per the method reported in Sollberger et al. (2009). For this co-atrophy check, we accepted a level of significance of p &lt; .05 uncorrected for multiple comparisons for clusters of CMS atrophy previously identified in the SRE magnitude covariate analysis, and p &lt; .01 for clusters outside these regions. Finally, inclusive and exclusive masking procedures were employed to identify regions commonly associated with SRE magnitude across both patient groups, as well as regions uniquely associated with SRE magnitude in bvFTD and AD. SRE magnitude covariate analyses and masking procedures were conducted at significance levels of p &lt; .01, uncorrected for multiple comparisons. To reduce the potential for false positives, we applied a stringent cluster extent threshold of 50 contiguous voxels for the covariate analyses. Regions of significant atrophy were superimposed on T1-weighted standard brain images, and regions of significant grey matter intensity decrease were localised with reference to the Harvard-Oxford probabilistic cortical atlas. Maximum coordinates for the anatomical locations of significant results are reported in MNI coordinates.

3. Results

3.1. Demographics

Demographic and clinical characteristics of the participants are detailed in Table 1. Participant groups were matched for age (p = .111) and sex distribution (p = .281). An overall group difference was evident for total years of education (p = .015), driven by the fact that controls were more highly educated than both bvFTD (p = .023) and AD (p = .039) patients. The total years of education were subsequently included as a covariate in between-group comparisons of cognitive, episodic memory and SRE task measures.

Importantly, the patient groups were matched for disease duration (p = .871) and severity of dementia symptoms on the CDR (p = .976). As expected, bvFTD patients were more impaired in comparison to AD patients on a FTD-specific measure of functional impairment (FRS; p = .016). Based on CBI-R scores, both patient groups showed significantly more symptoms of overall behavioural disturbance compared to controls (p values &lt; .001), with more severe symptoms in bvFTD compared to AD patients (p = .006).

3.2. General cognition and episodic memory assessment

Both patient groups were significantly impaired on the ACE-III cognitive screening measure, relative to controls (bvFTD, p &lt; .001; AD, p &lt; .001). However, performance on the ACE-III was comparable between AD and bvFTD patients (p = .202). In comparison to controls, both patient groups demonstrated significant episodic memory impairment across all measures of verbal and visual recall (p values &lt; .01). Comparisons between patient groups revealed lower episodic memory performance in AD compared to bvFTD on the RAVLT immediate recall (p = .004), RAVLT delayed recall (p = .015) and RCFT 3-minute delayed recall (p = .003) scores.

3.3. SRE task performance

Supplementary Table 1 shows the mean percentages of each response type (hit, miss, “don’t know”) for items and sources from the self-reference, other-reference and perceptual encoding conditions, as well as for unstudied items.

3.3.1. Item recognition task

Supplementary Fig. 1 depicts corrected item recognition accuracy for each encoding condition across the three participant groups. A three (group) by three (condition) repeated measures ANCOVA with years of education included as a covariate revealed a significant group effect [F(2,51) = 10.702, p &lt; .001] for overall corrected item recognition accuracy. This group effect reflected the fact that corrected item recognition accuracy was significantly lower in AD patients relative to controls (p &lt; .001), irrespective of condition. Similarly, corrected item recognition accuracy was significantly lower in bvFTD patients compared to controls (p = .003). No significant condition effect (p = .465) or group × condition interaction (p = .857) was evident.

Post hoc paired-samples t-tests were conducted separately for each participant group, to explore differences in corrected item recognition for each encoding condition. In the control group, as expected, corrected item recognition accuracy was higher for the self-reference compared to perceptual condition [t(16) = 3.913, p = .001] and higher for the other-reference relative to perceptual condition [t(16) = 3.118, p = .007]. However, corrected item recognition accuracy did not differ across self-reference and other-reference conditions [t(16) = 1.231, p = .236] in this group. In the bvFTD group, corrected item recognition accuracy was lower for the self-reference compared to other-reference condition [t(21) = −2.085, p = .049]. While corrected item recognition accuracy was comparable for the self-reference and perceptual conditions in bvFTD [t(21) = .756, p = .458], this was significantly higher for the other-reference relative to perceptual condition [t(21) = 2.795, p = .011]. In AD patients, no significant difference in corrected item recognition accuracy was observed between the self-reference and other-reference conditions [t(15) = .659, p = .520], or between the other-reference and perceptual conditions [t(15) = .768, p = .455]. Nonetheless, a trend was present for higher corrected item recognition accuracy in the self-reference compared to perceptual condition [t(15) = 2.085, p = .055].

3.3.2. Source recognition task

Fig. 3A depicts source recognition accuracy for each encoding condition across the three participant groups. A three (group) by three (condition) repeated measures ANCOVA with years of education included as a covariate revealed a significant group effect [F(2,51) = 25.372, p &lt; .001] for overall source recognition accuracy. This group effect indicated that source recognition accuracy was significantly higher in controls compared to both bvFTD (p &lt; .001) and AD (p &lt; .001) patients, irrespective of condition. Furthermore, AD patients scored significantly lower than bvFTD patients (p = .003) on overall source recognition accuracy, regardless of condition. No significant condition effect (p = .937) or group × condition interaction (p = .977) was detected.

To explore differences in source recognition for each encoding condition, post hoc paired-samples t-tests were conducted separately for each participant group. In controls, source memory recognition accuracy was significantly higher for the self-reference compared to the other-reference condition [t(16) = 3.357, p = .004], and higher for the self-reference compared to the perceptual condition [t(16) = 3.067, p = .007]. In contrast, source memory accuracy did not differ between the other-reference and perceptual conditions in controls [t(16) = .803, p = .434]. That is, controls showed a significant SRE for source recognition accuracy. In the patient groups however, none of the pairwise comparisons between self-reference, other-reference and perceptual conditions reached significance (all p values &gt; .1). Therefore, only control participants showed a significant source memory benefit for self-referenced compared to other-referenced and perceptually encoded stimuli.

3.3.3. SRE magnitude for source recognition

Fig. 3B shows the mean SRE magnitude for source recognition accuracy across participant groups. Independent samples t-tests were conducted to determine whether SRE magnitude for source recognition was significantly greater than 0, indicating a positive memory advantage for self-referenced information. While SRE magnitude was significantly greater than 0 in the control group [t(16) = 3.357, p = .004], this did not reach statistical significance in either bvFTD [t(21) =−.576, p = .571] or AD [t(15) = .496, p = .627]. As such, only control participants showed a significant SRE, whereas both AD and bvFTD patients showed no source memory enhancement effect for self-referenced information.

3.4. Correlations between SRE magnitude and episodic memory impairment

Spearman rank correlations were used to examine the relationship between SRE magnitude and performance on neuropsychological tests of episodic memory. Across all participants, SRE magnitude scores did not correlate significantly with the RAVLT immediate recall (R = .114, p = .449), RAVLT delayed recall (R = .178, p = .238) or RCFT 3-min recall (R = .238, p = .097) scores. Similarly, correlations between SRE magnitude scores and episodic memory scores within each participant group did not reach statistical significance (all p values &gt; .1). This suggests that the benefit of self-reference over other-reference encoding was not related to episodic memory performance per se.

3.5. VBM results

3.5.1. CMS grey matter atrophy profiles across patient groups

Fig. 4 displays the patterns of CMS grey matter atrophy evident in each patient group relative to controls. BvFTD patients showed a predominantly anterior profile of CMS atrophy, encompassing the bilateral subcallosal cortex, orbitofrontal cortex, medial prefrontal cortex, frontal pole, anterior cingulate cortex, paracingulate cortex and superior frontal gyrus, as well as bilateral regions of the PCC (see Fig. 4A, Table 2). In contrast, the AD group showed a predominantly posterior profile of grey matter atrophy, including the bilateral PCC and precuneus. To a lesser extent, bilateral anterior cingulate and paracingulate and right frontal polar grey matter atrophy was also evident in AD patients (see Fig. 4B, Table 2).

Direct comparison of the two patient groups revealed a predominantly anterior burden of atrophy in bvFTD, in contrast to a predominantly posterior burden of atrophy in AD. Bilateral regions in the subcallosal cortex, orbitofrontal cortex, medial prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex and paracingulate cortex showed greater atrophy in bvFTD compared to AD (see Fig. 4C, Table 2). The reverse contrast revealed significantly greater atrophy in the bilateral PCC and precuneus in the AD group (see Fig. 4D, Table 2). These grey matter atrophy profiles are consistent with previously reported patterns of atrophy in bvFTD (Seeley et al., 2008) and AD (Karas et al., 2004; Rabinovici et al., 2007).

3.5.2. Grey matter correlates of SRE magnitude

SRE magnitude (indicating source memory advantage of self vs other-referencing) scores were entered into two separate GLMs, to investigate correlations between SRE magnitude and regions of grey matter atrophy in each patient group (bvFTD, AD) combined with controls. In bvFTD, SRE magnitude covaried with grey matter intensity decrease in predominantly anterior CMS regions including the anterior cingulate cortex, paracingulate cortex, medial prefrontal cortex and subcallosal cortex, bilaterally (see Fig. 5A, Table 3). In AD, SRE magnitude covaried with grey matter intensity decrease in bilateral anterior cingulate and paracingulate cortices, right PCC and precuneus, and right frontal pole and orbitofrontal and medial prefrontal cortices (see Fig. 5B, Table 3). Analysis of potential co-atrophy effects revealed that these regions remained significant (p &lt; .05, uncorrected) when controlling for diagnostic group effects (see Table 3), and no significant clusters outside the regions of CMS atrophy identified in the SRE magnitude analyses emerged (p &lt; .01, uncorrected). As a final check, mean cluster intensity values were extracted for each significant cluster in the anterior-dorsal CMS, anterior-ventral CMS and posterior CMS and plotted against SRE magnitude scores for bvFTD patients and controls (see Supplementary Fig. 3A) and AD patients and controls (see Supplementary Fig. 3B).

To identify the regions significantly associated with SRE magnitude in both bvFTD and AD, we conducted an overlap analysis (see Fig. 6, Supplementary Table 2). This analysis revealed the bilateral anterior cingulate and paracingulate cortices to be commonly implicated across both patient groups. Next, exclusive masking was used to identify the regions that uniquely contributed to SRE magnitude in each patient group (see Fig. 6, Supplementary Table 2). In bvFTD, integrity of the right medial prefrontal and subcallosal cortices, as well as left anterior cingulate cortices correlated exclusively with SRE magnitude. In contrast, SRE magnitude in AD patients was exclusively associated with integrity of the right PCC, as well as regions in the right frontal pole and orbitofrontal cortex and right anterior cingulate cortex. Thus, in relation to the three CMS subregions proposed by Northoff et al. (2006), anterior-dorsal CMS atrophy was associated with reduced SRE magnitude across both bvFTD and AD. In bvFTD, there was additional involvement of anterior-ventral CMS atrophy only. By contrast, SRE magnitude was exclusively associated with posterior CMS atrophy in AD patients, as well as atrophy in an OFC/frontal polar region within the anterior-ventral CMS.

4. Discussion

A vast body of work highlights the preferential encoding of information related to the self. In the current study, we investigated how damage to regions in the CMS, crucial for self-referential processing, impact the SRE in neurodegenerative disorders with divergent anterior versus posterior CMS pathology. In bvFTD, where the burden of pathology is overwhelmingly anterior, we found that the reduced SRE was related to atrophy in the anterior-ventral CMS. In contrast, atrophy in the posterior CMS was uniquely associated with the attenuated SRE in AD, consistent with the predominantly posterior burden of atrophy in this patient group. Furthermore, atrophy in the anterior-dorsal CMS was implicated across both patient groups. Our findings therefore highlight important similarities and differences in the contribution of these CMS subregions and corresponding subcomponents of self-referential processing, in mediating the SRE in bvFTD and AD.

This is the first study, to our knowledge, to explore the mechanisms underpinning SRE disruption in AD and bvFTD. In line with our predictions, bvFTD patients did not show an enhancement effect of self-referential processing. Our findings mesh well with previous work showing impaired retrieval of autobiographical memory, which is inherently self-referential, in these patients (Irish, Hornberger, et al., 2011; Piolino et al., 2003). Importantly, the reduced benefit of self-versus other-referential encoding did not correlate with performance on standardised tests of episodic memory, suggesting that the absence of SRE in these patients could not be explained by a general memory deficit per se. Rather, our results indicate that self-referencing has no appreciable influence on source memory retrieval in bvFTD. One potential explanation is that alterations in self concept influence the degree to which self-related information is preferentially encoded in this syndrome. In his original study, Rogers (1977) described the self as a cognitive structure that plays an active role in memory, such that new information that is consistent with one’s self is organised and remembered more easily than information that is incompatible with one’s self. This raises the possibility that alterations to the self, as documented by changes in personality (Rankin, 2005; Ruby et al., 2007) and personal values (Miller et al., 2001) in bvFTD, impact on its stability and reliability as a cognitive structure that facilitates the encoding of self-related information. Nonetheless, the precise mechanisms underlying this effect require further investigation.

On a behavioural level, our findings in AD are comparable with bvFTD, where there was no self-referential enhancement of source memory. The absence of SRE in our AD group corroborates results from previous reports of attenuated SRE and SRRE in AD (Genon et al., 2014a; Leblond et al., 2016), but extend these findings by using a source memory experimental design, showing neither item nor source memory enhancement. While a number of existing studies have demonstrated significant SRE and SRRE in AD (Kalenzaga &amp; Clarys, 2013; Kalenzaga et al., 2013; Lalanne et al., 2013), the apparent disparity in results may be related to differences in methodological approaches. Whereas all previous self-referential encoding tasks conducted in AD patients have involved making judgements regarding the self-relevance of trait adjectives, reports of significant SRE or SRRE appear to be driven by the effect in positive (Lalanne et al., 2013) or negative (Kalenzaga &amp; Clarys, 2013; Kalenzaga et al., 2013) trait adjectives only. Thus, it is plausible that self-referencing alone is not sufficient to provide a memory advantage in AD, unless the to-be-remembered stimuli are emotional in nature. Indeed, evidence suggests that a significant emotional enhancement effect persists in AD patients, despite their profound episodic memory impairments (Kalenzaga, Piolino, &amp; Clarys, 2014; Kumfor, Irish, Hodges, &amp; Piguet, 2013, 2014). Given that we included relatively neutral objects and background stimuli in our SRE paradigm, it is unlikely that emotional valence had any appreciable impact on memory performance. Taken together, our findings contribute to a growing body of research which indicates that self-referential processing alone is insufficient to enhance memory retrieval in AD.

Importantly, while the absence of source memory enhancement for self-referential information was comparable in bvFTD and AD, the neural correlates differed markedly between groups. In line with evidence from neuroimaging studies that have highlighted the importance of the MPFC for SRE (D’Argembeau et al., 2005; Moran, Heatherton, &amp; Kelley, 2009; Northoff et al., 2006; Philippi, Duff, Denburg, Tranel, &amp; Rudrauf, 2012), atrophy in this region was associated with reductions in SRE magnitude in bvFTD. In the context of Northoff et al. (2006) model, damage to this anterior-ventral CMS region disrupts the initial coding of stimuli as self-related, thus compromising downstream self-referential processes in more posteriorly located CMS regions. In conjunction with findings from MPFC lesion patients, who do not show any significant SRE (Philippi et al., 2012), our results support the notion that disruption to the initial stages of self-referential processing in the anterior-ventral CMS may impact the extent to which memory for self-related information is enhanced. On a broader level however, the anterior-ventral CMS has also been proposed to function as a ‘valuation’ centre, where subjective value is assigned to incoming stimuli (D’Argembeau, 2013; Northoff &amp; Hayes, 2011). As such, this region appears to be involved in processing and integrating features that contribute to the subjective value of a stimulus, such as self-relatedness (D’Argembeau, 2013; Northoff &amp; Hayes, 2011), reward value (Kringelbach, 2005; Levy &amp; Glimcher, 2012) and emotional value (Winecoff et al., 2013), which determines whether it is preferentially encoded. Of particular relevance, bvFTD patients do not show the typical memory advantage for emotional information, and this has been associated with atrophy in the OFC, which forms the most ventral part of the anterior-ventral CMS (Kumfor et al., 2013, 2014). In the same vein, the reduced memory enhancement effect for personally ‘valuable’ information was related to anterior-ventral CMS atrophy in our bvFTD patients. Damage to this anterior-ventral CMS region in bvFTD may therefore be particularly disruptive to the early processing of self-referential information, during which personal value is assigned.

In contrast, integrity of the posterior CMS regions (including the PCC and precuneus) was exclusively associated with the degree of self-referential enhancement of memory in AD. This contrasts with results from Genon et al. (2014a, 2014b), where PCC activity was associated with the accurate recognition of self-referentially encoded information, rather than the SRE magnitude per se. Instead, SRE magnitude was associated with lateral PFC atrophy, which presumably mediates the interaction between self-referential and higher order cognitive processes (Genon et al., 2014a; Northoff et al., 2006). Nonetheless, our results extend existing findings by using a targeted region-of-interest approach to identify specific CMS correlates of the SRE in AD, primarily involving the posterior CMS but also an OFC/frontal polar region in the anterior-ventral CMS. Notably however, this anterior-ventral CMS subregion implicated in AD was located more laterally and did not overlap with the anterior-ventral CMS subregion implicated in bvFTD. Whether this lateral-ventral distinction reflects further functional subdivisions within the anterior-ventral CMS, requires further investigation. Nonetheless, our results in AD are compatible with previous reports of both posterior and anterior-ventral CMS activity during the retrieval of self-referenced relative to non-self-referenced stimuli in healthy adults (Fossati et al., 2004; Leshikar &amp; Duarte, 2013; Yaoi, Osaka, &amp; Osaka, 2015). On a broader level, the involvement of both posterior and anterior-ventral CMS subregions is also consistent with the pattern of CMS activity during inherently self-related memory processes such as autobiographical memory retrieval (Addis, McIntosh, Moscovitch, Crawley, &amp; McAndrews, 2004; Maguire, 2001; Svoboda, McKinnon, &amp; Levine, 2006). In the context of Northoff et al. (2006) model, involvement of the posterior CMS in AD, but not bvFTD, suggests that the reduced SRE in AD may be further impacted by specific deficits in the ability to integrate newly coded self-referential information within the context of existing autobiographical memories (Cavanna &amp; Trimble, 2006). Our findings therefore point to the unique contribution of posterior CMS atrophy to self-referential memory processes in AD, corroborating previous work emphasizing the role of the posterior CMS regions in the retrieval of past, and simulation of future, self-referential events in this patient group (Irish, Addis, et al., 2012; Irish et al., 2013).

While we identified divergent CMS contributions to the SRE specific to each patient group, our analyses also implicated the anterior-dorsal CMS, particularly the anterior cingulate cortex, as a common neural correlate of SRE magnitude in bvFTD and AD. With respect to its role in self-referential processing, Northoff et al. (2006) proposed that the anterior-dorsal CMS is involved in the reappraisal and evaluation of self-related information. Indeed, a recent meta-analysis of functional neuroimaging studies contrasting self- and other-judgements revealed a spatial gradient in MPFC activation, such that self-referential judgements were associated with greater ventral MPFC activity, whereas other-referential judgements were related to greater activity in the dorsal MPFC (Denny, Kober, Wager, &amp; Ochsner, 2012). The finding that dorsal MPFC supports judgements about others is unsurprising, given its role in perspective taking tasks, such as those involving theory of mind (ToM) (D’Argembeau et al., 2007; Gallagher &amp; Frith, 2003). Crucially, bvFTD patients show impairments in perspective taking and empathy (Cerami et al., 2014; Dermody et al., 2016; Eslinger et al., 2011), which have been proposed to be associated with underlying difficulties in inhibiting their own perspective when required to adopt another person’s perspective (Le Bouc et al., 2012). It is therefore possible that bvFTD patients tended to encode all stimuli in relation to the self, thereby reducing the SRE magnitude. Importantly however, our findings from the perceptual encoding condition do not support this position, as we did not find enhanced source memory retrieval for both the self- and other-reference conditions compared to the perceptual condition. Furthermore, while perspective taking and ToM deficits have been widely reported in bvFTD patients (Adenzato, Cavallo, &amp; Enrici, 2010; Bertoux, Funkiewiez, O’Callaghan, Dubois, &amp; Hornberger, 2013; Kipps &amp; Hodges, 2006), recent work has delineated between cognitive (attribution of intention) and affective (attribution of emotion) ToM, showing comparable deficits in cognitive ToM across both bvFTD and AD patients (Dermody et al., 2016; Dodich et al., 2016). Against this background, the anterior-dorsal CMS involvement in SRE magnitude across both bvFTD and AD patients may be related to deficits in their ability to evaluate information from the perspective of another person. Nonetheless, the relationship between perspective taking ability and self-referential enhancement of memory in these patient groups remains to be established, and represents an important area for future research.

From a theoretical viewpoint, the current findings suggest that attenuation of the self-referential enhancement effect in bvFTD and AD may reflect the breakdown of discrete facets of self-referential processing, which in turn rely upon the integrity of different subregions of the CMS. Our results in bvFTD confirm the importance of prefrontal cortex contributions to episodic memory function (Simons &amp; Spiers, 2003; Wong et al., 2014) and complement a growing body of literature, which views the anterior-ventral CMS as a core ‘valuation’ hub by assigning subjective value to personally-, affectively- and motivationally-salient information (D’Argembeau, 2013; Northoff &amp; Hayes, 2011). On the other hand, our findings in AD confirm the prominence of the PCC in mediating all aspects of self-related memory impairments in this syndrome (reviewed by Irish &amp; Piolino, 2015). While our findings are in line with the notion that different CMS subregions mediate discrete aspects of self-referential processing, functional neuroimaging studies employing targeted experimental paradigms that directly contrast the different aspects of self-referential processing are necessary to support this proposal.

A number of methodological issues warrant consideration. Firstly, as our SRE task only assessed source memory accuracy for background images, it is unclear how this compares to accurate retrieval of other source details (e.g., encoding context). Nonetheless, our findings demonstrate that self-referential processing in AD and bvFTD does not ameliorate impairments on an objective measure of source memory. A second point to consider is the use of background image, rather than encoding context, as the source recognition question, as this precluded us from distinguishing between false alarms for ‘new’ items incorrectly assigned as self, other or perceptually referenced. Of particular relevance, recent studies (Rosa &amp; Gutchess, 2013; Rosa, Deason, Budson, &amp; Gutchess, 2015) have indicated that the SRE may also impact false alarm rates, such that ‘new’ items that are subsequently judged to be highly self-relevant are more likely to be falsely recognized as ‘old’. Given that false recognition rates on clinical measures of episodic memory are elevated in both bvFTD and AD patients (Flanagan et al., 2016), future studies should investigate the potential impact of self-referential processing on false alarm rates in these patient groups. Thirdly, due to time constraints and patient fatigue, it was necessary to limit the number of trials in our SRE encoding task. Given the small number of responses, item-only hits and item misses were collapsed into the same response category (i.e., source-unrecollected) to contrast against item-and-source hits (i.e., source-recollected). Hence, our source memory recognition accuracy measure only allowed us to draw conclusions regarding source memory effects, which were not conditionalised based on item memory effects. Similarly, the small number of responses also precluded us from correcting for lucky guesses in source recognition performance, as per previously reported procedures in healthy adults (Leshikar &amp; Duarte, 2013). As such, the impact of such response biases on source recognition memory following self-referential encoding in these patient groups represents an important area of future enquiry. Additionally, we were not able to contrast subsequent item and source recognition accuracy for items positively or negatively judged for pleasantness during encoding. Given that greater MPFC activation is observed in relation to stimuli judged to be self-relevant (D’Argembeau et al., 2005; Moran et al., 2009), comparison of memory for stimuli according to degree of self-relevance may further elucidate mechanisms underlying the reduced SRE in bvFTD and AD. Likewise, the relationship between the SRE and alterations in concept of self represents an important area of future enquiry, especially considering the marked changes to personality and interpersonal conduct in bvFTD (Piguet et al., 2011). While previous studies in AD have used self-rated measures of identity valence and certainty (Lalanne et al., 2013; Leblond et al., 2016), inclusion of measures that allow comparison between self and informant responses is necessary, as loss of insight is a prominent clinical characteristic in bvFTD (Piguet et al., 2011). Furthermore, given that we employed a region-of-interest approach in our VBM analyses, we could not exclude the possibility that atrophy of regions beyond the CMS may have also contributed to the reduced SRE in bvFTD and AD. In particular, the lateral prefrontal cortex has been proposed to support interactions between self-referential and higher-order processes, especially during tasks with a strong cognitive component (Northoff et al., 2006). Comparison of the SRE on tasks with a low versus high cognitive load may help further elucidate the role of the lateral prefrontal cortex in self-referential processing in these patient groups. Nonetheless, given that the lateral prefrontal cortex shows a similar degree of atrophy (Rabinovici et al., 2007) and contributes to episodic memory deficits (Wong et al., 2014) in both bvFTD and AD, it is unlikely that this region differentially contributes to the reduced SRE in these patient groups. Finally, future investigations of self-referential processing in bvFTD and AD would benefit from incorporating resting-state functional connectivity metrics to clarify the impact of CMS pathology on the SRE, in the context of large-scale network dysfunction characteristic of these disorders.

In summary, this study reveals the differential involvement of CMS subregions in facilitating the SRE, by contrasting neurodegenerative disorders with a predominantly anterior versus predominantly posterior burden of pathology. Absence of the SRE in bvFTD is associated with underlying pathology in the anterior-ventral CMS, which potentially mediates the early stages of self-referential processing, during which personal value is assigned to stimuli. In contrast, pathology in the posterior CMS uniquely contributes to the attenuated SRE in AD, likely reflecting breakdown in integrative processes that link newly encoded self-related information with existing self-referential, autobiographical memories. In addition, anterior-dorsal atrophy appears to contribute to reductions in SRE across both bvFTD and AD, pointing to deficits in the evaluative aspects of self-referential processing in both syndromes. Our results provide important insights into the mechanisms underlying self-referential memory and point to clinically relevant similarities and differences in the interaction between self and memory in bvFTD and AD. Exploring the relationship between alterations in self concept and the memory benefit conferred by self-referential processing will be an important next step for future studies to address.

Supplementary Material

Supplementary data

Funding

This work was supported by funding to ForeFront, a collaborative research group dedicated to the study of frontotemporal dementia and motor neuron disease, from the National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) (APP1037746) and the Australian Research Council (ARC) Centre of Excellence in Cognition and its Disorders Memory Program (CE11000102); SW is supported by an Australian Postgraduate Award Scholarship and an Alzheimer’s Australia Dementia Research Foundation Top-Up Scholarship; MI is supported by an Australian Research Council Discovery Early Career Researcher Award (DE130100463). MB is supported by a Marie Skłodowska Curie fellowship from the European Commission; OP is supported by an NHMRC Senior Research Fellowship (APP1103258). MH is supported by Alzheimer’s Research UK and the Wellcome Trust. The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

The authors are grateful to the participants and their families for supporting our research.

Fig. 1 Encoding and test phase procedures for the SRE task. Screens were separated by a fixation cross (500 msec) not represented here.

Fig. 2 Representation of brain regions included in the CMS mask used in VBM analyses.

Fig. 3 A) Mean percentage correct source recognition responses for self-reference, other-reference and perceptual encoding conditions across participant groups. (B) SRE magnitude (self-reference source accuracy – other-reference source accuracy) across groups. * = significant difference between encoding conditions. # = SRE magnitude significantly different from 0. Error bars represent standard error of the mean.

Fig. 4 VBM analyses showing CMS regions of greater reduction in (A) bvFTD patients in comparison with controls (B) AD patients in comparison with controls (C) bvFTD patients in comparison with AD patients and (D) AD patients in comparison with bvFTD patients. Coloured voxels show regions that were significant in the analysis with p &lt; .05, Family-wise Error corrected, and a cluster threshold of 100 contiguous voxels. Clusters are overlaid on the MNI standard brain.

Fig. 5 Regions of CMS grey matter atrophy correlating with self-other SRE magnitude in (A) bvFTD patients and (B) AD patients. Coloured voxels show regions that were significant in the analysis with p &lt; .01, uncorrected and a cluster threshold of 50 contiguous voxels. Clusters are overlaid on the MNI standard brain.

Fig. 6 Regions of CMS grey matter atrophy that correlate with SRE magnitude scores across both bvFTD and AD (overlap shown in green), and regions that correlate exclusively in bvFTD patients (red) and exclusively in AD patients (blue). Coloured voxels show regions that were significant in the analysis with p &lt; .01, uncorrected and a cluster threshold of 50 contiguous voxels. Clusters are overlaid on the MNI standard brain.

Table 1 Demographic and clinical characteristics of the study cohort.a

	Control	bvFTD	AD	Group effect	Post hoc test	
Sex (M:F)	9:8	14:8	6:10	n.s.		
Age (y)	67.21 (6.35)	62.10 (6.78)	64.81 (9.13)	n.s.		
Education (y)	14.38 (2.38)	11.90 (2.64)	11.91 (3.42)	*	Controls &gt; bvFTD, AD	
Disease duration (y)	–	5.54 (3.80)	5.51 (4.67)	n.s.		
CDR sum of boxes [18]	.25 (.38)	5.45 (2.83)	4.10 (1.79)	***	Controls &lt; bvFTD, AD	
FRS Rasch score	–	−1.06 (.99)	.06 (1.48)	*	bvFTD &lt; AD	
CBI-R total frequency score [100]	3.06 (3.06)	39.57 (13.44)	27.08 (13.36)	***	Controls &lt; AD &lt; bvFTD	
ACE-III [100]	96.31 (2.87)	75.82 (12.14)	67.50 (7.67)	***	Controls &gt; bvFTD, AD	
RAVLT immediate recall [15]	10.8 (2.48)	5.69 (4.01)	2.07 (1.98)	***	Controls &gt; bvFTD &gt; AD	
RAVLT delayed recall [15]	10.67 (2.99)	5.63 (3.26)	1.27 (1.33)	***	Controls &gt; bvFTD &gt; AD	
RCFT 3-min recall [36]	22.21 (6.86)	9.80 (6.15)	4.32 (4.99)	***	Controls &gt; bvFTD &gt; AD	
Clinical Dementia Rating Scale (CDR); Frontotemporal Dementia Rating Scale (FRS); Cambridge Behavioural Inventory-Revised (CBI-R); Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination-III (ACE-III); Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test (RAVLT); Rey-Osterrieth Complex Figure Test (RCFT).

* p &lt; .05,

** p &lt; .01,

*** p &lt; .001, n.s. = non-significant.

a Standard deviations in parentheses, maximum score for tests shown in brackets.

Table 2 Voxel-based morphometry results showing regions of significant grey matter intensity decrease for bvFTD and AD groups compared to controls.

Regions	Hemisphere (L/R/B)	MNI coordinates	Number of voxels	
	
X	Y	Z	
bvFTD &lt; controls	
Medial prefrontal cortex, subcallosal cortex, orbitofrontal cortex, frontal pole, anterior cingulate cortex, paracingulate cortex, superior frontal gyrus	B	6	32	−16	7462	
Posterior cingulate cortex	L	−14	−34	38	104	
AD &lt; controls	
Posterior cingulate cortex, precuneus	B	−8	−46	2	3669	
Anterior cingulate cortex, paracingulate cortex	B	12	14	34	699	
Frontal pole	R	16	50	−22	113	
bvFTD &lt; AD	
Subcallosal cortex, orbitofrontal cortex, medial prefrontal cortex	B	10	14	−20	1426	
Paracingulate cortex, anterior cingulate cortex	B	6	34	32	867	
AD &lt; bvFTD	
Precuneus, posterior cingulate cortex	B	2	−68	40	3196	
All results FWE-corrected at p &lt; .05; only clusters with at least 100 contiguous voxels included. All clusters reported t &gt; 1.99. Age and years of education were included as covariates in all contrasts. L = Left; R = Right; B = Bilateral; MNI = Montreal Neurological Institute.

Table 3 Voxel-based morphometry results showing regions of significant grey matter intensity decrease that covary with SRE magnitude scores.

Regions	Hemisphere (L/R/B)	MNI coordinates	Number of voxels	
	
X	Y	Z	
bvFTD combined with controls	
Anterior cingulate cortex, paracingulate cortexa	B	0	32	28	152	
Medial prefrontal cortex, subcallosal cortexa	R	4	38	−14	122	
AD combined with controls	
Anterior cingulate cortexa	B	2	28	26	311	
Frontal pole, orbitofrontal cortex, medial prefrontal cortexa	R	12	42	−20	240	
Posterior cingulate cortexa	R	16	−36	38	68	
All results uncorrected at p &lt; .01; only clusters with at least 50 contiguous voxels included. All clusters reported t &gt; 3.36. Age and years of education were included as covariates in all contrasts. L = Left; R = Right; B = Bilateral; MNI = Montreal Neurological Institute.

a Clusters significant (p &lt; .05) when diagnostic group included as an additional covariate for co-atrophy check.

Supplementary data

Supplementary data related to this article can be found at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2016.09.013.


Addis DR McIntosh AR Moscovitch M Crawley AP McAndrews MP 2004 Characterizing spatial and temporal features of autobiographical memory retrieval networks: A partial least squares approach NeuroImage 23 4 1460 1471 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.08.007 15589110
Adenzato M Cavallo M Enrici I 2010 Theory of mind ability in the behavioural variant of frontotemporal dementia: An analysis of the neural, cognitive, and social levels Neuropsychologia 48 1 2 12 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2009.08.001 19666039
Anderson JLR Jenkinson M Smith S 2007a Non-linear optimisation: FMRIB technical report TR07JA1
Anderson JLR Jenkinson M Smith S 2007b Non-linear registration, aka spatial normalisation: FMRIB technical report TR07JA2
Ashburner J Friston KJ 2000 Voxel-based morphometry—the methods NeuroImage 11 6 805 821 http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/nimg.2000.0582 10860804
Bertoux M de Souza LC Corlier F Lamari F Bottlaender M Dubois B 2014 Two distinct amnesic profiles in behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia Biological Psychiatry 75 7 582 588 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2013.08.017 24090793
Bertoux M Funkiewiez A O’Callaghan C Dubois B Hornberger M 2013 Sensitivity and specificity of ventromedial prefrontal cortex tests in behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 9 5 S84 S94 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jalz.2012.09.010
Bower GH Gilligan SG 1979 Remembering information related to one’s self Journal of Research in Personality 13 4 420 432 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0092-6566(79)90005-9
Cavanna AE Trimble MR 2006 The precuneus: A review of its functional anatomy and behavioural correlates Brain 129 Pt 3 564 583 http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/brain/awl004 16399806
Cerami C Dodich A Canessa N Crespi C Marcone A Cortese F 2014 Neural correlates of empathic impairment in the behavioral variant of frontotemporal dementia Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 1 8 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jalz.2014.01.005
Chételat G Desgranges B Landeau B Mézenge F Poline JB de La Sayette V 2007 Direct voxel-based comparison between grey matter hypometabolism and atrophy in Alzheimer’s disease Brain 131 1 60 71 http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/brain/awm288 18063588
Craik FIM Moroz TM Moscovitch M Stuss DT Winocur G Tulving E 1999 In search of the self: A positron emission tomography study Psychological Science 10 1 26 34 http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/1467-9280.00102
D’Argembeau A 2013 On the role of the ventromedial prefrontal cortex in self-processing: The valuation hypothesis Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 7 372 http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2013.00372 23847521
D’Argembeau A Collette F Van der Linden M Laureys S Del Fiore G Degueldre C 2005 Self-referential reflective activity and its relationship with rest: A PET study NeuroImage 25 2 616 624 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.11.048 15784441
D’Argembeau A Ruby P Collette F Degueldre C Balteau E Luxen A 2007 Distinct regions of the medial prefrontal cortex are associated with self-referential processing and perspective taking Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 19 6 935 944 http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2007.19.6.935 17536964
Denny BT Kober H Wager TD Ochsner KN 2012 A meta-analysis of functional neuroimaging studies of self- and other judgments reveals a spatial gradient for mentalizing in medial prefrontal cortex Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 24 8 1742 1752 http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_00233 22452556
Dermody N Wong S Ahmed R Piguet O Hodges JR Irish M 2016 Uncovering the neural bases of cognitive and affective empathy deficits in Alzheimer’s disease and the behavioral-variant of frontotemporal dementia Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 53 3 801 816 http://dx.doi.org/10.3233/JAD-160175
Dodich A Cerami C Crespi C Canessa N Lettieri G Iannaccone S 2016 Differential impairment of cognitive and affective mentalizing abilities in neurodegenerative dementias: Evidence from behavioral variant of frontotemporal dementia, Alzheimer’s disease, and mild cognitive impairment Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 50 4 1011 1022 http://dx.doi.org/10.3233/JAD-150605
Dunn OJ 1964 Multiple comparisons using rank sums Technometrics 6 3 241 252 http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00401706.1964.10490181
Eslinger PJ Moore P Anderson C Grossman M 2011 Social cognition, executive functioning, and neuroimaging correlates of empathic deficits in frontotemporal dementia Journal of Neuropsychiatry 23 1 74 82 http://dx.doi.org/10.1176/appi.neuropsych.23.1.74
Eustache ML Laisney M Juskenaite A Letortu O Platel H Eustache F 2013 Sense of identity in advanced Alzheimer’s dementia: A cognitive dissociation between sameness and selfhood? Consciousness and Cognition 22 4 1456 1467 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2013.09.009 24177236
Flanagan EC Wong S Dutt A Tu S Bertoux M Irish M 2016 False recognition in behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer’s disease—disinhibition or amnesia? Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience 8 805 811 http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fnagi.2016.00177
Fossati P Hevenor SJ Lepage M Graham SJ Grady C Keightley ML 2004 Distributed self in episodic memory: Neural correlates of successful retrieval of self-encoded positive and negative personality traits NeuroImage 22 4 1596 1604 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.03.034 15275916
Frisch S Dukart J Vogt B Horstmann A Becker G Villringer A 2013 Dissociating memory networks in early Alzheimer’s disease and frontotemporal lobar degeneration – a combined study of hypometabolism and atrophy Plos One 8 2 http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0055251 e55251 12 23457466
Gallagher HL Frith CD 2003 Functional imaging of “theory of mind Trends in Cognitive Sciences 7 2 77 83 12584026
Genon S Bahri MA Collette F Angel L D’Argembeau A Clarys D 2014a Cognitive and neuroimaging evidence of impaired interaction between self and memory in Alzheimer’s disease Cortex 51 11 24 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2013.06.009 23993283
Genon S Bastin C Angel L Collette F Bahri MA Salmon E 2014b A partial least squares analysis of the self reference effect in Alzheimer’s disease: A reply to Irish Cortex 1 6 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2014.02.003
Glisky EL Marquine MJ 2009 Semantic and self-referential processing of positive and negative trait adjectives in older adults Memory 17 2 144 157 http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09658210802077405 18608973
Good CD Johnsrude I Ashburner J Henson RNA Friston KJ Frackowiak RSJ 2001 Cerebral asymmetry and the effects of sex and handedness on brain structure: A voxel-based morphometric analysis of 465 normal adult human brains NeuroImage 14 3 685 700 http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/nimg.2001.0857 11506541
Graham A Davies R Xuereb J Halliday G Kril J Creasey H 2005 Pathologically proven frontotemporal dementia presenting with severe amnesia Brain 128 Pt 3 597 605 http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/brain/awh348 15634737
Grigg O Grady CL 2010 The default network and processing of personally relevant information: Converging evidence from task-related modulations and functional connectivity Neuropsychologia 48 13 3815 3823 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2010.09.007 20837034
Gutchess AH Kensinger EA Schacter DL 2007 Aging, self-referencing, and medial prefrontal cortex Social Neuroscience 2 2 117 133 http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17470910701399029 18633811
Gutchess AH Kensinger EA Schacter DL 2010 Functional neuroimaging of self-referential encoding with age Neuropsychologia 48 1 211 219 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2009.09.006 19765600
Gutchess AH Kensinger EA Yoon C Schacter DL 2007 Ageing and the self-reference effect in memory Memory 15 8 822 837 http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09658210701701394 18033620
Gutchess AH Sokal R Coleman JA Gotthilf G Grewal L Rosa N 2015 Age differences in self-referencing: Evidence for common and distinct encoding strategies Brain Research 1612 C 118 127 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2014.08.033 25223905
El Haj M Kessels RPC 2013 Context memory in Alzheimer’s disease Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders Extra 3 1 342 350 http://dx.doi.org/10.1159/000354187 24403906
Hamami A Serbun SJ Gutchess AH 2011 Self-referencing enhances memory specificity with age Psychology and Aging 26 3 636 646 http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0022626 21480719
Hornberger M Piguet O 2012 Episodic memory in frontotemporal dementia: A critical review Brain 135 3 678 692 http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/brain/aws011 22366790
Hornberger M Piguet O Graham AJ Nestor PJ Hodges JR 2010 How preserved is episodic memory in behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia? Neurology 74 6 472 479 http://dx.doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181cef85d 20142613
Hsieh S Schubert S Hoon C Mioshi E Hodges JR 2013 Validation of the Addenbrooke’s cognitive examination III in frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer’s disease Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders 36 3–4 242 250 http://dx.doi.org/10.1159/000351671 23949210
Irish M Addis DR Hodges JR Piguet O 2012 Considering the role of semantic memory in episodic future thinking: Evidence from semantic dementia Brain 135 Pt 7 2178 2191 http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/brain/aws119 22614246
Irish M Graham A Graham KS Hodges JR Hornberger M 2012 Differential impairment of source memory in progressive versus non-progressive behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology: The Official Journal of the National Academy of Neuropsychologists 27 3 338 347 http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/arclin/acs033 22414677
Irish M Hodges JR Piguet O 2013 Episodic future thinking is impaired in the behavioural variant of frontotemporal dementia Cortex 49 9 2377 2388 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2013.03.002 23582296
Irish M Hornberger M Lah S Miller L Pengas G Nestor PJ 2011 Profiles of recent autobiographical memory retrieval in semantic dementia, behavioural-variant frontotemporal dementia, and Alzheimer’s disease Neuropsychologia 49 9 2694 2702 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2011.05.017 21658396
Irish M Hornberger M El Wahsh S Lam BYK Lah S Miller L 2014a Grey and white matter correlates of recent and remote autobiographical memory retrieval – insights from the dementias Plos One 9 11 http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0113081 e113081 14 25396740
Irish M Lawlor BA O’Mara SM Coen RF 2011 Impaired capacity for autonoetic reliving during autobiographical event recall in mild Alzheimer’s disease Cortex 47 2 236 249 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2010.01.002 20153463
Irish M Piguet O Hodges JR Hornberger M 2014 Common and unique gray matter correlates of episodic memory dysfunction in frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer’s disease Human Brain Mapping 35 4 1422 1435 http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/hbm.22263 23670951
Irish M Piolino P 2015 Impaired capacity for prospection in the dementias – theoretical and clinical implications British Journal of Clinical Psychology 55 1 49 68 http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/bjc.12090 26014112
Johnson MK Hashtroudi S Lindsay DS 1993 Source monitoring Psychological Bulletin 114 1 3 28 8346328
Kalenzaga S Bugaïska A Clarys D 2013 Self-reference effect and autonoetic consciousness in Alzheimer disease: Evidence for a persistent affective self in dementia patients Alzheimer Disease and Associated Disorders 27 2 116 122 http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/WAD.0b013e318257dc31 22596082
Kalenzaga S Clarys D 2013 Self-referential processing in Alzheimer’s disease: Two different ways of processing self-knowledge? Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology 35 5 455 471 http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13803395.2013.789485 23631426
Kalenzaga S Piolino P Clarys D 2014 The emotional memory effect in Alzheimer’s disease: Emotional words enhance recollective experience similarly in patients and control participants Cognition &amp; Emotion 29 2 342 350 http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02699931.2014.907127 24734952
Karas GB Scheltens P Rombouts SARB Visser PJ van Schijndel RA Fox NC 2004 Global and local gray matter loss in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease NeuroImage 23 2 708 716 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.07.006 15488420
Kipps CM Hodges JR 2006 Theory of mind in frontotemporal dementia Social Neuroscience 1 3–4 235 244 http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17470910600989847 18633790
Kipps CM Hodges JR Fryer TD Nestor PJ 2009 Combined magnetic resonance imaging and positron emission tomography brain imaging in behavioural variant frontotemporal degeneration: Refining the clinical phenotype Brain 132 Pt 9 2566 2578 http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/brain/awp077 19416953
Kipps CM Hodges JR Hornberger M 2010 Nonprogressive behavioural frontotemporal dementia: Recent developments and clinical implications of the “bvFTD phenocopy syndrome Current Opinion in Neurology 23 6 628 632 http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/WCO.0b013e3283404309 20962637
Klein SB Cosmides L Costabile KA 2003 Preserved knowledge of self in a case of Alzheimer’s dementia Social Cognition 21 2 157 165 http://dx.doi.org/10.1521/soco.21.2.157.21317
Kringelbach ML 2005 The human orbitofrontal cortex: Linking reward to hedonic experience Nature Reviews Neuroscience 6 9 691 702 http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nrn1747 16136173
Kumfor F Irish M Hodges JR Piguet O 2013 The orbitofrontal cortex is involved in emotional enhancement of memory: Evidence from the dementias Brain 136 10 2992 3003 http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/brain/awt185 23838694
Kumfor F Irish M Hodges JR Piguet O 2014 Frontal and temporal lobe contributions to emotional enhancement of memory in behavioral-variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer’s disease Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience 8 225 http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fnbeh.2014.00225 25009480
Lalanne J Rozenberg J Grolleau P Piolino P 2013 The self-reference effect on episodic memory recollection in young and older adults and Alzheimer’s disease Current Alzheimer Research 10 10 1107 1117 24156261
Le Bouc R Lenfant P Delbeuck X Ravasi L Lebert F Semah F 2012 My belief or yours? Differential theory of mind deficits in frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer’s disease Brain 135 10 3026 3038 http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/brain/aws237 23065791
Leblond M Laisney M Lamidey V Egret S de La Sayette V Chételat G 2016 Self-reference effect on memory in healthy aging, mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease: Influence of identity valence Cortex 74 C 177 190 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2015.10.017 26691733
Leshikar ED Duarte A 2012 Medial prefrontal cortex supports source memory accuracy for self-referenced items Social Neuroscience 7 2 126 145 http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17470919.2011.585242 21936739
Leshikar ED Duarte A 2013 Medial prefrontal cortex supports source memory for self-referenced materials in young and older adults Cognitive, Affective, &amp; Behavioral Neuroscience 14 1 236 252 http://dx.doi.org/10.3758/s13415-013-0198-y
Leshikar ED Dulas MR Duarte A 2015 Self-referencing enhances recollection in both young and older adults Aging, Neuropsychology, and Cognition 22 4 388 412 http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13825585.2014.957150
Levy DJ Glimcher PW 2012 The root of all value: A neural common currency for choice Current Opinion in Neurobiology 22 6 1027 1038 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.conb.2012.06.001 22766486
Maguire EA 2001 Neuroimaging studies of autobiographical event memory Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 356 1413 1441 1451 http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2001.0944
McKhann GM Knopman DS Chertkow H Hyman BT Jack CR Jr Kawas CH 2011 The diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer’s disease: Recommendations from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer’s disease Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia 7 3 263 269 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jalz.2011.03.005
Mendez MF Shapira JS 2011 Loss of emotional insight in behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia or “frontal anosodiaphoria Consciousness and Cognition 20 4 1690 1696 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2011.09.005 21959203
Miller BL Seeley WW Mychack P Rosen HJ Mena I Boone K 2001 Neuroanatomy of the self: Evidence from patients with frontotemporal dementia Neurology 57 5 817 821 11552010
Mioshi E Hsieh S Savage S Hornberger M Hodges JR 2010 Clinical staging and disease progression in frontotemporal dementia Neurology 74 20 1591 1597 http://dx.doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181e04070 20479357
Moran JM Heatherton TF Kelley WM 2009 Modulation of cortical midline structures by implicit and explicit self-relevance evaluation Social Neuroscience 4 3 197 211 http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17470910802250519 19424905
Morris JC 1997 Clinical dementia rating: A reliable and valid diagnostic and staging measure for dementia of the Alzheimer type International Psychogeriatrics 9 Suppl 1 173 176 9447441
Multhaup KS Balota DA 1997 Generation effects and source memory in healthy older adults and in adults with dementia of the Alzheimer type Neuropsychology 11 3 382 391 9223142
Nestor PJ Fryer TD Ikeda M Hodges JR 2003 Retrosplenial cortex (BA 29/30) hypometabolism in mild cognitive impairment (prodromal Alzheimer’s disease) European Journal of Neuroscience 18 9 2663 2667 http://dx.doi.org/10.1046/j.1460-9568.2003.02999.x 14622168
Nichols TE Holmes AP 2002 Nonparametric permutation tests for functional neuroimaging: A primer with examples Human Brain Mapping 15 1 1 25 11747097
Northoff G Bermpohl F 2004 Cortical midline structures and the self Trends in Cognitive Sciences 8 3 102 107 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2004.01.004 15301749
Northoff G Hayes DJ 2011 Is our self nothing but reward? Biological Psychiatry 69 11 1019 1025 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2010.12.014 21276963
Northoff G Heinzel A de Greck M Bermpohl F Dobrowolny H Panksepp J 2006 Self-referential processing in our brain—a meta-analysis of imaging studies on the self NeuroImage 31 1 440 457 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.12.002 16466680
O’Keeffe FM Murray B Coen RF Dockree PM Bellgrove MA Garavan H 2007 Loss of insight in frontotemporal dementia, corticobasal degeneration and progressive supranuclear palsy Brain 130 Pt 3 753 764 http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/brain/awl367 17347257
Pennington C Hodges JR Hornberger M 2011 Neural correlates of episodic memory in behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease: JAD 24 2 261 268 http://dx.doi.org/10.3233/JAD-2011-101668 21239854
Philippi CL Duff MC Denburg NL Tranel D Rudrauf D 2012 Medial PFC damage abolishes the self-reference effect Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 24 2 475 481 http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_00138 21942762
Piguet O Hornberger M Mioshi E Hodges JR 2011 Behavioural-variant frontotemporal dementia: Diagnosis, clinical staging, and management The Lancet Neurology 10 2 162 172 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(10)70299-4 21147039
Piolino P Desgranges B Belliard S Matuszewski V Lalevée C de La Sayette V Eustache F 2003 Autobiographical memory and autonoetic consciousness: Triple dissociation in neurodegenerative diseases Brain 126 Pt 10 2203 2219 http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/brain/awg222 12821510
Qin P Northoff G 2011 How is our self related to midline regions and the default-mode network? NeuroImage 57 3 1221 1233 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.05.028 21609772
Rabinovici GD Seeley WW Kim EJ Gorno-Tempini ML Rascovsky K Pagliaro TA 2007 Distinct MRI atrophy patterns in autopsy-proven Alzheimer’s disease and frontotemporal lobar degeneration American Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease and Other Dementias 22 6 474 488 http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1533317507308779
Rankin KP 2005 Self awareness and personality change in dementia Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery &amp; Psychiatry 76 5 632 639 http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/jnnp.2004.042879
Rascovsky K Hodges JR Knopman D Mendez MF Kramer JH Neuhaus J 2011 Sensitivity of revised diagnostic criteria for the behavioural variant of frontotemporal dementia Brain 134 9 2456 2477 http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/brain/awr179 21810890
Rey A 1941 L’examen psychologique dans les cas d’encephalopathie traumatique Archives De Psychologie 28 215 285
Rogers TB 1977 Self-reference in memory: Recognition of personality items Journal of Research in Personality 11 3 295 305 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0092-6566(77)90038-1
Rogers TB Kuiper NA Kirker WS 1977 Self-reference and the encoding of personal information Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 35 9 677 688 909043
Rosa NM Deason RG Budson AE Gutchess AH 2014 Source memory for self and other in patients with mild cognitive impairment due to Alzheimer’s disease The Journals of Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences 71 1 59 65 http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/geronb/gbu062
Rosa NM Deason RG Budson AE Gutchess AH 2015 Self-referencing and false memory in mild cognitive impairment due to Alzheimer’s disease Neuropsychology 29 5 799 805 http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/neu0000186 25689510
Rosa NM Gutchess AH 2011 Source memory for action in young and older adults: Self vs. close or unknown others Psychology and Aging 26 3 625 630 http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0022827 21443350
Rosa NM Gutchess AH 2013 False memory in aging resulting from self-referential processing The Journals of Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences 68 6 882 892 http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/geronb/gbt018
Ruby P Schmidt C Hogge M D’Argembeau A Collette F Salmon E 2007 Social mind representation: Where does it fail in frontotemporal dementia? Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 19 4 671 683 http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2007.19.4.671 17381257
Rueckert D Sonoda LI Hayes C Hill DL Leach MO Hawkes DJ 1999 Nonrigid registration using free-form deformations: Application to breast MR images IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 18 8 712 721 http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/42.796284 10534053
Scahill RI Schott JM Stevens JM Rossor MN Fox NC 2002 Mapping the evolution of regional atrophy in Alzheimer’s disease: Unbiased analysis of fluid-registered serial MRI Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 99 7 4703 4707 http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.052587399
Schmidt M 1996 Rey auditory and verbal learning test: A handbook Los Angeles Western Psychological Services
Seeley WW Crawford R Rascovsky K Kramer JH Weiner M Miller BL 2008 Frontal paralimbic network atrophy in very mild behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia Archives of Neurology 65 2 249 255 http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/archneurol.2007.38 18268196
Serbun SJ Shih JY Gutchess AH 2011 Memory for details with self-referencing Memory 19 8 1004 1014 http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09658211.2011.626429 22092106
Simons JS Spiers HJ 2003 Prefrontal and medial temporal lobe interactions in long-term memory Nature Reviews Neuroscience 4 8 637 648 http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nrn1178 12894239
Simons JS Verfaellie M Galton CJ Miller BL Hodges JR Graham KS 2002 Recollection-based memory in frontotemporal dementia: Implications for theories of long-term memory Brain 125 Pt 11 2523 2536 http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/brain/awf247 12390977
Smith SM Jenkinson M Woolrich MW Beckmann CF Behrens TEJ Johansen-Berg H 2004 Advances in functional and structural MR image analysis and implementation as FSL NeuroImage 23 S208 S219 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.07.051 15501092
Sollberger M Stanley CM Wilson SM Gyurak A Beckman V Growdon M 2009 Neural basis of interpersonal traits in neurodegenerative diseases Neuropsychologia 47 13 2812 2827 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2009.06.006 19540253
Svoboda E McKinnon MC Levine B 2006 The functional neuroanatomy of autobiographical memory: A meta-analysis Neuropsychologia 44 12 2189 2208 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2006.05.023 16806314
Symons CS Johnson BT 1997 The self-reference effect in memory: A meta-analysis Psychological Bulletin 121 3 371 394 9136641
Tulving E 1985 Memory and consciousness Canadian Psychology/Psychologie Canadienne 26 1 1 12
Tulving E 2002 Episodic memory: From mind to brain Annual Review of Psychology 53 1 1 25 http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev.psych.53.100901.135114
Wear HJ Wedderburn CJ Mioshi E Williams-Gray CH Mason SL Barker RA 2008 The Cambridge behavioural inventory revised Dementia &amp; Neuropsychologia 2 2 102 107 29213551
Winecoff A Clithero JA Carter RM Bergman SR Wang L Huettel SA 2013 Ventromedial prefrontal cortex encodes emotional value Journal of Neuroscience 33 27 11032 11039 http://dx.doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4317-12.2013 23825408
Wong S Flanagan E Savage G Hodges JR Hornberger M 2014 Contrasting prefrontal cortex contributions to episodic memory dysfunction in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer’s disease Plos One 9 2 http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0087778 e87778 13 24505314
Yaoi K Osaka M Osaka N 2015 Neural correlates of the self-reference effect: Evidence from evaluation and recognition processes Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 9 1 9 http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2015.00383 25653611
Yonelinas AP 2002 The nature of recollection and familiarity: A review of 30 years of research Journal of Medicine and Life 46 3 441 517 http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/jmla.2002.2864
Zhang Y Brady M Smith S 2001 Segmentation of brain MR images through a hidden Markov random field model and the expectation-maximization algorithm IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 20 1 45 57 http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/42.906424 11293691
